Bere 
a 


Exposition of the Gospel of John. 


MO 


Life Pacific College Alumni Library 


226.2 
K299e 


Prere. N.T. John. .English, 1898, 
Kelly 

An exposition of the Gospel of 
John 


LIFE Pacitic College 


ae ee 
AHIMA Library 
1100 West Covina Btyet, 


CP me, PO ie a a le ne 


a 


“ far lac g 
dt Gi, Lave fore 


WORKS BY THE SAME. ‘ 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE PENTATEUCH. Cr. 8vo. Cloth. 

LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE EARLIER HISTORICAL BOOKS. 
Crown 8vo. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 

LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE MINOR PROPHETS. Cr. 8vo. Cloth. 

LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE FOUR GOSPELS. Cr. 8vo. Cloth. 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE PAULINE EPISTLES. Crown 8yo. 
Cloth. . 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE ACTS, CATHOLIC EPISTLES, | 
AND THE REVELATION, Crown 8vo. Cloth. 


IN THE BEGINNING. An Exposition of Genesis iii. 3. Post 8vo. Cloth, — 
Is. 6d. . 


NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB, with a New Version. 12mo. Cloth, 2s. 
AN EXPOSITION OF ISAIAH. A New Edition. 8yvo. Cloth, 7s. 6d. 

AN EXPOSITION OF EZEKIEL. A New Edition. 8vo. Cloth, 2s. 

AN EXPOSITION OF DANIEL (or New Ed., &c., 2s.). 8vo. Cloth, 1s. 6d. 


LECTURES ON THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 
Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 2 vols. in one. Post 8vo. Cloth, 4s, 6d. 
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. 12mo. Cloth, 2s. 6d. 

THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 12mo. Cloth, 2s. 6d. 
THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 12mo. Cloth, 2s. 
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 12mo. Cloth, 1s. 6d. 

THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 12mo. Cloth, 2s. 6d. 


THE EPISTLES TO THE PHILIPPIANS AND THE COLOSSIANS. 12mo. 
Cloth, 2s. 


THE TWO EPISTLES TO THE THESSALONIANS. 12mo. Cloth, 2s. 
THE TWO EPISTLES TO TIMOTHY. 12mo. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


LECTURES ON THE BOOK OF REVELATION (New Version). 8vo. 
Cloth, 6s. 6d. 


NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Cr. 8vo. 2s.6d. 
COMING AND KINGDOM OF CHRIST. Crown 8vo. Oloth, 2s. 6d. 
CHURCH OF GOD. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 2s. 

OCCASIONAL LECTURES. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 4s. 6d. 

THE DAY OF ATONEMENT. Cloth, 1s. 6d. 

THE SECOND ADVENT PRE-MILLENNIAL. Paper Cover, 6d. 
THE KNOWN ISAIAH, Paper Cover, 6d. 

THE SPIRITS IN PRISON. 

ABRAM. 

THE TYPES OF SCRIPTURE. 

CHRIST’S COMING. In Review of Dr. Brown’s Book. 


THE BIBLE TREASURY. Post-paid, monthly, 2d. ; yearly, 2s. 


ixe 


AN EXPOSITION 


go TE = 


Lg : a é <A 5 
HE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


AN EXPOSITION 


OF 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


BY 


WILLIAM KELLY 


LONDON 
T. WESTON, 53 PATERNOSTER ROW 
1898 


" £400 Glendale Blvd, 
Los Angeles, Calif. 900; 


PREFACE. 


————— 


HE work now before the Christian did not consist of 

discourses taken down in shorthand and corrected, as 
many books of mine have been. It was written with care 
from first to last, with the deep conviction how little my 
plummet, perhaps anyone’s, can sound its revealed depths. 
Still, its communications are freely given by the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus, that we might know them through 
the Spirit in our measure. May the truth, and nothing but 
the truth, commend itself to the conscience and heart of 
all God’s children. It is a day when many, listening to 
the tempter, have found a hard saying in the matchless 
words of life eternal, and even gone back, so as to walk 
no more with the Lord. May they so learn, as it were 
from His own lips, that the words He has spoken are spirit 
and are life. Of these sayings none is more eminent a witness 
among the inspired than the apostle, and of his inspired 
writings none so rich in these sayings as his Gospel. May 
grace use whatever help may be in this exposition to 
appreciate better the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. No 
reader is likely to feel its shortcomings so much as the 
writer, but he also feels that the Father delights in honour 
truly paid to the Son. This throughout he has sought humbly 
and heartily, counting on the Spirit’s presence and power, 
Who is here to glorify Him. 


Lonpon, April, 1898. 


024249 


ms 


Siig ae 


i Da ie ¥ fa us “shat ‘ 


ig 


nse 


12 
ft 


© ee : me as a 4 fig 4 
THAT the fourth Gospel is phetarter aud by: sinh forth the 
Lord Jesus as the Word, the Only - ‘begotten Son, God ~ 
Himself, on earth, can be questioned by no intelligent Christian. . 
It is not as Messiah, Son of David and of Abraham, yet withal © 
the Jehovah of Israel, Emmanuel; nor yet as the Son devoted - 
to the service of God, above all in the gospel; neither is it as 
the Holy Thing born of the Virgin by the miraculous agency 
of the Holy Ghost and in this sense too Son of God, that He is » 
presented, as in each of the other inspired accounts respectively 
by Matthew, Mark, and Luke. In the Gospel of John His 
divine nature shines from under the veil of flesh, as He moves 
here and there, evermore displaying the Father in His Person 
and words and ways; and then, on His going above, giving and 
- sending the Holy Ghost to be with and in His own for ever. 

Hence it is that He is here declared the giver of eternal life 
to the believer, who is accordingly entitled in virtue of this 
new life to become a child of God. For it is no question here 
of dispensational dealings, nor of testimony to the creature, nor 
yet of the moral perfections of the man Christ Jesus, All 
these have their fitting places elsewhere; but here the Spirit 
of God has in hand a deeper task, the manifestation of the 
Father in the Son, and this as the Word become flesh and 
tabernacling here below, with its immense consequences for 
every soul, and- even for God* Himself glorified both in the 
exigencies of His moral being and in the intimate depths of 
His relationship as Father. 

Further, we may take note of the divine wisdom which 
wrote and gave such a Gospel at a comparatively late date, 
when the enemy was seeking to corrupt and destroy, not by 

A2 


6 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Pharisaic or Sadducean adversaries, nor by idolatrous Gentiles, 
but by apostates and antichristian teachers. These, under the 
highest pretensions to knowledge and power, were undermining 
the truth of Christ’s Person, on the side both of His proper 
Deity and of His real humanity, to the ruin of man and to the 
most thankless and daring dishonour of God. No testimony 
came in more appropriately than that of John, who, like the 
writer of the earliest Gospel, was an eye-witness, and even 
above all others familiar, if one may reverently so say, with 
the Lord Jesus as man on earth. Yet none the less but above 
all is he the instrument of attesting His divine glory. The 
bearing of both on the closing efforts of Satan, even then and 
thenceforward prevalent (1 John ii. 18), is also most evident 
and of supreme importance. The Lord, on the other hand, 
as ever in His grace, met the efforts of Satan by a fuller 
assertion of “That which was from the beginning,” for divine 
glory in the clearing, comfort, and consolidation of the family 
of God, yea, of the babes. For what greater security than to 
find themselves the objects of the Father’s love, loved as the 
Son was loved, Himself in them, and they in Him, Who on 
departing assures them of the abiding presence of that other 
Paraclete, the Holy Spirit ?—a blessedness so great that He 
declares His own deeply missed absence “expedient” for them 
in order to secure it. 

Consequently along with the reality and manifestation of 
eternal life in man, in Christ the Son, there is the careful, 
complete, and distinct abolishing of Jewish or any other 
relationships for man in the flesh with God; while it is shewn 
clearly both in the introduction and at the end of the Gospel 
that the dispensations of God are not overlooked, nor Christ’s 
relation to them, His Person, divine yet a man, being the pivot 
on which all turns. 

Indeed it was a great oversight of the ancient ecclesiastical 
writers to regard John as the evangelist who views the Lord or 
His own in their heavenly connections, ill as the eagle could 
symbolise any such thing; though even Augustine accepted the 
fancy, as Victorinus seems first to have suggested it. But 
theologians do not at all agree; for Irenzeus will have Mark to 


INTRODUCTION, ff 


be the eagle, and Andreas follows in his wake. Williams of 
late, and he is not alone, revived the interpretation of Augustine, 
who strangely applied the man to Mark, and the ox to Luke, 
where the converse would have been at least more plausible. 
Many more applications equally wild prevailed; but they are 
hardly worth recording. 

For the “living creatures” in Revelation iv. and elsewhere 
have no real or intended relation to the four Gospels. These 
present to us the grace of God which appeared in Christ 
among men, and the redemption which He accomplished in the 
rejected Messiah. The cherubim, on the contrary, are revealed 
when the throne on high assumes a judicial character in 
chastisements, preparatory to the Lord’s taking the kingdom of 
the world and appearing from heaven for that reign. They 
symbolise the divine attributes in figures taken from the heads 
of creation. Ingenious but superficial analogies cannot avail 
against the entire moral bearing of their associations as con- 
trasted as grace is with judgment. 

But the characteristic truth which it is hard to overlook in 
John, with a slight exception here and there, is God mani- 
festing Himself in His Son, yet man on earth; not man in Him 
the exalted Christ on high, which is the line assigned to the 
apostle Paul, and among the inspired accounts of the Lord 


_ to the end of Luke and even, in a measure, of Mark. Therefore 


we may notice that there is no ascension scene (though 
abundantly supposed) in John any more than in Matthew, 
though for wholly different reasons. For the first Gospel 
shows us the Lord in His final presentation, risen indeed but 
still maintaining His links of relationship with the disciples or 
Jewish remnant in Galilee, where He gives them their great 
commission, and assures them of His presence with them till 
the consummation of the age. The last shows us Him uniting 
in His person the glory not only of the risen man and Son of 
God, the last Adam, but also of the Lord God, Who as the 
quickening spirit breathes the breath of a better life in 
resurrection power into His disciples, and thereon gives also 
a mystical view of the age to come, with the special places of 
both Peter and John. 


8 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


It is God on earth therefore that appears in the account 
of our Lord here, not (save for exceptional purposes) man 
glorified in heaven, as in the writings of St. Paul. Hence in 
the first chapter, so remarkable for the fulness with which the 
titles of Christ are brought before us there, we do not read of 
Him either as priest or as head of the church: relations which 
are exclusively bound up with His exaltation above and 
service at the right hand of God. John presents all that 
is divine in Christ’s Person and work on earth; and as he gives 
us the setting aside of the first man in his best shape, so 
also the absolute need of the divine nature if man is to see or 
enter the kingdom of God. What is essential and abiding 
naturally flows from the presence of a divine Person revealing 
Himself here below in grace and truth. 

Again, the character of the truth before the Holy Spirit 
evidently excludes any genealogy such as is found in the 
Gospels of Matthew and Luke, who respectively traced our 
blessed Lord down from Abraham and David, or up to Adam 
“which was [the son] of God.” Here John gives no such birth- 
roll; for how trace the line of Him Who in the beginning, 
before a creature existed, was with God and was God? If 
Mark is devoted to the details of His service, especially His 
service in the gospel, accompanied by suited powers and signs 
(for He would arouse man and appeal to unbelievers in the 
patient goodness of God), he in the wisdom of the same Spirit 
was led to omit all record of His earthly parentage and early 
life, and at once enters on His work, only preceded by a brief 
notice of His herald, John the Baptist, in his work. Hence as the 
Lord was the perfect Servant, so the perfect account of it says 
nothing here of a genealogy; for who would ask the pedigree 
of a servant? Thus, if His service seems to keep it out from 
Mark, His Deity being the prominent truth renders it unsuit- 
able for the Spirit’s purpose by John. It is only from all the 
four that we receive the truth in its various fulness: only 
so could even God adequately reveal to us our Lord Jesus 
Christ. In the Gospels He is given us in view not merely 
of our need, but of the divine love and glory. 

The contents of this Gospel may be more clearly appre- 


INTRODUCTION. 9 


hended by the summary that follows. Chapters i-iv. precede 
the Galilean ministry of our Lord given by the three Synoptists. 
John the herald was still baptising, and free (chap. iii. 23, 24); 
while our Lord was on His way to Galilee (chap. iv.) through 
Samaria. Chapters i. to ii. 22 are preliminary; i. 1-18 being 
the wondrous and suited preface of His personal glory, seen in 
the chapter throughout. Then from verses 19-42 is John’s 
‘testimony historically, not to others only about Jesus, but 
to Himself and its fruit. From verse 43 Christ calls indivi- 
dually and gathers, wherein He passes from the truth of His 
position as the Christ in Psalm ii. to the wider and higher 
glory of the Son of Man in Psalm viii. Then we have in 
chapter ii. 1-22 the marriage in Cana of Galilee which 
manifests His glory, and His execution of judgment in 
purifying the temple as risen from the dead. 

From chapter ii. 23 is shewn the impossibility of God’s 
trusting man as he is, and in chapter iii. the necessity of his 
being born anew to see or enter the kingdom of God, even on 
its earthly side. The cross of the Son of Man is no less 
requisite; but God’s Only-begotten Son is given in His love 
to save the world. Only faith in His name is indispensable. 
It is not a charge of law violated, but of light come and hated, 
men’s works being evil. But John, the Bridegroom’s friend, 
~ rejoices to be eclipsed by His glory Who comes from heaven 
and is above all, not only the Sent One with God’s words but 
the Son of His love to Whom the Father has given all things. 
To believe on Him therefore is to have life eternal; to disobey 
Him in unbelief is to have the wrath of God abiding on him. 
Such is the introduction. 

Chapter iv. is the Son of God humbling Himself in grace to 
draw a reprobate Samaritan to God, in order to worship Him 
and as Father too in spirit and truth, Jerusalem being now gone, 
_as her rival was nothing. For He is the Saviour of the world. 
Yet the courtier in Capernaum proves that his faith in the 
Saviour for his sick son, though in Jewish form, was not 
in vain. He does not despise feeble faith. 

Chapter v. shows us Jesus the Son of God, not a healer only, 
but quickening the dead souls that hear Him now, and raising 


10 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


to a life resurrection at His coming; while those who hearken 
not and live wickedly He, the Son of Man, will raise to a 
resurrection of judgment. The grounds of faith are therefore 
added in the rest of the chapter. 

In chapter vi. the sign of the bread He gave the great crowd 
introduces the teaching of Himself, incarnate, the true Bread 
from heaven, and in death His flesh truly food and His blood 
truly drink, followed by His ascension. He is the object of 
faith thus, as the Quickener in the preceding chapter. 

Thence chapter vii. lets us into His sending down the Holy 
Spirit from Himself in glory before the Feast of Tabernacles 
is literally fulfilled. Such is the power for witness, as in 
chap. iv. for worship. In these four chapters the Lord is set 
as Himself the truth of which Israel had possessed forms. 

In chapters vii. and ix. His word and His work are 
rejected respectively and to the uttermost. Nevertheless the 
sheep, which receive both to their blessmg, He not only keeps 
but leads outside the fold to better still, one flock, one 
Shepherd. Nothing can harm. They are in the Father’s 
hand and in the Son’s (chap. x.). 

Chapters xi. and xii. give us the testimony to Christ, as 
Son of God in resurrection power, as Son of David according 
to prophecy, and as Son of Man bringing in through His death 
a new, unlimited; and everlasting glory, which His joint-heirs 
should share with Him. 

From chapters xiii. to xvii. is unfolded the Lord’s position in 
heaven, and what He is for us then and there: an entirely new 
thing for the disciples who looked for the kingdom here and 
now. He is our Advocate (1 John ii. 1), and washes by the word 
our feet defiled by the way ; and when Judas is gone out, opens 
His death as morally glorifying Himself, glorifying God in 
every way, and His glorification in Him as the immediate 
consequence. But He is coming (chapter xiv.) to receive them 
to Himself in the Father’s house, the proper Christian hope. 
Meanwhile Christ promises another Advocate, or Paraclete, to 
dwell with them and be in them for ever, Who is the present 
power of Christianity, and works in the obedience of the 
Christian. In chapter xv. we have the Christian position on 


INTRODUCTION. 11 


earth contrasted with Judaism. It is not union but communion 
with Christ to bear fruit, and render testimony to His glory: 
moral government is in question rather than sovereign grace. 
Chapter xvi. treats of the presence of the Spirit, what it proves 
to the world, and how He deals with the believers who now 
ask the Father in Christ’s name. Chapter xvii., in Christ’s 
outpouring to the Father, gives our place with Him, and 
apart from the world, in past, present, and future unity, both 
privilege in heaven with Him by-and-by, and our wondrous 
blessedness even now. 

Chapters xviii. and xix. characteristically sketch the closing 
scenes of His varied mock trials after His willing surrender, 
and the humiliating experience of His disciples; then the 
death of the cross, and its fruit, as well as the beloved disciple’s 
witness, to whom He confided His mother. Chapter xx. 
presents Him risen, His message through Mary of Magdala, and 
His manifestation to, the gathered disciples on the resurrection, 
and in eight days to Thomas, the type of Israel seeing and believ- 
ing. Chapter xxi. adds the mystical picture of the millennial age, 
when the Gentiles become Christ’s, and the net is not broken as 
heretofore. As an appendix, we have Peter restored and 
reinstated, with the assurance that in the weakness of age 
grace would strengthen him to die for his Master, Whom he 
failed thus to glorify in the day of his more youthful self- 
confidence. John is left in no less mysterious guise, though it 
was not said that he should not die, but in suspense. “If I 
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee ? follow thou 
me.” So we know that the same pen, which God employed to 
set out the Son of God in His personal glory and ineffable grace, 
was to give us, after the translation of the heavenly on high, 
the divine government which will at length invest Christ and 
them with the world’s kingdom, in the day when He will be 
the manifest centre of all glory—heavenly and earthly. For 
this and more we find in the Revelation. 


CHAPTER I. 


“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God” (ver. 1). The Word, the ex- 
pression of the Godhead, has eternal being, distinct personality, 
and proper Deity, not merely Qevorys but Oedrns. We see One 
Who was before time began. It is not even the beginning 
of creation, but before then, when the Word was with God 
before all things were made by Him. Look back as we may 
before creation, the Word was—not éyévero, existed, as One 
that had commenced to be, but jv, was, the Word increate, yea 
the Creator. Further, He “was with God,” not exactly here 
with the Father as such; for scripture never speaks with such 
correlation. “The Word was with God.” Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost were there; but the Word was with God, “and the 
Word was God.” He was no creature, but essentially divine, 
though not He alone divine. Other Persons there were in the 
Godhead. 

“The same was in the beginning with God” (ver. 2); not at 
a subsequent date, but “in the beginning,” when no creature 
had commenced its existence. For this truth we are entirely 
indebted to God. Who could speak of such things but God ? 
It is He Who uses John to write, and all He says is worthy of 
implicit faith. The Word “was in the beginning with God.” 
His personality was eternal, no less than His nature or being. 
He was no mere emanation, as the Indo-Aryans dreamed in the 
earliest form of their thoughts known tous. For God thus was 
not really supreme and free, but subject to restraint necessarily 
incompatible with sovereignty, and ever tending to that 
pantheism which, making the universe to be God, denies 
the only true God. Thus, He was merely Tad (That), an 

ry ey 


CHAPTER I. 13 


abstract energy, yet not in self-sufficiency, but in longing for 
others to emanate Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, the Creator, the 
Preserver, and the Destroyer. In the Hindoo system de- 
veloped later, as the divinity was thus imaginatively resolved 
into emanations, so is the universe itself pantheistically to 
be an emanation rather than a creation formed by divine will, 
power, and design. ~All is flux and illusion. What a contrast 
is its Triad with the Trinity, the Father, and the Son, and the 
Holy Spirit, one God! And its Avataras, even that of Krishna, 
late as the legend rose, how remote from the Incarnation! 
Thereby God and man stand for ever united in one Person, by 
His death the Reconciler of all creation, heavenly and earthly, 
_and of those who by grace are to reign with Him over all 
things to the glory of God the Father. 

Then as an added and after communication we are told that 
“all things were made by him, and without him not one thing 
was made which hath been made” (ver. 3). The Word was not 
made, but Himself made all.* The Word is the Creator of all 
that has had a derived being. He created all. No creature 
received being apart from Him. The Word was the agent. Had 
He not been God, this must have been a work impossible to 
Him. Had He not been “in the beginning with God,” it could 
not have been in any special way attributed to Him, the eternal 
Word. But creation is here affirmed as His work, not in a 
positive way only, but without exception for every. creature. 
So in Col. i. 16, 17 we are told that by (éy, in virtue of) Him 


* T think the remark not only unhappy but worthy of reprobation, wherein it 
is said that evil itself implicitly (and not all matter only) was made by the Word. 
This is false philosophy ; the Hegelianism even of many who oppose Hegel. 
Evil has nothing to do with creation, save as it is an inconsistency with it. The 
question now is not of evil in the sense of physical punishment ; for this is pre- 
eminently sent of God. But moral evil in any being is a contradiction of the 
relationship in which God set that being. It is therefore neither in God nor of 
God, being failure relative to what previously existed as the fruit of God’s 
pleasure, Who nevertheless permits it in view of government and redemption. 
Thus the angels left their first estate. Satan stood (or stands) not in the truth, 
and Adam fell from his original innocence. This is in no way a limitation 
of divine power; but contrariwise the error I am combating does limit His 
goodness or His truth. Impossible that there can be in or from God the 
contrary of what He is, and He is good, He only ; in the creature it can easily 
be, and it is, where creation is not sustained by God or delivered by His grace. 


14 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


were created all things, the things in the heavens and the 
things on the earth, the visible and the invisible, whether 
thrones, or lordships, or principalities, or authorities; all things 
have been created through Him, and for Him; and He is 
before all things, and by (év) Him all things consist, or are 
held together. What repeated and irrefutable proofs of Deity! 

Each of these scriptures gives us precise instruction of the 
highest kind. Even Genesis i, though it points in verses 1 
and 2 to states of creation indefinitely anterior to Adam, 
only begins with John i. 3. But of the details that followed 
in time no scripture gives us such complete information. 
What was before creation is wholly omitted by Moses. John 
i. 1, 2 shows us eternity before creation, as well as creation 
itself (ver. 3), in the most precise terms. 

But there is much more than the power of an eternal Being. 
For we come now to a thing higher and more intimate: not to 
what was brought into being through Him, but to what was in 
Him. “This is the true God and eternal life” (John v. 20). 
“Tn him was life.”* The only life here noticed is that which 
being eternal is capable of knowing, enjoying, serving and wor- 
shipping God, suited to His presence, and to be there for ever. 
Believers have life; but it is in the Son, not in them but in 
Him. Here, however, it is not pursued beyond its source in 
Him ; its communication will soon follow in due course. The 
Spirit is occupied with the character of His person. Only He 
adds at this point the deeply interesting announcement, “and 


* The arrangement of verses 3, 4, which Lachmann, Tregelles, and Westcott 
and Hort prefer (partly because of the absence of interpunction in some very 
ancient MSS., partly because some copies, versions, and fathers, expressly so take 
it), is 6 yéyover év atr@ Soh Fv. But with Tischendorf and others I unqualifiedly 
decide for a colon or full stop after yéyovey, and begin a new sentence with 
év a’r@ {wy Hv. There is an intended contradistinction between what was — 
made or brought into being through the Word with life in Him, which is 
lost when the new sentence begins with 6 yéy. Is it not false doctrine so 
to reduce life in the Word? Further, it is not Johannean, if grammatical, to 
take yéyovey év atr@ as ‘‘made by him.” Again, this life,which would mean 
the living universe (in itself a strange, unscriptural, and senseless phrase), must 
then be the light of men, contrary to the express teaching, just after, that the 
Word exclusively was the light. On the other hand the phrase, as it usually 
stands, is in the fullest harmony with the style of the evangelist elsewhere, as 
Dean Alford has pointed out. 


a 


CHAPTER I. 15 


the life was the light of men” (ver. 4), Not angels, but men 


were the object. _ He does not say life but light of men. The 
life was only for those that believe in His name: the light goes 
far beyond. That which makes manifest is light. So in 
Proverbs viii. the beautiful introduction of Wisdom, Whom 
Jehovah possessed in the beginning of His way before His 
works of old, not more His delight than Wisdom’s delights 
were with the sons of men. : 

But men, in fact, were in a fallen condition, and at a 
distance from God; and so it is intimated here that a worse 
darkness reigned than the gloom which covered the deep before 
the six days’ work began. “And the light shineth in darkness, 
and the darkness comprehended [that is, apprehended] it not” 
(ver. 5). 

Darkness is neither the mother of all as the heathen said, 
nor a malignant Demiurge, the never ceasing opponent of the 
good Lord of light. It is really. the moral condition of man, 
fallen as he is, a negation of the light, differing wholly from the * 
physical reality, inasmuch as it is of itself unaffected by light. 
Grace only, as we shall see by and by, can deal effectually with 
the difficulty. 

Here it may be noticed that John does not discourse of life 
absolutely, but of life in the Word, which life is affirmed to be 


the Light of men. It is exclusive of other objects; at least the 


proposition goes not beyond men. So in Colossians i. Christ 
is said to be the image of the invisible God, Who is here only 
revealed to perfection in man and to men. He is the light of 
men, and there is no other: for if man has what scripture calls 
light,-he has it only in the Word, Who is the life. Beyond 
controversy God is light and in Him is no darkness at all; but 
He dwells in unapproachable light, Whom no man has seen 
nor can see: ‘Not so with the Word of Whom we are reading. 


_“The light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness com- 


prehended it not.” Observe the striking precision of the 
phrases.- It appears in darkness, such is its nature—it shines, 
not it shone; whereas the abstract form is changed for the 
historical, when we are told that the darkness apprehended 


it not. 


16 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Thus we have had the Spirit’s statement of the Word, as 
related first to God, next to creation, lastly to men, with a 
solemn sentence on their moral state in relation to the light . 
and not merely to life. 

We are next presented with John sent from God to testify 
of the light. “There was a man sent from God—his name 
John. The same came for witness that he might witness 
about the light, that all might believe through him. He was 
not the light, but that he might witness about the light” 
(vers. 6-8). Ged Who is love was active in His goodness to 
draw attention to the light; for deep was man’s need. Hence 
there was a man sent from Him—his name John. He, as we 
are told elsewhere, was the burning and shining lamp (6 Avxvos); 
but the Word was the Light (70 ges) concerning Whom he came 
to bear witness. For his mission is here viewed in relation, 
not to the law or any legal purpose, but to the Light (and 
hence its scope is far beyond Israel), that he might witness 
concerning the Light, that all might believe through him. It 
is a question of personal faith in the Saviour, not merely of 
moral exhortation to the multitude, tax-gatherers, soldiers, 
or any others, as in the Gospel of Luke. Every scripture 
is perfect, and perfectly adapted to the divine purpose of 
glorifying Jesus. 

The Light is here the object of God’s gracious purpose. John 
is but an instrument and witness; he was not the Light, but 
that he might witness concerning the Light. “The true light 
was that [or, he was the true light] which, coming into the 
world, lighteth every man” (ver. 9) in exclusion of Philonism 
and Platonism, as we have seen before of eternal matter and 
Manicheism. The law dealt with those under it, that is, 
with Israel; the Light on coming into the world, a cardinal 
point in the teaching of our apostle (1 John i. 1-4, ii. 8, 14, 
&c.), casts its light on every man. Coming, or a comer, into 
the world is used by the Rabbis for birth as man; but for this 
very reason it would be the merest tautology if viewed in 
apposition with a. avOp. “every man.”’* It qualifies the 

* There seems to be no force in taking #v with épxéduevov as equivalent to an 


imperfect ‘‘came,” even if an independent clause such as 8 ¢. 7. &vOp. might 


‘ 


NNN 


CHAPTER I. Ly 


relative, and affirms that as incarnate the true Light lights 
every man, that is, sheds light on him. 

The result, however, in itself is, and can only be, condemna- 
tion by reason of opposition of nature; for, as we are told, 
“He was in the world, and the world was made [or brought 
into being] through him, and the world knew him not. He 
came unto his own, and his own received him not; but as 
many as received him, to them he gave authority to become . 
children of God, to those that believe on his name; who were 
born not of blood, nor of flesh’s will, nor of man’s (dvdpds) will, 
but of God” (vers. 10-13). What infinite and loving con- 
descension that He, the eternal Word, the true Light, should be 
in the world—the world which received its being from Him! 
How dense its ignorance that the world knew Him not, its 
Creator! But He had one place on earth which He was 
pleased to regard as His own peculiar (ra té:a): there He 
came; and (of icvor) His own people (it is not said knew Him 
not, but) received Him not! It was rejection, not ignorance. 

This prepared the way for the manifestation of a new thing, 
men from out of the ruined world separated to a new and 
incomparably nearer relationship with God, to whom, as many 
as received Christ (for it is no question of “every man” here), 
He gave right or title to enter the place of God’s children, 
to those that believe on His name. Nor is this a mere 
legitimately come between the verb and the participle ; which, as far as I know, 
has not yet been produced, Mark ii. 18 (which Liicke advances and Alford 
approves) being in no way parallel. But were it so, where is the propriety of 
telling us in this wondrous prologue, where each brief clause, yea word, is brimful 
of the profoundest truth, that the true Light which lights every man was in 
process of coming (not of manifesting Himself, which is quite another thought) 
into the world? On the other hand, the construction given in the Authorised 
Version, though vouched by ancient translations, western and eastern, and even 
by Greek fathers, seems not really admissible. It would require the article 
with épxyéuevoyv. The anarthrous participle does not mean ‘‘that cometh” but 
as” or ‘on coming,” which could have no proper meaning in connection with 
dvOpwrov. For how strange the doctrine resulting, that every man on coming 
into the world of darkness has or receives the light of Christ! With 4 it teaches 
a momentous truth, and this extinguishing, not suggesting, the Quaker idea. 
For it is the Word in His own nature, not an inward light, Who pours it on 
every man. He alone coming here is the true Light for man, and sheds it on 
all, high or low, Jew or Greek. It is like the sun’s light for all mankind, but 
in a spiritual way. 

B 


18 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


external position of honour, into which sovereignty might choose, 
so as to maintain by adoption family name and grandeur. It 
is a real communication of life and nature, a living birth-tie. 
They were réxva Qcov, God’s children. It is not that they had 
been better than others. They had been once alienated, and 
enemies in mind by wicked works. They believed on Christ’s 
name ; they were born of God. It was a work of divine grace 
through faith. Receiving the Word, they were begotten of 
God. Natural generation from either side, effort of one’s own, 
influence of another however exalted, had no place here. 

John nowhere describes believers as uviéot but as réxva, for 
his point is life in Christ, rather than the counsels of God by 
redemption. Paul on the other hand (as in Romans viii.) calls 
us both véovs and récva Oeov, because he is setting forth alike 
the high place given us now in contrast with bondage under 
the law, and also the intimacy of our relationship as children 
of God. On the other hand it is notable that Jesus is never 
called réxvoy (though as Messiah He is styled zais or Servant), 
but vies. He is the Son, the only-begotten Son in the bosom 
of the Father, but not récvoy as if He were born of God as we 
are. Thus it is the name of nearest but derived relationship. 
This is quite confirmed by the immediately following statement 
of John, “who were born . . . of God.” So indeed it will be 
seen invariably elsewhere, despite the Authorised Version 
which wrongly represents téxva by “sons” in his First Epistle, 
chapter iii. They believe on His name, after the manifestation 
of what the Word is. Every creature’ source is shut out, as 
well as all previous relationship closed and done with; a new 
race is brought in. ‘They were men of course, and cease not to 
be men as a fact; but they are born afresh spiritually, born of 
God most truly, partake of the divine nature (2 Peter i.) in 
this sense, as deriving their new life from God. 

Life, as we may observe ever throughout the writings of 
John and Paul, is wholly distinct from simple existence. 
| It is the possession of that divine character of being, which 
in the Son never had a beginning, for He was the eternal 
life which was with the Father and was manifested to us. 
He is our life; because He lives, we also live. It is true in 


gent \ 


ave 


CHAPTER I. 19 


Him and in us: in Him essentially, in us derivatively through 
grace; yet this is not so as to be for a moment independent 
of Him, but in Him. Still we have the life now ; nowhere is 
it taught that we shall be born of God, only that as believers 
we are. “Begotten” now, as distinct from “born,” is false, 
absurd, and without a shadow of scripture to support it. 

From the revelation of the Word in His own intrinsic 
nature, we now turn to His actual manifestation as man here 
below. The Incarnation is brought before us, the full revelation 
of God to man and in man, “And the Word became flesh and 
tabernacled among us (and we beheld his glory, glory as of an 
only-begotten from beside a father), full of grace and truth” 
(ver. 14). Here it is not what the Word was, but what He 
became. He was God; He became flesh and dwelt among us, 
full of grace and truth. 

It was no transient vision, however momentous, as on the 
holy mount. It was a contemplation of His glory vouchsafed 
to His witnesses, not of an earthly conqueror, nor Messianic 
even, but glory as of an only-begotten from beside a father. No 
sword girds His thigh, no riding to victory, no terrible things 
in righteousness: the incarnate Word dwelt among’ us, full 
of grace and truth. Such is He that was in and from the 
beginning, and thus known. He was the King undoubtedly, 
but not so portrayed here. He is infinitely more than king, 
even God, yet God on earth, man dwelling among men, full of 
grace and truth. So only could God be displayed, unless in 
judgment which had left no hope but only destroyed to the 
bitter end at once and unreservedly. For infinitely different 
purposes had He come, as this passage itself declares in due 
season, perfectly knowing and feeling the universal evil of 
man. He tabernacled among us full of grace and truth. It 
was not a visit or a theophany, as in O.T. experiences. So He 


_ here manifested God, Who is love. But grace is more; it is 


love in the midst of evil, rising above it, going down under it, 
overcoming it with good. 

And such was Jesus, sojourning on earth, full of truth withal ; 
for otherwise grace was no more grace, but a bage imitation, 
and most ruinous both for God and to man. Not such was 


20 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Jesus, but full of grace and truth, and in this order too. For 
grace brings in the truth and enables souls to receive truth 
and to bear it, themselves as sinners judged by it. He and He 
only was full of grace and truth. To make it known, to make 
God Himself thus known, He came. For, as grace is the activity 

- of divine love in the midst of evil, so truth is the revelation of 
all things as they really are, from God Himself and His ways 
and counsels down to man and every thought and feeling as 
well as word and work of man, yea, of every invisible agency for 
good or evil throughout all time, and throughout all eternity. 
So He dwelt among us, full of grace and truth. 

Nor did God fail to render testimony to Him thus. “John 
witnesseth about him, and hath cried, saying, This was he of 
whom I said, He that cometh after me is become before me, for he 
was before me” (ver. 15). Most strikingly is John introduced 
with his testimony in each of the great divisions of the chapter. 
Before it was to the abstract revelation of the Light. Here it 
is to His actual presentation to the world, and as it is historical, 
so we have what John cries, not merely a description as before. 
He says “This was he of whom I said, &c.” The coming of 
Jesus after John was no derogation from His glory, but the 
very contrary. No greater prophet than John the Baptist 
had arisen among those born of women. But Jesus is God. If 
He was pleased therefore to come after John in time, He had 
become incomparably before him in place and title; nay, He 
was really before him, but this only because He is divine. 

The last verse (15) appears to be a parenthesis, however full 
of instruction. But the direct line of truth runs, “full of 
erace and truth... and of his fulness all we received, and 
grace for grace” (ver. 16). An astonishing truth! He is the 
gift and the giver—full of grace and truth; and of His fulness 
did we all -receive* Such is the portion of the least 


Fai * Before our apostle died, Gnosticism was sowing its baneful seeds, it would 
seem even before St. Paul’s death. Early in the second century we know that 
Basileides had developed the system so far as to separate Jesus from Christ, the 
latter an emanation from God united to Jesus at His baptism, and returning to 
the Fulness on high before His death on the cross. Thus the Incarnation was 
annulled no less than the Atonement. But even Christ in this impious reverie 
was not the true God, but only an emanation, sent to make known the good, 


CHAPTER I. lt 


believer. The strongest is only the stronger, because he better 
appreciates Him. For there is no blessing outside Him, and 
consequently no lack for the soul that possesses Jesus. If the 
Colossian saints, if any others, seek to add any other thing 
to the Lord, it is a real loss, not gain. It is but to add what 
detracts from Him. For Christ is all (ra 7.), and in all. 

The expression “and grace for grace” has perplexed many, 
but without much reason ; for an analogous phrase occurs, even 
in profane authors not unfrequently, which ought to satisfy any 
inquirer that it simply means grace upon grace, one succeeding 
to another without stint or failure—super-abundance of 
grace, and not a mere literal notion of grace in us answering to 
grace in Him. It will be noticed further, that scripture speaks 
of grace upon grace, not truth upon truth, which last would be 
wholly unsuitable; for the truth is one, and cannot be so 
spoken of. The same apostle wrote even to the babes, not 
because they did not know the truth, but because they do 
know it, and that no lie is of the truth. The unction, which 
they in fact received from Him, teaches them as to all things, 
- and is true, and is not a lie. But as grace brings the truth, so 
the truth exercises in grace. How blessed that of His fulness 
all we received, and grace for grace ! 

Wholly different was seen at Sinai, “for the law was given 
through Moses, grace and truth came through Jesus Christ” 
(ver. 17). Not that the law is sin. Far be the thought. It is 
holy; and the commandment holy and just and good. But it is 
altogether impotent to deliver man or to reveal God. It has 
neither life to give, nor object to make known. It requires from 
man what he ought to render both to God and to his fellows ; 
but in vain is it required from man, already a sinner before the 
law was given. For sin entered the world through Adam no 
less surely than the law was given through Moses. Man fell 
and was lost; none could bring eternal life but Jesus Christ 


God, and expose the Demiurge, who made the world with all its evils inseparable 
from matter. One readily sees how the doctrine of the apostles cuts off by 
anticipation this irreverent and destructive falsehood by stating the simple 
truth of Christ’s Person and work, though only the germs may have then 
appeared, 


ee AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the Lord. Even this was wholly unavailable to man without 
His death in expiation of sin. Here however we have not yet 
_ reached the work of Christ, nor the message of grace that goes 
out to the world grounded on it in the gospel, but His Person 
in the world; and to this the testimony is “grace and truth 
came (éyévero) through Jesus Christ.” There and there only 
was the divine love superior to man’s evil; there and there 
only was everything revealed and in its due relation to God, 
for such is the truth. . Truly Jesus is a divine Saviour. 

But there is yet more than this. God Himself must be 
known, not merely fulness of blessing come in Christ, or souls 
be brought into the blessing by redemption. Yet man as such 
is incapable of knowing God. How is this difficulty to be 
solved? “No one hath seen God at any time: the only- 
begotten Son* who is in the bosom of the Father—je declared 
[him]” (ver. 18). Thus only can God be known as He is, for 
Christ is the truth, the revealer and revelation of God, as of 
everything in God’s sight. Nowhere does: scripture say with 
rationalists and, one regrets to add, with theologians, that God 
is the truth. Not so: God is the “I AM,” the self-subsisting 
One; He is light, He is love. But Christ is the truth 
objectively, as the Spirit is in power, working in man, And 
Christ has declared God, as One Who as the Son ¢s in the 
bosom of the Father, not Who was, as if He had left it; as He 
left the glory and is now gone back into glory as man. He 
never left the Father's bosom. It is His constant place, and 
His peculiar mode of relationship with the Father, Hence we 
by the Holy Ghost are in grace privileged to know God, even 
as the Son declared Him, Who perfectly, infinitely, enjoyed 
love in that relationship from everlasting and to everlasting. 
Into what a circle of divine association does He not introduce 
us! It is not the Light of men, nor yet the Word acting, or 
becoming flesh, but the Only-begotten Son Who is in the 
Father’s bosom, declaring Him according to His own competency 


* SB Crm L 33, Syrr. "cu. Aeth, Rom have the strange reading Qeds, God, 
which Tregelles, Westcott and Hort adopt, the latter having written a learned 
monograph in its defence, As the variant seems to be out of all correlation to 
“Father,” the weight of evidence is against it. 


2 Bie fab ae 


CHAPTER I. De 


_ of nature and the fulness of His own intimacy with the Father. 


Even John Baptist as having his origin in the earth was of the 
earth and spoke as of it. Jesus alone of men could be said to 
come out of heaven and be above all, testifying what He had 
seen and heard as the Holy Spirit also does. It was for Him 
to declare God, and this in His own proper relationship. 

If the verses which precede comprise the divine preface, the 
sections which follow may be viewed as an introduction. The 
Baptist in answer to the enquiring deputation gives an 
explicit, though in the first place negative, testimony to the 
Lord Jesus. A singularly fitted vessel of witness to the Messiah, 
as he was himself filled by the Spirit from his mother’s womb, 
he was sustained as scarce another had ever been in nothing 
but the function of making straight the way of Jehovah. 

“ And this is the witness of John when the Jews sent from 


- Jerusalem priests and Levites that they might ask him, Who 


art thou? And he confessed, and denied not, and confessed, 
Iam not the Christ. And they asked him, What then? 
Art thou Elijah? And he saith, I am not. Art thou the 
prophet? And he answered, No. ‘They said therefore to him, 
Who art thou, that we may give an answer to those that sent 
us? What sayest thou of thyself? He said, I [am the] voice 
of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of 
Jehovah, as said Isaiah the prophet. And they were sent 
from among the Pharisees; and they asked him and said to 
him, Why then baptisest thou, if thou art not the Christ, 
nor Elijah, nor the prophet? John answered them saying, I 
baptise with [éy] water: in the midst of you standeth, whom 
ye know not, he who cometh after me, of whom I am not 
worthy to unloose the thong of his sandal. These things took 
place in Bethany,* across the Jordan where John was baptising ” 
(vers. 19-28). 

Thus did God take care to rouse a general expectancy of the 
Messiah in the minds of His people, and to send them the 

* The best reading according to ancient authorities is Bydavig (NP™ A B 
omEFGHLMSVXI A I1P™ more than a hundred and thirty cursives, 
and many ancient versions), not ByéaBap¢ or BnOapagg. It was not the well- 


known village near Jerusalem, but another district of the same name beyond the 
Jordan, 


24 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


fullest witness. And never was there a more strictly in- 
dependent witness than John, born and brought up and kept 
till the fit moment to testify of the Messiah. For while the 
minute questions of those sent by the Jews from Jerusalem 
show how men’s minds were then exercised, how they wished 
to ascertain the real character and aim of the mysterious 
Israelite, himself of priestly lineage, and thereby as they ought 
to have known excluded from the Messianic title, there was no 
vagueness in the reply. John was not the Anointed. This 
was the main aim of their search; and our Gospel very simply 
and fully attests his reply. 

There is somewhat of difficulty in the next answer. For 
when asked, “Art thou Elijah?” he says, “I am not.” How 
is this denial from the lip of John himself to be reconciled 
with the Lord’s own testimony to His servant in Matthew xvii. 
11,12? “Elijah truly shall first come and restore all things. 
But I say to you, that Elijah is come already, and they knew 
him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. 
_ Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them. Then 
the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the 
Baptist.” And they were right. The key appears to le in 
Matthew xi. 14: “And if ye will receive it,” (says the Lord 
in vindicating John at a time when, if ever, he seemed to waver 
in his testimony; for who but One is the Faithful Witness ?) 
“ this is Elijah which was (lit. is) to come.” Such a word however 
needed ears to hear. Like the Lord (Son of man no less than 
Messiah), his testimony and his lot were to be in unison with 
an advent in shame and sorrow as well as in power and glory. 
The Jews naturally cared only for the latter; but, to avail not 
only for God but for the true wants of man, first must Jesus 
suffer before He is glorified, and comes again in power. So 
Elijah came to faith (“if ye will receive it”) in the Baptist, 
who testified in humiliation and with results in man’s eyes 
scanty and evanescent. But Elijah will come in a manner 
consonant with the return of the Lord to deliver Israel and 
bless the world under His reign.. To the Jew who only looked 
at the external he was not come; to point to the Baptist would 
have seemed mockery; for if they had no apprehension of 


CHAPTER I. 25 


God’s secrets or His ways, if they saw no beauty in the 
‘humbled Master, what would it avail to speak of the servant ? 
The disciples, feeble though they might be, enter into the truths — 
hidden from men, and are given to see beneath the surface the 
true style of the servant and of the Master to faith. 

Nevertheless John does take his stand of witness to Jesus, 
to His personal and divine glory; and to this end, when 
challenged who he was, applies to himself in every Gospel the 
prophetic oracle attached to him, “I [am the] voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of Jehovah.” 
Jesus was Jehovah, John no more than a voice in the desolation 
of the earth, yea, of Israel, to prepare the way before Him. 

They further inquire why he baptised if neither the Messiah, 
nor Elijah (that is, the immediate precursor of the kingdom in 
power and glory over the earth, Mal. iv.), nor the prophet 
(that is, according to Deut. xviii. which, however, the apostle 
Peter in Acts iii. as clearly applies to the Lord Jesus, as the 
Jews seem to have then alienated it from the Messiah). This 
gives John the occasion to render another testimony to Christ’s 
glory ; for his answer is, that he himself baptised with water ; 
but there stands among them, yet unknown to them, One 
coming after, Whose sandal-thong he was not worthy to 
unloose. 

It is evident that John’s baptism had a serious import in 
men’s minds, since, without a single sign or other miracle, it 
awakened the question whether the Baptist were the Christ. 
It intimated the close of the old state of things and a new 
position, instead of being the familiar practice which tradition- 
ists would make it. On the other hand, scripture is equally 
plain that it is quite distinct from Christian baptism: so much 
so, that disciples previously baptised with John’s baptism had 
to be baptised to Christ when they received the full truth of 
the gospel (Acts xix.). The Reformers and others are singularly 
unintelligent in denying this difference, which is not only 
important but plain and certain. Think of Calvin’s calling it 
a foolish mistake, into which some had been led, of supposing 
that John’s baptism was different from ours! The confession 
of a coming Messiah widely differs from that of His death and 


26 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


resurrection ; and this is the root of differences which involve 
“weighty consequences. 

From verses 19 to 28 John the Baptist does not rise beyond 
what was Jewish and dispensational. The next paragraph 
brings before us the testimony which he rendered when he saw 
Jesus approaching. And here we have Christ’s work viewed 
in all the extent of gracious power which might be expected in 
the Gospel devoted to showing out the glory of His Person. 

“On the morrow he seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, 
Behold, the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world!” (ver. 29.) There was no image more familiar to a Jew’s 
mind than that of the lamb. It was the daily sacrifice of 
Israel, morning and evening. Besides, the paschal lamb was 
the pledge for the fundamental peace of the year; even as its 
first institution was co-eval with the departure of the sons of 
Israel from the house of bondage. We can understand therefore 
what thoughts and feelings must have crowded on the heart 
of those who looked for a Saviour now, when Jesus was thus 
attested by His forerunner, “Behold the Lamb (duvos) of 
God.” In the book of Revelation He is frequently viewed as 
the Lamb, but there with a pointedly different word (apviov), 
the holy earth-rejected Sufferer, in contrast with the ravening 
wild Beasts, civil or religious instruments of Satan’s power in 
the world (ch. xiii.). Here the idea seems to centre not so 
much in the slain One exalted on high as in the sacrifice, 
“Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world.” 

John does not say “that will take,” still less “that has 
taken”; nor does the notion seem at all tenable that He was 
then taking sin away. It is, as frequently in John and else- 
where, the.abstract form of speech; and the meaning should 
be understood in its fullest extent, irrespective of the time of 
its accomplishment. There was the Person, and this His work. 
Thus the testimony looks onward to the effects of the death of 
Christ as a whole; but these were not to appear all at once. 
The first result was to be the gospel, the message of remission 
of sins to every believer. Instead of the sin of the world only 
being before God, the blood of the Lamb is set; and God could 


CHAPTER I. ATE 


_ therefore meet the world in grace, not in judgment. Not only 
was love come in Christ’s Person as during His life, but now 
the blood also shed whereby God could cleanse the foulest; 
and the gospel is to every creature God’s proclamation of His 
readiness to receive all, and of His perfectly cleansing all who 
do receive Christ. In fact only those that are His now, 
the church, receive Him; but the testimony is sent forth to 
all the creation. 

When Christ comes again in His kingdom, there will be a 
further result; for all creation will then be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption, and Israel will at length look upon 
the Messiah Whom they pierced in their blind unbelief. The 
blessing resulting from the sacrifice of Christ will then be far and 
wide extended, but not complete. Only the new heavens and 
new earth (and this exceeds the limited scope of the Jewish 
- prophets, but is the full meaning which the christian apostles 
give the words) will behold the ultimate fulfilment; and then 
indeed it will be seen how truly Jesus was “the Lamb of God 
that taketh away the sin of the world.” Jor then, and not till 
then, will sin have disappeared absolutely, and all its active 
consequences. The wicked having been judged and cast for 
ever into the lake of fire, as well as Satan and his angels, 
righteousness will then be the footing of God's relationship 
with the world, not sinlessness as at first, nor dealings in Christ 
in view of sin as since and now, but all things made new. 
Observe however that the Baptist does not say the “sins” of 
the world. What a fatality of error haunts men when they 
venture to handle the truth of God after a human sort! It 
is not only in sermons or books that one finds this common 
and grave blunder. The solemn liturgies of Romanism and 
Protestantism are alike wrong here. They alter and un- 
consciously falsify the word of God when directly referring 
to this scripture. In speaking of believers both the apostles 
Paul and Peter show that the Lord Himself bore their sins upon 
the cross. Without this indeed there could be neither peace 
secured for the conscience nor a righteous basis for worshipping 
God, according to the efficacy of the work of Christ. The 
Christian is exhorted to come boldly into the holies by the 


28 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


blood of Jesus, which has, at the same time, purged his sins 
and brought himself nigh; but this is only true of the believer. 
In total contrast is the state and condition of the unbeliever, 
of every man in nature. He is far off, in guilt, in darkness, in 
death. The language of the liturgies confounds all this, ac- 
cording indeed to the practice of their worship; for the world 
is treated as the church, and the church as the world. Were 
_ Christ the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world, all men 
would stand absolved before God, and might well therefore 
boldly approach and worship; but it is not so. The blood is 
now shed for the sin of the world, so that the evangelist can 
go forth and preach the gospel and assure all who believe 
of pardon from God; but all who refuse must die in their sins, 
and only the more terribly be judged because they refused the 
message of grace. 

But God never forgets the personal dignity of the Lord Jesus 
here. Hence John the Baptist adds, ‘‘ This is he of whom I said, 
After me cometh a man who is become before [or, hath taken 
precedence of] me, for he was before me.* And I knew him 
not, but that he might be manifested to Israel, therefore 
came I baptising with (év) water” (vers. 30, 31). There is no 
reference here to His Messianic judgment as in other Gospels, 
which on the other hand are silent as regards a testimony like 
this to His glory. Undoubtedly also John did call souls in 
Israel to repent in view of the kingdom as at hand; but here 
the one object is the manifestation of Jesus to Israel. It 
is an absorbing topic of this Gospel indeed. The previous 
unacquaintance of the Baptist with Jesus made his testimony 
so much the more solemn and emphatically of God; and 
whatever the inward conviction he had as the Lord came for 
baptism, it did not hinder the external sign nor the witness he 
bears to His person and His work as he had borne before it. 

Hence we read, “And John bore witness, saying, I have 
beheld the Spirit descending as a dove out of heaven, and it 
abode upon him. And I knew him not; but he that sent me 


* It is interesting and instructive to note that to the Pharisees John is silent 
(ver. 27) as to Christ’s pre-existent eternity as the ground of His taking 
precedence of himself though born after him. Compare verses 15, 30, 


Pay 


CHAPTER I. 29 


to baptise with (év) water, he said unto me, Upon whomsoever 


thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, this is 
he that baptiseth with (éy, the) Holy Spirit. And I have seen 
and borne witness that this is the Son of God” (vers. 32-34). 
Such was the suited sign for the Saviour. Ravens might 
have been employed in God’s wisdom to feed the famished 
prophet at another dark day; but not such was the appearance 
of the Spirit descending from heaven to abide on Jesus. The 
dove only could be the proper form, emblematic of the spotless 
purity of Him on Whom He came. Yet did He come upon 
Him as man, but Jesus was man without sin; as truly man as 
any other, but how different from all before or after! He was 
the second Man in bright contrast with the first. And He 
is the last Adam: in vain does unbelief look for a higher 
development, overlooking Him in Whom dwelt all the fulness” 


_of the Godhead bodily. 


Observe again, the Spirit came before the death of the Lord 
Jesus. If Christ died, He died for others. If He suffered and 
became a sacrifice, it was not for Himself. Jesus needed no 
blood in order that He might subsequently be anointed with 
the holy oil. He was Himself the Holy One of God in that 
very nature which in every other case had dishonoured God. 

But if the Spirit abode on Him as man, this is He that 


-baptises with the Holy Spirit. None could so baptise but 


God. It were blasphemy to say otherwise. It is the fullest 
prerogative of a divine person so to act; and hence John the 
Baptist utterly disclaimed it, and in every Gospel points to 
Jesus only as the Baptiser by (év) the Holy Ghost, as himself 
had come baptising with water. It is the mighty work of 
Jesus from heaven, as He was the Lamb of God on the cross. 
Thus, though the immediate aim of John’s mission with 
baptism attached to it was for the manifestation of Jesus 
to Israel, he testifies to Him as the Lamb of God in relation to 
the world, the Eternal at whatever time He came (and surely it 
was the right moment, “the fulness of the time,” as the great 
apostle assures us, Galatians iv. 4), not merely as the object 
of the Holy Ghost’s descent to abide on Him, but as baptising 
with the Holy Ghost. “And I have seen and borne witness 


30 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


that this is the Son of God” (ver. 34). Such was His everlasting 
relationship: not the Son of man Who must be lifted up if we 
are to have life eternal, but the Lamb of God and the Son 
of God. On the other hand it is not here the Father declared: 
by, or revealing Himself in, His. Only-begotten Son, but God 
in view of the broad fact of the world’s sin, and Jesus His 
Lamb to take its sin away. So the baptism of the Holy Ghost 
is not quickening, but that power of the Spirit which acts 
on the life already possessed by the believer, separates from all 
that is of flesh and world, and sets in communion with God’s 
nature and glory as revealed in Christ. He was as man on 
earth, not only Son of God, but always conscious of it; we 
becoming so by faith in Him are rendered conscious of our 
relationship through the Holy Ghost given to us. Nevertheless 
even Him, as the Gospels show, the descent of the Spirit Who 
anointed Him placed in a new position here below. All here 
is public announcement and reaches the world in result. 

We have had before us John’s testimony reaching out far 
beyond the Messiah in Israel; we see now the effect of his 
ministry. “Again, on the morrow, stood John and two of his 
disciples ; and, looking at Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold, 
the Lamb of God! and the two disciples heard him speak, and 
followed Jesus. But Jesus, having turned and beheld them 
following, saith to them, What seek ye? And they said to 
him, Rabbi (which is to say, being interpreted, Teacher), where 
abidest thou? He saith to them, Come and see. They went 
therefore * and saw where he abode, and abode with him that 
day. It was about the tenth hour” (vers. 35-39). It is not 
_ the fullest or clearest statement of the truth which most acts 
on others. Nothing tells so powerfully as the expression of 
the heart’s joy and, delight in an object that is worthy. So it 
was now. “Looking at Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold, 
the Lamb of God!” The greatest of woman-born acknow- 
ledges the Saviour with unaffected homage, and his own 
disciples that heard him speak follow Jesus. “He must 
increase, but I must decrease.” And soit ought to be. Not: 
John but Jesus is the centre: a man but God, for none other | 

* NS ABCLT>X A, 33, Memph. read ofv, which inferior witnesses omit. 


CHAPTER I. 31 


could be. a centre without derogation from the divine glory. 
Jesus maintains that place, but this as man too, Wonderful 
truth, and for man how precious and cheering! John was the 
servant of God’s purpose, and his mission was thus best 
executed “when his disciples followed Jesus. The Spirit of 
God supplants human and earthly motives. How indeed could 
it be otherwise, if one really believed that He in His Person 
was God on earth? He must be the one exclusive and 
attractive centre for all that know Him; and John’s work was 
to prepare the way before Him. So here his ministry gathers 
to Jesus, sending from himself to the Lord. 

But if in the Gospel of Matthew the Lord has a city if not a 
home, which we can name, here in that of John it is unnoticed 
where He abode. The disciples heard His voice, came and saw 
where He abode, and abode with Him that day; but for others 
it is unnamed and unknown. We can understand that so it 
should be with One Who was not only God in man on earth, 
but this wholly rejected of the world. And so divine hfe 
effects in those that are His: “therefore the world knoweth 
us not, because it knew him not” (1 John iii. 1). 

Nor does the work stop there or then. “Andrew, the 
brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two that heard [it] 
from John and followed him. He first findeth his own brother 
Simon, and saith to him, We have found the Messiah (which 
interpreted is Christ), and he led him to Jesus. Jesus looking 
at him said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonah [or, John]; thou 
shalt be called Cephas (which is interpreted Peter [or, Stone])” 
(vers. 40-42). Deeply interesting are the glimpses at the first 
introduction to Jesus of those souls who receiving Him found 
life eternal in Him, and were called afterwards to be founda- 
tions of that new building which would supersede the old, 
God’s habitation in the Spirit. But all here concentrates in 
_ the Person of Jesus, to Whom Simon is brought by his brother, 
one of the first two whose souls were drawn to Him, however 
little yet they appreciated His glory. Yet was it a divine 
work, and Simon’s coming was answered with a knowledge 
of past and present and future that told out Who and What He 
was, Who now spoke to man on earth in grace. 


/ 


o2 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Here the same principle re-appears. Jesus, the image of the 
invisible God, the only perfect manifestation of God, is the 
acknowledged centre beyond all rivalry. He was to die, as 
this Gospel relates (chap. xi.), to gather in one the scattered 
children of God; as He will by-and-by gather all things in 
heaven and all things on earth under His headship (Eph. i. 10). 
But then His Person could not but be the one centre of 
attraction to every one who saw by faith what He is entitled to 
be for every creature. Only He was come not only to declare 
God and show us the Father in Himself the Son, but to take 
all on the ground of His death and resurrection, having 
perfectly glorified God in respect of the sin which had ruined . 
all; and thereon to take His place in heaven, the glorified 
Head over all things to the church His body on earth, as 
we know now. On this however, as involving the revelation of 
God’s counsels and of the mystery hidden from ages and from 
generations, we do not enter, as it would carry us rather to the 
Epistles of the apostle Paul, the vessel chosen for disclosing 
these heavenly wonders. 

Our business now is with John, who lets us see the Lord 
on earth, a man but very God, and so drawing to Himself the 
hearts of all taught of God. Had He not been God, it would 
have been robbery not only from God but sometimes also from 
man. But not so: all the fulness dwelt in Him—dwelt in 
Him bodily. He was therefore from the beginning the divine 


/ centre for saints on earth, as afterwards when the exalted Man 


the centre on high, to Whom as Head the Spirit united them as 
members of His body. This last could not be till redemption 
made it possible according to grace, but on the basis of 
righteousness. What we see in John attaches to the glory 
of His divine Person: otherwise to bring to Jesus would have 
been to separate from God, not to Him as itis. But, in truth, 
He was and is the sole revealed centre, as He was and is 
the only full revealer of God, and this because He is the true 
God and life eternal, though He Who was manifested in flesh, 
and so meeting and winning man to God by His death. 

“On the morrow he* would go forth into Galilee, and Jesus 


* The best copies do not read “ Jesus” here, but in the next clause. 


ENE 


CHAPTER I. oe) 


findeth Philip and saith to him, Follow me. Now Philip was 


from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter” (ver. 43, 44). 
It is an immense thing to be delivered by Jesus from the 
waste of one’s own will or from the attachment of the heart to 
the will of a man stronger than ourselves; an immense thing 
to know that we have found in Him, not the Messiah merely, 
but the centre of all God’s revelations, plans, and counsels, 
so that we are gathering with Him because we are gathering 
to Him. All else, whatever the plea or pretension, is but 
scattering, and therefore labour in vain, or worse. 

But we need more, and find more in Jesus, Who deigns to be 
not only our centre but our “ way,” on earth indeed, but not of 
the world as He is not. For such He is, no less than the 


, truth and the life. What a blessing in such a world! It is 
_ now a wilderness where is no way. He is the way. Do we 


fear where to walk, what step to take? Here are snares to 
seduce, there dangers to affright. Above them says the voice 
of Jesus, “Follow me.” None other is safe. The best of His 
servants may err, as all have. But even were it not so, He 
says “Follow me.” Christian, hesitate no more. Follow Jesus. 
You will find a deeper and better fellowship with those that 
are His; but this by following Him Whom they follow. Only 
look well to it that it be according to the word, not your own 
thoughts and feelings; for are they better than those of others? 
Search your motives according to the light where you walk. 
“Tf thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.” 
But singleness is secured by looking to Jesus, not, to ourselves 
or others. We have seen enough of ourselves when we have 
judged ourselves before God. Let us follow Jesus: to Him 
only and absolutely, a divine Person on earth, it is due. It is 
the true dignity of a saint; it is the only security for him who 
has still to watch against the sin that is in him; it is the path 
of genuine humility, and of real love, and of faith. In this shall 
we be sure of the guidance of the Spirit Who is here to glorify 
Him, taking of His and showing them to us. 

He that has found and follows Christ soon seeks and finds 
others. But they are not always prepared to follow at once. 
So Philip proves here with the son of Talmai, here called not 

© 


34 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Bartholomew but Nathanael. And hence, too, we learn that 
a man otherwise excellent, may be hindered by not a little 
prejudice. It is a wholesome lesson neither to be hasty in our 
expectations nor to be cast down if a good man be slow to 
listen, as we may often prove. 

“Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith to him, We have 
found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did 
write, Jesus from Nazareth, the son of Joseph” (ver. 46). 
Nathanael was not at all prepared for this. Most surely did 
his heart look for Him of Whom Moses and the prophets wrote; 
but that the Christ was Jesus from Nazareth, the son of Joseph, 
he had yet to learn. He believed in the glory of Messiah’s 
Person, as far as the Old Testament had revealed it before- 
hand: it had never occurred to him how Messiah could be 
“from Nazareth,” not to speak of “the son of Joseph.” For 
that village was despicable in the eyes even of a despised 
Galilean, who doubtless felt the more its miserably low moral 
repute because of his own practical godliness. Had Philip 
said “from Bethlehem, the Son of David,” no such shock could 
have been given to the expecting Jew. But in truth, the Lord . 
is here viewed as wholly above all earthly associations, and 
therefore He could come down to the lowest. For He was the 
Son of God Who came to Nazareth, and only so could be said 
to be “from Nazareth” any more than “ the son of Joseph.” 

However this may be, Nathanael does not withhold his ex- 
pression of hesitation. “And Nathanael said to him, Can there 
be any good thing out of Nazareth? Philip saith to him, 
Come and see” (ver. 46). But there was another also to see. 
For Jesus, Who saw Nathanael coming to Him, gave him to 
hear words of grace about himself which might well surprise 
him in His greeting, “ Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is 
no guile” (ver. 47). If the Spirit of prophecy wrought 
according to Psalm xxxii., soon was he to know the Spirit 
of adoption and the liberty wherewith the Son makes free. 

“ Nathanael saith to him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus 
answered and said to him, Before that Philip called thee, 
when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee” (ver 48). He 
is God always and everywhere in this Gospel. Unseen, Jesus 


ew 


CHAPTER I. 3D 


had seen Nathanael. He had seen him where evidently he 
thought himself seen by none; but He who heard the musings 
of his heart in that spot “under the fig tree” saw him: the 
irresistible evidence of His own glory, of omniscience and 
omnipresence. Yet was He Who saw him evidently a man 
in flesh and blood. He could be none other than the promised 
Messiah—Emmanuel, Jehovah’s fellow, “ Ruler in Israel, whose 
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.” His 
prejudice instantly vanished away as mist before the sun in 
its strength. He might not be able to explain the connection 
with Nazareth, or with Joseph; but a good man would not, 
none but a bad one could, resist the positive light of One Who 
thus knew all things, and told it out in grace to win the heart 
of Nathanael and of every one who hears His word and fears 
God since that day to this. 

But there is more conveyed here. Surely the fig tree is not 
a fact only, or an isolated circumstance, but clothed with the 
significance usually found in it, at least in scripture. In the 
great prophecy of our Lord, the fig tree is employed as the 
symbol of the nation; and so one cannot doubt it is here. If 
Nathanael were there musing in his heart before God on the 
expected Messiah and the hopes of the elect people, as many, 
indeed all men, were at that time through the impulse of John 
the Baptist, nay, even whether he were the Christ or not 
(Luke iii. 15), we may conceive the better with what amazing 
force the words of Jesus must have appealed to the heart and 
conscience of the guileless Israelite. This appears to be 
powerfully confirmed by the character of his own confession. 
“ Nathanael answered [and saith to]* him, Rabbi, thou art the 
Son of God, thou art the King of Israel” (ver. 49). It was a 
confession precisely of the Messiah according to Psalm ii. He 
might be Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph; but He could 
be, He was, none other than “ My [Jehovah’s] king,” “the Son” 


; (vers. 6, 12), though not yet anointed on Zion, the hill of 


Jehovah’s holiness. Nathanael was prompt and distinct now, 


as slow and cautious before. 
Nor did the Lord check the flow of grace and truth, and 


* There is not a little variation here in the copies, even the more ancient. 


36 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Nathanael must borrow vessels not a few, till there was not 
one more to receive the blessing that would still overflow. 
“Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, 
I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see 
greater things than these. And he saith to him, Verily, 
verily, I say to you, [Henceforth]* ye shall see heaven opened, 
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son 
of man” (vers. 50, 51). Was Messianic glory the horizon of 
that which Nathanael’s soul saw and confessed in Jesus? Not 
“hereafter,” but if any word here, “from the present,” “from 
that out,’ should the disciples see, if earthly power were still 
delayed, the opened heaven, and the homage of its glorious deni- 
zens to the rejected Messiah, the Son of man. Him all peoples, 
nations, and languages should serve, when He should enter on 
His everlasting dominion which should not pass away, and 
His kingdom which should not be destroyed. Truly these are 
“oreater things”; the pledge of which Nathanael saw thenceforth 
in the attendance of God’s angels on Him Whom man despised 
and the nation abhorred to their own shame and ruin, but to 
the working out of heavenly counsels and an incomparably 
larger sphere of blessing and glory than in Israel or the land. 
These the reader may see in Psalm viii., especially if he consult 
the use made of it in 1 Corinthians xv., Ephesians i, and 
Hebrews ii. 


* The oldest copies and versions omit dm’ dpi, which, if read, must be rendered 
“from now” or “henceforth,” not ‘‘ hereafter,” 


CHAPTER II. 


THE second chapter opens with a striking miracle—the water 
turned into wine. It is only given here. Jesus is God, the 
God of creation. He had shewn His omniscience to Nathanael, 
now His omnipotence to others. It was “the third day,” 
possibly the third since He had first seen Nathanael. But the 
passage is so significant that one does not feel disposed to 
question the thought that the Spirit may here have meant 
figuratively the type of a day yet future when glory will 
appear, as distinguished from the day of John the Baptist’s 
testimony, and that of the Lord and His disciples. For as the 
light shone in despised Galilee when He came in humiliation, 
so will it shine on the poor in spirit when He appears in glory ; 
and judgment fall on the proud and lofty, on Jerusalem in its ; 
religious pretensions, so big and so hollow, till grace makes 
even her lowly before Him. 

“ And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; 
and the mother of Jesus was there. And Jesus also was invited 
and his disciples unto the marriage” (vers. 1, 2). It is the figure 
of things on earth: there is no picture of the heavens opened 
here. Hence we find the mother of Jesus brought forward 
prominently as one at home in the scene. “ And when the wine 
fell short, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no 
wine” (ver. 3). The first Adam always fails, and fails most 


- where most is wanted. But Jesus will meet all wants, though 


His time is not yet come. Faith however never looks to Him 

in vain, and “Jesus saith to her, What have I to do with thee, 

woman? mine hour is not yet come” (ver. 4). It is a 

remarkable answer, which Romanist theologians find very 

difficult to square with their doctrine and practice. He does 
37 


38 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


not'say, Mother. It is no longer a question of the first Adam: 
not that there was disrespect, but that Mariolatry is unfounded 
and sinful. Jesus was here to do.the will of God. Blessing, 
He would show, comes down from the Father through the 
Son. Flesh and its relationships have nothing to do in the 
matter. All must be of grace. 

“His mother saith to the servants, Whatever he shall say to 
you, do.” Now there were six waterpots of stone set there 
according to the purification of the Jews, holding each two or 
three measures” (vers. 5,6). The Jewish system was a witness 
of defilement ; and its ordinances could do no more-than sanctify 
to the purifying of the flesh. This was human. Jesus was here 
for divine purposes, then in testimony, by-and-by in power. 
“Jesus saith to them, Fill the waterpots with water. And 
they filled them up to the brim. And he saith to them, Draw 
now and carry to the master of the feast. And they carried. 
But when the master of the feast tasted the water that 
had become wine (and he knew not whence it was, but 
the servants that had drawn the water knew), the master of 
the feast calleth the bridegroom and saith to him, Every man 
at first setteth on the good wine, and when they have drunk 
freely, then the worse; thou hast kept the good wine until 
now” (vers. 7-10). 

So will Jesus do on the richest scale in the day that is 
coming. He will reverse the sorrowful history of man. The 
wine will not fail when He reigns. There will be joy for God 
and man in happy communion together. Jesus will furnish all 
to the glory of God the Father. In that day too He will be the 
Bridegroom and the master of the feast; and the joy of that day 
will find its root not only in the glory of His Person, but in the 
depth of that work of humiliation already wrought on the 
cross. There will be no secrets then. It will not be the 
servants ouly who will then know, but all from the least to 
the greatest. “This beginning of signs did Jesus at Cana of 
Galilee, and he manifested his glory, and his disciples believed 
on him” (ver. 11). Faith grows where real (2 Thess. i. 3). 

It will be noticed that our Gospel gives us most important 
particulars, unnoticed by all the others, which took place 


a 


’ CHAPTER II. 39 


before His Galilean ministry commenced when John was cast 
into prison. Thus we have John’s testimony suited to the 
Lord’s personal glory, about His earthly work for the universe 
even to eternity, and His heavenly work in baptising with the 
Holy Spirit. We have had Christ’s testimony “on the next 
day” after John’s; and here “the third day.” 

The hour of Jesus is not yet come. The marriage at Cana 
was but a shadow, not the very image. For the true bridals 
here below, as well as on high, we must yet wait. The mother 
of Jesus, of the true male Son, will be there when the feast 
arrives. What has been is but a testimony, a beginning of signs, 
to manifest His glory. Jehovah's day for Israel will come. 

“ After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother 
and his brethren and his disciples; and there they abode not 
many days” (ver. 12). It may be noted that Joseph does not 


- appear anywhere since the end of Luke ii. when the Lord 


was twelve years old. Doubtless he had fallen asleep mean- 
while. Mary is again seen with Him, His absolute separation 
to the will and work of His Father in no way interferes with 
the earthly relations He had graciously taken. And so will it 
be with that which He represents. 

But the marriage is only part of the display of His glory in 


‘the kingdom by-and-by; and of the judgment to be executed, 


He gives a token in the scene that follows, and this at the first 
Passover noted since that of His childhood. Our evangelist is 
careful to mention this feast throughout our Lord’s course 
(vi. 4; xi, 55). Alas! how little the Jews entered into its 
meaning. 

“ And the passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up 
to Jerusalem. And he found in the temple the sellers of oxen and 
sheep and doves, and the money-changers sitting; and having 
made a scourge of cords (or, ropes), he drove them all out of the 
temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and poured out the 
change of the money-changers, and overthrew their tables ; and 
to the sellers of the doves he said, Take these things hence; 
make not my Father’s house a house of merchandise. [And]* 


*NBLTX Maniph. omit 6¢, which A E P A with some cursives and versions 


insert. ‘ 


40 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


his disciples remembered that it is written, The zeal of thine 
house will eat me up” (vers. 13-17). 

Not only is this clearing of the temple distinct from that 
which the Synoptic Gospels relate on His last visit to 
Jerusalem, but it is instructive to remark that, as they only 
give the last, John gives only the first. It is a striking witness 
by a significant fact, as we have already seen doctrinally in his 
introduction, that he begins where they end, not in a barely 
literal way, but in all the depth of what Jesus is, says, and does. 
The state of the temple,:the selfishness which reigned there, 
the indifference to the true fear and honour and holiness of 
God while there was the utmost punctiliousness in a ritual 
show of their own invention, were characteristic of the ruined 
state of a people called to the highest earthly privilege by 
God’s favour. 

Solomon had acted at the beginning with a vigour which 
drove out the unworthy high priest in his day; when the 
kingdom was divided, Hezekiah and Josiah, sons of David, 
had each sought to vindicate the glory of Jehovah. Nehemiah, 
alas! under the protection of the Gentiles, had not been 
lacking, when the returned remnant so quickly manifested that 
the captivity on the one hand and God’s mercy on the other 
had failed to lead them to repentance. Now the Son gives 
a sign as solemn for proud religious Jerusalem, as the miracle 
of the water changed into wine was full of bright hope for 
despised Galilee. 

He does act as the Lord with divine rights, yet as the 
lowly sent One and servant. Nevertheless He does not with- 
hold the testimony to the glory of His Person in the very 
command not to make His Father’s house a house of 
merchandise. He was the Son of God, announced as such, 
even as Nathanael had already owned Him, judicially dealing 
not merely on moral grounds, such as might be open to 
any godly Israelite, but openly as the One Who identified 
Himself with His Father’s interests; and this was His house. 
So too the Spirit of prophecy spoke of the rejected Messiah, as 
the disciples remembered at a later day. 

“The Jews therefore answered and said to him, What sign 


CHAPTER II. 41 


‘Showest thou to us that thou doest these things? Jesus 
answered and said to them, Destroy this temple (vaoy), and in 
three days I will raise it up. The Jews therefore said, In 
forty and six years was this temple built, and wilt thou raise it 
up in three days? But he spoke of the temple of his body. 
When therefore he was raised from among [the] dead, his 
disciples remembered that he said this; and they believed 
the scripture, and the word which Jesus said” (vers. 18-22). 

The sign that He would give was His own resurrection- 
power, raising not others merely but-His own body, the true 
temple in which alone God was (for the Word was God). That 
of which they boasted had but a name without God, soon to 
be formally pronounced “their” house (Matt. xxiii.) and given 
up to destruction (Matt. xxiv.). It is resurrection that defines 
Him Son of God in power; and when He was raised, the 
disciples remembered His saying, as they yet more found the 
strongest confirmation of their faith in both scripture and His 
word. His resurrection is the fundamental truth both of the 
gospel and of our distinctive place as Christians. No wonder 
that the Jews were jealous of it, and that Gentiles mock or 
evade it. May we ever remember it, and Him Who thus gives 
scripture all its grace and power. 


We arrive now at a new division of the Gospel introduced 
by the prefatory verses as to man and his state, which con- 
clude chapter ii. The coming and the inquiry of Nicodemus 
give rise to our Lord’s testimony to the necessity of birth anew 
for the kingdom of God, to the cross, eternal life, the love of 
God, and the world’s condemnation, closing with the Baptist’s 
testimony to the glory of His Person. 

“Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, at the 
feast, many believed on his name, beholding his signs which he 
. did. But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, 
inasmuch as he knew all [men], and because he needed not 
that any should testify of man, for himself knew what was 
in man” (vers, 23-25). 

It was at the city of solemnities; it was a feast of Jehovah, 
nay, the most fundamental of the sacred feasts; and the 


42 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Messiah was there, the object of faith, working in power, and 
manifesting His glory in appropriate signs. And many 
believed on His name accordingly. It was man doing and 
feeling his best under circumstances the most favourable. Yet 
did not Jesus Himself trust Himself to them. Certainly it 
was from no lack of love or pity in Him; for whoever did 
or could love as He? And the reason, calmly given, is truly 
overwhelming: “inasmuch as he knew all men, and because he 
needed not that any should testify of man, for himself knew 
what was in man.” What a sentence; from Whom; and on 
what grounds! We do well to weigh it gravely: who is not 
concerned in it? It is the ordained Judge of quick and dead 
Who thus pronounces. Is it not all over with man ? 

One great fact, one truth, accounts for it; the total evil, the 
irremediable ruin, of man as such. The ways of the Lord are 
in the strictest accord with the words of the Spirit by the 
_ apostle Paul: “the mind of the flesh [and this is all that is in 
man] is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of 
God, for neither indeed can it be.” Hence they that are in the 
flesh cannot please God. Its doings and its sufferings are 
selfish and worthless Godward. Its faith as here is no better ; 
for it is not the soul subject to God’s testimony, but mind 
judging on evidence satisfactory to itself. It is a conclusion 
that Jesus must be Messiah; not submission to, nor reception 
of, divine testimony. For in this case the mind sits on the 
throne of judgment, and pronounces for or against, according 
to its estimate of reasons favouring or adverse, instead of the 
soul setting to its seal (in the face of all appearances it may be, 
yea, of the most real difficulties) that God is true. For what 
ground to expect the love of the Holy One to the vile and 
rebellious? Christ received according to God’s -testimony, 
Christ in grace to the lost dying for the ungodly and the 
powerless, He it is accounts for, as He displays, all; miracles 
or signs. not in the least. They arrest the eye; they exercise 
the mind; they may touch and win the affections. But 
nothing short of God’s word judges the man; or reveals what — 
He is in Christ to man thus judged; and this only, as we shall 
see, is of the Spirit, for He only, not man, has before Him the 


CHAPTER II. 43 


true object, the Son of God’s love given in grace to a ruined 
and guilty world. 

The truth is that our judgments flow from our affections. 
What we love we easily believe; what makes nothing of 
us we naturally resist and reject. As long as Jesus was deemed 
an ameliorator of humanity, there seemed to be the readiest, 
warmest welcome. Man would accredit Jesus if he thought 
Jesus accredited man. But how could he receive what 
makes nothing of himself, what condemns him morally, what 
keeps before him the solemn warning.of eternal judgment and 
the lake of fire? No, he hates the testimony and the Person 
Who is the central object of it, and truth connected with it 
and Him. When broken down before God and made willing 
to own one’s utter and inexcusable sins and sinfulness, it is 
a wholly different matter; and He Who was dreaded and 
repugnant is turned to as the only hope from God, even Jesus 
the Deliverer from the wrath to come. This is indeed con- 
version, and grace by quickening power alone effects it. 

So it is when christian doctrine is made to suit the world by 
being emasculated and changed to build up what in truth 
it judges. Then indeed it is no longer a seed that takes root 
and grows and bears fruit, but a mere leaven that spreads and 
may assimilate largely to itself. Such is Christendom, when 
human will was engaged on its side, and the religion became 
traditional. 

But here it is the holy and awful witness of Jesus to man at 
his best estate, when no enmity had appeared, but all looked 
full of human promise. Here, again, we see John beginning 
where the other Gospels close. It is not Messiah rejected, but 
Jesus the Son of God, Who knows the end from the beginning, 
treating man as altogether vanity and sin; and this, because 
God is in none of his thoughts, but self without real sorrow or 
shame about his opposition to God, without any due sense of sin 
or consequently a serious care about it. He gathered from 
the evidence of the signs before him that none but Messiah 
could have wrought them; but such an inference did not 
affect his moral state either with God or with man. He was 
just as he had been with any other object for his busy mind 


— 


44 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


to work on, but his nature unjudged, God no better known, 
and the enemy with just the same power over him as ever. 
As yet, it was man and not God; for there is no work of God 
till the word is received as it is in truth His, revealing His grace 
to man consciously needing it. Here was nothing of the sort, 
but a simple process of man’s own mind and feelings, without a 
question of his sins or state before God, without the smallest 
felt need of a Saviour. Jesus knew what it was worth and 
trusted not Himself to man, even when he thus believed on 
Him. It was human faith, of which we have instances not 
infrequently in this Gospel as elsewhere, whilst as clearly 
we have the divinely given faith which has eternal life: this 
having to do with God, as that, being of man, rises not above 
its source. “Beware of men,” said He to His apostles at a 
later day, Himself about to prove in the cross how truly from. 
the first He Himself knew what was in man. 


CHAPTER III. 


' TuE worthlessness of believing on Christ because of evidence 
we have seen. But in the crowd of such there might be 
souls who had the sense of wants awakened which led them to 
Jesus personally. And in Him was life: not merely all 
things brought into being through Him, and signs wrought 
and things done by Jesus, which, if written one by one in 
books, would be beyond the world’s power to contain, but, 
beyond all, life in the Son for the believer. And such is 
the fact which is here recorded in detail. 

“ But there was a man of the Pharisees, his name Nicodemus, 
a ruler of the Jews. He came to him by night, and said 
to him, Rabbi, we know that thou art come a teacher from 
God, for none can do these signs which thou doest, unless God 
be with him. Jesus answered and said to him, Verily, verily, 
I say to thee, Except one be born anew, he cannot see 
the kingdom of God” (vers. 1-3). It was a chief man from 
among the most orthodox in the chosen people; sufficiently in 
earnest to seek Jesus for truth, and still valuing the world 
enough to fear its condemnation and scorn. So he came by night 
to Jesus; yet did he take the ground of a persuasion he shared 
in common with his fellows because of the signs wrought by 
the Lord. He knew not that a deeper work was going on 
within, which drew him, not them, to Jesus. He, the teacher 
of Israel, recognised in Jesus One come a teacher from God, 
and God with Him: for any others born of woman a signal 
honour; for Jesus the proof that His true glory was un- 
known. As yet then Nicodemus was astray as to himself, 
as to the Jews, and as to Jesus. In short the true God was 


unknown. 
45 


46 AN. EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


The Lord accordingly stops him at once with the declaration 
that man, any one, needs to be born from the outset and 
origin. Not teaching is wanted but a new nature, a new 
source of being spiritually, in order to see the kingdom of God. 
No inference, however logical, is faith. It is not even a 
conviction of conscience. It may be a conclusion fairly drawn 
from sound premisses, from sensible facts of the weightiest kind 
before the mind; but neither God is known nor itself yet 
judged. The new character of life which suits the kingdom of 
God does not yet exist for the soul. In such a state teaching 
would but aggravate the danger or expose to fresh evil. The 
word of God had never penetrated the heart of Nicodemus. 
He knew not himself utterly defiled, spiritually dead in sins. 
What he wanted was to be quickened, not to have fresh 
aliment for the exercise of his mind. And Jesus, instead of 
commenting on his words, answered his true need, which 
he too would have sought himself, had he but known it. 

If Nicodemus then took for granted his own capacity, as 
he then stood, to profit by the truth and serve God and 
inherit His kingdom, the Lord with incomparable solemnity 
assures him, that the new birth is indispensable to seeing the 
kingdom. For God is not teaching or improving human 
nature. He had already tried it patiently; and the trial 
would ere long be absolutely complete. 

The kingdom of God is in question and not anything in 
fallen man. It was not yet established or displayed in power 
over the earth, as it will be at the appearing of Jesus. It was 
not yet preached to the Gentiles as it was after the cross. 
But it was come for faith in the Person of Christ, the pledge 
that it will be set up by and by in all its extent, its “ earthly ” 
and its “heavenly things.” The kingdom of God was among 
them in Christ, Who demonstrated its power, the enemies 
themselves seen or unseen being judges. Why then did 
not Nicodemus see it? From no defect in the object of faith 
or in His testimony, by general conviction and confession from 
no lack of signs attesting the presence and power of God. 
Alas! the defect is in man, and to man it is incurable; for 
who can change his nature? In fact, if ib were possible, it 


, CHAPTER III. AT 
could avail nothing. “Except one be born anew, he cannot see 
the kingdom of God.” God only can give a new nature, and a 
nature suited to His kingdom. Without this none can as 
much as see it. 

“Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when 
he is old? Can he eater a second time into the womb of his 
mother and be born?” (ver. 4). We learn hence that the 
intimation was the birth not from above but again; else the 
difficulty expressed in reply could have had no place. The 
truth is, however, that even if the fabled conversion of an old 
man into youth again could be true, yea, if the strange case 
suggested by the astonished Pharisee could have been turned 
by miracle into fact (as Jonah came forth alive from the great 
fish that swallowed him), it would fail to meet the requirements 
of the kingdom of God, as we shall see expressly in the further 
* explanation of our Lord. For it would be human nature 
still, let it be renewed in its youth or repeated in its birth ever 
so far or so often. A clean thing cannot come out of an 
unclean; and such is man’s nature since the fall. Nor is 
aught God’s way of renewal, but by giving a nature wholly 
fresh from its source; for the believer is born of God, not of 
corruptible seed but of incorruptible by the living and abiding 
word of God. 

“Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say to thee, Except one 
be born of water and Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom 
of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that 
which is born of the Spirit is spirit” (vers. 5, 6). Words 
of incalculable moment to man, of deep blessing where grace 
gives him ear to hear, and heart to receive and keep. Yet 
I scarce know a scripture more widely perverted than this has 
been to baptism, nor one where tradition is more dangerously 
false, though quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus be as. 
true of this as of any interpretation of scripture that could 
‘be named. A double result would follow, that not a soul could 
enter the kingdom of God save such as are baptised; and, 
secondly, as the context would prove, that, the new nature 
being identified with eternal life, none of the baptised could 
perish: a statement which all but the most grossly ignorant 


48 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


or prejudiced must confess to be in both its parts opposed to 
other and clear scriptures, and to notorious fact. 

Christian baptism (and this is what it is traditionally 
conceived to mean, not that of John or of the disciples) was 
not instituted, nor did the facts exist which it symbolises, till 
the Lord died and rose. How then could Nicodemus by any 
possibility anticipate them or understand what the Lord gives 
as-the clearing up of his difficulty as to being born anew? 
Yet the Lord reproaches him as “the teacher of Israel” with 
his slowness of intelligence. That is, he should (even as 
teaching Jews) have known these things, which he could not 
possibly know if the Lord alluded to a christian institution as 
yet undivulged. 

The reasoning of Hooker* (Works, ii. 262, &c. Keble’s ed. 5) 
as of others before and since is beside the mark, and simply 
proves inattention to scripture, and superficial acquaintance ° 
with the truth. It is not true that “born of water and Spirit ” 


* Cartwright had said that irregular baptism had grown out of a false 
interpretation of John iii. 5, ‘‘ where certain do interpret the word water for (of) 
the material and elemental water, when as (whereas) our Saviour Christ taketh 
water there by a borrowed speech for the Spirit.” This the reader will see 
to be imperfect ; for water here is the figure of the word bringing the sentence 
of death on the flesh ; and so is sinful man cleansed by Him out of Whose side 
flowed blood and water, as John testifies. On the general point says Hooker, 
*‘T hold it for a most infallible truth in exposition of sacred scripture, that 
where a literal construction will stand, the furthest from the letter is 
commonly the worst. There is nothing more dangerous than this licentious and 
deluding art, which changeth the meaning of words, as alchymy doth or would 
do the substance of metals, making of anything what it listeth, and bringeth in 
the end all truth to nothing, ... To hide the general course of antiquity 
agreeing in the literal interpretation, they cunningly affirm that ‘certain’ have 
taken those words as meant of material water, when they know that of all the 
ancients there is not one to be named that ever did otherwise either expound or 
allege the place than as implying external baptism” (E. P., V. lix. 2, 8). 
Antiquity was perhaps as unanimous in applying John vi. to the Lord’s Supper 
with as little solid reason. In neither case is it a literal construction, but a mere 
catching at a superficial resemblance; and in both cases the consequence is 
heterodoxy most perilous to souls, which has enormously helped on the ruin of 
Christendom as well as of deluded individuals. To deny that the Lord often 
elsewhere employed water figuratively is impossible; to maintain that He 
meant it literally here is to lower the sense immensely and to involve the worst 
consequences, as of an ordinance saving ex opere operato. It is remarkable, 
I would add, that the Gospel of John omits even the institution of baptism and 
of the Lord’s Supper, dwelling beyond all others on life and the Spirit, 


CHAPTER III. 49 


if literally construed means baptism. Never is that rite set 
out as figuring life but death, as in Romans vi., Colossians ii, 
and 1 Peter iii. “Know ye not that so many of us as were 
baptised unto Jesus Christ were baptised unto his death?” It 
is never the sign of quickening, but rather of identifying those 
quickened with the death of Christ; that they in virtue of 
Him might take the place of men dead to sin but alive to God, 
and so reckon themselves by grace, for under this we are, not 
under law. Such is the apostolic doctrine. The words of our 
Lord do not and cannot teach otherwise, as they must if John 
ili. 5 be applied to baptism. Take water here as figurative 
of the word which the Spirit uses to quicken, and all is clear, 
consistent, and true. Were it said in the scripture that we are 
born of the Spirit by means of water, we should have some 
approach to what the Fathers drew from it, and what is 
necessary to bear the construction put on it in the Anglican 
and other formularies that apply it to baptism. Their 
dealing with it seems to be really “licentious,” “ deluding,” and 
“dangerous,” at issue with what our Lord says even in verse 
5, still more with His omission of “water” in verse 6, most of 
all if it be possible with the place of baptism everywhere else 
given in scripture. Baptism may be the formal expression of 
washing away sins, never of communicating life, which is 


- unequivocally false teaching. 


So it is in John xiii. and xv., not to speak of chapters iv. and 
vii. Compare for the figure Ephesians v. 26, for the truth 
couched under it 1 Corinthians iv. 15, James i. 18, 1 Peter 
i. 23. It is not a rite giving honour to an official class, but the 
word of God applied by His Spirit, bringing death on nature 
that we might live to God in Christ. 

For Christ came by water and blood; He purifies and 
expiates (1 John v.). He is the truth, which the word of God 


_ applies in the power of the Spirit, judging the old nature and 


introducing the new. “I live, no longer I, but Christ liveth in 

me” (Gal. ii. 20). One is the same person, but a life is 

communicated which he had not before, not of Adam, but 

of Christ the Second man. He is begotten of God, made a 

partaker of the divine nature through the greatest and precious 
D 


~~ 50 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


promises, having escaped the corruption that is in the world 
through lust. Such is it to be born of water and of Spirit: 
an incomparably deeper thing than any form of truth, 
however it be prized in its place and for the object the Lord 
Who instituted it had in view. Baptism was the formal 
admission ; it was the confession of Christ on the ground of 
His death and resurrection, not of quickening which was true 
of all saints before Christ when there was no Christian 
baptism. If baptism were really the sign and means of 
quickening, consistency would deny life to the Old Testament 
saints, or they ought to have been so baptised, which they were 
not. But this is clearly false ground. There is no reason 
to infer that the twelve were baptised with Christian baptism : 
they baptised others, but, it would seem, were not themselves ; 
were they not then born again? Nor did circumcision mean 
life; and so we know that souls were born anew even before 
it was imposed on Abraham already justified by faith. 

Hence too it is important to observe that he who is thus 
born again is said to be born of the Spirit, omitting water, in 
verse 6. “That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that 
which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” The word (or water 
emblematically) can do nothing toward quickening without 
the Spirit, Who is the efficient agent in communicating the 
life of Christ. Water cleanses, but of itself it is not capable of 
quickening; ib is death to the flesh. There had been only 
flesh before; now as believing in Christ the man is born of 
God (1 John v.); and each nature retains its own characteristic. 
As flesh never becomes spirit, so spirit never degenerates into 
flesh, The natures abide distinct; and the practical business 
of the believer is to hold himself for dead to the one that he 
may live in the other by the faith of the Son of God Who 
loved him and gave Himself for him. 

Nor was Nicodemus to wonder that he and other Jews (not 
pagans merely, to which they would have assented at once) 
needed to be born afresh. “Wonder not that I said to thee, 
Ye must be born anew” (ver. 7). But if sovereign grace met 
that need, could it, would it, stop there? Certainly not. It 
would breathe the blessing as widely as the ravages of sin 


CHAPTER III. pull 


according to the choice of God. “The wind bloweth where it 
will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it 
cometh, and where it goeth: so is every one that is born of the 
Spirit” (ver. 8). Thus “every one” leaves room for any fallen 
man, a Gentile no less than a Jew. Whatever might be their 
distinction after the flesh, the Spirit thus freely flowing can 
bless those who are most distant, while the nearest is nothing 
without Him. 

It has been already remarked moreover, that in all this was 
no such special privilege as should have been beyond the ken 
of an intelligent Jew. Hence when “ Nicodemus answered and 
said to him, How can these things be? Jesus answered and 
said to him, Art thou the teacher of Israel and knowest not 
these things?” (vers. 9,10). Had he never read the promise 
to Israel in one prophet? “I will pour water on him that 
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my 
Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring.” 
Had he forgotten the words of another prophet? ‘Then will 
I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from 
all your filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you. 
A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I 
put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of 
your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh. And I will 
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my 
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. And 
ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye 
shall be my people, and I will be your God” (Isa, xliv. and 
Ezek. xxxvi.). 

There can be no mistake that Israel will require the new 
birth in order to receive and enjoy aright even the earthly 
blessings of God’s kingdom by-and-by, and that God will of 
His grace impart it to them for this end. Nicodemus then need 
_ not be surprised at the universal need of the new birth, even 
for the Jew, proclaimed by the Lord; but as the blessing is 
not of flesh but of Spirit, grace will not restrain it from 
any on grounds that give weight to man. The Gentile will not 
be left out of such rich mercy, indispensable to the kingdom of 
God, which is of grace, not of law or flesh, as the Jew was apt 


52 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


to assume. “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the 
waters, and he that hath no money: come ye, buy and eat; 
yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without 
price.” Is not this grace, and so expressed as to open the door 
to any of the nations? to sense of need, resourceless need, 
wherever found? Yet who did, who could, draw it out from 
the prophets and give the principle its absolute shape, as here 
to Nicodemus, but the One Who spoke? Others inspired of 
the Spirit were soon to follow; and of them all none more 
distinctly than the apostle Paul. 

Thus far then Nicodemus as a Jew, as the teacher of Israel, 
should have known the nature as well as the necessity of the 
new birth. The ancient prophets were not silent about its 
application to Israel, even for the days when blessings shall be 
shed abundantly on them from God according to His promise. 
Not the heathen only but His people (whatever might be their 
present self-complacency and the pride which wraps itself up in 
ignorance) are described as unclean, till He sprinkle clean 
water upon them and put His Spirit within them. Un- 
doubtedly the Lord, as was due to His personal glory, presents 
the truth with incomparably greater clearness and depth, 
as well as with an all-embracing comprehensiveness ; but what 
was presented ought not to have been strange to Nicodemus on 
his own ground. The new thing follows the cross whether in 
statement or in fact, as we see it implied in chapter iv. 

But even here the Lord intimates a knowledge to be com- 
municated, as in fact it was first by Himself in Person, then by 
the Holy Ghost through chosen witnesses, transcending that of 
the prophets and of a character, not measure only, quite 
different. “Verily, verily, I say to thee, We speak that 
_ we do know, and testify that we have seen ; and ye receive not 
our testimony” (ver. 11). It is no vision of things out of the 
ordinary sphere of him who was inspired to be a prophet, nor 
a message founded on the authority of Him Who sent His 
servant with a “Thus saith Jehovah.” Jesus only, true man 
among men, could none the less say because He was none the 
less God, We speak that which We know and bear witness of 
that which We have seen. He knew what was in man, 


CHAPTER III. 5)3) 


needing no testimony about man (chap. ii.); He knew what 
was in God, and alone of men could testify of Him without 
testimony about Him (chap. iii). I have known Thee, says 
Himself to the Father later on in this Gospel (chap. xvii. 25). 
But the world knew not the Father; least of all were the 
Father and the Son known by those who, in persecuting the 
disciples, thought to do God’s service. But, blessed be His 
name, if none knew the Father but the Son, there were not 
lacking those to whom the Son reveals Him; and so the Holy 
Ghost Who searches all things, yea the depths of God, reveals 
what was previously hidden even from prophets, and gives to 
Christians the mind, or intelligence, of Christ. 

For a divine person knows in Himself all things in them- 
selves ; not as the prophets from One without and above Who 
gives the commission, vision, and message. These therefore 
might often speak that which they knew not, and learn on 
searching that not unto themselves but unto us they did 
minister the things, which are now reported by those that 
have preached the gospel by (év) the Holy Ghost sent down from 
heaven. But Jesus spoke what He knew. Coming from God 
and being Himself God, He knew the divine nature perfectly 
and was here a man to reveal it to men. If none had seen 
God at any time, the Only-begotten Son Who is in the bosom 
of the Father has declared Him; He, alone of woman-born, 
had this competency, both as Son and as the image of the 
invisible God, in a sense not only pre-eminent but exclusive, 
as the Epistles to the Colossians and the Hebrews formally 
teach. And this He spoke in ineffable grace, expressing the 
grace and truth of Him Who is God and Father through a man’s 
heart to the hearts of men. Of the glory too, familiar to Him 
with the Father before the world was, He testified. For what 
was divine love keeping back from those about to share with 
Him the glory in which both will be displayed to the world, 
and to behold His glory as none else will see it? In heaven, 
yea in its brightest glory, He was at home; and as He was 
about to prepare a place in the Father’s house for His own, so 
He bears witness of what He alone had seen to those whom 
sovereign grace would call and fit to be with Him there. 


54 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


And what a testimony is this twofold knowledge, to the 
Person of Jesus, absolute yet in relation! He is indeed the 
true God, but withal eternal life.. It was not empirical, but 
intrinsic. Asa divine person alone could, He knew both man 
and God; and, after He has urged the indispensable need of 
being born anew, He speaks of God known above in nature 
and glory, as before it we had His knowledge of what was in 
man. How blessed to have such a knowledge communicated 
to us as now in Christ and Christianity! Would not man, 
needy, ignorant, blind, weleome such a boon? Alas! no: not 
even when grace brings it down and tells all out in the tones 
of human speech. “And ye receive not our testimony.” It 
declares God, and reveals the Father. It leaves no room for 
receiving glory one of another. It condemns man as he is, 
self-willed and proud, not only without heart for God but 
unwilling to believe what is in His heart for man expressed in 
every word and way of Jesus. As the apostle tells us, The 
things of God knoweth no one but the Spirit of God. The 
natural man is far from receiving them, for they are foolishness 
unto him; neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned. 

There is a natural repugnance in man’s mind to divine 
testimony. The judgment depends on the affections, and the 
affections of man are estranged from God. Privileges do not 
alter this, nor the responsibility which flows from the relation 
in which one may stand to God. He must be born again. A 
divine nature cleaves to God; the life which comes from Him 
as its source goes up to Him in desire, if not always (till 
redemption is known) in confidence of heart. 

Yet the Lord had not in this solemn declaration gone beyond 
the universal necessity of man for the kingdom of God; and 
therefore it was inexcusable in the Jewish teacher so to have 
overlooked its truth as to feel amazement at the Lord’s assertion 
of it. He ought to have known from the ancient scriptures, 
from the psalms and prophets especially, that Israel must be 
renewed in order to enter and enjoy their promised portion 
on the earth. “Truly God is good to Israel,” as the Messiah’s 
kingdom will manifest; but the assurance is restricted. It is 


CHAPTER III. 55 


“to such as are of a clean heart” (Ps. lxxiii.). So far will 
the mass of the Jews be from fitness for the kingdom, that 
the Spirit of Christ in the pious remnant does not hesitate 
to ask God’s judgment and pleading of their cause against 
an ungodly or unmerciful nation (Ps. xliii.). They were no 
better, but guiltier, than the Gentiles. There were enemies 
within as well as without. “And I said, Oh that I had wings 
like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at rest. Lo 
then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. 
Selah. I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and 
tempest. Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have 
seen violence and strife in the city. Day and night they go 
about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are 
in the midst of it. Wickedness is in the midst thereof; deceit 
and guile depart not from its streets. For it was not an 
enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it: 
neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself 
against me; then I would have hid myself from him. But it 
was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. 
We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house 
of God in company” (Ps. lv. 6-14). Thus to the saint’s 
mind the city (the holy city in title, in fact most unholy) is 
worse than the wilderness, dreary as it may be. Not Gentiles 


- only but Jews need to be born afresh: otherwise the name 


of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through them, 
as it is written (Rom. i. 24). 

But it is striking to notice that the chapter of Ezekiel 
(chap. xxxvi.), already cited in part, which is naturally brought 
to illustrate these words of the apostle Paul, declares in the 
plainest and most unconditional terms that God will sanctify 
His great name which was blasphemed among the heathen, 
“Which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the 
heathen shall know that I am Jehovah, saith the Lord Jehovah, 


' when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes. For I will 


take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all 
countries, and will bring you into your own land. Then will I 
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all 
your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. 


56 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put 
within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your 
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put 
my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, 
and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. And ye shall 
dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be 
my people, and I will be your God. I will also save you from 
all your uncleannesses: and I will call for the corn, and 
will increase it, and lay no famine upon you. And I will 
multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, 
that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the 
heathen. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and 
your doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in 
your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations. 
Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord Jehovah, be it 
known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own 
ways, O house of Israel. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, In 
the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities 
I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall 
be builded. And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas 
it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by. And they 
shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden 
of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are 
become fenced, and are inhabited. Then the heathen that are 
left round about you shall know that I Jehovah build the 
ruined places, and plant that which was desolate; I Jehovah 
have spoken it, and I will do it” (vers. 23-36). 

Further, these words of the prophet illustrate “the earthly 
things” in our Lord’s conversation with Nicodemus. “If I 
told you the earthly things and ye believe not, how shall 
ye believe if I tell you the heavenly things?” (ver. 12). In 
speaking as He had of the necessity to be born afresh—born 
of water and of Spirit, the Lord had not gone beyond “the 
earthly things.” The kingdom of God could not be entered 
or seen without that new birth. Of course it is indispensable 
for heaven; but the Lord goes farther and insists on it as 
essential even for the lower province of God’s kingdom. Even 
the Jew must be born again, and for millennial blessings too 


aes 


CHAPTER III. 57 


as well as for eternity. .So true is it that they are not all 
Israel which are of Israel, neither, because they are the seed 
of Abraham, are they all children. 

We shall see too, when our Lord proceeds in His discourse to 
touch on His cross and the love of God in giving His Son, that 
to be born anew does not adequately describe what is given 
to the believer, but life eternal. Substantially no doubt it 
is the same new nature which every saint has and must have; 
but, now that the glory and work of Christ are revealed, its 
full character shines out. There is yet more, as we know 
and the next chapter shows, the Spirit given, and the relation- 
ship of children of God enjoyed, and the results of the death 
and resurrection and ascension of Christ our portion even now. 
But I enlarge no more on this as yet. Only we here learn 
that the kingdom of God has its “heavenly things,” no less 
than “the earthly things” of which the prophets spoke. Jesus 
the Son could have opened the heavenly things, but the 
condition of such as Nicodemus did not admit of it for the 
present. The Spirit revealed all these and other depths of 
God amply after the shed blood vindicated God and purged 
their consciences. Then were the disciples free to learn all in 
the power of Christ’s resurrection and in the light of ee hl 
Such is christian knowledge. 

But even while Christ was here, He intimated distinctly the 
Father’s kingdom as a heavenly sphere where the risen saints 
are to shine as the sun, contra-distinguished from the Son of 
man’s kingdom, which is clearly the world, out of which 
at His coming the angels shall be sent to clear away all 
offences and those that practise lawlessness (Matt. xiii. 41-43). 
Nay, in the prayer given to the disciples we may recognise 
a similar distinction though not so sharply drawn out, for 
He bade them pray for their Father’s kingdom to come, where 
they and all the risen saints would be glorified; and then, that 


- His will be done as in heaven so on earth, which will only 


be secured at the completion of the age, when the Son of 
man comes in His kingdom (Matt. vi. 10). These together 
constitute the kingdom of God, which comprises therefore, 
as the Lord here assumes, “the heavenly things” and “the 


58 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


earthly things.” The reader will find abundant confirmation ~ 
in Ephesians i. 10, Colossians i. 20, and Hebrews xi. 22-24. 
We are next given to learn Who it is that could speak with 
competent knowledge and authority of heavenly things. It 
is the Son of man, the same Person doubtless Who deigned to 
be born of the virgin, the Son of David, the Messiah. But as 
Messiah He is to judge Jehovah’s people in righteousness, and 
to reign with a power which cannot be disputed, save to the 
ruin of every rebel. For the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest 
upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit 
of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear 
of Jehovah, and shall make Him of quick understanding in 
the fear of Jehovah; and He shall not judge after the sight 
of His eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of His ears; 
but with righteousness shall He judge the poor, and reprove 
with equity for the meek of the earth. As such He presented 
Himself to Israel, but was rejected; and, as we know, they 
reject Him to this day. For man, being lost, proves himself 
wholly blind, and of men none more than Israel against their 
truest glory and best treasure, Christ the Lord. And thus 
we have seen it from the first in the Gospel of John, who was 
given to treat things as they are, and as they are in presence 
of grace and truth in His Person Who reveals the Father. 
Here accordingly it is not a prophet revealing the future of 
the kingdom of Jehovah over the earth, or of the judgments 
which will introduce it, or of the evils which must be judged 
before the establishment of blessing in that day. It is more 
than a prophet who gives out what he receives responsibly to 
communicate from God to man. Jesus knows not merely 
what is in man on earth as none ever knew, as the Word made 
flesh alone did know, but what is in God above as only a 
divine Person could, yet now as man also. No prophet ever 
did, ever could, so speak as He; none but He so knew and so 
testified. He therefore could speak of things heavenly, as 
well as of the earthly, not as one inspired to tell of what was 
before unknown, but of that which He knew and saw in the 
communion of the Godhead. His becoming man in no way 
detracted from His divine capacity or rights; it was unspeak- 


ANE 


CHAPTER III. 59 


able grace to those for whose sakes He was come from God 
and went to God, not only the truth and witness of it, as He. 
alone could be, but about to die atoningly, as we shall see 
shortly in this very context, that the believer might live 
eternally and righteously. 

What could man, angel, or any other creature avail? It 
was His glory, His work. The man, Adam, whom Jehovah 
Elohim formed, He put in Eden, chief of all creatures around 
him which God had pronounced very good. But the heaven 
is Jehovah’s throne, though neither it nor the heaven of 
heavens can contain Him. “And no one hath gone up to 
heaven but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man 
that is* in heaven.” Men have been, and will be, caught up 
to heaven; angels have been sent down from heaven. To Jesus 
only it belonged to go up, as He only came down. For He was 
a divine person, and He came in love; and love is ever free as 
well as holy. “Lo! I am come to do thy will, O God.” In the 
volume of the book it was written of Him alone. And He 
Who was thus pleased to be found in fashion as a man, taking 
the body God prepared Him, rejoiced ever to speak of Himself 
as the Sent One, the man Christ Jesus, Who came down from 
heaven, to do not His own will but the will of Him that sent 
Him. He became servant, but did not, could not, cease to be 


God. But He is man withal, as truly as Adam; yea, He is 


what Adam was not—Son of man, come of woman. 

And so it is that in the form of the expression used He is 
stamped as having ascended to heaven, He only that descended 
from heaven: dvaBéBncevt ... 6 é« Tod ovpavod KataPas. 


* The Alexandrian (pr. m.) and a cursive of the Gospels (4949 in the Br. 
Museum) omit dy. Still more serious is the omission 6 dy év T@ ovpav@ in the 
Sinai, Vatican, two other uncials, a valuable Paris cursive, &c. There need be 
no hesitation however in accepting the mass of authorities against these testi- 
monies ; which illustrate the danger of being carried away by a few favourites, 
be they ever so venerable and in general trustworthy. I am glad to see that 


- Dr. Tregelles inserts the clause ; but it is hard to understand with what consis- 


tency it is done in his system of recension. 

+ We are not to suppose dvaBjoerae here. The futurity of the ascension is 
perfectly right in John vi. But here it is a proleptic character attached to the 
Person of the Lord; and hence to express this no tense was so proper as the 
perfect, the present continuance of a past act. The seeming anomalies of scrip- 
ture are most instructive when understood. 


60 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


For, as the apostle asks, That He ascended, what is it but 
that He also descended into the lower parts of the earth? 
He that descended is the same also that ascended up above 

all the heavens, that He might fill all things. Only, as the 
apostle Paul tells us it is in connection with His work and the 
counsels of God, so John presents it in our Lord’s words as 
connected with the truth of His Person—‘‘the Son of man 
that is in heaven.” And an astonishing truth it is. To have 
said the Son of God that was in heaven would have been true ; 
but what an infinite truth is that which is said, “the Son of 
man that is in heaven!” Impossible to be said if He had 
not been God, the Son of the Father, yet, what was of the 
deepest moment, said of Him as man, the rejected Messiah, 
“the Son of man that is in heaven.” The Incarnation was no 
mere emanation of divinity; neither was it a Person once 
divine Who ceased to be so by becoming man (in itself an 
impossible absurdity), but One Who, to glorify the Father, 
and in accomplishment of the purposes of grace to the glory 
of God, took humanity into union with Godhead in His 
Person. Therefore it is that He could say, and of Him alone 
could it be said, “the Son of man that is in heaven,” even as 
He. is the only-begotten Son that is [not merely that was*] in 
the bosom of the Father. He it is Who met, and more than 
met, the challenge of Agur (Prov. xxx.) speaking prophetically 
to Ithiel and Ucal, “Who hath ascended up into heaven or 
descended? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who 
hath bound the waters in his garment? Who hath established 
all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is 
his son’s name, if thou canst tell?” It is God, not man, Who 
can take up the challenge; but it is God become man, yea, the 
Son of man. How suited as well as competent is He to unfold 
all things, heavenly, earthly, human, and divine! He is indeed 
the Truth. 

We saw that the ascension of the Lord is grounded on His 
descent from heaven, and that both flow from and belong to 


* It is surprising that Bengel should follow Raphelius in preferring: ‘ qui 
erat” to “‘qui est,” as almost all the ancients, Greeks and Latins, rightly 
insist. 


CHAPTER III. 61 


His Person as the Son of man that is in heaven. But the 
Lord follows this up by setting out the mighty work He came 
to do for sinners, that they might have life eternal—by grace, 
indeed, but on the footing of divine righteousness. 

“ And even as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, 
so must the Son of man be lifted up; that every one that 
believeth on* him should [not perish, but]t have life eternal. 
For God so loved the world that he gave hist only-begotten 
Son, that every one that believeth on him should not perish 
but§ have life eternal” (vers. 14-16). 

The new birth had been already insisted on for man to see 
or enter the kingdom of God. But so is the cross also a 
necessity, if guilty man was to receive pardon from God whilst 
living to Him. They are alike indispensable. Compare 1 John 
iv. 9,10. And Christ as He alone could be, so was He sent a 
propitiation for our sins. The Lord here illustrates the latter 
’ truth by the well-known scene in the wilderness, where God 

directed Moses, in his distress for the guilty Israelites bitten 
by the fiery serpents and dying in all quarters, to set a serpent 
of brass on a pole, that whoever looked might live. It was the 
figure of Himself, Who knew no sin, for us made sin, identified 
in divine dealing with the consequences of our evil in judgment 
on the cross. Impossible that sin could otherwise be expiated 
adequately. It must be by God’s judging it in One capable of 
bearing what it deserved at His hands; and it must be in man, 
in the Son of man, to be available for man. Yet, had it been 
any other than Jesus, it had been offensive to God, and not 
efficacious for man; for He only was the Holy One, and in no 
offering was there more jealous care that it should be without 
blemish. “It is most holy,” says the law of the sin-offering. 

* The Sinai MS. and the great mass of the uncials and cursives have es here, 
as in verse 16; but the Vatican (B) and the St. Petersburg uncial of the sixth 
century (T) read év air, supported by many Latin copies; as the Paris L has 
‘here in verse 16 ém aire, the Alexandrian ém’ avrdv here only, though T» reads 
it in verse 16. A Bodleian cursive (47) omits the phrase in both cases, 

+ Some few very ancient witnesses omit. 

{ The Sinai and the Vatican (B) omit atrod, ‘‘ his.” 

§ The clause wh daédnra aN here is wanting in four uncials of the high- 


est character, seven cursives, and many Vv., &c.; but almost all read it in 
verse 16. 


62 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Adam fell, and all other men were shapen in iniquity, and in 
sin conceived. 

In Him only of woman-born was no sin, not only no sins 
committed, but no sin in Him. Therefore was a body prepared 
for Him as for no one else, when the Holy Ghost came on the 
virgin Mary, and the power of the Highest overshadowed her. 
Therefore also that Holy Thing which was born was called the 
Son of God; not only the Son of God before He was sent of 
the Father, but, when in grace the Word thus became flesh, 
perfect man, yet not the less truly God. For there was none 
other way, if the desperate case of man was to be remedied 
before God. It could only be righteously through atonement ; 
and the Son of man was the only fitting victim. For blood of 
bulls and goats is incapable of taking away sins, however 
such sacrifices might be beforehand instructive of man’s need 
and of God’s way. ‘Wherefore, when he cometh into the 
world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but 
a body didst thou prepare me. In burnt-offerings and sacrifices 
for sin thou hadst no pleasure. Then said I, Lo I am come (in 
the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O 
God.” 

Thus did the man Christ Jesus, Son of God withal, yea, God 
over all blessed for. ever, deign to suffer once for sins, Just for 
unjust, that He might bring us to God. Only so could it be, 
for God could not make light of sin, however surely He can 
and does pardon sinners; but even He could not pardon con- 
sistently with Himself or His word, or the creature’s real 
blessing, but through the blood of the cross. And therefore did 
the Lord say here to Nicodemus, who knew the law, if he had 
little known the prophets, “As Moses lifted up the serpent in 
the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up.” 
Thus did He redeem out of the curse of the law, having 
become a curse for us. It is not a living Messiah reigning 
over His people on earth, but He rejected by them, sinners 
and lost as they were now proved to be; it is Jesus Christ and 
He crucified, in that character or title which connects Him 
with the one object for a sinful man: or, as He says Himself 
here, “that every one that believeth on him may not perish, 


CHAPTER III. 63 


but have life eternal.” By Him only thus presented one 
comes to God, all his sins being judged and borne in His 
cross. Hence it is by believing on Him that one has life 
eternal. The believer looks out of himself to the Lord Jesus. 

~ But this alone might leave the soul, though looking to Christ 
by faith, without liberty or peace, however truly blessed thus 
far. Hence the Lord reveals another truth. “For God so 
loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that every 
one that believeth on him should not perish but. have life 
eternal.” It is no longer the abject and absolute need of 
guilty man, be he Jew or any other. There is now revealed 
the sovereign love of God, which confines not itself to any 
limits such as the law, or man under it, had contemplated, but 
goes out freely and fully to the world, where He was unknown 
and hated; and this, not in creation or providential mercies, 
but in such sort as to give His Son, His Only-begotten, “ that 
every one that believeth on him may not perish but have 
eternal life.” It is grace to the uttermost. It is no question 
here of a needs-be. There was no moral necessity that God 
should give His Son; it was His love, not obligation on His 
part, nor claim on man’s. Whatever need there was in man’s 
state was amply met in the cross of the Son of man, and 
therein was accomplished the atonement or propitiation for the 


sins of those who believe. But there is incomparably more in 


the Only-begotten Son given by the God of love, not to the 
elect nation, but to the world. Thus divine love is manifested 
as perfectly as His just and holy requirement in judging sin ; 
and this in Christ, the Only-begotten Son of God, the suffering 
but now glorified Son of man, both too displayed in and enjoyed 
by that life eternal which the believer has in Him. 

The great truth has been cleared: not only that man, sinful 
man, needed an adequate atonement as well as new birth, but 
that God loved the world, the guilty lost world, of Gentiles no 


“less than Jews, and loved it so that He gave His Only-begotten 


Son that every one who believeth in Him should not perish 
but have eternal life. It is in the Son of God that both lines 
of the truth meet; for He is incarnate and crucified. Accord- 
ingly the true light shines, life eternal is given, God’s love is 


64 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


known, redemption is accomplished, salvation is come. There 
is more in and by Him now than if the kingdom were set up 
in power, for which those waited whose expectations were 
formed and bounded by the Old Testament. Mercy and. truth 
are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each 
other ; and, though one could not say perhaps till “that day” 
that truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness 
shall look down from heaven, yet one knows assuredly that 
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, and that righteousness 
is established and displayed in Him exalted.on the throne 
and glorified in God Himself above. In the bright days of 
heaven upon the earth He is to judge His people and the 
world righteously, and will early cut off the wicked; for the 
quick must be judged by Him at His coming, as well as the 
dead at last, ere He gives up the kingdom to God. 

But deeper purposes were in hand now that the Messiah 
is viewed as rejected by the Jews: eternal life in, and salva- 
tion by, the Son of God, Who dies atoningly on the cross. 
“For God sent not his* Son into the world that he should 
judge the world, but that the world might be saved through 
him” (ver. 17). And as a work beyond comparison deeper 
and with everlasting consequences was before God, so the 

objects of His grace are no longer within the circumscribed 
‘limits of the land of Israel. If He is to manifest Himself 
now as a Saviour God in His Son, it suits His love to send 
out. the good news to the world as a whole. God was in 
Christ reconciling the world to Himself, not imputing their 
trespasses to them. Granted that Christ thus present was 
rejected; but the errand of love was in no way abandoned ; 
rather did it enter on a new ground whence it could go 
forth in the power of the Spirit. For Him Who knew no 
sin God made sin for us (that is, in the cross), that we 
might become God’s righteousness in Him. 

Thus Christ as Saviour, not as Judge, expresses the charac- 
teristic testimony of God now made known to man and 
here declared by our Lord, in contradistinction from His 


* The word avrod (“his”) is omitted by NB L T®, five cursives and some 
Fathers, but read by all other authorities, 


CHAPTER III. 65 


predicted glory as Messiah and Son of Man ruling as He 
will over the earth by-and-by in the age to come. This 
is followed up by the result for him who receives Christ 
now. “He that believeth on him is not judged; but* he 
that believeth not hath been already judged, because he hath 
not believed on the name of the only-begotten Son of God” 
(ver. 18). Not only is the believer not condemned, but he 
is not an object of judgment. He will give account, but 
is never put on his trial. This is explicitly taught in 
John-v., where the two-fold issue is connected with the 
mystery of Christ’s Person. As He is Son of God and Son 
of man, so He gives life and will exercise judgment, the 
one for the blessing of believers as owning His glory, the 
other for His vindication on such as have dishonoured Him. 
Thus, as His stooping to become man exposed Him to un- 
belief, it is as Son of man that He will judge His despisers, 
which clearly does not apply to the believer whose joy is 
even now and ever to honour Him as the Father. And 
as in this later chapter of John the believer is declared to 
have life eternal, and not to come into judgment, but to 
have passed out of death into life, so here “he that believeth 
not hath been already judged, because he hath not believed 
on the name of the only-begotten Son of God.” For John 
presents the Lord as declaring all decided by the test of 
His own Person received in faith or unbelievingly rejected. 
Good or evil in all other respects turns on this, as He 
shows soon after. There is no such touchstone, not even 
the law of God, weighty and incisive as it is. Hence we 
see the fallacy of the older divines who drag in the law 
here as everywhere and thus make it only a question of 
moral condemnation; whereas the very point of instruction 
is that it is Christ Himself believed or disbelieved, though 


no doubt conduct follows accordingly. 


But here it is not death for not doimg God’s command- 
ments, but the unbeliever already judged by Him Who sees 
the end from the beginning, and pronounces on all persons 

* ~ B, &., omit dé (‘‘but”’) which all else read, 


E 


66 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. , 


and things as they are before God. Only One can avail 
him who is dead in trespasses and sins; in nowise the law, 
which can simply condemn him~whose walk is opposed to 
itself, but the Son Who is life and gives life to the believer. 
But the unbeliever refuses the Son of God: carelessly or 
deliberately, in haughty pride or in cowardly clinging to 
other trusts, pleasures, or interests, it is only a difference 
of form or degree. For he has not believed on the name 
of the Only-begotten Son of God, Whose name is not hidden 
but preached. There is the fullest declaration of what He 
is, and is to sinners: so that all excuse is vain and can 
only add sin to sin. His very name implies, yea asserts, 
that He is the Saviour, a divine Saviour, yet a Man and 
so for men. Nor can it be truthfully urged that there is 
any doubt as to God’s feeling and mind; for it had just 
been said that God sent Him into the world to this end, 
whatever must be the character of His coming another day 
when He will reckon with those who would have none 
of Him. But what is it to God that wretched, guilty, ruined 
sinners should despise and reject Him Who is at once the 
only Saviour of man, and the Only-begotten Son of God! 
When those who most need mercy least feel it, when they 
in their utter degradation refuse the Highest Who comes 
down to them in the fullest love to bless, what remains 
but judgment for those who thus render God’s grace null 
as to themselves, heightened as it is by the glory of Him 
Who in love came for their sakes and deepened by the 
humiliation in which He deigned to come ? 

I am aware that the Puritan divines drag in the law even 
here, and will have it that Christ, in illustrating the certainty 
of salvation for those that believe in Him, shows on\the con- 
trary the condemnation of unbelievers to be twofold, one 
by the law and the other by the gospel. Their idea is that the 
unbelievers are here declared to be condemned already by the 
sentence of the law, which they still lie under, and have it con- 
firmed by the gospel, since they do not by faith lay hold on the 
offered and only remedy in Christ. 

But there is no trace of such a scheme either here or 


CHAPTER IIL. 67 


anywhere else in scripture, which teaches expressly that “as 
many as sinned without law shall also perish without law, 
and as many as sinned in the law shall be judged by the law, 

. in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by 
Jesus Christ” (Rom. i. 12-16). St. Paul’s doctrine therefore 
excludes the assumption that every unbeliever is already under 
the law, which would intelligibly involve his being condemned 
by it, law affecting only those under it, whilst those who have 
it not are dealt with on their own ground. With this entirely 
agrees the language of our Gospel, which does not say a word 
about the law, even where a teacher of it was before the Lord 
inquiring into life eternal and salvation. It is solely a question 
of Christ. “And this is the judgment, that the light hath come 
into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the 
light; for their works were evil. For every one that doeth evil 
hateth the light, and cometh not unto the light lest his works 
should be convicted; but he that practiseth the truth cometh 
unto the light, that his works may be manifested that they 
have been wrought in God” (vers. 19-21). 

Inasmuch as the true light now shines—no longer the law in 
Israel, but the light come into the world, a criterion is in force 
which decides for every man. There is a far deeper question 
than a man’s own state or conduct. Indeed this too is already 
- decided: man is no longer under probation, as the Jew was 
under law. He is lost: be he Jew or Gentile, he is alike lost. 
It is therefore a question of believing on Jesus, Son of God and 
Son of man, Who (as we saw before) has been sent of God, not 
as He will be shortly to judge the quick and the dead, but that 
the world (not the elect nation now, but the world, spite of its 
ruin, in His grace) may be saved through Him. This tests to 
the core. All thus depends on believing on Him. If one 
believes not, one has been already judged. It is not merely to 
fail in duty, but to fight against the grace and truth come 
. by Jesus Christ. It is to reject life eternal, and the perfect love 
of God, in the Only-begotten Son of God, Whose name one dis- 
believes or makes light of. 

It is wholly vain to complain of lack of light. The very 
reverse is true. “This is the judgment, that the light hath 


68 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather 
than the light; for their works were evil.” Terrible revela- 
tion of their state! Alas! it was our state, our affections 
so utterly corrupt as to prefer the darkness to the light, and 
this from the guiltiest reason, and a bad conscience. For our 
deeds were evil. Assuredly the trumpet gives no uncertain 
sound. Have we heard its clear warning above, beneath, the 
din of this world? Have we submitted to the sentence of 
Him Who knows what is in man, no less than what is in God ? 
Or are we unbroken still in self-righteousness and self-conceit ? 
Do we dare to dispute the words of the Lord, solemn and 
plain—too plain to be mistaken? Would we put off the 
decision till the great white throne? And what will He then 
judge of the unbelief which thus virtually gives Him the 
lie? For no man that believed these words of His now would 
put off till then, but surely cast his soul on Him Who, if 
the Judge then, is Saviour, and nothing but a Saviour, to 
the lost one that now believes on His name. 

But when eternal judgment does come, it is not true that 
then it is a question simply of man’s unbelief. From the 
divine account given to us, we learn that the dead are judged 
according to their works. There is no such thing at any time 
as salvation according to our works; for all who reject Christ 
there will be judgment according to their works. They had 
refused the Saviour, they had despised the grace of God through 
religiousness or irreligiousness, through opposition or indiffer- 
ence. They are not found written in the book of life, they are 
judged out of the things written in the book according to their 
works. They are cast into the lake of fire. This is the second 
death, the lake of fire, the end of all who loved the darkness 
rather than the light. For their works were evil: is not their 
judgment just? What is the Lord’s moral analysis? _“ For 
every one that doeth evil hateth the light, and cometh not 
unto the light, lest his works should be convicted.” How could: 
| such a one suit the portion of the saints in light? He hates 
| the light which has come here: would he suit it or love it better 
on high? He is inwardly false and dishonest, deliberately and 
decidedly preferring to go on in his sins, instead of submitting 


CHAPTER III. 69 


to their complete detection by the light, that they might be 
blotted out and forgiven by the faith of Christ’s blood. Is this 
truth in the inner man? Does it not rather prove that such as 
refuse Christ are of the devil as their father and desire to 
do their lusts, instead of hearing the word of God and being 
subject to His Son? 

On the other hand, “he that practiseth the truth cometh unto 
the light, that his works may be manifested that they have 
been wrought in God.” For the faith that is of God’s elect 
is never powerless but living, not only productive of results 
seen among men, but such as savour of their divine source 
and sphere. None makes more of the truth or of knowing God 
than John; none has a deeper horror of Gnosticism. It is life, 
life eternal, that one should know the Father, the only true 
God, and Jesus Christ Whom He sent; but His commandment 
is life everlasting, as our Lord could say of Him Who gave 
to Himself what He should say and what He should speak. 

If we know these things, we are blessed if we do them. Un- 
blessed is the forgetful hearer, who does not practise the truth 
nor come unto the light, but is rather gone away after considering 
himself, and straightway loses all remembrance of what he was 
like. Is it not too plain that his works are at best impulsive 
and natural? But he that practises the truth comes unto the 


light; walking therein he seeks to walk according to the light, 


trying by it his inward thoughts and feelings, motives and 
objects, words and ways. The realised presence of God imparts 
its colour to his works. They were manifestly wrought in God. 
They bear His image and superscription. Hence when all that 
are in the tombs hear the Lord’s voice and go forth, it is 
for those that have practised good to a life-resurrection, for 
those that have done evil to a judgment-resurrection. There 
was life in the one case, not in the other. He that heard 


_ the Saviour’s word and believed the God Who sent Him has life 


eternal, and hence practises good. He who rejects the Son of 
God has no ground but man, and can have no power but 
Satan’s; he has refused Him Who is God’s wisdom and God’s 
power. He might not like to be lost and judged; but he 
despises the only way of salvation open to any, the crucified 


} 
| 
| 
| 


| 


70 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Son of man, the life-giving Son of God. He will not be able 
to refuse or despise His judgment by-and-by. 


The next paragraph has for its object the homage rendered 
by the Baptist to the Lord. This the Spirit of God introduces 
by telling us the occasion of it. The conversation with 
Nicodemus was in Jerusalem; and in this was unfolded the 
absolute need of both the new birth and the cross. Only that 
when the Lord speaks of these things, He could not but let us 
know that it is life eternal which the believer receives, and that 
He Himself was not more surely the Son of man Who must be 
lifted up for man’s desperate case than He is the only-begotten 
Son of God given to the world in divine love. Salvation was 
in His mind, not judgment, though the unbeliever in Him must 
be, yea is, judged already ; and this on the deepest of all grounds, 
the preference of darkness, that they might do their wicked 
works at ease, to the Light come into the world in Christ. The 
case then of every rejector of Him is thus solemnly decided. 

It is evident that the Person of Christ is the key to all, and 
shines out more and more in the secret scene with Nicodemus. 
Still it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, Who gave a yet fuller 
witness to His glory by John at a critical moment, to reproduce 
this permanently for us with the circumstances which led to it. 
The thought might enter some minds that the Lord only used 
His predecessor to continue the work and outdo it. It was 
fitting, therefore, that John the Baptist should give a final 
testimony to Him where human nature is apt to be most 
grudging. 

“ After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land 
of Juda, and there he was tarrying with them and baptising. 
And John also was baptising at Alnon near Salim, because 
much water was there; and they were coming there and being 
baptised : for John was not yet cast into prison” (vers, 22-24). 
We have thus a view of what was going on previous to the 
public Galilean ministry of our Lord in the three Synoptic 
Gospels. They do not touch on any work of His before John’s 


| imprisonment; whilst the early chapters of the fourth Gospel 


are devoted to this, after the revelation of His Person and glories 


at the beginning. 


CHAPTER III. 71 


“There arose then a dispute on the part of the disciples of 
John with a Jew* about purification, And they came unto 
John and said to him, Rabbi, he who was with thee across the 
Jordan, to whom thou hast borne witness, behold, he is baptising 
and all come unto him” (vers. 25, 26). A Jew’s reasoning did 
not ruffle them; for their souls could not but feel the moral 
superiority of John’s call and baptism to repentance in the 
faith of the coming Messiah; but the nearness of Jesus and the 
fact of His attractive power, veiled as it then might be, was a 
fact that disconcerted them, though the appeal to their master 
took the shape of zeal for one who had been prompt to own the 
dignity of Jesus when He came to John for baptism. But 
now He was baptising and all were flocking to Him: so com- 
plained John’s disciples. 

Let us well weigh the reply. “John answered and said, A 


Man can receive nothing unless it have been given him from 


heaven. Ye yourselves bear met witness that I said, I am not 
the Christ, but that I am sent before him” (vers. 27, 28). It 
was lowly yet wise withal; it put, as truth always does, both 
God and ourselves in the right place, thus securing a like recog- 
nition of His sovereign disposal of all and the contentedness of 
each with his own lot, and, it may be added, quiet firmness in 
the discharge of the duty which flows from it. For there is no 
greater error than the thought that our own will is really strong. 
Be it ever so, obedience is stronger still. “He that doeth the 
will of God abideth for ever.” Out of this spirit of dependence 
and happy submission to God did John answer his disciples. If 
he were eclipsed as the morning star by the dawn of day, it was 
to fulfil, not to fail in, his mission. He, the servant and fore- 
runner, had never set up to be the Master, as they could all 
attest, if they would. 


* There is equally good evidence from the most ancient and excellent wit- 
nesses for the plural form (NP™ G A? II? 1. 13. 69. 124. &. It. Vulg. Syre- 
Cop. Arm." <Aeth. Goth. Orig.) in the common text as for the singular (Nco 
ABEFHKLMSUVIAAr™ IIp™, many cursives, SyrPesch et phil. and Arm7eh. 
Chrys. Nonn.) preferred by most critics, partly as being the less common of the 
two, and so more likely to be changed. 

+ The witnesses for omitting wo: include % E F H M VT, many cursives, &c. 
and are scarcely inferior therefore to those in favour of the ordinary text. 


v2 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN, 


Then John applies to himself a figure taken from the circum- 
stance of a bridal feast to illustrate his relation to the Lord, in 
beautiful harmony with the Lord’s own use of it elsewhere. 
Here of course all is connected with Israel, though, when the 
church took the place of that nation, the Holy Spirit applies it 
freely to the new relationship constantly before us in the 
Epistles and the Revelation. ‘He that hath the bride is [the] 
bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom that standeth 
and heareth him rejoiceth with joy because of the voice of the 
bridegroom: this my joy then is fulfilled. He must increase, 
but I decrease” (vers. 29, 30). John was indeed the most 
favoured servant, yea, “the friend” of the Bridegroom. It was 
his joy therefore that the bride should be Christ’s, not his whose 
highest distinction was to be His immediate herald, seeing those 
days which kings and prophets had so ardently desired to see, 
seeing Him Who gave those days their brightness. It was his 
chiefest joy to hear His voice of love and satisfaction in those 
He deigned to love as His bride. His own mission was closed. 
If Simeon could depart in peace, John could say that his joy was 
fulfilled. It was right, it was necessary, that He should increase 
and himself decrease, though no greater was born of woman. 
Instead of feeling a pang,*his heart bowed and delighted in it. 
By-and-by when Christ comes in power and glory, and sits on 
the throne of David as well as of the yet larger dominion of 
the Son of man, there will be no end of the increase of His 
government, as the prophet declares. But John could say it 
now in the days of His humiliation, as his soul rests on the 
glory of His Person, and the Spirit leads him on in the sense of 
what was due to Him. 

The glory of the Person of Christ shines with rich lustre 
here. It is not merely His nearness of relation to His people 
as distinguished from John, nor His increase while the greatest 
of woman-born decreases. He is superior to all comparison. 
“He that cometh from above is above all” (ver. 31). Neither 
Adam nor Abraham, Enoch nor Elijah, could take such a 
ground. They, like John, did not come from above, nor could 
any one of them be said to be above all. Nor could our blessed 
Lord Himself be so described, as born of Mary and heir of 


CHAPTER III. 73 


David, had He not been God—the great theme of our Gospel. 
But this it has been the grand aim to show He is: a truth 
of the deepest moment, we can say boldly, not only to us the 
children but to God the Father. For thus and now are to be 
solved all the questions that had ever risen between God and 
man, insoluble till He appeared, and appeared a true man, Who 
is no less truly God, and thus both “from above” and “above 
all.” 

And it was fitting that John the Baptist’s own lips should 
give utterance to the incontestable supremacy of the Lord 
Jesus in presence of his own disciples jealous of their leader’s 
honour. Hence follows the explanation: “he that is of the 
earth is of the earth, and speaketh [as] of the earth; he that 
cometh of the heaven is above all” (ver. 31). The Lord may 
vindicate John ; but John asserts the glory of Jesus who had 
lost none of His intrinsic and supreme dignity by deigning 
in divine love to become man. Like all other men John could 
not claim to have any other origin naturally than the earth. 
Jesus alone is out of heaven; for such is the virtue of His 
Person that He raises up humanity into union with His divine 
nature, instead of being dragged down by humanity into its 
degradation by sin as some have vainly and evilly dreamt. 


Nor is it of His person only that we are here taught. His_ 


testimony is invested with kindred value. “And what he hath 
seen and heard, this he testifieth; and no one receiveth his 
testimony ” (ver. 32). His is the perfection of testimony; for 
what was there of God, of the Father, and this in heaven, that 
the Son had not seen and heard? There could be no conceiy- 
able defect here in the glory whence He came, and in the grace 
with which He made all known to man. How withering 
therefore the sad result! For surely beforehand it must have 
been universally anticipated that all but the most besotted 
_ would eagerly welcome such a witness of things divine, heavenly, 
and eternal. But such is man’s estate through sin, not only 
the savage and the brutal, not only the idolater or the sceptic, 
but those who pique themselves on their religion, whether it be 
theory or practice, ordinances or tradition, effort, ecstasy, or 
experience,—“no one receiveth his testimony.” How solemn 


— 


74 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the sentence! and the more so as being the unimpassioned 
utterance of holiness. Doubtless they knew not what they 
did in their dislike of, or indifference to, His testimony; but 
what a state man must be in, to have the heavenly and divine 
Saviour thus bearing witness of things most deeply needed 
by himself in relation to God and heaven and for ever, without 
ever finding out the worth of the Testifier or of the testimony! 
It is not that grace did not open some hearts, here and there, 
now and then; but the point here noted is the rejection of 
His testimony by man, not the reserve of sovereign mercy 
when all was lost in sin and ruin. 

Faith is in no way a growth natural to the heart of sinful 
man. Without faith it is impossible to please God ; and without 
His grace faith is impossible, such faith at least as pleases 
Him. For they that are in flesh cannot please God; but 
who are not in flesh till brought to God? Man conscious 
of sin and shrinking from divine judgment dislikes the God 
| Whose punishment he dreads. His grace he sees no reason, 
_ as far as he is concerned, for believing; and no wonder he sees 
none, for it would not be God’s grace if there were a ground 
for it in himself. Grace excludes the desert of him to whom 
it is shewn; and this is as offensive to his own self-sufficiency 
as it supposes love in Him Whose displeasure he knows he 
deserves. Thus there is no disposition in his heart to believe 
in God’s grace, ample to make him doubt; and the more, as 
he reasons on what God must be, and on what he himself has 
been toward God. Christ is not seen to change all, as the 
manifestation of love, and His death the ground of the 
righteousness of God which justifies the believer, spite of past 
sins and ungodliness. 

His testimony therefore puts the heart thoroughly to the 
test; for it tells the truth of the sinner as decidedly as it 
announces the grace of God; and the heart resists the one and 
distrusts the other. The last thing submitted to is to think ill 
of oneself, and well of God. But this is just the effect of 
receiving the testimony of Christ. We then begin to take 
God’s side against ourselves ; for if there be genuine faith, there 
is genuine repentance, without which indeed the faith is human 


CHAPTER III. 75 


and worthless, as in John ii. where men believed beholding the 
signs wrought, and Jesus did not trust Himself to them. Such 
faith is not of God’s Spirit, but merely of the mind drawing 
a conclusion from the probabilities of the case. In it man 
judges; which pleases him, instead of his being morally judged, 
which is humbling and offensive. He sees no sufficient reason 
to reject the evidence; and, his will going along with it, he 
believes accordingly. As this was the case with many in 
Jerusalem at the Passover, so it is with multitudes throughout 
Christendom now and ever since. The vague creed which 
prevails generally awakens enough neither of interest nor of 
opposition to put men to the test. But when any great truth, 
even of that creed, is pressed on the conscience or comes 
distinctly before the heart, it will then be seen how little men 
believe what they in words accredit, only because they never 
seriously apply it to their souls before God. 

Take the simple truth, for instance, of our Gospel, the Word 
Who was God become flesh and dwelling among us, or again 
remission of sins in His name, the message to every soul, the 
possession of every believer: who doubts either as long as they 
are preached abstractedly in the pulpit? But the moment 
a man receives them for his own soul, and, though feeling and 
owning his sins more than ever, blesses God for forgiveness 
and rejoices in Christ, while he worships God and the Lamb, 
others shrink back and cry presumption! As if such truths 
were never intended for the heart and life and lips of every 
day, but only as a religious: service or rather a form for the 
multitude keeping holiday. 

The fact is however that the grace and truth which came 
by Jesus Christ (being perfect in themselves and in Him Whose 
glory is adequate to display and make them good, as well as 
perfectly adapted to man, sinful and lost as he is) test him 
_ absolutely, “and no one receiveth his testimony.” Where the 
quickening power of the Spirit acts, it is far otherwise. So 
proper is it to win the heart, that he who is not won shows 
that his will is against God and His grace and truth in Christ, 
hatred naturally and soon following. He who bows, being 
begotten by the word of truth, judges himself. He has 


76 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


received not man’s word, but, as it truly is, God’s word which 
effectually works in the believer; or, as it is put here, “he 
that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that 
God is true” (ver. 33). 

This is the essential character of real living faith. His 
testimony is received because He gives it: nothing more simple, 
but we are not simple; nothing more right and due to Him, 
but we have been all wrong, and most wrong to Him. It is 
received because He says it, not because it seems reasonable 
or wise or good, or for evidence of any kind; though one need 
not say there are the fullest evidences, and the testimony 
is that which alone could suit God or man, if one be a sinner, 
the other a Saviour where His testimony is received. A divine 
faith is due to a divine testimony; but the faith which is 
grounded on human motives is not divine: only that which 
is founded on God’s word truly searches heart and conscience. 
When a man is broken down to feel his own state of sin, as 
well as what he has done against such a God, the heart desires 
that the good news of the gospel should be the truth, instead 
of yielding to the indifference or active repugnance natural 
to it; and this is to believe with the heart (Rom. x. 9, 10). 

Further the ground of confidence is laid plainly and ex- 
pressed fully. We are not left to inference. “For he whom 
God sent speaketh the words of God; for God giveth not the 
Spirit by measure” (ver. 34). To receive the words of Jesus 
then is to receive those of God. What possible ground is there 
for hesitation? To faith alone belongs absolute certainty. 
And of this the Spirit is the power, as in Him perfectly, so 
in and by us as far as flesh is judged. He was the holy vessel 
of the Spirit, so that the testimony was poured out as pure 
as it was poured in, or rather as it is in Him Who is Himself 
the truth. As for what inspired men have written, it is just 
the same. “If any man think himself to be a prophet, or 
spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write 
unto you are the commandment of the Lord” (1 Cor. xiv. 37). 
In all others, whatever the power, there is no such guarantee 
against infirmity or mistake, though one may be perfectly kept 
and guided, where only and simply dependent: so real is the 
connection between the truth and the Spirit. 


CHAPTER III. OE 


We have had the supremacy of Jesus, and His testimony, 
so thoroughly marking Him off from all others. But there 
is more. He is “the Son,” and the especial object of divine 
affection and honour. This follows; and here accordingly we 
rise far above His position either as the Messiah, the Bride- 
groom on the one hand or the heavenly prophet on the other, 
Whose testimony absolutely detected every child of Adam, 
while it brought him that received it to the knowledge of God 
and His mind with divine certainty. Hence we hear of the 
Father and the Son. “The Father loveth the Son and hath 
put [lit. given] all things in his hand” (ver. 35). Jesus is the 
Heir of all, as the Son of the Father in a sense peculiar to 
Himself, the true Isaac Who abides ever, the beloved Son Who 
has all that He Himself has, and has all given to be in His 
(the Son’s) hand. 

Consequently it is no question here of blessing for any 
measured time or for glory on earth under His reign as king. 
All things come to the point at once and for ever before Him 
Who is the object of testimony, and not the testifier merely. 
“He that believeth on the Son hath life eternal.” One need 
_ not thus wait for the blessing in the days of the kingdom. 
Then no doubt Jehovah will command blessing, even life for 
-evermore. But he that believes in the Son has eternal life 
now. For the same reason it is of all things the most fatal 
to refuse subjection to His Person now. Therefore is it added, 
“and he that believeth not on the Son shall not see life, but 
the wrath of God abideth on him” (ver. 36). If disobedience 
is intended, it is to Himself as well as to His words, as indeed 
by the obedience of faith the apostle Paul meant not practical 
obedience, however important in its place and season, but 
subjection to Himselfi—to the truth revealed in Him. He 
that refuses Him in unbelief abides in unremoved death and 
under the wrath of God, Who cannot but resent such insult of 
heart to His Son. 


CHAPTER IV. 


WE find ourselves still in that part of our Gospel which 
precedes the Galilean ministry of our Lord presented in the 
three Synoptic Gospels, though this journey through Samaria 
is conducting the Lord to their starting-point. In chapter ii. 
24 it will have been noticed that John was not yet cast into 
prison. When he was put in prison (Mark i. 14), and Jesus 
heard it (Matt. iv. 12), He came into Galilee, preaching. Our 
chapter speaks of a previous moment, and, as usual, lets us 
into a deeper view of all that was at work. 

“When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees heard 
that Jesus maketh and baptiseth more disciples than John 
(though Jesus himself did not baptise but his disciples), he 
left Judea and went away [again]* into Galilee” (vers. 1-3). 

Little did the disciples know the depth of the glory that 
was in Him or the consequent blessing for man, though they 
zealously baptised and thus exposed their Master to the spleen 
of those who could ill brook His increase and honour. It will 
be noticed that not He but His disciples did baptise. He knew 
the end from the beginning; and this finds its appropriate 
statement here. They might baptise to Him as Messiah; but 
He, the Son of God, knew from the first that He must suffer 
and die as the Son of man: so indeed He had already declared 
to Nicodemus with its blessed results for the believer. The 
baptism He instituted was therefore after and to His death 
and resurrection. The Son of God knew what was in man, 
even when he was disposed to pay Him homage because of the 


* A BEA, &., omit, SC DLM T, 1, 38, 69, and many ancient versions, 
insert. 


78 


CHAPTER IV. 79 


signs which He wrought. So did He know the effect of His 
disciples’ activity on the religious men of that day. 

It was the jealousy of the Pharisees, then, which in reality 
drove the Lord from Judea. What was that land longer? 
What without Him, above all when it rejected Him and He 
abandoned it? They might boast of the law, but they had 
not kept it; they might claim the promises, but He, the 
promised One and accomplisher of all the promises, had been 
there, and they knew Him not, loved Him not, but were more 
and more proving their heart-estrangement from Him, their 
Messiah. What could the first covenant avail now? It must 
ensure their condemnation; it could work no deliverance. The 
Jew was to reap only ruin and death under its terms. We 
shall presently see more; yet here at the beginning of the 
chapter is the Son of God, through the ill-feeling of those 
who ought most to have appreciated His presence, forced out, 
we may say, from the people of God and the scene of His 
institutions, but in the power of life eternal, whatever the 
humiliation which the haughty religionists put on Him, who 
saw in Him a man only, little suspecting that He was the 
Word become flesh. 

“And he must pass through Samaria. He cometh therefore 
to a city of Samaria called Sychar near the land which Jacob 
gave to Joseph his son. Now a fountain of Jacob was there. 
Jesus therefore being wearied with the journeying sat thus at 
the fountain. It was about the sixth hour” (vers. 4-6). He 
is as truly man as God, but the Holy One always and only. 
Weary and rejected, He sits there in unwearied love. The 
false pretensions before Him can no more hinder now than 
the proud iniquity He had just left behind. Jerusalem and 
Samaria alike vanish. What could either do for a wretched 
heart, a guilty sinner? And such a one approaches. 

“There cometh a woman out of Samaria to draw water. 
Jesus saith to her, Give me to drink (for his disciples had gone 
away into the city to buy provisions). The Samaritan woman 
therefore saith to him, How dost thou being a Jew ask to 
drink of me being a Samaritan woman? for Jews have no 
intercourse with Samaritans. Jesus answered and said to 


80 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that 
saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of 
him, and he would have given thee living water” (vers. 7-10). 

He that made the heart perfectly knows the avenue to its 
affections. And what grace can He not show Who came to 
give a new and divine nature, as well as to reveal God in love, 
where there was nothing but sin, self, and unrest? God in 
the lowliness of man asks a favour, a drink of water, of the 
Samaritan woman; but it was to open her heart to her wants, 
and give her life eternal in the power of the Holy Ghost, 
communion with the Father and His Son Jesus Christ. 

Beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth 
good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation, that saith 
unto Zion, Thy God cometh. So said the Spirit of prophecy 
by Isaiah of old; and so it will be fulfilled in its fulness 
by-and-by, as even now it is in principle. But what a sight 
to God, and indeed to faith, the Son of God, when driven out 
by the jealous hatred and contempt of man, of His own 
people who received Him not, thus occupying Himself with 
an unhappy Samaritan who had exhausted her life in quest 
of happiness never thus found! Surprised she inquires how 
a Jew could ask aught of one like her: what had she felt, 
had she then conceived Who He was, and that He knew to 
the full what she was? And how reassuring to her after- 
wards when she looked back on the path by which God had 
in gracious wisdom led her that day that she might know 
Himself for evermore ! 

Alone He spoke to her alone, beginning in her soul His 
work for heaven, for eternity, for God. No miracle of an 
external sort is wrought before the eyes, no sign is needed 
without. ‘The Son of God speaks in divine love, though (as 
we shall see) intelligence is not till the conscience is reached 
and exercised. The law is good if one use it lawfully, knowing 
that its application is not to a righteous person but to lawless 
and insubordinate, to impious and sinful, and in short to all 
that is opposed to sound teaching. But Christ is the best of 
all as the revelation of God in grace, giving all that is wanted, 


erent 


CHAPTER IV. Neill 


producing (not seeking) what should be, not to dispense with 


the absolutely needed lesson of what we are, but enabling us 
to bear it, now that we know how truly God Himself cares for 
us in perfect love spite of all that we are. 

This is grace, the true grace of God. No error is more 
complete or perilous than the notion that grace makes light 
of sin. Was it a slight dealing with our sins when Christ 
bore them in His own body on the tree? Did law ever strike 
such a blow at any sinner, as God when He, sending His own 
Son in likeness of flesh of sin and for sin, condemned sin in 
the flesh, and thus brought “no condemnation to those in Christ 
Jesus”? Nay, it was expressly what the law could not do. 
The law could condemn the sinner with his sins; but God has 
thus in Christ condemned not only the sins but the root of 
evil, sin in the flesh, and this in a sacrifice for sin, so that 
those who otherwise had nothing but condemnation inwardly 
and outwardly, past and present, in nature as well as ways, 
have now by grace “no condemnation.” All that could be 
condemned has been condemned; and they are in Christ, 
and they walk not according to flesh but according to the 
Spirit. This is now the law of liberty. 

Here doubtless there was no such standing yet existing, or 
consequently possible to any. But the Son was here acting 
and speaking in the fulness of grace which was soon to accom- 
plish all for the believer and give all to him. Yet He lets the 
Samaritan know that she knew nothing. For, whatever His 
goodness (and it has no limits), grace does not spare man’s 
assumption; and the revelation it brings from God and of 
God never really enters till self is judged. Samaria and 
Jerusalem are alike ignorant of grace; and only Christ by 
the Spirit can open the heart to bow and receive it. “If 
thou knewest the gift of God”: such is the reality and the 
aspect of God in the gospel. He is not an exacter but a 


giver. He is not commanding man to love Him, but pro- 


claiming His love to man, yea, to the most wretched of sinners. 

He is not requiring the creature’s righteousness, but revealing 

His own. But man is slow to believe, and religious man the 

slowest to understand, what makes nothing of himself and 
F 


82 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


all-of God. But such is the word of truth, the gospel of 
our salvation; such the free-giving of God, which the Lord 
was then manifesting as well as declaring to the woman of 
Samaria. 

But there was and is more. The knowledge of the gift of 
God, in contradistinction from the law on the one hand or 
from blank ignorance of His active love on the other, is 
inseparable from faith in the personal dignity of the Son of 
God. Therefore does the Saviour, all-lowly as He was, add, 
“And who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink.” For 
without this nothing is known aright. Jesus is the truth, and 
abides ever the test for the soul, which owns with so much 
the more decision and adoring thankfulness the glory of Him 
Who, true God, became man in infinite love that we might have 
life eternal in Him. For otherwise, we may boldly say, it 
could not be. The truth is exclusive and immutable; it is 
not only the revelation of what is, but of what alone can and 
must be, consistently with the real nature of God and the 
state of man. Yet is God acting in His own liberty, for His 
love is always free and always holy ; and the truth can only be 
what it is; for it is He Who has brought down that love in 
man to men in all their sin and death and darkness. 

It is the revelation of God to man in Him, Who though the 
Son of God stooped so low to bless the most needy and defiled 
and distant from God as to ask a drink of water, that He might 
in this find the occasion to give even to such a one living 
water. For this too He does not fail to say as a consequence, 
“Tf thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to 
thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and, 
he would have given thee living water.” For grace truly, 
known in Christ produces confidence in grace, and draws out 
the heart to ask the greatest boon of Him Who will never be 
below but.above the highest position that can be conferred 
on Him. Never can it be that the faith of man equals, 
still less surpasses, the riches of the grace of God. If men, 
spite of their evil, know how to give good gifts to their 
children, how much more should the Father Who is of heaven’ 
give the Holy Spirit to those that ask Him? If a guilty 


CHAPTER IV. 83 


Samaritan woman is assured by the Son of God that she, 
knowing the gift of God and Who He is that asked of her 
to drink when weary by the fountain, had but to ask of Him 
in order to receive living water, still none that so asked and 
received had anything like an adequate sense of that infinite 
blessing, the Holy Ghost given to be in the believer. 

Such is the living water that Christ here speaks of: not 
power in gift, nor yet simply eternal life, but the Spirit given 
of the Son to be in the believer as the spring of communion 
with Himself and the Father. 

It is not then quite correct, as some have said, that Christ 
is here alluded to as meant by “the gift of God,” the next 
clause being viewed as explanatory. Undoubtedly He was the 
means of displaying it; but the first of the clauses in this rich 
word of our Lord sets forth the thought, so strange to man, of 
the free-giving of God. Nature as such never understands it; 
law alone makes it still less intelligible. Faith only solves the 
difficulty in the Person, mission, and work of Christ, Who is the 
witness, proof, and substance of it; but it is the. gratuitous 
grace of God that is meant. - Hence the second clause, instead 
of being merely exegetic of the first, directs attention to 
Him Who was there in the utmost humiliation (weary with 
His journeying and asking a drink of water from one whom 
He knew to be the most worthless of Samaritans), yet the Son 
of the Father in unshorn fulness of divine glory and of grace 
to the most wretched. And this was so true, that she who was 
as yet blind to all this had but to ask Him and have the best 
and greatest gift the believer can receive—tiving water, not 
life only, but the Holy Ghost. Thus, while Christ is the way 
of it, the Trinity was really involved in making good these 

ords of our Lord to the Samaritan woman, all the Godhead 

ngaged in the proffered blessing. 
“ ©The woman saith to him, Sir, thou hast no bucket, and the 
well is deep: whence then hast thou the living water? Art 
thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and 
drank of it himself and his sons and his cattle?” (vers. 11, 12.) 
She comprehends none of the gracious words she had heard: 
they were not mixed with faith in her heart. She therefore 


84 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


reasons against them. If the water was to be drawn from 
Jacob’s well, where was the bucket to let down, for the well 
was deep? Did He pretend to be greater than Jacob? or was 
His a better well than that which of old supplied him and his 
house, a well which was now theirs?) Thus the mind argues 
against the Lord, according to the senses or tradition: so fatal 
is ignorance of His person and of the truth. Circumstances 
are the trial of faith and the swamp of unbelief, which gladly 
avails itself (with or without any just title) of a great name 
and its gifts, alas! to slight a greater, yea the greatest. 

Mark now the Saviour’s grace. He develops with the 
utmost fulness to this dark soul the unspeakable gift of God, 
in contrast with her own thoughts, and with those of man 
generally. “Jesus answered and said to her, Every one that 
drinketh of this water shall thirst again; but whosoever 
drinketh of the water which I shall give him, shall in no way 
thirst for ever,* but the water which I shall give him shall 
become in him a fountain of water springing up into life 
eternal” (vers. 13, 14). 

Water of whatever spring nature boasts may refresh, but 
thirst will come again; and God has ordered for the creature 
that so it should and must be. But it is not so when one is 
given to drink into the Spirit. Christ gives the Holy Ghost 
to the believer to be in him a fresh fountain of divine enjoy- 
ment, not only life eternal from the Father in the Person of 
the Son, but the communion of the Holy Ghost; and hence the 
power of worship, as we shall see later in this very conversation. 
Thus it is not only deliverance from hankering after pleasure, 
vanity, sin, but a living spring of exhaustless and divine joy, 
joying in God through our Lord Jesus, and this in the power 
of the Spirit. It supposes the possession of life eternal in the 
Son, but also the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the 
Holy Spirit Who was given to us. 

Even then the Samaritan remains as insensible as ever, 
“The woman saith to him, Sir, give me this water that I may 


* It is not merely od pj, nor od wh... . mwmore, but od wh... . els Top 
aiéva, the strongest possible exclusion of what is in question for eternity, 


CHAPTER IV. 85 


not thirst nor come here* to draw. He saith to her, Go, call 
thy husband and come here. The woman answered and said, 
I have not a husband. Jesus saith to her, Thou saidst well, 
I have not a husband; for thou hast had five husbands, and 
he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: this thou hast 
spoken truly. The woman saith to him, Sir, I see that thou 
art a prophet” (vers. 15-19). She would gladly learn how 
she might be relieved of her wants and of her labour for this 
world. As yet not a ray of heavenly light had entered her. 
Not to thirst nor to come here to draw formed the boundary 
of her desires from the Saviour not yet known to be a 
Saviour, still less the Only-begotten Son. 

This closes the first part of our Lord’s dealings with her. 
It was useless to say more as before. Jesus had already set 
before her the principle on which God is acting, and His 
own gracious competence to give her, on her asking, living 
water; He had also shown the incomparable superiority of 
His gift as being divine over any or every boon left by Jacob. 
But her heart did not rise above the sphere of her daily wants 
and earthly wishes. She was deaf to His words, albeit spirit 
and life, which disclosed what is eternal. 

Had it been in vain then to have so spoken to her as He 
did in the fulness of God’s love? Far from it. It was all- 
important, when a door was once opened within, to reflect 
and find that such riches of grace had been brought to her 
absolutely unsought. But it was useless to add more till then. 
Hence the Lord’s abrupt and seemingly unconnected appeal, 
“Go, call thy husband, and come here.” But was the: digres- 
sion apart from the question of her salvation? Not so. It 
was the second and necessary way with a soul, if it is to be 
blessed divinely. It is through an awakened conscience that 
grace and truth enter; and it was because her conscience 
hitherto was unreached that the grace and truth were not at 
all understood. 

On the one hand it was of all consequence that she and we 


* In NP™ B and Origen the reading is diépywuar, which Tischendorf and 
W. and H. adopt; but the MSS. differ, many giving the indicative, many the 
subjunctive. 


86 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


and all should have the clearest proof that the testimony of 
the Saviour’s grace goes out before there is any fitness to 
receive it; for this, as it magnifies God and His free-giving, 
so it abases and exposes the wholly evil and frightfully 
dangerous state of man. 

On the other hand it was equally momentous that she 
should be brought to feel her need of that free and wondrous 
grace of which the Saviour had assured her, in all its depths 
and amplitude and everlasting continuance, before she had 
judged herself as a sinner before God. To this point He now 
conducts her: for if it is impossible to please God without 
faith, without repentance faith is intellectual and worthless. 
It is man discerning evidence and accepting what he in his 
wisdom judges best; not a sinner who, met by sovereign grace, 
is judged, owning himself in his sins, but too glad to find the 
Saviour, the only Saviour, in Jesus Christ the Lord. 

Yet the Lord still holds to grace. He does not say, “Go, 
call thy husband,” without adding “and come here.” He does 
not repent of His goodness because she was dull; on the 
contrary He was using the fresh and necessary means to have 
the need of such goodness felt. How painstaking is grace, 
working in the soul that it may enter and abide, now that it 
had been testified of in all its fulness, and without any 
preparation for it any more than desert in man! 

The woman answering “I have not a husband” is astounded 
to hear the withering reply, “ Thou saidst well, I have not a - 
husband ; for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom thou 
now hast is not thy husband: this thou hast spoken truly.” 
She was convicted. In was in demonstration of the Spirit and 
power. Yet were the words few and simple, not one of them 
harsh or strong, It was the truth of her state and of her life 
brought home most unexpectedly, as God knows how to do 
and does in one form or another in every converted soul. It 
was the truth which spared her not and laid her sins bare 
before God and her own conscience. She did not doubt for a 
moment what it was that made everything manifest. She 
recognised it to be the light of God. She owns His words to 
be not man’s wisdom but God’s power. She falls under the 


CHAPTER IV. 87 


conviction and at once confesses, “Sir, I see that thou art a 
prophet.” It was not the fact only, but the truth from God. 

It is plain hence that “prophet” does not mean one only who 
predicted the future, for this was not in question, but one who 
told out the mind of God—one who spoke by the evident 
guidance of the Spirit what could not be known naturally, yet 
what therefore so much the more put the soul before God and 
His light. ‘So Abraham is a prophet (Gen. xx. 7), and the 
fathers generally (Ps. cv. 15), and the O. T. prophets in all 
their ministry and writing, not merely in what was prediction. 
The same thing is emphatically true of New Testament prophe- 
sying, as we may see in 1 Corinthians xiv. 24, 25. That is 
communicated from God which judges the life, yea, the secrets 
of the heart before Him. 

Recognising the divine power of His words, the Samaritan 
seizes the opportunity to have light from God on that which 
had not been without perplexity and interest even to her—the 
religious difference between her race and the chosen nation, and 
this not merely in homage to God but in formal or express 
public worship. She wants to have the question, old as it was, 
settled for her now. The Samaritan like many another in 
grievous error could talk of great antiquity. Happy the soul 
that has recourse for it to Jesus! He alone is the Truth. 
Others may deceive, themselves deceived. 

To this end was Jesus born, and for this cause came He into 
. the world that He should bear witness to the truth. What is 
more: “every one that is of the truth heareth his voice.” Alas! 
how different has it been with Christendom, corrupted first, 
then rent hopelessly, most haughty when it has most reason to 
be ashamed. Be it ours in such a state of ruin to keep His 
word and not deny His name. 

A time of declension beyond all things tests the soul; for it 
_ seems proud to differ from the excellent of the earth, especially 
if they are many, and those who cleave to God’s word are few 
and have nothing to boast. For this very reason it is precious 
in God’s eyes and no small testimony to the absent Master. 
Still it becomes all who differ from the mass to be sure of their 
ground, as this woman sought when she appealed to Jesus; and 


88 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the Christian need seek no other—yea, is guilty and infatuated 
if, where men’s uncertainty is so great and grave, he heed aught 
other—than Jesus speaking by His word and Spirit. 

“Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say that 
in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship. Jesus saith 
to her, Woman, believe me, an hour is coming when neither in 
this mountain nor in Jerusalem shall ye worship the Father. 
Ye worship what ye know not: we worship what we know, for 
salvation is of the Jews. But an hour is coming and now is 
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit 
and truth; for also the Father seeketh such as his worshippers. 
God is a Spirit; and his worshippers must worship [him] in 
spirit and truth. The woman saith to him, I know that Messiah 
is coming, that is called Christ: when he shall come, he will 
tell us all things. Jesus saith to her, I that speak to thee am 
[he]” (vers. 20-26). 

The Lord more than meets every desire of the Samaritan’s 
heart. For here we have, not merely the vindication of 
Israelitish worship as compared with its Samaritan rival, but 
the first unfolding of Christian worship ever given by God to 
man; and this as superseding not Samaritanism only but 
Judaism also—a change withal then at hand. Yet is all 
conveyed in language that was plain enough even to the 
soul thus addressed; while there is depth of truth which no 
saint has.ever fathomed, however deeply he may have drawn 
on it and enjoyed it. 

“The Father” was to be worshipped henceforth: of itself, 
what a revelation! It is no longer a question of the Jehovah 
God of Israel, nor even of the Almighty as was the name by 
which He was made known to the fathers. There is a richer 
display of God, and far more intimate. It is not as the 
Eternal Who put Himself in covenant and government, Who 
will surely yet make good His ways with Israel, as He has 
chastised them for theirs. Nor is it the God Who shielded His 
poor pilgrims that hung on His promises in their wanderings 
among hostile strangers before their children formed a nation 
and received His law. It was God as the Son knew Him and 
was making Him known in the fulness of love and fellowship, 


CHAPTER IV. 89 


Who would accordingly bring His own that were in the world 
into the conscious relationship of children as born of Him. 
(Compare John i. 12, 13, 18; xiv. 4-10, 20; xvi. 23-27; xx. 
17=23:) 

No wonder that, in presence of such nearness and the 
worship that befits it, the mountain of Gerizim melts and 
the sanctuary of Jerusalem fades away. For the one was 
but the effort of selfwill, the other but the test and proof 
of the first man’s inability to meet God and live. Christian 
worship is found on the possession of life eternal in the Son, 
and on the gift of the Spirit as the power of worship. _ 

In verse 22 the Lord leaves it impossible for the Samaritan 
to draw the inference that, if christian worship was about to be 
alone acceptable to God, independently of place or race, Samari- 
tan had been just as good as Jewish. Not so. The Samaritans 
worshipped what they did not know, the Jews knew what they 
worshipped ; “for salvation,” as He added, “is of the Jews.” 
They had the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, the 
law-giving, and the service, and the promises, whose were the 
fathers, and of whom as pertaining to flesh was the Christ Who 
is over all God blessed for ever. Amen. The Samaritans were 
mere imitators, Gentiles jealous of Israel and hostile to them, 
without fear of God; else had they submitted to His ways and 
word. 

Thus God’s privileges to Israel are vindicated; but none the 
less was the Lord at that time driven out by Pharisaic jealousy, 
and none the less had He set aside all pretension to traditional 
and successional blessing. He was there to communicate from 
God, not to accredit man; and, He being rejected, Jerusalem 
and Samaria alike vanish away. Old things are judged; all 
things must become new. God was in Christ reconciling the 
world to Himself, now that those who had the institutions of 
God are rejecting His counsel against themselves. And if that 
unbelief went to the uttermost in hatred of the Father and the 
Son, it would only bring out the fulness of divine grace and 
righteousness, leaving His love absolutely free to act supremely 
above all evil for His own glory, as we know is the fact in 
a crucified but risen Christ. 


90 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


It is remarkable accordingly that the Lord does not say 
“Who,” but “what.” For in Judaism God dwelt in thick dark- 
ness, and the testimony rendered by the whole Levitical system 
(with its sacrifices and priests, door, veil, incense, everything in 
short) was that the way into the holiest had not yet been made 
manifest. When Christ died, it was: the veil was rent from 
top. to bottom, and eternal redemption found; the worshippers 
once purged have no more conscience of sins, and are invited to 
draw near. Such is Christianity, God having revealed Himself 
as the Father in the Son through the Spirit. To know Him, 
the only true God, and Him Whom He had sent to reveal Him, 
even Jesus, is life eternal. And the mighty werk which was 
done on the cross has dealt with all our evil, so that we are free 
to enjoy Himself. We know therefore Whom we worship, and 
not merely “ what.” When God was hidden in the thick dark- 
ness and only the unity of His nature proclaimed, the Godhead 
remained vague. When the Father is revealed as now in the 
Son by the Spirit, what a difference! 

Hence this exceeding blessedness is opened in its positive 
character in verses 24, 25. For it is an hour when form is 
repudiated, as it could not be in Judaism. Reality alone is 
endorsed. National worship therefore is now an evident de- 
lusion, being but an effort to resuscitate what has vanished 
away as far as regards any recognition on God’s part. It was 
owned in Israel under law for its own purpose; it will be so on 
the largest scale in the millennium; but it is not, if we believe 
the Saviour, during the hour which, then coming, now is. It is 
an hour now when the true worshippers worship the Father. 
Who and what are they? The doctrinal utterances of the 
apostles answer with one voice that they are God’s children, 
born of Him through the faith of Christ, and sealed by the 
Spirit consequently as resting on His redemption. So the 
apostle says (Phil. ili. 3) that we (in contrast with mere Jews 
or Judaizers) are the true circumcision, who worship by the 
Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and have no con- 
fidence in flesh. But we must cite the New Testament as 
a whole to give the full proof, if one asks more evidence 
than the Lord affords in this context, though I feel assured 


ms 


CHAPTER IV. 91 


that he who bows not to such a witness would not be won 
by ten thousand. A single word from God is more to the 
believer than every other evidence: how many would convince 
the unbeliever ? 

Further what is said of the worship excludes all but true 
believers. For they are to worship in spirit and truth. How 
can any who have not the Spirit and know not the truth? 
Granted, that the article is wanting. But this in such a case 
as the one before us adds to the strength of the statement; for 
it predicates a spiritual and truthful character of the worship. 
That is to say, the Lord’s words express more than the necessity 
of having the Holy Ghost or of acquaintance with the truth, 
though this would suppose the Christian with his distinguish- 
ing privileges. But He says that they worship in that character, 
not merely that they have the Spirit and the truth in order to 
worship. Now plainly a real Christian might act unspiritually 
and not according to the truth. Even Peter and Barnabas 
failed at a grave crisis to walk according to the truth of the 
gospel. However true the worshipper then, if he were grieving 
the Spirit or dishonouring the Lord, this would not be to 
worship in spirit and truth. But it remains still more mani- 
fest that none but “the true worshippers” could so worship, 
though on a given occasion or in a given state they might not 
in fact as they ought. 

Moreover “also the Father seeketh such as his worshippers.” 
Let us weigh it. Time was when every Jew went up to 
Jerusalem to seek Jehovah; time will be when all nations 
shall flow to the same centre when the Son of man comes in 
power and reigns in glory. But the characteristic working of 
grace is that the Father seeks the true worshippers. Un- 
doubtedly when sought they gather unto the name of the Lord, 
and enjoy His presence by the Spirit. It is not enough that 
they are washed, and not by water only but by water and blood, 
and thus are every whit clean; it is not only that they have the 
Spirit as the witness of the one efficacious sacrifice and the 
spring of praise and power of continual thanksgiving; “also 
the Father seeketh such as his worshippers.” What confidence 
for them! What grace in Him! Yet is His seeking such true 


92 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


of every Christian. May they answer His grace by eschewing 
all that is unworthy of it in this evil day ! 

But there are other words of profound import. “God is a 
Spirit, and his worshippers must worship in spirit and truth.” 
It is the nature of God which is here in question, not the 
relationship of grace which He now reveals in and by Christ. 
And this is not without the greatest importance for us. For 
He must be worshipped correspondingly; and He most fully 
provided for this, seeing that the new life we enjoy is by the 
Spirit and is spirit, not flesh (John iii. 6); as indeed He begot 
us of His own will by the word of truth (James i.), and we are 
thus born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 
by God’s living and abiding word (1 Peter i. 23). Assuredly we 
should walk and worship in the Spirit, if we live in the Spirit. 
He is given to us that we should judge and reject the first 
Adam, glorifying only the Second man, our Lord Jesus. Nay, 
more, as God is a Spirit, spiritual worship is all He accepts. 
His worshippers “must worship in spirit and truth.” It is amoral 
necessity flowing from His nature—a nature fully revealed in 
Him Who is the image of the invisible God; and we should not 
be ignorant of it and its character who are born of Him as 
believers in Christ. 

The woman, struck by words plain indeed but no doubt far 
beyond her (for they reach up to God as surely as they come 
down to.man), at once thinks of the Messiah, owns her confi- 
dence in His coming, and is sure that when He is come, He will 
tell us all things (ver. 25). Would that all who believe on 
Him believed this of Him! Would that, when He has spoken 
peace to them, they turned not again to folly! And what folly 
greater than to turn from His words on this very theme, and in 
this very chapter for instance, to follow the traditions of men 
and the ways of the world in the worship of God ? 

And now break on her ear and heart the last words needed 
to clench all the rest and insure her blessing evermore: “Jesus 
saith to her, I that speak to thee am [he]” (ver. 26). It might 
be the lowest form of presenting the only One Who can avail 
the sinner; yet it remains ever true from first to last that every 


‘7’. one who believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God. 


CHAPTER IV. 93 


And this the Samaritan did. Her heart was touched, her con- 
science searched, and now the grace and truth which came by 
Jesus Christ was all to her. All the blessing was hers in His 
person Who was then present and received by her in faith. 

What a moment, a present Messiah, and He speaking to 
a Samaritan woman, yea, on Christian worship! 

“And upon this came his disciples, and wondered * that he 
was speaking with a woman: none however said, What seekest 
thou? or why speakest thou with her?” (ver. 27.) Their 
wonder was that He spoke with a woman: what was hers who 
knew that every secret of her heart was naked and open 
before Him with Whom she had todo? His grace, however, 
had fully prepared the way. He Who searched all the 
recesses of her soul had already encouraged her by revealing 
the richest grace of God the Father, Himself the only true 
Revealer of it, about to give the Holy Spirit that even she 
might receive and enjoy it truly. It was no question of 
seeking on her part at any rate: the Father was seeking 
such; nor was it of talking with her, but of revealing to her. 
The disciples had much to learn. Had they known the 
subject-matter of converse, they might well have wondered 
incomparably more. 

“The woman then left her waterpot, and went away into 
the city, and saith to the men, Come, see a man who told me 
all things that; ever I did: is not this the Christ? They 
went out of the city and were coming unto him” (vers. 28-30). 
The moral change was immense. A new world opened to her 
which eclipsed the present with new affections, new duties, 
the power of which asserted itself in lifting her entirely 
above the things that are seen, whatever might be the effect 
ordinarily, in strengthening to a better fulfilment of present 
earthly toil. But the revelation of Christ to her soul was 
both all-absorbing and the most powerful stimulus to make 


* The imperfect é@avuafoy is better than the common é@avuacay, and rests 
on far better authority ; but it is needless to express its continuity in English in 
such a case as this. 

“+ There is a question between 4 on the authority of 8 B Ce™ and some 
other ancient witnesses, and doa with far more numerous copies, here and in 
verse 39, the difference in English being that the latter adds “ever.” 


94 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Him known to others. Where the eye is single, the body 
is full of light. She felt who needed Him most, and she acted 
on it forthwith. She left her waterpot, went off to the town, 
and told the men of Jesus. How well she understood Him! 
He had not formally sent her, yet she went boldly with the 
invitation. Nor was it merely that she bade them go: “Come, 
see a man.” She would go along with them. Her heart was 
in the current of His grace, and counted upon the same 
welcome for others, unwarranted though it might appear, as 
for herself. Such is the power of divine love even from the 
very first. 

Yet there was no enfeebling of the truth because of His 
grace. They too must prepare for what had searched her. 
“Come, see a man that told me all things that ever I did. Is 
not he the Christ?” Well they knew what she had been; 
and if He had so dealt with her, might not they also see 
and hear Him? Such a personal experience has great power, 
and it is safe too, where it is not merely an appeal to the 
affections, but conscience is searched along with it. 

* “Meanwhile the disciples were asking him, saying, Rabbi, 
eat. But he said to them, I have food to eat which ye do not 
know. Then the disciples said to one another, Hath any one 
brought him to eat? Jesus saith to them, It is my food that 
I should do} the will of him that sent me, and finish his 
work” (vers. 31-34). How humbling to find His disciples 
at such a time occupied with the body and its wants. And 
this the Lord makes them feel by His answer. They knew 
not as yet such food, disciples though they were. It is not 
as men often quote it, “his meat and his drink”; for there was 
an inner spring of loving and delighting in His Father beyond 
doing His will and completing His work. But this was His 
food. He came to do His will. In this He was never 
wearied, nor should we be even now, whatever might be the 


* The great majority of the witnesses add 6é¢ ‘‘and” or “but”; the most 
ancient omit. 

+ The best reading and most forcible sense is rod (N AEGHMSUV 
TAA, &c.), not movjow, read by Lachmann, Treg., W. and H., though a 
manifest assimilation to redevdow. 


CHAPTER IV. 95 


fatigue of the body. For “he giveth power to the faint, and 
to them that have no might he increaseth strength.” Without 
Him even the “youths shall faint and be weary, and the young 
men shall utterly fail. But they that wait upon Jehovah shall 
renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as 
eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk 
and not faint.” Jesus knew this Himself in perfection, and 
here is a sample of it. 

“Do not ye say that there are yet four months and the 
harvest cometh? Lo, I say to you, Lift up your eyes, and 
behold the fields, for they are white unto harvest already.* 
' Hey that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto 
life eternal, that both} he that soweth and he that reapeth may 
rejoice together. For in this is the saying true,§ It is one 
that soweth and another that reapeth. I sent you to reap 
that on which ye have not toiled: others have toiled, and ye 
have entered into their toil” (vers. 35-38). Whatever might 
be the times and seasons of the natural harvest, the fields 
spiritually were ripe for the reaper. Man, the world, 
undoubtedly deserved judgment; but the very same state 
of sin which calls for judgment God uses for His call of 
grace. The gospel comes expressly on the ground of man’s 
total ruin, and therefore levels all distinctions. Jew, 
Samaritan, Gentile—what are any now but sinners? The 
Jew had been under probation, but he was now rejecting the 
Messiah, the Son of God. All was lost; but the rejected 
Christ is the Saviour, and now there is salvation for any, and 
grace carries it among such as these Samaritans. 

Not that grace had failed to work during the past times of 
probation. Man had broken down utterly ; but God was pre- 

* Tischendorf, &c., sever #5y from verse 35 and make it begin 36, following 
some ancient authorities ; but the most ancient (NP™ B M IIp™, &c.) leave it 


open, and most give as is here done, which seems to be alone in keeping with 


the context. 

+ The common text prefixes cat on ample authority, but the most ancient 
uncials, and some good cursives, &c., are adverse. 

+ Some good and ancient authorities omit Kal. 

§ The article before d\n@uwvds is not read by N B CP™ K LT? A IIP™ many 
good cursives, and some of the Greek fathers, In one passage of Chrysostom 
which has the article, he has dA767s after it, and so have a few cursives. 


96 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


paring the way when it should be, no longer experimental 
dealings and man’s righteousness sought, but God’s righteous- 
ness revealed in virtue of the work of Christ. His witnesses 
had not wrought in vain, however little seen the effects mean- 
while. But the true light was now shining, and things 
appeared as they are to the eye of grace. What a sight to 
Christ the Samaritans coming to Him!—coming to hear One 
Who tells us whatever we did! The fields were white indeed. 

It is remarkable that the Lord speaks about reaping now 
rather than sowing, though sowing of course goes on, and 
has its place elsewhere, as in Matthew xii. Of old it 
was rather sowing than reaping; now in this day of grace 
there is a characteristic reaping—fruit not only of God’s past 
dealings, but of His coming and mighty work Who thus 
speaks to the disciples, “the reaper receiveth wages and 
gathereth fruit unto life eternal, that both the sower and the 
reaper may rejoice together.” So shall it be in the day of 
glory, as the spirit of it is even now true in the church and 
the Christian heart. “For in this is the, saying true, The 
sower is one, and the reaper another.” But while there are 
these differences still, it remains that the apostles are charac- 
terised by reaping rather than by sowing, and so of course are 
other labourers also. “I sent [or, have sent] you to reap that 
on which ye have not toiled: others have toiled, and ye have 
entered into their toil.” How emphatically this was verified 
at Pentecost and afterwards, all know. 

“But out of that city many of the Samaritans believed 
on him because of the word of the woman as she bore witness, 
He told me all things that [ever] I did. When therefore the 
Samaritans came to him, they asked him to abide with them. 
And he abode there two days; and many more believed 
because of his word. And they said to the woman, No longer 
on account of thy saying do we believe, for we have ourselves’ 
heard and know that this is indeed the* Saviour of the world” 
(vers. 39-42). It is cheering to see how God honoured the 
simple testimony of the woman. Many out of that town 


* The Sinai, Vat., Palimpsest of Paris, and an old St. Petersburg uncial 
(T>), with almost all the most ancient versions, &c., do not read 6 Xpucrds, 


CHAPTER IV. 97 


believed on Him because of her word. Here again she bears 
witness to the searching of her conscience by His word. “He 
told me all that ever I did.” It is a good guarantee that the 
work is divine when there is no shrinking from such a scrutiny: 
otherwise grace is apt to be misused as a cover for sin or a 
slight dealing with a sinner, instead of judging all in God’s 
light. But faith whenever it is real rises from the instrument 
to Him Who deigns to use it, and God loves to put honour 
upon the word of Jesus Himself. Hence we are told that, 
when He graciously acceded to the desire of the Samaritans 
and abode there two days, “more by a great deal believed 
because of his word.’ How sweet to the woman when they 
said to her, “No longer because of thy saying do we 
believe, for we have ourselves heard and know that this is 
indeed the Saviour of the world.” God led them too in 
dropping His Messiahship, and the copyists have inserted it 
without due reason. Ancient authority seems conclusive that 
the words “the Christ” should disappear. Their confession is 
much more simple and emphatic when so put. They now 
knew and confessed the truth—the grace and truth that came 
by Jesus Christ. (Compare 1 John iv. 14.) 

Thus without a miracle the Lord has been owned, as we see, 
in Samaria, first, as a prophet by one, finally, as Saviour of the 
world by all, who believed on Him there. There the fullest 
confession of His grace was found where one might have 
looked for least intelligence; but faith gives new wisdom so 
different from the old that those who are wise must become fools 
if they would be wise according to God. How blessed for those 
who have no wisdom to boast, whom grace forms with all 
simplicity according to its own power! Such were the 
Samaritans among whom the Lord abode for this little 
while. 

“ And after the two days he went forth thence * into Galilee. 
For Jesus himself testified that a prophet hath no honour in 
his own country ” (vers. 43, 44). He resumes His place among 
the despised and lowly. The first Gospel points out that this 

* The Received Text, with most uncials and cursives, &c., has also kal 


dmfdOev, contrary to & B C D T> 13, 69, and some other excellent authorities, 
¢ ; 


98 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


sphere of His ministry was according to prophecy ; for Isaiah, 
in setting forth the sins and judgment of Israel from first 
to last, had spoken of the light shining in Galilee when dark- 
ness enveloped the favoured seats in the land. All the 
evangelists indeed, for one reason or another, dwell upon His 
ministry in Galilee, John alone bringing into prominence 
some characteristic incidents in Jerusalem. Mark speaks 
much of Galilee, because his office was to describe the Lord’s 
ministry; and there in fact we must follow Him if we would 
trace its details. Luke again gives it as illustrating the moral 
ways of God in the grace of our Lord Jesus, and the activities 
of One Who went about doing good and healing all that were 
oppressed of the devil. John, on the other hand, as usual, lays 
it on a ground that pertains more strictly to His Person. 

It was His own testimony that a prophet hath no honour in. 
his own country. He had come down not to seek His own 
honour but that of Him Who sent Him. He had riches of grace 
and truth to dispense; He was sent, He was come, to do His 
Father’s will; content to be nothing—have nothing from men, 
He goes away into Galilee. But if the Galileans paid Him no 
honour when He was in their midst, they were not unmoved 
by the fame that had gone out, specially by the impression 
made in the capital. “When therefore he came into Galilee, 
the Galileans received him, having seen all that * he did in 
Jerusalem at the feast, for they too went unto the feast” 
(ver. 45). Galilee was not only the place where He had 
spent the greater part of His earthly life in humiliation and 
obedience, but there He had begun to make Himself known to 
the disciples ;.and there He had first wrought a sign in witness 
of His glory. “Het came therefore again into Cana of 
Galilee where he made the water wine” (ver. 46). That first 
sign held out the promise, pledge, and earnest of Israel's future 
joy and blessedness ; and He Himself in the day that is coming 
will be there in the land, no longer the guest, nor the master of 


* There is good authority for écoa as well as a, the more widespread if not 
ancient copies inclining to the latter, 

+ The best witnesses do not read 6 ’I., as do the Received Text and Scholz, 
(though with a slight difference of position) following many MSS. 


CHAPTER IV. 99 


the feast alone, but the Bridegroom. And the barren one shall 
know her Maker as her husband, Jehovah of hosts His name, 
and her Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. The God not 
merely of the land but of the whole earth shall He be called. 

But it is not yet the day for singing, but of sadness; not 
yet for enlarging the place of Israel’s tent, nor of stretching 
the curtains of their habitation, nor of strengthening the stakes: 
no breaking forth yet on the right hand or on the left, no inherit- 
ing the Gentiles, or making the desolate cities to be inhabited. 
Contrariwise, did not Messiah come to His own things, and His 
own people received Him not? Nay, they were about to con- 
summate their sin in His cross, and to seal their unbelief 
in their rejection of the gospel, forbidding His servants to 
speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their 
sins always, so that wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, 
however grace may turn their fall to the salvation and the 
riches of the Gentiles. Nevertheless grace is yet to make good 
every sign which is hung out to Israel, and the Lord adds on 
this occasion a fresh and suited display of His power for their 
actual circumstances and present need. 

“And there was a certain courtier whose son was sick at 
Capernaum. He, having heard that Jesus was come out of 
Juda into Galilee, went away unto him and asked that he 
would go down and heal his son, for he was about to die. 
Jesus therefore said unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, 
ye will in nowise believe” (vers. 46-48). How strikingly in 
contrast with the simpler souls in Samaria! There was faith 
in the power of Jesus, but it was of a Jewish sort. The 
courtier had heard, no doubt, of miracles wrought by Him 
personally present. His faith rose no higher; yet evidently, 
if it were the power of God, there could be no limits. 
Absence or presence could account for nothing—they were 
but circumstances; and the very essence of a miracle is God 
rising above all circumstances. It is irrational as well as 
unbelieving to measure a miracle by one’s experience. It is 
solely a question of God’s will, power, and glory; and therefore 
the Lord justly rebukes the unbelief of all such thoughts. 

How finely too the grace which wrought in the Gentile 


100 AN EXPOSITION .OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


centurion whose servant was sick contrasts with the limited 
expectations of this Jewish courtier! There, just to exercise 
and manifest the power of his faith, the Lord proposed to go 
with the elders of the Jews who begged Him to come and save 
his bondman. But even though He was not far from the 
house, the centurion sent to Him friends expressly not to 
trouble Him; for he was not worthy that He should come 
under his roof, any more than he counted himself worthy to 
come to Him. He had only to say by a word, and his servant 
should be healed. This accordingly drew out the strong appro- 
bation of the Lord, not His censure as here. “Not even in 
Israel” had He found such great faith. 

Nevertheless the grace of the Lord never fails, and little 
faith receives its blessing as surely as greater faith its larger 
answer. “The courtier said unto Him, Sir, come down ere my 
child die” (ver. 49). Here again how scanty the faith if 
urgent the appeal! Still faith must have a gracious assurance. 
“Jesus saith to him, Go, thy son liveth” (ver. 50). It was 
better for the courtier’s soul in every way and more to the 
glory of God, that Jesus should bid im go, instead of going 
with him. If it crossed the man’s thoughts and words, it was 
meant to exercise his faith so much the more. “[And]* the 
man believed the word which Jesus had said unto him, and 
went his way” (ver. 50). He had not long to wait before he 
knew the blessing. 

“But as he was now going down, his t servants met him and 
brought [him] word, saying, Thy child liveth. He inquired 
therefore from them the hour at which he got better. They 
said to him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left 
him. The father therefore knew that [it was] at that hour 
in which Jesus said to him, Thy son liveth: and himself 
believed and his whole house” (vers. 51-53). Thus God took 
care to arrest the servants, who were all the more interested 
and responsible because of their master’s absence. They would 
watch the case; they would mark the changes in the malady of 
the patient; and they therefore were the first to see when he 


* & B D anda few other authorities omit cal, “ and.” 
t S De L., &., omit adrod, ‘‘ his,” 


CHAPTER IV. 101 


began to amend. They could tell the master the precise hour 
when the fever left the child—the very hour, as he could tell 
them, when Jesus spoke the word of healing power. “This 
second sign again did Jesus on coming out of Judza into 
Galilee” (ver. 54). Is it not a sign of what He is to do in the 
day when, re-animating the dead daughter of Zion, He will also 
change the water of purification into the wine of joy for God 
and man? Meanwhile. He relieves the one ready to perish in 
Israel where there was the faith, however feeble, to seek it from 
the Christ. It was true even then of His ministry in all its 
meaning and force. In the chapter which follows we have the 
rights of His Person asserted still more mightily in effects 
present and future. Here it is rather arresting the power of 
death than giving life. Even that He only could do, and did 
where there was faith. 


CHAPTER V. 


Ir is one of the peculiarities of our Gospel that in it we see 
the Lord frequently in Jerusalem, while the Synoptic Gospels 
are occupied with His Galilean ministry. The miracle at the 
pool of Bethesda is an instance: only John records it. Both 
the fact and the discourse which follows eminently bring out 
His Person. This alone abides, and it is all to the believer, 
with the infinite work which owes its infiniteness to it. In the 
other Gospels the process of probation is viewed as still going 
on; by John all is seen from the first to be closed before God. 
Hence His moral judgment of Jerusalem is shewn us at the 
beginning by John, as its rejection of Him also. This, to my 
mind, accounts for the record of the Lord’s work there as well 
as in Galilee in the Gospel of John. If all be regarded 
as a scene of wreck and ruin morally, it was of no consequence 
where He wrought. As to trial, all was over; grace could and 
would work equally anywhere: Galilee and Jerusalem were 
thus alike. Sin levels all: life from God in the Son was 
needed by one as much as another. » This our Gospel develops. 

“After these things was the feast of the Jews, and Jesus 
went up to Jerusalem” (verse 1). Here authority is pretty 
equally divided for and against the insertion of the article. 
Ten uncials (8 CE F HI LM A II) insert it, ten (A BD GK 
SU VI A) omit it. About fifty cursives and the Memph. 
and Theb. versions are with the former, still more with the latter. 
If the article be received, it can scarcely be any other feast 
than the passover, the first and foundation feast of the Jewish 
holy year. Some have thought that it might be the feast of 
Purim, but this would not account for Jesus going up to 
Jerusalem. It had no such divine claim. 

102 


CHAPTER V. 103 


- “Now there is in Jerusalem at the sheep-gate* a pool that is 
called in Hebrew Bethesda, having five porches. In these lay 
at multitude of the sick, blind, lame, withered [awaiting the 
moving of the water. For an angel descended from time to 
time in the pool and troubled the water. He therefore that 
first went in after the troubling of the water, became well, 
whatever disease he was affected by]. But a certain man 
was there, for thirty and eight years suffering under hist 
infirmity. Jesus seeing him lying down, and knowing that 
he was [so] now a long time, saith to him, Desirest thou 
to become well ? 


* There is a good deal of confusion in the MSS. even where the text is certain - 
here. Thus while ém! 77 mpoBaricy (at the sheep-gate, Neh. iii. LXX.) is read by 
the Vatican, Rescript of Paris, and thirteen more uncials and the great body of 
cursives, confirmed by most ancient versions, N°" A DG L, &., have & 
7 7. probably in the sense of the Authorised Version—“sheep-market” ; whilst 
Pm and a few other inferior authorities omit ém (or év) 77, and hence seem to 
construe mpoSarixy Kod. a “sheep pool”: so Jerome’s Onomast. (ed. Lars. et 
Parth. p. 112), Theod. Mops. p. 26, and the Jerusalem Itin., not to speak of the 
Vulg. Aeth. and Slav. Again, for 7 émiAey. NP™ gives 7d heyduevov (adopted by 
Tisch. in his eighth ed.), and N° 4 émiNey.; while D V, eight cursives, &c., 
read Xey. In the same ed, Tisch. exhibits By0fada with 8 L, &c. (D Bedfeda, 
B, &. Bydcadda, &c., A, &c., Biber Oa). 

+ In verses 3, 4 there are more serious differences. High if not large 
authorities (8 B C D L 33, 68, many of the ante-Hier. Latin versions, 
Theb. Memph. Syre- et bier, &c.) do not read odd, nor (except D h) 

“mapahutix@v, which last is not in T. R. But the great omission is of the | 
clause éxdexouévov tiv rod tdaros Klynow with 8P™ B Crm L, 18, 157, 314 
Syre Theb, Memph4 and all verse 4 as in the common text, here 
strengthened by D (an ancient though erratic copy), but deserted by AP™. It 
is certain that the narrative as ordinarily given must have been read by 
Tertullian (de Bapt. 5) ; and the answer of the sick man in the critical text, 
verse 7, implies, if it does not demand, such an explanation. The fact may have 
been too startling for the copyists to believe, not about themselves or Christian 
times, but about the days before and up to Christ’s ministry. The Romanists 
found it hard to credit any evidence of God’s goodness to the Jews as such, and 
in the time alleged. Even Lachmann retained the passage. I do not think 
there is real weight in Alford’s argument against its genuineness grounded on 
the plea that there are seven words used here only, or here only in this sense ; 
for so remarkable and singular a fact would naturally call for words suited to it. 
There are variations among the MSS. that contain the omitted passage, but not 
more perhaps than usual. 

+ In verse 5 T. R. omits cat (so BK SVT A. &.) contrary to NACDEFG 
HILMUA and the mass of cursives, versions, &c. ; also avrod against S B 
Crm D L Ile &c. with most ancient versions. 


104 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


The infirm [man] answered, Sir,* I have no man, when the 
water is troubled, to put me into the pool; but whilst I am 
coming, another goeth down before me. Jesus saith to him, 
Arise, take up thy couch, and walk. And immediatelyt the 
man became well and took up his couch and walked. And 
on that day was sabbath” (verses 2-9). 

A striking picture that scene was of man, of the Jews under 
law. There they lay without strength, and though the grace 
of God might interfere at intervals, the greater the need, the 
less could souls take advantage of His mercy. It was “what 
the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh.” 
The impotent man was himself the witness of it till Jesus 
came, and, unsought, sought him. No angel’s moving of the 
water could avail a man unable to step down and without help 
to plunge him into the pool. He that was stronger could 
always anticipate the helpless. But now grace in Jesus the 
Son of God looks at him who had been suffering so long; grace 
speaks to him; grace works for him in a word without further 
delay ; for the word was with power. “And immediately the 
man became well, and took up his couch and walked. And on 
that day was sabbath.” 

But how could sabbath be kept or enjoined on that day 
of man’s misery? Jesus had come to work, not to rest; 
whatever Pharisees might urge, He would not seal up man 
in a rest broken before God by sin and ruin. 

Thus the sign wrought on that sabbath carries out further 
what the Lord is seen doing throughout these chapters of the 
Gospel—substituting Himself for every object of trust or 
means of blessing, of old or in that day, without Israel and 
within. Even angels bow to the Son; yet was He incarnate, 
working in humiliation, going on straight to the cross. The 
law could not deliver from the guilt or power or effects of sin; 
no extraordinary intervention of God by the highest of creatures 


* Several uncials (C°" E F G H with many cursives, &c.) add vat before 
kvpee, a few omitting x.—The received reading BdAAy is incorrect and rests 
on few if any copies. 


t See D, the Lat. Cod. Rhedig., and Arm. omit ed@éws, but all other 
authorities insert it. 


’ 


CHAPTER V. 105 


could adequately meet the need: nothing and no one but Jesus 
the Son of God. Yet have we also the clearest proof that the 


| Jews were so self-satisfied in their misery by a misuse of the 


| 


law which blinded them to their sin as well as to the Son, that 
they were content to go on with such a sabbath, incensed with 
Him Who wrought a sign that proclaimed not more surely His 
grace than their ruin. Hopeless too it was because of their 
rejection of the remedy and their self-complacency in their 
own righteousness. 

Observe, however, that the Lord made the infirm feel his 
powerlessness more than ever before He spoke the word that 
raised him up. He did awaken the desire to be made whole, 
as He looked with infinite compassion and knew the case in all 
its fulness; but the desire then felt expressed itself in the man’s 
conviction of his own wretchedness. It was like the soul’s 
saying in Romans vii, “O wretched man that I am! who shall 
deliver me,” &c. How little he knew Who had deigned to be 
his “neighbour,” and do the part of the good Samaritan, yea, 
incomparably more here where need is sounded more deeply. 
The Quickener of the dead is here. “He spake and it was 
done,” sabbath as it might be; but what sabbath acceptable to 
God can sin and misery keep? Thank God! Jesus wrought; 
but they felt that if He was right, it was all over with them. © 
Hence they judged Him, not themselves, as we shall see, to 
God’s dishonour and their own perdition. 

Undoubtedly to see a man carrying his couch on the sabbath 
was a strange thing in Judea, and especially in Jerusalem. But 
it was, of course, by a deliberate injunction on the Lord’s part. 
He was raising a question with the Jews which He knew would 
bring about a breach with their incredulity. It was a blow 
purposely struck at their self-complacent observance of the 
sabbath, when they were blinded, not merely by self-will to 


violate the law, but by unbelief against their own Messiah, 


spite of the fullest proofs of His mission and Person. Could 
God accept thé sabbath-keeping of the people in-such a state? 
Here then the Lord commanded an act expressly public on the 


. sabbath-day in Jerusalem. 


“The Jews therefore said to him that was cured, It is 


106 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


sabbath, and* it is not allowed thee to take up thyt couch. 
He answered them, He that made me well, the same said to me, 
Take up thy couch and walk” (vers. 10,11). The healed man 
was simple, and his answer bears the stamp of right and truth. 
The divine power that had wrought beyond even an angel’s 
compass or commission, and without it, was his warrant to act 
upon the word. “They asked him [therefore], Who is the 
man that said to thee, Také up [thy couch]{ and walk? But he 
that was healed § knew not who he was, for Jesus withdrew, a 
crowd being in the place” (vers. 12, 13). The Jews spoke with 
malice and contempt, “Who is the man?” They can scarcely 
be conceived ignorant that there was more in their midst, and 
Who He was. They knew His works, if they knew not Him- 
self; and His works as well as ways proclaimed a mission more 
than human. The very work before them, and they could not 
deny it, was beyond an angel; yet they asked the healed person, 
“Who is the man that said to thee, Take up thy couch and 
walk?” The Lord had ordered things so that the healed man 
should know no more; He had passed away unnoticed, a crowd 
being there. 

“ After these things Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said 
to him, Behold, thou art made well. Sin no more, lest some 
worse thing happen to thee. The man went away, and told 
the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well” (vers. 14, 
15). It was a gracious, but withal a solemn word. To live 
now, to enjoy the life that is now, is not the great matter. “No 
cure, however bespeaking the power and goodness of God, could 


* Kal is omitted in T, R. with at least ten uncials, very many cursives, Vulg., 
Syrr., &c., but read by 8 A BCrP™ D GL VT, forty cursives, most ancient 
versions and fathers, 

+ A B and some eleven or twelve other uncials, and most cursives, omit cov, 
reading “the.” But ® Cp™ DL A II, thirteen cursives, and the body of 
ancient versions, &c., read the pronoun ‘‘ thiy,” 

{ T. R. with most copies, &c., reads ody, therefore” ; but it is not found in 
& B D and several other good authorities. So rdv xp. cov is not read by NP™ 
et con B Crm L Sah. Two uncials and six cursives omit ‘the verse, evidently 
by osovoré\evrov. (Compare end of ver. 11.) 

§ For ladels, ‘‘ healed” (with 8 ABCLIA ATI and almost all the rest of 
the copies and versions and fathers), Tischendorf reads dodevav with D and two - 
or three Latin copies—a strange judgment and on light grounds. 


CHAPTER V. 107 


meet man’s underlying need, for sin still remained. A cure was 
only provisional. The man that was cured, though it was 
Jesus Who cured him, had to be warned, “Sin no more, lest 
some worse thing happen to thee.” He does not appear to 
have then adequately judged the malice of the Jews. They 
probably concealed their real feelings. It is often so with men 
toward Jesus, especially men who have a reputation for 
religion. They do not believe on Him, neither do they love 
Him. So the healed man in his simplicity fathomed not their 
object, but seems rather to have assumed that they were 
anxious to know his wondrous benefactor. Hence he went . 
off, and brought them word that it was Jesus Who had made 
him well. There is no ground, I think, to suppose that he 
shared the feelings of the Jews, or wished to betray Jesus 
to those who hated Him. 
_ But now they knew as a fact, what they ee no doubt, 
suspected from the first, that the sick man had to do with 
Jesus. I do not say that their informant should not have 
known better, for they had asked, “Who is the man that said 
. to thee, Take up thy couch and walk?” He told them now 
_ that it was Jesus Who had made him well. His heart dwelt on 
the good and mighty deed that was done; theirs on the word 
which touched their sabbath-keeping. “ And for this the Jews 
persecuted Jesus,* because he did these things on a sabbath” 
(ver. 16). It was the blindness of men, who, lost in forms, 
knew not the reality of God, and consequently knew not 
themselves in His presence. Sooner or later such men find 
themselves in collision with Jesus; what will they feel 
by-and-by ? 

“But Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and 
I work” (ver. 17). It was an overwhelming answer. They 
knew nothing of fellowship with the Father. He (Jesus), not 
they, could call God “My Father,” and loved to say that He 
‘worketh hitherto.’ For the Father could not rest in sin, 
He would not rest in misery. It is not yet God judging. 

* T. R. adds kcal é¢jrovy atrov dmoxretvac with fourteen uncials, most cursives 


and some versions, contrary to NBC DL, 1, 22, 33, 69, 249, some old Latin, 
Vulg. Syrc"* Memph. Arm., and early Greeks. 


108 AN EXPOSITION. OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Therefore was He working as Father, and until now, though 
only now declaring Himself Father in and by the Son. - Even 
before this, however, He had not left Himself without witness 
in Jerusalem itself, as the crowd of expectant sick round the 
pool of Bethesda attested. But this was only partial and 
transient. The Son was here to make Him fully known, and 
known as One Who could not keep His sabbath yet, whatever 
the Jews ignorant of Him might wish to say or do. “My 
Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” Jesus, the Son, had 
fellowship, unbroken and perfect, with His Father. 

Yet the words were still more offensive than the work they 
had just seen; and the way in which Jesus had openly caused it 
to be done and seen clashed with all their prejudices and stirred 
the depths of their unbelief. For in so speaking His personal 
glory could not but shine forth. 

Both the Father and the Son were working, not resting. “ For 
this therefore * the Jews sought the more to kill him, because 
he not only broke the sabbath, but also said that God was his 
own Father, making himself equal with God” (ver. 18). Nor 
were they mistaken in this inference at least. For as He did 
expressly charge the healed man to do what He knew would 
bring things to a rupture, so He did not deny but confess, that 
God was His own Father in a sense that was true of none but 
Himself. This is the truth; and the truth of all truths most 
due to God, and the turning-point of all blessing to man., By 
it the believer knows God, and has life everlasting ;, without it 
one is an enemy of God, as the Jews showed themselves that 
day and ever since. Hardened men, perversely, fatally blinded, 
who, in presumed zeal for His honour, sought the more to kill 
Jesus, His own Son, come in infinite love to make the Father 
known, and to reconcile man to God. But God is wise and 
infinitely good in His work; for in letting them prove their 
malice tothe uttermost, when the due time was come, in killing 
Jesus, He proved His own love to the full in atonement, 
making Christ, Who knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we 
might become God’s righteousness in Him. 


* ND and other authorities, followed by Tischendorf, omit ofy, contrary to 
the rest. 


CHAPTER V. 109 


The Lord takes up the unbelieving rejection of His Person 
and brings out the truth which puts all in its place. “Jesus 
then answered and said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, 
The Son can do nothing of himself unless he sees the Father 
doing something; for whatever things he doeth, these also the 
Son doeth in like manner” (ver. 19). It is the expression of 
the entire exclusion of a will separate from God the Father. 
He speaks of Himself as man on earth, yet God withal: the 
especial topic of our Gospel. He was here displaying God, 
Whom otherwise no man had seen or could see; and He dis- 
played Him as Father, however dull even disciples might be to 
discern it till redemption removed the veil from the eyes and 
sense of guilt from the conscience, till the love that gave Him 
to effect it was apprehended by the heart. But He had 
deigned to take the place of man, without forfeiting for a 
moment His divine nature and rights: and as such He dis- 
claims the least shade of self-exaltation, or independence of 
His Father. This flesh cannot understand now more than 
then ; and as then it led the Jews to repudiate the Son, so now 
in Christendom largely to the open denial of His divine glory 
or to the practical humanising of Him. Hence the effort of 
so many to get rid of such a symbol as the Athanasian creed, 
and the otiose acquiescence of far more who believe on Him 
no more than they. The truth is that scripture goes beyond 
any creed that ever was framed in the maintenance of His 
honour; and this not only in the doctrine of His inspired 
servants, but in their report of. His own words as here. 

Besides however being the Eternal, God over all, blessed for 
ever, He speaks of Himself as in this world a man, yet the 
Son, and as such only doing what He sees the Father do: any- 
thing else would not be to declare Him. And for this He was 
here. Yet so truly is He divine that whatever things the 
Father does, these also does the Son likewise. He is the 
image of the invisible God, and alone competent to show the 
Father. ‘How perfect the conjoint working of the Father and 
the Son! So we learn here, as in John x. their unity. It is 
not only that the Son does whatever the Father may, but in 
like manner. How blessed their communion ! 


110 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


But the ground the Lord lays is also to be considered. 
“For the Father loveth (¢:Aez) the Son and showeth him all 
things which he himself doeth;-and he will show him greater 
works than these that ye may wonder” (ver. 20). Truly the 
Persons in the Godhead are real, if anything is; and as the 
divine nature is morally perfect, the affections that reign are 
not less. The joint working of the Father and the Son our 
blessed Lord explains by the Father loving the Son and show- 
ing Him all that He Himself does; nay, He lets them know 
as He knew Himself that greater works would be shewn Him 
by the Father, as the latter part of this Gospel testifies, “that 
ye may wonder ”—He does not say believe. For He speaks, not 
of grace, but of power displayed in testimony to the Jews, the 
effect of which would be, not the faith which honours God, but 
the amazement which is the frequent and stupid companion of 
incredulity. 

The Lord next singles out the immense miracle of: resurrec- 
tion. “For even as the Father raiseth the dead and 
quickeneth, so the Son also quickeneth whom he will; for 
not even the Father judgeth any one, but hath given all the - 
judgment to the Son; that all may honour the Son even as 
they honour thé Father. He that honoureth not the Son 
honoureth not the Father that sent him” (vers. 21-23). 
There can be no doubt that giving life to the dead befits and 
characterises God; but if the Father does so, no less does the 
Son, and this not as an instrument but sovereignly: “the Son 
also quickeneth whom He will.” He is a divine Person as 
truly as the Father, in full right and power. But more: He 
alone judges. Judgment as a whole and in all its forms is 
committed to the Son by the Father Who in this sense judges 
none, with the express aim that all should honour the Son 
even as they honour the Father. And so it really is; for they 
honour not. the Father but do Him despite who honour not 
His sent One, the Son. It is the Son on Whom by the 
Father’s pleasure it devolves to judge; but we shall find that 
there is a moral reason for this which appears afterward. As 
it is, we learn that the Son quickens in communion with the 
Father, and that only He judges. Thus is His honour secured 


CHAPTER V. 111 


from all men, who are either quickened if they believe, or 
judged if they do not. 

For how can a soul know that he is quickened and shall not 
be judged? He who reveals the portion that belongs to some 
and awaits the rest has not left in obscurity or doubt that 
which is so all-important; He has told out what so deeply 
concerns every child of man. Only unbelief need or can be 
uncertain, though it indeed should not be, for its sorrowful end 
is too plain to others if not to itself. Defying God, it must be 
judged by Him Whom it can no longer dishonour. What on 
the other hand can be more graciously distinct than the 
portion our Lord warrants to faith? “Verily, verily, I say to 
you, He that heareth my word and believeth him that sent 
me hath life eternal, and cometh not into judgment, but is 
passed out of death into life”* (ver. 24). It was no question 


* The contrast of life and judgment here, as of salvation and judgment in 
Heb. ix. 27, 28, is so distinctly revealed, and on ground so solemn as the 
honour or dishonour of the Son, that one may wonder at the prejudice of the late 
able Knightsbridge Professor in the University of Cambridge, who opposes 
Dr. Gr. Guinness where he is as right as he himself was wrong on the judgment 
in Rev. xx. For the faithful never coming into judgment at all, Mr. T. R. 
Birks saw ‘‘no ground but Alford’s altered translation of John v. 24, which 
I believe to be a mistake” (Thoughts on the Times and Seasons of Sacred 
Prophecy, p. 65, 1880): an astounding utterance, not only in its philological 
aspect, since the Greek admits of no other sense, but no less certainly as a 
question of divine grace and truth, and of divine righteousness. It is nothing 
less than a heterodox or unbelieving offence against the gospel, even against what 
an O.T. saint could say before the Saviour came, as in Ps, cxliii. 2. If the 
manifestation of all absolutely before the judgment-seat of Christ were en- 
feebled, there had been reason for the gravest warning. But it is agreed, that 
each of us shall give account of himself to God, and receive the things done 
through the body accordingly, whether good or evil. This, however, gives no 
title to deny Christ’s word, or the believer’s distinctive privilege that he comes 
not into judgment or needs ‘‘ acquittal” in that day, after having been already 
justified. Doctrinally it dishonours the Lord and His work, yet more than the 
faith of the saint ; it replunges into doubt and darkness those whom grace has 
saved through believing ; it would bring back the distress on exercised hearts, 
which the misrendering of John v. and of 1 Cor. xi. introduced. This mis- 
rendering in the A.V. is corrected beyond just hesitation by the R.V. As to 
‘* Alford’s altered translation,” be it remarked, that the A.V. of John v, 22 and 
27 corrects the error in 24 and 29. It is the same word xplovs all through, 
which indisputably means “judgment,” not damnation or ‘condemnation ” 

,like xardkxpiwa, as the verb (22, 30) means ‘‘to judge.” Nor is it unim- 
portant to notice the ignorance of talking thus of Dean A., seeing that the 
most influential perhaps of all versions, Jerome’s Vulgate, is quite right in 


1123 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


of the law, but of hearing Christ’s word, of believing (not a 
God in any sense, as the Authorised Version conveys, but) 
Him that sent Christ, believing His testimony. For this had 
He sent His Son that He might give life eternal. He there- 
fore that believeth Him “hath life eternal.” It is a present 
gift of God and possession of the believer, to be enjoyed 
perfectly in heaven doubtless, but none the less truly given 
now and exercised here where Christ then was. 

But there is more than the actual communication of a new 
life by faith, a life of which Christ, not Adam, is the source 
and character; he who has life does not come into judgment 
(kpicw). The Authorised English version has “condemna- 
tion”; but the Lord says more than this: the believer 
“cometh not into judgment.” He will be manifested before 
Christ’s tribunal; he will give account of all done in the body, 
but he does not, if Christ is to be believed, come into judg- 
ment. He will never be put on his trial to see whether he is 
to be lost or not. Strange notion! after it may be in the 
separate state departing “to be with Christ, which is far 
better,” certainly after being changed into the likeness of His 
glory, to be judged. Think of the “beloved disciple,’ when 
glorified, put on so awful a trial! It is equally inconsistent 
for every other believer; for life eternal is the same for all. 
Salvation does not vary for any, more than Christ does. No! 
such an idea is theology, the too common doctrine of Christen- 
dom, Protestant or Popish, Arminian or Calvinist; but it is 
directly in collision with the plain and sure words of Christ. 

All the great English translations are wrong here, Wiclif, 
Tyndal, Cranmer, and Geneva, with the Authorised Version. 
Singular to say, the Rhemish version alone is right, in this 
following the Vulgate: a mere accident undoubtedly, for none 
are so distant from the truth conveyed by their own transla- 
tion, from the apprehension of exemption from judgment, as 
both John v, and 1 Cor. xi., where the A.V. was lamentably and inexcusably. 
wrong. In the Gospel the old Latin MSS. Vercell. Veron. Brix. etc. were right. 
Many of the Oriental versions are correct ; some waver like the A.V. to the 
ruin of definite truth on what is of great moment. But where the doctrine on 


everlasting punishment was unsound, it is not surprising to learn that there was 
lack of faith as to life eternal and its exemption from judgment. 


CHAPTER V. ENS 


Romish doctors. And none are so unfaithful in the next 
clause, for they actually make the Lord seem to say “shall 
pass from death into life.”* He really said adda peraBéByxev 
ex T. 0. ets T. ¢., “but is (or, hath) passed (the present result of 
a past act) out of death into life.” Here the Protestant 
versions are right, Wiclif feeble, the Rhemish false. And 
there is not even the excuse of the Vulgate, which reads 
“transiit.” Possibly they read “transiet”: but if so, it was an 
error which some copies of the Latin would have corrected, 
if they ignored the inspired original. 

However this be, the truth set forth by our Saviour is of all 
moment: would that every believer knew it and rejoiced in it 
with simplicity and in its fulness, as this one verse presents it ! 
It is Christ’s word that is heard in divinely given faith, and 
this quickens the soul: no thought here or anywhere else of 
any such virtue in an administered ordinance. But faith does 
not slight His judgment; on the contrary the believer now 
bows to it morally in His word, receives God’s testimony to 
His Son, and is passed from death into life. 

The Lord has thus answered the question which His solemn 
words would raise in every soul that fears God. He had 
shewn it to be no question of law or of ordinance, but of 
hearing His word and believing the Father that sent Him. 
Such only have eternal life; but he who so believes has 
it now. - How blessed and secure his portion in Christ ? 

Next He turns to the more general state of things. 
“Verily, verily, I say to you, An hour is coming and now 
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; 
and they that have heard shall live” (ver. 25). It is indeed 
the sad truth: men in all the activities of the world are 
here “the dead.” Nor is it a question of a stricter morality or 
of a holier religion. Either one or other or both they may 
acquire and yet want life. Dogma cannot give it any more 
than practice. It flows from the Son of God Who quickens 


* In Nonnus’ Paraphrase of our Gospel (fifth century, ed. by Passow and 
Bach, 1834) there is the similar error of rendering iferac é« Qavdroo. So in the 
+ Amiatine and other ancient Vulgate MSS. we have ‘‘ ¢ransiet,” and in a Munich 
old Latin copy of the sixth century ‘‘¢ransibit.” 
: H 


1s AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


whom He will; yet is it by faith, and so through the word 
which the Spirit applies livingly. 

Here it is that Evangelicalism is feeble and Sacramentalism 
is false. If the latter superstitiously gives to a creature 
ordinance the honour which belongs to a divine Person 
alone, the former ignores and lowers the truth by talking 
of a converted character and of devoting to God what was 
once abandoned to self and sin; but neither has any adequate 
estimate of the total ruin of man, nor consequently of the 
absolute need and real power of divine grace. “The dead” 
are men universally now till born of God. It is no picture 
of the future resurrection, whether of just or unjust, which 
follows in verses 28, 29, but of the present hour, as the 
Lord Himself intimates; for it “now is,’ “when the dead shall 
hear the voice of the Son of God.” His voice goes forth 
“to every creature” in the gospel; “and those that heard 
shall live.” Such are the means and condition of life. It is 
of faith that it might be by grace. Man’s utter powerless- 
ness is as manifest and certain as His glorious energy. 

Those then that heard shall live. Alas! the mass of man- 
kind have ears but they hear not; even as to the Jews, 
when they saw Him, there was no beauty that they should 
desire Him. Whether it be superstitious or sceptical man, 
he submits not to the sentence of God on his own estate, 
nor consequently feels the need of sovereign mercy in Christ, 
Who alone can give the life man wants for God now or 
through eternity. But whatever the mercy of God, He will 
have His Son honoured, and this now by hearing His word 
and believing the testimony of Him Who sent Him. This 
tests man thoroughly, which the law only did partially. For 
never does the sinner trust God for life eternal till grace 
makes him see his sins and distrust himself utterly. Then 
how glad is he to learn that the goodness of God gives 
life eternal in Christ, and has sent Him that he might know 
it! How willingly he owns himself one of “the dead,” which 
no man does really till he lives of the new life which is in 
Christ! How heartily he bows to the Son of God and blesses 
the God Who sent Him in love and compassion, willing not 


CHAPTER V. 115 


the death of the sinner, but rather that he might have life 
through His name! 
But the same unbelief, which of old in the Jews violated 
the law and lusted after idols, now in the Gentiles trusts 
an ordinance for it, to the exaltation of those that arrogate 
to themselves its valid and exclusive administration, or openly 
_ distrusts God and slights His Son, confiding in themselves 
- without Him. They are the religiously or the profanely infidel. 
They are “the dead” and have never heard the voice of the 
Son of God, but only of their priests or of their philosophers. 
Whatever their boastings, they shall not live, for they have 
not Christ, but only ideas, imaginative or rational; not the 
truth which is inseparable from Christ received by faith to 
the glory of God, and the annihilation of human pretensions. 
It is all-important to see that all truth centres in the 
Person of Christ Who, being God from everlasting to ever- 
lasting, deigned to become man, without the least forfeiture 
of divine glory, yet loyally accepting the position proper to 
humanity. Hence the language of the Lord in what follows, 
the misapprehension of which has led not a few theologians 
of eminence to the brink, if not into the pit, of fundamental 
heterodoxy. “For even as the Father hath life in himself, so 
he gave to the Son also to have life in himself; and gave him 
authority to execute judgment [also],* because he is Son of 
man” (vers. 26, 27). The Lord evidently speaks here as 
come below, a man, the Sent of God, and Servant of the 
divine purposes, not as the One Who is over all, God blessed 
for ever, though both be true of Him in His Person. As 
the eternal Son, He quickens whom He will; as come in 
‘humiliation, it is given Him of the Father to have life in 
Himself. Born of a woman, He is still Son of God (Luke i. 
35). But men despise the man Christ Jesus. Some trust 
in themselves that they are righteous, all disliking Him Who 
did not His own will but the will of Him that sent Him. 
He Who lived on account of the Father is irksome to all 
that live to themselves, and odious to such as seek honour 
‘one of another. They misuse His humanity to deny His 


i The majority read kal, ‘‘also,” but not A B L, &c., Memph. 


116 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


deity. They have no life, for they have no faith. But they 
cannot escape judgment, and a judgment executed in that 
very nature of man for which they rejected the Son of God. 

It is as Son of man that the Lord Jesus will sit on 
the throne. Doubtless He will show His divine knowledge 
in judging; but, as He says expressly, authority is given 
Him of the Father to execute judgment, because He is Son 
of man. As Son of God He quickens; as Son of man He 
will judge. How solemn! Had He been only Son of God, 
who would have dared to despise Him? The light of His 
glory had consumed instantly every proud adversary from 
before Him. It was His grace then in becoming man to 
save men which exposed Him to contempt in His path of 
lowly obedience and suffering in love. The archangel is a 
servant; He stooped to become one (Phil. u. 6, 7). But 
the god of this world blinded them, so that they counted as 
only man Him Who never more proved Himself God to 
such as by grace had eyes to see. If they insulted Him in 
His work of grace, how will it be when He executes judg- 
ment, and this as Son of man? Such is the award of God. 

“Wonder not at this; for an hour is coming, in which 
all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall 
go forth, those that practised good unto a resurrection of 
life, and those that did evil unto a resurrection of judg- 
ment” (vers. 28, 29). 

Thus another hour is announced distinct from what “now 
is,’ and only “coming,” an hour not of quickening such of 
the dead as hear the voice of Christ, but of “all that are 
in the tombs” rising. It is the hour of proper resurrec- | 
tion; and the Lord carefully negatives the popular thought 
of one general resurrection. Not so; here, as elsewhere, 
we learn of two resurrections wholly and distinctly con- 
trasted_in character, as we find in Revelation xx. they are 
in time, with the millennium and more between them. 

It did not enter into the scope of the Lord’s discourse, 
any more than of the Spirit’s design in the Gospel, to reveal 
in detail the order of events chronologically. This has its 
suited place in the great prophecy of the New Testament. 


CHAPTER V. 117 


But the far deeper difference of their relation to Christ Him- 
self, viewed as Son of God and Son of man, is laid before 
us in a few words of the profoundest interest—a difference 
which would be true if no more than ten minutes inter- 
vened, but which is rendered far more distinct and impressive, 
inasmuch as the Revelation lets us see an interval of more 
than a thousand years. How great the confusion in the 
theology of the schools and pulpits, which supposes a single 
promiscuous rising of just and unjust, and this mainly on 
an exegesis so absurd as that which applies Matthew xxv. 
31-46 to the resurrection! For it is certainly a judgment 
of the quick, of “all the nations,” before the Son of man when 
He comes again in glory; not the judgment of the wicked 
dead and their works before the great white throne after 
heaven and earth are fled away, and all question of coming 
again is closed. There is the further mischief resulting from 
this interpretation, that it tends to insinuate that just and 
unjust come into judgment, to the destruction of the capital 
truth of the gospel, which contrasts life and judgment, as we 
have seen in our Saviour’s words, and may find elsewhere 
also. 

There is this essential difference in the two “hours,” that, 
while in the first some only by grace hear His voice and 
have life, in the second all that are in the tombs shall hear 
it and shall go forth. But there is no confusion of just 
and unjust longer. In the world they had been more or less 
mixed together. In the field where the good seed was sown 
the enemy sowed darnel ; and, spite of the servants, the Lord 
ruled that both were to grow together until the harvest. 
But in the coming hour there is no mingling more: the 
solemn severing of all takes place, “those that practised good 
unto a resurrection of life, and those that did evil unto a 
resurrection of judgment.” For life eternal in Christ is never 
inoperative, and the Holy Ghost, Who is given to the believer 
consequent’ on the accomplishment of redemption and the 
ascension of Christ, works in that life, that there may be 
‘the fruit of righteousness by Jesus Christ to God’s glory 
and praise. Hence such as believed are here characterised 


118 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


as those that practised good, and as this had its root in life, 
so its issue is a resurrection of life; while those who had 
no life, being rejecters of Him Who is its source, are 
described as “those that did evil,” and their end a resurrec- 
tion of judgment. In the hour that now is they would 
not have the Son of God in all His grace; they must be 
judged by the Son of man in the hour that is coming. The 
two resurrections are as distinct as the characters of those 
who rise in each. But Jesus is Lord of all and raises all, 
though on a different principle, of a different class, and to 
a different end. 

Nothing can be more definite than the Son’s claim of the 
powers most characteristic of God the Father, quickening and 
raising the dead; nothing more decided than the Father’s 
resolve to maintain the honour of His incarnate Son. For 
every tittle and form of judging is committed to the Son 
of man, and with the express purpose, which shall surely stand, 
that all are to honour the Son as they honour the Father. But 
the giving life is the action of grace in its fullest character, as 
judgment is the vindication of the Son’s honour on those who 
slighted Him and never had life eternal any more than salva- 
tion. To confound the two is the unintelligence of man and 
his tradition, and is wholly opposed to plain revelation. It is 
an error of great magnitude. 

The Lord still speaks as Son, but as man on earth, and in 
verse 30 binds together what He had already unfolded with 
the various witnesses to His glory in what follows. He was 
equal to the task of judging, though the lowliest of men; and 
this just because He was in none of His ways or thoughts 
independent of the Father. It is the perfection of man; He 
alone was so, Who counted it no object of robbery to be on 
equality with God. But being God He had become man for 
God’s glory; and so He says, “I cannot do anything of myself; 
as I hear I judge, and my judgment is righteous, because I 
seek not my will, but the will of him* that sent me” 
(ver. 30). He saw, He heard, as the perfectly dependent and 


* The received text adds warpds, ‘‘ Father,” with many authorities, but not 
the most ancient. 


CHAPTER V. 119 


obedient man, though none could have taken in such a range 
unless a divine Person. He had a will, but it was used in 
entire subjection to the Father. He saw whatever the Father 
does to do the same likewise; He heard with an ear opened and 
wakened morning by morning to hear as the learned, and so He’ 
judged; and His judgment was just. There was nothing to 
distract or mislead, though there was one who sought it with 
all subtilty. But he was foiled, and failed utterly, for here he 
was assailing not the first man but the Second Who had come 
to do the will of God. Such a purpose of heart maintains 
both singleness of eye and unswerving fidelity. Thus did the 
sent One ever walk. Who so competent and suited to judge, 
and this, as Man, mankind ? 

Next we are introduced to the witnesses who testify to Him. 
“Tf I bear witness about myself, my witness is not true. It is 
another that beareth witness about me, and I know* that the 
witness which he beareth about me is true. Ye have sent unto 
John, and he hath borne witness to the truth. But I do not 
receive the witness from man; but these things I say that ye 
may be saved. He was the burning and shining lamp, and ye 
were willing to rejoice for a season in his light” (vers. 31-35). 

John the Baptist then is the first witness, whom the Lord 
summons in the ready and everlasting love which said nothing 
of His own testimony, if by any means they might be con- 
vinced and believe the truth. For this had He been born, 
and for this come into the world. He lived on account of 
the Father, Who testified about Him. Never was His an 
interested or an isolated testimony; but He would waive it, 
and points to His forerunner. For this purpose had John been 
raised up beyond denial, and no testimony from among men 
could be conceived more unimpeachable. His birth, his life, 
his preaching, his death, all bore the stamp of truthfulness; 
and never had one pointed to another as he to the Lord Jesus. 
The Jews too had sought his death solemnly, and he had not 
flinched. ~Who else had ever so testified before and after the 


* The Sinaiticbk™ and the Cambridge MS. of Beza, with a few other good 
authorities, read oldare, “‘ ye know,” but almost all the rest support the common 
reading. 


120 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


coming of the object of testimony? He was not the Christ, as 
he confessed and denied not, when men were ready to give him 
the glory due to the Master. Nor on the other hand did Christ 
seek testimony from man; yet to what did He not stoop that 
souls might be saved? If a man, however, was to be used at all, 
none greater than John had arisen among those born of women, 
‘as the Lord says. The burning and shining lamp had been a 
source of joy for a while; but men are inconstant, and the 
testimony of him, who was truly “a voice in the wilderness,” 
was refused. 

The second and greater witness we see in the works of 
Christ. “But I have the witness greater than of John; for 
the works which the Father hath given me that I should 
complete them, the works themselves which I do bear witness 
about me that the Father hath sent me” (ver. 36). In every 
way Christ’s works testify not merely of the power displayed, 
so much as their character. What grace and truth shine 
through them as in Him! 

The third witness is the Father’s voice. “And the Father 
who sent me, himself * hath borne witness about me. Ye have 
neither heard his voice at any time nor seen his shape; and 
his word ye have not abiding in you, because him whom he 
sent ye do not believe” (vers. 37, 38). This attestation to the 
relation and glory of the Son rises still higher—we might have 
thought to the highest, had not our Lord added another and 
crowning testimony in that which degenerate Christendom is 
now learning to abandon with contempt to its own ruin and 
speedy judgment. 

The fourth and crowning witness is that of the scriptures. 
“Search ” [or, “ Ye search ”] “ the scriptures, for ye think that ye 
have in them life eternal; and it is they that bear witness about 
me, And ye are not willing to come unto me that ye may have 
life” (vers, 39, 40). The practical difference between the in- 
dicative and the imperative is not great, because the context 
decides that it is an appeal, as it has been well remarked, rather 
than a command. They were not so infatuated as to suppose 


* 8 BL have éxeivos, D éxeivos ards, for avrds in the great mass of the 
authorities, as in Text, Rec, 


’ 


CHAPTER v. 121 


that they had life eternal in themselves; they looked for it in 
the scriptures, and so were in the habit of searching them, as _ 
they do, more or less, to this day. But though the scriptures 
testify about the Lord Jesus, they have no willingness to come 
unto Him that they may have the life He alone can give. For 
the scriptures cannot give life apart from Him, nor will the 
Father; yet are the scriptures the standing witness of Christ, 
continually holding Him forth as the revealed resource for man 
and triumph for God, and this in goodness, not merely in judg- 
ment, to the utter confusion of the enemy and of all who take 
their part with him against God. The presence of Christ put 
to the test, not merely man in his misery and universal de- 
parture. from God, but those who were intrusted with those 
oracles of God; and the Saviour Son, despised by the Jews, has 
but to pronounce the sentence on them thus wilfully slighting 
their own best witnesses to Him, “Ye will not come unto me 
that ye may have life.” 

Was it then that the Lord Jesus sought present honour ? 
His whole life, from His birth to His death, declared the 
contrary with a plainness which none could mistake. How was 
it with His adversaries? “Glory from men I do not receive ; 
but I know you that ye have not the love of God in yourselves. 
I am come in my Father’s name, and ye receive me not: if 
another come in his own name, him ye will receive” (vers. 41- 
43). “Glory from men” is the moving spring of the world: 
Jesus not only sought it not, but did not receive it. He always 
did the things that pleased the Father, Who gave Him com- 
mandment what He should say, and what He should speak. 
He kept His Father’s commandments, and abode in His love. 
In no sense had the Jews the love of God in them: ambitious 
of human glory, and self-complacent, their soul abhorred Jesus, 
as His soul was straitened for them. His coming had put them 
to a fresh and far fuller test. He had brought God too close to 
them, yea, the Father; but they knew neither Christ nor the 
Father: if they had known the one, they should have known 
the other. 

But there should be another test yet: not His coming in the 
Father’s name with the simple aim of doing His will and 


122 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


glorifying Him, but another to come in his own name. This 
would suit the Jew—man. Self-exaltation is his bane, and 
Satan’s bait, and therein utterly irremediable ruin under divine 
judgment. It is the man of sin in contrast with the Son 
of God, the Man of obedience and righteousness; and, according 
as we have heard that Antichrist comes, even now there have 
come many antichrists. But the presence of Antichrist will be 
according to the working of Satan, in all power and signs and 
wonders of falsehood, and in every deceit of unrighteousness, to 
those that perish, because they have not received the love of the 
truth that they might be saved. They would not have the true 
God and eternal life in the Son become man and suffering in 
love for man; they will receive Satan’s man when he sets up to 
be God. This is the great lie of the end, and they will be lost 
in it who rejected the truth in Christ. 

Nor is there anything strange in such a close for those who 
know the ways of man from the beginning. “How can ye 
believe who receive glory one of another, and seek not the glory 
which [is] from the only God?” (ver. 44.) Such is the world, 
the scene where man walks in a vain show, blessing his soul 
while he lives, and praised by his fellows when he did well 
to himself; but’ such shall never see light. This their way is 
their folly, let posterity ever so much delight in their mouth. 
Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on 
them, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the 
morning. If God’s “ children” are told to keep themselves from 
idols, one cannot wonder that the idolatry of man—of self— 
should be the death of faith. Any object is welcome rather 
than the true and only God, Who shall render to each according 
to his works; to those who in patience of good work seek for 
glory, honour, and incorruption, life eternal; but to those that 
are contentious, and are disobedient to the truth, and obey 
unrighteousness, [there shall be] wrath and indignation, tribula- 
tion and distress. 

Does the Lord then take the place of accusing the Jews? 
Not so: they boasted of Moses, but will find in him testimony 
fatal to themselves. “Think not that I will accuse you unto 
the Father: there is one that accuseth you, Moses, on whom ye 


CHAPTER V. 123 


trust; for if ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for 
he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall 
ye believe my words?” (vers. 45-47.) Never was such honour 
put on the written word. Jesus had, if any one, God’s word 
abiding in Him. Nobody ever had the Father’s words and His 
word as He; no one gave them out invariably, and at all times, 
as He; yet does He set the writings of the Bible above His own 
sayings, aS a testimony to Jewish conscience. It was no 
question of superior claim in themselves, or in the character of 
truth conveyed; for none of old could compare with the words 
of Christ. The Father on the holy mount had Himself answered 
the foolish words of Peter, who would have put Moses, Elias, 
and the Lord in three tabernacles and co-ordinate glory. Not so. 
“This is my beloved Son: hear ye Him.” The lawgiver, the 
prophet, must bow to Jesus. They had their place as servants: 
He is Son and Lord of all. They retire, leaving Him the one 
object of the Father’s good pleasure, and of our communion 
with the Father through hearing the Son Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 

Nevertheless it is the Son Himself Who here gives to the 
writings of Moses a place in testimony beyond His own words; 
not because the servant approached the Master, or the deca- 
logue the sermon on the mount, but because the scripture, as 
such, has a character of permanence in testimony which can 
attach only to the written word. And Moses wrote of Christ, 
necessarily therefore by divine power, as a prophet of “the 
prophet which should come into the world,” of the Prophet 
incomparably more than prophet, the Son of God, Who quickens 
every believer, and shall judge every despiser, raising from the 
grave these for a resurrection of judgment, as those for one of 
life. Had the Jews then believed Moses, they would have 
believed Christ: words which teach us that faith is no such 
otiose exercise as some would make it; for the Jews in no way 
questioned but received his writings as divine. But not to 
doubt is far from believing; and they saw not in any of his 
books the great object of testimony in all, Jesus the Messiah, 
a man yet far more than man, a divine Saviour of sinners and 
sacrifice for sins, the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of 


124 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the world. If they believed Moses, they would have believed 
Him, for he wrote of Him. But if they believed not his writings, 
the Saviour did not expect them to believe His own words. 

What an estimate of the authority of those very scriptures 
which self-sufficient men have assailed as untrustworthy! They 
dare to tell us that they are neither Mosaic in origin, nor 
Messianic in testimony, but a mass of legends which do not 
even cohere in their poor and human reports of early days. 
On the other hand the Judge of quick and dead declares that 
the scriptures testify of Him, and that Moses wrote of Him, 
setting the written word in point of authority above even His 
words. As the Saviour and Rationalism are thus in direct 
antagonism, the Christian has no hesitation which to receive 
and which to reject, for one cannot serve both masters. Either 
he will hate the one and love the other, or he will hold to the 
one and despise the other. So it is, and must be, and ought to 
be; for Christ and Rationalism are irreconcilable. Those who 
pretend to serve both have no principle as to either, and are 
the most corrupting dogmatically of all men. They not only do 
not possess the truth, but they make the love of it impossible, 
enemies alike of God and man. 


CHAPTER VI. 


OuR Gospel now gives us the great miracle, or sign rather, 
common to all the four; and this, as ever here, introductorily 
to the discourse that follows—Christ, incarnate and in death, 
the food of eternal life for those who believe on His name. 
Here it is the Son of man humbled and ascended, as in chapter 
v. the Son of God quickening those that hear, and by-and-by 
as Son of man about to judge those that believe not. 

“ After these things Jesus went away beyond the sea of 
Galilee, of Tiberias; and a great crowd followed him because 
they saw the* signs which he wrought on the sick. But Jesus 
went up into the mountain, and there sat with his disciples; 
and the passover, the feast of the Jews, was near. Jesus then 
_ lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a great crowd cometh unto 
him, saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy loaves that these 
may eat? But this he said, trying him, for he himself knew 
what he was about to do. Philip answered him, Loaves for 
two hundred pence are not sufficient for them, that each of 
them+t may have some little. One of his disciples, Andrew, 
the brother of Simon Peter, saith to him, There is a little boy 
here that hath five barley-loaves and two fishes; but these, what 
are they for so many?” (vers. 1-9.) 

The scene is wholly changed from Jerusalem. We see the 
Lord in Galilee, and in that part of the lake called from the 
city of Tiberias, as well as from the province bordering on its 
western side. A great crowd follow Him because of the signs 
He wrought on the sick. The Lord withdraws to the high 
land, where He sits with His disciples, the passover being then 


* Without airod X A B D K LS A OJ, many cursives, and almost all the 
ancient versions; with it EF GHMUVTA, &. 
+ & A BLIL, six cursives, and most versions reject avray. 


125 


126 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


at hand. None of the motives mentioned in the Synoptic 
accounts do we find here: neither the beheading of John 
Baptist, nor the apostles’ return from their mission, nor the 
need of rest after toils in teaching or other work. Jesus fills 
the picture: all is in His hand. It is He Who takes the 
initiative; not that the disciples may not have previously been 
perplexed, nor as if John did not know this as well as Matthew 
and the rest, but because it pleased the Holy Spirit to give us 
Christ Himself alone master of the situation, as always in his 
Gospel. The nearness of the passover is noted, as repeatedly 
in this Gospel. Here too there was the reason for it, that the 
discourse that follows, as well as the sign wrought, is grounded 
on eating and drinking as the token of communion. 

“Jesus then lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a great 
crowd cometh unto him, saith unto Philip, Whence shall we 
buy loaves that these may eat?” The evangelist, however, is 
careful of His glory and loses no time in letting us know that 
it was out of no uncertainty in His own mind, but in order to 
test Philip: He knew what He was going to do. Nevertheless 
He awaits the despairing words of Philip’s fellow-townsman, 
Andrew, and would teach all now what His gracious power 
loves to do with the little and despised, were it for the greatest 
need. The brother of Simon Peter, who was even before his 
brother in seeing the Messiah, could think of a little boy with 
five barley-loaves and two fishes, not of Jesus. And where was 
Peter ? where John, the disciple that He loved? Nowhere in 
faith. Truly flesh cannot glory in His presence. 

Let us turn to the One we may and ought to glory in, 
honouring the Father in honouring Him. “Jesus said, Make 
the people [avOpéovs] sit [or, lie] down. Now there was 
much grass in the place. The men [avdpes] then sat down 
in number about five thousand, Jesus then took the loaves 
and, having given thanks,* distributed ¢ to those that were set 


* ND, &c., read edyaplorycev cat, ‘‘ gave thanks and,” 

+ It will be noticed that the vulgar text interpolates the disciples, rots 
wadnrais, ot dé wabyrat, while the true text makes it only a question of the 
Lord. One may add too that 8 D I, nine cursive MSS. and other authorities 
have @dwxey (eight others dédwxer), ‘* gave,” while A B L A A II and most others 
give diddwxer, “ distributed.” 


CHAPTER VI. E27 


down, and likewise also of the fishes as much as they would. 
But when they were filled, he saith to his disciples, Gather the 
fragments that are over, that nothing be lost. They gathered 
[them] then, and filled twelve baskets with fragments of the 
five barley-loaves which were over to those that had eaten. The 
people [of @Opw7or] then, having seen the sign which Jesus * 
did, said, This is truly the prophet that is coming into the 
world. Jesus then, knowing that they would come and seize 
him that they might make [him] king, withdrew [again]t to the 
mountain himself alone” (vers. 10-15). 

One is afraid that, poor as was the intelligence of the Galilean 
crowd, they understood the import of this great sign better 
than the Christendom of the last seventeen hundred years. 
They were no doubt dull enough as to their deepest need, and 
they had no appreciation of the Saviour’s grace in humiliation 
and redemption, afterwards fully set forth by Him in the 
discourse that ensues ; but they had some thoughts not wholly 
untrue, though human and short enough, of the kingdom God 
is going to set up here below. Now and for many centuries 
theology indulges in a sort of mystic dream that the gospel 
or church is the kingdom of Christ, His kingdom of grace to 
be at the end His kingdom of glory. But they have no 
thought of His coming in the kingdom He will have received, 
that not Israel only but all peoples, nations, and languages 
should serve Him; and this too an everlasting dominion which 
shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be 
destroyed. A two-fold error, which lets slip the oneness of 
the body of Christ, the church, with its glorified Head on 
high, and denies the mercy and faithfulness of God to Israel 
who are the destined centre of Jehovah’s earthly plans for the 
kingdom, when we, changed into the likeness of Christ’s glory, 
shall reign together with Him. 

The crowd were struck with the fulfilment of this fresh and 
crowning sign. They had not abandoned as yet their hopes. 


* ‘0 Inoots, the reading of most MSS., is not in 8 B D and some other good 
authorities, 

+ médw is supported by X ABD KL A, many cursives, and some versions, 
It is omitted by EF GHMSUVT A, more than one hundred cursives, 
besides versions. 


128 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


They knew that Jehovah has chosen Zion; that He has desired 
it for His habitation; that He will abundantly bless her pro- 
vision and satisfy her poor with bread (Ps. cxxxii.). Was not 
He Who now displayed this power of Jehovah the promised 
Son of David Whom Jehovah will set on His throne? Such 
was their conclusion. “This is truly the prophet that is 
coming into the world.” They thus bound up the law, Psalms, 
and prophets in their testimony to the Messiah; and so far 
they were quite right. But not so in their desire, which the 
Lord knew, to force Him to be king. For this would be in no 
way the kingdom of God but of man, nor of heaven but of 
earth. Not so: as He Himself taught afterwards, He was to 
go into a far country to receive for Himself a kingdom and to 
return. Not till then shall the kingdom of God appear. 

Till then it is a question for us of righteousness and peace 
and joy in the Holy Ghost, and the kingdom is not in word 
but in power which is known to faith, not displayed yet. But 
it will not be always hidden as now, nor the domain of purely 
spiritual energy. Christ will come in His kingdom and reign 
till He has put all enemies under His feet, after asking from 
Jehovah, Who will give Him the heathen for His inheritance 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession. It 
will be no question then as now of patiently working by the 
gospel, but of breaking the nations with a rod of iron and of 
dashing them in pieces like a potter’s vessel. 

Unbelief either antedates the kingdom, striving to set it up 
now by man’s will, or abandons it for the delusion of human 
progress, without a thought of God’s purpose to establish it by 
Christ the second Man when the first is judged. Faith 
patiently waits for it meanwhile. So the Lord declined then 
and went up on high—this time Himself alone. It was the 
figure of what is actually true. Owned as Prophet, He 
refuses to be man’s king, and goes above to exercise His 
intercession, as He is now doing, the great Priest in the 
presence of God. 

But the Lord vouchsafes another sign to the very people 
who soon after ask for a sign that they might see and believe 
(ver. 30). So blind is man even when grace is multiplying 


CHAPTER VI. 129 


these helps for those who discern it! Submission to God was 
the true want, not more signs. 

“But when evening was come, his disciples went down unto 
the sea, and, having gone on board ship,* were crossing the sea 
unto Capernaum. And darkness had already come on, and Jesus 


had not yett come to them, and the sea was rough as a strong 


wind was blowing. Having rowed then about twenty-five or 
thirty stadia, they behold Jesus walking on the sea and coming 
near the ship, and they were affrighted. But he saith to them, 
It is I: be not afraid. They were willing therefore to receive 
him into the ship, and immediately the ship was at the land 
whither they were going” (ver. 16-21). 

How striking the contrast with another storm on the same 
lake where the waves beat into the ship so that it was now 


e full, and He was on board, but asleep, and the disciples awoke 


Him with the selfish and unbelieving cry, Master, carest Thou 
not that we perish? And He arose and rebuked the wind and 
said to the sea, Peace, and both obeyed the Creator of all, 
Whom man alone despised because His love made Him the 
servant of all to God’s glory. 

Here it is the picture of the Lord’s people while Himself is 
on high, exposed to the storms which the enemy knows how to 
excite, and after much toil making little progress. So it will 
be also for those who follow us at the end of the age. They 
will experience untold trials of the sharpest kind with scanty 
comfort or even intelligence, save as compared with “the 
wicked,” who shall not understand, least of all (we may 
perhaps add) in that day. Darkness will have already set in; 
but in the midst of their increasing troubles Jesus will appear, 
though they will not even then be delivered from their fears, 
for the glorious light will rather augment them, till they hear 
His voice and know that He is indeed their Saviour, long 
absent, now come back. Received into the ship He causes it 
to reach immediately the desired haven. So it will be with 
the righteous remnant by-and-by. Whether for them or for 


* The article is not in 8 B L A, a few cursives, &c., but is in more than a 
"dozen uncials, and most cursives. 
+ oUmw is read by 8 B D L, some cursives, and most ancient versions. 
I 


130 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


ourselves, all turns on Christ; and this it is the peculiar office 
of our Gospel to illustrate. 

Matthew, who alone specifically names the church as taking 
the place now of the disowned people after the rejection of the 
Messiah, alone shows us Peter quitting the ship to walk over 
the water toward Jesus, to walk where nothing but faith 
could sustain, and where therefore we see him soon sinking 
through unbelief, as the church has done still more deplorably : 
but the Lord, faithful in His care, keeps spite of all. It is 
only when the ship is entered (the Jewish position properly) 
that the wind ceases, and He is welcomed with all His 
beneficent power in the land whence once they had besought 
Him to depart out of their borders (Matt. xiv.). 

Our evangelist, however, does not trace these earthly bless- 
ings which await “that day,” but turns to the circumstances 
and questions which the Lord makes the occasion of the 
wonderful discourse that follows. He adheres to his task of 
unfolding the grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ. 

“On the morrow the crowd, that was standing on the other 
side of the sea, having seen that there was no other boat but 
one,* and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the ship, t 
but that his disciples went off alone (yet} [other] boats§ came 
from Tiberias near the place where they ate the bread after 
the Lord had given thanks); when the crowd then saw that 
Jesus was not there nor his disciples, they went themselves on 
board the ships and came to Capernaum seeking for Jesus; 
and having found him on the other side of the sea, they said 
to him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither? Jesus answered 
them and said, Verily, verily, I say to you, Ye seek me, not 
because ye saw signs, but because ye ate of the loaves and 
were filled. Work not for the food that perisheth, but for the 
food || that abideth unto life eternal which the Son of man 


* xc A BL, some cursives, and excellent versions, support ef wh év, but the 
common text, following at least a dozen uncials, most cursives, &., has éxeivo 
eis 5 évéBnoay of wabnral avrod, ‘‘that one whereinto his disciples were entered.” 

+ mrotov, 8 A BD K L ©8, twenty-five cursives, &c. ; mAowdpiov, ‘‘ boat,” 
eleven uncials, most cursives, &c. 

} de is omitted by BL 68, &c. It is also a question between dda, ‘other,’ or 
andra, ‘but.’ § mdota “ships” in a few MSS, 

|| The second ryv Bp&ow is omitted by 8 EF GH, &c. 


CHAPTER VI. ides}! 


shall give* you; for him the Father sealed, [even] God. They 
said therefore to him, What must we do that we may work the 
works of God? Jesus answered and said to them, This is the 
work of God that ye believe on him whom he sent” (vers. 
22-29). 

The particulars related serve to show how the crowd was 
struck by the mysterious disappearance of the Lord. They 
knew that He had no’ accompanied the disciples in their ship, 
and that there was no other in which He could have crossed 
the lake when He must have left the mountain. They put 
forward their curiosity as to His mode of passage as a cover 
for their desire to profit, as they had done already, by His 
miraculous supply of their wants. The Lord in reply strips 
them of their disguise and confronts them with their selfish- 
ness. It was this which prompted their search after Him, not 
their interest in the signs which He had just wrought. He 
prefaces their exposure with the formula of unusual solemnity 
which He reserved for the enunciation of great truths. 
“Rabbi,” (said they,) “When camest thou hither?” They 
had sought after Jesus; they had taken trouble to find Him; 
when found, they address Him with honour; but they manifest 
by their inquiry that it was not Himself nor yet the signs 
which He had wrought which attracted them. Faith was not 
in their hearts, but curiosity about the time and mode of 
His coming, and at the bottom a desire after present ease 
through Him. Was the Son of God here to gratify all this? 

“Verily, verily, I say to you, Ye seek me not because ye 
saw signs, but because ye ate and were filled.” Here the Lord 
searches those who had been in quest of Him and searches 
them thoroughly, for a single act that looks fair may prove a 
character hollow and base. And He looked on and listened, 
and did not trust Himself to them because He knew all men, 
and needed none to testify of man, for Himself knew what was 
-inman. To make Him a king in order to enjoy His promised 
earthly favours was nothing in His eyes, nay, called for His 
most grave detection of them to themselves. It was no ques- 


* Sidwow ‘doth give” is the reading of N D, &c. ; dwoe “shall give” of 
ABEFGHKL, &. 


132 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


tion of the Messiah for Israel now, but of a Saviour for sinners. 
He was rejected as the Christ by those who ought most to 
have hailed Him with joy, but. did not because His coming as 
He did made nothing of them and their religiousness, that is, 
of all they valued. And if this poor hungry crowd seemed to 
feel quite differently and wished to give Him the honour that 
was due, it was needful to demonstrate that they were not a 
whit better, but sought their own things, not God’s glory in 
Him. He was-really come, into a world of death over which 
judgment hung, that the poorest of sinners might feed on Him 
and live for ever: what did they think of or care for His love ? 
They thought only of themselves in their way, just as their 
rulers and teachers in theirs. God was in none of their 
thoughts. High or low, they had no sense of their sins or 
ruin, no knowledge of God or His grace. A Messiah for 
temporal good was what they wanted, not a Jesus to save His 
people from their sins. But the Messiah as a divine Person 
could not but lay bare their alienation and distance from God ; 
and thus He became increasingly odious till their hatred ended 
in His cross. This made plain the deep purpose of grace in 
sending Him into the world, not for Israel only, but, if now 
rejected by them, that we might live by Him and He be a 
propitiation for our sins. 

Hence He adds, “ Work not for the food that perisheth, but 
for the food that abideth unto life eternal, which the Son of 
man shall give you; for him the Father sealed, [even] God.” It 
is no question of Messianic honour or blessing, but of what the 
Son of man has to give; and as He gives the food that abides 
to life eternal, so man needs no less than this. It is as such 
that God the Father sealed Him. Toil will not suffice, nor 
any seeming sincerity. The humbled Messiah, the Son of man, 
is no less God’s object in sealing with the Holy Ghost than He 
is the giver of the only food that abides to life everlasting ; 
and nothing less can supply the need of lost man, be he Jew 
or Gentile. 

But the natural man does not receive the things of the 
Spirit of God, and he cannot know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned. Hence they misapply the Lord’s exhor- 


CHAPTER VI. 133 


tation, “Work not for the food that perisheth, but for the food 
that abideth unto life eternal,” and infer their own capacity to 
do something acceptable to God. “They said therefore to him, 
What should we do that we may work the works of God? 
Jesus answered and said to them, This is the work of God 
that ye believe on him whom he sent.” Jesus is the object of 
faith. To believe on Him is the only work for a sinful man, if 
it. is to be called a work. It is truly God’s work, for man 
trusts it not and refuses to confide in Him for eternal life. 
He would rather trust to his own wretched performance, or 
his own miserable experience—anything rather than to Jesus 
only. But God will not allow men to mix up self with Jesus, 
whether it be a fancied good self or a confessedly evil self. It 
is the Son of man Whom the Father sealed, and Him only can 
He accept as the ground of the sinner’s approach to God, Him 
only does He commend as the food that abides to life eternal. 
For this He sent Him, not for man to make Him a king over 
a people with their sins unremoved, but to be the true pass- 
over, and the only food that He warrants. Faith, however, is 
the sole way in which one can feed on Him; not of works, 
else it must be by the law and thus be for Jews only. On the 
contrary; it is by faith that it might be according to grace, 
and thus be open to Gentile as freely as to Jew. Truly it is 
not the way of man but the work of God, that we believe on 
Him Whom He sent. 

The crowd was not so ignorant as not to know that the 
Lord claimed no insignificant place when He spoke of Himself 
as the Son of man. The Psalms and the prophets had spoken 
of such a One, and of His wide and exalted glory. Besides, 
apart and different from the Old Testament testimony, He had 
just told them that the Son of man is the giver of the food 
that abides unto eternal life, and that the Father, even God, 
sealed Him. “They said therefore to him, What should we do 
that we may work the works of God? Jesus answered and 
said to them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him 
whom he sent.” Thus, as He spoke clearly, they manifest afresh 

- the inveterate assumption of men in every state and age and 
country, that fallen man is capable of working the works of 


134 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


God. They ignore their own sin, His holiness and majesty. 
It was the way of Cain; and professing Christendom is as 
infected with it as Judaism or heathenism. It is the universal 
lie of man, till the Holy Spirit brings him to repentance. Then 
in the new life he feels and judges the old, and finds, as we see 
in Romans vii., that it is a question not of works but of what 
he is, and that there is no help for him but Stab is Sle from 
all, and that in Christ by faith. 

So the Lord here answers that the work of God is that they 
should believe on Him Whom He sent. Similarly the apostle 
reasons in Romans iv. that, if Abraham were justified by works, 
he would have had matter for boast, but not before God from 
Whom it would detract. Scripture guards against any such 
misunderstanding, and says plainly that he believed God, which 
was reckoned to him as righteousness. The principle is thus 
evident: to him that works the reward is reckoned as not 
of grace, but of debt; while to him that does not work but 
believes on Him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is reckoned 
as righteousness. Man may be fully and securely blest, but it 
is only of grace, and so by faith, which gives the glory to God, 
as itself His gift. Faith is thus the work of God, and excludes 
man’s working, not as its effect (for it produces works, and good 
works abundantly), but as antecedent to it or co-ordinate with 
it; and justly so, unless it would suit God to be a partner with 
man, and this the believer would be the first to eschew. The 
sent One of the Father is the object of faith. 

It was at once felt that this was to claim more and more on 
God’s part, although He refused to be made a king by man. 
“They said therefore to him, What sign doest thou then that 
we may see and believe thee? What dost thou work? Our 
fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, according as it is 
written, Bread out of heaven he gave them to eat. Jesus 
therefore.said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, Not Moses 
hath given* you the bread out of heaven, but my Father giveth 
you the true bread out of heaven. For the bread of God is he 
that descendeth out of heaven, and giveth life to the world” 


* So the majority of uncials with 8 A, & But BDL, &., have gdwxev, 
66 ” 
gave. 


CHAPTER VI. 135 


(vers. 30-33). Such is unbelief, ever dissatisfied with the 
admirably suited and magnificent signs of God, refusing 
perhaps to ask a sign when God offers, despising those He 
does give. They did not on this occasion say outright what 
they meant, but it seems to have been some such thought as 
this: “You ask us to believe; yet, after all, what was the 
miracle of the loaves to that of the manna? Give us food from 
heaven, as Moses did, for forty years; and then it will be time 
enough to speak of believing. Do a work to match his, if you 
cannot surpass it.” The Lord answers that it was not Moses 
that had given the bread out of heaven, but His Father was 
giving them the true bread out of heaven. The bread of God 
is Jesus Himself, and these two great characteristics are His 
alone of all men; He comes down out of heaven, and He gives 
life to the world. He is a divine Person, yet a man here 
below, the bread of God for every one that needs Him. It is 
no mere question of Israel in the desert: He gives life to the 
world. Less is not the truth, nor would it suit God. 

“They said therefore to him, Lord, evermore give us this 
bread. And [or, Then]* Jesus said to them, I am the bread 
of life; he that cometh to me shall in nowise hunger, and 
he that believeth on me shall in nowise ever thirst. But 
I said to you, that ye have even seen me, and do not believe” 
(vers. 34-36). This is their last effort to get what they sought 
—bread for this world, bread evermore, if not through them in 
any way, at least from Him. But unbelief is every way wrong. 
It is life that God is giving, and nothing less meets the true 
need of man; and this life is in Christ, not from Him. Apart 
from Him, given out of Him, and thus, so as to be independent 
of Him, it exists not. In Him was life; in Him only is life 
found. He is the bread of life. He is not here viewed as the 
Son of God, quickening whom He will, even as the Father. 
Here He is the Son of man sealed, and the object of faith. 
“T am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall in nowise 
hunger, and he that believeth on me shall in nowise ever 
thirst.” Alas! the crowd that saw Him had no faith in 

, Him. Their privilege in seeing Him but added to their guilty 


* The witnesses differ, some giving neither. 


136 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


unbelief; and, one must add, that now that the atoning work 
is done, and He is dead, risen, and glorified, and preached 
among Gentiles, it is a greater sin still where He is not 
believed on in the world. Yet men no more believe on Him 
than those who then followed Him, nor are their motives 
purer who profess and preach Him than theirs who would 
have crowned Him in Galilee. 

The Lord proceeds to explain what was behind and above 
this in the words that follow. “ All that the Father giveth me 
shall come unto me; and him that cometh unto me I will 
in nowise cast out. For I am descended from* heaven not 
to do my will, but the will of him that sent me” (vers. 37, 38). 
This then is the key, and it is twofold; and only in this large- 
ness do we know the truth. If either side be taken to the 
exclusion of the other, the teaching is imperfect, and the 
consequences are apt to be error on this hand or on that. 
The reprobationist presses the first clause; the Arminian the 
second. Neither gives its due weight to the clause they 
respectively omit. The theologian who sees only the divine 
decrees pays little heed to the encouragement given by the Lord 
to the individual that comes unto Him. The advocate of what 
he calls free-will seeks to neutralise, if he does not absolutely 
ignore, the declaration that all the Father gives to Christ shall 
come unto Him; and no wonder, for it is an assertion of His 
sovereignty, which is inexplicable on his own theory. But the 
hard lines of reprobationism can as little admit cordially the 
Lord’s assurance of a welcome to him that comes unto Him. 

The purpose of the Father is as sure as the Son’s reception 
of all that come to Him. The unbelief of Israel, favoured as 
they were, did not enfeeble the counsels of the Father: and 
the Son would not refuse the vilest or most hostile that came 
to Him. The reason given also is most touching. He was 
thoroughly the servant of God in this. Come to Him who 
might, He had come down from heaven to serve, not to 
do His own will. It was for the Father to choose and give, 
He had descended to serve, and would in nowise cast out even 
the man who had reviled Himself most. He was the Father’s 


* ard A BLT with cursives; ée ND EA, &e. 


CHAPTER VI. TS. 


_ servant in salvation as in all else. The servant would not 
choose but receive him that came to Him, as all the Father 
_ gives should come. He is come down from heaven to do the 
_ Father’s will Who sent Him, not His own will. 

This is carried out still more fully in verses 39, 40, where 
the Lord says, “ And this is the will of him who sent me, that 
of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but 
should raise it up at the last day. For this is the will of my 
Father, that every one who beholdeth the Son, and believeth 
on him, should have life eternal, and I will raise him up at the 
last day.” Thus, on the one hand, He Who sent Christ, and 
gave Him in His sovereign grace, fails in nothing of His will, 
for Christ loses nothing of it; on the other hand, Christ abides 
the test for every soul of man who receives life eternal in Him 
by faith alone; while in both cases, whether for the whole 
or for each individual, Christ raises up when man’s day is 
ended for ever. All hope of present deliverance under the 
Messiah, which they fondly dreamt for men in the flesh or dead 
as they were, was vain. The Father's will, whether for His 
children as a whole or individually, shall stand: the whole that 
He has given to the Son shall be kept, and every believer 
in Him has life everlasting; as Christ’s raising will prove for 
both when the last day comes. 

The Lord is thus contrasting His glory as Messiah on the 
earth with His raising up the believer at the last day. Un- 
belief was even then using the former to overlook the latter ; 
but the Lord here brings what was unseen and eternal into 
prominence, and this, because He had (to God’s glory and 
in love) taken the place of a servant to accomplish purposes 
yet deeper. Had He sought His own will or His own name, 
His reign as Messiah would have been still nearer to Him 
than to the Jews. But no! He sought the glory and the 
will of His Father, and, as He gave Himself up to suffer, so 
He should lose nothing but raise it up at the last day. To 
the individual all turns on beholding the Son and believing 
on Him: every one who does should have life eternal, and 
‘Christ should raise him up at the last day. Those who look 
for nothing but the reign of the Messiah inevitably perish. 


138 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


They acknowledge not their sins, they feel not for the violated 
majesty and holiness of God, they believe not on the Saviour, 
and, not so believing, have not life. He that believes knows 
Him to be more than the Messiah, even the Son of the 
Father; he knows that only in Him has he life eternal, and 
that he will have his portion with Christ in resurrection at 
the last day. It is no question of man or the world as they 
now are, but of Christ then. 

This was peculiarly strange to the people of Judea and 
Jerusalem, resting as they did in tradition, and so we see 
next, “The Jews therefore murmured about him, because he 
said, I am the bread that came down out of heaven. And 
they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father 
and mother we know? How then* doth he say, I am come 
down out of heaven?” (vers. 41, 42.) Thus they set the 
circumstances as they knew them (and they knew them ill) 
against the truth of Christ. It was judging according to 
appearances, and consequently unrighteous judgment. He 
was son of Mary—truly and properly man; else His work 
had not availed for man. He was not son of Joseph save 
legally ; but this He was, in order that He should be Messiah ~ 
according to the law. Had He been really son of Joseph, 
as of Mary, He had not been Son of God, or a divine Person; 
but this was the foundation of all, and without it the Incarna- 
tion were a falsehood, and the Atonement a nullity. He was 
really Son, the only begotten Son of the Father, Who deigned 
to become son of Mary, and by law consequently son of 
Joseph, who had espoused her (a point of all moment for 
His Messianic title, for Messiah He could not properly have 
been unless He were heir of Joseph’s rights). But as Son 
of God, the incarnate Word, He was the bread which came 
down out of heaven: thus only could man feed on Him by 
faith and be blessed for ever. 

“Jesus | therefore} answered and said to them, Murmur 

* viv “now” is the reading of BC T, the Memph. Goth. and Arm. 
Syr.hiers. &.; ody 8 A D L and eleven other uncials, all known cursives 


(Aeth, =ody viv), Theb., &c. Many vv. omit both. 
+ ‘Inoods, omitted by most, is read by N B LT, &c. 


t ody ‘‘ therefore” is read by 8 A D and ten uncials more, most cursives, &c. ; 


but omitted by BC K LT II, ten cursives, and several ancient versions. 


CHAPTER VI. 139 


_not among yourselves. No one can come unto me except the 
_ Father who sent me draw him, and I will raise him up at the 
last day. It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all 
taught of God. Every one that heard* from the Father and 
learned cometh unto me. Not that any one hath seen the 
Father, except he who is of God, he hath seen the Father” 

(vers. 43, 44). Unbelief can only destroy and trouble; it 
cannot give life or comfort. Man under Satan is the source 
of unbelief, which ever leads from Christ, not to Him. But 
as the Father sent Christ, so He draws the believer to Christ 
Who raises him up at the last day. It is not man’s worth or 
work or will therefore but the Father’s grace, by which one 
comes to Christ. The whole blessing, in short, is of sovereign 
mercy, and so the: prophets have written. All true teaching 
comes from God, and all are taught of God Who never forgets 
what is due to Christ. “Every one that heard from the 
Father and learned” comes to Christ. Not that the Father 
has been seen by man. He is known in the Son. “He who is 
of God, he hath seen the Father”; it is Christ only Who has. 

. The Lord then solemnly reiterates, “ Verily, verily, I say 
to you, He that believeth [on met] hath life eternal. I am 
the bread of life” (vers. 47, 48). In truth, as the promised 
One, He was always the object of faith, even as being the 
eternal Son He had ever quickened the believer. But now He 
was the Word made flesh; He was the Son of God, and this 
as man in the world, and, as rejected by Israel, He announces 
that He is the giver of life eternal. This is the grand point: 
not the kingdom merely by-and-by, but life eternal now in the 
Son and inseparable from Him, but in Him now a man. 

Hence the Lord says, following this up, “ Your fathers ate 
the manna in the wilderness and died. This is the bread that 
cometh down out of heaven, that one may eat of it and not 
die. I am the living bread that came down out of heaven. 
If one shall have eaten of this + bread, he shall live for ever. 


* The aorist participle has the preponderance of witnesses in age and number. 
+ S BLT, &c., omit eis éue, though given by AC D EA, &c., cursives, &c, 
* + Instead of rovrov rod, as given by B C L T and twelve other uncials, all 
cursives, and versions, rod éuod ‘‘my,” is read by N, some old Latin copies, &c. 


140 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Yea, and the bread that I will give is my flesh* for the life 
of the world” (vers. 49-51). Thus, if the Lord was typified 
by the manna, He went incomparably beyond its virtue. The 
fathers of the Jews ate the manna in the wilderness; but it 
could not ward off death, for they died like others. Christ 
is the bread that comes down out of heaven that a man may 
eat thereof and not die. Eternal life is in the Son of God, 
and none the less because He was then the Son of man. 
Rather was the grace of God more manifest in Him thus; 
for, if He were a man, was it not for men to eat thereof and 
not die? He was the living bread that came down out of 
heaven. If one ate of this bread, he should live for ever. 

This, we shall see, involves another truth besides the Incar- 
nation, even His death in Atonement; for the bread that He 
would give is His flesh for the life of the world. Here He 
hints at what He would open out somewhat further—His 
atoning death. When His life is given, it is not for the life 
of Israel only but of the world. The grace of God which was 
about to descend so low could not be circumscribed to the 
Jews alone. ‘God so loved the world that he gave his Only- 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not 
perish, but have life eternal.” On this, however, He enlarges 
more fully afterwards. Did they strive against His words 
in unbelief? He puts forward the truth, so as still more to 
offend man’s pride and opposition to God, but to feed and 
strengthen faith in His elect. 

Such words from our Lord, His flesh given for the life of 
the world, were startling enough to those who heard them, but 
statements yet plainer follow. He insists on the necessity of 
drinking His blood. “The Jews therefore contended among 
themselves, saying, How can he (odros) give us his} flesh to 
eat? Jesus therefore said to them, Verily, verily, I say to 
you, Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man 
and drunk his blood, ye havet no life in yourselves. He that 

* So B C DLT, several cursives, ancient versions and fathers, so S &c., 


putting 7 odpt wou éorlv last ; but twelve inferior uncials and the mass of other 
authorities add jv éya ddéow. 


+ BT (and the ancient versions apparently) add avroi. 
t The Latins read ‘‘ habebitis,” ‘‘ye shall have,” contrary to all authority. 


CHAPTER VI. 141 


_ eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath life eternal; and 
I will raise him up at the last day; for my flesh is truly* food, 
-and my blood is truly* drink. He that eateth my flesh and 
drinketh my blood abideth in me and I in him. As the living 
Father sent me, and I live by reason of the Father, he also 
that eateth me, even he shall live by reason of me. This is 
the bread that came down out of heaven. Not as thet fathers 
ate and died: he that eateth this bread shall live for ever. 
These things said he in [the] synagogue, as he taught in 
Capernaum” (vers. 52-59). 

Thus as the Lord set forth Himself incarnate under the 
bread that came down out of heaven to be eaten in faith, so 
here we have His death under the figure of the flesh{ to be 

_ eaten and the blood to be drunk. It is the life given up, the 

blood drunk as a separate thing, the most emphatic sign of 
death. Of this faith partakes and finds in it atonement and 
communion. Without it there is no life. It was the more 
important, as some professed to receive Him as the Christ but 
stumbled at His death. The Lord shows that such is not the 
faith of God’s elect ; for he who welcomed Him as come down 
from heaven would glory in His cross; and though none could 
anticipate His death, all who truly believe would rejoice, once 
it is made known, and its object and efficacy opened. Those 
who receive the Incarnation in faith do also with like faith 
receive His death; and these only have eternal life. For such 
as accept the former after a human sort are apt to cavil at 
the latter. Both are objects and tests of faith; and the more 
decisive of the two is His death. 

It may be observed that, as there are two figures in the 
central part of the chapter, so under the last there are two 
forms of expression which we distinguish: the act of having 
eaten His flesh and drunk His blood, as in verse 53; and the 


* d\nOhs N° BO Fa K L T II, many cursives and versions ; d\y0Gs N and 
eleven other uncials, most cursives, &c, 

+ A dozen uncials and most cursives and versions add vuév, which is not in 
NBCLT, &c. 

+ Dean Alford’s notions, that the flesh here is in His resurrection form only, 
and the world here all the creation form, as said to be held together in Colossians 
i, 17, are groundless in themselves and contrary to the context. 


142 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


continuous eating and drinking, as in verse 54. This is of 
moment as cutting off all occasion from such as either argue 
for or object against severing eternal life from its source. 
Scripture leaves no room for the thought.. The believer has 
eternal life, but it is in the Son, not apart from Him. The 
believer eats His flesh and drinks His blood. He is not content 
that he ate so once: if thus content, can such an one be supposed 
to have life in him? Assuredly not. If his faith were real, 
he would be ever eating His flesh and drinking His blood; and 
he who so does has eternal life, and the Lord will raise him up 
at the last day. The love that came down from heaven is 
precious, and the heart receives Christ thus humbled thank- 
fully, not doubting but desiring that it should be the truth. 
And if that love goes farther, even down to death itself, the 
death of the cross, the heart is enlarged and well nigh over- 
whelmed, but it counts nothing too great, nothing too good, for 
the Son of God and Son of man. It bows and blesses God for 
Christ’s dying to accomplish redemption. For the same reason, 
if it has tasted that the Lord is thus gracious, it perseveres, it 
can never tire, it feeds on Him again and again. For it is felt 
that His flesh is truly meat, and His blood is truly drink. 

Hence it is added, “he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my 
blood abideth in me and I in him.” This abiding in Christ 
and Christ in him is one of the characteristic privileges of the 
Christian in John. It is not merely security for the Christian, 
but Christ the home of the soul as it is of Christ. How un- 
speakable the nearness! And as the life of fellowship is thus 
blessed, so is the effect in motive and object which accompanies 
it. “As the living Father sent me and I live by reason [or, on 
account] of the Father, he also that eateth me, even he shall 
live by reason of me.” As the Father's will and glory were ever 
before the Lord here below, so is He Himself before the believer. 
Otherwise one lives to self or the world. “To me to live is 
Christ,” said the apostle Paul; and this is proper Christian 
experience. When Christ is the motive, such is the result. 

It is well known that many have laboured to prove that the 
eating the flesh and drinking the blood, on which last our Lord 
insists as distinct from eating the bread, means His supper. 


CHAPTER VI. 143 


This is groundless, not merely because the Eucharist was not 
even instituted till long after, but far more because what is 
affirmed of eating the flesh and drinking the blood here is 
wholly irreconcilable with participation in the Lord’s supper; 
and this both positively and negatively. For it would follow 
that the Lord lays down with His most impressive formula 
of truth, on the one hand the impossibility of life save for 
those who have so partaken, on the other the certainty of 
eternal life now and of blissful resurrection at the last day for 
him who habitually so partakes, yea the highest privilege of 
Christianity necessarily attached to the constant celebration of 
it. Doctrine so absolute as this must be repudiated by all 
Romanists or Protestants save by such as are utterly blinded 
by superstition. But it is not a whit too strong when applied 
to, as it really was spoken of, feeding by faith on Christ’s 
death. 

It is not correct to say that the same topic is continued 
before and after verse 51. There is eating both before and 
after; and it is conceded on all hands that eating “the bread 
that came down from heaven” is to be understood of faith. It 
is harsh in the extreme therefore to contend that eating the 
flesh and drinking the blood means something else than par- 
taking by faith—that it is figurative in the one, and literal in 
the other. It is at least consistent that, as the eating in the 
former part of the discourse unquestionably means communion 
by faith, so it should continue in the latter part. The discourse 
in both parts clearly refers to what was literal—the eating of 
the bread miraculously provided for the multitude. But the 
doctrine, though vitally akin, is not the same in the two parts, 
for the Lord’s Incarnation is the topic and object of faith in 
the former, His death in the latter. It is the way of John on 
outward facts or miracles to hang some essential truth of 
Christ’s Person or operation; and so it is here. He begins 


“ with Himself as the incarnate bread, more immediately 


answering to the divinely supplied loaves; He goes on, when 
unbelief cavilled, to bring out the truth of Himself dying, still 
more repulsive to nature, especially to a Jew. 

Thus all hangs simply yet profoundly together. Christ lets 


144 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the Jews know (for the discourse is to them, not to the dis- 
ciples) that He had not come to be a king after the flesh, but 
to be fed on in humiliation, yea also in death: the only food 
of eternal life issuing in resurrection at the last day, not in 
temporal power and present glory as the people fondly hoped 
who wished to crown Him now. To bring in the Eucharist 
here is to import a foreign element which suits neither the 
scope of the chapter as a whole, nor a single section of the 
discourse. And it is the more absurd, when we see that another 
topic follows the main argument as its fitting conclusion, the 
ascension of the same Son of man Whose Incarnation and death 
had been previously presented as the food of faith, and this as 
a climax for faith when unbelief had stumbled first at His 
coming down from heaven and yet more at His death. As 
was said afterwards, “We have heard out of the law that 
Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man 
must be lifted up? Who is ¢his Son of man?” (John xi. 
34.) “Doth this offend you?” said the Lord to the disciples 
when they too murmured. “What and if ye shall see the 
Son of man ascend up where he was before?” It is not an 
institution which the Lord hints at establishing. Throughout 
it is Himself the object of faith as the Son of man incarnate, 
dead, and ascended. 

I am aware that a celebrated controversialist strove to 
persuade people that the first part closes with verse 47. But 
this is to the last degree arbitrary. Verse 51 is the true 
transition where the bread is declared to be Christ’s flesh 
which He should give for the life of the world. This, in 
answer to their incredulous query in verse 52, the Lord 
expands in verses 53-58. For the bread as such is still 
continued in verses 48-50, which ought not to be the case if 
we had really passed into the second part. The eating of His 
flesh and drinking of His blood begins properly with verse 53. 
This is plain and positive in the chapter; and indeed it is 
bold to state differently; but, if so, eating the bread pertains 
as clearly and certainly to the first part, as eating the flesh 
and drinking the blood to the second. In fact it is assumed 
from the beginning (vers. 32-35), but definitely affirmed before 


ainth™ 4 


Das 


CHAPTER VI. 145 


the end (vers. 48-50). Undoubtedly the language is stronger 
when the necessity of faith in His death is pressed in verse 53 
and what follows. But this proves nothing more certainly 
than the exclusion of the Eucharist, except to such as can 
conceive our Lord’s making His supper more momentous than 
His work and faith in it. That He would speak more strongly 
of the giving up of His life than of His coming down from 
heaven to become man, no Christian could doubt, as well as 
of the graver danger to man of despising His death, and of the 
deeper blessing for the believer of communion with it. 

Nor, let me add, is it absolutely true that in the first part 
the Father alone is said to give, in the second the Son of man; 
for in the beginning of the first part (ver. 33) the bread of 
God is said to be He that comes down from heaven and gives 
life to the world, not merely to be given. But so far as it is 
said, it entirely falls in with the real difference in these two 
parts. The Father gave the Son to be incarnate; the Son 
gives Himself to die, and consequently His flesh to be eaten 
and His blood to be drunk. Further it is not true that the 
consequences stand in contrast; for as in the first part eternal 
life results with resurrection at the last day, so this is carefully 
repeated in the second part (ver. 54). 

It is true, as we may readily observe that more is attached 
to one’s eating His flesh and drinking His blood, namely, 
his dwelling in Christ and Christ in him (ver. 56); but this 
is as certainly a result of faith in Christ’s death as it is 
nowhere in scripture attributed to the Eucharist. John xv., 
where Christ speaks of Himself, and 1 John iv. 13-16, where 
the apostle speaks of God, approach nearest; neither of these 
alludes to the Lord’s supper, but one sets forth Christ as the 
only source of fruit-bearing by continual dependence on Him, 
the other predicates God’s dwelling in him and his in God of 
every soul that confesses Jesus to be the Son of God. These 


’ then so far confirm the conviction that the Lord is in John vi. 


56 describing the privilege enjoyed by him who feeds on His 

own death by faith. No doubt he that dwells in love dwells 

in God, and God in him; but all flows from a new life which 

comes only through faith in Christ: for without faith it is 
K 


146 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF: JOHN. 


impossible to please God. This therefore shows an advance, 
not a new and different theme, but the same Christ viewed not 
in His life but in His death with its deepening consequences 
to the believer. 

Himself the life eternal which was with the Father before 
all worlds, He took flesh that He might not only show the 
Father and be the perfect pattern of obedience as man, but 
that He might die in grace for us and settle the question of 
sin for ever, glorifying God absolutely and at all cost in the 
cross. Except the corn of wheat (as He Himself taught us) 
fall into the ground and die, it abides alone; dying it brings 
forth much fruit. His death is not here regarded as an 
offering to God as elsewhere often, but the appropriation of 
it by the believer into his own being. Hence what was 
comparatively vague in speaking of the bread given from 
above becomes most precise when He alludes to His death. 
For this was in the Father’s purpose and the Son of man’s 
heart, not reigning over Israel now but giving His flesh for 
the life of the world: for, Jew or Gentile, all are here seen 
as reprobate, lost, and dead. He only is life, yet this not in 
living but in dying for us, that we might have it in and with 
Him, the fruit of His redemption, life eternal as a present 
thing but only fully seen in resurrection power, already 
verified and seen in Him ascended up as man where He was 
before as God, by-and-by to be seen in us at the last day 
manifested with Him in glory. 

Hence the believer is here said to eat His flesh and drink 
His blood, and this not once only when we believed in Him 
and the efficacy of His death, but continuously taking in its 
depth and force, as death to the world and man’s estate 
estranged as they are from God. Drinking His blood gives 
the more emphasis to the expression of the full reception of 
His dying by the believer. Had He simply left the world as 
One ever a stranger to it, we had been left behind for ever, 
objects of the judgment of God. But, dying to it and for us 
by the grace of God, He gave us who believe what separated 
us to God as well as cleansed us from our sins. Had it been 
simply our death, it had been our judgment and no honour to 


rr os 
aia 


CHAPTER VI. 147 


God but rather the triumph of the enemy. Blessed be God, it 


is of His death, and of our entrance by faith into His death 
in all its reality and value, that He here speaks. It is not 
His supper; but His supper points as the sign to Christ’s 
death, and these verses speak of the same death. They, how- 
ever, speak of the efficacious reality, not of its symbol, which, 
when confounded with the truth, becomes no ‘better than an 
idolatrous vanity, and when most stript of truth even as a 
sign is then made openly an object of worship. So we see in 
Romanism, where the votaries are sentenced not to drink the 
blood. Christ is contained whole and entire, as they say, 
under the species of bread: so that all is there together, flesh 
and blood, soul and divinity; but if so, the blood is not shed, 
and the mass is to the Romanist who communicates a too true 
witness of the non-remission of his sins. Such is the showing 


of their own formal doctrine and most trusted theologians. 


It may be added that, after the rich testimony to His death 
as the object of faith, which should follow with its con- 
sequences, the Lord seems to me in verse 57 to shut out all 
excuse for overlooking His intention. It was Himself, not a 
symbolic act which He here meant, as should be plain from 
the words “he that eateth me.” Further, He unites the two 
parts of the discourse by the following verse which closes the 
part about His flesh and His blood by again using the figure 
of “the bread that came down out of heaven,” and “he that 
eateth this bread shall live for ever”: a declaration as true 
when applied to faith in Himself as it is false of the Eucharist 
taken in whatever sense men please. 

The Lord had now in the synagogue at Capernaum con- 
eluded His discourse, the main topics of which were His 
Incarnation and Atonement, as the indispensable food of faith, 
let men despise them as they might; and let them cry up the 
manna or aught else, which had neither such a divine and 


’ heavenly source nor such an everlasting effect but must leave 


men to die after all; for in Him, and none else, was life. 
“Many therefore of his disciples on having heard said, This 
word is hard: who can hear it? But Jesus, knowing in 
himself that his disciples murmur concerning this, said to 


148 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


them, Doth this offend you? If then ye behold the Son of 
man ascending where he was before? It is the Spirit that 
quickeneth: the flesh profiteth nothing. The words which I 
have spoken* to you are spirit and are life; but there are 
some of you who do not believe. For Jesus knew from [the] 
beginning which were they that should believe not, and which 
was he that should betray him. And he said, On this account 
have I said that no one can come unto me unless it hath 
been given him from the} Father” (vers. 60-65). 

A most serious form of unbelief now betrayed itself, not 
among those of Juda or elsewhere only but the disciples, 
many of whom murmur, stumbling at His words. If they 
found hard His descent from heaven or His dying, what if 
they beheld the Son of man going up where He was before ? 
It was implied in Psalms viii., 1xxx., ex., as well as Daniel vii. 
But Jewish will had long turned only to Israel’s hopes in 
their land and liked not a higher aspect, any more than a 
lower. The cross and heaven were equally out of their field 
of vision. Hence the Lord here confronts them with His 
own ascension as a most unpalatable truth. Yet is it one 
which fitly follows His death, as it falls in with His coming 
down to be a man in incarnation. He is gone up a Saviour 
in righteousness, having glorified God to the uttermost about 
sin, as surely as He came down to serve in love. All hang 
together here, as in fact it is while He is thus ascended on 
high that faith. feeds on Him in life and death here below. 
But disciples murmuring at His words of humiliation He 
told of His exaltation, sad to say to still deeper offence. 
Had they been true, had they known and loved the truth, 
it had been their joy; but they valued the first man rather 
than the Second, and were more and more offended. 

Such is the flesh even in disciples. It profits nothing. It 
is the Spirit that quickens, and this by and in Christ, never 
apart from Him, still less to His dishonour. Hence His 
words have a character essentially divine and divine efficacy ; 


* NeAdAnka 8 BC DK LT U I, many cursives, and most ancient versions ; 
but AaAG in the Text. Rec. with ten uncials and most cursives. 
+ Text. Rec. adds pod, with more than a dozen uncials, &c. 


CHAPTER VI. 149 


they are spirit and life, as He says Himself of what He 
had just spoken in His discourses, stumble as men might; 
and few words have been more disastrously perverted to 
this day, idolising the sign to the shame of Him Who was 
signified to have thus come and died in supreme love, Who. 
blesses faith accordingly. But alas! “there are some of you 
who do not believe.” Not to believe is fatal to any, most 
inconsistent withal in a disciple. Christ must be all or 
nothing. If all, His words are to the believer no reproach 
but a delight and have power all through, yea increasingly 
as He is thereby better known. Jesus knew their unbelief, 
not by observation or experience, but from the first. He 
is God, and none the less because He became man; and 
this is our evangelist’s constant thesis. Yet did He dis- 
tinguish between such as did not believe and him who 


should betray Him; but who ever gathered it save now from 


His own words? Who had ever seen grace in Him falter 
in His ways with all? How solemn is the patience of divine 
love! On the other hand those who believed had no ground 
of boasting, for though they did cleave to Jesus, none could 
come unto Him, except it had been given to him from the 
Father. It was sovereign grace in God. 

“From that [time] many of his* disciples went away back 
and walked no more with him. Jesus therefore said to the 
twelve, Do ye also wish to go away? Simon Peter t answered 
him, Lord, to whom shall we go away? Thou hast words of 
life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou 
art the Holy One} of God. [Jesus]§ answered them, Did I 
not choose you the twelve? And one of you is a devil. Now 
he was speaking of Judas [son] of Simon Iscariot ;|| for he, 

* B G T, seven cursives, &c., read éx, but the weight of authority is 
against it. 

+ The ody of the Text. Rec. is notin NBC GK LUA IL, many cursives, 
and the oldest versions. 

tSoN BCmDL, &c., against the great majority of inferior authorities 
which support the received reading, 6 xs 6 vids, many also adding rod ¢dvTos, 
There are varieties in copies and versions which point to the most ancient 
reading, but mixed up with the later ones in different measures and forms. 


§ Many omit 6’Iyaobs. 
|| The Text. Rec. reads ’ ee with some good MSS. ; but the best have 


*Iox—v. 


150 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


one* of the twelve, was about to betray him” (vers. 66-71). 
Thus the warnings of the Lord precipitate the departure 
of unbelievers, while they knit~ the faithful more closely 
to Himself, and bring out their sense of what He is to their 
souls. The cause lay in their own will which gave Satan 
power. Yet the Lord does not hesitate to let the twelve 
know that, while one confessed for all that He was the 
Holy One of God, one of themselves should betray Him. 
What a contrast with all but Himself, unless it be with 
such as have learned of Him! How different those who 
seek to draw the disciples after them! Still His words would 
confirm His own, even all that were real. The more free, 
the more are they bound. He only is worthy, He is the 
Holy One of God. 

I am aware that a learned but self-confident German pro- 
nounces the “Holy One” not Johannean. But this was a 
rash and ignorant judgment. It is a title given to our Lord 
once in his first Epistle as here once in his Gospel. He is 
the only writer in the New Testament who ever uses it of 
the Lord in relation to the saints. It is therefore more 
characteristic of John than of any other apostle. Mark and 
Luke tell us of evil spirits tremblingly owning Him thus. 
Well might they quail before the Holy One Who is destined 
to deal with them in judgment. How blessed to hear one 
saint confess for all their faith in Him in this very character, 
cleaving to Him and His words of eternal life with con- 
fidence! How gracious to hear another comforting the babes 
of God’s family with the reflection that they had received 
unction from the Holy One and knew all things! Antichrists 
might go out from among those who bore Christ's name, 
but they were not of the family of God: if they had been, 
they would surely have remained as Peter did here, as Judas 
did not when the last crisis came. First or last they went 
out that they might be made manifest that none are “of us” 
—of the family. For God’s children the Holy One is the 
spring of every joy and of all peace, of repulsion for un- 


@ 
* ov, “being,” is not read by B OP™ D L Syrr, cu et peseh. Aeth., but is found 
in the great majority. 


CHAPTER VI. . Pot 


believers, of terror for demons. The babes rebuke the pride 
of mere unbelieving human intelligence which denies the 
Father and the Son, yea, that Jesus is the Christ, and 


perishes away from Him Who alone has life and gives it to 


every believer. So it is in the Gospel as in the Epistle. 

But we see here also the vast moment of walking with 
Him, of open identification with Him in this way before 
men as well as God, the danger and ruin of going away. 
Faith, however weighty, is not all: one has to walk with 
Him here below. Where else are words of life eternal ? 
Without may be religion, philosophy, present ease, or honour 
and power. With Him are those who think of the Father's 
appreciation of the Son, and act for eternity. 

Yet even the apostolate, as the Lord here shows, gives 
no sure ground to build on—nothing but Himself. So His 
most honoured servant lets the Corinthians (too enamoured 
of gifts) know, that he might preach to others,’ yet, if he 
kept not his body in subjection, himself must be a reprobate. 
The Son of man, in life and death appropriated by faith, 
alone secures life eternal now and resurrection at the 
last day. 


CHAPTER VII. 


THE Lord had thus propounded His humiliation and His death, 
with His ascension to heaven, completely setting aside the 
carnal expectations then prevalent as to His kingdom. He 
had done more than this; He had taught the absolute necessity 
of appropriating Himself, both incarnate and dying, for eternal 
life. He had pointed forward all hope to resurrection at the 
last day, however unintelligible to the Jews, and repulsive even 
to many of His disciples. They looked for present honour and 
glory through the Messiah; they could not bear death with 
Him, opening into resurrection life and glory. 

“[And]* after these things Jesus walked in Galilee, for he 
was unwilling to walk in Judea, because the Jews were seeking 
to kill him. Now the feast of the Jews, the tabernacles, was 
near. His brethren therefore said unto him, Remove hence, 
and go into Judea, that thy disciples too may behold thy 
works which thou doest; for no one doeth anything in secret, 
and seeketh himself to be in public. If thou doest these 
things, show thyself to the world. For not even did his 
brethren believe on him” (vers. 1-5), 

Thus we see the Lord in the despised place the True Light, 
not in the city of solemnities, where darkness reigned the more, 
because it was least suspected; and in Galilee He walks about 
on His errand of love. He does not wait for souls to seek 
Him; He seeks them, that, believing, they might have life in 
Him. Judea He avoids, knowing that the people of that part 
of the country, identifying themselves with the murderous 
hatred of their rulers, were seeking to kill Him. He was 
unwilling, not (one need not say) afraid, to walk about there. 


* «al is read by most uncials and cursives, but not 8 »™ D, &e. 
152 


CHAPTER VII. 153 
He was subject to His Father’s will in this. He must complete 
the work given Him to do. As He said to certain Pharisees 
who sought to move Him by naming Herod’s desire to kill 
Him, I cast out demons and accomplish healings to-day and 
to-morrow, and on the third day I am perfected (that is, reach 
the end of My course); but I must proceed to-day, and to- 
morrow, and the next (day), because it cannot be that a prophet 
perish out of Jerusalem. He knew perfectly the end from the 
beginning. He feared not man. He goes up at the appointed 
moment to do and suffer all the will of God, as well as all from 
man and Satan. 

The festival then at hand, the feast of Tabernacles, tests man 
afresh, or rather our Lord tests by means of it. Those attached 
to Him by natural kin, His brethren, were impatient at His 
Galilean sojourn, at His separateness from the centre of religious 
life and honour. As the Passover closely connected itself with 
the truth of the last chapter, so the Tabernacles furnished the 
occasion for what the Lord bring$ out here. There the blood 
of the lamb, itself eaten by the Israelites, points to His death, 
let them hear or forbear. Here the gathering of the people to 
rejoice was after the harvest and the vintage, types of the 
various forms of divine judgment at the end of the age when 
Israel, at rest in the land, will remember their former days 
of pilgrimage. It was pre-eminently the season of triumph, 
which proclaimed all the promises fulfilled. 

But was it really so now? Because Jesus, the Messiah, was 
there, and working such works as He did, was the time come 
for the accomplishment of Israel’s hopes? So His brethren 
thought, because they wished it for themselves, though they 
put forward His disciples, and their need of seeing His works, 
and this in Judea. No thought had they of God, not the 
faintest conception that in the obscurity of Galilee Jesus was 
glorifying the Father, and manifesting the Father’s name to 

‘those the Father gave Him. They betrayed their own con- 
dition, their ignorance of God, their lack of self-judgment, 
their unconsciousness not only of their own ruin but of the 
world, their unbelief of Him Who deigned to be born of their 
family: Who He was, and what He had come to do, was in 


154 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


none of their thoughts. They reasoned from self, not from 
God, and were thus so much the more hopelessly wrong as it 
concerned the Lord. “No one,” said they, “doeth anything in 
secret, and seeketh to be in public. If thou doest these things, 
show thyself to the world.” It was what they would have 
done. They sought, and conceived that every wise man must 
seek, present glory. Had they never heard One Who taught 
even His disciples to do their alms and pray and fast in secret 
to their Father, Who will render accordingly? If they had, 
the truth and will of God certainly had left no impression. 
The real ground of the wish and words was in this, that, as the 
evangelist solemnly adds, even His brethren did not believe on 
Him. Such is man, however nearly related, naturally. 

“ Jesus therefore saith to them, My time is not yet come, but 
your time is always ready.. The world cannot hate you; but 
me it hateth, because I testify concerning it that its works are 
evil. Go ye up unto the* feast. I go nott up unto this feast, 
for my time is not yet fulfilled” (vers. 6-8). 

In no sense does flesh profit, and the friendship with the 
world is enmity with God, Satan taking advantage of both . 
against man as well as God. Jesus abides in perfect depend- 
ence (to speak of this only), His movements were invariably 
in obedience. In everything it was a question to Him of the 
Father. His single eye saw that His time to show Himself to 
the world was, and could be, not yet. Death, as He had 
implied even before His Galilean ministry began (John ii. 
19-22), and is still more emphatically opened out in John vi, 
was before being displayed to the world. This will be in its due 
time; but here, as ever, the order is the sufferings that pertain 
to Christ, and the glories after these. First must He suffer 
many things and be rejected of this generation. Man’s time, 
contrariwise, was always ready. They spoke as of the world, 
and the world heard them. They loved the world, and the ~ 
things of the world; and the love of the Father was not in 


* ravrnv is added here in Text. Rec., in the N ?™ and eleven other uncials 
and many ancient versions, but not in B and some of the best. It was probably 
taken from the next clause. 

+ odk S D K M IL and the most ancient versions and fathers; o’rw in B L T 
and eleven other uncials, &c. 


+ 


AR AS Nice 


CHAPTER VII. 155 


them, but, what they valued more, they were loved by the 
world as its own. Terrible position for His brethren, but not 
more terrible than true! How could the world hate those who 
so prized its honours? Jesus it did hate with a deadly hatred, 
because He bore witness about it that its works are evil; a 
testimony most of all galling to the religious world, to the men 
of Judea and Jerusalem. Hence the Lord bids them go up to 
this feast, while He tells them that He goes not up, His time 
not yet being fulfilled. 

The significance of this is the more marked by His action in 
contradistinction from theirs, and, as read above all, in the light 
of His subsequent testimony on the great day of the feast. 
“* Having said these things to them,+ he abode in Galilee. 
But when his brethren had gone up, then he himself also went 
up, not manifestly but as in secret. The Jews therefore sought 
him at the feast, and said, Where is he? And there was much 
murmuring about him among the crowds. Some said, He is 
good; others said, No; but he deceiveth the crowd. No one, 
however, spoke openly about him because of the fear of the 
Jews” (vers. 9-13). The seventh chapter of John has this 


_ point of view, for the truth taught is based on the sixth; 


it supposes the Lord not only in death but in ascension, 
There is a manifest break with the world, and flesh is treated 


as proved no longer capable of association or communion. It 


really never was; but now it takes its own way, and the 
Lord withdraws. His brethren go up to the feast of tabernacles 
without Him; He does not go up, but abides in Galilee. Only 
after they had gone does He go, and then not manifestly, as 
they desired, but as in secret—more so than ever before. He 


is content to be, as it were, hidden: type of that which He 


really is now, and we with Him, as far as our life is concerned, 
hid in God. 
This gives rise to questions and whispers about Him among 


the crowds, some speaking patronisingly, others with the 


utmost ill-will and contempt; but even so there was no 


* “se is added in many uncials. 
+ For airis 8 D K L X I, &c., excellent authority gives avrots, ‘‘to 
them.” 


156 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


discourse in public, or plainly. The leaders of Judxa kept 
men in fear. 

That the Lord had a deeper purpose in view was soon 
apparent. He had refused to go with His brethren; He had 
affirmed that the fit moment for displaying Himself to the 
world was not come. But God had a present mission for His 
Son, and He goes to Jerusalem to fulfil it. 

“But now in the midst of the feast Jesus went up unto the 
temple and taught. The Jews therefore * wondered, saying, 
How knoweth this [man] letters, having not learned? Jesus 
therefore + answered them and said, My doctrine is not mine, 
but his that sent me. If one desire to do his will, he shall 
know about the doctrine whether it is of God or I speak from 
myself. He that speaketh from himself seeketh his own 
glory; but he that seeketh the glory of him that sent him,— 
he is true, and no unrighteousness is in him” (vers. 14-18). 

There was no secrecy now: Jesus was teaching in the 
temple. It was His actual work. Soon He would suffer in 
atonement. Now it was the time for giving out the truth, 
to the astonishment of those who lived in the region of law 
and ordinance, who could only ask how He could know since 
He had not learned. They knew Him not, they rose not above 
human sources. Jesus was quick and careful to vindicate His 
Father. What is learned from man man is proud of. His 
doctrine He would not allow to be His own in the sense of 
independence, any more than the derivation from human 
teaching which they owned to be out of the question. It was 
not of man but of Him that sent Him. Was this a high claim 
and easily made? Any one of single eye would soon see its 
reality. Faith alone gives a single eye. Others speculate and 
err. God guides and teaches him who desires to practise His 
will, as Christ gives the positive assurance that he shall know 
concerning the doctrine whether it is of God or whether He 
speaks from Himself. How comforting as well as surely 
verified! The Son was making known the Father; and God 


* oly 8 BD LT X, some cursives, &c. ; cal, as in Text. Rec., most uncials, 


cursives, and versions. 
+ Text. Rec., with D L X and few cursives, &c., omits ody. 


CHAPTER VII. Lov 


is faithful in this as in every other way. He Who counts every 
hair of our heads, and apart from Whom not a sparrow falls to 
the ground, cares for His children. 

Every one that is of the truth hears the voice of Christ. 
Whatever their pretensions, all others are not of the truth: 
else they would know that His teaching is of God. Where we 
do not know, we must suspect ourselves, not blame God; if we 
really desired to do, we should soon learn, God’s will. Certainly 
He did not speak from Himself. Yet of all men He was most 
entitled. But if He is the true God, He is true man and came 
to exalt His Father, not Himself. He had no private ends to 
serve. Lord of all He became the servant of all, above all of 
God. Self is what blinds the race, even the faithful, so far as 
it is allowed to act. He that speaks from himself seeks his 
own glory; but Jesus never did so—always served to the glory 
of Him that sent Him. There is, there can be, no solid 
guarantee of the truth where God’s glory is not sought and 
secured. Christ in this was perfect; and so He here declares 
that He is true, and no unrighteousness is in Him. As self is 
what hinders the truth, so it is just to neither God nor man. 
Jesus is both true and righteous. afm Bo G 

Further, when men boast, they are sure to be wrong not only 
in other things but most where they are haughtiest. Did the 
Jews pique themselves on the law of Moses? How vain to 
boast of that law which none of them practised! Yet so it 
was, aS the Lord pressed on their consciences here. They 
reasoned, but what was their walk? “Hath not Moses given 
you the law? and none of you doeth the law. Why do ye 
seek to kill me?” (ver. 19.) Jesus is ever the touchstone. 
One might never have learnt their murderous malice but for 
Him Who brought God close and convicted them of sin. This 
they could not bear and so sought to get rid of Him, in their 
zeal for the law violating it utterly, and in their dark rebellious- 
‘ness rejecting Him Who gave it by Moses. But is it now 
uncommon to glory in the law and hate the truth? 

Yet the people in general were not aware how far hatred 
was impelling the leaders, and had no suspicion that they were 
bent on the death of Jesus. “The crowd answered, Thou hast 


158 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


a demon: who seeketh to kill thee? Jesus answered and said 
to them, One work I did, and ye all wonder because of this. 
Moses hath given you circumcision (not that it is of Moses but 
of the fathers), and on a sabbath ye circumcise a man. If a 
man receiveth circumcision on a sabbath, that the law of Moses 
may not be broken, are ye angry at me because I made a 
man entirely sound on a sabbath?” (ver. 20-23.) In their 
ignorance the crowd spoke with rash irreverence and violence 
against the Lord, Who stops not to notice it but draws 
attention to the absurdity of their quarrelling as well as of 
wondering at one work of His, the cure of the infirm at 
Bethesda on the sabbath. Yet it was a common matter of 
course to circumcise a male child on the eighth day spite 
of its being a sabbath, and this in honour of the law of Moses, 
though in fact circumcision was rather of the fathers. The 
Lord closes His reproof with an exhortation which touches 
the root of their cavils, “Judge not according to sight, but 
jadge the righteous judgment” (ver. 24). They had not brought 
in God, and were consequently wrong not on the surface 
merely but altogether. If the readings (as in Tischendorf’s 
text) be xpivere . . . kpivate, the first warns against the evil 
habit in general, the second urges the righteous judgment they 
should follow on this oceasion. It is clear that one wants 
divine guidance, if we are not to judge according to appear- 
ance; but that is what God is so willing to vouchsafe His 
children, not teaching only but direction and judgment. 
Knowing all, He knows also how to communicate what is 
needed by His own. 

The Lord’s plain speaking surprised, if the multitude, not 
such as knew the enmity of the rulers. “Some therefore of 
those of Jerusalem said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill ? 
And, behold, he speaketh openly, and they say nothing to him. 
Did the rulers indeed decide that this is the Christ? Howbeit 
we know him whence he is; but when the Christ cometh, no 
one knoweth whence he is. Jesus therefore cried in the temple, 
teaching and saying, Ye both know me and ye know whence 
Iam; and I have not come from myself, but he that sent me 
is true whom ye know not. I know him, for I am from him, 


’ 


CHAPTER VII. 159 


and he hath sent me” (vers. 25-29). The men of Jerusalem, 
knowing too much of the rulers to accept their decisions 
absolutely, indulge in irony ; but they too prove their ignorance 
like the rest. They did not know whence Jesus was, whilst 
they ought to have known where and when the Messiah was to 
be born. Isaiah vii. and Micah v. taught much more. 

Jesus in replying contrasts their assumed knowledge of Him 
and His origin with their positive ignorance of the Father who 
sent Him. He assuredly knew the Father as He was from Him 
and sent by Him. And the Father was not only truthful but 
true, as the Son could attest in all its force, not the Jews who 
knew not the Father. This drew on Him the open desire to lay 
hold of Him with which He had charged them. How little man 
knows himself any more than God,as Jesus shows! “They 
sought therefore to seize him, and none laid hand on him, 
because his hour had not yet come. But many of the crowd 
believed on him, and said, When the Christ cometh, will he do 
more signs than these* which this [man] did?”* (vers. 30, 31.) 
Those who rejected the Lord for their tradition and will were 
only the more exasperated by the truth; but they were power- 


less till His hour came. God abides God, spite of man and 


Satan. His purpose stands, though the enemies betray and 
commit themselves; but even when they do their worst, they 
but fulfil the scriptures they deny and the will of God they 
detest. Another effect also appears: “many of the crowd 
believed on him.” The truth might not enter conscience, and 
so the result be human; but at least it was felt and owned 
that from the Messiah none need expect more signs. Still 
all is vain Godward but Christ and the faith that receives 
Himself from the Father that sent Him. 

The religious leaders are disturbed at any impression made 
on the multitude, and show their fear as well as their enmity. 
They dislike the truth they did not themselves possess and 
would gladly get rid of Him Who told it out. “The Pharisees 
heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the 


rit érolnoev, the common reading, is supported by N°" B L T and the body of 
the uncials and cursives, save NP D, 13, 69 and a few versions which read roce?, 
‘doeth.’—The best witnesses omit rovrwv, ‘‘ these”’ also. 


— 160 AN EXPOSITION. OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


chief priests and the Pharisees* sent officials to seize him. 
Then said Jesus,t Yet a little while am I with you, and I go 
unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me,and shall not find { ; 
and where I am, ye cannot come” (vers. 32-34). The Lord 
speaks with a solemn calmness. All efforts to apprehend Him 
would be vain till the appointed moment; nor need they hurry. 
It was but a little while for Him to be with them: then He is 
going to His Father. So it is ever in this Gospel. It is no 
question only of the rejection of men nor of the Jews despising 
Him, though both were true and fully set out by the Synoptic 
evangelists; but here the Spirit shows us One fully conscious 
of where He was going, and so speaking to all, if any by grace 
might believe and see God’s glory in Him. Soon unbelief 
would seek and not find Him. What does the world know of 
the Father? Heaven is to it more dreary than the earth. 
“Where I am, ye cannot come”; nor would they if they could. 
Nothing is so repulsive to a sinner as the light, presence, and 
glory of God. 

“The Jews therefore said unto each other, Where is this 
[man] about to go that we shall not find him? Is he about 
to go unto the dispersion among the Greeks and teach the 
Greeks? What is this word which he said, Ye shall seek me, 
and shall not find; and where I am, ye cannot come?” (vers. 
35, 36.) It was blindness indeed; nor is any darkness so dense 
as that of unbelief. But it is striking that what the unbe- 
lieving pride of the Jew deemed incredible is what God has 
made true of Christ exalted to His right hand. It is not more 
certain that He went on high than that He came and preached 
peace to the Gentiles that were far off and peace to them that 
were nigh (Jews), giving both access by one Spirit to the 
Father. The dispersed among the Greeks, § are those that 


* There is high authority for the transposition here as compared with the 
Text. Ree. 

+ There is little authority for adding avrofs ‘‘to them” as in Text. Rec. 

+ BT X with a few cursives and ancient versions add we which Lachmann 
edits here, and in verse 36 too. 

§ The late Dr. Alford says (the Greek Test. im loco), ‘‘The dwaom. 7. ‘EAA. 
must not be interpreted ‘the Hellenistic Jews,’ for the "E\\nves are always 
distinguished from the Jews ; and this would convey hardly any meaning. The 
sense of diacmopd is—see reff. James; 1 Pet.,—‘the country where Jews lay 


a 


CHAPTER VIL. 161 


Peter shows to have found in Him the object of their faith, 
believing on Jesus in the Father’s house as they believed on 
God; and Paul no less clearly shows that he is teaching the 
Greeks. To those that are called, both Jews and Greeks, 
Christ is God’s power and God’s wisdom—Christ crucified, 
let others count it an offence or foolishness. But He is none 
the less the Lord of glory, which none of the princes of this 
age knew: had they known it, they would not have crucified 
Him. And so it was that scripture was verified, man humbled, 
and God glorified ; even as those that dwelt in Jerusalem and 
their rulers, not knowing Him nor yet the voices of the 
prophets which are read every sabbath, fulfilled them by their 
judgment of Him. And now is God pleased to make known 
the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, 
“which is Christ among you the hope of glory.” He is lost 
meanwhile to the Jew, who seeking Him not in faith cannot 
find Him nor come where He is; for He is in heaven and they 
given up more and more to an earthly mind, grovelling after 
filthy lucre. 

But the Faithful Witness speaks. “ Now in the last, the 
great, day of the feast Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any one 
thirst, let him come unto me* and drink. He that believeth 
on me, even as the scripture said, Out of his belly shall flow 
rivers of living water. But this said he of the Spirit, which 
they that believed t on him were about to receive, for [the] 
Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified” 
(vers. 37-39). 

It is not the new birth, but the Holy Ghost in power of 


scattered, as qualified by the succeeding genitive, where one occurs, as here. 


So here 4 6, 7. ‘EA. means ‘the dispersed in the Gentile world.’”” This seems 
a singular mystification of plain Greek. The meaning unquestionably _is_the 


Jews dispersed among the Greeks as representative of Gentiles in general. The 


country is in no way expressed, but at most implied. The Dean further confused 


. the meaning in his Prolegg. to 1 Peter (Greek Test. iv., third edition, p. 128) 


by saying that 6. ‘‘may well designate the engrafting of Gentile (!) converts 
into dispersed Israel.” 

* Tischendorf omits mpés me (or éué) ‘unto me” on the testimony of XP™ D 
and a few other witnesses contrary to the great mass. 

+ muorevovres the vast majority, ricredcavres BL T, &e. 

+ dycov and dedouévoy are evident additions, contrary to the best authorities. 


L 


v 


162 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


testimony, rather than of worship. Thus is it distinguished 
not merely from John iii. but also from chapter iv., even though 
He be given at the same time to be a fountain of living water 
springing up to life eternal within the believer, and rivers 
of living water flowing out, which suppose the soul already 
born afresh. It is not here, however, communion with the 
Father and the Son in the energy of the Spirit which goes 
upward in adoration; but the same Spirit going outward to 
refresh largely the weary and parched in the wilderness from 
the inmost affections of the believer. Both figures are 
strikingly true, but they are different though enjoyed by the 
same individual. They are the characteristic power and privi- 
lege of the Christian, not only the divine life but this in the 
power of the Spirit going up to its source in praise, or flowing 
out actually in testimony to Christ in a dry and thirsty land. 
Here it is the glorified man Who is the object, as in chapter iv. 
the Son of God is the giver. 

Even so there is the most careful guard against coming to 
the Lord merely for teaching as a scholar or for material as 
a teacher: both in divine things attitudes of peril to the soul. 
“Tf any one thirst, let him come unto me and drink.” It is the 
heart met in its own need, not men invited to draw for others, 
but to drink for themselves; and thus it is they safely and best 
learn so as to teach others also. “Out of his belly shall flow 
rivers of living water.” Such is the general testimony of Old 
Testament scriptures; and so the Lord urges even more 
distinctly. But this follows not only the coming but the 
glorification of Jesus founded on His work. Only then could 
the streams flow thus abundantly from “the inward parts,” truth 
being there already and God on His part perfectly glorified in 
the cross. The Holy Spirit could act freely and in power, on 
the owned ruin of the first man, to the glory of Him Who is 
at God’s right hand and in those who are His for a little 
while in a dry and thirsty land where otherwise no water is. 
But now, to His praise Whom the Spirit is here to glorify, water 
is given, not alone the fountain to refresh within, but rivers to 
flow out. The Israelites never rose to this, even in figure. 
They drank of water from the smitten rock; and after, when 


CHAPTER VII. 163 


the rod of priestly power had budded, the rock was but to be 
spoken to in order to yield abundantly. But no Israelite, not 
even a Moses or an Aaron, could be the channel of living 
water, as every believer now; and this, let it be repeated, no 
premium on the Christian, but solely in witness of God’s 
delight in Christ and appreciation of His work, wherein as He 
is, SO are we in this world. 

The feast, and the day of it so noted, are not without deep 
significance. It was not Pentecost as might be thought natural 
in view of the gift of the Spirit, but Tabernacles. Indeed if 
the feast of Weeks was ever the epoch of any acts or discourses 
of our Lord in the fourth Gospel, it is carefully kept out of 
sight; and this because it falls within the province of Paul, 
rather than of John whose characteristic truth is the revelation 
of God and of the Father in the man Christ Jesus on earth, 
not the Head of the body on high. It is not therefore the 
Spirit baptising into one body which is here treated but power 
of testimony, and this from the most intimate enjoyment of the 
soul, through that Spirit Who comes from Jesus glorified. 

We are not in heaven yet but passing through the wilderness. 
The day of glory is not come; but He Who died in atonement is 
in glory, and thence sends down the Spirit on-us who are here 
that we may have a divine association with Him there. What 
could give such force to testimony? There is more than the 
brightest hope; for the Spirit is a present link with Him Who 
is on high; yet is there all the power of hope bearing us 
onward and above surrounding circumstances. For the glory 
itself does not yet appear, though He Who will introduce it is 
already in it, its centre and in its highest sphere. His hour 
will come to show Himself to the world. Meanwhile we are in 
the secret of His exaltation and waiting for His display; while 
we have the Holy Ghost sent down by Him from that glory 
which He gives us to know and so much the more to feel the 
dreary desert through which we pass. This is not our rest; it 
is polluted ; and here we have no continuing city, but we seek 
the one to come. But we are awaiting, not righteousness nor 
the Spirit of glory, but through the Spirit by faith the hope of 
righteousness (that is, the glory of God). And He Who is not 


/ 


164 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


only in the glory, the Head and Heir of all things, but will 
shortly come to bring us like Himself there, gives us the Spirit 
as rivers of living water to fill us inwardly and to flow abroad, 
let the wilderness be ever so parched. 

Ido not know a stronger expression of the intimacy of the 
Spirit’s indwelling in us as contrasted with His working of old 
even though by saints. But here there is supposed such a deep 
intermingling with the inner man’s affections and thoughts as is 
| eminently characteristic of the Christian’s possession of the 
Spirit, and the more remarkably because it is in view of a rich 
outflow of testimony to Christ on high. Hence there could be 
no such privilege till Jesus was glorified consequent on His 
glorifying of God morally by the death of the cross. 

The phraseology of verse 39, though at first it may sound 
strange, is strictly accurate and suitable. The Spirit is beyond 
doubt a person, but He is viewed here as the characterising fact 
of a state not yet in being. Hence it is zvevua without the 
article. Again it is jy, not éyévero. He never began to exist, 
for His being was divine and eternal. But it was not yet a fact 
for man on earth. At Pentecost He was sent down from 
heaven. Compare Acts xix., where the question was, Did ye 
receive the Holy Spirit when ye believed? and the answer is, 
We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was (lit. is). The 
meaning is not at all as to His existence but His baptism, of 
which John the Baptist had testified to’ his disciples. 

We have had then the Lord’s anticipative declaration of 
the power of the Spirit that the believer was about to receive, 
which he did receive at Pentecost and thenceforward: not the 
quickening of the unbeliever; nor yet. power rising up in 
worship, but flowing forth abundantly from the inner man 
in testimony, both eminently characteristic of Christianity. 
How painful that Christendom should now, and for ages, show 
itself incredulous and hostile! But thus it is that God’s warn- 
ings must be verified in every tittle. Im man’s hands each 
dispensation makes manifest nothing so much as faithlessness 
to its own special privileges and responsibility. Thus Israel 
not only rebelled against the law but renounced Jehovah for 
heathen vanities, the returned even rejecting their own 


CHAPTER VII. 165 


Messiah. Is the Spirit now sent down and present since 
Jesus wa’ glorified? Christendom, since the apostolic days, 
ran greedily after law and forms, reinstating thus the first man, 
to the denial of the cross on earth and of the Second man 
in heaven about to come again. It opposes itself to no truth 
so expressly as that to which it is called above all to testify in 
word and deed. 

The words of our Lord made a certain impression; but all 
is In vain unless conscience be reached before God. “[Some]* 
of the crowd, therefore, when they heard these sayings,f said: 
This is truly the prophet; others said, This is the Christ; 
otherst said, Doth the Christ then come out of Galilee? Did 
not the scripture say that the Christ cometh of the seed of 
David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was ? 
A division therefore took place in the crowd on account of 
him; and some of them wished to seize him, but none laid his 
hands on him” (vers. 40-44). 

Men do not only join what God separates, but separate 
what God joins. Some called Him the prophet, others the 
Christ, as we have seen from the beginning of this 
Gospel: a distinction then prevalent but unfounded. The 
objections which lack of knowledge makes expose an 
ignorance which the least conscientious inquiry must have 
dispelled. With faith too there may be, and often is, want 
of light; but, spite of obstacles, it holds on to what it discerns 
to be of God, instead of being stumbled by a difficulty which 
further knowledge would have shewn to be unreal. Bartimeeus, 
when he heard that Jesus of Nazareth was at hand, did not 
fail to cry, “Son of David, have mercy on me”; and his faith 
reaped the blessing immediately. None the less was He the 
Messiah from Bethlehem, and of David’s line, because He 
was the despised prophet of Galilee. But unbelief is blind 
to His glory, and finds but an occasion of division in the only 

* éddoe is added by some eleven uncials and most cursives, &c., as in Text, 
Rec., contrary to 8 B D LT X and some other of the most ancient authorities, 

+ rav Myoww SBDEGH KLMTUTL APT and many more witnesses, 
many of which give rovrwy also, contrary to Text. Rec., which on inferior 


authority has rov d. 
. t Text. Rec. adds d¢ with some cursives. 


166 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


centre of union. Yet, whatever the hostility of men, they 
could not take Him till the hour was come, little as they 
thought it, for God to accomplish the reconciliation in His 
Cross. 

There were darker traits, however, in the religious leaders 
than in the crowd; and this the Spirit next brings before us. 
“The officials therefore came unto the chief priests and 
Pharisees, and these said to them, Why did ye not bring him ? 
The officials answered, Never man so spake as this man.* 
The Pharisees thereforet answered them, Are ye also deceived ? 
Did any one of the rulers believe on him, or of the Pharisees ? 
But this crowd that knoweth not the law, they are accursed” 
(vers. 45-49). Here conscience answered to the words of 
the Lord in such a manner at least as to draw out before 
their masters an involuntary confession of the power with 
which He spoke. It was not as the scribes. But the 
Pharisees, with invincible hardness, retort on their weakness, 
challenge them to produce any of the rulers or of the Pharisees 
that believed, and betray their contempt for the mass of their 
countrymen. Boasting in law, they by transgression of the 
law and far worse were then dishonouring God. But God 
brings forward an unexpected, even if feeble, witness from 
among themselves, not only a Pharisee but a ruler. 

“Nicodemust{ saith unto them, being one of them, Doth our 
law judge the man, unless it have first heard from him, and 
know what he doeth? They answered and said to him, 
Art thou also of Galilee? Search and see that no prophet 
ariseth§ out of Galilee” (vers. 50-52): Unable to resist the 
righteous requirement of their own law, they proved that 
their insubjection had a deeper root by their haughty contempt, 

* Besides a difference in collocation, S &c. add Aade?; others omit the clause, 
perhaps by ouoorédevrov or through love of brevity. 

+ SD, twelve cursives, &c., omit ody. 

t Text. Rec. adds 6 €d@dv vuxrds mpds avrdv, with EG HM ST A, most 
cursives (probably from xix. 39), some, as K U A II, putting ». after 7. ad., and 
others, as N°" BLT, &c., omitting v. and adding mpérepov, and others giving 
both, as X and some cursives and ancient versions. Tischendorf omits thé 
clause with N2™, &c. 


§ éyelpera 8 B DK S™8 TT ATI, many cursives, Latin and other ancient 
versions; éy7yeprat, ‘‘is risen,” Text. Rec. following many uncials, cursives, &c, 


CHAPTER VII. 167 


not now of the ignorant rabble, but of not the least of their 
own chiefs; and, as usual, they manifest that men are never 
so sure to err as when most confident in an arm of flesh. 
Indeed, it is the fatality of tradition-mongers to be always 
astray, whether in Judaism or in Christendom. Scripture 
alone is reliable ; and those who profess to be ruled by scripture 
as interpreted by tradition will be found, like all who serve 
two masters, to hold to tradition and its uncertainty, and to 
despise scripture spite of its divine authority, with a blindness 
to their own state which is truly pitiable though not less 
censurable also. Thus Eusebius of C., though by no means the 
least able or the most superstitious of the Fathers, makes the 
grossest mistakes in reporting ecclesiastical facts from the 
Acts of the Apostles, or elsewhere. 

So here the Pharisees assume that no prophet arises out of 
Galilee. They were wrong in every possible way. Were they 
‘prophets to speak for God at that time? Had they never 
heard of Jonah or Nahum? The greatest of the prophets 
who wrote not—the mysterious Tishbite—who had arisen, and 
will yet again arise, was of Gilead, and so even more severed 
than Galilee from the seat of religious pride, being on the east 
of the Jordan. But the truth is, that the One their soul 
abhorred, on Whom the poor of the flock waited, had come 
_ forth out of Bethlehem-Ephratah, Whose goings forth have been 
from of old, from the days of eternity. Of Him they were 
profoundly ignorant, though law and prophets everywhere 
testified to Him; but the pillar of the cloud which encompassed 
Him gave no light to.the proud men of Jerusalem. Their 
darkness comprehended not the true light. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


WE are now arrived at a section of our Gospel, the external 
condition of which is to the reflecting mind a solemn evidence 
of human unbelief, here as daring as usually it appears to 
hesitate. No evangelist has suffered as much in this way, not 
even Mark, whose close disappears from two of the most 
ancient manuscripts. But as we saw that the angel’s visit to 
trouble the waters of Bethesda was unwelcome to not a few 
copyists of John v., so here again incredulity indisposed some 
to reproduce the story of the adulteress. This is plain from 
some copies (as L A), which leave a blank—a fact wholly in- 
explicable, if the scribe had not been aware of a paragraph 
which he knew to exist, but for reasons of his own thought fit 
to omit. Others, again, transposed it to another place, as the 
cursives 1, 19, 20, 129, 135, 207, 215, 301, 347, 478, &c., to the 
end of the Gospel (and 225 after chap. vii. 36), and even to 
another evangelist, as 13, 69, 124, 346, and 556, though alien 
in tone from all but John, and suiting no place in John but 
here, where the mass of authority gives it. » <A (probably) 
B C (probably) T X with many cursives and ancient ver- 
sions simply omit the passage; D F (defective) GH K UT 
(defective), more than 330 cursives, and many versions have 
it. It is marked by an asterisk, or obelus,in EM S§ A II, &e. 
The variations of the copies which do give it are considerable. 
This brief view of the evidence may suffice for the general 
reader, as it is more than enough to prove the peculiarity of 
the case externally. 

As regards the internal evidence, some have alleged against 
the passage its entire diversity from the style of the Gospel 
elsewhere; and this, not merely in words and idioms which 
John never uses, but in its whole cast and character, which is 
said to savour more of the Synoptic Gospels. 

168 


% en 


CHAPTER VIII. 169 


All this, however, fails to meet the positive weight of truth 
in the passage; and its fitness at this very point of the Gospel 
is utterly unaccountable in a forgery or a tradition. The Lord 
is displaying the true light in His Person, as contrasted with 
others who boasted in the law. We have seen their conscience- 
less discussion in the preceding chapter. 

“ And they went each to his home, but Jesus went to the 
mount of Olives” (vil. 53; vii. 1). Afar from man’s un- 
certainty and contempt, the Son of God retired to enjoy the 
fellowship of the Father. Thence He returns for service. 
“ And early in the morning he came again to the temple, and 
all the people were coming unto him; and he sat down, and 
was teaching them” (ver. 2). The Lord’s habit in this respect, 
recorded by Luke (xxi. 37, 38; xxii. 39), is a strange reason 
for discrediting John’s mention of this particular instance. 
Nor does any reason appear to question that it was not 
merely “the crowd” (6yxXos), but “the people” in a large 
sense (Aaos) which here flocked to the Lord’s teaching in the 
temple. 

“ And the scribes and the Pharisees bring to him a woman 
taken in adultery, and having set her in [the] midst, they say 
to him, Teacher, this woman was taken in the very act of 
adultery. Now in the law Moses charged us to stone such: 


thou, therefore, what sayest thou? But this they said proving 


him, that they might have [whereof] to accuse him. But Jesus 
stooped down, and with his finger was writing on the ground” 
(vers. 3-6). 

Such is man at his best estate when he sees and hears. Jesus, 
but refuses the grace and truth which came by Him. They 
were not ignorant men, but learned in the scriptures; they 
were not the crowd that knew not the law, but possessed of 
the highest reputation for religion. Nor could there be a 
question as to the guilt and degradation of the woman. Why 
they brought her, and not her paramour, does not appear. 
But her they brought in the hope, not only of perplexing, but 
of finding ground of accusation against, the Lord. It seemed 
to them a dilemma which allowed of no escape. Moses, said 
they, bade the Jews stone such as she. What did Jesus say ? 


170 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


If He only confirmed the decree of the law, where was the 
grace so much boasted of? If He let her off, did He not 
evidently set Himself in opposition not only to Moses but to 
Jehovah? What profound iniquity theirs! No horror at sin, 
even of the darkest dye, but an unfeeling perversion of the 
exposed adulteress to entrap the Holy One of God. 

But if the Lord wrote on the ground, it was in no way as if 
He heard them not. Rather was it to give them time to weigh 
their guilty question, and guiltier motive, while their hope of 
entrapping Him betrayed them more and more to commit 
themselves as He stooped to the ground. 

“And when they continued asking him, he lifted himself up 
and said to them, Let him that is without sin among you first 
cast the stone at her; and, again stooping down, he was 
writing on the ground. But they, having heard [it],* kept 
going out one by one, beginning from the elder ones until 
the last ; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in 
[the] midst” (ver. 7-9). 

Thus did the Lord show Himself the true light which 
lightens every man. Occupied with the law in its condemnation 
of the adulteress, and indeed far more essaying to condemn the 
Lord Himself, their darkness is laid bare by these few solemn 
words. God judges sin, not gross sins, but all sin, be it what 
it may be; and the Judge of quick and dead was He Who 
thus searched them through and through. It was no question 
of the law for either now: they shrank abashed from the light, 
even though Jesus stooped down again, and was writing on the 
ground. Assuredly He heard their question, and discerned 
their iniquitous aim, veiled as it was; and now they heard 
Him, and cowered before His all-scathing words of light. 
Convicted by their consciences, but in no way repentant, they 
sought to flee, ashamed to see His face Who stooped once 
more and thus gave them time to retire, if they refused to 
bow with broken spirit and heartfelt confession. 

This, however, it is not the object of the passage to illustrate, 
but the supremacy of divine light in Jesus, let Him be ever so 


« The clause translated, “and being convicted by their conscience,” in the 
Text. Rec,, and supported by EG H KS, &., is omitted by still better authority. 


CHAPTER VIII. 171 


lowly, and in presence of the proudest. And they were going 
off, one by one, beginning at the elder until the last, beginning 
at those who dreaded most their own exposure—an exposure 
which the youngest could not bear, only less ashamed of their 
fellows than of Jesus, Who had awakened the feeling. How 
awful the contrast with their own sweet singer who, spite of 
his sins, could say by grace, “ Zhow art my hiding-place !”— 
hiding in God, not from Him, and having before him One Who 
could and would cover all his iniquities, and impute nothing. 
Vain indeed is our effort to cover our sins, or to escape from 
His presence. But unbelief trusts itself, not Him, and betrays 
the will to get away from His light, as it may for a little 
season, till judgment come. How will it be then? It will be 
theirs to stoop in shame and everlasting contempt, when 
evasion cannot be even for a moment, and all is fixed for ever. 
Jesus then was left alone, as far as the tempting scribes and 
Pharisees were concerned, and the woman in the midst; for 
“all the people” appear to have been around, and He addresses 
them in a subsequent discourse, which seems to be founded on 
this very incident, as giving occasion to it (see vers. 12 and 
following). “ And Jesus lifting himself up, and beholding no one 
but the woman, said to her, Woman, where are they, thine 
accusers? Did no one condemn thee? And she said, No one, 
Sir. And Jesus said to her, Neither do I condemn thee: go 
and sin no more” (vers. 10, 11). It is the mistake of 
Augustine, as of others in modern no less than ancient times, 
that we have here “misera” in the presence of “ Misericordia,” 
which is much more true of the scene at the end of Luke vii. 
Here the Lord acts as light, not only in the detection of His 
self-righteous and sinful adversaries, but throughout. There 
was no need, however, for His exposure of the woman caught 
in the very act of sin. Hence the ignorance of the scribes 
who left out the tale was as glaring as their impiety was with- 
out excuse. There is not the least semblance of levity in 
dealing with her evil. The. Lord simply brings out the fact 
that her accusers retreat from the light which convicted their 
conscience, when the law had utterly failed to reach it; and as 
they could not condemn her, because they were sinners no less 


172 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


truly than herself, so He would not. It was not His work to 
deal with causes criminal any more than civil. But if grace 
and truth came by Him, He is none the less the true light; 
and so He abides here. As we do not hear of repentance or 
faith in the woman, so we have no such words from Him as, 
“Thy sins are forgiven thee,” “Thy faith hath saved thee,” 
“Go in peace.” He is the light still, and goes not beyond 
“Go and sin no more.” By-and-by He will act as a king, and — 
judge righteously; on their own showing He speaks as a 
“teacher,” not a magistrate. And it was a question of sin, 
but most unexpectedly of theirs as well as of hers, if they 
face the light of God. 

The words of our Lord are utterly lowered by such as infer 
that, either to the accusers or to the accused, He restrains sin 
to that offence against purity of which the woman was guilty. 
He means any and all sin as intolerable to God, Who is light, 
and in Whom is no darkness at all. 

The Lord continues His teaching of the people, but not 
without allusion to the incident which had just occurred, 
or rather to the character in which He had dealt with it. 
Nothing can be more evident than the True Light which was 
then shining and lightening every man. It is the more striking 
because the word “light” does not occur in that transaction ; 
but the fact is thoroughly in harmony with what immediately 
follows. 

“Again therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying, I am the light 
of the world: he that followeth me shall in no wise walk in dark- 
ness, but shall have the light of life” (ver. 12). His rejection 
by the Jews always brings Him out ina still larger character of 
blessing and glory to others. In our Gospel, however, the 
Spirit speaks of what He is personally or independently of 
all circumstances and above all dispensations. He is “the 
light of. the world.” His glory, His grace, could not be 
confined to Israel. He is come to deliver from Satan’s power 
and to give the enjoyment of God and the Father. Hence, 
whatever be the darkness of men, and it was now profound 
among the Jews, “ He that followeth me shall in no wise walk 
in darkness, but shall have the light of life.” The Christian is 


CHAPTER VIII. 173 


not only called out of darkness into God’s wonderful light, but 
he becomes light in the Lord, a child of light, and he walks in 
the light, being brought to God Who is light; and in the light, 
as John says, we have fellowship one with another, for in Him 
is life as well as light; or, as He says here, His follower has 
“the light of life.” He has Christ Who is both. 

So energetic a testimony rouses the pride and enmity of 
those who listened. They could not but feel that He spoke of 
a privilege and blessing which they did not enjoy. “The 
Pharisees therefore said to him, Thou bearest witness of thyself ; 
thy witness is not true” (ver. 13). They turn His own words 
in chapter v. 31 against Himself, but most unfairly. For there 
He was speaking of testimony alone and human, such as vanity 
gives itself; here, as He proceeds to show, He has the very 
highest support in God Himself. “Jesus answered and said to 
them, Even though I bear witness of myself, my witness is 
true; for I know whence I came, and where I go, [but]* 
ye know not whence I come or + where I go” (ver. 14). They 
were wholly ignorant of the Father as of the Son. They never ; 
thought of heaven. The Lord had the constant consciousness 
of the truth of His Person and mission ; and His witness was 
inseparable from the Father’s. As He says elsewhere, “I and 
my Father are one,” not more true in divine nature than in 
testimony to man. He never lost the sense for a moment 
whence He came and whither He was going away, whereas 
they had no true idea of either. They were in utter 
darkness, though the light was there shining in Him. How 
truly then He could say, “ Ye judge according to the flesh, I 
judge no one. And if also I judge, my judgment is true, { 
because I am not alone, but I and the Father§ that sent 
me” (vers. 15, 16). 

Self is the source and object of all the activity of the flesh, 
according to which the Jews were judging. Christ brought 


* & FH K, many cursives, &c., omit dé. 

+ 7B Ds* K TU X A, very many cursives and ancient versions, instead of 
cal with the rest and Text. Rec. 

+ dd\nOhs & and eleven other uncials, most cursives, &. ; dnd) B DLT X, 
&e. 

§ NP™ D omit rarzp. 


174 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


love as well as light into the world. He was judging none; 
He was serving all. This made Him intolerable to the self- 
complacent. Yet is He to be the judge of all. In His resur- 
rection God has given the pledge that He is to judge the world; 
even as in His own Person He is the fitting one to do so, being 
Son of man as well as Son of God. “ And if also I judge, my 
judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father 
that sent me.” It was an admitted principle that by the mouth 
of two or three witnesses every word should be established. 
To this the Lord here appeals, “And in your law too it is 
written that the witness of two men is true”-(ver. 17). How 
much more then the testimony of the Father and the Son! 
“T am he that testifieth concerning myself, and the Father 
that sent me testifieth concerning me” (ver. 18). Of this too 
the Lord had spoken before in chap. v., but they had not heard 
to receive it, only to despise Him. 

“They said to him then, Where is thy Father? Jesus 
answered, Ye know neither me nor my Father. If ye had 
known me, ye should have known my Father also” (ver. 19). 
Such ignorance of the only true God and of Jesus Whom He 
sent is death, eternal death; and the more solemn, because it 
was said not to the heathen but to Jews who had the oracles of 
God. These things they were saying because they knew 
not the Father nor the Son; as the hour would come when 
they would think to render God service by killing Christ’s 
disciples. Their sayings and doings betrayed their state 
of utter alienation from and ignorance of the Father. All that 
followed of persecution and hatred, whether for Christ or 
for the church, was but the consequence. “These words 
he spoke in the treasury, teaching in the temple; and no 
one seized him, because his hour was not yet come” (ver. 20). 
Their malice was as manifest as it was deadly; and it was 
against the Father as much as the Son. 

But, spite of will, they were powerless till the time was 
come. Then was He given up to their murderous iniquity; then 
too still deeper counsels were in accomplishment through the 
sacrifice of Himself. If on the one hand He was cut off and had 
nothing of His Messianic rights in the midst of the Jews in the 


- 


CHAPTER VIII. ies) 


land, He was on the other to suffer for sins, Just for the unjust, 
to bring all who believe to God, to be glorified on high, and to 
have a bride given Him associated with Himself in His supre- 
macy over all things. But this would carry us into the 
apostle Paul’s teaching. Let us pursue the line given to 
St. John, where we behold the Word become flesh, and His 
divine glory shining through the veil of humiliation, and in this 
chapter particularly, first as light convicting, then as the light 
of life possessed by His followers; but if His word were 
rejected, no less was He the Son Who alone can make free, yea, 
the I AM, let men avail themselves of His manhood to scorn 
and stone and crucify Him as they may. 

The next discourse turns on our Lord’s announcement of His 
departure—a truth of the most solemn import, especially for 
Israel responsible to receive Him as their Messiah. 

“He * said therefore again to them, I go away, and ye shall 
seek me and shall die in your sin: + where I go away, ye 
cannot come. The Jews therefore said, Will he kill himself 
because he saith, Where I go away, ye cannot come? And 
he said to them, Ye are of the things beneath, I am of those 
above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I said 
therefore to you that ye shall die in your sins; for, unless ye 
believe that I am [he], ye shall die in your sins” (vers. 21-24). 

The departure of Jesus after His coming is the overthrow of 
Judaism and the necessary condition of Christianity. We must 
not be surprised, then, if our Lord again and again recurs to it, 
to its moral associations and consequences, and above all to 
its bearing on Himself personally, ever the uppermost thought 
of our evangelist. He was going, and they should seek Him 
and die in their sin. They sought amiss’ and found Him not. 
They sought a Messiah that they might gratify their ambition 
and worldly lusts; and such is not the Messiah of God, Who 
is now found of those that sought Him not, after having spread 
out His hands all the day to a rebellious people that walked in 


* Hleven uncials, and the cursives, versions, &c., insert 6 ’Incods, contrary 


toS BDLTX, &., Orig. Cyr. 
+ All the old English versions too are wrong, save the Rhemish which has 


‘«your sinne.” 


176 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


a way anything but good, after their own thoughts. But God 
is not mocked, and he who sows to the flesh reaps corruption : 
if it be not public judgment, itis none the less the recompense 
of evil into the guilty bosom. “Ye shall die in your sin.” 
They were rejecting Christ and cleaving to their own will and 
way. There was no fellowship between them and Him. “My 
soul loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me.” The issue 
would make it still more apparent: “Where I go away, ye 
cannot come.” They could not follow Him. 

The Lord was going to heaven, to His Father. Their treasure 
was not there, nor therefore their heart, as both were on His 
part. So too as grace attracts the heart of the believer to 
Christ, faith follows Him where He is; and He will come 
and bring us there in due time that, where He is, there we 
may be also. Unbelief clings to self, to the earth, to present 
things; and so it was and is with the Jews: “Where I go 
away, ye cannot come.” They were rejecting the only One 
Who could wean from earth or fit for heaven, meeting them 
in their sin that they might not die in it, but live through 
Him. But Him they would not have and are lost, and proved 
it by their utterly false estimate of Him and of themselves, 
present or future, as we see in what follows. “The Jews 
therefore said, Will he kill himself because he saith, Where 
I go away, ye cannot come?” There was nothing too evil to 
impute to Him Whom they more and more hated. 

But He tells them out more. “And he said to them, Ye are 
of the things beneath, I am of those above; ye are of this 
world, I am not of this world. I said therefore to you, 
that ye shall die in your sins.” Here the Lord solemnly 
unveils the sources of things. To be of this world now is 
to be not merely of earth, but from beneath. Such is the 
Jew that rejects Jesus Who is not of this world but of 
the things above. Therefore should they die in their sins: 
their nature evil as their works, and they refusing the 
only light of life, how else could they end? “For, unless 
ye believe that I am [he], ye shall die in your sins.” The 
truth shines out fully from a rejected Christ—not only His 
personal glory, but their subjection to Satan who employs 


CHAPTER VIIL. LT 


them to dishonour Him. But His rejection is their everlasting 
ruin. They die in their sins, and have as their judge Him 
Whom they refused to believe on for life eternal. 

“They said therefore to him, Who art thou? Jesus 
said to them, Absolutely* that which I am also speaking 


* The Authorised Version is here faulty like many others ancient and 
modern. It is true that dpxiv with or without the article may be used 
in ordinary Greek for ‘‘at the first” or “formerly.” So in the Sept. of 
Gen. xiii. 4; xliii. 18, 20, &c.; and thus Nonnus understood the language 
of our evangelist in this place. Not the temporal sense, however, of the 
word is meant in the present remarkable phrase, but that of archetypal 
character or first principle. Thus Tyndale (1534): “even the very same 
thinge that I saye unto you”; and Cranmer (1539), only changing “saye” 
into ‘‘speake.” After them the Rhemish followed the strange and un- 
grammatical rendering of the Vulgate, ‘‘ Principium qui et loquor vobis.” 
It is hard, if not impossible, to understand ‘‘qui” here ; yet ‘‘principium”’ is 
not so far from the truth, as if the phrase had been confounded with ‘‘ab 
initio.” Indeed, the old Cod. Vere. has ‘‘Initium quod loquor vobis,” as 
Cod. Brix. ‘‘ Principium quod et loquor vobis.”” The Geneva Version misled 
the translators of 1611 into a sort of double rendering, ‘‘ Even the very 
same,” which would be a good enough version of ri dpxhv, but they added 
‘also ‘‘from the beginning,” which necessitated a false representation of add 
‘as if it were é\dAyoo or é\eka. 

As the fourth Gospel pointedly employs év apy, dm’ dpxijs (and in two cases 
é& dpxjs), there is the less reason for confounding the single occurrence of 
Thy apxnv with any of them. ‘The Lord uses the phrase prominently in 
answer to the question, Who art Thou? raised by the contemptuous unbelief 
of the Pharisees. He had already declared Himself the light of the world, 
but that they knew neither Him nor His Father, and should die in their 
sin because of their unbelief. He had not yet in terms disclosed His eternal 
Being as in ver. 58, but is gradually rising to this from the incident which 
so fittingly opens the chapter. The law of death in man’s hand is powerless 
before the Light of Life, Who is from above, and not of this world. He is the 
Word of God. He and He alone when challenged could say, ‘‘I am absolutely, 
altogether, what I speak also to you.” His speech thoroughly expresses 
Himself. Essentially, precisely, What He is, He also speaks. These alterna- 
tives, suggested by various interpreters, differ no doubt in degrees of accuracy ; 
but substantially they agree in identifying the Lord with His utterance also ; 
for He is the truth. They seem better than “‘ originally,” which means little 
more than ‘‘at first” or ‘‘at the beginning,” and, though often legitimate, looks 
quite out of place when applied to Christ, the Faithful Witness, Who is “the 
“same yesterday and to-day and for ever.” He alone could say that He was wholly 
what He also speaks. Mr. McClellan is right in holding that Christ’s speech 
reveals His eternal Being ; but does not ‘‘ originally ” fail to convey it? 

If the Sanscrit root helps us, it implies “worth, merit, fitness, dignity, 
and worship”; and ‘‘beginning” is secondary. Certainly dpx) appears in 
philosophic usage as “‘ a principle,” whether of being or of thought; and in 
ordinary application as a ‘‘first place,” estate, or office, and even materially 


M 


178 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


to you” (ver. 25). Jesus is not merely the way and the life, 
but the truth. He is, in the principle of His being, what also 
He speaks. A less expected answer could not be, nor one more 
withering to their thoughts of themselves and of Him. He 
alone of all men could say as much; yet was He the lowliest 
of men. His ways and words were in perfect accord; and 
all expressed the mind of God. It is not merely that He does 
what He says, but He és thoroughly and essentially what also 
He sets out in speech. The truth is the reality of things 
spoken. We cannot know God but by Him; nor can we but 
by Him know man. Good and evil are displayed or detected 
only by Him, and He identifies Himself with His speech. 

Such was the One the Jews were then rejecting. They have 
then and there lost the truth. Impossible to have the truth 
apart from Jesus, Who adds “I have many things to speak 


as in Acts x. 4; xi. 9. Thus ‘‘at the first” or ‘‘originally” is the sense in 
Herodotus (i. 86, 140 ; ii. 28, 148; iv. 59; viii. 128, 182), when contrast with 
the present is intended. But an exclusive force appears with the negative 
even more frequently still (as in i, 192; ii. 95; iii, 16, 39; iv. 25, 28; 
vi. 83; vii. 26; ix. 57). On its very first occurrence (i. 9), how could 
‘‘originally ” assure Gyges? Did not the king mean that his own contrivance 
was to screen him absolutely? So Larcher understood in his learned version 
(i. 8, note a, ed. 1802). Dean Blakesley’s view was ‘‘to begin with,” which 
would be almost absurd, and certainly inadequate, for our text. To assume that 
only in negative sentences the absolute sense occurs is mistaken, at any rate in 
later Greek ; as the reader may see in the following references to Dion Cassius 
(vol. i. 96 [Fr. Peir. ci.], ii. 342 [xlv. 34], iii. 688 [lix. 19], iv. 52, [Ixii. 4] 
ed. Sturz. Two cases at least might be added of dpxhv without ryv. 

We may dismiss then, among many untenable proposals, the renderings of 
Wiclif and the Wiclifite (iv. 280, Oxford, 1850), following the Vulgate, with 
whieh go Syr.2e! and the Gothic; and with slight variations Augustine of 
old, and Fritzsche and Wordsworth of late. Not so held Cod. Veron. but 
‘‘Imprimis,” as Cod. Corb, ‘‘de superioribus,” though it is hard to say what 
they meant. Nor can the interrogation stand with ‘‘at all,” as Chrysostom, 
Cyril. Alex. (and so Liicke and Ewald), and the R.V. margin; nor with ‘‘ from 
the beginning” as Meyer. The more prevalent construction of the A. and 
R.Vv., like the Sah, Memph, Syr.vesch-, slights both the sense and the tense of 
Aad&, with the place and force of kai, through the first fault of misrendering 
Thv apxjv. The Aeth. Arab, Arm. differ from these and from one another, but 
afford no help, as far as I can judge. ‘‘ Absolutely [or, In principle] what also 
I speak to you” reflects justly the language, the order of the words, the 
grammar, and above all the bearing of the context and of this sentence in 
particular. There is no need therefore of connecting the end of ver. 25 with 
the beginning of 26, as Bengel, Raphelius, and Wakefield suggested, who 
otherwise rather confirm the true import, as does the dws of Euth. Zig. 


CHAPTER VIII. 179 


and to judge eoncerning you; but he that sent me is true, 
and I, what I heard from him, speak these things unto the 
world” (ver. 26). He was a servant though Son, and uttered 
what the Father pleased as needed truth, not according to the 
affluence of what He had to say and judge respecting the Jews. 

It is impossible to know the Father but by receiving the Son; 
and Him they rejected, as they did even to the cross. “They 
knew not that he was speaking to them of the Father. Then 
said Jesus [to them],* When ye shall have lifted up the Son 
of man, then ye shall know that I am [he] and from myself 
do nothing, but, even as the Father taught me, these things 
I speak. And he that sent me is with me: het left me 
not alone, because the things pleasing to him I do always” 
(vers. 27-29). It is the actual truth presented by God which 
tests the soul. A former testimony, however true, does not 
provoke opposition in the same way. Often indeed unbelief 
avails itself of the past to strengthen its present antagonism to 
what God is doing. Thus the Jews avail themselves of the 
unity of God to deny the Son and the Father, for they knew 
not of Whom Jesus was speaking. His cross might not 
convince them divinely or win their heart to God; but it 
would convict them of deliberate and wilful rejection of the 
Messiah, and prove that what He spoke was spoken from the 
highest authority. As He was sent, so was He taught. The 
Father was with Him too, for Christ was doing always the 
things that pleased Him. If we know this in our measure, 
how much more fully and unwaveringly was it true of Him 
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth! 

How solemn it is to weigh the force of “ When ye shall have 
lifted up the Son of man, then ye shall know that I am [he] 
and from myself do nothing, but just as my Father taught me, 
these things I speak!” For the Son of man is alike His title 
as the rejected Messiah, and as the appointed Judge of living 
‘and dead. So He was crucified, and so returns for the kingdom 
of universal glory as in Psalm vii. and Daniel vii. How 


* BLT, &., omit avrots which is read by the great body of the witnesses. 
+ Some good authorities prefix cal ‘‘and,” others add 6 warhp ‘the Father” 
at the end of the clause, and so Text. Ree. 


‘ 


180 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


terrible to know this too late, when pride shuts out repentance 
to the acknowledgment of the truth! 

It is an encouraging fact that a time of unbelieving de- 
traction may be used of God to work extensively in souls. 
“While he was speaking these things, many believed on him” 
(ver. 30). But faith, where divinely given, is inseparable from 
life, exercises itself in liberty, and is subject to the Son of 
God; where it is human, it soon wearies of His presence, 
and abandons Him Whom it never truly appreciated, for 
licence either of mind or of ways in rebellion against Him. 
Hence the urgency of the Lord’s solemn appeal. Continuance 
in and with Him is of God. 

“ Jesus therefore said to the Jews that had believed him, If 
ye abide in my word, ye are truly my disciples; and ye shall 
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. They 
answered him, We are Abraham’s seed, and have never been 
in bondage to anyone: how sayest thou, Ye shall become free ? 
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say to you, Every one 
that practiseth sin is a bondman of sin. Now the bondman 
abideth not in the house for ever; the son abideth for ever. 
If therefore the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free 
indeed. I know that ye are Abraham’s seed, but ye seek to 
kill me because my word maketh no way in you. I speak 
what I have seen with my Father, and ye therefore practise 
what ye have seen* with yourt father. They answered and 
said to him, Our father is Abraham. Jesus saith to them, If 
ye aret Abraham’s children, ye would practise the works of 
Abraham ; but now ye seek to kill me, a man who hath spoken 
to you the truth which I heard from God: this Abraham did 
not practise. Ye practise the works of your father. They 
said [therefore]§ to him, We were not born of fornication; we 
have one father, God. Jesus said || to them, If God were your 
father, ye would have loved me, for I came forth from God and 

* éw(o)pdxareS P™DEFGHMSTUTLAA, &c., Text. Rec; jxodcare & com 
BCK LX, &c. + The great majority read duey, but not BL T, &e. 

t éoreS BDLT, &.; fre Text. Rec. following the great mass. 

§ Text. Rec, adds oy with fifteen uncials but not the oldest. 


|| The authorities are pretty equal for and against reading ody “therefore” as 
given in Text, Rec. 


CHAPTER VIII. 181 


am come; for neither have I come of myself, but he sent me. 
Why do ye not know my speech? Because ye cannot hear my 
word. Ye are of your* father, the devil, and ye desire to 
practise the lusts of your father. He was a murderer from 
[the] beginning, and standeth not in the truth, because there is 
no truth in him: whenever he speaketh the lie, he speaketh 
out of his own things, because he is a liar, and the father of 
it. But because I speak the truth, ye believe me _ not. 
Which of you convinceth me of sin? Ift I speak truth, why 
do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth the words 
of God; for this cause ye hear [them] not, because ye are not 
of God” (vers. 31-47). 

To abide in His word then is the condition of being in truth 
Christ’s disciple’ Others may be interested greatly, but they 
soon grow weary, or turn ere long to other objects. Christ’s 
disciple cleaves to His word, and finds fresh springs in what 
first attracted. His word proves itself thus divine, as it is 
faith which abides in it, and the truth is thus not only learned 
but known. Vagueness and uncertainty disappear, while the 
truth, instead of gendering bondage, like the law, makes the 
soul free, whatever its previous slavery. There is growth in 
the truth and’liberty by it. Law deals with the corrupt and 
proud will of man to condemn it on God’s part, as is right; the 
truth communicates the knowledge of Himself as revealed in 
His word, and thus gives life and liberty: privileges un- 
intelligible to the natural man, who hates the sovereign grace 
of God as much as he exalts and loves himself, while he 
despises and distrusts others. Man’s only thought therefore of 
obtaining righteousness is through the law. They know not 
the virtue of the truth, and dread liberty as though it must 
end in licence; while at the same time they are proud of their 
own position, as if it were inalienable, and God were their 
servant, not they bound to be His. Hence the Jews answered 
Jesus, “ We are Abraham’s seed, and have never been in bondage 
to anyone: how sayest thou, Ye shall become free ?” 


* Text. Rec. omits rod contrary to all good witnesses. 
+ dé is added by many uncials, &c., and followed by Text. Rec., contrary to 
the best MSS. and versions. 


182 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Far from this was the truth. Even outwardly, not to speak 
of the soul, the Jews were, and had long been, in servitude to 
the Gentiles. So Ezra (chap. ix.) confessed at the evening 
sacrifice: “Since the days of our fathers have we been in great 
trespass unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our 
kings, and our priests, been delivered into the hands of the 
kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to spoil, and 
to confusion of face, as it is this day. And now for a little 
space grace hath been shewn from Jehovah our God, to leave 
us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, 
that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little 
reviving in our bondage. For we are bondmen; yet our God 
hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy 
unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia,” &c. So, again, 
Nehemiah (chap. ix.): “Yet many years didst thou bear with 
them, and testifiedst against them by thy Spirit through thy 
prophets; yet would they not give ear: therefore gavest thou 
them into the hand of the peoples of the lands. . . . Behold, 
we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gavest 
unto our fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof, 
behold, we are servants in it; and it yieldeth much increase 
unto the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our 
sins; and they have dominion over our bodies, and over our 
cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.” 

Thus men of conscience felt when they lay under conquerors 
milder far than the Romans who now ruled. It was not that 
the Jews to-day were lightened, but that they had grown so used 
to the yoke as to forget and deny it altogether. And if it were 
because of God’s righteous government externally, much less did 
they estimate aright their true state before God, as the Lord 
Jesus was bringing it out now. Their haughty spirit was 
nettled at His word, which lay bare their thraldom to the 
enemy. “We are Abraham’s seed, and have never been in 
bondage to anyone: how sayest thou, Ye shall become free ?” 
Jesus in His answer brought in the light of God, for eternity 
indeed, but also for the present. “Verily, verily, I say to 
you, Every one that practiseth sin is a bondman of sin.” How 
true, solemn, and humiliating! No bondage so real, none so 


CHAPTER VIII. 183 


degrading, as that of sin: could they seriously deny it to be 
theirs? Truly unbelief blinds to moral state, and even to 
plain facts. Only grace delivers, and through the truth 
believed. 

But the Lord intimates more. None under sin is entitled to 
speak of permanence. Such an one exists only on sufferance 
till judgment. Bondage there was none when God created and 
made according to His mind; nor will there be when He shall 
make all things new. The bondman, in every sense, belongs 
only to the transitory reign of sin and sorrow. So says the 
Lord: “Now the bondman abideth not in the house for ever.” 
Another and contrasted relationship suits God’s will; “the son 
abideth for ever.” But there is infinitely more in Christ. He 
is not merely son, but “the Son.” He is the Son in His own 
right and title, as God and when man, in time and in eternity. 
He is therefore not “free” only, as all sons are, but such is 
His glory that He can and does make free in virtue of the 
grace which pertains to Him alone. Thus it is not only the 
truth which sets free, where law could only condemn, but the 
Son also gives and confirms the same character of liberty 
according to His own fulness. It is a question of what suits 
not them merely but Him. He could make free those who 
hear Him and abide in His word, and nothing else but free. 
It is worthy of Him to deliver from sin and Satan; and “if 
the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.” He 
frees after a divine sort. He brings into His own character 
of relationship out of the bondage to sin, which the first man 
made our sad inheritance. The last Adam is a quickening 
spirit and a Deliverer. Let us stand fast in His liberty, and 
be not entangled again with any yoke of bondage, as the 
apostle exhorts the Galatians against that misuse of the law, 
whatever its shape. 

To be Abraham’s seed, as the Lord lets the Jews know, is a 


“sorry safeguard. One might be of Abraham, and be the worst 


enemy of God. Such were the Jews then, who were seeking 
to kill Christ because His word had no hold in them. LEvery- 
one acts according to his source; character follows it. So our 
Lord deigns to say, “I speak what I have seen with my 


184 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Father; and ye therefore practise what ye have seen with 
your father.” To be of Abraham does not save from Satan. 
To hear the Son, to believe on Him, is to derive one’s nature 
from God and have life eternal. They boasted most of 
Abraham who were still in the darkness of unbelief and the 
enemy’s power. Hence “they answered and said to him, Our 
father is Abraham. Jesus saith to them, If ye were 
Abraham’s children, ye would practise the works of Abraham ; 
but now ye seek to kill me, a man who hath spoken to you 
the truth which I heard from God: this Abraham did not 
practise. Ye practise the works of your father.” It was 
allowed already that they were descended from the father 
of the faithful; but did they bear the family likeness? Was 
it not an aggravation of their evil that they stood in contrast 
with him from whom they vaunted themselves sprung ? 
Abraham believed, and it was counted to him for righteousness. 
They believed not, but sought to kill the man, albeit the Son 
of God, Who spoke to them the truth which He heard from 
God the Father. Whose works were these? Certainly not 
those of Abraham, but of a very different father. They were 
corrupt and violent. 

The Jews felt what was implied, and at once take the 
highest ground. “They said therefore to him, We were not 
born of fornication; we have one father, God. Jesus said to 
them, If God were your father, ye would have loved me, for I 
came forth from God and am come; for neither have I come of 
myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not know my speech? 
Because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father, the 
devil, and ye desire to practise the lusts of your father. He 
was a murderer from the beginning, and standeth not in the 
truth, because there is no truth in him: whenever he speaketh 
the lie, he speaketh out of his own things, because he is a liar, 
and the father of it. But because I speak the truth, ye believe 
me not. Which of you convinceth me of sin? If I speak 
truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth 
the words of God; for this cause ye hear [them] not, because 
ye are not of God.” 

The case is thus closed as regards the Jews. They were of 


CHAPTER VIII. 185 


the devil beyond all doubt, as this solemn controversy proved. 
It is really the conviction of man as against Christ, in every 
land, tongue, age. He turns out no other when tested by 
the truth, by the Son; however circumstances differ, this 
is the issue, and it comes out worst where things look fairest. 
If there was a family on earth, which might have seemed 
farthest removed from impurity, it was the Jews; if any could 
claim to have God as their father, they most of all. But Jesus 
is the touchstone; and they are thereby proved to be God’s 
enemies, not His children; else they would have loved Him 
Who came out from God, and was then present in their midst, 
Who had not come of His own mere motion but at God’s 
sending. He came and was sent in love beyond man’s thought 
or measure; and they rose against Him in hatred, seeking to 
kill Him. 

The Jews did not even know His speech; such utter strangers 
were they to Him, and the God Who spoke by Him. The reason 
is most grave: they could not hear His word. It is through 
understanding the thought, the scope, the mind of the person 
speaking that one knows the phraseology; and not the inverse. 
If the inner purpose is not received, the outer form is un- 
known. So it was with Jesus speaking to the Jews; so it is 
pre-eminently with the testimony im John’s writings now. 
Men complain of mysticism in the expression, because they 
have no notion of the truth intended. The hindrance is 
in the blinding power of the devil, who is the source of their 
thoughts and feelings, as surely as he is the adversary of 
Christ. Men’s judgments flow from their will and affections, 
and these are under the sway of His enemy. And as he pushes 
on men, especially those who are most of all responsible to 
bow to Christ as the Jews then were, to practise the lusts 
of their father, so violence follows as naturally as false- 
hood. For Satan was a murderer from the beginning, and 
‘stands not in the truth, because there is no truth in him, 
the great personal antagonist of the Son. 

Jesus alone of men is the truth; He is not only God, 
but the One Who reveals God to man. In Him is no sin, 
nor did He sin, neither was guile found in His mouth. He 


-186 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


was the manifest opposite, in all respects, of the devil, who, 
whenever he speaks falsehood, speaks out of his own store, 
because he is a liar and the father of it. Jesus is the truth, 
and makes it known to those who otherwise cannot know 
it. “But because I speak the truth, ye believe me not.” 
How awful, yet how just, God’s judgment of such! For 
we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth; 
and what can be the end of these things but death and 
judgment ? 

Finally, the Lord proceeds to challenge them, in order to lay 
bare their groundless malice. “Which of you convinceth me 
of sin? If I speak truth, why do ye not believe me? He 
that is of God heareth the words of God: for this cause ye 
hear them not, because ye are not of God.” He was the Holy 
One, no less than the Truth, and surely both go together. And 
thus were they convicted of being, in word and deed, in thought 
and feeling, wholly alienated from, and rebellious against, God. 
They were not of God, save in haughty pretension, which only 
made their distance from Him, and opposition to Him, more 
glaring. Instead of convincing Christ of sin, they were 
themselves slaves of sin; instead of speaking truth, they 
rejected Him Who is the Truth; instead of hearing the 
words of God, they hated Him Who spoke them, because 
they were not of God but of the devil. Terrible picture, 
which the unerring light failed not to draw and leave, never to 
be effaced, of His adversaries! To be not of God is to be 
wholly without good, and left in evil, exposed to its conse- 
quences, according to the judgment of Him Who will not, 
cannot, change in His abhorrence of it. Such were and are 
the rejecters of Jesus. 

There is nothing a man so reluctantly allows as evil in 
himself; there is nothing he so much resents as another’s 
saying evil of him, and leaving him no loophole of escape. 
So was it now with the Jews whom the Lord denied to be of 
God, as they heard not His words. Never had their self- 
complacency been thus disturbed before. The scorn of the 
heathen was as nothing compared with such a libel, which 
was severe in proportion to its self-evident truth. For the 


CHAPTER VIII. 187 


ground taken was indisputable. Who could doubt that he 
who is of God heareth the words of God? How solemn then 
to face the fact that One Who spoke as none ever did declared 
with holy calmness that therefore they did not hear, because 
they were not of God! Conscience might wince, but refused 
to bow. Will, ill-will, alone declared itself, save indeed that 
it was animated from beneath. 

“The Jews* answered and said to him, Say we not well that 
thou art a Samaritan, and hast a demon? Jesus answered, I 
have not a demon, but honour my Father, and ye dishonour 
me. But I seek not my glory: there is one that seeketh and 
judgeth. Verily, verily, I say to you, If any one keep my 
word, death he shall in no wise behold for ever” (vers. 48-51). 
Thenceforth the Jews, unable to refute, and unwilling to 
confess, the truth, betake themselves to insolent retort and 
railing. They justify and openly repeat their application of 
“Samaritan” to Him; for what could more prove enmity in 
their eyes than to refuse their claim to be pre-eminently God’s 
people? If He declared them to be of their father, the devil, 
they did not scruple to rejoin that he had a demon. He was, 
they dared to imply, outside the Israel of God and the God of 
Israel. Yet was He the true Israel and the true God. 

No Christian then has ever suffered worse in this way of 
-dishonour than Christ. The disciple is not above his Lord, and 
can expect no exemption. And none are so prone to reproach 
others falsely as those who are themselves really slaves of the 
enemy. But let us learn of Him Who was meek and lowly of 
heart, and now calmly repudiates their taxing Him with a 
demon. Not so, but He was honouring His Father, they 
dishonouring Him. Yet was there no personal resentment as 
on his part who courts his own honour now, or seeks to injure 
when he can such as insult him. “ But I seek not my glory: 
there is one that seeketh and judgeth.” He leaves all with 
His Father, Himself content to serve, able and ready to save. 
“Verily, verily, I say to you, If any one”—let him be the 
vilest of His foes—“ keep my word, death he shall in no wise 


* A dozen uncials and most cursives, &c. (and so Text. Rec.) add ody, 
‘‘ therefore,” contrary to the oldest, 8 B C D L X, many cursives and versions, 


188 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


behold for ever.” Such an utterance was worthy of all 
solemnity on His part, of all acceptation on theirs. 

“The Jews therefore* said to him, Now we know that thou 
hast a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets; and thou 
sayest, If anyone keep my word, he shall never taste of death. 
Art thou greater than our father Abraham who died, and the 
prophets died? whom makest thou thyself? Jesus answered, 
If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing ; it is my Father that 
glorifieth me, of whom ye say, He is ourt God, and ye have 
not known him, but I know him; and if I should say, I know 
him not, I shall be like you a liar; but I know him, and keep 
his word. Abraham your father exulted to see my day, and he 
saw and rejoiced. The Jews therefore said to him, Thou art 
not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus 
said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, Before Abraham was, 
Iam. They took up therefore stones to cast at him; but Jesus 
hid himself, and went out from the temple, going through the 
midst of them, and so passed by” (vers. 52-59). 

Unbelief reasons from its own thoughts, and is never so 
confident as when completely wrong. So the Jews, mis- 
interpreting the faithful sayings of the Lord Jesus, avail 
themselves of it triumphantly as the proof that Abraham 
and the prophets could not be of His school; for they, beyond 
controversy, were already dead. He must be possessed there- 
fore to speak thus. Did He set up to be greater than they ? 
Whom did He make Himself? Alas! it is here that man, Jew 
or Gentile, is blind. Jesus made Himself nothing, emptied 
Himself, taking a bondman’s form, becoming a man though 
being God over all blessed for ever, and as the humbled man 
exalted by God the Father. If the eye be single, the whole 
body is full of light. So it was with Him Who came here 
and became man to do the will of God, in Whom He could 
and did-confide to glorify Him. His path was one of un- 
broken fellowship as of obedience. He never sought His own 

* Fifteen uncials and most cursives, &c., read ody, ‘‘therefore,” but not 
S BC, &c., with some very old versions, 

+ 8S Bem DF X, &c., juay (and so Text. Rec.) contrary to the rest, 


+ Here end S B D ond some of the oldest versions, the rest adding ue 
stantially as in Text, Rec. 


CHAPTER’ VIII. 189 


glory, He always kept His Father's word; He could say, from 
first to last, I know Him; in all leaving us an example that we 
should follow His steps. We may learn of Him that, if it be 
the grossest presumption for men of the world to affect. the 
knowledge of God the Father, it is the greatest wrong in a 
child of His to deny it. “If I should say I know him not, 
I shall be like you a liar.” But He that claims to know Him 
keeps His word, and herein gives. the testimony of reality 
along with that claim. The Spirit of truth is the Holy Spirit, 
and where He communicates the truth, He also effectually 
‘works in holiness according to God’s will. 

But the Lord did not hesitate to meet their challenge of 
Abraham, and lets the Jews know that the father of the 
faithful exulted to see His day (as ever, I presume, His 
appearing in glory), and saw and rejoiced. It was of course 
by faith, like the not seeing or tasting death in the context; 
but the Jews took all in a mere physical way, and on their 
arguing from His comparative youth to the denial of 
Abraham’s seeing Him, the still deeper utterance comes 
forth, “Verily, verily, I say to you, Before Abraham was, I 
am,” the ever subsisting One. ~ 

It was said: the good confession before the Jews, the truth 
of truths, the infinite mystery of His Person, which to know is 
to know the true God and eternal life, as He is both. Such 
He was, such He is, from everlasting to everlasting. In- 
carnation in no way impeached it, but rather gave occasion for 
its revelation in man to men. He Who was God is become 
man, and as He cannot cease to be God, so He will not cease to 
be man. He is the Eternal, though also a man, and has taken 
manhood into union with Himself, the Son, the Word, not 
with God only, but God too. “Before Abraham was (yevécOax), 
I am” (eu). Abraham came into being. Jesus is God, and 
God zs. “Iam” is the expression of eternal subsistence, of 


‘Godhead. He could as truly have said, Before Adam was, 


I am; but the question was about Abraham, and with that 
calm dignity which never goes beyond the needed truth, He 
asserts it, and no more; but what He asserts could not be true, 
were He not the ever present and unchanging One, the I AM 


190 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


before Adam, angels, and all things; as, indeed, He it was Who 
created them. All things were made by Him, and without 
Him was not anything made that has been made. 

Not to know Him is the fatal ignorance of the world; to 
deny Him, the unbelieving lie of the Jews, as of all who ~ 
assume to know God independently, and to the exclusion, of 
His divine glory. And it is death while they live, eternal 
death, soon to be the second death, not extinction but 
punishment in the lake of fire. Meanwhile unbelief can 
with impunity show its spite. “Then took they up stones 
to cast at him; but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the 
temple.” The remaining words are probably taken from 
Luke iv. 30, though many witnesses (A C E L X A, &c., with 
some very ancient versions) insert them. 


CHAPTER IX. 


THE light of God had shone in Jesus (light, not of Jews only, 
but of the world); yet was He rejected, increasingly and 
utterly, and with deadly hatred. There was no miracle 
wrought; it was emphatically His words that we hear, but 
asserting at length the divine glory of His Person. This 
roused, as it always does, the rancour of unbelief. They 
believe not on Him, because they bow neither to their own 
ruin nor to the grace of God, which thus comes down to meet 
man, revealing the God Who is unknown. But Jesus pursues 
His way of love, and unfolds it in a new and suited form, only 
to meet with similar rejection afresh, as our chapter and the 
next will show. 

“And passing along he saw a man blind from birth. And 
his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, which sinned, this 
[man] or his parents, that he should be born blind? Jesus * 


answered, Neither this [man] sinned nor his parents, but that 


the works of God might be manifested in him. If must 
work the works of him that sent met while it is day: night 
cometh, when no one can work. When I am in the world, 


I am the world’s light” (vers. 1-5). 
It was an act of pure grace which the Lord was about to 


do. Nobody had appealed to Him, not even the blind man 
or his parents. The disciples only raised a question, one of 


* Some authorities insert 6, ‘‘ the,” contrary to the great mass. 

+ Tischendorf, in his eighth edition, reads #uds, “us,” in both occurrences, 
following NP™ B D L, several ancient versions, &. ; but Alford, Green, Gries- 
bach, Scholz, Lachmann, &c., adhere to éué and we, with A C and the great 
majority of uncials, cursives, 4nd many ancient versions. B D give me in the 
second place, followed by Tregelles, as by Westcott and Hort also, with the 
Sahidic and the Syriac of Jerusalem, &c. This goes far to explode the ‘‘we” 
must work ; still more is the internal evidence against it. 

191 


192 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


those curious speculations in which the later Jews delighted: 
was it the man’s sin, or his parents’, which had involved him 
in congenital blindness? Certainly no such Pythagorean 
fancy prevailed then in Judea as that a man might have 
sinned in a previous existence on earth, and be punished for 
it in an after-state also on earth. Nor is there any sufficient 
reason to endorse a pious and learned author’s view, that the 
disciples might have entertained—what rabbis afterwards drew 
from Genesis xxv. 22—the notion of sin before birth. 

It seems easy to understand that they conceived, however 
strangely, of punishment inflicted anticipatively on one whose 
eventual sin was foreseen by God. Doubtless it was unsound ; 
but this need be no difficulty in the way; for what question 
or assertion of the disciples did not betray error enough to 
draw out the unerring correction, so precious to them and 
us, of our Lord? He now puts the case on its real purpose 
in the divine mind—that the works of God might be mani- 
fested in him. It is the day of grace now: therefore was 
Jesus come; and this was just an opportunity for the display 
of His gracious power. Yet man understands not grace but 
‘by faith, and even believers only so far as faith is in exercise. 
Government is the natural thought when one sees God’s 
cognisance of every thing and every one here below. But it 
was not then, nor is it now, the time for His government of 
the world. Here lay the mistake of the disciples then, as of 
Job’s friends of old: a mistake which leads souls, not only 
to censoriousness and misjudgment, but to forget their own 
sins and need of repentance in occupying themselves with 
what they count God’s vengeance on others. 

Here, however, it is not the side of uncharitable self- 
‘righteousness which the Lord exposes. He speaks of the 
activity and purpose of grace as the key. It was no question 
of sin, either in the blind man or in his parents, but of God’s 
manifesting His works in man’s grievous need and sorrow. In 
the world He was the world’s light. He was the sent One and 
Servant in doing His work, as in speaking His word. Perfect 
‘God, He was perfect man, never swerving from the place He 
had taken here below. 


CHAPTER IX. 193 


- Further, the pressure of His rejection was felt by our Lord, 
whatever the holy calm which could so quickly turn from 
man’s murderous hatred to a work of divine love. “I must 
work the works of him that sent me while it is day: night 
cometh, when no one can work.” He was the “light” of the 
“day” which was then shining for Him to do the will and 
manifest the love of the One Who sent Him, yea, to declare 
God (see chap. i. 18) Whom man otherwise was incapable of 
seeing. Truly the need was great; for man, like the one in 
question, was utterly blind. But Jesus was the Creator, 
though man amongst men. Let Him be in the world, He is 
its light. It attaches alike to His mission, and to His Person, 
in virtue of His divine nature. 

“Having said these things, he spat on the ground, and made 
clay of the spittle, and spread the clay over his eyes, and said 
to him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, which is interpreted 
Sent. He went away therefore, and washed, and came seeing” 
(vers. 6,7). This was no unmeaning act on Christ’s part, no 
mere test of obedience on the man’s. It was a sign of the 
truth which the chapter reveals, or at least in harmony with 
it. For He Who was there manifesting the works of God was 
Himself a man, and had deigned to take the body prepared 
for Him; most holy, beyond all doubt, as became the Son of 
God Who knew no sin, about to be made sin for us on the 
cross, but none the less really of the woman, of blood and flesh, 
as the children partake. But Incarnation, precious as is the 
grace of the Lord in it, of itself is quite insufficient for man’s 
need; yea, it seems rather to add at first to the difficulty, as 
did the clay on the man’s eyes. The Spirit must work by the 
word, as well as the Son sent into the world, Jesus Christ 
come in flesh. Without the effectual work of the Holy Spirit 
in man he cannot see. Compare chap. ili. So it is here: 
the man must go to the pool of Siloam, and wash there. 
‘Attention is the more fixed on this by the appended inter- 
pretation or meaning of the word. It signifies the soul’s 
recognition that Jesus was the sent One of God, sent to do 
His will and finish His work, the Son yet servant withal, to 
accomplish the great salvation of God. The heart is thus 

N 


194 AN EXPOSITION. OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


purified by faith. Now the man has eyes and can see, not 
when the clay was laid on, but when he washed in the pool 
of Siloam. Christ must be here, and a man too, in contact 
with men in all their darkness; but only when the Holy 
Ghost applies the word to the conscience do they, owning 
Him to be the Sent of God, receive sight. Not Incarnation 
only but the efficacious work of the Spirit is needed that man 
may see according to God. According to His own mercy He 
saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewal 
of the Holy Ghost, which He shed on us richly through Jesus 
Christ our Saviour, that, being justified by His grace, we might 
become heirs according to the hope of eternal life. 

“The neighbours therefore, and those who used to see him 
before that he was a beggar,* said, Is not this he that sitteth 
and beggeth? Some said, It is he; otherst said, No, but he 
is like him; butt he said, It is I. They said therefore to 
him, How then} were thine eyes opened? MHe answered, 
The man § that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine 
eyes, and said to me, Go unto|| Siloam, and wash. Having 
gone away then** and washed I received sight. And tt} they 
said to him, Where is he? He saith,t{ I do not know” 
(vers, 8-12). 

Those accustomed to the blind beggar could not conceal 
their surprise and perplexity; for as the sightless eyes are a 
prime disfigurement of the human face, so their presence thus. 
unexpectedly changed the man’s entire expression. No wonder 
that they wondered; yet was the fact certain, and the evidence 
incontestable. God took care that there should be many 
witnesses, and would make the testimony felt the more it 


* The common and largely supported reading is ru@dds, “blind” ; but the 
more ancient is rpocalrns, ‘‘a beggar.” 

t So read 8 BC L X with many old versions; Text. Rec. &ddo 5¢ 871, with 
more than a dozen uncials, &c., as dé also. 

t oy NC DLX, &c. 

§ 6...6 8 B, &c., but omitting the first cal efrev, as the mass omit the 
articles. 

| SBDLX, &c., omit rv codupBHOpay rod and read rdv D. 

** ofyN BDL X, &c., dé the mass. 

tt cal 8 BL X, &c., ofv majority, but A and some old versions omit both. 

tt D &c., with ancient versions, add adrois, “ to them.” 


CHAPTER IX. 195 


was discussed and weighed. Had they known Who Jesus 
was, and for what He was sent, they would have understood 
the fitness of the work done that day. But he on whom the 
work was wrought gave out no uncertain sound. He was 
the man whom they were used to see sitting and begging. 
His witness to Jesus is most explicit. He does not know 
much: yet, but what he knows he declares with plain decision. 
How could he doubt whose eyes were opened? Did they 
ask how it was? His answer was ready and unreserved: 
“The [or, A] man that is called Jesus made clay, and 
anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam and 
wash.” The mighty effect followed at once, “And having 
gone away and washed, I received sight.” They are curious 
to know where Jesus is; but the man is as frank in acknow- 
ledging his ignorance of this, as before in confessing the 
reality of what He had done. It might not be to his own 
praise that he did not return to Jesus in thanksgiving for 
God’s grace; but God would use it to show how wholly the 
worker and the object of the work were above collusion. 
How few have the honesty to say “I do not know” when 
they know as little as he who here owns it! Yet is it no 
light condition of learning more. 

On the other hand we see that the Lord not only would 
draw attention by men’s debate, and by the man’s distinct 
testimony, but leaves the man for the present, that, by his 
own reflection on what was done and answering their questions, 
he might be prepared both for trial that was coming, and for 
still better blessing from and in Himself. The agitation 
among the neighbours was to be followed quickly by the more 
serious inquisition of the religious chiefs. These, as we shall 
see, readily find matter in the good deed for their usual 
malevolence toward that which brought honour to God inde- 
pendently of them. Worldly religion, whatever its profession, 
is really and always a systematic effort to make God the 
servant of man’s pride and selfishness. It knows not love, 
and values not holiness; it is offended by the faith that, 
feeding on the word, serves by the Spirit of God, glories in 
Christ Jesus, and has no confidence in the flesh. It hates 


196 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


walking in the light as a constant thing, for it only wants 
religion at its fit times and seasons as a shield against the 
day of death and the hour of judgment. Hence, for the Son 
of God to be here on earth, a man presented to men’s eyes, 
blind as they are, and sending them where they can wash 
and see, outside the regular established religion of the land 
and without the medium of the accredited guides, is in- 
tolerable. It comes out plainly in what follows, a most 
weighty, and, I doubt not, intended lesson in this instructive 
narrative: God’s witness in work, as before (chap. viii.) in word. 

Whenever God acts, the men of religion set up to judge, and 
the neighbours fear their displeasure more than they pitied the 
blind man or rejoiced in his healing. Such men are accredited 
of the world, and count it their province to decide such ques- 
tions, while others love to have it so. What then will the 
Pharisees say? They had cavilled before. 

“They bring unto the Pharisees him that was once blind” 
(ver. 13). Nor are the Pharisees slow to detect a flaw, as 
they supposed. Not that the man had not been blind, nor 
that Jesus had failed to give him sight; but had they not both, 
Jesus especially, broken the law? “Now it was sabbath [on 
the day]* when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes” 
(ver. 14). How little men, particularly those whom public 
opinion regards as pillars, are apt to suspect that their will 
exposes them to Satan! But so it is, and above all, where the 
Son of God is concerned, Who was manifested that He might 
destroy the works of the devil, and give us an understanding 
that we should know Him that is true. Yet those who, con- 
fident in their traditions, dare to arraign the Saviour, commit 
themselves the more to the enemy, because they flatter them- 
selves that they are upholding the cause of God. Thus are 
they ensnared to the destruction of themselves and of all who 
heed them. “He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not 
the Father that sent him” (chap. v. 23). 

“Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he 
received sight. And he said to them, He put clay upon mine 
eyes, and I washed and do see. Some of the Pharisees then 


* &v 7 nuépg NS BL X, &c., but the great mass give dre, ‘‘ when,” 


’ 


CHAPTER IX. . 197 


said, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not the 
sabbath. *Otheys said, How can a sinful man do such signs? 
And there was a division among them” (vers. 15,16). They are 
uneasy, whatever may be their affectation of superior sanctity 
and zeal for God’s honour. The power which gave sight, where 
blindness had hitherto ever rested, startled them, and excited 
their curiosity, with the desire of discovering an evil source 
if not of alarming the man. But grace wrought in him, and 
gave him quiet courage to confess the good deed wrought, 

albeit on a sabbath and without a word about it. “He put — 
clay upon mine eyes, and I washed and do see.” God calls us, 


_when blessed through Christ, all to be confessors, though not 


all martyrs; and surely it is the least we owe Him in praise 
and our fellow-men in love. 

But all true confession is odious to the religious world and 
its leaders. “Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man 
is not of God, because he keepeth not the sabbath.” This 
malicious plea had been already refuted; but Pharisaism has 
no heart for, no subjection to, the truth. It had never entered 


their consciences, or they had forgotten it in their zeal for 


forms and traditions. But how sad the self-deceit of men 
destitute of true holiness, or of real obedience, daring to arraign 
the Holy One of God! 

Yet others there were among them not so blinded by party 
passion or personal envy, who ventured to say a word, if they 
took no further step. “Others said, How can a sinful man do 
such signs?” All they meant was, that He Who wrought thus 
could be no such deceiver or impostor as the rest conceived. 
They had no right view of Himself, of His Person, or His rela- 
tion to God. They had not the faintest idea that He was God 
manifest in flesh; but they questioned whether He must not 
be “of God,” since He did such signs. “And there was a 
division among them.” Thus, as they were not yet of one 


‘mind, there was a delay for Satan’s design. 


But in their restlessness they examine once more the man, 
and are used unwittingly by the God of grace to help him on in 
the apprehension and acknowledgment of the truth which is 


* 8 BD and some cursives and versions add 6é, ‘‘ but.” 


198 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


according to piety. “They say therefore * to the blind [man] 
again, Thou, + what sayest thou of him, because he opened 
thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet” (ver. 17). The 
first examination was as to the fact and the manner. Now 
they want to force out of the man his thoughts of his bene- 
factor, in their malice wishing to find a plea for condemning 
both. On the other hand, the grace of God is as manifest as it 
is sweet in using the painful trial and exercise of soul to His 
own glory, through the man led on and blessed only the more. 
‘He knew their hatred of Jesus, yet he answers their challenge 
boldly, “He is a prophet”: a decided advance on his previous 
confession, though far from the truth he is soon to learn. He 
owns that Jesus has the mind of God as well as His power. 
Baffled by his quiet firmness, the religious inquisitors turned 
to another and accustomed means of assault. As the neigh- 
bours in their perplexity appeal to the Pharisees, so these work 
on and by natural relationships too. They would try whether 
some disproof could not be made out of the parents. Clearly 
unbelief lies at the bottom of all. Man, being fallen and evil, 
is unwilling to believe in the goodness of God, above all in His 
grace to himself. Had the neighbours bowed to the clear 
evidence of God’s intervention, they would not have brought 
the man to the Pharisees; had the Pharisees, they would not 
have persisted in sifting again and again beyond the ascertain- 
ment of the fact, still less would they have awakened the fears 
of the family. “The Jews therefore did not believe concerning 
him that he was blind, and received sight, until they called the 
parents of him that received sight, and asked them, saying, Is 
this your son who, ye say, was born blind? how then doth he 
now see? His parents thereforet answered and said, We 
know that this is our gon, and that he was born blind ; but 
how he now seeth we know not, or who opened his eyes we 
know not; ask himself: he is of age, he will speak for himself. 
These things said his parents because they feared the Jews; 


* ody 8 A BD L X, many cursives and versions; but most, followed by Text. 
Rec., omit. p 
+ od tt Text. Rec. with most; rf cv NS BL X, &c. 


t of NB, &c. ; most 6¢; many omit, and so Text. Rec., which adds avrovs 
with most, contrary to N BL X, &e. 


CHAPTER IX. 199 


for the Jews had already agreed that, if any one should confess 
him [to be] Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue. 
On this account his parents said, He is of age: ask him” (vers. 
18-23), 

The matter of fact is thus again the cardinal question as it 
really was; and as to this the parents answered conclusively. 
That the man now saw was undeniable, and this through 
Jesus, as he declared; that he was their son and born blind, 
the parents maintained unhesitatingly. The conclusion was 
irresistible, if unbelief did not resist everything where God 
is concerned. The parents answer only where they are con- 
cerned. It was not that they, or any reasonable person, 
doubted that Jesus had wrought the miracle; but they 
dreaded the consequence, from Pharisaic enmity, of going 
beyond their own circle of natural knowledge, and pleaded 
ignorance of how it was done, or of Whom it was that did it, 
Overborne by fear of the Pharisees, they forget even the 
affection that would otherwise have sheltered their offspring 
from the impending blow; and they throw all the burden 
on their own son. “Ask him: he is of age, he will speak 
concerning himself.” Thus their very fears, on which the 
Pharisees reckoned for a denial of the facts, God used to- 
make it solely a controversy between the Pharisees and the 
man himself, when they were compelled by the evidence of 
the parents to accept as a certain fact that he who now 
saw had been ever blind, and blind till just now. 

Another thing also comes out very plainly, that the enmity 
of the Jews to the Lord Jesus was known ere this to have 
gone so far as to threaten with excommunication every one 
that confessed Him to be the Christ. The will of man is 
blind to proofs; and as this flows from corruption, it issues 
in destruction. 

_. Hence the man is once more appealed to, and all question of 
the miracle is dropped. “Therefore they called a second time 
the man who was blind, and said to him, Give glory to God: 
we know that this man is a sinner. He therefore answered,* 


* «al elev is the addition of Text. Rec., following most uncials and cursives, 
but not of 8 A BD L, some good cursives, and the best ancient versions, 


200 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


If-he is a sinner I know not. One thing I know, that, blind 
as I was, now I see” (vers. 24, 25).! They now assume the 
highest ground; they at least hold to the divine side, if others 
are carried away by the apparent good done to man. Accord- 
ingly they call on him to give glory to God, whilst they 
assert their unqualified assurance that Jesus was a sinner. 
Nor has it been an uncommon thing, from that day to this, 
for men to profess to honour God at the expense of His 
Son; as the Lord warned His disciples to expect to the 
uttermost, where the Father and the Son are unknown. But 
the man in his simplicity puts forward the fact which he 
deeply felt and they would fain hide. “If he is a sinner I 
know not. One thing I know, that, blind as I was, now I 
see.” No argument can stand against the logic of reality, 
above all of such a reality as this. He certainly did not 
know what they pretended to know; but that Jesus was a 
sinner could not be: he alleges the most distinct and irre- 
fragable proof; and this on their own ground of what was 
before all. If reasoning be unseasonable and powerless, what 
is religious antipathy in presence of an undeniable fact which 
proves the mighty power and goodness of God? Their efforts 
proved their ill-will to Him Who had thus wrought: the 
blessed reality remained, whatever the insinuations or the 
assaults of unbelief. 

It is well also to remark that with faith goes a mighty 
operation of God, with its own characteristic effects, and 
more important in every soul that believes the gospel than 
even that of which the man, once blind but now seeing, 
was so sensible. Those who believe are quickened from death 
in trespasses and sins, and they henceforth live to God. 
Crucified with Christ, they nevertheless live, yet not they 
themselves properly, but Christ lives in them. They are 
thereby partakers of a divine nature, being born of God. It 
is no improvement of their old nature as men. They are 
born of water and Spirit; they are begotten by the word of 
truth. With faith goes this new life, which shows itself 
in wholly different thoughts and affections, as well as ways 
or walk. Of its gradual progress in the midst of opposi- 


€ 


CHAPTER IX. 201 


tion and persecution the story of this blind man, who’ now 
saw, is no unapt illustration. 

The pertinacity of the Pharisees finds in the man a quiet 
courage, which stands out in contrast with the fears of his 
parents, and even urges the claims of Him Who had wrought 
so good and great a deed on His adversaries in a way they 
could not resist. If they ply the man with the question, How ? 
he answers with the question, Why ? 

“They said therefore* to him [again], What did he e 
thee ? how opened he thine eyes? He answered them, I told 
you already, and ye did not hear: why do ye wish to hear 
again? Do ye also wish to become his disciples? They 
railed { at him, and said, Thou art his disciple, but we are 
disciples of Moses. We know that God hath spoken to 
Moses, but this man we know not whence he is” (vers. 
26-29). It was unbelieving scorn, not real ignorance. 

He who was once blind, but now saw, discerned the true 
state of the case, as those did not who had never experienced 
His gracious power. He felt satisfied that their opposition 
was invincible. The apostle of grace none the less, but the 
more, warns the despisers of their self-willed unbelief and 
danger of perishing. The same spirit of faith expresses 
itself in him who just now was but a blind beggar, even as 
from those that had not should be taken away what they 
seemed to have. Christ is a rock of strength to the one, and 
of offence to the other. They thus expose themselves to 
the sharp rebuke of their folly by the man they affected to 
despise. Zealous for the servant whom they set up as 
master, they confessed their ignorance of Him Who is Lord 


of all. 
“The man answered and said to them, Why in this is the§ 


. * Text. Rec. has 6é, ‘‘and,” with many good authorities, but not Neo 
(8 2™ omitting) B D K L X, many cursives and versions. 

+ mad, Text. Rec., with most uncials, cursives, &c., but not XB D, &c., 
and many ancient versions. 

+ ody is added in Text. Rec., with little support; cal 8 B, &c., but the most 


read neither. 
§ 7d 6. ‘‘the” in 8 B L, a few cursives, &c., omitted in the great majority. 


202 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


wonderful thing, that ye know not whence he is, and he 
opened mine eyes! *We know that God heareth not sinners, 
but if any one be God-fearing, and do his will, him he heareth. 
Since time [began] was it not heard that any one opened a 
born blind man’s eyes. If this man were not of God, he 
could do nothing. They answered and said to him, In sins 
thou wast born wholly, and dost thou teach us? And they 
cast him out” (vers. 30-34). 

The man’s answer was as solid as to the point. He discards 
the attack on himself personally, and treats it as a question 
between the religious leaders, who avowedly could not tell 
whence He was Who had wrought a work wholly unexampled 
as a display of God’s power. It was hard, if not impossible, 
to believe that such a one could be evil, as they had imputed. 
“We know that God heareth not sinners; but if any one 
be God-fearing and do his will, him he heareth.” For what 
can be surer, as a general principle, than that “them that 
honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be 
lightly esteemed?” Indeed this was plain as between Jesus 
(to take the lowest ground) and the Pharisees, whose moral 
incapacity astonishes the man. What then remained for his 
adversaries? Nothing but contemptuous rage, and the 
extreme blow of the ecclesiastical arm. “They cast him out,” 
but not before they unwittingly testified to the force of his 
words. “In sins wast ¢how born wholly, and dost ¢how teach 
us?” They were too proud to learn. 

But they cast him out into the arms and bosom of the Lord. 
For, as we are next told, “Jesus heard that they had cast him 
out, and, having found him, he said, Believest thou on the 
Son of God [or, man]? He answered,t and said, And{t who 
is he, Sir, that I may believe on him? § Jesus said to 
him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaketh with 
thee is he. And he said, I believe, Lord; and he did him 
homage” (vers. 35-38). Such is the final step of God’s grace 


* Text. Rec. adds dé, ‘‘now,” with most, against 8 B DG L. 

+ Band Theb. omit dexpl0n éxetvos, ‘he answered.” Memph. omits ‘ said.” 
t Text. Ree. omits cal, ‘‘and,” with AL and a few others, but good versions. 
§ Text. Rec, adds 6¢ with many good authorities, but 8 B D X, &c., omit. 


CHAPTER IX. 203 


in working with the blind man. He is thrust outside Judaism 
for the truth’s sake, consequent on the work wrought on his 
person; he there is found by Christ, and led to know and 
believe on Him, far beyond any thought, however true, he 
had previously conceived. It was faith in His own testimony 
and Person. 

It is really the history of a soul that goes onward under 
the guidance of God, Who makes the grace of the Lord and 
His glory shine the more fully after one is outside the world’s 
religion, whether cast or going out. And such is the character 
of Christianity, as the believers had at length to learn from 
the Epistle to the Hebrews, especially from its final chapter. 
So patient was the Spirit of grace with those of the ancient 
people of God, dull to learn the new thing which God has 
introduced through and in our Lord Jesus. But, late as it 
may be, the breach with earthly religion must come. Let 
us go forth therefore unto Him without the camp, bearing 
His reproach; and this so much the more, because we 
have boldness to enter into the holies by the blood of Jesus, 
the new and living way which He has dedicated for us 
through the veil, that is, His flesh. But the work was 
not yet done which opened this way, nor the Spirit shed 
to give souls the consciousness of righteous title. We have 
one therefore, not yet going forth thus, but cast out by 
hatred far more against the name of Jesus. than against the 
man—yea we may say against the man solely for Jesus’ sake, 
Who had heard of, and felt for, and found the sheep thus 
worried of men. 

But a perplexing difference of reading follows, which claims 
more than a bare critical notice. “Dost thou believe on 
the Son of man?” say the Sinaitic, the Vatican, and the 
Cambridge (of Beza) manuscripts, supported by the Sahidic, 
Roman edition of the Aethiopic, &c., though more than a 
dozen uncials, all the cursives, and the rest of the ancient 
versions, &¢., give us Tov Oeou, “of God.” But Tischendorf in 
his eighth edition, and W. and H. adopt tov avOpw7rov.. Nor 
can it be denied that, as the rule, the Lord habitually and 
graciously loved to present Himself in relation to man; as, 


204. AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


again, it is plain that this chapter in particular sets Him 
forth, not only as the Light, Word, and God, like the preceding 
one, but as the Incarnate One Who was sent to manifest 
the works of God, the rejected Messiah about to suffer 
but to be exalted over all. On the other hand, that the 
Son of God is the great distinctive testimony of our Gospel 
none can overlook; and we can well understand how the light 
of this glorious truth (bursting on the soul gradually led 
on, spite of, and in a certain sense through, the blind hostility 
of the Pharisees) draws him out in homage to the Lord. 
It was at any rate the Son of God in grace, a man on earth, 
Who had been seen by, and was talking with, one who had 
experienced His light-giving power. 

“And Jesus said, For judgment I came into this world, that 
they that see not may see, and they that see may become 
blind. *And some of the Pharisees that were with him 
heard these things,* and said to him, Are we blind also? Jesus 
said to them, If ye were blind, ye would not have sin; but 
now ye say, We see,f your sin remaineth” (vers. 39-41). 

The Lord thereon shows how His coming acted, and was meant 
to act, on souls. It had a higher purpose and more permanent 
result than any energy, however mighty and benign, that 
dealt with the body. He was the life to those, however dark, 
who received Him: those who rejected Him sealed their own 
ruin everlastingly, whatever their estimate of themselves or in 
the mind of others. The Jew, especially the Pharisee, might 
be ever so confident that he himself was a guide of the blind, 
a light of those in darkness; but the coming of the only True 
Light brought to evident nothingness all such haughty pre- 
tensions as surely as it gave eyes to such as owned their 
blindness. No flesh therefore shall glory: he that glorieth, let 
him glory in the Lord Who was come a man, but God on 
earth, for this reversal of fallen man’s thoughts, and display 


* S BL X, three cursives, Theb, or Sah, Memph. Arm., &c., do not read 
kal, asin Text, Rec. with most uncials, cursives, and versions, which also add 
taidra, ‘‘these things,” save NP™ D, &c., with several versions, 

t Text. Rec., adds of with ten uncials and most cursives, contrary to 
SBDKLX, &,, and the bulk of the ancient versions. 


CHAPTER IX. 205 


of His own grace. Pharisaic pride refuses to bow to Jesus 
imputing blindness as they thought; but if it speaks, it is 
obliged to hear its most withering sentence from the Judge of 
all mankind. For blindness there is all grace and power 
in Christ; but what can be the portion of those who, stone- 
blind, say they see? Their sin remains, as well as blindness, 
which of itself is not sin, though its consequence. 


CHAPTER X. 


Tue Lord proceeds to set forth the consequences of His rejec- 
tion, spite of His dignity, under a variety of forms. It is the 
disclosure of His grace to and for the sheep (from His humilia- 
tion as man and servant, even to the laying down His life in 
all its intrinsic excellency), and of His glory as one with the 
Father. The bright side of the truth comes to view. 

“Verily, verily, I say to you, He that entereth not through 
the door into the fold of the sheep but climbeth up otherwise, 
he is a thief and a robber; but he that entereth through the 
door is shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth, 
and the sheep hear his voice ; and he calleth* his own sheep 
by name, and leadeth them out. When he hath put forth 
allt his own, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him 
because they know his voice; but a stranger they will in no wise 
follow, but will flee from him, because they know not the voice 
of strangers. This proverb said Jesus to them ; but they knew 
not what things they were which he was speaking to them” 
(vers. 1-6). 

The mode of speech is allegorical, departing so far from 
ordinary language, but adopting a figure very familiar to the 
law, the psalms, and the prophets (Gen, xlix.; Ps. Ixxx.; Is. 
xl.; Ezek. xxxiv.; Zech. xi., xiii.), The application to pastors 
of the church is ridiculously out of place and time. It is the 
Shepherd of Israel in contrast with those who claimed to guide 
the ancient. people of God. Even He, albeit a divine Person, 


* «ade? Text. Rec, with eleven uncials and most cursives, &c.; @wve? N ABD 
L X, some cursives, &c, Hither means ‘calleth.” 

+ Most insert cal (as Text. Rec.), or 6¢; but the most ancient omit. 

{ Most uncials, &c., read mpédBara “ sheep,” as Text. Rec., but very ancient 
ones have either mavra ‘‘all,” or nothing more than ra té.a, ‘his own.” 


206 


ba woo Opa 


CHAPTER X. 207 


entered in the appointed way. Others who had no competency 
were no less destitute of title or commission, The woman’s 
Seed, the virgin’s Son, the Seed of Abraham, the Son of David, 
the mighty God, the Father of the age to come, coming forth 
out of Bethlehem, from of old, from everlasting, yet to be cut 
off after sixty-nine of Daniel’s seventy weeks, the righteous 
Servant abased beyond all yet to be exalted above all, what did 
not meet to point Him out and exclude every rival? Yes, the 
rejected Christ is He that entered through the door, Shepherd 
of the sheep—none but He. 

All others sought to mount some other way. Theudas might 
boast to be somebody, Judas of Galilee draw away people after 
him, Pharisees love the first seats, scribes and doctors of law lay 
heavy burdens on men. But the sheep, taught of God, hear 
His voice, not theirs ; even as the Spirit, in His care for God’s 
glory, was pleased to do the porter’s work, opening the door to 
Him only, as we see from the beginning in the Simeons and 
Annas and all who waited for redemption in Jerusalem. The 
others, small or great, orderly or revolutionary, had no right to 
the sheep; they were nothing better than thieves or robbers, 
if they claimed as they did the sheep that were His. He only 
is Shepherd, and the sheep hear His voice. They are His own, 
and He calls them as such by name. Who could, who would, 
but Himself? He knows and loves them, making them feel 


_ that He has an interest in them, such as God alone could feel, 


and such a right to them as God alone had and gave. 

Again, Christ entered in, but He leads out. Judaism is 
doomed. The Israel of God follow Him outside. It was no 
question now of gathering back into the land the outcasts of 
Israel, or the dispersed of Judah; this must await another 
day. Now He calleth His own sheep by name, and leadeth 
them out. “When he shall have put forth all his own”— 
for if such were the principle of His action now, still it was 


~ to be the necessary effect of His death on the cross—He goes 


before them, and the sheep follow Him because they know His 
voice. It is the wisdom of God for the simple. 

Precious word of God, the hearing of His voice! It is due 
to His Person, it is the fruit of His grace, it is their true and 


208 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


best safeguard. “And a stranger will they in no wise follow, 
but will flee from him, because they know not the voice of 
strangers.” The “stranger,” or alien, has nothing to do with 
them; however he might seek it, what have they to do with 
him? Their wisdom is to follow Jesus, Whose they are, Whose 
voice they hear and know. How simple, were we but simple? 
How honouring to the Son! This too best pleases the Father. 
It is through faith we are kept, not by discerning shades of 
scepticism or superstition, though this may be for some a duty 
or call of love for others, but by adhering to the truth. 

Yet such words are powerless to the men of either reason or 
tradition. For they seek their own honour, they give or receive 
it one of another. Jesus came in the Father’s name, and Him 
they receive not. They avow themselves strangers to Him; 
they deny that any can know His voice. Had they heard it 
themselves, they would not doubt it could be known. They 
prefer and follow a stranger. The superstitious exalt their 
church; were it God’s church, it would repudiate such exalta- 
tion at the expense of Christ. The sceptical exalt man as he 
is. But both agree in ignoring the Shepherd’s voice. So it is 
now, and so it was then. 

“This proverb * said Jesus to them, but they knew not what 
things they were which He was speaking to them.” His sayings 
are as Himself: if He is valued, so are they; if He is not 
believed on, neither are they understood. He is the light and 
the truth. All that He says depends on faith in Him for its 
apprehension. And therefore it is that in 1 John ii. the very 
babes of the family of God are said to know all things. Know- 
ing Christ, they have an unction from the Holy One. It is not 
by learning or by logic, any more than by sentiment, enthu- 
siasm, or bigotry, but by the possession of Christ, that they 
refuse errors which have ensnared unnumbered doctors of 
divinity. They are thus kept bright and fresh, simple and 


* The Gospel of John does not use the ordinary word ‘‘ parable,” as the 
Synoptics do frequently, and no other, for our Lord’s narrative likenesses in 
illustration of truth. John was led to employ the word given in the Septuagint 
for a ‘‘ proverb,” in the sense of an ‘‘ allegory,” or a divergence from the common 
way of speech, as parable means a comparison. 


CHAPTER X. 209 


secure, because dependent on Him. Those who count them- 
selves wise venture to judge for themselves, and perish in their 
unbelieving presumption. To hear His voice is the humblest 
place in the world, yet has it the power and wisdom of God with 
it. What they heard from the beginning abides in them, but 
for the stranger they have no ear or heart. They are satisfied 
with Christ’s voice. They know the truth in Him, and that no 
lie is of the truth. They are glad of every help which reminds 
them of His words, and brings them home’ to their souls. A 
stranger’s voice they distrust, and flee from him. They are 
right: God would have us value no other voice. 

“Therefore said Jesus again to them,* Verily, verily, I say 
to you, I am the door of the sheep. All as many as came 
[before me] are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not 
hear them. I am the door; through me if anyone have entered, 


_ he shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out, and shall 


find pasture. The thief cometh not unless that he may steal 
and slaughter and destroy; I came that they might have life, 
and have abundantly ” (vers. 7-10). 

In the former allegory the Lord speaks of Himself generally 
as Shepherd of the sheep, and this to put them forth, going at 
the head of them as they follow Him. Now He employs a 
different figure of Himself in direct terms, and with no less 
solemnity, “ Verily, verily, I say to you, I am the door of the 
sheep.” There is no confusion with the former relation. It is 
not a question now of the sheepfold. This He had entered 
with every proof suited to man by God—proofs personal, 
moral, ministerial, miraculous, and prophetic; but the carnal 
mind is invincible in its unbelief, and withal being enmity 
against God, it is if possible less subject to His grace (which it 
understands not, but suspects) than to His law, which con- 
science feels to be just and right. When bowed or broken in 
the sense of sin against God, how sweet to hear the voice of 
Jesus! “I am the door of the sheep,” not of the fold but of 
such as are of God, who yearn after the knowledge of Him 
and deliverance from self. “All, as many as came... . are 


* Some omit rdw, and others avrots. 
+ Authorities are about equally for and against pd uod as in Text, Rec. 


O 


210 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them.” They 
were not sent, but came without warrant; they sought their_ 
own things, not those of Jesus Christ, not of others therefore. 
Corrupt or violent, how could they avail, either for the sheep, 
or for God’s glory? To them the porter did not open, and if 
the adversary deceived, the sheep listened not; these were 
guarded, however tried. 

But quite another was here. “I am the door; through me, if 
any shall have entered, he shall be saved, and shall go in and 
shall go out, and shall find pasture.” How striking, yet perfectly 
simple, the fulness of grace touched in His words! It is no 
longer the narrow enclosure, but in principle for “anyone” to 
enter; and if one shall have entered through Christ, there is 
salvation, liberty, and food—the sure, free, and rich blessing of 
Christianity. All turns on His glorious Person. Grace bringing 
salvation to any, to all, has appeared. When law shut up a 
people from the depravities of a rebellious and idolatrous race, 
when it schooled those who heeded it, we can see why the 
wisdom of God chose a single nation for this great moral 
experiment. But when the fulness of the time was come, God 
sent forth His Son, come of woman, come under law, to redeem 
those under law, that we (the sheep of the fold) might receive 
sonship. But because ye are sons (the Gentiles that believe the 
gospel) God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, 
erying Abba, Father (Gal. iv.). The gift was too precious, the 
boon too efficacious, to be pent up in the strait limits of Israel, 
especially as the Light manifested the darkness universal 
around. 

Whoever then has entered through Christ shall be saved, 
shall go in and shall go out, and shall find all he lacks. God 
that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, 
how shall He not also with Him freely give us all things? The 
law condemned the sinner, placed him in bondage, and sentenced 
him to die. The unchanging One changes all for the believer, 
be he who he may. This is grace as well as truth, and both 
came through and in Christ the Lord. What a Saviour! How 
worthy of the God Who gave and sent Him, His only-begotten 
Son, into the world, that we might live through Him! 


TE ra 


SST ee ee ee 


een 


CHAPTER X. 211 


Outside Christ is sin and misery. Such is the world; and 
of all the world no part so delusive, so selfish, so fatal to itself 
and all governed by it, as the religious world and its leaders, 
the leaders now of infidelity as well as of superstition. Here 
is the testimony of Christ, of Him Who is the truth; “the 
thief cometh not unless that he may steal, and slaughter, and 
destroy.” No creature can rise above his level; what then can 
the creature do that is steeped in unremoved evil and selfish- 
ness? It may sink indefinitely ; it cannot possibly rise above 
itself. The world’s hatred may become more deadly, its dark- 
ness more dense; yet no ideas nor feelings, no helps nor 
ordinances, can change its nature. But the pretension to 
be of God, when one is not, may and does precipitate into 
the depths of avarice and cruelty. It is the more destructive 
because the false claim of His name shuts up every avenue of 


ordinary human pity; and the reality of what is of God 


provokes in the unreal the determination to get rid of what 
condemns itself. 

. How blessed the contrast of Christ! “I came that they 
might have life, and have abundantly.” He was the life, and 
life was in Him, not light only but life. All outside Him lay 
in darkness and death. He not only was sent of the Father 


- but came, and came that the sheep might have life; and He 


would give it abundantly, as was most due to His personal 
glory and His work—a work ever before Him here. Hence it 
was only in resurrection that He breathed into the disciples. 
As Jehovah God breathed on Adam, and the man became a 
living soul, after a different sort from every other living thing 
on earth; so did He, Who was alike the risen Man and true 
God, breathe a better life into those who believed on Him. It 
is life eternal, and this after all question of sin and law was 
settled for faith by His death. 

The Lord next presents Himself in the beautiful character 
of the good Shepherd ; a most affecting and expressive proof of 
His lowly love, when we think Who He is, and what we are. 

“T am the good shepherd. The good shepherd layeth 
down his life for the sheep. [But]* he that is a hireling, 


* The copulative particle 6¢ is not in B G L and a few other good witnesses. 


a 


"A 


212 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


and not a shepherd, whose own the sheep are* not, beholdeth 
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth, and the 
wolf snatcheth them, and scattereth; and the hireling fleethT 
because he is a hireling, and no care hath he for the sheep” 
(vers. 11-13). 

This indeed is love; not that we loved Him, but that He 
loved us, and died as propitiation for our sins. The giving up 
of life, in any case, for others would have been the fullest 
manifestation of love: how much more in His, to Whom the 
sheep belonged, Who had been from of old promised to stand 
and feed in the strength of Jehovah, in the majesty of the 
name of Jehovah His God! Greatness to the ends of the 
earth is a little thing compared with the good Shepherd’s 
laying down His life for the sheep. It is the same Messiah; 
but how incalculably greater the testimony to His love in 
thus dying, than in reigning ever so gloriously, however 
suitable and due to Himself as well as to God’s glory, and 
blessed for man when the kingdom comes ! 

Another phase of human pretension in divine things next 
appears, not thieves and robbers as before, but the “hireling,” 
the man who meddles with the sheep, without higher motive 
than his own pelf or greed. “The hungry sheep look up, and 
are not fed,” as sung one of our own poets, and not untruly. 
Here then the Lord first describes not their trials, but his 
character who claims what is not his own but Christ’s, and 
so deserts them openly in the hour of danger. He “ beholdeth 
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth.” It is 
the adversary, by whatever means or instruments he may 
work. Then follows the peril they incur, and the actual 
injury done. “And the wolf snatcheth them, and scattereth ; 
because he is a hireling, and no care hath he for the sheep.” 
As divine love wrought in God’s purpose and will, so in 
Christ’s death ; nor is there anything good or acceptable where 
love is not the motive. It is the true and only right spring 

* éorvy NA BL X, &c. 5 efolvy most uncials and cursives. 

+ This clause 6 d¢ cdwrds pevyet, ‘Cand the hireling fleeth,” is not given in 
S (A is somewhat uncertain) B D L, some cursives, ancient versions, &c., but a 


dozen uncials of inferior age and weight, with most cursives and some of the 
old versions, insert as in Text, Rec. 


y 
4 
wos 
4 
ye 


CHAPTER X. 213 


of service; even as the Lord intimated to the servant, now 
fully restored and reinstated, after his denial of Himself,. 
“Feed my lambs—my sheep.” Not that He does not propose 
rewards the most glorious to encourage the servant who is 
already in the path of Christ, and apt to be cast down by 
its difficulties; but love alone is recognised as that which 
constrains him to serve. Christ was the perfection of self- 
sacrificing love; and it is Satan who, as the wolf, seizes and 
scatters what is so precious to Him, through the selfishness 
of such as abandon the sheep in their greatest peril, the 
mercenary having no care for the sheep. The character of 
man and Satan is as plain as that of Christ, which last comes 
out for other traits in the next verses. From Him self-seeking 
was wholly absent; love only was there. 

“T am the good shepherd, and know mine, and mine know 
me,* even as the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father, 
and my life I lay down for the sheep” (vers. 14, 15). 

Here it is in the mutual knowledge of the Shepherd and 
the sheep that His goodness is shewn; and this, wondrous 
to say, after the pattern of the Father’s knowledge of the 
Son, and the Son’s of the Father. It is a knowledge after 
a divine sort, and as true in His absence as in His presence. 
It was not such sheltering care as the Messiah might and will 
extend to His people, however tender; for He too shall feed 
His flock like a shepherd, He shall gather the lambs with His 
arms, and carry them in His bosom, and shall gently lead 
those that are with young. But there had never been such 
transparent intimacy as between Him while on earth and His 
Father; and after this pattern, and none other, was it to be 
between Him on high and the sheep here below. This 
mutuality of knowledge disappears almost entirely in the 
Authorised Version through the unhappy full stop between 
verses 14, 15, and the consequent mistranslation of the earlier 
clause of verse 15. 

The Lord returns to His laying down His life for the sheep. 


* The Text. Rec. with thirteen uncials and perhaps all cursives, &c., has 


-ywabokopat Id Tav guov, ‘*I am known of mine”; % B DL, with the oldest 


versions, yuvwoKovol we Ta éud. 


214 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Nor can we wonder; for as He could give no greater proot 
‘of love, so there is nothing which is so strengthening, as well 
as humbling, to our souls, nothing that so glorifies God, and no 
other turning-point for the blessing of the universe. At this 
point, however, it is the good Shepherd’s love for the sheep. 

Here the Lord can speak distinctly for the first time of 
other objects of His love. He might come minister of the 
circumcision for the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But 
His love could not be so circumscribed, when His death opens 
the floodgates. The mention of His death leads Him to speak 
of what was quite outside Israel. “And other sheep I have 
which are not of this fold”—not of the Jewish people within 
their enclosure of law and ordinance; “them also I must lead, 
and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be* one flock, 
one shepherd” (ver. 16). 

It is not, as in the English Bible and others, following the 
Vulgate, “one fold,” but “ one flock.” God owns no such thing 
now asa fold. It is exclusively Jewish; and the idea came in 
among Christians through the Judaizing of the church, while 
the truth of the church, when seen, makes such a thought or 
word, as applied to itself, intolerable. The truth is, as we have 
heard, that the Lord was to put forth all His own, He going 
before them, and the sheep following. So it was out of the 
Jewish fold. But other sheep He had which were not of it. 
“Them also I must lead, and they shall hear my voice.” It 
was to be from among the Gentiles; and the believers there 
hear His voice, believing the gospel. But they form no new 
enclosure, fenced in by law, like the fold of Israel. The 
liberty of Christ is of the essence of Christianity, not only 
life and pardon, but freedom as well as food. For if Christ 
be all, what lack can there be? The Jewish sheep have been 
led out, the Gentile sheep are gathered, and both compose one 
flock, as truly as there is one Shepherd. 

One cause that has done as much as anything to dull the 
saints to the perception of the truth here is the fact of so 
many denominational enclosures in which they find themselves. 


* Sor BDL X, &c., support the plural form yerjoovra, ‘‘they shall be,” 
the rest have the sing. yevjoerat, which might bear the same meaning. 


CHAPTER X. 215 


Does it seem harsh to say that such a state of things, built up 
by Reformers and others of peculiar energy since the Reforma- 
tion, is unauthorised? But what saith the scripture, our only 
standard? “One flock, one shepherd.” How painful to find 
persons so prejudiced as to teach, “Many folds, but one flock”! 
But this is to pervert rather than to expound the word of 
God, which admits of no fold now that spirit and letter refuse 
the plea. 

Another element which has wrought powerfully in favour of 
“one fold” is the mischievous confusion of the church with 
Israel, Zion, &¢., which runs through not only common theology 
but even the headings of the Authorised Version, and con- 
stantly therefore is before all eyes. Hence, if we are now 
so identified with,the ancient people of God, that we are 
warranted to interpret all that is said of them in the Old 


_ Testament as our present portion, one cannot be surprised that 


this should tend to a similar result in the New. 

But Christ’s death has an aspect towards His Father of the 
deepest delight and complacency, besides being the basis of 
redemption and of Christianity. “On this account the Father 
loveth me, because I lay down my life (soul) that I may take it 
again. No one taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. 
I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take 
it again: this commandment I received from my Father” 
(vers. 17, 18). The Lord does not add here “for the sheep,” 
nor should we limit His death to ourselves. He lets us see the 
value His own laying down His life had in itself. It was a 
fresh motive for the Father’s love; and no wonder, if it were 
only as the unfathomable depth to which His own devotedness 
could go down. But indeed none but the Father knows what 
He found in it of love, confidence in Him, self-abandonment, 
and moral excellence in every. way, crowned by the personal 
dignity of Him Who, standing in ineffably near relationship 
to the Father Himself, was thus pleased to die. Hence it 
could not but be that the Son would take His life again, 
not now in connection with the earth and man living on it, 
but risen from the dead, and so the power and pattern of 
Christianity. 


216 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


In this profound humiliation, to which the Lord submitted 
. in grace, there is the utmost care to guard against the least 
suspicion that could lower His-glory as the Son and God. It 
is not, as in Matthew (where He is viewed as the rejected 
Messiah, the Son of man, not merely the destined head of all 
nations and tribes and tongues, but in command of the holy 
angels, His angels): He had only to call on His Father, Who © 
would furnish Him more than twelve legions of angels. And 
what would have availed all Rome’s legions against those 
heavenly beings, mighty in strength, that do His word? But 
how then, He blessedly adds, could the scriptures be fulfilled 
that thus it must be ? 

Divine Person though He was, He had come to die; the Life 
Eternal which was with the Father before there was either 
man or earth, He had deigned to become man, that He might 
thus lay down His life and take it again. But here He speaks 
not more in lowly love than as consciously God, “No one 
taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have 
authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it again: 
this commandment I received from my Father.’ On the one 
hand there is the calm assertion of the right as well as power 
to lay down His life and to take it again. As none but the 
Creator could do the latter, so no creature is entitled to do the 
former. None but God has power and title to do both; and 
the Word, without of course ceasing to be divine (which indeed 
could not be), became flesh that He might thus die and rise. 
On the other hand, even in this, which might have been justly 
deemed the most strictly personal of all acts, He abides the 
obedient man, and would do only the will of His Father. He 
was come to do the will of God. This is perfection, and found 
in Jesus alone. Well may we adore Him with the Father 
Who gave Him. He is worthy. 

These wondrous words were not without effect even then 
among the Jews. Love unknown before, the lowliness of a 
servant, the dignity of One consciously divine, wrought in some 
consciences, while they roused others to a deeper hatred. So it 
is, and must be, in a world of sinful men, where God and Satan 
are both at work in the momentous conflict of good and evil. 


} 
. 
‘ 


CHAPTER X,. PALEY, 


“There was a division* again among the Jews because of 
these words; butt many of them said, He hath a demon and 
is mad: why hear ye him? Others said, These are not the 
sayings of one possessed by a demon: can a demon open blind 
[men’s] eyes?” (vers. 19-21). The greater the grace, and the 
deeper the truth, the less does the natural mind appreciate 
Christ. He is indeed the test of every soul that hears His 
word. But if some imputed what was infinitely above man to 
a demon, and to the raving consequent on such a possession, 
others there were who felt how far the words were from those 
of a demoniac, and who bowed to the divine power which 
sealed them. The words and the works to their consciences 
had another character and import. 

“Nowt it was the feast of the dedication at Jerusalem, 
[and] it was winter; and Jesus was walking in the temple 
in the porch of Solomon. The Jews therefore surrounded him, 
and said to him, How long dost thou hold our soul in suspense? 
If thou art the Christ, tell us openly. Jesus answered, I told 
you, and ye believe not. The works which I do in the name of 
my Father, these bear witness of me; but ye believe not, 
because ye are not of my sheep.§ My sheep hear my voice, 
and I know them, and they follow me; and I give them life 
eternal, and they shall in no wise ever perish, and no one shall 
seize them out of my hand. My|| Father who|| hath given me 
[them] is greater than all; and no one is able to seize out of 
the hand of my|| Father. I and the Father are one” (vers. 
22-30). 

We are many of us familiar with the effort to, sustain 
tradition and human authority in divine things by such a 
passage as the opening of verse 22. But it is really futile. For 
here we learn nothing of our Lord’s participation in any 
observances of men, whatever they may have been, but of His 


* “Therefore” in the Text. Rec. has considerable support of MSS., but the 
older omit it. 

+ Here again some give “ therefore,” instead of ‘‘ but.” 

+ BL, 83, Memph. have “then,” as they and more omit “and,” 

§ The weightiest authorities omit “as I told you.” 

| Some MSS, say “‘the” for my; others, not ‘‘ who,” but ‘‘as to what he.”— 
& BL omit last wou, ‘‘my.” 


218 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


being then in Jerusalem, winter as it was, and walking in 
Solomon’s porch, when the Jews came round, and kept saying 
to Him, Till when (or, how long) dost Thou excite our soul (or 
keep it in suspense)? Wretched and guilty as their unbelief 
was, the Jews drew no such inference from His presence then 
and there. They were uneasy spite of their opposition to Him. 
“If thou art the Christ, tell us openly.” But the fatal hour 
was at hand, and the power of darkness; and the light was 
about to pass away from them after its full manifestation im 
their midst. “Jesus answered, I told you, and ye believe not.” 
Take only His words recorded in John v., vi, and vii. A 
plainer and richer testimony could not be. But testimony 
does not always last. It is given freely, fully, patiently, and 
may then be turned aside from those who reject to such as 
hear. Thus is God wont to act, and so does the Lord answer 
on this occasion. “TI told you, and ye believe not.” 

But there was more than words, however truly divine, words 
of grace and truth according to His Person. There were works 
of similar character; and the Jews were accustomed to look 
for a sign. If they sought honestly, they might see signs 
beyond man’s numbering or estimate. “The works which 
I do in the name of my Father, they bear witness of me.” 
What could account for such hardness in any heart? “But ye 
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.” Solemn solution 
of a difficulty, of a resistance to truth, of a rejection of Christ, 
as true now as ever ! 

Men trust to themselves, to their own feelings, to their own 
judgments. Have these never played them false? Have they 
ever been true before God? What suicidal folly not to distrust 
themselves, and look to God, cry to God, ask of God, what 
is His way, His truth, His Son! But no, this were to believe 
and be saved; and they will not. They are too proud. They 
will not. bow to the word that arraigns them as sinners, even 
though it sends them the message of remission of sins on their 
faith. They feel that such grace on God’s part supposes utter 
guilt and ruin on theirs, and this they are too hard, too proud, 
to own. They believe not; they are not of the Saviour’s 
sheep. Criminals, heathen, perhaps, may need a Saviour; not 


CHAPTER X. 219 


decent, moral, religious men like themselves! They do not, 
will not, believe, and are lost, not because they are too great 
sinners for Christ, but because they refuse Christ as the 
Saviour, and deny their ruin as sinners. They prefer to go on 
as they are, like the great mass of men: God, they think, is too 
merciful; and they hope to improve some day if they feel not 
quite right to-day. Thus are they lost. Such is the way and 
end of many an unbeliever now, as of the Jews then. 

How then are Christ’s sheep characterised? We need not 
hesitate to receive the answer, for here is His own account 
of them. “My sheep hear my voice”: a quality incomparably 
better than doing this, or that, or all things without it. It is 
the obedience of faith, the holy parent of all holy issues. 
Without faith it is impossible to please God; and this is the 
present characteristic of those who are of faith: they hear the 
voice of Christ, and are truly humble, yet firm. It is not 
self-assertion, nor the forgetfulness of their own sinfulness and 
of His glory. It is the simple owning of His grace, and of 
their own need ; and thus only are souls blessed through Christ 
to God’s glory. © 

This, however, is not their only privilege. “And I know 
them,” says the Saviour. It is not here said that they know 


. Christ, however true by grace. But He knows them, all their 


thoughts and feelings, their words and ways, their dangers and 
difficulties, their past, present, and future. He knows them- 
selves in short perfectly, and in perfect love. How infinite the 
favour and the blessing! What a resource and a joy ! 

But there is more. The sheep not only hear Christ’s voice, 
but, says He, “They follow me.” For faith is living and 
practical, or worse than useless. And as it is due to Christ that 
His own should follow Him, so they need it, exposed as they 
are to countless foes, seen and unseen. It is their security, 
whatever the circumstances they pass through: Christ Who 
leads the sheep cannot fail, and, as He knows them, so they 
follow Him. Thus He keeps them by the way, which He is. 

“And I give them life eternal, and they shall never perish, 
and no one shall seize them out of my hand.” Thus the Lord 
guarantees His own life to them, not the life of Adam, who 


220 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


brought in death, and died, and left the sad inheritance to all 
his offspring; whereas the second Man and last Adam, being 
Son of God, quickens whom He will, and quickens with 
and to life everlasting. Is it said, however, that the sheep are 
weak? Unquestionably; but here He excludes fear and 
anxiety for all who believe in Him, for He immediately adds 
that “they shall in no wise ever be lost.’ No intrinsic 
weakness therefore shall compromise their safety for a 
moment. Nor shall hostile force or wiles jeopard them; 
for “no one shall seize them out of my hand.” 

Could love assure its objects of more? His love would 
impart to them the certainty of His own deepest joy, His 
Father’s love as sure as His own; and so He closes His 
communication with it. “My Father Who hath given to me 
is greater than all, and no one is able to seize out of the hand 
of my Father. I and the Father are one.” Here we rise into 
that height of holy love and infinite power of which none 
could speak but the Son; and He speaks of the secrets of 
_ Godhead with the intimate familiarity proper to the Only- 
begotten Who is in the Father’s bosom. He needed none to 
_ testify of man, for He knew what was in man, being Himself 
' God; and He knew what was in God for the self-same reason. 
Heaven or earth made no difference, time or eternity. Not 
a creature is unapparent before Him, but all things are naked 
and laid bare in His eyes with Whom we have to do. And He 
declares that the Father Who had made the gift resists all that 
can threaten harm, and as He has given to Christ, so He is 
greater than all, and none can seize out of His hand. Indeed 
the Son and the Father are one, not one Person (which éopey, 
with every other scripture bearing on it, refutes), but one 
thing, év, one divine nature or essence (as other scriptures equally 
prove). The lowliest of men, the Shepherd of the sheep, He 
is the Son of the Father, true God and eternal life. And He 
and the Father are not more truly one in divine essence than 
in the fellowship of divine love for the sheep. 

Thus did the Lord assume and imply divine glory as His, no 
less than the Father’s, spite of the place of man He had taken 
in the humiliation of love, in order to undo the works of the 


CHAPTER X. 221 


devil, and deliver guilty sinners who hear His voice from the 
bondage of sin and God’s most righteous judgment. This 
roused again the murderous hatred of His hearers. . 

“The Jews [therefore]* again took up stones, that they 
might stone him. Jesus answered them, Many good works I 
showed you from the [or, my|t Father: on account of which 
work of them do ye stone me? The Jews answered him,} For 
a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because 
thou, being a man, makest thyself God” (vers. 31-33). 

Alas for the will and self-confidence of man! They were 
right in saying that Jesus was a man; they were not wrong 
in understanding that He claimed to be God. But it was 
the insinuation of Satan working on man’s unbelief of all 
beyond his senses and mind, that He Who was God would 
not deign, in love to men and for the divine glory, to become 
“mman in order to accomplish redemption. Was it incredible 
that God should stoop so low for these most worthy ends? 
And had not Jesus given adequate evidence of His glory and 
relation to the Father, in power and goodness, as well as truth ? 
A life of purity unknown, of dependence on God beyond 
parallel, of active goodness untiring, of humility and of 
suffering the more surprising, because in evident command 
of power unlimited in testimony to the Father, and this in 
accomplishment of the entire chain of scripture types and 
prophecy, combine to hurl back the imputation of imposture on 
the old serpent, the liar and father of it; whose great lie is to 
oust God from being the object of man’s faith and service and 
worship for false objects, or no object but self, which however 
little suspected is really Satan’s service. 

Nothing therefore so rouses Satan as God thus presented in 
and by the Lord Jesus, Who displays His own perfect meekness 
and man’s enmity by no intervention of power to save Him 
from insult and injury. “First he must suffer many things, 
and be rejected of this generation ””—a generation which goes 
on still morally, and will, till He returns in glory to judge. 

* NBL, 33, &c., omit; the rest add. 


+ &2™ BD omit pov, ‘‘my.” 
+ The bulk of witnesses omits, ‘‘ saying.” 


De AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


They therefore took up stones to stone Him; for Satan is a 
murderer as well as a liar, and nothing so awakens violence, 
even to death, as the truth which condemns men pretending to 
religion. To their blinded and infuriated minds it was blas- 
phemy for Him to say that He gave His followers eternal life 
beyond the weakness or the power of the creature—blasphemy 
to assert that He and the Father were one; whereas it is the 
truth, so vital and necessary that none who reject it can be 
saved. His words were as good as His works, and even more 
momentous to man; while both were of the Father. He Whom 
God sent, as John testified, spoke the words of God. It was 
they who blasphemed, denying Him to be God Who, in grace 
to them, condescended to become man. 

But He meets them on their own ground by an a /fortiore 
argument, which left His personal glory untouched. “Jesus 
answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are 
gods? If he called them gods to whom the word of God 
came (and the scripture cannot be broken), say ye of him 
whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, Thou 
blasphemest, because I said, I am Son of God?” (vers. 34-36.) 
Thus does He reason most conclusively from the less to the 
greater ; for every Jew knew that their inspired books, as for 
instance Psalm Ixxxii, calls judges elohim (gods), as com- 
missioned by God and responsible to judge in His name. If 
such a title could be used of a mere magistrate in scripture 
(and its authority is indissoluble), how unreasonable to tax 
with blasphemy Him Whom the Father set apart,* and sent 
into the world, because He said He was God’s Son! He is not 
affirming or demonstrating what He is in this, but simply 
convicting them of their perverseness on the ground of their 
law. They had not the least excuse whilst they claimed 
adherence to their law as of divine authority. If God called 


* It is well to note that the Lord predicates sanctification of Himself in 
chapter xvii. 19 as set apart now in heaven, the model Man in glory, and here 
by the Father for His mission into the world, quite distinct from the application 
of the word to us who were sinners and even dead in sins. Sanctification, in 
the case of the Holy One, resolves itself into its pure and abstract sense of 
setting apart, 


CHAPTER X. 223 


the judges by His name as being His representatives, how 
much more was it due to Him Who had a place so unique ? 

“Tf I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if 
I do, even if ye believe not me, believe* the works, that ye may 
perceive and [believe, or] know* that the Father [is] in me, and 
I in the Father” } (vers. 37, 38). There was no denying the irre- 
sistible force of this appeal. The character of the works bore 
testimony, not only to divine power, but to this in the ‘fulness 
of love. Think as they might of Him, the works were un- 
mistakable, that they might learn and come to know the unity 
of the Father and the Son. It is not that He enfeebles the 
dignity of His Person, or the truth of His words; but He was 
pleading with them, and dealing with their consciences, by 
those works which attested not more the power than the grace 
of God, and consequently His glory Who wrote them. But 
self-will holds out against all proofs. 

“They sought therefore again to seize him, and he departed 
out of their hand. And he went away again beyond the Jordan 
to the place where John was at first baptising, and abode there. 
And many came unto him and said, John did no sign, but 
all things whatsoever John said about him were true. And 
many believed on him there” (vers. 39-42). Thus it was not 
that their unbelief was incomplete, but that His time was not 
yet come. The Lord therefore retires till the moment appointed 
of God, and meanwhile goes to the scene of John’s work at the 
first, and there abode, where grace wins many a soul that 
recognised in Him the truth of John’s testimony, 


* The weight of testimony is for ricrevere rather than micrevoare, Then, as 
ywwoxnre seemed difficult after yvGre, many read morevonre as the Text. Rec. 
has it. 

+ “The Father” is in 8 B D L X, two cursives, several It. Vulg. Syrr. Sah. 
Arm. Arab, Anglo-Sax. Pers. (Memph. Aeth. reversing order); ‘‘ him,” as in 
Text. Rec., A I A and nine uncials more, mass of cursives, some It. Gothic, 


Syrr. #t Slav. 


CHAPTER XI. 


THE Lord was rejected, rejected in His words, rejected in His 
works. Both were perfect, but man felt that God was brought 
near to him by both; and, an enemy of God, he increasingly 
musters hatred against His Son, His image. 

But the grace of God still waits on guilty man, and would 
give a fresh, full, and final testimony to Jesus. And here we 
begin with that which was most of all characteristic of our 
Gospel, His divine Sonship displayed in resurrection power. 
All is public now; all near or in Jerusalem. The design of 
God governs here as everywhere. All the evangelists present 
the testimony to His Messianic glory, the second of these 
three testimonies, though none with such fulness of detail as 
Matthew, whose function it was pre-eminently to show Him as 
the Son of David according to prophecy, but rejected now, and 
about to return in power and glory. It was John’s place above 
all to mark Him out as Son of God, and this the Holy Spirit 
does by giving us through his Gospel the resurrection of 
Lazarus. Christ is in resurrection the life-giving spirit, as 
contrasted with Adam; but He is the Son eternally, and the 
Son quickens whom He will, before death no less*than after 
resurrection; and this is here exhibited with all fulness of 
detail as was due to it. 

“ Now there was a certain [man] sick, Lazarus, from Bethany, 
of the village of Mary and Martha her sister. But Mary was 
she that anointed the Lord with unguent, and wiped his feet 
with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. The sisters 
then sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest 
(giAeis) is sick” (vers. 1-3). Thus does John introduce the 
account. It puts us at once in presence of all concerned, the 
household whither He used to retire from the sterile but 

224 


ee ed on oa 


_ CHAPTER *XI. 225, 


guilty parties of Jerusalem. Who had not. heard of the 
woman that anointed the Lord with unguent, and wiped His 
feet with her hair? Wherever the gospel was preached in the 
whole world, this was told for a memorial of her. But her 
name had been withheld till now. It was John’s place to 
mention what so closely touched the Person of the Lord. 
John names others, if he conceals his own name. It was 
Mary; and she with her sister sent a message to the Lord, 
reckoning on the promptness of His love. They were not 
disappointed. His love exceeded all their thought, as His 
glory was beyond their faith, however real it might be. But 
their faith was tried, as it always is. : 

“But when Jesus heard, he said, This sickness is not unto 
death but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may 
be glorified by it. Now Jesus loved (jyara) Martha and her 
sister and Lazarus. When therefore he heard that he was 
sick, he then remained two days in the place where he was; 
then after this he saith to his* [or, the] disciples, Let us go into 
Judza again. The disciples say to him, Rabbi, the Jews were 
just now seeking to stone thee, and goest thou thither again ? 
Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours of the day? If 
one walk in the day, he doth not stumble, because he seeth the 
light of this world; but if one walk in the night, he stumbleth, 
because the light is not in him” (vers. 4-10), 

First appearances are ever in this world against the good 
and holy and true. Those who seek occasion against what 
is according to God can easily find excuse for their own evil. 
And the moral object of God, as of His word, tests every soul 
that comes into contact. So here the Lord knew the end from 
the beginning when He said, This sickness is not unto death; 
but he who was quick to judge by the beginning must 
inevitably misjudge. What would he have judged who heard 


Him say, Lazarus, come forth, and saw the dead man come 


forth from the cave of burial ? 

Resurrection displays the glorious power of God beyond all 
else. It arrests, and is intended to arrest, man who knows 
too well what sickness is, and how hopelessly death severs 


* SN BELX, &., read ro?s, but the weight favours airod also, 
P 


226 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


him from all his activities. The sickness of Lazarus then, just 
because it ran up into death, was about to furnish a meet 
occasion for God’s glory, and this too in the glorifying of His 
Son thereby. 

There are those who delight in what they call “the reign of 
law”; but what is the sense of such thoughts or words when 
brought to the touchstone of resurrection? Does not the 
raising of the dead prove the supremacy of God’s power over 
that which is a law, if there be an invariable lot appointed to 
sinful man here below, the law of death? For certainly death 
is not the cause of resurrection ; but the Son is He Who wields 
the power of life. He quickens whom He will, for He is God, 
but as the Sent One, the dependent and obedient Servant, for 
He is man. Such was Jesus here in this world, and this 
manifested most fully a short time before He laid down His 
life for the sheep. 

But man is a poor judge of divine love, and even saints learn 
it only by faith. Jesus will have us confide in His love. For 
this is love, not that we loved Him, but that He loved us, and 
proved it in His dying a propitiation for us. Even here too, how 
significantly the evangelist says that Jesus loved Martha and her 
sister and Lazarus, just before the mention of His staying two 
days in the place where He was after the message came. If a 
mere man, with power to heal, loved another that was sick, how 
soon he would have healed the patient! And Jesus had already 
shown His power to heal in the same hour. No matter what 
the intervening distance, or how unconscious the sufferer, why 
not speak the word on behalf of Lazarus? Did He love the 
nobleman of Capernaum and his boy, did He love the Gentile 
centurion and his servant, better than Lazarus? Assuredly 
nothing of the sort; but it was for the glory of God that the 
Son of God might be glorified by that very sickness, not 
arrested but allowed to work its way. 

The Lord was about to raise the dead Lazarus; and this 
when it had not the appearance of a law, but rather by grace 
the exemption of one from the law of death. How truly for 
the glory of God was the result! Not so was the way man 
would have wrought at once if he could. He Who was God, 


os 


Re, a 4 


CHAPTER XI. 220 


and loved as no man ever did, abode two days where He was, 
and then calmly said to the disciples, Let us go into Judea 
again. They wonder. Did He not know better than they the 
murderous rancour of the Jews? Had He forgotten their 
repeated efforts to stone Him? Why then did He propose to 
go thither again? He was here to do the will of His Father; 
and here was a work to do for His glory. His eye certainly 
was ever single, His body full of light. 

“Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours of the day? 
If one walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth 
the light of the world; but if one walk in the night, he 
stumbleth, because the light is not in him.” If it was the will 
of the Father, it was day; and as Jesus was not only sent by the 
living Father, but lived on account of Him, so for the disciple 
He is the light and the food and the motive. The known will 
and word of God is the light of day ; to be without it is to walk 
in the night, and stumbling is the sure consequence. If Christ 
be before us, the light will be in us, and we stumble not. May 
we evermore heed His word! 

The Lord would exercise the hearts of His own. As His 
tarrying in the same place for two days was not the impulse of 
human feeling, so His going to the place of deadly hatred was 
according to the light He walked in and was. He has more 


to say which they had to ponder. He abides in dependence, 


He awaits His Father’s will. This given decides His move- 
ments at once. 

“These things said he, and after this he saith to them, 
Lazarus our friend is fallen asleep; but I go that I may awake 
him. Therefore said the disciples to him,* Lord, if he is fallen 
asleep, he will recover. But Jesus had spoken of his death, but 
they thought that he was speaking [lit. speaketh] of the rest of 
sleep. Then therefore said Jesus to them plainly, Lazarus is 


_dead; and I rejoice on your account that I was not there, 


that ye may believe. But let us go unto him. Thomas 
therefore, that is called Didymus, said to his fellow-disciples, 


* gird ol wu. ND K II, &c., some adding adroo with Syrr. &c.;B CP™ X, &c., of 
p. airy (the latter only is in A, &c.), while the Text. Rec. with most gives oi yu. 


avrou. 


228 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Let us also go, that we may die with him” (vers. 11-16). The 
Lord begins to disclose what He was about to do; but they 
were dull to think of death on the one hand, or of His resur- 
rection power on the other. The prevention of death, the 
healing of disease, is far short of triumph over death. The 
disciples were to be strengthened by the sight of resurrection 
before He died on the cross and rose again. 

It is important to note that here, as everywhere, sleep is said 
of the body. It is the suited word of faith for death: how 
dark the unbelief that perverts it, as some do, to materialise 
the soul! He Who is the truth speaks as the thing really is. 
He knew that He was about to raise Lazarus. 

But the Lord Who tries faith meets the weakness of His 
disciples, and clears up the difficulty. He tells them plainly 
“ Lazarus is dead,” and expresses His joy on their account that 
He was not there (that is, merely to heal), in order that they 
might believe, when they knew better His power to quicken and 
raise the dead. Gloomy Thomas can see only His rushing into 
death when He proposed to go to Judea, though his love to the 
Lord prompts him to say, Let us also go that we may die with 
Him. How poor are the thoughts of a disciple, even where 
affection was true to the Master, Who was indeed about to die 
in willing grace for them—yea, for their sins—that they might 
live for ever, justified from all things; but Who would prove 
before He died a sacrifice that He could not only live but give 
life to the dead as He would, yet in obedience to, and in 
communion with, His Father! Such is our Saviour. 

“Jesus therefore, on coming, found that he was four days 
in the tomb. Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen 
furlongs off; and many of the Jews had come unto Martha 
and Mary * that they might comfort them concerning their 
brother. Martha then, when she heard Jesus is coming, met 
him ; but Mary was sitting in the house. Martha then said 
unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had 
not died. And now I know that, whatsoever thou mayest 
ask of God, God will give thee. Jesus saith to her, Thy 


* The Received Text with Syr.t! implies ‘‘and their company”; but the 
more ancient copies and versions do not allow this, 


>) eee 


CHAPTER XI. 229 


brother shall rise again. Martha saith to him, I know that he 
shall rise in the resurrection at the last day. Jesus said to her, 
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth on me, 
though he have died, shall live ; and every one that liveth and 
believeth on me shall never die [literally, shall in no wise die 
for ever]. Believest thou this? She saith to him, Yea, Lord, I 
do believe [I have believed, and do] that thou art the Christ, 
the Son of God, that should come into the world. And having 
said this she went away, and called Mary her sister secretly, 
saying, The Teacher is here, and calleth thee. When she heard 


[it], she riseth quickly, and cometh unto him” (vers. 17-29). 


The interval since death and burial is carefully stated, as well 


as the contiguity of the spot to Jerusalem, and the number 


of Jews who at the moment had joined the company of Martha 
and Mary, with a view to console them in their sorrow. God 
was ordering all for a bright testimony to His Son. For 


_ Aeschylus (Eum. 647) but expressed the universal mind of 


the heathen, himself a religious heathen, that man, once dead, 


_has no resurrection. What had God for such as believe on 


Jesus? What had Jesus? What is He but the resurrection 
and the life? It was no question of the last day only. Jesus 


-was there then, the conqueror of death as of Satan. 


Again Martha, prompt as ever when she heard of Jesus 


approaching, went to meet Him, while Mary kept sitting in the 
house with a deeper sense of death, but at least as ready to go 


when summoned. Meanwhile she waits, as the Lord knew well 
and appreciated. When Martha did meet the Lord, she con- 


‘fesses His power to have warded off death by His presence. 
She owns Him as the Messiah; and as such she is confident 
that even now, whatever He may “ask” of God will be given 
-Him. No doubt she meant this as a strong expression of her 
faith. But it was to correct this error, to give an incomparably 
fuller apprehension, that the Lord came now to raise Lazarus. 
Hence she applies to the Lord language far below His true 
-relation to the Father: dca dy airjoy Tov Oedv. Had she said 
épwrijon TOV TaTépa, it would have been more becoming. -It is 


all right to use airéw of us, for the place of a suppliant or 
petitioner becomes us; but the word of more familiar demand, 


eens 


230 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


épwraw, is suitable to Him. This, however, she though a 
believer had to learn. 

When Jesus tells Martha that her brother shall rise again, 
she replies at once, I know that he shall rise again in the 
resurrection at the last day. But the Lord was here, not to 
teach truths known already, but to give what was unknown, and 
this in the glory of His own Person. Therefore said Jesus to 
Martha, I am the Resurrection and the Life, and in this order 
as strictly applicable to the case in hand, Lazarus being dead 
and buried. He is the Resurrection no less than the Life, 
and this in fulness of power. “He that believeth on me, 
though he should die, shall live; and every one that liveth and 
believeth in me shall never die: believest thou this?” It 
is the superiority of life in Christ over all impediments, to be 
displayed at His coming. For we shall not all sleep, but 
we shall all be changed in an instant, in the twinkling of 
an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, 
and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be 
changed. Thus at the coming of the Lord the dead in Christ 
shall rise first; then we the living that remain, without 
passing through death, shall be caught up together with them 
to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with 
the Lord. Thus will He be proved the resurrection and the 
life: the resurrection, because the dead believers immediately 


' arise, obedient to His voice; the life, because every one 


that lives and believes on Him has mortality swallowed up of 


_ life at the same moment. 


This tests Martha. To the Lord’s inquiry, “ Believest thou 
this?” she can only give the vague reply, Yea, Lord, I have 
believed and do believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God, 
that should come into the world: a word containing truth doubt- 
less, but no real answer to the question. She felt the uneasiness 
usual even to saints who hear what is beyond their depth; and 
she thinks of her sister as one that would understand incom- 
parably better than herself; and so, without staying to learn, 
she hurried off, and called Mary secretly, saying, “The Teacher 
is here, and calleth thee.” Mary, when she heard, quickly 
rises and comes. How sweet the call to her heart! 


GHAPTER Xi. 231 


There was not the smallest haste in the movements of our 
Lord. Indeed we may rather note His calm bearing in 
presence of the one sister, so quick to go before she was 
called, and of the other when she was. Jesus abides the 
same, a man yet in the quiet dignity of the Son of God. 

“Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was 
in the place where Martha came to meet him. The Jews 
therefore who were with her in the house and consoling her, 
having seen Mary that she quickly rose up and went out, 
followed her,* thinking she goeth unto the tomb, that she may 
weep there” (vers. 30, 31). It was not so however; but the 
grace of Christ meant that there He should meet Mary, soon 
about to behold a bright outshining of the glory of God in her 
beloved Lord. What strangers to Jesus were those who would 
console her in vain in the presence of death! 

Not that Mary was above the pressure of death more than 
others. She repeats what Martha said; but she was of a 
different spirit in repeating it. “Mary therefore when she 
came where Jesus was, having seen him, fell at his feet, saying 
to him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not 
died” (ver. 32). But if she saw in Him as yet only power to 
preserve, if she had to learn that He is the resurrection and 
the life, at least she fell at His feet, as Martha did not; and 
the Lord, if He says nothing, will soon answer in deed and in 

truth. But the consciousness of divine glory, and this about 
to manifest itself superior to death in presence of all, in no 
way detracted from the sensibilities of His spirit. On the 
contrary, the very next verses let us know how deep were the 
emotions of our blessed Lord at this moment. 

“Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews 
that came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit, and 
troubled himself, and said, Where have ye laid him? They 
say to him, Lord, come and see. tJesus wept. The Jews 
therefore said, Behold, how he loved (é¢.) him! And some of 


* Odgavres S B CP™ D L X, some cursives, and most ancient versions, &c, ; 
Aéyorres, “saying,” (Text. Rec.) A C °° and a dozen uncials, most cursives and 
versions. 

+ ® D, &c., with most of the ancient versions, add the copula xa, ‘‘ and,” 


232 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


them said, Could not this [man] that opened the eyes of the 
blind, have caused that this [man] also should not have died?” 
(vers. 33-37.) 

The word translated “deeply moved” occurs elsewhere for a 
“strict” or stern “charge,” as in Matthew ix. 30, Mark 1. 43; 
or an angry speech, as in Mark xiv. 5. Here it is rather the 
inward feeling than the expression, approached rather nearly 

_by such use as that in Lucian (Nec. 20), of Gt would seem) 
groaning. It means the strong, and it may be indignant, 
affection the Lord experienced at the power of death over 
‘not the Jews only but Mary, wielded as it still was by the 
enemy. This is still farther expressed by the phrase that 
follows, as well as by verse 38. His tender sympathy appears 
rather in His weeping (ver. 35), after asking where they had 
laid Lazarus, and the invitation to come and see. His 
indignant sense of Satan’s power through sin did not interfere 
in the least with His deep compassion ; and what we see here 
is but the counterpart of His habitual bearing the diseases 
and taking the infirmities, which the first Gospel apples from 
Isaiah li. 4. Never was it mere power, nor was it only 
‘sympathy, but the entrance of His spirit into every case 
He cured, the bearing of the weight on His heart before God 
of all that oppressed sin-strieken man. Here it was the still 
graver ravage of death in the family He loved. 

But we may note that in our Lord’s case, profound as was 
' His grief, it was His servant. “He troubled himself.” It did 
‘not gain. the mastery, as our affections are apt to do with us. 
Every feeling in Christ was perfect in kind and measure as 
well as season. His groaning, His trouble, His weeping—what 
were they not in God’s sight! How precious should they not 
be to us! Even the Jews could not but say, “ Behold, how he 
loved him!” What had they thought had they known He 
was just going to raise the dead man? If they did not recall 
His power, it was only the unavailing regret that He Who 
healed the blind had not forefended death in the case of 
Lazarus. They were utterly at fault about this sickness, as 
blind to the glory of God as to the way of it, that the Son of 
God would be glorified thereby. Faith in the glory of His 


ALN ay N NG 
; 


CHAPTER XI. 233 


‘Person alone rightly interprets and appreciates in its measure 


the depth of His love. “Jesus wept.” What a difference 


these words convey to him who sees nothing but a man, and 


to him who knows Him to be the mighty God, the Only- 
begotten Son! Even the unbeliever could not in this case fail 
to own His love; but how immensely that love is enhanced by 
His divine dignity, and the consciousness that He was about to 
act in the power of divine life above death! 

Now it is of all consequence that we should believe and 
know, without doubt, that all which Jesus showed Himself that 
day on behalf of Lazarus He is, and far more, for His own, 
and that He will prove it for every one of us at His coming. 
For there is now also the fruit of the travail of His soul, and 
the power of His resurrection, after the fullest judgment of 
sin in the cross. Hence all His love and power can act 
unhinderedly on our behalf, as they surely will to the glory of 
God that the Son of God may be glorified thereby. What 


_men then beheld was but a testimony, however truly divine ; 


but at His coming the truth will be fully out in power. 
Now is the time to believe and confess the truth in the 


-mnidst of a crooked and perverted generation. May we be 


enabled in lowliness of mind to appear as lights in the world, 


holding forth the word of life ! 


“Jesus therefore again, deeply moved in himself, cometh 


unto the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay upon 


it. Jesus saith, Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of 
the deceased,* saith to him, Lord, he already stinketh, for he is 
four days [dead]. Jesus saith to her, Said I not to thee that if 
thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God? 
They took away therefore the stone ;| and Jesus lifted his eyes 


-upward, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou heardest 


me. And I knew that thou hearest me always; but on 


- account of the crowd that standeth around I said [it], that they 
may believe that thou didst send me. And having said this, 


* For the received reading reOvyxéros, ‘‘dead,” supported by a good many 
uncials and most cursives, the highest authorities give rereAeurnkéros, ‘‘ deceased,” 
¢ Text. Rec. with the great majority of MSS. adds of fv 6 reOynkas Kelwevos, 


'AK I, &c., only of jv, but the best (§ BC »™ D L X, some cursives, and the 


oldest versions) omit. 


234 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And* the 
dead came forth, having the feet and the hands bound with 
graveclothes, and his face was bound round with a handker- 
chief. Jesus saith to them, Loose him, and let him* go” 
(vers. 38-44). 

It was no longer the time for words, and Jesus, again 
realising for Himself the power which shut out God’s glory 
from man, comes to the cave with a stone laid on it, which 
served for a tomb. There the unbelief of Martha ventured 
(what does it not?) to oppose the Lord’s word to remove the 
stone: He, that all might be clear; she, because His words 
disappointed her haste, if indeed she expected anything. But 
if Martha could not rise above the humbling effects of death, 
which she would shut out from others, Jesus would not hide 
what was due to God in grace to man. How quickly the word 
of the Lord is forgotten in presence of the sad circumstances 
of human ruin! Faith gives the word heed, and reaps the 
blessing in due time: Listen to Jesus. He is heard already. 
He knows beforehand that He has what He asks, heard now 
as always before. The Father was concerned no less than 
the Son, and it was said that those who heard might believe 
that the Father sent Him forth. 

Thereon comes the word of power: “Lazarus, come forth.” 
He had prayed to the Father, jealous above all for His glory, 
and never forgetful of the place He had Himself come down 
to as man. But He was the Son, He could quicken whom 
He would, and so He does. Yet even in the majesty of this 
divine display, He intermingles after, as well as before, what 
drew men’s attention, that they might not be faithless but 
believing. What difficulty was there in the stone? For 
Himself He needed to remove nothing. It was for their 
sakes. Behold, man in the loathsomeness of death before he 
was raised! And so now what for Him mattered the binding 
of the graveclothes, or of the handkerchief? The grace of the 
Lord by both would only give them the better confirmation 
of what He had wrought. He could have loosed Lazarus as 


* The Received Text with most authorities begins with the copula «at, “and,” 
but omits the last avrév, ‘‘ him,” contrary to a few of the best authorities. 


ive MN aN pian 


CHAPTER XI. 235 


easily as He could have caused the stone to disappear; He 
could have willed all without crying with a loud voice; but 
He, Who would that we should confide in the power of His 
word, would have us note the corruption that precedes 
quickening and the bondage which may follow it now. 
Liberty is needed as well as life; but it is unnatural that 
one who is made to live should be longer bound. 

Mighty as was the work of thus raising Lazarus, we see 
here as everywhere how dependent man is on grace. Sin 
makes him the slave of Satan, little as he suspects it. His 
will is against God, in His goodness or in His judgment, in His 
word or His works; and the greater the mercy, the less he 
likes what is so contrary to his thoughts, and so humbling to 
his pride. If many were impressed and believed, some went 
mischievously to the enemy with their information. 

“Many of the Jews therefore that came to Mary, and beheld 
what he did, believed on him; but some of them went away 
unto the Pharisees, and told them what Jesus did. The chief 
priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered together a council, 
and said, What do we, for this man doeth many signs? [and]* if 
we leave him thus, all will believe on him, and the Romans will 
come and take away both our place and nation. But a certain 
one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest of that year, said to 
them, Ye know nothing, nor reckon} that it is profitable for 
yout that one man should die for the people, and not the 
whole nation perish. Now this he said not from himself, but, 


being high priest of that year, he prophesied that Jesus was 


about to die for the nation, and not for the nation only, but 
that also he should gather together into one the children of 
God that were scattered abroad. From that day therefore 
they consulted§ that they might kill him. Jesus therefore 
walked no more openly among the Jews, but went away thence 


* D, 255, with Syrr., Memph.W, Aeth.", add cal, *‘and.” 

t Aoyiverde 8 A BD L, some cursives, &c., instead of the Text. Rec, diad., 
‘‘consider,” supported by most uncials, cursives, &c. 

t vuiv, “you,” BDLM XI, many cursives, &e.; juiv, us,” still more 
witnesser; ® &c., omitting either. 

§ é8. SBD, &.; curve. much the most. 


236 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


“into the country near the desert, unto a city called Ephraim, 


and there he abode* with thet disciples ” (vers. 45-54). 
The chief priests and the Pharisees are immediately on the 
alert. They assemble a council; they wonder at their own in- 


activity in presence of the many signs done by Jesus; they 
fear that, if left alone, He may become universally acceptable, 


and that they may provoke the Romans to destroy them, 


‘church and state as men now say. How affecting to see the 


power of Satan blinding those most who take the highest 


place in zeal for God after the flesh! It was their desperately 
‘wicked purpose to put Him to death, a purpose as desperately 
effected, which led to the cross, in which He did become the 
‘attractive centre to men of every class and nation and moral 
- condition ; and it was their guilt in this especially, though not 


this alone, which drew on them the wrath of “the king,” who 


‘sent his forces, destroyed those murderers, and burnt their city. 
All righteous blood came upon them, and their house is left 


desolate unto this day, and this too by the dreaded hand of the 


- Romans, whom they professed to propitiate by the death of 


Jesus. Such is the way and end of unbelief. 

Yes, most solemn it is to see that God at the last hardens 
those who have long hardened themselves against the truth. 
So. He is by-and-by to send men a working of error, that they 


“should believe what is false, that all might be judged who have 
‘not believed the truth, but found pleasure in unrighteousness ; 
-and.this most justly, because they received not the love of the 
‘truth that they might be saved. It was He Who spoke by 
‘Balaam against his will to bless His people, though hired of 


Balak to curse them, and proving afterwards, not only by his 


corrupting wiles but to his own destruction, how little the 


‘prophecies then were from himself. It is He Who now speaks 
‘by Caiaphas, whose high-priesthood in that year gave his words 


the more official weight. Not that it was an orderly condition 
that there should be such shiftings of the high priest. But so 


-1t was total confusion when the Son of God came here; so 


most of all when He was to die. No wonder that God, long 


* Instead of dvérpiBev, “‘tarried,” as most, N B L euewev, “abode.” 
tN BDILTA, &c., do not read avrod, ** his,” as in the rest, 


She eae ee 
m 


CHAPTER XI. PRY 


silent, should speak by the high priest of that year. He is 
sovereign. He can employ evil as well as good—these heartily, 
those spite of themselves, and if their will be in it, with a 
sense as wicked as themselves. 

So it was here, when Caiaphas said, “Ye know nothing, nor) 
reckon that it is profitable for you that one man die for the 
people, and not the whole nation perish.” God was not in his 
thoughts but self without conscience. The evangelist comments 
on this, that he said it not from himself, but, being high priest of 
that year, prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation, 
and not for the nation only, but that He should also gather 
together into one the children of God that were scattered 
abroad. In the heart of Caiaphas it was an unprincipled 
sentiment; in the mind of the Spirit it was not only most 
holy, but expressed the foundation of God’s righteousness in 
Christ. On His death is based the future hope of Israel, and 
the actual gathering of God’s scattered children, the church. 
From that day measures were taken in concert to compass 
the death of our Lord, Who retired to the northern wilderness 
of Judea, and there abode awhile with the disciples in the 
city called Ephraim. The hour was coming. 

“But the passover of the Jews was near; and many went 
up unto Jerusalem out of the country before the passover, that 
they might purify themselves. They were seeking therefore 
Jesus, and said among themselves, standing in the temple, 
What think ye? That he will not at all come unto the feast ? 
Now the high priest and the Pharisees had given command- 
ment that if any one knew where he was, he should inform, 
that they might seize him” (vers. 55-57). 

Thus the closing scene is at hand; and Jesus pursues His 
service in retirement during the little interval before the Pass- 
over, the last so soon to be fulfilled in His death. They went 


.up to purify themselves before the feast, which gives rise to 


their seeking Him and to surmises as to His not coming. For 
orders had been given to inform them of His whereabouts, in 
order to His apprehension. Little did any, friends or foes, 
anticipate that one would be found among the chosen twelve to 
indicate the spot whither the Lord was wont to resort; but He 


238 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


knew all that should come upon Him. How far is man from 
suspecting that it is all a question between Satan and God, and 
that, if evil seems to gain the upper hand, good triumphs even 
now to faith, as it will in the judgment of evil to every eye 
ere long! 

But if the Lord retired from the machinations of men 
hardened in their enmity toward Himself because of their 
false pretension to feel and act for God, He had His own 
death on the cross to God’s glory ever before Him. It was 
not to be done in a corner, nor on mere secret information. 
It must be at that feast and. no other, at the approaching 
Passover, when all the religious chiefs should thoroughly 
commit themselves, the elders, chief priests, and scribes; 
when the whole nation save the little remnant that believed 
should also play their blinded part; when they all should. 
deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock and scourge and crucify. 
Oh, how little did any of them think of Him as in all this 
guilt and faithlessness of theirs the Son of God, and the Son 
of man come not to be served but to serve, and to give His 
life a ransom for many! Then should He quickly, but in 
measured predicted time, rise in resurrection power, transcend- 
ing that of Lazarus beyond all comparison; thenceforward to 
work spiritually in all that believe, quickened with Him and 
raised up together, and made to sit down together in the 
heavenlies in Him (as another apostle was given to teach), 
before the bright moment of His coming for us, when we 
shall all be changed. 


f 
i 
: 


CHAPTER XII. 


SucH was the testimony God gave to the Lord Jesus as the Son 
in resurrection power, with the plain result of deadly hatred 
in those that bowed not by faith. Here, before a fresh witness 
is given, we are permitted to see Him in the home of those He 
loved at Bethany, where the Spirit gives us a fresh proof of 
grace in the recognition of His glory, and this in view of His 
death. There reclined the man so recently raised from the 
dead with Him Who raised him! 

“Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came unto 
Bethany, where was Lazarus,* whom Jesus* raised from [the] 
dead. They made there for him a supper and Martha served ; 
but Lazarus was one of those at table with him. Mary then, 
having taken a pound of unguent of costly puret nard, 
anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair; 
and the house was filled with the odour of the unguent. And{ 
Judas Iscariot,§. one of his disciples that was about to give 
him up, saith, Why was this unguent not sold for three 
hundred denaries, and given to poor [persons]? And _ this 
he said, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was 
a thief, and, having|| the bag,|| used to bear what was deposited. 
Jesus then said, Leave her to have kept it@ for the day of my 

* Text. Rec. adds 6 re6vnxas with large consent of uncials, cursives, and 
versions, contrary to N B L X, Syr.vesch, Sah., Aeth., &c.; as it omits Incois at 
the end, spite of the best witnesses inserting it. 

+ muortxds perplexes the critics, some taking it as diguid, others as genuine 
or pure, according to its supposed source. 

t 6¢ 8 B, Memph., Goth., and probably Syr.Pesch Aeth. &c,; Text. Rec., ody, 
with most uncials and cursives, &c., a few omitting. 

§ Text. Rec. Ziuwvds without 6, on the authority of many MSS., &c. 

|| etyev xal Text. Rec. with most; éxwv 8 B DL Q, a few good cursives and 
versions. The ancient versions generally render yA, ‘‘ chest.” 


4 rerjpyxev Text. Rec., with a dozen uncials, most cursives, and many versions, 
but wa... rypjon SBD K LQ X I, several cursives, and most ancient versions. 


239 


240 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


preparation for burial: for the poor ye have always with you, 
but me ye have not always” (vers, 1-8). 

In presence of the Lord each comes out in his true colours. 
Jesus personally as everywhere is the object of God, the light 
which makes all manifest. But He does more. As He had 
brought life into the scene of death, the witnesses of His 
power and grace are there in their due place, according to their 
measure, one only having that special discernment which the. 
love that is of God imparts, though grace may interpret it 
according to its own power. They made for Him a supper 
there, Martha serving, Lazarus at the table with Him, Mary 
anointing His feet with the precious spikenard; and the house 
filled with the odour of the unguent. The Lord felt and 
explained its meaning, according to His own wisdom and love. 

But if one of the blessed family was led by a wisdom above 
her own, in single-eyed devotedness, to an act most fitting and 
significant at that time, one of His disciples was not found 
wanting for the work of the enemy, which makes nothing 
of Jesus. All of good or evil turns at bottom into a true 
or false estimate of Him. We may be and are slow to learn 
the lesson, albeit of greater moment than any other ; but it is 
the object of the Spirit in all scripture to teach us it, and 
nowhere so conspicuously, or so profoundly too, as in this 
Gospel. So Judas Iscariot, one of His disciples that was 
about to give Him up, says, Why was this ointment not sold 
for three hundred denaries, and given to poor people? He 
never thought of Jesus! Yet Mary’s act might naturally have 
awakened affection. What was He not to her? Judas coolly 
calculates the lowest selling price of the nard; he falsely puts 
poor persons forward for whom he had no real care; he would 
have liked that sum added to his unlawful gains. Nothing 
can be more thoroughly withering, more calmly true, than the 
comment of the Holy Ghost in verse 6. But what said Jesus ? 
“Leave her to have kept it for the day of my preparation 
for burial: for the poor ye have always, but me ye have 
not always.” 

Here is the truth said in divine love. Not indeed that Mary 
had received any prophetic intimation. It was the spiritual. 


See eile 


a 


CHAPTER XII. 241 


instinct of a heart that had found the Son of God in J esus, of 


.a heart that felt the danger that hung over Him as man. 


Others might think of His miracles, and hope that murderous 
intents might pass away at Jerusalem as at Nazareth. Mary 
was not so easily satisfied, though she had witnessed His 
resurrection power with as deep feelings as any soul on earth. 
And she was led of God to do what had a weightier import by 


far in the Lord’s eyes than in her own. The love that had 


prompted it was of God, and this is above all price. “If 
a man would give all the substance of his house for love, 


_ it would utterly be contemned.” So said he who knew above 
_ the sons of men the vanity of human love, with the amplest 


means ever vouchsafed to the head of any house. But what 
was Mary’s unguent, or the love that brought it out (kept as it 
had been, and now she knew why at that critical moment), 
compared with His Who vindicated her, and was about to die 


_ for all, even for Judas ? 


It is indeed a scene to dwell on, most instructive and affect- 
ing, whether one contemplates the family as a whole, or Mary 
in particular, whether one may think of the disciples (for 
Matthew and Mark show that all were unappreciative, some 
even angry), or of the one whose dark influence acted so ill on 
the rest, and, above all, when one looks and listens to Him 
Whose grace formed Mary’s heart according to its own nature 
and ways. 

“ A [or, The]* great crowd of the Jews therefore knew that 
he was [lit. is] there, and came not on account of Jesus only 
but that they might see Lazarus also whom he raised from 
[the] dead. But the chief priests consulted that they might 
kill Lazarus also, because on his account many of the Jews 
were going away and believing on Jesus” (vers. 9-11). “The 
Jews,” as often remarked, are not merely Israelites but men of 


_ Judeea, and greatly under the influence of the rulers in their 


hostility to Jesus as in other things. But they are not the 
rulers, and one sees the difference marked in these verses. 
The great crowd however seemed influenced quite as much by 


* A few witnesses of the highest antiquity and character (% B»™ L) read the 
article, as to which some of the old versions are ambiguous. 


Q 


242 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOBN. 


curiosity as by better motive. To see Lazarus who was raised 
from the dead is a very different thing from believing God. 
Still there was reality among some; and hence the deeper and 
deliberate malice of the chief priests, because many of the 
Jews were deserting them and believing on Jesus. 

Mary had not at all misread the position of the Lord. The 
crisis was at hand. Perfectly did He understand to what point 
every current was flowing; He knew what was in man, in 
Satan, and in God, and that as the malice of the creature 
would thus push to the uttermost in rebellious hatred, God 
would go farther still in redeeming love, but withal in His 
most solemn judgment of sin. Of this moral glory how little 
as yet could any heart conceive! Yet Mary’s affection was led 
of God to divine the enmity growing up rapidly and ruthlessly 
against the One Who more than ever possessed her heart’s 
homage and love. 

But the final testimony must be full. Jesus had already 
shown Himself Son of God in power by raising Lazarus from 
the grave wherein he had lain a dead man: a testimony 
characteristic of John’s Gospel, and peculiar to it. Men 
have raised objections, which only prove their own spiritual 
incapacity ; for here it exactly suits, as it would nowhere else, 
and it was the right place and time too. All was divinely 
ordered. 


The next testimony is to His Messianic title, and fittingly 
therefore given in every one of the Gospels. It could be 
wanting to none, and we find it as the next fact recorded 
by our evangelist. 

“On the morrow, a great crowd that came unto the feast, 
having heard that Jesus is coming into Jerusalem, took branches 
of palm, and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed 
[is] he-that cometh in Jehovah’s name, [even] the king of 
Israel. And Jesus, having found a young ass, sat upon it, as 
it is written, Fear not, daughter of Zion; behold, thy king 
cometh, sitting upon an ass’s colt. * These things his disciples 


* The copula of Text. Rec., with fourteen uncials and most cursives, is not in 
SB L Q and some of the more ancient versions, 


CHAPTER XII. 243 


knew not at the first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they 
remembered that these things were written of him, and they 
did these things to him. The crowd therefore that was with 
him bore witness, because * he called Lazarus out of the tomb, 
and raised him from [the] dead. Therefore also the crowd met 
him, because they heard that he had done this sign. The 
Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Ye behold that 
ye profit nothing: behold, the world is gone away after him ” 
(vers. 12-19). 

Thus did the crowd welcome Him as Messiah, applying to 
Him very justly the language of Psalm exviii., which the Lord 
in Matthew xxiii. declares shall be said by the repentant 
remnant who shall see Him when He returns to reign. Till 
then the house, once hallowed by Jehovah and bearing His 
name, is but thei7 house, and left unto them desolate; as indeed 
_ they had made it a house of merchandise and a den of robbers. 
Nor was it mere enthusiasm in the crowd, but God at work; 
and the Lord Himself sat on the young ass according to the 
prophecy of Zechariah ix. It is remarkable how both Matthew 
and John omit the clause of the prophet which did not then 
apply, however sure by-and-by; for He knew well that He was 
to suffer then, in order to bring salvation when He comes again 
in glory. It was but a testimony at the time, and in the word 
to faith; when He comes, having salvation for His own, it will 
be in destructive judgment of all that oppose. 

Here again it is notified for us that even His disciples 
knew not these things at the first; but when Jesus was 
glorified, then they remembered that these things were written 
of Him, and that they did these things to Him. He needed 
not that any should testify either of man or of Himself. Past, 
present, future, earth, and heaven, were open to His gaze. 
He Who made all knew all; as John constantly shows in 
harmony with the glory of His Person, which is everywhere 
prominent, save what He was pleased, in His capacity of 
servant, not to know, leaving it in the authority of the Father 
(Mark xiii.). In the light of His glorification the disciples 


* 67. D EP™™ K LI and some of the oldest versions; ére, ‘‘ when” (Steph., 
not Elz.) % A B and most of the other uncials, many cursives, &c. 


244. AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


learnt the import of the word and of the facts. It was His 
resurrection power which impressed the crowd so mightily. 
They did not draw the full lesson of faith, but concluded that 
He must be the promised Son of David, and met Him as such ; 
while the Pharisees could not but own among themselves that 
obviously their stand and opposition were in vain, and the 
world, the prize of unbelief, gone after Him. Little knew 
they what is proclaimed just afterwards: “Now is the 
judgment of this world.” In misjudging Him, its own doom 
was sealed; He sought its salvation, not popularity, but 
God’s will. 


But another scene completes the circle of the testimony 
here given before the close. 

“And there were certain Greeks of those coming up to 
worship at the feast; these therefore came to Philip, who was 
from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir, we desire 
to see Jesus. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew, and* Andrew 
cometh and Philip, and they tell Jesus. But Jesus answered + 
them, saying, The hour is come that the Son of man should be 
glorified. Verily, verily, I say to you, Except the grain of wheat 
falling into the ground die, it abideth alone; but, if it die, it 
beareth much fruit. He that loveth his life [soul] shall lose 
it,t and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto 
life eternal. If any one serve me, let him follow me, and 
where I am, there also my servant shall be;§ if any one serve 
me, him will my Father honour” (vers. 20-26), 

These were Gentiles, Greeks and not merely Hellenists, who 
desired to see the Lord; and Philip and Andrew name it to 
Him. It was enough. The Lord opens the great truth. It is 
not now the Son of God quickening or raising the dead, nor 
the Son of David coming to Zion according to prophecy, but 
the Son_of man glorified. This He explains after the solemn 


* So a few of the oldest MSS, with a slight variation, while Text. Rec. with 
most has cai rddu, A. x. ® 2X. as in the Authorised Version. 

+ dmoxplverat ‘‘answereth” N BL X., &c. 3; daexplvaro “answered” Text. 
Rec., with the mass of uncials, cursives, and versions. 

+ dmoddver, “loseth,” S BL, 33, &c. 

§ cal “and” is added in Text. Rec. with thirteen uncials, and most other 
authorities, but not the oldest, 


; 
4 
- 
E 
a 
4 
A 
an 
a3 


et Sin 


eee RK. 2 eee ORC Ce RO eT 


CHAPTER XII. 245 


asseveration, so often found in our Gospel, under the well- 
known figure of death and resurrection in nature. “Verily, 
verily, . . . Except the corn of wheat falling into the ground 
die, it abideth alone; but, if it die, it beareth much fruit.” He 
Himself was the true corn thus to produce fruit abundantly, 
yet even so only by death and resurrection. This was not, 
could not be, from defect of power in Him. It was from man’s 
estate that it could not righteously be otherwise before God. 
Death only can meet the evil, or fill the void, and His death 
alone. Of all others death were vain, yea fatal. Death to 
them must be for themselves to perish. He only could save, 
but through His death and resurrection ; for as He would die, 
so He could rise, and by the infinite value of His death avail 
for others so as to raise them righteously. Living He even, He 
must abide alone; dying, He bears much fruit in the energy 
of His resurrection. 

Thus was He the Son of man glorified. It was for sin that 
God at length might be gloritied; and now He was. Sin 
brought in death; His dying for it, by God’s grace and to 
God’s glory, laid the basis for the change of all things, even 
for the new heavens and earth in the eternal state; how much 
more for all that believe to be meanwhile blessed in a new life 
before they are changed into the likeness of His glory, when 
He comes for them! “He shall see his seed, he shall prolong 
his days, and the pleasure of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand. 
He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.” 
So said the first of prophets, and this founded on His death— 
“when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin,” in accord- 
ance with His own words here seven centuries after, when 
approached that wondrous hour and act of man’s guilt where 
he meant pain and ignominy, and God inflicted incomparably 
worse in His unsparing and unfathomable judgment. To Him 
the hour was come that the Son of man should be glorified. 
What perfect self-sacrifice! What devotedness to God! What 
love to man, even to His bitterest enemies! Such was Jesus 
going down to death, yea death of the cross; and such the 
fruit unfailing. 

The principle too becomes a primary one thenceforth, not 


246 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


ease and honour and advancement for self (which is truly 
the greatest loss), but suffering and shame, and if need be 
death, now in this world for Christ’s sake. Such is practical 
Christianity. “He that loveth his life loseth it, and he that 
hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal. 
If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where J am, there 
shall also my servant be; if any man serve me, him will my 
Father honour.” And what an honour! He assuredly knows 
what it is, and how to give it. But it is not in self-devised 
and self-imposed abasements; neither in flagellations of the 
back, nor in lickings of the dust, nor in like heathenish effort 
that dishonours the body to the satisfying of the flesh. It is 
in what the Holy Spirit alone can guide and sustain, in serving 
Christ—a service inseparable from following Him, its beginning 
life eternal in the Son, its end the same life in glory with Him; 
for such as serve and follow Him will the Father honour. 
May we be strengthened to discern and do the truth! 

The Lord reverts to thoughts of His approaching death. 
There is no avoidance of contemplating that which it was 
part of His perfection to feel, as no man ever did. He 
estimates it rightly and fully as before, instead of braving it 
as men do who cannot escape. To Him it was no inevitable 
doom but divine love, that God might be glorified in a guilty 
world, that sinners might be saved righteously, that the entire 
creation of heaven and earth (I say not those under the earth, 
the infernal beings of Phil. ii.) might be reconciled and blessed — 
for ever. He, and He only, had authority to lay down His 
life (Yvynv), as He had authority to take it again. As He 
is the Resurrection and the Life (¢wy), so no one takes the 
life He had in this world from Him, but He lays it down 
of Himself, though also in obedience to His Father, and to 
the everlasting glory of God, as the fulness of His Person 
enabled Him to do. None the less but the more did He 
feel the gravity, humiliation, and suffering of what was before 
Him. There was the deepest sense of death, not only as 
man and Messiah but of its import from man’s hand and 
from God’s judgment. Not an element of grief and pain 
and shame and horror was absent from His heart, com- 


TAREE SET REPLI NES CUT Y tele eT inane REE 


mary 


Lee ae ene 


Fe 
\ 


CHAPTER XII. 247 


patible with the perfection of His Person and His relationship 
to God. 

“Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, 
save me from this hour; but on account of this came I unto 
this hour. Father, glorify thy * name” (vers. 27, 28). He was 
the life, yet came to die; He was light and love, yet rejected 
and hated as man never knew before, nor will again. The 
reality of His manhood, the glory of His Godhead, in no way 
hindered His sorrow; His being Who and what He was, and 
perfect in all, only gave Him infinite capacity to feel and 
fathom what He endured, none the less because He came to 
endure it all, and had it now before Him in immediate prospect, 
though none of men saw it but Himself. He had not been 
perfect man if His soul had not been troubled, so as to feel, 
“What am I to say?” He had not been Son of God as man, 
had He not in His soul-trouble prayed, “Father, save me 
from this hour,” and quite as little, “but on this account came 
I unto this hour,’ crowned with, “Father, glorify thy name.” 
To have felt and expressed the first petition perfectly suited 
Him Who was man in such circumstances; to have added 
the second was worthy of Him Who is God no less than man 
in one undivided Person; to have said both was perfection in 
both, in sorrow as in joy, as to death no less than life. 

The Father appreciates and answers accordingly. “There 
came therefore a voice out of heaven, I both have glorified and 
will glorify [it] again. The crowd then+ that stood and heard 
said that it thundered; others said, An angel hath spoken to 
him” (vers. 28, 29). Augustine and Jerome confound this { 
with chapter xvii. 5, from which it is wholly and demonstrably 
distinct; but we must never expect spiritual intelligence, 
sometimes not even common orthodoxy, from the Fathers 
so-called. The later passage in our Gospel is the Son 
requesting the Father that He as the risen Man should be 


* B by an evident slip reads jov for cov, to the grievous detriment of the 
sense, + B omits ov, while S A DL X, &c. have it. 

+ So does the venerable but gloss-loving Codex Bezae (conventionally called 
D); for it actually adds to the text év ry O6& 7 elxov mapd coe mpd Tod roy 
Koapov yevér Oar. 


248 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


glorified, on the completion of His work, as well as consonantly 
with the rights of His Person, along with the Father Himself 
in the glory which the Son had along with Him before the 
world was. 

The passage before us refers to what had just been, and 
what was going to be, done in this world; for as the Father 
had glorified His name in the resurrection of Lazarus, so yet 
more infinitely would He in the rising from the dead of His own 
Son. The moderns, such as Dean Alford, fail, in meagre, vague, 
and even erroneous thought, to reach the mark as much as, 
or more than, the ancients. For how poor it is to tell us that 
Ota TOUTO=Wa cwOG éx THs opas TavTns, that I might be safe 
from this hour! that is, the going into and exhausting this 
hour, this cup, is the very appointed way of My glorification, 
or, as Meyer says, that Thy name may be glorified, which is 
to anticipate what follows. It was really to die, though un- 
doubtedly to the glory of the Father by the Son. So again, 
edo€aca points to something much more definite than “in 
the manifestation hitherto made of the Son of God, imperfect 
as it was (see Matt. xvi. 16, 17); in all Old Testament type 
and prophecy; in creation, and indeed (Aug. in Joan. li. 4) 
antequam facerem mundum.” Lastly, it is losing the exact 
force to treat zaduw as a mere intensification of the do€ateww, 
instead of seeing a distinct and higher display of that resur- 
rection power which marked out the Son of God. 

As to the question why some said the voice from heaven 
was thunder, others the speaking of an angel to the Lord, it 
seems vain to seek an answer. It was merely speculation on the 
part of the crowd, who all fell short of the truth. Unbelief 
of Him can weaken or get rid of all testimony till He come 
in judgment. Yet was it really in grace to them, for “Jesus 
answered and said, Not on mine account hath this voice 
come, but on yours. Now is judgment of this world; now 
shall the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if I be 
lifted up out of the earth, will draw all* to myself. But 


* Kor wdvras with the great mass, 8 P™ D, and some ancient versions, read 
mwavra, “every one” or “all things,” as Aug. in loc. expressly says. But there 
is the strongest internal reason to stand by the weight of external testimony. 


2 
i 
i 
z 
a 
an 


CHAPTER XII. 249 


this he said signifying by what death he was about to die. 
The crowd then* answered him, We heard out of the law 
that the Christ abideth for ever; and how sayest thow 
that the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son 
of man? Jesus then said to them, Yet a little time the 
light is amongt you. Walk while ye have the light, that 
the darkness may not overtake you; and he that walketh 
in darkness knoweth not where he goeth. While ye have 
the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of 
light” (vers. 30-36). 

These words, if any, are surely of the most solemn import, 
and the more, as Christendom now as ever ignores their 
truth. For men, christian men, believe nothing less than 
that “now is the judgment of this world,” even while some 
of them look for the casting out of its prince in due time. 
The glory of the Son of man is founded on death. The 
rejection of the Messiah gives occasion for what is thus in- 
comparably larger and more profound; and thus is God's 
glory immutably secured, and much fruit borne, even the 
blessing of those otherwise lost, now blessed with and in 
Christ, not merely by Him. But if heaven be thereby 
opened (for the cross and heaven answer to each other), the 
world is judged. Before God and to faith now is its judgment, 
and not only when execution takes place publicly and in 
power. But now it is judged for him who has the mind of 
Christ, who shares His rejection and awaits glory with Him 
on high. What does His cross mean morally ? 

A living Messiah should have gathered the twelve tribes 
of. Israel round Himself as their Chief, raised up of God 
according to promise; but He was to be lifted up out of the 
earth, crucified, Satan’s seeming victory but his real and 
everlasting defeat, and so known to faith, while we wait for 
the day which shall declare it beyond contradiction. Christ 


‘on the cross is a very different object from reigning over 


His people in grace, and abiding for ever; yet they should 


* Most omit ofy, but not N BLX, &e. 
+éeNSBDKLMX IU, &c.; instead of Text. Rec. ue’ AKEFGHSU 


TAA, &. 


250 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


have read it also out of the law, for there it is if dimly. But 
grace makes Him manifest thus lifted up, the attractive 
centre for all, Gentile or Jew, spite of their sins, which He 
was to bear in His own body. A suffering Son of man was, 
and is, no article of Jewish faith, though certainly revealed 
in their scriptures. To their expression of ignorance the 
Lord replies by telling them how brief was the stay of the 
light, by warning them of the darkness about to seize on 
them, and by exhorting them to faith in the light, if they, 
escaping the darkness, would have the light to characterise 
themselves. 

The close was at hand, and a token even then was given 
that the light would not be always there. “Jesus spoke these 
- things and, going away, hid himself from them. But though 
he had done so many signs before them, they did not believe 
on him, that the word of Isaiah the prophet which he said 
might be fulfilled. Jehovah, who believed our report? and to 
whom was Jehovah’s arm revealed? On this account they 
could not believe because Isaiah said again, He hath blinded 
their eyes, and he hardened* their heart that they may not 
see with their eyes and understand with their heart, and be 
converted, and I heal them. These things said Isaiah, because 
[or, when +] he saw his glory, and spoke concerning him. Still, 
however, from among the rulers also many believed on him, but 
on account of the Pharisees did not confess, that they might 
not be put out of the synagogue; for they loved the glory of 
men more than the glory of God” (vers. 36-43). 

Such was the result of the only absolutely perfect testimony 
ever rendered in this world, the words, and ways, and signs of 
the Son of God; and this, not where blank ignorance might 
be pleaded in extenuation, but where God had done all possible 
to prepare the way by prophecy, and to arouse attention by 
sign, grace, and truth in the midst of a people used to divine 
intervention. But man’s unbelief, left to itself and Satan, 
can shut out every sight and sound from God. So-.it was among 


* érdp, ABr™K LX, &. (NS IL in a corrupt form); mer. Text. Rec. 
following very many. 


t du SN ABLMX, &, bre Text. Rec., most uncials and cursives, &c. 


By 
ne 
: 
- 
Af 
ra 
“ 
e 
- 
zs 


CHAPTER XII. 251 


the Jews of our Lord’s day, and so it continues till this day. 
It is still “this generation,” which shall not pass away till all 


God’s threats be fulfilled. Of the outward judgments, however, 


John does not speak, but the Synoptic evangelists; John of 
having no more Him Who is all. For what is it to lose the 
light, to be abandoned to that darkness where he who walks in 
it knows not where he goes? And this is precisely the state 
of the Jews; the more aggravated because they had the light 
for a little among them, and did not believe, so that they failed 
to become children of light, and the darkness seized on them. 
Thus was the prince of prophets fulfilled by their unbelief in 
their own ruin, and this in both the parts of his prophecy, 
early and late, which speculation vainly seeks to divorce. But 
we believe the inspired evangelist, not the presumptuous 
professor, and are as assured that both prophecies are Isaiah’s, 


as that they were divinely given and now fulfilled in the Jew 


so long incredulous. 

But as the first citation proves the guilt of rejecting God’s 
testimony, so the second though really earlier points to the 
solemn fact of judicial blindness, never pronounced, still less 
executed, of God, till patience has had its perfect work and 
man has filled up the measure of his guilt beyond measure. 
Under such a sentence of hardening no doubt they could not 
believe; but the sentence came because of wickedness con- 
summated in wilful rejection of God and His will when they 
did not believe in spite of the fullest appeals to their hearts 
and consciences. As the first citation shows utter unbelief 
when Christ came in humiliation and suffering to do the work 
of atonement, so the latter conveys the dread word which shut 
them up in blindness before the light they had so long despised, 
followed up by the inspired comment that these things said 
Isaiah when he saw Christ’s glory and spoke of Him. It is 
Jehovah in the prophecy, Christ in the Gospel; but they are 
one; as indeed Acts xxviii. 25-27 enables us to include the 
Holy Spirit. How thoroughly confirmed and confirming the 
still older oracle in Deuteronomy vi. 4; “Jehovah our God is 
one Jehovah!” John xii. and Acts xxviii. weaken it in nothing, 
but add to its force and expressiveness, as they show out more 


252 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


and more the patience of God and the darkness of the Jew 
after ages of trifling with His mercy and His menaces alike. 
And the darkness increased as the light shone out. 

But ungodliness betrays itself not only in the insubjection 
of the heart to believe, but in the cowardliness of the soul 
to confess the Lord (Rev. xxi. 8); as we see here that “ many 
from among the chief rulers believed on him, but on account 
of the Pharisees did not confess, that they might not be put 
out of the synagogue.” And the motive or moral reason is 
given; they loved glory from men rather than glory from 
God. They feared the religious world, being keenly sensible 
of human glory, but dull to that which is from God. But 
we must not forget that, if with the heart man believes to 
righteousness, with the mouth confession is made to salvation. 
God makes much of confession of His Son, nor can we safely 
own salvation otherwise. 

Next, comes the final public testimony of our Lord, given 
in this Gospel. “But Jesus cried and said, He that believeth 
on me believeth not on me but on him that sent me; and he 
that beholdeth me beholdeth him that sent me. Jam come a 
light into the world, that every one that believeth on me may 
not abide in darkness. And if any one have heard my words 
and not kept* [them], Z judge him not, for I came not to judge 
the world, but to save the world. He that slighteth me and 
receiveth not my words hath one that judgeth him; the word 
which I did speak, that will judge him in the last day, 
because I did not speak from myself, but the Father who 
sent me hath himself givent me commandment, what I should 
say, and what I should speak; and I know that his command- 
ment is life eternal. What things then I speak, as the Father 
hath said to me, so I speak” (vers. 44-50). 

The Lord spoke with earnestness as elsewhere and always; 
and it was due to men in His grace, considering the solemn 
issues at stake, and the divine glory concerned. It was a 
question of His Father Who sent Him, no less than of Himself. 
To believe on the Son, to behold Him, was to behold and 


* puddéy NABDKLXII, &e. morevcy, “believed,” EFGHMSUTAA, &e. 
t 666. NABMX, many cursives, &c.; 26. Text, Rec. DLT AAT, &c. 


= 
ca 
7 
Ke 
a 
S 


it\sewee Lat MK 


Vee ee 


CHAPTER XII. 203 


believe on the Father. They were inseparably one, as He had 
already declared; and he who had the Son had the Father 
also. Further, the Lord was come as light into the world 
(for it was no question of Israel only) that every believer on 
Him might not abide in darkness. He has the light of life, 
and not life only; He is light in the’ Lord. It was therefore 
ruin to have heard and not kept His words; but such was the 
grace in which He came, that He could add, I judge him not, 
for I came not that I might judge the world, but that I might 
save the world. How then would His glory be vindicated in 
his case who slights Him and receives not His words? He 
has that which judges him, the word. “The word which I 
have spoken, that shall judge him in the last day”; and the 
more surely, because Jesus spoke not from Himself, as if He 
sought His own will or glory, but was simply and uniformly 


subject to the Father, Who not only sent Him but enjoined 


what He was to say and speak; the Father's commandment 
He knew to be life eternal. Jesus was as subject to Him 


in His utterances as in His doings, being here to declare 


Him and do His will. 


CHAPTER XIIL 


WE enter now on a new section of our Gospel: the last 
communications of the Lord to His disciples, closing with 
His heart opened out to the Father about them.- The entire 
drift is in all points and ways to lead His own into a true 
spiritual understanding of their new place before God the 
Father, in consequent contrast with that of Israel in the world. 
It is not as the church, but most fully and distinctively the 
Christian position in virtue of Christ, Who sets aside Israel in 
all respects. He was going to His Father on high, and here 
reveals what He in that glory would do for them while here 
below. His love must take a fresh shape; but it is faithful, 
unchanging, and perfect. 

“ Now, before the feast of the passover, Jesus, knowing that 
his hour was: come that he should depart out of this world 
unto the Father, having loved his own that [were] in the 
world, loved them unto [the] end” (ver. 1). He was the only 
man whom nothing took by surprise. All was read and known 
and felt in the presence of God His Father. Not only was He 
aware throughout that He was to die, and of its form, character, 
and object in God’s purpose, as well as in man’s and Satan’s 
malice, but we see here that its immediate proximity was 
before His mind with its immense consequences. Yet in John 
it is not man’s or God’s forsaking Him in that bitter crisis; 
but the hour came for His departure out of this world to His 
Father, instead of staying here as Jews expected according 
to the Old Testament for their Messiah. As the other Gospels 
bring out the evidence of His rejection by the people, our 
evangelist sees Him from the first rejected, and at the end 
preparing the disciples for the unlooked for change at hand, 


when the Christ should be in heaven, and the Holy Spirit sent 
254 


eo ER ERAS ALS Th, NR aS Rol ok oe gee 


Pie Gees 


A kk Ns eh Se 


t 
iM 
yb 
4 
~ 
ma 
' 
. 


CHAPTER XIII. 255 


down to be in and with His own on earth, the Father too 


being the relation of God, not to Him only, but in due time 
and way to them also. 

Further, He would show His love in fresh and suited forms. 
“Having loved his own that were in the world,” He loved © 
not merely till the end, as a question of time, however true 
this may be, but taking up each need, and incurring all 
labour for them, whatever the draught on it, unremittingly 
and without wavering. Such is the love of Jesus to His own 
in the world, where it is constantly wanted. We know what 
love He expressed to them at that last passover (Luke xxii. 15), 
and how infinitely it was proved in His blood and death for 
them as a lamb without blemish and without spot, foreordained 
before the foundation of the world, but manifested at the end 
of the times for their sakes who believed. But now He would 
show them a love as active for them day by day, when He 
should depart to His Father, as when He fulfilled the passover 
in dying for them. 

“ And, supper being come,* the devil having already put [it] 
into the heart of Judas, Simon’s [son], Iscariot, that he should 
deliver him up, [Jesus, or]t he, knowing that the Father had 
given all things into his hands, and that he came out from 
God and goeth unto God, riseth from supper and layeth aside 
his garments, and, having taken a towel, girded himself” 


(vers. 2-4). 


The Authorised Version regards the phrase 6. y. as implying 
the end of the repast; but I agree with those who take it 
to mean the arrival of the time for supper, which is confirmed 
by the wondrous action we are about to hear of. It cannot be 
doubted that it was usual to have the feet washed before, not 
after, supper. 

But if Jesus had ways of infinite love before His heart, 
the devil had already planted in that of Judas Iscariot the 


awful treachery to his divine Master, which no rolling ages can 


erase. So it was with Jesus: the enemy’s hate came out most, 


* ywvouévov BL X, Aeth. ; yevouévov A Ds HT A A Il, etc., the cursives, 
Chrys. Cyr., Ital. and Vulg. & reads yew. and gives ‘yey. as correction. 
+S BD LX, and a few cursives, etc., omit, though most insert, 


256 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


as the love of God manifested itself in and by Him; but how 
withering to human pretension it was that the devil wrought 
by a man and a disciple, the close personal honoured follower of 
the Lord Jesus! “It was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, 
and mine acquaintance.” In that holy companionship he had 
trifled with sin, with his besetting covetousness; and now the 
devil prompted the gratification of it by betraying the Son 
of God. The Lord, as we shall later see, deeply felt it, but 
here He pursues the design of love with the consciousness 
of the Father’s purposes and plans, with the consciousness too 
that He was going back to God with the same absolute purity 
in which He had come out from Him. It was no merely 
Messianic sphere, not even that of Son of man. The Father 
had given all things into the hands of His Son, and He was 
going back a man with not a shade over that intrinsic holiness 
which marked His coming out from God to become a man. 
He abode ever the Holy One of God, yet rises from supper, 
lays aside His garments, takes a towel and girds Himself. 

Jesus occupies Himself with a new service, which their 
nearness to God as His children called for, the removal of 
the defilements of His own in their walk as saints through 
the world. This is the meaning of what follows. “Then he 
-poureth water into the basin, and began to wash the feet of 
the disciples, and to wipe them with the towel with which he 
was girded” (ver. 5). Be it carefully observed, that it is a 
question here of water, not of blood. The reader of John’s 
Gospel will not have overlooked that he makes much of 
“water” as well as “blood.” So did the Lord in presenting 
the truth to His own, and no one shows this more than John. 
His first epistle also characterises the Lord as “He that came 
by (0?’) water and blood ; not in (év) water only, but in water and 
blood.” He purifies as well as atones. He employs the word 
to cleanse those who are washed from their sins in His blood. 
The apostles, Paul, Peter, and James, insist on this effect 
of the word, as John does. It is disastrous and dangerous in 
the highest degree to overlook purification by the washing 
of water by the word. If “the blood” is Godward, though for 
us, “the water” is saintward to remove impurity in practice, 


i 
‘ 
4 
a 
2“ 
3 


4 
< 
“2 
3 
OY 
: ‘ 


CHAPTER XIII. 257 


- as well as to give a new nature which judges evil according to 


God and His word, of which it is the sign, adding to it the 
death of Christ, which gives its measure and force. Out of His 
pierced side came blood and water (chap. xix.). 

As to this grave and blessed truth Christendom remains, one 
fears, as dark as Peter, when he declined the gracious action 
of the Lord. Nor did Peter enter into the truth conveyed by 
His most significant dealing till afterwards, that is, when the 
Holy Spirit came to show them the things of Christ. On the 
occasion itself he was wrong throughout. And so are men 
apt to be now, even though light divine has been fully afforded. 
They still perversely limit its extent to teaching humility. 
This only Peter saw, and hence his mistake; for he thought it 
stooping down excessively, that the Lord should wash his feet ; 
and, when alarmed by the Lord’s warning, he fell into an 


opposite error. We are only safe when subject to His word in 


distrust of ourselves. 

The fact is that, since apostolic times, the truth (save as to 
the foundation perhaps) has been either misapprehended, or 
perverted often to lifeless ordinances. Evangelicals as the rule 
ignore it, or merge it in the blood of Christ. Catholics (Greek, 
Oriental, Roman, or Anglican) misapply it to baptism. Hence 
not only do they miss the Lord’s special lesson of washing in 
water, but they enfeeble propitiation. Consequently non- 
imputation of sin is all but unknown from the earliest fathers 
till our own day. The Reformers wrought no deliverance in 
this respect; and the Puritans increased the confusion and 
darkness by pressing, not ordinances, but the law as the rule of 
life, instead of recalling by the Spirit of the Lord to Christ as 
the object according to which the Christian is being transformed 
here below. The Lord suffered once for sins, Just for unjust. 
The efficacy is as perfect for the believer as is His Person; 
and the unity of His sacrifice is therefore the great argument 
of Hebrews ix. x., as contrasted with the repetition of Jewish 
ones. By His one offering we are not only sanctified but 
perfected in perpetuity. Is there no failure in the saint 
afterwards? Too often there may be. What then is the pro- 
vision for such? It is the washing of water by the word 

R 


258 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


which the Spirit applies in answer to the Son’s advocacy with 
the Father. Of this Christ was here giving the sign. 

The Lord proceeds to the work in hand. “He cometh then 
unto Simon Peter. He saith to him, Lord, dost thow wash 
my feet? Jesus answered and said to him, What I am doing 
thou knowest not just now, but shalt know afterwards. Peter 
saith to him, In no wise shalt thou wash my feet for ever. 
Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part 
with me. Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, not my feet only, 
but also my hands and my head. Jesus saith to him, He that 
is washed [bathed] hath no need to wash [other] than his feet,* 
but is wholly clean; and ye are clean, but not all. For he 
knew him that was delivering him up: on this account he 
said, Ye are not all clean” (vers. 6-11). 

In divine things the wisdom of the believer is subjection to 
Christ and confidence in Him. What He does, we are called 
to accept with thankfulness of heart, and as Mary said to the 
servants at the marriage feast, “ whatsoever he saith unto you, 
do it.” This Simon Peter did not. For when the Lord 
approached him “in the form of a servant,” or bondman, he 
demurred. Was there not faith, working by love in Peter’s 
heart? Both undoubtedly, yet not then in action, but buried 
under superabundant feeling of a human sort: else he had not 
allowed his mind to question what the Lord saw fit to do. He 
had rather bowed to Christ’s love and sought to learn, as He 
might teach, what deep need must be in him and his fellows 
to draw forth such a lowly yet requisite service from his 
Master. Ah! he knew not yet that Jesus must go lower down 
far than stooping to wash the disciples’ feet, even to the death 
of the cross, if God were to be glorified and sinful man to be 
justified and delivered with an indisputable title. But the 
grace which was undertaking that infinite work of propitiation 
(the groundwork for meeting every exigency of the divine 
nature and majesty and righteousness in view of our guilt, and 
unto the glory of God) would provide for every step of the way 
where defilement abounds. Thus might we enjoy communion, 


* N, though the only MS. that omits # (or, ed) uh rods rédas, is followed by 
Tisch., ed. 8, and bracketed by W. and H. 


A ee ek, ee 


tO a Polen 


CHAPTER XIII. 259 


‘spite of Satan’s power and wiles and our own weakness, yea 
spite of failure be restored to communion with Him in the 
light and glory of God to which He was going back, and into 
which we shall in due time follow Him. 

Peter did believe, but he did not yet believe “all that the 
prophets spoke” (Luke xxiv. 25). He feebly entered into what 
he himself afterwards called the sufferings as to Christ, and the 
glories that should follow them. He continued to regard the 
Lord too exclusively as Messiah, little estimating till afterwards 
the depths involved in the Son of the living God, though his 
own lips had thus confessed His glory before. Nature was too 
little judged in Peter, so that he did not yet appreciate its 
meaning and application and results as subsequently under 
divine teaching when the cross manifested its worth or rather 
worthlessness before God and man. Too self-confident and 
indeed ignorant not only of himself and the defiling scene 
around but of the depths and constancy of Christ’s love, Peter 
says to Him, “ Lord, dost thou wash my feet?” We grant that 
he could not know what was not yet revealed; but was it 
comely in him, was it reverent, to question what the Lord was 
doing? He may have thought it humility in himself, and 
honour to the Lord, to decline a service so menial at His hands. 
But Peter should never have forgotten that as Jesus never said 


-a word, so He never did an act, save worthy of God and de- 


monstrative of the Father; and now more than ever were His 
words and ways an exhibition of divine grace, when human 
evil set on by Satan, not only in those outside, but within the 
innermost circle of His own, called for increased distinctness 
and intensity in view of His departure. 

The truth is that we need to learn from God how to honour 
Him, and learn to love according to His mind. And if any 
man thinks that he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing 


yet as he ought to know. This too was Peter’s mistake. He 


should have suspected his thoughts and waited in all sub- 
missiveness on Him Who, as many confessed that knew far less 
than Peter, “hath done all things well,’ and was absolutely 
what He was speaking, truth and love in the same blessed 
Person. The thoughts of man are never as ours; and saints 


260 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


slip into those of man, unless they are taught of God by faith, 
in detail too as well as in the main; for we cannot, ought not, 
to trust ourselves in anything. God the Father will have the 
Son honoured; and He is honoured most when believed and 
followed in His humiliation. Peter therefore was equally 
astray when he once ventured to rebuke the Lord for speaking 
of His suffering and death, as now when he asks, “ Dost thou 
wash my feet ?” 

But the meek Lord answered in fulness of grace and said 
to him, “What I am doing thou knowest [oféas] not just now, 
but shalt know [yywcy] afterwards.” Was not this a grave but 
compassionate intimation to Peter, had he been in the mood to 
learn? He ought to have gathered from the Lord’s words, 
if he did not at once bow to His act, that there was a meaning 
worthy of Him Who deemed it due to the Father in truest 
lowliest love to the children to wash their feet; he ought 
to have gathered more than this, that what he did not know 
of himself then, he was to learn afterwards: I presume, after 
the things now in progress, His rejection and death, resurrection 
and ascension, when the Holy Spirit should be given guiding 
them into all the truth. 

But Peter was not yet of those who are guided with the Lord’s 
eye, he did not feel the need of being instructed and taught 
the way in which he should go. There was too much of the 
horse or of the mule in him, too much need of being held 
with bit and bridle ; and failing to receive of the Lord that he 
should submit now and learn later, he plunges farther and 
more boldly into error with himself. “In no wise shalt thou 
wash my feet for ever”: the strongest repudiation of it, and 
this not merely in this life but for that to come—for ever. 

It was feeling, it was ignorance, no doubt; but should he 
have trusted himself to utter words so strong of the gracious 
way and act of His Master? How blessed that he had, that 
we have, to do with One Who does not hold His peace so as to 
bind the soul with a bond, Who knows when and how to 
disallow the foolish and even God-dishonouring word, so that 
it shall not stand and the soul be forgiven! See Numbers 
xxx. The Lord made Peter’s words utterly void the moment 


OA, ls ee 
eee : ao Tbe 2 


Fn TN Ne 
‘ *, q . 
rN = 


CHAPTER XIII. 261 


He heard them, as we shall see, in the grace which corrects 
every fault, and bore all our iniquity. 

“Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part 
with me.” Solemn assurance, not for Peter only, but for all 
who slight the same gracious provision on His part, who forget 
or have never apprehended their own need of it. It is a 
question not so much of life as of fellowship, of a part with 
Christ, rather than in Him, though not really separable. Christ 
was going on high to God, Peter and the rest still on earth and 
surrounded by defilements in the way. Christ would neither 
abate His love to His own, nor would He make light of their 
failures. Hence the need of washing the disciples’ feet, apt to be 
soiled in walking through the world. And this is carried on by 
the word applied to the conscience by the Spirit. The believer 
bows, judges himself, and is practically cleansed. His com- 


-munion is restored, and He can enjoy the things of Christ. He 


has part with Him. 

Alarmed by the Lord’s warning, His servant instantly flies 
to the opposite extreme: “Lord, not my feet only, but also my 
hands and my head.” Now Peter cannot have too much. He 
seeks to be bathed all over, as if all the value of his previous 
washing could evaporate, and he needed it afresh no less than 
if it had never been. But it is never so. To see and enter the 
kingdom of God one must be born afresh, born of water and 
of the Spirit. But this is never repeated. The new birth 
admits of no such repetition. It was wrong to suppose that, 
born of God, one needs nothing else, that defilements either 
cannot befall a believer, or that, if they do, they are of no 
consequence. 

What Simon thus thought and said in his ignorance, a 
certain school of divinity has formulated in its presumption. 
But this is not true knowledge of God. If law punishes 


_ transgression, grace condemns sin still more deeply. Impossible 


that any system of religious dogma could be of God which 
slurs over or ignores evil. But Simon Peter convicted of 
danger on this side falls into another on that side, and, roused 
to own the needful washing to have part with Christ, claims 
it all even for the believer as for the natural man. And here 


262 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


too an opposite school presents its corresponding dogma, denies 
the standing of the believer if unhappily he may get defiled, 
and insists that he must begin over again, perhaps many times 
in his life. Thus life eternal as a present possession in Christ is 
done away, and the constant responsibility which flows from 
the constant relationship of a child of God. One might be 
thus often lost, often saved spiritually ! 

The Lord corrects by anticipation both schools in correct- 
ing Peter. “He that is washed (AceAovuévos) hath no need to 
wash (viyrac@ar) [other] than his feet, but is wholly clean ; and 
ye are clean, but not all. For he knew him that was deliver- 
ing him up: on this account he said, Ye are not all clean.” 
Thus simply, but perfectly, does He put each truth in its place 
and in relation to all the rest. Grace is maintained, but so is 
righteousness. Not a sin is passed over lightly. Not a 
believer has reason for discouragement; his every failure 
is an object of fresh concern to the Lord, a fresh proof 
of love that will not let him go but bless him, spite of 
the carelessness which let the Lord go. But He will not go; 
He washes the feet of him that is already washed all over, 
that he may be wholly clean. Thus the new birth holds and 
is never renewed, because it abides true and good; while the 
failure of him who is born again comes under Christ’s active 
love and advocacy, and the soul is brought to judge himself in 
order to restored communion. Again the case of Judas is not 
one of losing life, but of manifesting that he never had been 
born of God, as indeed no scripture ever affirms it. It was 
not a sheep of Christ becoming unclean, but a dog returning 
to his vomit, yea far worse, because of such proximity to Him 
Whose intimacy he abused for lucre to betray Him to His 
enemies. 

It is of capital moment to hold fast along with atonement 
the washing of water by the word. Else the blood of Christ 
is diverted from its true aim and effect before God, and 
practically used as the resource in case of failure, 

Let us hear Calvin as an influential witness of the error 
it involves, where he teaches from the word of reconciliation 
in 2 Corinthians v. 20 (“Be reconciled to God”), that Paul 


y 

a 
% 
4 


CHAPTER XIII, 263 


is here addressing himself to believers, instead of illustrating 
the message of grace to the world. “He declares to them every 
day this embassy. Christ therefore did not suffer, merely that 
He might once expiate our sins, nor was the gospel appointed 
merely with a view to the pardon of those sins which we 
committed previously to baptism, but that, as we daily sin, 
so we might also by a daily remission be received by God into 
His favour. For this is a continued embassy, which must 
be assiduously sounded forth in the church till the end of 
the world; and the gospel cannot be preached unless remission 
of sins is promised. We have here an express and suitable 
declaration for refuting the impious trust of Papists, which 
calls upon us to seek the remission of sins after baptism from 
some other source than from the expiation that was effected 
through the death of Christ. Now this doctrine is commonly 
held in all the schools of Popery—that, after baptism we merit 
the remission of sins by penitence through the aid of the keys 
(Matt. xvi. 19)—as if baptism itself could confer this upon us 
without penitence. By the term penitence, however, they mean 
satisfaction. But what does Paul say here? He calls us to go, 
not less after baptism than before it, to the one expiation made 
by Christ, that we may know that we always obtain it 
gratuitously. Further, all their prating as to the adminis- 
tration of the keys is to no purpose, inasmuch as they conceive 
of keys apart from the gospel, while they are nothing else 
than that testimony of a gratuitous reconciliation, which is 
made to us in the gospel.” (Comm. Epp. to the Corinthians, 
Calvin Soe. ii. 240, 241.) 

Clearly this teaching is erroneous, not only founded on a 
misapplication to saints of the gospel ministry to sinners, 
but consequently unsettling their reconciliation as a great 
finished fact. It is not true that the apostle declares this 
embassy to believers every day. He declares on the contrary, 
that the work is done, and the worshippers once purged so as 
to have no longer any conscience of sins. There is no question 
of imputing sins or errors, nor of God’s judgment of them 
by-and-by. The error undermines or excludes the constant. 
relationship of the Christian on the ground of peace made by 


964 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the blood of Christ’s cross, and present and permanent fitness 
for sharing the inheritance of the saints in light (Col. i. 12). 

The one offering of Christ does not merely once expiate 
our sins, but has perfected in perpetuity the sanctified. The 
Romanist meets the need created by failure after baptism by 
penitence aided by the keys; the Protestant by fresh approach 
to the sacrifice of Christ, the one being as ignorant as the other 
of the washing of the defiled feet by the word in answer to the 
advocacy of Christ with the Father. The continued embassy 
is by the Lord’s servants in proclaiming the gospel to the 
world. There is no such thing as God’s receiving the believer 
by a daily remission into His favour. There may be the 
necessity of removing the uncleanness of flesh or spirit which 
hinders communion; but this supposes the groundwork of 
propitiation undisturbed and of the favour in which we stand. 
That the Christian requires to be reconciled afresh, that the 
call “ Be reconciled to God” goes out to failing believers, proves 
that Calvin, able as he was and a saint himself, was ignorant 
even of the elementary and distinctive truth of the gospel. 
This opened the door to the opposed error of Arminianism, 
which takes its stand more consistently on the same mistake, 
that the failing believer has to start afresh, as if eternal life 
had no meaning, and the blood of Christ lacked everlasting 
efficacy. Both systems are faulty. 

The truth puts everything in its place. The blood of Christ 
abides in its unchangeable value before God sacrificially and 
judicially ; but the failing believer is inexcusable, and needs to 
wash his feet. The word must deal with him morally, producing 
self-judgment and confession ; and the Lord looks to it in His 
ever-watchful grace by taking up His cause in living love with 
the Father. The Spirit too has His own suited function in 
producing, not the joy of fellowship with Christ in the things 
of Christ, but here grief and shame, pain and humiliation, in 
recalling the man’s own ways—haste, levity, pride, vanity, and 
perhaps corruption or violence; for of what is the flesh 
unjudged not capable? By that word of truth he was 
begotten of God, awakened to self-judgment in His sight; 
by the same word is each defilement judged day by day, 


eT Re a 


CHAPTER XIII. 265 


making it so much the more painful because the Spirit 
reminds the soul what Christ suffered for the sins which the 
flesh feels so lightly. 

But far from dissolving the relationship, the sense of incon- 
sistency with it, and with the grace which at so much cost and 
sovereign love withal conferred it on us, is that which most 
of all tries and humbles the erring one. Flesh would like 
exceedingly to have its way and indulge its pleasures, and the 
soul begin again; but God holds the believer to a relationship, 
which, if real, is everlasting, and makes every delinquency 
therefore to be so much the deeper sin, because it is against 
not conscience and righteousness only but the richest grace 
God could show in Christ. We were reconciled to God through 
the death of His Son. There is no repetition of reconciliation 
any more than of the new birth. There is complete remission 
of sins through His blood, and hence no longer an offering for 
sin. The one and only offering which could avail is made 
and accepted. But there is, whenever needful, a fresh 
application of “water by the word.” And this ever deals 
with the soul. The word detects whilst it removes the 
defilement, applying the death of Christ thus to the man, as the 
blood dealt with the sins before God. Thus is the work carried 
on holily without weakening the sole foundation for a sinful 
man’s peace as well as for divine glory. 

“When then he washed their feet and took his garments 
and reclined again, he said to them, Know ye what I have done 
to you? Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord, and ye say 
well, for I am. If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, washed 
your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet; for I have 
given you an example, that even as I did to you, ye should also 
do. Verily, verily, I say to you, A bondman is not greater 
than his lord, nor yet an apostle greater than he that sent him. 


. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do [or, practise] 


them ” (vers. 12-17). 

Undoubtedly the humility of the Lord was beyond question 
in His washing the disciples’ feet, and that He would have 
them cultivate it He had solemnly urged on them in the 
plainest terms, as we see in all the Synoptic Gospels. But 


266 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


then there is another and deeper instruction. It is the 
renewal of their defilements in walking through the world 
which is before His mind, now that He is about to leave them; 
and about this He would exercise their hearts by the question, 
“ Know ye what I have done to you?” It is His way indeed 
to teach us afterwards the good He has already done us; and 
as we grow up to Him in the truth, we appreciate better what 
we understood but slightly at first. Grace instructs us, as well 
as acts on our behalf; and it is humbling to find out how little 
we have understood while its activity has never staid. But 
how good and strengthening it is to learn its ways and lessons! 

The Lord next enforces what He had done by appealing to 
the titles they habitually gave Him. “ Ye call me the Teacher 
and the Lord; and ye say well, for I am:” One to obey as 
well as to instruct, as could not but be where His personal 
glory is known. If He then stooped in love to wash their 
feet, what did they not owe one another? It is not only that 
we should serve the Lord in the gospel. By this shall all men 
know, He says later on in this very chapter, that ye are My 
disciples, if ye have love one to another. Here, however, it is 
a definite call, where we are apt most to fail, to share His grace 
in seeking the restoration of each other where failure has come 
in. On the one hand it needs faith and self-denial and divine 
affections. Indifference about it detects our own failure. But 
on the other hand the righteousness that censures another is as 
far as possible from washing the feet, resembling rather the 
scourge than the service of the towel and basin. And assuredly, 
if grace be needed to bear the washing, a far larger measure 
must be in action to wash the feet. Hence says the apostle, 
“ Brethren, even if a man be overtaken in any fault, ye that 
are spiritual restore such an one in a spirit of meekness.” 
Where flesh was judged, love could act more powerfully, and 
with deeper sense that all is of grace. Self is the greatest 
hindrance in dealing with another's trespass. 

The service of love in every form is the mind which was in 
Christ. Hence He calls them here to weigh what they had 
first seen. “For I have given you an example that ye also 
should do even as I did to you. Verily, verily, I say to you, 


eae Se LenS reel: eee ei? Wye ly Pe om 


CHAPTER XIII. 267 


A bondman is not greater than his lord, nor an apostle greater 
than he that hath sent him. If ye know these things, happy 
are ye if ye do them.” The Lord knew the end from the 
beginning, and how soon His ministry would degenerate into a 
worldly institution, and become a title of pride, instead of being 
a work of faith and labour of love. Hence the need for His 
solemn formula, as a standing witness to all His own so prone 
in a world of vain show and selfishness to forget His word and 
wander from His way. But there His warning abides; to 
decline His service in washing the feet of His own is to set 
oneself above the Lord, and to claim a greater place than His 
Who sends even an apostle. Oh, for the blessedness of 
doing as well as knowing these things! It is the fellowship 
of His love in one of its most intimate forms; and love is 
of God, and everyone that loveth hath been begotten of God 
and knoweth God. 

The hint which closed verse 10 is now expanded into the 
growingly solemn intimations in word and deed that follow. 
It is no longer Christ’s love caring for His own, either once for 
all in atoning self-sacrifice to God for them, everlasting in its 
efficacy; or in unintermittent cleansing by the word, as for 
whom He died on earth, living for them in heaven, that they 
might be practically in unison with the relationship of grace 
into which they had been brought, spite of the defilements of 
the way. Here it is the faithless indifference of nature, with 
a conscience increasingly seared by indulgence in a besetting 
sin, which Satan was about to lure and blind to high treason 
against Christ, availing itself of the closest intimacy to sell the 
Master and Lord, the Son of God, for the paltriest price of 
a slave—to sell Him into the hands of enemies thirsting for 
His blood. It may not be the hatred of these; it is utter 
lovelessness, betraying Him Who was at this time more than 
ever showing and proving His love, not only up to and in 
death, but in life beyond it evermore. Now the unbelief 
which, having eyes and heart, sees not nor feels such love, 
precipitates above all into Satan’s deceit and power. This 
we sorrowfully behold in Judas; and no one felt the sorrow as 
the Lord. 


268 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


“T speak not of you all: I know whom* I chose out, but 
that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with 
me hatht lifted up his heel against me. Henceforth (or, From 
this present time) I tell you before it come to pass, that, when 
it hath come to pass, ye may believe that I am [he]. Verily, 
verily, I say to you, He that receiveth whomsoever I shall send 
receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that 
sent me. Having said these things, Jesus was troubled in 
his spirit and testified and said, Verily, verily, I say to you, 
One of you shall give me up. The disciples [then] ¢ looked 
one on another, doubting of whom he spoke [lit. speaketh]” 
(vers. 18-22). 

The Lord then did, and does, look for activity of love among 
His own. If they were objects of a love which could never 
fail, He would have them instruments or channels of it one 
toward another, and this in respect of evil to remove it, 
whereas legality could only condemn. Himself the Son yet 
the servant in love, He would exercise them in the service 
of love, where defilement otherwise would repel. But as He . 
came to suffer for our sins, so also He was going away to form 
us while on earth into His own mind and affections, through 
the truth, and in doing so to cleanse from every way which 
might grieve the Holy Spirit, whereby we are sealed till the 
day of redemption. For it is not a question of removing the 
guilt of a sinner only, but of restoring the communion of 
a saint, whenever interrupted by allowed evil. And in this last 
dealing of love, He would have His own caring one for another. 
But He did not speak of all the disciples then present: sad 
presage of what was to be far more common in after days! 
He knew whom He chose out: Judas was not among such, 
though called to be an apostle. He had never known the Lord; 
knew nothiug truly of His grace or of His mind, and was not 
born of God. Why then had he been selected for that place of 
honour, the apostolate, in immediate and constant attendance 
on the Lord here below ? 

* rlvas% BOLM, &c., ods A D and eleven more uncials, &e. 

t éerijpxey 8 A U II, &c.; the mass followed by Text. Rec. émfpev. 


{ ofy NP™ and most uncials, cursives, and versions, and so Text, Rec, ; but 
Noor BO, &., omit. 


9 
‘ 


SEUAI NATE ws 


ol tes Po 
ary 


Tn 


CHAPTER XIII. 269 


It was not that the Lord was unconscious of his character, 
conduct, or coming catastrophe, but that the scripture might be 
fulfilled, He that eateth bread hath lifted up his heel against 
Me. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked of old; he forsook God 
his Maker, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation. 
Judas went incomparably farther in his guilty indifference to 
the Son of God come down in love and humiliation, and in his 
eagerness to serve himself at all cost, betraying his gracious 
Master for the merest trifle. Never was such love, never such 
slight and abuse of it,and this in one of those specially respon- 
sible to be faithful. Doubtless it would be through Satan’s 
power; but to this flesh exposes, and so much the more because 
of nearness outwardly to the Lord Who is not believed on to 
salvation. Thereby comes out, most palpably and fatally, the 
hard baseness of the unrenewed heart, and this against the 
grace of the Lord above all. Thus, if the disciples were in 
danger of being stumbled by such a one’s defection, the 
evident fulfilment of scripture was meant to strengthen their 
faith in every written word of God. By this man lives 
Godward: bread, money, anything here below, may be the 
occasion of his ruin. How wondrous the patience which, 
knowing all from the beginning, bore all to the end, without a 
frown or sign of shrinking from the traitor! But so much the 
more withering must be the sentence of judgment when it 
comes from His lips, the Lord of glory, the hated and despised 
of man. 

The Lord gives precision to ancient oracles, hitherto applied 
only to others, as here to David suffering from Ahithophel. 
But the Holy Spirit wrote of Him pre-eminently; and He too, 
before the event, cites the word about to be verified in the 
treachery toward Himself. Thus did the Lord prove alike His 
perfect and divine knowledge of what lay yet in the future, 
while He taught the inestimable worth of scripture, and, not 
least, of prediction not yet fulfilled, meeting in every form the 
incredulity of believers as well as of unbelievers. For who 
knows not the accepted maxims which assume the dark and 
doubtful character of unfulfilled prophecy, which denies 
prophecy even to the prophets, still more to the Psalms and to 


270 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the law? At least men should fear to give the lie to Him Who 
declares Himself the truth, and spoke as never man did. They 
have reason to fear, if they turn away from Him to lying 
vanities which, far from being able to save their votaries in the 
day of need, shall assuredly be as stubble to burn themselves 
and all who trust them. Jesus, on the contrary, is never so 
transparently the Messiah as when beforehand He points to 
the word of scripture about to be accomplished in His own 
rejection and death of the cross, and affords in it a firmer 
ground of blessing for the poorest of sinners than in all the 
glories of the kingdom to be fulfilled in their season. 

Then, with His usual mark of profound solemnity, the Lord 
binds the reception of His sent ones with Himself and His 
Father. ‘Verily, verily, I say to you, He that receiveth 
- whomsoever I may send receiveth me; and he that receiveth 
me receiveth him that sent me.” This was the more important 
to be added here, for some might question their standing before 
God because of the awful doom of Judas, when and where 
known. The Lord comforts such, and turns from occupation 
with the fallen servant to the Master Who abides for ever the 
same, as does the Father. Did Judas betray the Lord? This 
sealed his own doom, but touched not the authority any more 
than the grace of Christ, as of God Himself. If they received 
one whom Christ sent, be his end even what it might, they 
received the Son, and so the Father, instead of sharing in the 
guilt or danger of the servant’s punishment who dishonoured 
his Master to his perdition. 

The Lord then, manifesting the deepest emotion, proceeds to 
urge the sin home, limiting its worst form to one only of the 
disciples. “Having said these things, Jesus was troubled 
in his spirit, and testified and said, Verily, verily, I say to 
you, One of you shall deliver me up.” It was holiness, it 
was love, which took thus to heart the impending iniquity 
of Judas. In every point of view the Lord felt it—in itself, 
in its contrariety to God, in its bearing on others as well as 
on Himself, and in its awfulness for the wretched guilty one. 
It is not self, but love, which is associated with the truest 
sensibility; and the Lord expresses it as a testimony also, 


CHAPTER XIII. 271 


“Verily, verily, I say to you, One of you shall give me up.” 
They were all faulty; but one, and only one, was thus about 
to become a prey to Satan, and the tool of his malice against 
the Lord. Their doubts were as honest, as his place in their 
midst was now a lie against the truth. If he joined the rest 
in looking one on another, it was hypocrisy; for he could not 
really doubt of whom Jesus was speaking. Yet no blush, no 
paleness, betrayed Judas. The disciples must have recourse to 
other means of learning the sad truth. 

The announcement of a traitor among the twelve troubled 
the disciples and led to anxious thought, as they looked one on 
another. What a testimony to His perfect grace Who had 
known it all along, and had given no sign of distrust or 
aversion! How solemn for the saints who have to do with 
the same unchanging Christ day by day! Nothing precipitates 
into the enemy’s hands more than grace abused and sin indulged, 
while outwardly he is in the presence of the only One Whose 
life rebukes it absolutely. Let us look a little into the scene. 

“[Now]* there was at table one of *his disciples in the 
bosom of Jesus whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter then beckoneth 
to this one and saith to him, {Tell who it is of whom he speaketh. 
He thent having thus{ fallen back t on the breast of Jesus saith 
to him, Lord, who is it? Jesus [then]{ answereth, That one it 
is to whom I, having dipped the morsel, shall give [it]. Having 
then dipped he [taketh and] giveth the morsel to Judas [son] 
of Simon, Iscariot. And after the morsel, Satan then entered 
into him. Jesus therefore saith to him, What thou doest do 
more quickly. But no one of those at table knew why he said 
this to him; for some supposed because Judas had the bag that 
Jesus saith to him, Buy the things that we have need of for 


* BCrmL, &c., have no copula, but it appears in the other uncials, &c., and 
Text. Rec., which omits éx with some of the uncials and most cursives, contrary 


to the more ancient authorities. 


+ & exhibits both readings which divide the other MSS. mv@ec@au ris dv ety 
mepl of Greyev* kal Aéyer atr@: etme rls éorw Tepl ob eye. 

+ Tischendorf abandons dvamecwv with some good and old uncials (the usual 
phrase for the position), for ém:w. with most MSS., and some ancient, which 
express the change of action.—It is a question of ody and 6¢ in connection with 
it.—otrws, ‘‘thus,” seems pretty sure though omitted by Text. Rec. 


272 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the feast, or that he should give something to the poor. He 
therefore having received the morsel went out immediately ; 
and it was night” (vers. 23-30). 

Peter and John are often seen together. So here in their 
perplexity Simon Peter beckons to John as he reclined at table 
in the bosom of Jesus; for that John and no other was this 
favoured disciple cannot be doubted from chapters xix. 26; xx. 
2; xxi. 7, 20, 24. And how truly of the Spirit that one en- 
joying such favour should describe himself, not as loving Jesus 
though indeed he did, but as beloved by Him; and this too as 
the disciple whom Jesus loved, withholding his name as here and 
elsewhere of small account, though plainly described at the 
close where needed, and named where men might deny the 
authorship as they have done! It is intimacy with Jesus that 
gathers secrets, but imparts them for others’ good. Falling back 
just as he was on the breast of Jesns, John asks who it is; and 
the Lord answers, not in word only but with a sign strikingly 
according to Psalm xli. 9, though an even more special mark of 
intimacy. 

In Judas’ state that token of love only hardened the con- 
science long seared by secret sin, which shut out from the heart 
all sense of love. His very familiarity with Christ’s passing 
through the snares and dangers of a hostile world may have 
suggested that so it would be now with his Master, while he 
himself might reap the reward of his treachery; and the know- 
ledge of His grace, without heart for it, may have led him to 
hope for mercy he had never known refused to the most guilty. 
The moment comes when holy love becomes unbearable to him 
who never relished it; and the sin he preferred blinded his 
mind and hardened his heart to that which had otherwise 
touched the most callous. “After the morsel, Satan then 
entered into him.” The devil had already put it into his heart 
to deliver the Lord up; now, after receiving without horror or 
self-judgment the last token of his Master’s love, the enemy 
entered. At being thus designated there may have been irrita- 
tion, which if retained gives room for the devil even in ordinary 
cases ; much more in his who had trifled with unfailing grace, 
and thus forgot wholly His glory, as he had ever been insensible 


CHAPTER XIII. ols 


to God’s nature and his own sin. “Jesus therefore saith to 
him, What thou art doing do more quickly,” that is, sooner 
than was indicated by his pretension to share the doubts of 
the disciples or to join in what was before their hearts. 

Never does God thus abandon to Satan poor man, however 
wretched and sinful, till he rejects His love and holiness and 
truth, above all shewn in the Lord Jesus and in this Gospel 
There He may and does judicially harden, and this to irretriev- 
able ruin, but only after the heart has steeled itself to the 
appeals of His most patient goodness. Still judicial hardening 
is a real thing on God’s part, whatever may be argued by those 
who seem unwilling to allow frankly and fully the activity of 
God on the one hand and of Satan on the other. Not a whit 
better is the opposite school which seems to banish from con- 
science the solemn fact of responsibility, whether in a man or 
in a Christian, or as here in one who, though in the unremoved 
darkness of a man, drew so near the Son of God, the personal 
expression in man of all God’s light and love. 

We have heard already how deeply our Lord felt the sin of 
Judas as the moment approached and the design was allowed 
in his heart. Now the sentence goes forth, which closed the 
door of life for the earth on the Saviour—of everlasting wrath 
on Judas. Yet did the disciples look on and listen without 
knowing the awfulness of the issues then pending. Not even 
John penetrated the meaning of words soon to be clear to all. 
It was not to buy things needful but to sell their Lord and 
Master; it was no preparation for the feast but that to which 
it, not they, had ever looked onward, the fulfilment of God’s 
mind and purpose in it, though it were the Jews crucifying 
their own Messiah, by the hand of lawless men; it was not 
that Judas should give to the poor, the last thing which would 
occupy his mind, but that He should Who was rich yet for our 
- gakes became poor, that we through His poverty might be made 
‘rich. It was man’s, a disciple’s, worst sin; it was God’s infinite 
love, both meeting in the death of the Lord on the cross; but 
where sin abounded, grace exceeded much more. 

Judas “therefore having received the morsel immediately went 
out.” What darkness rested thenceforward on that soul! “It 

8 


274 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


was night,” says our evangelist. And that night deepened in 
its horrors on the faithless man, given to see his irreparable evil 
only when done, till it closed on his going to his own place. 

The Lord felt the gravity of the moment, and saw the way 
and end from the beginning. All the wondrous and everlasting 
consequences of His death were stretched out before Him; and 
now that Judas is gone, He gives free expression to the truth 
in divinely perfect words. “When therefore he was gone out, 
Jesus saith, Now is [lit. was] the Son of man glorified, and God 
is glorified in him”* (ver. 31). His own cross is fully in view, 
and there was laid the basis for all true abiding glory, not for 
God only (though assuredly for God, for there can be none 
really unless He be foremost) but for man also in the person 
of the Lord, the Son of man, Who alone had shewn what man 
should be for God, as He had shewn what God is, even the 
Father, in Himself the Son. 

It is indeed a theme of incomparable depth, the Son of man 
glorified, and God glorified in Him; and no statement else- 
where, though from the same lips, was meant so to present and 
fathom it, though each was perfect for its own object, as the 
one before us. 

In chapter xii, when certain Greeks came to Philip the 
apostle, desiring to see Jesus, and Andrew and Philip tell Jesus, 
He answered them saying, The hour is come that the Son 
of man should be glorified; and forthwith, with His most 
solemn emphasis, He speaks of His death as the condition 
of blessing to others. So only should He bear much fruit. 
Otherwise the grain of wheat abode alone. A living Messiah 
is the crown of glory to Israel; a rejected One, the Son of man, 
by death opened the door, for the Gentile even, into heavenly 
things, and is the pattern thenceforth. So true is it that to love 
life in this world is to lose it, to hate it here is to keep it to life 
eternal ; and hence following Him Who died is the way to serve 
Him, secure the Father's honour, and be with the heavenly 
Master and Lord. It is by death that He takes the place, not 


* It is not that the aorist as here ever means the present or the future, but 
that in the Greek the act is spoken of as complete, summed up from the com- 
mencing fact to its completion. See ch. xv. 6 also, and Rev. x. 7. 


CHAPTER XIII. Dy eas 


of Son of David, according to promise (though this in grace 
He does also, according to Paul’s gospel), but of Son of man, 
and thus have all things and all men, Greeks no less than 
Jews, according to the counsels of God, heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ. There was no other way for guilt to 
be effaced, for heaven to be opened and enjoyed by those who 
were once lost sinners. Thus the heavenly glory follows the 
moral glory ; and every hope, for the Gentile most manifestly, 
turns on Christ’s obedience even unto death, wherein Satan’s 
power was utterly broken, and the judgment of God perfectly 
satisfied. For if the world was therein judged, and its prince 
to be cast out, Christ lifted up on the cross becomes the 
attractive centre of grace for all, spite of degradation, darkness, 
and death. 

In chapter xvii. the Son looks to the Father Whom He had 
glorified, that the Father might glorify Him in heaven. He 
was Son before time began; He had therefore of course glory 
with the Father before the world was. But He had taken the 
place of servant in manhood on earth, and now asks that the 
Father should glorify Him along with Himself with the glory 
which He had along with Him eternally. A man to everlasting, 
He would receive all from the Father, albeit Son from ever- 
lasting; and when glorified, it is that He may glorify the 
Father. Such is perfect love and devotedness. 

Here, in chapter xii, He speaks of the Son of man glorified, 
and of God glorified in Him. This has its own peculiar force. 
The first man was an object of shame and judgment through 
sin; the second Man, Jesus Christ the righteous, was glorified, 
and God was glorified in Him. He sees it all summed up 
in the cross, and so speaks to the disciples, now that the 
traitor’s departure left His heart free to communicate all that 
filled it. It is not the Father, as such, glorified livingly by 
His Son in an obedience which knew no limit but His Father’s 
will, but a man, the rejected Messiah, the Son of man, devoting 
Himself at all costs to the glory of God. This was indeed the 
Son of man’s glory, that God should be, as He was, glorified in 
Him. Blessed Saviour! what a thought, and now a fact and 
a truth, the truth made known to us, that we might know not 


276 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


merely God come to us but ourselves brought to God, and this 
in peace and joy, because man is glorified in the Person of 
Christ, and God is glorified in Him a Man, the man Christ 
Jesus. 

For in deed and in truth God is glorified in the cross as 
nowhere else—His love, His truth, His majesty, His righteous- 
ness. Herein was manifested the love of God in our ease, 
that God hath sent His only-begotten Son, that we might live 
through Him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but 
that He loved us, and sent His Son as propitiation for our sins 
(1 John iv.). And His truth, majesty, and righteousness have 
been maintained, no less than His love; for if God threatened 
guilty man with death and judgment, Jesus bore all, as man 
never could, that His word might be vindicated fully. Never 
did man prove his enmity to God, never did Satan prove his 
power over man, as in that cross where the Son of man gave 
Himself up in supreme devotedness and self-sacrificing love 
to the glory of God. Nowhere was so demonstrated the 
holiness of God, the impossibility of His tolerating sin; 
nowhere such love to God, and such love to the sinner. The 
Son of man was glorified, and God was glorified in Him. 

When, where, was Jesus so glorified as in stooping to the 
uttermost when God made sin Him Who knew no sin, that 
we might become the righteousness of God in Him? where 
Jesus, feeling the truth of death and judgment as none else ever 
could, bowed His head, not merely to man’s contemptuous 
hatred and.to Satan’s wily malice, but to God’s indignation 
against sin—despised of man, abhorred of the nation, aban- 
doned of the disciples, forsaken of God, when most of all 
needing comfort, doing and suffering His will perfeetly in the 
only unstormed fortress of the enemy’s power—to God’s glory 
and in His grace? No, there is nothing like it, even where, 
and where alone, all was perfection, in the life of Christ. This 
was glorifying the Father as to good in a devotedness and 
dependence with which none can compare; that, a glorifying 
God as to evil by the endurance of all that the Holy One of 
God could suffer from all that God could and did inflict in 
unsparing judgment— both the one and the other in absolute 


- 


eae eS ee 


: 
: 
; 
. 
3 


CHAPTER XIII. 27 


obedience and love and self-renunciation to His glory. And 
all this, and more than this, blessed be God! we see in Man, the 
Son of man; that in Him, in that nature which had wrought 
foul dishonour and rebellion against God from first to last, God 
might be glorified. “Now is the Son of man glorified, and God 
is glorified in him.” 

In that Person, and by that work, all was reversed. The 
foundation was iaid, the seed was sown, for an entirely new 
order of things. Previously God forbore, not only with man, 
but even with the saints, looking unto Him Who should come; 
and sins were not remitted exactly but pretermitted (Rom. 
iii. 25), if we would speak with dogmatic propriety. Man was 
simply and solely a debtor to God’s mercy. Nor would we 
weaken for a moment that man is still a debtor to His mercy, 
and must ever be.’ But there is a revelation now in virtue 
of Christ’s death, a new and different and infinite truth, that 
God is a debtor to the Son of man for glorifying Him as to 
evil no less than good; not only fulfilling all righteousness, but 
suffering for all unrighteousness. This is alone in the cross, 
which constitutes its specific glory, ever fading away from 
feeble man’s eyes unless filled with light from Christ in glory, 
never forgotten of God the Father, Who, in answer to the cry, © 
“Glorify thy name,” said, “I have both glorified and will 
glorify it again.” And so He does and ever will, whatever 
appearances may for a little while say to the contrary. 

His righteousness, once so dreaded a sound, armed (as it 
could not be without Christ) against us, is now by His death 
as distinctly for us, as is its spring, the grace which reigns 
through it unto eternal life. And we boast in hope of His 
glory, which, without Christ’s death, had been instant and ever- 
lasting destruction to us; as surely as we have an access by 
faith into His favour, in which we stand as a present thing. 
Oh, what has not the death of Christ done for God and for us ? 

Hence the Lord adds, “ If God is [lit. was] glorified in him,* 


* The oldest and best MSS. omit this clause, N»™ B Cem D LX UH, a 
dozen cursives, some of the good Latin, &c. Hence Lachmann and Tregelles 
bracket the clause, and W. and H. go so far as to omit it altogether. Before 
them, Schulz remarks on the omission, ‘‘recte, nam inepta videtur iteratio 


278 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


God also shall glorify him in himself, and shall glorify him 
immediately” (ver. 32). If we may reverently so speak, it is 
God now Who has become debtor for the vindication of His 
glory to the Man Who suffered on the cross. Was He not 
God from everlasting to everlasting, no less than the Father ? 
yet did He become most truly man, and as man the Son of man 
—which Adam was not—He brought glory to God, even in the 
matter of sin. Therefore it is that God, having been glorified 
in Him, could not but also glorify Him in Himself. This He 
has done by setting Him (not on David’s, but) on His own 
throne in heaven, the only adequate answer to the cross. 
There He alone is set down, the Son but a man, on God’s 
throne; and this “immediately.” God could not, would not, 
did not, wait for the kingdom, which will surely come, and 
Christ in it, when the due time arrives. But the work of 
Christ was too precious to admit of delay, and God had long 
hidden counsels to bring out meanwhile. Thus should He 
glorify Christ immediately; and so it is, as we all know now, 
however strange to Jewish expectation then. 

Not only was His death before the Lord, but His departure 
from the world—a notion absolutely new to a Jewish mind in 
connection with the Messiah. The more such a soul believed 
Him to be the promised One, the less could it be conceived 
that He should quit the scene which He had come to bless. 
“We have heard out of the law,” answered the people not long 
before, “that Christ abideth for ever; and how sayest thou, The 
Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man?” 
There too He had intimated to the Jews not only His death 
but what death He should die, and His retirement from their 
midst. A new creation and heavenly glory were beyond their 
field of vision. But here the Lord prepares His disciples more 
fully for what was then coming and is now come: facts simple 
enough for us who have to do with them every day, but wholly 
eiusdem dicti.” This is bolder than man should say and simply proves his 
own spiritual incapacity. It was worthy, if anything was, of repetition and 
most impressive. Twelve uncials, besides the correction of the Sinai MS., 
and the Rescript of Paris, the mass of cursives, much the weightier of the 


versions, not to speak of the fathers who commented on the passage, cite the 
passage as unquestionable scripture, 


CHAPTER XIII. 279 


unlooked for in Israel who expected the kingdom immediately 
to appear, not the things unseen and eternal, with which our 
faith is called to be conversant. 

“Little children, yet a little I am with you. Ye will seek 
me; and, even as I said to the Jews, where I go away ye 
cannot come, also to you I say now” (ver. 33). None had 
passed this way heretofore. It must be a new and living way, 
and only His death could make it possible, consistently with 
God or with man. But to His own there is a title of endear- 
ment; and if He was to be but a little with them, they were 
to seek Him. Heaven, however, was in no way accessible ~ 
to man like the earth, of whose dust his body was made. 
Christ came from God, and went to God, as He will come 
by-and-by and receive us to Himself, that where He is, there 
we may be also. But no more is the Christian able to go there 
than any other man; Christ alone can bring any therein, as 
He will surely do with His own at His coming. 

But He meanwhile lays a characteristic injunction on them 
here below. “A new commandment I give to you, that ye 
love one another; even as I loved you, that ye also love one 
another. By this shall all know that ye are my disciples, if ye 
have love among one another” (vers. 34, 35). 

The nation disappears. It is no question of loving one’s 
neighbour, but of Christ’s disciples and of their mutual love 
according to His love. New relationships would come out 
with increasing plainness when He rose from the dead, and 
sent down the Holy Spirit; and this new duty, loving one 
another, would flow out of the new relationship: a convincing 
proof to all men Whose they were, for He alone had shewn this 
throughout His life and death, as also alive again—love unfail- 
ing. How far were the Jews from such love? The Gentiles 
had not even the thought of it. And no wonder. Love is 
of God, not of man, which accounts for the blank till He came 
Who, though God, manifested love in man and to man, and 
was thus, through His death and resurrection, to bear much 
fruit. Their love was to be, if we may so say, of His own 
material and mould—to abide, if it did not begin, when He 
went away. For as is written in 1 John ii. 8, the new 


280 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


commandment now “is true in him and in you; because the 
darkness passeth, and the true light already shineth.” While 
He was here, it was true perfectly but only in Him; when 
He gave them redemption in Him through His death and 
resurrection, it was true in them also. The darkness was — 
passing (“is past” being too strong to say), and the true 
light already shines. It is not here activity of zeal in quest of 
sinners, however precious, but the unselfish seeking of the good 
of saints as such, in lowliness of mind and in Christ’s love. 

An irrepressible disciple, with a curiosity habitual in him, 
turns from what the Lord was enjoining to the words before: 
“Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, where goest thou? Jesus 
answered [him],* Where I go, thou canst not follow me now, 
but thou shalt follow me afterwards. Peter saith to him, Lord, 
why cannot I follow thee now? My life for thee I will lay 
down. . Jesus answeretht+ [him], } Thy life for me wilt thou lay 
down? Verily, verily, I say to thee, In no wise shall a cock 
crow till thou shalt have denied me thrice” (vers. 36-38). Peter 
knew and really loved the Lord, but how little he as yet knew 
himself! It was right to feel the Lord’s absence; but he 
should have heeded better the mild yet grave admonition, 
that where Christ was going away he was not able to follow 
Him now; he should have valued the comforting assurance 
that he should follow Him later. Alas, how much we lose 
at once, how much we suffer afterwards, through not laying to 
heart the deep truth of Christ’s words! We soon see the 
bitter consequences in Peter’s history; but we know, from the 
further words of our Lord in the close of this Gospel, how 
grace would ensure in the end the favour compromised by that 
self-confidence at the beginning, which he is here warned 
against. 

But we are apt to think most highly of ourselves, of our 
love, wisdom, power, moral courage, and every other good 
quality, when we least know and judge ourselves in God's 
presence; as here we see in Peter, who, impatient of the hint 
already given, breaks forth into the self-confident question, 


* Omitted by BCP™ L; but supported by 8 A Cr D, ete. 
¢ The best sustain the present tense. { The oldest omit “ him.” 


Se Ey te ee anne eee cE TONNE nS Oh ty RS a oer or een ae 


CHAPTER XIII. 281 


“Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my 
life for thy sake.” Peter therefore must learn, as we also, by 
painful experience what he might in faith have understood 
even better by subjection of heart to the Lord’s words. Where 
He warns, it is rash and wrong for us to question ; and rashness 
of spirit is but the precursor of a fall in fact, whereby we 
must be taught, if we refuse it otherwise. He that slighted the 
warning when Christ spoke it, lied through fear of a servant- 
maid. True Christian courage is never presumptuous, but well 
consorts with fear and trembling; for its confidence is not 
in the resources of self, or in the circumstances of others, but 
in God with a due sense of the power of Satan and of our 
own weakness. 

When ignorance slips, as it often does, into presumption, the 
Lord does not spare rebuke. “Wilt thou lay down thy life for 


my sake?” Was this Peter’s resolve? Soon would that stout 


heart quail at the shadow of death. Yet what was death itself 
for any saint to compare with Christ’s death, when tasting — 
rejection as none ever did, and bearing our sins in His own 
body on the tree, as it was His alone to suffer for them from 
God! It was judgment as well as death, but endured as only 
He could. 

But ignorance works often in another way. They will not 
believe their own utter weakness, spite of Christ’s plain 
warning, and want light to prove His truth and their folly. 
Nor is this all. They assume that if a believer fail once, 
he must immediately repent in dust and ashes. How little 
they know themselves, or have profited by scripture! “Verily, 
verily,” said the all-patient Master, “In no wise shall a cock 
crow till thou shalt have denied me thrice.” We recall Peter’s 
repeated denial of his Lord, and with oaths too under the 
most solemn circumstances, not to lower him but for the profit 
of our own souls, and to exalt Him Who alone is worthy. How 
infinite the grace which made the measure of his sin to be the 
signal and means of his repentance, under the Lord’s use of 
His own word, and in His wonder-working merey! And what 
He was to Peter, He is to us, and nothing less. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


THE way was now opened to bring out the Christian’s hope. 
Death, in its most solemn and most blessed aspect, had been 
put before the disciples, however little able as yet to follow 
their Master in thought, impossible then indeed in any way, 
as the Lord let the too confident hear, though Peter learnt 
it not till he proved his own utter powerlessness by the basest 
denial of Him he loved. How much we have to learn by most 
painful and humbling experience of ourselves, because we fail 
in sustained subjection to, and dependence on, our Lord! But 
now, this cleared, the Saviour turns to what is unfailingly 
bright, because it centres in Himself. It is no coming as Son of 
man to judge, no appearing in glory to set all that is crooked 
straight and to govern all righteously. It is His own coming 
for His beloved ones, that they may be with Him where He is, 
in the Father’s house on high. 

“Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe on God, believe 
on me also. In my Father’s house are many mansions: if not 
so, I would have told you, because* I go to prepare a place for 
you. And if I go and} prepare a place for you, I am coming 
again, and will receive you unto myself, that where I am ye 
also may be. And where It go ye know the way” (vers. 1-4). 

A greater break with Jewish feeling could not be than such 
a hope, a shock assuredly as wholly changing all they had 


* iu S A BO rm D K L X Il, twenty cursives, and most ancient versions, 
&e. ; but Text. Rec. omits with some ten or eleven uncials, most cursives, the 
Gothic, Aeth., &c. 

+ D M with more than sixty cursives read éro.udoa ; others, like A E G K 
I A and forty cursives with the Gothic and Pesch. Syr., simply érowudow with- 
out cal, but 8 BC LNSU X AIL, and versions, «al ér. 


{ Some authorities omit éy®, and most with Text. Rec. add kcal. . 


. oldare, 
“and... ye know.” 


282 


UE Us NS Ne i ee ae Ree nN " 
s ia AN 


SNS ONE pe 


CHAPTER XIV. 283 


expected, but only as supplanting an earthly prospect, however 
blessed, by a heavenly one incomparably more blessed. If His 
going away by death, not yet understood, either in its depth of 
suffering or in its efficacy, but as departure from them on 
earth, might naturally disturb their heart, He begins to explain 
its all-importance as making way for faith. He was no longer 
to be, according to prophetic intimation, as the Messiah of 
Israel on earth, still less displayed there in indisputable glory 
and resistless power. He is about to go a man yet to heaven, 
and there to be an object of faith as no longer seen, even as 
God is. “Ye believe in God, believe also in me.” This was 
a quite new thought about the Messiah, rejected here, glorified 
in heaven, believed on in earth: simple enough now, but then 
a strange sound, and an entirely new order of associations, 
which set aside for a time all that saints and prophets looked 
for. Not that these things were more than postponed, but 
that those, altogether unprecedented and unexpected, were to 
come in by the Lord’s going on high after redemption, with 
just enough in the Old Testament (as for instance in Ps. cx. 1) 
to stop the mouth of a Jew who might pervert the law to deny 
the gospel. 

This then is the central fact for the Christian as for the 
church—Christ not reigning over the earth, but glorified on 
high as the fruit of His rejection here below. But it is far 
from all, though all else be but consequences in divine grace or 
righteousness. The next thing He proceeds to unfold is that 
there is room above where He is for the saints who follow 
their rejected Lord. “In my Father's house are many 
mansions: if not so, I would have told you, because I go 
to prepare a place for you.” He would not have raised a hope 
incapable of realisation for these saints. If He discloses His 
own bright abode with the Father, there is ample room for 
them as for Him; and His love, which was giving Himself for 
them, would keep back nothing else. His love and the 
Father’s love—for indeed they were one in purpose as in 
nature—would have them near Himself there. There are 
many abodes in the Father's house. It is no question of 
crowns, or cities, or place in the kingdom. There will be 


284 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


reward according to walk, though grace will secure its own 
sovereign rights. But here differences vanish before the 
infinite love that will have us with Himself before His 
Father. Were it too much, or not so, He would have told 
us, because He goes to prepare a place for us. Love never 
could, nor does, wittingly disappoint its object. 

There is another thing of deep moment contingent on this, 
but plainly revealed, instead of being left for us to infer. He 
is coming to fetch His own to heaven. And this was meant 
to be ever acting on the heart, as we see by the subsequent 
teaching of the Holy Ghost throughout the rest of the New 
Testament. Our new place and home is where Christ is, and 
whither He is to translate us, we know not how soon. Times, 
dates, signs, circumstances, are purposely excluded. The 
Christian understands them by a sound intelligence of the 
word which takes cognizance of all things, but knows nothing 
of them for his own hope. He reads them about the Jew or 
the Gentile for the earth; but his are heavenly things, where 
such measures do not govern. He looks above sun, moon, and 
stars, where Christ sits at God’s right hand, and knows that 
Christ is coming again, as surely as He went, and this to 
prepare a place for us. And mark, He is not sending angels 
to gather us above. This were a great thing, but how im- 
measurably more the love as well as honour, since He, the 
Son of God, is coming again, and will receive us to Himself, 
that, where He is, we also may be! He came for us to die for 
our sins to God’s glory ; He is coming again, to have us with 
Himself in the same home of divine love and nearness to the 
Father where He is. He could not do more, He would not do 
less. There is no love like that of our Lord Jesus; nor is 
the predicted exaltation for Israel, still less for others, to be 
compared with it, any more than earth is with heaven. 

“And where I go ye know the way.” His own Person, the 
Son of the Father, in grace and truth, presented to man, and 
revealing the Father, is the way which could not but lead 
to heaven. He came from God, and was going to God. No 
earthly blessedness could adequately express His glory: He 
might, and would, take it, and glorify God in glory as in 


_ 
cf A 
~ 
A 


Ne OSTET  eemeTee 


CHAPTER XIV. 285 


humiliation ; but the saint constantly feels there is, and must 
be, more and higher. Heaven is His Who could communicate 
with His Father, and command its resources, though never 
whilst here abandoning the place of the lowliest of men and 
servant of all need. Yet, as He was the conscious Son, so the 
saints knew He must be going to the Father, as He was and 
is the way there. 

The Lord had laid down the inward conscious knowledge of 
the disciples according to God, and the glory of His own 
Person Whom they confessed, soon by redemption and the gift 
of the Spirit to bloom in full intelligence. But in this they 
were as yet dull to apprehend His meaning; and he who was 
remarkable among them for his gloomy thoughts expresses this 
difficulty of his for all. 

“Thomas saith to him, Lord, we know not whither thou 


_ goest ; [and]* how know we [or can we know]* the way? Jesus 


said to him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no one 
cometh unto the Father but by me. If ye had known} me, ye 
would have known; my Father also; and+ from henceforth ye 
know him, and have seen him” (vers. 5-7). 

No! the thoughts of Thomas limited the Lord to that earthly 
horizon which formed the boundary of his own hopes of Israel 
clustering around their Messiah. He could not conceive, any 
more than the rest, whither the Lord was retiring, now that 
He had come to the people and the land which, he knew, He 
was pledged to bless richly and for ever. How then know 
the way ? His mind was yet earthly. As he had no thought 
of heaven for the Lord Jesus, so he overlooked the way. But 
this furnished the opportunity for the Lord to announce in 
words as simple as profound, “I am the way, and the truth, 
and the life.” Much conveyed in them might have been 
gleaned from testimonies to Him, most from His own previous 


*BCrmL, &., omit «cal; whilst B Crm D, Lat. MSS., Aeth., &c., read 
oldapuev, “know we.” Text. Rec. with sixteen uncials, perhaps all the cursives, 
and the versions generally, has duvdpueba 7. 60. eldévm, ‘can we know”’ &c. 

+ éyvoxate... yuooerbe S D P™ instead of éyvwxerre . . . éyv. dv, as in all the 
other uncials, save that B C »™ &c., give for the last ay #devre. Some of these 
uncials, &c., omit xal before dm, and N® reads after it yrwoecde, not without 
some support from Latin ; B C ®™ omitting avrév at the end. 


286 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


discourses as given in this very Gospel, but nowhere so much 
combined with so brief an expression as here. It was worthy 
of Him, and at that moment above all. 

A way is a great boon, especially through a wilderness which 
characteristically has no way. Neither had Eden, or unfallen 
creation, a way; but then it needed none. For all things 
everywhere were good, and as long as man ate not of the 
forbidden tree, there was no straying. All else it was for him 
to enjoy, giving thanks to God. But sin came in, and death, 
the harbinger of judgment; and all was changed into a wilder- 
ness, and men wandered in all directions, alas! all of them away 
from God and irreparably wrong: a wilderness-world truly, a 
void place, where there is no way. Not that promise did not, 
less or more, hold out the hope of better things; not that law 
did not in due time thunder and lighten; but God’s way was 
not known, as His grace alone could show it. Now it is; for 
Christ is the way, the only sure way, for the most erring of 
sinners, avowedly for the lost, whom He is come to seek and to 
save; and He is the way to the Father, not to God displayed 
in power and glory on the earth, as the Jew should expect for 
the day that is coming, when the rejected Messiah returns as 
the glorious Son of man. But He is much more, and above all 
time or change, the deepest rejection only forcing out what was 
there always, His own personal glory as Son of God superior 
to every dispensation. And in the fullest consciousness of it 
He says to dimly-seeing Thomas, “ I am the way.” 

Why should one wait for the time when the wilderness shall 
be gladdened by His presence and power? Then doubtless 
the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land 
springs of water; and a highway shall be there, and a way, 
and it shall be called, The way of holiness; the unclean shall 
not pass over it, but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein. But He is this and more 
now to all that believe in Him; and faith delights to own, as 
God to make known, all He is, when unbelief disowns and 
slights and casts Him out. He is accordingly the one divine 
way ; and as there is none other, so is He all-sufficing for him 
who has no strength or wisdom or worth in any sort. But 


CHAPTER XIV. 287 


Christ is the way now for the steps of such as know Him, the 
wisdom of God in an evil world—Himself the highest and 
perfect expression of that wisdom, and thus open to the babe 
in faith no less than to an apostle. 

Further, He is the truth, the full expression of every one 
and of everything as they are. He tells us in His own Person 
what God is; He shows us the Father, being Himself the Son. 
But He, not Adam, shows us man. Adam, no doubt, shows us 
falling or fallen man; Christ alone is man according to God, . 
both morally as once here below, and in counsel as now risen 
and in heaven. Moreover, as He shows us holiness and 
righteousness, so also He brings out sin in its true colours; as 
He says Himself, “If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. 
He that hateth me hateth my Father also. If I had not done 
among them the works which none other man did, they had 
not had sin; but now have they both seen and hated both me 
and my Father.” Hence He, and He only, brings out His 
adversary the devil personally, the prince of this world, but 
the constant enemy of the Son. 

Even the law, holy, just, and good as the commandment may 
be, is not the truth; for it is rather on God’s part the demand 
of what a man should do; but Christ tells out, not merely 
what he ought to be, but what he is. The law claims his 
duty; Christ declares that all is over, and he is lost. But 
Christ also shows us a Saviour in His own Person, and this 
from God and with God. Not that He is not the Judge, for 
He will judge living and dead, as surely as He will appear and 
set up His kingdom; but He is Saviour now and to the utter- 
most. Indeed it would be impossible to say what of good and 
glorious He is not, nor from what evil He does not deliver. 
He is the truth, the exhibition of the true relation of all 
things with God, and consequently of the departure of any 
from God. He, and He only, to the challenge, Who art thou? 
could answer, Absolutely that which I am also speaking to you. 
He is what He also speaks; He is, as no other man was, the 
truth; and this, as He intimates in the same chapter vill. of 
our Gospel, because He is not man alone but God. 


288 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


But He is more than the way and the truth; He is life, and 
this because He is the Son. In communion with the Father 
He quickens. It is not so in judgment; for the Father judges 
none, but has given every kind of judgment to the Son, and 
this because He is the Son of man; and as men dishonoured 
Him because He deigned in love to become man, so the Father 
will have Him honoured not only as God but as man in judg- 
ment. Believers honour Him in a very different and far more 
excellent way. They bow to Him now; willingly, gladly, they 
exalt Him while rejected by the world. They are thus by 
grace in communion with God, Who has set Him on high at 
His own right hand, and will by-and-by compel every creature 
to bow and own Him Lord to His own glory. But those that 
believe have now in Him life, which issues by the Spirit’s 
power in the practice of good; and hence they will enjoy life- 
resurrection at His coming, as those that have done evil must 
be raised to a resurrection of judgment in its day. 

Thus the believer has Christ for all possible need, and all the 


blessing that our God and Father can bestow. One cannot . © 


have Him as the way and the truth without having Him as the 
life also, for indeed He is the resurrection and the life; and 
this life, which we have in Him the Son, the Holy Spirit 
strengthens and exercises, as His word nourishes it, revealing 
Him ever afresh to our souls. The gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord; and as the way in Christ is a 
path of love and liberty and holiness, so the end also is life 
everlasting. 

Nor is there any other means of blessing: “No one cometh 
unto the Father but by me,” says the Lord. There is the 
surest guarantee, the amplest and the highest good, but it is 
absolutely exclusive. By none but the Son can one come to 
the Father; by Him can come any, the proudest Jew, the 
most debased Gentile. Through Him we both have access by 
one Spirit unto the Father, as the apostle says expressly, when 
showing the nature of that church which now takes the place 
of the ancient people of God. And be it observed that it is 
not to God only in sovereign grace above sin, saving the most 
guilty and wretched, but to the Father as such; in it is that, 


3 


ioe ee i re 


CHAPTER XIV. 289 


relationship of grace which the Son knew eternally in His own 
right and title, and none the less but the more to His Father’s 
honour, when He glorified Him on earth as the perfectly 
dependent and obedient man. How wondrous that we should 
come to the Father, His Father and ours, His God and ours! 
All glory to Him and His work of redemption, through which 
alone it could be to us who believe! 

Next the Saviour lets them know that the knowledge of the 
Father is inseparable from that of the Son. “If ye knew me, 
ye would know my Father also; and henceforth ye know him, 
and have seen him.” He is the image of the invisible God; 
in the Son is the Father known; and this the disciples are 
given to learn now objectively. 

But there is no capacity in the bright and active-minded 
disciple to enter into divine things, any more than in the most 
reserved or sombre one. “Philip saith to him, Lord, show us 
the Father, and it-sufficeth us” (ver. 8): an excellent wish, it 
might seem to many who read his words, for one who had both 
seen Jesus and helped others in their desires to see Jesus, 
But it was sad unbelief in Philip, especially after the patient 
gracious words just uttered to lead them on. 

“Jesus saith to him, Am I so long a time with you, and hast 
thou not known me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen 
the Father; [and]* how sayest thou, Show us the Father? 
Believest thou not} that I [am] in the Father, and the Father 
isin me? The words which I say{ to you, I do not speak from 
myself; but the Father that abideth in me, he doeth the 
works.t Believe me that I [am] in the Father, and the Father 
in me; but, if not, believe me§ for the very works’ sake. 
Verily, verily, I say to you, He that believeth on me, the works 
which I do shall he do also; and greater things than these 
shall he do; because I go unto the Father ”|| (vers. 9-12). 

* Most MSS. read kal 7., but the copulative is omitted by 8 B Q, &c. 

+ B v™ strangely reads od miorevoers, ‘‘ wilt thou not believe?” 

$ Aéyo-B err (pm om.) LN X, &e. instead of the first AaA® as in most, as 
BL, &c., omit 6 after the second rarjp. S BD read atrod (‘‘ his works”) at 
the end, instead of avrds either there or before as ordinarily. 

§ & DL, &c., omit final wor read by the mass of authorities. 


|| The weight of authority (§\ A B D L Q X II, many cursives, almost all the 
ancient versions, and the fathers) is against the addition of mov after rarépa, 
T 


290 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


The Lord thus poured a flood of light on the perplexity of 
the disciples. The Messiah Himself was not a mere man, 
however endowed and honoured of God. He was true man, and 
the lowliest of men; but Who was He that was pleased to be 
born of the virgin? He was the Son—He was God, no less 
than the Father, and in Him the Father was displaying Him- 
self as such. It was God in grace, forming and fashioning His 
children by the manifestation of His affections and thoughts 
and ways in Christ the Son a man on earth. This they had 
known, and yet had not known. They were familiar with Him, 
and the facts of His every-day works and words, little feeling 
as yet that they were words and works for eternity of the 
Creator displaying Himself in incomparably deeper fashion 
than in the wonders of His creation, or of His government 
in Israel. 

No one hath seen God at any time: the Only-begotten 
Son, Who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared 
Him. It was for this He came, not only to annul sin by the 
sacrifice of Himself, but to manifest the eternal life which was 
with the Father, and this as the Son revealing the Father. 
How new the order of being, how strange the range of thought, 
to the disciples! Yet this had Jesus been ever doing here 
below, occupied with His Father’s business long before the 
beginning of His ministry. . 

“Believest thou not that I [am] in the Father, and the 
Father isin me?” All turned on the glory of His Person; and 
the very unity of the Godhead, the cardinal truth Israel had to 
testify, made a difficulty to the reasoning mind of man, unable 
to rise above its own experience. Not only had law and 
prophets prepared the way, and John the Baptist’s witness, 
but the words that Jesus said were not as any other man 
spoke. They were no mere human things, nor independently 
of His Father. He had been made flesh, but never ceased to 
be the Word, the Son; and the works He did bore the un- 
mistakable imprint of the same gracious One—the Father. It 
was He that did the works (or, His works). The disciples were 
therefore called to believe that He was in the Father, and the 
Father in Him; a state of being only possible in the divine 


‘ 


CHAPTER XIV. 291 


nature, to which the works themselves gave a witness that left 
the incredulous without excuse. 

And this the Lord follows up with His formula of special 
solemnity in verse 12, wherein He intimates the testimony that 
would be rendered to the glory of His Person when, and 
because, He was going to the Father; the power which should 
invest the believer, and enable him to do not only what they 
had seen Jesus do but things greater still in honour of His 
name. And this was to the letter fulfilled. For never do we 
hear of the Lord’s shadow healing the sick, nor were napkins 
taken from His body (save in lying legends) to cure disease, or 
expel demons, not to speak of the multitudes which were 
brought in far and wide by apostolic preaching. What greater 
proof of divine power than to work as He Himself did, and 
yet more by His servants! and more again, when He went on 
high, than when He sent them out from His presence on earth! 
But if the power displayed—if the works were to be greater, 
who could compare himself with the Lord in self-renouncing 
love, dependence, and obedience? Certainly none that believed 
on Him, none that through Him wrought so mightily. 

Thus had the Lord guaranteed the solemn and withal cheering 
promise, that His proceeding to the Father was in no way to 
stem and dry up the mighty stream of gracious power in which 
He had wrought here below. The believer on Him was to do 
what He did, and yet greater things. This He now follows up 
and explains by the place given to that exercise of faith which 
issues in prayer, henceforth to have its fullest character in His 
name Who had glorified the Father to the uttermost. 

“And whatsoever ye shall ask [or, beg, arv.] in my name, this 
I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye 
shall ask anything in my name, I will do it” (vers. 13, 14). 
The disciples were thus to count on power that could not fail, 
if sought in His name; for Jesus was no mere man, whose 
departure must terminate what He used to do when present. 
Absent He would prove Himself divine, and none the less 
interested in their petitions because He was risen from the 
dead. Whatever they might ask He would do, that the Father 
might be glorified in the Son. And not content with a broad 


292 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


assurance in verse 13, no matter what the difficulty, He repeats 
it in verse 14 as to any particular petition on their part with 
a yet more emphatic pledge of His personal action. 

_But the Lord adds a great deal more, and of the deepest 
moment. “If ye love me, keep [or, ye will keep*] my command- 
ments; and I will requestt the Father, and he will give you 
another Paraclete, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit 
of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it beholdeth 
him not, nor knoweth him; but ye know him, because he 
abideth with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you 
orphans, I am coming unto you. Yet a little, and the world 
beholdeth me no more; but ye behold me: because I live, ye 
also shall live” (vers. 15-19). The way to show their affection 
and devotedness to their Master would be by obedience; for, 
whatever His grace, He does not disguise from them His 
authority. To obey His commandments then would prove 
their love far better than zeal in work or in sorrow for His 
absence. For His absence, however serious in itself, is turned 
by God’s goodness and wisdom to better blessings and deeper 
ways for. the saints, even as it furnishes the occasion for 
bringing out the hidden counsels of God to His own infinite 
glory in Christ. Their place was to obey His commandments, 
as they loved Him; whilst He would pray the Father, Who 
would send them another, a Paraclete or Advocate as He 
Himself had been, One who would undertake and carry 
through their cause, as a Roman patron of old did for his 
clients or a modern solicitor does now in his little measure. 
“Comforter” | seems too narrow a word, and separates the 

* BL, &e. (N, 38, 69P™ rypyonre) rnpjoere, ‘ye will keep”: so W. and H. edit. 

+ It is of interest and even of importance to mark the distinctness of épwrdw 
as used of Christ with the Father, and airéw of the disciples. Scripture 
nowhere predicates of Him the last or supplicatory expression, save in Martha’s 
mouth whose faith though real was low. Christ uses é¢p. in speaking to the 
Father, asthe disciples use air, to Him, and both words to Christ. The word 
ép. is also employed in the sense of ‘‘interrogating” or ‘‘ questioning.” 

+ Philologically it is hard, not to say impossible, to conceive the Greek term 
meaning ‘‘Comforter.” Its structure and usage alike point to one ‘‘ called to 
aid,” as a cognate but different form signifies a comforter. This a paraclete 
may well be ; but He is far more, and summoned for every difficulty and need. 


So is the Paraclete, and in an infinite way, as a divine Person. To comfort is 
but a small part of His functions. ‘‘ Advocate” might do, as in 1 John ii. 1, 


CHAPTER XIV. 293 


Spirit unduly from our Lord, Who could hardly be so styled 
in J ohn i. 1, where Paraclete is applied to His action on high, 
as here to the Holy Ghost’s on earth. 

Further, this other Paraclete, given by the Father in answer. 
to Christ, was not to be for a brief season, like the Saviour here 
below. “He will give you another Paraclete, that he may be 
with you for ever.” This is a truth of the deepest consolation, 
but most solemn for Christendom. Who believes it? Certainly 
not those who boast of evangelical views, yet proclaim their 
unconscious unbelief by regular prayers at the beginning of 
every year, that God would pour out afresh His Holy Spirit on 
His children in their low estate. Is it meant that the self- 
complacent mass in Christendom (which utters no such special 
petitions, but assumes that the Holy Ghost acts, necessarily and 
infallibly, through popes, or patriarchs, or kindred officials) are 
more really believing? Far from it. They are inflated with 
pride, as if God sustains and sanctions their position ; and utter 
blindness holds their eyes, so that they cannot see their state 
to be one of departure from God’s will and truth and grace. 
But the opposite pole of an error may be also an error; and 
the assumption that the Holy Spirit directs Babylon, in her 
confusion of the world and the church, is not remedied by the 
practical denial of the abiding presence of the Spirit in the 
periodical petitions for a fresh outpouring on us. 

It were well to ask for a single eye and a spirit of humiliation, 
that we might cease to do evil, and learn to do well, and this 
with a truly contrite heart, and a deep sense of whence we have 
fallen, and of Christ’s speedy coming. It were well to judge 
ourselves by the word of God, not only in our individual walk, 
but in our corporate ways and worship, to see to it that we 
neither grieve nor quench the Spirit, to desire earnestly that we 
be strengthened with power by the Spirit in the inner man, if 
indeed we do not also need first to be enlightened of Him, so 
that we should know what is the hope of God’s calling, and 
what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints, 
and what the surpassing greatness of His power toward us who 
believe. These are the true wants, even where peace with God 
is enjoyed individually ; for there is nothing in general so little 


294. AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


known to the Christian or the church, as what the Christian 
and the church really are; and how can the functions or duties 
be discharged where the relationship is ignored or mistaken ? 

Now all this turns on the great truths before us in these 
chapters of our Gospel, the absence of Christ from the world 
to take His place as the risen Man in heaven on the footing of 

redemption, and the presence of the Holy Ghost sent down to 
be with the saints for ever. Faith then shows itself, not surely 
in imputing to Him failure in abiding, spite of our failure, and 
praying for a fresh outpouring, as if He had fled in disgust 
and needed to be sent down again, but in separating from every 
evil condemned by the word, and doing the will of God as far 
as we learn it, counting on the assured presence of the Spirit 
according to the Saviour’s promise. Blessing and power follow 
obedience, even as the Lord puts it here. Nothing can be con- 
ceived more false morally than to abide in what we know to be 
wrong, waiting for power, and then obeying. Not so; more 
especially too, as even this hollow excuse denies the distinctive 
privilege of the Christian, that he has the Spirit already in 
being a Christian. And so has the church of God: if not, it is 
some other church, not His; for only by the presence of the 
Spirit is the church really such, always and in all things respon- 
sible to be guided of Him, even “the Spirit of truth, whom 
the world cannot receive, because it beholdeth him not, nor 
knoweth him; but ye know him, because he abideth with you 
and shall be in you.” 

The Lord herein looked onward to the presence of the Holy 
Ghost with the saints, not only assuring them that it should be 
perpetual, but explaining why the world could have no portion 
in Him; whereas men might behold and know the Messiah 
objectively, though externally and in vain for eternal life. But 
with the Spirit as now given, what could the world have in 
common? He could but, by His presence with the saints 
outside the world, prove sin, righteousness, and judgment. 
But He is no object of sight or knowledge, and the world has 
no faith, or it would not be the world; whereas the saints, the 
Christians henceforth, would be characterised by knowing Him, 
invisible as He is, “because he abideth with you, and shall be 


CHAPTER XIV. 295 


in you.” Not that one thinks with Euthymius Zigabenus, 
followed by many a believer from his day to ours, that 
His abiding in Jesus Who was among them is the meaning; 
but that when given, He was to abide with them, instead of 
making a brief sojourn like the Lord’s; yea that He should 
not only abide, but be in them, which Messiah, as such, could 
not be, however companying with them. It was to be a new, 
special, intimate presence of God in and with the saints, in 
contrast with the world which had rejected Christ. And there 
is no surer sign of, or preparation for, the final apostasy, in its 
complete form, than that unbelieving departure from God which 
binds together the saints and the world: whether in a popish 
assumption of the Spirit’s sanction; or in a Protestant unbelief 
of His presence. One can understand this last, because of their 
experience of a name to live with death around and within; 
which prompts them to cry for the Spirit as if He were gone, 
instead of quitting all that grieves Him, and hinders the 
manifestation of His gracious action. 

But, said the Lord, “I will not leave you orphans, I am 
coming to you.” It is not here by His future advent but by 
the gift of the Spirit. Thus would He comfort them in His 
own absence. “Yet a little, and the world beholdeth me no 
more, but ye behold me: because I live, ye also shall live.” 
Nothing could be more opposed to their thoughts of, and 
expectations from, the Messiah of Israel seen by every eye, 
though in special nearness to His own people on earth. Now 
they were by the Holy Ghost to see Him Whom the world had 
rejected and lost, and should see no more save in judgment. 
And the saints should not behold Him only, but live of the 
selfsame life, having Christ living in them, as says the apostle 
Paul, or, as the Lord here, Because I live, ye also shall live. 
Christ is their life, and this in resurrection-power to which the 
future tense may point. 

But there is more than life, blessed as it is, living because 
Christ lives, Himself their life, not as Son simply, but as risen 
and gone to heaven. The Spirit is power to see and know, in 
contrast with flesh and world. And here He is supposed to be 
given, known, abiding with them and in them. A most solemn 


296 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


thing is His power, where Christ is not the life: unspeakably 
blessed, where we live of His life. 

“In that day ye shall know that I [am] in my Father, and 
ye in me, and I in you” (ver. 20). It is not here simply the 
glory of His Person as in verses 10,11. This was true and an 
object of faith then. “Believest thou not,” said the Lord 
to Philip, “that I [am] in the Father and the Father is in 
me?” Words and works both attested it. “Believe me,” He 
said to all,“ that I [am] in the Father and the Father * in me.” 
His being man in no way hindered or lowered His dignity, nor 
His essential oneness with the Father; and it was and is of all 
moment to believers unwaveringly to hold it and adoringly. 
The Son is God, even as the Father. But now more was to be, 
and to be known; impossible without His personal glory, but 
dependent on His work and the gift of the Spirit. This we 
have now, for that day 7s come. It is not the future glory, but 
present grace putting us in the closest vital association with 
Him Who has gone into heavenly glory, and yet is one with us 
here, as we with Him there, by the Spirit given that we might 
know it all. 

In this knowledge saints, true saints of God, are painfully 
dull, not merely to their privation in countless ways of the 
utmost moment, but to His dishonour Who cannot be duly 
served or worshipped now but in Spirit and in truth. The day 
of forms and shadows is closed; the true light now shines 
in Christ only, of Whom His saints are the responsible light- 
bearers as they hold forth the word of life. But there is more 
here, though all is bound up with Him. It is not Christ 
present in the world, and reigning over the land or even all 
the earth. He is here the despised and rejected of men, but 
glorified on high. “In that day ye shall know that I [am] in my 
Father’”—a relationship and sphere incomparably more glorious 
than the throne of His father David. It is not only heavenly, 
but also expressive of infinite nearness to the Father; and this 
gives its character to Christianity. All its blessedness turns 
on Who and what and where Christ is. Unbelief in saints, 


* In the Elz. of 1624 and 1638, éoriv, with the slenderest support ; Steph. 
rejects it in his edd. of 1546, 1549, and 1550, as Beza in all his. 


anita b\ Sars 


yo ar 


ent oe EN TEN n 


CHAPTER XIV. 297 


walking with the world and numbed by tradition, treats all as 
lifeless fact, not as truth which by the Spirit forms and guides 
the soul; unbelief in men learns fast to deny and deride even 
the fact. So much the more urgent call is there on those who 
believe by grace to walk on in the heavenly light; and the 
more so, as we know not only that He is in the Father, but 
that we are in Him and He in us, as the Lord proceeded to 
say in the words already cited. 

There can scarce be conceived a more striking contrast in 
position and relationship than of Christ and His own as here 
described with the Messiah and His people, which those then 
present had gathered, not from the tradition of the elders, but 
from the ancient oracles of God. But God is sovereign, though 
ever wise and never arbitrary. All His ways are good and 
glorious, as they all turn on Christ His image and their centre, 
the prime object before Him for heaven and earth. On earth 
government was and will be the aim; for heaven grace reigns, 
first however suffering to His glory, yet morally and infinitely 
superior to evil, by-and-by supreme when evil is dealt with 
and disappears by divine judgment. Between the humiliation 
of the cross and the coming again is the place of the Son as 
now known in the Father, as of us in Him and of Him in us. 

No Old Testament saint knew or could speak thus; nor did 
an expectation of it ever dawn on a single heart of old. No 
millennial saint will ever know such a relationship of Christ 
or of those then on earth. It is wholly and necessarily a part 
of what God is now intermediately working for the glory of 
the Lord; and as faith beholds Him in such a height of divine 
intimacy, so it owns the incomparable grace which has put us 
in Christ, and gives us to feel the grave responsibility of Christ 
in us. What can tell out our nearness more than such an 
identification of new life and nature, and this in power by the 
Spirit? Truly “he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit” ; 
and the union is just so much more real and permanent than 
natural oneness, as the Spirit is mightier and closer and more 
abiding than the flesh. But if thus one with Him and in Him 
by the Spirit, He is in us by the same Spirit. There is thus 
alike the highest privilege and the strongest obligation; and we 


298 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


must beware of sundering what the Lord here joins together. 
If we have life in the Son, we need to remind our souls that 
Christ lives in us, and that we are to show out Him, not 
ourselves. Doubtless this demands true and deep and constant 
self-judgment, and the faith that always bears about in the 
body the dying of Jesus; and God helps us by trials of all 
sorts, that the life also of Jesus may be manifest in our mortal 
flesh. Thus only does Christian practice flow from Christian 
principle and privilege; and ali is of Christ by the Holy 
Ghost in us. How comforting that our duty as Christians 
supposes our blessedness! How humbling that the gift of the 
Spirit makes our failure inexcusable ! 

But there is meanwhile, and especially connected with Christ 
being in us, not yet government of the earth by Christ reigning 
righteously and in power, but moral government of our souls 
in obedience, which assumes a twofold shape. “He that hath 
my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; 
but he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 
love him and will manifest myself to him” (ver. 21). To the 
superficial mind of man it may seem strange that our Lord 
should speak of having His commandments, not only keeping 
them, as a proof of loving Him; but it is profoundly true. 
The wicked, the disobedient, the careless, do not understand 
but the wise, even those whose wisdom ends not, though it 
begins, with the fear of the Lord. The single eye is full of 
light. The desire to do His will finds and knows what it is. 
Thus the loving heart has and keeps His commandments ; and 
loving Him draws down His Father’s love, Who honours the 
Son and will not be exalted at His expense. Obedience 
springing. from love is thus the condition of the disciples, 
which ensures the love of Jesus and the manifestation of 
Himself to us here below. 

Such a manifestation took the disciples by surprise; and one 
of them, Judas, carefully distinguished from the betrayer, could 
not but ask for explanation. “Judas, not the Iscariot, saith to 
him, Lord, [and]* how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself 


* aS GHKMQSUTAATIL, and many cursives; but AB D EL X, &«., 
with almost all the other versions, omit. 


mo ee 


Sy ; 


CHAPTER XIV. 299 


to us and not to the world? Jesus answered and said to hin, 
If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will 
love him, and we will come unto him, and make* our abode 
with him. He that loveth me not keepeth not my words; and 
the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s that sent 
me” (vers. 22-24). When Messiah manifests Himself to the 
world as He will, when the world-kingdom of. our Lord and 
of His Anointed is come, there will be a feigned obedience 
rendered by many kept in check by the display of His power 
and glory. Obedience now that He is absent must be more 
put to the proof, and is precious to Him as being real; and it 
should grow as being of life in the Spirit, as the knowledge of 
His will becomes better known. Compare Colossians i. 9, 10. 


‘Hence it deepens from His commandments to His word. His 


commandments were not grievous; His word is treasured, 
because He Himself is loved. So it is the Lord counts it; 
and fuller manifestation is enjoyed of the Father and the 
Son, and more abidingly. 

It will be noticed that in verse 23 it is “My word,” not, 
as in the Authorised Version, “My words.” He. that loves 
the Lord will keep His word as one whole, because it is His; 
as He adds in verse 24, that he who loves Him not does not 
keep His words or sayings. It is not his habit or way to 
keep any of them in detail. Disobedience betrays absence 
of love for Jesus; and this is the more serious, because it 
is not simply the Son Who is in question, but the Father 
that sent Him, Whose word is slighted. There is nothing so 
characteristic of a saint now as obedience. It was so perfectly 
with our Lord Himself. He came to do the will of God; He 
did and suffered it to the uttermost. Thus only is God known ° 
growingly by His children, and most intimately, as the Lord 
here declares. We must know Him to do His will, which can 
only be through knowing Jesus Christ Whom He sent; but 
keeping His word (as the expression not of His authority 


* roodueda & B L X II’, some cursives, and many fathers ; instead of the 
Text. Rec. roujoouey (or -wuev) as in most uncials and cursives and many fathers. 
D., etc., strangely read roujooua, “I will make.” The middle voice gives the 
force of ‘‘our” in the strongest way, which the Text. Rec. loses. 


300 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


alone, though this is dear to us from the first, but of His will), 
we grow by the knowledge of God, and this indefinitely while 
here below, though ever in unsparing judgment of ourselves 
and in confiding dependence on Him. -And how cheering to 
the heart the abiding sense of the presence of the Father and 
the Son with us as thus walking! Would that we knew it 
better! A manifestation is much, an abode is more. 

The value of what directs the life, of which it was also the 
revealing means, cannot be exaggerated; and this we have seen 
in the commands and words of our Lord Jesus, by which He 
exercises the life He has given to the believer, as indeed He is 
their life. But now He adds fresh consolation and blessing in 
the relation borne by the Advocate or Paraclete (for so now 
the Spirit is not only characterised but called). “These things 
I have spoken to you, while abiding with you; but the Para- 
clete, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, 
he shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance 
all things which I said to you” (vers. 25, 26). How blessed 
that the same Holy Spirit Who anointed and abode in Him, 
while ministering here below, was to teach the disciples all 
things, and to give them back all the words of Jesus! And 
so it was fulfilled, and more, as became a divine Person who 
deigned to serve in love, sent by the Father in the name of the 
Son. It is not here the Son requesting the Father and the 
Father giving as in verse 16, but the Father sending in the 
name of the Son the One Who could and would teach all 
things, besides recalling all that Jesus said to them. Room is 
thus left, not only for His reviving in their memory all the 
injunctions of Christ, but also for His own unlimited teaching, 

But there is more than doctrine. “Peace I leave with you, 
my peace I give to you, not as the world giveth give I to you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid” (ver. 
27). Throughout the Lord supposes His death. This was 
necessary to peace; His own peace goes farther still. It 
was the peace He enjoyed while here—a peace unruffled 
by circumstances, and in unbroken communion with His 
Father; a peace as far as possible from man’s heart, in 
such a world as this, ignorant of the Father, and on all 


CHAPTER XIV. 301 


points at issue with Him. But it characterised the second 
Man Who gives it to us. In the faith of Him Who loves 
us perfectly and to the end, Who has accomplished all to 
God’s glory and for us, we are entitled to it; and the Holy 
Ghost would have us enjoy it according to His word. He Who 
gives it gave it not away, and had it not the less because 
we were to receive it. Like all else that He gives, it is enjoyed 
unimpaired in its own divine fulness, everyone that shares 
rather adding to it than taking from it. The question is not 
merely of reality, but of its course and character. “Not as 
the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it be afraid.” Why indeed, with His 
peace, should the heart be confounded or fearful ? 

But the Lord looks now for hearts purified by faith to delight 
in His glory. “Ye heard that I said to you, I go away, and 
come unto you; if ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced that* 
I go unto the Father, because the* Father is greater than I. 
And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it 
is come to pass ye may believe” (vers. 28, 29). Thus, whatever ~ 
His essential and personal glory, He never forgets that He 
is man on earth. As such He goes away, and comes back to 
the disciples. As such He calls upon them to rejoice in His 
proceeding to the Father. It was no small thing that man in 
His Person should thus enter into glory; and there is almost 
as much unbelief in Christendom’s taking it as a matter of 
course, utterly indifferent to its value, as in Jewish rejection 
of it as incredible if not impossible. The Jew, as such, looked 
for man, that is for himself, to be blessed in the highest degree 
by God on the earth; and so doubtless, beyond his thought, it 
will be in the kingdom by-and-by. But the Lord would have 
the Christian rejoice in the second Man, gone up even now 
into the paradise of God, the sure pledge of our own following 
Him there when He comes back again for us. And therefore 
does He the more impressively call attention, not to the fact 
only, but to His mention of it then before it came to pass, that 
when it did, they should believe. Himself in glory is the living 
object of faith, full of weighty and fruitful consequence for us. 

* Text. Rec. following the later uncials and most cursives adds elov “‘I said” ; 


but the best give the text preferred. There is rather better authority for adding 
pov to o Il, (=“ my F.”) 


308 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


It is well to give His death the deepest value. Never can we 
lose sight of His profound humiliation in self-sacrificing love to 
glorify God and to bear our burden of sins and judgment, 
without incalculable loss to our souls; but we do well to have 
our eye fixed on Him “received up in glory,” and ever to wait 
for Him as about to come and have us there with Himself in 
the Father’s house. 

“No longer shall I talk much with you, for the prince of the* 
world cometh, and hath nothing in me. But that the world 
may know that I love the Father, and as the Father com- 
mandedt+ me, so I do. Arise, let us go hence” (vers. 30, 31). 
The Lord thus intimates that He has not much more to talk 
with them. He had another task on hand; for the enemy was 
coming, characterised now as the prince of the world which 
had rejected the Son of God, proving thereby its opposition to 
the Father and its subjection to Satan; but, come when he 
might, he had no more in Christ at the end than at the begin- 
ning. Then he would gladly have enticed the Saviour out 
of the path of obedience by offering gratification; now he 
strives to fill Him in that path with fear and horror of the 
death which was before him. It was in vain: “The cup which 
my Father giveth me, shall I not drink it?” In us naturally 
there is everything which can afford a handle to Satan; in 
Christ he had nothing. So it could not but be because of the 
glory and unsullied perfectness of His Person, true God and 
unblemished Man; and so it must be for us, if we were to have 
eternal life in Him, and He to take away our sins, and all this 
in obedience and to the glory of God His Father. Therefore 
does He add, “but that the world may know that I love the 
Father, and as the Father commanded me, even so I do.” It 
was indeed the Son’s love to the uttermost, it was also un- 
qualified obedience. 

Here the Lord ends this part of His communications, and 
marks it by the closing words, “ Arise, let us go hence.” 


*s AB D* L XT and ten more uncials, 150 cursives, both the Syriac, &., 
omit rovrov which appears in the Text. Rec. supported by a few cursives and the 
versions in general, &c. 

t éverelNard wou S A DT with ten other uncials and most cursives and versions; 
Lachmann, Treg., with W. and H., edit évrohjy 26, (or 5€6.) wou. after BL X, 
&c,, with the It. and Vulg. 


CHAPTER XV. 


THE change of subject having been made thus apparent, the 
Lord now proceeds to set forth His mind for the disciples in one 
of the allegories peculiar to our Gospel. “Iam the true vine, 
and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in_me not 
bearing fruit, he taketh it away; and every one that beareth 
fruit, he cleanseth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Already 


ye are clean, because of the word which I have spoken to you. 


_ Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit 


from itself, unless it abide in the vine; so neither [can] ye, 
unless ye abide in me” (vers. 1-4). 

Thus the Lord sets aside Israel as any source of fruit-bearing 
for God. Long since had the prophets denounced the nation 
as bearing wild grapes, as an empty vine, or as only fit for the 
burning. But the Lord brings to light Himself as the true 
and only stock acceptable unto God. This was an immense 
truth for Jews to learn. In Israel was all that they trusted for 
religion. There was the temple, there the priesthood, there the 
sacrifices, there the feasts; there every ordinance, public or 
private, great or small, instituted of God. Outside Israel were 
the heathen who knew not God. Now the Lord does not 
merely strip the veil from the elect people’s hollow state but 
make known the secret. He is the Vine, the true Vine. He 
is not merely a fruitful branch, where all others were unfruitful; 
He is Himself the true Vine. Thus we have the positive 
object before us, the one source of fruit-bearing. 

“And my Father,’ He adds, “is the husbandman.” But 
there is another truth needed, the revelation of His Father 
(not yet fully revealed as theirs, though soon to be in His resur- 
rection), no longer of Jehovah as once in the vineyard of the 


nation, nor as the Almighty known to their fathers. As Father, 
303 


304 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


He deals with the branches of the Vine, which is Christ Him- 
self on earth, object of all the active and watchful interest of 
His Father Who looks for fruit. But it is not Himself alone; 
there are branches in Him. It is here their responsibility 
enters: for they are the Lord’s disciples, once but Jews in their 
natural condition, henceforth called to bear fruit unto God. 

And what then are the terms laid down? “Every branch 
in me not bearing fruit, he taketh it away; and every one that 
beareth fruit, he cleanseth it, that it may bring forth more 
fruit.” Clearly it is the Father’s government of those who 
bear the name of the Lord. The fruitless professor he removes ; 
the fruitful one He cleanses, that more fruit may be borne. It_ 
is the Father judging according to every man’s work. The 
disciples were primarily in view; but the principle of course 
applies to us, now that Israel is still more manifestly set aside. 
As the apostle teaches us in Hebrews xi, He chastens us for 
our profit, that we might be partakers of His holiness. Here, 
if not taken away, we are cleansed in order to bear more fruit. 
It is a wholly different state of things from a Messiah reigning 
in power, and His people in nothing but prosperity, Satan shut 
up, and the desert rejoicing and blossoming as the rose. Doubt- 
less, it is not union with Christ in heaven, nor even the privileges 
of grace generally in Him, but the call to make Him everything 
on earth in daily ways, if we would indeed bear fruit. He, not 
the law, is the rule of life, and the source of fruitfulness; nor 
is there any other for the Christian, not even the Spirit Who 
uses the word to glorify Christ, but Himself. 

The disciples had already proved the purging power of the 
word. “ Already ye are clean because of the word which I 
have spoken to you.’ They had received it, and knew that 
He came from God, though they knew the Father imperfectly 
if at all. Yet Christ’s word had wrought in their souls; it had 
cleansed. their ways, it had judged their worldly thoughts, it 
had laid bare their carnal desires: the effect was real in their 
consciences. Judas was now gone, so that the Lord does not 
need to say, “ Ye are clean, but not all”; but, on the contrary, 
“Ye are clean already,” even before the Holy Ghost was given 
as power from on high. The cleansing efficacy of the word is 


F 


CHAPTER XV. 305 


a cardinal truth of scripture apt to be forgotten, not merely by 
the Romanist who trusts in ordinances, but by the Protestant 
who speaks exclusively of the Saviour’s blood “that cleanseth 
from all sin.” God forbid that a word should be said to obscure 
that blood, or to turn a soul from its justifying value. But out 
of the Lord’s side flowed water and blood; and we need both. 
The blood atones, the water purifies; and as the blood abides 
shed and efficacious once for all,in contrast with the ineffectual 
and many sacrifices of the Jews, the washing of water by the 
word is not only applied at the first but is needed to purge all 
through. Where this is not seen, confusion follows, and the en- 
feebling, if not destruction, of fundamental truth. 

But here the Lord insists on more—the necessity and the 
importance of dependence on Him, of intimacy with Himself. 
This is to abide in Christ; and His word is, “ Abide in me, and 
Tin you.” It is not sovereign grace to the sinner, but His call 
to the disciple; and hence His abiding in us, as a matter of 
daily communion, depends on our abiding in Him. “As the 
branch cannot bear fruit from itself, unless it abide in the vine; 
so neither [can] ye, unless ye abide in me.” Nothing simpler 
than the fact outwardly, nothing surer in our experience than 
that so it is inwardly. He, and He only, is the dwelling-place 
for the soul in this world of snare and danger, in this desert 
where no water is. Make Him the resource, make Him the 
object; and the sap as it were flows without hindrance, and 
fruit is borne. Without Him no teaching avails, and all 
religious excitement fails; bring Him in, confide in Him, 
and, no matter what the difficulty or the pain or the shame, 
no matter what the opposition or the detraction, He sustains 
the heart, and fruit-bearing follows. Apart from Him we can 
do nothing; with Him, all things. So said one who had learnt 
it well, “I have strength for all things in him that giveth me 
power” (Phil. iv. 13). 

It seems scarcely needful to remark, that the relation of 
head and body serves quite another purpose in scripture, and 
must be kept wholly distinct. Heavenly grace forms that one 
body by the one Spirit united to the glorified Head; and therein 
we do not hear of rending, maiming, or cutting off. It is the 

U 


306 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


church viewed as the object of Christ’s unfailing love, till He 
present it to Himself in glory. Responsibility on earth under 
divine government is another thing; and this, not the unfailing 
heavenly relationship of the church, is taught by the Vine and 
its branches. Hence Calvinistic devices are as uncalled for as 
the Arminian assaults they are meant to avert. No one doubts 
that profession may fail. Life is eternal for all that; and in 
Christ there is nothing short of eternal life; but this is not 
the teaching of the Vine, any more than the unity of the body. 
It is a pity that learned commentators do not read with faith 
and care the scriptures they essay to comment. on. 

The opening words had laid down the principle of Christ as 
the source of fruit, in contrast with Israel, and under the living 
watchful care of the Father. It was wholly distinct from 
government of the flesh by the law before Jehovah, as in the 
chosen nation to which all the branches belonged. Christ here 
displaces the old associations. He had shewn fruit to be so 
indispensable in the Father’s eyes, that not to bear it involves 
the removal of the branch, whilst that which bears fruit is 
cleansed in order to bear more. He had pronounced the disciples 
already clean by reason of His word, and had urged them to 
abide in Him, as He in them; and this because they could not 
bear fruit except they abode in Christ, any more than the 
branch itself except it abide in the vine. 

Next, He sums up and applies this weighty truth of com- 
munion with Him, in its great positive elements, and in strong 
contradistinction from abandonment of Him. “I am the vine, 
ye are the branches. He that abideth in me, and I in him, he 
beareth much fruit ; because apart from me ye can do nothing” 
(ver. 5). Nothing more precise. The Lord leaves no uncer- 
tainty in a matter so nearly affecting both Himself and them. 
As surely as He was the vine, they were the branches. There 
is, and could be, no failure on His part. It is easy for us to 
fail in dependence, and to lack confidence in Him. To abide 
in Him supposes, not merely distrust of ourselves, but cleaving 
to Him and counting on Him. Every influence around us is 
adverse to this; every natural feeling not less so. Faith 
working by love alone secures it, for self and the world are 


ee eae 


CHAPTER XV. 307 


then alike judged in the light of God. It is not only that 
we need and cannot do without Him for the least things 
as truly as the greatest, but He attracts us by His positive 
excellency. If He is the one source of fruit agreeable to the 
Father, He cannot be slighted with impunity, least of all by 
those who confess Him. It is not the grace which gives eternal 
life in Him of which the Lord speaks, but throughout these 
verses the responsibility of the disciples. Hence, as we shall 
see presently, there is danger of ruin, no less than fruitlessness, 
where one does not abide in Him. 

This then is the secret of fruit-bearing. It is not in saints 
any more than in self, but by abiding in Christ and Christ in 
us. Then there is more than promising blossom ; fruit follows. 
Where He is intercepted from our view, or we look elsewhere, 
there is no such power: we manifest our nature, not Christ. 
Nor does the character of the circumstances affect the result: 


- He is superior to all, spite of our weakness. Abiding in Christ, 


we may safely face the most hostile; and if traps be laid and 
provocation given, what matters it, if according to His word 
we are found abiding in Christ, and Christ abides in us, 
as He then does? For that the two are correlative, He 
guarantees, and we know. Again, does fruit follow because 
we are with dear children of God? Alas! how often the very 
reverse is proved, and the levity, if not the bitterness, in the 
heart comes out so much the more because we are saints not 
abiding in Christ. For gossip about saints to saints is even 
more painful than among the sons of this age, not a few of 
whom seem above it though on grounds of nature—of course 
not of Christ. Trials again cannot shake off spiritual fruit, 
nor blighting influences enter, if we abide in Christ and 
Christ in us; but the greater the pressure, the more fruit where 
we thus abide. And the heart feels that so it should be, as it 
is. For, as ordinances fail, and law is the strength of sin (not 
of holiness, flesh being what it is), Christ here as everywhere 
has the glory by faith and to faith; “because apart from me ye 
can do nothing.” 

On the other hand the peril is proportionably greater. “If 
one abide* not in me, he is cast out as the branch, and is dried 


* névn & P™ A BD, pelvy the mass. 


308 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


up: and they gather it,* and cast [it] into the fire, and it 
burneth” (ver. 6). Christ being the sole source of fruit, to 
abandon Him is fatal ; and so much the worse, if so at the last, 
when He should be the more precious, as the worthlessness 
of all else is learnt practically, and His excellency better known 
to faith. So it was with Judas, so in general with those not 
born of God who essay to follow Jesus. Not only their lusts 
but His words may give the occasion, as we see in John Vi. 
It is vain and mischievous to distinguish between the person 
and the work, as theologians and others do who reason on either 
side of the equation of truth. The Calvinist fears to com- 
promise his doctrines of grace; the Arminian is anxious to 
push his advantage on the side of falling away. Hence the 
former is apt to evade the solemn warning of personal ruin 
and final judgment conveyed here, as the latter argues that the 
passage implies that a saved soul may be lost after all. They 
both confound the figure of the Vine with the body in 
Ephesians ii-iv., and hence are alike wrong, and of course 
unable to expound these scriptures satisfactorily, so as to hold 
all the truth without sacrificimg one part to another. 

The error comes out plainly in the Anglican Baptismal Service: 
“Seeing now that this child is regenerated, and grafted into the 
body of Christ’s church.” To be grafted into the olive of 
Romans xi. is equivalent, in this teaching, to being made a 
member of Christ’s body; and the results of such confusion 
are ever favourable to the adversaries of the truth. The 
answer is that the body is the expression of unity by the Holy 
Ghost, the Vine insists on communion as the condition of bear- 
ing fruit. In no case do such trees necessarily imply life, but 
the possession of privilege as the olive, and the responsibility 
of bearing fruit as the vine. To leave Christ therefore is 
utter ruin, not only to be fruitless but to burn. It is not 
merely suffering loss as in 1 Corinthians iii. 15, but to be 
manifestly lost as in 1 Corinthians ix. 27. Thus each scripture 
renders its own testimony, and has its own value, while none 
can be broken, though men may stumble at the word, being 
disobedient, as another apostle warns. 


*airdS D L X A II, many cursives, and some ancient versions; avrd 
(‘‘them”’) the great majority, the Alex, and Vat. among them. 


CHAPTER XV. 309 


But now, from the sad case of the man that quits Him, the 
Lord returns to the disciples, and with divine simplicity and 
fulness gives the way of blessing and abundant fruit. “If ye 
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask [or, ye shall ask]* 
what ye will, and it shall come to pass for you. In this is [lit. 
was] my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and [ye shall] 
become+ my disciples” (vers. 7, 8). Thus is each thing put in 
its place. The first need for the Christian is to abide in Christ ; 
the next, to have Christ’s words abiding in Him; then he 
is emboldened to ask with the assurance that the resources 
of divine power effect accordingly. For thus Christ Himself 
has the first place, and the saint is kept in dependence as well 
as confidence. Then His words direct as well as correct; and 
we need and have both, though doubtless in so abiding direction 
would here be the characteristic, rather than that holy correction 
- which we deeply want in our walk through this unclean and 
slippery world. If so led, prayer is encouraged to expect the 
surest answer, for the heart is in fellowship with Him Who 
prompts the desire, in order to accomplish it in His love and 
faithfulness. Further in this is the Father glorified, that 
we bear much fruit, and become disciples of His. What en- 
largement of heart that so it should be in the midst of what, 
apart from Him, would be but a grief and worry to the saint, 
if not worse! With Christ all is changed, and even the 
most distracting cares turn to fruit; so that to live in flesh, 
instead of being with Him in glory, becomes worth the while, 
but only when to live is Christ. Thus was His Father 
glorified even now, and we became Christ’s disciples in deed 
and in truth. 

Another element of incalculable value in the disciple’s path 
is the consciousness of the Saviour’s love. This is next set 
before them. “As the Father loved me, I also loved you: 
abide in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall 
abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father’s command- 
ments and abide in his love. These things have I spoken 


* girhoacbe (-Oac A DT, &c.)A B DL M XT, many cursives, and the oldest 
versions ; airjoecbe Text. Rec. with 8 and most MSS. 
+ yévno0e BD LM X, &c. ; & and the rest support the future. 


310 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


to you that my joy may be* in you, and your joy may be 
fulfilled ” (vers. 9-11). 

We must bear in mind that the subject is fruit-bearing 
during the disciple’s passage through this world. It is not 
eternal purpose, nor is it that love in relationship which ~ 
secures unfailingly from first to last, but Christ’s love toward 
each in His path of daily walk and trial. He knew what 
this was on His Father’s part to Himself as man, though 
never ceasing to be Son here below. Such was His own love 
to the disciples ; and now He calls on them to abide in it, not 
in Him only, but, what is more, in His love: an immense and 
unfailing spring of comfort in the necessarily painful and 
otherwise disappointing current of earthly circumstances so 
strongly opposed to them for His sake. Give wine, says the 
Book of Proverbs, unto those that be of heavy hearts. But 
His love is better than wine, cheering and strengthening 
without fleshly excitement. There is thus not only depend- 
ence on Him, but that confidence in Him which His love 
is meant to inspire. 

But there is more that follows, even obedience. “If ye 
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even 
as I have kept my Father’s commandments and abide in his 
love.” It is manifest that we have nothing here to do with 
the sovereign mercy of God which goes out to the lost and 
reconciles enemies by the death of His Son. For as by the 
disobedience of the one man (Adam) the many were con- 
stituted sinners, so also by the obedience of the one (Christ) 
shall the many be constituted righteous. Grace in Christ 
surmounts every hindrance, and reigns righteously above all 
evil, whether of the individual or of the race. Here not 
the sinner’s ruin or deliverance, but the disciple’s path, is 
in question; and his obedience is the condition of abiding 
in his Master’s love. He Who in all things has and must 
have the pre-eminence trod the same path and accepted the 
same condition as man here below; though He counted it no 


sees day 1D many cursives, It. Vulg. Goth. the Syrr. Arm, and Aeth. ; 
belvy Text. Rec, 8 L and twelve uncials more, most cursives, but scarce any 
ancient version, unless the Georgian. 


CHAPTER XV. 311 


robbery to be on equality with God, He became obedient, and 
this to the lowest point, for the glory of God the Father. He 
in unwavering perfection did the will of Him that sent Him, 
and enjoyed its fruit in a like perfection; we follow Him 
though with unequal steps; and assuredly he that says he 
- abides in Him ought himself also so to walk even as He walked. 
And obedience is the way. None other morally befits us; as 
this but verifies our love to Him and sense of relationship 
to God. Nothing is so lowly, nothing so firm, as obedience. 
It delivers from self-assertion on the one hand, and on the 
other from subjection to the opinions or traditions of men. 
It brings us face to face with God’s word, and tests our desire 
to please Him in the midst of present ease, honour, lust, or 
passion. Here too it is a question of keeping Christ’s com- 
mandments, as that which secures His love, as in chapter xiv. 
we saw that it proved their love to Him. 

The last motive the Lord brings to bear on the disciples 
as to this is contained in the next verse. “These things have 
I spoken to you that my joy may be in you, and your joy may 
be fulfilled.” Nor is there a better criterion of our state, and 
consequently of our failure or success in entering into His 
mind. For if we take up the words of this chapter legally, 
scarce any words in the Bible are surer to plunge an up- 
right soul into sorrow and depression; but if we understand 
them as He intended, they are expressly given to impart 
His joy to us and make our joy full. His joy when here 
was in pleasing His Father; to obey His commandments 
was not burdensome. This joy of His, unbroken in His path, 
He would now make ours. 

What a contrast with the unfruitful groaning of a soul 
under law, even though quickened, as in the close of Romans 
vii.! What a mercy, if we have tasted such bitterness, now 
to know our joy in obedience fulfilled! The latter part of 
Romans vii. is a wholesome process for us to pass through, 
but a miserable ground of standing: for this God never 
intended it. Chapter viii. shows us the Christian delivered, 
holy, and abounding in good fruit. Can we be on both grounds 
at the same time? Only he would assert this who is not yet 


312 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


set free. Look to it, theologians; and you who believe them, 
and taste not Christ’s joy. 

This is clearly His desire concerning us. Those who ignore 
or deny it would deprive us of His joy, as no doubt they lack 
it themselves. Nor need we wonder; for as philosophy never 
can conceive divine love, so theology, pandering as it does 
to human science, ever misses the Saviour’s joy, seeking 
pleasure and applause in the schools of the world, which 
knows the Father no more now than of old. O righteous 
Father, said He a little later, the world knew Thee not; 
but I knew Thee, and these (the disciples) knew that Thou 
didst send Me; and I made known to them Thy name, and 
will make it known; that the love wherewith Thou didst love 
Me may be in them, and I in them. 

What ineffable goodness! Does not every thought, feeling, 
word prove itself divine? Settled peace is a great thing 
as the soul’s foundation, never to be moved, and God would 
have us know it simply and immutably; but we must not 
forget the joy of obedience and the favour of the Lord as 
a present thing in our daily ways. This has been too much 
overlooked by the children of God, and scarcely more through 
the slipshod laxity of evangelicalism than by the morose hard- 
ness of the legalists, ignorant alike of the full ground of grace, 
and of the true character of God’s government which is bound 
up with it as a present thing. 

The Lord now specifies one special character of fruit, ever 
precious, but here in the disciples’ relation one to another, as 
before we had the relation of Christ and the Father to them. 

“This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I 
loved you. Greater love no one hath than this, that one* lay 
down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends if ye do what 
[ever] t I command you. No longer do I call you bondmen, for 
the bondman knoweth not what his lord doeth ; but you I have 
called friends, because all things which I heard from my Father 
I made known to you. Not ye chose me, but I chose you and 


* Spm D pm, Ke., omit ris, contrary to the rest. 
+ && D LX, some cursives, and versions, &c, 6B, &c. oa the mass as also 
Text. Rec, 


CHAPTER XV. alte 


appointed you that ye should go and bear fruit, and your fruit 
abide; that whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he 
may give you. These things I command you, that ye love one 
another” (vers. 12-17). 

Love is emphatically the Lord’s injunction on His disciples, 
the love of each other. It is not the general moral duty of 
loving one’s neighbour, but the mutual love of Christians, of 
which His own love to them is the standard. The nature of 
the case excludes the love of God which went out to them in 
their guilt, enmity, and weakness, when objects of sovereign 
grace. They were now born of God, and hence love; for love, 
as it is of God Who is love, is the energy of the new nature. 
Hence, whatever else the Lord may enjoin, this is His com- 
mandment: He loved them, and would have them love one 
another accordingly. So Paul tells the Thessalonians that he 
needed not to write about it to them, for, young as they were 
in divine things, they were taught of God to love one another. 
This too was the more excellent way he would show the 
Corinthian saints, pre-occupied to their hurt with power rather 
than love, at best the display of the Lord’s victory in His 
creation over Satan rather than the inward energy which 
enjoys His grace toward our own souls or others to God’s glory. 
On the Roman saints again love is repeatedly urged, as that 
which should be unfeigned, and also which, wherever it is, has 
fulfilled the law practically without thinking of it. It is need- 
less to go over all the Epistles where the Holy Spirit unfolds 
its immense place and power. 

But every believer acquainted with the New Testament will 
remember how large a part it fills in the First Epistle of our 
evangelist. Not that love is God, but God is love as He is 
light; and he that loves is born of Him and knows Him. For 
men as then made knowledge all, as before some made power ; 
but it is a question of life in the Son of God, and the Holy 
Ghost works in that life by virtue of redemption, and those 
who have life, as they walk in the light, so also walk in love. 
And even as to knowledge, there is none true save in Him that 
is true, in His Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and 
eternal life: every object outside Him is an idol, from which 


314 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


we have to keep ourselves, be it knowledge, power, position, 
love, truth, or anything or anyone else. For whoever denies 
the Son has not the Father; he who confesses the Son has | 
the Father also. And as the Father has bestowed on us love 
beyond all measure, giving us even now to be children of God, 
so loving the brethren marks those who have passed from, 
death unto life. The old commandment is the word of Christ 
that we should love one another, but it is also a new command- 
ment as being true in Him and in us. If Christ lives in me, 
I live by faith of the Son of God Who loved me and gave 
Himself for me: and this life is characterised not only by 
obedience, but by love according to its source. 

And so here. The Lord had laid it down as a new and dis- 
tinguishing commandment He was giving them in chapter xii. 
Here He repeats love to one another according to the pattern 
of His love to them. How pure and unbounded it was! Do 
we believe this as His will about us? Do we love as if we 
believed Him and appreciated His love? Can anything be 
more hollow, or dangerous, or nauseous than the highest words 
with low and inconsistent ways? Gnosticism ate out the 
heart of early Christendom, where it fell not into superstition 
and formality, ever growing more dark and cold; and the same 
spirit is yet more destructive now, because it has more abundant 
materials, and hardens itself in unbelief even to Agnosticism. 
Loving one another, not merely those who think alike, least 
of all those who think alike on some comparatively small and 
external point, but loving those who are Christ’s spite of 
ten thousand things trying to our nature, is of all moment 
along with the truth, and guarded as it is here, loving one 
another as He loved us. He delights in love up to death. 

Greater love none has than to lay down his life for his 
friends. The love of God in Jesus went infinitely beyond 
this; but. then necessarily it stands alone, and it is meet that it 
should. We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, as 
we are taught elsewhere. But where is the worth of such a 
theory if we fail in every-day going out of heart to common 
wants and sufferings of God’s children (1 John iii. 17, 18) ? 
The Lord at once binds love up with obedience, without which 


ee a et 


CHAPTER XV. 315 


it is but self-pleasing, not having Him in it or before the soul. 
“Ye are my friends if ye do what [ever] I command you.” It 
is not reconciling enemies He speaks of, but why He calls us 
His friends. Obedience is the character and condition. Nor 
does He here indicate how He stood as our friend when we 
were enemies, but He calls us His friends if we practise what 
He enjoins on His disciples. 

Is this all? Far from it. He treats us as friends according 
to His perfect love, for He lets us into His secrets, instead of 
merely pressing our duty. “No longer do I call you bondmen, 
for the bondman knoweth not what his Lord doeth; but you I 
have called friends, because all things whatsoever I heard from 
my Father I made known to you.” He who of old was 
called “the friend of God” enjoyed this intimacy with his 
Almighty protector in the midst of the doomed races he lived 
amongst, a separated and circumcised pilgrim; and so it is with 
His own now that the Lord deals in still more lavish grace ; 
for what did He keep back? In another sense it is our boast 
to be His bondmen, as one said who was _ pre-eminently 
separated to the gospel of God. But none the less—indeed 
very much more truly—do we enter in, and value and act on 
the free communication of His love if we are habitually 
obedient, as we may see in Joseph of old or in Daniel later. 
It ought to be, it is in principle, the cherished privilege of the 
church thus to know His mind and by it to interpret the 
tangled web of human life or even the world’s changing 
fortunes; but practically we must be exercised and constant 
in obedience if the privilege is to be a living reality and not a 
bare title. Christendom has given it up, counting it nothing 
but presumption, and content to walk by sight, not by faith, 
in denial of its privilege. 

But God is faithful, and there are those who, walking 
obedient to His word, enter into what He has made known, 
and find the blessing. Doubtless the responsibility is great no 
less than the privilege; and therefore do His own need to be 
cheered with the grace that underlies all. Hence it is that He 
adds, “ Not ye chose me, but I chose you and appointed [or, set] 
you that ye should go and bear fruit, and your fruit abide; that 


316 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


whatever ye may ask the Father in my name he may give you. 
These things I command that ye love one another.” 

Blessing ever comes from the Lord Jesus and the grace that 
is in Him. Obedience follows, and ought to follow, such un- 
merited favour, as in obedience there is surely fresh blessing. 
But the heart needs to turn from our obedience or its blessing 
to the Blesser, if it would escape fresh dangers and positive 
evil; the spring of power is never known save in Him, and 
the grace that sought and found, saves and blesses. Hence it 
was of the greatest moment, in pressing the divine government 
of the saints, that they should ever remember Him and His 
sovereign will, as the source of all that distinguished them. 
Not they chose Christ, but He chose them. Nor was it only 
to know and follow their Master. He appointed,* or set, them 
that they should go and bear fruit, and their fruit should 
abide. Though apostles, they were His friends to obey Him all 
the more. 

Thus, while responsibility is maintained intact, grace is 
shewn to be the fountain of all that is looked for and made 
good; and further the connection of both with dependence on 
the Father, Who alone brings to a successful issue whatever 
they should have asked in the name of Jesus. The deeper 
and higher the blessing, the more need of prayer; but then the 
character and confidence of prayer should rise with the sense 
of grace in Christ, and the Father’s unwavering purpose to put 
honour on His name in which they draw near with their 
petitions. His name by faith in it can make the weakest 
strong, and the Father is thus glorified in the Son Who 
glorifies Him. Distrust or negligence is equally precluded. 

It is hardly necessary to say many words in disproof of 
Calvin’s exposition, and of others, who make this a question of 
choosing and ordaining to the apostolate, and consequently who 
take the fruit abiding to mean that the church will last to the 
very end of the world as the fruit of apostolic labour continued 
also in their successors. The love enjoined here is accordingly 


* “ Ordained” suggests another line of things foreign to the passage and 
connection. In Acts i, 22 the same word, as is commonly known, is foisted 
into the Authorised Version ; for it has no counterpart implied in the Greek, 


a 
a 
4 

od 
a 
oe 
a 
4 
a 


Ce ee ee ee ee ae ee 


CHAPTER XV. Sy 7 


restricted to mutual affection among ministers. Undoubtedly 
a free and unsuspicious flow of loving confidence is essential to 
a good state, and among those who labour especially, as the 
lack of it here is most deplorable; but the Lord does not limit 
His words to the apostles or even to such as follow them in 
the public service of His name. 

To love one another then is the new and repeated command- 
ment of Christ to His own. To love is the positive and proper 
and constant exercise of the new nature, as acted on by the 
Spirit’s ministration of Christ, not always brotherly kindness 
in exercise, but love never failing. But this very affection, 
strange here below, exposes those in whom it is found.to the 
direct counter-working of Satan, a murderer and liar from the 
beginning. Conscious that unselfishness in affection according 
to God is an impossibility to nature, men regard any evidence 
of it as mere hypocrisy to be scorned and detested in the 
Christian. For how could he be different from others ? 

“Tf the world hateth you, know [or, ye know] that me it 
hath hated before you. If ye were of the world, the world 
would love (ég.) its own; but because ye are not of the world, 


- but I chose you out of the world, on this account doth the 


world hate you. Call to mind the word which I told you, A 
bondman is not greater than his lord. If they persecuted me, 
they will persecute you also; if they kept my word, they will 
keep yours also; but all these things they will do unto you on 
account of my name, because they know not him that sent me” 
(vers. 18-21). 

To be Christ’s is enough to rouse the world’s rancour. Cir- 
cumstances may be needed to call it forth, but there it is. The 
world hates those who, being His, are no longer of the world. 
But the Lord would have us know that, not more surely does 
it hate us, than it had hated Himself before us. Is it not 
sweet and consoling to us that so it is, however awful in itself, 
to have such a conviction of the world? For it hates us 
because of Him, not Him because of us. It is not our faults 
therefore which are the true cause, but His grace and moral 
excellence, His divine nature and glory; it is the world’s 
repugnance and enmity to what is of God, and to Him Who is 


318 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


God. The world hates the Father shewn in the Son; hence it 
hates the children who were the Father’s and then were given 
to the Son. Christ was hated first, they next and for His sake. 

Not that the world does not love in its own way those 
who are of it, in most pointed contrast with the grace that 
goes out to the stranger and the wretched and the lost, to 
such as have wronged and have despitefully treated us. But 
grace is of all things most offensive to the world, which can 
love nature in its fallen state. Even righteousness, with its 
necessary condemnation of the sinner, is not so repugnant 
as the grace which can rise above the sins it condemns in 
compassion toward the sinner to save him by and in Christ ; 
and this because it treats man as nothing, giving the entire 
glory to God: indignity intolerable to the flesh, the mind 
of which is enmity against God. Hence the world’s hatred 
and rejection of Christ, Who had revealed God perfectly, and 
perfectly glorified Him in all His nature and ways. Hence 
also the world’s hatred of us who confess Christ, not only 
because we are not of the world, but as chosen out of it by 
Christ, which implies its utter worthlessness and condem- 
nation. Divine love is as odious as divine light. 

The Lord then recalls to their mind His word that no 
bondman is greater than his lord. They must rather expect 
His position, Who was despised and rejected of men. They 
themselves and their teaching would be equally odious for His 
sake. If they persecuted Me, they will persecute you also; 
if they kept My word, they will keep yours also. His Person 
and His word brought God too near their souls which drew 
back unwilling either to own their sins, or to be debtors to 
nothing but grace for pardon and deliverance. But this 
aversion assumes a stronger form where religion is honoured 
and men have a character to lose; and as these things were 
true in the highest measure among the Jews, they broke out 
to the last degree in resentment which claimed to persecute, as 
a duty to God, the Master first and then the disciples. And 
here the Lord graciously forewarned them that no sorrow might 
befall them unawares. 

But He does more. He gives His own the comfort of know- 


2 


oe — 


CHAPTER XV. 319 


ing in such hours, it might be of bitter woe, as beforehand also, 
that all the contempt and suffering they might endure from the 
world was for His sake, because of the world’s ignorance of 
Him that sent Himself, ignorance of the Father. How pro- 
foundly true! Impossible that a professing religion could 
persecute if it really knew Him that sent Christ. 

There might be discipline according to His word; and there 
must be in that which bears the name of the Lord: else the 
very grace it knows would tend to sink it below the world’s 
level if there were not vigilant, constant, and holy discipline. 
But discipline is never holy but worldly, when it takes the 
shape of persecution. What can one think then when that which 
arrogates the loftiest name invoked the civil arm to enforce 
the punishment of men’s bodies for the pretended good of their 
souls? What, when it sought and found means to inaugurate 


~ ecclesiastical tribunals with torments up to the bitter end in 


congenial secrecy with an unrelenting cruelty which never had 
a match even in this dark world? ‘Truly it was the self-same 
spirit of worldly hatred which first animated the Jews against 
the Lord and His disciples, and later wrought in the world- 
church, when it exchanged its pagan for its papal garb, and 
baptism was more easily adopted than circumcision. “But all 
these things they will do unto you on account of my name, 
because they know not him that sent me.” 

No! forms avail not: God will have reality, and never more 
plainly and stringently than since Christ and His cross, which 
proved the vanity of religious man and of a worldly sanctuary. 
Christianity came into being and manifestation when it was 
demonstrated that man in his best estate was not only worth- 
less before God, but would not have God at any price, even in 
the Person and mission of His own Son come in grace. “O 
righteous Father, the world did not know thee.” Yet is there 
no life eternal for man save in the knowledge of the only true 
God, the Father, and of Jesus Christ Whom He sent. The 
world is lost, and nowhere more evidently and guiltily than 
when, in religious pride, it hates Christ and those who are His. 

The presence and testimony of the Son of God had the 
gravest possible results. It was not only an infinite blessing 


320 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


in itself, and for God’s glory, but it left men, and Israel 
especially, reprobate. Law had proved man’s weakness and 
sin, as it put under curse all who took their stand on the legal 
principle. There was none righteous, none that sought after 
God, none that did good, no, not one. The heathen were 
manifestly wicked, the Jews proved so by the incontestable 
‘sentence of the law. Thus every mouth was stopped, and all 
the world obnoxious to God’s judgment. But the presence of 
Christ brought out, not merely failure to meet obligation as 
under law, but hatred of divine goodness come down to man 
in perfect grace. God was in Christ, as the apostle says, 
reconciling the world to Himself, not reckoning to them their 
offences. How immense the change! How worthy of God 
when revealed in His Son, as Man amongst men! But they 
could not endure His words and His works, and this increas- 
ingly, till the cross demonstrated that it was absolute rejection 
of God’s love without bounds. It is not here the place or 
time, as with the apostle Paul, to show how divine love rose 
in complete victory over man’s evil and hatred as attested in 
the ministry of reconciliation which is founded on the cross. 
Here the Lord is affirming the solemn position and state of 
the world in antagonism to the disciples, after preparing them 
for persecution: from its hating them as Him, and its ignorance 
of Him Who sent their Master. 

“Tf I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had 
sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin. He that hateth 
me hateth my Father also” (vers. 22, 23). Sin before or other- 
wise was swallowed up in this surpassing sin of rejecting the 
Son come in love and speaking not merely as man never spoke 
but as God never spoke; for by whom should He speak as in a 
Son? It was meet that He Who is the image of the invisible 
God, the Only-begotten in the bosom of the Father, should 
speak above all, as He is above all, God blessed for ever. 
Servants had been sent, prophets had spoken; and _ their 
messages had divine authority; but they were partial. The 
law had made nothing perfect. Now He Who had thus spoken 
of old zoAunepas Kal woAvTpoOTws (in Many measures and in 
many manners) spoke to us éy vim (in a Son). He was their 


Ses Oey sh 


CHAPTER XV. 321 


Messiah, the Son of David, born where and when they ex- 
pected, attested not only by the signs and vouchers of prophecy 
but by the powers of the world to come; but He was more, 
infinitely more, He was the Son of God, unapproachable in 
His own glory, yet here on earth the most accessible of men, 
giving out the words of the Father, as none had ever spoken 
since the world began. There never had been an adequate 
object on earth to draw out such communications; now there 
was in both dignity of person, intimacy of relationship, and 
mcral perfection as man. And the disciples were reaping the 
benefit; as the Jews, the world, which had Him before their 
eyes and ears, had the responsibility. Flaws, failure, there had 
been in all others who had spoken for and from God (though 
not in the inspired scripture), so as to weaken the effect of 
their testimony where men thought of men and forgot the God 
Who sent them. 

But now the Father had sent the Son Who had come and 
spoken not in law but in love, the true Light shining in a world 
of darkness which apprehended it not, and sin appeared as 
never before. What pretext could be pleaded now? It was 
no question of man or his weakness; no requirement of his 
duty as measured by the ten words, or any statutes or judg- 
ments whatsoever. There was the Son, the Word become flesh 
dwelling among men, full of grace and truth, in divine love 
that rose above every fault and all evil, to give what is of God 
for eternity, only met by increasing hatred till it could go no 
farther. Their ignorance of Him Who sent Christ was no 
doubt at the bottom of their hating Him, but it was in- 
excusable. For He was God as well as Son of the Father, 
and so perfectly able to present the truth and render man 
thoroughly and evidently guilty if he bowed not. What then 
did their not bowing prove but sin, without excuse for it, and 
hatred of the Father also in hating the Son ? 

And there was this further aggravation of their sin, the works 
that He had wrought. For some men are affected powerfully 


by suited words, others yet more deeply by works which express 


not power only but goodness, holiness, and love. Here they had 
in perfect harmony and mutual confirmation such words and 
x 


oo AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


works as never were save in Jesus the Son of God. But what 
was the effect? “If I did not among them the works which 
no other did, they had not had sin; but now have they both 
seen and hated both me and my Father. But [it is] that the 
word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated 
me without a cause” (vers. 24, 25). 

Such was man’s gratuitousness in presence of divine grace. 
Full manifestation of grace can have no other issue. The mind 
of the flesh is enmity against God. Not only is there insub- 
jection to His law, but hatred of His love; and this was proved 
now. Anything short of Jesus thus present, speaking and 
working among men as He did, would have fallen short of the 
demonstration. The testimony was complete; the One Who 
is the sum and substance, the subject and object of all divine 
testimony, was there; and they had seen Him, as well as the 
Father in Him; and they had hated both! They, the people of 
God once, had nothing but sin—they were lost. So they were 
then, and so they abide still, whatever grace may do another 
day to save the generation to come. But hatred of the Father 
and the Son is in.itself irreparable, complete, and final. 

Nor did the law in which they boasted to the rejection of 
their Messiah speak otherwise; on the contrary it was fulfilled 
in the word there written of Him, long suspended over them, 
now applied by His own lips to His own Person, They hated 
me for nothing—gratuitously. How true and how solemn! 
“OQ Jerusalem, Jerusalem!” O Israel, what have you not lost 
in the rejected Messiah, in the Father and the Son alike seen 
and hated? And what have not we gained, once poor sinners 
of the Gentiles? Life eternal in the knowledge of a God no 
longer dwelling in thick darkness, but fully revealed in Christ, 
and in the utmost nearness to the believer, His Father and our 
Father, His God and our God. Truly Israel’s fall has proved 
the world’s wealth, and their loss the true wealth of nations. 
But the nations so blessed boast and are high-minded, and will 
be spared no more than the Jews who, no longer abiding in 
unbelief, shall be graffed in again, and so all Israel shall be 
saved. Meanwhile they have lost their Messiah to their ruin, 
and their sin cannot be hid. 


CHAPTER XV. B20 


Thus had the Lord prepared His own for the world’s hatred, 
not only because He had known it before them, but because 
it had fallen on Him with an intensity and groundlessness 
beyond all experience. As even their law had forewarned 
of it, they were the more inexcusable. But nothing is so 
blind as unbelief, nor so cruel as its will irritated by the light 
of God, which treats it as sin, and sin refusing God in sovereign 
grace, the Father and the Son. For they that dwell at Jerusa- 
lem and their rulers, as Paul could say elsewhere, because they 
knew Him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are 
read every sabbath-day, they have fulfilled them in condemning 
Him. Therefore came the wrath on them to the utmost. 

It might seem then all must be swept away by the 
murderous rancour of man, and especially religious man. 
But not so. It is not that the Lord was not to die as well 
-as suffer; nor that His feeble followers should escape the lot 
of their Master, as far as God was pleased to let them taste 
it; but that He was about to leave the world for glory on high, 
and to send down the Holy Ghost thence, as a new, divine, and 
heavenly witness here below. 

[“ But]* when the Paraclete shall have come, whom I will 
send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who 
proceedeth out from (apa) the Father, he shall testify 
concerning me; and ye too testify, because ye are with me 
from [the] beginning” (vers. 26, 27). 

Here the Holy Spirit is viewed as sent by the ascended 
Christ from the Father, and consequently as witness of His 
heavenly glory. This is an advance on what we saw in the 
preceding chapter, where Christ asks and the Father gives 
the Paraclete to be with them for ever, sending Him in the 
Son’s name. Here the Son Himself sends, though of course 
from the Father. The Spirit of truth is thus the suited 
testifier of Christ as He is above; the disciples also testify, 
as His companions and so chosen from the beginning. For 
the first time it is said, “When the Paraclete is come,” not 
merely given or sent. He is a divine Person in the fullest 


* § B A and some other good authorities omit the copula which the great 
mass support. 


324 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


sense, not only to abide, teach, and recall to remembrance, but 
to testify concerning Christ, and that which the chosen com- 
panions, the apostles, of the Lord could not testify. For they 
as such could not go beyond what they had seen and heard, 
at any rate, what fell within the range of their being with 
Him from the beginning. The Spirit of truth which proceeds 
out from the Father would not merely strengthen them to 
do perfectly that task, but add quite another testimony 
of hitherto unknown blessedness, as sent by Christ personally 
from the Father. 

Thus is clearly defined the position of the disciples, hence- 
forward in due time called Christians: not of the world, but 
chosen by Christ out of it, commanded to love one another 
as loved of Christ, and hated of the world, with the Paraclete 
the Spirit of truth sent by Christ to testify of Him, of Whom 
they too were bearing witness as being with Him from the 
beginning. Who so competent to tell of Christ’s glory with 
the Father as the Spirit proceeding forth from the Father, 
and sent by the exalted Christ? Thus was secured full 
testimony to His glory morally on earth by the disciples 
(though not without the Spirit’s power already assured), and 
actually in heaven as the glorified Man by the One Who in 
every way could make it best known. 

It is evident that those who personally followed the Lord 
had a special place in the testimony to His manifestation 
on earth; and this testimony we have in the Gospels as 
fully as God saw fit to preserve it permanently for all saints. 
So the Holy Ghost’s testimony to His heavenly glory was 
pre-eminently presented in the inspired Epistles of Paul for 
like permanent use, though doubtless in no way limited to 
him or them. 

And assuredly in principle the place of testimony abides 
for those who are Christ’s, whatever the change of circum- 
stances and, alas! of state. As certainly as Christ abides 
on high and the Holy Ghost is come, never to leave us, it 
is not only that we know by faith the Son’s relationship 
to the Father, and our blessedness by virtue of it, and in Him 
Who is in the Father as He is in us, but we have all the profit 


CHAPTER XV. 325 


of His place as the True Vine on earth, as we know Him gone 
on high exalted as man, a quite new thing. And as we have 
the joy of His relationship to the Father and to us, we are 
called to bear witness to Him in every way. Wonderful 
comfort in our weakness! He the Spirit of truth was to 
testify of Jesus, and especially of Jesus where none could 
be with Him, none but the Paraclete Himself competent. 
It was not necessary to repeat here or later that He abides: 
this had been said at first in relation to us (chap. xiv.) where 
His guaranteed presence with us was most graciously named, 
lest we might feel orphans indeed. But if we have the com- 
fortable pledge of His being with us for ever, it is without 
doubt not less but more for testifying of Christ’s glory than 
for our consolation. Of this, however, we shall hear more 
in what is to follow, where the Lord renews the subject most 
fully. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Tue Lord proceeds to explain why He had now and not before 
spoken of the things which were then occupying His heart and 
being made known to the disciples. 

“These things I have spoken to you that ye should not 
be stumbled. They will put you out of the synagogue; nay, 
an hour is coming that every one who hath killed you will 
think that he is offering service to God. And these things will 
they do to you* because they knew not the Father nor me. 
But I have said these things to you, that when the [or, their]? 
hour shall have come, ye may remember them that I told you; 
but these things I told you not from [the] beginning, because 
I was with you. But now I go (szayw) unto him that sent 
me, and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? But 
because I have said these things to you, sorrow hath filled your 
heart” (vers. 1-6). 

Many were to be stumbled among the Jews who looked for 
anything but sorrow, shame, and groundless hatred to be the 
portion of those who follow the Messiah. But the Lord 
_ graciously considers His own; and while He uses trial for 
the blessing of the strong, He would shield and strengthen the 
weak, both by warning them of the world’s undying ill-will and 
of the Holy Ghost’s coming to add His testimony to theirs 
in the face of the persecution of the servants as of their 
Master. How precious what He has thus spoken ! 

Two forms should be taken to get rid of Christians and their 
testimony: one in common when men affect the utmost zeal 
for divine authority and holiness ; the other open to individuals 

* Text. Rec. duiv “to you” with N D L, &c., a few cursives and versions, 
but the mass of manuscripts and oldest versions omit. 

+ avray “their” A B ILP™, &c., but the great majority rejects 
826 


fa acca WE AS baad er asennad 
v .} 


Ee a SE a ay PUTS 


oe ee ee Se ee 


PEIN ay erate Sod Wey 


CHAPTER XVI. S27 


even to the extreme point of death to extinguish malefactors 
not fit to live. “They will put you out of the synagogue; nay, 
an hour cometh that every one that hath killed you will think 
that he is offering service to God.” Impossible to conceive 
rancour more deadly, yet sanctioned by all, than that anyone 
who liked might take on himself (though not without the 
seal of law and authority) to kill a follower of Christ, not 
only with impunity, but claiming therein to do a religious 
service to God. Saul of Tarsus furnishes a notable example 
of this till sovereign grace chose him to bear the Lord’s name 
before all and to suffer great things for His sake. 

Doubtless there is a disposition in men generally to fight for 
their religion, whatever it be. But a special reason gives in- 
tensity to the world’s, and-in particular to the Jews’, enmity 
to Christians. Any measure of truth possessed is to the flesh 
the most powerful motive for disliking and resenting that 
which claims fuller light; and Christianity cannot but confess 
the truth in all its fulness in Christ by the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven. He who confesses the Son has the Father 
also; as he is the antichrist who denies both (1 John ii, 23). 
And this is what the proud unbelief of Judaism ever tends to 
when confronted with the testimony of Christ. They set their 
partial and preparatory knowledge against that complete revela- 
tion which could not be till He came Who shows the Father, 
and accomplished everlasting redemption. How blessed for 
the babes of God’s family that, if what they heard from the 
beginning abides in them, they too shall abide in the Son and 
in the Father! 

And as it was with the Jew, so it is with every ecclesiastical 
system of Christendom itself, which in order to embrace the 
greatest possible number contents itself with the least and 
lowest confession, and hence is exposed to the snare of the 
devil in setting itself against all that go beyond the Christian 
alphabet. So even the Reformed bodies settled themselves on 
what their founders learnt on emerging from Popery, and oppose 
as innovation all that working of the Spirit which recalls to the 
fulness of Christ in the written word that was long before either 
the Reformation or Popery. They too persecuted when they had 


328 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


any confidence in their own Confessions; till of late they have 
become so honeycombed with the indifference or the activity of 
scepticism that they care too little for anything to persecute 
anybody. But where there is a real holding fast of such 
a measure of traditional truth as arrogates the name of ortho- 
doxy, there is always a jealousy of the action of the Spirit 
which insists on Christ more richly known with fresh power to 
men’s hearts, and consequently claiming exercise of faith. 

So the Jew set the unity of the Godhead to deny the Father 
and the Son and the Spirit; so men now resist the truth of the 
one body and one Spirit, devoted to the fleshly unity of Rome 
or boasting of the active rivalry of Protestant societies. But 
the more they hold even truth itself in a measure as a form, 
the less willing are they to allow the activity of the Spirit by 
God’s word as a whole. “And these things will they do, 
because they knew not the Father nor me.” Yet to know both 
is eternal life, which every Christian characteristically has by 
the gospel, though the most advanced is marked by deepening 
acquaintance with Him that is from the beginning. When and 
where idols reigned, it needed the energy of grace to turn to 
God, the living and true; where God was making Himself 
known in the Son, flesh might avail itself of old truth no 
longer contested nor costing any sacrifice, and have its tongue 
set on fire of hell to blaspheme the full revelation which tests 
actual faith and faithfulness, and seek to exterminate those who 
testified it. The principle holds good in small things as well as 
in the greatest, and now as ever. 

But as the Lord thus prepared the disciples for harsher things 
from the professing people of God than from men wholly 
ignorant, so now He lets them know what they must suffer, 
that they might gather comfort even in that hour by remem- 
bering His words. As the trial that came to pass was known to 
Him and made known to them, now they could trust His 
assurance of love and blessing, of deliverance and glory. 
Besides He explains why He had not told of these things 
before. He was with them, their shield and Paraclete; and 
what need was there to say a word? But as He was about to 
leave them, it was well, and would help all to work for good, 


i 
é 
3 
] 


Ls lea at AN la a lll 


het ete hate 


eR ee oe een 
. 


CHAPTER XVI. 329 


“But now I go unto him that sent me, and none of you 
asketh me, Whither goest thou? But because I have said these 
things to you, sorrow hath filled your heart.” This sorrow was 
more of nature than of faith. No wonder it surprised them to 
hear of their divine Master leaving them with such a prospect 
before them, with so little manifestation of the effects of His 
coming in the world or even in Israel. And they had forsaken 
their all and followed Him: what could it mean? He had 
already assured them that He would not leave them orphans, 
but was coming to them. Had faith been simpler, they would 
have not only counted on His loving care of them, but have 
asked whither He was going, and have learnt its bearing on His 
glory and their blessing. It is ignorance of His mind which 
fills the heart with sorrow at His words, for they are spirit and 
life, though we may need to wait on God in order to lay hold 
on them intelligently. But the Lord proceeds to bring out all 
clearly in what follows. 

This leads the way to the main distinctive truth the Lord is 
intimating, the presence and action of the Holy Ghost when 
sent down from heaven. The Son would send Him. 

“Nevertheless I tell you the truth: it is profitable for you 
that I go away; for if I go not away, the Paraclete will 
not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto 
you ” (ver. 7). 

The Lord had told them before, that had they loved Him, 
they would have rejoiced because. He said, I go unto the Father. 
What was it not for the humbled, holy, and suffering Son of 
man to quit the scene of His unequalled sorrows for His 
Father’s presence on high? Now He shows the connection 
of His departure with their fresh and deeper blessing. It 
might seem, to them especially, strange to say that the loss 
of His bodily presence should be their gain. But so it was 
to be. The truth is not what seems but the manifestation 
of what really is; nor is it found in the first man but in the 
Second; nor can we know it but by the Spirit. Now it was to 
be established and enjoyed more than ever. For Christ was 
going to heaven on the ground of accomplished redemption, 
thence to send the Holy Spirit to the saints on earth. It was 


330 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


profitable for them then that Christ should go away. He 
Who alone effectuates any spiritual good would not otherwise 
come. God’s will must first be done (Heb. x. 5-10). 

And now that the Lord was going above, having obtained 
eternal redemption, the Holy Spirit was not only to work 
as He had never before wrought in the children of men or 
in the children of God, but was to come personally and under- 
take the entire charge and business of the disciples. For this is 
the meaning of zapaxAyrTos, which our “Comforter” * imperfectly 
represents. He had come in person to abide in Jesus; He had 
sealed the Son of man; He had anointed Him with power. 
None else could have Him thus till God’s judgment of sin had 
taken its course in the cross. Not that compassion or fidelity 
of goodness, or any other form or way of divine love had been 
lacking in times past; but this presence of the Spirit could not 
be till then. Jesus at His baptism had the Spirit thus descend- 
ing and abiding on Him, and this as the perfect Man without 
blood-shedding, for He knew no sin. But others were sinners, 
and those who believed had a sinful nature, notwithstanding 
their believing. The flesh still remained, and they are contrary 
to each other. Here comes in the efficacy of Christ’s work. 
God was then and there glorified even as to sin in His cross. 
His blood cleanses from all sin. God made Him to be sin for 
us that we might become the righteousness of God in Him. 
What the law could not do in that it was weak through the 
flesh, God, sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh 
and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. Not only were the bad 
fruits gone but the evil root that bore them was judged and 
sentence executed. Hence could the Spirit come and dwell in 
us as never before, not as if we were better than the saints of 
past ages, but in virtue of Christ’s death and its infinite value 
in God’s eyes, and in pursuance of divine counsel. 


* It is striking to see how almost all the ancient translators felt compelled to 
adopt rather than to render the Greek word; for so it is in languages different 
as the Syriac, the Sahidic, and the Memphitic, the Latin (old Itala as well as 
Vulgate), the Aethiopic, the Arabic, the Gothic, and the Persian. The Armenian 
gives “Comforter,” followed by Georgian and the Sclavonic, and, it would seem, 
by the Anglo-Saxon in its own way, and certainly by Wiclif and his disciple- 
translator ; but they have “Advocate” like the Vulgate, Syrr. &., in 1 Johnii. 1, 


CHAPTER XVI. 331 


This then is the distinctive character of Christianity. It is 
not the kingdom, Christ reigning in Jehovah power and glory, 
and the Spirit poured out upon all flesh; but Christ departing 
to be in heaven and the Spirit as Paraclete sent and abiding 
with the saints on earth. 

“ And when come, he will convince [or, afford proof to] the 
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, 
because they believe not on me; of righteousness, because I 
go unto my [or, the]* Father, and ye behold me no more; of 
judgment, because the prince of this world is [or, hath been] 
judged” (vers. 8-11). 

The world cannot receive the Spirit of truth, because it 
seeth Him not neither knoweth Him. He is the object of 
neither sense nor intellect. Whatever the effects or displays 
of His energy, He abides invisible in Himself and outside the 
ken of the world. But the saints know Him, and that their 
bodies are His temple; even as they by Him know all else that 
they really know. God has revealed to us by His Spirit what 
is beyond human intelligence as such; for the Spirit searches 
all things, yea, His depths; and just as the spirit of man knows 
the things of a man, even so the things of God none knows 
but the Spirit of God. And Him we as Christians have received, 
not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit of God, that we might 
know the things that are freely given us of God. And not only 
so; but they are communicated in words by Him, and received 
by His power in the believer, as truly as they are by Him 
revealed: all is by the Holy Spirit of God. 

Here we have His present relation, not to the saints, but to 
that world which is outside. And the Lord tells us, that, when 
come, He édéyéer the world. It is difficult to convey justly 
the force of this. ‘Reprove,’ as in the Authorised Version, is 
too narrow a meaning, if not false. “Rebuke” is here out of 
the question. “Convict” hardly applies even to the first, not 
at all to the second and third clauses; and supposes an effect 
produced which may not really be in any case. Nor is one 
satisfied with “convince,” save in the sense of affording proof 
by His presence, rather than by His action. For by His 


* ® B DL, some cursives and versions, omit mov, “my,” which the rest add. 


Boe AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


coming and abiding in the saints, apart from the world, 
He gives it demonstrative proof of sin, of righteousness, and 
of judgment. ; 

The law dealt with Israel as those under it. But now it 
is the Spirit Who demonstrates the sin of the world; and this 
not because they violate that divine measure of a man’s duty, 
but because they reject the Son of God: “of sin, because they 
believe not on me.” He had come in grace; to reject this was 
fatal. It is not merely failure in obligation, but despite of 
God’s love. Such is the true and actual gauge of the world 
before God, Who tests and proves the guilt of the whole 
system which opposes Him by its unbelieving ignorance and 
refusal of His Son, spite of the fullest testimony. This is the 
sin demonstrated. 

Further, He affords demonstration of righteousness. Where 
is this? In the race or first man? On the contrary, there is 
none righteous, no, not one. And as for the Righteous One, 
even Jesus, He as we have seen was despised and rejected of 
men, by none so keenly as by the Jews, but in fact and to the 
uttermost by the world. Where then is the Spirit’s proof of 
righteousness? ‘“ Because I go to my [or, the] Father, and ye 
behold me no more.” Righteousness is on God’s part only. Man 
condemned and killed the Just One; God raised Him from the 
dead and set Him at His own right hand. The Son “going to 
the Father” is the standing witness of righteousness there, and 
not here. For man He Who came into the world in love is clean 
gone. They would not have Him, and “ye behold me no more.” 
He returns for the world as Judge; but this is a wholly 
different and most solemn affair. But He is lost to men 
according to His presence in grace as at His first Advent; all 
is closed with His mission to the world as He came. And the 
Spirit testifies and demonstrates only divine righteousness in 
Him on high, and man lost in casting out Him no longer to be 
seen as before here below. 

But again the Spirit gives proof of “judgment”; and this, 
“because the prince of this world is [or,hath been] judged.” Here 
again it is not a question of the kingdom in power and glory 
when Jehovah shall punish the host of the high ones on high, as 


CHAPTER XVI. DOO 


well as put down the kings of the earth upon the earth, and 
slay the dragon that is in the sea. The Christian knows what 
will be for the earthly people’s deliverance and the joy of all 
nations, but he sees already by faith that Satan is judged in 
Christ’s death and resurrection and ascension. The Holy Ghost 
sums up all in Christ’s Person; and this is the grand demonstra-. 
tion for the world. Its ruler is already judged in rejecting Him 
Who made known the Father, glorified God, and is glorified of 
God. All is closed for the world in Him Who came in love, 
and is gone up in righteousness. The ruler of the world is 
judged in His cross. 

Men are apt to err doubly in their estimate of the Holy 
Spirit’s relation to us. They either overlook the immense 
effect of His presence and teaching, or they attribute to Him 
what may be the mere fruit of natural conscience and diffused 
information. Our Lord here puts in His own perfect way 
what the Spirit would do as sent down from heaven, not now 
in external demonstration to the world, but in the positive 
blessing and help of the disciples. 

“T have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear 
[them] now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, shall have 
come, he will guide you in* [or, into] all the truth; for he will 
not speak from himself, but whatevert he shall heart he 
will speak; and he will announce to you the things to come. 
He will glorify me, for he will receive of mine, and will 
announce [it] to you. All things that the Father hath are 
mine: on this account I said, that he receiveth§ of mine and 
will announce [it] to you” (vers. 12-15). 

It has been repeatedly shewn, and in this chapter most 
expressly, that the presence of the Spirit depended on the 
departure of Christ to heaven consequent on accomplished 
redemption. This changed the entire groundwork, besides 
morally fitting the saints for the new truth, work, character, 
and hope of Christianity. The disciples were not ignorant 


* é&y & (om. don) D L, &c., but A B Y, &., eds 7. a. 7., while the mass have 
with Text. Rec. elo 7m. 7. d. + Many add ay, some édv, 

t Text. Rec. dkodoy with most, dxotoes BD Ee™ HY, dxovee & L, &c. 

§ Anweras Text, Rec. but AauBdver the best and most numerous. 


334 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


of the promise that the Spirit should be given to maugurate 
the reign of the Messiah. They knew the judgment under 
which the chosen people abide “until the Spirit be poured 
upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, 
and the fruitful field be counted for a forest”; so vast out- 
wardly, no less than inwardly, the change when God puts forth 
His power for the kingdom of His Son. They knew that He 
will pour out His Spirit upon all flesh; not only the sons and 
daughters, the old and young of Israel, enjoying a blessing far 
beyond all temporal favours, but the servants and the hand- 
maidens, in short all flesh and not the Jews alone sharing it. 

But here it is the sound heard when the great High Priest 
enters into the Sanctuary before Jehovah, and not only when 
He comes out for the deliverance and joy of repentant Israel 
in the last days. It is the Spirit given when the Lord Jesus 
went on high, and by Him thus gone. For this they were 
wholly unprepared, as indeed it is one of the most essential 
characteristics of God’s testimony between the rejection and 
the reception of the Jews; and the Spirit, when given, was 
to supply what the then state of the disciples could not bear. 
For the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God 
(and He is a spirit, not of fear, but of power and of love and 
of a sound mind), besides the incalculable facts of Christ’s 
work in death, resurrection, and ascension, to which He testifies. 
Truly the Lord had many things to say reserved for the Holy 
Ghost, when the disciples had their consciences purged and 
could draw near boldly into the holies, and a Man glorified in 
heaven furnished the meet occasion for the display of all 
that is in God, even for the secret hid in God before all worlds, 
of which not John or any other than the apostle Paul was 
to be the administrator. 

But be the instrument who it might, when the Spirit of 
truth is come, as the Lord intimates here, “he will guide you 
into all the truth,” or “in” it all as the Sinaitic, Cambridge 
(D), and Parisian (L) uncials with other authorities have it. 
For this two main grounds are given, besides His necessary 
competency as a divine Person. First, He does not act in- 
dependently, but fulfillig the mission on which He is sent 


CHAPTER XVI. 335 


expressly. “For he will not speak from himself, but whatever 
he shall hear, he will speak; and he will announce to you the 
things to come.” Secondly, His prime object is to exalt the 
Lord Jesus, and therefore He will assuredly make this good 
in testimony to the disciples. “Me he will glorify, for he 
will receive of mine and announce [it] to you.” 

The reader must guard against the popular error, easily 
suggested by the Authorised Version of verse 13, as if the 
sense meant were that the Spirit shall not speak about Himself. 
For it is neither true as a fact, nor is it of course intended 
here. The Spirit largely speaks concerning Himself in this 
Gospel, and particularly in the section we are examining. So 
He does in Romans vii.; in 1 Corinthians ii, xii.; in 2 Cor- 
inthians ii.; in Ephesians i, iL, i, iv., and many other parts 
of scripture. This makes it the more strange that even the 
simplest have not learnt the meaning here to be, that He shall 
not speak from Himself, but, as the next clause explains, 
whatever He shall hear He will speak. As the Son came not 
to act independently, whatever might be His glory, but to 
serve His Father; so the Spirit is come to serve the Son, and 
whatever He shall hear, He will speak. 

But there is more. Not only can He speak of the Son in 
heaven as Himself sent down by Him, and thus bear the 
highest testimony to His intrinsic dignity and the new position 
Christ is in there, but He has not ceased to be the Spirit of 
prophecy. On the contrary, He would thus work abundantly 
in view of the world’s total ruin and the blessing that waits 
on the Lord’s return. “And he will announce to you the 
things to come.” The prophetic word is found largely in 
the New Testament, not only in the Gospels, but also in the 
Epistles, but most of all in the wonderful book of Revelation. 
And the effect was immense in detaching the saints from the 
world as under judgment, however this might tarry. They 
knew these things before, and thus held fast their own sted- 
fastness. Nevertheless prophecy as occupied with the earth, 
even though it go on to the kingdom of God there, is but 
a small and even inferior part of the Spirit’s testimony, how- 
ever astonishing in man’s eyes and precious in itself. 


336 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Christ’s own glory, now on high, is the direct object; and 
this in every way. “Me he will glorify, for he will receive 
of mine and will announce [it] to you.” And here also all 
is in contrast with Messianic light or earthly dominion, 
however just and great. “All things that the Father hath 
are mine: on this account I said that he receiveth of mine 
and will announce [it] to you.” He is sent down to glorify 
not the church but Christ, and this by receiving and reporting 
what is Christ’s (and all the Father has is His), not by ex- 
ageerating man’s importance or allowing the will of man. 
Thus it was not only the universe which God had created, 
but the new creation also in relationship with the Father, 
and this even specifically. 

But there is another intimation needful to press the “little 
while” with its issues of sorrow and joy. 

“A little while and ye behold me not:* and again a little 
while and ye shall see me [because I go away unto the 
Father].* [Some] therefore of his disciples said one to 
another, What is this which he saith to us, A little while 
and ye behold me not: and again a little while and ye shall 
see me, and because 1 go away to the Father. They said 
therefore, What is this that he saith, the+ little while? We 
know not what he speaketh. Jesus knew [therefore ¢] that they 
wished to ask (éowray) him, and said to them, Do ye inquire 
of this one with another, because I said, A little while, and 
ye behold me not; and again a little while, and ye shall see 
me? Verily, verily, I say to you, Ye shall weep and 
lament, but the world shall rejoice; §ye shall be grieved, 
but your grief shall be turned into joy. The woman, when 
she bringeth forth, hath grief because her hour is come; but 
when she shall give birth to the child, she no longer re- 
membereth the affliction for the joy that a man was born 
into the world. And ye therefore now have grief, but I will 

* ovxért, “no more,” is read by 8 B Det, &c.; but od Text. Rec. with most, 
% BDL and other good authorities omitting the last clause, although it is 
added by some fourteen uncials, most cursives, and many ancient versions. 

+t BLY, &c., omit the article, contrary to the mass, 


TN BDL, &., omit oy, contrary to most. 
§ Text. Rec. with most adds dé, ‘‘and.” , 


Z 
2 
3 


Teast) 2 ee ee ee 


CHAPTER XVI. 337 


see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no 


_ one taketh from you” (vers. 16-22). 


The “little while” in any and every sense was a strange 
sound to Jewish ears; so was His going away to the Father. 
It is no question here of their lost Messiah, the suffering Son 
of man. This of course is true and important in its place, 
and fully treated in the closing scenes of the Synoptic Gospels. 
But here we see and hear the conscious Son of God, a man, 
but a divine person Who had come from, and was now going 
back to, the Father. We need especially to be in the spirit 
of this to estimate the “little while,” and indeed Christianity, 
in contradistinction to what was and what will be. The 
resurrection brought the disciples into the intelligence of 
this “little while,” though it may not be all out till He 
comes again. The Jew thought nothing more certain than 
that the Christ when He came would abide for ever. The 
“little while” was therefore another enigma which His death 
and ascension cleared up, and the Spirit subsequently showed 
to be bound up with all that is characteristic of the present 
work of God for the glory of Christ. We anticipate by faith 
what will come, and manifestly at His appearing. 

Nothing can be more marked than the Lord’s avoidance here 
of introducing His death as such; and it is all the more 
x., xii. Here no doubt it underlies all, and poor indeed had 
been the joy without His infinite sorrow on the cross. But 
that solemn hour is here passed over thus: “A little while, 
and ye behold me not; and again, a little while, and ye shall 
see me. Verily, verily, I say to you, Ye shall weep and 
lament, but the world shall rejoice; ye shall be grieved, but 
your grief shall be turned into joy.” This was surely true 
when He rose after His brief absence, as it will be fully 
verified when He comes for them never to part more. And 
this He illustrates by the most familiar of all figures of sorrow 
issuing in joy (vers. 21, 22). The absence of the Lord is to 
the world getting rid of Him; but even now His resurrection 
is a joy which none takes away. What will it be when He 
comes to receive us to Himself ? 

Y 


338 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


The Lord proceeds to set forth yet more fully the blessing 
and privilege which should flow from His going to heaven and 
so bringing out the Father’s love to them. 

“ And in that day ye shall ask me nothing; verily, verily, I 
say to you,* Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father, he will give 
you in my name.t Hitherto ye asked nothing in my name: 
‘ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full (vers. 23, 
24). 

It is well known that the Greek words we are well nigh 
obliged to translate “ask” in verse 23 are not the same, the 
first (épwraw) being expressive rather of familiar entreaty, the 
second (airéw) of lowly petition. Hence, while our Lord often 
in this Gospel employs the former in His requesting the Father 
on behalf of the disciples, never does He use the latter. How- 
ever low He may go down in grace, He is ever the conscious Son 
of God in flesh, but none the less a divine Person; whilst Martha 
shows her slight appreciation of His glory by supposing that 
He might fitly and successfully appeal to God after a supplant 
sort (chap. xi. 22). 

But it seems too strong to say that every competent judge 
admits that “ye shall ask” of the first half of the verse has 
nothing to do with “ye shall ask” of the second; or that in 
the first Christ is referring back to the desire of the disciples 
in verse 19 to question Him. So Euthymius Z., as well as the 
Vulgate, and a crowd of moderns from Beza to Trench, includ- 
ing many German and British theologians. But though the 
word épwraw occurs often in the New Testament and even in 
this chapter with the ordinary classical sense of “question” 
(interrogo), it is used quite as often or more so for “requesting ” 
or “beseeching,” &c. (rogo), as in the LXX., and thus like our 
English “ask,” which means “to request” no less than “to 
question” or “inquire.” Inquiring of God in Old Testament 
phrase approaches in fact nearer to prayer for any one or thing 
than to a question. It seems then that varying the English 

* Oru (Text. Rec. after very many) is not in some of the best, and for dca av 
‘‘whatsoever,” Text. Rec., supported by most; ay or édy 77 BO DL Y, &c. ; or 
8a N; dédv X IL, &e. 


t év rw ov. wou after ‘‘the Father” A © cor D, &c. and Text. Rec. ; but at 
theendN BCP™LXY A, &. 


CHAPTER XVI. 339 


word is not the true solution, though obvious enough on the 
surface, and that the earlier Greek commentators were nearer 
the truth, save Origen, who like later errorists perverted the 
passage to deny the propriety of praying to our Lord, thus 
flatly contradicting the early disciples (Acts i. 24), Stephen 
(Acts vii. 59), and the apostle Paul (2 Cor. xii. 8). In matters 
which concern His service and His church it is even more 
proper according to scripture to pray to Him than to the 
Father, to Whom we instinctively turn for all that concerns 
the family of God in general. 

The Lord is really signifying the great change from recourse 
to Him as their Messiah on earth for every difficulty, not for 
questions orfly but for all they might want day by day, to that 
access unto the Father into which He would introduce them as 
the accepted Man and glorified Saviour on high. Till redemp- 


- tion is known, and the soul by grace is set in righteousness, 


even believers are afraid of God and hide as it were behind 
Christ. They draw near in spirit, as the disciples did actually, 
to Him Who in love came down from heaven to bless and 
reconcile them to God. But they do not really know what it 
is to come boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and 
find grace. They are not in the distinct consciousness of 
children before their Father, enjoying liberty in Christ by the 
Spirit of adoption. 

This then appears to me what the Lord gives the disciples to 
know should follow His resurrection and departure “in that 
day”: a day already come, the day of grace, not of glory, save 
so far as we enter in by virtue of Him Who is gone above and 
sent the Spirit thence to be in us. He had already and fully 
told them what the Spirit of truth would do in guiding them 
into all the truth (vers. 12-15); here He substitutes access to 
the Father for everything in prayer, instead of personal re- 
quests to Himself as their Master ever ready to help on earth. 
It is not a question then of a declaration of being so taught of 
the Spirit as to have nothing further to inquire, but of no 
longer having One at hand to Whom they had been in the 
habit of appealing for each difficulty as it rose. The departing 
Son of God would draw out confidence of heart in the Father. 


340 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Hence the solemnity of making known their new resource. 
“Verily, verily, I say to you, Whatsoever [or, If] ye shall ask 
the Father in my name, he will give you [in my name].” 
The text differs in the manuscripts and other authorities; but 
the best of them place “in my name” after the assurance that 
the Father will give, not after the saints asking the Father as 
in the common text, which however is best supported by the 
ancient versions. There can be no doubt, as we shall see pre- 
sently, that the saints are encouraged and entitled in the value 
of the revelation of Christ to prefer their requests to the 
Father ; but, if the more ancient reading holds in verse 23, we 
have the collateral truth that He gives in virtue of that name 
whatsoever they shall ask Him. How blessed and cheering to 
the saints! What pleasure to the Father and honour to the 
Son! The rejection of the Messiah only turns to His greater 
glory and better blessings for His own. 

And this is followed up in verse 24: “Hitherto ye asked 
nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy 
may be fulfilled.” The importance of this can hardly be ex- 
aggerated: I do not mean as bearing merely on the use of the 
blessed prayer given long before to the disciples, but on the 
broader question of their approaching new relationship and 
standing by redemption and the gift of the Spirit. On the 
face of the words however, it is plain that to use that prayer 
is not to ask the Father in Christ’s name. The disciples were 
no doubt in the habit of using it day by day; yet up to the 
present they had asked nothing in His name. Now so to ask 
the Father in the Son’s name is alone Christian prayer in the 
true and full sense. Those therefore who insist on going back 
to the prayer of the disciples fail to enter into the new place 
on which the Lord here sets all that are His. It may be rever- 
ently meant; but is it the faith which really enters into God’s 
mind and honours the Master? I trow not. Asa prayer to 
be used when the disciples knew not how to pray, it was per- 
fection; as a model, it abides ever full of depths of instruc- 
tion. But the Lord, now at the end of His career here below, 
lets them know the shortcoming in ground and object of their 
previous petitions, and tells them what should be their appro- 


rN eM ee a 


CHAPTER XVI. 341 


priate character in future through their new blessing at 
hand through redemption and ascension. 

It would have been out of season and presumptuous for the 
disciples in the past to have drawn near to the Father as the 
Son did, Who, in His wisdom and goodness, gave them a prayer 
perfectly suited to their then state when the atoning work was 
not yet done and the Holy Ghost accordingly not given. But 
now, as we have already seen so often in this context, conse- 
quent on Christ’s glorifying God on earth by death and going 
up on high, the Holy Ghost would come to be in and with 
them. And this is the great result Godward, as we have already 
seen much saintward: they should ask in Christ’s name; and 
they are called to ask and receive, that their joy might be full. 
Life in Christ would go forth in suited desires, to which the 
Holy Ghost would impart power as well as intelligence; and 
assuredly, with such a ground and motive before Him as the 
Son of man Who had devoted Himself at all cost to His glory, 
the Father would fail in nothing on His part. Their joy would 
indeed be at the full. 

“These things have I spoken to you in proverbs (allegories): 
an hour cometh when I shall speak no longer to you in proverbs, 
but openly report* to you about the Father. In that day ye 
shall ask (airjcecOe) in my name, and I say not to you that I 
will request (épwrijcw) the Father for you; for the Father him- 
self dearly loveth you because ye have dearly loved me and 
have believed that I came out from (rapa) God. I came out 
from+ the Father and am come into the world; again I leave 
the world and proceed unto the Father” (vers. 25-28). 

It is owing, I presume, to the large and various meaning of 
the Hebrew -) that we have in Greek rapopuia as well as 
qapaoAy used correspondingly not only in the LXX. but in 
the New Testament, the Synoptic Gospels always using the 
latter, John only the former as in chapter x. and here. 


*S8 AB OC™ DKL MNXYTJI, drayy. ‘‘report”; others, dvayy. 
*“announce ” as in vers. 18, 14, 15. 

+ Ge00 & Pm A and most MSS. and versions; marpis BC ?™ DL X, &. How 
singularly biassed was Tregelles to edit the latter, being plainly inconsistent 
with the context! The edition of W. and H. follows Tregelles, 

té& BC ™L X, &.; rapt A CoTHT A, &. 


342 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Perhaps “allegory” might be more appropriate, or even a 
“dark saying” in our chapter where parable or allegory can 
scarcely apply. A close examination of the usage will prove 
that both Greek words are employed with considerable latitude 
in the four Gospels, as elsewhere. 

Here the Lord was conscious that what He uttered fell like 
enigmas on the ears of the disciples. His plain declaration or 
report about the Father would clear up all in due time. What 
did not His resurrection? and His appearances and converse 
from the first to the last of His forty days’ intercourse, as well 
as His ascension? Take alone the message through Mary of 
Magdala on the first day of the week. Did He not plainly 
declare about the Father, His and theirs? Was not His God 
and their God a deep intimation of blessing? But above all 
when He testified by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, 
did not the truth shine out more than ever? He made 
known to them His Father’s name then; He was to make it 
known when gone above (chap. xvii. 26), and did so only 
more effectively from thence. 

This also turned (as was intended) to their increasing sense 
of the value of Christ’s own name. “In that day ye shall ask 
(atr.) in my name.” Asking in His name is not merely for 
Christ’s sake as a motive, but in the value of Himself and His 
acceptance. His worth goes in its fulness to the account of 
those who thus plead; and how precious and all-prevailing it 
is in the Father’s eyes! How glorifying to both the Father 
and the Son! How humbling and no less strengthening to the 
saints themselves! It is the title of every Christian now; 
none ever enjoyed it before. Never was there a soul blessed 
on earth apart from Him and His work foreseen; but this is 
known nearness and acceptance applied even to our petitions in 
virtue of Himself fully revealed when His work was done and 
accepted in infinite efficacy. 

“And I say not that I will request (épwr.) the Father for 
you, for the Father himself loveth you dearly, because ye have 
loved me dearly, and have believed that I came out from God.” 
This is another of those sentences over which not men and 
scholars but saints also stumble, because many a believer even 


By 


CHAPTER XVI. 343 


is not enjoying the truth of it; and what John’s Gospel and 
Epistles treat of must be really entered into to be understood. 
This verse 26 not more denies Christ’s intercession for us, than 
verse 23 forbids the servant praying to His Lord about His 
work or His house. It is not an absolute statement, nor is 
there the smallest need to apply the technical device of 
Praeteritio, as it is called, so as to convey not a negation 
but a strong affirmation. Thus it would mean “I need not 
assure you that I will request the Father for you.” But it is 
simply an ellipse, which the words following explain: I do not 
say that I will request the Father for you, as if He did not 
love you; for the Father Himself (proprio motu) does love 
you dearly, &c. This too accounts for the words of special 
affection, ¢iAe¢ and zegiAr., which follow. It was grace, the 
Father's drawing, which brought them to hear the voice of 
the Son and believe on Him; yet does the Lord speak of 
the Father’s dearly loving them and of their having dearly 
loved Him, to Whom they clung truly, however feebly. 
They had believed that He came out from God. They truly 
believed that He was the Christ of God, and was born of 
God. It was divine teaching and grace as far as it went. 

But this was far short of the full truth which He proceeds 
to reveal: “I came out from the Father and am come into the 
world; again I leave the world and proceed unto the Father.” 
Here they were altogether short. They realised as yet little 
or nothing of His full, divine, and eternal glory as the Son of 
the Father. God the Father was fully revealed no doubt in 
the Son; but the presence and power of the Spirit, personally 
sent down, was needed to give them communion with Him 
thus made known. It is this which, when the conscience is 
purged, brings into happy liberty. Here then is what so many 
saints are still ignorant of, in the state of their souls pretty 
much where the disciples then were ; for though they may see 
rather better the glory of the Son, they fail to see in Him and 
His work their title to rest in the Father’s love. 

It is striking to remark the contrast throughout this series 
of discourses with the Synoptic Gospels. In these Christ's 
death is made most prominent; here it is going away to the 


344 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


‘Father. How true to the design the Holy Spirit impressed. on 
the narrative of John! 

It would be difficult to find a verse of John which presents 
more tersely and completely too the character of his Gospel 
than the one we have just had before us; nor one less really 
apprehended now as then by the disciples. His divine re- 
lationship and mission from the Father stand clearly revealed 
on earth before they join Him on high. His presence as man 
in the world, no less than His quitting the world, and going to 
the Father, none the less the Son now become man, with the 
immense results of all this for God and more especially for the 
saints. These great truths wholly transcend all Messianic glory 
which as yet filled the minds of His followers, who proved 
how little they knew by the very fact that they thought 
they knew all clearly. 

“ His disciples say [to him],* Behold, now thou talkest witht 
openness and speakest no parable. Now we know that thou 
knowest all things and hast no need that one ask thee: herein 
we believe that thou didst come out from God” (vers. 29, 30). 
Their own language bewrayed them. Simple as His words 
were, they had not taken in their depth. They had no 
conception of the mighty change from all they had gathered 
of the kingdom as revealed in the Old Testament to the new 
state of things that would follow His absence with the Father 
on high and the presence of the Spirit here below. It sounded 
plain to their ears; but even up to the ascension they feebly if 
at all caught a glimpse of it. They to the last clung to the 
hopes of Israel, and these surely remain to be fulfilled another 
day. But they understood not this day, during which, if the 
Jews are treated as reprobate, even as He was rejected of 
them, those born of God should in virtue of Christ and His 
work be placed in immediate relationship with the Father. 
His return to the Father was a parable still, though the Lord 
does not correct their error, as indeed it was useless: they 
would soon enough learn how little they knew. But at least 


* 


avr@ Text. Rec. with most MSS., vv., &c. ; but not the most ancient, some 
of which add év before zappyota. 


t Text. Rec. adds viv ‘‘now” with most manuscripts, but not the oldest. 


Sita ON Ee Ne oe 


CHAPTER XVI. 345 


even then they had the inward consciousness that He knew all, 
and, as He penetrated their thoughts, had no need that any 
should ask Him. “Herein we believe that thou camest out 
from God.” Undoubtedly: yet how far below the truth He 
had uttered is that which they were thus confessing! The 
Spirit of His Son sent into their hearts would give them in 
due time to know the Father; as redemption accomplished and 
accepted could alone lay the needful ground for it. 

“Jesus answered them, Just now do ye believe? [or, ye 
believe.] Behold, an hour cometh, and* is come, that ye 
should be scattered, each unto his own, and leave me alone; 
and I am not alone, because the Father is with me. These 
things have I spoken to you that in me ye may have peace. 
In the world ye havey tribulation; but be of good courage: 
I have overcome the world” (vers. 31-33). 

Their faith was real, but they were shortly to show how 
small it would be proved to be in the hour of trial already 
come. If doubt is never justifiable, it is good in our weakness 
to live in constant dependence. When strong in our own eyes, 
we are weak indeed; when weak, we are strong in the grace of 
our Lord Jesus. But O what a Saviour! and what disciples! 
They scattered to their own, and He left alone in the hour 
of His deepest need! Would any heart but His own have 
hastened to add, after such desertion on their part, “and I am 
not alone, because the Father is with me?” Could any but 
Himself have added, especially to such saints and under such 
circumstances, These things have I spoken to you that in Me 
ye may have peace? or have given such solid ground for it, 
at the very moment of contemplating their present portion 
of trouble in the world? “Be of good courage: I have over- 

* Text. Rec. adds viv ‘“‘now,” with some old MSS. and versions; but 8 A B 
Com Dem |, X, &c., have it not. 

+ ere, ‘tye shall have,” is the error of D and many cursives, with most 
of the Latin copies, &c., followed by Elzevir, but not Stephens, for though 
it appears in the text of his edition of 1550, it is corrected at the end according 
to his editions of 1546, 1549; éyere, ‘‘ye have,” % A BC L and a dozen more 
uncials, &c. Here many of the ancient versions are wrong, but not the Syrr., 
Memph., some old Latin, &c. It is strange that Lachmann edited é£ere, not 


only in his small edition of 1831, but in his larger and more mature one of 
1842, actually giving B with D adc as authority. 


346 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


come the world.” As Christ alone could so feel and bless, so 
are these words worthy of Him; and one knows not whether 
to admire most their divine authority, or their matchless grace 
and suitability to our need here below. As He is absolutely 
what He also speaks, so He speaks what He is to the unfailing 
comfort of the believer. 

Strikingly characteristic of our Gospel is the omission of 
the sorrows of Gethsemane, and yet more of God’s abandoning 
Him on the cross. Neither fell in with that account of Him 
which sets forth the glory of His Person, Whose it was to 
do the will of Him Who sent Him and to finish His work. 
Others bring out His complete rejection and humiliation, the 
service He rendered, and the depth of His sympathy as the 
perfect Man. John sees, hears, and records the Son above all 
circumstances, the object and the revealer of the Father, even 
when that sorrow came which scattered them, and that forsak- 
ing of God which was unfathomable save to Himself. 

With all before Him He spoke what He did here that in 
Him they might have peace; and so He walked Himself. In 
the world tribulation was to be their portion, not as for the 
Jew retributively at a specified and measured hour (Jer. xxx. 
7; Dan. xii. 1; Matt. xxiv. 21; Mark xiii, 19) at the time of 
the end, or even preparatorily meanwhile (Luke xxi. 22-24), 
but habitually for those not of the world, and hence a prey in 
it. Yet are they called to courage, as knowing Him Whom 
they have believed, His glory and His grace Who has over- 
come the world. What a spring and cheer, that we have to 
overcome a foe already overcome! He indeed alone; we look- 
ing to Him Who gives power for all things. And this is the 
victory that overcometh ‘the world, our faith. Who is he that 
overcometh the world but he that believeth that Jesus is the 
Son of God ? 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Next follows a chapter which one may perhaps characterise 
truly as unequalled for depth and scope in all the scriptures. 
Holiness, devotedness, truth, love, glory reign throughout. 
Who can wonder, seeing that it is unique in this respect, as 
it is the Son opening His heart to the Father when just about 
to die and leave His own for heaven? Yet profoundly interest- 
ing and momentous as the case was, it is the Son addressing 
Him thus which is so wondrous a privilege for us to hear. But 
all this may well fill our hearts with the sense of utter in- 
sufficiency to speak of such communications suitably. Never- 
theless as the Saviour uttered all within the hearing of the 
disciples, so the Holy Spirit has been pleased to reproduce His 
words with divine precision. They are therefore for us now, as 
then for His favoured followers. Encouraged by this grace we 
would count on the Lord’s real and living interest in us and on 
His faithfulness Who still abides with us to glorify Him by 
taking of His things and showing them to us. 

“These things spake Jesus, and lifting up his eyes unto 
heaven said, Father, the hour is come: glorify thy Son, that 
thy * [or, the] Son* may glorify thee, according as thou gavest 
him authority over all flesh, that, everything which thou hast 
given him, he should give them life eternal. And this is the 
eternal life, that they know thee, the only true God, and him 
whom thou didst send, Jesus Christ. I glorified thee on the 
earth, having} finished the work which thou hast given me to 
do; and now do thou, Father, glorify me along with (apa) 
taysels ee the glory which I had along yes thee before the 
world was” (vers. 1-5). 

* Treg. and Tisch. with W. and H. omit ood “thy,” following 8X BC ?™, &. 


T. R. has cat “also,” but the best do not accredit it. 
+So8ABCLI, &c.; but the finite verb in DE X Y AA, &c. 


347 


348 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


The Lord had closed His parting instructions to the disciples 
who had now to testify of and for Him; and so much the 
more because He was just about to leave them, His own 
personal testimony being already complete. To them not only 
had He spoken with fulness, but promised the Holy Spirit from 
heaven on His departure that there might be power as well as 
-truth. Unto heaven therefore did the Saviour lift up His eyes 
in addressing His Father. He Who even as Son of man is 
in heaven as a divine Person was going there in bodily presence, 
when the work of redemption was effected. In virtue of this 
work accomplished in death, proved in resurrection, He would 
take His seat there, the witness of its infinite acceptance. His 
proper ministry on earth, not merely to men but to the disciples, 
had been fully rendered. To the Father He turns as ever, but 
now in the hearing of His own, as indeed He would open His 
heart, if about Himself and His work, about them yet more, 
always the Sent One and Servant in divine love, though Lord of 
all. He looked to heaven when He blessed and brake the five 
loaves to feed the five thousand. He looked there and groaned 
as He made the deaf stammerer to hear and speak. Upward He 
lifted His eyes when at the grave of Lazarus He said, Father, 
I thank thee that Thou hast heard Me. To heaven He raising 
them once more said, “Father, the hour is come: glorify thy 
Son, that thy Son may glorify thee.” He is ever a divine 
Person; the Son but in flesh; not here as in the other Gospels 
the rejected and agonised sufferer, but the perfect executor 
of God’s purposes, heavenly and everlasting, and the manifesta- 
tion as Son of the Father. 

Hence, whatever the necessary and all-important intervention 
of His death, without which all else had been in vain for God’s 
glory in presence of sin and ruin, He nowhere speaks of it here, 
nor does He ask for resurrection but glorification. Further, the 
Father's name, so prominent in this Gospel, and particularly in 
these closing discourses to the disciples, is manifestly and more 
than in this chapter. It is indeed the characteristic of the 
Christian; even in the simplest form of His blessedness, the 
youngest, the babe, is described by our apostle as having the 
Father known (1 John ii. 13): a wondrous privilege, only possible 


CHAPTER XVII. 349 


through the Son of God come and redemption wrought, only 
enjoyable by the Holy Spirit given, the Spirit of adoption. 
But as at the beginning zeal for His Father’s house devoured 
Him, so here His heart is set on glorifying His Father in that 
heaven to which His eyes were lifted. “Father, the hour 
is come: glorify thy Son;” but, even so, it is “that thy Son 
may glorify thee.” Become man, He asks the Father to glorify 
Him ; He is Son, and when there glorified, it is still to glorify 
the Father. “According as thou gavest him authority over all 
flesh, that, everything which thou hast given him, he should 
give them eternal life.” Though God, He exerts no power 
in His, own right; He is true to the place into which He was 
pleased to come, and as man receives authority from the Father, | 
but authority inconceivable either in its universality of sphere 
or in its speciality of object, were He not God. For the 
authority given is over “all flesh”; and the special aim 
now, as to whatsoever the Father had given Him, is to give 
them eternal life. Thus the right of our Lord extends without 
limit, the Gentile being no more outside His title than the Jew; 
whilst eternal life is the portion of none beyond what is given 
of the Father to the Son, as elsewhere it is said to belong to the 
believer only. 

This leads to the explanation of “the eternal life” in question, 
Life for evermore, life to eternity, is the blessing commanded 
by Jehovah on the mountains of Zion (Ps. cxxxii.); and of the 
many Jews that sleep in the dust of the earth, some shall awake 
to everlasting life, as others to shame and everlasting contempt 
(Daniel xii.). But both these scriptures contemplate that great 
turning-point for the earth, the kingdom when it comes in 
manifest power and glory. The Lord speaks of life as given 
in Himself to faith now. “And this is the eternal life, that 
they know thee, the only true God, and him whom thou didst 
send, Jesus Christ.” If it be distinguished from that which is 
to be enjoyed in the displayed kingdom by-and-by, it stands 
as to its character in the knowledge not of the Most High 
Possessor of heaven and earth, with the true Melchisedec 
a Priest on His throne, but of the Father and of His sent 
One, the only true God now plainly revealed in the Son 


350 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the one Mediator between God and man. If distinguished 
from the past, it is no longer the Creator-God giving promises 
to the fathers protected and lodging as under the shadow of 
the Almighty; nor yet the sons of Israel in relationship with 
the name of Jehovah the moral governor of that chosen nation. — 
But the children of God now possess the revelation of the 
Father and of Jesus Christ Whom He sent; and this know- 
ledge is identified, not with promises nor government, but with 
“ eternal life,” as a present thing in Christ, the portion of every — 
believer. A deeper blessing it is impossible for God to bestow 
or for man to receive ; for it is exactly what characterised the 
Lord Himself Who is the eternal life which was with the Father 
and was manifested unto us. Only Christ could be said to be 
that life; we as believers are not, but we have it in Him; and 
as by faith alone it is received, so in faith it is exercised, sus- 
tained, and strengthened. 

It may be noticed further that, as eternal life is bound up 
with the knowledge of the Father, the only true God, in 
contrast with the gods many and false of the Gentiles, so 
it can only be where Christ is known Whom the Father 
sent, in contrast with His rejection by the Jews to their own 
deeper guilt and ruin. Neither the Son nor the Holy Ghost is 
excluded from the deity, which is elsewhere predicated or 
assumed of both equally with the Father. The object in hand 
is to assert it of the Father and to state the place taken here 
below by Him Who did not regard it as a prize [act or object 
of plunder] to be on equality with God, but emptied Himself, 
taking the form of a bondman. He was here to obey, to do the 
will of the Father that sent Him. But that He took such 
a place in lowly love is the strongest if indirect proof of His 
proper and eternal Godhead ; for even the archangel is a servant 
and can never rise out of the position or relation of a servant. 
Whereas the Son was pleased to take it in order to make good the 


| full blessing of redemption unto the glory of God the Father. 


So life was in Him, and He was eternal life before all ages; but 
here He is viewed as coming down to impart it in a scene de- 
parted from God, and to a creature, which otherwise must know 
death in its most terrible shape of judgment as now of guilt. 


AN NES Nesey 


CHAPTER XVII. 351 


Next, the Lord presents His work: we have seen His Person 
as already pleaded. But now He urges what He had done here 
below. “TI glorified thee on the earth, having finished the work 
which thou hast given me to do. And now, Father, glorify 
thou me along with thyself with the glory which I had along 
with thee before the world was.” The language here is more 
of sustained relationship than in chapter xiii. 31, 32, where 
it is a question of glorifying God, before Whom sin comes into 
unsparing judgment. Here it is glorifying His Father, and so 
there is no special contemplation of that final dealing where 
all that God is and feels came out against evil imputatively 
laid on the head of the Son of man. Here the entire path 
of Christ on earth in giving Himself up to obey and please 
His Father is summed up. Therefore it was the more needful 
to specify its completion, “having finished the work which thou 
hast given me to do.” He speaks not more as the faithful 
servant than as the conscious Son of God Who sees all com- 
pleted to the Father’s glory, Who had given Him the work that 
He should do it Who alone could. And thereon does He ask 
the Father to glorify Him, not because of His personal glory 
and relationship only but in virtue of the work completed to 
His glory here below, that He might thus lay a valid and sure 
title for us to join Him in the same heavenly blessedness. 

It is not that He ever did or could cease to be God, any more 
than after becoming incarnate He will ever cease to be man; 
but, having in divine love come down to be a servant and a man 
to glorify God the Father and make a righteous channel for all 
the purposes of divine grace, He asks to be glorified by the 
Father along with Himself with the glory which He had along 
with Him before the world was. There He had been from ever- 
lasting as the Son; there He asks to be as the Son but now 
also man, the Word made flesh but risen, to everlasting. It 


- was His perfection as man to ask for this glorification. Not 


even as risen does He glorify Himself. He had emptied and 
humbled Himself for the Father’s glory; He asks the Father 
to glorify Him, though He states His eternal and divine com- 
petency by asking to be glorified with the glory He had with 
the Father before the world was. Never so weighty a plea, 


302 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


never so solid a ground of righteousness, never such exquisite 
and infinite grace. 

The Lord then explains how souls were brought into such 
nearness of relationship to Him before the Father; as He had 
already laid the basis in His Person and work. 

“JT manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest me 
out of the world. Thine they were, and to me thou gavest 
them, and they have kept thy word. Now have they known 
that all things as many as thou hast given me are of (apa) 
thee; because the words which thou gavest me I have given to 
them, and they received [them], and knew truly that I came out 
from thee, and believed that thou didst send me” (vers. 6-8). 

Thus the manifestation of the Father’s name is first laid 
down. It was a characteristic and most influential truth, the 
Son being the only one competent, though none of course could 
enter in even so but by the Spirit, as we know and as is taught 
elsewhere. But as the Son could manifest His Father’s name, 
so this He did in unjealous love, that the disciples, the men 
whom the Father gave Him out of the world, might know 
what He is as the Son knew Him; not, it need hardly be said, 
infinitely as was proper to the Only-begotten, but after that 
manner, as children of God, to whom the Son would impart 
that which was wholly outside and above man, and intrinsically 
of God for the family of God. 

For-though the Lord had come to the Jews as their promised 
Messiah on earth, Him they would not have but even rejected, 
as they were just about to do even to the death of the cross. 
Hence, whatever may be the divine retribution another day 
when God makes inquisition for blood, and above all for His 
blood which they had blindly imprecated on themselves and 
their children, it became wholly a question of sovereign and 
heavenly grace, which, coming in the Person of the Son, mani- 
fested His Father’s name as no saint had ever enjoyed, no 
prophet so much as predicted, save perhaps in such a sort as 
to fall in with and confirm this most precious privilege when 
communicated, But even Hosea i. 10 is comparatively vague. 
Here all is as full as it is precise. It was the positive side of 
what the Lord undertook with His own here below, and its 


ANG ee AN 


Pay eo 


ua) wh A La 


q 


CHAPTER XVII. 353 


highest character: not the meeting sin and misery in grace, 
nor even the display of excellency as the righteous One, the 
Servant and Man, and as such Son of God; but the manifesta- 
tion of what His Father was and is as He knew Him, and as 
they were learning who were given to the Son by the Father 
out of the world. For the world is now defined and judged 
as alien and opposed to the Father. How blessed for the 
disciples to hear themselves thus singled out and designated 
as His by the Son to the Father ! 

Nor is this all. “Thine they were, and to me thou gavest 
them, and they have kept thy word” (Adyov). It appears to 
me that they err who refer the Lord’s description to His 
followers as formerly of Israel merely, and as walking in all 
the commandments and ordinances of Jehovah blameless. 
These were His elect out of the elect nation, His enemies now 
yet to be restored another day. The Father had a purpose 
about these, and thus they belonged to Him Who gave them 
to the Son, the object of His love and effectuator of His 
counsels, as He is also the accomplisher of redemption, to 
His own glory. And as the men given out of the world are 
thus viewed on a divine ground outside Jewish ties, so that 
which formed their souls and their ways was quite distinct; 
they had kept, says the Son, His Father’s word, made known 
by Himself when with them on earth hitherto. This we 
have, speaking generally, in the Gospels, with not a little 
they could not then bear in the Epistles. Everything refers 
to the Father: the Son, a man on earth, is always exalting 
Him, and in view of His own departure would endear them 
to Him and give them the assurance of it. 

This is developed yet more in what follows. “Now have 
they known that all things as many as thou hast given me 
are of thee.” They had entered into the secret of which the 
world knew nothing: the Father was the source of all that 
was given to the Son. Some wondered at His works and His 
words; others in their enmity blasphemously attributed what 
was beyond man to Satan. The disciples had learnt that they 
were all of the Father, as the Son desired that they should. 
It was not only that He came out from the Father, nor that 

Z 


354 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


He had finished the work the Father had given Him to do, as 
their title to blessing with the Son before Him; but the means 
for bringing them into the blessing were also of the Father; 
“because the words which thou gavest me I have given them, 
and they received [them], and knew truly that I came out from 
thee and believed that thou didst send me.” Thus the Lord 
handed over to His disciples those intimate communications of 
grace which the Father gave to Himself. It was no longer a 
question of the ten words given by Moses, the measure of man’s 
responsibility to prove his sin and ruin which he neither owned 
nor felt. 

The words (pyuaTa) which the Father gave the Son were the 
expression of divine grace and love according to that blessed 
relationship in which the Son stood, though man; and the 
disciples, once mere men but now born of God, have life eternal 
in Him and are given these words by the Son, that they might 
know and enjoy the new relationship which grace had conferred 
on them. Nor was it in vain, however slow of heart they might 
be in believing all. For if He had given to them the words 
the Father gave to Him, the disciples received the truth really, 
though no doubt imperfectly. The result was that they came 
to know truly that Christ the Son came out from the Father, 
and believed also that the Father sent Him. This is all the 
reckoning of grace here, not measuring degrees, but making 
much of reality, as He can well do Whose love gives, deepens, 
and secures from first to last. Even for them to know assuredly 
that the Son came out from the Father does not suffice His 
heart, for this would not necessarily prove more than His 
own love in so coming; but the disciples believed the further 
truth that the Father sent Him, the proof of His own love to 
them. How rich, how needful, is every word of His grace! 

“T request for them: not for the world do I request, but for 
those whom thou hast given me, for they are thine (and all my 
things are thine, and thy things mine), and I am glorified 
in them. And I am no longer in the world, and these* [or, 
they] are in the world, and I come to thee” (vers. 9-11). 


* § B, two cursives, D F (not the other Ita, nor Vulg.) Memph., Aeth., Arm,, 
Goth, read avrol “they,” in which they are followed by Tisch. in his last ed. and 
by W. and H. 


CHAPTER XVII. 355 


It is concerning the disciples He makes request, not for 
Israel nor the nations, not for the land nor the earth at large, 
but concerning those whom the Father had given Him. It is 
no question of taking up the world for government or blessing 
now: He is occupied with the joint-heirs, not with the in- 
heritance as yet. By-and-by, as Psalm ii. lets us know, Jehovah 
will say, Ask of Me, and I will give [Thee] the heathen for 
Thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy 
possession. But then the Son will reign on His holy hill of 
Zion, instead of being rejected on earth and received up on 
high. Then, instead of sustaining the suffering family of God 
who bear His reproach here below and wait for heavenly glory 
with Him, He will break the nations with a rod of iron and 
dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel. It will be, not the 
interval of the gospel as now, but the day of the kingdom in 
power and glory. Here the Lord is praying for His own as the 
precious gift of the Father to Himself, while cut off and having 
nothing that was promised Him here below; and He asks the 
more, because they were the Father’s. 

But it may be well to say that this gives occasion for a 
parenthetic statement which lets out much of the light of 
His personal glory: And all My things are Thine, and Thy 
things Mine.* As the Son of David, the Messiah, could this 
reciprocity have been so expressed? Is it not evidently and 
only in virtue of His being the Eternal Son, one with the 
Father, that they have rights and interests no less boundless 
than common? After this, however, He returns to the saints as 
those in whom He was glorified as a fact, not past but abiding, 
urging their care on the Father, because He sees both Himself 
no longer with them in the world and themselves so much the 
more exposed in it, as He was going back to the Father. Hence 
arises a fresh appeal. 

“ Holy Father, keep them in thy name which? thou hast given 
me, that they may be one even as [also] t we [are]. When I 

* It is surprising that the editors and commentators have not noticed the 
natural if not necessary parenthesis of all but the last clause of verse 10. As 
to the universe it would not be true to say yet deddfacua év avrots, It is precisely 


true of the saints. 
+ See note on next page. 


356 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


was with them,t I was keeping them in thy name which thou 
hast given me, and I guarded [them], and not one of them 
perished but the son of perdition that the scripture might be 
fulfilled. And now unto thee I come, and these things I speak 
_ in the world that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves” 
(vers. 11-13). 

~The Lord asks His Father, as the Holy Father, to keep the 
disciples in His name that they might be one, even as also the 
Father and the Son are. And this was accomplished by the power 
of the Holy Ghost in those very men who then stood around 
Him. Never before or since was such unity produced in human 
beings on earth. Yet the Gospels are the plainest proof that 
they were far from it whilst our Lord was here below with 
them. It was to be the fruit of His grace through redemp- 
tion after He went on high and sent down the Holy Ghost 
to effect it. And it was essential as a practical basis for 
Christianity. For doctrine is not enough without reality in 
life, and this most of all in those who were raised up of God 
to lay down the foundation. Their work and their written 
words were all during one generation in striking contrast with 
those of the Old Testament. 

Granted that they were men of like passions with ourselves 
or any; granted that they displayed varied and not slight 
infirmities even under their Master’s eyes and ministry on 
earth; granted that they then from first to last betrayed petty 
prejudices and narrow hearts and no small jealousy of each 
other, even in presence of the deepest love and lowliness, and of 
words and ways which made their contrasted jars (and the self- 
ishness which gave rise to all) most humbling and painful: all 
this, with more, only adds to the blessedness of what God 
wrought in these very men by His Spirit in answer to the 
Lord’s demand. The power of the Father’s name, which the 
Lord here below knew so well, was manifest in them; and the 
twelve were one even as the Father and the Son. None would 
have ventured so to describe but Christ; but if He did, He is 


t+ The Text. Rec. has ods, “whom,” but the better authorities support ¢, 
“which” (verse 11) ; and soin 12, though not so many.—The best also omit “in 
the world” (12), as some of them kal, “also” (11). 


Ath FF Va wall RATE 
ee 


CHAPTER XVII. 357 


the truth; and in fact with whom or what else could their 
unity as witnessed in the Acts and Epistles of the apostles 
be compared? Never elsewhere was seen such rising above 
egotism in the aims, measures, objects, in the life and service, 
of men on earth; never such common devotedness to, and 
absorption in, the will of God for the magnifying of the 
risen and glorified Jesus. 

The Lord then, in committing to the Father His own whom 
in that name He was keeping whilst here, speaks of having 
kept them safe, save that one who was doomed to destruction. 
Awitul lesson ! that even the constant presence of Jesus fails to 
win where the Spirit brings not the truth home to the conscience. 
Does this enfeeble scripture? On the contrary the scripture 
was thereby fulfilled. Chapter xiii. referred to Judas that none 
should be stumbled by such an end of his ministry. Here it 
is rather that none should therefore doubt the Lord’s care or 
the scripture. He was not one of those given to Christ by the 
Father, though called to be an apostle: of those so given He 
had lost none. Judas was an apparent, not a real, exception, 
as he was not a child of God but the son of perdition. To see 
the awful end of so heartless a course would only give more 
force to His works of grace Who, if He left the world for the 
Father, was bringing them into His own associations before the 
Father. Judas may never have meant the worst, as Satan did 
who entered him; but he did mean at all cost to gratify his 
love of money, trusting that He who had heretofore baffled His 
enemies would be able to extricate Himself. But he trusted 
his own thoughts to the death of His Master, and to his own 
eternal ruin; as Jesus carrying out His love in obedience to 
His Father would bring His own by His death to glory on high 
and His own place there, and expressed it here that even now 
they might have His joy fulfilled in themselves. For now that 
the Lord was going to the Father He speaks these things in the 
world to that end. The Father would prove the value of His 
name when the Son was not here in person to watch over them; 
and the very ruin of Judas rightly read should make the 
scripture still more solemn and sure to their souls. 

From verse 14 the Lord pleads for another object on behalf 


358 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


of the disciples. He had entreated for them to be set in His 
love in presence of the Father; He now asks that they may 
have His place in presence of the world. As He had sought 
their association with Himself in the one case, so in the other 
He would have no less an association. There it was for His 
joy to be fulfilled in them ; here it is for the Father’s testimony 
in and by them. It was His own place on earth, as in heaven. 
“T have given them thy word; and the world hated them 
because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world. 
I do not ask that thou shouldest take them out of the world, 
but that thou shouldest keep them out of the evil. Of the 
world they are not, as I am not of the world” (vers. 14-16). 
It is not here as in verse 8 “the words” (¢7uaTa) given of 
the Father to the Son which the Son had given to the disciples, 
the communications of love, whence they knew truly that He 
came from the Father, and believed to their joy that the Father 
sent Him. It is here (as in 6) the Father’s “word” (Adyos), the 
expression of His mind. This, it was said already, they had 
kept. But the Lord resumes the notice of it in connection 
with testimony in the world which for Him was closed. In 
the world they were to be witnesses of Him, and the Father’s 
word He has given them, and the world hated them, not for 
that word only, offensive as it is to the world, but because 
they, the disciples who had it, were not of the world even as 
their Master is not. This is the true measure of unworldliness, 
and it is intolerable in the world’s eyes, and nowhere so much 
as in the religious world. For men on earth to know them- 
selves possessors of life eternal sounds presumptuous to such as 
know not Christ and His work. But to add that they are not 
of the world, the world will have to be the worst intolerance. 
Yet nothing is so lowly as faith, and faith works by love, the 
very reverse of despising others or trusting in themselves that 
they are righteous. Christ is all to the believer, as He is to the 
Father; and as He is not of the world, so they are not. That 
they are not of the world depends on the former truth, that 
they are the Father’s and given to the Son, Who manifested 
the Father’s name to them and kept them in that name; as He 
besought that the Father would keep them still during His 


a 


CHAPTER Xvti. $59 


absence from the world. Christ in John is from the outset 
unknown to the world and rejected; they know not the Father 
and the Son. So it is with the children of God. “Therefore 
the world knoweth us not because it knew him not.” The 
breach is complete. “The world hated* them,” as it hated 
both the Father and the Son. 

Never had there been such a breach before. It was not so 
during God’s dealings with Israel of old; nor yet in their ruin 
during the ensuing times of the Gentiles. Man was still under 
trial; and even while the Lord was here below, the character 
of His ministry was God in Him reconciling the world to Him- 
self. But the world would none of Him, and is judged in its 
prince. And as man is now in the light of the cross pronounced 
lost, so is the saint crucified to the world and the world to him. 
They are not of the world, as Christ is not of the world. 
It is a fact, and not merely an obligation, though the firmest 
ground of obligation. They are not of the world, not merely 
they ought not to be; whilst if they are not, it is grievous 
inconsistency even to seem to be of the world. It is to be 
false to our relationship, for we are the Father's and given 
to the rejected Son, Who has done with the world. But if it 
be said that this is to bring in everlasting and heavenly rela- 
tionships now, be it so; this is exactly what Christianity means 
in principle and practice. It is faith possessing Christ, Who 
gives the believer His own place of relationship and acceptance 
on high as well as of testimony apart from and rejected by the 
world below; which he has to make good in words and ways, 
in spirit and conversation, whilst waiting for the Lord. 

Hence, if going back to law or flesh, as in Galatia, was to fall 
from grace, no less thorough is the departure of the Christian 
when he seeks the world of which he is not. That the world 
improves for Christ or His own is as false as that the flesh can 
ameliorate. It is the light become darkness, and how great is 


that darkness! There may not be the reflex of the latter part 


* The verb éuloncev is to be explained as meaning, neither the future as 
Kuinol, nor the present as Bloomfield. It is the most emphatic preterite 
possible, the whole being summed up in its conclusion, though no doubt it 
was the fact then and was about to be yet more and more manifest by-and-by. 


360 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


of Romans i., but it answers to the beginning of 2 Timothy ii. 
It is the natural man knowing enough to forego what is 
shameless, and to invest all with a religious veil; it is the world 
essentially, occupying itself with the things of God in pro- 
fession but in reality of the world, where common sense 
suffices for its service and its worship, and the mind of Christ 
would be altogether inapplicable. What a triumph to the 
enemy! It is just what we see in Christendom; and nothing 
irritates so much as the refusal so to walk, worship, or serve. 
It does not matter how loudly you denounce or protest; if you 
join the world, they will not mind your words, and you are 
faithless to Christ. Nor does it matter how much grace and 
patience you show; if you keep apart as not of the world, you 
incur enmity and hatred and contempt. A disciple is not 
above his Master; but everyone that is perfected shall be as 
his Master. To act as not of the world is felt to be its strongest 
condemnation ; and no meekness or love can make it palatable. 
Nor does God intend that it should, for He means it as part of 
the testimony to His Son. And as the world neither receives 
nor understands the Father’s word, so it hates those who have 
that word and act on it. 

Doubtless there is a moment when the dead in Christ shall 
rise first; then we the living who remain shall be caught up 
together with them in clouds to meet the Lord in the air, when 
He shall Himself with a shout, with archangel’s voice, and 
with trump of God, descend from heaven; and thus we shall 
ever be with Him. But the Lord did not ask yet that the 
Father should thus take His own out of the world, but that 
He should keep them out of the evil. This He does by His 
grace through His word, as we shall see presently. Only the 
Lord, before He explains how the Father keeps the saints, 
reiterates in a new form so as to give greater emphasis, “Of 
the world they are not, even as I am not of the world.” Nor is 
anything more speedily forgotten, unless the eye be fixed on 
Christ above with continual vigilance as to our motives, ways, 
and ends, as well as unsparing self-judgment. It was of all 
moment to have it firm and clear that the world and the 
Christian have no common ground, and that Christ Himself, 


CSET ASEAN GRRE 
; NN 


CHAPTER XVII. 361 


according to Whose grace and for Whose glory in communion 
with the Father we are here, is the pattern of our unworldliness. 
What separateness so absolute? or dependent on relationship 
to the Father so near, save only His Who is in the highest way 
its pattern? For the world in the sense here conveyed is that 
vast system which man has built up away from God in inde~ 
pendence and self-reliance, and to the exclusion, not of His 
nominal honour but of any real submission to His righteousness, 
His will, word, or glory. This fully came out in the rejection 
and cross of His Son, Who thereon reveals as wholly distinct 
in source, nature, character, and aim, those that the Father owns 
as His in the world, whose fellowship is indeed with the Father 
and with His Son Jesus Christ. Of the world they are not, as 
He is not. They are Christ’s. 

Now comes the formative power, as wholly new as above 
man, and not of God merely but of the Father. “Sanctify 
them by [or, in] the truth; thy word is truth. As thou didst 
send me into the world, I also sent them into the world. And 
for their sakes I sanctify myself that they also may be sanctified 
in truth” (vers. 17-19). 

It is impossible to overrate the importance of the Saviour’s 
words for His disciples; it is easy for men to misapprehend 
them, as those do who lower and narrow the word to separation 
for ministerial service.* But he had at heart a more personal 
and intimate want, that the disciples should themselves be 
imbued with, formed and fashioned by, the truth. The law 
now sufficed not; not even in the most comprehensive sense, 
as embracing the Prophets and the Psalms. For Christ was 
come, the Only-begotten Who declared God otherwise unseen 
of anyone. He revealed the Father, Who would make a fresh 
and full yet permanent revelation, as we have it not only in 
Him but in the scriptures as a whole. The sanctification or 


* Hence Jos. Mede regarded év 77 a. as meaning els rhv dd. and Bp. Pearce 
followed, as did Tittmann and Kuin6l, in the same wake. So Dr. Bloomfield 
(Rec. Syn. iii, 634), “‘ From this verse He speaks of the evangelical office to be 
committed to their charge, and expresses His wish that they should be ‘wholly 
dedicated and given up to it,’” He consequently would take év rq a\, as for 
imép THs Gd. How little these commentators believe that every word of scripture 
is from God ! 


362 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


setting apart was therefore as new as complete. It was to the 
Father that the Son spread His request for men who were none 
of them heathen but of the holy seed. Yet for such does He 
say, “Sanctify them by the truth.” The truth was revealed as 
it never was before. “Thy word,” the Father’s word, “is truth,” 
Truths had been made known, never the truth till Jesus Who 
is it. For He first, He only as an objective display, showed out 
every one, God, man, Satan even, and every thing, heaven, earth, 
hell, and all things in them, as they really are; for His Person 
(the Word made flesh) alone was competent to do it. His 
advent and redemption gave the suited occasion and needed 
object for the full revelation, as being Son of man and withal 
true God and eternal life. By the truth then, the Father's 
word, were the disciples to be sanctified. The Father revealed, 
not only in the Son personally but in His word detailedly, 
changed all for the soul. None but the Son, and the Son a man 
on earth, glorifying the Father perfectly in His life, glorifying 
God as such in His death, could furnish the adequate motive 
for the Father’s love, object for His ways, centre of His counsels, 
and manifestation of His glory, Hence all is out and in 
perfection: testimony higher, deeper, fuller, is looked for in 
vain; as those know who acknowledging the Son have the 
Father also, and are not of the world. 

Then comes their mission, which is drawn from the same 
unworldly source and is characterised by it. “As thou didst 
send me into the world, I also sent them into the world.” 
Moses disappears even as a pattern; so do the prophets. Even 
John the Baptist (and among those born of women was no 
prophet greater) was but man in mission from God; but he 
that is least in the kingdom is greater than John. He that 
cometh from above—from heaven—is above all. Such was 
Jesus; and as the Father sent forth Him, so He too sent 
those who then surrounded Him, their mission as new as the 
word which formed and furnished their souls. It flowed from 
One apart from the world and above it, Who had been sent 
into it on an errand of infinite love to the Father’s glory, and 
was in spirit no more here but in heaven, whither He was 
actually going soon. It was thus the Son sent the disciples 


CHAPTER XVII. 363 


associated with Himself in heaven and charged with the 
Father’s testimony to the world. Not of the world as He was 
not, they could be and were sent into it. Had they been of 
the world, they could not be sent into it; but, as taken out of 
- it by grace in Christ, they were not of it, and could be sent. 

This is fitly followed by another and crowning means of 
sanctification of which the Lord speaks. “And for their sakes 
I sanctify myself that they also may be sanctified in truth,” 
It is not the Father’s word now as given to them here and 
revealing Him in every detail as the disciples needed, though 
inseparable from Christ’s Person as come into the world, where 
they too were sent. This was essential both for themselves and 
their work. But grace does more; and the Lord goes on to show 
how He is setting Himself apart on high, the Son as ever but 
model Man before the Father in heaven, so as to complete their 
sanctification in seeing Him thus in glory. 

Thus it is not only the truth brought out here in all its 
application, but the truth also in the glorified Christ as the 
suited object to animate and strengthen as well as transform, 
while we behold Him with unveiled face: God revealed in man, 
the Son of man; the Son of man now glorified by God ia Him- 
self, and this Cee that the disciples might be sanctified 
“in truth,” both bearing on their nature and walk. For, with- 
out such an object above, the fullest demonstration of God’s 
righteousness and power were lacking; and so too one might 
add, of the Father’s love and glory, as well as what was due to 
His own Person, not only as divine but as man, and man 
glorified according to the counsels of God. And the disciples 
also needed His blessed Person thus before them at God’s right 
hand in order to fix and fill their affections, beside the word 
which perfectly reveals all the mind of God in grace. For 
it is not simply as incarnate that the Lord sanctifies Himself 
on their behalf; nor yet as dying sacrificially, according to 
Chrysostom and Cyril of Alexandria with a crowd of followers 
since their day. For on the cross for us God made Him sin 
Who knew no sin. It is as glorified, consequent on death 
and resurrection, that He becomes the pattern of His own. 
Beholding Him they are transformed into His image from 


364 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


glory to glory even as by the Lord the Spirit; and, when He 
shall be manifested, they are to be like Him, seeing Him as He 
is, and conformed to the image of the Son in resurrection glory. 
God Himself could give no other portion so blessed, when 
Christ shall be the Firstborn among many brethren. 

The Lord now proceeds to plead for those to be brought 
into faith in Him by apostolic testimony that they too might 
form a unity according to God and bear witness before the 
world to His mission of the Son. Verse 11 had contemplated 
only those disciples who were then surrounding Him in view 
of special grace and the consequent responsibility which 
attached to them. Those to follow have their new vested 
interest. 

“ And not for these only do I request, but also for those that 
believe * on me through their word, that they may all be 
one, even as thou, Father, in me and I in thee, that they also 
may be one} in us, that the world may believe that thou 
didst send me” (vers. 20, 21). 

There was to be, as we have seen, an astonishing exhibition 
of unity in the apostles. But there is another and larger 
unity*here. Those believing on Him through their word are 
now presented to the Father, “that they may all be one.” 
Room is thus left for multitudes of believers, for confessors of 
His name, Jew or Greek, barbarian, Scythian, bond or free; 
for those that had hitherto clung tenaciously to legal forms, 
the substance of which they refused through their unbelief 
of Him; for those that had been well-nigh as obstinate in 
cleaving to the dreams of heathenism and its debasing 
immorality, in utter ignorance of the only true God truly 
known through Him Whom He sent. The gospel was about 
to go forth to every land and in every tongue, as the Holy 
Ghost bore witness on the day of Pentecost; and the more 
strikingly on that day, because they as yet were Jews only 
from Gentile countries as well as Palestine. For the miracle 

*T. R. reads the future with some cursives, but against the great 
authorities, 

t&ewXACo™ELX Y TAIL, &., and good versions; but BC P™ D, some 


old Latin and other vy., omit, followed strangely by Treg., Tisch., Alford, W. 
and H., and the Revisers. The homoeoteleuton plainly accounts for this. 


CHAPTER XVII. 365 


was not the senseless and comparatively easy one of enabling 
all, home or foreign sons of Israel, to understand the wonderful 
works of God in the Hebrew tongue, but conversely that they, 
every man in his own dialect in which he had been born, 
should hear the disciples speak. God had of old smitten 
men’s pride and divided them into ever so many differing 
tongues. Grace now rose above judgment, not reducing them 
all to one lip and the same words, but meeting each where 
thus confounded and scattered. 

Nor was this by any means all; but the power of the Spirit 
baptised all the believers into one body, the church. The 
unity here however, though produced of course by the same 
Spirit in those. who compose that body, is not that which 
fell to the apostle Paul to set out. Of a spiritual nature 
it nevertheless displays itself in that which the world can 
see and appreciate in measure. It is not precisely “one as 
we,” that is, as the Father and the Son, which verse 11 
had predicated of the disciples. As the Father and the Son 
had but one mind and affection, purpose and way, so was 
this oneness desired for the apostles in their work and life; 
and wondrously was it realised in them as we have already 
noticed. Here the saints at large, those who believe through 
their word, are in view; and the thing sought is that they 
should “all be one,” “even as thou, Father, in me, and I 
in thee, that they also may be one in us”—not “as we” 
but “cn us,” in the Father and the Son. It is communion 
in virtue of the Father made known in the Son, and of the 
Son the object of the Father’s love and delight, into which 
we are brought by the Holy Ghost. With the Father we 
share the Son; with the Son we share the Father. Into 
this blessedness the saints were now for the first time to 
be introduced, and in such sort that they should all be one, 
even as the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father, 
so they also one in the Father and the Son. 

This was to be a testimony to the world, not preaching only, 
but this oneness so unearthly, so unprecedented among men, 
oneness in the joy of divine grace which drew together souls 
so diverse and by the power of divine objects, motives, and 


366 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


affections, those who had been once utterly indifferent or 
bitterly opposed, hating and hated. What a call for the world 
to believe that the Father sent the Son! For this, and this 
only, but this adequately, accounted for it, when the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven gave the truth energy in hearts 
purified by faith. For as flesh tends to scatter by the assertion 
of its own will, so the Spirit operates to unite in the Father 
and the Son; and when the world sees the fruits of such 
gracious and holy power in the oneness of men _ other- 
wise alienated, and by nothing so keenly and permanently 
as by their varying religions, what a demonstration that the 
Father sent the Son! For here at least was no power of the 
sword, here no pandering to lust, here no inducement of 
wealth or worldly honour, here no allowance any more of 
sin than of human righteousness, no pride of philosophy any 
more than religious show or ritualism. None can deny that 
as built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets 
there was constant and unresisting exposure to the world’s 
scorn and violence. Self-sacrificing love reigned, grace we 
may say through righteousness in devotedness to the name 
of Jesus; and a heavenly separateness to Him for Whom they 
avowedly waited from heaven. What then accounted for so 
astonishing a change from all that had previously characterised 
mankind, not merely among the Gentiles but in Israel even 
in its most flourishing estate? What did it attest but that 
the Father sent the Son? What of grace and truth, of perfect 
and eternal redemption, of near and heavenly relationship, 
does not this involve ? 

For if the Father sent the Son, it could not but be for 
ends impossible otherwise and worthy of the true God reveal- 
ing Himself in sovereign grace, yea in intimate love as well 
as in the light which makes everything manifest. Nor was 
the Son only to make the truth known and to impart the 
divine nature, the eternal life capable of receiving and enjoy- 
ing light, and walking in it by the Spirit of God. There 
was an incomparably solemn yet blessed work to be wrought 
to God’s glory as well as for man’s deep need and everlast- 
ing salvation: sin had to be borne in judgment, a propitiation 


a MES ee ee el 
a 


CHAPTER XVII. 367 


made for our sins so complete that God should be righteous 
in justifying the believer, and that believers should become 
God’s righteousness in Christ. Thus washed, sanctified, 
justified, children of God consciously, the Holy Ghost given, 
they find others in the communion of the same blessing. They 
are all one, as the Father in the Son and the Son in the 
Father, and brought out as they were of the strongest prejudices 
into a mutuality of enjoyed blessedness, into oneness in the 
Father and the Son. What could more powerfully bear 
witness to the world that the Father sent the Son ? 

There is yet another unity of the deepest interest which 
our Lord next spreads before the Father: not discipular 
or apostolic, which was so marvellously sustained; nor of 
testimony in the grace that would embrace all Christians, 
which after a bright display at first has long painfully broken 
down; but unity in glory where all is to be stable and accord- 
ing to God perfectly. 

“And the glory which thou hast given me I have given 
them, that they may be one as we [are] one, I in them and 
thou in me, that they may be perfected into one, [and]* that 
the world may know that thou didst send me and lovedst them 
as thou lovedst me” (vers. 22, 23). 

This is wholly distinct from what we have seen, though all 


be to the praise of Christ. It is an exclusively future unity, 


though the glory be given to our faith now, and grace would 
have us apprehend it and feel and walk accordingly. For all 
is revealed to act now on our souls. But this unity will be 
in glory when we shall be one as the Father and the Son are. 
Hence failure here is impossible. The weakness of man, the 
power of Satan, can damage no more. | 

The manner of this unity is to be noted also. It is not the 
mutuality which we had described in verse 21, that we should 


_ be one in the Father and the Son, as the Father in the Son and 


the Son in the Father. Such is the admirable way in which 
the Saviour set out what we are called to now by the Spirit, 
that the world may believe the Father sent the Son. But 


* BC DL X, some cursives, &c., omit xal, “and”; which is read by A anda 
dozen more uncials, most cursives, and good ancient vv. 


368 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


by-and-by, when the glory is revealed, there will be this new 
character, that, while the saints are to be one even as the 
Father and the Son are one, it will be Christ the Son in them 
and the Father in Him. And this as exactly agrees with 
Revelation xxi. as the former answers to 1 John i. 3. 

For as the holy city, new Jerusalem, is the bride the Lamb's 
wife, the symbol of ourselves glorified in that day, so we are 
shewn that the city had “the glory of, God,” and the Lamb its 
lamp, while the nations walk in its light (Rev. xxi. 11, 23, 24). 
Thus are the blessed on earth to enjoy the heavenly glory, 
not directly like the glorified on high who have the Lord God 
Almighty and the Lamb as their temple, and need none other ; 
whereas those on earth have it but mediately. Yet how con- 
stant and impressive the proof before them that the Father 
sent the Son! For how else could there have grown up such 
a holy temple in the Lord? And what adequately could 
account for men thus called out of the earth and glorified on 
high? Sovereign grace had given them that heavenly portion 
as the fruit of His mission Who at all cost to Himself had 
glorified God on. the earth. And now they share His glory 
above, and are so displayed before the wondering world. 

The salvation-bearing grace, which had appeared to all and 
had done its suited and appointed work in redeeming and purify- 
ing these to God as a people of possession, will then have given 
place to the appearing of the glory of our great God and 
Saviour Jesus Christ; but this through the church reigning 
over the earth, at any rate as the ordinary or normal method 
of its manifestation during the kingdom. As we by faith saw 
the Father in the Son to eternal life, they in that day will 
behold and learn them in the church, the glorious vessel of 
the light of Christ in Whom God’s glory shines. For then 
the false glory of man is for ever judged, never more to mis- 
lead the heart; and Satan will never regain his bad eminence 
in the heavenlies whereby he found means most effectively to 
misrepresent God, oppose Christ, accuse the saints, and deceive 
the world. It is thenceforward the glory of God that is estab- 
lished before all eyes, so that men “know” it in and by the 
glorified saints, instead of being objects of testimony that they 


CHAPTER XVII. 369 


might “believe.” For the earth shall be full of the glory 
of Jehovah (Num. xiv. 21) and of the knowledge of Jehovah 
(Is. xi. 9) and of the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah 
(Hab. ii. 14), as the waters cover the sea. Then Christ shall 
have come to be glorified in His saints, and to be admired 
in all them that believed, in that day. 

Therefore do we hear for the first time of being “ perfected 
into one.” The apostolic unity first spoken of, unity in counsel 
and action as the Father and the Son gave pattern, was as 
blessed as it was all-important for the place they had to fill 
and the work to be done in the testimony of Christ. Still it 
was comparatively partial, at least necessarily on a small scale. 
Far wider was the second unity of fellowship in the Father 
and the Son exhibited in the Pentecostal assembly at large, 
when thousands of souls walked together superior to selfish 
influence, and great grace was upon them all, and of the rest 
durst no man join himself to them, but the people magnified 
them, and believers were the more added to the Lord, multi- 
tudes both of men and women. But this was only transient. 
The third will be perfect in glory, and thus permanent as well 
as complete. 

And the effect will be immense and immediate, as indeed 
one could not conceive it otherwise. The world will con- 
template with amazement the church in the glory and the 
glory of God in the church, or (as the Lord says) the Father 
in Him, and He in them glorified. It is unity perfect both 
in connection with its source and in manifestation of the divine 
glory. And what a demonstration that the Father. sent the 
Son and loved the saints as He loved Him! For how should 
the Son be there as the glorified Man unless previously sent 
here in love? and how should we be manifested together with 
Him in glory, unless loved with the same love? It is no 
question of “believing” then, but of undeniable fact. The 
world will “know” it. We may know now what is only 
revealed in the word to our faith; but in that day will be 
a display of divine glory. 

The closing section of our Lord’s words is quite distinct in 
its character, and yet more intimate, as is marked by His use 

2A 


370 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


of Oérw, “I will” (or “desire”), for the first and only time 
throughout His prayer. 

“Father, that what * thou hast given me, I desire that, where 
I am, they also may be with me, that they may behold my 
glory which thou hast given me, because thou lovedst me 
before [the] world’s foundation. Righteous Father, though} the 
world knew thee not, but I knew thee, and these knew that 
thou didst send me. And I made thy name known to them 
and will make [it] known, that the love wherewith thou 
lovedst me may be in them and I in them” (vers. 24-26). 

First, the Lord desires of the Father that those whom He 
had given Him should be with Him where He is. He is in 
spirit on high before the Father, and would have His own with 
Himself there. It is no question of display in glory before the 
world, even though in the closest association with Him; it is to 
be with Himself where no stranger can (I do not say merely, 
intermeddle with the joy, but) look on Him or them, in the 
hidden scene which divine love forms for its deepest satisfac- 
tion. There the Father has the Son after glorifying Himself 
perfectly in the face of all possible difficulty, and the suffering 
entailed not only by creature opposition and malice, but by divine 
judgment of God on that evil, the consequences of which must 
be borne unsparingly by Him, Who would vindicate God on 
the one hand, and on the other deliver to the uttermost the 
euilty, so far as suited the gracious purpose of God. And this 
Jesus did in absolute obedience, as became Himself a man in 
grace beyond measure and at all cost; this He did in infinite 
suffering to His Father’s praise, Who acquired fresh and ever- 
lasting glory and could thenceforward act as freely as right- 
eously according to His nature and His love. 

And now, as we have seen at the beginning of the chapter, 
going to heaven on the ground not of His personal title only 
but of His work, He expresses His desire that His own also, 

* § “what,” 8 BD, &c., instead of ods “whom” as in the mass of authorities, 

+ It has been suggested, in order to make it smoother English, ‘‘ though the 
world knew thee not, yet,” &c., to translate thus, ‘‘ Righteous Father! and the 
world knew thee not! But,” &, I prefer simply to follow the words faithfully, 


“but I knew thee,” in a sort of parenthesis, contrasted with the world, and 
introductory of His own, who at least knew Him as the sent One. 


CHAPTER XVII. SUL 


the disciples whom the Father had given Him, should be with 


Him above, “that they may behold my glory.” It is not on 
the one hand that which is personal from everlasting to ever- 
lasting, beyond creature ken, that in the Son which I presume 
none really knows nor can, save the Father Who is not said to 
reveal Him. (Matt. xi, 27.) Neither is it on the other hand 
the glory given to the blessed Lord which is to be manifested 
even to the worid in that day, in which glory we are to be 
manifested along with Him. (Col. iii. 4.) Here it is proper to 
Himself on high, yet given Him by the Father, as we are in 
His perfect favour to behold it: a far higher thing than any 
glory shared along with us, and which the Lord, reckoning on 
unselfish affections divinely formed in us, looks for our valuing 
accordingly, as more blessed in beholding Him thus than in 
aught conferred on ourselves. It is a joy for us alone, wholly 


outside and above the world, and given because the Father 


loved Him before its foundation. None but the Eternal could 
be thus glorified, but it is the secret glory which none but His 
own are permitted to contemplate, “blest answer to reproach 
and shame,” not the public glory in which every eye shall see 
Him. Nothing less than that meets His desire for us. How 
truly even now our hearts can say that He is worthy! 

Next, the Lord draws the line definitely between the world 
and His own, and makes it turn not on rejecting Himself but on 
ignoring His Father. Here therefore it is a question of judgment 
in result, however grace may tarry and entreat; and therefore 
He says, “ Righteous Father,” not “ Holy Father” as in verse 11 
where He asks Him to keep them in His name, as He Himself 
had done whilst with them. Now He sets forth not the law- 
lessness of the world, not its murderous hatred of Himself or 
of His disciples, nor yet of the grace and truth revealed in the 
gospel, nor of the corruptions of Christianity and the church 
(which we are sure lay naked and opened before His all-seeing 
eyes), but that on the one side the world knew not the Father, 
and on the other that the Son did, as the disciples that the 
Father sent the Son: words simple and briefly said, but how 
solemn in character and issues! 

Never was so competent a witness of anyone or anything, as 


372 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Christ of the Father. Yet the world knew Him not, nor 
received His testimony for a moment, but rose up more and 
more against it till all closed in the cross. Thenceforward He 
is hid in heaven, and those who believe on Him are heavenly. 
False pretension to it is salt that has lost its savour. And all 
those who are true are the first to own that all turns for them 
on the Son’s knowledge of the Father, as they themselves knew 
the Father sent Him. It is no question of themselves at all 
but of the Father; and He is only known in the Son Whom 
He sent; and this is eternal life, whether now had in Christ or 
enjoyed without alloy when we behold His glory on high; as 
ignorance of the Father implies the guilty rejection of the Son, 
to the everlasting loss, and not merely passing judgment, of the 
world. 

But lastly, where Christ is known as the Father’s sent One, 
the deepest blessing and the highest privileges are even now 
given, and not merely what awaits the saints at Christ’s coming. 
“And I made known to them thy name, and will make known, 
that the love wherewith thou lovedst me may be in them, 
and I in them.” If ever there was one capable of estimating 
another, it was the Son in respect of the Father; and His 
name, the expression of what He was, with equal competency 
He made known to us. He had done it on earth to the 
disciples; He would do so from heaven whither He was going; 
and this that He might give them, and give us, the conscious- 
ness of the same love of the Father which rested ever on 
Himself here below. As if to cut off the not unnatural 
hesitation of the disciples, He adds the blessed guarantee of 
His own being in them, their life. For they could understand 
that, if they lived of His life, and could be somehow as He 
before the Father, the Father might love them as Him. This 
is just what He does give and secure by identification with 
them, or rather as He puts it, “and I in them.” Christ is all 
and in all. 


CHAPTER XVIIL 


Tue Lord had concluded His words to the disciples and to 
His Father. His work on earth now about to close had been 
before Him, as well as His departure on high, and contingent 
on both the approaching mission of the Holy Spirit to abide 
with His own apart from the world. That rejection of the 
Saviour which has been in view throughout our Gospel was 
now to reach its extreme in the cross; but its dark shadow, 
far from obscuring, only serves to bring out the True Light 
more distinctly. He is man, but a divine Person, the Son 
throughout wherever He moves. 

“Having said these things Jesus went out with His disciples 
beyond the torrent-bed of Kedron,* where was a garden, into 
which he entered, himself and his disciples. And Judas also 
that was delivering him up knew the place, because Jesus often 
met there with his disciples. Judas then, having received the 
band and officials from the high priests and from [the] Phari- 
sees, cometh there with lanterns and torches and weapons. 
Jesus then, knowing all things that were coming on him, 
went out and saith to them, Whom seek ye? They answered 
him, Jesus the Nazarean. Jesust saith to them, I am [hel]. 
And Judas that was delivering him up was standing with 
them. When then he said to them, I am [he], they went away 
backward and fell to the ground. Again then he asked them, 
Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus the Nazarean. Jesus 
answered, I told you that I am [he]: if then ye seek me, leave 
these to go away; that the word might be fulfilled which he 
said, Of those whom thou hast given me, I have lost not one of 

* The variations are strange: 7T&v xédpwy N BC L, &c., the most uncials and 
cursives, Tod cédpov NP™ D,, &c., Tod Kedpwv AS A,, &c. ; others xévdpwy or even 


dévdpwr. 
+ A few witnesses omit, but the most and best read 6 Inaois. 


373 


374 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


them. Simon Peter then, having a sword, drew it, and smote 
the bondman of the high priest, and cut off his right ear. 
Now the bondsman’s name was Malchus. Jesus said then to 
Peter, Put the* sword into the scabbard: the cup which the 
Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?” (vers. 1-11). 

It was the same orchard or garden which in the other 
Gospels is called Gethsemane (a word formed from the 
Hebrew words meaning “a winepress” and “oil”), but giving 
no real ground to say,t as some after the patristic and 
medieval style, that here emphatically were fulfilled those 
dark words, “I have trodden the winepress alone,” as Isaiah 
has foretold, and as the name imports. For the treading of 
the winefat is when the Lord comes to judge not to suffer, as 
the connected text, Revelation xiv. 20, ought to have made 
plain. Indeed no reader save one perverted by theological 
tradition could mistake the earlier prophet any more than the 
latest. For what is described in these prophecies is not agony 
but vengeance, not His bloody sweat with strong crying and 
tears, but His treading the peoples in His anger and their 
blood sprinkled on His garments. 

But an intelligent and thoughtfal reader would remark 
the striking absence of that wondrous scene where even those 
who loved the Lord, yea Peter, James, and John, could not 
watch with Him one hour. For His soul was exceeding 
sorrowful even unto death, and though He asked them to 
tarry and watch whilst He went a little farther to pray, He 
found them sleeping for sorrow, and this repeatedly. It is 
notorious that some left out of their copies of Luke the 
verses which record the angel which appeared from heaven 
strengthening Him, and the conflict such that His sweat 
became as great drops of blood falling down on the earth; 
as if the Lord were lowered by such an expression of real 
humanity and unspeakable grief, instead of seeing how charac- 
teristic the facts are of that evangelist, and of adoring Himself 
Who could so love and suffer as there portrayed. Yet John 
who alone of all four writers of the Gospels was near the Lord, 


* The best MSS, and versions omit ood, ‘‘ thy.” 
+ So Mr. Ffoulkes in Smrru’s Dictionary of the Bible, i. 684. 


i 
z 
va) 

‘ 


CHAPTER XVIII. 375 


nearer than Matthew—John is the only one who does not 
describe that conflict at all: and this, not because it was not 
infinitely precious to his spirit, nor because the others had 
given it to us, but because what he gave, as they also, was by 
inspiration and in no way a question of human judgment or 
feeling. John records, no less than Matthew and Mark and 
Luke, the miracle of the five barley loaves; and this because 
it was as essential to the work given him to do as for the 
others in theirs. For the same reason he, led by the Holy 
Spirit, does not give the agony in the garden, as not falling 
within his assigned province. He knew it of course, and 
must have often dwelt on it in his spirit deeply meditative 
beyond all the others, yet he is silent. 

Can anything more attest the overruling wisdom and power 
of the inspiring Spirit! Yes, in every part and every detail, 
one as much as another, and almost as self-evident were we 
not so dull of hearing; nor only in what is omitted, but in 
what is inserted by infinite grace. Witness what our evange- 
list tells us next. He brings before us the no doubt appalling 
spectacle of Judas availing himself of his intimate knowledge 
of the Saviour’s habit and haunt to guide those who wished to 
take and slay him. With the band and officers from His 
enemies, Judas guides them to the spot of nightly prayer, with 
lanterns and torches and weapons to make sure of their prey, 
though full moon shone and He had never struck a blow in 
self-defence. But Judas really knew not Him any more than 
his companions did. How terrible the sight of a soul blinded 
to the deadly malice at work, no less than to the Saviour's 
glory and His love! How surely Satan had entered when 
we look at him as he stood with them to betray Him ! 

Jesus, knowing all that was coming on Him, goes out to them, 
saying, Whom seek ye? And at His confession of Himself in 
reply to their answer of Jesus the Nazarean,* they went 

* It seems desirable to note that the term Nazarean in verses 5, 7, and in 
chap. xix. 19, is Nafwpatos. So it is in Matt. ii 28, xxvi. 71, Mark x, 47, and 
Luke xviii, 37 (though both questioned); and in Acts ii. 22, iii. 6, iv. 10, vi. 
14, ix. 5 (though the best omit), xxii. 8, xxiv. 5, and xxvi: 9. Itis the name 
of shame and scorn, Nafapnvds like ék Nagapér is an inhabitant of Nazareth, 
reproached or not, and occurs in Mark i. 24, xiv. 67, xvi. 6; Luke iv. 34; 
and our Lord we have characterised as rov dd N. in John i. 46, and in 
Acts x. 38. 


376 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


backward and fell to the ground. How manifest the proof of 
His intrinsic divine glory! A Man sent and come in love yet 
the true God, this was the constant and special testimony 
of John, the true key to what he does not say, no less than 
to what he does say. Yet is there no effort, but the most 
charming simplicity along with this deep and divine under- 
current. Not all the treachery of Judas, not all the hatred 
and emnity of the Jews, not all the power of Rome could have 
seized the Lord had not the time arrived to give Himself up. 
His hour was now come. He could have destroyed the com- 
pany which sought to apprehend Him as easily as He caused 
them to fall prostrate before His name; as by-and-by in virtue 
of His name every knee shall bow, of beings in heaven and 
beings on earth and beings under the earth, and every tongue 
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the 
Father (Phil. ii, 10, 11). 

But when He asked them again, Whom seek ye? and they 
said, Jesus the Nazarean, grace shone out, not power: the 
former now, as the latter before, expressing the true God Who 
was now manifesting Himself on earth in His own Person. 
“Tf then ye seek me, leave these to go away; that the word 
might be fulfilled which he said, Of those whom thou hast 
given me, I have lost not one of them.” Like the ark in 
Jordan He would go alone into the waters of death, and His 
own pass over dry-shod. He gives Himself up freely for them. 
The great salvation which is infallible includes every lesser one 
which suits and serves the glory of God meanwhile. And 
blessed it is to trace to the same spring of gracious power in 
Christ all the passing mercies we experience where His hand 
shields us from the enemy’s malice. He puts Himself forward 
to endure all. His people go free; His word is fulfilled in 
every way. Where the Father gives, the Son loses none. 
What comfort and assurance before a hostile world! 

But even His most honoured servants fail, and are apt to 
fail most where they push forward in natural zeal and their 
own wisdom, too self-confident to watch His ways and heed 
His word and thus learn of Him. So Simon Peter then dis- 
plays his haste in total discord with the grace of Christ; for 


CHAPTER XVIII. ork 


having a sword he drew it and struck Malchus the servitor of 
the high priest, maiming him of his right ear. Had Peter 
watched and prayed instead of sleeping, it might have been 
otherwise ; when we fail to pray, we enter into temptation. 

Luke alone, true to his testimony to God’s grace, tells us of 
the Lord’s answer, “Suffer ye thus far,” and of His touching 
the ear to heal the wounded man. Matthew alone, in harmony 
with the rejected Messiah but true King of Israel, gives the 
reproof which warned His servant of what it is for saints to 
resist carnally. Mark mentions the fact, but no more. John, 
agreeably to the purpose of God in his province, presents the 
Lord in unfaltering obedience to His Father, as before in divine 
power and grace. Nothing more calm than His correction of 
Peter’s energy ; nothing more distinct than His submission to 
the Father’s will, whatever it cost. “The cup which the Father 
hath given me, shall I not drink it ?” 

It is the same Jesus as in Luke and the other Gospels, yet 
what a difference! Everywhere worthy, never a word or way 
beneath the Holy One of God, but here above all the Son with 
perfect dignity and withal entire subjection of heart in suffering 
as in work. May we think it was His drink now in enduring 
His will, as before His meat in doing it? Certainly the inward 
trial, to say nothing of all the outward suffering, was far deeper, 
yet His heart bowed to all, where to bow in obedience was 
infinite perfection. As the living Father sent Him, and He 
lived on account of the Father, so He lays down His life that 
He may take it again; but if He says, I have authority to lay 
it down and I have authority to take it again, He adds, This 
commandment I received of my Father. Never was such 
deep and holy conflict as the Second Man knew in the garden ; 
but none of this appears in John. Here it is all the power 
and grace and calm of the Son with no motive but the 
Father’s will. Never was there an approach to such glorifying 
of God the Father. 

The believer will note the bearing of our Lord throughout 
these closing scenes, His lowliness and dignity, His infinite 
superiority to all who surrounded Him, friends or foes, His 
entire submission and withal His power intact. He is a man, 


378 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


the sent One but Son of God throughout. It is He Who 
shelters and secures the disciples; it is He who offers Himself 
freely. The traitor and the band, the torches and the weapons, 
had all failed, if He had not been pleased in letting His own 
go to give Himself up. For this indeed had He entered the 
world, and His hour was now come. But it was His own 
doing and according to the will of His Father, whatever man’s 
wickedness and Satan’s malicious wiles. Not more surely was 
it the power of His name which overwhelmed the armed 
crowd of His would-be captors than that His grace alone 
accounts for His subsequent subjection to their will. 

“The band therefore and the commander [chiliarch], and 
the officials of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him and led 
[him away]* unto Annas first; for he was father-in-law of 
Caiaphas who was high priest of that year. But it was 
Caiaphas who counselled the Jews that it was expedient [or, 
profitable] that one man should die+ for the people. Now 
Simon Peter was following Jesus, and thet other disciple. And 
that disciple was known to the high priest, and went in with 
Jesus into the palace of the high priest, but Peter was stand- 
ing at the door outside. The other disciple therefore, that was 
known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the porteress 
and brought in Peter. The maid therefore, the porteress, saith 
to Peter, Art thou also of this man’s disciples? He saith, I am 
not. But the bondmen and the officials were standing, having 
made a coal-fire because it was cold, and were warming them- 
selves; and there was§ with them Peter standing and 
warming himself. The high priest then asked Jesus about 
his disciples and about his doctrine. Jesus answered, I have 
openly spoken in the world, I always taught in [the] || syna- 
gogue and in the temple, where all || the Jews assemble, and 


* The oldest authorities omit. . 

+ The bulk of MSS. support drédAceoGar, ‘to perish” (Text. Rec.), but the best 
amobavety. 

{ The article is omitted by some of the best witnesses. 

§ 8 BCL X, several cursives Theb. Memph. Syrr, Peschethel Arm, Aeth. 
add ‘‘also,” which the rest omit. 

| The article, added in Text. Rec., with many, is omitted by the best and 


most; also mdvrore, ‘‘always,” the more common reading (rdvrodev, Elz.) is 
inferior to mdvres, ‘‘all.” 


CHAPTER XVIII. 379 


in secret I spoke nothing: why askest thou me? Ask those 
that have heard, what I spoke to them: behold, these know 
what I said. But when he said these things, one of the 
officials as he stood by gave Jesus a slap on the face, saying, 
Thus answerest thou the high priest? Jesus answered him, 
If I spoke ill, testify of the ill; but if well, why smitest thou 
me? Annas [therefore]* sent him bound unto Caiaphas the 
high priest. Now Simon Peter was standing and warming 
himself. They said therefore to him, Art thou also of his 
disciples? He denied and said, I am not. One of the bond- 
men of the high priest, being kinsman of him whose ear Peter 
cut off, saith, Did I not see thee in the garden with him? 
Peter therefore denied again, and immediately a cock crew” 
(vers. 12-27). 

Our evangelist notices the fact that the band led off our 
‘Lord, not only to Caiaphas the high priest, but before that to 
Annas his father-in-law, who had preceded him in that office, 
but was succeeded by Caiaphas before his death. All things 
were out of course, and in nothing was this more evident than 
in the closing scenes of the Saviour. And therefore does the 
Gospel recall what was already recorded in chapter xi. where 
the highest religious office blended with the lowest expediency, 
and the prophetic Spirit wrought in the wicked high priest, as 
of old in the unprincipled prophet of Pethor. As the rule the 
Holy Spirit actuated holy men for God’s will and glory; but 
exceptionally He could and did use for that glory those whom 
Satan was employing to thwart it as much as_ possible. 
Nothing can be more striking in Caiaphas’ case than the 
way in which his heartless sentiment is turned by grace into 
the expression of a great truth wholly outside his ken. 

Again we see Simon Peter following the Lord, but not in 
the Spirit, nor was the other disciple there to his own honour, 
still less to the Lord’s. For he finds access to the high priest’s 
palace, as known to that functionary, and in no way as a 
follower of Jesus. And how he must have soon grieved over 
the kindly influence he exerted to get Peter let in, who had 
been obliged to stay without! Little did he think that his 

* ody Elz. with BC ™ L, &., dé &c. Steph. omits, following most. 


380 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


word to the porteress would give occasion to the terrible and 
repeated fall of his beloved fellow-servant! But every word 
of the Lord must be fulfilled. It would seem that the maid 
who kept the door was not ignorant of John’s discipleship, for 
she says to Peter, “Art ¢how also of this man’s disciples?” 
But the trying question was put not to John, but to Peter; 
and Peter, in the garden so bold, now utterly quails before 
this woman. Such is man, though a saint: what is he to 
be accounted of? Nor is fleshly energy better really in 
Christ’s eyes than fleshly weakness, which not only lied but 
denied his Master in denying his relationship to Him as a 
disciple. And this was warm-hearted, fervent, courageous 
Peter! Yes, but it was Peter tried under the shadow of the 
coming cross. Death is an overwhelming trial to the disciple 
till he knows what it is to have died with Christ to sin and 
law, crucified to the world which crucified Him, and able 
therefore to glory in the cross. It was not so yet with Peter, 
and he fell; nor can we say more of John and the rest than 
that they were not so tried. That they would have stood the 
test better is more than any can accept who believe what God 
says of them and of man in general. 

The high priest pursues his investigation; Peter renews his 
sin. And no wonder. For he had slept when he ought to 
have watched and prayed, and he had ventured into the scene 
of temptation instead of heeding the warning of the Lord. 
“But the bondmen and the officials were standing, having made 
a coal-fire, for it was cold, and were warming themselves; and 
there was with them Peter standing and warming himself.” 
Evil communications corrupt good manners; and the confession 
of Jesus before friends is very different from confession before 
bloodthirsty enemies; and Peter must learn by painful 
experience what he was too unspiritual to realise from the 
words of Christ. It is blessed to learn our nothingness and 
worse in His presence Who keeps from falling; but every saint, 
and specially every servant, must learn himself, if not there, 
in the bitter humiliation of what we are when we forget Him. 
May we abide in Him, and have His words abiding in us, and 
so ask what we will and have it done unto us! Peter had not 


CHAPTER XVIII. 381 


thus failed before men if he had not failed before with his 
Master. Doubtless it is by the power of God we are kept, 
but this is through faith. 

“The high priest then asked Jesus about his disciples and 
about his doctrine.” He desired grounds against the Lord. Was 
this the procedure of—one will not ask the grace which should 
characterise a priest, but—ordinary painstaking righteousness ? 
It was not to screen Himself that the Lord points to His open 
and constant testimony. Others unlike Him might cultivate 
private coteries and secret instructions, not to speak of darker 
counsels inciting to deeds that shunned all light of day. 
“Jesus answered, I have openly spoken in the world, I always 
taught in synagogue,* and in the temple, where all the Jews 
assemble; and in secret I spoke nothing: why askest thou 
me? Ask those that have heard what I spoke to them: behold, 
these know what I said.” It was unanswerably true and right. 
The only reply was a brutal insult from a Jewish underling 
who would thus, as he could not otherwise, sustain the high 
priest. But the Lord answered the low as the high with a 
righteous dignity immeasurably above them all: “If I spoke 
ill, testify of the ill; but if well, why smitest thou me?” 

So fared the Lord with the high priest: how painful the 
contrast of the disciple warming himself with the slaves? 
More than one assailed him with the crucial question, “Art 
thou also of his disciples?” Again the fear of man prevailed ; 
and he who truly believed on Him did not confess but denied 
and said, I am not. But this was not all. For “one of the 
bondmen of the high priest, being kinsman of him whose ear 
Peter cut off, saith, Did I not see thee in the garden with him ? 
Peter therefore denied again, and immediately a cock crew.” 
Oh what fear of man bringing a snare! What blinding power 
of the enemy thus to involve a saint in direct and daring 
falsehood, and this to shame Him Who was his life and 
salvation! But of what is not the heart capable when the 
Lord is not before it, but fear or lust or aught else by which 
Satan beguiles? God, however, took care that the dread of 


* “Tn synagogue” without the article, for there were many ; “in the temple” 
with the article, for there was but one. 


382 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


man to His dishonour should cover the guilty disciple with 
self-reproach and contempt and utter humiliation when an 
eye-witness could brand him before all with his reiterated 
lying in denial of his Master. 

It will be noticed that we have in this Gospel neither the 
Lord’s antecedent praying for Peter and assurance of restora- 
tion, nor His turning and looking on Peter after his last denial, 
when he, remembering the word of the Lord, went out and 
wept bitterly. These are given explicitly in the only Gospel 
whose character they suit and sustain. (See Luke xxii. 31, 32, 
and 61, 62.) Here all turns, not on the discovery of what 
man’s heart is, and the grace of the Lord, but on the Person of 
Christ as the one central object, not so much the Second man 
despised by man, and the energy of His love acting on a 
disciple spite of utter failure in himself, but the Son of God 
glorifying the Father in the midst of complete and universal 
ruin, with friends or foes. 

The Lord has been before the religious authority ; He is now 
to appear before the civil power. It was a mockery every- 
where; and so it must be shewn out against His Person Who 
will one day cut off him that privily slanders his neighbour 
and will not suffer the man that has a high look and a proud 
heart, any more than the liar and deceiver, early destroying 
all the wicked of the land, and especially from the city of 
Jehovah. Yet His glory they wist not, nor consequently His 
grace; yet they should not have been blind to His holy and 
righteous ways; but man religious or profane was filling up 
the cup of his iniquity, and the more so because of God’s 
longsuffering. 

“They led then Jesus from Caiaphas to the preetorium; and 
it was early; and they entered not into the pretorium that 
they might not be defiled but eat the passover. Pilate then 
went out unto them, and saith,* What accusation do ye 
bring against this man? They answered and said to him, 
If this [man] were not an evil-doer, we should not have 
delivered him up to thee. Pilate therefore said to them, Take 
ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews said 


*® BCr™L X, cursives, Cyr., for the Text, Rec. “‘said” with most. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 383 


‘to him, It is not allowed to us to put any one to death; that 


the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which he said signifying 
by what death he should die. Pilate then again entered into 
the preetorium, and called Jesus and said to him, Art thou the 
king of the Jews? Jesus answered, Of thyself sayest thou 
this, or did others say [it] to thee about me? Pilate answered, 
AmlaJew? Thy nation and the chief priests delivered thee 
up to me: what didst thou? Jesus answered, My kingdom is not 
of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, my servants 
(vrnp.) would fight that I might not be delivered up to the 
Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence. Pilate then 
said to him, Art thou then a king? Jesus answered, Thou 
sayest that I am a king. I have been born for this, and for 
this I have come into the world, that I might bear witness to 
the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice. 
Piljate saith to him, What is truth? And having said this, he 
again went out unto the Jews, and saith to them, I find no 
fault in him; but ye have a custom that I should release one 
to you at the passover: will ye therefore that I release to you 
the king of the Jews? They all cried then again, saying, 
Not this [man] but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber” 
(vers. 28-40). 

The activity of hostile will marked the Jews, whose zeal 
was as great as their punctiliousness and their lack of con- 
science. Late and early were they at work, from one high 
priest to another, pushing on to the Roman governor. Bent 
on the blood of the Messiah they scrupled to enter the 
pretorium; they must not be defiled, as they would eat the 
passover and had not yet done so (ver. 28). Little thought 
they that they were but bringing about the death of the true 
paschal Lamb, and so in guilty unbelief fulfilling the voice of 
the law to their own destruction, whatever God’s purpose in 
His death. The hard-hearted pagan seems at first fair and just 
compared with the chosen nation: we shall see how at last 
Satan found the way to excite his unrighteousness and fix him, 
as them, in hopeless evil through rejecting Christ. Pilate felt 


that there was no proper case for him, and asks a tangible 


accusation (ver. 29). The want of this they evade by an 


384 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


affected or real affront at his question, as if they could not 
be unjust (ver. 30). The governor would gladly have thrown 
the responsibility on the Jews, who betray their own foregone 
conclusion: Jesus must die; and as death could not be law- 
fully at their hands, it must be by the hand of lawless men. 
He must die the death of the cross. 

Thus was the word of Jesus to be fulfilled, signifying by what 
death He should die (ver. 32). Compare John i. 15, viii. 28, 
xii. 32, 33, (Peter) xxi. 18, 19; also Matthew xvi. 21, xvu. 12, 22, 
23. Stephen might be stoned by the Jews in an outburst of 
religious fury, James be slain with the sword by Herod; but 
the Son of man must be condemned by the Jewish chief 
priests and scribes, and be crucified by the Gentiles. “For 
in truth against thy holy servant Jesus whom thou anointedst, 
both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the nations and people of 
Israel were gathered together in this city to do whatsoever thy 
hand and thy counsel pre-determined should come to pass” 
(Acts iv. 27, 28). Man universally must prove his guilt to the 
last degree and the divine word be fulfilled to the letter, God 
Himself (we may say in the Person of His Son) being cast out 
in shame from His own earth; for all this and more was in- 
volved in the deliberate and fatal act. Yet was it the deepest 
moral glory. Now was the Son of man glorified, and God was 
glorified in Him. Obedience unto death, absolute devotedness, 
suffering beyond measure both for righteousness and for sin, 
met there on the one hand; and on the other the truth, the 
justice, the grace and the majesty of God, were not vindicated 
only but glorified. Therein too Satan’s power and claims were 
for ever annulled, and a perfect everlasting basis to God’s glory 
was laid for the blessing of man and creation in general. Such 
were the fruits of Christ’s death on the cross. How dense the 
blindness of its instruments! how dim the intelligence even of 
its favoured objects! How blessed the Father and the Son in 
love and holiness, spite of all accomplishing all! 

Again the Roman (whose characteristic common sense saw 
through the envy and malice of the Jews, and repudiated 
all anxiety as to the honour or security of Cesar) entered into 
the pretorium, called the Lord, and said, Art thou the king of 


CHAPTER XVIII. 385 


the Jews? He Who was silent before the high priest till 
adjured by the living God answered Pilate by the question, 
Of thyself sayest thou this; or did others say it to thee about 
Me? (vers. 33, 34.) This was the turning-point. If the 
governor were uneasy as to the rights and interests of Cesar, 
the Lord could have pointed to His uniform life as in John vi. 
15, and to His invariable teaching as in Luke xx. 25, for 
a perfect disproof and reassurance. But if the question 
originated, as it really did, with the Jews (Luke xxiii. 2), 
the Lord had nothing to say but the truth in the face of 
Israel’s unbelief and gainsaying, nothing to do but witness 
the “good confession” before Pontius Pilate; and this He 
does with all simplicity. 

The governor’s answer made plain what was already sure, 
that the true Son of David was rejected by the Jew 
definitively false to the one divine hope of the nation. “Am 
Ia Jew?” said he. “Thy nation and the chief priests 
delivered thee up to me: what didst thou?” Not one thing 
against which there is any law: every word, every way, 
testified of God. He spoke, He was, the truth, which not 
only detected man but presented the Father; and both were 
intolerable. They would have none of Him; not because He 
did not give every possible proof of His Messiahship, but 
because He put them in presence of God and of their sins, 
from which testimony there was no escape but the rejection of 
Himself. Hence the all-importance of what was in question. 
People and priests alike refused their own Messiah; and He 
bowed to it. Deeper things were meanwhile in accomplish- 
ment; and the infinite glory of His Person, already confessed 
by the disciples, as well as His work of eternal redemption, 
were about to be proclaimed in the gospel and to supersede 
Jewish hopes. For the gathering together in one of the 
scattered children of God should replace the disowned nation, 
till at the end of the age they shall say, Blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of Jehovah. Then shall the long-rejected 
Jesus once more and for ever recall them as His own, and bless 
them unchangingly, and make them a blessing to all the 
families of the earth. 

2 8B 


386 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Hence Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world: 
if my kingdom were of this world, my servants would fight 
that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my 
kingdom is not from hence” (ver. 36). When the Jews repent 
and the Lord returns in power and glory, not only will He be 
revealed from heaven in flaming fire taking vengeance, but 
Jerusalem be made a burdensome stone for all peoples, as He 
bends Judah for Him and fills the bow with Ephraim. But here 
we have Christianity which has come in before that day with 
His kingdom not of this world, nor from hence but from above, 
where all savours of the rejected but glorified Christ, and 
according to the revealed knowledge of the Father, the Jews 
being as such outside and manifest enemies. 

The governor, while satisfied that there was nothing to fear 
politically, could not but perceive a claim incomprehensible to 
his mind. “Art thou then a king?” This the Lord could not 
deny. It was the truth, and He confessed it, whatever it 
might cost. But having done so, He set forth that which 
applies now. “Thou sayest I am a king. I have been born 
for this, and for this I have come into the world, that I might 
bear witness to the truth.” The law was given by Moses, and 
Jesus was the born King of the Jews. But He was conscious 
of another and higher glory bound up with His Person as Son 
of God: grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. “Every 
one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” How solemn and 
unwavering the testimony! The Jews were zealous for the 
law, not because it was of God, but because it was theirs; the 
Romans sought this world and its power. They were both 
blind to the eternal and unseen. Jesus was the truth, as 
well as the Faithful and True Witness to it. 

It may help some to remark here that “ King of His Church,” 
the favourite idea of Puritan theology, is not only unfounded 
but opposed to all the testimony of scripture. Even “King 
of saints,’ as in the Text. Rec. of Rev. xv. 3, must be aban- 
doned by all who know the best reading. It should be “of 
the nations,” though “of the ages” has excellent authority. 
Whichever of these may be adopted, it is certain that “of 
the saints” has scarce any support, as it is also foreign to 


Pei 
i ~ 


CHAPTER XVIII. 387 


scripture and to the mind of Christ in it. “Of the nations” 
seems plainly drawn from, or in full accordance with, Jeremiah 
x. 7. Christ is King of Israel in Zion; as Son of man all the 
peoples and nations and languages shall serve Him; and as 
Jehovah He shall be King over all the earth. But even as 
Head, it is written that He is so given “¢o the church,” His 
body, “and over all things”; never over the church, as men 
have said, who misunderstand His revealed relationships. 

He adds, strange to the ears of man, not least to Roman 
ears: “Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” 
If a man did not hear Him, he was not of the truth. How 
could it be otherwise if He was the Only-begotten Son, yet 
man on earth? What could such a One come for but for this, 
if He came in grace, not in judgment? And Pilate with a 
“What is truth?” returns to the Jews. He did not seriously 
seek an answer: an awakened conscience alone does; and 
grace, as it produces the desire in the sinner, gives the answer 
of good from God. Not so Pilate, who having said this went 
out again to the Jews, saying, “I find no fault in him”; and 
suggesting as a solution of the difficulty the customary release 
of a prisoner at the feast, he offers to let go their King. But 
this only draws out the depth of their hatred, and they all 
ery out .... “Not this man but Barabbas.” Now Barabbas, 
as the evangelist adds, was a robber. So the Jews chose 
Satan’s “son of the father” (for so the word means). How 
evident that man rejecting Jesus is Satan’s slave! 

But the Jews in their unbelief are more daringly evil than 
the dark heathen procurator. He, like the rest of the world, 
did not know anything of “truth”; they had abundant specu- 
lations, one as little satisfactory as another, no certain truth, 
least of all about God. The Jews knew better; and the Lord 
compelled them to hear what they could not deny, but would 
not receive. Therefore all ended for the present in their hatred 
of Him up to the cross, and their avowed preference of a 
robber and a murderer. No flesh shall glory in His presence. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


HARD-HEARTEDNESS and insult took their course, for His hour 
was come. Pilate took and scourged Jesus the Lord of glory; 
the soldiers treated their meek prisoner with the unfeeling 
scorn, natural in such towards One Who resisted not; yet we 
must look to the Jews for extreme and unrelenting hatred. 

“Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged [him]. And 
the soldiers platted a crown of thorns and put [it] on his head, 
and clothed him with a purple garment, and were coming to 
him* and saying, Hail, King of the Jews! and gave him slaps 
on the face. And Pilate went out again and saith to them, 
Behold, I bring him out to you, that ye may know that I find 
no fault [in him]. Jesus therefore came out wearing the crown 
of thorns and the purple garment, and he saith to them, Behold, 
the man!” (vers. 1-5), 

The Roman saw through the baseness of the people, through 
the craft and deadly malice of the religious chiefs; and he 
seems to have resorted to the unjust policy of scourging the 
Lord, followed up by the allowed, if not prescribed, derision of 
the soldiers, as a means of satisfying the Jews and letting 
Jesus go. Contrary to truth and righteousness he would 
humour their feelings against Jesus, but he would save an 
innocent man if possible without loss to himself. Such is 
man in authority here below—at least where Christ is con- 
cerned, or even those that are Christ’s. It was the place of 
judgment, but wickedness was there; and the place of 
righteousness, but iniquity was there. There was not one 
spark of conscience in the judge, any more than in the 
accusers, or the crowd now quite carried away. There was 

* Such is the reading of S BLU X ATI, more than twenty cursives, and 


nearly all the ancient versions, followed by the chief editors. The clause is 
omitted in Text. Rec. with most uncials and cursives. 


388 


arent it toe Ot esa 


CHAPTER XIX. 389 


man deceived by Satan; and God was in none of their 
thoughts. Pilate probably hoped that the uncomplaining 
endurance of such cruel mockery and scourging in their sight 
might perchance move the multitude and its leaders to com- 
passion, whilst the exposed futility of the royal claims of Jesus 
would naturally awaken their contempt, and so in both ways 
further his own desire to dismiss the captive in whom he 
avowedly saw no guilt whatever. But, no! all must come out 
in their true colours, priests and people, learned and unlearned, 
civilians and soldiers, judge and prisoner. It was their hour 
and the power of darkness. But if man and Satan were there, 
so was God morally judging them all by the One they mis- 
judged. 

Still in that blind and hardened throng the Roman, unjust 
as he was, shines in comparison with the Jews of all ranks; 
and as the difficulty grew of delivering the Guiltless from their 
will set on destruction, we see a man in spite of himself grow- 
ingly impressed with the unaccountable dignity of Him Who 
appeared to be at his mercy. Elsewhere indeed we read of his 
wife’s dream sent to warn him on the judgment-seat; but here 
it is His Person, with His silence and His words alike, which 
increased the desire to extricate Him from unscrupulous and 
murderous adversaries, always despised in Pilate’s eyes, never 
so despicable as now. 

Pilate’s effort, however, was vain. “Behold, the man!” had 
for its effect neither the pity nor the contempt intended to 
divert the crowd from their fell purpose, but rather to whet 
their rage afresh in clamouring for the Lord’s death. In the 
ways of God He will not allow iniquity to prosper, least of all 
where Christ is in question. The unjust judge might abuse and 
insult the Lord, hoping to gratify the Jews thus far and to turn 
them from an aim from which even his stern and callous mind 
revolted as useless crime. But God, Who abhorred the horrible 
iniquity of them all, lets Satan ensnare them all in the conse- 
quences of their utter unbelief, and their habitually evil state 
—deaf to every warning and blind to the fullest testimony of 
moral goodness, and divine glory, and perfect grace in the holy 
Sufferer before them. As the judge acknowledged His inno- 


390 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


_-eence, yet would risk nothing on His behalf, so all commit and 
condemn themselves to their own ruin, stumbling over the 
precious Corner-stone and sure foundation as a stone disallowed 
by the builders. 


“When then the chief priests and the officials saw him, they _ 


cried, Crucify, crucify. Pilate saith to them, Take ye him, and 
crucify; for I find no fault in him. The Jews answered, We 
have a law, and according to the* law he ought to die, because 
he made himself Son of God. When Pilate therefore heard 
this word, he was the more afraid, and entered into the pre- 
torium again, and saith to Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus 
gave him no answer. Pilate saith to him, Speakest thou not to 
me? Knowest thou not that I have authority to release thee, 
and I have authority to crucify thee? Jesus answered, Thou 
hadstt no authority at all against me except it were given thee 
from above: on this account he that delivered me up to thee 
hath greater sin” (vers. 6-12). 

The charge failing against the Lord as hostile to the powers 
of the world, His accusers now betake themselves to the still 
more solemn cry, He ought to die because He made Himself 
Son of God. And Pilate was the more afraid, but not more 
ready to fall in with their design, though he were a heathen 
and they the blasphemers of the Hope of Israel, the Holy One 
of God! Yes, He is going to die, but not for the lies some 
swore falsely against Him, but for the truth of God, the capital 
truth for man, the object of faith and the one source of eternal 
life. Having emptied Himself, He humbled Himself; but Son 
of God He was and is from all eternity to all eternity. Not 
more sure is it that man is a sinner dead to God, than that 
Jesus is His Son; and eternal life is in Him only, yet for every 
soul to have that believes on Him. “He that believeth hath 
everlasting life.” Neither is there salvation in any but Jesus, 
nor another name under heaven which is given among men 
whereby we must be saved. But those who ought most to have 
welcomed Him, and most to have set forth His glory, were 


* NBD svppl L A, most It. Vulg., &c., omit 7uv, which the rest give. 
+ Soin BT A and six more uncials, most cursives, &. But éyes “hast” in 
& A D spel L X Y A II, a dozen cursives, &c, 


ae 


y 


ee 


CHAPTER XIX. 391 


those who feared not to say, According to our law He ought to 
die, because He made Himself Son of God! O how real, how 
darkening the power of Satan, when Jews blasphemed Him 
boldly, and the heathen procurator “was afraid” before Him! 

Fear, however, is not faith; and in Pilate it was not more 
than undefined dread of the mysterious Man then on His trial, 
and a strong sense that the enmity to Him was without a cause 
save in their ravenous will. So entering his palace again he 
enquires, Whence art Thou? and, mortified at receiving no 
answer, he vaunts his authority to release or to crucify Him. 
The Lord did not answer the one query which had no better 
motive than curiosity apart from the fear of God or His love; 
but He replied to the second in terms worthy of His Person, 
in fulness of grace and truth. Truly the hour was come that 
the Son of man should be glorified, and God be glorified in 
Him. What was the authority of a Roman governor without 
the will of God to sanction it? His ways, His nature, must be 
made good; the words were now, for the deepest of purposes, 
just about to be accomplished to His own glory for ever; and 
Jesus bowed absolutely to all. 

Nevertheless, the accomplishing of divine counsels in Christ 
does not consecrate the will of man that cast Him out and slew 
Him; and God is righteous in judging the evil. “On this 
account he that delivered me up to thee hath greater sin.” The 
Gentile was wicked, the Jew worse; if Pontius Pilate were 
inexcusably unrighteous, how much more awful the position of 
Caiaphas or Judas Iscariot’ and of all they represented that 
day! If God sent His Son in infinite grace, He did not fail to 
present adequate proofs of Who and what He is, to leave all 


‘inexcusable for not perceiving and receiving Him; not only 


those who had God’s outward authority in this world, but yet 
more those who had His living oracles that testified of His Son, 
Who was the centre and object of them all. Were they not 
witnesses of such works and words and ways as never had been 
known on earth, proportionately measuring the guilt of those 
who after such grace rejected One so glorious ? 

“From this [time] Pilate sought to release him; but the 
Jews kept erying, saying, If thou wilt release this [man], thou 


392 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


art not a friend of Casar: every one that maketh himself a 
king speaketh against Cesar. Pilate then, having heard these 
words, led Jesus out and sat down on [the] judgment seat at a 
place called Pavement,* but in Hebrew Gabbatha. Now it was 
[the] preparationt of the passover; it was about sixth{ hour. 


* In later Greek 7d \Odorpwrov was said for tessellated work or mosaic used 
for the floors of buildings public or domestic, and very particularly for the 
tribunal of a Roman in the execution of his office. So Julius Cesar on his 
military expeditions regularly carried such a mosaic with him, as Suetonius tells 
us (cap. 46), The Chaldee word NNAj seems to be from a Hebrew root, 133, “to 
be high”: cf. Geba, Gibeah, Gibeon, &c. The one apparently refers to the 
flooring, the other to the elevated platform, unless Lightfoot’s idea be well 
founded who derives G. from 33, “a surface,” and hence regards the Greek 
and Hebrew words as equivalents. 

+ No matter of fact in the Gospel has been debated more keenly or with 
wider differences among men of piety and learning than this of rapacxevy rot 
wdéoxa in connection with chapter xviii. 28, which doubtless disposes a modern 
or Gentile reader at first sight to conceive that the Lord must have ohserved the 
passover and instituted His own supper on the day before the time followed by 
the Jews. On the other hand, it is no less plain that according to the three 
Synoptic Gospels the Lord partook of the passover with the disciples at the 
regular season, 14th Nisan. Hence there have not been wanting those who 
have dared to reject the narrative of John, whilst a still greater number have 
fallen into the opposite error and treated the earlier evangelists as confounding 
the meal with the passover. Not a few, like the late Dean of Canterbury, give 
up the question in despair as to us insoluble. The truth is, that all these con- 
tending parties start with the error of forgetting the obvious and certain fact 
that the Jews reckon the day from evening to evening; and that hence it is alla 
mistake to suppose that the Lord took the passover with the disciples on one 
day and suffered the next. So it would be to our western habit of thought, 
but not so according to the Jews nurtured in the law. It was on our Thursday 
they ate, and on our Friday He suffered ; but to the Jews it was one and the 
same day. Hence there was still time for such Jews as had been too much 
occupied with the mock trial and condemnation of our Lord to eat the passover 
if they did not legally defile themselves meanwhile. The preparation of the 
passover does not mean the 13th but the 14th Nisan. It was the day before the 
paschal sabbath, which was on this occasion a double one, and so of peculiar 
sanctity. Hence Matthew speaking of this sabbath says, #ris éorly werd Thy 
mapackevnvy, as Mark explains mapackevh 6 éoriv mpoodBBarov, or sabbath eve. 
This seems conclusive in reconciling the statements of the fourth Gospel with 
those of the other three. The painful fact is the unbelief that exposed so many 
persons eminent for erudition and even for godliness to such hasty and careless 
discussion of scripture. Had they held firmly the inspired character of the 
holy writings, they would at least have avoided error and irreverence if they 
could not clear up the difficulty. 

It is well known that not Nonnus only in his poetical paraphrase of our 
Gospel gives ‘‘third” hour, but also five uncials and four cursives, either in the 
original text or in a correction, not to speak of less direct authorities. Still the 


CHAPTER XIX. 393 


And he saith to the Jews, Behold, your king. They cried 
therefore, Away with [him], away with [him]; crucify him. 


weight of witnesses is overwhelming for éxry, “sixth.” It would seem that our 

evangelist adopted a different reckoning of hours, from midnight to noon, as we 

. do, Certainly the Romans did for their civil day: see Plin. N. Hist. ii. 77; 
Censorinus de Die. Nat. xxiii. ; Aul. Gell. NW. Add. iii. 2; and Macrob. Sat. i. 3. 
And it suits all the mentions of hours in the Gospel of John excellently, besides 
falling in with Mark’s 8rd, 6th, and 9th hours of the natural day from the sun. 
This serves to explain the otherwise singular message of Pilate’s wife (Matt. 
Xxvil. 19), in which she spoke of suffering much “to-day in a dream because of 
him.” To Procula as a Roman the day was reckoned from midnight; as the 
hours appear to be throughout our Gospel, but not in the Synoptists. 

It is singular as showing the perplexity in minds of old as now that Jerome 
says in his breviary on Psalm Ixxvii.: ‘‘ Sic scriptum est in Matthaeo et Ioanne 
quod Dominus noster hora sexta crucifixus sit. Rursus scriptum est in Marco: 
quid hora tertia crucifixus sit. Error scriptorum fuit; sed multi episemum 
Graecum s putaverunt esse y: sicut et ibi error fuit scriptorum: ut pro Asaph, 
Isaiam scriberent” (Hier. Opp. vii. 1046, ed. Migne). Jerome’s remedy was 
thus to correct the text, not of John, but of Mark; a correction of but one 

known cursive manuscript of the eleventh century, the margin of the later 
Syriac, and the Aeth. on which last says Bode (Pseudocrit. Millio-Beng. 265), 
*‘Habet omnino Aeth. seata hora, idque ex Io. 19, 14. Nimirum Interpres 
Ioanni contradicere noluit.” But it is the just retribution of these tamperings 
with scripture that they do not satisfy the desired aim ; for John connects his 
sixth hour with what was before, possibly hours before, the hours specified by 
Mark, be it sixth or even third. Thus the violence done to the surest authority 
in Mark would no more reconcile the statements than the similar violence offered 
to the witnesses of John xix. 14; for Mark specifies the time when our Lord was 
crucified as the third hour, John speaks of the time when Pilate took his seat on 
the tribunal to give sentence as about the sixth hour. To change the latter to the 
third, or the former to the sixth, if admissible in the face of the gravest adverse 
evidence, would not clear the truth but only give birth to fresh confusion. 

The true state of the readings also thoroughly overthrows the efforts of some 
eminent Greeks and Latins, who try to explain the earlier hour as applicable to 
the Jewish outcry for the crucifixion, the later hour as the actual moment when 
the soldiers carried it into effect. But this is only neglect of scripture ; for 
John predicates ‘‘ about the sixth hour” of the outery, Mark “‘the third hour” 
of the actual crucifixion. As there is no sufficient reason to doubt the accuracy 
of the seemingly conflicting texts of the second and fourth Gospels (in itself no 
mean evidence that the apparent discrepancy exhibits the genuine readings of 
both), and as the very slight variation of readings is easily accounted for by the 
desire thus to reduce them to harmony, the natural solution is that John’s 
reckoning of time differs from that of the other evangelists. It will be found by 
comparing the various hours named in Johni. 39, iv. 6, 52, that the hours of 
the civil day suit as well after all as those of the natural (the last occasion 
apparently better), so as to confirm the different computation of John through- 
out. John xi. 9 in no way opposes this, as being a general way of describing a 
working day, whatever the mode of computation ; as for instance we can say so, 
who follow the style of the civil day from midnight. 


394 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Pilate saith to them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief 
priests answered, We have no king but Cesar” (vers. 12-15). 

How powerless is the struggle to do right, where the world 
is loved, one’s sins are unjudged, and grace unknown! The 
Jews saw through Pilate as he through them. How wretched, 
not to have Christ for eternal life! Pilate preferred the friend- 
ship of the world to the Son of God, as the Jews saw no beauty 
in Him that they should admire Him; and both played their 
part in crucifying Him. Pilate may seek to release Jesus, may 
go in and out, may speak to Jesus and pour scorn on the Jews. 
But the last word of apostate unbelief passes their lips and 
closes Pilate’s mouth, who will not be behind the Jews in 
allegiance to Cesar. All is over now. The prince of the 
world comes, and though he has nothing in Christ, Christ dies 
rejected of man, forsaken of God, the Righteous One for our 
sins; never such hatred and unrighteousness as on the world’s 
part toward Him; never such love and righteousness as on 
God’s part toward the world in virtue of Him. 

The Christ-rejecting word was passed. Their allegiance to 
the Roman was a lie, their mad guilt manifest in getting rid 
of Messiah and God Himself and all their faith and hope. 
The Jews abhorred subjection to Cesar; they owned neither his 
right nor their own sin, which was the occasion of his supremacy. 
But they abhorred the Messiah more,* not their idea, but the 
reality according to God. They had not a thought nor a 
feeling, not a word nor a way nor a purpose, in common 
with Jesus; and this because He brought God near to them 
in grace, because He manifested man in perfect dependence 
and obedience to God, and their will with a bad conscience 
rejected both. Hence the cross was to them most repulsive. 
“We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever; 
and how sayest thou, the Son of man must be lifted up? 
Who is this Son of man?” Yet was the law plain enough 
that the Messiah should be rejected by man, especially by the 
Jew, and die that death of curse, the terrible sin of man, yet 
God’s atoning sacrifice for sin. But will, governed by Satan 
to serve a present purpose in pursuance of man’s lusts and 


* “Jesum negant usque eo ut omnino Christum negent.” Beng. Gn. in loco, 


eel 


et) 
ON wasn 


CHAPTER XIX. 395 


‘passions, blinded them to His word and to their own suicidal 


wickedness; as ere long they were about to prove their re- 
belliousness to Cesar, and have the Romans come and take 
away their place and nation, but not before they had filled 
Jerusalem with the spectacle of their own penalty till there 
was no room left for more crosses, and wood failed to make 
them: so Josephus. 

“Then therefore he delivered him up to them that he 
might be crucified. They took then Jesus* [and led (him) 
away]; and bearing for himself the cross he went out unto 
the place called of a Skull, which is called in Hebrew Golgotha, 
where they crucified him, and with him two others, on this 
side and on that, and Jesus in the middle. And also Pilate 
wrote a title and put [it] on the cross; and there was written, 
Jesus the Nazarean, the king of the Jews. This title therefore 


many of the Jews read, because the place where Jesus was 


erucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, 
in Greek, in Latin. Therefore said the high priest of the Jews 
to Pilate, Write not, The king of the Jews, but that he said, 
I am king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have 
written I have written” (vers. 16-22). 

Faith alone preserves from the power and wiles of the devil. 
Pilate and the Jews were wholly opposed in their thoughts and 
wishes; but God was not in the thoughts of the one more than 
of the others. They had each his own way, but all astray; 
and now they show themselves the open enemies of righteous- 
ness as well as of grace, incapable of discerning the clearest 
ways, marks, and proofs of God present in love to man, no 


_ matter how low He might come down. The cross of Christ 


makes all and every one manifest. Pilate under pressure 
of fear for his own worldly interests gave up Jesus to their 
malice, though knowing Him innocent; and He bearing His 
cross went forth to the place of a Skull, Golgotha, in Latin 
Calvary. There was He crucified with peculiar indignity, 
a robber also on either hand, as a robber had been preferred 
to Him. Yet God took care that even there a fitting testimony, 


* Thus end BL X, &. But most with D E, &c., add “and led.” A, &c,, 
support Text. Rec, NS supports the same sense in a peculiar form. 


396 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


from whatever motive in Pilate’s breast, should be rendered to 
Him in the inscription on the cross; the despised man of 
Nazareth was the Messiah. Where were the Jews if He was 
their King? The keenest adversaries of the true God, blindly 
fulfilling His terrible prophecies of their unbelief and wicked- 
ness under a self-complacent zeal for His name and law. 
There stood His title, read by many; for the place was near 
the city, written in the tongues not of the officials only, 
nor of the polite world, but of the Jews too; and all the 
efforts of their high priests but riveted it to the cross under 
the pertinacious and irritated and scornful spirit of the 
procurator. 

But the lowest played their part at the cross as well as 
the highest, men used to arms no less than the ministers of 
the sanctuary; and every class, every man, showed out there 
what each was in selfish indifference to the grace and glory 
of the Son of God, Who suffered Himself to be numbered 
with the transgressors. 

“The soldiers therefore, when they crucified Jesus, took his 
garments and made four parts, to each soldier a part, and the 
vest; but the vest was seamless from the top woven through 
the whole. They said therefore unto one another, Let us not 
rend it, but let us draw lots for it whose it shall be; that the 
scripture might be fulfilled that saith, They parted my garments 
for themselves, and for my vesture they cast lots. The soldiers 
therefore did these things” (vers. 23, 24). Little thought the 
soldiers who had charge of the execution beyond their poor 
perquisites. But God’s eye was now as ever on His Son, and 
He had taken care in His word to mark it. For in one of the 
most manifestly Messianic psalms (Psalm xxii.) stands written, 
a thousand years beforehand, the minute prediction of the 
soldiers’ appropriating the garments of the Saviour in a way 
unmistakably applicable to Him. He is the object of scripture, 
though unbelief sees it not and has a will against it, because 
His Person is as unknown as our own need of divine mercy in 
the cross. With what interest the Holy Spirit contemplated, 
as we should, every detail of His suffering, and of man’s 
behaviour at that hour! God counted Him not less worthy 


CHAPTER XIX. 397 


because He was made the object of such indignities. To make 


them known beforehand was of all moment. The very minute- 
ness of what is mentioned bears witness to the accurate reality 
of the prophecy. He is the demonstrated as well as rejected 
Messiah. His glory made it due to Him to name the par- 
ticulars, which also bear witness to the depth of His grace 
in humiliation, that God and man might be fully shewn out, 
and that the words of the Psalmist be proved His word in the 
face of every gainsayer. 

But faith and love gathered near the dying Saviour some 
of very different mind. “Now by the cross of Jesus stood 
his mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the [wife] of 
Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. Jesus therefore, seeing his 
mother and the disciple standing by whom he loved, saith 
to his mother, Woman, behold, thy son. Next he saith to the 


disciple, Behold, thy mother; and from that hour the disciple 


took her unto his own [home]” (vers. 25-27). These were 
among the women who had followed Him in His ministry and 
had ministered to Him in life. There they stood in His 
rejection by the cross, where the Lord shows how little ascetic- 
ism rises to the truth. He had been absorbed in the work for 
which He was sent by the Father; no honey mingled with the 
offering, any more than leaven: salt was never absent, nor 
the unction of the Holy Ghost. All had been in the consecrat- 
ing power of the word and Spirit of God, and to God. But 
perfect human affections were there, though the work under- 
taken in communion with the Father had filled heart and lips 
and hands with the higher object to the glory of God. Yet 
eternal interests, when thus taken up, do not efface or dishonour 
nature or its relationships according to God; and the Lord 
here marks this by commending in the most solemn and 
touching way John to His mother as son, and Mary to John 
as mother: a loving trust honoured from that hour. How 
sweet for the loved disciple to remember and record! And 
how strong the contrast with superstition, no less than as 
we have seen with asceticism! And what a testimony in all 
to His own entire superiority to overwhelming circumstances ! 

“ After this Jesus, knowing that all things were now finished, 


398 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


that the scripture might be accomplished, saith, I thirst. 
A vessel [therefore] was standing there full of vinegar; and 
they, having filled a sponge with vinegar and put hyssop round 
[it], put [it] up to his mouth. When therefore Jesus received 
the vinegar, he said, It is finished, and bowing his head delivered 
up his spirit” (vers. 28-30). It is not only that in human 
tenderness He provides for all left behind in that supreme 
moment, but He thinks of scripture in spirit or in terms not 
yet fulfilled. No doubt there is the distressing physical effect 
expressed of all that mind and heart and body had endured 
till then; but His last request is here bound up, not with His 
want only, but with His undying zeal for the word if only 
a single thing lacked to make it honourable. Every word that 
proceeds through God’s mouth must be fulfilled; and had He 
not said of Messiah, “My tongue cleaveth to my jaws,” and 
“Tn my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink”? Then, having 
drunk, the Saviour says, “It is finished,’ with a divine calm 
as perfect here as His expression is given elsewhere of His 
unfathomable suffering. 

Of none but Jesus is it or could it be said that He gave 
up (aapédwxev) the spirit, which is wholly distinct from the 
“expired” (é&érvevoev) of Mark and Luke, confounded with 
the former by our translators. To expire could apply to any 
one’s death, the blessed Lord being man as truly as any other; 
to give the spirit up, as said in John, expresses His divine 
glory though a dying man, as the One Who had title to lay 
down His life no less than to take it again. So Matthew 
implies Who the dying Messiah was in “He dismissed the 
spirit” (a@yxe To v.). Nor can words be more characteristic 
of Luke than “Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit,” 
nor of John than “It is finished.” He was man though God; 
He was God though man; and both in one Person. 

The reader will remark how perfectly the account of the 
Lord’s death suits the general character and special design 
of John’s Gospel and of no other. Here Jesus is the 
conscious Son, the divine Person Who made all things, but 
became flesh that He might not only give eternal life but 
die as a propitiation for our sins. And here therefore, here 


CHAPTER XIX, 399 


only, He said, It is finished, and bowing His head delivered 
up His spirit. There are witnesses, as we shall see, but they 
are of God, not of man or the creature, and they intimately 
flow from His own Person. No darkness is mentioned, no 
cry that His God had forsaken Him, no rending of the veil, 
no earthquake, no centurion’s confession; all of which meet 
to proclaim the rejected Messiah (Matt. xxvii.). So sub- 
stantially, save the earthquake, the Servant Son of God 
obedient to death in Mark xv. Luke xxiii. adds the testimony 
to His grace in the crucified robber, His firstfruits in paradise, 
and the centurion’s witness to “Jesus Christ the righteous,” 
after He had committed His spirit into His Father’s hands. 
It was reserved for John to set forth His death Who was God 
not less surely than man, and as such. The Creator but man 
lifted up from the earth could say, in dying for sin to God’s 
glory, It is finished. The work, the infinite work, was done 
for the putting away of sin by His sacrifice. Thereon hangs 
not only the blessing of every soul that is to be justified 
by faith but of new heavens and new earth wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. “It is finished,” teréXeorar: one word! yet 
what word ever contained so much? 

But no heathen were more blinded and obdurate than 
_ God’s ancient people who take the lead against Jesus in an 
unbelieving religiousness without true fear of God, and who 
consequently saw not that they were but accomplishing His 
word in their guilty rejection of His and their Messiah. 

“The Jews therefore, since it was the preparation, that the 
bodies might not remain on the cross on the sabbath (for the 
day of that sabbath* was great), asked of Pilate that their 
legs might be broken, and they be taken away. ‘The soldiers 
therefore came and broke the legs of the first and of the 
other that was crucified with him; but coming to Jesus, when 
‘ they saw that he was already dead, they broke not his legs, 
but one of the soldiers with a spear thrust his side, and there 
came out immediately blood and water. And he that hath 
seen hath borne witness, and his witness is true, and he 


* éxelvov Stephens, & A B D *¥PP!L, X Y, nine more uncials, the great bulk of 
cursives, &c.; éxelyn Elz, with a late uncial (H) and a few cursives, Vulg., &c. 


- 


400 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


knoweth that he saith true, that ye also* may believe. For 
these things came to pass that the scripture might be fulfilled, 
Not a bone of him shall be crushed; and again another 
scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they pierced” 
(vers. 31-37). 

In the Law, the Psalms, and the Prophets the Spirit of God 
had Christ before Him, and in the sufferings to come on 
Him, as well as in the glories that should follow. But the 
fleshly mind, as it shrinks from sufferings, is disposed to over- 
look and get rid of testimony; especially so if the sufferings 
be the effect and the proof of man’s evil estate, for this is 
of all things most unpalatable. Thus was the Jew dull to 
see what condemned himself and levelled him morally to 
the condition of any other sinner; and rejecting the fullest 
evidences and Christ’s own presence in divine grace and truth 
and the gospel at last, he was given over to judicial hardening 
when wrath came on them to the uttermost. Christ alone 
gives the key to the paschal lamb, Christ is the main object in 
the Psalms. No reasoning of sceptics, even if theologians, can 
efface the truth; though it exposes their own unbelief; and 
assuredly if the heart were made right by grace, it would 
desire that to be true which is the truth, instead of stumbling 
at the word being disobedient, or neglecting it because of 
indifference. In vain then do the Rosenmiillers and the like 
hesitate or avow their dislike of the type and the allusion. 
To faith it is food and strength and joy; for if God’s word 
is instinct with His delight in Christ giving Himself to 
die, He also expresses it in every sort of form beforehand 
that the very facts of His atoning death, the great stumbling- 
block, might render the most irrefragable testimony to its 
truth and His glory, when thus manifested here below in 
shame, to man’s shame and everlasting contempt. 

How marvellously meet in Christ’s cross the proud enmity 
of the Jew, the lawless hand of the Gentiles, the determinate 
counsel and foreknowledge of God, and this in perfect grace 
to the guiltiest of Jews and Gentiles! For out of Christ’s 


* The oldest read xal, which Text. Rec. omits, with seven uncials and most 
cursives. 


CHAPTER XIX. 401 


pierced side came out forthwith blood and water.* And John 
was not so preoccupied with the Saviour’s dying charge con- 
cerning Mary as not to mark the sight.’ In the strongest 
form he lets us know that what we saw and testified was 
no mere transient fact but before the mind as present, of 
permanent interest and importance. In his First Epistle 
(ver. 6) he characterises the Lord accordingly. “This is 
he that came through (é:a) water and blood, Jesus Christ ; not 
in (év) the power of water only, but in the power of water 
and blood. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because 
the Spirit is truth.” Moral purification, however needed and 
precious, is not enough; there must be expiation of sins also; 
and both are found by faith in the death of Christ, not 
otherwise nor elsewhere. As a fact in the Gospel the order 
is blood and water; as applied to us in the Epistle it is 
the water and the blood, and the Spirit as One personally 
given follows. Nothing but death flows to man from Adam: 
Christ, the second Man Who died for sin and sinners, is the 
source alike of purification and of atonement to the believer, 
who needs both and is dead before God without both. For 
though the Son of God with life in Himself, He stands alone 
till He dies; dying He bears much fruit. He quickens, 


* Euthymius Zigabenus (Comm. in, quat. Evv. III. 619, ed. C. F. Matthaei) 
thus writes: ‘Yreppues 7d mpGyua, Kal tpavGs diddoxov, bre vmép AvOpwrov 6 
puyels, ék vexpod- yap dvOpwrov, Kav jupidkis vvéy Ths, ovK éLeNevoeTat atua, ‘The 
fact was supernatural, and clearly teaches that He Who was pierced was more 
than man. For from a dead man, if one should pierce him ten thousand times, 
no blood would come out.” What follows is a poor effort to connect with it 
Genesis ii., or even false doctrine when he speaks of two baptisms: one by 
blood, martyrdom; the other by water, regeneration, by whose stream the 
stream of sin is overwhelmed. How constant is one’s disappointment in these 
Greek and Latin ecclesiastics! Like the Galatians, if they begin by the Spirit, 
how quickly they pass into a vain effort after perfection by flesh! Not one 
even of the ablest and most orthodox adheres simply and thoroughly to the 
delivering gospel of God’s grace, though many of them loved the Lord and 
hated known error. But the full efficacy of redemption was unknown to 
anyone, so far as I can speak. 

It is curious, by the way, that a modern work of reputation like Dr. SmirH’s 
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography should continue to repeat that “the 
Greek original [? of this work on the four Gospels] has never been printed” 
(Vol. ii. 125, col. 1). So one understands the writer. Matthaei’s work appeared 
at Leipzig in 1792, and is familiar to students. 


2°0 


A402 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


purifies, and expiates; and the Holy Ghost consequently given 
brings us into the import of His death as well as blessing 
resulting from it. For it is judgment pronounced and executed 
by God in His cross on the flesh, but in our favour, because 
in Him Who was a sin-offering. 

No wonder then that John was inspired to record the fact, ~ 
not more wondrous in itself than in its consequences now 
made known to the believer. The salvation must be suited 
to and worthy of the Saviour. If He was eternal, it was 
everlasting; if divine judgment fell on such a Victim, it 
was that they believing Him should not come into judgment 
but have life, being forgiven all their offences and made 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. Such is the 
declared standing of every true Christian, but it is in virtue 
of Christ, Who is all and in all. Creeds and theological 
systems enfeeble and hinder its enjoyment; but all this, and 
more than one could here develop, is clearly and plainly 
revealed to faith in scripture,as it is indeed due to Christ’s 
glory in Person and work. 

Hence the care with which the word of God is cited and 
shown to be punctually fulfilled. “For these things came 
to pass that the scripture might be fulfilled, Not a bone of 
him shall be crushed; and again another scripture saith, They 
shall look on him whom they pierced.”* The natural circum- 

* Dr. Thomas Randolph, in his little work on the Prophecies and other texts 
cited in the New Testament and compared with the Hebrew Original and the 
Septuagint Version (4to., Oxford, 1782), remarks (p. 32) that “the evangelist 
here plainly reads wbx instead of shy in the Hebrew: but so also read forty 
Hebrew MSS. And that this is the true reading appears by what follows—‘ and 
they shall mourn for him.’ The Syriac renders it, ‘they shall look on me 
through him, whom they have pierced.’ The Sept. I cannot make sense of.” 

Now there is really no serious doubt that the true reading is the latter (“to 
me”), not the former (“to him”), and that the best and most MSS. and 
versions are justified. It was in fact originally nothing but a marginal 
correction, due to the desire partly of eliminating so strong a testimony to the 
deity or Jehovah title of the Lord Jesus, partly of easing the flow of the 
context from the concurrence of “me” and “him.” Even the Targum and the 
Talmud, like the more ancient MSS., and all the Greek early versions, refute 
the idea. So even most of the better Jewish expositors notwithstanding their 
controversy with Christians and in the course of it. De Rossi suggests that 


‘“‘to him” may have entered by accident through the scribe having Psalm 
xxxiv. 6 in mind. Much better and wiser therefore would it have been to 


CHAPTER XIX. 403 


stances of the crucifixion, more especially on a Friday, and 
that Friday the eve of sabbath in the paschal week, would 
have called for the breaking of the legs as a coup de grdce. 
And in fact such was the portion of the two malefactors. But 
Jesus as He had proved Himself in the preceding chapter 
the willing Captive was now the willing Victim; and this was 
made manifest in His dying as and when He did die. For it 
surprised not only the Jews and the soldiers but Pilate, as 
we learn elsewhere; and it superseded all need of the 
crurifragium in His case. But it marked the separated Lamb 
of God, the Righteous One, all Whose bones Jehovah keeps, 
not one of them broken. 

Yet this very exemption led as a fact doubtless to the deed 
of the soldier, whose lance pierced not the malefactors but 
only the dead body of the Saviour, wholly ignorant that so 


have adhered to ancient and good authority, spite of seeming difficulty, than 
to have adopted this Jewish keri like Newcome and Boothroyd, and so to help 
on such a humaniser as Ewald. Even R. Isaac in his Chizzuk Emunah, when 
controverting those whom he calls the Nazarines, admits the reading ‘2X; 
though he tries to weaken its force by interpreting TWN NS as ‘because of 
him whom they pierced” and applying it to the war of Gog and Magog. Now 
it is true that WS NS may and does sometimes mean ‘‘ because” (and so the 
LXX took the words, probably also confounding 12% with 7P1 which might 
originate katwpxjcavro) ; but the meaning cannot possibly be ‘‘ because of him 
whom,” for this would leave the verb without an object contrary to invariable 
Hebrew idiom. Hence also Radak’s (or R. D. Kimchi’s) translation fails, 
““because they have pierced,” though less objectionable perhaps as not foisting 
in an expressly false object. But they both divert from the true object; and 
therefore Abarbanel, Aben Ezra, Alshech, &c., condemn it, and so far confirm 
our Authorised Version. Rashi (7.e. R. Solomon) is no bad proof of the 
perplexity the clause presents to the Jewish mind; for he inconsistently 
applies it to Messiah ben-Joseph in his comment on the Talmud, whereas in 
his Commentary on the Bible he gets rid of this, applying it to some of the 
Jews pierced and killed by the Gentiles. It is the more surprising in the face of 
all, that these exploded mistakes should be reproduced in modern Jewish 
versions; as when Dr. A. Benisch, like D. Kimchi, omits the object in his 
School and Family Bible, and Mr. J. Leeser in his Holy Scriptures supplies 
‘tevery one,” to the manifest falsification of the sense like R. Isaac. There is 
really an emphatic object in the Hebrew text, which accounts for (if it does not 
require) the change of construction in the foregoing clause. The conclusion 
then is that the evangelist read no otherwise than we do in the ordinary 
Hebrew, and that the Holy Spirit in the Gospel and the Revelation does not 
cite but suppose that text, which is distinctly applied to the fact carefully 
recorded in the history, and doctrinally employed in John’s First Epistle. 


404 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


it must be, for God had said it by His prophet. All was 
ordered and measured; even these minute differences were 
revealed beforehand; yet were men and Satan indulging 
freely their enmity against the Son of God. And in the 
face of such love and light men combine their ignorance* 
with their learning to escape from the truth into the dark 
once more. But we need not here dwell on such things. It 
is the same spirit that surrounded the cross : 


‘¢ Thy love, by man so sorely tried, 
Proved stronger than the grave ; 
The very spear that pierced Thy side 
Drew forth the blood to save.” 


“And after these things Joseph from Arimathea, being a 
disciple of Jesus but a secret one for fear of the Jews, asked 
Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus; and Pilate 
gave leave. Het came therefore and took his body away. 
And there came also Nicodemus, that came at first to 
himt by night, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes about 
a hundred pound [weight]. They took therefore the body 
of Jesus and bound it in linen swathes with the spices, as 
it is the Jews’ custom to prepare for burial.t Now there was 
in the place where he was crucified a garden, and in the 
garden a new tomb in which no one was ever yet laid. There 
then on account of the preparation of the Jews, because the 
tomb was near, they put Jesus” (vers. 38-42), 


* It may be worth mentioning as a singular instance of the importance of 
knowing the original that Euthymius Zigabenus, in his comment on verse 37, 
speaks of the scripture as probably got rid of by the Jews since the 
Gospel. ‘‘For nowhere is it found now; or he means another scripture 
of the books called apocryphal” (Vol. iii. 621), This sounds strong with 
Zechariah xii, 10 in view. How is it to be accounted for? This Greek monk 
read the prophet in the Septuagint, where the clause as to the piercing is 
miserably mistaken, dv0’ Gv karwpxjoavro, “because they insulted [me],” while 
the later Jewish rendering of Aquila evades the truth by givingodv 6. Theo- 
dotion has rendered the passage rightly on the whole. Hence the Spirit of God 
(both in John’s Gospel and in the Revelation) does not cite the Septuagint, but 
alludes to it in terms which accurately represent the clause. 

+ Tischendorf now adopts the plural “they” with N™, &c.; also adrdy, 
“him,” instead of 76 cGua adrod as in N° BL X A, ten cursives, &c., or 7. 
rod “I, with a dozen uncials and most cursives, &c., and in Text. Rec.; so in 
verse 39, the best give ‘“‘to him,” the majority ‘‘to Jesus.” 

{ The word is not @drrew but evragidfev, which is used for embalming, or at 
least preparing for burial as in the case before us, 


CHAPTER XIX. 405 


God uses a perilous time to call forth His own hidden ones. 
Joseph of Arimathea can be a secret disciple no longer. He 
was a rich man (Matt. xxvii.) and an honourable counsellor 
(Mark xv.); but wealth and position make the confession 
of Christ only the harder. Fear of the Jews had hitherto 
prevailed. The death of Jesus, which caused others to fear, 
made Joseph bold. He had not consented indeed to the 
counsel and deed of the Jews. Now he goes to Pilate and 
besought the Lord’s body. Nor was he alone: Nicodemus 
longer known but with no happy reputation for moral courage 
at the first, though afterwards venturing a remonstrance to 
the haughty yet unjust Pharisees, joins in the last offices of 
love with an abundant offering of myrrh and aloes. The 
cross of Christ so stumbling to unbelief exercises and 
manifests his faith; and the twain waxing valiant by grace 
fulfil the lack of service of the twelve. They take the body 
of Jesus and bind it in linen swathes with the spices, in 
the manner of the Jews to prepare for burial. Egypt had 
its custom of embalming; so in a measure had the Jews 
in hope of the resurrection of the just. No prophecy is 
cited here; but who can forget Isaiah’s words, He made 
His grave with the wicked [men] and with the rich 
[man] in His death? He was appointed His grave with 
the lawless, and was with the rich man in His death, 
that is, after being slain: a strange combination, yet verified 
in Him; and who could wonder? seeing that He had done 
no. violence and no deceit was in His mouth. And now 
we see in Joseph’s garden, hard by the fatal scene, a new 
tomb which had never known an inmate. So had God pro- 
vided, in honour for the body of His Son and in jealous 
wisdom for the truth, hewn out in the rock (as Matthew, 
Mark, and Luke tell us). There the Lord was put mean- 
while in view of more formal burial when the sabbath should 
pass. So little did the disciples anticipate what the glory 
of the Father had at heart, though the Lord had so often 
plainly revealed it, till the resurrection was a fact in its own 
predicted time. 


CHAPTER XxX. 


AS no created eye beheld what was deepest in the cross of 
Christ, so it was not for man to look on the Lord rising from 
among the dead. This was as it should be. Darkness veiled 
Him giving Himself for us in atonement. Man saw not that 
infinite work in His death; yet was it not only to glorify God 
thereby, but that our sins might be borne away righteously. 
We have seen the activity of the world, and especially of the 
Jew, in crucifying Him; high and low, religious and profane, 
all played their part ; even one apostle denied Him, as another 
betrayed Him to the murderous priests and elders. But 
Jehovah laid on Him the iniquity of us all; Jehovah bruised 
and put Him to grief; Jehovah made His soul an offering for 
sin; and as this was Godward, so was it invisible to human 
eyes, and God alone could rightly bear witness, by whom He 
would, of the eternal redemption thus obtained, which left 
divine love free to act even in a lost and ungodly world. 

So with the resurrection of Christ. He was raised up from 
the dead by the glory of the Father; God raised up Jesus 
Whom the Jews slew and hanged on a tree; He had laid down 
His life that He might take it again, in three days raising the 
temple of His body which they destroyed. But if no man was 
given to see the act of His rising from the dead, it was to be 
testified in all the world as well as His atoning death. Preach 
the gospel, said He risen, to every creature. And assuredly he 
who withholds His resurrection maims the glad tidings of its 
triumphant proof and character, and compromises the believer's 
liberty and introduction into the new creation, as he immensely 
clouds the Lord’s glory: even as the denial of resurrection 
virtually charges God’s witnesses with falsehood and makes faith 


vain. So the apostle insists in 1 Corinthians xv. Had death 
406 


CHAPTER XX. 407 


held the Saviour fast, all were lost; had it been only His spirit 
winning its way into the presence of God, would it be even 
a half-deliverance? His resurrection is in truth a complete 
deliverance, of which the Holy Spirit is to us the seal. 

Hence we find it is the grand foundation truth of the gospel. 
To be a witness of His resurrection was the main requirement 
for an apostle (Acts 1.); and that God had raised up Jesus 
Whom the Jews had crucified was the truth most pressed by 
Peter (Acts ii.). So it was urged by him in Solomon’s porch 
subsequently (Acts iii.) and before the Jewish council once and 
again (Acts iv., v.). Just so it was in preaching to the Gentiles 
(Acts x.); and by Paul yet more than by Peter (Acts xiii). 
This witness especially grieved the Sadducean chiefs (Acts 
iv.); this is what rouses the undying scorn or opposition of 
unbelief all the world over. And no wonder; for if the resur- 
rection be the spring of joy and ground of assured salvation to 
the believer, if it be the secret of his holy walk as the ex- 
pression of the life he has in Christ risen, and the power 
of a living hope, it is also the measure of the real estate of man 
as dead in sins; as it is the present, fixed, and constant pledge 
that judgment hangs over the habitable earth, for God has 
raised from among the dead as its appointed Judge the Man 
Whom the world slew. The resurrection therefore is as re- 
pulsive to man, as it is apt to be slighted by the fleshly mind 
even of Christians who seek earthly things. 

As the resurrection is thus manifestly a truth of capital 
moment, the Spirit of God has taken care that the testimony 
to it should be as precise as it is full. Hence Matthew, who 
from the design of his Gospel omits the ascension, does not fail 
to bring out the proof of Christ’s resurrection most clearly; 
and so does Mark; and Luke with more detail than either 
shows us the Lord in resurrection with all His loving interest 
in His own. He is a man as truly as ever, with flesh and bones, 
capable of eating with them, but risen. John as usual presents 
the conscious Son of God, the Word become flesh, but now 
in resurrection. Here the proofs are characteristically inward 
and personal, where the others as fittingly present what was 
outward but no less necessary. 


408 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


As a bulwark against philosophic scepticism the resurrection 
stands firm and impregnable. For it resists and refutes un- 
answerably the sophistry which ignores God and reduces the 
idea of causes to an invariable antecedence of constantly 
observed phenomena as in sequence: a theory quietly assumed 
and diligently instilled, so as to set aside the very possibility of 
divine intervention whether in grace or judgment, in miracles 
or prophecy, or in any relationship beyond nature with God. 
With God did I say? Why, according to this system logically 
carried out, He is and must be unknown; but if unknown, 
who can tell if He exist? or if all do not end in a mere deifica- 
tion of nature? Now the resurrection of Christ rests, as has 
been often shewn, on far fuller evidence and surer and better 
grounds than any event in history; and this because it was sifted 
at the time by friends and foes as nothing else ever was, and 
because God Himself gave a multiplicity of testimony, pro- 
portioned to its incalculable moment, not to us merely but to 
His own glory. Now as a fact without argumentation, it over- 
throws of itself and instantly every opposition to the truth 
of science or knowledge falsely so called. For it would be 
the depth of absurdity to suppose that the death of Jesus 
was the cause of His resurrection. What then was its cause ? 
Of what antecedent was it the sequence? If anything points 
to the power of God, it is resurrection no less than creation. 

The truth is that the effort to reduce cause and effect to 
a mere antecedent and consequent springs from the desire 
to get rid of God altogether; for cause really implies will, 
design, and power in activity, though we must distinguish 
between the causa causans and the causae causatae. These 
causes are in nature by God’s constitution, but He lives, 
wills, acts. Hence the resurrection of Christ stands in the 
midst of this world’s history to judge all unbelief, viewed 
now as a simple fact most fully proved. We may see its 
consequences as far as our chapter presents them later on. 
The Lord had distinctly and often spoken of His death and 
resurrection during His life. He had died and was buried; 
and here we learn that no power or precaution prevailed 
against His word. The grave had lost its inmate; and this 


CHAPTER XX. 409 


was all Mary’s heart took in—the loss of the dead body of 
the Lord. Deplorable forgetfulness, but of a heart absorbed 
in that one sad treasure here below, and it was gone! 

Thus even here the proof was in the wisdom of God 
gradual, and the growth of the apostles themselves slow in 
the truth. There was afforded the most evident demonstration 
that, as the power in itself was of Him only and immediately, 
above the entire course of nature and human experience, so 
those who were afterwards its most competent, strenuous, 
and suffering witnesses only yielded to its certainty by such 
degrees as let us see that no men were more surprised than 
the apostles. Even the enemies of the Lord had an undefined 
dread or uneasiness, which led to Pilate’s allowance of a mili- 
tary guard with the seal of the great stone to make the 
sepulchre sure. Not a disciple, so far as we know, looked 
for His rising. 

Nevertheless Christ did rise the third day according to the 
scriptures. In this very thing, the teaching of God’s word, 
were the disciples weak; not the uninstructed Magdalene 
only but all, as we shall see, senseless and slow of heart 
to believe in all that the prophets spoke; all as quick to forget 
the plain words in which the Lord Himself repeatedly an- 
nounced not only His death but His resurrection on the 
third day. 

Accordingly the opening verses have for their object to show 
us how the truth first began to dawn on any heart. Not only 
was there no collusion in feigning the resurrection of their 
Master, there was not so much as a hopeful anticipation in 
a single heart of which one can speak. The gloom of the 
cross had shrouded every heart; the fear of man pressed 
on the men yet more than on the women. Even where the 
fact should have been patent, she who saw the fact misunder- 
stood its import and was more distressed than ever. 

“Now on the first [day] of the week Mary of Magdala 
cometh early while it was yet dark unto the tomb and seeth 
the stone taken away from the tomb. She runneth therefore 
and cometh unto Simon Peter and unto the other disciple 
whom Jesus dearly loved (é¢,), and saith to them, They took 


410 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


away the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not where they 
laid him” (vers. 1, 2). 

Mary of Magdala seems to be alone on the first day; 
certainly, if other women were with or near her, as other 
testimonies may imply (not to speak of the plural form 
here “we know,” which may be merely general), she alone 
attracts the notice of the Spirit of God. He portrays a heart, 
first attracted irresistibly to a scene so overwhelming and 
withal sacred by her love to Him Whose body had been 
laid in the tomb; then at length met and blessed by the 
Lord when the best resources among the saints had failed, 
as will come before us in due time. 

Before His death Mary, the sister of Lazarus, had anointed 
the Lord, His head and His feet, out of the fulness of her 
affection which lavished what she had most precious on Him, 
just at that time when she instinctively felt danger impending, 
and hears, in answer to heartless indifference only thence hurry- 
ing on to the deadliest ungodliness, the vindication of His love 
which gave a meaning to her act beyond her thoughts. Oh, 
how satisfying to her heart till with Himself! It was a deep 
and true affection met by the affection of Jesus not perfect 
only but divine. 

And here too it was not in vain that Mary of Magdala was 
drawn thus early, dark as it was, to the grave, the empty grave, 
of Jesus. She had been there, though not alone, after sabbath 
had closed when it was growing dark (not “ dawning,” though 
the word applies to either) toward the first day of the week, 
for this is the true meaning of Matthew xxviii. With this 
compare Mark xvi.; as Luke xxii. 54 shows they had been 
on the preceding evening when Friday was closing and sabbath 
was drawing on. 

It is remarkable that this Mary runs to tell the fact of the 
stone’s removal, and what she inferred as to the Lord’s body, 
not to John only but to Peter also. The latter had notoriously 
and grievously dishonoured the Lord just before His death; 
but doubtless his repentance was well known to the saints 
at least. Still there is the record of her unhesitating appeal. 
Mary’s heart judged who among the disciples would most 


CHAPTER XX. 411 


heartily answer to the anxious enquiry which filled her own 
soul, For assuredly it was not lack of love but of self- 
judgment which had exposed that ardent disciple to deny 
his Master. On the contrary it was confidence in his own 
love for Him with utter ignorance of himself, and without 
due dependence on God, in the face of a hostile world with 
the shadow of death before his eyes. And the Master in 
the next chapter manifests His own grace toward His servant 
to the utmost, even while laying bare the sinful root which 
had betrayed him to such shameful failure. In fact Mary 
was far more justified in reckoning on the sympathy of Peter 
and John in that which troubled her, than in the ignorance 
which concluded that men had carried off the Lord’s body 
on the resurrection-day. Even the warmest love cannot 
without the word conceive a right thought of Him Who 
died for us. Her notion was wholly unworthy of Christ 
or of God’s care for Him. But unbelief in the saint is no 
better than in the sinner; and the very strength of her love 
to the Lord only brings out the more into evidence how 
faith is needed in order to rightly understand in divine 
things. He however “giveth more grace.” 


As to the accounts of the resurrection, let none believe that 
it is fruitless to compare them, any more than to accept the 
perfect accuracy of each one. Whether one attempt or 
despise a harmony, the result must be utterly wrong if he 
start with interpreting Matthew xxvii. of the dawn of Sun- 
day morning instead of the dusk of sabbath evening, which 
last to the Jew (and Matthew above all has the Jews in view) 
was and is the true beginning of the first day, however Western 
prejudice may incline to the Gentile sense of the day. This 
error must vitiate all right understanding for the student as 
much as for the harmonist. Let us read as believers. 

It has been said to be impossible that so astounding an event 
coming upon various portions of the body of disciples from 
various quarters and in various forms, should not have been 
related, by four independent witnesses, in the “scattered and 
fragmentary ” way in which we now find it. Certainly it would 


412 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


be impossible if there were no God securing perfect truth by 
all His chosen witnesses, and in each of their accounts. The 
remark is therefore mere unbelief, and quite unworthy of any_ 
intelligent Christian. “Scattered and fragmentary ” is not the 
way of the Holy Ghost, Who does not employ the four like men 
giving evidence in a court of justice, each of what he saw and 
heard. Not only is this inapplicable to Mark and Luke, but 
it does not fall in with the facts in John and Matthew. For 
He leads each of them to omit what both saw and heard, and 
to insert only such a selection as illustrates the scope and 
design of each particular Gospel. Was not Matthew a riveted 
spectator of the Lord in the midst of the disciples at Jerusalem 
on the evening of the day He rose from the dead? Was not 
John with the rest at the appointed mountain in Galilee ? 

It is not merely true then, that in the depth beneath their 
varied surface of narrative the great central fact of the resur- 
rection itself rests unmoved and immoveable (for this might 
be in merely human accounts of facts), but that every one 
of the four had a special object or aim in the mind of the 
inspiring Spirit, which is carried out unerringly in general plan 
and in minute detail. The objection admits the honesty of the 
Christian witnesses, but leaves God out of their writing, which 
is the essence of infidelity: the more painful, as the objector 
is really a believer, but with a wholly inadequate and dangerous 
theory of inspiration. The fact is that no man, who had the 
material, or knew what each evangelist had before him, would — 
ever have written as any one of them did; and that nothing 
accounts for their peculiar form but God giving a testimony 
in perfect keeping with each Gospel, so as by them all to fur- 
nish a complete whole. Where men of God only are seen, 
with nothing more than such guidance of the Spirit as in 
ordinary preaching or the like, what a blight such unbelief 
entails! Calling it inspiration only adds to the delusion. Are 
they G'od’s word ? 

Confessedly the resurrection was that above all other things 
to which the apostles bore their testimony; but it is, as we 
have seen and might show yet more fully, neglect of the 
evidence to suppose that each elaborated faithfully into 


Ee 


CHAPTER XX. 413 


narrative those particular facts which came under his own eye 
or were reported to himself by those concerned. This is a poor 
and misleading @ priori hypothesis. Their diversity springs not 
from human infirmity, but from divine wisdom. 


But we turn for a few moments more to the effect of the 
empty tomb on those who first noticed it. And certainly one 
cannot speak of spiritual intelligence in Mary of Magdala; 
but she clung in deep affection to the Lord’s Person; and He 
was not unmindful of it. She was the first, as we shall see, 
to have joy in Him, and He puts honour on her. Yet what 
could be less worthy of Christ than her hasty conclusion from 
the empty tomb! “They took away the Lord out of the tomb 
and we know not where they laid him.” She can think of 
Him only as under the power of death. She judges by the 
sight of her eyes; and to her mind as yet man has the upper 
hand. His assurance of resurrection had left no trace, as if 
on the barren sand. Who can glory in man thus overwhelmed 
before the undiscerned yet glorious power of God which had 
already raised Him from among the dead? Nevertheless her 
heart was true to Him, and she shows it, if only now by 
her visit to such a scene while it was yet dark, and by her 
extreme agitation when she saw the stone taken away, and 
the body gone from the tomb. What can she do but run with 
the news to break it to congenial hearts ? 

“Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and were 
coming unto the tomb. And the two were running together, 
and the other disciple ran forward more quickly than Peter, 
and came first unto the tomb, and stooping down seeth the 
linen clothes as they lay; nevertheless he went not in. Simon 
Peter therefore cometh following him, and entered into the 
tomb, and beholdeth the linen clothes lying, and the handker- 
chief which was upon his head, not lying with the linen clothes 
but folded up in a place apart. Then entered therefore also 
the other disciple that came first unto the tomb, and he saw 
and believed; for as yet they knew not the scripture that 
he must rise from [the] dead. The disciples therefore went 
away again unto their own [home]” (vers. 3-10). 


414 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


It was not John only who went forth at the tidings of Mary. 
Love, roused by words which sounded strange to their ears, led 
Peter to run along with John, with no less desire if not so 
fast. He had slumbered, when he ought to have watched and 
prayed; and, when the crisis came, he had denied his Master 
— with no small aggravation after His solemn warning. But he 
was not a Judas: very far indeed from it. He loved the Lord 
Who Himself knew that he loved Him; and therefore notwith- ~ 
standing his deep and shameful sin, his heart was moved by 
the news so unaccountable to him of the disappearance of the 
body from the tomb. So the two disciples (who were for other 
reasons often seen together) strove which should reach the spot 
soonest. Not the most distant hope of what the fact was had 
as yet crossed their minds; yet were they as far as possible 
from indifference to any little circumstance which concerned 
even His body. That it was no longer where it had been laid, 
especially with such a safeguard against conceivable hazards, 
is enough to stir both deeply ; and they are on the scene forth- 
with, John outrunning Peter. And as he came first to the 
tomb, so did he stoop down and see the linen clothes as they 
lay;* yet went he not in. Peter, though less agile, went 
farther when he reached the place, for he went into the tomb, 
and inspected the linen clothes as they lay, and the napkin 
which was on His head, not lying with them but wrapped up 
in one place by itself. 

So also reports Luke (xxiv. 12), though not in such detail as 
John does, who describes not only the twofold examination on 
his own part, but an added feature in Peter’s intent gaze, 
observing the peculiarity of the napkin wrapt up by itself. 
What clear presumptive proof that the body had not been 


* The careful reader will notice the emphatic place given to the lying of the 
grave-clothes as seen by John, compared with Peter’s contemplating them as 
they lay, and the kerchief or napkin for the head, not with them but apart and 
wrapt up. I reject the irreverent thought of Wetstein that John shrank from 
going in “‘ne pollueretur, Num, xix. 16”; for this would have operated to 
hinder John afterwards (vers. 8) as well as Peter’s entrance. It was Peter’s 
ardour, not burning less now but more from the sense of his recent wrong, which 
impelled him not merely to take a glance but to enter and survey all more 
closely. 


a 


CHAPTER XX. 415 


taken away by enemies any more than by friends! for why 
should either leave the linen swathes behind? Who but one 
arising from sleep would dispose of the habiliments in this calm | 
and orderly fashion? It must be His own doing as He rose 
from among the dead, and laid aside what was unsuited to as 
well as needless for His new estate. For here we may contrast 
the very differeut way in which Lazarus appeared when raised 
by the Lord, indicative of the different character of the resur- 
rection. Still there was no depth in the conviction Peter could 
not but form; for he returned home, the true rendering, won- 
dering at what had come to pass. Wonder is in no way the 
expression of the intelligence which faith gives; it implies 
rather the distinct lack of it. It does seem surprising that 
such men as Bengel and Stier should follow Erasmus and 
Grotius in the idea that John merely went as far as Mary’s 
idea in verse 2. 

“Then entered therefore also the other disciple that came 
first unto the tomb, and he saw and believed.” It was faith, 
but founded on evidence, not on the written word. Mary’s 
inference was upset by the indications John as well as Peter 
observed. Theirs was a sound conclusion, based on a reasonable 
judgment of the facts observed; but this in itself is only a 
human deduction, however right in itself, instead of being the 
subjection of the heart to the testimony of God. And it is 
John himself who, here as elsewhere, teaches us to draw this 
most momentous distinction. But Peter seems, though amazed, 
to have taken in the import of what he observed as well as 
John. They both went beyond Mary of Magdala and inferred 
that He must have risen ; not that either Joseph and Nicodemus 
on the one hand, nor that the Jews or Romans on the other, 
had taken away the Lord’s body. On ground of the apparent 
facts, they rightly accounted for the disappearance of His 
body. But in neither was there that character of faith in 
His resurrection which springs from laying hold of God’s 
word. The former was human, the latter divine, because in 
this alone is God believed, which gives Him His true place and 
puts us in ours. Thus is the soul purged by virtue of the 
word, which is no less needful than cleansing by blood; and 


416 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


hence repentance ever accompanies faith. We could not be 
made meet for the inheritance of the saints in light, did we 
not know experimentally the washing of water by the word as 
well as cleansing from our sins by Christ’s blood. 

Now it is not too much to say that, as far as the truth of 
resurrection, soon to be the characteristic testimony of the apos- 
tles John or Peter, it was not yet taught them of God, They 
did not as yet with the fact connect God’s testimony in the 
Law, the Psalms, or the Prophets, nor even the plain and recent 
words of our Lord Jesus. So little is there of truth in Lampe’s 
judgment that from this moment in the very darkness of the 
tomb the mind of John was enlightened with the saving faith 
of the resurrection of Jesus as with a certain new ray of the 
risen “Sun of Righteousness.” There is nothing in divine 
things beautiful which is not true; and this is not only not 
true, but the reversal of the truth inculcated by John himself 
in his inspired comment on the fact. They both believed in 
Christ, on the ground not of facts only but of God’s word; 
they neither of them believed in His resurrection beyond the 
seen facts that so it must be. “For as yet they knew not the 
scripture that he must rise from [the] dead.” 

We have had a fair sample of Protestant (I do not say 
Reformation) theology which shows their loose and human 
idea of faith. Romanist, and perhaps one might add Catholic, 
views are no better. Hence the Tridentine depreciation of 
faith; hence the effort to bring in love and obedience and 
holiness in order to justification. They feel that there must 
be a moral element, and their reducing faith to an intellectual 
reception of propositions excludes it; so that they are driven 
to add other things to faith in order to satisfy themselves. All 
this turns on the great fundamental error that the thoroughgoing 
Papist makes faith in the church the resting-place of his soul 
and the rule of faith, not the scriptures, nor God revealed 
in Christ by them. If they carried out the error to its results, 
no Romanist could be saved; for he believes not God’s word on 
God’s authority, but scripture and tradition on the church’s 
word. By his own principle he excludes faith in God, and 
could not truly believe unto life at all. Only through grace 


CHAPTER XX, A417 


men may be better than their principle, as many alas! are 
worse when the principle is of God. Believing scripture as 
God’s word, believing God in it, is of vital moment. 

Facts are of high interest and real importance; and as the 
Israelite could point to them as the basis of his religion, to 
the call of Abram by God, and the deliverance of the chosen 
people from Egypt and through the desert and into Canaan, so 
can the Christian to the incomparably deeper and more endur- 
ing ones of the incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension 
of the Son of God, with the consequent presence of the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven. But faith to have moral value, 
to deal with the conscience, to purify and draw out the heart, 
is not the pure and simple acceptance of facts on reasonable 
grounds, but the heart’s welcoming God’s testimony in His 
word. This tests the soul beyond all else, as spiritual intelli- 
gence consists in the growing up to Christ in an increasing 
perception and enjoyment of all that God’s word has revealed, 
which separates the saint practically to Himself and His will 
in judgment of self and the world. One has put off the old 
man and put on the new, being renewed into full knowledge 
according to the image of Him that created him. 

To “see and believe” therefore is wholly short of what the 
operation of God gives; as traditional faith or evidence answers 
to it now in Christendom. It is human, and leaves the con- 
science unpurged and the heart without communion. It may 
be found in him who is in no way born of God (compare 
chap. ii. 23-25), but also in the believer as here: if so, it is 
not what the Spirit seals, and it in no way delivers from 
present things. And this it seems to be the divine object 
to let us know in the account before us. Faith, to be of value 
and have power, rests not on sight or inference but on scrip- 
ture. Thus as the disciples show the most treacherous memory 
as to the words of the Lord till He was raised up from the 
dead (chap. ii. 22), so were they insensible to the force and 
application of the written word: after that they believed both, 
they entered into abiding and enlarging blessing from above. 
This, as Peter tells us in his First Epistle (chap. i. 8), is 
characteristically the faith of a Christian, who, having not 

2D 


418 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


seen Christ, loves Him; and on Whom though not now seeing 
Him but believing, he exults with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory. The faith that is founded on evidences may strengthen 
against Deism, Pantheism, or Atheism; but it never gave © 
remission of sins, never led one to cry Abba, Father, never 
filled the heart with His grace and glory Who is the object 
of God’s everlasting satisfaction and delight. 

Here also we have the further and marked testimony of its 
powerlessness; for we are told (ver. 10), “The disciples there- 
fore went away again unto their own [home].” The fact was 
known on grounds indisputable to their minds, but not yet 
appreciated in God’s sight as revealed in His word; and hence 
they return to their old unbroken associations. 

Mary did not, could not, take things so quietly as the two 
disciples. What was “home” now to her? What was the 
world? Nothing but an empty tomb where Jesus had lain. 
Others might depart again to their own home. For her heart it 
was impossible. 

“But Mary stood at the tomb without weeping. While then 
she was weeping, she stooped into the tomb, and beholdeth two 
angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, 
where had lain the body of Jesus. And they say to her, 
Woman, why weepest thou? She saith to them, Because they 
took away my Lord, and I know not where they laid him. 
Having said thus, she turned back, and beholdeth Jesus stand- 
ing, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus saith to her, Woman, 
why weepest thou? Whom dost thou seek? She, thinking that 
it was the gardener, saith to him, Sir, if thou didst carry him 
off, tell me where thou laidest him, and I will take him away. 
Jesus saith to her, Mary. She, turning, saith to him in Hebrew,* 
Rabboni, which meaneth [or, is to say] Teacher” (vers. 11-16). 

The sorrow of love for Jesus, that which mourns His 
absence, or which feels wrong done to Him in any way, is 
far different from the sorrow of the world that worketh death. 

* The Text. Rec. omits ‘HGpaiorl with twelve uncials, most cursive MSS., and 
a few versions. But the Sinaitic, the Vatican, Beza’s of Cambridge, the 
Parisian 62, the Moscow of cent. ix., the Munich or Landshut of a later date, 


those of St. Gall and of St. Petersburg, both of the ninth century, with some 
excellent cursives, and most of the ancient versions, give the reading. 


a 


CHAPTER XX. 419 


It soon passes into life and peace through the grace of Jesus. 
Mary’s sorrow was not fruitless, nor was it long. Other 
servants of the Lord, and the Lord himself Whom she saw 
not, looked upon her. While she wept outside, she stooped 
into the tomb and beheld two angels in white. But He was 
not there; they were sitting one at the head and one at the 
feet where the body of Jesus had lain. Yet we hear of no alarm, 
no amazement on her part: so absorbed was her heart with 
that one Person, to all appearance lost to her, even His body 
gone so that she could not weep over it. Nor does she speak 
to them, but they say to her, Woman, why weepest thou ? 
They were in the secret. She had not read as yet aright the 
signs of the grave. Her sorrowing heart would ere long 
receive better and clearer tidings still. Meanwhile she ex- 
plains to them why she wept: “Because they took away 
my Lord, and I know not where they laid him.” She wholly 
overlooks the strangeness of the angelic apparition within the 
tomb, and takes for granted that everyone must know Who He 
was Whose body was gone. But not even yet has the thought 
of His resurrection crossed her mind. The Lord was her 
Lord; she loved Him exceedingly, but to her apprehension 
men had taken Him and laid Him where she knew not. A 
soul may love the Lord, yet be dark indeed as to His risen 
glory, as we cannot fail to read here. 

Grace would now intervene. “On saying this she turned 
round and beholdeth Jesus standing, and knew not that it was 
Jesus.” How often the like may be for our dull hearts! But 
He never acts beneath His name, and speaks that we may 
know Him. “Jesus saith to her, Woman, why weepest thou ? 
Whom dost thou seek?” This last was a leading question. 
Till He is known however, there is still darkness, though there 
may be love. “She, thinking that he was the gardener, saith 
to him, Sir, if thou didst carry him off, tell me where thou 
laidest him, and I will take him away.” One word dispels all 
the difficulty and doubt, the expression, not of our love to Him, 
but of His love to us. “Jesus saith to her, Mary.” The work 
was done, the great discovery made. He had died, He was 
now risen, and He appeared first to Mary of Magdala. She 


420 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


that had sown in tears reaps now in joy. The Lord appreciated 
her abiding at the tomb in sorrow, even though but an empty 
tomb. Her heart was now filled with joy; and, as we shall see, _ 
the joy would run over to gladden other hearts, the hearts of 
all that believed. 

It was the good Shepherd calling His own sheep by name. 
She was the same to Him as ever; He stood in resurrection 
power; but His love was the same to her, certainly no less 
than when He cast seven demons out of her. Doubtless there 
was a sameness in the expression of her name which went 
straight home to her heart and recalled her from her dream 
about His Person, once dead but now in truth alive again for 
evermore. Soon she would learn that, as He lived, so did she 
also, alive to God in Jesus Christ her Lord. But for the 
moment to know Himself alive, Himself uttering her name 
with unutterable love, was the fruit of divine grace that touched 
and best satisfied her heart. 

Mary had known Christ according to the flesh, and evidently 
thought that she was thus to know Him still. But it is not so. 
Henceforth we know none after this sort. Christ was dead and 
risen and about to take His place in heaven according to the 
counsels of God. The Christian is called to know Him as Man 
in heaven, always the Son but now Man glorified on high. 
Hence the force of that which follows. Mary must learn to 
regard the Lord in an entirely new light, not in bodily presence 
here below, but for an object of faith as received up in glory. 
She is thus delivered from all her former associations, and is 
the given ensample of the Jewish remnant henceforward to 
become christian. 

“Jesus saith to her, Touch me not, for I have not yet 
ascended unto the [or, my] Father ; but go unto my brethren 
and say to them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and 
my God and your God. Mary of Magdala cometh bringing 
word* to the disciples, I have seen} the Lord, and that he said 
these things to her” (vers, 17, 18). 


* Text. Rec, adds uov with most uncials, cursives and versions, but not § B D 
and some few other authorities. 

+ The oldest manuscripts give the uncompounded form of the participle, and 
also the direct style, ‘‘I have seen,” &c,, not as in Text. Rec, 


Sas 


CHAPTER XX. 421 


It is the more striking if we compare Matthew xxviii. 9 
with the Lord’s prohibition of Mary in our Gospel. Both 
incidents happened very nearly about the same time. Yet 
the Lord permitted the other women to come and hold Him 
by the feet, and pay Him homage, whereas only a very little 
while before He forbade Mary of Magdala to touch Him. We 
know that He was divinely perfect on both occasions, as indeed 
always, that though man and the Son of man it was not His 
to repent, for He is the truth. But we may be permitted, and 
I think ought, to inquire why ways so different and so rapidly 
following one another could be each absolutely right in its own 
place. The difference of design in the two Gospels helps much 
to clear the matter. 

In Matthew the risen Lord resumes His relations with the 
Jewish remnant, and gives these women, as a sample of that 
remnant, to enjoy His presence on earth. For this reason 
too there is not only no ascension scene in the end of 
Matthew, but no allusion to the fact there; indeed it would 
mar the perfection of the picture, which shows us the Lord 
present with His own until the consummation of the age. In 
John, on the other hand, Jewish feeling is immediately cor- 
rected; new relations are announced, and ascension to the 
Father takes the place of all expectations for the nations on 
the earth with the Jews as the Lord’s centre and witnesses. 
“Touch me not,” says Jesus to Mary, “for I have not yet 
ascended unto the Father.” Henceforth the Lord is to be known 
characteristically by the Christian as in heaven. The Jew had 
looked for Him on earth, and rightly so; as by-and-by the 
Jew will have Him reigning over the earth, when He comes 
again in power and great glory. Between the broken and 
restored hopes of Israel, we find our place as Christians. 
We are baptised unto His death, and we show forth His 
death until He come, remembering Him in the breaking of 
the bread; but we know Him above, no longer dead but risen 
and glorified. 

Yea, though we had known Christ according to flesh, yet 
now we know Him thus no more. Indeed without boasting, 
in sober truth but all-surpassing grace, we can say, and as 


422 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


believers are bound to say, that we are in Him. “In that day 
ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in 
you.” “That day” of the N.T.is this day, being already come, 
the day of grace to the world in the gospel; the day of grace 
to the saints in their union with Christ. “So if any one be in 
Christ, it is a new creation; the old things have passed away, 
behold, all things are become new; and all things are of the 
God who reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ.” Such is 
Christianity ; and this undeveloped was implied in our Lord’s 
dealing and words with Mary of Magdala. “Touch me not” 
was a saying of eminent significance, and still more when 
interpreted by the words that accompany it. It is not as in 
Colossians ii. 21 ja) dy (a single transient action), but uy mov 
darov, Do not go on touching me; it is a general and contin- 
uous prohibition, and this to represent the remnant taken out of 
their associations as Jews and put into new relations, not only 
with Christ in heaven, but through Him with His Father and 
God; as contradistinguished from those who represent the 
remnant allowed to lay hold of Him as a sign of His return 
in bodily presence for the kingdom. 

But there is more. ‘Go unto my brethren.” He is not 
ashamed to call the disciples His brethren. He had prepared 
the way for this; He had said on Israel’s rebellious rejection 
of their Messiah, “Whosoever shall do the will of my Father 
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and 
mother.” Now on the accomplishment of His atoning work 
He acknowledges definitely this blessed fruit of it, not only 
sins forgiven to faith by virtue of His shed blood, but believers 
in the most intimate way related to Himself, the risen Man 
and Son of God. They are His brethren; to whom according 
to Psalm xxii, 22 He proceeds to make known the name, not 
merely of Jehovah, but of the Father. For now they were not 
quickened only, but quickened with Christ. They stood in 
Him risen from the dead, forgiven all trespasses. And they 
learn that thus related to Christ in His new place as in the 
condition of Man according to divine counsels for eternity, all 
question of sin being closed triumphantly on the cross, not for 
Him Who had no need, but for the believer who had all 


a 


CHAPTER XX. 423 


possible need in guilt and an evil nature and an accusing 
enemy and a holy righteous Judge, they enter into His own 
blessed and everlasting relationship with His Father and God. 
“And say to them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, 
my God and your God.” 

It was a moment of unequalled depth: the Son risen again 
after having borne the judgment of our sins in His own body 
on the tree and glorified God in respect, not of obedience in life 
only but up to death for sin, on the resurrection morning send- 
ing, through one from whom He had formerly expelled seven 
demons to His disciples (desponding through unbelief), a message 
of the new and incomparable blessedness He had acquired for 
them by His death and resurrection. Doubtless He is the risen 
Messiah of the seed of David, and the mercies of David are 
made sure by His resurrection, as will be proved in the king- 
dom restored to Israel in due time. But this must be postponed 
in God’s wisdom and yield to the far deeper purpose meanwhile 
coming into evidence, the calling out of God’s children, heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Christ, into the knowledge and enjoy- 
ment and testimony of Himself and His Son by the Holy 
Ghost, which is usually styled Christianity. It could not be 
before, nor only because He had relations after flesh and by 
promise with Israel, until they had thoroughly despised and 
rejected deliberately through unbelief but guiltily and in- 
excusably, their infinitely blessed King; but because solely on 
the ground of redemption by His death could God be free to 
form and gather into one those children of His freed from their 
sins and quickened together with Him, whether Jew or Gentile. 
Now having died He could bear much fruit; and here He 
announces the fact as worthy of Himself as of the God Who 
sent Him in love beyond all thought of man. “I ascend unto 
my Father and your Father, my God and your God.” 

How poor and pale are the dreams of men even in their 
highest aspirations, compared with the simple truth spoken 
by the Lord and sent to His own! Yet nothing less could 
satisfy His love, which must demonstrate its power, first by 
going down with our sins to suffer for them from God, and next 
by ascending into glory and giving us as far as possible His own 


_ 424 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


position as sons and saints, with all evil and guilt for ever gone 
before God, purged worshippers having no more conscience of 
sins. This was not merely a hope to be made good when He 
comes again to receive us to Himself, but the truth of a really 
existing relationship announced now on the resurrection day, 
sent to His disciples that they might know and enjoy it to the 
full, as pledged in His own ascension to the presence of the 
Father in heaven. It is for all saints till He come again: would 
that all knew it as their only true place in Him! Still grace 
has given the truth fresh power in our day, though by mes- 
sengers who have no more reason to boast than Mary of 
Magdala that came then with the tidings to the disciples 
(ver. 18), I have seen the Lord; or as it is more commonly 
read, that she had seen the Lord and He had spoken these 
things to her. But we may and ought to glory in our risen 
Lord, and of such a place for the believer in Him. “Of such 
a one will I glory,” said a greater than any of us; “yet of 
myself I will not glory, but in mine infirmities.” Of a man in 
Christ it is well to glory: only we cannot expect those to do so 
who do not even conceive what it means, and who are so 
depraved by a jargon of Jewish and Gentile notions, commonly 
called systematic divinity, that they are slow indeed to learn. 
If we know the truth, may we have grace not only to walk in 
it, but to wait on such as know it not, if peradventure grace 
and truth may at length win their way and the saints learn 
their true blessedness in Christ. 

The Lord’s message was not in vain. The disciples gathered 
on that resurrection-day with the world shut out; and Jesus 
stood in the midst. It is the beautiful anticipative picture of 
the assembly, as may be seen more fully when details are 
entered into. 

“When it was evening then, on that day which was the first 
of the week, and the doors were shut where the disciples were 
by reason of the fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the 
midst, and saith to them, Peace to you. And having said this 
he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples then 
rejoiced when they saw the Lord. He [or, Jesus]* said therefore 


* Text. Rec. and Lachmann follow A B and eleven other uncials, most 
cursives, &c,, in reading 6 ’I,, but “ D LC X and most ancient versions omit. 


oe eC 


CHAPTER XX. 425 


to them again, Peace to you: according as the Father hath sent 
me forth, I also send you. And having said this he breathed 
into and saith to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whose 
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever 
ye retain, they are retained” (vers. 19-23). 

How many things of spiritual weight were here brought into 
the smallest compass and conveyed in the simplest form! That 
day which in due time was to receive its appropriate designa- 
tion of “the Lord’s day” (Rev. i. 10), as characteristic of the 
Christian as the sabbath of the Jew, was marked off, not only 
by the gathering together of the saints, but by the presence of 
the Lord in their midst. So it was at the beginning of the 
following week (ver. 26); and so afterwards does the Holy 
Spirit distinguish it as the day when the breaking of the bread 
is observed (Acts xx. 7), and the wants of the holy poor rise up 
in remembrance before Him and them (1 Cor. xvi. 2). It was 
indeed divine guidance, though it did not take the shape of 
a command; but none the less precious or obligatory on all 
who value His special presence in communion with His own 
and the showing forth of His death till He come. It was the 
day, not of creation rest nor of law imposed, but of resurrec- 
tion and of the grace which associated the believer with its rich 
and enduring results; on which all thus blessed come together 
to enjoy in common that death of the Lord which is the 
righteous ground of these privileges and of all others. 

On that day the Lord gave the assembled disciples a signal 
witness of the power of life in resurrection; for where they 
were, the doors having been shut for fear of the Jews, Jesus 
came and stood in the midst. Weakness attaches to the natural 
body, which, unless a miracle be wrought, is stopped by a wall 
or a closed door or a chain or a thousand other checks. Not so 
the body which is raised in power, as the Lord here silently 
shows them. It appears to be the object of the statement 
here, and again lower down, to intimate that the risen body 
can thus enter, not by miracle (however wonderful it may seem 
to us, who view and measure things by the actual condition of 
this life) but normally as in the power of resurrection, wherein 
all indeed is supernatural. There is no ground here to suppose, 


~ 496 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


but rather the contrary, that the doors were caused to open of 
themselves. So it was (Acts v.19), when the angel led the 
apostles Peter and John out of prison; so again, when Peter 
was a second time set free (Acts xii. 10), and the iron gate 
opened of itself, not to let in the angel who needed it not, but 
to let Peter out. It is no question of omnipotence but of the 
risen body, which has no more need of an open door than an 
angel. The ancients seem to have had far simpler faith as to 
this than most moderns who betray the growing materialism *- 
of the day. To talk of philosophical difficulties is puerile 
pretension: what does philosophy know of the resurrection ? 
It is a question of God and His Son, not of mere causes and 
effects, still less of experience. The Christian believes the 
word and knows what God reveals. Let philosophy confess, 
not boast of, its nescience: if dumb before creation, resurrec- 
tion is to it still more confounding. 

Jesus then and thus came and stood in the midst, saying to 
the disciples, Peace to you. This He had left as His legacy 
before the cross ; now alive again from the dead He announces 
it to His own: how sweet the sound in a world at war with 
God! Doubly so, where earnest souls have striven ineffectually 
to make it for themselves with God, whatever their sighs and 
tears and groans, whatever their prayers, yearnings, and agony, 
whatever their efforts to eschew the evil and cleave to the 
good. For such best know that conscience and heart can find 
no solid peace in self-judgment or in self-denial, in contem- 
plation of God or in labours for him; on the contrary, the 
more sincere, the less have they peace. They are on a wholly 
wrong road. Peace for a sinful man can only be made by the 
blood of Christ’s cross, which faith receives on His word, And so 
the Lord spoke it to the disciples that day, the mighty work 
on which it is grounded being finished and accepted of God, as 
His resurrection declares. “And having said this he showed 
them his hands and his side. The disciples then rejoiced when 
they saw the Lord.” 


* Even Calvin was led into misunderstanding of this scripture, through his 
dread of Popery and its effort to prove the dogma of a real presence everywhere 
in the Mass. His faith in, or at least intelligence of, the resurrection was small. 


ae a \ 


CHAPTER XX. 427 


Some have conceived that the second “Peace to you” was 
a sort of farewell or valete, as the first a salvete.* As the 
former was far otherwise, even the deep blessing which 
characterises those who are justified by faith, and ever re- 
curring in one form or another throughout the New Testament, 
so the second is in connection with the mission the Lord 
proceeds to confer on the disciples. They first received peace 
for themselves; they are next charged to go forth with the 
gospel of peace to others. “According as the Father hath sent 
(améor.) me forth, I also send (7.) you.” These are Christ’s true 
legates d latere: others are but thieves and robbers whom 
the sheep do well not to hear. Strangers to peace themselves, 
as their own tongue cannot but confess, how can they tell 
others of a peace which poor sinners might trust with 
assurance ? 

But the Lord next proceeds to another highly significant 
token of new and lasting privilege. “And having said this, he 
breathed into and saith to them, Receive the Holy Spirit +: whose 
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever 
ye retain, they are retained.” It was He Who before He took 
flesh had breathed into Adam’s nostrils the breath of life; and 
now He breathed into the disciples the breath of a better and 
everlasting life, His own life, as being both now (that is, 
Jehovah-God and the risen second Man) in one Person. Never 
had He so done before. The right moment was come. He 
had been delivered for their offences and was raised for their 
justification. The risen life is deliverance from the law of sin 
and death, as well as the bright witness of a complete remission 
of sins; and this not as an abstract truth for all believers, but 
intended to be known and enjoyed by each. “There is there- 
fore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. 
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath delivered 
me from the law of sin and death.” In Romans vii. before, 
from verse 7, we read how tried and sifted and wretched the 

* It will hardly be credited that Calvin saw no more than a desire for pros- 
perity in these words of our risen Lord. 

+ That character of the Holy Spirit’s action, which consists of life in resurrec- 


tion ; and hence expressed without the article. It was not yet the Holy Spirit 
given personally, the baptism of the Spirit, as at Pentecost. 


wv 


ord 


428 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


“I” was, till it dropped self to find grace in Christ, not only 
for the past but for the present and of course for ever. 

What can be more intensely personal than this deliver-_ 
ance from misery? and what more evident also that it was 
not only a new and divine life, but this after judgment of sin 
and the curse of the law had fallen on Christ, and He risen 
victoriously dispensing a life beyond sin, law, or judgment, and 
this as having borne all and borne all away for the believer 
righteously? Of this His in-breathing was the sign; and He 
says, “ Receive the Holy Spirit”: not yet the Spirit sent down 
from the ascended Lord and Christ to baptise into one body 
and to give power and testimony, but the energy of His own 
risen life. For the Spirit ever in the closest way takes His 
part in every blessing; and as for the kingdom of God every 
one is born of water and Spirit, and none else can see or enter 
that kingdom, so here with life in resurrection to deal with 
souls that heard and believed the gospel. 

For this is not all. The disciples thus delivered are invested 
with a blessed privilege and a solemn responsibility as regards 
others. Those without are now viewed as sinners, the old 
distinction of Jews and Gentiles for the time disappearing 
in the true light. But if it be the judgment of the world, it is 
the day of grace; and the disciples have the administration, 
the Spirit of life in Christ giving them capacity. Hence the 
word of the Lord is, “Whose soever sins ye remit, they are 
remitted; whose soever ye retain, they are retained.” So 
repentant souls were baptised for the remission of sins, whilst 
a Simon Magus was pronounced in the gall of bitterness and 
bond of iniquity. So the wicked person was put away from 
among the saints, and the same man after the judgment of his 
evil and his own deep grief over his sin was to be assured 
of love by the assembly’s receiving him back, obedient yet 
taking the initiative in the act that it might be conscience 
work and not of bare authority or influence. It was the 
assembly’s doing. “To whom ye forgive anything, I also; for 
also what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, [it is] 
for your sakes in Christ’s person.” Paul would have nothing 
forced, but fellowship unbroken in discipline: not he dictating 


a aes 


CHAPTER XX. 429 


and they blindly or in dread following, as in the church-world ; 
but they following Christ’s authority and he also in a com- 
munion truly of the Spirit. 

On the resurrection-day the apostles were not all present. 
“But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with 
them when Jesus came. The other disciples said therefore to 
him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Except I 
see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger 
into the print of the nails, and put my hand intc his side, I 
will in nowise believe” (vers. 24, 25). 

His state of soul coincided with his absence on that day. 
He resisted the blessed news of the resurrection, and did not 
join the gathering of the disciples to share the joy of the 
Master’s presence in their midst. Slow of heart to believe, 


he missed the early taste of the blessing, and abode in the 


darkness of his own unbelief, whilst the rest were filled with 
gladness. He becomes therefore no unmeet type of the Jew, 
not of the ungodly mass who receive another coming in his 
own name, but of the poor sorrow-stricken remnant who 
cleave to the hope of the Messiah in the latter day, and will 
enter into rest and joy only when they see Him appearing for 
their deliverance. 

“And after eight days again his disciples were within, and 


Thomas with them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and 


stood in the midst, and said, Peace to you. Then he saith to 
Thomas, Reach hither thy finger; and see my hands, and reach 
thy hand, and put [it] into my side, and be not unbelieving but 
believing. Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and 
my God. Jesus saith to him, Because thou hast seen me, thou 
hast believed; blessed are those that saw not and believed” 
(vers. 26-29). 

It is a blessed picture of the fruit of Christ’s resurrection in 
the latter day: not the church but “the great congregation,” 
brought in infinite grace to know and praise the Lord, when 
He is no longer hidden but visibly reigning. Those before will 
have had the good portion, which shall not be taken from them 
—they saw not yet believed. Israel will see and believe: blest 
indeed, but not after the same high measure of blessing. There 


430 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


will be no such revelation of the Father to them, no such 
association with the Son, no conscious link by His ascension 
with the heavens. The rejected One will have returned to 
reign in power and glory; and the heart of Israel, long 
withered and dark, is to be lighted up at length with the 
brightness of their hope accomplished in the presence of the 
Lord to make good every promise, when they on their part 
boast no more of their own righteousness, but take their stand 
on the mercy that endureth for ever. They recognise the Judge 
of Israel that was smitten with a rod upon the cheek, and 
themselves given up by Him, until the birth of God’s great 
final purpose in their favour, when He shall be great to the 
ends of the earth, and they as a dew of blessing from Jehovah 
in the midst of the nations, and all their enemies shall be cut 
off. “They shall look upon Me Whom they pierced, and they 
shall mourn for Him,” in bitterness of self-reproach, but with 
a spirit of grace and supplication poured upon them. For truly 
He was wounded in the house of His friends, but wounded (as 
they learn afterwards) for their transgressions, bruised for their . 
iniquities, stricken for the transgression of Jehovah’s people. 
(See Micah v., Zech. xii., and Isaiah liii.) 

Hence we hear nothing now of not touching the Lord because 
of His ascension to His Father, nor of going to His brethren, 
and saying to them, “I ascend unto my Father and your Father, 
and my God and your God.” On the contrary, grace will con- 
descend to those who demanded signs and tokens ere they would 
believe ; and they will stand overwhelmed and abashed at the 
fulness of visible proof when Messiah returns here below. 
There is peace to them; “for this man shall be the peace” 
in that day also, whatever the pride and power of the foe. 
But there will not be the same mission of peace in the power 
of His risen life; all their iniquities forgiven, all their diseases 
healed, but not the place of the church to forgive or retain sins 
in the name of the Lord. 

Accordingly there is the characteristic exclamation and con- 
fession withal of Thomas, “My Lord and my God.”* So will 


* That Gilbert Wakefield should deny the confession and merge all in a mere 
exclamation, or rather in two, “O! my Lord! and O! my God!” was to have been 


Ye 


CHAPTER XX, 431 


Israel say in the kingdom. “And it shall be said in that day, 
Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save 
us: this is Jehovah; we have waited for him, we will be glad, 
and rejoice in his salvation.” It is the truth, and true blessing 
for Israel to possess and blessedly acknowledge, especially for 
those who had so long despised Him to their own shame and 
ruin; but it has not the intimacy of that fellowship into which 
the Christian is now called. “For truly our fellowship is with 
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.” “We walk by 
faith, not by sight”; and having not seen Christ, we love Him; 
“on whom though now we see him not yet believing, we rejoice 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” 

Here the evangelist, as on occasion is his manner, interrupts 
for a moment the thread of the divine tale to say a few words 
on the gracious way of the Saviour in the affluence of signs or 
significant miracles which studded His ministry here below, as 
well as on the purpose of blessing the Holy Ghost had in view, 


in selecting from that countless crowd such as were most suit- 


able for permanent testimony to God’s grace. Two objects are 
set out: first, and pre-eminently, the glory of the Lord’s 
Person, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; secondly, 
that the believer may have life in His name. 

“Many other* signs therefore did Jesus in the presence of 
the} disciples, which aré not written in this book; but these 
are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the 
Son of God; and that believing ye may have life in his name” 
(vers. 30, 31). 


expected from his heterodoxy. But such a notion is as inconsistent with the 
context as it is irreverent, and of course misses all the force of the truth. For 
it will be observed that the Gospel says, not merely that Thomas said these 
words, but that they were said to his Master. It is true that, if a mere assertion, 
the article would be absent, as being simply predicative. The emphatic form of 
the sentence is due to its combining exclamation in the vocative according to the 
New Testament usage with confession, and this said to the Lord Jesus ; which 
also accounts for the twofold occurrence of the personal pronoun, the first of 
which assuredly could not have been used had it been an address to Jehovah as 
such. 

* It may be that the Authorised Version has led some into, or confirmed in, 
the mistake of a possible conclusion here. ‘‘And many,” &c., is not a quite 
correct rendering. It is literally the familiar ‘‘ Many and other signs,” that is, 


‘Many other signs,” &c. 
+ avrod, ‘‘his,” is added by many copies, but not the oldest or best. 


432 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


No doubt this was a fitting moment here to pause and thus 
to speak. The unbelief of a believer, yea of an apostle, 
furnished the material, where the Lord had stooped to meet 
and receive His erring servant by the visible tokens and the 
tangible proofs he had insisted on in his folly, and to his hurt 
irreparable, if grace had not intervened as we have seen. It 
was a priceless favour to have seen the things the disciples saw. 
It is better still to believe without seeing. And grace would 
provide for those who in the nature of things could not see 
that they might hear and live. Hence the writing of this 
precious book. It was to be in witness of Jesus; it was to be 
known and read of all men. Not that scripture ever exhausts 
its wondrous theme, whatever it may be; and here above all it 
is as infinite in the Person described, as the blessing is eternal 
for those who believe. God graciously selects some signs out 
of many, in the considerate goodness which knows precisely 
what we can bear. For if scripture be His word, it is given to 
man, even to us who believe, to the end of our enjoying that 
blessing in His Son, indeed the deepest which He could bestow, 
the communication of that nature which, as it comes from God, 
ever goes to Him, yea yields fellowship with the Father and 
with His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, 

But as the supreme and crucial test now is the Person of 
Jesus Christ come in flesh (1 John iv. 2, 3), so connected with 
it is the divinely given and guarded testimony to God’s grace 
and Christ’s glory, by which the family of God, weak as they 
are, overcome the adverse might of the world and its prince; 
because greater is He that is in them than he that is in the 
world. And those who are of God turn a deaf ear to such as 
are of the world and speak as of the world whom the world 
hears; but have they none especially to hear? Thanks be to 
God, they know God and hear those who are of God, His 
chosen witnesses, whom the Holy Ghost was to lead and did 
lead into all the truth, and who in due time wrote “ this book,” 
as did others no less inspired for the work than John. On the 
other hand those who are not of God do not hear the apostles, 
preferring the thoughts of themselves or of other men to their 
irremediable ruin. “ By this we know the Spirit of truth and 
the spirit of error.” 


“~~ yas 


CHAPTER XX. . 433 


After this brief but worthy and gracious interruption the 
evangelist turns to “the third” (xxi. 14) of the great mani- 
festations of the risen Jesus which it was his task to’ describe, 
before he closes with the respective and peculiar places the 
Lord would give Peter and John in their service here below. 
How any men of intelligence could say that our two verses 
which conclude chapter xx. are a formal close of the Gospel 
might have been viewed as inconceivable, if it was not positive 
fact. Grotius seems to have been the first man of mark who 
gave expression and currency to a supposition irreconcilable 
with the plain connection of the two first days of the week in 
chapter xx., and with the scene which follows in chapter xxi.: 
irreconcilable just in proportion to one’s real understanding 
of the Gospel as a whole. Modern Germany took up this 
and other injurious notions of that learned Dutchman, not 
only Ewald, Liicke, and Tholuck, but even Meyer, Neander, 
and Stier. It is painful to add that Alford, Scrivener, West- 
cott, &c., have yielded to the uncalled-for theory that John xx. 
originally ended the Gospel, and that chapter xxi. is a later 
appendix from the apostle’s own hand, though many go farther 
and deny it to him altogether. 

When we enter on the details of the concluding chapter, we 
may be enabled to show yet more how unfounded is this thought. 
Meanwhile it suffices here to point out briefly the mistake of 
regarding as a true end the two verses which have been now 
occupying us. In fact, they are an instructive comment by 
the way, not without a glance at the signs wrought by the 
Lord all through, but with special declaration of God’s aim for 
the glory of Christ and the blessing of the faithful, suggested 
by the case of Thomas, yet delicately avoiding any needlessly 
direct allusion to one so honoured of the Lord. It would 
indeed be as true to say that the evangelist began more than 
once in chapter i. as to admit more than one ending in chapters 
xx., xxi. In fact, if men are to reason thus from superficial 
appearances, it would be more plausible to infer at least two if 
not three supplements to the Epistle to the Romans. Nor is 
authority wanting which transports the doxology from the end 
of chapter xvi. to that of chapter xiv. Yet it is to be doubted 

25 


434 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


if the hypothesis there be so unnatural as it would be here to 
sever the third manifestation of the Lord in resurrection from 
the two which preceded it, or even to admit the former as a 
later addition, since it is necessary to the completeness of the 
picture. It is the true complement. In no way is it, as men 
have thought, a mere supplement, since it forms an essential 
part of one organic whole; just as chap. il. 1-22 pertains as a 
sequel to chap. i. and never could be justly dislocated from it, 
as an afterthought supplied at a later date even by the same 
hand. 

“Mr. J. B. McClellan, in his “New Testament” (I. 744-747), 
is an honourable exception to the fashion of the day, which 
subordinates sound criticism to subjective ideas. On the one 
hand, the external authority is full and unimpeachable; on the 
other, the peculiarity of the Evangelist’s manner has not been 
fairly taken into account by any who have indulged in the 
hypothetical Appendix. John was led of the Spirit. to inter- 
vyene from time to time with the expression of his heart at 
what affected his divine Master for good or ill, or at the 
testimony rendered in His words, in His ways, and in the signs 
that accompanied all as here. More than this is a spurious 
inference, which severs chap, xxi. from its due place. How 
disereditable to the self-vaunting “modern critics” that they 
allow their own thoughts to run away with them in the face of 
overwhelming authority and consentient witnesses! Nor is 
this all. For the true internal evidence is conclusive for the 
continuity of the text as it stands, as it demands the chapter 
which follows to complete the scope of this Gospel in general, 
and especially the bearing of what was begun in the latter 
part of chap, xx. : 


CHAPTER XXI. 


It is impossible fairly to sever the manifestation of Jesus at 
the lake of Tiberias from the two previous scenes of which 
it is the complement; as indeed verse 14 warrants us to say 
with decision. It is therefore quite improper to speak of 
the chapter as an appendix, still more so to speculate on its 
being written at an interval of some length after the rest 
of the Gospel: an inference due chiefly if not altogether to 
a misunderstanding of the two closing verses of chapter xx., 
as has been already pointed out. 

The reader will notice that the connection is immediate 
and marked with the two previous manifestations of the risen 
Lord. First, we have seen Him (after making Himself known 
to Mary of Magdala and sending by her a most characteristic 
message to His disciples) standing in their midst when 
gathered together, without seeing Him enter, on the first or 
resurrection day of the week, in their enjoyment of peace and 
the mission of peace in the power of the Spirit to remit and 
retain sins in His name. Secondly, we have seen Him eight 
days after meeting His disciples again when Thomas was there, 
representing saved Israel of the latter day who only believe by 
the sight of Him risen. Now we have the beautiful picture 
of the millennial ingathering from the sea of Gentiles, which 
follows the Jews returning as such to the Lord, as all prophecy 
leads us to expect. The third scene follows in due order the 
second, on which the future truth conveyed by it hangs as 
a consequence, as here said to be “after these things.” 

“ After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the 
disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and he manifested [himself] 
thus. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called 
Didymus [that is, Twin], and Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, 

435 


436 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


and the [sons] of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples. 
Simon Peter saith to them, I go away to fish. They say to 
him, We also come with thee. They went forth, and entered* 
into the boat, and that night took nothing. But when early 
morn was now breaking,t Jesus stood ont the shore: however 
the disciples did not know that it was [lit. is] Jesus. Jesus 
therefore saith to them, Children, have ye anything to eat? 
They answered him, No. And he said to them, Cast the net 
on the right side of the boat, and ye will find. They cast 
therefore, and were no longer able} to draw it from the 
multitude of the fishes” (vers. 1-6). 

Peter with his usual energy proposes to go a-fishing, and six 
others accompany him. But the result is no better than when 
some of the same disciples with the same Peter essayed to catch 
fish before his call and theirs. Even in the days of the kingdom 
the power must be manifestly of the Lord, not of man nor of 
the saints themselves; and Petér must and would learn the 
lesson, if the Roman Catholic sect falsely claiming Peter refuse 
it in pride. It is not yet the kingdom manifested in power 
and glory, but.in mystery for such as have ears to hear. And 
although grace work its wonders, the nets break, and the boats 
threaten to sink, even when their partners come to share in 
taking the great multitude of fiShes. 

Here Jesus is not aboard, and there is no putting out into 
the deep, but with the early morn just breaking He stood 
on the beach, and still unknown put a question which brought 
out their confessed lack of success. Then comes the word, 
Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and ye will find. 
And so it was; for so casting they were now unable to draw 
the net for the multitude of fishes. It is the figure of the 
great millennial haul from among the nations, when the 
salvation of all Israel will prove to be incomparably blessed 

* The Compl. rightly gives év-, Erasmus wrongly dv-, with Steph., Be., and 
Elz., though not without uncials (A A) and other support ; but the Compl. is as ~ 
wrong as the rest in adding ev#0s with many more MSS. 

+ yev. Text. Rec., early read in uncials, and most copies; yw. A BC pm & L, 


ten cursives, &c. The MSS. also differ as to ém? and eis. 


+ The more correct form tcxvoy is given by 8 B CD L ATI, more than ten 
cursives, many Latin copies, Syriac, &c. 


CHAPTER XXI. 437 


to the Gentiles. If their “fall” has been so fraught with 
good in divine grace, how much more their “fulness” (Rom. xi. 
12), of which these seven Israelites may be the pledge? The 
once rejected but now risen Christ is to be the head of the 
heathen, not only of the church now on high, but by-and-by 
of the nations on the earth, owned by previously unbelieving 
Israel to be their Lord and their God. Then will the Jew 
sing, God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall 
fear Him; and again, Princes shall come out of Egypt: 
Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God, Sing 
unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto 
Jehovah. In the figure of that day the nets do not break, 
nor is there any thought of putting the fishes into the boat, 
still less of gathering the good into vessels and casting the bad 
away. The weakness of man and of earthly circumstances 
wanes before the present power of the Lord Who directs all. 

Augustine may be safely regarded as the ablest and most 
enlightened of the early writers on this sign, which he 
compares with that which preceded the call of Simon Peter 
and the sons of Zebedee. He is right in distinguishing the 
take of fish which followed the resurrection from the miracu- 
lous draught before it. Nor does any other among the ancients 
add to the truth of his observations, Gregory the Great rather 
darkening the force of our scripture by his effort to make 
much of Peter’s part in order to help on the Papal pretensions 
then in course of rapid growth. The earlier miracle he regards 
as significant of the good and evil in the church as it is now; 
the later, of the good only which it is to have for ever when 
the resurrection of the just is accomplished in the end of this 
age (Serm. cexlviii.—cclii., &c.). 

Enough perhaps has been said already which anticipatively 
corrects so erroneous an interpretation of the sign before us. 
There is no thought of a fishing scene in the resurrection 
either of just or unjust, no truth in the employing of Jews 
or men for gathering in the risen righteous to their heavenly 
and eternal rest. The fathers saw nothing of the future 
restoring of the kingdom to Israel, nor of the general blessed- 
ness of all nations as such under the reign of the Lord in the 


438 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


age to come. The moderns are in general no less uninstructed ; 
for though some see and allow the restoration of Israel to their 
land and the accomplishment of the glory promised so largely 
throughout the Old Testament, they somehow with strange 
inconsistency merge all into this age. They do not perceive 
that these are among the constituents of the age to come, 
before the eternal state when there will be no difference 
between Jew and Gentile absolutely, as there is none even 
now for the Christian and the church. 

But here is another source of this deep, long-lasting, and 
widespread misconception. Men and even good men fail to 
see the true nature of the church, as they do not believe in 
the special features of the millennial age. How much error 
would be avoided if they discerned the peculiar character 
and unexampled privilege of the body of Christ in union with 
its heavenly head, since redemption, while He sits at God’s 
right hand! How much more, if they looked for His return 
with His bride, already complete and caught up to be with 
Him on high, to make His foes His footstool, and Judah His 
goodly horse in the battle which introduces Jehovah-Jesus 
King over all the earth—one Jehovah and His name one in 
that day. It is as egregious to confound with the church 
wherein is neither Jew nor Greek all this distinctive blessing 
of Israel and the nations on the earth under the reign of the 
Lord, as it is to merge both in the end of the age or in 
the eternity which, they assume, is to follow. They blot out 
the new age to come, which is to be characterised by the 
reign of the second Man, the Lord Jesus, the absence of Satan, 
the exaltation of the glorified saints in power on high, and the 
blessedness of all the families of the earth here below. 

But these all stand indelibly written in the scriptures; and 
no strugglings of unbelief can get rid of a truth which may be 
and is offensive to the pride of nature and the worldly mind, 
as it would prove full of help and value to Christian men often’ 
perplexed by their own misreading of revelation and their 
misconception consequently of what is to be sought or ex- 
pected at this present time. For there is no error which does 
not bear its own baneful fruits; and the error in question, 


CHAPTER XXI. 439. 


_ though not assailing fundamental truth, affects most extensively 
the right understanding of the past, the present, and the future, 
Thus are the chief characteristic differences blurred, and an 
undistinguishable vague is presented; whereas the word of 
God affords the fullest light on the various dispensations, as 
well as on that mystery in regard of Christ and of. the church 
which comes in between and is superior to either. 

The love which is of God makes the eye single, and thereby 
the whole body is full of light. John was quick to discern 
the Lord. “Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith to 
Peter, It is the Lord. Then Simon Peter, hearing that it was 
[lit..is] the Lord, girt his over-coat about [him] (for he was 
naked), and cast himself into the sea. But the other disciples 
came in the little boat (for they were not far from the land, but 
about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net of the fishes. 
So when they had got off to the land, they see a coal-fire laid, 
and fish laid thereon, and bread. Jesus saith to them, Bring 
of the fish which ye took just now. Simon Peter [therefore] * 
went up and drew the net to land? full of great fishes, 
a hundred [and] fifty-three: and, many as they were, the net 
was not rent. Jesus saith to them, Come, dine. And none 
of the disciples durst inquire of him, Who art thou? knowing 
that it was [lit. is] the Lord. Jesus { cometh and taketh the 
bread and giveth to them, and the fish likewise. This already 
[was the] third [time] Jesus was manifested to the disciples § 
after having risen from [the] dead” (vers. 7-14). 

But if John was the first to perceive who He was that spoke 
to them, Peter with characteristic promptness is the first to act 
so as to reach His presence, yet not naked but in seemly guise. 
He had failed miserably and profoundly and repeatedly, but 
not his faith; even as the Saviour had prayed for him that 77 
should not fail. Despair because of the gravest failure is no 
more of faith than the indifference which hears not the 
Saviour’s voice, and, never knowing His glory or His grace, 


*NBCLL II, &c., add ofv, contrary to most uncials and cursives. 

+ Most, with Text. Rec., read éml ris y., but the best els ri y., a few 
él THY Y. 

+ ody is added by most, but 8 BC DL X, &c., do not warrant it. 

§ Text. Rec., against N A BO L, &e., adds avrod “his.” 


440 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


never has the consciousness of its own guilt. In the Lord he 
thus learns experimentally to confide, after having too much | 
trusted his own love for his Master; and Christ must be all to — 
the heart of him who is to strengthen his brethren. 

The Lord, however, despises none, and the other disciples 

follow in the small boat, dragging the net full of the fishes; 
for He had not given such a haul to leave it behind. Grace 
makes to differ, never to behave oneself unseemly. Peter 
carried himself suitably toward the Lord; so did they in their 
place; for indeed they all had one heart and purpose to please 
the Lord. 
_ Thus will it be when the abundance of the sea shall be 
converted to Zion. What will not be the effect of all Israel 
being saved? If their fall is the riches of the world, and 
their loss the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their 
fulness? What shall the receiving of them be but life from 
the dead? Jehovah will destroy the veil that is spread over 
all nations; and Israel will not only be the instrument of 
divine vengeance on their enemies but of God’s mercy and 
blessing to all: the families of the earth. “And the remnant 
of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples as a dew from 
Jehovah, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not 
for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men. And the remnant 
of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many 
peoples as a lion among the beast of the forest, as a young 
lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both 
treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver” 
(Micah v. 7, 8). 

It is remarked and remarkable that, when the disciples 
landed, they see a fire laid and fish thereon and bread. The 
Lord had wrought before them and without them, though He 
would give them communion with the fruits of the activity of 
His grace. He will have got ready a Gentile remnant Himself 
before He employs His people to gather the great millennial 
catch out of the sea of Gentiles. The grace of God will 
work after a far more varied and vigorous sort than men 
think; and while He deigns to use His people, it is good for 
them at that very time to learn that He can and does work 


srr 


CHAPTER XXI. 441 


independently. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom 
and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His 
judgments and His ways past finding out! How verified both 
in Israel and in the Gentile! 

Yet the Lord would have His own enter into the fellowship 
of what He has wrought as well as enjoy their own work. 
“Jesus saith to them, Bring of the fish which ye just now 
took. Simon Peter therefore went up and drew the net to 
land, full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three; and, as 
many as there were, the net was not rent. Jesus saith to 
them, Come, dine.” 

The contrast with all that characterises the actual work of 
His servants is very plain. The parable in Matthew xiii. 
shows us that even up to the close of the age good and bad 
fish are contained in the net, and that it is the marked call of 
the fishermen just then to put the good into vessels as well as 
to cast the bad away; whilst the angels, as we know, do the 
converse work, when judgment comes at the Lord’s appearing, 
of severing the wicked from among the righteous. The 
miraculous draught in Luke v., descriptive of present service, 
shows us the nets breaking and the boats into which the fishes 
were put beginning to sink. Nothing of this appears here 
where the days of the kingdom are set forth, when the Lord 
is with His own on earth. There are many great fishes named 
but none bad; the net is expressly said to be unrent; there is 
no thought of the boat sinking, and the net was dragged along 
instead of the boat being filled. Thus a wholly different and 
future state of things is pictured, after this age closes and 
before eternity begins. 

The Lord will surely yet and thenceforward renew His 
associations with His people on earth: I speak not of the 
Father’s house on high and its heavenly relations, but of those 
to be blessed and a blessing on earth. It is an unquestionably 
scriptural prospect, and most cheering, that this very earth is 
to be delivered from its present corruption and thraldom into 
the liberty of the glory of the children of God. For the 
revelation of His sons the earnest expectation of the creation 
waits, though, as we know, the whole of it groans and travails 

25 2 


* 


442 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


in pain till now. But it will not be so always. The Lord 
Himself is coming, and the day of His appearing will see 
creation delivered, not of course as we who have the firstfruits 
of the Spirit are now into the liberty of grace by faith, but the 
creation itself also by power shall be freed into the liberty of 
glory. It will be the kingdom of God, no longer a secret to 
faith, but displayed in power and in all its extent of blessing, 
with its earthly things and its heavenly, as the Lord intimated 
to Nicodemus and as we are taught in Eph. i. and Col. i. in 
connection with the headship of Christ and His reconciliation. 

Here the Lord on that day was giving the pledge of.the 
future widespread blessing, when the Gentile world will afford 
common joy, and the occasion of the manifestation of His 
risen power and presence, to His people. None but He could ~ 
or would act after such a sort. His grace is unmistakable. 
“And none of the disciples durst inquire of him, Who art 
thou? knowing that it was the Lord. Jesus cometh and 
taketh the bread and giveth to them, and the fish likewise. 
This already [was the] third [time] Jesus was manifested to 
the disciples, after being-risen from the dead.” It is the day, 
prefigured in prophecy and awaited by the saints from of old, 
when they shall all know Him from the least of them to the 
greatest of them, none more needing to say, Know the Lord. 
“ At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah ; 
and all the nations shall be. gathered unto it, to the name of 
Jehovah, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after 
the imagination of their evil heart. In those days the house 
of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall 
come together out of the land of the north to the land that I 
have given for an inheritance unto your fathers” (Jer. iii. 
17, 18). 

There would be an utter gap for this world and God’s glory 
in it, a gap which nothing else could fill up for him who takes 
a large and observant view of God’s dealings with the world, if 
there were not a period of divine blessedness here below for 
Israel and the nations through the grace and to the praise of 
the risen Lord Jesus. This does not in the least interfere with 
the deeper and higher things above the world to which the 


CHAPTER XXI. ; 443 


Christian and the church are now called. On the contrary, 
when the reality and the true character of the kingdom at 
Christ’s appearing are not seen, there is a confusion of it with 
the proper hopes of the church, which is ruinous to the 
distinctive blessedness of the church on the one hand and of 
Israel with the Gentiles on the other. 
~But our Gospel, while fully revealing God in Christ on 
earth, and in these closing chapters tracing His ways in Christ 
risen, first for the Christian and the assembly, next for Israel, 
-and lastly for the Gentiles, never loses sight of grace working 
with the individual soul. Thus Peter must be thoroughly 
restored and publicly reinstated: so would the Lord have it. 
He had been already singled out specially (Mark xvi. 7) 
at a moment when such a distinction was of all moment, 
both to himself and before his brethren, who would naturally 
have regarded with deep distrust the man who had so grievously 
and spite of full warning denied his Master. And before the 
eleven had the Lord standing in their midst, He had appeared 
to Simon (Luke xxiv. 84; 1 Cor. xv. 5). But He would carry 
on the gracious work profoundly in Peter’s heart, and let us 
into the secrets of this truly divine discipline. 

“When therefore they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon 
Peter, Simon [son] of Jonah [or, John],* lovest thou me more 
than these? He saith to him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that 
I dearly love thee. He saith to him, Feed my lambs. He saith 
to him again a second time; Simon [son] of Jonah,* lovest thou 
me? He saith to him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I dearly 
love thee. He saith to him, Tend my sheep. He saith to him 
the third time, Simon [son] of Jonah,* dost thou dearly love 
me? Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, 
Dost thou dearly love me? and he said to him, Lord, thou 
knowest all things, thou knowest that I dearly love thee. 
Jesus saith to him, “Feed my sheep [or little sheep]” 
(vers. 15-17). 

The Lord goes to the root of the matter. He does not 
speak of Peter’s denying Him, but penetrates to its cause. 


* “John” is supported by a few of the oldest authorities, “Jonah” or Jonas 
too being perhaps only an abridged form of the name, Johanan or Jehohanan. 


444 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


Peter fell through confidence in himself, at least in his love to 
his Master. He judged that he might go where others could 
not safely, and that he would stand to the confession of His 
name in the face of prison and death. The result we all know 
too well. The greatest of the twelve denied the Lord re- 
peatedly and swore to it, notwithstanding fresh and solemn 
warning. But restoration is not complete though we own the 
fruit ever so fully. In order to thorough blessing the Lord 
would have us, like Peter here, to discern the hidden spring. 
This he had not reached yet: the Lord makes it known to His 
servant. There is no haste; He waits till they had broken 
their fast, and then He says to Simon Peter, “Simon, [son] 
of John, lovest thou (ayamras) me more than these?” He 
calls him by his natural name; for well He knew wherein lay 
the secret which gave a handle to the enemy; and He would 
awaken a true sense of it in the apostle’s soul. Through 
assurance of his own superior affection he had not merely 
trusted in himself, in comparison with others, but slighted 
the word of the Lord. Had he laid His words to heart with 
prayer, he had not fallen when tried, but endured the tempta- 
tion and suffered. But it was not so. He was sure that he 
loved the Lord more than all the rest; and if they could not 
stand such a sifting, he would; and this confidence in his own 
surpassing love to Christ was precisely the cause, as the 
interrogation of the bystanders was the occasion, of his fall. 
And now the Lord lays the root bare to Peter, who had already 
wept over the open fruit. 

Yet at first Peter does not discover the aim of the Lara 
He does avoid unwise comparison with others; he simply 
appeals to the Lord’s inward conscious knowledge: “Yea, 
Lord, thou knowest that I dearly love (g:A®) thee.” Far 
from denying his profession of tender affection, the Lord 
proves His own value for it, and His confidence in Peter. 
For He, the good Shepherd, about to quit the world, entrusts 
to His servant that which was unspeakably precious in His 
eyes and most of all needed His care: “Feed my lambs.” Thus 
does He prove our love by answering to His love for the weakest 
of saints. “ Whosoever loveth him that begat, loveth him 


CHAPTER XXI. 445 


also that is begotten of him.” We love because He first loved 
us; but it is not that we love Him only, but those that are 
His, not those that love us naturally, but those that He loves 
as divinely. “He that saith, 1 know him and keepeth not his 
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him”; and 
“Tf a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; 
for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen? And this command- 
ment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his 
brother also.” 

Did not Peter deeply and increasingly feel the Lord’s loving 
trust thus reposed in him, more than even before he fell? The 
administration of the kingdom of the heavens, the keys (not 
of the church nor of heaven, but) of the kingdom, had been 
promised to Peter, and made good in due time. Here it is 
more tender and intimate, though there is no ground to 
extend the flock here committed to him beyond those of the 
circumcision. (Cf. Gal. ii.) Did he not remember Isaiah xl. 11, 
in communion with the blessed Messiah in His work of feeding 
that flock like a shepherd, gathering the lambs with His arm 
and carrying them in His bosom, while gently leading the 
nursing ewes ? 

The Lord appeals once more, but drops all reference to 
others. “He saith to him again a second time, Simon [son] 
of John, lovest thou me? He saith to him, Yea, Lord; thou 
knowest that I dearly love thee. He saith to him, Feed my 
sheep.” It is painfully instructive that even such a ripe 
scholar as Grotius should commit himself to an opinion so 
unworthy as that these marked changes of expression represent 
no weighty distinctions of truth.* But Peter, though he no 
longer thinks disparagingly of others, cannot give up his 
assurance that the Lord was inwardly aware of his true 
affection for Himself. And the Lord now bids him tend or 
rule His sheep, as before feed His lambs. So Peter at a 
later day impresses the same on the elders among the Jewish 
Christians he was addressing, sojourners of the dispersion 


* “Promiscue hic usurpavit Iohannes dyardy et greiv, ut mox Bdcxew et 
mouatvew. Neque hic quaerendae subtilitates,” : 


-446 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


in Pontus and other districts of Asia Minor: “Tend the flock 
of God which is among you, overseeing not of constraint, 
but willingly; nor yet for filthy lucre, but readily; nor as 
lording it over your possessions, but making yourselves en- 
samples to the flock” (1 Pet. v. 2, 3). 

In the Lord’s words, as in the apostle’s, it will be noticed 
to our profit how carefully the lambs and the sheep are said - 
to be Christ’s, not the elders’ nor even the apostle’s. The 
flock is God’s flock. He who treats Christians as his congrega- 
tion is guilty of the same forgetfulness of divine grace and 
divine authority, as the congregation in regarding the minister 
as their minister, instead of Christ’s. If any think these to 
be slight distinctions, it is clear that they have no right 
apprehension of a difference which is as deep in truth as it 
is fraught with the most momentous consequences for good and — 
ill in practice. Only this gives moral elevation, as it alone 
springs from faith; this alone delivers from self and gives the 
true relation and character, even Christ, whether to those that 
minister, or to those ministered to. 

But the Lord speaks to him yet again. “He saith to him 
the third time, Simon [son] of John, dost thou dearly love 
me?” Here the probe reached the bottom. Not a word of 
blame or reproach; but the Lord for the third time questions 
him, and for the first time takes up his own word of special 
affection. Did not his threefold denial appear in the light 
of the threefold appeal, and, above all, of that word ex- 
pressive of endearing love? “Peter was grieved, because 
he said to him the third time, Dost thou dearly love me? 
and he said to him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou 
knowest that I dearly love thee. Jesus saith to him, Feed my 
sheep,” or, if the reading of the Alexandrian, the Vatican, and 
the Paris palimpsest, &c., be preferred, My “little sheep,” a 
diminutive of tenderness and endearment. 

The work of restoration was now fully done. Peter abandons 
every thought of self and can find refuge only in grace. Only 
He Who of Himself knows all without an effort, only He could 
give credit to Peter’s heart spite of his mouth and all appear- 
ances; yet did not He know that His poor denying servant 


CHAPTER XXI. 447. 


dearly loved Him? The answer of the Lord, committing 
afresh what was dearest to Him on earth, the gift of the 
Father’s love to Himself, seals Peter’s restoration, not in soul 
only but in his relation to the sheep of His pasture. Feed 
them, says the Lord. To tend or rule pastorally is not for- 
gotten; but positive nourishment, as of the lambs at the 
beginning, remains to the last, the abiding task of the 
shepherd, the habitual need of the sheep; but it demands 
enduring and deep love, not to scold perhaps, or govern, but 
to feed, and not least of all the least of all Christ’s sheep. 
Only the love of Christ can carry one through it. 

But this is not all. It is not enough for the Lord to restore 
fully the soul of Peter and to more than reinstate him in his 
relation to the sheep which might have seemed otherwise 
compromised, Grace would give him in God’s due time what. 
he had not only lost but turned to his own shame and his 
Master’s dishonour, the confession of His name even to prison 
and death. 

“Verily, verily, I say to thee, When thou wast young, thou 
girdedst thyself and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but 
when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, 
and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou 
wouldest not. And this he said, signifying by what death 
he should glorify God. And having said this, he saith to 
him, Follow me” (vers. 18, 19). 

In this, as in what precedes and in what follows, actions and 
words are veiled yet significant. There was the intention to 
convey important and interesting truth, but only to such as 
weighed all and went not beyond the just bearing of the Lord’s 
sayings or doings. Peter was then in his prime of natural 
vigour. In his youth (and he was still far from being an old 
man) he was ready for energetic action, and disposed to use 
his liberty with too little distrust of himself. He had just 
ventured to go whither he would, into the high priest’s house ; 
and as far as doughty words promised, one might have thought 
he had girded up his loins like a man to do great feats of valour, 
or to endure a great fight of afflictions for his betrayed and 
insulted Master. The issue we all know too well; and Peter 


448 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 
3 


had been led more and more to see and feel it, till he had now 
got down to the root and judged it thoroughly before God. 
But now also the Lord lets him know that grace would give 
him back what had seemed for ever lost to him, the fellowship 
of Christ’s sufferings and conformity to His death, far more in 
fact than Peter in his own too confident love and strength had 
proffered before he miserably broke down. 

See how grace shuts out all ground for boasting, while it 
secures honour beyond what we in our most sanguine desires 
ever anticipated. Is not this worthy of God and suited to 
His saints? When Peter went forward according to his own 
words, he came to worse than nothing; he a most favoured 
servant denying the Holy and Righteous One, his own most 
gracious Master. It was the deepest humiliation, yet was he 
a true saint and a loving disciple; but so it was because he — 
entered into temptation at his own charges, instead of en- 
during it, when tried by it, according to God. Thus his fall 
was inevitable; for none can endure save in faith and self- 
judgment. To be a believer and fervently to love the Lord 
will not preserve in the least under such circumstances, how- 
ever strange this may sound to many, who little think how 
often and deeply they deny the Lord practically, in great 
matters and small to which He attaches His name. We 
must be put to shame in whatever thing we are proud; 
and how much better is even this gain, than to be let go 
on in unrebuked self-complacency ? 

But the Lord promises Peter that, when he should be old, he 
should stretch forth his hands, and another gird and carry him 
whither he would not. Thus, when it was no longer possible 
to boast of his own strength or courage, as a helpless old man, 
Peter would enjoy from God the singular privilege, not only of 
death for Christ’s sake which in younger days he had essayed 
to face and most ignominiously failed in, but of that very death 
which the Lord had suffered with its prolonged agony and 
shame. For the Lord, as we are expressly told, said as He 
did, signifying not death so much as “by what” sort of death 
Peter was to glorify God; and after saying this, He saith to 
him, Follow Me. 


CHAPTER XXI. 449 


The allusion was scarcely mistakable. In those days when 
such a punishment was common enough for the lowest slaves 
and guiltiest criminals, everyone understood the meaning of 
being “lifted up,” or outstretching the arms by the force of 
another. Again, the illustrative act of calling Peter to follow 
Him as He walked some paces on the shore made plain its 
grave intent. Yet even then and thus, another carrying him 
whither he would not proves how little of self was to be in 
Peter’s death on the cross, in contrast with those who, at a later 
day and a day lower incomparably, sought a martyr’s death to 
win this crown. No! Peter’s close on earth was to be suffer- 
ing and death for Christ, Who would give him to endure at the 
fit moment. Not heroism nor asceticism is the Christian badge, 
but obedience. 

The lesson of its surpassing grace abides for us who love 
‘the same Saviour, and have a nature no better than the 
disciple’s. Have we been taught it? Can one learn it safely 
and surely, save as following Christ? “If any man serve 
me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my 
servant be; if any man serve me, him will my Father honour.” 
Peter when called should follow the Master; and so he did. 
May the same grace strengthen and guide us in the same 
path for life or death! To follow Christ as He calls is our 
best service. 

The ardent mind of Peter, kindled by the solemn intimation 
of the Lord, seizes the opportunity to inquire about one so 
closely linked with him as the beloved disciple. It is hard in 
this question to discern the jealousy of the active for the 
contemplative life, of which early and medieval writers say 
much. But the Lord gives him the correction he needed. 

“ Peter* turning round seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved 
following (who also at the supper leaned on his breast and said, 
Lord, who is he that delivereth thee up?); Peter therefore + 
seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what [of] this man? 
Jesus saith to him, If I will that he abide till I come, what 


* Text. Rec., which & D XT ATI? and others support, adds de, “‘ but,” not the 


other ancient manuscripts. 
+ The highest authorities add ofy, ‘‘ therefore,” but most oppose. 


; 450 AN EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


[is it] unto thee? follow thow me. This saying therefore 
went forth among the brethren that that disciple doth not 
die; yet Jesus said not to him, that he doth not die; but, 
If I will that he abide till I come, what [is it] to thee?” * 
(vers. 20-23). . 
It was really loving interest concerning one more closely 
associated with himself than his own brother Andrew by the 
bond of a common affection for Jesus and of Jesus. This 
made Peter curious to learn about John now that his own 
earthly destiny was just revealed. But the gracious Lord, if 
He reproved in His own gentleness the prying spirit of His 
servant, did furnish ample matter for thought in the riddle He 
sets before Peter. One can readily see how shallow is the 
notion of Augustine and many since his day, that the Lord 
meant no more than John’s living to a protracted and placid 
age, in contrast with Peter slain violently in old age, as with 
his own brother James in youth. Peter emphatically was to 
follow the Lord even in His death as far as this could be. 
Not so John, who was to abide hanging on the will of the 
Lord till He came. “If I will that he abide,” &e. 
- Needless to say that there is evident and intentional mystery 
in the manner it was spoken of; and some have supposed 
that the destruction of Jerusalem and the judgment of the 
Jewish polity are here alluded to; as there is certainly more 
in such a thought than a merely peaceful death in advanced 
age. For death is in no true sense the Lord’s coming, but rather 
the converse, our going to Him. We know at any rate that 
to John it was given to see the Son of man judging the 
churches, and to have visions not only of God’s providential 
dealings with the world whether Jews or Gentiles, but of the 
Lord’s return in judgment of the apostate powers of the earth 
and of the man of sin, in order to the establishment of the 
long predicted kingdom of God and the times of the resti- 
tution of all things, with the still higher glory in the New 
Jerusalem. 
Out of the Lord’s words, perverted as they speedily were, 
the synagogue seems to have had its fable of the wandering 


* Np™ is alone in omitting rl mpds ce; “‘ what is it to thee?” 


CHAPTER XXI, Bip He 451 

- 
Jew, and Christeridom its Prester John, to entertain “minds 
which had lost the truth either through rejecting C Christ or an 
turning to superstition. — 
_ But this we learn of great practical moment from verse 23, 
: how dangerous it is to trust tradition, even the earliest, and 
_ how blessed to have the unerring standard of God’s written 
word. The saying that went forth among the brethren in 
apostolic times seemed a most natural, if not necessary, 
inference from the words of our Lord. But we do not well 
to accept unreservedly an inferential statement, still less to 
_ be drawn into a system built on such deductions. We have 
_ the word of the Lord, and faith bows to it for its joy and rest 
_ to God’s glory. Error easily insinuates itself into the first 
remove from what He says, as the apostle instructs us here 
that the Lord did not affirm that that disciple was not to die, 
but “If J will that he abide till I come.” Yet those who let 
in this primitive mistake were not enemies, were not grievous 
wolves, or men speaking perverse things to draw away the 
disciples. after them. It was “among the brethren” that 
the tradition, unfounded and misleading, got spread. Miracles 
did not hinder, nor gifts, nor power, nor unity. The mistake 
arose from reasoning, instead of cleaving to the word of the 
Lord. The brethren, through lack of subjection to God and 
of distrust in themselves, gave the words a meaning, instead of 
simply receiving from them their true import. No wonder 
another great apostle commends us to God and to the word 
of His grace; for if we may fully profit by His word in simple 
dependence on Himself, we cannot duly honour Him if we 
slight His word. And though it is by the Holy Spirit that 
-we are thus kept and blest, even He is in no sort the standard 
of truth (while He is power in every way), but Christ as 
revealed in the written word. 

Last of all comes the personal seal or attestation of the 
writer. “This is the disciple that beareth witness of these 
things, and wrote these things: and we know that his witness 
is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus 
did, the which, if they were written one by one, I suppose that 
‘not even the world itself would contain the books that should 


~ a 
~~ 452 AN EXPOSITION .OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. 


- ae . 


be written” (vers. 24, 25).* It “was John, and no other. — 
Every inspired writer preserves noné the less his own style — 


and manner, and none more unmistakably than he who wrote 


the fourth Gospel. Yet what was written is but a sample, 
selected in divine wisdom, and with a specific plan sub a 
the grand scope and purpose of divine revelation. If every- 
thing which Jesus did were written out, well might the — 


too small for the needed books. 


It may be noticed how strikingly the close of the Gas 


answers to the beginning, or at least the latter part of chapters 
i. and ii. For though the subject be the Person of the Son 
manifested on earth, and then sending the Holy Spirit on His 
going to the Father, while thus beyond all others consisting of 
eternal truth and the highest privilege, yet is there care, before 
and after this is done. historically, to show that the dispensa- 
tional ways of God are in no way slighted. The latter part 


adoring evangelist suppose that the world itself would be jas 


of chapter xx. and the beginning of chapter xxi. are the >) 
counterpart of the early notice. We may add that the Epistles 


of John are, of course, devoted to the deeper task of tracing 
eternal life and the fellowship it gives with the Father and 
the Son, of which the word, through the apostles, is the 
revelation, and the Holy Spirit is the power. The book of 
the Apocalypse, on the other hand, is the full and final un+ 
folding of the dispensational ways of God; but it also reveals 
that which is above them all, and their connection with 
heaven and eternity brought before us far more completely 
and vividly than anywhere else in the testimony of God. 


. 
* Verse 25 is omitted in Tischendorf’s eighth edition on the slender omission 


of the Sinaitic copy, supposed to be confirmed by “Scholia,” edited by — 


Matthei. The’ Ap at the end (Text. Rec.) is not in N A BO _ &e. 


William Brendon & Son, Printers, Plymouth. 


pie eit ERG ede i f: i: ieee 


