AN HISTORICAL SKETCH
OF THE
FIRST HILLSBORO BAPTIST CHURCH

Read before the N. B. Eastern Association, July, 1893, and published
by request of that body.

In May, 1763, a few years after the taking of Quebec by the English
and in the same year in which the “Treaty of Paris,” was signed at
Paris, which marked the close of “The Seven Years’ War,” six German
families left Pennsylvania to settle somewhere in a northern climate.
“They sailed in a sloop commanded by Capt. Hall. After a long and
wearisome passage, they arrived at a place now called Hillsboro, July
1, and landed at a small creek on the north side of Gray’s island.”

Among these adventurers was a family by the name of Steeves. Hendrick
Steeves and his wife, Rachel, had seven sons—Jacob, John, Christian,
Frederick, Lutrick, Henry and Matthias—names still cherished among
the Steeves and given to present generations.

Mr. and Mrs. Hendrick Steeves, with their seven sons, stopped at
Hillsboro, built a log house and made this their headquarters.

The sloop after landing the Steeves family, proceeded up the
Petitcodiac to a place afterwards called “The Bend,” and later
Moncton. Here the remainder of the party was landed. The names of
these families were Jones, Trites, Ricker, Lutz and Somers. After
this the sloop left on her homeward voyage promising to return the
next spring.

The Steeves family at Hillsboro began to clear land and make for
themselves a home. As the season was too late when they arrived to
sow grain they planted a few turnips, and contented themselves by
fishing and hunting and making preparations for the coming and
untried winter. When the winter came it was cold and stormy, and
seemed extremely severe to those accustomed to a warmer climate. They
looked forward to the coming of the spring with great hopefulness.
Soon the snow and ice began to melt, the forests were clothed in
green robes and June, with her warm and gentle breath stirred new
life in this lonely and discouraged family. Eagerly did they now look
for the returning sloop, but were doomed to disappointment. The
summer passed, the autumn with its beautifully tinted leaves came,
and the winter with its biting blasts returned, but no vessel arrived
to cheer these isolated settlers. After the first winter the most
trying times in their experience came. Their provisions were about
gone, and there was no place to procure more; the remainder of the
seed they brought with them they had just planted; and no vessel came
to supply their growing needs.

What they passed through the second summer and winter, hoping against
hope that the sloop would return; and then at last giving up all
hopes of her coming back. Manfully and heroically meeting the
difficulties which arose when they had only a few turnips and such
fish and game as they could procure—all this can be better imagined
than the stern facts can be recorded.

But meeting isolation, loneliness, cold winters and scarcity of food,
this noble family struggled on with a cheerfulness, a perseverance, a
hardihood and a heroism that characterize only the truly great. Such
manly conduct in the face of discouraging and trying surroundings
deserves a place in the history of the early settlers of this
province. And be it known that these pioneers building houses,
clearing lands and constructing dykes to keep out the Petitcodiac
from their marches did not toil without the inspiration of a preached
gospel. Henry Steeves, the sixth of the seven sons, began, about
1795, to preach the gospel to the people. Thus until the organization
of the church he kept alive in the hearts of those who came to hear
him the fires of faith and love towards Jesus, and made their lives
all the brighter and nobler by holding up to them the inspiring and
helpful life of Christ.

At the close of the Revolutionary War many of the troops came from
Fort Cumberland and settled along the Petitcodiac river. Among them
was a man by the name of Jacob Beck, known as the “king’s baker.”
Henry Steeves married Mr. Beck’s daughter and settled on his father’s
farm. He wrought with his hands six days of the week, tilling the
ground, and on the Sabbath read from his German Bible and expounded
the Word of God to his hearers. Thus until 1822 this man taught the
people the love of God in Christ. An old man now living informs the
writer that he, when a lad, heard Mr. Steeves speak to the people the
precious things of the gospel. There was a house of worship standing
on the same spot where now the village church stands. It was here
Henry Steeves preached or exhorted from Sabbath to Sabbath. Some time
after the First Hillsboro Baptist church was organized this building
was removed and came into the possession of the Methodists. Another
large building was put on the spot. This in time was removed and a
third still larger edifice built here. This is the present beautiful
structure which commands the old and memorable hill. Until the arrive
of Father Crandall, in 1822, Mr. Steeves was the only minister in
this neighborhood, save, perhaps, an occasional itinerant preacher.
Mr. Crandall, directed by God, visited what is now known as
Hillsboro. Shortly after his coming the Spirit of God began to move
upon the people.

Mr. Peter Janah, now an octogenarian, gives the writer a vivid
picture of a baptism which took place on the 6th of October, 1822. He
claims to have been present at the organization of the church. He was
then a boy of 18 years. On the banks of Weldon Creek, about three
miles from the village, there gathered, one Sabbath day, a few
settlers to witness the sacred ordinance of baptism administered to
several candidates. It was not the first baptism the people had seen.
There may have been one or two scenes like this before. What is now a
pleasant half hour’s drive amid beautiful trees and along beautifully
cultivated fields, and by neat and pretty houses, was then a tedious
journey over stumps and stones. And where now in Hillsboro and Salem
are large farms with delightful and pleasant homes then there were
isolated clearings with here and there a dwelling.

The octogenarian above referred to says that at this time,
seventy-one years ago, there were but five houses at the ‘Bend;’ and
from Edgett’s Landing to McLatchey’s in Weldon only fourteen houses.
But to return to the scene on the banks of the Weldon Creek. It was
the 6th of October, 1822. Rev. Joseph Crandall stood with several
happy converts who were about to follow their Saviour in His own
appointed ways. And there amid autumnal foliage, with God, and angels
and men as witnesses, this little band of believers put on Christ by
public obedience to His commands.

After this service was completed they went to a barn a short distance
from the spot and there organized the First Hillsboro Baptist church.
This barn was owned by Henry Steeves, grandson of the preacher and
one of the first deacons of the church. A man by the name of Robert
smith, a good singer, who was present from the Salisbury church and
whose home was in Pollet River, at Mr. Crandall’s request read the
articles of the Baptist faith: and those who were baptized that day,
together with others who had been baptized previously—perhaps ten or
twelve in all—formed themselves into a New Testament church. The name
of some of them were: Michael Steeves, Patrick Duffy, John Steeves,
Peggy Steeves, Jennie Gross, Vinnia Taylor, William Gross, Mrs. Peter
Hopper, and perhaps others.

Christ was born in a manger and cradled upon straw. If the barn was
not too low for the son of God it was not too mean and human a place
to witness the organization of a church His. What a quaint scene! On
the barn floor, surrounded by fragrant hay, solemn obligations were
assumed and sacred pledges given, which are now recorded in God’s
Books. One can imagine the love and affection which bound together
that little band of pioneer men and women, who could conquer the wild
forests and compel the earth to yield her increase, all the more
heroically and successfully by cherishing in their hearts the
religion of Christ and maintaining a visible church of our Redeemer
in their midst.

To the unconcerned this must have appeared as a delicate plant soon
to wither and die; but the sturdy nature of the pioneer was in the
organization, and it soon proved itself to be no “reed shaken in the
wind,” for toward Christmas this little band had grown to
seventy-seven—thirty-seven of these bearing the name of Steeves.

It is but fair to state that no church record has been preserved with
reference to the place of the organization of the Church, and that
some of the members hold that the tradition I have described and
verified from the memory of an old man is incorrect. Those who do not
think the church was organized at Salem believe the organized at
Salem believe the organization took place in the village in the first
building standing where now the village church stands.

The writer has presented what he believes to be the facts. It is
recorded that an association was held with this church the next
summer after its organization, i.e., in 1823. “In 1824 one of the
member, James Wallace, was licensed to preach. He had to improve his
talents without the aid of schools and colleges and with but a few
books. Towards the close of 1834 there seemed to be a subsiding of
the first enthusiasm. Doubtless the truth was penetrating beneath the
surface, effecting a work of which they were hardly conscious. Memory
says that the first deacons were Henry Steeves, David Steeves and
Elijah Milton. Joseph Steeves was clerk in 1824, and Isaac Gross was
appointed to that office in 1832.”

In 1834 Rev. Wm. Sears became pastor of the church, giving
three-fourths of his time. He had preached to the people before, but
now became their regular pastor. From 1834 to 1838 no remarkable
events occurred, but the work of God continued. Members were received
and baptized—not many at a time, but a few frequently. In 1840
Pastor Walker, from the Hopewell church, visited them. This sister
church was organized in 1818. After this visit the church seems to
have gained a new life. The country all about felt her influence. In
1841 a sister comes all the way from Middle Coverdale to confess her
Lord and to receive baptism. In 1848 Patrick Duffy was licensed to
preach. In 1844 James Wallace became pastor of this church. In 1845
William Gross was elected as a deacon of the church. For a few years
the church seems to have been in a depressed state. But in 1848
Alexander McDonald and John Francis arrived from Wales and for a time
preached and labored with good success. Many were converted, the work
extending to Baltimore. Among those converted at this time was James
Irving, who afterwards became a preacher of the gospel, and who for
some eighteen years held the pastorate of the Baltimore church,
leading many precious souls to Christ.

Little is known of the church’s prosperity from 1848 to 1860. These
are proofs, however, to show that this was not an uneventful period.
During these twelve years no less than three churches sprang from the
First Hillsboro. The Second Hillsboro was organized at Dawson
Settlement in 1852. The Third Hillsboro at Demoiselle Creek in 1855,
and the Fourth Hillsboro at Baltimore in 1857. Mr. James Newcomb, a
graduate of Acadia College, taught a high school and preached for the
churches of Hillsboro for some little times. Afterwards, in May,
1849, he and Patrick Duffy were ordained to the gospel ministry. Both
of these men did valiant work for God and died loved and honored by
all who came under their kind and Christian influence.

In 1852 Rev. John Hughes became pastor of this church. Before his
coming among the people the church was threatened with division.
Under his able and wise ministry the different opposing elements were
brought together and the work of the Lord carried forward with great
success. He remained until about 1861.

In 1860 steps were taken to provide for the first instrumental music.
Record is also made of a gracious revival during the winter of ’61,
when many souls were led to Christ as the result of special meetings.
No less than twelve ministers assisted in this work. The name Salem
was given to what was then called “The Back Settlement” in 1861.

In 1862 Rev. Levi Marshall had charge of the church for a short time.

In 1863 Rev. James Austen Smith accepted a call to this church, and
for four years continued his indefatigable labors with the people.
“During his ministry at Hillsboro, a revival of mighty power aroused
the church and called a large number to participate for the first
time in the blessings of redeeming love.” In the winter of 1863 this
revival took place, when there were added to the church 155 by
baptism and thirteen by letter, making in all 168—the largest
in-gathering at any one time during the history of this church. In
1865 the Salem house of worship was opened. About this time the
present edifice in the village was built—it being the third building
standing on this spot. In 1867 Rev. W. T. Corey was called as pastor
of the church. During his pastorate of some seven years, the village
church building was finished and dedicated. Mr. Corey’s pastorate was
a successful one. Many were added to the church and the Work of God
prospered.

It was during this pastorate that regular preaching services were
held in Weldon, where now there is an “upper room furnished” and set
apart for the worship of God, and where regular prayer and preaching
services are held.

In 1876 the Valley church, the fourth and last child, was organized.
A church building was already built in that part of Hillsboro, and
services had been held here. Now this became the home of one of the
most active churches in the county. And be it said with gratitude to
God, that these four daughters have, from the very first, maintained
a character worthy of a New Testament church. They have cherished the
pure gospel and built up a strong membership, and have done a work
for God that eternity alone will reveal. And so they have given their
mother church every reason to be grateful for their existence and
proud of their useful career. And now she looks upon them as loved
children who have grown up to womanhood and settled for themselves,
and rejoices that they have settled so well.

In 1878 Rev. C. B. Welton became the pastor of this church. During
his pastorate a large and burdensome debt was removed and many souls
added to the church.

In 1880 the convention of the Maritime Provinces was held in this
church. These meetings are still cherished in the memories of a large
part of the church members.

Rev. J. C. Bleakney was called to the pastorate in 1883. His stay,
though short, was one of great helpfulness to the cause. During the
summer of 1884 Evangelist Chubbuck visited Hillsboro and held special
services. Some eighty were converted and united with God’s people.

The present pastor, Rev. W. Camp, began his labors with the church
March, 1886. During these past seven years the church has greatly
prospered. About 153 have been baptized and 38 received by letter.
Large sums of money have been raised to purchase a parsonage, repair
and paint church buildings, and remove indebtedness. The benevolent
offerings of the church have more than doubled in these years. The
church is united and prosperous. The people have every reason to
thank “God and take courage.”

Last October, 1892, the church celebrated her seventieth anniversary.
For four days religious services were held. On the evening of October
sixth, after devotional exercises, a short historical record of the
church was read. Then followed addresses from former pastors. On the
evening of the seventh addresses were delivered by pastors of the
invited churches. October eighth there was held an old-fashioned
conference meeting. The ninth being Sunday, three services were held.
Preaching services morning and evening. In the afternoon was the
“roll call” and special “thank offering.” On this occasion 202
answered to their names, and $91 was taken as the thank offering.
These services were much enjoyed by the people and the life of the
church was quickened.

Beginning with ten or twelve members the church has grown until
twelve hundred and twenty-five have come into our fellowship. It has
become the mother of four living, active and flourishing churches.
Many of those who were baptized into the fellowship of this church
are now laboring for Jesus in different parts of the world. There are
at present 436 members, and hundreds have gone triumphantly to
heaven. Only the faintest outline of the history of this people has
been given in this summary. Facts interesting to the church members,
but not so interesting to this body, are withheld. Only the briefest
record has been kept from time to time, and unfortunately part of
that is gone. But form what facts are available and from what memory
can furnish we have many reasons for believing that the First
Hillsboro Baptist church has done a great and good work for God and
perishing souls. Only eternity can reveal all that has been
accomplished.

What inspiration is afforded by the study of the history of God’s
people! How we see His hand in all the years moving, guiding and
overruling all things to His glory and for the good His people. What
an inspiration to every church to make a good record—to live in
harmony, fellowship and love! And what an inspiration to every member
to live for the glory of Christ and the highest good of one another!

To the church and to the members of the church God is calling all
generations for earnest, God-fearing, consecrated and holy living.
