© 


ee eee eT 


ee ee . . siamese , Reet delves = : = 
eee =, ; . - 


. s 
: ; | | 
3 . ; ; - o || 
oe . i , 


| 
a| 
tt ANECDOTES 
k.® / 
a NM AND 
) | 
“s | ILLUSTRATIONS 
WK ess, IIv 
dl oP 
mM, ii 
si D. L. MOODY 
~G ; 
nt. RELATED BY HIM 
“+ | ' IN HIS 
uth 8 
Il REVIVAL WORK. 
ae 
, COMPILED BY 
| Rev. J. B. McCLURE, 
da, 
i Goronto: | 
ROSE PUBLISHING COMPANY, | 


? w 


f PAPER 


) Ch MANUFACTURES 
BY 


PAPER co 
\V/ MONTAEAI, 
y 


a 
TORONTO 


LS 
-GS 
& eo 


a 


<A- 


PREFACE. 


The breathless interest given to Mr. Moody’s anecdotes 
while being related by him before his immence sudiences, and 
their wonderful power upon the human heart, suggested to 
the compiler this volume, and led him to believe and trust 
that, properly classified and arranged in book form, they 
would still carry to the general reader a measure of their 
original potency for good. The best anecdotes have been 
selected and carefully compiled under appropriate headings, 
alphabetically arranged, making the many stories easily 
available for the private reader and public teacher. Mr. 
Moody’s idiom has been strictly preserved. He tells the 
story. Gold” will be found scattered through the volume, 
which includes Mr. Moody’s terse declarations of many pre- 
cious and timely truths, F 


The compiler acknowledges the benefit received from the 
extended reports of the Tabernacle meetings given in the 
daily press of Chicago, also the Hippodrome services reported 
in the New York papers, and the volume of Addresses re. 
vised by Mr. Moody. With the earnest prayer that God’s 
blessing may accompany the reading of these stories that 
have blessed so many thousands as they fell from the lips of 
the great Evangelist, this volume is dedicated to the public 
by the compiler, 


J. B. MCCLURE, 
CHICAGO, ILL. 


: 


D. L. MOODY’S 


Anecdotes and Illustrations. 


iS cesmeneenmenetiiel 


AFFECTION. 


Love; not the Rattan, Conquers Little Moody. 


I remember when a boy, I used to go to a certain school 
in New England, where we had a quick-tempered master, 
who always kept a rattan. It was, “If you don’t do this, 
and don’t do that, I’ll punish you.” Iremember many a time 
of this rattan being laid upon my back. I think I can 
almost teel it now. He used to rule that school by the law. 
But after a while there was somebody who began to get up 
a movement in favour of controlling the school by love. A 
great many said you can never do that with those unruly 
boys, but after some talk it was at last decided to try it. I 
remember how we thought of the good time we would have 
that winter when the rattan would be out of the school. 
We thought we would then have all the fun we wanted. I 
remember who the teacher was—it was a lady—and she 
opened tue school with prayer. We hadn’t seen it done be- 
fore and we were impressed, especially when she yrayed that 
she might have grace and strength to rule the school with 
love. Well, vhe school want on for several weeks and we 
saw no rattan, but at last the rules were broken, and I think 
[ was the firs boy to break them. She told me to wait un- 
til after the school, and then she would see me. I thought 
the rattan was coming out sure, and stretched myself up in 
warlike attituae. After school, however, I didn’t see the 
rattan, but sho sat down by me and told me how she loved 


6 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Affection. 


me, and how she had prayed to be able to rule that school 
by love, and concluded by saying, “ I want to ask you one 
favour—that is, if you love me, try and be a good boy ;” 
und I never gave her trouble again. She just put me under 
grace. And that is what the Lord does, God is love, and 
He wants us all to love Him. 


True Love. 


One day when T was in Brooklyn, I saw a young man go- 
ing along the street without any arms, A friend who was 
with me pointed him out, and told me his story. When the 
war broke out he felt it to be his duty to enlist and go to the 
front. He was engaged to be married, and while in the 
army, letters passed frequently between him and his intended 
wife. After the battle of the Wilderness the young lady 
looked anxiously for the accustomed letter. For a little 
while no letter was received, At last one came in a strange 
hand, She opened it with trembling fingers, and read these 
words: “ We have fought a terrible battle. I have been 
wounded so awfully that I shall never be able to support 
you. A friend writes this for me. I love you more ten- 
derly than ever, but I release you from your promise, [ 
will not ask you to join your life with the maimed life of 
mine.” That letter was never answered. The next train 
that left, the young lady was on it. § .e went to the hos- 
pital. She found out the number of his cot, and she went 
down the aisle, between the long rows of the wounded men. 
.At last she saw the number, and, hurrying to his side, she 
threw her Arms around his neck and said: “T’ll not desert 
you. I’ll'take care of you.” He did not resist her love. 
They were married, and there is no happier couple than this 
one. We are dependenton one another. Christ says, “I'll 
take care of you. I'll take you to this bosom of mine.” 
That young man could have spurned her love ; he could, but 
he didn’t. Surely you can be saved if you will accept the 
Saviour’s love. If God loves us, wy friends, He loves us 
unto the end. “ For God so loved tne world, that He gave 
His only begotten Son, that whosoever believe. w Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 


lion. 


schoo) 
u one 
boy ” 
under 
4, and 


in go- 
O WAS 
on the 
to the 
n the 
ended 
+ lady 
little 
range 
these 
been 
pport 
e ten- 
e. £ 
life of 
train 
e hos- 
went 
men. 
e, she 
lesert 
love. 
n this 
eT 
nine.” 
d, but 
yt the 
es us 
gave 

Lim 


A ffection. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 7 


How a Young. Irishman Opened Moody's Eyes. 


I want to tell you how [ got my eyes open to the truth 
that God loves the sinner, When I went over to Europe I 
was preaching in Dublin, when a young fellow came up to 
the platform and said to me that he wanted to come to 
America and preach, He had a boyish appearance ; did not 
seem to be over seventeen yeurs old, I measured him all 
over, and he repeated his request, and asked me when I was 
going back, I told bim I didn’t know; probably I should 
not have told him if I had known, I thought he was too 
young and inexperienced to be wble to preach. In course of 
time [ sailed for America, and hadn't been here long before 
[ got a letter from him, dated New York, saying that he 
had arrived there. I wrote him a note, and thought I would 
‘ear no more about him, but soon I got another letter from 
him, saying that he was coming soon t Chicago, and would 
like to preach. I sent him another letter, telling him if he 
came to call upon me, and closed with a few common-place 
remarks, I thought that would settle him, and I would 
hear no more from him. But in a very few days after he 
made his appearance. I didn’t know what to do with him, 
I was just going off to Iowa, and T went to a friend and 
said: “I have got a young Irishman—I thought he was 
an Irishman, becuuse I met him in lreland--and he wants 
to preach. Let Jiim preach at the meetings --try him, and 
if he fails, I will take him off your hands when I come 
home.” When J got home-—I remember it was on Saturday 
morning—lI said to my wife: “ Did thet young man preach 
at the meetings?” ‘ Yes.” “ How did they like him ?” 
“They like him very much,” she replied ; “he preaches a 
little different from you; he preaches that God loves sin. 
ners.” I had heen preaching that God hated sinners; that 
he had been standing behind the sinners with a double- 
bladed sword, ready to cut the heads of the sinners off. So 
I concluded if he preached different from me, [ would not 
like him. My prejudice was up. Well, I went down to the 
meeting that night, and saw them coming in with their 
Bibles with them. I thought it was curious. It was some- 
thing strange to see the people coming in with Bibles,and 
listen to the flutter of the leaves. The young man gaye out 


Pin 


8 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Affection. 


this text, saying: “Let. us turn to the third chapter of 
John and sixteenth verse: ‘For God go loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him sbould not perish, but have everlasting 
life.’” He didn’t divide up the text at all. He went from 
Genesis to Revelation, giving proof that God loved the sin- 
ner, and before he got through, two or three of my sermons 
were spoiled, I have never preached them since, 

The following day—Sunday—there was an immense crowd 
flocking into the hall, and he said, “ Let us turn to the third 
chapter of John, sixteenth verse: ‘For God so loved the 
world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in Him shail not perish, but have everlasting 
life ” and he preached the fourth sermon from this verge, 
He just seemed to take the whole text and throw it at them, 
to prove that God loved ‘he sinner, and that for six thousand 
years he had been trying to convince the world of this, I 
thought I had never heard a better sermon in my life. It 
seemed to be a new revelation to all. Ah, I notice there 
are some of you here who remember those times ) remember 
those nights. I gota new idea of the blessed Bible. On 
Monday night I went down and the young man said, “ Turn 
to the third chapter of John, sixteenth verse,” and he 
seemed to preach better than ever. Proof after proof was 
quoted from Scripture to show how God loved us. I thought 
aure he had exhausted that text, but on Tuesday he took 
his Bible in his hand and said: “Turn to the third chapter 
of John, sixteenth verse,” and he preached the sixth sermon 
from that verse. He just seemed to climb over his subject, 
while he proved that there was nothing on earth like the 
love of Christ, and he said: “If I can only convince men of 
His love, if I can but bring them to believe this text, the 
whole world will be saved.” On Thursday he selected the 
same text, John iii., 16, and at the conclusion of the ser- 

mon he said: “I have been trying to tell you for 
seven nights now, how Christ loves you, but I cannot 
do it. If I could borrow Jacob's ladder and climb 
up to heaven, and could see Gabriel there and ask 
him to tell me how much God loves me, he would 
oly say, ‘God so loved the world that He gave His only 


l fection. 


apter of 
ie world 
ver be- 
rlasting 
nt from 
the sin- 
sermons 


e crowd 
he third 
ved the 
osoever 
lasting 
3 verge, 
t them, 
ousand 
his, I 
fe, It 
» there 
1ember 
e. On 
“Turn 
nd he 
of was 
hought 
e took 
hapter 
ermon 
ubject, 
ke the 
nen of 
ct, the 
xd the 
1e ser- 
u for 
annot 
climb 
| ask 
would 
‘only 


Affection. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. ) 


begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life’ How a man can go out 
of this tabernacle after hearing this text, saying, ‘ God does 
not love me,’ is amystery to me.” 


Love’s Triumph in John Wannamaker’s Sunday 
School. 


Mr, John Wannamaker, superintendent of probably one 
of the largest Sunday schools in the world, had a theory that 
he would never put a boy out of his school for bad conduct. 
He argued if a boy misbehaved himself, it was through bad 
training at home, and that if he put him out of the school 
no one would take care of him. Well, this theory was put 
to the test one day. A teacher came to him and said, “ I’ve 
got a boy in my class that must be taken out ; he breaks the 
rules continually, he swears and uses obscene language, and 
I cannot do anything with him.” Mr. Wannamaker did not 
care about putting the boy out, so he sent the teacher back 
to his class. But he came again and said that unless the boy 
was taken from his class, he must leave it. Well, he lett, 
and a second teacher was appointed. The second teacher 
came with the same story, and met with the same reply from 
Mr. Wannamaker. And he resigned. A third teacher was 
appointed, and he came with the same story as the others, 
Mr. Wannamaker then thought he would be compelled to 
turn the boy out at last. One day a few teachers were 
standing about, and Mr. Wannamaker said: “TI will bring 
this boy up and read his name out in the school, and publicly 
excommunicate him.” Well, a young lady came up and 
said to him: “ I am not doing what I might for Christ, let 
me have the boy ; I will try and save him.” But Mr. 
Wannamaker said: “If these young men cannot do it, you 
will not.” But she begged to have him, and Mr. Wanna- 
maker consented. 

She was a wealthy young lady, surrounded with all the 
luxuries of life. The boy went to her class, and for several 
Sundays he behaved himself and broke no rule, But one 
Sunday he broke one, and, in reply to something she said, 
spit in her face. She took out her pocket-handkerchief and 


10 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Affection. 


wiped her face, but she said nothing. Well, she thought 
upon a plan, and she said to him, “J ohn,”—we will call him 
John,—“ John, come home with me.” « No,” says he, “3 
won't; I won’t be seen on the streets with you.” She was 
fearful of losing him altogether if he went out of the school 
that day, and she said to him, “ Will you let me walk home 
with you?” “No, I won't,” said he, “I won’t be seen or 
the street with you.” Then she thought upon another plan 
She thought on the “ Old Curiosity Shop,” and she said, ‘J 
won’t be at home to-morrow or Tuesday, but if you will come 
round to the front door on Wednesday morning there will 
be a little bundle for you.” “I don’t want it 3 you may 
keep your own bundle.” She went home, but made the 
bundle up. She thought that curiosity might make him 
“come. 

Wednesday morning arrived and he had got over his mad 
fit, and thought he would just like to see what was in that 
bundle. The little fellow knocked at the door, which - vas 
opened, and he told his story. She said; « Yes, here is the 
bundle.” The boy opened it and found a vest and a coat and 
other clothing, and a little note written by the young lady, 
which read something like this : 

‘‘ DEAR JOHNNIE :—Ever since you have been in my clasg 
I have prayed for you every morning and evening, that you 
might bea good boy, and I want you to stop in my class, 
Do not leave me.” 

The next morning, before she was up, the servant came to 
her and said there was a little boy below who wished to see 
her. She dressed hastily, and went down stairs, and found 
Johnnie on the sofa weeping. She put her arms around his 
neck, and he said to her, « My dear teacher, I have not had 
any peace since I got this note from you. I want you to 
forgive me.” “ Won't you let me pray for you to come to 
Jesus?” replied the teacher, And she went down on her 
knees and prayed. And now Mr. Wannamake? says that 
boy is the best boy in his Sunday-schoox. And wo it way 

love that broke that boy’s heart, 


Affection. 


| thought 
| call him 
ys he, “J 
She was 
he schoo! 
wlk home 
. seen or 
her plan 
said, “ ] 
vill come 
lere will 
ou. may 
iade the 
ake him 


his mad 
+ in that 
lich - vas 
re is the 
oat and 
ng lady, 


ny class 
hat you 
y class, 


came to 
1 to see 
1 found 
und his 
10t had 
you to 
ome to 
on her 
ys that 
it wag 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. Y 


AFFLICTION. 


A Child Visits Abraham Lincoln, and Saves the Life 
of a Condemned Soldier. 


During the war I remember a young man, not twenty, 
who was court-martialed down in the front and sentenced to 
be shot. The story was this: The young fellow had enlisted. 
He was not obliged to, but he went off with another young 
man. They were what we would call “chums.” One night 
this companion was ordered out on picket duty, and he asked 
the young man to go forhim. The next night he was ordered 
out himself; and having been awake two nights, and not 
being used to it, fell asleep at his post, and for the offence 
he was tried and sentenced to death. It was right after the 
order issued by the President that no interference would 
be allowed in cases of this kind. This sort of tling had 
become too frequent, and it must be stopped. When the 
news had reached the father and mother in Vermont it nearly 
broke their hearts. The thought that their son should be 
shot was too great for them. They had no hope that he 
would be saved by anything they coulddo. But they had a 
little daughter who had read the life of Abraham Lincoln, 
and knew how he had loved his own children, and she said : 
“Tf Abraham Lincoln knew how my father and mother 
love my brother he wouldn’t let him be shot.” That little 
girl thought this matter over and made up her mind to see 
the President. She went to the White House, and the 
sentinel, when he saw her imploring looks, passed her in, 
and when she came to the door and told the private secretary 
that she wanted to see the President, he could not refuse her. 
She came into the chamber and found Abraham Lincoln sur- 
rounded by his generals and counsellors, and when he saw 


WUsev 


13 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Affliction, 


the little country girl he asked her what she wanted. The 
little maid told her plain, simple story—how her brother, 
whom her father and mother loved very dearly, had been 
sentenced to be shot; how they were mourning for him, and 
if he was to die in that way it would break their hearts, 
The President’s heart was touched with compassion, and he 
immediately sent a dispatch cancelling the sentence and 
giving the boy a parole so that he could come home and see 
that father and mother. I just tell you this to show you 
how Abraham Lincoln’s heart was moved by compassion for 
the sorrow of that father and mother, and if he showed so 
much, do you think the Son of God will not have compassion 


upon you, sinner, if you only take that crushed, bruised heart 
to him? 


Broken Hearts, 


There is no class of people exempt from broken hearts, 
The rich and the poor suffer alike. There was a time when 
I used to visit the poor that I thought all the broken hearts 
were to be found among them, but within the last few years 
I have found there are as many broken hearts among the 
learned as the unlearned, the cultured as the uncultured, the 
rich as the poor. If youcould but go up one of our avenues 
and down another and reach the hearts of the people, and geg 
them to tell their whole story, you would be astonished a 
the wonderful history ‘of every family. I remember a few 
years ago I had been out of the city for some weeks. When 
T returned I started ont to make some calls, The first place 
I went to I found a mother ; her eyes were red with weep- 
ing. I tried to find out what was troubling her, and she 
reluctantly opened her heart and told me all. She said: 
“Last night my only boy came home about midnight, drunk, 
{ didn’t know that he was addicted to drunkenness, but this 
morning I found out that he had been drinking for weeks, 
and,” she continued, “I would rather have seen him laid in 
the grave than have had him brought home in the condition 

saw him in last night.” I tried to comfort her as best I 
could when she told me her sad story. When I went away 
from that house I didn’t want to go into any other house 


af" f wuss 


Affliction. 


ited. The 
x” brother, 

had been 
r him, and 
eir hearts, 
n, and he 
tence and 
le and see 
show you 
yassion for 
showed so 
ompassion 
‘ised heart 


n hearts. 
ime when 
en hearts 
few years 
nong the 
tured, the 
r avenues 
e, and geg 
nished a 
ber a few 
3 When 
irst place 
th weep- 
, and she 
he said: 
t, drunk, 
but this 
r weeks, 
n laid in 
vondition 
8 best I 
nt away 


er house 


| Affliction. 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 13 


_ where there was family trouble. The very next house I went 


to, however, where some of the children who attended my 
Sunday school resided, I tound that death had been there 
and laid hishand on one of them. The mother spoke to me 
of her afflictions, and brought to me the playthings and the 
little shoes of the child, and the tears trickled down that 
mother’s cheeks as she related to me her sorrow. I got out 
as soon as possible, and hoped 1 would see no more family 
trouble that day. 

The next visit I made was to a home where I found a wife 
with a bitter story. Her husband had been neglecting her 
for a long time; “and now,” she said, “he has left me, and 
I don’t know where he has gone. Winter is coming on, and 
I don’t know what is going to become of my family.” I tried 
to comfort her, and prayed with her, and endeavoured to get 
her to lay all her sorrows on Christ, The next home I en- 
tered I found a woman crushed and broken-hearted. She 
told me her boy had forsaken her, and she had no idea where 
he had gone. That afternoon I made five calls, and in every 
home I found a broken heart. Every one had a sad tale to 
tell, and if you visited every house in Chicago you would 
find the truth in the saying that “there is a skeleton in 
every house.” I suppose while I am talking you are think- 
ing about the great sorrow in your own bosom, I do not 
know anything about you, but if I were to come around to 
every one of you, and you were to tell me the truth I would 
hear a tale of sorrow. ‘The very last man I spoke to last 
night was a young mercantile man who told me his load of 
sorrow had been so great that many times during the last 
few weeks he had gone down to the lake and had been 
tempted to plunge in and end his existence. His burden 
seemed too much for him. Think of the broken hearts in 
Chicago to-night! They could be numbered by hundreds— 
yea, thousands. All over this city are broken hearts. 

If all the sorrow represented in this great city were writtem 
in a book, this building couldn’t hold that book, and you 
couldn’t read it in a long lifetime. This earth is not a 
stranger to tears, neither is the present the only time when 
they could be found in abundance. Fro 4dam’s days, to 
ours tears have been shed, and a wail has been going up to 


14 MOODY'S ANECDOTES A fiction. 


Heaven from the broken-hearted. And I say it again, it is 
a mystery to me how all thoso broken hearts can keep away 
from Him who has come to heal them. 


“That Is Your Fault.” 


I remember a mother coming to me and saying, “It is 
easy enough for you to speak in that way; if you had the 
burden that I’ve got, you couldn't cast it on the Lord.” 
“Why, is your burden go great that Christ can’t carry it?” 
Tasked. “No: it isn’t too great for him to carry; but I 
can’t put it on Him.” “That is your fault,” I replied ; and 
I find a great many people with burdens who, rather than 
just come to Him with them, Strap them tighter on their 
backs and go away struggling under their load. I asked her 
the nature of her trouble, and she told me. “TI have an 
only boy who is a wanderer on the face of the earth, I 
don’t know where heis. If I only knew where he was T 
would go around the world to find him, You don’t know 
how I love that boy. This sorrow is killing me.” “ Why 
can't you take him to Christ? You can reach Him at the 
throne, even though he be at the uttermost part of the 
world. Go tell God all about your trouble, and he will take 
away his sin, and not only that, but if you never see him on 
earth, God can give you faith that you will see your boy in 
heaven.” And then I told her of a mother who lived down 
in the southern part of Indiana, Some years ago her boy 
came up to this city. He was a moralist, My friends, a 
man has to have more than morality to lean upon in this 

great city. He hadn’t been here long before he was led 
astray. A neighbour happened to come up here and found him 
one night in the streets drunk. 

When that neighbour went home, at first he thought he 
wouldn’t say anything about it to the boy’s father, but after- 
ward he thought it was his duty to tellhim. Soin a crowd 
in the street of their little town he just took the tather 
aside, and told him what he had seen in Chicago. It was a 
terrible blow. When the children had been put to be! that 
night he said to his wife: « Wife, I have bad news. ? have 
heard from Chicago to-day.” The mother dropped her work 


seg oem eco OS A se oa 


A fiiction. 


again, it is 
keep away 


ng, “It is 
u had the 
she Lord.” 
carry it?” 
ry; but I 
lied ; and 
ither than 
'on their 
asked her 
[ have an 
earth. [I 
he was I 
on’t know 
(7 Why 
im at the 
rt of the 
will take 
ee him on 
ir boy in 
ved down 
> her boy 
riends, a 
nm in this 
was led 
yund him 


ought he 
ut after- 
&@ crowd 
1e tathar 
It was a 
be” that 

}? have 
er work 


re > | 
cease hae 


sciee atid 


Pare oe Pee ery 
RE She he 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 1d 


in an instant and said: “Tell me what itis.” “Well, our 
son has been seen on the streets of Chicago, drunk.” Neither 
of them slept that night, but they took their burden to Christ, 
and about daylight the mother said: ‘I don’t know how, I 
don’t know when or where, but God has given me faith to 
believe that our son will be saved and will never come to a 
drunkard’s grave.” 

One week after, that boy left Chicago. He couldn’t tel. 
why—an unseen power seemed to lead him to his mother’s 
home, and the first thing he said on coming over the thresh- 
old was: ‘Mother, I have come home to ask you to pray for 
me ;” and soon after he came back to Chicago, a bright and 
shining light. If you have a burden like this, fathers, 
mothers, bring it to Him and cast jt on Him, and He, the 
Great Physician, will heal your broken hearts. 


Affliction. 


“Tt will Kill Her.” 


I was thinking to-day of the difference between those who 
know Christ when trouble comes upon them and those who 
know Him not. I know several members of families who 
are just stumbling into their graves over trouble. I know 
two widows in Chicago who are weeping and mourning over 
the death of their husbands, and their grief is just taking 
them to their graves. Instead of bringing their burdens to 
Christ, they mourn day and night, and the result will be 
that in a few weeks or years at most their sorrow will take 
them to their graves, when ‘they ought to take it all to the 
Great Physician. =e F 

Three years ago a father took his wife and family on 
board that ill-fated French steamer. They were going to 
Europe, and when out on the ocean, another vessel ran into 
her and she went down. That mother when I was preaching 
in Chicago used'to bring her two children to the meetings 
every night. It was one of the most beautiful sights I ever 
looked on, to see how those little children used to sit and 
listen, and to see the tears trickling down their cheeks when 
the Saviour was preached. 1t seemed as if nobody else in 
that meeting drank in the truth as eagerly as those little 


ORGS. 


| oe MOODY'S ANECDOTES Affliction 


One night when an invitation had been extended to all to 
go into the inquiry room, one of these little children said: 
“Mamma, why can’t I go in too?” The mother allowed 
them to come into the room, and some friend spoke to them, 
and to all appearances they seemed to understand the plan 
of salvation as well as their elders. When that memorable 
night came that mother went down and came up without her 
two children, Upon reading the newsI suid: ‘It will kill 
her,” and I quitted my post in Edinburgh—the only time I 
left my post on the other side—and went down to Liverpool 
to try and comfort her. But when I got there I found that 
the Son of God had been there before me, und instead of me 
comforting her, she comforted me. She told me she could 
not think of those children as being in the sea; it seemed as 
if Christ had permitted her to take those children on that 
vessel only that they might be wafted to Him, and had saved 
her life only that she might come back and work a little 
longer for Him. When she got up the other day ata 
mother’s meeting in Farwell Hall, and told her story, I 
thought I would tell the mothers of it the first chance I got. 

So if any of you have had some great afflictlon, if any of 
you have lost a loving father, mother, brother, husband, or 
wife, come to Christ, because God has sent him to heal the 
broken-hearted. 


“Father, Father, Come This Way.” 


I remember a number of years ago [ went out of Chicago 
to try to preach. I went down to a litile town where was 
being held a Sunday-school convention. I was a perfect 
stranger in the place, and when I arrived a man stepped up 
to me and asked me if my name was Moody. I told him it 
was, and he invited me to his house. When I got there he 
said he had to go to the convention, and asked me to excuse 
his wife, as she, not having a servant, had to attend to her 
household duties. He put me into the parlour, and told me 
to amuse myself as best I could till he came back. I sat 
there, but the room was dark, and I could not read, and I 
got tired, So I thought I would try and get the children and 
play with them. I listened for some sound of childhood in the 


FS 


fiction 


lo all to 
2p said: 
allowed 
to them, 
the plan 
morable 
hout her 
will kill 
7 time I 
iverpool 
ind that 
id of me 
ie could 
emed ag 
on that 
1d saved 
a little 
ry ata 
story, I 
e I got. 
Pany of 
and, or 


1eal the 


Chicago 
ere was 

perfect 
pped up 
him it 
here he 
) excuse 
1 to her 
told me 
- TIT sat 
, and I 
ren and 
din the 


2 Ria earn ae 


SEERA RT 


Affliction. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 17 
house, but could not hear a single evidence of the presence of 
little ones. When my friend came back [ said: “ Haven't 
you any children?” ‘ Yes,” he replied, “I have one, but 
she’s in Heaven, and I am glad she is there, Moody.” ‘Are 
you glad that your child’s dead?” I inquired. 

He went on to tell me how he had worshipped that child ; 
how his whole life had been bound up in her to the neglect 
of his Saviour. One day he had come home and found her 
dying. Upon her death he accused.God of being unjust 
He saw some of his neighbours with their children around 
them. Why hadn’t He tuken some of them away? He was 
rebellious. After he came home from her funeral he said : 
“ All at once I thought I heard her little voice calling me, 
but the truth came to my heart that she was gone. Then I 
thought I heard her feet upon the stairs; but I knew she 
was lying in the grave. The thought of her loss almost 
made me mad. I threw myself on my bed and wept bitterly. 
I fell asleep, and while I slept I had a dream, but it almost 
seemed to me like a vision. 

“T thought I was going over a barren field, and I came to 
a river so dark and chill-looking that I was going to turn 
away, when all at once I saw on the opposite bank the most 
beautiful sight I ever looked at. I thought death and sorrow 
could never enter into that lovely region. Then I began to 
see beings all so happy looking, and among them I saw my 
little child. She waved her little angel hand to me and 
cried, ‘ Father, father, come this way.’ I thought her voice 
sounded much sweeter than it did on earth. In my dream 
{ thought I went to the water and tried te cross it, but 
found it deep and the current so rapid that I thought if I 
entered it would carry me away from her forever. I tried 
to find a boatman to take me over, but couldn't, and I 
walked up and down the river, trying to find a crossing, and 
still she cried: ‘Come this way.’ All at once I heard a 
voice come rolling down, ‘I am the way, the truth, and the 
life; no man cometh unto the Father but by Me.’ The 
voice awoke me from my sleep, and I knew it was my 
Saviour calling me, and pointing the way for me to reach my 
darling child. 

“T am now superintendent of a Sunday-sehool ; I have 

4 


18 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Affliction. 


made many converts ; my wife has been converted, and we 
will, through Jesus as the way, see one day our child.” 


A Place of Safety. 


My friends, there is one spot on earth where the fear of 
Death, of Sin, and of Judgment, need never trouble us, the 
only safe spot on earth where the sinner can stand—Calvary, 
Out in our western country, in the autumn, when men go 
hunting, and there has not been rain for many months, 
sometimes the prairie grass catches fire. Sometimes, when 
the wind is strong, the flames may be seen rolling along, 
twenty feet high, destroying man and beast in their onward 
rush. When the frontiersmen see what is coming, what do 
they do to escape? They know they cannot run as fast as 
that firecanrun, Not the fleetest horse can escape it, They 
just take a match and light the grass around them. The 
flames sweep onwards ; they take their stand in the burnt 
district and are safe. They hear the flames roar as they 
come along; they see death bearing down upon them with 
resistless fury, but they do not fear. They do not even 
tremble as the ocean of flame surges around them, for over 
the place where they stand the fire has already past and 
there is no danger. There is nothing for firetoburn, And 
there is one spot on earth that God has swept over. Eight- 
teen hundred years ago the storm burst on Calvary; the 
Son of God took it into his own bosom, and now, if we take 
our stand by the Cross, we are safe for time and eternity. 


GOLD. 


—Christ never preached any funeral sermons, 


—He is a loving, tender hand, full of sympathy and com- 
passion. 

—Take your stand on the Rock of Ages. Let death, let 
ae judgment come: the victory is Christ’s and yours through 

im. 


—The only man who ever suffered before Christ was that 
servant who had his ear cut off. But most likely in a 


== ae 


fliction. 


> fear of 
yus, the 
Calvary. 
men go 
months, 
a8, when 
g along, 
‘onward 
what do 
s fast as 
. They 
n. The 
e burnt 
as they 
2m with 
ot even 
for over 
ast and 
1 And 
Kight- 
ry; the 
we take 
rnity. 


nd com- 


eath, let 
through 


vas that 


ly in a 
- 


A fliction, AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 19 


moment afterward he had it on, and very likely it was a 
better ear than ever, because whatever the Lord does, He does 
it well. No man ever lost his life with Him. 


—A great many people wonder why it was that Christ 
did not come at once to Martha and Mary, whom he loved, 
whenever He heard of their affliction. It was to try them, 
and it is the same with his dealings toward us. If He seems 
not to come to us in our affliction, it is only to test us. 


— When the Spirit came to Moses, the plagues came upon 
Egypt, and he had power to destroy men’s lives ; when the 
Spirit came upon Elijah, fire came down from heaven ; when 
the Spirit came upon Gideon, no man could stand before 
him ; and when it came upon Joshua, he moved around the 
city of Jericho and the whole city fell into his hands; but 
when the Spirit came upon the Son of Man, he gave hig 
life ; He healed the broken-hearted. 


—No matter how low down you are; no matter what 
your disposition has been ; you may be low in your thoughts, 
words, and actions; you may be selfish ; your heart may be 
overflowing with corruption and wickedness; yet Jesus 
will have compassion upon you. He will speak comforting 
words to you ; not treat you coldly or spurn you, as perhaps 
those of earth would, but will speak tender words, and 
words of love and affection and kindness. Just come at 
once. He is a faithful friend--a friend that sticketh closer 
than a brother. 


20 MOODY’S ANECDOTES 


ASSURANCE, 


Napoleon and the Private. 


It is said of Napoleon that while he was reviewing his 
army one day, his horse became frightened at something, 
and the Emperor lost his rein, and the horse went away at 
full speed, and the Emperor’s life was in danger. He could 
not get hold of the rein, and a private in the ranks saw it, and 
sprang out of the ranks towards the horse, and was successful 
in getting hold of the horse’s head at the peril of his own 
life. The Emperor was very much pleased. ‘Touching his 
hat, he saidto him: ‘I make you Captain of my Guard.” 
The soldier didn’t take his gun and walk up there. He 
threw it away, stepped out of the ranks of the soldiers, and 
went up to where the body-guard stood. The captain of 
the body-guird ordered him back into the ranks, but he said: 
“No! I won’t go !” “ Why not?” “Because I am Captain of 
the Guard.” ‘ You Captain of the Guard?’ ‘“ Yes,” re- 
plied the soldier, ‘ Who said it?” and the man, pointing to 
the Emperor, said: “ He said it,” That was enough. Nothing 
more could be said. He took the Emperor at his word. My 
friends, if God says anything, let us take Him at His word. 
“ He that believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ shall not 
perish, but have everlasting life.” Don’t you believe it? 
Don’t you believe you have got everlasting life? It can be 
the privilege of every child of God to believe and then know 
that you have got it. 


Five Million Dollars. 


One thing I know---I cannot speak for others, but I can 
speak for myself; I sa.inot read other minds and other 
hearts ; J cannot reac. i> Bih’v and lay hold for others; but 


ng his 
thing, 
way at 
. could 
it, and 
cessful 
Ss own 
ng his 
uard,” 

He 
’s, and 
ain of 
e said: 
tain of 
s,” re- 
ting to 
othing 
. My 
word, 
ll not 
ve it? 
can be 


know 


I can 
other 
8; but 


Assurance, AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 21 


[can read for myself, and take God at his word. The great 
trouble is that people take everything in general, and do not 
take it to themselves, Suppose a man should say to me: 
“ Moody, there was a man in Europe who died last week, 
and left five million dollars to a certain individual, ‘Well,’ 
I say, “I don’t doubt that; it’s rather a common thing to 
happen,” and I don't think anything more about it, But 
suppose he says: “ But he left the money to you.” Then I 
pay attention ; I say: “ To me?” “ Yes, he left it to you.” 
I become suddenly interested, I want to know all about it. 
So we are apt to think Christ died for sinners ; He died for 
everybody, and for nobody in particular, But when the 
truth comes to me that eternal life is mine, and all the glories 
of Heaven are mine, I begin to be interested. I say: “Where 
is the chapter and verse where it says I can be saved?” If 
I put myself among sinners, I take the place of the sinner, 
then it is that salvation is mine and I am sure of it for time 
and eternity. 


a 


Engaging Rooms Ahead. 


Mr. Sankey and myself—going about and preaching the 
gospel, is nothing new. You will find them away back 
eighteen hundred years ago, going off two by two, like 
Brothers Bliss and Whittle, and Brothers Needham and 
Stebbins, to different towns and villages. They had gone 
out, and there had been great revivals in all the cities, towns 
and villages they had entered. Everywhere they had met 
with the greatest success. Even the very devils were subject to 
them. Disease had fled before them. When they met a 
lame man they said to him: “ You don’t want to be lame 
any longer,” and he walked. When they met a blind man 
they but told him to open his eyes, and behold, he could see. 
Axd they came to Christ and rejoiced over their great suc- 
cess, and Fe just said to them: “ I will give you something 
to rejoice over. Rejoice that your names are written in 
heaven.” 

Now there are a great many people who do not believe in 
such an assurance as this: “ Rejoice, because your names are 
written in heaven.” How are you going to rejoice if your 


22 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Assurance. 


names are not written there? While speaking about this 
some time ago, a man told me we were preaching a very ri- 
diculous doctrine when we preached this doctrine of assu- 
rance. I ask you in all candour what are you going to do 
with this assurance if we don’t preach it? It is stated that 
our names are written there; blotted out of the Book of 
Death and transferred to the Book of Life. 

I remember while in Europe I was travelling with'a friend 
—she is in this hall to-night. On one occasion we were 
journeying from London to Liverpool, and the question was 
put as to where we would stop. We said we would go to 
the “ Northwestern,” at Lime street, as that was the Hotel 
where Americans generally stopped at. When we got there 
the house was full and they could not let usin. Every room 
was engaged. But this friend said: ‘I am going to stay 
here. I engaged a room ahead. I sent a telegram on.” 
My friends, that is just what the Christians are doing— 
sending their names in ahead. They are sending a message up 
saying: “ Lord Jesus, I want one of those mansions You 
are preparing ; I want to be there.” That’s what they are 
doing. 

Every man and woman who wants one, if you have not 
already got one, had better make up your mind. Send your 
names up now. I would rather a thousand times have my 
name wr nin the Lamb’s Book than have all the wealth 
of the world rolling at my feet. 


‘“‘He Will Not Rest.” 


Suppose a man is going to Cincinnati, and he gets on the 
cars, but he feels uneasy lest the train will take him to St. 
Louis instead of to his destination. He will not rest till he 
knows he is on the right road, and the idea that we are on 
the road to eternity as fast as time can take us, and do not 
know our destination, is contrary to Scripture. If we want 
pexce we must know it; and we can know it, it is the Word 
of God. Look what Peter says: ‘We know we have an 
incorruptible dwelling.” Then in Paul’s epistle to the 
Colossians, i, 12: “Givingthanks unto the Father which 
hath mee us eet” —hath made us, not going to——“ w he 


a 


ae ess 


uUrance. 


it thig 
ery ri- 
f assu- 
y to do 
d that 
ook of 


. friend 
2 were 
on was 
go to 
Hotel 
t there 
y room 
(0 stay 
n on.” 
cing — 
age up 
s You 
ey are 


ve not 
d your 
re my 
wealth 


mn the 
to St. 
‘ill he 
re on 
lo not 
. Want 
Word 
ie an 
o the 
which 
w 6 


Assurance. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 23 


kers of the inheritance of the saints in light. Who 

ath delivered us—’” not going to deliver us, but He hath 

delivered us: this is an assurance—“ from the powers of 

darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of His 
dear Son.” 


“ Very Orthodox.” 


A person came to me some time ago and said: “ Mr. 
Moody, I wish you would give me a book that preaches 
assvrance, and that tells the children of God it is their 
rivilege to know they are‘accepted.” I said: “ Here is a 
ere it is very orthodox. It was written by John, the 
most intimate friend of Jesus while He was on earth. The 
man who laid his head upon His bosom.” Turn to John 
and see what he says in the 5th chapter : “For in them ye 
think ye liave eternal life.” 


“YT Don’t Know.” 


There is no doubt about assurance in the Word of God. 
A person said to me some time ago: “I think it is « great 
presumption for a person to say she is saved.” I asked her 
if she was saved. “I belong to a Church,” she sobbed. 
“ But are you saved?” “TI believe it would be presumption 
for me to say that I was saved.” “ Well, I think it is a 
greater presumption for any one tosay: ‘I don’t know if I 
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,’ because it is written, “ He 
that believeth on me hath everlasting life.” It is clearly 
stated that we have assurance. 


ATI 


“Tf I Knew.” 


Many think tha tassurance is not to be had while travelling 
through this world—they must wait till they get before the 
terrible judgment seat to know whether they are accepted 
or not. And I find some ministers preach this precious doc- 
trine from their pulpits. I heard of a minister who, while on 
his way to the buriai of aman, began to talk upon the sub- 
ject of assurance, ‘ Why,” said he, “if 1 knew for a cer- 


oe 


PE ETIERNN enor entrants: anew Wornscnnes 


7 

; 
g 
£ 


24 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Assurance % Ass 
tainty that I was saved the carriage couldn’t hold me. I dest 
would have to jump out with joy.” A man should be ocon- in t 
vinced that he has the gospel, before he preaches it to any | 
one else. Why, a man need not try to pull a man out of the - hop 
viver if heis in it himself. A man need not try to lift a my 
man out of a pit if he is there too, No man can preach sal- wol 
vation till he knows he is saved. try’ 

% aC 

“IT Know.” 


The man of God who has fixed his feet on the rock of 
salvation can say with certainty: “Iknow.” If you have - 
not got assurance and want it, just believe God’s Word. If - 


you godown South and ask those three million colored peo- he : 
ple how they think they are free, they won't talk about their 8101 
feelings ; they just believe that Abraham Lincoln made them ~ 
free. They believe the proclamation, and so we must be- by 
lieve the proclamation God has made in the Bible. “One sur 
thing thou teachest,” that is salvation. Gor 
we 
Moody’s Declaration. hov 
A great many people say: “ Mr. Moody, I would like to hea 
know whether I am a Christian or not. I would like to rig 
kn#w if I am saved.” The longer I live the more I am con. can 
vinced that it is one of the greatest privileges of a child of liev 
God to know—to be able to say: “I am saved.” The idea No 
of walking through life without knowing this until we get her 
to the great white throne, is exploded. If the Bible don’t 
teach assurance it don’t teach justification by faith; if it der 
don’t teach assurance it don’t teach redemption. The doc: if j 
trine of assurance is as clear as any doctrine in the Bible. fing 
How many people in the Tabernacle when I ask them if ang 
they are Christians, say: “ Well, I hope so,” in a sort of hes- y as 
itating way. Another class say: “TI am trying to be.” This ask 
is a queer kind of testimony, my friends. I notice no man is sta 
willing to go into the inquiry room till he has gota step be- dor 
yond that. That class of Christians don’t amount to much. wi 
The real Christian puts it: “ I believe ; I believe that my Re- . a ti 


deemer liveth ; T helieve that if this building of flesh were 


@. 


Assurance 


dme. I 
1 be con- 
it to any 
out of the 
y to lift a 
reach gal- 


le rock of 
you have 
Vord. If 
ored peo. 
out their 
ade them 
must be- 
. One 


d like to 
d like to 
am con- 
child of 
The idea 
| we get 
le don’t 
th; if it 
he doc: 
Bible. 
them if 
rt of hes- 
” Ehis 
oO man is 
step be- 
to much. 
tmy Re- 
“sh were 


i 
} 
: 
og 


Assurance. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 25 
destroyed, I have a building not made with hands, eternal 
in the heavens.” No hoping and trusting with them. It is 
‘“‘T know.” Hope is assured to the Christian. It is a sure 
hope ; it isn’t a doubting hope. Suppose a man asked me if 
my name was Moody, and I said: “Well, I hope so,” 
wouldn’t it sound rather strange? ‘I hope it is;” or, “ I’m 
trying to be Moody.” Now, if a man asks you if you are 
a Christian, you ought to be able to give a reason. 


GOLD. 


—There cannot be any peace where there is uncertainty. 

—There is no knowledge like that of a man who knows 
he is saved, who can look up and see his “ title clear to man- 
sions in the skies.” 

—I believe hundreds of Christian people are being deceived 
by Satan now on this point, that they have not got the as- 
surance of saly..tion just because they are not willing to take 
God at His word. 

—‘ But,” a man said to me, “no one has come back, and 
we don’t know what isin the future. It is all dark, and 
how can we be sure?” Thank God! Christ came down from 
heaven, and I would rather have Him, coming as he does 
right from the bosom of the Father, than any one else. We 
can rely on what Christ says, and He says: “He that be 
lieveth on Me shall not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
Not that we are going to have it when we die, but right 
here to-day. 

—Now, I find a great many people who want some evi- 
dence that they have accepted the Son of God. My friends, 
if you want any evidence, take God’s word for it. You can't 
find better evidence than that. You know that when the 
angel Gabriel came down and told Zachariah he should have 
a son he wanted a further token than the angel’s word. Ie 
asked Gabriel for it and he answered: “I am Gabriel, who 
stands in the presence of the Lord.” He had never been 
doubted, and he thundered out this to Zachariah. But he 
wanted a further token, and Gabriel said: ‘You shall have 
a token: you shall be dumb till your son shall be given you.” 


" 
s 
4 
a 


26 MOODY’S ANECDOTES > Belvev 

’ how it 

/ saw hi 

a fain 

- wilder 

soever 

BELIEVE. life.” 

read a 

© his he 

‘ ‘ ‘ Christ 

Moody and the Dying Soldier. Vo 

After the battle of Pittsburgh Landing and Murfreesboro’ God d 

I was in a hospital at Murfreesboro’. And one night after no ple 

midnight, I was woke up and told that there was a man in ye, fo 
one of the wards who wanted to see me. I went to him and 
he called me “ chaplain ”—I wasn’t a chaplain—and he said 
he wanted me to help him die. And I said: “I'd take you 

right up in my arms and carry you into the kingdom of Tr 

God if I could; but I can’t do it; I can’t help you to die.” been : 

And he said: “Who can?” I said: “The Lord Jesus Christ \ A fan 

can—He came for that purpose.” He shook his head and fever. 

said : “‘ He can’t save me; I have sinned all my life.” And sanite 

I said: “ But He came to save sinners.” I thought of his aroun 

mother in the North, and I knew that, she was anxious that sick 

he should die right, and I thought I’d stay with him. JI strick 

prayed two or three times, and repeated all the promises I and 

could, and I knew that in a few hours he would be gone, I son a: 

said I wanted to read him a conversation that Christ had - negle 

with a man who was anxious about his soul. I turned to fellov 

the third chapter of John. His eyes were riveted on me, you, 

and when I came to the 14th and 15th verses, he caught up moth 

the words, “ As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilder. grave 

ness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that who. the | 

soever believeth on Him should not perish, but have eternal about 

life.” He stopped me and said: “Is that there?” I said: had 

“Yes,” and he asked me to read it again, and Idid so. He wept 

leaned his elbows on the cot and clasped his hands together alizec 

and said ;: “That’s good ; won't you read it again,” along 

I read it the third time, and then went on with the rest askec 

of the chapter. When I finished, his eyes were closed, his what 


hands were folded, and there was a smile on his face. Oh! for J 


irfreesboro’ 
night after 
S @man in 
to him and 
ind he said 
d take you 
ingdom of 
ou to die.” 
sus Christ 
}head and 
fe.” And 
ght of his 
‘xious that 
h him I 
romises I 
e gone. J 
Yhrist had 
turned to 
ed on me, 
caught up 
he wilder- 
that who. 
ve eternal 
” T said: 
1so. He 
3 together 


h the rest 
slosed, his 
ce. Oh! 


Rd 
4 
ie 


5 


Belveve. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 27 


how it was lit up! What a change had come over it! I 
saw his lips quivering, and I leaned over him and heard, in 


a faint whisper: “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
_ wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that who- 


soever believeth on Him should not perish, but have eternal 
life.” He opened his eyes and said: “That’ enough ; don’t 
read any more.” He lingered a few hours and then pillowed 
his head on those two verses, and then went up in one of 
Christ’s chariots and took his seat in the Kingdom of God. 
You may spurn God’s remedy and perish ; but I tell you 


God don’t want you to perish. He says: “As I live I have 
no pleasure in the death of the wicked.” “Turn ye, turn 


ye, for why will ye die?” 


A Child at its Mother’s Gravee 


I remember seeing a story some time agoin print. It has 
been in the papers, but it will not hurt us to hear it again. 
A family in a Southern city were stricken down with yellow 
fever. It was raging there, and there were very stringent 
sanitary rules. The moment anybody died, a cart went 
around and took the coffin away, The father was taken 
sick and died and was buried, and the mother was at last 
stricken down. ‘The neighbours were afraid of the plague, 
and none dared go into the house. The mother had a little 
son and was anxious about her boy, and afraid he would be 


- neglected when she was called away, so she called the little 


fellow to her bedside, and said: ‘““My boy, I am going to leave 
you, but Jesus will come to you when I am gone.” The 
mother died, the cart came along and she was laid in the 
grave. The neighbours would have liked to take 
the boy, but were afraid of the pestilence. He wandered 
about and finally started up to the place where they 
had laid his mother and sat down on the grave and 
wept himself to sleep. Next morning he awoke and re- 
alized his position—alone and hungry. A stranger came 
along and seeing the little fellow sitting on the ground, 
asked him what he was waiting for. The boy remembered 
what his mother had told him and answered : “I am waiting 
for Jesus,” and told him the whole story. The man’s heart 


" 


wy 
on 


we 


28 MOODY'S ANECDCTES Believe ” Believe. 
was touched, tears trickled down his cheeks and he said: “thing. 
“Jesus has sent me,” to which the boy replied: “You have _ brings 
been a good while coming, sir.” He was provided for. So — testify 
it is with us. To wait for results, we roust have courage myself 
and patience and God will help us. B fored t 
medici! 
€ saving 
“You Know Me, Moody.” . the re 
: Sc 
Well, let me illustrate it then, and perhaps you will be the re 
able to understand it. Suppose I am dying with consump- darkne 
tion, which I inherited from my father or mother, I did you né 
not get it by any fault of my own, by any neglect of my you n¢ 
health ; I inherited it, let us suppose. Well, I go to my 
physician, and to the best physicians, and they all give me 
up. They say I am incurable ; I must die; I have not thirty 
days to live. Well, a friend happens to come along and Onc 
looks at me and says: ‘Moody, you have got the consump- ascens 
tion.” “T know it very well ; I don’t want any one to tel) ) car, bi 
me that.” ‘ But,” he says: “ there is a remedy—a remedy, that o 
I tell you. Let me have your attention. I want to call men s 
your attention to it. I tell you there is a remedy.” “But, rope. 
sir, I don’t believe it. I have tried the leading physicians the ca 
in this country and in Europe, and they tell me there is no hold a 
hope.” ‘ But you know me, Moody; you have known me of the 
for years.” ‘Yes, sir.” “Do you think, then, I would man \ 
tell you a falsehood?” “No.” “ Well, ten years ago I was sincer 
far gone. I was given up by the physicians to die, but I in his 
took this medicine and it cured me, 1 am perfectly well— _ the fa 
look at me.” “T say that it is a very strange case.” ‘Yes, believ 
it may be strange, but it is a fact. That medicine cured me; T ask 
take this medicine and it will cure you. Although it has posed 
cost me a great deal, it shall not cost you anything, Al- could 
though the salvation of Jesus Christ is as free as the air, it believ 
tost God the richest jewel of heaven. He had to give His ing WwW 


only Son ; give all He had ;--He had only ene Son, and He 
gave Him. Do not make light of it, then, I beg of you.” 
Well,” I say, “I would like to believe you, but this is con- 
trary to my reason.” Hearing this, my friend goes away Sil 
and brings another friend to me and he testifies to the same 


Believe 


nd he said: 

‘You have 
ded for. So 
Ave courage 


* 


you will be 
th consump- 
ther, I did 
glect of my 
I go to my 
all give me 
ve not thirty 
e along and 
he consump- 
y one to tel] 
—a remedy, 
vant to call 
iy. “Bat, 
y physicians 
there is no 
‘known me 
n, I would 
‘s ago I was 
» die, but I 
sctly well— 
ie 8 Yes, 
e cured me; 
ough it has 
thing. Al- 
S$ the air, it 
to give His 
on, and He 
eg of you.” 
this is con- 
goes away 
to the same 


$ 
EA 


| Believe 


~~ 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 29 


* thing. He again gves away when I do not yet believe, and 


‘brings in another, and another, and another, and they all 


‘testify tothe same thing. 


They say they were as bad as 


' myself ; and they took the same medicine that has been of- 


_ saving power, I die. 


fered to me, and it cured them. He then hands me the 
medicine. I dash it to the ground; I do not believe in its 
The reason is, then, that I spurned 
the remedy. 

So it will not be because Adam fell, but that you spurn 
the remedy offered to you to save you. You will have 
darkness rather than light. How, then, shall ye escape if 
you neglect so great salvation? There is no hope for you if 
you neglect the remedy. 


Rational Belief. 


Once there were a couple of men arranging a balloon 
ascension. They thought they had two ropes fastened to the 
car, but one of them only was fastened, and they unfastened 
that one rope, and the balloon started to go up. One of the 
men seized hold of the car, and the other seized hold of the 


rope. Up went the balloon, and the man who seized hold of 


the car went up with it, and was lost. The man who laid 
hold of the rope was just as sincere as the man who laid hold 
of the car. There was just as much reason to say that the 
man who laid hold of that would be saved, because he was 
sincere, as the man who believed in a lie because he’ is sincere 
in his belief, I like a man to be able to give a reason for 


the faith that is in him. Once I asked a man what he 


believed, and he said he believed what his Church believed: 
I asked him what his Church believed, and he said he sup- 
posed his Church believed what he did, and that was all I 
could get out of him. And so men believe what other people 
believe and what their church believes, without really know- 
ing what their Church and other people do believe. 


GOLD. 
—God is truth. 


— What grounds have we for not believing God 1 


A ty a ae creme IRONS se 


30 MOODY'S ANECDOTES The 
Well 

educ 

say 4 

be ju 

THE BIBLE. be j 

stud: 

“How Funny You Talk.” € on 

No book in the world has been so misjudged as the God 
Bible. Men judge it without reading it. Or perhaps they year 
read a bit here and a bit there, and then close it saying: “ It livin 


is so dark and mysterious!” You take a book, now-a-days, 
and read it, Some one asks you what you think about it. 
“ Well,” you say, “I have only read it through once, not Y 
very carefully, and I should not like to give an opinion,” 


Yet people take up God’s book, read a few pages, and con- abot 
demn the whole of it. Of all the sceptics and infidels 1 Mos 
have ever met speaking against the Bible, I have never met ue , 
one who read it through. There may be such men, but I nes 
have never met them. It is simply an excuse. There is no ee 
man living who will stand up before God and say that kept xe | 
him out of the kingdom. It is the devil’s work trying to a 
make us believe it is not true, and that it is dark and mys- ahi 
terious. The only way to overcome the great enemy of souls ilo 
. is by the written Word of God. He knows that, and so as 
tries to make men disbelieve it. As soon as a man is a true te 
believer in the Word of God, he is a conqueror over Satan. ‘4 
Young man! the Bible is true. What have these infidels “ 
to give you in its place}? What has make England but the 
vpen Bible? Every nation that exalteth the Word of God The 
is exalted, and every nation that casteth it down is cast 
down. Oh, let us cling close to the Bible. Of course, we T 
shall not understand it all at once. But men are not to con- thor 
demn it on that account. Suppose I should send my little littl 
boy, five years old, to school to-morrow morning, and when The 
he came home in the afternoon, say to him: ‘Willie, can you the 
read? Can you write? Can you spell? Do you understand got 
all about Algebra, Geometry, Hebrew, Latin, and Greek ?”’ paly 
“Why, papa,” the little fellow would say, “ how funny you Rave 


talk, I have been all day trying to learn the A BO)’ _ kno 


dged as the 
verhaps they 
saying; “ It 
now-a-days, 
nk about it. 
th once, not 
un opinion,” 
res, and con- 
d infidels 1 
e never met 
men, but I 
There is no 
ay that kept 
k trying to 
rk and mys- 
emy of souls 
hat, and so 
ian is a true 
over Satan, 
nese infidels 
land but the 
Vord of God 
own is cast 
course, we 
> not to con- 
id my little 
y, and when 
llie, can you 
understand 
nd Greek ?’ 
- funny you 
e ABQ?!’ 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 31 


The Bible. 


Well, suppose I should reply : “ If you have not finished your 
education, you need not go any more.” What would you 
say? Why, you would say, I had gone mad. There would 
be just as much reason in that, as in the way that people 
tal about the Bible. My friends, the men who have 
studied the Bible for fifty years—the wise men and the 
scholars, the great theologians—have never got down to the 
depths of it yet. There are truths there that the Church of 
God has been searching out for the last eighteen hundred 
years, but no man has fathomed the depths of that ever- 
living stream. 


“tow Christ Expounded It.” 


You will find Christ, after He had risen, again speaking 
about the Old Testament prophets: ‘And beginning at 
Moses, and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all 
the Scripture the things concerning Himself.” Concerning 
Himself. Don’t that settle the question? I tell youl am 
convinced in my mind that the Old Testament is as true as 
the New. “And He began at Moses and all the prophets.” 
Mark that, “all the prophets.” Then in the forty-fourth 
verse: ‘And He said unto them, these are the words 
which I spuke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all 
things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of 
Moses and in the prophets and in the psalms concerning 
Me. Then opened He their understanding that they might 
understand the Scripture.” 


The Scotch “Draw the Bible” on False Doctrine. 


There is no place I have ever been in where people so 
thoroughly understand their Bibles as in Scotland. Why, 
little boys could quote Scripture and take me up on a text. 
They have the whole nation just educated, as it were, with 
the Word of God. Infidelity cannot come there. A man 
got up in Glasgow, at a corner, and began to preach universal 
salvation. “Oh, sir,” said an old woman, “ that will never 


gave the like of me.” She had heard enough preaching to 
_ know that it would never save her. , If a man comes among 


32 MOODY'S ANECDOTES The Bible. 


them with any false doctrine, these Scotchmen instantly 
draw their Bibles on him. I had to keep my eyes open and 
be careful what I said there. They knew their Bibles a 
good deal better than I did. And so if the preachers could 
get the people to read the Word of God more carefully, and 
note what they heard, there would not be so much infidelity 
among us, 


Moody and the Infidel. 


An infidel had come the other day, to one of our meet- 
ings, and when I talked with him, he replied that he didn’t 
believe one-twelfth part of the Bible, but I kept on quoting 
Scripture, feeling that if the man didn’t believe, God could 
do what He chose with His word, and make it quick and 
powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword. The man 
kept saying that he did not believe what the Bible said, and 
I kept on quoting passage after passage of Scripture, and 
the man, who, two hours before, had entered the hall an 
infidel, went out of it a converted man, and a short time 
after his conversion he left the city for Boston, a Christian, 
to join his family in Europe., Before this gentleman went 
away, I asked him if he believed the Bible, and his reply 
was: “From back to back, every wurd of it.” 


“* Deluged with Blood.” 


A good many years ago there was a convention held in 
France, and those who held it wanted to get the country to 
deny God, to burn the Bible, wanted to say that men 
passed away like a dog and a dumb animal. What was tbe 
result? Not long since that country was filled with blood. 
Did you ever think what would take place if we could vote 
the Bible and the ministers of the gospel and God out from 
among tie people? My friends, the country would be 
deluged with blood. Your life and mine would not be safc 
in this city to-night. We could not walk through these 
streets with safety. We don’t know how much we owe Wod 
and the influence of His Gospel among even ungudly men. 


The 


from 
frien 
but 1 
ehild 
in yc 
You 
come 


but 1 
and { 


the | 


The Bible. 


n instantly 
98 Open and 
ir Bibles a 
chers could 
efully, and 
h infidelity 


' our meet- 
it he didn’t 
on quoting 
God could 
; quick and 

The man 
e said, and 
ipture, and 
she hall an 
short time 
Christian, 
‘man went 


l his reply 


nm held in 
country to 
that men 
at was the 
vith bloon. 
could vote 
lout from 
would be 
10t be safe 
ugh these 
e owe God 
rudly men. 


The Bitte. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 38 


GOLD. 


—There are over two hundred passages in the Old Testa- 
ment which prophesied about Christ, and every one of them 
has come true, 


—God didn’t give the wo.1d two different Bibles ; they are 
one, and must be believed from bav!: to back, from Genesis 
to Revelations, or not at all. 


—I haven’t found the first man who ev. read the Bible 
from back to back carefully who remained an infidel. My 
friends, the Bible of our mothers ¢.ad fathers is true, 


—The Word of God may be darkened to the natural man, 
but the way of Salvation is written so plain, that the little 
child six years old can understand it if she will, 


—NSet more and more store by the Bible. Then troubles 
in your Christian life will pass away like a morning cloud, 
You will feed and live on the Word of God, and it will be- 
come the joy of your soul. 


—There are dark and mysterious things in the Bible now, 
but when you bezin to trust Christ your eyes will be opened 
and the Bible will be a new book to you. It will become 
the Book of books to you. 


—TI notice if a man goes to cut up the Bible and comes to 
you with one truth and says: “I don’t believe this, and I 
don’t believe that,”—I notice when he begins to doubt por 
tions of the Word of God he soon doubts it all, 


—If you will show me a Bible Christian living on the 
Word of God, I will show you a joyful man. He is mount 
ing up all the time. He has got new truths that lift him 
up over every obstacle, and he mounts over difficulties higher 
and higher, like a man I once heard of who had a bag of gas 
fastened on either side, and if he just touched the ground 
with his foot, over a wall or a hedge he would go; and so 
these truths make us so light that we bound over every 
pbstacle, 


> 


34 MOUDY’'S ANECDOTES 


BIBLE SIUDY 


How Moody was Blessed---‘‘Mark Your Bible.” 


T want to tell you how I was blessed a few years ago, upon 
hearing a discourse upon the thirtieth chapter of Proverbs. 
The speaker said the children of God were like four things, 
The first thing was: ‘The ants are a people not strung,” 
and he went on to compare the children of God to ants. He 
said the people of God were like ants. They pay no atten- 
tion to the things of the present, but go on steadily preparing 
for the future. The next thing he compared them to was 
the conies, ‘The conies are buta feeble folk.” It is a very 
weak little thing. ‘ Well,” said I, “I wouldn’t like to be 
as a coney.” But he went on to say that it built upon a 
rock, The children of God were very weak, but they laid 
their foundation upon a rock. ‘“ Well,” said I, “I will be 
like a cdmey and build my hopes upon a rock.” Like the 
Irishman who said he trembled himself, but the rock upon 
which his house was built never did. The next thing the 
speaker compared them to was a locust. I didn’t think much 
of locusts ; and I thought I wouldn’t care about being like one. 
But he went on to read: “They have no king, yet they go 
forth all of them by bands.” There were the Congregation- 
alists, the Presbyterians, the Methodist bands going forth 
without a king, but by and by our King wiil come back 
again, and these bands will fly to Him. “ Well, I will be 
like a locust; my King is away,” I thought. The next com- 
parison wasa spider. I didn’t like this at all, but he said 
if we went into a gilded palace filled with luxury, we might 
see a spider holding on to something, oblivious to all 
the luxury below. It was laying hold of the things 
above, ‘ Well,” said I, “I would like to be a spider.” I 
heard this a good many years ago, and I just put the speak- 
er’s name to it, andit makes a sermon. But take your Bibles 


~w 


' Bible.” 


ago, upon 
Proverbs. 
ur things. 
t strong,” 
ants. He 
no atten- 
preparing 
em to was 
; 18 @ very 
like to be 
lt upon a 
they laid 
‘T will be 
Like the 
‘ock upon 
thing the 
ink much 
x like one. 
t they go 
gregation- 
ing forth 
ome back 
I will be 
next com- 
ut he said 
we might 
us to all 
1e things 
vider,” I 
the speak- 
our Bibles 


~ 


Bible Study. 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 35 


and mark them. Don’t think of weaung them out. It is a 
rare thing to find a man wearing his Bible out now-a-days— 
and Bibles are cheap, too. You are living in a land where 
they are plenty, Study them and mark them, and don’t be 
afraid of wearing them, 


Moody Visits Prang’s Chromo Establishment. 


When I went to Boston, I went into Mr, Prang’s chroma 
establishment. I wanted to know how the work was done. 
He took me toa stone several feet square, where he took 
the first impression, but when he took the paper off the stone 
I could see no sign of a man’s face there. ‘“ Wait a little,” 
he said. He took me to another stone, but when the paper 
was lifted I couldn’t see any impression yet. He took me 
up, up to eight, nine, ten stones, and then I could see just 
the faintest outlines of a man’s face. He went on till he got 
up to about the twentieth stone, and I could see the impres- 
sion of a face, but he said it was not very correct yet. Well, 
he went on till he got up, I think, to the twenty-eighth 
stone, and a perfect face appeared, and it looked as if all it 
had to do was to speak and it would be human. If you read 
a chapter of the Bible and don’t see anything in it, read it a 
second time, and if you cannot see anything in it read it a 
third time. Dig deep. Read it again and again, and even 
if you have to read it twenty-eight times, do so and you will 
see the Man Christ Jesus, for He is in every page of the 
Word, 


Get the Key to Job, 


An Englishman asked me some time ago: “Do you know 
much about Job?” “ Well, I know a little,” I replied. “Tf 
you've got the key of Job, you’ve got the key to the whole 
Bible.” “ What?” I replied, “T thought it was a poetical 
book.” ‘ Well,” said he, “I will just divide Job into seven 
heads. The first is the perfect man—untried ; and that is 
Adam and Eve before they fell. The second head is tried by 
adversity— Adam after the fall. The third is the wisdom of 
the world—the three friends who came to try to help Job 


36 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Bible Study 


out of his difficulties. They had no power to help him at all. 
He could stand his scolding wife, but he could not stand them. 
The fourth head takes the form of the Mediator, and in the 
fitth head God speaks at last. He heard Him before by the 
ear, but he hears Him now by the soul, and he fell down 
flat upon his face. A good many men in Chicago are like 
Job. They think they are mighty good men, but the 
moment they hear the voice of God they know they are 
sinners, they are in the dust. There isn’t much talk about 
their goodness then. Here he was with his face down. Job 
learned his lesson. That was the sixth head, ana in these 
heads were the burdens of Adam’s sin. ‘The seventh head 
was when God showed him His face.” Well, I learne the 
key to the Bible. I cannot tell how this helped me. I told 
it to another man, and he asked me if I ever thought how 
he got his property back and his sheep back. He gave Job 
double what he had and gave him ten children besides, so 
that he should have ten in heaven besides his ten on earth, 


One Book at a time. 


T have found it a good plan to take up one book at a time. 
Zt is a good deal better to study one book at a time tlian to 
run through the Bible. If we study one book and get its 
key, it will, perhaps, open up others. Take up the book of 
Genesis, and you will find eight beginnings ; or, in other 
words, you pick up the key of several books. The gospel 
was written that man might believe on Jesus Christ, and 
every chapter speaks of Him. Now, take the book of 
Genesis ; it says it is the book of beginnings. That is the 
key ; then the book of Exodus—it is the book of redemption; 
that is the key-word of the whole. Take up the book of 
Leviticus, and we find that it is the book of sacrifices, And 
so on through all the different books ; you will find each one 
with a key. Another thing: We must study it unbiased. 
A great many people believe certain things. They believe 
in certain creeds and doctrines, and they run through the 
book to get Scripture in accordance with them. If a manis 
a Calvinistic man he wantr to find something in accordance 
with bis doctrine. But if we go to seek truth, the Spirit of 


® 


le Study 


im. at all. 
nd them. 
d in the 
e by the 
‘ell down 
re like 
but the 
they are 
lk about 
vn. Job 
in these 
nth head 
rnc“ the 
» told 
ight how 
rave Job 
sides, so 
a earth, 


t a time. 
than to 
d get its 
book of 
in other 
he gospel 
rist, and 
book of 
at ia the 
em) ‘tion; 
book of 
s. And 
each one 
nbiased. 
y believe 
ugh the 
a& man is 
cordance 
Spirit of 


Bible Study. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 37 


God will come. Don’t seek it in the blue tight of Presby- 
terianism, in the red light of Methodism, or in the light of 
Episcopalianism, but study it in the light of Calvary. 


—— 


Note What Jesus Says. 


Some people say to me: “ Moody, you don’t believe in the 
flood. All the scientific men tell us it is absurd.” Let them 
tell us. Jesus tells us of it, and I would rather take the 
word of Jesus than that of anyother one. I haven't got 
much respect for those men who dig down for stones with 
shovels in order to take away the word of God. Men don’t 
believe in the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, but we have 
it sealed in the New Testament: “As it was in the days of 
Sodom and Gomorrah.” They don’t believe in Lot’s wife, 
but he says: “ Remember Lot’s wife.” So there is not a 
thing that men to-day cavilat but the son of God indorses. 
They don’t believe in the swallowing of Jonah. They say it 
is impossible thata whale could swallow Jonah—its throat 
is too small. They forget that the whale was prepared for 
Jonah; 23 the coloured woman said: “Why, God could pre- 
pare a man to swallow a whale, let alone a whale to swallow 
@ man.” 


One Word. 


I remember I took up the word “love,” and turned to the 
Scriptures and studied it, and got so that I felt I loved 
everybody. J got full of it. When I went on the street I 
felt as it T loved everybody I saw. It ran out of my 
fingers. Suppose you take up the subject of love and study 
it up. You will get so full of it that all you Lave got to do is 
to open your lips and a flood of the love of God flows upon 
the meeting. If you go into a court you will find a lawyer 
pleading a case. He gets everything bearing upon one 
point, heaped up so as to carry his argument with all the 
force he can, in order to convince the jury. Now it seems to 
mea man should do the same in talking to an audience ; just 
think that he has a jury before him, and he wants to convict 
asinner. If it is love, get all you can upon the subject and 
talk love, love, 


38 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Bible Study, 


The “I Ams,” “I Wills,” Ete. 


A favourite way to study the Bible with me, is first to take 
up one expression, and run through the different places where 
they are found. Take the “Iams” of John: “I am the 
bread of life ;” “I am the water of life;” “Iam the way, 
the truth, and the life ;” “Iam the resurrection pT am 
all, and in all.” God gives to His children a blank, and on it 
they can write whatever they most want, and He will fill 
the bill. And then the promises. A Scotchman found out 
thirty-one thousand distinct promises in the Word of God. 
There is not a despondent soul but God hasa promise just to 
suit him. 


GOLD. 
—The best truths are got by digging deep for them. 


—When we know our Bible, then it is that God can 
use us. 


—When we find a man meditating on the words of God, 
my friends, that man is full of boldness, and is successful. 


—When a man is filled with the Word of God you can- 


not keep him still. If a man has got the Word he must 
speak or die. 


—Let us have one day exclusively to study and read the 
Word of God. 1f we can’t take time during the week, we 
will have Sunday uninterrupted. 


—Now, as old Dr. Bonner, of Glasgow, said: “The Lord 
didn’t tell Joshua how to use the sword, but He told him 
how he should meditate on the Lord day and night, and 
then he would have good success,” 


—One thing I have noticed in studying the Word of God, 
and that is, when a man is filled with the Spirit, he deals 
largely with the Word of God, whereas the man who is filled 
with his own ideas refers rarely to the Word of God. He 


gets along without it, and you seldom see it mentioned ip 
his discourses, 


ble Study, 


rst to take 
uces where 
‘I am the 
| the way, 
” “Tam 
, and on it 
fe will fill 
found out 
‘d of God, 
ise just to 


em. 


God can 


} of God, 


uccessful. 


you can- 
| he must 


read the 
week, we 


The Lord 
told him 
ight, and 


1 of God, 
he deals 
o is filled 
od. He 
tionea in 


z 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 39 


BLIND. 


A Mother’s Mistake. 


While I was attending a meeting in a certsin city some 
time ago, a lady came to me and said: “TI want you to go 
home with me; I have something to say to you.” When we 
reached her home, there were some friends there. After 
they had retired, she put her arms on the table, and tears 
began to come into her eyes, but with an effort she repressed 
her emotion. After a struggle she went on to say that she 
was going to tell me something which she had never told 
auy other living person. I should not tell it now, but she 
has gone to another world. She said she had a son in 
Chicago, and she was very anxious aboat him. When he 
was young he got interested in religion at the rooms of the 
Young Men’s Christian Association. He used to go out in 
the street and circulate tracts. He was her only son, and 
she was very ambitious that he should make a name in the 
world, and wanted him to get into the very highest circles. 


“Oh, what a mistake people make about these highest circles. 


Society is false; it isa sham. She was deceived like a good 
many more votaries of fashion and hunters after wealth at 
the present time. She thought it was beneath her son to go 
down and associate with those young men who hadn’t much 
money. She tried to get him away from them, but they had 
more influence than she had, and, finally, to break his whole 
association, she packed him off to a boarding-school. He 
went soon to Yale College, and she supposed he got into one 
of those miserable secret societies there that have ruined so 
many young men, and the next thing she heard was that the 
boy had gone astray. 

She began to write letters urging him to come into the 
kingdom of God, but she heard that he tore the letters up 


40 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Blind 


without reading them. She went to him to try and regain 
whatever influence she possessed over him, but her efforts 
were useless; and she came home with a broken heart. He 
left New Haven, and for two years they heard nothing of 
him. At last they heard he was in Chicago, and his father 
found him and gave him $30,000 to start in business, They 
thought it would change him, but it didn’t. They asked me 
when I went back to Chicago to try and use my influence 
with him, I got a friend to invite him to his house one 
night, where I intended to meet him, but he heard I was to 
be there, and did not come near, like a good many other 
young men, who seem to be afraid of me. I tried many 
times to reach him, but could not. While I was travelling 
one day on the New Haven Railroad, I bought a New York 
paper, and in it I saw a dispatch saying he had been drowned 
in Lake Michigan, His father came on to find his body, 
and, after considerable searching, they discovered it. All 
his clothes and his body were covered with sand, The body 
was taken home to that broken-hearted mother. She said: 
“If I thought he was in heaven I would have peace.” Her 
disobedience of God’s law came back upon her. 

So, my friends, if you have a boy impressed with the 
gospel, help him to come to Christ. Bring him in the arms 
of your faith, and He will unite you closer to him, 


“Pull for the Shore.’’ 


Look at that man in a boat on Niagara River. He is 
only about a mile from the rapids. A man on the bank 
shouts to him: “ Young man, young man, the rapids are not 
far away ; you'd better pull for the shore.” ‘You attend to 
your own business ; I will take care of myself,” he replies, 
Like a great many people here, and ministers, too, they 
don’t want any evangelist here, don’t want any help, how- 
ever great the danger ahead. On he goes, sitting coolly 
in his boat. Now he has got a little nearer, and a man 
from the bank of the river sees his danger, and shouts; 
“Stranger, you'd better pull for the shore; if you go 
further, you'll be lost. You can be saved now if you pull 
in.” “Mind your business, and you'll have enough to 


el 


Blind 


and regain 
her efforts 
heart. He 
nothing of 
1 his father 
ess, They 
y asked me 
'y influence 
house one 
rd I was to 
nany other 
tried many 
3 travelling 
New York 
2n drowned 
| his body, 
ed it. All 

The body 

She said: 
ace.” Her 


l with the 
n the arms 
L. 


er. He is 
. the bank 
ids are not 
1 attend to 
he replies. 
too, they 
help, how- 
ing coolly 
nd a man 
d shouts: 
if you go 
F you pull 
enough te 


Blind. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 4] 
do; I’ll take care of myself.” Like a good many men, they 
are asleep to the danger that’s hanging over them while 
they are in the current. And I say, drinking young man, 
don’t you think you are standing still. You are in the cur- 
rent, and if you don’t pull for a rock of safety you will go 
over the precipice. On he goes. I can see him in the boat, 
laughing at the danger. A man on the bank is looking at 
him, and he lifts up his voice and cries: “Stranger, stranger, 
pull for the shore ; if you don’t, you'll lose your life ;” and 
the young man laughs at him—mocks him, That is the way 
with hundreds in Chicago. If you go to them and point out 
their danger, they will jest and joke at you. By and by, he 
says: “I think [ hear the rapids—yes, I hear them roar ;” 
and he seizes his oars and pulls with all his strength, but 
the current is too great, and nearer and nearer he is drawn 
on to that abyss, until he gives one unearthly scream, and 
over he goes. Ah, my friends, this is the case with hun- 
dreds in this city. They are in the current of riches, of 
pleasure, of drink, that will take them to the whirlpool. 


A Blind Man Preaches to 3,000,000 People. 


I was at a meeting in London when I was there, and I 
heard a man speak with wonderful power and earnestness. 
‘Who is that man?” I asked, my curiosity being excited. 
“ Why, that is Dr. He is blind.” I felt some inter- 
est in this man, and at the close of the meeting I sought an 
interview, and he told me that he had been stricken blind 
when very young. His mother took him to a doctor, and 
asked him about his sight. ‘ You must give up all hope,” 
the doctor said. ‘ Your boy is blind, and will be forever.” 
“What, do you think my boy will never see?” asked his 
mother. ‘“ Never, again.” The mother took her boy to her 
bosom and cried: “Oh, my boy, who will take care of you 
when [ am gone? Who will look to you ?”’—forgetting the 
fuithfulness of that God she had taught him to love. He 
became a servant of the Lord, and was permitted to print 
the Bible in twelve different languages, printed in the raised 
letters, so that all the blind people could read the Scriptures 
themselves. He had a congregation, my friends, of three 


42 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Blind. 


millions of people, and I think that blind man was one of 
the happiest beings in all London, He was naturally blind, 
but he had eyes to his soul, and could see a bright eternity 
in the future. He had buiit his foundation upon the living 
God. We pity those who have not their natural sight ; but 
how you should pity yourself if you are spiritually blind. 


ee 
Money-Blind. 


I heard of a man who had accumulated gre; . lth, and 
death came upon him suddenly, and he realizeu, as the say- 
ing is, that “there was no bank in the shroud,” that he 
couldn’t take anything away with him ; we may have all the 
money on earth, but we must leave it behind us, He called 
a lawyer in and commenced to will away his property be- 
fore he went away. His little girl couldn’t understand ex- 
actly where he was going, and she said: “ F ather, have you 
got a home in that land you are going to?” The arrow 
went down to his soul. “(ota home there?” The rich 
man had hurled away God and neglected to secure a home 
there for the sake of his money, and he found it was now 
too late. He was money-mad, he was money-blind. 


GOLD. 


—Now, I am no prophet, nor the son of a prophet, but 
one thing I can predict, that every one of our new converts 
that goes to studying his Bible, and loves this book above 
every other book, is sure to hold out. The world will have 
no charm for him ; he will get the world under his feet, be- 
cause in this book he will find something better than the 
world can give him. 


—What can botanists tell you of the lily of the valley % 
You must study this book for that. What can geologists 
tell you of the Rock of Ages, or mere astronomers about the 
Bright Morning Star? In those pages we find all know- 
ledge unto salvation; here we read of the ruin of man by 
nature, redemption by the blood, and regeneration by the 
Holy Ghost. These three things run all through and through 


them. 


Blind, 


1 was one of 
urally blind, 
ght eternity 
n. the living 
1 sight ; but 
lly blind, 


_ulth, and 
, a8 the say- 
id,” that he 
have all the 

He called 
roperty be- 
lerstand ex- 
r, have you 
The arrow 
' ‘The rich 
ire a home 
t was now 
id. 


ophet, but 
w converts 
00k above 
| will have 
is feet, be- 
‘than the 


he valley 3 
geologists 
about the 
all know- 
f man by 
mn by the 
id through 


fe J 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 43 


THE BLOOD. 


A Mother Dies that her Boy may Live. 


iforni t, a man went 

the California gold fever broke out, a 
tl cele hs his wife in New England with his boy. As 
as he got on and was successful he was to send for them. 
es a long time before '.. succeeded, but at last he got 


| ife’ t leaped 
h to send for them. The wife’s hear 
fur tone BEB took her boy to New York, got on board a 


They 


acifi er, and sailed away to San Francisco. 
rasa 65 long at sea before the cry of “ Fire! St a 
rang through the ship, and rapidly it gained on Wa oe 
was a powder magazine on board, and the cup tani new a 
moment the fire reached the powder, every ee : 
d child must perish. They got out the life-boats, bu ey 
a re too small! In a minute they were overcrowded. The 
fast one was just pushing away, when the mother pled with 
them to take her and her boy. - No,” they erie By i 
ot as many as we can hold. She anes em i 
seueaty, that at last they said they would take hea 
Do you think she leaped into that boat and left : : oN 
die? No! She seized her boy, gave him one “ ae 
kissed him, and dropped him over into the boat. <H i He 
she said, ‘if you live to see your father, tell him - : oe 
in your place.” That is a faint type of what Christ has don 
fae as He laid down his life for us. He died that ve 
mately lives Now will you. not love Him? What 1 
i" of that young man if he should speak contemptu- 
ial at such a mother! She went down to a watery grave 
es eee her son, Well, shall we speak Sige ae 
such a Saviour? May God make us loyal to bag . y 
friends, you will need Him one day. You will nee A 
when you come to cross the swellings of Jordan, You 


44 MOODY’S ANECDOTES The Blood. 


need Him when you stand at the bar of God. May God 
forbid that when death draws nigh it should find you making 
light of the precious blood of Christ ! 


A Man Drinks up a Farm. 

A few years ago, I was going away to preach one Sunday 
n.orning, when a young man drove up in front of us. He 
had an aged woman with him, ‘ Who is that young man?” 
Tasked. “Do you see that beautiful meadow?” said my 
friend, ‘and that land there with the house upon it?’ “Yes.” 
‘His father drank that all up,” said he. Then he went on 
to tell me all about him. His father was a great drunkard, 
squandered his property, died, and left his wife in the poor- 
house. “And that young man,” he said, “is one of the 
finest young men I ever knew. He has toiled hard and 
earned money, and bought back the land ; he has taken his 
mother out of the poor-house, and now he is taking her to 
church.” I thought, that is an illustration for me. The 
first Adam in Eden sold us for naught, but the Messiah, the 
econd Adam, came and bought us back again. The first Adam 
brought us to the poor-house, as it were; the second Adam 
makes us kings and priests unto God. That is redemption. 
We get in Christ all that Adam lost, and more. Men look 
on the blood of Christ with scorn and contempt, but the time 
is coming when the blood of Christ will be worth more than 
all the kingdoms of the world. 


All Right or All Wrong. 


I remember, when in the old country, a young man came to 
me—a minister—and said he wanted to talk with me. He 
suid tome: “ Mr. Moody, you are either all right and I 
am all wrong, or else Bam right, and you are all wrong.” 
‘Well, sir,” said I, “you have the advantage of me. You 
have heard me preach, and I know what doctrines I hold, 
whereas I have not heard you, and don’t know what you 
preach.” “ Well,” said he, “the difference between your 
preaching and mine is that you make out that salva- 
"ion is got by Christ’s death, and I make out that it 


culti 
prea 
thin 
repl 
doct 
who 


Chr 


The Blood. 


May God 


you making 


one Sunday 
of us. He 
oung man ?” 
‘Y said my 
it Ve Ves,” 
he went on 
it drunkard, 
in the poor- 
one of the 
d hard and 
as taken his 
king her to 
r me. The 
Wessiah, the 
e first Adam 
scond Adam 
redemption. 

Men look 
put the time 
1 more than 


man came to 
th me. 
right and I 
all wrong.” 
f me. You 
nes [ hold, 
v what you 
tween your 
that salva- 
ut that it 


He | 


Pee ee te 
1G tea elon 


vi 
“ 


The Blood. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 45 
is attained by His life.” “Now, what do you do 
with the passages bearing upon the death?” and I 
quoted the passages, “ Without the shedding of blood 
there is no remission,” and “He Himself bore our own sirs 
by His own body on the tree,” and asked him what he did 
with them, for instance. ‘ Never preach them at all.” I 
quoted a number of passages more, and he gave me the 
same answer. ‘Well, what do you preach?” I finally 
asked. “Moral essays,” he replied. Said I: “Did you 
ever know anybody to be saved by that kind of thing; did 
you ever convert anybody by them?” “I never aimed at 
that kind of conversion ; I meant to get men to heaven by 
culture—by refinement.” ‘“ Well,” said I, “if I didn’t 
preach those texts, and only preached culture, the whole 
thing would bea sham.” ‘And it is a sham to me,” was his 
reply. “I tell you the moment a man breaks away from this 
doctrine of blood, religion becomes a sham, because the 
whole teaching of this book is of one story, and this is, that 
Christ came into the world and died for our sins. 


The Fettered Bird Freed. 


A friend in Ireland once met a little Irish boy who had 
caught a sparrow. The poor little bird was trembling in his 
hand, and seemed very anxious to escape. The gentleman 
begged the boy to let it go, as the bird could not do him any 
good; but the boy said he would not, for he had chased it 
three hours before he could catch it. He tried to reason 1t 
out with the boy, butin vain, At last he offered to buy the 
bird; the boy agreed to the price, and it was paid. Then 
the gentleman took the poor little thing and held it out on 
his hand. The boy had been holding it very fast, for the 
boy was stronger than the bird, just as Satan is stronger than 
we, and there it sat for a time, scarcely able to realize the 
fact that it had got liberty; but in a little while it flew 
away, chirping, as if to say to the gentleman: “ Thank you! 
thank you! you have redeemed me.” That is what redemp- 
tion is—buying back and setting free. So Christ came back 
to break the fetters of sin, to open the prison doors and ses 
the sinner free. This is the good news, the gospel of Christ : 
—“Yoe are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver 
and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,” 


46 MOODY'S ANECDOTES The Blood. 
GOLD, 


—The most solemn truth in the gospel is that the only 
thing Christ left down here is His blood. 


—-A man who covers up the cross, though he may be an in- 
tellectual man, and draw large crowds, will have no life 
there, and his church will be but a gilded sepulchre, 


—There is either of two things we must do. One is to 
send back the message to heaven that we don’t want the 
blood of Christ to cleanse us of our sin, or else accept it. 


—Into every house where the blood was not sprinkled the 
destroying angel came. But wherever the blood was on 
door-post and lintel, whether they had worked much, or 
whether they had worked none, God passed them over, 


—A man who has not realized what the blood has done 
for him has not the token of salvation. It is told of Julian, 
the apostate, that while he was fighting he received an arrow 
in his side. He pulled it out, and taking a handful of 
blood threw it into the air and cried: « Galilean, Galilean, 
thou hast conquered.” 


—Look at that Roman soldier as he pushed his spear into 
the very heart of the God-man! What a hellish deed! But 
what was the next thing that took place? Blood covered 
the spear! Oh! thank God, the blood covers sin, There 
was the blood covering that Spear—the very point of it. 
The very crowning act of sin brought out the crowning act 


of love; the crowning act of wickedness was the crowning 
act of grace, 


—It is said that old Dr. Alexander, of Princeton College, 
when a young student used to start out to preaeh, always 
gave them a piece of advice. The old man would stand 
with his gray locks and his venerable face and say: “ Youug 
man, make much of the blood in your ministry.” Now, I 
have travelled considerable during the past few years, and 
never met a minister who made much of the blood and much 
of the atonement but God had blessed his ministry, and souls 
were born into the light by it, 


5 
hom 
visit 
hom 
Wh 
com 
that 
com 
tow: 
aro 
to r 

that 


The Blood. 


at the only 


ay be an in- 
ive no life 
re, 


One is to 
t want the 
cept it. 


rinkled the 
od was on 
much, or 
over, 


d has done 
of Julian, 
l an arrow 
handful of 
, Galilean, 


spear into 
eed! But 
1d covered 
n. There 
oint of it. 
wning act 
crowning 


n College, 
+h, always 
uld stand 
66 You ' 
Now, 4 
years, and 
and much 
and soulg 


% 
4 


Boal 


er ewer ats eee | reste 
sd SASS Ey eee eee Sd 


aed 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. ae 


CHILD STORIES. 


Little Moody. 


I remember when I was a boy, I went several miles from 
home with an older brother. That seemed to me the longest 
visit of my life, It seemed that I was then further away from 
home than I had ever been before, or havegver been since, 
While we were walking down the street we saw an old man 
coming toward us, and my brother said: “ There is a man 
that will give you a cent. He gives every new boy that 
comes into this town a cent.” That was my first visit to the 
town, and when the old man got opposite to us he looked 
around, and my brother not wishing me to lose the cent, and 
to remind the old man that I had not received it, told him 
that I was a new boy in the town. The old man taking off 
my hat, placed his trembling hand on my head, and told me 
T had a Father in heaven. It was a kind, simple act, but I 
feel the pressure of the old man’s hand upon my head to-day. 
You don’t know how much you may do by just speaking 
kindly. 


Won by a Smile. 


In London, in 1872, one Sunday morning a minister said 
to me: “ I want you to notice that family there in one of the 
front seats, and when we go home I want to tell you their 
story.” When wa got home I asked him for the story, and 
he said ; “All that family were won by a smile.” “ Why,” 
said I, “how's that?” “Well,” said he, “as I was walking 
down a street one day I saw a child at a window ; it smiled, 
and I smiled, and we bowed. So it was the second time ; I 
bowed, she bowed. It was not long before there was another 


48 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Child Storiva, 


child, and I had got in a habit of looking and bowing, and 
pretty soon the group grew, and at last, as I went by, a lady 
was with them, I didn’t know what to do, I didn’t want 
to bow to her, but I knew the children expected it, and so 
I bowed to them all, And the mother saw I was a minis- 
ter, because I carried a Bible every Sunday morning, So 
the children followed me the next Sunday and found I was 
a minister, And they thought I was the greatest preacher, 
and their parents must hear me, A minister who is kind ta 
a child and gives him a pat on the head, why, the children 
will think he is the greatest preacher in the world, Kind. 
ness goes a great way. And to make a long story short, the 
father and mother and five children were converted, and 
they are going to join our Church next Sunday.” 

Won to Christ’ by a smile! We must get the wrinkles out 
of our brows, and we must have smiling faces, 


A Little Boy’s Experience. 


One day as a young lady was walking up the street, she 
saw a little boy running out of a shoemaker’s shop, and 
behind him was the old shoemaker chasing him with a 
wooden last in his hand, He had not run far until the last 
was thrown at him, and he was struck in the back. The 
boy stopped and began to cry. The Spirit of the Lord 
touched that young lady’s heart, and she went to where he 
was. She stepped up to him, and asked him if he was hurt. 
He told her it was none of her business. She went to work 
then to win that boy's confidence. She asked him if he went 
to school. He said: “No.” “Well, why don’t you go to 
school?” “Don't want to.” She asked him if he woul.’ not 
like to go to Sunday school. “44 you will come,” she said, 
‘‘T will tell you beautiful stories and read nice books.” She 
coaxed and pleaded with him, and at last said that if he 
wocld consent to go, she would meet him on the corner of a 
street which they should agree upon. He at last consented, 
and the next Sunday, true to his promise, he waited for her 
at the place designated. She took him by the hand-and led 
him into the Sabbath-school. “ Can you give me a place to 
teach this little boy ?’ she asked of the superintendent, 


‘ He 
~ ing li 
and s! 
~ for Cl 
she hs 
had n 


e went 


" amon; 
been 1 
mothe 
get a 
came 
secon 
the sa 

would 
it whe 
Sabba 
custor 


y the pe 


, 


profits 
- tened 
: said t! 
“you w 
* Satur 
“there 

“to lea 
_aftern 
tried 1 
end ai 
> On 
“statior 
“both k 
after 


ild Stovriva. 


owing, and 
by, a lady 
idn’t want 
it, and so 
1S & minis- 
rnins, So 
und I was 
t preacher, 
is kind te 
e children 
d. Kind. 
short, the 
erted, and 


‘inkles out 


treet, she 
shop, and 
m with a 
il the last 
ick. The 
the Lord 
where he 
was hurt, 
t to work 
f he went 
you go to 
woul:' not 
she said, 
ks.” She 
hat if he 
oyrner of a 
onsented, 
1d for her 


d-and led 


a place to 


ent. 


ea 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 49 


Child Stories. 


a He looked at the boy, but they didn’t have any such look. 
ing little ones in the school. 


A place was found, however, 


and she sat down in the corner and tried to win that soul 


a 
MM 


had never heard anyone sing so sweetly before, 


‘went home he was asked where he had been. 
"among the angels” he told his mother. 


- for Christ. Many would look upon that with contempt, but 


The little boy 
When he 

‘* Been 
He said he had 


she had got something to do for the Master. 


been to the Protestant Sabbath-school, but his father and 
mother told him he must not gothere any more or he would 


geta flogging. 


The next Sunday he went, and when he 


‘came home he got the promised flogging. He went the 


“second time and got a flogging, and also a third time with 


the same result. At last he said to his father: “I wish you 


would flog me before I go, and then I won’t have to think of 


it when I am there.” 


The father said: “If you go to that 


‘Sabbath-school again I will kill you.” It was the father’s 


custom to send his son out on the street to sell articles to 


profits of what he sold on Saturday. 


the passers-by, and he told the boy that he might have the 
The little fellow has- 


 tened to the young lady’s house and said to her: “ Father 
said that he would give me every Saturday to myself, and if 
you will just teach me, then I will come to your house every 


"Saturday afternoon.” 


I wonder how many young ladies 


a 


there are that would give up their Saturday afternoons just 


‘to lead one boy into the kingdom of God, Every Saturday 
afternoon that little boy was there at her house, and she 
“tried to tell him the way to Christ. She laboured with him, 


‘rnd at last the Jight of God’s Spirit broke upon his heart. 
~ 49ne day while he was selling his wares at the railroad 


station a train of cars approached unnoticed and passed over 


“both his legs. A physician was summoned, and the first thing 


) and father that I died a Christian?” 
boy’s corpse, and with it the last message that he died a 
~ Christian. 
“Paving that little wanderer ! 


after he arrived, the little sutferer looked up into his face 
‘and said: “Doctor, will 1 live to get home?” ‘* No,” said 
the doctor, “you are dying.” Will you tell my mother 
They bore home the 


Oh, what a noble work was the young lady’s in 

How precious the remembrance 

her! When she goes to heaven she will not be a stranger 
i 


ae 


ee 


pee see eae 


50 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Child Stories. 


there. He will take her by the hand and lead her to the 
throne of Christ. She did the work cheerfully. Oh, may 
God teach us what our work is, that we may do it for His 


glory. 
” imi eereaioana a 
Love- 


In our city a few years ago there was a little boy who 
went to one of the mission Sunday schools, His father 
moved to another part of the city about five miles away, and 
every Sunday that boy came past thirty or forty Sunday 
schools to the one he attended. And one Sunday a lady who 
was out collecting scholars for a Sunday school met him and 
asked why he went so far, past so many schools, ‘‘ There 
are plenty of others,” said she, “ just as good.” He said: 
“They may be as good, but they are not so good for me.” 
“ Why not?” she asked. “ Because they love a fellow over 
there,” he answered. Ah! love wonhim. ‘“ Because they 
love a fellow over there!” How easy it is to reach people 
through love! Sunday school teachers should win the aftec- 
tions of their scholars if they wish to lead them to Christ. 


A Little Boy Converts His Mother. - 


I remember when on the North Side I tried to reach a 
family time and again and failed. One night in the meeting, 
I noticed one of the little boys of that family. He hadn't 
come for any good, however; he was sticking pins in the backs 
of the other boys. I thought if I could get hold of him it 
would do good. I used always to go to the door and shake 
hands with the boys, and when I got to the door and saw this 
little boy coming out, I shook hands with him, and patted 
him on the head, and said I was glad to see him and 
hoped he would come again. He hung his head and went 
away. The next night, however, he came back, and he 
behaved better than he did the previous night. He 
came two or three times after, and then asked us to pray for 
him that he might become a Christian. ‘That was a happy 
night for me. He became e Christian, and a good one. One 


Chila 


night 
got h 
he w 
moth 
him 
tried 
he re 
and ° 
to yo 
reach 
So 
will | 
he fo 
tunit 
bed. 
stopp 
then 
and. | 
she a 
told ] 
Chris 
ing t 
woul 
a fe 
room 
and | 
came 
she t 
see h 
ness 
her s 
said, 
that 


and 1 
them 


boy who 
lis father 
way, and 
y Sunday 
lady who 
/him and 

‘‘ There 
He said : 
for me.” 
llow over 
ause they 
ch people 
the aftec- 
to Christ. 


reach a 
meeting, 
He hadn’t 
the backs 
of him it 
ind shake 
1 saw this 
nd patted 
him and 
and went 
, and he 
ht. He 
) pray for 
}a happy 
one. One 


Child Stories. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 51 


night I saw him weeping. I wondered if his old temper had 
got hold of him again, and when he got up I wondered what 
he was going to say. “I wish you would pray for my 
mother,” he said. When the meeting was over I went to 
him and asked: “ Have vou ever spoken to your mother or 
tried to pray with her?’ ‘Well, you know, Mr. Moody,” 
he replied, “I never had an opportunity ; she don’t believe, 
and won’t hear me.” ‘ Now,” I said, ‘I want you to talk 
to your mother to-night.” For years I had been trying to 
reach her and couldn't do it. 

So I urged him to talk to her that night, and I said: “I 
will pray for you both.” When he got to the sitting-room 
he found some people there, and he sat waiting for an oppor- 
tunity, when his mother said it was time for him to go to 
bed. He went tothe door undecided. He took a step, 
stopped, and turned around, and hesitated for a minute, 
then ran to his mother and threw his arms around her neck, 
and buried his face in her bosom. ‘ What is the matter?” 
she asked—she thought he was sick. Between his sobs he 
told his mother how for five weeks he had wanted to-be a 
Christian ; how he had stopped swearing ; how he was try- 
ing to be obedient to her, and how happy he would be if she 
would be a Christian, and then went off to bed. She sat for 
a few minutes, but couldn’t stand it, and went up to his 
room. When she got to the door she heard him weeping 
and praying: “Oh, God, convert my dear mother.” She 
came down again, but couldn’t sleep that night. Next day 
she told the boy to go and ask Mr. Moody to come over and 
see her. He called at my place of business—I was in busi- 
ness then—and I went over as quick as I could. I found 
her sitting in a rocking-chair, weeping. ‘“ Mr. Moody,” she 
said, “I want to become a Christian.” ‘ What has brought 
that change over you, I thought you didn’t believe in it ? 
Then she told me bow her boy had come to her, and how she 
hadn't slept any all night, and how her sin rose up before 
her like a dark mountain. The next Sunday that boy came 
and led that mother into the Sabbath-school, and she became 
a Christian worker. 

Oh, little children, if you find Christ, tell it to your fathers 
and mothers. Throw your arms around their necks and lead 
them to Jesus, 


52 MOODY'S ANECDOTES (Child Stories, 


A Faher’s Mistake, 


There is a little story that has gone the round of the Am. 
erican press that made a great impression upon me ag a 
father. A father took his little child out into the field one 
Sabbath, and, it being a hot day, he lay down under a 
beautiful shady tree. The little child ran about gathering 
wild flowers and little blades of grass, and coming to its 
father and saying : “Pretty! pretty!” At last the father 
fell asleep, and while he was sleeping the little child wan- 
dered away. When he awoke, his first thought was, 
“Where is my child?” He looked all around, but he could 
not see him. He shouted at the top of his voice, but all he 
heard was the echo of his own voice, Running to a little 
hill, he looked around and shouted again. No response ! 
Then going to a precipice at some distance, he looked down, 
and there, upon the rocks and briars, he saw the mangled 
form of his loved child. He rushed to the spot, took up the 
lifeless corpse, and hugged it to his bosom, and accused him- 
self of being the murderer of his child. While he was 
sleeping his child had wandered over the precipice, ] 
thought as I heard that, what a picture of the Church of 
God. 

How many fathers and mothers, how many Christian men, 
are sleeping now while their children wander over the ter. 
rible precipice right into the bottomless pit. Father, where 
is your boy to-night ?” 


A Boy’s Mistake—A Saq Reconciliation. 


There was an Englishman who had an only son ; and only 
sons are often petted, and humoured, and ruined. This bo 
became very headstrong, and very often he and his father had 
trouble. One day they had a quarrel, and the father was 
very angry, and so was the son; and the father said he 
wished the boy would leave home and never come back. The 
boy said he would go, and would not come into his father’s 
house again till he sent for him, The father said he would 
never send for him. Well, away went the boy. But when 
a father gives up a boy, a mother dovg not, You mothers 


Child 


will 
there 
great 


= 
ii 


many 
is not 
moth 
that 
their 
she v 
W 
write 
boy § 
she | 
neve 
bed, 
hys 
Sisk 
her | 
knev 
thin; 
only 
and 
said 
see | 
me. 
A 
in h 
he g 
dyir 
his 1 
hea 
to n 
to s 
long 
my 
all 1 
spe 
ban 
spel 


sili: 


wld Stories, 


of the Am. 
1 me as a 
e field one 
1 under a 
gathering 
ing to its 
he father 
hild wan- 
ight was, 
; he could 
but all he 
0 a little 
response ! 
ed down, 
mangled 
k up the 
ised him- 
he was 
pice, J 
‘hurch of 


ian men, 
the ter. 
r, where 


Ne 


ind only 
“his boy 
cher had 
her was 
said he 
K:. Che 
father’s 
> would 


t when 
nothers 


- 


j 


Child Stories. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 53 
will understand that, but the fathers may not. You know 
there is no love on earth so strong as a mother’s love. A 
great many things may separate a man and his wife ; a great 
many things may separate a father from his son ; but there 
is nothing in the wide world that can ever separate a true 
mother from her child. To be sure, there are some mothers 
that have drunk so much liquor that they have drunk up all 
their affection. But Iam talking about a true mother ; and 
she would never cast off her boy. 

Well, the mother began to write and plead with the boy to 
write to his father first, and he would forgive him ; but the 
boy said: “I will never go home till father asks me.” Then 
she plead with the father, but the favher said: “ No, I will 
never ask him.” At last the mother came down to her sick- 
bed, broken-hearted, and when she was given up by the 
physicians to die, the husband, anxious to gratify her last 
wish, wanted to know if there was nothing he could do for 
her before she died. The mother gave him a look ; he well 
knew what it meant. Then she said: “ Yes, there is one 
thing you can do. You can send for my boy. That is the 
only wish on earth you can gratify. If you do not pity him 
and love him when I am dead and gone, who will?” “Well,” 
said the father, ‘I will send word to him that you want to 
see him.” “No,” she says, “ you know he will not come for 
me. If ever I see him you must send for him.” 

At last the father went to his office and wrote a dispatch 
in his own name, asking the boy to come home. As soon as 
he got the invitation from his father he started off to see his 
dying mother. When he opened the doo. to goin he found 
his mother dying, and his father by the bedside. The father 
heard the door open, and saw the boy, but instead of going 
to meet him, he went to another part of the room, and refused 
to speak to him. His mother seized his hand—how she had 
longed to press it ! She kissed him, and then said: “ Now, 
my son, just speak to your father. You speak first, and it 
ali will be over.” But the boy said: “ No, mother, I will not 
speak to him until he speaks to me.” She took her hus- 
band’s hand in one hand and the boy’s in the other, and 
spent her dying moments in trying to bring about a recon- 

siliation, Then just as she was expiring--she could not 


> 


Se se AES 


Sa eo ccnp age 


54 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Child Stories. 


apeak—so ske put the hand of the wayward boy into the 
hand of the father, and passed away! The boy looked at the 
mother, and the father at the wife, and at last the father’s 
heart broke, and he opened his arms, and took that boy te 
his bosom, and by that body they were reconciled. Sinner, 
that is only a faint type, a poor illustration, because God is 
not angry with you. 

I bring you to-night to the dead body of Christ. I ask 
you to look at the wounds in his hands and feet, and the 
wound in his side. And I ask you: “ Will you not be recon- 
ciled ?” 


Moody and his Little Willie. 


I said to my little family, one morning, a few weeks be- 
fore the Chicago fire: “I am coming home this afternoon to 
give you a ride.” My little boy clapped his hands. “Oh, 
papa, will you take me to see the bears in Lincoln Park ?” 
“ Yes.” You know boys are very fond of seeing bears. I 
had not been gone long when my little boy said: “‘ Mamma, 
I wish you would get me ready.” ‘ Oh,” she said, “it will 
be a long time before papa comes.” ‘ But I want to get 
ready, mamma.” At last he was ready to have the ride, 
face washed, and clothes all nice and clean. ‘ Now, you 
must take good care and not get yourself dirty again,” said 
mamma, Oh, of course he was going to take care ; he wasn’t 
going to get dirty. So off he ran to watch forme. How- 
ever, it was a long time yet until the afternoon, and after a 
little he began to play. When I got home, I found him out- 
side, with his face all covered with dirt. “TI can’t take you 
to the Park that way, Willie.’ ‘Why, papa? You said 
you would take me.” ‘Ah, but I can’t; you're all 
over mud. I couldn’t be seen with such a dirty little 
boy.” “Why, I’se clean, papa; mamma washed me,” 
“Well,” you've got dirty since. But he began to cry, 
and i coukd not convince him that he was dirty. “TI’se 
clean; mamma washed me!” he cried. Do you think 
Targued with him? No. I just took him up in my arms, and 
carried him into the house. and showed him his face in the 


7 


Child 


looki 
my W 
saw 
that. 
Ni 
=~ bu 
not. 
law } 
vile 
the | 


ld Stories. 


y into the 
ced at the 
e father’s 
iat boy te 

Sinner, 
ise God is 


tt. Task 
, and the 
be recon- 


weeks be- 
ernoon to 
os Oh, 
n Park ?” 
bears. I 
Mamma, 
, it will 
int to get 
the ride, 
Now, you 
ain,” said 
he wasn’t 
e. How- 
nd after a 
| him out- 
take you 
You said 
oure all 
rty little 
hed me,” 
n to cry, 
y. “Tee 
rou think 
arms, and 
ace in the 


Child Stories. AND ILL USTRATIONS. 55 


looking-glas. He had nota word tosay. He could not take 
my word for it; but one look at the glass was enough ; he 
saw it for himself, He didn’t say he wasn’t dirty after 
that ! 

Now the looking-glass showed him that his face was dirty 
—but I did not take the looking-glass to wash tt ; -of course 
not. Yet that is just what thousands of peopledo, The 
law is the looking-glass to see ourselves in, to show us how 
vile and worthless we are in the sight of God; but they take 
the law and try to wash themselves with it. 


er 


Jesus “ Wants them All to Cme.”’ 


I heard of a Sunday-school concert at which a little child 
of eight years was going to recite. Her mother had taught 
her, and when the night came the little thing was trembling 
go she could scarcely speak. She commenced : “ Jesus said,” 
and completely broke down. Again she tried it: “ Jesus 
said suffer,” but she stopped once more. A third attempt 
was made by her: “ Suffer little children—and don't anybody 


stop them, for He wants them all to come,” and that is the 
truth. There is not a child who has a parent in the Taber- 
nacle but He wants, and if you but pring them in the arms 
of your faith and ask the Son of God to bless them and train 
them in the knowledge of God, and teach them as you walk 


your way, aS you lie down at night, as you rise up in the 


morning, they will be blessed. 
ee 


Never to See its Mothere 


I was in an infirmary not long since, and a mother brought 
a little child in. She said: “ Doctor, my little child's eyes 
bave not been opened for several days, and I would just like 
you to do something for them.” The doctor got some oint- 
ment and put it first on one and then on the other, and just 
pulled them open. “ Your child is blind,” said the doctor ; 
“ perfectly blind ; it will never see again.’ At first the 
mother couldn’t take it in, but after a little she cast an ap- 
pealing look upon that physician, and in a voice full of emo- 


56 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Child Stories, 


tion said: “ Doctor, yon don’t mean to say that my child will 
never see again?” “ Yes,” replied the doctor, “ your child 
has lost its sight, and will never see again.” And the 
nother just gave a scream, and drew that child to her bo- 
som. “QO my darling child,” sobbed the woman, ‘are you 
never to see the mother that gave you birth? Never to see 
the world again?’ I could not keep back the tears when [ 
saw the terrible agony of that woman when she realized the 
misfortune that had come upon her child. That was a ter- 
rible calamity, to grope in total darkness through this world; 
never to see the faces of loved ones ; but what was it in com- 
parison to the loss of a soul? I would rather have my eyes 
plucked out of my head 4nd go down to my grave in total 
blindness than lose my soul. 


A Little Child Converts an Infidele 


IT rember hearing of a Sabbath-school teacher who had 
led every one of her children to Christ, She was a faithful 
teacher. Then she tried to get her children to go out and 
bring other children into the school. One day one of them 
came and said she had been trying to get the children of a 
family to come to the school, but the father was an infidel, 
and he wouldn’t allow it. “ What is an infidel ?” asked the 
child. She had never heard of an infidel before. The 
teacher went on to tell her what an infidel man was, and 
she was perfectly shocked. A few mornings after the girl 
happened to be going past the post-office on her way to school, 
and she saw the infidel father coming out. She went up to 
him and said : “ Why don’t you love Jesus?” Ifit had been 
a@ man who had said that to him, probably he would have 
knocked him down. He loooked at her and walked on. A sec- 
ond time she put the question: “ Why don’t you love Jesus?” 
He put out his hand to put her gently away from him,when,on 
looking down, he saw her tears, Please, sir, tell me why 
you don’t love Jesus?’ He pushed her aside and away he 
went. When he got to his office he couldn’t get this ques- 
tion out of his mind, All the letters seemed to read: “ Why 
don’t you love Jesus?” All men in his place of business 


Chila 


poem 
tried 
don’t 
he w 
hear 
Jesu 
with 
com] 
he 1: 
“WwW 


d Stories, 


child will 
our child 
And the 
» her bo- 
are you 
rer to see 
when [ 
lized the 
ras a ter- 
is world; 
| in com- 
my eyes 
in total 


vho had 
faithful 
ut and 
of them 
en of a 
infidel, 
ked the 
- ‘Phe 


aS; and 


Fesus?” 
hen,on 
ie why 
vay he 
3 ques- 
Why 
siness 


Child Stories. AND ILL USTRATIONS. 57 


seemed to say: “ Why don’t you love Jesus?’ When he 
tried to write, his pen seemed to shape the words: ‘ Why 
don’t you love Jesus?” He couldn’t rest, and on the streets 
he went to mingle with the business men, but he seemed to 
hear a voice continually asking him: ‘Why don’t you love 
Jesus?” He thought when night came and he got home 
with his family, he would forget it; but he couldn’t. He 
complained that he wasn’t well, and went tobed. But when 
he laid his head on the pillow that voice kept whispering: 
“ Why don’t you love Jesus ”” He couldn’t sleep. By-and- 
by, about midnight, he got up and said: “ I will get a Bible 
and find where Christ contradicts himself, and then T’'ll have 
a reason,” and he turned to the buok of John. My friends, 
if you want a reason for not loving Christ, don’t turn to 
John. He knew Him too long. I don’t believe a man can 
read the gospel of John without being turned to Christ. 
Well, he read through, and found no reason why he sheuldn't 
love Him, but he found many reasons why he should. He 
read this book, and before morning he was on his knees, and 
that question prt by that little child led to his conversion. 


The Dying Child. 


A lady had a little child that was dying. She thought it 
was resting sweetly in the arms of Jesus. She went into 
the room and the child asked her : «What are those clouds 
and mountains that I see so dark?” “Why, Eddy,” said 
his mother, “‘ there are no clouds or mountains, you must be 
mistaken.” “Why, yes, I see great mountains and dark 
clouds, and I want you to take me in your arms and carry 
me over the mountains.” “ Ah,” said the mother, “you 
must pray to Jesus, He will carry you safely,” and, my 
friends, the sainted mother, the praying wife, may come to 
your bedside and wipe the damp sweat from your brow, but 
they cannot carry you over the Jordan when the hour 
comes. This mother said to her little boy: “I am afraid 
that it is unbelief that is coming upon you, my child, and 
you must pray that the Lord will be with you in your dying 
moments.” And the two prayed, but the bov turned to her 


MOODY’S ANECDOTES Child Stories. 


and said: Don't you hear the angels, mother, over the 
mountains, and calling for me, and I cannot go?’ “My 
dear boy, pray to Jesus, and He will come; He only can 
take you.” And the boy closed his eyes and prayed, and 
when he opened them a heavenly smile overspread his face 
as he said: “ Jesus has come to carry me over the mountains.” 

Dear sinner, Jesus is ready and willing to carry you over 
the mountains of sin, and over your mountains of vubzlief. 
Give yourself to Him. 


ee 


The Finest Looking Little Boy Mr. Moody EverSaw. 


A few years ago I was in a town down in our State, the 
guest of a family that had a little boy about thirteen years, 
who did not bear the family name, yet was treated like the 
rest. Every night when he rétired, the lady of the house 
kissed him and treated him in every respectlike all the other 
children, I said to the lady of the house: “I don’t under- 
stand it.” I think he was the finest looking boy I have ever 
seen, I said to her: “I don’t understand it.’ She Says: 
“IT want to tell you about that boy. That boy is the son of 
a missionary. is father and mother were missionaries in 
India, but they found they had got to bring their children 
back to this country to educate them. So they gave up their 
mission field and came back to educate their children and to 
find some missionary work to do in this country. But they 
were not prospered here as they had been in India, and the 
father said: “T will go back to India ;” and the mother said: 
“If God has called you to go, I am sure it will be my duty 
to go, and my privilege to go, and I will go with you.” The 
father said: “You have never been separated from the 
children, and it will be hard for you to be separated from 
them ; perhaps you had better stay and take care of them.’ 

But after prayer thoy decided to leave their children to be 
educaved, and they left for India. This lady heard of it and 
sent a letter to the parents, in which she stated if they left 
one child at her house she would treat it like one of her own 
children, She said the mother came and spent a few days 
at her house, and being satisfied that her bov would receive 


Chile 


prop 
was 
66 I y 
said 
wan 
doir 
leav 
car! 
she 
stre 
wit 


ow 


ANON A NU SURh upereane eeu MUA, tio ly a 


L Stories. 


yver the 
E 66 My 
nly can 
yed, and 
his face 
ntains,” 
rou OVveL 
vubelief. 


arSaw. 


ate, the 
A, years, 
like the 
3 house 
ie other 
; under- 
ve ever 
1€ Says: 
> son of 
ries in 
hildren 
ip their 
and to 
ut they 
nd the 
ar said: 
y duty 
Ly The 
ym the 
d from 
them.’ 
n to be 
‘it and 
ey left 
[r own 
w days 
recelve 


59 


Child Stories. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 


proper care, consented to leave him, and the night before she 


was to leave him, the missionary said to the Western lady : 
« T want to leave my boy to-morrow morning without a tear ed 
gaid she, “‘I may never 8¢e him again.” But she didn’s 
want him to think she was weeping for anything she was 
doing for the Master. The lady said to herself ; ‘‘ She won't 
leave that boy without a tear.’ But the next day when the 
carriage drove up to the door, the lady went up stairs and 
ghe heard the mother in prayer, crying: “QO God, give me 
strength for this hour. Help me to go away from my boy 
without a tear.” When she came down there was a smile 
upon her face. She hugged him and she kissed him, but 
she smiled as she did it. She gave up all her five or six 
children without shedding a tear, went back to India and in 
about a year there came a voice; “Come up bither.” Do 
you think she would be a stranger in the Lord’s world?” 
Don’t you think she will be known there a8 & mother that 


loved her child? 


eae 


“mma, this is Papa’s Friend.” 
o my office for the purpose of 


getting me interested in a young man who had just got out 
of the penitentiary. « He says,” said the gentleman, “ he 
don’t want to go to the office, but I want your permission to 
bring him in and introduce him.” T said: “ Bring him eg 
The gentleman brought him in and introduced him, and I 


took him by the hand and told him I was glad to see him. 
and when I took him into my 


I invited him up to my house, 
a friend. When my little 


family I introduced him as m 
daughter came into the room, I said ; “ Emma, this 1s papa’s 
friend.’ And she went up and kissed him, and the man 


sobbed aloud. After the child left the room, T said ; “ What 
is the matter?” ‘“O sir,” he said, “ I have not had a kiss 
for years. The Jast kiss I had was from my mother, and she 
was dying. I thought I would never have another one 


again.” His heart was broken. 


A gentleman one day came t 


60 MOOJY’S ANECDOTES Child Stories Child & 

Moody’s Little Emma. out: * 

I remember one time my little girl was teasing her mother a 
to get her a muff, and so one day her mother brought a muff vet 


4“ Moo 
such ti 
I neve 
than | 
long r 
witho 


soul % 


home, and, although it was storming, she very naturally 
wanted to go out in order to try her new muff. So she tried 
to get me to go out with her. I went out with her, and I 
said: “ Emma, better let me take your hand.” She wanted 
to keep her hands in her muff, and so she refused to take m 

hand. Well, by and by she came to an icy place, her little 
feet slipped, and down she went. When I helped her up 
she said: “ Papa, you may give me your little finger.” * No, 
my daughter, just take my hand.” “No, no, papa, give me 
your little finger.” Well, I gave my finger to her, and for 
a little way she got along nicely, but pretty soon we came to 


another icy place, and again she fell. This time she hurt . a ; 
herself a little, and she said: « Papa, give me your hand,” our 
and I gave her my hand, and closed my fingers about her on 
wrist, and held her up so that she could not fall. J ust go and 
God is our keeper. He is wiser than we. you 
fello 
u 
Little Jimmy. ii 
A friend of mine in Chicago took his Sabbath-school out put 
on the cars once. A little boy was allowed to sit on the he 
platform of the car, when by some mischance he fell, and the ask 
whole train passed over him. They had to goon a half a mile So 
before they could stop. ‘They went back to him and found dor 
that the poor little fellow had been cut and mangled all shc 
to pieces. Two of the teachers went back with the remains got 
to Chicago. Then came the terrible task of telling the sta 
parents about it. When they got to the house they dared his 
‘hot goin. They were waiting there for five minutes before toc 
any one had the courage to tell the story. But at last they a 
ventured in, They found the family at dinner, The father a 
was called out—they thought they would tell the father a 
first. He came out with the napkin in his hand, My friend - 
said to him: “T have got very bud news to tell you. Your . 
little Jimmy has got run over by the cars,” The poor Y 
man turned deathly pale and rushed into the room crying tt 


| Stories 


mother 
i a muft 
vturally 
he tried 
, and IT 
wanted 
ke my 
sr little 


ame to 
ie hurt . 
hand,” 
ut her 
lust so 


ol out 
n the 
id the 
a mile 
found 
1d all 
nains 
r the 
lared 
efore 
they 
uther 
ither 
‘lend 
Your 
poor 
ying 


an 


Child Stories, AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 61 


“Dead, dead.” The mother sprang to her feet and 
om where the teachers were. When 


he fainted dead away at their feet. 
“ Moody,” said my friend, “I wouldn’t be the messenger of 
such ti'ings again if you would give me the whole of Chicago. 
I never suffered so muc ” JT have got a son dearer to mie 
than my life, and yet I would rather have a train a mile 
long run over him than that he should die without God and 
without hope. What is the loss of a child to the loss of 


soul % 


out : 
came out to the sitting-ro 


she heard the sad story § 


— nl 
Stubborn Little Sammie. 


At one time my sister had trouble with her little boy, and 
the father said: “ Why, Sammy, you must go now and ask 
our mother’s forgiveness.” The little fellow said he 
‘wouldn't. The father says: “You must. If you don't go 
and ask your mother’s forgiveness, I shall have to undress 
you and put you to bed.” He was a bright, nervous little 
fellow, never still a moment, and the father thought he 
would have such a dread of being undressed and put to bed, 
But the little fellow wouldn’t, so th 


ey undressed him and 
put him to bed. The father went to his business, and when 
he vame home @ 


+ noon he said to his wife: ‘ Has Sammy 
asked your forgiveness t” 


“No,” she said: “ he hasn't.” 
So the father went to him and said: “ Why, Sammy, why 
don’t you ask your mother’s forgiveness ¢” The little fellow 
shook his head: “ Won't do it.” “ But, Sammy, you have 
got to.” “ Couldn't.” The father went down to his office, 
stayed all the afternoon, and when he came home he asked 
his wife: “‘ Has Sammy ask 


ed your forgiveness gr «Mo, L 
took something up to him and tried to have him eat, but he 
wouldn't.” So the father went up to see him, 


and said : 
“ Now, Sammy, just ask your mother’s forgiveness, and you 
may be dressed and come 


» down to supper with us.” 
« Gouldn’t do it.” The father coaxed, but the little fellow 
“ couldn't do it.” That was all they could get out of him. 
You know very 


well he could, but he didn’t want to. Now, 
the hardest thing a man has to do is to become a Christian, 


6a MOODY'S ANECDOTES Child Storie, WR Chil 
and it is the easiest. That may seem a contradiction, but it inte’ 
isn’t. The hard point is because he don’t want to. ' pock 

The hardest thing for a man to do is to give up his will, i littl 
That night they retired, and they thought surely early in : sped 
the morning he will be ready to ask his mother’s forgive. and 
ness, ‘The father went to him—that was Friday morning — Spu 
to see if he was ready to ask his mother’s forgiveness, but a you 
he “couldn’t.” The father and mother felt so bad about it to ¢ 
they couldn’t eat ; they thought it was to darken their whole , don 
life. Perhaps that boy thought that father and mother a Sat 
didn’t love him. Just what many sinners think, be caus i rig! 
God won’t let them have their own way. The father went , Bec 
to his business, and when he came home he said to his wife: to | 


‘Has Sammy asked your forgiveness?” “No,” So he 
went to the little fellow and said: “ Now, Sammy, are you 
not going to ask your mother’s forgiveness?” “Can't,” and 
that was all they could get out of him. The father couldn't 
eat any dinner ; it was like death in the house. It seemed ’ 


as if the boy was going to conquer his father and mother, uh 
Instead of his little will being broken, it looked very much bg 
as if he was going to break theirs. Late Friday afternoon, wi 
“ Mother, mother, forgive,” says Sammy—‘“ me.” And the he 
little fellow said “me,” and he sprang to his feet and said: an 
“T have said it, I have said it. Now dress me, and take th 
me down to see father. He will be so glad to know I have at 
said it.” And she took him down, and when the little fel- i 
low came in he said : “ I’ve gaid it, I’ve said it.” - 
Oh, my friends, it is so easy to say: “I will arise and go Ee 
to my God.” It is the most reasonable thing you can do, é 
Isn’t it an unreasonable thing to hold out? Come right to 8 if 
God just this very hour. “Believe on the Lord Jesus é A 
Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” By t 
I 
Spurgeon and the Little Orphan. . 


While we were in London, Mr. Spurgeon one day took 
Mr. Sankey and myself to his orphan asylum. .ad he was 
telling about them—that some of them had aunts and some 
~usins, and that every boy had some friend that took an 


Storiea, 
1, but it 


iis will, 
arly in 
forgive. 
mning— 
ess, but 
vbout it 
r whole 
mother 
1 CAUSb 
r went 
is wife: 
So he 
are you 
t,” and 
ouldn’t 
seemed 
nother, 
y much 
noon, 
nd the 
1 said: 
d take 
I have 
tle fel. 


and go 
can do. 
ight to 

Jesus 


y took 
68 was 
1 some 
0k an 


Child Storie. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 63 


18 to sce him and gave him a little 
e gaid while he stood there, @ 
d said; “ Mr. Spurgeon, let me 
speak to you,” and the boy sat down between Mr. Spurgeon 
and the elder, who was with the clergyman, and said: “ Mr. 
Spurgeon, suppose your father and mother were dead, and 
you didn’t have any cousins, or aunts, or uncles, or friends 
to come and give you pocket money, and give you presents, 
dov’t you think you would feel bad—because that’s me !” 
Ssid Mr. Spurgeon: “The minute he asked that, I put my 
right hand down into my pocket and took out the money.” 
Because that’s me ! And so with the Gospel ; we must say 
to those who have sinned, the Gospel is offered to them. 


ee 


A Child Looking for its Lost Mother. 


A little child, whose mother was dying, was taken away 
to live with some friends because it was thought she did not 
ind what death is. All the while the child wanted 


and see her mother. At last, when the funeral 

as taken home, she ran all over the 

house, searching the sitting-room, the parlour, the library, 

and the bedrooms. She went from one end of the house to 
the other, and when she could not find her mother, she 
wished to be taken back to where they brought her from. 
Home had lost its attractions for the child when her mother 
was not there. My friends, the great attraction in heaven 
will not be its pearly gates, its golden streets, nor its choir 
of augels, but it will be Christ. Heaven would be no heaven 
‘¢ Christ were not there. But we know that He is at the 
right hand of the Father, and these eyes shall gaze on Him 
by-and-by ; and we shall be satisfied when we awake with 


Hig likeness. 


interest in him, and cam 
pocket money, and one day h 
little boy came up to him an 


understi 
to go home 
was over, and she w 


MOODY'S ANECDOTES 


CHRIST SAVES. 


Moody in Prisone 


I have good news to tell you—Christ is come after you, 
I was at the Fulton-street prayer-meeting, a good marty 
years ago, one Saturday night, and when the meeting was 
over, @ man came to me and said: “ I would like to have you 
go down to the city prison to-morrow, and preach to the 
prisoners. I said I would be very glad to go. There was 
no chapel in conuection with that prison, and I was to preach 
to them in their cells. I had to stand at a little iron rail- 
ing and talk down a great, long, narrow passage-way, to some 
three or four hundred of them, I suppose, all out of sight. It 
was pretty difficult work ; I never preached to the bare walls 
before. When it was over I thought I would like to see to 
whom I had been preaching, and how they had received the 
gospel. I went to the first door, where the inmates could 
have heard me best, and looked in at a little window, and 
there were some men playing cards, I suppose they had 
been playing all the while. ‘“ How is it with you here?’ I 
scid. “ Well, stranger, we don’t want you to get a bad idea 
of us. False witnesses swore a lie, and that is how we are 
here.” Oh,” I said, “ Christ cannot save anybody here , 
there is nobody lost.” I went to the next cell, « Well, 
friend, how is it with you?” “Oh,” said the prisoner, “ the 
mun that did the deed looked very muoh like me, so they 
caught me and I am here.” He was mnocent, too! I 
passed along to the next cell, “How is it with you?” 
“Weil, we got into bad company, and the man that did it 
got clear, and we got taken up, but we never did anything.” 
I went along to the next cell. “How is it with you ?” 
“Our trial comes on next week, but they have nothing 
against us, and we'll get free.” I went round to nearly every 
eell, but the answer was always the same—they had never 


Christ 


done ¢ 
togethe 
magist 
wrapp 
And t 
discou 
on, ce. 
hadn’ 
throu 
with | 
Two ] 
they 
te 
ture | 
I can 
said - 
ain’t 
«c df Q 
than 
are I 
who 
Jesu 
gsinn 
the 
The 
whi 
free 
beli 
fied 
ces, 
a le 
wre 


r you, 
mary 
ng was 
ve you 
to the 
re was 
preach 
mn. rail- 
0 some 
ht. It 
e walls 
see to 
ed the 
could 
v, and 
sy had 
re ? I 
d idea 
ve are 
here ; 
Well, 
“the 
) they 
oo! I 
rou?” 
did it 
hing.” 
you Yd 
thing 
every 
never 


christ Saves. AND ILL USTRATIONS. 1) 


done anything. Why, I never saw 60 many innocent men 
together in my life. There was nobody to blame but the 
} magistrates, according to their way of it. These men wera 
> wrapping their filthy rags of self-rightousness about them. 
And that has been the story for six thousand years. I got 
discouraged as I went through the prison, on, and on, and 
cell after cell, and every man had an excuse. If he 
hadn’t one, the devil helped him to make one. I had got almost 
through the prison, when I came to a cell and found « man 
a with his elbows on his knees, and his head in his hands. 
iy Two little streams of tears were running down his cheeks ; 
7) they did not come by drops that time. 
| «} What's the trouble?” I said. He looked up, the pic- 
ture of remorse and despair. “ Oh, my sins are more than 
I can bear.” ‘ Thank God for that,” I replied. ‘“ What,” 
said he, “ you are the man that has been preaching to us, 
ain't you?” “Yes.” “ I think you said you were a friend ?” 
“And yet you are glad that my sins are more 
“JT will explain,” I said ; “if your sins 
f™ are morethan you can bear, won't you cast them on One 
© §=6who will bear them for you?’ “ Who's that?” ‘The Lord 
Jesus.” “ He won't bear my sins.” ‘Why not?” “Ihave 
sinned against Him all my life.’ ‘don’t careif you have ; 
the blood of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanses from all sin.” 
Then I told him how Christ had come to seck and save that 
which was lost; to open the prison doors and set the captive 
free, It was like a cup of refreshment to find a man who 
believed he was lost, so I stood there, and held up a crucl- 


fied Saviour to him. ‘“¢ Christ was delivered for our offen- 


ces, died for our sins, rose again for our justification.” For 
h a miserable 


a long time the man could not believe that suc 
wretch could be saved. He went on to enumerate his sins, 
and I told hita that the blood of Christ could cover them all. 
After I had talked with him Lsaid: “ Now let us pray.” 
en He got down on his knees inside the cell, and I got down 
x% outside and said: “ You may Why,” he said, “ it would 
® be blasphemy for me to call on God.” ‘ You call on God,” 
> said. He knelt down, and, like the poor. publican, he 
lifted up his voice and said: “ God be merciful to me, a vile 
wretch |” I put my hand tkrough the window, and as 
5 


on, 


“T am.” 
than I can bear !” 


66 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Christ Saves 


shook hands with him a tear fell on my hand that burned 
down into my soul. Tt was a tear of repentance. He be- 
lieved he was lost. Then I tried to get him to believe that 
Christ had come to save him. I left him still in darkness, 
“T will be at the hotel,” I said, “between nine and ten 
o'clock, and I will pray for you.” Next morning I felt go 
much interested, that I thought I must see him before 1 
went back to Chicago. No sooner had my eye lighted on 
his face, than I saw that remorse and despair had fled awa 
and his countenance was beaming with celestial light ; the 
tears of joy had come into his eyes, and the tears of despair 
were gone. The Sun of Righteousness had broken out 
across his path ; his soul was leaping within him for joy ; 
he had received Christ as Zaccheugs did—joyfully. “Tell 
me about it,” I said. “Well, I do not know what time it 
was ;I think it was about midnight. I had been in dis- 
tress a long time, when all at once my great burden fell off, 
and now, I believe I am the happiest man in New York.” 
I think he was the happiest man I saw from the time I left 
Chicago till I got back again. His face was lighted up 
with the light that comes from the celestial hills. I bade 
him good-bye, and I expect to meet him in another world. 
Can you tell me why the Son of God came down to that 
prison that night, and, passing cell after cell, went to that 


one, and set the captive free? It was because the man be- 
lieved he was lost. 


ER LES, Se PRERTRE SORENNIE tn 


A Father’s Love for his Boy, 


A number of years ago, before any railway came into Chi- 
cago, they used to bring in the grain from the Western prai- 
vies in waggons for hundreds of miles, so as to have it 
shipped off by the lakes. There was a father who had a 


sarge farm out there, and who used to preach the gospel as 
well as to attend to his farm. One day when church business 
engaged him, he sent his son to Chicago with grain. 
He waited and waited for his boy to return, but he 
did not come home. At last he could wait no lon- 
ger, so he saddled his horse and rode to tha place where his 


Christ 


gon hi 
and gc 
his bo 
aid of 
where 
his m 
sold 1] 
amon: 
they § 
What 
his fa 
He k: 
He v 
feelin 
He t] 
do w: 
“ Let 
his b 
town 
ters t 
6c I | 
eartk 
73 If 
me? 
sand 
No; 
wen 
that 
Wh 
boy 
chu 
was 
out 


rist Saveéa 


at burned 
. He be- 
lieve that 
darkness, 
e and ten 
I felt go 
n before 1 
ighted on 
led away, 
ight ; the 
of despair 
ken out 
for joy ; 
a ell 
t time it 
en in dis- 
n fell off, 
w York,” 
‘me I left 
ghted up 
I bade 
r world. 
n to that 
t to that 
man be- 


into Chi. 
m prai- 
have it 
o hada 
‘ospel as 
business 
1 grain, 
but he 
no jon- 


1ere hig 


Christ Saves. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 67 


gon had sold the grain. He found that he had been there 
and got the money for his grain ; then he began to fear that 
his boy had been murdered and robbed, At last; with the 
aid of a detective, they tracked him to a gambling den; 
where they found that he had gambled away the whole of 
his money. In hopes of winning it back again, he then had 
sold his team, and lost that money too. He had fallen 
among thieves, and like the man who was going to Jericho, 
they stripped him, and then they cared no more about him. 
What could he do? He was ashamed to go home to meet 
his father, and he fled. The father knew what it all meant. 
He knew the boy thought he would be very angry with him. 
He was grieved to think that his boy should have such 
fecling toward him, That is just exactly like the sinner. 
He thinks because he has sinned, God will have nothing to 
do with him. But what did that father do? Did he say. 
«“ Let the boy go”? No; he went after him. He arranged 
his business, and started after the boy. That man went from 
town to town, from city tocity. He would get the minis- 
ters to let him preach, and at the close he would tell his story. 
“ T have got a boy who is a wanderer on the face of the 
earth somewhere.” He would describe his boy, and say: 
“Tf you ever hear of him or see him, will you not write to 
me?” At last he found that be had gone to California, thou- 
sands of miles away. Did that father say: “ Let him go’? 
No; off he went to the Pacific coast, seeking the boy. He 
went to San Francisco, and advertised in the newspapers 
that he would preach at such a church on such a day. 
When he had preached, he told his story, in hopes that the 
boy might have seen the advertisement and come to the 
church, When he had done, away under the gallery there 
was a young man who waited until the audience had gone 
out; then he came toward the pulpit. The father looked 
and saw it was that boy, and he ran to him, and pressed 
him to his bosom. The boy wanted to confess what he had 
done, but not a word would the father hear. He forgave 
him freely, and took him to his home once more. 
I tell you Christ will welcome you this minute if you will 
come. Say: “I will arise and go to my Father.” May 
God incline you to take this rep. There is not one whom 


MOODY'S ANECDOTES Christ Saves. 


Jesus has not sought for longer than that father. There 
has not been a day since you left Him but He has followed 
you. 


Lady Ann Erskine and Rowland Hill. 


There is a very good story told of Rowland Hill and Lady 
Ann Erskine. You have seen it, perhaps, in print, but I 
would like to tell it to you. While he was preaching in a 
park in London toa large assemblage, she was passing in 
her carriage. She said ‘to her footman when she saw Row- 
land Hill te the midst of the people: ‘* Why, who is that 
man?’ ‘That is Rowland Hill, my lady.” She had heard 
a good deal about the man, and she thought she would like 
to 1 see him, so she directed her coachmau to drive her near 
the platform. When the carriage came near, he saw the in- 
signia of nobility, and he asked who that > ob le lady was. 
Upon being told, he said: “Stop, my friends, I have got 
something to sell. The idea of a preacher becoming sud- 
denly an auctioneer made the people wonder, and in the 
midst of a dead silence he said: ‘I have more than a title 
to sell—I have more than a crown of Europe to sell; it is 
the soul of Lady Ann Erskine. Is there any one here who 
bids for it? Yes, I hear a bid. Satan, Satan, what will 
you give? ‘T will give pleasure, honour, riches—yea, I will 
give the whole world for her soul.’ Do you hear another 
bid? Ts there any other one? DoT hear another bid? Ah, 
T thought so; I hear another bid. The Lord Jesus Christ, 
what will You give for this soul? ‘I will give peace, joy, 
comfort, that the world knows not of—yea I will give eter- 
nal life.’ Lady Ann Erskine, you have heard the two bid- 
ders for your soul, which will you accept?’ And shs 
ordered the door of her carriage to be opened, and came 
weeping from it, and accepted the Lord Jesus Christ. He, 
the great and mighty Saviour, is a bidder for your soul to- 
night. He offers you riches and comfort, and joy, peace 
here, and eternal life hereafter, while Satan offers you what 
he cannot give. Poor lost soul, which will you have? He 
will ransom your soul if you put your burden upen Him, 


Christ & 


Twenty 
have m 
man ha 
Him w 
tain, bi 
you rig 
Him t 


[ re 
man ¢ 
ted y' 
away 
cured 
mista 
with 
is a ¢ 

away 
man 
rowé 
long 
Say, 

of 1 

how 

he ¢ 
hon 

Ru 


kne 
r 


pre 
an 
let 
sic 


ist Saves. 


There 
followed 


le 


und Lady 
t, but I 
hing in a 
issing In 
uw Row- 
10 is that 
ad heard 
ould like 
her near 
w the in- 
ady was. 
have got 
ning sud- 
id in the 
an a title 
sell ; it is 
here who 
vhat will 
ea, I will 
* another 
bid? Ah, 
is Christ, 
ace, Joy, 
sive eter- 
two bid- 
And shs 
and came 
ist. He, 
r soul to- 
oy, peace 
you what 
ive? He 
on Him, 


Christ Saves. 


Twenty 
have my sou 
man has ever felt sorry for 


AND ILLUSTRATI ONS. 69 


-one years ago I made up my mind that Jesus would, 


1, and I have never regretted the step, and no 


coming to Him. When we accept 


Your sins may rise up as a moun 
purge you of all evil, and take 
if you will only allow 


Him we must like Him. 
tain, but the Son of Man can 
you right into the palaces of heaven, 
Him to save you. 

—_—————— 


The Czar and the Soldiers 

w years ago a story about a young 
man away off in Russia. He was a wild, reckless, dissipa- 
ted youth. His father, thinking that if he could get him 
away from his associates, & reform would be worked, pro- 


cured a commission in the army for him. And this is a 
mistake a great many Christian people fall into in dealing 
with their sons. lace they require, it 


It is not a change of p 
ss a change of heart. A change of place will not take them 
away from th 


e tempter. Well, off to the army this young 
man went, and, instead of reforming, he gambled and bor- 
yowed, and took to drinking as V 


igorously as ever At 
longth he had borrowed all the money he could, and, as we 
say, he “ had come to the end of his rope.” A certain sum 
of money had to be paid the next day, and he did not see 
how it could be done without selling his commission, and if 
he did that he would be compelled to leave 


the army and go 
home to his father disgraced. The laws were very rigid in 
Russia upon the matter of de 


[ remember hearing @ fe 


pt, and if he couldn’t pay he 


knew he would have to go to prison. 
That night ashe sat in his barracks, heart-broken at the 


prospect before him, he thought he would take up @ paper 
and figure up he stood. And here, 
let me say, it would be wellif the sinner would pause occa- 

and see where he 


sionally, and try an 
ut down one debt 


stood with 

after another, until they made a long column. The total 
completely disheartened him ; aml he just put at the bottom 
of his figures: “ Who is to pay this”? He laid his head upon 
his desk, wearied, and fell asleep. That night the Czar, ac 


MOCDY’S ANECDOTES Christ Saves. 


cording to his custom, was walking through the barracks 
while the soldiers slept, and happened to come to that spot 
where the young soldier slept. He saw upon the desk the 
column of debts, and when he came to the bottom saw the 
question: ‘Who’s to pay them?’ and wrote underneath 
the name “ Nicholas.” When the young man awoke he 
took up the paper and found written at the bottom the sig- 
nature of the Czar of all the Russias. What did it mean? 
Had an angel dropped down and cancelled the debt ? It was 
too good to be true. He couldn't believe it. But by and 
by the money came from the Emperor himself. This story 
may be true or not. I don’t care whether it is or not; but 
there is one thing I do know is true, and that is that the 
great Emperor of heaven is here, and if you put down all 
your sins and multiply them by ten thousand, He will pay 
it and shelter you underneath the blood of Jesus Christ, 
which cleanseth us from all sin. 


The Artist andthe Beggar. 


I have read of an artist who wanted to paint a picture of 
the Prodigal Son. He searched through the madhouse, and 
the poor houses, and the prisons, to find a man wretched 
enough to represent the prodigal, but he could not find one. 
One day he was walking down the streets and met a man 
whom he thought would do. He told the poor beggar he 
would pay him well if he came to his room and sat for the 
portrait. The beggar agreed, and the day was appointed for 
him to come. The day came, and a man put in his appear- 
ance at the artist’s room. ‘ You made an appointment 
with me,” he said, when he was shown into the studio. 
The artist looked at him: “ I never saw you before,” he said ; 
“you cannot have an appointment with me.” “ Yes,” he 
said: ‘I agreed to meet you to-day at ten o’clock.” ‘ You 
must be mistaken; it must have been some other artist; 1 wag 
to see a beggar here at this hour.” ‘ Well,” says the beggar, 
“Tam he.” “You?” “ Yes.” “Why, what have you been 
doing?” ‘ Well, I thought [ would dress myself up a bit 
before I got painted.” “Then,” said the artist, “T do not 
want yeu; [ wanted you as you were; now, you are no ye 


Christ & 


to me.” 
just as | 
wardrol 
boots, & 
asked | 
when | 
was dr 
his fee 
So if : 
is the 1 


Ir 
Hipp 
that t 
bling 
went 
The 1 
bad, 
mise! 
ence. 
whel 
in al 
told 
He © 
and 
reac 
mer 
hea 
wo 
ear 
tho 
as 
to 
qu 
ha 
pr 
Ug 


st Saves. 


arracks 
hat spot 
esk the 
saw the 
erneath 
voke he 
the sig- 
; mean } 
| It was 
by and 
lls story 
ot ; but 
shat the 
lown all 
will pay 
s Christ, 


cture of 
use, and 
wretched 
find one. 
et a man 
sgear he 
t for the 
inted for 
3 appear- 
ointment 
1e studio. 
he said ; 
Yes,” he 
= (- You 
ist; I wag 
e beggar, 
you been 
‘up a bit 
‘T do not 
re NO Qn 


Christ Saves. 


to me.” That is the 
just as he is. It is only 
wardrobe. 


boots, and 
asked him what he had done wi 


when he was dressed up it spoi 
wags dressed up no 0 


mooDY’s ANECDOTES. 71 


way Christ wants every poor sinner, 
the ragged sinners that open God’s 


I remember a boy to whom I gave a pair of 
T found him shortly after in his bare feet again. I 
th them, and he replied that 


led his business ; when he 
anything. By keeping 
his feet naked he got as many as five pairs of boots a day. 
So if you want to come to God don’t dress yourself up. It 


isthe naked sinner God wants to save. 


ne would give 


sical 
A Commercial Traveller. 


r when preaching in New York City, at the 
a man coming up to me and telling me a story 
that thrilled my goul, One night, he said he had been gam- 
pling ; had gambled all the money away he had. When he 
went home to the hotel that night he did not sleep much. 
The next morning happened to be Sunday. He got up, felt 
bad, could’nt eat anything, didn’t touch his breakfast, was 
miserable, and thought about putting an end to his exist- 
ence. That afternoon he took a walk up Broadway, and 
when he came to the Hippodrome he saw great crowds going 
in and thought of entering too. Buta policeman at the door 
told him he couldn’ come in as it was a women’s meeting. 
He turned from it and strolled on ; came back to his hotel 
and had dinner. At night he walked up the street until he 
yeached the Hippodrome again, and this time he saw a lot of 
men going in. When inside he listened to the singing and 
heard the text: “ Where art thou 4” and he thought he 
would go out. He rose to go, and the text came upon his 
ears again : “ Where art thou y This was too personal, he 
thought, it was disagreeable, and he made for the door, but 
as he got to the third row from the entrance, the words came 
to him again. “ Where art thou y’ He stood still, for the 
question had come to him with irresistible force, and God 
had found him right there. He went to his hotel and 
a bright and shining 
ommercial travel- 


I remembe 
Hippodrome, 


prayed all that night, and now he is 
who was & ¢ 


tivlt, And this young man, 


* casein Si 


72 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Christ Saves 


ler, went back to the village in which he had been reared, 
end in which he had been-one of the fastest young men— 
ment back there, and went around among his friends and 
acquaintances and testified for Christ, as earnestly and hene- 
ficially for Him as his conduct had been against Him, 


Governor Pollock and the Condemned Criminal. 


When I was East a few years ago, Mr. Geo. H, Stewart 
told me of a scene that occurred in a Pennsylvania prison, 
when Governor Pollock, a Christian man, was Governor of 
the State. A man was tried for murder, and the judge had 
pronounced sentence upon him. His friends had tried every 
means in their power to procure his pardon. They had sent 
deputation after deputation to the Governor, but he had told 
them all that the law must take its course. When they 
began to give up hope, the Governor went down to the prison 
and asked the sheriff to take him to the cell of the con- 
demned man. The Governor was conducted into the pres- 
ence of the criminal, and he sat down by the side of his bed 
and began to talk to him kindly—spoke to him of Christ 
and heaven, and showed him that although he was con- 
demned to die on the morrow by earthly judges, he would re- 
ceive eternal life from the Divine Judge if he would accept 
salvation, He explained the plan of salvation, and when he 
left him he committed him to God. When he was gone the 
sheriff was called to the cell by the condemned man, ‘ Who 
was that men?” asked the criminal, ‘ who was in here and 
talked so kind tome?” ‘ Why,” said the sheriff, “ that was 
Governor Pollock.” Was that Governor Pollock? O 
Sheritf, why didn’t you tell me who is wast If Thad known 
that was him, I wouldn’t have ‘ci him go out till he had 
given me pardon. The Governor has been here—in my 
cell—and I didn’t know it,” and the man wrung his hands 
and wept bitterly. My friends, there is one greater than @ 
Governor here to-night. He sent fis Son to redeem you— 
to bring you out of the prison-hon:e of sin, J come to-nigi# 
to tell you He is here 


Deliver 


< 


T rel 
came t 
speak 
nothin 
would 
peak 
gure | 
him | 

away 
escap 
Ever. 

the e 

said 

and 

in m 

mist 

you 
thos 


'st Saves 


1 reared, 
ig men— 
ends and 
ind hene- 
im. 


‘iminal, 


, Stewart 
a prison, 
vernor of 
udge had 
‘ied every 
r had sent 
» had told 
Then they 
the prison 
f the con- 
» the pres- 
of his bed 
of Christ 
Was COn- 
,would re- 
ild accept 
1 when he 
s gone the 
in. “ Who 
n here and 
that was 
llosk? O 
had known 
till he had 
re—in my 
his hands 
ter than & 
eem you— 
ne to-nig* 


Deliverance. 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 13 


would not Speak to his Wife. 


a man with his wife 


A Man who 

T remember, while in Philadelphia, 
came to our meetings. When he went out he would not 
speak to his wife. She thought it was very queer, but said 
nothing, and went to bed thinking that in the morning he 
would be all right. At breakfast, however, he would not 
gpeak a word. Well, she thought this strange, but she was 
sure he would have got all over whatever was wrong with 
him by dinner. The dinner hour arrived, and it passed 
oe a word. At supper not a word 


‘vithout his saying 

and he would not go with her to the meeting. 
thing went on. But at 

the end of the week he could not stand it any longer, and he 

said to his wife : «“ Why did you go and write to Mr. Moody 
and tell him all about me?” “I never wrote to Mr. Moody 
in my life,” said the wife. “ You did,” he answered. “ You're 
mistaken ; Why do you think that?” “ Well, then I wronged 
you; but when I saw Mr. Moody picking me out among all 
those people, and telling all about me, I was sure you must 
an seeking for 
‘11 be a man here to- 


have written to him.” Ib was the Son of M 

hin, my friends, and I hope there wil 

night—that man in the g that one before me 
__-who will feel that I am talking personally to him. May 
you feel that you are lost, and that the Lord is seeking for 
you, and when you feel this there is some chance of your 


being saved. 


away 
escaped him, 


Every day for 


ee 


GOLD. 


was never a sermon which 
but in it Christ was seeking for you. 
cannot but find in every page of this 
is seeking him through His blessed W 
Bible is for—to seck out the lost. 
__No man in the world should be 80 happy a8 a man of 
God. It is one continual source of gladness. He can look 
wp and say + “God is my father, Christ is my Saviour, and 
the Church 18 My mother.” 


you have listened to 
T contend that a man 
book that Jesus Christ 
ord. This is what the 


—-There 


74 


—There is no other way to the kingdom of God but by 


the way of the cross, and it will be easier for you to take it 
now than it will be afterward, 


—Everything has to be tried by the sinucr before he will 
come to Christ. He has to feel that there ig nothing that 
can save him but Christ, then he will come, 


— Have not some of you heard a sermon in which you were 
offered as a sinner to the Lord Jesus Christ, and your con. 
science was troubled} You went away, but you came back 
again, and the Spirit of God came upon you again and again, 
and you were troubled, Haven’t you passed through that 
experience? Don’t you remember something like that 
happening to you? That was the Son of God seeking for 
your soul, 


—The Son of God has come into the world to bless us. 
Look at that Sermon on the Mount. It is filled with the 
word blessed, blessee’, blessed. I think it occurs nine times. 
His heart was full of blessings for the people. He had to 
get it out before He gave His sermon, 


—A rule I have had for years is to treat the Lord J esus 
Christ as a personal friend. He is nota creed, a mere empty 
doctrine, but it is He himself we have, The moment we 
have received Christ we should receive Him as a friend. 
When I go away trom home I bid my wife and children 
good-bye, I bid my friends and acquaintances good-bye, 
but I never heard of a poor backslider going down 
on his knees and saying: “I have been near You for ten 
years ; Your service has become tedious and monotonous; I 
have come to bid You farewell ; good-bye, Lord Jesus Christ.” 
I never heard of one doing this, I will tell you how they go 
away ; they just run away, 


MOODY’S ANECDOTES Christ Saves. 


T re 


Bb not se 


in my 
came | 
and 1 
and 8) 
ever § 
all at 
he sa 
ough 
been 
comi 
ing 
hunt 
Hol 
and 
any 
mee 
ae to } 
Mo Saw 
$00 
anc 


AND 1/LUSTRA TIONS. 


ist Saves, 
l but by 
0 take it 
» he will 
ing that 
CHRISTIAN WORK. 
‘Ou were 
our con. — 
ie — tg How Moody was Encouraged. 
gh shat 4 I remember a few years ago I got discouraged, and could 
To that of not see much fruit of my work ; a 1 one morning, as I was 
cing for in my study, cast down, one of my ©: bbath-school teachers 
came in and wanted to know what I was discouraged about, 
iene and I told him because I could see no result from my work ‘ 
th the and speaking about Noah, he said , “By the way, did you 
eshnae ever study up the characte of Noah?” I felt that I knew 
had to all about that, and told him that I was fam iliar with it, and 
he said: “ Now, if you never studied that carefully, you 
ought to do it, for | cannot 11 you what a blessing it has 
d Jesus been to me.” When he went out I took down my Bible and 
> empty commenced to read about Noah, and the thought came steal- 
ent we ing over me: “Here is a man that toiled and worked ® 
friend. hundred years and didn’t get discouraged ; if he did, the 
hildren Holy Ghost didn’t put it on record,” and tl louds lifted, 
od-bye, and I got up and said, if the Lord wants me to wors without 
down any fruit, I will work on. I went down to the noon prayer: 
for ten meeting, and vhen I saw the pe yple coming to pray [ said 
ous; I to myself : «© Noah worked a hundred years and he never 
thrist.” o saw a prayer-meeting outside of his own family.” Pretty 
hey go tj soon a man got up right across the aisle where I was : itting, 
and said he had come from a little town where there had 
hurch of God the year 


been a hundred uniting with the 
before. And Il thought to myseli 
that ! He preached so many; many yea and didn’t get 

eonvert, yet he was not discouraged.” ‘Then a man got up 
right pehind me, and he trembled as he said: ‘I am_ lost. 
T want you to pray for my soul.” And I said: “ What if 
Noah had heard that! He worked 4 hundred and twenty 


What if Noah had heard 


76 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Christian Work. 


years, and never had a man come to him and say that; and 
yet he didn’t get discouraged.” And I made up my mind 
then, that, God helping me, I would never get sliscouraged, 
IT would do tho best I could, and leave the result with God, 
and it has been a wonderful hel p to me, 


“We Will Never Surrender.” 


There is a story told in hisfory in the ninth century, ] 
believe, of a young man that came up with a little handful 
of men to attack a king who had a great army of three thou- 
sand men, The young man had only five hundred, and the 
king sent a messenger to the young man, saying that he 
need not fear to surrender, for he would treat him merci- 
fully. The young man called up one of his soldiers and said : 
“Take this dagger and drive it to your heart;” and the 
soldier took the dagger and drove it to his heart. And eall- 
ing up another, he said to him: “Leap into yonder chasm,” 
and the man leaped into the chasm. The young man then 
said to the messenger: “Go back and tell your king I have 
got five hundred men like these. We will die, but we will 
never surrender, And tell your king another thing: that I 
will have him chained with my dog inside of half an hour.” 
And when the king heard that he did not dare to meet them, 
and his army fled before them like chaff before the wind, 
and within twenty-four hours he had that king chained with 
his dog. That is the kind of zeal we want, “We will die, 


but we will never surrender,” We will work until Jesus 
comes, and then we will rise with Him. 


ER reer ccna on ornmeenene 


The Faithful Aged Woman. 


An old woman who was seventy-five years old had a Sab. 
bath-school two miles away among the mountains. One 
Sunday there came a terrible storm of rain, and she thought 
at firstshe would not go that day, but then she thought: 
‘ What if some one should go and not find me there?” Then 
she put on her waterproof, and took her umbrella and aver 


Christie 


shoes, § 
to the 
there § 
best sh 
again, 
Sabba' 
man € 
old w 
going 
thoug 
wom 
to go 
as Cu 
mace 
Whe 
old \ 

a gli 
she. 
witl 


an Work. 


hat ; and 
ny mind 
ouraged, 
rith God, 


ntury, ] 
handful 
ree thou- 
and the 
that he 
n merci- 
nd said: 
and the 
And call- 
chasm,” 
an then 
x I have 
we will 
: that I 
n hour.” 
et them, 
16 wind, 
ied with 
will die, 
il Jesus 


l a Sab. 

One 
thought 
hought: 
” Then 
dt over 


2 
La 


vivir 
fe 


4“ 


Christian Work. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 


ent through the storm, two miles away, 
| in the mountains. When she got 


there she found one yolitary young man, and taught him the 
pest she knew how all the afternoon. She never saw him 
and I don’t know but the old woman thought her 
hool had been @ failure. That week the young 
and in % year or two after, the 
om tbe soldier, thanking her for 


going through the storm that Sunday. ‘This young man 
thought that stormy day he would just go and see if the old 
s in earnest, and ‘¢ she cared enough about souls 
He found she came and taught him 
aching the whole school, and God 
1g man to Christ. 


shoes, and away she W 
to the Sabbath-schoo 


again, 
Sabbath-se 
man enlisted in the army, 


old woman got & letter fr 


woman wa 
to go through the rain. 
as carefully as if she was te 
made that the occasion of winning the your 
When he lay dying in a hospital he sent the message to the 
old woman that he would meet her in heaven. Was it not 
a glorious thing that she did not get discouraged because 
she had but one Sunday-school scholar? Be willing to work 
with one. 


—— 


A Dream. 
ian who did not succeed in his work so 
d he got homesick and wished himself 
amed that he had died, and was 


the Eternal City. As he went 
he met a man he used 


I heard of a Christ 
well as he used to, an 
dead, One night he dre 
carried by the angels to 
along the crystal pavement of heaven, 
to know, and they went walking down the golden streets to- 


gether. All. at once he noticed every one looking in the 
same direction, and saw one coming up who was fairer than 
the sons of men. It was his blessed Redeemer. As the 
chariot came opposite, He came forth, and beckoning the 
one friend, placed him in His own chariot-seat, but himsel 
He led aside, and pointing over the battlements of heaven, 
«Look over yonder,” He said, “ What do you see?” “it 


seems as if I see the dark earth I have come from. 
else?’ “1 see men as if they were plindfolded, going over 


a terrible precipice into a bottomless oh Well,” said 
He, ‘ will you remain up here, and enjoy these mansions 
that I have prepared, or 6° back to yon dark earth, and 


» «¢ What 


78 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Christian Work. 


warn these men, and tell them about Me and my kingdom, 
and the rest that remaineth for the panple of God?” That 
man never wished himself dead again. He yearned to live 
as long as he could, to tell men of heaven and of Christ. 


eee 


The Faithful Missionnry. 


When I was going to Europe in 1867, my friend, Mr, 
Stuart, of Philadelphia, said: “Be sure to be at the General 
Assembly in Edinburg, in June. I was there last year,” 
said he, “and it did me a world of good.” He said that a 
returned missionary from India was invited to speak to the 
General Assembly, on the wants of India, This old mis. 
sionary, after a brief address, told the pastors who were 
present, to go home und stir up their Churches and send 
young men to India to preach the gospel. He spoke with 
such earnestness, that after a while he fainted, and the 
carried him from the hall. When he recovered he asked 
where he was, and they told him the circumstances under 
which he had been brought there, « Yes,” he said, “I wag 
making a plea for India, and I didn’t quite finish my speech, 
did I?” After been told that he did not, he said: “Take me 
back and let me finish it.” But they said: “No you will 
die in the attempt.” “Well” said he, “I will die if T dont,” 
and the old man asked again that they would allow him to 
finish his plea. When he was tuken back, the whole con- 
gregation stood as one man, and as they brought him on the 
platform, with a trembling voice he said: ‘Fathers and 
mothers of Scotland, is it true that you will not let your 
sons go to India? I spent twenty-five ye 
there. I lost my health and [h 
and shattered health. If it is 
grandsons to go to India, I will 
off to-morrow, and I will let th 
cannot live for them, I will di The world will 


say that old man was enthusiastic, Well, that is just what 


ed 
a 


Christie 


Am 
ather 1 
about | 
I pres 
buildin 
men h 

Men’s 
are th 
They 
watcel 
their 
preac 
Whe 


mini 


an Work, 


kingdom, 
WE That 
sd to live 
‘brist, 


end, Mr, 
> General 
st year,” 
d thata 
uk to the 
old mis- 
ho were 
and send 
ke with 
nd they 
le asked 
§ under 
“TT was 
r speech, 
Take me 
you will 
I dont,” 
y him to 
ole con- 
1 on the 
1ers and 
et your 
my life 
sickness 
) strong 
-and be 
hat if I 
rid will 
st what 


| 
ve: 


Christian Work. AND ILL 


ather in heaven, 4 
about recognizing ea 
I preached, I looked 
building where it 
men here and there. 
Men’s Christian Association who got up 
are these men?” 


They were all scattere 
watching for souls. Out of the fifty of them, forty-one of 


USTRATIONS. 79 


Forty-one Little Sermons: 

A man was preaching about Christians recognizing each 
nd some one said: “ I wish he would preach 

ch other on earth.” Tn one place where 
over the great hall of the old circus 
wus held, and saw men talking to other 
T said to the secretary of the Young 
the meeting: “ Who 
He said: “They are a band of workers?” 
d through the hall, and preaching and 


got a soul each and were talking and 


We have been asleep long enough. 
elp the minister, the 


their number had 
preaching with them. 
When the laity wake up and try and h 


minister will preach better. 
a 


GOLD. 


_It is the greatest pleasure of living to win gouls to 


Christ. 
_J believe in what John W 
and always at it,” and that is w 
_If we were all of us doing the w 
for us to do, don’t you see how the wo 
advance 4 


«There is no man living tha 
has got for me to do. Noone can do it but mys 
if the work ain’t done we will have to answer fo 


we stand before God’s bar. 
__What makes the Dead Sea dead 4 Beca 


time receiving, never giving out anything 
many Christians are cold? Because they are 


receiving, never giving out anything. 


esley used to say: “¢ All at it, 
hat the Church wants to-day. 


ork that God has got 
rk of the Lord would 


t can do the work that God 
elf. And 


r it when 


use it is all the 
Why is it that 
all the time 


MO“ DY'S ANECDOTES 


CHRISTIAN ZEAL, 


Satan’s Match. 


If you will allow me an expression, Satan got a match 
when he got Paul. He tried to get him away from God, 
but he never switched off. Lock how they tortured him, 
Look how they stripped and beat him. Not only did the 
Romans do this, but the Jews also. How the Jews tried to 
drag him from his high calling. How they stripped him 
and laid upon the back of the apostle blow after blow. And 
you know that the Scourge in those days was no light thing, 
Sometimes men died under that punishment. If one of us 
got one of the stripes that Paul got, how the papers would 
talk about it. But it was nothing to Paul. He just lcoked 
at it as if it were a trivial thing—as if it were a light afflic. 
tion. When he was stripped and scourged by his persecu- 
tors you might have gone and asked him: “ Well, Paul, 
What are you going to do now?” « Why, press toward the 
mark of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” Take 
your stand before him and ask him as they bring the rod 
down upon his head : “ What are you going to do now, Paul ?” 
“Do? Tam going to press toward the mark of the high 

calling of God in Christ Jesus,” He had one idea, and that 
was it. Look at him ag they stoned him. The Jews took 
“ip great stones to throw upon the great apostle. They left 
him for dead, and [ suppose he was dead, but God raised him 
up. Come up and look at him all bruised and bleeding as 
he lies. “ Well, Paul, you've had a narrow escape this 
time. Don’t you think you had better give up? Go off 
into Arabia and rest for six weeks, What will you do if 
you remain here? They mean to kill you.’ “Do!” he 
cries as he raises Limself like a mighty giant, “TI am going 
to press toward the mark of the high calling of God.” And 


Christe 


he goe 
Christ 
early | 
the } 
every 
the 
he, te 
gospe 
woul 
woul 
woul 
obsta 
he cc 
stree 
prea 
this, 
from 
pills 
ing 
for | 
of t 
the 
the 
you 
hin 
do 
cal. 
no 


5 @ match 
‘om God, 
red him, 
y did the 
s tried to 
ped him 
ww, And 
ht thing. 
one of ws 
rs would 
st leoked 
ht afflic. 
persecu- 
11, Paul, 
vard the 
” Take 
the rod 
, Paul 7” 
the high 
und that 
WS took 
hey left 
ised him 
sding as 
pe this 
Go off 
ou do if 
Do !” he 


m going 


Christian Zeal. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 81 
he goes forth and preaches the gospel. Tam ashamed of 
Christianity in the nineteenth century when I think of those 
early Christians. Why, it would take all the € ‘hristians in 
the Northwest to make one Paul. Look at his heroism 
everywhere he went. Talk about your Alexanders ; why, 
the mighty power of God rested upon Paul. “Why,” said 
he, “thrice was I shipwrecked while going off to preach the 
gospel.” What did he care about that? Cold Churches 
wouldn’t trouble him, although they trouble us. What 
would lying elders and false deacons be to him? That 
wouldn't stop him. He had but one idea, and over all 
obstacles he triumphed for that one idea. Look at him as 
he comes back from his punishment. He goes up some side 
street and gets lodgings. He works during the day and 
preaches at night on the street. He had no building like 
this, no committee to wait on him, no carriage to carry him 
from the meeting, no one to be waiting to pay his board 
bills. ‘There he was toiling and preaching, and, after preach- 
ing for eighteen mont “ Welll have to pay you 
for all this preaching, ake him to the corner 
of the street and pay h That is 
the way they p 
the li : 
yoursely id. Go to 
him in the Philippian jail is going to 
do now. ‘ Dot press forward for high 
And so he went on looking tow 
d before him. 


calling.” 
no man could stan 


Se 


Saved and Saving: 
that I liked very much. 


the finest thing I ever had seen, at the time, 

It was a picture of a woman coming out 
1 clinging with both arms to the cross. There 
drowning waves with both arms around 
Afterwards, I saw another picture 
me entirely, it was 80 much more 
ming out of the dark 


One day I saw a steel engraving 


T thought it was 
and I bought it. 
of the water, an¢ 
she came out of the 
the cross, perfectly safe. 
that spoiled this one for 
lovely. It was @ picture of a person co 
6 


82 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Christian Zeal, 


waters, with one arm clinging to the cross and with the other 
she was lifting some one else out of the waves. That ig 
what I like. . Keep a firm hold upon the cross, but alws.ys 
try to rescue another from the drowning, 


A Story Moody Never will Forget; 


A few years ago, in a town somewhere in this state, a 

merchant died, and while he-was lying a corpse I was told a 
story I will never forget. When the phy sician that attended 
him saw there was no chance for him here, he thought it 
would be time to talk about Christ to the dy Ingman, And 
there are a great many Christians just like this physician. 
They wait till a man is just entering the other world, just till 
he is about nearing the throne, till the sands of life are about 
run out, till the death rattle is in his throat, before they 
commence to speak of Christ. The physician stepped up 
to the dying merchans and began to ‘speak of Jesus, the 
beauties of Christianity, and the-s salvation he had offered to 
all the world. The merchant listened quietly to him, and 
then asked him: ‘“ How long have you known of these 
things ” “T have been a Christian since I came from the 
Kast,” he-replied. “You have been a Christian so long and 
have known ail this, and have been in my store every day. 
You have been in my house; have associated with me; you 
knew all these things, and why didn’t you tell me Susden gs 
The doctor went home and retired to rest. but could not 
sleep. The question of the dying man rang in his ears, He 
could not explain why he had not spoken before, but he saw 
he had neglected his duty to his principles. He went back 
to his dying friend, intending to urge upon him the accept- 
ance of Cheist’s s salvation, beati when lat began to speak to him, 
the merchant only replied im a sad whisper: “Oh, why didn’t 
you tell me before?’ Oh, my friends, how many of us act 
like this phy sician? If we don’t practise in every particular 
the professions we make, and try to influence the lives of 
others, and lead the lives of Christians according to Christian 
precept, the world will go on stumbling over us, 


Christia 


I ren 
agined 
beautift 
ered tl 
little s 
“ What 
“That 
things, 
startle 
workel 
that. 


Tw 
other 
showe 
were 
the ni 

one: 

chure 
more 
ken t 


ia 
lady 
have 
of a 
a lal 
gett 
ettol 
look 
was 
her 
plac 
is 
aw? 


stian Zeal, 


1 the other 
That is 
ut alwys 


§ state, a 
vas told a 
, attended 
hought it 
un, And 
»hysician, 
l, just till 
are about 
fore they 
“pped up 
esus, the 
ffered to 
him, and 
of these 
from the 
long and 
rery day. 
me; you 
before ?” 
ould not 
ars. He 
t he saw 
ent back 

3 accept- 

< to him, 
ty didn’t 
f us act 
irticular 
lives of 
‘hristian 


Christian Zeal. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 83 


The Missing Stone. 

J remember hearing of a man’s dream, in which he im- 
agined that when he died he was taken by the angels to @ 
beautiful temple. After admiring it for a time, he discov- 
ered that one stone was missing. All finished but just one 
little stone; that was left out. He said to the angel : 
«What is this stone left out for?’ ‘The angel replied: 
“That was left out for you, but you wanted to do great 
things, and so there was no room left for you.” He was 
startled and awoke, and resolved that he would become & 
worker for God, and that man always worked faithfully after 


that. 


Sad Lack of Zeale 

o our enquiry room here the 
other night, and after a convert had talked with them, and 
showed them the way, the light broke in upon them. They 
were asked: “Where do you go to church?’ They gave 
the name of the church where they had been going. Said 
one: “1 advise you to go and see the minister of that 
church.” They said: «We don’t want to go there any 
more; we have gone there for six years and no one has spo- 


ken to us.” 


Two young men came int 


ed 


A Zealous Young Lady. 

much interested some time ago in a young 

lady that lived in the city. I don’t know her name, or I 

have forgotten it. She was about to go to China as the wife 

of a missionary on his way to some heathen field. She had 

a large Gabbath-school class in the city and succeeded in 
cetting a blessing upon many of her scholars through her 
ettorts. She was very anxious to get some one who would 
look after her little flock and take care of them while she 
She had a brother who was not & Christian, and 
her heart was set on his being converted and taking her 
place as leader of the class. The young mn —perhaps he 
‘3 in this audience to-day — refused to accept of C hrist, but 
away in her closet alone she pleaded with God that her 
bo converted ard take her place. She 


1 was very 


was gone. 


brother might 


84 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Christian Zeal, 


wanted to reproduce herself and that is what every Christian 
ought to do—get somebody else converted to take up your 
work. Well, the last morning came, and around the family 
altar as the moment drew near for the lady’s departure, and 
they did not know when they should see her again, the 
father broke down, and the boy went up stairs. Just before 
she left for the train the boy came down, and putting his 
arms around his sister’s neck, said to her: “« My dear sister, 
T will take your Saviour for mine, and I wii! take care of 
your class for you,” and the young man took her class, ana 
the last I heard of him he was filling her place, There was 
a young lady established in good work, 


How Moody Treated the Committees. 


I remember when I was in Chicago before the fire, I was 
on some ten or twelve committees, M y hands were full. If 
a man came to me to talk about his sou] Ll would say I 
haven’t time ; got a committee to attend to. But now I 
have turned my back on everything—turned my attention 
to saving souls, and God has blessed me and made me an in- 
Strument to save more souls during the last four or five 
years than during alJ my previous life. And so if a minis- 
ter will devote himself to this undivided work,God will bless 
him. Take that motto of Paul’s: « One thing I do, forget- 
ting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto 
those things which are before, I press toward the mark for 
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,” 


Fourscore and Five. 

When we went to London there was an old w 
years old, who came to the meetings and g 
hand in that work. She was appoint 
called on all classes of people. 
we would probably have been put out, and told the people 
of Christ. There were none that could resist her, When 
the old woman, eighty five years old, came to them and 
offered to pray for them, they all received her kindly— 


--Catholics, Jews, Gentiles—all. That is enthusiasm. That 
ia what we want, 


oman eighty-five 
aid she wanted a 
ed to a district, and 
She went to places where 


On 
eame 
the § 
tude: 
who 
city, 
meet 
whe: 
She 
dow 
depe 

she 

She 
laug 
you 

666 I 

one 

& (jl 

as | 

wit 
thi 
nex 

to 1 

she 

an 
the 
hit 
ab 
ihe 


‘istian Zeal. 


'y Christian 
ke up your 
tue family 
arture, and 
again, the 
Just before 
utting his 
dear sister, 
ake care of 
’ class, and 
There was 


38. 


fire, I wag 
ore full. If 
ould say I 
Sut now I 
attention 
-me an in- 
ur or five 
f a minis- 
| will bless 
lo, forget- 
orth unto 
mark for 
sus.” 


ighty-five 
wanted a 
rict, and 
es where 
1e€ people 

When 
hem and 
kindly— 
im. That 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 


CONFESSING CHRIST. 


What a Woman did. 


in England, I recollect a Quakeress 
as held in a Methodist Church, and 


the Spirit of God was there—souls were being saved: multi- 
tudes were pressing into the kingdom, She had a brother 
who was a drinker and a nephew who had just come to the 
city, and he was in a critical state, too. They came to the 
meeting with her. Everything appeared strange to her, and 
when she went home she did not know really what to say. 
She and her brother and nephew went up stairs, and coming 
down she thought, it may be that the destiny of their souls 
depends on what I say now. When she entered the parlour 
she found them laughing and joking about the meeting. 
She put on a serious face and said: “I don’t think we should 
laugh at it. Suppose Mr. Moody had come to you and asked 
you if you were converted, what would you have told him ?’ 
«| would have told him to mind his own business,” replied 
one of them. “J think it is a very important question, and 
a (juestion a Christian ought to put to any one ; Mr. Moody, 
as a Christian, has a right to ask any one.” She talked 
with them, and when that brother went to bed, he began 
thinking and thinking. He had tickets for the theatre 
next night, but when next night came he said he would go 
to the meeting with his sister, and, to make a long story 
short, he came and was converted. Hecame to me—he was 
a mechanic—aad asked me to tall to the labourers and have 
them come to the meetings. He had got such a blessing 
himself that he wanted them to share it. 
The man brought me a list of the names of the mechanics 
about half as long as this room, and we got up a meeting in 
the theatre, and we had that theatre packed. That was the 


One place we were in, 
eame in, The meeting w 


d6 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Confessing Christ. Confe 
first meeting of working men I ever had, and the work of 
grace broke out among them. This was but the result of Tk 
the woman taking her stand. She went into the inquiry- York 
room and became an earnest worker. J yet letters from her same 
frequently now, and I do not believe there is a happier ian 
woman in all England. If she had taken another course a 
she might have been the means of ruining these young men. tere 
There is one thing that Christians ought to ask themselves, ad 
Ask your heart: “Is this the work of the devil?’ That is ane 
the plain question, If it’s the work of the devil turn your Rian 
back against it. I would if I thought it was. If it is the S ogiat 
work of God, be careful what you do. My friends, it is a ‘ A 
ef | ay. a $ ; ; Y ae ’ ° ¥ L 
bial f terril;'o thing to fight against God. If it is the Lord’s wish, ; they 
ui | come cut, snd take your stand, and let there be one united ae 
Al coumn of people coming up to heaven. Let every man, a oe 
a! | woman and chid, be not afraid to confess the Lord Jesus : “Ww 
Christ. : 4 ‘nee 
hy afra 
A Business Man Confessing Christ. tim 
When I was in Ireland, I heard of a man who got great at 


blessings from God. He was a business man—a landed 
proprietor, He had a large family, and a great many men 
to work for him, taking care of his home. He came up to 
Dublin and there he found Christ. And he came boldly out 
and thought he would go home and confess Him. He thought q 1 
that if Christ had redeemed him with his precious biood, the q 


least he could do would be to confess Him, and tel{ about it E Pre 
sometimes. So he called his family together, and his ser- ie bee 
vants, and with tears running down his cheeks he poured q ms 
out his soul to them, and told them what Christ had done a oO! 
for him. He took the Bible down from its resting-place = 
and read a few verses of gospel. Then he went down on his 4 we 
knees to pray, and so greatly was the little gathering blessed a i 
that four or five out of that family were convicted of sin ; a = 
they forsook the ways of the world, and accepted Christ and & Me 
eternal life. It was like unto the household of Cornelius, lo 
which experienced the working of the Holy Spirit. And FF bh, 


that man and his family were not afraid to follow out their 
profession, 


ng Christ. 


2 work of 
result of 
) Inquiry- 
from her 
1 happier 
er course 
ung men, 
emsel ves, 

That is 
urn your 
f it is the 
ds, it is a 
rd’s wish, 
ne united 
ery man, 
ord Jesus 


got great 
a landed 
1any men 
me Up to 
oddly out 
e thought 
bood, the 
{ about it 
d his ser- 
e poured 
had done 
ting-place 
wn on his 
1g blessed 
sd of sin ; 
Yhrist and 
Cornelius, 
it. And 
out their 


Confessing Christ. AND I LLUSTRATIONS. 87 


Two Young Men. 


I heard a story about two young men 
York City from the country on a visit. ‘They went to the 
same boarding-house to stay and took a room together Well, 
when they came to go to bed, each felt ashamed to go down 
on his knees before his companion first. So they sat watch- 
ing each other. In fact, to express the situation in one 
word, they were both cowards—yes, cowards ! But at last 
one of them mustered up a little courage, and with burning 
blushes, as if he was about to do something wrong and 
wicked, he sank down on his knees to say his prayers. AS 
soon as the second saw that, he also knelt. And then, after 
they had said their prayers, each waited for the other to get 
up. When they did manage to get up, one gaid to the other : 
«JT really am glad to see that you knelt ; I was afraid of you.” 
“Well,” said the other, “ and I was afraid of you.” So it 
turned out that both were Christians, aud yet they were 
afraid of each other. You smile at that, but how many 
times have you done the same thing—perhaps not in that 
way, but the same thing in effect. Henceforth, then, be not 


ashamed, but let every one know you are His. 


who came to New 


es 


The Little Tow-Headed Norwegian. 


T remember, while in Boston, I attended one of the daily 
prayer meetings. The meetings we had been holding had 
been almost always addressed by young men. Well, in that 
meeting a little tow-headed Norwegian boy stood up. He 
could hardly speak a word of English plain, but he got up 
and came to the front. He trembled all over and the tears 
were all trickling down his cheeks, but he spoke out as well 
as he could and said: “If I tell the world about Jesus, then 
will He tell the Father about me.” He then took his seat ; that 
wasall he said, but I tell you that in those few words he said 
more than all of them, old and young together. ‘Those few 
words went straight down into the heart of every one present. 
“TfL tell the world” —yes, that’s what it means to confess 


Christ. 


wel cee 


MOODY'S ANECDOTES Confessing Chriat. 


The Famiy that Hooted at Moody. 


J remember a family in Chicago that used to hoot at me 
and my scholars as we passed their house sometimes, Ona 
day one of the boys came into the Sunday-school and made 
light of it. As he went away, I told him I was glad to see 
him there and hoped he would come again. He came and 
still made a noise, but I urged him to come the next time, 
and finally one day he said: “ I wish you would pray for me, 
boys.” ‘hat boy came to Christ. He went home and con- 
fessed his faith, and it wasn’t long before that whole family 
had found the way into the kingdom of God, 


Peter’s Confession. 


One day He said: “Whom do men say that lam?” He 
wanted them to confess Him, But one said; « They say Thou 
art Hlias,” and another “that Thou art Jeremiah ;’ and 
another—‘“ Thou art St. John the Baptist.” But He asked : 
“ Whom do you say that I am ?’—turning to His disciples, 
And Peter answers : “Thou art the Son of the living God,” 
Then our Lord exclaimed: “Blessed art thou. Simon Barjonas,’ 
Yes, He blessed him right there because he confessed Him 
to be the Son of God. He was hungry to get some one to 


confess Him, Let every one take his stand on the side of the 
Lord, 


The Blind Beggar 


Here is a whole chapter in John (ix.) of forty-one verses, 
just to tell how the Lord blessed that blind beggar. It was 
put in this book, I think, just to bring out the confession of 
that man. ‘The neighbours, therefore, and they which 
before had seen him which was blind, said: ‘Is not this he 
that sat and begged ? Some said: ‘This is he ;’ others said : 
‘He is like him ;’ but he said: ‘I am he.” Tf it had been 
our case, I think we would have kept still ; we would have 
said: “There is a storm brewing among the Pharisees, and they 
have said: ‘If any man acknowledges Christ we will put him 
out of the Synagogue. Now I don’t want to be put out of the 
Synagogue.’” I am afraid we would have gaid that ; that is the 
way with a good many of the young converts, What did the 


saat od a 
ea ee 


Jonfe 


youn 
minc¢ 
give! 
gaid 
wha 
that 
unt¢ 
said 
i! in 
was 
gai 
poo 
got 
ph 
the 
br 


sing Christ. 


hoot at me 
mes. Ona 
!and made 
glad to see 
came and 
next time, 
‘ay for me, 
ie and con- 
10le family 


am?’ He 
y say Thou 
iah ;” and 
He asked: 
disciples, 
ying God,” 
Barjonas,’ 
essed Him 
me one to 
side of the 


ne verses, 
. It was 
fession of 
ey which 
ot this he 
hers said : 
had been 
uld have 
5) and they 
l put him 
out of the 
shat is the 
at did the 


a9 


Jonfessing Christ. AND ILLUSTRATION: 


young convert here? He gaid, “1 am he. And bear ‘a 
mind, he only told what he knew ; new the Man had 
given him his eyes. Some said: “! like him”; but he 
gaid: “1 amhe.” So, young cony pen your lips and tell 
what Christ has done for you. | in't do more than 
that, open your lips and do tha [Therefore said t 

unto him: ‘ Row were thine eves opened ? He an: | 

made clay, and : 


said: ‘A man that is called o sus 
mine eyes, and said unto me, Go 
wash ; and I went and washed, in 
gaid ; “He anointed my eyes with cla 
pool and washed, and whereas { had no eyes, I have now 
rot two good eyes.” Some sceptic might ask: “ What is the 
philosophy of it?” But he couldn’t tell that. “Then said 
they unto him: ‘Where is he? He eaid: ‘I know not.’ They 
brought to the Pharisees bim that aforetime wis blind. 
And it was the Sabbath day when Jesus made the cli id 
opened his eyes. Then again the Pharisees also asked him 
how he had received his sight, Ie said unto them : ‘ He put 


clay upon mine eyes, and J. washed and do sce,” He wasn't 
afraid to tell his experience twice ; he had just told it once. 
« Therefore said some of the Pharisees : ‘ This man is not 0 
God, because he keepeth not the Sabbath day.’ Others said : 
‘How can a man that is @ sinner do such miracles ? and there 
was a division among them.” Now I am afr 


aid if it had 
heen us, we would have kept still a 


o the p ol of Siloam 
LT received sigh 20 


an went to the 


nd said: “ There is a storm 


“They say unto thggphnt man again : ‘What 
1 opened thine eyes ” He 


has got to talking 


\ rewing.” 
sayest thou of Him, that He hat 
said‘ ‘ He is a prophet.’ ” Now you see he 
of the Master, and that is a grand, good thing. 


cent 


The Young Convert. 


nvert got up in one of our meetings and tried 
ach very well either, but he did 
1said: “ Young 


A young co 
to preach ; he could not pre 
the best he could—but some one stood up ant 
man, you cannot preach ; you 
gelf.” Said the young man: 
ashamed of my Lord.” 
of Christ—of the man 


ought to be ashamed of your- 
“So I am, but T am not 
That is right. Do not be ashamed 
that pought us with His own blood. 


le 


Photographic 
Sciences 
Corporation 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


ms W225 
2 


32 2.2 
be yz 


ll I. u MS WW22 
: bre — 
| eee wuts 


ile 


2S MA We 


6” 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 
WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 
(716) 872-4503 


90 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Confessing Christ. 
GOLD. 


—If Christ comes into our hearts we are not ashamed. 


- -I wish we had a few more women like the woman of 


Samaria, willing to confess what the Lord Jesus Christ had 
done for their souls, 


—Belmving and confessing go together ; and you cannot 
be saved without you take them both. « With the mouth 
confession is made unto salvation.” Tf you ever see the 
kingdom of heaven you have to take this way. 


-—Satan puts straws across our path and magnifies it and 
makes us believe it is a mountain, but all the devil’s moun- 


tains are mountains of smoke 3 when you come up to them 
they are not there. 


—I do not know anything that would wake up Chicago 
better than for every man and woman here who loves Him 
to begin to talk about Him to their friends, and just to tell 


them what He has done for you. You have got a circle of 
friends. Go and tell them of Him. 


I can’t help thinking of the old woman who started out, 
when the war commenced, with a poker in her hand. When 
asked what she was going to do with it, she said: «T can’t 
do much with it, but I can show what side I’m on.” M 


friends, even if you can’t do much, show to which side you 
belong. 


—I may say with truth that there is only about one in 
ten who professes Christianity who will turn round and 
glorify God with aloud voice. Nine out of ten are still- 
born Christians. You never hear of them. If you press 
them hard with the question whether they are Christians, 
they 1aight say: “ Well, I hope so.” We never see it in 
their actions ; we never see it in their lives, They might 
belong to the church you go to, but you never see them at 
the prayer-meetings or taking any interest in the church 
affairs. They don’t profess it among their fellows or in 
their business, and the result is that there are hundreds 


going cn with a half hope, not sure whether their religion 
will stand them or not, 


| Christ. 


med, 


man of 
rist had 


cannot 
‘mouth 
see the 


;it and 
, moun- 
o them 


Jhicago 
s Him 
to tell 
rele of 


one in 
d and 
. still- 
press 
itians, 
it in 
might 
em at 
hurch 
or in 
dreds 
ligion 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 91 


CONVERSION. 


Mr. Moody's first Impulse in Converting Souls. 


I want to tell you how I got the first impulse to work 
solely for the conversion of men. For a long time after my 
conversion I dian’s accomplish anything. T hadn’t got into 
my right place ; thav was it. I hadn't thought enough o 


this personal work. vd get up in prayer meeting, and I'd 
pray with the others, 


but just to go up to 4 man and take 
hold of his coat aud gee him down on his knees, 1 hadn’t yet 


to that. Iv was in 1860 the change came, In 
tne Sunday-school I had a pale, delicate young man as one 
of the teachers. I knew his burning piety, and assigned 
him to the worst class in the school. They were all girls, 
and it was an awful class. They kept gadding around in 
the school-room, and were laughing and carrying on all the 
while. And this young man had better success then any 
one else. One Sunday he was absent, and I tried myself to 
teach the class, but couldu't do anything with them ; they 
seemed farther off than ever from any concern about their 


Well, the day after his absence, early Monday 


souls. 
morning, the young man cane into the store where I worked, 


and, tottering and bloodless, threw himself down cn some 
boxes. ‘ What’s the matter?” Lasked. “I have been 
bleeding at the lungs, and they have given me Up to die,” 
he said, ‘ But you are not afraid to die?” I questioned. 
“ No,” said he, “T am not afraid to die, but } have got to 
stand before God and give an account of my stewardship, 
and not one of my Sabbath-school scholars has been brought 
to Jesus. I have failed to bring one, and haven't any 
strength to do it now.” 

He was so weighed 
that dying man in it, an 
one of hrs scholars, and to eac 


got round 


down that I got a carriage and took 
d we called at the homes of every 
h one he said, as best his faint 


92 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Conversion 


voice would let him: “I have come to just ask you to come 
to the Saviour,” and then he prayed as I never heard before, 
And for ten days he laboured in that way, sometimes walk. 
ing to the nearest houses. And at the end of that ten days 
every one of that large class hud yielded to the Saviour, 
Full well I remember the night before he went away (for 
the doctcrs said he must hurry to the South), how we held 
a true love-feast. It was the very gate of heaven, that 
meeting. He prayed, and they prayed ; he didn’t ask them, 
he didn’t think they could pray ; and then we sang: “ Blest 
be the tie that biads.” It was a beautiful night in June 
that he left on the Michigan Southern, and I was down to 
the train te help him off. And those girls every one 
gathered there again, all unknown to each other ; and the 

depot seemed a second gate to heaven, in the joyful, yet 

tearful, communion and farewells between these newly re- 
deemed souls and him whose crown of rejoicing it wilf be 

that he led them to Jesus. At last the gong sounded, and, 
supported on the platform, the dying man shook hanus with 
each one, and whispered: “I will meet you yonder.” 


— 


Very Hard, Yet Very Easy. 
The hardest thing, I will admit, ever a 
become a Christian, and yet it is the easiest. 


n’t like to see 
im: ‘ Go pick up uncle’s Bible 
from the floor,” “J won't,” he replied. “ Go and pick up 
that Bible directly.” “TI won't.” « What did you say?” 
asked his mother, She thought he didn’t understand. But 
he understood well enough, and had made up his mind that 
he wouldn’t. She told the boy she would have to 
punish him if he didn’t, and then he said he couldn’t, and 
by-and-by he said he didn’t want to, And that is the way 
with the people in coming to Christ. At first they say they 
won't, then they can’t, and then they don’t want to, The 


Conve 


moth 
vot ¢ 
could 
have 
the f 
she d 
by-a 
woul. 
very 
fectl 
they 
save 
Sav 
you 
Chi 
me} 
aro 


nversion 


1 to come 
‘d before, 
les walk. 
ten days 
Saviour, 
way (for 
we held 
en, that 
sk them, 
a Blest 
in June 
down to 
ery one 
and the 
ful, yet 
awiy re. 
wilf be 
ol, and, 
aS with 


dois to 
ems to 
e most 
2asiest, 
about 
3 floor. 
to see 
Bible 
ick up 
say 9” 
But 
d that 
ve to 
b, and 
8 way 
r they 
The 


AND ILLUSTRATI ONS. 93 


mother insisted upon the boy picking’ up the Bible, and he 
got down and put his arms aroun it and pretended he 
-ouldn’t lift it. He was & great, healthy boy, and he could 

I was very anxious to see 


because she was a young mother, and if 
as going to break her heart 


o she told him again if he didn’t pick it up she 


Conversion. 


fectly easy for men to acce 
they don’t want to give up their will. If you want to be 


saved you must just accept that gospel—that Christ is your 
Saviour, that he is yout Redeemer, and that he has rescued 
‘ou from the curse of the law. Just say: “Lord Jesus 
Christ, I trust you from this hour to save me,” and the mo- 


ment you take that stand he will put his loving alms 
around you and wrap about you the robe of righteousness. 


——— ee 


The Arrows of Conviction. 


I remember, while preaching in Glasgow, an incident oc- 
curred which I will relate. 1 had been preaching there 
ight was my last one, and I pleaded 
with them as I had never pleaded there before. I urged 
the people to meet me in that jand. It is a very solemn 
thing to stand before a vast audience for the last time and 


think you may neve 

to come to Christ. 

opportunity, and urged them to accept, and just asked them 
At the conclusion I 


to meet me at that marriage supper. 
1 young lady coming into the inquiry room. 
-~ when another tall young lady 
came in, and she went up to the first and put her arms 
around her and wept. Pretty soon another young lady came, 
and went up to the first two and just put her arms around 
both of them. They were three sisters and I found that al- 
though they had been sitting in different parts of the build. 


ing, the sure arrow of conviction went down to their souls, 
and brought them to the inquiry room. Another young 
“ Mr. Moody, I 


lady came down from the gallery and said : 


soon saw a tal 
She had scarcely come 1n 


94 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Conversion. 


want to become a Christian.” TI asked a young Christian to 
talk to her, and when she went home that night about 10 
o’clock—her mother was sitting up for her—ghe gaid : 
‘‘ Mother, I have accepted the invitation to be present at 
the marriage supper of the Lamb.” Her mother and father 
laid awake that night talking about the salvation of their 
child. That was Friday night, and next day (Saturday) she 
was unwell, and before long her sickness developed into 
scarlet fever, and a few days after I got this letter : 

“Mr. Moopy—Dear Sir: It is now my painful duty to intimate 
to you that the dear girl concerning whom I wrote to you on Mon- 
day, has been taken awey from us by death. Her departure, how- 
ever, has been signally softened to us, for she told us yesterday she 
was ‘going home to be with Jesus,’ and after giving messagus to 
many, told us to let Mr, Moody and Mr. Sankey know that she died 
a happy Christian. 


—_. 


How a Citizen Became a Soldier. 


One day I was walking through the streets of York, in 
England. I saw a little way ahead a soldier coming toward 
me. He had the red uniform on of the infantry—the dress of 
the army. I knew at once when I saw him that he was a 
soldier. When he came near me I stopped him. Isaid: 
“My good man, if you have no objection, I would like to 
ask you a few questions.” « Certainly, sir,” saidhe. “Well 
then, I would like to know how you first became a soldier ?” 
“Yes, sir, I will tell you. You see, sir, I wanted to become 
« soldier, and the recruiting officer was in our town, and [ 
went up to him and told him I wanted to enlist. Well, sir, 
he said: ‘ All right,’ and the first thing he did, sir, he took 
an English shilling out of his pocket, sir, and put it into my 
hand. The very moment, sir, a recruiting-sergeant puts a 
shilling into your hand, sir, you are a soldier.” | Said tu 
myself: “That is the very illustration I want.” 

That man was a free 
and there; do just wh 
shilling was put into his 
war, and Queen Victoria 


him obey the rules and regulations of the a 


rmy. He is a 
soldier the very minute he t 


akes the shilling. He has not 


Conversion. 


hristian to 
t about 10 
-she said: 
present at 
and father 
n of their 
urday) she 
loped into 


to intimata 
ou on Mon- 
rture, how- 
sterday she 
nessagus to 
at she died 


York, in 
ig toward 
e dress of 
he was a 
I said : 
d like to 
“Well 
soldier ?” 
0 become 
mn, and [ 
Well, sir, 
’ he took 
‘into my 
it puts a 
[ said tu 


go here 
1ent the 
rules of 
od make 
He is a 
has not 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 95 


Conversion. 


i _ And when you ask me 
got to wait to hag poetic Panes mee fing 
Mee tbs he eeoarae a soldier. The citizen ee 
perrens ag Saute and from being a free man naga ahs 
ene Pa of others. The moment yo 
ject to 


. 


itten in 
Christ into your heart, that moment your name 18 wrl 
r 
the roll of heaven. 


Moody % TOUns eerie antheist got 
ber, soon after I got converted, a tee world 
ne es and just mee a aE a al are the 
or % D3 

Those meth vie Be I (ae oe a worse man than ne whi 
WOIRe - ae Christians down. He ls are : sce 
ie fh i than any man I know. W ae ego 8 
borders oy ound Jeeua he just tried to pall'tie Pablenery 
knew I had eri me, and [ did not know the hye! 
Or, el he got the best of me. The only Ae ee 
well then, an sPhelata, pantheists, or infidels, is eae 
pes uae oe fthe Bible. Well, this ag 0 oe 
good mnowleege street the air, in the sun, aa 2 7 i 
God was ca he stars, but really he meant now ee at 
fe aia ‘: went to pray, it seemed as if I was " ip : 
eae hats or to anyone. We rane pa pk hate 
ing anyw jot 1 a place as heaven, 
ne ane conned His influence from heaven 18 
abunda 


felt among us. 


——. ee 


‘“Hree,” 


C have 
lavery, we used to 
: : ber when we had s lave 
You will gy es "Reainale Rensieeres), a ate 
men es to escape from slavery ma ay this allusion 
states a. rn people here they will not AY all remember 
any Bout he o¢ to wound their feelings. . ed to be afraid 
IT am try eenounet men came here howthey 4 ck. Why, I 
Ms ‘ te should come and take rey und he used 
est so D had. a poor tug : d 
we : 
nee verde time. Sometimes a customer woul 
to e qua 


96 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Conversivn. 


come in, and he would be uneasy all the time. He was 
afraid it was some one to take him back to slavery. But 
somebody tells him if he was in Canada he would be per. 
fectly safe, and he says: “If I could only get into Canada ; 
if I could only get under the Union Jack I would be free,” 
There are no siaves under the Union Jack he has been told 
~~that is the flag of freedom ; the moment he gets under it 
he isa free man. Sohe starts. We'll say there are no rail- 
ways, and the poor fellow has got ten miles ahead when his 
master comes up, and he hears that his slave has fled to 
Canada and sets off in pursuit. Some one tells the poor 
fugitive that his master is after him. What does the poor 
fugitive do? What does hedo? He redoubles his exertions 
and presses on, on,on,on. He is aslave born, and he knows 
a slave belongs to his master. Faster he goes! He knows 
his master is after him and he will be taken if he comes up 
with him before he reaches the lines. He says: “If I can 
only hold out and get under the English Flag, the English 
government will protect me.” The whole English army will 
come to protect me if need be. On he presses. He is now 
nearing the boundary line. One minute he is a slave, and 
in an instant he is a free man. My friends, don’t mistake. 
These men can be saved to-night if they cross the line. 


An Irishman Leaps Into the Life-boat. 


While I was in New York, an Irishman stood up in a 
young converts’ meeting and told how he had been saved. 
He said in his broken Irish brogue that I used an illustra- 
tion, and that illustration saved him. And I declare that 
that is the only man I ever knew who was converted without 
being spoken to. He said I used an illustration of a wrecked 
vessel, and said that all would perish unless some assistance 
came. Presently a life-boat came alongside and the captain 
shouted: “Leap into the life-boat—leap for your lives, or 
you will perish,” and when I came to the point I said: 
“Leap into the life-boat; Christ is your life-boat of salvation, 
and he leaped and was saved. 


Jonversivn. 


He was 
ery. But 
ld be per. 
» Canada ; 
1 be free,” 

been told 

Ss under it 
re no rail. 
when his 
as fled to 
| the poor 
} the poor 
exertions 
he knows 
He knows 
comes up 
“If I can 
» English 
irmy will 
le is now 
lave, and 
mistake. 
ne. 


i 
up ina 
n saved. 
illustra- 
are that 
without 
wrecked 
sistance 
, captain 
lives, or 
I said: 
ulvation, 


Cunverston. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 97 


Safe in the Ark. 


When the voice came down from heaven to Noah: “ Come 
thou and all thy house into the ark, for thee have I seen 
righteous before me in this generation,” now, there was a 
minute when Noah was outside the ark, and another when 
he was inside, and by being inside he was saved, As long 
as he was outside of the ark he was exposed to the wrath of 
God just like the rest of those antediluvians, If he stayed 
out, and remained with those antediluvians, he would have 
been swept away, as they were. It was not his righteous- 
ness ; it was not his faith nor his works that saved him ; 
it was the ark. And, my friends, we have not, like Noah, 
to be one hundred and twenty years making an ark for our 
safety. God has provided an ark for us, and the question 
is: “ Are you inside or outside this ark?” If you are inside 
you are sate; if you are outside you are not safe, 


GOLD. 
—-lIt is our privilege to know that we are saved. 


—We shall draw the world to Christ when we are filled 
with religion. 

—He that overcometh shall inherit all things. God has 
no poor children. 

—I hold to the doctrine of sudden conversion as I do to 
my life, and I would as quickly give up my life as give up 
this doctrine, unless it can be proved that it is not according 
to the word of God. Now, I will admit that light is one 
thing and birth is another. A soul must be born before it 
can see light, A child must be born before it can be taught ; 
it must be born before it can walk ; it must be born before 
it can be educated, 


98 MOODY'S ANECDOTES 


DECISION. 


Moody’s Mistake. 


The last time I preached upon this question was in old 
Farwell Hall, I had been for five nights preaching upon 
the life of Christ. I took Him from the cradle and followed 
Him up to the judgment hall, and on that occasion I con. 
sider I made as great a blunder as ever I made in my life. 
If I could recall my act I would give this right hand. It 
was upon that memorable night in October, and the Court 
House bell was sounding an alarm of fire, but I paid no 
attention to it. You know we were accustomed to hear the 
fire bell often, and it didn’t disturb us much when it sounded. 
I finished the sermon upon “ What shall I do with Jesus?” 
And I said to the audience: “ Now, I want you to take the 
question with you and think over it, and next Sunday I 
want you to come back and tell me what you are going to 
do with it.” What a mistake! It seems now as if Satan 
was in my mind when I said this. Since then I never have 
dared give an audience a week to think of their salvation. 
Tf they were lost they might rise up in judgment against me. 
“ Now is the accepted time.” We went down stairs to the 
other meeting, and I remember when Mr. Sankey was sing- 
ing, and how his voice rang when he came to that pleading 
verse : 

To-day the Saviour calls ; 
For refuge fly. 
The storm of justice falls, 
And death is nigh, 


After the meeting we went home. I remember going down 
La Salle street with a young man who is probably in the hall 
to-night, and saw the glare of flames, T said to the young 
man: “This means ruin to Chicago,” About one o'clock, 


vas in old 
ing upon 
l followed 
on I con- 
1 my life. 
hand, It 
the Court 
I paid no 
hear the 
sounded. 
1 Jesus?” 
take the 
Sunday I 
going to 
if Satan 
ver have 
alvation. 
1inst me. 
rs to the 
was sing- 
pleading 


ng down 
the hall 
eB young 
o’clock, 


Decision. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 99 


Farwell Hall went; soon the church in which T had 
preached went down, and everything was scattered, | never 
saw that audience again. My friends, we don’t know what 
may happen to-morrow, but there is one thing I do know, 
and that is, if you take the gift you are saved. If you have 
eternal life you need not fear fire, death, or sickness. Let 
disease or death come, you can shout triumphantly over the 
grave if you have Christ. My friends, what are you going 
to do with Him to-night? Will you decide now ¢ 


A Day of Decision. 


I believe there is a day of decision in our lives—a day 
upon which the crisis of our lives occurs. There is a day 
when the Son of Man comes and stands at our heart and 
knocks and knocks for the last time and leaves us forever. 
I can imagine when Pilate was banished how this recollec- 
tion troubled him day and night. He remembered how that 
Saviour had looked on him—how innocent He was ; he re- 
membered how,when the Jews were clamouring for His death, 
and the cry echoed through the streets of Jerusalem: “Ciu- 
cify Him! Crucify Him!” It seemed as if He had nothing 
but love for them. Probably some one told him the story 
of the crucifixion, and how when nailed to the cross and the 
howling mob around Him, He cried: “Father forgive them ; 
they know not what they do ;” he remembered how they cla- 
moured for his life, and how he hadn’t the moral courage to 
stand up for the despised Nazarene, and that preyed upou 
his mind, and he put an end to his miserable existence. 


Moody Puts a Man in his “ Prophets’ Room.” 


A few years ago as I stood at the door of a church giving 
out invitations to a meeting to take piace that evening, a 
young man to whom I offered one said: “ I want something 
more than that, I want something to do!” I urged him to 
come into the meeting, and after some remonstrance he con. 
sented. After the meeting I took him home, and after 
dinner I told him there was a room which I called the 


100 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Decision. 


“Prophets’ Room,” and up stairs was another Which I called 
the “ Unbelievers’ Room,” and I would give him till night 
to decide which he would take. He was able by night to 
take the first, and the next day was at work urging young 
men to attend the noonday prayer-meeting. When I wag 
burned out in the great fire and was left perfectly destitute, 
I received a letter with some money from this young man 
in Boston, who said: “ You helped me and took me in your 
home, keeping me six weeks and refused to take anything 
for it, and I have never forgotten your kindness.” ‘I had 


lost sight of him, but he had remembered that as & turning: 
point in his existence, 


GOLD. 


—If you receive Him it will be well ; if you reject Him 
and are lost it will be terrible, 


—Thanks be to God, there is hope to-day ; this very hour 
you can choose Him and serve Him. 


—Now just think a moment and answer the question, 
“What shall I do with Jesus who is called Christ ?” 


—I believe in my soul that there are more at this day 
being lost for want of decision than for any other thing, 


—One of two things you must do; you must either 
receive Him or reject Him. You receive Him here and He 


will receive you there; you reject Him here and He will 
reject you there, 


Decision. 


h [ called 
till night 

night to 
ig young 
en I was 
lestitute, 
ung man 
>in your 
anything 
” Thad 
turning: 


ect Him 
ry hour 
uestion, 


his day 


ing. 


either 
and He 
He will 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 101 


DELIVERANCE. 


Ce eel 


The Scotch Lassie. 


Tners 1s a story told of an incident that occurred during 
the last Indian mutiny. The English were besieged in the 
city of Lucknow, and were in momentary expectation of 
perishing at the hands of the fiends that surrounded them. 
There was a little Scotch lassie in this fort, and, while lying 
on th ground, she suddenly shouted, her face aglow with 
joy: “ Dinna ye hear them comin’?” Hear what?” they 
asked: “ Dinna ye hear them comin’ ?” And she sprang to 
her feet. It was the bagpipes of her native Scotland she 
heard. It was a native air she heard that was being played 
by a regiment of her countrymen marching to the relief of 
those captives, and these deliverers made them free. Oh, my 
friends, don’t you hear Jesus Christ crying to you to-night 


Geo. H. Stewart Visits a Doomed Criminal. 


I remember of hearing a story of Mr. George Stewart. 
One day the governor of Pennsylvania came to him and 
said: “Mr, Stewart, I want you to go to such a prison and 
tell that man for whose executiou I signed the warrant the 
other day, that there is not a ray of hope for him. When 
the day and hour comes he must be executed. His mother 
has been tormenting the life out of me, and all his friends 
have been running after me day and night, and they are 
giving the poor fellow a false hope.” ‘That is a very disas 
ereeable thing to do, Governor,” answered Mr. Stewart, 
“ Well I want you to go and tell him, so that he can be set- 
tled in his mind.” The story goes that when the doors of 
the cell were opened, that prisoner seized Mr. Stewart's 
hands, and in his joy cried: “ You are a good man. I’ 
know you have come with a pardon from the governor.’ 


102 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Deliverance, 


But when Mr. Stewart told him the governor had sent him 
to say there was not a ray of hope for him, that upon the 
day and hour he must be executed, the man completely 
broke down and fainted away. The thought that at such a 
day and such an hour he was going to be ushered into eter- 
nity, was to much for the poor fellow. Suppose I come to 
you to-night and tell you there is not a ray of hope—that 
you have broken the law of pardon. How many would say: 
“‘T know a great deal better. The blackest sinner on earth 
Christ can save. He says so.” But, my friends, there is 


no hope without the deliverancs to be free from the bondage 
of sin, 


‘ The Demoniac. 


When this man found himself delivered he wanted to go 
with the Saviour. That was gratitude ; Christ had saved 
him, had redeemed him. He had delivered him from the 
hand of the enemy. And this man cried; “ Let me foliow 
You around the world ; where You go I will go.” But the 
Lord said: “You go home and tell your friends what good 
things the Lord has done for you.” And he started home, 
I would like to have been in that house when he came there. 
I can imagine how the children would look when they saw 
him, and say: “Father is coming.” “Shut the door” the 
mother would cry; “look out! fasten the window ; bolt 
every door in the house.” Many times he very likely had 
come and abused his family and broken the chairs and ta- 
bles and turned the mother into the street and alarmed all 
the neighbours. They see him now coming down the street. 
Down he comes till he gets to the door, and then gently 
knocks, You don’t hear a sound as he stands there, At 
last he sees his wife at the window and he says: “ Mary?” 
“Why,” she says, “ why, he speaks as he did when I first 
married him ; I wonder if he got well?” So she looks out 
and asks: “John, isthat you?” « Yen, Mary,” he replies, 
“it’s me, don’t be afraid any more, I’m well now.” I see 
that mother, how she pulls back the bolts of that door, and 
looks at him. The first look is sufficient, and she springs 
into his arms and clings shout bis neck. She takes him in 


eliverance, 


l sent him 


upon the 
ompletely 
at such a 


into eter- 


come to 
ope—that 
vould say: 
‘on earth 
3, there is 
> bondage 


ited to go 
1ad saved 
from the 
me foliow 
But the 
hat good 
ed home. 
me there. 
they saw 
loor” the 
ow; bolt 
ikely had 
S and ta- 
rmed all 
1e street. 
on gently 
ere, At 
6 Mary y? 
on I first 
looks out 
e replies, 
” 
” [gee 
loor, and 
> Springs 
shim in 


Deliverance. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 103 


and asks him a hundred questions—how it all happened— 
all about it. ‘“ Well, just take a chair and I'll tell you how 
I got cured.” The children hang back and look amazed. 
He says: “I was there in the tombs, you know, cutting 
myself with stones, and running about in my nakedness, 
when Jesus of Nazareth came that way. Mary, did you 
ever hear of Him? He is the most wonderful man ; I’ve 
never seenaman like Him. He just ran in. and told those 
devils to leave me, and they leftme. When He had cured me [ 
wanted to follow Him, but He told me to come home and 
tell you all about it.” The children by and by gather about 
his knee, and the elder ones run to tel! their playmates what 
wonderful things Jesus has done for their father. Ah, my 
friends, we have got a mighty deliverer. I don’t care what 
affliction you have, He will deliver you from it. The Sen 
of God who cast out those devils can deliver you from your 


besetting sin. 


-_—— 


Spurgeon’s Parable. 


Mr. Spurgeon, a number of years ago, made a parable. 
He thought he had a right to make one, and he did it. He 
said: ‘There was once a tyrant who ordered one of his 
subjects into his presence, and ordered him to make a chain. 
The poor blacksmith—that was his occupation—had to go to 
work and forge the chain, When it was done he brought it 
into the presence of the tyrant, and he was ordered to take 
it away and make it twice the length. ‘He brought it again 
to the tyrant, and again he was ordered to double it. Back 
he came when he had obeyed the order, and the tyrant 
looked at it, and then commanded the servants to bind the 
man hand and foot. with the chain he had made, and cast him 
into prison, ‘“ And,” Mr. Spurgeon said, “ that is what the 
devil does with man.” He makes them forge their own 
chain, and then binds #&em hand and foot with it, and casts 
them into outer darkness.” My friends, that is just what 
these drunkards, these gamblers, these blasphemers—that is 
just what every sinner is doing. But, thank God, we can 
tell you of a deliverer. The Son of God has power to break 
every ene of these fetters if you will only come to Him. 


GOLD. 


—The mightiest man that ever lived could not deliver 
himself from his sins, If a man could have saved himself 
Christ would never have come into the world, 


—He came to deliver us from our sinful dispositions, and 
create in us pure hearts, and when we have Him with us it 


will not be hard for us, Then the service of Christ will be 
delightful. 


—If you are under the power of evil, and you want to get 
under the power of God, cry to Him to bring you over to His 
service ; cry to Him to take you into Hisarmy, He will 
hear you; he will come to you, and, if need be, He will send 
a legion of angels to help you to fight your way up toa 
heaven, God will take you by the right hand and Jead you 
through this wilderness, over death, and take you right into 
His kingdom, That’s what the Son of Man came to do. 


He has never deceived us; jest say here; “ Christ ia aly 
delivever,” 


MOODY'S ANECDOTES Deliverance 


Deliverance 


not delive 
d himself 


itions, and 
with us it 
18st will be 


rant to get 
ver to His 
He will 
» will send 
fay up ta 
l lead you 
right into 
me to do. 
‘1st ip my 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 105 


EXCUSES. 


“J Have Intellectual Difficulties.” 


There is another voice coming down from the gallery yon- 
der: “Ihave intellectual difficulties ; I cannot believe.” A 
man came to me sometime ago and said : “ I cannot.” “ Can- 
not what?” I asked. * Well,” said he, “1 cannot believe.” 
«“Whot” “Well,” he repeated, “I cannot believe.” 
“Who?” I asked. “ Well—I—can’t—believe—myself,” 
« Well, you don’t want to.” [ Laughter. ] Make yourself 
out false every time, but believe in the truth of Christ. If 
a man says tome: “ Mr. Moody, you have lied to me; you 
have dealt falsely with me,” it may be so, but no man on the 
face of the earth can say that God ever dealt unfairly, or 
that He lied to him. If God says a thing, it is true. We 
don’t ask you to believe in any man on the face of the earth, 
but we ask you to believe in Jesus Christ, who never lied— 
who never deceived any one. If a man says he cannot be- 


lieve Him, he says what is untrue. 


—— 


I Am Not All Right. 


I had to notice during the war, when enlisting was going 
on, sometimes a man would come up with a nice silk hat on, 
atent-leather boots, nice kid gloves, and a fine suit of 
clothes, which, probably, cost him $100; perhaps the next 
man who came along would be a hod-carrier, dressed in the 
poorest kind of clothes. Both had to strip alike and put on 
the regimental uniform. So when you come and say you 
ain’t fit, haven't got good clothes, haven’t got righteousness 
enough, remember that He will furnish you with the uniform 
of heaven, and you will be set down at the marriage feast 
of the Lamb. I don’t care how black and vile your heart 
nay be, only accept the invitation of Jesus Christ and He 
will make you fit to sit down with the rest at that feast, 


106 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Excuses, 


“Those Hypocrites.” 


“I won't accept this invitation because of those hypocrites 
in the churches,” My friend, you will find very few there if 
you get to heaven. There won’t be a hypocrite in the next 
world, and if you don’t want to be associated with hypocrites 
in the next wofd, you will take this invitation, Wh yy you 
will find hypocrites everywhere. One of the apostles wag 
himself the very prince of hypocrites, but he didn’t get to 
heaven, You will find plenty of hypocrites in the church, 
They have been there for the last one thousand eight hun. 
dred years, and will probably remain there. But what ig 
that to you? This is an individual matter between you and 
and your God, 


SL 


“I Can’t Fee]. 
“T can’t feel,” Says one, 


n—it ig 
The question 


didn’t feel I had 
tation.” Sat- 


Excuses, 


© hypocrites 
few aoe if 
in the next 
h hypocrites 
hy, » you 
postles wag 
idn’t get to 
the church, 
eight hun- 
But what ig 
en you and 


st excuse, 
ing prett 
a Engl 
think we 
to feeling, 
e. What 
sire to be 
marriage 
er, I Say: 
No it 
on—it ig 
question 
e+ There 
Vhen you 
3 you will 
a will re. 
e saying: 
hive 
id, and [ 
the invi- 
“ Sup- 
he Rock 
ipon the 


Excuses. MOODY'S ANECDOTES. 107 


Word of God and the waves of unbelief cannot touch you, 
the waves of persecution cannot assail you; the devil and 
all the fiends of hell cannot approach you if you only build 
your hopes upon God’s Word. Say: “ I will trust Him, 
though He slay me’—I will take God at His word. 


1 Am Not “One of the Elect” 


I can imagine some men saying: “Mr. Moody has not 
touched my case at all. That is not the reason why I won't 
accept Christ. I don’t know as I am one of the elect.” How 
often I am met with this excuse—how often do I hear it in 
the inquiry room! How many meh fold their arms and 
say: “If I am one of the elect I will be saved, and if I ain’t 
[ won’t. No use of your pothering about it.” Why don’t 
some of those merchants say : “ If God is going to make me 
a successful merchant in Chicago I will be one whether I 
like it or not, and if he isn’t L won't.” If you are sick, and 
a doctor prescribes for you, don’t take the medicine, throw 
it out the door, it don’t matter, for if God has decreed you 
are going to die, you will: if he hasn’t, you will get better. 
If you use that argument you may as well not walk home 
from this tabernacle. If God has said you'll get home, 
you'll get home—you'll fly through the air if you have 
been elected to go home. [have an idea that the Lord 
Jesus saw how men were going to stumble over this doc- 


trine, so after he had been thirty or forty years in heaven, 
he came down and spoke to John. One Lord’s day, in Pat- 
«“ Write these things to the Churches.” 


mos, He said to him : 

John kept on writing. His pen flew very fast. And then 
the Lord, when it was nearly finished, said: “ John, before 
you close the pook, put in this: ‘ The Spirit and the Bride 
say, Come; and let him that heareth say, Come.’ But there 
will be some that are deaf, and they cannot hear, so add : 
‘Let him that is athirst, Come ;’ and in case there shoulda 
be any that do not thirst, put it still proader : ‘Whosoever will, 
ict him take of the water of life freely.” “What more can 
you have than that? And the Book is soa’ ed, as it were, 
with that, Itis the last ‘nvitation in the Bible, Whose 


- 


108 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Excuses, 


ever will, let him take of the water of life freely.” You are 
thirsty. You want water. I hold out this glass to you, 
and say: “ Take it.” You say: “If I am decreed to have it, 
Tam not going to put myself to the trouble of taking it,” 
Well, you will never get it. And if you are ever to have 
salvation, you must reach out the hand and take it, J 


will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of 
the Lord,” 


Why did he not take his Wife Along ? 


Take the excuses. There wasn’t one that wasn’t a lie, 
The devil made them all ; and if the sinner hadn’t one 
already the devil was there at his elbow to suggest one, about 
the truth of the Bible, or something of that sort. One of 
the excuses mentioned was that the man invited had bought 
a piece of ground, and had to look at it. Real estate and 
corner lots are keeping a good many men out of God’s king- 
dom. It was a lie to say that he had to go and see it then, 
for he ought to have looked at it before he bought it. Then 
the next man said he’d bought some oxen, and must prove 
them. That was another lie ; for if he hadn’t proved them 
before he bought them he ought to have done so, and could 
have done it after supper just as well as before it. But the 
third man’s excuse was the most ridiculous of them alli, 
“I have married a wife, and therefore cannot come.” Why 
did he not take his wife along with him? Who likes to go 
to a feast better than a young bride? He might have asked 
her to go, too; and if she were not willing, then let her stay 
at home. The fact was, he did not want to go. 


A Good Excuse: 

If you have got a good excuse don 
thing I have said ; don’t give it up for anything your mother 
may have said; don’t give it up for anything your friend 
may have said. Take it up to the bar of God and state it to 
Him ; butif you have not got a good excuse—an excus@ that 


will stand in eternity—let it go to-night, and flee to the armw 
of a loving Saviour, 


’t give it up for any- 


Hacuses. 


Tt is 
ou Wal 
will do 
in the 
his wa) 
for wh; 
nation. 
despise 
look a’ 
pray ‘J 
you at 
in tha 
vitati 
shout 
comp: 
endec 


Excuses, 


You are 
3 to you, 
» have it, 
king it,” 

to have 
rit, “J 
name of 


2 
’t a lie, 
In’t one 
1e, about 
One of 
| bought 
tate and 
I's king- 
it then, 
Then 
st prove 
ed them 
id could 
But the 
hem ali, 
— Why ° 
es to go 
e asked 
ler stay 


or any- 
mother 

friend 
te it to 
sO that 
ie arm 


109 


AND ILL USTRATIONS. 


Eacuses. 


Excused at Last- 


thought that God will excuse you if 
d. He does not wish to do it, but He 
willdo it _“ as T live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked ; but that the wicked turn from 
dlive. Turn ye, turn ye fro 


his way an 
for why will ye die O house of Israel.” Look at the Jewish 
nation. They wanted to be excused from the feast. They 


f God and trampled it under foot, and 
look at them to-day! Yes, +t is easy enough to say: a 
pray ‘Thee have me excused,” put by-and-by God may take 
you at your word, and say: “ Yes, 1 will excuse you.” And 
in that lost world, while others who have accepted the in- 
vitation sit down to the marriage supper of the Lamb, amid 
aven, you will be crying in the 


shouts and hallelujahs in he 
of the lost: “The harvest is past; the summer is 


company 

ended, and I am not saved.” 
a 
The Invitation. 


Suppose we should write out here to-night this excuse, 
how would it sound? ‘Zo the Ring of Heaven -— While sit- 
ting in the Tabernacle in the City of Chicago, January ——> 
1877, I received & very pressing invitation from one of your 
servants to be present at the marriaye supper of your only- 
begotten Son. { Pray THEE HAVE ME EXCUSED.” Would 
you sign that, young man’? Would you, mother? Would 
you come up to the reporters’ table, take up a pen and put 
your name down to such an excuse? You would say : “ Lot 
my right hand forget its cunning, and my tongue cleave to 


the roof of my mouth, if I sign that.” 

Just let me write out another answer: “ To the King of 
Heaven :-—While sitting in the Tabernacle, January j 
1877, I received a pressing invitation from one of your mes- 


sertgers to be present at the marriage supper of your onty- 
begotten Son. T hasten to reply : By THE GRACE OF GOD I 
WILL33E PRESENT.” Who will sign that? Is there on® who 
me to j0% Is there noon” who will say: 


will put his na 
“ By the grace of God I will accept the invitation now ?” 


110 MOUDY’S ANECDOTES Eacuses 


GOLD. 


—There is not an excuse but is a lie, 


—God’s service a hard one! How will that sound in the 
judgment. 


—It is easy enough to excuse yourself to hell, but you 
cannot excuse yourself to heaven. 


— When a man prepares a feast, men rush in, but when 


God prepares one they all begin to make excuses, and don’t 
want to go, 


~My friends, to accept this invitation is more important 
than anything else in this world. There is nothing in the 


world that is so important as the question of accepting the 
invitation. 


—If everybody could understand everything the Bible 
said it wouldn’t be God’s book ; if Christians, if theologians, 
had studied it for forty, fifty, sixty years, and then only 


began to understand it, how could a man expect to under- 
stand it by one reading } 


—If God were to take men at their word about these ex- 
cuses, and swept every one into his grave who had an excuse, 
there would be a very small congregation in the Tabernacle 
next Sunday; there would be little busizess in Chicago, and 


in a few weeks the grass would be growing on these busy 
streets, 


Kecuses 


d in the 
ut you 


it when 
nd don’t 


portant 
g in the 
ing the 


e Bible 
logians, 
en only 
. under- 


hese ex- 

excuse, 
ernacle 
wo, and 


se busy 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. irl 


FAITH. 


anal 


How Moody’s Faith Saved an Infidel. 


When I was in Edinburgh, at the inquiry meeting in 
Assembly Hall, one of the ushers came around and said : 
«Mr. Moody, Id like to put that man out ; he’s one of the 
greatest infidels in Edinburg ” He had been the chairman 
of an infidel club for years. 1 went around to where he was 
and sat down by him. ‘ How is it with you, my friend ?” 
Lasked, and then he laughed and said: * You say God an- 
swers prayer; I tell you He doesn’t. I don’t believe in a 
God. ‘Try it on me.” “ Will you get down with me and 
pray?” I asked him ; but he wouldn’t. So I got down on 
my knees beside him and prayed. Next night he was there 
again, I prayed, and quite a number of others prayed for 
him. A few months after that, away up in the north of 
Scotland, at Wick, I was preaching in the open air, an 
while I stood there I saw the infidel standing on the out- 
skirts of the crowd. T went up to him at the close of the 
meeting and said: “ How is it with you, my friend?” He 
laughed and gaid: “1 told you your praying is all false ; God 
hasn’t answered your prayers ; go and talk to thes 
people.” He had just the same spirit as before, but I relied 
on faith. Shortly after I got a letter from a barrister—& 


Christian. He was preaching one night in Edinburgh, 


when this infidel went up to him and said: “I want you to 
ray for me; fam troubled. ‘The barrister asked : “ What 
is the trouble ?” and he replied: “TI don’t know what’s the 
matter, but I don't have any peace, and I want you to pray 
for me.” Next day he went around to that lawyer's office 
and he said that he had found Christ. 0 
{This man now is doing good work, and I heard that out 


of thirty inquirers there, ten or twelve of his old assoclaten 


112 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Faith. 


and friends were among them. So, if you have God with 
you, and you go to work for Him, and you meet infidels and 
sceptics, just bear in mind that you can win through faith, 
When Christ saw the faith of those four men, He said to the 
man: “Thy sins are forgiven you.” My friends, if you 
have faith all things are possible. 


ES RRS SA Semen 


Taking the Prince at his Word. 

Some time ago I remember reading of an incldent that 
occurred between a prince in a foreign land and one of his 
subjects. This man for rebellion against the government 
was going to be executed. He was taken to the guil-otine 
block. When the poor fellow reached the place of execation 
he was trembling with fear. The prince was present and 
asked him if he wished anything before judgment was car- 
ried out, The culprit replied: “A glass of water.” It 
was brought to him, but he was so nervous he couldn’t drink 
it. ‘Do not fear,” said the prince to him, “ judgment will 
not be carrid out till you drink that water,” and in an in- 
stant the glass was dashed to the ground and broken into a 
thousand pieces. He took that prince at his word. 


A Wife’s Faith 


In one of the towns in England there is a beautiful little 
chapel, and a very touching story is told in connection with 
it. It+vas built by an infidel. He had a praying wife, but 
he would not listen to her, would not allow her pastor even 
to take dinner with them, would not look at the Bible, 
would not allow religion even to be talked of. She made up 
her mind, seeing she could not influence him by her voice, 
that every day she would pray to God at twelve o'clock for 
his salvation, She said nothing to him, but every day at 
that hour she told the Lord about her husband. At the end 
of twelve months there was no change in him, But she did 
not give up. Six months more went past. Her faith began 
to waver, and she said: “ Will I have to give him up at last? 
Perhaps when I am dead He will answer my prayers.” When 
she had got to that point, it seemed just as if God had got her 


Faith. 


God with 
fidels and 
ugh faith, 
aid to the 
ls, if you 


dent that 
one of his 
vernment 
guil/otine 
execation 
esent and 
5 Was car- 
ater.” It 
dn’t drink 
ment will 
1 in an in- 
ken into a 


L. 


tiful little 
ction with 
+ wife, but 
astor even 
the Bible, 
e made up 
her voice, 
o’clock for 
ery day at 
At the end 
ut she did 
aith began 
up at last? 
*s.” When 
ad got her 


Faith. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 113 


where he wanted her. The man came home to dinner one 
day. His wife was in the dining-room waiting for him, but 
he didn’t come in, She waited some time, and finally looked 
for him all through the house. At last she thought of going 
into the little room where she had prayed so often. There 
he was, praying at the same bed with agony, where she had 
prayed for so many months, asking forgiveness for his sins. 
‘And this is a lesson to you wives who have infidel husbands, 
The Lord saw that woman’s faith and answered her prayers. 


Mr. Morehouse’s Illustration. 


Iremember Mr. More‘.ouse, while here four years ago, 
nsed an illustration whidn nas fastened itself on my mind. 
fle said: “Suppose you go up the street and meet a man 
whom you have known for the last ten years to be a beggar, 
and you notice a change in his appearance, and you say: 
“ Halloo, beggar, what’s come over you y” “Tain’t no.beggar. 
Don’t call me beggar.” “ Why,” you say, “ I saw you 
the other day begging in the street.” ‘Ah, but a change has 
taken place,” he replies. “‘ Is that so? How did it come 
about?” you inquire. “ Well,” he says, “I came out this 
morning and got down here intending to catch the business 
men and get all the money out of them, when one of them 
came up to me and said there was $10,000 deposited for 
me.” “How do you know this is true y? yousay. “I 
went to the bank and they put the money in my hand.” 
“ Are you sure of that?’ you ask ; “how do you know it 
was the right kind of a hand y But he says: “ I don't 
care whether it was the right kind of a hand or not; I got 
the money, and that’s all f wanted.” And so people are 
looking to see if they’ve got the right kind of a hand be- 
fore they accept God by it. They have but to accept his 
testimony and they are save‘, for, as John says: “ He that 
hath received. His testimony hath set his seal that God is 
true.” Is there a man in this assemblage who will receive 
His testimony and set his seal that God is true? Proclaim 
that God speaks the truth. Make yourself a liar, but make 
God’a testimony truthful, Take Him at His word, 

8 


EEN tk Ro sage ad nn 


‘ao 
4 
Mf, 


114 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Faith. 


Faith More Powerful than Gunpowder. 


I remember at one of the meetings at Nashville, during 
the war, a young man came to me, trembling from head to 
foot. What is the trouble?’ I asked, “ There is a letter 
I got from my sister, and she tells me every night as the 
sun goes down she goes down on her knees and prays for 
me.” This man was brave, had been in a number of battles ; 
he could stand before the cannon’s mouth, but yet this letter 
completely upset him, “ I have been trembling ever since I 
received it.” Six hundred miles away the faith of this girt 
went to work, and its influence was felt by the brother. He 
did not believe in prayer; he did not believe in Christianity ; 
he did not helieve in his mother’s Bible. This mother was 
a praying woman, and when she died she left on earth a 
praying daughter. And when God saw her faith and heard 
that prayer, he answered her. How many sons and daugh- 
ters could be saved if their mothers and fathers had but 
faith. 


GOLD. 
—CGod will honour our faith. 


—There is nothing on this earth that pleases Christ #0 
much as faith. 


—Fuith is the foundation of all society. We have onl; 
to look around and see this, 


_I believe there is no man in the world so constituted 
but he can believe in God’s word. He simply tells you to 
believe in Himj and He will save you. 


—When I was emverted twenty years ago I felt a faith 
in God; but five years after I had a hundred times more 
faith, and five years ago I had more than ever, because I 
became better acquainted with Him. I have read up 
the Word, and [ see th: + She Lord has done so and so, and 
then I have turned {> ~>sre hu has promised to pertorm it, 
and when IJ see this * +vo reason to believe in Him. 


= S 


Faith. 


ler. 


le, during 
m head to 
is a letter 
ght as the 
| prays for 
of battles ; 
this letter 
ver since [ 
of this girt 
rother. He 
iristianity ; 
nother was 
on earth a 
.and heard 
and daugh- 
rs had but 


es Christ #0 
e have onl: 


y constituted 
tells you to 


T felt a faith 

times more 
sr, because I 
ve read up 
and so, and 
0 pertorm it, 
| Him, 


=» S 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 116 


FORGIVENESS. 


s  eeeemenemmieenmaad 


How Moody’s Mother Forgave her Prodigal Son. 


Ican give you a little experience of my own family. 
Before I was fourteen years old the first thing I remember 
was the death of my father. He had been unfortunate in 
business, and failed, Soon after his death the creditors came 
in and took everything. My mother was left with a large 
family of children. One calamity after another swept over 
the entire household. Twins were added to the family, and 
my mother was taken sick, The eldest boy was fifteen years 
of age, and to him my mother looked as a stay in her calam- 
ity, but all at once that boy became a wanderer. He had 
been reading some of the trashy novels, and the belief had 
seized him that he had only to go away to make a fortune. 
Away he went. I can remember how eagerly she used to 
look for tidings of that boy ; how she used to send us to the 
post-office to see if there was a letter from him, and recollect 
how we used to come back with the sad news : “ No letter.” 
I remember how in the evenings we used to sit beside her in 
that New England home, and we would talk about our 
futher ; but the moment the name of that boy was mention- 
ed she would hush us into silence. Some nights, when the 
wind was very high, and the house, which was upon a hill, 

ould tremble at every gust, the voice of my mother was 
raised in prayer for that wanderer who had treated her so 
unkindly, I used to think she loved him more than all the 
rest of us put together, and f believe she did. On a Thanks- 
giving day—you know that is a family day in New England 
~_ghe used to set a chair for him, thinking he would re- 
turn home. Her family grew up and her boys left home. 
When I got so that I could write, I sent letters all over the 
vountry, but could find no trace of him, One day while in 


116 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Forgiveness. 


Boston, the news reached me that he had returned, While 
in that city, I remember how I used to look for him in 
every store—he had a mark on his face—but I never got 
any trace. One day while my mother was sitting at the 
door, a stranger was seen coming toward the house, and 
when he came to the door he stopped. My mother didn’t 
know her boy. He stood there with folded arms and great 
beard flowing down his breast, his tears trickling down his 
face. When my mother saw those tears she cried: “Oh, 
it’s my lost son,” and entreated him to come in, But he 
stood still. ‘No, mother,” he said, “I will not come in 
till I hear first you have forgiven me.” Do you believe 
she was not willing to forgive him? Do you think she was 
likely to keep him long standing there? She rushed to the 
threshold and threw her arms around him, and breathed for- 
giveness. Ah, sinner, if you but ask God to be merciful to 
you a sinner, ask Him for forgiveness, although your life 


has been bad—ask Him for mercy, and He will not keep 
you long waiting for an answer, 


————$—$——— 


A Rich Fa.uer Visits his Dying Prodigal Son in 
a Garret and Forgives hime 


There is a story told of Mr. William Dawson, which I 
would like to relate. While preaching in London, one night 
at the close of his sermon, he said that there was not one 
in all London whom Christ could not save. In the morning 
« young lady called upon him and said: “Mr. Dawson, in 
your sermon last night you said that ‘there was no man in ail 
London whom Christ could not save.’ I find a young man 
in my district who says he cannot be saved, and who will 
not listen to me. Won’t you go and see him? I am 
sure rou can do more with him than I can.” Mr. Dawson 
readily assented, and went with the young lady to the Hast 
End—up one of those narrow streets there, and at the top of 
a rickety staircase found a garret in which a man was stretched 
upon straw. He bent over him and said: “Friend.” “Friend” 
said the young man, turning upon him, “you must take me for 


some other person, I have no friends,” “Ah,” replied thus 


Jivenesa. 


While 
him in 
aver got 
y at the 
ise, and 
r didn’t 
nd great 
ovn his 
ce On, 
But he 
come in 
1 believe 
she was 
ad to the 
thed for- 
erciful to 
your life 
not keep 


Son in 


which I 
one night 
gs not one 
2 morning 
awson, in 
man in ail 
oung man 
| who will 
it 2 om 
. Dawson 
o the East 
the top of 
3 stretched 

“Friend” 
‘ake me for 
replied thus 


Forgiveness, AND ILLUSTRATIONS. i; 


Christian, “ you are mistaken. Christ is the sinner’s friend.” 
The man thought this too good. “ Why,” said he, “ my 
whole family have cast me off; every friend I had has left 
me, and no one cares for me.” Mr. Dawson spoke to him 
kindly, and quoted promise after promise—told him what 
Christ had suffered to give him eternal life. At first his 
efforts were fruitless, but finally the light of the gospel began 
to break in on the young man, and the first sign was his 
heart went out to those he had injured, And, my friends, 
this is one of the first indications of the acceptance of Christ 
with the sinner. He said: “I could die in peace now if my 
father would but forgive me.” Well,” replied the man of 
God, “I will go and see your father and ask him for his for- 
giveness.” ‘ No, no,” was the sad answer of the young man, 
“you cannot go near him. My father has disinherited me ; 
he has taken my name from the family records ; he has for- 
bidden the mention of my name in his house by any of the 
family or servants in his presence, and you needn’t go.” 

However, Mr. Dawson obtained the address, and went 
away to the West End of London, ascended the steps of a 
beautiful villa, and rang the bell. A servant in livery came 
to the door and conducted him to the drawing-room. There 
was everything in that house for comfort and luxury that 
money could purchase. He could not help contrasting the 
scene of poverty in that garret with the scene of luxuriant 
elegance everywhere around him, Presently a prov, 
haughty-looking merchant came in, and as he stepped for- 
ward toshake hands with Mr. Dawson that gentleman said : 
“ T believe you have a son named Joseph ?” and the merch- 
ant threw back his hand and drew himself up. “ If you 
come to speak of him—that reprchate--I want you to go 
away. I have no son of that name. I disown him. If he 
has been talking to you he has been only deceiving you.” 
“ Well,” replied Mr. Dawson, “he is your boy now, but ne 
won't be long.” The father stood for a minute looking at the 
Christian, and then asked: “ Is Joseph sick ” ‘ Yes” was 
the reply, “he is at the point of death. I only came to ask 
your forgiveness for him, that he may diein peace. I don’t 
ask any favour ; when he dies we will bury him.” 

The father put his hands to his face and great tears rolled 


118 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Forgiveness. 


down his cheeks, as he said: “Can you take me to him?’ 
In a very short time he was in that narrow strect where his 
son was dying, and as he mounted the filthy stairs it hardly 
seemed possible that the boy could be in such a place. When 
he entered the garret he could hardly recognize his son, and 
when he bent over him the boy opened his eyes and said : 
“Qh, father, can you—will you forgive me?’ and the father 
answered: “O Joseph, I would have forgiven you long ago 
if you had wanted me to.” That haughty man laid his Loy’s 
head on his bosom and the son told him what Christ hac 
done for him ; how he had forgiven his sins, brought peace 
to his soul ; how that son of God had found him in that poor 
garret, and had done all for him. The father wanted the 
servant to take him home. “No, father,” said the boy, “I 
have but a short time to live, and I would rather die here.” 
He lingered a few hours, and passed from that garret in the 
East End to the everlasting hills. 


ed 


Moody ina Billiard Hall-A Remarkable Story 


In a meeting recently a man got up. I didn’t know him 
at first. When I was here he was a rumseller, and broke 
up his business and went to the mountains, This is how it 
happened. When I was here before, he opened a saloon and 
a grand billiard hall. Zt was one of the most magnificent 
Hilliard halls in Cliicago, all elegantly gilded and frescoed. 
For the opening he sent me an invitation to be present, 
which I accepted, and went around before he opened it. 
saw the partners and asked them if they would allow me to 
bring a friend. They said: “ Certainly,” but asked me who it 
was. Well, I said it wasn’t necessary to tell who it was, 
“Dut” said I, “I never go without him.” They began to 
mistrust me, “ Who is it?” they again inquired. ‘ Well, 
1’ll come with him and if I see anything wrong ll ask him 
to forgive you.” “Come,” said they, “we don’t want 
any praying.” ‘ You've given me an invitation, and I am 
going to come.” ‘“ But if you do come you needn’t pray.” 
“ Well,” said I, “I'll tell you what we'll do, we'll compromise 
the matter, and if you don’t want me to come and pray for 
you when you open, let me pray for both of you now,” 


Veness. 


him ?’ 
are his 
hardly 
When 
mn, and 
1 said : 
father 
ug ago 
is Loy’s 
st had 
; peace 
at poor 
ted the 
i; “S 
» here.” 
| in the 


Story 
iow hin 
d broke 
s how iti 
oon and 
ynificent 
frescoed. 
present, 
xd it. 

w me to 
e who it 
y it was, 
began to 

“Well, 
ask him 
vt want 
nd I am 
’t pray.” 


Forgiveness. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 119 


which they agreed to. It turned out that one of them had 
a praying mother, and the prayer touched his heart, and the 
other had a sister in heaven. I asked God to bless their 
gouls, and just to break their business to pieces. In a few 
months their business did go all to pieces. The man who got 
up 1n the prayer meeting told me astory that touched my soul. 
He said with his business he hadn't prospered—he failed and 
went away to the Rocky Mountains. Life became a burden 
to him and he made up his mind that he ‘vould go to some 
part of the mountains and put an end to his days He took 
a sharp knife with him which he proposed driving into his 


‘heart. He sought a part of the mountains to kill himself. 


He had the knife ready to plunge into his heart, when he 
heard a voice—it was the voice of his mother. He remem- 
bered her words when she was dying, even though he was a 
boy. He heard her say; « Johnny, if you get into trouble, 
pray.” That knife dropped from his hand, and he asked God 
to be merciful to him, He was accepted, and he came back 
to Chicago and lifted up his voice for Him. He may be in 
this Tabernacle to-night. Just the moment he cried for 
mercy he got it. If you only cry: “God be merciful to me 
a sinner,” He will hear you. 


LT 


Moody and the Judge: 


A number of years ago as I was coming out of a daily 
prayer meeting in one of our Western cities, a lady came up 
to me and said: “I want to have you see my husband and 
ask him to come to Christ.” She says: «¢ T want to have you 

o and see him.” She told me his name, and it was a man 
[ had heard of before. “ Why,” said I, “I can’t go and see 
your husband. He is « booked infidel. I can’t argue with 
iim. He isa good deal older than I am, and it would be 
out of place. Then I am not much for infidel argument.” 
«© Well, Mr. Moody,” she says,” ‘ that ain’t what he wants. 
He’s got enough of that. Just ask him to come to the 
Saviour.” She urged me so hard and so strong, that I con- 
gented to go. I went to the office where the judge was doing 
business, and told him what I had come for. He laughed at 
me. ‘You are very foolish,” he said, and began to argue 


MOODY'S ANECDOTES Forgiveness. 


with me. I said: “I don’t think it will be profitable for me 
to hold an argument with you. I have just one favour I 
want to ask you, and that is, that when you are converted 
you will let me know.” ‘ Yes,” said he, “I will do that. 
When I am converted I will let you know ”—with a good 
deal of sarcasm. 

I went off, and requests for prayer were sent here and to 
Fulton street, New York, and I thought the prayers there 
and of that wife would be answered if mine were not. A 
year and a half after, I was in that city, and a servant came 
to the door and said: “There is a man in the front parlour 
who wishes to see you.” I found the judge there ; he said: 
“T promised I would let you know when I was converted.” 
Well,” said I, “tell me all about it.” I had heard it from 
other lips, but I wanted to hear it from his own. He said 
his wife had gone out toa meeting one night and he was 
home alone, and while he was sitting there by the fire he 
thought : “Supposing my wife is right, and my children are 
right ; suppose there is a heaven and a hell, and I shall be 
separated from them.” His first thought was: “ T don’t be- 
lieve a word of it.” The second thought came: “ You be- 
lieve in the God that created you, and that the God that 
created you is able to teach you. You believe that God can 
give you life.” “Yes, the God that created me can give me 
life. I was too proud to get down on my knees by the fire, 
and I said: ‘O God, teach me!’ And as I prayed, I don’t 
understand it, but it began so get very dark, and my heart 
got very heavy. I was afraid to tell my wife, and I pre- 
tended to beasleep. She kneeled down beside that bed, and 
I knew she was praying for me. I kept crying, ‘O God, 
teach me!’ I had to change my prayer. ‘O God, save me; 
O God, take away this burden!’ But it grew darker and 
darker, and the load grew heavier and heavier. All the way 
to my office I kept crying! ‘O God, take away this load of 
guilt: I gave my clerks a holiday, and just closed my office 
and locked the door. I fell down on my face: I cried in 
agony tomy Lord: ‘O Lord, for Christ’s sake take away this 
guilt!’ I don’t know how it was, but it began to grow 
very light. I said, I wonder if this isn’t what they call con- 
version, I think I will go and ask the minister if I am not 


giveness. 


e for me 
favour I 
onverted 
do that. 
h a good 


‘e and to 
rs there 
not. A 
ant came 
t parlour 

he said: 
nverted.” 
d it from 

He said 
d he was 
e fire he 
ldren are 
shall be 
don’t be- 
‘You be- 
God that 
, God can 
1 give me 
7 the fire, 
1, I don’t 
my heart 
nd I pre- 
; bed, and 
*O God, 
save me; 
rker and 
l the way 
is load of 
my office 
[ cried in 
away this 

to grow 
7 call con- 
I am not 


Forgiveness.) AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 121 


sonyerted. I met my wife at the door and said: ‘My dear, 
I’ve been converted.’ She looked in amazement. ‘Oh it’s 
a fact ; I’ve been converted !’ We went into that drawing: 
room and knelt down by the sofa and prayed to God to bless 
us.” The old Judge said to me, the tears trickling down his 
cheeks: “Mr. Moody, I’ve enjoyed life more in the last three 
months than in all the years of my life put together.” If 
there is an infidel here—if there is a sceptical one here, ask 
God to give you wisdom to come now. Let us reason to- 
gether, and if you become acquainted with God the day will 
not go before you receive light from Him, 


een TT 


Reuben Johnson Pardoned. 


I want to tell you a scene that occurred some time ago. 
Our commissioner went to the governor of the state and 
asked him if he wouldn’t pardon out five men at the end of 
six months who stood highest on the list for good behaviour 
The governor consented, and the record was to be kept 
secret; the men were not to know anything about it. The 
six months rolled away and the prisoners were brought up 
—1,100 of them—and the president of the commission came 
up and said: “I hold in my hand pardons for five men.” 
I never witnessed anything like it. Every man held his 
breath, and you could almost hear the throbbing of every 
man’s heart. “Pardon for five men,” and the commissioner 
went on to tell the men how they had got these pardons— 
how the governor had given them, but the chaplain said the 
surprise was so great that he told the commissioner to read 
the names first and tell the reason afterward. The first name 
was called —‘‘Reuben Johnson,”—and he held out the pardon, 
but not a man moved. He looked all around, expecting to 
see a man spring to his feet at once; but no one moved. 
The commissioner turned to the officer of the prison and 
inquired: “Are all the convicts here?” “Yes,” was the 
reply, ‘Reuben Johnson, come forward and get your pardon ; 
you are no longer a criminal.” Still no one moved. 

The real Reuben Johnson was looking all the time behind 
him, and around him to see where Reuben was, The chap- 
lain saw him standing right in front of the commissioner, 


122 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Forgiveness. 


and beckoned to him; but he only turned and looked around 3 


him, thinking that the chaplain might mean some other 
Reuben. A second time he beckoned to Reuben and called 
to him, and a second time the man looked around, At last 
the chaplain said to him: “You are the Reuben.” He had 
veen there for nineteen years, having been placed there for 
life, and he could not conceive it would be for him. Av last 
it began to dawn upon him, and he took the pardon from the 
commissioner’s hand, saw his name attached to it, and wept 
like a child, This is the way that men make out pardons 
for men; but, thank God, we have not to come to-night and 
say we have pardons for only five men—for those who have 
behaved themselves. We have assurance of pardon for 
every man, “Whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely.” 


GOLD. 


—All you have got to do is to prove that you are a sinner, 
and I will prove that you have got a Saviour. 


—Do you believe the Lord will call a poor sinner, and 
then cast him out? No! His word stands forever: “ Him 
that cometh unto Me, I will in no wise cast out,” 


—If God put Adam out of this earthly Eden on account of 
one sin, do you think He will let us into the Paradise above 
with our tens of thousands sins upon us. 


—The only charge they could bring against Christ down 
here was, that He was receiving bad men, They are the 
very kind of men He is willing to receive. 


“Tord, you don’t really mean that we shall preach the 
gospel to those men that murdered you, to those men that 
took your life?” “Yes,” says the Lord, “go and preach the 
gospel to those Jerusalem sinners.” I can imagine him 
saying: “Go and hunt up that man that put the cruel crown 
of thorns upon My brow, and preach the gospel to him. 
Tell him he shall have a crown in My kingdom without a 
thorn in it.” 


iveness. 


around 
e other 
d called 

At last 
He had 
here for 
Av last 
from the 
nd wept 
pardons 
ight and 
ho have 
don for 
ar of life 


2» sinner, 


ner, and 
; “ Him 


count of 
ise above 


ist down 
r are the 


each the 
men that 
reach the 
gine him 
1el crown 
| to him. 
without a 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 123 


GRACE. 


meremoempancemimaarstt A 


Moody’s First Sermon on Grace. 


Tremember preaching one night in winter—one of the 
coldest winters we had—the winter after the Chicago fire. 
I bad been studying up grace, and it was the first time I had 
spoken of it, and I was just full of it. I started out of the 
house, I remember, and the first man I met I asked him if 
he knew anything about the grace of God, and I tried to 
preach to him, ‘This man thought I was crazy. Tran on 
and met another, and finally got up to the meeting. That 
night I thought I was speaking to a lot of people who felt 
as I did about grace, and when I got through I asked any 
one who would like to hear about grace—who had any in- 
terest in it, to stay. I expected some would have stayed, 
but what was my mortification to see the whole audience rise 
ap and go away. They hadn’t any interest in grace ; they 
didn’t want to learn anything about grace. I put my coat 
and hat on and was going out of the hall, when I saw a poor 
fellow at the back of the furnace crying. “ I want to hear 
about the grace of God,” said he. “You're the man I want, 
then,” said I. “ Yes,” the poor fellow said, ‘ you said in 
your sermon that it was frec, and I want you to tell me 
something about it.” Well, I got to talking to him, and he 
told me a pitiful story. He had drunk away twenty thou- 
sand dollars, his home had been broken up, and his wife and 
chil dren had left him, I spoke to him, and it was not long 
before we were down together praying. That night I got 
him a night’s lodging in the Bethel, and next day we got him 
on his feet, and when I went to Europe he was one of 
the most earnest workers we had. He was just a par- 
taker of grace—believed that the peace of God was sufficient 
for him, and he took God at his word and he was a saved 
man, 


124 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Grace 


Dr. Arnott’s Dog ‘‘ Rover.” 


L remember when Dr, Anott, who has gone to God, was 
delivering a sermon, he used this illustration. The sermon 
and text have all gone, but that illustration is fresh upon 
my mind to-night and brings home the iruth. He said : 
“ You have been sometimes out at dinner with a friend, and 
you have seen the faithful household dog standing watching 
every mouthful his master takes. All the crumbs that fall 
on the floor he picks up, and seems eager for them, but when 
his master takes a plate of beef and puts it on the floor and 
says: ‘Rover, here’s something for you,’ he comes up and 
smells of it, looks at his master, and goes away toa corner of 
the room. He was willing to eat the crumbs, but he 
wouldn’t touch the roast beef—thought it was too good for 
him.” That is the way with a good many Christians. They 
are willing to eat the crumbs, but not willing to take a'l 
God wants. Come boldly to the throne of grace and get the 
help we need ; there is an abundance for every man, woman 
and child in the assemblage. 


Young Moody Penniless in Boston is Warned by 
his Sister to ‘“‘ Beware of Pickpockets.” 


T remember when I was a boy and went to Boston, I went 
to the postoffice two or three times a day to see if there was 
a letter for me. I knew there was not, as there was but one 
mail a day. I had not had any employment and was very 
homesick, and so went constantly to the postoflice, thinking 
perhaps when the mail did come in my letter had been mis- 
lain. At last, however, I got a letter. It was from my 
youugest sister, the first letter she ever wrote to me. I 
opened it with a light heart, thinking there was some good news 
from home, but the burden of the whole letter was that she 
heard there were pickpockets in Boston, and warned me to 
take care of them. I thought I had better get some money 
in hand first, and then I might take care of pickpockets. 
And so you must take care to remember salvation is a gift. 
You don’t work for salvation, but work day and night after 
you have got it. Get it first before you do anything, but 


Grace. 


don’t tr 
Ephesia: 
that not 
God-—“ 
one thin 
game W 
take ou 


L 
Ther 


in his ¢ 
to dra 
he pré 
would: 
that tl 
ing to 
and 8 
ener‘ 
cand 
empe! 
great 
abun 
many 


“ Cor 


T F 
ladd 
deed 
good 
larg 
and 
up, 
he ¢ 
but 

eth 
dov 
wa! 


go 


Grace 


d, wag 
ermon 
; upon 
» said : 
d, and 
tching 
at fall 
; when 
yr and 
ip and 
ner of 
ut he 
od for 

They 
ike a’l 
get the 
vyoman 


ed by 


I went 
re was 
ut one 
Ss very 
inking 
n mis- 
om my 
me. I 
yd news 
hat she 
1 me to 
nioney 
ockets. 
3a gilt. 
ht after 
ng, but 


AND ILL USTRATIONS. 125 


don’t try to get it yourself. Look at what Paul says in 
Ephesians: “ For by grace are y© saved through faith, and 
that not of yourself, it is the gift of God”—it is the gift of 
God-~' Not of works, lest any men should boast.” There is 
one thing we know: We have all got to get into heaven the 
game way. We cannot work our way there; we have to 


take our salvation from God. 
—_—_—~ 


Draw on Alexander the Great. 
d of Alexander the Great. A general 


at favourite with him, and he told him 
that he wanted. Well, 


Grace. 


A Heavy 


There is a story tol 
in his army was @ gre 
to draw anything from his treasury 
he presented @ bill to the treasurer, and the treasurer 
wouldn’t honour it. Tt was for such an enormous amount 
that the treasurer wa hed. ‘The general went rush- 


s astonis 
ing to the emperor and told him, and he called the treasurer 
and said: “ Didn’t I tell you to honour the draft of the 
» « But,” replied the treasurer, 


«do you under- 
stand its amount?” “ Never mind what it is,” replied the 


emperor, “ he honours me and my kingdom by making & 
great draft. And so we honour God by asking for grace in 
abundance. I tell you, my friends, it is a pity there are S° 
many half-starved, mean Christians around when God says: 


« Come and get all you want.” 
— 


A J.ong Ladder Tumbles to the Ground. 
mber hearing of a man who dreamt that he built a 
ladder from earth to heaven, and when he did a good 
deed up went his ladder a few feet. When he did a very 
good deed his ladder went higher, and when he gave away 
large sums of money to the poor, up it went further still. By 
and by it went out of sight, and years rolled on, and it went 
up, he thought, past the clouds, clear into heaven. 


he died, he thought he would step off his ladder into heaven, 
but he heard a voice roll out from paradise: “ He that climb- 
eth up another way, the same is a thief and a robber,” and 
down he came, laddur and all, and he awoke. 
wanted to get t get it another way than by 


good deeds, an 


general. 


T reme 


salvation he mus 


d he took it the other way: 


When 


He said if he 


126 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Grace. 


GOLD. 
_—_We must not limit the mighty grace of God. 


—Grace means undeserved kindness. It is the gift of 
God to man the moment he sees he is unworthy of God’s 
favour. 


__A man does not get grace till he comes down to the 
ground, till he sees he needs grace. When a man stoops to 
the dust and acknowledges that he needs mercy, then it is 
that the Lord will give him grace. 


—If you are ready to partake of grace you have not to 
atone fur your sins—you have merely to accept of the atone- 
ment, All that you want to do is to ery: “ God have marcy 
upon me,” and you will receive the blessing. 


—“The grace of God hath power to bring salvation to all 
men,” and if a man is unsaved itis because he wants to work 
it out; he wants to receive salvation in some other way than 
God’s way ; but we are told that “he that climbeth up an- 
other way, the same is a thief and a robber.” 


__When we get full of this grace we want to see every one 
plessed——we want to see all the Churches blessed, not only 
all the Churches here, but in the whole country. That was 
the trouble with Christ’s disciples. He had hard work to 
make them understand that His gospel was for every one, 
that it wasa stream to flow out to all nations of the earth. 
They wanted to confine it to the Jews, and He had to con 
vince them that it was for every living being. 


=) 
a fev 
ther 
plai 
the 
nigh 
Tsai 
trea 
rea 


had 


Grace. 


gift of 
' God's 


to the 
oops to 
en it is 


» not to 
p atone- 
pe rercy 


yn. to all 
to work 
ray than 
h up an- 


very one 
not only 
That was 

work to 
ery one, 
he earth. 
dd #0 con 


AND ILLUSTRATI ONS. 127 


HEAVEN. 


a NAT ES 


Moody in a California Sunday School. 


I remember when I went to California just to try and get 
a few souls saved on the Pacific coast, I went into a school 
there and asked: “Have you got some one who can write a 
plain hand?” * Yes.” Well, we got up the blackboard, and 
the lesson upon it proved to be the very text we have to- 
night.” “ Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven.” And 
Tsaid ; “ Suppose we write upon that board some of the earthly 
treasures ? And we will begin with ‘gold.’” The teacher 
readily put down gold, and they all comprehended it, for all 
had run to that country in the hope of finding it. “ Well, 
we will put down ‘ houses ’ next, and then ‘ land.” Next we 
will put down ‘fast horses.” ‘They all understood what fast 
horses were—they knew 4 good deal more about fast horses 
than they knew about the kingdom of God. Some of them, 
I think, actually made fast horses serve as gods. ‘Next we 
will put down ‘ tobacco.’ The teacher seemed to shrink at 
this.“ Put it down,” said I, “ many 4 man thinks more of 
tobacco than he does of God. Well, then, we will put down 
‘rum.” He objected to this—didn’t like to put it down at 
all. “Down with it. Many a man will sell his reputation, 
will sell his home, his wife, his children, everything he has, 
for rum. Itis the god of some men. Many here in Chicago 
will sell their present and their eternal welfare for it. Put it 
down,” and down it went. ‘ Now,” said I, ‘ suppose we put 
down some of the heavenly treasures. Put down ‘Jesus’ to 
head the list, then ‘heaven,’ then ‘ River of Life,’ then 
‘Crown of Glory,’ and went on till the column was filled, and 
then just drew a line and showed the heavenly and the earthly 
things in contrast. My friends, they could not stand com- 
parison. Ifa man just does that, he cannot but see the su- 
periority of the heavenly over the earthly treasures. Well, it 


> 


NS PE RPS EES ~ 


128 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Heuven 


turned out that the teacher was not a Christian. He had 
gone to California on the usual hunt—gold ; and when he saw 
the two columns placed side by side, the excellence of the one 
over the other was irresistible, and he was the first soul God 


gave me on that Pacific coast. He accepted Christ, and that» 


man came to the station when I was coming away and blessed 
me for coming to that place. 


Mothers are Looking Down from Heaven: 


I remember in the Exposition building in Dublin, while I 
was speaking about heaven, I said something to the effect 
that at this moment a mother is looking down from heaven 
expecting the salvation of her daughter here to-night, and I 
pointed down toa young lady in the audience. Next morning 
I veceived this letter : 

‘On Wednesday, when you were speaking of heaven, you 
said: ‘It may be this moment there is a mother looking down 
from heaven expecting the salvation of her child who is here.’ 
You were apparently looking at the very spot where my child 
was sitting. My heart said: ‘That is my child. There is her 
mother.’ ‘ears sprang to my eyes. I bowed my head and 
prayed: ‘Lord, direct that word to my darling child’s heart 
Lord save my child.’ I was then anxious till the close of the 
meeting, when I went to her. She was bathed in tears. She 
rose, put her arms around me, and kissed me. When walk 
ing down to you she told me it was that same remark—about 
the mother looking down from heaven—-that found the way 
home to her, and asked me: ‘Papa, what can I do for Jesus?” 


The Rich Man Poor. 


I heard of a farmer who, when a friend of mine called upon 
him to give something for the Christian Commission, promptly 
drew a check for ten thousand dollars. He wanted the agent 
to have dinner with him, and after they had dined the farmer 
took the man out on the verandah and pointed to the rich 
lands sweeping far away, laden with rich products. ‘ Look 
over these lands,” said the farmer, “‘ they are all mine,” 


— 


wi tp 1 ae 


ina VON 


6 had 
6 saw 
16 one 
1 God 
1 that Fa 
lessed 


hile I 

effect 
eaven 
and I 
orning 


n, you 
down 
here.’ 
child 
is her 

id and 
heart 
of tha 

. She 
walk 

-about 

18 way 

esus}’” 


| upon 
mptly 


Wea 
Be 


Heaven: AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 129 


He took him to the pasture and showed the agent the choice 
stock, the fine horses he had, and then pointed to a little 
town, and then to a large hall where he lived ; he drew him- 
self up, and his face lit up with pride as he said; “ They are 
all mine. I came here when a poor boy and I have earned 
all that you see.” When he got through, my friend asked 
him: “ Well, what have you got up yonder?” “ Where?” 
replied the farmer, who evidently knew where my friend 
meant, “ What have yougot in heaven?” “ Well,” said the 
farmer, “I haven’t anything there.” “ What !” replied my 
friend, “you, a man of your discretion, wisdom, business 
ability, have made no provision for your future? He hadn't, 
and ina few weeks he died—a rich man here and a Leggar in 
eternity. A man may be wise in the eyes of the world to 
pursue this course, but he is a fool in the sight of God. 
‘Wealth tu most men proves nothing more or less than a great 
rock upon which their eternity is wrecked, 


The Dying Boy- 


But I have another anecdote to tell. It was Ralph Wallace 
who told me of this one. A certain gentleman was a mem- 
ber of the Presbyterian Church. His little boy was sick, 
When he went home his wife was weeping, and she said: 
“ Our boy is dying ; he has had a change for the worse. I 
wish you would go in and see him.” The father went into 

he room and placed his hand upon the brow of his dying 
boy, and could feel that the cold, damp sweat was gathering 
there ; that the cold, icy hand of death was feeling for the 
shords of life. ‘Do you know, my boy, that you are dying?” 
asked the father. “Am I? Is this death? Do you really 
think Iam dying?” “Yes, my son, your end on earth is 
near.” ‘And will I be with Jesus to-night, father?” “Yes, 
you will be with the Saviour.” ‘Father, don’t you weep, 
for when I get there I will go right straight to Jesus and tell 
Him that you have been trying all my life to lead me to Him.” 
God has given me two little children, and ever since I can 
remember I have directed them to Christ, and I would rather 
they carried this message to J a I had tried all my 


130 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Heaven. 


life to lead them to Him—than have all the crowns of the 
earth ; and I would rather lead them to Jesus than give them 
the wealth ofthe world. Ifyou have gota child go and point 
the way. I challenge any man to speak of heaven without 
speaking of children, “ For of such is the kingdom of 
heaven.” 


A Sad and Singular Story. 


When I was a young boy—befcre I was a Christian—I 
was in a field one day with a man who was hoeing. He was 
weeping, and he told me a strange story, which I have never 
forgotten. When he left home his mother gave him this 
text: “Seek first the kingdom of God.” But he paid no 
heed to it. He said when he got settled in life, and his 
ambition to get money was gratified, it would be time enough 
then to seek the kingdom of God. He went from one village 
to another and got nothing to do, When Sunday came he 
went into a village church, and what was his great surprise to 
hear the minister give out the text: “Seek first the kingdom 
of God.’ He said the text went down to the bottom of his 
heart. He thought that it was but his mother’s prayer fol- 
lowing him, and that some one must have \ ritten to that 
minister about him. He felt very uncomfortable, and when 
the meeting was over he could not get that sermon out of his 
mind. He went away from that town, and at the end of a 
weck went into another church and he heard the minister 
give out the same text: “Seek first the kingdom of God.” 
He felt sure this time that it was the prayers of his mother, 
but he said calmly and deliberately: “No, I will first get 
wealthy.” He said he went on and did not go into a church 
for a few months, but the first place of worship he went into 
he heard a third minister preaching a sermon from the same 
text. He tried to drown—to stifle his feelings; tried to get 
the sermon out of his mind, and resolved that he would keep 
away from church altogether, and for a few years did keep out 
of God’s house. “My mother dicd,” he said, ‘‘and the text 
kept coming up in my mind, and I said I will try and become a 
Christian.” The tears rolled down his cheeks as he said: “I 
could not; no sermon ever touches me; my heart is as hard 


leaven. 


of the 
s them 
| point 
rithout 
om of 


jan—TI 
He was 
y never 
im. this 
paid no 
nd his 
enough 
village 
ame he 
prise to 
ingdom 
1 of his 
yer fol- 
to that 
d when 
t of his 
nd of a 
minister 
f God.” 
mother, 
first get 
. church 
ent into 
he same 
id to get 
uld keep 
keep out 
the text 
pecome & 
said: “T 
} as hard 


Heaven. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 131 
as that stone,” pointing to one in the field. I couldn’t under- 
stand what it was all about—it was fresh to me then. I 
went to Boston and got converted, and the first thought that 
came to me was about this man. When I got back I asked 
my mother: “Is Mr. L living in such a place?” 
“Didn't I write to you about him?” she asked. ‘They 
have taken him to an insane asylum, and to every one who 
goes there he points with his finger up there and tells him to 
“seek first the kingdom of God.” There was that man with 
his eyes dull with the loss of reason, but the text had sunk 
into his soul—it had burned down deep. Oh, may the Spirit 
of God burn the text into your hearts to-night. When I got 
home again my mother told me he was in her house, and I 
went to see him. I found him in a rocking chair, with that 
vacant, idiotic look upon him. Whenever he saw me he 
pointed at me and said: * Young man, seek first the kingdom 
of God.” Reason was gone, but the text was there. Last 
month when I was laying my brother down in his grave I 
could not help thinking of that poor man who was lying so 
near him, and wishing that the prayer of his mother had been 
heard, and that he had found the kingdom of God. 


ee 


The Eleventh Commandment 


There are a great many people who forget that there are 
eleven commandments. They think there are only ten. The 
eleventh commandment is: ‘“‘ Lay up for yourselves treasures 
in heaven.” How many of us remember—ah ! how many 
people in Chicago forget the words of the Lord now in his 
wonderful sermon on the mount: “ Lay not up for your- 
selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth cor- 
rupt, and where thieves break through and steal ; but lay up 
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor 
rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through 
and steal.’ How few of our people pay any heed to these 
words. That's why there are so many broken hearts among 
us; that’s why so many men and women are disappointed 
and going through the streets with shattered hopes ; it’s 
because they have not been laying up treasures 1m heaven. 


132 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Heaven. 


“Tt’s Better Higher Up.” 


Not long ago there lived an old bed-ridden saint, and a 
Christian lady who visited her found her always very cheer- 
ful. This visitor had a lady friend of wealth who constantly 
(ooked on the dark side of things, and was always cast down, 
although she was a professed Christian. She thought it would 
do this lady good to see the bed-ridden saint, so she took her 
down to the house. She Jived up in the garret, five stories 
up, and when they had got to the first story the lady drew 
up her dress and said : “ How dark and filthy itis!” “It’s 
better higher up,” said her friend. They got to the next 
story, and it was ao better; the lady complained again, but 
her friend replied: “It’s better higher up.” At the third 
floor it seemed still worse, and the lady kept complaining, 
but her friend kept gaying : “ It’s better higher up.” At last 
they got to the fifth story, and when they went into the sick- 
room, there was a nice carpet on the floor, there were flower- 
ing plants in the window, and little birds singing. And there 
they found this bed-ridden saint—one of those saints whom 
God is polishing for his own temple—just beaming with joy. 
The lady said to her: “It must be very hard for you to lie 
here?’ She smiled, and said: “J's better higher up.” 
Yes! And if things go against us, my friends, let us remem- 
ber that “it’s better higher up.” 


ee cas eR 


Calling the Roll of Heaven. 

A soldier, wounded during our last war, lay dying in his 
cot. Suddenly the deathlike stillness of the room was broken 
by the cry: “ Here! Here !” which burst from the lips of the 
dying man. Friends rushed to the spot and asked what he 
wanted. “Hark,” he said, “they are calling the roll of 
heaven, and I am answering to myname.” In a few moments 
once more he whispered: ‘¢ Here!” and passed into the pre- 
sence of the King. 


GOLD. 
—The way to heaven is straight as an arrow. 


—Heaven is just as much a place as Chicago. It is a des- 


leaven. 


and a 
cheer- 

stantly 
down, 

would 

ok her 
stories 

y drew 
“It’s 

e next 
in, but 
» third 
aining, 
At last 
1e sick- 
flower- 
d there 
;whom 
ith joy. 
u to lie 
or up.” 
remem- 


¢ in his 
broken 
s of the 
what he 
roll of 
1oments 
the pre- 


is a des- 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 


INFIDELITY. 


The Young French Nobleman and the Doctor. 


In London, when I was there in 1867, I was told a story 
which made a very deep impression upon me. A young 
French nobleman came there to see a doctor, bringing letters 
from the French Emperor. The Emperor Napoleon III. had 
a great regard for this young man, and the doctor wanted to 
save him. He examined the young man, and saw there was 
something on his mind. “ Have you lost any property 4 
What is troubling you? You have something weighing upon 
your mind ?” said the dor*or. “Oh, there is nothing particular.” 
“TI know better; have you lost any relations !” asked the 
doctor. “No, none within the last three years.” ‘“ Have you 
lost any reputation in your country?’ “ No.” The doctor 
studied for a few minutes, and then said: “I must know 
what is on your mind ; I must know what is troubling you.” 
And the young man said: ‘‘ My father was an infidel ; my 
grandfather was an infidel, and I was brought up an infidel, 
and for the last three years these words have haunted me: 
‘Eternity, and where shall it find me?” ‘ Ah,” said the 
doctor, “you have come to the wrong physician.” ‘Is there 
no hope for me?” cried the young man. “T walk about in 
the day time; I lie down at night, and it comes upon me 
continually: ‘ Eternity, and where shall I spend it? Tell 
me, is there any hope for me?” The doctor said: “* Now just 
sit down and be quiet. A few years ago | was an infidel. I 
did not believe in God, and was in the same condition in 
which you are in.” The doctor took down his Bible and 
turned to the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah and read: “ He 
was wounded for our transgressions , He was bruised for our 
iniquities ; the chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and 
with His strives we are healed.” And he read on through this 


chapter. 


134 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Infidelity. 


When he had finished, the young man said: “ Do you be- 
lieve this, that He voluntarily left heaven, came down to this 
earth, and suffered and died that we might be saved ?” “ Yes, 
¥ believe it. That brought me out of infidelity, out of dark- 
ness into light.” And he preached Christ and His salvation 
and told him of heaven and then suggested that they get 
down on their knees and pray. And when I went there in 
in 1867, a letter had been received from that young noble- 
man, who wrote to Dr. Whinston, in London, telling him that 
the question of “ eternity, and where he should spend it” was 
settled, and troubled him no more. My friends, the question 
of eternity, and where we are going to spend it, forces itself 
upon every one of us. We are staying here for a little day. 
Our life is but a fibre and it will soon be snapped. I may be 
be preaching my last sermon. To-night may find me in 
eternity. By the grace of God say that you will spend it in 
heaven. 


Sambo and the Infidel Judge. 


Once there was a judge who hada coloured man. Thecol- 
oured man was very godly, and the judge used to have him 
to drive him around in his circuit. The judge used often 
to talk with him, and the coloured man would tell the 
judge about his religious experience, and about his battles 
and conflicts. One day the judge said to him: “ Sambo, how 
is it that you Christians are always talking about the conflicts 
you have with Satan. I am better off than you are. I don’t 
have any conflicts or trouble, and yet I am an infidel and you 
are a Christian—always in a muss—how’s that, Sambo ?” 
This floored the coloured man fora while. He didn’t know 
how to meet the old infidel’s argument. So he shook his 
head sorrowfully and said: “Idunno, Massa, I dunno.” 
The judge always carried a gun along with him for hunting, 
Pretty soon they came to qlot of ducks. The judge took 
his gun and blazed away at them, and wounded one and 
killed another. The judge said quickly: “ You jump in, 
Sambo, and get that wounded duck before he gets off,’ and 
did not pay amy attention to the dead one. In went Sambo 
for the wounded duck, and came out reflecting. The coloured 


oa ’ 


a] 
a4 
ee 
a 
s 
a 


Infi 


man 
jud; 
de ¢ 
kno 
was 
just 
San 
wol 
tro. 
is I 
the 


fidelity. 


you be- 
to this 

““ Yes, 
f dark- 
lvation 
ey get 
here in 
r noble- 
im that 
t” was 
uestion 
13 itself 
tle day. 
may be 
me in 
nd it in 


The col- 
ive him 
d often 
‘ell the 
; battles 
bo, how 
conflicts 

I don’t 
and you 
sambo ?” 
’t know 
ook his 
dunno.” 
hunting, 
ge took 
one and 
imp in, 
ff,’ and 

Sambo 
coloured 


Babes 


® 

| 
at 
hel 
we 

bs | 
ae 
z 2 
ry 
B 
ad 
Bel 
15 


Infidelity. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 135 
man then thought he had an illustration. He said to the 
judge: “I hab ’im now, Massa, I’se able to show you how 
de Christian hab greater conflict den de infidel. Don't you 
know de moment you wounded dat ar duck, how anxbous you 
was to get ’im out, and you didn’t care for de dead duck, but 
just left ’im alone !”- “ Yes,” said the judge. ‘ Well,” said 
Sambo, “ye sce as how dat ar dead ducx’s a surething. I’se 
wounded, and I tries to get away from de debbil. It takes 
trouble to cotch me. But, Massa, you are a dead duck—dar 
is no squabble for you. The debbil have you “gure!” So 


the devil has no conflict with the infidel. 
\ 


An Infidel who would not Talk Infidelity before 
his Daughter. 


Not long ago I went into a man’s house, and when I com- 
menced to talk about religion he turned to his daughter and 
said: “You had better go out of the room; I want to say a 
few words to Mr. Moody.” When she had gone he opened 
a perfect torrent of infidelity upon me. “Why,” said I, 
“did you send your daughter out of the room before you 
said this?’ ‘“ Well,” he replied, “I did not think it would 
do her any good to hear what I said.” My friends, his “rock 
is not as our rock.” Why did he send his daughter out of 
the room if he believed what he said? When these infidels 
are in trouble, why do not they get some of their infidel 
friends to administer consolation? When they make a will, 
why do they call in soe follower of the Lord Jesus Christ 
to carry it out? Whytit is because they cannot trust their 
infidel friends. 


A. Dying Infidel’s Confession. 


T want to read you a letter which I received some time ago. 
I read this to you because I am cetting letters from infidels 
who say that not an infidel has repented during our meetings. 
Only about ten days ago I got a letter from an infidel, who 
accused me of being a liar. He said there had not been an 
infidel converted during our meetings. My friends, go up te 
the young converts’ meeting any Monday night, and you will 


136 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Infidelity. Infidel: 


see thore ten or twelve every night whe have accepted Christ. about 
Why, nearly every night we meet with a poor infidel who it woul 
accepts Christ. But let me read this letter. We get many my mi 
letters every day for prayer, and, my friends, you don’t know “Yes, 
the stories that lie behind those letters, ‘The letter 1 am come t 
about to read was not received here, but while we were in A paid : | 
Philadelphia. When I received it I put it away, intending . told hi 
to use it at a future day : went | 
“Dear Sin: Allow me the privilege of .... .ing you with having 
a few words. The cause of writing is ina « : # serious one. them. 
I am the son of an aristocratic family of Germany—was ex- to-day. 

pensively educated, and at college at Leipsic was ruined by 

drinking, etc.; was expelled for gambling and dishonesty. 
My parents were greatly grieved at my conduct, and I did How 

not dare return home, but sailed for America. I went to St. 
Louis, and remained there for want of money to get away. I Tt i 
finally obtained a situation as bookkeeper in a dry goods : take u 
house ; heard from home and the death of my parents. ‘This F world 
made me more sinful than ever before. I heard one of your x to tak 
sermons, which made a deep impression on me. I was taken 4 a, ET 
sick, and the words of your text came to me and troubled : that i 
me. Ihave tried to find peace of God, but have not suc- t fisher 
ceeded. My friends, by reasoning with me that there was no i pullec 
God, endeavoured to comfort me. The thought of my sin- q strean 
fulness, and approaching the grave, my blasphemy, my bad a us, all 
example, caused me to mourn and weep. I think God is too G. but it 
ae to forgive me my sins. My life is drawing to a close. I i fectly 
ave not yet received God’s favour. Will you not remember = He hi 
me in your prayers, and beseech Goffto save my soul from x and | 
eternal destruction? Excuse me for writing this, but it will e he be 
be the last I shall write this side of the grave.” 7 of © 
-  eeept 
. od « 

Infidel Books. i = 
If you stop to ask yourself why you don’t believe in Christ, 

is there really any reason? People read infilel books and 
wonder why they are unbelievers, I ask why they read such ‘ies 

books. They think they must read both sides. I say that 
book is a lie, how can it be one side when it is a lie? It is — 
not one side at all, Suppose a man tells right down liea worl 


lelity. 


‘hrist. 
who 
many 
know 
lam 
re in 
nding 


| with 
3 one, 
is @X- 
sd by 
nesty. 
I did 
to St. 
ay. I 
goods 

This 
' your 
taken 
ubled 
{ suc- 
vas no 
y sin- 
y bad 
is too 
se. I 
ember 
from 
it will 


Yhrist, 
3 and 
. such 
y that 

It is 
m lieg 


an 
3 
ee 
4] 
re 
- 
“a 
x 
J 
15 
Ne 
ee 
tae 
he 
Fe 
MS 
reset 
a8 
aM 
aE 
ie 
ee 
pia 
age 
¥ 
a 
Ny 
& 
f 
a 
if 
: 
ES 
: 
% 
c 
af 


Infidelity. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 137 


about my family, and I read them so as to hear both sides | 
it would not be long before some suspicion would creep inéo 
my mind. I said to a man once, “ Have you got a wife ?” 
“Yes, and a good one.” I asked: “ Now, what if I should 
come to you and cast out insinuations against her?” And he 
said: “Well, your life would not be safe long if you aid,” £ 
told him just to treat the devil as he would treat a man who 
went around with such stories. We are not to blame for 
having doubts flitting through our minds, but for harbouring 
them. Let us go out trusting the Lord with heart and soul 
to-day. 


How a Little Stv.iy Upset the Plans of a few Prom- 
inent Infidelse 


It is said of West, an eminent man, that he was going to 
take up the doctrine of the resurrection, and just show the 
world what a fraud it was, while Lord Lyttleton was going 
to take up the conversion of Saul, and just show the folly of 
it. These men were going to annihilate that doctrine and 
that incident of the gospel. A Frenchman said it took twelve 
fishermen to build up Christ’s religion, but one Frenchman 
pulled it down. From Calvary this doctrine rolled along the 
stream of time, through the eighteen hundred years, down to 
us, and West got at it and began to look at the evidences 
but instead of his being able to cope with it he found it per- 
fectly overwhelming—the proof that Christ had risen, that 
}le had come out of the sepulchre and ascended to heaven 
and led captivity captive. The light dawned upon him, and 
he became an expounder of the word of God and a champion 
of Christianity. And Lord Lyttleton, that infidel and 
aceptic, hadn’t been long at the conversion of Saul before the 
God of Saul broke upon his sight, and he too, began to preach. 


GOLD. 
—What reason have I for doubting God’s own word? 


—I just as much believe that God sent Christ into the 
world to be the Saviour of the world, as I believe that I exist. 


138 MOODY'S ANECDOTES 


INTEMPERANCE,) 


Cast Out but Rescued. 


I met a man in New York who was an earnest worker 
and I asked him to tell me his experience. He said he had 
been a drunkar1 for over twenty years. His parents had for 
saken him, and his wife had cast him off and married come 
one else. He went into a lawyer's office in Poughkeepsie 
mad with drink. This lawyer proved a good Samaritan, and 
reasoned with him, and told him he could be saved. The 
man scouted the idea. He said: “I must be pretty low 
when my father and mother, my wife and kindred, have cast 
me off, and there is no hope for me here or hereafter.” But 
this good Samaritan showed him how it was possible to secure 
salvation, got him on his feet, got him on his beast, iike the 
good Samaritan of old, and guided his face toward Zion. 
And this man said to me: “I have not drunk a glass of 
liquor since.” He is now leader of a young men’s meeting in 
New York. I asked him to come last Saturday night to North- 
field, my native town, where there are a good many drunkards, 
thinking he might encourage them to seek salvation. He 
came and brought a young man with him. They held a 
meeting, and it seemed as if the power of God rested upon 
that meeting when these two men went on telling what God 
had done for them—how he had destroyed the works of the 
devil in their hearts, and brought peace and unalloyed hap- 
piness to their souls. ‘hese grog shops here ate the works of 
the devil—they are ruining men’s souls every hour. Let us 
fight against them, and let our prayers go up in our battles, 
It may seem a very difficult thing for us, but it is a very 
easy thing for God to convert rumsellers. 


| 


— pape nasi an UIP MN RNS ORR PERN IN  erT = 
peat alsa ES i De RE ee SEE Srey oS ME a EES a 4 


worker 
_ he had 
had for. 
xd some 
‘keepsie 
tan, and 
d. The 
tty low 
ave cast 
«Bat 
0 secure 
like the 
d Zion. 
glass of 
eeting in 
o North- 
unkards, 
on. He 
r held a 
ed upon 
hat God 
s of the 
yed hap- 
works of 

Let us 
- battles, 
8 a very 


= See ors Sa 


eR TANEMERE ee 


Intemperance. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 139 


The Way of the Transgressor is Hard. 


There was aman whom I knew who was an inveterate 
drinker. He hada wife and children. He thought he could 
stop whenever he felt inclined, but he went the ways of most 
moderate drinkers. I had not been gone more than three 
years, and when [I returned I found that that mother had 
gone down to her grave with a broken heart, and that man 
was the murderer of the wife of his bosom. ‘Those children 
have all been taken away from him, and he is now walking 
up and down those streets homeless. But four years ago he 
had a beautiful and a happy home with his wife and children 
around him. They are gone; probably he will never see 
them again. Perhaps he has come in here to-night. If he 
has, I ask him: “Is not the way of the transgressor hard ?” 


ee es 


A Rum-Seller’s Son Blows his Brains Out 


Look at the rum-seller. When we talk to him he laughs 
at us. He tells you there is no hell, no future—there is no 
retribution. I’ve got one man in my mind now who ruined 
nearly all the sons in his neighbourhood. Mothers and 
fathers went to him and begged him not to sell their children 
liquor. He told them it was his business to sell liquor, and 
he was going to sell liquor to every one who came. The 
saloon was a blot upon the place as dark as hell. But the 
man had a father’s heart. He had ason. He didn’t worship 
God, but he worshipped that boy. He didn’t remember that 
whatsoever a man soweth so shall he reap. My friends, they 
generally reap what they sow. It may not come soon, but 
the retribution will come. If you ruin other men’s sons 
some other man will ruin yours. Bear in mind God is a God 
of equity ; God is a God of justice. He is not going to allow 
you to ruin men and then escape yourself. If we go against 
his laws we suffe.. Time rolled on and that young man be- 
came a slave to drink, and his life became such a burden to 
him that he put a revolver to his head and blew his brains 
out. The father lived a few years, but his life was as bitter 
as gall, and then went down to his grave in sorrow. Ah, my 
friends, it is hard to kick against the pricks, 


140 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Intemperance, | — futem 
A Distiller Interrogates Moody. 


In Europe ina place where there was a good deal of whiskey Im 
distilled, one of the men in the business was a Church mem- af ow 
ber, and got a little anxious in his conscience about his busi- had n 
ness. He came and asked me if I thought that a inan could any 0 
not be an honest distiller. I said, you should do whatever got w 
you do for the glory of God. If you can get down and pray who * 
about a barrel of whiskey, and say, for instance, when you sell only 
it: “ O Lord God, let this whiskey be blessed to the world,” His c 
it ia probably honest. powe 
The Most Hopeless Man in New York now a Sun: 

day School Superintendent. T 

A young man in one of our meetings in New York got up delpl 
and thrilled the audience with his experience. ‘1 want to youn 
tell you,” he said, “ that nine months ago a Christian came one § 
to my house and said he wanted me to become a Christian. dregs 
He talked to me kindly and encouragingly, pointing out the and ° 
error of my ways, and I became converted. I had been a delp! 
hard drinker, but since that time I have not touched a drop hom 
of liquor. If any one had asked who the most hopeless man were 
in town was, they would have pointed to me.” To-day this He] 
man is the superintendent of a Sabbath-school. Eleven years wow 
ago, when I went to Boston, I had a cousin who wanted a he k 
little of my experience. I gave him all the help I could, and Edw 
he became a Christian. He did not know how near death repr 
was to him. He wrote to his brother and said: ‘‘ I am very not 
anxious to get your soul to Jesus.” The letter somehow went wer 
to another city, and lay from the 28th of February till the quie 
28th of March—just one month. He saw it was in his bro- of ¢ 
ther’s handwriting, and tore it open and read the above and 
words. It struck a chord in his heart, and was the means of can’ 
converting him. And this was the Christian who led this mot 


drunken man to Christ. This young man had a neighbour mer 
who had drunk for forty years, and he went to that neighbour 6 
and told him what God had done for him, and the result was : he § 
another conversion. I tell you these things to encourage you 
te believe thet the drunkard can be saved. 

@ 


erance. 


rhiskey 
1 mem- 
is busi- 
1 could 
hatever 
id pray 
you sell 
world,” 


a Sun: 


got up 
want to 
in came 
iristian. 
out the 

been a 
La drop 
988 Man 
day this 
an years 
ranted a 
ild, and 
ar death 
am very 
ow went 
till the 
his bro- 
e above 
neans of 
led this 
sigh bour 
righbour 
sult was 
age you 


cl 


ne: A aa 


Se 


ie 
Lal 
§ 
i‘ 
a 
ie 
= 
Be 
ie 
bs 
4 
we 
ee 
: 
B 
ca 


aes | a 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 141 


Intemperance. 


A Remarkable Case. 


I may relate a little experience. In Philadelphia, at one 
of our meetings, a drunken man rose up. Till that time I 
had no faith that a drunken man could be converted. When 
any one approached, he was generally taken out. This man 
got up and shouted: “ I want to be prayed for.” The friends 
who were with him tried to draw him away, but he shouted 
only louder, and for three times he repeated the request. 
His call was attended to and he was converted. God has 
power to convert a man even if he is drunk, 


'O Edward!’ 


I remember going into a young converts’ meeting in Phila- 
delphia, where I heard a story that thrilled my soul. A 
young man said he had been a great drunkard. He had lost 
one situation after another, till finally he came to the very 
dregs. He left Philadelphia, and went first to Washington, 
and then to Baltimore. One night he came back to Phila- 
delphia. He had lost his key and could not get into his 
home. He was afraid to go into the house while the people 
were stirring, so he staid outside watclring till all had retired. 
He knew that after that there would be at least one who 
would hear him and come to the docr. He went to the door ; 
he knocked, when he heard the footsteps of his mother. “O 
Edward,” said she, “I am so glad to see you.” She did not 
reprove him ; did not rebuke him. He went up-stairs and did 
not come down for two days. Wher he came to, the servants 
were walking about the house very softly—everything was 
quiet. They told him that his mother was at the point 
of death. His brother was a physician, and he went to him 
and asked him if it was so. “ Yes, Ned,” said he “ mother 
can’t live.’ He immediately went up-stairs, and asked his 
mother’s forgiveness, and prayed to his mother’s God to have 
mercy upon him. “And God,” said he , “ my mother’s God, 
heard my prayers,” and the tears trickled down his face and 
he said: ‘God has kept me straight these four years in the 
face of all trials.” © sinner, ask for His grace and might; 
do not turn him away. 


MOODY'S ANECDOTES Intemperance. 


Moody Aks a Few Questions. 


Let me ask you a question. Do you think that those 
gamblers, thieves, harlots, and drunkards who are trampling 
the ten commandments under their feet, they who have never 
given any respect to God’s Word or to His instructions—do 
you think they will be swept into the kingdom of heaven, 
against their will? Do you think those antediluvians who 
were so sinful that God could not let them live on the earth 
would be swept into Paradise and Noah left to wade through 
the deluge? Do you think that these people, too corrupt for 
earth, would go there? As I have said before, an unregen- 
erated man in heaven would make a hell of it. An unregen- 
erated man couldn’t stay there. Why, some of you cannot 
wait an hour here to listen to the Word of God. Before the 
hour expires you want to go out. Some of you just wish it 
was over so that you could go and get adrink in some of those 
saloons. I tell you, from the very depths of my heart, I be- 
lieve heaven. would be a hell to an unregenerated man, “I 
don’t want to be here,” he would say. My friends, heaven is 
a prepared place for prepared people, and no one will ever see 
the kingdom of God without being born of God. 


The Drunken Father and His Praying Child. 


I remember when out in Kansas, while holding a meeting, 
[ saw alittle boy who came up to the window crying. [ 
went to him and said: “ My little boy, what is your trouble ?” 
“Why, Mr. Moody, my mother’s dead, and my father drinks, 
and they don’t love me, and the Lord won’t have anything to 
do with me because I am a poor drunkard’s boy.” ‘“ You 
have got a wrong idea, m, boy, Jesus will love you and savo 
you and your father too,’ and I told him a story of a little 
boy in an Eastern city. The boy said his father would never 
allow the canting hypocrites of Christians to come into his 


house, and would never allow his child to go to Sunday 
school. A kind-hearted man got his little boy and brought 
him to Christ. When Christ gets into a man’s heart he can- 
not help but pray. This father had been drinking one day, 
and coming home he heard that boy praying. He went te 


aes <a 


SR 


Inten 


him 
been 
pray 
and» 
was 
him 
neve 
my 

old 1 
and 
thre 
drin 
offer 
66 D 
yow 
mar 
wen 
are 
Lea 
The 
her 
bos 
his 
can 


th 


perance, 


it those 
ampling 
re never 
ons—do 
heaven, 
ns who 
he earth 
through 
rupt for 
inregen- 
inregen- 
1 cannot 
fore the 
wish it 
of those 
rt, I be- 
nm, “iL 
eaven is 
ever see 


rild. 


meeting, 
ying. I 
ouble ?” 
- drinks, 
thing to 

“ You 
nd sav 
a little 
id never 
into his 
Sunday 
brought 
he can- 
me day, 
went to 


i 
t 
¥ 
a 
& 
1 
‘ 
ee 
: 


Intemperanee. AND ILLUSTRATIONS, 143 

him and said : “J don’t want you to pray any more, You've 

been along with some of those Christians. If I catch you 

praying again I'll flog you.” But the boy was filled with God 

and he couidn’t help praying, The door of communication 

was opened between him and Christ, and his father caught 

him praying again. He went to him. “Tidn’t I tell you 

never to pray again? If I catch you at it once more you leave 

my house.” He thought he wouid stop him, One day the 
old tempter came upon the boy, and he did something wrong 
and got flogged. When he got over his mad fit he forgot the 
threats of his father and went to pray. His father had been 
drinking more than usual, and coming in he found the boy 
offering a prayers He caught the boy with a push and said : 
« Didn't I tell you never to pray again? Leave this house. Get 
your things packed up and go.” The little fellow hadn't 
many things to get together—a driakard’s boy never has, and 
went up to his mother’s room. “ Good-by, mother.” “Where 
are yougoing?” ‘I don’t know where I’ll go, but father says 
[cannot stay here any longer; I’ve been praying again,” he said. 
The mother knew it wouldn't do to try to keep the boy when 
her husband had ordered him away, so she drew him to hex 
bosom and kissed him, and bid him good-bye. He went to 
his brothers and sisters and kissed them good-bye. When he 
came to the door his father was there and the little fellow 
reached out his hand—“Good-bye, father ; as long as I live I 
will pray for you,” and left the house. He hadn’t been gone 
many minutes when the father rushed after him. ‘ My boy, 
if that is religion, ifit can drive you away from father and 
mother and home, I want it.” Yes, may be some little boy 
here to-night has gota drinking father and mother. Lift 
your voice to heaven, and the news will be carried up to 
heaven: ‘He prays.” 


GOLD. 
—The drunkard, the open blasphemer, the worst sinners, 
are precisely the ones that need Jesus most. The well don’t 
need Him at all. 


—There is many a gem in these billiard halls that only needs 
the way pointed out to fill their souls with the love of Christ, 


444 MOODY'S ANECDOTES 


LIBERTY. 


Old Sambo and “ Massa.” 


A friend of mine said he was down in Natchez before the 
war, and he and a friend of his went out riding one Saturday 
—they were teaching school through the week—and they 
drove out back from Natchez. It was a beautiful day, and 
they saw an old slave coming up, and they thought they 
would have a little fun. They had just come to a place 
where there was a fork in tie road, and there was a sign-post 
which read: “40 miles to Liberty.” One of the young men 
said to the old darkey driver: ‘ Sambo, how old are you?’ 
“T don’t know, Massa. [ guess I’se about eighty.” ‘ Can 
you read?’ ‘No, sah; we don’t read in dis country. It’s 
agin the law.” “Can you tell what is on that sign-post ?” 
“Yes, sah; it says 40 miles to liberty.” “ Well, now,” said 
my friend, “why don’t you follow that road and get your 
liberty. It says there, ‘only 40 miles to Liberty.’ Now, 
why don’t you take that road and go there?’ ‘Lhe old man’s 
countenance changed, and he said: “Oh, young Massa, that 
isallasham. Ifthe post pointed out the road to the liberty 
that God gives, we might try it. There could be no sham in 
that.” My friend said he had never heard anything more 
eloquent from the lips of a preacher. God wants all his sons 
to have liberty. 


“Liberty Now and Forever.” 


When Miss Smiley went down South to teach, she went 
to a hotel and found everything covered with dirt. The 


tables were dirty, dishes dirty, beds were dirty. So she 


called an old coloured woman who was in the house,and said : 
“ Now you know that the Northern people set you at 
liberty. I came from the Novth and I don’t like dirt, so t 


eee eee 


£ 
é 
| 
& 


ore the 
iturday 
id they 
ay, and 
it they 
a place 
gn-post 
1g men 
9 you?” 

“ Can 
y. It’s 
\-post ?” 
v,” said 
et your 

Now, 
1 man’s 
3a, that 
liberty 
sham in 
¢ more 
1is sons 


18 went 
hi Ene 
So she 


id said: 


you at 
irt, so t 


; 
f 
i 


= 
i 
ee 


Liberty. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 145 


want you to clean the house.” The old coloured woman set to 
work, and it seemed as if she did more work in that half day 
than she had done in a month before. When the lady got 
back the coloured woman came to her and said: ‘* Now, is 
I‘ free or ben’t I not? When I go to my old massa he says I. 
ain’t free, and when I go to my own people they say I is, and 
T don’t know whether I’m free or not. Some people told me 
Abraham Linzoln signed a proclamation, but massa says he 
didn’t; he hadn’t any right to.” So Christian people go 
along, not knowing whether they are free or not. Why, when 
they have the Spirit they are as free as air. Christ came for 
that. He didn’t come to set us free and then leave us in ser- 
vitude. He came to give us liberty now and forever. 


Out of Libby Prison. 


There was a story told me while I was in Philadelphia, by 
Capt. Trumbull. Te said when he was in Libby Prison the 
news came that his wife was in Washington, and his little 
child was dying : and the next news that came was that his 
child was dead, and the mother remained in Washington in 
hopes that her husband could come with her and take that 
child off to New England and bury it ; but that was the last 
he heard. One day the news came into the prison that there 
was a boat up from City Point, and there were over nine 
hundred men in the prison rejoicing at once. They expected 
to get good news. ‘Then came the news that there was only 
one man in that whole number that was to be let go, and they 
all began to say: “ Who is it?” It was some one who had 
some influential friend at Washington that had persuaded the 
government to take an interest in him and get him out. The 
whole prison was excited. At last an officer came and shouted 
at the top of his voice: “Henry Clay Trumbull!” The 
chaplain told me his name never sounded so sweet to him as 
it did that day. That was election, but you can’t find any 
Henry Clay Trumbull in the Bible. There is no special case 
in the Bible. Giod’s proclamations are to all sinners. Every- 
body can get out of prison that wants to. The trouble is, 
they don’t want to go. They had rather be captives te some 
darling sin, 


19 


146 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Liberty. 


An Emperor Sets Forty Million Slaves Free. 


Once the emperor of Russia had a plan by which he was 
to liberate the serfs of that country. There were forty mil- 
lions of them. Of some of them, their whole time was sold, 
of others, only a part. The emperor called around him his 
council, and wanted to have them devise some way to set the 
slaves at liberty. After they had conferred about it sor six 
months, one night the council sent in their decision, sealed, 
that they thought it was not expedient. The emperor went 


down to the Greek Church that night and partook of the t Te 
Lord’s Supper, and he set his house in order, and the next f boy | 
morning you could hear the tramp of soldiers in the streets of : heart 
St. Petersburgh. The emperor summoned his guard, and | the u 
before noon sixty-five thousand men were surrounding that was | 
palace. Just at midnight there came out a proclamation that | to-nig 
every slave in Russia was forever set free. The proclamation — moth 
had gone forth, and all the slaves of the realm believed it. stay 
‘They have been free ever since. Suppose they had not be- “it i 
lieved it? They never then would have got the benefit of it. } am & 
If one man can liberate forty millions, has not God got the last ‘ 
power to liberate every captive? ' killec 
; are st 
; stay, 
Moody on “Duty ”—How He Loves His Mother. — cere 
sis 
I have an old mother away down in the Connecticut moun- Se 
tains, and I have been in the habit of going to see her every ; the d 
year for twenty years. Suppose I go_ there and say: | tram] 
“Mother, you were very kind to me when [ was young—you 
were very good to me ; when father died you worked hard for 
us all to keep us together, and so I have come to see you be- 
cause it is my duty.” Iwent then only because it was my TI] 
duty. Then she would say to me: “ Well, my son, if you abou 
only come to see me because it is your duty, you need not | world 
come again.” And that is the way with a great many of the | they 
servants of God. They work for him because it is their duty up tl 
—not for love. Let us abolish this word duty, and feel that tried 
it is only a privilege to work for God, and iet us try to re- religi 
member that what is done merely fiom a sense of duty is not party 
acceptable to God. : worl 


Liberty. 


"re@e 


1 he was 
orty mil- 
was sold, 
him his 
o set the 
it sor six 
1, sealed, 
ror went 
k of the 
the next 
streets of 
ard, and 
ling that 
tion that 
lamation. 
lieved it. 
d not be- 
efit of it. 
lL got the 


Mother. 


ut moun- 
her every 
und say: 
ing—you 
1 hard for 
» you be- 
, was my 
n, if you 
need not 
ny of the 
heir duty 
feel that 
try to re- 
ity 1s not 


i 
= 
k 
¥ 
e 
& 
e 
E 
% 
i. 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 147 


PARENTAL, 


A Father’s Love Trampled Under Foot. 


I once heard of a father who had a prodigal boy, and the 
boy had sent his mother down to the grave with a broken 
heart, and one evening the boy siarted out as usual to spend 
the night in drinking and gambling, and his old father, as he 
was leaving, said: ‘ My son, I want to ask a favour of you 
to-night. You have not spent an evening with me since your 
mother died. Now won't you gratify your old father by 
staying at home with him?” ‘ No,” said the young man, 
‘“‘it is lonely here, and there is nothing to interest me, and L 
am going out.” And the old man prayed and wept, and at 
last said: “My boy, you are just killing me as you have 
killed your mother. These hairs are growing white, and you 
are sending me, too to the grave.” Still the boy would not 
stay, and the vld mansaid: “If you are determined to go to 
ruin, you must go over this old body to-night. I cannot re- 
sist you. Youare stronger than I, butif you go out you 
must go over this body.” And _ he laid himself down before 
the door, and that son walked over the form of his father, 
trampled the love of his father wader foot, and went out. 


“That is the Price of My Soul.” 


I heard a story of o young lady who was deeply concerned 
about her soul. Her father and mother, however, were 
worldly people. They thought lightly of her serious wishes ; 
they did not sympathize with her state of mind, They made 
up their minds that she should not become a Christian, and 
tried every way they could to discourage her notions about 
religion. At last they thought they would get up a large 
party, and thus with gaiety and pleasure win her back to the 


world, So they made every preparation ior a gay time; they 


148 MOODY’S ANECDOTES Parental. 


even sent to neighbouring towns and got all her most worldly 
companions to come to the house; they bought her a mag- 
nificent silk dress and jewellery, and decked her out in all 
the finery of such an occasion. The young lady thought 
there would be no harm in attending the party ; that it would 
be a trifling affair, a simple thing, and she could, after it was 
over, think again of the welfare of her soul. She went decked 
out in all her adornments, and was the belle of the ball. 
Three weeks from that night she was on her dying bed. She 
asked her mother to bring her ball dress in. She pointed 
her finger at it, and, bursting into tears, said: “ Tha. is the 
price of my soul.” She died before dawn. Oh, my friends, 
if you are anxious about your soul, let everything else go ; 
let parties and festivals pass, 


The Two Fathers. 


Whenever I think about this subject, two fathers come 
before me. One lived on the Mississippi river. He was a 
man of great wealth. Yet he would have freely given it als 
could he have brought back his eldest boy from his eavly 
grave. One day that boy had been borne home unconsvious. 
They did everything that man could do to restore him, but in 
vain. ‘He must die,” said the doctor. ‘ But, doctor,” said 
the agonized father, “can you do nothing to bring him to 
consciousness, even fora moment?’ ‘That may be,” said 
the doctor; “ but he can never live.” ‘Time passed, and, 
after a terrible suspense, the father’s wish was gratified. 
** My son,” he whispered, “the doctor tells me you are 
dying.” ‘ Well,” said the boy, “you never prayed for me, 
father; won’t you pray for my lost soul now?’ The father 
wept. It was true he had never prayed. He was a stranger 
to God. And ina little while that soul, unprayed for, passed 
into its dark eternity. Oh, father! if your boy was dying, 
and he called on you to pray, could you lift your burdened 
heart to heaven? Have you learned this sweetest lesson of 
heaven on earth, to know and hold communion with your 
God? And before this evil world has marked your dearest 
treasures for its prey, have you learned to lead your little ones 
to a children’s Christ ? 


eae 


SIONAL EAS MEARS | Fi PRSEAR ENACT: Re 


lovel: 
gates 
said 

fore, 

went 
the li 
son, ¢ 
you a 
you | 
Jesus 
spend 
little 
You | 
they 
be m 
millic 


Th 
the sé 
years 
as thé 
her e 
the m 
boy Vv 
chimy 
the w 
the s 
trave] 
that 
early 
there 
He si 
until 
him } 
took 
te he 


Parental. 


worldly 
ra mac- 
it in all 
thought 
t would 
rit was 
decked 
he ball. 
1. She 
pointed 

is the 
friends, 
else go ; 


ars come 
e@ was a 
nit als 
ris early: 
nsvlous. 
1, but im 
yr,” said 
> him ta 
a,” said 
d, and, 
ratified. 
you are 
for me, 
e father 
stranger 
r, passed 
3 dying, 
urdened 
esson of 
ith your 

dearest 
tle ones 


FELT ENA | PREM ACES : RR ee 


a 
Se 


i 


Parental, AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 149 


What a contrast is the other father? 
lovely boy, and one day he came home to find him at the 


He, too, had a 


gates of death. “ A great change has come over our boy,” 
said the weeping mother; “he has only been a little ill be- 
fore, but it seems now as if he were dying fast.” The father 
went into the room and placed his hand on the forehead of 
the little boy: He could feel the cold damp of death. ‘My 
son, do you know you are dying?’ “No; amI?” “Yes; 
you are dying.” ‘And shall I die to-day?’ ‘Yes, my boy, 
you cannot live till night.” ‘Well, then, I shall be with 
Jesus to-night, won’t I, father?’ ‘ Yes, my son, you will 
spend to-night with the Saviour.” Mothers and fathers, the 
little ones may begin early; be in earnest with them now. 
You know not how soon you may be taken from them, or 
they may be taken from you. Therefore let this impression 
be made upon their minds—that you care for their souls a 
million times more than for their worldly prospects. 


The Stolen Boy—A Mother’s Love. 


There was a boy a great many years ago stolen in London, 
the same as Charley Ross was stolen here. Long months and 
years passed away, and the mother had prayed and prayed, 
as that mother of Charley Ross has prayed, I suppose, and all 
her efforts had failed and they had given up all hope; but 
the mother did not quite give up her hope. One day a little 
boy was sent up into the neighbouring house to sweep the 
chimney, and by some mistake he got down again through 
the wrong chimney. When he came down, he came in by 
the sitting-room chimney. His memory began at once to 
travel back through the years that had passed. He thought 
that things looked strangely familiar. ‘The scenes of the 
early days of youth were dawning upon him; and as he stood 
there surveying the place, his mother came into the room. 
He stood there covered with rags and soot. Did she wait 
until she sent him to be washed before she rushed and took 
him in her arms? No, indeed; it was her own boy. She 
took him to her arms all black and smoke, and hugged him 
te her bosom, and shed tears of joy upon his head. 


150 MOODY’S ADECDOTES 


PRAYER, 


A Voice from the Tomb. 


The other day I read of a mother who died, leaving her 
child alone and very poor. She used to pray earnestly for her 
boy, and left an impression upon his mind that she cared more 
for his soul than she cared for anything else in the world. 
He grew up to be a successful man in business, and became 
very well off. One day, not long ago, after his mother had 
been dead for twenty years, he thought he wouid remove her 
remains and put her into his own lot in the cemetery, and put 
up a little monument to her memory, As he came to remove 
them, and to lay her away, the thought came to him, that 
while his mother was alive she had prayed for him, and he 
wondered why her prayers were not answered. That very 
night that man was saved. After his mother had been buried 
so long a time, the act of removing her body to another rest- 
ing place, brought up all the recollections of his childhood, 
and he became a Christian, O, you mothers! 


Prayer Answered. 


Only a few years ago, in the City of Philadelphia, there 
was a mother that had two sons. They were just going as 
fast us they could to ruin. They were breaking her heart, and 
she went into a little prayer-meeting and got up and presented 
them for prayer. They had been on a drunken spree, or had 
just got started in that way, and she knew that their end 
would be a drunkard’s grave, and she went among these 
Christians and said: “ Won't you just cry to God for my two 
boys?’ The next morning those two boys had made an ap- 
pointment to meet each other on the corner ef Market and 
Thirteenth streets—though not that they knew anything about 


{ 
f 
OI 


RTS TI 


rere eI 


wR: 


er 


RG | NaC a RINRNO SRE TE 


ring her 
y for her 
‘ed more 
e world. 
became 
her had 
nove her 
and put 
) remove 
im, that 
, and he 
hat very 
nu buried 
cher rest- 


\ildhood, 


lia, there 
going as 
eart, and 
presented 
e, or had 
their end 
ng these 
r my two 
le an ap- 
rket and 
ing about 


® 


TIS | Sgr NER SIRE NCIS 


Prayer. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 151 
our meeting—and while one of them was there at the corner, 
waiting for his brother to come, he followed the people wlio 
were flooding into the depot building, and the Spirit of the 
Lord met him, and he was wounded and found his way to 
Christ. After his brother came he found the place too 
crowded to enter, so he too went curiously into another meet. 
ing and found Christ, and went home happy; and wher he 
got home he told his mother what the Lord had done for 
hira, and the second son came with the same tidings. I heard 
one of them get up afterwards to tell his experience in the 
young converts’ meeting, and he had no sooner told the story 
than the other got up and said: “I am that brother, and 
there is not a happier home in Philadelphia than we have 
got.” 


The Praying Mother. 

I remember being inthe camp and a man came to me and 
said : “* Mr. Moody, when the Mexican war began I wanted to 
enlist. My mother, seeing I was resolved, said if I became 
a Christian I might go. She pleaded and prayed that I 
might become a Christian, but I wouldn’t. I said when the 
war was over I would become a Christian, but not till then. 
All her pleading was in vain, and at last, when I was going 
away, she took out a watch and said: ‘ My son, your father 
left this to me when he died. Take it, and I want you to re- 
member that every day at 12 o’clock your mother will be 
praying for you.’ Then she gave me her Bible, and marked 
out passages, and put a few different references in the fly-leat. 
I took the watch and the Bible just because my mother gave 
them. I never intended to read the bible. I went off to 
Mexico, and one day while on a long, weary march, I took 
out my watch, and it was 12 o'clock. I had been gone four 
months, but I remembered that my mother at that hour was 
praying forme. Something prompted me to ask the officer to 
relieve me for a little while, and I stepped behind a tree 
away out on those plains of Mexico, and cried to the God of 
my mother to save me.” My friends, God saved him, and he 
went through the Mexican war, “and now,” he said, “ I have 
enlisted again to see if I can do any good for my Master's 
Caltse, 


MOODY’S ANECDOTES Prayer 


The Sinner’s Prayer Heard. 


There was a man at one of our meetings in New York City 
who was moved by the Spirit of God. Ho said: “1 am going 
home, and I am,not going to sleep to-night till Christ takes 
away my sins, if I have to stay up all night and pray, I’li 
do it.” He had a good distance to walk, and as he went 
along he thought: “ Why can’t I pray now ssI go along, 
instead of waiting to go home?’ But he did not knows 
prayer. His mother had taught him to pray, but it was sa 
long since he had uttered a prayer that he had forgotten. 
However, the publican’s prayer came to his mind. Every- 
body can say this prayer. That man in the gallery yonder, 
that young lady over there: “God be merciful to me a 
sinner.” May God write it on your hearts to-night. If you 
forget the sermon, don’t forget that prayer. It is a very short 
prayer, and it has brought joy—salvation—to many a soul, 
Well, this prayer came to the man, and he began: ‘God be 
merciful to mae a »’ but before he got to “sinner” God 
blessed him. 


Black-Balled by Man—Saved by Christe 


At tke Fulton streed prayer-meeting a man came in, and 
this was his story. He said he had a mother who prayed 
for him; he was a wild, reckless prodigal. Some time after 
his mother’s death he began to be troubled. He thought he 
ought to get into new company, and leave his old companions 
So he said he would go and join a secret society ; he thought 
he would join the Odd Fellows. They went and made in- 
quiry about him, and they found he was a drunken sailor, so 
they Slack-balled him. They would not have him. He then 
went to the Freemasons; he had nobody to recommend 
him, so they inquired and found there was no good in his 
character, and they, too, black-balled him. They didn’t want 
nim, One day, some one handed him a little notice in the 
street about the prayer-meeting, and he went in. He heard 
that Christ had come to save sinnoya. He believed Him ; 
he took Him at His word ; and, in repurting the matter, he 
said he “came to Christ without a character, and Christ hadw't 
Wack-balied him,” My friends, that is Christ’s way. 


Prayes 


rk City 
m going 
it takes 
y I 
e@ went 
. along, 
know & 
; Was SO 
rotten. 
Every- 
yonder, 
> mea 
If you 
ry short 
a soul, 
God be 
r” God 


in, and 
prayed 
ne after 
ight he 
anions 
hought 
ade in- 
lor, so 
fe then 
mmend 
| in his 
't want 
in the 
> heard 
| Him ; 
tter, he 
hadwt 


— 


AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 163 


REAPING. 


Sad Ending of a Life that Might have been 
Otherwise. 


T remember a few years ago I felt very anxious for a man 
who was present at a meeting like this. At the close of the 
meeting I asked all to rise, and he rose among the others. I 
took him aside and said: ‘Now you are going to become a 
Christian —you will come out for the Lord now?” He said 
he was wanting to very much. The man was trembling from 
head to foot, and I thought surely he was going to accept 
Him. I spoke to him in his hesitating condition, and found 
out what was standing between him and Christ. He was 
afraid of his companions. Nearly every day and night news 
came to me that some of these employers and clerks made 
light of these meetings, and make fun of all who attend them, 
and so many give the same reason that this man did. I said 
to him: “If heaven is what we are led to believe it is, I 
would be willing to accept it and bear their fun.” I talked 
to him, bnt he wouldn’t accept it. He went off, but for weeks 
he came every night, and went away as he came, without ac- 
cepting it. One day I received a message to come and see 
him. He was sick, and I went to his chamber. He wanted 
to know if there was hope for him in the eleventh hour? I 
spoke to him, and gave him every hope I could. Day after 
day I visited him, and, contrary to all expectation, I saw him 
gradually recovering. When he got pretty well he was sit- 
ting on the front porch, and I sat down by him and said: “You 
will be going now t. confess Christ; you'll be going to take 
your stand for him now?” “ Well,” said he, “ Mr. Moody, I 
promised God on my sick bed that I would ; but I will wait 
a little. Iam going over to Michigan, where I am going to 
buy a farmfand settle down, and then I'll become a Christian.” 
“Tf God cannot make you a Christian here he cannot do it 
thore,” I replied. I tried to get him to make an unconditional 


154 MOODY'S ANECDOTES Reaping. 


surrender, but he wouldn’t; he would put it off till the next 
spring. “ Why,” I said, “you may not live till next spring.” 
“Don’t you sce I am getting quite well?” “ But are you 
willing to take the risk till next spring?” Oh, yes, I’ll take 
it; Mr. Moody, you needn’t trouble yourself any more about 
my soul; I’ll risk it, you can just attend to your business, 
and f will to mine, and if I lose my soul, no one will be to 
blame but myself—certainly not you, for you’ve done all 
you could.” I went away from that house then with a heavy 
heart. 

I well remember the day of the week, Thursday, about 
noon, just one week from that very day, when his wife sent 
forme. When I went to their home I found her in creat 
trouble, and learned that he had had a relapse. I asked if he 
had expressed a desire to see me. She said: « No; he is 
always saying ‘there is no hope,’ and I cannot bear to have 
him die in that condition.” I went into the room. He did 
not speak to me, but I went round to the foot of the bed and 
looked in his face and said: “ Won't you speak to me?” and 
at last he fixed that terrible deathly look upon me and said; 
“Mr. Moody, you neea not talk to me any more. It is too 
late ; there is no hope for me now. Go talk to my wife and 
children ; pray for them; but my heart is as hard as the iron 
in that stove there, When I was sick He came to the door 
of my heart, and I promised to serve Him, but I broke that 
promise, and now I must die without Him.” I got down to 
pray. “You needn’t pray for me,” he said. I prayed, but it 
seemed as if my prayer went no higher than my head. He 
lingered till that night, repeating: “The harvest is past, the 
summer is ended, and I am not saved.” There he lay in 
agony, every few minutes this lamentation breaking from him. 
Just as the sun was going down behind those Western prairies, 
his wife leaned over him, and in an almost inaudible voice, he 
whispered: “ "he harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I 
am not saved,” and he died, He had lived a Chvistless life, 
he died a Christless death, he was wrapped in # Christless 
shroud, and he was buried in a Christless grave, Oh, how 
dark and sad! Dear friends, the harvest is passing ; the 
summer will soon be ended ; wun't you let Him redeem you? 


a ee a ee ee oe ee -) 


eaping. 


16 next 
pring.” 
we you 
ll take 
» about 
isiness, 
1 be to 
ne all 
_ heavy 


about 
fe sent 
1 great 
d if he 
; he is 
o have 
He did 
ed and 
?” and 
d said: 
; is too 
ife and 
1e iron 
ie door 
ce that 
wn to 
but it 
1. ie 
st, the 
lay in 
n him. 
rairies, 
ce, he 
and I 
ss life, 
‘istless 
1, how 
r; the 
1 you? 


Reaping. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 155 


By the Wayside. 


I went down past the Corner of Clark and Lake streets one 
day, and, fulfilling my vow, on seeing a man leaning up against 
a lamp-post, | went up to him and said: “Are you a Christian)’ 
He damned me and cursed me, and told me to mind my own 
business. He knew me, but I didn’t know him. He said to 
a friend of his that afternoon that he had never been so in. 
sulted in his life, and told him to say to me that I was damn- 
ing the cause | pretended to represent. Well, the friend 
came and delivered his message. ‘May be I am doing more 
hurt than good,” I said; “may be I’m mistaken, and God 
hasn’t shown me the ‘ght way.” That was the time I was 
sleeping and living in the Young Men’s Christian Association 
rooms, where I was then President, Secretary, janitor, and 
everything else, Well, one night after midnight I heard a knock 
at the door, And there on the step leading into the street 
stood this stranger I had made so .aad at the lamp-post, and 
said he wanted to talk to me about his soul’s salvation. He 
said: “ Do you remember the man you met about three 
months go at the lam:p-post, and how he cursed you? I 
have had no peace since that night ; I couldn’t sleep. Oh, 
tell me what to do to be saved.” And we just fell down on 
our knees, and prayed, and that day he went to the noon 
prayer meeting and openly confessed the Saviour, and soon 
after went to the war a Christian man. I do not know but 
he died on some Southern battle-field or in a hospital, but I 
expect to see him in the kingdom of God. 

Sowing the Tares. 

I was at the Paris Exhibition in 1867, and I noticed there 
a little oil painting, only about a foot square, and the face was 
the most hideous I have ever seen. On the paper attached 
to the painting were the words: “ Sowing the tares,” and 
the face looked more like a demon’s than a man’s, As 
he sowed these tares, up came serpents and reptiles, and they 
were crawling up his body, and all around were woods with 
wolves and animals prowling in them. I have seen 
that picture many times since. .ih! the reaping time 
is coming. If you sow to the flesh you must reap the flesh 


156 MOODY'S ANECDOTES 


FRUST, 


FO Somes am 


“Iam Trusting Jesus’—A Young Lady’s Trust. 


The other Sunday, when I was speaking on “Trust,” 
@ person came to me next day and said: I want to tell you 
how [ was saved. You remember you told about that lad 
who sought Christ three years and could not find Him, 
and when you told that, it was I. I was in that same con 
dition and through your story I got light.” I don’t think 
] have ever told it but what somebody got light and life. 
T will tell it again, for IT would go up and down the 
world telling it if I could get a convert. One night I 
was preaching, and happening to cast my eyes down dur- 
ing the sermon, I saw two eyes just rivetted upon me. Every 
word that fell from my lips she just seemed to catch with 
her own lips, and I was very anxious to go down where she 
was. After the sermon I went to the pew and said: “ My 
friend, are you a Christian?” ‘ Oh, no,” said she, “ I wish I 
was. I have been seeking Christ three years and I cannot 
find Him.” aid I: “ Oh, there is a great mistake about 
that.” Says she: “Jo you think I am not in earnest? v0 
you think, sir, I have not been seeking Christ ?” Said I; “I 
suppose you think you have, but Christ has been seeking you 
these twenty years, and it would not take an anxious sinner 
and an anxious Saviour three years to meet, and if you had 
been really secking Him you would have found Him long be 
fore this.” What would you do, then?’ Said L: “Do nothing, 
only believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.’ 
“wh,” said she, “I have heard that till my head swims, 
Everybody says, believe! believe ! believe ! and I am none the 
wiser, Idon’t know what you mean wy it.” “Very well, 
said I, “T will drop the word; but just trust the Lord Jesus 
Christ to save.” * If I say [ trust Him,will tle save me ?” “ No, 


Se sia 


— 


rust. 


Trust,” 
Il you 
it lady 
Him, 
e con 
think 
l life. 
1 the 
cht I 
1 dur- 
Every 
with 
e she 
é My 
vish I 
annot 
about 
| oO 
eet 
§ you 
inner 
u had 
ne be 
thing, 
aved.’ 
wWims, 
1e the 
well, 
Jesus 
if NG, 


4) 


Trust. AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 157 


yoa may do a thousand thimgs ; but if you really trust Him, 
He will save you.” “ Well,” said she, “I trust Him, but I 
don’t feel any different.” ‘ Ah,” said I, “ LT have found your 
difficulty. You have been hunting for feeling all these three 
years. You have not been looking for Christ.” Says she: 
“Christians tell how much joy they have got.” “ But,” said 
I, “ you want Christian experience before you get one. In- 
stead of trusting God, you are looking for Christian experi- 
ence.” Then I said: “ Right here in this pew, just commit 
yourself to the Lord Jesus Christ, and trust Him, and you 
will be saved,” and I held her right to that word “ trust,” 
which is the same as the word “believe” in the Old Testa- 
ment. ‘ You know what it is to trust a friend. Cannot you 
trust God as a friend?” She looked at me for five minutes, it 
seemed, and then said slowly: ‘“ Mr. Moody, I trust the Lord 
Jesus Christ this night to save my soul.” Turning to the pastor 
of the church she took him by the hand and repeated the de- 
claration, Turning to an elder in the church she said again 
the solemn words, and near the door, meeting another officer 
cf the church, she repeated for the fourth time: “I am trust- 
ing Jesus,” and went off home. The next night when I was 
preaching I saw her right in front of me, “ Eternity” written 
in her eyes, her face lighted up, and when T asked inquirers to 
go into the other room she was the first to go in, I wondered 
at it, for I could see by her face that she was in the joy of the 
Lord. But when [ got in I found her with her arms around 
a young lady’s neck, and I heard her say: “ It is only just 
trusting. I stumbled over it three years and found it all in 
trusting ;” and the three weeks I was there she led more souls 
to Christ than anybody else. If I gota difficult case I would 
send it to her. Oh, my friends, won’t you trust Him? Let 
us put our trust in Him. 


Mrs. Moody Teaching her Child. 


There was a time when our little boy did not like to go te 
church, and would get up in the morning and say to his 
mother; “ What day is to-morrow?” “Tuesday.” “ Next 
day?” “ Wednesday.” “ Next day?” “Thursday ;” and 
so on, till he came to the answer, “ Sunday.” “Dear me,” 


158 MOODY'S ANECDOTES. Trust, 


he said. Isaid to the mother: “ We cannot have our boy 
grow up to hate Sunday in this way; that will never do. 
That is the way I used to feel when I was a boy. I used to 
look upon Sunday with a certain amount of dread. Very 
few kind words were associated with the day. I don’t know 
that the minister ever put his hand on my head. I don’t know 
that the minister even noticed me, unless it was when I was 
asleep in the gallery, and he woke me up. This kind of 
thing won’t do; we must make the Sunday the most attrac- 
tive day of the week ; nota day to be dreaded; but a day 
of pleasure.” Well, the mother took the work up with this 
boy. Bless those mothers in their work with the children, 
Sometimes I feel as if I would rather be the mother of John 
Wesley or Martin Luther or John Knox than have all the 
glories in the world. Those mothers who are faithful with 
the children God has given them will not go unrewarded. 
My wife went to work and took those Bible stories and 
put those blessed truths in a light that the child could 
comprehend, and soon the feeling of dread for the Sabbath 
with the boy was the other way. “ What day’s to-morrow ?” 
he would ask: “Sunday.” “TI am glad.” And if we make 
those Bible truths interesting—break them up in some shape 
so that these children can get at them, then they will begin 
to enjoy them. 


pee 


“More to Follow.” 


Nowland Hill tells a good story of a rich man and a poor 
man in his congregation. The rich man desired to do an act 
of benevolence, and so he sent a sum of money to a friend to 
be given to this poor man as he thought best. The friend 
just sent him five pounds, and said in the note: “More to 
follow.” After a while he sent another five pounds, and said: 
““ More to follow.” Again and again he sent the money to 
the poor man, aiways with the cheering words, “ more to 
follow.” So it is with the wonderful grace of God. ‘There ig 
always ‘“ more to follow.” 


More and more, more and more, 

Always more to follow; 

Oh, His matchless, boundless love ! 

Still there's more to follow.—P. P, Bliae, 


Trust. 


ur boy 
ver do. 
used to 
Very 
; know 
| know 
I was ¢), 
ind of 
attrac- 
a day 
th this 
ildren, 
f John 
all the 
il with 
rarded. 
3 and 
could a 
ibbath { 
rrow }” 
» make 
shape 
begin 


& poor 
an act 
and to 
friend 
ore to 
1 said: 
ney to 
ore to 
lere ig 


