NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES ^    ^  jj^;  jj 


3  3433  06826538  2 


OTES AND 


PJPIBBpBj|l^t|U|UI(IUil(li(l!''i|l!||ll||):i  IIMJIIIipWIWIiWIiilP'^^  J 


^^'^p^  ^'-'^-^^UhJU^*.^ 


Anecdotes  and  Illustrations 


By  R.  A.  TORREY,  D.D. 

LATEST  ISSUES 

The  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
As  Revealed  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  Per- 
sonal Experience.    Cloth,  net  ^1.00. 

Difficulties  and  Alleged  Errors  and  Contra- 
dictiojis  in  the  Bible.  12mo,  Cloth,  net 
50c.;  Paper,  15c. 

Practical  and  Perplexing  Questions  An- 
swered.   12mo,  Cloth,  net  60. 

Anecdotes  and  Illustrations.  Illustrated, 
12mo,  Cloth,,  net  76c.;  Paper,  net  36c. 

FOR  REVIVAL  WORK 
How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ.    Cloth,  75c.; 

Paper,  net  25c. 
How  to  Work  for  Christ.    8vo,  Cloth,  $2.50. 
How  to  Promote  and  Conduct  a  Successful 

Revival.     New  Edition,  net  ;?1. 00. 

REVIVAL  TALKS  AND  ADDRESSES 
The  Bible  and  Its  Christ.    Cloth,  net  75c.; 

Paper,  net  25c. 
Revival  Addresses.    Clo.,net  $1., pa., net 50. 
Real  Salvation  and  Whole-Hearted  Service. 

I2mo,  Cloth,  net  ;^1.00.,  paper,  net  50. 

FOR  BIBLE  STUDY 

What  the  Bible  Teaches.    8vo,  Cloth,  $2.50. 
The  Divine   Origin   of  the  Bible.      12mo, 

Cloth,  50c. 
How  to  Study  the  Bible  for  Greatest  Profit. 

12mo,  Cloth,  75c. 

FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE 

How  to  Succeed  in  the  Christian  Life.    Cloth 

net  60c.;  Paper,  net  25c. 
How  to  Pray.  12mo,  Cloth,  50c.;  Paper,  15c 
How  to  Obtain  Fullness  of  Power  in  Chris 

tian  Life  and  Service.    Cloth,  50c. 
The  Baptism  With  the  Holy  Spirit.    12mo, 

Cloth,  60c. 
A    Vest  Pocket   Companion  for  Christian 

Workers.     Leatherette,  net  25c. 

131 


R.  A.  TORREY 


Anecdotes  and  Illustrations 


BY 

R.  A.  TORREY 

Author  of  "  How  to^' Bring  Men  to  Christ^* 
and  **  How  to  Pray,^  etc. 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 


London 


AND 


Edinburgh 


Copyright,  1907,  by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


THE  NEW  YORK 
PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

793898  A 

ASTOR,  LENOX  AND 

TILDtN  FQL'NDAIIONS 

B.  1936  L 


New  York:  158  Fifth  Avenue 
Chicago:  125  No,  Wabash  Ave. 
Toronto:  25  Richmond  Street,  W. 
London:  21  Paternoster  Square 
Edinburgh:     100    Princes     Street 


Publisher's  Note 


The  value  of  an  apt  illustration  can  hardly  be 
over-estimated.  It  is  oftentimes  the  entering  wedge 
or  the  clinching  conclusion  for  the  more  serious 
argument.  At  times  it  is  both.  Mr.  D.  L.  Moody 
used  to  say  that  a  sermon  without  illustrations  was 
like  a  house  without  windows.  To  one  of  his  ablest 
associates,  one  second  to  none  as  a  Bible  expositor, 
he  would  frequently  say,  "  You  don't  put  enough 
windows  in  your  sermons.  No  one  can  do  it  better, 
but  you  get  so  interested  in  your  subject  you  go  on 
and  on  with  argument  and  proof  texts  until  the  au- 
dience is  weary.  You  want  to  wake  them  up :  let 
them  see  out  and  in  through  a  window — use  pointed 
illustrations." 

One  does  not  need  to  say  the  preacher  referred  to 

was  not  Dr.  Torrey,  for  his  use  of  apt  stories  largely 

drawn  from  his  own  wide  and  varied  experience, 

add  largely  to  the  effective  ministry  of  his  power- 

^  ful  addresses. 

^  The  collection  of  stories  and  illustrations  here 
^gathered  has  had  Dr.  Torrey's  careful  revision,  but 
><for  the  form  of  publication  and  especially  for  the 
I©  addition  of  illustrations  and  portraits,  the  publisher 
COstlone  is  responsible. 

5 


Anecdotes  and  Illustrations 


A  Deacon  Who  Went  Fishing  on  Sunday 

One  night  when  I  arose  to  preach  in  the  Chicago 
Avenue  Church  I  saw  sitting  just  to  my  left  in  the 
front  seat  underneath  the  gallery  one  of  my  dea- 
cons and  side  by  side  with  him  a  flashily-dressed 
and  hard-looking  man.  I  at  once  concluded  that 
he  was  a  sporting  man  and  I  said  to  myself,  "  Dea- 
con Young  has  been  fishing  to-day."  It  is  a  good 
thing  to  have  deacons  that  go  fishing  on  Sunday — 
fishing  for  souls.  Every  little  while  as  I  was 
preaching,  I  would  turn  around  and  look  at  that 
man.  His  eyes  were  riveted  upon  me.  He  was 
paying  the  closest  attention.  Evidently  the  whole 
scene  was  strange  to  him  and  some  power,  mysteri- 
ous to  him,  had  taken  hold  of  him.  When  we  went 
to  the  inquiry  room  below.  Deacon  Young  brought 
him  along.  I  was  late  talking  to  inquirers  that 
night,  and  about  eleven  o'clock  Deacon  Young 
came  over  to  me  as  I  finished  with  one  inquirer 
and  said,  "  Come  over  here  and  talk  to  a  man  that 
I  have."  I  went  over.  It  was  this  big  sporting 
man.  He  was  shaking  and  groaning  with  emotion. 
"  Oh,"  he  groaned,  "  I  don't  know  what  is  the  mat- 

7 


8  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

ter  with  me.  I  never  felt  like  this  before  in  all  my 
life.  I  never  was  in  a  place  like  this  before,"  he 
continued.  "  My  mother  keeps  a  gambling  house 
in  Omaha,  and  we  are  Koman  Catholics,  but  this 
afternoon  as  I  was  going  down  the  street  over 
here,  I  saw  some  of  your  men  holding  an  open  air 
meeting.  As  I  passed,  one  of  them  rose  to  speak. 
I  had  known  him  before  when  he  was  leading  a 
wild  life,  and  out  of  curiosity  I  stopped  to  listen. 
I  listened  until  he  was  done  speaking  and  then  con- 
tinued on  my  way,  intending  to  go  down  on  Cot- 
tage Grove  Avenue  to  meet  some  men  to  pass  the 
afternoon  gambling.  But  I  had  not  gone  two 
blocks  before  some  strange  power  took  hold  of  me 
and  brought  me  back  to  the  meeting.  When  the 
meeting  broke  up,  this  man  (pointing  to  Deacon 
Young)  brought  me  to  your  church  to  the  Yoke 
Fellow's  Supper,  and  then  to  the  meeting  after- 
wards, then  took  me  up-stairs  to  hear  you  preach. 
Then  he  brought  me  down  here.  Oh,"  he  groaned 
again,  "  I  don't  know  what  is  the  matter  with  me. 
I  feel  awful.  I  never  felt  this  way  before  in  all 
my  life."  "  I  will  tell  you  what  is  the  matter  with 
you,"  I  said.  "  You  are  under  conviction  of  sin. 
The  Spirit  of  God  is  dealing  with  you.  Will  you 
take  Christ  as  your  Saviour  ?  "  The  huge  man  fell 
on  his  knees  on  the  floor  and  commenced  to  cry  to 
God  for  mercy.  Jesus  Christ  met  him  there.  His 
sobs  ceased,  a  look  of  peace  came  into  his  face  and 
he  left  the  building  rejoicing  in  Christ. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS  9 

An  Infidel  Converted  Beside  a  Coffin 

A  YOUNG  lady  in  the  Bible  Institute,  Chicago, 
started  to  call  upon  every  family  on  a  certain  street 
in  the  poorer  quarter  of  the  city.  One  day  she 
pushed  open  a  door  and  found  a  man  lying  ill  in 
bed,  dying  with  consumption.  When  she  began  to 
speak  to  him,  he  told  her  crossly  that  he  was  an 
infidel  and  did  not  believe  in  the  Bible.  She  spoke 
a  few  words  and  left.  The  next  day  she  took  him 
a  glass  of  jelly,  and  the  next  day  took  him  some 
other  delicacy  and  a  few  days  after  that  something 
else.  She  kept  up  her  kindly  ministrations  for 
about  a  month.  One  Sunday  afternoon  she  came 
to  me  as  I  was  leaving  my  Bible  class  and  said, 
"  There  is  an  infidel  dying  down  on  Milton  Avenue. 
I  know  you  are  very  busy,  but  could  you  not  take 
a  few  moments  to  go  and  see  him  ?  "  "  Yes,"  I  re- 
plied, "  I  will  go  now."  She  took  me  to  the  home 
and  introduced  me  to  the  man  and  left.  I  sat  down 
by  his  bed  and  asked  if  I  could  read  from  the  Bible 
to  him.  He  replied  that  I  could.  I  read  him  a 
part  of  the  fifth  chapter  of  Komans,  dwelling  upon 
the  places  that  told  of  God's  love  for  the  sinner.  I 
read  him  the  place  where  it  told  how  Jesus  Christ 
bore  all  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  cross. 
Then  I  asked  if  I  could  pray.  I  knelt  by  his  bed. 
I  felt  his  time  was  short.  I  asked  God  to  open  his 
eyes  to  see  that  he  was  a  lost  sinner,  and  also  to 
open  his  eyes  to  see  that  Jesus  had  borne  all  his 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  cross,  and  to  show  him 
that  h©  could  find  pardon  and  salvation  then  and 


10        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

there  by  simply  trusting  in  Jesus.     When  I  finished 
the  prayer  I  began  to  sing  in  a  low  tone, 

"  Just  as  I  am  without  one  plea, 
But  that  Thy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
And  that  Thou  bid'st  me  come  to  Thee  — 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come,  I  come." 

I  sang  on  verse  after  verse.  When  I  reached  the 
last  verse  he  broke  in  in  a  feeble  voice  (he  had  evi- 
dently heard  the  song  somewhere  in  his  boyhood 
days)  and  he  sang  with  me, 

"Just  as  I  am — Thou  wilt  receive. 
Wilt  welcome,  pardon,  cleanse,  relieve, 
Because  Thy  promise  I  believe  — 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come,  I  come  !  '* 

When  we  had  finished,  I  looked  up  and  said, "  Did 
you  really  come  ? "  He  said,  "  I  did."  I  talked 
with  him  a  little  while  and  found  that  he  really 
was  trusting  in  the  Saviour.  That  night  he  passed 
away  to  be  with  Him. 

His  wife,  who  was  a  Koman  Catholic,  came  to 
me  the  next  day  and  asked  if  I  would  conduct  the 
funeral.  I  said  I  would.  Around  the  cofiin  were 
gathered  a  considerable  number  of  his  old  infidel 
friends.  I  told  them  the  story  of  his  death ;  how 
his  infidelity  had  failed  him  in  that  trying  hour  and 
how  he  had  been  led  to  see  his  need  of  the  Saviour 
and  that  Jesus  Christ  was  just  the  Saviour  he 
needed,  and  how  he  had  been  led  to  accept  Christ. 
Then  I  said,  "  Are  there  any  of  you  here  to-day  who 
have  been  infidels  who  will  accept  Jesus  Christ  as 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        11 

your  Saviour  ?  "  A  stalwart  man  standing  on  the 
other  side  of  the  coffin  reached  his  hand  across  to 
me  and  said,  "  I  have  been  an  infidel  with  him.  I 
have  sympathized  with  him  in  all  his  views,  but  I 
now  give  them  up  and  take  Jesus  Christ  as  my 
Saviour." 


The  Holy  Spirit's  Power  to  Convict  of  Sin 

The  officers  of  Chicago  Avenue  Church  were 
greatly  troubled  at  one  time  that  there  was  not 
more  conviction  of  sin  in  the  meetings,  and  had  a 
number  of  prayer  meetings  that  God  might  send 
His  Holy  Spirit  in  mighty  convicting  power. 

Not  long  after  that,  one  Sunday  night  as  I  was 
preaching,  I  noticed  a  man  in  the  front  seat  in  the 
gallery  to  my  left,  leaning  forward  listening  most 
intently.  A  great  diamond  flashed  upon  his  shirt 
front  and  he  had  every  appearance  of  a  sporting 
man.  He  proved  to  be  a  travelling  man  but  was 
also  leading  a  sporting  life.  In  the  midst  of  my 
sermon,  without  any  intention  of  drawing  the  net 
at  the  time,  but  simply  to  drive  a  point  home  and 
make  it  definite,  I  said,  "  Who  will  accept  Jesus 
Christ  to-night  ?  "  Scarcely  had  the  words  left  my 
lips  when  this  man  sprang  to  his  feet  and  cried  so 
that  it  rang  through  the  church  like  a  pistol  shot,  "  I 
will,"  and  sank  back  into  his  seat  overcome  with 
emotion.  His  action  produced  a  sensation  in  the 
audience  like  a  shock  of  electricity.  I  saw  it  was 
no  time  to  finish  the  sermon.  I  was  not  there  to 
save  sermons  but  to  save  souls,  and  I  immediately 


12        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTKATIONS 

gave  the  invitation.  I  said,  "Who  else  in  this 
building  will  accept  Jesus  Christ  here  and  now  as  his 
personal  Saviour  ?  "  Ail  over  the  church  men  and 
women,  young  and  old,  began  to  rise  to  their  feet 
and  a  large  company  that  night  accepted  Jesus 
Christ.  Among  the  number  was  an  old  v^hite- 
haired  colonel  belonging  to  a  very  wealthy  family 
in  the  east,  but  who  was  entirely  overcome  with 
strong  drink.  His  family  had  sent  him  out  to 
Chicago  and  boarded  him  at  a  hotel  there  while  he 
drank  himself  to  death,  but  that  night  the  Spirit  of 
God  touched  his  heart. 


Saved  at  Ninety-two 

When  we  were  in  Warrnambool,  Australia,  for 
two  or  three  successive  nights,  I  noticed  an  old  man 
sitting  up  in  the  front  seats  drinking  in  every  word 
I  said.  I  afterwards  learned  that  he  was  ninety- 
two  years  of  age.  One  night  after  having  come 
two  or  three  times,  when  I  gave  out  the  invitation, 
this  old  man  rose  to  his  feet  and  professed  to  accept 
Christ.  It  was  a  very  clear  case  of  conversion.  He 
said,  "  I  have  never  been  to  a  religious  meeting  since 
I  was  ten  years  of  age  until  these  meetings  began, 
but  I  have  been  led  to  see  myself  a  sinner  and  to 
accept  Jesus  Christ  as  my  Saviour."  He  was  a 
very  happy  convert.  Every  day  he  would  come 
and  whenever  he  could  he  would  bring  others  and 
he  was  always  ready  to  testify  to  the  saving  grace 
of  God.  It  filled  our  hearts  with  joy  to  think  how 
this  old  man  was  plucked  from  the  fire  at  the  last 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        13 

moment  but  how  much  more  it  meant  for  the  king- 
dom when  some  of  the  children  of  Warrnambool  at 
the  age  of  eight  or  nine  accepted  Jesus  Christ  as 
their  Saviour.  This  old  man  was  a  soul  saved, 
"saved  so  as  by  fire,"  but  with  little  work  accom- 
plished for  the  Master.  The  boy  of  eight  who  was 
converted  was  a  soul  saved,  plus  fifty,  or  sixty  or 
seventy  or  eighty  years  of  service. 


Do  You  Believe  Thai,  Sir  ? 

One  night  when  I  was  speaking  in  a  hall  on  the 
ground  floor  in  Washington  Avenue,  there  stag- 
gered into  the  room  a  man  very  much  under  the  in- 
fluence of  liquor.  He  had  once  been  prominent  in 
his  home  town,  postmaster  of  the  town,  but  he  had 
gone  down  through  drink.  He  had  drifted  to 
Minneapolis.  For  a  while  he  served  beer  in  one  of 
the  lowest  dens  in  the  city,  but  afterwards  became 
too  low  even  for  that  and  was  kicked  out  on  to  the 
street.  This  night  everything  he  had  in  the  world 
but  one  small  coin  was  gone.  As  he  entered  the 
hall,  which  by  mistake  he  had  taken  for  a  saloon, 
his  hat  was  on  his  head,  a  cigar  in  his  mouth  and  he 
began  to  stagger  down  the  aisle.  A  lady  by  the 
door  stepped  up  to  him  and  kindly  asked  him  to 
take  off  his  hat  and  let  her  have  his  cigar.  Then 
she  conducted  him  down  the  aisle  to  a  seat  near  the 
front.  Just  as  he  took  his  seat,  a  man  who  had 
formerly  been  in  the  deepest  depths  of  degradation 
was  giving  his  testimony  to  the  saving  power  of 
Christ.    The  drunken  man  leered  up  at  me  as  the 


14        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATION8 

other  man  gave  his  testimony  and  said  with  a  hic- 
cough, "  Do  you  believe  that,  sir  ?  '*  "  Yes,  sir,"  I 
replied,  "  I  know  that  story  is  true.  I  know  this 
man,  and  what  is  more  the  same  Jesus  that  saved 
him  can  save  you."  Then  as  the  other  man  finished 
his  testimony  I  turned  to  him  and  said:  "Joe, 
take  this  man  out  into  my  office  and  talk  with 
him."  He  took  him  out  into  my  office  and  talked 
with  him  and  kept  him  there  until  the  meeting  was 
over.  Then  I  went  out  and  found  him  partly 
sobered  and  was  able  to  point  him  to  Christ.  He 
went  away  that  night  with  the  knowledge  of  sins 
forgiven.  He  was  taken  to  a  cheap  lodging  house 
where  he  spent  the  night.  The  next  day  he  found 
work,  very  humble  work  but  enough  to  pay  for  his 
lodging  and  food.  In  a  little  while  he  found  a  bet- 
ter position  and  soon  a  still  better  one.  He  entered 
the  employ ^^of  one  of  the  large  railways  entering 
Minneapolis.  He  soon  won  the  confidence  of  his 
employers.  He  was  beginning  to  think  about  going 
to  Chicago  to  prepare  for  Christian  work  when  his 
health  broke  down.  The  company  that  employed 
him  were  very  kind  to  him  and  sent  him  to  the 
southwest  in  the  hope  that  he  would  recover  his 
health  but  he  gradually  failed  and  in  a  few  months 
died  of  rapid  consumption.  At  his  death  his  mother, 
who  had  rejoined  him  sent  me  a  letter  telling  of  his 
last  days,  days  of  triumph,  and  also  sending  me  the 
last  picture  he  had  had  taken.  For  years  that  pic- 
ture stood  on  my  mantel  with  his  story  written  on 
the  back  of  it.  To  have  looked  into  the  face  one 
would  never  have  thought  that  it  was  the  face  of  a 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        15 

man  who  had  been  down  into  the  deepest  depths  of 
degradation.  It  was  a  frank,  open,  genial,  true 
Christian  face.  But  the  same  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ  who  transformed  this  man's  life  can 
transform  yours. 


A  Deep  Spiritual  Concern  for  Your  Soul 

In  a  small  country  town  there  was  an  infidel 
blacksmith.  He  was  a  hard-headed,  well-read  man, 
strong  in  argument.  An  old  deacon  in  the  town 
became  deeply  interested  in  this  infidel  blacksmith 
and  determined  to  lead  him  to  Christ.  He  studied 
up  as  best  he  could  all  the  infidel  arguments  and  the 
answers  to  them.  When  he  thought  he  had  all  the  in- 
fidel arguments  and  answers  at  his  fingers'  ends,  he 
called  on  the  blacksmith  and  engaged  him  in  con- 
versation, but  the  blacksmith  was  far  more  than  a 
match  for  him  in  argument  and  in  a  few  moments 
had  fought  the  old  deacon  to  a  standstill.  The  old 
deacon  knew  that  he  was  right,  but  he  could  not 
prove  it  to  the  blacksmith.  He  burst  into  tears  and 
said,  "  Well,  I  cannot  argue  with  you,  but  I  simply 
want  to  say,  I  have  a  deep  spiritual  concern  for  your 
soul,"  and  then  left  the  shop. 

The  deacon  made  his  way  home  and  went  in  to 
his  wife  and  said,  "I  am  only  a  botch  on  God's 
work.  God  knows  I  am  sincere  and  that  I  really 
do  desire  the  salvation  of  the  blacksmith  but  I  could 
not  meet  him  in  argument.  He  laid  me  out  cold  in 
five  minutes."  Then  the  deacon  went  into  his  own 
room  by  himself  and  knelt  down.    "  Oh,  God,"  he 


16        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

cried,  ''I  am  only  a  botch  on  Thy  work.  Thou 
knowest  that  I  sincerely  desired  to  lead  the  black- 
smith to  Thee,  but  I  could  not  talk  with  him.  Oh, 
God,  I  am  only  a  botch  on  Thy  work." 

But  soon  after  the  deacon  had  left  the  blacksmith 
shop,  the  blacksmith  went  into  the  house  and  said 
to  his  wife,  "  Deacon brought  up  an  argu- 
ment to-day  that  I  never  heard  before.  He  said  he 
had  a  deep  spiritual  concern  for  my  soul.  What 
did  he  mean  ?  "  His  wife  was  a  canny  woman  and 
said,  "  You  had  better  go  and  ask  him."  The 
blacksmith  hung  up  his  apron  and  went  cross  lots 
to  the  deacon's  home.  Just  as  he  stepped  on  the 
front  porch,  through  the  open  window  he  heard  the 
deacon's  prayer,  "  Oh,  God,  I  am  only  a  botch  on 
Thy  work.  Thou  knowest  that  I  sincerely  desired 
to  lead  the  blacksmith  to  Thee  but  I  could  not  talk 
with  him.  Oh,  God,  I  am  only  a  botch  on  Thy 
work."  He  pushed  the  door  open  and  went  into 
the  room  where  the  deacon  was  kneeling  and  said, 
"  Deacon,  you  are  no  botch  on  God's  work.  I 
thought  I  knew  all  the  arguments  for  Christianity 
and  could  answer  them  but  you  brought  up  an 
argument  I  never  heard  before.  You  said  you  had 
a  deep  spiritual  concern  for  my  soul.  Won't  you 
pray  for  me  ?  "  and  the  blacksmith  broke  down  and 
accepted  Christ.  Eeal  earnestness  and  love  succeed 
where  all  argument  fails. 


Ai^ECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTBATIONS        17 

How  the  Devil  Got  Us  an  Audience 

One  night  all  of  my  workers  that  were  to  help 
me  in  an  open  air  meeting  failed  to  come  except 
one  man.  This  man  could  not  sing  much  better 
than  I  could,  and  I  turned  to  him  and  said, "  George, 
shall  we  go  out  and  try  to  hold  an  open  air  meet- 
ing ? "  And  he  said,  "  Yes,  let  us  go  anyhow." 
We  went  to  the  corner  where  we  usually  held  the 
meeting  and  stood  in  the  road  facing  the  sidewalk 
and  began  to  sing  to  an  audience  of  one.  Our 
singing  did  not  seem  to  attract  any  one  that  night, 
but  soon  a  drunken  man  came  along,  and  thought 
he  would  have  some  fun.  He  began  to  shout  and 
dance  and  go  through  all  sorts  of  antics  in  the 
street  right  beside  us,  and  the  crowds  began  to 
gather  together  to  watch  him.  When  the  crowd 
was  large  enough,  I  held  him  by  the  hand  and  said 
to  my  companion,  "  Now,  George,  give  your  testi- 
mony." He  commenced  to  tell  what  the  Lord  had 
done  for  him  and  also  to  preach  a  short  sermon, 
using  the  drunken  man  as  a  text.  When  he  had 
finished,  he  held  the  drunken  man  by  the  hand  to 
keep  him  quiet  and  I  spoke,  using  the  drunken  man 
as  a  text.  Hardened  characters  in  the  audience 
began  to  say,  "I  would  not  like  to  be  in  that 
drunken  man's  place."  But  God  blessed  the  Word 
and  we  had  one  of  the  best  meetings  we  ever  had. 
We  had  been  unable  to  draw  a  crowd  but  the  drunken 
man  had  drawn  the  crowd  for  us  and  then  God  had 
given  us  the  message. 


18        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

The  Meanest  Thief  in  Minneapolis 

I  WAS  preaching  one  hot  summer  night  in  Min- 
neapolis. The  room  was  packed,  mostly  with  men. 
The  windows  had  been  taken  out  of  the  cases  to 
get  a  little  additional  fresh  air.  "When  I  gave  out 
the  invitation  a  man  arose  by  one  of  these  windows 
near  a  door.  As  soon  as  I  pronounced  the  benedic- 
tion, he  shot  through  the  door,  not  waiting  for  the 
after-meeting.  I  forgot  all  about  the  after-meeting 
and  saw  only  that  man.  I  do  not  know  to  this  day 
what  became  of  the  after-meeting.  I  reached  him 
just  as  he  was  about  to  go  down  the  stairway.  I 
laid  my  hand  on  his  shoulder  and  said,  "  My  friend, 
you  stood  up  to-night  to  say  you  wished  to  become 
a  Christian."  "  Yes."  "  Why  did  you  not  stay  to 
the  after-meeting  ?  "  "  It  is  no  use."  "  God  loves 
you,"  I  said.  "  You  don't  know  who  you  are  talk- 
ing to,"  he  replied,  "I  am  the  meanest  thief  in 
Minneapolis."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  if  you  are  the 
meanest  thief  in  Minneapolis,  I  can  prove  God  loves 
you,"  and  I  opened  my  Bible  to  Eomans  5 :  8, 
"God  commendeth  His  love  towards  us,  in  that 
while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 
"  Now,"  I  said,"  "  if  you  are  the  meanest  thief  in 
Minneapolis,  you  are  certainly  a  sinner,  and  this 
verse  says  that  God  loves  sinners."  It  touched  the 
man's  heart  and  he  went  quietly  with  me  to  my 
office.  "  I  was  released  from  prison,"  he  said, 
"  to-day,  and  started  out  to-night  with  three  com- 
panions to  commit  one  of  the  most  daring  burglar- 
ies that  was  ever  committed  in  Minneapolis.    By 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        19 

to-morrow  morning  I  would  either  have  had  a  pile 
of  money,  or  a  bullet  in  my  body.  I  passed  by  the 
corner  and  heard  your  open  air  meeting.  A  Scotch- 
man was  speaking.  I  am  a  Scotchman  and  my 
mother  was  Scotch.  When  I  heard  that  Scotch 
tongue,  it  made  me  think  of  my  mother.  The 
other  night  in  prison  I  dreamed  of  my  mother.  I 
dreamed  that  she  came  to  me  and  besought  me  to 
give  up  the  evil  life  I  was  leading.  When  I  heard 
that  Scotchman  speak  it  brought  it  all  back.  I 
stopped  and  listened  and  my  companions  tried  to 
pull  me  along  but  I  would  not  go.  They  cursed 
me  but  still  I  stayed.  When  you  gave  out  your 
invitation  for  your  meeting  in  the  hall,  I  followed 
you  and  listened  to  your  sermon." 

I  explained  to  him  the  way  of  life  and  he  ac- 
cepted the  Saviour.  We  knelt  side  by  side  in 
prayer.  He  offered  the  most  wonderful  prayer 
but  one  I  ever  heard  in  my  life,  and  went  out  of 
my  office  rejoicing  in  the  knowledge  of  sins  for- 
given. 

A  short  time  before  the  meanest  thief  in  Minne- 
apolis but  now  a  happy  child  of  God. 


Forgiven  by  Both  Fathers 

Some  years  ago  an  English  farmer,  William 
Dorset,  was  preaching  in  London.  In  the  course  of 
his  sermon  he  said,  *'  There  is  not  a  man  in  all 
London  whom  Jesus  Christ  cannot  save." 

At  the  close  of  the  meeting  a  lady  missionary  in 
London  came  to  him  and  said,  "  Mr.  Dorset,  did 


20        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

you  say  that  there  wasn't  a  man  in  all  London  that 
Jesus  Christ  cannot  save  ?  "  "  Yes,  madam,  that  is 
what  I  said."  "  Well,  there  is  a  man  here  in  Lon- 
don I  wish  you  would  see.  He  says  that  he  is  be- 
yond salvation."  "  I  will  go  and  see  him  to- 
morrow morning,"  replied  Mr.  Dorset,  "  if  you  will 
take  me  to  him."  They  started  out  early  the  next 
morning  for  East  London,  stopped  before  a  high, 
wretched  tenement  building.  ^'  You  will  find  him," 
she  said,  "  in  the  top  story  in  the  back  room.  You 
had  better  go  up  alone  as  he  will  talk  more  freely 
with  you  than  if  some  one  else  is  with  you."  Mr. 
Dorset  began  to  climb  the  stairs.  Each  flight  of 
stairs  seemed  more  wretched  and  filthy  than  the 
one  that  preceded  it.  At  last  he  reached  the  top 
story  and  found  the  door  hanging  by  one  hinge 
which  he  pushed  open  as  best  he  could.  There  was 
not  a  window  in  the  room  but  when  his  eye  became 
accustomed  to  the  darkness,  over  in  the  corner  he  saw 
a  young  man  lying  on  a  pile  of  filthy  straw.  He 
walked  softly  across  the  floor  and  leaned  over  the 
young  man  and  said,  "My  friend."  The  young 
man  looked  up  with  a  start  and  said,  "  You  are 
mistaken,  sir,  I  am  not  your  friend ;  you  are  not 
my  friend.  I  haven't  a  friend  in  the  world." 
"  Yes,  you  have,"  said  Mr.  Dorset,  *'  I  am  your 
friend  and  what  is  better  Jesus  Christ  is  your 
Friend  too."  "  No,"  he  replied,  "  Jesus  Christ  is  no 
Friend  of  mine.  I  have  disobeyed  His  laws.  I 
have  trampled  Him  under  foot  all  my  life,  and  He 
is  no  Friend  of  mine."  "  Yes,  He  is,"  insisted  Mr. 
Dorset,   and  sat  down  by  his  side  and  from  the 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        21 

Bible  proved  that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Friend  of 
sinners  and  his  Friend,  The  young  man  listened 
to  the  story  of  redeeming  love  and  at  last  put  his 
trust  in  Jesus  Christ  and  found  pardon.  Then  he 
turned  to  Mr.  Dorset  and  said,  "My  Heavenly 
Father  has  forgiven  me.  I  could  die  happy  if  I 
only  knew  my  earthly  father  had  forgiven  me 
also."  "  I  will  go  and  see  him,"  said  Mr.  Dorset. 
"  Ko,  I  don't  wish  you  to  do  that.  You  would  only 
be  insulted.  My  father  does  not  allow  my  name  to 
be  mentioned  in  his  presence.  He  has  taken  it  oif 
the  family  register.  He  has  not  allowed  my  name 
to  be  mentioned  to  him  for  two  years."  "  I  will  go 
and  see  him  anyway,"  said  Mr.  Dorset.  He  se- 
cured his  address,  and  hurried  to  the  West  End  of 
London  where  the  father  lived.  It  was  in  a  beauti- 
ful mansion.  He  was  met  at  the  door  by  a  liveried 
servant  and  taken  into  the  reception-room.  The 
father,  a  fine-looking  English  gentleman,  soon 
came  into  the  room,  and  extended  his  hand  in  a 
cordial  way  towards  Mr.  Dorset.  "  I  have  come  to 
speak  to  you  about  your  son  Joseph,"  said  Mr. 
Dorset.  The  father  dropped  his  hand  as  if  he  had 
been  shot.  "  I  have  no  son  Joseph,"  he  said.  "  I 
do  not  allow  that  young  man's  name  to  be  men- 
tioned in  my  presence.  I  have  had  it  taken  off  the 
family  register.  I  simply  want  to  tell  you  if  you 
have  had  anything  to  do  with  that  young  man,  you 
are  being  deceived.  Good  day."  He  turned  upon 
his  heel  and  started  to  leave  the  room.  As  he  was 
about  to  cross  the  threshold  Mr.  Dorset  said  in  a 
gentle  voice,  **  Well,  he  is  your  son  anyway,  but  he 


22        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

won't  be  very  long."  The  father  turned  around 
quickly  and  said,  "  Is  Joseph  dying  ?  "  "  Yes,  he  is 
dying.  I  haven't  come  to  ask  you  to  do  anything 
for  him.  I  do  not  ask  you  even  to  pay  his  funeral 
expenses.  I  will  gladly  do  that ;  but  his  Heavenly 
Father  has  forgiven  him  and  he  says  he  could  die 
happy  if  only  his  earthly  father  would  forgive  him 
too."  "Forgive  him,"  said  the  father,  "I  would 
have  forgiven  him  long  ago  if  he  had  only  asked  it. 
Take  me  to  him."  The  gentleman  ordered  his  car- 
riage and  they  hurried  down  to  the  wretched  tene- 
ment in  the  East  End  of  London,  hurried  up  the 
stairs  and  to  the  dark  room  where  the  son  lay 
dying.  As  the  father  entered  the  door  the  son 
looked  up  and  said,  "  Father,  my  Heavenly  Father 
has  forgiven  me.  I  could  die  happy  if  you  would 
forgive  me  too."  "  Forgive  you,"  cried  the  father 
as  he  hurried  across  the  floor,  "  I  would  have  for- 
given you  long  ago  if  you  had  only  asked  it."  The 
boy  was  too  ill  to  be  moved  and  the  gentleman 
sank  on  the  floor  by  his  side  and  took  his  son's  head 
upon  his  shoulder  and  he  died  happy,  knowing  that 
his  Heavenly  Father  had  forgiven  him  and  his 
earthly  father  had  forgiven  him  too.  God  stands 
ready  now  to  forgive  any  sinner,  even  the  vilest 
and  most  hopeless  who  will  trust  Him. 


No  Greater  Joy 
One  of  the  greatest  joys  on  earth  is  the  joy  of 
bringing  others  to  a  saving  knowledge  of  Christ. 
I  have  heard  people  tell  that  when  they  were  con- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS        23 

verted  the  whole  world  seemed  different ;  that  the 
sun  seemed  to  shine  with  a  new  light ;  there  was 
new  music  in  the  song  of  the  birds;  all  nature 
seemed  clothed  with  new  beauty  and  glory.  I  had 
no  such  experience  when  I  was  converted.  In  fact, 
I  was  converted  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  the 
sun  was  not  shining  at  all.  But  I  did  have  such  an 
experience  the  first  time  I  led  another  to  the 
definite  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  personal 
Saviour. 

Looking  across  one  of  Mr.  Moody's  inquiry  meet- 
ings in  the  city  of  New  Haven,  I  saw  a  young  lady 
that  I  had  known  when  I  was  living  a  worldly  life. 
I  went  over  to  her  and  spoke  to  her  and  invited  her 
to  accept  the  Saviour  that  I  had  found,  but  she  was 
stubborn  and  unwilling  to  give  up  the  world.  I 
dealt  with  her  for  two  solid  hours  and  seemed  to  be 
making  but  little  headway.  Then  at  the  very  close 
she  yielded  and  accepted  Christ.  When  I  left  the 
building  where  this  decision  was  made,  it  was  nearly 
sunset  in  the  spring-time  ;  the  whole  world  seemed 
to  have  a  beauty  in  it  that  I  had  never  seen  in  it 
before.  It  literally  seemed  as  if  I  had  never  seen 
such  a  light  in  the  sun,  nor  such  beauty  in  the 
flowers  and  trees  and  grass.  It  seemed  as  if  I  were 
walking  on  air.  My  heart  was  filled  with  a  joy  I 
had  never  known  before.  There  is  no  joy  like  the 
joy  of  saving  men  and  it  is  possible  for  every  child 
of  God,  no  matter  how  humble  nor  how  ungifted, 
to  have  this  joy. 


^4        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

A  Converted  Jewess 

When  after  an  absence  of  two  years  from  Amer- 
ica, I  returned  to  spend  a  month  with  my  church  in 
Chicago,  I  found  that  a  young  Jewish  woman,  a 
very  brilliant  woman  in  the  work  she  had  to  do, 
had  been  converted  during  my  absence.  Her  con- 
version was  very  genuine.  She  was  full  of  love  to 
Christ  as  Jews  generally  are  when  they  are  con- 
verted. She  went  to  the  place  where  she  worked, 
a  well  known  house  in  Chicago,  and  commenced 
talking  of  Christ  to  the  other  employees.  Some  of 
them  did  not  like  it,  and  they  went  to  the  head  of 

the  firm  and  said,  "  Miss —  is  constantly  talking 

to  us  about  Christ.  We  don't  like  it."  The  man- 
ager of  the  firm  called  her  in  and  said,  "  We  have 
no  objection  to  Christianity,  no  objection  to  your 
being  a  Christian.  We  think  it  is  a  good  thing,  but 
you  must  not  talk  it  about  this  establishment." 
"  Yery  well,"  she  said,  "  I  will  not  work  in  a  place 
where  I  cannot  take  Christ  with  me  and  talk  for  my 
Master."  She  had  a  family  to  support,  an  aged 
mother  and  other  members  of  the  family,  and  did 
not  know  where  she  was  going — just  converted 
from  Judaism  to  Christianity.  But  she  would  not 
give  up  her  loyalty  to  her  new  Master.  "  Yery 
well,"  they  said,  "  you  will  have  to  lose  your  posi- 
tion." "Yery  well,"  she  said,  "I  will  give  up  my 
position  before  I  will  be  disloyal  to  Jesus  Christ." 
They  said,  "  Yery  well,  go  back  to  your  work." 
She  went  back  to  her  work  expecting  every  day  to 
receive  her  dismissal.    At  the  end  of  the  week  she 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS        25 

received  a  letter  from  the  manager.  "  Here  is  my 
discharge,"  she  said  as  she  tore  it  open.  The  head 
of  tiie  establishment  said,  "  We  have  a  place  of 
greater  responsibility  than  the  one  you  now  occupy 
and  with  a  larger  salary  than  you  are  getting.  We 
think  you  are  just  the  person  for  the  place,  and  we 
offer  it  to  you."  They  saw  she  could  be  trusted. 
Business  men  are  looking  for  men  and  women 
whom  they  can  trust. 


The  Greatest  Sin  a,  Man  Can  Possibly  Commit 

One  night  I  was  preaching  in  Chicago  for  an- 
other pastor.  At  the  close  of  the  service,  the 
minister  came  to  me  and  said,  "I  have  a  young 
man  in  my  congregation  who  wishes  to  be  a 
minister.  I  would  like  to  have  you  talk  with  him." 
I  replied,  "  Bring  him  to  me  after  the  after-meet- 
ing," and  he  brought  the  young  man  to  me.  He 
had  one  of  the  cleanest,  finest,  most  open  faces  I 
ever  saw  in  my  life.  I  looked  into  the  face  of  this 
young  man  and  said,  "  Your  pastor  says  you  wish  to 
enter  the  ministry."  "Yes,  I  do."  "Well,"  I 
said,  "  let  me  ask  you  a  question.  Are  you  a 
Christian  ? "  "  Of  course,  I  am  a  Christian,"  he 
answered,  "  I  was  brought  up  a  Christian,  and  I  am 
not  going  back  on  the  training  of  my  parents."  I 
said,  "  Have  you  been  born  again  ? "  He  said, 
"  What  ? "  I  said,  "  Have  you  ever  been  born 
again  ?  God  says,  *  Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.'  Have  you 
ever  been  born  again  ?  "    He  said,  "  I  don't  know 


26        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

what  you  are  talking  about.  I  have  never  heard  of 
that  before  in  all  my  life."  I  said,  "  My  friend,  see 
here ;  do  you  know  that  you  have  committed  the 
greatest  sin  that  a  man  can  commit  ?  "  "  No,"  he 
said,  "  I  never  did  in  my  life.  You  don't  understand 
me.  I  have  been  very  carefully  reared.  My  life  has 
been  a  most  exemplary  life.  I  never  committed 
the  greatest  sin  that  a  man  can  commit — never! "  I 
asked,  "What  do  you  think  is  the  greatest  sin  a 
man  can  commit  ?  "  "  Why,"  he  replied,  "  murder, 
of  course."  "  You  are  greatly  mistaken.  Will  you 
please  read  what  Jesus  says  about  it?"  and  I 
opened  my  Bible  to  Matt.  22 :  37,  38,  and  asked 
him  to  read.  He  read,  "Jesus  said  unto  him, 
*Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind. 
This  is  the  first  and  greatest  commandment.'" 
"Which  commandment  is  that?"  I  asked.  He 
replied,  "  The  first  and  great  commandment."  "  If 
this  is  the  first  and  great  commandment  what 
is  the  first  and  great  sin  ? "  "  Not  to  keep  this 
commandment."  "  Have  you  kept  it  ?  Have  you 
loved  God  with  all  your  heart,  and  all  your  soul, 
and  all  your  mind?  Have  you  put  God  first  in 
everything — God  first  in  business,  God  first  in  poli- 
tics, God  first  in  pleasure,  God  first  in  study,  God 
first  in  everything  ?  "  "  No,  sir,"  he  said,  "  I  have 
not."  "What  have  you  done  then?"  "I  have 
broken  this  commandment."  "  Which  command- 
ment is  it  ?  "  "  The  first  and  the  great  command- 
ment." "  What  have  you  done  then  ?  "  He  replied, 
"I  have  broken  the  first  and  greatest. of  God's 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS        27 

commandments.  I  have  committed  the  greatest 
sin  a  man  can  commit,  but  I  never  saw  it  before 
in  all  my  life."  And  so  have  you,  though,  perhaps, 
you  never  saw  it  before  in  all  your  life. 


An  Angry  Father  Converted 

When  I  lived  in  Minneapolis  a  child  of  a  man 
deep  down  in  sin  had  been  converted.  This  greatly 
angered  the  father.  One  day  I  was  holding  an 
open  air  meeting  at  the  foot  of  Washington  Ave- 
nue. The  father  thought  he  saw  his  opportunity 
to  have  revenge.  He  got  a  basket  of  rotten  eggs, 
and  went  up  on  the  top  of  an  adjoining  building  to 
throw  the  eggs  at  us  as  we  held  the  meeting.  But 
as  he  stood  on  the  top  of  the  building  and  was 
about  to  throw  the  eggs,  the  Spirit  of  God  touched 
his  heart  and  brought  him  under  the  deepest  con- 
viction of  sin. 

At  the  close  of  our  meeting  that  night  in  our 
hall,  a  tall  muscular  man  with  a  hardened  face  that 
bore  the  marks  of  long-continued  sin,  came  to  me 
overwhelmed  with  grief  and  asked  me  to  pray  for 
him.  He  said,  "This  afternoon  when  you  were 
speaking  down  at  the  foot  of  Washington  Avenue, 
I  went  up  on  the  top  of  the  building  with  a  basket 
of  rotten  eggs  to  rotten-egg  you,  but  I  became 
overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  sin  and  I  have  come 
up  here  to-night  for  you  to  tell  me  what  to  do  to  be 
saved."  It  was  easy  work  to  lead  him  to  a  knowl- 
edge of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  One  who  had  borne  all 
his  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  cross,  and  the  man 


28        ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS 

left  the  hall  that  night  rejoicing  in  the  knowledge 
of  sins  forgiven. 


The  Other  Half  of  the  Gospel 

A  MAN  came  to  me  one  day  in  Chicago  and  said, 
"  I  want  to  talk  with  you."  Mr.  Moody  was  away, 
so  I  took  him  into  Mr.  Moody's  room,  and  asked, 
"  What  do  you  want  to  talk  with  me  about  ? " 
He  said,  "  I  am  a  Scotchman.  When  I  was  seven 
years  old  over  in  Scotland,  I  started  to  read  my 
Bible  through.  Before  I  had  read  long,  I  came  to 
a  place  where  it  said  that  if  a  man  should  keep  the 
law  of  God  a  hundred  years,  and  then  break  it, 
he  was  under  the  curse  of  a  broken  law.  Is  that 
right  ?  "  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  the  Bible  does  not  put 
it  in  just  those  words,  but  it  amounts  to  that.  It 
says,  *  Cursed  is  every  man  that  continueth  not  in  all 
the  things  that  are  written  in  the  Book  of  the  Law 
to  do  them.'"  "Well,"  he  said,  "that  is  what  I 
found,  and  I  knew  I  had  already  broken  the  law  of 
God,  though  I  was  only  seven  years  old,  and  I  was 
under  the  curse  of  a  broken  law.  I  was  plunged 
into  the  deepest  distress.  Though  I  was  only  a 
child  of  seven,  I  wept  over  my  sins  often  by  day 
and  often  by  night.  I  was  in  distress  of  soul  for 
a  whole  year,  but  I  kept  on  reading  my  Bible,  and 
at  last  I  got  over  to  the  New  Testament,  and  read 
John  3  :  16,  *  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave 
His  only  begotten  Son  that  whosoever  believeth  in 
Him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life.' 
I  saw  that  Jesus  died  for  my  sins,  and  my  burden 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        29 

all  rolled  away,  and  I  was  perfectly  happy.  Was  I 
converted  ?  "  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  that  sounds  like  an 
evangelical  conversion." 

"Wait  a  moment,"  he  said,  "and  listen  to  the 
rest  of  my  story.  I  grew  up  to  manhood ;  I  moved 
to  America ;  I  came  over  here  to  Chicago ;  I  went 
to  work  in  the  stockyards,  and  live  down  there. 
You  know  it  is  a  hard  place.  I  have  got  to  drink- 
ing, and  every  little  while  I  go  off  on  a  drunk. 
Now,  what  I  want  to  know  is  this,  is  there  any  way 
I  can  get  victory  over  drink  and  over  all  sin  ? " 
"  You  have  come  just  to  the  right  place  to  get  an  an- 
swer to  your  question,"  I  replied,  "  I  can  tell  you 
the  way.  You  have  only  believed  half  the  Gospel, 
and  therefore  youVe  got  only  half  a  salvation. 
Listen  to  the  whole  Gospel."  I  opened  my  Bible 
to  1  Cor.  15  ;  1-4  and  I  read,  "  '  This  is  the  Gospel 
that  I  have  preached  unto  you  .  .  .  that  Christ 
died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the  Scriptures.' 
That  is  the  first  half  of  the  Gospel  but  it  is  only 
half.  Listen  as  I  read  on  and  you  will  see  the 
other  half,  '  And  that  He  was  buried,  and  that  He 
rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the  Scrip- 
tures.' Do  you  believe  that  half  of  the  Gospel 
also  ?  You  have  already  believed  in  Christ  cruci- 
fied and  found  pardon  and  peace,  but  the  rest  of 
the  Gospel  is  that  Christ  rose  again.  Do  you  be- 
lieve that  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,"  he  said,  "  I  believe  every- 
thing in  the  Bible."  I  said,  "  Do  you  believe  that 
Jesus  Christ  rose  again  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  do."  "  Do 
you  believe  He  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  on 
earth  as  He   said   He  had  ? "    He  said,  "  I  do." 


30        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

"  Well,  if  He  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth, 
He  has  power  to  set  you  free  from  the  power  of  sin. 
Do  you  believe  that  ?  "  "  Yes,  I  do."  "  Will  you 
trust  Him  to  do  it  now  ?  You  have  believed  half 
the  Gospel,  you  have  got  half  a  salvation.  You 
have  believed  in  a  crucified  Christ  and  got  pardon ; 
now  will  you  believe  in  a  risen  Christ  and  get  vic- 
tory ?  Will  you  trust  Him  now  as  the  risen  Sa- 
viour to  set  you  free  from  the  drink  and  other  sin  ?  " 
He  said,  "  I  will."  "  Let  us  kneel  down  and  tell 
God  so."  We  knelt  down.  I  prayed  and  he 
prayed.  After  he  had  prayed  he  looked  up  and 
said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  I  have  believed  half  the  Gospel 
that  Thou  didst  die  in  my  place  and  I  have  found 
pardon  and  peace  through  believing  it.  I  now  be- 
lieve the  other  half  of  the  Gospel  that  you  rose 
again  and  have  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth  and 
have  power  to  set  me  free  from  drink  and  sin  and  I 
trust  you  to  do  it.  Set  me  free  now."  When  he 
had  finished,  I  said,  "  Do  you  really  trust  Him  to 
do  it  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  do."  We  got  up.  I  gave 
him  a  few  words  of  advice  and  we  separated.  In 
a  few  weeks  I  received  a  letter  from  him,  a  very 
short  letter,  but  very  much  to  the  point.  He  said, 
"  I  am  so  glad  I  came  to  see  you.  It  works." 
Thank  God  it  does  work.  A  crucified  Christ  brings 
pardon ;  a  risen  Christ  brings  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  sin  the  moment  you  believe. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        31 

God  Uses  a  Weak  Instmment 

Befoee  Mr.  Alexander  joined  me  in  the  work,  he 
was  engaged  with  another  evangelist,  much  of  their 
time  being  given  to  meetings  in  large  tents.  At 
one  of  their  meetings  in  Iowa,  a  young  fellow  who 
was  very  illiterate  was  converted.  Soon  after  his 
conversion,  he  came  to  Mr.  Alexander  and  said, 
"Charlie,  I  want  to  go  with  you  in  the  work." 
Mr.  Alexander  said,  "  Fred,  you  could  not  go  with 
us  in  the  work.  You  can  scarcely  read.  What 
could  you  do  ?  "  "  Oh,"  he  replied,  "  I  could  take 
care  of  the  tent,  black  your  boots,  do  anything,  but 
I  must  go  with  you."  Mr.  Alexander  thought  it 
was  only  a  whim  and  put  him  oJff,  but  the  man  was 
so  insistent  day  after  day  that  he  decided  to  try 
him.  He  proved  himself  invaluable  in  many  ways 
but  to  the  surprise  of  all,  he  not  only  attended  to 
the  janitor  work  of  the  tent  but  proved  a  most  effi- 
cient soul  winner.  So  great  was  his  earnestness 
and  his  spiritual  power  that  people  entirely  over- 
looked his  ungrammatical  speech,  and  he  succeeded 
with  many  cases  where  every  one  else  failed.  He 
not  only  led  the  most  desperate  cases  among  the 
lower  classes  to  Christ,  but  also  was  used  among 
the  cultured  and  refined.  He  kept  an  accurate 
record  of  all  those  whom  he  led  to  Christ.  In  five 
years  he  was  used  of  God  in  personal  work  to  the 
salvation  of  1,200  persons. 

Why  did  God  so  use  him  ?  Because,  though  he 
had  but  little,  all  that  he  had  and  all  that  he  was  he 
gave  up  unreservedly  to  God.    It  was  a  case  of  ab- 


32        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

solute  surrender,  and  God  kept  His  promise  and 
gave  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  man  who  obeyed  Him. 
(Acts  6 :  32.) 


How  the  Sun  Burst  Through  the  Clouds 

On  the  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  in  Dundee,  the 
rain  poured  down  in  torrents  during  the  morning 
hour  of  meeting.  We  were  planning  for  a  meeting 
at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  in  the  open  air.  One 
of  the  brethren  as  he  led  in  prayer,  offered  a  very 
earnest  and  confident  prayer  that  it  v^ould  clear  off 
for  the  open  air  meeting,  and  as  he  closed  his 
prayer  expressed  the  utmost  confidence  that  the 
prayer  would  be  heard,  that  we  should  have  clear 
weather  at  that  hour.  A  good  many  that  listened 
to  the  prayer  were  uneasy  at  the  man's  confidence 
and  feared  that  God  would  be  dishonoured  by  the 
prayer  not  being  answered.  One  of  the  ministers 
said  to  Mr.  Alexander,  "That  man  ought  not  to 
have  prayed  that  way.  The  barometer  is  going 
down  all  the  time  and  there  is  no  chance  whatever 
of  its  clearing  up." 

I  went  to  my  room  and  began  to  pray  alone  to 
God  about  the  various  interests  of  the  work.  Be- 
fore I  finished  the  prayer,  it  was  nearly  two  o'clock. 
I  was  led  to  pray  that  it  would  clear  up  and  the 
sun  shine  during  the  afternoon  meeting.  As  I 
opened  my  eyes,  the  sun  burst  through  the  clouds 
and  streamed  into  my  room. 

There  was  a  great  gathering  for  the  open  air 
meeting  and  God's  Spirit  was  present  in  power,  but 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        33 

no  sooner  had  the  open  air  meeting  closed  and  the 
workers  and  others  gotten  back  to  Kinnaird  Hall, 
than  the  rain  began  again  and  poured  incessantly. 


Samed  and  Healed 

I  SAT  one  day  at  my  desk  in  my  office  in  Min- 
neapolis, and  a  hard  faced  woman  came  in  and  asked 
me  brusquely,  "  Have  you  any  missionaries  that  you 
send  to  talk  to  dying  people  ?  "  "  Yes,"  I  replied. 
"  Well,"  she  said,  "  there  is  a  woman  dying  around  at 

'■ ' Street.     I  wish  you  would  send  a  missionary 

around  there."  Soon  after  she  had  gone,  two  lady 
missionaries  came  in.  I  said  to  them,  "  A  woman 
was  just  in  here  to  have  some  one  go  around  and 
talk  to  a  dying  woman.  I  judge  from  the  woman's 
face  and  the  locality  where  she  lives,  that  the 
woman  who  is  dying  is  an  outcast.  You  and  Selma 
hurry  around  and  speak  to  her."  The  two  mission- 
aries were  gone  a  long  time  and  came  back  with 
radiant  faces.  They  told  me  how  the  woman  who 
was  dying  from  an  awful  and  incurable  disease, 
whom  the  doctor  had  given  up  entirely,  was  rejoic- 
ing in  her  new-found  Saviour.  The  two  mission- 
aries called  again  and  were  led  to  pray  for  the 
woman,  who  was  now  clearly  converted,  that  she 
should  also  be  raised  up  from  the  bed  of  sickness 
and  healed.  When  they  told  me  that  they  had 
offered  this  prayer,  I  was  not  at  all  clear  that  they 
had  done  wisely,  for  there  was  no  human  possibility 
of  a  cure,  but  God  did  hear  the  prayer  and  raised 
the  woman  up.    She  became  an  earnest  active  mem- 


34        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

ber  of  my  church.  The  last  I  knew,  which  was 
several  years  after  her  restoration,  she  was  still 
leading  an  earnest  Christian  life. 


*'  Alt  Things  Working  Together  for  Good^^ 

One  Sunday  afternoon  we  drove  with  our  Gospel 
wagon  down  to  a  street  in  the  city  that  was  given 
up  to  vice  in  the  lowest  forms.  We  stopped  in  front 
of  one  of  these  dens  of  iniquity  and  began  to  sing 
Gospel  hymns.  The  women  flocked  to  the  win- 
dows and  out  on  to  the  street.  Some  of  them  were 
very  drunk.  One  of  the  most  drunken,  urged  on 
by  her  companions,  made  a  sudden  rush  and  sprang 
up  the  steps  of  the  Gospel  wagon  and  in  among  our 
workers.  There  was  a  great  laugh,  but  instantly  I 
said  to  the  driver,  "  Drive  on."  And  we  went  up 
the  street  carrying  the  drunken  woman  away  to  the 
dismay  of  her  friends.  We  took  her  to  our  rooms 
and  she  soon  became  very  much  sobered.  Wise 
Christian  workers  pointed  her  the  way  of  life  and 
she  was  soon  in  tears  and  before  long  on  her  knees 
looking  to  God  through  Christ  to  forgive  her  sins. 
The  devil  had  overreached  himself. 

God  is  Love 

When  Mr.  Moody  built  his  tabernacle  in  Chicago, 
he  was  so  anxious  that  every  one  that  came  there 
should  learn  one  truth,  namely,  that  "  God  is  love," 
and  so  fearful  that  some  day  some  preacher  might 
stand  in  the  pulpit  and  forget  to  tell  the  people  that 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        35 

God  is  love,  that  he  had  these  three  words  put  into 
gas  jets  over  the  pulpit.  So  every  night  when  the 
gas  was  lighted,  there  it  blazed  away  over  the 
preacher's  head,  "  God  is  love."  Whether  the 
preacher  told  it  to  the  people  or  not,  they  could  see 
it  for  themselves  in  letters  of  fire. 

One  night  the  tabernacle  was  lighted  but  the 
people  had  not  yet  gathered  for  the  evening  service. 
A  poor  drunkard  coming  up  the  street  saw  the  door 
a  little  ajar  and  saw  the  light,  and  then  stumbled 
up  the  steps  hoping  to  find  warmth  and  cheer 
within.  As  he  pushed  the  door  a  little  wider,  his 
attention  was  directed  to  the  sentence  in  the  letters 
of  fire  above  the  pulpit,  "  God  is  love."  He  turned 
away,  pulled  the  door  to,  went  down  the  steps  and 
went  up  the  street  muttering,  "  It  is  not  so.  That 
is  not  true.  God  is  not  love.  If  God  was  love.  He 
would  love  me,  and  God  does  not  love  a  miserable 
wretch  like  me.  It  is  not  true."  But  all  the  time, 
the  words  were  burning  down  into  his  soul,  "  God 
is  love.     God  is  love." 

After  awhile  he  turned  about  and  retraced  his 
steps,  entered  the  church  again,  and  took  a  seat 
back  of  the  stove  over  in  the  corner.  The  people 
gathered  and  Mr.  Moody  ascended  the  platform  and 
began  to  preach.  All  the  time  that  Mr.  Moody 
preached,  the  man  was  weeping  in  the  corner.  Mr. 
Moody's  quick  eye  caught  sight  of  him,  and  at  the 
close  of  the  service  he  hurried  to  him  and  sat  down 
beside  him.  "What  are  you  crying  about,  my 
friend?"  he  said  gently.  "What  was  it  in  the  sermon 
that  touched  you  ?  "    The  man  replied,  "  There  was 


36        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTKATIONS 

nothing  in  the  sermon  that  touched  me.  I  did  not 
hear  a  word  of  your  sermon."  "  Well,  what  was  it 
then  that  touched  you  ?"  asked  Mr.  Moody.  "  That 
sentence,"  pointing  to  the  words  in  fire,  "  that  sen- 
tence, *  God  is  love,'  that  broke  my  heart."  Mr. 
Moody  opened  his  Bible  and  showed  the  man  from 
the  Bible  how  God  loved  him,  and  how  Jesus  was 
an  all-sufficient  Saviour  for  all  who  take  Him.  The 
man  listened  and  accepted  Christ,  and  went  away 
that  night  a  saved  man. 

May  these  same  words  burn  down  deep  into  the 
heart  of  every  hearer,  and  may  you  all  be  won  by 
the  love  of  God  to  you  to  love  the  God  who  loves 
you. 

First  Sober  Christmas  in  Ten  Years 

One  afternoon  a  wild  looking  Scandinavian 
rushed  into  the  office  in  Minneapolis.  My  assistant, 
Mr.  George  Sanborn,  was  in  the  office.  Mr.  San- 
born is  not  a  large  man,  and  the  Scandinavian  was 
a  big,  burly  fellow.  He  rushed  towards  Mr.  San- 
born as  if  he  were  going  to  do  him  personal  vio- 
lence. Though  small,  Mr.  Sanborn  was  fearless. 
He  sprang  to  his  feet  and  said,  *'What  do  you 
want?"  "I  want  sympathy,"  the  man  cried. 
*'  N'o,"  said  Mr.  Sanborn,  "  you  want  Jesus  Christ. 
Jesus  Christ  and  Jesus  Christ  alone  can  help  you." 
In  a  moment  the  man  was  subdued  and  sank  upon 
his  knees,  and  Mr.  Sanborn  explained  to  him  the 
way  of  life  and  he  accepted  the  Saviour. 

On  the  following  Christmas  Day  at  our  testi- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        37 

mony  service,  this  man  arose  and  said,  "  I  am  so 
happy  to-day.  This  is  the  first  sober  Christmas 
that  I  have  spent  in  ten  years.  Jesus  Christ  has 
saved  me." 


Three  Silver  Dollars 

OiSTE  night  I  reached  home  from  my  work  very 
late.  There  was  no  one  in  the  house.  My  family 
were  all  out  at  Lake  Minnetonka  and  I  was  to  gO 
out  to  them  the  next  morning  by  a  very  early  train. 
I  knew  that  they  would  be  in  need  of  money  to 
buy  ice  and  provisions  and  other  things.  When  I 
took  out  my  pocketbook  to  see  how  much  money  I 
had,  I  found  to  my  dismay  that  while  I  had  quite  a 
little  money,  none  of  it  belonged  to  me.  It  was  all 
money  that  I  had  set  apart  for  the  Lord.  The  fare 
out  to  Lake  Minnetonka  was  less  than  fifty  cents 
but  I  did  not  have  even  enough  to  pay  that,  much 
less  any  to  give  the  family  when  I  reached  there. 
What  should  I  do  ?  There  was  no  possibility  of 
my  seeing  any  one  before  the  train  left ;  for  most 
people  would  be  in  bed  and  the  streets  deserted  as 
I  walked  to  the  station.  I  had  taken  the  ground 
anyway  that  I  would  never  borrow  money  from 
anybody  for  any  purpose,  for  the  scripture  says, 
"  Owe  no  man  anything."  Of  course,  the  thought 
came  to  me  to  take  the  money  I  had  set  apart 
for  the  Lord  and  repay  it  some  other  time  when 
I  had  more  money,  but  I  saw  clearly  that  that 
would  not  do,  that  I  had  no  more  right  to  take 
the  Lord's  money  for  my  own  uses  than  I  had  to 


38        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

take  any  other  person's.  I  knelt  down  and  said, 
"  Heavenly  Father,  I  cannot  honestly  take  the 
money  that  belongs  to  Thee.  Thou  hast  never 
failed  me  in  the  past  v^hen  I  have  taken  my  stand 
absolutely  on  what  is  right,  and  I  do  not  believe 
that  Thou  wilt  fail  me  now.  I  will  not  touch  the 
money  that  belongs  to  Thee.  I  cannot  see  where 
money  will  come  from,  but  I  must  have  it.  Send 
me  the  money  I  need  before  five  o'clock  to-morrow 
morning." 

I  arose  from  my  knees  confident  that  the  money 
■would  come,  but  I  could  not  see  any  possible  way 
in  which  it  would  come.  ISTo  one  would  call  at  my 
house,  there  would  be  no  letters,  I  would  not  see 
any  one  that  I  knew  on  my  way  over  to  the  station. 

In  a  few  minutes,  I  went  up-stairs  to  my  ofiice. 
I  pulled  open  a  drawer  of  the  table  to  look  for  an 
account  book.  I  had  not  opened  that  drawer  for 
some  time,  but  no  sooner  was  the  drawer  opened 
than  I  saw  lying  before  me  three  silver  dollars.  It 
seemed  to  me  as  if  three  silver  dollars  never  looked 
so  large  as  those  did.  I  do  not  know  how  the  three 
dollars  came  in  the  drawer.  Of  course,  I  do  not 
think  that  any  miracle  was  performed.  I  presume 
that  I  myself  had  put  those  three  silver  dollars 
there  weeks  or  months  before  when  I  had  more 
silver  dollars  in  my  pocket  than  I  cared  to  carry, 
but  it  was  as  plain  an  answer  to  prayer  as  if  the 
three  silver  dollars  bad  come  tumbling  down 
through  the  chimney.  The  three  dollars  would  not 
only  take  me  out  to  Lake  Minnetonka,  but  meet  at 
least  part  of  the  immediate  necessities  of  the  family. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        39 

After  reaching  our  home  on  the  lake  I  rowed  over 
to  Excelsior  to  call  on  a  friend  who  had  asked  me 
to  come  over  to  get  vegetables  out  of  his  garden. 
In  the  course  of  our  conversation  I  was  led  to  tell 
him  of  the  answer  to  prayer  that  had  come  to  me 
the  night  before.  God  blessed  the  story  to  his  own 
heart.  He  walked  down  to  the  boat  with  me,  and 
when  I  stepped  down  into  my  rowboat,  we  shook 
hands  as  we  separated.  He  left  in  my  hand  a  five 
dollar  bill,  which  met  all  the  needs  of  the  family. 


Prayer  Answered  on  the  Other  Side  of  the  Globe 

In  the  early  days  of  Mr.  Moody's  work  in 
Chicago,  a  reckless,  worthless  Scotchman  used  to 
hang  around  the  tabernacle.  He  was  a  desperate 
fellow,  feared  by  his  own  companions.  He  would 
carry  a  dagger  in  his  stocking,  and  many  were 
afraid  that  he  would  draw  that  dagger  upon  them. 
He  seemed  to  have  an  especial  spite  against  the 
meetings  that  were  going  on.  One  night  he  stood 
outside  the  tabernacle  with  a  pitcher  of  beer  in  his 
hands  offering  a  drink  to  every  man  that  came  out 
of  the  building.  At  other  times  he  would  go  into 
the  inquiry  meetings  and  try  to  interfere  with  the 
workers. 

One  night  Major  Whittle  was  talking  to  two 
young  men,  who  were  more  or  less  interested,  and 
this  jeering  Scotchman  was  interfering.  Finally 
Major  Whittle  turned  to  the  two  young  men  and  said, 
"  Young  men,  if  you  set  any  value  on  your  souls,  I 
advise  you  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  man." 


40        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

This  seemed  only  to  amuse  the  Scotchmari.  But 
God  was  working.  Over  in  Scotland  was  an  earnest 
Christian  mother  who  was  praying  for  her  wayward 
son.  One  night  he  went  to  bed  as  godless  as  ever, 
but  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  he  was  aroused  from 
his  sleep.  He  awakened  under  conviction  of  sin, 
and  as  he  lay  there  in  bed,  the  Holy  Spirit  brought 
to  his  mind  a  passage  that  he  had  forgotten  was  in 
the  Bible.  He  did  not  even  know  it  was  there  at  all, 
though  doubtless  he  had  heard  it  some  time  in  his 
boyhood.  It  was  Romans  4:5,  "  But  to  him  that 
worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  Him  that  justifieth 
the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness." 
The  Holy  Spirit  made  clear  the  meaning  of  the 
verse  to  him.  Then  and  there,  without  getting  out 
of  bed,  he  believed  on  Him  that  justifieth  the  un- 
godly and  found  peace. 

He  at  once  became  as  active  in  the  cause  of 
Christ  as  he  had  been  active  in  the  cause  of  the 
devil.  For  nearly  thirty  years  he  has  been  a  mem- 
ber of  Chicago  Avenue  Church  and  is  to-day  a 
deacon  in  the  church. 

Some  time  after  his  conversion,  he  went  back  to 
Scotland  to  visit  his  old  mother.  They  had  glad 
times  of  Bible  reading  and  prayer  together,  but 
there  was  another  wayward  son,  a  sailor,  sailing  the 
sea  somewhere,  they  knew  not  where.  One  night 
the  old  mother  and  the  converted  son  knelt  down 
and  began  to  cry  to  God  for  the  wandering  son  and 
brother.  That  very  night  he  was  in  the  China 
Seas,  though  they  did  not  know  it,  and  while  they 
prayed  in  Scotland,  the  Spirit  of  God  fell  in  the 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS        41 

China  Seas  and  that  son  and  brother  was  converted 
there  oa  the  deck  of  the  ship. 

He  returned  to  Scotland  and  told  his  mother  the 
good  news.  He  entered  the  Free  Church  college 
and  commenced  to  study  to  be  a  foreign  missionary. 
He  was  sent  out  by  the  missionary  society  of  the 
Free  Church  of  Scotland,  and  after  years  of  faithful 
service,  laid  down  his  life  as  a  missionary  in  India. 


A  Prayer  Fifteen  Years  Long 

Almost  immediately  after  my  conversion,  an- 
other man  was  laid  on  my  heart,  and  I  began  to 
pray  every  day  for  his  conversion.  After  I  had 
been  praying  for  some  time  for  his  conversion,  the 
thought  came  into  my  mind  that  I  would  spend  the 
night  in  prayer  for  him.  I  did  not  succeed  in 
praying  the  whole  night.  The  spirit  was  willing 
but  the  flesh  was  weak.  I  was  on  my  knees  almost 
the  entire  night,  but  part  of  the  time  I  was  asleep, 
but  the  best  I  could  I  spent  the  whole  night  in 
prayer  for  him. 

When  the  morning  came,  I  thought,  "  Now  you 
have  prayed  for  him  all  night,  write  him  a  letter 
beseeching  him  to  accept  Christ."  In  a  very  short 
time  I  received  a  reply  making  fun  of  me  and 
ridiculing  me  for  my  attempts  to  bring  him  to 
Christ.  The  devil  came  to  me  and  mocked  me  and 
said,  "  That  is  all  your  prayers  amount  to.  What 
is  the  good  of  praying  ?  Here  you  spent  the  whole 
night  praying  for  him  and  have  written  him  a 
letter  and  this  is  all  you  get  for  your  pains."    But 


42        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

the  devil  did  not  succeed  in  deceiving  me  this  time. 
I  continued  praying  for  him  every  day.  I  kept  it 
up  for  about  fifteen  years,  never  letting  a  day  pass 
without  praying  definitely  for  his  conversion. 

In  the  meantime  he  had  moved  to  Chicago  and 
so  had  I.  I  visited  him  in  Chicago,  but  could  get 
no  opportunity  to  speak  to  him  about  his  soul. 
Indeed,  he  seemed  to  put  himself  out  to  be  par- 
ticularly blasphemous  when  I  was  around  in  order 
to  hurt  my  feelings,  but  still  I  kept  on  praying. 

One  morning,  after  having  prayed  about  fifteen 
years,  as  I  was  on  my  knees  before  God,  it  seemed 
as  if  God  said  to  me,  "  You  need  not  ask  for  that 
any  more.  I  have  heard  your  prayer.  He  will  be 
converted."  I  never  prayed  again  for  his  conver- 
sion but  every  morning  I  would  look  up  and  say, 
"  Heavenly  Father,  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast 
heard  my  prayer,  and  now  I  am  waiting  to  see  it." 

About  two  weeks  from  that  morning  he  came  to 
my  house  to  dinner.  After  dinner  I  said  to  him, 
"  Don't  you  think  you  had  better  stay  here  all 
night  ?  "  He  replied,  "  I  don't  know  but  I  had.  I 
am  just  up  from  inflammatory  rheumatism  and  it  is 
damp  outside  and  I  am  really  afraid  to  go  home 
lest  the  rheumatism  come  back."  When  he  awoke 
the  next  morning  the  inflammatory  rheumatism 
had  come  back  to  that  extent  that  his  feet  were  so 
swollen  he  could  not  put  on  his  shoes.  For  two 
weeks  he  was  laid  up  in  my  house.  My  opportu- 
nity had  come.  I  had  him.  Every  morning  we 
held  family  prayers  in  his  room.  My  friends  com- 
ing in  and  out  of  the  house  seeing  him  there  took 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        43 

it  for  granted  that  he  was  a  Christian  and  seemed 
to  talk  more  about  religion  than  usual.  My  chil- 
dren running  in  and  out  of  his  room  seemed  to  talk 
more  about  Christ  than  they  usually  did,  though 
they  always  loved  to  talk  about  their  Saviour. 

After  breakfast  when  the  two  weeks  were  up,  we 
started  down  La  Salle  Avenue  together.  We  had 
not  gone  half  a  block  when  he  turned  to  me  and 
said,  "  Archie,  I  am  thinking  of  going  into  temper- 
ance work.  How  do  you  begin?"  If  there  was 
ever  any  one  on  earth  that  needed  to  go  into  tem- 
perance work,  it  was  he.  I  replied,  "  The  only  way 
I  know  to  begin  temperance  work  right  is  by  first 
of  all  becoming  a  Christian  yourself."  He  said, 
"  I  always  thought  I  was  a  Christian."  "  You 
have  the  strangest  way  of  showing  it  of  any  man 
I  ever  knew."  "  How  do  you  become  a  Christian  ?  " 
he  next  asked  bluntly.  "  Come  over  to  my  oflBce 
and  I  will  tell  you."  I  took  him  over  to  my  oflS^ce 
and  as  Mr.  Moody  was  away  I  took  him  to  Mr. 
Moody's  office  and  though  he  was  seven  years  older 
than  I,  I  explained  to  him  the  Way  of  Life  as  I 
would  have  explained  it  to  a  little  child.  He  lis- 
tened eagerly  and  when  I  had  finished,  he  knelt 
down  and  accepted  Christ  as  his  Saviour  just  like 
a  little  child.  Those  who  had  known  him  in  the 
olden  time  could  hardly  believe  that  he  was  con- 
verted. Some  in  the  east  would  not  believe  it  until 
they  came  out  and  saw  him  for  themselves.  Within 
a  year  he  was  preaching  the  Gospel.  He  preached 
it  up  to  the  end. 

I  had  been  down  east  visiting  old  friends  of  his 


44        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

and  mine,  and  returned  to  Chicago.  Hearing  that 
he  was  ill  at  the  place  where  he  was  preaching, 
forty  miles  out  of  Chicago,  I  went  out  to  see  him, 
and  spent  the  day  with  him.  I  started  to  tell 
him  about  the  old  friends  I  met  down  in  the  east 
but  he  said,  "  ISTever  mind  that.  Let's  have  a  time 
of  prayer."  We  passed  the  whole  day  in  prayer 
and  conversation  and  a  happy  day  it  was. 

At  evening  I  returned  to  Chicago,  as  I  was  to 
go  south  the  next  day,  I  spent  the  night  in  the 
Institute.  About  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  there 
was  a  rap  on  my  door.  When  I  went  to  the 
door  and  opened  it,  one  of  the  students  stood  there 
with  a  telegram  in  his  hand.  I  opened  it  and 
read,  "  Your  brother  passed  away  this  morning  at 
two  o'clock."  I  jumped  on  a  train  and  hurried 
out  to  the  place.  When  I  entered  the  room  where 
his  body  lay,  and  turned  back  that  white  sheet 
and  looked  into  the  face  of  my  eldest  brother  as 
he  lay  there  at  peace  at  last,  I  thanked  God  that 
for  fifteen  years  I  had  believed  in  a  God  that 
answers  prayer. 

Have  you  those  that  you  love  who  are  wandering 
far  from  God?  There  is  a  way  to  reach  them. 
That  way  is  by  the  Throne  of  God. 


An  Opportunity  Lost  Forever 

I  ONCE  had  a  friend  who  was  a  very  bright 
scholar.  He  entered  college  at  an  earlier  age  than 
most  men  are  able  to  enter.  He  was  a  young 
fellow  of  good  habits  but  without  settled  princi- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        45 

pies.  After  he  had  been  in  college  awhile  it  be- 
gan to  be  rumoured  about  that  he  was  thinking 
of  becoming  a  Christian.  Some  one  came  to  me 
and  said,  "  Frank  is  thinking  of  becoming  a  Chris- 
tian," but  I  was  not  a  Christian  myself  and  was 
not  greatly  interested  in  the  information.  If  I 
had  been  a  Christian,  I  believe  I  could  have  spoken 
the  word  that  would  have  brought  him  over  the 
line,  but  not  being  a  Christian  and  not  being  in- 
terested in  the  matter,  I  said  nothing  to  him  about 
it.  After  a  few  days  of  indecision,  he  decided  the 
wrong  way.  He  became  infatuated  with  a  beauti- 
ful actress  and  followed  her  about  the  country. 
He  never  married  her  but  he  got  to  going  to  the 
bad.  He  graduated  from  the  college  a  moral 
wreck.  Not  long  after  graduation  he  married  the 
daughter  of  one  of  the  best  families  in  one  of  our 
eastern  states.  Of  course,  the  marriage  was  un- 
happy. 

One  day,  he  and  his  young  wife  were  preparing 
to  go  out  riding  together.  The  carriage  stood  at 
the  door  and  he  stood  by  it  waiting  for  his  wife. 
She  did  not  appear.  He  hurried  up  to  her  dressing- 
room  and  went  in.  The  servants  heard  sharp 
words,  then  they  heard  the  crack  of  a  revolver,  and 
as  they  rushed  into  the  room,  that  beautiful  young 
wife  lay  dead  upon  the  floor  with  a  bullet  through 
her  brain.  Whether  she  shot  herself  or  whether  he 
shot  her,  it  was  difficult  to  say.  The  coroner's 
verdict  was  that  she  died  by  her  own  hand.  At  all 
events,  he  became  a  haunted  man.  Not  long  after, 
he  came  to  the  house  of  a  friend  and  said,  "  John, 


46        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

can  I  spend  the  night  with  you  ?  "  "  Certainly," 
he  replied.  "  Can  I  have  the  room  next  to  yours  ?  " 
"  Why,  Frank,  you  can  have  anything  in  the 
house."  They  sat  up  late  into  the  night,  talking 
and  then  retired.  The  host  had  fallen  asleep  when 
suddenly  he  was  awakened  by  a  constant  rapping 
at  his  door.  "What  is  it,  Frank?"  he  cried. 
"  Are  you  there,  John  ?  "  the  wretched  man  called. 
"  Yes,  can  I  do  anything  for  you  ?  "  "  No,  I  only 
wanted  to  know  that  you  were  there."  The  host 
fell  asleep  again  but  was  soon  awakened  by  another 
rap  at  his  door.  "  What  is  it,  Frank  ?  "  he  called. 
"  Are  you  there,  John  ?  "  "  Yes.  Are  you  sick, 
can  I  do  anything  for  you,  Frank  ?  "  "  Ko,  I  only 
wanted  to  know  that  you  were  there."  ^  Again  he 
fell  asleep,  and  again  he  was  awakened  by  the  same 
woeful  call.  All  the  night  through  the  man  haunted 
by  evil  memories  would  come  and  wake  him  by  a 
rap  on  the  door  to  find  if  he  was  there.  He  could 
not  bear  to  be  alone  a  moment. 

The  next  day  he  left.  He  went  west  to  San 
Francisco,  took  a  steamer  on  the  Pacific  Ocean, 
and  when  several  days  out  jumped  overboard.  To- 
night his  body  rests  beneath  the  waters  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean.  If  I  had  been  a  Christian  in  the 
early  days,  I  might  have  led  that  friend  to  Christ 
and  saved  all  this  frightful,  awful  tragedy.  I  have 
had  the  joy  of  leading  many  another  young  man  to 
Christ,  but  that  young  man  has  passed  beyond  my 
reach  forever.  If  you  do  not  accept  Christ  to-day 
you  may  a  year  from  to-day,  and  when  you  do 
there  will  be  opportunities  to  work  for  Christ  in 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        47 

bringing  others  to  Him,  but  opportunities  are  pass- 
ing by  you  to-day  and  to-morrow  and  next  day 
that  will  never  come  back  again. 


A  Child's  Prayer  Answered 

A  Christian  worker  going  through  the  tene- 
ments in  the  east  end  of  London  looking  for  un- 
fortunates to  help,  came  one  day  into  a  wretched 
room  in  the  upper  story  of  one  of  the  large  tene- 
ment houses.  There  seemed  to  be  no  one  in  the 
room  and  the  worker  was  about  to  leave  when  he 
noticed  a  ladder  leading  up  to  a  hole  in  the  ceiling. 
Something  impelled  him  to  climb  the  ladder.  When 
he  had  put  his  head  through  the  hole  in  the  ceiling, 
the  garret  at  first  was  so  dark  he  could  not  see,  but 
as  he  became  accustomed  to  the  darkness,  he  saw  a 
child  lying  on  a  pile  of  stuff  in  the  corner. 

"  What  are  you  doing  here,  child  ?  "  the  worker 
said.  "  Hush,"  the  child  said,  "  don't  tell  father." 
"But  what  are  you  doing  here?"  The  child 
showed  the  worker  his  back  bearing  the  marks  of 
the  awful  beating  that  the  drunken  father  had 
given  him.  The  worker  said,  "  You  cannot  stay 
here.  You  will  die  here.  I  will  go  and  get  you 
help."  As  the  worker  was  about  to  withdraw,  the 
little  fellow  said,  "  Would  you  like  to  hear  a  hymn 
that  I  learned  at  the  Sunday-school  ?  "  The  worker 
stopped  a  moment  to  listen  and  the  child  repeated 
the  familiar  verse, 

"Gentle  Jesns,  meek  and  mild, 
Look  upon  a  little  child. 


48        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Pity  my  simplicity, 

Suffer  me  to  come  to  Thee. 
Fain  would  I  to  Thee  be  brought, 

Gracious  Lord,  forbid  it  not ; 
In  the  kingdom  of  Thy  grace, 

Make  a  little  child  a  place." 

Telling  the  child  to  keep  quiet  and  he  would  soon 
return,  the  worker  stole  away  for  help.  He  found 
a  place  to  take  the  child  and  soon  returned  to  get 
him.  Again  he  climbed  the  ladder  and  put  his 
head  through  the  hole  in  the  ceiling,  but  every- 
thing was  quiet.  He  spoke  to  the  child  but  there 
was  no  answer.  The  child  was  dead.  His  prayer 
had  been  heard. 

"  In  the  kingdom  of  His  grace, 
The  Lord  had  given  the  little  child  a  place." 


The  President  of  a  Racing  Association 
Converted 

One  night  in  an  Australian  city  after  I  had  given 
out  the  invitation  and  a  large  number  of  people  had 
risen  and  were  standing,  a  minister  sitting  near  me 
became  very  much  excited  and  said,  "  Look  there ! 
Look  there  ! "  "  Look  where  ?  "  I  said.  "  Look  over 
there  at  that  tall  gentleman  and  his  wife  standing." 
"  Yes,"  I  said,  "  I  see  them,  what  of  it  ?  "  "  Why," 
he  said,  "  that  man  is  the  former  mayor  of  the  city 
and  is  now  president  of  our  race  track  association. 
What  does  he  mean  ?  "  "  Why,"  I  said,  "  I  suppose 
he  means  to  accept  Christ.  That  was  the  proposi- 
tion."   The  minister  was  nonplussed.    He  did  not 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        49 

know  what  to  make  of  it.  As  soon  as  the  meeting 
was  over,  I  went  down  to  where  this  gentleman 
and  his  wife  were  standing,  and  stepped  up  to  them 
and  said  to  him,  "  Did  you  really  accept  Jesus  Christ 
this  evening  ? "  Quietly  but  firmly  he  replied, 
"  Yes,  I  did.  Would  you  like  to  know  how  I  came 
to  accept  Him?"  "Yes,  I  would."  "Well,"  he 
said,  "  my  little  boy  was  at  your  children's  meeting 
this  afternoon  and  was  converted.  He  came  home 
full  of  enthusiasm  and  insisted  that  we  should  come 
to-night  to  hear  you  preach  and  we  came  and  have 
decided  to  accept  Christ." 

Who  can  tell  how  much  is  involved  in  the  con- 
version of  a  little  boy  ? 


A  Little  Child  Shall  Lead  Them 

Two  little  girls  came  to  our  children's  meeting  in 
Bristol,  England,  accepted  Christ,  'and  went  home 
full  of  joy  and  enthusiasm  to  tell  their  mother  the 
story  of  their  conversion.  When  the  mother  heard 
the  story  from  her  children  and  saw  the  "  God's 
Sure  Promise  "  cards  they  held  in  their  hands,  her 
heart  was  full.  She  kept  the  cards  with  her  all 
evening,  took  them  to  bed  with  her,  put  them  under 
her  pillow  and  kept  her  hand  on  them.  She  was 
afraid  to  go  to  sleep  lest  she  should^get  her  hand  off 
the  cards.  The  next  day  was  Sunday  and  the 
meeting  in  the  afternoon  was  for  women  only. 
This  mother  came  with  the  cards  still  in  her  hand 
and  when  the  invitation  was  given  out  stood  up  to 
accept  Christ  as  her  Saviour.    Led  to  Christ  by  her 


50        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

own   little  daughters.      "  A  little  child  shall  lead 
them." 


Saved  Five  Minutes 

One  evening  in  our  church  in  Chicago  one  of  the 
officers  in  going  around  the  gallery  after  I  was 
through  preaching,  and  as  the  audience  was  going 
out  of  the  church,  stepped  up  to  a  gentleman  and 
said,  "  Are  you  saved  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir,"  he  replied. 
He  was  very  positive  about  it.  "  How  long  have 
you  been  saved  ?  "  "  About  five  minutes,"  he  an- 
swered. "When  were  you  saved  ?  "  asked  the  gen- 
tleman. The  man  replied,  "  About  five  minutes  ago 
while  that  man  was  preaching."  He  did  not  wait 
until  I  got  through  the  sermon.  He  did  not  wait 
for  some  one  to  deal  with  him.  He  came  to  Jesus 
right  there  and  then  and  Jesus  saved  him  right 
there.  It  only  takes  an  instant  to  be  saved.  The 
moment  you  receive  Jesus  you  are  saved.  "As 
many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to 
become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  His  name."  (John  1 :  12.)  Will  you  receive 
Him  now  ? 


Never  be  Discouraged 

One  night  in  Hobart,  Tasmania,  as  my  wife  and 
I  were  walking  home  together  from  the  meeting, 
she  said,  "  Archie,  I  have  just  wasted  my  time  to- 
night. I  have  spent  the  whole  evening  talking  with 
the  most  frivolous  girl  I  have  dealt  with  for  a  long 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        51 

time.  I  made  no  impression  whatever.  I  just 
wasted  my  time.  I  don't  believe  it  pays  to  talk  to 
that  kind  of  a  girl."  But  she  went  home  and  cried 
to  God  for  that  girl.  The  next  night  that  girl  came 
to  her  completely  transformed  and  brought  her 
mother  with  her  and  asked  Mrs.  Torrey  to  talk  to 
her.  They  were  both  brightly  converted.  Often- 
times where  we  seem  to  have  accomplished  the  least, 
we  have  in  reality  accomplished  the  most. 


Converted  by  President  Wotsey^s  Singing 

When  Mr.  Moody  visited  Kew  Haven  in  1878  I 
was  a  student  in  the  University  there.  The  ripest 
scholar  in  the  University  at  the  time,  if  not  the 
ripest  in  America,  was  President  Wolsey,  Ex-Presi- 
dent of  Yale  University.  One  night  a  young  man 
went  up  to  hear  Mr.  Moody  preach  and  President 
Wolsey  sat  on  the  platform,  and  when  they  sang 
the  old  Gospel  hymns.  President  Wolsey,  himself  a 
gray-haired  scholar,  joined  in  singing  the  hymns 
with  all  his  heart.  That  young  man  said,  "  Well, 
if  one  of  the  greatest  scholars  in  America  can  sing 
those  hymns  in  that  way,  there  certainly  must  be 
something  in  it,"  and  he  was  converted,  not  through 
Mr.  Moody's  preaching,  but  through  President 
Wolsey's  singing. 

Hoiv  to  Love  Jesus 

A  LITTLE  girl  in  London  once  came  to  Mark  Guy 
Pearse  and  said,  "  Mr.  Pearse,  I  don't  love  Jesus. 


52        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

I  wish  you  would  tell  me  how  to  love  Hhn."  He 
said,  "  Little  girl,  as  you  go  away  from  here  to-day, 
keep  saying  to  yourself,  '  Jesus  loves  me,'  '  Jesus 
loves  me,'  aud  I  believe  you  will  come  back  next 
Sunday  saying,  '  I  love  Jesus.'  " 

The  next  Sunday  the  little  girl  came  back  to 
Mark  Guy  Pearse  radiant,  and  she  said,  "  Oh,  Mr. 
Pearse,  I  do  love  Jesus.  As  I  went  away  from  here 
last  Sunday,  I  kept  saying  to  myself  as  you  told  me 
to,  '  Jesus  loves  me,  Jesus  loves  me,  Jesus  loves  me,' 
and  then  I  soon  saw  Him  hanging  on  the  cross  and 
dying  in  awful  agony  for  me,  and  my  heart  began 
to  grow  warm  and  very  soon  it  was  full  of  love  to 
Jesus." 

"  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us." 


''  If  Any  Man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  He  is  a.  New 
Creature 

I  KNEW  a  man  who  used  to  go  to  dances  at  least 
four  nights  a  week,  and  in  summer  time  spend  his 
days  on  the  race-course.  He  would  spend  a  large 
share  of  his  afternoons  at  the  card  table  and  the  re- 
maining nights  on  a  big  drunk,  or  something  of  that 
kind.  I  have  known  that  man  so  touched  by  the 
finger  of  God  that  you  could  not  get  him  to  a  ball 
unless  you  dragged  him  by  an  ox-team,  unless  he 
went  to  preach  the  Gospel.  I  have  known  him  to 
do  that.  In  the  olden  days  he  loved  the  theatre, 
but  to-day  he  would  be  perfectly  unhappy  in  a 
theatre  unless  he  went  there  to  preach  the  Gospel. 
I  have  known  him  to  do  that.    In  the  olden  days, 


ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS        53 

be  played  cards  six  days  out  of  seven  but  to-day 
you  could  not  hire  him  to  touch  the  cards.  In  the 
olden  daj^s,  the  prayer  meeting  would  have  been 
crucifixion  to  him,  but  there  is  scarcely  anything  he 
enjoys  to-day  as  he  enjoys  the  prayer  meeting.  In 
the  olden  days,  the  Bible  was  the  stupidest  book  to 
him,  though  he  read  it  every  day.  He  loved  every- 
thing in  the  way  of  literature  better  than  the  Bible 
and  religious  books.  To-day  he  loves  the  Bible  and 
sometimes  he  thinks  he  won't  read  anything  else. 
I  know  that  man  well.  I  know  him  better  than  I 
know  any  other  man,  and  knowing  the  transforma- 
tion that  has  taken  place  in  his  life,  I  know  that 
the  new  birth  is  a  reality,  if  I  don't  know  anything 
else. 


^'Give  Me  Back  M^p  Tears  " 

One  of  the  mightiest  soul  winners  I  ever  knew 
was  Colonel  Clarke  of  Chicago.  He  would  work  at 
his  business  six  days  every  week  that  he  might  keep 
his  mission  open  seven  nights  every  week.  And 
every  night  in  the  week  the  year  around  five  or  six 
hundred  men  would  gather  together  in  that  mission 
hall.  It  was  a  motley  crowd ;  drunkards,  thieves, 
pickpockets,  gamblers  and  everything  that  was 
hopeless.  I  used  to  go  and  hear  Colonel  Clarke 
talk,  and  he  seemed  to  me  one  of  the  dullest  talkers 
I  ever  heard  in  my  life.  He  would  ramble  along 
and  yet  these  five  or  six  hundred  men  would  lean 
over  and  listen  spellbound  while  Colonel  Clarke 
talked  in  his  prosy  way.     Some  of  the  greatest 


54        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

preachers  in  Chicago  used  to  go  down  to  help 
Colonel  Clarke  but  the  men  would  not  listen  to 
them  as  they  did  to  Colonel  Clarke.  When  he  was 
speaking  they  would  lean  over  and  listen  and  be 
converted  by  the  score.  I  could  not  understand  it. 
I  studied  it  and  wondered  what  the  secret  of  it  was. 
Why  did  these  men  listen  with  such  interest,  and 
why  were  they  so  greatly  moved  by  such  prosy 
talking  ?  I  found  the  secret.  It  was  because  they 
knew  that  Colonel  Clarke  loved  them,  and  nothing 
conquers  like  love.  The  tears  were  very  near  the 
surface  with  Colonel  Clarke.  Once  in  the  early 
days  of  the  mission,  when  he  had  been  weeping  a 
great  deal  over  these  men,  he  got  ashamed  of  his 
tears.  He  steeled  his  heart  and  tried  to  stop  his 
crying,  and  succeeded,  but  he  lost  his  power.  He 
saw  that  his  power  was  gone  and  he  went  to  God 
and  prayed,  "  Oh,  God,  give  me  back  my  tears,"  and 
God  gave  him  back  his  tears,  and  gave  him  won- 
derful power,  marvellous  power  over  these  men. 

If  we  would  see  the  seed  that  we  sow  bring  an 
abundant  harvest,  we  must  water  it  with  our  tears. 
"  He  that  goeth  forth  bearing  precious  seed,  shall 
doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing  bringing  his 
sheaves  with  him." 


Conquered  By  Compassion 

One  night  I  was  preaching  in  one  of  the  suburbs 
of  Chicago,  and  when  I  gave  out  the  invitation  an 
enormous  man  rose  to  his  feet.  He  weighed  290 
pounds.     I  thought  to  myself,  "  You  have  caught  a 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        55 

big  fish  to-night."  After  the  meeting  was  over,  I 
went  down  and  sat  beside  him  and  talked  to  him. 
He  said,  "  Let  me  tell  you  how  I  came  to  accept 
Christ  to-night.  I  have  been  a  church-goer  all  my 
life,  but  I  only  went  to  criticise,  and  when  men  got 
up  in  the  prayer  meeting  to  talk  I  took  out  a  little 
note-book  which  I  kept,  and  wrote  down  what  they 
said,  and  then  kept  tab  on  them  during  the  week  to 
see  how  their  life  agreed  with  their  profession,  so  I 
came  to  say  to  myself,  '  All  Christians  are  hypo- 
crites.' My  heart  became  as  hard  as  a  stone.  I 
was  perfectly  indifferent.  Some  months  ago,  I  was 
taken  very  ill,  and  the  doctors  said  I  must  die,  but 
I  was  not  at  all  afraid  to  die.  I  had  become  so 
hardened  by  the  criticism  of  professors  of  religion 
that  even  death  had  no  terrors  for  me.  But  one 
day  a  retired  minister  came  and  asked  if  he  might 
pray  for  me.  I  said,  '  Yes,  you  can  pray  for  me  if 
you  want  to.  I  have  no  objection,  if  it  will  do  you 
any  good,  it  won't  hurt  me  any.  Yes,  pray  if  you 
want  to,  if  you  will  enjoy  it.  It  won't  disturb  me.' 
He  knelt  down  beside  my  bed  and  began  to  pray, 
and  I  watched  him  out  of  the  corner  of  my  eyes. 
I  was  keeping  tab  on  him  to  see  if  he  was  real.  I 
thought  I  was  dying  but  I  was  not  a  bit  frightened. 
I  was  perfectly  callous  and  hardened,  but  as  I  lay 
there  watching  him  out  of  the  corner  of  my  eyes,  I 
saw  a  tear  rolling  down  his  cheeks.  I  said  to  my- 
self, '  Here  is  this  man,  a  perfect  stranger  to  me, 
with  no  possible  interest  in  me,  and  yet  he  is  weep- 
ing over  my  sins  and  my  lost  condition.'  That 
broke  my  heart.     That  is  why  I  am  here  to-night. 


56        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

That  is  why  I  got  up  and  asked  for  prayers ;  that  is 
why  I  have  taken  the  Lord  Jesus." 

I  tell  you,  you  will  win  more  men  and  women 
by  your  tears  than  you  will  ever  win  by  your 
arguments. 

The  Curse  Coming  Home 

I  RECALL  a  man  who  was  a  daily  drinker  all  his 
life.  I  don't  think  that  man  was  ever  drunk  in  his 
life.  He  despised  a  drinker  but  he  also  laughed  at 
total  abstinence.  I  have  heard  him  ridicule  it  time 
and  time  again.  He  had  three  boys,  carefully 
reared  in  most  respects  but  reared  to  his  ideas  about 
drinking,  reared  to  think  that  moderate  drinking 
was  the  proper  course,  reared  to  despise  a  drunkard, 
but  also  to  ridicule  total  abstinence.  Every  one  of 
these  three  boys  grew  up  to  be  a  drunkard. 

The  rumseller  is  bound  to  reap  in  his  own  family, 
if  he  has  one.  A  friend  of  mine  of  very  wide  ex- 
perience, I  think  the  widest  experience  of  any  friend 
I  ever  had,  once  said  to  me  that  he  had  never  known 
a  rumseller,  who  did  not  sooner  or  later  feel  the 
curse  in  his  own  home.  One  time  I  was  holding 
meetings  in  an  American  city.  Kiding  through  the 
streets  one  day  a  friend  pointed  out  a  man. 
"  There,"  said  ho,  "  is  a  man  who  has  run  a  saloon 
the  most  persistently  of  any  man  in  our  community. 
The  saloon  is  prohibited  among  us,  but  he  has  done 
everything  in  his  power  to  overthrow  or  circumvent 
the  law.  His  own  brother  committed  suicide 
through  the  effects  of  drink,  and  every  member  of 
his  family  is  ruined  by  drink." 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        57 

Big  Interest 

One  afternoon  I  got  out  of  a  street  car  to  go  to 
a  home  where  my  wife  and  I  were  to  take  tea  with 
some  friends.  After  paying  my  fare  I  had  but 
seven  cents  left — all  the  money  I  had  in  the  world. 
I  did  not  even  know  Avhere  the  money  was  coming 
from  to  buy  breakfast  for  my  family  next  morning, 
and  yet  I  had  no  care  as  God  had  supplied  our 
needs  so  often,  I  knew  that  He  would  now.  A 
young  woman  got  on  the  car  and  went  to  the  front 
end  of  the  car  and  dropped  her  five  cents  in  the 
box.  The  driver  opened  the  door  and  shook  his 
head  and  said,  "  That  Q.\q  cents  is  bad."  She  said, 
"  That  is  all  the  five  cents  I  have.*'  "  Then,"  he 
said,  "  you  must  get  off  the  car."  The  young 
woman  was  in  great  perplexity.  I  thought  of  my 
seven  cents  in  my  pocket,  all  the  money  I  had,  but 
I  went  to  the  front  end  of  the  car  and  dropped  five 
cents  in  the  box  and  relieved  the  young  woman's 
embarrassment.  I  felt  no  poorer.  I  had  no  doubt 
that  before  I  needed  money,  money  would  come. 
After  going  to  the  house  of  the  friend,  I  went  over 
town.  As  I  was  passing  along  the  street  a  gentle- 
man whom  I  knew  got  out  of  a  carriage  and  went 
to  his  horse's  head.  He  saw  me  passing  and  held 
out  his  hand  and  said,  "  How  do  you  do  ?  How  are 
you  getting  on  in  your  work  ?  "  I  told  him  I  was 
getting  on  nicely.  "  Well,"  he  said,  ''  I  want  to 
give  something  for  your  work,"  and  he  took  out  his 
pocketbook  and  gave  me  $200.  The  five  cents  had 
brought  quick  interest. 


58        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

I  Have  Seen  One  of  Those  Before 

A  YOUNG  fellow  came  to  the  Bible  Institute 
from  a  Kansas  farm  to  be  a  student.  He  was  one 
of  the  greenest  looking  men  that  ever  applied  to  the 
Institute  to  enter  as  a  student.  At  my  first  casual 
meeting  with  him  I  thought  to  myself,  "  I  wonder 
what  that  man  will  ever  do."  He  was  so  inde- 
scribably fresh  and  green.  But  he  was  full  of  zeal 
for  Christ  and  not  as  green  as  he  looked  or  acted. 

Not  long  afterwards  one  evening  he  was  on 
Chicago  Avenue  distributing  tracts  to  men  as  they 
passed  by.  It  was  a  hard  neighbourhood.  There 
had  been  many  a  murder  in  the  vicinity.  He  ap- 
proached one  man  to  hand  him  a  tract  and  the 
young  desperado  drew  a  revolver  and  held  it  at  his 
breast.  The  young  farmer  boy  was  not  phased  in 
the  least.  "  Oh,"  he  said  smiling,  "  I  have  seen  one 
of  those  before.  Have  a  tract."  The  young  fellow 
was  more  completely  disarmed  than  if  the  farmer 
had  knocked  him  down,  and  immediately  took  the 
tract  and  walked  away. 

Rescued 

One  night  at  a  late  meeting  in  the  Florence 
Crittenton  mission  in  New  York  a  drunken  Scotch 
girl  ran  to  the  front  screaming,  '^  Pray  for  me  ! 
Pray  for  me  !  "  After  the  meeting  was  over,  the 
workers  gathered  around  her.  She  told  how  she 
had  wandered  from  home.  How  her  mother  lived 
in  New  York  City,  a  poor  but  honest  woman.    They 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        59 

tried  to  get  the  girl  to  go  to  her  home  but  she  said 
no,  her  mother  would  not  welcome  her.  They  tried 
to  get  her  to  stay  with  them,  but  she  would  not, 
but  promised  that  if  they  would  see  her  mother  the 
next  day  that  she  would  come  around  the  next 
night,  and  if  her  mother  would  receive  her,  she 
would  go  to  her  home. 

One  of  the  workers  went  the  next  day  to  the  ad- 
dress given  and  found  the  mother.  She  said  to  her, 
"  We  have  found  your  daughter."  The  mother  re- 
plied, "  I  have  no  daughter."  But  when  they  ex- 
plained to  her  about  the  night  before,  she  said,  "  I 
had  a  daughter  once  but  she  left  me  years  ago.  I 
thought  she  was  dead.  I  will  take  her  back,  but 
do  not  disappoint  me  now  that  you  have  raised  my 
hopes  again.  Be  sure  and  bring  her."  They  ap- 
pointed an  hour  in  which  they  would  bring  her  that 
night.  But  the  night  came  and  the  girl  did  not 
come.  Hour  after  hour  the  meeting  went  on  but 
the  girl  did  not  come.  About  midnight  the  meet- 
ing closed  but  the  girl  had  not  appeared.  They 
held  a  consultation  as  to  what  they  should  do  and 
some  of  them  decided  to  make  a  visit-  to  the  low 
dens  of  iniquity  in  the  neighbourhood.  At  last  in 
a  sub-cellar  in  a  little  narrow  room,  blue  with 
smoke,  they  found  a  crowd  of  men  and  women  and 
the  Scotch  girl  in  the  midst,  wild  with  drink.  Her 
good  resolutions  had  fled  and  she  refused  to  go  to 
her  mother.  A  policeman  heard  the  noise  and 
came  down  to  see  what  it  was  and  said  to  the  girl, 
"  Now  you  have  a  chance  to  lead  a  better  life,  you 
accept  it.    If  you  don't,  if  I  ever  find  you  on  my 


60        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

beat  again,  I  will  club  you."  The  girl  was  getting 
somewhat  sobered  but  still  protested  that  she  could 
not  go  to  her  home  because  she  had  no  shoes  fit  to 
wear.  A  warm-hearted  Irishman  in  the  crowd 
agreed  to  find  her  a  pair  of  shoes.  Where  he  found 
them  at  that  hour  of  the  night,  I  do  not  know,  but 
he  soon  found  her  a  good,  strong  pair  of  shoes 
and  they  started  for  the  mother's  rooms.  When 
they  reached  the  rooms,  they  found  the  door  locked. 
The  mother  had  given  up  in  despair  and  had  gone 
to  bed,  but  in  answer  to  repeated  rappings  she 
came  to  the  door.  She  said  she  would  unlock  the 
door  and  they  could  pass  into  the  other  room  and 
as  soon  as  she  could  dress  she  would  come  in.  As 
they  sat  in  the  room  waiting  for  the  mother  to 
come  in,  the  daughter  looked  around  the  room,  and 
as  the  old  familiar  objects  met  her  eyes,  her  heart 
began  to  melt.  The  mother  soon  came  into  the 
room  carrying  a  candle.  As  she  looked  at  the  girl 
seated  on  the  sofa,  she  started  back  almost  dropping 
the  candle  and  exclaimed,  "  That  is  not  my  daugh- 
ter." "  Mother,"  said  the  girl,  "  do  you  not  know 
me?"  In  a  moment  the  mother  recognized  the 
voice  and  rushed  to  her  child's  side  and  they  were 
locked  in  one  another's  arms.  The  visitors  felt  that 
the  scene  was  too  sacred  to  gaze  upon  and  turned 
away.  Both  mother  and  girl  were  later  shown  the 
way  of  life,  and  turned  their  faces  heavenward. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        61 

''I  Will  Feel  for  a  Man'' 

One  night  in  the  lecture-room  of  Chicago  Avenue 
Church  Charles  Herald  was  urging  the  people  to  go 
out  and  bring  in  the  unsaved.  The  response  to  his 
appeals  were  somewhat  slow,  when  suddenly  a 
blind  man  sprang  to  his  feet  and  said,  "  Why  can- 
not you  do  as  the  evangelist  asks  you  ?  Now  I  can- 
not see,  but  I  will  feel  for  a  man  and  bring  him  to 
the  meeting  to-morrow  night."  The  next  night 
came  and  the  blind  man  was  picking  his  way 
through  a  dark  alley  back  of  the  church.  He  had 
nearly  reached  the  gate  when  suddenly  it  occurred 
to  him,  "  I  have  not  got  the  man  that  I  promised  to 
bring."  He  backed  up  against  the  wall  of  the 
church  and  listened.  Soon  he  heard  the  feet  of  a 
man  coming  down  the  asphalt  pavement  of  the 
alley  way.  When  the  man  was  in  front  of  him,  he 
suddenly  sprang  out  and  grabbed  the  man  and  said, 
"  Come  with  me  to  meeting."  The  man  was 
startled,  and  thought  at  first  he  was  being  held  up 
by  a  footpad.  He  was  ready  to  do  almost  anything, 
and  submissively  went  to  the  meeting.  He  was 
converted  that  night. 

The  next  night  the  blind  man  brought  three,  all 
of  whom,  I  think,  were  converted.  If  a  blind  man 
can  go  out  and  bring  in  people  that  way,  certainly 
we  that  have  our  eyes  ought  to  be  able  to  bring 
some  one  with  us  to  every  meeting. 


62        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

**  I  Have  Committed  a  Sin  for  Which  There  is 
No  Forgiveness  " 

At  the  close  of  a  service  in  our  Chicago  church  I 
found  a  man  standing  by  one  of  the  chairs.  He 
seemed  to  be  deeply  interested.  The  moment  I 
began  to  speak  to  him  he  broke  down  and  said, 
"  I  would  like  to  be  saved,  but  I  have  committed 
a  sin  for  which  there  is  no  forgiveness.  I  re- 
member my  mother  reading  me  in  the  Bible  Avhen 
I  was  a  boy  that  those  who  committed  this  sin 
could  not  be  saved."  I  asked  him  what  the  sin 
was  that  he  had  committed.  He  told  me,  and  for 
a  moment  I  could  not  think  where  there  was 
any  passage  in  the  Bible  that  could  by  any  possi- 
bility be  construed  into  meaning  that  there  could 
be  no  forgiveness  for  this  sin,  but  suddenly  1  Cor. 
6  :  9-11  occurred  to  me.  I  said,  "  I  think  I  know 
the  passage  to  which  you  refer,"  and  opened 
my  Bible  and  began  to  read,  "Know  ye  not  that 
the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God  ?  Be  not  deceived :  neither  fornicators,  nor 
idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers 
of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves,  nor  covet- 
ous, nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners, 
shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  Yes,"  he  said, 
"  that  is  it.  Does  it  not  say  there  is  no  salvation 
for  those  who  do  this  sin  ?  Does  it  not  say  '  they 
shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  '  ?  "  I  said, 
"  Listen,  while  I  read  the  next  verse,"  and  I  read 
on,  "  And  such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are 
washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified 


ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS        63 

in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of 
our  God."  "  Does  it  say  that  ?  Does  it  say  that  ?  " 
the  man  cried.  I  said,  "  Read  it  for  yourself." 
He  took  my  Bible  and  read  it  and  cried, 
"Thank  God."  He  knelt  down  with  the  tears 
streaming  down  his  face  and  accepted  the  Saviour, 
and  arose  full  of  joy  in  the  knowledge  that  his  sins 
were  all  forgiven. 

Some  weeks  after  when  I  entered  the  church  one 
Sunday  morning,  I  saw  him  standing  at  the  back  of 
the  seats  with  a  lady  between  thirty  and  forty  and 
a  young  lady  perhaps  seventeen  or  eighteen.  As  I 
stepped  up  to  speak  to  him  he  said,  "  Let  me  intro- 
duce you  to  my  wife  and  daughter."  I  spoke  to 
them  about  Christ  and  they  both  took  Christ.  To" 
day  that  man  is  a  hard-working  member  and  office- 
bearer in  Chicago  Avenue  Church.  His  sin  wai 
great,  but  even  such  as  he  could  be  "  washed  "  and 
"  sanctified  "  and  "  justified." 


Isaiah  Fifty-three  Six 

I  WAS  preaching  one  evening  in  a  college  town  in 
Minnesota.  I  noticed  a  fine  looking  man  with 
white  hair  and  beard  sitting  near  the  front. 
Though  he  listened  with  the  closest  attention,  the 
way  he  acted  while  I  preached,  and  when  I  gave 
the  invitation,  made  me  confident  that  he  was  not 
a  Christian.  Immediately  upon  the  close  of  the 
meeting,  I  made  my  way  to  him  and  said  to  him, 
"  Are  you  a  Christian  ?  "  "  No,  sir."  "  Would  you 
become  one  if  I  showed  you  how  ?  "    He  said,  "  I 


64        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

would."  I  said,  "  Let's  sit  down  and  talk  it  over." 
I  opened  my  Bible  to  Isaiah  53  :  6  and  read,  "  All 
we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray.  We  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way."  I  said,  "  Is  that  true 
of  you  ?  "  He  said,  "  It  is,  sir."  I  said,  "  What  are 
you  then?"  He  said,  "I  am  lost."  "Now,"  I 
said,  "  listen  to  the  rest  of  the  verse."  "  And  the 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
"  Do  you  believe  that  ?  "  I  said.  "  Yes,"  he  said, 
"  I  believe  everything  in  the  Bible."  I  said, "  Do  you 
believe  that  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all  ?  Do  you  believe  that  the  Lord  hath  laid 
on  Jesus  your  sin?"  He  said,  "I  do."  "What 
then  is  all  that  is  necessary  for  you  to  do  in  order 
to  be  saved?"  "Simply  to  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  he  said.  I  said,  "Will  you  do  it 
now  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  will."  "  Let  us  tell  God  so," 
and  side  by  side  we  knelt  in  prayer.  When  I  had 
prayed,  he  followed  me  in  prayer.  When  he  had 
finished  his  prayer,  I  said,  "  What  are  you  ?  "  He 
said,  "  I  am  saved.  My  sins  are  forgiven."  Then 
I  asked  him,  "  What  are  you  going  to  do  about  it  ?  " 
He  said,  "  I  am  going  back  to  my  home  and  set  up 
the  family  altar  and  unite  with  the  church."  Some 
months  after  I  met  the  pastor  of  the  church  that  he 
attended  in  a  town  down  on  the  Mississippi  Eiver 
and  asked  him  what  this  man  had  done.  He  said, 
"  He  came  back  to  his  home,  came  to  me  and  made 
application  for  membership  in  the  church,  and 
brought  his  oldest  son,  a  grown  man,  with  him, 
and  together  they  have  become  members  of  the 
church." 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        65 

''I  Lied  To  You,  Sir'' 

At  the  close  of  a  service  in  a  tent  in  a  section 
of  Chicago  called  "  Little  Hell,"  I  went  to  the  door 
of  the  tent  to  speak  to  the  people  as  they  walked 
out.  A  large  share  of  the  audience  were  Eoman 
Catholics.  I  shook  hands  with  one  after  another 
when  a  young  Koman  Catholic  Irishman  walked 
out.  I  held  out  my  hand  to  him  and  said,  "  Why 
don't  you  take  Jesus  Christ  as  your  Saviour?" 
"Oh,"  he  said,  "I  am  all  right."  I  said,  "You 
haven't  peace."  He  said,  "Yes,  I  have."  I  said, 
"  No,  you  haven't."  He  said,  "  Perhaps  you  know 
better  than  I  do."  I  said,  "  No,  but  God  knows 
better  than  either  of  us  and  God  says,  '  There  is  no 
peace  to  the  wicked.'  (Isa.  57 :  21.)  Now,"  I  said, 
"  either  God  lies  or  you  do,  but  I  know  God  does 
not  lie  and  God  says  you  haven't  peace.  *  There  is 
no  peace  to  the  wicked,  saith  my  God.'  "  The  man 
got  angry  and  said,  "  If  you  don't  want  me  to  come 
here  any  more,  I  won't."  I  said,  "  Yes,  I  do  want 
you  to  come  but  I  want  you  to  understand  that  you 
don't  deceive  me.  I  can  read  your  heart  just  as 
well  as  if  I  could  see  into  it,  and  I  know  there  is 
no  peace  in  your  heart."  He  said,  "  There  is,  too," 
and  broke  away  and  passed  out  of  the  tent. 

The  next  night  at  the  close  of  the  service  as  I 
looked  over  to  the  side  of  the  tent  to  my  left  I  saw 
this  man  on  his  knees  with  a  worker  beside  him. 
In  a  few  moments  he  and  the  worker  arose  and  the 
worker  came  to  me  and  said,  "That  young  man 
wishes  to  apologize  to  you."    I  said,  "  He  has  noth- 


66        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

ing  to  apologize  to  me  for.  He  has  never  wronged 
me."  "  Well,"  she  said,  "  he  says  he  did  and  wants 
to  apologize."  I  said,  "  Yery  well,  bring  him  over." 
He  said,  "  I  want  to  apologize  to  you.  I  lied  to  you 
last  night.  I  said  I  had  peace  when  I  had  not."  I 
said,  "  I  knew  you  hadn't,  for  God  says,  '  There  is 
no  peace  to  the  wicked.'  "  But  now  the  man  had 
peace,  real  peace  through  the  acceptance  of 
Christ. 


A  Letter  from  Stillwater  Prison 

I  EECEiVED  one  day  a  letter  from  a  man  in 
States'  prison  at  Stillwater.  It  read  as  follows: 
"Nearly  two  years  ago  I  heard  you  preach  on 
Washington  Avenue,  Minneapolis.  At  the  close  of 
the  service  you  came  to  me  and  urged  me  to  accept 
Christ.  I  was  under  deep  conviction  and  almost 
yielded,  but  finally  I  said,  *  No,  I  will  not  accept 
Christ  to-night,  but  I  will  come  back  to-morrow  night 
and  accept  Christ.'  You  urged  me  to  accept  Christ 
at  once  saying  that  no  one  could  tell  what  would 
happen  before  another  night,  but  I  was  stubborn  and 
would  not  yield.  I  went  out  of  the  meeting,  into  a 
saloon  and  got  drunk.  The  next  morning  I  found 
myself  under  arrest  for  stealing  an  overcoat.  I  had 
not  the  slightest  recollection  of  stealing  the  overcoat, 
but  suppose  I  did  steal  it  while  I  was  intoxicated. 
I  was  sentenced  to  this  place  for  two  years.  My 
time  is  almost  up,  but  now  I  have  accepted  Christ 
here  in  prison,  but  if  I  had  only  accepted  Him  that 
night  you  urged  me  to  down  on  Washington  Ave- 


"I  WANT  YOU  TO  UNDERSTAND  THAT  YOU  DON'T 
DECEIVE  ME." 


THE  NEW  TOftK 
PUBLIC  LIBRAKT 


AStOR,  LE-l^QX  AN© 
TILDKN  POaNDATlOMS 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        67 

nue,  I  would  not  have  had  the  disgrace  of  these  two 
years'  imprisonment." 


How  to  Reach  a  Son  in  a  Distant  Land 

At  the  close  of  a  meeting  one  day  in  Manchester, 
England,  a  prominent  business  man  of  that  city 
came  to  me  and  asked  me  to  pray  for  his  son.  He 
said  his  son  was  a  gifted  young  man,  nearly  forty 
years  of  age,  a  graduate  of  Cambridge  University 
and  a  lawyer  but  that  he  was  a  wanderer,  and  had 
left  his  wife  and  child  and  was  then  wandering,  he 
knew  not  where.     I  promised  to  pray  for  him. 

The  next  summer  at  Keswick,  this  father  came  to 
me  again  and  said,  "  I  have  got  track  of  my  son. 
He  is  in  Vancouver.  Do  you  know  any  minister  in 
Vancouver  ?  I  want  to  cable  him  at  once."  I 
gave  him  the  name  of  a  friend  in  Vancouver  and 
he  cabled  him.  But  the  next  day,  he  came  and 
said,  "  I  am  too  late.  The  bird  has  flown.  Will 
you  still  pray  for  my  son?"  I  promised  him  I 
would. 

The  following  November,  we  began  our  second 
mission  in  the  great  Tournament  Hall  in  Liver- 
pool. The  first  Sunday  afternoon  I  preached  on 
"God  is  Love."  At  the  close  of  the  service,  a 
fine  looking  man  thirty-eight  years  of  age  came  up 
to  me  and  told  me  that  he  had  decided  to  accept 
Christ.  When  we  inquired  into  the  matter,  we 
found  that  this  man  was  the  son  that  the  Man- 
chester man  had  asked  me  to  pray  for.  He  had 
returned  to  England,  had  wandered  into  our  first 


68        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

meeting  on  Sunday  afternoon  and  accepted  Christ 
He  at  once  gave  himself  to  the  work  of  winning 
others  with  great  success  and  afterwards  studied 
for  Holy  Orders  under  the  Bishop  of  Liverpool. 


A  Music  Halt  Singer  Converted 

One  night  in  Liverpool  a  music  hall  singer  as  he 
was  about  to  go  on  the  platform  was  handed  a  tele- 
gram asking  him  to  hurry  home  at  once,  that  his 
mother  was  dying.  He  left  the  music  hall  and 
started  for  home.  In  passing  by  the  Philharmonic 
Hall  where  we  were  holding  meetings,  he  heard  the 
music  and  thought  he  would  go  in  for  a  moment. 
Mr.  Alexander  was  singing,  "  Tell  Mother  I'll  be 
There."  He  thought  of  his  dying  mother,  a  Chris- 
tian woman,  and  thought  of  the  life  that  he  was 
leading  and  how  they  could  not  tell  his  mother  that 
he  would  be  there,  and  then  and  there  he  accepted 
Jesus  Christ. 

The  following  ITew  Year's  eve,  he  was  out  in  a 
company  of  friends  and  was  asked  for  a  song.  He 
arose  and  took  out  one  of  our  hymn-books  and  be- 
gan to  sing,  "  Tell  Mother  I'll  be  There,"  and  the 
power  of  God  came  upon  the  gathering,  and  the 
social  gathering  was  turned  into  a  meeting  that 
lasted  until  midnight. 

During  our  second  mission  in  Liverpool,  this  man 
was  one  of  our  chief  ushers,  and  one  of  our  most 
faithful  workers. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        69 

A  Would-be  Suicide  Saved  b^  Prayer 

A  YOUis'G  man  in  England  was  left  a  very  com- 
fortable sura  of  money  by  his  father,  but  he  ran 
through  it  very  rapidly  in  drink  and  gambling.  He 
squandered  part  of  it  in  England  and  part  of  it  in 
India.  As  his  money  ran  low,  he  came  back  to 
England  in  a  state  of  despair.  He  had  a  stroke  of 
good  luck  at  the  gaming  table  and  won  nearly 
$1,000,  but  he  began  to  squander  it  all  in  a  terrible 
debauch. 

Just  at  this  time,  his  broken-hearted  Christian 
sister  sent  a  request  to  our  meeting  in  Birmingham 
that  we  would  pray  for  him.  The  night  we  prayed 
for  him,  her  brother  was  in  desperation.  He  was 
not  in  Birmingham  but  about  forty  miles  away. 
He  sat  by  a  table  with  a  loaded  revolver  about  to 
end  his  life,  but  God  heard  the  prayer  that  went  up 
in  Birmingham,  and  as  he  sat  there,  memories  of 
his  mother  came  to  him  and  instead  of  doing  the 
rash  act  that  he  contemplated,  he  knelt  down  and 
surrendered  his  life  to  God.  He  became  at  once  an 
out  and  out  Christian  and  an  active  worker  for 
Christ.  He  obtained  a  position  as  a  nurse  for  an 
invalid  but  constantly  did  Christian  work  as  he  had 
opportunity.  "When  we  were  holding  our  mission 
in  Brighton,  he  came  and  spent  his  whole  month's 
vacation  working  in  the  after-meeting.  God  called 
him  into  a  larger  work  and  now  he  is  holding  meet- 
ings in  different  parts  of  the  world  with  great 
success. 


70        Ai^ECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

Last  Opportunity  Throivn  Away 

At  one  of  the  meetings  in  Bradford,  a  man  and 
wife  were  deeply  moved  but  they  hung  back  and 
neither  of  them  rose  to  accept  Christ.  As  they 
went  home  together  that  night  the  wife  said  to  the 
husband,  "  Would  it  not  have  been  nice  if  we  had 
both  risen  together  and  accepted  Christ  to-night  ?  " 
He  replied,  "  Yes,  it  would."  In  the  middle  of  the 
night  she  awakened  her  husband  and  complained  of 
feeling  ill  and  in  a  few  moments  had  passed  into 
eternity.  It  was  her  last  opportunity  to  make  a 
public  confession  of  Christ  and  she  had  thrown  it 
away. 

After  the  man  had  laid  his  wife's  body  away  in 
the  cemetery  he  came  to  the  meeting  and  told  the 
story  and  publicly  accepted  Christ. 

God  Save  My  Papa 
One  night  a  man  stood  at  the  door  of  the  city 
mission  in  Minneapolis  inviting  passers-by  to  come 
in.  An  Englishman,  a  stone  cutter  by  trade,  passed 
by.  "  Come  in  to  a  Gospel  meeting,"  the  worker 
cheerily  said  to  him.  "  What  do  I  want  with  a  Gos- 
pel meeting  ?  I  have  no  use  for  a  Gospel  meet- 
ing," the  Englishman  replied  gruffly,  and  went 
grumbling  up  the  street.  He  was  a  splendid  work- 
man, making  over  four  dollars  a  day  at  his  trade 
when  he  worked,  but  squandering  his  time  and  his 
money  and  his  life  in  strong  drink  and  gambling.  At 
times  he  was  so  desperate  that  he  would  stand  upon 


A2O:CD0TES  AND  ILLUSTKATIONS        71 

the  Tenth  Avenue  Bridge  and  look  over  into  the 
Mississippi  Eiver  as  it  flowed  below  and  contem- 
plate throwing  himself  into  the  river. 

One  Sunday  afternoon,  not  many  days  after,  a 
little  girl  of  ten  went  up  Washington  Avenue.  The 
Sunday-school  session  of  the  City  Mission  was  in 
progress.  "  Would  you  not  like  to  come  to  Sunday- 
school  ?  '^  a  bright-faced  .Christian  woman  said  to 
the  little  girl  as  she  passed  the  door.  In  curiosity 
the  little  girl  turned  in  to  the  Sunday-school,  was 
greatly  delighted  with  all  she  saw  and  heard. 
When  she  heard  of  Jesus  as  her  own  Saviour,  she 
very  readily  accepted  Him  and  gave  her  whole 
heart  and  life  to  Him.  She  became  greatly  inter- 
ested in  the  conversion  of  her  father.  Her  mother 
and  grandfather  and  grandmother  and  uncle  and 
aunt  were  saved  but  her  father  held  out.  She 
begged  the  workers  to  come  down  to  their  home  and 
hold  a  cottage  meeting  there,  for  she  felt  it  was  the 
only  way  to  get  hold  of  her  father  as  he  would  not 
come  to  the  meetings.  The  workers  consented  to 
go.  It  was  a  drunkard's  home,  down  on  the  east 
side  flats  in  Minneapolis.  On  the  appointed  evening 
her  father  rose  from  the  supper  table  and  took  down 
his  overcoat  and  was  about  to  start  for  the  saloon, 
and  Annie  said,  "  Papa,  we  are  going  to  have  a 
cottage  meeting  here  to-night,  won't  you  stay?" 
"  What  do  I  want  with  a  cottage  meeting  ?  "  "  But 
papa,"  urged  the  little  child,  ^'  won't  you  stay  for 
Annie's  sake?"  Drunkard  though  he  was,  he 
loved  his  child.  He  hung  up  the  old  overcoat  again 
and  sat  down  on  the  rickety  old  sofa  and  waited  for 


72       ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

them  to  come.  One  by  one  workers  and  neighbours 
crowded  into  the  house.  The  man  felt  very  uneasy 
and  wished  he  were  at  the  saloon.  A  song  was 
sung  and  the  leader  read  a  passage  and  they  all 
knelt  in  prayer.  One  after  another  the  workers 
prayed.  The  man  on  the  sofa  grew  more  and  more 
uneasy  and  looked  around  for  some  way  of  escape 
from  the  meeting,  but  all  possibility  of  escape  was 
cut  off.  "  If  I  ever  get  out  of  this,  you  will  never 
get  me  into  a  place  like  this  again,"  the  man  thought 
to  himself.  One  after  another  the  Christian  men 
and  women  prayed,  and  then  all  was  still.  Sud- 
denly a  child^s  voice  broke  the  silence,  "  Oh,  God, 
will  you  not  save  my  papa  ?  "  That  prayer  went  to 
the  heart  of  God  and  like  an  arrow  it  went  to  the 
heart  of  the  wicked  father.  He  dropped  off  the 
sofa  on  to  his  knees  and  cried  to  God  for  mercy  and 
was  saved  that  night. 

He  became  one  of  the  most  indefatigable  Chris- 
tian workers  I  ever  knew  and  when  I  left  Minne- 
apolis, he  was  a  deacon  in  my  church. 


Saved  in  a  Theatre 

Some  of  the  business  men  of  Minneapolis  de- 
termined on  an  assault  upon  Satan  in  one  of  his 
strongholds  in  that  city.  "  The  Theatre  Comique," 
the  lowest  den  in  Minneapolis  at  the  time,  was  en- 
gaged for  a  series  of  Sunday  afternoon  meetings. 
Some  good  people  thought  it  was  unwise  to  take 
the  Gospel  down  into  such  a  den  of  iniquity.  One 
of  the  leading  business  men  of  the  city  stood  on  the 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        73 

street  corner  giving  out  invitations  to  the  Theatre 
Comique  meetings.  A  young  fellow  came  along 
and  took  an  invitation.  He  read  it  and  then  said 
to  the  business  man,  "  Do  you  know  what  sort  of  a 
place  the  Theatre  Comique  is  ?  "  Mr.  G.  replied, 
"  Do  you  suppose  I  have  been  in  Minneapolis  twenty 
years  not  to  know  ?  "  "Well,"  said  the  3^oung  fel- 
low, "  what  are  you  having  the  Gospel  preached  in 
such  a  place  as  that  for  ?  "  "  When  you  go  fishing," 
replied  Mr.  G.,  "  where  do  you  go  ?  "  "  Oh,"  the 
young  fellow  replied,  "  I  see  it.  I  go  where  the 
fish  are."  The  fish  were  there  in  abundance  and 
many  of  them  were  caught. 

The  first  meeting  was  held  on  NTew  Year's  Day. 
A  few  days  after  the  first  meeting  I  received  a 
letter  from  Ottumwa,  Iowa.  The  letter  was  anony- 
mous but  the  writer  said,  "  I  was  at  your  meeting 
in  the  Theatre  Comique  on  N"ew  Year's  Day. 
Years  ago  in  England  I  was  a  Christian  and  a  local 
preacher,  but  the  first  thing  that  I  did  when  I 
walked  off  the  gangplank  of  the  steamer  in  E'ew 
York  was  to  go  to  a  saloon,  and  I  have  been  going 
down  ever  since.  I  had  squandered  $300  in  the 
Theatre  Comique  the  week  preceding  your  meeting, 
but  as  I  sat  there  on  the  first  day  of  the  new  year 
and  listened  to  you  preach  the  Gospel,  the  Spirit  of 
God  touched  my  heart  and  I  accepted  Christ  as  my 
Saviour  and  have  started  a  new  life." 

A  year  passed  by.  On  the  following  New  Year's 
Day  we  were  having  a  reception  all  day  long  in 
our  mission  hall  on  Washington  Avenue.  Several 
months  before  a  man  had  come  into  our  fellowship 


74       ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

and  had  proven  himself  a  very  earnest  active  Chris- 
tian and  had  so  won  the  confidence  of  the  people 
that  he  had  been  elected  a  deacon  in  the  church  and 
was  filling  the  office  with  great  acceptance.  As 
we  were  sitting  in  the  reception-room  of  the  mis- 
sion, he  turned  to  me  suddenly  and  said,  "  Did  you 
receive  a  letter  from  Ottumwa,  Iowa,  from  a  man 
that  was  converted  in  the  Theatre  Comique  on  New 
Year's  Day  last  year?"  I  said,  "Yes,  I  did.'' 
"  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  am  the  man."  And  now  this 
man,  who  had  squandered  $300  in  one  of  the  vilest 
dens  in  Minneapolis  a  year  before  was  an  active  and 
honoured  office  bearer  in  a  Christian  church. 


Despondency  Changed  into  Abounding  Joy 

There  came  to  me  one  night  at  the  close  of  a 
meeting  a  man  with  as  sad  a  face  as  I  had  ever 
seen.  He  asked  me  to  pray  for  him.  I  tried  to 
show  him  the  way  of  life.  He  would  listen  intently 
but  did  not  seem  to  be  able  to  grasp  it.  Night 
after  night  he  would  come  to  me  with  the  same 
look  of  hopeless  gloom  in  his  face.  1  was  afraid 
the  man  would  go  insane.  In  fact,  I  afterwards 
learned  that  he  had  at  one  time  been  in  an  insane 
asylum.  He  would  profess  to  accept  Christ,  but 
when  I  showed  him  the  Word  of  God  that  "He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,"  and 
tried  to  impress  him  with  the  fact  that  he  had 
God's  own  assurance  for  it  that  he  had  everlasting 
life,  he  seemed  utterly  unable  to  grasp  it  and  would 
go  away  with  a  despairing  look,  asking  me  if  I 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        75 

would  still  pray  for  him.  This  went  on  for  weeks 
and  I  almost  dreaded  to  see  the  man  approaching 
me. 

But  one  night  as  I  was  about  to  strike  a  match  to 
light  the  gas  Peter  N.  came  in  through  the  front 
door  as  I  struck  the  match  and  lighted  the  gas.  I 
saw  there  was  a  still  brighter  light  in  his  face. 
The  gloom  was  all  gone.  He  was  radiant.  The 
Spirit  of  God  had  shone  into  his  heart.  He  had 
full  assurance  of  sins  forgiven.  His  gladness  was 
not  for  a  day,  nor  for  a  week,  nor  a  month  but 
continuous.  He  gave  himself  to  God's  work  with 
an  earnestness  that  I  have  seldom  seen  equalled. 
He  was  a  skillful  workman,  receiving  large  pay,  but 
he  gave  almost  his  entire  income  to  the  Lord's 
work,  keeping  scarcely  anything  for  himself  to  live 
on.  Indeed  I  sometimes  felt  he  did  not  keep 
enough  to  live  on.  Out  of  working  hours,  he  was 
always  witnessing  for  Christ  in  public  or  in  private. 

Hopeless  gloom  had  been  transformed  by  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  into  triumphant  joy. 


Shoiv  Me  Myself 

A  GODLY  minister  was  once  travelling  in  Scot- 
land and  put  up  at  a  certain  tavern.  At  evening- 
time  the  landlord  asked  if  he  would  conduct  family 
prayer.  He  consented  on  the  condition  that  the 
landlord  would  call  all  the  servants  of  the  house- 
hold. The  servants  came  in  and  when  all  seemed 
to  be  assembled,  the  minister  asked,  "  Are  all 
here?"    "Yes,"    said   the   landlord.    "Not    one 


76        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

missing  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Oh,  well,"  said  the  land- 
lord, ''  there  is  a  poor  girl  we  never  bring  in. 
She  does  the  dirty  work  about  the  kitchen  and  is 
not  fit  to  come  in  with  the  others."  "  Well  then," 
said  the  minister,  "I  will  not  go  on  until  she 
comes."  He  insisted  and  the  landlord  yielded. 
Seeing  her  neglected  appearance,  the  minister  took 
a  peculiar  interest  in  her.  When  he  was  leaving 
the  next  day,  he  called  for  the  girl  and  said  to  her, 
"  I  wish  to  teach  you  a  prayer,  and  I  want  you  to 
pray  it  until  I  come  back  again.  It  is  this,  *  Lord, 
show  me  myself.' " 

He  left  the  hotel,  but  returned  in  a  few  days. 
He  asked  the  landlord,  "  How  is  that  poor  girl  ?  " 
"  Oh,"  replied  the  landlord,  "  she  is  spoiled.  She 
is  of  no  use  whatever  now.  She  can  do  no  work. 
She  is  weeping  all  the  time.  She  mopes  and  is 
melancholy.  I  don't  know  what  is  the  matter  with 
her."  The  minister  knew,  and  asked  to  see  her. 
The  landlord  brought  her  in  and  the  minister  said, 
"  Now  I  wish  to  teach  you  another  prayer.  You 
have  been  praying,  *  Show  me  myself '  ?  "  "  Yes," 
she  said,  in  deep  distress,  "and  I  am  so  wicked  I 
can  do  nothing  but  weep  over  my  sins."  "  Now  let 
me  teach  you  another  prayer,  *  Lord,  show  me  Thy- 
self.' " 

Years  passed.  The  minister  was  preaching  in 
Glasgow  when  a  neat-looking  woman  came  up  to 
him  at  the  close  of  the  sermon  and  said,  "  Do  you 
remember  me  ?  "  "  No,"  he  said,  "  I  do  not."  "  Do 
you  remember  teaching  a  poor  girl  in  a  hotel  to 
pray,  *  Show  me  myself '  ?  "    "  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  I 


ANECDOTES  A]SrD'ILLUSTEATIO:t^S        77 

remember  that  well."  "  I  am  that  girl.  I  prayed 
that  prayer  and  got  such  a  view  of  myself  that  I 
was  overwhelmed  with  grief  and  despair.  Then 
you  taught  me  the  other  prayer,  '  Lord,  show  me 
Thyself,'  and  He  showed  me  Himself  and  my  grief 
and  despair  went  and  I  trusted  Him  and  found  sal- 
vation and  He  has  made  me  what  I  am  to-day." 

It  is  a  good  prayer  for  us  all  to  pray,  "Lord, 
show  me  myself,"  and  after  He  has  shown  us  our- 
selves, let  us  go  on  and  ask  Him  to  show  us  Him- 
self. 


Fighting  Whiskey 

One  of  the  most  notoriously  bad  characters  that 
ever  lived  in  New  York  was  Orville  Gardner.  He 
was  the  trainer  of  prize-fighters  and  companion  of 
all  sorts  of  hard  characters.  His  reputation  was  so 
thoroughly  bad  that  he  was  called  "  Awful  Gardner." 
He  had  a  little  boy,  whom  he  dearly  loved,  and  this 
boy  died.  A  short  time  after  his  boy's  death,  he 
was  standing  at  the  bar  in  a  New  York  saloon,  sur- 
rounded by  a  number  of  his  boon  companions.  The 
night  was  sweltering,  and  he  stepped  outside  the 
saloon  to  get  a  little  fresh  air.  As  he  stood  out 
there  and  looked  up  between  the  high  buildings  at 
the  sky  above  his  head,  a  bright  star  was  shining 
down  upon  him,  and  as  he  stood  looking  at  the  star, 
he  said  to  himself,  "  I  wonder  where  my  little  boy 
is  to-night  ?  "  Then  the  thought  came  to  him  quick 
as  a  flash,  "  Wherever  he  is,  you  will  never  see  him 
again  unless  you  change  your  life."    Touched  by 


78        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

the  Spirit  of  God,  he  hurried  from  the  saloon  to  the 
room  where  he  knew  his  godly  mother  was.  He 
went  in  and  asked  his  mother  to  pray  for  him. 
They  spent  the  whole  night  in  prayer  and  towards 
morning  "  Awful  Gardner  "  had  found  peace  and 
gained  the  victory.  He  was  the  victim  of  an  over- 
whelming appetite  for  drink,  and  had  in  his  house  a 
jug  of  whiskey  at  the  time.  He  did  not  dare  to 
keep  it  and  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  it. 
Finally  he  took  it  down  to  the  river,  got  into  a  boat 
and  rowed  over  to  an  island.  He  set  the  liquor  on 
a  rock  and  knelt  down,  and  as  he  afterwards  said, 
"  Fought  that  jug  of  whiskey  for  a  long  time,"  and 
God  gave  him  perfect  deliverance.  But  what  should 
he  do  with  the  jug  ?  He  did  not  dare  break  it,  lest 
the  fumes  set  him  wild.  He  did  not  dare  leave  it, 
lest  some  one  else  get  it.  Finally  he  dug  a  hole  in 
the  ground  with  his  heel  and  buried  it.  He  left  the 
island  a  free  man. 

He  became  a  mighty  preacher  of  the  gospel.  It 
was  through  listening  to  him  preach  that  Jerry 
McAuley  was  set  to  thinking,  and  that  thinking 
afterwards  led  to  his  conversion. 


Infidelity  and  Licentiousness 

One  night  when  Colonel  IngersoU  was  delivering 
one  of  his  brilliant  lectures  in  one  of  our  great  cities  a 
large  number  of  medical  students  went  to  hear  him. 
They  listened  with  admiration  and  applause  to  the 
colonePs  brilliant  periods,  and  when  the  lecture  was 
over,  they  marched  out  arm  in  arm,  a  long  company 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS        79 

of  them  down  the  streets  of  the  city,  and  into  the 
vilest  dens  of  infamy. 

Some  at  least  of  those  who  watched  them  could 
not  but  note  the  intimate  connection  between  in- 
fidelity and  licentiousness. 


A  Theological  Professor  Doing  the  DeviVs 
Work 

D.  L.  Moody  was  generally  considered  a  broad 
man,  and  so  he  was.  No  matter  how  far  astray  a 
man  might  go  in  doctrine,  D.  L.  Moody  would  do 
his  best  to  reclaim  him  to  the  truth.  But  Mr. 
Moody  was  a  plain-spoken  man  as  well  as  a  broad 
man.  One  man  whose  views  of  the  Bible  were  ex- 
tremely lax  used  to  make  a  good  deal  of  Mr.  Moody's 
friendship  for  him,  and  that  Mr.  Moody  was  friendly 
towards  him  there  can  be  no  doubt,  but  Mr.  Moody 
told  me  that  he  told  this  man  to  his  face  that  he  was 
doing  the  devil's  work.  It  was  plain  talking,  but  it 
was  unquestionable  truth. 

Persistence  Pays 

In  the  early  days  of  his  work  in  Chicago,  Mr. 
Moody  was  always  on  the  watch  for  children  for 
his  Sunday-school.  Wherever  he  saw  a  child,  he 
would  approach  them  and  invite  them  to  the 
Sunday-school.  One  day  he  saw  a  little  girl  stand- 
ing on  the  corner  with  a  pail  in  her  hand  in  which 
she  was  going  to  fetch  beer.  He  accosted  the  little 
child  pleasantly  and  invited   her  to  his  Sunday- 


80        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

school,  and  she  promised  to  come.  The  next 
Sunday  Mr.  Moody  was  on  the  lookout  for  her,  but 
she  did  not  put  in  an  appearance.  Then  he  began 
to  hunt  for  her  everywhere,  but  days  passed  with- 
out seeing  her.  One  day  he  noticed  her  on  the 
street  and  started  towards  her.  But  no  sooner  did 
she  see  him  coming  than  she  broke  into  a  run.  He 
began  to  run  down  the  street  after  her.  She  went 
flying  as  fast  as  her  feet  would  carry  her.  Mr. 
Moody  was  after  her  in  hot  pursuit.  She  turned 
the  corner ;  he  after  her.  She  went  down  an  alley, 
up  another  street,  Mr.  Moody  still  in  hot  pursuit. 
She  dashed  into  a  saloon.  He  dashed  after  her. 
Through  the  saloon  she  went ;  Mr.  Moody  following. 
Up  the  stairway  at  the  rear.  Mr.  Moody  still  in 
pursuit.  She  dashed  into  a  bedroom,  and  Mr. 
Moody  never  stopped.  She  plunged  under  a  bed, 
and  Mr.  Moody  drew  her  out  by  the  leg.  She 
proved  to  be  the  child  of  a  widow  with  a  large 
family  that  were  living  over  the  saloon.  The  cir- 
cumstances of  the  family  were  anything  but  ele- 
vating, but  Mr.  Moody  won  that  whole  family  for 
Christ.  In  later  years,  the  child  grown  to  woman- 
hood, was  one  of  the  most  honoured  workers  in  the 
church  and  the  wife  of  a  highly  esteemed  office- 
bearer. 


Won  by  a  Smite 

As  a  Sunday-school  worker  hurried  down  the 
streets  of  Chicago  one  day  on  his  way  to  Sunday- 
school,  he  noticed  a  little  baby  being  held  at  the 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS        81 

window  by  some  one  in  the  family.  He  turned 
towards  the  baby  and  smiled.  The  baby  smiled 
back.  The  next  Sunday  the  baby  was  there  again 
and  again  he  smiled  at  the  baby  and  waved  his 
hand.  The  next  Sunday  there  were  several  at  the. 
window  with  the  baby  watching  for  him  to  pass 
and  again  he  recognized  the  baby  and  smiled  and 
waved  his  hand.  Some  one  in  the  house  followed 
him.  They  saw  him  turn  into  the  Sunday-school 
and  went  back  home  and  told  where  he  had  gone. 
The  next  Sunday  some  of  the  children  appeared  at 
the  Sunday-school  and  finally  the  whole  family  was 
won  for  Christ.  Won  by  a  smile.  JSTo  one  can 
ever  tell  where  some  little  act  of  kindness  will  end. 


Could  Not  Get  Over  Her  Father's  Life 

I  ONCE  received  an  anonymous  note  asking  me  to 
call  on  the  lady  principal  of  a  school.  She  was  a 
woman  of  very  brilliant  gifts  but  professed  to  be 
an  utter  unbeliever.  I  called  one  day  at  the  school 
and  received  a  very  cordial  reception,  but  the 
woman  said,  "  I  do  not  believe  anything.  I  do  not 
even  read  the  Bible  because  it  seems  wrong  for  one 
to  read  it  and  disbelieve  everything  in  it  as  I  do." 
As  I  talked  with  her,  she  insisted  that  she  was  con- 
firmed in  her  unbelief,  and  that  there  was  no  pos- 
sibility of  her  being  led  out  of  it.  But  suddenly 
she  began  to  weep  and  I  said  to  her,  "  Why  are 
you  crying  ?  "  "  Oh,"  she  said, "  there  is  one  thing 
I  cannot  get  over,  and  that  is  my  father's  life.  My 
father  was  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  and  whenever  I 


82        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

think  of  the  holy  life  he  lived,  I  feel  that  there 
must  be  something  in  Christianity.  I  cannot  get 
over  his  life."  She  had  tried  hard  to  do  so,  but  she 
had  failed  utterly. 

Starting  out  from  this  point,  I  was  able  to  tell 
her  how  she  could  find  out  for  herself  that  beyond 
a  peradventure  the  Bible  was  the  Word  of  God, 
and  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God.  She  promised  to 
follow  the  plan  suggested,  and  I  afterwards  had 
the  privilege  of  receiving  her  into  membership  in 
the  church. 

But  my  reasonings  would  have  been  of  no  avail 
if  she  had  not  been  prepared  to  listen  to  them  by 
the  insurmountable  argument  of  her  own  father's 
holy  life.  The  best  argument  for  Christianity  is  a 
Christian  life. 


Converted  at  Nine  Years  of  Age 

A  CHILD  can  be  a  true  Christian.  Some  people 
do  not  believe  that.  Some  people  think  a  boy  or 
girl  must  grow  up  until  they  are  twenty  or  twenty- 
one,  or  at  least  until  they  are  fifteen  or  sixteen  be- 
fore they  can  understand  what  it  means  to  be  a 
Christian.  This  is  a  great  mistake.  Boys  and 
girls  that  can  understand  anything  can  understand 
that  Jesus  died  for  them  and  that  He  rose  again 
and  is  able  to  help  and  keep  them  day  by  day,  and 
they  can  take  Jesus  and  trust  Him  as  their  own 
Saviour. 

Long,  long  years  ago  over  in  Western  Asia,  there 
was  an  old  man  ninety -five  years  of  age  with  long 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        83 

beard  hanging  down  upon  his  bosom,  and  long 
white  hair  hanging  down  upon  his  neck.  His 
name  was  Polycarp,  Bishop  of  Smyrna.  A  new 
Koman  governor  came  to  Smyrna  who  bitterly 
hated  Christianity  and  determined  to  stamp  it  out 
of  his  province.  His  councillors  said  to  him,  "  If 
you  are  going  to  stamp  out  Christianity,  you  would 
better  deal  with  Polycarp,  for  he  is  the  best  and 
most  influential  Christian  in  Smyrna."  Polycarp 
was  away  from  Smyrna  in  the  country  at  the  time 
but  the  governor  sent  for  him  and  had  him  dragged 
to  Smyrna.  When  Polycarp  was  brought  before 
the  governor,  he  said  to  him,  "  Are  you  a  Chris- 
tian?" "Yes,  I  am  a  follower  of  Jesus."  "But," 
said  the  governor,  "  you  must  renounce  Jesus  and 
sacrifice  to  the  idols  or  I  will  throw  you  to  the 
lions  and  they  will  tear  you  limb  from  limb."  But 
Polycarp  refused.  The  governor  grew  more  angry 
and  said,  "  Unless  you  renounce  Jesus,  I  will  have 
them  burn  you  at  the  stake."  Polycarp  replied, 
"These  eighty  and  six  years  have  I  served  my 
Lord  and  He  never  did  me  any  harm,  and  I  cannot 
deny  my  Lord  and  Master  now." 

They  took  old  Polycarp  out  and  tied  him  to  the 
stake.  They  piled  the  fagots  around  him  and  they 
came  with  a  torch  and  touched  the  light  to  the 
wood.  Hotter  and  hotter  grew  the  flames  and 
Polycarp's  flesh  began  to  burn,  but  the  aged  saint 
stood  there  triumphant,  rejoicing  to  suffer  for  the 
name  of  Jesus. 

He  w^as  ninety-five  years  old  when  he  died.  He 
had  been  a  Christian,  according  to  his  own  testi- 


84        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

mony,  eighty -six  years.     Poly  carp  must  have  been 
converted  when  he  was  nine  years  of  age. 

It  is  plain  that  a  boy  can  be  a  Christian  and  a 
good  one  too.  It  is  also  plain  that  the  good  chil- 
dren do  not  all  die  young.  JSTinety-five  years  of  age 
is  not  very  young  to  die. 


Are  You  a  Murderer} 

I  WAS  sitting  one  day  with  a  very  brilliant 
lawyer  in  the  city  of  Minneapolis,  who  was  be- 
ginning to  go  down  through  drink.  He  was  partly 
intoxicated  this  day.  I  said  to  him,  "John,  you 
ought  to  be  a  Christian."  "Oh,"  he  said,  with  a 
laugh,  "I  don't  believe  as  you  do.  I  am  one  of 
these  new  theologians.  I  believe  in  the  larger 
hope.  Now,  honour  bright,"  he  continued,  "do 
you  believe  in  hell,  Torrey  ? "  "  Yes,"  I  replied, 
" I  do."  " Honestly,  do  you  believe  in  hell ? "  "I 
do."  "  See  here,  suppose  I  should  drop  down  dead 
right  here,  what  do  you  think  would  become  of 
me?"  I  said,  "John,  if  you  should  drop  down 
dead  right  here,  you  would  go  to  hell  and  you 
would  deserve  to."  He  bristled  up  full  of  anger 
and  said,  "  What  have  I  done  ?  "  I  said,  "  I  will 
tell  you  what  you  have  done.  You  have  got  your 
wife's  heart  right  under  your  heel,  and  you  are  grind- 
ing the  life  right  out  of  it."  He  could  not  deny  it. 
He  knew  it  was  true.  I  said,  "  You  are  doing 
something  worse.  You  are  trampling  under  foot 
the  Son  of  God  who  died  on  the  cross  of  Calvary 
for  you." 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS        85 

How  many  a  young  man  is  killing  his  mother  by 
his  wild,  reckless,  dissolute  life.  I  was  once  stop- 
ping in  a  beautiful  home,  fine  house,  spacious 
grounds,  many  servants,  horses  and  carriages,  lawns 
and  parks,  everything  that  money  could  buy.  Now 
to  have  gone  into  that  home  and  not  have  known 
what  lay  beneath  the  surface,  one  would  have  said, 
"  The  lady  at  the  head  of  this  house  must  be  per- 
fectly happy."  But  I  found  out  while  I  was  there 
that  the  mother  of  the  household,  so  far  from  be- 
ing perfectly  happy,  was  perfectly  miserable. 
When  all  the  rest  of  the  household  were  asleep, 
she  would  arise  in  the  silent  hours  of  the  night  and 
walk  up  and  down  the  broad  halls  of  that  mansion 
with  a  breaking  heart.  She  could  not  sleep.  She 
had  a  wayward  boy  in  New  York  City  and  did  not 
even  know  where  he  was.  Some  months  after- 
wards I  stood  by  the  grave  into  which  that  woman 
had  been  lowered,  and  that  wayward  son  stood  by 
my  side.  The  doctor's  verdict  was  that  that 
woman  died  from  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  but  I  said 
in  my  heart,  "  This  woman  died  of  murder,  and 
this  man  beside  me,  her  son,  is  her  murderer." 

I  told  this  story  once  in  Melbourne,  Australia,  in 
the  Town  Hall  at  the  business  men's  meeting. 
Scarcely  had  I  finished  the  story  when  a  man  thirty 
or  thirty-five  years  of  age  in  the  back  part  of  the 
room  sprang  to  his  feet  and  came  rushing  down  the 
aisle  crying  aloud,  '^  I  am  a  murderer.  I  am  a 
murderer.  I  have  killed  my  mother."  He  was  a 
notorious  infidel  and  drunkard.  He  had  often 
blasphemed  Christ  from  the  public  platform  in  that 


86        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

city,  but  this  day  the  arrow  went  home,  his  sin  was 
laid  bare.  He  went  into  a  side  room  and  fell  upon 
his  knees  and  cried  to  God  for  mercy.  After  the 
meeting  was  over,  I  went  and  knelt  by  his  side, 
where  an  aged  Episcopal  clergyman  was  talking  to 
him.  "  Oh,"  he  said,  "  is  there  pardon  for  me  ? 
For  one  who  has  spoken  so  blasphemously  as  I  have 
from  the  infidel  platform  in  this  city  ?  "  I  showed 
him  that  there  was  pardon  for  the  chief  of  sinners, 
that  there  was  pardon  for  one  who  had  killed  his 
mother  by  his  reckless  life  and  even  for  one  who 
had  blasphemed  the  name  of  the  Saviour  who  had 
died  on  the  cross  of  Calvary  for  him,  and  done  all 
he  could  to  get  others  to  blaspheme  Him  too,  and 
that  day  he  went  away  trusting  in  the  Saviour, 
whom  he  had  once  blasphemed. 

What  joy  there  must  have  been  in  that  mother's 
heart  that  day  in  the  Glory  if  word  of  her  son's 
conversion  was  taken  to  her. 


Insulting  God 

One  night  one  of  my  workers  called  me  and 
said,  "  Come  and  talk  to  this  man.  He  is  an  in- 
fidel." I  went  over  and  talked  to  him.  I  said, 
"  Are  you  an  infidel  ?  "  He  said,  "  Yes,  I  am  an 
infidel."  I  said,  "  Will  you  tell  me  why  you  are  an 
infidel  ?  "  He  said,  "  Yes,  sir,  because  the  Bible  is 
full  of  contradictions."  I  said,  "  Will  you  please 
show  me  one?"  He  said,  "It  is  full  of  them." 
"  Well,"  I  said,  "  if  it  is  full  of  them  you  ought  at 
least  to  be  able  to  show  me  one.    Will  you  show  me 


ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS        87 

one  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  don't  pretend  to  know  as  much 
about  the  Bible  as  you  do."  "  What  are  you  talk- 
ing about  it  for  then  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Now,"  I  con- 
tinued, "the  Bible  is  God's  Word.  God  is  its 
author,  and  in  throwing  contempt  on  the  Bible,  you 
are  throwing  contempt  upon  God  who  is  the  author 
of  it,  and  Jesus  tells  us  that  men  shall  give  ac- 
count of  every  idle  word  in  the  Day  of  Judgment, 
and  you  will  have  to  give  account  of  this  idle  word 
you  have  spoken  against  the  Bible  and  against  God 
who  is  its  Author."  He  turned  pale,  as  well  he 
might,  and  said,  "  I  did  not  mean  to  do  that." 
"  Well,  that  is  what  you  have  done,"  and  that  is 
what  many  a  man  is  doing,  speaking  lightly  and 
thoughtlessly  about  the  Bible,  not  realizing  that  in 
condemning  the  Bible,  he  is  insulting  the  God  who 
is  the  Author  of  it,  and  he  will  have  to  give  ac- 
count of  his  folly  in  the  Day  of  Judgment. 


Waiting  for  an  Opportunity 

One  year  when  I  was  conducting  missions  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  England,  my  family  resided  at 
Southport,  a  pleasant  seaside  town.  I  would  go 
there  to  spend  my  holidays.  The  first  time  I  was 
there  I  met  a  man  whom  God  laid  upon  ray  heart, 
and  whom  I  determined  to  win  for  Christ.  He  had 
once  been  a  prosperous  farmer  and  had  gone  down 
and  down  through  drink  and  his  wife  was  now  sup- 
porting the  family  by  taking  lodgers,  and  he  was 
doing  little  things  as  he  was  able.  He  was  a  most 
unlikely  case  and  my  heart  went  out  towards  him, 


88        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

and  I  determined  to  win  him  for  Christ.  I  began 
to  cultivate  his  acquaintance,  watching  for  an  op- 
portunity to  win  him  for  Christ.  Every  time  I 
met  him  on  the  street,  I  would  speak  with  him. 
When  he  became  disposed  to  show  me  little  acts  of 
kindness  I  accepted  them  in  order  to  win  him. 
Time  after  time  I  met  him  but  an  opportunity  to 
speak  about  the  great  question  did  not  come. 
When  we  were  in  Manchester,  I  referred  to  him  in 
an  address  and  about  my  waiting  for  an  oppor- 
tunity, and  a  man  in  the  audience  was  heard  to 
whisper  to  another,  "  Well,  he  will  die  before  he 
speaks  to  him,"  but  he  was  mistaken.  I  was  watch- 
ing and  praying  and  God  was  listening,  and  the  de- 
sired opportunity  came. 

Eeturning  to  Southport  for  a  few  days  after  a 
mission,  I  heard  the  man  had  caught  cold  and  was 
quite  ill.  I  met  his  daughter  and  asked  if  I  could 
see  him.  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  father  heard  you  were 
coming  to  Southport,  and  wondered  if  you  would 
not  come  to  see  him."  I  went  to  the  room  where 
he  was  lying  in  bed  and  found  him  very  ill  indeed 
and  very  approachable.  In  fact,  his  wife  was  try- 
ing to  read  the  Bible  to  him,  though  she  did  not 
know  where  to  read.  I  took  the  Bible  and  read 
passages  that  pointed  out  our  need  of  a  Saviour 
and  told  of  God's  love  to  sinners,  and  that  made 
clear  God's  way  of  salvation,  and  then  explained 
the  way  of  salvation  as  simply  as  I  could  and 
prayed  with  him. 

The  next  evening  I  met  his  daughter  again  and 
asked  if  I  could  see  her  father  again.     "  Yes,"  she 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLTJSTEATIONS        89 

said,  "  he  was  hoping  you  would  come  again  and 
wondered  if  you  would  not."  I  heard  that  during 
the  night  in  his  delirium  he  had  been  talking  about 
me  and  my  son,  whose  acquaintance  he  had  also 
made.  This  encouraged  me  to  think  that  I  was 
winning  my  way  with  him.  I  went  to  see  him  and 
found  him  perfectly  clear  in  mind,  but  I  felt  he  could 
not  pull  through  the  night.  I  was  more  definite  than 
the  night  before,  explained  the  Way  of  Life  more 
fully  and  he  professed  to  accept  Christ,  and  I  knelt 
by  his  bed  and  prayed,  and  afterwards  asked  him 
to  follow  me  in  prayer  word  by  word.  He  followed 
me  in  a  confession  of  his  sin,  in  an  expression  of 
his  belief  in  the  testimony  of  God's  Word  about 
Jesus  Christ,  that  Jesus  had  borne  his  sin  in  His 
own  body  on  the  cross  (Isa.  53  : 6)  and  he  asked  God 
to  forgive  his  sins  because  Jesus  had  borne  them  in 
His  own  body.  Then  he  told  his  Heavenly  Father 
that  he  trusted  He  had  forgiven  his  sins  because  of 
the  atoning  death  of  Christ.  Finally  he  told  God 
that  if  it  was  His  will,  he  wished  to  be  raised  from 
that  bed  of  sickness,  that  he  might  serve  Christ 
before  men  but  if  it  was  not  His  will  to  raise  him 
up,  he  was  willing  to  be  taken  from  this  world  and 
to  depart  and  be  with  Christ.  When  I  arose  he 
seemed  to  be  resting  clearly  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

A  few  hours  later,  there  was  a  rap  on  my  door. 
A  lady  came  in  and  told  me  he  had  passed  away,  a 
little  while  after  I  left,  trusting  in  Christ. 


90        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

Lost  Through  Delay 

When  I  was  at  home  in  Chicago,  if  I  had  a 
night  off,  I  would  often  run  out  to  some  other  city 
to  help  the  ministers  there.  One  night  I  ran  across 
the  line  to  the  city  of  Hammond,  Indiana.  After 
speaking  I  gave  out  the  invitation.  Among  those 
who  were  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  was  a  young 
woman.  She  rose  to  her  feet  and  started  for  the 
front,  but  the  young  man  who  sat  by  her  side 
caught  her  by  her  arm  and  said,  "  Don't  go  to-night. 
If  you  wait  a  few  days  I  may  go  with  you."  For 
fear  of  offending  this  young  man  to  whom  she  was 
engaged  to  be  married,  she  sat  down  and  threw 
away  her  opportunity. 

The  next  week  I  went  to  speak  in  the  opera 
house.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting  two  young 
women  came  to  me  and  said,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Torrey, 
just  as  soon  as  you  can  get  away  from  the  opera 
house,  come  with  us.  There  is  a  young  lady  who 
started  for  the  front  the  other  night  but  the  young 
man  to  whom  she  was  engaged  asked  her  to  wait 
for  him  and  she  sat  down.  Now  she  has  erysipelas. 
It  has  gone  to  her  brain.  We  think  she  is  dying. 
Probably  she  will  not  live  until  morning.  Come  to 
see  her  just  as  soon  as  you  can  get  away  from  the 
opera  house."  As  soon  as  I  could  get  away  from  the 
after  meeting,  I  hurried  along  from  the  opera  house 
to  her  home.  I  was  taken  up  the  stairs  into  the 
room  where  the  poor  girl  lay  a  dying.  You  could 
not  recognize  her.  Her  face  was  painted  black 
with  iodine.     But  she  was  perfectly  conscious.     I 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        91 

urged  her  then  and  there  to  take  Christ.  "  Oh,"  she 
said,  """I  cannot."  "  But,"  I  said,  "  you  started  to 
take  Him  the  other  night  when  I  was  here  at  Ham- 
mond." "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  but  I  did  not  take  Him 
then.  I  am  dying  now  and  I  cannot  take  Christ 
now.  It  is  too  late."  I  plead  with  her.  I  besought 
her.  I  knew  it  was  her  last  hour.  I  tried  to  per- 
suade her  that  the  Lord  Jesus  would  receive  her 
even  then,  that  He  said :  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me 
I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,"  but  she  would  not  listen 
and  would  not  yield. 

When  I  passed  out  of  that  room  of  awful  dark- 
ness, a  young  man  in  the  hallway  caught  me  by  the 
hand,  took  me  into  a  cold,  dark  room,  and  though  I 
could  not  see  him  in  the  darkness,  I  could  feel  that 
he  was  shaking  like  a  leaf.  "  Oh,"  he  said,  "  Mr. 
Torrey,  I  am  engaged  to  marry  that  girl.  When 
you  spoke  here  last  week  we  were  both  at  the  meet- 
ing. When  you  gave  out  the  invitation,  she  started 
for  the  front  but  I  detained  her.  I  said,  *  No,  don't 
go.  H  you  wait  for  a  few  days  I  may  go  with  you.' 
She  did  not  go  forward  and  now  she  is  dying  with- 
out Christ.  She  is  lost,  and  I  am  to  blame.  I  am 
to  blame." 

If  you  to-night  are  anywhere  near  a  decision  for 
Christ,  don't  put  it  off.  Don't  let  the  fear  of  man 
frighten  you  out  of  taking  your  stand  for  Him. 

Jolly,  But  Wretched 

One  of  the  brightest  memories  of  my  boyhood  is 
of  the  jolliest  man  I  ever  met.    He  was  the  centre 


92        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

of  attraction  in  every  circle  of  society  he  ever 
visited.  Let  him  go  into  a  room  full  of  strangers 
and  soon  everybody  was  at  home  with  him  and  he 
was  the  centre  of  the  entire  circle  always.  I  loved 
him.  I  delighted  in  his  company.  There  was  no 
man  or  boy  that  I  so  loved  to  have  around.  When- 
ever he  was  present  I  knew  there  was  to  be  merri- 
ment. He  was  the  first  man  that  ever  took  me  to 
the  theatre.  He  took  my  brother  next  older  than  I 
and  myself  and  his  own  son,  but  he  was  more  fun 
than  the  whole  show.  It  was  merriment  all  the 
way  to  the  theatre  ;  it  was  merriment  all  the  way 
back  from  the  theatre. 

Though  more  than  forty  years  have  passed  I  can 
remember  the  details  of  that  evening  yet.  I  think 
he  was  the  brightest,  cheeriest  man  I  ever  saw. 

But  I  grew  older  and  he  grew  older.  When 
I  had  attained  to  manhood  and  was  a  preacher  of 
the  Gospel,  one  night  he  dropped  into  the  house 
where  I  was  staying.  It  was  the  dinner  hour. 
After  dinner  I  was  to  preach  in  New  York,  and  I 
invited  him  to  go  along  with  me.  He  had  become 
somewhat  religious  but  not  an  out  and  out  Chris- 
tian. I  felt  confident  he  was  not  a  saved  man  and 
hoped  that  if  he  went  to  the  meeting  that  night  I 
might  succeed  in  leading  him  to  Christ ;  for  I  was 
sure  he  loved  me  as  I  did  him ;  so  I  invited  him 
to  go.     He  went  with  me. 

After  the  meeting  was  over  and  we  were  on  our 
way  home,  I  approached  him  directly  and  personally 
on  the  point  of  accepting  Christ.  He  opened  his 
heart  to  me  and  let  me  see  what  was  there,  and  I 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        93 

found  that  the  merriest  of  all  men  I  had  ever  known, 
underneath  all  this  gaiety  was  one  of  the  saddest  of 
men.  He  had  not  found  the  true  secret  of  joy,  the 
joy  that  goes  down  to  the  deepest  depths  of  the 
heart  and  that  never  fails,  the  joy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  Jesus  alone  can  give. 


A  Bartender' s  Jest 

An  honest  German  couple  in  Chicago  kept  a 
saloon  on  the  west  side.  It  did  not  seem  to  have 
ever  entered  their  heads  that  there  was  anything 
wrong  in  keeping  a  saloon.  One  day  the  woman 
was  a  little  ill  and  complaining  about  the  saloon. 
A  company  of  colored  people  across  the  road  were 
holding  meetings  and  claiming  that  God  answered 
their  prayers.  The  bartender  said  jestingly  to  the 
saloon  keeper's  wife,  "  Why  don't  you  go  over  and 
let  the  niggers  pray  for  you  ?  "  She  replied,  "  I  be- 
lieve I  will."  She  went  over  and  they  did  pray  for 
her  and  she  was  not  only  healed  but  led  to  accept 
Christ  and  saved. 

She  came  back  to  the  saloon  and  told  what  the 
Lord  had  done  for  her.  After  that  every  day  she 
would  go  into  the  saloon,  sit  down  with  the  men  at 
the  tables  and  urge  them  to  accept  Christ.  The  bar- 
tender was  now  frightened  and  said  to  the  saloon- 
keeper, "  You  had  better  stop  your  wife's  talking, 
or  she  will  spoil  your  business."  He  said,  "  I  don't 
care  if  she  does."  Soon  he  was  converted  himself 
and  they  both  gave  up  the  business  and  became 
active  out  and  out  Christians,  and  for  years  have 


94        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

been    faithful    members    of  the   Chicago  Avenue 
Church. 


''  /  W^nt  to  Wait  a.  Little  Longer  " 

It  is  amazing  how  the  devil  blinds  men  and 
women  into  thinking  that  there  is  plenty  of  time 
to  repent  and  accept  Christ.  One  night  there  came 
into  our  after  meeting  in  Chicago  a  man  far  above 
the  average  in  intelligence.  In  fact,  he  occupied  a 
high  judicial  position  in  an  adjoining  state.  When 
I  began  to  speak  to  him,  he  said,  "  I  have  lost  my 
wife  this  past  summer,  and  I  have  been  very  lonely 
and  I  have  been  thinking  that  I  ought  to  accept 
Christ.  I  am  getting  to  be  an  old  man.  I  am  sev' 
enty-six  years  old.  Your  sermon  touched  me  deeply 
to-night  and  I  decided  that  I  would  rise  and  that  I 
would  speak  to  you  afterwards."  "  I  am  very  glad 
you  did,"  I  said.  "  Will  you  accept  Christ  now  ?  " 
The  old  judge  hesitated  a  little  while,  then  he  said, 
"  No,  I  don't  think  I  am  quite  ready  to  do  it  yet. 
I  would  like  to  wait  a  while  longer."  It  took  an 
amazing  amount  of  persuasion  to  convince  that 
man  that  seventy-six  years  was  long  enough  to  wait. 
He  seemed  to  think  that  though  he  was  seventy-six 
years  old,  there  was  still  plenty  of  time  to  accept 
Christ. 

Sold  Her  Soul  for  One  Dance 

A  YOUNG  lady  was  once  under  deep  conviction  of 
sin.     She  saw  and  felt  her  need  of  a  Saviour.     Her 


ANECDOTES  A^D  ILLTJSTRATIOIs^S        95 

minister  went  to  her  and  urged  upon  her  an  im- 
mediate acceptance  of  Christ.  "  No,"  she  said,  "  I 
cannot  accept  Christ  to-night.  I  am  going  to  a 
dance  next  week,  and  if  I  accepted  Christ  I  could  not 

go  to  that  dance,  but  I  will  promise  you,  Mr.  S 

that  I  will  accept  Christ  immediately  after  that 
dance."  Her  minister  tried  to  show  her  the  peril 
of  the  decision  she  was  making,  but  she  was  de- 
termined to  go  to  one  more  dance  and  then  she 
would  accept  Christ.  Until  that  dance  was  past  no 
amount  of  persuasion  moved  her.  The  night  of 
the  dance  came  and  she  went.  She  caught  cold  at 
the  dance  and  it  settled  down  into  lung  fever.  She 
began  to  sink  rapidly,  and  her  minister  fearing  that 
her  time  had  come  called  upon  her  again.  He  re- 
called his  former  conversation  and  how  she  had 
promised  to  accept  Christ  after  the  dance,  but  the 
dying  girl  was  hard  and  hopeless.     "  No,"  she  said, 

"  Mr.  S ,  I  cannot  accept  Christ  now.     I  refused 

to  accept  Him  when  I  was  well  and  strong  and  now 
I  am  dying  and  I  cannot  accept  Christ."  He  tried 
to  show  her  how  ready  Christ  was  to  pardon  even 
at  the  last  moment  but  she  could  not  grasp  it.  All 
his  persuasions  were  of  no  avail  and  the  poor  girl 
died  in  hopeless  despair.  She  had  sold  her  soul  for 
one  more  dance. 


I  Am  an  Infidel 

"When  we  were  in  New  Zealand,  by  the  delay  of 
the  steamer,  we  were  enabled  to  hold  one  evening 
meeting  in  Invercargill.    The  meeting  was  held  in 


96        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

the  Drill  Hall.  The  night  was  close.  There  was 
no  way  of  adequately  ventilating  the  building. 
Men  and  women  fainted  on  every  hand  and  were 
carried  from  the  building,  but  still  the  people 
lingered  and  listened  to  the  preaching  of  the 
Word  of  God.  When  I  dismissed  the  first  meet- 
ing, many  of  the  people  had  to  pass  right  in  front 
of  the  platform.  A  tall  man  with  stooped 
shoulders  about  sixty  years  of  age  came  by  the 
platform  and  looked  up  at  me  and  scowled  and 
said,  "  I  am  an  infidel."  "  You  don't  need  to  tell 
me  that,"  1  replied.  "  Your  face  shows  it.  You 
have  one  of  the  most  wretched  faces  I  ever  saw." 
The  man  passed  on  in  silence.  The  next  day  I  re- 
ceived a  letter  from  him.  He  said,  "  I  am 
wretched.  How  can  I  be  anything  but  wretched  ?  " 
Ah,  there  is  nothing  in  infidelity  to  meet  the 
deepest  needs  of  the  human  heart.  Nothing  in  in- 
fidelity to  transform  the  sorrows  of  life  into  joys. 
Intelligent  faith  in  Christ  fills  the  life  with  sun- 
shine. Unbelief  fills  the  heart  with  clouds  and 
despair. 

The  Champion  Heavy  Weight  Pugilist 
Converted 

When  we  were  in  Launceston  in  Tasmania,  I 
received  a  letter  from  a  man  asking  me  to  visit  his 
wife.  He  said  his  wife  had  been  an  invalid  for 
many  years  and  they  had  tried  all  the  physicians 
in  Launceston.  He  noticed  in  the  papers  that  I 
was  a  doctor  and  he  thought  an  American  doctor 
might  succeed  where  their  home  doctors  had  failed. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        97 

It  was  evident  that  the  man  had  mistaken  me  for  a 
physician.  A  few  nights  after  this  man  followed 
up  his  letter  by  coming  around  to  the  meeting  to 
interview  me  personally.  He  was  the  champion 
heavy-weight  pugilist  of  Tasmania.  He  had  not 
come  to  hear  a  sermon  but  to  implore  me  to  visit 
his  sick  wife.  But  he  got  there  in  time  to  hear  the 
sermon.  The  subject  was  "  Heroes  and  Cowards," 
and  he  was  greatly  interested.  In  it  I  told  the 
story  of  a  S'orth  Carolina  farmer's  son  whose 
father  at  great  sacrifice  had  sent  him  to  college, 
and  then  when  the  father  went  to  visit  the  son,  the 
son  was  ashamed  of  him  before  his  gay  college  com- 
panions. As  I  pictured  this  farmer  with  glad  heart 
driving  towards  the  college  town  to  visit  his  son 
and  then  his  son's  denial  of  his  father,  the  pugilist 
grew  very  angry.  He  wanted  to  thrash  that  un- 
grateful son,  but  then  the  thought  came  to  him, 
"  You  are  meaner  and  more  ungrateful  than  he. 
You  owe  more  to  God  than  that  son  owed  his 
father  and  yet  how  are  you  treating  Him  ?  "  Filled 
with  shame  at  his  ungrateful  treatment  of  God, 
when  I  gave  out  the  invitation,  the  pugilist  rose  to 
his  feet  and  then  came  forward  and  turned  around 
and  faced  the  audience,  most  all  of  whom  knew 
him  by  reputation,  and  publicly  confessed  his  sin 
and  his  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ. 

He  immediately  went  to  work  for  Christ,  and 
about  the  last  sight  we  saw  as  the  steamer  pulled 
out  of  Launceston  and  sailed  down  the  river  was 
Jim  Burke,  towering  above  the  crowd  waving  good- 
bye to  us  with  his  red  hymn-book. 


98        ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

The  spirit  lUumined  the  Face  of  Jesus 

One  night  a  lot  of  our  students  came  home  from 
Pacific  Garden  Mission  full  of  rejoicing  over  the 
number  of  conversions  there  had  been  that  night. 
"  We  had  a  great  time  at  the  mission  to-night,"  they 
said,  "  a  large  number  of  drunkards  came  to  the  front 
and  accepted  Christ  as  their  Saviour." 

The  next  day  I  met  Harry  Monroe,  superintend- 
ent of  the  mission  on  the  street.  "  Harry,"  I  said, 
"  the  boys  tell  me  you  had  a  great  time  at  the  mission 
last  night."  "  Would  you  like  to  know  how  it  came 
about  ?"  he  answered.  "  It  pleased  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  illumine  the  face  of  Jesus,  and  sinners  just  saw 
Him  and  believed."  It  was  a  rather  unique  way  of 
putting  it  but  it  well  stated  the  truth.  It  is  only 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  bears  His  testimony  to  Jesus 
that  men  see  and  believe. 

Satisfied 

There  was  handed  to  me  one  evening  in  Christ 
Church,  New  Zealand,  a  note  from  a  lady.  It  read, 
"  Is  there  any  place  where  I  can  find  satisfaction  for 
my  soul  ?  I  have  been  looking  for  it  everywhere. 
I  have  sought  it  in  wealth,  but  have  not  found  it ;  I 
have  sought  it  in  society,  but  have  not  found  it ;  I 
have  sought  it  in  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  but 
have  not  found  it ;  I  have  sought  it  in  study,  but 
have  not  found  it ;  I  have  sought  it  in  art,  but  have 
not  found  it ;  I  have  been  seeking  it  in  travel,  I  have 
just  returned  from  a  tour  around  the  world  seeking 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS        99 

for  satisfaction  for  my  heart,  but  have  not  found  it. 
Can  you  tell  me  where  I  can  find  it  ?  ' " 

The  note  was  unsigned.  I  read  it  before  the 
meeting  that  night  and  replied,  "  Yes,  I  can  tell  this 
lady  where  she  can  find  satisfaction  to-night.  She 
can  find  it  in  Jesus.  *  Whosoever  shall  drink  of  the 
water  that  1  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst,  but 
the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well 
of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life.'  " 

At  the  close  of  the  meeting  a  lady  came  to  me  and 
said,  "  It  was  I  who  wrote  that  note."  With  my 
open  Bible,  I  showed  the  Way  of  Life  and  she  ac- 
cepted Jesus.  The  next  night  she  came  back  and 
came  forward  and  said,  "  Last  night  I  wrote  a  note 
to  Dr.  Torrey  asking  him  if  there  was  any  place 
where  I  could  find  satisfaction  for  my  soul.  I  had 
sought  it  everywhere.  I  had  sought  it  in  wealth, 
in  fashion,  in  society,  in  pleasure,  in  study,  in  art 
and  in  travel  but  could  not  find  it.  Last  night  I 
took  Jesus  Christ  and  I  have  found  the  satisfaction 
for  my  soul  which  I  have  been  seeking  all  these 
years." 

/  Don't  Knoiv  Him 

A  BEAUTIFUL  young  mother  in  New  York  City 
returning  to  the  building  in  which  her  little  infant 
lay  asleep  was  appalled  to  see  the  building  in  flames. 
The  firemen  could  not  restrain  her  and  she  dashed 
through  the  flames  and  rescued  her  child,  but  in 
doing  so,  she  was  so  severely  burned  that  her  face 
was  horribly  disfigured  for  life.    When  she  looked 


7CJQ8QR  A 


100      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

at  her  face  in  the  glass  after  it  was  healed,  she  was 
shocked  at  her  disfigurement,  but  was  comforted  by 
the  thought  that  when  her  little  daughter  grew  up 
she  would  appreciate  the  sacrifice  that  her  mother 
had  made  to  rescue  her.  The  little  child  did  grow 
up  to  be  a  young  woman  of  uncommon  beauty. 
She  was  much  admired  and  petted. 

One  day  there  was  an  excursion  up  the  river  and 
both  mother  and  daughter  went.  The  beautiful 
daughter  was  on  the  front  deck  surrounded  by  a 
host  of  admirers,  laughing  and  talking.  The  dis- 
figured mother  was  on  the  rear  deck  looking  after 
the  wraps  and  other  things.  The  mother  had  occa- 
sion to  go  to  the  front  deck  to  speak  to  her  daughter. 
As  she  drew  near,  a  gay  young  man  asked  the 
beautiful  young  girl,  "  Who  is  that  hideous  looking 
woman  coming  ? "  In  a  low  tone,  the  beautiful 
daughter  said,  "I  don't  know."  But  the  words 
were  not  so  low  but  what  the  mother  caught  them 
and  that  loving  heart  was  broken  by  the  gross  in- 
gratitude of  the  daughter  for  whom  she  had  sacri- 
ficed so  much. 

How  we  shudder  at  the  thought  of  such  awful  in- 
gratitude, but  are  we  not  guilty  of  a  grosser  ingrat- 
itude towards  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ? 
His  visage  was  more  marred  than  any  man's  and 
His  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men,  and  yet  how 
many  to-day  are  ashamed  of  Him  and  say,  "  I  do 
not  know  Him." 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLTJSTEATIONS      101 

Won  by  Love 

I  USED  to  have  a  friend  in  Chicago— he  is  in 
heaven  now — Colonel  Clarke,  a  man  who  lived  en- 
tirely for  others,  and  especially  for  the  poor  and 
outcast — a  rich  man,  who  gave  up  all  his  money  for 
the  poor.  He  lived  very  plainly.  He  worked  him- 
self literally  to  death.  He  worked  at  his  business 
six  days  every  week,  and  he  preached  the  Gospel 
seven  nights  every  week.  He  worked  at  his  busi- 
ness to  make  money  to  run  his  mission  and  feed  the 
poor.  And  the  poor  loved  him,  and  the  outcast 
loved  him,  and  everybody  that  had  any  sense  and 
knew  him  loved  him — one  of  the  loveliest  men  that 
ever  walked  God's  earth.  One  night  there  came 
into  the  Pacific  Garden  Mission — his  mission — a 
man  who  had  for  fourteen  years  been  a  hopeless 
slave  to  whiskey  and  alcohol  in  all  its  forms,  and 
opium  and  morphine.  The  man  had  been  crippled 
in  early  childhood.  He  had  been  in  a  railroad  acci- 
dent, was  all  smashed  up,  and  lost  the  use  of  both 
legs.  He  dragged  himself  along  as  best  he  could 
on  his  crutches.  He  was  not  able  to  stand  on  his 
feet.  He  sort  of  balanced  himself  as  he  dragged 
himself  along  on  his  crutches. 

This  night,  when  he  came  into  the  mission. 
Colonel  Clarke  saw  him.  I  suppose  he  was  the 
most  miserable-looking  man  in  the  mission  and 
Colonel  Clarke  went  up  to  him,  and  tried  to  per- 
suade him  to  take  Christ  and  to  believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus.  But  he  would  not.  The  next  day 
Colone  Clarke  was  going  down  La  Salle  Street,  one 


102      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

of  our  busiest  business  streets,  and  right  ahead  of 
him  he  saw  this  poor  opium  fiend  dragging  himself 
along  on  his  crutches.  Colonel  Clarke  hurried  up, 
put  his  hand  on  his  shoulder,  and  took  him  into  an 
alleyway,  where  he  told  him  about  Jesus.  Then  he 
said,  "  Let  us  kneel  down."  And  the  strong  man 
put  his  arm  around  that  poor  wretch  of  a  cripple, 
helped  him  down  on  to  his  knees  and  prayed  for 
him.  This  poor  man  in  rags,  a  wretch,  a  cripple, 
an  opium  fiend,  a  whiskey  fiend,  an  alcohol  fiend, 
knelt  there  in  the  alleyway,  put  his  confidence  in 
Jesus  Christ,  and  when  Colonel  Clarke  helped  him 
up  on  his  crutches  he  was  a  child  of  God,  and  to- 
day he  is  a  preacher  of  the  gospel. 


Two  Lawyers  Convinced 

In  the  great  triumph  of  Deism  in  England,  two 
of  the  most  brilliant  men  in  the  denial  of  the 
supernatural  were  the  eminent  legal  authorities, 
Gilbert  West  and  Lord  Lyttleton.  The  two  men 
were  put  forward  to  crush  the  defenders  of  the 
supernatural  in  the  Bible.  They  had  a  conference 
together  and  one  of  them  said  to  the  other  that  it 
would  be  difiicult  to  maintain  their  position  unless 
they  disposed  of  two  of  the  alleged  bulwarks  of 
Christianity,  namely  the  alleged  resurrection  of 
Jesus  from  the  dead,  and  the  alleged  conversion  of 
Saul  of  Tarsus.  Lyttleton  undertook  to  write  a 
book  to  show  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  never  con- 
verted, as  is  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
but  that  his  alleged  conversion  was  a  myth,  if 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      103 

Gilbert  West  would  write  another  book  to  show 
that  the  alleged  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the 
dead  was  a  myth.  West  said  to  Lyttleton,  "  I  shall 
have  to  depend  upon  you  for  my  facts,  for  I  am 
somewhat  rusty  on  the  Bible."  To  which  Lyttle- 
ton replied  that  he  was  counting  upon  West,  for  he 
too  was  somewhat  rusty  on  the  Bible.  One  of 
them  said  to  the  other,  "  If  we  are  to  be  honest  in 
the  matter,  we  ought  at  least  to  study  the  evidence," 
and  this  they  undertook  to  do. 

They  had  numerous  conferences  together  while 
they  were  preparing  their  works.  In  one  of  these 
conferences  West  said  to  Lyttleton  that  there  had 
been  something  on  his  mind  for  some  time  that  he 
thought  he  ought  to  speak  to  him  about,  that  as 
he  had  been  studying  the  evidence,  he  was  begin- 
ning to  feel  that  there  was  something  in  it.  Lyttle- 
ton replied  that  he  was  glad  to  hear  him  say  so,  for 
he  himself  had  been  somewhat  shaken  as  he  had 
studied  the  evidence  of  the  conversion  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus.  Finally,  when  the  books  were  finished,  the 
two  men  met.  West  said  to  Lyttleton,  "  Have  you 
written  your  book  ?  "  He  replied  that  he  had,  but 
he  said,  "  West,  as  I  have  been  studying  the  evi- 
dence and  weighing  it  according  to  the  recognized 
laws  of  legal  evidence,  I  have  become  satisfied  that 
Saul  of  Tarsus  was  converted  as  is  stated  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  that  Christianity  is  true 
and  I  have  written  my  book  on  that  side."  The 
book  can  be  found  to-day  in  any  first-class  library. 
"Have  you  written  your  book?"  said  Lyttleton. 
"  Yes,  but  as  I  have  studied  the  evidence  for  the 


104      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  and 
have  weighed  it  according  to  the  acknowledged 
laws  of  evidence,  I  have  become  satisfied  that  Jesus 
really  rose  from  the  dead  as  recorded  in  the  gospels, 
and  have  written  my  book  on  that  side."  This 
book  can  also  be  found  in  our  libraries  to-day. 

Let  any  man  of  legal  mind,  any  man  that  is  ac- 
customed to  and  competent  to  weigh  evidence — yes, 
any  man  with  fair  reasoning  powers,  and  above  all 
with  perfect  candour,  sit  down  to  the  study  of  the 
evidence  for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from 
the  dead,  and  he  will  become  satisfied  that  beyond 
a  peradventure  that  Jesus  really  rose  from  the  dead 
as  is  recorded  in  the  four  gospels. 


Lost  by  Neglect 

More  people  are  lost  in  Christian  lands  through 
simple  neglect  than  in  any  other  way.  Millions  of 
people  drift  through  life  neglecting,  drift  into  the 
grave  neglecting,  drift  into  eternity  neglecting,  drift 
into  hell  neglecting.  Here  is  a  dying  man,  very 
near  death,  lying  upon  his  death-bed.  Standing 
upon  a  table  within  easy  reach — and  he  has  power 
to  put  out  his  hand  and  get  it — is  a  goblet  in  which 
there  is  a  healing  draught.  If  the  man  puts  out  his 
hand  and  takes  the  goblet  and  drinks  the  medicine, 
he  will  be  cured.  If  he  won't  drink  it,  he  will  die. 
Kow,  what  is  all  that  is  necessary  for  that  man  to 
do  to  be  saved  ?  Simply  to  put  out  his  hand,  take 
the  medicine  and  drink  it.  What  is  all  that  is 
necessary  for  him  to  do  to  die  ?    It  is  not  necessary 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      105 

for  him  to  commit  suicide  by  cutting  his  throat ;  it 
is  not  necessary  for  him  to  assault  the  doctor ;  it  is 
not  necessary  for  him  to  even  take  the  medicine  and 
throw  it  out  of  the  window ;  it  is  not  even  neces- 
sary for  him  to  refuse  to  take  the  medicine ;  all  that 
is  necessary  for  him  to  die  is  simply  to  neglect  to  put 
out  his  hand  and  take  it.     Every  man  and  woman 
and  child  out  of  Christ  is  now  dying  the  eternal 
death.     Eight  within  reach  in  the  Bible  and  in  the 
Christ  of  the  Bible  is  the  medicine  that  will  cure 
you  and  save  you,  and  it  is  the  only  medicine  that 
will.     What  is  all  that  you  have  to  do  to  be  saved  ? 
Simply  to  put  out  your  hand  and  take  the  medicine. 
What  is  all  that  is  necessary  for  you  to  do  to  be 
lost  ?    It  is  not  necessary  to  get  up  and  curse  and 
swear ;  it  is  not  necessary  for  you  to  get  up  and 
ridicule  the  Bible ;  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  out  and 
say  outrageous  things  about  God  and  Christ ;  it  is 
not  necessary  to  go  out  and  commit  a  great  im- 
morality ;  it  is  not  necessary  even  to  say,  "  I  won't 
take  the  Gospel " ;  all  that  is  necessary  for  you  to 
do  to  be  lost  is  simply  to  neglect  to  take  it.    You 
are  lost  already,  and  unless  you  take  Christ  and  take 
Him  soon,  you  will  be  lost  eternally. 

Here  is  a  boat  in  the  Niagara  Kiver  away  above 
the  falls.  The  current  there  is  very  gentle.  A  man 
sits  in  the  boat.  There  is  a  strong  pair  of  oars  rest- 
ing by  his  feet.  If  the  man  wants  to,  he  can  take 
the  oars  and  pull  out  of  the  current  to  the  shore. 
But  the  man  simply  sits  there  and  drifts  on  and  on, 
gently  at  first,  then  a  little  swifter,  then  swifter, 
and  now  the  man  is  in  the  swift  current.    He  is  al- 


106      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

ready  at  the  head  of  the  rapids.  If  he  should  get 
up  now  and  take  hold  of  the  oars  with  all  his 
strength,  he  could  not  pull  against  the  current. 
Men  on  the  shore  see  his  peril.  They  run  along 
the  shore,  throw  a  rope,  as  has  often  been  done,  and 
it  falls  in  the  boat  right  at  the  man's  feet.  Strong 
arms  on  the  shore  are  ready  to  pull  him  ashore  if 
he  takes  the  rope.  What  is  all  that  is  necessary  for 
him  to  do  to  be  saved  ?  Simply  to  lay  hold  of  the 
rope,  and  the  men  on  shore  will  do  the  rest.  What 
is  all  that  is  necessary  for  him  to  do  to  be  lost  ?  It 
is  not  necessary  for  him  to  take  the  oars  and  pull  on 
with  the  current ;  it  is  not  necessary  for  him  to 
throw  himself  overboard  into  the  rapids ;  it  is  not 
necessary  for  him  even  to  refuse  to  take  the  rope. 
If  he  will  only  sit  still  for  about  thirty  seconds  and 
do  nothing,  the  current  will  take  that  boat  and 
sweep  it  on,  on,  on  over  the  falls  over  which  no  man 
has  gone  and  lived. 

That  is  a  picture  of  every  man  and  woman 
out  of  Christ.  You  are  in  the  current.  The  cur- 
rent of  sin  is  so  swift  and  strong  that  no  man  can 
pull  against  it  in  his  own  strength.  But  God,  stand- 
ing on  the  shores  of  eternity,  in  His  infinite  love, 
has  thrown  out  a  rope  in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son, 
good  and  strong,  and  it  has  fallen  at  the  feet  of 
every  man  and  woman.  What  is  all  that  you  have 
got  to  do  to  be  saved  ?  Just  lay  hold  of  the  rope — 
just  take  Christ,  and  God  will  bring  you  home  to 
glory.  What  is  all  you  have  to  do  to  be  lost  ?  It 
is  not  necessary  for  you  to  get  drunk,  to  commit 
adultery,  or  some  other  great  sin ;  it  is  not  neces- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      107 

sary  for  you  to  go  out  and  try  to  be  an  infidel ;  it 
is  not  necessary  for  you  to  abuse  the  preacher.  All 
that  is  necessary  for  you  to  do  is  simply  to  do  noth- 
ing. You  are  in  the  current.  Do  nothing  just  a 
little  longer,  and  it  will  sweep  you  on,  on,  on  over 
the  awful  cataract  into  the  bottomless  abyss  of 
eternal  despair. 


The  Holy  Ghost  Felt  Upon  Us 

I  SHALL  never  forget  a  day  at  Northfield,  July  8, 
1894.  It  was  a  Sunday.  I  was  preaching  in  the 
church  to  the  college  students  gathered  there  from 
Yale,  Harvard  and  other  eastern  colleges.  I  was 
speaking  about  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  took  out  my 
watch  as  I  closed.  It  was  precisely  twelve  o'clock. 
I  said,  "  Young  men,  Mr.  Moody  has  invited  us  up 
to  the  mountainside  this  afternoon  at  three  o'clock 
to  pray  for  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  three  hours  to 
three  o'clock.  Three  hours  is  a  long  time  to  wait. 
You  don't  need  to  wait  three  hours.  Go  to  your 
hotel,  go  to  your  tent,  go  out  into  the  woods,  go 
anywhere  alone  with  God,  meet  the  conditions,  and 
ask  God  for  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
you  will  receive  it  before  three  o'clock."  Three 
o'clock  came,  and  four  hundred  and  fifty-six  students 
gathered  in  front  of  Mr.  Moody's  mother's  house. 
She  was  still  living  then.  I  know  the  number,  be- 
cause Paul  Moody  counted  them  as  they  passed 
through  the  gate.  We  passed  down  through  the 
fields,  and  started  up  the  mountainside.  After  going 
part  way  up,  Mr.  Moody  said,  "  We  don't  need  to 


108      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

go  farther  now  ;  sit  down  here."  We  sat  dow^n  on 
the  logs  and  on  the  pine  needles.  Mr.  Moody  said, 
"  Has  any  one  anything  to  say  before  we  pray  ?  " 
One  after  another — about  seventy-five  students,  rose 
and  said  in  substance,  "  Mr.  Moody,  I  could  not  wait 
till  three  o'clock.  I  have  been  alone  with  God  and 
I  believe  I  have  a  right  to  say  I  have  received  the 
Holy  Ghost." 

After  these  testimonies  were  over,  Mr.  Moody 
said,  "  I  can't  see  any  reason  why  we  should  not 
kneel  down  here  and  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
fall  upon  us  as  definitely  as  He  fell  upon  the  apos- 
tles on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Let  us  pray."  Some 
of  us  knelt.  Some  of  us  lay  upon  our  faces,  and  we 
began  to  pray.  As  we  had  been  going  up  the  moun- 
tainside, thick  clouds  had  been  gathering  over  us. 
As  we  began  to  pray,  the  clouds  broke  and  the  rain- 
drops commenced  to  fall  through  the  overhanging 
pine  needles.  Another  cloud  had  been  gathering 
over  Northfield  for  ten  days — a  cloud  big  with  the 
blessing  and  power  of  God ;  and  as  we  prayed,  our 
prayers  seemed  to  pierce  that  cloud,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  fell  upon  us. 

An  Untutored  Savage  Silences  a  Man  of  Science 

Years  ago  a  great  Frenchman  of  science  was 
crossing  the  Arabian  desert  under  the  leadership 
of  an  Arab  guide.  When  the  sun  was  setting  in 
the  west,  the  guide  spread  his  praying-rug  down 
upon  the  ground  and  began  to  pray.  When  he  had 
finished  the  man  of  science  stood  looking  at  him 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      109 

with  scorn,  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing.  He 
said,  "I  am  praying."  "Praying!  praying  to 
whom?"  "To  Allah,  to  God."  The  man  of 
science  said,  "  Did  you  ever  see  God  ?  "  "  No." 
"  Did  you  ever  hear  God  ?  "  "  No."  "  Did  you  ever 
put  out  your  hand  and  touch  God  or  feel  God  ?  " 
"  No."  "  Then  you  are  a  great  fool  to  believe  in  a 
God  you  never  saw,  a  God  you  never  heard,  a  God 
you  never  put  out  your  hand  and  touched."  The 
Arab  guide  said  nothing.  They  retired  for  the 
night,  rose  early  the  next  morning,  and  a  little  be- 
fore sunrise  they  went  out  from  the  tent.  The 
man  of  science  said  to  the  Arab  guide,  "  There  was 
a  camel  round  this  tent  last  night."  With  a 
peculiar  look  in  his  eye,  the  Arab  said,  "  Did  you 
see  the  camel?"  "No."  "Did  you  hear  the 
camel  ? "  "  No."  "  Did  you  put  out  your  hand 
and  touch  the  camel  ?  "  "  No."  "  Well,  you  are 
a  strange  man  of  science  to  believe  in  a  camel  you 
never  saw,  a  camel  you  never  heard,  a  camel  you 
never  put  out  your  hands  and  touched."  "Oh, 
but,"  said  the  other,  "  here  are  his  footprints  all 
around  the  tent."  Just  then  the  sun  was  rising  in 
all  its  oriental  splendour,  and  with  a  graceful  wave 
of  his  barbaric  hand,  the  guide  said,  "  Behold  the 
footprints  of  the  Creator,  and  know  that  there  is  a 
God."  I  think  the  untutored  savage  had  the  best 
of  the  argument. 


110      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

Worth  More  Than  a  Bank  Account 

Here  is  a  working  man  who  goes  home  on 
Saturday  from  the  place  where  he  works.  His 
wife  meets  him  at  the  door,  expecting  him  to  hand 
over  the  week's  wages — very  happy  at  the  end  of 
another  week's  work.  As  she  opens  the  door  she 
sees  a  very  anxious  look  in  his  face.  She  says, 
"  John,  what  is  the  matter  ?  "  "  Mary,  I  am  dis- 
charged. The  place  is  shutting  down.  We  are 
all  discharged.  There  are  thousands  of  men  out 
of  employment  in  London.  I  don't  know  of  any- 
thing I  can  find  to  do.  I  have  no  money  in  the 
bank,  and  I  don't  know  how  I  am  going  to  take 
care  of  you  and  the  children  till  work  begins 
again."  And  the  man  sits  down  and  buries  his 
face  in  his  hands,  and  is  filled  with  utter  despair. 

Another  man  goes  home  from  the  same  mill. 
His  wife  meets  him  at  the  door,  but  there  is  no 
anxious  look.  There  is  a  serious  look.  She  says, 
"  John,  what  is  the  matter  ? "  and  he  tells  her  the 
same  story  up  to  a  certain  point.  "  The  place  is 
shut  down;  we  are  all  out  of  work.  I  have  no 
money  put  away  for  a  rainy  day,  and  I  don't  know 
where  to  find  employment.  I  don't  know  how  to 
keep  you  and  the  children  from  starvation,  but, 
Mary,  we  believe  in  God  and  we  believe  in  the 
Bible."  He  hangs  up  his  overcoat,  takes  out  the 
family  Bible,  opens  it  at  the  twenty-third  Psalm, 
and  reads,  "The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall 
not  want ; "  turns  to  the  sixth  chapter  of  Matthew, 
the  thirty-third  verse,  "Seek   ye   first  the  King- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      111 

dom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these 
things  shall  be  added  unto  you ; "  turns  to 
Philippians,  fourth  chapter  and  the  nineteenth 
verse,  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  ac- 
cording to  His  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus." 
"  Mary,"  he  says,  "  these  are  promises  of  God.  I 
don't  know  how  we  shall  be  taken  care  of,  but  I 
know  we  shall,  for  these  promises  are  sure." 
I  had  rather  have  that  in  a  world  of  change 
such  as  you  and  I  live  in,  where  a  man  is  a  million- 
aire to-day  and  a  pauper  to-morrow  than  to  have 
the  biggest  bank  account  in  England. 

Take  another  illustration.  The  man  goes  home 
this  time  light-hearted,  his  week's  wages  in  his 
pocket,  thinking  how  it  will  gladden  his  wife  as  he 
hands  it  over.  As  he  reaches  the  door,  his  wife 
hurries  to  the  door.  The  anxious  look  is  on  her 
face  now.  He  says,  "  Mary,  what  has  happened  ?  " 
"Oh,"  she  says,  "John,  little  Minnie  is  very  ill. 
She  has  a  high  fever.  You  know  they  are  having 
scarlet  fever  around  the  corner.  I  am  afraid  she 
has  it."  He  hurries  in,  lays  his  hand  upon  the 
fevered  brow,  looks  at  those  parched  lips  and  that 
curious  looking  skin.  He  says,  "Mary,  you  are 
right;  she  has  the  scarlet  fever."  He  sits  down 
crushed.  He  has  nowhere  to  turn,  for  a  man  who 
is  godless  cannot  turn  to  God. 

The  other  man — the  Christian  man — goes  home. 
His  wife  meets  him  at  the  door.  He  sees  an  earnest 
look  in  her  face.  He  asks  the  same  question  and 
gets  the  same  answer  up  to  a  certain  point — that 
she  is  afraid  the  little  daughter  has   the  scarlet 


112      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

fever.  He  goes  in,  lays  his  hand  upon  the  fevered 
brow,  looks  at  the  symptoms,  and  sees  beyond  a 
doubt  that  his  little  child  has  the  terrible  plague. 
He  says,  "  Mary,  she  has  the  scarlet  fever,  but  we 
believe  in  a  God  that  answers  prayer,  and  I  believe 
that  if  we  pray  He  will  raise  up  our  child.  But,  if 
in  His  infinite  wisdom.  He  sees  fit  to  take  her  from 
us,  we  have  brought  her  up  to  be  a  Christian,  and 
for  her  to  die  will  simply  be  to  depart  and  be  with 
Christ,  where  we  shall  meet  her  again."  He  opens 
his  Bible  and  reads  Psalm  50 :  15 :  "  Call  upon  Me 
in  the  day  of  trouble:  I  will  deliver  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  glorify  Me."  He  kneels  down  and 
prays ;  arises  and  opens  his  Bible  again  at  John 
14 : 1  and  reads,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled : 
ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  Me.  In  My 
Father's  house  are  many  mansions :  if  it  were  not 
so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I  go  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you.  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you, 
I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  Myself, 
that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also." 

That  is  something  wprth  having  in  a  world  such 
as  you  and  I  live  in,  and  I  would  rather  have  that 
than  the  biggest  bank  account  on  earth. 


Whom  the  Lord  Loveth  He  Chasteneth 

A  GENTLEMAN  met  me  on  the  street  one  day 
and  said,  "  Would  you  like  to  take  a  drive  ?  "  We 
went  out  to  a  cemetery,  and  came  to  a  place  where 
there  were  three  graves.  One  was  long;  it  was 
the  grave  of  an  adult,  and  in  it  his  wife  was  buried. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      113 

In  the  two  short  graves  were  the  bodies  of  his  two 
daughters,  all  he  had  in  the  world  except  a  baby- 
boy.  We  knelt  and  prayed  by  the  side  of  the 
graves.  As  we  were  driving  back  to  town  the 
gentleman  said,  "  I  pity  the  man  that  God  has  not 
chastened."  What  did  he  mean?  He  meant  that 
he  had  been  a  man  of  the  world,  an  upright  man, 
but  not  a  Christian.  One  night  when  he  came  home 
his  wife  said,  '*  Porter,  one  of  the  children  is  sick." 
In  a  few  days  she  was  cold  and  dead ;  and,  as  she  lay 
in  the  casket,  he  knelt  down,  and  promised  God  to 
take  Christ  as  his  Lord  and  Master.  But  he  lied  to 
God,  and  forgot  all  about  his  resolution.  Some 
time  after  he  came  home  again,  and  his  wife  said, 
"  Porter,  the  other  child  is  sick."  In  a  few  days 
she  also  lay  cold  and  dead.  Once  more  he  knelt 
down  and  promised  God  that  he  would  become 
a  Christian,  and  Icejpt  his  word.  All  the  holiest, 
deepest,  purest  joys  of  life  had  come  from  his  great 
sorrow. 


*'I  Am  a  Scoundrel'' 

One  night  in  my  own  church  in  Chicago  in  the 
after-meeting,  a  gentleman  who  sat  in  the  second 
row  called  me  to  his  side.  He  said,  "  I  want  to  ask 
you  a  question.  I  am  not  a  Christian.  I  make  no 
pretensions  to  being  a  Christian,  but  I  lead  a  moral, 
upright,  honest  life,  and  the  question  I  want  to  ask 
you  is  this,  if  I  don't  accept  Christ,  leading  the 
moral,  upright  life  that  I  do,  will  I  be  sent  to  hell 
just  because  I  don't  accept  Christ  ?  "    I  said,  "  You 


114      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

certainly  will."  "  Well,  all  I  have  to  say  is,  it  isn't 
fair."  I  said,  "  Wait.  Suppose  you  had  a  mother, 
who  was  one  of  the  noblest  women  that  ever 
lived."  He  said,  "I  have."  "  Suppose  that  mother 
loved  you  with  even  greater  love  than  a  mother 
ordinarily  loves  her  son."  He  said,  "  She  does." 
"  Suppose  that  mother  would  be  willing  to  lay 
down  her  life  and  to  die  for  you."  He  said,  "  She 
would." 

"  Yery  well,"  I  said,  "  having  such  a  mother  as 
you  say  you  have,  suppose  you  should  do  your  duty 
by  every  one  else,  your  duty  by  your  wife,  by  your 
children,  by  those  you  are  connected  with  in  busi- 
ness, by  your  neighbours,  by  the  state,  your  duty 
by  every  one  else  but  that  old  mother  that  loves 
you,  that  has  suffered  for  you,  that  would  be  willing 
to  die  for  you ;  now  suppose  you  turned  her  out  on 
the  street  to  starve  and  perish,  what  would  you  say 
of  yourself  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  should  say  that  I  was 
a  scoundrel." 

"  Yery  well,"  I  said,  "  Jesus  Christ  is  holier, 
better,  nobler  than  any  mother  that  ever  lived. 
Jesus  Christ  not  only  loved  you  enough  to  die  for 
you.  He  actually  did  die  for  you.  Now  suppose 
you  do  your  duty  by  wife,  by  children,  by  neigh- 
bours, by  business  associates,  but  utterly  fail  in  your 
duty  to  Jesus  Christ,  what  would  you  say  of  your- 
self ?  "  He  had  sense  enough  to  see  the  point.  He 
said,  "  I  am  a  scoundrel." 

Be  honest.  You  will  have  to  be  honest  some 
day.  Be  honest  with  God,  be  honest  with  yourself. 
The  claims  of  Christ  are  higher  than  the  claims  of 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      115 

the  whole  race,  and  if  we  do  our  duty  by  every  fel- 
low being  and  fail  in  our  duty  towards  Christ,  we 
fail  at  the  principal  point. 


**  Earth  has  no  Sorrow  That  Jesus  Cannot 
Hear' 

Some  time  ago,  in  America,  there  were  a  gentle- 
man and  his  wife  who  had  a  very  happy  home. 
The  man  was  prosperous  in  business  in  the  city  of 
Cleveland,  but  there  came  a  reverse  in  business,  and 
the  man  lost  everything  he  had  in  the  world.  The 
home  was  broken  up  ;  his  eldest  daughter  had  to 
go  out  to  work  for  a  living.  His  two  boys  were 
too  young  to  work.  His  wife  had  to  leave  him  and 
take  the  two  boys  and  go  away  to  one  of  the 
southern  states  to  the  home  of  a  sister,  and  act  as 
housekeeper  to  make  a  living  for  herself  and  boys. 
The  father  went  to  Chicago,  to  see  if  he  could  not 
retrieve  his  fortunes.  He  met  with  success  and 
cheering  letters  full  of  promise  of  a  brighter  day 
were  sent  to  the  wife  in  the  south.  But  one  day 
she  received  a  telegraphic  dispatch  saying  that  her 
husband  was  very  ill,  and  that  she  had  better  come 
on  to  Chicago  at  once.  She  took  the  train.  It  was 
a  long  journey.  She  reached  Chicago  at  night  and 
went  to  the  hospital  to  which  her  husband  had  been 
taken. 

By  some  mistake,  the  authorities  of  the  hospital 
said  to  her,  "  You  cannot  see  your  husband  to-night ; 
come  at  nine  o'clock  to-morrow  morning,  and  you 
can  see  him."    With  a  heavy  heart  she  went  to  the 


116      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

place  where  she  stopped,  and  went  back  to  the 
hospital  at  nine  the  next  morning.  As  she  rang 
the  bell,  they  met  her  at  the  door  and  said,  "  Your 
husband  died  last  night."  She  took  him  out  and 
buried  him,  and  so  great  was  her  loneliness  and 
her  sorrow,  and  so  frequent  her  weeping,  that  it 
affected  her  eyesight.  She  went  to  a  physician. 
The  physician  told  her  that  it  was  not  very  serious, 
that  she  could  go  back  to  Mississippi  and  her  eyes 
would  soon  be  well.  She  supposed  that  he  was  a 
regular  practitioner  but  she  found  out  too  late  that 
he  was  a  Christian  Science  physician,  and  was  tr}^- 
ing  to  cure  her  by  making  her  think  she  was  not  ill. 

She  went  back  to  Mississippi.  Her  eyes  got 
worse  and  worse.  She  went  to  a  regular  physician. 
He  said,  "  Madam,  your  case  is  hopeless.  If  you 
had  come  to  me  a  few  weeks  ago,  I  could  have 
helped  you.  Your  trouble  has  gone  so  far  now 
that  there  is  absolutely  no  hope  for  you.  You  will 
be  totally  blind."  In  a  few  days  she  was  totally 
blind — home  broken  up,  husband  buried,  eyesight 
gone.  She  came  on  to  Chicago.  She  dropped  into 
our  church  ;  she  heard  the  gospel,  she  heard  about 
Jesus.  She  came  to  Jesus  with  all  her  overwhelm- 
ing sorrow,  and  Jesus  gave  her  rest. 

If  you  come  to  the  prayer-meeting  at  our  church 
any  Friday  night,  you  will  see  sitting  there  a 
woman  with  a  refined,  beautiful  face,  dressed  in 
black,  eyes  closed,  perfectly  sightless,  but  in  that 
face  you  will  see  a  serener  and  profounder  joy  than 
you  have  ever  seen  in  many  faces.  Yery  likely, 
you  will  see  her  rise  to  her  feet  in  the  course  of 


AlsTECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      117 

the  meeting  with  a  face  radiant  with  the  sunshine 
of  heaven,  and  tell  how  wonderfully  God  has 
blessed  her ;  and  you  may  hear  her  say  (what  she 
often  says)  that  she  thanks  God  she  has  lost  her 
sight,  for  out  of  her  great  trouble  she  was  brought 
to  Christ  and  found  a  joy  that  she  never  knew  be- 
fore. 

There  is  a  place  where  there  is  a  cure  for  every 
sorrow.    That  place  is  at  the  feet  of  Jesus. 

Hunted  to  Death  b^  Her  Own  Conscience 

Oyer  in  Canada  there  was  a  young  girl  leading 
a  quiet  life  in  the  country.  Keport  came  to  her  of 
the  greater  gaiety  of  city  life  in  Toronto.  She  said, 
"  I  will  go  to  the  city ;  it  is  too  quiet  here  in  the 
country.  I  will  go  to  the  city  of  Toronto,  and  en- 
ter into  a  life  of  gaiety."  She  went  to  Toronto  ; 
she  entered  upon  her  gay  life,  and  was  soon  caught, 
as  so  many  another  girl  has  been  caught,  in  the 
whirlpool  of  sin,  and  went  down  into  a  life  of 
shame.  Days  passed  by ;  her  conscience  did  not 
torment  her  very  much.  One  night  the  Fisk  Jubi- 
lee Singers  were  singing  in  Toronto,  and  a  friend 
asked  her  to  go  and  hear  them  sing.  So  she  went 
to  the  church  to  hear  the  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers  sing, 
and  she  enjoyed  the  concert  very  much  until  these 
black  singers  came  to  that  song,  the  weird  refrain 
of  which  runs : 

"  My  mother  once,  my  mother  twice, 
My  mother  she'll  rejoice. 
In  heaven  once,  in  heaven  twice, 
My  mother  she'll  rejoice." 


118      ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS 

As  the  strains  of  that  refrain  came  floating  over 
the  heads  of  the  audience  up  to  where  that  poor  girl 
sat  in  the  gallery,  it  brought  back  recollections 
of  her  childhood.  She  was  a  little  child  again  of 
four  years  of  age.  It  was  evening  time.  Her 
mother  sat  by  the  table  in  the  sitting-room.  The 
lamp  stood  upon  the  table,  and  the  open  Bible  was 
in  her  mother's  lap,  and  the  mother  was  teaching 
her,  an  innocent  golden-headed  child  of  four,  how 
to  pray.  The  concert  went  on.  Again  the  Fisk 
Jubilee  Singers  came  to  that  refrain : 

"  M}'^  mother  once,  my  mother  twice, 
My  mother  she'll  rejoice. 
In  heaven  once,  in  heaven  twice, 
My  mother  she'll  rejoice." 

The  hot  blood  rushed  to  the  girl's  cheeks.  She 
sprang  from  her  seat  in  the  gallery.  Her  friend 
tried  to  detain  her,  but  she  broke  away  and  rushed 
down  the  gallery,  down  the  stairway,  out  on  to  the 
streets  of  Toronto.  On  and  on  and  on,  as  fast  as 
her  feet,  now  growing  weary,  could  carry  her ; 
on  and  on  and  on,  beneath  the  flickering  gaslights 
of  Toronto;  on  and  on  and  on,  out  into  the  open 
country ;  and  the  next  morning,  when  a  farmer 
came  to  his  w^hite  farmhouse  door,  there  lay  the 
poor  girl  clutching  the  threshold — dead.  Hunted 
to  death  by  her  own  conscience. 

Woe  be  to  the  men  and  women  whose  conscience 
wakes  up,  who  have  no  hiding  place  from  their  own 
conscience. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      119 

Only  Two  Boys 

A  CHILD  can  bear  witness  for  Christ.  One  night 
I  wenii  out  to  a  suburb  near  Chicago.  It  was  a  bitter 
cold  night.  After  the  meeting  I  said,  "  Anybody 
that  will  accept  Christ  to-night,  stand  up."  I  saw 
something  big  begin  to  get  up,  and  it  rose  higher 
and  higher  and  higher,  and  broader  and  broader 
and  thicker  and  thicker — he  weighed  two  hundred 
and  ninety  pounds.  An  enormous  man.  I  said, 
"  I  have  caught  a  pretty  big  fish  to-night,"  and  I 
had,  for  he  has  been  an  excellent  worker  ever  since, 
but  I  caught  two  little  fish  that  night — they  looked 
little  but  they  turned  out  big.  Before  leaving  the 
building  I  turned  up  my  coat  collar  and  put  on  my 
gloves  ready  to  go  out  into  the  cold.  I  got  about 
half  way  down  the  aisle  and  I  saw  two  boys,  I  tliink 
one  was  about  twelve  and  the  other  fourteen  years 
old.  I  always  like  boys.  Almost  everybody  had 
gone,  and  I  turned  and  said,  "  Good-evening,  boys. 
What  are  you  waiting  for  ?  "  "  AYaiting  to  talk 
with  you,  Mr.  Torrey."  "  What  do  you  want  to 
talk  with  me  about  ?  "  They  said,  "  We  want  you 
to  tell  us  how  to  be  Christians."  I  turned  down 
my  coat  collar  and  took  off  my  gloves  and  sat  down 
and  explained  to  them  the  way  to  be  a  Christian. 
They  understood  it,  and  they  took  Christ.  After  we 
got  up,  I  said,  ''  Boys,  what  are  your  names  ? " 
"  Henry  Harris,"  "  Charlie  Harris."  I  wrote  them 
down  in  my  book. 

A  few  nights  after  there  was  a  young  lady  sitting 
in  the  meeting,  and  while  I  preached  I  made  up  my 


120      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

mind  that  she  was  not  a  Christian.  When  I  got 
through  preaching  I  went  down  and  said,  "  Good- 
evening,  are  you  a  Christian  ?  "  *'  No,  I  am  not  a 
Christian."  "  Would  you  like  to  become  a  Chris- 
tian ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Would  you  become  a  Christian 
if  I  showed  you  how  ?  "  "  Yes."  She  sat  down, 
and  I  took  my  Bible  and  showed  her  how  to  be  a 
Christian.  Then  I  asked  for  her  name.  "  Miss 
Harris."  "  Where  do  you  live  ? "  I  wrote  it 
down,  and  I  said  over  and  over  to  myself,  *f  Harris, 
Harris ;  where  have  I  heard  that  name  ? "  I 
turned  back  in  my  little  book  and  I  saw  the  names 
of  these  two  boys.  I  said,  "I  had  two  boys 
here  the  other  night  with  the  same  name  as 
yours  and  they  live  where  you  do."  "  Oh,  yes," 
she  said,  "  they  are  my  brothers.  They  brought 
me." 

A  few  nights  after  a  lady  came,  and  while  I 
talked  she  just  sat  and  listened,  and  when  the  meet- 
ing was  over  I  stepped  up  to  her  and  said,  "  Are 
you  a  Christian  ?  "  "I  am  not  what  you  call  a 
Christian.  I  call  myself  a  Universalist."  "  Are 
you  saved  ?  "  "  Not  what  you  would  call  saved." 
"  Would  you  like  to  become  a  Christian  to-night  ? 
Would  you  become  a  real  Christian  if  I  showed  you 
how  ?  "  We  sat  down,  and  she  took  Christ  and  we 
had  prayer  together.  Then  I  said,  "  What  is  your 
name,  please  ?  "  "  Mrs.  Harris."  "  I  had  two  boys 
by  that  name  the  other  night,  who  live  just  where 
you  do."  "  They  were  my  two  boys.  They  would 
not  give  me  any  rest  until  I  came." 

The  last  meeting  was  in  a  great  big  skating  rink, 


^  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      121 

and  one  night  a  little  boy,  with  long  chestnut  curls, 
came  up  to  me.  I  said,  "Good-evening,  my  boy, 
what  do  you  want  ? "  "I  want  to  become  a  Chris- 
tian." I  said,  "  Why  do  you  want  to  become  a 
Christian  ? "  "  Because  I  am  a  sinner."  He  did 
not  look  a  bit  like  it — he  looked  more  like  an  angel 
— but  he  was  right ;  he  was  a  sinner.  "  We  have 
all  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  I 
sat  down  and  took  my  Bible  and  turned  to  Isaiah 
53:6;  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  "  Is 
that  true  of  you,  my  boy  ?  "  "  Yes."  *•  What  are 
you  then?"  "I  am  lost."  "We  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way."  "Is  that  true  of 
you  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir."  "  Then  what  are  you  ?  "  "I 
am  a  lost  sinner."  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him 
the  iniquity  of  us  all."  I  said,  "  On  whom  ?  " 
He  said,  "  On  Jesus."  "  Yery  well,  what  is  all  you 
have  to  do  then  to  become  a  Christian  ?  "  "  Just  to 
believe  on  Jesus."  "Will  you  do  it?"  "I  will." 
"Let's  kneel  down."  And  he  knelt  down.  I 
prayed  and  he  prayed,  and  when  he  had  finished  I 
said,  "  What  are  you,  my  boy  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  am 
saved ;  my  sins  are  all  forgiven."  "  How  do  you 
know  that?"  "Because  Jesus  says  so."  "Sup- 
pose after  you  go  home  to-night  you  forget  and  do 
something  you  ought  not  to  do,  what  will  you  do 
about  it?  "  He  said,  "  I  will  tell  Jesus."  "What 
will  He  do  ?  "  "  He  will  forgive  me."  "  How  do 
you  know  that  ?  "  "  Because  He  says  so.  "  I  think 
that  boy  had  a  better  idea  of  salvation  than  some 
grown-up  men.  "Now;  my  boy,  what  is  your 
name  ?  "    "  George  Harris."    The  last  one  of  the 


122      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

family.     These  two  little  boys  that  came  out  that 
first  night  brought  the  whole  family  to  Jesus. 


A  Lost  Diamond 

A  QUAINT  preacher  of  the  olden  days  in  our 
country,  the  Eev.  Dan  Baker,  puts  the  danger  of 
delay  in  the  way  of  a  story.  He  tells  of  a  man 
who  was  crossing  the  ocean.  He  was  leaning  over 
the  side  of  the  vessel ;  it  was  a  bright  sunny  day, 
and  not  a  wave  broke  the  surface  of  the  water,  just 
a  little  ripple  here  and  there  kissed  by  the  rays  of 
the  sun.  And  the  man,  as  he  leaned  over  the  rail 
of  the  vessel,  was  tossing  something  in  the  air, 
something  which,  when  it  fell  through  the  sunlight, 
sparkled  with  singular  radiance  and  glory  ;  and  he 
watched  it  so  eagerly  as  he  tossed  it  up  and  caught  it 
as  it  fell.  He  tossed  it  up  again  and  again  and  again, 
and  it  threw  out  its  marvellous  light  as  it  fell  through 
the  sunlight.  At  last  an  onlooker  came  and  said, 
"May  I  ask  what  that  is  that  you  are  tossing  up 
so  carelessly?"  "Certainly,"  he  replied,  "look  at 
it,  it  is  a  diamond."  "  Is  it  of  much  value  ?  "  asked 
the  onlooker.  "  Yes,  of  very  great  value.  See  the 
color  of  it,  see  the  size  of  it.  In  fact,  all  I  have  in 
the  world  is  in  that  diamond.  I  am  going  to  a  new 
country  to  seek  my  fortune,  and  I  have  sold  every- 
thing I  have,  and  have  put  it  into  that  diamond,  so 
as  to  get  it  into  a  portable  shape."  "  Then  if  it  is 
so  valuable,  is  it  not  an  awful  risk  you  are  running 
in  tossing  it  up  so  carelessly  ?  "    "  No  risk  at  all. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      123 

I  have  been  doing  this  for  the  last  half-hour,"  said 
the  man.  "  But  there  might  come  a  last  time,"  said 
the  onlooker ;  but  the  man  laughed  and  threw  it 
up  again,  and  caught  it  as  it  fell,  and  again  and 
again,  and  once  more,  and  it  flashed  and  blazed  with 
glory  as  it  fell  through  the  sunlight,  and  he  watches 
it  so  eagerly  as  it  falls.  Ah !  but  this  time  it  is  too 
far  out.  He  reaches  as  far  as  he  can  over  the  rail 
of  the  vessel,  but  he  cannot  reach  far  enough. 
There  is  a  little  plash  in  the  ocean.  He  leans  far 
over  the  rail  and  tries  to  penetrate  with  his  eager 
gaze  the  unfathomable  depths  of  deep  blue  ocean. 
Then  cries,  "  Lost !  lost !  lost !  All  I  have  in  the 
world  is  lost !  " 

You  say,  "  N'o  man  would  be  so  great  a  fool  as 
that ;  that  story  is  not  true."  That  story  is  true, 
and  the  man  is  here  to-night.  Thou  art  the  man ! 
That  ocean  is  eternity ;  that  vessel,  life ;  that  dia- 
mond, your  soul,  that  soul  of  such  priceless  value 
that  Christ  died  to  save  it.  And  you  have  been 
trifling  with  it !  I  come  to  you  to-night  and  say, 
"  My  friend,  what  is  that  in  your  hand  which  you 
are  playing  with  so  carelessly  ?  "  You  say,  "  It  is 
my  soul."  "  Is  it  worth  much  ?  "  "  Worth  much  ? 
More  than  the  whole  round  earth, '  for  what  shall  it 
profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his 
own  soul  ?  '  "  "  But  don't  you  think  you  are  taking 
an  awful  risk  ?  "  "  Oh,  no,"  you  say,  "  I  have  been 
doing  this  for  the  last  five  years,  for  the  last  ten,  fif- 
teen, twenty  years."  "  Yes,  but  you  might  do  it  once 
too  often."  "  Oh,  no,"  you  sa}^,  and  to-night  once 
more  you  throw  it  up.     But  you  may  throw  it  up 


124      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

once  too  often ;  it  will  fall  too  far  out,  beyond  your 
reach ;  there  will  be  a  plash,  and  you  will  try  to 
look  after  it ;  not  into  the  impenetrable  depths  of 
the  blue  ocean,  but  into  the  unfathomable  depths 
of  the  bottomless  pit  as  it  sinks  and  sinks  and  sinks, 
and  you  will  cry,  "  Lost !  lost !  lost !  my  soul  is  lost  I " 
That  may  be  your  cry  some  day.  Come  to-night, 
before  it  is  too  late,  and  put  your  soul  where  it  will 
be  everlastingly  safe,  in  the  keeping  of  the  Son 
of  God. 


''We  Shall  be  Like  Him'' 

How  well  I  remember  one  man — I  spent  more 
time  and  more  money  on  the  salvation  of  that  man 
than  on  any  man  I  ever  tried  to  lead  to  Christ.  It 
was  very  discouraging.  He  came  to  me  one  night 
away  down  in  sin,  about  fifty  years  of  age.  He 
came  of  a  good  family.  He  had  been  well  educated, 
but  now  he  was  a  common  day  laborer  when  he  was 
sober — a  complete  wreck.  He  came  into  a  meet- 
ing. When  almost  everybody  had  gone  he  came 
up  and  said,  "  I  want  to  ask  you  something  alone." 
I  said,  "Come  this  way."  He  leaned  over  and 
whispered,  "  Mr.  Torrey  "  (I  had  never  met  him  be- 
fore that  night),  "  do  you  think  Jesus  Christ  can 
save  me  ?  "  I  said,  "  Jesus  Christ  can  save  any- 
body." He  said, "  Do  you  really  think  He  can  save 
a  man  as  far  down  as  I  am  ?  "  I  said,  "  Jesus  Christ 
can  save  anybody."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  will  take 
Him." 

For  a  little  while  he  went  on  well.    One  day  I 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      125 

was  to  go  to  a  dinner  at  a  house  where  he  was  in- 
vited also.  My  wife  and  I  had  nearly  reached  the 
house  when,  at  the  bottom  of  the  block  of  houses, 
we  saw  a  young  fellow  running  out  of  the  house  up 
the  street.  He  came  to  me  and  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey, 
C.  is  drunk."  My  wife  thought  very  much  of  him, 
and  she  turned  to  me  and  almost  burst  into  tears 
and  said,  "  Oh,  Archie,  whom  can  we  trust  ? "  I 
replied  in  one  word,  "  God  I "  "  You  cannot  trust 
C.  You  cannot  trust  any  man,  but  you  can  trust 
God." 

We  got  to  the  house  and  found  him  raging.  He 
wanted  to  get  out,  but  they  had  locked  him  in  a 
room.  I  went  into  the  room  and  stood  between 
him  and  the  door.  He  was  a  great,  big,  burly  fel- 
low, and  I  said  to  him,  "  You  cannot  go  out."  He 
cried,  "  Let  me  out."  I  said,  "  You  cannot  go  out. 
You  are  not  going  to  get  out  until  you  are  sober." 
He  said,  "  That  is  not  fair.  You  know  I  would  not 
strike  you.  You  know  I  could  throw  you,  and  you 
know  I  won't  touch  you."  I  said,  "  You  cannot  go 
out."  At  last  he  lost  all  control  of  himself,  and  he 
made  a  rush  for  me,  and  there  were  heads  and  arms 
flying  around  the  room  for  about  half  a  minute. 
Then  there  was  a  sudden  crash,  and  I  was  sitting 
on  top.  He  was  a  much  stronger  man  than  I,  one 
of  the  most  powerful  men  I  ever  knew.  I  have 
heard  that  man  when  he  was  angry,  grind  his  teeth 
so  that  you  could  hear  it  across  this  hall.  I  have 
seen  that  man,  when  under  the  influence  of  liquor, 
strike  an  iron  fence  with  his  bare  fist.  It  was  God 
that  gave  me  the  victory.    He  was  subdued  for  the 


126      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

time  being.  I  held  him  there  until  he  got  calmed 
down.  "  Now,"  I  said,  "  I  have  to  call  and  see  a 
dying  woman.  I  cannot  leave  you  here.  I  cannot 
very  well  take  you  to  see  a  dying  woman,  but  you 
have  got  to  go  along."  I  took  him  along  as  far  as 
the  door  of  the  house  where  the  woman  w^as  dying, 
and  I  said,  "  Sit  down  on  that  threshold,  and  wait 
there  until  I  come."  When  I  came  back  he  was  fast 
asleep.     I  got  him  home  all  right. 

This  sort  of  thing  went  on  for  months  and  years. 
I  moved  to  Chicago.  I  sent  for  him  to  come  to 
Chicago,  where  I  got  a  position  for  him.  He  did 
first-rate  for  a  while,  and  then  he  got  drunk,  and  he 
came  to  see  me  and  he  said  :  "  That  was  not  fair 
at  all  the  time  you  threw  me  in  Minneapolis.  You 
know  you  cannot  throw  me."  I  said,  "  I  am  not 
going  to."  That  sort  of  thing  went  on  for  months 
and  years ;  but  I  made  up  my  mind  that,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  no  matter  what  it  cost  in  money,  and 
no  matter  what  it  cost  in  time  and  patience,  I  was 
going  to  see  that  man  saved.  For  some  time  I 
lost  sight  of  him.  One  night  I  was  in  my  pulpit 
in  Chicago,  preaching.  I  had  already  begun  the 
service  when  I  saw  C.  coming  into  the  building. 
I  went  down  to  where  he  was  sitting,  and  said, 
"  Good-evening,  C,  I  am  glad  to  see  you."  He 
stayed  to  the  after-meeting.  The  next  day  I  was 
going  to  Minneapolis,  and  I  took  him  along  with 
me.  He  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  there  is  one  thing  that 
has  cured  me.  I  thought  you  would  never  want  to 
see  me  again,  but  I  hardly  had  got  into  the  build- 
ing, and  had  sat  down  away  in  the  back,  when  you 


ANECDOTES  AITD  ILLUSTEATIONS      127 

walked  down  from  the  platform  and  came  to  speak 
to  a  miserable  tramp  like  me.  That  was  too 
much  !  "  Do  you  know,  from  that  day  C.  got  his 
feet  on  the  Rock ! 

Years  passed,  I  was  in  Minneapolis  again.  I  was  in 
a  big  restaurant,  when  I  saw  C.  come  in  at  the  far- 
ther end,  and  I  went  up  to  him.  He  said,  "  I  was 
looking  for  you.  I  heard  you  were  in  town.  Don't 
laugh  at  me."  I  said,  "  I  am  not  going  to  laugh  at 
you.  What's  up  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  want  to  ask  you 
something.  Don't  laugh  at  me."  I  said,  "  I  am 
not  going  to  laugh  at  you.  What  do  you  want  ?  " 
He  said,  "  I  want  to  be  married.  I  am  engaged  to 
a  right  good  Christian  woman  and  I  want  you  to 
marry  us."  I  said,  "  I  am  your  man.  I'll  do  it." 
I  married  him.  You  say  it  was  pretty  risky,  but 
his  feet  had  been  on  the  Rock  now  for  a  good  while. 
He  married  that  Christian  woman,  and  they  built 
up  a  happy  Christian  home. 

The  other  day  my  wife  wrote  to  a  friend  of  ours, 
who  had  gone  to  Minneapolis,  to  know  how  C.  was 
getting  on — I  think  he  is  her  pet  of  all  the  drunk- 
ards who  have  come  under  our  roof.  This  lady 
wrote  back,  "  He  is  doing  well.  He  is  leading  a 
Christian  life." 

And,  friends,  the  time  is  coming  when  poor, 
Wrecked,  ruined  C.  transformed  by  the  power  of  the 
returning  Christ  will  be  like  Him,  "  For  when  He 
shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see 
Him  as  He  is ; "  and  when  this  man  that  I  wept 
over  and  worked  for  and  spent  money  on  all  these 
years,  when  he  meets  his  Christ,  and  his  salvation  is 


128      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

indeed  complete,  he  will  be  so  like  his  Master  that 
we  can  hardly  tell  the  two  apart. 


Killed  by  Shame 

Oh,  the  awful  heart-breaking  agony  of  shame. 
In  America,  in  New  York  State,  we  had  a  cashier 
in  a  bank,  who  was  in  a  hurry  to  get  rich,  so  he  ap- 
propriated the  funds  of  the  bank  and  invested  them, 
intending  to  pay  them  back.  But  his  investment 
was  a  failure.  For  a  long  time  he  kept  the  books 
so  as  to  blind  the  bank  examiner,  but  one  day  when 
the  bank  examiner  was  going  over  the  books  he  de- 
tected the  embezzlement.  He  called  in  the  cashier 
— he  had  to  acknowledge  his  defalcation.  He  was 
arrested,  tried,  and  sent  to  State's  prison.  He  had 
a  wife  and  a  lovely  child,  a  sweet  angel-like  little 
girl.  Some  time  after  his  arrest  and  imprisonment 
the  little  child  came  home  sobbing  with  a  breaking 
heart.  "  Oh,"  she  said,  "  mother,  I  can  never  go 
back  to  that  school  again.  Send  for  my  books. 
"  Oh,"  she  said,  "  my  darling,"  thinking  it  was  some 
childish  whim,  "  of  course  you  will  go  back."  "  ^N'o," 
she  said,  "  mother,  I  can  never  go  back.  Send  for 
my  books."  She  said,  "  Darling,  what  is  the  mat- 
ter ?  "  She  said,  "  Another  little  girl  said  to  me  to- 
day, '  Your  father  is  a  thief.^  "  Oh,  the  cruel  stab ! 
The  mother  saw  that  she  could  not  go  back  to 
school.  The  wound  was  fatal.  That  fair  blossom 
began  to  fade.  A  physician  was  called  in,  but  it 
surpassed  all  the  possibilities  of  his  art.  The  child 
faded  and  faded,  until  they  laid  her  upon  her  bed, 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS      129 

and  the  physician  said,  "  Madam,  I  must  tell  you 
this  is  a  case  in  which  I  am  powerless ;  the  child's 
heart  has  given  way  with  the  agony  of  the  wound. 
Your  child  must  die."  The  mother  went  in  and 
said  to  her  dying  child,  "  Darling,  is  there  anything 
you  would  like  to  have  me  do  for  you  ?  "  "  Oh," 
she  said,  "  yes,  mother,  send  for  father.  Let  him 
come  home,  and  lay  his  head  down  on  the  pillow 
beside  mine  as  he  used  to  do."  Ah  !  but  that  was 
just  what  could  not  be  done.  The  father  was  be- 
hind iron  bars.  They  sent  to  the  governor  of  the 
State,  and  he  said,  '*  I  have  no  power  in  the  matter." 
They  sent  to  the  warden  of  the  prison.  He  said, 
"  I  have  no  power  in  the  matter." 

But  hearts  were  so  touched  that  they  trumped  up 
a  case  and  summoned  him  as  a  witness.  So  they 
made  arrangements  whereby  the  father  was  suffered 
to  come  home  under  a  deputy- warden.  He  reached 
his  home  late  at  night,  and  entered  his  house.  The 
physician  was  waiting.  He  said,  "  I  think  you  had 
better  go  in  to-night,  for  I  am  afraid  your  child  will 
not  live  till  morning."  The  father  went  to  the  door 
and  opened  it  softly.  The  child  looked  quickly  up. 
"  Oh,"  she  said,  "  I  knew  it  was  you,  father.  I  knew 
you  would  come.  I  have  been  praying  God  to  send 
you.  Father,  come  and  lay  your  head  beside  mine 
upon  the  pillow  just  as  you  used  to  do."  And  the 
strong  man  went  and  laid  his  head  upon  the  pillow, 
and  the  child  lovingly  patted  his  cheek,  and  died. 
Killed  by  shame.  Men  and  women,  hell  is  the  place 
of  shame,  where  everybody  is  dishonoured. 


130      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

A  Well-Known  Entertainer  Becomes  a.  Soul 
Winner 

One  night  in  London  two  men  went  to  the  theatre 
and  presented  passes  for  entrance.  For  some  reason 
or  other,  the  man  at  the  door  did  not  recognize  them 
and  the  passes  were  refused.  One  of  the  men  was 
a  very  prominent  entertainer  and  thought  he  was 
well-known  in  the  theatrical  profession  everywhere, 
and  this  refusal  to  accept  the  passes  irritated  him 
greatly,  and  he  left  the  theatre  with  his  friend  in  a 
rage.  They  took  the  Kensington  Avenue  bus,  and 
as  they  were  passing  the  Koyal  Albert  Hall,  he 
noticed  the  signs  of  the  mission.  He  remembered 
he  had  promised  his  sister  that  he  would  come  and 
hear  me,  so  he  suggested  to  his  friend  that  they  get 
off  the  bus  and  come  into  the  hall  that  night.  His 
friend  consented  and  in  they  came.  He  was  not 
much  interested  in  the  singing,  though  he  himself 
did  a  good  deal  of  work  in  his  profession  along  that 
line,  but  the  sermon  went  right  to  his  heart.  He 
left  the  Koyal  Albert  Hall  to  think  the  matter  over. 
His  sister,  who  v^as  an  earnest  Christian  woman, 
had  left  on  his  mantelpiece  a  little  tract  (a  report  of 
a  sermon  on  "  Hell "  that  I  had  delivered  in  Lon- 
don). He  took  it  down  and  read  it.  It  brought 
him  under  deepest  conviction  of  sin,  and  he  then  and 
there  fell  on  his  knees  and  surrendered  himself  to 
God. 

The  next  night  he  came  to  see  me  at  the  Eoyal 
Albert  Hall,  and  told  me  of  his  decision  to  accept 
Christ.    He  made  a  public  profession  that  night  be- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      131 

fore  the  great  crowd  in  the  hall.  He  told  me  he 
could  not  go  on  and  take  the  entertainments  for 
which  he  was  booked  the  next  day  at  St.  George's 
Music  Hall.  He  said,  ''  I  cannot  go  and  entertain 
those  people  and  make  them  laugh  when  I  know 
they  are  going  to  hell."  He  tried  to  get  into  com- 
munication with  the  stage  manager,  but  could  get 
no  reply  from  him  either  by  letter  or  telegraph. 
He  went  down  to  the  Hall  and  asked  to  be  let  off 
from  his  engagement.  The  manager  replied,  "I 
will  let  you  off  on  one  condition,  and  one  condition 
only,  and  that  is  that  you  will  go  out  and  tell  the 
waiting  crowd  why  you  are  not  performing."  He 
said,  "  I  will  do  that."  He  went  out  on  the  stage 
and  said,  "  Friends,  I  cannot  give  my  entertainment 
this  afternoon.  I  was  converted  last  night  at  the 
Torrey-Alexander  mission."  The  crowd  burst  into 
applause,  thinking  it  was  a  new  joke  that  he  was 
getting  off.  He  stopped  the  applause  and  said,  "  It 
is  no  joke.  I  have  been  converted.  I  cannot  stand 
here  and  make  you  people  laugh  when  I  know  that 
many  of  you  are  on  the  road  to  hell."  The  audience 
stopped  their  applause  and  became  serious.  Many 
of  them  were  touched  by  his  earnestness  and  his 
bravery.  At  least  one  woman  was  converted  then 
and  there  in  that  audience. 

When  he  went  off  the  stage,  the  manager  offered 
the  hall  for  the  use  of  Gospel  meetings  the  next 
week.  He  accepted  the  offer.  Meetings  were  held 
in  that  music  hall  all  through  the  week,  and  there 
were  many  interesting  conversions,  including  at  least 
one  person  connected  with  the  nobility.    He  was 


132      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

afterwards  invited  ail  over  England  and  Scotland 
and  Ireland  and  Wales  to  bold  evangelistic  meet- 
ings. A  great  London  magazine  had  an  article  upon 
his  conversion  and  said,  "Two  or  three  such  con- 
versions as  that  would  move  all  London." 


Guilty  of  High  Treason 

OiTE  day  in  Maryborough,  over  in  Australia,  a 
fine-looking  man  came  to  see  me,  an  unusually  fine- 
looking  man,  with  splendid  physique  and  dome-like 
forehead.  He  said,  "  I  want  to  talk  with  you,"  and 
I  said,  "  Yery  well,  take  a  seat,  sir."  He  said,  "  I 
want  to  know  what  you  have  against  me  ? " 
"  What  I  have  against  you,"  I  exclaimed,  "  I  don't 
know  you."  "  I  mean  this ;  I  am  not  a  Christian ; 
I  don't  pretend  to  be  a  Christian,  but  I  am  a  moral, 
upright  man,  and  no  one  can  deny  it.  Now,"  he 
said,  "  I  would  like  you  to  tell  me  what  you  have 
against  me."  I  said,  "  You  are  not  a  Christian  ?  " 
"  No,  sir,"  he  replied.  "  You  have  not  taken  Jesus 
Christ  as  your  personal  Saviour,  and  surrendered 
your  life  to  Him  as  your  Lord  and  Master,  and 
confessed  Him  as  such  before  the  world,  and  given 
your  life  to  Him  ? "  "  No,  sir,"  he  replied. 
"  Then,"  I  said,  "  I  charge  you,  sir,  with  high  trea- 
son against  your  King.  Jesus  Christ  is  your  King, 
by  Divine  appointment,  and  I  charge  you,  sir" 
— and  I  looked  him  right  in  the  eye — "  I  charge 
you,  sir,  with  the  crime  of  high  treason  against 
your  divinely  appointed  King."  A  dark  cloud 
came  over  the  man's  face.    He  got  up,  and  left  the 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      133 

room,  scarcely  saying  a  word.  As  he  went  out  the 
door  he  never  looked  back.  He  walked  down  the 
long  walk  without  ever  looking  back.  Out  of  the 
front  gate,  never  looking  back. 

Months  passed  away ;  we  had  been  over  to  Tas- 
mania and  conducted  a  mission  there,  and  had  re- 
turned, and  I  was  preaching  in  Ballarat,  about 
forty  miles  away  from  Maryborough.  After  the 
service,  a  fine-looking  man  came  to  me,  and  said, 
"  Do  you  remember  me  ?  "  I  knew  his  face,  but  I 
could  not  remember  where  I  had  seen  him.  I  said, 
"  I  have  seen  you  somewhere,  but  I  cannot  place 
you."  He  said,  "  Do  you  remember  charging  a 
man  with  high  treason  ?  "  I  said,  "  I  have  charged 
many  a  man  with  high  treason."  "  Yes,"  he  said ; 
"but  do  you  remember  charging  a  specific  man 
with  high  treason?"  Then  he  began  to  tell  me 
his  story,  and  I  commenced  to  gather  who  he  was. 
He  said,  "  I  am  the  man,  and  I  have  come  way  to 
Ballarat,  sir,  to  tell  you  that  you  will  never  charge 
me  with  high  treason  again  ; "  and  he  held  out  his 
hand,  and  I  held  out  mine,  and  he  took  mine  in  his 
mighty  grip — and  it  was  a  mighty  grip  !— and  he 
said,  "  Down !  "  and  he  dropped  on  his  knees,  and  I 
dropped  on  to  mine,  and  he  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  I 
hand  in  my  allegiance ;  I  give  up  my  treason ;  I 
take  Thee  as  my  King." 

You  men  ought  to  do  it  to-night.  He  is  your 
King,  and  every  man  and  woman  among  you  that 
does  not  accept  Him  and  acknowledge  Him  as  such 
to-night  I  charge  you  with  high  treason  against 
Heaven's  King. 


134      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

How  D.  L.  Mood:^  Became  a,    World-Wide 
Evangelist 

Mr.  Moody  once  told  me  this  story  long  after 
the  incident  occurred.  He  went  over  to  London  in 
1872,  when  his  church  lay  in  ashes,  and  while  his 
new  church  in  Chicago  was  building,  not  in  order 
to  preach,  but  to  listen  to  others  who,  he  thought, 
could  preach  better  than  he.  One  Sunday  he  was 
prevailed  upon  to  preach.  He  got  up  that  Sunday 
morning,  and  tried  to  preach.  "  I  never  had  such 
a  hard  time  preaching  in  my  life.  Everything  was 
perfectly  dead.  I  said  to  myself  as  I  tried  to 
preach,  *  What  a  fool  I  was  to  consent  to  preach. 
I  came  here  to  listen,  and  here  I  am  preaching.'  As 
I  drew  towards  the  end  of  my  sermon,  I  felt  a 
sense  of  relief  that  I  would  be  through  in  a  few 
minutes.  Then,"  he  said,  "the  awful  thought 
came  to  me,  '  You  have  got  to  do  it  again  to-night.' 
I  tried  to  get  out  of  my  night  meeting,  but  I  could 
not.  I  had  promised  to  preach  that  night  and  I 
must  keep  my  word. 

"  I  went  back  to  preach  that  night.  The  build- 
ing was  packed  with  people.  There  was  a  new  at- 
mosphere. The  powers  of  an  unseen  world  seemed 
to  have  fallen  upon  the  audience.  As  I  drew 
towards  the  close,  I  became  emboldened  to  give  out 
an  invitation ;  so  when  I  finished  my  sermon,  I 
said,  '  If  there  is  a  man  or  woman  here  who  will 
to-night  accept  Jesus  Christ,  please  stand  up.' 
About  five  hundred  people  arose  to  their  feet.  I 
thought  there  must  be  some  mistake,  and  I  asked 


ANECDOTES  AI^D  ILLUSTEATIONS      135 

the  people  to  be  seated.  Then  I  repeated  the  in- 
vitation in  a  stronger  form  and  they  all  arose  again. 
Again  I  asked  them  to  be  seated,  still  thinking 
there  must  be  some  mistake.  ^Now,'  I  said,  'if 
there  are  any  of  you  who  really  mean  to  accept 
Christ  to-night,  please  pass  into  the  vestry  and  your 
pastor  and  I  will  meet  you  there.'  They  com- 
menced to  stream  in  through  the  two  doors.  I  said, 
*  Mr.  L.,  who  are  these  people  ?  '  He  said,  "  Don't 
know.'  'Are  they  your  people,  Mr.  L.?'  'Some 
of  them.'  '  Are  they  Christians  ? '  '  Not  so  far  as 
I  know.' 

"  We  went  into  the  vestry  and  I  stood  up  and  gave 
out  a  stronger  invitation,  and  I  asked  all  that  really 
meant  to  accept  Christ  then  and  there  to  stand  up. 
They  all  arose,  about  five  hundred  of  them.  I 
asked  them  to  be  seated  again.  I  still  thought 
there  must  be  some  mistake,  so  I  said,  '  I  am  going 
to  leave  London  to-morrow  for  Dublin,  but  your 
pastor  will  be  here  to-morrow  night.  If  you  really 
mean  it  come  back  and  meet  him.'  I  went  to  Dub- 
lin. No  sooner  had  I  got  there  than  I  received  a 
telegram  from  Mr.  L.  It  was  Tuesday  morning 
and  he  said,  '  There  was  a  bigger  crowd  out  Mon- 
day night  than  Sunday.  A  great  revival  has 
broken  out  in  my  church.  You  must  come  back 
and  help  me.'  " 

Mr.  Moody  hurried  back  to  London.  There  was 
a  revival  there  that  added  hundreds  of  souls  to  the 
churches  of  North  London.  That  was  before  he 
came  here  in  1873  for  his  great  work — his  introduc- 
tion to  England. 


136      ANECDOTES  AI^D  ILLUSTRATIONS 

When  he  had  finished  the  story  I  said  to  him, 
"  Mr.  Moody,  somebody  must  have  been  praying." 
"  Oh,"  he  said,  "  didn't  I  tell  you  that  ?  That  is 
the  point  of  the  story.  There  was  a  woman  in  the 
congregation  that  morning  who  had  an  invalid  sis- 
ter. She  went  home  and  said  to  her,  *  "Who  do  you 
think  preached  for  us  this  morning  ?  '  and  her  sis- 
ter guessed  all  the  preachers  who  were  in  the  habit 
of  exchanging  with  Mr.  L.,  and  she  said,  ^No,  Mr. 
Moody  from  Chicago.'  When  she  said  that,  the 
invalid  turned  pale.  She  said,  ^  What,  Mr.  Moody 
from  Chicago  ?  I  read  about  him  some  time  ago  in 
an  America  paper,  and  I  have  been  praying  God  to 
send  him  to  London  and  to  our  church.  If  I  had 
known  he  was  going  to  preach  this  morning,  I 
would  have  eaten  no  breakfast.  I  would  have 
spent  the  whole  time  in  prayer.  Now,  sister,  go 
out  of  the  room,  lock  the  door,  send  me  no  dinner ; 
no  matter  who  comes,  don't  let  them  see  me.  I  am 
going  to  spend  the  whole  afternoon  and  evening  in 
prayer.' "  And  while  Mr.  Moody  stood  in  the  pulpit 
where  all  was  coldness  and  death  in  the  morning, 
that  bedridden  saint  was  holding  him  up  in  prayer 
before  God.  And  God,  who  delights  to  answer 
prayer,  poured  out  His  Spirit.  While  the  multitude 
saw  Mr.  Moody,  God  was  looking  at  that  bedridden 
saint. 


Of  Course  There's  a.  Hell 

Another  reason  why  I  believe  that  there  is  "  a 
wrath  to  come,"  is  that  mj  common  sense  says  SQ. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      137 

Look  here,  here  is  a  man  who  grows  rich  by  over- 
reaching his  neighbours,  grows  rich  by  robbing  the 
widow  and  the  orphan.  He  does  it  by  legal  means. 
Oh,  yes,  he  is  too  cunning  to  come  within  reach  of 
the  law.  But  he  grows  rich  by  making  other  people 
poor.  He  increases  in  wealth  and  is  honoured  and 
respected.  When  he  goes  down  the  streets  in  his 
magnificent  equipage,  the  gentleman  on  the  streets 
turns  and  says  to  his  son:  "There  goes  Mr.  So- 
and-so,  a  man  of  rare  business  ability,  a  man  who  is 
now  one  of  our  leading  men  of  capital.  I  hope,  my 
boy,  when  you  grow  up  you  will  be  as  successful  as 
he."  He  lives  in  honour,  dies  in  honour,  dies  re- 
spected by  everybody — almost.  And  the  victims 
of  his  rapacity,  the  victims  of  his  oppression,  the 
victims  of  his  dishonesty  lie  yonder,  bleaching  in 
the  potter's  field,  where  they  have  gone  prematurely 
because  of  his  robbery.  Do  you  mean  to  tell  me 
that  there  will  not  be  a  day  when  these  men  who 
have  lived  on  wealth  wrung  from  the  poor  widow 
and  orphan  w^ll  not  have  to  go  before  a  righteous 
God  whose  eyes  are  not  blinded  by  a  few  thousands 
or  by  millions  given  in  philanthropy  or  to  the 
Church  and  answer  for  the  infamy  of  their  conduct 
and  receive  what  they  never  received  in  this  world, 
the  meet  reward  of  their  dishonesty  ?  Of  course 
there  is  a  judgment  day  ;  of  course  there  is  a  hell. 
If  there  is  not,  then  there  ought  to  be.  Look  here, 
here  is  a  man  who  goes  through  life,  never  giving 
God  one  thought  from  one  year's  end  to  another. 
He  leaves  God  out  of  his  business,  leaves  God  out 
of  his  social  life^  leaves  God  out  of  his  study,  leaves 


138      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

God  out  of  his  pleasures.  God's  holy  day,  the 
Sabbath,  he  makes  a  day  of  selfish  pleasure.  God's 
holy  Book,  the  Bible,  he  never  opens,  or  even 
scorns.  God's  holy  Son,  Jesus,  he  tramples  under 
foot.  And  thus  the  man  lives,  and  thus  he  dies, 
going  through  the  world  ignoring  the  God  that 
made  him,  and  gave  His  Son  to  die  upon  the  Cross 
to  save  him.  Do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  there  will 
not  be  a  day  when  that  man  will  have  to  go  up 
before  a  righteous  God  and  answer  these  questions  : 
"  What  did  you  do  with  My  holy  day,  the  Sabbath  ? 
What  did  you  do  with  My  holy  Word,  the  Bible  ? 
What  did  you  do  with  My  holy  Son,  Jesus  ?  "  Of 
course  there  is  a  hell,  if  there  is  not  there  ought  to 
be.  And  you  and  I  need  a  hiding-place  from  it, 
every  one  of  us,  for  every  one  of  us  has  sinned  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God. 


*'  I  Have  Heard  the  Biggest  Joke  " 

On  our  first  visit  to  Liverpool,  a  well  known 
business  man  (manager  of  eighty-nine  butcher  shops) 
was  asked  by  his  wife  to  accompany  her  to  the 
meeting  in  Philharmonic  Hall  a  certain  evening. 
He  consented  to  go  but  with  no  intention  of  keeping 
his  promise.  He  was  far  more  interested  in  prize- 
fights than  he  was  in  evangelistic  meetings.  He 
was  known  all  over  the  city  as  a  patron  of  prize- 
fights and  had  been  a  referee  in  many  of  them. 
When  the  evening  to  accompany  his  wife  to  the 
mission  came,  he  found  there  was  a  great  prize- 
fight on.     He  tried  to  see  if  there  wasn't  some  way 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOXS      139 

out  of  taking  his  wife  to  the  hall,  and  slipping  away 
to  go  in  to  the  fight.  He  tried  being  gruff  to  her, 
but  this  made  no  difference,  she  held  him  to  his 
promise.  Finally  he  said,  "  If  I  promised  you  to 
go,  of  course,  I'll  take  you."  When  they  got  to 
the  hall,  they  found  the  main  floor  reserved  for 
men  and  the  women  were  asked  to  go  to  the 
gallery.  "Now,"  thought  he,  "my  chance  for 
escape  has  come,"  so  he  said  to  his  wife,  "  You  go 
into  the  gallery,  and  I'll  slip  in  down  here,"  but 
she  knew  him  too  well  to  be  fooled  that  w^ay,  and 
insisted  that  he  go  into  the  gallery  with  her.  He 
went  but  very  much  against  his  will.  In  spite  of 
himself,  he  was  soon  interested. 

The  next  night  he  slipped  out  of  the  house  with- 
out saying  a  word  to  his  wife  and  made  his  way  to 
the  Philharmonic  Hall  alone.  The  singing  was  in 
full  swing  when  he  reached  the  hall.  Soon  after 
getting  his  seat,  he  heard  the  men  singing  very 
softly, 

"See!  from  His  head,  His  hands,  His  feet, 
Sorrow  and  love  flow  mingled  down! 
Did  e'er  snch  love  and  sorrow  meet, 
Or  thorns  compose  so  rich  a  crown  ?  " 

He  was  completely  overcome.  He  saw  Jesus  Christ 
on  the  cross  for  him,  and  forgetting  the  crowd  and 
everything  about  him,  he  fell  on  his  knees  and 
sobbed.  All  through  the  evening  the  vision  of 
Christ  on  the  cross  for  him  was  before  his  eyes. 
He  heard  little  of  the  sermon.  He  was  occupied 
with  but  one  thing,  his  Saviour  dying  for  him. 


140      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

When  the  invitation  was  given  out,  he  was  the  first 
to  come  to  the  front  and  profess  his  acceptance  of 
Christ.  He  went  home  and  told  his  wife  that  he 
had  accepted  Christ.  To  his  surprise,  she  was  not 
surprised.  She  said,  "  I  knew  you  would  do  it,  Ted. 
I  have  been  praying  for  you  for  years,  and  recently 
we  have  been  holding  prayer-meetings  for  your 
conversion,  and  I  knew  that  God  would  answer  my 
prayer." 

He  became  an  active  worker  at  once.  Was  con- 
stantly testifying  in  private  and  public  to  the 
saving  power  of  Christ.  Wherever  he  could  find  a 
mission  going  on,  he  would  go  and  give  his  testi- 
mony. He  was  much  in  demand  among  the  mis- 
sions and  churches  to  go  and  tell  the  story. 

A  former  comrade  met  him  one  day  on  the  street 
and  said,  "  Ted,  I  have  heard  the  biggest  joke.  I 
heard  you  were  converted."  He  replied,  "Didn't 
they  tell  you  the  rest  of  it  ?  The  rest  of  it  is  the 
best  part  of  the  joke."  "  No,  what  is  the  rest  ?  " 
"  The  rest  of  it  is,  it's  true,"  and  immediately  he 
preached  unto  him  Jesus. 

About  fifteen  months  afterwards  we  went  to  Liver- 
pool for  the  second  mission,  and  this  man  was  one 
of  the  best  workers  we  had.  He  was  constantly  in 
attendance  and  constantly  working  to  bring  others 
to  Christ.  He  bought  a  wagonette  to  bring  people 
to  the  hall,  and  when  they  would  try  to  excuse 
themselves  from  going,  he  would  say,  "  If  I  drive 
around  for  you,  will  you  go  ?  "  In  this  way  he  was 
able  to  bring  many  of  his  friends  and  neighbours  to 
Christ. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      141 

One  night  I  called  on  him  for  a  testimony.  He 
responded  gladly  and  told  in  a  thrilling  way  what 
the  Lord  Jesus  had  done  for  him.  The  man  who 
was  over  him  in  the  employ  of  the  great  firm  he  rep- 
resented happened  to  be  in  the  building  and  heard 
this  testimony.  After  the  meeting  he  came  to  him 
and  said,  "  It  is  all  very  well  your  being  a  Christian, 
but  if  you  are  going  around  making  a  fool  of  your- 
self in  this  way,  you  will  lose  your  position."  For 
a  moment  he  was  nonplussed  and  then  replied,  "  I 
must  be  true  to  the  Lord  Jesus  no  matter  what  it 
costs,  even  if  it  costs  me  my  position."  It  did  not 
cost  him  his  position.  On  calm  reflection  his  su- 
perior thought  better  of  his  foolish  threat. 

**  The  Fire  is  in  the  Fifth  Story,  Fm  in  the 
Sixth'' 

Years  ago  in  Minneapolis,  the  leading  paper  was 
the  Minneaj^olis  Tribune^  published  in  a  magnifi- 
cent six  or  seven-story  building,  the  finest  newspaper 
building  at  that  time  in  the  Northwest.  I  had  oc- 
casion every  week  to  go  into  the  upper  stories  of 
that  building  to  see  editorial  friends.  But  there 
was  one  great  defect  in  that  great  building  which  I 
had  never  noticed.  The  defect  was  this,  that  the 
stairway  went  right  round  the  elevator  shaft,  so 
that  if  a  fire  broke  out  in  the  elevator  shaft  escape 
would  be  cut  off  by  the  stairway  as  well  as  by  the 
elevator.  That  very  thing  happened.  A  fire  broke 
out  in  the  elevator  shaft,  and  it  commenced  to 
sweep  up  the  shaft,  story  by  story,  cutting  off 


142    a:necdotes  and  illustrations 

escape  by  the  elevator  and  cutting  off  escape  by  the 
stairway  as  well.  But  they  had  a  brave  elevator 
boy,  who  went  up  through  the  smoke  a  number  of 
times  until  he  got  a  large  number  of  men  down  from 
the  upper  stories,  and  almost  all  the  rest  escaped  by 
the  lire-escape  outside  the  building  or  by  the  stair. 
But  away  up  in  the  sixth  story  there  was  a  man,  a 
despatcher  for  the  Associated  Press.  He  was  urged 
to  escape,  but  he  refused  to  move.  There  he  sat  by 
his  instrument,  telegraphing  to  all  parts  of  the 
country  that  the  building  was  on  fire.  He  could 
have  gone  out  of  the  building  by  the  fire-escape,  and 
across  the  road  to  an  instrument  there,  and  could 
have  done  just  as  well;  but,  like  a  typical  news- 
paper man,  he  wanted  to  do  something  sensational, 
and  so  there  he  sat  telegraphing  the  news.  Besides 
a  short  time  before  at  the  time  of  the  Johnstown 
flood,  when  the  dam  of  the  river  was  breaking,  a 
woman  sat  in  a  telegraph  office  below  the  dam  tele- 
graphing down  the  Conemaugh  River  to  the  people 
at  Johnstown  that  the  dam  was  breaking  and  that 
they  had  better  flee  for  their  lives.  But  she  had  re- 
mained at  her  post  till  the  dam  broke  and  swept  her 
away  into  eternity  and  her  bravery  and  self-sacrifice 
had  been  heralded  over  the  world  and  he  wished 
to  match  her  brave  deed.  But  she  had  done  it  to 
save  life.  This  man  sat  there  quite  unnecessarily, 
merely  because  of  his  desire  for  notoriety.  "  I  am  in 
the  Tribune  building,"  he  telegraphed,  "  in  the  sixth 
story,  and  the  building  is  on  fire.  The  fire  has  now 
reached  the  second  story  ;  I  am  in  the  sixth."  In 
a  little  while  he  sent  another  message :     "  The  fire 


THE  PEOPLE  DOWN  IN  THE  STREET  LOOKED  ON 
IN  BREATHLESS  SUSPENSE." 


rm  NEW  YOkK 
P"3r,rc  LIBRARY 


TILDENfoo.VDATION3 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      143 

has  now  reached  the  third  story;  I  am  in  the 
sixth."  Soon  he  telegraphed :  "  The  fire  has 
reached  the  fourth  story  ;  I  am  in  the  sixth."  Soon 
again  the  message  came  over  the  wires  :  "  The  fire 
has  reached  the  fifth  story ;  I  am  in  the  sixth." 
Then  he  thought  it  was  time  to  leave ;  but,  in  order 
to  do  this,  he  had  to  cross  the  hallway  to  another 
room  and  a  window  to  reach  the  fire-escape.  He 
went  to  his  door  and  opened  it,  and,  to  his  dismay, 
found  that  the  fire  was  not  in  the  fifth  story  but  the 
sixth  and  that  the  hallway  was  full  of  smoke  and 
flame,  which,  the  moment  he  opened  the  door,  swept 
into  the  room.  He  shut  the  door  quickly.  What 
was  he  to  do  ? 

The  stairway,  the  elevator,  and  the  fire-escape 
were  all  cut  off;  but  he  was  a  brave  man,  and 
would  not  give  up  easily.  He  went  to  the  window 
and  threw  it  up.  Down  below  to  one  side  stood  a 
great  crowd,  six  stories  down.  They  could  not 
reach  him  with  a  ladder.  They  could  not  get  un- 
der him  to  spread  a  net  to  catch  him,  if  he 
jumped.  There  he  stood  on  the  window-sill,  not 
knowing  what  to  do.  But  presently  he  looked  up. 
Above  his  head  was  a  long  wire  guy-rope  that 
passed  from  the  Tribune  building  to  the  roof  of  an- 
other building  across  a  wide  opening.  Below  him 
was  a  chasm  six  stories  deep,  but  brave  man  that 
he  was,  he  caught  hold  of  the  guy-rope,  and  began 
to  go  hand-over-hand  across  that  chasm.  The  peo- 
ple down  in  the  street  looked  on  in  breathless  sus- 
pense. On  and  on  he  went,  and  then  he  stopped. 
The  people  below  could  hardly  breathe.     Would  he 


144      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTKATIONS 

let  go  ?  No.  On  and  on  he  went,  and  again  he 
stopped,  and  again  the  crowd  below  gasped. 
"Will  he  let  go?"  He  took  one  hand  off 
the  wire  and  hung  high  in  air  hj  one  hand. 
"  Will  he  let  go  with  the  other  hand  ?  Is  his 
strength  all  gone  ?  Or  will  he  replace  the  other 
hand  further  forward  ? "  The  suspense  is  awful, 
but  only  for  a  moment.  The  fingers  of  the  other 
hand  loosen  and  down  he  comes  through  the  air 
tumbling,  tumbling,  tumbling  through  those  six 
stories  of  space,  crushed  into  a  shapeless  mass  below. 
All  through  mere  unnecessary  neglect ! 

Men  and  women,  you  are  in  a  burning  building 
to-night,  you  are  in  a  doomed  world  ;  but  thank  God, 
there  is  a  way  of  escape,  but  only  one,  Christ  Jesus. 
That  way  is  open  to-night,  but  no  one  knows  how 
long  that  way  will  be  left  open.  I  beg  of  you,  do 
not  neglect  it,  and  then  when  it  is  too  late  lay  hold 
on  some  poor  guy-rope  of  human  philosophy,  and  go 
a  little  way,  and  then  let  go,  and  plunge,  not  six 
stories  down,  but  on  and  on  and  on  through  the 
awful  unfathomable  depths  of  the  gulf  of  eternal 
despair.  Men  and  women,  turn  to  Christ  to-night ! 
"  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salva- 
tion?" 


Love  Conquered 

We  have  in  America  a  devoted  Christian  woman 
of  culture,  refinement,  and  position,  with  a  heart 
full  of  love  to  the  most  outcast  and  abandoned. 
She  has  devoted  much  of  her  life  and  strength  to 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      145 

getting  matrons  appointed  in  jails  and  lockups  for 
the  reception  and  charge  of  female  prisoners.  In 
one  city  they  said  to  her,  "  Mrs.  Barney,  no  woman 
can  manage  the  class  of  women  with  whom  we 
have  to  do."  Mrs.  Barney  replied, "  You  never  had 
a  prisoner  that  I  could  not  manage."  "  We  would 
like  to  have  you  try  your  hand  on  *  Old  Sal ! ' "  was 
the  laughing  reply.  "  I  would  like  to,"  replied  the 
gentle  lady.  "Well,  the  next  time  we  have  her 
under  arrest,  we  will  send  for  you." 

Not  long  after,  early  one  morning,  Mrs.  Barney 
received  word  that  "  Old  Sal "  was  under  arrest, 
and  she  hurried  down  to  the  lockup.  She  asked  to 
be  shown  to  "  Old  Sal's  "  cell.  The  sergeant  at  the 
desk  protested  that  it  was  not  safe.  "  Look  there," 
he  said  to  Mrs.  Barney,  pointing  to  four  policemen 
with  torn  clothes  and  faces,  "  there  is  a  specimen 
of  *  Old  SaPs '  handiwork.  It  took  those  four  men 
to  arrest  her  and  she  left  them  in  that  shape." 
"  Never  mind,"  said  Mrs.  Barney,  "  show  me  to  her 
cell."  "  Well,  if  you  must  go  an  oflBcer  must  go 
with  you."  "No,  I  will  go  alone.  Just  let  the 
turnkey  open  the  door,  and  I  will  go  to  her  cell 
alone." 

Before  going  down,  Mrs.  Barney  asked  the 
sergeant  at  the  desk  for  "  Old  Sal's  "  right  name. 
"  Why,"  he  said,  "  we  always  call  her  '  Old  Sal.'  " 
"Yes,"  said  Mrs.  Barney,  "but  I  wish  her  right 
name.  What  is  her  right  name  ?  "  "  It  is  a  long 
time  since  we  first  booked  her,  and  we  always  book 
her  now  as  *  Old  Sal.' "  "  Look  up  her  right 
name,"  said  Mrs.  Barney.    The  sergeant  went  way 


146      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

back  through  the  books  and  found  "Old  Sal's*' 
proper  name.  The  turnkey  opened  the  door  and 
pointed  to  her  cell  down  the  corridor.  When  Mrs. 
Barney  reached  the  door,  she  saw  a  wild  creature 
with  gray,  dishevelled  hair,  torn  garments,  and 
glaring  eyes,  crouching  in  the  corner  of  the  cell, 
waiting   to   spring  upon  the  first  policeman  that 

should  enter.     "  Good-morning,  Mrs. ,"  said 

Mrs.  Barney,  calling  her  by  her  true  name. 
"Where  did  you  get  that  name?"  said  the  poor 
creature.  Without  answ^ering  her  question,  Mrs. 
Barney  said,  "  Sarah,  do  you  remember  the  first 
time  that  you  were  committed  here  ?  "  "  My  God, 
don't  I  ?  "  she  cried.  "  I  spent  the  whole  night  cry- 
ing on  the  floor  of  my  cell."  "  Suppose,"  said  Mrs. 
Barney,  "there  had  been  some  kind  Christian 
woman  here  to  receive  you  that  night  and  to  have 
treated  you  gently  do  you  think  your  life  would 
have  been  any  different  ?  "  "  Altogether  different," 
she  replied.  "  Well,"  said  Mrs.  Barney,  "  I  am  try- 
ing to  get  them  to  appoint  a  woman  in  this  lockup 
to  receive  young  girls  when  they  are  brought  here 
for  the  first  time,  as  you  Tvere  when  you  were 
brought  here  that  first  night.  Will  you  help  me  ?  " 
"  I  will  do  all  that  I  can,"  she  said.  All  the  time 
Mrs.  Barney  had  been  drawing  nearer,  and  was 
now  kneeling  by  her  side  upon  the  cell  floor, 
gathering  up  her  torn  and  grizzled  hair,  fastening 
it  up  with  pins  taken  out  of  her  own  hair,  pulling 
together  the  torn  shreds  of  her  garments,  and 
fastening  them  with  pins  taken  from  her  own 
garments. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      147 

The  work  was  now  done,  and  Mrs.  Barney  rising 
to  her  feet  said,  "  Sarah,  we  are  going  into  the 
court-room.  If  you  will  be  good,  they  will  appoint 
a  woman  in  this  lockup.  Shall  I  go  in  on  your 
arm,  or  will  you  go  in  on  mine?"  The  strong 
woman  looked  at  Mrs.  Barney,  and  said,  "  I  think 
I  am  stronger  than  you.  You  had  better  go  in  on 
my  arm."  And  into  court  they  went,  the  gentle 
lady  leaning  on  the  arm  of  the  hardened  old 
criminal.  "  Old  Sal "  restrained  herself  through  the 
whole  trial,  and  answered  the  judge's  questions 
pleasantly. 

She  did  forget  Lcrself  once  and  swear  at  the 
judge,  but  immediately  begged  his  pardon.  Every- 
body was  amazed  at  the  transformation.  A  woman 
was  appointed  as  matron  of  the  jail,  but  best  of  all 
Sallie  got  her  feet  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and  to- 
day, "  Old  Sal "  is  in  the  glory.  Love  had  con- 
quered.   It  always  will. 


God  Silences  a  Scoffer 

On  the  31st  day  of  May,  1904,  four  young  men 
were  playing  cards  two  blocks  from  the  Chicago 
Avenue  Church.  They  were  sober,  industrious 
men  above  the  average  intelligence,  but  not  Chris- 
tians. At  the  conclusion  of  their  game  of  cards, 
they  got  to  discussing  religion  and  one  of  them,  a 
shipping  clerk  with  a  leather  firm  on  Illinois  Street, 
said,  "I  don't  believe  there  is  a  God.  I  believe 
something  like  IngersoU.  I  don't  believe  there  is  a 
God,  and  I  won't  believe  there  is  a  God  until  He 


148      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

proves  it  to  me,  but  if  He  proves  it  to  me  by  strik- 
ing me  deaf  and  dumb,  I  will  believe  it." 

There  was  silence  for  a  moment  or  two.  Then 
he  threw  up  his  hands,  staggered  and  fell  to  the 
floor  unconscious.  At  first  his  companions  thought 
it  was  a  joke.  Then  they  became  frightened  and 
ran  to  him  and  tried  to  pick  him  up,  and  found  him 
unconscious.  One  ran  for  a  doctor  and  another  ran 
down-stairs  for  the  landlady  and  told  her  that 
Julian  had  fainted.  The  doctor  soon  came.  He 
thought  at  first  that  the  young  man  was  shamming 
but  soon  became  convinced  that  he  was  actually 
deaf  and  dumb.  He  was  una  Die  to  account  for  the 
condition  of  things.  The  young  man  was  not  of 
a  nervous  disposition,  was  strong  physically,  and 
right  in  his  mind.  When  he  came  to  himself  he 
tried  to  talk,  his  lips  moved  but  no  sound  came 
from  them.  Then  they  handed  him  a  pencil  and 
paper.  The  first  thing  he  wrote  on  the  paper  was, 
*'  I  want  my  Bible."  The  next  thing  he  wrote  was, 
"  I  want  my  mother." 

The  next  morning  two  ladies  came  to  my  assist- 
ant, Kev.  W.  S.  Jacoby  (I  was  out  of  the  country 
at  the  time)  and  asked  him  to  go  over  to  see  the 
young  man.  Mr.  Jacoby  went  over  about  eleven 
o'clock.  Julian  sat  at  the  table  calm,  quiet,  well 
dressed,  showing  to  all  appearances  that  he  was 
above  the  average.  He  shook  hands  with  Mr. 
Jacoby  and  the  people  wrote  on  a  piece  of  paper 
that  Mr.  Jacoby  was  a  minister.  Mr.  Jacoby  sat 
down  at  the  table  beside  him  and  prayed  God  that 
He  might  guide  him  in  what  he  should  sav.    After 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      149 

this  prayer  he  wrote  on  a  piece  of  paper,  "  God  loves 
you."    Julian  wrote  back,  "  I  know  it." 

Then  Mr.  Jacoby  wrote,  "  What  did  you  do  ?  " 

He  wrote,  "  I  did  what  I  should  not  have  done." 

"  Why  did  you  do  it  ?  " 

"  I  did  not  believe  there  was  a  God.  I  believed 
what  I  said.  Now  I  am  satisfied  there  is  a  God, 
and  I  am  wanted  in  His  service." 

"  Why  do  you  believe  there  is  a  God  ?  " 

"  Because  I  said  I  would  not  believe  there  was  a 
God  unless  He  struck  me  dumb.  A  look  from  His 
countenance  struck  me  dumb ;  a  look  from  His  eye 
was  as  a  flash  of  lightning."  (He  had  written  on 
the  paper  to  his  companions,  he  had  seen  the  flash 
and  asked  them,  "  Did  you  see  the  flash  ?  "  They 
had  not  seen  it.     It  was  for  him  alone.) 

Mr.  Jacoby  wrote,  "  Did  you  see  anything  as  you 
fell  to  the  floor  ?  " 

"  Yes." 

"  Are  you  sorry,  and  why  ?  " 

"  I  am,  because  I  feel  I  did  very  wrong." 

"  Do  you  believe  that  there  is  a  God  ?  " 

"I  do." 

"  Do  you  believe  that  God  hears  prayer  ?  " 

"  I  do." 

Again  Mr.  Jacoby  wrote,  "  God  loves  you." 

He  wrote,  "  I  believe  He  does,  for  I  have  heard  a 
whisper  calling  me  to  His  work  for  many  years,  but 
I  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  it." 

Mr.  Jacoby  then  related  to  him  part  of  his  own 
experience,  and  how  God  had  revealed  Himself  to 
him.     How  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  had  said  to  him 


150      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

once  in  a  time  of  sickness,  "  Down  on  your  knees," 
and  how  he  had  resisted  that  Spirit  but  how  God 
had  not  left  him  but  again  by  His  Holy  Spirit  called 
him  and  he  had  come. 

Again  Mr.  Jacoby  wrote,  "  God  loves  you,  and 
He  is  filling  my  heart  with  sympathy  for  you.  He 
would  not  do  this  unless  He  was  going  to  save  you." 

The  young  man  wrote  as  an  answer,  "  I  feel  that 
way  about  it  but  I  feel  I  shall  remain  this  way 
(deaf  and  dumb)  until  I  have  prepared  to  go  and 
work  for  Him.  My  life  is  His  to  use  as  He  sees  fit. 
I  shall  go  home  and  apply  all  my  time  in  learning 
of  Him  and  when  I  am  fit  to  do  His  work,  I  shall 
be  all  right." 

Mr.  Jacoby  wrote,  "  I  believe  the  first  thing  is  to 
know  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour."  He  then  showed 
him  John  6  :  37,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me,  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out."  He  read  it  and  nodded  his 
head. 

Mr.  Jacoby  then  turned  him  to  Isaiah  1 :  18, 
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the 
Lord ;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet  they  shall  be 
as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson, 
they  shall  be  as  wool."  He  took  his  pencil  and 
marked  this  passage  in  the  Bible.  He  was  then 
shown  John  5  :  24,  "  Yerily,  verily  I  say  unto  you, 
he  that  heareth  My  word,  and  believeth  on  Him  that 
sent  Me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 
into  condemnation,  but  is  passed  from  death  unto 
life."  Pointing  his  finger  at  the  word  "  hath,"  Mr. 
Jacoby  wrote,  "  The  w^ork  is  done,  not  will  be  or 
shall  be,  but  *  Tiath '  is  in  the  present  tense  and  means 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS      151 

that  we  have  eternal  life."  Again  he  nodded  his 
head. 

Then  he  wrote,  "  I  believe  now  there  is  a  God. 
I  also  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  died  to  save  all  sin- 
ners. I  feel  that  I  am  accepted  because  I  believe 
Him  and  trust  Him,  but  there  is  work  for  me 
to  do." 

He  was  then  shown  Isaiah  53  :  6,  and  after  that 
he  was  pointed  to  Acts  13  :  38,  39  ("  Be  it  known 
unto  you  therefore,  men  and  brethren,  that  through 
this  Man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of 
sins :  and  by  Him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from 
all  things,"  Mr.  Jacoby  pointed  his  finger  at  the 
"  all "  in  order  that  he  might  see  that  God  would 
forgive  him  for  all  he  had  done. 

Then  he  turned  to  Ps.  103  :  12,  "  As  far  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  He  removed  our 
transgression  from  us." 

He  then  showed  him  John  1 :  12,  *'  But  as  many 
as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  His 
name." 

Pointing  to  the  word  "  Sons,"  Mr.  Jacoby  wrote, 
"  A  child  has  a  right  to  call  God  Father." 

He  then  showed  him  other  passages  that  would 
enable  him  to  remember  that  God  would  keep  him 
from  every  temptation  and  keep  him  from  ail  sin : 
1  Cor.  10  :  13  ;  Jude  24 ;  2  Tim.  1:12;  1  Peter  1 :  5. 

He  read  all  these  very  eagerly  as  he  was  shown 
them. 

Mr.  Jacoby  then  asked  him,  "  Do  you  know  you 
are  saved  ?    You  write  that  you  feel  you  are  saved. 


152      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

do  you  believe  God  has  forgiven  you  ?  Are  you 
saved?" 

"  I  am." 

"  What  makes  you  think  so  ?  " 

"  Because  I  am  contented."  / 

"  How  long  have  you  thought  so  ?  " 

"  Since  I  have  believed  in  Him." 

"  Why  do  you  think  so  ?  " 

"  Because  I  know  He  will  save  if  I  trust  Him,  and 
I  do  trust  Him." 

"  How  long  is  that  ?  " 

"  Since  you  have  shown  me  His  many  promises." 

He  was  then  asked  to  read  Kom.  10  :  13,  "  Who- 
soever shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
saved." 

"  Do  you  believe  you  are  saved  ?  " 

He  wrote,  "  I  believe  I  am  saved."  He  then  drew 
his  pencil  through  the  word  "  believe,"  and  wrote 
the  word  "  know  "  over  it. 

He  made  a  confession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
before  his  friends  in  the  next  room.  By  standing 
up  in  the  doorway  Mr.  Jacoby  would  speak  the 
words  so  they  could  hear  and  then  write  them  so  he 
could  read  them,  and  he  answered  each  question 
with  a  nod. 

"  You  believe  there  is  a  God  ?  " 

He  nodded,  yes. 

"  Do  you  receive  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  your 
Saviour  ?  " 

"  Yes." 

"  You  believe  He  saves  you  ?  " 

"Yes." 


ANECDOTES  AI^D  ILLUSTEATIOITS      153 

"  You  thus  publicly  confess  Jesus  Christ  as  your 
Saviour  ?  " 

"  Yes,"  he  wrote,  "  I  am  perfectly  satisfied." 

The  physician  who  attended  him  made  this  state- 
ment regarding  the  case  afterwards,  "  It  would  not 
be  remarkable  if  he  had  been  merely  stricken  speech- 
less under  certain  conditions  of  hysteria,  but  in  such 
an  event  there  would  have  been  physical  conditions 
that  he  did  not  have.  He  seemed  to  be  in  full  pos- 
session of  his  faculties,  his  ideas  were  coherent,  and 
his  general  health  was  good."  The  medical  man 
could  find  no  physical  conditions  or  symptoms  which 
would  lead  to  the  sudden  loss  of  speech.  It  was 
evidently  an  act  of  God.  An  act  of  mercy  more 
than  an  act  of  judgment. 

His  speech  was  restored  to  him  the  following 
July.  His  first  words  were,  "  The  Lord  be  praised," 
and  after  this  his  lips  continued  to  move  and  he  was 
repeating  the  words  of  the  twenty-third  Psalm. 

He  is  now  preparing  for  the  ministry  of  the 
Gospel. 


''  Is  Not  God's  Word  as  Good  as  Mine  ?  " 

Preaching  one  night  in  Minneapolis  in  my  own 
church  on  the  text  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit,"  the 
power  of  God  came  in  a  wonderful  way  upon  the 
audience.  When  I  stepped  down  from  the  pulpit,  I 
found  in  one  of  the  front  pews  four  persons  kneel- 
ing in  great  distress  of  soul,  two  brothers  and  two 
young  ladies  whom  they  had  brought  with  them  to 
the  meeting.    These  brothers  came  from  an  utterly 


154      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

godless  family  and  were  regarded  as  hard  young 
men,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  had  taken  hold  of  them 
that  night  in  mighty  power.  Three  other  workers 
spoke  to  three  of  the  four  who  were  kneeling  in 
prayer  and  brought  them  out  into  the  light,  and  I 
undertook  to  talk  to  the  older  of  the  men.  He  was 
in  great  agony  of  soul  and  listened  attentively  as  I 
pointed  him  to  the  passages  of  the  Word  of  God 
that  showed  how  Jesus  Christ  had  borne  all  his  sin 
in  His  own  body  on  the  Cross,  and  how  if  he  would 
believe  in  Christ,  he  would  have  pardon  at  once. 
He  claimed  to  accept  Christ  but  he  found  no  peace, 
and  left  the  building  in  great  distress.  He  was 
present  again  the  next  night,  and  again  I  talked 
with  him.  He  claimed  to  have  accepted  Christ,  but 
did  not  believe  that  his  sins  were  pardoned.  I  took 
him  to  John  3  :  36,  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
hath  everlasting  life,"  and  had  him  read  it  over  and 
over  again.  I  said  to  him,  "  Hector,  who  does  God 
here  say  hath  everlasting  life  ?  "  He  said, "  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son."  I  said,  ''  Do  you  believe  on 
the  Son  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  do."  I  said,  "  What  does 
God  say  ?  "  ''  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life."  "  What  have  you  ?  "  "  Oh, 
Mr.  Torrey ,"  he  cried,  "  won't  you  pray  for  me  ? " 
I  said,  "  Yes,  I  will  pray  for  you,"  and  again  I  went 
over  it,  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  ever- 
lasting life."  I  said,  "  Who  has  everlasting  life  ?  " 
"  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son."  "  How  many 
that  believe  on  the  Son  have  everlasting  life  ? " 
"  Every  one."  "  Have  you  believed  on  the  Son?  " 
"  I  have."    "  What  does  God  say  about  those  who 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      155 

believe  on  the  Son  ? "  "  They  have  everlasting 
life.""  "  Are  you  sure  that  they  that  believe  on  the 
Son  have  everlasting  life ? "  "I  am."  " "What 
makes  you  so  sure  ?  "  "  God  says  so."  "  What 
does  God  say  ?  "  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
hath  everlasting  life."  "  Do  you  believe  on  the 
Son?"  "I  do."  "What  does  God  say  you 
have  ?  "  "  Oh  !  "  he  cried,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  will  you 
pray  for  me  ?  "  I  went  over  it  and  over  it  again 
but  he  could  not  seem  to  grasp  it.  At  last  he  arose 
and  started  slowly  down  the  aisle  to  leave  the 
building.  Before  he  started,  he  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey, 
will  you  pray  for  me  ?  "  I  said,  "  I  will."  I  let 
him  get  part  way  down  the  aisle  and  then  I  called 
after  him,  "  Hector,  do  you  believe  that  I  will  pray 
for  you  ?  "  "  Why,  I  know  you  will,"  he  replied. 
"  How  do  you  know  that  I  will  ?  "  "  Because  you 
said  so."  "  Is  not  God's  Word  as  good  as  mine  ?  "  I 
asked.  The  truth  flashed  in  upon  his  soul  in  a  mo- 
ment. He  saw  that  while  he  had  been  ready  to  be- 
lieve me,  he  had  not  been  ready  to  believe  God. 
He  took  God  at  His  Word  and  knew  he  had 
everlasting  life  because  God  said  so,  and  went 
home  rejoicing  in  perfect  ^assurance  that  he  had 
everlasting  life  and  that  his  sins  were  all  forgiven. 


**  God  Use  This  Stammering  Tongue  " 

One  day  during  his  great  mission  in  London,  Mr. 
Moody  was  holding  a  meeting  in  a  theatre  packed 
with  a  most  select  audience.  Noblemen  and  noble- 
women were  there  in  large  numbers.    A  prominent 


156      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

member  of  the  royal  family  was  in  the  royal  box. 
Mr.  Moody  arose  to  read  the  Scripture  lesson.  He 
attempted  to  read  Luke  4 :  27,  "  And  many  lepers 
were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of  Eiiseus  the  prophet." 
When  he  came  to  the  name  Eiiseus,  he  stammered 
and  stuttered  over  it.  He  went  back  to  the  begin- 
ning of  the  verse  and  began  to  read  again,  but 
again  when  he  reached  the  ^vord  "  Eiiseus "  he 
could  not  get  over  it.  He  went  back  and  began  the 
third  time  to  read  the  verse  but  again  the  word 
"  Eiiseus  "  was  too  much  for  him.  He  closed  the 
Bible  with  deep  emotion  and  looked  up  and  said, 
"  Oh,  God  !  Use  this  stammering  tongue  to  preach 
Christ  crucified  to  these  people."  The  power  of 
God  came  upon  him  and  one  who  heard  him  then 
and  had  heard  him  often  at  other  times  said  to  me 
afterwards  that  he  had  never  heard  Mr.  Moody  pour 
out  his  soul  in  such  a  torrent  of  eloquence  as  he  did 
then,  and  the  whole  audience  was  melted  by  the 
power  of  God. 


Give  Me  a  Love  For  Souls 

One  time  during  my  ministry  in  Chicago,  I  was 
deeply  disturbed  that  I  had  so  little  love  for  souls ; 
that  I  could  meet  men  and  women  who  were  lost 
and  be  so  little  concerned  about  it ;  that  I  could 
preach  to  them  and  had  so  little  inclination  to  weep 
over  them.  I  went  alone  with  God  and  prayed, 
"  O  God  give  me  a  love  for  souls."  Little  did  I 
realize  how  much  the  answer  to  that  prayer  in- 
volved. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS      157 

The  next  day  there  came  into  my  Bible  class  a 
man  who  was  the  most  distressing  picture  of  utter 
despair  I  ever  saw.  At  the  close  of  my  Bible  class 
I  walked  down  the  aisle.  I  saw  him  in  the  last 
seat.  His  face  haunted  me.  I  was  burdened.  I 
could  not  lose  sight  of  him.  I  cannot  tell  the  pain 
I  had  for  hours  and  days  as  I  cried  to  God  for  his 
salvation,  but  I  had  the  joy  of  seeing  him  profess  to 
accept  Christ. 

Love  for  souls  is  one  of  the  costliest  things  a  man 
can  have,  but  if  we  are  to  be  like  Christ,  and  if  we 
are  to  be  successful  in  His  work,  we  must  have  it. 
But  don't  pray  for  it  unless  you  are  willing  to  suffer. 


Pray  Through 

A  LADY  in  Melbourne,  Australia,  in  reading 
the  book  "  How  to  Pray  "  was  greatly  impressed  by 
one  sentence  of  two  short  words,  "  Pray  through." 
It  took  a  great  hold  upon  her  and  she  began  to  or- 
ganize prayer  circles  all  over  Melbourne.  Before 
we  reached  Melbourne  there  were  1,700  prayer  cir- 
cles a  week  and  the  wonderful  success  of  the  mis- 
sion was  largely  due  to  these  prayer  circles.  After 
we  reached  Melbourne,  this  lady  told  Mr.  Alexander 
this  story  and  it  made  a  great  impression  on  him. 
He  afterwards  said  the  two  words, " '  Pray  through,' 
gripped  me  like  a  vice."  One  day  he  had  occasion 
to  go  into  a  bank  in  Liverpool  to  get  some  money. 
While  he  was  standing  at  the  bank  counter  waiting 
for  the  clerk  to  come,  he  picked  up  a  pen  and  began 
to  write  on  the  blotter  in  large  letters  these  two 


158      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

words,  which  had  been  burned  into  his  soul,  "  Pray 
through,"  "  Pray  through,"  "  Pray  through."  Over 
and  over  and  over  again  he  wrote  it  on  the  blotter 
until  the  big  blotter  was  filled  from  top  to  bottom 
with  the  words  "Pray  through."  After  he  had 
transacted  his  business  he  went  away. 

The  next  day  a  friend  to  whom  he  kept  talking 
as  he  printed  on  the  blotter  came  to  him  and  said 
that  he  had  a  striking  story  to  tell  him.  "  A  busi- 
ness man  came  into  the  bank  soon  after  we  had 
gone.  He  had  grown  discouraged  with  business 
troubles.  He  started  to  transact  some  business 
with  the  same  clerk  over  that  blotter,  when  his 
eyes  caught  the  long  column  of  '  pray  theough.' 
He  asked  who  wrote  those  words,  and  when  he  was 
told,  he  exclaimed,  'That  is  the  very  message  I 
needed.  I  will  pray  through.  I  have  tried  to 
worry  through  in  my  own  strength,  and  have 
merely  mentioned  my  troubles  to  God.  Now  I  am 
going  to  pray  the  situation  through  until  I  get 
light. ' " 

A  lady  who  heard  Mr.  Alexander  tell  the  story 
wrote  a  hymn  upon  it,  the  last  verse  of  which  runs, 

''Don't  stop  praying  but  have  more  trust; 
Don't  stop  praying  !  for  pray  we  must; 
Faith  will  banish  mountains  of  care ; 
Don't  stop  praying!     God  answers  prayer.'* 


Which  are  Yoa  Like  ? 

Up  in  the  mountains  of  North  Carolina,  lived  a 
farmer  who  had  a  poor  farm,  with  thin  soil,  where 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      159 

by  hard  work,  he  was  barely  able  to  make  a  living 
for  himself,  wife  and  son.  The  son,  however,  was 
a  remarkably  bright  boy,  and  easily  surpassed  all 
the  other  boys  in  the  district  school.  One  day  the 
father  said  to  the  mother,  "  Our  son  is  a  natural 
born  scholar  and  if  he  is  only  a  poor  farmer's  son 
he  shall  have  as  good  an  education  as  a  millionaire's 
son."  The  father  and  mother  economized  and 
raked  and  scraped  and  got  enough  together  to  send 
the  boy  oif  to  college.  The  boy  did  well  at  college, 
and  every  little  while  sent  a  letter  home  telling 
how  well  he  was  doing  in  his  classes.  When  these 
letters  came  the  father  and  mother  would  read  and 
reread   them,   and   they  filled   their    hearts    with 

joy- 
One  day  a  letter  came  and  after  the  father  had 

read  it,  he  said,  "Mother,  these  letters  are  all 
right.  They  do  cheer  my  old  heart,  but  letters  are 
not  enough.  My  heart  is  lonely  for  the  boy  and  I 
must  see  the  boy  himself.  I  cannot  wait.  I  must 
see  him."  But  the  mother  was  a  canny  woman  and 
said,  "  You  must  wait,  you  cannot  see  him.  He 
cannot  afford  to  lose  a  day  from  his  studies  to  come 
down  here,  and  you  cannot  lose  a  day  from  the 
farm  to  go  and  see  him.     You  must  wait." 

The  father  said,  "  I  must  see  him.  I  cannot 
stand  it  any  longer.  I  must  see  my  boy.  I  have 
a  plan.  I'll  load  up  the  old  farm  wagon  this  after- 
noon and  get  up  before  sunrise  to-morrow  and  drive 
to  town  and  sell  my  load  and  make  enough  to  pay 
expenses,  and  see  my  boy.  I  cannot  stand  it  any 
longer,   I  must  see    him."     That    afternoon    the 


160      A:NrECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

farmer  loaded  up  the  wagon,  went  to  bed  wuth  the 
chickens,  got  up  early  in  the  morning  before  sun- 
rise, hitched  up  the  old  team  and  started  for  the 
college  town.  It  was  a  long  tedious  journey,  but 
it  did  not  seem  long  to  the  farmer  for  he  was  go- 
ing to  see  his  boy.  As  he  drove  along  he  would 
chuckle  to  himself,  "  I  will  soon  see  my  boy. 
Won^t  he  be  glad  to  see  me  ?  He  thinks  I  am  at 
home  on  the  farm.  Won't  he  be  surprised  when  I 
walk  into  his  room  ?    Won't  he  be  glad  ?  " 

Every  hour  of  his  dreary  journey  as  he  drew 
nearer  the  college  town  his  heart  grew  lighter  and 
happier,  and  at  last  as  he  drew  near  the  town  he 
said,  "  I  am  almost  there.  In  a  little  while  now  I 
will  see  my  boy.  Won't  he  be  surprised  ?  Won't 
he  be  glad  ?  "  As  he  entered  the  town  he  tried  to 
hurry  the  old  team  forward,  but  to  no  avail  as  the 
team  was  tired  and  could  not  go  any  faster.  As  he 
drove  up  the  hill  towards  the  college  who  should 
he  see  coming  down  the  sidewalk  but  his  boy  with 
two  gay  young  college  companions.  "  There  he 
comes !  There  he  comes ! "  said  the  old  man, 
"  won't  he  be  surprised  to  see  me  ?  Won't  he  be 
glad  ?  "  He  whipped  up  the  team,  but  it  could  not 
go  any  faster,  they  were  tired  out.  He  jumped  off 
the  wagon  and  ran  up  to  his  boy,  who  had  not  seen 
hira.  "  My  son,"  he  cried.  His  son  was  surprised, 
but  was  not  glad.  He  was  ashamed  of  his  father 
in  his  plain  old  homespun  clothes  before  his  gay 
college  companions.  "  There  must  be  some  mis- 
take, sir,"  he  said.  "  I  am  not  your  son,  you  are  not 
my  father.    I  do  not  know  you.   There  must  be  som^ 


AlsTECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTRATIONS      161 

mistake,  sir."  He  might  as  well  have  driven  a  dag- 
ger into  his  father's  heart.  I  am  told  that  the 
father  went  home  with  a  broken  heart  to  die. 
Whether  that  part  of  the  story  is  true  I  cannot  say, 
but  I  can  well  believe  it.  If  my  son  should  treat 
me  that  way  (thank  God  he  never  will)  I  think  it 
would  break  my  heart.  What  do  you  think  of  a 
son  like  that  ?  I  think  he  should  be  horsewhipped. 
The  cowardly,  ungrateful  wretch.  But  stop  before 
you  condemn  him.  Some  of  you  here  to-night  are 
more  ungrateful  than  that  son.  Jesus  Christ  has 
done  more  for  you  than  that  father  did  for  his  son. 
Jesus  Christ  has  done  more  for  you  than  any  father 
ever  did  for  his  son.  Yet  you  are  so  cowardly 
and  ungrateful  that  you  won't  stand  up  and  confess 
Him  before  the  world,  because  you  are  afraid  of 
what  some  one  will  say,  and  you  are  ashamed  of 
Him.  I  have  never  told  this  story  without  its  mak- 
ing my  blood  boil,  although  I  suppose  I  have  told 
it  over  one  hundred  times. 

Let  me  tell  you  another  story.  Thank  God  it  is 
entirely  different. 

Down  in  the  mountains  of  Georgia  lived  a  poor 
widow.  She  had  a  few  acres  of  ground  where  she 
raised  berries  and  one  thing  and  another  and  made 
a  little  money  keeping  chickens  and  selling  eggs. 
She  also  took  in  washing  and  did  other  humble 
work  for  a  living,  but  God  gave  her  a  bright  son. 
He  too  surpassed  every  one  in  the  district  school. 
The  mother  worked  hard  to  get  the  money  to  send 
him  to  Emory  College.  The  son  worked  hard  to 
get  himself  through  the  college.    He  graduated 


162      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

with  high  honors  and  won  a  gold  medal  for  special 
excellence  in  study. 

When  it  came  time  for  him  to  graduate  he  went 
up  to  the  mountain  home  for  his  mother,  and  said, 
"  Mother,  you  must  come  down  and  see  me  gradu- 
ate." 

"  ITo,"  said  his  mother,  "  I  have  nothing  fit  to 
wear,  and  you  would  be  ashamed  of  your  poor  old 
mother  before  all  those  grand  people." 

"  Ashamed  of  you,"  he  said,  with  eyes  filled  with 
filial  love,  "  ashamed  of  you,  mother,  never.  I  owe 
everything  I  am  to  you  and  you  must  come  down. 
What  is  more  I  will  not  graduate  unless  you  come." 
Finally  she  yielded.  He  brought  her  to  the  town. 
When  the  graduating  day  came  she  went  to  the 
commencement  exercises  in  her  plain  calico  dress 
with  her  neat  but  faded  shawl  and  simple  moun- 
tain bonnet.  He  tried  to  take  her  down  the  mid- 
dle aisle  where  the  richest  people  of  the  town, 
friends  of  the  graduating  class,  sat,  but  this  she  re- 
fused and  insisted  on  sitting  way  off  under  the  gal- 
lery. The  son  went  up  on  the  platform  and  de- 
livered his  graduating  address.  He  was  handed 
his  diploma  and  received  his  gold  medal.  No 
sooner  had  he  received  the  gold  medal  than  he 
walked  down  from  the  platform  and  way  to  where 
his  mother  sat  off  under  the  gallery  and  pinned  the 
gold  medal  on  her  faded  shawl  and  said,  "  Mother, 
that  belongs  to  you,  you  earned  it." 

That  is  a  son  worth  having.  Which  of  those  two 
sons  are  you  like,  the  cowardly  ungrateful  wretch, 
ashamed  of  his  poor  old  father  or  the  noble  boy 


^ 

•-fc*s=«^ 

'HE   PINNED  THE   GOLD   MEDAL  ON   HER  FADED 

SHAWL  AND  SAID.  'MOTHER,  THAT  BELONGS 

TO  YOU.' " 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS      163 

who  was  proud  of  his  poor  mother  to  whom  he 
owed  all  he  was  in  the  world  ?  I  have  been  told  by 
a  president  of  the  college  where  this  happened 
that  when  the  boy  pinned  that  gold  medal  on  his 
mother's  shawl  the  whole  audience  burst  into  such 
prolonged  applause  that  the  exercises  could  not  go 
on  for  five  minutes. 

You  want  to  applaud  too.  Let  me  tell  you  a 
better  way  to  applaud,  imitate  him.  You  owe  all 
you  are  to  Jesus  Christ.  Come,  pin  all  your  honors 
upon  Him  to  day.  Come  out  and  confess  Him 
before  the  world. 


'*  If  I  Could  Only  Have  Saved  Just  One 
More  " 

Befoee  I  close  I  must  tell  you  a  story.  This  in- 
cident is  so  remarkable  that  when  I  first  heard  it  it 
seemed  to  me  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  true. 
But  the  man  that  told  it  was  of  such  a  character 
that  I  felt  that  it  must  be  true  because  he  told  it, 
and  yet  I  said,  "  I  must  find  out  for  myself  whether 
that  story  is  true  or  not."  So  I  went  to  the 
librarian  of  the  university  where  the  incident  was 
said  to  have  occurred  and  I  found  out  that  it 
was  true.  The  story  as  I  tell  it  to  you  to-day  is  as 
I  got  it  from  the  brother  of  the  main  actor  in  the 
scene.  The  story  is  this :  About  twelve  miles 
from  where  I  live,  twelve  miles  from  the  city  of 
Chicago,  is  the  suburb  of  Evanston,  where  there  is 
a  large  Methodist  university,  I  think  the  largest 
university     of    the     Methodist    denomination    in 


164      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

America ;  at  all  events,  a  great  university.  Years 
ago,  before  the  college  had  blossomed  into  a  great 
university,  when  there  were  not  many  students  in 
it,  two  young  country  boys  came  from  the  State  of 
Iowa — strong,  husky  fellows,  and  one  of  them  was 
a  famous  swimmer.  Early  one  morning  word  came 
to  the  college  that  down  on  Lake  Michigan,  just  oif 
the  shores  of  Evanston,  there  was  a  wreck.  It 
proved  to  be  the  Lady  Elgin.  The  college  boys  with 
everybody  in  town  hurried  down  to  the  shores  of 
Lake  Michigan.  Off  yonder  in  the  distance  they 
saw  the  Lady  Elgin  going  to  pieces.  Ed  Spencer, 
the  famous  swimmer,  threw  off  all  his  superfluous 
garments,  tied  a  rope  round  his  waist,  threw  one 
end  to  his  comrades  on  the  shore,  sprang  into  Lake 
Michigan,  swam  out  to  the  wreck,  grasped  one  that 
was  drowning  and  gave  the  sign  to  be  pulled  ashore. 
And  again,  and  again,  and  again  he  swam  out  and 
grasped  a  drowning  man  or  woman  and  brought 
them  safe  to  shore,  until  he  had  brought  to  shore  a 
seventh,  an  eighth,  a  ninth,  and  a  tenth.  Then  he 
was  utterly  exhausted.  They  had  built  a  fire  of 
logs  upon  the  sand.  He  went  and  stood  by  the  fire 
of  logs  that  cold  bleak  morning,  blue,  pinched, 
trembling,  hardly  able  to  stand.  He  stood  before 
that  fire  trying  to  get  a  little  warmth  into  his 
perishing  members.  As  he  stood  there  he  turned 
and  looked  out  over  Lake  Michigan,  and  off 
in  the  distance,  near  the  Lady  Elgin,  he  saw  men 
and  women  still  struggling  in  the  water.  He  said, 
"  Boys,  I  am  going  in  again."  "  No,  no,  Ed," 
they  cried,  "  it  is  utterly  vain  to  try ;  you  have  used 


ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTRATIOIS^S      165 

up  all  your  strength,  you  could  not  save  anybody ; 
for  you  to  jump  into  the  lake  again  will  simply 
mean  for  you  to  commit  suicide."  "Well,"  he 
cried,  "  boys,  they  are  drowning,  and  I  will  try, 
anyhow."  And  he  started  to  the  shore  of  the  lake. 
His  companions  cried,  "  No,  no,  Ed,  no,  don't  try." 
He  said,  "  I  will,"  and  he  jumped  into  Lake 
Michigan  and  battled  out  against  the  waves,  and 
got  hold  of  a  drowning  man  who  was  struggling  in 
the  water  and  brought  him  ashore.  And  again, 
and  again,  and  again,  until  he  had  brought  an 
eleventh,  a  twelfth,  a  thirteenth,  a  fourteenth, 
and  a  fifteenth,  safe  to  shore.  Then  they  pulled 
him  in  through  the  breakers.  He  could  scarcely  get 
to  the  fire  on  the  beach,  and  there,  trembling,  he 
stood  before  that  fire  trying  to  get  a  little  warmth 
into  his  shivering  limbs.  As  they  looked  at  him  it 
seemed  as  if  the  hand  of  death  was  already  upon 
him.  Then  he  turned  away  from  the  fire  again, 
and  looked  out  over  the  lake,  and  as  he  looked, 
away  off  yonder  in  the  distance  he  saw  a  spar 
rising  and  falling  upon  the  waves.  He  looked  at  it 
with  his  keen  eye,  and  saw  a  man's  head  above  the 
spar.  He  said,  "  Boys,  there's  a  man  trying  to  save 
himself."  He  looked  again  and  saw  a  woman's 
head  beside  the  man's.  He  said,  "Boys,  there's  a 
man  trying  to  save  his  wife."  He  watched  the 
spar  as  it  drifted  towards  the  point.  He  knew  that 
to  drift  around  that  point  meant  certain  death.  He 
said  "  Boys,  I  am  going  to  help  him."  "  Ko,  no, 
Ed,"  they  cried,  "  you  can't  help  him.  Your 
strength  is  all  gone."    He  said,  "  I  will  try,  any- 


106      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

way."  He  sprang  into  Lake  Michigan,  swam  out 
wearily  towards  the  spar,  and  reaching  it  he  put  his 
hands  upon  the  spar,  and  summoning  all  his  dying 
strength,  brought  it  around  the  right  end  of  the 
point  to  safety.  Then  they  pulled  him  in  through 
the  breakers.  Loving  hands  lifted  him  from  the 
beach  and  carried  him  to  his  room  up  in  the  college. 
They  laid  him  upon  his  bed,  made  a  fire  in  the 
grate,  and  his  brother  Will  remained  by  to  Avatch 
him,  for  he  was  becoming  delirious.  As  the  day 
passed  on  Will  Spencer  sat  looking  into  the  fire. 
Suddenly  Will  heard  a  gentle  footfall  behind  him 
and  felt  some  one  touch  him  on  the  shoulder.  He 
looked  up  and  there  stood  Ed  looking  wistfully 
down  into  his  face.  He  said,  "  What  is  it,  Ed  ?  " 
He  said,  "Will,  did  I  do  my  best?"  "Why, 
Ed, "  he  said,  "  3^ou  saved  seventeen."  He 
said,  "I  know  it,  I  know  it,  but  I  was  afraid 
I  didn't  do  my  very  best.  Will,  do  you  think  I 
did  my  very  best  ?  "  Will  took  him  back  to  bed 
and  laid  him  upon  it,  and  sat  down  by  his  side.  As 
the  night  passed,  I  am  told,  Ed  went  into  semi- 
delirium,  and  Will  sat  by  the  bed  and  held  his  hand 
and  tried  to  calm  him  in  his  delirium.  All  that  he 
thought  about  were  the  men  and  women  that 
perished  that  day,  for  in  spite  of  all  his  bravery 
many  went  down  that  day  to  a  w^atery  grave. 
Will  sat  there  and  held  Ed  's  hand,  and  tried  to 
calm  him.  "  Ed,"  he  said,  "  you  saved  seventeen." 
He  said,  "  I  know  it,  Will,  I  know  it ;  but  oh,  if  I 
could  only  have  saved  just  one  more." 

Men  and  women  of  Birmingham,  you  and  I  stand 


Sm- 


M 


'HE   SWAM   OUT   WEARILY  TOWARD   THE   SPAR." 


TRE  NEW  roftJf 


ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS      167 

this  afternoon  beside  a  stormy  sea.  Oh,  as  we 
look  out  at  this  tossing  sea  of  life  round  about  us 
on  every  hand  there  are  wrecks.  Will  you  and  I 
sit  here  calmly  while  they  are  going  down,  going 
down,  going  down,  going  down  to  a  hopeless 
eternity ! 

Men  and  women,  let  us  plunge  in  again  and 
and  again  and  again  and  again,  until  every  last  ounce 
of  strength  is  gone,  and  when  at  last  in  sheer  exhaus- 
tion we  fall  upon  the  shore  in  the  earnestness  of 
our  love  for  perishing  men,  let  us  cry,  "  Oh,  if  I 
could  only  save  just  one  more." 

God  Does  Give  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Answer 
to  Prayer 

With  me  the  doctrine  that  God  gives  the  Holy 
Spirit  definitely  in  answer  to  prayer  is  not  a  matter 
of  mere  exegesis,  it  is  a  matter  of  personal  experi- 
ence. If  it  were  a  matter  of  mere  exegesis,  I  would 
believe  it.  If  it  was  clearly  taught  in  the  Bible,  I 
would  believe  it,  whether  I  had  experience  or  not ; 
for  I  do  not  believe  in  bringing  the  Bible  down  to 
the  level  of  our  experience  but  in  bringing  our  ex- 
perience up  to  the  level  of  the  Bible.  But  with  me 
it  is  a  matter  of  certain  experience.  I  know  that 
God  gives  the  Holy  Spirit  in  answer  to  definite 
prayer  as  well  as  I  know  that  water  quenches  thirst 
and  food  satisfies  hunger.  How  often  as  I  have 
knelt  beside  a  single  brother,  and  how  often  as  I 
have  knelt  in  a  great  gathering  of  God's  believing 
children,  the  Holy  Ghost  has  fallen  upon  us  as  we 


168      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

prayed  as  definitely,  and  perceptibly,  as  the  rain 
ever  falls  upon  the  thirsty  ground. 

I  shall  never  forget  one  night  in  Chicago  Avenue 
Church.  The  ministers  of  the  city  had  been  hold^ 
ing  meetings  at  noon  in  the  Young  Men's  Christian 
Association  preliminary  to  an  expected  coming  to 
the  city  of  Mr.  Moody.  At  one  of  these  noon 
meetings,  one  of  the  ministers  of  the  city  sprang  to 
his  feet  and  said,  "  Brother  Torrey,  what  we  need 
in  Chicago  is  an  all  night  prayer-meeting  of  the 
ministers."  "  Yery  well,  Brother  E.,"  I  replied, 
"  if  the  ministers  of  Chicago  wish  to  have  an  all- 
night  prayer-meeting,  let  them  come  to  Chicago 
Avenue  Church  at  ten  o'clock  next  Friday  night, 
and  if  God  keeps  us  there  all  night,  we  will  stay 
all  night." 

At  ten  o'clock  the  following  Friday  night  some 
four  or  five  hundred  people  gathered  in  the  vestry 
of  Chicago  Avenue  Church.  They  were  not  all  min- 
isters, though  there  were  many  ministers.  Indeed, 
they  were  not  all  men ;  there  were  some  women. 

Were  you  ever  in  a  prayer-meeting  where  the 
devil  made  a  dead  set  to  spoil  the  meeting  ?  Well 
that  was  the  kind  of  a  meeting  it  Avas  for  the  first 
two  hours.  To  begin  with  three  men  got  down  by 
chairs  near  the  door,  and  commenced  to  pound  on 
the  chairs  and  shout  until  some  of  our  heads  were 
nearly  splitting,  and  when  some  one  went  to  them 
and  protested  that  things  should  be  done  decently 
and  in  order,  they  swore  at  the  man  who  made  the 
protest.  Later  still  a  man  jumped  up  in  the  midst 
of  the  meeting  and  proclaimed  that  he  was  Elijah. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTKATIONS      169 

He  was  not  to  blame.  He  was  a  lunatic.  But 
these  things  disturbed  many  and  they  began  to 
think  of  going  home.  But  it  is  a  poor  prayer- 
meeting  that  the  devil  can  spoil,  and  hundreds  of 
us  were  there  w4th  the  determination  to  stay  until 
we  got  the  blessing. 

About  midnight  God  gave  us  complete  victory, 
and  for  two  hours  there  was  such  prayer  in  the 
Spirit  as  I  have  seldom  heard.  A  little  after  two 
in  the  morning  while  we  were  all  kneeling  in 
prayer,  suddenly  there  fell  upon  us  an  awful  hush. 
Nobody  could  speak,  nobody  could  sing,  nobody 
could  pray.  All  you  could  hear  was  the  subdued 
sobbing  of  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  The 
very  air  seemed  tremulous  with  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if,  if  I  had  looked 
up,  I  could  almost  have  seen  the  Holy  Spirit  there 
visibly.  I  do  not  know  how  long  we  were  held 
there  in  this  awed  silence  before  the  presence  of 
God.  It  was  now  Saturday  morning.  The  fol- 
lowing Sunday  morning  one  of  my  deacons  came  to 
me  and  held  out  his  hand  and  took  mine  and  gave 
it  a  mighty  grip  and  said,  with  choking  voice,  "  I 
shall  never  forget  yesterday  morning  to  the  longest 
day  I  live." 

In  the  early  morning  hours,  one  business  man 
went  out  of  that  meeting  and  took  an  early  train 
for  Missouri  to  transact  some  business.  When  the 
business  was  done,  he  said  to  the  hotel  proprietor, 
"Is  there  any  meeting  going  on  in  this  town?" 
"  Yes,"  he  said.  "  There  is  a  meeting  going  on  in 
the  Cumberland  Presbyterian  Church."    He  was 


170      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

a  Cumberland  Presbyterian  himself  and  went  to 
the  meeting.  When  the  meeting  was  opened, 
he  stood  up  and  asked  if  he  might  say  a  few 
words.  The  permission  was  readily  given,  and 
with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  him,  he 
poured  out  his  soul  to  the  people.  In  a  few  days  I 
received  a  paper  from  that  town  saying  that  fifty- 
eight  persons  were  converted  while  he  spoke. 

A  young  man  went  out  from  that  meeting  to 
Baraboo,  Wis.,  and  in  a  few  da3^s  I  received  a  letter 
from  Baraboo,  Wis.,  saying  that  thirty-eight  men 
and  boys  had  been  converted  in  Baraboo.  That 
same  man  afterwards  laid  down  his  life  in  South 
Africa  after  a  brilliant  record  as  a  missionary  there. 

Another  young  man  went  out  in  the  early  hours 
and  took  a  train  to  Wisconsin,  and  I  soon  began  to 
receive  letters  from  Methodist  ministers  and  others 
near  Milwaukee  asking  if  we  had  in  our  Institute  a 
young  man  named  Sam  J.,  and  adding  that  a  young 
man,  giving  that  name,  had  appeared  among  them 
and  was  holding  meetings  in  schoolhouses  and 
churches  and  the  soldiers'  home,  and  wherever  he 
went  there  seemed  to  be  conversions.  But  they 
knew  nothing  about  him,  and  he  said  he  was  a 
student  of  the  Bible  Institute. 

Men  and  women  went  from  that  meeting  to  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  with  the  power  of  God 
upon  them.  As  I  have  gone  around  the  world  and 
visited  China,  Japan,  India  and  Australia  and  other 
lands,  I  think  in  every  land  I  visited,  I  have  found 
some  one  who  was  present  that  morning  when  the 
Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  us. 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLTJSTEATIONS      171 

''ICmHardh  Wait'' 

In  my  first  pastorate  there  was  a  revival  of  re- 
ligion. It  was  sweeping  through  the  town  and 
people  of  all  classes  were  being  converted.  Some  of 
the  infidels  were  greatly  disturbed  and  sent  oif  for 
an  infidel  lecturer  with  the  hope  of  stopping  the 
work,  but  his  coming  helped  the  work  rather  than 
hindered  it.  Many  who  did  not  dare  to  come  out 
to  hear  the  preachers  had  courage  to  go  to  hear  the 
infidel  lecturer  and  were  so  disgusted  by  his  man- 
ner of  presenting  his  position  that  they  looked  into 
the  claims  of  Christ  and  were  led  to  accept  Him. 

One  lady  said  to  her  husband  the  night  of  his  first 
lecture,  "  Let  us  go  and  hear  Professor  J.  to-night 
at  the  hall."  Her  husband  replied,  "  What  do  you 
want  to  hear  him  for?  You  don't  believe  as  he 
does."  "  I  don't  know  what  I  believe,"  she  replied. 
The  husband  consented  to  take  her.  As  they  came 
down  the  stairs  of  the  hall  after  listening  to  the 
professor's  coarse  ridicule  of  the  Bible,  the  lady 
turned  to  her  husband  and  said,  "  Well,  I  have 
found  out  one  thing  to-night  anyway."  "  What  is 
that  ?  "  "I  have  found  out  that  I  believe  the  Bible." 
She  came  to  me  and  asked  to  be  taken  into  rdy 
church.  It  was  evident  she  really  had  accepted 
Christ  and  she  entered  the  church  and  became  one 
of  the  most  active  members  in  it. 

But  there  was  another  lady  in  the  community, 
who  a  few  years  before  in  a  revival  meeting  in  an 
adjoining  town  had  started  for  the  front  and  her 
husband  had  laid  his  hand  upon  her  shoulder  and 


172      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

forced  her  back  into  her  seat.  She  never  after- 
wards made  any  attempt  to  become  a  Christian  but 
drifted,  as  so  many  others  do  who  resist  the  Holy 
Spirit,  into  rampant  infidelity.  When  she  heard 
that  the  infidels  of  the  town  had  sent  for  this  infidel 
lecturer  she  remarked  to  a  friend,  "  I  can  hardly 
wait  until  Professor  J.  gets  here."  She  did  not  wait. 
One  Saturday  evening  she  was  at  the  house  of  a 
friend  at  a  card  party.  Ten  o'clock  came  and  they 
were  still  playing  cards.  Eleven  o'clock  came  and 
they  were  still  playing  cards.  Twelve  o'clock  came 
and  they  were  still  playing  cards.  The  Sabbath  began 
but  they  were  still  plajdng  cards  ; — Sabbath  break- 
ing and  card-playing  go  hand  in  hand.  In  the  early 
hours  of  the  Sabbath  morning,  she  sprang  suddenly 
from  the  card  table,  clapped  her  hand  upon  her 
head  and  cried,  "  Oh,"  and  dropped  dead  beside  the 
table.     I  would  rather  die  somewhere  else. 

I  shall  never  forget  my  first  meeting  with  that 
woman's  husband  after  this  awful  tragedy.  He 
had  never  spoken  to  me  before,  but  as  I  entered  the 
post-office  through  one  door,  he  came  in  through 
another.  As  soon  as  he  saw  me,  he  hurried  across 
the  post-office  towards  me,  held  out  his  hand  and  I 
held  out  mine  in  deepest  sympathy  for  the  unfortu- 
nate man.  I  shall  never  forget  the  grasp  he  gave 
my  hand.  He  knew  his  wife  had  gone  out  into  a 
hopeless  eternity  and  that  he  was  to  blame.  Oh ! 
you  men,  who  are  standing  between  your  wives  and 
their  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ,  there  is  an  awful 
day  coming  for  you,  a  day  when  you  will  look  upon 
the  white  faces  of  your^wives  as  they  lie  in  the  casket 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS      173 

and  will  be  face  to  face  with  the  thought  that  your 
wives  are  lost  forever  and  that  you  are  to  blame. 

Hoiv  Men  Become  Infidels 

Iw  one  of  our  western  colleges  there  was  a  time 
of  deep  religious  interest.  Many  of  the  students 
were  being  converted  but  there  were  two  young 
men  in  the  college  that  set  themselves  against  the 
movement.  They  agreed  to  meet  on  a  certain 
evening  and  go  into  the  college  chapel  and  there 
blaspheme  the  Holy  Ghost  and  thus  get  rid  of  their 
religious  impressions.  The  appointed  hour  came 
and  the  two  young  men  met  at  the  door  of  the  col- 
lege chapel.  One  man's  courage  failed  him  and  he 
refused  to  go  in,  and  do  as  they  had  agreed.  He 
afterwards  was  converted  and  became  a  Christian. 
The  other  went  into  the  college  chapel  alone.  It  is 
not  known  what  he  did  in  there,  but  when  he  came 
out,  he  was  as  white  as  death.  He  afterwards 
drifted  into  utter  unbelief  and  became  a  leader  in 
one  of  the  well-known  infidel  organizations  of  one 
of  our  great  cities.  This  is  the  way  in  which  many 
become  infidels.  They  resist  the  Spirit  of  God. 
They  know  their  duty,  they  know  they  ought  to  ac- 
cept Christ  but  they  refuse  to  do  it,  the  Spirit  of 
God  leaves  them  and  they  drift  into  the  darkness 
of  utter  unbelief. 

''  /  Wish  I  Were  a  Christian  " 

In  one  of  my  pastorates  there  was  a  man  who 
was  bitterly  opposed  to  the  church.     He  was  one  of 


174      ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS 

the  most  self-righteous  men  I  ever  knew.  He  never 
tired  of  criticising  others,  but  maintained  that  his 
own  character  was  so  good  that  he  had  no  fear  of 
standing  before  God  on  the  ground  of  his  own  up- 
right character. 

But  the  time  came  for  that  man  to  die.  A  cancer 
appeared  on  his  scalp.  It  ate  its  way  through  the 
scalp  and  then  began  to  eat  its  way  through  the 
skull.  At  last  there  was  only  a  thin  film  of  skull 
between  the  cancer  and  the  brain.  The  doctor  in- 
formed him  that  as  soon  as  the  cancer  penetrated  to 
the  brain,  he  must  die.  As  he  lay  face  to  face  with 
the  stern  reality  of  death,  he  said,  "  Send  for  Mr. 
Torrey.'*  I  hurried  to  his  bedside  and  sat  down  be- 
side him.  "  Oh,"  he  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  they  tell 
me  I  have  not  long  to  live;  that  as  soon  as  the 
cancer  eats  a  little  further  through  the  skull  and 
penetrates  the  brain,  I  must  die.  Tell  me  just 
what  I  must  do  to  become  a  Christian."  I  tried  to 
make  the  way  of  life  as  plain  as  I  knew  how,  but 
he  seemed  unable  to  grasp  it.  He  had  put  off  the 
great  decision  until  too  late,  and  his  mind  seemed 
to  have  lost  all  power  to  grasp  things.  At  night  I 
said  to  his  family,  "  You  have  sat  up  with  him  night 
after  night.  I  will  sit  up  with  him  to-night."  They 
told  me  what  to  do  for  him  and  retired.  All 
through  the  night  I  was  with  him.  Several  times 
it  was  necessary  to  go  out  into  an  adjoining  room 
to  get  him  something,  and  whenever  I  would  re- 
turn to  the  room  where  he  lay  from  the  bed  over  in 
the  corner  of  the  room,  I  would  hear  one  constant 
groan,  "  Oh,  I  wish  I  was  a  Christian,"  "  Oh,  I  wish 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS      175 

I  was  a  Christian,"  "  Oh,  I  wish  I  was  a  Christian  " ; 
and  so  the  man  died. 

He  had  found  comfort  in  the  thought  of  his  own 
goodness  in  the  time  of  health  and  strength  but  as 
he  had  lain  face  to  face  with  death  and  eternity  and 
God,  he  had  seen  clearly  it  was  necessary  to  have 
some  better  foundation  but  it  was  too  late  to  find  it. 


"  /  Cannot  Believe  the  Bible  Because  I  am  a. 
Scientist'' 

One  night  one  of  my  workers  called  me  to  deal 
with  a  man  who  claimed  to  be  an  infidel.  I  said 
to  him,  "  Are  you  an  infidel  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  am." 
I  said,  "  Will  you  please  tell  me  what  makes  you  an 
infidel  ?  "  He  said,  "  Because  I  am  a  scientist  and 
the  Bible  contradicts  the  teachings  of  science."  I 
asked  him  of  what  branch  of  science  he  made  a 
specialty.  He  replied,  "  Chemistry."  I  said,  *'  Did 
you  ever  hear  of  Henry  Clerk  Maxwell  ? "  He 
said,  "  No,  I  never  did."  I  suggested  he  could  not 
be  very  well  read  in  chemistry  if  he  had  never 
heard  of  Henry  Clerk  Maxwell,  and  further  called 
his  attention  to  the  fact  that  though  Henry  Clerk 
Maxwell  was  such  an  eminent  man  of  science,  he 
was  also  an  earnest  Christian.  I  next  asked  him  if 
he  had  ever  heard  of  James  D.  Dana  (the  great 
geologist).  He  replied  that  he  had.  I  doubt  if  he 
really  had,  but  he  was  becoming  rattled  and  did 
not  wish  to  appear  too  ignorant.  "  Well,"  I  said, 
"you  know  that  James  D.  Dana  was  one  of  the 
most  eminent  men  of  science  that  this  country  has 


176      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

ever  produced.  ISTow,"  I  said,  "  it  was  my  privilege 
to  study  under  James  D.  Dana  and  to  know  him 
personally,  and  I  have  heard  him  say  that  one  rea- 
son why  he  believed  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of 
God  was  because  there  was  such  a  remarkable 
agreement  between  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  and 
the  most  recent  discoveries  in  geology.  Now,"  I 
continued,  "  it  will  not  do  for  a  little  six-by-nine 
scientist  like  you  to  say  you  cannot  believe  the 
Bible  because  you  are  a  man  of  science,  when  men 
so  eminent  in  the  scientific  world  have  found  no 
difficulty  in  believing  in  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of 
God." 


**  There  is  But  a  Step  Between  Me  and 
Death  " 

At  one  of  the  noon  meetings  for  business  men  in 
the  Lyceum  Theatre  in  Cleveland,  a  well  known 
socialist  agitator  sat  near  a  Christian  man.  He 
listened  attentively  to  what  was  said.  After  I  had 
finished,  the  Christian  man  said  to  him,  "  D.,  how 
did  you  like  that  ?  "  He  replied,  "  Such  reasoning 
as  that  is  no  good.  I  could  wipe  that  out  in  a  few 
minutes  if  they  would  give  me  a  chance  to  talk." 
The  Christian  man  replied,  "  D.,  you  do  not  under- 
stand spiritual  things.  You  may  be  able  to  talk 
politics,  but  you  cannot  talk  religion."  "Yes,  I 
can  talk  politics  with  any  orator  and  no  one  can 
pluck  the  laurels  from  my  brow,"  he  replied. 

The  following  day  at  noon,  just  a  little  short  of 
twenty-four    hours    from  the  time   he  made  his 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      177 

boasts,  the  Big  Four  Kailroad  threw  him  into  a 
ditch  a  lifeless  corpse. 

Oh,  if  we  only  realized  that  there  was  but  one  step 
between  us  and  death  and  eternity.  How  soon  we 
would  cease  our  empty  boasting. 


''I  Thought  of  My  Mother  " 

DuEiNG  our  Dublin  campaign,  a  young  man 
came  to  me  in  great  distress.  He  had  been  paying 
attention  to  a  young  lady,  who  was  very  worldly. 
He  had  been  brought  up  under  Christian  influences, 
his  mother  being  an  earnest  Christian  woman.  He 
told  me  that  the  preceding  Sunday  evening  he  had 
called  upon  the  young  lady  in  whom  he  was  inter- 
ested. Though  it  was  Sunday  evening,  the  girl's 
mother  proposed  that  they  play  cards.  The  young 
lady's  mother  urged  him  to  join  in  the  game,  but 
he  refused.  He  said  to  me,  "  When  I  was  invited 
to  play  cards  on  a  Sunday  evening,  the  thought 
came  to  me,  'What  if  I  should  and  my  mother 
should  hear  of  it.  It  would  break  her  heart.'" 
How  many  a  man  is  kept  back  from  doing  things 
he  would  otherwise  do  by  the  thought  of  how  it 
would  grieve  his  mother  if  she  should  hear  of  it. 
But  there  is  One  who  is  more  keenly  sensitive  than 
the  purest  mother,  who  is  grieved  at  the  slightest 
departure  from  the  path  of  right  as  no  mother  even 
is  grieved,  that  One  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  goes 
with  us  wherever  we  go.  He  sees  all  that  we  do. 
He  hears  all  that  we  say.  Yes,  He  sees  the  most 
secret  fancy  of  the  heart,  and  if  there  is  an  act  or 


178      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATION8 

word  or  thought  that  has  a  taint  of  impurity  or 
selfishness  or  sin,  He  is  deeply  grieved.  To  me  this 
is  one  of  the  mightiest  incentives  to  a  careful  walk. 
Oftentimes  when  some  evil  thought  is  suggested  to 
me  by  the  enemy,  the  thought  comes,  "  I  cannot 
entertain  that  thought  for  a  moment.  If  I  do,  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  sees  it,  will  be  deeply  grieved, 
and  I  cannot  bear  to  grieve  this  ever-present,  faith- 
ful Friend." 


"  God  Won't  Take  Me  Away  Without  Giving 
Me  Another  Chance  " 

A  SAILOE  from  one  of  the  lines  of  steamers 
entering  ISTew  York  dropped  one  night  into  the 
Berachah  Mission.  As  he  was  going  out,  a  worker 
stopped  him  at  the  door  and  urged  him  to  accept 
Christ.  But  he  refused  to  do  so.  The  worker  be- 
came more  insistent  and  said,  "  It  might  be  your 
last  opportunity."  "  No,"  he  said,  "  This  will  not 
be  my  last  opportunity.  God  certainly  won't  take 
me  away  without  giving  me  another  chance."  He 
resisted  all  the  pleadings  of  the  worker  and  left  the 
mission  and  started  for  his  steamer.  As  he  went 
across  the  gangplank  from  the  dock  to  the  steamer, 
he  missed  his  footing  and  fell  into  the  water  be- 
tween the  steamer  and  the  dock.  Before  they 
could  get  him  out  he  was  drowned.  It  will  not  do 
to  trifle  with  God.  JSTo  man  can  tell  that  he  will 
have  another  chance.  The  only  day  of  which  we 
are    absolutely  certain  is  to-day.     The  only  op- 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      179 

port  unity  of  which  we  are  absolutely  certain  is  the 
present  opportunity. 


''  There  Will  be  no  Dance  To-Night " 

Death  often  throws  its  dark  shadow  across  our 
gayest  moments.  I  shall  never  forget  one  of  the 
last  dances  with  which  I  had  anything  to  do.  It 
was  a  charity  ball  for  the  benefit  of  an  organization 
in  which  I  was  deeply  interested,  and  though  I  was 
a  theological  student  I  was  one  of  the  managers  of 
the  ball. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  day  when  the  ball  was 
to  take  place,  my  minister  called  upon  me.  I  think 
he  was  disturbed  that  one  of  his  members  should  be 
the  manager  in  a  charity  ball.  But  as  he  talked 
with  me,  he  did  not  come  to  the  exact  point  of  the 
ball.  After  a  while  a  classmate,  who  was  also  one 
of  the  managers  of  the  ball,  came  in  and  said, 
"  Torrey,  are  you  going  to  the  ball  to-night  ?  "  I 
think  he  did  it  partly  to  annoy  me  and  partly  to 
annoy  the  minister.  I  said,  "  Yes,  of  course,  I  am 
going  to  the  ball  to-night."  "  No,"  he  said,  "  You  are 
not  going  to  the  ball  to-night."  I  said,  "  I  am  going 
to  the  dance  to-night."  He  said,  "  You  are  not  going 
to  the  dance  to-night."  "  Well,"  I  replied,  "  I  guess 
I  know  and  I  am  going  to  the  dance  to-night."  He 
said,  "  You  are  not  going  to  the  dance  to-night,  for 
there  is  to  be  no  dance  to-night.  While  we  were 
making  the  last  arrangements  in  the  hall  this  after- 
noon, Mrs. —  as  she  walked  across  the  stage 

fell  dead,  and  there  will  be  no  dance  to-night." 


180      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

An  Infidel  Professor  Converted 

In  one  of  my  pastorates  there  was  a  lady  member 
of  our  church  who  had  a  brother  who  was  a  pro- 
fessor of  geology.  He  was  an  able  man  but  an 
infidel.  Sometimes  he  delivered  lectures  on  the 
conflict  between  science  and  Christianity.  His 
sister  came  to  me  and  asked  me  to  pray  for  his 
conversion.  This  I  consented  to  do.  Not  a  great 
while  after  she  came  to  me  one  day  and  said,  "  My 
brother  is  converted,"  and  showed  me  a  letter  he 
had  written  her.  He  said  he  had  recently  begun 
the  study  of  the  Bible  (it  would  have  been  well 
if  he  had  begun  the  study  of  the  Bible  before  he 
lectured  on  it)  and  he  had  been  deeply  impressed 
by  the  agreement  between  the  teachings  of  the 
Bible  and  the  teachings  of  modern  science  and 
that  he  had  become  a  Christian. 

If  more  men  who  talked  against  the  Bible  would 
get  down  to  a  real  study  of  the  Bible,  they  would 
soon  give  up  their  infidelity  and  accept  the  Bible 
and  its  Christ. 


Common  Stones  Turned  into  Diamonds 

If  it  were  announced  that  I  were  to  speak  in  this 
hall  to-morrow  morning  to  the  business  men  of  the 
city  upon  a  process  which  I  had  discovered  by 
which  common  ordinary  stones  taken  out  of  the 
street  could  be  transformed  iato  real  diamonds,  and 
if  the  business  men  of  this  city  knew  I  really  had 
discovered  such  a  process,  and  this  was  the  only 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS      181 

occasion  upon  which  I  was  to  explain  it,  do  you 
think  there  would  be  any  one  here  to  hear  the  ad- 
dress? The  building  would  be  packed  to  its  utmost 
capacity.  The  business  men  of  this  city  would 
begin  to  gather  hours  before  the  appointed  time  of 
the  meeting.  They  would  camp  out  all  night  be- 
fore the  doors  and  a  few  moments  after  the  doors 
were  open,  the  building  would  be  filled,  and  when 
I  had  finished  describing  the  process,  they  would 
not  wait  for  the  benediction,  but  would  rush  out 
into  the  streets  and  into  the  country  roads,  and  you 
would  see  leading  men  of  this  city,  forgetting  their 
dignity,  down  on  their  knees  in  the  dirt  and  mud 
hunting  for  stones.  If  some  friend  should  come 
along  and  say,  "  What  are  you  doing  there  down  in 
the  dirt  ? "  they  would  say,  "  Don't  bother  me.'' 
If  they  should  still  inquire,  "What  are  you  doing?" 
He  would  reply,  "  Looking  for  stones." 

I  can  tell  you  that  very  thing.  I  can  tell  you 
how  to  go  out  into  the  streets  and  alle3^s  of  the 
city,  out  into  the  roads  and  lanes  of  the  country, 
and  stoop  down  into  the  mud  and  mire  of  sin,  and 
take  up  the  common  ordinary  rude  stones,  lost  men 
and  women,  and  by  the  glorious  art  of  the  soul 
winner,  transform  them  into  diamonds  worthy  of  a 
place  in  the  Saviour's  eternal  diadem.  Is  not  that 
worth  while  ?  Is  there  any  other  work  in  the  uni- 
verse that  really  is  worth  while  ? 


182      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIOKS 

No  Pilot  Ready 

One  night  during  a  severe  storm  a  vessel  was 
seen  beating  about  near  the  entrance  to  the  Golden 
Gate,  making  signals  of  distress  and  asking  by  sig- 
nal for  a  pilot  to  guide  it  through  the  gate,  to  the 
harbour  within.  It  kept  on  beating  about  and  sig- 
nalling for  some  time,  but  its  signals  were  not 
answered,  and  so  after  a  while  the  imperilled  ship 
turned  its  prow  again  towards  the  stormy  sea,  from 
whose  perils  it  was  seeking  to  escape.  The  ship  was 
never  heard  from  again. 

There  is  many  a  storm-tossed  vessel  to-day  seek- 
ing guidance  through  the  golden  gate  into  the 
harbour  but  many  of  us  who  profess  to  be  Christians 
and  know  the  way  into  the  harbour  well  will  not 
take  the  trouble  to  go  out  and  face  the  storm  and 
bring  the  distressed  vessel  safely  into  harbour. 
Thus  we  leave  them  to  the  perils  of  the  deep  and 
they  are  never  heard  of  again.  Oh,  that  God  would 
arouse  us  sleeping  Christians  to  a  sense  of  our  duty, 
and  that  we  would  hear  the  cry  of  God  and  go  out 
to  bring  the  storm-tossed  safely  into  harbour. 


''  The  Harvest  is  Past,  the  Summer  is 
Ended,  and  I  am  not  Saved'' 

In  the  early  days  of  Mr.  Moody's  work  in 
Chicago,  a  man  who  was  a  constant  attendant  at 
the  Tabernacle  often  seemed  on  the  verge  of  deci- 
sion for  Christ.  One  day  when  Mr.  Moody  urged 
him  to  accept  Christ,  he  replied,  "  No,  Mr.  Moody, 


ANECDOTES  AKD  ILLUSTEATIONS      183 

I  cannot.  My  business  partner  is  not  a  Christian 
and  if  I  should  accept  Christ,  he  would  ridicule  me." 
Mr.  Moody  urged  him  to  trust  God  and  to  brave  his 
partner's  ridicule  but  he  could  not  muster  courage 
to  do  it.  Finally  he  became  annoyed  at  Mr. 
Moody's  constant  urging  of  him  to  accept  Christ, 
and  ceased  attending  at  the  Tabernacle.  For  some- 
time he  was  lost  sight  of,  but  one  day  his  wife  came 
to  Mr.  Moody's  house  and  said,  "  Mr.  Moody,  my 
husband  is  very  ill.  There  has  been  a  consultation 
of  physicians  and  they  say  he  cannot  possibly  live. 
"Won't  you  come  down  and  speak  to  him  before  he 
dies  ?"  Mr.  Moody  hurried  to  the  home.  He  found 
the  man  in  a  very  approachable  state  of  mind,  and 
he  presented  Christ  to  him.  The  man  listened  and 
seemed  to  accept  Christ.  To  every  one's  surprise 
his  disease  took  a  turn  for  the  better.  His  convales- 
cence was  rapid  and  the  next  time  Mr.  Moody 
called,  he  found  him  sitting  up  outdoors  in  the  sun- 
shine. Mr.  Moody  said  to  him, ''  Now  God  has  been 
so  good  to  you  and  raised  you  up,  of  course  as  soon 
as  you  are  able  to  come  up  to  the  Tabernacle,  you  will 
come  and  make  a  public  confession  of  your  acceptance 
of  Christ."  "  ISTo,  Mr.  Moody,"  he  said,"  I  cannot  do 
that  for  if  I  should  do  that  my  partner  would  ridicule 
me  and  I  cannot  stand  his  ridicule."  Mr.  Moody 
urged  him  but  he  would  not  consent  to  make  an  open 
confession  of  his  faith.  Finally  he  said,  "  Mr.  Moody, 
I  am  going  to  move  to  Michigan  and  I  promise  you 
when  I  get  over  there,  I  will  make  a  public  confes- 
sion of  Christ."  Mr.  Moody  told  him  that  Jesus 
Christ  could  keep  him  in  Chicago  just  as  well  as  H© 


184      ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIONS 

could  in  Michigan,  but  the  man  would  not  listen. 
Mr.  Moody  went  away  that  day  with  a  heary 
heart. 

Just  a  week  from  that  day,  the  man's  wife  called 
at  Mr.  Moody's  house  again.  "  Oh,  Mr.  Moody," 
she  said,  "my  husband  has  had  a  relapse.  We  have 
had  another  consultation  of  physicians  and  they  say 
it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  live.  Won't  you  come 
down  and  speak  to  him  before  he  dies  ?  "  Mr.  Moody 
said, "  Did  he  send  for  me  ?  "  "  No,"  she  replied,  "  he 
did  not.  That  is  the  worst  of  it.  He  does  not 
want  to  see  you,  but  I  cannot  let  him  die  this  way. 
Won't  you  come?"  Mr.  Moody  accompanied  the 
wife  to  the  home,  went  into  the  room  where  the  dy- 
ing man  lay.  As  he  approached  the  bed,  the  dying 
man  said,  "  Mr.  Moody,  I  don't  want  you  to  talk  to 
me.  It  will  do  no  good.  I  have  had  my  chance  and 
thrown  it  away."  Mr,  Moody  tried  to  show  him 
how  there  was  hope  even  in  the  last  hour ;  how 
Jesus  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out "  ;  that  even  then  he  might  put  his  trust 
in  Jesus  Christ  and  be  saved,  but  the  man  said,  "No, 
it  is  too  late.  I  had  my  chance  and  I  threw  it 
away,"  and  he  could  not  be  moved.  Mr.  Moody 
said,  "  May  I  pray  with  you  ?  "  "  No,  I  don't  want 
you  to  pray  with  me.  It  won't  do  any  good. 
Pray  for  my  wife  and  children — they  need  your 
prayers,  but  don't  pray  for  me.  It  is  too  late,  I 
have  thrown  away  my  chance."  Mr.  Moody  knelt 
down  beside  the  dying  man's  bed  and  tried  to  pray. 
He  said  to  me  when  telling  the  story  long  after- 
wards, "  I  could  not  pray.    My  prayers  did  not  seem 


ANECDOTES  AND  ILLTJSTEATIONS      185 

to  go  higher  than  my  head.  The  heavens  above  me 
seemed  like  brass.  When  I  got  up  the  man  said, 
*  There,  I  told  you  it  would  do  no  good.  It  is  too 
late.  I  have  thrown  away  my  chance.' "  Mr. 
Moody  went  home  with  a  heavy  heart. 

All  that  afternoon  as  the  man  sank  lower  and 
lower,  he  kept  repeating  just  one  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture, ''  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended  and 
I  am  not  saved."  Again  and  again  those  standing 
around  his  bed  heard  him  repeating,  "  The  harvest 
is  past,  the  summer  is  ended  and  I  am  not  saved." 
Just  as  the  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  western 
prairies  they  heard  him  whispering  in  a  low  tone 
and  they  leaned  over  to  listen  and  in  a  feeble 
whisper  he  said,  "  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer 
is  ended,  and  I  am  not  saved,"  and  thus  he  went  out 
into  the  darkness. 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  A  mericcu 


BIBLE  STUDY 


JAMES  M.    GRAY,     P.P.  Dean  of  Moody  Bible  Institutt 

Christian  Workers*  Commentary  on  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments.  Cloth,  net,  $2.00. 

The  author  has  specially  considered  the  Adult  Bible  Class 
and  provided  for  those  who  have  long  felt  the  need  of  some 
method  of  studying  the  Bible  by  "wholes."  The  Family 
Altar  has  not  been  overlooked,  provision  being  made  for  an 
element  of  added  instruction  suited  to  the  Scripture  reading 
for  the  day. 

ROBERT  E.  SPEER,   P.P. 

John's  Gospel 

The  Greatest  Book  in  the  World.     Cloth,  net  50c. 

A  study  of  John's  Gospel  by  a  man  whose  far-reaching  in- 
fluence is  one  of  the  great  formative  forces  of  religious  life 
in  America.  The  material  here  brought  together  has  already 
been*  "tried-out"  by  Dr.  Speer  at  some  important  student  con- 
ferences with  conspicuous  success. 

G.    CAMPBELL  MORGAN 

Living  Messages  of  the  Books  of  the 

Bible.  Vol.  I.       O^d  Testament— Genesis  to  Malachi 

Living  Messages  of  the  Books  of  the 

Bible,  Vol.  II.  NewTesiameni—'HAatthe'Vi-Revelation 

8vo,  cloth,  each  net  $1.00. 

This  popular  four  volume  set  is  now  published  in  two,  each 
volume  containing  twice  the  amount  previously  included. 
This  work  is  quite  distinct  from  the  author's  "Analyzed 
Bible."  "Each  book  is  treated  as  a  unit,  having  a  message  or 
messages  for  our  own  times." — The   United  Presbyterian. 

MARCUS  POPS,    P.P. 

The  Parables  of  Our  Lord 

A  new  edition.  In  one  volume.  International 
Leaders'  Library.    Net  50c ;   postage  extra. 

"The  author  occupies  a  foremost  place  among  evangelical 
writers  of  our  times.  His  writings,  while  scholarly,  are  at  tho 
same  time  simple  in  statement,  practical  in  purpose,  and  de- 
vout in  spirit." — Religious  Telescope. 

W.     O.    E.     OESTERLEY,  PP.  Warden  of  the  Society  of 

'  the  Apocrapha 

The  Books  of  the  Apocrypha 

Their  Origin,  Teaching  and  Contents.    Net  $3.00. 

The  author  has  presented  a  highly  satisfactory^  piece  of 
work.  Besides  what  would  be  naturally  looked  for  in  a  work 
of  this  sort — an  introduction  to  the  books  of  the  Apocrypha, 
account  of  their  contents,  date  of  writing,  etc., — this  book  con- 
tains an  astonishing  mass  of  useful  and  interesting  matter  oi 
scientific  value. 


DEVOTIONAL 


JOHN  HENRY  JOWETT 

My 'Daily  Meditation  for  the  circling  Year 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.25. 

A  series  of  choice,  tabloid  talks — a  spiritual  meditation 
for  every  day  in  the  year.  Dr.  Jowett  points  every  word  of 
these  brief  expositions  so  that  it  tells,  while  the  lessons  he 
seeks  to  convey  are  so  propounded  as  to  enter  the  under- 
standing of  his  readers  along  a  pathway  of  light.  The  whole 
volume  is  of  true  mintage,  bearing  the  impress  of  Dr.  Jowett'j 
ripest  thought  and  fruitful  mind. 

S.  D.   GORDON 

Quiet  Talks  About  the  Crowned  Chri^ 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  75c. 

After  many  years'  study  of  the  one  book  of  the  Bible 
devoted  to  the  subject  of  the  crowned  Christ — the  Revelation 
of  John — Mr.  Gordon  has  put  these  latest  talks  together.  No 
book  of  the  sixty-six  has  seemed  so  much  like  a  riddle,  and 
set  so  many  guessing.  Mr.  Gordon,  however,  holds  the  deep 
conviction  that  it  is  wholly  a  practical  book,  and  concerned 
wholly  with  our  practical  daily  lives. 

F.  B.  MEYER,  B.A. 

My  Daily  Prayer 

A  Short  Supplication  for  Every  Day  in  the  Year. 
32mo,  leather,  net  35c ;  cloth,  net  25c. 

"This  is  a  tiny  volume,  in  the  'Yet  Another  Day'  series, 
and  contains  a  brief  prayer  for  each  day  in  the  year.  Some 
of  the  petitions  contain  onlv  one  sentence,  but  each  one  is 
simple,  pertinent,  and  helpful." — Zion's  Herald. 

GEORGE  MATHESON 

Day  Unto  Day 

A  Brief  Prayer  for  Every  Day.  New  Edition. 
i6mo,  cloth,  net  50c.  ,   . 

These  choice  prayers  will  be  valued  by  the  Christian 
world  for  the  stimulus,  inspiration,  and  wide  spiritual  out- 
look which  have  made  the  memory  of  their  author  a  cher- 
ished possession. 

HENRY  WARD  BEECHER 

A  Book  of  Public  Prayer 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  75c. 

"A  distinct  addition  to  our  devotional  literature.  It  is  good 
for  private  reading;  but  would  be  especially  valuable  for 
ministers  as  an  aid  to  the  difficult,  but  immensely  important, 
service  of  voicing  the  petitions  of  a  congregation  m  publiq 
prayer."— i'tondorrf. 


BIBLE  STUDY,  Etc. 


B.  H.  CARROLL,  P.P. 

An  Interpretation  of  the  English  Bible 

Numbers  to  Ruth.        8vo,  cloth,  net  $175. 

"These  works  are  designed  especially  for  class  use  in  tke 
Seminary,  Christian  Colleges  and  Bible  Schools,  as  well  as 
the  Sunday  School.  That  they  will  make  the  greatest  com- 
mentary on  the  English  Bible  ever  published,  is  our  sincere 
conviction." — Baptist  and  Reflector. 

OTHER   VOLUMES  NOW  READY 
The  Book  of  Revelation.    8vo,  cloth,  net  $1.75. 
Th«  Book  of  Genesis.    8vo,  cloth,  net  $2.25. 
Exodus  and  Leviticus.    8vo.  cloth,  net  $2.25. 

/.  FRANK  SMITH,    P.P. 

My  Father's  Business— And  Mine 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.00. 

Dr.  Smith  devotes  the  earlier  part  of  his  book  to  a  study 
of  Christ's  historic  pronouncement  concerning  His  Father's 
business,  presenting  an  examination  of  the  analogical  content 
of  the  word  "Father,"  and  an  analysis  of  the  Master's  own 
sayings  respecting  His  earthly  miision. 

JOHN  F.    STIRLING  Auihorof"An  Atlasofth* 

-  Life  of  Chris  f 

An  Atlas  of  the  Acts  and  Epistles 

A  Complete  Outline  of  Apostolic  History,  Show- 
ing the  Details  of  the  Apostles'  Journeys  and  the 
Area  of  the  Epistles  in  Specially  Drawn  Maps.  8vo, 
limp  cloth,  net  40c. 

"Gives  at  a  glance  a  complete  and  graphic  outline  of  apos- 
tolic history.  The  outline  follows  the  narrative  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles,  supplemented  by  the  data  furnished  in  the 
epistles,  and  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the  best  scholarship. 
The  historical  details  are  presented  in  their  geographical  and 
chronological  setting,  on  a  series  of  specially  drawn  maps,  so 
that  the  student  may  follow  easily  the  movements  of  the 
leading  figures  in  the  growth  of  the  early  c\xvLXc\i*'— 'Service. 

JESSE  FOREST  SILVER 

The  Lord's  Return 

Seen  in  History  and  in  Scripture  as  Pre-MIllennlal 
and  Imminent.  With  an  Introduction  by  Bishop 
Wilson  T.  Hogue,  Ph.D.     8vo,  cloth,  net  $1.00. 

In  his  Introductory  Preface,  Bishop  Hogue  of  the  Free 
Methedlst  Church  says:  "An  encyclopedia  of  valuable  infor- 
mation condensed  into  9>  ?pnv«nieat  hand-book  for  ready  ref- 
erence. 


SERMONS— LECTURES- ADDRESSES 

JAMES  L.  GORDON,    P.P. 

AU's  Love  Yet  All's  Law 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.25. 

"Discloses  the  secret  of  Dr.  Gordon's  eloquence — fresh, 
and  intimate  presentations  of  truth  which  always  keep  close 
to  reality.  Dr.  Gordon  also  seems  to  have  the  world's  litera- 
ture at  his  command.  A  few  of  the  titles  will  give  an  idea 
of  the  scope  of  his  preaching.  'The  L,aw  of  Truth:  The 
Science  of  Universal  Relationships';  'The  L,aw  of  Inspiration: 
The  Vitalizing  Power  ^of  Truth';  'The  Law  of  Vibration'; 
'The  Law  of  Beauty:  The  Spiritualizing  Power  of  Thought'; 
The  Soul's  Guarantee  of  Immortality." — Christian  Work. 
BISHOP  hRANCIS  J.  McCONNELL         Cole  Lectures 

Personal  Christianity 

Instruments  and  Ends  in  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
l2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.25. 

The  latest  volume  of  the  famous  "Cole  Lectures"  delivered 
at  Vanderbilt  University.  The  subjects  are:  I.  Ihe  Per- 
sonal in  Christianity.      II.     The   Instrumental  in   Christianity. 

III.  The  Mastery  of  World- Views.  IV.  The  Invigoration 
of  Morality.  V.  The  Control  of  Social  Advance.  VI. 
"Every  Kindred,  and   People,  and  Tongue." 

NEWELL  P  WIGHT  HILLIS,  P.P. 

Lectures  and  Orations  by  Henry  Ward 
Beecher 

Collected  by  Newell  Dwight  Hillis.     i2mo,  net  $1.20. 

It  is  fitting  that  one  who  is  noted  for  the  grace,  finish  and 
elequence  of  his  own  addresses  should  choose  those  of  his 
predecessor  which  he  deems  worthy  to  be  preserved  in  a 
bonnd  volume  as  the  most  desirable,  the  most  characteristic 
and  the  most  dynamic  utterances  of  America's  greatest  pulpit 
orator. 

IV.  L.  IVATKINSON,  D.D, 

The  Moral  Paradoxes  of  St.  Paul 

l2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.00. 

"These  sermons  are  marked,  even  to  greater  degree  than 
is  usual  with  their  talented  preacher,  by  clearness,  force  and 
illustrative  aptness.  He  penetrates  unerringly  to  the  heart 
of  Paul's  paradoxical  settings  forth  of  great  truths,  and  il- 
lumines them  with  pointed  comment  and  telling  illustration. 
The  sermons  while  thoroughly  practical  are  garbed  in  strik- 
ing and  eloquent  sentences,  terse,  nervous,  attention-com- 
pelling."— Christian  World. 

LEN  G.  BROUGHTON,  D.D. 

The  Prodigal  and  Others 

i2nio,  cloth,  net  $1.00. 

"The  disc®urses  are  vital,  bright,  interesting  and  helpful. 
It  makes  a  preacher  feel  like  preaching  once  more  on  this 
exhaustless  parable,  and  will  prove  helpful  to  all  young  people 
• — and  elder  ones,  too.  Dr.  Broughton  does  not  hesitate  to 
make  his  utterances  striking  and  entertaining  by  the  intro- 
duction of  numerous  appropriate  and  homely  stories  and  illua- 
trations.    He  leaches  the  heart," — Review  and  Expositor, 


HOMILETICS  AND  CHURCH  WORK 


CHARLES  SILVESTER   HORNE  Yale  Lectures  on 

'  Preachtns 

The  Romance  of  Preaching 

WitH  an  Introduction  by  Charles  R.  Brown,  D.D., 
Dean  of  Yale  Divinity  School,  and  a  Biographical 
Sketch  by  H.  A.  Bridgman,  Editor  of  The  Congre- 
gationalisf.    With  Portrait.    i2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.25. 

"From  the  days  when  Henry  Ward  Beecher  gave  the  first 
series  of  lectures  on  the  Lyman  Beecher  Foundation  in  Yale 
University  .  .  .  the  task  of  inspiring  young  ministers  to 
nobler  effort  in  their  high  calling,  has  been  well  performed. 
But  among  all  the  lecturers  few  have  ever  so  gripped  the 
divinity  students,  the  larger  audience  of  pastors  in  active 
service,  as  did  Silvester  Home.  The  intellectual  distinction 
■wkich  marked  his  utterances,  the  fine  literary  form  in  which 
they  were  phrased,  the  moral  passion  which  gave  to  their 
delivery  that  energy  which  belongs  to  words  which  are  'spirit 
and  life,'  together  with  the  rare  spiritual  insight  displayed 
all  combined  to  make  notable  the  service  rendered  by  Mr. 
Home  to  Yale  University."— CAar/^^  R.  Brovm,  D,D.,  Dean 
of  Yale  Divinity  School. 

The  last  message  of  a  leader  of  men. 

BISHOP  THOMAS  B.  NEELY,  Of  the  Methodist 
'•                   Episcopal  Church 

The  Minister  in  the  Itinerant  System 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.00. 

"Bishop  Neely  discusses  frankly  the  fact  that  large  num- 
bers of  strong  men  eagerly  accept  official  service,  leaving  the 
intinerant  pastorate.  He  states  the  system  itself  briefly,  but 
the  burden  of  the  book  is  a  full  discussion  of  the  bearing  of 
it  all  on  the  minister  himself.  It  was  to  be  presumed  of 
course  that  a  Methodist  bishop  would  conclude  that  'the  sys- 
tem should  be  maintained'  and  even  that  'the  appointing 
power  should  be  untrammelled';  but  it  is  none  the  less  in- 
teresting to  follow  the  argument.  We  do  not  know^  any  other 
book  which  states  the  whole  case  with  such  eminent  fair- 
ness."— The  Continent. 

EDMUND  S.  LORENZ,  B.  D. 

Practical  Church  Music 

A  Discussion  of  Purpose,  Methods  and  Plans.  NeiO 
Popular  Bdition.     i2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.00. 

"Mr.  Lorenz  has  had  thirty  years'  active  experience  ,with 
both  the  theoretical  and  practical  sides  of  church  music  in 
all  its  forms.  This  is  one  of  the  most  practical  books  on  the 
subject  of  church  music  we  have^  ever_  read.  Every  page  is 
suggestive  and  every  suggestion  is  eminently  practical.  The 
book  closes  with  a  worthy  appendix  dealing  with  musical  and 
hymnological  books  worth  owning,  choice  church  music  for 
choir. and  solo  use,  and  suggestive  outlines  and  subjects  foff 
fng  sermons  and  song  services." — Advance, 


CHURCH  WORK 


HARRY  F.  fTARD 

A  Year  Book  of  the  Church  and  Social 
Service  in  tJie  United  States 

Prepared  for  The  Commission  on  the  Church  and 
Social  Service,  Federal  Council  of  the  Churches  of 
Christ  in  America.  i2mo,  paper,  net  30c.;  cloth^ 
net  50c. 

ERNEST  EUGENE  ELLIOTT 

The  Problem  of  Lay  Leadership 

A  Companion  to  "Making  Good  In  The  Local 
Church."    i2mo,  cloth,  net  50c. 

"What  Christian  ideal  should  guide  our  men's  work?" 
"What  methods  may  we  safely  use  in  realizing  it?"  "What 
must  we  do?"  "What  must  we  undo?"  These  are  some  of 
the  problems  pressing  insistently  on  the  minds  and  hearts  of 
ministers  and  religious  leaders  of  the  present  day.  This 
timely  book  of  Mr.  Elliott's  suggests  some  eminently  workable 
methods  of  awakening  the  interest  of  men,  some  lines  of 
study  by  which  it,  is  hoped,  they  may  advance  materially  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  together  with  some 
"pointers"  for  such  as  may  aspire  to  leadership.  The  pro- 
grams suggested  are  not  theoretical.  All  have  been  tried,  in 
whole  or  in  part,  in  some  local  church  with  profit  and  success. 

HARLAN  L.  FEEMAN       Prof,  of  Practical  Theology  West- 
•  minster  Theological  Seminary 

The  Kingdom  and  the  Farm 

The  Problem  of  the  Country  Church.   Cloth,  net  75c. 

In  compact  form  this  timely  book  presents  the  problem  of 
the  country  church  and  its  attendant  difficulty.  Dr.  Feeman 
was  born  on  a  farm,  knows  his  subject  well  and  writes  with 
precision  and  authority.  His  suggestions  have  vision,  breadth 
and  sanity  and  oflfer  a  real  scientific  study  of  this  vastly  im- 
portant subject. 

D.  C.  TREMAINE 

Church  Efficiency 

A  Study  of  Methods.  i6mo,  cloth,  net  SOc. 

A  plan  of  procedure  whereby  methods  ©f  business  efficiency 
may  be  applied  to  the  work  of  the  churca.  Mr.  Tremaine  is 
a  layman  and  what  he  here  presents  is  the  result  of  special 
and  careful  study.  Most  of  his  suggestions  have  already 
been  adopted  and  none  are  submitted  untried.  Ihe  con- 
clusions are  calculated  to  help  lift  the  burdens  of  pastors, 
and  in  solving  some  of  the  problems  of  church  life  and  ac- 
tivity. 


■111 


