? 


Ausk 
ARE YOU FORGIVENA9® & 


. 


A QUESTION FOR EVERYBODY. 


BY THE 


REY. J. C. BYLE, B. A., 
Rector of Belmingham, Suffolk. 


Author of * Living on Deap ?” 
“¢ ASSURANCE,” &c. 


oe 
Price Two Pence. 
renter terns 


Mlontreal : 
PRINTED BY W. SALTER & Co. 


1851. 


ARE YOU FORGIVEN? 


‘*YOUR SINS ARE FORGIVEN YoU.”? 
1 John it. 12. 


READER, 


Do you see the question which 
stands at the head of this page? It is just possible 
you may not understand its meaning. erhaps 
you may think, “ Whom have I injured ?—Whom 
. have I defrauded ?—Whom have I wronged ?— 
Whose confidence have I forfeited?—What need 
have I of forgiveness ?” 

I answer, it is not an earthly forgiveness I am 
asking about, but a heavenly one. I do not inquire 
whether you are forgiven in the sight of men, but 
whether you are forgiven in the sight of God. The 
question I desire to press home on your conscience 
is simply this, “ Are you a pardoned soul ?” 

Come now, and give me your attention, while [ 
speak to you about the forgiveness of sins. The 
subject is one that can never be considered too soon. 
We lately saw the pestilence slaying its thousands 
and tens of thousands of our countrymen. The 
Strongest were carried off in a few hours. The 
cleverest Rearinians found their skill entirely un- 
availing. e live yet, and we may be thankful. 


We live yet, and surely we should be thcughtful. 
Our turn may come next. Our graves inay soon be 
ready for us. Come then, I say once more, 
and let me speak to you about the forgiveness of sins. 

I. Let me show you first of all your need of 
JSorgiveness. 


37477 a 


4 


All men need forgiveness, because all men are 
sinners. He that does not know this, knows nothing 
in religion. Itis the very AB C of Christianity, 
that a man should know his right place, and under- 
stand his deserts. 

We are all great sinners. Sinners we were 
born, and sinners we have been all our lives. We 
take to sin naturally from the very first. No child 
ever needs schooling and education to teach it to 
do wrong. No devil or bad companion ever leads 
us into such wickedness as our own hearts. And 
the wages of sin is death, We must either be for- 


given, or lost eternally. 


Weare all guilty st 
We have broken His 


nners in the sight of God. 
holy law. We have trans- 


gressed His precepts. We have not done His will. 
There is not a commandment in all the ten which 
does not condemn us. If we have not brokea it in 
deed we have in word, we have in thought and im- 
agination,—and that continually. Tried by the 


standard of the fifth chapter of St. Matthew, there is 
not one of us that would be acquitted. And as it 1s 
fter this comes 


appointed unto men once to die, so a 
the judgment. We must either be forgiven, or perish 
everlastingly. 
When | walk through the crowded streets of 
London, I see hundreds and thousands, of whom 
I know nothing beyond their outward appearance. 
I see some bent on pleasure, and some on business,— 
some who look rich, and some who look poor,— 
some rolling in their carriages, some hurrying along 
on foot. Each has his cwn object in view. ac 
has his own aims and ends, all alike hidden from me. 
But one thing I know for a certainty, as I look upon 
them,—they are all sinners. There is not a_ soul 
among them all but is guilty before God. ‘There 
breathes not the man or woman in that crowd, but 
must die forgiven, or else rise again to be con- 


demned for ever at the last day. 
and breadth of 


When I look through the length 
Great Britain, I must make the same report. 
From the Land’s End to she North Foreland, from 


5 


the Isle of Wight to Caithness, from the Queen on 
the throne to the pauper in the work-house, we are 
all sinners. We have gota name among the empires 
of the earth. We send our ships into every sea, 
and our merchandize into every town in the world. 
We have bridged the Atlantic with our steamers. 
We have made night in our cities like day with gas. 
We have changed England into one great County 
by railways. We can exchange thought between 
London and Edinburgh in a few seconds by the 
electric telegraph. But with all our arts and 
sciences, with all our machinery and inventions, with 
all our armies and navies, with all our lawyers and 
statesmen, we have not altered the natures of our 
people ; we are still in the eye of God an island ful] 
of sinners, 

When I turn to the map of the world, I must 
say the same thing. It matters not what quarter I 
examine, I find men’s hearts are everywhere the 
same, and everywhere wicked. Sin is the family 
disease of all the children of Adam. Never has 
there been a corner of the earth discovered, where 
sin and the devil do not reign. Wide as the dif. 
ferences are between the nations of the earth, they 
have been found to have one great mark in common. 
Europe and Asia, Africa and America, Iceland and 
India, Paris and Pekin, all alike have the mark of 
sin. ‘The eye of the Lord looks down on this globe 
of our’s as it rolls round the sun, and sees it covered 
with corruption and wickedness. What He sees in 
the moon and stars, in Jupiter and Saturn, I cannot 
tell, but on the earth I know He sees sin. (Psalm 
Ziv. 2, 3.) 

Reader, you may not perhaps like what I am 
saying. I have no doubt such language as this 
sounds extravagant to some. You think I am going 
much too far. But mark well what Iam about to 
say next, and then consider whether I have not used 
the words of soberness and truth. 

What then, I ask, is the life of the best Chris- 
tian amongst us all? What is it but one great 
career of short-comings? What is it but a daily 


6 


acting out the words of our Prayer Book, “ leaving 
undone things that we ought to do, and doing things 
that we ought not to do?” Our faith, how feeble ! 
Our love, how cold! Our. works, how few! Our 
zeal, how small! Our patience, how short-breathed ! 
Our humility, how threadbare! Our self-denial, 
how dwarfish! Our knowledge, how dim! Our 
spirituality, how shallow! Our prayers, how formal ! 
Our desires for more grace, how faint! Never did 
the wisest of men speak more wisely than when he 
said, “there is not a just man upon earth that doeth 
good and sinneth not.” (Eccles, vii. 20.) “In many 
things,” says the apostle James, “ we offend all.” 
(James iii. 2.) 

And what is the best action that is ever done by 
the very best of Christians? What is it after all but 
an imperfect work, when tried on its own merits ? 
It is, as Luther says, no better than a splendid sin. 
It is always more or less defective. It is either 
wrong in its motive, or incomplete in its perform- 
ance,—not done from perfect principles, or not ex- 
ecuted in a perfect way. The eyes of men may 
see no fault in it, but weighed in the balance of God 
it would be found wanting, and viewed in the light 
of heaven it would prove full of flaws, It is like 
the drop of water which seems clear to the naked 
eye, but placed under a microscope is discovered to 
be full of impurity. David’s account is literally 
true, ‘there is none that doeth good, no not one.” 
(Psalm xiv. 3.) 

And then, what is the Lord God, whose eyes are 
on all our ways, and before whom we have one day 
to give account? “Holy, holy, holy,” is the re- 
markable expression applied to Him by those who 
are nearest to Him. (Isaiah vi. 3. Rev. iv. 8.) It 
sounds as if no one word could express the intensity 
of His holiness. One of His prophets says, “He 
is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look 
on iniquity.” (Habak.i. 13.) We think the angels 
exalted beings, and far above ourselves ; but we are 
told in Scripture, “He charged His angels with 
folly.” (Job iv. 18.) We admire the moon and 


: 
ral 


: 


7 


stars as glorious and splendid bodies ; but we read, 
“‘ Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not ; yea 
the stars are not pure in His sight.” (Job xxv. 5.) 
We talk of the heavens as the noblest and purest 
part of creation; but even of them it is written, 
“the heavens are not clean in His sight.” (Job 
xv. 14.) Reader, what is any one of us but a mis- 
erable sinner in the sight of such a God as this ? 

Surely we ouglit all to cease from proud thoughts 
about ourselves. We ought to lay our hands upon 
our mouths, and say with Abraham, “I am dust and 
ashes,” and with Job, “I am vile,” and with Isaiah, 
“We are all as an unclean thing,” and with John, 
“If we say that we have no sin we deceive our. 
selves, and the truth is not in us,” (Gen. xviii. 27; 
Job xl. 4; Isaiah lxiv.6; 1 Johni. 9.) Where ts 
the man or woman in the whole catalogue of the 
Book of life, that will ever be able to say more than 
this, “I obtained mercy ?” What is the glorious 
company of the apostles, the goodly fellowship of 
the prophets, the noble army of martyrs, what are 
they all but pardoned sinners? Surely there is but 
one ccnclusion to be arrived at, we are all great sin- 
ners, and we all need a great forgiveness. 

See now what just cause I have to tell you that 
to know your need of forgiveness, is the first thing 
in true religion, Sin is a burden, and must be taken 
off. Sin is a defilement, and must be cleansed 
away. Sin is a mighty debt, and must be paid. 
Sin is a mountain standing between us and heaven, 
and must be removed. Happy is that mother’s child 
amongst us that feels all this! The first step towards 
heaven is to see clearly that we deserve hell. 'There 
are but two alternatives before us, we must cither 
be forgiven, or be miserable for ever. 

See too how little many persons know of the 
design of Christianity, though they live in a Chris- 
tian land. They fancy they are to go to church to 
learn their duty, and hear morality enforced, and for 
no other purpose. They forget that the heathen 
philosophers could have told them as much as this, 
They forget that such men as Plato and Seneca 


8 


gave instruction, which ought to put to shame the 
hristian liar, the Christian drunkard, and the Chris- 
tian thief. They have yet to learn that the leading 
mark of Christianity is the remedy it provides for 
sin, This is the glory and excellence of the Gospel. 
It meets man as he really is. It takes him as it 
finds him. It goes down to the level to which sin 
has brought him, and offers to raise him up. It tells 
him of a remedy equal to his disease, a great for- 
giveness for great sinners. 
Reader, I ask you to consider these things well, 
if you have not considered them before. It is no 
light matter whether you know your soul’s necessi- 
ties or not. It is a matter of life and death. Try, 
I beseech you, to become acquainted with your own 
heart. Sit down and think quietly what you are in 
the sight of God. Bring together the thougths,and 
words, and actions of any day in your life, and 
measure them by the measure of God’s word. 
Judge yourself honestly, that you may not be con- 
demned at the last day. Oh! that you might find 
out what you really are! Oh! that you might learn 
to pray Job’s prayer, “ Make me to know my trans- 
gression and my sin.” (Job xiii. 23.) Oh! that you 
might see this great truth, that until you are for- 
given, your Christianity has done nothing for you 
at all! 

Il. Let me point out to you, wn the second place, 
the way of forgiveness. 

Lask your particular attention to this point, for 
none can be more important. Granting for a moment 
that you want pardon and forgiveness, what ought 
you todo? Whither will you go? Which way 
will you turn? Every thing hinges on the answer 
you give to this question. 

Will you turn to ministers, and put your trust in 
them? They cannot give you pardon : they can 
only tell you where it is to be found. ‘They can set 
before you the bread of life : but you yourself must 
eat it. They can show you the path of peace: but 
you yourself must walk into it. The Jewish priest 
had no power to cleanse the leper, but only to declare 


a 
j 


=~ 
es ££ © tea = era 


Oo -*\ Oo 


evi 


) 
j 


9 


him cleansed. The Christian minister has no power 
to forgive sins, he can only pronounce who they are 
that are forgiven. 

Will you turn to sacraments and ordinances, and 
trust in them? They cannot supply you with 
forgiveness, however diligently you may use them. 
By sacraments faith is confirmed and grace in- 
creased, in all who rightly use them. But they 
cannot justify the sinner. They cannot put away 
transgression. You may go to the Lord’s tabie 
every Sunday in your life; but unless you look 
far beyond the sign to the thing signified; you will 
after all die in your sins. You may attend a daily 
service regularly, but if you think to establish a 
righteousness of your own by it, in the slightest 
degree, you are only getting further away from God 
every day. 

Will you trust in your own works and endea- 
vours, your virtues and your goo1 deeds, your 
prayers and your alms? They will never buy for 
you an entrance into heaven. hey will never pay 
your debt to God. They are all imperfect in them- 
selves, and only increase your guilt. There is no 
merit or worthiness in them at the very best. 
“When ye have done all those things which are 
commanded you,” says the Lord Jesus, “ say we 
are unprofitable servants.” (Luke xvii. 10.) 

Will you trust in your own repentance and 
amendment ? You are very sorry for the past. 
You hope to be better for the time tocome. You 
hope God will be merciful. Alas! if you lean on 
this, you have nothing beneath you but a broken 
reed. The judge does not pardon the thief because 
he is sorry for what he did. 'To-day’s sorrow will 
not wipe off the score of yesterday’s sins. It is not 
an ocean of tears that would ever cleanse an uneasy 
conscience and give it peace. 

Where then must a man go for pardon? Where 
is forgiveness to be found? Listen, reader, and by 
God’s help I will tell you. ‘There is a way both 
sure and plain, and into that way I desire to guide 
every inquirer’s feet. 

\ * 


10 


That way is, simply to trust in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, as your Saviour. It isto cast your soul, with 
all its sins, unreservedly on Christ, to cease com- 
pletely from any dependance on your own works and 
doings, either in whole or in part, and to rest on no 
other work but Christ’s work, no other righteousness 
but Christ’s righteousness, no other merit but Christ’s 
merit, as your ground of hope. Take this course, 
and you are a pardoned soul. “To Christ,” says 
Peter, “give all the prophets witness, that through 
His name whosoever believed in Him shall receive 
remission of sins.” (Acts x. 43,) ‘“ Through this 
man,” said Paul at Antioch, “ is preached unto you 
the forgiveness of sins, and by Him all that believe 
are justified from all things.” (Acts xiii, 38.) “In 
Him,” writes Paul to the Colossians, ‘‘ we have 
redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness 
of sins.” (Col. i. 14.) 

The Lord Jesus Christ, in great love and compas- 
sion, has made a full and complete satisfaction for 
sin, by His own death upon the cross. There He 
offered Himself as a sacrifice for us, and allowed the 
wrath of God, which we deserved, to fall on His own 
head. For our sins He gave Himself, suffered, and 
died, the just for the unjust, the innocent for the 
guilty, that He might deliver us from the curse of a 
broken law, and provide a complete pardon for all 
who are willing to receive it. And by so doing, as 
Isaiah says, He has borne our sins, as John the Bap- 
tist says, He has taken away sin, as Paul says, He 
has purged our sins, and put away sin, and as Daniel 
says, He has made an end of sin, and finished 
transgression. (Isaiah liu. 11. John i. 29. Heb. i. 3. 
ix. 26, Dan. ix. 24.) 

And now the Lord Jesus is sealed and appointed 
by God the Father to be a Prince and a Saviour, to 
give remission of sins to all who will have it. ‘The 
keys of death and hell are put in His hand. ‘The 
government of the gate of heaven is laid on His 
shoulder. He Himself is the door, and by him all 
that enter in shall be saved. (Acts v. 31. Rev. i, 16 
John x. 9.) 


-- = | ©, = 


Mt = et + 


nm 
bi 2 


11 


Christ, in one word, has purchased a full forgive- 
ness, if youand I are willing to receive it. He has 
done all, paid all, suffered all that was needful to 
reconcile us to God. He has provided a garment of 
righteousness to clothe us. He has opened a foun- 
tain of living waters tocleanse us. He has removed 
every barrier between us and God the Father, taken 
every obstacle out of the way, and made a toad 
by which the vilest may return. All things are aow 
ready, and the sinner has only to believe and be 
saved, to eat and be satisfied, to ask and receive, to 
wash and be clean. 

And faith, simple faith, is the only thing required, 
in order that you and I may be forgiven. That we 
will come to Jesus as sinners with our sins, trust in 
Him, rest on Him, lean on Him, confide in Him, 
commit our souls to Him, and forsakixy all other 
hope, cleave only to Him, this is all and every thing 
that God asks for. Let a man only do this, and he 
shall be saved. His iniquities shall be found com- 
pletely pardoned, and his transgressions entirely taken 
away. Every man and woman that so trusts is wholly 
forgiven, and reckoned perfectly righteous. His sins 
are clean gone, and His soul is justified in God’s 
sight, however bad and guilty he may have been. 

Faith is the only thing required, not knowledge. 
A man may be a poor unlearned sinner, and know 
little of books. But if he sees enough to find the 
foot of the cross, and trust in Jesus for pardon, I will 
engage he shall not miss heaven. 'To know Christ 
is the corner-stone of all religious knowledge. 

Faith, I say, and not conversion. A man may have 
been walking in the broad way up to the very hour he 
first hears the Gospel. But if in that hearing he is 
awakened to feel his danger, and wants to be saved, 
let him come to Christ at once. and wait for nothing. 
That very coming is the beginning of conversion. 

Faith, I repeat, and not holiness. A man may 
feel all full of sin, and unworthy to be saved. But 
let him not tarry outside the ark till he is better. 
Let him come to Christ without delay, just as he 
is. Afterwards he shall be holy. 


12 


Reader, I call upon you to let nothing move you 
from this strong ground, that faith in Christ is the 
only thing needed for your justification. Stand 
firm here, if you value your soul’s peace. I see 
many walking in darkness and having no light, from 
confused notions as to what faith is. They hear that 
saving faith will work by love and produce holiness, 
and not finding all this at once in themselves, they 
think they have no faith at all. They forget that 
these things are the fruits of faith, and not faith itself, 
and that to doubt whether we have faith because we 
do not see them at once, is like doubting whether a 
tree be alive, because it does not bear fruit the very 
day we plant it inthe ground. I charge you to settle 
it firmly in your mind that ir the matter of your 
forgiveness and justification there is but one thing 
required, ahd that is simple faith in Christ. 

I know well that the natural heart dislikes this 
doctrine. Itruns counter to man’s notions of religion. 
It leaves him no room to boast. Man’s idea is to 
come to Christ with a price in his hand, his regularity, 
his morality, his repentance, his goodness, and so, as 
it were, to buy his pardon and justification. The 
Spirit’s teaching is quite different; it is, first of al! 
to believe. Whosoever believeth shall not perish. 
(John iii. 16.) 

Some say, such doctrine cannot be right, because 
it makes the way to heaven too easy. I fear that 
many such persons, if the truth were spoken, find 
ittoo hard. I believe in reality it is easier to give 
a,fortune in building a cathedral like York minster, 
or to go to the stake and be burned, than thoroughly to 
receive justification by faith without the deeds of the 
law, and to enter heaven as a sinner saved by grace. 

Some say this doctrine is foolishness and enthu- 
siasm. I answer, this is just what was said of it 
1800 years ago, and is a vain cavil now, as it was 
then. So far from the charge being true, a thousand 
facts can prove this doctrine to be from God. No 
doctrine certainly has produced such mighty effects 
in the world, as the simple proclamation of free for- 
giveness through faith in Christ. 


ia cee. 


Sh Siete “Kft ot See eh ea 


lc 


Bit nS |b + 


13 


This is the glorious doctrine that was the strength 
of the Apostles when they went forth to the Gentiles 
to preach a new religion. They began’ a few poor 
fishermen, 1n a despised corner of the earth. They 
turned the world upside down. They changed the 
face of the Roman empire. They emptied the 
heathen temples of their worshippers, and made the 
whole system of idolatry crumble away And what 
was the weapon by which they did it all? It wag 
free forgiveness through faith in Jesus Christ. 

This is the doctrine which brought light into 
Europe 300 years ago, at the time of the blessed 
Reformation, and enabled one solitary Monk, Martin 
Luther, to shake the whole church of Rome. 
Tarough his preaching and writing the scales fell 
from men’s eyes, and the chains of their souls were 
loosed. And what was the lever that gave him his 
power? It was free forgiveness through faith in 
Jesus Christ. 

This is the doctrine that revived our own church 
in the middle of last century, when Whitefield, and 
the Wesleys, and Berridge, and Venn broke the 
wretched spirit of slumber that had come over the 
land, and roused men to think. They began a 
mighty work, with little seeming likelihood of suc- 
cess. ‘They began, few in number, with small 
encouragement from the rich and great. But they 

prospered. And why ?—Because they preached 
Sree forgiveness through faith in Christ. 

This is the doctrine which is the true strength of 
any church on earth at this day. It is not orders, 
or endowments, or liturgies, or learning, that will 
keep achurch alive. Let free forgiveness through 
Christ be faithfully proclaimed in her pulpits, and 
the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. Let 
it be buried or kept back, and her candlestick shall 
soon be taken away. When the Saracens invaded 
the lands where Jerome and Athanasius, Cyprian 
and Augustine, once wrote and preached, they found 
bishops and liturgies, I make no question. But I 
fear they found no preaching of free forgiveness of 
sins, and so they swept the churches of those lands 


14 


clean away. They were a body without a vital 
an and therefore they fell. et us never 
orget the brightest days of a church are those when 
Christ crucified is most exalted. The dens and 
caves of the earth, where the early Christians met to 
hear of the love of Jesus, were more full of glory 
and beauty in God’s sight than ever was St. Peter’s 
at Rome. The meanest barn at this day, where the 
true way of pardon is offered to sinners, is a far 
more honourable place than the cathedral of Cologne 
or Milan. Achurch is only useful so far as she 
exalts free forgiveness through Christ. 
This is the doctrine which of all others is the 
mightiest engine for pulling down the kingdom of 
Gatan, ‘The Greenlanders were unmoved, so long 
as the Moravians told them of the creation and the 
fall of man; but when they heard of redeeming love, 
their frozen hearts melted like snow in spring. 
Preach salvation by the sacraments, exalt the church 
above Christ, and keep back the doctrine of the 
atonement, and the devil cares little,—his goods are 
at peace. But preach a full Christ and a free pardon, 
and then Satan will have great wrath, for he knows 
he has but a shorttime. John Berridge said he went 
on preaching morality and nothing else, till he found 
there was not a moral man in his parish. But when 
he changed his plan, and began to preach the love of 
Christ to sinners, then there was a stirring of the 
dry bones, and a mighty turning to God. 

This is the only doctrine whieh will ever bring 
peace to an uneasy conscience, and rest to a troubled 
soul. A man may get on pretty well without it so 
long as he is asleep about his spiritual condition. 
But once let him awake from his slumber, and noth- 
ing will ever calm him but the blood of atonement 
and the peace of Christ. How any one can under- 
take to be a minister of religion without a firm grasp 
of this doctrine, | never can understand. Yor my- 
self, I can only say. I should think my office a most 
painful one, if I had not the message of free forgive- 


ness to convey: It would be miserable work indeed 


to visit the sick and dying, if I could not say, “ Be- 


“fF oa = oD -&» = 


‘omnd sid ane) 


tal 


ver 
en 
nd 
, to 
ory 
1's 
the 
far 
me 
she 


the 
1 of 
ong 
the 
ove, 
ing. 
irch 
the 
are 
Jon, 
ows 
vent 
und 
yhen 
ve of 
| the 


ring 
ibled 
it so 
ition. 
noth- 
ment 
nder- 
rasp 
-my- 
most 
C1Ve= 
Mead 
‘6 Be- 


Sons aa 


15 


hold the Lamb of God, believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” The right hand of 
a Christian minister is the doctrine of free forgive- 
ness through faith in Christ. Give us this doctrine, 
and we have power: we will never despair of doing 
good to men’s souls. Take away this doctrine, and 
we are weak as water. We may read the prayers, 
and go through a round of forms, but we are like 
Samson with his head shorn, our strength is gone. 
Soul’s will not be benefitted by us, and good will not 
be done. 

Reader, I commend the things I have been saying 

to your notice. Jam not ashamed of free pardon 
through faith in Christ, whatever some may say 
against the doctrine. I am not ashamed of it, for 
its fruits speak for themselves. It has done things 
that no other doctrine can do. It has effected moral 
changes which laws and punishments have failed to 
work, which magistrates and policemen have laboured 
after in vain, which mechanics’ institutes and secular 
knowledge have proved utterly powerless to produce. 
Just as the fiercest lunatics in Bethlehem hospital 
became suddenly gentle when kindly treated, even 
so the worst and most hardened sinners have often 
become as little children, when told of Jesus loving 
them and willing to forgive. I can well understand 
Paul ending his Epistie to the erring Galatians with 
that solemn burst of feeling, “ God borbid that I 
should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.” (Gal. vi. 14.) The crown has indeed 
fallen from a Christian’s head, when he leaves the 
doctrine of justification by faith. 

See now how you should ask yourself whether yon 
have really received the truth whichI have been 
dwelling on, and know it by experience. Jesus, and 
faith in Him, is the only way to the Father. He 
that thinks to climb into paradise by some other 
road, will find himself fearfully mistaken. Other 
foundation can no man lay for an immortal soul than 
that of which I have been feebly speaking. He that 
ventures himself here is safe. He that is off this 
rock has got no standing ground at all. 


¥ 3 * 


i6 


See too how you should seriously consider what 
kind of a ministry you are in the habit of attending, 
supposing you have a choice. You have reason 
indeed to be careful. Itis not all the same where 
you go, whatever people may say. There are many 
places of worship, I fear, where you might look long 
for Christ crucified, and never find Hira. He is 
buried under outward ceremonies, thrust behind the 
baptismal font, lost sight of under the shadow of the 
church. “They have taken away my Lord, and I 
know not where they have laid Him.” Take heed 
where you settle yourself. Try all by this single 
test: “Is Jesus and free forgiveness proclaimed 
here?” There may be comfortable pews, there may 
be good singing, there may be learned sermons. 
But if Christ’s Gospel is not the sun and centre of 
the whole place, do not pitch your tent there. Say 
rather with Isaac, ‘‘ Here is the wood and the fire, 
“ut where is the Lamb?” Be very sure this is not 
the place for your soul. 

Reader, remember these things, and you wil! be 
wise. I have set before you the way of life. Ihave 
told you where pardon is to be found ? Oh! beware, 
lest an offer being made you of free forgiveness, any 
of you should come shoit of it. 

IU. Let me in the third place encourage all 
who wish to be forgiven. 

I dare be sure this paper will be read by some one 
who feels he is nov yet a forgiven soul. My heart's 
desire and prayer is that such an one may seek his 
pardon at once. And I would fain help him forward, 
by showing him the kind of forgiveness offered to 
him, and the glorious privileges within his reach. 

Listen to me then, while I try to exhibit to you 
the treasures of Gospel forgiveness. I cannot 
describe its fulness as I ought. Its riches are indeed 
unsearchable. (Eph. iii. 8.) But if you will turn 
away from it, you shall not be able to say in the day 
of judgment, you did not at all know what it was. 

Consider then for one thing, that the forgiveness 


set before you is a great and broad forgiveness. 


Hear what the Prince of Peace Himself declares, 


G5 | See 


» all 


» one 
art’s 
k his 
vard, 
id to 
ne 
) you 
innot 
deed 
turn 
e day 
as. 


eness 
NESS. 
lares, 


98 ie : 


17 


“All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, 
and blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall blas- 
pheme.” (Mark iii. 28.) “Though your sins be 
as scarlet, they shall become white as snow ; though 
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wd.” 
(Isaiah i. 18.) Yes! though your trespasses be 
more in number than the hairs of your head, the 
stars in heaven, the leaves of the forest, the blades 
of grass, the grains of sand on the sea shore, still 
they can all be pardoned. As the waters of Noah’s 
flood covered over and hid the tops of the highest 
hills, so can the blood of Jesus cover over and hide 
your mightiest sins. ‘ His blood cleanseth from 
allsin.” (1 Johni.'7.) Though to you they seem 
written with the point of a diamond, they can all be 
effaced from the book of God’s remembrance by that 
precious blood. Paul names a long list of abomina- 
tions which the Corinthians had committed, and then 
says, ‘“‘such were some of you, but ye are washed.” 
(1 Cor. vi. 11.) 

Furthermore, it is a full and complete forgive- 
ness. It is not like David’s pardon to Absalom,— 
a permission to return home, but not a full restora- 
tion to favour. (2Sam. xiv. 24.) It is not, as some 
fancy, a mere letting off, and letting alone. It is 
a pardon so complete, that he who has it is reckoned 
as righteous as if he had never sinned at all. His 
iniquities are blotted out. They are removed from 
him as far as the east from the west. (Psalm ciii. 
12.) There remains no condemnation for him. 
The Father sees him joined to Christ aad is well 
pleased. The Son beholds him clothed with his 
own righteousness, and says, ‘Thou art all fair, 
there is no spot in thee.” (Cant. iv. 7.) Blessed 
be God that it is so. I verily believe if the best of 
us all had only one blot left for himself to wipe 
out, he would miss eternal life. If the holiest 
child of Adam were in heaven al! but his little 
finger, and to get in depended on himself, I am 
sure he would never enter the kingdom. If Noah, 
Daniel, and Job had had but one day’s sins to wash 
away, they would never have been saved. Praised 


18 


be God that in the matter of our pardon there is 
nothing left for man to do. Jesus does all, and 
man has only to hold out an empty hand and to 
receive. 

Furthermore, it is a free and unconditional 
forgiveness. It is not burdened with an “if,” 
like Solomon’s pardon to Adoniyah, “ If he will show 
himself a worthy man.” (1 Kings i. 52.) Nor 
yet are you obliged to carry a price in your hand, or 
bring a character with you to prove yourself deserving 
of mercy. Jesus requires but one character, and that 
is that you should feel yourself a sinful, bad man. 
He invites you to “buy wine and milk without money 
and without price,” and declares “ Whosoever will 
let him take the water of life freely.” (Isaiah lv. 1. 
Rey. xxii. 17.) Like David in the cave of Adullam, 
He receives every one that feels in distress and a 
debtor, and rejects none. (1 Sam. xxii. 2.) Are 
you a sinner? Do you want a Saviour?) Then 
come to Jesus just as you are, and your soul shall live. 

Again, it is an offered forgiveness. I have read 
of earthly kings who knew not how to show mercy, 
of Henry the Eighth of England, who spared neither 
man or woman; of James the Fifth of Scotland, 
who would never show favour toa Douglas. The 
King of kings is not like them. He calls on man to 
come to Him, and be pardoned. ‘ Unto you, O men, 
I call, and my voice is to the sons of men.” (Prov. 
viii. 4.) ‘‘ Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters.” (Isaiah lv. 1.) “If any man thirst, 
let him come unto me and drink.” (John vil. 37. 
“Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest.” (Mat. xi. 28.) Oh! 
reader, it ought to be a great comfort to you and me 
to hear of any pardon at all; but to hear Jesus 
Himself inviting us, to see Jesus Himself holding 
out His hand to us,—the Saviour seeking the sinner 
before the sinner seeks the Saviour,—this is encour- 
agement, this is strong consolation indeed. 

Again, it is a willing forgiveness. 1 have heard 
of pardons granted in reply to long entreaty, and 
wrung out by much importunity. King Edward 


| 1 


ave 38 the Third of England would not spare the citizens 
» and of Calais till they came to him with halters round 
nd to their necks, and his own queen interceded for them 
on her knees. But Jesus is “ good and ready to 
tional forgive.” (Psalm Ixxxvi. 5.) He delighteth in 
if, mercy. (Micah vii. 18.) Judgment is His strange 
show work. He is not willing that any should perish. (2 
Nor Peter iii.) He would fain have all men saved, and 
nd, or come to the knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. ii. 4.) 
TVINg He wept over unbelieviiig Jerusalem. ‘“ As I live,” 
d that He says, “I have no pleasure in the death of the 
man. wicked. ‘Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways: 
nOney why will ye die?” (Ezek. xxxiii.11.) Ah! reader, 
r will you and IT may well come boldly to the throne of 
lv. 1. grace. He who sits there is far more willing and 
illam, ready to give mercy than you and | are to receive it. 
and a Besides this, it is unted forme Thousands 
Are and tens of thousands have sought for pardon at the 
Then mercy-seat of Christ, and not one has ever returned 
I hive. to say that he sought in vain. Sinners of every 
, read name and nation,—sinners of every sort and descrip- 
1ercy, tion, have knocked at the door of the fold, and none " 
either have ever been refused admission. Zaccheus the 
tland, extortioner, Magdalen the harlot, Saul the persecutor, 
The Peter the denier of his Lord, the Jews who crucified 
yan to the Prince of life, the idolatrous Athenians, the 
‘men, adulterous Corinthians, the ignorant Africans, the 
Prov. : blood-thirsty New Zea'anders,—all hive ventured 
ye to their souls on Christ’s promises of pardon, and none 
hirst, have ever found them fail. Ah! reader, if the way 
37. I set before you were a new and untravelled way, : 
heavy you might well feel faint-hearted. But it is not so. 
Oh! | It isan old path. It is a path worn by the feet of 
id me many pilgrims, and a path in which the footsteps are 
Jesus all one way. The treasury of Christ’s mercies has 
olding never been found empty. The well of living waters 
ipieinis i has never proved dry. 
Ag0uTs E Besides this, itis a present forgiveness. ll that 
es ‘ believe in Jesus are at once justified from all ee 
== a things. (Acts xi. 38.) ‘ihe very day the younger 
» and son returned to his father’s honse, he was clothed 


dward with the best robe, had the ring put on his hand, 


20 


and the shoes on his feet. (Luke xv.) The very day 
Zaccheus received Jesus he heard those comfortable 
words, “this day is salvation come to this house.” 
(Luke xix. 9.) The very day that David said, “I 
have sinned against the Lord,” he was told by Na- 
than, “ The Tons also hath put away thy sin.” (2 
Sam. xii. 13.) The very day you first flee to Christ, 
your sins are all removed. Your pardon is nota 
thing far away, to be obtained only after many years. 
It is nigh at hand. Itis close to you, within your 
reach, all ready to be bestowed. Jelieve, and that 
very moment it is yourown. “He that believeth is 
not condemned.” (John iii. 18.) It is not said, 
“He shall not be,” cr “ will not be,” but ‘2s not.” 
From the time of his believing condemnation is gone. 
“ He that believeth hath everlasting life.” (John iii. 
36.) It is not said, “He shall have,” or “ will 
have,” itis “hath.” Itis his own as surely as if 
he was in heaven, though not so evidently so to his 
own eyes. Ah! reader, you must not think forgive- 
ness will be nearer to a believer in the day of judg- 
ment than it was in the hour he first believed. His 
complete salvation from the power of sin is every 
year iearer and nearer to him; but as to his forg:ve- 
ness and justification, it is a finished work from the 
very minute he first commits himself to Christ. 
Last and best of all, it is an everlasting forgive- 
ness. It is not like Shimei’s pardon, a pardon that 
may some time be revoked and taken away. (1 Kings 
ii.9.) Once justified, you are justified for ever. 
Once written down in the book of life, your name 
shall never be blotted out. The sins of God’s chil- 
dren are sai’ to bce cast into the depths of the sea,— 
to be sought for and not found,—to be remembered 
no more,—to be cast behind God’s back. (Mic. vil. 
19. Jerem. ]. 60, xxxi. 34. Isaiah xxxviii. 17.) Some 
people fancy they may be justified one year and con 
demned another,—children of adoption at one time, 
and strangers by and by,—heirs of the kingdom in 
the beginning of their days, and yet servants of the 
devil in their end. I cannot find this in the Bible ; 
as the New Zealander told the Romish priest, I do 


Ty day 
ortable 


 & 
Christ, 
; nota 


y as if 
to his 
wrgive- 
| judg- 
. His 
every 
orgive- 
ym the 
it. 
rg ive- 
on that 
Kings 
ever. 
name 
s chil- 
sea,—— 
nbered 
lic. Vil. 
Some 
id con 


fs 
f 


21 


not see it in the book. It seems to me to ove.turn 
the good news of the Gospel altogether, and to tear 
up its comforts by the roots. I belisve the salvation 
Jesus offers is an everlasting salvation, and a 
pardon once sealed with His blood shall never be 
reversed, 

Reader, I have set before you the nature of the 
forgiveness offered to you. I have told you but a 
little of it, for my words are weaker than my will. 
The half of it remains untold. ‘The greatness of it 
is far more than any report of mine. But I think I 
have said enough to show you it is worth the seeking, 
and I can wish you nothing better than that -you may 
strive to make it your own. 

Do you call it nothing to look forward to death 
without fear, and to judgment without doubting 
and to eternity without a sinking of heart? Do 
yo:l call it nothing to feei the world slipping trom 
your grasp, and to see tne grave getting ready for 
you, and the valley of the shadow of death opening 
before your eyes, and yet not be afraid? Do you 
call it nothing to be able to think of the great day 
of account, the throne, the books, the Judge, the 
assembled worlds, the revealing of secrets, the final 
sentence, and yet to feel “Iam safe?” This is 
the portion, and this the privilege of a forgiven 
soul. 

Such an one is on a rock. When the rain of God’s 
wrath descends, and the floods come, and the winds 
blow, his feet shall not slide, his habitation shall be 
sure. 

Such an one is tz an ark. When the last fiery 
deluge is sweeping over all things on the surface of 
the earth, it shall not come nigh him. He shall be 
caught up and borne securely above it all. 

Such an one is in a hiding place. When God 
arises to judge terribly the earth, and men are 
calling to rocks and mountains to fall upon them 
and cover them, the everlasting arms shall be 
thrown around him, and the storm shall pass over 
his head. He shall abide under the shadow of the 
Almighty. 


22 


Such an one is ina city of refuge. The accuser 
of the brethren can lay no charge against him. 
The law cannot condemn him. There is a wall 
between him and the avenger of blocd. The 
enemies of his soul cannot hurt him. He is in a 
secure sanctuary. 

Such an one is rich. He has treasure in heaven 
which cannot be affected by worldly changes, com- 
pared to which Peru and California are nothing atall. 
He need not envy the richest merchants and bankers. 
He has a portion that will endure when bank-notes 
and sovereigns are worthless things. He can say, 
like the Spanish ambassador, when shown the trea- 
sury at Venice, ‘My master’s treasury has no 
bottom.” He has Christ. 

Such an one is insured. He is ready for any 
thing that may happen. Nothing can harm him. 
Banks may break, and governments may be overturn- 
ed. Famine and pestilence may rage around him. 
Sickness and sorrow may visit his own fireside. But 
still he is ready for all,—ready for health, ready for 
disease,—ready for tears, ready for joy,—ready for 
poverty, ready for plenty,—ready for life, ready for 
death. He has Christ. He is a pardoned soul. 
“Blessed” indeed “is he whose transgression is for- 
given, and whose sin is covered.” (Psalm xxxii. 1.) 

Reader, how will you escape if you neglect so 
great salvation? Why should you not lay hold on 
it at once, and say, Pardon me, even me also, O my 
Saviour. What would you have, if the way I have 
set before you does not satisfy you? Come while 
the door is open. Ask, and you shall receive. 

IV. Let me give you in the last place some marks 
of having found forgiveness. 

I dare not leave out this point. ‘Too many per- 
sons presume they are forgiver, who have no evi- 
dences to show. Not a few cannot tuink it possible 
they are forgiven, who are plainly in the way to 
heaven, though they may not sce it themselves. I 
would fain raise hope in some, and self-inquiry in 
others ; and to do this let me tell you the leading 
marks of a forgiven soui, 


sis: Bey 


accuser 
st him. 
- a wall 


The 


,isina 


heaven 
3, COM- 
ng atall. 
bankers. 
nk-notes 
can say, 
he trea- 

has no 


for any 
rm him. 
yverturn- 
ind him. 
Je. But 
eady for 
eady for 
eady for 
ed soul, 
on is for- 
xxii. 1.) 
sglect so 
hold on 
0, O my 
y I have 
ne while 
ve. 
ne marks 


any per- 
e no evi- 


possible 


nquiry in 
e leading 


23 


Forgiven souls hate sin. They can enter most 
fully into the words of our Communion Service, 
“the remembrance of sin is grievous unto them, and 
the burden of it is intolerable.” It is the serpent 
which bit them: how should they not shrink from it 
with horror? It is the poison which brought them to 
the brink of eternal death: how should they not 
loathe it with a godly disgust? It is the Egyptian 
enemy which kept them in hard bondage: how 
should not the very memory of it be bitter to their 
hearts? It is the disease of which they carry 
the marks and scars about them, and from which 
they scarcely recovered : well may they dread it, 
flee from it, and long to be delivered altogether from 
its power. Remember how the woman in Simon’s 
house wept over the feet of Jesus. (Luke vii. 38.) 
Remember how the Ephesians publicly burned their 
wicked books. (Acts xix. 19.) Remember how 
Paul mourned over his youthful transgressions, “ I 
am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I per- 
secuted the Church of God.” (1 Cor. xv. 9.) Ah! 
reader, if you and sin are friends, you and God are 
not yet reconciled. You are not meet for heaven, 
for one main part of heaven’s excellence is the 
absence of all sin. 

Forgiven souls love Christ. This is that one 
thing they can say, if they dare say nothing else,— 
they do love Christ. His person, His office, His 
work, His name, His cross, His blood, His words, 
His example, His day, His ordinances, all, all are 
precious to forgiven souls. The ministry which 
exalts Him most, is that which they enjoy most. 
The books which are most full of Him, are most 
pleasant to their minds. ‘The people on earth they 
feel most drawn to, are those in whom they see 
something of Christ. His name is as ointment 
poured forth, and comes with a peculiar sweetness to 
their ears. (Cant. i. 3.) They would tell you they 
cannot help feeling as they do. He is their Redeem- 
er, their Shepherd, their Physician, their King, their 
strong deliverer, their gracious guide, their hope, their 
joy, their all. Were it not for Him they would be of 


24 


all men most miserable. They would as soon con- 
gent that you should take the sun out of the sky, as 
Christ out of their religion. Those people who talk 
of “the Lord,” and “the Almighty,” and “the 
Deity,” and so forth, but have not a word to say 
about Christ, are in any thing but a right state of 
mind. What saith the Scripture? “He that hon- 
oureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father which 
hath sent Him. (John v. 23.) “If any man love 
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema.” — 
1 Cor. xvi. 22. 

Forgiven souls are humble. They cannot forget 

that they owe all they have and hope for to free grace, 
and this keeps them lowly. ‘They are brands plucked 
from the fire,—debtors who could not pay for them- 
selves,—captives who must have remained in prison 
for ever, but for undeserved mercy,—wandering 
sheep who were ready to perish when the shepherd 
found them,—and. what right then have they to be 
proud? Ido not deny that there are proud saints. 
But this Ido say, they are of all God’s creatures the 
most inconsistent,—and of all God’s children, the 
most likely to stumble and pierce themselves with 
many sorrows. Forgiveness more often produces 
the spirit of Jacob :—“ I am not worthy of the least 
of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou 
hast shewed unto thy servant ;” (Gen. xxxii. 10.) and 
of Hezekiah, “I shall go softly all my years “ 
(Isaiah xxxviii. 15.) and of the Apostle Paul, “Iam 
less than the least of all saints,—chief of sinners.” 
(Ephes. iii. 8.;—1 Tim. i. 15.) Reader, when you 
and I have nothing we can call our own but sin and 
weakness, there is surely no garment that becomes 
us so well as humility. 

Forgiven souls are holy. Their chief desire is 
to please Him who has saved them, to do His will, 
to glorify Him in body and in spirit which are His. 
«« What shall I render unto the Lord for all His bene- 

fits,” is a leading principle in a pardoned heart. It 


was the remembrance of Jesus showing mercy, that 
made Paul in labours so abundant, and in doing good 


so unwearied. It was a sense of pardon that made 


n con- 
sky, as 
‘ho talk. 
d “the 
l to say 
state of 
iat hon- 
rt which 
an love 
2ma.’— 


ot forget 
e grace, 
plucked 
yr them- 
n prison 
andering 
shepherd 
sy to be 
d saints. 
tures the 
ren, the 
ves with 
produces 
the least 
1ich thou 
10.) and 

years ;” 
1, “Lam 
sinners.” 
yhen you 
t sin and 
becomes 


desire 18 
His will, 
. are His. 
His bene- 
heart. It 
ercy, that 
oing good 
that made 


OS 


Zaccheus say, “ The half of my goods I give tothe 
poor, and if I have taken anything from any man 
by false accusation, [ restore him fourfold.” (Luke 
xix. 8.) Reader, if you point out to me believers 
who are in a carnal, slothful state of soul, I reply 
in the words of Peter, ‘‘ They have forgotten they 
were purged from their old sins.” (2 Pet. i. 9.) 
But if you show me a man deliberately living an un- 
holy and licentious life, and yet boasting that his sins 
are forgiven, I answer he is under a ruinous delusion, 
and is not forgiven at all. I would not believe he 
is forgiven, if an angel from heaven affirmed it, and 
I charge you not to believe it too. Pardon of sin 
and love of sin are like oil and water, they will 
never go together. All that are washed in the 
blood of Christ, are also sanctified by the Spirit of 
Christ. 

Forgiven souls are forgiving. ‘They do as they 
have been done by. ‘They look over the offences of 
their brethren. ‘They endeavour to walk in love, as 
Christ loved them, and gave Himself for them. 
They remember, how God for Christ’s sake forgave 
them, aiid endeavour to do the same toward their 
fellow creatures. Has He forgiven them pounds, 
and shall they not forgive a few pence? Doubtless 
in this, as in everything else they come short ;—but 
this is their desire and their aim. A spiteful, quar- 
relsome Christian is a scandal to his profession. It 
is very hard to believe that such an one has ever sat 
at the foot of the cross, has ever considered how he 
is praying against himself every time he uses the 
Lord’s prayer, and saying as it were, “ Father, do 
not forgive me my trespasses at all.” But it is still 
harder to understand what such an one would do in 
heaven, if he got there. All ideas of heaven in 
which forgiveness has not a place, are castles in the 
air, and vain fancies. Forgiveness is the way by 
which every saved soul enters heaven. Forgiveness 
is the only title by which he remains in heaven. 
Forgiveness is the eternal subject of song with all 
the redeemed who inhabit heaven. Surely an unfor- 
giving soul in heaven would find his heart completely 


26 


out of tune. Surely we know nothing of Cnrist’s 
love tous but the name of it, if we do not love our 
brethren, 

Reader, I lay these things before you. I know 
well there are great diversities in the degree of men’s 
attainments in grace, and that saving faith in Christ 
is consistent with many imperfections. But still Ido 
believe, the marks I have just been naming, will 
generally be found more or less in all forgiven souls. 

I cannot conceal from you, these marks should 
raise in many minds great searchings of heart. I 
must be plain. I fear there are thousands of persons 
called Christians, who know nothing of these marks. 
They are baptized. ‘They keep their church. They 
would not on any account be reckoned infidels. But 
as to true repentance and saving faith, union with 
Christ and sanctification of the Spirit, they are names 
and words of which they know nothing at all. 

Now if this paper is read by such persons, it will 
probably either alarm them, or make them very 
angry. If it makes them angry I shall be sorry. 
If it alarms hem I shall be glad. I want to alarm 
them. Iwai. to awaken them from their present 
state. I want them to take in the great fact, that 
they are not yet forgiven, they have not peace with 
God, and are on the high road to destruction. 

I must say this, for I see no alternative. Itseems 
neither Christian faithfulness, nor Christian charity, 
to keep it back. I see certain marks of pardoned souls, 
laid down in Scripture. I see an utter want of these 
marks in many men and women around me. How 
then can I avoid the conclusion that they are not yet 
forgiven ? And how shall I do the work of a faithful 
watchman, if I do not write it down plainly in so many 
words? Where is the use of crying peace, peace, 


when there is no peace? Where is the honesty of 


acting the part of a lying physician, and telling people 
there is no danger, when in reality they are fast draw- 
ing near to eternal death? Surely the blood of souls 
would be required at my hands, if I wroie to you any- 
thing less than the truth. If the trumpet give an un- 
certain sound, who shall prepare himself for the battle. 


27 


Examine yourselves then, before this subject is 
forgotten. Consider of what sort your religion is. 
Try it by the marks I have just set before you. I 
have endeavoured to make them as broad and gene- 
ral as I can, for fear of causing any heart to be sad 
that God has not made sad. If you know anything 
of them, though it be but a little, I am thankful, and 
entreat you to go forward. But if you know noth- 
ing of them in your own experience, let me say in 
all affection, I stand in doubt of you. I tremble for 
your soul. 

1. And now before I conclude, let me put a home 
question to every one who reads this paper. It shall 
be short and plain, but it is all-important, “ Are you 
forgiven ?” 
~ Ihave told you al! I can about forgiveness. Your 
need of forgiveness,—the way of forgiveness,—the 
encouragement to seek forgiveness,—the marks of 
having found it,—all have been placed before you. 
Bring the whole subject to bear upon your own heart, 
and ask yourself, “Am I forgiven? Either I am, 
or Tamnot. Which of the two is it ?” 

You believe perhaps, there is forgiveness of sins. 
You believe that Christ died for sinners, and that 
He offers a pardon to the most ungodly. But aie 
you forgiven yourself? Have you yourself laid hoida 
on Christ by faith, and found peace through His 
blood? ‘What profit is there to you in forgiveness, 
except you get the benefit of it? What does it profit 
the shipwrecked sailor, that the life-boat is alongside, 
if he sticks by the wreck, and does not jump in and 
escape? What does it avail the sick man, that the 
doctor offers him a medicine, if he only looks at it 
and does not swallow it down? Except you lay 
hold for your own soul, you will be as surely lost, as 
if there was no forgiveness at all. 

Reader, if ever your sins are to be forgiven, it 
must be nuw,—now in this life, if ever in the life to 
come,—now in this world, if they are to be found 
blotted out when Jesus comes again. There must 
be actual business between you and Christ. Your 


_sins must be laid on Him, by faith. His righteousness 


28 


must be laid on you. His blood must be applied to 
your conscience, or else your sins will meet you in 
the day of judgment, and sink you into hell. Oh! 
reader, how can you trifle, when such things are at 
stake? How can you be content to leave it uncer— 
tain whether you are forgiven? Surely that a man 
can make his will, insure his life, give directions 
about his funeral, and yet leave his soul’s affairs in 
uncertainty, is a wonderful thing indeed. 

2. Let me next give a solemn warning to every 
one who reads this paper, and knows in his con- 
science he is not forgiven. 

Your soul is in awful danger. You may die this 
year. And if you die as you are, you are lost for 
ever. If you die without pardon, without pardon 
you will rise again at the last day. There is a sword 
over your head that hangs by a single hair. There 
is but astep between you and death. Oh! I wonder 
that you can sleep quietly in your bed. 

You are not yet forgiven. 'Then what have you 
got by your religion? You go to church. You 
have a Bible, you have a prayer-book, and perhaps 
a hymn-book. You hear sermons. You join in 
services. It may be you go to the Lord’s table. 
But what have you really got after all? Any hope? 
Any peace? Any joy? Any comfort? Nothing, 
literally nothing! You have got nothing but mere 
temporal things, if you are not a pardoned soul. 

You are not yet forgiven. But you trust God 
will be merciful. And why should He be merciful, 
if you will not seek Him in His own appointed 
way? Merciful He doubtless is, wonderfully merci- 
ful to all who come to Him in the name of Jesus. 
But if you choose to despise His directions, and 
make a road to heaven of your own, you will find to 
your cost there is no mercy for you. 

You are not yet forgiven. But you hope you 
shall be some day. I cannot away with that expres- 
sion. It is like thrusting off the hand of conscience, 
and seizing it by the throat to stop its voice. Why 
are you more likely to seek forgiveness at a future 
time? Why should you not seek it now? Now 1s 


29 


the time for gathering the bread of life. The day 
of the Lord is fast drawing near, and then no man 
can work, (Exod. xvi. 26.) The seventh trumpet 
will soon sound. The kingdoms of this world will 
soon become the kingdoms of our God and of His 
Christ. Woe to the house which is found without 
the scarlet line, and without the mark of blood upon 
the door! (Josh. ii. 18. Exod. xii. 13.) 

Well! you may not feel your need of forgiveness 
now. But a time may come when you will want it. 
‘The Lord in mercy grant that it may not then be too 
late. 

3. Let me next give an earnest invitation to all 
who read this paper, and desire forgiveness. 

I know not who you are, or what you have been 
in time past, but I say boldly, Come to Christ by 
faith, and you shall have a pardon. High or low, 
rich or poor, young men and maidens, old men and 
children,—you cannot be worse than Manasseh and 
Paul before conversion, than David and Peter after 
conversion,—come all of you to Christ, and you 
shall be freely forgiven. 

Think not for a moment that you have some great 
thing to do before you come to Christ. Such a notion 
is of the earth, earthy; the Gospel bids you come 
just as you are. Man’s idea is to make his peace 
with God by repentance, and then come to Christ at 
last: the Gospel way is to receive peace from Christ 
first of all, and begin with Him. Man’s idea is to 
amend and turn over a new leaf, and so work his way 
up to reconciliation and friendship with God: the 
Gospel way is first to be friends with God through 
Christ, and then to work. Man’s idea is to toil up 
the hill, and find life at the top : the Gospel way is 
first to live by faith in Christ, and then to do His 
will. 

And judge ye, every one, judge ye, which is true 
Christianity? Which is the good news? Which is 
the glad tidings? First the fruits of the Spirit, and 
then peace ; or first peace, and then the fruits of the 
Spirit? First sanctification and then pardon; or first 
pardon and then sanctification? First service and 


30 


then life; or first life and then service? Reader, 
your own heart can well supply the answer. 

Come then willing to receive, and not thinking 
how much you can bring. Come willing to take 
what Christ offers, and not fancying you can give 
any thing in return. Come with your sins, ant no 
other qualification but a hearty desire for pardon, and 
so sure as the Bible is true you shall be saved. 

You may tell me you are nui worthy, you are 
not good enough, you are not elect. IJ answer, you 
are a sinner, and you want to be saved, and what 
more do you want? You are one of those whom 
Jesus came to save. Come to Him, ard you shall 
have life. Take with you words, and He will hear 
you graciously. Tell Him all your soul’s necessities, 
and I know He will give heed. Tell Him you have 
heard He receiveth sinners, and that you are such. 
Tell Him you have heard He has the keys of life in 
His hand, and entreat Him to letyou in. ‘Tell Him 
you come in dependence on His own promises, and 
ask Him to fulfil His word, and do as He has said. 
Do this in simplicity and sincerity, and my soul for 

our’s, you shall not ask in vain. Do this, and you 
shall find Him faithful and just to forgive your sins, 
and to cleanse you from all unrighteousness. 

4. Last of all let me give a word*of exhortation 
to all forgiven souls. 

You are forgiven. Then know the full extent of 
vy privileges, and learn to rejoice in the Lord. 

ou and I are great sinners, but then we have a 
great Saviour. You and I have sinned sins that 
are past man’s knowledge, but then we have the 
love of Christ which passeth knowledge to rest upon. 
You and I feel our hearts to be a bubbling fountain 
of evil, but then we have another fountain of greater 
power in Christ’s blood, to which we may daily 
resort. You and I have mighty enemies to contend 
with, but then the Captain of our salvation is mightier 
still, and is ever with us. Why should our hearts 
be troubled? Why should we be disquieted and 
cast down? O men and women of little faith that 
we are! Wherefore do we doubt? 


>AW 


ae 


wee WS Ne ON US 


— mot am OD 


SA 


ws 
) 


. Ue mH - OD 


i 


31 


Let us strive every year to grow in grace, and 
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is 
sad to be content with a little religion. It. is hon- 
ourable to covet the best gifts. We ought not to be 
satisfied with the same kind of hearing, and reading, 
and praying which satisfied us in years gone by. 
We ought to labour every year to throw more heart 
and reality into every thing we do in our religion. 
To love Christ more intensely,—to abhor evil more 
thoroughly,—to cleave to what is good more closely, 
to watch even our least ways more narrowly,—to 
declare very plainly that we seek a country,—to put 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and be clothed with Him 
in every place and company,—to see more,—to feel 
more,—to know more,—to do more,—these ought to 
be our aims and desires, every year we begin. Truly 
there is room fur improvement in us all. 

Let us try to do good to the souls of others more 
than we have done hitherto. Alas! it is poor work 
indeed to be swallowed up in our own spiritual con- 
cerns, and taken up with our own spiritual ailments, 
and never to think of others. We forget that there 
is such a thing as religious selfishness. Let us 
count it a sorrowful thing to go to heaven alone, and 
let us seek to draw companions with us. We ought 
never to forget that every man, woman, and child 
around us will soon be either in heaven or hell. Let 
us say to others as Moses did to Jethro, “ Come 
with us, and we will do thee good.” (Num. x. 29.) 
Oh! it is indeed a true saying, “He that watereth 
shall be watered himself.” (Prov. xi. 25.) The 
selfish Christian has little idea what he is missing. 

But above ali let us learn to live the life of faith 
in Jesus more than we have hitherto. Ever to be 
found by the fountain side,—ever to be eating Christ’s 
body by faith, and drinking Christ’s blood by faith,— 
ever to have before our minds Christ dying for'our 
sins,—Christ rising again for our justification,— 
Christ interceding for us at God’s right hand,— 
Christ soon coming again to gather us to Himself, — 
this is the mark which we should have continually 
before our eyes. We may fall short, but let us aim 


32 


high. Let us walk in the full light of the Sun of 
righteousness and then our graces will grow. Let 
us not be like trees on a north wall, weak and un- 
fraitful and cold. Let us rather strive to be like the 
sun-flower, and follow the great fountain of light 
wherever He goes, and see Him with open face. 
Oh! for an eye more quick to discern His leadings ! 
Oh! for an ear more ready to hear His voice ! 

Let us say to everything in the world that inter— 
feres between ourselves and Jesus, ‘‘ stand aside ;” 
and let us dread allowing ourselves in the least evil 
habits, lest insensibly they rise up like a mist and 
hide Him from our eyes. In His light alone shall 
we see light and feel warmth, and separate from Him 
we shall find the world a dark and cold wilderness. 
We should call to mind the request of the Athenian 
philosopher when the mightiest monarch on earth 
asked him what he desired most: “I have,” said he, 
“but one request to make, and that is that you would 
stand from between me and the sun.” Let this be 
the spirit in which you and I are found continually. 
Let us think lightly of the world’s gifts. Let us 
sit calmly under its cares. Let us care for nothing, 
if we may only ever see the King’s face, if we may 
cnly ever abide in Christ. 

And now reader, with every kind and Christian 
wish for your soul’s happiness, I commend you to 
the only wise God, our Saviour. He is able to keep 
you from falling, and to present you faultless before 
the presence of His glory with exceeding joy. (Jude 
24.) I ask to be always remenbered in your 
prayers, and remain, 


Your affectionate friend, 


J. C. RYLE. 


