a 


>>•' 


ATE 


^      f        ! 


-^i^.^^-f&'V 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 


Shelf 

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


w 


#■ 


'«tT 


»-^>- 


-jW 


:^'j*L 


r:^^"^ 

^^^  ^A\  I 


AROUiND 
THE    WICKET    GATE; 


OR, 

A  FRIENDLY  TALK  WITH  SEEKERS 
CONCERNING  FAITH  IN  THE  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST 


.  ^  C .      II .      S  P  U  Pv  G  E  O  N  . 


"  ^ntrr  ue  m  at  tlje  strait  gate." — Matt.  vii.  13. 


JV'ew  l^oi'k  : 
A.    C   ARMSTRONG    & 

714  BROADWAY 
1890. 


o\ 


Vc,A 


^"..0, 


r 


By  agreeiTient  ATvith  Messrs.  PASSMORE  & 
ALABASTER,  and  ^7vith  my  full  authority,  this 
book  is  published  in  America  by  Messrs.  ARM- 
STRONG &  SON  of  New  York. 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


COPYRIGHT,  1S90, 
BY  A.  C.  ARMSTRONG  &  SON. 


P  E  E  F  A  C  E . 


1\ /PILLIONS  of  men  are  in  the  outlying  regions,  far 
off  from  God  and  peace ;  for  these  we  pray,  and 
to  these  we  give  warning.  But  just  now  we  have  to  do 
with  a  smaller  company,  who  are  not  far  from  the 
kingdom,  but  have  come  right  up  to  the  wicket  gate 
which  stands  at  the  head  of  the  way  of  life.  One  would 
think  that  they  would  hasten  to  enter,  for  a  free  and 
open  invitation  is  placed  over  the  entrance,  the  porter 
waits  to  welcome  them,  and  there  is  but  this  one  way 
to  eternal  life.  He  that  is  most  loaded  seems  the  most 
likely  to  pass  in  and  begin  the  heavenward  journey; 
but  what  ails  the  other  men? 

This  is  what  I  want  to  find  out.  Poor  fellows  !  they 
have  come  a  long  way  already  to  get  where  they  are ; 
and  the  King's  highway,  which  they  seek,  is  right 
before  them :  wh}^  do  they  not  take  to  the  Pilgrim 
Eoad  at  once  ?  Alas !  they  have  a  great  many  reasons  ; 
and  foolish  as  those  reasons  are,  it  needs  a  very  wise 
man  to  answer  them  all.  I  cannot  pretend  to  do  so. 
Only  the  Lord  himself  can  remove  the  folly  which  is 
bound  up  in  their  hearts,  and  lead  them  to  take  the 
great  decisive  step.  Yet  the  Lord  works  by  means ; 
and  I  have  prepared   this   little  book   in   the  earnest 


4  PREFACE. 

hope  that  he  may  work  by  it  to  the  blessed  end  of 
leading  seekers  to  an  immediate,  simple  trust  in  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

He  who  does  not  take  the  step  of  faith,  and  so  enter 
upon  the  road  to  heaven,  will  perish.  It  will  be  an 
awful  thing  to  die  just  outside  the  gate  of  life.  Almost 
saved,  but  altogether  lost !  A  man  just  outside  Noah's 
ark  would  be  drowned ;  a  manslayer  just  outside  the 
wall  of  the  city  of  refuge  would  be  slain;  and  the  man 
who  is  within  a  yard  of  Christ,  and  yet  has  not  trusted 
him,  will  be  lost.  Therefore  am  I  in  terrible  earnest  to 
get  my  hesitating  friends  over  the  threshold.  Come  in  ! 
Come  in !  is  my  pressing  entreaty.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  render  it  effectual  with  many  who  shall  glance 
at  these  pages  !  May  he  cause  his  own  almighty  voice 
to  be  heard  creating  faith  at  once  ! 

My  reader,  if  Grod  blesses  this  book  to  you,  do  the 
writer  this  favour — either  lend  your  own  copy  to  one 
who  is  lingering  at  the  gate,  or  buy  another  and  give 
it  away ;  for  his  great  desire  is  that  this  little  volume 
should  be  of  service  to  many  thousands  of  souls. 

To  God  this  book  is  commended;  for  without  his  grace 
nothing  will  come  of  all  that  is  written. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  AMERICAN  EDITIGH. 


The  host  of  American  Christians  who  have 
had  the  privilege  of  listening  to  the  prince  of 
modern  preachers  of  the  gospel  in  his  own 
London  Tabernacle,  and  the  countless  thou- 
sands who  have  read  his  printed  sermons,  have 
long  desired  to  see  and  hear  him  on  this  side 
the  ocean.  The  state  of  his  health,  however, 
which  requ.ires  frequent  respites  from  his  in- 
cessant and  exhausting  labors,  precludes  the 
hope  of  an  American  tour,  with  its  inevitable 
demands  upon  his  already  overburdened 
strength. 

All  the  more  on  this  account  they  will  wel- 
come a  new  volume  from  his  pen,  designed  for 
the  benefit  of  a  class  found  in  every  Christian 
community,  the  object  of  the  deepest  concern  to 
the  Church  of  Christ :  a  volume  written  by  a 
master  in  Israel  who  has  shown  such  a  profound 
knowledge  both  of  the  human  heart  with  all 
its  needs,  and  of  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God 
in   the  gospel,  and  who   has  been  to  so  many 


O  PREFACE   TO    THE   AMERICAN    EDITION. 

souls  the  blessed  means  of  leading  them  to 
Christ. 

This  new  volume,  like  the  author's  many 
previous  books  and  tracts,  his  well-organized 
Colporter  Society,  etc.,  testifies  to  his  high 
appreciation  of  the  power  of  the  press,  and  to 
his  desire  thus  to  win  for  Christ  myriads  of 
those  whom  his  voice  cannot  reach. 

To  all  who  are  hovering  around  the  "  Wicket 
Gate,"  or  who  even  from  time  to  time  come 
within  sight  of  it  and  wish  they  were  safe 
within  it,  this  little  book  is  commended,  with 
the  hope  that  even  while  they  are  reading  they 
will  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  them. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Awakening   --•-•---9 


Jesus  Only        -------16 

Faith  in  the  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus     -  -    21 

Faith  vert  Simple    -         -         -        -        -  -         35 

Fearing  to  Believe      -        -        -         -         -  -48 

Difficulty  in  the  'Wat  of  Believing        -  -        57 

A  Helpful  Survey  of  Christ's  Work          -  -     65 

A  Real  Hindrance  to  Faith    -        -        -  .        73 

On  Raising  Questions  -         -         -         -         _  -     80 

Without  Faith  no  Salvation    -         -         .  .         88 

To  those  who  have  Believed       -         -         -  -     93 


^rounb  i^c  XDicket  (Bate. 


RE  AT  numbers  of  persons 
have  no  concern  about 
eternal  things.  They  care 
more  about  their  cats  and 
dogs  than  about  their  souls. 
It  is  a  great  mercy  to  be 
made  to  think  about  our- 
selves, and  how  we  stand 
towards  God  and  the  eternal  world.  This  is 
full  often  a  sign  that  salvation  is  coming  to 
us.  By  nature  we  do  not  like  the  anxiety 
which  spiritual  concern  causes  us,  and  we 
try,  like  sluggards,  to  sleep  again.  This  is 
great  foolishness  ;  for  it  is  at  our  peril  that  we 
trifle  when  death  is  so  near,  and  judgment  is 
so  sure.  If  the  Lord  has  chosen  us  to  eternal 
life,  he  will  not  let  us  return  to  our  slumber. 
If  we  are  sensible,  we  shall   pray  that  our 


10  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

anxiety  about  our  souls  may  never  come  to 
an  end  till  we  are  really  and  truly  saved. 
Let  us  say  from  our  hearts  : — 

"  He  that  suffered  in  my  stead, 
Shall  my  Physician  be  ; 
I  will  not  be  comforted 
Till  Jesus  comfort  me." 

It  would  be  an  awful  thing  to  go  dreaming 
down  to  hell,  and  there  to  lift  up  our  eyes 
with  a  great  gulf  fixed  between  us  and 
heaven.  It  will  be  equally  terrible  to  be 
aroused  to  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come, 
and  then  to  shake  ofp  the  warning  influence, 
and  go  back  to  our  insensibility.  I  notice 
that  those  who  overcome  their  convictions 
and  continue  in  their  sins  are  not  so  easily 
moved  the  next  time :  every  awakening 
which  is  thrown  away  leaves  the  soul  more 
drowsy  than  before,  and  less  likely  to  be 
again  stirred  to  holy  feeling.  Therefore  our 
heart  should  be  greatly  troubled  at  the 
thought  of  getting  rid  of  its  trouble  in  any 
other  than  the  right  way.  One  who  had  the 
gout  was  cured  of  it  by  a  quack  medicine, 
which  drove  the  disease  within,  and  the 
patient  died.  To  be  cured  of  distress  of 
mind  by  a  false  hope,  would  be  a  terrible 
business :  the  remedy  would  be  worse  than 
the  disease.     Better  far  that  our  tenderness 


AWAKENING.  11 

of  conscience  should  cause  us  long  years  of 
anguish,  tlian  tliat  we  should  lose  it,  and 
perish  in  the  hardness  of  our  hearts. 

Yet  awakening  is  not  a  thing  to  rest  in,  or 
to  desire  to  have  lengthened  out  month  after 
month.  If  I  start  up  in  a  fright,  and  find 
my  house  on  fire,  I  do  not  sit  down  at  the 
edge  of  the  bed,  and  say  to  myself,  '^  I  hope 
I  am  truly  awakened !  Indeed,  I  am  deeply 
grateful  that  I  am  not  left  to  sleep  on!" 
No,  I  want  to  escape  from  threatened  death, 
and  so  I  hasten  to  the  door  or  to  the  window, 
that  I  may  get  out,  and  may  not  perish 
where  I  am.  It  would  be  a  questionable 
boon  to  be  aroused,  and  yet  not  to  escape 
from  the  danger.  Remember,  awakening  is 
not  salvation.  A  man  may  know  that  he  is 
lost,  and  yet  he  may  never  be  saved.  He 
may  be  made  thoughtful,  and  yet  he  may 
die  in  his  sins.  If  you  find  out  that  you  are 
a  bankrupt,  the  consideration  of  your  debts 
will  not  pay  them.  A  man  may  examine 
his  wounds  all  the  year  around,  and  they  will 
be  none  the  nearer  being  healed  because  he 
feels  their  smart,  and  notes  their  number.  It 
is  one  trick  of  the  devil  to  tempt  a  man  to  be 
satisfied  with  a  sense  of  sin  ;  and  another  trick 
of  the  same  deceiver  to  insinuate  that  the 
sinner  may  not  be  content  to  trust  Christ, 


12  AROUND   THE   WICKET   GATE. 

unless  he  can  brin^  a  certain  measure  ol 
despair  to  add  to  the  Saviour's  finished  work. 
Our  awakenings  are  not  to  help  the  Saviour, 
but  to  help  us  to  the  Saviour.  To  imagine 
that  my  feeling  of  sin  is  to  assist  in  the 
removal  of  the  sin  is  absurd.  It  is  as  though 
I  said  that  water  could  not  cleanse  my  face 
unless  I  had  looked  longer  in  the  glass,  and 
had  counted  the  smuts  upon  my  forehead.  A 
sense  of  need  of  salvation  by  grace  is  a  very 
healthful  sign ;  but  one  needs  wisdom  to  use 
it  aright,  and  not  to  make  an  idol  of  it. 

Some  seem  as  if  they  had  fallen  in  love 
with  their  doubts,  and  fears,  and  distresses. 
You  cannot  get  them  away  from  their  terrors 
— they  seem  wedded  to  them.  It  is  said 
that  the  worst  trouble  with  horses  when  their 
stables  are  on  fire,  is  that  you  cannot  get 
them  to  come  out  of  their  stalls.  If  they 
would  but  follow  your  lead,  they  might 
escape  the  flames  ;  but  they  seem  to  be 
paralyzed  with  fear.  So  the  fear  of  the  fire 
prevents  their  escaping  the  fire.  Reader,  will 
your  very  fear  of  the  wrath  to  come  prevent 
your  escaping  from  it  ?     We  hope  not. 

One  who  had  been  long  in  prison  was  not 
willing  to  come  out.  The  door  was  open ; 
but  he  pleaded  even  with  tears  to  be  allowed 
to  stay  where  he  had  been  so  long.     Fond  of 


AWAKENING.  13 

prison !  Wedded  to  the  iron  bolts  and  the 
prison  fare  !  Surely  the  prisoner  must  have 
been  a  little  touched  in  the  head  !  Are  you 
willing  to  remain  an  awakened  one,  and 
nothing  more  ?  Are  you  not  eager  to  be  at 
once  forgiven  ?  If  you  would  tarry  in 
anguish  and  dread,  surely  you,  too,  must  be 
a  little  out  of  your  mind  !  If  peace  is  to  be 
had,  have  it  at  once !  Why  tarry  in  the 
darkness  of  the  pit,  wherein  your  feet  sink  in 
the  miry  clay  ?  There  is  light  to  be  had ; 
light  marvellous  and  heavenly ;  why  lie  in 
the  gloom  and  die  in  anguish  ?  You  do  not 
know  how  near  salvation  is  to  you.  If  you 
did,  you  would  surely  stretch  out  your  hand 
and  take  it,  for  there  it  is  ;  and  it  is  to  he  had 
for  the  taking. 

Do  not  think  that  feelings  of  despair 
would  fit  you  for  mercy.  When  the  pilgrim, 
on  his  way  to  the  Wicket  Gate,  tumbled 
into  the  Slough  of  Despond,  do  you  think 
that,  when  the  foul  mire  of  that  slough  stuck 
to  his  garments,  it  was  a  recommendation 
to  him,  to  get  him  easier  admission  at  the 
head  of  the  way  ?  It  is  not  so.  The  pilgrim 
did  not  think  so  by  any  means ;  neither  may 
you.  It  is  not  what  you  feel  that  will  save 
you,  but  what  Jesus  felt.  Even  if  there  were 
some  healing  value  in  feelings,  they  would 


14  AROUND   THE   WICKET   GATE. 

have  to  be  good  ones  ;  and  the  feeling  which 
makes  us  doubt  the  power  of  Christ  to  save, 
and  prevents  our  finding  salvation  in  him,  is 
by  no  means  a  good  one,  but  a  cruel  wrong 
to  the  love  of  Jesus, 

Our  friend  has  come  to  see  us,  and  has 
travelled  through  our  crowded  London  by 
rail,  or  tram,  or  omnibus.  On  a  sudden  he 
turns  pale.  We  ask  him  what  is  the  matter, 
and  he  answers,  '^  I  have  lost  my  pocket-book, 
and  it  contained  all  the  money  I  have  in  the 
world."  He  goes  over  the  amount  to  a  penny, 
and  describes  the  cheques,  bills,  notes,  and 
coins.  We  tell  him  that  it  must  be  a  great 
consolation  to  liim  to  be  so  accurately  ac- 
quainted with  the  extent  of  his  loss.  He 
does  not  seem  to  see  the  worth  of  our  con- 
solation. We  assure  him  that  he  ought  to 
be  grateful  that  he  has  so  clear  a  sense  of 
his  loss  ;  for  many  persons  might  have  lost 
their  pocket-books  and  have  been  quite  un- 
able to  compute  their  losses.  Our  friend  is 
not,  however,  cheered  in  the  least.  ^'No," 
says  he,  'Ho  know  my  loss  does  not  help 
me  to  recover  it.  Tell  me  where  I  can  find 
my  property,  and  you  have  done  me  real 
service;  but  merely  to  know  my  loss  is 
no  comfort  whatever."  Even  so,  to  believe 
that  you  have  sinned,  and  that  your  soul  is 


AWAKENING. 


15 


forfeited  to  the  justice  of  God,  is  a  very 
proper  thing  ;  but  it  will  not  save.  Salvation 
is  not  by  our  knowing  our  own  ruin,  but  by 
fully  grasping  the  deliverance  provided  in 
Christ  Jesus.  A  person  who  refuses  to  look 
to  the  Lord  Jesus,  bat  persists  in  dwelling 
upon  his  sin  and  ruin,  reminds  us  of  a  boy 
who  dropped  a  shilling  down  an  open  grating 


of  a  London  sewer,  and  lingered  there  for 
hours,  finding  comfort  in  saying,  ^'  It  rolled 
in  just  there !  Just  between  those  two  iron 
bars  I  saw  it  go  right  down."  Poor  soul ! 
Long  might  he  remember  the  details  of  his 
loss  before  he  would  in  this  way  get  back  a 
single  penny  into  his  pocket,  wherewith  to 
buy  himself  a  piece  of  bread.  You  see  the 
drift  of  the  parable  ;  profit  by  it. 


) 


E3U3    ONLY. 


E  cannot  too  often  or  too 
plainly  tell  the  seeking  soul 
that  his  only  hope  for  salva- 
tion lies  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  It  lies  in  liim  com- 
pletely, only,  and  alone.  To 
save  both  from  the  guilt  and 
the  power  of  sin,  Jesus  is 
all-sufficient.  His  name  is  called  Jesus, 
because  "  he  shall  save  his  people  from 
their  sins."  ''The  Son  of  man  hath  power 
on  earth  to  forgive  sins "  He  is  exalted 
on  high  "  to  give  repentance  and  remission 
of  sins.'^  It  pleased  God  from  of  old  to 
devise  a  method  of  salvation  which  should 
be  all  contained  in  his  only-begotten  Son. 
The  Lord  Jesus,  for  the  working  out  of 
this  salvation,  became  man,  and  being  found 
in    fashion    as    a   man,  became  obedient    to 


JESUS   ONLy.  17 

death,  even  tlie  death  of  the  cross.    If  another 

way  of  deliverance  had  been  possible,   the 

cup   of  bitterness  would  have  passed  from 

him.     It  stands  to  reason  that  the  darling  of 

heaven  would  not  have  died  to  save  us  if  we 

could   have  been  rescued   at   less    expense. 

Infinite  grace  provided  the  great  sacrifice ; 

infinite  love  submitted  to  death  for  our  sakes. 

How  can  we  dream  that  there  can  be  another 

way  than  the  way  which  Grod  has  provided 

at  such  cost,  and  set  forth  in  Holy  Scripture 

so  simply  and  so  pressingly  ?     Surely  it  is 

true  that  ^'  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 

other :    for  there  is  none  other  name  under 

heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must 

be  saved." 

To  suppose  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  only 

half  saved  men,  and  that  there  is  needed 

some  work  or  feeling  of  their  own  to  finish 

his  work,  is  wicked.     What  is  there  of  ours 

that    could    be    added    to    his    blood    and 

righteousness  ?     "  All  our  righteousnesses  are 

as  filthy  rags."     Can  these  l)e  patched  on  to 

the  costly  fabric  of  his  divine  righteousness  ? 

Rags  and  fine  white  linen !     Our  dross  and 

his  pure  gold  !     It  is  an  insult  to  the  Saviour 

to  dream  of  such  a  thing.     We  have  sinned 

enough,  without  adding  this  to  all  our  other 

offences. 
2 


18  AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 

Even  if  we  had  any  righteousness  in  which 
we  could  boast;  if  our  fig  leaves  were 
broader  than  usual,  and  were  not  so  utterly 
fading,  it  would  be  wisdom  to  put  them  away, 
and  accept  that  righteousness  which  must  be 
far  more  pleasing  to  God  than  anything  of 
our  own.  The  Lord  must  see  more  that  is 
acceptable  in  his  Son  than  in  the  best  of  us. 
The  best  of  us  I  The  words  seem  satirical, 
though  they  were  not  so  intended.  What 
best  is  there  about  any  of  us?  '^  There  is 
none  that  doeth  good;  no,  not  one."  I  who 
write  these  lines,  would  most  freely  confess 
that  I  have  not  a  thread  of  goodness  of  my 
own.  I  could  not  make  up  so  much  as  a.  rag, 
or  a  piece  of  a  rag.  I  am  utterly  destitute. 
But  if  I  had  the  fairest  suit  of  good  works 
which  even  pride  can  imagine,  I  would  tear 
it  up  that  I  might  put  on  nothhig  but  the 
garments  of  salvation,  which  are  freely  given 
by  the  Lord  Jesus,  out  of  the  heavenly 
wardrobe  of  his  own  merits. 

It  is  most  glorifying  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  that  we  should  hope  for  every  good 
thing  from  him  alone.  This  is  to  treat  him 
as  he  deserves  to  be  treated  ;  for  as  he  is  God, 
and  beside  him  there  is  none  else,  we  are 
bound  to  look  unto  him  and  be  saved. 

This  is  to  treat  him  as  he  loves  to  be  treated. 


JESUS    ONLY. 


19 


for  he  bids  all  those  who  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden  to  come  to  him,  and  he  will  give  them 
rest.  To  imagine  that  he  cannot  save  to  the 
uttermost  is  to  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
and  put  a  slur  upon  his  power;  or  else  to 
slander  the  loving  heart  of  the  Priend  of 
sinners,  and  cast  a  doubt  upon  his  love.  In 
either  case,  we  should  commit  a  cruel  and 
wanton  sin  against  the  tenderest  points  of 
his  honour,  which  are  his  ability  and  willing- 
ness to  save  all  that  come  unto  God  by  Inm. 

The  child,  in  danger  of  the  fire,  just  clings 
to  the  fireman,  and  trusts  to  him  alone.     She 


mm^-''j^ 


20  AROUND   THE   WICKET   GATE. 

raises  no  question  about  the  strength  of  his 
limbs  to  carry  her,  or  the  zeal  of  his  heart  to 
rescue  her ;  but  she  clings.  The  heat  is 
terrible,  the  smoke  is  blinding,  but  she  clings ; 
and  her  deliverer  quickly  bears  her  to  safety. 
In  the  same  childlike  confidence  cling  to 
Jesus,  who  can  and  will  bear  you  out  of 
danger  from  the  flames  of  sin. 

The  nature  of  the  Lord  Jesus  should  in- 
spire us  with  the  fullest  confidence.  As  he  is 
God,  he  is  almighty  to  save ;  as  he  is  man, 
he  is  filled  with  all  fulness  to  bless  ;  as  he  is 
God  and  man  in  one  Majestic  Person,  he 
meets  man  in  his  creatureship  and  God  in  his 
holiness.  The  ladder  is  long  enough  to  reach 
from  Jacob  prostrate  on  the  earth,  to  Jehovah 
reigning  in  heaven.  To  bring  another  ladder 
would  be  to  suppose  that  he  failed  to  bridge 
the  distance ;  and  this  would  be  grievously  to 
dishonour  him.  If  even  to  add  to  his  words 
is  to  draw  a  curse  upon  ourselves,  what  must 
it  be  to  pretend  to  add  to  himself  ?  Remember 
that  he,  himself,  is  the  Way ;  and  to  suppose 
that  we  must,  in  some  manner,  add  to  the 
divine  road,  is  to  be  arrogant  enough  to 
think  of  adding  to  him.  Away  with  such  a 
notion  !  Loathe  it  as  you  would  blasphemy ; 
for  in  essence  it  is  the  worst  of  blasphemy 
aorainst  the  Lord  of  love. 


JESUS   ONLY.  21 

To  come  to  Jesus  with  a  price  in  our  hand, 
would  be  insufferable  pride,  even  if  we  had 
any  price  that  w^e  could  bring.  What  does 
he  need  of  us  ?  What  could  we  bring  if  he 
did  need  it?  AVould  he  sell  the  priceless 
blessings  of  his  redemption  ?  That  which  he 
wrought  out  in  his  heart's  blood,  would  he 
barter  it  with  us  for  our  tears,  and  vows,  or 
for  ceremonial  observances,  and  feelings,  and 
w^orks  ?  He  is  not  reduced  to  make  a  market 
of  himself :  he  will  give  freely,  as  beseems  his 
royal  love;  but  he  that  offereth  a  price  to 
him  knows  not  with  whom  he  is  dealing, 
nor  how  grievously  he  vexes  his  free  Spirit. 
Empty-handed  sinners  may  have  what  they 
will.  All  that  they  can  possibly  need  is  in 
Jesus,  and  he  gives  it  for  the  asking ;  but  we 
must  believe  that  he  is  all  in  all,  and  we  must 
not  dare  to  breathe  a  word  about  completing 
what  he  has  finished,  or  fitting  ourselves  for 
what  he  gives  to  us  as  undeserving  sinners. 

The  reason  why  we  may  hope  for  forgive- 
ness of  sin,  and  life  eternal,  by  faith  in  the 
Lord  Jesus,  is  that  God  has  so  appointed. 
He  has  pledged  himself  in  the  gospel  to  save 
all  who  truly  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
he  will  never  run  back  from  his  promise.  He 
is  so  well  pleased  with  his  only-begotten 
Son,  that  he  takes  pleasure  in  all  who  lay 


22  AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 

hold  upon  him  as  their  one  and  only  hope. 
The  great  God  himself  has  taken  hold  on 
him  who  has  taken  hold  on  his  Son.  He 
works  salvation  for  all  who  look  for  that 
salvation  to  the  once-slain  Redeemer.  For 
the  honour  of  his  Son,  he  will  not  suffer  the 
man  who  trusts  in  him  to  be  ashamed.  ^^  He 
that  belie veth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting 
life ;  "  for  the  ever-living  God  has  taken  him 
unto  himself,  and  has  given  to  him  to  be  a 
partaker  of  his  life.  If  Jesus  only  be  your 
trust,  you  need  not  fear  but  what  you  shall 
effectually  be  saved,  both  now  and  in  the 
day  of  his  appearing. 

When  a  man  confides,  there  is  a  point  of 
union  between  him  and  God,  and  that  union 
guarantees  blessing.  Faith  saves  us  because 
it  makes  us  cling  to  Christ  Jesus,  and  he  is 
one  with  God,  and  thus  brings  us  into  con- 
nection with  God.  I  am  told  that,  years  ago, 
above  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  a  boat  was  upset, 
and  two  men  were  being  carried  down  by  the 
current,  when  persons  on  the  shore  managed 
to  float  a  rope  out  to  them,  which  rope  was 
seized  by  them  both.  One  of  them  held  fast 
to  it,  and  was  safely  drawn  to  the  bank ;  but 
the  other,  seeing  a  great  log  come  floating 
by,  unwisely  let  go  the  rope,  and  clung  to 
the  great  piece  of   timber,   for   it  was   the 


JESUS    ONLY.  23 

bigger  thing  of  the  two,  and  ai'jparently 
better  to  cling  to.  Alas  !  the  timber,  with  the 
man  on  it,  went  right  over  the  vast  abyss, 
because  there  was  no  union  between  the  wood 
and  the  shore.  The  size  of  the  log  was  no 
benefit  to  him  who  grasped  it ;  it  needed 
a  connection  with  the  shore  to  produce 
safety.  So,  when  a  man  trusts  to  his  works, 
or  to  his  prayers,  or  almsgivings,  or  to 
sacraments,  or  to  anything  of  that  sort,  he 
will  not  be  saved,  because  there  is  no  junction 
between  him  and  God  through  Christ  Jesus ; 
but  faith,  though  it  may  seem  to  be  like  a 
slender  cord,  is  in  the  hand  of  the  great  God 
on  the  shore  side ;  infinite  power  pulls  in  the 
connecting  line,  and  thus  draws  the  man  from 
destruction.  Oh,  the  blessedness  of  faith, 
because  it  unites  us  to  God  by  the  Saviour, 
whom  he  has  appointed,  even  Jesus  Christ ! 
0  reader,  is  there  not  common-sense  in  this 
matter  ?  Think  it  over,  and  may  there  soon 
be  a  band  of  union  between  you  and  God, 
through  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus ! 


FyVITH     1|N     THE    pEF^gON     Of    THE 
JUORD    jEgU3 


|HERE  is  a  wretched  tendency 
among  men  to  leave  Christ 
himself  oat  of  the  gospel. 
They  might  as  well  leave 
flom^  out  of  bread.  Men 
hear  the  way  of  salvation 
explained,  and  consent  to  it 
as  being  Scriptural,  and  in  every  way  such 
as  suits  their  case  ;  but  they  forget  that  a 
plan  is  of  no  service  unless  it  is  carried  out ; 
and  that  in  the  matter  of  salvation  their  own 
personal  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  essential. 
A  road  to  York  will  not  take  me  there,  I 
must  travel  along  it  for  mysell  All  the 
sound  doctrine  that  ever  was  believed  will 
never  save  a  man  unless  he  puts  his  trust 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  for  himself. 

Mr.   Macdonald  asked   tlie  inhabitants  of 


PERSONAL  FAITH  IN  JESUS.        25 

the  island  of  St.  Kilda  how  a  man  must  be 
saved.  An  old  man  replied,  ^'  We  shall  be 
saved  if  we  repent,  and  forsake  our  sins,  and 
turn  to  God."  '^Yes,"  said  a  middle-aged 
female,  ^'  and  with  a  true  heart  too."  ^'  ^y?" 
rejoined  a  third,  ''  and  with  prayer";  and, 
added  a  fourth,  ^'It  must  be  the  prayer  of 
the  heart."  '^  And  we  must  be  diligent  too," 
said  a  fifth,  ^'in  keeping  the  command- 
ments." Thus,  each  having  contributed  his 
mite,  feeling  that  a  very  decent  creed  had 
been  made  up,  they  all  looked  and  listened 
for  the  preacher's  approbation  ;  but  they  had 
aroused  his  deepest  pity  :  he  had  to  begin  at 
the  beginning,  and  preach  Christ  to  them. 
The  carnal  mind  always  maps  out  for  itself 
a  way  in  which  self  can  work  and  become 
great;  but  the  Lord's  way  is  quite  the  re- 
verse. The  Lord  Jesus  puts  it  very  com- 
pactly in  Mark  xvi.  16  :  '^  He  that  belie veth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  Believing 
and  being  baptized  are  no  matters  of  merit 
to  be  gloried  in;  they  are  so  simple  that 
boasting  is  excluded,  and  free  grace  bears 
the  palm.  This  way  of  salvation  is  chosen 
that  it  might  be  seen  to  be  of  grace  alone. 
It  may  be  that  the  reader  is  unsaved :  what 
is  the  reason  ?  Do  you  think  the  way  of 
salvation,  as  laid  down  in  the  text  we  have 


26  AROUND   THE   WICKET   GATE. 

quoted,  to  be  dubious  ?  Do  you  fear  tliat 
you  would  not  be  saved  if  you  followed  it  ? 
How  can  that  be,  when  God  has  pledged  his 
own  word  for  its  certainty  ?  How  can  that 
fail  which  God  prescribes,  and  concerning 
which  he  gives  a  promise  ?  Do  you  think  it 
very  easy  ?  Why,  then,  do  you  not  attend 
to  it  ?  Its  ease  leaves  those  without  excuse 
who  neglect  it.  If  you  would  have  done 
some  great  thing,  be  not  so  foolish  as  to 
neglect  the  little  thing.  To  believe  is  to 
trust,  or  lean  upon  Christ  Jesus ;  in  other 
words,  to  give  up  self-reliance,  and  to  rely 
upon  the  Lord  Jesus.  To  be  baptized  is 
to  submit  to  the  ordinance  which  our  Lord 
fulfilled  at  Jordan,  to  which  the  converted 
ones  submitted  at  Pentecost,  to  which  the 
jailer  yielded  obedience  on  the  very  night 
of  his  conversion.  It  is  the  outward  con- 
fession which  should  always  go  with  inw^ard 
faith.  The  outward  sign  saves  not ;  but 
it  sets  forth  to  us  our  death,  burial,  and 
resurrection  with  Jesus,  and,  like  the  Lord's 
Supper,  it  is  not  to  be  neglected. 

The  great  point  is  to  believe  in  Jesus,  and 
confess  your  faith.  Do  you  believe  in  Jesus? 
Then,  dear  friend,  dismiss  your  fears ;  you 
shall  be  saved.  Are  you  still  an  unbeliever? 
Then  remember,  there  is  but  one  door,  and 


PERSONAL  FAITH  IN  JESUS.        27 

if  you  will  not  enter  by  it,  you  must  perish 
in  your  sins.  The  door  is  there  ;  but  unless 
you  enter  by  it,  what  is  the  use  of  it  to 
you  ?  It  is  of  necessity  that  you  obey  the 
command  of  the  gospel.  Nothing  can  save 
you  if  you  do  not  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus, 
and  do  his  bidding  indeed  and  of  a  truth. 
Thinking  and  resolving  will  not  answer 
the  purpose ;  you  must  come  to  real  business ; 
for  only  as  you  actually  believe  will  you 
truly  live  unto  God. 

I  heard  of  a  friend  who  deeply  desired  to 
be  the  means  of  the  conversion  of  a  young  man, 
and  one  said  to  him,  ''  You  may  go  to  him, 
and  talk  to  him,  but  you  will  get  him  no 
further ;  for  he  is  exceedingly  well  acquainted 
with  the  plan  of  salvation."  It  was  eminently 
so ;  and  therefore,  when  our  friend  began  to 
speak  with  the  young  man,  he  received  for 
an  answer,  ^'  I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  but 
I  do  not  know  that  you  can  tell  me  much,  for 
I  have  long  known  and  admired  the  plan  of 
salvation  by  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  of 
Christ."  Alas  !  he  was  resting  in  the  plan, 
but  he  had  not  believed  in  the  Ferson.  The 
plan  of  salvation  is  most  blessed,  but  it  can 
avail  us  nothing  unless  we  personally  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself.  What  is 
the  comfort  of  a  plan  of  a  house  if  you  do  not 


28 


AROUND   THE   WICKET   GATE. 


enter  the  house  itself  ?     The  man  in  our  cut, 


who  is  sitting  out  in  the  rain,  is  not 
deriving  much  comfort  from  the  plans  which 
are  spread  out  before  him.  What  is  the  good 
of  a  plan  of  clothing  if  yon  have  not  a  rag  to 
cover  you  ?  Have  you  never  heard  of  the 
Arab  chief  at  Cairo,  who  was  very  ill,  and 
went  to  the  missionary,  and  the  missionary 
said  he  could  give  him  a  prescription  ?  He 
did  so  ;  and  a  week  after  he  found  the  Arab 
none  the  better.  '•  Did  you  take  my  pre- 
scription?" he  asked.  ''Yes,  I  ate  every 
morsel  of  the  paper."  He  dreamed  that  he 
was  going  to  be  cured  by  devouring  the 
physician's  writing,  which  I  may  call  the 
plan  of  the  medicine.     He  should  have  had 


PERSONAL   FAITH    IN    JESUS.  29 

the  prescription  made  up,  and  then  it  might 
have  wrought  him  good,  if  he  had  taken  the 
draught:  it  could  do  him  no  good  to  swallow 
the  recipe.  So  is  it  with  salvation  :  it  is  not 
the  plan  of  salvation  which  can  save,  it  is  the 
carrying  out  of  that  plan  by  the  Lord  Jesus 
in  his  death  on  our  behalf,  and  our  acceptance 
of  the  same.  Under  the  Jewish  law,  the 
offerer  brought  a  bullock,  and  laid  his  hands 
upon  it :  it  was  no  dream,  or  theory,  or  plan. 
In  the  victim  for  sacrifice  he  found  something 
substantial,  which  he  could  handle  and  touch  : 
even  so  do  we  lean  upon  the  real  and  true 
work  of  Jesus,  the  most  substantial  thing 
under  heaven.  We  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
by  faith,  and  say,  '^  Grod  has  provided  an 
atonement  here,  and  I  accept  it.  I  believe 
in  the  fact  accomplished  on  the  cross ;  I  am 
confident  that  sin  was  put  away  by  Christ, 
and  I  rest  on  him."  If  you  would  be  saved, 
you  must  get  beyond  the  acceptance  of  plans 
and  doctrines  to  a  resting  in  the  divine  person 
and  finished  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Dear  reader,  will  you  have  Christ  now  ? 

Jesus  invites  all  those  who  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden  to  come  to  him,  and  he  will 
give  them  rest.  He  does  not  promise  this  to 
their  merely  dreaming  about  him.  They 
must  COME ;  and  they  must  come  to  him,  and 


30  AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 

not  merely  to  the  Church,  to  baptism,  or  to 

the  orthodox  faith,  or  to  anything  short  of  his 

divine  person.     When  the  brazen  serpent  was 

lifted  up  in  the  wilderness,  the  people  were 

not  to  look  to  Moses,  nor  to  the  Tabernacle, 

nor  to  the  pillar  of  cloud,  but  to  the  brazen 

serpent    itself.     Looking    was    not    enough 

unless  they  looked  to  the  right  object :  and 

the  right  object  was  not  enough  unless  they 

looked.     It  was  not  enough  for  them  to  know 

about  the  serpent  of  brass ;  they  must  each 

one  look  to  it  for  himself.    When  a  man  is  ill, 

he  may  have  a  good  knowledge  of  medicine, 

and  yet  he  may  die  if  he  does  not  actually 

take  the  healing  draught.     We  must  receive 

Jesus;  for  ^'to  as  many  as  received  him,  to 

them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of 

Grod."     Lay   the   emphasis   on   two  words : 

We  must  receive  HIM,  and  v:}e  must  receive 

him.    We  must  open  wide  the  door,  and  take 

Christ  Jesus  in;  for  ^'Christ  in  you"  is  ^Hhe 

hope  of  glory."     Christ  must  be  no  myth,  no 

dream,  no  phantom  to  us,  but  a  real  man, 

and   truly  God ;    and  our  reception  of  him 

must  be  no  forced  and  feigned  acceptance, 

but  the  hearty  and  happy  assent  and  consent 

of  the  soul  that  lie  shall  be  the  all  in  all  of 

our  salvation.     Will  we  not  at  once  come  to 

him,  and  make  him  our  sole  trust  ? 


PEKSONAL  FAITH  IN  JESUS. 


31 


The  dove  is  hunted  by  the  hawk,  and  finds 
no  security  from  its  restless  enemy.  It  has 
learned  that  there  is  shelter  for  it  in  the  cleft 


of  the  rock,  and  it  hastens  there  with  glad- 
some wing.  Once  wholly  sheltered  within 
its  refuge,  it  fears  no  bird  of  prey.  But  if 
it  did  not  hide  itself  in  the  rock,  it  would 
be  seized  upon  by  its  adversary.  The  rock 
would  be  of  no  use  to  the  dove,  if  the  dove 
did  not  enter  its  cleft.  The  whole  body 
must  be  hidden  in  the  rock.  What  if  ten 
thousand  other  birds  found  a  fortress  there, 
yet  that  fact  would  not  save  the  one  dove 
which  is  now  pursued  by  the  hawk  !  It  must 
put  its  whole  self  into  the  shelter,  and  bury 
itself  within  its  refuge,  or  its  life  will  be 
forfeited  to  the  destroyer. 


32  AROUND    THE   WICKET   GATE. 

What  a  picture  of  faith  is  this  !  It  is  enter 
ing  into  Jesus,  hiding  in  his  wounds. 

"Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  thee." 

The  dove  is  out  of  sight :  the  rock  alone  is 
seen.  So  does  the  guilty  soul  dart  into  the 
riven  side  of  Jesus  by  faith,  and  is  buried 
in  him  out  of  sight  of  avenging  justice.  But 
tliere  must  be  this  personal  application  to 
Jesus  for  shelter;  and  this  it  is  that  so  many 
put  off  from  day  to  day,  till  it  is  to  be  feared 
that  they  will  '^  die  in  their  sins.''  What  an 
awful  word  is  that !  It  is  what  our  Lord 
said  to  the  unbelieving  Jews ;  and  he  says 
the  same  to  us  at  this  hour:  ^'  If  ye  believe 
not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins." 
It  makes  one's  heart  quiver  to  think  that  even 
one  who  shall  read  these  lines  may  yet  be  of 
the  miserable  company  who  will  thus  perish. 
The  Lord  prevent  it  of  his  great  grace ! 

I  saw,  the  other  day,  a  remarkable  picture, 
which  I  shall  use  as  an  illustration  of  the  way 
of  salvation  by  faith  in  Jesus.  An  offender 
had  committed  a  crime  for  which  he  must 
die,  but  it  was  in  the  olden  time,  when 
churches  were  considered  to  be  sanctuaries 
in  which  criminals  might  hide  themselves, 
and  so  escape  from  death.  See  the  trans- 
gressor !     He  rushes  towards  the  church,  the 


PERSONAL  FAITH  IN  JESUS.        33 

guards  pursue  him  with  their  drawn  swords, 
athirst  for  his  blood  !  They  follow  him  even 
to  the  church  door.  He  rushes  up  the  steps, 
and  just  as  they  are  about  to  overtake 
him,  and  hew  him  in  pieces  on  the  thres- 
hold of  the  church,  out  comes  the  Bishop, 
and  holding  up  the  cross,  he  cries,  ''  Back, 
back !  Stain  not  the  precincts  of  God's 
house  with  blood  !  Stand  back !  "  The  fierce 
soldiers  at  once  respect  the  emblem,  and 
retire,  while  the  poor  fugitive  hides  himself 
behind  the  robes  of  the  Bishop.  It  is  even 
so  with  Christ.  The  guilty  sinner  flies 
straight  away  to  Jesus ;  and  though  Justice 
pursues  him,  Christ  lifts  up  his  v/ounded 
hands,  and  cries  to  Justice,  ''  Stand  back!  I 
shelter  this  sinner ;  in  the  secret  place  of  my 
tabernacle  do  I  hide  him  ;  I  will  not  suffer 
him  to  perish,  for  he  puts  his  trust  in  me." 
Sinner,  fly  to  Christ!  But  you  answer,  ^^I 
am  too  vile."  The  viler  you  are,  the  more 
will  you  honour  him  by  believing  that  he  is 
able  to  protect  even  you.  ''  But  I  am  so 
great  a  sinner."  Then  the  more  honour 
shall  be  given  to  him  if  you  have  faith  to 
confide  in  him,  great  sinner  though  you 
are.  If  you  have  a  little  sickness,  and 
you  tell  your  physician — '^  Sir,  I  am  quite 
confident  in  your  skill  to  heal,"  there  is  no 


34  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

great  compliment  in  your  declaration.  Any- 
body can  cure  a  finger-ache,  or  a  trifling 
sickness.  But  if  you  are  sore  sick  with  a 
complication  of  diseases  which  grievously 
torment  you,  and  you  say — ^'  Sir,  I  seek  no 
better  physician  ;  I  will  ask  no  other  advice 
but  yours;  I  trust  myself  joyfully  with 
you ;  "  what  an  honour  have  you  conferred 
on  him,  that  you  can  trust  your  life  in  his 
hands  while  it  is  in  extreme  and  immediate 
danger  !  Do  the  like  with  Christ ;  put  your 
soul  into  his  care  :  do  it  deliberately,  and 
without  a  doubt.  Dare  to  quit  all  other 
hopes:  venture  all  on  Jesus  ;  I  say  ^^  venture" 
though  there  is  nothing  really  venturesome  in 
it,  for  he  is  abundantly  able  to  save.  Cast 
yourself  simply  on  Jesus  ;  let  nothing  but 
faith  be  in  your  soul  towards  Jesus  ;  believe 
him,  and  trust  in  him,  and  you  shall  never 
be  made  ashamed  of  your  confidence.  "  He 
that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  con 
founded"  (1  Peter  ii.  6). 


;.S,;'-^^«?7?\ 

^X"'^^^"^ 

i>ii^^^st2^SA>;/i<S''?^''£'''''^^^ 

^ 

^^^^IIlS^w^ 

Faith    very    3'J^p^^- 


lO  many,  faith  seems  a  hard 
thing.  The  truth  is,  it  is 
only  hard  because  it  is  easy. 
Naaman  thought  it  hard  that 
he  should  have  to  wash 
in  Jordan ;  but  if  it  had 
been  some  great  thing,  he 
would  have  done  it  right  cheerfully.  People 
think  that  salvation  must  be  the  result  of 
some  act  or  feeling,  very  mysterious,  and 
very  difficult ;  but  God's  thoughts  are  not  our 
thoughts,  neither  are  his  ways  our  ways.  In 
order  that  the  feeblest  and  the  most  ignorant 
may  be  saved,  he  has  made  the  way  of 
salvation  as  easy  as  the  A,  B,  C.  There  is 
nothing  about  it  to  puzzle  anyone ;  only,  as 
everybody  expects  to  be  puzzled  by  it,  many 
are  quite  bewildered  when  they  find  it  to  be 
so  exceedingly  simple. 


36 


AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 


The  fact  is,  we  do  not  believe  that  God 
means  what  he  is  saying;  we  act  as  if  it 
could  not  be  true. 

I  have  heard  of  a  Sunday-school  teacher 
who  performed  an  experiment  which  I  do 
not  think  I  shall  ever  try  with  children,  for 
it  might  turn  out  to  be  a  very  expensive 
one.  Indeed,  I  feel  sure  that  the  result  in 
my  case  would  be  very  different  from  what  I 
now  describe.  This  teacher  had  been  trying 
to  illustrate  what  faith  was,  and,  as  he  could 
not  get  it  into  the  minds  of  his  boys,  he 
took  his   watch,   and  he  said,   "Now,  I  will 


give  you  this  watch,  John.  Will  you  have 
it  ?  "  John  fell  thinking  what  the  teacher 
could  mean,  and  did  not  seize  the  treasure, 


FAITH    VERY    SIMPLE.  37 

but  made  no  answer.  The  teacher  said  to 
the  next  boy,  ^' Henry,  here  is  the  watcli. 
Will  you  have  it  ? "  The  boy,  with  a  very 
proper  modesty,  replied,  ^^No,  thank  you, 
sir."  The  teacher  tried  several  of  the  boys 
w4th  the  same  result ;  till  at  last  a  youngster, 
who  was  not  so  wise  or  so  thoughtful  as  the 
others,  but  rather  more  believing,  said  in  the 
most  natural  way,  ^'  Thank  you,  sir,"  and  put 
the  watch  into  his  pocket.  Then  the  other 
boys  woke  up  to  a  startling  fact :  their  com- 
panion had  received  a  watch  which  they  had 
refused.  One  of  the  boys  quickly  asked  of 
the  teacher,  '^s  he  to  keep  it?"  *^  Of 
course  he  is,'  said  the  teacher,  ^^I  offered  it 
to  him,  and  he  accepted  it.  I  would  not 
give  a  thing  and  take  a  thing :  that  would 
be  very  foolish.  I  put  the  watch  before  you, 
and  said  that  I  gave  it  to  you,  but  none  of 
you  would  have  it."  ''Oh!"  said  the  boy, 
''  if  I  had  known  you  meant  it,  I  would  have 
had  it."  Of  course  he  would.  He  thought 
it  was  a  piece  of  acting,  and  nothing  more. 
All  tlie  other  boys  were  in  a  dreadful  state  of 
mind  to  think  that  they  had  lost  the  watch. 
Each  one  cried,  "Teacher,  I  did  not  know 
you  meant  it,  hut  I  thought — "  No  one  took 
the  gift;  but  every  one  thought.  Each  one 
had   his   theory,  except    the    simple-minded 


38  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

boy  wlio  believed  what  he  was  told,  and  got 
the  watch.  Now  I  wish  that  I  could  always 
be  such  a  simple  child  as  literally  to  believe 
what  the  Lord  says,  and  take  what  he  puts 
before  me,  resting  quite  content  that  he  is 
not  playing  with  me,  and  that  I  cannot  be 
wrong  in  accepting  what  he  sets  before  me 
in  the  gospel.  Happy  should  we  be  if  we 
would  trust,  and  raise  no  questions  of  any 
sort.  But,  alas !  we  will  get  thinking  and 
doubting.  When  the  Lord  uplifts  his  dear 
Son  before  a  sinner,  that  sinner  should  take 
him  without  hesitation.  If  you  take  him, 
you  have  him ;  and  none  can  take  him  from 
you.  Out  with  your  hand,  man,  and  take 
him  at  once ! 

When  enquirers  accept  the  Bible  as  literally 
true,  and  see  that  Jesus  is  really  given  to 
all  who  trust  him,  all  the  difficulty  about 
understanding  the  way  of  salvation  vanishes 
like  the  morning's  frost  at  the  rising  of  the 
sun. 

Two  enquiring  ones  came  to  me  in  my 
vestry.  They  had  been  hearing  the  gospel 
from  me  for  only  a  short  season,  but  they 
had  been  deeply  impressed  by  it.  They 
expressed  their  regret  that  they  were  about 
to  remove  far  away,  but  they  added  their 
gratitude  that  they  had    heard   me   at  all. 


FAITH   VERY    SIMPLE.  39 

I  was  cheered  by  their  kind  thanks,  but  felt 
anxious  that  a  more  effectual  work  should 
be  wrought  in  tliem,  and  therefore  I  asked 
them    "Have  you  in  very  deed  believed  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?     Are  you  saved  ?  " 
One  of  them  replied,    '^I  have  been  trying 
hard   to   believe.''     This  statement   I    have 
often  heard,  but  I  will  never  let  it  go  by 
me  unchallenged.     ''  No,"  I  said,   "  that  will 
not  do.     Did  you  ever  tell  your  father  that 
you  tried  to  believe  him  ? "      After   I   had 
dwelt  a  while  upon  the  matter,  they  admitted 
that  such  language  would  have  been  an  insult 
tQ  their  father.     I  then  set  the  gospel  very 
plainly  before  them  in  as  simple  language  as 
I  could,  and  I  begged  them  to  believe  Jesus, 
who  is  more  worthy  of  faith  than  the  best 
of  fathers.     One  of  them  replied,  "I  cannot 
realize  it :  I  cannot  realize  that  I  am  saved." 
Then  I  went  on  to  say,   "  Grod  bears  testi- 
mony to  his  Son,  that  whosoever  trusts  in  his 
Son  is  saved.     Will  you  make  him   a  liar 
now,  or  will  you  believe  his  word  ?  "     While 
I   thus   spoke,    one   of    them   started    as    if 
astonished,   and  she  startled  us   all    as   she 
cried,    "0    sir,   I   see  it  all;  I  am    saved! 
Oh,  do  bless  Jesus  for  me ;  he  has  shown  me 
the  way,  and  he  has  saved  me !    I  see  it  all." 
The  esteemed  sister  who  had  brought  these 


40  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

young  friends  to  me  knelt  down  with  them 
while,  with  all  our  hearts,  we  blessed  and 
magnified  the  Lord  for  a  soul  brought  into 
light.  One  of  the  two  sisters,  however,  could 
not  see  the  gospel  as  the  other  had  done, 
though  I  feel  sure  she  will  do  so  before  long. 
Did  it  not  seem  strange  that,  both  hearing 
the  same  words,  one  should  come  out  into 
clear  light,  and  the  other  should  remain  in 
the  gloom  ?  The  change  which  comes  over 
the  heart  when  the  understanding  grasps 
the  gospel  is  often  reflected  in  the  face, 
and  shines  there  like  the  light  of  heaven. 
Such  newly-enlightened  souls  often  exclaim, 
'^  Why,  sir,  it  is  so  plain ;  how  is  it  I  have 
not  seen  it  before  this  ?  I  understand  all 
I  have  read  in  the  Bible  now,  though  I  could 
not  make  it  out  before.  It  has  all  come  in  a 
minute,  and  now  I  see  what  I  could  never 
understand  before."  The  fact  is,  the  truth 
was  always  plain,  but  they  were  looking 
for  signs  and  wonders,  and  therefore  did  not 
see  what  was  nigh  them.  Old  men  often 
look  for  their  spectacles  when  they  are  on 
their  foreheads ;  and  it  is  commonly  observed 
that  we  fail  to  see  that  which  is  straight 
before  us.  Christ  Jesus  is  before  our  faces, 
and  we  have  only  to  look  to  him,  and  live; 
but  we  make  all  manner  of  bewilderment  of 


FAITH    VERY    SIMPLE.  41 

it,  and  so  manufacture  a  maze  out  of  that 
which  is  plain  as  a  pikestaff. 

The  little  incident  about  the  two  sisters 
reminds  me  of  another.  A  much-esteemed 
friend  came  to  me  one  Sabbath  mornincr  after 
service,  to  shake  hands  with  me,  "  for,"  said 
she,  ''  I  was  fifty  years  old  on  the  same  day 
as  yourself.  I  am  like  you  in  that  one  thing, 
sir ;  but  I  am  the  very  reverse  of  you  in 
better  things."  I  remarked,  "  Then  you  must 
be  a  very  good  woman  :  for  in  many  things 
I  wish  I  also  could  be  the  reverse  of  what  I 
am."  ''No,  no,"  she  said,  ^'I  did  not  mean 
anything  of  that  sort :  I  am  not  right  at  all." 
'^  What!  "  I  cried,  "  are  you  not  a  believer 
in  the  Lord  Jesus?"  ''  Well,"  she  said,  with 
much  emotion,  '^  T,  I  will  try  to  be."  I  laid 
hold  of  her  hand,  and  said,  ^'  My  dear  soul, 
you  are  not  going  to  tell  me  that  you  v/ill 
try  to  believe  my  Lord  Jesus  !  I  cannot  have 
such  talk  from  you.  It  means  blank  unbelief. 
What  has  HE  done  that  you  should  talk  of 
him  in  that  way  ?  Would  you  tell  77ie  that 
you  would  try  to  believe  me  ?  I  know  you 
would  not  treat  me  so  rudely.  You  think  me 
a  true  man,  and  so  you  believe  me  at  once ; 
and  surely  you  cannot  do  less  with  my  Lord 
Jesus."  Then  with  tears  she  exclaimed, 
^'  Oh,    sir,    do   pray   for  me ! "      To   this    I 


42  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

replied,  ^'  I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  do 
anything-  of  the  kind.  What  can  I  ask  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  do  for  one  who  will  not 
trust  him  ?  I  see  nothing  to  pray  about. 
If  you  will  believe  him,  you  shall  be  saved  ; 
and  if  you  will  not  believe  him,  I  cannot 
ask  him  to  invent  a  new  way  to  gratify  your 
unbelief."  Then  she  said  again,  "'  I  will  try 
to  believe  "  ;  but  I  told  her  solemnly  I  would 
have  none  of  her  trying ;  for  tlie  message  from 
the  Lord  did  not  mention  ''  trying,"  but  said, 
^'  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved."  I  pressed  upon  her  the  great 
truth,  that  "  He  that  belie veth  on  him  hath 
everlasting  life  "  ;  and  its  terrible  reverse — 
''  He  that  belie  veth  not  is  condemned  already, 
because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name 
of  the  only-begotten  Son  of  Grod."  I  urged 
her  to  full  faith  in  the  once  crucified  but 
now  ascended  Lord,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  there 
and  then  enabled  her  to  trust.  She  most 
tenderly  said,  "•  Oh,  sir,  I  have  been  looking 
to  my  feelings,  and  this  lias  been  my 
mistake !  Now  I  trust  my  soul  with  Jesus, 
and  I  am  saved."  She  found  immediate 
peace  through  believing.  There  is  no  other 
way. 

God  has  been  pleased  to  make  the  neces- 
sities of  life  very  simple  matters.     We  must 


FAITH   VERY   SIMPLE. 


43 


eat ;  and  even  a  blind  man  can  find  the  way 
to  his  mouth.     We  must  drink  ;^nd   even 


the  tiniest  babe  knows  how  to  do  this  with- 
out instruction.  We  have  a  fountain  in  the 
grounds    of   the    Stockwell    Orphanage,   and 


44  AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 

when  it  is  running  in  tlie  hot  weather,  the 
boys  go  to  it  naturally.  We  have  no  class 
for  fountain-drill.  Many  poor  boys  have 
come  to  the  Orphanage,  but  never  one  who 
was  so  ignorant  that  he  did  not  know  how  to 
drink.  Now  faith  is,  in  siDiritual  things,  what 
eating  and  drinking  are  in  temporal  things. 
By  the  mouth  of  faith  we  take  the  blessings 
of  grace  into  our  spiritual  nature,  and  they 
are  ours.  0  you  who  would  believe,  but 
think  you  cannot,  do  you  not  see  that,  as  one 
can  drink  without  strength,  and  as  one  can 
eat  without  strength,  and  gets  strength  by 
eating,  so  we  may  receive  Jesus  without 
effort,  and  by  accepting  him  we  receive  power 
for  all  such  further  effort  as  we  may  be  called 
to  put  forth  ? 

t'aith  is  so  simple  a  matter  that,  whenever 
I  try  to  explain  it,  I  am  very  fearful  lest  I 
should  becloud  its  simplicity.  When  Thomas 
Scott  had  printed  his  notes  upon  ^'The 
Pilgrim's  Progress,"  he  asked  one  of  his 
parishioners  whether  she  understood  the  book. 
'^Oh  yes,  sir,"  said  she,  '^I  understand  Mr. 
Bunyan  well  enough,  and  I  am  hoping  that 
one  day,  by  divine  grace,  I  may  understand 
your  explanations."  Should  I  not  feel  morti- 
fied if  my  reader  should  know  what  faith 
is,  and  then  get  confused  by  my  explanation  ? 


FAITH    VERY    SIMPLE. 


45 


I  will,  however,   make  one  trial,   and  pray 
the  Lord  to  make  it  clear. 

I  am  told  that  on  a  certain  highland  road 
there  was  a  disputed  right  of  way.  The 
owner  wished  to  preserve  his  supremacy, 
and  at  the  same  time  he  did  not  wish  to 
inconvenience  the  public  :  hence  an  arrange- 
ment which  occasioned  the  following  incident. 


Seeing  a  sweet  country  girl  standing  at  the 
gate,  a  tourist  went  up  to  her,  and  offered 
her  a  shilling  to  permit  him  to  pass.  "No, 
no,"  said  tlie  child,  "  I  must  not  take  any- 
thing from  you;  bat  you  are  to  say,  ^Please 
allow  me  to  pass,^  and  then  you  may  come 
through  and  welcome."  The  permission 
was  to  be  asked  for ;  but  it  could  be  liad  for 
the  asking.    Just  so,  eternal  life  is  free ;  and 


46  AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 

it  can  be  liad,  yea,  it  shall  be  at  once  had, 
by  trusting  in  the  word  of  him  wlio  cannot 
lie.  Trust  Christ,  and  by  that  trust  you 
grasp  salvation  and  eternal  life.  Do  not 
philosophize.  Do  not  sit  down,  and  bother 
your  poor  brain.  Just  believe  Jesus  as  you 
would  believe  your  father.  Trust  him  as 
you  trust  your  money  with  a  banker,  or 
your  health  with  a  doctor. 

Faith  will  not  long  seem  a  difficulty  to 
you ;  nor  ought  it  to  be  so,  for  it  is  simple. 

Faith  is  trusting,  trusting  wholly  upon 
the  person,  work,  merit,  and  power  of  the 
Son  of  God.  Some  think  this  trusting  is  a 
romantic  business,  but  indeed  it  is  the  simplest 
thing  that  can  possibly  be  To  some  of  us, 
truths  which  were  once  hard  to  believe  are 
now  matters  of  fact  which  we  should  find  it 
hard  to  doubt.  If  one  of  our  great  grand- 
fathers were  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and  come 
into  the  present  state  of  things,  what  a  deal 
of  trusting  he  would  liave  to  do  !  He  would 
say  to-morrow  morning,  ^'  Where  are  the  flint 
and  steel  ?  I  want  a  lio-ht ; ''  and  we  should 
give  him  a  little  box  with  tiny  pieces  of  wood 
in  it,  and  tell  him  to  strike  one  of  them  on 
the  box.  He  would  have  to  trust  a  good  deal 
before  he  would  believe  that  fire  would  thus 
be  produced.     We  should  next  say  to  him, 


FAITH    VERY   SIMPLE.  47 

^^Now  that  you  have  a  light,  turn  that  tap, 
and  light  the  gas."  He  sees  nothing.  How 
can  light  come  through  an  invisible  vapour  ? 
And  jet  it  does.  ''Come  with  us,  grand- 
father. Sit  in  that  chair.  Look  at  that  box 
in  front  of  you.  You  sh  all  have  your  likeness 
directly."  ''  No,  child,"  he  would  say,  ''  it  is 
ridiculous.  The  sun  take  my  portrait  ?  I 
cannot  believe  it."  ''  Yes,  and  you  shall  ride 
fifty  miles  in  an  hour  without  horses."  He 
will  not  believe  it  till  we  get  him  into  the  train. 
''  My  dear  sir,  you  shall  speak  to  your  son  in 
New  York,  and  he  shall  answer  you  in  a  few 
minutes."  Should  we  not  astonish  the  old 
gentleman  ?  Would  he  not  want  all  his  faith  ? 
Yet  these  things  are  believed  by  us  without 
effort,  because  experience  has  made  us  fami- 
liar with  them.  Faith  is  greatly  needed  by 
you  who  are  strangers  to  spiritual  things ; 
you  seem  lost  while  we  are  talking  about  them. 
But  oh,  how  simple  it  is  to  us  who  have  tlie 
new  life,  and  have  communion  with  spiritual 
realities !  We  have  a  Father  to  whom  we 
speak,  and  he  hears  us,  and  a  blessed  Saviour 
who  hears  our  heart's  longings,  and  helps  us 
in  our  struggles  against  sin.  It  is  all  plain 
to  him  that  understandeth.  May  it  now  be 
plain  to  you  1 


Fearijnq  to  Believe. 


T  is  an  odd  product  of  our  un- 
healthy nature — the  fear  to 
believe.  Yet  have  I  met 
with  it  often :  so  often  that 
I  wish  I  may  never  see  it 
again.  It  k)oks  like  humility, 
and  tries  to  pass  itself  off  as 
the  very  soid  of  modesty, 
and  yet  it  is  an  infamously  proud  tiling :  in 
fact,  it  is  presumption  playing  the  hypocrite. 
If  men  were  afraid  to  <i^sbelieve,  there  would 
be  good  sense  in  the  fear ;  but  to  be  afraid 
to  trust  their  God  is  at  best  an  absurdity,  and 
in  very  deed  it  is  a  deceitful  way  of  refusing 
to  the  Lord  the  honour  that  is  due  to  his 
faithfulness  and  truth. 

How  unprofitable  is  the  diligence  which 
busies  itself  in  finding  out  reasons  why  faith 
in  our  case  should  not  be  saving !  We  have 
God's  word  for  it,  that  lohosoever  believe th 


FEARING    TO    BELIEVE.  49 

in  Jesus  shall  not  perish,  and  we  search  for 
arguments  why  toe  should  perish  if  we  did 
believe.  If  any  one  gave  me  an  estate,  1 
certainly  should  not  commence  raising  ques- 
tions as  to  the  title.  What  can  be  the  use 
of  inventing  reasons  why  I  should  not  hold 
my  own  house,  or  possess  any  other  piece  of 
property  which  is  enjoyed  by  me  ?  If  the 
Lord  is  satisfied  to  save  me  through  the 
merits  of  liis  dear  Son,  assuredly  I  may  be 
satisfied  to  be  so  saved.  If  I  take  God  at 
his  word,  the  responsibility  of  fulfilling  liis 
promise  does  not  lie  with  me,  but  with  God, 
who  made  the  promise. 

But  you  fear  that  you  may  not  be  one  of 
those  for  whom  the  promise  is  intended.  Do 
not  be  alarmed  by  that  idle  suspicion.  No 
soul  ever  came  to  Jesus  wrongly.  No  one 
can  come  at  all  unless  the  Fatlier  draw  him ; 
and  Jesus  has  said,  ''  Him  that  cometh  to  me 
I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  No  soul  ever 
lays  hold  on  Christ  in  a  way  of  robbery ;  he 
that  hath  him  hath  him  of  right  divine ;  for 
the  Lord's  giving  of  himself /or  us,  and  to  us, 
is  so  free,  that  every  soul  that  takes  him  has 
a  grace-given  right  to  do  so.  If  you  lay  hold 
on  Jesus  by  the  hem  of  his  garment,  without 
leave,  and  behind  him,  vet  virtue  will  flow 
from   him   to   you   as    surely   as  if   he  had 


50 


AROUND    THE    WICKET   GATE. 


called  you  out  by  name,  and  bidden  you 
trust  him.  Dismiss  all  fear  when  you  trust 
the  Saviour.  Take  him  and  welcome.  He 
that  belie veth  in  Jesus  is  one  of  God's  elect. 
Did  you  suggest  that  it  would  be  a  horrible 
thing  if  you  were  to  trust  in  Jesus  and  yet 
perish  ?  It  would  be  so.  But  as  you  must 
perish  if  you  do  not  trust,  the  risk  at  the 
worst  is  not  very  great. 

"  I  can  but  perish  if  I  go  ; 
I  am  resolved  to  try  ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  know 
I  must  for  ever  die," 

Suppose  you  stand  in  the  Slough  of  Desp^ond 


for  ever;    what  will  be  the  good  of  tliat? 


FEARING   TO    BELIEVE,  51 

Surely  it  would  be  bette.r  to  die  struggling 
along  the  King's  highway  towards  the  Celes- 
tial City,  than  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  in 
the  mire  and  filth  of  dark  distrustful  thoughts ! 
You  have  nothing  to  lose,  for  you  have  lost 
everything  already ;  therefore  make  a  dash 
for  it,  and  dare  to  believe  in  the  mercy  of 
God  to  youj  even  to  you. 

But  one  moans,  ''  What  if  I  come  to  Christ, 
and  he  refuses  me  ?  "  My  answer  is,  '^  Try 
him."  Cast  yourself  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
see  if  he  refuses  you.  You  will  be  the  first 
against  whom  he  has  shut  the  door  of  hope. 
Friend,  don't  cross  that  bridge  till  you  come 
to  it !  When  Jesus  casts  you  out,  it  will  be 
time  enough  to  despair ;  but  that  time  will 
never  come.  ^'  This  man  receiveth  sinners  "  : 
he  has  not  so  much  as  begun  to  cast  them 
out. 

Have  you  never  heard  of  the  man  who 
lost  his  way  one  night,  and  came  to  the  edge 
of  a  precipice,  as  he  thought,  and  in  his  own 
apprehension  fell  over  the  cliff  ?  He  clutched 
at  an  old  tree,  and  there  hung,  clinging  to 
his  frail  support  with  all  his  might.  He  felt 
persuaded  that,  should  he  quit  his  hold,  he 
w^ould  be  dashed  in  pieces  on  some  awful 
rocks  that  waited  for  him  down  below. 
There  he   hung,    with  the    sweat    upon    his 


52  AROUND  THE  WICKET    GATE. 

brow,  and  anguish  in  every  limb.  He  passed 
into  a  desperate  state  of  fever  and  faintness, 
and  at  last  his  hands  could  hold  up  his  body 
no  longer.  He  relaxed  his  grasp !  He 
dropped  from  his  support !  He  fell — about 
a  foot  or  so,  and  was  received  ujDon  a  soft 
mossy  bank,  w4iereon  he  lay,  altogether 
unhurt,  and  perfectly  safe  till  morning. 
Thus,  in  the  darkness  of  their  ignorance, 
many  think  that  sure  destruction  awaits 
them,  if  they  confess  their  sin,  quit  all 
hope  in  self,  and  resign  themselves  into  the 
hands  of  God.  They  are  afraid  to  quit  the 
hope  to  which  they  ignorantly  cling.  It  is 
an  idle  fear.  Give  up  your  hold  upon  every- 
thing but  Christ,  and  drop.  Drop  from  all 
trust  in  your  works,  or  prayers,  or  feelings. 
Drop  at  once  !  Drop  now  !  Soft  and  Safe 
shall  be  the  bank  that  receives  you.  Jesus 
Christ,  in  his  love,  in  the  efficacy  of  his 
precious  blood,  in  his  perfect  righteousness, 
will  give  you  immediate  rest  and  peace. 
Cease  from  self-confidence.  Fall  into  the  arms 
of  Jesus.  This  is  the  major  part  of  faith 
— giving  up  every  other  hold,  and  simply 
falling  upon  Christ.  There  is  no  reason  for 
fear:  only  ignorance  causes  your  dread  of 
that  which  will  be  your  eternal  safety.  The 
death  of  carnal  hope  is  the  life  of  faith,  and 


FEARING    TO    BELIEVE.  53 

the  life  of  faith  is  life  everlasting.     Let  self 
die,  that  Christ  may  live  in  you. 

But  tlie  mischief  is  that,  to  the  one  act  of 
faith  in  Jesus,  we  cannot  brins^  men.  They 
will  adopt  any  expedient  sooner  than  have 
done  with  self.  They  fight  shy  of  believing, 
and  fear  faith  as  if  it  were  a  monster.  0 
foolish  tremblers,  who  has  bewitched  you  ? 
You  fear  that  which  would  be  the  death  of 
all  your  fear,  and  the  beginning  of  your  joy. 
Why  will  you  perish  through  perversely 
preferring  other  ways  to  God's  own  appointed 
plan  of  salvation  ? 

Alas  !  there  are  many,  many  souls  that  say, 
"  We  are  bidden  to  trust  in  Jesus,  but  instead 
of  that  we  will  attend  the  means  of  grace 
regularly."  Attend  public  worship  by  all 
means,  but  not  as  a  substitute  for  faith,  or 
it  will  become  a  vain  confidence.  The  com- 
mand is,  ^'  Believe  and  live ;  "  attend  to  that, 
whatever  else  you  do.  "  Well,  I  shall  take 
to  reading  good  books ;  perhaps  I  shall  get 
good  that  way."  Read  the  good  books  by 
all  means,  but  that  is  not  the  gospel :  the 
gospel  is,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Suppose  a  physician 
has  a  patient  under  his  care,  and  he  says  to  him, 
'^YoQ  are  to  take  a  bath  in  the  morning;  it 
will  be  of  very  great  service  to  your  disease." 


54  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

But  the  man  takes  a  cup  of  tea  in  tlie  morning 
instead  of  the  bath,  and  he  says,  ''  That  will 
do  as  well,  I  have  no  doubt."  What  does  his 
physician  say  when  he  enquires — ''Did  you 
follow  my  rule  ?  "  ''  No,  I  did  not."  ''  Then 
you  do  not  expect,  of  course,  that  there  will 
be  any  good  result  from  my  visits,  since  you 
take  no  notice  of  my  directions."  So  we, 
practically,  say  to  Jesus  Christ,  when  we 
are  under  searching  of  soul,  ''  Lord,  tfiou 
badest  me  trust  thee,  but  I  would  sooner 
do  sometiiing  else  !  Lord,  I  want  to  have 
horrible  convictions ;  I  want  to  be  shaken 
over  hell's  mouth ;  I  want  to  be  alarmed  and 
distressed !  "  Yes,  you  want  anything  but 
what  Christ  prescribes  for  you,  which  is  that 
you  should  simply  trust  him.  Whether  you 
feel  or  do  not  feel,  cast  yourself  on  him,  that 
he  may  save  you,  and  he  alone.  ''But  you 
do  not  mean  to  say  that  you  speak  against 
praying,  and  reading  good  books,  and  so 
on  ? "  Not  one  single  word  do  I  speak 
against  any"  of  those  things,  any  more  than, 
if  I  were  the  physician  I  quoted,  I  should 
speak  against  the  man's  drinking  a  cup  of 
tea.  Let  him  drink  his  tea ;  but  not  if  he 
drinks  it  instead  of  taking  the  bath  which  is 
prescribed  for  him.  So  let  the  man  pray : 
the  more  the  better.     Let  the    man  search 


FEARING    TO    BELIEVE. 


56 


the  Scriptures  ;  but,  remember,  that  if  these 
things  are  put  in  the  place  of  simple  faith 
in  Christ,  the  soul  will  be  ruined.  Beware 
lest  it  be  said  of  any  of  you  by  our  Lord, 
'^  Ye  search  the  Scriptures,  for  in  them  ye 
think  ye  liave  eternal  life  ;  but  ye  will  not 
come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life." 

Come  by  faith  to  Jesus,  for  without  him 
you  perish  for  ever.  Did  you  ever  notice 
how  a  fir-tree  will  get  a  hold  among  rocks 


»  A\ 


which  seem  to  afford  it  no  soil  ?  It  sends  a 
rootlet  into  any  little  crack  which  opens  ;  it 
clutches  even  the  bare  rock  as  with  a  huge 
bird's  claw ;  it  holds  fast,  and  binds  itself  to 


5Q  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

earth  with  a  Imndred  anchorages.  Our  little 
drawing  is  very  accurate.  We  have  often 
seen  trees  thus  firmly  rooted  upon  detached 
masses  of  bare  rock.  Now,  dear  heart,  let 
this  be  a  picture  of  yourself.  Grip  the  Rock 
of  Ages.  Witli  the  rootlet  of  little-faith  hold 
to  him.  Let  that  tiny  feeler  grow;  and,  mean- 
while, send  out  another  to  take  a  new  grasp 
of  the  same  Rock.  Lay  hold  on  Jesus,  and 
keep  hold  on  Jesus.  Grow  up  into  him. 
Twist  the  roots  of  your  nature,  the  fibres  of 
your  heart,  about  him.  He  is  as  free  to  you 
as  the  rocks  are  to  the  fir-tree  :  be  you  as 
firmly  lashed  to  him  as  the  pine  is  to  the 
mountain's  side 


ft 

'iV'    S 

!^^ 

itA 

^ 

•      * 

i5^^ 

Difficulty   ijm  the  Way  of 
Believinq. 


T  may  be  that  the  reader  feels 
a  difficulty  in  believing. 
Let  him  consider.  We  can- 
not believe  by  an  immediate 
act.  The  state  of  mind 
which  we  describe  as  be- 
lieving is  a  result,  following 
upon  certain  former  states 
of  mind.  We  come  to  faith  by  degrees. 
There  may  be  such  a  thing  as  faith  at  first 
sight ;  but  usually  we  reach  faith  by  stages  : 
we  become  interested^  we  consider,  we  hear 
evidence,  we  are  convinced,  and  so  led  to 
believe.  If,  then,  I  wish  to  believe,  but  for 
some  reason  or  other  find  that  I  cannot  attain 
to  faith,  what  shall  I  do  ?  Shall  I  stand  like 
a  cow  staring  at  a  new  gate ;  or  shall  I,  like 
an  intelligent  being,  use  the  proper  means  ? 
If  I  wish  to  believe  anything,  what  shall 
I  do  ?  We  will  answer  according  to  the 
rules  of  common-sense. 


58  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

If  I  were  told  that  the  Sultan  of  Zanzibar 
was  a  good  man,  and  it  happened  to  be  a 
matter  of  interest  to  me,  I  do  not  suppose 
I  should  feel  any  difficulty  in  believing  it. 
But  if  for  some  reason  I  had  a  doubt  about 
it,  and  yet  wished  to  believe  the  news,  how 
should  I  act  ?  Should  I  not  hunt  up  all  the 
information  within  my  reach  about  his 
Majesty,  and  try,  by  study  of  the  newspapers 
and  other  documents,  to  arrive  at  the  truth  ? 
Better  still,  if  he  happened  to  be  in  this 
country,  and  would  see  me,  and  I  could  also 
converse  Avith  members  of  his  court,  and 
citizens  of  his  country,  I  should  be  greatly 
helped  to  arrive  at  a  decision  by  using  these 
sources  of  information.  Evidence  weighed 
and  knowledge  obtained  lead  up  to  faith. 
It  is  true  that  faith  in  Jesus  is  the  gift  of 
God ;  but  yet  he  usually  bestows  it  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  mind,  and  hence 
we  are  told  that  '  ^  faith  cometh  by  hearing, 
and  hearing  by  the  word  of  Grod.''  If  you 
want  to  believe  in  Jesus,  hear  about  him, 
read  about  him,  think  about  him,  know 
about  him,  and  so  you  will  find  faith 
springing  up  in  your  heart,  like  the  wheat 
which  comes  up  through  the  moisture  and 
the  heat  operating  upon  the  seed  which 
has  been  sown.     If  1  wished  to  have  faith 


DIFFICULTY    IN    THE  WAY    OF  BELIEVING.       59 


in  a  certain  physician,  I  should  ask  for 
testimonials  of  his  cures,  I  should  wish  to 
see  the  diplomas  which  certified  to  his  pro- 
fessional knowledge,  and  I  should  also  like 
to  hear  what  he  has  to  say  upon  certain 
complicated  cases.  In  fact,  I  should  take 
means  to  know,  in  order  that  I  might  believe. 
Be  much  in  hearing  concerning  Jesus. 
Souls  by  hundreds  come  to  faith  in  Jesus 
under  a  ministry  which  sets  him  forth  clearly 
and  constantly.  Few  remain  unbelieving 
under  a  preacher  whose  great  subject  is  Christ 
crucified.  Hear  no  minister  of  any  other  sort. 
There  are  such.  I  have  heard  of  one  who 
found  in  his  pulpit  Bible  a  paper  bearing  this 
text,  '^  Sir,  toe  tooiild  see  Jesus.''     Go  to  the 


place  of  worship  to  see  Jesus ;  and  if  you 
cannot  even  hear  the  mention  of  his  name, 


60  AROUND    TllH    WICKET    GATE. 

take  yourself  off  to  another  place  where  he  is 
more  thought  of,  and  is  therefore  more  likely 
to  be  present. 

Be  much  in  reading  about  the  Lord  Jesus. 
The  books  of  Scripture  are  the  lilies  among 
which  he  feedeth.  The  Bible  is  the  window 
through  which  we  may  look  and  see  our  Lord. 
Read  over  the  story  of  his  sufferings  and 
death  with  devout  attention,  and  before  Ions' 
the  Lord  will  cause  faith  secretly  to  enter 
your  soul.  The  Cross  of  Christ  not  only 
rewards  faith,  but  begets  faith.  Many  a 
believer  can  say — 

"  When  I  view  thee,  wounded,  grieving, 
Breathless,  on  the  cursed  tree, 
Soon  I  feel  my  heart  believing 
Thou  hast  suffered  thus  for  me." 

If  hearing  and  reading  suffice  not,  then 
deliberately  set  your  mind  to  loork  to  over- 
haut  the  matter^  and  have  it  out.  Either 
believe,  or  know  the  reason  why  you  do  not 
believe.  See  the  matter  through  to  the 
utmost  of  your  ability,  and  pray  God  to  help 
you  to  make  a  thorough  investigation,  and 
to  come  to  an  honest  decision  one  way  or 
the  other.  Consider  who  Jesus  was,  and 
whether  the  constitution  of  his  person  does 
not  entitle  him  to  confidence.  Consider 
what  he  did,  and  whether  this  also  must  not 


DIFFICULTY    IN    THE    WAY    OF    BELIEVING.     61 

be  good  ground  for  trust.  Consider  him  as 
dying,  rising  from  t1ie  dead,  ascending,  and 
ever  living  to  intercede  for  transgressors ; 
and  see  whether  this  does  not  entitle  him  to 
be  relied  on  by  you.  Then  cry  to  him,  and 
see  if  he  does  not  hear  you.  When  Usher 
wished  to  know  whether  Rutherford  was 
indeed  as  holy  a  man  as  he  was  said  to  be, 
he  went  to  his  house  as  a  beggar,  and  gained 
a  lodging,  and  heard  the  man  of  Grod  pour- 
ing out  his  heart  before  the  Lord  in  the 
night.  If  you  would  know  Jesus,  get  as 
near  to  him  as  you  can  by  studying  his 
character,  and  appealing  to  his  love. 

At  one  time  I  might  have  needed  evidence 
to  make  me  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  but 
now  I  know  him  so  well,  by  proving  him, 
that  I  should  need  a  very  great  deal  of 
evidence  to  make  me  doubt  him.  It  is  now 
more  natural  to  me  to  trust  than  to  dis- 
believe :  this  is  the  new  nature  triumphing; 
it  was  not  so  at  the  first.  The  novelty  of 
faith  is,  in  the  beginning,  a  source  of  weak- 
ness ;  but  act  after  act  of  trusting  turns  faith 
into  a  habit.  Experience  brings  to  faith 
strong  confirmation. 

I  am  not  perplexed  with  doubt,  because 
the  truth  which  I  believe  has  wroug^ht  a 
miracle  on  me.    By  its  means  I  have  received 


62 


AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 


and  still  retain  a  new  life,  to  which  I  was 
once  a  stranger :  and  this  is  confirmation 
of  the  strongest  sort.  I  am  like  the  good 
man  and  his  wife  who  had  kept  a  lighthouse 
for  years.     A  visitor,  who  came  to  see  the 


liglithouse,  looking  out  from  the  window 
over  the  waste  of  waters,  asked  the  good 
woman,  ''  Are  you  not  afraid  at  night,  when 
the  storm  is  out,  and  the  big  weaves  dash 
right  over  tlie  lantern  ?  Do  you  not  fear 
that  tlie  lighthouse,  and  all  that  is  in  it,  will 
be  carried  away  ?  I  am  sure  I  should  be  afraid 


DIFFICULTY    IN    THE    WAY    OF    BELIEVING.     63 

to  trust  myself  in  a  slender  tower  in  the 
midst  of  the  great  billows."  The  woman 
remarked  that  the  idea  never  occurred  to 
her  now.  She  had  lived  there  so  long  that 
she  felt  as  safe  on  the  lone  rock  as  ever  she 
did  when  she  lived  on  the  mainland.  As 
for  her  husband,  when  asked  if  he  did  not 
feel  anxious  when  the  wind  blew  a  hurricane, 
he  answered,  ^'  Yes,  I  feel  anxious  to  keep 
the  lamps  well  trimmed,  and  the  light 
burning,  lest  any  vessel  should  be  wrecked." 
As  to  anxiety  about  the  safety  of  the  light- 
house, or  his  own  personal  security  in  it,  he 
had  outlived  all  that.  Even  so  it  is  with  the 
full-grown  believer.  He  can  humbly  say, 
'^  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am 
persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day." 
From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me  with 
doubts  and  questionings ;  I  bear  in  my  soul 
the  proofs  of  the  Spirit's  truth  and  power, 
and  I  will  have  none  of  yoiu*  artful  reason- 
ings. The  gospel  to  me  is  truth :  I  am 
content  to  perish  if  it  be  not  true.  I  risk 
my  soul's  eternal  fate  upon  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  and  I  know  that  there  is  no  risk 
in  it.  My  one  concern  is  to  keep  tlie  lights 
burning,  that  I  may  thereby  benefit  others. 
Only  let  the  Lord  give  me  oil  enough  to  feed 


64  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

my  lamp,  so  that  I  may  cast  a  ray  across 
the  dark  and  treacherous  sea  of  life,  and  I 
am  well  content. 

Now,  troubled  seeker,  if  it  be  so,  that  your 
minister,  and  many  others  in  whom  vou  con- 
fide, have  found  perfect  peace  and  rest  in  the 
gospel,  why  should  not  you  ?  Is  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  Do  not  his  words 
do  good  to  them  that  walk  uprightly  ?  Will 
not  you  also  try  their  saving  virtue  ? 
'  Most  true  is  the  gospel,  for  God  is  its 
Author.  Believe  it.  Most  able  is  the  Saviour, 
for  he  is  the  Son  of  God.  Trust  him.  Most 
powerfid  is  his  precious  blood.  Look  to 
it  for  pardon.  Most  loving  is  his  gracious 
heart.     Run  to  it  at  once. 

Thus  would  I  urge  the  reader  to  seek 
faith  ;  but  if  he  be  unwilling,  what  more  can 
I  do  ?  I  have  brought  the  horse  to  the 
water,  but  I  cannot  make  him  drink.  This, 
however,  be  it  remembered — unbelief  is  wilful 
when  evidence  is  put  in  a  mans  loay^  mid  he 
refuses  carefully  to  examine  it.  He  that  does 
not  desire  to  know,  and  accept  the  truth,  has 
himself  to  thank  if  he  dies  with  a  lie  in  his 
ricrht  hand.    It  is  true  that  ''  he  that  believeth 

a 

and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved  "  :  it  is  equally 
true  that  ''  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned." 


A  Helpful   ^^i^vey. 


?5 


0  help  the  seeker  to  a  true 
faith  in  Jesus,  I  would  re- 
mind him  of  the  work  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  the  room  and 
place  and  stead  of  sinners. 
'^  When  we  were  yet  with- 
out strength,  in  due  time 
Christ  died  for  the  un- 
godly'' (Rom.  V.  6).  ^^  Who  his  own  self 
bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree  " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  24).  ''  The  Lord  hath  laid  on 
him  the  iniquity  of  us  all"  (Is.  hii.  6).  ''~Fot 
Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us 
to  God"  (1  Pet.  iii.  18). 

Upon  one  declaration  of  Scripture  let  tlie 
reader  fix  his  eye.  ''  With  hiB  stripes  we 
ARE  healed  "  (Is.  liiL  5).  God  here  treats 
sin  as   a  disease,  and  he  sets  before  us  the 

costly  remedy  which  he  has  provided. 
5 


66  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

I  ask  you  very  solemnly  to  accompany 
me  in  your  meditations,  for  a  few  minutes, 
while  I  bring  before  you  the  stripes  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  The  Lord  resolved  to  restore 
us,  and  therefore  he  sent  his  only-begotten 
Son,  ^^very  Grod  of  very  God,'^  that  he 
might  descend  into  this  world  to  take  upon 
himself  our  nature,  in  order  to  our  re- 
demption. He  lived  as  a  man  among  men ; 
and,  in  due  time,  after  thirty  years  or  more 
of  obedience,  the  time  came  when  he  should 
do  us  the  greatest  service  of  all,  namely,  stand 
in  our  stead,  and  bear  ''  the  chastisement 
of  our  peace."  He  went  to  Grethsemane,  and 
there,  at  the  first  taste  of  our  bitter  cup,  he 
sweat  great  drops  of  blood.  He  went  to 
Pilate's  hall,  and  Herod's  judgment-seat,  and 
there  drank  draughts  of  pain  and  scorn  in 
our  room  and  place.  Last  of  all,  they  took 
him  to  the  cross,  and  nailed  him  there  to  die 
— ^to  die  in  our  stead.  The  word  ^*  stripes  " 
is  used  to  set  forth  his  sufferings,  both  of 
body  and  of  soul.  The  whole  of  Christ  was 
made  a  sacrifice  for  us :  his  whole  manhood 
suffered.  As  to  his  body,  it  shared  with  his 
mind  in  a  grief  that  never  can  be  described. 
In  the  beginning  of  his  passion,  when  he 
emphatically  suffered  instead  of  us,  he  was 
in  an  agony,  and  from  his  bodily  frame  a 


A    HELPFUL    SURVEY.  67 

bloody  sweat  distilled  so  copiously  as  to  fall 
to  the  ground.  It  is  very  rarely  that  a  man 
sweats  blood.  There  have  been  one  or  two 
instances  of  it,  and  they  have  been  followed 
by  almost  immediate  death ;  but  our  Saviour 
lived — lived  after  an  agony  which,  to  any- 
one else,  would  have  proved  fatal.  Ere  he 
could  cleanse  his  face  from  this  dreadful 
crimson,  they  hurried  him  to  the  high 
p]'iest's  hall.  In  the  dead  of  night  they 
bound  him,  and  led  him  away.  Anon  they 
took  him  to  Pilate  and  to  Herod.  These 
scourged  him,  and  their  soldiers  spat  in  his 
face,  and  buffeted  him,  and  put  on  his  head 
a  crown  of  thorns.  Scourging  is  one  of  the 
most  awful  tortures  that  can  be  inflicted  by 
malice.  It  was  formerly  the  disgrace  of  the 
British  army  that  the  '^cat"  was  used  upon 
the  soldier :  a  brutal  infliction  of  torture. 
But  to  the  Roman,  cruelty  was  so  natural  that 
he  made  his  common  punishments  worse  than 
brutal.  The  Eoman  scourge  is  said  to  have 
been  made  of  the  sinews  of  oxen,  twisted 
into  knots,  and  into  these  knots  were  in- 
serted slivers  of  bone,  and  huckle-bones  of 
sheep;  so  that  every  time  the  scourge  fell 
upon  the  bare  back,  ''  the  plowers  made 
deep  furrows."  Our  Saviour  was  called 
upon  to  endure  the  fierce  pain  of  the  Roman 


68  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

scourge,  and  this  not  as  the  finis  of  his 
punishment,  but  as  a  preface  to  crucifixion. 
To  this  his  persecutors  added  buffeting,  and 
pkicking  of  the  hair :  they  spared  him  no 
form  of  pain.  In  all  his  faintness,  through 
bleeding  and  fasting,  they  made  him  carry 
his  cross  until  another  was  forced,  by  the 
forethought  of  their  cruelty,  to  bear  it,  lest 
their  victim  sliould  die  on  the  road.  They 
stripped  him,  and  threw  him  down,  and 
nailed  liim  to  the  wood.  They  pierced  his 
hands  and  his  feet.  They  Hfted  up  the  tree, 
with  him  upon  it,  and  then  daslied  it  down 
into  its  place  in  the  ground,  so  that  all  his 
limbs  were  dislocated,  according  to  the 
lament  of  the  twenty-second  psalm,  ^'lam 
poured  out  like  water,  and  all  my  bones  are 
out  of  joint."  He  hung  in  the  burning  sun 
till  the  fever  dissolved  his  strength,  and  he 
said,  ''  My  heart  is  like  wax ;  it  is  melted  in 
the  midst  of  my  bowels.  My  strength  is 
dried  up  like  a  potsherd;  and  my  tongue 
cleaveth  to  my  jaws  ;  and  thou  hast  brought 
me  into  the  dust  of  death."  There  he  hung, 
a  spectacle  to  God  and  men.  The  weight  of 
his  body  was  first  sustained  by  his  feet,  till 
the  nails  tore  through  the  tender  nerves : 
and  then  the  painful  load  began  to  drag 
upon    his   hands,    and    rend   those   sensitive 


A    HELPFUL    SURVEY.  69 

parts  of  his  frame.  How  small  a  wound  in 
the  hand  has  brought  on  lockjaw !  How 
awful  must  have  been  tlie  torment  caused 
by  that  dragging  iron  tearing  through  the 
delicate  parts  of  the  hands  and  feet !  Now 
were  all  manner  of  bodily  pains  centred 
in  his  tortured  frame.  All  the  while  his 
enemies  stood  around,  pointing  at  him  in 
scorn,  thrusting  out  their  tongues  in  mockery, 
jesting  at  his  prayers,  and  gloating  over  liis 
sufferings.  He  cried,  ^'  I  thirst,"  and  then 
they  gave  him  vinegar  mingled  with  galL 
After  a  while  he  said,  ^'  It  is  finished."  He 
had  endured  the  utmost  of  appointed  grief, 
and  had  made  full  vindication  to  divine 
justice :  then,  and  not  till  then,  he  gave  up 
the  ghost.  Holy  men  of  old  have  enlarged 
most  lovingly  upon  the  bodily  sufferings  of 
our  Lord,  and  I  have  no  hesitation  in  doing 
the  same,  trusting  that  trembling  sinners 
may  see  salvation  in  these  painful  ''  stripes  " 
of  the  Redeemer. 

To  describe  the  outward  sufferings  of  our 
Lord  is  not  easy :  I  acknowledge  that  I  have 
failed.  But  his  soul- sufferings,  which  were 
the  soul  of  his  sufferings,  who  can  even 
conceive,  much  less  express,  what  they  were  ? 
At  the  very  first  I  told  you  that  he  sweat 
great  drops   of  blood.     That  was  his  heart 


70  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

driving  out  its  life-floods  to  the  surface 
through  the  terrible  depression  of  spirit  which 
was  upon  him.  He  said,  ''  My  soul  is  ex- 
ceeding sorrowful,  even  unto  death."  The 
betrayal  by  Judas,  and  the  desertion  of  the 
twelve,  grieved  our  Lord ;  but  the  weight  of 
our  sin  was  the  real  pressure  on  his  heart. 
Our  guilt  was  the  olive-press  whicli  forced 
from  him  the  moisture  of  his  life.  No  lan- 
guage can  ever  tell  his  agony  in  prospect 
of  his  passion  ;  how  little  then  can  we  con- 
ceive the  passion  itself  ?  AVhen  nailed  to 
the  crosSj  he  endured  what  no  martyr  ever 
suffered  ;  for  martyrs,  when  they  have  died, 
have  been  so  sustained  of  God  that  they 
have  rejoiced  amid  their  pain ;  but  our 
Redeemer  was  forsaken  of  his  Father,  until 
he  cried,  ''  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  "  That  was  the  bitterest  cry 
of  all,  the  utmost  depth  of  his  unfathomable 
grief.  Yet  was  it  needful  that  he  should  be 
deserted,  because  God  must  turn  his  back  on 
sin,  and  consequently  upon  him  who  was 
made  sin  for  us.  The  soul  of  the  great 
Substitute  suffered  a  horror  of  misery  instead 
of  that  horror  of  hell  into  which  sinners 
would  have  been  plunged  had  he  not  taken 
their  sin  upon  himself,  and  been  made  a 
curse  for  them.     It  is  written,    ^'  Cursed  is 


A   HELPFUL    SURVEY.  71 

every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree ; "  but  who 
knows  what  that  curse  means  ? 

The  remedy  for  your  sins  and  mine  is 
found  in  the  substitutionary  sufferings  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  these  only.  These 
'^stripes"  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were 
on  our  behalf.  Do  you  enquire,  '^  Is  there 
anything  for  us  to  do,  to  remove  the  guilt  of 
sin  ?  "  I  answer :  There  is  nothing  what- 
ever for  you  to  do.  By  the  stripes  of  Jesus 
we  are  healed.  All  those  stripes  he  has 
endured,  and  left  not  one  of  them  for  us 
to  bear. 

^'  But  must  we  not  believe  on  him  ?  "  Ay, 
certainly.  If  I  say  of  a  certain  ointment 
that  it  heals,  I  do  not  deny  that  you  need  a 
bandage  with  which  to  apj)ly  it  to  the  wound. 
Faith  is  the  linen  which  binds  the  plaster  of 
Christ's  reconciliation  to  the  sore  of  our  sin. 
The  linen  does  not  heal ;  that  is  the  work  of 
the  ointment.  So  faith  does  not  heal ;  that 
is  the  work  of  the  atonement  of  Christ. 

^'  But  we  must  repent,"  cries  another. 
Assuredly  we  must,  and  shall,  for  repentance 
is  the  first  sign  of  healing ;  but  the  stripes 
of  Jesus  heal  us,  and  not  our  repentance. 
These  stripes,  when  applied  to  the  heart, 
work  repentance  in  us :  we  hate  sin  because 
it  made  Jesus  suffer. 


72  AROUND    the"  wicket    GATE. 

When  you  intelligently  trust  in  Jesus  as 
having  suffered  for  you,  then  you  discover 
the  fact  that  God  will  never  punish  you  for 
the  same  offence  for  which  Jesus  died.  His 
justice  will  not  permit  him  to  see  the  debt 
paid,  first,  by  the  Surety,  and  then  again 
by  the  debtor.  Justice  cannot  twice  demand 
a  recompense :  if  my  bleeding  Surety  has 
borne  my  guilt,  then  I  cannot  bear  it. 
Accepting  Christ  Jesus  as  suffering  for  me, 
I  have  accepted  a  complete  discharge  from 
judicial  liability.  I  have  been  condemned 
in  Christ,  and  there  is,  therefore,  now  no 
condemnation  to  me  any  more.  This  is  the 
ground- work  of  the  security  of  the  sinner 
who  believes  in  Jesus :  he  lives  because 
Jesus  died  in  his  room,  and  place,  and  stead; 
and  he  is  acceptable  before  God  because 
Jesus  is  accepted.  The  person  for  whom 
Jesus  is  an  accepted  Substitute  must  go 
free  ;  none  can  touch  him  ;  he  is  clear.  0 
my  heaier,  wdlt  thou  have  Jesus  Christ  to  be 
thy  Substitute  ?  If  so,  thou  art  free.  ^'  He 
that  belie veth  on  him  is  not  condemned." 
Thus  ''with  his  stripes  we  are  healed." 


^ 

im 

^M 

P 

^ 

^^m^M 

B 

i 

^ 

s 

mM 

^K^«w^r 

A    T\E/iL    HlNDf^yVjNlCE. 


LT HOUGH  it  is  by  no  means  a 
difficult  thing  in  itself  to  believe 
him  who  cannot  lie,  and  to  trust 
in  One  whom  we  know  to  be 
able  to  save,  yet  something  may 
intervene  which  may  render 
even  this  a  hard  thing  to  my 
reader.  That  hindrance  may  be 
a  secret,  and  yet  it  may  be  none  the  less  real. 
A  door  may  be  closed,  not  by  a  great  stone 
which  all  can  see,  but  by  an  invisible  bolt 
which  shoots  into  a  holdfast  quite  out  of 
sight.  A  man  may  have  good  eyes,  and  yet 
may  not  be  able  to  see  an  object,  because 
another  substance  comes  in  the  way.  You 
could  not  even  see  the  sun  if  a  handkerchief, 
or  a  mere  piece  of  rag,  were  tied  over  your 
face.  Oh,  the  bandages  which  men  persist  in 
binding  over  their  own  eyes  ! 


74  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

A  sweet  sin,  harboured  in  the  heart,  will 
prevent  a  soul  from  laying  hold  upon  Christ 
by  faith.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  come  to  save 
us  from  sinning ;  and  if  Ave  are  resolved  to 
go  on  sinning,  Christ  and  our  souls  will  never 
agree.  If  a  man  takes  poison,  and  a  doctor 
is  called  in  to  save  his  life,  he  may  have  a 
sure  antidote  ready  ;  but  if  the  patient  per- 
sists in  keeping  the  poison-bottle  at  his  lips, 
and  w^ill  continue  to  swallow  the  deadly 
drops,  how  can  the  doctor  save  him  ?  Salva- 
tion consists  largely  in  parting  the  sinner 
from  his  sin,  and  the  very  nature  of  salvation 
would  have  to  be  changed  before  we  could 
speak  of  a  man's  being  saved  when  he  is 
loving  sin,  and  wilfully  living  in  it.  A  man 
cannot  be  made  white,  and  yet  continue 
black ;  he  cannot  be  healed,  and  yet  remain 
sick;  neither  can  anyone  be  saved,  and  be 
still  a  lover  of  evil. 

A  drunkard  will  be  saved  by  believing  in 
Christ — that  is  to  say,  he  will  be  saved  from 
being  a  drunkard ;  but  if  he  determines  still 
to  make  himself  intoxicated,  he  is  not  saved 
from  it,  and  he  has  not  truly  believed  in 
Jesus.  A  liar  can  by  faith  be  saved  from 
falsehood,  but  then  he  leaves  off  lying,  and 
is  careful  to  speak  the  truth.  Anyone  can 
see  with  half  an  eye  that  he  cannot  be  saved 


A    REAL    HINDRANCE.  75 

from  being  a  liar,  and  yet  go  on  in  his  old 
style  of  deceit  and  untruthfulness.  A  person 
who  is  at  enmity  with  another  will  be  saved 
from  that  feeling  of  enmity  by  believing  in 
the  Lord  Jesus ;  but  if  he  vows  that  he  will 
still  cherish  the  feeling  of  hate,  it  is  clear 
that  he  is  not  saved  from  it,  and  equally 
clear  that  he  has  not  believed  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  unto  salvation.  The  great  matter  is 
to  be  delivered  from  the  love  of  sin  :  this  is 
the  sure  effect  of  trust  in  the  Saviour  ;  but  if 
this  elfect  is  so  far  from  being  desired  that 
it  is  even  refused,  all  talk  of  trusting  in  the 
Saviour  for  salvation  is  an  idle  tale.  A  man 
goes  to  the  shipping-office,  and  asks  if  he  can 
be  taken  to  America.  He  is  assured  that  a 
ship  is  just  ready,  and  that  he  has  only  to  go 
on  board,  and  he  will  soon  reach  New  York. 
^^  But,"  says  he,  ''I  want  to  stop  at  home 
in  England,  and  mind  my  shop  all  the  time 
I  am  crossino:  the  Atlantic."  The  ag-ent  thinks 
he  is  talking  to  a  madman,  and  tells  him  to 
go  about  his  business,  and  not  waste  his  time 
by  playing  the  fool.  To  pretend  to  trust 
Christ  to  save  you  from  sin  while  you  are  still 
determined  to  continue  in  it,  is  making  a  mock 
of  Christ.  I  pray  my  reader  not  to  be  guilty 
of  such  profanity.  Let  him  not  dream  that 
the  holy  Jesus  will  be  the  patron  of  iniquity. 


76  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 


Do  you  see  the  tree  in  my  picture  ?     The 


ivy  has  grown  all  over  it,  and  is.  strangling 
it,  sucking  out  its  life,  and  killing  it.  Can 
that  tree  be  saved  ?  The  gardener  thinks  it 
can  be.  He  is  willing  to  do  his  best.  But 
before  he  begins  to  use  his  axe  and  his  knife, 
he  is  told  that  he  must  not  cut  away  the  ivy. 
"Ah!  tlien,"  he  says,  ^' it  is  impossible.  It 
is  the  Ivy  whicli  is  killing  the  tree,  and  if 
you  want  the  tree  saved,  you  cannot  save 
the  ivy.  If  you  trust  me  to  preserve  the 
tree,  you  must  let  me  get  the  deadly  climber 
away  from  it.''  Is  not  that  common  sense  ? 
Certainly  it  is.  You  do  not  trust  the  tree  to 
the  gardener  unless  you  trust  him  to  cut 
away  that  which   is    deadly  to   it.     If   the 


A    REAL    HINDRANCE.  77 

sinner  will  keep  his  sin,  he  must  die  in  it ;  if 
he  is  willing  to  be  rescued  from  his  sin,  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  able  to  do  it,  and  will  do  it  if 
he  commits  his  case  to  his  care. 

What,  then,  is  your  darling  sin?  Is  it 
any  gross  wrong-doing  ?  Then  very  shame 
should  make  you  cease  from  it.  Is  it  love  of 
the  world,  or  fear  of  men,  or  longing  for  evil 
gains  ?  Surely,  none  of  these  things  should 
reconcile  you  to  living  in  enmity  with  God, 
and  beneath  his  frown.  Is  it  a  human  love, 
which  is  eating  like  a  canker  into  the  heart  ? 
Can  any  creature  rival  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Is 
it  not  idolatry  to  allow  any  earthly  thing  to 
compare  for  one  instant  with  the  Lord  God? 
^'Well,"  saith  one,  ^'for  me  to  give  up  the 
particular  sin  by  which  I  am  held  captive, 
would  be  to  my  serious  injury  in  business, 
would  ruin  my  prospects,  and  lessen  my 
usefulness  in  many  ways.''  If  it  be  so,  you 
have  your  case  met  by  the  words  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  bids  you  to  pluck  out  your  eye, 
and  cut  off  your  hand  or  foot,  and  cast  it 
from  you,  rather  than  be  cast  into  hell.  It 
is  better  to  enter  into  life  with  one  eye,  with 
the  poorest  prospects,  than  to  keep  all  your 
hopes,  and  be  out  of  Christ.  Better  be  a 
lame  believei  han  a  leaping  sinner.  Better 
be  in  the  rear  rank  for  life  in  the  army  of 


78  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

Christ  than  lead  the  van  and  be  a  chief 
officer  under  the  command  of  Satan.  If  you 
win  Christ,  it  will  little  matter  what  you 
lose.  No  doubt  many  have  had  to  suffer 
that  which  has  maimed  and  lamed  them  for 
this  life  ;  but  if  they  have  entered  thereby 
into  eternal  life,  they  have  been  great 
gainers. 

It  comes  to  this,  my  friend,  as  it  did  with 
John  Bunj^an ;  a  voice  now  speaks  to  you, 
and  says — 

WILT    THOU    KEEP    THY    SIN    AJSTD    GO    TO    HELL? 

OR 
LEAVE    THY    SIN    AND    GO    TO    HEAVEN  ? 

The  point  should  be  decided  before  you 
quit  the  spot.  In  the  name  of  God,  I  ask 
you,  Which  shall  it  be — Christ  and  salva- 
tion, or  the  favourite  sin  and  damnation  ? 
There  is  no  middle  course.  Waiting  or 
refusing  to  decide  will  practically  be  a  sure 
decision  for  the  evil  one.  He  that  stands 
questioning  whether  he  will  be  honest  or  not, 
is  already  out  of  the  straight  line  :  he  that  does 
not  know  whether  he  wishes  to  be  cleansed 
from  sin  gives  evidence  of  a  foul  heart. 

If  you  are  anxious  to  give  up  every  evil 
way,  our  Lord  Jesus  will  enable  you  to  do 


A   EEAL   HINDRANCE.  79 

SO  at  once.  His  grace  has  already  changed 
the  direction  of  your  desires :  in  fact,  your 
heart  is  renewed.  Therefore,  rest  on  him  to 
strengtlien  you  to  battle  with  temptations  as 
they  arise,  and  to  fulfil  the  Lord's  commands 
from  day  to  day.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  great  at 
making  the  lame  man  to  leap  like  a  hart,  and 
in  enabling  those  who  are  sick  of  the  palsy 
to  take  up  their  bed  and  walk.  He  will 
make  you  able  to  conquer  the  evil  habit.  He 
will  even  cast  the  devil  out  of  you.  Yes,  if 
you  had  seven  devils,  he  could  drive  them 
out  at  once  ;  there  is  no  limit  to  his  power  to 
cleanse  and  sanctify.  Now  that  you  are 
willing  to  be  made  whole,  the  great  difficulty 
is  removed.  He  that  has  set  the  will  right 
can  arrange  all  your  other  powers,  and  make 
them  move  to  his  praise.  You  would  not 
have  earnestly  desired  to  quit  all  sin  if  he 
had  not  secretly  inclined  you  in  that  direc- 
tion. If  you  now  trust  him,  it  will  be  clear 
that  he  has  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  and 
we  feel  assured  that  he  will  carry  it  on. 


On  I^ai3inq  QuESTiojMg. 


N  these  days,  a  simple,  child- 
like faith  is  very  rare  ;  but 
the  usual  thing  is  to  believe 
nothing,  and  question  every- 
thing. Doubts  are  as  plen- 
tiful as  blackberries,  and  all 
hands  and  lips  are  stained 
with  them.  To  me  it  seems 
very  strange  that  men  should  hunt  up  diffi- 
culties as  to  their  own  salvation.  If  I  were 
doomed  to  die,  and  I  had  a  hint  of  mercy,  I 
am  sure  I  should  not  set  my  wits  to  work  to 
find  out  reasons  why  I  should  not  be  par- 
doned. I  could  leave  my  enemies  to  do  that : 
I  should  bo  on  the  look-out  in  a  very  different 
direction.  If  I  were  drowning,  I  should 
sooner  catch  at  a  straw  than  push  a  life-belt 
away  from  me.  To  reason  against  one's 
own  life  is  a  sort  of  constructive  suicide  of 


ON    RAISING    QUESTIONS. 


81 


which  only  a  drunken  man  wonld  be  guilty. 
To  argue  against  your  only  hope  is  like  a 
foolish  man  sitting  on  a  bough,  and  chopping 


it  away  so  as  to  let  himself  down.  Who  but 
an  idiot  would  do  that  ?  Yet  many  appear 
to  be  special  pleaders  for  their  own  ruin. 
They  hunt  the  Bible  through  for  threatening 
texts  ;  and  when  they  have  done  with  that, 
they  turn  to  reason,  and  philosojDhy,  and 
scepticism,  in  order  to  shut  the  door  in  their 
own  faces.  Surely  this  is  poor  employment 
for  a  sensible  man. 

Many  nowadays  who  cannot  quite  get 
away  from  religious  thought,  are  able  to 
stave  off  the  inconvenient  pressure  of  con- 
science by  quibbling  over  the  great  truths  of 
revelation.     Great  mysteries  are  in  the  Book 


82 


AROUND    TJIE    WICKET    GATE. 


of  God  of  necessity ;  for  how  can  the  infiiiite 
God  so  speak  that  all  his  thoughts  can  be 
grasped  by  finite  man  ?  But  it  is  the  height 
of  folly  to  get  discussing  these  deep  things, 
and  to  leave  plain,  soul-saving  truths  in 
abeyance.  It  reminds  one  of  the  two 
philosophers  who   debated    about   food,  and 


went  away  empty  from  the  table,  while  the 
common  countryman  in  the  corner  asked 
no  question,  but  used  his  knife  and  fork 
with  great  diligence,  and  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing.  Thousands  are  now  happy  in  the 
Lord  through  receiving  the  gospel  like  little 
chiklren ;  while  others,  who  can  always  see 
difficulties,  or  invent  them,  are  as  far  off  as 
ever  from  any  comfortable  hope  of  salvation. 
I  know  many  very  decent  people  who  seem 


ON   RAISING   QUESTIONS.  83 

to  have  resolved  never  to  come  to  Christ  till 
they  can  understand  how  the  doctrine  of 
election  is  consistent  with  the  free  invitations 
of  the  gospel.  I  might  just  as  well  deter- 
mine never  to  eat  a  morsel  of  bread  till  it 
has  been  explained  to  me  how  it  is  that  God 
keeps  me  alive,  and  yet  I  must  eat  to  live. 
The  fact  is,  that  we  most  of  us  knoiv  quite 
enougli  already,  and  the  real  want  with  us 
is  not  light  in  the  head,  but  truth  in  the 
heart ;  not  help  over  difficulties,  but  grace  to 
make  us  hate  sin  and  seek  reconciliation. 

Here  let  me  add  a  warning  against  tam- 
pering with  the  Word  of  Grod.  No  habit 
can  be  more  ruinous  to  the  soul.  It  is  cool, 
contemptuous  impertinence  to  sit  down  and 
correct  your  Maker,  and  it  tends  to  make 
the  heart  harder  than  the  nether  millstone. 
We  remember  one  who  used  a  penknife  on 
his  Bible,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he  had 
given  up  all  his  former  beliefs.  The  spirit 
of  reverence  is  healthy,  but  the  impertinence 
of  criticizmg  the  inspired  Word  is  destructive 
of  all  proper  feeling  towards  Grod. 

If  ever  a  man  does  feel  his  need  of  a 
Saviour  after  treating  Scripture  wiih  a  2)roud, 
critical  spirit,  he  is  very  apt  to  find  his  con- 
science standing  in  the  way,  and  hindering 
him    from    comfort    by    reminding    him    of 


84 


AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 


ill-treatment  of  tlie  sacred  Word.  It  comes 
hard  to  him  to  draw  consolation  out  of 
passages  of  the  Bible  which  he  has  treated 
cavalierly,  or  even  set  aside  altogether,  as 
unworthy  of  consideration.  In  his  distress 
the  sacred  texts  seem  to  laugh  at  his  calamity. 
When  the  time  of  need  comes,  the  wells 
which  he  stopped  with  stones  yield  no  water 
for  his  thirst.  Beware,  when  you  despise  a 
Scripture,  lest  you  cast  away  the  only  friend 
that  can  help  you  in  the  hour  of  agony. 

A  certain  German  duke  was  accustomed  to 
call  upon  his  servant  to  read  a  chapter  of  the 
Bible  to  him  every  morning.  When  anything 
did  not  square  with  his  judgment  he  would 
sternly   cry,    ^'  Hans,  strike  that  out."      At 


ON    RAISING    QUESTIONS.  85 

length  Hans  was  a  long  time  before  he  began 
to  read.  He  fumbled  over  the  Book,  till  his 
master  called  out,  '^Hans,  why  do  you  not 
read  ?  "  Then  Hans  answered,  ^^  Sir,  there  is 
hardly  anything  left.  It  is  all  struck  out !  " 
One  day  his  master's  objections  had  run  one 
way,  and  another  day  they  had  taken  another 
turn,  and  another  set  of  passages  had  been 
blotted,  till  nothing  was  left  to  instruct  or 
comfort  him.  Let  us  not,  by  carping  criticism, 
destroy  our  own  mercies.  We  may  yet  need 
those  promises  which  appear  needless ;  and 
those  portions  of  Holy  Writ  which  have  been 
most  assailed  by  sceptics  may  yet  prove 
essential  to  our  very  life :  wherefore  let  us 
guard  the  priceless  treasure  of  the  Bible,  and 
determine  never  to  resign  a  single  line  of  it. 

What  have  we  to  do  with  recondite 
questions  while  our  souls  are  in  peril  ?  The 
way  to  escape  from  sin  is  plain  enough.  The 
wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err 
therein.  God  has  not  mocked  us  with  a  sal- 
vation which  we  cannot  understand.  Believe 
AND  LIVE  is  a  command  which  a  babe  may 
comprehend  and  obey. 

Doubt  no  more,  but  now  believe ; 
Question  not,  but  just  receive. 
Artful  doubts  and  reasonings  be 
Nailed  with.  Jesus  to  trie  tree. 


SQ 


AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 


Instead  of  cavilling  at  Scripture,  the  man 
who  is  led  of  the  Spirit  of  God  will  close  in 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  at  once.  Seeing  that 
thousands  of  decent,  common- sense  people — 
people,  too,  of  the  best  character — are  trusting 
their  all  with  Jesus,  he  will  do  the  same,  and 
have  done  with  further  delays.  Then  has  he 
begun  a  life  worth  living,  and  he  may  have 
done  with  further  fear.  He  may  at  once 
advance  to  that  higher  and  better  way  of 
living,  which  grows  out  of  love  to  Jesus,  the 
Saviour.  Why  should  not  the  reader  do  so 
at  once  ?     Oh  that  he  would ! 

A  Newark,  New  Jersey,  butcher  received 
a  letter  from  his  old  home  in  Germany, 
notifying  that  he  had,  by  the    death  of    a 


ON    RAISING    QUESTIONS.  87 

relative,  fallen  heir  to  a  considerable  amount 
of  money.  He  was  cutting  up  a  pig  at  the 
time.  After  reading  the  letter,  he  hastily 
tore  off  his  dirty  apron,  and  did  not  stop  to 
see  the  pork  cut  up  into  sausages,  but  left 
the  shop  to  make  preparations  for  going 
home  to  Germany.  Do  you  blame  him,  or 
would  you  have  had  him  stop  in  Newark 
with  his  block  and  his  cleaver  ? 

See  here  the  operation  of  faith.  The 
butcher  believed  what  was  told  him,  and 
acted  on  it  at  once.     Sensible  fellow,  too  ! 

God  has  sent  his  messao^es  to  man,  telling^ 
him  the  good  news  of  salvation.  When  a 
man  believes  the  good  news  to  be  true,  he 
accepts  the  blessing  announced  to  him,  and 
hastens  to  lay  hold  upon  it.  If  he  truly 
believes,  he  will  at  once  take  Christ,  with 
all  he  has  to  bestow,  turn  from  his  present 
evil  ways,  and  set  out  for  the  Heavenly  City, 
where  the  full  blessing  is  to  be  enjoyed.  He 
cannot  be  holy  too  soon,  or  too  early  quit 
the  ways  of  sin.  If  a  man  could  really  see 
what  sin  is,  he  would  flee  from  it  as  from  a 
deadly  serpent,  and  rejoice  to  be  freed  from 
it  by  Christ  Jesus. 


Without  Faith   no   Salvation. 


OME  think  it  hard  that  there 
should  be  nothing  for  them 
but  ruin  if  they  will  not 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  but 
if  you  will  think  for  a  minute 
you  w^ill  see  tliat  it  is  just 
and  reasonable.  1  suppose 
there  is  no  way  for  a  man 
to  keep  his  strength  up  except  by  eating. 
If  you  were  to  say,  ^^I  will  not  eat  again, 
I  despise  such  animalism,"  you  might  go 
to  Madeira,  or  travel  in  all  lands  (sup- 
posing you  lived  long  enough  !),  but  you 
would  most  certainly  hnd  that  no  climate 
and  no  exercise  would  avail  to  keep  you 
alive  if  you  refused  food.  Would  you  then 
complain,  ''It  is  a  hard  thing  that  I  should 
die  because  I  do  not  believe  in  eating "  ? 
It  is  not  an  unjust  thing  that  if  you  are  so 


WITHOUT   FAITH    NO    SALVATION.  89 

foolish  as  not  to  eat,  you  must  die.  It  is 
precisely  so  with  believing.  ''  Believe,  and 
thou  art  saved."  If  thou  wilt  not  believe,  it 
is  no  hard  thing  that  thou  should st  be  lost. 
It  would  be  strange  indeed  if  it  were  not  to 
be  the  case. 

A  man  who  is  thirsty  stands  before  a 
fountain.  "No,"  he  says,  ''I  will  never 
touch  a  drop  of  moisture  as  long  as  I  live. 
Cannot  I  get  my  thirst  quenched  in  my  own 
way  ?  "  We  tell  him^  no  ;  he  must  drink  or 
die.  He  says,  '^  I  will  never  drink;  but  it  is 
a  hard  thino^  that  I  must  therefore  die.  It 
is  a  bigoted,  cruel  thing  to  tell  me  so." 
He  is  wrong.  His  thirst  is  the  inevitable 
result  of  neglecting  a  law  of  nature.  You, 
too,  must  believe  or  die  ;  w^hy  refuse  to  obey 
the  command?  Drink,  man,  drink!  Take 
Christ  and  live.  There  is  the  way  of  sal- 
vation, and  to  enter  you  must  trust  Christ ; 
but  there  is  nothing  hard  in  the  fact  that  you 
must  perish  if  you  will  not  trust  the  Saviour. 
Here  is  a  man  out  at  sea ;  he  has  a  chart, 
and  that  chart,  if  well  studied,  Avill,  with  the 
help  of  the  compass,  guide  him  to  his  journey's 
end.  The  pole-star  gleams  out  amidst  the 
cloud-rifts,  and  that,  too,  will  help  him. 
"No,"  says  he,  "I  will  have  nothing  to  do 
w^ith   your   stars;    I   do  not   believe  in  the 


90  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

North  Pole.  I  sliall  not  attend  to  tliat  little 
thing  inside  the  box ;  one  needle  is  as  good 
as  another  needle.  I  have  no  faith  in  your 
chart,  and  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it. 
The  art  of  navigation  is  only  a  lot  of  non- 
sense, got  up  by  people  on  purpose  to  make 
money,  and  I  will  not  be  gulled  by  it." 
The  man  never  reaches  port,  and  he  says  it 
is  a  very  hard  thing — a  very  hard  thing.  I 
do  not  think  so.  Some  of  you  say,  ''I  am 
not  going  to  read  the  Scriptures ;  I  am  not 
going  to  listen  to  your  talk  about  Jesus 
Christ:  I  do  not  believe  in  such  things." 
Then  Jesus  says,  '^He  that  belie veth  not 
shall  be  damned."  ^'  That's  very  hard,"  say 
you.  But  it  is  not  so.  It  is  not  more  hard 
than  the  fact  that  if  you  reject  the  compass 
and  the  pole-star  you  will  not  reach  your 
port.  There  is  no  help  for  it ;  it  must  be  so. 
You  say  you  will  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Jesus  and  his  blood,  and  you  pooh-pooh  all 
relio^ioQ.  You  will  find  it  ha-rd  to  lauo^h 
these  matters  down  when  you  come  to  die, 
when  the  clammy  sweat  must  be  wiped  from 
your  brow,  and  your  heart  beats  against 
your  ribs  as  if  it  wanted  to  leap  out  and 
fly  away  from  God.  0  soul !  you  will  find 
then,  that  those  Sundays,  and  those  services, 
and  this  old  Book,  are  something  more  and 


WITHOUT  FAITH  NO  SALVATION.      01 

better  than  you  tliought  they  were,  and  you 
will  wonder  that  you  were  so  simple  as  to 
neglect  any  true  help  to  salvation.  Above 
all,  what  woe  it  will  be  to  have  neglected 
Christ,  that  Pole-star  which  alone  can  guide 
the  mariner  to  the  haven  of  rest ! 

Where  do  you  live  ? 

You  live,  perhaps,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river,  and  you  have  to  cross  a  bridge  before 
you  can  get  home.  You  have  been  so  silly 
as  to  nurse  the  notion  that  you  do  not  believe 
in  bridges,  nor  in  boats,  nor  in  the  existence 
of  such  a  thing  as  water.  You  say,  ' '  I  am 
not  going  over  any  of  your  bridges,  and 
I  shall  not  get  into  any  of  your  boats.  I  do 
not  believe  that  there  is  a  river,  or  that  there 
is  any  such  stuff  as  water."  You  are  going 
home,  and  soon  you  come  to  the  old  bridge ; 
but  you  will  not  cross  it.  Yonder  is  a  boat ; 
but  you  are  determined  that  you  will  not  get 
into  it.  There  is  the  river,  and  you  resolve 
that  you  will  not  cross  it  in  the  usual  way ; 
and  yet  you  think  it  is  very  hard  that  you 
cannot  get  home.  Surely  something  has 
destroyed  your  reasoning  powers,  for  you 
would  not  think  it  so  hard  if  you  were  in 
your  senses.  If  a  man  will  not  do  the  thing 
that  is  necessary  to  a  certain  end,  how  can 
he  expect  to  gain  that  end  ?    You  have  taken 


92  AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

poison,  and  the  physician  brings  an  antidote, 
and  says,  ^'  Take  it  quickly,  or  you  will  die; 
but  if  you  take  it  quickly,  I  will  guarantee 
that  the  poison  will  be  neutralized."  But 
you  say,  ^^No,  doctor,  I  do  not  believe  in 
antidotes.  Let  everything  take  its  course ; 
let  every  tub  stand  on  its  own  bottom ;  I 
will  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  remedy. 
Besides,  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  any 
remedy  for  the  poison  I  have  taken ;  and, 
what  is  more,  I  don't  care  whether  there  is 
or  not.'' 

Well,  sir,  you  will  die ;  and  when  the 
coroner's  inquest  is  held  on  your  body,  the 
verdict  will  be,  ^  Served  him  right ! '  So 
will  it  be  with  you  if,  having  heard  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  say,  ^'  I  am  too 
much  of  an  advanced  man  to  have  any- 
thinfr  to  do  with  that  old-fashioned  notion 
of  substitution.  I  shall  not  attend  to  the 
preacher's  talk  about  sacrifice  and  blood- 
shedding."  Then,  when  you  perish,  the 
verdict  given  by  your  conscience,  which  will 
sit  upon  the  King's  quest  at  last,  will  run 
thus,  '^  Suicide  :  he  destroyed  his  own  soul.^^ 
So  says  the  old  Book — '  0  Israel,  thou  hast 
destroyed  thyself  1 "  lieader,  I  implore  thee, 
do  not  so. 


To    TH03E    WHO      H/^VE     BeLIEVED. 


RIENDS,  if  now  you  have 
begun  to  trust  the  Lord, 
trust  him  out  and  out. 
Let  your  faitli  be  the 
most  real  and  practical 
thing  in  3'our  whole  life. 
Don't  trust  the  Lord  in 
mere  sentiment  about  a 
few  great  spiritual  things;  but  trust  him 
for  everything,  for  ever,  both  for  time  and 
eternity,  for  body  and  for  soul.  See  hoAv 
the  Lord  hangeth  the  world  upon  nothing 
but  his  own  word !  It  has  neither  prop  nor 
pillar.  Yon  great  arch  of  heaven  stands 
without  a  buttress  or  a  wooden  centre.  The 
Ijord  can  and  will  bear  all  the  strain  tliat 
faith  can  ever  put  upon  him.  The  greatest 
troubles  are  easy  to  his  power,  and  the 
darkest   mysteries   are   clear  to  his  wisdom. 


94 


AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 


Trust  God  up  to  the  hilt.  Lean,  and  lean 
hard  ;  yes,  lean  all  your  weight,  and  every 
other  weight  upon  the  Mighty  God  of  Jacob. 


The  future  you  can  safely  leave  with  the 
Lordj  who  ever  liveth  and  never  changeth. 
The  past  is  now  in  your  Saviour's  hand,  and 
you  shall  never  be  condemned  for  it,  what- 
ever it  may  have  been,  for  the  Lord  has 
cast  your  iniquities  into  tlie  midst  of  the 
sea.  Believe  at  this  moment  in  your  present 
privileges.  You  are  saved.  If  you  are  a 
believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  and  you  are  saved. 
In  the  old  slave  days  a  lady  brought  her 
black  servant  on  board  an  English  ship, 
and  she  laughingly  said  to  the  Captain,   "  I 


TO    THOSE    WHO    HAVE    BELIEVED.  95 

suppose  if  I  and  Aunt  Chloe  were  to  go  to  Eng- 
land she  would  be  free  ?  "  ^'  Madam,"  said 
the  Captain,  "  she  is  noiv  free.  The  moment 
she  came  on  board  a  British  vessel  she  was 
free."  When  the  negro  woman  knew  this, 
she  did  not  leave  the  ship — not  she.  It  was 
not  the  hope  of  liberty  that  made  her  bold, 
but  the  fact  of  liberty.  So  you  are  not  now 
merely  hoping  for  eternal  life,  but  ^ '  Ble  that 
believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  lifeP  Accept 
this  as  a  fact  revealed  in  the  sacred  Word, 
and  begin  to  rejoice  accordingly.  Do  not 
reason  about  it,  or  call  it  in  question  ;  believe 
it,  and  leap  for  joy. 

I  want  my  reader,  upon  believing  in  the 
Lord  Jesus,  to  believe  for  eternal  salvation. 
Do  not  be  content  with  the  notion  that  you 
can  receive  a  new  birth  which  will  die  out, 
a  heavenly  life  which  will  expire,  a  pardon 
which  will  be  recalled.  The  Lord  Jesus 
gives  to  his  sheep  eternal  life,  and  do  not  be 
at  rest  until  you  have  it.  Now,  if  it  be 
eternal,  how  can  it  die  out  ?  Be  saved  out 
and  out,  for  eternity.  There  is  ^^  a  living 
and  incorruptible  seed,  which  liveth  and 
abideth  for  ever  "  ;  do  not  be  put  off  with  a 
temporary  change,  a  sort  of  grace  which 
will  only  bloom  to  fade.  You  are  now 
starting    on    the   railway    of   grace — take  a 


96  AROUND    THE   WICKET    GATE. 

ticket  all  the  way  through.  I  have  no 
com  mission  to  preach  to  you  salvation  for  a 
time  :  the  gospel  I  am  bidden  to  set  before 
you  is,  ''He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved."  He  shall  be  saved  from  sin, 
from  going*  back  to  sin,  from  turning  aside 
to  the  broad  road.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead 
you  to  believe  for  nothing  less  than  that. 
''Do  you  mean,"  says  one,  "that  I  am  to 
believe  if  I  once  trust  Christ  I  shall  be  saved 
whatever  sin  I  may  choose  to  commit  ?  "  I 
have  never  said  anything  of  the  kind.  I 
have  described  true  salvation  as  a  thorough 
change  of  heart  of  so  radical  a  kind  that  it 
will  alter  your  tastes  and  desires  ;  and  I  say 
that  if  you  have  such  a  change  w^rought  in 
you  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  be  permanent ; 
for  the  Lord's  work  is  not  like  the  cheap 
work  of  the  present  day,  which  soon  goes  to 
pieces.  Trust  the  Lord  to  keep  you,  how- 
ever long  you  may  live,  and  however  much 
you  may  be  tempted ;  and  "  according  to 
your  faith,  so  be  it  unto  you."  Believe  in 
Jesus  for  everlasting  life. 

Oh,  that  you  may  also  trust  the  Lord  for 
all  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time !  In 
the  world  you  will  have  tribulation  ;  learn  by 
faith  to  know  that  all  things  work  together 
for  good,  and  then  submit   yourself   to  tlic 


TO    THOSE   WHO    HAVE    BELIEVED. 


97 


Lord's   will.     Look  at  the  sheep  when  it  is 


.^. 


being  shorn.  If  it  lies  quite  still,  the  shears 
will  not  hurt  it ;  if  it  struggles,  or  even 
shrinks,  it  may  be  pricked.  Submit  your- 
selves under  the  hand  of  God,  and  afflic- 
tion will  lose  its  sharpness.  Self-will  and 
7 


98  AROUND   THE   WICKET   GATE. 

repining  cause  us  a  hundred  times  more 
grief  than  our  afflictions  themselves.  So  be- 
lieve your  Lord  as  to  be  certain  that  his 
will  must  be  far  better  than  yours,  and 
therefore  you  not  only  submit  to  it,  but  even 
rejoice  in  it. 

Trust  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  matter  of 
sanctification.  Certain  friends  appear  to 
think  that  the  Lord  Jesus  cannot  sanctify 
them  wholly,  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  Hence 
they  wilUngly  give  way  to  such  and  such 
sins  under  the  notion  that  there  is  no  help 
for  it,  but  that  they  must  pay  tribute  to  the 
devil  as  long  as  they  live  in  that  particular 
form.  Do  not  basely  bow  your  neck  in 
bondage  to  any  sin,  but  strike  hard  for 
liberty.  Be  it  anger,  or  unbelief,  or  sloth, 
or  any  other  form  of  iniquity,  we  are  able, 
by  divine  grace,  to  drive  out  the  Canaanite, 
and,  what  is  more,  we  must  drive  him  out. 
No  virtue  is  impossible  to  him  that  believeth 
in  Jesus,  and  no  sin  need  have  victory  over 
him.  Indeed,  it  is  written,  ^^  Sin  sliall  not 
have  dominion  over  you :  for  ye  are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  Believe 
for  high  degrees  of  joy  in  the  Lord,  and 
likeness  to  Jesus,  and  advance  to  take  full 
possession  of  these  precious  things ;  for  as 
thou   believest,    so   shall    it    be   unto   thee. 


TO    THOSE    WHO    HAVE    BELIEVED.  99 

^^All  tilings  are  possible  to  him  that  be- 
lieve! h  " ;  and  he  who  is  the  chief  of  sinners 
may  yet  be  not  a  whit  behind  the  greatest 
of  saints. 

Often  realize  the  joy  of  heaven.  This  is 
grand  faith ;  and  yet  it  is  no  more  than  we 
ought  to  have.  Within  a  very  short  time 
the  man  who  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  shall 
be  with  him  where  he  is.  This  head  will  wear 
a  crown ;  these  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his 
beauty  ;  these  ears  shall  hear  his  own  dear 
voice ;  this  soul  shall  be  in  glory ;  and  this 
poor  body  shall  be  raised  from  the  dead  and 
joined  in  in  corruption  to  the  perfected  soul ! 
Glory,  glory,  glory !  And  so  near,  so  sure. 
Let  us  at  once  rehearse  the  music  and  anti- 
cipate the  bliss ! 

But  cries  one, ' '  We  are  not  there  yet."  No : 
but  faith  fills  us  with  delight  in  the  blessed 
prospect,  and  meanwhile  it  sustains  us  on 
the  road.  Reader,  I  long  that  you  may  be 
a  firm  believer  in  the  Lord  alone.  I  want 
you  to  get  wholly  upon  the  rock,  and  not 
keep  a  foot  on  the  sand.  In  this  mortal  life 
trust  God  for  all  things  ;  and  trust  him  alone. 
This  is  the  way  to  live.  I  know  it  by 
experience.  God's  bare  arm  is  quite  enough 
to  lean  upon.  I  will  give  you  a  bit  of  the 
experience  of  an  old  labouring  man  I  once 


100  AROUND    THE   WICKET   GATE. 

knew.  He  feared  God  above  many,  and 
was  very  deeply  taught  of  the  Spirit.  My 
picture  will  show  you  what  kind  of  a  man 
he  was — great  at  hedging  and  ditching;  but 
greater  at  simple  trust.  Here  is  how  he 
described  faith: — "It  was  a  bitter  winter, 
and  I  had  no  work,  and  no  bread  in  the 
house.  The  children  were  crying.  The 
snow  was  deep,  and  my  way  was  dark. 
My  old  master  told  me  I  might  have  a 
bit  of  wood  when  I  wanted  it :  so  I  thouorht 
a  bit  of  fire  would  warm  the  poor  children, 
and  I  went  out  with  my  chopper  to  get  some 
fuel.  I  was  standing  near  a  deep  ditch  full 
of  snow,  which  had  drifted  into  it  many  feet 
deep — in  fact,  I  did  not  know  how  deep. 
While  aiming  a  blow  at  a  bit  of  wood  my 
bill-hook  slipped  out  of  my  hand,  and  went 
right  down  into  the  snow,  where  I  could  not 
hope  to  find  it.  Standing  there  with  no  food, 
no  fire,  and  the  chopper  gone,  something 
seemed  to  say  to  me,  '  Will  Richardson,  can 
you  trust  Grod  now  ?  '  and  my  very  soul  said, 
'  That  I  can.'  "  This  is  true  faith— the  faith 
which  trusts  the  Lord  when  the  bill-hook  is 
gone :  the  faith  which  believes  God  when  all 
outward  appearances  give  him  the  lie  ;  the 
faith  which  is  happy  with  God  alone  when 
all  friends  turn  their  backs  upon  you.     Dear 


TO    THOSE    WHO    HAVE    BELIEVED.  101 


OLD    WILL,     THE    LABOFTIER. 


102  AROUND    THE    WICKET    OxATE. 

reader,  may  you  and  I  have  this  precious 
faith,  this  real  faith,  this  God-honouring 
faith !  The  Lord's  truth  deserves  it ;  his 
love  claims  it,  his  faithfulness  constrains  it. 
Happy  is  he  who  has  it !  He  is  the  man 
whom  the  Lord  loves,  and  the  world  shall  be 
made  to  know  it  before  all  is  finished. 

After  all,  the  very  best  faith  is  an  every- 
day faith  :  the  faith  which  deals  with  bread 
and  water,  coats  and  stockings,  children  and 
cattle,  house-rent  and  weather.  The  super- 
fine confectionery  religion  which  is  only 
available  on  Sundays,  and  in  drawing-room 
meetings  and  Bible  readings,  will  never  take 
a  soul  to  heaven  till  life  becomes  one  long 
Conference,  and  'there  are  seven  Sabbaths 
in  a  week.  Faith  is  doing  her  very  best 
when  for  many  years  she  plods  on,  month 
by  month,  trusting  the  Lord  about  the  sick 
husband,  the  failing  daughter,  the  declining 
business,  the  unconverted  friend,  and  such- 
like things. 

Faith  also  helps  us  to  use  the  world  as  not 
abusing  it.  It  is  good  at  hard  work,  and  at 
daily  duty.  It  is  not  an  angelic  thing  for 
skies  and  stars,  but  a  human  grace,  at  home 
in  kitchens  and  workshops.  It  is  a  sort  of 
maid  of- all-work,  and  is  at  home  at  every 
kind  of  labour,   and  in  every  rank  of  life. 


TO  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  BELIEVED.    103 

It  is  a  grace  for  every  day,  all  the  year 
round.  Holy  confidence  in  God  is  never  out 
of  work.  Faith's  ware  is  so  valued  at  the 
heavenly  court  that  she  always  has  one  fine 
piece  of  work  or  another  on  the  wheel  or  in 
the  furnace.  Men  dream  that  lieroes  are  only 
to  be  made  on  special  occasions,  once  or 
twice  in  a  century ;  but  in  truth  the  finest 
heroes  are  home-spun,  and  are  more  often 
hidden  in  obscurity  than  platformed  by  public 
observation.  Trust  in  the  living  God  is  the 
bullion  out  of  which  heroism  is  coined.  Per- 
severance in  well-doing  is  one  of  the  fields 
in  which  faith  grows  not  flowers,  but  the 
wheat  of  her  harvest.  Plodding  on  in  hard 
work,  bringing  up  a  family  on  a  few  shillings 
a  week,  bearing  constant  pain  with  patience, 
and  so  forth — these  are  the  feats  of  valour 
through  which  God  is  glorified  by  the  rank 
and  file  of  his  believing  people. 

Keader,  you  and  I  will  be  of  one  mind  in 
this  :  we  will  not  pine  to  be  great,  but  we 
will  be  eager  to  be  good.  For  this  we  will 
rely  upon  the  Lord  our  God,  whose  we  are, 
and  whom  we  serve.  We  will  ask  to  be 
made  holy  throughout  every  day  of  the 
week.  We  will  pray  to  our  God  as  much 
about  our  daily  business  as  about  our  soul's 
salvation.     We  will  trust  him  concerning  our 


104      .         AROUND    THE    WICKET    GATE. 

farm,  and  our  turnips,  and  our  cows,  as  well 
as  concerning  our  spiritual  privileges  and 
our  hope  of  heaven.  The  Lord  Jehovah  is 
our  household  God ;  Jesus  is  our  brother 
born  for  adversity ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
our  Comforter  in  every  hour  of  trial.  We 
have  not  an  unapproachable  Grod :  he  hears, 
he  pities,  he  helps.  Let  us  trust  him  without 
a  break,  without  a  doubt,  without  a  hesitation. 
The  life  of  faith  is  life  within  Grod's  wicket- 
gate.  If  we  have  hitherto  stood  trembling 
outside  in  the  wide  world  of  unbelief,  may 
the  Holy  Spirit  enable  us  now  to  take  the 
great  decisive  step,  and  say,  once  for  all, 
^*  Lord,  I  believe :  help  thou  mine  unbelief!  " 


INVALUABLE  BOOKS 

BY  REV.  JAS.  STALKER,  M.  A. 


LIFE  OF  CHRIST.     i2mo.     i66  pp.    60  cts. 
One  of  the  latest  and  best  lives  of  our  Lord.     Highly 
and  universally  commended. 

"  It  presents  in  a  comparatively  small  space  a  clear,  con- 
cise, and  at  the  same  time  eloquent  account  of  our  Lord's 
career  and  teachings." — Congregationalist. 

THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  PAUL.  i2mo.  183  pp.,  with  map. 
60  cts. 

A  new  and  admirable  work  on  this  exhaustless  theme. 

The  author  avails  himself  of  the  best  previous  writings 
and  presents  his  own  fresh  thoughts  clearly  and  concisely. 

"The  picture  of  St.  Paul's  life  and  teachings  as  here 
given  comprehends  all  the  salient  points  and  unites  them 
into  a  very  striking  whole.  The  treatment  is  from  the  ortho- 
dox standpoint,  under  the  light  of  the  best  modern  criti- 
cism."— Evangelist. 

"  We  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  no  minister's  library  is 
complete  without  it." — Zion's  Advocate. 

IMAGO  CHRISTI.     i2mo.     332  pp.    $1  50. 

"The  book  holds  the  interest  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end.  The  style  is  terse,  clear,  straightforward,  adorned  only 
by  a  lack  of  adornment."— Christian  Inquirer. 

Smerican  j|ract  Jodctij, 

150  NASSAU  ST.  and  304  FOURTH  AV.,  NEW  YORK. 

BOSTON,  54  Bromfield  st.      ROCHESTER,  N.  Y.,  93  State  st. 
CHICAGO,  122  Wabash  av.    PHILADELPHIA,  1512  Chestnut  st. 
CINCINNATI,  176  Elm  st.     SAN  FRANCISCO,  735  Market  st. 


0e^©ti©nal  B©©l^s. 


DAILY  LIGHT  ON  THE  DAILY  PATH.  32010.  Size, 
4^  by  3X  by  ^  inches. 

Morning  or  Evening  Hour,  each,  in  cloth,  40  cts.;  cloth 
gilt,  50  cts.;  morocco  gilt,  ^i  ;  kid-lined,  $2,. 

Morning  and  Evening  Hour,  combined.  32010  edition. 
Cloth,  60  cts.;  cloth  gilt,  75  cts.;  Seal  Russia,  |i  20;  morocco, 
%i  40;  morocco,  red  and  gold  edges,  %\  60;  seal  extra,  gold 
edges,  %2  ;  calf,  %2  ;  kid-lined,  $4. 

Large  Print  Edition.     i6mo.    Size,  5^  by  4>^  ins. 

Morning  or  Evening  Hour,  each,  cloth  gilt,  75  cts.;  mo- 
rocco, gilt,  |i. 

Morning  and  Evening  Hour,  combined.  Morocco  gilt,  %2  ; 
calf,  |2  50;  Levant  gilt,  I3  ;  kid-lined,  I5. 

ANCHOR  OF  THE  SOUL.  By  Dr.  Arnot.  24mo. 
48  pp.     Cloth,  40  cts.;  gilt,  60  cts.     Cloth  limp,  20  cts. 

BIBLE  PRAYERS.  By  Jonas  King,  D.  D.  32mo.  182 
pp.     Cloth,  25  cts. 

CHRISTIAN  HOME  LIFE.     i2mo.     299  pp.    %i. 

DAILY  COMMUNION  WITH  GOD.  By  J.  R.  Boyd, 
D.  D.  i8mo.  104  pp.  Cloth,  30  cts.;  gilt,  50  cts.;  morocco, 
|i  25. 

DEVOTIONAL  THOUGHTS.  By  D.  A.  Harsha,  M.  A. 
i2mo.     566  pp.     7  portraits.     Cloth,  |i  50. 

DROPS  FROM  THE  BROOK  BY  THE  WAY.  24mo. 
196  pp.     Cloth,  50  cts. 

PASSION  FLOWERS.  By  Rev.  C.  S.  Hageman,  D.  D. 
24mo.     Illuminated.     64  pp.     Cloth  gilt,  50  cts. 

AMERICAN    TRACT  SOCIETY, 

150  NASSAU  ST.  and  304  FOURTH  AV.,  NEW  YORK. 


THE  BIBLE  IN  PICTURE  AND  STORY. 


By  Mrs.  L.  S.  Houghton.  4to.  240  pp.  269  illustrations, 
many  of  them  full-page.     Cloth,  $1  25;  gilt  extra,  |i  75. 

"  An  outline  of  Biblical  history,  told  simply  enough  for 
the  children  to  grasp  easily,  full  of  interest,  and  illustrated 
freely  and  fittingly.    We  like  it." — Congregationalist. 

**  Here  is  a  book,  safe,  interesting,  educating,  sanctifying, 
designed  and  calculated  to  mould  and  otherwise  help  to 
form  and  even  to  construct  the  plastic  mind  for  righteous- 
ness, usefulness,  and  honor.     It  should  certainly  fare  well." 

Occident. 

"  It  is  very  freely  illustrated.  The  type  is  large  and  suit- 
able for  little  folks,  and  the  old,  old  stories  of  the  old,  old 
Book  are  told  in  a  manner  calculated  to  prove  very  attractive 
to  little  learners." — New  York  Observer. 

"  This  volume  is  adapted  to  catch  the  attention  and  win 
the  interest  of  every  child.  There  is  a  picture  on  every  page 
of  the  two  hundred  and  forty  which  make  up  the  handsome 
quarto.  Mothers  who  seek  a  new  version  of  the  old  story 
will  be  glad  to  have  their  attention  called  to  this,  both  for 
reading  to  the  children  and  for  placing  in  their  hands  when 
they  have  learned  to  read  themselves." 

Christian  Intelligencer. 

American  Tract  Society, 

150  NASSAU  ST.  and  304  FOURTH  AV.,  NEW  YORK. 


Helps  to  Bible  Study. 


THE  BIBLE  DICTIONARY.  By  Rev.  W.  W.  Rand,  D.  D. 
Revised  and  enlarged.  720  pp.  8vo.  360  illustrations.  18 
maps.  Cloth,  $2;  sheep,  sprinkled  edge,  $2  50;  morocco, 
gilt,  |3  50;  full  Levant,  I5. 

"A  model  of  accuracy,  cheapness,  and  typographical  ex- 
cellence."— Occident. 

"  I  have  had  occasion  to  refer  to  it  frequently,  and  I  am 
more  than  satisfied  with  its  fulness  and  accuracy." 

Rev.  C.  Hamlin,  D.  D.,  in  Christian  Mirror. 

COMPANION  TO  THE  BIBLE.  By  Prof.  E.  P.  Bar- 
rovi^s,  D.  D.  Designed  to  assist  in  the  study  of  God's  Word. 
8vo.     639  pp.     Cloth,  |i  75  ;  half  morocco,  red  edge,  I3. 

CRUDEN'S  CONCORDANCE.  Edited  by  Rev.  John 
Eadie.  This  book,  containing  over  150,000  distinct  references 
to  passages  in  the  Scriptures,  is  invaluable  to  the  student  of 
the  Word.  Cloth,  $1 ;  roan,  sprinkled  edge,  $2  25  ;  half  mo- 
rocco, sprinkled  edge,  $3. 

BIBLE  TEXT-BOOK.     i2mo.     232  pp.     Cloth,  90  cts. 

A  short  yet  very  comprehensive  cyclopaedia  of  the  con- 
tents of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  All  Bible  places,  persons,  and 
subjects  are  arranged  alphabetically,  and  under  each  word  is 
given  the  texts  bearing  upon  the  same.  It  has  the  "  Bible 
Student's  Manual,"  with  indexes,  tables  of  various  kinds,  and 
a  complete  set  of  maps.  It  is  one  of  the  most  useful  and 
complete  "  Bible  Helps  "  published. 

/\n]QriQaT]  TraQt  Society, 

150  NASSAU  ST.  and  304  FOURTH  AV.,  NEW  YORK. 


TE^d^M^'Ji  ©IBLE^. 


NEW  MINION  TYPE,  6^  inches  long,  5  wide,  i^  thick. 

References  between  the  verses.     Morocco,  leather  lined, 

protecting  edges,  round  corners,  full  flexible        -    I3  50 

With  Text-Book,  order  No.  184;  Concordance,  No.  214. 

Levant,    kid-lined,    with  pocket,  red  under  gold  edges, 
round  corners,  extra- 5  00 

With  Text-Book,  No.  185  ;  Concordance,  No.  215. 
"LARGE    PRINT"    Edition,      yj^  inches   by  5X  by   i^. 
References  in  centre  of  page.     Mor.,  limp  or  stiff  -    4  00 

With  Text-Book,  No.  189;  Concordance,  No.  219. 
Morocco,  kid-lined,  divinity  circuit,  full-flexible      -     7  00 
With  Text-Book,  No.  191 ;  Concordance,  No.  221. 

Levant,  kid-lined,  flexible,  silk-sewed,  protecting  edges, 

pocket,  round  corners 10  00 

With  Text-Book,  No,  192  ;  Concordance,  No.  222. 

LARGE  PAPER  (Wide  Margin)  Edition.  8^  ins.  by  6>^ 
by  1%.  Ref's  in  centre.  With  24  blank  pages  for  Notes, 
Scripture  Index,  Maps, etc.  Seal,  kid-lined.  No.  199  11  00 
Do.  with  Text-Book  instead  of  Scrip.  Index,  No.  211  12  00 

BIBLE  STUDENT'S  Editions.  Full-faced  Bourgeois,  kid- 
lined  binding,  with  Index  and  Maps.  No.  250  -  10  00 
Same  book,  with  Bible  Text-Book,  No.  255  -        -     11  00 

NEW  STYLES,  POCKET  EDITIONS,  containing  over 
500  pages  of  aids  to  Bible  Study,  including  Concordance, 
Subject  Index,  Proper  Names,  their  pronunciation,  etc.. 
Epitome  of  Bible  History,  Chronological  Tables,  Bible 
Monuments,  Classification  of  Bible  Animals,  Birds,  Po- 
etry, Music,  Weights  and  Measures,  with  12  Maps. 

No.  603  T.  Pearl,  sH  by  4X  by  1)4  ins.     French  morocco, 

flap  edges,  gilt,  round  corners,  postpaid       -        -     i  75 

No.  496  T.   Ruby,  size  and  binding  as  603.     Postpaid  i  88 

7\tt|eriGar|  Tract  SoQietyj 

150  NASSAU  ST.  and  304  FOURTH  AV.,  NEW  YORK. 


VOLUMES   BY   DR.  ROBINSON. 


SABBATH  EVENING  SERMONS.     12mo. $1  25 

Discourses  which  might  be  read  for  tlie  services  in  churches  Avith- 
out  a  pastor. 

SERMONS  IN  SONGS.     12mo. 1  25 

Sermons  preached  in  the  Memorial  Church,  New  York  city,  the 
texts  of  which  are  chosen  from  the  Songs  of  the  Bible. 

CHURCH  WORK.    12mo. 1  25 

Sermons  neither  occasional  nor  selected,  but  the  actual  rehearsal 
(once  a  week)  of  half  a  year's  pastoral  work. 

BETHEL  AND  PENUEL.     12mo. 1  25 

The  remaining  half-year's  work  in  the  same  pulpit:  founded  upon 
the  two  incidents  of  Jacob's  life  at  Bethel  and  Penuel. 

STUDIES  OF  NEGLECTED  TEXTS.     12mo. ,     -    1  25 

Sermons  peculiar  in  that  the  themes  of  discourse  are  chosen  from 
texts  somewhat  rarely  selected  for  pulpit  use. 

STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     12mo. 1  25 

Homiletic  expositions  with  illustrations  of  consecutive  passages  in 
the  Gospels,  the  Epistles,  and  the  Apocalypse. 

STUDIES  IN  MARK'S  GOSPEL.     12mo. 1  25 

These  discourses  are  constructed  upon  passages  for  study  chosen 
in  the  shortest  and  most  vivid  of  the  four  Gospels. 

FROM  SAMUEL  TO  SOLOMON.    12mo. 1  25 

Four  histories— Samuel's  and  Saul's.  David's  and  Solomon's— cross 
the  highest  lines  of  Israel's  splendor  as  a  kingdom. 

STUDIES  IN  LUKE'S  GOSPEL.     I.     12mo. -    -    1  25 

These  discourses  are  like  the  others  in  construction,  being  exposi- 
tory and  illustrative;  they  cover  the  first  half  of  the  third  Gospel. 

SIMON  PETER:  His  Early  Life  and  Times.    12mo 1  25 

Sermons,  biographical  and  practical,  picturesquely  delineating  the 
career  of  this  misunderstood  disciple  of  our  Lord. 


FOR  SALE  BY  THE 

AMERICAN  TRACT  SOCIETY. 


INSTRUCTIVE  VOLUMES. 

By  tliat  eminent  author 

REV.    E.    F.    BURR,    D.  D.,    LL.  D. 


ECCE  C(EIiUM.    12mo.    198  pp.     $1. 

"I  have  gotten  a  better  idea  of  Astronomy,  as  a  whole,  from  it  than  I  ever 
got  before  fi-ora  all  other  sources."— Horace  Bushnell. 

PATER  3IUJVDI ;  or  Modern  Science  Testifying  to  the  Hea-renly 
Father.    First  Series.    l2mo.    307  pp.    $1  25. 

"  It  discusses  with  masterly  ability  the  testimonies  of  Modern  Science  to  the 
being  of  a  God."— Presbyterian  Review. 

PATER  MUIVDI ;  or  The   Doctrine  of  Evolution.     Second  Series. 
12mo.     370  pp.     $1  25. 

"A  complete  and  unanswerable  reply  to  Evolutionism." — Lutheran  Quar- 
terly Review. 

AD  FIDEM.     12mo.     388  pp.     $1  50. 

"  One  of  the  finest  defences  of  the  Christian  religion  tliat  has  been  made  in 
this  country."— Christian  quarterly. 

TEMPTED  TO  UNBEL.IEF.     12mo.     224  pp.     $1. 

"We  should  like  to  see  it  circulating  actively  from  house  to  house  in  every 
community."— Congregationalist. 

CEIiESTIAL.  EMPIRES.     12mo.     302  pp.     $1  50. 

"  A  very  grand  view  of  the  revelations  of  science."— Prof.  James  Dana. 

UXIVERSAIi  BELIEFS.    12mo.     312  pp.     $1  25. 

"An  able  and  opportune  volume,  forcibly  setting  forth  essential  truths."— 
President  Mark  Hopkins. 

LONG  AGO:  as  Interpreted  by  the  Nineteenth  Century.    12mo. 

388  pp.     Cloth,  $1  50. 

SUPREME  THINGS.     l-2n:o.     430  pp.     $1  75. 

A  fresh  and  suggestive  work,  treating  in  the  author's  striking  style  of  many 
of  the  themes  of  highest  importance— such  as  the  Supreme  Book,  the  Supreme 
Day,  Institution,  Evil,  Good,  etc. 

American  Tract  Society, 

150  Nassau  St.,  New  York;  Boston.  54  Biomfield  St.:  Philadelphia,  1512  Chestnut 
St.;  Rochester,  93  State  St.:  Chicago,  122  Wabash  Ave.;  Cincinnati,  176  Elm  St.; 
San  Francisco,  735  Market  St. 


IMPORTANT  RELIGIOUS  WORKS. 

MR.  SPURGEON'S  NEW  BOOKS. 

I.  THE  SALT-CELLARS,  PROVERBS  AND  QUAINT 

SAYINGS,  Together  with  Homely  Notes  Thereon. 

JM.  to  Ij,     Very  handsomely  bound  in  i2mo,  illuminated 
cloth,  gilt  side,  $i  50. 

"The  placing  of  a  proverb  for  every  day  for  twenty  years 
has  cost  me  great  labor,  and  I  feel  that  I  cannot  afford  to  lose  the 
large  collection  of  sentences  which  I  have  thus  brought  together. 
There  are  many  proverb  books,  but  none  exactly  like  these.  Some 
of  my  sentences  are  quite  new,  and  more  are  put  into  a  fresh  form." 

From  the  Author^s  Preface. 
The  London  Literary  World  says  :  "  There  is  not  a  page  that  is  not  brightened 
with  genuine  wit  and  enriched  with  wisdom." 

"  An  admirable  help  to  teachers  and  preacliers,  being  very  suggestive  of  illus- 
tration.   It  is  not  only  highly  entertaining,  but  full  of  instruction." 

St.  Louis  Evangelist. 
"The  pith,  pertinence,  and  point  of  the  work  are  sure  to  make  it  popular  and 
helpful." — N.  W.  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal. 

"  An  exceedingly  interesting  book  which  should  find  a  place  in  every  family, 
and  especially  in  every  teacher's  library." — Reformed  Quarterly  Review. 

Second  Series — A  Companion   Volume — •JfK  to  J^. 
THE    SALT-CELLARS,    PROVERBS    AND    QUAINT 
SAYINGS.     Bound  uniform  with  ist  series.     Price,  |i  50. 

II.  THE  CHEQUE  BOOK  OF  THE  BANK  OF  FAITH. 

Being   Precious   Promises  arranged   for  daily  use.     With 

brief  experimental   comments.      Nearly   400  pages,  i2mo, 

cloth,  gilt  side,  %\  50. 

"When  it  is  stated  that  this  well-named  book  contains  a  Scrip- 
ture Promise  for  Each  Day  in  the  Year,  commented  on,  in  his  best 
vein,  by  the  prince  of  practical  and  experimental  preachers,  enough 
has  been  said  to  commend  it  as  first  in  its  class." 

JSeio  York  Christian  Intelligencer. 

"  It  is  done  in  the  great  preacher's  inimitable  style,  and  speaks  home  on  every 
page  to  the  heart  and  need  of  the  believer."— iVew  York  Independent. 

"Mr.  Spurgeon's  words  are  so  plain,  his  style  so  spiirkling,  and  his  spirit  so 
devout,  that  the  reading  of  his  productions  is  almost  sure  to  excite  a  mental  glow 
and  awaken  holy  aspirations.  This  book  is  brimful  of  quickening,  soothing,  soul- 
lifting  power."— iVew  York  Witness. 

"  As  there  are  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  cheques  in  this  book,  the  man  who 
makes  right  use  of  tiiem  is  rich  indeed." — New  York  Observer. 

Copies  sent  by  mail,  postpaid,  on  receipt  of  price. 
A.  C.  ARMSTRONG  &  SON,    714  Broadv^ay,  New  York. 


p.  /L 


^M 


'^'^M 


■'^:i 


.1  .v.c^'V^^^^^ 
S'i-'fli^    ^♦t'p    -'^^^ 


.  ir^  ^5 :5^s' 


M 


UBRARY 


