—  ^^^^=^^     f 

Ds^  1 

— 

CO 

plW  l«C    -         £^gj 


THE 


HOLY  BIBLE 

A  Facsimile  in  a  reduced  size  of  the 
Authorized  Version  published  in  the  year 


i 


611 


***  ^ 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  A.  W.  POLLARD 

AND  ILLUSTRATIVE  DOCUMENTS 


OXFORD 

PRINTED  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
LONDON : HENRY  FROWDE 

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  AMEN  CORNER 
NEW  YORK:  35  WEST  32ND  STREET 

191  I 


4 


OXFORD 

PRINTED  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

BY  HORACE  HART 


CONTENTS. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  INTRODUCTION . 


PREFACE  

CHAPTER 

I.     The  Earlier  English  Translations  (1380-1582). 

II.     The  Bible  of   161 1 

III.     The  Later  History  of  the  Bible  of   161 1 


PAGE 
7 


9 
33 


APPENDIX  TO  INTRODUCTION. 

DOCUMENTS  RELATING  TO  THE  MAKING,  PRINTING,  AND  PUBLISHING  OF  THE  ENGLISH 
TRANSLATIONS  OF  THE  BIBLE,  FROM  TYNDALE'S  NEW  TESTAMENT  OF  1525  TO  THE 
APPEARANCE  OF  THE  VERSION  OF  161 1. 


NUMBER 
I. 


II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 
XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 


Prohibition  of  English  Translations  of  the  Bible  from  the  time  of  Wyclif  unless 

authorized  by  a  Bishop  or  a  Provincial  Council 
Sir  Thomas  More  on  the  Prohibition 
More's  Plan  for  a  Limited  Circulation   . 
Tyndale's  Translations  .... 

Tyndale's  Story  of  his  Translation 

The  Printing  of  the  first  New  Testaments 

The  News  sent  to  the  King 

The  supposed  Trial  Version  of  S.  Matthew    . 

The  Beginning  of  Tyndale's  Prologue  to  the  first  New  Testament 

Tyndale's  Epilogue  to  the  second  New  Testament 

Henrv  VIII's  belief  that  Tyndale  was  instigated  by  Luther  . 

Tyndale  on  his  fellow  '  apostate  '  William  Roy 

An  Expert  Criticism  of  Tyndale's  Version       .... 

The  Criticisms  of  Sir  Thomas  More         ..... 

Episcopal  Prohibition   ........ 

The  Search  for  English  New  Testaments  and  other  Heretical  Books  at  Antwerp 

and  endeavour  to  get  their  Printers  punished 

The  Bishop  of  London  buys  New  Testaments 

The   Bishop   of  Norwich  refunds   the    Archbishop    part   of   his   outlay  on  New 

Testaments        ...... 

The  Confession   of   Robert   Necton   that   bought   and   sold   New  Testaments  in 

English    .  ......... 

Bishop  Nix  implores  the  King's  help    ..... 

The  King  consults  his  Council  and  the  Bishops,  May  25,  1530 
The  King's  Proclamation,   June,   1 5  50     . 


41 
41 
43 
44 
46 
48 
52 
53 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
59 
61 

62 
68 

69 

70 
72 
73 
73 


Contents. 


NUMBER 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 


XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

xxxu. 

XXXIII. 


xxxiv. 

XXXV. 
XXXVI. 


XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 


Tyndale's  Terms  of  Submission. 
Frith's  Defence  of  Tyndale  and  his  Work  . 
George  Jove's  Letter  to  the   King  and  Queen 
The  Bishops'  Petition  for  an  English  Bible 

George  Joye's  unauthorized  Revision  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament  : 

A.  Tyndale's  Complaint 

B.  George  Joye's  Answer 

C.  The  Reconciliation  breaks  down 

D.  Jove's  Narrative 

Tyndale's  Work  as  a  Transit 

The  Projected  Bishops'   Version 

Financial  help  given  to  Coverdale  by  Jacob  van  Meteren    . 

Co\  erdale's  Bible,    i  ;  ;;  : 

A.  End  of  Dedication  ....  .  . 

B.  Beginning  of  the  Address  to  the  Reader  .... 

Coverdale's  Latin-English  New  Testament  following  the  Vulgate  Text 

A.  Dedication  to  the  First  Edition         ..... 

B.  Preface  to  the  same  Edition    ...... 

I  lit    licensing  of  Matthew's  Bible  : 

A.  Letter  from  Cranmer  to  Cromwell,  August  4.    1537    . 

B.  Cranmer  to  Cromwell,  August   13,   1537     . 
I'.     Cranmer  to  Cromwell.  August  28,    1537      . 

D.  Richard  Grafton  to  Cromwell    August  28,    1537 

E.  Richard  Grafton  to  Cromwell,  after  August  28,   1537 

Fox's  Account  of  the  Printing  of  the  Great  Bible  of   1539 

The  French   King's  Licence  ....... 

Reports  of  Progress  : 

\.     Letter  of  Coverdale  and  Grafton  to  Cromwell,  June  23,   1538 

B.  Letter  of  Edward  Whitchurch  to  Cromwell  (undated) 

C.  Letter  of  Coverdale,  Grafton,  and  W.  Gray  to  Cromwell.  August  9,  15; 

D.  Coverdale  and  Grafton  to  Cromwell,  September   12,   1538  . 

E.  Bishop  Bonner  to  Cromwell,  October  7,   1538    . 

The  King's  Proclamation,  November   16,   1538     .... 

More   Reports  from  Paris  : 

A.  Grafton   to  Cromwell,  December  I,  1538   . 

B.  Coverdale  to  Cromwell.  December   13,   1538 

llu    Bibles  Confiscated:    Cromwell's  Efforts  to  obtain  their  release: 

\.     Citation  of  Francois  Regnault  for  Printing  the  Bible  at  Paris.  Decern 

ber   ;-.  ... 

B.     Castillon,    the    French    Ambassador   111    England,    to    the   Constable   of 

France,  December  31,  1538  . 
('.     Extract   from    Letter  of  the    Imperial   Ambassador  in   England  to  the 

cror  Charles  V.  January  9,    1  5  jg 
l».      Postscript   ol  .1   Lettei    from   the   French  Ambassador.  Charles  Marillac 
to  the  Grand  Constable  of  France.  May   1,   1539 

E.  Extract  from  a   Letter  from  the  Grand  Constable  oi    France  to  the 

French  Ambassador  in   England,  May  6,   1539 

F.  Extract   from  a   1  1  French   Ambassador  to  the  Constable 

July  5.   1539 


Contents. 


NUMBER 
XL. 

XLI. 

XLII. 
XLIII. 
XLIV. 


XLV. 

XLVI. 

XLVII. 

XLVIII. 

XLIX. 
L. 


LI. 
LII. 


LIII. 

LIV. 
LV,  LVI. 


LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

INDEX  TO 


The  Price  and  Copyright  of  the  Great  Bible        ..... 

Patent  for  Bible  Printing  granted  to  Cromwell   ..... 

Anthony  Marler  and  the  Privy  Council       ...... 

The  King's  Proclamation  for  the  English  Bible  to  be  set  up  in  Churches 

The  Reading  of  the  Bible  : 

A.  Draft  for  a  Proclamation  ....... 

B.  An  Admonition  and  Advertisement  given  by  the  Bishop  of  London  to 

all  Readers  of  the  Bible  in  the  English  Tongue.     154-  . 

C.  The  Narrative  of  William  Maldon  of  Newington 

The  Great  Bible  condemned        ....... 

Preface  to  the  Geneva  New  Testament       ..... 

Preface  to  the  Geneva  Bible       ....... 

Privilege  and  Licence  to  John  Bodley  for  printing  the  Geneva  Bible  for  seven 
years     ............ 

Parker  and  Grindal  on  the  Renewal  of  Bodley's  Privilege    . 

The  Preparation  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  : 

A.  Letter  of  Richard  Cox,  Bishop  of  Ely,  to  Cecil 

B.  Parker  invites  Cecil  to  take  part  in  the  Revision 

C.  Strype's  Summary  of  other  Correspondence        .... 

Parker  announces  to  Cecil  the  completion  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  . 

Presentation  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  to  the  Queen,  and  Story  of  the  Revision  : 

A.  Archbishop  Parker  to  Cecil       ....... 

B.  Archbishop  Parker  to  Queen  Elizabeth     ..... 

C.  Parker's  Note  as  to  the  Translators  ..... 

The  Inception  of  the  Rheims  New  Testament     ..... 
Preface  to  the  Rheims  New  Testament       ...... 

Jugge  and  Barker  and  their  Patrons  : 

A.  The  High  Commissioners'  Order  taken  between  Richard  Jugge  and  others 

of  the  Stationers'  Company  ...... 

B.  The  Beginning  of  the  Bible  Stock    ..... 

C.  Barker's  Satisfaction  to  Jugge  ..... 

Barker  establishes  his  Monopoly  ..... 

Barker's  Circular  to  the  City  Companies     .  .  .  . 

Draft  for  an  Act  of  Parliament  for  a  New  Version  of  the  Bible 

The  Attempt  to  provide  for  the  Translators  of  161 1  : 

A.  Bishop  Bancroft  circulates  a  Letter  from  the  King 

B.  Bancroft's  Exhortation  to  the  Bishops  to  subscribe 


PAGE 

1 10 

1 1 1 
1 1 1 
112 

113 

114 
ii5 
116 
117 
119 

121 
121 

122 
122 
122 

124 

124 
125 
125 

127 

128 


132 
133 
134 


137 
138 

139 
140 

141 


The  Bible  Stock  in   1606    ........ 

Report  on  the  Making  of  the  Version  of   16  ri  presented  to  the  Synod  of  Dort     141 

THE  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  INTRODUCTION 143 


Contents. 


FACSIMILE  OF  THE  1611  BIBLE. 

The  Epistle  Dedicatory. 

The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 

Calendar. 

An  Almanack   for  39  Years. 

Directions  to  find  Easter. 

The  Order  of  Psalms  and  Lessons  to  be  said  at  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer. 

The  Names  and  Order  of  the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 

Genealogies  of  Holy  Scripture. 

Map  of  Canaan. 

THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 
THE  APOCRYPHA. 
THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  INTRODUCTION. 

PREFACE. 

In  writing  a  Bibliographical  Introduction  to  the  Oxford  University  Press  reprints 
of  the  English  Bible  of  1611  I  found  myself  constantly  hampered  by  the  lack  of  such 
a  collection  of  original  documents  as  has  here  been  brought  together.  Quite  a  large 
number  of  important  documents  had  never  been  printed  in  full  ;  others  were  available 
only  in  books  now  out  of  print  or  for  other  reasons  difficult  to  obtain.  Many  of  the 
books,  moreover,  were  extremely  bulky,  and  when  it  was  desired  to  consider  afresh  the 
evidence  of  several  different  documents  in  order  to  straighten  out  some  small  tangle, 
the  difficulties  of  remembering  where  each  was  to  be  found  and  getting  hold  of  the 
right  books  were  somewhat  harassing.  I  was  thus  moved,  when  my  Introduction 
was  nearing  completion,  to  suggest  to  Mr.  Frowde  that  a  collection  of  original  docu- 
ments relating  to  the  making,  printing,  and  publishing  of  the  English  translations 
of  the  Bible,  from  Tyndale's  New  Testament  of  1525  to  the  appearance  of  the  version 
of  161 1,  would  be  as  appropriate  a  commemoration  of  the  Tercentenary  as  could 
well  be  conceived.  Mr.  Frowde  cordially  agreed,  and  the  volume  was  accordingly 
put  in  hand.  The  natural  desire  of  publisher  and  editor  that  it  should  be  available 
for  the  use  of  those  taking  part  in  the  Tercentenary  Celebrations  in  March  191 1  will 
be  no  defence  if  any  serious  fault  should  be  found,  but  may  perhaps  be  allowed  some 
weight  by  readers  who  would  have  liked  fuller  notes  to  some  of  the  documents,  or  see 
room  for  minor  improvements  in  other  respects. 

Although  the  documents  here  printed  are  mainly  those  which  I  used  in  writing 
my  Introduction  1  they  take  a  considerably  wider  range.  The  personal  element  which 
the  bibliographer  was  bound  to  leave  very  imperfectly  indicated  here  crops  up  at 
every  turn,  and  in  their  own  words  in  prefaces  and  letters,  or  in  the  narratives  and 
comments  of  contemporaries  we  get  intimate  glimpses  into  the  characters  of  many  of 
those  who  played  their  part  in  the  century  which  it  took  to  determine  the  great  question 
as  to  what  Bible  the  English  people  should  be  allowed  to  read.  Another  point  which 
the  documents  emphasize  is  the  political  importance  attached  to  that  struggle.  Just 
as  the  documents  relating  to  the  quarrel  of  Tyndale  and  Joye  have  little  bearing  on 
the  main  history  of  the  English  Bible,  and  yet  are  worth  all  the  pages  they  fill  because 
of  their  human  interest,  so  the  long  reports  of  Hackett  to  Wolsey,  or,  again,  the  diplo- 
matic correspondence  about  the  Bible  of  1539,  which  takes  us  so  far  away  from  text  and 
translators,  are  yet  thoroughly  relevant  as  showing  the  immense  importance  attached 
by  the  statesmen  of  the  day  to  stopping  or  forwarding  the  supply  of  the  Scriptures 
in  English,  according  as  their  policy  dictated. 

I  have  already  indicated  in  my  Introduction  my  belief  that  after  the  accession 
of  Queen  Elizabeth  the  question  of  what  Bible  the  English  people  should  be  allowed 

1  In  reprinting  this,  marginal  references  by  their  numbers  have  been  given  to  the  documents  used. 


8  Bibliographical    Introduction. 


to  read  was  almost  as  keenly  contested  as  before.  The  documents  kindly  supplied 
to  me  by  Mr.  Charles  Rivington,  just  in  time  for  insertion  (see  Nos.  LVI  and  LXI), 
justify  far  stronger  language  than  on  the  evidence  at  first  before  me  I  ventured  to  use. 
As  long  as  he  lived  Archbishop  Parker  kept  the  Geneva  Bible  from  being  printed  in 
England,  and  secured  a  monopoly  for  the  Bishops'  Bible,  and  for  Jugge  as  its  printer. 
We  now  know  that  it  was  within  three  weeks  of  Parker's  death  that  J  ugge's  monopoly 
was  broken  down  and  that  not  more  than  three  days  later,  at  the  instance  of  seven 
members  of  the  Privy  Council,  Christopher  Barker  was  allowed  to  enter  the  Geneva 
Bible  '  for  his  copy  '  at  Stationers'  Hall.  In  1577,  when  Jugge  died,  the  office  of 
Queen's  Printer  was  conferred  on  Barker  by  a  patent  which  gave  him  the  most  absolute 
control  over  Bible-printing  in  England,  and  until  the  accession  of  Whitgift  this  patent 
was  used  to  secure  a  monopoly  for  the  Geneva  version  as  rigorous  as  that  which  Parker 
had  obtained  for  the  Bishops'.  To  the  reasons  I  have  given  in  my  Introduction  for 
believing  that  after  a  few  years  of  grace  recourse  was  had  to  the  methods  of  Arch- 
bishop Parker  to  support  the  version 'of  1611  as  against  that  of  Geneva,  I  should  like 
to  add  here  that  the  real  triumph  of  the  161 1  version  came  in  the  days  of  the  Common- 
wealth, when  its  hold  on  the  affections  of  the  people  proved  so  strong  that  its  supremacy 
remained  undisturbed.  The  leaders  of  the  two  great  parties  in  the  Church  had  loyally 
co-operated  in  making  it,  and  after  the  experience  of  a  third  of  a  century  it  was 
recognized  as  the  Bible  of  the  whole  Church  and  the  whole  Nation. 

It  only  remains  to  acknowledge  some  personal  obligations.  The  heaviest  of  these 
is  to  my  friend  Mr.  H.  R.  Plomer,  by  whom  the  greater  part  of  the  documents  were 
transcribed.1  Mr.  Plomer  took  the  keenest  interest  in  the  work,  and  without  his 
experienced  helpfulness  I  could  have  done  nothing.  Like  most  other  students  of  the 
subject,  I  have  found  Anderson's  Annals  of  the  English  Bible  (1845)  of  great  use  despite 
its  vehement  partisanship.  I  also  owe  many  valuable  references  to  Professor  Arber's 
introduction  to  his  facsimile  of  the  Grenville  fragment  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament 
of  1525;  to  Mr.  J.  A.  Kingdon's  privately  printed  monograph  on  Two  Members  of  the 
Grocers1  Company,  Richard  Grafton  and  Thomas  Poyntz ;  to  the  admirable  Historical 
Catalogue  of  Printed  Bibles  by  Messrs.  Darlow  and  Moule ;  and  to  that  standard  work, 
A  General  View  of  the  History  of  the  English  Bible  by  the  late  Bishop  Westcott,  as 
edited  by  Dr.  Aldis  Wright. 

ALFRED  W.  POLLARD. 

1  With  the  exception  of  a  few  in  Episcopal  Registers  all  documents  have  been  transcribed  from, 
or  collated  with,  the  originals.  These  have  been  transcribed  as  they  stand,  but  contracted  forms  have 
been  written  out.  In  some  documents  the  form  '  &  '  has  been  expanded  ;  in  others  it  has  been  allowed 
to  stand. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

CHAPTER   I. 

THE  EARLIER  ENGLISH  TRANSLATIONS  (1380-1582). 

Mainly,  no  doubt,  because  of  the  predominance  of  French  as  the  language 
of  educated  people  in  England  from  the  time  of  the  Norman  Conquest  until  the 
middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  Bible,  as  a  whole,  remained  untranslated  into 
English,  until  the  last  years  of  the  life  of  Wyclif.  A  version  was  then  made,  about 
1380-3,  and  some  years  later  this  was  revised  and  substantially  rewritten  in 
a  simpler  style  by  another  hand.  That  the  reformer  himself  took  any  personal  share 
in  either  of  these  versions  which  pass  popularly  under  his  name  is  unlikely,  and  in  the 
case  of  the  second  is  not  seriously  contended.  We  know  from  a  manuscript  at 
the  Bodleian  Library,  Oxford,  that  Nicholas  of  Hereford,  who  up  to  the  time  of  the 
final  defeat  of  Wyclif 's  cause  at  Oxford  (June  1382 )  figured  as  one  of  his  strongest  sup- 
porters at  the  University,  was  the  author  of  the  first  version  as  far  as  Baruch  iii.  20, 
where  it  breaks  off  in  the  manuscript  abruptly,  presumably  because  of  Hereford's 
flight.  The  authorship  of  the  rest  of  this  version  is  unknown,  and  being  unknown  has 
been  ascribed  to  Wyclif  himself,  with  more  piety  than  probability,  since  the  master 
does  not  often  take  up  the  work  of  the  disciple,  and  Wyclif,  after  June  1382,  was 
both  old  and  ill.  The  authorship  of  the  second  version  was  tentatively  ascribed 
to  one  of  Wyclif's  followers,  John  Purvey,  by  Daniel  Waterton  in  1729  {Waterton's 
Works,  vol.  x,  p.  361),  and  although  Waterton  says  himself  that  he  merely  guessed 
and  '  pitched  upon  '  Purvey  as  the  author,  and  his  reason  for  doing  so  has  not  been 
confirmed,  the  suggestion  was  accepted  by  Forshall  and  Madden  in  their  splendid 
edition  of  the  two  versions  in  1850,  and  is  now  frequently  stated  as  a  fact. 

A  name  which  long  before  Waterton's  time  was  connected  with  an  English 
version  of  the  Bible  was  that  of  John  of  Trevisa,  of  whom  Caxton  wrote  in  the 
preface  to  his  edition  of  Higden's  Polychronicon  that  at  the  request  of  '  one  Sir 
Thomas  lord  barkley  ',  to  whom  he  acted  as  priest,  he  had  translated  the  Poly- 
chronicon, the  Bible,  and  the  De  Proprietatibus  Rerum  of  Bartholomaeus  Anglicus, 
one  of  the  best  known  of  mediaeval  encyclopaedias.  The  first  and  third  of  these 
translations  survive.  Of  that  of  the  Bible  (mentioned  also,  probably  on  Caxton's 
authority,  in  the  preface  to  the  Bible  of  1611)  nothing  is  known,  unless  it  can  be 
identified  either  with  the  completion  of  the  first  version  begun  by  Nicholas  of 
Hereford  or  with  the  second  version  which  has  somewhat  lightly  been  assigned  to 
Purvey.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  further  into  these 
questions  of  authorship.  It  is  sufficient  to  note  that  the  translator  of  the  second 
of  the  two  extant  versions  worked,  according  to  his  own  account,  '  with  diverse  felawis 
and  helpars  '  and  had  '  manie  gode  felawis  and  kunnynge  at  the  correccioun  of 
his  translacioun  '.  It  thus  seems  certain  that  there  was  something  of  the  nature 
of  an  informal  board  or  company  of  translators,  and  if  piety  did  not  constrain 
us  to  speak  of  these  two  versions,  not  indeed  as  the  Wyclif,  but  as  the  Wyclifite 
Bible,  we  might  well  have  been  content,  as  the  present  writer  suggested  ten  years 
ago,  to  have  called  this  the  Oxford  Bible,  since  it  was  with  the  reform  party  at 
Oxford  that  it  took  its  inception  and,  despite  its  origin  among  Wyclif 's  followers, 
there  was  no  attempt  in  either  version  to  translate  in  any  party  spirit,  or  to  do 
anything  else  than  give  a  faithful  rendering  of  the  Vulgate  Latin. 

As  early  as  1397  at  least  one  copy  of  this  English  Bible  was  in  the  possession  of 
a  royal  duke,  and  the  names  of  other  noble  owners  during  the  fifteenth  century,  as 
well  as  fine  manuscripts  decorated  so  as  to  be  worthy  of  such  ownership,  remain  on 
record.  In  1408  the  Convocation  held  at  Oxford  had  forbidden  the  possession 
of  any  English  version  of  the  Bible  without  licence  from  a  bishop,  but  it  is  plain  that 
such  a  licence  could  be  procured,  and  we  even  hear  of  a  copy  belonging  to  such  an 
eminently  orthodox  community  as  the  Bridgetine  house  of  Sion,  at  Isleworth.  But 
the  existence  of  Lollardy  had  reawakened  such  fears  as  Aelfric  had  expressed  lest 
his  epitome  of  the  Pentateuch  should  entrap  the  unwary  to  believe  in  the  lawfulness 
of  polygamy,  and  a  reader  of  the  merchant  class  who  had  asked  his  priest  to  get  him 


The 

Wyclifite 

Bibles. 


Record  i, 
iii. 


Tyndale's 
New 
Testa- 
ment. 


iv,  note  4. 
viii,  jriii, 
xix. 

vii. 


IO 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


a  licence  to  own  an  English  Bible  towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  would 
probably  have  met  but  small  encouragement.  Add  to  this  the  fact  that  by  this  time 
the  language  of  the  Wyclifite  versions  was  fast  becoming  obsolete,  and  also  the  vast 
expense  of  such  an  enterprise,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  wonder  that  Caxton 
neither  printed  either  of  the  existing  translations,  nor  set  himself  to  procure,  or 
(hardened  translator  as  he  was)  to  make,  a  new  one.  But  a  generation  later, 
other  ideas  had  sprung  up,  and  at  least  one  man  in  England,  William  Tyndale, 
was  determined  that  there  should  be  an  English  Bible  which  not  merely  merchants 
but  ploughboys  could  buy  and  read. 

William  Tyndale  had  come  to  London,  with  a  translation  of  a  speech  of  Isocrates 
as  a  proof  of  his  ability,  in  the  hope  of  finding  encouragement  from  the  Bishop  of 
London  (Cuthbert  Tunstall)  to  make  a  new  translation  of  the  New  Testament  not, 
as  the  '  Wyclifite  '  translators  had  done,  from  the  Latin  Vulgate,  but  from  the 
original  Greek.  Erasmus  had  published  his  famous  edition  of  the  Greek  Testament 
in  1516,  and  this  had  been  revised  and  reprinted  in  1519  and  1522.  Along  with  it 
he  had  printed  a  new  translation  into  Latin.  Tyndale  had  probably  heard  Erasmus 
lecture  at  Cambridge,  and  he  must  have  been  prepared,  if  Tunstall  had  given  him 
any  encouragement,  to  make  his  English  version  in  the  spirit  of  Erasmus.  But 
there  was  no  room  for  a  translator  of  the  Bible  in  the  Bishop's  house,  nor  indeed, 
as  Tyndale  said  bitterly,  in  all  England,  so  in  1524  he  betook  himself  to  Hamburg, 
with  the  help  of  a  subsidy  of  £10  given  him  by  a  generous  and  devout  London 
merchant,  Henry  Monmouth,  and  completed  his  translation  undisturbed.  There  are 
references  to  what  may  have  been  trial  issues  of  Matthew  and  Mark,  but  if,  which 
is  doubtful,  these  ever  had  a  separate  existence,  no  traces  of  them  remain.  But 
before  December,  1525,  copy  had  been  handed  to  a  Cologne  printer,  probably 
vi.  connected  in  some  way  with  the  important  printing-house  of  Peter  Ouentell,  founded 
some  fifty  years  earlier,  and  ten  quires  (eighty  pages)  of  an  edition  of  3,000  copies  in 
small  quarto  had  been  printed  off,  when  an  anti-Lutheran  controversialist,  Johann 
Dobneck,1  better  known  as  Cochlaeus,  anxious  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  king 
of  England,  persuaded  the  magistrates  of  Cologne  to  interfere.  To  escape  arrest, 
Tyndale  and  his  amanuensis,  William  Roy,  fled  along  the  Rhine  to  Worms,  taking 
the  printed  quires  with  them,  and  it  was  thus  at  Worms,  not  at  Cologne,  that  the 
first  printed  edition  of  the  New  Testament  in  English  was  brought  out. 

By  a  lucky  chance  a  single  copy  of  eight  of  the  ten  quires  of  Tyndale's  New 
Testament  printed  at  Cologne  has  been  preserved,  wanting  only  the  first  leaf,  and 
is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  to  which  it  was  bequeathed  by  Thomas  Grenville. 
According  to  Dobneck,  a  quarto  edition  was  published  at  Worms,  but  whether  this 
incorporated  and  completed  the  sheets  printed  at  Cologne,  or  was  entirely  reset,  is 
unknown,  as  no  copy  has  survived.  Our  knowledge  of  Tyndale's  Testament  in  its 
unrevised  form  thus  rests  on  an  octavo  edition  which  has  been  identified  from  its 
types  and  illustrations  as  printed  at  Worms  by  Peter  Schoeffer,  the  second  son  of  the 
Schoeffer  of  the  same  name  who  had  helped  to  make  the  art  of  printing  a  practical 
success  at  Mainz  some  seventy  years  before.  This  has  survived  in  a  copy  at  the 
Baptist  College,  Bristol,  lacking  only  the  first  leaf,  and  another,  much  more  imper- 
fect, at  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  According  to  Dobneck,  Tyndale  printed  6,000  New 
Testaments  at  Worms  ;  it  is  thus  probable  that  both  the  Worms  quarto  edition 
and  the  octavo,  like  the  projected  Cologne  quarto,  consisted  of  3,000  copies. 

The  thirty-one  leaves  still  extant  of  the  Cologne  fragment  contain  Tyndale's 
Prologue  and  the  text  of  St.  Matthew  down  to  the  middle  of  chapter  xxii.  To 
the  text  are  attached  marginal  notes,  some  of  them  vehemently  anti-Roman.  In  the 
Worms  octavo  the  marginal  notes  have  been  removed,  but  the  prefaces  are  largely 
based  on  those  of  Luther,  and  the  translation  of  the  text  shows  abundant  traces  of 
Luther's  German  version.  It  is  clear  that  Tyndale  worked  with  this,  the  Vulgate, 
the  Latin  version  of  Erasmus,  and  the  Greek  text  all  before  him,  but  it  is  also  clear 
that  it  was  primarily  from  the  Greek  that  he  translated,  and  that  the  other  three  books 
were  only  aids  in  the  use  of  which  he  exercised  his  own  very  competent  judgement. 
We  have  his  personal  assurance  ('I  had  no  man  to  counterfet,  nether  was  holpe 
with  englysshe  of  eny  that  had  interpreted  the  same,  or  soche  lyke  t hinge  m  the 
scripture   beforetyme ')   that  among  his  aids  there  was  no  copy  of  either  of  the 

1  Dobneck  has  left  three  accounts  of  his  exploit,  of  which  he  seems  to  have  been  more  than 
a  little  proud,  written  respectively  in  153;,  and  [538  and  (the  fullest)  in  his  De  actis  ct  senilis 
Martini  Lutheri  of  1549  (see  Record  vi). 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


1 1 


'  Wyclifite  '  versions,  and  though  some  resemblances  have  been  quoted  between  his 
translation  and  these,  they  are  not  sufficient  to  cast  any  doubt  on  his  statement. 
On  the  other  hand,  Tyndale's  own  work  fixed,  once  for  all,  the  style  and  tone  of  the 
English  Bible,  and  supplied  not  merely  the  basis  of  all  subsequent  Protestant  ren- 
derings of  the  books  (with  unimportant  exceptions)  on  which  he  laboured,  but  their 
very  substance  and  body,  so  that  those  subsequent  versions  must  be  looked  upon  as 
revisions  of  his,  not  as  independent  translations. 

After  the  octavo  printed  at  Worms,  no  fragment  of  the  text  of  any  subsequent 
edition  earlier  than  August  1534  is  known  to  exist.  Tyndale  was  at  work  on  the 
Old  Testament  and  refused  all  requests  to  supervise  reprints  of  his  version  of  the  New. 
J  Copies  of  this  are  heard  of  as  selling  in  England  as  early  as  the  spring  of  1526,  and  they 
I  were  episcopally  denounced  in  the  following  autumn.  We  hear  of  English  Testa- 
|  ments  sold  the  next  year  at  five  and  seven  groats  apiece  (is.  8d.  and  2s.  4^.,  answering 
to  a  modern  value  of  ten  or  twelve  times  as  much),  and  the  profit  on  these  prices 
may  have  been  sufficient  of  itself  to  evoke  unauthorized  reprints,  though  it  is  equally 
probable  that  the  unauthorized  reprinters  were  enthusiasts  who  did  not  make 
pecuniary  profit  their  chief  object.  According  to  George  Joye,  the  editor  of  the 
unauthorized  edition  of  August  1534,  '  anon  after  '  Tyndale's  own  issue  (i.  e.  of 
1525),  the  'Dutchmen  '  got  a  copy  and  printed  it  again  in  a  small  volume,  adding 
the  Kalendar  at  the  beginning,  concordances  (i.e.  references  to  parallels)  in  the 
margins,  and  a  Table  at  the  end.1  A  second  reprint  was  in  a  larger  form,  and  with 
larger  type2  and  with  figures,  i.e.  wood-cuts,  in  the  Apocalypse.  Of  these  two  editions 
there  were  about  5,000  copies  printed  and  these  were  all  sold  out  some  time  in 
1533.  A  third  reprint,  consisting  of  2,000  copies,  Joye  was  asked  to  revise,  but 
refused.  When,  however,  yet  another  was  in  preparation,  rather,  according  to  his 
own  account,  than  allow  2,000  additional  copies  to  be  placed  on  the  market  with  the 
errors  which  by  this  time  a  succession  of  Dutch  compositors  had  introduced,  he  under- 
took to  correct  the  edition  which  appeared  in  August  1534.  For  doing  this  he  was 
paid  at  the  rate  of  <\\d.  for  sixteen  leaves,  a  small  enough  sum  even  when  multiplied 
by  ten  to  give  it  its"  modern  value,  but  probably  the  full  market-price  of  press- 
correction  at  that  day.  Unhappily,  Joye  did  not  confine  himself  to  press-correction, 
but  not  only  botched  Tyndale's  English  in  places  where  he  thought  it  obscure,  but  in 
certain  passages  gave  practical  effect  to  views  which  he  had  expressed  in  private 
controversy  with  Tyndale  by  substituting  the  words  '  the  life  after  this  '  and  similar 
phrases  for  Tyndale's  '  the  resurrection  '.  This  edition  was  very  neatly  printed  in 
sexto-decimo  at  Antwerp  by  the  widow  of  Christoffel  van  Endhoven,  whose  husband's 
share  in  Bible  printing  is  mentioned  below  (note  1). 

Meanwhile,  Tyndale  himself  had  at  last  revised  his  translation,  and  his  new 
edition  was  printed  as  an  octavo  at  Antwerp  in  November  1534  by  Martin  Emperour, 
otherwise  known  as  Martin  Caesar  or  Keysere.  Tyndale  had  time  to  insert  into  this 
a  vigorous  and  deserved  denunciation  of  Joye,  whom,  however,  he  probably  wronged 
in  depicting  him  as  actuated  by  merely  mercenary  motives.  In  1904  the  British 
Museum,  which  possesses  both  these  editions,  was  fortunate  enough  to  acquire  yet 
another,  previously  unknown,  '  prynted  now  agayne  at  Antwerpe  by  me  Catharyn 
wydowe  [the  words  'of  Christoffel  of  Endhouen  '  appear  to  have  dropped  out]  in  the 
yere  of  our  lorde  M.  ccccc.  and  xxxv,  the  ix.  daye  of  Januarye.'  This  contains  a  letter 
from  Joye  '  Unto  the  Reader  '  written  at  a  moment  when  friends  had  brought 
the  two  men  together,  and  Tyndale  had  agreed  to  withdraw  his  '  uncharitable  pistle  ', 
as  Joye  calls  it,  and  substitute  a  '  reformed  '  one  in  which  they  were  both  to 
'  salute  the  readers  with  one  salutacion  '.  But  the  reconciliation  was  shortlived,  the 
appearance  of  Joye's  new  edition  being  probably  itself  a  fresh  cause  of  offence  ; 
Tyndale  drew  back,  and  on  February  27,  1535,  Joye  sent  to  press  an  Apology,  in 

1  This  edition  was  apparently  printed  at  Antwerp  in  1526  by  Christoffel  van  Endhoven,  who 
was  in  trouble  about  it  with  the  city  authorities  by  the  end  of  the  year,  and  in  1 531  died  in  prison 
at  Westminster  as  a  result  of  trying  to  sell  Testaments  in  England.  Endhoven  also  called  himself 
Van  Ruremond  (in  various  spellings),  and  until  Mr.  Gordon  Duff  cleared  up  the  matter  in  his 
Century  of  the  English  Book  Trade,  much  confusion  was  caused  by  the  natural  assumption  that  the 
two  names  belonged  to  different  men. 

2  This  may  be  the  edition  of  1532  of  which  Dr.  Angus  possessed  a  mutilated  title-page.  Joye 
certainly  seems  to  be  enumerating  all  the  editions  of  which  he  knew,  and,  although  he  may  have 
used  one  or  more  which  actually  appeared,  statements  like  that  of  Anderson  (Annals  of  the  English 
Bible),  that  there  were  six  editions  before  the  end  of  1530,  seem  based  on  very  slender  evidence. 


XVI  A, 

note  2. 


Cover- 
dale's 
Bible. 


12 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


VI,  Vll,   XI, 

xiii,  xiv. 


which  he  made  out  the  best  case  he  could  for  himself  and  incidentally  tells  us  that 
Tyndale  was  paid  £10  for  his  edition  of  November  1534. 

In  December  1534  the  Upper  House  of  Convocation  of  the  province  of  Canter- 
bury had  departed  so  far  from  its  attitude  of  mere  resistance  as  to  petition  the 
King  that  the  Bible  might  be  translated  by  authorized  translators,  and  the  progress 
which  this  denotes  accounts  for  the  rapidity  with  which  one  edition  of  Tyndale 's 
New  Testament  follows  another  at  this  period.  Tyndale  himself  revised  one  more, 
printed  for  him  by  G.  H.,  i.e.  Godfrid  van  der  Haghen,  ere  he  was  enticed  from  the 
house  of  the  English  merchants  at  Antwerp  in  May  1535,  with  the  result  that  once 
beyond  the  walls  of  the  free  city  he  was  arrested  by  the  imperial  authorities  and 
carried  to  imprisonment  and  death  at  Vilvorde.  Yet  another  1535  edition  may  be 
noticed  (probably  printed  by  Hans  van  Ruremond),  because  its  strange  spellings 
(faether,  moether,  &c.)  at  one  time  were  imagined  to  have  been  adopted  to  assimilate 
its  language  to  the  dialect  of  the  ploughboys  for  whom  Tyndale  had  declared  that 
he  would  write.  More  prosaic  commentators  attributed  it  to  the  vagaries  of  Flemish 
compositors.  But  several  similar  spellings  are  found  in  a  letter  written  this  year  by 
Tyndale's  friend,  Thomas  Poyntz,  with  whom  he  lodged  at  the  '  English  house  '  at 
Antwerp,  and  it  is  possible  that  they  should  be  looked  upon  as  among  the  phonetic 
devices  by  which  many  bookish  people  in  the  sixteenth  century  tried  to  express  their 
views  on  pronunciation.  All  these  phonetic  devices  without  exception  were  bad, 
and  it  would  be  well  if  we  could  get  rid  of  them,  but  while  many  remained  to 
trouble  us  in  the  twentieth  century,  some  were  rejected  very  quickly,  and  those 
of  the  Antwerp  press-corrector  (possibly  Thomas  Poyntz  himself)  w:ere  among  those 
which  never  obtained  currency.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  Van  der  Haghen  edition 
of  1535  has  sometimes  been  confused  with  this  which  has  the  strange  spellings,  and 
also  that  the  spellings  are  repeated  in  a  reprint  known  only  from  a  fragment  in  the 
British  Museum.  Seven  different  issues  or  editions  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament 
appeared  in  1536,  the  year  of  his  martyrdom  (October  6),  and  between  1525  and 
1566,  when  the  last  dated  edition  was  issued,  more  than  forty  editions  were  printed, 
of  which  definite  evidence  has  been  preserved.  From  the  fact  that  many  of  these 
are  known  only  from  a  single  copy,  or  fragment  of  a  copy,  we  may  be  sure  that 
other  editions  have  perished  entirely. 

Had  Tyndale  escaped  his  enemies  for  but  a  few  more  years  he  would  assuredly 
have  translated  the  whole  Bible.  He  had  published  an  English  Pentateuch  in 
January  1530  [1531  ?],  purporting  to  be  printed  by  Luther's  favourite  printer, 
Hans  Luft,  not  at  Wittenberg  but  at  '  Malborow  [Marburg]  in  the  land  of  Hesse  ' 
(an  imprint  of  which  the  genuineness  has  been  alternately  accepted  and  denied  by 
bibliographers  for  a  fatiguing  number  of  years1),  and  a  second  edition  of  this  with- 
out date,  or  imprint  (?  Antwerp,  Martin  Keysere,  1531) ;  also,  'The  prophete  Ionas, 
with  an  introduction  before,  teachinge  to  understawde  him  and  the  right  use  also 
of  all  the  scripture.'  To  his  New  Testament  of  November  1534,  moreover,  he  had 
appended  English  versions  of  all  the  lessons  from  the  Old  Testament  appointed  to 
be  read  in  the  liturgy  instead  of  Epistles.  As  we  shall  see,  he  had  also  left  behind 
him,  in  all  probability,  a  manuscript  translation  of  the  Old  Testament  as  far  as  the 
end  of  Chronicles.  But  the  completion  of  an  English  Bible  was  reserved  for  a  man 
of  far  less  scholarship,  but  an  equally  happy  style,  Miles  Coverdale,  a  Yorkshireman 
born  in  1488,  and  educated  at  Cambridge,  where  he  had  taken  the  degree  of  Bachelor 
of  Canon  Law  as  recently  as  1531. 

The  most  explicit  information  which  Coverdale 's  Bible  offers  as  to  its  provenance 
is  that  of  its  colophon,  which  reads:  'Prynted  in  the  yeare  of  oure  LORDE 
M.D.XXXV.  and  fynished  the  fourth  daye  of  October.'  Its  earliest  title-page  begins 
with  the  word  '  Biblia  '  in  roman  majuscules,  followed  in  German  script  type  of 

1  The  recent  investigations  of  Mr.  Steele  have  tended  to  connect  the  types  and  ornaments 
with  some  firm  at  Antwerp,  but  Fox  states  circumstantially  that  Tyndale  took  his  translation  to 
be  printed  at  Hamburg,  lost  the  manuscript  by  shipwreck  on  the  coast  of  Holland,  and  when  he 
reached  Hamburg  in  another  ship  was  obliged  to  begin  his  work  anew,  completing  it  with  the  aid 
of  Miles  Coverdale.  There  are  some  difficulties  in  this  account,  but  the  hue  and  cry  for  Lutheran 
books  raised  by  Wolsey's  agents  in  Antwerp  at  the  end  of  1526  and  beginning  of  1527  make  it  not 
at  all  improbable  that  a  press  and  materials  may  have  been  shipped  from  Antwerp  to  Hamburg 
(also  a  Free  City  and  under  ordinary  circumstances  comparatively  safe)  in  1527,  and  that  books 
may  have  been  produced  there  until  printing  at  Antwerp  could  be  resumed.  The  attribution  of 
them  to  Luther's  printer  would  have  gained  ready  credence  at  the  time,  as  Tyndale's  adversaries 
had  greatly  exaggerated  Luther's  influence  on  his  work. 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


13 


various  sizes  by  the  explanation  :  '  The  Bible,  that  ||  is,  the  holy  Scripture  of  the  ]| 
Olde  and  New  Testament,  faith  ||  fully  and  truly  translated  out  ||  of  Douche  and 
Latyn  in  to  Englishe  ||  m.d.xxxv.'  Subsequently  this  was  replaced  by  another  title 
in  English  black-letter  with  the  shortened  formula,  '  faythfully  translated  in  ||  to 
Englyshe.'  The  whole  of  the  text  of  the  book  is  in  a  small  German  script,  and  it  had 
originally  preliminary  leaves  in  the  same  type  (of  which  only  one  has  survived) ;  these, 
however,  were  reprinted  in  English  black-letter  at  the  same  time  as  the  title-page. 

In  his  dedication  to  the  king  Coverdale  protests  '  I  haue  nether  wrested  nor 
altered  so  moch  as  one  worde  for  the  mayntenaunce  of  any  maner  of  secte  :  but 
haue  with  a  cleare  conscience  purely  and  faythfully  translated  this  out  of  fyue  sundry 
interpreters,  hauyng  onely  the  manyfest  trueth  of  the  scripture  before  myne  eyes  '. 
Investigation  has  shown  that  of  the  five  '  interpreters  '  here  mentioned  two  must 
have  been  '  Douche  '  i.  e.  (i)  the  Swiss-German  version  of  Zwingli  and  Leo  Juda,  first 
printed  at  Zurich  by  Christopher  Froschouer  in  the  years  1527-9,  and  (ii)  Luther's 
German,  of  which  the  New  Testament  was  printed  in  1522,  the  Old  Testament  as 
far  as  the  Song  of  Songs  in  1523-4,  and  a  complete  edition  in  1534  ;  two  Latin, 
i.  e.  (hi)  the  new  rendering  of  Sanctes  Pagninus,  an  Italian  Catholic  theologian,  pub- 
lished with  papal  sanction  at  Lyons  in  1527-8,  and  (iv)  the  Vulgate  ;  and  one 
English,  i.e.  (v)  the  New  Testament  and  Pentateuch  translated  by  Tyndale. 

Coverdale  graduated  as  Bachelor  of  Canon  Law  at  Cambridge  in  1531,  but  there- 
after until  1536  his  movements  are  unknown.1  There  has  consequently  been  much 
dispute  as  to  where  and  by  what  firm  his  Bible  was  printed  in  1535.  Early  in  the 
18th  century,  however,  Humphrey  Wanley,  the  librarian  of  Robert  Harley,  Earl  of 
Oxford,  suggested  that  the  printer  was  probably  Christopher  Froschouer  of  Zurich, 
who  fifteen  years  later  produced  another  edition  of  it.  Investigation  showed  that  two 
of  the  larger  types  of  the  English  Bible  of  1535  were  in  the  possession  of  Froschouer, 
but  these  were  used  also  by  other  German  printers,  and  the  matter  remained 
undecided  until,  in  his  article  on  Coverdale  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography, 
Mr.  H.  R.  Tedder  by  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Christian  Ginsburg  was  enabled  to  state 
that  he  had  seen  two  leaves  of  a  Swiss-German  Bible  printed  in  the  same  German 
type  as  the  text  of  Coverdale's  English  version.  The  complete  book,  an  unrecorded 
edition  of  1529-30  from  the  press  of  Froschouer,  had  once  been  in  Dr.  Ginsburg 's 
possession,  but  I  learn  from  Dr.  Ginsburg  himself  that  this  disappeared  from  his 
library  in  a  very  painful  manner,  and  only  these  leaves  remain.  While  it  is  regret- 
table that  the  complete  evidence  can  no  longer  be  produced,  they  may  be  taken  as 
sufficiently  establishing  that  it  was  at  Zurich  and  by  Froschouer  that  the  first 
printed  English  Bible  was  issued. 

The  problem  presented  by  the  reprinted  preliminary  leaves  is  not  very  difficult. 
These,  as  printed  at  Zurich,  probably  did  not  exceed  four,  of  which  the  first  was 
occupied  by  the  title  with  a  list  of  the  books  of  the  Bible  printed  on  the  back,  the 
second  and  third  by  Coverdale's  Prologue,  the  fourth  by  the  statement  as  to  '  The 
first  boke  of  Moses,  called  Genesis,  what  this  boke  conteyneth  '.  When  it  was 
ascertained  that  the  book  would  be  allowed  to  circulate  in  England  it  was  very 
desirable  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Antwerp  New  Testaments  which  had  brought 
such  trouble  on  their  purchasers.  The  word  '  Douche  '  was  therefore  eliminated 
from  the  title-page  ('  Latyn  '  going  with  it),2  a  dedication  to  the  king  was  inserted 
and  the  whole  quire  was  printed  in  English  black-letter,  almost  certainly  by  James 
Nycholson  at  Southwark,  first  with  the  date  mdxxxv  on  the  title,  afterwards 
with  that  of  the  following  year.  There  would  be  the  less  difficulty  in  doing  this, 
as  under  an  Act  passed  in  1534  books  printed  abroad  could  not  be  imported  into 
England  ready  bound,  but  only  in  sheets  (so  that  English  binders  might  make  their 
profit  off  them),  and  there  was  thus  no  need  to  pull  the  book  to  pieces  in  order  to 
make  the  change.    In  the  revised  form  the  preliminary  quire  was  made  up  as  follows  : 

ia,  title;  ib,  blank;  2»-4i,  an  Epistle  ||  Unto  the  Kynges  Highnesse ;  4b-7%  A  prologe  ||  To 
the  reader ;  7b-8",  The  bokes  of  the  hole  Byble  ||  how  they  are  named  in  Englyssh,  etc.  ;  8b, 
The  first  boke  of  |]  Moses,  called  |l  Genesis  ]|  what  this  book  conteyneth. 

1  If  the  story  that  he  was  subsidized  while  translating  by  Jacob  van  Meteren  of  Antwerp  be 
believed  he  was  probably  part  of  the  time  at  Antwerp. 

2  The  space  thus  saved  was  devoted  to  extending  the  third  of  three  texts  quoted  in  the  title 
by  an  additional  two  lines.  It  has  been  contended  that  the  mention  of  '  Douche  and  Latyn  ' 
was  removed  expressly  to  make  room  for  this.  Such  a  view  surely  reverses  the  relative  im- 
portance of  the  two  changes. 


14 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


Matthew's 
Bible. 


xix, 

note  8. 


Coverdale's  version  was  reprinted  in  folio  and  quarto  by  James  Nycholson  in 
1537,  each  edition  bearing  on  its  title,  not  over  truthfully,  the  words  '  newly  ouersene 
and  corrected  ',  or,  as  the  last  word  stands  in  the  quarto,  '  correcte.'  The  quarto 
title,  which  must  thus  be  the  later  of  the  two,  bears  also  the  still  more  reassuring 
announcement,  '  Set  foorth  with  the  Kynges  moost  gracious  licence.'  When  as 
much  favour  was  shown  to  it  as  this,  it  is  surprising  that  this  text  of  1537  was  not 
taken  as  the  official  version,  since  Coverdale  was  a  much  suppler  and  more  concilia- 
tory translator  than  Tyndale,  and  whereas  the  latter  had  consistently  substituted 
(even  going  out  of  his  way,  at  times,  to  do  so),  the  less  ecclesiastical  terms  congre- 
gation, elder,  favour,  knowledge,  love,  repentance,  for  church,  priest,  grace,  confession, 
charity,  penance,  Coverdale  was  ready  to  use  either  or  both.  While,  however,  his 
folio  and  quarto  were  being  printed  at  Southwark,  a  new  Bible  was  being  set  up, 
almost  certainly  at  Antwerp,  which  used  Coverdale's  version  of  the  Old  Testament 
from  the  end  of  Chronicles,  including  the  Apocrypha,  but  Tyndale 's  New  Testament, 
as  revised  by  him  for  the  edition  of  May  1535,  and  also  his  Pentateuch  and  a  hitherto 
unprinted  version  of  Joshua — 2  Chronicles,  which  has  been  conjectured  with  every 
appearance  of  reason  to  be  Tyndale 's  continuation  of  his  translation  to  the  point,  or 
very  near  the  point,1  which  he  had  reached  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.  This  version 
was  corrected  for  the  press  by  Tyndale 's  disciple,  John  Rogers,  and  was  put  forward 
as  '  truly  and  purely  translated  into  Englysh  by  Thomas  Matthew  ',  a  probably 
fictitious  and  certainly  deceptive  attribution,  the  name  serving  at  the  time  to  cover 
the  share  of  Tyndale,  but  being  afterwards  unequivocally  treated  as  the  alias  of  the 
real  editor,  Rogers. 

Almost  childish  as  the  device  of  attributing  a  translation  of  the  Bible  made  up 
of  the  work  of  Tyndale  and  Coverdale  to  a  fictitious  or  man-of-straw  Thomas 
Matthew  2  now  appears,  it  served  to  save  the  face  of  the  king  and  the  bishops  by  the 
pretence  that  this  was  a  new  version,  and  so  one  which  might  be  considered  to 
have  been  made  in  compliance  with  the  petition  sent  to  the  king  by  the  Upper 
House  of  Convocation  in  December  1534.  Cranmer  had  originally  planned  that 
such  a  version  should  be  made  by  the  English  bishops,  sharing  the  task  between 
them,  and  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  some  steps  in  this  direction  had  actually 
been  taken.  But  while  some  of  the  bishops  had  little  fitness  for  such  a  task,  others 
had  still  less  inclination,  and  the  work  made  no  progress.  Thus  when  the  Matthew 
Bible  was  submitted  to  Cranmer,  he  wrote  urgently  to  Cromwell  (August  1537), 
entreating  him  to  use  his  influence  to  get  from  the  king  '  a  license  that  the  same  may 
be  sold  and  redde  of  every  person  withoute  danger  of  any  acte,  proclamacj'on  or 
ordinaunce  hertofore  graunted  to  the  contrary,  untill  such  tyme  that  we  the  Bishops 
shall  set  forth  a  better  translation,  which  I  thinke  will  not  be  till  a  day  after 
Domesday  '.  The  petition  thus  made  was  granted,  Cromwell's  goodwill  having 
apparently  been  already  secured,  and,  with  a  lightheartedness  which  is  realty 
amazing,  official  sanction  was  given  to  a  Bible  largely  made  up  of  the  work  of 
Tyndale,  and  which  included  his  markedly  Protestant  Prologue  to  Romans  (based 
on  Luther),  and  equally  Protestant  side-notes,  some  of  them  supplied  by  Rogers 
from  the  version  of  the  French  reformer  Olivetan.  In  his  letter  to  Cromwell 
Cranmer  characterizes  the  book  as  '  a  Bible  in  Englishe  both  of  a  new  translation 
[which,  save  for  the  portion  Joshua — 2  Chronicles,  from  Tyndale's  unpublished 
manuscript,  it  was  not]  and  of  a  new  prynte  [Antwerp!],  dedicated  unto  the 
Kinges  Majestie,  as  farther  apperith  by  a  pistle  unto  His  Grace  in  the  begynnyng  of 
the  boke ',  and  further  remarks.  '  as  for  the  translation,  so  farre  as  I  haue  redde 
therof  I  like  it  better  than  any  other  translation  hertofore  made.'  No  doubt  in  1537 
the  king  had  moved  a  long  way  in  the  direction  of  Protestantism — for  the  moment 
— but  considering  his  character,  the  whole  transaction  bore  a  remarkable  resemblance 

1  According  to  Halle's  Chronicle,  printed  by  Richard  Grafton  in  1548,  Tyndale  also  translated 
Nehemiah,  '  the  Prophet  Jonas  and  no  more  of  the  holy  scripture. '  Why  Coverdale's  version 
was  preferred  to  his  for  Nehemiah  is  hard  to  see,  but  the  statement  strongly  confirms  the  attribu- 
tion of  Joshua — 2  Chronicles  to  Tyndale.  The  manuscript  of  this  may  have  been  handed  by 
Thomas  Poyntz,  Tyndale's  host  at  Antwerp,  either  to  Rogers,  the  editor,  or  to  the  two  English 
printers,  Grafton  and  Whitchurch,  who  are  known  to  have  superintended  the  production  of  the 
edition.  Poyntz  and  Grafton  were  both  members  of  the  Grocers'  Company,  at  this  time  appa- 
rently very  favourable  to  Protestantism.  The  attribution  of  the  edition  to  a  press  at  Antwerp 
is  confirmed  by  Grafton  sending  Bibles  to  Cromwell  by  the  hands  of  a  servant  who,  as  he  tells 
Cromwell,  had  just  arrived  from  I  [an  lei 

1  A  few  years  earlier  a  real  Thomas  Matthew  lived  at  Colchester. 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


15 


to  playing  with  gunpowder.     From  a  letter  of  Grafton's  it  appears  that  1,500  copies 
of  this  Bible  were  printed,  and  that  it  had  cost  him  £500. 

As  was  inevitable,  the  Matthew  Bible  was  quickly  superseded,  but  its  importance 
was  very  great,  since  it  formed  the  starting-point  of  the  successive  revisions  which 
resulted  in  the  version  of  1611,  a  matter  for  sincere  congratulation,  as  it  contained 
(save  for  the  rejection  of  his  version  of  Nehemiah,  Jonah,  and  the  '  Epistles  '  from  the 
Old  Testament)  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  the  work  of  Tyndale,  who  was  a  far 
better  scholar  than  Coverdale.  "Tt  was,  however,  to  the  latter,  who  is  known  to  have 
been  in  England  early  in  1538,  that  the  task  of  revising  it,  and  expunging  all  con- 
troversial annotation,  was  entrusted.  It  was  intended,  at  first,  to  substitute  new 
notes,  but  although  signs  drawing  attention  to  these  were  printed,  the  notes  themselves 
were  suppressed.  For  the  revision  of  the  text,  great  use  was  made  in  the  Old 
Testament  of  a  new  Latin  translation  from  the  Hebrew  by  Sebastian  Miinster, 
published  in  1534-5,  while  the  New  Testament  was  compared  afresh  with  the  transla- 
tion of  Erasmus  and  the  Complutensian  Polyglott.  No  English  office  being  considered 
sufficiently  well  equipped  to  produce  so  large  a  book  in  a  handsome  manner,  or 
with  the  speed  desired,  it  was  resolved  to  have  recourse  to  the  great  Paris  firm 
of  Francois  Regnault,  who  up  to  1534  had  been  accustomed  to  print  service-books 
for  the  English  market.  Coverdale  and  Grafton  went  to  Paris  to  see  the  work  through 
the  press,  and  an  edition  of  2,000  copies  was  put  in  hand,  the  funds  being  provided 
wholly  or  mainly  by  Cromwell.  Letters  written  by  Coverdale  and  Grafton  to  Crom- 
well in  June,  August,  and  September,  1538,  speak  of  the  rapid  progress  of  the  book, 
and  its  arrival  in  England  seemed  to  be  only  a  matter  of  a  few  months.  In  November 
the  king  issued  a  proclamation  which  reflects  the  scandal  caused  to  the  less  progressive 
Churchmen  by  the  notes  and  prologues  in  Matthew's  Bible.  The  contents  of  the 
earlier  sections  are  thus  summarized  by  Mr.  Robert  Steele  (Bibliography  of  Royal 
Proclamations  of  the  Tudor  and  Stuart  Sovereigns,  No.  176)  : 

In  consequence  of  the  import  of  certain  printed  books  from  abroad  and  the  publication  of 
others  here  'with  privilege'  containing  annotations  in  the  margins,  &c,  imagined  by  the 
makers  and  printers  of  these  books,  dissension  has  been  set  up  concerning  the  sacraments,  &c. 
It  is  therefore  ordered  (1)  that  no  English  books  printed  abroad  be  brought  into  the  country 
on  pain  of  forfeiture  of  all  goods  and  imprisonment.  (2)  No  person  to  print  any  English 
book  except  after  examination  by  some  of  the  Privy  Council  or  other  persons  appointed.  The 
words  '  cum  privilegio  regali '  not  to  be  used  without  '  ad  imprimendum  solum  ',  and  the  whole 
copy  or  the  effect  of  the  licence  to  be  printed  underneath.  No  copies  of  Scripture  with  anno- 
tations to  be  printed  except  they  are  first  examined,  but  only  the  plain  sentence  with  a  table. 
No  translations  to  be  printed  without  the  name  of  the  translator,  unless  the  printer  answer 
for  it  as  his  own.  (3)  No  printer  to  publish  any  books  of  Scripture  in  English  till  they  are 
examined  by  the  King,  or  one  of  the  Privy  Council,  or  a  bishop. 

While  these  provisions  were  clearly  directed  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  the  scandal 
of  1537,  some  of  them  naturally  caused  great  alarm  to  Grafton  and  Coverdale,  who 
wrote  at  once  to  Cromwell  to  know  how  they  were  to  be  met.  But  a  heavier  blow 
was  awaiting  them.  The  relations  between  England  and  France  were  becoming 
critical,  and  the  French  ambassador,  learning  of  Cromwell's  personal  interest  in  the 
English  Bible  which  was  being  printed  at  Paris,  wrote  home  suggesting  that  it  should 
be  seized.  On  December  9  the  crisis  was  intensified  by  the  execution  of  Cardinal  Pole's 
relations  on  a  charge  of  treason.  On  December  13  Coverdale  became  alarmed  and 
wrote  to  Cromwell  that  he  had  deposited  some  of  the  printed  sheets  (quantity 
unspecified)  with  the  English  ambassador,  Bishop  Bonner,  that  something  at  least 
might  be  saved  from  the  threatened  wreck.  Four  days  later  the  Inquisitors  were 
let  loose  on  the  printing  office,  Regnault  was  arrested,  the  English  correctors  had  to 
flee  for  their  lives,  and  all  the  stock  on  the  premises  was  seized  for  conveyance  to 
the  custody  of  the  University  of  Paris.  As  early  as  December  31  we  find  Cromwell 
asking  the  French  ambassador  in  London  to  secure  its  return.  He  had  spent,  he 
said,  £400  on  the  work,  and  any  good  offices  rendered  in  this  matter  should  meet 
with  due  acknowledgement.  Mention  of  the  Bibles  recurs  in  the  ambassador's  corre- 
spondence, and  as  late  at  least  as  July  1539  it  is  evident  that  the  stock  still  lay 
at  the  University,  and  that  the  negotiations  for  its  return  were  at  a  standstill.  Yet 
the  printed  copies  of  the  book  bear  a  colophon  which  reads  :  '  The  ende  of  the  New 
Testament  and  of  the  whole  Byble.  Fynisshed  in  Apryll  Anno  M.  ccccc.  xxxix. 
A  dowino  factum  est  istud.' 

It  seems  probable  that  in  the  colophon  just  quoted  there  was  at  least  a  touch 
of  bravado.     Doubtless  the  completion  in  any  form  of  the  edition  in  April  1539  was 


The  Great 
Bibles. 


XXXVI  c. 

xxxviii  b. 
xxxiv. 


XXXV, 

xxxix  B. 


XXXV1C,  D. 

xxxvii. 


XXXVlll  A 


XXXV111  B. 


XXXIV, 

note  10. 


xliii, 
note  I. 

xliii. 


xlii. 

xl. 


16 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


xli. 


indeed  '  the  Lord's  doing  ',  and  doubtless  its  editors  desired  that  it  should  appear 
marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  their  enemies.  But  it  is  far  from  certain  that  the  existence 
of  the  colophon  denotes  the  existence  of  sufficient  copies  for  an  edition  to  have  been 
issued  anywhere  near  the  date  named.  In  the  later  editions  of  his  Actes  and  Monu- 
mentes,  John  Foxe  added  to  his  '  Story  of  the  L[ord]  Cromwell '  a  section  '  Of  the 
Bible  in  English  printed  in  the  large  volume  ',  and  although  almost  every  statement 
in  this  which  can  be  tested  can  be  shown  to  be  inexact,  his  account  of  what  happened 
in  Paris  is  worth  quoting  : 

And  so  the  printer  went  forward  and  printed  forth  the  booke  euen  to  the  last  part,  and  then 
was  the  quarell  picked  to  the  printer,  and  he  was  sent  for  to  the  inquisitors  of  the  fayth,  and 
there  charged  with  certaine  articles  of  heresie.     Then  were  sent  for  the  Englishmen  that  were  : 
at  the  cost  and  charge  thereof,  and  also  such  as  had  the  correction  of  the  same,  which  was 
Myles  Coverdale,  but  hauing  some  warning  what  would  folow  the  said  Englishmen  posted  away 
as  fast  as  they  could  to  saue  themselves,  leauing  behynd  them  all  their  Bibles,  which  were  to  i 
the  number  of  2500,  called  the  Bibles  of  the  great  volume,  and  neuer  recouered  any  of  them,  | 
sauing  that  the  Lieftenaunt  criminal  hauing  them  deliuered  vnto  hym  to  burne  in  a  place  of  ] 
Paris  (like  Smithfield)  called  Maulbert  place,  was  somewhat  mooued  with  couetousnes,  and 
sold  4  great  dry  fattes  of  them  to  a  Haberdassher  to  lap  in  caps,  and  those  were  bought  againe, 
but  the  rest  were  burned,  to  the  great  and  importunate  losse  of  those  that  bare  the  charge  of  , 
them.      But  notwithstandyng  the  sayd  losse  after  they  had  recouered  some  part  of  the  fore- 
sayde  bookes,  and  were  comforted  and  encouraged  by  the  Lord  Cromwell,  the  said  Englishmen 
went  agayne  to  Paris,  and  there  got  the  presses,  letters,  and  seruaunts  of  the  aforesayd  Printer 
and  brought  them  to  London,  and  there  they  became  printers  themselues  (which  before  they 
neuer  entended)  and  printed  out  the  said  Bible  in  London,  and  after  that  printed  sundry 
impressions  of  them  ;    but  yet  not  without   great  trouble  and   losse,   for  the  hatred  of  the 
Bishops,  namely,  Steven  Gardiner,  and  his  fellowes,  who  mightily  did  stomacke  and  maligne 
the  printing  thereof.     [Acts  and  Monuments,  newly  recognised  and  inlarged  by  the  Authour, 
John  Foxe,  1583,  page  1191). 

It  is  clear  from  this  narrative  that  the  French  authorities,  while  holding  the  bulk  of 
the  stock  as  an  asset  in  their  negotiations  with  Cromwell,  made  a  pretence  of  burning  | 
it,  and  that  of  the  copies  set  aside  to  be  burnt,  Grafton  rescued  a  certain  number, 
possibly  sixty  or  eighty,  as  it  would  need  a  large  vat  to  hold  more  than  a  score  of 
them.  Add  the  copies  deposited  with  Bonner  before  the  raid,  and  there  may  have 
been  a  hundred  or  so  available  for  issue,  enough  for  distribution,  but  not  a  quantity 
which  could  be  put  on  the  market.  When,  therefore,  on  the  arrival  of  type  and 
printers  from  France,  the  missing  sheets  were  printed  and  the  first  edition  finished, 
a  new  one,  answering  to  the  first  page  for  page,  so  that  sheets  would  be  inter- 
changeable, was  put  in  hand,  at  the  expense  this  time,  not  of  Cromwell,  but  of  a 
member  of  the  Haberdashers'  Company,  Anthony  Marler.  In  November  1539  there 
is  good  evidence  that  Grafton  was  once  more  in  Paris,  and  nothing  is  likely  to 
have  taken  him  there  save  the  business  of  the  Bible.  It  seems  probable  that 
this  time  he  succeeded  in  rescuing  the  remains  of  the  confiscated  stock,  and  that 
this  first  Great  Bible  was  thus  ready  for  issue  some  time  before  the  end  of  the  year 
1539,  which,  it  must  be  remembered,  answered  to  March  24,  1540,  the  more  prevalent  I 
English  reckoning  at  this  time  being  from  the  Incarnation,  not  the  Nativity,  nor  the 
Jan.  1  of  the  Roman  Civil  Year.  Thus  the  issue  of  '  April  1539  '  was  probably 
followed  within  a  few  weeks  by  that  of  April,  1540,  and  this  by  a  third  in  July,  and 
a  fourth  in  November,  while  yet  others  followed  in  May,  November,  and  December,  1 
1541,  making  seven  Great  Bibles  in  all.  Only  by  an  output  on  this  scale  could 
it  be  possible  for  every  parish  church  to  supply  itself  with  a  copy,  as  Cromwell  had 
bade  in  the  Injunctions  which,  as  Vicar-General,  he  issued  (before  the  trouble  in 
Paris)  in  September,  1538,  and  as  the  king  commanded  afresh  by  a  proclamation  of 
May  6,  1541,  the  limit  of  date  being  then  fixed  at  the  feast  of  All  Saints  (November 
1),  under  penalty  of  a  fine  of  forty  shillings  for  each  month's  delay.  In  order  to 
lighten  the  obligation,  the  price  of  the  book  was  fixed  as  low  as  10s.  unbound,  or 
12s.  well  and  sufficiently  bound,  trimmed  and  clasped.  This  price  of  ten  shillings 
was  only  formally  imposed  by  the  Privy  Council  on  April  25,  1541,  but  as  early  as 
November,  1539  we  find  Cranmer  writing  to  Cromwell  that  Berthelet  (the  king's 
printer)  and  Whitchurch  had  been  with  him,  and  that  he  had  sanctioned  a  charge  of 
13s.  4^.,  but  that  as  the  printers  understood  that  Cromwell  desired  it  to  be  10s., 
they  were  contented  to  sell  them  for  that,  if  they  could  be  protected  against  com- j 
petition.  This  Cromwell  effected  the  same  day,  by  getting  a  patent  from  the  king 
made  out  to  himself,  which  enabled  him  to  make  the  authorized  printers  and  | 
publishers  his  deputies.    All  the  same,  the  substitution  of  ios.  for  13s.  4^.  as  the 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


17 


price  must  have  hit  the  producers  rather  heavily,  as  from  a  curious  lawsuit 
decided — such  were  the  law's  delays  in  Tudor  times — in  1560,  it  appears  that  Anthony 
Marler  had  actually  agreed  to  repurchase  Bibles  from  a  stationer  rfamed  Philip 
Scapulis  at  the  rate  of  10s.  ^d.  apiece,  or  4^.  more  than  the  price  which  he  was 
himself  allowed  to  charge  (see  '  Anthony  Marler  and  the  Great  Bible ',  by  H.  R. 
Plomer.  The  Library,  3rd  Series,  i.  200-6).  If  he  had  made  many  such  con- 
tracts the  vellum  copy  of  the  issue  of  April  1540,  which  Marler  presented  to  the 
king,  can  hardly  have  been  paid  for  out  of  profits. 

In  the  fine  wood-cut  title-page,  designed,  it  is  said,  by  Holbein,  for  these  Great 
Bibles,  the  king  is  shown  seated  while  Cranmer  and  Cromwell  stand  distributing 
copies  to  the  people,  who  receive  them  with  shouts  of  '  Vivat  Rex  '.  For  the 
1539  Bible  Cranmer  had  done  nothing,  and  it  is  accordingly  called  Cromwell's. 
That  of  April  1540  and  the  subsequent  issues  are  enriched  '  with  a  prologe 
thereinto,  made  by  the  reuerende  father  in  God.  Thomas  archbysshop  of  Canterbury  ', 
and  these  are  usually  called  Cranmer's.1  The  April  1540  text  shows  fairly  numerous 
signs  of  further  revision  by  Coverdale,  and  that  of  July  of  a  few  further  changes  ; 
the  remaining  editions  were  reprints.  The  first,  third,  and  fourth  of  the  seven 
editions  bear  the  name  of  Grafton,  the  second  and  fifth  that  of  Whitchurch,  the 
sixth  mostly  Whitchurch  with  a  few  Grafton  titles,  the  seventh  mostly  Grafton 
with  a  few  for  Whitchurch.  The  second,  third,  fifth,  and  seventh  bear  only  the 
notice,  '  This  is  the  Bible  appoynted  to  the  vse  of  the  churches  ' ;  the  fourth  and 
sixth  bear  title-pages  specially  worded  to  comply  with  the  proclamation,  viz. : 

The  Byble  in  Englyshe  of  the  largest  and  greatest  volume,  auctorised  and  apoynted  by 
the  commaundement  of  oure  moost  redoubted  prynce  and  soueraygne  Lorde,  Kynge  Henry 
the  VIII,  supreme  head  of  this  his  churche  and  realme  of  Englande  :  to  be  frequented  and 
vsed  in  euery  church  w'in  this  his  sayd  realme,  accordynge  to  the  tenoure  of  hys  former 
Injunctions  g'euen  in  that  behalfe.  Ouersene  and  perused  at  the  comaundement  of  the  kinges 
hyghnes  by  the  ryght  reuerende  fathers  in  God,  Cuthbert,  bysshop  of  Duresme,  and  Nicholas 
bisshop  of  Rochester.  Printed  by  Rycharde  Grafton  [in  other  copies  by  Edwarde  Whitchurch]. 
Cum  priuilegio  ad  imprimendum  solum,  1541. 

Diligent  investigation  has  not  yet  discovered  in  what  the  episcopal  revision  consisted. 

A  smaller  folio  edition  was  printed  in  1540  by  Petit  and  Redman  for  Berthelet, 
who,  from  his  presence  at  the  interview  between  Cranmer  and  Whitchurch  as  to 
the  price  of  the  Great  Bible,  seems  to  have  helped  Whitchurch  with  funds.  It 
should  be  mentioned  also  that  in  1539  an  independent  version  by  Richard  Taverner, 
a  barrister  with  a  considerable  knowledge  of  Greek,  was  printed  by  Petit  for 
Berthelet,  but  this,  as  attaining  little  success  at  the  time  and  having  no  influence 
on  the  version  of  161 1,  need  not  detain  us  here. 

After  December,  1541,  no  more  English  Bibles  were  printed  during  the  reign 
of  Henry  VIII.  Proposals  were  made  for  a  more  conservative  rendering,  with  due 
retention  of  ecclesiastical  phrases,  but  these  came  to  nothing.  During  the  short 
reign  of  Edward  VI  the  idea  was  entertained  of  a  new  revision  by  Fagius  and 
Bucer,  but  this  also  fell  through.  Reprints,  however,  were  very  numerous, 
Matthew's  Bible,  the  Great  Bible,  and  Tyndale's  Testament  (revised  and  unrevised) 
being  the  most  favoured,  but  Coverdale's  Bible  was  also  reprinted,  and  even 
Taverner's  version  of  the  Old  Testament  was  touched  up  and  reissued  with 
Tyndale's  of  the  New. 

Under  the  reign  of  Mary  there  was  no  Bible-printing  in  England,  but  the 
number  of  Protestant  exiles,  holding  extreme  views  and  interested  in  scholarship, 
who  found  themselves  congregated  at  Geneva,  led  to  a  new  revision  of  great 
importance  in  the  history  of  the  English  Bible.  The  Geneva  Bible  itself  did  not 
appear  until  1560,  but  it  was  preluded  in  1557  by  a  New  Testament,  obviously  the 
work  of  a  single  translator,  identifiable  with  practical  certainty  as  William  Whitting- 
ham,  a  senior  student  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  who  subsequently  (1563)  became 
Dean  of  Durham,  although  he  had  received  no  episcopal  ordination.  While  working 
on  his  translation  Whittingham  was  acting  as  a  '  senior  '  or  elder  of  the  Church 
at  Geneva,  of  which  in  1559  he  became  deacon  and  the  following  year  minister.  He 
is  said  to  have  been  connected  by  marriage  with  Calvin,  who  contributed  to  the 
New  Testament  of  1557  '  The  Epistle  declaring  that  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  Lawe  ', 
and  he  was  undoubtedly  the  moving  spirit  of  the  Bible  of  1560,  which  he  stayed  at 

1  After  Cromwell's  execution  in  July,  1540,  his  arms  were  cut  out  from  this  title-page. 


xlv. 


The 

Geneva 

Bible. 


xlvi. 


1 8  Bibliographical   Introduction. 


xlvi. 


y 


xlvii. 


Geneva  to  complete  when  other  exiles  were  hurrying  home  on  the  accession  of 
Elizabeth.  Moreover,  while  the  1557  translation  of  the  New  Testament  was  very 
thoroughly  revised  when  reprinted  in  the  Bible  of  1560,  the  general  lines  of  the 
earlier  book  were  carefully  followed  in  the  later,  and  even  some  phrases  were 
taken  over  from  its  preface.  There  is  thus  a  very  strong  presumption  that  the  new 
translation,  destined  to  so  great  a  popularity,  originated  with  Whittingham,  and 
that  the  trial  New  Testament  was  his  individual  work.  The  printing  of  this  was 
completed  at  Geneva  '  this  x.  of  Iune  '  1557,  by  Conrad  Badius,  the  book  being  a 
pretty  little  320,  in  the  style  at  that  time  specially  popular  at  Lyons,  with  ornamental 
capitals  and  headpieces,  printed  in  a  small  clear  roman  type,  with  a  still  smaller  type 
of  the  same  class  for  the  marginal  notes,  and  italics  as  a  subsidiary  fount.  The 
title  of  the  book  reads  : 

The  ||  New  Testa- 1|  merit  of  our  Lord  Ie.  ||  sus  Christ.  |||  Conferred  diligently  with  the  Greke, 
and  best  ap-  ||  proued  translations.  ||  With  the  arguments,  aswel  before  the  Chapters,  as  for 
euery  Boke  ||  &  Epistle,  also  diuersities  of  readings,  and  moste  proffitable  ||  annotations  of  all 
harde  places  :  wherunto  is  added  a  copi-  ||  ous  Table.  [Woodcut  illustrating  the  theme  '  : 
God  by  time  restoreth  Truth  jj  and  maketh  her  victorious.]  At  Geneva  l|  Printed  by  Conrad 
Badius,  ||  M.D.  LVII. 

In  the  preface,  quoted  in  full  in  the  Records,  Whittingham  says  that  in  his  trans- 
lation he  has  chiefly  had  respect  to  the  '  simple  lambes,  which  partely  are  already 
in  the  folde  of  Christ,  and  so  willingly  heare  their  Shepeheards  voyce,  and  partly 
wandering  astray  by  ignorance,  tary  the  tyme  tyll  the  Shepeherde  fynde  them  and 
bring  them  vnto  his  flocke  ',  being  himself  '  moued  with  zeale,  counselled  by  the 
godly,  and  drawen  by  occasion,  both  of  the  place  where  God  hath  appointed  vs  to 
dwel,  and  also  of  the  store  of  heauenly  learning  &  iudgement,  which  so  abundeth  in 
this  Citie  of  Geneua,  that  iustely  it  may  be  called  the  patron  and  mirrour  of  true 
religion  and  godlynes  '. 

To  these  therfore  which  are  of  the  flocke  of  Christ  which  knowe  their  Fathers  wil,  and  are 
affectioned  to  the  trueth,  I  rendre  a  reason  of  my  doing  in  fewe  lines.  First  as  touching  the 
perusing  of  the  text,  it  was  diligently  reuised  by  the  moste  approued  Greke  examples,  and 
conference  of  translations  in  other  tonges  as  the  learned  may  easiely  iudge,  both  by  the 
faithful  rendering  of  the  sentence,  and  also  by  the  proprietie  of  the  wordes  and  perspicuitie  of 
the  phrase.  Forthermore  that  the  Reader  might  be  by  all  meanes  profnted,  I  haue  deuided 
the  text  into  verses  and  sections,  according  to  the  best  editions  in  other  langages,  and  also,  as 
to  this  day  the  ancient  Greke  copies  mencion,  it  was  wont  to  be  vsed.  And  because  the 
Hebrew  and  Greke  phrases  which  are  strange  to  rendre  in  other  tongues,  and  also  shorte, 
shulde  not  be  so  harde,  I  haue  sometyme  interpreted  them  without  any  whit  diminishing  the 
grace  of  the  sense,  as  our  langage  doth  vse  them,  and  sometyme  haue  put  to  that  worde,  which 
lacking  made  the  sentence  obscure,  but  haue  set  it  in  such  letters  as  may  easely  be  dis- 
cerned from  the  commun  texte. 

He  goes  on  to  explain  his  system  of  annotation,  and  the  critical  marks  by  which  he 
drew  attention  to  differences  in  the  Greek  manuscripts,  either  in  single  words  or  '  in 
the  sentence  ',  and  finally  expatiates  at  some  length  on  the  value  of  the  Arguments 
'  aswel  they  which  conteyne  the  suwme  of  euery  chapter,  as  the  other  which  are 
placed  before  the  bookes  and  epistles,  wherof  the  cowmoditie  is  so  great  that  they 
may  serue  in  stede  of  a  Commentarie  to  the  Reader.' 

Space  forbids  more  quotation,  but  it  will  be  evident  from  these  extracts  that 
it  is  to  Whittingham's  New  Testament  that  the  Version  of  1611  owes  two  of  its 
prominent  features,  its  division  into  verses  (taken  by  Whittingham  from  Etienne's 
Greek-Latin  Testament  of  155 1)  and  the  use  of  italics  for  explanatory  and  con- 1 
nective  words  and  phrases  (taken  from  Beza's  New  Testament  of  1556).    Whitting- 1 
ham's  chapter-summaries,  moreover,  were  much  fuller  than  those  of  the  Great  Bible.  I 

All  the  features  in  the  New  Testament  of  1557  are  repeated  in  the  Bible  of) 
1560,  in  preparing  which  Whittingham  had  the  help  of  Anthony  Gilby  and  Thomas  i 
Sampson,  afterwards  (from  1561  till  his  deprivation  in  1565)  Dean  of  Christ  Church. 
The  funds  for  this  were  apparently  subscribed  by  the  Protestant  exiles  or  sent  out ' 
by  friends  in  England,  since  the  translator  speaks  of  '  being  earnestly  desired  and  by 
diuers,  whose  learning  and  godlynes  we  reuerence,  exhorted  and  also  incouraged  by 
the  ready  willes  of  suche,  whose  heartes  God  likewise  touched,  not  to  spare  any 
charges  for  the  fortherance  of  suche  a  benefite  and  fauour  of  God  toward  his  Churche '. 

1  It  is  evident  that  we  have  hire  the  inspiration  for  the  pageant  of  Time,  Truth,  and  the  Bible 
at  '  the  Little  Conduit  in  Cheape  '  which  attracted  so  much  attention  at  the  progress  of  Queen 
Elizabeth  from  Westminster  to  the  Tower  the  next  year. 


-\ 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


19 


xlix. 


One  of  these  helpers  was  John  Bodley  (father  of  Sir  Thomas),  who  in  January,  1561, 
received  an  exclusive  patent  from  Elizabeth  for  printing  this  Bible  under  episcopal  [  xlviii 
supervision  for  seven  years,  a  grant  which  in  March,  1565  (?  1566),  Parker  and] 
Grindal  recommended  should  be  extended  for  another  twelve,  but  still  subject  to 
implied  conditions  which  apparently  Bodley  could  not  accept.  By  the  help  of  these 
funds  the  translators  were  able  to  borrow  or  buy  woodcuts  to  illustrate  the  descrip- 
tions of  the  tabernacles,  &c,  in  Exodus,  1  Kings,  and  Ezekiel  from  Antoine  Rebul, 
the  publisher  of  the  French  Bible  printed  at  Geneva  in  the  same  year.  They  allude 
to  these  cuts  in  their  preface  and  also  to  the  addition  of  verse-numbers  in  the 
chapter-summaries,  by  which  these  were  brought  into  the  form  used  in  1611. 

As  regards  the  literary  influences  which  affected  the  Geneva  version,  it  is  clear 
that  increased  use  was  made  of  the  Latin  translation  of  Pagninus,  the  revised  Bible 
of  Leo  Juda,  and  that  of  Sebastian  Miinster,  also  of  the  French  revisions  of 
Olivetan.  For  the  New  Testament  Whittingham  had  constant  recourse  to  the  French 
version  of  Beza  (Theodore  de  Beze),  published  in  1556  ;  further  use  was  made  of  this 
in  1560,  while  in  1576  Laurence  Tomson  (a  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford,  who 
sat  for  fourteen  years,  1575-89,  in  the  House  of  Commons)  used  the  Geneva  version 
as  the  basis  of  a  direct  translation  from  the  French  of  Beza,  and  editions  of  this 
were  often  bound  up  with  the  Geneva  Old  Testament. 

After  Elizabeth's  accession  the  Great  Bible  was  once  again,  by  the  Injunctions  of 
1559,  ordered  to  be  set  up  in  churches,  and  new  editions  were  printed  by  R.  Harrison 
at  London  in  1562,  and  at  Rouen  in  1566  by  Cardin  Hamillon,  at  the  expense  of 
Richard  Carmarden  (an  Englishman  connected  with  the  customs),  this  foreign  edition 
disarming  suspicion  by  stating  on  its  title-page  that  it  was  '  According  to  the  trans- 
lation apoynted  by  the  Queenes  Majesties  Iniunctions  to  be  read  in  all  Churches 
with  in  her  Majesties  Realme  '.  Archbishop  Parker  had  shown  no  ill-will  to  the 
Geneva  version,  was  even,  indeed,  subject  to  conditions,  ready  to  support  John 
Bodley's  application  for  an  extension  of  his  privilege  for  it,  but  the  use  of  a  trans- 
lation with  bitterly  controversial  notes  in  the  public  services  of  the  Church  was 
contrary  both  to  Tudor  ideals  of  uniformity  and  to  Parker's  own  preference  for 
the  via  media.  In  or  before  1566,  therefore,  perhaps  at  the  instigation  of  Richard 
Cox,  Bishop  of  Ely,  he  revived  the  project,  which  had  come  to  naught  in  Cranmer's 
day,  of  a  new  revision  to  be  mainly  the  work  of  the  Anglican  bishops.  Beyond 
two  or  three  quotations  in  Strype's  Life  of  Parker  from  letters  of  prelates  engaged 
in  the  task  we  know  curiously  little  about  its  progress  until  October  5,  1568,  when 
Parker  was  able  to  send  to  Sir  William  Cecil  a  bound  copy  for  presentation  to  the 
Queen,  and  enclosed  with  it  a  dedicatory  letter,  and  (for  Cecil's  information)  a  list 
of  the  revisers  and  a  copy  of  the  '  Observations  respected'  by  them.  The  observations 
tell  us  that  the  revisers  were  to  follow  the  Great  Bible  '  and  not  to  recede  from  it 
but  where  it  varyeth  manifestly  from  the  Greek  or  Hebrew  original ',  to  make  use 
of  the  versions  of  Pagninus  and  Miinster,  to  abstain  from  bitter  or  controversial 
notes,  to  mark  sections  not  edifying  for  public  reading,  and  to  substitute  more 
convenient  terms  and  phrases  for  '  all  such  words  as  sound  [tend]  in  the  old  trans- 
lation to  any  offence  of  lightnes  or  obscenity  '. 

As  regards  the  personality  of  the  revisers,  Parker  tells  Cecil  '  bicause  I  wold  yow 
knewe  all,  I  here  send  yow  a  note  to  signifie  who  first  travelled  in  the  diverse 
bookes,  though  after  them  sum  other  perusing  was  had ;  the  lettres  of  their  names 
be  partlie  affixed  in  the  ende  of  their  bookes ;  which  I  thought  a  polecie  to  showe 
them,  to  make  them  more  diligent,  as  awnswerable  for  their  doinges'.  When  we 
turn  to  the  Bible  itself  we  find  initials  such  as  Parker  thus  leads  us  to  expect  not 
only  at  the  end  of  certain  books,  but  also  in  certain  cases  printed  in  or  under 
the  ornamental  capital  with  which  a  book  or  chapter  begins.  We  may  thus  con- 
struct the  following  table  : 


1  A,  B. 

The 

Bishops' 

Bible. 

lc. 

li,  lii. 


B  2 


20 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


The  sum  of  the  Scripture 
The  Tables  of  Christ's  Line 
The      Arguments      of       the 

Scripture 
The    first    Preface    unto    the 

Whole  Bible   . 
The  Preface  unto  the  Psalter 
The    Preface   unto    the    New 

Testament 
Genesis 
Exodus 
Leviticus  . 
Numbers  . 
Deuteronomy 
Joshua 
Judges      . 
Ruth 

Kings  (Samuel)  I,  II 
Kings  III,  IV  (I,  II) 
Chronicles  I,  II 
Job  . 
Proverbs  . 
Ecclesiastes 
Cantica 
Ecclesiasticus 
Susanna    . 
Baruch 
Maccabees 
Esdras 
Judith 
Tobias 
Wisdom    . 
Isaiah 
Jeremiah  . 
Lamentations 
Ezekiel 
Daniel 
Minor  Prophets 


Matthew 

Mark 

Luke 

John 

Acts . 

Romans 

i  Corinthians 

2  Corinthians 

Galatians 

Ephesians 

Philippians 

Colossians 

Thessalonians 

Timothy  . 

Titus 

Philemon 

Hebrews  . 


Canonical  Epistles 
Apocalypse 


Parker's  Note.  Indications  in  the  Bible. 


M.  Cant. 


M.  Cant.     . 

Cantuariae 
W.  Exon.   . 


Ik. 


Meneven 


Ed.  Wigorn 

Cantuariae 

Cantabri- 
giae 

J.  Norwic 


W.      Cices- 
tren. 


R.  Winton 

J.  Lich.  and 
Covent. 
Ed.  London  . 


M.  Cant.      . 

Ed.  Peterb. 

R.  Eliensis 
D.  West- 


L  M.  Cant. 


N.  Lincoln 


The  Archbishop's  arms  quar- 
tered with  those  of  Christ 
Church,  Canterbury,  in  the 
capital  before  the  Table  of 
Christ's  Line  ;  his  personal 
arms  in  the  capital  before  the 
general  preface  or  prologue 

Initials  M.  C.  under  capitals    . 


W.  E.  at  end    . 

R. M.  at  end     .         .         .         . 

E.    W.    under  capital  and   at 
end 

A.  P  C  at  end  of  each  book 
A  P  E  at  end   .... 


J.N. 


W.  C.  (in  some  copies)  at  end 
of  Wisdom 


R.  W.  at  end    . 

T.  C.  L.  at  end 

E.  L.  at  end 

M.  C.  under  first  capital 


R.  E.  at  end  of  both 
G.  G.  at  end 


M.  ('.  under  capitals  beginning 
J  Corinth.,  Galatians  (in  some 
copies),  Ephesians,  Philipp.,  I , 
2  Coloss.,  i,  2  Thessal.,  Titus, 
Philemon,  Hebrews 


H.  L.  under  capitals  beginning 
i  IVter  v,  2  Peter  iii,  I  John 
v,  3  John,  Jude  and  Apoca- 
lypse xxii 


Author. 


Matthew    Parker,    Archbishop 
of  Canterbury. 


Matthew  Parker. 

Andrew    Pierson,   Prebend,   of 

Canterbury. 
William  Alley , Bishop  of  Exeter. 

Richard  Davies,  Bishop  of  St. 
Davids. 

Edwin     Sandys,      Bishop     of 
Worcester. 
Andrew   Pierson,   Prebend,   of 
Canterbury. 

Andrew  Perne,  Dean  of  Ely. 


John    Parkhurst,    Bishop     of 
Norwich. 


William     Barlow,    Bishop     of 
Chichester. 


Robert  Home,  Bishop  of  Win- 
chester. 

Thomas  Bentham,  Bishop  of 
Coventry  and  Lichfield. 

Edmund  Grindal,  Bishop  of 
London. 

Matthew  Parker. 

Edmund  Scambler,  Bishop  of 
Peterborough. 

Richard  Cox,  Bishop  of  Ely. 

Gabriel  Goodman,  Dean  of 
Westminster. 


Matthew  Parker. 


Nicholas  Bullingham,  Bishop 
of  Lincoln  (?  completed  by 
Hugh  Jones,  Bishop  of  Llan- 
daff). 


1  c. 


It  will  be  noticed  that  in  the  above  list  (the  books  in  which  are  given  in 
Parker's  order,  but  with  English  instead  of  Latin  names)  there  is  no  mention  of  the 
Psalms.  These  had  originally  been  assigned  to  Guest,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  but  the 
intention  he  expressed  in  a  letter  quoted  by  Strype  of  bringing  his  translation  into 
violent  conformity  with  the  New  Testament  quotations  had  apparently  alarmed 
Parker,  and  the  initials  at  the  end  of  the  book  are  T.  B.  These  Strype  interpreted 
as  standing  for  Thomas  Becon,  a  prebendary  of  Canterbury,  but  a  very  unlikely 
man.  Dr.  Aldis  Wright,  in  his  revision  of  Westcott's  General  View  of  the  History  of 
the  English  Bible  assigns  them,  no  doubt  rightly,  to  Thomas  Bickley,  one  of  Parker's 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


21 


chaplains,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Chichester.  The  only  other  difficulty  is  as  to  the 
responsibility  for  the  Canonical  Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse.  Until  Dr.  Wright 
drew  attention  to  them,  the  initials  beneath  the  capitals  in  such  seemingly  haphazard 
positions  had  escaped  notice.  His  conjecture  that  the  revision  was  begun  by  the 
Bishop  of  Lincoln  and  completed  by  his  brother  of  Llandaff  meets  the  case,  though 
it  is  strange  that  the  first  worker  should  have  left  so  many  of  his  books  unfinished. 

Portioned  out,  as  it  was,  among  a  number  of  individual  revisers  who,  as  far  as  we 
know,  never  checked  each  other's  work,  the  Bishops'  Bible,  as  it  came  to  be  called 
from  the  number  of  prelates  who  collaborated  in  it,  while  an  improvement  on  the 
Great  Bible,  more  especially  in  the  New  Testament,  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  much 
more  than  a  makeshift.  In  form,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  handsome  book,1  and 
Parker  highly  commended  Richard  Jugge,  the  printer,  to  Cecil  for  the  pains  he  had 
taken  with  it,  even  to  the  point  of  printing  the  New  Testament  on  thicker  paper 
to  withstand  the  extra  amount  of  wear  it  was  likely  to  receive.  The  Bible  is 
embellished  with  numerous  woodcuts,  and  also  with  a  fine  engraved  title-page, 
attributed  to  Franciscus  Hogenberg,  bearing  in  the  centre  a  rather  pleasing  portrait 
of  the  Queen.  Before  the  Book  of  Judges  there  is  another  engraved  portrait, 
representing  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  in  whom  the  bishops  apparently  found  some 
resemblance  to  Joshua,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Psalms  a  third  portrait,  of  Lord 
Burghley  holding  a  B,  which  thus  at  once  does  duty  for  a  capital  and  helps  to 
identify  its  holder.  Punning  capitals,  of  which  this  may  claim  to  be  one  of  the  least 
pleasing,  had  been  for  some  time  in  vogue,  but  in  the  second  folio  edition,  published 
in  1572,  the  B  was  taken  out  of  the  plate  and  Burleigh  divorced  from  his  immediate 
connexion  with  the  Psalter.  A  little  further  revision  was  bestowed  on  the  New 
Testament  in  this  reprint,  and  the  Psalter  is  printed  twice  over,  once  as  revised, 
and  once  in  the  text  of  the  Great  Bible,  still  familiar  to  all  churchgoers  as  the 
'  Prayer-book  version  '. 

The  struggle  for  supremacy  between  the  Geneva  and  the  Bishops'  version  leads 
so  directly  to  the  undertaking  of  that  of  1611  that  we  must  leave  the  discussion  of 
it  to  our  next  chapter.    Meanwhile  there  is  still  another  translation  to  be  noticed  here. 

The  years  which  followed  the  publication  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  witnessed  a  devoted 
attempt  by  the  Jesuits  to  win  back  England  to  the  faith.  It  appears  to  have  been 
in  connexion  with  this  attempt  that  the  New  Testament  was  rendered  into  English 
by  members  of  the  English  College  at  Douay  early  in  their  temporary  exile  to 
Rheims  which  began  in  1578.  In  a  Latin  letter  written  by  Cardinal  Allen  to 
Dr.  Vendeville,  September  16  in  that  year,2  we  find  this  interesting  passage,  in 
a  description  of  the  life  of  the  college  : 

On  every  Sunday  and  festival  English  sermons  are  preached  by  the  more  advanced  students 
on  the  gospel,  epistle  or  subject  proper  to  the  day.  .  .  .  We  preach  in  English,  in  order  to  acquire 
greater  power  and  grace  in  the  use  of  the  vulgar  tongue.  ...  In  this  respect  the  heretics, 
however  ignorant  they  may  be  in  other  points,  have  the  advantage  over  many  of  the  more 
learned  Catholics,  who  having  been  educated  in  the  universities  and  the  schools  do  not  com- 
monly have  at  command  the  text  of  Scripture  or  quote  it  except  in  Latin.  Hence  when  they 
are  preaching  to  the  unlearned  and  are  obliged  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  to  translate  some 
passage  which  they  have  quoted  into  the  vulgar  tongue,  they  often  do  it  inaccurately  and 
with  unpleasant  hesitation,  because  either  there  is  no  English  version  of  the  words  or  it  does 
not  then  and  there  occur  to  them.  Our  adversaries  on  the  other  hand  have  at  their  fingers' 
ends  all  those  passages  of  Scripture  which  seem  to  make  for  them,  and  by  a  certain  deceptive 
adaptation  and  alteration  of  the  sacred  words  produce  the  effect  of  appearing  to  say  nothing 
but  what  comes  from  the  bible.  This  evil  might  be  remedied  if  we  too  had  some  catholic 
version  of  the  bible,  for  all  the  English  versions  are  most  corrupt.  I  do  not  know  what  kind 
you  have  in  Belgium.  But  certainly  we  on  our  part,  if  his  Holiness  shall  think  proper,  will 
undertake  to  produce  a  faithful,  pure  and  genuine  version  of  the  bible  in  accordance  with  the 
edition  approved  by  the  Church,  for  we  already  have  men  most  fitted  for  the  work. 

The  man  of  all  others  most  fitted  for  the  work  in  Allen's  eyes  was  Gregory 
Martin,  one  of  the  original  scholars  (1557)  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  when 
Edmund  Campion  was  a  Fellow,  now,  in  1578,  lecturer  in  Hebrew  and  Holy  Scripture 
at  the  Douay-Rheims  College.  According  to  the  entry  in  the  College  Diaries  he 
began  to  translate  the  Bible  on  or  about  October  16  (i.  e.  just  a  month  after  Allen's 
letter),  and  in  order  to  get  on  with  it  rapidly,  made  a  practice  of  translating  two 

1  Messrs.  Darlow  and  Moule  note  that  27s.  Sd.  was  paid  for  a  copy  by  St.  John's  College, 
Cambridge,  in  1571. 

"■  The  text  is  given  on  pp.  52-67  of  Letters  and  Memorials  of  William  Cardinal  Allen  by 
T.  F.  Knox  (1882)  the  translation  on  p.  xl.  sq.  of  the  First  and  Second  Diaries  of  the  English 
College  at  Douay  by  the  same  editor  (1878). 


lii  A. 
Hi  c. 


The 
Rheims 
New 
Testa- 
ment. 

liii. 


liv. 


A 


liv. 


22 


Bibliographical    Introduction. 


chapters  daily,  his  version  being  corrected  by  Allen  himself  and  by  Richard  Bristow, 
Moderator  of  the  College.  His  work  occupied  him  altogether  three  years  and  a  half, 
the  entry,  '  Hoc  ipso  mense  extrema  manus  Nouo  Testamento  Anglice  edito  imposita 
est  '  occurring  in  the  Diary  under  March,  1582,  and  in  the  same  year  the  New 
Testament  was  published  with  the  title  : 

The  New  Testament  of  Iesus  Christ,  translated  faithfully  into  English,  out  of  the  authentical 
Latin,  according  to  the  best  corrected  copies  of  the  same,  diligently  conferred  with  the 
Greeke  and  other  editions  in  diuers  languages  :  With  Arguments  of  bookes  and  chapters, 
Annotations,  and  other  necessarie  helpes,  for  the  better  vnderstanding  of  the  text,  and 
specially  for  the  discouerie  of  the  corruptions  of  diuers  late  translations,  and  for  cleering  the 
controuersies  in  religion  of  these  daies :  in  the  English  College  of  Rhemes.  [Quotations1  in 
Latin  and  English].     Printed  at  Rhemes  by  Iohn  Fogny.  1582.     Cum  priuilegio. 

On  the  back  of  the  title  is  '  The  Censure  and  Approbation  '  signed  by  four 
licensers,  and  this  is  followed  by  twenty-two  pages  of  small  print  containing  '  The 
Preface  to  the  Reader  treating  of  these  three  points  :  of  the  translation  of  Holy 
Scriptures  into  the  vulgar  tongues,  and  namely  into  English  ;  of  the  causes  why 
this  new  Testament  is  translated  according  to  the  auncient  vulgar  Latin  text :  &  of 
the  maner  of  translating  the  same.'  Quotations  from  this  interesting  preface  will  be 
found  in  our  Records ;  here  it  may  be  well  to  remind  any  reader  struck  with  the 
superficial  absurdity  of  translating  from  a  translation  instead  of  an  original,  that  if 
St.  Jerome  worked  from  better  Greek  manuscripts  than  any  which  were  known 
in  the  sixteenth  century,  his  Latin  translation  might,  at  least  theoretically,  represent 
the  original  Greek  better  than  any  manuscript  used  by  Erasmus.  Practically, 
of  course,  the  question  would  be  one  of  the  balance  between  loss  and  gain,  and 
in  striking  this  balance  Gregory  Martin,  or  whoever  wrote  the  preface,  was  probably 
very  insufficiently  conscious  that  if  the  available  Greek  texts  were  corrupt  the 
available  Latin  texts  were  very  corrupt  also,  and  far  from  representing  what 
St.  Jerome  really  wrote.  Thus  from  the  point  of  view  of  scholarship  the  decision 
to  translate  from  the  Vulgate  was  doubtless  wrong,  but  it  was  not  absurd,  and 
there  is  ample  evidence  that  Martin  and  his  supervisors  were  good  Graecists,  and 
on  any  point,  such  as  the  use  of  the  article,  on  which  they  felt  free  to  interpret 
the  Latin  by  the  Greek,  did  so  with  conspicuous  success. 

Another  point  which  must  be  made  is  that  the  translation  is  much  simpler  than 
popular  accounts  of  it  make  out.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  translators  acted  up  to 
their  declaration,  '  we  presume  not  in  hard  places  to  mollifie  the  speaches  or  phrases,- 
but  religiously  keepe  them  word  for  word,  and  point  for  point,  for  feare  of  missing 
or  restraining  the  sense  of  the  holy  Ghost  to  our  phantasie,'  and  it  is  possible  to 
quote  verses,  especially  from  the  Epistles,  which  remain  utterly  unintelligible  until 
we  know  the  original.  In  this  the  translators  seem  to  have  forgotten  the  needs  of 
popular  preaching  which  Cardinal  Allen  made  the  main  ground  for  setting  Gregory 
Martin  to  work.  But  '  hard  places  '  do  not  occur  on  every  page  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  it  is  easy  to  find  long  passages  in  the  Gospels  without  a  difficult  word  in 
them,  and  which  a  good  reader  could  make  all  the  more  dramatic  because  of  the 
abruptness  of  some  of  the  constructions  and  transitions. 

The  Jesuit  New  Testament  was  reprinted  at  Antwerp  in  1600.  In  1593  the 
College  returned  from  Rheims  to  Douai,  and  in  1609-10,  a  press  having  been  set  up 
in  the  town,  the  Old  Testament  was  printed  there.  This  had  been  mentioned  in 
the  Introduction  of  1582  as  '  lying  by  us  for  lacke  of  good  meanes  to  publish  the 
whole  in  such  sort  as  a  worke  of  so  great  charge  and  importance  requireth  ',  and  it 
was  doubtless  the  news  of  the  forthcoming  new  Anglican  version  which  at  last 
brought  it  to  the  light.  No  use  was  made  of  the  Old  Testament  by  the  Anglican 
revisers,  but  in  his  excellent  study,  The  Part  of  Rheims  in  the  making  of  the 
English  Bible  (1902),  Dr.  James  G.  Carleton  has  shown  that  the  influence  of  the 
Rheims  New  Testament  on  the  version  of  1611  was  very  considerable.  That  it 
attained  this  influence  was  mainly  due  to  the  exertions  of  the  Rev.  William  Fulke, 
D.D.,  who  in  1589  published  '  The  Text  of  the  New  Testament  of  Iesus  Christ, 
translated  out  of  the  vulgar  Latine  by  the  Papists  of  the  traiterous  Seminarie 

1  The  first  from  Psalm  118'  Give  me  vnderstanding,  and  I  wil  searche  thy  law,  and  wil  keepe 
it  with  my  whole  hart  ',  the  second  from  St.  Augustine,  tract  2,  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  John  '  al 
things  that  are  readde  in  holy  Scriptures  we  must  heare  with  great  attention,  to  our  instruction 
and  saluation  :  but  those  things  specially  must  be  commended  to  memorie,  which  make  most 
against  Heretikes  :  whose  deceites  cease  not  to  circumuent  and  beguile  al  the  weaker  sort  and 
the  more  negligent  persons.' 


The  Earlier  English  Translations. 


23 


at  Rhemes  ',  and  very  honestly  reprinted  the  whole  translation  with  its  notes, 
parallel  with  the  Bishops'  version  and  alternated  with  his  own  confutations. 
Fulke's  folio  (reprinted  in  1601,  1617,  and  1633)  was  regarded  for  over  forty  years 
as  a  standard  work  on  the  Protestant  side,  and  probably  every  reviser  of  the  New 
Testament  for  the  edition  of  161 1  possessed  it.  Along  with  Tyndale,  Cover  dale, 
Whittingham,  and  Parker,  the  exiled  Jesuit,  Gregory  Martin,  must  be  thus  recog- 
nized as  one  of  the  builders  of  the  version  of  the  Bible  which  after  three  centuries 
is  still  in  scarcely  disturbed  possession  of  the  affections  of  the  English  people. 

CHAPTER  II 
THE  BIBLE  OF  1611. 

In  his  letter  of  October  5,  1568,  to  Cecil,  forwarding  a  copy  of  the  Bishops' 
Bible  for  presentation  to  the  Queen,  Archbishop  Parker  writes  with  obvious 
timidity  :  '  The  printer  hath  honestly  done  his  diligence  ;  if  your  honour  would 
obtain  of  the  Queen's  Highness  that  this  edition  might  be  licensed  and  only 1 
commended  in  public  reading  in  churches,  to  draw  to  one  uniformity,  it  were  no 
great  cost  to  the  most  parishes,  and  a  relief  to  him  for  his  great  charges  sustained.' 
That  the  adoption  of  the  new  version  for  use  in  churches  should  thus  be  urged 
mainly  on  the  ground  of  an  obligation  to  recoup  the  printer  is  certainly  strange,  but 
the  very  half-hearted  canons  on  the  subject  passed  by  the  Province  of  Canterbury 
in  1571  show  that  there  was  not  much  enthusiasm  to  be  reckoned  on.  The  passage 
usually  quoted  (Cardwell,  Synodalia,  115)  is  indeed  almost  malicious,  since  it  merely 
lays  down  that  every  archbishop  and  bishop  is  to  have  the  book  ('  sacra  Biblia  in 
amplissimo  volumine,  uti  nuperrime  Londini  excusa  sunt ')  in  his  own  house  along 
with  Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs  and  other  similar  works,  and  that  deans  were  to  see  that  it 
was  bought  and  placed  in  their  cathedrals  in  order  that  vicars,  minor  canons,  the 
servants  of  the  church,  strangers,  and  wayfarers  might  read  and  hear  it,  and  were 
also  to  buy  it  for  their  own  households,  i.  e.  the  chief  obligation  imposed  was  on 
the  bishops  and  other  '  superior  clergy  '  to  buy  their  own  revision.  In  a  later  canon 
(Cardwell,  Synodalia,  123)  churchwardens  are  enjoined  to  see  that  a  copy  of  the 
new  edition  is  placed  in  every  church,2  but  the  proviso,  '  if  it  can  be  done 
conveniently,'  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the  royal  order  to  provide  a  copy  by 
a  certain  day  under  penalty  of  a  fine  of  four  times  its  cost  for  every  month  of 
delay,  which  had  been  issued  by  Proclamation  in  the  case  of  the  Great  Bible. 

With  little  backing,  either  from  the  State  or  from  his  own  Convocation,  Parker 
was  left  to  deal  with  the  question  of  the  circulation  of  the  Bible  by  means  of  his 
own  resources,  and  these,  it  must  be  remembered,  owing  to  the  duties  cast  on  him  in 
connexion  with  the  licensing  of  books  for  the  press,  were,  for  any  negative  purpose, 
very  great.  In  March  1565  (?  1566)  he  and  Grindal,  who  as  Bishop  of  London  shared 
these  duties,  had  recommended  Cecil  to  extend  John  Bodley's  exclusive  privilege  for 
printing  the  Geneva  Bible  for  another  twelve  years  on  the  ground  that  '  thoughe 
one  other  speciall  Bible  for  the  churches  be  meant  by  us  to  be  set  forthe,  as 
convenient  time  and  leysor  hereafter  will  permytte  :  yet  shall  it  nothing  hindre,  but 
rather  do  moch  good  to  have  diversitie  of  translations  and  readinges '.  They  had 
added,  however,  '  and  if  his  licence,  hereafter  to  be  made,  goe  simplye  foorthe  with- 
owt  proviso  of  owr  oversight,  as  we  thinke  it  maye  so  passe  well  ynoughe,  yet  shall 
we  take  suche  ordre  in  writing  withe  the  partie,  that  no  impression  shall  passe  but 
by  our  direcaon,  consent  and  advise.'  In  the  face  of  this  last  sentence  it  is  highly 
significant  that  during  Parker's  life  no  edition  of  the  Geneva  Bible  was  printed  in 
England,  although  at  Geneva  itself  one  was  published  by  John  Crispin  in  1570.  At 
variance  with  the  Privy  Council  over  the  question  of  '  prophesyings '  during  1574, 
Parker  was  unable  during  the  last  months  of  his  life  to  attend  its  meeting  owing  to 
his  rapidly  failing  health.  He  died  on  May  17,  1575,  and  the  first  Geneva  New 
Testament  printed  in  London  is  dated  in. this  year  without  specifying  the  month; 
we  have,  however,  documentary  evidence  that  Parker  was  dead  before  its  publica- 
tion, and  there  are  excellent  reasons  for  placing  this  in  the  latter  half  of  the  year. 
It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  avoid  the  conviction  that  to  the  very  end  of  his  life 
Parker  used  his  control  over  the  Stationers'  Company  to  prevent  the  Geneva  version 

1  i.  e.  to  the  exclusion  of  any  other. 

2  '  Curabunt  etiam  ut  sacra  Biblia  sint  in  singulis  ecclesiis  in  amplissimo  volumine  (si 
commode  fieri  possit)  qualia  nunc  nuper  Londini  excusa  sunt.' 


Hi. 


xlix. 


24  Bibliographical   Introduction. 


lvi.  A. 
lvi.  B. 


lvi.  c. 


lvii.  c. 


being  printed  in  England,  and  also  to  secure  for  Jugge  the  monopoly  of  printing  the 
Bishops'  Bible. 

According  to  the  ideas  of  the  day  the  exclusion  of  the  Geneva  Bible  was  perhaps 
justified  by  the  character  of  a  few  of  the  notes.  The  monopoly  secured  for  Jugge 
might  also  have  been  defended  from  the  Tudor  standpoint,  if  it  had  been  accom-  j 
panied  by  an  insistence  that  the  Bishops'  version  should  be  effectively  circulated; 
but,  as  far  as  the  evidence  before  us  shows,  there  was  no  such  insistence.  Editions 
in  large  folio  were  printed  in  1568,  1572,  and  1574  ;  others  in  large  quarto  in  1569 
and  1573.  Evidence  as  to  editions  in  octavo,  either  of  the  whole  Bible  or  of  the 
New  Testament,  is  much  less  exact,  owing  on  the  one  hand  to  the  curious  absence  of 
dates  from  the  two  or  three  editions  probably  of  this  period  of  which  copies  remain, 
and  on  the  other  to  the  possibility  of  one  or  more  entire  editions  having  perished. 
But  taking  the  most  favourable  view  possible,  it  seems  certain  that  the  Archbishop 
cared  little  for  providing  Bibles  for  private  reading.  He  saw  and  met  the  need  of  suit- 
able editions  for  the  service  of  the  church,  but  to  use  a  phrase  which,  though  it  has  a 
ring  of  these  present  times,  is  taken  from  the  preface  to  the  version  of  161 1  (where  it  is 
applied  to  the  Roman  Catholic  position)  he  did  not  '  trust  the  people  '  with  cheap 
editions  of  the  Bible,  and  his  lack  of  confidence  sealed  the  fate  of  the  Bishops'  Bible. 
Immediately  after  the  death  of  Archbishop  Parker,  the  other  printers  of  London, 
who  had  previously  acquiesced  in  Jugge 's  monopoly  of  Bible-printing,  took  courage 
to  urge  their  right  to  share  it.  A  compromise  was  patched  up  by  which  Jugge  was 
left  with  the  exclusive  right  of  printing  editions  of  the  Bible  in  quarto,  and  of  the 
New  Testament  in  sextodecimo,  while  the  other  sizes  were  left  free,  subject  (pre- 
sumably to  secure  responsibility  for  accuracy)  to  a  licence  from  the  Stationers' 
Company.  Licences  were  obtained,  and  on  November  24,  1575,  there  appeared  a  j 
folio  edition  of  the  Bishops'  Bible,  printed  by  Jugge,  but  on  behalf  of  William 
Norton,  Luke  Harrison,  and  other  stationers,  each  of  whom  put  his  name  on 
a  portion  of  the  edition.  This  was  apparently  the  beginning  of  the  '  Bible  Stock  '  of 
the  Stationers'  Company,  a  company  within  a  company,  the  subsequent  history  of 
which  is  very  obscure,  but  which  is  said  to  have  earnt  profits  and  possessed  funds 
which  enabled  it,  on  occasion,  to  lend  money  at  interest  to  the  Stationers'  Company 
itself.  If,  as  is  usually  said,  the  revisers  of  1611  received  any  payment  from  the 
Company,  it  must  have  been  from  this  separate  Bible  Stock  that  it  was  derived. 
The  existence  of  this  Stock  also  offers  a  strong  ground  for  believing  that  the  com- 
promise of  1575  continued  to  affect  the  business  of  Bible-printing  in  ways  of  which 
we  have  no  knowledge.  But  for  this  we  should  be  bound  to  believe  that  it  had  no 
other  result  than  the  folio  edition  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  already  mentioned.  In  this 
same  year,  1575,  under  the  powerful  patronage  of  Sir  Francis  Walsingham,  Christopher 
Barker,  who  had  been  in  Walsingham's  service,  and  was  himself  a  man  of  some 
means,  employed  Thomas  Vautrollier  to  print  for  him  an  edition  in  duodecimo  of 
the  Geneva  Bible,  hitherto  unprinted  in  England,  and  printed  another  edition  himself 
in  octavo.  Barker  advertised  his  connexion  with  Walsingham  by  taking  the  latter's 
crest,  a  tiger's  head,  as  the  sign  of  his  house,  and  used  a  cut  of  it  as  an  ornament 
in  his  books.  He  also  printed  in  1576  the  already  mentioned  translation  of  Beza's 
French  New  Testament,  on  the  basis  of  the  Geneva  version,  made  by  Laurence 
Tomson,  who  was  in  Walsingham's  service.  He  further  printed  two  folio  editions 
of  the  Geneva  Bible  in  1576  and  another  in  1577.  In  that  year  Richard  Jugge  made 
his  will,  on  August  17  and  18,  and  died.  From  subsequent  allusions  we  know  that 
his  patent  as  Queen's  printer  must  immediately  have  been  obtained  (if  the  reversion 
had  not  already  been  secured)  by  Thomas  Wilkes,  a  diplomatist  of  some  ability. 
The  new  patent  extended  to  all  editions  of  the  Bible,  and  Wilkes  must  have  tried 
at  first  to  work  it  through  John  Jugge,  the  son  of  Richard,  since  John,  who  had 
begun  business  for  himself  the  previous  May  by  copyrighting  two  insignificant  books, 
is  actually  called  Queen's  Printer  about  this  time  in  a  largely  signed  petition  against 
monopolies.  He  disappears,  however,  possibly  by  death,  possibly  because  Wilkes 
learnt  that  he  was  receiving  under  his  father's  will  the  inconsiderable  sum  of  ios., 
and  was  thus  not  a  person  to  be  dealt  with.  On  September  28,  at  Wilkes's  instance, 
a  new  patent  conferring  complete  monopoly  of  Bible-printing  was  granted  to 
Christopher  Barker.  Five  years  later,  in  1582,  when  monopolies  were  again 
challenged,  Barker  wrote  as  follows  : 

The  whole  bible  together  required!   so  great  a  somme  of  money  to  be  employed  in  the 
imprinting  thereof :   as  Master  Iugge  kept  the  Realme  twelue  yere  withoute,  before  he  Durst 


The  Bible  of  1 6 1 1 


25 


aduenture  to  print  one '  impression  ■  ;  but  I  considering  the  great  somme  I  paide  to  Master 
Wilkes,  Did  (as  some  haue  termed  it  since)  gyue  a  Desperate  aduenture  to  imprint  tower 
sundry  impressions  for  all  ages,  wherein  I  employed  to  the  value  of  three  thowsande  pounde 
in  the  terme  of  one  yere  and  an  halfe,  or  thereaboute  :  in  which  tyme  if  I  had  died,  my  wife 
and  children  had  ben  vtterlie  vndone,  and  many  of  my  frendes  greatlie  hindered  by  disbursing 
round  sommes  of  money  for  me,  by  suertiship  and  other  meanes  :  as  my  late  good  master 
Master  Secretary  for  one,  so  that  nowe  this  gappe  being  stopped,  I  haue  little  or  nothing 
to  doe,  but  aduenture  a  needlesse  charge  ;  to  keepe  many  Journemen  in  worke,  most  of 
them  seruauntes  to  my  predicessours. 

The  '  fower  sundry  impressions  '  to  which  Barker  here  alludes,  comprised  a  small 
folio  and  octavo  in  1577,  and  two  large  folios  in  1578.  One  of  the  large  folios  was  of 
the  Bishops'  version  but  of  this  we  find  him  writing  to  the  City  Companies  as 
'  another  Bible,  which  was  begon  before  I  had  authoritie,  as  it  is  affirmed,  which 
could  not  be  finished  but  by  my  consent  and  therefore  hath  the  name  to  be  printed 
by  the  assignement  of  Christopher  Barker  '.  All  the  other  three  impressions  were 
of  the  Geneva  version,  and  the  large  folio  is  a  very  notable  volume  since  it 
was  clearly  intended  for  use  in  churches  and  was  accompanied  by  a  prayer-book 
in  which  the  word  '  minister  '  was  throughout  substituted  for  '  priest  ',  and  references 
to  the  books  from  which  they  come  printed  instead  of  the  text  of  the  Gospels 
and  Epistles.  All  this  surely  shows  that,  despite  the  suspension  of  Grindal,  the 
extremer  Protestant  party  were  very  strong,  and  that  behind  these  printing  ventures, 
for  which  Walsingham  helped  to  find  money,  there  was  something  more  than 
ordinary  trading.  Numerous  other  editions  of  the  Geneva  version  were  printed 
during  the  next  five  years,  but  I  can  find  no  single  Bishops'  Bible  to  balance  them. 
When,  however,  Whitgift  succeeded  Grindal  as  Archbishop,  Barker  was  awakened 
from  his  dream  that  the  '  gappe  '  was  stopped,  and  ordered  to  put  in  hand 
a  smaller  and  larger  edition  of  the  Bishops'  Bible,  as  to  which  when  they  were  both 
ready  (the  quarto  in  1584,  the  folio  in  1585),  and  apparently  had  not  sold  very 
quickly,  Whitgift  wrote  (July  16,  1587)  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  : 

Whereas  I  am  credibly  informed  that  divers,  as  well  parish  churches,  as  chapels  of  ease, 
are  not  sufficiently  furnished  with  Bibles,  but  some  have  either  none  at  all,  or  such  as  be  torn 
and  defaced,  and  yet  not  of  the  translation  authorized  by  the  synods  of  bishops  :  these 
are  therefore  to  require  you  strictly  in  your  visitations,  or  otherwise,  to  see  that  all  and 
every  the  said  churches  and  chapels  in  your  diocese  be  provided  of  one  Bible,  or  more,  at 
your  discretion,  of  the  translation  allowed  as  aforesaid,  and  one  book  of  Common  Prayer,  as 
by  the  laws  of  this  realm  is  appointed.  And  for  the  performance  thereof,  I  have  caused 
her  highness's  printer  to  imprint  two  volumes  of  the  said  translation  of  the  Bible  aforesaid, 
a  bigger  and  a  less,  the  largest  for  such  parishes  as  are  of  ability,  and  the  lesser  for  chapels 
and  very  small  parishes  ;   both  which  are  now  extant  and  ready. 

One  other  folio  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  was  printed  by  Christopher  Barker 
himself  in  1588.  In  August,  1589,  he  secured  a  fresh  patent  from  the  queen  for 
his  own  life  and  that  of  his  son  Robert,  and  thenceforth  entrusted  his  Bible-printing 
to  deputies,  until  his  death  in  1599.  During  the  fourteen  years  1589-1603  three 
more  folio  editions  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  appeared,  no  quarto,  and  three  or  four 
octavos.  Against  this,  during  the  entire  period  from  1575  onwards,  on  an  average 
three  editions  of  the  Geneva  version  were  produced  each  year,  the  majority  of 
them  in  small  sizes  for  private  reading.  How  far  this  superiority  was  the  result 
of  demand,  how  far  it  was  produced  by  a  control  of  the  supply,  is  a  question  which, 
difficult  as  it  is  to  answer,  deserves  more  attention  than  it  has  received.  It  is 
clear,  on  the  one  hand,  that  during  Parker's  life  the  circulation  of  the  Geneva 
version  was  artificially  barred,  and  nothing  was  done  to  popularize  its  rival.  It  is 
clear,  I  think,  also,  that  from  the  death  of  Parker  to  the  appointment  of  Whit- 
gift, the  positions  were  reversed,  and  that  in  these  eight  years  the  Geneva  version, 
which  was  not  only  favoured,  but  pushed,  by  the  aid  of  Walsingham  and  his  friends, 
with  a  zeal  in  which  politics,  religion,  and  desire  or  gain  (closely  allied  in  those  days) 
were  all  combined,  was  put  on  the  market  in  such  quantities  as  to  give  it  a  real 
hold  on  the  English  people.  After  Whitgift's  accession  it  is  possible  that,  as  the 
scales  were  more  evenly  held,  the  editions  of  each  version  came  gradually  to  be 
issued  mainly  in  accordance  with  the  demand,  although  until  nearly  the  end  of 
the  century  the  rarity  of  octavo  editions  of  the  Bishops'  version  is  very  noticeable. 
But  taking  the  period  as  a  whole  it  is  obvious  that  other  influences  than  those 
of  publishers  merely  anxious  to  make  money  were  contending  over  the  fortunes 

1  This  must  refer  to  the  period  before  1568. 


lviii. 


26 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


of  the  two  versions,  and  that  the  short-sighted  policy  of  Parker  gave  Walsingham 
and  his  friends  a  chance  of  which  they  availed  themselves  to  the  full.  Interpret 
the  evidence  as  we  may,  the  fact  must  steadily  be  borne  in  mind  that  throughout  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth,  the  production  of  editions  of  the  Bible  was  always  a  controlled 
production,  and  when  we  come  to  consider  the  fortunes  of  the  version  of  1611  it 
will  be  well  to  remember  that  the  control  still  went  on. 

The  lack  of  agreement  between  the  Bible  which  men  read  in  their  houses  and 
that  which  they  heard  in  church  must  have  caused  annoyance  to  both  parties. 
It  is  creditable  to  the  scholarship,  and  perhaps  also  to  the  foresight,  of  the 
Puritan  party,  that  at  the  Conference  at  Hampton  Court,  which  James  I  called 
together  (quite  informally)  in  January  1604  to  ascertain  how  far  the  Puritan  com- 
plaints could  be  met,  the  demand  for  a  new  translation,  which  would  command 
the  assent  of  the  whole  church,  came  from  their  spokesman,  Dr.  John  Reynolds, 
President  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.  According  to  the  fullest  account  of 
the  Conference  which  has  come  down  to  us,  Reynolds  began  by  raising  questions 
about  the  Catechism,  &c. 

After  that,  he  moued  his  Maiestie,  that  there  might  bee  a  newe  translation  of  the  Bible, 
because,  those  which  were  allowed  in  the  raignes  of  Henrie  the  eight,  and  Edward  the  sixt, 
were  corrupt  and  not  aunswerable  to  the  truth  of  the  Originall.  For  example,  first, 
Galathians,  4,  25,  the  Greeke  word  avarotxi'  is  not  well  translated,  as  nowe  it  is,  Bordreth, 
neither  expressing  the  force  of  the  worde,  nor  the  Apostles  sense,  nor  the  situation  of  the  place. 

Secondly,  Psalme,  105,  28,  they  were  not  obedient  ;  the  Originall  beeing,  They  were  not 
disobedient. 

Thirdly,  Psalme,  106,  verse  30.  Then  stood  up  Phinees  and  prayed,  the  Hebrew  hath 
Executed  iudgement.  To  which  motion,  there  was,  at  the  present,  no  gainsaying,  the  obiections 
beeing  triuiall  and  old,  and  alreadie,  in  print,  often  aunswered  ;  onely,  my  Lord  of  London  well 
added,  that  if  euery  mans  humour  should  be  followed,  there  would  be  no  ende  of  translating. 
Whereupon  his  Highnesse  wished  that  some  especiall  paines  should  be  taken  in  that  behalfe 
for  one  vniforme  translation  (professing  that  hee  could  neuer  yet  see  a  Bible  well  translated 
in  English  ;  but  the  worst  of  all,  his  Maiestie  thought  the  Geneua  to  bee)  and  this  to 
bee  done  by  the  best  learned  in  both  the  Vniuersities,  after  them  to  be  reuiewed  by  the 
Bishops,  and  the  chiefe  learned  of  the  Church  ;  from  them  to  bee  presented  to  the  Priuie- 
Councell ;  and  lastly  to  bee  ratified  by  his  Royall  authoritie  ;  and  so  this  whole  Church  to  be 
bound  vnto  it,  and  none  other  ;  Marry,  withall,  hee  gaue  this  caueat  (vpon  a  word  cast  out 
by  my  Lord  of  London)  that  no  marginall  notes  should  be  added,  hauing  found  in  them  which 
are  annexed  to  the  Geneua  translation  (which  he  sawe  in  a  Bible  giuen  him  by  an  English 
Lady)  some  notes  very  partiall,  vntrue,  seditious,  and  sauouring  too  much  of  daungerous, 
and  trayterous  conceites.  As  for  example,  Exod.  1,  19,  where  the  marginal  note  alloweth 
disobedience  to  Kings.  And  2.  Chron.  15,  16,  the  note  taxeth  Asa  for  deposing  his  mother, 
onely,  and  not  killing  her  :  And  so  concludeth  this  point,  as  all  the  rest  with  a  graue  and 
iudicious  aduise.  First,  that  errours  in  matters  of  faith  might  bee  rectified  and  amended. 
Secondly,  that  matters  indifferent  might  rather  be  interrupted  and  a  glosse  added  ;  alleaging 
from  Bartolus  de  regno,  that  as  better  a  King  with  some  weaknesse,  then  still  a  chaunge  ; 
so  rather,  a  Church  with  some  faultes,  then  an  Innovation.  And  surely,  sayth  his  Maiestie, 
if  these  bee  the  greatest  matters  you  be  grieued  with,  I  neede  not  haue  beene  troubled 
with  such  importunities  and  complaintes,  as  haue  beene  made  vnto  me  ;  some  other  more 
priuate  course  might  haue  bene  taken  for  your  satisfaction,  and  withall  looking  vppon 
the  Lords,  he  shooke  his  head,  smiling.1 

It  is  evident  from  every  page  in  the  narrative  that  the  writer  of  it,  William 
Barlow,  had  no  love  for  the  Puritans,  and  that  his  report  is  highly  prejudiced.  We 
cannot,  therefore,  feel  sure  that  Reynolds  ignored  the  Bishops'  Bible  by  referring 
only  to  the  versions  allowed  in  the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII  and  Edward  VI,  in  the 
rather  insulting  way  that  the  text  represents.  The  renderings  to  which  he  objected 
are  found  also  in  the  Bishops'  Bible,  and  if  Reynolds  passed  over  this,  either  as 
a  mere  reprint,  or  as  not  formally  '  allowed  '  (i.  e.  approved),  he  was  needlessly 
provocative.  But  the  genuine  interest  which  the  king  at  once  took  in  the  proposal 
swept  away  any  difficulty  which  might  have  been  raised  by  its  form.  Nor  was  that 
interest  transient.  The  Dean  of  Westminster  and  the  Regius  Professors  of  Hebrew 
at  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  must  have  been  instructed  with  little 
delay  to  suggest  the  names  of  revisers,  and  by  June  30  Bancroft,  Bishop  of  London, 

1  '  The  Summe  and  Substance  of  tin  Conference,  which  it  pleased  his  Excellent  Maiestie  to 
haue  with  the  Lords,  Bishops  and  other  of  his  Clergie,  (at  which  the  most  of  the  Lordes  of  the 
Councell  were  present)  in  his  Maiesties  Priuy-Chamber,  at  Hampton  Court,  Ianuary  14,  1603. 
Contracted  by  William  Barlow,  Doctor  of  Diuinity,  and  Deane  of  Chester.  Whereunto  are  added, 
some  Copies,  (scattered  abroad),  vnsauory,  and  vntrue.  London,  Printed  by  Iohn  Windet,  for 
Matthew  Law  and  are  to  be  sold  at  his  shop  in  Paules  Churchyeard,  neare  S.  Austens  Gate.  1604.' 
It  should  be  noted  that  a  different  turn  is  given  to  the  Puritan  complaint  in  the  preface  to  the 
161 1   Bible. 


The  Bible  of  i  6 1 1 . 


27 


with  whom  (in  the  vacancy  of  the  see  of  Canterbury)  the  King  communicated,  was 
able  to  write  : 

His  Majesty  being  made  acquainted  with  the  choice  of  all  them  to  be  employed  in  the 
translating  of  the  Bible,  in  such  sort  as  Mr.  Lively  can  inform  you,  doth  greatly  approve  of 
the  said  choice.  And  for  as  much  as  his  Highness  is  very  anxious  that  the  same  so  religious 
a  work  should  admit  of  no  delay,  he  has  commanded  me  to  signify  unto  you  in  his  name  that 
his  pleasure  is,  you  should  with  all  possible  speed  meet  together  in  your  University  and  begin 
the  same. 

The  Mr.  Lively  here  named  was  the  Professor  of  Hebrew  at  Cambridge,  and  must 
have  specially  attracted  the  notice  of  the  king,  by  whom  he  was  presented  to  the 
rectory  of  Purleigh,  Essex,  in  September  1604.  His  death  the  following  May  was 
a  great  blow  to  the  work.  The  interest  taken  by  James  is  further  shown  by  a 
circular  sent  out  by  Bancroft  to  the  other  Bishops  on  July  31  enclosing  a  letter 
of  the  22nd  from  the  king,  stating  that  he  had  appointed  '  certain  learned  men  to 
the  number  of  four  and  fifty  1  for  the  translating  of  the  Bible,  and  that  in  this 
number  divers  of  them  have  either  no  ecclesiastical  preferment  at  all,  or  else  so  very 
small,  as  the  same  is  far  unmeet  for  men  of  their  deserts '.  The  king  himself  being 
unable  to  remedy  this  'in  any  convenient  time  ',  enjoins  all  patrons  of  parsonages  or 
prebends,  of  the  value  of  twenty  pounds  at  least,  to  certify  him  of  the  next  vacancy 
in  order  that  he  may  commend  to  them  '  some  such  of  the  learned  men  as  we  shall 
think  fit  to  be  preferred  unto  it '.  In  another  circular  of  the  same  date  Bancroft 
asks  each  bishop  '  not  only  to  think  yourself  what  is  meet  for  you  to  give  for  this 
purpose,  but  likewise  to  acquaint  your  dean  and  chapter  '  that  they  might  subscribe 
also.  The  response  to  the  first  of  these  circulars  seems  to  have  been  very  slight ; 
that  to  the  second  nil. 

Of  the  lists  of  the  translators  which  have  come  down  to  us,  the  most  trustworthy 
is  that  printed  by  Bishop  Burnet  in  his  History  of  the  Reformation,2  which  is  here 
given  together  with  the  Rules  by  which  the  revisers  were  to  be  guided,  and  brief 
biographical  notes,  based  on  those  by  Cardwell,  supplemented  from  the  Dictionary  of 
National  Biography  and  other  sources  : 

An  Order  set  down  for  the  Translating  of  the  Bible,  by  King  James. 

The  Places  and  Persons  agreed  upon  for  the  Hebrew,  with  the  particular  Books  by  them 

undertaken. 


Irstrmnstrr. 


'Mr.  Dean  of  Westminster 
Mr.  Dean  of  Paul's 
Mr.  Doctor  Saravia 
Mr.  Doctor  Clark 
Mr.  Doctor  Lei  field 
Mr.  Doctor  Teigh 
Mr.  Burleigh 
Mr.  King 
Mr.  Thompson 
Mr.  Beadwell 


Penteteuchon. 
The  Story  from  Joshua 
to  the  first  Book  of 
Chronicles,  exclusive. 


Mr.  Dean  of  Westminster  :   Lancelot  Andrewes,  made  Bishop  of  Chichester  in  1605. 

Mr.  Dean  of  Pauls  :     John  Overall,  made  Bishop  of  Coventry,  1614. 

Mr.  Dr.  Saravia:  born  at  Hesdin  in  Artois  in  1531,  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Leyden,  1582;  Rector 
of  Tattenhill,  Staffs,  1588;  Prebendary  of  Canterbury  and  Vicar  of  Lewisham,  1595  ;  Pre- 
bendary of  Worcester  and  Westminster,  1601  ;  died,  1612. 

Mr.  Dr.  Clark  :   Dr.  Richard  Clark,  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge. 

Mr.  Dr.  Leifield:  Dr.  John  Layfield,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge  (resigned  1603),  Rector 
of  St.  Clement  Danes,  London,  1601. 

Mr.  Dr.  Teigh  :   Robert  Tighe,  Vicar  of  All  Hallows,  Barking,  and  Archdeacon  of  Middlesex. 

Mr.  Burleigh,  probably  the  Dr.  Francis  Burley,  who  was  one  of  the  first  Fellows  of  Chelsea  College. 

Mr.  King  :  Geoffrey  King,  Fellow  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  and  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew 
(1607-8)  in  succession  to  Spalding. 

Mr.  Thompson  :  Richard  Tomson,  of  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  B.D.  1593. 

Mr.  Beadwell :  William  Bedwell,  Arabic  Scholar,  Rector  of  St.  Ethelburga's,  Bishopsgate  Street, 
1601. 


1.x.  A. 


lx.  B. 


1  Only  about  fifty  names  in  all  have  come  down  to  us,  and  only  forty-seven  in  any  one  list. 
It  may  have  been  intended  at  first  that  there  should  be  nine  revisers  on  each  board. 

2  The  History  of  the  Reformation  of  the  Church  of  England.  By  Gilbert  Burnett.  The  Fourth 
Edition,  with  Additions,  He.  London,  17 1 5.  Part  II.  A  Collection  of  Records,  p.  333  sqq. 
The  document  has  the  side-note  '  Ex  MS.  D.  Borlase  ',  i.  e.  Edmund  Borlase,  the  physician  and 
historian.  There  are  several  similar  lists  in  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  with  unimportant  variants. 
One  of  these  (Add.  34218)  is  dated  '  Anno  secundi  regis  Iacobi  1604  ',  and  there  is  no  doubt  that 
the  lists  refer  to  that  year,  although  Cardwell,  from  a  mistake  as  to  the  date  of  Barlow  being 
made  Dean  of  Chester,  thought  otherwise. 


28 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


iTambriBgr. 


©iforB. 


OmbriBgr. 


[  Mr.  Lively 

Mr.  Richardson 

Mr.  Chatterton 

Mr.  Dillingham 
|  Mr.  Harrison 
I  Mr.  Andrews 
1  Mr.  Spalding 
(Mr.  Binge 

Doctor  Harding 

Dr.  Reynolds 

Dr.  Holland 

Dr.  Kilbye 

Mr.  Smith 

Mr.  Brett 

Mr.  Fairclough 

Doctor  Dewport 

Dr.  Branthwait 

Dr.  Radclifc 

Mr.  Warde,  Eman. 

Mr.  Downs 

Mr.  Boyes 

Mr.  Warde,  Reg. 


From  the  First  of  the 
Chronicles,  with  the 
rest  of  the  Story,  and 
the  Hagiographi,  viz. 
Job,  Psalms,  Pro- 
verbs, Canticles,  Ec- 
clesiastes. 


The  four,  or  greater 
Prophets,  with  the 
Lamentations,  and 
the  twelve  lesser 
Prophets. 


The  Prayer  of  Ma- 
nasses  and  the  rest 
of  the  Apocrypha. 


The  Places  and  Persons  agreed  upon  for  the  Greek,  with  the  particular  Books  by  them 

undertaken. 


[Mr.  Dean  of  Christchurch 
\  Mr.  Dean  of  Winchester 
Mr.  Dean  of  Worcester 


©iforD. 


Mr. 
Mr. 
Dr. 
Dr. 
Mr. 


Dean  of  Windsor 

Savile 

Perne 

Ravens 

Harmer 


The  four  Gospels.  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  Apo- 
calyps. 


Mr. 
Mr. 

Mr. 

Mr. 

Mr. 
Mr. 

Mr. 

Mr. 

Dr. 
Dr. 
Dr. 
Dr. 
Mr. 


Mr. 
Mr. 
Dr. 
Dr. 

Dr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 

Mr. 
Mr. 

Mr 


Lively:    Edward  Lively,  appointed  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  at  Cambridge,  1580;   pre- 
sented by  the  king  to  the  rectory  of  Purleigh,  Essex,  September  20,  1604;  died,  May  1605. 
Richardson  :  Dr.  John  Richardson,  Fellow  of  Emmanuel  College,  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity, 

1607  ;   Master  of  Peterhouse,  1609-15  ;   then  of  Trinity. 
Chatterton  :    Laurence  Chaderton,  Master  of  Emmanuel  College,  1 584-1622.     Took  part  as 

a  Puritan  in  the  Hampton  Court  Conference. 
Dillingham  :    Francis  Dillingham,  Fellow  of  Christ's,  author  of  numerous  books,  1599-1609 

(or  later)  ;   Incumbent  of  Wilden,  Beds. 
Harrison  :   Thomas  Harrison,  a  noted  Hebraist,  Vice-Master  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
A  ndrews :  Roger  Andrewes,  brother  of  Lancelot,  Fellow  of  Pembroke,  Master  of  Jesus  College, 

Cambridge. 
Spalding  :    Robert  Spalding,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Regius  Professor  of 

Hebrew  in  succession  to  Lively  (1605-7). 
Binge  :  Andrew  Byng,  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  at  Cambridge  in  succession  to  King,  1608. 

'  About  1605  we  find  a  decree  of  the  Chapter  of  York  to  keep  a  residentiary 's  place  for  him.' 

[D.AT.B.] 
Harding:  John  Harding,  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  (1 591-8,   1604-10)  and  President  of 

Magdalen  College,  Oxford. 
Reynolds  :    John  Reynolds  or  Rainolds,  President  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  from 

1598.     Died,  1607. 
Holland:  Thomas  Holland,  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity,  1589;  Rector  of  Exeter  College, 

1592.     Died,  161 2. 
Kilbye  :    Richard  Kilbye,  Rector  of  Lincoln  College,   1590  ;    Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew, 

1610-21. 
Smith  :    Miles  Smith,  of  Brasenose,  Prebendary  of  Hereford  and  Exeter  Cathedrals,  a  noted 

Orientalist,  one  of   the  two  final  revisers   of  the  version  of  161 1,  and  the  writer  of  the 

preface  ;   made  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  161 2. 
Brett:    Richard  Brett,  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College,  Rector  of  Quainton,  Bucks,  1595. 
Fairclough  :   Richard  Fairclough,  Fellow  of  New  College,  Rector  of  Bucknell,  Oxford,  1593. 
Dewport  :    John  Duport,  Master  of  Jesus  College,  Cambridge,  1590  ;  Prebendary  of  Ely,  1609. 
Branthwait:  William  Branthwait,  Fellow  of  Emmanuel  College,  1584;  Master  of  Gonville  and 

Caius,  1607. 
Radcliffe  :    Jeremiah  Radcliffe,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Warde:  Samuel  Ward,  Fellow  of  Sidney  Sussex,  1599;  master,  1610;  King's  Chaplain,  161 1. 
Downs  :   Andrew  Dowries,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  1581  ;   Regius  Professor 

of  Greek,  1 585-1624. 
Boyes  :  John  Boys,  Fellow  of  Clare  Hall,  1593  ;  Dean  of  Canterbury,  1619. 
.  Dean  of  Christchurch  :    Thomas  Ravis,  Dean  of  Christ  Church,  1596  ;    Bishop  of  Gloucester, 

1605;  Bishop  of  London,  1607  ;  died,  1609. 
Dean  of  Winchester  :  George  Abbot,  Master  of  University  College,  1597  ;  Dean  of  Winchester, 

1600  ;  Bishop  of  Coventry  and  Lichfield,  1609  ;  of  London,  1610  ;  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 

1611. 


I  Dean  of  Chester 
I  Dr.  Hutchinson 
1  Dr.  Spencer 
KScstminstrr.-;  Mr.  Fenton 
Mr.  Rabbett 
Mr.  Sanderson 
I  Mr.  Dakins 


The  Epistles  of  St. 
Po!(/.  The  Canonical 
Epistles. 


Mr.  Dean  of  Worcester  :  Richard  Edes,  Dean  of  Worcester,   1597;   Chaplain  to  James  I.;  died, 

November  19,  1604.     Edes  was  succeeded  by  James  Montague,  afterwards  (1608)  Bishop 

of   Bath   and  Wells,   &c.     Fuller  is  the  authority  for  identifying  Edes  as  the  (intended) 

reviser. 
Mr.  Dean  of  Windsor  :    Giles  Thompson,  or  Tomson,  Fellow  of  All  Souls,  Bishop  of  Gloucester, 

161 1  ;  died,  1612. 
Mr.  Savile  :   Sir  Henry  Savile,  Warden  of  Merton,  1585-1622  ;  Provost  of  Eton,  1596  ;  knighted, 

1604;    edited  works  of  Chrysostom,  1610-13. 
Dr. Feme:   John  Perin,  Fellow  of  St.  John's,  Oxford  ;   Regius  Professor  of  Greek,   1597-1615; 

Canon  of  Christ  Church,  November  24,  1604. 
Dr.  Ravens  :  apparently  an  error.     See  below. 
Mr.  Harmer  :     John  Harmer,  Fellow  of  New  College,  1582  ;    Regius  Professor  of  Greek,  1585  ; 

Head  Master  of  Winchester,  1588  ;   Warden  of  St.  Mary's  College,  1596  ;  died,  1613. 
Dean  of  Chester  :   William  Barlow,  Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall,  Dean,  1602  ;  Bishop  of  Rochester,  1605  ; 

died,  1613. 
Dr.  Hutchinson  :    Ralph  Hutchinson,  President  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford. 
Dr.  Spencer  :   John  Spenser,  Editor  of  Hooker,  1604 ;  President  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford, 

1607. 
Mr.  Fenton  :    Roger  Fenton,   Fellow  of  Pembroke  Hall,  Cambridge,  Vicar   of  Chigwell,    1606  ; 

Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's,  1609. 
Mr.  Rabbett  :  Michael  Rabbett,  Rector  of  St.  Vedast  Foster,  1603. 
Mr.  Sanderson  :    Thomas  Sanderson,   Rector  of  All  Hallows  the  Great,  Thames  Street,   1603  ; 

Archdeacon  of  Rochester,  1606. 
Mr.  Dakins  :    William    Dakins,   Fellow   of  Trinity   College,    Cambridge,    Professor   of   Divinity, 

Gresham  College,  London,  1604;   died  in  1607. 

In  other  lists  the  name  of  J.  Aglionby,  Principal  of  St.  Edmund  Hall,  is  substituted  for  that 
of  the  Dean  of  Worcester,  and  that  of  L.  Hutten,  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  for  the  mysterious 
Dr.  Ravens.  The  choice  of  the  revisers  seems  to  have  been  determined  solely  by  their  fitness, 
and  both  parties  in  the  Church  were  represented  by  some  of  their  best  men. 


The  Rules  to  be  observed  in  the  Translation  of  the  Bible. 

1 .  The  ordinary  Bible  read  in  the  Church,  commonly  called  the  Bishops  Bible,  to  be  followed, 
and  as  little  altered  as  the  Truth  of  the  original  will  permit. 

2.  The  Names  of  the  Prophets,  and  the  Holy  Writers,  with  the  other  Names  of  the  Text,  to 
be  retained,  as  nigh  as  may  be,  accordingly  as  they  were  vulgarly  used. 

3.  The  old  Ecclesiastical  Words  to  be  kept,  viz.  the  Word  Church  not  to  be  translated 
Congregation  &c. 

4.  When  a  Word  hath  divers  Significations,  that  to  be  kept  which  hath  been  most  commonly 
used  by  the  most  of  the  Ancient  Fathers,  being  agreeable  to  the  Propriety  of  the  Place,  and 
the  Analogy  of  the  Faith. 

5.  The  Division  of  the  Chapters  to  be  altered,  either  not  at  all,  or  as  little  as  may  be,  if 
Necessity  so  require. 

6.  No  Marginal  Notes  at  all  to  be  affixed,  but  only  for  the  Explanation  of  the  Hebrew  or 
Greek  Words,  which  cannot,  without  some  circumlocution,  so  briefly  and  fitly  be  express'd  in 
the  Text. 

7.  Such  Quotations  of  Places  to  be  marginally  set  down  as  shall  serve  for  the  fit  Reference 
of  one  Scripture  to  another. 

8.  Every  particular  Man  of  each  Company,  to  take  the  same  Chapter,  or  Chapters,  and  having 
translated  or  amended  them  severally  by  himself,  where  he  thinketh  good,  all  to  meet 
together,  confer  what  they  have  done,  and  agree  for  their  Parts  what  shall  stand. 

9.  As  any  one  Company  hath  dispatched  any  one  Book  in  this  Manner  they  shall  send  it 
to  the  rest,  to  be  consider'd  of  seriously  and  judiciously,  for  His  Majesty  is  very  careful  in 
this  Point. 

10.  If  any  Company,  upon  the  Review  of  the  Book  so  sent,  doubt  or  differ  upon  any  Place, 
to  send  them  Word  thereof  ;  note  the  Place,  and  withal  send  the  Reasons,  to  which  if  they 
consent  not,  the  Difference  to  be  compounded  at  the  General  Meeting,  which  is  to  be  of  the 
chief  Persons  of  each  Company,  at  the  end  of  the  Work. 

11.  When  any  Place  of  special  Obscurity  is  doubted  of.  Letters  to  be  directed,  by  Authority, 
to  send  to  any  Learned  Man  in  the  Land,  for  his  Judgement  of  such  a  Place. 

12.  Letters  to  be  sent  from  every  Bishop  to  the  rest  of  his  Clergy,  admonishing  them  of 
this  Translation  in  hand  ;  and  to  move  and  charge  as  many  as  being  skilful  in  the  Tongues  ; 
and  having  taken  Pains  in  that  kind,  to  send  his  particular  Observations  to  the  Company, 
either  at  Westminster,  Cambridge  or  Oxford. 


3o 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


13.  The  Directors  in  each  Company,  to  be  the  Deans  of  Westminster  and  Chester  for  that 
Place  ;   and  the  King's  Professors  in  the  Hebrew  or  Greek  in  either  University. 

/  Tindoll's. 

14.  These  translations  to  be  used  when  they    Matthews. 
agree  better  with  the  Text  than  the  Bishops J  Coverdale's. 
Bible.  I  Whitchurch's. 

\  Geneva. 

15.  Besides  the  said  Directors  before  mentioned,  three  or  four  of  the  most  Ancient  and 
Grave  Divines,  in  either  of  the  Universities,  not  employed  in  Translating,  to  be  assigned  by 
the  Vice-Chancellor,  upon  Conference  with  the  rest  of  the  Heads,  to  be  Overseers  of  the 
Translations  as  well  Hebrew  as  Greek,  for  the  better  Observation  of  the  4th  Rule  above  specified. 

In  contrast  with  all  these  preparatory  arrangements  and  rules,  we  may  now  quote 
the  only  nearly  contemporary  account  of  the  experiences  of  one  of  the  revisers 
which  has  come  down  to  us.  This  relates  to  one  of  the  second  Cambridge  group,  to 
whom  was  committed  the  translation  of  the  Apocrypha,  Dr.  John  Boys,  afterwards 
(1619)  Dean  of  Canterbury,  but  at  this  time  the  holder  of  a  living  at  Boxworth, 
which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  he  rather  neglected  during  his  work  as  a  translator.  His 
biographer,  Dr.  Anthony  Walker,  writes  : 

When  it  pleased  God  to  move  King  James  to  that  excellent  work,  the  translation  of  the 
Bible  ;  when  the  translators  were  to  be  chosen  for  Cambridge,  he  was  sent  for  thither  by  those 
therein  employed,  &  was  chosen  one  ;  some  university  men  thereat  repining  (it  may  be  not 
more  able,  yet  more  ambitious  to  have  born  [a]  share  in  that  service)  disdaining  that  it  should 
be  thought  they  needed  any  help  from  the  country. — Forgetting  that  Tully  was  the  same  man  at 
Tusculan[um]  as  he  was  at  Rome.  Sure  I  am,  that  part  of  the  Apocrypha  was  alotted  to  him 
(for  he  hath  shewed  me  the  very  cop}-  he  translated  by),  but  to  my  grief  I  know  not  which  part. 

All  the  time  he  was  about  his  own  part,  his  commons  were  given  him  at  St.  John's ;  where 
he  abode  all  the  week,  till  Saturday  night  ;  &  then  went  home  to  discharge  his  cure  : 
returning  thence  on  Monday  morning.  When  he  had  finished  his  own  part,  at  the  earnest 
request  of  him  to  whom  it  was  assigned,  he  undertook  a  second  ;  and  then  he  was  in  commons 
in  another  college  :   but  I  forbear  to  name  both  the  person  and  the  house. 

Four  years  were  spent  in  this  first  service  ;  at  the  end  whereof  the  whole  work  being  finished, 
&  three  copies  of  the  whole  Bible  sent  from  Cambridge,  Oxford  &  Westminster,  to  London  ; 
a  new  choice  was  to  be  made  of  six  in  all,  two  out  of  every  company,  to  review  the  whole 
work  ;   &  extract  one  [copy]  out  of  all  three,  to  be  committed  to  the  presse. 

For  the  dispatch  of  which  business  Mr.  Dovvnes  &  Mr.  Bois  were  sent  for  up  to  London. 
Where  meeting  (though  Mr.  Downes  would  not  go  till  he  was  either  fetcht  or  threatned  with 
a  pursivant)  their  four  fellow  labourers,  they  went  dayly  to  Stationers  Hall,  &  in  three  quarters 
of  a  year,  finished  their  task.  All  which  time  they  had  from  the  Company  of  Stationers  xxx' 
[each]  per  week,  duly  paid  them  :  tho'  they  had  nothing  before  but  the  self-rewarding,  ingenious 
industry.  Whilst  they  were  imployed  in  this  last  businesse,  he  &  he  only,  took  notes  of  their 
proceedings  :   which  notes  he  kept  till  his  dying  day.1 

Dr.  Boys's  biographer  seems  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  alike  at  Oxford,  Cambridge, 
and  Westminster,  there  were  two  companies,  making  six  in  all,  so  that  if  two  revisers 
went  to  Stationers'  Hall  from  each  company,  this  final  board  of  revision  must  have 
had  twelve  members  instead  of  the  six  of  which  he  speaks.  We  know  this  indeed  as 
a  fact  from  the  report  of  the  English  delegates  to  the  Synod  of  Dort,  among  whom 
was  Samuel  Ward,  one  of  the  revisers.2  On  the  basis  of  a  board  of  twelve,  paid 
30s.  each  a  week  for  39  weeks,  the  sum  disbursed  would  be  £702.  That  this  sum  was 
paid  by  the  Company  is  incredible  ;  it  is  just  possible,  however,  that  it  was  the 
contribution  of  the  proprietors  of  the  '  Bible  Stock '  already  mentioned,  which  can 
only  have  continued  in  existence  all  these  years  if  its  owners  were  admitted  by  the 
holder  of  the  royal  patent  to  share  a  portion  of  the  expenses  and  profits  either  of 
all  editions  or  of  those  in  particular  sizes.  Even,  however,  if  this  were  so  it  is  evident 
that  such  a  payment  would  only  be  made  in  pursuance  of  a  private  agreement 
with  Robert  Barker,  and  forty  years  after  the  Bible  was  published  we  meet  with 
a  definite  statement3  that  Barker  had,  in  fact,  '  paid  for  the  amended  or  corrected 

1  From  Desiderata  Curiosa  :  or  a  collection  of  divers  scarce  and  curious  pieces.  By  Francis 
Peck.  New  ed.,  1779.  Part  viii,  p.  325  sqq.  '  The  life  of  that  famous  Grecian,  Mr.  John 
Bois,  S.T.B.  one  of  the  translators  of  the  Bible,  temp.  Jac.  I.  .  .  Bv  Anthony  Walker,  M.A.,  of 
St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  From  a  40  MS.  in  the  hands  of  the  publisher.  The  gift  of  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Thomas  Baker.' 

2  '  Post  peractum  a  singulis  pensum,  ex  hisce  omnibus  duodecim  selecti  viri  in  unum  locum 
convocati  integrum  opus  recognoverunt  ac  recensuerunt. ' 

a  In  William  Ball's  Briefe  treatise  concerning  the  regulating  of  printing,  1651.  On  May  10,  1612, 
Robert  Barker  obtained  an  extended  patent,  and  on  February  II,  1617,  this  was  re-granted  to 
him  for  his  own  life  and  for  thirty  years  after  his  death  to  his  son,  Robert  II.  In  1635  the  rever- 
sion was  re-granted  to  Charles  and  Matthew  Barker.  Robert  died  in  1646,  ahd  in  1664  a  moiety 
of  these  rights  was  valued  at  ^1,300.  See  the  article  by  H.  R.  Plomer,  'The  King's  Printing 
House  under  the  Stuart-.'  in  The  Library,  2nd  Series,  vol.  8  (1901). 


Translation  of  the  Bible  £3,500  :  by  reason  whereof  the  translated  copy  did  of  right 
belong  to  him  and  his  assignes.'  If,  as  the  statement  should  mean,  this  sum  was 
actually  paid  to  the  translators,  it  would  have  represented  between  £50  and  £60 
apiece  for  the  work  done  during  the  sittings  of  the  six  companies.  Now  the  preface 
to  the  Bible  says  of  the  translation  that  it  '  hath  cost  the  workemen,  as  light  as  it 
seemeth,  the  paines  of  twise  seven  times  seventy-two  dayes  and  more  ',  or  about  two 
years  and  nine  months.  On  the  basis  of  the  prebend  of  the  value  of  £20  at  least 
which  the  King  desired  to  secure  for  the  translators,  this  would  mean  a  payment  of 
just  £55,  either  to  the  translators  direct  or  to  the  colleges  which  boarded  them.  But 
neatly  as  these  figures  work  out,  the  hypothesis  thus  suggested  is  quite  uncorroborated, 
and  we  have  really  no  sound  basis  even  for  guessing  how  the  £3,500  was  paid.  The 
sessions  of  the  six  companies,  it  may  be  noted,  are  usually  supposed  to  have  begun 
(although  doubtless  there  were  preliminary  meetings)  in  1607,  the  years  1605,  1606 
being  thus  allotted  to  private  research,  1607-9  *°  the  work  of  the  six  boards,  part 
of  1610  to  that  of  the  twelve  revisers  at  Stationers'  Hall,  and  the  rest  of  1610  and  part 
of  1611  to  printing.  From  the  Report  to  the  Synod  of  Dort  (November  16,  1618) 
already  mentioned,  we  learn  that  the  final  touches  to  the  translation  were  given  bv 
Bilson,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  and  Miles  Smith,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Gloucester.1 
The  former  was  not  a  member  of  any  of  the  boards  of  revisers,  but  that  the  work 
of  the  revisers  should  subsequently  be  '  reviewed  by  the  Bishops  and  the  chiefe  learned 
of  the  Church '  was  part  of  the  scheme  which  the  King  had  sketched  out  at  the 
Hampton  Court  Conference,  and  another  Bishop,  Bancroft  of  London,  is  said  to 
have  insisted  on  fourteen  alterations.  Whether  in  further  pursuance  of  the  King's 
programme  the  version  was  presented  by  the  bishops  to  the  Privy  Council,  and  lastly 
ratified  by  his  Royal  authority,  we  cannot  say.  As  is  well  known  no  authority  has 
ever  been  discovered  for  the  words  '  Appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches  '  which  appear 
on  the  title-page  of  all  editions,  nor  for  the  phrase,  the  '  Authorized  Version  ',  by 
which  the  Bible  is  usually  known.  When,  however,  this  point  was  raised  at  the  time 
of  the  Revision  of  1881,  Lord  Chancellor  Selborne  wrote  to  the  Times  (June  3,  1881), 
giving  it  as  his  opinion  that  if  the  version 

was  '  appointed  to  be  read  in  churches  '  (as  is  expressly  stated  on  the  title-page  of  161 1),  at 
the  time  of  its  first  publication,  nothing  is  more  probable  than  that  this  may  have  been  done 
by  Order  in  Council.  If  so,  the  authentic  record  of  that  order  would  now  be  lost,  because  all 
the  Council  books  and  registers  from  the  year  1600  to  161 3  inclusive  were  destroyed  by  a  fire 
at  Whitehall,  on  the  12th  of  January,  1618  (O.S.).  Nothing,  in  my  opinion,  is  less  likely 
than  that  the  King's  printer  should  have  taken  upon  himself  (whether  with  a  view  to  his  own 
profit  or  otherwise)  to  issue  the  book  (being  what  it  was,  a  translation  unquestionably  made  by 
the  King's  commandment  to  correct  defects  in  earlier  versions  of  which  the  use  had  been 
authorized  by  Royal  injunctions,  &c.  in  preceding  reigns)  with  a  title-page  asserting  that  it 
was  '  Appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches  '  if  the  fact  were  not  really  so. 

Lord  Selborne  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  terrors  of  the  Court  of  High  Commission 
and  the  Star  Chamber  as  making  it  '  incredible  '  that  Barker  should  have  taken 
any  risks.  But  he  does  not  seem  sufficiently  to  have  distinguished  between 
what  may  be  done  when  authorities  are  amiable  and  when  they  are  the  reverse.  The 
Version  of  1611  was  produced  to  take  the  place  of  the  Bishops'  Bible,  on  the 
title-pages  of  which,  in  the  editions  from  1585  to  1602  (the  last)  inclusive,  had 
been  printed  the  words  'Authorised  and  Appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches'.  In 
the  small  folio  edition  of  1584  the  phrase  runs,  '  Of  that  Translation  authorised 
to  be  read  in  Churches.'  Previously  to  this  (1574-8)  we  find  only  'Set  foorth  by 
aucthoritie  '.  In  1568,  1569,  and  1572,  there  are  no  words  to  this  effect  of  any 
sort  or  kind,  although  we  know  that  Parker  would  have  liked  to  use  them.  Parker 
had  even  had  to  endure  the  sight  of  an  edition  following  the  text  of  the  Great  Bible, 
which  was  published  in  1569  by  Cawood,  and  advertized  itself  as  '  According  to  the 
translation  that  is  appointed  to  be  read  in  the  Churches  ',  a  phrase  which  he  might 
not  use  of  his  own.  None  the  less,  the  Bishops'  Bible  superseded  the  Great  Bible, 
and  as  the  need  for  distinguishing  it  from  the  Geneva  version  made  itself  felt  we  find 
Jugge  (and  the  assigns  of  Christopher  Barker  in  the  folio  of  1578)  using  the  words, 
'  Set  foorth  by  aucthoritie  '.  When  Whitgift  became  Archbishop  we  get  first  the 
phrase   of    1584  and  then   the   fuller    'Authorised   and  Appointed  to  be  read  in 

1  '  Postremo  Reverendissimus  Episcopus  Wintoniensis  Bilsonus  una  cum  Doctore  Smitho  nunc 
Episcopo  Glocestriensi,  viro  eximio,  et  ab  initio  in  toto  hoc  opere  versatissimo,  omnibus  mature 
pensitatis  et  examinatis,  extremam  manum  huic  versioni  imposuerunt.' 


lxii. 


3  2  Bibliographical   Introduction. 


Churches  '  of  1585-1602.  As  far  as  I  know  it  has  never  been  contended  that  there 
was  any  Order  in  Council  passed  in  1584  or  1585  to  justify  this,  and  it  seems 
therefore  far  from  safe  to  postulate  the  existence  of  such  an  Order  in  1611. 
There  is  indeed  negative  evidence  that  there  was  no  such  order,  for  the  word 
'  Appointed  ',  is  considerably  weaker  than  the  '  Authorised  and  Appointed  '  which  it 
replaced.  By  itself  '  Appointed  '  means  little  more  than  '  assigned  '  or  '  provided  ', 
and  the  words  '  Appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches  '  literally  expressed  the  facts 
that  this  Bible  was  printed  by  the  King's  printer  with  the  approval  of  the  King 
and  the  Bishops  for  use  in  churches,  and  that  no  competing  edition  '  of  the  largest 
volume  '  was  allowed  to  be  published.  Theoretically  this  justification  by  facts  may 
have  been  insufficient  ;  but  when  all  the  parties  are  agreed,  legal  formalities  are 
often  omitted. 

If  the  notes  which  Dr.  Boys  treasured  so  carefully  to  the  end  of  his  life  had  been 
preserved,  it  might  be  possible  to  trace,  if  only  for  a  single  section,  the  work  done  at 
the  different  stages  of  the  revision.  As  it  is  we  have  nothing  but  the  finished  result 
and  a  few  remarks  on  it  in  the  preface.  As  far  as  ecclesiastical  politics  were 
concerned  the  task  of  the  revisers  was  with  the  smallest  possible  amount  of 
disturbance  to  harmonize  the  Bishops'  version  with  the  Geneva  wherever  the  latter 
was  more  correct,  and  the  desire  to  do  this  accounts  for  the  vast  majority  of  the 
changes  which  in  any  way  affect  the  sense.  The  revisers  were  concerned  also, 
although  pride  prevented  any  reference  to  the  fact,  to  meet  the  objections  which 
had  been  urged  in  the  preface  and  notes  to  the  Rheims  New  Testament,  and  it  is 
to  their  credit  that  they  not  only  did  this,  but  took  from  that  version  much  that 
was  good,  though  with  no  other  acknowledgement  than  a  gibe.  Other  changes  were 
due  to  the  study  of  two  new  Latin  versions,  that  by  Arias  Montanus  of  the  Old 
Testament  printed  in  the  Antwerp  Polyglott,  and  that  by  Tremellius  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testament,  with  the  Apocrypha  by  his  son-in-law,  Franciscus  Junius  ;  yet 
others  from  the  Geneva  French  version  (1587-8),  Diodati's  Italian  (1607),  and  the 
Spanish  (1602)  of  Cipriano  de  Valera.  These  three  foreign  translations  seem  to 
have  attracted  considerable  attention,  as  they  are  mentioned  not  only  in  the  Preface, 
but  by  Selden,  in  whose  Table-Talk  we  read  (clearly  of  the  meetings  of  the  final 
board  of  twelve)  that  : 

The  translators  in  king  James's  time  took  an  excellent  way.  That  part  of  the  Bible  was 
given  to  him  who  was  most  excellent  in  such  a  tongue  (as  the  Apocrypha  to  Andrew 
Downs)  and  then  they  met  together,  and  one  read  the  translation,  the  rest  holding  in  their 
hands  some  Bible,  either  of  the  learned  tongues,  or  French,  Spanish,  Italian,  etc.  If  they  found 
any  fault  they  spoke  ;   if  not,  he  read  on. 

Whether  the  wonderful  felicity  of  phrasing  should  be  attributed  to  the  dexterity 
with  which,  after  meanings  had  been  settled  and  the  important  words  in  each 
passage  chosen,  either  the  board  of  twelve  or  the  two  final  revisers  put  their 
touches  to  the  work,  or  whether,  as  seems  more  likely,  the  rhythm,  first  called  into 
being  by  Tyndale  and  Coverdale,  reasserted  itself  after  every  change,  only  gathering 
strength  and  melody  from  the  increasing  richness  of  the  language,  none  can  tell. 
All  that  is  certain  is  that  the  rhythm  and  the  strength  and  the  melody  are  there. 

The  Bible  of  161 1,  being  only  a  revised  edition,  was  not  entered  on  the  Stationers' 
Registers,  nor  have  we  any  information  as  to  the  month  in  which  it  was  issued.  In 
its  original  form  it  is  a  handsome,  well-printed  book,  set  up  apparently  with  newly 
cast  type  yielding  a  clean  and  sharp  impression,  and  on  excellent  paper.  It  begins 
with  an  engraved  title-page  signed  '  C.  Boel  fecit  in  Richmont ',  i.e.  by  Cornells 
Boel,  an  Antwerp  artist,  who  about  this  time  produced  portraits  of  the  Queen,  the 
Princess  Elizabeth,  and  Prince  Henry.  In  the  upper  panel  SS.  Peter  and  James 
sit,  holding  between  them  an  oval  frame  within  which  is  a  representation  of  the 
Lamb  ;  at  the  sides  are  SS.  Matthew  and  Mark.  On  the  two  sides  of  the  title  stand 
Moses  and  Aaron  in  niches.  At  the  foot  are  seated  SS.  Luke  and  John,  while 
between  them  is  another  oval  frame  containing  a  picture  of  a  pelican  feeding  her 
young.     The  title  reads  : 

'  The  Holy  Bible,  conteyning  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  Newly  Trans- 
lated out  of  the  Originall  tongues :  &  with  the  former  Translations  diligently 
compared  and  reuised  by  his  Maiesties  speciall  Coman dement.  Appointed  to  be 
read  in  Churches.  Imprinted  at  London  by  Robert  Barker,  Printer  to  the  Kings 
most  Excellent  Maiestie.    Anno  Dom.  1611.' 


The  Bible  of  1 6 1 1 . 


33 


Leaves  2  and  3a  are  occupied  with  the  Dedication  :  '  To  the  most  High  and  Mightie 
Prince,  lames  by  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Great  Britaine,  France  and  Ireland. 
Defender  of  the  Faith,  &c.'  ;  3b-8,  by  the  preface  headed  '  The  Translators  to  the 
Reader  ',  9-14  by  a  Calendar  ;  15",  by  '  An  Almanacke  for  xxxix.  yeeres  ',  1603- 
1641 ;  I5b,  by  Directions  '  To  finde  Easter  for  euer ' ;  16-18*  by  '  The  Table  and 
Kalendes,  expressing  the  order  of  Psalmes  and  Lessons  to  be  said  at  Morning  and 
Euening  prayer ',  and  a  table  headed.  '  These  to  be  obserued  for  Holy  dayes,  and 
none  other  ; '  18'',  by  '  The  names  and  order  of  all  the  Bookes  of  the  Olde  and  New 
Testament,  with  the  Number  of  their  Chapters  '.  Inserted  at  the  binder's  pleasure 
after  the  preface,  after  leaf  18  or  elsewhere,  are  usually  eighteen  leaves  of  the 
Genealogies  of  Holy  Scripture  and  a  sheet  containing  a  Map  of  Canaan  with  a  table 
!  of  the  places  named  printed  on  the  reverse.  In  October  1610  John  Speed  had 
obtained  a  privilege  from  the  king  enabling  him  for  ten  years  to  saddle  every  edition 
of  the  Scriptures  with  his  decoratively  printed  but  useless  Genealogies,  and  so  the 
cost  of  the  book  was  needlessly  increased  by  from  sixpence  to  two  shillings  a  copy, 
according  to  the  size.  In  some  copies,  it  may  be  mentioned,  the  Genealogies  begin 
with  a  blank  page  ;  in  others  this  is  occupied  by  a  fine  cut  of  the  royal  arms, 
subscribed  Cum  Priuilegio  Regis  Maiestatis. 

The  text  of  the  Bible  is  printed  in  black-letter  with  the  inserted  words  (now 
printed  in  italics)  in  small  roman,  and  roman  type  is  also  used  for  the  summaries 
at  the  head  of  each  chapter,  for  the  subject  headlines  at  the  top  of  each  page,  and 
for  the  references  to  parallel  passages  in  the  margin  ;  the  alternative  renderings  in 
the  margins  are  in  italics.1  The  text  is  printed  in  double  columns  enclosed  within 
rules,  with  ornamental  headpieces  and  a  few  tailpieces  and  capitals  at  the  beginning 
of  each  chapter  and  psalm.  At  the  outset  it  was  clearly  intended  that  the  capital 
at  the  beginning  of  a  book  should  occupy  the  depth  of  nine  lines  of  text,  that  at 
the  beginning  of  each  chapter  after  the  first  the  depth  of  five  ;  but  the  run  on 
capitals  in  the  Psalter  caused  four-  and  six-line  blocks  to  be  used,  and  after  this  the 
arrangement  is  more  frequently  disturbed,2  though  it  still  remains  the  normal  one. 
In  order  to  begin  the  Psalter  (one  of  the  old  five  sections  into  which  Bibles  used  to 
be  divided),  on  a  right-hand  page,  the  page  before  it  is  left  blank,  but  there  is  no 
typographical  break  throughout  the  Old  Testament.  The  New  Testament  has  a 
separate  title-page,  with  a  woodcut  previously  used  in  editions  of  the  Bishops'  Bible. 
It  was  also  taken  as  a  new  typographical  starting-point.  The  book  consists  in  all 
of  366  sheets  of  two  leaves,  or  four  pages  each,  grouped  in  123  quires  or  gatherings 
signed  as  follows  :  Preliminaries  :  A-D.  Old  Testament  :  A-Z,  Aa-Zz,  Aaa-Zzz, 
Aaaa-Zzzz,  Aaaaa-Ccccc.     New  Testament  :  A-Z,  Aa. 

With  the  exception  of  B  and  D,  in  the  preliminaries,  of  which  the  former  has 
only  one  sheet,  the  latter  only  two,  every  quire  is  regularly  made  up  of  three  sheets 
or  six  leaves.  The  whole  book  is  homogeneous,  and  was  almost  certainly  set  up  and 
printed  in  its  own  sequence,  not  in  different  sections  worked  simultaneously.  Of 
the  Bible  thus  set  up  only  a  single  issue  was  printed.  The  so-called  second  issue 
is  an  entirely  distinct  and  separate  edition,  save  that  a  few  leaves  of  the  original 
edition,  of  which  an  excessive  number  had  been  printed  by  some  mistake,  are  some- 
times found  used  in  it.  It  is  the  exact  text  of  this  first  edition  that  the  present 
reprint  reproduces. 

CHAPTER    III. 

THE  LATER  HISTORY  OF  THE  BIBLE  OF  1611. 

As  we  have  seen,  every  parish  in  England  had  been  obliged  to  provide  itself 
with  a  Bible  of  the  '  largest  volume  '  in  1541  under  penalty  of  a  fine  of  40s.  for 
every  month  of  delay,  the  book  costing  10s.  in  sheets  and  12s.  bound.  Beyond 
the  words  on  the  title-page,  '  Appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches,'  which,  as  they  stand, 
are  purely  affirmative,  not  exclusive  (unlike,  for  instance,  the  '  These  to  be  obserued 

1  The  alternative  renderings  and  references  to  parallels  are  probably  the  work  of  the  six  com- 
panies ;  the  chapter  summaries  and  subject  headlines  are  usually  attributed  to  the  two  final 
revisers.  In  later  editions  the  subject  headlines,  which  are  based  on  the  chapter  summaries,  have 
usually  been  left  to  the  printer's  reader. 

:  In  the  New  Testament  two  of  the  mythological  ten-line  set,  the  use  of  which  in  the  Bishops' 
Bible  had  justly  been  censured,  reappear'at  the  beginning  of  Matthew  and  Romans  ;  and  small 
pictorial  capitals  of  an  evangelist  writing,  at  the  beginning  of  the  gospels  according  to  S.  Luke 
and  S.  John. 


34  Bibliographical   Introduction. 


for  Holy  dayes,  and  none  other'  of  this  very  volume),  there  is  no  tittle  of  evidence  for 
any  Order  in  Council  having  enjoined  parishes  to  buy  copies  with  inconvenient  haste. 
In  the  year  of  issue  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Worcester  bought  '  a  Great  Bible  of  the 
new  translation  '  for  £2  18s.,  which  probably  represents  the  cost  of  the  book  in 
a  binding  good  enough  for  cathedral  use.  From  a  book  printed  in  1641  (Michael 
Sparke's  Scintilla)  we  learn  that  the  price  of  Church  Bibles  had  then  recently  been 
raised  from  30s.  to  40s.,  and  that  '  in  former  times '  these  were  sold  in  quires  at  25s., 
to  which  must  be  added  the  cost  of  binding.  It  would  have  been  highly  unpopular 
to  force  an  expenditure  of  this  kind  on  every  parish,  however  small.  To  do  so,  more- 
over, would  have  been  alike  impolitic  and  needless  ;  impolitic,  because  any  haste  in 
the  matter  would  have  suggested  that  very  slur  on  the  Bishops'  version  which  the 
Preface  so  earnestly  disclaims  1  ;  needless,  because  the  supply  of  Bibles  being,  as  we 
have  pointed  out,  a  regulated  and  controlled  supply,  whenever  an  old  Church  Bible 
was  worn  out,  it  was  necessarily  replaced  by  a  new  one  of  the  version  of  161 1,  because  | 
no  other  Bible  in  large  folio  was  purchasable.  In  an  interesting  article  on  The 
Authorisation  of  the  Englisli  Bible,  contributed  by  the  present  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury to  Macmillan's  Magazine  for  June  1881,  we  find  it  stated  : 

Of  twenty-four  [25  ?]  '  inquiries  '  between  161 2  and  1641  thirteen  Bishops  and  Archdeacons, 
ask  for  '  a  Bible  of  the  latest  edition  ',  or  '  of  the  last  translation  ',  while  twelve  ask  only  for 
'  a  Bible  of  the  largest  volume  ',  in  accordance  with  what  had  been  the  usual  form  of  the 
question  prior  to  161 1.  Among  the  latter  are  Bishop  Neile  of  Lincoln  (1614) ;  Bishop  Williams 
of  Lincoln  (1631) ;  Bishop  Duppa  of  Chichester  (1638)  ;  and  the  Archdeacons  of  London,  York 
and  Colchester  (1640).  Archbishop  Abbot  in  his  metropoliticall  visitation  in  i6i6asks  only  for 
'  the  whole  Bible  of  the  largest  volume  ',  though  three  years  later,  in  a  visitation  of  the  Diocese 
of  Canterbury,  he  carefully  refers  to  '  the  Bible  of  the  New  Translation,  lately  set  forth  by 
His  Majesty's  authority  '.  Archbishop  Laud,  however,  in  a  Diocesan  visitation  in  1634,  depart- 
ing from  the  form  adopted  by  his  predecessor,  asks  only  for  '  the  whole  Bible  of  the  largest 
volume  '. 

With  the  policy  of  patience  and  quiet  penetration  which  the  bishops  as  a  body 
(some,  no  doubt,  being  more  urgent  than  others)  thus  seem  to  have  pursued,  the 
bibliographical  evidence  is  in  entire  agreement.  Misapprehension  of  the  ecclesiastical 
position  has  indeed  caused  some  bibliographers  to  go  astray,  and  to  imagine  the 
simultaneous  printing  of  two  issues  in  1611  to  meet  a  demand  for  20,000  copies,  such 
as  Grafton  and  Whitchurch  had  to  provide  for  in  1540  and  1541.  But  the  demand 
for  20,000  copies  and  the  double  issue  are  equally  imaginary.  After  the  first  edition, 
completed  in  1611,  an  entirely  new  one  was  put  in  hand,  the  issue  of  the  bulk  of 
which  belongs  to  1613,  and  in  this  year  there  appeared  also  a  folio  reprint  for  church 
use  in  smaller  type'-;  a  third  edition  in  the  largest  type  was  published  in  1617, 
a  fourth  in  1634,  a  fifth  in  1640.  It  is  clear  that  if  every  parish  had  acquired  a  copy 
in  1611,  there  could  have  been  no  demand  for  new  editions  in  1613  and  1617.  It  is 
also  clear,  from  the  seventeen  years  interval  before  a  reprint,  that  the  1617  edition 
did  substantially  complete  the  necessary  supply.  If  so,  the  editions  may  have  been 
of  as  many  as  5,000  copies  apiece. 

To  understand  the  trouble  which  has  arisen  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  the 
case  of  Bibles  all  editions  of  the  same  size  were  so  printed  that,  the  contents  of 
corresponding  sheets  being  the  same,  the  sheets  should  be  interchangeable.  This 
probably  made  for  correctness  in  reprinting,  and  the  reprints  follow  each  other  so 
closely,  mostly  line  for  line,  and  always  leaf  for  leaf,  that  they  can  only  be  distin- 
guished from  the  copy  they  follow  by  careful  collation.  But  the  printer's  object  in 
this  arrangement  was  probably  the  lower  one  of  being  able  to  use  up  sheets  which 
had  been  printed  in  excess  of  the  requirements  of  one  edition  by  printing  fewer  copies 
for  the  next,  and  also,  when  any  sheets  of  a  nearly  exhausted  edition  had  accidentally 
been  spoilt,  by  printing  these  particular  sheets  in  advance  of  the  next  edition,  to 
make  one  setting  serve  for  both  purposes.  In  a  well-managed  printing-office,  neither 
class  of  accident  would  recur  with  sufficient  frequency  to  be  worth  providing  against ; 
but  Barker's  office  was  not  well  managed,  and  from  his  plea  in  one  of  the  intermin- 
able lawsuits  which  made  him  end  his  days  in  a  debtor's  prison,  we  learn  that  about 

'  '  Truly  (good  Christian  Reader)  wee  neuer  thought  from  the  beginning,  that  we.  should  neede 
to  make  a  new  Translation,  nor  yet  to  make  of  a  bad  one  a  good  one,  (for  then  the  imputation  of 
Sixtus  had  bene  true  in  some  sort,  that  our  people  had  bene  fed  with  gall  of  Dragons  instead  of 
wine,  with  whey  instead  of  milke  :)  but  to  make  a  good  one  better.' 

2  By  printing  72  instead  of  59  lines  to  a  column,  and  a  corresponding  lateral  saving,  the 
number  of  leaves  was  reduced  from  732  to  508. 


The  Later  History  of  the  Bible  of  i  6 1 1 


35 


1616-18  he   owed   over  £200   to   various   booksellers  as   compensation   for  having 
supplied  imperfect  books.1 

Before  the  end  of  1611  the  stock  of  the  first  edition  of  the  new  Bible  was  suffi- 
ciently low  to  cause  a  second  to  be  put  in  hand.  The  engraved  plate  from  which 
the  title  had  been  printed  must  by  this  time  have  been  much  worn  and  (possibly 
after  some  hesitation)  henceforth  Barker  preferred  the  woodcut  border  which  appears 
in  the  New  Testament  for  the  general  title  as  well.  The  easiest  hypothesis  to  account 
for  the  peculiarities  which  we  find  in  the  edition  which  he  now  proceeded  to  print 
is  that  he  first  reprinted  the  sheet  which  bears  the  title,  and  a  few  other  sheets  at 
various  points,  to  complete  imperfect  copies  of  the  first  edition^  and  then  settled 
down  to  reprint  the  rest,  completing  this,  if  we  are  bound  to  press  the  date  1611 
found  on  the  New  Testament,  within  the  year,  somewhat  ahead  of  the  demand. 
Before  this  became  urgent  a  serious  accident  must  have  happened  in  his  warehouse, 
which  rendered  unusable  a  large  part  of  the  stock  (about  119  out  of  138  sheets) 
in  one  part  of  the  book,  viz.  the  quires  signed  Aa-Zz  and  Aaa-Zzz.  A  few  sheets,2 
which  I  conjecture  to  have  been  among  those  printed  in  advance  of  the  rest  and 
kept  in  a  different  place,  escaped,  but  the  stock  of  the  rest  had  to  be  completed  by 
a  second  reprinting,  and  the  completed  stock  was  then  stored  according  to  the  exigen- 
cies of  the  warehouse.  By  1613  the  supply  of  the  title-sheet,  of  which  only  a  small 
number  seems  to  have  been  printed  in  1611  (possibly  because  Barker  at  first  thought 
of  re-engraving  the  original  copper-plate 3)  was  exhausted,  and  this  sheet  was  then 
reprinted  and  dated  1613.  During  the  next  three  or  four  years  the  copies  sold 
exhibit  so  many  combinations  of  the  two  printings  of  the  sheets  bearing  the  double 
and  treble  signatures  (Aa  and  Aaa,  &c),  that  with  the  exception  of  a  group  of 
about  twenty  hardly  any  two  copies  agree.  The  inference  is  that  this  score  of  copies 
represent  the  part  of  the  edition  sold  to  the  booksellers  when  first  it  was  ready, 
since  these  copies  would  all  be  made  up  at  the  same  time,  and  the  sheets  required 
for  them  would  be  extracted  from  the  same  part  of  each  bundle.  On  the  other 
hand,  copies  made  up  at  later  dates  in  response  to  the  casual  daily  demand  would 
naturally  differ  according  to  the  whim  of  the  man  who  picked  out  the  sheets  for  them. 

The  above  explanation  is  based  4  on  the  very  able  paper  by  the  Rev.  Walter  E. 
Smith,  published  in  three  numbers  of  The  Library  for  1890  under' the  title  The  Great 
She-Bible,  and  is  intended  to  account  for  the  following  facts  : 

(i)  While  the  great  majority  of  the  extant  title-pages  of  the  second  edition  are 
dated  1613,  those  in  at  least  three  copies  are  dated  1611,  and  this  title  with  the 
j  woodcut  border  and  the  date  1611  has  also  been  found  on  some  copies  of  the  editio 
princeps.     The  title-page  of  the  New  Testament  in  all  copies  is  dated  1611. 

(ii)  Out  of  a  total  of  357  sheets  of  text,  four  of  those  singly  signed  (E,,  P2,  :i.  X2), 
and  119  of  those  doubly  and  trebly  signed  (Aa,  &c,  Aaa,  &c.)  are  found"  in  two 
different  forms,  constituting  different  editions  of   these  individual  sheets,  one  of  j 
which  can  almost  always  be  positively  proved  to  have  been  set  up  from  the  other. 

(iii)  The  sheets  of  these  signatures  first  printed  are  not,  as  a  rule,  all  found 
together  in  some  copies,  and  the  reprints  of  them  in  others,  but  the  two  printings 
are  very  much  mixed  together,  and  in  very  various  ways. 

The  explanation  is  probably  only  a  very  rough  approximation  to  the  truth,  and 
further  investigation  is  rendered  almost  hopeless  by  the  fact  that  collectors  like  Lea 
Wilson  and  Francis  Fry  (the  latter  of  whom  bought  and  sold  an  extraordinary  number 
of  copies),  and  many  much  more  easily  forgivable  booksellers,  have  transferred  sheets 
from  one  copy  to  another  to  bring  them  into  accord  with  their  own  mistaken  ideas 
of  perfection,  and  the  evidence  has  thus  been  hopelessly  confused.  Nor  if,  as  I 
believe,  the  way  in  which  copies  of  this  second  edition  were  made  up  depended 
mainly  on  the  whim  of  Barker's  storekeeper,  is  it  possible  as  regards  the  bulk  of 

1  See  Mr.  H.  R.  Plomer's  article  in  The  Library  (Second  Series,  vol.  ii,  pp.  353-375),  oil  '  The 
King's  Printing  House  under  the  Stuarts  '. 

•  Viz.  (probably)  Aa,,  Ft,  Gg„  ,,,  Kk,,  Tt,_„  Aaa,,,  Bbb,,  Iii  ,  Lll„  Ooo„  „  Qqq3,  Sssl,_„  Zzz;. 

3  I  may  note  that  the  engraved  title  is  said  to  be  found  in  a  '  very  few '  copies  of  the  cheaper 
Church  folio  (72  line)  of  161 3.  In  one  at  least  of  these  it  is  clearly  inserted.  But  as  long  as  the 
plate  existed  it  might  be  used  on  an  emergency  to  complete  copies. 

1  I  use  this  word  because  Mr.  Smith  did  not  fully  express  his  views  on  the  significance  of  the 
161 1  printed  title-page,  as  to  which  he  obtained  additional  information  after  his  text  was 
printed,  and  in  some  points  I  think  I  interpret  the  evidence  he  collected  a  little  differently. 
His  paper  settled  the  main  question  quite  finally. 


C2 


36 


Bibliographical   Introduction. 


the  copies1  to  say  with  any  probability  that  one  is  earlier  than  another.  The 
important  point  is  that  we  must  repudiate  altogether  the  misuse  of  bibliographical 
terms  by  which  Mr.  Fry  constantly  wrote  of  a  certain  type  of  copy  of  the  second 
edition  as  the  second  '  issue  '  of  the  first.  A  sheet  of  the  first  edition  may  here  and 
there  be  found  (for  the  reasons  given)  in  a  copy  of  the  second,  but  the  second  edition 
as  a  whole,  whether  it  bears  a  1611  title  or  a  1613  title,  was  printed  from  a  new 
setting  up  of  the  type,  whereas  the  essence  of  a  new  '  issue  '  is  that  it  is  printed 
from  the  same  setting  up,  but  with  additions,  cancels,  or  other  subordinate  changes. 
The  only  first  edition  is  that  which  is  here  reprinted. 

A  still  more  serious  error  was  committed  by  the  distinguished  scholar,  Dr.  F.  H.  A. 
Scrivener,  who  in  1884,  in  his  book  entitled  The  Authorised  Edition  of  the  English 
Bible  (1611)  :  its  subsequent  reprints  and  modern  representatives  (an  enlargement  of 
his  Introduction  to  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible  of  1873)  argued  strenuously,  but 
in  entire  ignorance  of  the  customs  of  the  book  trade  in  the  seventeenth  century,  that 
copies  of  the  (second)  edition  with  the  woodcut  title  dated  1611  preceded  the  (first) 
edition  with  the  engraved  title,  here  reprinted.  Dr.  Scrivener  was  led  to  this  con- 
clusion by  the  idea,  natural  to  a  modern  scholar,  that  the  opportunity  of  a  new 
edition  would  be  used  for  making  the  text  more  correct.  So  far  from  this  being  the 
case  it  is  a  practically  invariable  experience  that  for  every  error  corrected  in  a 
seventeenth-century  reprint,  at  least  two  are  introduced.  Dr.  Scrivener  allowed  that 
the  accepted  editio  princeps  was  the  finer  and  better,  but  did  not  see  how  incredible 
it  is  that  an  eagerly  expected  book  like  the  version  of  1611,  of  which  copies  would 
at  once  be  given  to  the  king  and  other  great  persons,  should  have  been  put  on  the 
market  in  the  first  instance  in  an  inferior  form,  have  been  then  improved  in  almost 
every  respect  in  a  second  edition,  and  then  have  gone  back  to  its  original  state,  or 
a  little  worse,  in  a  third.  The  relations  of  the  copies  with  the  1611  and  1613  wood- 
cut titles  constitute  another  insuperable  difficulty  to  his  theory,  but  the  priority  of 
the  true  editio  princeps  can  be  proved  bibliographically  in  a  dozen  different  ways. 
A  few  of  these  may  be  indicated  : 

(i)  Dr.  Scrivener  himself  noted  a  blunder  in  the  editio  princeps  by  which  three 
lines  are  repeated  in  Exodus  xiv.  10.  In  the  second  edition  we  can  see  the  printer, 
who  could  not  ignore  this  particular  error,  bringing  a  couple  of  words  on  to  another 
line,  and  leaving  extra  space  at  the  head  of  chapter  xv,  in  order  to  fill  the  gap 
created  by  omitting  the  three  repeated  lines. 

(ii)  The  editio  princeps,  as  we  have  seen,  begins  with  a  regular  system  of  nine-line 
capitals  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  chapter  of  each  book,  and  five-line  capitals  at 
the  beginning  of  other  chapters,  and  only  gradually  departs  from  it.  In  the  second 
edition  the  printer  is  careless  all  the  way  through,  using  additional  capitals  from  other 
1  sets,  and  making  changes  in  the  line-arrangements  obviously  dictated  by  the  different 
sizes  of  the  new  capitals. 

(iii)  In  the  editio  princeps  the  word  'Lord'  is  printed  throughout  the  book  of 
Genesis  as  LORD,  afterwards  as  Lord.  In  the  second  edition  it  is  always  printed 
Lord. 

All  of  these  changes  are  intelligible  if  the  second  edition  was  printed  from  the 
first.  None  of  them  can  be  explained  if  the  first  edition  was  printed  from  the  second. 
Add  the  fact  that  the  type  of  the  second  edition  is  distinctly  more  worn,  and  the  true 
sequence  is  obvious.  This  is  now  generally  recognized,  and  it  is  only  just  to  say 
that  on  this  point  Mr.  Francis  Fry  was  quite  sound. 

It  remains  to  be  added  that  the  first  edition  of  the  new  translation  is  frequently 
called  the  He-Bible  and  the  second  the  She-Bible,  from  the  fact  that  in  Ruth  iii.  15 
the  former  reads  '  He  went  into  the  city  ',  and  the  latter  '  She  '.  All  such  nicknames 
for  editions  of  the  Bible  are  objectionable,  and  this,  which  suggests  that  the  two 
editions  form  a  pair,  is  mischievous.  Their  relation  is  not  that  of  equality  as 
between  man  and  woman,  but  the  second  is  derived  from  the  first,  as  a  child  from 
its  parents,  an  entirely  new  and  distinct  edition,  reprinted  from  the  original,  and 
not  a  contemporaneous  issue. 

Turning  now  from  the  Church  Bibles  to  those  for  private  use  we  find  that  two 
quartos  and  two  octavos  were  issued  in  1612,  one  quarto  and  one  octavo  following 
the  editio  princeps,  and  the  other  quarto  and  octavo  following  the  second  edition. 

1  Those  with  one  or  more  1O11  sheets  used  in  them  may  perhaps  be  set  down  as  earlier,  and 
those  with  161 7  sheets  as  later.     But  even  this  is  not  always  certain. 


The  Later  History  of  the  Bible  of  1 6 1 1 .  37 


A  quarto  and  octavo  were  printed  at  the  turn  of  the  years  1612-13,  two  other 
quartos  and  an  octavo  in  1613,  two  quartos  in  1613-14,  and  two  more  quartos  and 
an  octavo  in  1614,  almost  all  of  these  following  the  text  of  the  second  edition. 
These  fourteen  editions  (there  may  have  been  more)  seem  to  have  satisfied  the 
immediate  demand,  and  after  this  we  find  one,  two,  and  three  editions  printed  in 
different  years.  Very  few  editions  of  the  New  Testament  seem  at  first  to  have  been 
printed  separately,  and  it  is  interesting  to  find  Messrs.  Darlow  and  Moule,  in  their 
catalogue  of  the  treasures  of  the  Bible  Society,  recording  editions  of  the  Bishops' 
version  as  being  printed  in  1613.  1614,  1615,  and  1617.  After  this  New  Testaments 
of  the  new  translation  became  more  common. 

As  regards  the  Geneva  Bible,  of  which  a  folio  and  quarto  had  been  printed  in 
1611,  we  find  another  folio  published  in  1612,  three  quartos  in  1614,  two  more 
quartos  in  1615,  and  a  folio  in  1616.  After  this,  although  for  another  fifteen  or 
twenty  years  eminent  ecclesiastics,  ordained  before  161 1,  continued  to  take  into  the 
pulpit  their  old  Geneva  pocket  editions,  no  doubt  marked  and  familiar  to  their 
hands,  and  had  no  hesitation  in  using  this  version  for  their  texts,  the  king's  printers 
were  encouraged  to  print  no  more  Geneva  Bibles,  and  the  production  of  them  was 
thus  driven  underground.  It  has  long  been  a  puzzle  to  bibliographers  why  there 
should  be  so  many  different  editions  (at  least  six),  of  the  Geneva  Bible  asserting 
themselves  on  their  title-pages  to  have  been  '  Imprinted  at  London  by  the  Deputies 
of  Christopher  Barker,  Printer  to  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Maiestie.  1599.'  One 
of  these  editions  is  found  also  bearing  the  much  more  truthful  statement,  '  By 
Iohn  Fredericksz.  Stam,  dwelling  by  the  South  Churche  at  the  signe  of  the  Hope. 
1633  '  (see  Bible  Society  Catalogue,  Nos.  191  and  364).  Mr.  N.  Pocock,  who  wrote 
on  the  subject  in  the  Bibliographer,  vol.  iii,  stated  as  his  conclusion  that  '  the  whole 
investigation  seems  to  show  that  these  editions  of  the  Geneva-Tomson  [Bible]  were 
published  at  different  times  at  Amsterdam  and  Dort,  and  adopted  afterwards  by 
Barker,  who  affixed  the  date  1599,  probably  because  this  was  a  well-known  and 
popular  edition'.  A  still  more  probable  reason  for  the  selection  of  the  date  1599  is 
surely  that  in  1600  Robert  Barker  took  over  his  father's  business,  and  the  deputies 
vanished.  Thus  this  particular  imprint  was  the  latest  with  which  editions  could 
circulate  freely  in  England,  without  Robert  Barker  being  personally  implicated. 
Whether  Robert  himself  was  always  in  the  position  of  having  '  a  few  remaining 
copies  '  of  one  or  other  of  these  editions  in  stock  we  can  only  surmise.  But  the 
complete,  or  nearly  complete,  cessation  of  English-printed  editions  of  the  Geneva 
Bible  after  1616,  combined  with  the  appearance  of  Dutch-printed  editions,  one  at 
least  of  which  belongs  to  the  year  1633,  disguised  by  spurious  imprints,  is  fair  proof 
that  the  Geneva  Bible  was  now  again  subjected  to  the  silent  boycott  by  which 
Parker  had  repressed  it  until  the  year  of  his  death.  Fortunately,  lethargy  no 
longer  accompanied  repression,  and  the  supply  of  Bibles  of  every  size  was  abundant, 
although  we  hear  murmurs  that  the  king's  printers  were  allowed  to  charge  too  much 
for  them. 

Although  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  price  of  Bibles  gradually  rose,  in  1629 
buyers  of  small  folios  and  large  quartos  were  for  a  short  time  able  to  obtain  them 
cheap  enough,  as,  on  the  Cambridge  University  Press  for  the  first  time  exercising 
its  right  to  print  a  Bible,  and  putting  a  small  folio  on  the  market  at  10s.  instead  of 
12s.,  the  king's  printers  sold  a  specially  printed  folio  edition  and  a  thousand  copies 
in  quarto  at  ~,s.  apiece,  '  to  overthrow  the  Cambridge  printing,  and  so  to  keep  all  in 
their  own  hands'  (Sparke's  Scintilla,  1641).  This  Cambridge  edition  of  1629  is 
noteworthy  also,  not  only  as  exceptionally  well  printed,  but  as  bearing  marks  of 
careful  revision,  carried  still  further  in  an  edition  of  1638,  which  went  so  far  as  to 
improve  the  text  (I  quote  from  Dr.  Scrivener)  '  by  inserting  words  or  clauses, 
especially  in  the  Old  Testament,  overlooked  by  the  editors  of  161 1  ;  by  amending 
manifest  errors  ;  by  rendering  the  italic  notation  at  once  more  self-consistent,  and 
more  agreeable  to  the  design  of  the  original  translators.'  According  to  a  con- 
temporary note  the  revisers  were  Dr.  Goad,  of  Hadley,  Dr.  Joseph  Mede,  Dean 
Boys,  and  Dr.  Samuel  Ward,  of  Sidney  Sussex,  of  whom  the  last  two  were  survivors 
of  the  original  Cambridge  board  of  1611.  Between  these  two  Cambridge  editions 
came  one  from  the  king's  printers  in  1631,  for  which  the  firm  was  fined  £300  for 
omitting  the  word  not  in  the  seventh  commandment.  After  1638  carelessness  still 
continued,  and  the  London  market  was  also  flooded  with  incorrect  editions  printed 
in  Holland.     In  the  eighteenth  century  even  Baskett,  as  a  rule  a  careful  printer, 


X 


38  Bibliographical   Introduction. 

in  aiming  at  sumptuousness  could  produce  the  Bible  of  1716-17  x  with  its  '  basket-  j 
full  '  of  errors.  In  1762  a  Bible  revised  by  Dr.  Thomas  Paris  of  Trinity  College 
was  printed  at  Cambridge,  and  seven  years  later  a  similar  revision  was  carried 
through  at  Oxford  by  Dr.  Benjamin  Blavney,  of  Hertford  College.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  no  copy  of  the  version  of  1611  had  been  '  sealed  '  as  a  standard, 
as  was  done  in  the  case  of  the  Prayer-book,  and  these  attempts  to  increase  con- 
sistency and  to  remove  errors  were  wholly  laudable.  On  the  other  hand  it  is 
obvious  that  under  cover  of  such  minor  revisions  more  serious  changes  might  be 
introduced,  and  in  1831,  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  The  Existing  Monopoly  an  inadequate 
protection  of  the  Authorised  Version  of  the  Scripture,  Thomas  Curtis,  of  Islington, 
called  public  attention  to  a  number  of  departures  from  the  original  text.  The 
uneasiness  thus  created  was  effectually  dispelled  by  the  Oxford  University  Press 
producing,  in  1833,  a  line  for  line  reprint  of  the  editio  princeps,  the  extraordinary 
accuracy  of  which  has  been  everywhere  acknowledged. 

ALFRED  W.  POLLARD. 

1  The  so-called  Vinegar  Bible,  from  the  misprint  Vinegar  for  Vineyard  in  the  headline  to 
Luke  xx. 


APPENDIX  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION. 

DOCUMENTS  RELATING  TO  THE  MAKING,  PRINTING, 
AND  PUBLISHING  OF  THE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATIONS 
OF  THE  BIBLE  FROM  TYNDALE'S  NEW  TESTAMENT 
OF    1525    TO    THE    APPEARANCE    OF    THE    VERSION 

OF  1611. 


RECORDS. 

I.  PROHIBITION  OF  ENGLISH  TRANSLATIONS  OF  THE  BIBLE  FROM 
THE  TIME  OF  WYCLIF  UNLESS  AUTHORIZED  BY  A  BISHOP  OR 
A  PROVINCIAL  COUNCIL. 

The  text  of  the  Constitution  adopted  by  the  Provincial  Council  at  Oxford,  1408,  from 
Lyndewode's  Provinciate,  Antwerp,  Christopher  of  Endhoven,  December  20,  1525,  fo.  ccvi, 
compared  with  the  same  constitution  as  ratified  by  the  Provincial  Council  which  met  at 
St.  Paul's,  London,  January  14,  1408-9,  from  Wilkins's  Concilia,   1737,  vol.  iii.  317. 

1  Scriptura  sacra  non  transf eratur  in  linguam  vulgarem  nee  translata  interpretur 
donee  rite  fuerit  examinata  sub  pena  excommunicationis  et  nota  hereseos. 

Periculosa  [quoque  2]  res  est,  testante  beato  Hyeronymo,  textum  sacre  scripture 
de  uno  in  aliud  ydioma  transferre,  eo  quod  in  ipsis  translationibus  non  de  facili  idem 
sensus  in  omnibus3  retinetur,  prout  idem  beatus  Hyeronymus,  etsi  inspiratus 
fuisset,  se  in  hoc  sepius  fatetur  errasse.  Statuimus  igitur  et  ordinamus,  ut  nemo 
deinceps  textum  aliquem 4  sacre  scripture  auctoritate  sua  in  linguam  Anglicanam, 
vel  aliam  transferat,  per  viam  libri  vel  libelli  aut  tractatus,  nee  legatur  aliquis 
huiusmodi  liber,  libellus,  aut  tractatus  iam  nouiter  tempore  dicti  Iohannis  Wyklyff, 
siue  citra,  compositus,  aut  in  posterum  componendus,  in  parte  vel  in  toto,  publice 
vel  occulte,  sub  pena  maioris  excommunicationis,  quousque  per  loci  diocesanum, 
seu,  si  res  exegerit,  per  concilium  prouinciale  ipsa  translatio  fuerit  approbata.  Qui 
vero  5  contra  fecerit,  ut  fautor  heresis  et  erroris  similiter  puniatur. 

Translation. 

The  Holy  Scripture  not  to  be  translated  into  the  vulgar  tongue,  nor  a  translation 
to  be  expounded,  until  it  shall  have  been  duly  examined,  under  pain  of  excom- 
munication and  the  stigma  of  heresy. 

Moreover  it  is  a  perilous  thing,  as  the  Blessed  Jerome  testifies,  to  translate  the 
text  of  Holy  Scripture  from  one  idiom  into  another,  inasmuch  as  in  the  translations 
themselves  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  keep  the  same  meaning  in  all  cases,  like  as  the 
Blessed  Jerome,  albeit  inspired,  confesses  that  he  often  went  astray  in  this  respect. 
We  therefore  enact  and  ordain  that  no  one  henceforth  on  his  own  authority 
translate  any  text  of  Holy  Scripture  into  the  English  or  other  language,  by  way 
of  a  book,  pamphlet,  or  tract,  and  that  no  book,  pamphlet,  or  tract  of  this  kind  be 
read,  either  already  recently  composed  in  the  time  of  the  said  John  Wyclif,  or 
since  then,  or  that  may  in  future  be  composed,  in  part  or  in  whole,  publicly  or 
privily,  under  pain  of  the  greater  excommunication,  until  the  translation  itself 6 
shall  have  been  approved  by  the  diocesan  of  the  place  or  if  need  be  by 
a  provincial  council.  Whoever  shall  do  the  contrary  to  be  punished  in  like  manner 
as  a  supporter  of  heresy  and  error. 

II.    SIR  THOMAS  MORE  ON  THE  PROHIBITION. 

From  '  A  dyaloge  of  syr  Thomas  More  .  .  .  Wherin  be  treatyd  dyuers  maters,  as  of  the  . 
worshyp  of  ymagys  .  .  .  With  many  othre  thyngys  touchyng  the  pestylent  sect  of  Luther  and 
Tyndale.     London,  J.  Rastell,  1529.     (fol.  xciii  verso.) 

The  thyrde  boke.     The  xvi.  chapyter. 

The  messenger  *  reherseth  som  causys  whych  he  hath  herd  layd  by  som  of  the 
clergye,  wherfore  the  scrypture  shold  not  be  suffred  in  englysh.     And  the  author 

I.  *  The  heading  given  by  Wilkins  is  :  '  Ne  quis  texta  (sic)  S.  Scripturae  transferat  in 
linguam  Anglicanam,'  but  he  quotes  from  a  Lambeth  MS.  the  variant:  '  Ne  textus  aliquis 
S.  Scripturae  in  linguam  Anglicanam  de  caetero  transferatur  per  viam  libri  aut  tractatus.' 

2  From  Wilkins.  3  Wilkins,  'in  omnibus  sensus.' 
4  Wilkins,  '  aUquem  textum.'  6  Wilkins  omits  '  vero  '. 

8  It  wilt  be  noted  that  it  is  the  translation  itself  ('ipsa  translatio')  which  the  Bishop  or 
Provincial  Council  was  to  approve.  In  the  uncertainty  which  almost  from  the  beginning 
surrounded  the  origin  of  the  Wyclifite  versions  it  seems  to  have  become  the  practice  to  grant 
a  licence  to  specified  readers  instead  of  to  a  specified  version. 

II.  '  More  secures  entire  freedom  of  speech  for  his  interlocutor  by  making  him  merely  the  mes- 
senger of  a  friend,  who  reports  everything  he  hears  said  without  taking  any  responsibility  for  it. 


42 


Sir  Thomas  More  on  the  Prohibition. 


sheweth  hys  mynde  that  yt  were  conuenyent  to  haue  the  byble  in  englyshe.     And 
therwyth  endeth  the  thyrd  boke. 

Syr  quod  your  frende,  yet  for  all  thys  can  I  se  no  cawse  why  the  clergye  shold 
kepe  the  byble  out  of  lay  mennys  handys,  that  can  no  more  but  theyr  mother 
tonge. 

1  had  wente  quod  I  that  I  had  proued  you  playnly,  that  they  kepe  yt  not  from 
them.  For  I  haue  shewed  you  that  they  kepe  none  frome  theym,  but  suche  trans- 
lacyon  as  be  eyther  not  yet  approued  for  good,  or  such  as  be  all  redy  reproued  for 
naught,  as  Wyclyffys  was  and  Tyndals.  For  as  for  other  olde  onys,  that  were 
before  Wyclyffys  days,  [these]  remayn  lawful,  and  be  in  some  folkys  handys  had 
and  red.2 

Ye  say  well  quod  he.  But  yet  as  women  say,  somwhat  yt  was  alway  that  the 
cat  wynked  whan  her  eye  was  oute.  Surely  so  ys  yt  not  for  nought  that  the 
englysh  byble  is  in  so  few  mennys  handys,  whan  so  many  wold  so  fayn  haue  yt. 

That  ys  very  trouth  quod  I.     For  I  thynke  that  though  the  fauourers  of  a  secte 
of  heretyques  be  so  feruent  in  the  settynge  forthe  of  theyr  sect,  that  they  let  not 
to  lay  theyr  money  togyder  and  make  a  purse  amonge  them  for  the  pryntyng  of 
an  euyll  made  or  euyll  translated  boke,  whych  though  yt  happe  to  be  forboden  and 
burned  yet  som  be  solde  ere  they  be  spyed,  and  eche  of  theym  lese  but  theyr  parte, 
yet  I  thynk  ther  wyll  no  prynter  lyghtely  be  so  hote  to  put  eny  byble  in  prent  at 
hys  own  charge,  wherof  the  losse  sholde  lye  hole  in  hys  owne  necke,  and  than  hange 
vppon  a  doutfull  tryall  whyther  the  fyrst  copy  of  hys  translacyon  was  made  before 
Wyclyffys  dayes  or  synnys.     For  yf  yt  were  made  synnys,  yt  must  be  approued 
byfore  the  pryntynge.     And  surely  howe  yt  hathe  happed  that  in  all  thys  whyle 
god  hathe  eyther  not  suffred  or  not  prouyded  that  eny  good  vertuouse  man  hath 
had  the  mynde  in  faythfull  wyse  to  translate  yt,  and  thervppon  eyther  the  clergye  , 
or  at  the  lest  wyse  som  one  bysshop  to  approue  yt,  thys  can  [I]  no  thynge  tell.     But  \ 
howe  so  euer  yt  be,  I  haue  herd  and  here  so  myche  spoken  in  the  mater,  and  so  j 
mych  dout  made  therin,  that  peraduenture  yt  wold  let  and  wythdrawe  eny  one  | 
bishop  from  the  admyttyng  therof,  wythout  the  assent  of  the  remanaunt.     And  t 
where  as  many  thyngys  be  layd  agaynst  yt,  yet  ys  there  in  my  mynde  not  one  thyng 
that  more  putteth  good  men  of  the  clergye  in  dout  to  suffer  yt,  than  thys  that  they  1 
se  somtyme  myche  of  the  worst  sort  more  feruent  in  the  callyng  for  yt,  than  them  j 
whom  we  fynde  far  better.     Whych  maketh  theym  to  fere  lest  such  men  desyre  yt 
for  no  good,  and  lest  yf  yt  were  had  in  euery  mannys  hand,  there  wold  gret  parell 
aryse,  and  that  sedycyouse  people  shold  do  more  harme  therwyth,  than  god  and 
honest  folke  sholde  take  frute  therby.     Whyche  fere  I  promyse  you  no  thyng  fereth 
me,  but  that  who  so  euer  wolde  of  theyre  malyce  or  foly  take  harme  of  that  thynge 
that  ys  of  ytself  ordeyned  to  do  all  men  good,  I  wold  neuer  for  thauoydyng  of  theyr 
harme,  take  frome  other  the  profyte  whyche  they  myght  take,  and  no  thyng  deserue 
to  lese.     For  ellys  yf  thabuse  of  a  good  thyng  shold  cause  the  takynge  awaye  therof 
frome  other  that  wolde  use  yt  well,  Cryst  shold  hym  selfe  neuer  haue  ben  borne,  nor 
brought  hys  fayth  in  to  the  worlde,  nor  god  sholde  neuer  haue  made  yt  neyther,  yf 
he  shold  for  the  losse  of  those  that  wold  be  dampned  wreches,  haue  kepte  away  the 
occasyon  of  reward  from  theym  that  wold  wyth  helpe  of  hys  grace  endeuoure  theym 
to  deserue  yt.  .  .  . 

2  In  '  An  Answere  vnto  Sir  Thomas  Mores  dialoge '  Tyndale  (fol.  cv)  thus  comments  on  this 
section  :  '  What  maye  not  Master  More  saye  by  auctorite  of  his  poetrie  ?  there  is  a  lawfull  trans- 
lacion  that  no  man  knoweth  which  is  as  moch  as  no  lawfull  trauslacion.  Whi  mighte  not  the 
bisshopes  shew  which  were  that  lawfull  translacion  and  lat  it  be  printed  ?  Naye  if  that  might 
haue  bene  obteyned  of  them  with  large  money  it  had  be  printed  ye  maye  besure  longe  yer  this. 
But  sir  answere  me  here  vnto,  how  happeneth  that  ye  defendars  translate  not  one  youre  selues, 
to  cease  the  murmoure  of  the  people,  and  put  to  youre  awne  gloses,  to  preuent  [i.  e.  forestall] 
heretikes  ?  Ye  wold  no  doute  haue  done  it  longe  sens,  if  ye  coude  haue  youre  gloses  agre  with 
the  texte  in  euery  place.  And  what  can  you  saye  to  this,  how  that  besydes  they  haue  done 
their  best  to  disanull  all  translatynge  by  parlement,  they  haue  disputed  before  the  kinges  grace 
that  it  is  [text  is  it]  perelous  and  not  mete  and  so  concluded  that  it  shal  not  be,  vnder  a  pretence 
of  deferrynge  it  of  certayne  yeres.  Where  Master  More  was  there  speciall  orator,  to  fayne  lyes  for 
their  purpose.' 


More's  Plan  for  a  Limited  Circulation. 


43 


III.     MORE'S  PLAN  FOR  A  LIMITED  CIRCULATION. 

From  the  same  (fol.  xcvii.,  recto). 

Fynally  me  thynketh  that  the  constytucyon  prouyncyall  of  which  we  spake 
ryght  now  hath  determyned  thys  questyon  all  redy.  For  whan  the  clergye  therin 
t  agreed  that  the  englysh  bybles  shold  remayne  whyche  were  translated  afore 
Wyclyffes  dayes,  they  consequently  dyd  agre  that  to  haue  the  byble  in  englysh  was 
'  none  hurte.  And  in  that  they  forbade  eny  new  translacyon  to  be  redde  tyll  yt  were 
approued  by  the  bishoppes,  yt  appereth  wel  therby  that  theyre  entent  was  that  the 
bysshoppe  shold  approue  yt  yf  he  founde  yt  fawtelesse,  &  also  of  reason  amend  yt 
where  yt  were  fawtye,  but  yf  the  man  were  an  heretyque  that  made  yt,  or  the  fawtis 
suche  and  so  many,  as  yt  were  more  ethe1  to  make  yt  all  new  than  mend  yt.  As  yt 
happed  for  bothe  poyntys  in  the  translacyon  of  Tyndall. 

Nowe  yf  yt  so  be  that  yt  wold  happely  be  thought  not  a  thyng  metely  to  be 
aduentured,  to  set  all  on  a  flushe  at  onys,  &  dash  rashly  out  holy  scrypture  in  euery 
lewde  felowys  tethe,  yet  thynketh  me  there  mighte  suche  a  moderacion  be  taken 
therin,  as  neyther  good  vertuous  lay  folk  shold  lacke  yt,  nor  rude  and  rashe  braynes 
abuse  yt.  For  it  might  be  with  dylygence  well  and  truly  translated  by  som  good 
catholyke  and  well  lerned  man,  or  by  dyuerse  dyuydynge  the  laboure  amonge  theym, 
and  after  conferryng  theyr  seuerall  partys  together  eche  with  other.  And  after 
that  myght  the  work  be  allowed  and  approued  by  the  ordynaryes,  and  by  theyre 
authorytees  so  put  vnto  prent,  as  all  the  copyes  shold  come  hole  vnto  the 
bysshoppys  hande.  Whyche  he  maye  after  hys  dyscrecyon  and  wysedome  delyver 
to  suche  as  he  perceyueth  honest  sad  and  vertuous,  with  a  good  monicyon  & 
fatherly  counsayl  to  vse  yt  reuerently  wyth  humble  hart  and  lowly  mynd,  rather 
sekyng  therin  occasyon  of  deuocyon  than  of  dyspycyon  2.  And  prouydyng  as  mych 
as  may  be,  that  the  boke  be  after  the  deceace  of  the  partye  brought  agayn  and 
reuerently  restored  vnto  the  ordynary.  So  that  as  nere  as  may  be  deuysed,  no  man 
haue  yt  but  of  the  ordynaryes  hande,  and  by  hym  thoughte  and  reputed  for  suche, 
as  shall  be  lykely  to  vse  yt  to  goddys  honour  and  meryte  of  his  own  soule.  Among 
whome  yf  eny  be  proued  after  to  haue  abused  yt,  than  the  vse  therof  to  be  for- 
boden  hym,  eyther  for  euer,  or  tyll  he  be  waxen  wyser. 

By  our  lady  quod  youre  frende  thys  way  myslyketh  not  me.  But  who  sholde  set 
the  pryce  of  the  boke  ? 

Forsothe  quod  I  that  reken  I  a  thynge  of  lytell  force.3  For  neyther  were  yt  a  grete 
mater  for  any  man  in  maner  to  geue  a  grote  or  twayne  aboue  the  meane  pryce  for 
a  boke  of  so  great  profyte,  nor  for  the  byshop  to  gyue  them  al  fre,  wherin  he  myght 
serue  hys  dyocyse  wyth  the  coste  of  .x.  li.  I  thynke  or  xx.  markys4.  Whyche  some 
I  dare  saye  there  is  no  bysshop  but  he  wold  be  glad  to  bestowe  about  a  thynge  that 
myght  do  hys  hole  dyocyse  so  specyall  a  pleasure  wyth  suche  a  spyrytuall  profyte. 

By  my  trouth  quod  he  yet  wene  I  that  the  people  wolde  grudge  to  haue  yt 
on  thys  wyse  delyuered  theym  at  the  bysshops  hand,  and  had  leuer  pave  for  yt  to 
the  prenter  than  haue  yt  of  the  bysshop  fre. 

It  myght  so  happen  wyth  some  quod  I.  But  yet  in  myne  opinion  there  were 
in  that  maner  more  wylfulnesse,  than  wysedom  or  eny  good  mynd  in  such  as  wold 
not  be  content  so  to  receyue  them.  And  therfore  I  wolde  thynke  in  good  fayth 
that  yt  wold  so  fortune  in  fewe.  But  for  god  the  more  dowte  wolde  be,  leste  the[y] 
wolde  grudge  and  holde  them  self  sore  greued,  that  wolde  requyre  yt  and  were 
happely  denyed  yt.  Whych  I  suppose  wolde  not  often  happen  vnto  eny  honest  howse- 
holder  to  be  by  hys  dyscrecyon  reuerently  red  in  hys  howse.  But  though  yt  were 
not  taken  5  to  euery  lewd  ladde  in  hys  awn  handes  to  rede  a  lytel  rudely  whan 
he  lyst,  and  than  cast  the  boke  at  hys"  helys,  or  among  other  such  as  hym  selfe  to 
kepe  a  quodlibet 6  and  a  pot  parlement  vppon,  I  trowe  there  wyll  no  wyse  man  fynde 
a  fawte  therin. 

1  A  misprint  for  '  easy  '  ?  2  Discussion,  disputation.  3  Importance. 

4  The  larger  of  these  two  sums  is  only  twice  as  much  as  Bishop  Nix  contributed  to  the  cost  of 
buying  up  Tyndale's  New  Testaments  (see  no.  xviii).  It  might  have  paid  for  thirty  folio  bibles 
or  fifty  in  quarto. 

s  Entrusted.  *  Argument  on  any  subject. 


IV.    TYXDALE'S  TRANSLATIONS. 

From  Fox's  'Actes  and  Monuments  of  matters  most  speciall  and  memorable,  happenyng  in 
the  Church.  .  .  .  Newly  reuised  and  recognised,  partly  also  augmented,  and  now  the  fourth  time 
agayne  published  .  .  .  by  the  Authour.1    /.  Daye,  London,  1583.  pp.  1076  sq.' 

To  be  short,  M.  Tyndal  being  so  molested  and  vexed  in  the  countrey  by  the 
Priests,  was  constrained  to  leaue  that  country  and  to  seke  an  other  place  :  and  so 
comming  to  M.  Welche,  he  desired  him  of  hys  goodwill  that  hee  myght  depart  from 
him,  saying  on  this  wise  to  him  :  Syr,  I  perceiue  I  shall  not  be  suffered  to  tary  long 
heere  in  this  countrey,  neither  shall  you  be  able  though  you  woulde,  to  keepe  me 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  spiritualitie,  and  also  what  displeasure  might  grow  therby  to 
you  by  keeping  me,  God  knoweth  :  for  the  which  I  shoulde  be  right  sorie.  So  that 
in  fine,  M.  Tindall  with  the  good  will  of  his  maister,  departed,  and  eftsoones  came  vp 
to  London,  and  there  preached  a  while,  according  as  he  had  done  in  the  country 
before,  and  specially  about  the  towne  of  Bristowe,  and  also  in  the  sayde  towne,  in 
the  common  place  called  S.  Austines  Greene.  At  length  he  bethinking  him  selfe 
of  Cutbert  Tonstall,  then  Byshop  of  London,2  and  especially  for  the  great  commenda- 
tion of  Erasmus,  who  in  his  annotations  so  extolleth  him  for  his  learning,  thus  cast 
with  himselfe,  that  if  hee  might  attaine  vnto  his  seruice  hee  were  a  happy  man. 
And  so  comming  to  Syr  Henry  Gilford  the  kings  controller,3  and  bringing  with  him 
an  Oration  of  Isocrates,  which  he  had  then  translated  out  of  Greeke  into  Englishe, 
he  desired  him  to  speake  to  the  sayde  B.  of  London  for  him.  Which  he  also  did,  and 
willed  him  moreouer  to  wryte  an  Epistle  to  the  Byshop,  and  to  go  him  self  with 
him,  Which  he  did  likewise  and  deliuered  his  Epistle  to  a  seruaunte  of  his,  named 
William  Hebilthwait,  a  man  of  his  olde  acquaintaunce.  But  God  who  secretely  dis- 
poseth  the  course  of  things,  saw  that  was  not  the  best  for  Tyndals  purpose,  nor  for 
the  profite  of  hys  Churche,  and  therefore  gaue  him  to  finde  little  fauor  in  the  Bishops 
sight.  The  answer  of  whom  was  thys,  that  hys  house  was  full,  he  had  mo  then  he  could 
wel  finde,  and  aduised  him  to  seeke  in  London  abroade,  where  hee  saide  hee  coulde 
lacke  no  seruice,  &c.  and  so  remained  hee  in  London  the  space  almoste  of  a  yeare, 
beholding  and  marking  wyth  him  selfe  the  course  of  the  world,  and  especially  the 
demeanour  of  the  preachers,  howe  they  boasted  them  selues  and  set  vp  their  authoritie 
and  kingdome  :  beholding  also  the  pompe  of  the  Prelates,  wyth  other  thynges 
moe  whiche  greatly  misliked  him  :  In  so  muche  that  he  understoode,  not  onely  there 
to  be  no  rowme  in  the  Bishops  house  for  hym  to  translate  the  new  Testament :  but 
also  that  there  was  no  place  to  do  it  in  al  England.  And  therfore  finding  no  place 
for  his  purpose  within  the  realme,  and  hauing  some  ayde  and  prouision,  by  Gods 
prouidence  ministred  vnto  hym  by  Humphrey  Mummouth  aboue  recited,  as  you  may 
see  before,  pag.  1076.4  and  certain  other  good  men,  hee  tooke  hys  leaue  of  the  realme, 

1  The  fourth  edition  was  the  last  which  Fox  revised.  In  the  case  of  Tyndale  Fox  had  inserted 
new  information  in  the  second  edition  of  1570,  and  this  is  here  reprinted.  The  extract  begins 
with  Tyndale's  leaving  Gloucestershire,  where  he  had  acted  as  tutor  in  the  house  of  Sir  John  Walsh 
at  Little  Sodbury,  and  had  had  controversies  with  the  neighbouring  clergy. 

2  Cuthbert  Tunstall  or  Tonstall  (1474-1559),  bishop  of  London,  1522-30  ;  bishop  of  Durham, 
1530  ;  confined  to  his  house,  1550,  deprived  1553,  restored  on  Mary's  accession  the  same  year  ; 
deprived  again,  1559.    For  Tyndale's  own  version  of  his  relations  with  Tunstall,  see  No.  V. 

3  Sir  Henry  Guildford  (1489-1532),  Master  of  the  Horse  and  Comptroller  of  the  King's 
Household. 

4  A  wrong  reference,  1076  being  the  page  of  the  present  text.  '  The  trouble  of  Humfrey 
Mummuth,  Alderman  of  London,'  is  told  on  p.  997.  His  story  begins  :  '  Maister  Humfrey 
Mummuth  was  a  right  godly  and  sincere  Alderman  of  London,  who  in  the  dayes  of  Cardinall 
Woolsey,  was  troubled  and  put  in  the  Tower,  for  the  Gospell  of  Christ,  and  for  mainteyning  them 
that  fauoured  the  same.  Stokesley  then  Bishop  of  London,  ministred  Articles  unto  him,  to  the 
number  of  xxiiij,  as  for  adhereing  to  Luther  and  his  opinions  :  for  hauing  and  reading  heretical 
bookes  and  treatises,  for  geuing  exhibition  [i.e.  maintenance]  to  William  Tindall,  Roy,  and  such 
other,  for  helping  them  ouer  the  sea  to  Luther,  for  ministring  priuie  helpe  to  translate,  as  well 
tin  Testament,  as  other  bookes  into  English,  for  eating  flesh  in  Lent  [&c]  .  .  .  He  being  of  these 
articles  examined,  and  cast  in  the  Tower  at  last  was  compelled  to  make  his  sute  or  purgation, 
writing  to  the  foresaid  Cardinall,  then  Lord  Chauncelor,  and  the  whole  Counsayle  out  of  the 
Tower.  In  the  contents  whereof  he  answered  to  the  criminous  accusation  of  them  which  charged 
him  with  certayne  bookes,  receyued  from  beyond  the  sea  :  Also  for  his  acquaintance  wyth 
M.  Tindall.  Whereunto  he  sayde,  th.it  tie  denied  not,  but  that  foure  yeares  then  past,  he 
had  heard  the  said  Linda]  preach  t\\<>  01  three  sermons  at  S.  Dunstons  in  the  west,  and  after- 
ward meeting  with  the  said   Tindall,   had   certaine  communication   with   hym   concerning   his 


Tyndale's  Translations. 


45 


and  departed  into  Germanie.  Where  the  good  man  being  inflamed  with  a  tender  care 
and  zeale  of  his  countrey,  refused  no  trauell  nor  diligence  howe  by  all  meanes  possible, 
'  to  reduce  his  brethren  and  countreymen  of  England  to  the  same  tast  and  vnderstand- 
yng  of  Gods  holy  word  and  veritie.  which  the  Lord  had  endued  him  withal. 

\Yhereupon  he  considering  in  his  minde,  and  partely  also  conferring  with  Iohn 
Frith,5  thought  wyth  him  selfe  no  way  more  to  conduce  therunto,  then  if  the  Scrip- 
ture were  turned  into  the  vulgar  speach,  that  the  poore  people  might  also  reade  and 
see  the  simple  plaine  woord  of  God.  For  first  hee  wisely  casting  in  hys  minde, 
perceiued  by  experience,  how  that  it  was  not  possible  to  stablish  the  lay  people  in 
any  truth,  except  the  Scripture  were  so  plainly  layde  before  theyr  eyes  in  theyr 
mother  tongue,  that  they  myght  see  the  processe,  order,  and  meaning  of  the  text : 
For  els  what  so  euer  truth  shuld  be  taught  them,  these  enemies  of  the  truth  would 
quenche  it  againe,  either  wyth  apparant  reasons  of  Sophistrie,  and  traditions  of  their 
own  making,  founded  without  all  ground  of  Scripture  :  either  els  iuggling  with  the 
text,  expounding  it  in  such  a  sense,  as  impossible  it  were  to  gather  of  the  text,  if  the 
right  processe,  order,  and  meaning  thereof  were  seene  .  .  . 

For  these  and  such  other  considerations,  this  good  man  was  moued  (and  no  doubt 
styrred  vp  of  God)  to  translate  the  Scripture  into  his  mother  tongue,  for  the  publicke 
vtility  and  profit  of  the  simple  vulgar  people  of  the  country:  first,  setting  in  hand 
with  the  newe  Testament,  whiche  he  first  translated  aboute  the  yeare  of  our  Lord 
1527.6  After  that  he  tooke  in  hand  to  translate  the  olde  Testament,  finishing  the 
fiue  bookes  of  Moyses,  with  sondry  most  learned  and  godly  prologues  prefixed  before 
euery  one,  most  worthy  to  be  read  and  read  againe  of  all  good  Christians  :  as 
the  lyke  also  he  did  vpon  the  new  Testament. 

Hee  wrote  also  diuers  other  woorkes  vnder  sundry  titles,  among  the  which  is  that 

.  most  worthy  monument  of  his,  intituled  :   The  obedience  of  a  Christian  man  :   wherin 

'  with  singulare  dexteritie  he  instructeth  all  men  in  the  office  and  duetie  of  Christian 

.  obedience,  wyth  diuers  other  treatises  :    as  The  wicked  Mammon  :    The  practise  of 

\  Prelates,  wyth  expositions  vppon  certaine  partes  of  the  Scripture,  and  other  Bookes 

also  aunswearing  to  Syr  Thorn.  More  and  other  aduersaries  of  the  truthe,  no  lesse 

delectable,  then  also  most  fruitfull  to  be  read,  which  partly  before  beyng  unknowen 

vnto  many,  partly  also  being  almost  abolished  and  worne  out  by  time,  the  Printe  ■ 

heereof  (good  Reader)  for  consenting  and  restoring  such  singulare  treasures,  hath 

collected  and  set  foorth  in  Print  the  same  in  one  generall  volume,7  all  and  whole 

together,  as  also  the  woorkes  of  John  Frith,  Barnes,  and  other,  as  are  to  be  seene 

most  special  and  profitable  for  thy  reading. 

These  bookes  of  W.  Tyndal  being  compiled,  published  and  sent  ouer  into  England, 
it  cannot  be  spoken  what  a  dore  of  light  they  opened  to  the  eies  of  the  whole 
English  nation,  which  before  were  many  yeres  shut  vp  in  darkenesse. 

At  his  first  departing  out  of  the  realme,  he  toke  his  iorny  into  the  further  parts 
of  Germany,  as  into  Saxony,  where  he  had  conference  with  Luther  and  other  learned 
men  in  those  quarters.  Where,  after  that  he  had  continued  a  certen  season,  he 
came  down  from  thence  into  the  netherlands,  &  had  his  most  abiding  in  the  town 
of  Antwerp,  vntil  the  time  of  hys  apprehension  :  wherof  more  shalbe  said  god 
willing  hereafter  .  .  . 

These  godly  bookes  of  Tindall,  and  specially  the  newe  Testament  of  his  trans- 
lation, after  that  they  began  to  come  into  mens  handes,  and  to  spread  abroad,  as 

• 
Huing,  who  then  told  him  that  he  had  none  at  all,  but  trusted  to  be  in  the  Bishop  of  London 
I  his  seruice  :  for  then  he  laboured  to  be  his  chaplayne.  But  being  refused  of  the  Bishop,  so 
came  agayne  to  the  sayd  Mummuth  this  examinate,  and  besought  him  to  helpe  hym.  Who  the 
same  tyme  tooke  hym  into  hys  house  for  halfe  a  yeare,  where  the  said  Tindall  liued  (as  he  sayd) 
like  a  good  priest,  studieng  both  night  &  day.  He  would  eat  but  sodden  meate,  by  his  good 
will,  nor  drink  but  small  single  beere.  He  was  neuer  seene  in  that  house  to  weare  lynnen 
about  him,  al  the  space  of  his  beyng  there.  Whereupon  the  sayd  Mummuth  had  the  better  liking 
of  hym,  so  that  he  promised  him  ten  pound  (as  he  then  sayd)  for  his  father  and  mothers  soules, 
and  all  Christen  soules,  which  money  afterward  he  sent  him  ouer  to  Hamborow,  according  to  his 
promise.     And  yet  not  to  him  alone  he  gaue  this  exhibition,'  &c. 

s  John  Frith  (1503-33),  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  junior  canon  of  Wolsey's  College, 
Oxford,  imprisoned  there  in  1528  for  helping  to  circulate  Tyndale's  Testament,  on  his  release 
went  to  Marburg  ;  returning  to  England,  was  imprisoned  (1532)  and  burnt. 

6  Fox's  mistake  for  1525. 

'  '  The  whole  workes  of  William  Tyndall,  John  Frith  and  Doct.  Barnes,'  edited  with  bio- 
1  graphical  introductions  by  Fox  and  printed  by  John  Day,  1573. 


46  Tyndale's  Translations. 

they  wroughte,  great  and  singuler  prolite  to  the  godly  :  so  the  vngodly  enuying 
and  disdaining  that  the  people  should  be  any  thing  wiser  then  they,  and  againe 
fearing  least  by  the  shining  beames  of  truth,  their  false  hypocrisie  &  workes  of 
darkenesse  should  be  discerned :  began  to  stirre  with  no  small  ado,  like  as  at  the 
birth  of  Christ,  Herode  &  al  Ierusalem  was  troubled  with  him.  But  especially  Sathan 
the  prince  of  darkenes,  maligning  the  happy  course  and  successe  of  the  Gospel,  set 
to  his  might  also,  how  to  empeache  and  hinder  the  blessed  trauailes  of  that  man  : 
as  by  this,  and  also  by  sondry  other  wayes  may  appeare.  For  at  what  time  Tindall 
had  translated  the  fift  booke  of  Moises  called  Deuteronomium,  minding  to  Printe  the 
same  at  Hamborough,  hee  sailed  thereward  :  where  by  the  way  vpon  the  coast 
of  Holland,  he  suffred  shipwracke,  by  the  which  he  loste  all  his  bookes,  wrytings 
and  copies,  and  so  was  compelled  to  begin  al  againe  a  new,  to  his  hinderance  and 
doubling  of  his  labors.  Thus  hauing  lost  by  that  ship,  both  money,  his  copies  and 
time,  he  came  in  an  other  ship  to  Hamborough,  where  at  his  appoyntment  M.  Couer- 
dale  taried  for  him,  and  helped  hym  in  the  translating  the  whole  5  bookes  of  Moises, 
from  Easter  till  December,  in  the  house  of  a  worshipfull  widowe,  Maistres  Margaret  ■ 
van  Emmerson.  Anno  1529.  a  greate  sweating  sicknesse  being  the  same  time  in  the 
Towne.  So  hauing  dispatched  his  businesse  at  Hamborough,  he  returned  afterward  ! 
to  Antwerpe  againe.8 

V.     TYNDALE'S  STORY  OF  HIS  TRANSLATION. 

This  forms  the  preface  to  Tyndale's  translation  of  Genesis  in  his  version  of  the  Pentateuch 
printed  in  1530.1 

W.  T.     To  the  Reader. 

When  I  had  translated  the  newe  testament,  I  added  a  pistle  vnto  the  latter  ende,2 
In  which  I  desyred  them  that  were  learned  to  amend  [it]  if  ought  were  founde  amysse. 
But  oure  malicious  and  wylye  hypocrytes  which  are  so  stubburne  and  hard  herted 
in  their  weked  abhominacions  that  it  is  not  possible  for  them  to  amend  any  thinge 
at  all  (as  we  see  by  dayly  experience  when  their  both  lyvinges  and  doinges  are 
rebuked  with  the  trouth)  saye,  some  of  them  that  it  is  impossible  to  translate  the 
scripture  in  to  English,  some  that  it  is  not  lawfull  for  the  laye  people  to  have  it  in 
their  mother  tonge,  some  that  it  wold  make  them  all  heretykes,  as  it  wold  no  doute 
from  many  thinges  which  they  of  longe  tyme  haue  falsely  taught,  and  that  is  the 
whole  cause  wherfore  they  forbyd  it,  though  they  other  clokes  pretende.  And  some 
or  rather  every  one,  saye  that  it  wold  make  them  ryse  ageynst  the  kinge,  whom 
they  them  selves  (vnto  their  damnatyon)  never  yet  obeyed.  And  leste  the 
temporall  rulars  shuld  see  their  falsehod,  if  the  scripture  cam  to  light,  causeth  them 
so  to  lye. 

And  as  for  my  translation  in  which  they  afferme  vnto  the  laye  people  (as  I  haue 
hearde  saye)3  to  be  I  wotte  not  how  many  thousande  heresyes,  so  that  it  can  not 
be  mended  or  correcte,  they  haue  yet  taken  so  greate  payne  to  examyne  it,  and  to 
compare  it  vnto  that  they  wold  fayne  haue  it  and  to  their  awne  imaginations  and 
iugglinge  termes,  and  to  haue  some  what  to  rayle  at,  and  vnder  that  cloke  to 
blaspheme  the  treuth,  that  they  myght  with  as  little  laboure  (as  I  suppose)  haue 
translated  the  moste  parte  of  the  bible.  For  they  which  in  tymes  paste  were  wont 
to  loke  on  no  more  scripture  then  they  founde  in  their  duns  4  or  soch  like  develysh 
doctryne,  haue  yet  now  so  narowlye  loked  on  my  translatyon,  that  there  is  not 
so  much  as  one  I  therin  if  it  lacke  a  tytle  over  his  tied,  but  they  haue  noted  it, 

"  This  paragraph  first  appeared  in  Fox's  second  edition  (1570).  It  is  so  precise  in  its  state- 
in.  m  s  that  Fox  would  seem  to  have  written  it  from  special  information.  It  agrees  with  what  we 
know  of  the  state  of  affairs  at  Antwerp,  where  Wolsey's  agent,  Hackett  (see  No.  XVI  A-E.)  made 
such  a  hue  and  crv  after  English-Lutheran  books  in  December,  1526,  and  January,  1527,  that 
it  may  well  have  seemed  advisable  to  move  a  press  and  printing  materials  elsewhere.  The 
Pentateuch  and  other  books  of  this  period  profess  to  have  been  printed  at '  Malborow  [Marburg] 
in  the  land  of  Hesse  '  by  Hans  Lufft,  Luther's  printer. 

V.  '  This  piece  is  given  in  this  place  because  its  interest  lies  chiefly  in  its  narrative  of  Tyndale's 
1  \|i-  in  in  1  in  London  when  he  desired  to  translate  the  New  Testament  there.  In  this  and  the 
other  English  tracts  printed  abroad  it  should  be  noted  that  in  the  middle  of  words  11  an  1  v 
are  used  indifferently. 

:  The  Epilogue  to  the  Worms  octavo,  printed  in  full  below.     See  Xo.  X. 

3  The  text  omits  the  second  bracket.  '  i.e.  the  commentaries  of  Duns  Scotus. 


and  nombre  it  vnto  the  ignorant  people  for  an  heresy.  Fynallye  in  this  they  be  all 
agreed,  to  dryve  you  from  the  knowlege  of  the  scripture,  and  that  ye  shall  not  haue 
the  texte  therof  in  the  mother  tonge,  and  to  kepe  the  world  styll  in  darkenesse, 
to  thentent  they  might  sitt  in  the  consciences  of  the  people,  thorow  vayne  super- 
stition and  false  doctrine,  to  satisfye  their  fylthy  lustes  their  proude  ambition,  and 
vnsatiable  couetuousnes,  and  to  exalte  their  awne  honoure  aboue  kinge  &  emperoure, 
i  yee  and  aboue  god  him  silfe. 

A  thousand  bokes  had  they  lever  to  be  put  forth  agenste  their  abhominable 
doynges  and  doctrine,  then  that  the  scripture  shulde  come  to  light.  For  as  longe 
as  they  may  kepe  that  doune,  they  will  so  darken  the  ryght  way  with  the  miste 
of  their  sophistrye,  and  so  tangle  them  that  ether  rebuke  or  despyse  their  abhomina- 
tions  with  argumentes  of  philosophye  and  with  wordly 5  symylitudes  and  apparent 
reasons  of  naturall  wisdom.  And  with  wrestinge  the  scripture  vnto  their  awne 
purpose  clene  contrarye  vnto  the  processe,  order  and  meaninge  of  the  texte,  and  so 
delude  them  in  descantynge  vppon  it  with  alligoryes,  and  amase  them  expoundinge 
it  in  manye  senses 6  before  the  vnlerned  laye  people  (when  it  hath  but  one  symple 
litterall  sense  whose  light  the  owles  can  not  abyde)  that  though  thou  feale  in  thyne 
harte  and  arte  sure  how  that  all  is  false  that  they  save,  yet  coudeste  thou  not  solve 
their  sotle  rydles. 

Which  thinge  onlye  moved  me  to  translate  the  new  testament.  Because  I  had 
perceaved  by  experyence,  how  that  it  was  impossible  to  stablysh  the  laye  people 
in  any  truth,  excepte  the  scripture  were  playnly  layde  before  their  eyes  in  their 
mother  tonge,  that  they  might  se  the  processe,  ordre  and  meaninge  of  the  texte  : 
for  els  what  so  ever  truth  is  taught  them,  these  ennymyes  of  all  truth  qwench  it 
ageyne,  partly  with  the  smoke  of  their  bottomlesse  pytte  wherof  thou  readest  apoca- 
lipsis  ix.  that  is,  with  apparent  reasons  of  sophistrye  and  traditions  of  their  awne 
makynge,  founded  with  out  grounde  of  scripture,  and  partely  in  iugglinge  with  the 
texte,  expoundinge  it  in  soch  a  sense  as  is  impossible  to  gether  of  the  texte,  if  thou 
see  the  processe  ordre  and  meaninge  thereof. 

And  even  in  the  bisshope  of  londons  house  I  entended  to  have  done  it.  For  when 
I  was  so  turmoyled  in  the  contre  where  I  was  that  I  coude  no  lenger  there  dwell 
(the  processe  wherof  were  to  longe  here  to  reherce)  I  this  wyse  thought  in  my 
silfe,  this  I  suffre  because  the  prestes  of  the  contre  be  vnlerned,  as  god  it  knoweth 
there  are  a  full  ignorant  sorte  which  haue  sene  no  more  latyn  then  that  they  read 
in  their  portesses7  and  missales  which  yet  many  of  them  can  scacely  read  (excepte  it 
be  Albertus 8  de  secretis  mulierum  in  which  yet,  though  they  be  neuer  so  soryly 
lerned,  they  pore  day  and  night  and  make  notes  therin  and  all  to  teach  the  mydwyves 
as  they  say,  and  linwood  9  a  boke  of  constitutions  to  gether  tithes,  mortuaryes 10, 
offeringes,  customs,  and  other  pillage,  which  they  calle,  not  theirs,  but  godes  parte 
and  the  deuty  of  holye  chirch,  to  discharge  their  consciences  with  all  :  for  they  are 
bound  that  they  shall  not  dimynysh,  but  encreace  all  thinge  vnto  the  vttmost  of 
their  powers)  and  therfore  (because  they  are  thus  vnlerned  thought  I)  when  they 
come  to  gedder  to  the  alehouse,  which  is  their  preachinge  place,  they  afferme  that 
my  sainges  are  heresy.  And  besydes  that  they  adde  to  of  thir  awne  heddes  which 
I  never  spake,  as  the  maner  is  to  prolonge  the  tale  to  shorte  the  tyme  with  all,  and 
accuse  me  secretly  to  the  chauncelare u  and  other  the  bishopes  officers,  And  in 
deade  when  I  cam  before  the  chauncelare,  he  thretened  me  grevously,  and  revyled 
me  and  rated  me  as  though  I  had  bene  a  dogge,  and  layd  to  my  charge  wherof 
there  coude  be  none  accuser  brought  forth  (as  their  maner  is  not  to  bringe  forth  the 
accuser)  and  yet  all  the  prestes  of  the  contre  were  that  same  day  there.  As  I  this 
thought  the  bishope  of  London  came  to  my  remembrance  whome  Erasmus  (whose 
tonge  maketh  of  litle  gnattes  greate  elephantes  and  lifteth  vpp  above  the  starres 
whosoever  geveth  him  a  litle  exhibition)  prayseth  excedingly  amonge  other  in  his 
annotatyons  on  the  new  testament  for  his  great  learninge.  Then  thought  I,  if  I  might 
come  to  this  mannes  service,  I  were  happye.  And  so  I  gate  me  to  london,  and  thorow 
the  accoyntaunce  of  my  master  came  to  sir  harry  gilford12  the  kinges  graces  coun- 

'  Worldly,  the  first  1  in  which  was  often  dropped. 

8  The  '  sensus  mysticus  '  was  a  distinct  department  of  Biblical  exposition. 
'  Breviaries.  8  i.  e.  Albertus  Magnus. 

9  William  Lyndewode's  Proainciale,  a  digest  of  English  canon  law  written  in  1433.  See 
above,  No.  I.  10  Customary  gifts  claimed  from  the  heirs  of  dead  parishioners. 

11  i.  e.  the  Bishop's  Chancellor  of  the  diocese.  "  See  note  3  to  No.  IV. 


4 8  Tyndale's  Story  of  his  Translation. 


troller,  and  brought  him  an  oration  of  Isocrates  which  I  had  translated  out  of  greke 
in  to  English,  and  desyred  him  to  speake  vnto  my  lorde  of  london  for  me,  which  he 
also  did  as  he  shewed  me,  and  willed  me  to  write  a  pistle  to  my  lorde,  and  to  goo  to 
him  my  silf  which  I  also  did,  and  delivered  my  pistle  to  a  servant  of  his  awne,  one 
Wyllyam  hebilthwayte,  a  man  of  myne  old  accoyntaunce.  But  god  which  knoweth 
what  is  within  hypocrites,  sawe  that  I  was  begyled,  and  that  that  councell  was  not 
the  nexte  way  vnto  my  purpose.  And  therfore  he  gate  me  no  favoure  in  my  lordes 
sight. 

\Yherevppon  my  lorde  answered  me,  his  house  was  full,  he  had  mo  then  he  coude 
well  finde,  and  advised  me  to  seke  in  london,  wher  he  sayd  I  coude  not  lacke  a  service. 
And  so  in  london  I  abode  almoste  an  yere,  and  marked  the  course  of  the  worlde. 
and  herde  oure  pratars,  I  wold  say  oure  preachers  how  they  bosted  them  selves  and 
their  hye  authorite,  and  beheld  the  pompe  of  oure  prelates  and  how  besyed  thev 
were  as  they  yet  are,  to  set  peace  and  vnite  in  the  worlde  (though  it  be  not  possible  for 
them  that  walke  in  darkenesse  to  continue  longe  in  peace,  for  they  can  not  but  ether 
stomble  or  dash  them  selves  at  one  thinge  or  another  that  shall  clene  vnquyet  all 
togedder)  and  sawe  thinges  wherof  I  deferre  to  speake  at  this  tyme,  and  vnderstode 
at  the  laste  not  only  that  there  was  no  rowme  in  my  lorde  of  londons  palace  to  translate 
the  new  testament,  but  also  that  there  was  no  place  to  do  it  in  all  englonde,  as 
experience  doth  now  openly  declare. 

Vnder  what  maner  therfore  shuld  I  now  submitte  this  boke  to  be  corrected  and 
amended  of  them,  which  can  suffer  nothinge  to  be  well  ?  Or  what  protestacyon  shuld 
I  make  in  soch  a  matter  vnto  oure  prelates  those  stubburne  Nimrothes  which  so 
mightely  fight  agenste  god  and  resiste  his  holy  spirite,  enforceynge  with  all  crafte 
and  sotelte  to  qwench  the  light  of  the  everlastinge  testament,  promvses,  and 
apoyntemente  made  betwene  god  and  vs  :  and  heapinge  the  firce  wrath  of  god 
vppon  all  princes  and  rulars,  mockinge  them  with  false  fayned  names  of  hypocrvse, 
and  servinge  their  lustes  at  all  poyntes,  and  dispensinge  with  them  even  of  the  very 
lawes  of  god,  of  which  Christe  him  silf  testifieth.  Mathew  v.  that  not  so  moch  as  one 
tittle  therof  maye  perish  or  be  broken.  And  of  which  the  prophete  sayth  Psalme 
cxviij.  Thou  hast  commaunded  thy  lawes  to  be  kepte  meod13,  that  is  in  hebrew 
exceedingly,  with  all  diligence,  mighte  and  power,  and  haue  made  them  so  mad  with 
their  iugglinge  charmes  and  crafty  persuasions  that  they  thinke  it  full  satisfaction  for 
all  their  weked  lyvinge,  to  torment  soch  as  tell  them  trouth,  and  to  borne  the  worde  of 
their  soules  helth  and  sle  whosoever  beleve  theron. 

Not  withstondinge  yet  I  submytte  this  boke  and  all  other  that  I  have  other 
made  or  translated,  or  shall  in  tyme  to  come  (if  it  be  goddes  will  that  I  shall  further 
laboure  in  his  hervest)  vnto  all  them  that  submytte  themselues  vnto  the  worde 
of  god,  to  be  corrected  of  them,  yee  and  moreover  to  be  disalowed  &  also  burnte, 
if  it  seme  worthy  when  they  have  examyned  it  wyth  the  hebrae,  so  that  thev  first 
put  forth  of  their  awne  translatinge  a  nother  that  is  more  correcte. 

VI.     THE  PRINTING  OF  THE  FIRST  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

From  the  '  Commentaria  Ioannis  Cochlaei,  de  Actis  et  Scriptis  Martini  Lutheri  Saxonis  chrono- 
graphice  ex  ordine  ab  anno  Domini  15 17  usque  ad  annum  1546  inclusiue,  fideliter  conscripta. 
Apud  S.  Victorem  prope  Mognntiam,  ex  officina  Francisci  Bchem  typographi.  1549,  pp.  1  }2-i  35.'  ' 

.  .  .  Sed  multo  adhuc  impudentiori  audacia  Lutherus  aggressus  est  Regem  Angliae. 
Henricum  VIII.  Quern  publice  prius  tot  probris  kedoriis.  sannis  atque  calumniis. 
ad  populos  &  Nationes  traduxerat.  Ipse  quidem  affirmabat  se  illectum  fuisse  a  Rege 
Daniae  Christierno  (qui  e  regnis  suis  profugus,  exul,  per  Germaniam  uagabatur)  ut 
ad  ipsum  scriberet  Regem  Angliae.  Verum  Duo  Angli  Apostatae,  qui  aliquandiu 
fuerant  Vuittenbergae,  non  solum  quaerebant  subuertere  Mercatores  suos,  qui  eos 
occulte  in  exilio  fouebant  &  alebant :  Verum  etiam  cunctos  Angliae  populos.  uolente 
nolente  Rege,  breui  per  nouum  Lutheri  Testamentum,  quod  in  Anglicanam  traduxerant 

13  "UNO 

VI.  l  Johann  Dobneck,  or  as  he  called  himself,  Cochlaeus.  born  in  1470,  proved  himself  next  to 
Eck  the  keenest  and  most  energetic  controversialist  on  the  Catholic  side.  He  had  already,  in  1533 
and  1538,  given  two  brief  accounts  of  his  exploit  111  routing  I 'yndale  out  of  Cologne,  aiid  now  in 
the  last  year  of  his  life  narrated  it  in  full.  He  -tails  his  story  with  Luther's  unlucky  second 
letter  to  Henry  VIII,  in  which  he  tried  to  make  his  peace  for  his  previous  attacks. 


The  Printing  of  the  First  New  Testaments.        49 


linguam,  Lutheranos  fore  sperabant.  Venerant  iam  Coloniam  Agrippinam,  ui  Testa- 
mentum  sic  traductum,  per  Typographos  in  multa  Milia  multiplicatum,  occulte  sub 
aliis  mercibus  deueherent  inde  in  Angliam.  Tanta  enim  eis  erat  rei  bene  gerendae 
fiducia,  ut  primo  aggressu  peterent  aTypographis,  Sex  Milia  sub  praelum  dari.  Illi  autem 
subuerentes,  ne  grauissimo  afncerentur  damno,  si  quid  aduersi  accideret,  tantum  Tria 
Milia  sub  praelum  miserunt :  Quae  si  fceliciter  uenderentur,  facile  possent  imprimi 
denuo.  Iam  literas  ad  Sanctos,  qui  sunt  in  Anglia,  praemiserat  Pomeranus,2  &  ad 
Regem  quoque  scripserat  ipse  Lutherus.  Cunque  nouum  Testamentum  mox  subse- 
quuturum  crederetur,  tanta  ex  ea  spe  laetitia  Lutheranos  inuasit  ac  uanas  fiduciae 
uento  inflauit,  ut  gaudio  distenti,  ante  diem  ruperint  secretum  uanis  iactationibus. 
Exulabat  eo  tempore  Coloniae  Ioannes  Cochlaeus,  Decanus  Ecclesiae  B.  Virginis  Franco- 
fordiensis,  Qui  per  hospitem  suum,  Georgium  Lauer,  Canonicum  ad  Apostolos, 
Abbati  Tuitiensi  redditus  familiariter  notus,  ubi  audisset  opera  quaedam  Ruperti 
Tuitiensis  quondam  Abbatis,  mittenda  esse  Nurenbergam,  ut  a  Lutheranis  aederentur 
in  publicum  :  ccepit  summo  studio  earn  rem  &  dissuadere  &  impedire.  Nam  Lutherani 
in  eum  usque  diem,  cum  omnes  Bibliothecas  antiquas  diligentissime  exquisiuissent 
ac  discussissent,  nullum  prorsus  autorem  ex  cunctis  tot  saeculorum  Doctoribus  Ecclesiae 
inuenire  potuerunt,  qui  Lutheri  dogmata  comprobasset.  Inuentum  tandem  illius 
Ruperti,  qui  ante  400.  annos  uixerat,  opusculum,  cui  titulus  erat,  De  Victoria  uerbi 
Dei,  mox  Nurenbergae  a  Lutheranis  euulgatum  est.  Quod  suo  titulo  ita  mox  placuit 
omnibus  Lutheranis,  ut  nihil  uideretur  eo  autore  desiderabilius.  Interim  ex  Tritemio3 
intelligebant,  ilium  complura  scripsisse  opuscula,  sed  duo  tantum  paruula  inuenerant. 
Quorum  unum  de  potentia,  alterum  de  uoluntate  Dei  inscriptum  erat.  In  eorum 
aeditione  multa  Lutherice  apposuerat  Osiander,4  uxoratus  presbyter  &  praedicator, 
quibus  pium  autorem  impiae  sectae  patronum  facere  tentabat.  Et  iam  dudum  egerant 
cum  ipso  Abbate  Tuitiensi :  ut  reliqua  Ruperti  Opera  Nurenbergam  excudenda, 
transmitteret.  Me  uero,  ut  a  Cochlaeo  audiuit,  quantum  periculi  foret  ea  in  re,  si 
pium  autorem  traderet  in  manus  impiorum,  qui  eum  non  solum  impiis  praefationibus 
&  annotationibus  fcede  contaminaturi  essent :  Verum  etiam  integros  &  sanos  illius 
sensus  deprauaturi,  ex  Catholico  antiquo  facturi  essent  haereticum  nouum,  qui 
uideretur  cuncta  Lutheri  dogmata  ante  annos  400.  approbasse.  Abbas  igitur  ille,  uir 
bonus,  mutata  sententia,  uolumina  iam  in  grandem  fascem  compacta,  uelut  Nuren- 
bergam transmittenda,  apud  se  retinuit.  In  quo  sane  fasce  erant  xiiii.  libri  in 
Euangelium  Ioannis,  XII.  libri  in  Apocalypsim  eiusdem,  &  xn.  libri,  de  Diuinis 
Officijs.  Cum  autem  Monachi  quieturi  non  essent,  nisi  aederentur  opera  ilia :  Cochlaeus 
Petro  Quentellio,5  &  Arnoldo  Berckmanno  sedulo  suasit,  ut  communibus  inter  se 
impensis  &  lucris  ea  opera  susciperent  aedenda.  Persuadere  tamen  non  potuit,  donee 
tandem  omnem  suam  operam  ad  aeditionem  illam  eis  pollicitus  esset.  Cunque  aeditio 
ilia  satis  quaestuosa  eis  existeret,  non  egebant  amplius  impulsore  Cochlaeo,  sed  ipsimet 
ultro  plura  illius  opuscula  desiderabant :  rogantes  nunc  Abbatem,  nunc  Cochlaeum,  ut 
undecunque  plura  conquirerent.  Abbas  itaque  ex  uetustis  S.  Benedicti  Monasteriis 
perquisiuit  xxxn.libros  in  xn.prophetas  minores,  &  vn.libros  in  Canticum  Canticorum. 
Cochlaeus  uero  inuenit  Colonias  in  Bibliotheca  Maioris  Ecclesiae  ix.  libros,  De  glorifica- 
tione  Trinitatis,  &  processione  Spiritus  sancti.  Et  in  scholis  Artium  grande  uolumen, 
quod  de  operibus  Trinitatis  inscriptum,  xlii.  complectebatur  libros.  E  quibus  in 
Genesim  erant  ix.  In  Exodum  nil.  &c.  Cunque  sciret  Rupertum  olim  Leodij  ad 
S.  Laurentium  fuisse  Monachum,  scripsit  Theodorico  Hezio,  Canonico  Leodiensi,  quern 
Romae  post  obitum  Adriani  VI.  (cuius  ille  a  Secretis  intimus  extiterat)  familiarius 
cognouerat,  obsecrans,  ut  is  in  eo  Monasterio  perquireret,  quidnam  ex  Ruperti  libris 
extaret.  Ille  ergo  repperit  maxime  desideratum  opus,  xm.  libros  in  Matthaeum,  de 
Gloria  &  honore  filij  hominis.  Verum  transmittere  Coloniam  non  potuit  Archetypum, 
nisi  ipse  cum  duobus  alijs  Canonicis,  pro  restituendo  exemplari,  cuncta  bona  sua  in 
hypothecam  Monachis  obligarent.  Ea  igitur  uolumina  uniuersa  Cochlaeus,  Moguntiam 
euocatus,  secum  detulit.  atque  ibi  residens,  ad  aeditionem  praeparauit,  Coloniamque 
aedenda  remisit.  Hinc  Typographis  Coloniensibus  notior  ac  familiarior  factus,audiuit 
I  eos  aliquando  inter  pocula  fiducialiter  iactitare,  Velint  Nolint  Rex  &  Cardinalis  Angliae, 

2  Johann  Bugenhagen,  of  Pomerania,  Protestant  theologian,  1484-1558. 

3  i.  e.  from  the  Catalogus  Illustrium  Virorum  of  Johann  Tritheim,  abbot  of  the  Benedictine 
1  monastery  at  Spanheim,  which  enumerates  the  writings  of  many  early  German  authors. 

'  Andreas  Osiander,  Protestant  theologian,  1498-1552. 

1  Peter  Quentell  was  a  prominent  printer  at  Cologne,  and  Arnold   Birckmann  a  bookseller 
largely  engaged  in  supplying  books  to  the  English  market. 


50        The  Printing  of  the  First  New  Testaments. 


totam  Angliam  breui  fore  Lutheranam.  Audiuit  item,  duos  ibi  latitare  Anglos,  eruditos 
linguarumque  peritos  et  disertos,  quos  tamen  uidere  aut  alloqui  nunquam  potuit.  Vo- 
catis  itaque  in  hospitium  suum  quibusdam  Typographis,  postea  quam  mero  incaluis- 
sent,  unus  eorum  in  secretiori  colloquio  reuelauit  illi  arcanum,  quo  ad  Lutheri  partes 
trahenda  esset  Anglia.  Nempe  uersari  sub  praelo  Tria  Milia  Exemplarium  Noui 
Testamenti  Lutherani,  in  Anglicanam  linguam  translati,  ac  processum  esse  iam  usque 
ad  literam  Alphabeti  K.  in  ordine  Cjuaternionum.  Impensas  abunde  suppeti  a  Mer- 
catoribus  Anglicis,  qui  opus  excusum  clam  inuecturi  per  totam  Angliam  latenter 
dispergere  uellent,  antequam  Rex  aut  Cardinalis  rescire  aut  prohibere  possit.  Cochlaeus 
intra  se  metu  &  admiratione  uarie  affectus,  foris  mirabundus  mcerorem  dissimulabat. 
Altero  autem  die,  periculi  magnitudinem  tristis  secum  expendens,  cogitabat,  quo  nam 
pacto  possit  commode  pessimis  illis  conatibus  obsistere.  Abijt  igitur  clam  ad  Her- 
mannum  Rinck,  Patricium  Coloniensem,  ac  Militem  Auratum,  qui  &  Caesari  &  Regi 
Angliae  familiaris  erat  &  Consiliarius,  eique  rem  omnem,  ut  acceperat  uini  beneficio, 
indicauit.  Ille,  ut  certius  omnia  constarent,  alium  misit  exploratum  in  earn  domum, 
ubi  opus  excudebatur  iuxta  indicium  Cochlaei.  Cunque  ab  illo  accepisset  rem  ita 
habere,  &  ingentem  Papyri  copiam  ibi  existere  :  adijt  Senatum,  atque  effecit,  ut  Typo- 
graphis interdiceretur,  ne  ultra  progrederentur  in  eo  opere.  Duo  Apostatae  Angli, 
arreptis  secum  Quaternionibus  impressis,  aufugerunt,  nauigio  per  Rhenum  ascen- 
dentes  Vuormaciam,  ubi  plebs  pleno  furore  Lutherizabat,  ut  ibi  per  alium  Typographum 
coeptum  perficerent  opus.  Rincus  uero  &  Cochlaeus  de  his  mox  admonuerunt  Uteris 
suis  Regem,  Cardinalemque  &  Episcopum  Roffensem.6  ut  quamdiligentissime  prae- 
cauerent  in  omnibus  Angliae  portubus,  ne  merx  ilia  perniciosissima  inueheretur. 
Ferunt  Dominum  Cuthebertum  Tunstallum,  uirum  disertissimum,  Episcopum  tunc 
Londinensem,  nunc  Dunelmensem,  cum  adeptus  fuisset  unum  ex  illis  exemplaribus, 
in  maxima  concione  ad  populum  Londini  publice  affirmasse,  supra  duo  Milia  depraua- 
tionum  atque  peruersitatum  se  in  uno  opere  illo  depraehendisse.  Dum  hasc  agerentur, 
peruenit  tandem  in  manus  Regis  Angliae  epistola  Lutheri,7  quam  is  anno  superiore 
scripserat  Vuittenbergae,  prima  die  Septembris. 

Translation.8 

With  a  hardihood  even  still  more  impudent  Luther  approached  the  King  of 
England,  Henry  VIII,  whom  he  had  previously  traduced  in  public  before  peoples 
and  nations  with  so  many  slanders,  revilings,  gibes,  and  calumnies.  His  own  con- 
tention was  that  he  had  been  enticed  by  King  Christiern  of  Denmark  (who  was 
wandering  about  Germany  as  a  fugitive  exile  from  his  realm)  to  write  to  the  King  of 
England.  But  two  English  apostates  who  had  been  sometime  at  Wittenberg  were 
not  only  seeking  to  undo  their  own  merchants,  who  were  secretly  supporting  and 
maintaining  them  in  exile,  but  were  also  hoping  that  all  the  peoples  of  England, 
whether  the  King  liked  it  or  not,  would  shortly  become  Lutherans  by  means  of  the 
New  Testament  of  Luther  which  they  had  translated  into  English.  They  had  al- 
ready come  to  Cologne  that  thence  they  might  convey  to  England,  secretly,  under 
cover  of  other  goods,  the  Testament  so  translated  after  it  had  been  multiplied  by 
printers  into  many  thousands.  For  they  had  so  much  confidence  of  managing  the 
business  well  that  at  the  first  onset  they  asked  of  the  printers  that  six  thousand 
should  be  printed.  The  printers,  however,  fearing  a  very  heavy  loss  if  anything 
went  wrong,  sent  only  three  thousand  copies  to  press,  on  the  ground  that  if  these 
were  successfully  sold  they  could  easily  be  printed  afresh.  Already  Bugenhagen  had 
sent  forward  letters  addressed  'To  the  Saints  who  are  in  England',  and  Luther 
himself  had  also  written  to  the  King.  When  it  was  believed  that  the  New  Testa- 
ment would  quickly  follow,  so  great  joy  from  that  hope  seized  the  Lutherans  and 
inflated  them  with  vain  confidence,  that,  swollen  with  delight,  they  prematurely 
broke  their  secret  by  their  idle  boasts. 

At  that  time  Johann  Dobneck,  Dean  of  the  Church  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  at 
Frankfort,  was  living  in  exile  at  Cologne,  and  through  his  host,  Georg  Lauer,  Canon 
at  [the  church  of]  the  Apostles,  he  was  put  on  familiar  terms  with  the  Abbot  of  Deutz. 
On  hearing,  therefore,  that  certain  works  of  Rupert,  a  former  Abbot  of  Deutz.  were 

6  Bishop  Fisher. 

'  Epistola  Martini  Lutheri  ad  Henricum  viii  Anglia"  ac  Franciae  Regem,  et  in  qua  veniam  petit 
eorum  quae  prius  stultus  in  eundem  regem  emiderit. 

8   Partly  based  on  that  in  Anderson's  Annals  of  the  English  Bible. 


The  Printing  of  the  First  New  Testaments.        5  1 


to  be  sent  to  Nuremberg  for  publication  by  the  Lutherans  he  began  very  zealously 
to  dissuade  from  and  hinder  the  business.  For  down  to  that  time  the  Lutherans, 
although  they  had  most  diligently  searched  and  ransacked  all  the  old  libraries,  could 
find  not  a  single  author  of  all  the  Doctors  of  the  Church  for  so  many  centuries 
whom  they  could  quote  as  favouring  the  doctrines  of  Luther.  At  last  there  was 
discovered  a  little  book  of  this  Rupert,  who  had  lived  400  years  before,  with  the  title 
On  the  Victory  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  this  was  presently  published  by  the  Lutherans 
at  Wittenberg,  its  title  giving  all  the  Lutherans  so  much  pleasure  that  nothing 
could  seem  more  delightful  than  the  author.  Meanwhile  they  learnt  from  Tritheim 
that  he  had  written  many  small  works,  but  they  had  only  discovered  two  little 
ones,  of  which  one  was  entitled  On  the  Power,  the  other  On  the  Will  of  God.  In 
editing  these,  Osiander,  a  married  priest  and  preacher,  made  many  additions  in  the 
Lutheran  manner  in  the  endeavour  to  turn  the  pious  author  into  the  patron  of  an 
impious  sect.  They  had  now  for  some  time  been  treating  with  the  Abbot  of  Deutz 
to  send  the  rest  of  the  works  of  Rupert  to  Nuremberg  to  be  printed.  But  the  Abbot, 
as  soon  as  he  heard  from  Dobneck  what  danger  there  would  be  in  delivering  the 
pious  author  into  the  hands  of  impious  editors,  who  would  not  only  contaminate 
him  foully  with  impious  prefaces  and  notes,  but  would  corrupt  his  upright  and 
sound  opinions  and  out  of  an  ancient  Catholic  make  a  modern  heretic  who  should 
seem  to  have  approved  all  Luther's  doctrines  400  years  before, — the  Abbot,  I  say, 
good  man,  changed  his  mind  and  kept  in  his  own  custody  the  volumes  which  had  al- 
ready been  tied  up  in  a  bulky  parcel  to  be  sent  to  Nuremberg.  In  this  parcel  there 
were  fourteen  books  on  the  Gospel  of  S.  John,  twelve  books  on  the  Apocalypse,  and 
twelve  on  the  Divine  Offices.  When,  however,  the  monks  were  not  to  be  quieted 
without  these  works  being  published,  Dobneck  put  pressure  on  Peter  Quentell  and 
Arnold  Birckmann  to  undertake  their  publication  as  a  joint  venture.  But  he  could 
not  persuade  them  to  do  this,  until  he  had  finally  promised  to  give  the  edition  all  the 
help  in  his  power.  The  venture  proving  profitable  enough  the  publishers  no  longer 
needed  Dobneck's  incitement,  but  of  their  own  accord  began  to  look  out  for  more  of 
Rupert's  little  books,  asking  now  the  Abbot,  now  Dobneck,  to  hunt  out  more  from 
wherever  they  could.  The  Abbot  accordingly  searched  out  from  old  Benedictine 
monasteries  thirty-two  books  on  the  twelve  Minor  Prophets,  and  seven  on  the  Song 
of  Songs.  Dobneck  on  his  part  discovered  at  Cologne,  in  the  library  of  the  greater 
Church,  nine  books  on  the  Glorifying  of  the  Trinity  and  the  Procession  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  in  the  School  of  Arts  a  large  volume  entitled  On  the  Works  of  the  Trinity 
in  forty-two  books,  of  which  nine  were  on  Genesis,  four  on  Exodus,  &c.  And  when 
he  learnt  that  Rupert  had  been  formerly  a  monk  at  Liege  he  wrote  to  Dietrich 
Heze,  Canon  of  Liege,  whom  he  had  known  intimately  at  Rome  after  the  death  of 
Adrian  VI,  to  whom  he  had  been  a  privy  councillor,  and  besought  him  to  search  in 
that  monastery  for  any  books  of  Rupert's  that  could  be  found.  The  Canon  lighted 
upon  a  work  much  in  request,  the  thirteen  books  on  Matthew,  On  the  Glory  and 
Honour  of  the  Son  of  Man.  But  he  could  not  send  the  original  to  Cologne  until  he 
himself  and  two  other  canons  pawned  all  their  property  to  the  monks  as  a  pledge 
for  its  return.  All  these  volumes,  therefore,  Dobneck,  when  he  was  called  away  to 
Mainz,  took  with  him,  and  while  he  was  living  there  prepared  them  for  publication 
and  sent  them  to  Cologne  to  be  published. 

By  all  this  business  Dobneck  had  become  pretty  intimate  and  familiar  with  the 
Cologne  printers,  when  one  day  he  heard  them  boasting  confidently  over  their  wine 
that  whether  the  King  and  Cardinal  of  England  liked  it  or  no,  all  England  would  soon 
be  Lutheran.  He  heard  also  that  there  were  there  in  hiding  two  Englishmen,  learned, 
skilled  in  languages  and  ready  of  speech,  whom,  however,  he  could  never  see  nor  speak 
to.  Dobneck  therefore  asked  certain  printers  to  his  inn  and,  after  he  had  warmed 
them  with  wine,  one  of  them  in  confidential  talk  revealed  to  him  the  secret  by  which 
England  was  to  be  brought  over  to  the  side  of  Luther — namely  that  there  were  in 
the  press  three  thousand  copies  of  the  Lutheran  New  Testament  translated  into 
English,  and  that  in  the  order  of  the  quires  they  had  got  as  far  as  letter  K  ;  funds 
were  being  freely  supplied  by  English  merchants  who  meant  secretly  to  importthe 
work  when  printed  and  disperse  it  surreptitiously  through  all  England  before  King 
or  Cardinal  could  discover  or  forbid  it. 

Alarmed  and  bewildered  as  he  was,  Dobneck  disguised  his  grief  under  an  appear- 
ance of  admiration  ;  but  the  next  day,  weighing  the  greatness  of  the  danger,  he 
began  to  think  by  what  means  he  could  conveniently  thwart  the  wicked  project. 


D  2 


5  2        The  Printing  of  the  First  New  Testaments. 


He  went,  therefore,  secretly  to  Hermann  Rinck,  a  patrician  of  Cologne,  and  military 
knight,  intimate  with  the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  England  and  of  their  counsel, 
and  to  him  disclosed  the  whole  business  as,  thanks  to  the  wine,  he  had  heard  it. 
Rinck,  to  make  more  certain,  sent  another  person  to  the  house  where,  according  to 
Dobneck's  discovery,  the  work  was  being  printed,  to  search.  When  this  man 
reported  that  the  facts  were  as  stated,  and  that  a  great  quantity  of  paper  was  lying 
there,  Rinck  approached  the  Senate  and  brought  it  about  that  the  printers  were 
forbidden  to  go  on  with  the  work.  The  two  English  heretics,  hastily  taking  with 
them  the  printed  quires,  made  their  escape  by  boat  up  the  Rhine  to  Worms,  where 
the  people  were  all  mad  on  Luther,  in  order  that  there  by  another  printer  they 
might  complete  the  work.  Rinck  and  Dobneck,  on  their  part,  presently  advised  the 
King,  Cardinal,  and  Bishop  of  Rochester  of  the  affair  by  letters,  so  that  they  might 
take  diligent  precautions  at  all  the  English  ports  to  prevent  these  pernicious  wares 
being  imported.  It  was  while  this  affair  was  in  progress  that  there  reached  the 
hands  of  the  King  of  England  the  letter  of  Luther  which  he  had  written  the  year 
before  at  Wittenberg,  on  September  ist. 

VII.-   THE  NEWS  SENT  TO  THE  KING. 

From  a  letter  to  Henry  VIII,  written  by  Edward  Lee,  afterwards  (1531)  Archbishop  of  York, 
dated  December  2. — Cotton  MS.  Vespasian,  C.  Ill,  fol.  21 1. 

Please  it  your  highnesse  morover  to  vnderstond,  that  I  arae  certainlie  enformed 
as  I  passed  in  this  contree,  that  an  englishman  your  subiect  at  the  sollicitacion  and 
instaunce  of  Luther,  with  whome  he  is,  hathe  translated  the  newe  testament  in  to 
Englishe,  and  within  four  dayes  entendethe  to  arrive  with  the  same  emprinted  in 
England.  I  nede  not  to  aduertise  your  grace,  what  infection  and  daunger  maye 
ensue  heerbie,  if  it  bee  not  withstonded.  This  is  the  next  waye  to  fulfill  your  realme 
with  lutherians,  for  all  Luthers  peruerse  opinions  bee  grownded  vpon  bare  wordes  of 
scriptur  not  well  taken  ne  vnderstanded,  wiche  your  grace  hathe  opened1  in  sondrie 
places  of  your  royall  booke.  All  our  forfaders  gouenors  of  the  chirche  of  England 
hathe  with  all  diligence  forbed  &  exchued  publicacion  of  englishe  bibles,  as  appereth 
in  constitutions  prouincall  of  the  chirche  of  Englond.  Nowe  sire  as  god  hathe  en- 
dued your  grace  with  Christian  couraige  to  sett  forthe  the  standard  against  thees 
Philistees  &  to  vanquish  them,  so  I  doubt  not  but  that  he  will  assist  your  grace  to 
prosecute  &  performe  the  same,  that  is  to  vndertreade  them  that  they  shall  not 
nowe  againe  lift  vppe  their  hedds,  wiche  they  endevor  nowe  by  meanes  of  englyshe 
bibles.  They  knowe  what  hurte  suche  bookes  hathe  doone  in  your  realme  in  tymes 
passed.  Hidretoo  blessed  bee  god,  your  realme  is  save  from  infection  of  luthers 
sect,  as  for  so  mutche  that  althowgh  anye  peradventure  bee  secretlie  blotted  within, 
yet  for  feare  of  your  royall  maiestie,  wiche  hathe  drawen  his  swerd  in  godes  cawse, 
they  dare  not  openlie  avowe.  Wherfor  I  can  not  doubte  but  that  your  noble  grace 
wil  valiauntlie  maynetaine  that  you  have  so  noblie  begonne. 

This  realme  of  fraunce  hathe  been  somewhat  tooched  with  this  sect,  in  so  mutche 
that  it  hathe  entred  amongs  the  doctors  of  parisse,  wherof  some  bee  in  prison,  some 
fled,  some  called  in  Iudicium.  The  bisshoppe  also  of  Meulx  called  Molday  is  sum- 
moned for  that  cause,  for  he  suffred  luthers  peruerse  opinions  to  bee  preached  in  his 
diocese.  Faber2  also  a  man  hidretoo  noted  of  excellent  good  lief  and  lemyng  is 
called  among  them,  but  some  saye  heer  for  displeassure,  wiche  I  can  well  thinke.  The 
Parliament  of  Parisse  hathe  had  mutche  businesse  to  represse  this  sect.  And  yet 
blessed  be  god,  your  noble  realme  is  yet  onblotted.  Wherfor  lest  anye  daunger 
myght  ensue,  if  thees  bookes  secretlie  shold  bee  browght  in,  I  thowght  my  duetie  to 
advertise  your  grace  therof,  considering  that  it  toochethe  your  highe  honor,  &  the 
wealthe  &  intregrite  of  the  christen  fayth  within  your  realme  wiche  can  not  long 
endure,  if  thees  bookes  may  come  in.  .  .  .  At  Burdeaulx  the  second  Dav  of  Decembre 
[15251- 

Your  most  humble  preest.  subiect  &  almesman 

Edouardo  lee. 
[Endorsed:    'To  the  kinges  higness  p  .  .  .  th3  the  same  thing.'] 

1  Expounded.  2  Jacques  Lefevre  d'  Etaples,  the  translator  of  the  Bible. 

a  The  damaged  word  may  be  '  proveth  '.  The  king  was  warned  also  by  Dobneck,  Rinck,  and 
probably  others. 


Tyndale's  Prologue  to  the  First  New  Testament.    5  3 


VIII.    THE  SUPPOSED  TRIAL  VERSION  OF  S.  MATTHEW. 

From  The  Life  of  John  Frith,  by  Foxe,  prefixed  to  Frith's  writings  in  Foxe's  edition  of  The 
Whole  Workes  of  IV.  Tyndall,  Iohn  Frith  and  Doct.  Barnes.     London,  John  Day,  1573. 

Not  long  after  the  sayd  William  [Tyndale]  &  Iohn  Frith  had  many  metinges  and 
great  conferences,  and  by  the  sayd  William  he  fyrst  receaued  into  his  hart  the  seede  of 
the  Gospell  and  sencere  godlines,  &  after  with  great  perill  and  Daunger  they  both 
being  inquired  &  sought  for,  fled.  William  Tyndall  first  placed  him  selfe  in  Germany, 
and  there  did  first  translate  the  Gospell  of  S.  Mathewe1  into  Englishe,  and  after 
the  whole  new  testament  &c.  And  not  long  after  the  departure  of  Tyndall.  Iohn 
Frith  escaped  and  fled  into  Flaunders,  etc. 

IX.    THE  BEGINNING  OF  TYNDALE'S  PROLOGUE  TO  THE  FIRST 

NEW  TESTAMENT. 

From  the  unique  copy  of  the  Cologne  fragment  of  1525  in  the  British  Museum. 

The  Prologge. 

I  haue  here  translated  (brethren  and  susters  moost  dere  and  tenderly  beloued  in 
Christ)  the  newe  Testament  for  youre  spirituall  edyfyinge,  consolacion,  and  solas  : 

Exhortynge  instantly  and  besechynge  those  that  are  better  sene  in  the  tonges 
then  y,  and  that  have  hyer  gyftes  of  grace  to  interpret  the  sence  of  the  scripture,  and 
meanynge  of  the  spyrite,  then  y,  to  consydre  and  pondre  my  laboure,  and  that  with 
the  spyrite  of  mekenes.  And  yf  they  perceyue  in  eny  places  that  y  have  not  attayned 
the  very  sence  of  the  tonge,  or  meanynge  of  the  scripture,  or  haue  not  given  the 
right  englysshe  worde,  that  they  put  to  there  handes  to  amende  it,  remembrynge  that 
so  is  there  duetie  to  doo.  For  we  have  not  receyved  the  gyftes  of  god  for  oureselues 
only,  or  forto  hyde  them :  but  forto  bestowe  them  vnto  the  honouringe  of  god  and 
christ,  and  edyfyinge  of  the  congregacion,  which  is  the  body  of  christ. 

The  causes  that  moved  me  to  translate,  y  thought  better  that  other  shulde 
ymagion,  then  that  y  shulde  rehearce  them. 

More  over  y  supposed  yt  superfluous,  for  who  ys  so  blynde  to  axe  why  lyght  shulde 
be  shewed  to  them  that  walke  in  dercknes,  where  they  cannot  but  stomble,  and  where 
to  stomble  ys  the  daunger  of  eternall  dammacion,  other  so  despyghtfull  that  he  wolde 
envye  eny  man  (y  speake  nott  his  brother)  so  necessary  a  thinge,  or  so  bedlem  madde 
to  affyrme  that  good  is  the  naturall  cause  of  yuell,  and  derknes  to  procede  oute  of 
lyght,  and  that  lyinge  shulde  be  grounded  in  trougth  and  verytie,  and  nott  rather 
clene  contrary,  that  lyght  destroyeth  dercknes,  and  veritie  reproveth  all  manner 
lyinge. 

After  hit  had  pleasyd  god  to  put  in  my  mynde,  and  also  to  ge[v]e  me  grace  to 
translate  this  forerehearced  newe  testament  in[t]o  oure  englysshe  tonge,  howesoever 
we  have  done  it.  I  supposed  yt  very  necessary  to  put  you  in  remembraunce  of 
certayne  poyntes,  which  are :  that  ye  well  vnderstand  what  these  wordes  meane.  C  The 
olde  testament.  C  The  newe  testament.  CThelawe.  C  The  gospell.  C  Moses. 
C  Christ.  C  Nature.  C  Grace.  C  Workinge  and  belevynge.  C  Dedes  and  f aythe, 
Lest  we  ascrybe  \  to  the  one  that  which  belongeth  to  the  other,  and  make  of  Christ 
Moses,  of  the  gospell  the  Lawe,  despise  grace  and  robbe  faythe  :  and  fall  from  meke 
lernynge  into  ydle  despicionns  2,  braulinge  and  scoldynge  aboute  wordes. 

VIII.  '  Compare  the  reference  of  Robert  Ridley  (No.  XIII)  to  the  '  commentares  and  annotations 
in  Mathew  &  Marcum  in  the  first  print ',  and  that  of  Robert  Necton  (No.  XIX)  to  '  the  chapiters  of 
Matthew  '.  In  the  Confession  of  John  Tyball,  a  Lollard,  charged  with  heresy  (printed  by  Strype, 
Memorials,  I.  ii.  50-56,  from  Bishop  Tunstall's  Register),  one  paragraph  reads  :  '  Furthermore,  he 
saythe,  that  abowght  ii.  yeres  agon  he  companyed  with  Sir  Richard  Fox  Curate  of  Bumstede,  and 
shewid  hym  al  his  bookys  that  he  had  :  that  is  to  say,  the  New  Testamente  in  Englishe,  the  Gospel 
of  Matthew  and  Mark  in  Englishe  :  which  he  had  of  John  Pykas  of  Colchester,  and  a  book  ex- 
poundyng  the  Pater  Noster,  etc'  All  these  references  fall  a  little  short  of  a  decisive  proof  that 
the  gospels  of  Matthew  and  Mark  in  Tyndale's  version  were  printed  separately,  otherwise  than  in 
the  ten  quires  set  up  at  Cologne  for  Tyndale  in  1525.  Perhaps  the  easiest  hypothesis  is  that  Tyndale 
completed  the  Cologne  fragment  at  Worms  to  the  end  of  Mark,  and  put  this  in  circulation,  subse- 
quently printing  an  entirely  fresh  quarto  at  Worms. 

IX.  •  Misprinted  'astrybe.'  2  Discussions. 


54   Tyndale's  Prologue  to  the  First  New  Testament. 


The  olde  testament  is  a  boke,  where  in  is  wrytten  the  lawe  and  commaund- 
mentes  of  god,  and  the  dedes  of  them  which  fulfill  them,  and  of  them  also  which 
fulfill  them  nott. 

The  newe  testament  is  a  boke  where  in  are  coteyned  the  promyses  of  god,  and 
the  dedes  of  them  which  beleue  them  or  beleue  them  nott. 

Euangelion  (that  we  cal  the  gospel)  is  a  greke  worde,  &  signyfyth  good,  mery, 
glad  and  ioyfull  tydinges,  that  maketh  a  mannes  hert  glad,  and  maketh  hym  synge, 
daunce  and  leepe  for  ioye  As  when  Davyd  had  kylled  Golyath  the  geaunt,  cam  glad 
tydinges  vnto  the  iewes,  that  their  fearfull  and  cruell  enemy  was  slayne,  and  they 
delyvered  oute  of  all  daunger  :  for  gladnes  were  of,  they  songe,  daunsed,  and  wer 
ioyfull.  In  lyke  manner  is  the  evangelion  of  god  (which  we  call  gospell,  and  the  newe 
testament)  ioyfull  tydinges,  and  as  some  saye  :  a  good  hearing  publisshed  by  the 
apostles  through  oute  all  the  worlde,  of  Christ  the  right  Davyd  howe  that  he  hathe 
fought  with  synne,  with  dethe,  and  the  devill,  and  over  cume  them.  Whereby  all 
men  that  were  in  Bondage  to  synne,  wounded  with  dethe,  ouercum  of  the  devill,  are 
with  oute  there  awne  merrittes  or  deservinges  losed,  iustyfyed,  restored  to  lyfe, 
and  saved,  brought  to  libertie,  and  reconciled  vnto  the  favour  of  god,  and  sett  at 
one  with  hym  agayne  :  which  tydinges  as  many  as  beleve  laude  prayse  and  thancke 
god,  are  glad,  synge  and  daunce  for  ioye. 

This  evangelion  or  gospell  (that  is  to  saye,  suche  ioyfull  tydinges)  is  called  the  newe 
testament.  Because  that  as  a  man  when  he  shall  dye  apoynteth  his  gooddes  to  be 
dealte  and  distributed  after  hys  dethe  amonge  them  which  he  nameth  to  be  his 
heyres.  Even  so  Christ  before  his  dethe  commaunded  and  appoynted  that  suche 
evangelion,  gospell,  or  tydynges  shulde  be  declared  through  oute  all  the  worlde, 
and  there  with  to  geue  vnto  all  that  beleve  all  his  gooddes,  that  is  to  saye,  his  lyfe, 
where  with  he  swalowed  and  devoured  vp  dethe  :  his  rightewesnes,  where  with 
he  bannyshed  synne  :  his  salvacion,  wherewith  he  overcam  eternall  damnacion  3. 
Nowe  can  the  wretched  man  (that  is  wrapped  in  synne,  and  is  in  daunger  to  dethe 
and  hell)  heare  no  moare  ioyus  a  thynge,  then  suche  glad  and  comfortable  tydinges, 
of  Christ.  So  that  he  cannot  but  be  glad  and  laugh  from  the  lowe  bottom  of  his  hert, 
if  he  beleve  that  the  tydynges  are  trewe.  .  .  . 

X.    TYNDALE'S  EPILOGUE  TO  THE  SECOND  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

From  the  Facsimile  of  the  edition  of  Worms  1526,  published  in  1862. 

To  the  Reder. 

Geve  diligence  Reder  (I  exhorte  the)  that  thou  come  with  a  pure  mynde,  and 
as  the  scripture  sayth  with  a  syngle  eye,  vnto  the  wordes  of  health,  and  of  eternall 
lyfe  :  by  the  which  (if  we  repent  and  beleve  them)  we  are  borne  a  newe,  created 
a  fresshe,  and  enioye  the  frutes  off  the  bloud  of  Christ.  Whiche  bloud  cryeth  not  for 
vengeance,  as  the  bloud  of  Abel  :  but  hath  purchased,  lyfe,  love,  faveour,  grace, 
blessynge,  and  whatsoever  is  promysed  in  the  scriptures,  to  them  that  beleve  and 
obeye  God  :  and  stondeth  bitwene  vs  and  wrathe,  vengeaunce,  cursse,  and  whatsoever 
the  scripture  threateneth  agaynst  the  vnbelevers  and  disobedient,  which  resist,  and 
consent  not  in  their  hertes  to  the  lawe  of  god,  that  it  is  ryght,  wholy,  iuste,  and 
ought  soo  to  be. 

Marke  the  playne  and  manyfest  places  of  the  scriptures,  and  in  doutfull  places, 
se  thou  adde  no  interpretacion  contrary  to  them  :  but  (as  Paul  sayth)  let  all  be  con- 
formable and  agreynge  to  the  fayth. 

Note  the  difference  of  the  lawe,  and  of  the  gospell.  The  one  axeth  and  requyreth, 
the  wother  perdoneth  and  forgeveth.  The  one  threateneth,  the  wother  promyseth  all 
good  thynges,  to  them  that  sett  their  trust  in  Christ  only.  The  gospell  signifieth 
gladde  tydynges,  and  is  nothynge  butt  the  promyses  off  good  thynges.  All  is  not 
gospell  that  is  written  in  the  gospell  boke  :  For  if  the  lawe  were  awaye,  thou  couldest 
not  know  what  the  gospell  meante.  Even  as  thou  couldest  not  se  perdon,  favour, 
and  grace,  excepte  the  lawe  rebuked  the,  and  declared  vnto  the  thy  sinne,  mysdede, 
and  treaspase. 

Repent  and  beleve  the  gospell  as  sayth  Christ  in  the  fyrst  of  Marke.    Applye  all 

3  Misprinted  'damancion.' 


Tyndale's  Epilogue  to  the  Second  New  Testament.  5  5 


waye  the  lawe  to  thy  dedes,  whether  thou  finde  luste  in  the  bottom  of  thyne  hert  to 
the  lawe  warde  :  and  soo  shalt  thou  no  dout  repent,  and  feale  in  the  silfe  a  certayne 
sorowe,  payne,  and  grefe  to  thyne  herte  :  because  thou  canst  nott  with  full  luste  do 
the  dedes  off  the  lawe.  Applye  the  gospell,  that  is  to  saye  the  promyses,  vnto  the 
deservynge  off  Christ,  and  to  the  mercye  of  god  and  his  trouth,  and  soo  shalt  thou 
nott  despeare  :  butt  shalt  feale  god  as  a  kynde  and  a  mercifull  father.  And  his 
sprete1  shall  dwell  in  the,  and  shall  be  stronge  in  the  :  and  the  promises  shalbe  geven 
the  at  the  last  (though  not  by  and  by2,  lest  thou  shuldest  forgett  thysylfe,  and  be 
negligent)  and  all  threatenynges  shalbe  forgeven  the  for  Christis  blouddis  sake,  to 
whom  commit  thy  silfe  all  togedder,  with  out  respect,  other  of  thy  good  dedes  or  of 
thy  badde. 

Them  that  are  learned  Christenly,  I  beseche  :  for  as  moche  as  I  am  sure,  and  my 
conscience  beareth  me  recorde,  that  of  a  pure  entent,  singilly  and  faythfully  I  have 
interpreted  itt,  as  farre  forth  as  god  gave  me  the  gyfte  of  knowledge,  and  vnder- 
stondynge:  that  the  rudnes  off  the  worke  nowe  at  the  fyrst  tyme,  offende  them  not : 
but  that  they  consyder  howe  that  I  had  no  man  to  counterfet,  nether  was  holpe  with 
englysshe  of  eny  that  had  interpreted  the  same,  or  soche  lyke  thinge  in  the  scripture 
before  tyme.  Moreover,  even  very  necessitie  and  combraunce  (God  is  recorde)  above 
strengthe,  which  1  will  not  rehearce,  lest  we  shulde  seme  to  bost  ourselues,  caused  that 
many  thynges  are  lackinge,  which  necessaryly  are  requyred.  Count  it  as  a  thynge 
not  havynge  his  full  shape,  but  as  it  were  borne  afore  hys  tyme,  even  as  a  thing 
begunne  rather  then  fynnesshed.  In  tyme  to  come  (yf  god  have  apoynted  vs  there 
vnto)  we  will  geve  it  his  full  shape  :  and  putt  out  yf  ought  be  added  superfluusly  : 
and  adde  to  yff  ought  be  oversene  thorowe  negligence  :  and  will  enfoarce  to  brynge  to 
compendeousnes,  that  which  is  nowe  translated  at  the  lengthe,  and  to  geve  lyght 
where  it  is  requyred,  and  to  seke  in  certayne  places  more  proper  englysshe,  and  with 
a  table  to  expounde  the  wordes  which  are  nott  commenly  vsed,  and  shewe  howe  the 
scripture  vseth  many  wordes,  which  are  wother  wyse  vnderstonde  of  the  commen 
people,  and  to  helpe  with  a  declaracion  where  one  tonge  taketh  nott  another.  And 
will  endever  oureselves,  as  it  were  to  sethe  it  better,  and  to  make  it  more  apte  for  the 
weake  stomakes:  desyrynge  them  that  are  learned,  and  able,  to  remember  their 
duetie,  and  to  helpe  therevnto  :  and  to  bestowe  vnto  the  edyfyinge  of  Christis  body 
(which  is  the  congregacion  of  them  that  beleve,)  those  gyftes  which  they  have  receaved 
of  god  for  the  same  purpose.  The  grace  that  commeth  of  Christ  be  with  them  that 
love  hym.    praye  for  vs. 

XI.    HENRY  VIII'S  BELIEF  THAT  TYNDALE  WAS  INSTIGATED 

BY  LUTHER.1 

Extract  from  '  A  copy  of  the  letters,  wherin  the  most  redouted  &  mighty  prince  our  souerayne 
lorde  kyng  Henry  the  eyght  .  .  .  made  answere  vnto  a  certayne  letter  of  Martyn  Luther.  London, 
Rycharde  Pynson  [1526-27]  (Sig.  Av  recto.) 

So  came  it  than  to  passe,  that  Luther  at  laste,  parceyuyng  wyse  men  to  espye 
hym,  lerned  men  to  leaue  hym,  good  men  to  abhorre  hym,  and  his  frantyke  fauourers 
to  fall  to  wracke,  the  nobles  and  honest  people  in  Almaygne,  beynge  taught  by  the 
profe  of  his  vngratyous  practyse,  moche  more  hurt  &  myschefe  to  folowe  therof,  than 
euer  they  loked  after,  deuysed  a  letter  to  vs  written,  to  abuse  them  and  all  other 
natyons,  in  suche  wyse,  as  ye  by  the  contentes  therof  herafter  shal  well  perceyue. 
In  whiche  he  fayneth  hymselfe  to  be  enformed,  that  we  be  tourned  to  the  fauour  of 
his  secte.  And  with  many  flateryng  wordes,  he  laboreth  to  haue  vs  content  that  he 
myght  be  bolde  to  write  to  vs  in  the  mater,  and  cause  of  the  gospell.  And  thervpon 
without  answere  had  from  vs,  nat  onely  publysshed  the  same  letter  and  put  it  in 
print,  of  purpose  that  his  adherentes  shulde  be  the  bolder,  vnder  the  shadowe  of  our 
fauour,  but  also  fell  in  deuyce  with  one  or  two  leude  persons,  borne  in  this  our 
realme,  for  the  translatyng  of  the  Newe  testament  in  to  Englysshe,  as  well  with  many 
corruptions  of  that  holy  text,  as  certayne  prefaces,  and  other  pestylent  gloses  in  the 
margentes,  for  the  aduauncement  and  settyng  forthe  of  his  abhomynable  heresyes, 

X.  '  Spirit.  2  Immediately. 

XI.  l  Luther's  letter  was  dated  September  i,  1525.  The  King's  answer  in  the  Latin  edition, 
which  differs  from  the  English,  is  dated  1526.  This  English  edition  probably  belongs  to  March, 
1527. 


56    Henry  VIIFs  Belief  that  Tyndale  was  Instigated. 


entendynge  to  abuse  the  gode  myndes  and  deuotion,  that  you  oure  derely  beloued 
people  beare,  towarde  the  holy  scrypture,  &  to  enfect  you  with  the  deedly  corruption 
and  contagious  odour  of  his  pestylent  errours.  In  the  aduoydynge  wherof,  we  of  our 
especiall  tendre  zele  towardes  you,  haue  with  the  deliberate  aduyse  of  the  most  reue- 
rende  father  in  god,  Thomas  lorde  Cardynall,  legate  de  Latere  of  the  see  Apostolyke, 
Archebysshop  of  Yorke,  primate  and  our  Chauncellour  of  this  realme,  and  other 
reuerende  fathers  of  the  spyritualtye,  determyned  the  sayde  corrupte  and  vntrue 
translatyons  to  be  brenned,  with  further  sharpe  correction  &  punysshment  against 
the  kepars  and  reders  of  the  same,  rekenyng  of  your  wisdomes  very  sure  that  ye  wyll 
well  and  thankfully  parceyue  our  tendre  and  louyng  mynde  towarde  you  therin,  and 
that  ye  will  neuer  be  so  gredy  vppon  any  swete  wyne,  be  the  grape  neuer  so  plesaunt, 
that  ye  wyll  desyre  to  taste  it,  beyng  well  aduertised  that  your  enemy  before  hath 
poysoned  it. 

XII.    TYNDALE  ON  HIS  FELLOW  'APOSTATE'  WILLIAM  ROY.1 

The  beginning  and  end  of  the  preface  to  Tyndale's  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon  Printed 
at  Malborowe  in  the  londe  off  Hesse  by  Hansluft  the  viij.  day  of  May  Anno  M.D.xxviij. 

William  Tyndale  otherwise  called  hychins  to  the  reader. 

Grace  and  peace  with  all  maner  spirituall  fealinge  and  livinge  worthy  of  the 
kyndnes  of  Christ,  be  with  the  reader  and  with  all  that  thurst2  the  will  of  God 
Amen.  The  cause  why  I  sett  my  name  before  this  little  treatyse  and  have  not  rather 
done  it  in  the  new  testament  is  that  then  I  folowed  the  cownsell  of  Christ  which 
exhorteth  men  Matth.  vj.  to  doo  theyr  good  deades  secretly  and  to  be  content  with 
the  conscience  of  well  doynge,  and  that  God  seeth  vs,  and  paciently  to  abyde  the 
rewarde  of  the  last  daye,  which  Christ  hath  purchased  for  vs  and  now  wold  fayne 
have  done  lykewyse,  but  am  compelled  other  wyse  to  doo. 

While  I  abode  a  faythfull  companyon3  which  now  hath  taken  another  vyage  apon 
him  to  preach  Christ  where  (I  suppose)  he  was  never  yet  preached  (God  which  putt 
in  his  herte  thither  to  goo  sende  his  sprite  with  him,  comforte  him  and  bringe  his 
purpose  to  good  effecte)  one  William  Roye,  a  man  somewhat  craftye  when  he  cometh 
vnto  new  accoyntaunce  and  before  he  be  thorow  knowen  and  namely  when  all  is 
spent,  came  vnto  me  and  offered  his  helpe.  As  longe  as  he  had  no  money,  somewhat 
I  could  ruele  him,  but  as  sone  as  he  had  goten  him  money,  he  became  lyke  him 
selfe  agayne.  Neuer  the  lesse  I  suffered  all  thinges  till  that  was  ended  which  I 
coulde  not  doo  alone  without  one  both  to  write  and  to  helpe  me  to  compare  the 
textes  together.  When  that  was  ended  I  toke  my  leve  and  bode  him  farewell  for  oure 
two  lyves,  and  as  men  saye  a  daye  longer.  After  we  were  departed4  he  went,  and 
gate  hym  new  frendes  which  thinge  to  doo  he  passeth  all  that  ever  I  yet  knewe. 
And  there  when  he  had  stored  him  of  money  he  gote  him  to  Argentine5  where  he 
professeth  wonderfull  faculties  and  maketh  bost  of  no  small  thinges.  A  yere  after 
that  and  now  xij.  monethes  before  the  printinge  of  this  worke,  came  one  Jerom 
a  brother  of  Grenewich  6  also,  thorow  wormes  to  Argentine,  saienge  that  he  entended 
to  be  Christes  disciple  a  nother  while  and  to  kepe  (as  nye  as  God  wolde  geve  him 
grace)  the  profession  of  his  baptim,  and  to  gett  his  lyvinge  with  his  handes,  and  to 
live  no  lenger  ydely  and  of  the  swete  and  laboure  of  those  captives  which  they  had 
taught,  not  to  beleve  in  Christ :  but  in  cuttshowes7  and  russet  coetes.  Which  Jerom 
wyth  all  diligence  I  warned  of  Royes  boldnesse  and  exhorted  him  to  bewarre  of  him 
and  to  walke  quyetly  and  with  all  pacience  and  longe  sofferinge  acordinge  as  we 
have  Christe  &  his  Apostles  for  an  ensample,  which  thinge  he  also  promised  me. 
Neverthelesse  when  he  was  comen  to  Argentine  william  Roye  (whos  tonge  is  able 
not  only  to  make  foles  sterke  madde,  but  also  to  disceave  the  wisest  that  is  at  the 

1  Roy,  who  had  studied  at  Cambridge,  was  a  Franciscan,  and  belonged  to  a  convent  at 
Greenwich.  The  sequence  of  Tyndale's  paragraphs  suggests  that  Roy  had  been  claiming  some 
more  important  part  in  the  translation  of  the  New  Testament  than  the  facts  justified.  The 
passage  is  printed  here  because  in  several  of  the  hostile  references  the  '  two  apostates  '  are  treated 
as  on  an  equality,  whereas,  according  to  Tyndale,  Roy  was  merely  his  amanuensis. 

■  This  is  probably  meant  for  '  trust  '  rather  than  for  '  thirst '.  " 

:!  Presumably  Frith.  '  Separated.  a  Strassburg. 

°  Jerome  Barlow,  presumably  of  Roy's  convent  at  Greenwich. 

'  I  cannot  explain  this  word.     Russet  coats  are  those  of  the  Franciscans. 


first  sight  and  accoyntaunce)  gate  him  to  him  and  sett  him  a  werke  to  make  rimes,8 
while  he  him  selfe  translated  a  dialoge  9  out  of  laten  in  to  englisch,  in  whose  prologe 
he  promyseth  moare  a  greate  deall  than  I  fere  me  he  will  ever  paye.  .  .  . 

End. 

They  wolde  devide  you  from  Christe  and  his  holy  testamente,  and  ioine  you  to 
the  pope  to  beleve  in  his  testamente  and  promisses.  Some  men  wil  aske  parauenture 
why  I  take  the  laboure  to  make  this  worke  in  as  moch  as  they  will  brunne  it  seinge 
they  brunt  the  Gospel  I  answare  in  brunninge  the  new  testamente  they  did  none 
other  thinge  then  that  I  loked  for,  no  more  shal  they  doo  if  the[y]  brunne  me  also 
if  it  be  gods  will  it  shall  so  be.  Neverthelesse  in  translatinge  the  new  testamente 
I  did  my  dutye,  and  so  doo  I  now,  and  will  doo  as  moch  more  as  god  hath  ordened 
me  to  doo.  And  as  I  offered  that  to  all  men  to  correcte  it,  whoso  ever  coulde  even  so 
doo  I  this.  Who  so  euer  therfore  readest  thys,  compare  it  vnto  the  scripture.  If 
gods  worde  beare  recorde  vnto  it  and  thou  also  felest  in  thine  herte  that  it  is  so  be  of 
good  comfort  and  geve  god  thankes.  Iff  gods  worde  condemne  it,  then  hold  it  acursed, 
and  so  do  all  other  doctrines.  As  Paul  counseleth  his  galathiens.  Beleve  not  every 
spyrite  sodenly,  but  iudge  them  by  the  worde  of  god  which  is  the  triall  of  all  doctrine 
and  lasteth  for  ever  Amen. 


XIII.     AN  EXPERT  CRITICISM  OF  TYNDALE'S  VERSION., 

Letter  from  Robert  Ridley,  chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  to  Henry  Gold,  chaplain  to  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  dated  February  24,  almost  certainly  of  the  year  1527.  From  British 
Museum  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  362b. 

Maister  gold  I  hartly  commaunde  me  vnto  you,  as  concernyng  this  common  & 
vulgare  translation  of  the  new  testament  in  to  englishe,  doon  by  M.  William  hichyns, 
other  wais  called  M.  W.  tyndale  &  frear  William  roy,  manifest  lutheranes  heretikes 
&  apostates,  as  doth  opynly  apeir  not  only  by  their  daily  &  continuall  company 
&  familiarite  with  Luther  &  his  disciples,  but  mych  mor  by  their  comentares  & 
annotations  in  Mathew  &  Marcum,  in  the  first  print,  also  by  their  preface  in  the 
2d  prent,1  &  by  their  introduccion  in  to  the  epistle  of  paule  ad  romanes,  al  to 
gither  most  posoned  &  abhominable  hereses  that  can  be  thowht,  he  is  not  filius 
ecclessiae  christi  that  wold  receaue  a  godspell  of  such  damned  &  precised  heretikes, 
thowh  it  wer  trew  lyk  as  paule  &  our  saviour  christ,  wold  not  take  the  trew  testi- 
monial of  evil  spretes  that  prased  christe  treith  (?)  saying  quod  filius  dei  erat, 
&  quod  ipse  paulus  seruus  esset  veri  dei.  As  for  errors,  if  ye  haue  the  first  prent 
with  annotationes  in  Mathew  and  Marcus,  &  the  preface  al  is  mere  frenesy,  he  saith 
that  euangelium  nihil  est  aliud  quam  dulcis  promissio  gratiae,  so  that  by  that 
meanes,  penitentiam  agite  [Matt.  hi.  2I2,  is  no  part  of  the  evangelion,  the  pater 
noster  is  no  part  of  the  godspell,  'ite  maledicti  in  ignem  eternum  '  [Matt.xxv.  41],  no 
part  of  the  evangelion,  but  only  such  appropinquavit  regnum  celorum  [Matt.  iii.  2], 
inuenietis  requiem  animabus  vestris  [Matt.  xi.  29].  Also  he  writeth  in  that  preface 
&  annotationes  that  there  is  no  difference  between  virginite  &  an  hoor  of  the  stewes, 
if  she  cum  to  repentaunce,  Also  that  lyk  as  no  man  doth  evil  to  the  extent  that 
he  show[d]  be  punyshed  or  hanged  there  for,  so  no  man  showd  do  good  to  haue 

8  i.e.  the  tract  in  verse  known  as  Rede  me  and  be  not  wroth,  printed  at  Strassburg  by  Johann 
Schott  in  1528. 

9  i.e.  The  Dialogue  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  also  printed  in  1528  at  Strassburg  by  Johann 
Schott.  The  authorities  at  Strassburg  were  persuaded  by  Wolsey's  agent,  Hermann  Rinck  (see 
No.  VI,  pp.  50,  52),  to  order  Schott  to  deliver  the  copies  of  this  tract  to  him  on  payment  of 
his  bill.  It  was  believed  that  with  the  exception  of  two  they  were  all  destroyed,  but  Mr.  Robert 
Steele  has  lately  shown  (Bibliographical  Society's  Newsheet,  January,  191 1)  that  they  must  have 
been  brought  to  England  and  delivered  in  Edward  VI's  reign  to  a  printer  named  Walter  Lynne, 
who  cancelled  the  preliminary  half-sheet,  and  reissued  the  text  in  1550,  with  a  new  introduction, 
under  the  title  The  true  belief  in  Christ. 

XIII.  1  See  No.  VIII.  A  few  lines  lower  down  Ridley  writes  of  '  the  first  prent  with  annota- 
tiones in  Matthew  and  Marcus  &  the  preface  '  as  if  the  annotations  and  preface  came  in  the  same 
book  or  fragment.  If  what  he  calls  the  '  2d  prent '  contained  the  introduction  to  Romans  it  cannot 
have  been  the  Cologne  fragment.  Despite  some  confusion  it  seems  as  if  his  '  first  prent '  must  be 
the  Cologne  fragment,  and  his  '  2d  prent  '  the  Worms  unannotated  edition. 

2  The  references  in  brackets  are  all  here  added. 


58         An  Expert  Criticism  of  Tyndale's  Version. 


any  rewarde  therfor  contra  ad  faciendas  iustiikationes  tuas  propter  retributionem 
[Ps.  cxix.  112]  et  ad  Hebraeos  [xi.  26]  de  Mose  aspiciebat  enim  in  remuneratorem 
alias  remunerationem  et  illud  facite  vobis  amicos  de  mammona,  ut  cum  defeceritis 
recipiant  eos  in  eterna  tabernacula  [Luke  xvi.  9].  Also  that  by  good  warkes  we 
do  no  thyng  merite,  contra  illud  ad  Corinthos  ut  referat  unusquisque  prout  gessit 
siue  bonum  siue  malum  [2  Cor.  v.  10]  et  illud  genes,  [xxii.  16]  ad  Abram  quia  fecisti 
hanc  rem  etc.  item  illud  Matthsei  quod  sitiui  et  dedistis  mihi  potum  [Matt.  xxv.  35] 
&c.  et  vemte  benedicti  patris  mei  [Matt.  xxv.  34].  Also  he  saith  that  he  that 
doth  any  thyng  to  haue  hy  place  in  heven,  he  is  satanice  &  luciferine  supervius. 
I  have  none  of  thies  bowkes  but  only  I  remembre  such  thynges  I  redde  in  the 
prefaces  &  annotations.  As  for  the  texte  of  the  godspell,  first  the  title  is  hereticall 
saying  that  it  is  prent  as  it  was  writen  by  the  evangelistes  :  cum  neque  consentiat 
cum  antiqua  translatione  neque  cum  erasmica  this  is  the  bowk  of  generacion  of 
ies[us]  the  son  of  Abraham  &  also  the  son  of  david.  Cum  in  archetypo  sit  nominatus 
absolutus  et  in  illo  filii  Abraham  filii  Dauid  &c.  [Matt.  i.  1]  fit  sensus  ipse  unum 
solum  affert  eumque  minus  germanum ;  voluit  clam  ab  ea  diuertere  he  wold  have 
put  hir  away  [Matt.  i.  10] ;  in  quo  omnes  peccauerunt  ad  Romanos  [hi.  12]  in  so 
mych  that  every  man  hath  synned,  et  homo  stultissime  poenitentiam  agite  [Matt, 
iii.  2],  repent.  By  this  translation  shal  we  losse  al  thies  christian  wordes.  penance, 
chante,  confession,  grace,  prest,  chirche,  which  he  alway  calleth  a  congregation! 
quasi  turcharum  et  brutorum  nulla  esset  congregatio  nisi  velit  illorum  etiam  esse 
ecclesiam  :  Idololatria  callith  he  worshyppyng  of  images,  I  wold  that  ye  showd 
have  seen  my  lordes  bowkes.  As  for  the  translation  in  franche  vvithovvt  any  postille 
it  is  for  certane  condemned  in  parys  decreto  publico  thow  it  be  trewly  doon, 
condemned  I  say  that  it  shal  not  be  lawfull  to  publishe  it  to  every  layman,  bot  by 
prestes  quorum  labia  custo[diunt]  sc[ientiam]  so  it  was  in  the  olde  law  &  in  the 
tyme  of  the  apostles.     Vide  Sutorem  de  Translatione  Bibliae.3 

I  certefy  you  if  ye  look  well,  ye  shal  not  look  iij  lynes  withowt  fawt  in  al  the 
bowk,  bot  I  haue  not  the  bowk  to  marke  them  owt,  ye  showd  haue  had  lasure  your 
selff  to  have  doon  it,  how  be  it,  it  becummyth  the  people  of  truste  to  obey  & 
folowe  their  rewellers  which  hath  geven  study  &  is  lerned  in  such  matters  as  thys. 
People  showd  heir  &  beleve,  thai  showd  not  iudge  the  doctrine  of  paule  ne  of  paule 
vicares  &  successors  bot  be  iudged  by  their  learnyng,  as  long  as  thai  knaw  no  thyng 
contrary  goddes  lawes  as  saynt  bernard  saith  most  goodly  &  clerkly  in  libro"  de 
dispensatione  &  precepto.     Vale  in  al  haist 

Yor  awn 

Robert  Ridley  prest. 

item  idem  pauli  stultas  questiones  devita  &c.  [2  Tim.  ii.  23],  bewarre  of  fowlishe 
problemes  or  questiones  in  the  scoles,  Hoc  procul  dubio  dictum  in  odium  scolastice 
theologie  &  universitatum.  Such  a  thyng  is  in  the  translation,  thowh  it  be  not  in 
the  same  wordes.  Ego  &  pater  unum  sumus  [John  x.  30].  We  are  on  quasi  diceret 
unus  sumus  &  not  on  substance  or  on  thyng. 

Shew  ye  to  the  'people  that  if  any  be  of  so  prowde  &  stuburne  stomac  that  he 
will  beleve  ther  is  no  fawt  ne  error  except  it  be  declared  to  hym  that  he  may  se  it, 
latt  hym  cum  hither  to  my  lordes  which  hath  profowndly  examined  al  &  he  shal 
heir  &  se  errors  except  that  he  be  blynde  &  have  no  eys. 

24  February. 

Master  Gold  I  pray  you  be  good  to  this  pore  whoman  Gylbarttes  whyff  as  vet 
your  tenaunt.4 

Ye  shal  not  neede  to  accuse  this  translation,  it  is  accused  &  damned  by  the  con- 
sent of  the  prelates  &  learned  men,  and  comanded  to  be  brynt  both  heir  &  beyonde 
the  see,  wher  is  many  hundreth  of  theym  brynt.  So  that  it  is  to  layt  now  to  ask 
reson  why  thai  be  condemned,  &  which  be  the  fawtes  &  errores.  Luther  &  his  scoole 
teachith  quod  nos  non  cooperamus  cum  gratia  dei  sed  tantum  patimur  ut  saxa  et 
stipites,  bycawse  of  that,  this  texte  non  ego  sed  gratia  dei  mecum  [1  Cor.  xv.  10], 

3  Petrus  Sutor's   '  De  tralatione   Bibliae  et  nouarum  reprobatione  interpretationum  '    Paris 
J.  Petit,  1525. 

*  Added  in  a  different  handwriting  at  the  foot  of  the  first  page. 


An  Expert  Criticism  of  Tyndale's  Version.         59 


thus  is  translate  not  I  bot  the  grace  of  god  in  me.  Ouam  hoc  heretice,  maligne, 
sediciose  et  falso  translatum  sit,  qui  non  perpendit  stupidus  est.  My  lorde  your 
maister  hath  of  thies  bowkes  geven  &  send  to  hym  by  my  lorde  my  master. 

Shew  the  people  that  ye  be  cum  to  declare  vnto  them,  that  certane  bowkes  be 
condemned  by  the  cownsell  and  profownde  examination  of  the  prelates  &  fathers  of 
the  chirch. 

[Addressed]  :  To  Master  henry  golde  chaplayne  to  my  lorde  of  Canterbury,  at 
Knolle. 


XIV.     THE  CRITICISMS  OF  SIR  THOMAS  MORE. 

From  'A  dyaloge  of  syr  Thomas  More',  1529,  as  No.  II.  (fol.  lxxix.) 

The  thyrd  booke. — The  viij  chapyter. 

The  author  shewethe  why  the  new  testament  of  Tyndales  translacyon  was 
burned,  &  shewith  for  a  sample  certain  wordes  euill  &  of  euyll  purpos  changid. 

But  now  I  pray  you  let  me  kno  your  mynd  concernyng  the  burning  of  the  new 
testament  in  english,  which  Tindal  lately  translated,  &  (as  men  say)  right  wel,  whiche 
makethe  men  mich  meruayl  of  the  burning. 

It  is,  quod  I,  to  me  gret  meruayl,  that  eny  good  cristen  man  hauing  eny  drop  of 
wyt  in  hys  hed,  wold  eny  thing  meruell  or  complayn  of  the  burning  of  that  boke  if 
he  knowe  the  mater  which  who  so  callith  the  new  testament  calleth  it  by  a  wrong 
name,  except  they  wyl  call  yt  Tyndals  testament  or  Luthers  testament.  For  so  had 
tyndall  after  Luthers  counsayle  corrupted  &  chaunged  yt  from  the  good  &  holsom 
doctryne  of  Criste  to  the  deuylysh  heresyes  of  theyr  own,  that  it  was  clene  a 
contrary  thing. 

That  were  maruayle  quod  your  frend  that  it  shuld  be  so  clene  contrary,  For  to 
som  that  red  it  yt  semed  very  lyke. 

It  ys  quod  I  neuer  the  lesse  contrary,  and  yet  the  more  peryllous.  For  like  as  to 
a  trew  siluer  grote  a  fals  coper  grote  is  neuer  the  lesse  contrary  thogh  yt  be  quyk 
syluered  ouer,  but  so  mych  the  more  false  in  how  mich  it  is  counterfeted  the  more 
lyke  to  the  trouth,  so  was  the  translacion  so  mich  the  more  contrary  in  how  mich  it 
was  craftely  deuysed  like,  and  so  mych  the  more  peryllus  in  how  miche  it  was  to 
folke  vnlernyd  more  hard  to  be  dyssernid. 

Why  quod  your  frend  what  fautes  wer  ther  in  yt  ? 

To  tell  you  all  that  quod  I  were  in  a  maner  to  reherse  you  all  the  hole  boke, 
wherin  ther  were  founden  and  noted  wrong  &  falsly  translated  a  boue  a  thousand 
textes  by  tale. 

I  wolde  quod  he  fayn  here  some  one. 

He  that  shuld  quod  I  study  for  that,  shuld  study  where  to  hnde  water  in  the  see. 
But  I  wyll  shewe  you  for  ensample  two  or  thre  suche  as  euery  one  of  the  thre  ys 
more  than  thryes  thre  in  one. 

That  were  quod  he  very  straunge  except  ye  mene  more  in  weyght.  For  one  can 
be  but  one  in  nomber. 

Surely  quod  I  as  weyghty  be  they  as  eny  lyghtly  can  be.  But  I  mene  that  euery 
one  of  them  is  more  than  thryes  thre  in  nomber. 

That  were  quod  he  sum  what  lyke  a  rydel. 

This  rydell  quod  I  wyl  sone  be  red.  For  he  hath  mystranslated  .iii.  wordes  of  gret 
weyght  &  euery  one  of  them  is  as  I  suppose  more  than  thryes  three  tymes  repeted 
and  rehersed  in  the  boke. 

Ah  that  may  well  be  quod  he,  but  that  was  not  well  done.  But  I  pray  you 
what  wordes  be  they  ? 

The  tone  ys  quod  I  this  word  prestys.  The  tother,  the  chyrch.  The  thyrd 
charyte.  For  prestis  wher  so  euer  he  speketh  of  the  prestes  of  Crystis  chirch  he 
neuer  calleth  them  prestes  but  alway  senyours,  the  chyrch  he  calleth  alway  the 
congregacyon,  and  charyte  he  callyth  all  loue  loue.  Now  do  these  names  in  our 
englysh  tong  neyther  expresse  the  thyngis  that  be  ment  by  them,  and  also  there  ap- 
pereth  (the  circumstaunces  well  considered)  that  he  had  a  mischeuous  mind  in  the 
chaunge.    For  fyrst  as  for  prestes  and  presthed  though  that  of  old  they  vsedcomenly 


60  The  Criticisms  of  Sir  Thomas  More. 


to  chese  wel  elderly  men  to  be  prestes,  &  ther  fore  in  the  greke  tong  prestys  wer 
called  presbeteri,  as  we  myght  sav  elder  men,  yet  nether  were  all  prestes  chosen 
old  as  apperyth  by  sainte  Poule  wryting  to  Timotheus,  nemo  iuuentutem  tuam  con- 1 
tempnat  let  no  man  contempne  thy  youth,  nor  euery  elder  man  is  not  a  prest.     And 
in  our  englysh  tonge  thys  word  senyor  sygnyfieth  nothing  at  al,  but  is  a  trench  word 
vsed  in  englysh  more  than  halfe  in  mockage,  whan  one  wyll  call  a  nother  my  lord  in  j 
scorn.     And  if  he  mene  to  take  the  laten  worde  senyor,  that  word  in  the  laten  tong 
neuer  sygnyfyed  a  prest  but  only  an  elder  man.     By  whych  name  of  elder  men  yf 
he  wold  call  the  prestes  englishly,  than  shold  he  rather  sygnify  theyr  age  than  theyr 
offyce.     And  yet  the  name  doth  in  english  plainly  sygnify  thaldermen  of  the  cyties,  | 
and  nothyng  the  prestys  of  the  chyrch.     And  thus  may  we  perceyue  that  rather  than  I 
he  wolde  call  a  prest  by  the  name  of  a  prest,  he  wold  seke  a  new  word  he  neyther , 
wyst  nor  cared  what. 

Now  where  he  calleth  the  chyrch  alvvay  the  congregacyon,  what  reson  had  hej 
therin  ?  For  euery  man  well  seeth  that  though  the  chyrch  be  in  dede  a  congregacion, j 
yet  is  not  euery  congregacion  the  chirch  bu[t]  a  congregacion  of  cristen  peple, 
whiche  congregacion  of  crysten  peple  hath  ben  in  englond  alway  called  &  known  by 
the  name  of  the  chirch,  which  name  what  good  cause  or  colour  could  he  find  to  torn 
into  the  name  of  congregacion,  whych  worde  is  comen1  to  a  company  of  cristen  men 
or  a  company  of  turkys  ?  -  .  .  . 

Ibid.  fol.  lxxx.  col.  2. 

For  now  yt  ys  to  be  consydered  that  at  the  tyme  of  thys  translacyon  hvchens 
was  wyth  Luther  in  wyttenberge,  and  set  certayne  glosys  in  the  mergent,  framed 
for  the  settyng  forthe  of  that  vngracious  sect. 

By  saynt  John  quod  your  frende  yf  that  be  true  that  Hychens  were  at  that  tyme 
with  Luther,  it  is  a  playne  token  that  he  wrought  sumwhat  after  hys  counsayle, 
and  was  wyllynge  to  helpe  hys  maters  forwarde  here.  But  why  ther  Luthers  matters 
be  so  badde  as  they  be  made  for,  that  shall  we  see  hereafter. 

Very  true  quod  I.  But  as  touchyng  the  confederacye  betwene  Luther  and  hym, 
is  a  thyng  well  knowen  and  playnly  confessed,  by  suche  as  haue  ben  taken  and 
conuycted  here  of  herysye  comyng  from  thense,  and  some  of  them  sente  hyther 
to  sowe  that  sede  aboute  here,  and  to  sende  worde  thyther  fro  tyme  to  tyme  how 
yt  sprang. 

But  now  the  cause  why  he  chaunged  the  name  of  charyte  and  of  the  chyrche 
and  of  presthed,  is  no  very  grete  dyffyculte  to  perceyve.  For  sithe  Luther  and  his 
felowes  amonge  other  theyre  damnable  heresyes  haue  one,  that  all  our  saluacj'on 
standyth  in  fayth  alone,  and  toward  our  saluacyon  nothynge  force  of  good  workys, 
therfore  yt  semeth  that  he  laboreth  of  purpose  to  mynyshe  the  reuerent  mynd 
that  men  bere  to  charyte,  and  therfore  he  chaungeth  that  name  of  holy  vertuous 
affeccyon,  in  to  the  bare  name  of  loue  comen1  to  the  vertuouse  loue  that  man 
berith  to  god,  &  to  the  lewd  loue  that  is  bytwene  flekke  &  his  make.3  And  for  by 
cause  that  Luther  vtterly  denyeth  the  very  catholyque  chyrche  in  erthe,  and  sayth 
that  the  chyrch  of  Crist  is  but  an  vnknowen  congregacyon  of  sum  folke,  here  ii  & 
there  iii,  no  man  wot  where  hauyng  the  ryght  fayth,  whych  he  calleth  onely  hys 
owne  new  forgede  faythe,  therfore  Hichens  in  the  new  testament  can  not  abyde  the 
name  of  the  chyrch,  but  turneth  it  into  the  name  of  congregacyon,  wyllyng  that  yt 
shuld  seme  to  englysh  men,  eyther  that  Cryste  in  the  gospell  had  neuer  spoken  of 
the  chirch,  or  ellys  that  the  chyrche  were  but  such  a  congregacyon  as  they  myghte  j 
haue  occasyon  to  say,  that  a  congregacyon  of  some  such  heretyques  were  the  chyrch 
that  god  spake  of. 

Now  as  towchinge  the  cause  wiry  he  chaunged  the  name  of  prest  into  senior,  ye 
muste  vnderstand  that  luthere  and  his  adherentys  holde  thys  heresye,  that  all  holy 
order  ys  nothyng.  And  that  a  prest  is  nothyng  ellys,  but  a  man  chosen  among  the 
peple  to  preche,  and  that  by  that  choyce  to  that  offyce  he  is  preste  by  and  by  wyth- 
oute  eny  more  ado,  and  no  preste  agavne  whan  so  euer  the  people  chese  a  nother 
in  hys  place,  and  that  a  preestys  offyce  is  no  thynge  but  to  preche.  For  as  for  saynge 
masse  and  hervnge  of  confessvon  and  absolucyon  theruppon  to  be  geuen,  all  thys  he 

1  common.  -    Turks. 

1    \  contemptuous  exprn->3ion  for  a  man  and  his  paramour  (Oxf.  Eng.  Did.). 


The  Criticisms  of  Sir  Thomas  More. 


61 


sayethe  that  euery  man  woman  and  childe  may  do  as  well  as  eny  preste.  Now 
doth  Hychen  therfore  to  set  forthe  thys  opynyon  wythall  after  hys  masters  herysye 
putte  awaye  the  name  of  preste  in  hys  translacyone,  as  thoughe  prestehede  were 
nuthvng,  where  so  euer  the  scrypture  speketh  of  the  prestys  that  were  amonge  the 
Iewe's,  there  dothe  he  in  hys  translacyon  call  theym  styll  by  the  name  of  prestis. 
But  where  so  euer  the  scrypture  spekith  of  the  prestys  of  Christis  chyrche,  there 
doth  he  put  away  the  name  of  prest  in  his  translacyon,  bycause  he  wold  make  hyt 
seme  that  the  scrypture  dyd  neuer  speke  of  eny  prestys  dyfferent  from  leymen 
amonge  chrysten  peple. 


XV.     EPISCOPAL  PROHIBITION. 

Text  and  translation  from  Fox's  Acts  and  Monuments  (first  edition).    John  Day,  1563,  pp.  449,  450. 

A  prohibition  sent  out  by  Cuthberth  Tunstall  Byshop  of  London,  to  the  Arche- 
deacons  of  his  dioces,  for  the  calling  in  of  the  newe  Testamentes  translated  into 
Englyshe.1 

Cvtbertus  permissione  diuina  Lond.  Episcopus  dilecto  nobis  in  Christo  Archi- 
diacono  nostro  Londo.2  seu  eius  officiali  salutem  gratiam  &  benedictionem,  Ex 
pastoralis  officij  nostri  debito  ea  quae  ad  subiectorum  nostrorum  periculum  et  maxime 
ad  internetionem  animarum  earundem  tendere  dinoscuntur,  salubriter  propellere  & 
totis  viribus  extirpare  astringimur,  sane  ex  fide  dignorum  relatione  ipsaque  rei 
euidentia,  ad  nostram  iamdudum  peruenit  noticiam,  quod  nonnulli  iniquitatis  filij 
ac  Lutheriane  factionis  mmistri  quos  summa  excecauit  malicia  a  via  veritatis  &  ortho- 
doxe  fidei  declinantes  sanctum  dei  euangelium  in  vulgare  nostrum  Anglicanum 
subdola  versutia  transferentes  ac  nonnullos  heretical  prauitatis  articulos  &  opiniones 
erroneas  perniciosas  pestiferas,  scandalosas  &  simplicium  mentium  seductiuas  inter- 
miscentes,  illibatam  hactenus  sacre  scripture  maiestatem,  suis  nepharijs  &  tortuosis 
interpretationibus  prophanare,  &  verbo  domini  sacrosancto  &  recto  sensu  eiusdem 
callide  et  peruerse  abuti  tentarint.  Cuius  quidem  translationis  nonnulli  libri  impressi 
quidam  cum  glosis,  quidam  sine  glosis  vt  accepimus  dictum  pestiferum  et  perniciosum 
virus  invulgari  idiomate  in  se  continentes  in  promiscuam  nostrarum  dioc.  et  iuris- 
dictionis  Lond.  multitudine  sunt  dispersi,  qui  sane  gregem  nobis  commissum  nisi  citius 
prouideatur  tarn  pestifero  veneno  et  mortifero  prauitatis  heretics  morbo  proculdubio 
inficient  et  contaminabunt  in  animarum  nobis  commissarum  graue  periculum  et 
diuine  maiestatis  grauissimam  offensam.  Vnde  nos  Cutbertus  episcopus  ante  dictus 
de  predictis  magnopere  dolentes  et  antiqui  hostis  calliditati  ire,  quam  suis  satellitibus 
ad  animarum  subditorum  nostrorum  interemptionem  subministrat,  obuiam  curaque 
pastorah  super  grege  nobis  commisso  diligenter  inuigilare  ac  remedia  oportuna  pre- 
missis  adhibere  cupientes,  vobis  coniunctim  et  diuisim  comittimus  ac  firmiter  in  vir- 
tute  sancte  obediencie  qua  nobis  tenemini  iniungendo,  mandamus  quatenus  autori- 
tate  nostra  moneatis  monerive  faciatis  omnes  et  singulos  tarn  exemptos  quam  non 
exemptos,  infra  vestrum  Archidiaconatum  vbi  libet  commorantes,  quatenus  infra 
xxx.  dierum  spacium  quorum  quidem  dierum  decern  pro  primo,  decern  pro  secundo, 
et  decern  pro  tertio  et  peremptorio  termino  sub  excommunicationis  poena  ac  criminis, 
hereseos  suspitionis  incurrende  eis  assignamus  omnes  et  singulos  huiusmodi  libros 
translationem  noui  testamenti  in  vulgarem  linguam  factam  continentes  ad  nos  seu 
nostrum  in  spiritualibus  vicarium  generalem  inferant  et  realiter  tradant.  Et  quid  in 
premissis  feceritis  nos  aut  vicarium  nostrum  huiusmodi  infra  duos  menses  a  die  data 
presentium  debite  certificare  personaliter  vel  per  literas  vestras  patentes  vna  cum 
presentibus  autentice  sigillatas  non  omittatis  sub  poena  contemptus.  Dat.  sub  sigillo 
nostro  24.  die  mensis  Octobris  An.  M.D.  26.  nostra;  cons.  An.  quinto. 

1  Fox  adds  here  the  words  '  with  diuers  other  bookes,  the  Cataloge  whereof  hereafter  ensueth  '. 
But  the  list  of  books  which  he  mistakenly  appends  belongs  to  a  later  date  than  October  1526, 
when  this  prohibition  was  issued.  In  reprinting  Fox's  text  a  few  obvious  misprints  have  been 
corrected. 

2  Fox  notes  '  The  like  commission  in  like  manner  and  forme  was  sent  to  the  thre  other 
Archdeacones,  of  Middlesexe,  Essex,  and  Colchester,  for  the  execution  of  the  same  matter,  vnder 
the  Byshoppes  seale  '. 


62  Episcopal  Prohibition. 


Thus  in  Englyshe 
Cutbert  by  the  permission  of  god,  byshop  of  London,  vnto  our  wellbeloued  in 
christ  the  Archdeacon  of  London,  or  to  his  officiall,  helth  grace  and  benediction. 
By  the  deuty  of  our  pastorall  office,  we  are  bounde  diligently  with  all  our  power 
to  forsee,  prouide  for,  roote  out  and  put  away  all  those  things,  which  seme  to  tende 
to  the  perill  and  daunger  of  our  subiectes  and  specialy  the  distraction  of  ther  soules, 
wherfor  we  hauing  vnderstanding  by  the  reporte  of  diuers  credible  persones,  and  also 
by  the  euident  apparaunce  of  the  matter,  that  many  children  of  iniquitie  mainteiners 
of  Luthers  sect,  blinded  through  extreame  wickednes,  wandring  from  the  way  of  truth 
and  the  catholike  faith,  craftely  have  translated  the  new  testament  into  our  English 
tongue,  entermedling  there  with  many  hereticall  articles  anderronious  opinions,  perni- 
cious and  offensiue,  seducing  the  simple  people,  attempting  by  their  wicked  and  per- 
uerse  interpretations,  to  prophanate  the  maiestie  of  the  scripture,  whiche  hetherto 
hath  remayned  vndefiled,  and  craftely  to  abuse  the  most  holy  word  of  God,  and  the 
true  sence  of  the  same,  of  the  whiche  translation  there  are  many  bokes  imprinted, 
some  with  gloses  and  some  without,  conteining  in  the  english  tongue  that  pestiferous 
and  moste  pernicious  poyson  dispersed  throughout  all  our  dioces  of  London  in  great 
nomber,  whiche  truely  without  it  be  spedely  forsene  without  doubt  will  contaminate 
and  infect  the  flocke  committed  vnto  vs,  with  moste  deadly  poyson  and  heresy.  To 
the  greuous  perill  and  daunger  of  the  soules  committed  to  our  charge,  and  the  offence 
of  gods  diuine  maiestie.  Wherfore  we  Cuthbert,  the  byshop  aforesaid,  greuously 
sorowing  for  the  premisses,  willing  to  withstande  the  craft  and  subteltie  of  the 
auncient  enemy  and  his  ministers,  which  seke  the  destruction  of  my  flock,  and  with 
a  diligent  care  to  take  heade  vnto  the  flocke  committed  to  my  charge,  desiring  to 
prouide  spedy  remedies  for  the  premisses,  we  charg  you  iointly  and  seuerally,  and 
by  vertue  of  your  obedience,  straightly  enjoyne  &  comaund  you  that  by  our  autorytie 
you  warne  or  cause  to  be  warned,  all  and  singuler  aswell  exempte  as  not  exempt, 
dwelling  with  in  your  Archdeacons  that  with  in  xxx.  daies  space,  wherof  ten  daies 
for  the  first,  x  for  the  second  and  x.  for  the  third  peremptory  terme,  vnder  payne 
of  excommunication,  and  incurring  the  suspicion  of  heresie,  they  do  bring  in  and 
really  deliuer  vnto  our  vicar -general!,  all  and  singular  such  books  conteyning  the 
translation  of  the  new  testament  in  the  English  tongue,  and  that  you  doo  certyfie  vs 
or  our  said  comissary,  within  ii  monthes,  after  the  day  of  the  date  of  these  presents, 
dewly,  personally  or  by  your  letters,  together  with  these  presentes,  vnder  your 
seales,  what  you  haue  done  in  the  premisses,  under  paine  of  contempt,  geuen  vnder 
our  seale  the  xxiii.  of  October,  in  the  v.  yeare  of  our  consecration. 

XVI.    THE  SEARCH    FOR  ENGLISH  NEW  TESTAMENTS  AND  OTHER 

HERETICAL  BOOKS  AT  ANTWERP  AND  ENDEAVOUR 

TO  GET  THEIR  PRINTERS  PUNISHED. 


Extract  from  a  letter  of  John  Hackett '  to  Wolsey,  November  24.  1526  (Letters  and  Papers  of 
Hen.  VIII,  vol.  iv,  2652).     From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office. 

Aftyr  my  comyng  here  to  thys  towne,  I  haue  send  prively  to  all  places  here 
to  know  surly,  wher  that  thys  nywe  translatyd  volumes  be  pryntyd  In  Inglishe, 
or  to  be  sold,  &  as  I  haue  fownd  by  Inquesission  ther  be  tweyn2  In  thys  towne  that 

1  One  of  Wolsey 's  confidential  agents. 

1  One  of  these  two  printers  of  English  heretical  books  was  Christopher  van  Endhouen,  also 
known  as  Christopher  van  Ruremond,  the  printer  of  the  first  Antwerp  New  Testament,  1526; 
the  name  of  the  other  is  not  known.  From  the  fact  that  only  Christopher  is  subsequently 
mentioned  it  is  possible  that  this  other  printer  was  Hans  van  Ruremond  (presumably  a  kinsman 
of  Christopher),  who  had  been  convicted  by  the  town  council  on  October  30,  1525,  of  printing 
Lutheran  books,  and  ordered  to  leave  the  town  and  go  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Blood  at 
Wilseraken  in  Prussia  (see  Duff,  Westminster  and  London  Printers,  p.  223).  Mr.  Duff  writes  : 
'Christopher  left  in  Antwerp  soon  afterwards  started  on  the  very  dangerous  undertaking  of 
printing  English  New  Testaments,  which  were  sent  into  England  and  sold  there  by  Hans.  In 
1528  in  the  table  of  certain  persons  abjured  within  the  diocese  of  London  we  find  "  John  Raimund 
a  Dutchman  for  causing  fifteen  hundred  of  Tyndale's  New  Testaments  to  be  printed  at  Antwerp 
and  for  bringing  five  hundred  into  England  ".  John  Raimond  is  clearly  the  English  form  of 
Jan  Roemundt  [otherwise  Hans  van  RuremondJ  and  is  probably  identical  with  the  Dutchman 
who  earlier  in  the  year  was  in  the  Fleet  for  having  sold  to  Robert  Necton  some  200  or  }oo  copies 


The  Search  for  English  New  Testaments,  &c.      63 


pryntys  &  syllys  the  sayd  bokes,  wherfore  I  wrott  sodenly  to  my  lord  of  palermo  3 
That  he  shold  aduertyse  my  lady  *  &  requyre  hyr  that  she  shold  make  comand- 
ment  to  the  margrave  of  thys  towne  to  se  thys  errurs  Remedyyd,  whych  mediatly 
she  has  done,  &  I  was  thys  day  meselfe  with  the  sayd  margrave  &  have  had  long 
comm[un]ycasionto  gyddyr,  &  showdme  the  sayd  lady  ys5letter.  whych  was  wrytten 
In  very  good  forme,  &  att  a  conclusion  he  promest  me  by  hys  faythe  that  he  wyll 
do  hys  ottermust  best  to  fulfyll  my  lady  ys  commandment,  the  kynges  hyghnes  & 
yowr  grace  ys  mynd  &  dessyr.  In  thys  matner  &  all  odyr  wher  he  may  do  hys 
hyghnes  or  your  grace  any  honor  plessure  or  seruys  convenient. 

I  send  your  grace  here  Inclosed  ij  of  thys  nywe  translatyd  volumes  In  Inglyshe. 
of  the  whych  sorte  I  tryst  or  xiiij  dayys  cum  to  an  end  to  se  agrett  meyne  of  them 
afyre,  &  as  shortly  as  I  can  ther  shalbe  adefens6  made  to  all  the  Inprimurs  of  thys 
contre  that  from  hensforward  They  shall  nott  pryme  neddyr  byne  syll7  non  of  syche 
lyke  bokes  &  what  ther  shalbe  don  I  wyll  aduertysse  your  grace  praynge  the  holy 
trynyte  to  preserwe  your  grace  wher  euer  ye  be,  from  andwerpe  The  xxiiij  day  of 
novembre.  1526. 

per  your  humbyll  Bedesman.  John  Hackett. 

Addressed  : — '  Legat  ys  good  grace.' 

B. 

Extract  from  letter  of  John  Hackett  to  Wolsey,  December  22,  1526  (Letters  and  Papers  of 
Henry  VIII,  vol.  iv,  2721).  Printed  from  Cotton  MS.  Galba  B.  IX.  37,  which  like  many  other 
Cotton  MSS.  has  been  damaged  by  fire. 

.  .  .  By  my  last  lettris  datyd  the  xvijth  day  of  thys  monythe  I  wrott  to 
[Mr.]  Bryan  tuck1  how  that  the  lordes  of  the  towne  of  andwerpe  showyd  [to]  me 
that  thei  had  submyttyd  them  selfs  as  towchynge  the  correccion  o[f]  thys  nywe 
bokes  In  Inglyshe,  to  be  ordryd  aftyr  the  dyscression  [and]  avyse  of  the  lady 
margrett 2  and  hyr  consell,  And  aftyr  thys  conclusion  takyn,  the  forsayd  lordes 
came  to  the  cowrte  wher  I  was  present,  &  [I]  showyd  to  the  sayd  consell.  howe  that 
I  made  grett  dylygence  to  se  the  for[sayd]  bokes  bowrnt  &  the  Inprimwrs  to 
be  crimynally  punnyshyd  acordyng  to  the  .  .  .  merytees,  &  that  they  have  had 
in  party  the  examinacion  of  the  sayd  impri[murs]. 

But  consyderynge  that  syche  byssynes  as  thys  ys  towchys  both  lyfe  [and  goods] 
the  sayd  lordes  of  andwerp  declaryd  vnto  the  forsayd  consell  that  thei  th[ought]  nott 
in  no  wysse  to  Juge  apon  the  example  of  anothyr  Juge  ys  Ju[gement]  wythowt  thei 
hawe  perfytt  knowlege  apon  the  fowndment  &  reyson  that  [thei]  may  do  hytt, 
Desyrynge  the  sayd  consell  that  thei  myght  haue  the  sayd  [bokes]  translatyd  in 
to  lattyn  or  duche,  so  that  they  myght  wnderstand  the  [menin]ge.  Where  apon 
that  thei  may  gywe  the  sentence,  to  the  whych  the  off  3  the  prive  consell  wold  lyghtly 

of  the  New  Testament.  On  a  previous  page  (21S)  Mr.  Duff  recorded  how  a  certain  Jan  Silverlink 
recovered  April  4,  1 53 1,  from  the  heirs  of  Francis  Birckmann  (a  member  of  the  same  family  of 
book-agents  as  the  Arnold  Birckmann  mentioned  by  Cochlaeus,  cp.  No.  VI,  p.  51)  the  balance 
of  an  account  of  £28  1  ys.  3d.  for  700  New  Testaments,  obviously  delivered  on  behalf  of  Hans 
or  Jan  van  Ruremond,  since  the  heirs  were  allowed  to  deduct  a  debt  due  from  him  to  Birckmann. 
Mr.  Duff  identifies  Christopher  van  Endhouen  or  Van  Ruremond  with  the  Antwerp  bookseller 
named  Christopher,  of  whom  Fox  writes,  under  the  year  1531,  that  for  selling  certain  New  Testa- 
ments in  English  to  John  Row,  bookbinder,  he  was  thrown  into  prison  at  Westminster,  and  there 
died.  This  is  confirmed  by  his  business  being  found  after  this  date  in  the  hands  of  his  widow  (see 
No.  xxvii,  A.B.).  Hans  van  Ruremond  is  further  identified  by  Mr.  Duff  with  the  'John  Holi- 
busche  alias  Holybusche  of  London,  Stationer  otherwise  bookbinder,  born  in  Ruremond  under 
the  obedience  of  the  Emperor '  on  a  London  list  of  denizens  in  1535,  and  through  this  entry  with 
the  Johan  Hollybushe  whose  name  was  put  by  John  Nycholson  of  Southwark  on  the  title-page 
of  his  second  edition  of  the  Latin-English  New  Testament  in  1538  (' Faythfullye  translated  by 
Johan  Hollybushe')  after  his  quarrel  with  Coverdale.  This  would  not,  of  course,  imply  that 
the  Dutch  bookseller  had  really  revised  Coverdale's  work,  but  merely  that  Nycholson  desired  to 
provide  himself  with  a  scapegoat. 

3  The  Archbishop  of  Palermo. 

'  Margaret  of  Savoy,  Archduchess  of  Austria,  Regent  of  the  Netherlands. 

°  Hackett's  way  of  forming  the  possessive  case. 

8  i.  e.  a  prohibition.  '  They  shall  not  print,  neither  buy  nor  sell. 

B.  l  This  letter  of  December  17,  1526,  to  Sir  Brian  Tuke,  has  not  been  preserved. 

''  Margaret  of  Savoy.  3  '  the  off  '  must  be  read  '  they  of '. 


64  The  Search  for  English  New  Testaments 


consent,  But  I  answeryd  apon  [that]  artycle  that  hytt  were  not  convenyent  to 
permit  that  syche  translation]  shold  be  don  in  thys  syde  of  the  sees,  for  lafully  I 
wold  suspect  [eny]  that  wolds  medyll  In  the  same,  They  answeryd  me  that  the 
[iuges]  Ought  not  to  iuge  without  they  knewe  the  fowndement  of  the  cawse.  I 
answerd  them  that  the  kynge  my  sowerayne  lord  &  master  ys  lettris  were  sufficient 
Inoughe  for  the  defence  of  syche  a  cawse,  and  for  the  condemnacion  of  thys  bookes 
&  all  syche  othyr  lyke  erytycke  scriptours  as  has  ben  condemnyd  &  bowrnd  In 
Ingland,  They  answeryd  me  agayne  that  yf  that  the  kynges  highnes  or  your 
grace  had  send  them  hyther  of  euery  booke  one  of  syche  lyke  as  ye  haue  bowrnd 
there,  that  fyndynge  syche  bookes  here  thei  wold  do  syche  lyke  Iustyce,  Yea  there 
has  ben  one  of  them  that  sayd  that  euery  contre  hawe  ther  owne  lawys  &  that 
the  Juges  of  thys  contres  ought  as  well  to  know  where  apon  thei  shall  Juge.  as  owr 
Juges  knowys  what  they  have  Jugyd,  &  apon  what  grownd  hytt  standes.  But  to 
cum  to  a  conclusion  aftyr  many  arguments,  nott  as  in  fowrme  of  consell,  but  mediatly 
to  brynge  owr  matur  to  an  effecte,  I  toke  apon  me  to  wryte  wnto  yowr  grace,  &  that 
within  short  tyme.  yow  shall  send  to  the  lady  margrett,  or  to  the  forsayd  lordes  of 
andwerpe  sufficient  certyficacion  with  one  or  tweyne  or  tre  off  syche  lyke  bokes, 
whyche  as  were  condemnyd  &  bowrnt  In  Ingland :  whych  I  supose  ye  have  kept 
sum  for  syche  an  intent,  &  here  apon  the  lordes  off  the  prive  consell  defferyd  the 
translacion  of  the  forsayd  bokes,  &  requyrd  me  to  wryte  wnto  yowr  grace  to  have 
the  same,  [&  that  thei  wold  as  fayne  do  the  Justyce  apon  syche  lyke  cawsys,  as  we 
to  desyre  ytt,  &  that  as  sone  as  your  good  answere  cumys,  that  thei  wyll  admynystre 
the  Iustys  In  syche  fowrme  &  maner  that  ther  shalbe  suffycient  correccion  don  apon 
them  that  do  offende,  Whych  surly  I  certefye  yor  grace  hytts  very  nessessary  & 
tyme  to  be  done,  afore  the  end  of  thys  barro4  markett,  But  the  fyrst  begynynge 
&  execusion  must  be  done  in  the  towne  of  andwerpe  whych  ys  the  fowntayne  of 
sych  tynges,  &  here  with  all  othyr  places  shall  take  an  ensample,  &  consyderynge 
that  thys  byssynes  requyres  dylygence,  I  send  thys  paper  post  purposely  vnto  yowr 
grace  to  have  yowr  gracious  answere  &  Instruccions  when  ye  tynke  the  tyme. 

And  yf  hapent  that  yowr  grace  had  nott  ressewit  sum  othyr  bookes  of  thys 
translacions,  as  I  have  send  yow  her  before,  now  att  all  aventures,  I  yow  with  thys 
inclosyd  one  of  syche  lyke,  as  has  ben  impryntyd  in  the  sayd  towne  of  andwerpe,  of 
the  whyche  be  arestyd  in  the  Justyce  their  handes  ny  a  iii  abydyng  sentence,  &  yf 
yowr  grace  haue  any  othyr  of  syche  lyke  bookes,  hytt  were  nessessary  to  send  one 
of  euery  sorte  hydyr  to  the  condemnasion  of  all  syche  othyrs  as  we  can  fynd  in 
thys  partyys  .  .  .  mechlyn  the  xxijth  day  of  dessember.  1526. 

per  yowr  hummyl  Bedesman 

John  Hackett. 

C. 

Extract  from  letter  of  John  Hackett  to  Brian  Tuke,  January  4,  152S  (Letters  and  Papers  of 
Henry  VIII,  vol.  iv,  2778).     Printed  from  Cotton  MS.  Galba  B.  IX.  38. 

My  last  wrytyng  vnto  your  grace  was  datyd  the  22  day  of  dessember  which 
letter  derecktyd  I  post  to  my  lord  legattes  grace,  only  for  the  recoveryng  of  sych 
bokes  as  ye  have  send  me  now  with  yowr  wrytyng  datyd  the  xj'h  day  of  the 
forsayd  monyth  which  be  cum  too  my  handes  a  monday  last  was  at  after  dynner, 
And  sodenly  the  same  day  betwx  four  &  fyve  of  clock  I  came  to  audyence  in  the 
preve  counsell,  &  aftir  I  schowd  them  aparty  of  the  substance  of  your  wrytyngs 
vnto  me,  be  my  [lordj  legattes  comandment,  &  schowyng  them  the  forsayd  bookes 
awant  syngnyd1  with  my  lord  of  london  ys  hand  wrytyng,  the  lord  of  hooghestrat2 
&  monsieur  de  Palermo3  ordynyt  &  concludyd  that  my  lady  schold  wryt  to  the 
margr[ave]  &  consell  of  the  towne  of  andwerp  to  do  Ju[stice]  &  corexion  apon  all 
sych  lycke  bookes  as  the[y]  can  fynd  in  ther  lemyttes  or  Juredyctyons,  &  so  hyt  has 
ben  don,  &  I  delyuyrd  me  self  the  sayd  lady  ys  lettrys  to  the  forsayd  marfgrave]  in 
pressens  of  the  hole  consell  of  the  sayd  towne  of  andwerp  &  aftir  that  they  had  the 
redyfng]  of  the  sayd  letters,  they  answered  me  in  good  maner  that  they  schold  do  ther 

4  Barro  or  Barrow,  the  English  form  of  Berghen  op  Zoom,  a  port  in  North  Brabant. 
('.  '  avant  [?]  signed,  signed  at  the  beginning. 

5  Antoine  de  la  Lalaing,  Count  of  Hochstrate.  3  The  Archbishop  of  Palermo. 


and  other  Heretical  Books  at  Antwerp,  &c.        65 


dewoy  acordyng  to  ryght  &  raysson  &  that  within  fo[wer]  days  I  shall  knowe  howe 
they  sail  procede  in  th[ys]  byssenys,  my  trust  ys  that  they  sail  do  well. 

From  andwerp  the  iiijth  day  of  Ienne  .  .  .  1526 
per  yowr  own         John  Hackett. 

D. 

Extract  from  Letter  of  John  Hackett  to  Wolsey,  January  12,  152^  (Letters  and  Papers  of 
Henry  VIII,  vol.  iv.  2797).    Printed  from  Cotton  MS.  Galba  B.  IX.  40. 

Plesse  yowr  grace  to  vnderstand  that  my  last  lettris  vnto  yowr  grace  was  datyd 
xxijtf  day  of  December.  &  synnes  I  hawe  ressewt1  a  lettyr  fro  Mr.  bryan  tuke 
d[atyd]  the  xith  day  off  the  sayd  monyth  &  with  the  sayd  lettyr  I  ressewyth  syche 
.  .  .  Bookes  as  I  dessyred  by  my  last  wrytyng  vnto  your  grace,  the  whych  bookes 
lyke  ...  I  hawe  wrytten  to  the  sayd  Mr.  tuke  the  fowrthe  day  of  thys  present  monyth. 
Trywe  hytt  ys  that  by  the  avysse  off  thees  lordes  of  the  prive  consell,  I  del[yuered] 
them  with  the  lady  margrett  ys  lettris  wnto  the  lorde  margrave  off  andwerpe  in  presens 
of  all  the  lordes  that  admynystris  the  lawys  no  we  in  the  sayd  to[wne]  off  andwerpe. 
And  aftyr  that  they  had  red  the  sayd  lady  ys  lettris,  &  visityd  [my]  lorde  off  london 
ys  veryficacion  in  the  fyrst  levys  of  the  forsayd  bookes,  w[ith]  grett  honor  &  reuer- 
ence  they  made  answere  wnto  me  that  they  wold  gladl[y]  do  ther  devoyre,  and  that 
within  iij  or  iiij  dayes  ther  aftyr  that  I  sh[old]  know  ther  resolute  answere. 

Where  apon  I  desyred  them  in  the  kyng  my  souerayne  lorde  &  maisteris  na  [me] 
for  the  incressynge  &  preseruacion  of  owr  crysten  feythe  &  for  the  anychil  [atyon]  & 
extyrpacion  off  the  malycious  sept  lutherianen  that  in  as  muche  as  h  [yt]  apers  by 
one  off  syche  orygynall  bookes  as  were  condemnyd  &  bowrnt  in  Ingland  whyche  was 
ther  present  afore  them,  &  that  hytt  apers  playnly  that  ther  [ys]  no  defference 
nethyr  defuculte,  but  that  in  the  text  of  ther  bookes  that  [were]  imprynted  in  thys 
towne,  ther  conteynes  all  syche  errures  &  herissees  as  conteyne[d]  in  the  text  of  the 
forsayd  condemnyd  &  bownt  bookes,  requirenge  them  that  they  showld  do  apon  the 
sayd  bookes  that  be  here,  syche  correccion  &  punission  as  ye  &  dayly  ys  done  apon 
syche  lyke  &  semblabell  heretyke  bookes  in  Ingland. 

The  sayd  lordes  answeryd  me  agayne  that  within  the  space  aforesaid  I  showlde 
know  ther  intere  resolucion. 

In  the  space  of  the  whyche  tyme  the  margrave  aforsayd  as  the  Emperor  is  officer 
d[esyred]  Justyce  to  be  done,  declarynge  to  the  sayd  lordes  how  that  hytt  aperyd 
by  the  verification]  off  my  lorde  the  byshope  off  london  that  in  the  text  off  the 
bookes  that  be  inp[rinted]  in  thys  towne,  conteynes  all  the  same  errures  &  heresees 
as  has  conteyned  .  .  .  the  text  off  the  orygynall  bookes  that  were  condemnyd  &  bownt 
in  Ingland  [as]  hytt  may  apere  by  one  of  the  sayd  orygynall  bookes  whych  ys  nowe 
h[ere]  present,  &  ought  to  be  sufficient  profe  &  certifycacon  to  collacion  the  tone  by 
the  todyr.  Wherfore  &  consyderynge  that  the  Emperor  had  commandyd  apon  peyne 
off  bany[shment]  &  to  lese  the  tyrdpart  off  hys  goodes  that  showld  inprime  syche 
errures  or  ...  as  thys  be,  that  the  Inprimer  of  the  sayd  bokes  namyd  Christofer 
endhowe  . .  .2  ought  to  be  banyshyd  owte  off  all  the  Emperor  is  landes  &  contres  & 
that  t  [he]  tyrd  part  off  all  hys  goodes  showld  be  confyskyd  in  the  Emperor  is  han  [dis] 
&  all  the  forsayd  Englyshe  bookes  bowrnt  to  the  fyre  acordynge  to  the  Emperor  is 
last  mandment  apon  syche  lyke  eryssees. 

And  ther  beynge  present  the  Inprimure  of  the  forsayd  bookes,  hys  atorney  or 
procurer  spake  .  .  .  spal  for  hym,  sayenge  that  he  had  nott  offendyd  the  Emperor  ys 
mandment  nedyr  that  Tie  had  nott  inprymed  no  bookes  with  heryssees.  And  more 
sayd  forthe  that  the  Emperor  is  subiectes  beynge  in  the  Emperor  is  contres  and  in 
land  of  Justyce,  ought  nott  to  be  Jugyd  nedyr  condemnyd  by  the  sentence  or  con- 
demnacion  of  the  lawys  or  luges  off  eny  othyr  contres  concludynge  by  the  lawe  that 
the  luges  of  thys  contres  ought  nott  to  gyve  no  blynd  sentence  to  banyshe  dishonor 
or  confyske  eny  man  or  hys  goodes  with  owt  that  they  knew  ryght  well  them  selfs 
the  very  fowndment  &  cawse,  sustenyng  lyke  wyse  that  with  owt  that  the  lord  mar- 

1  received. 

a  Christopher  of  Endhoven,  the  printer  of  the  Antwerp  New  Testament  of  1526.  See 
I  No.  XVI,  note  2. 


66  The  Search  for  English  New  Testaments 


grave  as  the  Emperor  is  officer  can  showe  or  do  show  sum  particuler  articlyes  in  the 
sayd  bookes  wher  that  theis  forsayd  errures  &  herissees  ben  fownd,  that  the  forsayd 
Christofer  inprimure  ought  to  be  eslargyd  owt  off  prisone  &  to  do  hys  plessure  with 
the  forsayd  bookes. 

And  for  a  conclusion  aftyr  many  othyr  replikes  &  duplikes  done  on  bothe  sides 
betwix  the  margrave  &  the  sayd  malefactor  &  hys  procuror,  nott  withstandynge  the 
promesses  that  the  lordes  of  the  prive  consell  made  vnto  me  when  I  send  yow  my  last 
post,  whyche  promesses  was,  that  with  condicion  that  I  myght  showe  them  here  eny 
of  syche  lyke  bookes  as  has  ben  condemnyd  &  bownrt  in  Ingland,  that  they  as  ther, 
showld  orthyn  3  &  comand  all  othyr  syche  lyke  bokes  or  with  syche  lyke  heressees  as 
myght  be  fownd  in  thys  contres  to  be  condemnyd  &  bowrnt  in  lyke  wyse.  But  yett 
for  all  thys,  nethyr  for  my  lady  ys  fyrst  second  nethyr  tyrd  lettyr  whyche  were 
wrytten  in  metly  good  fowrme,  the  lordes  of  andwerpe  has  gyven  for  ther  sentence 
that  afore  the  banyshment  of  the  sayd  Inprimure  the  confeskacion  of  hys  goodes  or 
the  burnynge  off  hys  bookes  that  the  margrave  aforesayd  as  officer  for  the  Emperor 
shall  show  and  declare  sum  articles  conteynyge  in  the  sayd  bookes  wher  thys  errures 
&  heryssees  ben  fownd,  And  in  thys  maner  the  margrave  told  me  that  he  cowd 
procede  no  ferdyr  in  thys  byssines.  Wherfore  I  have  turned  to  the  cowrte  agayne 
fro  the  sayd  towne  of  andwerpe  to  showe  my  lady  &  the  lordes  of  hyr  pryve  consell, 
the  denegacion  off  Justyce  that  they  off  the  towne  of  andwerpe  has  done  vnto  me  att 
thys  tyme.  there  apon  I  have  had  grett  comunycacion  with  the  forsayd  lordes  of  the 
pryve  consell.  Showyng  them  with  fayre  wordis  that  I  had  grett  marvell  of  the 
fyrst  denegacion  off  Justyce  that  they  of  andwerpe  dyd  vnto  me  I  showynge  them 
the  efecte  &  substance  off  the  kyng  my  souerayne  lorde  ys  lettris  with  presentynge 
them  the  lettris  of  my  lady  margrett  confowrmynge  to  my  comyssion,  &  now  that 
acordynge  to  the  presentacion  that  they  made  vnto  me  whych  was  lyke  as  aforsayd 
ys,  that  yff  I  had  here  to  showe  any  syche  boke  or  bokes  as  has  ben  bowrnt  in  Ing- 
lande,  &  fyndynge  any  syche  lyke  bokes,  in  thys  contres,  that  they  sholde  do  syche 
lyke  Justyce  off  them. 

And  lyke  as  hytt  aperes  off  trowte  that  they  have  had  the  vysytacion  of  the  sayd 
bookes,  &  hawe  seyne  my  lord  the  byshope  off  london  is  verificacion,  in  the  fyrst 
levys  of  thos  same,  whych  books  with  the  lady  margrett  is  second  &  tyrd  lettrys  to 
them  of  Andwerpe  I  dyd  deliuer,  &  for  eny  reyson  that  I  myght  show  besydes 
nethyr  for  no  lettyr  that  the  sayd  lady  cowd  wryte  nethyr  for  none  ...  off  Justyce 
that  the  margrave  off  andwerpe  dyd  desyre,  yett  cowd  I  have  none  othyr  Justyce 
off  them  but  lyke  as  afore  sayd  ys. 

Wher  apon  sum  off  the  sayd  lordes  answeryd  me  that  hytt  ys  as  gr[eat]  Reyson 
that  the  luges  of  thys  contres  ought  as  well  to  know  what  the}'  shall  Juge  here  as 
the  Juges  off  owr  contre  knowys  what  thei  juge  there. 

I  answeryd  agayne  that  hytt  was  very  hard  to  make  a  man  vnders[tand]  the 
Inglyshe  tunge  in  generall,  that  can  nott  speke  hytt  nethyr  neuer  has  lernyd  hytt 
in  particuler,  &  that  I  cowd  fynd  no  defference  in  yewynge  off  correccion  to  hym 
that  has  fyrst  forgyd  or  cownyd  [false]  mone  4  by  hym  that  secondly  has  forgyd  or 
inynyd  syche  lyke. 

They  answeryd  me  that  hytt  ys  becawse  that  they  have  nott  the  perfytt  knowlege 
whyther  the  fyrst  or  second  be  false  or  not  &  that  they  wyll  do  ther  best  to  know 
the  veryte  in  thys  contre  &  that  they  w[yll]  as  feyne  do  good  Justyce  in  thys 
contres  as  we  can  or  may  desyre  hytt. 

I  answeryd  them  that  I  knowe  nott.  nethyr  I  am  assuryd,  that  ther  [ys]  nott 
in  all  the  Emperor  is  lands,  in  thys  syde  the  sees  no  susi  .  .  .  ne  bettyr  lernyd  men 
to  kan  determe  the  Englyshe  tunge  fro  the  latten,  &  latten  fro  Inglishe  then  syche 
prelates  doctours  &  lerny[d]  men  off  the  kynges  consell  that  has  fownd  the  errures 
&  heressee[s]  off  siche  bookes  as  has  ben  condemnyd  &  bowrnt  In  Ingland.  A[nd] 
here  apon  my  lorde  of  palermo,  presens  my  lorde  off  hoghestrate  &  othyrs  off 
the  sayd  lordes,  required  me  to  be  plesyd  that  thy[se]  maturs  myght  be. spoken  of 
yett  onys  agayne,  amonges  them,  &  that  aftyr  that  they  may  know  the  lordes  of 
andwerpe  is  [ex]cusacions.  Whyche  be  here  cum  to  cowrte  for  syche  an  intent 
[and]  that  as  then  by  my  lady  ys  advyse,  &  delyberacion  of  consell  [they]  trustyd 
to  gywe  me  sysh  answere  that  resonably,  I  showld  [have]  no  caw[s]e  to  cumplayne. 
but  what  hytt  shalbe  I  can  nott  [tell]  and  knowynge  the  resolucion  I  wyll  send  yowr 

a  ordain  ?  *  Money ;  '  inynyd  '  in  the  next  line  awaits  explanation. 


and  other  Heretical  Books  at  Antwerp,  &c.        67 

grace  the  hole  [of  the]  declaration,  sertyfyenge  yowr  grace  that  I  was  onys  so  dysplesyd 
with  them  [of]  Andwerpe  that  I  was  purposed  to  a  bought  vp  all  the  forsayd  bookes  5 
&  to  a  send  them  to  yowr  grace  there  to  burne  &  destrue  there  att  home  lyke  as  all 
syche  maliciovvse  bookes  meritably  &  wordy  ar  to  be  done,  but  aftyrward  that  my 
colora  was  descendyd  &  by  consell  off  a  good  frend  of  myne  I  thought  hytt  was 
bettyr  to  antyse  my  lady  &  hyr  consell,  fyrst  to  knowe  &  see  fynally  what  remedy 
that  they  showld  do  apon  my  complayntes  &  yff  ther  resolucions  lykyd  me  nott 
that  as  then  I  wold  by  all  the  forsayd  bookes  or  as  many  as  I  cowde  fynd  &  send 
ham  yow  there  to  do  yowr  grace  ys  plessure  lyke  as  I  wyll  in  deyd  yff  they  do  nott 
here  bettyr  Justyce. 

Hytt  shall  plese  yowr  grace  to  wnderstand  that  where  ther  was  two  inprimurs 
taken  prisoners,  there  ys  but  one  off  them  that  was  fownd  gylty  in  the  inprimynge 
off  the  Englyshe  bookes,  whych  ys  namyd  Christofer  endhowen  as  afore  wryten  ys. 

I  hawe  wryten  to  my  lorde  of  barro  requyrynge  hym  in  the  kynges  ys  hyghnes 
&  yowr  grace  hys  name,  that  for  the  preseruacion  off  the  cristen  feythe  &  the  extyr- 
pacion  off  the  abhomynable  secte  luterian  that  he  wold  se  Justyce  to  be  done  in 
hys  towne,  apon  all  syche  Inglyshe  bookes  entytled  the  nywe  testment,  &  all  syche 
lyke  bookes  as  I  have  infowrmyd  to  the  gouuenor  off  owr  nasion  whych  shall  show  hys 
lordshype  the  efecte  of  all  syche  byssynes. 

My  lorde  of  Valleyne  came  yesternyght  to  thys  towne  &  showyd  me  by  mowttie 
that  my  sayd  lorde  hys  fadyr  recomandyd  hym  unto  me  &  that  he  has  promest  surly 
that  he  wyll  se  syche  Justyce  to  be  done,  that  the  kynges  hyghnes  nethyr  yowr  grace 
shall  have  no  cawse  to  be,  but  well  plesyd  with  hym,  desyrynge  me  that  I  myght 
cum  me  selfe  to  barro  as  sone  as  I  cowde  to  awans6  the  sayd  bysynes  lyke  as  I  wyll 
as  sone  as  I  shall  know  how  that  the  maturs  betux  me  &  the  lordes  of  andwerpe  shalbe 
determyned. 

I  haue  begon  the  wrytynge  off  thys  letyr  att  andwerpe  and  fynshyd  hytt  here  att 
maghlynge.7     The  xijth  day  of  Jenner,  1526. 

Afftyr  this  letter  wryten  I  hawe  spocken  with  my  lady  margret  touchyng  thes 
Inglis  bookes,  &  sche  promest  me  suyrly  that  afore  fywe  dayys  to  a  nend  that 
ther  salbe  sych  justyce  don  of  them  that  I  salbe  plessyd,  then  as  then, 

per  yowr  hummyll  Bedesman  John  Hackett. 


Extract  from  letter  of  John  Hackett  to  Wolsey,  February  20,  152^  (Letters  and  Papers  of 
Henry  VII J,  vol.  iv,  Xo.  2903).    Printed  from  Cotton  MS.  Galba,  B.  VI.  4. 

Plesse  yowr  grace  to  wnderstand  that  synnes  my  last  wrytyngs  [to  your]  g[race] 
I  hawe  ressewyth  none  of  yowrys.  I  trust  by  this  tyme  that  yowr  [grace  has] 
ample  infowrmacion  off  syche  execucion  &  Justyce  as  has  bene  done  in  [these] 
townes  of  Andwerpe  &  barrow  apon  all  syche  Inglyshe  bookes  as  we  [could]  fynd 
in  thys  contres.  semblablys  to  trye  syche  othyr  bookes  as  yowr  g[race  shall]  send 
wnto  me,  with  my  lorde  the  byshope  off  london  is  sygnature,  And  b[y  my]  last 
wrytyngs  wnto  Mr  bryan  tuke  I  aduertyssyd  hym  that  there  [were]  dyvers  marchands 
off  scottland  that  bought  many  off  syche  lyke  bookes  [to  take]  Them  in  to  scottland, 
aparty  to  edenbowrghe  &  the  most  party  to  the  tow[ne  of]  sent  androys  for  the 
whyche  cawse  when  I  was  at  barro  beyng  a  .  .  .  the  skottyshe  shyppes  were  in 
se  land  thare  the  sayd  bookes  were  ladyn  .  .  .  sodenly  thedyrwarde  thynkynge  yff 
that  I  had  fownd  syche  stuffe  th[at]  I  wold  cawse  to  make  as  good  a  fyer  off 
them  as  there  has  bene  [made]  off  the  remenaunt  in  brabant,  but  fortune  wold  nott 
that  I  showld  [this]  tyme,  for  the  forsayd  shyppes  were  departyd  a  day  afore  my 
cummyng  so  I  must  atakyn  pacience  for  all  my  labowre,  with  levyng  my  lady  is 
lettris  &  good  instruction  with  my  lorde  off  beveris  &  the  rent  m[aste]r  off . . .  con- 
cernyng  the  forsayd  byssynes. 

6  This  suggestion  was  subsequently  carried  out  bv  Tunstall  and  Warham.  See  Nos.  XVI] 
and  XVIII. 

6  Advance.  '  Mechlin. 


E  2 


Cutbard 

Tonstall 

bishop  o£ 

London 

bought 

Newe 

Testa- 

raentes  to 

burne. 


Augus- 
tyne 

Packyng  - 
ton  the 
Bishop  of 
Londons 
mer- 
chaunt. 


68      The  Search  for  English  New  Testaments,  &c. 


The  margraw  off  andwerpe  &  drossard  of  barghys  requyred  &  pray[ed]  yff  hytt 
were  possibell  to  cawse  them  to  gett  qute  off  Ingland  a  [notyfyjcacion  off  sum 
partyculer  artyclys  off  erryssees  conteynynge  in  the  say[d  bokes]  by  the  whyche 
notyfycacion,  they  may  lafully  nott  only  to  bowrne  syche  .  .  .  bookes,  but  also  to 
correcte  &  punnj'she  the  inprymurs  byers  &  syllers  of  [them]  bothe  in  body  &  in  goodes, 
for  els  acordynge  to  the  lawys  off  thys  [land]  They  may  nott  punnyshe  nethyr  make 
correcion  apon  the  forsayd  [imprimurs]  nethyr  apon  there  goodes,  as  they  say. 

.  .  .  att  maglyne  the  .  .  .  day  off  Februer. 

per  yowr  ryght  hummyll  Bedes  [man] 

John  hackett. 
[Addressed  :   '  My  Lorde  Legate.'] 

F. 

Extract  from  postscript  to  previous  letter  (Letters  and  Papers  of  Henry  VIII,  vol.  iv,  No.  2904). 
Printed  from  Cotton  MS.,  Galba  B,  IX,  235. 

.  And  as  for  the  xl  mark  that  I  ressewt  here  at  y[owr]  grace  ys  comandment.  I 
tynke  ye  wyll  alowe  me  the  same  for  the  expenssis  extra  ordenary  that  I  have  done 
in  comyng  &  goyng  &  abyddyng  at  andwerpe  at  Barow  selomd  (?)  &  elswher.  with 
the  prewe1  Inquesissiones  that  I  have  don  at  gant  at  bruges  at  Brussellis,  and 
lowayn  and  els  wher  touchyng  the  recoverans  &  execussyons  to  be  don  apon  all  syche 
heretyk  bokes  as  I  myght  fynd  in  this  contres  acordyng  vnto  your  grace  ys  mynd 
instruxions  &  wryghtyngs  sobmytyng  me  self  all  ways  to  be  ordyrt  acordyng  vnto  ' 
your  gracious  comandment  goodwyll  &  plessure. 

[The  postscript  is  dated  'fro  machlvng  the  xxth  day  of  fewrer  a  1526.] 

XVII.     THE  BISHOP  OF  LONDON  BUYS  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

Extract  from  Halle's  Chronicle,  or  '  Union  of  the  two  noble  and  illustrious  famelies  of  Lancastre 
and  Yorke',  London,  R.  Grafton,  1548,  fol.  clxxxvi. 

Here  is  to  be  remembred,  that  at  this  present  tyme,  Willyam  Tyndale  had  newly 
translated  and  imprinted  the  Newe  Testament  in  Englishe,  and  the  Bishop  of 
London,  not  pleased  with  the  translacion  thereof,  debated  with  hymself,  how  he  | 
might  compasse  and  deuise,  to  destroye  that  false  and  erronious  translacion  (as  he 
saied).  And  so  it  happened  that  one  Augustine  Packyngton,  a  Mercer  and  Merchant 
of  London,  and  of  a  greate  honestie,  the  same  tyme  was  in  Andwarp,  where  the  i 
Bishope  then  was,1  and  this  Packyngton  was  a  man  that  highly  fauored  William 
Tindale,  but  to  the  bishop  vtterly  shewed  hymself  to  the  contrary.  The  bishop 
desirous  to  haue  his  purpose  brought  to  passe,  commoned  of  the  New  Testamentes. 
and  how  gladly  he  would  bye  them.  Packyngton  then  hearyng  that  he  wished  for, 
saied  vnto  the  bishop,  my  Lorde,  if  it  bee  your  pleasure  I  can  in  this  matter  dooe 
more  I  dare  saie,  then  moste  of  the  Merchauntes  of  Englande  that  are  here,  for 
I  knowe  the  Dutchemen  and  straungiers,  that  haue  bought  theim  of  Tyndale,  and 
haue  theim  here  to  sell,  so  that  if  it  be  your  lordshippes  pleasure,  to  pave  for  theim, 
for  otherwise  I  cannot  come  by  them,  but  I  must  disburse  money  for  theim,  I  will 
then  assure  you,  to  haue  every  boke  of  them,  that  is  imprinted  and  is  here  vnsolde. 
The  Bishop  thinkyng  that  he  had  God  by  the  too,2  when  in  deede  he  had  (as  after 
he  thought)  the  Deuell  by  the  fiste,  saied,  gentle  Master  Packyngton,  do  your  dili- 
gence and  get  them  and  with  all  my  harte  I  will  paie  for  them,  whatsoeuer  thei  cost 
you,  for  the  bokes  are  erronious  and  naughtes  and  I  entende  surely  to  destroy  theim 
all,  and  to  burne  theim  at  Paules  Crosse.  Agustine  Packyngton  came  to  Willyam 
Tyndale  and  saied,  Willyam  I  knowe  thou  arte  a  poore  man,  and  hast  a  hepe  of 
newe  Testamentes,  and  bokes  by  thee,  for  the  whiche  thou  hast  bothe  indaungered 
thy  frendes,  and  beggered  thy  self,  and  I  haue  now  gotten  thee  a  Merchaunt,  whiche  ' 

XVI.  F.   '  Privy. 

XVII.  >  Presumably  in  connexion  with  the  negotiations  closed  by  the  Treaty  of  Cambrai, 
between  France  and  Spain,  August  1529.  *  Toe. 


The  Bishop  of  London  buys  New  Testaments.     69 


with  ready  money  shall  dispatche  thee  of  all  that  thou  hast,  if  you  thynke  it 
so  proffitable  for  your  self.  Who  is  the  Merchant  said  Tyndale  ?  The  bishoppe 
of  London,  saied  Packyngton,  O  that  is  because  he  will  burne  them  saied  Tyndale,  ye 
Mary  quod  Packyngton,  I  am  the  gladder  said  Tyndale  for  these  two  benefites  shall 
come  therof,  I  shall  get  money  of  hym  for  these  bokes,  to  bryng  myself  out  of  debt 
(and  the  whole  world  shall  crie  out  vpon  the  burnynge  of  Goddes  worde.)  And 
the  ouerplus3  of  the  money,  that  shall  remain  to  me,  shall  make  me  more  studious, 
to  correct  the  said  Newe  Testament,  and  so  newly  to  Imprint  the  same  once  again, 
and  I  trust  the  second  will  muche  better  like  you,  then  euer  did  the  first :  And  so 
forward  went  the  bargain,  the  bishop  had  the  bokes,  Packyngton  had  the  thankes, 
and  Tyndale  had  the  money. 

Afterward  when  mo  newe  Testamentes  were  Imprinted,  thei  came  thicke  and 
threfolde  into  Englande,  the  bishop  of  London  hearyng  that  still  there  were  so  many 
Newe  Testamentes  abrode,  sent  for  Augustyne  Packyngton  and  saied  vnto  him  : 
Sir  how  commeth  this,  that  there  are  so  many  Newe  Testamentes  abrode,  and  you 
promised  and  assured  me  that  you  had  bought  al  ?  then  saied  Packyngton,  I  promes 
you  I  bought  all  that  then  was  to  bee  had  :  but  I  perceiue  thei  haue  made  more 
sence,  and  it  will  neuer  bee  better,  as  long  as  thei  haue  the  letters  and  stampes, 
therefore  it  wer  best  for  your  lordshippe  to  bye  the  stampes  to,  and  then  are  you 
sure  :  the  bishop  smiled  at  hym  and  saied,  well  Packyngton  well,  and  so  ended 
this  matter. 

Shortly  after  it  fortuned  one  George  Constantine,4  to  be  apprehended  by  Sir 
Thomas  More,  whiche  then  was  lorde  Chauncellor  of  England  of  suspicion  of  certain 
heresies.  And  this  Constantine  beyng  with  More,  after  diuerse  examinacions  of 
diuerse  thynges,  emong  other,  Master  More  saied  in  this  wise  to  Constantine.  Con- 
stantine I  would  haue  thee  plain  with  me  in  one  thyng  that  I  will  aske  of  thee,  and 
I  promes  thee  I  will  shewe  thee  fauor,  in  all  the  other  thynges,  whereof  thou  art 
accused  to  me.  There  is  beyond  the  sea  Tyndale,  Ioye,  and  a  great  many  mo  of  you. 
I  knowe  thei  cannot  hue  without  helpe,  some  sendeth  theim  money  and  succoureth 
theim,  and  thy  self  beyng  one  of  them,  haddest  parte  thereof,  and  therefore  knowest 
from  whence  it  came.  I  praie  thee  who  be  thei  that  thus  helpe  them  ?  My  lorde 
quod  Constantine,  will  you  that  I  shal  tell  you  the  truthe  ?  Yea  I  praie  thee  quod 
my  Lorde.  Mary  I  will  quod  Constantine,  truly  quod  he  it  is  the  Bishoppe  of 
London  that  hath  holpen  vs,  for  he  hath  bestowed  emong  vs,  a  greate  deale  of 
money  in  New  Testamentes  to  burne  theim,  and  that  hath  and  yet  is  our  onely 
succoure  and  comfort.  Now  by  my  trothe  quod  More,  I  thynke  euen  the  same,  and 
I  said  so  muche  to  the  bishop,  when  he  went  about  to  bye  them. 


XVIII.    THE   BISHOP   OF  NORWICH   REFUNDS  THE  ARCHBISHOP 
PART  OF  HIS   OUTLAY  ON  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

Letter  of  Richard  Nix,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  June  14,  1527. 
Printed  from  Cotton  MS.  Vitellius  B,  IX,  117. 

In  right  humble  maner  I  commende  me  vnto  your  goode  Lordeshippe,  Doynge 
the  same  tundrestand,  that  I  lately  receyued  your  letters  dated  at  your  manor  of 
Lambethe,  the  xxvj  daie  of  the  moneth  of  Maij .  by  the  whiche  I  do  perceyue  that 
youre  grace  hath  lately  goten  into  your  handes  all  the  bokes  of  the  newe  testamente 
translated  into  Englesshe  and  pryented  beyonde  the  see  aswele  those  with  the  gloses 
ioyned  vnto  theym  as  thoder  without  the  gloses,1  by  meanes  of  exchaunge  by  you 
made  therfore  to  the  somme  of  lxij/.  ixs.  iiijrf.2 

Surely   in   myne   opynion   you  have   done   therin    a   graciouse  and   a   blessed 

3  Tyndale  had  first  to  repay  the  merchants  who  advanced  money  to  print  his  Testaments. 

'  George  Constantine,  a  Cambridge  graduate.  When  under  examination  by  More  he  gave 
information  as  to  the  method  of  shipping  the  Lutheran  books.  For  his  activity  before  his  arrest, 
see  No.  XIX. 

XVIII.   '  The  books  purchased  must  have  been  the  8°  and  40  printed  at  Worms. 

2  Large  as  this  sum  is,  about  ^700  of  modern  value,  if  the  average  retail  price  of  a  New 
Testament  was  six  groats  (five  for  the  8°  and  seven  for  the  40,  see  No.  XIX)  or  2s.,  the  number 
purchased  would  only  be  about  663,  and  even  if  50  per  cent  be  added  to  this  to  represent  the 
allowance  made  to  a  wholesale  buyer,  it  would  amount  to  about  one  thousand,  or  one-sixth  of 
the  total  number  printed. 


70    The  Archbishop's  Outlay  on  New  Testaments. 


dede,  and  god  I  doubt  not  shall  highly  rewarde  you  therfore,  And  where  in  your 
said  letters  ye  write,  that  in  so  moche  as  this  matur  and  the  daunger  therof  if 
remedie  had  not  be  prouyded  shulde  not  only  haue  towched  you  but  all  the 
Busshoppes  within  your  province,  and  that  it  is  no  reason  that  the  holle  charge 
and  coste  therof  shulde  reste  only  in  you,  but  that  thei  and  euery  of  theym  for 
their  parte  shulde  avaunce  and  contribute  certain  sommes  of  money  towarde 
the  same.  And  for  that  entente  desire  me  to  certifie  you  what  conuenyent  somme 
I  for  my  part  wulbe  contented  to  avaunce  in  this  behalue,  and  to  make  paymente 
therof  vnto  Maister  William  Potkyn  your  seruaunte.  Pleaseth  it  you  tundrestande 
that  I  am  right  wele  contented  to  geue  and  avaunce  in  this  behalue  ten  markes,3 
and  shall  cause  the  same  to  be  delyuered  vnto  the  said  maister  Potkyn  shortely 
the  which  somme  I  thinke  sufficient  for  my  parte  if  euery  Busshopp  within  your 
said  provynce  make  like  contribution  &  avauncemente  after  the  Rate  and  substance 
of  their  benefices.  Neuer  the  lesse  if  your  grace  thinke  this  somme  of  ten  markes 
not  sufficient  for  my  parte  in  this  mater,  (the  nombre  and  substance  of  thoder 
your  suffragans  considered)  your  furdre  pleasure  knowen  I  shalbe  as  gladde  to 
conforme  my  self  therunto  in  this  or  any  other  mater  concernynge  the  churche,  as 
any  your  subgiet  within  your  provynce.  As  knowes  Almyghty  god,  who  longe  preserue 
you  to  his  moste  pleasure  and  your  hertes  desire.  At  hoxne  in  Suff.  the  xiiij  daie 
of  Junii  1527. 

Your  humble  obediencur  and  baidman 

R.  Norvich. 

I  wolde  be  as  gladde  to  wayte  vpon  your  lordeshipp  and  do  my  duetie  vnto 
you  as  any  man  lyvinge,  but  I  thynke  that  I  can  not  so  do  this  somer,  I  praye 
god  I  may  haue  some  tyme  for  to  do  it. 

[Addressed  :   To  my  Lorde  of  Canterbury  is  goode  lordeshippe.] 

XIX.    THE  CONFESSION  OF  ROBERT  NECTON 1  THAT  BOUGHT  AND 
SOLD  NEW  TESTAMENTS  IN  ENGLISH. 

From  Strype,  Ecclesiastical  Memorials,  1822,  vol.  i,  Pt.  II,  pp.  63-5.  Reference  given  to  MSS. 
Fox.  Regist.  Cuthb.,  i.e.  to  the  Register  of  Cuthbert  Tonstall,  Bishop  of  London. 

He  bowght  at  sondry  tymes  of  Mr.  Fyshe  2  dwellyng  by  the  Whight  Frears  in 
London,  many  of  the  New  Testaments  in  English  ;  that  is  to  say,  now  V.  and 
now  X.  And  sometyme  mo,  and  sometyme  less,  to  the  nombre  of  XX.  or  XXX. 
in  the  gret  volume.  The  which  New  Testaments  the  said  Mr.  F3'she  had  of  one 
Harmond,  an  English  man,  beyng  beyond  see.  But  how  many  he  had  this 
respondent  cannot  tell.  And  this  respondent  saith,  that  about  a  yere  and  half 
agon  he  fell  in  a  quaintaunce  with  Vicar  Constantyne3  here  in  London.  Which 
shewed  this  respondent  first,  that  the  said  Mr  Fyshe  had  New  Testaments  to  sell  ; 
and  caused  this  respondent  to  by  some  of  the  said  New  Testaments  of  Mr  Fyshe. 
And  the  said  Mr  Fyshe,  at  the  desire  and  instance  of  Vicar  Constantine,  browghte 
the  said  New  Testaments  home  to  this  respondents  house.  And  before  that  Vicar 
Constantine  caused  this  respondent  to  by  some  of  the  said  New  Testaments,  he 
had  none,  nor  no  other  books,  except  the  chapiters  of  Matthew.4 

And  moreover,  this  respondent  saith,  that  about  the  same  tyme  he  sold  fyve 
of  the  said  New  Testaments  to  Sir5  William  Furboshore  synging  man,  in  Stow- 
market,  in  Suffolk,  for  vii  or  viii  grotes  a  pece.  Also,  two  of  the  same  New  Testa- 
ments in  Bury  St.  Edmunds  :  that  is  to  say,  to  Raymond  Wodelesse  one  ;  and 
Thomas  Horfan  another,  for  the  same  price. 

Also,  he  saith,  that  about  Cristmas  last,  he  sold  one  New  Testament  to  a  Priste  ; 

3  i.e.  £6  13s.  4d.,  about  one-tenth  of  the  whole  sum. 

XIX.  '  Probably  a  kinsman  of  Thomas  Necton,  sheriff  of  Norwich  (1531),  whose  sympathies  ' 
were  with  the  Protestants. 

*  Simon  Fish,  a  student  of  Gray's  Inn,  who  subsequently  wrote  the  Supplication  of  the  Beggars. 

3  See  No.  XVII,  note  4. 

4  This  reference  may  equally  well  be  to  the  Cologne  fragment  of  the  New  Testament,  or  to  a 
separate  edition. 

'   Here  and  elsewhere  '  Sir  '  denotes  a  prir^t. 


The  Confession  of  Robert  Necton. 


71 


whose  name  he  cannot  tell,  dwellynge  at  Pycknam  Wade  in  Northfolke  ;  and  two 
Latin  books,  the  one  Oeconomica  Christiana  ;  and  the  other  Unio  Dissidentium. 
Also,  one  Testament  to  William  Gibson  merchant  man,  of  the  parish  of  S.  Margaret 
Patens. 

Also,  Vicar  Constantyne  at  dyvers  tymes  had  of  this  respondent  a  XV.  or  XVI. 
of  the  New  Testaments  of  the  biggest.6  And  this  respondent  saith,  that  the  sayd 
Vicar  Constantyne  dyvers  tymes  bowght  of  him  certayne  of  the  sayd  New  Testaments  : 
and  this  respondent  lykewise,  of  hym.  Also,  he  sold  Sir  Richard  Bayfell  two  New 
Testaments  unbound  about  Cristmas  last  :    for  the  which  he  payd  iiis  iiii^. 

Farthermore,  he  saith,  that  he  hath  sold  V  or  VI  of  the  said  N.  Testaments 
to  diverse  persons  of  the  cite  of  London  :  whose  namys,  or  dwellyng  places,  he  doth 
not  remember. 

Moreover,  he  saith,  that  since  Easter  last,  he  bowght  of  Geffray  Usher  of  Saynct 
Antonyes,  with  whom  he  hath  byn  aqueynted  by  the  space  of  a  yere,  or  thereabout 
(by  reason  he  was  Mr  Forman,  the  person  of  Hony  Lane  his  servant,  and  for  that 
this  respondent  did  moche  resort  to  the  said  persons  sermons)  XVIII  N.  Testaments 
in  English  of  the  smal  volume,  and  XXVI.  books,  al  of  one  sort,  called  Oeconomica 
Christiani  in  Latin  ;  and  two  other  books  in  Latin  called  Unio  Dissidentium.  For 
which  he  payed  hym  xls.  Of  the  which  Oeconomica  Christiana  Vicar  Constantyne 
had  XIII.  at  one  tyme. 

And  of  which  N.  Testaments  since  Easter  this  respondent  caryed  XV  of  them,  and 
thother  XXIII  Oeconomica  Christiana,  to  Lynne,  to  sell.  Which  he  wold  have  sold 
to  a  young  man,  callid  William  .  .  .  merchant  man,  dwellyng  by  one  Mr  Burde 
of  the  same  towne.  Which  young  man  wold  not  medle  with  them,  because  they 
were  prohibite.  And  so  this  respondent  left  the  said  books  at  Lynne  with  the 
said  William,  untyll  his  retornyng  thider  ayen.  And  so  the  said  bookes  do  remayne 
ther  still,  as  yet.  And  two  of  the  said  N.  Testaments  he  hath  in  his  own  custodie, 
with  another  of  the  great  volume.  Also,  another  Testament  of  the  smal  volume 7 
he  sold  since  Easter  to  young  Elderton,  merchant  man,  of  Saynct  Mary  Hill  parishe. 

Howbeit  he  saith,  that  he  knew  not  that  any  of  thies  bookes  were  of  Luthers 
sect. 

To  the  xvnjtb,  That  he  hath  byn  a  receptor,  he  saith,  that  he  twice  or  thryese 
hath  byn  in  Thomas  Mathews  8  house  of  Colchestre.  Wheras  he  hath  red  diverse 
tymes  in  the  N.  Testament  in  English,  before  the  said  Thomas  Matthew,  his  wif, 
William  Dykes,  and  other  servantes  ther.  And  there,  and  then  have  herd  old  Father 
Hacker  speke  of  prophesies  ;  and  have  had  communications  of  diverse  articles  : 
which  he  doth  not  now  remember. 

To  the  XIXth,  so  begynnyng,  That  he  went  about  to  by  a  great  nombre  of  N. 
Testaments,  he  saith,  that  about  Cristmas  last,  there  came  a  Duche  man,9  beyng 
now  in  the  Flete,  which  wold  have  sold  this  respondent  ii  or  iii  hundreth  of  the 
said  N.  Testaments  in  English  :  which  this  respondent  did  not  by  ;  but  sent  him 
to  Mr  Fyshe  to  by  them  :  and  said  to  the  Duche  man,  Look  what  M1'  Fyshe  doth, 
I  wil  do  the  same.  But  whether  Mr  Fyshe  bowght  any  of  them,  he  cannot  tell : 
for  the  which  iii  hundreth  he  shold  have  paid  xvi  I  V  sh.  after  IX  d.  a  pece.10 

To  the  xx  article,  That  he  is  inframed  ;  he  saith,  that  since  Easter  last,  he  was 
at  Norwiche  at  his  brothers  house,  wher  as  one  had  complayned  of  this  respondent 
to  my  Lord  of  Norwiche,"  because  he  had  a  N.  Testament.  Wherfor  his  brother 
counceled  this  respondent  to  send  or  delyver  his  said  N.  Testament,  and  said  to 

8  i.e.  of  the  quarto  edition  with  marginal  notes. 

I  Presumably  the  octavo  Worms  edition. 

8  The  name  is  worth  noting,  as  it  is  possible  that  this  Thomas  Matthew  was  used  in  connexion 
with  the  Bible  of  1537  as  a  scapegoat,  on  whom,  after  he  had  been  got  out  of  the  way,  any  blame 
could  be  laid.  Compare  the  part  possibly  played  by  Hans  van  Ruremond  as  the  '  Johan  Holly- 
bushe'  of  the  second  Latin-English  New  Testament  printed  by  Nicholson  in  1538  (see  note 
to  No.  XVI.  A). 

9  Probably  Hans  van  Ruremond  acting  for  Christoffel  van  Endhoven  or  van  Ruremond,  who 
brought  out  an  edition  at  Antwerp  in  1526  (see  note  to  No.  XVI.  A).  This  was  apparently  a  little 
i6mo,  and  sold  consequently  wholesale  at  either  gd.  or  is.  id.,  according  to  which  emendation 
of  the  faulty  reckoning  made  at  the  end  of  the  paragraph  is  adopted.  The  700  copies  sold  to 
F.  Birckmann  for  £2$  17s.  3d.  work  out  at  just  under  lod.  each.  But  in  the  case  of  copies  sold  in 
England  the  price  would  naturally  be  higher. 

10  Three  hundred  copies  at  gd.  each  come  to  £11  5s.,  not  ^16  5s. 

II  See  Nos.  XVII  and  XIX. 


him,  If  he  wold  not  delyver  it,  my  Lord  of  Norwiche  wold  send  him  to  my  Lord 
of  London,  his  Ordinary.     And  so  afterwards  he  sent  it  to  London  by  the  caryer. 

To  the  xxi.  article,  so  begynnyng,  That  contrary  to  the  prohibition,  he  hath 
kept  the  N.  Testament,  he  confessith,  that  after  he  had  knowledge  of  the  con- 
dempnation  of  the  said  N.  Testament,  by  the  space  of  a  yere,  or  more,  he  hath  had 
in  his  custodie,  kept,  and  studyed  the  same  Testament,  and  have  red  it  thoroughly 
many  tymes.  And  also  have  red  in  it  as  wel  within  the  citie  and  diocess  of  London, 
as  within  the  citie  and  diocesse  of  Norwiche.  And  not  onely  red  it  to  himself,  but 
redd  and  tawght  it  to  diverse  other. 

To  the  xxii.  he  awnsweryth  and  denyeth,  that  he  had  Wycliefs  Wycket  or  the 
Apocalips  at  any  tyme. 

Per  me  Robert  Necton. 


XX.     BISHOP  NIX   IMPLORES  THE   KING'S  HELP. 

From  a  letter  of  Richard  Nix,  bishop  of  Norwich,  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  May  14, 
1530  (Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  V.  360). 

After  moste  humbill  recomendation,  I  do  your  grace  tvndrestande  that  I  am 
accombered  with  suche  as  kepith  and  redethe  these  Arronious  bokes  in  engleshe 
and  beleve  and  gif  credence  to  the  same  and  teacheth  other  that  they  shuld  so 
doo,  My  Lorde  I  have  done  that  lieth  in  me  for  the  suppression  of  suche  parsons, 
but  it  passith  my  power,  or  any  spirituall  manne  for  to  do  it,  for  dyuerse  saith 
openly  in  my  diocesse,  that  the  kinges  grace  wolde  that  they  shulde  have  the  saide 
Arronious  bokes,  and  so  maynteynith  them  self  of  the  kinge,  wherupon,  I  desired 
my  lorde  Abbot  of  Hide  to  shew  this  to  the  kinges  grace,  besechinge  him  to  sende 
his  honorabill  lettres  vndre  his  seall  downe  to  whome  he  please  in  my  diocesse 
that  they  may  shew  and  publiche  that  it  is  not  his  pleasure  that  suche  bokes  shuld 
be  had  or  red.  And  also  punyshe  suche  as  saith  soo,  I  truste  before  this  lettre 
shall  come  vnto  you,  my  saide  lorde  Abbot  hath  donne  soo,  the  saide  Abbot  hath 
the  names  of  some  that  crakith  in  the  kinges  name  that  ther  false  opinions  shuld 
goo  furth,  and  will  dye  in  the  quarell  that  ther  vngracious  opinions  be  true,  And 
trustith  by  michalmas  daye  ther  shalbe  more  that  shall  beleve  of  ther  opinions 
than  they  that  beleveth  the  contrary.  If  I  had  knowen  that  your  grace  had 
bene  at  london,  I  wolde  have  commanded  the  saide  Abbot  to  have  spoke  with  you, 
but  your  grace  may  sende  for  him  whan  ye  please,  and  he  shall  shew  you  my 
holl  mynde  in  that  mater,  and  how  I  thought  best  for  the  suppression  of  suche 
as  holdeth  these  Arronious  opinions,  for  if  they  contynue  any  tyme  I  thinke  they 
shall  vndoe  vs  all,  The  said  Abbot  departed  from  me  on  monday  laste  and  sith  that 
tyme  I  have  had  moche  trobill  and  busynes  with  other,  in  like  mater,  And  they 
say  that  where  somever  they  go  they  here  say  that  the  kinges  pleasure  is  the  new 
testament  in  inglishe  shulde  go  forth,  and  men  shuld  have  it,  and  rede  it,  and 
from  that  opynion  I  canne  no  wise  induce  them,  but  I  had  gretter  auctorite  to 
punyshe  them,  thanne  I  haue,  Wherfor  I  besiche  your  good  lordeshippe  to  advertise 
the  kinges  grace,  as  I  trust  the  saide  abbot  hath  done  before  thes  lettre  shall  come 
vnto  your  grace  that  a  remedy  may  be  had,  for  now  it  maye  be  done  well  in  my 
diocesse,  for  the  gentilmen  and  the  commentye  be  not  greatly  inseth,  but  marchantes 
and  suche  that  hath  ther  abyding  not  ferre  from  the  see,  the  saide  Abbot  of  Hide 
canne  shew  you  of  a  curat  and  well  lerned  in  my  diocesse,  that  exorted  his  parishioners 
to  beleve  contrary  to  the  Catholicall  faith. 

Ther  is  a  collage  in  Cambrige  called  gunwell  haule  1  of  the  foundacion  of  a 
Bishoppe  of  Norwiche.  I  here  of  no  clerke  that  hath  come  ought  lately  of  that  col- 
lage but  saverith  of  the  friainge  panne  thoughe  he  speke  never  so  holely,  I  beseche 
your  grace  to  pardon  me  of  my  rude  and  tedious  writinge  to  you,  the  zele  and  love 
that  I  ough  to  almighty  god  cause  me  this  to  do,  And  thus  almighty  god  longe 

1  Gonville  Hall  was  founded  in  1 348  by  Edmond  GonviUe,  rector  of  Terrington  in  Norfolk,  but 
William  Bateman,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  whom  Gonville  left  his  executor,  changed  both  the  site  and 
the  statutes  of  the  Hall,  and  added  to  its  endowments  in  1353,  and  is  thus  reckoned  as  its 
second  founder.  The  Hall  became  Gonville  and  Caius  College  by  the  benefactions  of  Dr.  John 
Caius,  its  third  founder,  in  1558. 


Bishop  Nix  Implores  the  King's  Help. 


73 


preserue  your  grace  in  good  prosperite  and  helth.      At  hoxne  the  xiiij,h  Day  of 
Maii  1530. 

Your  obediensary  and 

Daily  orator 

Ri  Norwich. 

XXI.     THE  KING  CONSULTS  HIS  COUNCIL  AND  THE  BISHOPS. 

May  25,  1530. 

Extract  from  Halle's  Chronicle,  The  Union  of  the  two  Noble  Houses,  &c.    Grafton,  1 548,  fol.  192. 

The  xxii  yere 

In  the  begynnyng  of  this  two  and  twentie  yere,  the  kyng  like  a  politike  and  pru- 
j  dent  prince,  perceiued  that  his  subiectes  and  other  persons  had  diners  times  within 
1  foure  yeres  last  past,  brought  into  his  realme,  greate  nombre  of  printed  bokes,  of  the 
new  Testament,  translated  into  the  English  tongue  by  Tyndall,  Joy,  and  other, 
which  bokes  the  common  people  vsed  and  dayly  red  priuely,  which  the  clargie  would 
not  admit,  for  thei  punnished  suche  persones  as  had  red  studied  or  taught  the  same 
with  greate  extremitie,  but  bycause  the  multitude  was  so  greate,  it  was  not  in  their 
power  to  redresse  there  grefe  :  wherefore  they  made  complaint  to  the  Chauncelor1 
(which  leaned  much  to  the  spirituall  mennes  part,  in  all  causes)  where  vpon  he  im- 
prisoned and  punished  a  greate  nomber  so  that  for  this  cause  a  great  rumor  and 
controuersie  rose  daily  emongst  the  people  :  wherfore  the  kyng  consideryng  what 
good  might  come  of  readyng  of  the  new  Testament  with  reuerence  and  folowyng  the 
same,  and  what  euell  mighte  come  of  the  readyng  of  the  same  if  it  were  euil  trans- 
lated, and  not  folowed  :  came  into  the  starre  chambre  the  hue  and  twentie  day  of 
May,2  and  there  commoned  with  his  counsaile  and  the  prelates  concernyng  this 
cause,  and  after  long  debatyng,  it  was  alleged  that  the  translacion  [s]  of  Tyndall  and 
Joy  were  not  truely  translated,  and  also  that  in  theim  were  prologues  and  prefaces 
which  sounded  to  heresie,  and  rayled  against  the  bishopes  vncharitably,  wherefore  all 
such  bokes  were  prohibited  and  commaundement  geven  by  the  kyng  to  the  bishop- 
pes,  that  thei  callyng  to  theim  the  best  learned  men  of  the  vniuersities  should  cause 
a  new  translacion  to  be  made,  so  that  the  people  should  not  be  ignoraunte  in  the 
law  of  god  :  And  notwithstandyng  this  commaundement  the  bishopes  did  nothing  at 
all  to  set  furth  a  new  translacion,  which  caused  the  people  to  stody  Tindalles  trans- 
lacion, by  reason  where  of  many  thinges  cam  to  light,  as  you  shall  here  after. 

In  this  yere  in  Maye,3  the  bishop  of  London  caused  al  his  newe  Testamentes 
which  he  had  bought  with  many  other  bokes.  to  be  brought  into  Paules  churche- 
yarde  in  London  and  there  was  openly  burned. 


XXII.   THE  KING'S  PROCLAMATION,  JUNE,  1530. 
From  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum,  printed  by  Thomas  Berthelet. 

Mense  Junii,  Anno  regni  metuendissimi  domini  nostri  regis  Henrici  octaui.  xxii. 

A  proclamation  made  and  diuysed  by  the  kyngis  highnes,  with  the  aduise  of  his 
honorable  counsaile,  for  dampning  of  erronious  bokes  and  heresies,  and  prohibitinge 
the  hauinge  of  holy  scripture,  translated  into  the  vulgar  tonges  of  englisshe,  frenche, 
or  duche,  in  suche  maner,  as  within  this  proclamation  is  expressed. 

The  kinge  our  most  dradde  soueraigne  lorde,  studienge  and  prouidynge  dayly  for 

1  Sir  Thomas  More. 

2  Of  the  proceedings  of  May  24  (see  XXII,  note  1 )  the  '  Bill  in  English  to  be  published  by  the 
prechours '  says  that  '  his  gracious  highnes,  being  in  parson  in  the  chapell  called  the  "  Old 
Chapell ",  which  sometime  was  called  Saint  Edwards  chambre,  sett  on  the  est  side  of  the  parlia- 
ment chambre,  within  his  gracis  palace  at  Westminster,  then  and  there  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
parsonages  there  assembled  and  gathered  '  caused  three  notaries  to  record  the  decisions  arrived  at. 

3  Tunstall  succeeded  Wolsey  as  Bishop  of  Durham  in  February,  1530,  and  John  Stokesley,  his 
successor,  was  nominated  July,  1530,  and  consecrated  the  following  November.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  Tunstall  is  meant. 


74  The  King's  Proclamation,  June,  1530. 


the  weale,  benefite,  and  honour  of  this  his  most  noble  realme,  well  and  euidently 
perceiueth,  that  partly  through  the  malicious  suggestion  of  our  gostly  enemy,  partly 
by  the  yuell  and  peruerse  inclination  and  sedicious  disposition  of  sundry  persons, 
diuers  heresies  and  erronious  opinions  haue  ben  late  sowen  and  spredde  amonge  his 
subiectes  of  this  his  said  realme,  by  blasphemous  and  pestiferous  englisshe  bokes, 
printed  in  other  regions,  and  sent  in  to  this  realme,  to  the  entent  as  well  to  peruerte 
and  withdrawe  the  people  from  the  catholike  and  true  fayth  of  Christe,  as  also  to 
stirre  and  incense  them  to  sedition,  and  disobedience  agaynst  their  princes,  soue- 
raignes,  and  heedes,  as  also  to  cause  them  to  contempne  and  neglect  all  good  lawes, ! 
customes,  and  vertuous  maners,  to  the  final  subuersion  and  desolation  of  this  noble  j 
realme,  if  they  myght  haue  preuayled  (whiche  god  forbyd)  in  theyr  most  cursed  per- ' 
suasions  and  malicious  purposes.  Where  vpon  the  kynges  hignes,  by  his  incom-  j 
parable  wysedome,  forseinge  and  most  prudently  considerynge,  hath  inuited  and  called 
to  hym  the  primates  of  this  his  gracis  realme,  and  also  a  sufficient  nombre  of  dis- 
crete vertuous  and  well  lerned  personages  in  diuinite,  as  well  of  either  of  the  vniuer- 
sites,  Oxforde  and  Cambrige,  as  also  hath  chosen  and  taken  out  of  other  parties  of 
his  realme  :  gyuinge  vnto  them  libertie,  to  speke  and  declare  playnly  their  aduises, 
iudgementes,  and  determinations,  concernynge  as  well  the  approbation  or  reiectynge 
of  suche  bokes  as  be  in  any  parte  suspected,  as  also  the  admission  and  diuulgation 
of  the  olde  and  newe  testament,  translated  in  to  englisshe.  Wher  vpon  his  highnes, 
in  his  owne  royall  person,  callynge  to  hym  the  said  primates  and  diuines,  hath 
seriously  and  depely,  with  great  leisure  and  longe  deliberation,  consulted,  debated, 
inserched,  and  discussed  the  premisses  :  and  finally,  by  all  their  free  assentes,  con- 
sentes,  and  agrementes,  concluded,  resolued,  and  determined,  that  these  bokes 
ensuynge,  That  is  to  say,1  the  boke  entitled  the  wicked  Mammona,  the  boke  named 
the  Obedience  of  a  Christen  man,  the  Supplication  of  beggars,  and  the  boke  called 
the  Reuelation  of  Antichrist,  the  Summary  of  scripture,  and  diuers  other  bokes  made 
in  the  englisshe  tonge,  and  imprinted  beyonde  the  see,  do  conteyne  in  them  pesti- 
ferous errours  and  blasphemies  :  and  for  that  cause,  shall  from  hensforth  be  reputed 
and  taken  of  all  men,  for  bokes  of  heresie,  and  worthy  to  be  dampned,  and  put  in 
perpetuall  obliuion.  The  kynges  said  highnes  therfore  straitly  chargeth  and  com- 
maundeth,  all  and  euery  his  subiectes,  of  what  astate  or  condition  so  euer  he  or 
they  be,  as  they  wyll  auoyde  his  high  indighacion  and  most  greuous  displeasure, 
that  they  from  hensforth,  do  not  bye,  receyue,  or  haue,  any  of  the  bokes  before 
named,  or  any  other  boke,  beinge  in  the  englisshe  tonge,  and  printed  beyonde  the 
see,  of  what  matter  so  euer  it  be,  or  any  copie  written,  drawen  out  of  the  same,  or 
the  same  bokes  in  the  frenche  or  duche  tonge.  And  to  the  entent  that  his  highnes 
wylbe  asserteyned,  what  nombre  of  the  sayd  erronious  bokes  shalbe  founde  from 
tyme  to  tyme  within  this  his  realme,  his  highnes  therfore  chargeth  and  commaundeth, 
that  all  and  euery  person  or  persones,  whiche  hath  or  herafter  shall  haue,  any  boke 
or  bokes  in  the  englisshe  tonge,  printed  beyonde  the  see,  as  is  afore  written,  or  any 
of  the  sayde  erronious  bokes  in  the  frenche  or  duche  tonge :  that  he  or  they,  within 
fyftene  dayes  nexte  after  the  publisshynge  of  this  present  proclamation,  do  actually 
delyuer  or  sende  the  same  bokes  and  euery  of  them,  to  the  bisshop  of  the  diocese, 
wherin  he  or  they  dwelleth,  or  to  his  commissary,  or  els  before  good  testimonie,  to 
theyr  curate  or  parisshe  preest,  to  be  presented  by  the  same  curate  or  parisshe  preest, 
to  the  sayd  bisshop  or  his  commissary.  And  so  doynge,  his  highnes  frely  pardoneth 
and  acquiteth  them,  and  euery  of  them,  of  all  penalities,  forfaitures,  and  paynes, 
wherin  they  haue  incurred  or  fallen,  by  reason  of  any  statute,  acte,  ordinaunce, 
or  proclamation  before  this  tyme  made,  concernynge  any  offence  or  transgres- 
sion by  them  commytted  or  done,  by  or  for  the  kepynge  or  holdynge  of  the  sayde 
bokes. 

Forseen  and  prouided  alwayes,  that  they  from  hensforth  truely  do  obserue,  kepe, 

1  These  works,  by  Tyndale,  Simon  Fish,  and  Frith,  form  the  first  five  of  the  seven  books,  a 
list  of  the  '  heresies  and  errours  '  in  which  was  set  forth  in  the  '  Publick  Instrument  made  A.C. 
M.D.xxx.  May  24  in  an  assembly  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  Bishop  of  Durham,  and 
others,  by  order  of  King  Henry  VIII  containing  divers  heretical  and  erroneous  opinions,  con- 
sidered and  condemned.'  Printed  '  Ex  reg.  Warham,  fol.  188.  a.  in  Wilkins,  Concilia,  iii.  728  sqq. 
There  is  reference  in  this  to  '  the  translation  also  of  Scripture  corrupted  by  William  Tyndall,  as 
well  in  the  Olde  Testamente  as  in  the  Newe  ',  and  again  in  '  the  bill  in  Englisshe  to  be  published 
by  the  prechours '  to  '  the  Newe  Testament  in  Englisshe  of  the  translation  which  is  nowe  prynted  ', 
but  the  Instrument  was  mainly  I'niuvrni-d  with  the  controversial  books. 


The  King's  Proclamation,  June,  1530.  75 


and  obey  this  his  present  gracis  proclamation  and  commaundement.  Also  his  high- 
nes  commaundeth  all  mayres,  sheriffes,  bailliffes,  constables,  bursholders 2,  and  other 
officers  and  ministers  within  this  his  realme,  that  if  they  shall  happen  by  any 
meanes  or  wayes  to  knowe  that  any  person  or  persons  do  herafter  bye,  receyue, 
haue,  or  deteyne  any  of  the  sayde  erronyous  bokes,  printed  or  written  any  where,  or 
any  other  bokes  in  englisshe  tonge  printed  beyonde  the  see,  or  the  sayd  erronious 
bokes  printed  or  written  in  the  frenche  or  duche  tonge,  contrarye  to  this  present 
proclamation,  that  they  beinge  therof  well  assured,  do  immediatly  attache  the  saide 
person  or  persons,  and  brynge  hym  or  them  to  the  kynges  highnes  and  his  most 
honorable  counsayle  :  where  they  shalbe  corrected  and  punisshed  for  theyr  con- 
tempte  and  disobedience,  to  the  terrible  example  of  other  lyke  transgressours. 

More  ouer  his  highnes  commaundeth,  that  no  maner  of  person  or  persons  take 
vpon  hym  or  them  to  printe  any  boke  or  bokes  in  englisshe  tong,  concernynge  holy 
scripture,  not  before  this  tyme  printed  within  this  his  realme,  vntyll  suche  tyme  as 
the  same  boke  or  bokes  be  examyned  and  approued  by  the  ordinary  of  the  diocese, 
where  the  said  bokes  shalbe  printed  :  And  that  the  prynter  therof,  vpon  euery  of  the 
sayde  bokes  beinge  so  examyned,  do  sette  the  name  of  the  examynour  or  examyn- 
ours,  with  also  his  owne  name  vpon  the  sayde  bokes,  as  he  wyll  answere  to  the 
1  kynges  highnes,  at  his  vttermoste  peryll. 

And  farthermore,  for  as  moche  as  it  is  come  to  the  herynge  of  our  saide 
soueraigne  lorde  the  kynge,  that  report  is  made  by  diuers  and  many  of  his  subiectes, 
that  as  it  were  to  all  men  not  onely  expedyent,  but  also  necessarye,  to  haue  in  the 
englisshe  tonge  bothe  the  newe  testament  and  the  olde  :  and  that  his  highnes,  his 
noble  men,  and  prelates  were  bounden  to  suffre  them  so  to  haue  it :  His  highnes  hath 
therfore  semblably  there  vpon  consulted  with  the  sayd  primates  and  vertuous,  dis- 
crete, and  well  lerned  personages  in  diuinite  forsayde,  and  by  them  all  it  is  thought, 
that  it  is  not  necessary,  the  sayde  scripture  to  be  in  the  englisshe  tonge,  and  in  the 
handes  of  the  commen  people  :  but  that  the  distribution  of  the  sayd  scripture,  and 
the  permyttyng  or  denyenge  therof,  dependeth  onely  vpon  the  discretion  of  the 
superiours,  as  they  shall  thynke  it  conuenyent.  And  that  hauing  respecte  to  the 
malignite  of  this  present  tyme,  with  the  inclination  of  people  to  erronious  opinions, 
the  translation  of  the  newe  testament  and  the  olde  in  to  the  vulgare  tonge  of  englysshe, 
shulde  rather  be  the  occasion  of  contynuance  or  increace  of  errours  amonge  the  sayd 
people,  than  any  benefyte  or  commodite  towarde  the  weale  of  their  soules.  And  that 
it  shall  nowe  be  more  conuenient  that  the  same  people  haue  the  holy  scripture  ex- 
pouned  to  them,  by  preachers  in  their  sermons,  accordynge  as  it  hath  ben  of  olde 
tyme  accustomed  before  this  tyme.  All  be  it  if  it  shall  here  after  appere  to  the 
kynges  highnes,  that  his  saide  people  do  vtterly  abandon  and  forsake  all  peruerse, 
erronious,  and  sedicious  opinyons,  with  the  newe  testament  and  the  olde,  corruptly 
translated  in  to  the  englisshe  tonge  nowe  beinge  in  print  :  And  that  the  same  bokes 
and  all  other  bokes  of  heresy,  as  well  in  the  frenche  tonge  as  in  the  duche  tonge,  be 
clerely  extermynate  and  exiled  out  of  this  realme  of  Englande  for  euer  :  his  highnes 
entendeth  to  prouyde,  that  the  holy  scripture  shalbe  by  great  lerned  and  catholyke 
persones,  translated  in  to  the  englisshe  tonge,  if  it  shall  then  seme  to  his  grace  con- 
uenient so  to  be.  Wherfore  his  highnes  at  this  tyme,  by  the  hoole  aduise  and  full 
determination  of  all  the  sayde  primates  and  other  discrete  and  substanciall  lerned 
personages,  of  both  vniuersites,  and  other  before  expressed,  and  by  the  assent  of  his 
nobles  and  others  of  his  moste  honorable  Counsayle,  wylleth  and  straytly  com- 
maundeth, that  all  and  euery  persone  and  persones,  of  what  astate,  degree  or  condi- 
cion  so  euer  he  or  they  be,  whiche  hath  the  newe  testament  or  the  olde  translated  into 
englisshe,  or  any  other  boke  of  holy  scripture  so  translated,  beinge  in  printe,  or 
copied  out  of  the  bokes  nowe  beinge  in  printe,  that  he  or  they  do  immediatly  brynge 
the  same  boke  or  bokes,  or  cause  the  same  to  be  brought  to  the  bysshop  of  the 
dyocese,  where  he  dwelleth,  or  to  the  handes  of  other  the  sayde  persones,  at  the  daye 
afore  limytted,  in  fourme  afore  expressed  and  mencioned,  as  he  wyll  auoyde  the 
kynges  high  indignation  and  displeasure.  And  that  no  person  or  persons  from  hens- 
forth  do  bie,  receyue,  kepe  or  haue  the  newe  testament  or  the  olde,  in  the  englisshe 
tonge,  or  in  the  frenche  or  duche  tonge,  except  suche  persones  as  be  appoynted  by 
the  kinges  highnes  and  the  bishops  of  this  his  realme,  for  the  correction  or  amendinge 
of  the  sayd  translacion,  as  they  wyll  answere  to  the  kinges  highnes  at  their  vttermost 

2  I  cannot  explain  this  word. 


76  The  King's  Proclamation,  June,  1530. 


perils,  and  wyll  auoyde  such  punysshement,  as  they  doinge  contrary  to  the  purport  of 
this  proclamacion  shall  suffer,  to  the  dredefull  example  of  all  other  lyke  offenders. 

And  his  highnes  further  commandeth,  that  all  suche  statutes,  actes,  and  ordi- 
nances, as  before  this  tyme  haue  be  made  &  enacted,  as  well  in  the  tyme  of  his  moste 
gracious  reigne,  as  also  in  the  tyme  of  his  noble  progenitours,  concernynge  heresies, 
and  hauynge  and  deteynynge  erronyous  bokes,  contrary  and  agaynst  the  faith  catho- 
lyke,  shall  immediatly  be  put  in  effectuall  and  due  execution  ouer  and  besyde  this 
present  proclamation. 

And  god  saue  the  kynge.  Thomas  Bertheletus  regius  impressor  excusit. 

Cum  priuilegio. 


XXIII.    TYNDALE'S  TERMS  OF  SUBMISSION. 

From  a'letter  written  by  Stephen  Vaughan  to  Henry  VIII.1    Printed  from  Cotton  MS.  Galba 
B.  X,  5  (a  corrected  draught),  completed  from  the  letter  itself  in  the  Record  Office. 

I  have  agayne  byn  in  hande  to  perswade  Tyndall  and  to  draw  him  the  rather  to 
fauour  my  perswasions  and  not  to  thinke  the  same  fayned,  I  shewed  hym  a  clause 
conteyned  in  Maister  Crumwells  lettre  conteynynge  these  wordes  followinge,  And  not 
withstanding  other  the  premisses  in  this  my  lettre  conteyned  if  it  were  possible  by 
good  and  holsom  exhortacions  to  reconsile  and  convert  the  sayde  tyndall,  from  the 
trayne  and  affection  whiche  he  now  is  in,  and  to  excerpte  and  take  away  the  opynyons 
and  fantasies  sorely  rooted  in  hym,  I  doubte  not,  but  the  kynges  highnes  wolde  be 
muche  ioyous  of  his  conversion  and  amendement,  And  so  beinge  converted,  if  then  he 
wolde  returne  into  his  realme,  vndoubtidly,  the  kinges  royall  magestie  is  so  inclined 
to  mercie,  pitie  and  compassion,  that  he  refusethe  none,  whiche  he  seyth2,  to  submyt 
them  self  to  the  obedyence  and  good  order  of  the  worlde. 

In  these  wordes  I  thought  to  be  suche  swetnes  and  vertue,  as  were  able  to  perse 
the  hardest  harte  of  the  worlde,  And  as  I  thought  so  it  cam  to  passe.  For  after 
sight  therof  I  perceyued  the  man  to  be  excidinge  altered,  and  [moued]  to  take  the 
same  very  nere  vnto  his  harte,  in  suche  wise  that  water  stode  in  his  yees3,  And 
answered,  what  gracious  wordes  are  these,  I  ass[ure]  youe,  sayed  he,  if  it  wolde  stande 
withe  the  kinges  most  gracious  pleas[ure]  to  graunte  only  a  bare  text  of  the  scrip- 
tures 4  to  be  put  forthe  emonge  h[is]  people,  like  as  is  put  forthe  emonge  the  subgectes 
of  the  emperour  in  th[ese]  parties,  and  of  other  cristen  princes  be  it  of  the  translation 
of  what  perso[n]  soeuer  shall  please  his  magestie,  I  shall  ymedyatly  make  f aithf ul[l ) 
promyse,  neuer  to  wryte  more,  ne  abide  ij.  dayes  in  these  parties  after  th[e]  same, 
but  ymedyatly  to  repayre  into  his  realme,  and  there  most  humbly  submytt  my  selfe 
at  the  fete  of  his  roiall  magestie,  offerynge  my  bodye,  to  suffer  what  payne  or  torture, 
ye  what  dethe  his  grac[e]  will,  so  this  be  obteyned,  And  till  that  time,  I  will  abide 
thasper[itie]  of  all  chaunses  what  so  euer  shalle  come,  and  indure  my  lyfe,  in  asm[any] 
paynes,  as  it  is  able  to  bere  and  surfer,  And  as  concernynge  m[y]  reconsiliacion,  his 
grace  maye  be  assured  that  what  soeuer  I  haue  sayd  or  written,  in  alle  my  lyfe 
agenste  thonour  of  goddes  worde,  and  so  proued,  the  same  shall  I  before  his  magestie 
and  all  the  worlde  v[tterlie]  renownce  and  forsake,  and  with  most  humble  and  meke 
mynde  im[brace]  the  truthe,  abhorringe  all  errour,  soner  at  the  most  gracious  and 
benygne  req[uest]  of  his  royall  magestie,  of  whose  wisdome,  prudence,  and  learnynge, 
I  [here]  so  greate  prayse  and  commendation,  then  of  any  other  creature,  ly[uyng]. 
But  if  those  thinges  whiche  I  haue  written,  be  true,  and  stande  w[ith]  goddes  worde, 

1  Stephen  Vaughan,  who  in  1534  became  Governor  of  the  English  Merchant  Adventurers  [ 
at  Antwerp,  was  charged  by  Henry  VIII  in  1531  to  persuade  Tyndale  to  retract  and  return  to  j 
England.  On  January  26  he  reported  to  the  king  that  he  had  written  letters  to  Tvndale  addressed 
to  Frankfort,  Hamburg,  and  Marburg,  not  knowing  in  which  place  he  was,  and  encloses  his 
answer  (State  Papers,  v.  65) ;  on  March  25  he  reports  to  Cromwell  his  negotiations  with  Tyndale 
(ib.,  153) ;  in  a  mutilated  letter  assigned  to  April  he  reports  to  the  king  an  interview  with  Tyndale 
outside  Antwerp  (ib.,  201).  The  present  letter  begins  with  secular  politics,  then  refers  to  Frith,  and 
finally  to  Tyndale.  Besides  the  draft  here  printed  it  exists  also  in  the  Record  Office,  ib.,  vii.  301. 
It  must  have  been  crossed  by  an  answer  to  No.  1 53  from  Cromwell  commanding  Vaughan  to  break 
off  all  negotiations  with  Tyndale. 

2  Sees.  3  Eyes. 

1  This  expression  has  sometimes  been  twisted  so  as  to  denote  a  preference  on  Tyndale  s  part 
for  unannotated  texts.  It  is  clear  that  he  preferred  annotated  ones,  but  would  have  accepted  the 
circulation  of  the  bare  text  of  the  scriptures  as  a  compromise. 


Tyndale's  Terms  of  Submission. 


77 


why  shulde  his  magestie  hauynge  so  excellent  a  gu[yfte]  of  knowlege  in  the  scrip- 
tures, moue  me  to  do  any  thinge  agenst  m[y]  conscience,  with  many  other  wordes 
whiche  were  to  longe  to  writte,  Fyn[ally]  I  haue  some  good  hope  in  the  man,  and 
wolde  not  doubte  to  bringe  [hym]  to  some  good  poynt,  were  it  that  some  thing  now 
and  then  myght  pro[ceede]  from  your  magestie  towardes  me,  wherby  the  man 
myght  take  the  better  comforte  of  my  perswasions. 

[I]  aduertised  the  same  tyndall,  that  he  shulde  not  put  forthe  [t]he  same  booke5, 
tyll  your  most  gracious  pleasure  were  knowen,  wherunto  he  answered,  myne  aduertise- 
ment  cam  to  late,  for  he  feared  lest  one  that  had  his  copie  wolde  put  it  very  shortly 
in  prynte,  whiche  he  wolde  lett  if  he  coulde,  if  not  there  is  no  remedy,  I  shall 
staye  it  asmuche  as  I  can,  as  yet  it  is  not  come  forthe,  ne  will  not  in  a  while  by 
that  I  perceyue. 

Luther  hathe  lately,  put  forthe  a  worke  agenst  themperour  in  the  German  tongue, 
whiche  I  wold  cause  to  be  translated  into  laten,  and  send  it  to  your  magestie,  if 
I  knew  your  gracious  pleasure,  in  it  were  many  thinges  to  be  seen. 

from  Barroughe  [the  xxDaye  of  Maye  an°  M.D.  XXXI] 

the  most  humble  subgect  of  your  Royall 

Magestie 
S[tephen]  V[aughan]. 

XXIV.    FRITH'S  DEFENCE  OF  TYNDALE  AND  HIS  WORK. 

From  'An  answer  to  the  preface  of  master  mores  boke  ','  part  of  '  A  Boke  made  by  John  Frith 
prisoner  in  the  Tower  of  London,  answeringe  unto  M.  more's  lettur  which  he  wrote  agenst  the 
first  title  treatyse  that  John  Frith  made  concerninge  the  sacramente  of  the  body  and  bloud  of 
Christ.     Monster.  C.  Willems,  1533.' 

It  ys  not  possyble  for  hym  that  hathe  hys  eyen  and  seth  hys  brother  which 
lackyth  sight  in  Ieoperdye  of  peryshynge  at  a  perylous  pyt,  but  that  he  must  com 
to  hym  and  guyde  hym  tyll  he  be  past  that  Ieoperdye,  and  at  the  lest  wise,  yf  he  ] 
can  not  come  to  hym,  yet  wyll  he  calle  a  crye  vnto  hym  to  cause  hym  chose  the 
better  waye,  excepte  hys  herte  be  cankered  with  the  contagion  of  suche  hatered  that 
he  can  reioyse  in  hys  neighbours  distructyon.  And  euyn  so  ys  yt  not  possyble  for  vs 
whiche  haue  receyuyd  the  knowelege  of  goddes  worde,  but  that  we  moste  crye  and 
call  to  other,  that  they  leue  the  perillous  pathys  of  ther  owyn  folishe  phantasyes. 
And  do  that  only  to  the  lorde,  that  he  comandeth  them,  nether  addinge  any  thinge 
nor  diminishyng.  And  therfor  vntyll  we  se  som  meanes  founde,  by  the  which 
a  reasonable  reformacyon  may  be  had  on  the  on  partye,  And  suffecyent  instructyon 
for  the  pore  comens  I  insure  yow,  I  nether  wyll  nor  can  cease  to  speake,  for  the 
worde  of  God  boylyth  in  my  bodye,  lyke  a  feruent  fyere,  and  wyll  nedes  haue  an 
issue  and  breakyth  oute,  whan  occasyon  ys  geuyn.  But  this  hath  ben  offered  yow, 
ys  offered,  and  shall  be  offered  ?  Graunt  that  that  the  worde  of  God,  I  meane 
the  text  of  scrypture,  may  goo  abrode  in  oure  ynglyshe  tonge,  as  other  nacyons 
haue  yt  in  ther  tonges,  and  my  brother  Wyllyam  tendale,  and  I  haue  don,  and  wyll 
promisse  you  to  wryte  no  more.  Yf  yow  wyll  not  graunt  this  condicyon  then  wyll 
we  be  doynge  whyle  we  haue  brethe  and  shewe  in  fewe  wordes  that  the  scrypture 
doth  in  many :  and  so  at  the  lest  saue  some.  .  .  . 

[Sig.  B  8  recto  : 2]  And  Tyndale  I  truste  leuyth,  well  content  with  suche  a  poore 
apostylis  lyffe,  as  god  gaue  his  son  christe,  and  hys  faythfull  ministers  in  this  worlde 
which  ys  not  sure  of  so  many  mites,  as  ye  be  yerly  of  poundes,  allthough  I  am 
sure  that  for  hys  lernynge  and  Iudgement  in  scrypture,  he  were  more  worthye  to 
be  promoted,  then  all  the  bushoppes  in  england.     I  receyuyd  a  letter  from  hym, 

6  Presumably  Tyndale's  Answer  to  Sir  Thomas  More's  'Dialoge  '. 

XXIV.  '  Frith  answers  More  paragraph  by  paragraph.  He  here  replies  to  More's  wish  as  to 
the  reformers,  '  sith  there  can  nothing  refrayne  their  studie  from  deuising  and  compassyng  of  euill 
and  ungracious  writyng,  that  they  would  and  could  kepe  it  so  secretly,  that  neuer  man  should 
see  it,  but  such  as  are  so  farre  corrupted,  as  neuer  would  be  cured  of  their  canker.' 

2  More  had  accused  Frith  of  '  teaching  in  a  few  leaues  shortly  al  the  poyson  that  Wickleff, 
Oecolampius,  Tyndall,  and  Zwinglius  haue  taught  in  all  their  bookes  before  '.  Frith  eulogizes 
each  in  succession. 


which  was  wrytyn  syns  crystmas  wherin  amonge  other  maters  he  wrytyth  thus. 
I  calle  God  to  record  agaynst  the  day  we  shall  apere  before  our  lorde  Iesus  to  geue 
a  reconynge  of  our  doynges,  that  I  never  altered  one  sillable  of  goddes  worde, 
agaynst  my  conscyence  nor  wolde  do  this  daye,  yf  all  that  ys  in  yerth,  whether 
yt  be  honour,  pleasure  or  rychis,  mighte  be  geuyn  me.  Moreouer  I  take  God  to 
record  to  my  conscience  that  I  desyre  of  God  to  my  sellf  in  this  world  no  more  then 
that  with  oute  which  I  can  not  kepe  his  lawes,  &c,  Iudge  Christen  reader  whether 
thes  wordes  be  not  spoken  of  a  faythfull,  clere  innocent  harte.  And  as  for  hys 
behauyour  ys  suche  that  I  am  sure  no  man  can  reproue  hym  of,  any  synne,  howbeyt 
no  man  ys  innocent  before  god  which  beholdeth  the  harte. 


XXV.    GEORGE  JOYE'S  LETTER  TO  THE  KING  AND  QUEEN. 

From  A  Letter  of  M.  W.  Tyndall  to  John  Frith,  in  Foxe's  edition  of  The  Whole  Workes  of 
W.  Tyndall,  Iohn  Frith  and  Doct.  Barnes  (London,  John  Day,  1573),  p.  454. 

George  Ioye1  at  Candlemasse  being  at  Barrow,  Printed  two  leaues  of  Genesis  in 
a  greate  forme,  and  sent  one  Copy  to  the  King,  and  an  other  to  the  newe  Queene, 
with  a  letter  to  N.  for  to  deliuer  them  :  and  to  purchase  licence,  that  he  might  so 
goe  through  all  the  Bible.  Out  of  that  is  sprong  the  noyse  of  the  new  Bible  :  and 
out  of  that  is  the  greate  seeking  for  Englishe  bookes  at  all  Printers  &  Booke  bynders 
in  Antwarpe,  and  for  an  English  Priest  that  shoulde  Printe.  This  chaunced  the 
ix.  day  of  May  [1533]- 


XXVI.    THE  BISHOPS  PETITION  FOR  AN  ENGLISH  BIBLE. 

Petitio  synodi  Cantuariensis  provinciae  de  libris  suspectis  exhibendis,  et  de  transferendis  Bibliis 
in  linguam  Anglicanam.  19  Dec,  1534  (From  Wilkins's  Concilia  iii,  compared  with  the  Cotton 
MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  339  b.). 

Decimo  nono  die  Decembris,  anno  Domini  Millesimo  Quingentesimo  tricesimo 
quarto,  Episcopi,  Abbates  et  Priores  superioris  domus  conuocationis,  siue  sacre  synodi 
Cantuariensis  provincie,  In  domo  Capitulari  Ecclesie  Cathedralis  diui  Pauli  London, 
in  presentia  Reuerendissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini,  domini  Thome,  permissione 
diuina  Cant,  archiepiscopi,  totius  Anglie  Primatis,  et  Metropolitani  legitime  con- 
gregati,  unanimi  eorum  consensu  pariter  et  assensu  consentiebant,  quod  dictus 
Reuerendissimus  pater  apud  Illustrissimum  in  Christo  Principem  et  dominum  no- 
strum, dominum  Henricum,  Dei  gratia  Anglie  et  Francie  regem,  fidei  defensorem,  et 
dominum  Hiberniae,  Ecclesiaeque  Anglicane  (sub  Deo)  caput  supremum,  instantiam 
faceret,  quatenus  sua  regia  maiestas  dignaretur  pro  augmento  fidei  subditorum 
suorum  decernere  et  mandare,  Quod  omnes  et  singuli  subditi  sui,  penes  quos  aut 
in  quorum  possessione  aliqui  libri  suspecte  doctrine  existunt,  presertim  in  lingua 
vulgari,  citra  aut  ultra  mare  impressi,  moneantur  et  cogantur  eosdem  suspecte  doc- 
trine libros  infra  tres  menses  a  tempore  monitionis  in  ea  parte  facte,  coram  personis 
per  regiam  majestatem  nominandis  presentare,  et  realiter  exhibere,  sub  certa  pena  per 
regiam  maiestatem  moderanda,  et  limitanda.  Et  quod  ulterius  sua  regia  maiestas 
dignaretur  decernere,  quod  sacra  Scriptura  in  vulgarem  linguam  Anglicanam,  per 
quosdam  probos  et  doctos  viros  per  dictum  illustrissimum  regem  nominandos  trans- 
feratur,  et  populo  pro  eorum  eruditione  deliberetur  et  tradatur.  Ac  insuper  quatinus 
sua  Regia  maiestas  dignaretur  prohibere  et  mandare,  etiam  Indicta  et  imposita  pena, 
ne  quisquam  laicorum  aut  secularum  subditorum  suorum  de  fide  catholica  aut  arti- 
culis  fidei,  sacrave  scriptura,  aut  eiusdem  intellectu  publice  disputare,  aut  aliquo 
modo  rixose  contendere  presumat  infuturum. 

1  George  Joye  was  a  Cambridge  graduate,  and  fellow  of  Peterhouse  (15 17).  On  being  de- 
nounced as  a  heretic  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  in  152;,  he  fled  to  Strassburg.  Four  years  later 
(May  10,  1 531)  he  published  there  a  translation  of  'the  prophet  Isaye '.  Of  these  two  leaves 
of  Genesis,  copies  of  which  Joye  sent  from  Barrow  (i.e.  Bergen-op-Zoom),  Humphrey  Wanley, 
Harley's  librarian,  is  said  to  have  possessed  an  example.  Joye  aided  Tyndale  in  his  controversy 
with  More,  but  the  tone  of  Tyndale's  reference  here  printed  suggests  that  the  latter  thought  his 
action  ill  considered,  and  the  two  men  came  into  violent  collision  the  next  year  (see  No.  XXVII). 


The  Bishops  Petition  for  an  English  Bible.  79 


Translation. 

The  petition  of  the  synod  of  the  province  of  Canterbury  concerning  the  declaring 
suspected  books  and  the  translation  of  the  Bible  into  English. 

On  the  19th  day  of  December,  in  the  year  of  the  Lord  one  thousand  five  hundred 
and  thirty  four,  the  Bishops,  Abbots  and  Priors  of  the  upper  house  of  convocation, 
otherwise  the  sacred  synod  of  the  province  of  Canterbury  in  the  chapter  house  of 
the  Cathedral  Church  of  S.  Paul,  London,  in  the  presence  of  the  most  reverend 
father  in  Christ  and  lord,  the  lord  Thomas,  by  divine  permission  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  Primate  of  all  England  and  Metropolitan,  lawfully  assembled,  unani- 
mously alike  by  consent  and  assent  agreed  that  the  said  most  reverend  father  should 
make  instance  to  the  most  illustrious  prince  in  Christ  and  our  lord,  the  lord  Henry, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England  and  France,  defender  of  the  faith,  and  lord  of 
Ireland,  and  (under  God)  supreme  head  of  the  English  Church,  that  his  royal  majesty 
should  think  fit  for  the  increase  of  the  faith  of  his  subjects  to  decree  and  command 
that  all  and  singular  his  subjects,  in  whose  keeping  or  possession  are  any  books 
of  suspected  doctrine,  more  especially  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  whether  printed  here  or 
beyond  the  sea,  be  admonished  and  compelled  to  show  and  actually  declare1  those 
books  of  suspected  doctrine  within  three  months  from  the  date  of  the  admonish- 
ment being  published  in  that  district,  before  persons  to  be  named  by  the  king's 
majesty,  under  a  fixed  penalty  to  be  controlled  and  limited  by  the  king's  majesty. 
And  that  furthermore  the  king's  majesty  should  think  fit  to  decree  that  the  holy 
scripture  shall  be  translated  into  the  vulgar  English  tongue  by  certain  upright  and 
learned  men  to  be  named  by  the  said  most  illustrious  king  2  and  be  meted  out  and 
delivered  to  the  people  for  their  instruction.  And  moreover  that  his  royal  majesty 
should  think  fit  to  forbid  and  command,  with  a  penalty  assigned  and  imposed,  that 
no  layman  or  secular  person  among  his  subjects  should  for  the  future  presume  pub- 
licly to  dispute  or  in  any  manner  to  wrangle  concerning  the  catholic  faith,  or  the 
articles  of  the  faith,  the  Holy  Scripture  or  its  meaning. 


XXVII.  GEORGE  JOYE'S  UNAUTHORIZED  REVISION  OF  TYNDALE'S 

NEW  TESTAMENT. 

A.  Tyndale's  Complaint. 

From  a  supplementary  preface  to  Tyndale's  revised  New  Testament,  Antwerp, 
Martin  Keysere,  November  1534. 

Willyam  Tindale,  yet  once  more  to  the  christen  reader 

THou  shalt  vnderstonde  moost  dere  reader,  when  I  had  taken  in  hande  to  looke 
ouer  the  new  testament  agayne  and  to  compare  it  with  the  greke,  and  to  mende 
whatsoeuer  I  coulde  fynde  amysse  and  had  almost  fynesshed  the  laboure  :  George 
Ioye  secretly  toke  in  hand  to  correct  it  also  by  what  occasyon  his  conscyence  knoweth  : 
and  preuented1  me,  in  so  moche,  that  his  correccyon  was  prynted  in  great  nombre, 
yer2  myne  beganne.  When  it  was  spyed  and  worde  brought  me  ;  though  it  semed 
to  dyuers  other  that  George  Joye  had  not  vsed  the  offyce  of  an  honest  man,  seinge 
he  knewe  that  I  was  in  correctynge  it  myselfe  :  nether  dyd  walke  after  the  rules  of 
that  loue  and  softenes  which  christ,  and  his  disciples  teache  vs,  how  that  we  shuld 
do  nothynge  of  stryfe  to  moue  debate,  or  of  vayne  glorie  or  of  couetousnes.  Yet  I 
toke  the  thinge  in  worth  as  I  have  done  dyuers  other  in  tyme  past,  as  one  that  have 
moare  experyence  of  the  nature  and  dysposicion  of  the  mannes  conplexion,  and  sup- 
posed that  a  lytle  spyse  of  couetousnes  and  vayne  glorie  (two  blynde  gydes)  had 
bene  the  onlye  cause  that  moued  him  so  to  do,  aboute  which  thynges  I  stryue  with 
no  man  :  and  so  folowed  after  and  corrected  forth  &  caused  this  to  be  prynted, 
without  surmyse  or  lokynge  on  his  correctyon. 

But  when  the  pryntynge  of  myne  was  almost  fynesshed,  one  brought  me  a  copie 
and  shewed  me  so  manye  places,  insoche  wyse  altered  that  I  was  astonyd  and  won- 


XXVI.  ■  '  realiter  exhibere,'  they  were  to  produce  the  books. 
2  Compare  No.  XXIX  and  note. 

XXVII.  *  Forestalled.    Joye's  edition  appeared  in  August,  Tyndale's  in  November. 


before. 


8o  George  joye's  Unauthorized  Revision 


dered  not  a  lytle  what  furye  had  dryuen  him  to  make  soche  chaunge  and  to  call  it  a 
diligent  correction.  For  thorow  oute  Mat.  Mark  &  Luke  perpetually  :  and  ofte  in  the 
actes,  and  sometyme  in  John  and  also  in  the  hebrues,  where  he  fyndeth  this  worde 
Resurreccion,  he  chaungeth  it  into  the  lyfe  after  this  lyfe,  or  verie  lyfe,  and  soche 
lyke,  as  one  that  abhorred  the  name  of  the  resurreccion. 

If  that  chaunge,  to  turne  resurreccion  into  lyfe  after  this  lyfe,  be  a  dylygent  cor- 
reccion,  then  must  my  translacion  be  fautie  in  those  places,  and  saynt  Jeromes,  and 
all  the  translatours  that  euer  I  heard  of  in  what  tonge  so  euer  it  be,  from  the 
apostles  vnto  this  his  dylygent  correccyon  (as  he  calleth  it)  which  whither  it  be  so 
or  no,  I  permyt  it  to  other  mennes  iudgementes. 

But  of  this  I  chalenge  George  Joye,  that  he  dyd  not  put  his  awne  name  thereto 
and  call  it  rather  his  awne  translacion  :  and  that  he  playeth  boo  pepe,  and  in  some 
of  his  bookes  putteth  in  his  name  and  tytle,  and  in  some  kepeth  it  oute.  It  is  lawfull 
for  who  will,  to  translate  and  shew  his  mynde,  though  a  thousand  had  translated 
before  him.  But  it  is  not  lawfull  (thynketh  me)  ner  yet  expedyent  for  the  edifienge 
of  the  vnitie  of  the  fayth  of  christ,  that  whosoeuer  will  shall  by  his  awne  auctorite, 
take  another  mannes  translacion  and  put  oute  and  in  and  chaunge  at  pleasure,  and 
call  it  a  correccion. 

Moreover,  ye  shall  vnderstonde  that  George  Joye  hath  had  of  a  longe  tyme  mar- 
velouse  ymaginacions  aboute  this  worde  resurreccion,  that  it  shuld  be  taken  for  the 
state  of  the  soules  after  their  departinge  from  their  bodyes,  and  hath  also  (though  he 
hath  been  reasoned  with  thereof  and  desyred  to  cease)  yet  sowen  his  doctryne  by 
secret  lettres  on  that  syde  the  see,  and  caused  great  division  amonge  the  brethren. 
In  so  moche  that  John  Fryth  beynge  in  preson  in  the  toure  of  London,  a  lytle 
before  his  death,  wrote  that  we  shuld  warne  him  and  desyer  him  to  cease,  and  wolde 
have  then  wrytten  agaynst  him,  had  I  not  withstonde  him.  Therto  I  have  been 
sence  informed  that  no  small  nomber  thorow  his  curiositie,3  vtterly  denye  the  resur- 
reccion of  the  fleshe  and  bodye,  affirminge  that  the  soule  when  she  is  departed,  is  the 
spirituall  bodye  of  the  resurreccion,  &  other  resurreccion  shall  there  none  be.  And 
I  have  talked  with  some  of  them  myselfe,  so  doted  in  that  folye,  that  it  were  as  good 
perswade  a  post,  as  to  plucke  that  madnes  oute  of  their  braynes.  And  of  this  all  is 
George  Joyes  vnquyet  curiosite  the  hole  occasion,  whether  he  be  of  the  sayde  faccion 
also,  or  not,  to  that  let  him  answere  him  selfe. 

If  George  Joye  wyll  saye  (as  I  wot  well  he  will)  that  his  chaunge,  is  the  sence 
and  meaninge  of  those  scriptures.  I  answer  it  is  soner  seyde  then  proved  :  howbeit 
let  other  men  iudge :  But  though  it  were  the  verie  meaninge  of  the  scripture  :  yet  if 
it  were  lawfull  after  his  ensample  to  every  man  to  playe  boo  pepe  with  the  transla- 
cions  that  are  before  him,  and  to  put  oute  the  wordes  of  the  text  at  his  pleasure  and 
to  put  in  everywhere  his  meaninge  ;  or  what  he  thought  the  meaninge  were,  that 
were  the  next  wave  to  stablyshe  all  heresyes  and  to  destroye  the  grounde  wherewith 
we  shuld  improve  them.  As  for  an  ensample,  when  Christ  sayeth  Jo  :  v.  The  tyme 
shall  come  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  heare  his  voyce  and  shall  come 
forth  ;  they  that  have  done  good  vnto  resurreccion  of  lyfe,  or  with  the  resurreccion  of 
lyfe,  and  they  have  done  evell,  vnto  the  [resu]reccion  or  with  the  resurreccion  of 
damnacion  ;  George  Joyes  correccion  is,  they  that  have  done  good  shall  come  forth 
into  the  verie  lyfe,  and  they  that  have  done  evell  into  the  life  of  damnacion,  thrust- 
inge  cleane  oute  this  worde  resurreccion.  Now  by  the  same  auctorite,  and  with  as 
good  reason  shall  another  come  and  saye  of  the  rest  of  the  text,  they  that  are  in 
sepulchres,  shall  heare  his  voyce,  that  the  sence  is,  the  soules  of  them  that  are  in  the 
sepulchres  shall  heare  his  voyce,  and  so  put  in  his  diligent  correccion  and  mocke  oute 
the  text,  that  it  shall  not  make  for  the  resurreccion  of  the  flesshe,  whiche  thinge  also 
George  Joyes  correccion  doth  manyfestlye  affirme.  If  the  text  be  lefte  vncorrupt, 
it  will  pourge  hir  selfe  of  all  maner  false  gloses,  how  sotle  soever  they  be  fayned,  as 
a  sethinge  pot  casteth  vp  hir  scome.  But  yf  the  false  glose  be  made  the  text, 
diligentlye  oversene  and  correct,4  wherewith  then  shall  we  correcte  false  doctrine  and 
defende  Christes  flocke  from  false  opinions,  and  from  the  wycked  heresyes  of  raven- 
inge  of  wolves  ;  In  my  mynde  therfore  a  lytle  vnfayned  love  after  the  rules  of  Christ, 
is  worth  moche  hie  learninge,  and  single  and  sleyght  vnderstondinge  that  edifieth  in 

3  Fancifulness. 

*  The  words  '  diligentlye  oversene  and  correct '  should  be  read  as  a  sarcastic  quotation.  These 
sentences  sum  up  Tyndale's  case. 


of  Tyndale's  New  Testament. 


81 


vnitie,  is  moche  better  then  sotle  curiosite,  and  mekenes  better  then  bolde  arrogancye 
and  stondinge  over  moche  in  a  mannes  avvne  consayte. 

Wherfore,  concernynge  the  resurreccion,  I  protest  before  god  and  oure  savioure 
Jesus  Christ,  and  before  the  vniversall  congregacion  that  beleveth  in  him,  that  I  be- 
leve  accordynge  to  the  open  and  manyfest  scriptures  and  catholyck  fayth,  that  Christ 
is  rysen  agayne  in  the  flesshe  which  he  receaved  of  his  mother  the  blessed  virgin 
marie,  and  bodye  wherin  he  dyed.  And  that  we  shall  all  both  good  and  bad  ryse  both 
flesshe  and  bodye,  and  apere  together  before  the  iudgement  seat  of  christ,  to  receave 
every  man  accordynge  to  his  dedes.  And  that  the  bodyes  of  all  that  beleve  and  con- 
tynew  in  the  true  fayth  of  christ,  shalbe  endewed  with  lyke  immortalyte  and  glorie  as 
is  the  bodye  of  christ. 

And  I  protest  before  God  and  oure  savioure  Christ  and  all  that  beleve  in  him,  that 
I  holde  of  the  soules  that  are  departed  as  moche  as  maye  be  proved  by  manifest  and 
open  scripture,  and  thinke  the  soules  departed  in  the  fayth  of  Christ  and  love  of  the 
lawe  of  God,  to  be  in  no  worse  case  then  the  soule  of  Christ  was,  from  ye  tyme  that 
he  delivered  his  sprite  into  the  handes  of  his  father,  vntyll  the  resurreccion  of  his 
bodye  in  glorie  and  immortalite.  Neverthelater,  I  confesse  openly,  that  I  am  not 
persuaded  that  they  be  all  readie  in  the  full  glorie  that  Christ  is  in,  or  the  elect 
angels  of  god  are  in.  Nether  is  it  anye  article  of  my  fayth  :  for  if  it  so  were,  I  se  not 
but  then  the  preachinge  of  the  resurreccion  of  the  flesshe  were  a  thinge  in  vayne. 
Notwithstondinge  yet  I  am  readie  to  beleve  it,  if  it  maye  be  proved  with  open  scrip- 
ture. And  I  have  desyred  George  Joye  to  take  open  textes  that  seme  to  make  for 
that  purpose,  as  this  is,  To  daye  thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  Paradise,  to  make  therof 
what  he  coulde,  and  to  let  his  dreames  aboute  this  worde  resurreccion  goo.  For 
I  receave  not  in  the  scripture  the  pryvat  interpretacion  of  any  mannes  brayne,  with- 
out open  testimony  of  eny  scriptures  agreinge  thereto. 

Moreover  I  take  God  (which  alone  seeth  the  heart)  to  recorde  to  my  conscience, 
besechinge  him  that  my  parte  be  not  in  the  bloude  of  Christ,  if  I  wrote  of  all  that 
I  have  wrytten  thorow  oute  all  my  boke,  ought  of  an  evell  purpose,  of  envie  or 
malice  to  anye  man,  or  to  stere  vp  any  false  doctrine  or  opinion  in  the  churche  of 
Christ,  or  to  be  auctor  of  any  secte,  or  to  drawe  disciples  after  me,  or  that  I  wolde 
be  estemed  or  had  in  pryce  above  the  least  chylde  that  is  borne,  save  onlye  of  pitie 
and  compassion  I  had  and  yet  have  on  the  blindnes  of  my  brethren,  and  to  bringe 
them  vnto  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  to  make  every  one  of  them,  if  it  were  possi- 
ble as  perfect  as  an  angell  of  heaven,  and  to  wede  oute  all  that  is  not  planted  of  oure 
hevenly  father,  and  to  bringe  doune  all  that  lyfteth  vp  it  selfe  agaynst  the  knowledge 
of  the  salvacion  that  is  in  the  bloude  of  Christ.  Also,  my  parte  be  not  in  Christ,  if 
myne  heart  be  not  to  folowe  and  lyve  accordinge  as  I  teache,  and  also  if  myne  heart 
wepe  not  nyght  and  daye  for  myne  awne  synne  and  other  mennes  indifferentlye, 
besechinge  God  to  convert  vs  all,  and  to  take  his  wrath  from  vs,  and  to  be  mercifull 
as  well  to  all  other  men,  as  to  myne  awne  soule,  caringe  for  the  welth  of  the  realme 
I  was  borne  in,  for  the  kinge  and  all  that  are  therof,  as  a  tender  hearted  mother 
wolde  do  for  hir  only  sonne. 

As  concerninge  all  I  have  translated  or  other  wise  written,  I  beseche  all  men  to 
reade  it  for  that  purpose  I  wrote  it  :  even  to  bringe  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
scripture.  And  as  farre  as  the  scripture  approveth  it,  so  farre  to  alowe  it,  and  if  in 
anye  place  the  worde  of  God  dysalow  it,  there  to  refuse  it,  as  I  do  before  oure  savyour 
Christ  and  his  congregacion.  And  where  they  fynde  fautes  let  them  shew  it  me,  if 
they  be  nye,  or  wryte  to  me,  if  they  be  farre  of :  or  wryte  openly  agaynst  it  and 
improve  it,  and  I  promyse  them,  if  I  shall  perceave  that  there  reasons  conclude 
I  will  confesse  myne  ignoraunce  openly. 

Wherfore  I  beseche  George  Joye,  ye  and  all  other  to,  for  to  translate  the  scripture 
for  them  selves,  whether  oute  of  Greke,  Latyn  or  Hebrue.  Or  (if  they  wyll  nedes)  as 
the  foxe  when  he  hath  pyssed  in  the  grayes  5  hole  chalengeth  it  for  his  awne,  so  let 
them  take  my  translacions  and  laboures,  and  chaunge  and  alter,  and  correcte  and 
corrupte  at  their  pleasures,  and  call  it  their  awne  translacions,  and  put  to  their  awne 
names,  and  not  to  playe  boo  pepe  after  George  Joyes  maner.  Which  whether  he  have 
done  faythfully  and  truly,  with  soche  reverence  and  feare  as  becommeth  the  worde  of 
God,  and  with  soche  love  and  mekenes  and  affeccion  to  vnite  and  circumspexcion 
that  the  vngodlye  have  none  occasion  to  rayle  on  the  verite,   as  becommeth  the 

6  A  badger. 


82 


George  Joye's  Unauthorized  Revision 


servauntes  of  Christ,  I  referre  it  to  the  iudgmentes  of  them  that  knowe  and  love 
the  trouth.  For  this  I  protest,  that  I  provoke  not  Joye  ner  any  other  man  (but  am 
prouoked,  and  that  after  the  spytfullest  maner  of  provokynge)  to  do  sore  agaynst 
my  will  and  with  sorow  of  harte  that  I  now  do.  But  I  nether  can  ner  will  soffre  of 
anye  man,  that  he  shall  goo  take  my  translacion  and  correct  it  without  name,  and 
make  soche  chaungynge  as  I  my  selfe  durst  not  do,  as  I  hope  to  have  my  parte  in 
Christ,  though  the  hole  worlde  shuld  be  geven  me  for  my  laboure. 

Finally  that  new  Testament  thus  dyligently  corrected,  besyde  this  so  ofte  puttinge 
oute  this  worde  resurreccion,  and  I  wote  not  what  other  chaunge,  for  I  have  not  yet 
reede  it  over,  hath  in  the  ende  before  the  Table  of  the  Epistles  and  Gospelles  this 
tytle  : 

(Here  endeth  the  new  Testament  dylygentlye  ouersene  and  correct  and  printed 
now  agayne  at  Andwarp,  by  me  wydow  of  Christophell  of  Endhouen.  In  the  3'ere  of 
oure  Lorde.  A.M.D.  xxxiiii  in  August)  Which  tytle  (reader)  I  have  here  put  in 
because  bv  this  thou  shalt  knowe  the  booke  the  better.     Vale. 


B.    George  Joye's  Answer. 

From  Joy's  second  edition.     Antwerp,  by  Catharyn  (wydow  of  Christoffel  of  Endhouen), 
January  9,  1535,1  sigs.  C  7-C  8  recto. 

Vnto  the  Reader. 

Thus  endeth  the  new  Testament  prynted  after  the  copye  corrected  by  George 
Joye  :  wherin  for  englisshyng  thys  worde  Resurrectio,  the  lyfe  after  this.  W.  Tindale 
was  so  sore  offended  that  he  wrote  hys  vncharitable  pistle  agenst  me  prefixed  [to] 
his  newe  corrected  testament,  prynted  1534.  in  Nouember,  entytled.  W.  T.  yet  once 
more  to  the  Christen  redere.  Which  pistle  W.  T.  hath  promysed  before  certayne 
men  and  me  (or  els  I  wolde  my  selfe  haue  defended  my  name  and  clered  myselfe 
of  those  lyes  and  sclaunders  there  writen  of  me)  that  he  wolde  calle  agene  his  Pystle 
and  so  correcte  yt,  redresse  yt,  and  reforme  yt  accordinge  to  my  mynde  that  I  shulde 
be  therewyth  contented,  and  vs  bothe  (as  agreed)  to  salute  the  readers  withe  one 
salutacion  in  the  same  reformed  pistle  to  be  set  before  his  testament  now  in 
printing.  And  that  I,  for  my  parte  shulde  (a  rekeninge  and  reson  firste  geuen 
of  my  translacion  of  the  worde)  permyt  yt  vnto  the  iudgement  of  the  lerned  in 
christis  chirche.  Which  thynge,  verely  I  do  not  onely  gladly  consent  there  to,  vpon 
the  condicion  on  his  parte,  but  desyer  them  all  to  iuge  expende  and  trye  all  that  euer 
I  haue  or  shall  wryte,  by  the  scriptures. 

Let  yt  not  therfore  in  the  mean  ceason  offende  the  (good  indifferent  reder)  nor  yet 
auerte  thy  mynde  nether  from  W.  Tindale  nor  fro  me  :  nor  yet  from  redyng  our 
bokis  whiche  teche  and  declare  the  very  doctryne  and  Gospel  of  Christe,  because  yt 
thus  chaunceth  vs  to  varye  and  contende  for  the  trewe  englisshing  of  this  one  worde 
Resurrectio  in  certayne  places  of  the  newe  Testament.     For  I  doubt  not  but  that 

1  As  this  edition  has  only  recently  come  to  light  I  append  a  collation. 

Title  missing. — Colophon  :  C  The  ende  of  the  hole  new  Testamet  |  with  the  Pistles  taken  out 
of  the  olde  |  Testament/  to  be  red  in  the  chirche  |  certayn  dayes  thorowt  the  year.  |  Prynted 
now  agayne  at  Ant-  |  werpe  by  me  Catharyn  wy-  |  dowe  [of  Christoffel  of  Endhouen]  in  the  yere 
of  oure  I  lorde.     M.CCCCC,  and  |  xxxv,  the  ix.  daye  of  |  Januarye. 

472  leaves.     Sigs.  :    +  a-z,  A-H,  Aa-Xx,  Aaa-Ccc,  A-C  in  eights.     32  lines  to  a  page.     160. 

[Title  »J«  1'  ;  Almanacke  •$<  ib  ;1  Kalendar  [►£«  2a]-»I«  7"  ;  The  Gospell  of  S.  Matthew  &c.  to  end 
of  the  Actes  •£■  8b-2tx8b ;  title  to  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostle  of  S.  Paul,  within  a  border  containing 
the  mark  c  |  e  Aai",  verso  blank  ;  The  Epistles  &c.  Aa  2"-[Bbb  ib];  Table/  wherein  you  shall 
fynde/  the  Pistelys  to  the  Gospellys  after  the  vse  of  Sarysbuery.  Bbb  ii-[Ccc  6b],  followed  by 
Ccc  7  and  8,  which  may  have  been  both  blank  ;  [?  Title  to  the  Pistles  taken  out  of  the  olde  Testa- 
ment] Ai  ;  heading  to  the  Pistles  and  text  A2"-C6b ;  Vnto  the  Reader,  C7a-C8*  ;  Colophon,  C8b. 

The  heading  to  the  Epistles  reads  as  follows : 

C  Here  folow  the  pistles  |  taken  out  of  the  olde  Testament  to  be  |  red  in  the  chyrche  certayn 
dayes  tho :  |  rowt  the  year  :  traslated  by  George  Jo-  |  ye/  1  copared  with  the  Pistles  pointed  | 
forth  ad  red  in  the  messe  boke/  and  also  j  withe  the  chapiters  alleged  in  the  By-  [  ble :  so  that 
nowe  here  they  maye  be  fo-  |  unde  easlyer  then  euer  before.  Whiche  |  thys  my  laboure  in  trans- 
latyng  these  |  pistles  in  correcking  1  redressing  them  |  to  make  them  correspondent  wyth  the 
chapters  alleged  in  the  byble  ad  with  |  the  pistles  red  in  the  chirche/  whe-  |  ther  yt  be  more 
diligent  then  [  hathe  ben  shewd  hitherto    |  lot  the  indifferent  re-  |  ders  be  iuges. 

The  unique  copy  in  the  British  Museum  wants  sigs-(-  1,  2,  Ee  I  Bbb  1,  Bbb  8-Ccc  2,  Ccc  6-8,  A  1. 


of  Tyndale's  New  Testament. 


83 


God  hathe  so  prouyded  yt,  that  our  stryfe  and  dyssent  shalbe  vnto  hys  chirche  the 
cause  of  a  perfayter  concorde  and  consent  in  thys  mater,  Noman  to  thinke  hence 
forth  that  the  soulis  departed  slepe  with  out  heauen  feling  nether  payne  nor  ioye 
vntill  domes  daye  as  the  Anabaptistis  dreame  but  to  be  a  lyue  in  that  lyfe  after  thys 
whithe,  and  in  Christe  in  blysse  and  ioye  in  heuen,  as  the  scriptures  clerely  testifye. 
Whych  verite  and  true  doctrine  off  Christe  and  his  apostles,  as  yt  is  a  swete  and 
present  consolacion  vnto  the  pore  afflicte  persecuted  and  trowbled  in  thys  worlde  for 
Christis  sake  when  they  shall  dye,  so  doeth  the  tother  false  opinion  and  erroneouse 
doctryne,  that  is  to  weit,  that  they  sleap  out  of  heauen  nether  feling  payn  nor  ioye, 
minyster  and  geue  perellous  audacite  and  bolde  suernes  to  the  vngodly  here  to  lyue 
styl  and  continew  in  their  wickednes,  sith  they  se  and  be  so  taught  that  after  their 
departing  there  is  no  punysshment  but  sleap  and  reste  as  wel  as  do  the  soulis  of  the 
good  and  ryghteous  tyll  domes  daye.  Which  daye  as  some  of  them  beleue  it  to  be 
very  longe  ere  yt  come,  so  do  many  of  them  beleue  that  yt  shal  neuer  come.  Also 
to  stryue  for  the  knowlege  of  the  trowth  with  a  meke  and  godly  contencion  hathe 
happened  vnto  farre  perfayter  men  then  we  be  bothe,  Nether  haue  there  bene  euer 
any  felowship  so  fewe  and  smal,  but  some  tyme  syche  breache  and  imperfeccion  hath 
hapened  emonge  them  for  a  lytle  ceason  (as  I  trust  in  god  this  shal  not  continew 
longe  betwene  vs  two)  ye  and  that  euen  emonge  the  apostles  as  betwene  Paule  and 
Peter,  and  Paule  and  Bernabas.  This  thing  (I  saye)  may  fall  vpon  vs  also  to  lerne 
men  that  all  men  be  but  lyers  and  maye  erre,  and  to  warne  vs  that  we  depende  not 
wholl  vpon  any  mannis  translacion  nor  hys  doctryne  nether  to  be  sworne  nor  addicte 
to  any  mannis  lerning,  make  he  neuer  so  holye  and  deuoute  protestacions  and  pro- 
logs, but  to  mesure  all  mennis  wrytingis,  workis  and  wordis  wyth  the  infallible  worde 
off  God  to  whom  be  prayse  and  glory  for  euer. 

Amen. 


C.    The  Reconciliation  breaks  down. 

Extracts  from  An  Apologye  made  by  George  Joye  to  satisfye  (if  it  may  be)  W.  Tindale  of  hys 
new  Testament,  1535.     (Unique  copy  at  the  University  Library,  Cambridge,  Sayle  568.) 

How  we  were  once  agreed 

After  that  w.  Tyndale  had  putforth  in  prynt  and  thrusted  his  vncharitable  pystle 
into  many  mennis  handis,  his  frendis  and  myne  vnderstanding  that  I  had  prepared 
my  defence  to  pourge  and  clere  my  name  whyche  he  had  defamed  and  defiled,  called 
vs  togither  to  moue  vs  to  a  concorde  and  peace,  where  I  shewed  them  my  grete 
greif  and  sorowe,  for  that  he  shulde  so  falsely  belye  and  sclaunder  me  of  syche 
crymes  which  I  neuer  thought,  spake,  nor  wrote,  and  of  siche  which  I  knowe  wel 
his  owne  conscience  doth  testifye  the  contrarie,  euen  that  I  denied  the  Resureccion 
of  the  bodie,  but  beleue  it  is  constantly  as  himselfe  :  and  this  with  other  haynous 
crymes  whiche  he  impingeth  vnto  me  in  his  pistle,  nether  he  nor  no  man  els  shall 
neuer  proue  :  wherfore  except  Tin.  (sayd  I)  wil  reuoke  the  sclaunders  fayned  vpon 
me  hym  self,  I  wyl  (as  I  am  bounde)  defende  my  fame  and  name,  whiche  there 
is  nothyng  to  me  more  dere  and  leif  And  to  be  shorte  aftir  many  wordis  :  It  was  { 
thus  thorowe  the  mocion  of  our  frendis  concluded  for  our  agrement  and  peace  :  That 
I  shulde  for  my  parte  (a  reason  and  rekenyng  firste  geuen  why  I  translated  this 
worde  Resurrectio  into  the  lyfe  after  this)  permyt  and  leaue  my  translacion  vnto  the 
iugement  of  the  lerned  in  christis  chirche.  And  T.  on  his  parte  shuld  cal  agein  his 
pistle  into  his  hand,  so  to  redresse  it,  reforme  it,  and  correcke  it  from  siche  sclaun- 
derous  lyes  as  I  was  therwith  offended  and  he  coude  not  iustifye  them,  that  I  shulde 
be  therwith  wel  contented,  T.  addyng  with  hys  own  mouthe  that  we  shulde  with  one 
accorde  in  his  next  testament  then  in  printing  in  the  stede  of  this  vncharitable  pistle 
wherwith  I  was  offended,  salute  the  reders  with  one  comon  salutacion  to  testifye  our 
concorde  :  of  these  condicions  we  departed  louyngly.  Then  after  .v.  or  vj.  dayes 
I  came  to  Tin.  to  se  the  correccion  and  reformacion  of  hys  pistle,  and  he  sayd  he 
neuer  thought  of  it  sence,  I  prayd  him  to  make  yt  redy  shortely  (for  I  longed  sore 
to  se  it)  and  came  agene  to  him  after  .v.  or  .vj.  dayes.  Then  he  sayd  it  was  so 
wryten  that  I  coude  not  rede  it :  and  I  sayd  I  was  wel  aquainted  with  his  hande  and 


The  con- 
dycionsof 
oure  agre- 
ment. 


F   2 


Tindal 
first 

breaketh 
hys  pro- 
myse. 


Nolite  iu- 
dicare  vt 
non  iu- 
dicemini. 


84  George  Joye's  Unauthorized  Revision 


shulde  rede  it  wel  ynough  :  but  he  wolde  not  let  me  se  it.  I  came  agene  the  thirde 
tyme  desyring  him  to  se  it,  but  then  had  he  bethought  him  of  this  cauyllacion  con- 
trary to  the  condicions  of  our  agrement,  that  he  wolde  firste  se  my  reasons  and 
wryte  agenst  them  ere  I  shulde  se  this  his  reformacion  and  reuocacion.  Then  thought 
I,  syth  my  parte  and  reasons  be  put  into  the  iugement  of  the  lerned,  T.  ought  not 
to  write  agenst  them  tyl  their  iugement  be  done,  no  nor  yet  then  nether,  syth  he 
is  content  before  these  men  to  stonde  to  their  iugement,  and  not  to  contende  any 
more  of  thys  mater  withe  me.  yet  I  came  agene  the  fourthe  tyme,  and  to  be  shorte : 
he  persisted  in  his  laste  purpose  and  wolde  fyrste  se  my  reasons  and  wryte  agenst 
them  and  then  leaue  the  mater  to  the  iugement  of  Doctour  Barnes1  and  of  his 
felowe  called  Hijpinus  pastour  of  s.  nicholas  parisshe  in  Hambourg,  adding  that  he 
wolde  reuoke  that  euer  he  wrote  that  I  shulde  denye  the  resurreccion.  Then  I  tolde 
one  of  the  men  that  was  present  at  the  condicions  of  our  agrement  all  this  mater: 
and  wrote  vnto  the  other  these  answers  that  I  had  :  so  ofte  seking  vpon  T.  to  be  at 
peace  and  to  stande  to  hys  promyse,  desyering  them  al  to  moue  him  and  aduyse 
him  to  holde  his  promyse,  or  els,  if  he  wolde  not,  them  not  to  blame  me  thoughe 
I  defende  my  selfe  and  clere  my  fame  whiche  he  hath  thus  falsely  and  vncharitably 
denigrated,  deformed,  and  hurte.  But  in  conclusion  I  perceyued  that  T.  was  half 
ashamed  to  reuoke  according  to  his  promyse  al  that  he  coude  not  iustifye  by  me, 
and  with  whiche  I  was  so  offended,  wherfore  sythe  he  wolde  not  kepe  promyse,  I  am 
compelled  to  answere  here  now  for  my  selfe :  which  I  desier  euery  indifferent  reder 
to  iuge  indifferently. 

D.    Joye's  Narrative. 

From  the  same,  ff.  19-23. 

Lo  good  Reder,  here  mayst  thou  se  of  what  nature  and  complexion  T.  is  so 
sodenly  fyercely  and  boldely  to  choppe  in  to  any  mannis  conscience  and  so  to  vsurpe 
and  preuent  the  office  of  god  in  iugment  which  is  onely  the  enseer  and  sercher  of 
herte  and  mynde.  Thys  godly  man,  iugeth  and  noteth  me  vayngloriouse  curiouse 
and  couetouse,  and  al  for  correcking  a  false  copie  of  the  testament  that  thei  mought 
be  the  trwelyer  printed  agen,  and  so  not  so  many  false  bokis  solde  into  the  realme 
to  the  hurt  and  deceyt  of  the  byers  and  reders  of  them.  I  correcked  but  the  false 
copye  wherby  and  aftir  whyche  the  printer  dyd  sette  his  boke  and  correcked  the 
same  himself  in  the  presse. 

But  I  shall  now  playnly  and  sengly  (for  the  trowth  knoweth  no  fucated  polesshed 
and  paynted  oracion)  declare  vnto  euery  man,  wherof,  howe,  and  by  whom  I  was 
moued  and  desyered  to  correcke  this  false  copie  that  shulde  els  haue  brought  forth 
mo  then  two  thousand  falser  bokes  more  then  euer  englond  had  before. 

First,  thou  shalt  knowe  that  Tindal  aboute  .viij.  or  .ix.  yere  a  goo  translated  and 
printed  the  new  testament  in  a  mean  great  volume,1  but  yet  wyth  oute  Kalender, 
concordances  in  the  margent,  and  table  in  thende.  And  a  non  aftir  the  dwche  men2 
gote  a  copye  and  printed  it  agen  in  a  small  volume  adding  the  kalendare  in  the 
begynning,  concordances  in  the  margent,  and  the  table  in  thende.  But  yet,  for  that 
they  had  no  englisshe  man  to  correcke  the  setting,  thei  themselue  hauyng  not  the 
knowlege  of  our  tongue,  were  compelled  to  make  many  mo  fautes  then  were  in  the 
copye,  and  so  corrupted  the  boke  that  the  simple  reder  might  ofte  tymes  be  taryed 
and  steek.  Aftir  this  thei  printed  it  agein  also  without  a  correctour  in  a  greatter 
letter  and  volume  with  the  figures  in  thapocalipse  whiche  were  therfore  miche  falser 
then  their  firste.3  when  these  two  pryntes  (there  were  of  them  bothe  aboute  v. 
thousand  bokis  printed)  were  al  soulde  more  then  a  twelue  moneth  a  goo,  Tind.  was 
pricked  forthe  to  take  the  testament  in  hande,  to  print  it  and  correcke  it  as  he 
professeth  and  promyseth  to  do  in  the  later  ende  of  his  first  translacion.4  But  T. 
prolonged  and  diff erred  so  necessary  a  thing  and  so  iust  desyers  of  many  men.  In 
so  miche  that  in  the  mean  season,  the  dewch  men  prynted  it  agen  the  thyrde  tyme 
in  a  small  volume  lyke  their  firste  prynt,  but  miche  more  false  than  euer  it  was 

1  Robert  Barnes,  formerly  Prior  of  the  Cambridge  Augustinians,  burnt  in  1540. 
D.  '  A  mean  great  volume,  apparently  the  Worms  octavo  of  1526. 

2  Christoffel  and  Hans  van  Endhoven  in  their  Antwerp  edition  of  1526. 

3  This  may  be  the  edition  of  1532  of  which  Dr.  Angus  possessed  a  mutilated  title-page 
a  tracing  from  which  was  reproduced  by  Mr.  Demaus  in  his  Life  of  Tyndale. 

'  i.  e.  in  the  Epilogue  to  the  Worms  octavo.    See  No.  X. 


of  Tyndale's  New  Testament. 


85 


before.  And  yet  was  T.  here  called  vpon  agen,  seyng  there  were  so  many  false 
printed  bokis  stil  putforth  and  bought  vp  so  fast  (for  now  was  ther  geuen  thanked 
be  god  a  lytel  space  to  breath  and  reste  vnto  christis  chirche  aftir  so  longe  and 
greuouse  persecucion  for  reading  the  bokes)  But  yet  before  this  thyrd  tyme  of 
printing  the  boke,  the  printer  desiered  me  to  correcke  it :  And  I  sayd  It  were  wel 
done  (if  ye  printed  them  agene)  to  make  them  truer,  and  not  to  deceiue  our  nacion 
with  any  mo  false  bokis,  neuertheles  I  suppose  that  T.  himself  wil  put  it  forth  more 
perfait  and  newly  corrected,  which  if  he  do,  yours  shalbe  naught  set  by  nor  neuer 
solde.  This  not  withstanding  yet  thei  printed  them  and  that  most  false  and  aboute 
.ij.  M.  bokis,  and  had  shortly  solde  them  all.  Al  this  longe  while  T.  slept,  for  nothing 
came  from  him  as  farre  as  I  coude  perceiue.  Then  the  dewche  began  to  printe 
them  the  fowrth  tyme  because  thei  sawe  noman  els  goyng  aboute  them,  and  aftir  thei 
had  printed  the  first  leif  which  copye  a  nother  englissh  man  had  correcked  to  them, 
thei  came  to  me  and  desiered  me  to  correcke  them  their  copie,  whom  I  answered  as 
before,  that  if  T.  amende  it  with  so  gret  diligence  as  he  promysethe,  yours  wilbe  neuer 
solde.  Yisse  quod  thei,  for  if  he  prynte  .ij.  m.  and  we  as  many,  what  is  so  litle 
a  noumber  for  all  englond  ?  and  we  wil  sel  ours  beter  cheape,5  and  therfore  we  doubt 
not  of  the  sale  :  so  that  I  perceyued  well  and  was  suer,  that  whether  I  had  correcked 
theyr  copye  or  not,  thei  had  gone  forth  with  their  worke  and  had  geuen  vs  .ij.m.  mo 
bokis  falselyer  printed  then  euer  we  had  before.  Then  I  thus  considred  with  myself : 
englond  hath  ynowe  and  to  many  false  testaments  and  is  now  likely  to  haue  many 
mo :  ye  and  that  whether  T.  correck  his  or  no,  yet  shal  these  now  in  hand  goforth 
vncorrecked  to,  except  some  body  correck  them  :  And  what  T.  dothe  I  wote  not,  he 
maketh  me  nothing  of  his  counsel,  I  se  nothyng  come  from  him  all  this  longe  whyle. 
wherin  with  the  helpe  that  he  hathe,  that  is  to  saye  one  bothe  to  wryte  yt  and  to 
correcke  it  in  the  presse,  he  myght  haue  done  it  thryse  sence  he  was  first  moued  to  do 
it.  For  T.  I  know  wel  was  not  able  to  do  yt  with  out  siche  an  helper  which  he 
hathe  euer  had  hitherto.  Aftir  this  (I  saye)  consydered,  the  printer  came  to  me 
agen  and  off  red  me  .ij.  stuuers  and  an  halfe  for  the  correcking  of  euery  sheet  of  the 
copye,  which  folden  contayneth  .xvj.  leaues,  and  for  thre  stuuers  which  is  .iiij.  pense 
halpeny  starling,  I  promised  to  do  it,  so  that  in  al  I  had  for  my  labour  but  .xiiij. 
shylyngis  flemesshe,  which  labour,  had  not  the  goodnes  of  the  deede  and  comon 
profyte  and  helpe  to  the  readers  compelled  me  more  then  the  money,  I  wolde  not 
haue  done  yt  for  .v.  tymes  so  miche,  the  copie  was  so  corrupt  and  especially  the 
table  :  and  yet  saith  T.  I  did  it  of  couetousnes  :  If  this  be  couetousnes,  then  was  Tindal 
moche  more  covetouse,  for  he  (as  I  her  say)  toke  .x.  ponde  for  his  correccion.  I  dyd 
it  also,  sayth  he,  of  curiositie  and  vaynglory,  ye  and  that  secretly :  and  did  not  put 
to  my  name,  whiche,  I  saye,  be  two  euydent  tokens  that  I  sought  no  vaynglory,  for 
he  that  doth  a  thing  secretly  and  putteth  out  hys  name,  how  seketh  he  vaynglory? 
and  yet  is  not  the  man  ashamed  to  wryte  that  vaynglory  and  couetousnes  where  my 
two  blynde  goides,  but  I  tell  Tin.  agen,  that  if  malyce  and  enuy  (for  all  his  holy  pro- 
testacions)  had  not  bene  his  two  blynde  goidis,  he  wold  neuer  haue  thus  falsely, 
vncharitably,  and  so  spightfully  belyed  and  sclaundred  me  with  so  perpetual  an 
infamie.  Tin.  saith  I  walked  not  aftir  the  rules  of  loue  and  softenes,  but  let  men 
read  how  maliciously  he  belyeth  and  sclaundereth  me  for  wel  doing :  and  iuge  what 
rule  of  loue  and  softnes  he  obseruethe.  It  is  greate  shame  to  the  teacher  when  his 
owne  deedis  and  wordis  reproue  and  condempne  himself :  He  hath  grete  experience 
of  my  natural  disposicion  and  complexion  saith  he.  But  I  wyll  not  be  his  Phisicion 
and  decerne  his  water  at  this  tyme.  And  as  for  his  two  disciplis  that  gaped  so 
longe  for  their  masters  morsel  that  thei  might  haue  the  aduauntage  of  the  sale  of  his 
bokis  of  which  one  sayd  vnto  me.  It  were  almose  6  he  were  hanged  that  correcketh 
the  testament  for  the  dewch,  and  the  tother  harped  on  his  masters  vntwned  string, 
saying  that  because  I  englissh  Resurreccion  the  lyfe  aftir  this,  men  gatherd  that 
I  denied  the  general  resurreccion :  which  errour  (by  their  own  sayng)  was  gathred 
longe  before  this  boke  was  printed,  vnto  which  ether  of  theis  disciples  I  semed  no 
honest  man  for  correcking  the  copye,  I  wil  not  now  name  them,  nor  yet  shew  how- 
one  of  them,  neuer  I  dare  say  seyng  s.  Ierome  de  optimo  genere  interpretandi,  yet 
toke  vpon  him  to  teche  me  how  I  shuld  translat  the  scripturis,  where  I  shuld  geue 
worde  for  worde,  and  when  I  shulde  make  scholias,  notis,  and  gloses  in  the  mergent 

5  Joye  apparently  saw  nothing  objectionable  in  this  intention  to  undersell  Tyndale's  own 
revision.  8  Almose,  alms,  a  mercy. 


86  George  Joye's  Unauthorized  Revision. 


as  himself  and  hys  master  doith.  But  in  good  faithe  as  for  me  I  had  as  lief  put  the 
trvvthe  in  the  text  as  in  the  margent  and  excepte  the  glose  expovvne  the  text  (as  many 
of  theirs  do  not)  or  where  the  text  is  playn  ynough :  I  had  as  lief  leue  sich  fryuole 
gloses  clene  out.  I  wolde  the  scripture  were  so  purely  and  playnly  translated  that  it 
neded  nether  note,  glose  nor  scholia,7  so  that  the  reder  might  once  swimme  without 
a  corke.  But  this  testament  was  printed  or  T.  was  begun,  and  that  not  by  my 
preuencion,  but  by  the  printers  quicke  expedicion  and  T.  own  longe  sleaping,  for  as 
for  me  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  printing  ther  of,  but  correcked  their  copie  only, 
as  where  I  founde  a  worde  falsely  printed,  I  mended  it :  and  when  I  came  to  some 
derke  sentencis  that  no  reason  coude  be  gathered  of  them  whether  it  was  by  the 
ignorance  of  the  first  translatour  or  of  the  prynter,  I  had  the  latyne  text  by  me  and 
made  yt  playn  :  and  where  any  sentence  was  vnperfite  or  clene  left  oute  I  restored  it 
agene :  and  gaue  many  wordis  their  pure  and  natiue  signification  in  their  places 
which  thei  had  not  before.  For  my  conscience  so  compelled  me  to  do,  and  not 
willingly  and  wetingly  to  slip  ouer  siche  fautis  into  the  hurte  of  the  text  or  hinderance 
of  the  reder. 


XXVIII.    TYNDALE'S  WORK  AS  A  TRANSLATOR. 

From  Halle's  Chronicle,  '  The  Union  of  the  two  noble  and  illustre  families  of  Lancastre 
&  Yorke.'    London,  R.  Grafton,  1548,  reign  of  Henry  VIII,  fol.  CC.xxvii. 

This  yere  in  the  moneth  of  September  Wyllyam  Tyndale  otherwyse  called  Hichyns 
was  by  the  crueltie  of  the  clergie  of  Louayn  condempned  and  burned  in  a  toune 
besyde  Bruxelles  in  Braband  called  Yylford.  This  man  translated  the  New  testa- 
ment into  Englishe  and  fyrst  put  it  in  Prynt,  and  likewise  he  translated  the 
v.  bookes  of  Moses,  Iosua,  Iudicum,  Ruth,  the  bookes  of  the  Kynges  and  the  bookes 
of  Paralipomenon,  Nehemias  or  the  fyrst  of  Esdras,  the  Prophet  Ionas,  and  no  more 
of  the  holy  scripture.  He  made  also  diuers  treatises,  which  of  many  were  well 
lyked  and  highly  praysed,  and  of  many  vtterly  dispised  and  abhorred,  and  especially 
of  the  moste  part  of  the  bishoppes  of  this  realme,  who  often  by  their  great  labours 
caused  Proclamacions  to  be  made  against  his  bookes,  and  gatte  them  condempned 
and  brent,  aswell  the  Newe  testament  as  other  woorkes  of  his  doynges  .  .  . 

XXIX.    THE  PROJECTED  BISHOPS'  VERSION. 

From  Harley  MS.  422,  fol.  87.    One  of  Fox's  manuscripts. 

The  lyke  fyne  answer  he1  [Mr.  Thomas  Lawney]  made  of  Bisshopp  Stokeleys 
answer  made  to  my  Lorde  of  Cant,  his  letters  requiryng  his  part  of  the  translation 
of  the  new  Testament. 

My  Lorde  Cromwell  mynding  to  haue  the  New  Testament  thoroughlie  corrected, 
deuided  the  same  into  ix  or  x  partes  and  caused  yt  to  be  written  at  large  in  paper 
bokes  and  sent  vnto  the  best  lernyd  Bisshopps,  and  other  lernyd  men,  tothintent 
thei  sholde  make  a  perfectt  correction  thereof,  and  when  thei  hadd  don  to  sende 
them  vnto  hym  at  Lambethe  by  a  day  lymyted  for  that  purpose.  It  chanced  that 
the  Actes  of  the  Apostells  were  sent  to  Bisshopp  stokisley  to  ouersee  and  correcte 
than  Bisshopp  of  London,  When  the  day  came  euerymanne  hadd  sentt  to  Lambeth 
thair  partes  correcte,2  onlie  Stokisley's  portion  wanted,  My  Lorde  of  Cant,  wrote  to 
the  Bisshopp  lettres  for  his  parte,  requiring  to  delyuer  them  vnto  the  bringer  this 
his  Secretary.  Bisshopp  Stokesley  being  at  Fulham  receyued  the  lettres,  vnto  the 
whiche  he  made  this  answer,  I  maruaile  what  my  Lorde  of  Canterbury  meaneth, 
that  thus  abuseth  the  people  in  gyving  them  libertie  to  reade  the  scriptures,  which 

'  It  is  Joye  who  writes  this,  not  Tyndale  (cp.  note  to  XXIII),  and  he  desired  to  make  it 
possible  by  manipulating  the  text  according  to  his  views.     The  text  reads  '  puerly  and  plyanly  '. 

XXIX.   ■  Thomas  Lawney  was  chaplain  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk. 

'  This  seems  highly  improbable  (cp.  No.  XXXIII).  One  bishop,  however,  Stephen  Gardiner, 
performed  his  task,  as  on  June  10,  1535,  he  wrote  to  Cromwell  :  '  I  haue  as  gret  cause  as  any 
man  to  desire  rest  and  quiet  for  the  helth  of  my  body  ;  wherunto  I  thought  to  haue  entended  and 
to  absteyne  from  bookes  and  wryting,  hauing  finished  the  translation  of  Saynt  Luke  and  Saynt 
John,  wherin  I  have  spent  a  gret  labour.'  (Slate  Papers  of  Henry  VII I,  vol.  i,  p.  430.  Printed 
'  From  Crumwell's  Correspondence  in  the  Chapter  House.     Bundle  \V.') 


The  Projected  Bishops'  Version. 


a? 


doith  nothing  els  but  infect  them  with  heryses,  I  haue  bestowed  neuer  an  howre 
apon  my  portion  nor  neuer  will.  And  therfore,  my  lorde  shall  haue  his  boke  againe, 
for  I  will  neuer  be  gyltie  to  bring  the  simple  people  into  error. 

My  Lorde  of  Cant,  servaunte  toke  the  boke,  and  brought  the  same  to  Lambeth 
vnto  my  Lorde,  declaring  my  Lorde  of  London's  answer.  When  my  1.  had  perceyued 
that  the  Bisshopp  hadd  don  nothing  therein,  I  marvaile  quod  my  Lorde  of  Cant, 
that  my  Lorde  of  London  ys  so  frowarde,  that  he  will  not  do  as  other  men  do. 
Mr  Lawney  stode  by  hearyng  my  lorde  speake  somoche  of  the  Bisshopps  vnto- 
wardnes,  saied,  I  can  tell  your  grace  whie  my  Lorde  will  not  bestowe  any  labor  or 
payne  this  way.  Your  grace  knoweth  well  (quod  Lawney)  that  his  portion  ys  a  pece 
of  Newe  Testament,  And  than  he  being  persuaded  that  Christe  had  bequeth  hym 
nothing  in  his  Testament,  thoughte  it  were  madnes  to  bestowe  any  labour  or  payne 
where  no  gayne  was  to  be  gotten,  And  besides  this  It  ys  the  Actes  of  the  Apostells, 
whiche  were  symple  poore  felowes,  and  therfore  my  lord  of  London  disdayned  to 
haue  to  dc*  with  any  of  thair  Actes. 

My  Lorde  of  Cant,  and  other  that  stode  by  coulde  not  forbere  from  lawghter 
to  here  Mr  Lawney's  accute  invensyon  in  answeryng  to  the  Bisshopp  of  London's 
frowarde  answer  to  my  lorde  of  Cant,  lettres. 


XXX.    FINAXCIAL  HELP  GIVEN  TO  COVERDALE  BY 
JACOB  VAN  METEREN. 

A. 

Part  of  a  deposition  of  Jacob's  son  Emanuel  in  1609,  as  to  the  Dutch  Church  in  London, 
quoted  from  the  transcript  in  '  The  Marriage,  Baptismal  and  Burials  Registers  of  the  Dutch 
Reformed  Church,  Austin  Friars,  London;  edited  by  W.  J.  C.  Moens.'     Lymington,  1884. 

Emanuel  Demetrius,  marchant  of  Andwarp,  aged  about  74  yeares,  doth  witnes 
and  can  depose.  That  he  was  brought  in  England  Anno  1550  in  King  Edward's 
the  6  dayes,  by  his  Father,  a  furtherer  of  reformed  religion,  and  he  that  caused  the 
first  Bible  at  his  costes  to  be  Englisshed  by  Mr.  Myles  Coverdal  in  Andwarp,  the 
which  his  father,  with  Mr.  Edward  Whytchurch,  printed  both  in  Paris  and  London,1 
by  which  meanes  he,  wel  acquaynted,  was  one  of  the  Suters  for  the  erection  of 
a  Dutche  Church  at  the  Augustin  Fryers  and  made  this  Deponent  a  member  of  the 
same  Anno  I552- 

And  he  doth  wel  remember  that  the  Churchyeard  and  houses  on  bothe  sydes  of 
the  West  dore  of  the  Church  were  inhabited  and  possessed  by  the  Members  of  the 
Church.  And  harde  his  sayd  father  and  others  of  the  Elders  of  the  Church  often 
tymes  consel  of  buylding  there  [&c]  .  .  .  Thus  much  I  can  depose,  in  London, 
28  of  May,  1609.  Emanuel  Demetrius. 

B. 

Part  of  '  Het  leven  ende  sterven  vanden  eerweerden,  vromen  ende  vermaerden,  Emanuel  van 
Meteren,  cortelijck  beschreven  door  sijnen  ghetrouwen  Vriendt,  Simeon  Ruytmck,'  forming 
an  appendix  to  '  Emanuels  van  Meteren  Historie  der  Nederlandscher  ende  haerder  Naburen 
Oorlogen  ende  geschiedenissen. '     In  's  Graven-Haghe,  1614. 

Emanuel  van  Meteren,  die  met  grooten  vlijt  ende  yernuft  desen  Boeck  by  een 
versamelt  was  heeft,  t'  Antwerpen  gheboren  den  9.  Iulij  1535. 

Sijn  Vader  hiet  Iacob  van  Meteren  van  Breda,  Sone  van  Cornelius  van  Meteren. 
Sijn  Moeder  hiet  Ottilia  Ortels,  docter  van  Willem  Ortels  van  Ausborch,  die  Groot- 
vader  was,  van  den  wijdt-beroemden  Werelt  beschrijver,  Abrahamus  Ortelius. 

Sijn  Vader  in  sijn  Ieucht  hadde  ghelurt  die  edele  Conste  van't  Letter  setten, 
hy  was  begaeft  met  de  kennisse  van  veelderley  talen  ende  andere  goede  weten- 
schappen,  wist  van  in  die  tijden  t'licht  t'onderscheyden  van  dysternisse,  ende 
bethoonde  sijnen  bysonderen  yver  in't  becostighen  vande  oversettinghe  ende  Druck 
vanden  Engelschen  Bijbel  binnen  Antwerpen,  daer  toe  ghebruyckende  den  dienst 

1  There  is  an  obvious  confusion  here  between  the  'first  Bible'  of  1535,  which  was  certainly 
not  printed  at  Paris  and  London,  and  the  first  Great  Bible,  which  was  begun  at  Pans  and  finished 
at  London. 


88  Financial  Help  given  to  Coverdale. 


van  een  gheleert  Student  met  namen  Miles  Couerdal,  tot  groote  bevoorderinghe 
van  het  Rijcke  Iesu  Christi  in  Enghelandt. 

Translation. 

Emanuel  van  Meteren,  who  with  great  industry  and  intelligence  brought  together 
the  present  book,  was  born  at  Antwerp,  9  July,  1535- 

His  father,  named  Jacob  van  Meteren  of  Breda,  was  son  of  Cornelius  van 
Meteren.  His  mother,  named  Ottilia  Ortels,  was  daughter  of  Willem  Ortels  of 
Augsburg,  the  grandfather  of  the  far-famed  Cosmographer,  Abraham  Ortelius. 

His  father  had  taught  him  in  his  youth  the  noble  art  of  letter-setting,  and  he 
was  endowed  with  a  knowledge  of  several  languages  and  other  useful  sciences.  He 
knew  how  to  distinguish  light  from  darkness,  and  showed  his  zeal  more  especially 
in  bearing  the  cost  of  the  translating  and  printing  of  the  English  Bible  at  Antwerp,1 
using  for  this  purpose  the  services  of  a  learned  student  named  Miles  Couerdale,  to 
the  great  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  in  England. 


XXXI.     COVERDALE'S   BIBLE,   1535. 

A. 

[end  of  dedication.] 

Considerynge  now  (most  gracyous  prynce)  the  inestimable  treasure,  frute  &  pros- 
perite  euerlastynge,  that  God  geueth  with  his  worde,  and  trustynge  in  his  infynite 
goodnes  that  he  wolde  brynge  my  symple  and  rude  laboure  herin  to  good  effecte, 
therfore  as  the  holy  goost  moued  other  men  to  do  the  cost  herof,1  so  was  I  boldened 
in  God,  to  laboure  in  the  same.  Agayne,  consyderynge  youre  Imperiall  maiestye 
not  onely  to  be  my  naturall  soueraigne  liege  Lorde  &  chefe  heade  of  the  church 
of  Englonde,  but  also  the  true  defender  and  maynteyner  of  Gods  lawes,  I  thought  it 
my  dutye,  and  to  belonge  vnto  my  allegiaunce,  whan  I  had  translated  this  Bible, 
not  onely  to  dedicate  this  translacyon  vnto  youre  highnesse,  but  wholy  to  commytte 
it  vnto  the  same  :  to  the  intent  that  yf  any  thynge  therin  be  translated  amysse  (for 
in  many  thynges  we  fayle,  euen  whan  we  thynke  to  be  sure)  it  may  stonde  in  youre 
graces  handes,  to  correcte  it,  to  amende  it,  to  improue  it,  yee  and  cleane  to  reiecte 
it,  yf  youre  godly  wysdome  shall  thynke  it  necessary.  And  as  I  do  with  all  hum- 
blenes  submitte  myne  vnderstondynge,  and  my  poore  translacyon  vnto  the  spirite 
of  trueth  in  your  grace,  so  make  I  this  protestacyon  (hauyng  God  to  recorde  in  my 
conscience)  that  I  haue  nether  wrested  nor  altered  so  moch  as  one  worde  for  the 
mayntenaunce  of  any  maner  of  secte  :  but  haue  with  a  cleare  conscience  purely  and 
faythfully  translated  this  out  of  fyue  sundry  interpreters,2  hauyng  onely  the  many- 
fest  trueth  of  the  scripture  before  myne  eyes  :  Trustynge  in  the  goodnes  of  God, 
that  it  shalbe  vnto  his  worshippe  :  quietnes  and  tranquilite  vnto  your  highnes  :  a 
perfecte  stablyshment  of  all  Gods  ordynaunces  within  youre  graces  domynion  : 
a  generall  comforte  to  all  Christen  hertes,  and  a  continuall  thankfulnesse  both  of 
olde  and  yonge  vnto  god,  and  to  youre  grace,  for  beynge  oure  Moses,  and  for 
bringynge  vs  out  of  this  olde  Egypte  from  the  cruell  handes  of  our  spirituall  Pharao. 
For  where  were  the  Iewes  (by  ten  thousande  partes)  so  moch  bounde  vnto  Kynge 
Dauid,  for  subduynge  of  greate  Goliath,  and  all  theyr  enemyes,  as  we  are  to  your 
grace,  for  delyuerynge  vs  out  of  oure  olde  Babylonycall  captiuyte  ?  3  For  the  whiche 
delyueraunce  and  victory  I  beseke  oure  onely  medyatoure  Iesus  Christ,  to  make 
soch  meanes  for  vs  vnto  his  heauenly  father,  that  we  neuer  be  vnthankfull  vnto 
him,  ner  vnto   youre  grace  :    but  that  we  euer   increace  in  the  feare  of  him,  in 

1  If  this  version  of  the  Van  Meteren  legend  were  not  at  third  hand,  Ruytinck's  version  of 
Emanuel's  recollections  of  what  his  father  had  told  him,  it  would  be  entitled  to  some  weight 
as  evidence  as  to  where  the  Bible  of  1535  was  printed.  As  it  stands  it  can  hardly  be  adduced  as 
evidence  of  more  than  some  general  support  of  Coverdale. 

XXXI.  A.  '  The  plural  here  seems  to  negative  any  theory  that  Jacob  van  Meteren  bore  the 
whole  expense,  as  has  been  contended.  It  is  probable  that  Cromwell  was  one  of  Coverdale's 
instigators;  whether  he  helped  him  with  funds  is  much  more  doubtful. 

2  See  Introduction,  p.  13. 

3  The  phrase  is  from  Luther's  tract,  De  Captiuitate  Babylonica  Ecdesiae. 


Coverdale's  Bible,  1535. 


89 


obedience  vnto  your  hyghnesse,  in  loue  vnfayned  vnto  oure  neghbours  :  and  in  all 
vertue  that  commeth  of  God.  To  whom  for  the  defendynge  of  his  blessed  worde 
(by  your  graces  most  rightfull  administracyon)  be  honoure  and  thankes,  glory  and 
dominyon,  wo  ride  without  ende,  Amen. 

Youre  graces  humble  sub- 

iecte  and  daylye  oratour, 

Myles  Couerdale. 


B. 

[beginning  of  the  address  to  the  reader.] 

A  prologe. 
Myles  Couerdale  Vnto  the  Christen  reader. 

COnsiderynge  how  excellent  knowlege  and  lernynge  an  interpreter  of  scripture 
oughte  to  haue  in  the  tongues,  and  ponderyng  also  myne  owne  insufficiency  therm, 
and  how  weake  I  am  to  perfourme  the  office  of  translatoure,  I  was  the  more  lothe  to 
medle  with  this  worke.  Notwithstondynge  whan  I  consydered  how  greate  pytie  it 
was  that  we  shulde  wante  it  so  longe,  and  called  to  my  remembraunce  the  aduersite 
of  them,  which  were  not  onely  of  rype  knowlege,  but  wolde  also  with  all  theyr  hertes 
haue  perfourmed  that  they  beganne,  yf  they  had  not  had  impediment 1  :  considerynge 
(I  saye)  that  by  reason  of  theyr  aduersyte  it  coulde  not  so  soone  haue  bene  broughte 
to  an  ende,  as  oure  most  prosperous  nacyon  wolde  fayne  haue  had  it  :  these  and 
other  reasonable  causes  consydered,  I  was  the  more  bolde  to  take  it  in  hande.  And 
to  helpe  me  herin,  I  haue  had  sondrye  translacions,  not  onely  in  latyn,  but  also 
of  the  Douche  interpreters  2  :  whom  (because  of  theyr  synguler  gyftes  and  speciall 
diligence  in  the  Bible)  I  haue  ben  the  more  glad  to  folowe  for  the  most  parte, 
accordynge  as  I  was  requyred.3  But  to  saye  the  trueth  before  God,  it  was  nether 
my  laboure  ner  desyre,  to  haue  this  worke  put  in  my  hande  :  neuertheles  it  greued 
me  that  other  nacyons  shulde  be  more  plenteously  prouyded  for  with  the  scripture 
in  theyr  mother  tongue,  then  we  :  therfore  whan  I  was  instantly  requyred,  though 
I  coulde  not  do  so  well  as  I  wolde,  I  thought  it  yet  my  dewtye  to  do  my  best,  and 
that  with  a  good  wyll. 

where  as  some  men  thynke  now  that  many  translacyons  make  diuisyon  in  the 
fayth  and  in  the  people  of  God,  that  is  no[t]  so  :  for  it  was  neuer  better  with  the 
congregacion  of  god,  then  whan  euery  church  allmost  had  the  Byble  of  a  sondrye 
translacyon.  Amonge  the  Grekes  had  not  Origen  a  specyall  translacyon  ?  Had 
not  Vulgarius  one  peculyar,  and  lykewyse  Chrysostom  ?  Besyde  the  seuentye  inter- 
preters, is  there  not  the  translacyon  of  Aquila,  of  Theodotio,  of  Symachus,  and 
of  sondrye  other  ?  Agayne  amonge  the  Latyn  men,  thou  findest  that  euery  one 
allmost  vsed  a  specyall  and  sondrye  translacyon  :  for  in  so  moch  as  euery  bysshoppe 
had  the  knowlege  of  the  tongues,  he  gaue  his  diligence  to  haue  the  Byble  of  his 
awne  translacion.  The  doctours,  as  Hireneus,  Cyprianus,  S.  Iherome,  S.  Augustine, 
Hylarius  and  S.  Ambrose  vpon  dyuerse  places  of  the  scripture  reade  not  the  texte  all 
alyke. 

Therfore  oughte  it  not  to  be  taken  as  euel,  that  soche  men  as  haue  vnderstondynge 
now  in  our  tyme,  exercyse  them  selues  in  the  tongues,  and  geue  their  diligence  to 
translate  out  of  one  language  in  to  another.  Yee  we  ought  rather  to  geue  god 
hye  thankes  therfore,  which  thorow  his  sprete  stereth  vp  mens  myndes,  so  to  exercise 
them  selues  therin.  wolde  god  it  had  neuer  bene  left  of  after  the  tyme  of  S.  Augustine, 
then  shulde  we  neuer  haue  come  in  to  soch  blindnes  and  ignoraunce,  in  to  soch  erroures 
and  delusyons.  For  as  soone  as  the  Byble  was  cast  asyde,  and  nomore  put  in  exercyse, 
then  beganne  euery  one  of  his  awne  heade  to  wryte  what  so  euer  came  in  to  his  brayne 
and  that  semed  to  be  good  in  his  awne  eyes  :    and  so  grewe  the  darknes  of  mens 

1  The  reference  seems  to  be  clearly  to  Tyndale,  but  Coverdale  must  have  begun  his  task  long 
before  Tyndale's  arrest. 

2  See  Introduction,  p.  13. 

3  Compare  the  first  note  to  the  preceding  section. 


go  Coverdale's  Bible,  1535 


tradicions.  And  this  same  is  the  cause  that  we  haue  had  so  many  wryters,  which 
seldome  made  mencyon  of  the  scripture  of  the  Byble  :  and  though  they  some  tyme 
aleged  it,  yet  was  it  done  so  farre  out  of  season  and  so  wyde  from  the  purpose,  that 
a  man  maye  well  perceaue,  how  that  they  neuer  sawe  the  oryginall. 

Seynge  then  that  this  diligent  exercyse  of  translatynge  doth  so  moch  good  and 
edifyeth  in  other  languages,  why  shulde  it  do  so  euell  in  oures  ?  Doutles  lyke  as 
all  nacyons  in  the  dyuersite  of  speaches  maye  knowe  one  God  in  the  vnyte  of  faith, 
and  be  one  in  loue  :  euen  so  maye  dyuerse  translacyons  vnderstonde  one  another, 
and  that  in  the  head  articles  and  grounde  of  oure  most  blessed  faith,  though  they 
vse  sondrye  wordes.  wherfore  me  thynke  we  haue  greate  occasyon  to  geue  thankes 
vnto  God,  that  he  hath  opened  vnto  his  church  the  gyfte  of  interpret acy on  and  of 
pryntyng,  and  that  there  are  at  this  tyme  so  many,  which  with  soch  diligence  and 
faithfulnes  interprete  the  scripture  to  the  honoure  of  god  and  edifyenge  of  his  people, 
where  as  (lyke  as  whan  many  are  shutynge  together)  euery  one  doth  his  best  to 
be  nyest  the  marke.  And  though  they  can  not  all  attayne  therto,  yet  shuteth  one 
nyer  then  another,  and  hytteth  it  better  then  another,  yee  one  can  do  it  better 
then  another,  who  is  now  then  so  vnreasonable,  so  despytefull,  or  enuyous,  asto 
abhorre  him  that  doth  all  his  diligence  to  hytte  the  prycke,4  and  to  shute  nyest 
it,  though  he  mysse  and  come  not  nyest  the  mark  ?  Ought  not  soch  one  rather 
to  be  commended,  and  to  be  helped  forwarde,  that  he  maye  exercyse  himselfe  the 
more  therin  ? 

For  the  which  cause  (acordyng  as  I  was  desyred)  I  toke  the  more  vpon  me 
to  set  forth  this  speciall  translacyon,  not  as  a  checker,  not  as  a  reprouer,  or  despyser 
of  other  mens  translacyons  (for  amonge  many  as  yet  I  haue  founde  none  without 
occasyon  of  greate  thankesgeuynge  vnto  god)  but  lowly  and  f aythfully  haue  I  folowed 
myne  interpreters,  and  that  vnder  correccyon.  And  though  I  haue  fayled  eny  where 
(as  there  is  noman  but  he  mysseth  in  some  thynge)  loue  shall  constyrre  5  all  to  the 
best  without  eny  peruerse  iudgment.  There  is  noman  lyuynge  that  can  se  all  thynges, 
nether  hath  god  geuen  eny  man  to  knowe  euery  thynge.  One  seyth  more  clearly 
then  another,  one  hath  more  vnderstondyng  then  another,  one  can  vtter  a  thynge 
better  then  another,  but  noman  oughte  to  enuye,  or  dispyse  another.  He  that 
can  do  better  then  another,  shulde  not  set  him  at  naught  that  vnderstondeth  lesse : 
Yee  he  that  hath  the  more  vnderstondyng,  ought  to  remembre  that  the  same 
gyfte  is  not  his  but  Gods,  and  that  God  hath  geuen  it  him  to  teach  &  enfourme 
the  ignoraunt.  Yf  thou  hast  knowlege  therfore  to  iudge  where  eny  faute  is  made, 
I  doute  not  but  thou  wilt  helpe  to  amende  it,  yf  loue  be  ioyned  with  thy  knowlege. 
Howbeit  wherin  so  euer  I  can  perceaue  by  my  selfe,  or  by  the  informacyon  of 
other,  that  I  haue  fayled  (as  it  is  no  wonder)  I  shall  now  by  the  helpe  of  God  ouerloke 
it  better  and  amende  it. 


XXXII.     COVERDALE'S   LATIN-ENGLISH    NEW  TESTAMENT 
FOLLOWING  THE   VULGATE  TEXT. 

A.    Dedication1  to  the  First  Edition  Printed  by  J.  Nycholson  at 

Southwark. 

To  the  moost  noble,  moost  gracious,  and  oure  moost  dradde  soueraigne  lord 
kynge  Henry  the  eyght,  kynge  of  Englande  and  of  Fraunce,  &c.  Defender  of 
Christes  true  fayth,  and  vnder  God  the  chefe  and  supreme  heade  of  the  churche  of 
Englande,  Irelande,  &c. 

COnsyderynge  (moost  gracious  Soueraigne)  how  louyngly,  how  fauourably,  and 
how  tenderly  your  hyghnesse  hath  taken  myne  infancy  &  rudenesse  in  dedicat- 
ynge  the  whole  bible  in  Englysh  to  your  moost  noble  grace.  And  hauyng  sure 
experience  also  how  benygne  and  gracious  a  mynde  your  hyghnes  doth  euer  beare 
to  all  them  that  in  theyr  callyng  are  wyllynge  to  do  theyr  beste :  It  doth  euen 

*  The  bull's  eye.  *  Construe,  interpret. 

XXXII.  '  From  the  edition  which  Coverdale  caused  to  be  printed  at  Paris  we  learn  that  he 
supplied  James  Nycholson  of  Southwark  with  copy,  but  was  obliged  to  leave  the  correction  of 
the  press  in  his  hands.  The  result  was  an  edition  so  incorrect  that  Coverdale  repudiated  it  and 
printed  a  new  edition,  which  he  dedicated  to  Cromwell.  Nothing  daunted,  Nycholson  printed  it  a 
second  time  as  '  Faythfully  translated  by  Johan  Hollybushe  '  (cp.  No.  XVI  A,  note  J). 


Coverdale's  Latin-English  New  Testament.         91 


animate  and  encorage  me  now  lykewyse  to  use  the  same  audacite  towarde  your 
grace  :  Neuer  intendyng  nor  purposynge  to  haue  ben  thus  bold,  yf  your  most  noble 
kyndnes  and  princely  benygnite  had  not  forced  me  here  vnto.  This  (doutles)  is 
one  of  the  chefest  causes  why  I  do  now  with  moost  humble  obedience  dedicate  and 
offre  this  translacion  of  the  new  Testament  vnto  your  moost  royall  maiestye.  And 
to  saye  the  truth :  I  can  not  perceaue  the  contrary,  but  as  many  of  vs  as  intende 
the  glory  of  god  haue  all  nede  to  commytte  vnto  your  gracious  protection  and  defence 
aswell  our  good  doynges  as  our  selues :  Oure  good  doynges  I  meane,  and  not  our  euel 
workes.  For  yf  we  went  aboute  euel,  god  forbyd  that  we  shuld  seke  defence  at 
your  grace.  But  euen  our  weldoynges,  our  good  wylles  and  godly  purposes,  those 
with  all  humble  obedience  must  we  and  do  submytte  to  your  graces  moost  sure  pro- 
tection. For  as  our  aduersary  the  deuell  walketh  about  lyke  a  roarynge  lyon,  and 
seketh  whom  he  may  deuoure.  And  as  the  enemies  of  Christ  went  aboute  to  tangle 
hymselfe  in  his  wordes,  and  to  hunt  somwhat  out  of  his  owne  mouth :  Euen  so  do 
not  the  enemies  of  gods  word  ceasse  yet  to  pycke  quarels,  and  to  seke  out  new 
occasions,  how  they  may  depraue  and  synistrally  interprete  our  wel  doynges.  And 
where  as  with  all  faythfulnes  we  go  about  to  make  our  brethren  (youre  graces 
louynge  subiectes)  participante  of  the  frutes  of  oure  good  wylles,  they  yet  not 
regardynge  what  profite  we  wolde  be  glad  to  do  them,  reporte  euell  of  vs,  sklaunder 
vs,  and  saye  the  worste  of  vs  :  Yee  they  are  not  ashamed  to  affirme,  that  we  intende 
to  peruerte  the  scripture,  and  to  condemne  the  commune  translacion  in  Latyn, 
whych  costumably  is  red  in  the  church  :  where  as  we  purpose  the  cleane  contrary. 
And  because  it  greueth  them  that  your  subiectes  be  growen  so  farre  in  knowlege 
of  theyr  dewtye  to  God,  to  youre  grace,  and  to  theyr  neghboures,  theyr  inwarde 
malyce  doth  breake  oute  in  to  blasphemous  and  vncomlye  wordes,  in  so  much  that 
they  cal  your  louynge  and  faythfull  people,  heretikes,  new  fangled  fellowes,  English 
biblers,  coblers  of  diuinite,  fellowes  of  the  new  fayth  &c,  with  such  other  vngodly 
sayenges. 

How  nedefull  a  thynge  is  it  then  for  us  to  resorte  vnto  the  moost  lawfull  protection 
of  God  in  youre  graces  suppreme  and  imperiall  authorite  vnder  hym  ?  Without 
the  which  moost  lawfull  defence  now  in  these  turbulent  and  stormy  assaultes  of 
the  wycked,  we  shuld  be,  but  euen  Orphanes,  and  vtterly  desolate  of  comforte.  But 
God  whom  the  scripture  2  calleth  a  father  of  the  comfortles  and  defender  of  wedowes, 
dyd  otherwyse  prouyde  for  us,  whan  he  made  youre  grace  his  hye  supreme  mynister 
ouer  vs. 

To  come  now  to  the  original  and  fyrst  occasion  of  this  my  moost  humble  laboure, 
and  to  declare  howe  lytle  I  haue  or  do  intende  to  despyse  this  present  translation 
in  Latyn  (or  ony  other  in  what  language  so  euer  it  be)  I  haue  here  set  it  forth  and 
the  Englysh  also  therof,  I  mean  the  text  which  communely  is  called  S.  Hieroms,  and 
is  costumably  red  in  the  church.  And  thys  (my  moost  gracious  Soueraigne)  haue 
I  done  not  so  much  for  the  clamorous  importunyte  of  euell  speakers,  as  to  satisfye 
the  iust  request  of  certayne  youre  graces  faythfull  subiectes.  And  specially  to 
induce  and  instructe  such  as  can  but  Englishe,  and  are  not  learned  in  the  Latin,  that 
in  comparynge  these  two  textes  together,  they  maye  the  better  vnderstonde  the  one 
by  the  other.  And  I  doute  not  but  such  ignoraunt  bodies  as  (hauynge  cure  and 
charge  of  soules)  are  very  vnleamed  in  the  Latyn  tunge,  shall  trough  thys  smal 
laboure  be  occasioned  to  atteyn  vnto  more  knowlege,  and  at  the  leest  be  constrayned 
to  saye  well  of  the  thynge,  whyche  here  tofore  they  haue  blasphemed.  The  igno- 
raunce  of  which  men  yf  it  were  not  so  exceadyng  great,  a  man  wolde  wonder 
what  shulde  moue  them  to  make  such  importune  cauillacions  agaynst  vs.  It  is  to 
be  feared,  that  frowardnesse  and  malice  is  myxte  with  theyr  ignoraunce.  For  in 
as  much  as  in  our  other  translacions  we  do  not  followe  thys  olde  Latyn  texte  word 
for  word  they  crye  out  vpon  vs  :  As  though  al  were  not  as  nye  the  truth  to  translate 
the  scripture  out  of  other  languages,  as  to  turne  it  out  of  the  Latyn.  Or  as  though 
the  holy  goost  were  not  the  authoure  of  his  scripture  aswell  in  the  Hebrue,  Greke. 
French,  Dutche,  and  in  Englysh,  as  in  Latyn.  The  scripture  and  worde  of  God 
is  truly  to  euery  Christen  man  of  lyke  worthynesse  and  authorite,  in  what  language 
so  euer  the  holy  goost  speaketh  it.  And  therfore  am  I,  and  wyl  be  whyle  I  lyue 
(vnder  youre  moost  gracious  fauoure  and  correction)  alwaye  wyllynge  and  ready  to 
do  my  best  aswell  in  one  translation,  as  in  another. 


2  Marginal  note  :    Ps.  lxvii. 


g  2        Coverdale  s  Latin-English  New  Testament. 


Now  as  concernynge  thys  present  text  in  Latyn,  for  asmuch  as  it  hath  bene 
and  is  yet  so  greatly  corrupt,  as  I  thynke  none  other  translacion  is,  it  were  a  godly 
and  gracious  dede,  yf  they  that  haue  authorite,  knowlege,  and  tyme,  wolde  (vnder 
youre  graces  correction)  examen  it  better  after  the  moost  auncient  interpreters 
and  moost  true  textes  of  other  languages.  For  certaynly,  in  comparynge  dyuerse 
examplers  together,  we  se,  that  in  many  places  one  copye  hath  eyther  more  or 
lesse  then  a  nother,  orels  the  texte  is  altered  from  other  languages. 

To  geue  other  men  occasion  now  to  do  theyr  best,  and  to  expresse  my  good  wyll,  \ 
yf  I  could  do  better,  I  haue  for  the  causes  aboue  rehearsed,  attempted  this  smal 
laboure,  submyttynge  (with  all  humblenesse  and  subiection)  it  and  all  other  my 
lyke  doinges,  to  your  graces  moost  noble  Maiestye.  Not  onely  because  I  am  bounde 
so  to  do,  but  to  the  intent  also  that  through  youre  moost  gracious  defence,  it  maye 
haue  the  more  fredome  amonge  your  obedient  subiectes,  to  the  glory  of  the  euer- 
lastynge  God:  To  whom  onely  for  your  grace,  for  youre  mooste  noble  and  deare 
sonne  Prynce  Edward,  for  youre  moost  honourable  counsell,  and  for  all  other  hys 
syngular  gyftes  that  we  daylye  receaue  in  youre  grace.  To  hym  I  saye,  which  is 
the  onely  geuer  and  graunter  of  all  thys  oure  welth,  be  honoure  and  prayse  for 
euermore.  To  youre  grace,  continual  thankfulnesse,  and  due  obedience  with  longe 
lyfe  and  prosperite  :  Fynally  to  vs  the  receauers  of  gods  good  gyftes,  be  daylye 
increace  of  grace  and  vertue  more  and  more.     Amen. 

Youre  graces  humble 
and  faythfull  subiecte 

Myles  Couerdale. 


B.     Preface   to   the   same   Edition. 
To  the  Reader. 

I  Must  nedes  aduertise  the  (moost  gentle  Reader,)  that  this  present  text  in  Latyn 
which  thou  seist  set  here  with  the  Englyshe,  is  the  same  that  costumably  is  red 
in  the  church,  and  communly  is  called  S.  Hieroms  translacion.  Wherin  though 
in  some  places  I  vse  the  honest  and  iust  libertye  of  a  grammaryan  (as  nedeful  is 
for  thy  better  vnderstondynge,)  yet  because  I  am  lothe  to  swarue  from  the  texte, 
I  so  tempre  my  penne,  that  yf  thou  wylt,  thou  mayest  make  playne  construction 
of  it,  by  the  Englyshe  that  standeth  on  the  other  syde.  Thys  is  done  now  for  the 
that  art  not  exactly  learned  in  the  latyn  tunge  and  woldest  fayne  vnderstonde  it. 
As  for  those  that  be  learned  in  the  latyn  already,  thys  oure  small  laboure  is  not 
taken  for  them,  saue  onely  to  moue  and  exhorte  them,  that  they  lykewyse  knowynge 
of  whome  they  haue  receaued  theyr  talent  of  learnynge,  wyll  be  no  lesse  greued 
in  theyr  callyng  to  serue  theyr  brethren  therwith,  than  we  are  ashamed  here  with 
thys  oure  small  mynistracion  to  do  them  good.  I  besech  the  therfore  take  it  in 
good  worth  ;  for  so  well  done  as  it  shulde  and  myght  be,  it  is  not  :  But  as  it  is,  [ 
thou  hast  it  with  a  good  wyll. 

Where  as  by  the  authorite  of  the  text  I  somtyme  make  it  cleare  for  thy  more 
vnderstondyng,  there  shalt  thou  fynde  thys  mark  [  ]  whych  we  haue  set 
for  thy  warnynge,  the  texte  neuerthelesse  nother  wrested  nor  peruerted.  The  cause 
wherof  is  partely  the  figure  called  Eclipsis  diuerse  tymes  vsed  in  the  scriptures, 
the  which  though  she  do  garnysh  the  sentence  in  latyn,  yet  wyll  not  so  be  admitted 
in  other  tunges  :  wherfore  of  necessite  we  are  constrayned  to  enclose  suche  wordes 
in  thys  marke.  Partely  because  that  sundery,  and  sometyme  to  rash  wryters  out 
of  bokes,  haue  not  geuen  so  greate  diligence,  as  is  due  in  the  holy  scripture,  and 
haue  lefte  out,  and  sometyme  altered  some  word  or  wordes  and  another  vsynge 
thesame  boke  for  a  copy,  hath  commytted  lyke  faut.  Let  not  therfore  thys  oure 
diligence  seme  more  temerarious  vnto  the  (gentle  reader,)  than  was  the  diligence  of 
S.  Ierome  and  Origene  vnto  learned  men  of  theyr  tyme,  which  vsynge  sundery 
markes  in  theyr  bokes,  shewed  theyr  iudgmente  what  were  to  be  abated  or  added 
vnto  the  bokes  of  scripture,  that  so  they  myghte  be  restored  to  the  pure  and  very 
originall  texte.  Thy  knowlege  and  vnderstondynge  in  the  worde  of  God  shall  iudge 
thesame  of  vs  also,  yf  it  be  ioyned  with  loue  to  the  truth.  And  though  I  seme  to  be 
al  to  scrupulous  callyng  it  in  one  place  penaunce,  that  in  another  I  call  repentaunce : 


Coverdale's  Latin-English  New  Testament.        93 


and  gelded,  that  another  calleth  chaist,  thys  me  thynk  ought  not  to  offende  the 
seynge  that  the  holy  goost  (I  trust)  is  the  authoure  of  both  our  doynges.  Yf  I  of 
myne  owne  heade  had  put  in  to  the  new  Testament  these  wordes  :  Nisi  poenitueritis 
Poenitemini,  Sunt  enim  eunuchi,  Poenitentiam  agite.  &c.  then  as  I  were  worthy  to 
be  reproued,  so  shulde  it  be  ryght  necessary  to  redresse  thesame.  But  it  is  the  holy 
gooste  that  hath  put  them  in,  and  therfore  I  hartely  requyre  the  thynke  nomore 
harm  in  me  for  callyng  it  in  one  place  penaunce,  that  in  another  I  call  repentaunce, 
then  I  thynk  harme  in  hym  that  calleth  it  chaist,  which  I  by  the  nature  of  thys 
worde  Ennuchus  cal  gelded.  Let  euery  man  be  glad  to  submytte  his  vnderstondyng 
to  the  holy  goost  in  them  that  be  learned  and  no  doute  we  shall  thynk  the  best  one 
by  another,  and  fynde  no  lesse  occasion  to  prayse  god  in  another  man,  then  in  our 
selues.  As  the  holy  goost  then  is  one,  workynge  in  the  and  me  as  he  wyl,  so  let  us 
not  swarue  from  that  vnite,  but  be  one  in  him.  And  for  my  parte  I  ensure  the  I  am 
indifferent  to  call  it  aswell  with  the  one  terme  as  with  the  other,  so  longe  as  I  knowe 
that  it  is  no  preiudice  nor  iniury  to  the  meanynge  of  the  holy  goost  :  Neuerthelesse 
I  am  very  scrupulous  to  go  from  the  vocable  of  the  text. 

And  of  truth  so  had  we  all  nede  to  be  :  For  the  worlde  is  capcious,  and  many  ther 
be  that  had  rather  fynde  xx  fautes,  then  to  amende  one.  And  ofte  tymes  the  more 
laboure  a  man  taketh  for  theyr  commodite,  the  lesse  thanke  he  hath.  But  yf  they 
that  be  learned  and  haue  wherwith  to  maynteyne  the  charges  dyd  theyr  dewty, 
they  themselues  shulde  perfourme  these  thynges,  and  not  onely  to  loke  for  it  at  other 
mens  handes.  At  the  leest  yf  they  wolde  nother  take  the  payne  of  translatynge 
themselues,  nor  to  beare  the  expenses  therof,  nor  of  the  pryntyng,  they  shulde  yet 
haue  a  good  tunge,  and  helpe  one  waye,  that  they  can  not  do  another.  God  graunt 
thys  worlde  once  to  spye  theyr  vnthankfulnesse.  Thys  do  not  I  saye  for  onye  lucre 
or  vauntage  that  I  loke  for  at  your  handes  ye  rych  &  welthy  bellyes  of  the  worlde  : 
for  he  that  neuer  fayled  me  at  my  nede,  hath  taught  me  to  be  content  with  such 
prouision  as  he  hath  and  wyll  make  for  me.  Of  you  therfore  that  be  seruauntes 
to  your  owne  ryches,  requyre  I  nothynge  at  all,  saue  onely  that  which  S.  lames 
sayeth  vnto  you  in  the  begynnynge  of  hys  fyfth  chapter  :  Namely,  that  ye  wepe  and 
howle  on  your  wrechednesse  that  shall  come  vpon  you.  For  certaynly  ye  haue 
greate  cause  so  to  do,  nother  is  it  vnlyke  but  greate  misery  shal  come  vpon  you, 
consyderynge  the  gorgious  fare  and  apparell  that  ye  haue  euery  daye  for  the  proude 
pompe  and  appetite  of  your  stynkynge  carcases,  and  yet  be  not  ashamed  to  suffre 
youre  owne  fleshe  and  bloude  +o  dye  at  youre  dore  for  lacke  of  your  helpe.  O  synfull 
belly  Gods.  O  vnthankfull  wretches.  O  vncharitable  Idolatrers.  Wyth  what  con- 
science darre  ye  put  one  morsell  of  meate  in  to  youre  mouthes  ?  0  abhominable 
helhoundes,  what  shall  be  worth1  of  you  ?  I  speake  to  you,  ye  ryche  nyggardes  of 
the  worlde,  whych  as  ye  haue  no  fauoure  to  gods  holy  worde,  so  loue  ye  to  do 
nothynge  that  it  commaundeth.    Our  LORDE  sende  you  worthy  repentaunce. 

But  now  wyll  I  turne  my  penne  vnto  you  that  be  lordes  and  rulers  of  youre 
ryches.  For  of  you  whom  God  hath  made  stewardes  of  these  worldly  goodes.  Of 
you  whom  God  hath  made  plenteous  aswell  in  hys  knowl[e]ge,  and  in  other  ryches, 
of  you  (I  saye)  wolde  I  fayne  requyre  and  begge  (euen  for  his  sake  that  is  the 
geuer  of  all  good  thynges)  that  at  the  last  ye  wolde  do  but  youre  dewty,  and 
helpe  aswell  with  youre  good  counsell  as  with  youre  temperall  substaunce,  that 
a  perfyte  prouision  maye  be  made  for  the  poore,  and  for  the  vertuous  bryngynge  vp 
of  youth  :  That  as  we  now  already  haue  cause  plentyfull  to  geue  God  thankes  for 
his  worde  and  for  sendynge  vs  a  prynce  (with  thousandes  of  other  benefytes)  Euen 
so  we  seynge  the  poore,  aged,  lame,  sore,  and  syck  prouided  for,  and  oure  youth 
brought  vp  aswell  in  gods  knowlege  as  in  other' vertuous  occupations  maye  haue 
lykewyse  occasion  sufficient  to  prayse  God  for  the  same.  Our  LORD  graunt  that 
this  oure  longe  beggyng  and  moost  nedeful  request,  may  once  be  herde.  In  the 
meane  tyme  tyll  God  brynge  it  to  passe  by  his  ministers  let  not  thy  counsel  nor 
helpe  be  behynde  (moost  gentle  Reader)  for  the  furtheraunce  of  the  same.  And 
for  that  thou  hast  receaued  at  the  mercifull  hande  of  god  already,  be  thankful 
alway  vnto  hym,  louynge  and  obedient  vnto  thy  Prynce.  And  lyue  so  continually 
in  helpynge  and  edifyenge  of  thy  neghbours,  that  it  may  redounde  to  the  prayse  and 
glory  of  God  for  euer  :   AMEN. 


Become. 


XXXIII.     THE  LICENSING  OF  MATTHEW'S  BIBLE. 
A  Letter  from  Cranmer  to  Cromwell,  4  August  [1537]. 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office.     (Letters  and  Papers  of  the  reign  of  Hem  y  VIII,  1537, 

vol.  xii,  pt.  2,  434.) 

My  especial  good  Lorde  after  moost  hartie  commendacions  unto  your  Lordeship. 
Theis  shalbe  to  signifie  vnto  the  same,  that  you  shall  receyue  by  the  bringer  herof, 
a  Bible  in  Englishe,  both  of  a  new  translacion  and  of  a  new  prynte,  dedicated  vnto 
the  Kinges  Majestie,  as  farther  apperith  by  a  pistle  vnto  his  grace  in  the  begynnyng 
of  the  boke,  which,  in  myn  opinion  is  very  well  done,  and  therefore  I  pray  your 
Lordeship  to  rede  the  same.  And  as  for  the  translacion,  so  farre  as  I  haue  redde 
therof  I  like  it  better  than  any  other  translacion  hertofore  made  ;  yet  not  doubting 
but  that  ther  may,  and  wilbe  founde  some  fawtes  therin,  as  you  know  no  man  euer 
did  or  can  do  so  well,  but  it  may  be  from  tyme  to  tyme  amendid.  And  forasmoche 
as  the  boke  is  dedicated  vnto  the  kinges  grace,  and  also  great  paynes  and  labour 
taken  in  setting  forth  the  same,  I  pray  you  my  Lorde,  that  you  woll  exhibite  the 
boke  unto  the  kinges  highnes ;  and  to  obteign  of  his  Grace,  if  you  can,  a  license  that 
the  same  may  be  sold  and  redde  of  euery  person,  withoute  danger  of  any  acte,  procla- 
macion,  or  ordinaunce  hertofore  graunted  to  the  contrary,  vntill  such  tyme  that  we, 
the  Bishops  shall  set  forth  a  better  translacion,1  which  I  thinke  will  not  be  till  a  day 
after  domesday.  And  if  you  contynew  to  take  such  paynes  for  the  setting  forth  of 
goddes  wourde,  as  you  do,  although  in  the  meane  season  you  suffre  some  snubbes, 
many  sclandres,  lyes,  and  reproches  for  the  same,  yet  one  day  he  will  requite  alto- 
gether ;  and  the  same  wourde  (as  Saincte  John  saieth)  Whiche  shall  judge  every 
man  at  the  last  daye  must  nedes  shewe  favour  to  theym,  that  now  do  favour  it. 
Thus  my  Lorde,  right  hartely  faire  you  well. 

At  Forde  the  4th  of  August, 

Your  assured  ever, 


T.  Cantuarien. 


To  the  Right  Honourable 
and  my  especiall  good  Lorde 
my  Lorde  Pryvye  Seale. 


B.    Cranmer  to  Cromwell,  13  August  [1537]. 

From  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  329  b.  [348.] 

My  verey  singuler  good  Lorde,  in  my  moost  hartie  wise  I  commend  me  unto 
your  Lordeship  And  whereas  I  vnderstande,  that  your  Lordeship  at  my  requeste 
hath  not  only  exhibited  the  Bible  which  I  sent  vnto  you,  to  the  Kinges  majestie, 
but  also  hath  obteigned  of  his  grace,  that  the  same  shalbe  alowed  by  his  auctoritie 
to  be  bowght  and  redde  within  this  realme.  My  Lorde  for  this  your  payne,  taken 
in  this  bihalf,  I  give  vnto  you  my  moost  hartie  thanks,  assuryng  your  Lordeship  for 
the  contentacion  of  my  mynde.  you  have  shewed  me  more  pleasour  herin  than  yf 
you  had  given  me  a  thowsande  pownde  ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  that  herby  such 
fruicte  of  good  knowledge  shall  ensewe,  that  it  shall  well  appere  herafter,  what  high 
and  acceptable  service  you  have  don  unto  godde  and  the  King,  whiche  shall  somoche 
redovvn  to  your  honour,  that,  besides  goddes  reward  you  shall  opteyn  perpetuall 
memorye  for  the  same  within  this  Realme.  And  as  for  me,  you  may  recken  me 
your  bondeman  for  the  same,  and  I  dare  be  bold  to  say  so  may  ye  do  my  lorde  of 
Wurcester.  Thus  my  Lorde,  right  hartely  faire  you  well.  Att  Forde  the  xiii  day  of 
Auguste. 

Your  own  Bowndman  ever 


T.  Cantuarien. 


1  Cp.  No.  XXIX,  note  2. 


The  Licensing  of  Matthew's  Bible. 


95 


C.    Cranmer  to  Cromwell.    28  August  [1537]. 

From  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  292. 

My  very  singuler  and  especiall  good  Lorde  in  my  most  hartie  wise  I  comend  me 
to  your  Lordeship.  Theis  shalbe  to  give  to  you  most  hartie  thanks  that  any  harte 
can  thinke,  and  that  in  the  name  of  theym  all  which  favoreth  goddes  wourde,  for 
your  Diligence  at  this  tyme  in  procuring  the  Kinges  highnes  to  set  forth  the  said 
goddes  wourd  and  his  gospell  by  his  graces  auctoritie.  For  the  whiche  acte  not  only 
the  Kinges  maiestie,  but  also  you  shall  have  a  perpetuall  Lawde  and  memorye  of 
all  theym  that  be  now  or  hereafter  shalbe  goddes  faithfull  people  and  the  favorers 
of  his  wourde.  And  this  dede  you  shall  here  of  at  the  greate  daye,  whan  all  thinges 
shalbe  opened  and  made  manifest.  For  our  Saviour  Christ  saieth  in  the  said 
gospell,  that  whosoeuer  shrynketh  from  hym  and  his  wourde.  and  is  abasshed  to 
professe  and  sett  it  forth  bifore  men  in  this  worlde,  he  will  refuse  hym  at  that  day. 
And  contrarye,  whosoeuer  constantly  doth  professe  hym  and  his  wourde,  and 
studeth  to  sett  that  forwarde  in  this  worlde,  Christe  will  declare  the  same  at  the 
laste  daye  bifore  hys  father  and  all  his  Angells,  and  take  upon  hym  the  defence  of 
those  men.  Theis  shalbe  farder  to  aduertise  youre  Lordeship  that  syns  my  last 
commyng  frome  London  into  Kent  I  have  founde  the  people  of  my  dioces  very 
obstinately  given  to  observe  and  kepe  with  solempnitie  the  halidayes  lately  abro- 
gated.1 Whereupon  I  have  punisshed  diuers  of  the  offenders,  and  to  diuers  I  have 
given  gentill  monition  to  amende  .  .  .  Whan  shal  we  perswade  the  people  to  ceasse 
from  kepynge  theym.  For  the  Kyngs  own  howse  shalbe  an  example  vnto  all  the 
realme  to  breake  his  own  ordinances  .  .  . 

Thus  my  Lorde  right  hartely  faire  you  well 

At  Forde  the  xxviij  day  of  Auguste. 

Your  Lordeshipps  own  euer 

T.  Cantuarien. 


D.    Richard  Graftox  to  Cromwell.    August  28,  1537. 

From  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  330. 

Moost  humbly  besechynge  your  lordship  to  vnderstand  that  accordynge  to  your 
request,  I  haue  sent  your  lordship  vj  bybles,  which  gladly  I  wolde  haue  brought 
my  selfe,  but  because  of  the  sycknes  which  remayneth  in  the  cytie.  And  therfore  I 
haue  sent  them  by  my  servaunt  which  this  daye  came  out  of  Flaundyrs,  requyrynge 
your  lordship  yf  I  maye  be  so  bolde  as  to  desyer  you  to  accept  them  as  my  symple 
gyfte,  geuen  to  you  for  those  most  godly  paynes,  for  which  the  heuenly  father  is 
bounde  euen  of  his  Justice  to  rewarde  you  with  the  euerlastynge  kyngdom  of  god. 
For  your  lordship  mouynge  our  moost  gracyous  prynce  to  the  alowance  and  lycensynge 
of  soche  a  worke,  hath  worought  soche  an  acte  worthy  of  prayse,  as  neuer  was  men- 
cyoned  in  any  cronycle  in  this  realme.  And  as  my  lorde  of  Cantorbury  sayde  The 
tydynges  therof  dyd  hym  more  good  then  the  gyfte  of  ten  thousand  pounde.  Yet 
certen  there  are  which  beleue  not  that  yt  pleased  the  kynges  grace  to  lycence  yt 
to  go  forth.  Wherfore  yf  your  lordshippes  pleasour  were  soche  that  we  myght 
have  yt  lycensed  vnder  your  preuy  seale.  Yt  shuld  be  a  defence  at  this  present 
and  in  tyme  to  come  for  all  enemyes  and  aduersaryes  of  the  same.  And  for 
as  moche  as  this  request  is  for  the  maynetenaunce  of  the  lordes  worde,  which  is 
to  mayntayne  the  lorde  him  selfe.  I  feare  not  but  that  your  lordship  wilbe 
ernest  therin.  And  I  am  assewred  that  my  lorde  of  Cantorbury,  Worsetter  and 
Salsbury,  will  geue  your  lordship  soche  thankes  as  in  them  lyeth  and  sewre  ye 
maye  be  that  the  heuenly  lorde  will  rewarde  you  for  the  establysshynge  of  his 
gloryous  truthe.  And  what  youre  lordshipes  pleasor  is  in  this  request,  yf  it  maye 
please  your  lordship  to  enforme  my  servaunt,   I   and  all  that  loue  god   hartely 

1   By  the  Injunctions  of  1536,  which  were  specially  directed  against  '  holydayes  in  haruest  time  '. 


9  6  The  Licensing  of  Matthew's  Bible. 


are  bound  to  praye  for  your  preseruacyon  all  the  dayes  of  our  lyfe.     At  london 
the  xxviij  daye  of  this  present  moneth  of  August  1537, 

Your  Orator  whyle  he  lyueth 

Rychard  grafton  grocer. 
To  the  honorable  lorde  pryvaye  Seale. 


E.    Richard  Grafton  to  Cromwell,  after  August  28,  1537. 

From  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  325. 

Moost  humbly  besechynge  your  lordshippe  to  vnderstand  that  accordynge  as 
your  comyssyon  was  by  my  servaunt  to  sende  you  certen  bybles,  so  have  I  now 
done,  desyrynge  your  lordship  to  accept  them  as  though  they  were  well  done.    And 
where  as  I  wryt  vnto  your  lordship  for  a  preuye  seale  to  be  a  defence  vnto  the 
enemyes  of  this  byble  I  vnderstonde  that  your  lordshipes  mynde  is  that  I  shall  not 
nede  it.    But  now  moost  gracyous  lorde,  for  as  moche  as  this  worke  hath   bene 
brought  forthe  to  our  moost  great  and  costly  laboures  and  charges,  which  charges 
amount  aboue  the  some  of  v  c  li.,  and  I  haue  caused  of  these  same  to  be  prynted 
to  the  some  of  xv  c  bookes  complete.    Which  now  by  reason  that  of  many  this 
worke  is  commended,  there  are  that  will  and  dothe  go  aboute  the  pryntynge   of  j 
thesame  worke  againe  in  a  lesser  letter,1  to  the  entent  that  they  maye  sell  their  1 
lytle  bookes  better  chepe  then  I  can  sell  these  gret,  and  so  to  make  that  I  shall  sell 
none  at  all,  or  elles  verye  fewe,  to  the  vtter  vndoynge  of  me  your  orator  and  of  all 
those  my  credytors  that  hath  bene  my  comforters  and  helpers  therin.    And  now  this 
worke  thus  set  forthe  with  great  stodye  and  laboures  shall  soche  persons  (moued 
with  a  lytle  couetousnes  to  the  vndoynge  of  other  for  their  owne  pryuate  welthe) ' 
take  as  a  thynge  don  to  their  handes,  in  which  halffe  the  charges  shall  not  come  j 
to  them  that  hath  done  to  your  poore  orator.     And  yet  shall  they  not  do  yt  as  they  ! 
fynde  yt,  but  falsefye  the  texte,  that  I  dare  saye,  looke  how  many  sentences  are  in  I 
the  byble,  euen  [as]  many  fautes  and  errours  shalbe  made  therin.   For  their  sekynfg]  i 
is  not  to  set  it  out  to  goddes  glorie  and  to  the  edefyenge  of  christ  congregacyon  (but  j 
for  couetousnes)  and  that  maye  apere  by  the  former  bybles  that  they  have  set  forthe, ! 
which  hath  nether  good  paper,  letter,  ynke  ner  correccyon,2  Sir  euyn  so  shall  they  [ 
corrupt  this  worke  and  wrapp  yt  vp  after  their  fassyons,  and  then  maye  they  sell 
yt  for  naught  at  their  pleasor.     Ye  and  to  make  yt  more  trewer  then  yt  is,  therfore 
douchemen  3  dwellynge  within  this  realme  go  about  the  pryntyng  of  ytt,  which  can 
nether  speke  good  englyshe,  ner  yet  wryte  none,  and  they  wilbe  bothe  the  prynters 
&  correctors  therof,   because   of   a   lytle  couetousnes  that  wyll  not  bestow  xx  or 
xl  li  to  a  learned  man  to  take  payne  in  yt  to  haue  yt  well  done.    It  were  therfore 
(as   your  lordship   dothe   euydently  perceaue)    a   thynge   vnreasonable   to  permyt 
or  softer  them  (which  now  hath  no  suche  busynes)  to  enter  into  the  laboures  of  them 
that  hath  had  bothe  sore  trouble  and  vnreasonable  charges.    And  the  truthe  is  this 
that   if  yt  be  prynted  by  any  other  before  these  be  solde  (whiche  I   thynke  shall 
not  be  this  iij  yere  at  the  least)   that  then  am  I  your  poore  Orator  vtterly  vndone. 

Therfore  by  your  moost  godly  fauor  if  I  maye  obtayne  the  kynges  moost  gracyous 
priuiledge  that  none  shall  prynt  them  tyll  these  be  solde,  which  at  the  least  shall 
not  be  this  iij  yere,  your  lordship  shall  not  fynde  me  vnthankfull,  but  that  to 
the  vtter  most  of  my  power  I  wyll  consyder  yt,  and  I  dare  saye  that  so  will 
my  lorde  of  Cantorbury  with  other  my  moost  speciall  frendes.  And  at  the  least, 
god  will  loke  vpon  your  mercifull  heart  that  consydereth  the  vndoynge  of  a  pore 
yonge  man.  For  truly  my  whole  lyuynge  lyeth  hervpon,  which  if  I  maye  have  sale  i 
of  them,  not  beynge  hyndered  by  any  other  man,  yt  shalbe  my  makyng  and  welthe, 
and  the  contrary  is  my  vndoynge.  Therfore  most  humbly  I  beseche  your  lordship 
to  be  my  helper  herin  that  I  maye  obtayne  this  my  request.    Or  elles  yf  by  no  meanes 

1  Grafton  probably  feared  competition  from  Nycholson. 

2  The  reference  is  to  Nycholson's  quarto  editions  of  Coverdale's  Bible. 

3  This  supports  Mr.  Gordon  Duff's  identification  of  Johan  Hollybushe  with  Hans  van  Rure- 
mond.    See  No.  XVI  A,  note  2,  and  XXXII,  note  I. 


The  Licensing  of  Matthew's  Bible. 


97 


this  pryuyledge  maye  be  had  (as  I  have  no  dout  thorow  your  helpe  yt  shall)  and 
seinge  men  are  so  desyrous  to  be  pryntynge  of  yt  agayne  to  my  vtter  vndoynge 
as  aforsayde.  That  yet  for  as  moche  as  it  hath  pleased  the  kynges  highnes  to 
lycence  this  vvorke  to  go  abroade  and  that  it  is  the  moost  pure  worde  of  god  which 
teacheth  all  true  obedyence  and  reproueth  all  scismes  and  contencyons.  And  the 
lacke  of  this  worde  of  the  allmightie  god  is  the  cause  of  all  blyndenes  and  super- 
sticion,  yt  maye  therfore  be  commaunded  by  your  lordship  in  the  name  of  our  most 
gracyous  prynce  that  euery  curat  haue  one  of  them  that  they  maye  learne  to  knowe 
god  and  to  instruct  their  parysshens.  Ye  and  that  euery  abbaye  shuld  have  vj 
to  be  layde  in  vj  seuerall  places  that  the  whole  covent  and  the  resorters  thervnto 
maye  have  occasyon  to  looke  on  the  lordes  lawe.  Ye  I  wold  none  other  but  they 
of  the  papisticall  sorte  shuld  be  compelled  to  haue  them,  and  then  I  knowe  there 
shuld  be  ynow  founde  in  my  lorde  of  londons  dyocesse  to  spende  away  a  great  part 
of  them,  and  so  shuld  this  be  a  godly  acte  worthy  to  be  had  in  remembrance  whyle 
the  world  doth  stande,  Sir  I  know  that  a  small  comyssyon  wyll  cause  my  lorde 
of  Cantorbury,  Salsbury  &  Worscetter  to  cause  yt  to  be  done  thorow  their  dyocesse, 
Ye  and  this  shuld  cease  the  whole  scisme  and  contencyon  that  is  in  the  realme, 
which  is,  some  callyng  them  of  the  olde  and  some  of  the  new,  now  shuld  we  all 
folow  one  god.  one  boke  and  one  learnynge,  and  this  is  hurtfull  to  no  man  but  proffyte 
to  all  men.  I  will  trouble  your  lordship  no  lenger  for  I  am  sory  I  have  troubled 
you  so  moche.  But  to  make  an  ende  I  desyer  your  moost  gracyous  answer  by 
my  servaunt,  for  the  sycknes  is  bryme4  aboute  vs  or  elles  wolde  I  wayte  vpon  your 
lordship,  and  because  of  comynge  to  your  lordship,  I  have  not  soffred  my  servaunt 
with  me  sence  he  came  ouer.  Thus  for  your  contynuall  preseruacyon  I  with  all 
that  truly  loue  god  do  most  hartely  praye  that  you  maye  ouercome  all  your 
aduersaryes  of  the  papisticall  sorte. 

Your  Orator  Rychard  grafton. 


XXXIV.    FOX'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  PRINTING  OF  THE  GREAT 

BIBLE  OF  1539. 

From  Fox's  Acles  and  Monumenles,  Fourth  Edition.     London,  1583,  p.  1191. 

%  Of  the  Bible   in   English   printed  in  the  large   volume,    and   of  Edmund 
Boner  preferred  to  the  Bishoprike  of  London,  by  the  meanes  of  the  Lord 

Cromwell. 

ABout  the  time  and  yere,  when  Edmund  Boner  bishop  of  Hereford,  and  ambassa- 
dour  resident  in  Fraunce,  began  first  to  be  nominate  and  preferred  by  the  meanes  of 
the  lord  Cromwel  to  the  bishoprike  of  London  :  which  was,  anno  1540,1  it  happened 
that  the  said  Thomas,  Lord  Cromwell  and  Erie  of  Essex,2  procured  of  the  king  of 
england  his  gracious  letters  to  the  French  king  to  permitte  and  licence3  a  subiect  of 
his  to>  imprint  the  Bible  in  English  within  the  vniuersitie  of  Paris  4  because  paper 
was  there  more  meete  and  apt  to  be  had  for  the  doing  therof,  then  in  the  realme  of 
England,  and  also  that  there  were  more  store  of  good  workmen  for  the  readie  dispatch 
of  the  same.  And  in  like  maner  at  the  same  time  the  said  king  wrote  vnto  his 
ambassadour,  who  then  was  Edmund  Boner  Bishop  of  Herford  lying  in  Paris,  that 
he  should  ayde  and  assist  the  doers  thereof  in  all  their  reasonable  sutes.  The  which 
Bishop  outwardly  shewed  great  friendship  to  the  merchants  that  were  the  imprinters 
of  the  same,  and  moreouer  did  diuers  and  sundrie  times  call  and  commande  the 
said  persons,  to  be  in  maner  daily  at  his  table  both  dinner  and  supper,  and  so 
much  rejoyced  in  the  workemanship  of  the  said  Bible,  that  he  himselfe  would 
visite  the  imprinter's  house,  where  the  same  bibles  were  printed,  and  also  would  take 

4  Furious. 

XXXIV.  '  This  is  a  year  too  late  for  the  beginning  of  the  Great  Bible.  Bonner  was  elected 
Bishop  of  London  October  20,  1539,  confirmed  November  11,  consecrated  April  4,  1540. 

2  Cromwell  was  only  made  Earl  of  Essex  on  April  17,  1540,  less  than  four  months  before  his 
execution  (July  28). 

3  See  No.  XXXV. 

'  The  University  had  the  supervision  of  all  printing  in  Paris,  and  the  chief  printers  were 
libraires  juris  of  it. 


The 

Bibles  of 
the  great- 
est vo- 
lume 
printed 
in  Paris. 

The  doers 

hereof 

were 

Rich: 

Grafton 

and 

Whyt- 

church. 

Edmund 

Boner  a 

great  fur- 

therer  in 

printing 

the  Bibles 

in  Eng- 

lishe. 


The  new 
testa- 
ment in 
Englishe 
and 
La  tine 
put  in 
print  by 
Boner. 

Edmund 
Boner 
made 
Byshop 
of  Lon- 
don. 

Boners 
wordes  to 
Grafton, 
when  he 
toocke  his 
othe  to 
the  king. 

Boner  re- 
proueth 
Stokesley 
for  his 
perse- 
cuting. 

Boners 
promise 
to  set 
forth  the 
Scripture 
in  Eng- 
lishe. 

Boner 
sweareth 
hartely  to 
thekinges 
suprem- 
acy. 
Myles 
Couer- 
dale  cor- 
rector in 
printing 
the  Bible 
of  the 
large 
volume. 

The  print- 
ing of  the 
Bible 
stayed  at 
Paris 
thorough 
the  prac- 
tise of 
Englishe 
Bishops. 

English 
Bibles 
burnt  at 
Paris. 


98 


Fox's  Account  of  the  Printing 


part  of  such  dinners  as  the  Englishmen  there  had,  and  that  to  his  cost,  which,  as 
it  seemed  he  little  vvayed.  And  further  the  sayd  Boner  was  so  feruent  that  he 
caused  the  said  Englishmen  to  put  in  print  a  new  testament  in  english  &  latine,5  and 
himselfe  took,  a  great  many  of  them  and  payd  for  them  and  gaue  them  to  his  friends. 
And  it  chaunced  the  meane  time,  while  the  said  Bible  was  in  printing,  the  king  Henry 
the  8.  preferred  the  said  Boner  from  the  said  bishoprike  of  Herford,  to  be  bishop  of 
London,  at  which  time  6  the  said  Boner  according  to  the  statute  law  of  England,  tooke 
his  othe  to  the  king,  knowledging  his  supremacie,  and  called  one  of  the  aforesaid 
Englishmen  that  printed  the  bible,  whom  he  then  loued,  although  afterward  vppon 
the  change  of  the  worlde  he  did  hate  him  as  much,  whose  name  was  Richard  Grafton  : 
to  whom  the  said  Boner  saide  when  he  tooke  his  othe,  maister  Grafton,  so  it  is,  that 
the  kings  most  excellent  maiestie  hath  by  his  gracious  gift  presented  me  to  the 
Bishoprike  of  London,  for  the  which  I  am  sory,  for  if  it  would  haue  pleased  his 
grace,  I  could  haue  bene  well  content  to  haue  kept  mine  old  bishopricke  of  Herford. 
Then  said  Grafton  I  am  right  glad  to  heare  of  it,  and  so  I  am  sure  will  bee  a  great 
number  of  the  Citie  of  London  :  for  though  they  yet  know  you  not,  yet  they  haue 
heard  so  much  goodnes  of  you  from  hence,  as  no  doubt  they  will  hartily  reioyce 
of  your  placing,  Then  said  Boner,  I  pray  God  I  may  doe  that  may  content  them, 
and  to  tel  you  M.  Grafton,  Before  god  (for  that  was  commonly  his  othe)  the 
greatest  fault  that  I  euer  found  in  Stokesley,  was  for  vexing  and  troubling  of 
poore  men,  as  Lobley  the  bookebinder7  and  other,  for  hauing  the  scripture  in 
english,  and  God  willing  he  did  not  so  much  hinder  it,  but  I  wil  as  much 
further  it,  and  I  wil  haue  of  your  Bibles  set  vp  in  the  Church  of  Paules,  at 
the  least  in  sundrie  places  sixe  of  them,  and  I  will  pay  you  honestly  for  them  and 
giue  you  hartie  thankes.8  Which  wordes  hee  then  spake  in  the  hearing  of  diuers 
credible  persons,  as  Edmund  Stile  Grocer  and  other.  But  now  M.  Grafton  at  this 
time  I  haue  specially  called  you  to  be  a  witnes  with  me  that  vpon  this  translation 
of  Bishops  Sees,  I  must  according  to  the  statute  take  an  othe  vnto  the  kings  maiestie 
knowledging  his  Supremacie,  which  before  God  I  take  with  my  heart  and  so  thinke 
him  to  be,  and  beseech  almightie  God  to  saue  him,  and  long  to  prosper  his  grace  : 
holde  the  booke  sirah,  and  reade  you  the  oth  (said  he)  to  one  of  his  chapleins,  and 
he  layd  his  hand  on  the  booke  and  so  he  tooke  his  othe.  And  after  this  he  shewed 
great  friendship  to  the  saide  Grafton  and  to  his  partener  Edward  Whitchurch, 
but  specially  to  Myles  Couerdall,  who  was  the  corrector  of  the  great  Bible. 

Now  after  that  the  foresaid  letters  were  delivered,  the  French  kyng  gaue  very 
good  wordes,  and  was  well  content  to  permit  the  doing  therof.  And  so  the  printer 
went  forward  and  printed  forth  the  booke  euen  to  the  last  part,  and  then  was  the 
quarrell  picked  to  the  printer,  and  he  was  sent  for  to  the  inquisitors  of  the  fayth, 
and  there  charged  with  certaine  articles  of  heresie.  Then  were  sent  for  the  English- 
men that  were  at  the  cost  and  charge  thereof,  and  also  such  as  had  the  correction  of 
the  same,  which  was  Myles  Couerdale,  but  hauing  some  warning  what  would  folow 
the  said  Englishmen  posted  away  as  fast  as  they  could  to  saue  themselues,  leauing 
behynd  them  all  their  Bibles,  which  were  to  the  number  of  2500,9  called  the  Bibles 
of  the  great  volume,  and  neuer  recouered  any  of  them,  sauing  that  the  Lieftenaunt 
criminal  hauing  them  deliuered  vnto  hym  to  burne  in  a  place  at  Paris  (like  Smith- 

6  This  is  the  Paris  edition  of  Coverdale's  Latin  and  English  New  Testament  printed  to 
supersede  the  faulty  edition  published  by  Nycholson;  see  No.  XXXII  A,  note  i,  and  No.  XXXVIII. 
Inasmuch  as  it  was  translated  from  the  Vulgate  this  would  be  regarded  as  more  likely  to  be 
orthodox  than  those  which  followed  the  Greek  or  German.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  think 
that  Bonner  'caused  '  it  to  be  printed. 

6  i.e.  in  October  or  November,  1538. 

'  Michael  Lobley  was  indicted  in  1531  for  buying  heretical  books  at  Antwerp  and  speaking 
against  images  and  purgatory.  He  lived,  however,  to  be  a  warden  of  the  Stationers'  Company 
in  1560. 

8  Bonner  carried  out  this  promise,  and  on  the  occasion  of  his  doing  so  issued  the  exhortation 
mentioned  in  No.  XLIV,  B. 

9  The  true  number  was  2,000,  as  stated  by  Grafton  in  his  'Abridgement  of  the  Chronicles  of 
England  .  .  .  1564.  In  aedibus  Richardi  To'thyl,'  fol.  I35b:  'In  this  yere  the  Great  Bible  in 
English  in  the  Great  Volume  was  printed  in  Paris  in  as  privy  a  manner  as  might  bee,  but 
when  it  was  knowne,  not  only  the  same  Bible  beeing  XXC  in  nomber  was  seased  and  made 
confriscat,  but  also  both  the  printer,  marchants,  and  correctors  in  great  jeopardy  of  their  lyves 
eskaped.'  There  is  not  the  smallest  reason  to  attribute  the  interference  of  the  Inquisition  to 
'the  practise  of  the  Englishe  Bishops'.  It  was  a  political  move,  suggested  by  the  French 
ambassador  in  London,  see  No.  XXXIX  C. 


of  the  Great  Bible  of  1539. 


99 


field)  called  Maulbert  place,  was  somewhat  mooued  with  couetousnes,  and  sold  4.  great 
dry  fattes  of  them  to  a  Haberdasher  to  lap  in  caps,  and  those  were  bought  againe, 
but  the  rest  were  burned,  to  the  great  and  importunate  losse  of  those  that  bare  the 
charge  of  them.  But  notwithstandyng  the  sayd  losse  after  they  had  recouered 
some  part  of  the  foresayde  bookes,  and  were  comforted  and  encouraged  by  the 
Lord  Cromwell,  the  said  Englishmen  went  agayne  to  Paris,10  &  there  got  the  presses, 
letters,  and  seruaunts  of  the  aforesayd  Printer,  and  brought  them  to  London,  and 
there  they  became  printers  themselues  (which  before  they  neuer  entended)  and 
printed  out  the  said  Bible  in  London,  and  after  that  printed  sundry  impressions  of  I 
them:  but  yet  not  without  great  trouble  and  losse,  for  the  hatred  of  the  bishops 
namely,  Steven  Gardiner,  and  his  fellowes,  who  mightily  did  stomacke  and  maligne 
the  printing  thereof. 

Here,  by  the  way,  for  the  more  direction  of  the  story,  thou  hast  louying  Reader, 
to  note  and  vnderstand  that  in  those  daies  there  were  ii  sundry  Bibles  in  English, 
printed  and  set  forth,  bearing  diuers  titles,  and  printed  in  diuers  places.  The  first 
was  called  Thomas  Mathews  Bible,  printed  at  Hambrough,u  about  the  yeare  of  our 
Lord,  1532.12  the  corrector  of  which  print  was  then  John  Rogers,  of  whom  ye  shall 
heare  more  Christ  willing  hereafter.  The  Printers  were  Richard  Grafton,  and 
Whitchurch.  In  the  translation  of  this  Bible,  the  greatest  doer  was  in  deede 
William  Tyndall,  who  with  the  helpe  of  Miles  Couerdale  had  translated  all  the 
bookes  thereof,  except  onely  the  Apocrypha,13  and  certaine  notes  in  the  margent 
which  were  added  after.  But  because  the  said  William  Tyndall  in  the  meane 
tyme  was  apprehended  before  this  Bible  was  fully  perfected,  it  was  thought  good 
to  them  which  had  the  doing  therof,  to  chaunge  the  name  of  William  Tyndall, 
because  that  name  then  was  odious,  and  to  father  M  it  by  a  strange  name  of  Thomas 
Mathew,  John  Rogers  the  same  time  beyng  corrector  to  the  print,  who  had  then 
translated  the  residue  of  the  Apocrypha,  and  added  also  certaine  notes  thereto  in 
the  margent,  and  thereof  came  it  to  be  called  Thomas  Mathewes  Bible.  Which 
Bible  of  Thomas  Mathew,  after  it  was  imprinted  and  presented  to  the  Lord  Crom- 
well, and  the  Lord  Cranmer,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  liked  very  well  of  it,  the 
sayd  Cromwell  presented  it  to  the  kyng,  and  obteined  that  the  same  might  freely 
passe  to  be  read  of  hys  subiectes  with  hys  graces  licence  :  So  that  there  was  Printed 
upon  the  same  booke,  one  lyne  in  red  letters  with  these  wordes  :  Set  forth  with  the 
kings  most  gracious  licence. 

The  setting  forth  of  this  booke  did  not  a  little  offend  the  Clergy,  namely,  the 
Bishop  aforesayd,  both  for  the  Prologues  and  specially  because  in  the  same  booke  was 
one  special  table  collected  of  the  common  places  in  the  Bible,  and  the  scriptures  for 
the  approbation  of  the  same,  and  chiefly  about  the  supper  of  the  lord  and  manage  of 
priests,  and  the  masse,  which  there  was  said  not  to  be  found  in  Scripture. 

Furthermore,  after  the  restraint  of  this  foresayde  Bible  of  Mathew,  another  Bible 
began  to  be  printed  at  Paris,  an.  1540.  which  was  called  the  Bible  of  the  large 
Volume.  The  Printers  whereof  were  the  foresayde  Richard  Grafton,  and  Whit- 
churche  which  bare  the  charges.  A  great  helper  thereto  was  the  lord  Cromwell. 
The  chiefest  ouerseer  was  Myles  Couerdale,  who  taking  the  translation  of  Tyndall, 
conferred  the  same  with  the  Hebrue,  and  amended  many  things. 

In  this  Bible,  although  the  former  notes  of  Thomas  Mathew  was  omitted,  yet 
sondry  markes  and  handes  were  annexed  in  the  sides,  which  ment  that  in  those 
places  shuld  be  made  certeine  notes,15  wherwith  also  the  clergy  was  offended,  though 
the  notes  were  not  made. 

After  this,  the  bishops  bringing  their  purpose  to  passe,  brought  the  Lord  Crom- 
well out  of  fauour,  and  shortly  to  his  death  :  and  not  long  after,  great  complaint 
was  made  to  the  king  of  the  translation  of  the  Bible,  and  of  the  preface  of  the 
same,  and  then  was  the  sale  of  the  Bible  commaunded  to  be  stayed,  the  B[ishop] 
promising  to  amend  and  correct  it,  but  neuer  performing  the  same  : 16    Then  Grafton 

10  It  was  presumably  during  this  visit  to  Paris  that  Grafton  witnessed  the  taking  by  Bonner 
of  the  Oath  acknowledging  the  king's  supremacy  in  October  or  November  1538. 

"  No  one  believes  that  the  Bible  was  printed  at  Hamburg. 

12  Fox's  mistake  for  1537  (reading  MDXXXVII  as  MDXXXII). 

13  This  exaggerates  Tyndale's  share.  None  of  the  Old  Testament  after  2  Chronicles  is  believed 
to  be  his.    See  No.  XXVIII. 

11  Misprinted  '  farther  '. 

ls  See  Nos.  XXXVI  C,  XXXVIII  B.  IG  See  No.  XLV. 


How 
Grafton 
and  Whit- 
church 
became 
printers. 


Tho: 
Mathewes 
Bible,  by 
whom 
and  how. 


The  Bible 
presented 
to  the 
king  by 
the  Lord 
Crom- 
well. 

The 

Bybleput 
forthwith 
the  kings 
priui- 
ledge. 

An  other 
Byble  of 
the  great 
volume 
printed 
at  Paris. 

The 

Byshops 
offended 
at  the 
Byble 
trans- 
lated into 
Englishe. 

The  sale 
of  the 
Byble 
stayd  by 
the  king, 
throug[h] 
the  Bys- 
hops 
meanes. 


G  2 


Rich. 
Grafton 
imprison- 
ed for 
printing 
the  Bible. 


Edm. 
Boner  a 
great 
trend  to 
L.  Crom- 
well, al 
the  tyme 
of  his 
pros- 
peritye. 

Steph. 

Gardiner 

and 

Boner  of 

enemyes 

made 

frendes. 

Doct. 
Boner  al- 

tereth  his 
frendship 
and  re- 
ligion. 

Doctor 
Boner  a- 
gaynst 
the 

L.  Crom- 
well. 


i  oo   Fox's  Account  of  the  Printing  of  the  Great  Bible. 


was  called,  and  first  charged  with  the  printing  of  Mathewes  Bible,  but  he  being  feare- 
ful  of  trouble,  made  excuses  for  himselfe  in  all  things.  Then  was  he  examined  of  the 
great  Bible,  and  what  notes  he  was  purposed  to  make.  To  the  which  he  aunswered, 
that  he  knewe  none.  For  his  purpose  was  to  haue  retayned  learned  men  to  have 
made  the  notes,  but  when  he  perceyued  the  kynges  maiestie,  and  his  Clergye  not 
willing  to  haue  any,  he  preceded  no  further.  But  for  al  these  excuses,  Grafton  was 
sent  to  the  Fleet,  and  there  remayned  vi  weekes,  and  before  he  came  out,  was 
bound  in  CCCli  that  he  should  neither  sell  nor  imprint,  or  cause  to  be  imprinted  any 
moe  Bibles,  vntill  the  king  and  the  clergy  should  agree  vpon  a  translation.  And 
thus  was  the  Bible  at  that  tyme  stayed,  during  the  raigne  of  Kyng  Henry  the  viii. 

But  yet  one  thing  more  is  to  be  noted,  that  after  the  imprinters  had  lost  their 
Bibles,  they  continued  suiters  to  Boner,  as  is  aforesaid,  to  be  a  meane  for  to  ob- 
teyne  of  the  French  king  their  bookes  againe  :  but  so  long  they  continued  suters, 
and  Boner  euer  fed  them  with  faire  wordes,  promising  them  much,  but  did  nothing 
for  them17,  till  at  the  last  Boner  was  discharged  of  his  ambassade,  and  returned 
home,  where  he  was  right  ioyfully  welcomed  home  by  the  lord  Cromwell,  who  loued 
him  dearely,  and  had  maruelous  good  opinion  of  him.  And  so  long  as  Cromwell 
remained  in  autoritie,  so  long  was  Boner  at  his  beck  and  friend  to  his  friends  and 
enimy  to  his  enimies;  as  namely,  at  that  tyme  to  Gardiner  B[ishop]  of  Winchester, 
who  neuer  fauoured  Cromwell,  and  therefore  Boner  could  not  fauour  him,  but  that 
he  and  Winchester  were  the  greatest  enemies  that  might  be.  But  so  soone  as  Crom- 
well fel,  immediately  Boner  and  Winchester  pretended  to  be  the  greatest  men  that 
liued,  and  no  good  word  could  Boner  speake  of  Cromwell,  but  the  lewdest,  vilest,  and 
bitterest  that  he  could  speake,  calling  him  the  rankest  heretike  that  euer  liued  :  and 
then  such  as  the  sayd  Boner  knew  to  be  in  good  fauour  with  Cromwell,  he  could 
neuer  abide  their  sight.  Insomuch,  as  the  next  day  after  that  Cromwell  was  appre- 
hended, the  abouenamed  Grafton,  who  before  had  bene  very  familiar  with  Boner, 
met  with  the  sayd  Boner  sodenly.  and  sayd  vnto  hym,  that  he  was  sory  to  heare  of 
the  newes  that  then  was  abroad.  What  are  they,  sayd  he  ?  Of  the  apprehension  of 
the  L.  Cromwell  sayd  Grafton.  Are  ye  sory  for  that  (sayd  he  ?)  It  had  bene  good 
that  he  had  bene  dispatched  long  ago.  With  that  Grafton  looked  vpon  hym  and 
knew  not  what  to  say,  but  came  no  more  to  Boner.  Howbeit  afterward  the  sayd 
Grafton  beyng  charged  for  the  imprinting  of  a  ballet  made  in  the  fauour  of  Crom- 
wel  was  called  before  the  Councel,  where  Boner  was  present  and  there  Boner  charged 
hym  with  the  wordes  that  hee  spake  to  hym  of  Cromwell,  and  told  out  a  great  long 
tale.  But  the  lord  Awdeley,  who  then  was  Lord  Chauncellor,  right  discretly  and 
honourably,  cut  of  the  matter,  and  entered  into  other  talke. 


XXXV.    THE  FRENCH  KING'S  LICENCE.1 

Printed  from  an  early  transcript,  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra,  E.  v.  326. 

Franciscus  etc.  dilectis  nobis  Richardo  Grafton  et  Edwardo  Whitchurch  Anglis  et 
civibus  londini  salutem,   Quia   fide  digno  testimonio   accepimus  quod  charissimus 
frater  noster  anglorum  Rex  vobis  cuius  subditi  estis  sacram  bibliam  tarn  latine  quam  | 
britannice  sive  anglice  imprimendi  ac  imprimi  curandi  et  in  suum  Regnum  appor- 

17  This  is  contradicted  by  XXXIX  B  (last  sentence  but  one). 

XXXV.  '  The  date  of  this  document  being  in  dispute  it  is  here  placed  immediately  after  Fox's 
narrative.  It  is,  however,  fairly  obvious,  since  it  mentions  Latin  as  well  as  English  printing,  that 
it  must  be  placed  after  the  appearance  of  the  faulty  edition  of  Coverdale's  Latin-English  Testa- 
ment at  Southwark,  which  caused  him  to  desire  to  print  a  more  perfect  one  in  Paris,  and  as  it 
was  his  absence  which  obliged  him  to  leave  the  correction  of  the  proofs  to  Nycholson,  this  licence 
cannot  have  been  obtained  until  after  he  had  been  some  time  at  Paris.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the 
Latin-English  New  Testament  was  safely  printed  in  1538  it  seems  impossible  to  agree  with  Dr. 
Kingdon,  who  in  his  monograph  on  Poyntz  and  Grafton  contends  that  this  licence  was  only- 
granted  on  the  return  of  Grafton  to  Paris  late  in  1 539  (see  No.  XXXIV,  note  10).  That  theory  is 
also  negatived  by  the  fact  that  ample  facilities  then  existed  for  printing  Bibles  in  England,  and 
Grafton  only  wanted  to  get  back  the  stock.  The  true  date  appears  to  be  some  time  after  the 
letter  of  June  23  (see  next  document),  in  which  the  printers  ask  Cromwell  to  write  letters  on 
their  behalf  to  the  English  ambassadors,  who  would  supply  the  '  fide  dignum  testimonium ' 
alluded  to  in  the  opening  paragraph  of  the  licence.  While,  however,  issuing  the  licence  in  accord- 
ance with  Cromwell's  request,  the  French  king,  by  the  vague  stipulation  that  the  translation 
should  avoid  all  private  and  unlawful  opinions,  made  it  valueless. 


The  French  King's  Licence. 


101 


tandi  et  transferendi  libertatem  sufficientem  et  legittimam,  concesserit,  et  vos  turn 
propter  chartam  turn  propter  alias  honestas  considerationes  animos  vestros  in  hac 
parte  iuste  moventes  dictam  bibliam  sic  imprimendam  Parisiis  infra  hoc  nostrum 
Regnum  curaveritis  ac  in  Angliam  quam  primum  transmittere  intenderitis,  Nos  ut 
hec  vobis  facere  liceat  potestatem  facientes,  vobis  coniunctim  et  deuisim  ac  procura- 
toribus  factoribus  et  agentibus  vestris  et  cuiuslibet  vestrum,  vt  in  Regno  nostro 
apud  calchographum  quemcumque  dictam  sacram  bibliam  tarn  latine  quam  anglicana 
lingua  tuto  imprimere  et  excudere  possitis  et  possint,  necnon  excussam  et  impressam 
in  Angliam  dumtaxat  sine  ulla  perturbacione  aut  molestia  vel  impedimento  quocum- 
que  transmittere  et  apportare,  dummodo  quod  sic  imprimentes  et  excudentes  sincere 
et  pure  quantum  in  vobis  erit  citra  vllas  privatas  aut  illigittimas  opiniones  impressum 
et  excussum  fuerit,  et  onera  ac  officia  mercatoria  nobis  et  ministris  nostris  debite  in 
hac  parte  extiterint  prosoluta  licentiam  nostram  impartimur  et  concedimus  specialem 
per  presentes,  Datis  et  ceteris. 

Translation. 

Francis,  etc.  to  our  well  beloved  Richard  Grafton  and  Edward  Whitchurch  English- 
men and  citizens  of  London  greeting.  Whereas  by  trustworthy  testimony  we  have 
been  informed  that  our  most  dear  brother  the  King  of  the  English,  whose  subjects 
ye  are,  hath  granted  you  sufficient  and  lawful  liberty  of  printing  and  getting  printed 
the  Holy  Bible  both  in  Latin  and  in  British  or  English  and  of  bringing  and  trans- 
porting it  into  his  kingdom,  and  that  ye,  alike  for  the  sake  of  the  paper  and  for 
other  honourable  reasons  rightfully  influencing  you  in  this  matter,  have  taken  steps 
for  thus  printing  the  said  Bible  at  Paris  within  this  our  kingdom  and  intend  as 
soon  as  may  be  to  send  it  over  to  England.  We  therefore,  that  you  may  be  able  to 
do  this,  empowering  you  jointly  and  severally,  and  also  the  representatives,  factors 
and  agents  of  both  or  either  of  you,  that  within  our  kingdom  in  the  house  of  any 
printer  you  and  they  may  safely  impress  and  print  the  said  Holy  Bible  alike  in  Latin 
and  in  the  English  tongue  and  when  it  is  printed  and  impressed  may  transport  it 
into  England  without  any  interference,  annoyance,  or  hindrance,  provided  always 
that  ye  shall  so  print  and  impress  it  sincerely  and  purely  so  far  as  in  you  lies, 
avoiding  any  private  or  unlawful  opinions,  and  when  it  is  so  printed  and  impressed 
all  imposts  and  custom  duties  have  been  duly  paid  to  us  and  to  our  officers,  grant 
and  concede  our  special  licence  by  these  presents.     Dated,  etc. 


XXXVI.     REPORTS   OF   PROGRESS. 
A.    Letter  of  Coverdale  and  Grafton  to  Cromwell,  June  23,  1538.1 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office,  (Letters  and  Papers  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII, 

vol.  xiii,  pt.  1,  1249). 

After  moost  humble  and  hartie  commendacions  to  your  good  lordship.  Pleaseth 
the  same  to  vnderstand,  that  we  be  entred  into  your  worke  of  the  byble,  wherof 
(accordynge  to  our  moost  bounden  dutie)  we  haue  here  sent  vnto  your  lordship  ij 
ensamples,  one  in  parchement,  wherin  we  entende  to  prynt  one  for  the  kynges  grace, 
and  another  for  your  lordship  :  and  the  seconde  in  paper,  wherof  all  the  rest 
shalbe  made,  trustynge  that  it  shalbe,  not  onlye  to  the  glorye  of  god,  but  a  synguler 
pleasure  also  to  your  good  lordship  the  causer  therof ,  and  a  generall  edefyenge  of  the 
kinges  subiectes,  accordynge  to  your  lordshipes  moost  godlye  request.  For  we 
folowe  not  only  a  standynge  text  of  the  hebrue,  with  the  interpretacion  of  the  Caldee, 
and  the  greke,  but  we  set  also  in  a  pryuate  table  the  dyuersite  of  redinges  of  all 
textes,  with  soche  annotacions  in  another  table,  as  shall  douteles  delucidate  and 
cleare  thesame,  as  well  without  any  singularyte  of  opinions  as  all  checkinges  and 
reprofes.  The  prynt  no  dout  shall  please  your  good  lordship.  The  paper  is  of  the 
best  sorte  in  Fraunce.  The  charge  certaynly  is  great,  wherin  as  we  moost  humbly 
requyer  your  fauourable  helpe   at  this  present,  with  whatsoeuer  yt   shall  please 

1  [Docketed]  Myles  Coverdale  and  Rychard  Grafton  letter  certefyinge  that  the  byble  is  almost 
prynted  at  Parys. 


102 


Reports  of  Progress. 


your  good  lordship  to  let  vs  haue,2  so  trust  we,  (yf  nede  requyer)  in  our  iust  busynes, 
to  be  defended  from  the  papistes  by  your  lordshipes  fauourable  letters,  which  we 
moost  humbly  desyer  to  haue,  (by  this  berer,  Wyllyam  Graye)  ether  to  the  bysshop 
of  Wynchester,3  or  to  some  other  whome  your  lordship  shall  thinke  moost  expedyent. 
We  be  daylye  threatened,  and  look  euer  to  be  spoken  withall,  as  this  berer  can 
farther  enforme  your  lordship,  but  how  they  will  vse  vs,  as  yet,  we  knowe  not. 
Neuerthelesse  for  our  farther  assewraunce  where  thorough  we  maye  be  the  abler  to 
performe  this  your  lordshipes  work,  we  are  so  moche  the  bolder  of  your  good  lord- 
ship, for  other  refuge  haue  we  none  vnder  god  and  our  kynge,  whom  with  noble 
prynce  Edward  and  all  you  their  most  honorable  councell,  god  allmightie  preserue 
now  and  euer,  Amen.  Wrytten  at  Parys  the  xxiij  daye  of  Juyn  by  your  lordshipes 
assured  and  daylye  oratours, 

Myles  Couerdale 
Rychard  Grafton  grocer 

To  the  right  honorable  and  their  syngular  good  lorde,  the  lorde  Cromewell  and 
lorde  preuaye  Seale. 

B.    Letter  of  Edward  Whitchurch  to  Cromwell,  undated.1 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Letters  and  Papers  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII, 

vol.  xiii,  pt.  2,  1086). 

Pleas  it  your  lordship  to  be  advertysed,  that  your  lordships  certyfying  me,  that 
you  wold  not  wryt  your  lettres,  nor  medle  at  all,  with  owr  purposed  worke,  Lately 
taken  in  hand  for  your  lordship,  so  greatly  dyscomforted  me  your  poore  Orator,  that 
it  almost  brought  me  vtterly  into  dispeire,  but  that  I  hadd  sum  hope  of  comfort, 
when  I  Rem[em]bryd  your  godly  Intent  euer  in  preferyng  of  all  thyngs  wyche  were 
for  goddes  glory  trustyng  that  your  sayd  lordship  woll  styll  contenew  in  the  same. 
And  ayde  &  defend  vs  in  thys  our  iust  besynes.  Havyng  non  other  refuge  vnder  god 
and  the  Kynges  highnes  but  of  your  lordship.  Wherfor  I  most  humbly  beseche 
your  lordship  not  to  refuse  vs  now,  but  wythe  your  goodnes  to  helpe  vs  in  the 
furtherans  of  our  sayd  worke,  And  when  yt  shall  pleas  your  lordship  to  command 
me  I  shall  informe  your  lordship  of  those  people,  and  moste  chieffly  of  our  contrey- 
men,  wyche  doo  compleyn  on  vs  vnto  the  vniuersitye,  &  most  shamfully  vsethe 
their  toungs  toward  the  Kynges  grace,  &  his  most  honorable  counsaill. 

Your  bound  Orator 

Edward  Whitchurche. 


C.    Letter  of  Coverdale,  Grafton,  and  W.  Gray  to  Cromwell, 

August  9,  1538.1 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Letters  and  Papers  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII, 

vol.  xiii,  pt.  2,  58). 

After  moost  humble  and  due  salutacion  to  your  good  lordship.  Pleaseth  the 
same  to  vnderstand,  that  your  worke  going  forward,  we  thought  it  oure  moost 
bounden  dutie  to  sende  vnto  your  lordship  certayne  leaues  therof,  specially, 
seynge  we  had  so  good  occasyon,  by  the  return ynge  of  your  beloued  seruant 
Sebastian.  And  as  they  are  done,  so  will  we  sende  your  lordship  the  residue  from 
tyme  to  tyme.  As  touchynge  the  maner  and  order  that  we  kepe  in  thesame  worke, 
Pleaseth  your  goode  lordship  to  be  aduertised  that  this  merke  <IT  in  the  text, 
signifieth,  that  vpon  the  same  (in  the  later  ende  of  the  booke)  there  is  some  notable 

!  Cromwell  informed  the  French  ambassador  that  he  had  himself  spent  on  the  work  £400. 
See  No.  XXXIX,  B  and  C. 

3  Stephen  Gardiner,  the  English  ambassador,  superseded  by  Bonner  in  July  of  this  year. 

B.  '  This  letter  being  undated  its  place  is  uncertain.  It  is  inserted  here  on  the  supposition  that 
Cromwell  at  first  replied  unfavourably  to  the  letter  of  Coverdale  and  Grafton  of  June  23,  but 
was  moved  by  the  appeal  from  Whitchurch  to  instruct  the  English  ambassador  to  take  action. 

C.  '  Endorsed  :  '  Myles  couerdale  Ric.  Grafton  Win.  Gray  certefying  the  maner  howe  they  are 
in  hand  to  translate  the  Byble.     At  Parys.  ix  Aug.' 


Reports  of  Progress. 


103 


annotation,  which  we  haue  writen,  without  any  pryuate  opinion,2  onlye  after  the 
best  interpreters  of  the  hebrues  for  the  more  clearenesse  of  the  texte.  This  marke  ♦ 
betokeneth,  that  vpon  the  same  texte  there  is  diuersite  of  redynge  amonge  the 
hebrues,  Caldees  and  Grekes  and  latenystes,  as  in  a  table  at  the  ende  of  the  booke 
shalbe  declared.  This  marke  c^jff  sheweth  that  the  sentence  written  in  small  letters 
is  not  in  the  hebrue  or  Caldee,  but  in  the  latyn,  and  seldome  in  the  Greke,  and  that 
we  neuerthelesse  wolde  not  haue  it  extinct,  but  hig[h]lye  accept  yt  for  the  more 
explanation  of  the  text.  This  token  f  in  the  olde  testament  geueth  to  vnderstand, 
that  thesame  texte  which  foloweth  it,  is  also  alledged  of  christ  or  of  some  apostle 
in  the  newe  testament.3  This  (amonge  other  oure  necessarie  laboures)  is  the  waye 
that  we  take  in  this  worke,  trustynge  verely,  that  as  God  allmightie  moued  youre 
lordship  to  set  vs  vnto  yt  :  so  shall  it  be  to  his  glorie,  and  right  welcome  to  all 
them  that  loue  to  serue  him  and  their  prynce  in  true  faithfull  obedyence.  As  is 
onlye  knowen  to  the  lorde  of  heauen,  to  whom  we  moost  harteley  praye  for  your 
lordshipes  preseruacion.  At  parvs  the  ix  daye  of  August  1538  by  your  faithfull 
oratours. 

Myles  Couerdale 
Richard  grafton 
William  Grey. 

To  the  right  honorable  and  their  synguler  good  lorde,  lorde  preuye  seale  be  this 
delyuered. 

D.     COVERDALE    AND    GRAFTON    TO    CROMWELL    SEPTEMBER    12,    1538.1 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Letters  and  Papers  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII, 

vol.  xiii,  pt.  2,  336). 

After  most  humble  and  due  salutacions  to  your  mooste  honorable  lordshippe, 
pleaseth  the  same  to  vnderstand,  that  we  are  instantly  desyred  of  oure  hoste  (whose 
name  is  Fraunces  Reynold2  a  frenchman)  to  make  supplicacion  for  him  vnto  your 
lordshippe.  Where  as  of  long  tyme  he  hath  bene  an  occupier  in  to  England  more 
then  xl.  yere,  he  hath  allwayes  provyded  soche  bookes  for  England,  as  they  moost 
occupied,  so  that  he  hath  a  great  nombre,  at  this  present  in  his  handes,  As  prymers 
in  Englishe,  Missales  with  other  soche  like  :  Whereof  now  (by  the  company  of  the 
booksellers  in  London)  he  is  vtterly  forbydden  to  make  sale,  to  the  vtter  vndoyng 
of  the  man,  Wherfore  moost  humbly  we  beseke  your  lordshippe  to  be  gracious  and 
fauourable  vnto  him,  that  he  maye  have  lycence  to  sell  those  which  he  hath  done 
allready,  so  that  herafter  he  prynte  nomoo  in  the  english  tong,  onlesse  he  have 
an  english  man  that  is  lerned,  to  be  his  corrector  ;  and  that  is  the  man  well  con- 
tented withall.  he  is  also  contented  and  hath  promised  before  my  lord  elect  of 
harfford,  that  yf  there  be  founde  anye  notable  faute  in  his  bookes,  he  will  put  the 
same  out,  and  prynte  the  leafe  agayne.  Thus  are  we  bolde  to  wryte  vnto  your 
lordshippe  in  his  cause  (as  doth  also  my  lord  elect  of  herfford)  beseching  your  1. 
to  pardon  oure  boldnesse,  and  to  be  good  lorde  vnto  this  honest  man,  whose  servaunt 
shall  geve  attendaunce  vpon  your  1.  most  fauourable  answere.  Yf  your  1.  shewe 
him  this  benefyte,  we  shall  not  fare  the  worse,  in  the  readynesse  and  due  expedicion 
of  this  your  1.  worke  of  the  byble.  Which  goeth  well  forwarde,  and  within  few 
monethes  will  drawe  to  an  ende,  by  the  grace  of  allmightie  god,  who  preserue  your 
good  lordshippe  now  and  euermore. 

From  Parys  the  xijth  daye  of  Septembre. 

Myles  Couerdale. 
Rychard  Grafton. 

To  the  right  honorable  and  their  singular  good  lorde,  the  lord  prevye  seale. 

2  This  reads  like  a  translation  of  the  '  citra  vllas  priuatas  opiniones  '  of  the  licence  which  had 
almost  certainly  been  granted  by  this  time. 

3  As  to  these  marks  see  No.  XXXIV  on  page  99. 

D.  »  Endorsed  :  Miles  Coverdale  and  Richard  Grafton.     The  byble  is  in  printing. 

2  i.  e.  Francois  Regnault,  the  printer  of  the  Bible,  with  whom  apparently  Coverdale  and 
Grafton  were  lodging.  Regnault  had  begun  printing  service-books  for  the  use  of  Salisbury  in 
1 5 19,  and  from  1524  to  1535  his  output  had  been  large  and  uninterrupted.  He  had  already 
in  1536  himself  written  to  Cromwell  asking  that  the  Act  of  1534  regulating  the  importation 
of  foreign  books  might  not  be  used  to  exclude  those  he  had  printed,  and  he  now  procured  the 
aid  of  Grafton  and  Coverdale.    He  died  some  little  time  before  June  21,  1541. 


104 


Reports  of  Progress. 


E.    Bishop  Bonner   to   Cromwell. 

Extract  from  the  original  letter  in  the  Record  Office  (Letters  and  Papers  of  the  reign  of 
Henry  VIII,  vol.  xiii,  pt.  2,  557). 

Of  late  ther  is  a  stay  made  att  Parys  towching  the  printing  of  the  bible  in 
English,  and  sute  made  to  the  great  mayster  1  to  prouide  for  remedie  therin  ;  but  as 
yet  it  is  not  obteyned.  God  send  all  to  the  best  and  preserue  your  Lordeship  so  well 
as  I  can  and  am  mooste  bounden  to  desire.    At  St.  Quyntyns  y°  Octobris. 

XXXVII.    THE  KING'S  PROCLAMATION.    November  16,  1538. 
From  the  British  Museum  facsimile  of  the  copy  in  the  library  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries. 

The  Kynges  Moste  Royall  maiestie  beinge  enfourmed,  that  sondry  contentious 
and  sinyster  opinyons,  haue  by  wronge  teachynge  and  naughtye  printed  bokes, 
encreaced  and  growen  within  this  his  realme  of  Englande.  .  .  . 

Fyrste  for  expellynge  and  aduoydinge  the  occasion  of  the  said  errours  and 
seditiouse  opinions,  by  reason  of  bokes  imprinted  in  the  englyshe  tonge,  brought 
and  transported  from  outward  parties,  The  kynges  most  royall  maiestie  straytely 
chargeth  and  commaundeth,  that  no  person  or  persons,  of  what  estate  degree  or 
condition  so  euer  he  be,  shall  from  hensforth  (without  his  maiesties  speciall  licence) 
transport  or  bringe  from  outwarde  parties,  into  this  his  realme  of  England,  or  any 
other  his  gracis  dominions,  any  maner  bokes  printed  in  the  englyshe  tonge,  nor  sell, 
gyue,  vtter,  or  publishe  any  suche  bokes  from  hensforthe  to  be  broughte  into  this 
realme,  or  into  any  his  highnes  domynions,  vpon  the  peynes  that  the  offendours  in 
that  article  shall  nat  onely  incurre  and  runne  into  his  gracis  moste  high  displeasure 
and  indignation,  but  also  shall  lose  and  forfaite  vnto  his  maiestie,  all  his  or  theyr 
goodes  and  cattalles,  and  haue  emprisonment  at  his  gracis  wyll. 

Item  that  no  persone  or  persons  in  this  realme,  shall  from  hensforth  print  any 
boke  in  the  englyshe  tonge,  onles  vpon  examination  made  by  some  of  his  gracis 
priuie  counsayle,  or  other  suche  as  his  highnes  shall  appoynte,  they  shall  haue 
lycence  so  to  do,  and  yet  so  hauynge,  not  to  put  these  wordes  Cum  priuilegio  regali, 
without  addyng  ad  imprimendum  solum}  and  that  the  hole  copie,  or  els  at  the  least 
theffect  of  his  licence  and  priuilege  be  therwith  printed,  and  playnely  declared  and 
expressed  in  the  Englyshe  tonge  vnderneth  them :  Nor  from  henseforth  shall  printe 
or  bryng  into  this  his  realm  any  bokes  of  diuine  scripture  in  the  englishe  tonge, 
with  any  annotations  in  the  margyn,  or  any  prologe  or  additions  in  the  calender 
or  table,  excepte  the  same  be  firste  viewed,  examyned,  and  allowed  by  the  kynges 
highnes,  or  suche  of  his  maiesties  counsayle,  or  other,  as  it  shall  please  his  grace 
to  assigne  therto,  but  onely  the  playne  sentence  and  texte,  with  a  table  or  reper- 
torie,  instructynge  the  reader  to  fynde  redely  the  chapiters  conteyned  in  the  sayd 
boke,  and  the  effectes  therof.  Nor  shall  from  henseforthe  prynte  any  boke  of 
translations  in  the  englyshe  tonge,  oneles  the  playne  name  of  the  translatour  therof 
be  conteyned  in  the  saide  boke,  or  elles  that  the  prynter  will  answere  for  the  same  as 
for  his  owne  priuie  dede  and  acte,  and  otherwise  to  make  the  translatour  the  printer 
and  the  setter  forthe  of  the  same,  to  suffre  punishment,  and  make  a  fyne  at  the 
kynges  wyll  and  pleasure. 

Item  that  no  persone  or  persons,  vsyng  the  occupation  of  pryntyng  of  bokes  in 
this  realme,  shall  prynt,  vtter,  sel,  or  cause  to  be  published  any  bokes  of  scripture  in 
the  englishe  tonge,  vntyl  suche  time  as  the  same  bokes  be  fyrst  viewed,  examyned, 
and  admitted  by  the  kynges  highnesse,  or  one  of  his  priuie  counsayle,  or  one  byshoppe 
of  this  realme,  whose  name  also  his  grace  wylleth  shall  be  therin  expressed,  vpon 
peyne  not  onely  to  incurre  and  runne  into  the  kynges  most  hygh  displeasure  and 
indignation,  but  also  to  lose  and  forfayte  al  theyr  goodes  and  catalles,  and  suffre 
emprisonement  at  his  gracis  wyll  and  pleasure.  .  .  . 

Westminster  xvi.  Nouembr.  Anno  regni  regis  Henrici  octaui  xxx. 

Tho.  Berthelet,  regius  impressor  excudebat. 

Cum  priuilegio. 

E.  '  Anne  de  Montmorency,  Grand  Master  and  Constable  of  France  since  February  10  of  this 
year. 

XXXVII.  '  i.e.  they  were  not  to  make  a  mere  permission  to  print  appear  as  if  any  special 
favour  or  monopoly  were  being  conferred  on  the  edition. 


More  Reports  from  Paris. 


!05 


XXXVIII.    MORE   REPORTS   FROM   PARIS. 
A.    Grafton  to  Cromwell.1 

From  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E,  v.  323. 

After  moost  humble  comendacions.  Pleaseth  it  your  lordship  to  vnderstand  that 
it  chaunsed  sence  oure  comynge  into  these  partes,  that  James  Nycolson  that  dwelleth 
in  Southwark  put  in  prynt  the  newe  testament  both  in  latyn  and  englyshe,2  which 
booke  was  delyuered  vnto  vs  by  a  straunger  And  when  Master  Couerdale  had  aduvsed 
and  consydered  thesame.  he  founde  his  name  added  thervnto  as  the  translator,  with 
thewhich  he  neuer  had  to  do,  nether  sawe  he  it  before  it  was  full  prynted  and 
ended.  And  also  founde  the  booke  so  folyshly  done,  ye  and  so  corrupt,  that  yt 
did  not  only  greue  him  that  the  prynter  had  so  defamed  him  and  his  learnyng  by 
addynge  his  name  to  so  fonde  a  thinge,  but  also  that  the  commen  people  was 
depryued  of  the  true  and  syncere  sence  of  godes  true  worde,  and  also  that  soche 
an  occasyon  was  mynystred  to  the  enemyes  of  Godes  worde,  that  rather  seke  occa- 
syons  to  rayle  and  sclaunder,  then  to  be  edefyed.  And  therfore  at  his  moost  honest 
and  lawful!  request  (although  I  had  ynough  to  do  besyde)  I  haue  prynted  thesame 
agayne,  translated  and  corrected  by  Master  Couerdale  him  selfe.  Of  the  which 
bookes  now  beynge  fyneshed,  I  have  here  sent  your  lordship  the  fyrst  (and  so  haue 
I  also  sent  vnto  my  lorde  of  Cantorbury  another  and  almoost  to  euery  christen 
bysshop  3  that  is  in  the  realme,  My  lorde  of  harfforde  also  hath  sent  to  Mr.  Rychard 
Cromwell  one  of  the  same)  thewhich  I  moost  humbly  desyer  your  lordship  to  accept, 
hauyng  respecte  rather  vnto  my  harte,  then  to  the  gifte ;  for  it  is  not  so  well  done 
as  my  harte  wolde  wysshe  it  to  be  :  I  haue  also  added,  as  your  lordship  maye 
perceaue,  these  wordes,  Cum  gracia  et  priuilegio  Regis.  And  the  day  before  this 
present  came  there  a  post  named  Nycolas  which  brought  your  lordshipes  letters 
to  my  lorde  of  harfforde,  with  thewhich  was  bounde  a  certen  inhibicion  for  pryntynge 
of  bookes,  and  for  addynge  of  these  wordes  Cum  priuilegio.4  Then  assone  as  my 
lorde  of  harfforde  had  receaued  yt,  he  sent  ymedyatlye  for  Mr.  Couerdale  and  me, 
readynge  thesame  thynge  vnto  vs,  in  thewhich  is  expressed,  that  we  shuld  adde  these 
wordes  (ad  imprimendum  solum)  which  wordes  we  neuer  heard  of  before.  Nether 
do  we  take  it  that  those  wordes  shuld  be  added  in  the  pryntynge  of  the  scripture 
(if  yt  be  truly  translated)  for  then  shuld  yt  be  a  great  occasyon  to  the  enemyes 
to  saye  that  yt  is  not  the  kynges  acte  or  mynde  to  set  yt  forth,  but  only  lycence  the 
prynters  to  sell  soche  as  is  put  forth.  Wherfore  moost  humbly  we  beseke  your 
lordship  to  take  no  dyspleasor  for  that  we  haue  done,  for  rather  then  any  soche 
thynge  shuld  happen,  we  wolde  do  yt  agayne,  but  I  trust  the  thynge  yt  selfe  is  so 
well  done,  that  it  shall  not  only  please  your  lordship,  but  also  the  Kynges  highnes 
and  all  the  godly  in  the  realme.  And  where  as  your  lordship  hath  added  in  thesayd 
inhibicions  that  your  lordship  and  all  the  Kynges  most  honorable  councell  wylleth 
no  booke  from  henceforth  to  be  put  in  prynt,  but  that  fyrst  yt  be  alowed  at  the 
least  by  one  bysshop.  We  moost  humbly  beseke  your  lordship  to  apoynt  certen 
therto,5  that  they  maye  be  as  readye  to  reade  them,  as  other  good  men  be  to  put 
them  forth.  For  yt  is  now  vij  yere,6  sence  the  bysshopes  promysed  to  translate  and 
set  forth  the  byble,  and  as  yet  they  haue  no  leasor,  I  praye  god  they  maye  haue. 
howbeyt,  the  christen  bysshops  in  dede  haue  small  leasor.  Thus  I  commyt  your 
lordship  to  the  tuition  of  allmyghtie  god,  who  euermore  preserue  your  good 
lordship. 

your  humble  and  faythfull 

seruytor  Rychard  grafton. 

At  Parys  the  first  daye  of  December. 

1  Endorsed  :  '  To  ye  right  honorable  and  their  synguler  good  lorde,  my  lord  preuaye  seale. 
Rychard  Grafton,  the  nrste  of  Decembre  from  parys.' 

2  See  above,  No.  XXXII,  A,  note  1. 

3  By  '  christen  bishop',  here  and  in  the  final  paragraph,  Grafton  seems  to  mean  those  favour- 
able to  the  Protestant  cause. 

*  See  No.  XXXVII. 

s  This  was  not  done  in  the  case  of  this  edition,  nor  of  any  of  the  Great  Bibles,  except  the 
fourth  and  sixth.     See  p.  17. 

6  The  promises  of  1 530  were  vague  ;  it  was  after  December  1 534  that  an  effort  was  made. 


io6  More  Reports  from  Paris. 


B.     C-OVERDALE   TO   CROMWELL,    DECEMBER    13,    1538.1 

From  Harleian  MS.,  No.  604,  p.  98  (112). 

Right  honorable  and  my  syngular  good  lorde  (after  all  dew  salutacions)  I  humbly 
beseche  youre  lordshippe,  that  by  my  lorde  electe  of  Herdforde,  I  maye  knowe  youre 
pleasure,  concernynge  the  Annotacions  of  this  byble,  whether  I  shall  proceade 
therin,  or  no.  Pitie  it  were,  that  the  darck  places  of  the  text  (vpon  the  which  I  haue 
allwaye  set  a  hande  <1F)  shulde  so  passe  vndeclared.  As  for  anye  pryuate  opynion 
or  contencious  wordes,  as  I  wyll  utterly  avoyde  all  soche,  so  wyll  I  offre  the  annota- 
cions first  to  my  sayde  lord  of  Herdforde  ;  to  the  intent  that  he  shall  so  examen  the 
same,  afore  they  be  put  in  prynte,  yi  it  be  your  lordshippes  good  pleasure,  that 
I  shall  so  do.  As  concernyng  the  new  Testamentes  in  english  &  latyn,  wherof  your 
good  lordshippe  receaued  lately  a  boke  by  your  seruaunt  Sebastian  the  Cooke, 
I  besech  your  lfordship]  to  consydre  the  grenesse  therof,  which  (for  lack  of  tyme)  can 
not  as  yet  be  so  apte  to  be  bounde  as  it  shulde  be  :  And  where  as  my  sayde  lord  of 
Hardforde  is  so  good  vnto  vs  as  to  convaye  thus  moch  of  the  Byble  to  your  good 
lordshippe,  I  humbly  beseche  the  same,  to  be  the  defender  &  keper  therof  :  To  the 
intent  that  yf  these  men  proceade  in  their  cruelnesse  agaynst  us  &  confiscate  the 
rest,  yet  this  at  the  leest  maye  be  safe  by  the  meanes  of  your  lordshippe,  whom 
god  the  allmightie  euermore  preserue  to  his  good  pleasure.  Amen.  Written  somwhat 
hastely  at  Parys  the  xiij  daye  of  Decembre. 

Your  1  [ordships]  humble  &  f aithfull  seruitour 

Myles  Couerdale. 

To  my  most  syngular  good  lorde  and  master  the  lorde  Cromwell  lorde  prevye 
seale.  this  delyuer. 


XXXIX.     THE  BIBLES   CONFISCATED  :   CROMWELL'S  EFFORTS 
TO  OBTAIN  THEIR   RELEASE. 

A.   Citation  of  Francois  Regnault  for  Printing  the  Bible 
at  Paris,  December  17,  1538. 

From  the  copy  transcribed  in  Cotton  MS.,  Cleopatra  E,  v.  58,  fol.  326.1 

Frater  henricus  Garuais  in  sacra  theologia  Doctor.  Regius  Prior  conventus 
fratrum  predicatorum,  paris.  necnon  vicarius  generalis  venerabilis  patris  fratris 
mathei  ory  eiusdem  ordinis  etiam  sacre  theologie  doctoris,  Inquisitoris  generalis 
heretice  prauitatis  in  toto  Regno  francie  apostolica  et  Regia  auctoritatibus  spe- 
cialiter  deputati. 

Omnibus  Presbiteris  vicariis  curatis  et  non  curatis  notariis  quoque  et  tabellio- 
nibus  publicis  vbilibet  constitutis  salutem  in  domino.  Quoniam  ex  traductione  sacre 
scripture  tarn  veteris  quam  noui  testamenti  in  vernaculam  linguam  que  ad  simplicium 
manus  pervenit  compertum  est  novissimis  diebus  nonnullos  occasionem  sumpsisse 
erroris  in  fide,  Et  edicto  supreme  curie  parliamenti  cautum  est  ne  quispiam  vetus 
aut  novum  testamentum  vernacula  lingua  imprimat  aut  impressa  vendat  Nobis 
autem  notum  est  quendam  franciscum  Regnault  bibliopolam  huiusce  ciuitatis  pari- 
siensis  his  diebus  imprimere  bibliam  in  ydiomate  vulgari  britannice,  Occacione 
cuius  possent  oriri  scandala  et  errores  in  ecclesia  hinc  est  quod  nobis  quibus  ex 
officio  incumbit  nedum  ortos  errores  et  hereses  in  fide  extirpare  sed  etiam  futuris 
pro  posse  obuiare  vobis  omnibus  et  singulis  supradictis  in  virtute  sancte  obedientie 
districte  percipiend.  mandamus  quatenus  ad  Requestam  et  Instantiam  venerabilis 
viri  promotoris  causarum  officii  dicte  sancte  Inquisitionis  Citetis  peremptorie  et 
personaliter  apud  dictum  conventum  fratrum  predicatorum  coram  nobis  ad  diem 
primam  post  presentium  nostrarum  literarum  executionem  hora  secunda  expectatem 
tertiam  post  meridiem  eiusdem  diei  franciscum  Regnault  et  alios  quos  decebit  nobis 
ex  officio  nostro  et  dicti  promotoris  supra  premissis  responsuros,  inhibentes  eisdem 

XXXVI II.  B. '  Endorsed  :  Myles  Coverdale  about  thexposycyon  of  darke  places  of  the  byble,  &c. 

XXXI X.  A.  '  Endorsed:  'Thecopie  of  the  secondecitacion  and  inhibicion  made  to  the  prynter. ' 


The  Bibles  Confiscated. 


107 


sub  pena  canonica  ne  vltra  ad  impressionem  dicte  biblie  vernacula  lingua  procedant. 
Nee  folia  impressa  a  se  et  sua  possessione  abdicent  et  alienent  donee  utraque  biblia  2 
per  nos  visa  aliter  fuerit  ordinatum.  Date  parisius  sub  sigillo  quo  in  talibus  vtimur 
ac  signo  manuali  notarii  seu  scribe  dicte  sancte  Inquisitionis  iurati.  Anno  domini 
millessimo  quingentesimo  tricesimo  octavo  die  decima  septima  mensis  decembris. 
Item  et  aliam  bibliam  in  sermone  gallico  impressam  passim  vendere.3  Date  ut 
supra. 

Le  tellier. 

Translation. 

Friar  Henry  Garvais,  Regius  Doctor  in  Sacred  Theology,  Prior  of  the  Convent 
of  Preaching  Friars  at  Paris,  Vicar-General  also  of  the  venerable  father  Friar  Matthew 
Ory  of  the  same  order,  also  Doctor  of  Sacred  Theology,  Inquisitor  general  of  heresy 
in  all  the  Kingdom  of  France,  specially  deputed  by  the  authority  of  the  Apostolic 
See  and  the  King,  To  all  priests,  vicars,  with  and  without  cures,  notaries  also  and 
summoners,  wherever  they  be,  health  in  the  Lord.  Whereas  from  the  translation 
of  Holy  Scripture  alike  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  into  the  vernacular  tongue 
which  has  come  into  the  hands  of  the  simple  it  has  been  found  lately  that  some 
have  taken  occasion  to  err  in  the  faith.  And  by  an  edict  of  the  supreme  court  of 
parliament  it  has  been  provided  that  none  shall  print  the  Old  or  New  Testament 
in  the  vernacular  or  sell  printed  copies.  And  it  has  become  known  to  us  that 
a  certain  Francois  Regnault,  bookseller  of  this  city  of  Paris,  at  the  present  time  is 
printing  a  bible  in  British  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  by  occasion  of  which  scandals  and 
errors  might  arise  in  the  church,  hence  is  it  that  we  whose  official  duty  it  is  not 
only  to  root  out  errors  and  heresies  in  faith  when  they  have  arisen  but  also  as  far 
as  possible  to  obviate  them,  to  you  the  aforesaid,  one  and  all,  in  the  virtue  of  holy 
obedience  give  command,  at  the  request  and  instance  of  the  venerable  promoter  of 
the  office  of  the  said  holy  Inquisition,  to  cite  peremptorily  and  personally  at  the  said 
convent  of  the  Preaching  Friars  before  us  on  the  first  day  after  the  execution  of  our 
present  letters,  between  the  hours  of  two  and  three  after  noon,  Francois  Regnault 
and  others  whom  it  shall  beseem  to  make  answer  to  us  in  accordance  with  our  office 
and  the  premises  of  the  said  promoter,  prohibiting  the  aforesaid  persons  under  the 
canonical  penalty  from  proceeding  further  to  the  impression  of  the  said  Bible  in  the 
vernacular  tongue  and  from  surrendering  and  alienating  the  printed  sheets  from  their 
possession  until,  after  such  bible  has  been  examined  by  us,  it  be  otherwise  ordained. 
Given  at  Paris  under  the  seal  which  we  use  in  such  matters  and  the  sign  manual  of 
the  sworn  notary  or  scribe  of  the  said  holy  Inquisition  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1538  the  seventeenth  day  of  December.  Also  that  another  Bible  printed  in  the 
French  language  is  being  sold  everywhere      Given  as  before. 

Le  Tellier. 

B.    Castillon,  the  French  Ambassador  in  England,  to  the  Constable  of 
France,  December  31,  1538.1 

Extract  from  British  Museum  Additional  MS.  33514,  f.  9- 

Monseigneur,  depuis  la  lettre  que  ie  vous  escriuis  hier,  Milord  Prive  seel  m'a  ce 
matin  enuoye  prier  que  ie  me  trouuasse  en  son  logis,  pour  vng  peu  deviser  auec 

2  The  information  thus  applied  to  the  Latin-English  New  Testament  which  Regnault  was 
printing  for  Coverdale,  as  well  as  to  the  English  Bible. 

3  This  sentence  about  a  French  Bible  seems  to  have  got  into  the  transcript  by  mistake. 

B.  !  This  letter  describing  an  interview  with  Cromwell  is  thus  summarized  in  the  Letters  and 
Papers  of  the  Reign  of  Henry  VII  J,  vol.  xiii,  2,  No.  1163  :  'The  substance  of  his  discourse  was 
that  he  himself  had  at  his  own  cost  got  a  Bible  printed  in  English,  and  the  printers  have  been 
cited  and  troubled  by  certain  of  the  University  of  Paris,  and  the  books  arrested.  He  would  pray 
the  King  and  you  (as  it  is  the  true  text  of  the  Bible,  and  could  only  be  used  by  Englishmen)  to 
permit  its  being  printed  in  Paris ;  because  the  printing  is  finer  there  than  elsewhere,  and  with 
the  great  number  of  printers  and  abundance  of  paper,  books  are  despatched  sooner  than  in 
any  other  country.  If  the  King  will  do  this  for  him  he  hopes  soon  to  do  as  much  in  return  in 
some  other  way.  If  the  King  will  not  grant  this,  will  he  allow  (as  it  seems  he  has  already  pro- 
mised the  ambassador)  the  books  to  be  sent  here  as  they  are  ?  He  told  me  they  cost  him 
600  marks,  that  is  3600  livres  tournois,  and  that  his  only  object  is  to  give  them  away.  More- 
over he  wishes  the  King  to  forbid  in  his  realm  people  to  speak  against  this  King,  etc.  ...  As  to 
the  first,  I  replied  as  I  had  done  long  before,  and  as  you  answered  the  English  ambassador,  etc' 


io8  The  Bibles  Confiscated. 


moy,  Et  m'a  compte  comme  il  auoir  receu  des  lettres  de  l'Ambassadeur  du  Roy  son 
maistre  devers  le  Roy  ;  lequel,  comme  il  m'a  dit,  est  modeste  et  veritable  Ambassa- 
deur,  escrivant  toutes  choses  pour  la  continuation  de  l'amitie  d'entre  nos  deux  Roys, 
Et  selouant  de  l'audience  et  assez  bonne  chere  qu'on  luy  faict.  La  substance  de  ses 
propos  est  que  luy-mesmes,  a  ses  propres  cousts  et  despens,  a  faict  imprimer  vne 
Bible  en  vulgaire  Angloys,  Et  que  les  Imprimeurs  ont  este  citez  et  tourmentez  par 
quelques-vns  de  l'Vniuersite  de  Paris,  et  les  liures  arrestez,  II  vouldroit  bien  prier  le 
Roy  et  vous,  qu'on  permist  (attendu  que  ce  n'est  que  le  vray  texte  de  la  Bible,  trans- 
late de  mot  a  mot,  pour  la  lecture  des  Angloys  qui  n'ont  pas  la  langue  latine,  et  que 
ladicte  Bible  ne  peult  seruir  qu'aux  Angloys)  II  pleust  au  Roy  permettre  qu'elle  fust 
imprime  a  Paris  ;  pource  que  les  impressions  y  sont  plus  belles  qu'en  autre  lieu,  et 
pour  le  grand  nombre  des  Imprimeurs,  et  la  grande  abondance  de  papier  qui  y  est, 
les  liures  y  sont  plustost  expediez  qu'en  nul  autre  pays.  Et  s'il  plaist  au  Roy  tant 
faire  pour  luy,  il  luy  donnera  a  congnoistre  (comme  il  espere  faire  en  bref,)  qu'il  fera 
autant  pour  luy  en  quelqu'autre  endroit  ;  comme  celuy  qui  est  du  tout  enclin  a  son 
seruice.  Ouelque  opinion  que  i'ay  autres-foys  eu  au  contraire  et  dont  certes  il  m'as- 
seure,  et  me  prie  le  croyre.  Et  au  cas  qu'il  ne  pleust  au  Roy  ainsi  luy  octroyer, 
qu'il  soit  content  (comme  il  me  semble  qu'il  diet  qu'on  l'a  desia  accorde  audict  Am- 
bassadeur)  qu'ils  soyent  R'enuoyez  ainsi  qu'ils  sont.  II  m'a  diet  que  les  diets  liures 
luy  coustent  bien  six  cents  marcs,  qui  sont  troys  mil  six  cens  liures  tournoys,  et  que 
le  tout  n'est,  sinon  pour  les  donner. 


C.    Extract  from  Letter  of  the  Imperial  Ambassador  in  England  to 
the  Emperor  Charles  V,  January  9,  1539.1 

From  Correspondenz  des  Kaisers  Karl  V.  aus  dem  Koniglichen  Archiv  und  der  Bibliothek  de 
Bourgogne  zu  Briissel,  mitgetheilt  von  Dr.  Karl  Lanz,  Band  II,  Leipzig,  1845,  P-  299  S1<1- 

Sire,  en  oultre  ledit  Crumuel  avertist  icelluy  ambassadeur,  comme  il  avoit  fait 
imprimer  a  Paris  une  libelle  [? bible]  en  anglois  que  luy  coustoit  bien  environ  deux 
mille  escuz,  et  que  dez  ce  quelle  avoit  este  achevee  et  payee  ceulx  de  luniversite 
lavoient  fait  detenir,  arrester  et  sequestrer,  ce  qu'il  trouvait  bien  estrange  ;  parquov 
prioit  tresfort  ledit  ambassadeur  vouloir  escripre  bien  acertes  pour  la  relaxation  di 
celle,  et  asseurer  de  sa  part  ledit  roy  treschrestien,  que,  sil  faisait  tant  pour  luy  faire 
tout  incontinent  relaxer  sadite  bible,  quil  luy  rendroit  bien  la  pareille.  Et  sur  ce, 
sire,  ledit  seigneur  Crumuel  vint  a  prier  ledit  ambassadeur,  vouloir  penser,  imaginer 
et  luy  dire,  sil  y  avoit  chose  en  ce  monde  qui  puist  ayder  et  seruir  au  laugmente- 
ment  et  confirmation  de  lindissoluble  amytie  entre  leurs  maiestes,  il  se  feroit  fort 
dy  conduire  cedit  roy  son  maistre,  comme  aussi  de  oster  toutes  les  causes  et  occa- 
sions qui  pourroient  en  facon  du  monde  engendrer  quelque  scrupule  entre  eulx,  pres- 
sant  extremement  ledit  ambassadeur,  luy  vouloir  declairer,  sil  en  scavoit  ou  suspe- 
connoit  quelcune  ;  et  pense  icelluy  ambassadeur,  que  ledit  seigneur  Crumuel  desiroit, 
quil  lui  dit,  quil  serait  bon  dabolir  la  pension  que  cedit  roy  pretendoit  en  France, 
pour  abatre  tous  les  scrupules. 

[Postscript.2] 

Sire,  en  cest  instant  veuillant  serrer  ceste,  le  secretaire  de  l'ambassadeur  de 
France  mest  venu  dire  de  la  part  de  sondit  maistre,  comme  hier  sur  le  tard  reve- 
nant  Crumuel  de  la  court,  saddressant  son  chemin  par  devant  le  logis  dicelluy  am- 
bassadeur, il  entre  dedans  pour  ladvertir,  que  puis  deux  heures  ce  roy  avoit  receu 

1  This  letter  summarizes  the  conversation  between  Cromwell  and  Castillon  already  recounted 
by  Castillon  himself.  Its  importance  lies  in  the  postscript,  which  implies  that  it  was  the  French 
ambassador  himself  who  had  suggested  that  the  Inquisition  should  be  allowed  to  seize  the 
Bibles.     The  cost  of  the  Bibles  to  Cromwell  is  here  given  as  2,000  crowns. 

2  Summarized  in  Letters  and  Papers,  <&•<:.,  vol.  xiv,  I.  37  :  '  At  this  moment  the  secretary  of 
the  French  ambassador  has  come  to  tell  me  on  his  master's  part  that  Cromwell  returning  late 
from  Court  visited  him  and  told  him  that  within  two  hours  the  King  had  received  letters  from 
his  ambassador  in  France  stating  that  the  French  King  had  imprisoned  two  Cordeliers  who 
had  defamed  the  King  in  their  sermons,  and  it  was  said  they  would  be  severely  punished ;  and 
that  Francis  had  on  the  first  day  of  the  year  given  the  English  ambassador  a  good  reception 
and  ordered  that  what  was  already  printed  of  the  Bible  in  English  should  be  delivered  to  his 


The  Bibles  Confiscated. 


109 


lettres  bien  freiches  de  son  ambassadeur  resident  en  court  dudit  France,  par  lesquelles 
il  ladvertissoit,  que  le  roy  treschrestien  avoir  fait  mectre  en  prison  deux  cordeliers 
qua  voient  voulu  en  leurs  sermons  diffamer  cedit  roy,  et  ce  parloit  que  lesdits  corde- 
liers seroient  tres  aigrement  pugnis  et  chastoyez,  et  que  ledit  roy  treschrestien  avait 
a  ce  premier  jour  de  Ian  fait  bon  recueil  et  grosse  chiere  a  son  ambassadeur,  et  si 
avoit  commande,  que  ce  questoit  desja  imprime  de  la  bible  en  anglais,  il  fut  delivre 
a  ses  ministres  ;  de  quoy  cedit  roy  sestoit  monstre  merveilleusement  joyeulx  et  sen 
tenoit  tres  oblige  audit  seigneur  roy  treschrestien  et  aussi  a  icelluy  ambassadeur  qui 
ne  cessoit  de  faire  tout  bon  office  pour  conserver  lamytie  entre  ledit  seigneur  roy 
treschrestien  et  luy.  Et  ma  mande  dire  ledit  ambassadeur,  que  tout  ce  quavoit  este 
fait  audit  France  nestoit  que  artiffice  pour  abuser  ceulx  cy,  pour  non  les  mectre  en 
meffiance,  et  quil  avoit  cella  sollicite  par  ses  lettres  :  toutefois  celles  quil  a  deu  es- 
cripre  sur  le  cas  de  la  diffamation  de  cedit  roy  et  touchant  le  sequestrement  de  la 
bible  a  payne  pour  lheure  presente  peuvent  estre  arrivees  a  la  court  dudit  France. 
Ledit  ambassadeur  ma  aussi  envoye  demander,  sil  estoit  vray,  que  ce  roy  eust 
envoye  presenter  a  la  duchesse  du  Milan  ung  dyamant  de  la  valeur  de  seize  mil 
ducatz,  comme  luy  avoit  este  dit  ;  a  quoy  luy  envoyay  dire  nen  avoit  oncques  ouy 
parlei,  comme  aussi  en  verite  ne  avoie. 

Sire,  atant  &c.    De  Londres  le  9®  de  Janvier  1538  [1539]. 


D. 


Postscript  of  a  Letter  from  the  French  Ambassador,  Charles  Marillac, 
to  the  Grand  Constable  of  France,  May  i,  1539. 


From  British  Museum  Additional  MS.  33514,  f.  18. 


Monsegneur 


le  sr  Crumoil  qui  a  le  maniement  de  tous  les  affaires  de  ce 
Royaulme  ma  prie  et  Requis  vous  supplyer  tresaffectueusement  de  sa  part  de  luy 
faire  deliurer  certaines  bibles  en  Angloys  qui  furent  Imprimes  a  Paris  soffrant  en  cas 
pareil  a  faire  tout  ce  quil  vous  plaira  luy  commandey  et  soy  disant  votre  treshumble 
seruiteur  a  quoy  je  nay  fait  aulcune  Responce  sinon  que  je  te  vous  escrivois.1 

E.    Extract  from  a  Letter  from  the  Grand  Constable  of  France  to  the 
French  Ambassador  in  England,  May  6,  1539.1 

From  the  letter  of  M.  Francisque  Michel  to  the  Athenaeum,  May  20,  1871,  compared  with 
Correspondance  politique  de  MM.  de  Castillon  et  de  Marillac,  ambassadeurs  de  France  en  Angleterre, 
1 537—1 542,  publiee  par  M.  Jean  Kaulek.     Paris,  1885,  No.  113. 

Au  demeurant,  quant  a  ce  que  le  sieur  Cramoei  vous  a  diet  et  prie  touchant  les 
bibles  en  vulgaire  angloys  imprimees  a  Paris,  qu'il  desire  luy  estre  delivrez,  je  pense 
qu'a  vostre  partement  d'icy  il  vous  a  este  communicque  la  responce  que  Ton  a 
plusiers  foys  fecte  la-dessous  a  la  continuelle  instance  que  en  faisoict  lambassadeur 
d'Angleterre  estant  icy,  qui  est  en  substance,  que  le  roy,  apres  avoir  entendu  plusiers 
choses  falciffiees  et  erronnees  estre  dedans,  s'est  resolu  de  ne  les  faire  delivrer  :  car 
ce  qui  est  bon  se  peult  aussi  bien  imprimer  en  Angleterre  que  en  France  ;  mais  ce  qui 
est  mauvais,  ledict  seigneur  ne  permetra  qu'il  se  imprime  par  deca,  oil,  soubz  la 
faculte  de  l'impression,  il  ne  veult  donner  coulleur  ne  auctorite  aux  maulvaises 
choses.  Veez  la  ce  que  l'on  a  respondu,  comme  ledict  Cramoei  a  este  assez  adverty, 
sans  ce  que  vous  luy  en  replicque  aultre  chose,  &c.  .  .  . 

Escript  a  Chasteau  Regnard,  le  vie  jour  de  May,  1539. 

ministers ;  at  which  the  King  had  showed  himself  wonderfully  pleased  and  felt  himself  greatly 
bound  to  Francis,  and  also  to  the  said  Ambassador,  who  did  not  cease  to  do  everything  to 
preserve  the  amity.  The  Ambassador  informs  me  that  all  that  was  done  in  France  was  merely 
an  artifice  to  abuse  those  here,  not  to  put  them  in  mistrust,  and  that  he  had  advised  it  by  his 
letters ;  nevertheless  those  which  he  wrote  about  the  defamation  of  the  King  and  the  sequestra- 
tion of  the  Bible  could  scarcely  have  yet  arrived  at  the  French  court.' 

D.  >  Marillac  being  newly  appointed  ambassador  in  succession  to  Castillon  simply  reports 
Cromwell's  application,  in  ignorance  of  the  part  which  his  predecessor  had  played  in  the  matter. 

E.  '  This  letter  instructs  Marillac  to  decline  to  give  up  the  Bibles,  on  the  ground  that  if  they 
were  unobjectionable  they  could  as  well  be  printed  in  England  ;  if  objectionable,  the  French 
king  did  not  wish  to  be  responsible  for  them.  The  point  of  the  better  equipment  of  the  French 
presses  is  not  considered. 


1 1  o  The  Bibles  Confiscated. 


F.    Extract  from  a  Letter  of  the  French  Ambassador  to  the  Constable, 

July  5,  1539.1 

From  the  same  sources  as  the  preceding. 

[Londres],  5  juillet. — Le  dernier  jour  du  passe  arriva  le  sieur  d'Ampont,  depeche 
pour  laffaire  de  monseigneur  de  la  Rochepot  avec  les  lettres  du  roi  de  France  au  roi 
d'Angleterre  et  celles  du  connetable  a  Cromwell  et  au  due  de  Norfolk.  Marillac 
a  expose  l'affaire  au  long  a  Cromwell.  Celui-ci  a  fait  si  honnete  reponse  '  que  s'il 
estoit  si  vaillant  a  tenir  qu'il  est  hardy  a  promettre,  sans  dimculte  ne  m'en  pourrois 
esperer  que  bien,  combien  qu'entre  aultres  propoz  en  discourant  sur  cest  affaire  et 
aultres  qu'il  avoit  mis  en  avant,  il  se  soit  bien  souvenu  des  bibles  en  vulgaire  dont 
aultrefoys  il  me  avoit  prye  de  vous  escripre,  alleguant  le  dommaige  qu'il  en  avoit  eu 
pour  avoir  este  aucteur  et  fait  les  fraiz  de  ce  qui  fust  comence  a  Paris,  ne  voulant 
prendre  pour  grand  satisfaction  les  responces  que  je  luy  en  ay  faictes  le  plus  dextre- 
ment  qu'il  m'estoit  possible,  pour  l'entretenir  le  mieux  que  pourroie,  d'aultant  que 
l'on  a  affaire  de  luy  et  que  l'yssue  de  cest  affaire  pend  plus  de  sa  voulente  que  de 
celle  du  roy,  son  maistre ;  lequel  aussi,  apres  que  je  luy  ay  remonstre  les  mesmes 
raisons  du  fait  de  mondit  sieur  vostre  frere,  nous  a  diet  pour  responce  qu'il  escriroit 
audict  sieur  Cramoil,  a  son  chancellier  et  aultres  de  son  conseil,  qu'ilz  eussent  a 
regarder  et  examiner  ceste  cause,  en  laquelle  s'ilz  y  voyent  apparance  pour  nous, 
encores  que  la  justice  en  fust  doubteuse,  qu'ilz  nous  eussent  gratifiez  en  tout  ce  qu'ilz 
verroyent  que  la  raison  de  justice  ne  seroict  directement  au  contraire,  pour  l'amour 
du  roy,  son  frere,  que  luy  en  rescripvoit  si  affecteusement ;  et  sur  ceste  responce, 
Monseigneur,  je  suys  retourne  des  champs,  ou  jestoys  alle.  trouver  ce  roy  en  ceste 
ville  pour  solliciter  vifvement  ledict  affaire  pour  en  tirer  briefve  resolution  et  responce 
par  escript,  ainsi  que  ledict  seigneur  roy  m'a  promis,  &c.  .  .  . 

De  Londres,  ce  ve  de  iuillet. 


XL.    THE  PRICE  AND  COPYRIGHT  OF  THE  GREAT  BIBLE. 
Letter  from  Cranmer  to  Cromwell,  November  14  [1539].1 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Letters  and  Papers  of  Henry  VIII , 
vol.  xiv,  pt.  2,  517). 

My  veray  singuler  good  Lorde, — After  my  moste  hartie  commendations  theis 
shalbe  to  signifie  unto  your  Lordeship  that  Bartelett  and  Edward  Whitecherche 
hath  ben  with  me,  and  have,  by  thair  accomptes,  declared  thexpensis  and  charges 
of  the  pryntyng  of  the  great  bibles  ;  and  by  thadvise  of  Bartelett  I  haue  appoynted 
theym  to  be  soulde  for  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  a  pece,  and  not  aboue.  Howbeit  Whitechurche 
enformeth  me,  that  your  lordeship  thinketh  it  a  moore  convenient  price  to  haue 
theym  solde  at  x  s  a  pece  2,  which,  in  respecte  of  the  greate  chargis,  both  of  the 
papar  (which  in  very  dede  is  substanciall  and  good)  and  other  great  hinderaunces, 
Whitechurche  and  his  felowe  thinketh  it  a  small  price,  Nevertheles  they  ar  right  well 
contented  to  sell  theym  for  x  s.,  so  that  you  wolbe  so  good  lorde  unto  theym,  as 
to  graunte  hensforth  none  other  Lycence  to  any  other  printer,  saving  to  theym, 
for  the  printyng  of  the  said  bible.  For  els  thei  thinke  that  thei  shalbe  greately 
hindered  therbye ;  yf  any  other  should  printe,  they  susteynyng  suche  charges  as 
they  al  redie  have  don.  Wherefore  I  shall  beseche  your  Lordeshipe,  in  consideration 
of  their  travaile  in  this  behalf,  to  tender  thair  requestes,  and  thei  have  promysed 

F.  '-  Cromwell  is  here  shown  trying  to  use  a  case  in  which  the  French  were  complainants  as 
a  lever  to  obtain  the  restoration  of  the  Bibles,  but  the  tone  of  Marillac's  report  shows  that  not 
much  attention  was  then  being  paid  to  him.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  Bibles  were  ultimately 
given  up  early  in  November,  the  dispute  in  which  Monseigneur  de  Rochepot,  i.  e.  Francois  de 
Montmorency,  Governor  of  Picardy  and  brother  of  the  Constable  of  France,  was  involved 
eventually  giving  Cromwell  a  strong  enough  card  to  play. 

XL.  l  Endorsed  :   The  bishopp  of  Cant,  the  xiiij"1  of  November. 

2  This  was  presumably  the  price  at  which  the  early  Great  Bibles  were  issued,  although, 
since  Cromwell  kept  the  matter  in  his  own  hands  (see  next  document),  it  was  not  until  April 
1541  (see  No.  XLII),  that  it  was  fixed  by  the  Privy  Council. 


The  Price  and  Copyright  of  the  Great  Bible.     1 1 1 


me  to  prynte  in  thende  of  their  bibles  the  price  therof,  to  thente  the  Kinges  lege 
people  shall  not  hensforth  be  deceyvid  of  thair  price. 

Farther,  yf  your  Lordeship  hath  known  the  kinges  highnes  pleasure  concernyng 
the  preface  of  the  Bible,  whiche  I  sent  to  you  to  oversee,  so  that  his  grace  doth 
alowe  the  same,  I  pray  you  that  the  same  may  be  delyvered  unto  the  said 
Whitechurch,  unto  printyng  :  trusting  that  it  shall  both  encorage  many  slovve 
readers,  and  also  stay  the  rash  judgementes  of  theym  that  reade  therin.  Thus  our 
Lorde  have  your  good  Lordeship  in  his  blessed  tuition.  Att  Lambeth  the  xiiijt"  Day 
of  Nouember. 

Yor  own  ever  assured, 


T.  Cantuarien. 


To  my  singuler  good  Lorde  my  Lorde  Privie  Seale. 


XLI.    PATENT  FOR  BIBLE  PRINTING  GRANTED  TO  CROMWELL.1 

From  the  original  Patent  Roll,  31  Henry  VIII,  part  4,  November  14,  1539. 

For  the  Bible  to  be  pryntyd  by  the  ouersight  of  the  lord  Crumwell 

Henry  the  eight  &c.  To  all  and  singular  Prynters  and  sellers  of  bookes  within  this 
oure  realme  and  to  all  other  officers  mynistres  and  subiectes  theise  oure  lettres 
heryng  or  seyng,  gretyng.  We  late  you  witt  that  beyng  desirous  to  haue  oure  people 
at  tymes  conuenyent  geue  theym  selfes  to  thatteynyng  of  the  knowlege  of  goddes 
worde  Wherby  they  shall  the  better  honour  hym  and  obserue  and  kepe  his  com- 
maundementes  and  also  do  their  duties  the  better  to  vs  beyng  their  Prince  and 
soueraigne  lorde.  And  consideryng  that  as  this  oure  zeale  and  desire  cannot  by 
any  meane  take  so  good  effecte  as  by  the  grauntyng  to  theym  the  free  and 
lyberall  use  of  the  bible  in  oure  oune  maternall  english  tonge  so  onles  it  be  forseen 
that  the  same  passe  at  the  begynnyng  by  one  translation  to  be  perusid  and  con- 
sidered, the  frailtie  of  menne  is  suche  that  the  diuersitie  therof  maye  brede  and 
brynge  forthe  manyfolde  inconuenyences  as  when  wilfull  and  hedy  folkes  shall  con- 
ferre  upon  the  diuersitie  of  the  said  translacions,  WTe  have  therfore  appoynted  oure 
right  trusty  and  welbeloued  counsellour  the  lorde  Crumwell  keper  of  oure  pryvye 
i  seale  to  take  for  vs  and  in  oure  name  speciall  cure  and  charge  that  no  manner  of 
persone  or  persones  within  this  oure  realme  shall  enterprise  attempte  or  sett  in  hande 
1  to  print  any  bible  in  the  english  tonge  of  any  maner  of  volume  duryng  the  space  of 
fyue  yeres  next  ensuyng  after  the  date  hereof,  but  only  all  suche  as  shalbe  deputid 
assignid  and  admytted  by  the  said  lorde  Crumwell,  Willyng  and  commaundyng 
all  maires  Shrifes  Bailyffes  constables  and  all  other  oure  officers  ministres  and  sub- 
iectes to  be  aydyng  to  oure  said  counsailour  in  thexecution  of  this  oure  pleasure  and 
to  be  conformable  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  same  as  shall  apperteigne.  In 
Witnes  wherof  &c,  Witnes  oure  self  at  Westm.  the  xiiij  days  of  Nouembre.  per 
ipsum  Regem  &  de  dat.  predicta,  &c. 


XLII.    ANTHONY  MARLER  AND  THE  PRIVY  COUNCIL. 

From  Proceedings  and  Ordinances  of  the  Privy  Council  0/  England.     Edited  by 
Sir  Harris  Nicolas,  vol.  vii,  pp.  18 1-6. 

A.    At  Greenwich,  April  25,  33  Hen.  VIII,  1541. 

At  Grenewiche  the  xxv'y  of  April  beyng  present  the  Counsail  which  was  present 
the  daye  before. 

It  was  agreed  that  Anthony  Marler  of  London,  merchant,  might  sell  the  bibles 
of  the  gret  volume  unbounde  for  x  s.  sterl.  and  bounde  being  trymmed  with 
bullyons  for  xij  s.  sterling. 

1  As  this  patent  is  dated  on  the  same  day  as  Cranmer's  letter,  it  is  evident  that  immediately 
on  hearing  Irom  the  archbishop  of  the  need  for  protecting  the  printers,  Cromwell  must  have 
obtained  a  patent  from  the  king,  not  for  them,  but  for  himself.  He  was  thus  enabled  to  keep 
the  whole  matter  in  his  own  hands. 


I 


ii2        Anthony  Marler  and  the  Privy  Council. 


B.    At  Greenwich,  May  i,  33  Hen.  VIII,  1541. 

At  Grenewich  the  furst  dave  of  Mave  being  present  the  Archebishop  of  Canterbury, 
the  Chauncelor  of  Englande,  the  Duke  of  Norffolk,  the  Lord  Pryvey  Seale,  the  Gret 
Chambrelain,  of  Englande,  the  Erie  of  Hertforde,  the  Gret  Admiral  of  Englande, 
the  Bisshop  of  Duresme,  the  Treasurer  of  Household,  the  Comptroller  of  Household, 
Sir  Thomas  Wriothesley  Secretary,  Sir  Rauff  Sadleir  Secretary.  .  .  . 

Wheras  Antony  Marler  of  London  marchaunt  put  up  a  supplicacion  unto  the 
forsaid  Counsaill  in  maner  &  forme  Mowing.  Wheras  it  hath  pleased  you  for  the 
comon  wealth  to  take  no  small  peynes  in  the  furtheraunce  of  the  price  of  my  bookes, 
moost  humbly  I  beseche  the  same  to  have  in  consideracion  that  onles  I  have  by  the 
meane  of  proclamacion  sum  charge  or  commission  that  every  church  not  redy  pro- 
vided of  one  bible,  shall  according  to  the  Kinges  highnes  former  injunctions  gyven 
in  that  behalf,  provide  them  of  a  Bible  of  the  largest  volume,  by  a  day  to  be  pre- 
fixed and  appointed,  as  shalbe  thought  moost  convenient  by  your  wisdomes,  my 
grete  sute,  that  I  have  made  herin  is  not  only  frustrate  and  voyde,  but  also  being 
charged  as  I  am  with  an  importune  somme  of  the  said  bookes  now  lying  on  my 
hande,  am  undone  for  ever.  And  therfor  trusting  to  the  merciful  consideracions  of 
your  high  wisedomes,  I  humbly  desire  tobteyn  the  same  commission,  or  sum  other 
commaundement,  and  I  with  all  myne  during  our  lifes  ar  and  shalbe  bounde  to  pray 
contynually  for  your  prosperous  felicites  long  tendure. 

It  was  agreed  by  the  Lordes  and  others  of  the  Kinges  Maiesties  Consaill  that 
there  shalbe  a  proclamacion  made  according  to  his  request,  and  that  the  day  to  be 
limited  for  the  havyng  of  the  saide  bookes  shall  be  Hallowmasse. 


XLIII.    THE  KING'S  PROCLAMATION  FOR  THE  ENGLISH  BIBLE 
TO  BE  SET  UP  IN  CHURCHES. 

May  6,  1541 
From  the  original  edition  in  the  British  Museum. 

A  proclamacion,  ordeyned  by  the  Kynges  maiestie,  with  the  aduice  of  his 
honourable  counsayle  for  the  Byble  of  the  largest  and  greatest  volume,  to  be  had 
in  euery  churche.  Deuised  the  vi  day  of  May  the  xxxiii.  yeare  of  the  kynges  moste 
gracious  reygne. 

Where,  by  Iniunctions  *  heretofore  set  forth  by  the  auctorite  of  the  kynges  royall 
maiestye,  Supreme  head  of  the  churche  of  this  his  realme  of  Englande.  It  was 
ordeyned  and  commaunded  amongest  other  thynges.  that  in  al  and  synguler  paryshe 
churches,  there  shuld  be  prouyded  by  a  certen  day  nowe  expyred,  at  the  costes  of 
the  curates  and  paryshioners,  Bybles  conteynynge  the  olde  and  newe  Testament, 
in  the  Englyshe  tounge,  to  be  fyxed  and  set  vp  openlye  in  euery  of  the  sayd  paryshe 
churches.  The  whiche  Godlve  commaundement  and  iniuntion  was  to  the  onlve 
intent  that  euery  of  the  kynges  maiesties  louynge  subiectes,  myndynge  to  reade 
therin,  myght  by  occasyon  thereof,  not  only  consyder  and  perceyue  the  great  and 

1  The  third  and  fourth  of  the  Injunctions  issued  by  Cromwell  as  Vicar-General  were:  'Item, 
that  ye  shall  provyde  on  this  side  the  feast  of  .  .  .  next  commyng,  one  boke  of  the  whole  Bible 
of  the  largest  volume  in  Englyshe,  and  the  same  sett  up  in  summe  convenyent  place  within  the 
said  churche  that  ye  have  cure  of,  whereas  your  parishners  may  most  commodiouslye  resort  to 
the  same,  and  rede  yt ;  the  charges  of  which  boke  shal  be  ratablie  born  between  you  the 
parson,  and  the  parishners  aforsaid,  that  ys  to  say,  the  one  half  by  yowe,  and  th'other  half 
by  them. 

'  Item,  that  ye  discorage  no  man  pryuely  or  apertly  from  the  readinge  or  hearing  of  the  same 
Bible,  but  shall  expresslye  provoke,  stere,  and  exhorte  every  parsone  to  rede  the  same,  as  that 
whyche  ys  the  verye  lively  worde  of  God,  that  every  christen  man  ys  bownde  to  embrace,  beleve, 
and  followe,  yf  he  loke  to  be  saved ;  admonyshinge  them  neverthelesse,  to  avoid  all  contention, 
altercation  therin,  and  to  use  an  honest  sobrietye  in  the  inquisition  of  the  true  sense  of  the  same, 
and  referre  th'explication  of  obscure  places,  to  men  of  higher  jugement  in  Scripture.'  (Printed 
from  Reg.  Cranmer,  fol.  99b,  in  Wilkius's  Concilia,  hi.  815,  under  the  date  1536,  which  is  probably 
two  years  too  early. ) 

In  1537  Latimer,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  had  laid  as  his  second  and  third  Injunctions  on  the 
prior  and  convent  of  St.  Mary's  House  in  Worcester  :  '  Item,  that  the  prior  shall  provide  of 
the  monasteries  charge,  a  whole  Bible  in  English  to  be  laid,  fast  chained,  in  some  open  place, 
either  in  their  church  or  cloister.  Item,  that  every  religious  person  have  at  the  least  a  New 
Testament  in  English,  by  the  feast  of  the  nativity  of  our  Lord  next  ensuing  '  (Wilkins,  iii.  832). 


The  King's  Proclamation  for  English  Bible.      113 


ineffable  omnipotent  power,  promyse,  iustice,  mercy  and  goodnes  of  Almyghtie  God, 
But  also  to  learne  thereby  to  obserue  Gods  commaundementes,  and  to  obeye  theyr 
soueraygne  Lorde  and  hyghe  powers,  and  to  exercyse  Godlye  charite,  and  to  vse 
themselues,  accordynge  to  theyr  vocations  :  in  a  pure  and  syncere  christen  lyfe 
without  murmure  or  grudgynges.  By  the  which  Iniunctions  the  Kynges  royall 
maiestye  intended,  that  his  louynge  subiectes  shulde  haue  and  vse  the  commoditie 
of  the  readyng  of  the  sayd  Bybles,  for  the  purpose  aboue  rehersed,  humbly,  mekely, 
reuerently  and  obediently  ;  and  not  that  any  of  them  shulde  reade  the  sayde 
Bybles,  wyth  lowde  and  hyghe  voyces,  in  tyme  of  the  celebracion  of  the  holye 
Masse  and  other  dyuyne  seruyces  vsed  in  the  churche,  nor  that  any  hys  lay  sub- 
iectes redynge  the  same,  shulde  presume  to  take  vpon  them,  any  common  dysputa- 
cyon,  argumente  or  exposicyon  of  the  mysteries  therein  conteyned,  but  that  euery 
suche  laye  man  shulde  humbly,  mekely  and  reuerentlye  reade  the  same,  for  his 
owne  instruction,  edificacion,  and  amendement  of  hys  lyfe,  accordynge  to  goddes 
holy  worde  therin  mencioned.  And  notwythstandynge  the  kynges  sayde  moost 
godlye  and  gracious  commaundement  and  Iniunction  in  forme  as  is  aforesayde,  Hys 
royall  maiestye  is  informed  that  dyuers  and  many  Townes  and  paryshes  wythin 
thys  hys  realme  haue  negligently  omytted  theyr  dueties  in  the  accomplishement 
therof  wherof  his  highnes  maruayleth  not  a  lytle.  And  myndynge  the  execucion  of 
his  sayde  former,  moost  godly  and  gracyous  Iniunctions :  doeth  straytlye  charge  and 
commaunde  that  the  Curates  and  paryshioners  of  euerye  towne  and  paryshe  wythin 
thys  hys  realme  of  Englande,  not  hauynge  already  Bybles  prouyded  wythin  theyr 
paryshe  churches,  shall  on  thys  syde  the  feaste  of  Alsayntes  next  commynge,  bye 
and  prouyde  Bybles  of  the  largest  and  greatest  volume,  and  cause  the  same  to  be 
set  and  fyxed  in  euery  of  the  sayde  paryshe  churches,  there  to  be  vsed  as  is  aforesayd : 
accordynge  to  the  sayde  former  Iniunctions  ;  vpon  payne  that  the  Curate  and 
inhabitauntes  of  the  paryshes  and  townes,  shal  lose  and  forfayte  to  the  Kynges 
maiestye  for  euery  moneth  that  they  shall  lacke  and  want  the  sayde  Bybles,  after 
the  same  feast  of  Alsayntes  fourty  shyllynges,  the  one  halfe  of  the  same  forefayt 
to  be  to  the  kynges  maiesty,  and  the  other  halfe  to  hym  or  them  whyche  shall  fyrste 
fynde  and  present  the  same  to  the  Kynges  maiestyes  counsayle.  And  fynally,  the 
kynges  royall  maiestie  doeth  declare  and  sygnifye  to  all  and  syngular  his  louynge 
subiectes,  that  to  thentent  they  maye  haue  the  sayde  Bybles  of  the  greatest  volume 
at  equall  and  reasonable  pryces,  His  hyghnes  by  the  aduyse  of  hys  counsayle  hath 
ordeyned  and  taxed  :  that  the  sellers  therof,  shall  not  take  for  any  of  the  sayde 
Bybles  vnbounde,  aboue  the  pryce  of  ten  shyllynges.  And  for  euery  of  the  sayde 
Bybles  well  and  sufficientlye,  bounde,  trymmed  and  clasped,  not  aboue  twelue  shyl- 
lynges, vpon  payne,  the  seller  to  lose  for  euerye  Byble  solde  contrary  to  this  his 
hyghnes  proclamacion  fourty  shyllynges,  the  one  moyte  therof  to  the  kynges  maiestie  : 
&  the  other  moyte,  to  the  fynder  and  presenter  of  the  defaulte,  as  is  afore  sayde. 
And  his  hyghnes  streyghtly  chargeth  and  commaundeth  that  all  and  syngular  ordin- 
aries hauynge  ecclesiasticall  iurysdiction  within  this  his  churche  and  realme  of 
Englande  and  the  dominion  of  Wales,  that  they  and  euery  of  them  shall  put  theyr 
effectuall  endeuours,  that  the  Curates  and  parishioners  shall  obeye  and  accomplyshe, 
thys  his  maiestyes  proclamacion  and  commaundement,  as  they  tendre  the  aduaunce- 
ment  of  the  kynges  moost  gracious  and  godly  purpose  in  that  behalfe,  and  as  they 
wyll  answer  to  his  hyghnes  for  the  same. 

GOD  SAVE  THE  KYNGE 


Excussum  per  Richardum  Grafton  &  Eduardum  Whitchurch, 
imprimendum  solum. 


Cum  priuilegio  ad 


XLIV.  THE  READING  OF  THE  BIBLE. 
A.    Draft  for  a  Proclamation. 

From  Cotton  MS.  Cleopatra  E.  v.  327." 

Where  it  hathe  pleased  the  kinges  maiestie  oure  most  dradde  souereigne  lorfd] 
and  supreme  hed  vnder  god  of  this  Churche  of  England  for  a  declaratyon  of  the' 
greate  zeale  he  bereth  to  the  setting  furthe  of  goddes  woorde  and  to  the  vertuouse 

1  Endorsed  :   Towchinge  the  reading  of  the  Byble. 


H4 


The  Reading  of  the  Bible. 


mayntenaunce  of  his  commenwealthe  to  permyjt]  and  commaunde  the  Bible  being 
translated  in  to  our  mother  tongue  to  be  syncerely  taught  and  declared  by  vs  the 
curates,  And  to  bee  openly [e]  layed  furthe  in  every  parrishe  churche  ;  to  thintent 
that  all  his  good  subiectes  aswel  by  reading  thereof  as  by  hering  the  true  explanacion 
of  the  same  may  First  lerne  their  dieuties  to  allmightie  god  and  his  maiestie  and 
euery  of  vs  charitably  to  vse  other  And  thenne  applying  themselfes  to  doo  according  , 
to  that  they  shall  here  and  lerne,  may  bothe  speke  and  doo  Christienly  and  in  al 
thinges  as  it  beseamethe  Christien  men,  Because  his  highnes  very  muche  desireth  that 
this  thing  being  by  him  most  godly  begonne  And  sett  forward  maye  of  all  you  be 
Receyued  as  is  aforesaide  His  maiestie  hathe  willed  and  commaunded  this  to  be  | 
declared  vnto  youe  that  his  graces  pleasure  and  hiegh  commaundement  is  that  in  the 
reading  and  hering  thereof,  first  most  humbly  and  Reuerently  vsing  and  addressing 
yourselfes  vnto  it,  you  shall  haue  allwayes  in  your  Rememberaunce  and  memoryes 
that  all  thinges  conteyned  in  this  booke  is  the  vndoubted  wylle,  lawe  and  com- , 
maundement  of  almightie  god  thonely  and  streight  meane  to  knowe  the  goodnes  and 
benefytes  of  god  towardes  vs  and  the  true  dieutye  of  euery  christien  manne  to  serue 
him  accordingly,  And  that  therefore  reading  this  booke  with  suche  mynde  and  firme 
feythe  as  is  aforesaid,  you  shall  first  endevor  yourselfes  to  conforme  your  owne 
lyvinges  and  conuersacion  to  the  contentes  of  the  same  And  so  by  your  good  and 
vertuouse  exemple  to  encourage  your  wifes  childerne  and  seruauntes  to  lyue  wel  and 
christienly  according  to  the  rule  thereof.     And  if  at  any  tyme  by  reading  any  doubt  I 
shall  comme  to  any  of  youe  touching  the  sense  and  meanyng  of  any  parte  thereof, 
that  thenne  not  geving  to  moche  to  your  owne  mynde,  fantazies  and  opinions  nor 
having  thereof  any  open  reasonyng  in  your  open  Tauernes  or  Alehowses,  ye  shall 
haue  Recourse  to  suche  lerned  menne  as  be  or  shalbe  auctorised  to  preache  and  j 
declare  the  same,  soo  that   avoyding  all  contentions  and  disputacions  in  suche  j 
Alehowses   and  other   places  vnmete  for  suche  conferences  and  submytting  your  ■ 
opinions  to  the  Iudgementes  of  suche  lerned  menne  as  shalbe  appoynted  in  this ; 
behaulf ,  his  grace  may  wel  perceyue  that  you  vse  this  most  hiegh  benefyte  quietly ; 
and  charitably  euery  of  you  to  the  edefying  of  himself  his  wief  and  famylye  in  al  I 
thinges  aunswering  to  his  hieghnes  good  opinion  conceyued  of  you  in  thaduauncement  i 
of  vertue  and  suppressing  of  vice  without  failing  to  vse  suche  discrete  quietnes  and 
sober  moderatyon  in  the  premisses  as  is  aforesaid     As  ye  tender  his  graces  pleasure  ' 
and  intend  to  avoyde  his  hiegh  indignacion  and  the  perill  and  daunger  that  may  ensue  I 
to  you  and  euery  of  you  for  the  contrary 

And  god  saue  the  King 

B.  An  admonition  and  advertisement  given  by  the  bishop  of  London  to  all 

READERS   OF   THE   BlBLE    IN    THE    ENGLISH   TONGUE.       1.542. 

From  Wilkins's  Concilia,  vol.  iii,  p.  863  sq.  :    '  Ex  reg.  Bonner,  et  Burnet  Hist.  Reform. 

vol.  i,  App.  p.  251.' 

To  the  intent,  that  a  good  and  wholesom  thing,  godly  and  virtuously  for  honest  j 
intents  and  purposes  set  forth  for  many,  be  not  hindered  or  maligned  at,  for  the 
abuse,  default,  and  evil  behaviour  of  a  few,  who  for  lack  of  discretion  and  good 
advisement  commonly  without  respect  of  time  or  other  due  circumstances,  proceed 
rashly  and  unadvisedly  therein,  and  by  reason  thereof  rather  hinder  than  set  forward 
the  thing,  that  is  good  of  itself :  it  shall  therefore  be  very  expedient,  that  whosoever 
repaireth  hither  to  read  this  book,  or  any  such  like  in  any  other  place,  he  prepare 
himself  chiefly  and  principally  with  all  devotion  humility  and  quietnes,  to  be  edified 
and  made  the  better  thereby,  adjoining  thereto  his  perfect  and  most  bounden  duty 
of  obedience  to  the  king's  majesty,  our  most  gracious  and  dread  sovereign  lord,  and 
supreme  head,  especially  in  accomplishing  his  grace's  most  honourable  injunctions 
and  commandment,  given  and  made  in  that  behalf ;  and  right  expedient,  yea  neces- 
sary it  shall  be  also,  that  leaving  behind  him  vain  glory,  hypocrisy,  and  all  other 
carnal  and  corrupt  affections,  he  bring  with  him  discretion,  honest  intent,  charity, 
reverence,  and  quiet  behaviour  to  and  for  the  edification  of  his  own  soul,  without  the 
hinderance,  let,  or  disturbance  of  any  other  his  christian  brother ;  evermore  foreseeing, 
that  no  number  of  people  be  especially  congregate  therefore  to  make  a  multitude, 
and  that  no  exposition  be  made  thereuppon  otherwise  than  is  declared  in  the  book 
itself ;  and  that  especial  regard  be  had,  no  reading  thereof  be  used,  allowed,  and  with 


The  Reading  of  the  Bible. 


ri5 


noise  in  the  time  of  any  divine  service  or  sermon,  or  that  in  the  same  be  used  any 
disputation,  contention,  or  any  other  misdemeanour  ;  or,  finally,  that  any  man  justly 
may  reckon  himself  to  be  offended  thereby,  or  take  occasion  to  grudge  or  malign 
thereat. 

God  save  the  King. 

C.   The  Narrative  of  William  Maldon  of  Newington,  written  for 
Fox's  Actes  and  Monuments} 

From  British  Museum,  Harley  MS.  590,  fol.  77. 

A  young  man  inhumanly  persecuted  by  his  Father  for  reading  ye 
scripture,  in  K  Henries  time. 

Grace  peace  and  mercy  from  god  our  father,  &  from  our  lorde  Jesus  chryste  be 
with  all  them  that  love  the  gospell  of  Jesus  chryst  vnfaynedly,  so  be  it,  Not  vnto  vs 
lord  not  vnto  vs  but  vnto  thy  name  be  all  honour  &  glory. 

Jentyll  reder  vnderstand  that  I  do  not  take  in  hande  to  wryte  this  lytyll  tratyse 
as  followeth,  of  myne  anone  provokyng  but  I  with  another  chavnced  to  goo  in  the 
coumpany  of  Mr.  Foxe  the  gather[er]  together  of  this  grete  boke  &  he  desyred  vs  to 
tell  hym  yf  we  knewe  of  any  man  that  had  suffered  persecvcyon  for  the  gospell  of 
Jesus  Chryst,  to  that  end  he  myght  adde  it  vnto  the  boke  of  martres,  then  sayd 
I  that  I  knewe  one  that  was  whipped  in  kyng  henryes  tyme  for  it  of  his  father,  then 
he  enquired  of  me  his  name,  then  I  bwrayed  &  sayd  it  was  I  myselfe  &  tould  hym 
a  pece  of  it  then  was  he  desyrous  to  have  the  whole  svrcomstavnes  of  it,  then 
I  promysed  hym  to  wryght  it,  &  as  I  sayd  to  hym  not  for  any  vayne  glory  I  will 
speke,  but  vnto  the  prayse  &  honour  of  our  god  that  worketh  all  in  all,  men  of  all 
good  gyftes  that  cometh  from  aboue,  vnto  whom  be  all  honour  &  glory  for  euer,  in 
this  life  &  for  euer  in  the  lyfe  to  come  so  be  it,  As  I  fynde  by  the  brefe  crovnakill 
that  the  bibill  of  the  sacred  chrypetvres  was  set  forthe  to  bee  rede  in  all  chvrches  in 
ingelonde,  by  the  late  worthy  kynge  henry  the  viijth,  &  Imedyately  after  dyueres 
poore  men  in  the  towne  of  chelmysford  in  the  county  of  Essyx  where  my  father 
dwellyd  &  I  borne  &  with  hym  brovght  vp,  the  sayd  poore  men  bought  the  newe 
testament  of  Jesus  chryst  &  on  svndayes  dyd  syt  redyng  in  lower  ende  of  chvrche, 
&  manye  wolde  floke  abovte  them  to  here  theyr  redyng  then  I  cam  amonge  the  sayd 
reders  to  here  them,  redyng  of  that  glade  &  swete  tydynges  of  the  gospell,  then  my 
father  seyng  this  that  I  lestened  vnto  them  euery  svndaye,  then  cam  he  &  sovght 
me  amonge  them,  &  brovght  me  awaye  from  the  heryng  of  them,  and  wold  have  me 
to  saye  the  lattyn  mattyns  with  hym,  the  which  greued  me  very  myche  &  thvs  did 
fete2  me  awaye  dyueres  tymes,  then  I  see  I  covlde  not  be  in  reste,  then  thovghte 
I  I  will  learne  to  read  engelyshe,  &  then  will  I  haue  the  newe  testament  &  read  ther 
on  myselfe,  and  then  had  I  lamed  of  an  engelyshe  prymmer  as  fare  as  patrissapyentia 
&  then  on  svndayes  I  plyed  my  engelysshe  prymmer,  the  mayetyd  follovyng  I  &  my 
fathers  prentys,  thomas  Jeffary  layed  our  mony  to  gether,  &  bought  the  newe  testa- 
ment in  engelyshe,  &  hydde  it  in  our  bedstrawe  &  so  exersysed  it  at  convenyent 
tymes,  then  shortly  after  my  father  set  me  to  the  kepyng  of  habardashe[ry]  & 
grossary(?)  .  .  .  wares  beyng  a  shott  from  his  howse,  &  then  I  plyed  my  boke,  then 
shortly  after  I  wold  begyn  to  speke  of  the  schryptores,  &  on  a  nyght  aboute  eyght 
acloke  my  father  sate  slepyng  in  a  chayr  &  my  mother  &  I  fyll  on  resonyng  of  the 
crvsyfyx,  &  of  the  knelyng  downe  to  it,  knokeynge  on  the  breste,  &  hovldyng  vp 
our  handes  to  it,  when  it  cam  by  on  precessyon,  then  sayd  I  it  was  playne  Idolatry 
&  playnely  agayneste  the  comavndement  of  god,  wher  he  sayeth,  thou  shalt  not 
make  to  thy  selfe  anye  graven  Image  thou  shalt  not  bow  downe  to  it  nor  worshyp  it, 
then  sayed  she  a  thou  thefe  yf  thy  father  knewe  this  he  wolde  hang  the,  wilte  not 
thou  worshyppe  the  crosse  &  it  was  aboute  the  when  thou  were  crystened,  &  mvste 
be  layed  on  the  when  thou  art  deade,  with  other  tavlke,  then  I  went  &  hyde  frythes 
boke  on  the  sacarment  then  I  went  to  bede,  &,  then  my  father  awakyd,  &  my 
mother,  tovlde  hym  of  our  commvyncatyon,  then  came  he  vp  in  to  our  chamber 
with  a  greate  rodde,  &  as  I  harde  hym  comyng  vp,  I  blessyd  me,  saying  in  the 


theu  was 
I  about  a 
xv  yeres 
of  age. 

uo  mau 
can 

comme 
vnto  me 
exsepte  it 
be  geuen 
hym  of 
my 

father. 
John  vi. 


1  Endorsed:   receaued  of  W.  Maldon  of  Newyngton. 
document  is  printed  exactly  as  it  stands. 


With  some  misgivings  this  ingenuous 
2  Fetched. 

II   2 


name  of  the  father  &  of  the  sonne  &  of  the  holy  goste  so  be  it,  then  sayd  my  father 
to  me  serra  who  is  your  scholmaster  tell  me,  for  sovthe  father  sayd  I,  I  have  no 
scholmaster  but  god  wher  he  sayth  in  his  commaundement  thou  shant  not  make  to 
thyselfe  anye  graven  Image  you  shavlt  not  bow  downe  to  it  nor  worshypp  it,  then 
he  toke  me  by  the  heare  of  my  heade  with  bothe  his  handes  &  pvllyd  me  out  of  the 
bed  behynd  Thomas  Jeffary  bake  he  syttyng  vp  in  his  bedde,  then  he  bestowed  his 
rodd  on  my  bodye  &  styll  wolde  knowe  my  scholmaster  &  other  master  then  I  sayd 
before  he  had  none  of  me  &  he  sayd  I  spake  agayneste  the  kynges  injvntyones,  &  as 
trevly  as  the  lorde  lyueth,  I  reioysyd  that  I  was  betten  for  chrystes  sake,  &  wepte 
not  one  taare  out  of  myne  eyes  &  I  thynke  I  felte  not  the  strypes  my  reioysynge 
was  so  mvche,  &  then  my  father  sawe  that  wen  he  had  beten  me  Inofe  3  he  let  me 
goo  &  I  wente  to  bede  agayne,  &  shede  not  one  tare  out  of  myne  eyes,  suerly  sayd 
my  father,  he  is  paste  grace  for  he  wepeth  not  for  then  was  he  in  twyse  so  moche 
rage,  &  sayd,  fette  me  an  havlter  I  will  suerly  hange  hym  vp,  for  as  good  I  hange 
hym  vp  as  another  shovlde,  &  when  he  sawe  that  nobody  wolde  goo  he  went  downe, 
into  his  shoppe  &  brovght  vp  an  havlter,  &  the  whyles  he  went  a  thou  thefe,  sayd 
my  mother,  howe  haste  thow  angeryd  thy  father,  I  neuer  sawe  hym  so  angary, 
mother  sayed  I,  I  am  the  more  sorryer  that  he  sholde  be  so  angary  for  this  matter, 
&  then  began  I  to  wepe  for  the  grefe  of  the  lake  of  knowledge  in  them,  then  sayed  my 
mother,  thomas  Jeffary  aryse,  &  make  the  reddy  for  I  cannot  tell  what  he  will  doo 
in  his  anger,  &  he  sat  vp  in  his  bed  pvttyng  on  of  his  clothis  &  my  father  cometh  vp 
with  ye  havlter  &  my  mother  intretyd  hym  to  lette  me  alone  but  in  no  wise  he  wolde 
be  intretj'd  but  pvtte  the  havlter  aboute  my  neke  I  lyinge  in  my  bedde  &  pvlled  me 
with  the  havlter  behynde  the  sayd  Thomas  Jeffaryes  bake  almoste  clene  ovt  of  my 
bede  then  my  mother  cryed  out  &  pullyd  hym  by  the  arme  awaye,  &  my  brother 
rycherd  cryed  out  that  laye  on  the  other  syde  of  me,  &  then  my  father  let  goo  his 
hovlde  &  let  me  alone  &  wente  to  bede. 

I  thynke  vj .  dayes  after  my  necke  greved  me  with  the  pvllyng  of  the  havlter.4 


XLV.    THE  GREAT  BIBLE  CONDEMNED. 

From  Wilkins's  Concilia,  vol.  iii,  pp.  860  sq. 

Convocatio  praelatorum  &  cleri  provinciae  Cantuar.  in  domo  capitulari 
ecclesiae  S.  Pauli  London.  20.  Jannarii,  congregata.  Ex  reg.  convoc.  et 
Excerpt.  Heylinianis,  et  reg.  Cranmer  fol.  9. 

In  prima  hujus  convocations  sessione  sacra,  et  quae  sub  auspiciis  tractari  solent, 
peragebantur.  In  secunda  (Jan.  27)  postquam  Ric.  Gwent,  prolocutor,  esset  con- 
firmatus,  reverendissirruis  ex  parte  regis  exposuit  utrique  domui,  '  Quod  regiae 
intentionis  sit,  quod  ipsi  patres,  praelati,  et  clerus  de  rebus  religionis  lapsis  et 
ruentibus  consulant,  ac  de  remediis  congruis  exhibendis  inter  se  deliberent,  et  quae 
reformanda  et  corrigenda  duxerint,  inter  se  corrigant  et  reforment ;  denuncians  iis, 
quod  in  Testamento  tarn  Veteri  quam  Novo  in  lingua  Anglicana  habentur  multa, 
quae  reformatione  indigent  ;  proinde  velle,  ut  prolocutor  cum  clero  ad  inferiorem 
domum  se  conferant,  et  inter  se  conveniant  de  dictis  libris  examinandis,  quodque 
nonnulli  periti  etiam  designentur  ad  canones  et  alias  leges  de  simonia  vitanda  et 
coercenda  condendos.' 

In  tertia  sessione  (Febr.  3.)  post  discursum  de  versione  Bibliorum  habitum, 
'  reverendissimus  rogavit  singulos,  utrum  sine  scandalo  et  errore  ac  offensione 
manifest  a  Christi  fidelium  magnam  Bibliam  in  Anglico  sermone  tralatam  vellent 
retinere.  Visum  est  majori  parti  eorundem  dictam  Bibliam  non  posse  retineri,  nisi 
prius  debite  castigetur  et  examinetur  juxta  earn  Bibliam,  quae  communiter  in  ecclesia 
Anglicana  legitur.  Postea  prolocutor  et  clerus  comparens,  exhibuerunt  reverendissimo 
quandam  constitutionem  provincialem  per  eos  et  in  vulgari  et  Latino  sermone  con- 
ceptam  de  simoniacis ;  cujus  considerationem  ipse  in  aliud  tempus  distulit,  clerique 
tempus  ad  exhibenda  notata  et  errata  in  Veteri  Testamento  protraxit.' 

3  Enough. 

4  This  is  written  in  the  margin,  as  is  also  the  following  sentence,  part  of  which  has  been 
rendered  illegible  in  mounting  the  leaf: — 'wepyng  tares  .  .  .  vrete  this  to  thynke  .  .  .  lake  of 
knowledge  .  .  .  my  father  and  mother  they  hade  thought  they  had  done  god  good  servis  at  that 
tyme,  I  troste  he  hath  forgeuen  them.' 


The  Great  Bible  Condemned. 


1 1 


/ 


In  quarta  sessione  (Feb.  10)  nihil  actum  est.  In  quinta  (Febr.  13)  'post 
colloquium  inter  episcopos  habitum  de  modo  et  forma  procedendi  in  et  circa  examen 
sacri  voluminis,  prolocutor  intrans  praesentavit  librum,  continentem  notata  per  eos 
ex  Veteri  Testamento  in  diversis  paginis.  quae  commisit  rever.  et  patrum  acri 
judicio  examinanda.  In  coetu  selecto  pro  examinandis  Bibliis,  Novum  Testamentum 
tradebatur  episcopis  Dunelm.  Winton.  Hereford,  Roffen.  et  Westmon.  cum  doctori- 
bus  Wotton,  Day,  Coren,  Wilson,  Leighton,  May  et  aliis  e  domo  inferiori  convoca- 
tionis  :  Vetus  Testamentum  archiepisc.  Ebor.  episcopo  Elien.  cum  Redman,  Taylor, 
Haynes,  Robertson,  Cocks,  etc.  viris  in  Hebraica,  Graeca,  Latina  et  Anglicana 
peritis.  .  .  . 

(Febr.  17)  Prolocutore  autem  intrante,  antequam  djscessissent  membra  ejus, 
episcopus  Winton.  publice  legebat  verba  Latina  in  sacro  volumine  contenta,  quae 
voluit  pro  eorum  germano  et  nativo  intellectu  et  rei  majestate,  quoad  poterit  vel  in 
sua  natura  retineri,  vel  quam  accommodatissime  fieri  possit  in  Anglicum  sermonem 
verti.'     Quaenam  ilia  fuerint  ex  Fullero  (Church  Hist.  p.  236)  docemur. 

Abridged  Translation. 

The  Archbishop's  speech  asks  the  clergy  in  the  king's  name  to  come  to  the  aid 
of  the  Church  in  its  stress,  and  denounces  the  English  Old  and  New  Testament  as 
needing  many  reforms ;  there  was  therefore  to  be  a  meeting  of  the  two  houses  to 
make  arrangements  for  examining  the  said  books.  In  the  third  session  after  a  dis- 
cussion the  Archbishop  asked  members  individually  whether  without  scandal  error 
and  manifest  offence  of  Christ's  faithful  they  voted  to  retain  the  Great  Bible  in  the 
English  speech.  The  majority  resolved  that  the  said  Bible  could  not  be  retained 
until  first  duly  purged  and  examined  side  by  side  with  the  (Latin)  Bible  commonly 
read  in  the  English  Church.  .  .  .  The  day  for  bringing  up  passages  marked  as  erro- 
neous in  the  Old  Testament  was  deferred.  In  the  fifth  session  after  a  conversation 
among  the  Bishops  as  to  the  manner  and  form  of  proceeding  with  the  examination 
of  the  sacred  volume,  the  prolocutor  entered  and  presented  a  book  containing 
passages  out  of  the  Old  Testament  marked  by  the  clergy  in  various  pages, 
which  he  committed  to  be  rigorously  examined  by  the  most  reverend  and  the  fathers 
(i.  e.  the  Archbishop  and  Bishops).  In  committee  for  examining  the  Bible  the  New- 
Testament  was  entrusted  to  the  Bishops  of  Durham,  Winchester,  Hereford,  Roches- 
ter and  Westminster,  with  Doctors  Wotton,  Day,  Coren,  Wilson,  May,  and  others  of 
the  Lower  House  of  Convocation.  The  Old  Testament  to  the  Archbishop  of  York 
and  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  with  Redman,  Taylor,  Haynes,  Robertson,  Cocks,  &c,  men 
skilled  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  and  English.  ...  On  the  prolocutor  entering  before 
they  dissolved,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  publicly  read  the  Latin  words  in  the 
Sacred  Volume  which  he  desired  for  their  germane  "and  native  meaning  and  for  the 
majesty  of  their  matter  might  be  retained  as  far  as  possible  in  their  own  nature  or 
be  turned  into  English  speech  as  closely  as  possible.2 


XLVI.     PREFACE  TO  THE  GENEVA  NEW  TESTAMENT. 
To  the  Reader  Mercie  and  peace  through  Christ  our  Saviour. 

As  the  life  of  a  true  Christian  is  moste  subiect  to  the  reprehension  of  the  worlde  : 
so  all  his  actions,  and  entreprises,  be  they  neuer  so  commendable,  moue  the  wicked 
rather  to  grudge  and  murmure,  then  to  glorifie  God  who  is  autor  of  the  same. 
Which  euil  God  hath  left  to  his  Churche,  as  a  necessarie  exercise,  aswel  that  man 

2  The  words  as  given  by  Fuller  are  :    Ecclesia,  Poenitentia,  Pontifex,  Ancilla,   Contritus, 

Olocausta,  Justitia,  Justificare,  Idiota,  Elementa,  Baptizare,  Martyr,  Adorare,  Dignus,  Sandalium. 

Simplex,  Sapientia,  Pietas,  Presbyter,  Lites,  Servus,  Opera,  Sacrincium,  Tetrarcha,  Sacrarnentum, 

Simulachrum,  Gloria,  Conflictationes,  Ceremonia,  Mysterium,  Religio,  Spiritus  Sanctus,  Spintus, 

Merces,  Confiteor  tibi  Pater,  Panis  propositionis,  Communio,  Perseverare,  Dilectus,  Didragma, 

1  Hospitalitas,  Episcopus,  Gratia,  Charitas,  Tyrannus,  Concupiscentia,  Benedictio,  Humilis,  Humi- 

,  litas,  Scientia,  Gentilis,  Synagoga,  Ejicere,  Misericordia,  Complacui,  Increpare,  Distribueretur, 

Orbis,  Inculpatus,  Senior,  Apocalypsis,  Satisfactio,  Contentio,  Conscientia,  Peccatum,  Peccator, 

Idolum,  Prudentia,  Prudenter,  Cisera,  Apostolus,  Apostolatus,  Egenus,  Stater,  Societas,  Zizania, 

Christus,  Conversari,   Profiteor,  Impositio   manuum,  Idololatria,   Dominus,  Sanctus,  Confessio, 

I  Imitator,  Pascha,  Innumerabilis,  Inenarrabilis,  Infidelis,  Paganus,  Commilito,  Virtutes,  Parabola, 

Magnifico,  Oriens,  Subditus,  Dominationes,  Throni,  Potestates,  Hostia. 


1 1  8         Preface  to  the  Geneva  New  Testament. 


sholde  not  be  puffed  vp  with  opinion  of  the  gifts  that  he  receaueth  of  his  heauenly 
Father  :  as  also  that  seing  how  he  euer  mainteyneth  the  same  in  despite  of  all  out- 
rageous tyrannie,  he  might  be  more  assured  of  Gods  diuine  prouidence,  and  louing 
kyndenes  towards  his  elect.  For  this  cause  we  se  that  in  the  Churche  of  Christ  ther 
are  thre  kyndes  of  men  :  some  are  malicious  despicers  of  the  worde,  and  graces  of 
God,  who  turne  all  things  into  poison,  and  a  farther  hardening  of  their  hearts :  others 
do  not  openly  resiste  and  contemne  the  Gospel,  because  they  are  stroken  as  it  were 
in  a  trance  with  the  maiestie  therof ,  yet  ether  they  quarell  and  cauell,  or  els  deride 
and  mocke  at  whatsoeuer  thing  is  done  for  the  aduancement  of  the  same.  The 
thirde  sort  are  the  simple  lambes,  which  partely  are  already  in  the  folde  of  Christ, 
and  so  heare  willingly  their  Shepeherds  voyce,  and  partly  wandering  astray  by  igno- 
rance, tary  the  tyme  tyll  the  Shepherde  fynde  them  and  bring  them  vnto  his  flocke. 
To  this  kynde  of  people,  in  this  translation  I  chiefly  had  respect,  as  moued  with  zeale, 
conselled  by  the  godly,  and  drawen  by1  occasion,  both  of  the  place  where  God  hath 
appointed  vs  to  dwel,  and  also  of  the  store  of  heauenly  learning  &  iudgement,  which 
so  abundeth  in  this  Citie  of  Geneva,  that  iustely  it  may  be  called  the  patron  and 
mirrour  of  true  religion  and  godlynes.  To  these  therfore  which  are  of  the  flocke  of 
Christ  which  knowe  their  Fathers  wil,  and  are  affectioned  to  the  trueth,  I  rendre 
a  reason  of  my  doing  in  fewe  lines.  First  as  touching  the  perusing  of  the  text, 
it  was  diligently  reuised  by  the  moste  approued  Greke  examples,  and  conference  of 
translations  in  other  tonges  as  the  learned  may  easely  iudge,  both  by  the  faithful 
rendering  of  the  sentence,  and  also  by  the  proprietie  of  the  wordes,  and  perspicuitie 
of  the  phrase.  Forthermore  that  the  Reader  might  be  by  all  meanes  proffited,  I  haue 
deuided  the  text  into  verses  and  sections,  according  to  the  best  editions  in  other 
langages,  and  also,  as  to  this  day  the  ancient  Greke  copies  mencion,  it  was  wont  to 
be  vsed.  And  because  the  Hebrewe  and  Greke  phrases,  which  are  strange  to  rendre 
|  in  other  tongues,  and  also  short,  shulde  not  be  so  harde,  I  haue  sometyme  inter- 
preted them  without  any  whit  diminishing  the  grace  of  the  sense,  as  our  langage  doth 
vse  them,  and  sometyme  haue  put  to  that  worde,  which  lacking  made  the  sentence 
obscure,  but  haue  set  it  in  such  letters  as  may  easely  be  discerned  from  the  commun 
text.  As  concerning  the  Annotations,  wherunto  these  letters,  a,  b,  c,  &c,  leade  vs, 
I  haue  endeuored  so  to  promt  all  therby,  that  both  the  learned  and  others  might  be 
holpen:  for  to  my  knollage  I  haue  omitted  nothing  vnexpounded,  wherby  he  that  is 
anything  exercised  in  the  Scriptures  of  God,  might  iustely  complayn  of  hardenes : 
and  also  in  respect  of  them  that  haue  more  proffited  in  the  same  I  haue  explicat  all 
suche  places  by  the  best  learned  interpreters  ;  as  ether  were  falsely  expounded  by 
some  or  els  absurdely  applyed  by  others  :  so  that  by  this  meanes  both  they  which 
haue  not  abilitie  to  by  the  Commentaries  upon  the  Newe  testament,  and  they  also 
which  haue  not  opportunitie  and  leasure  to  reade  them  because  of  their  prolixitie 
may  vse  this  booke  in  stede  therof,  and  some  tyme  wher  the  place  is  not  greatly 
harde,  I  haue  noted  with  this  marke  ",  that  which  may  serue  to  the  edification  of  the 
Reader  :  adding  also  suche  commone  places,  as  may  cause  him  better  to  take  hede  to  i 
the  doctrine.  Moreouer,  the  diuerse  readings  according  to  diuerse  Greke  copies,  which 
stande  but  in  one  worde,  may  be  knowen  by  this  note  ",  and  if  the  bookes  do  alter 
in  the  sentence  then  is  it  noted  with  this  starre  *,  as  the  cotations  are.  Last  of  all 
remayne  the  arguments,  aswel  they  which  conteyne  the  summe  of  euery  chapter,  as 
the  other  which  are  placed  before  the  bookes  and  epistles  :  wherol  the  commoditie  is 
so  great,  that  they  may  serue  in  stede  of  a  Commentarie  to  the  Reader  :  for  many 
reade  the  Scriptures  with  myndes  to  profnt,  but  because  they  do  not  consider  the 
scope  and  purpose  wherfore  the  holy  Gost  so  writeth  and  to  what  ende  (which  thing 
the  Arguments  do  faithfully  expresse)  they  either  bestowe  their  tyme  without  fruit, 
or  els  defraude  them  selues  of  a  great  deale  which  they  might  atteyne  vnto  otherwise. 
To  the  intent  therfore  that,  not  oneby  they  which  are  already  aduanced  in  the 
knollage  of  the  Scriptures,  but  also  the  simple  and  vnlearned  "might  be  forthered 
hereby,  I  haue  so  moderat  them  with  playnenes  and  breuitie,  that  the  verie  igno- 
rant may  easely  vnderstande  them  and  beare  them  in  memorie.  And  for  this  cause 
I  haue  applied  but  one  argument  to  the  foure  Euangelists,  chiefely  for  because  that 
all  writing  of  one  matter,  thogh  by  euery  one  diuersly  handeled,  they  required  no 
diuersitie  of  arguments.  Thus  in  fewe  wordes  I  haue  declared  as  touching  the 
chiefe  pointes,  beseching  God  so  to  inflame  our  hearts  with  the  desire  to  knowe  his 


1  Misprinted  '  dy  '. 


Preface  to  the  Geneva  New  Testament. 


119 


diuine  wil,  that  we  may  meditate  in  his  holy  worde  both  day  and  night,  wherin  he 
hath  reueiled  it,  and  hauing  atteyned  thervnto  may  so  practise  it  in  all  our  actions, 
that  as  we  growe  in  the  ripenes  of  our  Christian  age,  so  we  may  glorifie  him  more  and 
more  rendring  to  him  eternal  thankes  and  praises  for  his  heauenly  and  inestimable 
giftes  bestowed  vpon  his  Churche,  that  all  thogh  Satan,  Antichrist,  and  all  his 
ennemies  rage  and  bnrste,  yet  are  they  not  able  to  suppresse  them,  nether  wil  he 
diminishe  them  :  for  seing  lie  doth  not  onely  brydel  his  ennemies  furie,  but  causeth 
them  to  defende  and  preserue  his  gifts  for  the  vse  of  his  Churche  (as  we  se  the  Jewes, 
Christs  professed  ennemies  preserue  the  olde  testament  in  moste  integritie)  what 
shulde  we  doute  of  his  bontiful  liberalitie  towards  vs  ?  or  why  do  we  not  rather  with 
all  humilitie  and  submission  of  mynde  obey  him,  loue  and  feare  him  which  is  God 
blessed  for  euer  ?  To  whome  with  the  Sonne  and  holy  Gost  be  praise,  honour  & 
glorie.     Amen. 


XLVII.     PREFACE  TO  THE  GENEVA  BIBLE. 

To  our  Beloved  in  the  Lord  the  Brethren  of  England,  Scotland,  Ireland, 
&c,  Grace,  mercie,  and  peace,  through  Christ  Iesus. 

Besides  the  manifolde  and  continual  benefites  which  almightie  God  bestoweth 
vpon  vs,  bothe  corporal  and  spiritual,  we  are  especially  bounde  (deare  brethren) 
to  giue  him  thankes  without  ceasing  for  his  great  grace  and  vnspeakable  mercies,  in 
that  it  hath  pleased  him  to  call  vs  vnto  this  meruelous  light  of  his  Gospel,  and  merci- 
fully to  regarde  vs  after  so  horrible  backesliding  and  falling  away  from  Christ  to 
Antichrist,  from  light  to  darcknes,  from  the  liuing  God  to  dumme  and  dead  idoles, 
and  that  after  so  cruel  murther  of  Gods  Saintes,  as  alas,  hathe  bene  among  vs,  we  are 
not  altogether  cast  of,  as  were  the  Israelites,  and  many  others  for  the  like,  or  not  so 
manifest  wickednes,  but  receyued  agayne  to  grace  with  moste  euident  signes  and 
tokens  of  Gods  especial  loue  and  fauour.  To  the  intent  therefore  that  we  may  not 
be  vnmyndeful  of  these  great  mercies,  but  seke  by  all  meanes  (according  to  our 
duetie)  to  be  thankeful  for  the  same,  it  behoueth  vs  so  to  walke  in  his  feare  and 
loue,  that  all  the  daies  of  our  life  we  may  procure  the  glorie  of  his  holy  name.  Now 
forasmuche  as  this  thing  chefely  is  atteyned  by  the  knollage  and  practising  of  the 
worde  of  God  (which  is  the  light  to  our  paths,  the  keye  of  the  kingdome  of  heauen, 
our  comfort  in  affliction,  our  shielde  and  sworde  against  Satan,  the  schoole  of  all 
wisdome,  the  glasse  wherein  we  beholde  Gods  face,  the  testimonie  of  his  fauour, 
and  the  only  foode  and  nourishment  of  our  soules)  we  thoght  that  we  colde  bestowe 
our  labours  &  studie  in  nothing  which  colde  be  more  acceptable  to  God  and  com- 
fortable to  his  Churche  then  in  the  translating  of  the  holy  Scriptures  into  our  natiue 
tongue  :  the  which  thing  albeit  that  diuers  heretofore  haue  indeuored  to  atchieue  yet 
considering  the  infancie  of  those  tymes  and  imperfect  knollage  of  the  tongues,  in 
respect  of  this  ripe  age  and  cleare  light  which  God  hath  now  reueiled,  the  trans- 
lations required  greatly  to  be  perused  and  reformed.  Not  that  we  vendicat  any  thing 
to  our  selues  aboue  the  least  of  our  brethren  (for  God  knoweth  with  what  feare  and 
trembling  we  haue  bene  now,  for  the  space  of  two  yeres  and  more  day  and  night 
occupied  herein)  but  being  earnestly  desired,  and  by  diuers,  whose  learning  and 
godynes  we  reuerence,  exhorted,  and  also  incouraged  by  the  ready  willes  of  suche, 
whose  heartes  God  likewise  touched,  not  to  spare  any  charges  for  the  fortherance  of 
suche  a  benente  and  fauour  of  God  toward  his  Churche  (thogh  the  tyme  then  was 
moste  dangerous  and  the  persecution  sharpe  and  furious)  we  submitted  our  selues  at 
length  to  their  godly  iudgementes,  and  seing  the  great  oportunitie  and  occasions, 
which  God  presented  vnto  vs  in  this  Churche,1  by  reason  of  so  many  godly  and 
learned  men  ;  and  suche  diuersities  of  translations  in  diuers  tongues,  we  undertoke 
this  great  and  wonderful  worke  (with  all  reuerence,  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  as 
intreating  the  worde  of  God,  whereunto  we  thinke  our  selues  vnsufticient )  which  now 
God  according  to  his  diuine  prouidence  and  mercie  hath  directed  to  a  moste  pros- 
perous end.  And  this  we  may  with  good  conscience  protest,  that  we  haue  in  euery 
point  and  worde,  according  to  the  measure  of  that  knollage  which  it  pleased  al  mightie 


1  i.e.  at  Geneva. 


i  2  o  Preface  to  the  Geneva  Bible. 

God  to  giue  vs,  faithfully  rendred  the  text,  and  in  all  hard  places  moste  syncerely 
expounded  the  same.  For  God  is  our  witnes  that  we  haue  by  all  meanes  indeuored 
to  set  forthe  the  puritie  of  the  worde  and  right  sense  of  the  holy  Gost  for  the 
edifying  of  the  brethren  in  faith  and  charitie. 

Now  as  we  haue  chiefely  obserued  the  sense,  and  laboured  alwaies  to  restore  it 
to  all  integritie,  so  haue  we  moste  reuerently  kept  the  proprietie  of  the  wordes, 
considering  that  the  Apostles  who  spake  and  wrote  to  the  Gentiles  in  the  Greke 
tongue,  rather  constrayned  them  to  the  liuely  phrase  of  the  Ebrewe,  then  entreprised 
farre  by  mollifying  their  langage  to  speake  as  the  Gentils  did.  And  for  this  and 
other  causes  we  haue  in  many  places  reserued  the  Ebrewe  phrases,  notwithstanding 
that  thei  may  seeme  Somewhat  hard  in  their  eares  that  are  not  wel  practised  and 
also  delite  in  the  swete  sounding  phrases  of  the  holy  Scriptures.  Yet  lest  ether  the 
;  simple  shulde  be  discouraged,  or  the  malicious  haue  any  occasion  of  iust  cauillation, 
j  seing  some  translations  read  after  one  sort,  and  some  after  another,  whereas  all  may 
serue  to  good  purpose  and  edification,  we  haue  in  the  margent  noted  that  diuersitie 
of  speache  or  reading  which  may  also  seme  agreable  to  the  mynde  of  the  holy  Gost 
and  propre  for  our  langage  with  this  marke  x. 

Agayne  where  as  the  Ebrewe  speache  semed  hardly  to  agre  with  ours,  we  haue 
noted  it,  in  the  margent  after  this  sort",  vsing  that  which  was  more  intelligible. 
And  albeit  that  many  of  the  Ebrewe  names  be  altered  from  the  olde  text,  and 
restored  to  the  true  writing  and  first  original,  whereof  thei  haue  their  signification, 
yet  in  the  vsual  names  litle  is  changed  for  feare  of  troubling  the  simple  readers. 
Moreouer  whereas  the  necessitie  of  the  sentence  required  any  thing  to  be  added  (for 
suche  is  the  grace  and  proprietie  of  the  Ebrewe  and  Greke  tongues,  that  it  can  not 
but  ether  by  circumlocution,  or  by  adding  the  verbe  or  some  worde  be  vnderstand 
of  them  that  are  not  wel  practised  therein)  we  haue  put  it  in  the  text  with  another 
kynde  of  lettre,  that  it  may  easel}*  be  discerned  from  the  common  lettre.  As  touching 
the  diuision  of  the  verses,  we  haue  followed  the  Ebrewe  examples,  which  haue  so 
euen  from  the  begynning  distinct  them.  Which  thing  as  it  is  moste  profitable  for 
memorie  :  so  doeth  it  agre  with  the  best  translations,  and  is  moste  easie  to  finde 
out  both  by  the  best  Concordances,  and  also  by  the  cotations  which  we  haue  dily- 
gently  herein  perused  and  set  forthe  by  this  starre  *.  Besides  this,  the  principal 
matters  are  noted  and  distincted  by  this  marke  *[[.  Yea  and  the  argumentes  bothe 
for  the  booke  and  for  the  chapters  with  the  numbre  of  the  verse  are  added,  that  by 
all  meanes  the  reader  might  be  holpen.  For  the  which  cause  also  we  haue  set  ouer 
the  head  of  euery  page  ■some  notable  worde  or  sentence  which  may  greatly  further 
aswel  for  memorie,  as  for  the  chief  point  of  the  page.  And  considering  how  hard 
a  thing  it  is  to  vnderstand  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  what  errors,  sectes  and  heresies  i 
growe  dailie  for  lacke  of  the  true  knollage  thereof,  and  how  many  are  discouraged 
(as  thei  pretend)  because  thei  can  not  atteine  to  the  true  and  simple  meaning  of  the 
same,  we  haue  also  indeuored  bothe  by  the  diligent  reading  of  the  best  commentaries, 
and  also  by  the  conference  with  the  godly  and  learned  brethren,  to  gather  brief , 
annotations  vpon  all  the  hard  places,  aswel  for  the  vnderstanding  of  suche  wordes  as 
are  obscure,  and  for  the  declaration  of  the  text,  as  for  the  application  of  the  same  as  \ 
may  most  apperteine  to  Gods  glorie  and  the  edification  of  his  Churche.  Forthermore 
whereas  certeyne  places  in  the  bookes  of  Moses,  of  the  Kings  and  Ezekiel  semed  so  ' 
darke  that  by  no  description  thei  colde  be  made  easie  to  the  simple  reader,  we  haue 
so  set  them  forthe  with  figures  and  notes  for  the  ful  declaration  thereof,  that  thei 
which  can  not  by  iudgement,  being  holpen  by  the  annotations  noted  by  the  letters 
a  b  c.  &c.  attevn.therevnto,  yet  by  the  perspectiue,  and  as  it  were  by  the  eye  may 
sufficiently  knowe  the  true  meaning  of  all  suche  places.  YVherevnto  also  we  haue 
added  certeyne  mappes  of  Cosmographie  which  necessarely  serue  for  the  perfect 
vnderstanding  and  memorie  of  diuers  places  and  countreys,  partely  described,  and 
partely  by  occasion  touched,  bothe  in  the  olde  and  newe  Testament.  Finally  that 
nothing  might  lacke  which  might  be  boght  by  labors,  for  the  increase  of  knowlage 
and  fortherance  of  Gods  glorie,  we  haue  adjoyned  two  moste  profitable  tables,  the 
one  seruing  for  the  interpretation  of  the  Ebrewe  names  :  and  the  other  contevning 
all  the  chefe  and  principal  matters  of  the  whole  Bible :  so  that  nothing  (as  we  trust) 
that  any  colde  iustely  desire,  is  omitted.  Therefore,  as  brethren  that  are  partakers 
of  the  same  hope  and  saluation  with  vs,  we  beseche  you,  that  this  riche  perle  and 
inestimable  treasure  may  not  be  offred  in  vayne,  but  as  sent  from  God  to  the 
people  of  God.  for  the  increase  of  his  kingdome,  the  comfort  of  his  Churche,  and 


Preface  to  the  Geneva  Bible. 


121 


discharge  of  our  conscience,  whome  it  hath  pleased  him  to  raise  vp  for  this  purpose, 
so  you  wolde  willingly  receyue  the  worde  of  God,  earnestly  studie  it,  and  in  all  your 
life  practise  it,  that  you  may  now  appeare  in  dede  to  be  the  people  of  God,  not 
walking  any  more  according  to  this  worlde,  but  in  the  frutes  of  the  Spirit,  that 
God  in  vs  may  be  full}'  glorified  through  Christ  Iesus  our  Lord,  who  lyueth  and 
reigneth  for  euer.     Amen.     From  Geneua,  10  April.  1560. 

XLVIII.     PRIVILEGE  AND  LICENCE  TO  JOHN  BODLEY  FOR  PRINTING 
THE  GENEVA  BIBLE  FOR  SEVEN  YEARS. 

Printed  from  the  original,  Patent  Roll,  3  Elizabeth,  part  13  (34),  r. 

Elizabeth  by  the  grace  of  god,  &c,  To  all  maner  of  printers  booke-sellers  and 
other  our  officers  ministers  and  subiectes  greating.  We  do  youe  to  understande 
that  of  our  grace  especiall.  We  haue  graunted  and  geven  priuiledge  and  licence 
and  by  thes  presentes  for  us  our  heires  and  successors  do  graunte  and  geue  priuilege 
and  lycence  vnto  our  welbeloued  subiecte  John  Bodeleigh  and  his  assignes  for  terme 
of  seven  yeares  next  ensuyng  the  date  of  thes  our  lettres  patent  to  imprint  or  cause 
to  be  emprinted  the  Inglysshe  bible  with  annotacions  faithfully  translated  and 
fynished  in  thes  present  yeare  of  our  lord  god  a  thousand  fyve  hundreth  and 
threscore,  and  dedicated  to  vs.  straightly  forbidding  and  commanding  by  thes 
presentes  all  and  singuler  our  subiectes  aswell  printers  as  bokesellers  as  all  other 
person  within  our  Realmes  and  dominions  whatsoever  they  be,  in  anie  maner  to 
imprint  or  cause  to  be  emprinted  anie  of  the  forseid  englisshe  bibles  that  the  said 
John  Bodeleigh  shal  by  auctoritie  of  this  our  licence  imprint  or  cause  to  be  emprinted 
or  any  parte  of  them,  but  onely  the  said  John  Bodeleigh  and  his  assignes  vpon  payne 
of  our  high  Indignacion  and  displeasure,  And  that  euery  offender  theren  shall  forfeit 
to  our  vse  fortie  shillinges  of  lawfull  money  of  Englond  for  euery  suche  bible  or 
bibles  at  anie  tyme  so  imprinted  contrary  to  the  true  meanyng  of  this  our  presente 
licence  and  priuilege,  ouer  and  besides  all  suche  booke  or  bookes  so  imprinted  to  be 
forfeited  to  whom  soeuer  shall  susteyne  the  charges  and  sue  the  said  forfeiture  on 
our  behalf.  Prouided  that  the  bible  to  be  emprinted  may  be  so  ordered  in  the 
edicion  thereof  as  may  be  seme  expedient  by  the  aduise  of  our  trusty  and  welbeloued 
the  bisshopps  of  Canterbory  and  London.1  In  witnes  whereof  &c.  Witnes  the  quene 
at  Westminster  the  viij  day  of  Januarye.2    per  breue  de  priuato  sigillo. 

XLIX.     PARKER  AND  GRINDAL  ON  THE  RENEWAL  OF 
BODLEY'S  PRIVILEGE. 

From  British  Museum,  Lansdowne  MS.  viii.  Art.  82  [p.  205]. 

Being  enformed  by  this  berer  John  Bodleygh  that  vppon  his  late  sute  to  you 
for  the  renewing  of  his  privilege  with  longer  tearme,1  for  the  reimprintinge  of  the  late 
Geneva  Bible  by  him  and  his  associates  sett  foorthe,  you  suspended  to  give  your 
furderaunce  vntill  you  had  hearde  owre  advise.  So  it  is  that  we  thinke  so  well  of 
the  first  impression,  and  reviewe  of  those  whiche  have  sithens  travailed  therin,  that 
we  wishe  it  wold  please  you  to  be  a  meane  that  twelve  yeres  longer  tearme  maye  be 
by  speciall  privilege  graunted  him,  in  consideracion  of  the  charges  by  him  and  his 
associates  in  the  first  impression,  and  the  reviewe  sithens  susteyned.2  For  thoughe 
one  other  speciall  bible  for  the  churches  be  meant  by  vs  to  be  set  forthe  as  convenient 
tyme  and  leysor  hereafter  will  permytte  :   yet  shall  it  nothing  hindre  but  rather  do 

XLVIII.  '  In  the  absence  of  any  other  explanation  of  the  failure  of  John  Bodley  to  make 
any  use  of  this  licence  it  seems  reasonable  to  attribute  it  to  this  clause,  which  enabled  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  Bishop  of  London  to  make  any  conditions,  such  as  the  omission 
of  notes  which  they  considered  objectionable,  that  they  might  please. 

2  The  year  being  reckoned  from  Lady  Day,  the  date  January  8  [1561]  would  be  the  same  year 
as  that  in  which  the  Geneva  Bible  was  printed  (1560). 

XLIX.  '  Over  four  of  the  seven  years  for  which  Bodley  had  obtained  a  privilege  had  now 
elapsed,  and  he  clearly  wanted  to  keep  his  rights  alive  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  come  to  terms 
with  the  Archbishop. 

2  This  suggests  that  the  Geneva  Bible  had  been  revised,  at  Bodley 's  expense,  in  the  hope  of 
meeting  the  Archbishop's  wishes. 


122  Renewal  of  Bodley's  Privilege. 


moche  good  to  have  diversitie  of  translations  and  readinges.  And  if  his  licence, 
herafter  to  be  made,  goe  simplye  foorthe  without  proviso  of  our  oversight  as  we 
thinke  it  maye  so  passe  well  ynoughe,3  yet  shall  we  take  suche  ordre  in  writing  withe 
the  partie,  that  no  impression  shall  passe  but  by  owr  direcion,  consent,  and  advise. 
Thus  ending  we  commende  you  to  Allmightie  god.  From  Lambethe  this  ixth  of 
Marche  1565. 

Yor  in  Christe, 
Matthue  Cantuar 

Edm.  London.4 

L.    THE  PREPARATION  OF  THE  BISHOPS'  BIBLE. 
A.  Letter  of  Richard  Cox,  Bishop  of  Ely,  to  Cecil. 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Domestic  State  Papers,  Elizabeth,  vol.  xxi,  Article  18). 

A  nother  thing  ther  is  worthy  to  be  consydered,  the  translation  of  the  bible  to 
be  committed  to  mete  men  and  to  be  vewed  ouer  and  amended.  I  called  apon  it  j 
in  bothe  my  masters  tymes  sed  frustra.  Yet  god  be  praised,  ye  haue  men  hable 
to  do  it  thoroughly.  Thus  muche  I  signifie  to  you  because  god  hath  apoynted  you 
a  speciall  instrumente  to  the  furtheraunce  of  his  heavenly  truthe,  vnder  so  gratiouse 
a  soverayn,  who  I  trust  doth  not  mislyke  the  apologie 

From  Downham  the  xix  of  January  1561. 

Your  hartyly  assured 

Richarde  Ely.1 
B.  Parker  invites  Cecil  to  take  part  in  the  Revision. 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Domestic  State  Papers,  Elizabeth,  vol.  xli,  Article  33). 

Sir  I  haue  destributed  the  bible  in  partes  to  dyuerse  men,  I  am  desierus  yf  ye  | 
coud  spare  so  moche  leysur  eyther  in  mornyng  or  evenyng :  we  had  one  epistle  of ; 
S.  Paul  or  peter,  or  Jamys  of  your  pervsinge  to  thentent  that  ye  maye  be  one  of  the  j 
buylders  of  this  good  worke  in  christes  churche,  although  otherwise  we  account  youe  j 
a  comon  paterne  to  christes  blessed  word  &  religion,  thus  God  kepe  your  honor  in  1 
helthe,  from  my  house  this  xxvj  of  novembre 

Your  honors 

Matth.  Cant.1 
C.    Strype's  Summary   of  other   Correspondence. 

From  the  Life  and  Acts  of  Matthew  Parker.      By  John  Strype,  Oxford,  182 1,  vol.  i,  pp.  415-17. 

Edwin,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  who.  as  he  was  an  excellent  preacher,  so  a  man 
well  skilled  in  the  original  languages,  was  one  of  the  Bishops  appointed  to  this 
work.  His  part  being  finished,  he  sent  it  back  to  the  Archbishop,  with  his  letter 
dated  from  Worcester,  Feb.  6.  Which,  because  it  may  give  us  some  light  into  this 
good  design,  I  will  here  set  down. 

3  i.  e.  the  clause  in  the  original  privilege  '  Prouided  that  the  bible  to  be  emprinted  may  be  so 
ordered  in  the  edicion  thereof  as  may  seme  expedient  by  the  aduise  of  our  trusty  and  welbeloued 
the  bisshopps  of  Canterbory  and  London '  might  be  omitted — a  concession,  perhaps  to  Puritan 
feelings,  which  Parker  owing  to  the  strength  of  his  position  could  afford  to  make. 

*  Addressed  :  '  To  the  honorable  Sir  William  Cecill  knight  principall  Secretarie  to  the  Quenes 
Maiestie  '  ;  endorsed  :  '  9  Martii  1565.  Archb.  of  Cantuar  &  B.  of  Lond.  for  John  Bodlegh  for 
printing  of  the  Geneva  bible.' 

L.  A.  '  Addressed:  '  To  the  most  honorable  Sir  William  Cecill  knight  Secretary  to  the  Quenes 
maiestie';  endorsed  in  two  hands.  '  19  Januar.  B.  of  Ely  &  my  master.  In  commendacion  of 
Apologia  [pro]  Ecclesia  Anglicana.  1561.' 

B.  •  Addressed  :  '  To  ye  right  honorable  Sir  \V.  Cecill  principal  Secretary  to  the  Queens 
Maiestie';  endorsed  :  '  26  Novembre  1566.  Archb.  of  Cantuar  to  my  master.  Translacion  of 
ye  Bible.' 


The  Preparation  of  the  Bishops'  Bible. 


123 

'  My  duty  remembered  ;  According  to  your  Grace's  letter  of  instruction,  I  have 
perused  the  book  you  sent  me,  and  with  good  diligence :  having  also,  in  conference 
with  some  other,  considered  of  the  same,  in  such  sort,  I  trust,  as  your  Grace  will 
not  mislike  of.  I  have  sent  up  with  it  my  Clerk,  whose  hand  I  used  in  writing  forth 
the  corrections  and  marginal  notes.  When  it  shall  please  your  Grace  to  set  over 
the  Book  to  be  viewed  by  some  one  of  your  Chaplains,  my  said  Clerk  shall  attend 
a  day  or  two,  to  make  it  plain  unto  him,  how  my  notes  are  to  be  placed. 

'  In  mine  opinion,  your  Grace  shall   do   well  to   make  the  whole  Bible  to  be 

diligently  surveyed  by  some  well  learned,  before  it  be  put  to  print ;  and  also  to  have 

J  skilful  and  diligent  correctors  at  the  printing  of  it,  that  it  may  be  done  in  such 

;  perfection,  that  the  adversaries  can  have  no  occasion  to  quarrel  with  it.     Which 

thing  will  require  a  time.     Sed  sat  cito,  si  sat  bene.     The  setters  forth  of  this  our 

'common    translation    followed    Munster1   too    much,   who    doubtless    was  a  very 

negligent  man  in  his  doings,  and  often  swerved  very  much  from  the  Hebrew. 

'  Thus,  trusting  that  your  Grace  will  take  in  good  part  my  trifles,  wherein  wanted 
no  good  will,  I  commend  the  same  to  the  grace  of  Almighty  God.  From  my  house 
at  Worcester. 

'  Your  Grace's  in  Christ  at  commandment, 

'  Ed.  Wigorn.' 

And  in  another  letter,  the  same  pious  Bishop  put  the  Archbishop  in  mind  of  | 
this  great  work,  to  proceed  earnestly  forward  in  it.     '  Your  Grace,'  said  he,  '  should 
much  benefit  the  Church,  in  hastening  forward  the  Bible  which  you  have  in  hand : 
thosethat  we  have  be  not  only  false  printed,  but  also  give  great  offence  to  many,  by 
reason  of  the  depravity  in  reading.' 

To  Guest,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  the  Archbishop  sent  the  Book  of  Psalms  to  revise  : 

j  and  he  sent  it  back  again  with  his  notes  and  advertisements,  as  the  Bishop  of 

'  Worcester  had  done.     In  his  letter  to  the  Archbishop  he  said,  '  he  had  not  altered 

!  the  translation  but  where  it  gave  occasion  of  an  error.     As  at  the  first  Psalm,  at  the 

'■  beginning,  I  turn  the  preterperfect  tense  into  the  present  tense  :  because  the  sense  is 

too  harsh  in  the  preterperfect  tense.     Where  in  the  New  Testament  one  piece  of 

!  a  Psalm  is  reported,  I  translate  it  in  the  Psalms  according  to  the  translation  thereof 

in  the  New  Testament,  for  the  avoiding  of  the  offence  that  may  rise  to  the  people 

upon  divers  translations.2    Where  two  great  letters  be  joined  together,  or  where  one 

great  letter  is  twice  put,  it  signifieth  that  both  the  sentences  or  the  words  be 

expounded  together.' 

To  Parkhurst,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  the  Archbishop  sent  another  part  of  the  Bible, 
to  make  his  notes  and  advertisements  upon.  Who  wrote  back  to  the  Archbishop, 
that  he  would  travail  therein  with  such  diligence  and  expedition  as  he  might. 

Davies,  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  had  another  portion.     And  he  wrote  to  the  Arch- 
bishop that  he  was  in  hand  with  that  part  of  the  Bible  he  sent  him.     And  again,  not 
long  after,  in  the  vear  1566,  he  wrote  the  Archbishop,  that  he  would  finish  it  with  as 
much  speed  as  he"  could  ;  and  that  he  bestowed,  for  his  performance  of  the  same,  all 
'  such  time  as  he  could  spare. 

This  Bishop  was  now  very  busy  in  translating  the  Bible  into  Welsh,  together  with 
William  Salisbury,  Bishop  of  Man,  a  man  very  learned  in  the  British  antiquities. 

This  business  in  correcting  the  former  translation  of  the  Bible,  went  forward 
along  the  next  year  1566.  Cox,  Bishop  of  Ely,  who  seems  to  have  had  another  part 
of  the  holy  Scripture  committed  to  him,  in  a  letter  dated  May  3,  1566,  had  these 
words  concerning  this  noble  work  :  '  I  trust  your  Grace  is  well  forward  with  the 
Bible  by  this  time.  I  perceive  the  greatest  burden  will  lie  upon  your  neck,  touching 
care  and  travail.  I  would  wish  that  such  usual  words  as  we  English  people  be 
acquainted  with  might  still  remain  in  their  form  and  sound,  so  far  forth  as  the 
Hebrew  will  well  bear  ;  ink-horn  terms  to  be  avoided.  The  translation  of  the  verbs 
in  the  Psalms  to  be  used  uniformly  in  (me  tense,  &c.  And  if  ye  translate  bonitas  or 
miser  icordia,  to  use  it  likewise  in  all  places  of  the  Psalms,  &c.  God  send  this  good 
travail  a  blessed  success.' 

1  i.e.  Sebastian  Miinster,  the  author  of  a  new  Latin  version  of  the  Old  Testament,  first 
printed  at  Basel,  1534-5.  ,  , 

2  Probably  because  these  views  did  not  commend  themselves  to  Parker,  Bishop  Guest  s  worK 
seems  not  to  have  been  used.     See  Introduction,  p.  21 1. 


T 


LI.     PARKER  ANNOUNCES  TO  CECIL  THE  COMPLETION  OF 
THE  BISHOPS'  BIBLE. 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Domestic  State  Papers,  Elizabeth,  vol.  xlvii,  No.  78).1 

Salutem  in  Christo.     Sir  I  have  receyved  your  lettres,  and  shall  performe  that  i 
yowe  desier,  concerning  Mr.  Welles  when  he  cometh  to  me  or  any  of  his  factors, ; 
I  here  his  knowledge  and  honestye  to  be  well  reported.     Sir,  after  much  toyle  of  the 
Printer  and  sum  Labors  taken  of  sum  parties  for  the  setting  owte  and  Recognising  j 
of  the  Englishe  bible,  we  be  nowe  come  to  a  conclusion  for  the  substance  of  the 
booke.     Sum  ornamentes  of  the  same2  be  yet  lacking,  prayeng  your  Honor  to  beare 
in  pacience  till  yt  be  fully  reedy.     I  do  meane  by  gods  grace,  yf  my  health  will  serve 
me  better  than  yt  is  at  this  tyme,  to  present  the  Quenes  highnes  with  the  first,  as  : 
sone  as  I  can  here  her  Maiestie  to  be  come  to  Hampton  Courte  which  we  here  will  be 
within  eight  or  nyne  dayes.     Which  god  prosper,  and  sent  to  your  honor  grace  and 
health  as  I  wishe  to  my  selfe.     From  my  howse  at  Lambith,  this  xxij  of  September 

Your  Honors  loving  Frende 

Matth.  Cant. 


LII.     PRESENTATION  OF  THE  BISHOPS'  BIBLE  TO  THE  QUEEN, 
AND  STORY   OF  THE  REVISION. 

A.    Archbishop  Parker  to  Cecil. 

From  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Domestic  State  Papers,  Elizabeth,  vol.  xlviii,  6).1 

Sir  after  my  right  hartie  Comendacions,  I  was  in  purpose  to  have  offred  to  the 
Quenes  highnes  the  first  fruites  of  our  Labors  in  the  recognising  the  Bible,  But 
I  feale  my  health  to  be  such,  that  as  yet  I  dare  not  adventure.  Whervppon  for  that 
I  wold  not  have  the  Queens  highnes  and  your  honor  to  be  long  delayed,  nor  the 
poore  printer  after  his  great  charges  to  be  longer  deferred,  I  have  caused  one  booke 
to  be  bound  as  you  see  which  I  hartelye  pray  vow  to  present  favorablie  to  the 
Queens  Maiestie,  with  your  frendlie  excuse  of  my  disabylitie,  in  not  coming  my  self. 
I  haue  also  wrytten  to  the  Queens  Maiestie,  the  Copie  wherof  I  have  sent  yow  the 
rather  to  vse  your  oportunitie  of  deliuerie,  yf  your  Prudence  shall  not  think  them 
tolerable.  And  bicause  I  wold  yow  knewe  all,  I  here  send  yow  a  note  to  signifie : 
who  first  travelled  in  the  diuerse  bookes,  though  after  them  sum  other  perusing  was 
had,  the  lettres  of  their  names  be  partlie  affixed  in  the  ende  of  their  bookes,  Which 
I  thought  a  polecie  to  showe  them,  to  make  them  more  diligent,  as  Awnswerable  for 
their  doinges.  I  have  remembred  yow  of  such  observacions  as  my  first  lettres  sent  j 
to  them  (by  your  advise)  did  signifie.  Yt  may  be  that  in  so  long  a  worke  thinges  I 
have  scaped  which  may  be  Lawfull  to  euerie  man  cum  bona  venia  to  amend  whan 
they  find  them  non  omnia  possumus  omnes.  The  Printer  hath  honestlie  done  his 
diligence,  yf  your  honor  wold  obteine  of  the  Queens  highnes,  that  the  edicion  might 
be  Licensed  and  only  comended  in  publike  reading  in  Churches,  to  drawe  to  one 
vniformitie,  yt  weare  no  greate  cost  to  the  most  parishes  and  a  Relief  to  him  for  his 
great  charges  susteined.  The  Psalters  might  remayn  in  Queres  as  they  be  much 
multiplied  but  wher  of  ther  owne  accord  they  wold  vse  this  Translacion.2    Sir, 

LI.  1  Addressed  :  '  To  the  right  honorable  Sir  William  Cicell  knight  Principall  Secretarye  to  the 
Quenes  maiestie.  At  the  Cowrte  ' ;  endorsed  :  '  22  Septembre  1 568.  Tharchbishop  of  Canterbury 
to  my  Master.    Bible.' 

•  Almost  certainly  the  engraved  title-page  and  portraits  of  Leicester  and  Cecil  (now  Lord 
Burghley),  which  would  be  printed  by  a  separate  impression. 

LII.  '  Addressed :  '  To  the  right  honorable  Sir  William  Cecyll  knight  principall  Secretary  to 
the  Queen's  maiestie  and  one  of  hir  prevy  counseyle  be  it  deliuered';  endorsed:  '  5  October 
1568,  Archb.  of  Canterbury  to  my  master  with  the  bible  newly  sett  forth.' 

2  i.e.  Churches  which  had  bought  Psalters  of  the  Great  Bible  version  for  use  in  choir  were 
not  to  be  put  to  the  expense  of  buying  new  ones  of  the  Bishops'  version.  In  the  second  edition 
(1572)  the  hold  which  the  Psalter  of  the  Great  Bible  had  established  was  further  recognized  by 
that  version  being  printed  as  well  as  the  newer  one,  and  it  has  continued  the  liturgical  psalter 
unto  this  dav. 


Presentation  of  the  Bishop's  Bible. 


125 


I  pray  your  honor  be  a  meane  that  Jug  only  may  have  the  preferment  of  this 
edicion,3  for  yf  any  other  shuld  Lurche  him  to  steale  from  him  thes  copies,4  he 
weare  a  great  Loser  in  this  first  doing,5  And  Sir  without  doubt  he  hath  well  deserved 
to  be  preferred.  A  man  wold  not  thinke  that  he  had  devoured  so  much  payne  as 
he  hath  susteined.  Thus  I  wish  your  honor  all  grace  vertue  and  helthe  as  to  my 
self.     From  my  house  at  Lambith  this  fifth  of  October. 

Your  Honors  loving  Frend 

Matthue  Cantuar. 


B.  Archbishop  Parker  to  Queen  Elizabeth. 

Printed  from  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Domestic  State  Papers,  Elizabeth, 

vol.  xlviii,  6,  I). 

After  my  most  Lowlie  submission  to  your  Maiestie,  with  my  hartie  reioyce  of 

your  prosperous  progresse  and  retorne,  pleaseth  yt  your  highnes  to  accept  in  good 

parte,  the  endevor  and  diligence,  of  sum  of  vs  your  chapleins,  my  brethren  the 

-  Bisshoppes,  with  other  certaine  Learned  men,  in  this  newe  edicion  of  the  bible, 

j  I  trust  by  comparisone  of  divers  translacions  put  forth  in  your  realme  will  apeare 

I  as  well  the  workemanshippe  of  the  printer,  as  the  Circumspection  of  all  such  as  have 

travelled  in  the  recognition.     Amonge  divers  observations  which  have  bin  regarded 

1  in  this  recognition  one  was,  not  to  make  yt  varye  much  from  that  translation  which 

1  was  comonlve  vsed  by  Publike  order,  except  wher  eyther  the  verytie  of  the  hebrue 

&  greke  moved  alteration,  or  wher  the  text  was  by  sum  negligence  mutilated  from 

the  originall.     So  that  I  trust  your  Loving  subiectes  shall  se  good  cause  in  your 

\  Maiesties  dayes  to  thanke  god,  and  to  reioyce,  to  see  this  his  treasor  of  his  holy 

I  worde,  so  set  oute,  as  may  be  proved  (So  farforth  as  mortall  mans  knowledge  can 

attaine  to,  or  as  farforth  as  god  hath  hitherto  revealed)  to  be  faithfully  handeled  in 

the  vulgar  tonge,  besechinge  your  highnes,  that  yt  may  have  your  gracious  favor, 

License  and  protection  to  be  com[un]icated  abrode,  aswell  for  that  in  many  Churches 

I  they  want  their  bookes,  and  have  longe  tyme  loked  for  this  :  as  for  that  in  certaine 

places  be  publikely  vsed  sum  Translations  Which  have  not  byn  Labored  in  your 

Realme  having  inspersed  diverse  preiudicall  notis  which  might  have  ben  also  well 

spared.1     I  have  byn  bolde  in  the  forniture  with  fewe  wordes  to  expresse  the  incom- 

iperable  valewe  of  this  Treasor  amonge  many  thinges  good  profitable  and  bewtifull. 

i  ye  have  in  possession,  yet  this  only  necessarie,  whereof  so  to  thinke,  and  so  to 

1  beleve,  maketh  your  Maiestie  blessed,  not  only  here  in  this  your  gouernance,  but  yt 

shall  advance  your  maiestie  to  attaine  at  the  last  the  blisse  everlastinge,  which  after 

a  longe  prosperous  raigne  over  vs,  Almightie  god  send  yow,  as  certainelie  he  will,  for 

cherishinge  that  Juell  which  he  loveth  best,  of  which  is  pronounced  that  Quomo- 

documque  Celum  et  terra  transibunt  verbum  tamen  domini  manebit  in  eternum. 

God  preserve  your  highnes  in  all  grace  and  felicitie. 

C.    Parker's  Note  as  to  the  Translators.1 

Printed  from  the  original  in  the  Record  Office  (Domestic  State  Papers,  Elizabeth, 

vol.  xlviii,  6,  II). 


The  sum  of  the  scripture 

The  Tables  of  Christes  line 

The  argument  of  the  scriptures 

The  first  Preface  into  the  whole  Bible 

The  Preface  into  the  psalter 

The  preface  into  the  new  Testament 

Genesis  )   ,,  n 

Exodus  fM"Cant- 

Leviticus)  n 

Numerus|Cantuarie- 

Deuteronomius.     W.  Exon. 


.M.  Cant. 


3  '  edition  '  seems  here  used  in  the  sense  of  '  version  '. 

'  The  word  '  translacion  '  has  been  struck  out  before  '  doing  ' 


4  i.  e.  copyrights. 


B.  '  The  allusion  is  of  course  to  the  Geneva  Bible. 


C.  '  See  Introduction,  p.  20. 


126  Presentation  of  the  Bishops'  Bible. 


Josue 

Judicum  n   it 

Ruth  '        -ueneuen. 

Regum  i,  2   J 

Regum  3,  4  )  „  ,   .... 

Paralipomena  i,  2  ,  Ed.  \\lgorn. 

Proverbial  Cantuarie. 
Ecclesiastes  )   ,,     ,  ,    .  . 
Cantica         I  Cantabngie. 

Ecclesiasticus  . 
Susanna  T   vr 

Baruc  M"  Norwlc- 

Maccabeorum ) 
Esdras      \ 

Tobias       ."  W"  Cicestren. 

Sapiencia  ) 

Esaias  i 

Hierimias  •  R.  Winton. 

Lamentaciones  j 

Ezechiel )  T   T  .  ,     „  n 

Daniel     }  J- Lich.  &  Covent. 

Sour:  M.  Cant. 

{-u.cas       '  Ed.  Peterb. 
Johannes) 

ActaApostolorum!    R.  Eliensis. 

Ad  Komanos  j 

i  epistola  Corin.     D.  Westmon. 

2  epistola  Corin. 

Ad  Gallathas 

Ad  Ephesios  | 

Ad  Philepenses 

Ad  Collossenses  \  M  r„„f 

Ad   1  hessalonicenses 

Ad  Timothium 

Ad  Titum  j 

Ad  Philemonem 

Ad  Hebreos 

Epistolae  Canonicae  .   x   Lincoln. 

Apocahpsis  I 

Observations  respected  of  the  Translators. 

Firste  to  followe  the  Commune  Englishe  Translacion.  vsed  in  the  Churches  and 
not  to  receed  from  yt  but  wher  yt  varieth  manifestlye  from  the  Hebrue  or  Greke 
originall. 

Item  to  vse  such  sections  and  devisions  in  the  Textes  as  Pagnine  in  his  Transla- 
cion vseth,  &  for  the  veritie  of  the  Hebrue  to  followe  the  said  Pagnine  and  Munster 
specially,  And  generally  others  learned  in  the  tonges. 

Item  to  make  no  bitter  notis  vppon  any  text,  or  yet  to  set  downe  any  determina- 
cion  in  places  of  controversie. 

Item  to  note  such  Chapters  and  places  as  conteineth  matter  of  Genealogies  or 
other  such  places  not  edefieng,  with  some  strike  or  note  that  the  Reader  may  eschue 
them  in  his  publike  readinge. 

Item  that  all  such  wordes  as  soundeth  in  the  Okie  Translacion  to  any  offence  of 
I.ightnes  or  obscenitie  be  expressed  with  more  convenient  termes  and  phrases. 

The  printer  hath  bestowed  his  thickest  Paper  in  the  newe  Testament  bicause  yt 
shalbe  most  occupied. 


127 


LIII.    THE  INCEPTION  OF  THE  RHEIMS  NEW  TESTAMENT. 
Part  of  a  Letter  from  Cardinal  Allen  to  Dr.  Vendeville. 

From  Letters  and  Memorials  of  William  Cardinal  Allen,  by  T.  F.  Knox.     1882,  p.  52  sqq. 

Singulis  diebus  Dominicis  et  festis  habentur  conciones  anglicae  a  provectioribus 
ad  evangelium,  epistolam  vel  historiam  diei  propriam,  ubi  inflammantur  omnium 
animi  ad  pietatem  in  Deum  et  ad  zelum  in  Angliam  a  schismate  in  viam  salutis 
revocandum.  Id  autem  anglice  facimus  ut  vernaculae  linguae  facultatem  majorem 
et  gratiam,  qua  haeretici  mire  sibi  placent  et  insigniter  aliis  simplicioribus  nocent, 
assequamur.  In  quo  genere  vel  imperiti  alioquin  haeretici  multis  doctioribus  catho- 
licis  saepe  praestant,  quod  hi  in  academiis  et  scholis  educati  non  habent  fere  Scrip- 

'  turae  textum  nee  allegant  nisi  latinum,  quern  cum  pro  concione  indocta  coguntur 

'  mox  in  vulgarem  linguam  vertere,  quia  statim  alicujus  versionis  vulgaris  verba  non 
sunt,  saepe  parum  accommodate  et  non  sine  ingrata  haesitatione  transferunt  ;  ubi. 
adversarii  ad  unguem  tenent  ex  haeretica  aliqua  versione  omnia  Scripturae  loca  quae 

1  pro  ipsis  facere  videantur,  et  quadam  composita  fraude  ac  mutatione  sacrorum 
verborum  efficiunt  tandem  ut  nihil  loqui  videantur  nisi  ex  Bibliis.  Cui  malo 
utrinque  mederi  possit,  si  et  nos  haberemus  aliquam  catholicam  versionem  Biblio- 

:  rum  ;  omnes  enim  anglicae  versiones  sunt  corruptissimae.  Ouales  in  Belgio  vestro 
habeatis  nescio  ;  certe  nos  si  sua  Sanctitas  faciendum  judicabit,  id  etiam  agemus  ut 

j  fideliter,  pure  et  genuine  secundum  approbatam  ecclesiae  editionem  Biblia  vertantur  ; 
cum  ad  hanc  rem  viros  jam  habeamus  aptissimos.  Licet  enim  optandum  esset 
fortasse  ut  nunquam  in  barbaras  linguas  Scripturae  verterentur,  tamen  cum  tanta 
sit  hodie  vel  ex  haeresi  vel  aliunde  curiositas  horninum  etiam  non  malorum,  et  saepe 
etiam  propter  confutationem  adversariorum  legendi  necessitas,  satius  est  ut  fidelem 
et  catholicam  habeant  translationem,  quam  ut  cum  periculo  aut  ad  perditionem 
utantur  corrupta  ;  praesertim  cum  periculis  ex  difficiliorum  quorundam  locorum  lec- 
tione  commodis  quibusdam  annotationibus  occurri  possit. 

Translation. 

From  First  and  Second  Diaries  of  the  English  College  at  Douay.     By  T.  F.  Knox.    1878,  p.  xl. 

On  every  Sunday  and  festival  English  sermons  are  preached  by  the  more  ad- 
vanced students  on  the  gospel,  epistle,  or  subject  proper  to  the  day.  These  dis- 
courses are  calculated  to  inflame  the  hearts  of  all  with  piety  towards  God  and  zeal 
for  the  bringing  back  of  England  from  schism  to  the  path  of  salvation.  We  preach 
in  English,  in  order  to  acquire  greater  power  and  grace  in  the  use  of  the  vulgar 
tongue,  a  thing  on  which  the  heretics  plume  themselves  exceedingly,  and  by  which 
they  do  great  injury  to  the  simple  folk.  In  this  respect  the  heretics,  however  igno- 
rant they  may  be  in  other  points,  have  the  advantage  over  many  of  the  more  learned 
catholics,  who  having  been  educated  in  the  universities  and  the  schools  do  not  com- 
monly have  at  command  the  text  of  Scripture  or  quote  it  except  in  Latin.  Hence 
when  they  are  preaching  to  the  unlearned,  and  are  obliged  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment  to  translate  some  passage  which  they  have  quoted  into  the  vulgar  tongue, 
they  often  do  it  inaccurately  and  with  unpleasant  hesitation,  because  either  there  is 
no  English  version  of  the  words  or  it  does  not  then  and  there  occur  to  them.  Our 
adversaries  on  the  other  hand  have  at  their  fingers'  ends  all  those  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture which  seem  to  make  for  them,  and  by  a  certain  deceptive  adaptation  and 
alteration  of  the  sacred  words  produce  the  effect  of  appearing  to  say  nothing  but 
what  comes  from  the  bible.  This  evil  might  be  remedied  if  we  too  had  some 
catholic  version  of  the  bible,  for  all  the  English  versions  are  most  corrupt.  I  do 
i  not  know  what  kind  you  have  in  Belgium.  But  certainly  we  on  our  part,  if  his 
I  Holiness  shall  think  proper,  will  undertake  to  produce  a  faithful,  pure  and  genuine 
:  version  of  the  bible,  in  accordance  with  the  edition  approved  by  the  Church,  for  we 
I  already  have  men  most  fitted  for  the  work.  Perhaps  indeed  it  would  have  been 
more  desirable  that  the  Scriptures  had  never  been  translated  into  barbarous  tongues  ; 
nevertheless  at  the  present  day,  when  either  from  heresy  or  other  causes,  the  curiosity 
of  men,  even  of  those  who  are  not  bad,  is  so  great,  and  there  is  often  such  need  oi 
reading  the  Scriptures  in  order  to  confute  our  opponents,  it  is  better  that  there 
should  be  a  faithful  and  catholic  translation  than  that  men  should  use  a  corrupt 
version  to  their  peril  or  destruction  ;  the  more  so  since  the  dangers  which  arise  from 
reading  certain  more  difficult  passages  may  be  obviated  by  suitable  notes. 


Transla- 
tion of 
the  Scrip- 
< tures  into 
|  the 
;  vulgar 
,  tongues, 
j  not  abso- 
lutely ne- 
cessarie 
or  profit- 
able, but 
according 
I  to  the 
time. 


Many 
causes 
why  this 
new 
Testa- 
ment is 
trans- 
lated ac- 
cording 
to  the 
auncient 
vulgar 
Latin 
text. 

It  is  most 
auncient. 
Corrected 
byS. 
Hierom. 
Com- 
mended 
by  S.  Au- 
gustine. 

Vsed 
and  ex- 
pounded 
by  the 
fathers. 
Only 
authenti- 
cated by 
the  holy 
Councel 
of  Trent. 


128 

LIV.    PREFACE  TO  THE  RHEIMS  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

From  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum. 

The  Preface  to  the  Reader  treating  of  these  three  points  :  of  the  transla- 
tion of  Holy  Scriptures  into  the  vulgar  tongues,  and  namely  into  English ; 
of  the  causes  why  this  new  Testament  is  translated  according  to  the  auncient 
vulgar  Latin  text :  &  of  the  maner  of  translating  the  same. 

The  holy  Bible  long  since  *  translated  by  vs  into  English,  and  the  old  Testament 
lying  by  vs  for  lacke  of  good  meanes  to  publish  the  whole  2  in  such  sort  as  a  vvorke  , 
of  so  great  charge  and  importance  requireth  :   we  have  yet  through  Gods  goodnes  at  I 
length  fully  finished  for  thee  (most  Christian  reader)  all  the  New  Testament,  which  i 
is  the  principal,  most  profitable  &  comfortable  peece  of  holy  writte  :  and,  as  wel  for 
all  other  institution  of  life  and  doctrine,  as  specially  for  deciding  the  doubtes  of  these 
daies,  more  propre  and  pregnant  then  the  other  part  not  yet  printed. 

Which  translation  we  doe  not  for  all  that  publish,  vpon  erroneous  opinion  of , 
necessitie,  that  the  holy  Scriptures  should  alwaies  be  in  our  mother  tonge,  or  that 
they  ought,  or  were  ordained  by  God,  to  be  read  indifferently  of  all,  or  could  be  easily 
vnderstood  of  euery  one  that  readeth  or  heareth  them  in  a  knowen  language  :  or 
that  they  were  not  often  through  mans  malice  or  infirmitie,  pernicious  and  much 
hurtful  to  many  :  or  that  we  generally  and  absolutely  deemed  it  more  conuenient  in 
it  self,  &  more  agreable  to  Gods  word  and  honour  or  edification  of  the  faithful,  to 
haue  them  turned  into  vulgar  tonges,  then  to  be  kept  &  studied  only  in  the  Ecclesi- 
astical learned  languages  :  Not  for  these  nor  any  such  like  causes  doe  we  translate 
this  sacred  booke,  but  vpon  special  consideration  of  the  present  time,  state,  and  con- 
dition of  our  countrie,  vnto  which,  diuers  thinges  are  either  necessarie,  or  profitable 
and  medicinable  now,  that  otherwise  in  the  peace  of  the  Church  were  neither  much 
requisite,  nor  perchance  wholy  tolerable.  .  .  . 

[b.  iij  recto] 
Now  TO  GIVE  thee  also  intelligence  in  particular,  most  gentle  Reader,  of  such 
thinges  as  it  behoueth  thee  specially  to  know  concerning  our  Translation  :  We  trans- 
late the  old  vulgar  Latin  text,  not  the  common  Greeke  text,  for  these  causes. 

1.  It  is  so  auncient,  that  it  was  vsed  in  the  Church  of  God  aboue  1300  yeres  agoe, 
as  appeareth  by  the  fathers  of  those  times. 

2.  It  is  that  (by  the  common  receiued  opinion  and  by  all  probabilitie)  which 
S.  Hierom.  afterward  corrected  according  to  the  Greeke,  by  the  appointment  of 
Damasus  then  Pope,  as  he  maketh  mention  in  his  preface  before  the  foure  Euange- 
listes,  vnto  the  said  Damasus  :  and  in  Catalogo  in  fine,  and  ep.  102. 

3.  Consequently  it  is  the  same  which  S.  Augustine  so  commendeth  and 
alloweth  in  an   Epistle  to   S.  Hierom.3 

4.  It  is  that,  which  for  the  most  part  euer  since  hath  been  vsed  in  the  Churches 
seruice,  expounded  in  sermons,  alleaged  and  interpreted  in  the  Commentaries  and 
writings  of  the  auncient  fathers  of  the  Latin  Church. 

5.  The  holy  Councel  of  Trent,  for  these  and  many  other  important  considera- 
tions, hath  declared4  and  defined  this  onely  of  al  other  latin  translations,  to  be 
authentical,  and  so  onely  to  be  vsed  and  taken  in  publike  lessons,  disputations, 
preachings,  and  expositions,  and  that  no  man  presume  upon  any  pretence  to  reiect 
or  refuse  the  same. 

6.  It  is  the  grauest,  sincerest,  of  greatest  maiestie,  least  partialitie,  as  being 
without  al  respect  of  controuersies  and  contentions,  specially  these  of  our  time  ;  as 
appeareth  by  those  places  which  Erasmus  and  others  at  this  day  translate  much 
more  to  the  aduantage  of  the  Catholike  cause. 

7.  It  is  so  exact  and  precise  according  to  the  Greeke,  both  the  phrase  and  the 
word,  that  delicate  Heretikes  therfore  reprehend  it  of  rudenes.  And  that  it  followeth 
the  Greeke  far  more  exactly  then  the  Protestants  translations,  beside  infinite  other 

1  According  to  the  College  Diaries  it  was  begun  on  or  about  March  16,  1578,  and  finished 
in  March  1582. 

2  The  Old  Testament  was  not  printed  until  1609. 

3  Note  :  Ep.  10.  '  Note  :  Sess.  4. 


Preface  to  the  Rheims  New  Testament.         129 


places,  we  appeale  to  these.  Tit.  3.  14.  Curent  bonis  operibus  praeesse,  Trpolo-Tao-Oai 
Eng.  bib.  1577  to  mainteine  good  workes,  and  Hebr.  10.  20.  Viam  nobis  initiavit, 
cveieaiveo-ev.  English  bib.  be  prepared.  So  in  these  wordes,  htstificationes,  Traditiones, 
Idola  &c.     In  al  which  they  come  not  neere  the  Greeke,  but  auoid  it  of  purpose. 

8.  The  Aduersaries  them  selues,  namely  Beza,  preferre  it  before  al  the  rest.  In 
praefat.  no.  Test,  an  1556.  And  againe  he  saith,  that  the  old  Interpreter  translated 
very  religiously.     Annot.  in  1.  Luc.  v.  1. 

9.  In  the  rest,  there  is  such  diuersitie  and  dissension,  and  no  end  of  reprehending 
one  an  other,  and  translating  euery  man  according  to  his  fantasie,  that  Luther  5  said, 
If  the  world  should  stand  any  long  time,  we  must  receiue  againe  (which  he  thought 
absurd)  the  Decrees  of  Councels,  for  preseruing  the  vnitie  of  faith,  because  of  so 
diuers  interpretations  of  the  Scripture.  And  Beza  (in  the  place  aboue  mentioned) 
noteth  the  itching  ambition  of  his  fellow-translators,  that  had  much  rather  disagree 
and  dissent  from  the  best,  then  seeme  them  selues  to  haue  said  or  written  nothing. 
And  Bezas  translation  it  self,  being  so  esteemed  in  our  countrie,  that  the  Geneua  6 
English  Testament  be  translated  according  to  the  same,  yet  sometime  goeth  so  wide 
from  the  Greeke,  and  from  the  meaning  of  the  holy  Ghost,  that  them  selues  which 
protest  to  translate  it,  dare  not  folow  it.  For  example,  Luc.  3.  36.  They  haue  put 
these  wordes,  The  sonne  of  Cainan,  which  he  wittingly  and  wilfully  left  out  ;  and 
Act.  1.  14,  they  say,  With  the  women,  agreably  to  the  vulgar  Latin  :  where  he  saith. 
Cum  vxoribus,  with  their  wiues. 

10.  It  is  not  onely  better  then  al  other  Latin  translations,  but  then  the  Greeke 
text  it  self,  in  those  places  where  they  disagree. 

[c  iii  recto  :] 

In  This  Our  Translation,  because  we  wish  it  to  be  most  sincere,  as  becometh 
a  Catholike  translation,  and  have  endeuoured  so  to  make  it  ;  we  are  very  precise 
&  religious  in  folowing  our  copie,  the  old  vulgar  approued  Latin  :  not  onely  in 
sense,  which  we  hope  we  alwaies  doe,  but  sometime  in  the  very  wordes  also  and 
phrases,  which  may  seeme  to  the  vulgar  Reader  &  to  common  English  eares  not  yet 
acquainted  therewith,  rudenesse  or  ignorance  :  but  to  the  discrete  Reader  that 
deepely  weigheth  and  considereth  the  importance  of  sacred  wordes  and  speaches, 
and  how  easily  the  voluntarie  Translatour  may  misse  the  true  sense  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  we  doubt  not  but  our  consideration  and  doing  therein,  shal  seeme  reasonable 
and  necessarie  :  yea  and  that  al  sortes  of  Catholike  Readers  wil  in  shorte  time 
thinke  that  familiar,  which  at  the  first  may  seeme  strange  &  wil  esteeme  it  more, 
when  they  shal 7  otherwise  be  taught  to  vnderstand  it,  then  if  it  were  the  common 
knowen  English. 

For  example,  we  translate  often  thus.  Amen,  Amen  I  say  vnto  you.  Which  as  yet 
seemeth  strange,  but  after  a  while  it  wil  be  as  familiar,  as  Amen  in  the  end  of  al 
praiers  and  Psalmes,  and  euen  as  when  we  end  with,  Amen,  it  soundeth  far  better 
then  So  be  it :  so  in  the  beginning,  Amen  Amen,  must  needes  by  vse  and  custom 
sound  far  better,  then,  Verily  verily.  Which  in  deede  doth  not  expresse  the  asseuera- 
tion  and  assurance  signified  in  this  Hebrue  word,  besides  that  it  is  the  solemne  and 
vsual  word  of  our  Sauiour8  to  expresse  a  vehement  asseueration,  and  therfore  is  not 
changed,  neither  in  the  Syriake  nor  Greeke,  nor  vulgar  Latin  Testament,  but  is  pre- 
sented and  vsed  of  the  Euangelistes  and  Apostles  them  selues,  euen  as  Christ  spake 
it,  propter  sanctiorem  authoritatem,  as  S.  Augustine  saith  of  this  and  of  Allelu-ia,  for 
the  more  holy  and  sacred  authoritie  thereof,  li  2.  Doct.  Christ,  c.  11.  And  therfore  do 
we  keepe  the  word  Allelu-ia.  Apoc.  19.  as  it  is  both  in  Greeke  and  Latin  yea  and 
in  al  the  English  translations,  though  in  their  bookes  of  common  praier  they  trans- 
late it,  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Againe,  if  Hosanna,  Raca,  Belial,  and  such  like  be  yet 
vntranslated  in  the  English  Bibles,9  why  may  not  we  say  Corbana,  and  Parasceve: 
specially  when  they  Englishing  this  later  thus,  the  preparation  of  the  Sabboth  put 
three  wordes  more  into  the  text,  then  the  Greeke  word  doth  signifie.  Mat.  27.  62. 
And  others  saying  thus,  After  the  day  of  preparing,  make  a  cold  translation  and 

5  Note  :  Cochla.  c.  11.  de  cano,  Script,  authoritate. 

8  Note  :  The  new  Test,  printed  the  yere  1580  in  the  title. 

'  Note  :  See  the  last  Table  at  the  end  of  the  booke. 

"  Note  :  See  annot.  Io.  c.  8.  v.  34  <~  Apoc.  c.  19.  v.  4. 

'  Note  :  No.  Test.  an.  1580,  Bib.  an  1577. 


Most 

graue, 

least 

partial. 

Precise  in 

following 

the 

Greek. 

Preferred 
by  Beza 
himself. 

Al  the 
rest  mis- 
liked  of 
the  Sec- 
taries 
them- 
selues, 
eche  re- 
prehend- 
ing an- 
other. 


It  is  truer 
than  the 
vulgar 
Greek 
text  it 
selfe. 


Certaine 
wordes 
not  Eng- 
lish nor  as 
yet  fami- 
liar in  the 
English 
tongue. 
Amen. 


Alleluia. 


Para- 
sceue. 


Pasche, 
Azymes. 


Why  we 
say  our 
Lord,  not 
the  Lord 
(but  in 
certaine 
cases) see 
the  An- 
notations 
I .  Tim.  6 
pag.  585. 


Catholike 
termes 
proceeding 
from  the 
very  text 
of  Scrip- 
ture. 

Certain 

hard 

speaches 

and 

phrases. 


The  Pro- 
testants 
presump- 
tuous 
boldnes 
and  liber- 
tie  in 
translat- 
ing. 


short  of  the  sense:  as  if  they  should  translate,  Sabboth,  the  resting,  for,  Parasceve10 
is  as  solemne  a  word  for  the  Sabboth  eue,  as  Sabboth  is  for  the  Iewes  seuenth  day, 
and  now  among  Christians  much  more  solemner,  taken  for  Good-friday  onely.  These 
wordes  then  we  thought  it  far  better  to  keepe  in  the  text,  and  to  tel  their  signification 
in  the  margent  or  in  a  table  for  that  purpose,  then  to  disgrace  bothe  the  text  &  them 
with  translating  them.  Such  are  also  these  wordes,  The  Pasche,  The  feast  of  Azymes, 
The  bread  of  Proposition.  Which  they  translate11  The  Passeouer,  The  feast  of  sweete 
bread,  The  shew  bread.  But  if  Pentecost  Act.  2.  be  yet  vntranslated  in  their  bibles, 
and  seemeth  not  strange  :  why  should  not  Pasche  and  Azymes  so  remaine  also,  being 
solemne  feastes,  as  Pentecost  was  ?  or  why  should  they  English  one  rather  then  the 
other  ?  specially  whereas  Passeouer  at  the  first  was  as  strange,  as  Pasche  may  seeme 
now,  and  perhaps  as  many  now  vnderstand  Pasche,  as  Passeouer,  and  as  for  Azymes, 
when  they  English  it,  the  "feast  of  sweete  bread,  it  is  a  false  interpretation  of  the  word, 
&  nothing  expresseth  that  which  belongeth  to  the  feast,  concerning  vnleauened  bread. 
And  as  for  their  terme  of  shew  bread,  it  is  very  strange  and  ridiculous.  Againe,  if 
Proselyte  be  a  receiued  word  in  the  English  bibles  Mat.  23.  Act.  2  :  why  may  not 
we  be  bold  to  say,  Neophyte.  1.  Tim.  3.  ?  specially  when  they  translating  it  into 
English  do  falsely  expresse  the  signification  of  the  word  thus,  a  yong  scholer. 
Whereas  it  is  a  peculiar  word  to  signifie  them  that  were  lately  baptized,  as  Cate- 
chumenus,  signifieth  the  newely  instructed  in  faith  not  yet  baptized,  who  is  also 
a  yong  scholar  rather  then  the  other,  and  many  that  haue  been  old  scholars,  may 
be  Neophytes  by  differring  baptisme.  And  if  Phylacteries  be  allowed  for  English 
Mat.  23.  we  hope  that  Didragmes  also,  Prepuce,  Paraclete,  and  such  like,  wil  easily 
grow  to  be  currant  and  familiar.  And  in  good  sooth  there  is  in  al  these  such 
necessitie,  that  they  can  not  conueniently  be  translated,  as  when  S.  Paul 12  saith, 
concisio,  non  circumcisio :  how  can  we  but  folow  his  very  wordes  and  allusion  ?  And 
how  is  it  possible  to  expresse  Euangelizo,  but  as  we  do,  Euangelize  ?  for  Euangelium 
being  the  Gospel,  what  is,  Euangelizo  or  to  Euangelize,  but  to  shew  the  glad  tydings 
of  the  Gospel,  of  the  time  of  grace,  of  al  Christes  benefites  ?  Al  which  signification 
is  lost,  by  translating  as  the  English  bibles  do,  /  bring  you  good  tydings.  Luc.  2.  10. 
Therfore  we  say  Depositum  1  Tim.  6.  and,  He  exinanited  him  self,  Philip.  2.  and, 
You  haue  reflorished,  Philip.  4.  and,  to  exhaust,  Hebr.  9.  28.  because  we  can  not 
possibly  attaine  to  expresse  these  wordes  full}'  in  English,  and  we  thinke  much 
better,  that  the  reader  staying  at  the  difficultie  of  them,  should  take  an  occasion  to 
looke  in  the  table  folowing,  or  otherwise  to  aske  the  ful  meaning  of  them,  then  by 
putting  some  vsual  English  wordes  that  expresse  them  not,  so  to  deceiue  the  reader. 
Sometime  also  we  doe  it  for  an  other  cause,  as  when  we  say,  The  aduent  of  our  Lord, 
and  Imposing  ofhandes.  because  one  is  a  solemne  time,  the  other  a  solemne  action  in 
the  Catholike  Church :  to  signifie  to  the  people,  that  these  and  such  like  names  come 
out  of  the  very  Latin  text  of  the  Scripture.  So  did  Penance,  doing  penance,  Chalice, 
Priest,  Deacon,  Traditions,  aultar,  host,  and  the  like  (which  we  exactly  keepe  as 
Catholic  termes)  procede  euen  from  the  very  wordes  of  Scripture. 

Moreouer,  we  presume  not  in  hard  places  to  mollifie  the  speaches  or  phrases, 
but  religiously  keepe  them  word  for  word,  and  point  for  point,  for  feare  of  missing, 
or  restraining  the  sense  of  the  holy  Ghost  to  our  phantasie,  as  Eph.  6.  Against 
the  spirituals  of  wickednes  in  the  celestials,  and  What  to  me  and  thee  woman  ? 13  whereof 
see  the  Annotation  vpon  this  place,  and  1  Pet.  2.  As  infants  euen  now  borne,  reason- 
able, milke  without  guile  desire  ye,  We  do  so  place  reasonable,  of  purpose,  that  it 
may  be  indifferent  both  to  infants  going  before,  as  in  our  Latin  text :  or  to  milke 
that  foloweth  after,  as  in  other  Latin  copies  and  in  the  Greeke,  Io.  3.  we  translate, 
The  spirit  breatheth  where  he  wil  &c.  leauing  it  indifferent  to  signifie  either  the  holy 
Ghost,  or  winde  :  which  the  Protestants  translating,  winde,  take  away  the  other 
sense  more  common  and  vsual  in  the  auncient  fathers.  We  translate  Luc  8.  23, 
They  were  filled,  not  adding  of  our  owne,  with  water  to  mollifie  the  sentence,  as 
the  Protestants  doe,  and  c.  21.  This  is  the  chalice,  the  new  Testament  &c  not, 
This  chalice  is  the  new  Testament,  likewise  Mar.  13,  Those  daies  shal  be  such  tribula- 
tion &c  not  as  the  Aduersaries,  In  those  dales,  both  our  text  and  theirs  being 
otherwise,  likewise  lac.  4.  6.  And  giueth  greater  grace,  leauing  it  indifferent  to  the 
Scripture,  or  to  the  holy  Ghost,  both  going  before.     Whereas  the  Aduersaries  to  to 


10  Note  :   Mar.  14.  v.  42. 
12  Note  :  Phil.  3. 


11  Note  :   Bib.  1577.  Mat.  26.  17. 
"  Io.  2. 


Preface  to  the  Rheims  New  Testament.  131 


boldly  &  presumptuously  adde,  saying,  The  Scripture  giueth,  taking  away  the  other 
sense,  which  is  far  more  probable,  likewise  Heb.  12.  21.  we  translate,  So  terrible 
was  it  which  was  seen,  Moyses  said  &c.  neither  doth  Greeke  or  Latin  permit  vs  to 
adde,  that  Moyses  said,  as  the  Protestants  presume  to  doe,  So  we  say,  Men  brethren, 
A  widow  woman,  A  woman  a  sister,  lames  of  Alphaeus,  and  the  like.  Sometime  also14 
we  folow  of  purpose  the  Scripture  phrase,  as,  The  hel  of  fire}5  according  to  Greeke 
and  Latin,  which  we  might  say  perhaps,  the  firyhel,  by  the  Hebrue  phrase  in  such 
speaches,  but  not,  hel  fire,  as  commonly  it  is  translated  Likewise  Luc  4.  36.  What 
word  is  this,  that  in  power  and  authoritie  he  commaundeth  the  vncleane  spirits?  as 
also  Luc  2.  Let  vs  passe  ouer,  and  see  the  word  that  is  done.  Where  we  might  say, 
thing,  by  the  Hebrue  phrase,  but  there  is  a  certaine  maiestie  and  more  signification 
in  these  speaches,  and  therfore  both  Greeke  &  Latin  keepe  them,  although  it  is  no 
more  the  Greeke  or  Latin  phrase,  then  it  is  the  English.  And  why  should  we  be 
squamish  at  new  wordes  or  phrases  in  the  Scripture,  which  are  necessarie :  when  we 
do  easily  admit  and  folow  new  wordes  coyned  in  court  and  in  courtly  or  other 
secular  writings  ? 

We  adde  the  Greeke  in  the  margent  for  diuers  causes.  Sometime  when  the  sense 
is  hard,  that  the  learned  reader  may  consider  of  it  and  see  if  he  can  helpe  him  selfe 
better  then  by  our  translation  as  Luc.  11.  Nolite  extolli,  ^  /«Tc<op<.'feo-0€  and  againe, 
Quod  superest  date  eleemosynam,  ™  Ivovra.  Sometime  to  take  away  the  ambiguitie  of 
the  Latin  or  English,  as  Luc.  11.  Et  domus  supra  domum  cadet  which  we  must  needes 
English,  and  house  upon  house,  shal  fall  by  the  Greeke,  the  sense  is  not,  one  house 
shal  fal  vpon  an  other,  but,  if  one  house  rise  vpon  it  self,  that  is,  against  it  self,  it 
shal  perish,  according  as  he  speaketh  of  a  kingdom  deuided  against  it  self,  in  the 
wordes  before,  And  Act.  14.  Sacerdos  Iouis  qui  erat,  in  the  Greeke,  qui,  is  referred 
to  Jupiter.  Sometime  to  satisfie  the  reader,  that  might  otherwise  conceiue  the 
translation  to  be  false,  as  Philip  4  v  6.  But  in  euerything  by  praier,  Sc.  h>  -rravTi 
■n-pocrivxfi  not,  in  al  praier,  as  in  the  Latin  it  may  seeme.  Sometime  when  the  Latin 
neither  doth,  nor  can,  reache  to  the  signification  of  the  Greeke  word,  we  adde  the 
Greeke  also  as  more  significant.  I  Hi  soli  seruies,16  him  only  shalt  thou  serue,  KaTpcvo-w 
And  Act.  6.  Nicolas  a  stranger  of  Antioche,  irpoo-qXi tos  and,  Ro.  9.  The  seruice, 
y\  Xarpeia  and  Eph  i.  to  perfite,  instaurare  omnia  in  Christo,  a.vo.Kt<$a\aiwo-o.o-6ai  And 
Wherein  he  hath  gratified  us,  l^apiTuicrtv  &  Eph.  6.  Put  on  the  armour,  Travowkiav  and 
a  number  the  like.  Sometime,  when  the  Greeke  hath  two  senses,  and  the  Latin  but 
one,  we  adde  the  Greeke.  2.  Cor.  1.  By  the  exhortation  wherewith  we  also  are  exhorted, 
the  Greeke  signifieth  also  consolation  S-c.  and  2.  Cor.  10.  But  hailing  hope  of  your  faith 
increasing,  to  be  S-c.  where  the  Greeke  may  also  signifie,  as  or  when  your  faith  in- 
creaseth.  Sometime 17  for  aduantage  of  the  Catholike  cause,  when  the  Greeke  maketh 
vs  more  then  the  Latin,  as,  Seniores,  Trpto-jivTipovs.  Vt  digni  habeamini,  Iva.  a$iw6r}T( 
Qui  effundetur,  ro  iK^w6fj.tvov,  Praecepta,  -irapaSoaus.  &  Io.  21.  iroip.aivc,  Pasce  S-  rege. 
I  And  sometime  to  shew  the  false  translation  of  the  Heretike,  as  when  Beza  saith 
Hoc  poculum  in  meo  sanguine  qui,  to  iroT-qptov  h>  ™  ai'/xa-n  to  iK^puvo/xevov  Luc.  22. 
&  Quern  oportet  coelo  contineri,  ov  Sei  ovpavov  8exco-8cu,  Act.  3.  Thus  we  vse  the  Greeke 
diuers  waies,  &  esteeme  of  it  as  it  is  worthie,  &  take  al  commodities  thereof  for  the 
better  vnderstanding  of  the  Latin,  which  being  a  translation,  can  not  alwaies  attaine 
to  the  ful  sense  of  the  principal  tonge,  as  we  see  in  al  translations. 

Item  we  adde  the  Latin  word  sometime  in  the  margent,  when  either  we  can  not 
fully  expresse  it  (as  Act.  8  They  tooke  order  for  Steuens  funeral,  Curauerunt  Stephanum, 
and,  Al  take  not  this  word,  Non  omnes  capiunt)  or  when  the  reader  might  thinke,  it 
can  not  be  as  we  translate,  as,  Luc.  8.  A  storme  of  winde  descended  into  the  lake, 
and  they  were  filled,  &  complebantur ,  and  Io.  5.  when  Iesus  knew  that  he  had  now 
a  long  time,  quia  iam  multum  tempus  haberet,  meaning,  in  his  infirmitie. 

This  precise  folowing  of  our  Latin  text,  in  neither  adding  nor  diminishing,  is  the 
cause  why  we  say  not  in  the  title  of  bookes,  in  the  first  page,  S.  Mathew,  S.  Paul : 
because  it  is  so  neither  in  Greeke  nor  Latin,  though  in  the  toppes  of  the  leaues 
folowing,  where  we  may  be  bolder,  we  adde  S.  Matthew  &c  to  satisfie  the  reader. 
Much  vnlike  to  the  Protestants  our  Aduersaries,  which  make  no  scruple18  to  leaue 
out  the  name  of  Paul  in  the  title  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrues,  though  it  be  in 
euery  Greeke  booke  which  they  translate.    And  their  most  authorised  English  Bibles 


The 
Greeke 
added 
often  in 
the  mar- 
gent for 
many 
causes. 


»  Note  :  Mat.  5. 

11  Note  :   Act.  15.  2  Thes.  2. 


15  Note  :   Gehenna  ignis. 
1  Cor.  11.  JB  Note  : 


16  Note  :  Mat.  4. 
Bib.  an  1579,  1580  an  1577,  1562. 


The  Latin 
text  some- 
times 
noted  in 
the  mar- 
gent. 

In  the 

beginning 
of  bookes 
Matthew, 
Paul,  &c. 
not  S. 
Matthew, 
S.  Paul 
&c. 


I  2 


Another 
reading 
in  the 
margent. 


The 

pointing 
some- 
times 
altered. 


The  mar- 
gent read- 
ing some- 
time pre- 
ferred 
before 
the  text. 


132         Preface  to  the  Rheims  New  Testament. 


leaue  out  (Catholike)  in  the  title  of  S.  lames  Epistle  and  the  rest,  which  were  famously 
knowen  in  the  primitiue  Church  by  the  name  of  Catholicae  Epistolae,  Euseb.  hist. 
Eccl.  li  2.  c  22. 

Item  we  giue  the  Reader  in  places  of  some  importance,  an  other  reading  in  the 
margent,  specially  when  the  Greeke  is  agreable  to  the  same,  as  Io.  4,  transietde  morte 
ad  vitam.    Other  Latin  copies  haue,  transiit,  and  so  it  is  in  the  Greeke. 

We  binde  not  our  selues  to  the  pointes  of  any  one  copie,  print,  or  edition  of 
the  vulgar  Latin,  in  places  of  no  controuersie,  but  folow  the  pointing  most  agreable 
to  the  Greeke  and  to  the  fathers  commentaries.  As  Col.  1. 10.  Ambulantes  digne  Deo, 
per  omnia  placentes.  Walking  worthy  of  God,  in  al  things  pleasing,  d£('a>s  tov  Kvpiov  eh 
■natrav  apio-Kciav.  Eph.  I.  17.  We  point  this,  Deus  Domini  nostri  Iesu  Christi,  pater 
gloriae.  as  in  the  Greeke,  and  S.  Chrysostom,  &  S.  Hierom  both  in  text  and  com- 
mentaries. Which  the  Catholike  reader  specially  must  marke,  lest  he  finde  fault, 
when  he  seeth  our  translation  disagree  in  such  places  from  the  pointing  of  his 
Latin  Testament. 

We  translate  sometime  the  word  that  is  in  the  Latin  margent,  and  not  that  in 
the  text,  when  bv  the  Greeke  or  the  fathers  we  see  it  is  a  manifest  fault  of  the 
writers  heretofore",  that  mistooke  one  word  for  an  other.  As,  In  fine,  not  in  fide, 
1  Pet.  3.  v.  8.  praesentium,  not,  praescientinm,  2  Pet.  1.  v.  16.  Heb.  13.  latuerunt, 
not,  placuemnt. 

Thus  we  haue  endeuoured  by  al  meanes  to  satisfie  the  indifferent  reader,  and  to 
helpe  his  vnderstanding  euery  way,  both  in  the  text,  and  by  Annotations  ;  and 
withal  to  deale  most  sincerely  before  God  and  man,  in  translating  and  expounding 
the  most  sacred  Text  of  the  holy  Testament.  Fare  wel  good  Reader,  and  if  we  profit 
the  any  whit  by  our  poore  paines  let  vs  for  Gods  sake  be  partakers  of  thy  deuout 
praiers,  and  together  with  humble  and  contrite  hart  call  vpon  our  Sauiour  "Christ  to 
cease  these  troubles  &  stormes  of  his  derest  spouse :  in  the  meane  time  comforting 
our  selues  with  this  saying  of  S.  Augustine  :  That  Heretikes,  when  they  receiue  power 
corporally  to  afflict  the  Church,  doe  exercise  her  patience :  but  when  they  oppugne  her 
onely  by  their  euil  doctrine  or  opinion,  then  they  exercise  her  wisedomes.  De  ciuit. 
Dei  li  18.  ca.  51. 


LVI.     JUGGE   AND   BARKER  AND  THEIR  PATRONS. 

A.  The  copie  of  the  Ouenes  maiesties  High  Commissioners  order  taken 
between  Mr  RicharTd  Jugge  and  others  of  the  Companie  of  Stationers 
as  hereafter  foloweth.1 

Sexto  die  mensis  junii  Anno  Domini  1575.  Coram  reverendo  patre  Domino 
Edwino  London.  Episcopo  ac  venerabilibus  viris,  Roberto  Monnson  armiger.  uno 
justiciar,  domine  Regine  de  communi  banco  petro  Osborne  Armiger.  et  John  Harmon 
legum  doctor.  Commissioner  regiis  in  causis  ecclesiasticis  et  legitime  assignat.  in 
presencia  mei  Willim  Bedell  Registrar  &c. 

At  which  da  ye  and  place  after  longe  hearinge  and  debatinge  of  the  grieves  and 
differences  between  the  Stationers  of  London  as  namely  then  present  Humfrey  Toye 
Luke  Harrison  ffrauncis  Coldock  and  George  Bisshopp  declaring  their  grieves  therein 
on  their  partie,  and  Richard  Jugge  also  Stationer  hir  maiesties  prynter  on  the  other 
partie,  Touchinge  the  printinge  of  the  Bible  and  Testament.  Yt  was  ordered  by  the 
sayd  Commissioners  by  assent  of  the  parties  present  That  from  henceforthe  the  sayd 
Richard  Jugge  onlv  shall  have  without  interrupcion  the  printinge  of  the  Byble  in 
Quarto  and  the  Testament  in  decimo  Sexto  ;  And  all  other  Bibles  in  folio  and 
Testaments  (excepted  as  before)  to  be  at  the  liberty  of  the  printinge  of  the  rest  of 
the  Stationers  and  he  the  said  Richard  Jugge  also  without  contradiction  of  any  person 
to  have  the  printinge  of  the  rest  as  aforesaid 

1  This  and  the  next  two  documents  and  also  No.  LXI  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Charles 
Rivington,  Clerk  to  the  Stationers'  Company.  "1  he  date  of  the  first,  just  three  weeks  after 
Archbishop  Parker's  death,  is  very  significant. 


jugge  and  Barker  and  their  Patrons.  133 


B.    The  Beginning  of  the  Bible  Stock. 
Ninth  June  1575. 

Whereas  on  the  Sixth  daie  of  this  instant  month  of  June  yt  was  ordered  by  the 
Quenes  maiesties  Comissioner  in  Causes  ecclesiasticall  by  assent  of  Richard  Jugge 
Stationer  hir  maiesties  Printer  and  certen  other  Stationers  then  present,  That  the 
said  Richard  Jugge  onelie  shall  have  without  interrupcion  the  printinge  of  the  byble 
in  Quarto  and  the  testament  in  decimo  Sexto.  And  all  other  bibles  in  folio  and 
testaments  (excepted  as  before)  to  be  at  the  libertie  of  the  printinge  of  the  rest  of 
the  Stationers.  And  he  the  saide  Richard  Jugge  also  without  contradiction  of  any 
person,  to  have  the  printinge  of  the  reste  as  aforesaid.  As  by  the  same  order  (a  trewe 
copie  whereof  is  before  entred  into  this  present  booke)  more  plainelie  maie  appeare 

For  good  order  and  quietness  to  be  had  and  used  touchinge  the  saide  Bibles  and 
Testaments  so  licenced  to  be  printed  in  comon,  yt  was  thoughte  meete  and  con- 
venient, and  also  ordeined  established  and  decreed  on  the  nyneth  daie  of  June  afore- 
saide,  by  the  Master  Wardens  and  Assistants  of  the  saide  Arte  or  misterie  of  Stationers, 
and  with  the  assent  of  all  the  persons  here  undernamed,  That  noe  person  or  persons, 
at  anye  tyme  hereafter  shall  printe  or  cause  to  be  printed,  any  of  the  saide  Bibles  or 
Testaments  ordered  to  be  printed  in  comon  as  aforesaide  unles  he  or  they  (which  so 
will  printe  or  cause  to  be  printed  any  of  the  same  Bibles  or  testaments)  shall 
before  the  printinge  thereof :  as  well  present J  every  suche  Bible  and  testament  so 
to  be  printed,  to  suche  of  the  master  wardens  and  assistants  of  the  saide  arte  or 
misterie  as  shal  be  noe  parties  nor  partners  to  or  in  the  imprintinge  thereof :  As 
also  have  and  obteyne  their  licence  for  the  imprintinge  of  the  same,  to  the  intent 
that  the  same  master  wardens  and  assistants  in  the  grauntinge  of  every  suche  licence, 
maie  jnioyne  and  take  order  with  the  partie  and  parties  to  whome  any  suche  licence 
shal  be  graunted,  for  the  good  and  sufficient  imprintinge  of  everye  suche  Bible  & 
testament  so  to  be  presented  as  well  with  good  paper  and  good  woorkemanshippe, 
as  with  good  correction 

And  that  also  upon  the  finishinge  of  every  impression  of  any  of  the  saide  bibles 
or  Testaments  so  to  be  presented  and  licenced  :  the  parties  and  partners  of  the  same, 
shall  before  any  of  the  same  be  putt  to  sale  :  bringe  give  and  deliver  one  whole  and 
perfecte  booke  thereof  to  the  master  wardens  and  assistants  of  the  saide  arte  or 
misterie  beinge  noe  partners  therein,  to  the  ende  that  they  maie  see  and  viewe  the 
same  if  it  be  done  woorkmanlie  and  orderlie  in  all  poynts  accordinge  to  the  true 
meaninge  of  this  present  order  and  decree  everie  of  which  booke  so  to  be  viewed 
shall  remaine  in  the  saide  hall  to  the  use  of  the  saide  whole  Companie  forever 

Whereupon  John  Walley  John  Judson  William  Norton  Humfrey  Toye  John 
Harrison  Lucas  Harrison  George  Bisshoppe  Garret  Dewce  Richard  Watkins  and 
Frauncis  Coldock  on  the  saide  nyneth  daie  of  June,  did  present  unto  the  master  and 
wardens  and  others  of  the  assistants  of  the  saide  arte  or  misterie  accordinge  to  the 
saide  order,  one  Englishe  bible  in  folio  of  the  Pica  letter,  a  newe  Testament  in 
Englishe  in  Octavo  of  the  longe  primer  letter,  and  one  other  Jnglishe  new  testament 
in  Quarto  of  the  Englishe  or  pica  letter,  And  were  licenced  accordinge  to  the  same 
order,  to  vmprinte  one  impression  of  the  same  sevrall  bookes,  in  folio  and  octavo 

And  the  saide  Richard  Jugge  hath  assented  notwithstandinge  that  the  newe 
Testament  in  Quarto  (as  he  sayeth)  his  parcell  of  the  bible  in  quarto  by  the  saide 
order  of  the  Comissioners  is  lefte  to  remayne  to  him  alone,  that  the  imprintinge  of 
the  saide  Testament  in  Quarto  shalbe  likewise  permitted,  and  by  the  order  of  the 
saide  companie  it  is  also  the  saide  nvneth  daie,  so  licenced  to  the  parties  abovesaide. 
And  further  it  is  likewise  ordered  "and  agreed  by  the  saide  master  wardens  and 
assistants  on  the  saide  nynth  daie  of  June,  and  the  saide  John  Walley  William  Norton 
Humfrey  Toye  John  Harrison  Lucas  Harrison  George  Bisshopp  Garret  Dewce  Richard 
Watkins  and  Frauncis  Coldock,  and  also  John  Wighte,  for  them  and  their  assigns 
have  hereunto  submitted  themselves,  and  consented  and  faithfullie  promised  to  be 
contented  with  and  to  obey  and  observe  the  orders  followinge,  viz.  That  if  any  com- 
plainte  or  controversie  shall  at  any  time  arise  or  be  made  or  occasioned  by  or 
amongst  any  of  the  saide  persons  now  licenced  or  hereafter  to  be  licenced  to  printe 

'  'Exhibit,'  not  '  give.' 


134  JuSSe  and  Barker  and  their  Patrons. 


the  saide  bookes  laste  mencioned,  or  any  of  the  saide  bookes  ordered  to  be  printed  in 
comon  as  aforesaid  :  or  any  printer,  or  other  person  that  shall  have  to  doe  in  the 
woorkemanshippe  or  utterance  thereof,  or  any  other  person  whiche  the  said  persons 
licenced  shall  ioyne  with  them  in  an}?  parte  of  the  charge  or  proffit :  for  or  touchinge 
their  or  any  of  their  dealings  or  doings  in  the  printinge  utteringe  or  Sellinge  of  the 
same  bookes  or  any  of  them,  that  then  every  person  and  persons,  whoe  shalbe 
occasions  thereof,  or  whome  it  shal  in  any  wise  concerne,  shall  stande  to  abide  obey 
observe  and  performe,  suche  ende  order  and  determinacion,  as  in  and  for  evry  or  any 
suche  complainte  or  controversie,  shalbe  made  by  the  master  wardens  and  assistants 
of  the  saide  arte  or  misterie  beinge  noe  parties  nor  partners  thereto  as  aforesaide 

And  that  any  person  or  persons  whiche  hereafter  shall  or  will  accordinge  to  theis 
ordenances  and  decrees  ymprint  or  cause  to  be  imprinted  any  of  the  saide  Bibles  or 
Testaments  ordered  to  be  printed  in  comon  as  aforesaide,  shal  not  at  anie  tyme  put 
to  sale  or  cause  to  be  put  to  sale  any  of  the  same  bookes,  to  any  person  or  persons 
beinge  not  a  freeman,  or  brother  of  the  saide  companie,  at  suche  rates  as  maie  be 
preiudice  hurte  hinderance  or  losse  to  the  usuall  and  reasonable  maner  of  Sale  by  other 
Stationers  that  shall  sell  the  same  againe  by  retaile 

And  that  no  suche  person  or  persons  as  shall  so  printe  or  cause  to  be  printed  any 
suche  Bible  or  Testament,  shall  at  anye  tyme  after  he  or  they  shall  have  putt  any 
of  the  same  to  Sale  :  by  any  meanes,  by  reason  of  scarcitie  thereof  when  the  moste  of 
them  be  uttered  and  Sold,  or  for  any  other  occasion,  encrease  and  enhaunce  or  cause 
to  be  encreased  or  enhaunced  to  any  freeman  or  brother  of  the  saide  companie,  the 
firste  price  whiche  he  or  the}'  shall  have  made  of  the  same  bookes  at  the  firste  puttinge 
to  sale  thereof,  whiche  firste  price  to  the  Companie  they  shall  cause  to  be  entered  in 
the  hall  of  the  Companie  before  the  puttinge  of  any  of  the  same  bookes  to  Sale 

And  moreover  that  evry  offender  and  offendors  of  or  in  theis  present  orders  and 
decrees  and  other  the  premisses  or  any  of  them,  from  and  after  due  proofe  made  of 
his  or  their  offence,  shalbe  for  ever  barred  excluded  and  amoved  from  printinge  and 
beinge  partner  in  the  printinge  of  any  of  the  said  Bibles  or  Testaments  ordered  to  be 
printed  in  comon  as  aforesaide  ;  and  from  havinge  any  further  interest  or  benefit 
therein :  And  shall  also  forfeite  and  lose  all  his  and  their  interest  parte  and  parts 
therein,  to  be  employed  and  disposed  at  the  discrecion  of  the  master  wardens  and 
assistants  of  the  saide  companie  then  beinge  and  havinge  no  parte  in  the  printinge 
of  the  same  bookes  :  or  to  be  (upon  reasonable  consideracions)  to  him  restored,  as  the 
saide  master  wardens  and  assistants  with  the  assent  of  the  rest  of  the  partners  shall 
think  meete 

C.    Barker's  satisfaction  to  Jugge. 
IX0  die  Junij  1575. 

Whereas  Christofer  Barker  citizen  and  Draper  of  London  hathe  obteyned  a  graunt 
and  licence  in  writinge  under  the  handes  of  seven  of  the  Ouenes  maiesties  honrable 
privie  counsell1  accordinge  to  hir  highnes  jniuntions,  for  the  printinge  of  theise  Twoo 
Bookes  hereafter  mencioned  That  is  to  save.  A  Byble  in  Englishe  with  notes  in  the 
same  which  was  dedicated  unto  hir  maiestie  in  the  ffirst  yere  of  hir  highnes  reign  and 
commenly  called  or  knowen  by  the  name  of  the  Geneva  Byble  and  a  Testament  to 
be  translated  out  of  the  latin  tonge  into  the  Englishe  (the  Latin  copie  thereof  by  hir 
highnes  privledge)  belonginge  to  one  Thomas  Vautrolier  a  frenchman.  And  whereas 
hir  maiesties  highe  comissioners  in  causes  ecclesiasticall  in  consideracion  of  the  greate 
charges  costs  and  expenses  which  Richard  Jugge  hir  Maiesties  servant  and  printer 
nowe  master  of  the  Companie  of  Stationers  of  the  Citie  of  London  (by  and  upon 
comaundement)  hathe  susteined  in  the  printinge  of  the  Bibles  and  Testaments  in 
Englishe,  have  licenced  and  ordered  to  the  same  Richard  Jugge  the  only  impryntinge 
of  evrye  Englishe  Byble  in  Quarto,  and  of  evry  Jnglishe  Testament  in  decimo  sexto. 
As  by  a  true  copie  of  the  same  order  beinge  before  entred  into  this  booke  moore  at 
large  appearethe.  For  and  in  consideracion  of  which  order  and  licence  so  made  and 
gyven  by  the  saide  highe  comissioners  and  for  diverse  other  goode  and  reasonable 
causes  and  consideracions  him  the  said  Christofer  Barker  especially  movinge  he  the 

1  This  would  not  be  a  patent,  only  an  ordinary  copyright  obtained  in  an  unusually  formal 
and  dignified  way.  That  seven  privy  councillors  thus  supported  Barker  is  very  significant  of  the 
determination  that  now  Parker  was  dead  the  Geneva  version  should  have  its  turn. 


Jugge  and  Barker  and  their  Patrons.  i  3  5 


same  Christofer  in  the  nynth  day  of  June  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1575  and  in  the 
Sevententhe  vere  of  the  reigne  of  our  sovreign  Ladie  Quene  Elizabeth  about  thhoure 
of  eleven  of  ye  clocke  in  the  forenone  of  the  same  day  at  and  within  the  said 
Stationers  Hall  in  the  presence  of  theise  persons  whose  names  are  hereunto  subscribed 
of  his  owne  franke  and  free  accord  and  good  will,  did  gyve  his  hand  and  faythfull 
promise  to  the  said  Richard  Jugge.  And  did  covenaunte  promise  graunte  and  agree 
to  and  with  the  said  Richard  Jugge  in  manner  and  forme  folowinge.  That  is  to  say. 
That  he  the  said  Christofer  or  any  other  person  or  persons  by  his  assent  meanes  or 
procurement  shall  not  at  any  tyme  ymprint  or  cause  to  be  ymprinted  any  maner 
of  Englishe  Testament  in  XVI°  or  any  Englishe  Byble  in  Quarto,  or  in  any  other 
volume  or  volumes  whatsoever  which  shall  or  may  be  hurtfull  or  preiudiciall  unto 
ye  said  Richard  Jugge  for  or  concerninge  ye  printinge  utteringe  or  sellinge  of  any 
Byble  in  Quarto  or  any  Testament  in  Decimo  Sexto.  And  that  he  the  said  Richard 
Jugge  shall  and  may  have  and  enioye  to  his  owne  use  the  onely  ymprintinge  utteringe 
and  sellinge  of  all  Jnglishe  Bybles  in  Quarto  and  of  all  Englishe  Testaments  in  Decimo 
Sexto  at  all  tvmes  without  resistance  hurt  preiudice  or  interrupcion  therein  or  thereto 
to  be  made  done  caused  or  procured  in  any  wise  by  the  said  Christofer  or  any  other 
by  his  assent  meanes  or  procurement.  And  further  that  yf  the  said  Christofer  or  his 
assignes  shall  at  any  tyme  be  comaunded  by  or  from  the  Quenes  maiestie  or  hir 
counsell  or  by  any  comissioner  or  comissioners  in  causes  Ecclesiasticall  or  by  any 
other  person  or  persons  authorised  by  hir  highnes  :  to  ymprint  any  Englishe  Testa- 
ment in  XVIt0  or  any  Englishe  Byble  in  the  volume  called  quarto,  or  in  any  other 
volume  or  size  which  may  be  hurtfull  or  preiudiciall  to  the  said  Richard  Jugge  as 
aforesaide.  That  then  he  the  said  Christofer  Barker  and  his  assignes  imediately 
upon  any  suche  comaundement  to  him  or  them  gyven  shall  thereof  gyve  notice  to 
the  said  Richard  Jugge  And  shall  quietly  permit  and  suffer  the  same  Richard  Jugge 
at  his  owne  charge  and  to  and  for  his  owne  propre  and  onely  use  to  ymprinte  utter 
and  sell  evry  suche  Byble  and  Testament  whiche  the  said  Christofer  or  his  assignes 
shalbe  so  comaunded  to  printe.  The  said  Richard  Jugge  therefore  alowinge  unto 
the  said  Christofer  for  every  suche  booke  Licenced  to  the  said  Christofer  as  abovesaid 
and  so  to  be  comaunded  as  aforesaid  to  be  printed :  at  and  upon  evry  ympression 
thereof  to  be  made  by  the  said  Richard  Jugge  accordinge  to  the  tenor  of  theis 
presents :  only  1  quier  of  printed  paper  of  evry  shete  of  evry  booke  so  to  be  printed 
amountinge  in  the  whole  to  ffyve  and  twentie  perfect  bookes  of  evry  suche  whole 
impression  thereof.  Jn  witnes  whereof  the  persons  hereunder  named  for  a  remem- 
brance and  testimonie  of  the  truethe  in  the  premisses  hereunto  have  subscribed  their 
names  as  witnesses  thereof.  Gyven  the  nynthe  day  of  June  in  the  year  within 
written 


Rychard  Tottyl 
Wvllvam  Cooke 


(Wardens  of 
the  said 
ICompanie  of  Stationers. 


Also  about  Tenne  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone  of  the  eight  daye  of  June  in  the 
said  yere  within  wrytten.  The  saide  Christofer  Barker  came  to  the  house  of  the 
said  Richard  Jugge  beside  Newegate  Market  in  London  signifyenge  unto  the  same 
Richard  the  seid  graunte  and  licence  abovemencioned  to  be  made  to  the  same 
Christofer.  And  then  and  there  in  the  presence  of  the  wife  of  the  said  Ric.  Jugge 
and  of  Richard  Watkins  citizen  and  Stationer  of  London  the  same  Christofer  Barker 
did  gyve  his  hand  and  faythfull  promise  unto  the  sayde  Richard  Jugge  for  all  the 
same  causes  effects  intents  and  purposes  above  and  within  wrytten  concerninge  the 
ymprintinge  of  the  Byble  in  Quarto  and  the  testament  in  Decimo  Sexto. 

by  me  Richard  Watkyns 

The  said  Richard  Tottell  Willm  Cooke  and  Richard  Watkins  dyd  sevrally  sub- 
scribe as  is  above  written  in  the  presence  of  us  whose  names  ensue  viz. 

Willm  Seres 
Jhon  Daye 
Thomas  Marshe 
John  Waley 
J  lion  Judson 


LVII.    BARKER    ESTABLISHES  HIS   MONOPOLY.1 

From  the  original  Patent  Roll,   19  Elizabeth,  Part  8. 

Regina  omnibus  ad  quos  etc.  salutem.     Sciatis  quod  nos  de  gratia  nostra  speciali 
ac  ex  certa  scientia  et  mero  motu  nostris,  necnon  propter  credibilem  informacionem 
nobis  factam  promptitudinis  et  dextre  noticie  que  dilectus  subditus  noster  Christoferus 
Barker  de  civitate  London  impressor  habet  et  demonstravit  in  arte  &  misterio  im- 
pressionis  dedimus  et  concessimus  ac  per  presentes  pro  nobis  heredibus  et  successoribus 
nostris  damus  ac  concedimus  eidem  Christofero  Barker  officium  Impressoris  nostri 
omnium  et  singulorum  statutorum  librorum  libellorum  actuum  parliamenti  procla- 
macionum  iniunctionum  ac  bibliorum  et  novorum  testamentorum  quorumcunque  in 
lingua  anglicana  alicujus  translacionis  cum  notis  aut  sine  notis  antehac  impressorum 
aut  imposterum  per  mandatum  nostrum  imprimendorum.     Necnon  omnium  aliorum 
librorum  quorumcunque  quos  nos  pro  dei  servicio  in  Templis  hujus  Regni  nostri 
Anglie  uti  mandavimus  aut  imposterum  uti  mandaverimus  ac  aliorum  voluminum 
ac  rerum  quorumcumque  quocumque  nomine  termino  titulo  aut  sensu  seu  quibus- 
cumque  nominibus  terminis  titulis  aut  sensibus  nominentur  vocentur  vel  censeantur 
aut  eorum  aliquod  nominetur,  vocetur  censeatur  aut  imposterum  nominabuntur, 
vocabuntur  vel  censebuntur  seu  per  parliamentum  regni  nostri  predicti  in  Anglicana 
lingua  vel  in  Anglicana  et  alia  lingua  quacumque  mixtis  iam  edit  impressit  vel 
excussit   aut  imposterum    edendum    excudendum    &   ad  impressionem   ponendum 
(exceptis  solummodo  rudimentis  grammatice  institucionis  latine  lingue)  ac  ipsum  i 
Christoferum  Barker  Impressorem  nostrum  omnium  singulorum  permissorum  facimus  I 
ordinamus  et  constituimus  per  presentes  habendo  gaudendo  occupando  et  exercendo 
officium  predictum  prefato  Christofero  Barker  per  se  vel  per  sufficientem  deputatum  j 
suum  sive  deputatos  suos  sufficientes  durante  vita  sua  naturali  unacum  omnibus  I 
proficuis  commoditatibus  advantagiis  preeminentiis  privileges  eidem  officio  quoquo- 
modo  spectantibus  sive  pertinentibus.     Ouare  prohibemus  et  vetamus  ac  inhibemus  j 
omnibus  et  singulari[bu]s  subditis  nostris  quibuscunque  ubivis  gentium  et  locorum  ' 
agentibus  et  ceteris  aliis  quibuscunque  ne  illi  vel  eorum  aliquis  per  se  vel  per  alium  | 
vel  alios  imprimat  seu  imprimi  faciat  vel  faciant  infra  seu  extra  dominia  nostra ! 
quecumque  aliquod  volumen  librum  aut  opus  seu  aliqua  volumina  libros  aut  opera 
quecunque  de  quibus  impressio  per  presentes  per  nos  conceditur  prefato  Christofero 
Barker.     Ac  quod  nullus  aliquos  libros  volumina  aut  opus  quodcumque  in  vernacula 
aut  anglicana  lingua  aut  anglicana  cum  aliis  ut  prefertur  infra  regna  seu  dominia 
nostra  per  prefatum  Christoferum  Barker  impressa  aut  que  in  futuris  erunt  per  ipsum 
impressa  in  partibus  transmarinis  aut  in  partibus  forinsecis  imprimi  facient  vel  faciet 
nee  ea  seu  eorum  aliquod  importet  vel  importent  seu  importari  faciet  vel  facient  aut 
ea  vel  eorum  aliquod  vendat  vel  vendant  sub  pena  forisfacturis  XL9-  legalis  monete 
Anglie  pro  quolibet  tali  libro  volumine  vel  opere  sic  imprimendo  vel  vendendo  ac 
confiscationis  et  amissionis  talium  librorum  voluminum  operum  materiarum  et  rerum 

1  The  purport  of  this  very  full  patent  is  that  the  queen,  in  consideration  of  the  skill  shown 
by  Christopher  Barker  in  the  art  of  printing,  grants  to  him,  for  herself,  her  heirs  and  successors, 
the  office  of  royal  printer  of  all  statutes,  books,  bills,  acts  of  parliament,  proclamations,  in- 
junctions, bibles,  and  new  testaments,  in  the  English  tongue  of  any  translation,  with  or  without 
notes,  whether  previously  in  print  or  to  be  subsequently  printed  by  her  command.  Also  of  all 
service-books  ordered  to  be  used  in  churches,  and  all  other  volumes,  however  called,  ordered  to 
be  printed  by  [the  Queen]  or  Parliament,  whether  in  English  or  in  English  and  some  other 
language  (save  only  Latin  grammars)  and  makes  Christopher  Barker  her  printer,  to  exercise 
the  office  personally  or  by  a  sufficient  deputy  or  deputies  for  his  natural  life.  Wherefore  she 
forbids  all  and  sundry  her  subjects  in  or  out  of  her  dominions  to  print  any  book,  &c,  of 
which  the  printing  is  hereby  given  to  the  said  Christopher  Barker,  or  to  cause  any  book  of  the 
said  Christopher  Barker's  printing  to  be  printed  abroad  or  at  home,  and  imported  or  sold  in 
England  under  penalty  of  a  fine  of  40s.  for  every  book  so  printed  or  sold  and  seizure  of  the 
stock.  And  she  gives  to  Christopher  Barker  and  his  assigns  the  right  of  seizing  and  arresting 
without  let  or  stay.  Moreover  she  gives  the  right  of  impressing  skilled  workmen  when  needed 
for  his  service.  The  said  Christopher  Barker  to  be  paid  £6  1 3s.  4d.  yearly,  one  half  at  Michaelmas, 
the  other  at  Easter. — A  complete  monopoly  of  printing  English  Bibles  of  every  kind  was  thus 
conferred,  including  adequate  powers  for  enforcing  it.  As  to  Barker's  personal  position,  how- 
ever, the  patent  must  be  read  in  connexion  with  his  statement  in  1582  (printed  on  page  24), 
in  which  he  writes  of  many  of  his  friends  disbursing  round  sums  of  money  for  him,  and  the 
Memorandum  printed  as  No.  LXI,  where  we  find  used  the  remarkable  phrase  '  parteners  in 
the  previleges  '. 


Barker  establishes  his  Monopoly. 


137 


quorumcunque  et  eorum  cuius  libet.  Que  quidem  libri  volumina  materia  et  res 
quecumque  sic  impressoris  vel  imposterum  contra  tenorem  presentium  imprimenda 
aut  infra  hoc  regnum  nostrum  sive  dominia  quecumque  importanda  &  sicut  prae- 
mittitur  forisfaciendum  et  confiscandum  nos  concessimus  ac  aucthoritatem  et  pote- 
statem  per  presentes  pro  nobis  heredibus  et  successoribus  nostris  concedimus  prefato 
Christofero  Barker  impressori  nostro  et  assignatis  suis  apprehendendi  capiendi  seizendi 
et  ad  opus  nostrum  arestandi  et  confiscandi  sine  impedimento  interrupcione  dilatione 
contradiccione  seu  perturbacione  quacumque  vetantes  insuper  et  rirmiter  prohibentes 
virtute  et  vigore  presentium  ne  quis  alius  quocumque  modo  colore  vel  pretextu 
librum  vel  libros  aut  opera  quecumque  per  dictum  Christoferum  Barker  impri- 
menda de  novo  imprimere  vel  alibi  impressa  vendere  aut  emere  presumat  vel  audeat 
quovismodo.  Et  insuper  de  ampliori  gracia  nostra  concessimus  et  licenciam  dedimus 
ac  per  presentes  pro  nobis  heredibus  et  successoribus  nostris  concedimus  et  licenciam 
damus  eidem  Christofero  Barker  quod  ipse  vel  assignati  sui  de  tempore  in  tempus 
durante  vita  naturalis  prefati  Christopher  Barker  operarios  de  arte  et  misteriis 
impressionis  capere  apprehendere  ac  conducere  possit  vel  possint  ad  operandum  in 
arte  predicta  ad  appunctament[um]  sive  assignationem  dicti  Christoferi  Barker  tali 
tempore  et  talibus  temporibus  durantibus  quo  vel  quibus  idem  Christoferus  Barker 
vel  assignati  sui  hujusmodi  operariis  egebit  vel  egebunt.  Concessimus  etiam  ac  per 
presentes  pro  nobis  heredibus  ac  successoribus  nostris  concedimus  dicto  Christofero 
Barker  pro  exercitio  officii  predicti  feodum  sive  annuitatem  sex  librorum  tredecim 
solidos  et  quatuor  denariis  :  habendo  et  annuatim  percipiendo  predictum  feodum 
sive  annuitatem  sex  librorum  tresdecim  solidos  et  quatuor  denariis  prefato  Christofero 
Barker  ad  festum  Sancti  Michaelis  archangeli  et  pasche  equis  portionibus  solvendum 
durante  vita  sua  naturali  de  Thesauro  nostro  ab  receptis  scaccariis  nostri  West- 
monasteriensis  per  manus  Thesaurari  et  camerari  nostrorum  pro  tempore  existentis 
mandantes  etiam  et  per  presentes  firmiter  injungendum  precipientes  omnibus  et 
singulis  maioris  vice  ballivis  constabularum  et  aliis  officiorum  ministris  et  subditis 
nostris  quibuscunque  quod  prefato  Christofero  et  assignatis  suis  in  execucione  officii 
predicti  ac  factione  omnium  et  singulorum  in  his  lettris  nostris  patenti[bu]s  specificat 
agendum  de  tempore  in  tempus  quando  necesse  fuit  sint  intendentes  attendent  pariter 
&  auxiliantes  in  omnibus  presentibus  decet  eo  quod  expresse  mencione  etc.  In  cuius 
rei  etc.     Teste  R.  apud  castrum  de  Windesore  xxvii0  die  septembris 

per  breve  de  privato  sigillo. 


LVIII.     BARKER'S  CIRCULAR  TO  THE  CITY  COMPANIES. 

Broadside  in  the  Library  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries. 

May  it  please  you,  whereas  at  my  extreeme  charges  I  haue  lately  imprinted 
a  large  Bible  most  faithfully  translated,  with  large  notes  and  expositions,  especiallie 
vpon  Job,  the  Psalmes,  the  Prophets  and  the  newe  Testament,  and  that  the  right 
honourable  my  L.  Maior  with  the  consent  of  his  worshipfull  brethren,  hauing  con- 
sideration of  the  same,  hath  made  request  as  you  know  for  the  vtterance  of  some 
of  them  among  the  worshipfull  and  well  disposed  Citizens.  And  nowe  I  vnderstand 
that  my  Booke  is  mistaken  for  another  Bible 1  which  was  begon  before  I  had 
authoritie,  as  it  is  affirmed,  which  could  not  be  finished  but  by  my  consent,  and 
therefore  hath  the  name  to  be  printed  by  the  assignement  of  Christopher  Barker, 
and  as  I  will  not  dispraise  the  said  booke,  so  may  I  iustly  affirme  that  there  is 
in  quantitie,  paper,  and  workmanship,  besides  many  other  things  therein  conteined 
for  the  profite  of  the  Reader,  ten  shillings  difference  to  him  that  hath  any  iudge- 
ment  at  all,  and  yet  if  any  be  disposed  to  haue  their  bookes  bossed,  I  wil  bosse 
them  at  the  same  price  mentioned  in  my  articles  Further  if  there  be  anie  that  is 
not  willing  to  disburce  present  money,  may  haue  time  till  Candlemas  next,  so  that 
the  Master  and  wardens  be  then  answerable  for  so  many  bookes  as  shall  be  so 
deliuered,  and  where  the  beadle  was  appointed  ijd.     I  thinke  it  to  litle,  and  will 

1  But  for  this  circular  we  should  have  been  bound  to  believe  that  Barker  began  his  career 
as  Queen's  Printer  by  printing  not  only  several  Geneva  Bibles,  but  also  a  Bishops'.  We  learn 
here  that  he  only  printed  the  Geneva  Bibles  and  that  the  Bishops'  must  have  been  printed  in 
pursuance  of  the  arrangement  set  forth  in  No.  LVI  A  and  B,  which  Barker  was  now  able 
to  override. 


138        Barker's  Circular  to  the  City  Companies. 


alowe  him  for  each  booke  iiijd  and  although  here  can  rise  no  great  gaine  to  me 
in  this  bargaine,  yet  must  I  needs  thinke  my  selfe  most  bounden  to  this  most ! 
honourable  citie,  to  the  vttermost  of  my  possible  power,  besides  the  ordinarie  duetie 
I  owe  thereunto. 

Articles  concerning  the  deliuery  of  the  Bibles  mentioned  in  the  peticion  of 
Christopher  Barker  Printer  to  the  Oueenes  most  excellent  Maiestie. 

First  that  your  said  suppliant  shall  deliuer  to  euery  hall  or  company  one  large 
Bible  with  the  argumentes  to  euery  booke  in  the  olde  and  newe  Testaments,  the 
summaries  or  contents  of  euery  Chapter,  the  notes  or  expositions  vpon  all  the  hard 
places  of  the  text,  and  also  a  Table  of  the  principall  matters  therein  conteined. 
Which  Booke  is  dedicated  to  the  Oueenes  most  excellent  Maiestie,  authorized  by  the 
Lordes  and  others  of  her  Highnesse  priuie  counsell,  confirmed  and  allowed  by  the 
L.  Archbishops  grace  of  Canterburie,  the  Bishop  of  Sarum  her  Maiesties  high  almner 
&c.  Whereunto  is  added  a  Kalender  historicall,  the  Booke  of  Common  prayer  with 
the  administration  of  the  Sacraments  and  other  things  most  necessary. 

Item  that  the  clarkes  of  eche  of  the  sayde  Companies  may  take  and  set  downe 
in  writing  the  names  of  all  such  persons  of  the  same  companies  as  will  graunt  to 
buy  of  the  said  Bibles,  and  what  nomber  thereof  they  are  minded  to  haue,  and 
whether  they  will  haue  them  bound  or  unbound. 

And  that  euery  of  the  said  clarkes  hauing  so  done,  may  certifie  your  said  suppliant 
thereof,  And  he  will  thereupon  bring  the  same  bookes  to  the  halles  of  eche  of  the  sayd 
companies  where  the  buyers  may  haue  the  same  with  asmuch  conuenient  speed  as 
may  be,  paying  for  the  same  as  foloweth. 

Your  said  suppliant  hauing  bene  at  great  charge  aswell  in  preparing  furniture  as 
in  retayning  Iourneymen  and  three  learned  men  for  a  long  time  for  the  printing  of 
the  said  bibles,  and  correcting  such  small  faultes  as  had  escaped  in  the  former  prints 
thereof,  so  as  if  it  were  prised  at  xxxs.  it  were  scarce  sufficient,  (his  labour  and  cost 
being  well  considered)  yet  he  is  content  for  present  money  by  this  meane  to  take  for 
euery  of  the  same  bibles  bound  xxiiijs.  and  for  euery  of  the  same  vnbound  xxs. 

And  for  the  paines  of  the  clarkes  of  the  same  companies  in  taking  and  writing 
the  names  of  the  buyers  of  the  same  bookes  and  receyuing  the  money  for  the  same, 
your  said  suppliant  will  giue  to  every  of  them  iiijrf.  for  euery  booke  that  is  solde  in 
their  seuerall  companies. 

And  in  euery  of  the  said  companies  where  your  said  suppliant  shal  receyue  xl. 
pound  or  aboue,  he  is  content  to  giue  to  the  hall  thereof  one  bible  for  the  vse  of 
the  whole  companie  at  their  assemblies  in  the  same  hall. 


LIX.     DRAFT  FOR  AN  ACT  OF  PARLIAMENT  FOR  A  NEW  VERSION 

OF  THE  BIBLE.1 

From  British  Museum  Add.  MS.  34729,  fol.  y~. 

An  act  for  the  reducinge  of  diversities  of  Bibles  now  extant  in  the 
Englishe  tongue  to  one  setled  vulgar  translated  from  the  originall. 

For  avoydinge  of  the  multiplicitie  of  errors,  that  are  rashly  conceaved  bv  the 
inferior  and  vulgar  sorte  by  the  varietie  of  the  translacions  of  Bible  to  the  most 
daungerous  increase  of  papistrie  and  atheisme.  And  whereas  many  from  the  high  to 
the  lowe  of  all  sortes  have  bene  desierous  greatly  and  a  longe  time  to  have  the  holy 
booke  of  god  which  for  the  olde  testament  is  in  Hebrewe  for  the  new  all  originally  in 
Greeke  to  be  translated  in  such  sorte,  that  such  as  studie  it,  shoulde  in  noe  place  be 
snared,  which  worke  noe  doubt  the  lordes  spirituall  of  this  Parliament  with  the  pain- 
full travailles  of  such  of  both  Vni versifies  as  they  shall  or  mav  call  vnto  them,  may 
with  the  grace  of  Allmightie  god  perfect,  which  will  tende  to  her  Majesties  immortall 
fame  beinge  amongest  the  Christian  princes  universally  knowen  to  be  not  inferior  to 
any  in  the  furtheringe  anddefendinge  of  the  faith  of  [Christ,  And  whereas]  the  chiefest 
obstacle  to  the  buildinge  of  this  godly  worke  heretofore  hath  bene  discerned  to  be  for 
that  noe  compulsarie  meanes  hath  bene  had  no  made  wherebv  the  students  of  both 

1  This  draft  clearly  belongs  to  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  probably  to  the  primacv  of  Whitgift,  but 
with  whom  it  originated  appears  not  to  be  known. 


Draft  for  Act  of  Parliament  for  New  Version,     i  39 


universities  may  be  compelled  to  assiste  the  saide  lordes  spirituall  in  the  painefull 
examinacion  and  execucion  of  the  saide  worke,  nor  howe  the  charges  of  such  students 
and  laborers  in  the  same  vyneyarde  may  from  time  to  time  be  competently  defrayed 
Bee  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  Oueenes  most  excellent  Majestie  by  the  assent  of  the 
Lords  spirituall  and  temporall  and  the  Commons  in  this  Parliament  assembled  and 
by  the  Aucthoritie  of  the  same  that  the  lords  spirituall  of  this  Realme  that  now  are 
and  in  succession  hereafter  shalbe,  or  any  Sixe  or  more  of  them,  whereof  the  Lorde 
Archbisshoppe  of  Canterbury  for  the  time  beinge  to  be  one  may  at  their  pleasures 
from  time  to  time  assemble  treate  and  deale  towchinge  the  accomplishment  of  the 
saide  worke  and  may  by  their  letters  call  and  appoint  such  students  of  both  universi- 
ties to  assist  them  in  the  same  from  time  to  time  as  by  them  shalbe  thought  requisite, 
and  to  allowe  such  sommes  of  money  towards  the  charges  and  paines  of  such 
students  that  shalbe  imployed  in  or  about  such  worke  to  be  levied  by  censure  eccle- 
siasticall  as  to  the  saide  Lordes  spirituall  or  any  sixe  or  more  of  them  whereof  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterburye  for  the  time  beinge  to  be  one  shalbe  thought  meet,  the 
saide  charges  of  such  students  and  workers  to  be  assessed  levied  and  gathered  of 
such  Cathedrall  Churches  and  Colledges  and  the  revenues  thereof  as  by  the  saide 
lordes  spirituall,  or  any  sixe  or  more  of  them  whereof  the  saide  Archbisshoppe  of 
Canterbury  to  be  one  shalbe  thought  requisite  and  vnder  their  handes  and  seales 
ordeyned  or  appointed,  and  that  it  shall  and  may  be  lawfull  to  or  for  any  temporall 
person  by  deede  gift  or  will  to  bestowe  any  gifte  or  legacy  of  mony  or  goodes 
towards  the  supportinge  of  the  saide  charges,  and  such  gifte  or  will  to  be  put  in 
execucion  bv  decree  or  censure  of  the  Lorde  Keeper  of  the  greate  seale  of  England 
or  lorde  Chauncellor  for  the  time  beinge,  vppon  an}'  complaint  or  Informacion  to  him 
given  in  her  Majesties  Courte  of  Chauncery  in  that  behalfe. 

[Endorsed:]  The  form  of  an  Act  Concerninge  translacion  of  the  holie  Bible  from 
the  originall  hebrew  and  greeke.     To  compel  any  of  either  University  to  come  &  assist 


in  translating.     A[rch]B[ishop]  Whitgift. 


Tempore  Regin.  Elizab.2 


LX.    THE  ATTEMPT  TO  PROVIDE  FOR  THE  TRANSLATORS  OF  1611.1 
A.    Bishop  Bancroft  circulates  a  Letter  from  the  King. 

Printed  from  Strype.     (Reg.  III.  Whitgift,  fol.  155.) 

After  my  hearty  commendations  unto  your  lordship  I  have  received 
letters  from  his  most  excellent  majesty,  the  tenor  whereof  followeth : — 

Right  trusty  and  well  beloved,  we  greet  you  well.  Whereas  we  have  appointed 
certain  learned  men,  to  the  number  of  four  and  fifty,  for  the  translating  of  the  Bible, 
and  that  in  this  number,  divers  of  them  have  either  no  ecclesiastical  preferment  at 
all,  or  else  so  very  small,  as  the  same  is  far  unmeet  for  men  of  their  deserts,  and  yet 
we  of  ourself  in  any  convenient  time  cannot  well  remedy  it,  therefore  we  do  hereby 
require  you,  that  presently  you  write  in  our  name  as  well  to  the  archbishop  of  York, 
as  to  the  rest  of  the  bishops  of  the  province  of  Cant,  signifying  unto  them,  that  we 
do  will,  and  straitly  charge  every  one  of  them,  as  also  the  other  bishops  of  the  pro- 
vince of  York,  as  they  tender  our  good  favour  towards  them,  that  (all  excuses  set 
apart)  when  any  prebend  or  parsonage,  being  rated  in  our  book  of  taxations,  the  pre- 
bend to  twenty  pound  at  the  least  and  the  parsonage  to  the  like  sum  and  upwards, 
shall  next  upon  any  occasion  happen  to  be  void,  and  to  be  either  of  their  patronage 
and  gift,  or  the  like  parsonage  so  void  to  be  of  the  patronage  or  gift  of  any  person 
whatsoever,  they  do  make  stay  thereof,  and  admit  none  unto  it,  until  certifying  vs 
of  the  avoidance  of  it,  and  of  the  name  of  the  patron  (if  it  be  not  of  their  own  gift) 
we  may  commend  for  the  same  some  such  of  the  learned  men,  as  we  shall  think  fit  to 
be  preferred  unto  it  :  not  doubting  of  the  bishops'  readiness  to  satisfy  us  herein,  or 
that  any  of  the  laity,  when  we  shall  in  time  move  them  to  so  good  and  religious 
an  act,  will  be  unwilling  to  give  us  the  like  due  contentment  and  satisfaction  ;  we 
ourselves  having  taken  the  same  order  for  such  prebends  and  benefices  as  shall  be 

2  The  words  in  italics  are  in  a  different  handwriting  to  the  remainder. 

LX.  '  Other  documents  concerning  the  version  of  161 1  are  quoted  textually  in  the  Introduction. 


140     Attempt  to  Provide  for  Translators  of  161 1 


void  in  our  gift.  What  we  write  to  you  of  others,  you  must  apply  it  to  yourself, 
as  also  not  forget  to  move  the  said  archbishop  and  all  the  bishops,  with  their  deans 
and  chapters  of  both  provinces,  as  touching  the  other  point  to  be  imparted  otherwise 
by  you  unto  them.  Furthermore  we  require  you,  to  move  all  our  bishops  to  inform 
themselves  of  all  such  learned  men  within  their  several  dioceses,  as  having  especiall 
skill  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  tongues,  have  taken  pains,  in  their  private  studies  of  the 
scriptures,  for  the  clearing  of  any  obscurities  either  in  the  Hebrew  or  in  the  Greek,  or 
touching  any  difficulties  or  mistakings  in  the  former  English  translation,  which  we 
have  now  commanded  to  be  thoroughly  viewed  and  amended,  and  thereupon  to  write 
unto  them,  earnestly  charging  them,  and  signifying  our  pleasure  therein,  that  they 
send  such  their  observations  either  to  Mr.  Lively,  our  Hebrew  reader  in  Cambridge, 
or  to  Dr.  Harding,  our  Hebrew  reader  in  Oxford,  or  to  Dr.  Andrews,  dean  of  West- 
minster, to  be  imparted  to  the  rest  of  their  several  companies  ;  so  that  our  said 
intended  translation  may  have  the  help  and  furtherance  of  all  our  principal  learned 
men  within  this  our  kingdom.  Given  under  our  signet  at  our  palace  of  Westm.  the 
two  and  twentieth  of  July,  in  the  second  year  of  our  reign  of  England,  France  and 
Ireland,  and  of  Scotland  xxxvii. 

Your  lordship  may  see,  how  careful  his  majesty  is  for  the  providing  of  livings  for 
these  learned  men  :  I  doubt  not  therefore,  but  your  lordship  will  have  a  due  regard 
of  his  majesty's  request  herein,  as  it  is  fit  and  meet,  and  that  you  will  take  such 
order  both  with  your  chancellor,  register,  and  such  your  lordship's  officers,  who  shall 
have  intelligence  of  the  premises,  as  also  with  the  dean  and  chapter  of  your  cathedral 
church,  whom  his  majesty  likewise  requireth  to  be  put  in  mind  of  his  pleasure  herein, 
not  forgetting  the  latter  part  of  his  majesty's  letter,  touching  the  informing  of  your- 
self of  the  fittest  linguists  within  your  diocese  for  to  perform,  and  speedily  to  return 
that,  which  his  majesty  is  so  careful  to  have  faithfully  performed.  I  could  wish  your 
lordship  would,  for  my  discharge  return  me  in  some  few  lines,  the  time  of  the  receipt 
of  these  letters,  that  I  may  discharge  that  duty,  which  his  majesty,  by  these  his 
letters,  hath  laid  upon  me ;  and  so  I  bid  your  lordship  right  heartily  farewell. 
From  Fulham  the  31st  of  July,  MDCIV. 

Your  lordship's  loving  friend  and  brother, 

R.  London. 

B.    Bancroft's  Exhortation  to  the  Bishops  to  subscribe. 

From  the  same.     (Reg.  III.  Whitgift,  fol.  156.) 

'  Salutem  in  Christo.'  My  very  good  lord,  as  touching  that  clause  in  his  majesty's 
letter,  which  is  referred  to  my  relation,  this  it  is  :  there  are  many,  as  your  lordship 
perceiveth,  who  are  to  be  employed  in  this  translating  of  the  Bible,  and  sundry  of 
them  must  of  necessity  have  their  charges  borne,  which  his  majesty  was  very  ready 
of  his  most  princely  disposition  to  have  borne  :  but  some  of  my  lords,  as  things 
now  go,  did  hold  it  inconvenient,  whereupon  it  was  left  to  me,  to  move  all  my 
brethren,  the  bishops,  and  likewise  every  several  dean  and  chapter,  to  contribute  j 
toward  this  work.  Accordingly  therefore  to  my  duty,  I  heartily  pray  your  lordship, 
not  only  to  think  yourself  what  is  meet  for  you  to  give  for  this  purpose,  but  likewise 
to  acquaint  your  dean  and  chapter  not  only  with  the  said  clause  of  his  majestv 's 
letter,  but  likewise  with  the  meaning  of  it,  that  they  may  agree  upon  such  a  sum, 
as  they  mean  to  contribute.  I  do  not  think  that  a  thousand  marks  will  finish  the 
work,  to  be  employed  as  is  aforesaid,  whereof  your  lordship,  with  your  dean  and 
chapter,  having  due  consideration,  I  must  require  you  in  his  majesty's  name, 
according  to  his  good  pleasure  in  that  behalf,  that  as  soon  as  possibly  you  can,  you 
send  me  word,  what  shall  be  expected  from  you  and  your  said  dean  and  chapter  ;  for 
I  am  to  acquaint  his  majesty  with  every  man's  liberality  towards  this  most  godly 
work. 

And  thus  not  doubting  of  your  especiall  care  for  the  accomplishing  of  the 
premises,  and  desiring  your  lordship  to  note  the  date  to  me  of  your  receipt  of  this 
letter,  I  commit  your  lordship  unto  the  tuition  of  the  Almighty  God.  From  Fulham 
this  31st  of  July  MDCIV. 

Your  lordship's  very  loving  friend  and  brother, 

R.  London. 


I+I 


LXI.    THE  BIBLE  STOCK  IN   1606.1 


Mr.  Barker  Master. 
Mr.  White  1 


Mr.  Leake 


Wardens. 


1606     4  July 


Memorandum  that  Mr.  Barker  in  consideration  that  Mr.  Dawson  hath  remitted 
and  yeilded  up  unto  hym  all  the  full  right  &  interest  &  Clayme  to  the  printinge 
of  the  booke  of  holy  Scripture  called  the  Newe  Testament  in  the  volume  called 
Octavo  of  Mr.  Cheak's  translacion  hathe  undertaken  and  agreed  to  pay  unto  the 
parteners  in  the  previleges  to  their  own  proper  use  Foure  hundred  pounds  either 
out  of  his  Divids  of  his  parte  in  the  said  privilege  as  they  shall  growe  due  untyll 
they  amount  to  so  muche  Or  else  in  some  spedye  sorte  as  he  shall  think  convenient 
Be  yt  remembered  that  on  this  present  day  Mr.  Barker  hathe  payd  unto  the  said 
partners  as  well  Twenty  pounds  whiche  he  receaved  for  the  dividt  of  his  parte 
upon  the  dividt  made  this  day  As  also  four  score  pounds  moore  in  present  money 
whiche  maketh  up  one  hundred  pounds  and  is  the  first  hundred  pounds  parcell  of 
the  said  Foure  hundred  pounds 

LXII.     REPORT  ON  THE  MAKING  OF  THE  VERSION  OF  1611 
PRESENTED  TO  THE  SYNOD  OF  DORT. 

Sessione  Septima. 

xx  Novembris,  Die  Martis  ante  meridiem. 

Theologi  Magnae  Britanniae  scripto  explicarunt,  quo  consilio,  quaque  ratione 
negotium  accuratissimg  versionis  Anglican^  a  Serenissimo  Rege  Iacobo  institutum 
fuerit,  qu?  ratio  in  distribuendo  opere  fuerit  observata :  turn  que  leges  interpretibus 
fuerint  prescripte  ;  ut  inde  ea,  que  nobis  usui  fore  judicarentur,  desumi  possent. 
Exemplum  ejus  scripti  hie  subjicitur  : 

Modus  quem  Theologi  Angli  in  versione  Bibliorum  sunt  secuti. 

Theologi  Magnae  Britanniae,  quibus  non  est  visum  tantae  quaestioni  subitam  et 
inopinatam  responsionem  adhibere,  officii  sui  esse  judicarunt,  praematura  delibera- 
tione  habita,  quando  quidem  facta  esset  honorifica  accuratissimae  translationis 
Anglicanae  mentio,  a  Serenissimo  Rege  Iacobo,  magna  cum  cura,  magnisque 
sumptibus  nuper  editae,  notum  facere  huic  celeberrimae  Synodo,  quo  consilio,  qua- 
que ratione  sacrum  hoc  negotium  a  Serenissima  ejus  Majestate  praestitum  fuerit. 

Primo,  in  opere  distribuendo  hanc  rationem  observari  voluit :  totum  corpus 
Bibliorum  in  sex  partes  fuit  distributum :  cuilibet  parti  transferendae  destinati  sunt 
septem  vel  octo  viri  primarij,  Linguarum  peritissimi. 

Duae  partes  assignatae  fuerunt  Theologis  quibusdam  Londinensibus :  quatuor 
vero  partes  reliquae  divisae  fuerunt  aequaliter  inter  utriusque  Academiae  Theologos. 

Post  peractum  a  singulis  pensum,  ex  hisce  omnibus  duodecim  selecti  viri  in  unum 
locum  convocati,  integrum  opus  recognoverunt,  ac  recensuerunt. 

Postremo,  Reverendissimus  Episcopus  Wintoniensis.  Bilsonus,  una  cum  Doctore 
Smitho,  nunc  Episcopo  Glocestriensi,  viro  eximio,  et  ab  initio  in  toto  hoc  opere 
versatissimo,  omnibus  mature  pensitatis  &  examinatis  extremam  manum  huic  versioni 
imposuerunt. 

Leges  Interpretibus  praescriptae  fuerunt  hujusmodi : 

Primo,  cautum  est,  ut  simpliciter  nova  versio  non  adornaretur,  sed  vetus,  et  ab 
Ecclesia  diu  recepta  ab  omnibus  naevis  et  vitiis  purgaretur ;  idque  hunc  in  finem, 
ne  recederetur  ab  antiqua  translatione,  nisi  originalis  textus  Veritas,  vel  emphasis 
postularet. 

Secundo,  ut  nullae  annotationes  margini  apponerentur :  sed,  tantum  loca  parallela 
notarentur. 

1  This  very  important  document,  most  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  Charles  Rivington,  invites  more 
commentary  than  the  date  of  its  receipt  allows.  The  surrender  of  the  copyright  of  Sir  John  Cheke's 
version  of  the  New  Testament,  though  mentioned  as  the  only  consideration,  was  probably  quite 
a  minor  one,  as  its  pecuniary  value  would  have  been  nearer  four  hundred  pence  than  as  many 
pounds.  It  reads  as  if  Barker  had  been  taking  too  large  a  share  of  the  profits  and  that  this 
was  a  settlement  not  improbably  in  anticipation  of  the  outlay  to  be  incurred  on  the  new  version. 


Mr.  Bar- 
ker. 

Mr.  Daw- 
son. 

Mr.  Daw- 
son yeild- 
eth  up  the 
testament 
in  8  to  Mr. 
Barker. 
Mr.  Bar- 
kerunder- 
takeththe 
payment 
of  400li  to 
the  ptners 
in  the  pri- 
vilege to 
theire 
own  use. 
He  now 
payeth 
the  first 
iooli 
thereof. 


142  Report  to  the  Synod  of  Dort. 


Tertio,  ut  ubi  vox  Hebraea  vel  Graeca  geminum  idoneum  sensum  admittit :  alter 
in  ipso  contextu,  alter  in  margine  exprimeretur.  Quod  itidem  factum,  ubi  varia 
lectio  in  exemplaribus  probatis  reperta  est. 

Quarto,  Hebraismi  et  Graecismi  difficiliores  in  margine  repositi  sint. 

Ouinto,  in  translatione  Tobit  et  Iudithae,  quando  quidem  magna  discrepantia 
inter  Graecum  contextum  et  veterem  vulgatam  Latinam  editionem  reperiatur, 
Graecum  potius  contextum  secuti  sunt. 

Sexto,  ut  quae  ad  sensum  supplemendum  ubivis  necessario  fuerunt  contextui 
interserenda,  alio,  scilicet  minusculo,  charactere,  distinguerentur. 

Septimo,  ut  nova  argumenta  singulis  libris,  &  novae  periochae  singulis  capitibus 
praefigerentur. 

Denique,  absolutissima  Geneologia  et  descriptio  Terrae  sanctae,  huic  opere 
conjungerentur. 

Translation. 

The  theologians  of  Great  Britain  offered  a  written  explanation  of  the  design  and 
plan  in  accordance  with  which  the  business  of  the  very  accurate  English  version 
was  instituted  by  the  most  Serene  King  James,  of  what  plan  was  observed  in  dis- 
tributing the  work,  and  what  rules  were  laid  down  for  the  translators ;  with  the 
intent  that  any  points  which  might  be  judged  useful  to  us  might  be  taken  from  it. 
A  copy  of  this  document  is  subjoined. 

Method  which  the  English  Theologians  followed  in  the  version  of  the  Bible.  The 
theologians  of  Great  Britain,  unwilling  to  give  a  sudden  and  unconsidered  answer 
to  so  important  a  question,  considered  it  their  duty  to  hold  an  early  consultation, 
and  since  honourable  mention  has  been  made  of  the  very  accurate  English  translation 
lately  set  forth,  with  great  care  and  at  great  expense,  by  the  most  Serene  King  James, 
to  notify  to  this  numerously  attended  Synod  the  design  and  plan  with  which  this 
sacred  business  was  furnished  by  his  most  Serene  Majesty. 

Firstly,  in  the  distribution  of  the  work  he  willed  this  plan  to  be  observed :  the 
whole  text  of  the  Bible  was  distributed  into  six  sections,  and  to  the  translation  of 
each  section  there  were  nominated  seven  or  eight  men  of  distinction,  skilled  in 
languages. 

Two  sections  were  assigned  to  certain  London  theologians;  the  four  remaining 
sections  were  equally  divided  among  the  theologians  of  the  two  Universities. 

After  each  section  had  finished  its  task  twelve  delegates,  chosen  from  them  all, 
met  together  and  reviewed  and  revised  the  whole  work. 

Lastly,  the  very  Reverend  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  Bilson,  together  with 
Dr.  Smith,  now  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  a  distinguished  man,  who  had  been  deeply 
occupied  in  the  whole  work  from  the  beginning,  after  all  things  had  been  maturely 
weighed  and  examined,  put  the  finishing  touch  to  this  version. 

The  rules  laid  down  for  the  translators  were  of  this  kind  : 

In  the  first  place  caution  was  given  that  an  entirely  new  version  was  not  to  be 
furnished,  but  an  old  version,  long  received  by  the  Church,  to  be  purged  from  all 
blemishes  and  faults  ;  to  this  end  there  was  to  be  no  departure  from  the  ancient 
translation,  unless  the  truth  of  the  original  text  or  emphasis  demanded. 

Secondly,  no  notes  were  to  be  placed  in  the  margin,  but  only  parallel  passages  to 
be  noted. 

Thirdly,  where  a  Hebrew  or  Greek  word  admits  two  meanings  of  a  suitable  kind, 
the  one  was  to  be  expressed  in  the  text,  the  other  in  the  margin.  The  same  to  be 
done  where  a  different  reading  was  found  in  good  copies. 

Fourthly,  the  more  difficult  Hebraisms  and  Graecisms  were  consigned  to  the 
margin. 

Fifthly,  in  the  translation  of  Tobit  and  Judith,  when  any  great  discrepancy  is 
found  between  the  Greek  text  and  the  old  vulgate  Latin  they  followed  the  Greek 
text  by  preference. 

Sixthly,  that  words  which  it  was  anywhere  necessary  to  insert  into  the  text  to 
complete  the  meaning  were  to  be  distinguished  by  another  type,  small  roman. 

Seventhly,  that  new  arguments  should  be  prefixed  to  every  book,  and  new 
headings  to  every  chapter. 

Lastly,  that  a  very  perfect  Genealogy  and  map  of  the  Holy  Land  should  be  joined 
to  the  work. 


INDEX  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION  AND  RECORDS. 


Abbot,  George,  Dean  of  West- 
minster, 28. 

^Elfric,  9. 

Aglionby,  J.,  29. 

Allen,  Cardinal,  298. 

Alley,  William,  Bishop  of  Exeter, 
20. 

Amsterdam,  21,  22,  37. 

Anderson,  Christopher,  11,  50. 

Andrewes,  Lancelot,  Bishop  of 
Winchester,  27. 

Andrewes,  Roger,  28. 

Antwerp,  printing  at,  11-13,  22, 
46,  62-8,  76,  78,  82,  87,  88,  98. 

Antwerp  Polvglott,  the,  32. 

Authorized  Version  of  l6ll: 
history  of  its  production,  23- 
33  ;  list  of  translators,  27-9  ; 
rules  observed  in  translation, 
29-30  ;  account  by  one  of  the 
revisers,  30;  payment  of  trans- 
Iators,3U-i,  139-40;  was  this 
Version  ever  authorized?  31- 
2;  bibliographical  description, 
32-3;  later  history,  33-8;  ac- 
count laid  before  the  Synod 
of  Dort,  141-2. 

Awdeley,  Lord  Chancellor,  100. 


Badius,  Conrad,  printer  of  Ge- 
neva, 18. 

Ball,  William,  30. 

Bancroft,  Richard,  Bishop  of 
London :  his  interest  in  the 
1611  version,  26-7,  31;  cir- 
culates a  letter  from  King 
James  to  procure  provision 
for  the  translators,  139-40; 
his  exhortation  to  the  Bishops, 
140. 

Baptist  College,  Bristol,  10. 

Barker,  Charles,  printer,  30. 

Barker,  Christopher,  printer: 
prints  the  Geneva  version 
and  the  Bishops'  Bible,  24-5  ; 
licensed  to  print  Bibles,  134-5  ; 
establishes  his  monopoly,  24- 
5,  136-7;  his  circular  to  the 
City  Companies,  137-8;  his 
agreement  with  the  Bible 
Stock,  141. 

Barker,  Matthew,  printer,  30. 

Barker,  Robert,  printer,  25 ; 
said  to  have  paid  for  the 
translation  of  the  161 1  ver- 
sion,  30—1  ;    its   first   printer, 

_  32,  35,  37- 

Barker,  Robert  (2),  printer,  30. 

Barlow,  Jerome,  56. 

Barlow,  William,  Bishop  of 
Chichester,  20,  26. 

Barlow,  William,  Dean  of 
Chester,  29. 

Barnes,  Robert,  84. 

Baskett,  J.,  printer,  57. 

Becon,  Thomas,  20. 

Bedwell,  William,  27. 

Bentham,  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
Coventry  and  LichBeld,  20. 

Bergen-op-Zoorn,  78. 

Berthelet,  Thomas,  printer,   17, 

,   73.  "6,  104. 

Beza,  ig,  24,  129. 

Bible,  the  English  :  prohibition 
of  English  translations,  9,  41 ; 
Sir  Thomas  More  on  pro- 
hibition, 41-2;  More's  plan 
for  a  limited  circulation,  43  ; 
the  printing  of  the  first  New 
Testaments,  48-52;  the  news 
sent  to  the  King,  52;  epis- 
copal prohibition,  61—  2  ;  search 
for  English  New  Testaments 
at  Antwerp,  62-8;  Bishop  of 
London's  attempt  to  buy  up 
the  translation,  68-9 ;  Nix, 
Bishop  of  Norwich,  refunds 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
part  of  his  outlay  on  New 
Testaments,  69— 70;  confession 
ot  Robert  Necton  as  to  buy- 


ing and  selling  New  Testa- 
ments, 70-2  ;  Bishop  Nix  im- 
plores the  King's  help  in  sup- 
pression, 72—3  ;  the  King  con- 
sults his  Council  and  the 
Bishops,  73;  the  King's  Pro- 
clamation, forbidding  the 
translation  and  possession  of 
Holy  Scripture  in  the  English 
tongue,  73-6 ;  the  Bishops 
petition  for  an  English  Bible, 
12,  78—9;  the  projected  Ver- 
sion, 86—7;  Fox's  account  of 
the  first  Bibles,  97—100 ; 
King's  Proclamation,  forbid- 
ding importation  without  li- 
cence, 104;  patent  for  Bible 
priniing  granted  to  Cromwell, 
in  ;  King's  Proclamation  for 
the  English  Bible  to  be  set  up 
in  churches,  112-13  ',  Draft  for 
a  Proclamation  as  to  the  read- 
ing of  the  Bible  in  churches, 
113-14;  an  admonition  by  the 
Bishop  of  London,  1 14-15 ; 
narrative  of  William  Maldon, 
1 15-16;  the  Great  Bible  con- 
demned in  Convocation,  116— 
l7  \  Jug£e  and  Barker  and 
the  Company  of  Stationers, 
132 ;  the  beginning  of  the 
Bible  Stock,  24,  133-4;  Draft 
for  an  Act  of  Parliament  for 
a  new  version,  138-9;  attempt 
to  provide  for  the  translators 
of  the  [611  version,  139-40. 

See  a/so  under  Authorized 
Version  ;  Bishops'  Bible ; 
Coverdale;  Douai  Version; 
Great  Bible  ;  Geneva  Bible  ; 
Matthew;  Rheims  New  Testa- 
ment ;  Tyndale ;  Wyclif. 

Bible  Society,  37. 

Bickley,  Thomas,  20. 

Bilson,  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
3i,  142. 

Birekmann,  Arnold,  49,  51. 

Birckmann,  Francis,  63,  71. 

Bishops*  Bible:  history  of  its 
production,  19-21,  24-5;  list 
of  revisers,  20;  petition  of 
Convocation  for  an  English 
translation,  78-9;  projected 
version  approved  by  Crom- 
well, 86-7 ;  Committee  ap- 
pointed to  examine  former 
translations,  117;  letter  from 
Bishop  of  Ely  to  Cecil,  122.; 
Parker  invites  Cecil  to  take 
part  in  the  revision,  ib.  ; 
Strype's  summary,  122-3 ; 
Parker  announces  completion 
of  the  work,  124;  presenta- 
tion to  Queen  Elizabeth  and 
story  of  revision,  2^,  124—5; 
Parker's  note  as  to  trans- 
lators, 125-6;  rules  observed 
in  translation,  126. 

Blayney,  Dr.,  of  Oxford,  revises 
the  161 1  text,  38. 

Bodley,  John,  receives  an  ex- 
clusive patent  for  printing  the 
Geneva  Bible,  19,  23,  121-2. 

Boel,  Cornells,  32. 

Bonner,  Edmund,  Bishop  of 
London  :  promotes  the  print- 
ing of  the  Bible  in  English, 
16,  97-100,  104;  changes  his 
views,  100;  his  admonition, 
1 14-15. 

Boys,  Dr.  John,  28,  30,  32,  37. 

Branthwait,  Dr.  William,  28. 

Brett,  Richard,  28. 

Bristow,  Richard,  22. 

British  Museum,  10,  12,  82. 

Bucer,  Martin,  17. 

Bugenhagen,  Johann,  49,  50. 

Bullingham,  Nicholas,  Bishop 
of  Lincoln,  20. 

Burleigh,  Lord,  21. 

Burley,  Dr.  Francis,  27. 

Byng,  Andrew,  28. 


Calvin,  17. 

Cambridge.  30,  37,  72,  74. 

Campion,    Edmund,  21. 

Canterbury,  Synod  of,  78-9. 

Carleton,  Dr.  James  G.,  22. 

Castillon,  French  Ambassador 
in  England,  107,  109. 

Caxton,  William,  9,  10. 

Cecil,  Sir  William,  19,  23,  122. 

Chaderton,  Laurence,  28. 

Charles  V,  Emperor,  108. 

Cheke,  Sir  John  :  his  version 
of  the  New  Testament,  141. 

Christiern,  King  of  Denmark, 
48,  50. 

Clark,  Dr.  Richard,  27. 

Cochlaeus:  see  Dobneck. 

Cologne,  printing  at,  10,  48—51, 
53,  57,  "o. 

Constantine,  George,  69,  70—1. 

Coverdale,  Miles:  his  version 
of  the  Bible,  12-14;  financial 
help  given  by  Jacob  van 
Meteren,  13,  87-8;  edits  the 
Great  Bible,  15,  98-9,  101, 
106  ;  Coverdale's  account  of 
his  work,  15,  88-90,  101-3, 
106  ;  his  Latin-English  New 
Testament,  90-3,  98,  too,  105, 
106. 

Cox,  Richard,  Bishop  of  Ely, 
19,  20,  122,  123. 

Cranmer,  Thomas,.  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury :  shows  favour 
to  Matthew's  Bible,  14,  94-5, 
96—7,  99;  connexion  with  the 
Bishops'  Bible,  78-9,  86-7 ; 
writes  Prologue  to  second 
edition  of  the  Great  Bible,  17; 
discusses  price  and  copyright 
of  the  Great  Bible,  16,  no— 11. 

Crispin,  John,  23. 

Cromwell,  Richard,  105. 

Cromwell,  Thomas,  Earl  of 
Essex :  encourages  Bible 
translation,  14,  15,  76 ;  fa- 
vours the  publication  of 
Matthew's  Bible,  14,  94—7,  99; 
provides  funds  lor  the  Great 
Bible,  15  ;  his  interest  in  the 
work,  15—16,  90,  97,  99,  100, 
101-3,105-11;  his  injunctions 
for  setting  up  the  Bible  in  the 
churches,  16,  112;  secures  the 
patent  for  printing,  16,  in; 
his  arrangements  lor  transla- 
tion of  the  New  Testament, 
86;  his  fall  from  power,  99— 
IOO. 

Curtis,  Thomas,  38. 

Dakins,  William,  29. 

Davidson,  Dr.,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  34. 

Davies,  Richard,  Bishop  of  St. 
David's,  20,  123. 

Day,  John,  printer,  78. 

Demetrius,  Emanuel,  87. 

de  Montmorencv,  Anne,  Con- 
stable of  France,  104, 107,  no. 

de  Valera,  Cipriano,  32. 

Dillingham,  Francis,  28. 

Diodati,  32. 

Dobneck,  Johann  (Cochlaeus), 
4,  4852. 

Dort,  37;  Synod  of,  30, 31,  141-2. 

Douai,  English  College  at,  21, 
22. 

Douai  Version  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, 22-3. 

Downes,  Andrew,  28,  30,  32. 

Duff,  Mr.  Gordon,  62-3,  96. 

Duport,  Dr.  John,  28. 

Edes,  Richard,  Dean  of  Wor- 
cester, 29. 

Edward  VI,  17,  26,  57. 

Edwin,  Bishop  of  Worcester, 
122-3. 

Elizabeth,  Queen,  18,  19,  26; 
presentation  of  the  Bishops' 
Bible  to,  19,  124-5. 


Emmerson,  Margaret  van,  46. 
Emperour,     Martin    (otherwise 

Martin   Caesar  or   Keysere), 

printer  of  Antwerp,  n,  12. 
Endhoven,  Catharyn,  82. 
Endhoven,       Christoffel       van, 

printer  of  Antwerp,  11,62,  65, 

67,  71.  84. 
Endhoven,  Hans  van,  84. 
Erasmus,  10,  15,  22,  44,  47. 

Fagius,  Paul,  17. 

Fairclough,  Richard,  2&. 

Fenton,  Roger,  29. 

Fish,  Simon,  70,  71,  74. 

Fisher,  Bishop,  50. 

Fogny,  John,  printer  of  Rheims, 
22. 

Fox,  John,  16,  23,  44,  53,  63,  70, 
78,  97,  115. 

Francis  I,  King  of  France  :  per- 
mits the  Great  Bible  to  be 
firinted  in  Paris,  97,  98;  his 
icence  to  Grafton  and  Whit- 
church, 100-1. 

Frankfort,  49,  50,  76. 

Frith,  John,  74,  77  ;  his  friend- 
ship with  Tyndale,  45,  5^  ;  de- 
fends Tyndale  and  his  work 
against  More,  77-8. 

Froschouer,  Christopher,  printer 
of  Zurich,  13. 

Fry,  Francis,  35. 

Fulke,  Dr.  William,  22-3. 


Gardiner,  Stephen,  Bishop  ot 
Winchester,  16,  86,  99,  100, 
102. 

Garvais,  Friar  Henry,  106,  107. 

Geneva  Bible,  17-19 ;  printed 
in  London,  23  ;  excluded  by 
Parker,  23,  25,  37;  its  popu- 
larity, 25,  37;  Preface  to  New 
Testament,  1 17-19  ;  Preface 
to  Bible,  119-21  ;  licence  to 
John  Bodley,  19,  23,  121-2. 

Gilby,  Anthony,  18. 

Gilford,  Sir  Henry,  44. 

Ginsburg,  Dr.  Christian,  13. 

Goad,  Dr.,  37. 

Gold,  Henry,  $y. 

Goodman,  Gabriel,  Dean  of 
Westminster,  20. 

Grafton,  Richard,  grocer  and 
printer,  86,  113;  arranges  for 
publication  of  Matthew's 
Bible,  14,  15,  95-7  99-100; 
and  of  the  Great  Bible,  15—17, 
34,  97-103,  105  ;  the  French 
King's  licence  to  print  in 
Paris.  100-1. 

Gray,  William,  102. 

Greenwich,  in. 

Great  Bible,  15-17,  19,  21 ;  Fox's 
account,  10,  97—100 ;  the 
French  King's  licence,  100— 1 ; 
reports  as  to  progress,  15,  16, 
101— 5 ;  Bishop  Bonner's  sup- 
port, 15,  104 ;  Bibles  confis- 
cated, and  citation  of  Francois 
Regnault.  106—7;  letters  from 
the  French  Ambassador  to  the 
Constable  of  France,  15,  107— 
8,  109,  no;  letter  from  the 
Imperial  Ambassador  to  the 
Emperor  Charles  V,  108-9; 
letter  from  tin*  Grand  Con- 
stable of  France  to  the  French 
Ambassador,  109;  price  and 
copyright  of  the  Bible,  16-17, 
no;  patent  granted  to  An- 
thony Marler.  111-12;  Preface 
by  Cranmer,  17;  condemned 
in  Convocation,  116—17. 

Grindal,  Edmund,  Bishop  of 
London,  19,  23;  one  of  the 
translators  of  the  Bishop's 
Bible,  20;  suspension  of,  25. 

Guest,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  20, 
1 -'3- 


144 


Index  to  the  Introduction  and  Records. 


Haberdashers'  Company,  16. 

Hackett,  John:  searches  at 
Antwerp  for  English  New 
Testaments,  46,  62—8. 

Haghen,  Godfrid  van  der,  12. 

Halle's  Chronicle^  14,  86. 

Hamburg,  10,  12,  46,  76,  99. 

Hampton  Court  Conference,  26, 
31- 

Harding,  Dr.  John,  28. 

Harmer,  John,  29. 

Harrison,  Luke,  24. 

Harrison,  R.,  printer,  19. 

Harrison,  Thomas,  28. 

Hebblethwavte,  William,  44, 
48. 

Henry  VIII,  17,  26,  48,  50;  An- 
swer to  Martin  Luther,  55-6  ; 
consults  his  Council  and  the 
Bishops  as  to  surreptitious 
translations,  73 ;  endeavours 
to  get  Tyndale  to  retract,  76 ; 
petition  of  Convocation  to, 
78—9;  Coverdale's  dedication 
of  his  Latin-English  New 
Testament  to,  90;  Matthew's 
Bible  dedicated  to,  94,  99 ; 
favours  production  of  the 
Great  Bible,  97;  Proclama- 
tion forbidding  the  circulation 
of  books  without  licence,  104; 
Proclamation  for  the  English 
Bible  to  be  set  up  in  churches, 
1 12-13;  Draft  Proclamation 
as  to  reading  the  Bible,  113- 
H- 

Heze,  Dietrich,  49,  51. 

Hogenberg,  Franciscus,  21. 

Holbein,  Hans,  17. 

Holland,  Dr.  Thomas,  28. 

Hollybush,  Johan,  63,  71,  90,96. 

Home,  Robert,  Bishop  of  Win- 
chester, 20. 

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Ralph,  29. 

Hutten,  L.,  29. 

James  I :  calls  together  Hamp- 
ton Court  Conference,  26,  31  ; 
pushes  forward  work  of  re- 
vision, 27;  his  order  for  trans- 
lation, 27-30;  endeavours  to 
secure  payment  for  trans- 
lators, 31. 

Jerome,  St.,  22. 

John  of  Trevisa,  9. 

Jones,  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Llan- 
daff,  20. 

Joye,  George,  69,  73  ;  edits  an 
unauthorized  version  of  Tyn- 
dale's New  Testament,  11; 
seeks  to  obtain  a  licence  from 
the  King  to  translate  Scrip- 
ture, 78  ;  Tyndale  complains 
of  Joye's  unauthorized  re- 
vision, 79-82  ;  Joye's  answer, 
82—3;  reconciliation  and  fresh 
quarrel,  83—6. 

Juda,  Leo,  13,  19. 

Jugge,  John,  printer,  24. 

Jugge,  Richard,  printer,  24,  31  ; 
commended  for  his  printing  of 
the  Bishops'  Bible,  21  ;  mono- 
poly secured  to  him,  24;  dis- 
pute w  ith  the  Stationers'  Com- 
pany, 132  ;  beginning  of  the 
Bible  Stock,  133-4;  Barker's 
satisfaction  to,  134—5. 

Junius,  Franciscus,  32. 

Kilbye,  Dr    Richard,  2S. 
King,  Geoffrey,  27. 
Kingdon,  Dr.,  ion. 
Knox,  T.  F.,  127. 

Latimer,  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, 112. 

Laud,  Archbishop,  34. 

Lawney,  Thomas,  86-7. 

Layfield,  Dr.  John,  27. 

Lee,  Edward,  Archbishop  of 
York,  52. 

Leicester,  Earl  of,  21,  124. 


Lively,  Edward,  28. 
Lobley,  Michael,  98. 
Luft,  Hans,  printer,  12,  46,  56. 
Luther,  Martin,    10,   12,  45,  46. 

49-51,  55,  59,  60,  77,  88. 
Lynne,  Walter,  printer,  57. 

Mainz,  10,  49,  >i. 

Maldon,  William,  narrative  of, 
1 15-16. 

Marburg,  46,  76. 

Margaret  of  Savoy,  63. 

Marillac,  Charles.  French  Am- 
bassador in  England,  109, 1 10. 

Marler,  Anthony,  gives  financial 
support  towards  the  produc- 
tion of  the  Great  Bible,  16; 
concerned  in  its  sale,  17,  111- 

12. 

Martin,  Gregory,  21-3. 

Mary,  Queen,  17. 

Matthew,  Thomas:  his  version 
of  the  Bible,  14—15;  Cranmer 
recommends  the  version,  94— 
5  ;  Grafton's  arrangements 
for  publication,  95-7 ;  Foxe's 
account  of,  99. 

Mede,  Dr.  Joseph,  37. 

Meteren,  Cornelius  van,  88. 

Meteren,  Emanuel  van,  87. 

Meteren,  Jacob  van:  story  of 
financial  help  given  by  him  to 
Coverdale  in  the  production 
of  the  1535  Bible,  13,  87-8. 

Monmouth,  H.,  10,  44. 

Montanus,  Arias,  32. 

More,  Sir  Thomas  :  his  Dialogue 
on  the  prohibition  of  English 
translations,  41—2  ;  plan  for  a 
limited  circulation,  43  ;  criti- 
cizes Tyndale's  translation, 
59—61;  controversy  with  Tyn- 
dale, 73,  77,  78. 

Mummuth.  H.,  see  Monmouth. 

Munster,  Sebastian,  15,  19,  123. 

Necton,  Robert,  53  ;  confession 
as  to  buying  and  selling  New 
Testaments,  62,  70-2. 

Necton,  Thomas,  70. 

New  Testament :  see  Bible. 

Nicholas  of  Hereford,  9. 

Nicholson,  James,  printer,  of 
Southwark,  13,  14,  o^t  go,  96, 
105. 

Nix,  Richard,  Bishop  of  Nor- 
wich :  refunds  the  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury  part  of  his 
outlay  on  New  Testaments, 
69-70;  implores  the  King's 
help,  72-3. 

Norton,  William,  printer,  24. 

Nuremberg,  49,  51. 

Olivetan,  iq. 
Ortelius,  Abraham,  88. 
Osiander,  Andreas,  49,  51. 
Overall,  John,  Bishop  of  Coven- 
try, 27. 
Oxford,  1,  30,  38,  41,  74. 

Packington,  Augustine,  buys  up 
Tyndale's  translation,  68-9. 

Pagninus,  S-,  19. 

Paris,  printing  at,  87,  97-102, 
106-8. 

Paris,  Dr.  Thomas,  of  Cam- 
bridge, revises  the  161 1  text, 
38. 

Parker,  Matthew,  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury :  his  attitude 
towards  the  Genevan  version, 
19,  23—5;  his  interest  in  the 
Bishops'  Bible,  20,  23-4,  31, 
123;  commends  Jugge,  21, 
23-4  ;  announces  completion 
of  the  Bishops'  Bible,  124  ; 
presents  the  Bible  to  Queen 
Elizabeth,  124-5;  his  note  as 
to  the  translators,  125-6. 

Parkhurst,  John,  Bishop  of 
Salisbury,  20,  123. 


Perin,  Dr.  John,  29. 

Perne,  Andrew,  Dean  of  Ely,  20. 

Petit,  T.,  printer,  17. 

Pierson,  Andrew,  20. 

Plomer,  Mr.  H.  R.,  8,  17,  30,  35. 

Pocock,  Mr.  N.,  37. 

Pole,  Cardinal,  15. 

Poyntz,  Thomas,  12,  14,  100. 

Puritans     and     the     Hampton 

Court  Conference,  26. 
Purvey,  John,  9. 

Quentell,  Peter,  printer  of 
Cologne,  10,  49,  51. 

Rabbett,  Michael,  29. 

Radclitfe,  Dr.  Jeremiah,  28. 

Raimond,  John,  printer,  62. 

Ravens,  Dr.,  29. 

Ravis,  Thomas,  Dean  of  Christ 
Church,  28. 

Rebul,  Antoine,  19. 

Redman,  R.,  printer,  17. 

Regnauk,  Francois,  printer  of 
Paris,  15,  103;  cited  for  print- 
ing the  Great  Bible,  106-7. 

Reynolds,  Dr.  John,  26,  28. 

Rheims  New  Testament,  21—3; 
its  inception,  127  ;  story  of  the 
translation,  128-32. 

Richardson,  Dr.  John,  28. 

Ridley,  Robert,  criticizes  Tyn- 
dale's version  of  the  New- 
Testament,  ^},  57~9- 

Rinck,  Hermann,  50,  52. 

Rivington,  Mr. Charles,  132,  141. 

Rogers,  John,  14,  99. 

Roy,  William,  10;  his  quarrel 
with  Tyndale,  56-7. 

Rupert,  Abbot  of  Deutz,  49-51. 

Ruremond,  Hans  van,  printer  of 
Antwerp,  12,  62-3,  71,  96. 

St.  Paul's,  London,  10,41,79,98. 
Salisbury,    William.    Bishop   of 

Man,  123. 
Sampson,  Thomas,  18. 
Sanderson,  Thomas,  29. 
Sandys,      Edwi  n,      Bishop     of 

Worcester,  20. 
Saravia,  Dr.,  27. 
Savile,  Sir  Henrv,  29. 
Scambler,    Edmund,   Bishop  of 

Peterborough,  20. 
Schoeffer,      Peter,     printer,     of 

Worms,  10. 
Schott,      Johann,      printer,      of 

Strassburg,  57, 
Scrivener,  Dr.  F.  H.  A.,  36,  37. 
Selborne,   Lord  Chancellor,  on 

the  authorization  of  the  161 1 

version,  31. 
Selden,  John,  32. 
Sion,    Bridgetine    house    of,   at 

Isleworth,  9. 
Smith,    Miles,    Bishop  of  Glou- 
cester, 28,  31,  142. 
Smith,  Rev.  Walter  E.,  35. 
Spalding,  Robert,  28. 
Sparke,  Michael,  34,  37. 
Speed,  John  :  his  Genealogies  of 

Scripture,  33,  14J. 
Spenser,  Dr.  John,  29. 
Stationers' Company,  24,  30,98, 

132-5. 
Steele,  Mr.  Robert,  15,  57. 
Stokeslev,      John,      Bishop      of 

London,  73,  86,  98. 
Strassburg,  57,  78, 
Strype's  Memorials,  19,  20,  70, 

122. 
Sutor,  Petrus,  58. 

Tavenur.   Richard,  his  version 

of  the  Bible,  17. 
Tedder,  Mi.  II.  R.,  13. 
Thompson,      Giles,      Dean     of 

\\  indsor,  29. 
Tighe,  Dr.  Robert,  27. 
Tomson,  Laurence,  19,  24. 
Tomson.  Richard,  27. 
Tremellius,  32, 


Tritheim,  Johann,  49,  51. 

Tuke,  Sir  Brian,  63-5,  07. 

Tunstall,  Cuthbert,  Bishop  of 
London  :  declines  to  en- 
courage Tyndale,  10,  44  ;  pro- 
hibits the  circulation  of  Tyn- 
dale's translation,  61-2  ;  en- 
deavours to  suppress  the  New 
Testament  by  purchase,  68-9 ; 
burns  New  Testaments  in  St. 
Paul's  churchyard,  73. 

Tyndale,  William  :  his  transla- 
tions of  the  New  Testament, 
10-12,  17;  translates  portions 
of  the  Old  Testament,  12 ; 
Fox's  account  of  Tyndale's 
translations,  44-6 ;  Tyndale's 
own  story  of  his  translation 
of  the  New  Testament,  46—8  ; 
the  printing  of  the  first  New 
Testaments,  48-52 ;  news  sent 
to  the  King,  ^2  ;  supposed  trial 
version  of  St.  Matthew,  53; 
beginning  of  the  Prologue  to 
the  first  New  Testament,  53-4; 
Epilogue  to  the  second  New 
Testament, 54— 5;  HenryVIII's 
belief  that  Tyndale  was  insti- 

fated  by  Luther,  55-6 ;  Tyn- 
ale  and  his  fellow  'apostate' 
William  Roy,  56-7  ;  an  expert 
contemporary  criticism  of 
Tyndale's  version,  57-9;  criti- 
cisms of  Sir  Thomas  More, 
59—61  ;  episcopal  prohibition, 
61—2;  Bishop  of  London  buys 
up  the  translation,  68-9  ;  Ste- 
phen Vaughan's  attempt  to 
persuade  Tyndale  to  submit, 
76—7  ;  Friths  defence  of  Tyn- 
dale, 77-8;  Tyndale  complains 
as  to  Joye's  unauthorized  re- 
vision of  his  New  Testament, 
79-82;  Joye's  answer,  82-3; 
reconciliation  and  fresh  dis- 
agreement, 83-4  ;  Joye's  nar- 
rative of  the  quarrel,  84-6; 
Halle's  account  of  Tyndale's 
work  as  a  translator,  86;  his 
share  in  Matthew's  Bible,  99. 

Yaughan,  Stephen  :  endeavours 
to  persuade  Tyndale  to  re- 
tract, 76—7. 

Vautrolher,  Thomas,  printer,  24.  ' 

Vendeville,  Dr.,  21,  127. 

Yilvorde,  12. 

Walker,  Dr.  Anthony,  30. 

Walsh,  Sir  John,  44." 

Walsingham,  Sir  Francis,  24,25. 

Wanley,  Humphrey,  78. 

Ward,  Dr.  Samuel,  28,  31),  37. 

Waterton,  Daniel,  9. 

Westcott,  Bishop,  20. 

Whitchurch,  Edward,  printer, 
113;  partner  with  Grafton,  14, 
[7i  34,  *7.  97-103. 

\\  hitgift,  John,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  25,  31,  138. 

Whittingham,  William  :  trans- 
lates the  New  Testament,  17; 
probable  originator  of  the 
Geneva  Bible,  18;  his  system 
of  translation  and  annotation, 
id. ;  its  effect  on  the  161 1  ver- 
sion, id. 

Wilkes,  Thomas,  24. 

Wilson,  Lea,  3^. 

Wittenberg,  12,  48,  50. 

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  12,  46,  57,  62, 
»3.  °5,  67. 

Worcester,  Chapter  of,  34. 

Worms,  printing  at,  io,  11,  4(1, 
52,  53,  57.  69,-1,  84. 

Wright,  Dr.  Aldis,  20-1. 

Wyclif,  John,  first  English  trans- 
lations of  the  Bible  ascribed 
to,  9,  10;  works  prohibited, 
4*,  77- 

Zurich,  printing  at,  13. 
Zwinglius,  13,  77. 


TO    THE    MOST 

HIGH    AND    MIGHTIE 

Prince,  I A  M  E  S  by  the  grace  of  G  od 

Kina  ofGreacBricaine.France  and  Ireland, 

Defender  of  che  Faith,  ckc. 

THE   TRANSLATORS    OF   THS  tBI'BLey 

vijh  Grace->,Merc\z->,and  Teace^^brough  Iesvs 

ChruiwcLord. 


Reat  and  manifold  were  the  bleffings^moft  dread 
Soueraigne  )  which  Almighty  God,  the  Father 
of  all  Mercies,  bellowed  vpon  vs  the  people  of 
England,  when  firft  he  fent  yourMaiefties 
Royall  perfon  to  rule  and  raigne  ouer  vs.  For 
whereas  it  was  the  expectation  of  many,  who 
wifhed  not  well  vnto  our  S  I  o  n,  that  vpon  the 
fettins  of  that  bright  Occidental!  Starrer  Queene 
Elizabeth  of  moft  happy  memory ,  lome 
thicke  and  palpable  cloudes  of  darkenefle  would  fo  haue  ouerfhadowed 
this  land,  that  men  fhould  haue  bene  in  doubt  which  way  they  were  to 
walke,  and  that  it  fhould  hardly  be  knowen,  who  was  to  direct  the  vnfeded 
State:  the  appearance  of  your  Maiestie,  asof  theiSWze_>inhisftrength, 
inftantlydifpelled  thofe  fuppofed  and  furmifed  mitts,  and  gaue  vnto  all 
that  were  well  aftectedjexceedingcaufeofcomfortj-efpecially  when  we  be- 
held the  gouernmenteftablifhed  in  your  Hi  g  h  ness  e,  and  your  hope- 
full  Seed,  by  an  vndoubted  Title,  and  this  alfo  accompanied  with  Peace 
and  tranquillitie,at  home  and  abroad. 

But  amongft:  all  our  Ioyes ,  there  was  no  one  that  more  filled  our  hearts, 
then  the  blefied  continuance  of  the  Preaching  of  Gods  facred  word  a- 
mongft  vs.whichisthatineftimable  treafure/which  excelleth  all  the  riches 
of  the  earth,  becaufe  the  fruit  thereof  extendeth  itfelfe,notonelyto  the  time 
fpentin  this  tranfitory  world,  but  dire&eth  and  difpofeth  men  vnto  that 
EternallhappinelTe  which  isabouein  Heauen. 

Then.not  to  fufFer  this  to  fall  to  the  ground,  but  rather  to  take  i  t  vp,  and 
to  continue  it  in  that  ftate,wherein  the  famous  predeceiTbur  ofyour  Hio  h- 
nesse  did  leaue  it  •  Nay,  togoe  forward  with  the  confidence  and  refo- 
A    z lunon 

K  2 


The  Epiftle 


lunon  of  a  man  m  maintaining  the  trueih  of  C  h  r  i  s  t,  and  propagating  it 
farre  and  neere,  is  that  which  hath  fo  bound  and  firmelyknit  the  hearts  of 
all  your  Maies.ties  loyall  and  Religious  people  vnto  you,  that  your 
very  Name  is  precious  among  them,  their  eye  doeth  behold  you  with 
comfort,  and  they  blefie  you  in  their  hearts,  as  that  fanclifiedperfon  ,  who 
vnderGoD,is  the  immediate  authour  of  their  true  happinelTe.  And  this 
their  contentment  doeth  not  diminifh  or  decay,  but  euery  day  increafeth 
and  taketh  ft  rength,  when  they  obferue  that  the  zeale  ofyour  Maieftie  to- 
wards the  houfe  of  G  o  D,doth  not  flacke  or  goe  backward,but  is  more  and 
more  kindled,manifefling  it  felfe  abroad  in  the  furtheft  parts  ofOm/ienc/ome, 
by  writing  in  defence  of  the  Trueth,  (which  hath  giuen  fuch  ablowvnro 
that  man  ofSiime,  as  will  not  be  healed)  and  euery  day  at  home,by  Religi- 
ous and  learned  difcourfe,by  frequenting  the  houfe  of  GoD,by  hearing  the 
word  preached,by  cherifhing  the  teachers  therof,by  caring  for  the  Church 
as  a  moll  tender  and  louing  nourcing  Father. 

There  are  infinite  arguments  of  this  right  Chriftian  andReligious  af- 
fection in  your  M  a  i  e  s  t  i  e:  but  none  is  more  forcible  to  declare  itto  o- 
thers,then  the  vehement  and  perpetuated  defire  of  the  accomplifhing  and 
publishing  of  this  VVorke,  which  now  with  all  humilitie  we  prefentvnto 
yourMAiEsri  e.  For  when  your  HighnefTe  had  once  out  of  deepeiudg> 
ment  apprehended  ,  how  conuenient  it  was ,  That  out  of  the  Originall  fa> 
cred  tongues,  together  with  comparing  of  the  labours,  both  in  ourowne 
and  other  forreigne  Languages,of  many  worthy  men  who  went  before  vs, 
there  fhould  be  one  more  exact  Translation  of  the  holy  Scriptures  into  the 
Englijl)  tongue-/-^ 'our  Maiestie  did  neuerdefifit,  tovrgeand  to  excite 
thole  to  whom  it  was  commended,  that  the  worke  might  be  haitened,and 
that  the  bufineffe  might  beexpedited  in  fo  decent  a  maner,  asamatterof 
fuch  importance  might  iuftly  require. 

And  now  at  laftjby  the  Mercy  of  God, and  the  continuance  ofourLa- 
bours,it  being  brought  vnto  fuch  a  conclusion ,  as  that  we  haue  great  hope 
that  the  Church  ofEngland  (hall  reapegood  fruit  thereby ;  we  hold  it  our 
duetytoofTerit  to  your  M  aiesii  E,noconelyas  to  our  King  and  Soue- 
raigne,but  as  to  theprincipallrnoouer  and  Author  ofthe  Worke.  Hum- 
bly crauing  ofyour  moft  Sacred  Maieftie ,  that  fince  things  of  this  quality 
haue  euer  bene  fubiect  to  the  cenfuresofill  meaning  and  difcontentedper- 
fons,itmayreceiue  approbation  and  Patronage  from  fo  learned  and  iudi- 
cious  a  Prince  as  your  HighnefTe  is,  whofe  allowance  and  acceptance  of 
our  Labours,  fhall  more  honour  and  incourage  vs,  then  all  the  calumniati- 
ons and  hard  interpretations  of  other  men  fhall  difmay  vs.  Sothat,ifon 
the  one  fide  we  (hall  be  traduced  by  Popiih  perfons  at  home  or  abroad, 
who  therefore  will  maligne  vs ,  becaufe  we  are  poore  Instruments  to  make 
Gods  holy  Trueth  to  be  yet  more  and  more  knowen  vnto  the  people, 
whom  they  defire  ftill  to  keepe  in  ignorance  and  darkneffe :  or  if  on  the 
other  fide,  we  fhall  be  maligned  by  felfe -conceited  brethren,  whorunne 
their  owne  wayes,  and  giue  liking  vnto  nothing  but  what  is  framed  by 
themfelues,  and  hammered  on  their  Anuile;  we  may  reft  fecure,fupported 
within  by  the  trueth  and  innocencie  of  a  *ood  confeience ,  liauinc  walked 
the 


Dcd 


icacorie. 


the  wayes  otfimphcme  and  integrities  as  before  the  Lord  -  And  fu (lamed 
without ,  by  the  powerfull  Protection  of  your  Maieflies  grace  and  fauour, 
winch  will  euergiue  countenance  to  honed  and  Chnllianendeuours,a- 
gainll  bitter  cenfures3and  vnchantable  imputations. 

The  Lord  of  Heauen  and  earth  blefle your  Mafellie  with  many  and 

happy  dayes ,  that  as  his  Heauenly  hand  hath  enriched  your  HifhnerTe 

with  many  lingular,  and  extraordinary  Graces  •  fo  you  may  be  the 

wonderof  the  world  in  chis  later  age/orhappinelfe  and  true 

felicitie  ,co  the  honour  of  that  Great  G  o  D,and  the 

good  ofhisChurch,through  I  e  s  v  s  Christ 

our  Lord  and  onely  Sauiour. 

c-.o 


THE 


With)  OlhtTf. 


Oregon  iht 
Dkbtc 


T^MMtltT 


i.Sam.ii.if. 

I.King.  11-31 


THE    TRANSLATORS 

TO    THE   READER. 


Lale  to  promote  the  common  good ,  whether  it  be  by  deuifing  any 
thing  our  felues,or  reuifing  that  which  hath  bene  laboured  byo- 
thers,deferuerh  certainly  much  rtfpect  and  efteeme,buryetfindeth 
but  cold  intertaiument  in  the  world.  Itiswelcommedwithfulpi- 
cion  in  ftead  of  loue,  and  with  emulation  in  (lead  or  thankes :  and  if 
there  be  any  hole  left  tor  cauill  to  enter,(and  cauill,it  it  doe  not  finde 
a  hole,  will  makeone  )  itisfuretobecmi/conftrued,andindanger 
to  be  condemned.  This  w  ill  eaflly  be  granted  by  as  many  as  know 
ftory , or  haue  any  experience.  For ,  was  there  euer  any  thing  pro- 
jected,that  (auoured  any  way  of  newnefle  or  renewine.but  the  lame 
endured  many  a  ftorme  of  gaine-faying,  or  oppofition  I  Araan  would  thinkethatCiuilitie,  hole 
fome  Lawes,  learning  and  eloquence,Synods,  and  Church-maintenance,(that  we  fpeake  of  no  more 
things  of  this  kinde)  fhould  be  as  fafe  as  a  Sanctuary,  and  ||  out  of  fhor,  as  they  fay ,  that  no  man 
would  lift  vp  the  heele,no,nor  dozge  mooue  his  tongue  againft  the  motionersof  them.  For  by  the 
fiiif  ,wc  are  diftinguifhed  from  bruit-beafts  led  with  fenfualitie :  By  the  fecond,  we  are  bridled  and  re. 
(trained  from  0  utragious  behauiour,and  from  doing  of  miuries,whether  by  fraud  or  by  violence ;  By 
the  third,  we  are  enabled  toinformeandreformeothers.by  the  light  and  feeling  that  we  haue  attai- 
ned vnto  our  felues :  Briefly,by  the  fourth  being  brought  together  to  a  parle  face  to  face.we  fooner 
compofe  our  diffetences  then  by  writings,  which  are  endleflc  :  And  Lift ly,  that  the  Church  be  futfi- 
cientlv  prouided  for, is  Co  agreeable  to  good  reafbn  and  confcience,that  thofe  mothers  are  holden  to 
be  lefTecruell,  that  kill  their  children  aflooneasthey  are  borne,  then  thofe  nourling  fathers  and  mo- 
thers (whercfoeuer  they  bc^that  withdraw  from  them  who  hang  vpon  their  breads  (and  vpon  whole 
breafts  againe  diemfelues  doe  hang  toreceiuethe  Spiritual!  and  fincere  milkcofthe  word)liuely- 
hood  and  fupport  fit  for  their  cftates.  Thus  it  is  apparent,that  thefe  things  which  we  fpeake  of,are 
ofmoft  neccflary  vfe,and  therefore,that  none,  either  without  abfurditic  can  fpeake  agamft  them,oi 
without  note  of  wickedneflc  can  fpurne  againft  them. 

Yet  for  all  that,  the  learned  know  that  certaine  worthy  men  haue  bene  brought  to  vntimely  death 
for  none  other  fauk,but  for  feeking  to  reduce  their  Countrey-men  to  good  order  and  difcipline  :  and 
that  in  fome  Common-weales  it  was  made  a  capita!!  crime,once  to  motion  the  making  of  a  new  Law 
for  the  abrogating  of  an  o!d,though  the  fame  were  mof!  pernicious :  And  that  certaine.which  would 
be  counted  pillars  oftheState,andpatcrnes  of  Venue  and  Prudence, could  not  be  brought  for  a  Ions; 
time  to  giue  way  to  good  Letters  and  refined  fpecch  ,  but  bare  themfelues  as  auerfe  from  them,  as 
from  rocks  or  boxes  of  poifon  :  And  fourthly  ,thathee  was  no  babe,but  a  great  clearke  ,  thatgaue 
foordi  (and  in  writing  to  remaine  to  poft  eritie )  in  paffion  peraduenture,  but  yet  he  gaue  foorth,that 
hee  had  not  feencany  profit  to  come  by  any  Synode,  or  meeting  of  the  Clergie,  but  rather  the  con- 
trary :  And  laftly,againfr  Church-maintenance  and  a!lowance,in  (iich  (ort,  as  the  Embafladors  and 
meflengers  of  the  great  King  of  Kings  fhould  be  furnifhed,  it  is  not  vnknowen  what  a  fiction  or  fable 
(foit  iselteemed,and  for  no  better  by  the  reporter  himlelfe, though  fuperflitious)was  deuifed; 
Namely, that  at  fuch  time  as  thepiofcffours  and  teachers  of  Chriffiamtie  in  the  Church  of  Rome, 
then  a  true  Church,were  liberally  endowed,a  voyce  forfooth  was  heard  from  heauen, faying;  Now  is 
poifon  powrcd  down  into  theChurch,&C  Thus  not  only  asoltas  wefpeake,asone  faith,buta!foas 
oft  as  we  do  any  tiling  of  note  or  conference,  we  fubiect,  our  felues  to  euery  ones  cenfure,and  happy 
is  he  that  is  leaft  tofled  vpon  tongues ;  for  vtterly  to  elcape  the  fnatch  of  them  it  is  impoffible.  Ifany 
man  conceit,that  this  is  the  lot  and  portion  of  the  meaner  fort  onely,  and  that  Princes  arepriuiledged 
by  their  high  efrate,he  is  deceiued.  As  the  (word  deuoureth  afwell  one  04theothcr,is  it  is  inSamuei  nay 
as  the  great  Commander  charged  his  fouldiers  in  a  certaine  battc!l,to  f  hike  at  no  part  of  the  enemie, 
but  at  the  face ;  And  as  the  King  oi  Syria.,  commanded  his  chiefe  Captaines  to  fight  neither  VtithJmaH 
nor  great ,  f.we  onely  againtt  the  King  oflfrael:  (o  it  is  too  true,  that  Enuie  fh  iketh  mof!  fpitefully  at  the 
lairef^andatthechictert.  ZWJ  was  a  worthy  Prince,  and  no  manrobc  comparedto  himtor  his 
firftdecdes,  and  yet  for  as  worthy  an  acre  as  euer  he  did  (  euenfor  bringing  backe  the  ArkeofGod 
in  folemnitic)  hewas  fcorncd  andfcofled  at  by  his  ownesvitc.   Solomon  was  greater  then  D»uid, 

though 


Thebefl 
things  han; 
been  calum- 
niated. 


To  the  Read 


er. 


The  higheft 

petfonages 

haucbecnea- 

lumniated. 


HisMaiefucs 
conftancic, 
normthltan- 
dingcalLtnir.i- 
ation/ortlic 
furuey  otlhc 
Englifh  tran- 
sitions. 


The  praite  of 
the  holy  Scri- 
ptures. 


though  notin  vertue.yet  in  power :  and  by  his  power  and  wifdome  hebuilt  a  Temple  to  the  L  o  R  D, 
fuch  a  one  as  was  the  glory  ot  the  land  oflfrael ,  and  the  wonder  ot'the  whole  world.  But  was  that 
his  magnificence  liked  of  by  all  ?  We  doubt  of  it.  Others  ile  ,  why  doe  they  lay  it  in  his  tonnes  difh, 
and  call  vnto  him  for  ||eafingot  the  burden,  Make,dy  they  ,the  grieuoit .<  [cruituJe  of  thy  father, and 
his  jore  yoke, lighter.  Belike  hehad  charged  them  withiomcleuies,and  troubled  them  with  fotne  ca- 
riages  ;  Hereupon  they  raiie  vp  a  ti  agedie  ,  and  wifh  in  their  heart  the  Temple  had  neuei  bene  builc. 
So  hard  a  thing  it  is  to  pleafe  all,  euen  when  we  pleafe  God  belt,  and  doe  leeke  to  approue  our  (dues 
to  euety  ones  conscience. 

II  wee  will  defcend  to  later  times ,  wee  fhall  finde  many  the  like  examples  of  fuch  kind.or  rather 
vnkind  acceptance.  The  firft  Romane  Empei  our  did  neuer  doe  a  morepleafing  deed  to  the  learned, 
nor  more  profitable  to  pofleritie/or  conferuing  the  record  of  times  in  true  f  imputation  i  then  when 
he  corrected  the  Calender  ,  and  ordered  the  yeere  according  to  tile  courle  of  theSunne:  and  yet 
this  was  imputed  to  him  for  nouelue,  and  airogancie,and  procured  to  him  great  oblocjuie.  Sothefiift 
ChrirtenedEmperout(attheleaftwife  that  openly  protefled  the  faith  himlelfe,and  allowed  others  to 
doe  the  like  )  for  Strengthening  the  Empire  at  his  great  charges,  and  prouiding  for  the  Church,  as  he 
did.gotfor  his  labour  die  name  PupiUns ,  as  who  would  fay,  a  waftefull  Prince  ,  that  had  neede  of  a 
Guardian, or  ouerfeer.  So  the  belt  Chriftened  Emperour,lor  the  louc  that  he  bare  vnto  pcace.there- 
by  to  en  rich  both  himfelfe  and  his  lubietfts  ,and  becau  le  he  did  no  t  f  eeke  wane  but  find  it,  was  iudged 
to  benomanatarmes,(though  in  deed  he  excelled  in  fearesofchiualrie,  andfhewedfo  much  when 
he  was  prouoked)  and  condemned  for  giuing  himfelte  to  his  eale,  and  to  his  pleafure.  To  be  fhort 
the  moll  learned  Emperour  of  former  tiroes,  (at  the  lejft,the  greateft  politician)  what  thanks  had  he 
for  cutting  oft  the  Superfluities  ot  the  lawes.and  diverting  them  into  fome  order  and  method  ?  This, 
that  he  hath  been  blotted  by  fome  to  bee  an  Epitomift,  that  is, one  that  extinguifhed  worthy  whole 
volumeSjto  bring  his  abridgements  into  recjueit.  This  is  the  meafure  that  hath  been  rendred  to  ex- 
cellent Princes  in  former  times,  euen,  Cum  bene  faecrent,  male  audire,  For  their  good  deedes  to  be  euill 
fpokenof.  Neither  is  diere  any  likelihood, that  cnuie  and  malignitiedied,and  we  re  buried  with  the 
ancient.  No,no,the  reproofe  ot  Mofes  taketh  hold  ofmoft  ages  ,•  lou  me  rijen  T)p  in  your fathers ftead, 
anlncreafeof  finfullmen.  Wvat  is that  that  hath  beendone?  that  Tpbicb  fha'J  be  done :  and  there  is  no  new 
th'mg'Vnier the  Sunne ,  faith  the  wifeman  :  sudS. Steven,  Jsyour  fathers  did  ,fo  doeyou.  This, and 
more  to  this  purpofe,His  Maiefhe  that  now  reigneth  (and  long,  and  long  may  he  reigne.and  his  off- 
spring for  euer,  Himfelfe  and  children  andchddrens  children  alfoayes)  knew  full  well,  according  to  the 
fin<nilarwifedomegiuenvnto  himby  God,  and  the  rare  learning  and  experience  that  he  hath  attai- 
ned vnto;  namely  that  whofoeuer  attempted!  any  thing  torthe  publike  ( Specially  if  itpertaineto 
Rek'cion,and  to  the  opening  and  clearing  of  the  word  of  God)the  fame  fetteth  himfelt'e  vpon  a  ftage 
to  be  clouted  vpon  by  euery  euil  eye,yea,he  cal  teth  himfelfe  headlong  vpon  pikes,to  be  gored  by  eue 
ry  fharpe  tongue.  For  he  that  medleth  with  mens  Religion  in  any  part,medieth  with  their  cuftome, 
nay,with  their  freehold  ;  and  though  they  finde  no  content  in  that  which  they  haue  ,  yet  they  can- 
not abide  to  heare  of  altering.Notwithftanding  his  Royall  heart  was  not  daunted  or  difcouraged  for 
this  or  that  colour , but  ftood  refolute,<«  aflame  immoueable,andan  aniale  not  cafe  to  be  beaten  into  plates, 
as  one  fa  vth ,  he  knew  who  had  chofen  him  to  be  a  Souldier,  or  rather  a  Captaine,and  being  allured 
diat  the  c'ourfe  which  he  intended  made  much  foi  the  glory  of  God,  &  the  building  vpot  his  Church, 
hewouldnotfuftcrittobebrokenofffotwhatfoeuerfpeachesorpracl;ifes.  It  doth  ceitamely  belong 
vnto  Kings,yea,it  doth  fpecially  belong  vnto  them,to  haue  care  of  Religion  ,  yea,  to  know  it  aright, 
yea,  toprotefTeit  zealoufly,  yea  to  promote  it  to  the  vttermoft  of  their  powA.  This  is  their  glory 
before  all  nations  which  meane  well,  and  this  will  bring  vnto  them  a  farre  moil  excellent  weight  ot 
Mory  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Iefus.  For  the  Scripture  faith  not  in  vune,Tbem  that  honor  me  JtpiII  honor, 
neither  was  it  a  vaine  word  that  Eufebius  deliuered  long  agoe,  that  pietie  towards  God  Was  the  wea- 
pon ,  and  the  onely  weapon  that  both  preferued  Qonflantmes  perloii  ,  and  auenged  him  of  his 

enemies.  , 

But  now  what  pietie  without  trueth  ?  what  trueth(what  fauingttueth)  without  the  word  of  God? 
what  word  of  God(whereofwe  may  be  fure_)without  the  Scripture ;  The  Scriptures  we  are  comman- 
ded to  fearch.Ioh.5.?$i.Efa.8.io.Theyareconimended  that  Searched  &ftudicdthem.Aa.i7.n.and 

8.18, 2Q.They  are  reproued  that  were  vnskilful  in  them,or  flow  to  beleeue  them.  M.it.-il-  19.Lwfc.24 
i^'.The'ycanmakevswifcvntofaluation.i.r/w.j.^.Ifwebeignorant.theywillinftrucTvsiifomof 

the  way,they  will  bring  vshome;  if  out  of  order.they  will  reforme  vs,  if  in  heauines.conifort  vs5  it  dull, 
quicken  vs;ifcolde,inflame  vs.  Tolle  Jege ;Tolle  ,lege ,  Take  vp  and  read,  takevpand  read  the  Scrip- 
tures, (for vnto  them  was  the  diredion)  11  was  laid  vnto  S.  JugtiUme  by  a  fupematurall  voyce. 
Wlmtfoenaris  in  the  Scriptures, beleeue  me ,  faith  the  fame  S.  Mgu/lint,  is  high  and dimne  thtre  is<verib 
trueth,  and  a  dot~lrine  moll  fit  for  the  rcfreflnng  and  renewing  of  mem  mtndcs,  andtruclyfo  tempered ,  that 


i.Kingu.* 


C.Ctfet. 


Cirfta 


Ztfm 


r/amb'a.r^. 
Ecde  1.1.9. 


SW«. 


t  Sam  1  jo. 
StsWSK 

«f.S. 


f.ffUb».«p.lx 

S  Jugmfi  dt 
■t.Ut.  trtdtnd 
up,6. 


The  Translators 


,HrU. 


Terf»l/JtUlf. 
Hrr—. 
TtmU  ai  cjr- 
raCh-ifi. 
In/tin  oz.Zrt. 


An  uliu?  bo> 
wrjppcti  J- 

wool!,*herc- 
vpondid  hang 
%-.,&brcjd, 
ind  hoatc  in 


S  BifiL  in 


I.C0M». 


Strom, 
5.Hitro*)n. 

ftill  (t. 

1  Te'it.  Cw.'. 
#j.  tJit.TKn 
IVti. 
Cur.--  f/tji 


entry  one  may  draw  from  thence  that  which  nfufficient  forhim ,  if  bee  come  to  draw  Diiihadeuout  and  pioiis 
minde.astrue  ^dgknrcqttiretb.  ThusS.  Auguftinc.  And  S.Hierome:  Ame  fcripturtt  ,  <jr  amabitte 
japientiatrc.  Loue  the  Scriptures,  and  wrfedonie  will  loue  thee.  And  S.  Cynll  againft  lulian ;  Earn 
boyes  that  are  bred  yp  in  the  Scriptures, become  mofl  religious  jtsrc.  But.  what  mention  wee  three  or  foure 
vfesofthe Scripture, whereas  whatfoeuer  istobebeleeuedorpradiled ,  orhopedfor,  is  contained 
in  them  ?  or  three  or  foure  femences  of  the  Fathers ,  fince  whoioeuer  is  worthy  the  name  of  a  Fadrer , 
from  Chriftstinicdovvneward, hath likewife  written  not  onely  of  die  ncheSjbutalfoottrieperfedion 
of  the  Scripture  ?  ladore  tbefulnejfe  of  the  Scripture  ,hkhTertuUian  againft  Hermogenes.  And  3game, 
to^M//«anHeretikeofthe  likeftampe.he  faith;  1  doe  not  admit  that  which  thoubrmgefl  in  (or  con- 
cluded) of 'thine  owne  (head  or  (tore ,  de  two)  without  Scripture.  So  Saint  htslm  Martyr  before  him  ; 
Wee  muft  knotf  by  ailmeanes ,  faith  hee,  that  it  is  not  lawful!  (or  polfible)  to  karne  (any  thing)  of  God  or 
of  right  pietie,faus  oneb)  out  of  the  Prophets ,  tvhoteatb'vs  by  diuiie  inspiration.  So  Saint  Baft!  after 
TertuBan  ,  Is  is  amamfejl  fal!inga-»ay  from  the  Faith ,  and  t;  fault  of  prejumptwn ,  either  to  reieSl  any 
ofthofe  things  that  are  written,  or  to  bring  in  (vpon  thehead  of  {hem^'t^ii^) any  of  tho/e  things  that 
are  not  written.  Weeoniittocitctothefanieefied,  S.  Cyril! B.  of  Hkrufalem  in  hi?  4.  faachtj. Sunt 
Hierome  againft  Heluidius ,  Saint  Auguftine  inhis  j.bookeagainilthe  letters  of  Tetiitan,  and  in  very 
many  other  places  of  his  workes.  Alfo  we  tbrbeare  to  defcend  to  lattei  Fathers,  becaufe  wee  will  not 
wearie  the  reader.  The  Scriptures  then  being  acknowledged  to  bee  fo  full  and  fo  perfeel ,  how  can 
wee  excufe  our  feluesof  negligence,  if  we  doe  not  ftudie  them, of  cunofitie,  if  we  be  not  content  with 
them?  Mentalke  muchof»>™»,  how  many  fwecte  and  goodly  things  it  had  hanging  on  it;  of  the 
Philofophersftone  ,  that  it  turneth  copper  into  gold  ;  of  Qornu  copia  ,  thatithadalrthiiigsneccflary 
fat  foode  in  it ,  ot  Pamces  the  herbe.that  it  was  good  for  all  difealcs  ■  oiCatholicon  the  drugge,  that  it 
is  in  ftead  of  all  purges;  of  Vukans  armour,  that  is  was  an  armour  ot  pi  oofc  againft  all  dirufts,  and  a1 
blowes,&c.  Well,  that  which  they  fallly  or  vainely  attributed  to  thefe  things  for  bodily  good,  wee 
may  iuftly  and  with  full  meafurealcribe  vnto  theScnpture,forfpir!tuall.  Itisnot  onelv  an  armour, 
but  alfo  a  whole  arrnorie  of  weapons,  both  ofTenliue,and  defenfiue ;  whereby  we  may  due  our  felues 
and  put  the  enemie  to  flight.  It  is  not  an  herbe,but  a  tree,or  rather  a  whole  paradife  of  trees  of  life, 
which  bring  foorth  fruit  euery  mcrveth  ,  and  the  fruit  thereof  is  for  meate ,  and  the  leaues  for  medi 
cine.  It  is  not  a  pot  of  M anna,  or  a  crufe  of  oyle.which  were  for  meniorie  only.or  for  a  meales  meate 
or  two,  but  as  it  were  a  (howre  of  hcauenly  bread  (ufficient  tor  a  wholehoft,  be  it  neuer  fo  great ;  and 
as  it  were  a  wholecellar  full  of  oyle  veflels ;  whereby  all  our  necefsities  may  be  prouided  for  ,  and  our 
debts  difcharged.  In  a  word.it  is  a  Panary  of  holefome  foode,  againft  tenowed  traditions;  a  Phyfi- 
ons-  (hop  (  Saint  BafiUaWt:  th  it )  of  preferuatiues  againft  poifoned  herefles ;  a  Pandect  of  profitable 
lawes,aga'mft  rebellious  fpirits;  a  trcafui  ieof  molt  coftly  lewcls ,  againft  beggarly  rudiments ;  Finally 
a  fountaine  of  mod  pure  water  (bringing  vp  vnto  euerlafting  life.  And  what  maruaile?  Theoriginall 
thereof  being  from  heauen, not  from  earth;  the  authour  being  God,  not  man  ;  the  enditer ,  the  holy 
jpirit.notthewitofthe  Apoftles  or  Prophets  ■  the  Pen-men  fuch  as  were  fanclified  fromthewombe, 
and  endewed  with  a  principall  portion  of  Gods  fpirit;  the  matter,  veritie,pietie,puritie,vprightnefle; 
the  forme,Gods  word,  Gods  teftimonie,Gods  oracles.thc  word  of  trueth,  the  word  of  faluation,&c. 
the  effects,  light  of  vnderftanduig  ftablenelle  of  perfwafion,  repentance  from  dead  workes,  newnelfc 
of  ltfe,holmelTe,  peace,  ioy  in  the  holy  Ghoft ;  ,laltly,thcend  and  reward  of  the  ftudie  thercoffellow- 
Ihip  with  theSaints,  participation  of  the  heauenly  nature,  fruition  of  an  inheritance  immortall.vnde- 
filed,  and  that  neuer  fhall  fade  away :  Happie  is  theman  that  deiighteth  in  die  Scripture  ,  and  thrife 
happie  that  meditateth  in  it  day  and  night. 

But  how  fhall  men  meditate  in  that,  which  they  cannot  vriderftand  ?  How  fhall  they  vnderftand 
that  which  is  kept  clofc  in  anvnknowen  tongue?  as  it  is  written ,  Except  Iknomchepoiv^rofthcvoyce 
lfhallbeto  himtkitjbeakftb,a  Barbarian  ,andhe  tbatjbeaketb,jbalbea  Barbartm  to  me.  The  Apoftle  ex- 
cepteth  no  tongue;  not  Hebrewe  the  ancientef  t ,  not  Grecke  the  moft  copious ,  not  Latine  the  fineft. 
Natuie  taught  a  naturall  man  to  confelTe,that  all  of  vs  in  thofe  tongues  which  wee  doe  not  vnder- 
ftand, are  plainely  deafe ;  wee  may  turne  the  dcafe  care  vnto  diem.  The  Scythian  counted  the  dtbe- 
nian,Vihvm  he  did  not  vnderftand,  barbarous:  fo  die  1(omanc  did  the  Syrian,  and  the  lap  (euenS. 
Hifrowtfhimfelfe  calleth  the  Hebrew  tonguebarbarous,  belike  becaufe  it  wasftrange  tofo  manvjfo 
the  Emperour  ot  Conftantinople  calleth  the  Ldfmc  tongueJbarb:irous,thougri  Pope  fjjcoUs  do  ftorme 
at  it :  (o  the  Iewes  long  before  C/vi/?,callcd  all  other  nations,Z.ogM<i^;»!, which  is  little  better  then  bar- 
barous. Therefore  asonecomplaineth.thatalwaycs  in  theScnateof  1$omc,  there  was  one  or  other 
that  called  for  an  interpreter:  fo  leftthe  Church  bedriuen  to  the  likcexigcnt.it  isneccflary  tohaue 
tranflations  in  a  readinefTe.  Tranflation  it  is  that  openeth  the  windo\v,to  let  in  the  light;  that  brea 
ke th  the  fhell,that  we  may  eat  the  kernel ;  that  putteth  afidc  the  curtainc.that  we  may  lookeinto  the 
moft  Holy  place;  that  rcmooueth  die  couerof  the  well,  tliatwcemay  comebyriiewatcr,euenas 

hcob 


rnnlliMon 
nccelljiic. 


To  the  Read 


er. 


The  rranflati 
onoflheoldc 
Teflamcnr 
out  of  the  He- 
brew into 
Greeke. 


Tranflation 
out  of  Hebrew 
and  Greeke 
into  Litinc- 


Iacob  rolled  away  the  ftonefrom  the  mouth  of  the  well ,  by  which  meanes  the  flockesof'/.d/W;  were 
watered.  Indeede  without  tranflation  into  the  vulgar  tongue,the  vnlearned  are  but  like  children  at 
■Jacobs  weD  (which  was  deepe)  without  a  bucket  or  fome  thingtodrawwith.-orastharperfonmen- 
rioned  by  E/iy,to  whom  when  a  fealed  booke  was  deliuered,  with  this  moilun/ftjadetkiijpray  thee, 
hee  was  faine  to  make  this  anfwere,  I  cannot  Jor  it  is  fealed. 

While  God  would  be  knowen  onely  in /acoi,  and  hauehisName  great  in  7//jf/,andiiinoneo- 
ther  place,  while  the  dew  lay  on  Gideons  fleece  onely,and  all  the  earth  betides  wa>  drie ;  then  for  one 
and  the  fame  people,  which  fpake  allot  them  the  language  o(  Caiuan,  chat  is,/ir^f;pc,oneandthe 
(ame  originall  in  Hebrew  was  fuffkienc.  But  when  the  tulnelle  of  time  drew  neerc,thar  the  Sunne  ot 
righteouinefle.the  Sonne  of  God  (hould  come  into  the  world,  whom  Godordemed  to  bearecon- 
ciliation  through  faith  in  his  blood, notot  the /eioonely, but  alio  ot  the  Greeke,  yea,  of  all  them  that 
were  fcattcrcd  abroad  j  then Ioe.it pleafed  the  Lord  to  ftirre  vp  the fpirit of  a  Greeke  Prince  (  Greeke 
for  defcent  and  language)  euen  of  PtolomeTbiLidelpb  King  of  Egypt, to  procure  rhe  tranflating  of  the 
Booke  of  God  out  of  Hebrew  into  Greeke.  This  is  the  tranflation  of  the  S«iM«cIiucrpreters,cocn- 
monly  fo  called,  which  prepared  the  way  for  our  Sauiour  among  the  Gentiles  by  written  preaching 
as  Saint  lobn  Baptift  did  among  the  Iewes  by  vocall.  For  the  Grecians  being  defitous  of  lea  rninc,were 
not  wont  to  funer  bookes  of  worth  to  lye  mouldingin  Kings  Libraries,  but  had  manv  of  then  lei- 
uants,ready  fenbes,  to  copie  them  out,and  fo  they  were  difperfed  and  made  common.  Againe,  the 
Greeke  tongue  was  well  knowen  and  madefamiharto  molt  inhabitants  in  Afia,  by  re:ifon  otthecon- 
cjueft  that  there  the  Grecuns  had  made,as  alio  by  the  Colonies.whichdiicher  they  had  fenc.  For  the 
(ame  caufes  alfo  it  was  well  vnderft ood  in  many  places  of  fii70^,yea,and  ot  Affrike  too.  Therefore 
the  word  of  God  being  tec  foorth  in  Greeke,  becommeth  hereby  like  a  candle  fet  vpon  a  caudleft icke, 
which  giueth  light  to  all  that  arc  in  the  houfc,  or  like  a  proclamation  founded  toorth  in  the  market 
place,which  moll  men  prefently  take  knowledge  of ;  and  therefore  that  language  was  fitted  to  con- 
tajne  the  Scriptures, both  for  the  tuft  Preachers  of  rhe  Golpel  to  appeale  vn  to  tor  w  itnefle,and  for  the 
learners  alloot  thofctimestomakefearchandtnallby.  Itisceitaine,  that  that  Tranflation  was  not 
(o  found  and  lo  perie&.but  that  it  needed  in  many  places  correction  :  and  who  had  bene  lo  liif  ficient 
for  this  worke  as  the  Apoftles  or  Apoifolikemeu?  Yet  it  teemed  good  to  the  holy  Ghoftandto 
them,  to  take  that  which  they  found,  (the  fame  being  for  the  grcateft  part  true  and  (ulficient)  rather 
then  by  making  a  new,m  that  new  world  andgteene  age  of  the  Church, to  expole  themfelues  to  ma- 
ny exceptions  and  cauillations,  as  though  they  made  a  Tranflation  to  ferue  their  owneturne,  and 
therefore  bearing  witnefle  to  themfelues,  their  witnefle  not  to  be  regarded.  This  may  be  fuppofed 
to  bee  fome  caute ,  why  the  Tranflation  ot  the  Seuentie  was  allowed  to  pafle  tor  currant.  Notwith 
ftanding,though  it  was  commended  generally.yet  it  did  not  fully  content  the  learned, no  notof  the 
Iewes.  For  not  long  after  (Jirijl,  Aquila  tell  in  hand  with  a  new  Tranflation,  and  after  him  Theodo* 
tion,iad  after  him  Symmacbut :  vea,there  was  a  fitt  and  a  fixt  edition,  the  Authours  wherof  were  no: 
knowen.  Thete  with  the  Seuentie  made  vp  the Hexapla  ,  and  were  worthily  and  to  great  purpole 
compiled  together  by  Origen.  How  beit  the  Edition  of  the  Seuentie  went  away  with  the  credit,  and 
theretore  not  onely  was  placed  in  themidlt  by  Origen  (tor  the  worth  and  excellence  thereof  aboue 
the  reft,  as  Fpipb.miui  gathereth)  but  alfo  was  vied  by  the  Greeke  fathers  for  the  ground  and  founda- 
tion of  their  Commentaries.  Yea,  Epipbanius  aboue  named  doeth  attribute  fo  much  vnto  it,thathe 
holdeththe  Authours  thereof  not  onely  for  Interpreters,  but  alfo  for  Prophets  in  fome  refpect :  and 
Iuftinian  the  Emperour  enioyuing  the  Iewes  his  lubiecls  to  vfe  Specially  the  Tranflation  of  the  Seuen' 
tie,  rendreth  this  reafon  thereof,  becaule  they  were  as  it  were  enlightened withpropheticallgrace. 
Yetforallthat,asthc£g^>fid»jarefaidof  the  Prophet  to  bee  men  and  not  God,  and  their  horfes 
flefh  and  nor  fpirit :  fo  it  is  euident,(  and  Saint  Hicromt;  affirmeth  as  much  )  that  the  Seuentie  were 
Interpicteis  ,  they  were  not  Prophers;  they  did  many  things  well,  as  learned  men ,-  but  yet  as  men 
they  ftunibled  and  fell,  one  while  through  oueriight,  another  while  through  ignorance,  yea /ome- 
times  they  may  be  noted  to  adde  ro  the  Originall ,  and  fomerimes  to  take  trom  it ;  which  made  the 
Apoftles  to  leaue  them  many  times ,  when  they  left  the  Hebrew,  and  to  deliuer  the  fence  thereof  ac- 
cording to  the  trueth  of  theword,as  the  fpirit  gaue  themvtrerance.  This  may  futfice  touching  the 
Greeke Tranflationsot  iheoldTeftamenr. 

There  were  alfo  within  a  few  hundreth  yeeres  after  Christ,  tranllations  many  into  the  Latine 
tongue :  for  this  tongue  alio  was  very  fit  to  conuey  the  Law  and  the  Gofpel  by  ,becaufe  in  thole  times 
very  many  Countreys  of  the  Weft ,  yea  of  theSouth  ,  Eaft  and  North,  fpake  or  vnderftood  Latine, 
being  made  Prouinces  to  the  Romanes.  But  now  the  Latine  Tranflations  were  too  many  to  be  all 
good.for  they  wereinfinite  (Latini  Interprets nuih  modoMmieraripoJJ~unt,(aithS.Auguniiie.)  Againe 
they  were  not  out  of  the  Hebrew  fountaine  (  wee  Ipeake  of  the  Latine  Tranflations  ot  the  Old  Tefta- 
ment)  but  out  of  the  Greeke  If  reamc,  therefote  the  Greeke  being  not  altogether  Jeare,the  Latine  deri- 


loh4.1T. 


lib.  I  L    umr* 


J 


menftir  Cfpt 
dmbu,. 


Set  T  ^upifl 
f.itiotltin. 

7\y»t3.  autjx. 
14*. 

c»t  ftrnivt  a  am/ 

Vw»^»i7*t  iusae, 

Elaj..,. 

S.H,er,n,Je 

tptimv  *tncr£ 
imtrfret , 


Mir.  ClmJIllt. 
l.«f.ll. 


The  Translators 


5.  fliironym. 

MmrttlL 

Zffim. 

x.King.79. 


S.  Hit  run.  f*dft 


fhtrmio. 


Six.StnM.4, 

S.Ckyfift.in 

Uhantaf.l. 

ttam.i. 

Tktodor.  ?. 
Tl>tr*fcut, 


T.DUccn.Uil. 
jfidarJm  Chrcn 
Goth.  SoXovhli. 

Vaftns  in 
Chror,  UtyM. 

rwn  ttfiatiir  <- 
dtmdtMuitdo 

Autnttn-Vil  4. 

rtrum  C  ma- 
U.l. 

Btrt*id. 


Th*ei, 


rftl.4S.8- 


ued  from  if  mult  needs  be  muddie.  This  moued  S.  Hierome-,  a  molt  learned  father,  and  die  belt 
linguift  withoutcontrouerfie,  of  his  age,  or  of  any  that  went  before  him,  to  vndertake  the  tranflatlng 
oftheOldTeftament,outof  thevery  fountaines  themfelues;  which  heeperformed  with  that  eui- 
dence  of  great  !eaming,iudgement,induftne  and  faithfu!nes,thathe  hath  for  euer  bound  the  Church 
vntohim,in  a  debtoffpeciall  remembrance  and  thankefulneffe. 

Now  though  the  Church  were  thus  furnifhed  with  Greeke  and  Latine  Tranflations ,  euen  before 
the  faith  of  C  H  r  1  s  t  was  generally  embraced  in  the  Empire :  (  for  the  learned  know  that  euen  in  S. 
Hieroms  timc,the  Conlul  of  (Rome  and  his  wife  were  both  Ethnicks,and  about  the  fame  time  the  grea- 
tcft  part  of  the  Senate  alfo)yetfor  all  that  the  godly-learned  were  not  content  to  haue  the  Scriptures 
indie  Language  which  themfelues  vnderftood ,  Greece  and  Ltttme_,,(  as  the  good  Lepers  werenot 
content  to  tare  well  themfelues ,  but  acquainted  their  neighbours  v>itn  the  ftore  that  God  had  fent, 
that  they  alfo  might  prouide  for  themfelues)  butalfoforthebehoofe  and  edifying  of  the  vnlearned 
which  hungred  and  thirir ed  after  Righteoufneffe,and  hadfoules  to  be  faued  afwell  as  they, they  pro- 
uided  Tranflations  into  the  vulgar  for  their  Countreymen,  infomuch  that  moft  nations  vnderhca- 
uen  did  fhortly  after  their  conuerfion ,  heare  Christ  /peaking  vnto  them  in  their  mother  tongue 
not  by  the  voyce  of  their  Mimfrcronely,butalfb  by  che  written  word  tranflated.  If  any  doubt  hereof, 
he  may  be  fatiffied  by  examples  cnough,if  enough  wil  feruc  the  turne.  Firft  S.Hierome  faithyVf«/W' 
rumgentiiilinguisScriptura  anti  tranflata,docet  falfa  effe  <jtuadditafimt,<S'C.i.  The  Scripture  being  tranfla- 
ted before  in  the  languages  of  many  TSfations,dothfl?cu>  that  thofe  things  tbattoert  addedQ>yLucian  oxHefy- 
chius)  arefalfe.  So  S.Hierome  in  that  place.  The  fame  Hierome  elfewhere  affirmeth  that  he,the  time 
was,had  let  forth  the  tranflation  odbeSeuentyfualingUithomimbus.  i.  for  his  countreymen  olDalma- 
tia.  Which  words  not  only  Erafmus  doth  vnderftand  to  purport,that  S.Hierome  tranflated  the  Scrip- 
ture into  the  Dalmatian  tongue ,  but  aKoSixtus  Senenfis,and  Alpbonfiis  d  Cafiro  ( that  we  fpeake  of  no 
more)  men  not  to  be  excepted  againft  bythemof^o>w,doeingeiiuouflyconfelTe  asmuch.  So,  S. 
ChryfoUome  that  liued  in  S.  Hieromes  time,giueth  euidence  with  him  :  The  doilrinc  o/S.Iohn  f  faith  he) 
did  not  injuchfort  fas  the  Philofophers  did )  <vanifl)  away :  but  the  Syrians,  Egyptians,  Indians,  Pet funs. 
Ethiopians, and  infinite  other  nations  beingbarbarouspeopte  tranflated  it  into  their{mother)  tongue  )and  haue 
learned  to  be  {true)  Tbilofophers, he  meaneth  Chiiftians.  To  this  may  be  added  Theodore, a  next  vnto 
him,  both  for  antiquitie,and  for  learning.  His  words  be  thefe,Eiwji  Countrey  that  is  <vnder  theSunne, 
is  fullof tbefefpordes  (oithe  Apoftks  and  Vxo^hm)  and  the  Hebrew  tongue^  {  he  meaneth  the  Scrip 
tures  in  the  Hebrew  tongue )  is  turnednot  onely  into  the  Language  oftlie  Grecians,but  alfo  of  the  Romanes, 
andEgyptianSydMdVerfianstandlndianSiandArmenianStandScytbianStandSauromatians,  and  briefly  into 
all  the  Languages  that  any  Ration  <vfeth.  So  he.  lnJikemaner,?7/>i/i*Jis  reported  by  Paulm  Diaconus 
and  Ifidor  (and  before  them  by  So^pmen~)  to  haue  tranflated  the  Scriptures  into  the  Gotbicke  tongue: 
Iobn  Biffeop  ol  Siuil  by  Vajjeus,  to  haue  turned  them  into  ArabickcLj, about  the  y  eere  ofour  Lord  717 : 
'Beda  by  Ciflertienfis,  to  haue  turned  a  great  part  of  them  into  Saxon  :  Efnard  by  Tr'tthemiits ,  to  haue 
abridged  the  French  Pfalter,  as  fBeda  had  done  the  Hebrew,  about  the  y  eere  800  :  King  Alured  by  the 
faid  Qiflertienfis, to  haue  turned  the  Pfalter  into  Saxon  ■  Methodius  by  Auentmus  (printed  at  Ingoljlad) 
to  haue  turned  the  Scriptures  into  ||  ScUuonian  :  Valdo,  Bifhop  of  Frifing  by  'Beatut  %henaiuis ,  to 
haue  caufed  about  that  time,the  Goipels  to  be  tranflated  into  D«tcfc-rithme,yet  extant  in  the  Library 
oiQorbinian  :  Valdiis ,  by  diuers  to  haue  turned  them  himfelfe ,  or  to  haue  gotten  them  turned  into 
French,about  die  yeere  1160  :  £W/cs  the),  of  that  name,  furnamed  The  tttfc,  to  haue  caufed  them 
to  be  turned  into  French,  about  100.  yeeres  after  Valtkkihis  time,  of  which  tranflation  there  be  many 
copies  yet  extant,  as  wituefleth  Beroaldits.  Much  about  that  time,  euen  in  our  King  ^ichardthe  fe- 
conds  dayes ,  Iobn  Treuifa-,  tranflated  them  into  Englifh ,  and  many  Engltfb  Bibles  in  written  hand 
are  yet  to  be  feene  with  diuers,n  anflated  as  it  is  very  probable,in  that  age.  So  ihe Syrian  tranflation 
of  the  New  Teftament  is  in  moft  learned  mens  Libraries,  of  Widminfladius  his  fetting  forth ,  and  the 
Pfalter  in  Aralncke  is  with  many,  of  Augufliniis  Nebienfis  fetting  foorth.  So  Pc/fc/alfirmeth,  diat  in 
his  trauaile  he  faw  the  Goipels  in  the  fir hiopum  tongue;  And  AmbrofeTncfiiis  alleageth  the  Pfalter  of 
the  Indians,  which  he  teftifieth  to  haue  bene  fet  forth  by  Potken  in  Syrian  characters.  So  that,to  haue 
the  Scriptures  in  the  modier-tongue  is  not  a  quaint  conceit  lately  taken  vp ,  either  by  the  Lord  Crorr.< 
•well  in  England,  or  by  the  Lord  %adaal  in  Tolonie--,  or  by  the  Lord  Fngnadmsm  the  Empcrours  do- 
minion, but  hath  bene  thought  vpon  ,  and  put  in  pra&ife  of  old ,  euen  from  the  firft  times  of  the  con- 
uerfion ot  any  Nation ;  no  doubt ,  becaufe  it  was  efteemed  moft  profitable,to  caufe  faith  to  grow  in 
mens  hearts  the  fboner,  and  to  make  them  to  be  able  to  fay  with  die  words  of  the  Pfalme,  As  Tfe  haue 
beard  Jo  w  bauefeene^. 

Now  the  Church  ofRome  would  fceme  at  the  length  tobeare  a  motherly  affection  towardsher 
children, and  to  allow  them  theScriptuvesinthcirmothertonguc:  butindeed  it  is  agift,notdefet- 
uing  to  be  called  a  gift,  an  vnprofitablc  gift :  they  muft  firft  get  a  Licence  in  writing  before  they  may 

vfe 


Thclrjnflr 
ting  of  the 
Scripture  in- 
to the  vulgar 
tongues. 


The  vnwil- 
lingnctof  our 
chicle  Aducr- 
taricMrutihc 
Scripture* 
fhouidbc  uV 


UJlgcd* ithc 

mother 
tonjurAc 


The  fp  caches 
anJ  rc*fons> 
both  if  our 
breitiien, 
jindofourAd- 
ueilarics  a* 
Cjm([  t.U* 
*ork& 


To  the  Read 


er. 


A  fjtbfaftion 
to  our  bre- 
thren. 


vie  them,  and  to  get  that,  they  mull  approue  themfelues  to  their  ConlelTor,  that  is, to  be  fuch  as  are,i 
if  not  frozen  in  the  dregs,  yet  ibwred  with  the  le.iuen  of  their  fuperfh'tion.  Howbeit,  it  feemed  too 
much  to  Qlement  the  8.  that  there  fhould  beany  Licence  granted  to  haue  them  in  the  vulgar  tongue, 
and  therefore  he  ouertuleth  and  ftuftrateth  the  grant  oXf'ms  the  fourth.  So  much  are  they  atraid 
of  the  light  of  the  Scripture^LHfi^rf  Scripturarum  as  Tertu'Jian  fpeaketh  )  that  they  will  not  trull  the 
p.-ople  with  it,  no  not  as  it  is  let  foorth  by  their  ownefworne  men  ,  no  not  with  the  Licence  of  their 
owneBifhopsandlhciuifitors.  Yea,fovnwillingrhey  are  to  communicate  the  Scriptures  to  the  peo- 
ples vnderftandirtg  in  any  fort,that  they  are  not  afhamed  to  confeffe ,  that  wee  forced  them  to  tran- 
(late  it  into  Englifh  againft  theirwills.  This  feemeth  to  argue  a  bad  caufe,orabadconfcience,or 
both.  Sure  we  are,that  it  is  not  he  that  hath  good  gold,  that  is  afraid  to  bring  it  to  the  touch- (lone, 
but  he  that  hath  the  counterfeit ;  neither  is  it  the  true  man  that  fhunneth  the  light,  but  themalefa- 
c"cour,Iell  his  deedes  fhould  be  reproued  :  neither  is  irthe  plainedealingMerchantthatisvnwillinc 
to  haue  the  waights,or  the  meteyard  brought  in  place,  but  he  that  vfeth  deceit.  But  we  will  let  them 
alone  for  this  fault,and  returne  to  translation. 

Many  mens  mouths  haue  bene  open  a  good  while  (and  yet  are  not  flopped)  with  (beeches  about 
the  Tranflatioafb  long  in  hand,oi  rather  perufals  of  Tranflations  made  before:  and  aske  what  may 
be  the  rea  fon  ,what  the  neceffitie  of  the  employment :  Hath  the  Church  bene  deceiued,  fa  v  they.all 
this  while  ?  Hath  her  fweet  bread  bene  mingled  w  ith  leauen.her  filuer  with  droffe,  her  wine  with  wa- 
ter,her  milke  with  lime  ?  (  Laile  gypfum  mde  mifcetur,  faith  S.  Jreney.)  We  hoped  that  we  had  bene  in 
the  right  way ,  that  we  had  had  the  Oracles  of  God  deliuered  vnto  vs,  and  that  though  all  the  world 
had  caufe  to  be  offended  and  tocomplaine  ,yet  that  we  had  none.  Hath  the  nurfe  holden  out  the 
breall,  and  nothing  but  winde  in  it  ?  Hath  the  bread  bene  deliuered  by  the  fathers  of  the  Church, 
and  the  fame  proued  to  be  lap'idoftis, as  Seneca  fpeaketh  ?  What  is  it  to  handle  the  word  of  God  de- 
ceitfully,if  this  be  not?  Thus certaine  brethren.  Alfo  the  aduerfarics'of  ludah  and  Hierufakmjikc 
Sanballat  in  Nebemiab,moc\ie,  as  we  heare,  both  at  the  worke  and  workemen,  faying ;  What  doethefe 
Tccake  lewes,iyc.  will  they  make  the  pones  -whole  againe  cut  of  the  heapes  ofdufl  tphicb  are  burnt  ?  although 
they  build ,  yet  ifafoxegoe<Vp,beflMlleucnbnake  downe  their ftonyTnall.  Was  their  Tranflation  good 
before?  Why  doc  they  now  mend  it  ?  Was  it  nor  good  ?  Why  then  was  it  obtruded  to  thepeople? 
Yea,  why  did  the Catholicks(  meaning  Pofilh  <I(omanifls)  alwayesgoe  inieopardie.forrefufingto 
goe  to  heare  it?  Nay,ifitmuftbetranflated  into  fcnglifh.Catholicks  are  fitted;  to  doe  it.  They  haue 
learning, and  they  know  when  a  thing  iswell,thevcan»j.iM«fW(it?f.j/>!</<5.  Weewillanfwerethem 
both  briefly:  and  the  former,beingbrcthren,thus,  with  S.Hierom^,,  Vamnamwveteres?  Minime./ed 
poflpriorumftudia  in  domoVomin:  quodpofjumus  laboramus.  That  is,  Doe  rcecondemnc  the  ancient?  In 
no  w/o :  but  after  the  endeuours  of  them  that  Taerc  before  'vs  ,tcee  take  the  beilpaines  Tt>e  can  in  the  houfe  of 
God.  As  if  hee  faid,Bcing  prouoked  by  the  example  ofthe  learned  that  liued  before  my  time,  I  haue 
thought  it  my  duetie,  to  allay  whether  my  talent  in  the  knowledge  ot  the  tongues,  may  be  profitable 
in  anymeafure  to  Gods  Church , left  I fliould  feeme  to  haue  laboured  in  tneminvaine,andlell  I 
fhould  be  thought  toglory  in  men,  (although  ancienr,)  aboue  that  which  was  in  them.  Thus  S.Hte 
rome  may  be  thought  to  fpeake. 

And  to  the  fame  effeel  fay  wee, that  we  are  fo  farre  off  from  condemning  any  of  their  laboursthat 
traueikdbeforevsinthiskinde,  either  in  this  land  or  beyond  fea  ,  either  in  Wm^Henries  time,  or 
KhgEdtPXrds  (lfthere  were  any  tranflation,  or  correction  of  a  tranflation  in  his  time)  orQueene 
£/i^tW;iof  euer-renoumedmernorie,  that  we  acknowledge  them  to  haue  beeneraifedvp  of  God, 
for  the  building  and  futniftlingof  his  Church ,  and  that  they  deferue  to  be  had  of  vs  and  ot  pollentie 
in  euei  lading  remembrance.  The  Iudgementof  A'iffoi'/c  is  worthy  and  well  know  en  :  If  Timothem 
had  not  bene,  ycc  hadnot  hadmuchfwectnu<fcke;butif  Phtynis  (Timothcus  his  mailer)  hadnotbeene,yvce 
had  not  had  Timotbeus.  Therefore  bleffed  be  they,  and  moll  honoured  be  their  name, that  breake  the 
vce,andgiuethonfetvpon  that  which  helpetli  forward  to  the  failing  of  foules.  Now  what  can  bet- 
more  auaileable  thereto  ,  then  to  deliuet  Gods  booke  vnto  Gods  people  in  a  tongue  which  they  vn- 
derlland  ?  Since  ofan  hidden  trea(ure,and  of  a  fountaine  that  is  (ealed,  there  is  no  profit, as  Ttolomee 
PhilaJelph  wrote  to  the  Rabbins  or  mailers  of  the  [ewes,  as  W'itnefl«h£/>7/>J>i.«M :  and  as  S.  Mgujiine 
faith  ;  A  mm  had  rather  be  with  his  dog  then  u>itba/lranger(  whofe  tongue  is  llrange  vnto  him.)  Yei 
for  all  that,  as  nothing  is  begun  and  perfited  at  the  fame  rime,  and  the  later  thoughts  are  thought  to 
be  the  wifer:  fo,  if  we  building  vpon  their  foundation  that  went  before  vs,  and  being  holpen  by  their 
labours,  doe  endeuour  to  make  that  better  which  they  left  fo  good ;  no  man  ,  we  are  lure,  hath  caufe 
to  miflike  vs  ;  they,  we  petfwade  out  felues,  if  they  were  aliue,  would  thanke  vs.  The  vintage  ot  utbt- 
c^er,  that  ilrake  thellroake:  yet  the  gleaning  ofgrapes  oiEphraim  was  not  to  be  defpifed.  See  Judges 
8.  verfe  i.  loafl)  the  king  of  Ifrael  didnot  fatilfiehimfelfe ,  till  he  had  (mitten  the  ground  three  times; 
and  yet  hee  offended  the  Prophet.for  giuingouer  then.    Aqw!a,o(  whom  wee  fpake  before,  tranlla- 

tcd  I 


Scetheobfcr- 
uation  (  fct 
forth  by  Cle- 
men his  au- 
thority )vpon 
the  4  rule  of 
Puis  the  4  his 
making  rn  the 
Index./ifi./ve- 

><M. 

TcriJ.J,„f„, 

t4rnn. 


loan 


J. 10. 


t4,My. 


Neb  4  j. 


S.WttTBI.^f- 

fl'Z'ditrf. 


S  EpipUan  Lee 
AntititAio. 

s.Aj»y?,v.'.H. 

Deic.J. 


|lt,J6c.8.i. 

I  King.  ,t 
■  3,19. 


TheTranflators 


lercm-ij-i8- 

tyr. 

Sanv:  viCfli. 

riae*.-  Hutvb. 
4/tScbLA. 


Umctl  i. 


It*,:. 


ced  ihe  Bible  as  caretully,and  as  1  kiltully  as  he  could;  and  yet  he  thought  good  to  goeouer  it  againe, 
and  then  it  got  the  credit  with  the  lewes.to  be  called  q  i**--,  that  is,  accuratly  done ,  as  Saint  Hierome 
witneffeth. '  How  many  bookes  of  profane  learning  haue  bene  gone  ouer  agameand  againe ,  by  the 
fame  tranflators,  by  others  ?  Ot  one  and  the  fame  booke  of  ^rtUotks  Ethikes ,  there  are  extant  not 
fo  fewasfrxeor  feuenfeucralltranflations.  Now  if  this  coft  may  bee  beflowed  vponthegoord, 
which  aftorderhvs  alitdefhade ,  and  which  today  flourifheth ,  but  to  morrow  is  cut  downe;  what 
may  webeftow.nay  what  ought  we  not  to  beftow  vpon  the  Vine,thefruite  whereof  maketh  ejad  the 
confaenceofman^ndtheftemme  whereof abidcth  for  euer?  And  this  is  thewordotGod,whichwc 
tranflate.  What  if  the  chaffe  to  ihcTbheot, faith  the  Lord  .'T.ot»  >vitreum,quMiti  Verum  margarttum  (faith 
TcrtuHtm,)  if  atoyof  glallcbeof  that  rekomngwuhvs,  how  ought  weetovaluc  thetruepcarle; 
Thcretore  let  no  roans  eye  be  euill,becaufe  his  Maiefties  is  good;  neither  let  any  be  gneucd,  that  wee 
haue  a  Prince  that  feeketh  the  increafe  ot  the  fpmruall  w  ealth  of  lirael  (let  Sjnballdts  and  Tohiahs  doe 
fo,  which  therefore  doe  beare  their  iuft  reproofe)  but  let  vs  rather  bleiTe  God  from  the  ground  ot  our 
heart,  for  working  this  religious  care  in  him,  to  haue  the  tranflationsof  the  Bible  maturely  confide- 
red  of  and  examined.  For  by  this  meanes  it  commeth  to  palTe ,  that  whatfoeuer  is  found  alitadic 
/and  all  is  found  tor  fubfhnce,  in  one  or  other  ot  our  editions ,  and  the  worfl  ot  ours  tarre  better  then 
their  autentike  vulgar)  die  fame  willfhine  as  gold  more  brightly,  being  rubbed  and  pohfhed  j  alfo  ,  it 
anv  thing  be  halting,  or  fuperfluous,  or  not  fo  agreeable  to  the  onginall.the  fame  may  bee  corrected, 
and  the  trueth  fet  in  place.  And  what  can  the  King  command  to  bee  done,  that  will  bring  him  more 
true  honour  then  this  ?  and  wherein  could  they  thathaucbecne  fet  a  worke,  approuc  their  duetic  to 
the  Kane,  yea  their  obedience  toGod,and  loue  to  his  Saints  moie,  then  by  yeelding  their  feruice ,  and 
all  that  is  within  them.for  the  fumifhing  of  the  worke  ?  But  befides  all  this ,  they  were  the  pi  incipall 
tnotiuesofit,and  therefore  ought  leafhoquarrell  it:  for  the  very  Hiitoricall  trueth  is,  that  vponthe 
impoitunatepetitionsot  the  PuntaDes,  at  his  Maiefhes  comming  ro  this  Crowne ,  the  Conference  at 
Hampton  Court  hauing  bene  appointed  for  hearing  their  complaints  :  when  by  force  of  rea  Ion  they 
wereput  from  all  other  grounds ,  they  had  recourfc  at  the  la  ft,  to  this  fhitt ,  that  they  could  not  with 
good  confciencefubfcnbeto  the  Communion  booke  ,  fiDceit  maintained  the  Bible  as  it  was  there 
trauflated,  which  was  as  they  faid,  a  moll  corrupted  tranllaticn.  Andalthough  this  wasiudgedto 
be  but  a  very  pooreand  emptic  fhift;  yet  euen  hereupon  did  his  Maiefhe  begmne  to  bethmke  him- 
felfe  of  the  good  that  might  enfue  by  a  new  tranflation,  and  prcfently  after  gaue  order  for  this  Tranf- 
lation which  is  now  prefented  vnto  thee.  Thus  much  to  fatiffie  our  fcrupulous  Brethren. 

Now  to  the  later  we  anfwere;  that  wet  doe  not  deny,  nay  weealfirmeand  auow,  that  the  very 
roeanefl  tranflation  of  the  Bible  inEnglifh,  letfoorthby  men  of  our  protcfsion  (for  wee  haue  feene 
none  of  theirs  of  the  whole  Bible  as  yet)contameth  the  word  ot  God,nay,isth?  word  of  God.  As 
thcKings  Speech  which  heevttered  in  Parliament,  being  tranflated  intoFrtHch,  Dutch,  Italian  and 
Lati/it,  is  ffiD  the  Kuigs  Speech,  though  it  be  not  interpreted  by  euery  Tranllator  with  the  like  grace, 
nor  peraduenture  fo  fitly  for  phrafc,  nor  fo  crprcfly  for  fence,  euery  where.  For  it  is  conteiTed.ihat 
things  arc  to  take  their  denomination  ot  the  greater  part;  andanaturall  man  could  fay,  VaumyiU 
multa  nitsnt  in  carmine,  nonegopaucis  offendor  maculu,  ffic.  A  man  may  be  counted  a  vei  tuous  man, 
though  hee  haue  made  many  flips  in  his  lite,  (els ,  there  were  none  vertuous,  for  in  many  things  Tee  of- 
fend all)  alfo  a  comely  man  and  louely,  though  hee  haue  fome  warts  vpon  his  hand, yea,  not  onelv 
treakles  vpon  his  face,  but  alfo  fkarres.  No  caufe  therefore  why  the  word  cranflated  fhould  bee  de- 
nied to  be  the  word,or  forbidden  to  be  currant,  notwithftandiQg  that  fome  imperfections  and  blemi- 
fhesmaybe  noted  in  thefettingfoorthof  it.  For  what  euer  was  perfect  vnder  the  Sunne,  where  A. 
poltlesor  Apofto!ikemen,diat  is,  men  indued  with  an  extraordinary  meafure  of  Gods  fpirit.and 
pnuiledged  with  the  ptiuiledge  of  infallibilitie,had  not  theii  hand  ?  The  Romamftes  therefore  in 
rcfufing  to  hearc.and  daring  to  burne  the  Word  tranflated,  did  no  lelle  then  defpite  the  (pint  of 
grace,trom  whom  originally  itproceeded,  and  whofe  fenfe  and  meanmg,as  well  as  mans  weakenefTe 
would  enable,  it  did  exprefle.  Iudge  by  an  example  or  two.  Plutarch  writeth,  that  after  that  1{ome 
had  beene  burnt  by  the  GaOes,  they  fell  foone  to  builde  it  againe :  but  doing  it  in  hafte,  they  did  not 
caff  the ftrects.nor  proportion  the  houfes  in  fuch  comely  fafhion.as  had  bene  molt  lightly  and  con- 
ueuient ;  was  fat'dine  therefore  an  honett  man,  or  a  good  Patriot,tbat  fought  to  bring  it  to  a  combu- 
ftion?  or  ?{ero  a  good  Prince,  that  did  indeed  fet  it  on  fire?  So,  by  theftory  of  E^ufc.and  the  pro- 
phefie  of  Haggai  it  may  begathered.that  the  Temple  built  by  Zerubhahel  after  the  returne  from  Ba 
bylon,  was  by  no  meanes  to  bee  compared  to  the  former  built  by  Solomon  (  for  they  that  remembred 
the  tormer,wept  when  they  confidered  the  later  )  notwithflanding,  might  this  later  either  haue  bene 
abhorred  and  forfaken  by  die  /«w,orprophaned  bythc  Creekesi  Thclike  wee  aretothinkeot 
Tranflations.  The  tranflation  of  xheScuentie  dilTentcth  from  the  Onomall  in  many  places,  neuhcr 
doeth  it  come  ncere  it/or  pcrlpicuiue.grauitie.maicftie:  yet  winch  ot~thc  Apoflles  did  condemne 
.  . 't? 


An  jnfWctr  t< 
tfic  imputjn 


To  the  Reader. 


it?  Condemned  Nay, they  vfed  it,  (as  it  is  apparent,  andasSaint  Herome  and  mod  learned  men 
doe  confeffe)  which  they  wouldnothauedoneaiorby  their  example  of  vfingit,  fo  grace  and  com 
mend  it  to  the  Church,  if  it  had  bene  vnwoithy  the  appellation  and  name  of  the  word  of  God.  And 
whereas  they  vrge  for  their  fecond  defence  of  their  vilifying  and  abufing  of  the  Engli/Jj  Bibles,or 
fome  pieces  thereof,  which  they  meete  with,  for  that  heretikes  (torfooth)  were  rhe  Authoursof  the 
tranflations,  (  heretikes  they  call  vs  by  the  fame  right  that  they  call  themfelues  Otholikes,  both  be- 
ing wrong)  wee  marueile  what  diuinkie  taught  them  fo.  Wee  are  fure  Tertullianwasot  another 
minde :  Ex  per/onis  probamus  ftdem  an  exfide^perfonu  ?  Doe  we  trie  mens  faith  by  dieir  perfons  ?  we 
fhotildtrie  their  perlbns  by  their  faith.  AifoS.  siugujline  was  of  an  other  minde:  for  he  lighting  vp- 
on  certaine  tules  made  by  Tycbonius  a  Von.ttisl,  tor  the  better  vnderftanding  of  the  word.was  not  a- 
fhamed  tomakevfeof  them,  yea,toinfert  them  into  his  owne  booke,  withgiuing  commendation 
to  them  fo  fane  fooi  th  as  they  were  worthy  to  be  commended,  as  is  to  be  feene  in  S.  Augujlines  third 
booke  T>e  doBrina  Chnftiaua.To  be  fhort,0/7gM,and  thewhole  Church  of  God  foi  certain  hundred 
yeeres,wereot  an  other  minde :  for  they  were  fofarre  from  treadingvnder  foote,(  much  more  from 
burning )  the  Tranflation  of  Aquila  a  Profelite,  that  is.one  that  had  turned  lew;  of  Symnuchiis,  and 
Theodotion,bodiEbionites,  that  is,moft  vile  heretikes,  that  theyioyned  them  together  with  theft. 
brew  Originall,and  the  Tranflation  of  the  Seuentie  (as  hath  bene  before  figm'fied  out  of  Epipbaniits) 
and  let  them  forth  openly  to  be  confidered  of  and  perufed  by  all.  But  we  weary  the  vnlearned,vvho 
need  not  know  (o  much,and  trouble  the  learned, who  know  it  already. 

Yet  before  we  end,  wemuftanfweie  a  third  cauill  and  objection  of  theirs  againftvs,  for  altering 
and  amending  our  Taanflations  fo  oft ;  wherein  trucly  they  deale  hardly ,  and  flrangely  with  vs.  For 
to  whom  eucr  was  it  imputed  for  a  fault  ( by  fuch  as  were  wife_)  to  goe  ouer  that  which  hec  had  done, 
andtoamendit  wherehefaw  caufe?  Saint  Augufline  was  not  airaide  to  exhort  S.Hieromew  a  Pali- 
nodia  or  recantation ;  the  fame  S.  Augufline  w  as  nor  afhamed  to  retradtate,  we  might  fay  reuoke,ma- 
ny  things  that  had  palled  him,  and  doth  euen  glory  that  he  leeth  his  infirmities.  If  we  will  be  fonnes 
oftheTrueth,wemufr  confider  what  it  lpeaketh,  and  ttample  vpon  our  owne  credit,  yea,  andvpon 
othermenstoOjit  either  be  any  way  anhinderancetoit.  Thistothe  caufe:  then  to  the  perfonswe 
fay,  that  of  all  men  they  ought  to  bee  moftfilcnt  in  this  cafe.  For  what  varieties  liaue  they,  and  what 
alterations  haue  they  made,  not  onely  of  their  Seruicebookes ,  Porteflesand  Breuianes,  but  alio  of 
then  Latine  Tranflation  ?  The  Seruice booke  fuppofed  to  be  made  by  S.  Ambrofe  ( Offcium  Ambro- 
fimum)  was  a  great  while  id  fpeciall  vfeand  requefr  but  Pope  Hadrian  calling  a  Councill  with  the 
aydeol  Qtarles  the  Empcrour,abolifhedit,yea,bumt  it,  and  commanded  the  Seruice-booke  of  Saint 
Grcgoric  vniuerfally  to  be  vfed.  Well,  Officium  Gregorianum  gets  by  this  meanes  to  be  in  credit,  but 
doeth  it  continue  without  change  or  altering?  No,:hevery  (fymane  Seruice  was  of two  ra(hions,the 
New tafhion  , and  theOld, (the onevfed in  one Church,the other  inanothei)as  is  to  beefeenein 
Pamdius  a  Romamff,  his  Preface,  before  Micrologics.  The  fame  fdrnf/i/w  reported)  out  of  %adid 
pbiu  de  ^ji<ot  that  about  theyeereof  our  Lord,  1177.  Pope  "Mkolai  the  third  remoued  our  of  the 
Churches  of  (Rome,  the  more  ancient  bookes  (of  Seruke)  and  brought  into  vie  the  Miflals  of  the 
Friers  Minorites,andcommaunded  them  to  bee  obfetued  there;  inlomuch  that  about  an  hundred 
yeeresafter,when  the  aboue  named  %adulphus  happened  to  beat^cni;-,  he  lound  all  the  bookes  to 
benew,(of  thenewftampe.)  Neither  was  there  this  chopping  and  changing  in  the  more  ancient 
times  onely,  but  alfo  of  late:  /%*^Vtf«.rhimfelteconfeiIeth,  thateuery  Bifhopricke  almofthada 
peculiar  kind  of  feruice,moft  vnlike  to  that  which  others  had :  which  moued  him  to  abolifh  all  other 
Breuiaries,  though  neuerfo  ancient,  and  priuiledged  and  publifhedby  Bifhops  in  their  Diocef- 
fes,  and  to  eftablifh  and  ratifie  that  onely  which  was  of  his  owne  letting  foot th,in  theyeere  \\  6%. 
Now,  when  the  father  of  their  Church,  who  gladly  would  heale  the  foare  of  the  daugheer  of  his  peo. 
pie  foftly  and  lleightly ,  and  make  the  beft,  of  it ,  finderh  fo  great  fault  with  them  for  their  oddes  and 
larnng;  we  hope  the  children  haue  no  great  caufe  to  vaunt  of  their  vniformitie.  But  rhe  difference 
thatappearethbetweeneourTranflations,and  our  often  correcting  of  them,  is  thethingthat  wee 
are  fpecially  charged  with;  let  vs  fee  therefore  whether  they  themfelues  bee  without  fault  this  way, 
("if  it  be  to  be  counted  a  fault,  to  correct)  and  whether  they  bee  fit  men  to  throw  (tones  at  vs:  Otan 
dem  maior parcas  injane  minor i :  they  that  are  lefTe  found  themfelues,  ought  not  to  obiect  infirmities  to 
others.  Ifwe  fhould  tell  them  that  f/alla,Stapiilenfis,&afmus, and  Viuts  found  fault  with  their  vulgar 
Tranflation,and  confecjuently  w  iihed  the  fame  to  be  mended,or  a  new  one  to  be  made,  they  would 
anfwere  peraduenture,  that  we  produced  their  enemies  for  witnefTes  again  ft,  them;  albeir,theywere 
in  no  other  (ort  enemies.then  as  S.  Paul  was  to  the  Galatians, for  telling  them  the  trueth :  and  it  were 
to  be  wifhed,  that  they  had  dared  to  tell  it  them  plainlier  and  oftner.  But  what  will  they  fiy  to  this, 
that  Pope  Leo  the  tenth  allowed  Bajmits  Tranflation  of  the  New  Teftament/omuch  different  from 
the  vulgar,  by  his  Apoftolike  Letter  &  Bull;that  the  fame  Leo  exhorted  Tagnin  to  tranflate  the  whole 

B  Bible, 


jmpt.tenlr* 
htrtfiu 


Jofl.Clir.fi  Mp. 


'/lien  interJutT) 

■*"i*pji.». 


Ditr&A.'Jh.',, 


iib  1  4.16. 


Stxtm  Strtnf. 


The  Tranflators 


Hcb.7.H. 
&8.7. 


Sixtus  l.prefet. 
pxaBikip. 


IJtn  i 


Afo. 


\crpgMf.v. 


S.H/fen.  «J 
frtttl. 

S.Wtrm.ti 

lucmn.m,Difl 


Bible,  and  bare  whatfoeuer  charges  was  necefTary  tor  the  worke?  Surely ,  as  the  Apoftle  reafoneth 
to  the  Hebrewes ,  that  if  the  former  Law  andTeftament  had  bene fufficient, there  hadbeene  no  need  of  tbe 
latter:  fowemay  fay,  that  if  the  oide  vulgar  had  bene  at  all  points  allowable,  to  fmall  purpofe  had 
(abour  and  charges  bene  vndergone,  about  framing  of  a  new.  It  they  fay ,  it  was  one  Popes  priuate 
opinion,  and  that  heconfultedonely  himfelfe;  then  wee  are  able  to  goe  further  with  them,aud  to  a- 
uerre,  that  more  of  their  chiefe  men  of  all  forts,euen  their  owne  Tmtf-championsP<2/«<j  ScVega ,  and 
their  owne  Inquifitoi  s,  Hieronymus ab  Okaflro,  and  their  own  Bifhop  IJidorus Qarius,  and  their  owne 
CardmalIT/;om«J^oCtfieta^doeeithermakenewTranflations  themfelues,  or  follownewones 
of  other  mens  making ,  or  note  the  vulgar  Interpreter  tor  halting  j  none  of  them  feare  to  diflent  from 
him,  nor  yet  to  except  againft  him.  And  call  they  this  an  vniforme  tenour  of  text  and  Judgement  a- 
bout  the  text,fo  many  ot  their  Worthies  diiclaimingthe  now  receiued  conceit?  Nay,we  wil  yet  come 
neerer  the  quicke:  doth  nottheir  Pair-edition  differ  from  the  Louaine, 2nd  Hcnienius  his  from  them 
both,and  yer  allot  them  allowed  by  authoritie?  Nay,  doth  not  Sixtus  Quintus  confelTe ,  that  cer- 
taineCatholikes(hemeanethcertaineof  his  owne  fide  _)  were  in  fuchan  humor  of  tranflating  the 
Scriptures  into  Latine,  that  Satan  taking  occafion  by  them ,  though  they  thought  of  no  fuch  matter, 
did  ft  riue  what  he  could,  out  of  to  vncertaine  and  manifold  a  varietie  of  Tranflations,fo  to  mingle  all 
things,  that  nothing  might  feeme  to  be  left  certaine  and  firme  in  them,&c  ?  Nay  further,  did  not  the 
fame  Sixlus ordaineby  an  inuiolable  decree ,  and  that  with  the  counlell  and  content  ofhis  Cardinals, 
that  the  Latine  edition  ot  the  oide  and  new  Teft  ament.which  the  Councill  of  Trent  would  haue  to  be 
authenticke,isthe  fame  without  controuertle  which  he  then  fet  forth ,  being  diligently  corrected  and 
printed  iu  the  Printing-houfe  ot  Vatican  ?  Thus  Sixtus  in  his  Preface  before  his  Bible.  And  yet  Cle- 
ment the  eight  his  immediate  fucccflour,  publifheth  another  edition  of  the  Bible ,  containing  in  it  in- 
finite differences  from  that  of  Sixtus, (2nd  many  of  them  waightie  and  materiall)and  yet  this  muft  be 
authentike  by  all  meanes.  What  is  to  haue  the  faith  ot  our  glorious  Lord  Iesvs  Christ  with  Yea 
andNay,ifthisbenot?  Againe,whatisfweetharmonieandconfent,ifthis  be?  Therfore.asCfWMrj- 
tusot  Corinth  aduifed  a  great  King ,  before  he  talked  of  the  diffentions  among  the  Grecians ,  to  com- 
pofe  his  domefticke  broiles  ("for  at  that  time  hisQyeene  and  his  fonne  and  heire  were  at  deadly  fuide 
with  him)  fo  all  the  while  that  our  aduerfaries  doe  make  fo  many  and  fo  various  editions  themfelues, 
and  doeiarrefornochaboutthe  worth  and  authontieof  them,  they  can  with  no  fhow  of  ecpitie 
challenge  vs  for  changing  and  correcting. 

But  it  is  high  time  to  leaue  thera,and  to  (hew  in  bricfe  what  wee  propofed  toour  felues ,  and  what 
courfeweheldinthisourperufallandfuruay  oftheBible.  Truly  ("good Chriftian Reader)  weene- 
uer  thought  from  the  beginning,  that  we  fhould  neede  to  make  a  newTranflation ,  nor  yet  to  make 
of  a  bad  one  a  good  one,  ( for  then  the  imputation  of Sixtus  had  bene  true  in  fome  fort,that  our  peo- 
ple had  benefed  withgallot  Dragons  in  ftead  ofwine,  with  wheyinfteadofmilke:)  buttomakea 
good  one  better,or  ou  t  ofmany  good  ones,one  principal!  good  one,not  iuftly  to  be  excepted  againffj 
that  hath  bene  our  indeauour,  that  our  marke.  To  that  purpofe  there  were  many  chofen,  that  were 
greater  in  other  mens  eyes  then  in  their  owne,  and  that  fought  the  truth  rather  then  their  own  praife. 
Ai^aine,  they  cameor  were  thought  to  come  to  the  worke,  not  exercendi  caitfa  (as  one  faith  J  but  exer- 
citati,  that  is,  learned,  not  to  learne :  Forthe  chiefe  ouerfeer  and  v^.»  vnder  his  Maieftie,  to  whom 
not  onely  we,  but  alfo  our  whole  Church  was  much  bound,  knew  by  his  wifedome,  which  thing  alfo 
Hazjanzen  taught  folongagoe,  that  it  is  a  prepoftcrous  order  to  teach  firft  and  to  learne  after,  yea 
chat  liam^^g^u  win  to  learneand  pracf  ife  together ,  is  neither  commendable  for  the  workeman, 
nor  fate  for  the  worke.  Therefore  fuch  were  thought  vpon,as  could  fay  modeftly  w  ith  Saint  Hierome, 
EtHcbr<cum  Sermoncm  ex  parte didkimus ,  isr  in  Latino  pend  ab  ipfis  incuvabulis  <?c.  detriti  fumus.  'Both 
Idc  haue  learned  tbe  Hebrew  tongue  in  part,  and  in  the  Latine  tttec  haue  bane  exercijedalntofl  from  our  <verie 
cradle.  S.  Hierome  m2kct\i  no  mention  aitheGreefo  tongue,  wherein  yet  hee  did  excell ,  becaufehee 
tranflatednottheoldTeftamentoutof  Gretke,  but  out  ol  Hebrewe.  And  in  what  fort  didthefeaf- 
lemble  >  In  the  truft  of  their  owne  knowledge.or  of  their  fharpenefle  of  wit.or  deepenefle  of  Judge- 
ments it  were  in  an  arme  of  fleffi?  Atno  hand.  They  truftedinhimthathaththekey  oCDauid, 
opening  and  no  man  fhutting;  they  prayed  to  the  Lord  the  Father  of  our  Lord,  to  the  effect  that 
S.Auguiline  did  j  0  let  thy  Scriptures  be  my  pure  delight  Jet  me  not  be  decerned  in  them,neithcr  let  me  deceiue 
by  them.  In  this  confidence,  andwiththisdeuotiondidtheyaflembletogedier;  nottoomany,left 
onefhould  trouble  another;andyetmany,leftmany  things  haply  might  efcape  them.  If  you  afke 
whatthey  had  before  them,  truely  rt  was  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  Oide  Teftamenr,  the  Crceke  of  the 
New.  Thcfe  are  the  two  golden  pipes,or  rather  conduits,where-through  the  oliue  branches  emp- 
tie  themfelues  into  the  golde.  Saint  Jlugwflmc  calleth  them  precedent,  or  originall  tongues;  Saint 
H»«<»we,fountaines.  ThefjmeSaintf/ic'M?»/caffinneth,andG^fM«  hath  not  (pared  to  put  itinto 
his  Decree ,  That  as  the  credit  of  the  oide  Bookes  (  hemeaneth  of  the  Old  Tefhment)  is  to  bee  tryedby 


vi  v«/ruw. 


the 


T"hepurpore 
of  the  Iran. 
flators,with 
their  number, 

'in.i':urcjcarc 


To  the  Reader. 


Rcafons  mo- 
umgvitolct 
diuer&ic  of 
[encesinthe 
margin,wherc 
there  is  great 
probability  for 
each. 


the  Hebrette  Vikuncs  jo  of  the  New  by  the  Greeke  tongue,  he  meancth  by  theoriginall  Grceke.  If trueth 
be  to  be  tried  by  rhefe  tongues,  then  whence  fhould  a  Tranflationbemade.but  out  otihem;  Thefe 
tongues  therefore,  the  Scriptures  wee  fay  in  thofe  tongues,  wee  fet  before  vs  to  tranilate,  being  the 
tono-ues  where'in  God  was  pleated  to  (peake  to  his  Church  by  his  Prophets  and  Apolfles.  Neither  did 
we  run  ouer  the  worke  with  that  porting  hafle  that  iheScptuagint  did  ,  it  that  be  true  which  is  repor- 
ted of  diem.that  they  finifhed  it  in  Ji.  dayes;  neither  were  we  barred  or  hindered  from  going  ouer  it 
againe,  hauing  once  done  it,  like  $.Hierome,\t  that  be  true  which  himfelfe  reporteth,that  he  could  no 
fooner  write  anv  thing,but  prefently  it  was  caught  from  him,  and  publifhed,  and  he  could  not  luue 
leaue  to  mend  it :  neither ,to  be  fhort.were  we  the  firrt  that  fell  in  hand  with  tranilating  the  Scripture 
into  Enolifh  and  confequently  deftitute  of  former  helpes,  as  it  is  written  of  Origen,  tha  t  hee  was  the 
firrt  in  a  maner,that  put  his  hand  to  write  Commentaries  vpon  the  Scriptures,  and  therefore  no  mar- 
ueile  if  he  ouerfhot  himfelfe  many  times.  None  of  thefe  things:  the  worke  hath  not  bene  hudledvp 
in  71.  dayes,  but  hath  cort  the  workemen,as  light  as  it  fcemeth.the  paines  ot  twife  feuen  times  feuen 
tie  two  daves  and  more :  matters  of  fuch  weight  and  confequence  are  to  bee  fpeeded  with  matuntie 
for  in  a  bufinefle  of  moment  a  man  fearedi  not  the  blame  of  conuenient  flacknefle.  Neither  did 
wee  thinke  much  to  confult  the  Tranflators  or  Commentators ,  QiaUee, Hibreive,  Syrian,  Greeke,  or 
Latins  no  not  ihe  SpanifrFrencb, Italian,  or  Dutch  ;nc\thet  did  wedifdaineto  reuife  thatwhichwe 
had  done  and  to  brin<*  backe  to  the  anuill  that  w  hich  we  had  hammered :  but  hauing  and  vfing  as 
ereat  helpes  as  were  needfull.and  fearing  no  reproch  for  flownefle,nor  coueting  praiie  for  expedition, 
wee  haue  at  the  len<nh,through  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord  vpon  vs,  brought  the  worke  to  that 
parte  that  you  fee.  _  , 

Some  peraduenturewouldhauenovarieucof  fencestobefet  inthemargine,lerttheauthontieof 
the  Scriptures  for  deciding  of  controucrfies  by  that  fhew  ofvncertaintie.fhould  fomewhat  be  fhaken. 
But  we  hold  their  iudgme  t  not  to  be  fo  found  in  this  point  For  though,  vhatfoeuer  things  are  neccjjary 
aremanifeft,  as  S.  Chryfoltome  faith,  and  as  S.  JuguUine ,  hi  thofe  things  that  areplamelyjet  downe  in  the 
Scriptures  all  [tub  matter  sarefomd  that  concern  FaUb,bopejndCbaritie.  Yet  for  all  that  it  cannc- ] 
diffembled,  that  partly  to  exercifeandwhetourwits,partlytoweanethecuriousrromloathi  _ 
them  for  their  euery- where  plaineoefle ,  partly  alio  to  ftirre  vpour  deuotiontocrauethealsiftance 
Gods  fpirit  by  prayer,and  laftly,that  we  might  be  forward  to  feeke  ayd  of  our  brethren  by  confe- 
ice  and  neuer  lcorne  thofe  that  be  not  in  all  refpe-fts  fo  complete  as  they  fhould  bee,  being  to  feeke 
in  many  thmgsourfelues,ithafhplcafed  Godinhisdiuinepromdence,  heereand  there  to  fcattet 
wotdesandfenteiicesotthatdifiicultieanddoubtfulnefTe,notii>docl:rina]l  points  that  concemefal- 
uation,  f  for  in  fuch  it  hathbeeue  vouched  that  the  Scriptures  are  plaine  )  but  in  matters  of  lefle  mo- 
ment that  tearefulnefle  would  better  befeeme  vs  then  confidence,and  if  we  will  refolue.to  refolue  vp- 
on modeftie  with  S.Juguftinc,  (though  not  in  this  fame  cafe  a!together,yet  vpon  the  fame  ground) 
Melius  &  dubhare  de  occultis,  quatn  litigare  de  incertis,  it  is  better  to  make  doubt  of  thofe  things  which 
are  (ecret,  then  to  tVme  about  thofe  things  that  are  vncertaine.  There  be  many  words  in  the  Scrip, 
tures  which  be  neuer  found  there  but  once,  (hauing  neither  brother  nor  neighbour,  as  the  Hcbrcwes 
fpeake)  fo  that  we  cannot  be-holpen  by  conference  of  places.  Againe,  there  be  many  rare  names  of 
certaine  birds,  beaffes  and  precious  ftones,&c.  concerning  which  the  Hcbrewes  themfelues  are  fodi- 
uided  among  themfelues  for  iudgement,  that  they  may  (eeme  to  haue  defined  this  or  that,rather  be- 
caufe  they  would  fay  fomthing,the  becaufe  they  were  fure  of  that  which  they  faid.as  S.Hierome  fome- 
whete  faith  of  the  Sebtmgint.  Now  in  fuch  a  cafe.doth  not  a  margine  do  well  to  admoniihthe  Reader 
to  feeke  furthered  not  to  conclude  ot  dogmatize  vpon  this  or  that  peremptonlyfFor  as  ins  a  fault  of 
incredulitie,  to  doubt  of  thofe  things  that  are  euident :  fo  todetermine  of  fuch  things  as  die  Spirit  of 
God  hath  left(euen  in  the  judgment  of  the  ludicious  jqueftionable.can  be  no  lefle  then  preemption. 
Therfore  as  S.>?«/fefaitri,tha  t  vanetie  of Tranflations  is  profitable  for  the  findingout  of  the  fenfe 
of  the  Scriptures :  fo  diuerfitie  of  fignification  and  fenfe  in  the  margine,  where  the  text  is  not  fo  deare, 
muftneedes  doe  good,  yea,isneceffary,as  weareperfwaded.  Weknow  that  W  £««:<*  exprefly 
forbiddeth,that  anv  varieric  of  readings  of  their  vulgar  edition,(hould  be  put  in  the  margme,(which 
though  it  be  not  altogether  the  fame  thing  to  that  wehauemhand,yetitlookeththatway)butwe 
thinte  he  hath  not  all  of  his  owne  fide  his  fauourers.for  this  conceit.  They  diat  are  wife.had  rather 
haue  their  judgements  at  libertie  in  differences  of  readings.then  to  be  captiuated  to  one,when  it  may 
be  the  other  If  thev  were  fure  diat  their  hie  Priert  had  all  lawes (hut  vp  in  his  breft.as  'JWthe  fecond 
braoaed,  and  thathewere  as  free  from  errourbyfpeciallprimledge,as  the  Dictators  of  <%om  were 
made  bv  law  ,nuiolable,it  were  an  othermatter;  then  his  word  were  an  Oracle,his  opinion  a  decii.on. 
But  the  eyes  of  the  world  are  now  open,  God  be  thanked^nd  haue  bene  a  great  whde  they  find  that 
he  is  fubi«a  to  the  fame  affections  and  infirmities  that  others  be.that  his  1  kin  ispenetrable,and  there- 
fore fo  much  as  he  prooueth,not  as  much  as  he  claimeth,they  grant  and  embrace, 

1  An 


ot 

rence 


$, Huron.  *l 
Pammacfro 


SefhotjnL- 


JotTr.ChrtJ}. 


S_4»$frj?.,7.8 
JtGtmfiJL 
ler.K^.J. 


doilr.chr^.m. 


SixHU^frjf. 
B.bU. 


The  Tranflators 


Abed. 

Jib  H  rjp.41 

S.HiMW-Jf>4< 
Sen*.  Sec  S. 

Angqifine. 


i«  Euftb.  «ct- 
tnvanti.  II- 1 1. 
tx  Tldlnr. 


Gen.iCn. 

[rid  .1   i  j 


March!  J, 
Hcbc-n-io". 

Junm'iyctt 

™.»*9»il  »  Tiuil' 

rnrtH  fibiftlij 
J. iff. 
.-Ofic.lf. 
Hcb.10.31. 


An  other  tlung  we  thinke  good  to  admonilh  thee  of  (sentlc  Reader  J  that  wee  haue  not  tyed  our 
{eluestoanvnitormitieof  phraling ,  or  toanidentitie  of  words,  as  lomeperaduenture  would  wifh 
thatwe  had  done,  becaute  they  obterue.thatlomelearned  men  iome  where  ,  haue  beene  as  exact  as 
they  could  that  way.  Truly,  that  we  might  not  varie  from  the  fenle  of  that  which  we  had  tranflated 
before,  it  the  word  fignifi.-d  the  fame  thing  in  both  places  (tor  there  bee  fome  wordes  that  bee  not 
of  the  f.ime  ienfe  euery  whei  ej  w  e  w  ere  elpecully  carefull,  and  made  a  confeience ,  according  to  our 
duetie.  But,  'hat  we  fhould  exprefle  the  fame  notion  in  the  lame  particular  word ;  as  for  example,  it 
we  tranilate  the  H-breTi>  or  Greeke  word  once  bv  Turpofe,  neuer  to  call  it  Intent ;  ifone  where  Iourney- 
ing  ,neueiTraueiling  ;  it  one  where  Tliinke,  neuei  Suppo/e  ^  if  one  where  Paine,  neuer  Ache ;  if  one 
where  Ioy  neuer  GLdnejJe ,  $ic .  Thtistominle  the  matter,  wee  thought  to  fauour  more  ot  curiofitie 
then  wifedome,  and  that  rather  it  would  breed  fcorne  in  the  Atheift ,  then  bring  profite  to  the  godly 
Reader.  Foristhekingdomeot  God  become  wordsor  fyllables  ?  why  fhould  wee  be  in  bonda"eto 
them  if  we  may  be  free,  vfe  one  precifely  when  wee  may  vfe  another  no  lefie  fit ,  as  commodioufly  r 
A  godly  Father  in  the  Primitiue  time  fhe.ved  himfclfe  greatly  moued,  that  one  ot  newfanglenes  cal- 
led .5,^.1.,  «,.,r,  though  the  difference  be  little  or  nonej  and  anothei  reporteth,  that  he  was  much  abu- 
fed  for  turning  Cucurbita  (to  which  reading  the  people  had  beene  vfed)  into  Hedera.  Now  it  this  hap. 
pen  in  better  time;,  and  vpon  fo  (mail  occafions ,  wee  might  iulf  ly  teare  hard  cenlure,  if  generally  wee 
ihould  make  verball  and  vnneceffary  changing?.  We  might  alto  be  charged  (byfeoffets)  with  fome 
vnequall  dealing  towards  a  great  number  of  good  Englifh  wordes  Forasit  is  Writtenot  a  certaine 
great  Philofopher,  that  he  fhould  fay,that  thole  logs  were  happie  that  were  made  images  to  be  wor- 
Ihipped  ;  for  their  lellowes,  as  good  as  they  ,  lay  for  blockes  behinde  the  fire  :  fo  if  wee  fhould 
fav,as  it  were,vnto  certaine  words  Stand  vp  higher,  liaue  a  place  in  the  Bible  alwayes,  and  to  others 
otlikequalitie,Getvehence,bebanifhedtoreuer,  weemight  be  taxed  peraduenture  with  S.  lames 
his  words,  namely ,  To  be  partial,  in  our  feiues  and  indues  of mil  thoughts.  Addehereunto.thatnicenefle 
in  wordes  was  alwayes  counted  the  next  If  ep  to  trifling,  and  (owas  to  bee  curious  about  names  too  : 
alfo  that  we  cannot  follow  a  better  patterne  for  elocution  then  God  himfclfe ;  thereloi  e  hee  vfin"  di- 
uers  wordsan  his  holy  writ,  and  indifferently  tor  one  thing  in  nature :  we,if  w  ee  will  not  be  fupcrfutt- 
ous,  may  vfe  the  fame  libertie  in  our  Englifh  verfions  out  ot  Htbrctt*  Si  Greeke ,  for  that  copie  or  (fore 
that  he  hath  giuen  vs.  Laff  ly  ,  wee  haue  on  the  one  tide  auoidcd  the  fci  upulofitie  of  the  Puntanes, 
\\  ho  leaue  the  olde  Ecclefiafticall  words ,  and  betake  them  to  other ,  as  when  they  put  7t\ip>inr-  for 
Baptifme,  and  Congregation  in  ft ead  ot  Church :  as  alfo  on  the  other  fide  w  e  haue  fhunned  the  oblcuri- 
tie  of  the  Papifts,  in  their  A^imes,Tun:k.%  Rational  Holocaufls,  Prepuce,  Tafche ,  and  a  number  ot'fuch 
like,  whereof  their  late  Tranflation  istull,  .mdthatof  purpole  to  darken  the  fence,  that  fince  they 
mull  needs  tranilate  the  Bible,  vet  bv  the  language  thereof ,  it  may  bee  kept  (torn  being  vnderft ood. 
But  we  defire  that  the  Scripture  may  fpeake  like  it  telle,  as  in  the  language  ofC<w<icW,that  it  may  bee 
vnde:  flood  euen  of  the  veiy  vulgar. 

Many  other  things  we  might  giue  thee  warning  of  (gentle  Reader )  if  wee  had  not  exceeded  the 
ir.eafureof  a  Preface  alreadie.  It  remaineth,  that  we  commend  thee  to  God  ,  and  to  the  Spirit  of  his 
grace, which  isable  to  build  further  then  We  can  aske  or  thinke.  Hee  remoueth  the  fcales  tromour 
eves,  the  vaile  from  our  hearts,  opening  our  wits  that  wee  mayvnderftand  his  word,  enlarging  our 
hearts,  yea  correcfnif;  our  affections,  that  we  may  loue  it  aboue  gold  andfiluer  yea  that  we  may  loue 
11  to  the  end.  Ye  are  brought  vnto  tountainesof  liuing  water  which  yee  digged  not;  doe  not  caft 
earth  into  them  with  the  Philiftines,  neither  prefcrre  broken  pits  before  them  with  the  w  icked  Iewcs. 
Othershauelaboured,andyoumay  enter  into  their  labours;  O  receiue  not  fo  great  things  in  vaine, 
O  defpife  not  fo  great  faluation!  Benotlikefwinetotrcadevndertoote  fo  precious  things,  neither 
yet  like  dogs  to  teare  and  abufeholv  things.  Say  not  to  our  Sauiour  with  the  Gcrgefites ,  Depart  out 
of  our  coal  is  j  neither  yet  with  Efau  fell  your  birthright  for  a  mefie  ofpotage.lt  light  be  come  into  the 
worldjoue  not  darkenelle  more  then  light;  iffoode.ifclothingbe  offered,goe  not  naked,  ftarue  not 
your  felues.  Remember  the  aduife  of  tia^ian^ene,  his  agriiuous  thing  ( or  dangerous )  to  neglecl  a 
great  faire,andtofeeke  to  make  markets  aftetTbards :  alfo  the  encouragement  of  S.  Qhryfoflome ,  It  is  alto- 
gether impofiible,that  he  that  i<[obir  (and  -KatchfulTjflmld  at  any  time  be  negleSled :  Laftly,the  admoniti- 
on and  menacing  ofS.  Augufline,Tbcy  that  defpije  Gods  teiHinuitingib.mJhalfeelc  Gods  Hull  taking  Ven- 
geance of  them,  ltisafearelullthmgto  fall  into  the  hands  ot  the  liuing  God  ;but  ableiledthingitis, 
and  will  bring  vs  to  euerlaf  ting  bleiTednes  in  the  end.when  God  Ipeakcth  vnto  vs.to  hearken;  when 
he  fetteth  his  word  before  vs,ro  reade  it  •,  when  hee  ftretchedi  out  his  hand  and  calleth ,  to  an/were. 
Here  am  I ,  here  we  are  to  doe  thy  w  ill,0  God.  The  Lord  worke  a  care  and  confeience  in  vs  to  know 
him  and  feme  him ,  that  we  may  be  acknowledged  of  him  at  die  appearing  of  our  Lord  Iefus  Chrift, 
to  whom  with  the  holy  Gholl.be  all  prayfe  and  thankefgiuing.   Amen. 


Reafonv  indu- 
cing v,  not 
cotbr.d  cuii- 
o'j.ly  vpon  an 
idcntnic  of 
|>  healing. 


S.ehrjfflM 
tfiflrfl&m 

C*p.n*ret. 
16  an  »9bi, 


<^5  Ianuary  hathxxxi.dayes. 


^  The  Moone  xxx. 


rifeth  ~) 
Sunne*' 


(8.  mi.  4, 
fallcch^  c3.mi.56, 


^houre 


SSMmW&Ss 


1  Morning 

Prayer. 


f  Eucning 

Prayer." 


1 1.  Leflbn. 


iLeffon. 


fit     l>      1%  I  K.ilrnd.     |        Circumcifion. 


tout  |l   |b_ 


IJ    \c 


X\n  k  lD 


tti    0b.\ 

PJtD.JftO.I 


J \<5tn.i7. 

|ii      \<5ta.u 


]£0attjM. 


IPcu.iq. 

\<Btm.i. 


|€qU. 
Iftbnni. 


J_ 


lit 


Itirt 


iii 


luti |b 


l«< 


iw 


tit 


15  It 


No 


[S3 


mi 


tout 


mi 


l«   If 


rm  17  lg 


u     18  la 


w«_3lti.i 
toit  3Jb. 


Epiphanie. 


Itoi     lefaUo.   \lLimtj.    |<£fa.49>    Uotjnu. 


Di    31D.I    Hunan. 


Itoij 


Itnii 


dgenc.9.  jffiattlj.s.  |<gen.ii.    Ifoom.b. 
Wt  |W  'nut         |tot 


Is  lb 


3D.! 


it 


jcto 


I  toii 


llo  It 


an  yp. 


mt 


ltou< 


|jCW 


(ybttt 


Itott 


I  tout 


|n  |D  |«i    3IDI 
rwttln  iFpbTllP'l 

tou  Ib  if  I  -M^-    i 


_ 


w 


It* 


Iw 


Sol  ti  Aquariu. 


$?iliaW. 


"L 


£tt 


nu 


Witt 


jl 


ME 


Itf 


*W_ 

imttt 


lie 


ji4jg  licit     W.|    jFebwant. 


rtt    In  |  ?t  Ittottt  Bt. 


rim 


rtb 


IW 


Itytot 


ru 


r_b 


rrbit       pcfrt 


Itrbtti 


IWt 


mt 


i6  |b  lictou  pl.| 


n>i 


mt 


i7 1  r  km  m 


rii   lis  |D  Itto    Bt.l    ^ifca. 


vpiL 
ruin 


xm 


luti 

10 


Ikjcjc 


Itttu 


ItlUL 

Irto 


tftltt 


IJCtM 


Itjctiiu      pctoi 


l |i9  |e  Ititu  Bt.l 

lo  |f  |jrt«   fjtl. 


nr 


r«b 


Irtoii 


Itttbii      Ii.Com. 


5fabtan. 


(rr 


rrttout     Irtom 


Ittttt 


111 


iii  |g  \m  mi 

"fxi~|  alt'     ml 


3gncs. 


tltnctnt. 


Irrt    Ifl 


lun  IWt 


Iw 


IW 


IWtt 


tu 


nit 


u  In  |b  |r     Bl.l 


|i4lc  jfr     Bt.l 


Irrtu  IWttt         \m 


licito 


1x5  |D  Itotii  BM 
rim  1x6  |t  Itoii  mi 
m    Egg  I  tot  ~m 


Itrutt  l3dW |iew_ 


Itltou 


Ibi 


Conuetl.ftam.      j nu  Inatfo.b.    iacts.Ii.  HPito^r 


[        |<gene.4S.  |l0atta3.  |(getMj> 


laits^ 
|i.Co?.7. 


us  la  ib    mi 


rrbu  H 


rum 


(StoD.i.     but 


ri     |i9  |a  jtttt    m 


nr  \y>  |b  liti     ml 


lira  M 


it! 3i  I c  iPZtD-BM 


1 !M 


leyop.z.  Ityb 

Ittbt 
Ijcctou 


"Ib 


IV 

It" 


tout 


xi 


i 


I 


C 


J0btit_  J5_ 


JW_ 


t- 


$#%#« 


sf^3  Bjfciffii^a^Qora^ci* 


^S  February  hath  xxviij.daye: 


^oWo^V ot-Jo4»    t**^*"t* 


q-  TheMoonexxix. 


Sunnc 


"nfeth  )  C7.1n1.  i< 

Mioure- 


.falleth)  (4-.mi. 


+5 


HD 


J" 


^  Morning 

Prayer. 


^Euen 

Prayer. 


ins 


I   i  Leflbn.  I'-LclfuD.     |  i.Leflbn. 


I 


rut  |i 


ti     I? 


mi  K 


D  |  K 


■vjlcnd 


5Fafl. 


Jl 


_  €rob.r<. 


fflarftet.  [gro.rtt.  li.CoiTjjttT 


n 


f  Hit    Bo.  I    asiattf. 


|tiu 


g  [pflb.  jfto.1 


.4      N( 


agatlic. 


L 


\€foo.piU\iii 
|rb         liirt 


Ireifb.ru. 
[cro.riiij. 


|1CU«_ 


"tcW        Itbt 


til       DCttt) 


rlnu 


IlCom. 


b  [Din  3n.\ 


till    |nr 


C   |tilt    3)D.| 


|bt 


IS 


l« 


tnif    \m 


|bti 


D_iw_ 
e  u 


3d. 


it 


Jwui 


I  torn 


rbin|«o_lf_|««__3lD.| 

till     |H      jfljflj       ^b.j      SolinPifcihus. 


\fjcm 


~Brtffl       H»t 


w 


rrnii 


ri_ 


|rrrtti» 

|?Lcut.rtr. 


Ijc 


n 


rr 


lb 


jLeu.i8.   |tit 


ibi! 


|u  Ui|P^b>Hb.| 


rb  l'3  lb 

iTi(  1 14  |t  |ybi  mi   taalenttnc. 


rttt    Irrbl |jcu 


run  Ijftuni.rit.lrui 


J3um.ii.  | tin) 


rb     rnii 


run 


riiL 

rtii 


VL 
lie 


1 15  |b  [rb    mi    mmb. 


r«    |itf  |e  |rt«i  mi 


rtit    Irtiu 


Irb 


rr 


m 


17 


HfS 


if  \m  bui 

"IB  P     *l.| 


rtiti  Irri 


Irbt 


rni 


m 


rtiiu  Irriq        IfUmDi.f 


rtuti 


irut 


nt    |rrb 


Di.t. 


rrbrt       Icsaiat.i. 


119 


in    mi 


rr 


rrr 


rwf 


lip  lb  it     mi 


rim  In  It  Ite     Bl 


rri    Irrni 


l« 


m 


rrrb 


m 


\m\  irrrM      \m 


Dcur.t. 


bj_|ii 
|X3 


|btn 
]b« 


mi 
mi 


|rnii  [Dcut.H. 


ifaff. 


irrtin 


ini 


I5_ 
IW 


tu 


til 


epfref.r 


nnl  I14  If  |b<     mj 


rrti 


nstrb.rir.  Ibii 


in     |i5  IB  lb      m 


Ixtf  la  laa    m 


bi     |17  I  b  IfU      Bl. 


I  is  it  ip^d.  m 


M 


£>cnt.bi.  Ibtii 


€ttlef.u_ 
3Dcot.bi|. 


|rnm 


bit) 


» 


ir 


in 


Iritiiii 


rt 


an 


rrir 


rtti 


!m 


rb 


I    I    I 


eTSMarch  hath  xxxj.dayes. 


3 


f  The  Moone  xxx. 


Crifeth  1  r6.mi.i8, 

Sunne^  Mioure^ 

(fallethj  C5.mi.42, 


rs 


^  Morning 

Prayer. 


^•Euening 

Prayer. 


1   Leflbn. 


.LciTc 


DL 


|U  I  Kalend 


DauiD. 


biq  |i   I  e  Ibt    Jfto.|     CcPdc. 


13    If  lb     Jfro. 


£rt    J®cu[gjftg,uttejctt.  ia>eiit.i7.  IffrjUTt. 

I  iii 


|tDU)_ 

Irr 


rui 

nut 


W 

IWl 


rbt  k  18  !«»   Jfto. 


b 15  la  jm   ®o- 


Ml 


jrrij 


m> 


Iwaii 


uu 


rtD 


|b  |p?Mo. 


CM 
1_ 


,7 
"18 


It    I   Nor.a> 


jb  jbtu  Hp.1 


ftccpctuc. 


7c 


llpcbij 


rbt         |rrbt        icoioi.i. 
ybh        bflttj      lit 


rrtc lytoiu      to 


"Itui    \xjcxj        lytic 


in 


|e  Jbit_3(b.| 
if  |bt     H"D.| 


)t-nx lirjcritj |jc£_ 


iTOCil         |t(tf 


lir      |3Jofua.i.  |jcrt 


Ireruti \i.%t)tf.L 

lllofua.ii  jtt 


I"  la  Ib_ 


31d. 


lv ill 


iJWt 


HiriJaJtfflJIiD.  I    dgrcgoitc. 

ton  I '3  lb  lift    3fo«l 


n 


I14IC   IPJID.IID.I 


■mi 


W 


lb 
Ibii 


Irrut 


Iticiin       |btu 


Kit 


IttiT 


rui     tc 


IHohnt. 


15 
licrttK 


I* 

jit.  XDcfTt. 


tb  i'5 


Idus. 


Irmi  |tn'M 


ttty   I'6 

'17 


|C  liCDtt   Bl-I      apilltS. 


|f  licbi  13il. 


lro    JHubg.t.    |iti 


lriJT    |m 


uu 


IHuD£Mk 
Ittff 


J«L 


It.  mtm.t. 


m  1 18  |g  \xn    ml    CDtbacD. 


|tt)it   |t> 

IrDu;  jttj 


Ibt 


III.  iu- 


ainut  m 


Ibt 


but 


I  tut 


ib  Iritt    m.| 


lnc    |tic 


|btt 


lb 


i_r_|zi  jc  irti    Bl.|    ascnemct. 


re 


Imtid  \n    mi. 


Jg_ 


Irrj    Iritr 


I  mu 

lir 


DM 


\Wi 


|b» 

Itt.Xtm.t. 


ttott  In  le  lie      Bl.| 


lent   |ru 


lit 


Irbf 


toi  "U4lf  lie     ml  imt.Rexiacob.  jfaft.   rem  Icblf 


15 

£ilU_ll« 


|g  jbtu  mi 
i*  Ibtt  mi 


n 


Ai mun.    of  Mane.      |rCUU  |€CClC2.      |rtt 


Irmtt |u<_ 

eccic.tit.  nut 


rru   iDuDg.tuc.lCTti 


>n    Ii7ib  |bi     mi. 


it" 


zS 


llb_mJ 
0  uu  m 


I30  |e_  |m     Bi. 


nc    1 31   If  iPnD.  BIT 


rrln  m 


tcrni  |&utl)H. 


jtfiu_ 

lrt> 


nautb  1 


1EltU5t. 


II 


tit 


Itti 


1  mi 


licw 


li.Btug.i.  Ipftflem. 


rnc  |t.tttng.t.    Irtoit 


at 


|$cb;.t. 


tec 


tut 


Itbttt 

J 

3  2 


JUL 


L  2 


&j  April  hath  xxx.dayes, 


^9       (*3*       1? 


^  The  Moone  xxix. 


5g^ 
»3 


Sunne 


)  Choure3 


mi. 15 


falleth 


3        r<J. 


mi. 45 


btu  |i    [g  [foi      _| 
if  \z   |5jfift  jfto.| 


f  Morning 

Prayer. 


.LcfTo 


]t.  LelTon. 


^  Euening 

Prayer. 


I.  LeiTb 


IlLeffon. 


t.Bmg.toilliotinmr. 
fofff 


i.iautg.bii'fifbjc.ut. 


Iw 


ir 


1  tut 


|j    |b  |fff_*3o.|    ISicpnrD. 
3mb;ofc. 


4  |c  Ipno.jnio.l 

1 1_5  10  I  Nonas.  I 

tt    \6  le  |bf«  W[ 


»i    If 


incf 


in 


_|ftt_ 
lirtitt 


|3lctcs.t.    Init 


" 


D» 


|bi 
[toff 


17  it  luff  jid.i 


fa  1    jybt 


ui 


Irtott 


bit    Itbtti 


tut 


inr 


18   IB  |bt     fD.| 


tout    In: 


lb 


Wl 


\JL 


r     to   ia|b     DP.! 


it 


IJtjrtf 


run  1 10  |b  luit^lb. 


bU  In  |c  It"    Ho 


iTj 


n 


Ijcmtti 
Irtbf 


|bf_ 

>tt_ 
"Ibitt 


|r*tii In 


Ju  |o Jpyb^lD.l 
tb  In  le  I  Jdus.    I 


Iwb 
Irttotf 


tut   I14  If   ItPtUBl.l 


tl9au. 


rtt    lyicbttt       |tg 

cm  \ttt         Ir 


ru 


tit    |l<5 


Is  |rbii_mi.| 
iSitbt  mi.  1 


t     [17  lb  Itb    mi 


lis  |c  Irtitt  Bl.1 


licyiy         lllantes.t. 


itm 


tt 


run  Itt.Btng.t.  |n' 


tb    [tit 


rbt    to 


lni_ 
Intf 


llttt 


tbtt  |tofi 


I  tut 

"IW" 


Ijtffff 


torn 


tbtu  lit 


jt.prt.t. 


Itb 


tt 


tt_ jt9jb_  Intf   mt.|    aipbege. 
uoie  \tn   mi.| 


tit 


tt 


!n_ 

toft 


lrbt_ 
Irtoit 


Ifii 


Itiiti 


m 


nut 


tDitlit  it  |n    mi.  1 


tti   Itb 


toi    |ii  !g  |r      mi. 


Ituttt 


Itbi 


rru  itDtt 


In  lalir.     mi.|     S>.U5cojge. 


IW 


Itbttt 


jtt.lDct.t. 


tnit  ittt 


ttut|i4lb  I  but  mi.| 


tit    In  It  Itott    mi. 


rtmi  Ittt 


ttb 


he  lb  Ibt    mi. 


Item 


tt 


|i7|e  lb     mi.l 


l<£ctlc.iut. 
|2.mtn.  23 


fry 

|WJ_ 
Iftti 


Itr 


it 


Itnt 


in 


Igcclcto.    If.Jtolu. 


U8if  ititt  mi.  1 


|rt'ju|?.mtng.t. 


Ittbiiifff 


tfclwlB Ifff     mi 


ItttiL 

Ittuit 

IrriT" 


i2.mtti.z4.|u 


|3.mtng.  u.[ut 


u  tt 


tut 


Irnr  lb 


Dm  I30  lalpno.mi.i 


IttDt 


IW 


rrt    I  bit 


jtfbtt       |bttt 

I  I 


|l.3.3>Dl). 


&j  May  hath  xxx|.d ayes. 


^  The  Moonexxx. 


>unne 


Crifeth  1  r4.mi.3d. 

I  rhoure\ 

/falleth)  t7.mi.24.. 


f  Morning 

Prayer. 


^  Euening 


Prayer 


|[      |b   I     :  .     I      Phifipandlacob. 


rut  |i    jc  |tt    00. 


t,     is    |D  ID    /ao.J3)nu.oftfteCroflfc~ 


k  Ic  Irift  jRo. 


rm  l<    If  Itti    JBo.| 


jg  |p;iD.  jfto.l   jlo&ncuang. 


17    Ul     n  I 

|8    lb|tttf  110,1" 


rtiiub    |t  Itti   3D.| 


I  1  Leflbn. 


.  Leir. 


|€ccle.7.  |3tts.8.     cctle.9. 

tj |3j>ng.9.  |t]Cbi|i |;.Bm.io, 

ui__|g7~       I  jjjgtttM.  |jC» 


IIU      lJClt'1 

t»      Itf) 


Itt 


l»i 


Icttit 


I  i.Leflbn. 

iffitbTTT 
JEonu. 

I" 

litt 


jrUi 


tut 


bt     I  rail 


bn    lytic 
but   Irrr 


|UH^ 

lb 


licttu 


Itt 


\xt 


Imi 


[tort 


bn    |io  |P  [W     HD.| 


|4.Bing.i.|tott 


l4-.Btng.2lbm 


im 


I  but 


Ititf 


w 


In   |c  ]b     3^\ 


_ I II    |f    I  Utt     "J&t I      SolmGer 

rn   I '3  IS  1m     3FP.| 


tt 


|Ut 


01 IPjl 


nn    Itt 


Irt 


Ibttt 


JL 


Inf 


1  1 14  lalP*»».mM 


I  nut  irt 


lieu 


licit 


lent 


Ig     l<J    I        Idu,      I 


Irb    Ictti 


lent 


Initt 


iriiu 


r;i   1 16  |c  |rbtt  ml    Huntt. 
I     I17  ffi  |rbt  istl. 


1I12lJ>*_ 
lrbn  Icbil 


Irttti 


Ijcto 


JJCM. 


Irbitt 


J*5_ 

rbi 


'18  |e  gjj   m 


Iruni  Iftt 


|rm 


licjc 


ll.COM. 


ir    |i9   |f  |  flirt  m     Dunttane. 


Irtr 


\m 


licbu Ijcrti 


|io  |g  Ifltt    BUI 


irr 


Irflij        Ijctotti 


Tu 


imm 


tn 


imJ" 


bil" 


I  aim    Bi.| 
lb  Itt    mi 


"FriT    Iffb 


|]riic 


|r.€foi.2. 


In  |c  it mi. 


Irnt    |i€fo,M.  R 


Itttt 


1  tu 

IE" 


rrm 


lictl 


IW 


IW 


|tti 


nut_|2_4_|bjtr Bl|  jretiilttj         1ff»t         Itt 

Mil**  It  |Wtt_mi.| jrrb   |i.CR»M»  IrytU 

I26  If  | bit     mi.|    3utiufhnf,        "Irrbi   l»»         _|jcyuU        |D  _ 


|z.€fD?.z.  Ibtu 


&i  lunehathxxx.dayes. 


f  The  Moonexxix. 


Crifeth  1  (3. mi.  34. 

Sunned  >  houre^ 


/falleth 


j         C'8.mi. 


16. 


^  Morning 

Prayer. 


f  Euening 

Prayer. 


rlulj   IS 


11    14.  I  3p?tb.J3o.| 


Kafend 


Mi  jfto.l 


Hi    0o.\    jfocriomcDe. 


|z.Lcflbn.      I  iLeifon,     |  i.Leffon. 


I!       |W« 


lgftct.6.  Ifflatfte  u. ]<gfter7. 

itti     n* 

IHob  a. 


I.C0M& 


ui    !3lobi: 


im 


tut    jtti 


itti 


5  lb 


x 


25omfatc. 


IW 


IW 


Itti 


jrbltfr 


lc  |bt«  3D. 


3| 


lb  ItoH  3iD.| 


t)ii 


bit  |s  |e  |t»t    gjbT 


"but 


|tou_ 

lfc_ 

to 


i)u 


Itout 


mi 


Itoiu 


I* 


iw 


Irtt 


Ibt 


|9_ 
"lio 


|f_|b_JH>.! 
Is  Itift  Hb.l 


lu 


mil 
Irta 


IFIIU 


Dll 


irt 


Irw 


I  but 


jr.  b|u|  3|tii     jlb-l    zsatnabe. 


iitf  |n_ 

In" 


IbJpjiDjJJb. 

It  I    id. 


\eiu.x.    latts.ynti.ltEccle.tii  i^cts.15. 


SoIinCancro. 


Solditi.  xrtiuum. 


_  |3Job  17.18  IflQacril. 

Itui  \%t  Itftt 


T3>ob  gljc.  |i.€oMr. 


W» 


I  r4  m  irbmBi.l    3mitt. 

i    Ik  |e  Irbtt  Bl. 


riiti  Irrii 


intu 


Imii 


JL 


in 


rt>    Inciiii.icici).  Irb 


rrbi.rrbii.lrii 


__|i« 

re  "I17 

IS 


If  irbi  Bl.l 


Iruj   Iffbttt      jybi 


inw 


m 


Is  |rb    Bl.l 


run  \m 


ILnfcei.    tot 


Icsaia.i. 


Ulntti  Bl! 


rem  irrrtt 


itt 


rtrm 


11 


tDiill9    |b   [tilt     Bl.|        ^U.ot    ing lames. 


bi  liolc  \va    Bl.l    CMbarb. 


ric   Irrrtin |ui Irtfb       mi 

rr    Irrrbt       |im  Itrtbu       Itut 


|i_L 

ntttlix 


|D_|tt_ 
|C   It 


BJ.| 
"Bl.l 


rr/  Ijwrbitt 


nil  Ifl 


Ibt 


[rlt 


l*_ 
"iw 


u 


-4 

\l6 


If  IDC  Bl.l 
Isjbtrt  iatl.| 
!  4btt_BI.| 

lb  |bi    Bl.l 


.faft. 


rruiliflif 


Ibu 


JofmBapt-.u 


rrmj  HJ0aia.ui.  Itigattrj.;.  IHj3al.ui. 


;ft20iu.    igpticflT 


rrb  H&otul.    |3Ltmc8.   [fe;ou.iu. 


iQ9att.i4. 
[gpricf.z. 


rtti  |tut 


ric  1 17 It  lb Bl. 


Ibi 


IW 


in 


'28  ID  'tilt     Bl.l 


faft. 


mmjbui 


in 


bn 
St 


itti 


tmijz9 
rni  1 30 


ie  Itti     Bl.l  rApofti.-. 


ICcclus.rbacts.nl.    (Ccdtis.19. 


if  |pnb.  Bl.l 


I3&2DOJ.   IlLubemt.  I^ou.rt. 


i» 


l^cts.^ 
|gprjef.6. 


1     I     I 


<f  The  Moonc  xxx. 


MW9 


frifeth  ^  ^7. mi. 34. 

Sunned  Wioures 


(fallethj  f4.mi.2<$ 


^  Morning 

Prayer. 

i.Leflon.  T    1.  Lei 


5  Eucning 

Prayer.  ^ 


^i  Augull  hath  xxxj.  d  ayes. 


<f  The  Moone  xxx. 


jlfe^FS? 


^3; 


?S3&i3^ 


/.viz; 


Sunn 


(rifeth  ~)  C4.mi.34. 

x  /'hourcN 

cfalleth)  (7.mi.z6 


1  Morning 

Prayer. 


^Euening 

Prayer. 


rui 


rtnii 


D11 


a   |D 


5    19 


l» 


8     C 


Kalcnd, 


ILammas. 


I     i.LefTon.   [    t.Lcflbn. 


uLeflbn. 


1  Leflbn 


tttt  412o.| 


l^ere.icry.  rgjoftnty. 


3?ere.rr#.lfoebj.uit. 


tit    4i2o.| 


put),  j^o. 


but  ^D.|  Xcattffigtuarion. 


bit    j)D.|  4l2aine  o[  Jjefus^ 


bt 


rt  b  id  id    310-1 


tin  1 10  |e  I  nit    3HM    3Laurcncc. 


If     111       3KM        Sulnivi  gjne. 


n     |q  |g  IPUD.  HD.j 


JiLlaL 


i  14 1 b  |rtr    ml    g>cptcmbug. 


r    |[<   |c  IftUti  BI.| 


M 


rbjDi^Jcj 

.irlitif  1 


D    fM  BI.| 
C  |i;W    1W.J 


111 


Iffgtt 

fyytuti 


tm    toictH       |u 


|3ttes.i. 


OTm 


CTlCt) 


Ibi 


g lEErtnu      |iii 


Ecybti 


bu 


xx&z 


"out 


in 


ft 


1111 


aft    Iflft 


but    |rtm< 

ir 


J*. 
|r.ibij (bit 


ribi'i 


__ 


IjcUc 


_ 


w 


Ibiu 


W 


rj] |jtamctuTliC 

riu     l«t |W_ 


|J0_ 

tt)     |€3CB.ttt.    |jrt« 


DHL 


JL 


rbi    |b» 


Irttti 


If  iFbmi 


19 





10 


IS  Ittut  B!.| 
aim    IH.| 


I 


UL 


Mb  licit    m. 


iDL 


IDan.i. 
at 


Ijctoitt 


ii  |c  In m.| 


J 


b 


lD~|t     mi      jfaO. 


CW 


IW 


£1_    H  , 

nr    [14  [C    [it       Bl.|       Banbo).  AtM 


v„,t  In  If  Ibtii  mi 


rtiii  Ifr 

milt  i€cclas.i5, 

rrb  j2>an.rf. 


tec 


Inrt 


|CT« 


Iwiti 


At 


fJM_   _j£_ 


JCH 


in 


JUmen.u. 


"2. 


C5cfe.1t, 


bt 


tut 


JCtll 

games  i. 


HI 


mi 


M0ct.t. 


jc_torti_ 
jcrjUit 


JL 


a>anteiu. 


uu 


bt 


but 


cerius.  29 


©an.jrij. 


tut 


u.ftetx 


11 


ttt 


i.JioD.i^ 


16 


g  |bit   m.| 


rtbt  1      £i»     Iflnm 


rrbtt  J>ft>'>       iBCb 


nut 


tit 


lJrfli.Hl. 


tttt 


n     |i8  |b  |b     Bl.|    auguftmc 


19 


|c   [fttt     »l.| 

lD~|ifi    m 


26el3faD.ofjlohn. 


abiii 


UU 


IILL 


bti 


Iffbt 


b.bt. 


Irrbtf 


but 


e  |pflp.iM.| 


iXL 


II 


irrbm 


D 

l.3.3lo^ll. 
31ubc. 


in_ 


ri 


iq^attjj.i.  jjea 


ttottu. 


.touchm^  (he  billoryot  Sui»n/u,ii  to  P<  n  .i.K  nn,  ihclcwordt:  (  And  hmg  Allyagct,fltc) 


<*i  Septc 


tyc 


^  The  Moone  xxix. 


nfeth  1 

^houre\ 
falleth)  t6.m1.24. 


r5.mi.36. 


|l     |f   I  KalendJjgylCS. 


M  4  |h  JPJiO.JBO'l 

■   |5    jc  I  Nonas.  |  Dog  oapes  cnD. 


3 


^  Morning 

Prayer. 


\z  la  liiii   Jfto. 

13    |3|1H     420^ 


II 


j6_|B_|Wtl_3l?il 


_,  7jj:jw^JDr[enurcUupin)op. 
ri?  i"8  |f  |bt    1ID.1  jftattuit.offfiarp 


tta. 


|9    iBl*      IW 


.  LefTon. 


"IflXc.yitt   Hi?at.tt. 
"llfoeH. 


liti 


iy     lltf 


gptc  flirt,  liftom.ii. 
lloclu.    [BT" 


uit 


nn    gjmogg  |fe 


gmggj,    [tilt 


t> 


Ian 


|W 


_|W |bj«_ 

nn    jbiii |tm^ 


lio  istluu  gib.j 


bin   pabDft.     |g 


jgion.iUii.lic 


Indict.   Iirt 


m 


JPI 


W 


ft 


jn_lD_|iiL_J)5.| . In 

Jiz_|c_IWil>i35il  ™ Ini     |t> 

|I3   |o  I    Idus. 

"  1 14  |e_  Irlntt  ml  fcolP  ccoCTc.         I  run  1  jgaum.  iulyu 
"U<1E  Itbii  mi    ^quinoaiuitT     |rt>    |3Cbac.i.     |ybi 


f  Euening 
Prayer. 


I  2.  LefTon. 


ill 


J 


bit 


|Dtt 

i% IbftL 

jlona  i.    jiy 


iiti 


_lfli 


uu 

[W~ 


rut 


ntj    Ifrft  Ifliit         ijBanmi.  lymi 


im 


13batii 


I*b 


r\)itli6_|gjtpj_,_ 

bTJi7 1  xlEb   ml  ILambett. 

'  i8_|b_  |nui_mi 

A|I9  |c  \fttLVL\ 

liL  |^tf|rtt    ml      5Fatt^_ 


I  rot   m 


rbft  |^>QPQ«tt»  IflUtt       IM 


licbit        [^)op6X~  |i.  Cow. 


I  rbui  |3ggci» 
Irit  Izatfrl 
Irr    Inii.b 


k» 


l« 


IWL 
"Iff* 


"laggc.a.  ifli 


Izat.u.ut.  |uit 


IW 


lb" 


! 


|X3  IB  I*  _OT 

)uiji4Lirbui^Li 


jijjcjfl_ 
In  If  If 


mi 

mi 


"MTTB  |brt    mi 


\%6  |c  |bi    ml  Cppjian. 

Lli7lbjb__m.| 

D    |i8]c  |tui_m.| 

mi  '29  |f  liti    mi 


u    |?o  |g  |p?fl»>mi  Income. 


rri    I^CCtC.  35-   l*fl<  fcEKl.38.    Hjj 


mi  jzaclr.  bii.[rflii        izat.tsiti.  |bit 


rrin  Ifc 


M 


rib  Igfl 


lyyiitt      iy 
l^cbi        Ifliii. 


Dm 


I* 


ran  Iffiafal 

MlM 


lECbii 
Irybifi 


_Jl_ 

|(©ala.iMfl 
|iiii_ |fll 


rriMnjXob.i.     1fl0artU.   13Cob.it._|flit 
r  \€tt\.JXXiX.\\\ 


n 


rrrJXob.iii.    |iii 


i(grtlc.44.|ntii 


|3Eob.iiu.  |m> 

"I 


^ I  )ccember  hath  xxxj.dayes. 


&£ 


f  The  Moone  xxx. 


(nfeth 


I 


Sunncx 

Ihlkth) 


f8.mi. 
n.mi.^S 


pg^Ti«h£^^^m«F^«»3«5>^M»'n^hM^«»»«l^5«»»« 


f  Morning 
Prayer. 


Eu( 
Prayer. 


^nuening 


lefa.fb. 


|I     If    |K 


.LefTon,    |     i.LelTon.    | 


2.Leflon. 


[ 


rbmlx  is  iiiii  i^Q-i 


bit 


3lttt    HJM 
b  lp?i0.j£o.l 


\%ttts  ti. 


i^cb?>7» 


i» 


If  on 


loin 


in 


:s 


jytrfty       lttft 


mi 


rblllc 


fefft>      |b 


Ifjf 


W_ 


ifftt 


No 


1  o      \ma        (Si 


IL 


I  mm 


W 


III! 


1$  |0  lout  3ID.I   jftttolasbifo.      lt>i     ItrO 


.'DI.0H 


Irrot 


Iff) 


I  on   IffQt? 


^DlOi^ 

Conc.offfiarp.   1  o  i  |jcytic         I  Out 


I io  lajgjLJfol 

,r    in  |b  litt    DO.' 


Jtt IfJEfj |fc_ 


Iff  Pitt       pcm 

Jfff 


Igamegj. 


fi 


lfffit)_ 

IfffO 


If 


itm? 


Iffftut       jtu 


JfL 


IX   |C     |P?tD.'3|D.l         SohnC.pricor,  )rU        IfffOtt  |ftt 


Ifffbi 


tut 


rjjui  13  10  I     idu>.  I    ILuct  Otcgtn.      |mi    Ifftif 
'i4-lc  If  ft;    ml    gfanogttt.         |  run  lfl? 


IfffOut 


m  |i$  |t  [tout  Bt.| 


IfQ    IfUij        IfQ 


rut  lis  IS  IfWt  BU|~£>faptentta.       |rm   IflO 


Ifjtt |f!_ 

lyttu        [yiu 
rlutt 


[i.ldct.i. 

lit 


ttt 


IfW 


tn  Ii7l?tlf0t  bui 
lis  |b  |rto    BU| 


Iroit  IflQti        lyoti 
Iritr         Irbuj 


Iriot 


lutt 


IfiOtq 


|t.0et.i._ 


K    Ii9  |c  lyttti  BUI 

nt  ho  10  iftti  ~BU~1 

XI  |C   |ftt     BU| 


5faft. 


|nr 


XX 


MiMf  If*     BU| 


Thom:*  Apoft.         |CCI 


frit 


13  IS  If      BU| 


rOili4laitr    bu|      jfatt. 


t)     |l5  |b   |0ttt    BU|       Chr.i 


rrra 


rum 


no 


it 


-JfJL 
^o.ffit>T|ftf 


Utj 


M. 


I« 


lltui 


l»i 


Cla.lb. 
tog 


|^0U.Z4, 


«f 


ClaJr. 


Iff "  _ 

Iffiu 

Ifftrti^ 

IILuueij. 


|efa.56. 


i.^ofttu. 

la 


Wtii 


Ittt. 


M. 


lutt 


|€fa.7.      |1Cttus.tu. 


|Z6  It    |0tt     BU|       S.Sicucn. 


r,it  |X7|0  |W 
nZPTTTo 


X9  |f~|ttft    BUT 


BU|       S.fohn. 
BU|       Innoi 


r    l3Q  IS  litt BUI 


not  H&oo.xS.  I^cts  6.7,  jgtdcf.^  |31cts.7. 
rrou |(£cctef.O.  |3ScocUt.    \etiU.6.    |!8rut!.xx. 


rtouffletem.3' 
rnr  lefa.Uu 


|3JCtSX5.     IIBtlD.i. 


frrjlftu 


JffOt 


|€fa.6x. 


iffOjt llfttit 


|3t  I  ajpztO.BUl    jSnutcfletbtQ).    |rrc   lift)  im>ul       I IfOt 


|i/3}oljn$. 
\z3otyu 

I3JU0C. 


orxxxix.yeeres. 


o   H 

H 

5   * 

§  ST 

S" 

9  ^ 

i-c 

m 

"3 

D_  <-J 

2> 

"1 

= 

l6oj 

1604 

i6c$ 

1606 

1607 

1608 

1609 

itfio 

161 1 

161 1 

I6ij 

KS14 

I«:5 

1616 

I  tf  J7 

1618 

1*19 

16:0 

I  fill 

■  621 

162J 

16:4 

1625 

1 6:6 

1627 

1628 

1*29 

1630 

Ifiji 

16;  2 

ifijj 

1654 

1035 

IlSjfi 

1637 

1658 

1<S}9 

1640 

1^41 


mil 

if 

J 

it 
r« 
cli 
tml 

fb 

1  in 
rbii 

Elllll 
tit 

i 

11 
iii 

ult 

t> 

Ui 

nil 

bill 

it 

t 

fi 

fii 

till 

cull 

tb 

mi 

tuii 

tti  111 

11 

i 

it 

iii 

iiii 

b 

bi 

bit 

111 


'l  IIII 

if 

re 

1 

lit 

ffiii 

iiit 

fb 

mi 

on 

Itbiit 
Wit 
fi 

roi 

ui 

fiiit 

Kb 

bi 

rbii 

rtbni 

if 

W 

i 

fii 

crni 

tin 

fb 

ttui 

bii 

fbiii 

ftif 

Fi 

tfii 

in 

tiiii 

fto 

bi 

(bit 

trbui 


B 
A   G 

JF 

e 

D 

C    3 

9 

(3 

E    D 
C 

15 

a 

C    F 

C 
D 
C 
B    A 
© 

C 

D    C 

B 

a 

© 

F     E 

D 

C 

B 
A   G 

Jf 

e 

D 
C    B 

9 

0 

JF 

E    D 

€ 


lo.JFcbiii. 

J- 

27.jlanu. 

i<S.jfeCij. 

i./Febju. 
J4.3»nu. 
ii.JFc&iu. 

4- 

2o.3anii, 
9.fcb;u. 
3 1 .  Janu, 
lo.jFcbjii. 

5. 

28.3ami. 
i6.ircli!. 
i, 

24.  Janu. 

IJ.iFcl)!. 

28.3anu. 
i7.JFrii;, 
9.Jfcbj. 
2;.  Janu, 
1 3.jTelif'i. 

5- 

21. Janu. 
lo.jfcbju. 

1. 
la.jlanu, 
iS.jFcbiu. 
29.Janu. 
i7.j?cbui. 
i.JFcbju. 

25.  Janti, 
i4.Jfcl)iii. 

5" 

21.  Janu. 

lo.jf  cluti. 

1, 
2 1. Janu. 


9.tBaii'l) 
2  2.JFct)iil. 

'?. 

r.SB.irtb 
1 S, Jfebjil, 

10. 

1  .CBarcb 
2i.jTeb}u, 

6. 
*5. 

17. 

9.£8attb 
22.jrcb;u. 

14. 

7.S0.ircb 
i8.tfebiu, 

10. 

i.SB.ttcb 
i4.tfebni. 
U.CBattb 
1 6,  jfciijlti 

1 1. 

2.SBarcb 
22,jFcb;u. 

7. 

»7- 


fi.spwctj 

i9.jTdiui. 
1 1. .Pel.  hi, 
2.03atc'j 
>2.jFcb!U. 

7- 

-7» 

19. 
10.CB.1tch 


24.  Spiil 

8. 

31.SB.1rcb 

20.  apui 

5- 
27.SB.1rcb 

is.atiiii 

8. 
24.i©atd) 

1  :.  J [lili 

4- 

M- 

9. 

ji.SBartb 
2o.apjiI 

5. 
2S.aB.1tcb 

16.  apui 

1. 

21. 

»?. 

2S.?Batd) 

9. 

2s.gBarrij 
1 3  .Slpjil 

5. 

2S.CB.1rcl) 
10. 3piil 

1, 

2i.apui 

6. 
fBatd)  29 
9p?fl.i7. 

9. 

jj.SBardj 
i3.apiil 

5- 


JO.tBjll 

2.  Jiiini'i 

fllll 

i7.CBan 

bi 

if 

rim 

f.tif 

» 

run 

It 

b 

rtn 

fib 

fllll 

tbu 

29.  apiii 

it 

18.  span 

fti 

r 

fui 

tff 

-.Jumi 

fb 

18. Span 

bi 

it 

ffbi 

ffit 

n 

fllll 

111 

bi 

fflt 

ffb 

bii 

f 

flbu 

ftf 

flf 

ftii          1 

in. '1'. ui 

bi 

fflll 

ffbi 

tu 

mm 

3o.ap?ft 

111 

1 9.  Span 

ftu 

fl 

fin 

ui 

bi 

fbi 

III 

bii 

t 

mm 

rit 

f« 

fb 

1111 

bu 

fun 

ffbi 

fb 

fbiii 

:  0.3(1111 

111 

2o.S8au 

ffiif 

It 

fllll 

ttti 

J.JlUIC 

1 2.  Juu; 

27.  jftOU, 

27.SB.111 

2.Detcm. 

fit 

1 

8. June 

;o.J<3ou. 

24.  :19.iii 

ftlt 

tu 

nbii 

4.  June 

3  .Decern. 

2  7.  Span 

11 

tu 

1 

ffti 

29./50U. 

ffiil 

Iibui 

1 2.  June 

ftbu 

2S.CBaii 

3  Decern. 

fit 

1 

3.  June 

;o..ftoil. 

24.  S8.111 

tut 

fbi 

ftUUl 

4. June 

j.Dccem, 

i        Spill 

11 

9.  June 

1 

1 

3O.J^0U. 

n5.sra,iu 

ftbm 

S.Junc 

nbii 

28.  SBaii 

3.Dcccin, 

fili 

1. June 
24.  CBjli 

fbi 

ffif 

ft 
9-Junc 

ftb 

i7.C0aii 
5. June 
2S.spaii 

fin 

J.JtUK' 

24.es  .111 
1  (.June 


11 
jcRotl, 

nil 

ffb.il 

Itbu 
i-Orcciti. 

1 
;o..nou. 

tut 

Itbii 
j.Octtm. 

11 

1 

29.f20.11 
ffbm 


^[Ofthc  Golden  number. 

TDefiaIicnmmiIj:risrocalkb,tictaiifcitliiaBb)iiiecniiii!)cKaltiiDfibji:Iilet[crB()fsolD.  rtejljc at tfic D.ij'  bjljrrroii tljr  Spjonc 
djunctct) :  ann  it  is  tlje  Tpacc  of  1 9.  pcccco.mtlje  Ui'oicbtlieSBaoiientiitiietbeorteftlfefaiiicwpoftbepetccoftljtfeaiiiitiaiio 

clictcfoiciisaifD  calico  tlic  C»cle  of  tiicCBoone.mtlieUJliitl)  tilt  Sollliccs  auo  Equinoflialstiocciutiic  10  nil  one  point  111  the  Zoduque. 
j:oftiioeitcutt!>ptetc,poumu(!aODeoncpcctrto!l)C|'ceccofChriit,(fo)Chiiltbiaalioiucoiicprcteoftl)e  i9.alieaoppatt)t!jcii 
o:uioetl)CWl)i)ltbpi9,anDtliaiu)l)iel)teaeiti,i3il)cGoldcnnuinbcifo!tl)atpccte:iflljctclicuol"uiplufacfC,itiatl)cni9. 

f  The  Epad. 

EPjfl.t lieincn in  ©tcehe.sotti (iiinifle in  englifii.oibcsfci 6ctuicene, ann rtjetefoic tfjc  1 1  oapte ano  3 .boutcs  tliat  ate aootb to 
t'jf  pcett  of  thc^ooue ,  are  catltD  Epi^ic.  alio  .ire  aDDi  a  to  malic  ttjepeetc  of  tljc  igoonc  .UiOicU  iotiut  5  j^.Oafcg ,  luQ  miclj  tb 
vccie  of  tlic  s&unnc  .luljidi  batb  365  .oapes  anD  a  quarter. 

Co  Suoc  outujc  Cpatt  of  caclj  peete.ooc  tiius :  Co  tlic  C;aet  of  toe  pecrc  ttiartatt  tueiit  Ocfojc  iljat  peetefoi  biljicl)  pou  uioulo  Sntic 
tbeCpjtt.aoDt  1 1  .anoiljcfummcoftbefeibjomatietijeepact.  JJf it lurmotint  jo.tljtn tattc  3 o.out, alio tljat tuljtcli rcOt ilj about  30 
I9tlir  Cinet  voutiffirc.  


fThevfeoftheEpatt. 

Obuobibobiolo  ibe  SBaoneia  at  anp  time  foi  cucrbpilicffipact,  00  tbus-.aDDebutotbeoapesof pout iitonttlitobetciu pou 

•  uioulo  knoui  tliia.tbe  Cp  ltt.aiio  asmanpoapea  moe  as  arc  motrctba  from  s^atdi  to  tliat  uniietb.incluoiiig  botbnionctlia,  out  of 

die  bMjidi  fulillract  3  o.aa  often  .13  pou  map, die  age  tcniaineili:  if  nortjuij  r  rm  uiir.tlic  CBoone  cbanpjciblbai  Ditf. 


T 


die  lubidi  fulillract  3  o. as ottcu  .10  pou  map, tbe  age  tcniaineili :  if  norliuig  run  une.tbc  fpoone  coangcig itjat  bap. 

Jf  oi  die  moic  cafe  of  tlje  Scaoct ,  uic  liaucplacco  bete  oner  .111  ainunackciiidiifiutlp  compidicnbing,  not  onclpbobi  to  Bnoc  ibe  ffi. 
patt  lo;  tlic  fpace  of  3  o-ytcteaio  conic,but  alio  tbcGolJrn  number  afoie  fpctiBco.togetbct  UJllb  tljt  Dominical!  Icitcr.Lcajjc  ycerc, 
ano  fcufii  oibttmoucablc  fca'.Is.oi  o.ipes  111  tlic  pccct.butiiig  tlic  fame  time.as  nup  appeate. 


<;  flaictljattbctioliicn  number  alio  Doininicalllciccr  00,  tlitb.-nsr  tuttpptctctliCfltllDapof  Januatp.onoibcffipacttbf  flrfltiai' 
of:Q.irdjto?tucr.  jloteatfo.tliattliepccteofoiirLoiibesiiiiictlitbcftb.oapof'JBatdi.tlief.inito.ipruppofeotobetlji'&rll 
DapbJanto!)id)iljcujDilD'aia3ctt«tD,au3tbeoai>bal]CiiiCI)ullb)iatontiiueoiiitl^uiombcoftbiUirsiiiei8.itp. 

D  To 


^TofindeEafter  for  cucr. 


a  I- 

a    a 


a 

III 

J 

31 

bit 
bui 

ijE 
t 
CI 

nit 

nut 

Ct)l 

rfeti) 

nr 


ap2ti(i;. 

figattlj  rrbt 
3tp;il  tX}\. 

ap?tit]c. 
fl0arcrjrrtot. 
3p:i!  rut. 

apzii  tt. 
3lp;tl  tun. 
ap;il  cic. 
3p:tlu. 
apjfljftf. 
ap;tlijc 
fiPactljCTW 
apzil  rtot. 
ap:ii  u. 
$9artlj  crtju 
apjtlrtit. 

ap;<uf. 

ap;iUrtit. 


W^cn  re  Uaue  fotint)  t&c  ^>unoap  letter  m  iljc  bppermoG  Itnc.gntDe  pone 
eye  botbnetbaro  from  tlje  fame ,  till  pee  tome  rfgflt  oner  againfl  trie 
IBnme,  anDtbcretsQierbeDbotlj  uMjat  uponetlj,  ano  roijatDayoftljc 
Q5onetD  eaOet  faiiett)  ttjat  pecrc. 


c^The 


<^£  The  Table  and  Kalender,  exprefsing  the  order  of 

Pfalmes  and  LelTons  to  be  faid  at  Morning  and  Euening  prayer 

throughout  the  yeerc,  except  certaine  proper  feafts ,  as  the  rules 
following  more  plamely  declare. 

The  order  bow  the  T falter  is  appointed  to  be  read. 

^^^JinVJX^WS^jlHePrakerfhall  bee  read  through  once  euery  Moneth.  And  be 
caufe  that  Tome  Moneths  be  longer  then  fome  other  be,it  is  thought 
good  to  make  them  euen  by  this  meanes. 

To  euery  moneth  fhal  be  appointed  (as  concerning  this  purpofe) 
ufhhirtiedayes. 

And  becaufe  Ianuary  and  March  haueoneday  aboue  the  fayd 

number,and  February,  which  is  placed  betweene  them  both ,  hath 

onely  xxviij.dayes :  February  fhall  borrowe  ofeither  of  the  Moneths 

(ofianuary  and  March  )  one  day :  and  fo  the  Pfalter  which  (hail  bee 

read  in  February.muft  begin  at  the  laft  day  ot  Ianuary  ,and  end  the  firft  day  of  March. 

And  whereas  May  July,  Auguft,  October,  and  December  haue  xxxj.  dayes  apiece :  It  is  ordered 
that  the  Plalmcs  fhal  be  read  the  laft  day  of  the  faid  Moneths,  v.  hich  were  read  the  day  before,fo  thai 
the  Pfalrer  may  begin  againe  thefirft  day  ot  the  next  moneth  enfuing. 

Now  to  know  what  Pfalmes  fhall  be  read  euery  day:  Lookein  the  Kalender  the  number  that  is 
appointed  for  the  Pfalmes,and  then  find  the  fame  number  in  this  Table ,  and  vpon  that  number  you 
fhall  fee  what  Pfalmes  fhall  be  fayd  at  Morning  and  Euening  prayer. 

And  where  the  Cxix.Pfalme  is  diuided  into  xxij.  portions,  and  is  ouerlong  to  be  read  at  one  time : 
it  is  fo  ordered,that  at  one  time  fhall  not  be  read  abouc  foure  or  fiue  of  the  faid  portions ,  as  you  (hall 
perceiue  to  be  noted  in  this  Table  following. 

And  here  is  alfo  to  bee  noted,  that  in  this  Table,  and  inallotherpartsoftheSeruicewhereany 
Pfalms  are  appointed, the  number  is  exprefled  alter  the  great  Englrfh  Bible,which  from  theix.Pfalme 
vntotheCxvnj  Pfalme,  (following  the  diuifion  of  the  Hcbrcwes )  doeth  variein  numbers  from  the 
common  LatincTranllation. 


The  order  how  the  reft  of  holy  Scripture  (  be  fide  the  Tfalter) 

is  appointed  to  bee  read. 


He  old  Teftamenr  is  appointed  for  the  firft  Leffons  at  Morning  and  Euening  prayer, 
and  (halbe read  through  euery  yeere  once,  except  certaine Bookes  and  Chapters, 
which  beleaft  edifying.and  might  beft  be  fpared,and  therfoie  are  left  vnread. 

The  New  Teftamcnt  is  appointed  for  the  fecond  LefTons  at  Morning  and  Eue- 

— -ningprayer,and  fhall  be  read  ouer  orderly  euery  yeerc  thrife.befides  the  Epiftles  and 

Gofpels :  except  the  ApocaIypfe,out  of  the  which  there  be  onely  certaine  Leffons  appointed  vpon 
diucrs  proper  Feaftes. 

And  to  know  what  Leffons  (hall  be  read  euery  day.finde  the  day  ofthe  Monethin  the  Kalender, 
going  before  and  there  ye  fhall  perceiue  the  Bookes  and  Chapters  that  (hall  be  read  for  the  Leffons 
both  at  Morning  and  Euening  prayer. 

And  here  is  tobenoted.thatwhenfoeuertherebe  any  proper  Pfalmes  or  Leffons  appointedfor 
theSundayes,orforanyFeaft,moueableor  vnmoueable:  then  the  Pfalmes  and  Leffons  appointed 
in  the  Kalender^hall  be  omitted  for  that  time. 

Yemuftnotealfo.ihatthe  Colle<ft,Epiftle,andGofpel  .appointed  for  theSunday,  (hall  ferae  all 
the  weeke  alter  ,except  there  fall  fome  Feaft  that  hath  his  proper. 

D  x  When 


•    When  the  yeeresotoui  Lord  may  be  diuided  into  roureeuen  parts,  ^hich  is  euery  fourth  yeere  . 

then  the  Sunday  letter  leapeth,and  that  yeere  the  Plalmes  and  Leflons  which  fcrue  tor  the  xxii).  day 

of February,  (hall  be  read  againe  the  day  following,  except  it  be  Sunday,which  hath  propet  Leffons 

of  the  old  Teftament,appointed  in  the  Table  feruing  to  that  purpofe. 

Alfo.wherefoeuer  the  beginning  of  any  Leflon,  Epiftle,  or  Gofpel  is  not  expreffed ,  thereyee  muft 

begin  at  the  beginning  of  the  Chapter. 

And  wherefoeuer  is  not  expreffed  how  faire  fhall  be  read,  there  fhall  you  reade  to  the  ende  of  the 

Chapter. 

Item.fo  oft  as  the  firft  Chapter  of  Saint  Matthew  is  read  either  for  Leflon  or  Gofpel,  ve  fhall  begin 

the  fame  at(iIJ0lb  tl)e  bitrf)  Of  3IrfWB  Cl)nft  ltJaS  0t»  tt)tS  MC,ftOAnd  the  third  Chapter 
of  S.  Lukes  Gofpel,  fhalbe  read  vnto.ffieittg  3S  IbaS  fuppoftD,tl)C  lOtUie  Of  3ofepl),?t. 

^Proper  Leflons  to  bee  read  for  the  firft 

Leffons,  both  at  Morning  and  Euening  prayer,  on 

the  Sundayes  throughout  the  yeere,  and  for  lome 

alfo  thefecondLeJJbns. 

C  Vndayes  of 
Aduenr. 

f  Martens. 

1  Euenfong. 

^  Mattens. 

1  Euenfong. 

Whitfunday. 

Theficft. 

era.j, 

tffa.tr'. 

j.  Leflon. 

SDeut.jcW. 

ffiXfcOOill.  (. 

')• 

1) 

rrtttj 

ij.  Leflon. 

3WS  r, 

2lctSrtr.  gjt 

nj. 

rrb 

rm 

XDeu  peter 

fotfuneD  p 

mj. 

XXX 

mn 

openeD  f)is 

tb&flcapot; 

Sundayes  after 

mout&.fjr. 

lo  Vbas  at 

Chnflmas. 

CojmtD,ft. 

The  firft. 

xxxiii 

xxxwa 

Trinitie  Sun- 

(vnto)^ftec 

')■ 

m 

mi 

day. 

tt\ek  tilings. 

Sundayes  after 

j. Leflon. 

(Sen.rbitt. 

3ofl)tia.t. 

the  Epiphany. 
The  firft. 

ij.  Leflon. 

itfatuu. 

rliiu 

rib? 

Sundayes  after 

')• 

l| 

W 

Trinitie. 

nj. 

ID 

m 

Firft. 

lioflj.  r. 

3[ouj.  xxiii 

in). 

mi 

llmj 

•j- 

fhiDg.utt. 

flubg.b. 

v. 

m 

Wuj 

iij. 

..Bmg.it, 

t.Btng.itt. 

Septuagefima. 

<Bttl.j. 

<Sen.n. 

iuj. 

tit 

rttt 

Sexagefima. 

U> 

*> 

v. 

rb 

srlju 

Quinquage- 

ijc 

m 

v). 

tt.Btttg.rti. 

tt.Bittg.rjn. 

fima. 

vii.- 

xti 

rrim 

Lent. 

viij. 

ttt.Bing.ritt. 

tti.Bttig.rbit 

Firft  Sunday. 

<5ttt.Tif. 

<eett.rrff. 

ix. 

rum 

Xix 

>)• 

JCJCtJlj 

mm 

X. 

XXi 

rrii 

nj. 

xxxix 

riii 

*j- 

ttu.Bmg.b 

(itt.Bing.tr. 

i.ij. 

Unj 

rltJ 

Xlj. 

X 

rbtu 

v. 

Crob.iu. 

erob.b. 

XII). 

XiX 

rrltt 

v)- 

it 

X 

Xllij. 

3Jcrem.b. 

Jercm.rrft, 

Eafterday. 

XV. 

rtrb. 

rrrbi 

).Leffon. 

crob.nj. 

Croc,  wit. 

xvj. 

C5ctl).iu 

C5etl).riiti. 

ij.Leflon. 

l\0lll.D|. 

act.tt. 

XVlj. 

rbt 

rbtu 

Sundayes  alter 

XVllj. 

XX 

rrtttt 

Eaftei. 

xix. 

3Dan.ttt. 

SDaniel.bi. 

The  firft. 

fiam.xbU 

/I3am.rrtt. 

XX. 

Tlorltt. 

i$tel).t>t. 

')• 

xxm 

rrb 

xxj. 

abatucrt. 

0ioucrb.< 

iij. 

Dcuf.mt. 

SDfUt.b. 

xxij. 

p.'oucrb.u. 

f&outtb.ttt. 

iiij. 

Dt 

m 

XXII). 

n 

rtt 

v. 

btii 

iX 

XXIII). 

jnii 

rtu 

Sunday  after 

XXV. 

rb 

rbi 

Alcenfion  day. 

SDcot.jrti. 

2>eat.rttf. 

XXV). 

rbtt 

rtr 

f  Leffons 

J 

tj  LelTons  proper  for  Holy  dayes. 


S. 


Andrew. 
S.Thomas 
the  Apoftle. 
Chriftmas  day. 
j.Lcflbn. 


I    ^jMattens. 
Jl&OUerb.rjE. 


^  Euen/bng. 

lMn.rrf. 
trim 


ij.Leflbn. 


S.Steuen, 
j.Leflon. 
i  I.Leflon. 


Cfa.tr         <£fa.  bii. 

^Jojcoucrp 
fLojbfpattc 
once  ft. 

!Lu6e«.vnto1CitnSirt. 

C5ood  iDiU  IILrje&inte 

toti)arbmcVnes$loue?c. 

0?on.irrbuu<£ceier.iui. 
act.6.anb7.actS7.  anb 
anb&teucntbljcrl.pcrcs 
ful  of  fait!)  ^  [Vbcrc  cjrpircD 


potbcr,?c. 

(vnto)  anb 

Vbhenfojttp 
pcercs,?t. 


S.Iohn. 

j.Leflon. 

ij.Leflbn. 
Innocents  day. 


Circumcifion. 
j.Leflon. 

ii.Lefibn. 
Epiphanie. 
i.Leflbn. 
ii.Lcflon. 


Conuerfion  of 

S.Paul. 

LLeflbn. 

li.Leflbn. 


cccicr.u. 

apoci. 
3Jerem.rm. 
mo,  5  ijaue 
rutelp  hearb 
€pl);atm. 
©cn.rtott. 


there  appea 
rebbntosJ)9o; 

feS ,  ?C.  vnto, 

I5uthe  being 

fulloftlifDo 
lp<3l)0U\?t. 

eeclef.tn. 
apocrru. 


Eom.it. 
efa.ri. 

ftUft.3.('vnto) 

seeing  as 
ibasfuppo* 
fcD,tl)cfonnr 

of  giofcpu 


3>ett.]C.(vnto) 

anb  notb 
3Jfracl,$e. 
colof.it. 
<£fa.rttr. 

^ODlUi.  (vn 

rafter  this 
dclDcnt  to 
Capernaum 


naifb.J). 
Ztt&mU™ 

hearb  htm. 


Purification  of 
the  virgin  Mary 
S.Matthias. 
Annunciation 

of  our  Lady. 
Wednefday  a- 

fore  Eafter. 
Thurfday  aforeJJJ>an.tje. 

Eafter. 
Good  Friday. 
Eafter  Euen. 
Munday  inEa 

ftcr  wecke. 

i.Leflbn. 


nmitur. 
n@ifD.tir. 

ecticf.u. 

Csfccrtil. 


<5en.rrii. 
ZacJMr. 


erob.rbi. 


noifo.bt 
act.rrbt. 


t@tfb.rit. 

<£cclef.i. 
ceclcf.iit. 

©fecrfirt. 

3Jerem.rrrt 

Cfa.ltit 
erob.jtit(. 

crob.rbit. 


ij.Leflbn. 
Tueiclay  in  Ea- 
fter weeke 
i.Leflon. 
ij.Leflbn. 


SJviarke. 
Philip  &Iacob 
Afcenfion  day. 
Munday  in 

Whitfun- 

weeke. 
LLeflon. 


^ati.trtntj. 


tfroo.rr. 
Huftctnttj. 

(vnto)  anb 

bcholbttbo 

ofthem. 

€ccle.ttti. 

Cccle.thj. 

SDcnt.r. 


ij.Leflbn. 
Tuefday  in 
Whitfun- 
weeke. 

S.Barnabe. 
i.Leflon. 

•J- 


,  Iohn  Baptift 
i.Leflbn. 
ij.Leflbn. 


S.Peter. 
i.Leflbn. 
ij.Leflbn. 

S.  lames. 

S.  Bartholo- 
mew. 

S.Matthew. 

S.MichaeL 

S.Luke. 

Simon  andludi 
i.Leflbn. 

All  Saints. 
i.Leflbn. 


1  Mattcns.       ijEuenibng. 


aets.nj. 


<£rob.rrrij. 
i.Co;mth.jcb. 


ecctc.fc. 
<sccle.it. 
uiuBtng.tj. 


©en,  itt.  (vnto  Jl5ttm.ti  (5a* 
Xhefeate   therbntome 


the  genera- 
tions of 
S>hcm. 

i.Coj.nj. 
i.mng.rtr. 
2Dautb  came 
to&amuel 
to  Rama.  ft. 

£ccle.ic. 
acts.jrtttt. 


70.  men,  ft 

(vnco)  SQoUe 

gate  him  in- 
to f  camp.ft. 

Deut.trr. 


tl9aia.m. 
#atth.tti. 


tfccm.rb. 
acts.uj. 
cttius.rrt. 
Jtrb. 


i.Leflbn. 


etelc.irtt. 

3tt.r1>.fvnto) 

after  certain 
bapes. 

$}aia.4. 
#at.rtttt. 
fvnto)  Ddhen 
3Jcfus!jeatb 

eccitt.rtr. 
acts.  lit). 
cccius.rru. 
rrir. 


ecelns.jrrrb.  rrrbitj. 
rrric.  rltin. 

Gttlns.lt.    fflobL 

5obtrtii.i5.   rlij. 

DStfoomc  Ui.tDlfcDOtllC  V 

(vnto)  whit*  (™io)$t  fbal 
fojc  blcfTctJis  tafte  to  ft 
the  barren. 


^eb?.rt.rtjf. 

Saints  by 
faith  ( vnto) 
Jjfyctnbure 
chaftcntng- 


apocalpp. 

nr(vnto)anb 
5  fatb  an 
angel  flanb. 

If  Proper 


8SaS&k8S38g$ffi 


n 


roper 


Pfal 


mesoncertaineda 


yes. 


|  Martens.  |       |  Euenfong. 

mas  day.  S      ^^S      ttntfi. 


Eafter 
day. 


|Mattens.|         |  Euenfong. 

>  ^  &     ?      ^  Ccuu 
>pfaU  lift.  CpraU  octitf. 

>  <-  Cjct  J      <-  Cjcbui. 


>  -s 


|Mattens.|       |  Euenfong. 

Afcenfi-  ?      c  trttf.  ?      c  JCJCftt 


|  Mattens.|     |  Euenfong. 

i     c  flb.  ■>     cCntt. 
funday.  S      I  mt$      2€lM. 


Whit^ 


WWW%#W*Him**>aeWW%i**8**8*^%»% 


m  Thetable  for  the  order  of  the  Pfalmes, 

to  be  faid  at  Morning  and  Euentng  prayer. 


Dayesofthc 

^Pfalmes  for  Morning 

Moncth. 

A. 

prayer. 

A 

'                                         i 
I. 

ULM.Utl.to, 

1. 

fcjkjtt. 

J. 

rb.rbi.rtou. 

4» 

%i%.tt$lii. 

5- 

miu.rrb.rrbf. 

«. 

jrxt.jrrtf. 

7. 

iORCb.JRClCtol. 

8. 

ttrbutrrxtjc.]rt. 

9. 

flffu.rlb.icltof. 

IO. 

UMtf. 

II. 

Ibtlbu.Ibuf. 

IZ. 

im.lriu.lnUf. 

13* 

Irbttt. 

14* 

irrf.irru. 

15. 

l]cirt).iy]cb(.ijc)rtrt|. 

16. 

JCrtC.l)RClC.l)C]C)Cf. 

17. 

!)TObtl)r^tt.ljciC]cWa. 

i& 

jcc.jcri.jccu. 

19. 

rtb.rtbi.)Ctbtt. 

IO. 

riuritt. 

21. 

tto. 

zz. 

cbit 

13. 

tr.tn.ncu.rntt' 

1+. 

rjctotcjctoy.t]cbttt. 

1* 

ginbeb. 

16. 

3Jnbcb. 

17. 

r^.o^.r>^t]r^tt.t)c)cluLt]C]rt). 

28. 

a^.tjcTttt).cjcr)ctiy 

19. 

tttxir.tjl.cjcu. 

30. 

rvlut].tflb.rrltot. 

^  PfaJmes  for  Euening 
Prayer. 


tot.totj.bui. 
jrt).jcuj.jcut|. 
jcbtij. 
jcnj.jcjriu. 

jcjcbitjcrbtu.rjrtr. 

nxu.rjcrutrxnuL 

jcrrbit. 

jcu.rltt.rltfu 

jclbiujclbuurlijc. 

IiiLluu.lb. 

Ur.lr.ln. 

Irb.ijctot.ljc1>u. 

mr.irr. 

Irttuljcxtftt 

Ittbut. 

Ijctxiujcic^u^rt'ljcp*- 

Ijcxjctjc. 

rtui.rcurt. 

rtbtu.jcojc.t4t 

cuu. 

cbt 

tbuuttjc 

rnuurrb, 

rnr.3lnbe«u. 

IJnbeitu. 

■Jntjcmt. 

rjttbUirmcwbui.cjrjcft.  rr^trwt 

cttjctoi^cCTbiucrrrWa. 

triu-trluL 

mbiurrlbm.rrltr.t1. 
SeptuageCma] 


Eptuagefima  -\ 
Sexagefima  ( 
Quinquagefima  f 
Quadragefima    J 


s 


DC 


\   VIII    [ 

before  Eafter  •<     ••■'  >   weekes. 


1  V 


Ogations  ] 

Whitfunday        }>  after  Eafter 
Trinitie  Sunday  j 


vij    j>    weekes. 
viij  J 


^S  Thcfe  to  be  obferued  for  Holy 

dayes,  and  none  other. 


$at  is  to  fay :  3111  £>un- 
uayes  inttjeyeerc. 

SClje  Dayes  of  tljcfcafls 
oftDeCireumufion  of  one 
Ho;tD3lefosef);tu\ 
Otttte  eptptjanie. 
Of  ttje  purification  of  tDc  bleffeD 
Wfogfxu 
sDf  S>atnt£0attl)ias  tlje  apoQle. 
Of  ttje  annunctatton  of  tlje  bleffeD 
Uitcjtn. 
Of  5>atnt  £@affec  tlje  tfuangcltff. 
Of  &.  0ljiltp  anD  3acob  tlje  3po 
files. 
Of  tlje  afcenfton  of  oat  fLo?o  JJcfiis 

Of  tlje  iBatiatty  of  S>atnt  3orjn 
25ap«ft. 


Of&.l&ctectljeapofrie. 

Of  £>.j<UHCS  the  3poMe. 

Of  S>.25actDolomeU)  ttjc  apoffle. 

Of  S>.fl0attljcib  tlje  3tpoQle. 

Of  £>.  $3tcrjael  t&e  3rcl)angel. 

Of  S>.fLuhetl)e  «euancjcua. 

Of  £>.  Pinion  $  31uDe  tlje  apoftlcs. 

Ofail&atnts. 

Of  &.ani»ett)  t&e  2lpoQIe. 

Of  5>.Xljomas  tlje  apoftlc. 

Of  tlje  /ftatluitte  of  our  Ho;D. 

Of  S>.£>tcuen  tfce  fi©art  w. 

Of  &.30W  ttjc  cnaiigclitt. 

Oftlje^oiyjnnocents. 

££unDay  ano  Xuefoay  in  eaficr 
tbecfte. 

fiPunDay  anD  XuefDay  in  H9ljitfan 
iDceftc- 


q  The  names  and  order  of  all  the  Bookes  of 

the  Olde  and  New  Teftament,  with  the 

Number  of  their  Chapters. 


lofhua 

Iudges 

Ruth 

i.Samuel 

i.  Samuel 

i.Kings 

i.Kings 

i. Chronicles 

i.  Chronicles 

Ezrah 

Nehemiah 

Efier 

lob 

Pfalmes 

Prouerbs 


Enefis  hath  Chapters   50 
Exodus  40 

Leuiticus  17 

Numbers  36 

Deuteronornie  34 

24 

21 

4 
}• 
14 
II 

M 
*? 
3« 

10 

'3 

10 

4i 
150 


Ecclefiaftes  hath  Chapters 

Thefongof  Solomon 

I/aiah 

Iercmiah 

Lamentations 

tzekiel 

Daniel 

Hofea 

loci 

Amos 

Obadiah 

Ionah 

Micah 

N'ahuni 

Habakkuk 

Zephaniah 

Haggai 

Zechariab 

Malachi 


11 

8 

66 

51 

5 

48 

It 

14 

3 

9 

1 

4 

7 

5 
? 
5 

14 

4 


^  The  Bookes  called  Apocrypha. 


Wifeciome 
Ecclefiafticiis 


SdrashathClupters  9 
i.Efdras  16 

Tcbit  1 4 

udeth  16 

The  reft  of  Either       6 

'9 
1« 


Baruch  with  the  Epiftle  oi  Iercmiah 

The  fong  of  the  three  children. 

The  ftory  ot  Sufatina. 

The  idoleBeland  the  Dragon. 

The  prayer  of  ManafTeh. 

i.Maccabees 

i.Maccabees 


16 

"i 


(%g  The  Bookes  of  the  New  Teftament. 


•Pff^SeM1^  Atthew  hath  Chap 
^KVaS&%  K  Marke 


f 


I  Luke 
lohn 


The  Epiftle  to  the  Ro- 
manes 
1. Corinthians 
1. Corinthians 
Galatians 
Ephefians 
Philippians 
Colofsians 
i.Thcftaloiiians 


18 
16 
14 

LI 

1<$ 

»J 

4 
4 
5 


i.ThcfTalonians  hadi  Chapters 

l.Timotheus 

i.Timotheus 

Titus 

Philemon 

To  the  Hcbrewes 

The  Epiftle  of  lames 

i.Peter 

i.Petcr 

l.Iohn 

i.Iohn 

3. Iohn 

ludc 

Reuelation 


3 
6 

4 

3 
l 

•3 

5 
3 

1 

1 

1 

it 


THE 


Cum  Triuilego%egi<s  Maieflatu. 


THE  GENEALOGIES  OF 

Holy  Scriptvr.es. 


To  the  ChriiTian  Reader, 

He  Spirit  of  Cod  in  the  fared  HiJlory,  kith  Lid  downe  fuch 

helps, as  ire  the  light  and  life  of  all  Nations  originals.  In  them  the 

circumflances  of  Perfon,  Time,  and  Place ,  ar e  the  chief e;  elfe 

doewee  wander  as  without  a  guide :  and  ofthefe  the  Perfon  it 

principal!.  Genealogies  then  drawnefrom  them,  from  whom  all 

are  defcended,  andby  Cods ownewarrant recordedvntovs,mujl 

°iyj*?T^"      \\A  "^H  "    mtuet  Jfeciall  reuerence  that  they  are  holy,  andfarre fromthofe 

other agatnfl  which  S.Piulwrtteth.  ^fmongji  whop  manifold 

vfes,  this  is  the  chief efl,  that  by  them  ii  prooued  how  CAmhwas 

made  very  man.  And  therefore  m  jeuer all  Tables  they  are  he  ere 

exhibited  euen  from  their frflroote,  andfo  continued  through  their Jpreadtng  branches  Jo  farre 

at  the  Scripture  gtueth  thtmfap.In  the  reading  whereof  let  the fe  few  drr  eft  tons  be  thy  futdes. 

I.   Such  defcents  m  hold  on  from  the  Parents  to  tiretr  Chi\dren,witkout  interruption,  are 
veryplaine  by  their  double  lines, which  runnefrom  rundle  to  rundle. 

2  ■  Thofe  whofe  Parents  are  net  certainly  knowne,  but  are  named  of  their  Country  .Citie, 
or  Tr\be,are  towed eachvnder  other ,wtth  thu figure  here m  the  margent. 
t"    "  "  1       5 .   And  hkewtfe fuch  as  are  fe  tin  rankefide  by  fide, and  diflmguifhedby  thu  marginal!  mark, 
are  not  to  be  reputed  )iret\wen,butfome  other  Perfons  ofnoteffthat  defcent  where  they  arefo 
inferted. 

4.  T/tf'HiJwf.ro/'Nations  WPcople,  {as  likewife  fometimet  of  Cities  and  other  places 
ef note)  wee  blue  nottncompaffedwrundlcs  asthcrefl,  but  in  Compartiments,  and  different 
letters  betwixt  direct  lines,  that  fo  they  might  bee  knowne  from  particular  perjons,  and  the 
Names  next  vnder  them, are  not  inferted  as  certainty  thence  defcended, but  as  eminent  Perfons 
amonp  them. 

J.  And  where  of neceftty  we  are tobreake off "the  fucceflion,  lobe  com inued in  fomt  other 
page,that  doe  we  at  fomc  principal!  Perfonsuj-  at  thefloudwtth  Noah  sfonnes;  at  the  Promife, 
with  Terah  and  Abraham  ,e>f.  So  that  euer  the  Man  at  which  we  bretkeoff,  is  againefet  m 
the  firfl  place  of  fame  enfumg  page, where  his  iffue  is  continued,  though  many  times  whole  leaues 
fall  betwixt  them  ;  which arefuppltcd  with  other  collaterals :  fuchu  from  Abraham pag.  ]. 
vnto  his  wiues  andfeed,pag  .6.and~!.&c. 
•Mauh.i.      6.   The  lineage  of  our  bleffed  Sauiour  {which  is  our  principal! fcope)  is  knowne  by  a  Chaine~ 


I  .uki ■.%  like  trade, continued  from  Adam/a  Scm,pJ£.l  .  and  thence  to  Terah  and  Abraham,^.}. 
iJi/h  ,n  '  &-c .  So likewife  from  Dauid,^.2  2 . to htsfonncs  Solomon  WNathan, pag. ;  \ .  Andlajl- 
hn  third  jyt  !o  our  Sau  lours  parents, pag .  ^lincked  together  {as  other  marriages  here  are)  by  thefculp- 
vponl"»i  turcofanhandin  band. Both  defcended from 'Zorobabcl.-wr/v  holy  iuangelijlshaue recorded: 
9.1.  y)w«I>iuid,  Iudah,  and  Abraham,  as  MoCes  and  the  Prophets  haue  Jpoken;  and  lev.es 
'  Rii.Ht- ifoffjffiues thus farre grant,  that  theMeisiah/hoaldbe the  Sonne  of  4  *  V\rime,her  nam<_j 
jui.zil:  Mane,  and fie  of '  Beth-lchem,tbe  daughter  of  Eli, of  the  houfe  o/Zorobabcl,  and  Tribe  of 
Talmud  Iudah./n  allwhich,our  Chrift  is  mamfcjlly  dcftgncd,/tnd  ly  thefe  Iewes  both  acknowledged  to 
clfc  "is,n  n"ue  ^'een  "f1"' '  hloud-royal,  and  alfo  recorded  in  the  number  of  the  Priejls,in  their  publike  Re- 
bran*,  gtfler  at  lcruialcm ,  by  this  title,  Iesvs  THE  SONNE  OF  THE  LIVING 
Chap  N,?- G  Q  D  ^  A  N  D  0  F  THE  VIRGIN  M  A  R  I  R.  Thus  is  he  Dauids  Sonnc,and  Abra- 
'ihtid.r.  hams  Heire,  in  whom  all  the  kindreds  of the  earth  are  bleffed,  beingthe  very  Image  of  the 
the  lew  in  wuifibleGod,  the  brightneffe  of  the  glory,  andthe  in(r auen  forme  of his  Per- 

ih't'ord  '  /'">  i"*1"""  dweUeih  thefulneffe  of  the  God-head  bodily,  and 

Icfus.  vnto  whom  be  afcrtbed  all  glory,  praife,  wtfdomc, 

Col.i.if.  thanks,power  andmioht  for  euer- 

Ai.oe.71i  ww,  Amen. 


10 


tl 


: 


12 


15 


\6 


i8 


20 


r 


fas,! 

« 


* 


H 


16 


27 


29 


o  J. 


3* 


B 


74. 


oannA 


AnAlphabeticall  Table  o7c  a  n  a  a  n,  and  the  borders  adioyning:  the  diuctficic  ofnamw  obferued.die  texts 

,  ,,p     T 


cf  Serif 

*  Tr.ir.  LU.   I.-.. 

Jf,:Kirg'   li.  Ar.bu  U-IS-.?." 

:ULiniwiti,  Num-fJ  .M1  lt«"°»  )  150^7  13 

.V-;1  t :  -.-'.11c1  Ai  '"11.  1 .  ij.  )„,_,-  ^ 

eih-naiehjl-.Uini.  io.i«.   3 
^bel  meholih.i.Km^Ji.it.  im«.  Eft"-  Jl-i--«.  J« 
Abel-ShutmNumb    140.      >       Rube.  ,1.50*7.10 

lli.lnre.Numb.iji.  $ 

At'.:,,.;!    :  j  10. 
AbithJint  Tcot. 
A  bukmik  filler. :  .Sarfl.l 8. 1  '■ 
Accb»,lud£.i.ji.. 

t'loJetnjii.iAiee.j  if. 
A. hoi  valleyioih  157. 
Aiinaph,lolh.ty.ii. 
A(ht>bJolh.ij.44-Mici. 


Beer-lihiiro'i,  Gen.  i&if 
f  lofh.  18  ij.  ;> 


Beerc-hX  Deuti 


ludah  ji   l»  o>. 
Ben.  31.10.  ttf. 


} 
"1 


Illich.ji  «iW  .0 

ludah    1  i   -  ■.   I  • 


I  Gen.J-.Ji.  ) 

cb*y>Iaihiyi.    > 
_    ?  iXh+ill.  S 


EetiTveiiiiifct  Alkali 


Sincoo  j:  1164.  jo 


ludah  JI-  4*66  J : 


Belu^or,  7   flg,I0riy.i6  Aft.  ,J  10*710 

Ihihot-LiOmn  $ 
Bena-JuLin.Miun.fi  jl.   18  Smuoq  -J-  ja.*J   •" 


Be..'-    lee  l  1  >...!■: . 


i.b.Cen.jlt.j. 
i;bi,i.Cl»c^  11 
h,Io[h.l,J.ll- 

Adan  tn,;olti .iii.  -a. 
Adar.lo&.lj.j. 
AJ.thunHtpfh.Ij.J*. 
C  Cen.i4.1- 

AJtiIi,.'  I'tur   1  J    JJ. 

CHoTct  ill.         J 

a.  '-  -" 1.*.  1 1  .'. 


Aflierjj.  is*7-io    Be^^sajj.     1 
rud.h  JI.  u.*>  JO-  ■  lewd^pwh*.      } 


15.65-  JO- 

Iodahji.io^j-jo. 
Nipht.jj.  10.67.  jo 
judnhjo.  60.64. jo 

luuflh.ji-jo.6j.jo 


S.DtfcdSen  ji.  60.66.1 
Vhe0f.j)«o.s8.i 


EenMba. 

Cbu>J.(.h'Ori. 

B  ciothc-  a,  Pt  J  Itt  - 

Bcfutflu.iSam.'o.s. 

Boih.issn.8.8. 

Trbbuh.H-b.ii.a. 

TMb^Ptolm. 
Bcicujolha*  W-*J. 
Be hihai 3 : f«  Bcb-baaan. 

CUlhis.jB  7    N     },.   „.  --.tfj.j 

Eeo.ji  jo.44.1 
ludah  31.30. 


Ahiab.ludg  t 

Al,ltremT^J. 

Ai.lofh;.--  > 

AutUf1.10.i8.     f 

A  jdoo.I.  .la-:,  . I. 

Aajalon  lofh. lo.li.Iuoj.il  II 

Ain,Nu~-.j4<l- 

A"-,;.li  i;,;:..  J 

Aftii.i.i.Ch'^.i?.  > 

ChotifAtn.lii.jn,J0.  3 

i!ir,n[':.;il.3   1,  - 
Alrxiodms. 
ALnxw.luft.ii.il.      ? 
Altraeih.1  Cbr*.»o.     j 
AltBlwJiblRhi-n-.Nwr.  J  J  47. 
!■  In    n  it  .i  .  -   ,      . 

Arra1i.I0G1.17. 16. 

, km. .un.JiHTg.il  ij. 
Aiiam.iofhujij.i-. 
Amaihuiboi  ivaien,  lemm. 


hill  i.Sami-14- 
JDeui.J 


Ammonite-. 
Zumowmcn 

f  Oca. 
A-ootiiei,  «?  N«n>. 

£  Iudg.*.»i. 

A«b.Inn...l.ll. 

.li-  1.    .    .   ■  .1.   ,.       .    :■,■. 
*•»        Vl''.'!!1 
AUS'  Ul.'-C-ftT      II. Jl. 

r  iofh-11.1i. 

Atuhp'h,  -^ietemj  t  1 
Cliai.M.jo 

.'■  j~         Eiguinus. 
ArfT     rf  r.i-i.  .. 
AKbaJo(h.if.p. 
A(nbedon,J      _     l 

Aatilibann. 
Aaiipitru.A6Sii  |t- 
Apame  fetliblih. 


jjeniao-.ji.jo^.jo 
Aflierji.10.  67.10 
Oid  jl.W-f7.s0 

Beniini^i.so.fttf.  ja 

PlO  Jl.lc.6j.  50 
Zebu.  Ji.  |o.t6.6o 
h»th.  ji  60.67.40 

Simeon  j1.30.6j.10 

Aflierj!. 10. 67.10 


J40.  Siar, ;  1.40.63.10 

in'-'nwii  m.-.'4-io 

Aiher  jj.  io.6*.6o 
tf-hn.jior.iti.jo 
I,jda)iji..o.6(.io 
C>d  ;:.io.6«.jc 
Icdahj140.6j.10 
Beau.    1    -■£-   ■- 

15*8.10 


Bcthiuab , 
Bcibamah,  I  oim  1 

Leih-i».,h,f(rtV.ji 
.rabah  lu.huj 


te.h-a: 


".Uih    ! 


i-} 


Lc  h  burnt 
teih  baja,    ludgi 

S  e  t  h  -bafu  1. .  .M  ae  .y  *  ». 
Be  hbiren  ice  Bcthtcbaoi 
Be.h<n.iji,ti.-,ii.     f 

EbBWTM.j^wkr.i.i' 

B«ih-J»J.,n,  lolhuiT. 
Iicth-Ai6on,Ji 

Btihel, 


sC*..lS.y.    ^ 
VlolKa.i).    S. 


i.  jo.  66.4O 

B«ll.|M*«*-  1° 

Rube^  ji   50.67.jo 

fll.l«IlJl.«3.«.J0 

tphja  ji.*o.6«  «o 

Ten.   Ji   l^f  (i 
Artie.  l1.toA7.10 

I.d.hjl4J.66.1J 

Beajjio.116  jo 


;.'Z 


0*dj:. 


P.  . '..'f    '  .    i-  /-    (  : 


Benia  jijo.66.i6 

i-r,„I      ,1      ■  '    I    1 


ladahjl  4«.6j.ic 
lttdih  J1.4064-6C 


bx.<feul    . 

Ee1h-tmeUu.k1y.17. 
Beth-aaRaiL,Ier^Hi|. 
B«h-Ei(cc- f  N«l.e...l4. 

rem  J  IcrtJ-J. 

Bnb-bjran^Njir  jy.6. 
Beihhjglihjofh.1^  19. 

thevP«.fI"i,'"'"S  J 
Bcih-homn  5,__ 

rt.<ne1hff.JlQ'},»,^^■ 
Beib-lctt-f  N«m   i|(0 

mwh,     iEteij.ji.    / 
Betliltbaoilsluf 

Leboih. 
Oetb-biict,  i.'Cb'on. 

»«**.».{£"■'■!  ■«,.„, „.,.„ 

Bphrmh.Mk  5-j,Cej  j.16  J 
Bcih-lchem,Iollki«  15. 
Bcthmucah:  fee  Abe!  maim. 
Btih-mn.   flolKij 
cabotti ,  J  i.rh-4. 
Beth-iDCim  1  fee  ftjaTmco" 
Boh™ 


U  ly*.  J 


/f>.o;i  fo*7i» 
bloab  ji.jj  *l  jo 

GaJ  jl  10.67  so. 

BlO-jl      JO.    66.40 

f.flw.  1%.ix66-sa 

tfht.  ji.io^J.lo 

H.btnji  ao -65.6a 


zeb.ji. 


} 


Sim.ji 


f  [olh-19  I* 


l.aamj  I 


Aptuk. 


AjAekJ  flua 

AHtftutn.Dtw-i-y. 

#f,N„mb.n.-.«fM  .tj.i. 
Anfaia  de'ift 
Artb,tcll.B.i5P'  iSam.: 
And.^ionb.ii.  i-lndge* 
Afob  Pev  4  i.K.np^ 
iimrN'i  '  IB 

Amonmiojofb  ij  ■   Ifi 
A«Kt,Ni  Rib-)  »■  14. 
Ajrcn»''e7Blcht', 
A«»»AJodgoy.4i. 

Alhdod.IoOi  M46  ? 
4HTfi,»a..!40.  f 
AkW*d,De»'   7  1-   > 

PJfitab.UOi.lJ-i^X 
AaVaKIofruaij  j;- 
ADwah.  ipfh  iMJ' 
AlHati" 

■fftl 
Xam: 

Afttemoh.  lofl.u: 
Albion,  ludti.iO 
AAke'onle.iJ.0.^ 
A!fcdeeh:feeOlb«ini- 
Aamh.Nu1rb.j1.j4. 
Axr-.-'   .Ji  .'    ■    "'   M 
Atitmhlorhoaif'.?.    7 

f-.l-       ,,  ■    .'.r   ■   *  ■    < 
A'»TOth>       ?ni__l,  .»  -r 

AMluh,ilawi.i?.i. 
AM-Sleftuaivl   ? 
i.O».i.rt..(W.f 
Alrtiaoeth.NtVien.  11.1 1. 
Atnoib-Tabof.lofl.-i*  ,4. 
Awcw  leeAiUod 


(j  jo 


ilD.ioin  15-4  J 
aroh.Iofh.aii  ■:  5 
BKcnh.lor.ii.t7-  > 

■011m,  Gen  14.J.      J 


Afhet  JJ  n 

Tuda  11.40 
kioib  Ji,  jc6?-J( 

Moab.ji  J067-V 
Fdom  ji  loJS.Ii  I  Beihfti, 
I.idib't  4C*(  jo 
I  ,dah  ji   15*1  10 
Man.e».j:.jo.a»4o 

Ruben  JI.40.66.C0 

Ruben  ji  60.67.  jo 

.limn.  Hflr  jo*o£j-lo 

Bjihra-    Ji  ki  at  10 

luJib  JI.60.  6j   30 
Ruben  Ji. 40. M.Jo 

l.dihji.it  Sj.jj 

Ijdah  11-40  aj  10 


Gid  j: 


NAfKjv 
lAth-p. 


Beih  palcijol  .n  :-. 

Beth-piixei.Ioln.ij)  ii. 

B«h  -phage.Mtitlui.i. 

BttbCa1d1.M1.-1h.  11  11. 

Bohftiew.-J1^  ■''-"■    1 

t  lKlni;.4.il-  S 

PchOim.  I   Sam.  ji.io    3 

Bcrhihtmclh,  ri.Sam.C.y.    7      T'dah-i   (56140 
LeihfheitieiKi  [nlh.io^l     f    Idath  ia.ao.M40 

Bejh^hemtrh.  iXinj+y.   "* 

Jrfhe»*fi..I-iIiuaiji.4i 

HftM.l.ideet.i  j;.  *- 

Feiii4!iii'ah1Ii«dEe».7  1: 

Be'h--arpo:h.Io0T.l;  15- 

BcbjbafecAiiinih. 

'    i.-.'i   ■  "-1.        ■- 


Dan  ji.  <to  65.50 

Fpht.j:.io.«.5o 

ludah  itaoaj.ao 


Man  r».  ji-50.67  Jo 
iLidahji  40.65. jo 
ludtb  ji.jo,  6j   10 

Gad  )i.  la  66.  *o 
BenLa.]!  10.6610 

1    ,  ■    ■•        I     » —  ■    4    ■ 

Cad  }i  10.  66.  ia 
ludahji.6o.6j   jo 

SinaoQ  ji.  10  64*0 

Tenia.    11*0.  6610 
^afh■  J  a.  jo.a7.  10 


1.  dj  y 


■wUh.ttJnoaij.f.  ludah  ji 

!n'.1  ■•■  .!■■.'    '      "  I'M  i~ 

Btvilahi  Tee  Krtiath-Icaiim. 
Baalacb  :■-<■-.'»  iuj.        J 

Sine  j  1  10.  64.40 
■Ul.1  Ch'on^.i,.  3 

BM'-Gad.loTh  ttiiAij  5.  phcoo.  ]i-  ■.•■'.' 

inlmeon.Scm.jl  jl  ta  ij  ».  *) 
J. 


Bcih   TC      ■■■■.-    ,  4  - 

lien  N  irkrrj  )i.  t 
a*'.  Tif-n   l...-f  f  ■.  1  .  ■  ■ 

Baa!- i*f Son, Sum  )  j  -. 

Bii'      16. J. 
Itllb.IolKljf.I. 

Bam-j-Li.  .u  ,      1  1  ■ 

6f    •»■■■'     .-ir  fl. 

In    -'  .         .  1 

*r.Norr.it  ISjudn-M 
B(«i  ,■:...;! 


■-Ruben  jt  (0  67. 


Ben.; 


50.66.1 


luj.h  , 

Moabji. 


10.64-60 
■  ■  50. 67. 4. 

ja-jo*7*, 


Beick.'ud-e.  1.4.  I.Ja- 

(■I»mf.*4t      ? 

Be^er,  ->,Cl..678   [- 

n..n.»g.  i 

Boxiah,T(iem)F  48.14. 


E.leam.-lee  Ibleam. 
BiimthiaJvIfifhaa  14  :S 
robin  ftone.Iofli.ia  1  (.< 
EoaAiih.  Iftfli.  k  19  :  1 
ttSn.i6.il  ~ 
B*/ra,^I«r^,.u.     < 

BoTTih:  TeeBtKr. 
BabaiH,N'jm. 
Bubaftm :  fe  PhibeJhttb 
BubiThcBi  flu. 

■■bit. 


Cabbon.tnfiSucij  49. 
ObuLi  lui>g.9.tj. 
Catn.loOuia  IJ.J7. 
Calkbo,  ■  rtoWnene  well. 
Caluoie  fnoai.t  :feeTabvi, 
1  't-j-.i-i.:     —.-    |0.|. 
Canaot6au)e,Iahl.  !  1. 
CafBMH,  lohna.i-r. 

c„4'°""!"<; 

CifmelfiMMint,!  Km«  4  -(. 

CaramcnvaUer.Ne'ne.ii  )J 

C  iii  ut  moun t,  p lu> I 

:aiie»hefcDa«iJ?      , 
olTsauUtap.         $   ,-S 

}Aa9. 


C«fa< 


CaraitaPhlfpi 

Cailor^a, 

ChcpkirafjtJb 

rhecMfaS^ujli. 

Ccf-hli-ha. 


d8t9  <7 


Bco  ji 

Tndabji 

Cad  |! 

t    Beo    H.] 


lulabu  lo.6t.6' 
Ben.j.  jo.  6*  4> 
■   ludah .JI+O.C}  4- 

EJora  30.406}  4< 

E|ypr  jo.40.6-3.il 

rjjfP'  ;o  40*1*. 
fpf.'t  lo.40.aTI  [I 
lirp»»o  40.6:1, 

Phefnt  jj  jo.  '6}.ii 

l.idiK(..io«.ic 
Rub.  (1. 40.6C. ja 
Ben. ji  50.61*0 
•lUi.  ji.6o.i"7jo 

'.'eb  1  ;  r,  !,-.  1  , 
Nip.3i-lO.67.lO 

ltifiJl  31.10*5. Jo 

Zeb.  j:.6o,66. 51 
Bco  ii.toMn 
ludah  p.iQ.64  Jo 

-ij  4  lud.;i.:o,6j  jj 
;o  Ma  iot  3:30*6.10 

ID.maet -j^of-.J  in 


CheiibclotT.i  tone 
Ctwha. 

C«Cl,Iothiii  ■ 
Belhullolh  1 
BeuS«<!.i     " 
C!«fu»wb1lothu»  , 
Cbcub  :(ec.Uh.bb. 
CMbtbTiKx.l.l}.  iy 
Xarah  Joihua  ;  1  [4. 
Ttboi  1  tlu-of*  -7. 

I       ,I,U"        ■■    T     ■      ■■     J.lfi 

Rera>pha.i^Aai-.iJ- 
Rifbui.,i.Ma£  j  {?. 
haph   lolej'l.aji..i:.i 

fhi>ti)nin;  lee  Aju. 

Chj.aEin.Lul-ei.-r   - 

t-horilluiflu  Pfol 

ChtiMbatiecAebib. 

Ch  mi  tee BetoimjU 

Cinet>rial(,folb.ij  61. 

CleopauiJa, 

'•liv./.-n.-  ia. 


TypV  p. '*a«  jo 
auneuD  ji  40C3.10 
liTichai  J0.««  40- 


Zcb.  •■40.94'  ;o. 


7eb  31  jo  66  60 
Ma.u>'-j;.JoM.fo 


10.  Dan.   }>.  tfo^j.jo 
D 

Dibnth.Iofhjaii.iS.  Iffae.j1.30  U  jo 

U'bbilhch,  loft  1j1.it,  Zeb.ji  60*^40 

DaknaBuihi,M*i.8  10-  Zeb  31.  jo*6  60 

l>am,fclB,  ,  K.lB  j  ia.Acb.5.)  Arab.jJ.K>oT(  so 

Uauiiaia,  Effi  ji^u.t;  10 
Dan-unim.'  fee  Bphel  Djmmim. 

■y1roahJotl1ua.1j.40-  luJai  j1.jo.6j.40 
DavhatPcluJiiu'ee  lehapoci. 
Debu,                5lofh.ia> 

K.nuh  raiuiaahJiM7.    J.  ludah  Ji  jo  C  Jo 

Kmailiiepher,l..-i"  i.n  y 

Deb«,loilia*  ij.*.d.  Old  ji  10  66  Co 

Debiijulhuiij.7.  ludahji  jaf6  jo 

Uecipoli«.Maik.j  13.47  »'•  I**?*  Is-*"1?-*0 

Uedajj,Liek.:j  ij  Enom  :j»  6o*6.:o. 

The  Cuuoufj.  cl  7    lel;(  I,Edoo.J0.6o.6j6o 
1'edan,  J 

'^S*  «■        ^Uk*'* '     ^AtSM  JI.JO  41.40 

W.ldcnefle    C  II -'ea  i.J.     $ 

Dtbllihaim  1   .,-(    i,i„    .„j;..i'ii 
l'.h  1.  K'.l'.i  ij  9.  Oad  ji  6o  67.10 

l>boa,Nu.i>i-i.i-j.  Gadli.ao.67.  jo 

DibuoOad  Nuon  j  J.  .  < 

Ddear-^lofbua  ij.jS. 

"  1-wab  i)» 


.!.-■'.!■.  1  ,;>».,  ij   11. 
UioLMiIiaTheU»\HiMO.ii. 
Dophkah.Nuoa.jj  11. 
Dor.Iofn.i.  lJT.>ng.4>ll 
D.'.bifi.Gfft.j7  iy. 
UuiBib.aXhuA  ij .  jj. 


fbeo  Etn-i  fee  Pcth-cat. 
Ebfonah,  Num.  j]  jt. 
idi,  ibtMijjdil-cder. 
Bdavjatwaii  :i. 
£dieitIo)n.iyj7. 

iDtu:.  j.i.     S 
B«Jon,I,.fli   10  j. 

IL0...1,  /:  a,  ,,    : 
fclajaallev.i  ; 

SJ«-  CNonvji 

leb.?  I.     - 
Llaleh.Ir 

tlephjofliui*  :8, 
Elenfheropoln, 
ElimJJam  j  -^  j 

Fl^nh,i.Kiiuiy  i6. 
Elickeh.IoNuaiy^^ 
Fltckon.IoO.ua  ij   ly. 
BlT^adJe.th,.  .^  »_ 
B-nek  nv^ni.Iofh.ij.iy. 
Eiunu,Deut-i  \a 

tnn,l     1    ;     J4. 
CUfhj 


JfSiai.Ji.lo66  1. 

luoab  ji-to.  6J  1 
Edoajo.  6o.66~  3 
ludah  ji.  10.6J.  j< 

EpP<-J 


GsJor.tcPiij.jg.i  Ch4  :•.  Jndah 

I't.intHK    ,l<i.h   .4    1  1  Mlp. 

Gennaeict:  lee  Tibciuu. 
Geiu.Cenel  13  1. 


Si-n,  1MB.  *45. 
Ocienuilui«  F;y?tJI  10  6r  J- 

Ce  Kerj,\1i,  g  jt.  CiJ.  JI.  10.67  4, 

-Grliun.l^fh  i)  .(Lieut  ;  14    Mietij:  jo.«» 
Cell. ui.ie-.Dt.Oe*! nci,t  Si.n  17  *  Am  10  00.94  jo 
Gethren.jnr.Mittk.it.JJ.  Cen.Jt.40  fl*  u 

C«*r.lHfc  is  jj.  tub   |i,] 

G>ah,:.iam.  :.:4.  Ben.  ji  t0.ad.3a 

G.bbe^o.J^;;^1*   I  Daoj]  ,j5l.j. 

Gibbeah.lulhij  j,  luJ^io  -a   ladih  JS.joij  4, 
UitwJm  lam.tlj.lvlh.ia.iS.  > 
Cabca,  j-Ben.Jt  jo.  6j  60 

C.bennjoth y  17  jwrh,8.ij,         Ben.ji.6a6s-j 

The.iuetol  J 
Cibexii,      '      J        l«i.s>.ii.   Btoji  jo,*-;  jc 

rhepovlcot  j 

Cibcoo.  J  l!im  ;    'i  Ben.ji  6aa"£  ;□ 

Mount CtleadUCN.Ji  ;J. 

l.iacAiiuitT  i->i  /  . 

Oto.,  I1-"! 

Ci!(,tJ.\i..  4  1  j  1  ■-.  lr  ,|  j 
Ukh.ioti  ij  jl   i.jmi  ij 
C'niO.:  (hrua.:J  lS 
0.lfaia.P.ol. 

Cinah  Hepber,[ufhnj  1 ,  , 
RllUW.,1  •.*n4,N.he  11 
Coo,;Aim  :i  18. 
CoUn,I,Jl]  11.17  Deur  4   . 


Caov.il  ib. 


\Crn  l?..>5 
-^DeuM,:,  < 
llll-oJia^.    ^ 

-  p.,  .  .     -* 


Cadji 

60.67 

aMn.ru.  j 

-40  6  j 

to 

Ben  j 

I-dah - 

jo  45  ,0 

Uta  | 

60  6, 

.1 

Ma.  e*t. 

>  6  6V 

1Q 

--eb.  j 

J..44 

o 

Epb  V 

Maei..;. 

IO«J 

6a.  »; 

Sj 
i- 

ji.Su.iein  j-. 


Ala- 


tr.Jl.4' 


jo 
-d+Jo 
64.1  a 


CNom.,,    ,7   -, 
flAith    .,4-i 


;i4:a;ion  :y  ja.dj.40 

ludah  jr.  10.65  jo 
Kaphji  00.67.30 

M'.<»t-]:-4o-t*7.-f0 

Jodahjl.40  6J  50 
Panji.  «o.6j.|o 
luJahji  J0.6J.  jo 

Rub.  j:.  10.67:0 

Ren.  ji  jo.*6ia 
lidahji  40.lij.jo 
itae...n  ay-  jo  6;.  60 
Bdoni  ;ji.  jn  nj.40) 
Dao.  ji.60  tfj.+o 
J-3ati3i.jo.6j.ja 
Sim.51  : 

RoM: 


HsctiiUfa  bill,  t  fin.  1]  1- 
KjJa4iiui[imn  Zaili  1  - 
H-dalb..bf|-f]i„ai:  .'. 
Hadii.»h,|oCh«,  ,-  .  .' 
HadidHXchen.  n  >-  "' 
Ht»ireni,ni  llWaeiidi 
Malhu|.iDuii(    , 
U»:iJ  fhuaiv;. 
Hitmb.iaCh 

I«-T.I  Chm, 

Hammiih,ti>i! 
Himir.ijLhdn.1ioihl 

Himon.fcr  ,_y  :8., ait-^      *""  ** 


ludah   ,, 

106-J.4- 

Nauij 

.,=  66  jo 

Judibj 

Kd.bj 

AUM.j 

ludah j 

ludlli  J 

•ft»jj 

Ben  ; 

Aiabu  j 

1 11  Jab  j 

JO*J.O 

..jty.   "'       y   A'sbiijj.jofie  jo 
llamm<Mi,[i-f(i.,u  ,j 


aiilh 

Honinilior.,'l)niul  ip 
"a^'ii-'i^Iolliuj,^ 
Haridah//uw  ,.  , 
ILateihfotell,:  ilJD  , 
Hi-oil. trb.fu.'-ei.  1 
Hafhnoiuh.N.n.bjj 
.F"k.47.iC.i!l 


^""Jl-jo*?! 

2<b.j:.c0.fr7.to 

J'lac.  j.".-,,  jrf  p 
S<aiMnji,o6jlo 
Ji'daJiir.jn.Ktero 


Kan 


W,  N.m 


>  dj-1 
i:d7-i 


r™  ,1   jofj6e- 
JudaB  ji.  J06J  ja 


Endor.  -o  1  <Ejmo.':I.v 

Cria!  tin 
Fn  e~1am.Fi*lu47  1 
Fn;iant~i.  lufh  IJ.J, 


liTat. 


jo.  6*,jo 


)  64  jo 


a.ldah.Ioflu.  »,.:,.  ffl 

En  hitoi.lofli  iji  17.  N 

En—fl-..,Gen,a7.  ?  Iu,j. 

KiJtfh  Refnej.NntD.il.!  i 
Enonjohn  j  1]  Kn.;  I.  6-.£4.,c 

FivHimrmin  1  lee  Ktmnajn. 
En-Ro-  CIoil.ua  i, ,7  ? 

F..iapph„jl..|eeTa|.riiih 

rUemL™ioV7  '"  '"        l"d,hi,e«G" 
Erhfarn..      *"    '      J 'olh  14  Jo.Eph  11. 10.06.1 

Sphi'l".  Oen    Ji.jo.«.ie 

Ephiaim  C-  Sim.  1*6} 

ih«f:w«fl,f  IiaHKu((.     f     MiM.jLjofij.i, 

FuhfaihirrcUettilehcm. 
Ffhean,Ioll..ia  ij.ji, 
EnhauMufh  1;  u. 
Ffhtemorfi:  (»e  Afhiemoth. 
Eiba/.l.fTnua  107.  ^ 
EtaPAludc.'j  S.      S  "m  ,( 

E<hajr,Num.:i  <■.  j  s-atfon 

Eiemi  'rf  *  !■  ■• 
Frtinn-Clbtr.Ninr  ( 1 
Fuou-CtLef,  1  f:.i,  ., 


ludal,,....-.*,,, 

1**3  J'   J«6J  + 


Hau.Gadaah 
Han.  iuf-b.j,.iTi  iy.j 

'--lufTm.jCli/ti 


He=i 


'  Arabj,. 


•a.   Si 


Haiefotb,  Nut 

"■"""'  ""ac.nen.47     5 
EnSed,.1Chir.,Ele.,1Jf 
Hn..t,  I.fl.uj  ,,  ,, 
Hi.oI,r..fH,1,,Ncjw.< 
-        Jofh 


Si*.,i.ioa-4,, 

:-.40.t'4,ja 


ludajt. 
lui 

Be.L 


•   CMrbfL».>,.C 

»>:Mll.Jol>^,y. 


;.,o? 


o-lofhe. 

K;r(a,K,rbM-di' 
HeJam.  ;5imu(j  , 

Alamibi,  r'.oletn 
Helbnh,i(,dce, ,  ,. 

Heiqi,,.,,^.,;;; 

HettaMaA     '" 

Heieulc  pjma 
""«"cene.J1,l,em(fJ 

Sli<n,.,etijtl  7,DeuiIy  * 

H**'lccHJiffcni,,t. 

He 'v.Iilpj,  r; 

HeioopoJuetjj, 
Hercwn,  ., 

Hetbou,        1 W|"" 


J  Nap.jj.Co.Sj.ij 
I-JaL  ji  floSjtfo 
Siw-Ji.  10.64.  Ja 


Judah  ji  j-.  5j  jo 
Arabia  j  1  46  alj, 

AftWjj  w,*;.fo 
N'P- J|  ao.  47.ju 
Afher  33.  14.67.19 
E£ri"Jo  lo.6j.6a 


tWu 
!ler. 

n   :■  ■  !■ ...  1 


8-.M 


a«h'if,       •) 

.l-S-m,- 13.      < 


JJ.I. 


63.60 


Slit  :p  :;  6j  jo 


Olaffi moum, juf|.  .4-0 

V,* 

:  le  ff.:o 

Gldan.Ma.ki  j  1 

C.i.1 

1.J0S7.10 

GaJud:lcca1ti7ali 

Cil!m,,ij#m,,J..;|.j1V:- 

.0.        E«»- 

Olroilab. 

Gadj 

''.nt!.-.nni.'(,       ,      . 

Ben  < 

-4t  6S  56 

0Mb.lJarA.17.). 

ludah  j 

Glih  i.nuraon.Titrha)  ti  ij 

l»an.  ji 

GaJuurnunucc  Iblc-m. 

Gall  iSltn  6  17  ASl"  :*. 

judah, 

-JO*"*  ja 

(,aea  »pon  ihe  lea  Conllac 

a,     ludiht 

.  J164  JO 

Ciufa.  i.Mic.o  j:. 

Dan.  j 

jeba,i.Chion.6  60  Nfh.l 

:».     Fen.j 

i.*j.«*  jo 

G.btl.Pal.R;-  tnk   :7J 

I'beonu  j  , 

j;o6S.:o 

r.fbi».''aJiah  10  jt. 

Ben., 

Gedetah.           }     **'     '' 

Jd.IuJJl  J 1 

t-.6j  ;o 

GeJcwsh.UO.  15.41  i.CI. 

Z.iS  ludaJi  J 

.*e.6jjo 

HaTr.fl 

Hc.blt 

Ht-jon.roJhu.h 

HinrCiJdah, 
reiahmeel.iJ, 

Hilem  fee  Hob 
i  Hiiwonnaflepj.n,, 
I  H-<t.iet,Gen.:j  j. 
I  hiuiici.I«dee<  t  ;. 
:  Hiu4tti.Iofru.,h.i-lo. 
j  i-  bi,r'.,e  1  ,  ,,  Iud((hlJ4> 
Opo  oJhnbn.  J 

I  llolan  Je.ei?:». 

Hi-anflJ.dhM  .,-ji  * 

■  Hilen.tChfUd.jl.     f 

■  H.iba-.dfMd^urr.  jj  ji      Ijjjiatif*  u 

'        /C|h'.b,|Jdj  1   17  i 

H0.ona.a»,|lii.Il  JJCf  4I.J.         Vnib  j 
;  }U-*uimNuwb.jo.,, 


S.m  jl   jo  f. J  Is 

l^TC<I*-;o.''l*o 

*i-rr'i«.'o.«j.io 

4->alub.iA.ia.4>- 

I-dlhjl     J0«(,lo 

l'hton.ji^o*lav 


JuJikjo.  60.  4,  JJ 

JudabfT.jofe.fa 

J  t  ill  jt,  .  ■■  ■- , 
Ph*nn|jio.a4io 
Ben;».4»»    *   jj 

Arabia  )Jfd4jhio 

M..ab[i  40.-74-1, 
Judih  jj    40, B j  ,, 


67.60 

J  J.V-1I.  jj  <4J  j..  J 

•Si  )>«7  JO 


'r.....  1  :       ,■        j, 

H.k  -      faeMekarb. 
H-mtah.lothua  11-14, 

Hua.ih.  Iicl;ri.da. 


JabffT.-  f  1  *am.u  1  > 
f.If.'.i  [.idgc- .1.1.1" 
Jd>t.k  R.ner.Gen  Jl.:a. 
iab..tbiCb-..»s.  7^ 

j.mma,.  Mac4.»J.  } 


AltV 


ii  = 


N.jb-ji 
juJahjifi. 


Oal  1  :o.  47.14 
*"nd  51  104*7  jo 
Das  |1  to,*]. jf 
N-j-lw  JJIB47  ja 
lhai 


j-,4*    Ut.    l*>£- 

-    ■      - 

A-mi  |1>  '°  "«-t« 

Judit.  jt-ioJj  I- 

Re.b  J.*o.*7 
i  CXI  |bf«A 


yu-iMoGimij  j"» 

hiiit).,i si >  1 7). 

lli;.i!i.M"  -■!■(»■ 
jo   MA*Mi*  {oi'^ilj 


•k^iTcc*. 
i»kci,i^c  i  Jl 

luutili,loA«ui|  >»-      i 

i,-(J.^.u!«*.I««-'oi-i-c-  ;;■;  ;0  M.kVri.-.hNum.,,  ij. 
lJ^iXr-u##...lu^'J^7^iV'°f,.;o  u.bkffah,i.ft."«.ic, 
l-rJo!lw  tyil  EKji.iaW^j    Hwrf  7r       .  r. 

«»«■>       ,  M>w  SCtl...,!*. 

'    \  UwnWdJcnwttc.t. 

Jfilbjl  *>••%¥>    »lM.n.NU.«.J|  I- 

.Mm  ».*,  :«ft->#  it. 
Itdir.,U°*I"  „     ,     Uolh* 

C»d  ji.io.»;."> 

Miftil 


.       C  ..OttPft-i  ■>'' 
lo?**.**"*  *- 

iimV«>.  i-*  "■  1- 

;(r».rf  IwllCMM 
liiar.lolK.j  .'  i'i 
In*t>.lo<rnii|.:f-? 
inwr.Uh  i»  ».?    J 
[bif-MMat.i7.il  >  *•»■»"■  / 
llcan.1  thf^.T*.        /- 
-  -  -i.Ioi.n  i;  j 


i  in: 


Cloth.    -J   41.   J 

/MrthlLlJ.    i 
jl.tee  hliflucL 


llesb  11.4a  «*.''n,,el'CB,-»1-iBv        . 
M->.b  jo.tfo e-  .0 ,  P«i  -hk,  iWu]  1!. 
Zeb.  i».  totf'to  »J*tHB»M. 
Gi4ji.jo.47<o  jhrbtei.MoiB. 

I    J     11    «J    »l    «ii     I'hiinilU,[t(E. 

,  ..|ad  |iio  tfi.43,rh'l*ddp>t,it«ft»bb»Lh. 
iVu.   lud.  jl.lo  41  4»   Pi-llilwoih.Soin  I  j  7. 
j.5«  stM«-*J-*°   i»«i-Jvni.  Iwds-iM. 
pifgiti.tcc  AlhJoth.. 

p"5^'jrn  JDcut  J4.1 

om.ttod.l 


ft*    fc--    f*  jfcj.j.^ftUishjBta 

Cti  J*,  jo.tf'folsehoeo.i. thron.it  7» 

Molb.^l4W7.'9:;!wl,!'•,l■lKM"c':l,■ 


j«j*  i«f.  t«»j. 

IsJlk  jt4c-.tfj.f0 


IMi.M|^uu  „oCl,lS.lJJ„uB^^'SJto 


-^■itoii........ 

SStbiffsNu»b.J*  J. 

s*.iiK,<:Kk^7.»«. 

Sin, feet!  iMlcf- 
SiD.*.Merneir#,Num  ]]<•  1 


jsgype  jtxjoJ: 

A<40iUl.fOJB. 

j  ,.43.484 
Egypt  jo^o.^j: 


.         II       !-■=  10     4    ' 

Ej.Ivi.ji4oj4.jo 


(•cttttLji, 

Iwlthji.io.4j. 10 


Ml.Illl.JI-j'"  J»    VtlliJih.lofeyhtii. 

.M.iLh,  f»*Jwi7.7. 


,l&t.i<M.      J 

.tudcih  «.i*  > 


Rw6.j1.j3.67j 


ItJI.loJI.ja 


I  S04-oh.loft.1j.4S. 

Shachi>h,i.Si«.ij. 
1  ■  ubo  1.  like, 


__.  Lh,ioCi». 

JtaSck 

"      «  41- 

«'  -if*-"-- 

■      ■     1 

'  ut  I  lohn  »*.  I.  Bei»b.  1  !.*«>.«*.»•       Ihepl 
It.Kha.  J  Medcbi, 

V.o-li.ne.fibciilMri        rtcn  •  3 1  ao.Cj.f^ 
•f  tcr««Ko.  J       _ 

ffS^HCU  ladih  tl.M         1 

I  Mtil  ^Jcihuti, 
(J    44      M  «■■■<'  *  N.rr.^,1. 

Hndcwv, 


.      1  cc     <:> 


Btiii.ji/o«49    Mahbi, 


Din  )i. 


WiM'-W,  fi-ih«.,.»i 

iuaih|i.4<>*1>'*l     ,„  C*>f.'7-*H 

N«ah  Jl-  40  *7-*«»  J  M«rfm,t.M« 


■.•;"} 


KcphM'l**'?  ,0 


;»l,Ioth  i>i  if. 


M«fu,  J'5 

j  [a.<4^o    fcUhtili,*Juii  1 1  1  J 


j ,:.  •,  lo.>  ■!-! 

mm*.,  {r^i.- 

.'o.'div'.'fti  IJ.J* 

1^'iift  •.'mi)  i<- 
jk^.islA.niM 

!„*  »b.'.ip-t  he.  I^'sfc*-     r»7*V„" 

■  :i-  R     ,"i*IM    *  \ *•&*[, l. CtuX.74.S 

I»bi«l.Ie'ti.»i-i  5i*<1  »o.l»l*5i) 

tfcklo.o:  in. 

!>*  «i-r- 

Kwi.iili'ili 

toM,lMlC>MI. 

'4    ll 

«.B4h^j.i((i»i<i.Bii;#' 

.Uflixll- 

1 1 10. 

KjrMm.  It*  AftitiroiK. 

^.hrtbof. 
Mrtl^.X  ItMlUfk 
XjiJ.Io*  if«I  J 

K  nwJ«J|i  |«>i 

iZrfktuAj. 

•/K«ltf.  J 

Kric*M4S,Ioft.i|  it 

tt-.wmtd.    ■■■  ■       ■ 

«4j€T«4fff.il4^l|.ll      5 


luJifi  JI.JOMIO1      t»nu.lui)ei 

jo.l1.a4  40         iicl^Kk 

Emm  jo  i«*>i»   Poffiduo, 

Nil  1,  1       i"  0-.)O    lJiu'ic  -T.fuir-.  rr, 

Aihti  ij  u.4-.)0   t1!  loaue  r<tA0Ni 

f«nto,SuT  b-JJ.^t. 
Btub)iSo.«-4«    R»,,r.re,,EiDd.t.ii   T 
S.n.L«tjo..3     S- 
I      rcliiliuin,  3 

RrJlJ.ji.rfoe;-4<>   Rjbbib  or  Cleft.. j,»j.  1 

t       'phi*.  CEtck-ij  j.  J 

M».ib.Ji»oJ*.:j    fljbd,  sepnufa^GtniMO. 

h  ikk  iih.j  vil.  j  j.  \$\\) 
O1n.11.  S^f;-i<> ,  K»rt»"i  KlK  si.  it  > 
E-Tp'  |"-««.6»  4»        Ktitj.hnm.i.CL«.;6  i 

EJo*.Jo.5o.(J.Io|  CMmh.  ..  ll. 

Niphi  j:  jo.    P)mih,I»tb-i*J*- 
Bftv  jl   iof)0O     Finuh.:i-!Ki*  1U.J*. 
Ainal.jo  »o#4  so    HtfDiihuni  JopW.   1'mi 

.^.AtibjLiatfijB  Ram,rM(  {2i+f:"-Jfiopti.sa.j».i*rf».* 

JuJiIijt  4o««  jo  'r^,|, ^'«Em1«iiH«*'. 
IuJiIi  j  1. 10  fttf.10    R™»ih,h:«  Remi 


c  Oen.lj  1.     7 
/.M«b.i<  'J-  J 

flud. 

'     (Cci 
whi.iS? 


I  t.tK.i9.*o.54,;o 
i:-Si»t  10.10  «4-ii 
Iyj4hj1.10.4j.jw 
Judlb  Jl-  4°«-l  4^ 

At.iI. ji.  ia.ti.10 


SodotD, 

Sittk  SjTiidg  1*  4 

1  SBCioib^Brrib.;j.4. 

"       ■  3  !. I.V.I 


Sur.Iudcth. 

STiht  lee  ihtthem. 


Owi5c»j»4o.<i'.  jo 
|»d4h  11  Jo  «J  10 

»,Sl4t.jO.IO,t 

l?  l-Gidji  10*7^0 

Allift  Jj.)0.*7  In 


Plieofii.j;.jfi.*S.4o 
1 


J-Jibjl  J**J" 


#Oictim«»*M« 

rptxa  |i.MM*.io 

Judihjc^'^*** 
#\iibuj*,)o.*L»o 


ijUiLjt  ji^r-jo 

Ei*4n.K  »*<J  l» 
Rc-b.j«J^«7-*o 

J*Jib  jo.*o*i  1° 


CfiAhiuh 

'4  Li-'—      '   l<    '■»-->     - 

CCcBciuj)4r 

.    ..y-i-  r. 
*nefii)i4T, 


■■'■"   .-.f.«'    . 

Mti^<ib.Iofl.uih>j.j|.  iuM  j1.jj.tfj4.-. 

lta»f«l»|^l"*J    Rcubjijo.**.!* 

Modi|W,(ct  '.'i.i..in. 


KoIit.'O*   1144 
Xr-'ii.1..H»lA 

R^LjKfttil.v.  Aaoi.it 
•r.t.Icftr  '-- 


Judlh  1I.4*"1)-*' 
At-iI  Ji  1"44  K 
J*Jih  1  1  1-4)  Jfl 
V.  .4b  |. .I""-*" 

j»!i.Mi  loej.if 

Ecru  ■.  !.*<>.••  10 

i,14.JU.jo.J(,«4.4* 


faiih 

N»phLj»4oe7. 

J  Ejrpt  ip40.»» : 
Be*  )i.io-#s  j 
A  (list  jj.  (.9.66  t 

1J.SU.1;.*0.I<],  I 


H*n...l>..  ..,CiJ    Jolh 

Kun«[h.MnpelHlo!li 
liaphm,  reethjjn. 


Cii   ;iiji!ii 

'  |Tnaxh.I*Cii.ii 

Beu  jt  40^j.to       Anet.i.Chr.tf.ji 

I      liU4h  1.,..  ■'.  ;..|li  it  i       £pbt.ji.io.  44.4* 
H1ph-JJ.10.i7.30    Tlbtr4h,^u'":'  n  {.  AmiLju.jot4).4j. 

,  Tlbor,ftc4  hlle:!..  (jth-r. 
Dia.  ti.4e.6j  40   TJborpIiinc.i.Sim.iu.1. 

f  iTibcto-.onm.IuJ.j.tf.Mll 

J  |T«tlltei«k:47.f,.       f  lvJlhJ04o.tfj4« 

N-p.h  ji  10.J7  jo    Tidmoi.i.Kiic.J.iJ.  1  Ch,*4  Ai*b  jj  io.no  la 

Afhci  )).)»  47.10   T«h»th,Niww.»j  ii. 

F^'ht  )i.  ia.fl;.co    T4nu:ree'iihurt!. 

Sim*  j1.404j.19    T4?poih.(uft.ii,,4 

Tipjnith.Ii  ili.itf.J. 

En-Tippuiti,ioili. 

Tmh,Niw.j).i7. 

T«rlUh,Io(b.iI.ar, 

Tthipbnchcr .  Ew.  j  1 


^Bcnii.jt.  jo*J  *o 
17.  N1rh.j4.jo.47.10 


>j  Sdjo. 

lud'b  Jl.  JO^j  40  I 

jBphrji.io.  «.io| 


^Ciji. 


(flthotnloft..*.  il.  jo. 

H<k<n>,uili.  ,3.17. 
Remmooj0lh.|fl,|  1. 1 
1       MhIi  '    > 


■•S 


M.>  S 


SBCO.  JI.4o.tfj. 00  !  S"BB>on,IoIh,l>7 
j  fliaimon.Z.ach.r  - 


,„.       T 

u.4-10.       s 


Athuii.  10.  47  j 
Bcaiiji  4^.4*  10 
^ipib.;i40.47  j 

Sa  j 


Jidib  ;t.io.4).io 
J  l-Jah  Ji.jo  ieja 


oted 

!oo4tii.h.i.Ch..3.4. 
MoilOith.  M«h.i.i. 

I»d(n-.i 
MJii-KNub.  p.  Jo. 

Mitu-  U1V1I.1A 

'■  ll<V»K,|.,l>,    ij.ii. 
N.^«h,(0IK,4... 


IiKJlbj1.4O.4jJl 

11  Stijo.  10,4441 
U1.e1.j1.fO.47j1 


Rnootb,  i.Chr  4.- 

Kcmfhim,(t«  Chiui 
Keph«itn  valley,  liim.1;  1( 

Hipbiilbi.M»ni  jj  1 1. 
Ril'Uh^Nuto  j4.1t 

Zl"]l\?!*4°J  "vine.    |>^l!l*"I«ArAiMorfH» 

DifiM.40.Mi1    Hinwk.^fceRemirwi. 

Iil4thji.jo.e4jj    R™«»*'«r*»nN«m,jj  ijt.       !*.(».  ;o.  jo^44« 

17.Si4i.oo  ••.fO.4f.io.     ^'ff»h,Sa».n,(.  iMllij04fl<j  10 

S«W«.|i.  tfo. 4i.io  !  R»l"~lsN-i».J|.i«.  lJ.Sa.io.«04«,o 

I  .     I...I  it,.-,,  1  Sim.)),  il     lodjh  11   j^.a  j  4.) 

luJi   |i.jo  a,«0  jRu6<l»'S».Sim.i-  17S11  Ji.kl*cx .ji.40JT.40 

Hphi  juo.»«4o    _  .  ,    .        _  S 

.    II. I   Nturrt.  |4.:o.tS4J,,0|S,1tB*h*,-Cnro,I-"-  Mcq|.|i.43,«jA. 

■"'•"■'.  i^::i}  !..~.,..w..«l"~<-  {r'^.'i}^-.-" 

U..UI   u 1 T  *      .-••  '• r 1 I  L_    iTj_  .-    -  .     r» _ 


I  Tthiphinei,^,.,., 
'M'TlU.n.cr.-'.  +  l.T. 
I  Difha^Pcl^i.MCTcd.i 
Afirr  j1C0.tt7.tv    Telew.Ipill.ij.  j4.     "j 
1  IclMB.i.-iim .  i5.'4-5" 
Pbcon.jj.lo4l4o    T(b.  f  i.ai.i.M.,\a, 
2  1  Sim.14.9, 
Tcloi  wildeme lie,  J.Ch.lo.io.ludahii.  1 .  ft  ,a 
Tcmin,        '       J"  Ict^o.7.      Edomjo  40.46.io 
'  1  I"m*B'fer-'*'7't«.ii.il.         P-Iobi  J04-.4d.lo 
^T,""^  Epp.jo.40.4j  .^ 

tf4.jjT1be1t14.M1n 4.1.  -y   ^T    '  ' 

Gen*-   Ttukcf.r.  <  Zjbvl.ji.w.44.^ 

fiMt.lMep.A.r.t.il.   \ 
Wich.ji^o.44.io   TibjihJeenenli. 

Tnnn4b.It.1l1  1, .j7.lKtg.i4 . 1.  Dan  j.   jo.tf«.  ft 
Timnulire.ihjoftisj.jo.     7    _. 
Tonnih.herQ,jadio.  /  Epl>  .ji.io.4r>.,  - 

Tilhbi.,i,np,i-.v.  MA.e».j«.4«.<3.-o 

T.b.[*J..,j,,,I.S,.l(».4,!.       A«b  jl.  fo.tffl.40. 
Toefa«,,.rb,4p.  &nr«.|i.lo.<j.i0 

T™,  j'S*"J'«.itj.l.? 

'         *    I   k1U.lt    l.llt.    .       > 


*Vmh 


ll. 


SeikA 

'■■.    -    ■   -•'  '.',1       ■  n. 
'-*b»  o'hju,  40,7. 
ThtColBirrroll 

'.<!.»-■    I    .  ^ 

VftuUtR.Mchc.it  14 

■'■'tt^i  -  "."i  'i ;  r*,:».4b  -'.'cbo  . 

C  Num  11 
Ntto 


Mid.  4, 
2t4Hj.ii 


BJ.    ft ,  #7  j c 


C«-|.    JLJ 

iml.ujih  ic-7 
jh  ("•ni4mi,i  j!>i 
1    '.-ftb 
J..Ov...,|- 

Ir-.IulTl    lltftj 
tl,(«  BctlllBIVlk. 

■  -••e.i,6f.»..l* 

•b.Hckcv'jrt 

■  ■    ..  11     v 


•■•H    I  .1), 
NibOun.lurn  1 
Kfwm.tt*  B*i 


'     K«|4'l.      Slfh 

C'jorlJt      ], 

M>or.e«.-{i3*m  ij  l|  S     ridib  |I.4A«*  to 

J4j.b  (i.  J_'J 

^  . '.  1  <  -  ■  -  >  L-  —  ■• '». 
It^b.u-1'  >«f  binwib-. 
lf«>  4V  bi .  «e  "«*"■- 
l4n4fc.V»l<-rf(  l-'fW. 
tunvlW-"  '  ,  n'-fki 

/-•-Jr. 

4Tjnffibir«.'cc».<k«!. 

<U»h.Bi4j.l.L}.    ij.o.  5.  ttJiiji  j»4j*o!_        %«l«ds«l,i..S 

fvMlXlt.  f*>  ,N»»A  111*       Utub  ).4r.  47.(0  I  rVj(,h»|..N«il*  ILJO. 

' J  Ne»f*Uui,N*>. 

r.'.«.-    ,   nil        Siifii-  lUt^l-tfA  - 

I        .  i|,.i  j   M     .  0'oih.*»14«M,4,, 

ra—  iiy.,\,.  irajiii  ^4*  ro'oue<™«o«'.*a».  it, 

rd    ji  D  it  <V       CiCrwijn 

.(   ,4    CHA-J  H»l  ».  1 1.     S 
(Nchc.i,  JJ.> 
1     I'.lt)     Qn4Jll.», 
iMUfe  |,l.4>    <tf  '     (l"^1  «.N«*. 

Ophaij".)!  .1  14, 

*" '  "  orh*** 

liffh  1,  -  4.  ,0  0rtj<  >m) 

fM«j  M        Mliwfc.i 


A-.,; 

••oil  JIJo.44, 


■j   .a     ii.-    iMitTuMir.  Ui{  i< 
fi.4i.io  I  imW-'cp.-iihcT.i  Sn.ij  1 
o.4j  do  '  i»f»r"h  lofn.i  1. 1 1. 
ij  0-  ,e    C4nd.|..Di  if  in. 

|lipKcTMoiinr.--«m.;,.ij. 
Saridjlolri.if.to, 
40.44.  jo  '  S»»n.  Act  o.  j  j. 

1  *,iubfef»Whf!'. 
)oJ4-jo    s«ioKi*liict,L.k  t  11 


Rd 


*•<*■  |I.|».C>.IB 

A IV.  ,».«4i  —  lo 
NqriMn  ("•nt4»f.t,i  J>i    IJ  p  ludih  It.  40.  tft.ta 

"•fiKiil*.^ 

ludlbjl  40  44.IO 


lotSodatnLiJLe. 

<Mo..Iof.J..c 


Dinji.  fo.4|  i 
'  fcph.  ji  ia.*tfo.t( 

lodthji  10.4J  1 
IrTicti  11  40  44  n 
m.1i4.jo  jotUtfi 

IiTie  ji  4,1.04  , 
Ephr  ji.io  4i  tf 
C i-lji.  ,,.  „■,  ,, 
ZcbuLji  jo.44  jo 

Ejfpt  14  4o  )|  0j 

Ijj-n  n   :o  45  10 


U-'iJ.J.J.Si 
•.l.rbr,.!,. 

i  Mil  nil.  A3  It. 

iih.Joft  IB. jo, 


tAttier  j-ut-i 

V   ' 

VnrMih.loih  ib.jo.  t,\t,  n  ,„  j.  j, 

rJernefffofFdom,  l4om.JB,J(u«Jx., 

rTeof'.hur,  At,'  10,-0.  #4).u 

wad«ne.ler.,K4defli..,7,n.   Am.l,  ,0.  ,0  4,   " 
W.McrftclTenfM04l.,otll,.;it.M()-lj     t  to  ^  „ 

"jjwl» ;  V"h '  '■       ErKi '-  *»  ** ' 

WU.mcflV.il  [r..,.,^,,  ,#.A..ai., 

W.LIem.lTcfPinn.      B  Aml| 

WitJt™««>  "t'Cfiri(»,di.Lo«  tj\. 


II4O04     1 


Wildec 

WJdc. 


trTcfUf, 


j.  Ren.  ,,.,0  4 


t1^'[*.ll».tj.t4.        JUtLhji.Jo.lSj.J, 


trfh. 


j  Ztlmncuh  Mi 


ifjj.  N»ph  i|  ioft-1  [o 

•  I«dj4,n.  Njph.11.1n.4tT.fja 

,B,"«f  |k-  Eptv.il   10.41  ,a 

JJSil.jo.io.4tf.jo 


-•■li. 

j(4U^.^:.<j4*- 

144^11     t*.1      If    IB' 

ttwr.|.  1<H1.  I.  J. 
ftlMBf, 
L4b4*-J«4|411l    If. 
L4--I-J       It,     I    |- 

1  •fV.l.itr.  il  1-  ■»■ 
•    •   .   Ill  S  fp    M4.'l   D 

M    ■ 


jt-i"  1  •  14. 

C,r«n,tvi..-J 
tfclii    n\ 


-     t  Mk 


r-jtti  1*4(4.  , 


Cld   JI14.  4744 
len.JI.  JB.4S.  10. 


Ftvib.  inn/.  |, 


HJl4.|B.J0.47.|O. 

Btan.|i.(i(4.,(, 


Irf  10.JB44.M 
Pjrp.  1 040  J  1.141 
»  oil.  J 1  4044.|0 

>*«*.|i  JOtfjao 

^4  .'  tl4-.fl  I 
■•fabjt.JOJf.JO 


ChHiloy 

'■ftfli,  IuJ|    1    ■/. 

JoWtfjd.}1  K"$"4-T- 

'HrjiM.lolephAjljq. 

tcphanc 

ftripruuaj. 

ftlhoTV, 

1  (1  banVci  rV  «i«h. 

Ull  J«>jjV    '■  •*  4J. 

Shiilbm, 


iklnft. 

.    .■lD.uh.f  jfTi    I(.l4. 

:  ■  f  j     ■  4  ■■  ■'■     4-  ■     '  1*    \:    '" 

tltJ  Haer,N>  ff.:i 

fptv  jvio.4j.io    7»ep»n.ri  i.Ktnjrj] 

4U>)4j\]l 


■ct  An  jicnjir* 


si'ft  i#  4J.  5 
riBdf.,..,  <. 

ll.Kk-4l  ^ 


M4L41.4 

AUScj, 

Rfvot  |o<a, 

Befptjojoj 
Rsypjo  jojj. 


jo.474    ?ciemh  raJe  5. 
EctMnl 

Trtvi- 


Cnc«,l4..        J 
■jLVlt,.  n   J. 


l|       .4  Ifttt.  1 1 

Mn    11  .  •■''  i« 

»"":      J  I.fa4.,>>      Ml- 


...  '4  •« 

|.    |at  14.141     P4l'"'.»1'ctC«frfClIV»T3ff. 

PHM-1-., 
4%M»fc*l«. 

Ill, 


ij  4.    ratVh |i. i«.«j.i 


Rjojii  !&Jo.4*|  jc 

IfVP'  l..lo.4l.|. 
lOf-.oJoJiJ 
Unii   ;,.r»«4   || 


,    'r.«r-4. 


wh.IoOi.   ly.i 
■'I4«. 


\k»nnr,  I«ili 
Jbil}*.  1.I41H 
Ihliilril  llnd,  1    t  ■    ■  4 
fl>f«ncn,l<>lt\!y4    7 

!■  SlWll-.JI    J" 

Ci.Chi.fi4.   7 

(  Km  It  b       5 

tKi*cih'fccK.nfrid4lr. 
iPt-KTcft  <ci 

Icftvi,Nch.lt   14. 

•  KcbHf.rtrl.bnuti 

■     -     •■!■-. ■ 


ihOMIA 


Jedih  j1.40.Cj40 
lodihjl  40.-ij.1n 
G»d  11)0.47    jo 

After  II.10J7.10 

Cjh/l.Jl.lojJ-J  jo 

DeidSeiji.io44,o 
>-)M|j.l|.S-e.1I.I4  Ben.  ||.tt<.  «.  40 

Di.  11.  ,atf5    pi  /.It.VoeltJvJ.i^M.Se,  H.jo.47.  o 

._    .  ?en.iti.r»,[o(n.,J  ,,      -f 

liTjihn   1  o  t*  jo     /etwfft-j.Chr..  .      f  Pcml-ll .  If.ttf.ltt 

^itSsfjs^fe      .^,.,...„. 

BcmiH.io^fljo.    74pn4.K4.hrtH,,  ,<s  ,.   10    ludtftti.iojtif 
Bef.14.iLfo.  n.  40 ,  7e.CT.hA,  ftfreran.  '  ' 

Sine.  tl.4aJJ.10   J*^0»h»«.lotri.t|.#.        Re^b  p.  itv  tf?  10 

'-  ?Afte,,|.i0.(J;.»., 


i.jii».<?.«f  zibo.-jt,; 

In 


Sxne.J140.4Jf.  10    ?*;«fc*.N(''  iM.i.Sim.17.4 
Ri4B,ffe  hihom. 


n.toft  . 


SW.ji  jartj  11 

1   -"it.     r«    »     .',  , 


l»br.  ji.  i»tff  j.} 


■>'",'  t^    '■■    ^    |4    Iff      7 

m  jti.tj  3 

MikhtofvlosV 


7  ,-s.i,  a  _  ip 

'iphion,\„f«..,4  o.  tRb4M».||.if>!t.) 

P..I.1.    1    ,       (O     (If 

lafabll.  10.44. 
IlJthjl.Io.tff.J,    '*' 


«4j  ji  i3fl.i,  !\hlfr«OTb,i4'(.,nra44a. 


ZMx.roftij  (4. 

*(-40  \  It  Chfi.iiCB.io.itf. 
7ora,&c  PiiJiftf. 
Zou/ec  !if  Li 


Arab.)  1. p.  4 J  , 


•To"!   Jl  to.<4.1rt|       Ntxbfi, 

bat  1  ■  ro.tW.fo I  tttj4jJff.N4Va.ii.if,  Heobii^atf- 

Sj  JO    '-wlll.fuJi;.»|.|Tij,  Dm  1 1  40. 4f 

RufbJJ.  Bphr.ji.  IO.j4.Jo 

' riMii 


iJifb.  ji 


The  creation 


Chap.j.  of  the  world. 


andijtf.  5. 
acts. 14. 1  5. 
:nd  17.24. 
hebr.11.3. 


*  s.Cor. 
4.6. 


tweenethe 
Ught*nAbe- 
tweerte  the 
darleneffe. 
\  Hebr.  And 
the  etttmny 
ttju,  and  the 
mormnp  wat 

&c. 

•Pfal.ijtf. 

5ier.lo.11 

and  ji.  1  5. 
\Hebr.Ex- 
panjon. 


THE 

FIRST    B  OOKE 

OF     MOSES, 

called  GENESIS. 


CHAP.    I. 

1  The  creation  of  Heauen  and  Earth,  3  ofthe 
light,  6  of  the  firmament,  9  or  the  earth  fe- 
paratedfrom  the  waters,  11  and  made  fruit- 
lull,  14  ofthe  Sunne,Moone,  and Starres, 
10  offifhandfowle,  14  of  beafts  and  cat- 
tell,  16  of  Man  in  the  Image  of  God.  19  Al- 
fo  the  appointment  of  food. 

i-Tthc  beginning 
%  <5od  crcateo  the 
s  heauen,  ano  the 
earth. 

^  2lnD  tDt 
earth  ibas  tbin> 
out  fonnc ,  ano 
boyD^nooatliC' 
nefle  was  bpon 
the  face  of  the  ucepe :  ano  the  Spirit 
of  d5oo  mooucb  Upon  the  rate  of  the 
tbatcrs. 

3  2nD(i&oDiaiD,*1Lettherebeught: 

ano  there  ibasught. 

4  3nD(5oDfatbthelight,thatitwas 

gooo :  ano  ©oo  DiutDeo '  the  light  from 
theDarBenefle. 

5  2nD  <bod  ealleo  ttjc  light,  2>ay, 
ano  tJ)c  DarUncfle  he  callcDjftight; T  ano 
the  euenutg  ant)  tlje  monungibetcthe 
fitftoap. 

6  C#nD(£oDlaiD,*!Letthetcbea 
Ornament  in  tbemiDfloftheibaters: 
ano  let  ft  Diwoe  the  ibatcrs  from  the 
tbaters. 

7  3no  (Boo  mat)c  the  firmaments 
ano  DuriDeo  the  maters  ,ibbicb  were  on* 
occtJje firmament, from  the  lbaters, 
Ybhlth  wereabouett)efirmament:anDtt 
ibasfo. 


s  3nD  <Soo  calico  the  *  firmament, 
heauen :  ano  the  cucning  anottjemo^ 
ningrbcrcthefcconD  bap. 

9  C3nD  (5oofaiD,*?tct  the tbaters 
bnocr  the  heauen  be  gather  cd  together 
Onto  one  plate,  ano  let  tjjc  ojpianD  ap 
pcare:anoinbasfo. 

10  :3no  000  calico  the  one  lano 
€arth ,  ano  the  gathering  together  of 
tlje  ibatcrs  calico  hec,  &eas :  ano  Gon 
ferbtl)at>twasgooo. 

11 3nD<5oOfeiD3ketthcCarthb2ing 
foojfh  tgraffcthe  herbc  vcciomgfeeo, 
and  the  fruit  tree,  yeeioingfrmt  after  his 
tmftse,rbl)ofcfceo  is  in  it  frifc,  bpon  the 
earth:  ano  ft  Ibasu). 

\z  3lnD  the  earth  fought  foo«h 
grau*c,and  herbcveelOtng  feco  after  his 
binoc,ano  the  tree  yeelOing  frutt,ibhofe 
teeo  was  m  tt  fclfe ,  after  his  feinoc :  ano 
©00  fetD  that  it  was  gooo. 

13  3nD  the  cummg  anD  the  morning 
rbcrcthethirDDap. 

14  C3nD(SoDfeiD,  fLet  there  bee 
lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heauen , 

to  oiuioe  ^e  Dap  from  the  night:  ano 
let  them  be  fo«t  fignes  anb  fo?  fcafons, 
ano  fo?  oapes  anD  pecrcs. 

15  2nD  let  them  be  fo;  lights  in  the 
firmament  ofthe  heauen ,  to  giue  light 
bpon  the  earth:  ano  ttibasfo. 

i6  &1D  C5oD  maoc  ttbo  gccatlights : 
the  greater  light *  to  rule  the  Dap,  anD 
tlieletTer  light  to  rule  themght:  he  made 
theftarresaifo. 

17  ^nD©oDfrtthenvtntl)efirma< 
ment  ofthe  heauen,  to  giue  light  bpon 
the  earth: 

18  ^iio  to  *  rule  ouct  the-oap ,  ano 

%  otter 


•icr.51.15. 


•Pftl.33.7- 

and  116.  5. 
iob.38.8. 


\Heb. tender 

srtf*- 


*Dca.4.ip 
plal.i  ^6.7. 

t  Hebr.be- 
tweene  the 
day  and  be - 
trveevethe 

igh:» 


f  Heir,  for 
the  rule  of 
heddi^c. 


■Icr.31  35 


Th 


e  creation  or  man. 


fi 


Gencfis.     ThefirftSabbath. 


•4.Efdt.«. 

47- 

|j  Or,  <jrt. 

}>n- 

\Hii.fMlt. 
j  Htkfue 
ofthe  firm*- 
memtofhtA- 

mm. 


•Chup.B. 
I7.i:ids>.l 


•Chip.  5. 1. 
ando.6. 
1.  corin.n 

7  cphef4. 
14. col. 3. 


Mann.lo 

4  wifd.  3. 

(  I  1; ■■■  :. 


I  fU.  tm- 
fetb. 

■dup.J.j, 


oucr  the  mgbt ,  anb  to  biuibc  tfic  light 
fcomfbebarRcncire  :anb  Gobfaibttjat 

it  was  jjoot). 

19  anD  the  mcnwgmib  the  morning 
Ibcrc  the  fourth  bay. 

20  anbGobfab,*1_ttthetbaters 
bnngfooith  abounbantly  thelimoumg 
creature  that  bath r  life,  anb  foule  that 
map  fl(c  abonc  the  earth  in  the*  open 
firmament  of  beauen. 

21  anb  Gob  createb  great  ibhaies, 
ant)  euery  luungtreature  tbatmoueth, 
lbbtcbthcibatcrsbjougbt  fo?tbaboun> 
bantly  after  their  mnDc,  anb  euery  Tom? 
gcb foule  after  1)10  tunbe :  anb  GobCavb 
that 'twas  goob. 

22  anb  Gobbleu"eDtbem,Taying,*25c 
fruitfull ,  anD  multtply ,  ano  fill  the  iba= 
terstn  toe  S>cas ,  anb  let  foulcmulhply 
m  the  earth. 

2)  anb  the  mmingroib  the  morning 
lberetbcfiftbay. 

24.  eanbGoblaib,  Hctthccarth 
bung  foztb  the  luting  creature  after  bis 
toiDe,  cattcll,  anb  creeping  thing,  anb 
beaft  ofthe  earth  after  bigbutDe:  aiiDtt 
ibaSfo. 

25  anD  Gob  mabe  $e  bead  of  the 
earth  after  bts  fethbe,anb  cattell  after 
their  ftmbe,  anb  euery  thing  tbatccee* 
peth  upou  the  earth ,  after  his  tanbe : 
anb  God  Caib  that  1 1  was  goob. 

26  eanbGoblaib, 'iLctbsmahc 
man  in  our  3hnage ,  after  our  Ubencfle: 
ant)  let  them  haue  bomuuon  oucr  the 
fiih  of  the  fea  ,anD  oucr  the  foule  of  the 
aire ,  anb  ouer  the  cattcll ,  anb  oner  ail 
t!Kcarth,anbouctcucrycrccputgtbing 
that  crccpcth  bpon  the  earth. 

27  £>o  Goo  crcatcb  man  in  his  otbne 
3lmagc  ,ut  the  3Jmagc  of  Gob  creates 
bee bun  ■,  *  male  anb  female  treateb  bee 
them. 

as  am>  Gob  blefleb  them,  anb  Gob 
faib  bnto  them,  *  Be  fnutfull,  ano  mul 
tiplp  ,anD  replcnrtb  the  earth,  anbfufr- 
bue  it,  anb  bauc  Dominion  oucr  the  fith 
of  the  fca,  anb  oucr  the  foule  of  thcairc, 
ano  ouer  cucry  uumg  thing  that 1  moo 
ueth  bpon  the  earth. 

29  CanDGoDfaiD,23cholD,3Jnaiie 
(jnien  pou  euery  herbe '  beariug  feeDc, 
tbhtrh  "bpon  the  face  of  all  the  earth, 
ano  euery  tree,  m  tbelbbtrb  is  the  fruit 
of  a  tree  y  cclDing  fecD,  *  to  pou  u  (ball  be 
fo;meat: 

30  anb  to  euery  bead  of  the  earth, 
anD  to  cuerv  foule  of  the  arrcanb  to  eue^ 
ry  th'Jig  that  creepcth  bpon  the  earth, 


'  Ecctus.ji 
11S. 


_  W 


•Eiod.so. 
11.  and  3  1. 

i7.dcut,5. 

I4.hcbr.4 

4" 


t  Htb,  "**- 
tid  to  makf- 


ibbercin  there  is  ^ufe^hauegiucn  euery  f**^? 
greeneberbefo:  meat :  anb  ttruasfo. 

31  anD*  Gob  fatb  euery  thing  that 
hee  bab  mabe  s  anb  bebolb, «  wasbery 
goob.  anb  the  euening  anb  the  mo?* 
mngtoeretberirtbbay. 

CHAP.    IL 

Thefirft  Sabbath.  4  The mancr  ofthe crea- 
tion. 8  TheplantingofthegardenofEden, 
10  and  the  riuer  thereof.  17  The  tree  of 
knowledge  onely  forbidden.  19.  10  The 
naming ot  the  creatures.  11  Tnemakuigof 
woman,  and  lnftiturion  of  Mariage. 

tyutf  the  beauens  anb  the 
S*  earth  lbcre  finilbeb ,  anb 
"m  alitbcboftcoftbem. 

2  *anbontbefcuentb 
_  bay  Gob  enbeb  his  tt)0?be, 
\bbicb  bee  bab  mate :  anbbereflTD  on 
the  feuenth  bay  from  all  bis  ttJOJfee, 
which  be  baDmabc. 

3  ^nb  Gob  blefleb  the  reuenthbay, 
ano  Canctifieb  it:  becauft  that  in  it  he  hab 
reftebfrom  all  his  ttwac,  Xbhirp  Gob 

crcateb  anb  mabe. 

4  CXhefCirethegenerattonsofthe 
heauens,?  ofthe  earthAbhen  they  lbere 
crcateb ;  tn  the  bay  that  the  %  w  &  20 
Gob  mabe  the  earth,anb  the  hcauens, 

5  ^nb  cuery  plant  ofthe  fielb,befo2c 
it  ibasm  the  earth, anb  cucryhcrbeof 
thefielb.befojeitgrcibifoJthelL^DBa? 
Gob  hab  not  caufeb  u  to  rauie  bpon  the 
earth ,  anb  there  was  not  a  man  to  toi 
thegrounb. 

6  ||26utfl)crevbentbpamnlfroin 
the  earth,anbu)atercb  tbeibholcface  of 
thegrounb. 

7  anb  the  H£>3&&>  Gobfomieb 
man^ofthcbnrtofthegrounb^bzea; 
tljeb  into  his  noltmstbctaeath  oflut, 
anb  *  man  became  a  lining  foule. 

s  canbthcH£)B2PGobplanteb 
agarben  eaftvbarbinCben,-  anb  there 
he  put  the  man  lbhom  he  hab  fo  web. 

9  anD  out  of  the  grounb  mabe  the 
%  &>  3R  2D  Gob  to  groib  euery  tree  that 
is  pleafent  to  the  fight,  anb  gooo  fo? 
foob :  the  tree  of  life  alfo  m  thenribftof 
the  garben,  anb  the  tree  of  hnolblcbge 
ofgoobanbeuill. 

io  anbarincrlbcntoutof€bento 
lbatcr  the  garben ,  anD  from  thence  tt 
vbas  parteb ,  anb  became  into  foure 
hcaos. 

h  Xl)c  name  ofthe  firO  is  *^ifon: 
that  is  tt  lbhicli  coinpaflitb  tl)e  lbhole 
lanb  offtauilah,  lbherc  there  is  golD. 
ii  anb 


l  Or.MimJl 
which  waa 
vpfrvm  8te 


tht  pvuiul. 
•l.Cor.ij 

47- 

•  i.Corin. 

15.4J. 


T. uut :4 
'9- 


Manage  inftituted.      Chap.iij.         The  fall  of: 


man. 


Htb.C»i%. 


(1  Or,  EaJl- 
rrard  fe  Af- 

frria. 

\OrtAa\or. 


\Hetr.ea- 

/iW  then 
Ml  talc. 


\Hehr.ij- 
m?  then 
/halt  Jit. 

•Ecclus. 

\Htkr.as 
hefirehm. 


[Or,  the 
matt. 


\tJih.  cal- 
led. 


\Heir.bml- 
drd. 


*i  .Corin. 
11.8. 

*  Matt,  lp 
5.mar.lo. 
7.1. corin. 
6.l6.tphc. 
5.31. 


ia  3tnfttlje0olt)oftfjatiaitD  ^gooo 
Xhtre «  aBoetttum  anb  tljc  £Dmr  Atone. 

n  aub thename  of the  fecottb  rtuer 
•stifthon :  tlje  lame  'sitthatrampalTeth 
tlje  tbljole  larib  of t  €  thtopia. 

14.  anb  tlicnamc  of  tljethtrbriucr 
is  ^fouefcel :  that  is « iDDtcl)  goeth  ||  to* 
tbarb  thetfaft-of  af%ia:aub  tlje  fourth 
rme-ctetfuphwtea. 

15  attt>  file  ?L<£>»S>  dftjfc  tooae  lithe 
man,  anu  put  htm  info  file  garben  of €-- 
DerMo-DjeuTr  it,  anb  to  fteepc  tt. 

\6  anb  the  fL£)B2D(!5ob  commas 
Deu  theman>laytng,<lDf  cuery  tree-oftljc 
gatben  thou  mayeft  *  freely  eate. 

17  Butofthetreeoftljcttnottrtebge 
of goob  anu  tutu ,  thou  lhaltnot  eate  of 
it:  fin  mthc  bay  that  thou  cateft  tljere* 
o^thoufbalt'uirelyufc. 

18  C3nDtl)C?LsdD3a2D<£DD&iiD, 
3ft  is  not  goob  that  the  man  fhoulb  be  a* 
tone :  3  Xbiil  mafte  fjttn  *  an  fielpc T meet 
foitjun. 

19  anboutofpgrounbthefl£>lR3D 
d&obfojmebenerybeartof  tfje  fielb,anb 
cuer  j>  foule  of  tlje  aire,  anb  brought  them 
bnto  || abam ,  to  fee  tbhat  He  tooulb  call 
them :  anu  tbhatfoeuer  ^CDani  caueb 
cucry  liumg  creaturcthatwas  tljcnamc 
thereof. 

10  anb  aoam +  gaue  names?  to  all 
tattell,ant>  to  ttlefoulc  ofthc  aire,anb  to 
eucry  bcaftof  the  fielbc :  but  foj  a&am 
there  vows  not  founb  an  heipe  mccte 
fojljmt. 

21  3tnDtlje1L€>Ba><ftobtaufcba 
fccepefleepetofall  bpon  abam,  anb  bee 
fiept;  anb  be  toofecone  of  bfsribs,anb 
clofeb  Dp  tlje  fleft)  m  fteab  thereof. 

zi  anbtbertbtbbu1JtbelLs£>Ba> 
d5ob  bab  taaen  from  man/  mabc  lice  a 
tboman#  brought  Dec  bnto  tbeman. 

23  ami  abam  fatD,  %\)i&  ie  notb 
boneof  my  bones, anb  flefbofmyfiefl): 
flic  flialue  talieb  tboman,  becaufefbec 
tuas  "taaenoutof  man. 

24  *Xr)etefo?efl)allamanleauel)t0 
father  anbbtf  mother ,  anb  fl)all  clcauc 
tontoljtgtbu%:anbtbeyfl)albeonefle(b. 

25  anb  they  tticre  both  naaeb ,  tl)e 
man  ?  bt$  flnfe,  aub  Vber  e  not  aftjameb. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  TheferpentdecciuethEue.  6  Mansfhame- 
fullfall.  9  God  anaignelh  them.  14  The 
lerpent  is  curfed.  15  The  promifed  Seed. 
16  The  punrfhmentofMankiiKi.  xi  Their 
firft  clothing,  xi  Their  cafting  out  of 
Paradrfe. 


jDlbtljeferpent  tuajjmoje 
ifubtill  then  any  bead  of  the 
fijeib,iDHtcl)tr)eiLj£)ma> 
C5oD  tjab  mabe,  anb  he  faflj 
„buto  the  lboman,  *  j?ea, 
hath  ©ob  faib,  J^e  fljall  not  eat  of  euetv 
tceeofthegarben; 

z  ^nbthettiomanCaibbntothefer 
pent,  usee  map  eate  of  tlje  fcuite  of  the 
tree*ofthegarben: 

j  28ut  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  ttrfjirh 
ijinthemibftof  the  garbnt,  d5ob  Ijarh 
fato,J9c  fhai  not  eate  of  itjueather  (hail  ye 
touch  it,leftj»ebie. 

4  ^nb  the  fiwpent  fa/b  hnto  tt)e 
tboman,  jselhali  not  *  fucdy  we. 

5  5F02  (5ob  boeth  anoib,  that  in  the 
bap  pc  eate  thereof,  then  vour  epeg  ftjat 
bee  opeueb :  anb  pee  (halt  bee  ae  (Bobs, 
hnommggoobanb  emu. 

6  3lnb  ibhen  the  tboman  fatb,that 
tlje  tree  wasgo'obfo^foob,  anb  that  ttwas 
^lealanttotheeve^anbarreetobebe^ 
ficebtomaHeone  ibife,fl)e  toofteof  the 
fnttt  thereof,  *  anb  did  eate ,  anb  gaue  al^ 
fobnto  her  hufbanbtbtthljer ,  anb  hec 
bib  eate. 

7  ^nb  the  em  of  them  both  tbere 
openeb,?  tljep  tutetu  that  rt)ev  were  n* 
fteb ,  anb  they  fca>eb  figge  leauejrtog^ 
tljer,anb  mabc  themfelues  |i  apiou*. 

3  anb  rtjey  Ijearb  the  Doyce  of  the 
%  <D  3R  S?  C5ob,tbalamg  m  the  gar-ben 
inthc  Uooleofthebap:  anb^lbamanb 
hi0  tbife  Ijit)  themfeluejB  fcom  the  p;e^ 
fence  of  the  %  £>M$>  (0ob ,  amongfl 
thetree2ofthcgarben. 

9  3lnb  the  3Lj©3a3D  d5ob  talieb 
buto^bam,anbfaibl)ntohtm,  i©here 
art  thou* 

10  flub  he  fato^  heart  thpboteem 
die  garben :  anb  jjfibas  afraib ,  becaufe 
5wasnaaeb,anb  ^htbmpfclfe. 

11  ^nbhefaib,i©hotolb  thee,  that 
thou  waft  natob^afl  thou  eaten  of  the 
tree,tbhertof  3lcommanocDthee,  that 
tljoufyoulbeir  not  eate* 

iz  ^nb  the  man  latb,  Xhe  tboman 
tbhomthougaueft  to  be  tbitfjmce,  fljee 
gaue  me  of  the  tree,anb  5  tnu  eate. 

13  anbthc!L£D3R2D(15ob&ibt)uto 
tl)e  tboman,  D9hat  is  thi*  that  tlwt  hart 
bone*  anb  tlje  tbomanfaib,Xhe^er 
pentbeguilebmcanbjj  bib  eate. 

14  anb  the  fL^DmJD  ©ob  faibtin 
to  the  S>erpem  ,|BecaufetljouhaQDonc 
thi«,thou  art  cunebaboueail  cartel, anb 
abouceuerpbeait  of  thefieib:  bpontrjy 
belly  ujalt  thottgoe,anbbuftfl)alt  thou 

a  t  eate. 


\Hli.  Tea, 

facanfe,&e. 


*J.Cor 
3.  1. tin 

2.I.). 


\Hcb.oJ,. 
fire. 

*EccIus.i  j 
25.1.  tim. 
2.14. 


U  Or  firings 
tooird  a- 
iftat. 

\H«b.wna. 


The  promifed  feed.     Genefis.      Abel  murthered". 


||  Or,  fmtUa 
tothyhuf- 
tmd. 
"i.Corin. 


\Hrb.Ch*- 


catcall  tbebayes  of  tftplift 

15  anbjujlilputeiimtticbcttbcene 
thee  ana  tl)c  ujoman ,  anb  bcnbecne  tiff 
feed  anb  bet  feeb :  it  0?ai  twite  tby  !)ea&, 
anb  tbott(baltb2utfebisheele. 

16  £lntothen>omanbelaib,3Jn)i(l 
greatly  multiply  tiff  fojotbe  ano  tijv 
conception,  ^n  10201b  thou  (bait  bang 
fozrti  chrtbjen :  anb  tiff  bcficc  ft  ail  be  ||  to 
tby  ijulbanu ,  anb  Dee  (hall  *rale  ouct 
thee. 

17  anb  bnto  abambcraib,25ccaufe 
thou  baftbearfecneb  bnto  tl)c  boyce  of 
thy  unfc ,  anb  baft  eaten  of  the  tree ,  of 
moid)  3  conunatmbeb  thee,  faying, 
Xbou  (bait  not  cate  of  it:  curfeb  « the 
grounbfo2dfffaBe:info;olb  (halt  thou 
eate  of  it  all  the  bayes  of  thy  life. 

18  Xhomts  alio  anb  tbiftles  (ball  it 
*  bjmg  fojth  to  thee :  anb  tf)ou  fljalt  eatc 
tbebcrbcoffbcfielb. 

19  3In  the  ftbeate  of  thy  face  (halt 
thou  eate  bjeab ,  nil  thou  rcturne  bnto 
the  grounb :  fi»  out  of  it  Ibaft  tl)ou  t& 
Bcn,fo?ouflthouart,anb  bnto  butt  (halt 
thou  rcturne 

io  ano  aoam  caileb  fiatbiuasnamt 
t  «ue,Detauft  (be  ibas  the  mother  of  all 
lining, 

21  atttoaoamaUo,anotobisttnfe, 
btbthc  |L£)3RS)  C5ob  mane  coatcsof 
ftnnncg,anb  cloathcb  diem. 

21  canbtbc?L£>&2><t50bfaib, 
26cholb ,  tl)c  man  is  become  asone of 
bs,  to  Know  goob  t  emu.  anb  notb  left 
hccpittfoo2tb  bisbanb,anbtaKeaifo  of 
tlje  tree  of  lifcanb  eatcaub  hue  fb2  cuer : 

2$  Xherefozc  the  %&>&$>  Gob 
fent  him  foo2tb  from  the  garben  of€^ 
ben,toniithcgrounb,fcomibhencchc 
ibastaum. 

24  5>ohcb2oucouttheman:anbhe 
platcb  at  the  eaft  of  the  garben  of  e^ 
ben, Cbctubtms,anb  a  flaming  fttwb, 
ibhich  tnrncb  eucrv  ibay,  to  ueepe  tlje 
tbayoftjie  tree  of  life. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  The  birth,  trade,  and  religion  of  Cain  and  A- 
bcl.  X  The  murder  ot  Abel  c;  ThccutTc 
of  Cain.  17  Enoch,  the  hrfc  citic.  19  La- 
mecli  and  his  two  wiues.  15  The  birth  ol 
Serb,    16  andEnos. 


Sflrv^.flb  abam  ftnetb  Cue  bis 
^^KAto^mftc ,  anb  fbec  conccuub, 


!  anb  bare  Cam  ,anbtaio,3I 
f  hauc  gotten  a  man  from 
rthcUDttD. 
1   ano  the  agauie  bare  his  bjorber 


^bcl^nb^belibafi  a^eepet  offyeep, 
but  Cam  Ibas  a  nllcr  of  the  grounb. 

j  anbUnpjoccffeot'tmieitcameto 
paffc ,  that  Caui  brought  of  the  fruite 
of  the  grounb ,  an  offering  bnto  the 

4  ano  abel,  be  alfo  bzought  of  the 
firttlings  ot  hi*  TflotKe,anO  of  the  fat 
thereof :  anb  tlje  %  £>  &  2D  bao*tebpcrt 
bnto  abel,anb  to  his  offermg. 

5  26ut  bnto  Cainanb  to  his  offrtng 
behabnotrefpect:  anb  Caintbasbery 
ib20tb,  anb  his  countenance  fell. 

6  anbtbc?L£>&3D  (alb bnto  Cam, 
nMff  art  thou  tbzoth  <  anb  lbby  is  tiff 
countenance  fallen* 

7  3Jfthouboerbcfl,  (halt  thou  not 
|be  accepted  anbtftbouDoettnotlbeU, 
Utmcncthatthcbooje :  Znt\\  bnto  thee 
fraiibehis  befirt,  anb  thouftjalt  rulco? 
uerhlm. 

8  anb  Cam  taiaeb  tbitft  ^bel  his 
b2other :  anb  it  tame  to  paCfc  *  snhtn 
they  ibtremthefielb,  that  Catntofebp 
agamft  ^bel  his  bother ,  anb  ftclb  hmi. 

9  C  ^nb  the  fL4D&2>latt>  mtn 
Cain,  ©here  is  abel  tiff  b20ther<  anb 
hcefcub,  3JlmoXbnot:am3Jmyb^ 
thers  Keeper; 

10  anbhclaib,aDhathaftthoubonc; 
the  boyce  of  thv  Mothers f  bloobcryeth 
bnto  me,fromthegtouno. 

11  anb  noib  a«  thou  ntrftb  ftomthe 
earth,  *bhich  hath  openeb  her  mouth  to 
rctciuc  thy  bjotljcrs  bloob  from  tiff 
hanb. 

12  nahen  thou  nllelt  the  grounb,  it 
(ban  not  bcntefo2tb  yeclb  bnto  theebcr 
ftrength :  a  fugitme  anb  a  bagabonb 
(halt  thou  be  in  the  earth. 

1$  anbCainraibbntotheHj©B2>, 
ll^ypuninjment  isgreatrr^enjean 
bearc. 

14  25ei)olb,tl)ouhaftb2iucnmcoiit 
this  bay  from  the  face  of  the  earth ,  anb 
fromtbyfaccfball3J  bchtb,anb33  ft^ail 
be  a  fugttuic,  anb  a  bagabonb  in  the 
earth:  anb  it  (ball  tome  to  paffc,  that 
cucry  one  that  finbetb  me,  (ball  flay  me, 

15  anb  tlje  !L4Dft£>  (aib  bnto  htm, 
Xberefo2e  ibhofocucr  flaycth  Cam, 
bciigeancc  fljalbe  taKcn  on  him  feutn 
folb.  anb  the  1L£>»2>  fetamarftc 
bponCam,  icftanynnbtuglim^lhoulb 
bill  him. 

16  C  anb  €ain  tbent  out  from  the 
pzefenceof  the  !L£Dias>,anbbibcltm 
the  lano  of  #ob,  on  the  <eaft  of  «ben. 

17  atibCamutiett)btstt>tfe,anblbe 
conceit 


\Hcb  Ht 
ill. 

der. 

\Hc!>.<atbe 
end  of  ciner. 


|Or,liaue 
thttxtttlen- 
tie? 
\\0r.fmtit8 

vntotbee, 


«WiCio.5 
mitth.i;. 
3  j.  1.  iohn 
3.1a.  iudc 
II. 


\HtbM»is 


IjOr.SWJ'*/;/- 
e^mttt  is 
7redter,r!xi 
tharit  may 
&eftrrgii/(:i. 


TS 


geneal 

_D 


ogie 


Chap.v.  of  the  Patriarch  s,&c. 


nech. 


\Htb 
r.:ch. 


r.  Le- 


t  Hekwhet- 
Icr. 


lOrJ-xrm/J 

fl.iy  a  m.ur  ir, 

my  yvoHfidt 

&c. 

H  Or,mmj 

hurt. 


t  Heir. 

Sheth. 


\Heir.E- 

\0r,tocrfl 
themlVlucs 
t>y  the  N.ime 
ef  the  Lord. 


concuueb  anD  bare  tetiod) ,  anD  Dec 
bittlDcD  a'Ctty  ,anb  caiicD  the  name  of 
riic  City ,  after  the  name  of  i)is  fonnc, 

<£ttOtl). 

is  3htDbnto  enocl)  itras  boinc  3J< 
ran :  attD3Jrab  begate  fcl3cl)maci,anD 
$)chiuacl  begate  ^etintfacl  ,anb  *$Ci 
djttfacl  begate  teamed). 

19  CSUibnamcchtooftcbnto  Ijtm 
rlbolbtucs :  tl)c  name  of  the  one  was  %■, 
bal),atib  thename  of  the other  Ztiial). 

20  stub  Ttotit)  bare  3Jabal :  l)c  ibas 
the  fatfjer  of  fuel)  as  btbcii  in  tents ,  anb 

of  lucli  as  haue  Ctltttll. 

ii  3tubl)isb20toersnameibas3nt= 
bai :  Dec  ibas  tnc  fartjer  of  all  fuel)  as 
hanDic  tfjc  harpc  anD  o?gan. 

2i  #tiDZiliah,fl)calfobarcXubai- 
Cam,an  t  mftrttctcr  of  cuery  artificer  in 
biaffc  ana  iron:  anD  tlje  fitter  of  Xubai- 
Cauiwas^aanial> 

23  3nD  named)  fayD  Ditto  his 
\btues ,  Stoat)  anD  Ztlial) ,  $earc  my 
boytc ,  ycc  ibiucs  of  fUmcdj  ,hcarUcn 
buto  my  fpcccl) :  foj|i5  Dane  flame  a 
matt  to  my  lbounbmg,anb  a  pons  man 
tomyllhurt. 

14  3Jf  Cain  (hall  bee  attcngcb  fcucn 
folb,  tritely  namedjfeucnty  anb  fenen 
folbc. 

25  C  3(nb  3foam  tmetb  Ijis  ttnfc  a 
game,anb  flicbarc  afottne ,  ?  callebtjis 
name  t  g>ctty  fo}  (5oD/a.d  fhe,rjadj  ap= 
potnteDmcc  anodjccfccD  in  fteab  of  % 
bcl.ibljomCauiflett). 

26  3mDto5>eflj,tor)imalfodicrc 
mas  bomc  a  fonnc ,  anD  he  eallcD  tj& 
name  t  enos :  then  began  men  to  il  tall 
bpon  djciftamcofdjc  3L£>&2>. 

CHAP.    V. 

i  The  s>enea!ogie,  age,  and  death  of  the  Patri 
archs  from  Adam  vnto  Noah.  24  Thegod^ 
ImefTe  and  tranflation  of  Enoch. 


tSfgSl  l?ts  «tljc*booftc  of  thege^ 


fSft  ncranons  of  3Dam :  3w 


|p|  the  bay  tljat  (Sod  treatcD 


*  t.Cliron, 
l.l.&f. 


man, in  the  Uftenes  of  (Sob 
maDcheljtm. 

2  *  fl^alc  anD  female  treatcD  Ijce 
ti)em,atiDbleffebd)em,anD  caileb  their 
name  3bam ,  in  tlje  Day  ttljen  djey 
tbcrccrcatcb. 

3  C  3itib  3tbam  liucD  an  tjnnDzcD 
atiDthtrttc  yccrcs,anb  begate  a  fonnetn 
msoibncltBcneffcaftcrDistmagCjanD 
callcDhisnamc£>cth. 

4  *3tiD  tl)c  Dayes  of  3lbam,aftcr  Ijc 


,hab  begotten  5>etlj,)bcrc  eight  him 
JD:cb  yccres:  anD  he  begate  fonncs  anb 
I  Daughters. 

5  3(nD  all  tDc  bayes  t^at  3tt>am  it 
neb ,  lbcrc  tunc  DutiDjcD  anb  rljirtic 
yccres  :anb  he  DtcD. 

6  3(nD  £>ctly  ItucD  an DutiDicD  anD 
futcyccrcs :  anD  begate  t  €nos. 

7  ^nb  £>ctl)  Imcb ,  after  He  begate 
€nos ,  eight  DunD?eD  anb  fcucn  y  ceres, 
anD  begate  fonncs  anb  Daughters, 

8  3lnD  all  the  Dayes  of  5>ctl) ,  iber e 
nine  huntycb  anb  tibcltte  yeercs,anb  Dc 
bieb. 

9  C^nDCnosluteD  nineticy ceres, 
anD  begate  tCatnan. 

to  ^nb  €nos  Itttcb  after  Ijec  begate 
Cainan ,  eight  hunbjcD  anb  fiftcenc 
y ceres,  anb  begate  fonncs  <t  baughtcr s. 

11  3lnb  all  tl)c  bayes  of  <£nos  iberc 
ninchunDzcDjnucycrcs,-  anD  hcDteD. 

12  c  3lnD  Caman  itucD  feumtie 
y ceres,  anb  begate  ts$)al)aiaicel. 

13  3lnb  Cainan  ItucD  after  Ijc  begate 
flj9ahaialecl ,  eight  huttb2CD  anb  fottrttc 
yccres,  ?  begate  fonncs  anb  battgl)tcrs. 

14  3lnbal  the  bayes  of  Camanibcrc 
ntnehunD.tcD  ettcn  ycresj  anD  DcDicD. 

15  C3lnD  spahalalccl  Uucd  ftrtic  anD 
ftue  yccres,  anD  begat  t^arcb. 

16  3lnD£0ahalalcellutcD  after  he  bc^ 
gatc3Jarcb,  cigDt  fjunmeD  anD  rhirtic 
y  ccres,anD  begate  fonncs  $  Daughters. 

17  ^nb  all  tt)c  Dayes  of  fl9ahalalcct, 
iberc  eight  DunD^eD  nmene  anD  futc 
yccrcs,anDl)cDicD. 

18  C5(nD  3arcD  ItucD  an  DuuDjcd 
firtte  anb  tlbo  yccres,  j  he  begat  €noei). 

19  Stnb'Jarcb  liucb  after  he  begate 
€noel),cig0thunD2cD  yer  cs,anD  begate 
fonncs  anD  Daughters. 

20  3mDalithcDaycsof3JareDibere 
nine  DttuDicD  firtie  anD  tlbo  yccrcs,anD 
DcDicD. 

21  C  3mD  CnocI)  littcD  ftrtic  anb  fmc 
yccres,  anD  begate  fl^cthufeial). 

12  3{nD  €notfj  tbaifecD  ibitlj  <£od, 
after  he  begate  £0cthufclah,  th.:cel)un^ 
djcd  yccres ,  anD  begate  fonncs  anb 
Daughters. 

23  3mb  all  ti)e  bayes  of  €norh,tt)erc 
thjee  hunbjcb  fticneauDftue  yccres. 

24  3lnD*<£nori)  ibalUcD  \bitl)  ©oD: 
anD  he  ibas  not ;  fo?  (Sod  tooitc  him. 

25  3lnD  ^cthufclah  liucD  an  hun* 
Dtcb  eigl)tf  c  anb  fcucn  yccrcs,anb  begat 
named). 

26  3lnD  $)ttrmfclah  ltttcD,after Dee 
begate  tfLamcd^feucnhttn^eDjeighrtc 

^  3  anb 


mji. 


E- 


Hct.Kt- 


OWilclecl. 


\Hct  Jerri. 


\Gr.AU- 

thufttln. 


•Eedus. 

44.16.hcb. 
■1.5. 


\Httr.Li. 
mefh. 


The  promifed  feed.      Genefis.       Abel  murthered. 


\\Or,/~uiirfl 
to  thy  huf- 
tmi. 
■l.Corin. 
14.34- 


\Hcb.c*ufc 

t0t»*J. 


ffU.CU- 

tt*b. 


catcall  tbeaayes  of  tbpufe. 

15  ^nbJJMiiputenmitfcbcttbcent 
theeanb  the  lbomatt ,  anu  bettbeene  ft)p 
feebanbberfeeb  :ttu>lbmiferhy  heab, 
auD  rhou  (halt  bmtfehisbeele. 

i6  ^Llnto  ttjcttJoniatiDefjaiD ,  3Jtbill 
greaflp  mulnplp  tbp  fojoibc  anb  th? 
conception.  Jnuwoib  thou  (bait  tying 
fo?ti)  chilbjen :  anb  tbp  befice  fliaii  be  ||  to 
tbp  ijufbanb,  anb  Dee  (hall  *rule  ouct 
thee. 

17  3uibbnto3tbamhcfaib,23ccaufe 
thou  hafthcatftcneb  bnto  tl)c  bopec  of 
tbp  ibifc ,  anb  haft  eaten  of  the  tree ,  of 
ibbich  3  coiranannbeb  tfjte,  faying, 
Xhou  (halt  not  eate  of  it:  curfeb  >s  the 
grounb  fo :  t  Dp  fane :  in  fo;  oil)  fljalt  t  b  0  u 
eateofit  ailtbebapcs  oftbp  life. 

is  Ithomcs  alfo  anu  tDittlc*  (hall  it 
f  tytngfotfb  to  tDee :  anb  thou  fljalt  eate 
tbebcrbeoftbcfielb. 

19  gin  the  fuicatc  of  tf)p  face  (halt 
thou  eate  tyeab ,  tilltfjou  rcturne  bnto 
the  grounb :  fo;  out  of  it  Xbafl  thou  t& 
ben,  fo;  bull  thou  an  ,anb  bnto  nutt  (bait 
thou  rcturne, 

20  3wb  TOt&m  eailebbteibutefntame 
* €ue,Uecaufc  (be  xbas  the  mother  of  all 
luting. 

ii  ^lnto3Damalfo,anbtobisrotfc, 
bib  the  3L£>ft2D  <5ob  matte  coatcsof 
fumnc&anb  cloathcb  them. 

12  C  3(nb  the  'fLfl>3ast>  C50b  faib, 
25crjolb ,  the  tnan  is  become  aeone of 
bs,toHnoibgoob  jeutll.  ^nbnoiblctt 
becpntfootfb  bishanb,ant)taKeaifo  of 
tlje  tree  of  lifcanb  eateaub  liuc  fo;  cuer : 

23  IDjercfiwc  tt)c  |L£>ft2D  ©ob 
fent  bmi  foojtb  from  trie  garben  of  c> 
Den ,  to  till  tbcgrounb,  f  rom  ibbence be 
ibaataften. 

24.  3>obcb:oucouttbcman:anDbe 
placcb  at  the  c-att  of  tfjc  gavben  of  & 
ben,  Cl)crubims,anb  a  flaming  ftbojb, 
ibrjicl)  tumcb  cucrp  Ibap,  to  Ueepe  the 
map  of  the  tree  of  life. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  The  birth,  trade,  and  religion  of  Cain  and  A- 
bel.  8  The  murder  of  Abe!.  9  ThecufJc 
of  Cain.  17  Enoch  the  firll  citie.  19  La- 
mech  and  his  two  wiues.  15  The  birth  of 
Seth,    16  andEnos. 

:0n  3ibam  ftneib  cue  btf 
*ibifc ,  anb  (bee  conccmeD, 
\mn  bare  Cam  ,anb  faib,  3 
?bauc  gotten  a  man  from 
rtt)CfLOB3T>. 
2  3Uib  (be  agaiue  bare  bis  b;otfjer 


+ ^bcl^nb^bel  lbas  a  deeper  of  0)eep, 
but  Cam  Mm  a  tiller  of  tbegtounb. 

3  %\\Xi T  in p^occflcof rime  itcameto 
pafJc ,  that  Cam  brought  of  ti)c  fruite 
of  the  grounb ,  an  offering  bnto  the 
?L£>ft2D. 

4  3uib  3lbel,  Dc  alfo  brought  of  the 
fir  (flings  ot  bis  tflocftcanb  of  the  fat 
thereof :  anb  the  %  £>  ft  2D  bab*te(pcrt 
bnto  ;3bel,anb  to  bis  offering. 

5  ffiutbntoCata,anbtobiSoffrtng 
bebabnotrefpect:  anb  Cain  tbasberp 
lbiotl),  anb  l)is:  countenance  fell. 

6  anbtljeH^DftSDfalbbntoCam, 
v®\)y  art  tfjou  tb?otl)  <  ^nb  lb!)?  \&  tl)v 
countenance  fallen; 

7  3(ftt)oubocrben,u)alttl)ounot 
|beaccepteb;  anbiftljouboeflnotibell, 
finnelietljattncboo^e :  3mb||bntotrjee 
fbaiibejjifif  befire,  anb  ti)ou  0>alt  rulco* 
uerl)(m. 

8  ^nb  Cam  taifetb  tbitih  ^bel  ty& 
bzotDer :  anb  it  came  to  pafft  *  ibnen 
tl)ci»Vbcremtt)ettclb,tl)atCamrofcbp 
agamlt  ^bel  rjis  b^tjjer,  anb  fletb  hmt 

9  C  3inb  tne  %  ©3R  2>  feib  bnto 
Cain,  severe  is  ^bel  trj?  bwtner  t  ^nb 
Ijcefatb,  3Jfenotbnot:^m3Jmpb?0' 
tjjers  feecper  f 

io  ^nbl)cfaib,nDl)atIjafttI)oubonc; 
tljebovce  oftf)v  b?otirjcrs f  bloob  crpcti) 
bnto  me,fromtl)egrounfi. 

ii  ^nbnoibarttljonnirftbftomtfje 
earti),Ujr)icl)r)at!)opencbl)crmoutl)to 
rccciue  tl)p  btotljcrg  bloob  front  tte 
Ijanb. 

12  lencn  tijou  rulett  tlje  grounb,  tt 
fbau  not  Ijcucefotfl)  rcelb  bnto  ajeeljcr 
frcengtr) :  ^  fugitme  anb  a  bagabonb 
fl)alttI)oubcintfjecartl). 

13  ^nb  Cain  faib  bnto  t!)e!L£>B3>, 
ll^ypuniflmient  isgreatcr^cn  Jean 
beare. 

14  2Sd)olb,tI)oul)aflb2iucnmcont 
trjis  bay  from  tftc  face  of  tlje  carti) ,  anb 
fcomtl)yfaccfball3J  bcl)ib,anb30  fbail 
be  a  tugitiue,  anb  a  bagabonb  in  tlje 
eartfj:  anb  itfbailcometopaflc,  that 
cucry  one  that  finuetl)  me,  (hall  flap  me, 

15  ^nbtfjc  |L£)ia2D  faib  bnto  htm, 
Xherefiw  ttihofocucr  flapcth  Cam, 
bengeance  fljalbe  taRcn  on  him  fenen 
folb.  ^nbtlic  U£>3R2)  fttamarfec 
bponCmn,  lcftaupfinbtnghim,fhouID 
bill  him. 

16  C  3lnb  Cain  roent  out  from  the 
pjefence  of  the  %  1D  ft  2D,  ant)  bibelt  in 
the  lanb  of  jfJoo,  on  the  call  of  «betu 

17  3lnbCamlmcibhistt>ifcanbfl)e 

conceit 


ktl. 

t  «•£.«/<■.- 

der. 

\Htb.iathe 
mdof  daleK 


\Heb.fhceyt 

crfeatti. 

"Hcb.ii.4 


|Or,haue 
thftxtellen- 
ae! 
\\Or,fmtitS 

■wuotbet, 


miith.i; 

35. 1,  iohir 
j.  1 ».  iudc 


\HtbM*ij 


\  Or,  wji>::- 
quittc  is 

qrtdtcrjhjt 

ibittitrntf 

befcrgtun. 


iTh< 


gencaloj 


rie 


CI 


aap.v.  o 


fthcP 


atnarcns 


hs,&c. 


noch. 


\Hrbr.  Lt- 
rr,:ch. 


1  Htb.vhct- 
ttr. 


t  J  would 
fl.iy  A  m.vi  tr, 
my  wound, 
&c 

\  Or,inmj 
hurt. 


t  Hcbr. 
Shtlh, 


\Hcbr.E- 
nojh. 

\Or,xeciU 
thenifclucs 
by  the  Name 


*  i.Chion. 
.1. 


•Wifd.1. 
»3« 


*  t.Chron, 
I.i.Stc. 


romtiueb  anb  bare  tettoeD ,  ana  Dec 
btulbcb  a"Ctty,anb  calico  tDc  name  of 
the  City,  after  tljc  name  of  $)iS  fonnc, 
enoclj. 

is  ^nbbnto  enocl)  tf)as  Dome  3?; 
ran :  anb3Jrab  begate  iDcDiuacl,  anb 
^cptuacl  begate  #etlwfacl,miD^c* 
rijufacl  begate  t  ULamccD. 

19  C3utb3LamceDtooKct>nto  ijim 
nno  Unties  *.  tlje  name  oftlK  one  was  ^ 
oal),anb  tDc  name  of  tDc  other  zuialj. 

20  3inb  ^toarj  bare  35abal :  Dc  ibas 
tlje  farfjer  of  fuel)  as  bibcil  ut  tents ,  anb 

of  fuch  as  haue  cattClI. 

ii  3fnbl)tsb20tl)ersname\nas5us 
bal :  Dee  ibas  tlje  fatDcr  of  all  fuel)  as 
banole  tlje  Darp'c  aub  o?gan. 

2i  3lttbZUiaf),fl)eaifobarcXubal- 
Cam,an  t  mftructcr  of  cucry  artificer  in 
fcaffc  anb  iron:  anb  tlje  fitter  of  Xubai- 
€amwasj[3aamal). 

2}  3inb  named)  favb  bnto  Dis 
wines ,  3tbaD  anb  ZtliaD ,  ^earc  nip 
boyce ,  yee  ibiucs  of  fLamecl)  ,l)carUcn 
Intto  my  fpcccl) :  fo2|i31  ftauc  flame  a 
man  to  my  ibounbutg,anb  a  yongman 
tomyllDurt. 

24  3Jf  Cain  fljall  bee  auengebfeucn 
folb,trucly  ?LamccDfcucnty  anb  feucn 
folbc. 

25  C  3(nb  2(bam  rnicvb  l)is  tbife  a^ 
gaine,anb  fljebarc  afonne,?  callebljis 
name  t  &etl):  $oi  C5ob  ,faid  fhe,DatD  ap 
pomtebmec  another  fceb  in  ftcab  of  & 
bcl,)Pl)omCamflein. 

26  3lnb  to  £>ctD ,  to  Dim  alfo  tfjerc 
was  borne  a  fonnc ,  anb  Dc  callcb  Dis 
name  t  enos :  tljen  began  men  to  II  call 
bpon  tDc  iRame  of  tlje  %  «©  &  2D. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  The  genealogie,  age,  and  death  of  the  Patri- 
archs from  Adam  vnto  Noah.  24  Thegod- 
iinefle  and  tranflation  of  Enoch. 

s-s*sj§^f  S?ts  h  tDe*booEC  of  tDc  ge* 
pSfl!  ncranons  of  ^bam :  3U 
%$m  tlje  bay  tljat  <5ob  treatcb 
wl  man,mtl)eliftcnesof(5ob 
mabcDcIjim. 
2  *  sa3alc  anb  female  creatcb  Dee 
tDem,anbblcfrcbtl)em,anb  cailcbtDeir 
name  3bam ,  ui  tlje  bay  iDljen  tDey 
tb ere  treatcb. 

j    C  3lnb  3bam  liucb  an  Dunbzeb 

anbtDirttc  yccrcs,anb  begate  a  fonnetn 

tjis  orbue  imcnefTcaftcr  ijts  imagcj  anb 

tallebDtsnamcSctD. 

4  *3r.b  tlje  bayes  of  3lbam,aftcr  Ijc 


Dab  begotten  £>etD,lbcrc  cigDt  Dim 
bzeby  ceres:  anb  De  begate  fonnes  anb 
oaugDtcrs. 

5  3(nb  all  ti)e  bayes  tfjat  3bam  ii 
ucb ,  iberc  tunc  Dutibicb  aub  rljmrne 
yccrcs:anbDcbicb. 

6  3utb  £>ctl)  lutcb  an IjuntHcb  anb 
fiucyecres :  anb  begate  t  enos. 

7  3lttb  £>ctl)  liucb ,  after  Dc  begate 
€nos ,  cigDt  Duhbicb  aub  feucn  y ceres, 
anb  begate  fonnes  anb  baugbtcrs, 

8  3Cnb  all  tDc  bayes  of  :=>ctD ,  lucre 
nine  Duubjcb  anb  nbcltte  ycercs,anb  Dc 
Dieb. 

9  C^nbCnositucbuineticyccrcs, 
anb  begate  tCainan. 

10  3lnb  enos  liucb  after  Dec  begate 
Caiuan ,  cigDt  Dunbjcb  aub  fiftcenc 
y  ceres,  anb  begate  fonnes  *  baugDtcrs. 

11  3lnb  all  tDc  bayes  of  €nos  voctt 
nincDunbzcbjfiucycrcs,-  anb  Dcbteb. 

12  C  Stub  Catnan  Itucb  fcuctttic 
yccres,  anb  begate  t£0aDaiaieel. 

ij  3lnb  Catnan  liucb  after  Dc  begate 
^iBaDaialecl ,  cigDt  Dunbieb  anb  fottrtic 
yccres,  fj  begate  fonnes  anb  baugDtcrs. 

14  Smbaltljc  bayes  of  CamanVbcrc 
ntncDunb«icb  fctcnycrcs;  anb  Dc  bieb. 

15  ezm  ^aDalalcci  liucb  fijrnc  anb 
fiuc  yccres,  anb  begat  1 3(areb. 

16  3utbi30aDalaicel!tucbaftcrDcbc; 
gate  3farcb,  cigDt  Dunb?cb  anb  tDirttc 
yccres,anb  begate  fonnes  «  baugDtcrs. 

17  3nb  all  tlic  bayes  of  Q9aDalalcct, 
iticrc  cigDt  Duhtyeb  nmene  anb  fiuc 
yccrcs,attbj)c  bieb. 

18  C3mb  3Jareb  liucb  an  Dunbjcb 
firtic  anb  nno  yccres,  $  Dc  begat  ettocD. 

19  Slnb'lJarcb  liucb  after  Dc  begate 
enocD,ctgDtDunbjcb  ycr  cs,anb  begate 
fonnes  anb  baugDtcrs. 

20  3inb all tljcbaycs  of 3fareb tbcre 
nine  Dunb^cb  firtic  anb  two  yccrcs,anb 
Dcbicb. 

21  C3mb  CnotD  liucb  firtic  anb  fiuc 
yccres,  anb  begate  fl^ctDufcial). 

22  3lnb  €nocD  tbalHcb  ttittD  d5ob, 
after  De  begate  upctDufclaD,  tDjceijmv- 
b?cb  yccres ,  anb  begate  fonnes  anb 
baugDtcrs. 

2  j  3lnb  all  tDc  bayes  of  Cnod),tberc 
tl)icc  Dunbjcb  firtic  aub  fitte  yccres. 

24  3lnb*€norDibalrtcb  \Pitl)  ©ob: 
anbDctbasnot;fo2(5obtooUelKm. 

25  ^nb  ^ctlntfelal)  liucb  an  Dutv 
bieb  eigl)ric  anb  feucn  yccrcs,anb  begat 
3LainccD. 

26  3lnb  JJBctDufclaD  liucb,  after  Dec 
begate  t?lamccD,feucnDunb2eb,C!gDnc 

31  s  aub 


\  H,b£- 
mjb. 


Hii.Ke 


dUalcleel. 


\Hch,lcrti. 


I  Cr.  Ma. 

thufujA. 


*Ecc!us. 

44.16.hcb. 

U.S. 


}Hcb.  Li- 

mefh. 


Mcthufelah. 


Gcnefis. 


Noahs  Arke. 


\gr.Noe. 


I  Or ,  tht 
wrote  imapi 
ntttmn.  The 
H,hr  ■*..*(,,■ 

mfitthutt  Car- 
ly  tit*  MMffrM- 

tnr^l.  ,t    ,. 

ll,t  purpoft* 
tnddff.rtu 

•Chjp.  8. 
it.mai.l  $. 
19. 

\Hrfr.cue- 

rjdjj. 


attD  two  yccccs,  attD  begate  fotiucs  attD 
Daughters. 

z7  3tnD  ailthcDayesof  fi£cthuuiah 
were  time  hutiDieD ,  ftjcttc  anD  tune 
yccrcs,attDheDicD. 

28  C3uiD!Lamcth  ItucD  an  hint* 
dzcd  cighttc  anD  two  yccrcs :  anD  be= 
gatcafounc. 

i9  2tib  he  tailco  his  name  ||  /Roah, 

favtttg ;  XhtS  fame  0)311  COtltfozt  DS,C0tl^ 

ecrnmg  our  WooiHc  anD  toylc  of  our 
hanDs,bccaurcofthcgrounD,Whichthc 
fL£>£S>hathcurfcD. 

30  SuiDUaincch  UttcD, after  ijeebe 
gate  iftoah  ,  fine  huttDieD  ntnettc  anD 
fine  yccrcs ,  anD  begate  founts  anD 
Daughters. 

31  3(nD  all  the  Dayes  of  fUmcth 
were  fettett  hutiDjcD  feuentte  anD  fcucu 
pccrcs,attDi)eDieD. 

32.  3lnD  iBoah  was  futc  huttDzcD 
yccrcs  olDc:  anD  jftoah  begate  £>cnt, 
^ani,anD3iaphctf). 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  The  \\  ickednefle  of  the  world,\vhich  prouo- 
ked  Gods  wrath ,  and  caufed  the  Flood.  8 
Noah  findeth  grace.  13  Theorder,forme, 
and  end  of  the  Avke. 

0n  it  tame  to  paffe,  when 
men  began  to  mttinply  on 
thcfatcofthceartl),anD 
Daughters  were  borne  ton* 
„  to  them: 
i  Xhat  tlic  fonncs  of  <5oD  faw  the 
Daughters  of  mctt,that they  wercfaire, 
anD  they  toon  them  Wutcs,of  all  which 
they  thofc. 

j  3nDthc?L£>ft£>fatD,S$)y5>pt; 
rttfhail  not  aiwaycsftrutc  With  man, 
fo?  that  hec  aifo  is  fled) :  vet  his  Dayes 
fljaibc  an  httttDJCD  atiDtWcttty  yccrcs. 

4  ICherc  Were  otattts  m  the  earth 
m  thofe  Dates:  anD  aifo  after  that,Wheu 
the  fonncs  of  <5od  tame  in  bnto  the 
Daughters  of  tnen ,  $  they  bare  children 
to  thciit;  the  fame  became  nughttc  men, 
Which  « ere  of  olD,  men  of  rcnowittc. 

5  C  3lnD  ©od  faw,that  the  WttucD< 
ties  of  man  was  great  in  the  carth,attD 
||  that  cuery  imagination  of  the  thoughts 
of  his  *  heart  was  onely  null  t  mate 
nuaiiy. 

6  3lnD  it  repenteD  the  %  <©&2D 
that  he  hao  maDc  matt  on  the  cacth,atiD 
tt  grteucD  hun  at  his  heart. 

7  3luD  the  %  3D  £  2)  faiD ,  3  Will 
Dcftroy  man,  whom  3J  Ijauc  crcatcD, 


from  the  face  of  the  earth :  t  both  man 
attDbcaft,attD  the  creeping  thing, anD 
the  foulcs  of  the  aire:  fo?  it  rcpentcth  me 
tltat  31  Dane  tnaDc  them. 

8  25ut  iftoao  fouttD  grace  m  the 
eyes  of  the  fLsDia®. 

9  C  IChcfc  are  ttjc  generations  of 
iI5oah :  *  43oah  MMffii  a  tuft  man,  and 
||  perfect  mhts  generations,  and  /l3oah 
waiitcDWttheoD. 

10  3inDji5oah  begate thjee fonncs: 
£>em,  i?am,anD  3Japhcth. 

11  Xhc  earth  aifo  was  tomipt  be- 
fee  <5oD  j  anD  the  earth  was  fillcD  with 
Piolcucc. 

11  3lnD(5oDlooUcDDpon  the  earth, 
anD  bcholD,itwaseo2rupt:fo?  all  flefh 
haD  cozruptcD  his  way  topon  the  earth. 

13  3inD  ©oDfaiD  Ditto  jftoah ,  %\)t 
cud  of  all  flefl)  is  come  before  nice;  fot 
the  earth  is  fillets  with  Diolcncc  through 
them ;  anDbcholD,3J  will  Dcftr op  them 

With  the  earth. 

14  C  flPasc  thee  an  Tithe  of  <5o- 
Pher-wooD :  t  rootnes  (halt  thou  mane 
m  the  ar  hc,anD  fl)ait  pitch  tt  Within  anD 
WithoutWtth  pttclj. 

15  3inD  this  is  the  f'»fhion,whtch  thou 
(halt  malic  it  of :  the  length  of  the  arne 
fhaibethJcchtuiDjcD  cubits,  the  bteaDth 
of  ttfiftp  tubits,attD  the  height  of  it  thir- 
tie  cubits. 

16  31  Winoow  a)ait  thou  maue  to 
thcarbc  ,attD  in  a  cubtte  fljalt  thou  ft; 
tuflnt  about ;  anD  the  Do o:c  of  the  ante 
ftiait  thou  Jet  in  the  ftDc  tl)crcof:  naith 
lower,  ftconD ,  anD  thirD  ftoncs  ftjatt 
thou  matte  ft. 

17  ^itDbcholD,3?,cuen3lDocb2ing 
a  flooD  ofwatcrs  Dpon  the  earth ,  to  De 
ftrovallflcfh ,  Wherein  tsthebJcathof 
ufc  from  biiDct  hcatten,  and  cuerv  tljutg 
that  is  in  the  earth  ftjail  Die. 

is  25ut  with  thee  wtlJJ  cftablift)  my 
Couenant :  anD  thou  ffjalt  tome  into 
thc^r&cthou.anDthyfonncs^tiDthy 
Wtfe.anD  thy  fottnes  Wtucs  With  thee. 

19  SutDof  euery  littutg  thing  of  all 
flcft),  two  of  cuery  fon  (halt  thou bztttg 
utto  thc3lrftc,to  iteepe  them  aitue  with 
thee :  they  (hall  be  male  attD  female. 

io  £>ffowies  after  their  hutDe,  anD 
of  cattel  after  their  UittDc :  of  cuery  crce 
ping  thing  of  the  card)  after  his  mttDe, 
two  of  cuery  fort  fhailcomc  Ditto  thec, 
tofccepcrhcmaituc. 

ii  3utD  taHc  thou  Dnto  thee  of  all 
fooD  that  is  eaten,  attD  rtiou  fhait  ga^ 
thec "  to  theci  attD  tt  fhau  be  fo?  fooo, 

fo 


f  Hebr.fiom 
m.w  who 

hall, 


"Ecclus.44 
17-i.pet. 

■  \Or,vf- 
nght. 


the  c-v;b, 
\Htb.ntm. 


Noah  entreth         Chap.vij.viij.         into  the  Arkc. 


•Hcb.n. 

7- 


•j.Pn.1.5. 


]  Hebr.fenen 
fetten. 


\Hebr 
out. 


Hot 


,Qr,onll>e 
fattnth  d*J. 


Or.jW- 


fb2tljee,anbfo:tbem. 

11  *  %bw  bib  iftoah ,  atcojbing  to 
all  that  000  commanDfl)  htm,fo  did  he, 

CHAP.    VIL 

1  Noah, with  his  familie,and the liuing crea- 
tures, enter  into  the  Arke.  17  Thebegin- 
ning,increafe,  and  continuance  of  the  Flood. 

/B&tl)c*3Li©m3>fatUc 
&W$  but0  iBoal) ,  Conic  tljou 
§£to&  anb  all  thy  honfc  into  the 
*  Sttfcc :  fo?  thee  hauc  3 
¥f§tt&  fecne  righteous  before  me, 
in  this  generation. 

z  £>f  cucry  tlcane  bcatt  thou  0>alt 
rase  to  thee  tby  feuens,  the  male  anb 
i)ts  female  j  anbofbeaftcstbatarcnot 
eleancby  tlbo,  tljemaic  anb  bis  female. 
3  £>f  foibles  alfo  of  ttjc  aire ,  by 
feuens,  themalc  $  tbe  female  ■,  to  secpe 
feeb alme  bpontlje  fate  of  ailtbc  earth. 
4.  jf o?  yet  feuen  bayes ,  anb  3  *bill 
canfe  it  to  rame  bpon  tbe  east!) ,  fo?tte 
bayes,  anb  forty  nights :  anb  enery  iv 
uing  fubttance  that  3  hauc  mabc  ,ibtll 
3 1  Dcftroy ,  fi'6  off  the  face  of  tlje  cacti). 

5  3inb  jBoab  bib  acto?bmg  bnto  all 
thattbe  %£>  &£>  eommanbcbbtm. 

6  Tim  iftoab  lbas  fijee  hunb:cb 
y ceres  olb ,  ibben  the  floob  of  ibatcrs 
lbas  bpon  the  cacth. 

7  C  2Cnb  jftoab  ibent  in ,  anb  I)iS 
fonncs,anb  l)is  ibifc ,  ano  bis  fonncs 
Unites  ibttb  htm,  into  tlje  3icUc,  becaufe 
offbcibatcrsofthcifloob. 

8  ^Df  tlcane  beads ,  $  of  beafts  tfiat 
ace  not  clcanc ,  $  of  foibles,  anb  of  euc- 
ry  thing  that  ccecpctl)  bpon  the  cacti), 

9  Xljcrc  Vbent  m  tlbo  ant)  nbo  bii^ 
to  j3oaIj  into  the  ^rac,  tljc  male  »tl)c 
fcinalcas  ©ob  l)ab  commanbeb  Jfloalj. 

10  Znn  it  came  to  paffc  I  after  fenen 
bayes ,  that  the  ibatcrs  of  the  irloob 
lbcrc  bpontlje  earth. 

11  €  3Jn  the  Ore  hunbjcbtb  ycerc  of 
i3oaDsufe,in  tbefeconb  monctt),tl)cfe* 
uentecntl)  bap  of  tlie  monctl) ,  tl)c  fame 
bay,\bcre  al  the  fountaines  of  the  great 
beepe  b:oKcu  bp,anb  tlje  ||  ibmbolbes  of 
Ijcancnibcccopencb. 

ii  3nb  tDc  rame  lbas  bpon  the 
cacti) ,  foztic  ba^cs.anb  fojnc  nights. 

1  j  3Jntl)efclfc  fame  bay  eutrebjfto* 
at), anb  £>ent,  anb  l^am,  anbgjapfieri), 
ti)c  fonncs  ofi^oai) ,  anb  /Soabsibifc, 
anb  the  tb*ec  lbiucs  of  l)is  fonncs  lbitb 
thcm,into  tbe  Girlie, 

i+  £!jcy,  anb  entry  bcaft  after his 


Hinbe,  |  all  the  cattell  after  their  nmbe : 
anbeucry  creeping  thing  that  cceepetfj 
bpon  the  earth  after  Ijis  Binbe,anb  eut= 
ry  fonic  after  tjis  mnbe,euery  birbe  of  c* 
ucrytfotf. 

15  3tab  they  tbent  in  bnto  ji3oah  \\v 
to  tlje^rUe ,  tlbo  anb  tlbo  ofailflclb, 
ibljcr  em  is  the  tycatfj  of  life. 

i6  ^nb  tljcy  that  tticnt  in ,  lbcnt  in 
male  anb  female  of  all  fleu),as  ©ob  hao 
commaunbcbljun :  anbti)c1L£)B2> 
fl)ittl)tmin. 

17  ^nb  tfle  ifloob  rbas  fo?tle  bayes 
bpon  the  eartb,anbtl)cibatersincrea^ 
feb ,  anb  bare  bp  tljc  3trUc,  anb  it  lbas 
liftbpabouett)eeartl> 

is  3lnb  tDc  ibatcrs  pjeuaileb ,  anb 
iberc  encrcafeb  greatly  bpon  tljc  cactb: 
anb  tljc  ^rKe  ibent  bpon  the  face  of  tlje 
ibatcrs. 

19  3tnb  tljc  ibaters  pzeuaileb  cjcccc* 
bingly  bpon  tl)c  cacti),  anb  all  tbe  biglj 
Dtls,  tljat  were  bnber  tlje  ibljolc  fjeauen, 
ibcrccottcrcb. 

zo  iFiftcenembitsbpibarb, bib tfjc 
ibatcrs  p?enailCi  anb  tljemountaincs 
Ibccctoucrcb. 

2 1  *  anb  all  flcfl)  dicd  ,  tl)at  mooucb 
I  bpon  tbe  cartl) ,  both  of  foible ,  %  of  tai> 
tell,  anb  ofbcaft,anb  of  enery  creeping 
tljmg  tljat  creepctlj  bpon  tljc  eartlj, 
anb  enery  man. 

iz  3W  in  ibljofc  nofctljjils  was  the 
t  bzcatl)  of  life ,  of  all  that  lbas  in  the 
b?ylanb,bicb. 

13  3lnD  cuery  lining  fubftance  lbas 
beftcoyeb,  iblncb  lbas  bpon  tlje  face  of 
tl)e  gcounb, both  man  anbtattcll,anb 
the  creeping  things,anbthefoiile  of  tljc 
Ijcancn ;  anbtljcy  ibcccbcftroycbfrom 
the  earth:  anb*iI5oaIjonclyrcmaineb 
aiuic ,  anb  they  tljat  were  mtlj  Ijim  in 
thc3lrKC. 

14  ^nbthcibaterspmiailebbpon 
tljc  carth,an  hnnbicb  anb  fifty  bayes. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  The  waters  affwage.  4  The  Arke  refteth  on 
Ararat.  7  The  rauen  and  the  done.  15  Noah, 
being  commanded,  18  goeth  forth  of  the 
Arke.  10  He  buildethan  Altar, and  ofie- 
rethfacrifice,  21  which  God  acccpteth, and 
promifeth  to  cutfe  the  eardi  no  more. 

jftD  <5ob  remembzeb  il5o- 
ah,anb  etiecy  liuing  thing> 
anb  all  the  cattell  that  was 

liiitlj  him  in  tljc  3rl$e : 

anb  (Sob  mabe  a  ibmbc 

to 


\Heb.wing. 


Wil'd.lo. 


\Hdr.the 
brentb  of  tbe 
Ipirit  of  life. 


VVifd.  IO. 
4.J.p«.z.5 


The  Arke  refteth.      Genefis.        Noah  facrificeth. 


tHttr.la 

■toing  and 


t  WW*,  were 
ingoing  and 
dtcreafmg. 


\Hebr.\xi 
toingfoorth) 
and  ret  ser- 
ving. 


\Hehr.c*u- 
fed  her  to 
come. 


to  paffe  oucr  tDe  cartD ,  anb  tDclbatcrs 
affuiagcb. 

z  %ty  fountaines  alfo  o f  tlje  bccpe, 
anb  tlje  ibinboibes  of  Dcauen  ibere 
fioppro ,  anD  rljc  rame  from  Jjcaucn 
lbasreftraincb. 

3  3nb  tDe  ibatcrs  rcturncb  from 
offtljc  cartDJcontmuaily:  anb  after  the 
cnb  of  tDe  Dunbjcb  am>  fiftic  bayes ,  tlje 
ibatcrs  lbcrcabatcb. 

4  Znn  tlje  Strftc  rcttcb  in  tlje  fe< 
ticntD  monctD,on  tDcfcucntccnfD  Dap 
oftDemonctD.bpontDcmountatncsof 
Ararat 

5  3nbtDcibatcrstbccrcafebconte 
nuallybntill  tDctcntDmonctD:  in  tDe 
tent!)  monctD,on  tlje  firftday  of  tDemo* 
nctD,ibmtDctopsoftDemouutautes 
fecne. 

6  OnbiteamctopaflcattDcenbof 
fojty  bay  cs,tDat  jftoal)  openeb  tlje  ibuv 
boib  of  tlje  Suite  lbDtclj  \)t  ljab  mabc. 

7  3nDftefmtfo?tl)a3&auen,lM)it!) 
rucnt  foo^tt)  t  to  ann  fto ,  bntiu  tlje  tta- 
tcrs  iber  c  bneb  bp  front  offtfjc  cart!). 

8  2HGo  Dee  fent  footfD  abouefcom 
Slim ,  to  fee  if  tDe  ibatcrs  vberc  abatcb 
from  off  tlje  fate  of  tlje  gcounb. 

9  26uttl)cboucfounbnorcftfo?tlje 
folc  of  tier  footc ,  anb  tlje  rcturncb  bnto 
Dim  into  t!)c  3irKC :  foj  tf)c  Ibatcrs  were 
on  the  fate  of  tDe  itoDoIc  cartD.  XDcn  tje 
put  footfD  tjis  Danb,  anb  toone  Der,anb 
t  puneb  Ijcr  ui  bnto  Dun,  into  tDe  ^rftc. 

io  3inb  Dee  ftaycb  vet  otDee  reucn 
bayes;  anb  agatnc  Dee  fent  footflj  tt>c 
boueoutoftDcStrue. 

ii  3mb  tlje  bone  tame  in  to  rjtm  in 
tDe  cucning ,  anb  loc  ,m  her  mourn  wis 
an  £>uuc  leafe  plutfet  off :  £>o  JBoaD 
tmflb  tDat  tDe  ibatcrs  tberc  abateb 
from  off  tDe  eartD. 

ii  3inb  Dec  ftaycb  pet  otDcr  fcucn 
baycs.anb  fent  fottlj  tDe  bouctbDicD  tc= 
turnebnot  againe  bnto  Dint  an?  mow. 

13  C3nb  it  tame  to  paffe  in  tDe  fire 
DumycbtD  anb  oneyccrc,mtDcfirftmo- 
n«h,  tDe  ftrft  Aiy  of  tlje  monctj) ,  tDe 
ibatcrs  lbcre  bjycb  bp  from  oft  tlje 
cartD:  anb  jRoat)  remooucb  tljecouc' 
ring  of  tDe  2rac ,  anb  looueb ,  anb  be* 
Dolb,tlje  fate  of  tlje  grottnb  was  bjie. 

14  3nb tn tlje fctonb monctlj,on tDe 
fcucnanb  tlbentictlj  bay  of  tDe  monctlj , 
lbastDc  cartD  bneb. 

15  C  3mb  <sob  fpauc  bnto  iRoali, 
faying, 

i6  (Sot  fpotfD  of  flic  Zv%t ,  tljou, 
anb  tDy  ibifc,anb  tDyfonnes,anbtDy 


fonnestbtucsibitDtDee: 

17  2S?tng  footfD  ibitD  tDcc  cucry  \i- 
uingtbtng  tljat  istt)UDtjjcc,ofallflcaj, 
both  offolblc,anbof  tattcll,anb  of  eucry 
creeping  tljing  tDat  crecpetDbpon  tDe 
cartD ,  tDat  tDey  may  tyeeb  abunbantly 
m  tDe  cartD, anb  bcfmtfull,anbmulte 
ply  bpon  tlje  cartD. 

18  ^nbii5oaDtbcntfoo?tD,anbDis 
fonncs,  anb  fjts  ttnfc ,  anb  Dts  fonnes 
lbiuesibitDDitti: 

19  Cucrybeaft.cncrycrecpingtDing, 
anb  cuery  foible,  and  tbDatfoeuer  crce= 
petDbpontDecartD,aftcrtDcir  t  nmbs, 
Jbcntfoo?tDontoftDc3IrHe. 

20  c  %nn  jHoaD  butibcb  an  ^itar 
bnto  tDe  %  <£>  B  2D,anb  toone  of  cucry 
cleane  beaft ,  anb  of  cucry  tlcauc  foible, 
anb  offrcb  burnt  offnngs  on  tljc^ltar. 

xi  3lnb  tlje  %  1D  3R  2D  fmclleb  a 
tfibcctcfauour,anbtDc  1L£>B2Dfatb 
inDisDwrt,3llbillnotagaineturfetlje 
grounbanymo2cfo?mansfaUc;foitDc 
imagination  of  mans  Dcart  >s  eutl  from 
DisyoutD :  neitDeribill 3  againe  finite 
anymo?ccucrytDingluung,as3  ijauc 
bone. 

ii  ti©DilctDecartDrcmainetD,fccb- 
ttmc  anb  Darueft,  anb  tolb,  anb  Deat, 
anb  Summer ,  anb  namtcr ,  anb  bay 
anbmgDt,fljallnottcafc. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  God  bleiTeth  Noah.  4  Blood  and  murder 
are  forbidden.  9  GodsCouenant  13  ilg- 
nifled  by  tire  Rainebow.  18  Noah  reple- 
nifheth  the  world,  io  planteth  a  Vineyard, 
11  is  drunken ,  and  mocked  of  his  fonne : 
15  Curfcth  Canaan,  16  BleiTeth  Sheni, 
17  prayerhforlaphet,  18  anddieth. 

0n  <5ob  blcffeb  i!5oalj, 
anb  Dig  fanncs ,  anb  faib 
bntotDcm,*26ccfcuttfull 
anb  multiply  ,  anb  rcplc^ 
.niftjtDeeartD. 
z  ^nbtDe  fcarc  of  you  ,$  tDebjeab 
of  you  njau  be  bpon  cuery  beaft  of  tlje 
cartD,anb  bpon  eucry  foible  of  tlje  aire, 
bpon  all  tljat  moouctD  vpon  tDe  cartlj, 
anb  bpon  all  tDe  Bftics  of  tlje  Tea;  mto 
your  Danb  arc  tl;cy  belmcreb. 

3  eucry  moumg  tljing  tDat  liuctlj, 
ftjaibc  meat  fo;  you ,  cucn  as  tljc*gr  eene 
Dcrbc  Dane  31  gmen  y  ou  all  tlimgs. 

4  *2&utflcnjibitDtDclifetDercof, 
which. s  tDe  btoob  tDcrcof,fljallyouuot 
cate. 

5  ^nb  furely  your  bloob  of  your 
. luics 


mtltes. 


uoMrcfrcH, 


•  Chap.*. 
5-matt.ij, 


1  Htb.  As  jet 
aM  the  dxjel 
cftkt  tMrlh. 


:hap.I. 
23.and8. 
'7- 


«ChaP.  1. 

*Lcuit.i7. 
14. 


The  Rainbow.  Chap.x.    Noahs  generations. 


•  Matt.  \6, 
5 1.  reucl, 
13.10. 
'  Chip.  1. 
>7- 


*Efa.j4-?. 


*Ecc!us.4j. 
u,u. 


\\H<b.Cb<- 


liues  lbtll_0  require :  attbebanb  of  cue= 
ry  bcaft  null  3  require  it,  $  at  the  banb 
of  man,  at  the  banb  of  cuery  mans  b?o^ 
tber  Xbill  3  require  the  hfe  of  man* 

6  *iffi)o  fo  mcbbctb  mans  bloob,by 
man  (bail  bis  Wood  be  (beb  j  *  fo?  m  the 
image  of  d5ob  mabc  be  man. 

7  anbyou,beyefntttfull,anbmufc 
ttply ,  b?ing  foojtb  abounbantly  in  the 
earth,  anb  multiply  therein. 

8  canbcsobfpaRcbnto4]2oab,anb 
to!)i£fonncsu)irl)i)im,tavmgi 

9  anb  3  ,be  bolb,_0  cttabltlb  my  to* 
ucnant  Hurt)  you ,  anb  Ibttb  your  feebe 
after  you: 

10  anb  tbttt)  cuery  liuing  trcature 
that  is  lbitb  you ,  of  the  foible,  of  the  cat* 
tell,  anb  of  eucry  bcaft  of  the  cart!)  lbitb 
you  ,from  all  that  goe  out  of  tbcarRc, 
to  cuery  beaft  of  the  earth. 

11  anb  *3  ttiil  ellabun)  my  coucnant 
ttrttfi  you,  neither  fbal  all  fletti  be  cut  off 
anymore,  byfbeibatctsofafloob,neiis 
t\K t  (hail  there  any  moic  be  a  floob  to 
beftcoytheearth. 

ii  anbd&obfaib,  XbiSistbetoRcn 
of  the  Coucnant  ibhtcb  3  mauc  be* 
nbeeue  mec  anb  you,  anb  cuery  liuing 
creature  tbattsibithyottfojperpctttall 
generations. 

i?  jJJbocfctmybotbtnfbccloub,anb 
it  (hall  be  fbisatoRcn  of  a  couniaut.bc 
tibecnemeanbthc  earth. 

14  *anbit{bailtometopalTc,tbbcn 
3  bnnga  cloub  oucc  the  eartb,tbattbc 
boiblbailbc  fecncmtbcclouD. 

15  ^nb  3  ibUl  remember  my  coue- 
nant ,  tthich  is  beflbeenc  mee  anb  you, 
anb  eucry  liuing  creature  of  all  fled) : 
anb  the  ibatcrs  (hall  no  moje  become  a 
floob  to  beftroy  all  fle(b. 

i6  anb  tbebotbfbaibc  in  the  cloub ; 
anbgjtbilllooRcbpon  it,  that  3Jmay 
remember  the  eucrlafhng  coucnant  be* 
ttbecne  C5ob  anb  cuery  liuing  creature, 
ofallflelhthatisbponthe  earth. 

17  anb  (Sob  latb  bnto  33oab,  Xhis 
is  the  toRcn  of  the  coucnant ,  Jbbttb  3 
hauc  cftabliftjcb  bcttbcenc  nice  anb  all 
flc(h,that>sbpon  the  earth. 

is  canbthelbnnesofiBoahthat 
Ibcnt  fo#b  of  the  arRe,  tbete  £>bem, 
anb  fcam ,  anb  giapbct :  anb  $am  is 
the  father  of  ||  Canaan. 

19  Xbefc  are  the  tlnec  fonncs  of /|3o; 
ah :  anb  of  them  tbas  the  ibbole  earth 
onerfpjeab. 

20  anb  jftoab  began  to  bee  an  hu£ 
banbinan,anbbeplanteb  abtneyarb. 


11  anb  he  bjanRe  of  the  nunc,  anb 
KbasbmnRen ,  anb  hec  ibas  bneouereb 
ttntbm  bis  tent. 

22  anb  s?am,thefatbcr  of  Canaan, 
fail)  the  naRcbneue  of  his  father,  aub 
tolb  his  ubo  hzcthjen  lbttbout. 

23  anb£>bemanb_liapbettooRca 
garment,  anb  layeb  "  bpon  both  their 
(houlbers,anb  Ibcnt  bacRibarb,anb  co- 
ucreb  the  naRcbneflc  of  their  father, 
anb  their  faces  were  bacRlbarD,anb  tbey 
(alb  not  their  fathers  naRcbneflc. 

24  anb  il3oai)  alboRe  from  his 
tbmc,anb  Rncvb  ibbatbss  yonger  Ibnne 
hab  bone  bnto  htm. 

25  anb  he  faib,  Curfcb  bee  Canaan : 
aferuantof  fcruants  (hall  bee  be  bnto 
bistsctbjen. 

26  anb  bee  faibc,  25lcfleb  bee  the 
3L_D-R3>  (£ob  of  £>bcm,anb  Canaan 
(haibcllhisfcruant. 

27  d5ob  (hall  ||  enlarge  Japbet, 
anb  be  (ha!  blbcl  in  the  tents  oT&bcm, 
anb  Canaanfljaibe  bisfcruant 

2s  canb/Boah  liucb  after  the  floob, 
tb?cc  bunbjeb  anb  fifty  y  ceres. 

29  anbailtbebaycsofiSoabVbete 
nine  buntycb  $  fifty  yecrcs,anb  be  tUtn. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  The  generations  of  Noah,  i  Thelbnnesof 
Iapher,  6  The  (brines  ofHam.  8  Nimrod 
the  firft  Monarch,  n  Thefonnesof  Shem. 

&>Vo  theft  are  the  gene* 
rations  of  the  fonncs  of 
/i5oab ;  dDcnt,  ®am,  anb 
_0apbct :  anb  bnto  them 
iberc  fonncs  borne  af- 
ter the  irloob. 

2  *  Xhe  fonncs  of  faphet :  «5o* 
mer,anb  fl0agog,anb  £0abai,anb  3J& 
uan,f  Xubai,anb  flpefhech,  $  Xiras. 

3  anb  the  fonncs  of  ©omet :  afl)^ 
Rena5,  anb  Biphath^anb  Xogarmah. 

4  anDtbcfonsof3Jauan:€hfbah, 
anb  Xarftjtft ,  Bttrim,  anb  2>obanim. 

5  25y  thefc  ibete  the  3llcs  of  the 
(Pcntilcsbtuibcb  ut  their  lanbs,  cuery 
one  after  bis  tongue :  after  their  fami* 
lies,in  their  nations. 

6  C*anbtbefonneS0f$am:Cn(b, 
anb  fl0i?raim,anb  |&hnt,  anb  Canaan. 

7  anb  the  fonncs  of  Cu(b ,  £>cba, 
anb  l^auaab ,  anb  ^>abtah ,  anb  3Raa* 
mab,anb  ^abtcdja:  anb  rhefonncs  of 
3Raamah  s  &beba,anb  SDcban. 

8  anbCu(hbcgat>15tmrob:bcbc* 
gantobcamigbtyonemtbeearth. 

9  J^e  Ibas  a  mighty  banter  bcfoic 
tjbc 


|  Cr,fertuM 
to  them. 
\Or,fcr. 
frvade. 


•i.Oiron. 


•i.ChioB. 
i-3. 


ThefirftMonarch.     Genetis.  Babel  builded. 


1CrB.Jj- 
In. 

|  Or,  he  went 
out  into  A[- 
fjru. 

Or ,  the 
jhettetofthe 
Citir. 


f  Heh.Tt.i- 
don. 


t  Hrtr.  A*-- 


"l.Chron 
1.17. 
t  Hetr.*st> 

fdchfljAd. 


t  Hthr.Sh,. 

bh. 

'l.Cliron. 
1,1$. 


the  1L4D&SD :  nrtjetcfoie  »t  is  faioe, 
cum  as/Tmnrob  tijc  nughtie  hunter 
befo2CtheH£>:R3>. 

10  3mb  the  beginning  of  his  fting 
borne  ibas '  25abei,anb  ercch,  anb  3c= 
cab, anb  Cainch,iu  the  lanb  of  Shtnar. 

11  £>ut  of  mat  lanb  ||  Bbcnt  foith  3ifc 
0)iir ,  anb  builbcb  j3mcuclj ,  anb  the  ||  r* 
ric&choboth,anb€aiah, 

u  3nb  Bcfcn  bettbeme  iftiucuch 
anb  Caiah :  the  fame  is  a  great  cuie. 

13  3tnb$teraim  begat  3Lubim,  anb 
3tnamtm ,  anb  ^Lchabuu ,  aiib/Raph- 
tuhim, 

14.  3nb  ^atftmum,  anb  Cafluhim 
(out  of  lDhotnc  tame  ^htuftnm)  anb 
daphtojtm. 

15  C'^nb  Canaan  negate  f;s>tbon 
hfsfirabome,anbi)eth, 

16  3nb  thc^Jcbuutc,  anb  the  tf mo 
rote,  anb  the  (Krgafitc, 

17  3Cnb  the  i?iuitc,  anb  the  Straite, 
anb  tilt  finite, 

18  3inb  me  3ruabttc ,  anb  the  "Zt- 
mantc,  anbthci?amatl)itc :  anb  after- 
ibarbiberethe  families  of  the  Canaan 
nttesfpjcababioab. 

19  3ltib  rt)c  bobber  of  the  Canaa* 
mtcs,  was  from  £nbon,  as  thou  com- 
nicftto  <3ctar,tonto f  <£a;a,aj6thougo- 
eft  bnto  doDoma  anb  <3omo;alj ,  anb 
3bmah,  %  zcboim,  cucntmtolLaflja. 

20  itnefc  aretDcfonucsof  l)am,  at* 
ter  their  famines,  after  their  tongues, 
m  their  tountrfes,  mdm  their  nations. 

21  c  Smto  dhem  alfo  tl)c  father  of 
all  tljcchittncn  of  Cbet,  the  toother  of 
3iaphet  thcclbcr,  men  to  htm  iberc 

children  bO?nc. 

22  %\)t  *  tljtltocn  of  £>hcm :  Clam, 
anb3mijur,anb 1 3trpharab,anb  Hub, 
anb  5lram. 

23  3lnb  the  chiltocn  of  3(ram :  H5, 
anb  5?m\anb  <3cthcr,anb  flJDafl). 

24  3inb3lrpljarab  begate  *;5>aiah, 
anb&aiah  begate  <2bcr. 

25  *3wbbnto€beribcrc  borne  tlbo 
fouties :  tlje  name  of  one  >■>  as  pelcg,  fo* 
uihisbayesDjas  the  earth  bunbcb,anb 
htstoortjcrsnamcw«3foRtan. 

26  3nb  3JoUtan  begate  3Umobab, 
anb&hcieplj,  anb  l^armaucth,  anb 
IJerah, 

27  3inb  i?abo:am,  anb  Vw\,  anb 
DflJiah, 

2s  3mb<©bai,  anb^bimael,  anb 
3>hcba, 

29  2lnb£Dpf)ir,anb  manual),  ?5Jo= 
bab:autl)tfcwcrctl)cfotmcsof3Johtan. 


30  anb  their  MtoeUmg  IMS  from 
£0cflja,  as  thou  gocft  bnto  ;S>cpljar, 
amountofthceaft. 

31  Xljefc -ire  tlje  tonnes  of  £>hcm,  af 
tctthetr families,  aftcrthetrtongucs, 
tntrjnr  lauosaftcr  their  nations. 

32  1Ehcfe  are  me  families  of  tlje 
fonncs  of  i^oal)  after  tljcir  gmeratt- 
ons,m  tljeir  nations:  anb  bp  tljcf c  iPerc 
tlie  nanons  awv^t^  m  tlje  cartl)  after 
tijcjfloob. 

CHAP.    XL 

1  One  language  in  the  world.  3  The  building 
otBabel.  5  Theconfuiionofcongues.  10 
ThegenerutionsofShem.  17  Thegencra- 
tionsofTei  ah  the  father  ot'Abram.  31  Tc- 
rah  goeth  i'rom  Vr  to  Haran. 

iBU  *tijc  ltoljolt  cart!)  xuas 

ofonctiauguagc,atibof 

onetfpeatl). 
2  ^nbtttamctopau*c 

as  tl)ev  iourncvcb  from 
tl)c  caft,  tl)at  tlje?  founb  a  plaint  in  tlje 
latib  of  S>l)inar  ,anb  tljev  bibclt  rtjere. 

3  3tnfc  ♦  tljev  favb  one  to  auotljer ; 
<5octo,  Ictbsmatic  bntUe,anbtbumc 
tl)cm  tl)020iblv.^nb  tljev  Ijao  biicUc  fo? 
Qoncanb  fltmeljab  rncyfoj  mooter. 

4  ^nbtl)c?faibjeocto,lctbsbiulb 
bsa  ntv  anb  a  torbcr  ,ibl)ofetopmav 
reach  bntol)caum,anb  let  Psmaaebsa 
name,leftvbcbcftattereb  ab?oab  bpon 
tljcfacc  oftl)eibI)oleearrt> 

5  ^nb  tlje  %  ©  B  3)  tame  botbnc 
to  fee  tljeritv  atibtljctoU)er,W)l)itl)tlje 
tljilb^mofmmbuilbeb. 

6  3liib  tlje  %  ®  8  2>  titii-  iBeljolb, 
tlje  peoples  one,  anb  tljey  haue  all  one 
language: anb  tnts  tljcp  begin  to boe: 
anb  noib  notljutg  lbill  be  reftratneb 
fromtljmi  ,U)ljir!j  tljcyljaueiniagmeb 
to  boe. 

7  <5oe to ,let  bs  go boibnc,anb  tljere 
cofounb  tlicir  language,  mat  rlity  may 
notbnocrftauboncanomcrsfpccel). 

8  ^»o  tlje  %  D  B£>  fcattereb  tljtm 
ab?oab  from  tticnte,  bpon  tlje  fate  of  all 
tlje  cartl) :  anb  t|)cy  left  offto  biulb  rlje 
Citic. 

9  Xljercfojcismenamcofttcailcb 
'Isabel,  beeaufc  tlje  ?L£>K£>  bib  mere 
confounb  tlje  language  of  all  ttje  eartl) : 
anb  from  thence  bib  me  %  ®  »  E>  frak 
tcr  tljcmab:oab  bpon  tlje  face  of  all  the 
earth. 

io  C  *3Ehefc  are  the  generations  of 
5>jjmi.S>ljemwasanljunb2CbperesolD, 
anu 


'Wif.io.5 

f  HrlrMfff 
I  Hcb.veardt. 


f. Hd  to  his 
neighbour. 
t  tieb.  burnt 
them  to  n 
burning. 


I  Thdtii, 
Confufion. 


*  I.Chron- 
<  "7- 


Thegenerations        Cliap.xij.     of  Tcrah.  Abram. 


■i.Chron. 
t.19. 

•Called 
Luke  J.  j  j. 
Philcc. 


•Luc.  5.3  5 

Saruch. 


"Luc.j.j,, 
Thara. 


« 10111.24.1 
i.Chron.  r. 
stf. 


anb  begate  3rpharab  ttbo  veeres  after 
thcJFloob. 

11  2nb  Sfytm  Uueb ,  after  he  begate 
3rpbarab,  fine  hunbzcb  peercs,  anb  bc> 
gatefonncs  anb  baughtcrs. 

it  ^nbarpharabiiucbfiueanbthir* 
tieyecres,  anb  begate  :a>alah. 

13  3MD  3irpharab  Uueb ,  after hebe* 
gate  £>aiah ,  foure  huntyeb  anb  tlncc 
veer  es ,  anb  begate  fonncs  anb  baugh; 
tecs. 

14  3tnb  £>aiahimeb  tbirtic  yeeres, 
anb  begate  tfber. 

15  3nb  S>aiab  lineb,  after  hec  begate 
<Jbcr,  foure  huntyeb  aub  th:cc  yccres, 
attbbegatcfonncsanbbaughters, 

i6  *3inb<£berliucb  foure  anb  thirty 
pecres,anb  begate  *  pclcg 

17  3tnb  Cber  luteb ,  after  bee  begate 
$eteg,  foure  buntycb  anb  tbtrttc  per  cs, 
anb  begatcfonnes  anbbaughtcrs. 

18  3tnb  0clcg  Uueb  thirtic  yecres, 
anb  begate  ftcu. 

19  3tnb0cleg  Uueb,  after  bee  begate 
Ectt,ttt>ol)imb2cb  anb  tunc  yecres,  anb 
begate  fonncs  anb  baughtcrs. 

20  3nb  &eu  Uueb  trbo  anb  tbirtic 
yecres,anbbcgatc*;t>crug. 

2 1  3lnb  &cu  Uurt) ,  after  I)cc  begate 
£>crug,  ttbo  bunbjetb  anb  feuen  ycrcs, 
anb  begate  fonncs  aub  baughtcrs. 

22  ^nb&cruglMCbthirtteyeeres, 
anb  begate  jfraljo?. 

23  :Snb5>crugUueb,aftcrhcbcgatc 
^al)o?,r)Dol)unb?cb yecres,  anb  begat 
fonncs  anbbaugbtcrs. 

24  3mb  jRaboz  uueb  nine  anb  ttbctfc 
ticyccrcs,anb  begate  *1Ecrah. 

25  %nn  ^abozuucb.aftctbcbcgatc 
Zcrah ,  anbunbjcb  .jninctccneyecrcs, 
anb  begate  fonncs  ano  baughtcrs. 

26  3nb1EcrabUucbfcucntyyccrc6, 
anb*bcgate3iD2am,#abo:,$!i?aran. 

27  C /ftott)  thefe  are  the  generate 
onsof  Xerab :  Xcral)  begate  2b2am, 
jftabo:,  anb  J?aran :  3nb  tyaran  be* 
gateHot. 

28  3Mb$aranbicb,bcfo:cbisfatber 
3Ccrab  in  the  lanb  ofljis  nattuityjtn  33r 
ofthcCbsibccs. 

29  3lnb  ajteani  anb  if5arjo?  toofte 
tftem  fttues :  the  name  of  ^bzams  ttnfc 
wa?  !=t>arat,  anb  rtic  name  of  iiSabojs 
Unfr,  fll&iicab,  the  baugbtcr  of  J^aran, 
the  fatljcc  of  flBtltal) ,  aub  tljc  fatl;cr  of 
Ufcal). 

30  25ut&atattbas  barren  ;tljc  had 
nocbiioe. 

31  anu  Xeral)  tooUe  3lb;am  ibis 


founc,  anb  lLot  tljc  fonnc  of  l?aran  his 
fonncs  tonne,  aub&arai  his  baugbtcr 
mtaibc,  his  tonne  3b;anis  vntft,  anb 
they  tticntfoortbttnth  tbemfrom  *  ?Ur 
of  tbeCbalbccs ,  to  goc  into  the  lanb  of 
Canaan :  anb  fycy  came  tmto  tyaran, 
anbbibelttljcre. 

32  3tnb  the  bayes  of  ICcrah ,  iberc 
ttbo  buntneb  anb  aue  ycrcs :  anb  %c- 
raljbicbtn^aran. 

CHAP.    XIL 

t  God  calleth  Abram ,  and  blclTeth  him  with  a 
promife  of Chrift.  4  HedepartethwithLot 
from  Haran.  6  He  iourneyeth  through  Ca- 
naan, 7  whichispromifedhiininavifion. 
10  Hee  is  driuen  by  a  famine  into  Egypt. 
Ji  Feare niaketh him  fainehiswifeto  behis 
filler.  14  Pharaoh  hauing  taken  her  from 
him,by  plagues  is  compelled  to  reflore  her. 

4Dtt>rbc*HiI>3a2>bab 
taibbnto^bzam,  <Btttt)cc 
out  of  tbycountrcy,anb 
from  thy  Uutr  cb,anb  from 
-tbyfafbcrsboufe,tmtoa 
lanbtt)at3U)mn)cU)rtjcc. 

2  3tnb  J  voill  mauc  of  tftec  a  great 
natton,  anb  3  tbil  bleffc  tt;cc,anb  mauc 
tt)t>  name  great ;  anb  tljou  than  bee  a 
btctfing. 

3  ^nb^jamblctretljcmtDatblctrc 
tijee,  anb  ctttfctjmt,  tftat  enrfettj  tfjee: 
*anb  in  rl)cc  tbatau  families  of  tt  c  earth 
bcblcffcb. 

4  &o  ^b?am  beparteb,  as  tije 
%  £T>  H  2D  hab  (pofecn  bnto  Ijim ,  anb 
ILotttentttithhim:  5Inb^bjamU)as 
fcucntie  anb  fiue  peercs  olb  rbUen  he  be- 
parteboutofJ^aran. 

<,  ^nb^biamtoofteiDaraihisibtfe, 
anb  Hot  his  Mothers  fonnc,  anb  an 
their  fub&antethatthepbab  gattiereb, 
anb  the  tbuics  that  thev  hab  gotten  m 
$?aran,ano  thepibemfoo^th  to  gocutto 
the  lanb  of  Canaan :  anb  into  fijcianb 
of  Canaan  the?  tame. 

6  C3Inb3lbjampaffcb  through  the 
lanb,  tonto  the  plate  of  Cithern ,  Unto 
thcplamcoffiPojch.  ^nbthcCanaa? 
nttewastheninthelanb. 

7  :an&thcH£>B2r>appcarcbi)n; 
to^b?am,anbtaio,  *  ^antothvfccbibil 
3  giuc  tins  lanb :  anb  there  butlbcb  hec 
an*aitarbnto  the!LCB2>,rbl)oa^ 
pcarebbntobinu 

8  3tnbhe  rcmoucb  fromtljnttcbn* 
to  amountamcontheeaftof  Bethel, 
anb  pitcheb  his  tent  hau.ng  asttl>cl  on 

the 


"Nehcm. 
p  7.  iudicli. 
J-7-"it*-7- 


"A*. 7. 3 


*Chap.  18 
18. and  ji 
l8.aas.  5. 
2j.gJat.3. 


'Chap.lj. 

»S- 

•  Chip.  1  j 

4- 


Ab 


ram  in 


£ZP 


c. 


Genei 


is. 


Ab 


ram  an 


dL 


ot. 


]  Hcb.'tngo- 


tbe  nacft ,  anD  $ai  on  tbe  €aC :  anu 
there  Dee  butlbcD  an  altar  bnto  ttjc 
%  <£>  Ka>,  anDtalltD  Uponttje  /I2ame 

oftbeH£>£3>. 
9  3(nD;clb;amiourncyeD,||  going  on 

ftilltott)arDtbc£>outl> 

io  c  3hid  ttjere  ibas  a  famine  in  tbe 
iauD,anD3ibjamttient  Dottmc  mto  <iE* 
gypt,  to  foioiirne  tljccc :  fa?  tbe  famine 
tt>as  gncuotis  m  tlje  lanD. 

li  anDittametopaffettJbenberbas 

tome  nccrc  to  enter  into  cgppt,  tljat  \)i 
fain  Unto  £>arai  bis  ttnfe,25eboiD  nott>, 
31  Unoiu  tbat  tbou  art  afairetttoman 
tolooitrDpon. 

u  ICbercfozc  it  (ball  tome  to  pafle, 
ttm  m  t\)t  egpptians  Q)aufcc  tbec,tbat 
tbev  fbalt  Cap ,  ^Ijtjs  is  b#  ttnfc :  anD 
tbev  tt)iU  Hill  mc,lmt  tJ)e^  null  faue  tbee 
aituc. 

13  £>ap,3Jp2aptl)cc,ri)ouattmpfi' 

Get,  tbatttmavbctt)clttntbmc,fojtbV 
faac;  anb  mpfonlefl)auiMC,betaufcof 

tDce* 

14  OnDitcametopaflc,tbattt)bcn 
Tfounn  was  tome  into  egvpt ,  tbe  €* 
gvpttans  bcbclbtbeiboman,  tbatfljee 
lba^bcrvfairc. 

15  %bcpnncesaifoofiM)araobfatt) 
ijer ,  anD  commcnbeD  Ijer  before  0b&= 
raol) :  anD  tbctbomautbastalicnuito 
pbaraobsboufe. 

16  3nbbccntrcatcb3fb?amTbcllfo? 
her  fait c :  anb  l)t  nao  fbeepe ,  anborcn, 
ano  Dec  aflcs,  anD  men  fcruants,  anD 
maiD  fcruants,  anD  fl)  ce  afTcs ,  anD  ta 
mebJ. 

17  3lnDtbeH!©3&SI>piagucD£ba 
raol) «  bjs  nonfe  ttiitl)  great  plagues, 
becaufe  of  5>ar  ai^bzams  ttnfc. 

18  3lnD0baraob tailcD  3lbjam,anD 
fatD,  nabat  is  tbis  tbat  tbou  baft  Done 
tonto  me  *  mhv  DiDDeft  tbou  not  tell  me, 
rijatfljemastbv  ttnfc* 

19  m\w  laiDcft  tbou ,  5>b«  iflmf  fc 
ftcri  fo  3Jm»gbtbauc  tabenbertomec 
to  lbife :  nolb  tb  trfojc  beljolb,  tt)V  tt)ife, 
taae  her  anb  goc  tbv  ibav. 

ao  3inD  pbaraobtomanDtDbismen 
tontcrmng  bun :  anD  tbev  Cent  bun  a- 
ttmj>,anb  ljis  ttnfc,  anD  ailfbat  be  baD. 

CHAP.     XIII. 

Abrara  and  Lot  rcturne  out  of  Egypt.  7  By 
difagreement  they  part  afunder.  10  Lotgo- 
cth  to  wicked  Sodom.  14  God  rcnuedi  the 
promifetoAbram.  18  HeremouethtoHc- 
bron,  and  there  burideth  an  Altar. 


il5D  ^b^ajnttjent  Dp  out 
of  tfgvpt ,  be  anb  b(s  ttnfc, 
anD  all  tbat  be  baD  >artD 
flot  ttntb  t)im  >  into  tbe 
S)outb. 
z  ^nDSityamttJasbervrtcbincnt? 
tell,in  fituer,  anb  m  goiD. 

3  3inD  bee  lbent  on  ty&  tourneyes 
from  tbe^outb,  cucn  to  25etb-el,bnto 
ttjc  plate  ttibere  bis  tent  baD  bene  at  tbe 
beginning,  bettbecne  asetb  el  anb  $au 

4  ?UMotbc*piacc  of  tbe  aitat,tt)bub 
be  baD  maoe  tljerc  at  tbe  firlhanD  rl)tr  e 
3tyam  taileD  on  tbe  i5amc  of  tbe 

5  C3nDHotalfott)birf)tt)cnttttffb 
abjam,  bab  flocfts  anD  bearD£,f  teuttf. 

6  3hsD  tbe  ianD  tt>as  not  able  to 
bcare  ttjem,  tbat  tbe?  mtgbtDtt>elltO' 
getber :  fo?  tljeir  fubftante  ttfcs  great, 
fo  tbat  tbev  toulb  not  Dttjcil  together. 

7  3mDtbctcibasaftrifcbcttt)ecne 
tt>c  bearbtnen  of  3ttyams  tattell,  anb 
tlje  bearbtnen  of  Hots  tattell :  3lnD  tbe 
Canaanitc,  anD  tbe  #eti53ite  DlDclleD 
tbenintbelanD. 

8  ^9nD 3lb?amlaiD into  Hot,  Hct 
tberc  be  no  ftrtfe,3J  p?ap  tbee,betvbeenc 
met  anb  tbee ,  anD  bctibcenc  mp  btarD 
men  anD  tb?  bcatDmcn :  fo?  lbee  bee 
ttyetbjm. 

9  3&  not  tbe  ttibole  lanD  before 
tbee  i  Separate  tbvfclfe,  91  p?ap  tljce, 
fcommcc:iftbouwiittaketbcleftbanD, 
tbcn^ttjillgocto  t^c  rtgbt:o?if  tbou 

depart  tO  fl)C  rtfltlt  battD ,  tljttt  3J  ID1U 

goc  to  tbe  left. 

10  3tnDHotltfteDbpbiseve^,  anD 
bebclb  all  tbe  plamc  of  3Jo?Dane,  tbat  it 
tbas  lbeillbatcrcb  euery  iDIjcrc  bcfo;e 
tbe  Hojb  DcftropeD&oDomeanD  d5o> 
mowb ,  wen  as  tljc  garDcn  of  tbe 
%  £>aa3P ,  UBc  tbe  lanD  of  €gppt,as 
tljoucommeftDnto  zoar. 

11  XbenHotcbofcbira  all  tbe  plamc 
of  3JoiDane :  anD  Hot  ionrncveD  call  ■, 
anb  tbev  feparatcDtbemfelucs  tlje  one 
from  tbe  otber. 

iz  3lbwmbtt)elleDmtbclanDof€a> 
naan,  anD  Hot  DttJcllcDtn  tljc  ntiesof 
tl)cpiaine,anD  pitcbeDbisteiu  tolbarD 
S>oDomc. 

13  iBitttbc  men  of  5>oDome  lbcrc 
\buUcD,anD  fumcrs  bcfo?etbeH£>tf£> 
cjctccbuigiv. 

1+  C5lnDtbeH£)3K3DlaiDDnto 
3tbwm ,  after  tbat  Hot  was  feparateD 
frombun,  HiftDpnott)ti)meeves,anb 
loouc  from  tljc  place  ttJljere  tbou  art, 
jftoztp 


*  Chap.  11, 

7* 


1  Hcbr.men 
Lrcthren. 


God! 


s  promi 


ifc.         Chi 


Lp.XlllJ. 


Melchizedek. 


hso.  1 2 
4- 


It  Or ,  the 

rutthaifn. 

^Or,thf 
fUiH!  of 


jRojtfttuarb,  anb  £>outftibatb,  anb 
<£a(tibaro,anb  naeftvbarb. 

15  ^o?all  tftc  lanDlUfjtdl  tljou  fcett, 
*totftceibul  31  siuett,  anb  to  tftyfceoe 
fojeuer. 

i6  3nb  3J  am  maae  tf)v  feetic  as  tftc 
butt  of  tftc  cartft :  fo  tftat  if  a  man  can 
number  tftc  butt  of  tftc  eattft,tften  tftail 
tlivfccbalfobenumbjeb. 

17  arifeabautctftjougfttfteianb.tn 
tfte  lengtft  of  it,  anb  m  tftc  tycabtft  of  it  t 
fo?  3J  ibtll  giuc  it  bnto  tftcc. 

is  %$m  3fbjam  ttmoueb  fits  tent, 
anb  tame  anb  bibclt  in  tfte f  piaine  of 
Mature,  ibfiicftiSin^ctyott,  anb  built 
tftcrcanaltat  bnto  tfte  %  fl>  B  2D. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

i  The  battell  of  foure  Kings  againft  fiue.  n 
Lot  is  taken  prifoner.  14  Abram  refcueth 
him.  18  Melchi-zedek  blefieth  Abram.  20 
Abram  giueth  him  tithe,  ci  The  reft  of  the 
fpoile.his  partners  hauing  had  their  portions 
he  reftoreth  to  the  King  of  Sodom. 

j!5b  it  tame  to  pafTe  in  tfte 
ba^es  of  SuncapftelBtng 
of  3>ftmar,  3rtocft  Bmg 
of  € uafat,Cftcbo?laomct 
Bins  of  Clam,  anb  %v 
bal  Bins  of  nations: 

r  f:ftatthefemabeibarcelbitft25e« 
ra  Bins  of  S>obomc,anb  tottft  iBirtfia 
Bins  of  tiPomojraft,  S>fttnabBinsof 
3bmaft ,  anb  £>ftemcber  Btns  of  ze* 
boiim ,  anb  tfte  Bins  of  26e!a ,  ibftirfi 
bjzoar. 

j  3Utfteferberetovnebtogctfierin 
tfte  bale  of  £>ibbim  ■>  Vbfttcft  is  tfte  fait 
£>ea. 

4  XtocUw  pcetes  tfte?  feruebCftc* 
bojiaomcr ,  anb  uttftctftirtecntft  vcerc 
tfiey  tebelleb. 

<,  anbintftcfouttetntftvectccame 
Cftcbojlaomcr ,  anb  tfte  Binss  tftat 
tberc  ibitft  ftun ,  anb  fmotc  tftc  Kcpfta? 
ims,  in  ^ffiterotft  Barnaun,  $  flic  zu* 
5imsin$am,  anb  tftc  Cmtmstn  |  ;S>fta 
ueftBtriatftaim; 

6  3nb  tfte  pontes  in  tftcir  mount 
■S>eir,bnto||  £l-#aran,ibfiitfi  is  by  tfte 
ttnlbcmefle. 

7  ^nb  tftcp  teturncb ,  anb  tanic  to 
en-mtffipat,ibfticfi  is  Babcfft,  $  fmotc 
an"  tfte  countre?  of  tfte^tmalefeitcs,  anb 
ano  tfte  3montes,tftat  oibelt  m$a5e* 
son-tamar. 

8  £nb  tftere  lbcnt  out  tfte  Bmg  of 
£>obome,anb  tfteBins  of  dDomojtaft, 


ano  tfte  Bins  of  3tomaft,anb  tfte  Bmg 
of  zebotim,anb  tfte  Bins  of  25cia,(tfie 
fame  is  Zoar)anb  tftc?  lovncbbattell 
ibitft  tftem,mtftebalcofS>tbbim, 

9  naitft  Cftebo?laomcr  tfte  Bins  of 
Clam,  anb  ibitft  ICtbai  Bmg  of  nan< 
ons,  anb  #mrapftel  Bmg  of  S>ftinar, 
anb  3iriocft  Bins  of  Cliafar  ■,  foure 
Bmgs  tttitft  fiue. 

10  3f  no  tfte  bale  of  5>tbbim  rbas  full 
of  fume  pits :  anb  tfteBings  of£>o 
borne  f©omo?raftflcb,  anb  fell  tftcrc: 
anb  tftev  tftat  rcmatneb ,  fleb  to  tftc 
mountatne. 

ii  3lnb  tftep  toofee  all  tftc  soobs  of 
S>ooomcanb  <©omo?raft,  ano  ailtfteir 
btctuais,anb  lbcnt  tfteir  ibap. 

ii  3mbtftevtooUe!Lot,3ibjamsb^ 
tftcrs  fonne,(ibfto  bibcit  m  S>obomc) 
anb  ftis  go  oos,anb  beparteb. 

ij  C  2ino  tftere  tame  one  tftat  ftab 
efcapcb,  anb  tolb  3tb?am  tfte  l^cbjeib, 
fo?  ftce  blbclt  in  tfte  piaine  of  $)amre 
tftc^mo?ite,b?otftcr  of  Cfftcol,anbtyO' 
tftcr  of  ^ner :  anb  tftefe  Ibcre  tonfcbc= 
ratcib(tft^b;am. 

14-  ^nbibftcn^b?amftcarbtftatftis 
bjotftcr  ibastaacn  captiuc,fte||armcb 
ftiS  II  traincb  feruants  oome  in  ftis  olbnc 
ftoufc,tft?ccftunb2cb  anb  cisfttcene,anb 
purfucb  them  bnto  2Dan. 

15  3lnb  ftce  biuibcb  ftimfelfc  asalnft 
tftcm,fte  anb  ftisfcruants  bp  tugftt,  anb 
fmotetftcm,  anb  purfucb  tftem  bnto 
^oba,tt)fttrft  is  on  tfte  left  ftanb  of 3Da^ 
mafrus: 

16  ^nb  ftee  tyougftt  batae  ail  tftc 
S00bs,anb  alfo  toousftt  asamc  ftb5  b?o- 
tfter?Lot,anb  ft(ssoobs,anbtfteibO' 
men  alfo , anb  tfte  people. 

17  C^nbtfte&insof^>obomclbcnt 
out  to  mcetc  ^im,  ( after  ftis  returne 
from  tfte  Oausftter  of  Cftcbojlaomer, 
anb  of  tftc  Bmgs  tftattticreibttftftmi) 
at  tfte  ballev  of  S>aucft ,  ibftirft  is  tfte 
*  Bmgs  bale. 

is  3lnb*fl0clcfti5CbcaBfngof£>& 
lent  b?ousftt  foo?tft  b?cab  anb  ibine: 
anbftc  tbastftc^teft  of  tftc  moftftisft 

(POD* 

19  3mb  ftce  blcfTebftim,  anb  fatbc; 
ffilcffcb  bee  Zbmn  of  tftc  moft  ftisft 
d5ob,poffeffour  of  ftcaucn  ano  cartft, 

io  ^nb  blefTcb  bee  tfte  mofi  fttgft 
<5ob,  tbfticft  ftatft  beltuercb  tfttne  me* 
miesmto  tftvftanb :  anb  fteesaueftim 
*titftcsofail. 

ii  ^nb  tftc  Bins  of  £>obomc  falb 
bnto  3b?am,siueme  tfte  'petfonSjanb 
\  *  taae 


\Or,Ui 

foortb. 

i  Or,  in$bn- 

tlli. 


'j.Soid.iS. 
'Hcb-7  1. 


•Hcb.y.4- 

Heir. 


!God: 


promi 


lfe. 


Genefis. 


Ab 


rams  vi 


lfion. 


•PfaI.l6.KS 


"Rom. 4. 
18. 

"  Rom. 4.5. 
galil  3.6. 
lam.i.aj, 


tafee  the  goobs  to  thyfclfc. 

ii  2tnb  abzam  faib  to  the  ISing  of 
^oDomcJJftaucliftbp  my  hatiDPnto 
the  iLOfi2D,thcmoQhigh<3ob,the 
poffeflbur  of  I)eaucn  ano  earth , 
23  XhatlJilnlnottaRcfrom  atlnccb 
turn  to  alhociatchct,anb  thafJUbill 
not  tafee  any  thing  that ts thine ,  left 
thou  fhoulocft  lap ,  5  hauc  mabc  71? 
biamrirh: 

14  3>anconciy  that  iDhieh  the  yong 
men  haue  eaten,  ano  the  portion  of  the 
men  lbljuh  lucnt  ibith  n»ec,^ner,ef* 
chol,  ano  #amrc;  let  them  talte  their 
portion. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  God  encourageth  Abram.  i  Abram  com- 
plaineth  for  want  of  an  heire.  4  Godpro- 
mifeth  him  a  ibnne,  and  a  multiplying  of  his 


feed. 


6  Abramisiuftifiedbyiaith. 
naanispromifedagaine,  andconfirme 
anVne, 


7  Ca- 
dby 
andavifion. 

ifter  thefe  things  ,  the 
il>o:bof  the  ?L£)S2D 
tame  Pnto  &b;tam  ut  a  uu 
(ion, faying-,  iPcarenot, 
^b«wm:3lamthpanelD, 
and  thy  crcecbutg  *  great  rclbarb. 

2  3fnb  3ityam  faib ,  3Lort>  <Bd>D, 
itohat  Unit  thou  giuc  tuc ,  feeing  3J  goe 
chtiblcffc  t  anb  the  GciDarb  of  my  houfc 
is  this  Clicker  of  2Damafcus. 

s  3lnb  3ltyam  fatb  ■,  2Seholb,to  mec 
thou  haft  giuen  no  fceb :  anb  loc,  one 
borne  tn  my  houfc  is  nunc  he itt, 

4  2nb  bcfjolb,  the  iDozb  of  the 
%  £>& 2D  came  unto  htnt,faytng,Xhts 
(hall  not  be  thine  hcirc:but  he  that  (hall 
come  foo;th  out  of  thy  olbnc  bolucls, 
fhaibc  thine  heirc. 

5  3lnb  he  bjought  him  fozth  abzoab, 
anb  faio ,  fLooKc  noli)  toiDarbs  hca* 
uen,anbtcltthc  (larres,  if  thou  be  able 
to  number  them.  3inb  hec  faib  tnto 
hun,*S>ofhailrhyfecbbe. 

6  anbhe*bclccucbtnthc1L4D132D; 
anb  hec  countcb  it  to  htm  fo;  riglite- 
ottfneffc. 

7  ano  he  fatb  unto  him  ■,  J  am  the 
1L  O  E  2D  that  brought  thec  out  of  air 
of  the  Caioccs,  to  cjuictljcc  tins  lanb, 
to  tnhcrttit. 

s  3nbhcfatb,3Lo;0(5£>2D,n)here; 
by  fhaigi  imoiu  that  _fl  mail  tnhentttf 

9  3Jnb  he  fatb  Ditto  htm, XaRcmc 
an  hetfer  office  yecres  olb,  anb  a  (hec 
goat  of  thzee  yecres  olb.aubaramme 
of  th:ee  yecres  olb ,  anb  a  turtle  bouc, 
aubayongpigeon. 


io  ^nbhctooUcPntohunailthcfe, 
ano  muibcb  them  m  the  miblt,  anb  layb 
each  peeceoneagatnft  another  :butthc 
btrbsbuttbcbhcnot. 

ii  2nb  llihen  the  foibles  tame 
boi&netoponthe  carcafcs3b^mib2ouc 
themaibay. 

ii  3inb  ibhen  the  S>unne  lDas  go- 
ing boiunc  ,abeepc  Qeepc  fell  topon  3i? 
bjam :  anb  loc,  an  hojronr  of  great 
DarHnicffe  fell  Upon  him. 

i j  :3n&hc(afoOnto2ib2am,Bnoib 
of  a  furety,*  that  thy  fceb  ftjalbc  a  (tratv 
ger  ,m  a  lanb  that  is  not  theirs,  anb  (hal 
feruc  them ,  anb  they  (hail  afflict  them 
fottrehunbjcb  yecres. 

14  3nbalfort)atnationil)homfhey 
(hauferuc,ibt(  3J  mbge:  anb  aftcribarb 
fljau  tljey  come  out  ilrith  great  im> 
fiance. 

15  3nb  thou  fljaitgocto  thy  fathers 
in  peace  ■>  thou  (halt  be  buneb  m  a  goob 
olb  age. 

i6  25utinthefourth  generation  they 
(hail  come  hither  agamc :  foz  the  uncuti* 
tie  ofthc  ^moutcsts  not  ytt  full. 

17  3lnb  it  tame  to  pafft  that  tbhen 
the  &vmz  lhtnt  borbne,  anb  it  ibas 
darke,  oeholb ,  a (molting  furnace ,  anb  a 
'burning  lampc  that  paffeb  bctlbecnc 
thofcptcccs. 

is  3ln  that  fame  bay  then  Dm  2D 
mabc  a  toutnant  Unth  Slbjam,  faying , 
*  Unto  thy  fecb  haue  _0  giuen  this  lanb 
from  thcnuerofCgypttontothcgrcat 
rtucr,the  ruter  €uph)atcs : 

19  XheiBtcnttes,anbthcBcn(5ltes, 
anbthemabmonites: 

to  %xfo  the  pittites,  anb  the  $v 
ri55ites,  anb  the  Kcphaims, 

21  3lnb  the  ^montes,  anb  the  C& 
naatutcs,  anb  the  dSirgafhttcs,  anb  the 
Actuates. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1    Sarai,bcingbarren,  giueth  Hagar  to  Abram. 
4  Hagar  being  afflicted  for  defpifing  her  mi- 
ftrefle,  runneth  away.   7   An  Angelfendeth 
herbacketoiubmitherfelfe,    11   andtelleth 
child.  15  Ifhmaelisbome. 

£>lb&ara(^b?amsiDife 
barchimnochtlbien :  antj 
(hehabanhanbmaibc,  an 
Egyptian ,  iDhofc  name 
iba6i?agar. 
2  anb  5>arai  faib  unto  3b2am,25e* 
holb  noilt,  the  H£>&2D  hath  refh-ai^ 
neb  mcfrom  bearing :  3f  pjay  thec  go  m 
onto  u^  matb:  it  may  bee  that  3  may 
f  obtatne 


*A^s7.c-. 


J  ticlrmr. 
fre. 


"Chap.!  j. 

7.andi3. 

Ij.&l6\<j. 

Jcut. j  4.4. 


Hagarfleeth.  Chap.xvij. 


Abrah 


ranam. 


(  Htt.ire 
buittcdbj 
her. 


f  HA.thtt 

>vhichugood 
1 1  thy  eyet. 

Stihtr. 


Thuis, 

GiJfitS 
hrdrc* 


Chap.  35 
18. 


*  Chap.  24. 
J  Thais, 

tht  wr/tof 
him  that  li- 
uttL  orUjee- 
eth  me. 


tobtamccbtlbicttbp  W :  anb  abzam 
hearfecneb  totheboiceof  £>atat. 

j  anbS>araiab?antsibife,  toobc 
$agar  ber  maib,tbe  egyptian,  after  a- 
bjam  hab  otbclt  ten  yeercs  in  the  lanb 
of  Canaan,  anb  gaue  her  to  her  hut 
banbabzaimtobchtsibtfc. 

4  canb  be  ibent  in  bnto  f?agar, 
anb  (be  eoncciucb :  anb  ibhen  fl)tc  falb 
that  (bee  hab  conteutcb,  her  nuttrefTe 
tbasbefptfebinhcreyes. 

5  anbS>aratfaibbntoab?am,s$y 
lb?ong  be  bpon  tbec :  3  hauc  giucn  my 
tnatb  into  thy  bofomc,  anbXbhenfljcc 
faib  that  (be  hab  eoncciucb, Jjibasbe- 
fptfebinber  eyes :  the  %$>  &2D  iubgc 
bcnbcencmcanbtbce. 

6  But  atyam  faib  bnto  3>arai,ffie; 
bolb,thymaibisinthyhanb;boctohet 
'asitplcafctbtbcc.  anb  lbbcn  5>atai 
'bealtbarblylbttb  bet,  (bee  fleb  from 
her  face. 

7  canbtbcangcloftbc1Lj©&2D 
founb  bec  by  a  fountatnc  of  ibatct ,  in 
(he  rbtlbcrncffc,by  the  fonntainc,  in  the 
ttjayto&hur: 

8  anbbcfaib^agar&araismaib, 
lbhcntctamcftthou;  atunbbithcrttnlt 
thougoc*  anb  mcfatb,gj  flee  from  the 
fate  of  my  miftr  effe  <§>arai. 

9  anb  the  3ngcl  of  the  %  sD  B  2P 
faib  bnto  her,  Bcturnc  to  tby  mifrreffc, 
anb  fubmtt  tby  fclfc  bnbet  her  banbs. 

10  anb  the  angel  of  the  H  £>  ft  3D 
faib  bnto  bet,  gjuM  multiply  thy  feebe 
cttcebtngly  ,that  it  (hall  not  be  nutntyeo 
fo?muttttubc. 

11  anb  the  angel  of  the  %  sf>  H  2D 
faib  bnto  her,  zscbolb ,  thou  artibitb 
cbtlb,  anb  (bait  bearc  afonnc,  anb  (halt 
tall  hts  name  ||  gjfbinael  5  betaufc  the 
H  s©  ft  2D  hart)  hcacb  tby  affliction. 

iz  anb  he  lbtil  be  a  rutlbc  man ;  hts 
hanb  ibillbcagamft  cttctyman,  anbe^ 
uerymansbanbagatn{tbim:*ejbc{bai 
blbeli  in  the  pjefenee  of  alibis  tyertnen. 

i)  anb  (bee  talleb  the  name  of  the 
%  j©  ft  2D  that  fpafcc  bnto  her ,  Xbou 
Gob  feed  me :  ft»  fl)C  fatb,  $aue  gj  aifo 
here  loofteo  after  hint  that  teeth  me  i 

14  aabcrefojc  the lbclltbas  talleb, 
*||2Scct-lahat-roi:  ascholb ,  gjt  is  be* 
tibeene  Cabefh  anb  25crcb. 

15  canbftagarbarcabjamafonne: 
anb  abjant  talleb  his  fonncs  name, 
ibhith  3?agar  bare,  gjfbmacl. 

i6  anbabjam  lbas  fourcfeojte  anb 
fire  yeeres  olb,  tuhenl>)agar  bare  gju> 
maeltoabjam. 


CHAP.    XVII. 

GodreneweththeCouenJiit.  5  Abramhis 
name  is  changed,  in  token  of  a  greater  b!ef- 
fing.  10  Circumcifion  is  inftituted.  15  Sa. 
rai  her  name  is  changed,  andfheblefled.  17 
Iziaacispromifed.  13  Abram  and  Ifhmael 
are  circumcifed. 

iBb  rbhen  ab^am  ibas 
ninetieperesolb  anb  nine, 
the  ft  3©  3R  2D  appeartb 
to  abiam,  anb  fatb  bnto 
_  him,  gjam  the  aimtghtic 
Gob,  * ibaitte  before  me ,  anb  be  thou 
I  perfect 

z  anbgjibilmaKcmvcouenantbei 
tibecne  me  anb  rtjec ,  anb  ibill  multiply 
thcecrtcebtngip. 

j  anb  ab;am  fell  on  his  face,  anb 
©ob  talncb  ttiith  him/aping, 

4.  as  fo?  me,  beljolb,  my  touenant 
is\biththce,anbthoua)altbca*fartjcr 
of  ||  manv  nations, 

5  Neither  Jhalithp  name  anpmo?e 
be  talleb  ab?am,  but  tljp  name  (hall  bee 
ab?aham :  *  fo?  a  father  of  man?  nati* 
onshattegjmabcrhee. 

6  anb  gj  lbtii  mane  thee  erccebing 
frnufull ,  anb  ^  ttrtll  mahc  nations  of 
thee.anb  l&tags  fl)ail  come  out  of  thee. 

7  anb  3}  mill  c(tablt(h  my  touenant 
betibecnc  me  anb  thee,  anb  thy  feebe  af* 
ter  thee ,  in  their  generanons  fo?  an  e 
uerlamng  touenant ,  to  bee  a  Gob  bnto 
thee,  anb  to  thv  fceb  after  thee. 

s  anb3ifbnlgutcbntothcc,anb 
to  th?  feeb  after  thtc,the  lanb  *  tbljercin 
thou  art  aftranger ,  allthclattb  of  Ca? 
naan,fo;ancucriamngpo(rcinou,aub 
gittiill  be  their  Gob. 

9  canb  Gob  faib  bnto  abjtaham, 
Xhou  u)alt  Kccpc  my  touenant  thtre^ 
fo?c,  thou,  anb  thpftebe  after  thee,  in 
their  generations. 

10  3Chlsismpcoumant,tbhichpee 
(hall  hcepc  bctibcenc  me  anbvou,  anb 
fhp  fceb  after  rtjee :  *  cucrp  man  rtjilb  a 
mong  foufljail  be  tircumtu"cb. 

11  anb  vc  fljail  nrcumcifc  the  flefh  of 
pour  fo?efbtnne  i  anb  it(l)al  be  a  *  toben 
of  the  touenant  bctibirt  me  anb  you. 

iz  anbhc  that  is  ^ghtbapcsolbc, 
*(halbe  tirntmtifeb  among  pou,  euery 
man  thtlb  in  pour  generations,  be  that 
is  borne  in  the  houfc,  o?  bought  lbith 
moncv  of anp  Granger ,  tbljtth  isnot  of 
thpfceb. 

ij  ^e  rtiatisbome  in  thy  houfc,  anb 

hethatts  bought  rbiththpmoucp,mufl 

as  z  ueebs 


"  Chap,  j, 
22. 

iOr,vp  nght 
orfneere. 


\Heb. mul- 
titude ofn*- 

tlOMf, 

*Rom.^.i7 


\lhb.BftUj 

[Qtenrntngt. 


'Aas7-8. 


*Acls7.S. 
rom.4,1 1. 

\Htbr.* 

fonntofettht 
cUycs. 

"Lcuit.  it. 
j.lukc  2,;i 
iobn7-U. 


Of  Circumcifion.      Genefis.  Three  Angels. 


\H4rJh.- 

fhjRbtcemc 
nttianl. 


'Chap.  1 8 
10. and  ai 


12. 


neebs  bccircumctfcb:  anbmpcoucuant 
fftallbcmvonr  flcfl),  foj  ancucriafhttg 
untenant. 

i+  anbtftclmciteumcifcbman  cliiits, 
lijftofc  flcfl)  of  ftts  foicffiume  ts  not  tip 
cumcifeb,tftat  fonlc  fftall  be  mt  off  from 
Dig  people :  ftee  ftatft  tyofecn  mp  couc? 
nant. 

15  canb  <5ob  fatb  into  abzaftam, 
as  foz  £>arat  tftpU>ifc,tftDu  fftait  not 
tall  ftcr  name  5>arat ,  but  £>araft  frail 
ftcr  name  be. 

i6  anb  3}  Mil  bleffc  ftcr ,  anb  gutc 
tftce  a  fonne  alfo  of  ftcr :  pea  3J  ibti  blefTc 
fter,  anb  ||  fl)C  fftaibc  a  mother  of  nations : 
l&mgs  of  people  fftall  be  of  ftcr. 

17  Xftett  atyaftam  fell  Upon  fjis 
fate,  anb  lattgftcb,  anb  fatb  in  ftts  ftcart, 
£>ftail  a  child  be  borne  bnto  ftim  tftat  ts 
anftunb?cb  pecrcs  oib  ?anb  fftal  £>araft 
tftat  is  nutcttepceres  olb,  bearer 

13  anb  ab?aftant  fatb  bnto  ©ob,  £) 
tftat  35fl)tnaelnugfttliucbcfo?ctftee. 

19  anbcSobfaib,  *£>araft  tftp  lbtfc 
fftall  bcatc  tftce  afonncutbccbc,  anb 
tftou  fftait  tall  ftts  name  3Jfaac :  anb  3 
Urill  cftabltfl)  mp  tonenant  luttft  ftutt, 
fo?  an  cuerlafhng  touenant,  and  Hntft 
ftts  feeb  after  ftim. 

10  anb  as  foz  3Jfl)inacl  >  3  tout 
ftcarb  tft  ee  i  b  cftoib,ipi  ftatte  blcffcb  ftim, 
anb  ttnll  malic  ftim Truirfull ,  anb  ttnll 
mulnpUc  ftim  crrccbinglp:  *3Ctt>cluc 
pnntcs  0?au  fte  beget,  anb  3J  ttnll  maac 
!)un  a  great  nation. 

n  25utmp  touenant  rbtl3Jcflabltfl) 
ttiitft  1Haac ,  Ibftttft  £>araft  fftali  bcarc 
bnto  tftce ,  at  tftts  fet  time ,  in  tftc  nert 
pecre. 

ii  anb  fte  left  off  talluitg  ttiitft  ftim, 
anb  <5ob  tticnttop  fcomatoaftam. 

1}  canbabjaftamtooltc^Kftmael 
his  fonne,anb  all  ttjat  tticrc  boute  in  ftts 
l)oufc,  anb  all  tftat  mere  bougftt  ttiitft 
l)is  moncp,cucrp  male,amongtftc  mm 
of  abiaftams  ftoufc,  anb  rirtumcifcb 
tftc  flcfl)  of  tftc;r  fojeflrinne ,  in  tftc  fclfc 
famebap.as  d5ob  ftab  fatb  bnto  ftim. 

14  anbajyaftam  wasntnetppecres 
olb  anb  tunc,  ttiftcn  fte  tbas  tirenmnfeb 
in  tftc  flcfl)  of  Ijtsfojcftnnne. 

25  anb  3Jflnnacl  ftts  fount  was  tf)ic- 
tecne  pecrcs  olb,  ttiftcn  Dc  ttias  rirtum- 
cifcb in  tftc  flcfl)  of  ftis  fo?cfltmne. 

16  gin  tftc  fclfc  fame  bap  ttias  a* 
bjaftam  rtrcumnfeb ,  anb  Jjfftmacl  ftts 
fomtc. 

17  Stub  all  tftc  men  of  his  ftoufc, 
borne  in  tfte  ftoufc ,  anb  bougftt  ttiitft 


money  of  tftc  ftrangcr  ,votw  ctccumct* 
feb  ibttft  ftun. 

CHAP.    XVIIL 

1  Abraham  entertaineth  three  Angels.  9  Sa. 
rah  is  reproued  for  laughing  at  theftrange 
promife.  17  The  deflrudion  ot  Sodome  is 
reuealed  to  Abraham.  13  Abraham  ma- 
keth  intercelsion  for  the  men  thereof. 

/Bbtftt*H£)ft2>  ap- 
peareb  into  ftim ,  m  tfte 
piaines  of  t$amre:anb  fte 
wtcintftetentboo?e,tntftc 
„ftcatoftftebap. 
1  ^nb  fte  lift  bp  ftis  eyes  anb  loo 
6eb,anb  loe,  tftjee  men  floob  by  ftim : 
anb  ibften  fte  fatb  them ,  ftce  ranne  to 
mectc  tftem  from  tfte  tent  booje ,  anb 
botticb  fttmfclfc  toibacb  tfte  grounD, 
j  3lnb  fatb, £0p3Lo?b,fifnoH) 
ftatte  founb  fattouc  m  tfty  figftt ,  pau 
not  avbavj  pjap  tftec,fro  tft  v  fcruant . 

4  %ttmticmttt,'$wnouM 
fctcfteb  ,anb  ibafl)  vour  Rctc,  anb  rcfl 
vour  fclucsbnbcr  tfte  tree : 

5  anb  3  m\\  fctrft  a  raotfell  of 
b:eab  i  anb  ^omfotf vt  pour  ftcarts,  af* 
tet  tftat  vou  (ftailpaflc  on:  fo:  tftercfo^c 
f  arc  vou  come  to  pour  fcruant  anb 
fftcvfatb ;  S>oboe,astftouftaftfatb. 

6  anb  abjaftam  ftaftcneb  into  tftc 
tcnt,bnto  5>araft,  9  fatb ; + ^aae  rcabv 
atucRip  tft?cc  meafurcs  of  fine  mcale, 
mtcab  it ,  anb  maftc  tafees  bpon  tfte 
ftcartft. 

7  anb  abjaftam  rannc  brtto  tftc 
ftcarb ,  anb  fctcftt  a  taifc ,  tenber  anb 
goob ,  anb  gaue  tt  bnto  a  pong  man : 
anbftcftattcbtotyeiTett. 

8  anb  fte  tooRe  butter,  anb  mflae, 
anbtftccaifcibftitft  ftcftab  b?eu"cb,anb 
ret  it  before  tftem  -,  anb  fte  floob  bv  tftem 
bttber  tftc  tree: anb tftcp bib eate. 

9  Canbtftc?  fatb  bnto  ftun,i0ftcrc 
\s  3>araft  tftpibtfcf  anb  fte  fatb,  2^ 
ftolb,m  tfte  tent. 

10  anbftcfaib ,  3 mtu"  ccrtainlp  re^ 
turnc  bnto  tftce  atcojbmg  to  tftc  time  of 
life ;  anb  loe ,  *a>arah  tftp  ibux  (ftali 
ftauca  fomtc.  anb  ^araft  ftearb  it  m 
the  tent  boo:c  ,ibfticft  ibasbefttnbftun. 

n  MoW)  abzaftam  anb  S>araft  iberc 
olbanbibcli  ftrtcfecnin  age :  anditcca. 
febto  be  ibttft  5»araft  after  tfte  matter 
ofibomett. 

n  XftercfozeSaraftiaugftebttitf) 
tn  ftcr  fcifc ,  fapmg ,  after  J  am  ibarcb 
olb ,  (bair J  ftatte  picafttrc,  nn>  *  io?D  be 
mgolbalfb^ 

u  anb 


^tbr.ii 


\Hctr.fly. 
t  Heh.you 


jHtkr.H*- 
flm. 


•Chap.  17, 
19. and  l!. 


.Pet. 


Abraham  prayeth      Chap.xix.     for  the  Sodomites. 


•Chap.  II. 
J. and  12, 
i8.ad"ls.j. 
25.gahe. 
5.3. 


13  3taDtt)e3L«0D&2>faiDbtito^ 
bjabam,  valymfoit  biD£>arab  laugh, 
facing  ■>  &ball  3  of  a  furctp  bcare  a 
cbiiDc,tbbicbamolb* 

14  JJs  an?  tt)lng  too  barb  fo?  the 
fLjp&JBD*  3lttbctimcappomteDlbtll 
*J  retnrne  bnto  tbce,  atcojDmg  toti)c 
time  of  life,  anD  >§>arah  (ball  ijauc  a 
fonne. 

15  Chen  £>arab  DenicD,  faping,33 
laugbeD not  :fo?  (Ijc  tbas  afcatD.  2(nD 
he  fatD,  jfcap,but  tbouDiDDett  laugh. 

16  C  3lnD  tljc  men  rofe  Dp  from 
thence ,  anD  IookcD  totbarb  ;&oDome : 
anD  3fl»abam  tbent  tbtth  them ,  to 
tying  tbcni  on  the  tbap. 

17  3nDtbc£.iim2!>faiD,£>naH<5 
ftiuc  from  3!tya!)am  that  thing  tbbich 
3Jooe; 

13  Bering  that  ^bjabam  (ball  Cure* 
Ip  become  a  great  anb  mtgbtp  nation, 
ano  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  (bail  be 
*bleficDinblm* 

19  JFo?  3  fenorb  him ,  tfjatijee  tbill 
tommanbhis  ebittuen ,  anb  \)is  boufo 
liolb  after  him ,  ano  the?  Ojall  beepe  the 
tbap  of  the  %  £>  3&  3D,  to  Doc  iumcc  anb 
ttiDgemcnt ,  that  the  fL£)Bffi>  map 
bang bpon  ^bjabain,  that  tbbich  hec 
hathfpofecn  of  him. 

20  3nbtfjc1L£>&aDCaib,25ccaiu"c 
the  trp  of  £>obomc  anb  (Somojtabis 
great ,  anb  bcraufe  their  finne  is  berp 
grieuous: 

ii  3  tbtllgoe  Dotbne  notb  ,anb  fee 
tbbctber  thep  hauc  Done  altogether  at* 
cobbing  to  the  crp  of  it,  tbbich  is  come 
bnto  me :  anD  if  not,  35  ibill  bnotb. 

22  3nD  the  mm  mrncD  their  feces 
from  thence ,  anb  tbent  totbarb  $>& 
borne :  but  ^tyabam  ftoob  pet  before 
the  SI  £>  ft  2D. 

23  C3nb3b;!ahamb2etbncere,anb 
faib ,  J®(lt  thou  alfo  Dritrop  the  righ- 
teous tbith  the  tbtcfecb* 

14  ^erabuenture  there  be  fifrp  righ- 
teous tbitbin  the  citie;  tbilttboualfo  De- 
drop,  anDnotfpatetbcpiacefo?  tbcfif 
riertgbteous,  rbatarc  therein; 

25  H3)atbcfarrcfromtbec,toDoa& 
tcr  this  mancr,  to  flap  tl)e  righteous 
tbith  tbctb(ckeD,anD  tbattbertgbtcous 
flioulb  be  as  the  tbicBcD ,  that  be  farr  e 
from  thee :  £>bail  not  the  3JuDgc  of  all 
theearthDocrtght* 

26  3{nD  tbclL£>-R2D(aiD,  3Jf  3J 
finD  in  SJoDomfifne  righteous,  tbuhin 
the  ewe,  then3J  tbill  fpare  all  the  place 
fo?  their  Cafees. 


27  ^nb^aham  anftbereDj  anD 
faiD.BcholD  noa>,  31  bauetaben  bpon 
me  to  (peafee  bnto  the  %  $>  ft  £>,tbbub 
ambutbuftanbafljes. 

28  0erabucnture  there  fbail  lacac 
fine  of  the  nfttc  righteous :  twit  thou  w 
ftrop  all  the  ntte  foj  Ucke  of  Sue  t  anD  he 
CaiD ,  3Jf  3J  finD  there  fourtie  anD  fiue, 
3J  tbill  not  Dcftrop  it. 

29  3nD  bee  fpafte  bnto  him  pet  a* 
game,  anD  faiD,  jDcrabucnture  there 
(ball  be  fourtie  founD  there:  anD  befetD, 
3  tbill  not  Do  c  it  fo;t  fourtics  fane. 

30  ^nb  he  faib  bnto  him,  j©h  let  not 
the  ILo?D  be  augrp,  anD  3J  tbill  fpeafee : 
$>craDucnturc  there  (bail  tbtrnc  bee 
founD  thctc^nD  he  feiD,3i  tbill  not  Doe 
t,  ifJJfinDthirticthcre. 

31 :3nDhc!aiD,2echDlDnotb,3Jhauc 
taben  bpon  mec  to  fpeafee  bnto  the 
H02D :  i&eraDucntutc  there  fl)all  bee 
ttbcntp  founb  thcr&  SlnDhciatD,  31 
tbill  not  beftrop  u  fo?ttbenties(afee.  *" 

32  3tnb  hec  faiDc,  &>\)  let  not  the 
1Lo?D  be  angtp,  ano  5  tbill  Ipcafec  pet 
but  this  once :  ^erabucnturc  ten  (ball  be 
founb  therc.^nbhc(aiD,3Jtbainotbet 
flropitfojtcnncsfaHe. 

33  ^nDthelLCKSDtbenthistbap, 
adoone  as  hec  haD  left  comniiming 
tbith  ^b^aham :  anD  3b?aham  retur 
neb  bnto  his  place. 

CHAP.  XIX. 

Lot  entertaineth  two  Angels.  4  The  vici- 
ous Sodomites  are  fliikcn  with  blindnefle. 
11  Lotisfentforfafetyinto  themountaines. 
18  Hee  obtatneth  leaue  to  goe  into  Zoar. 
14  Sodome  and  Gomonah  aredeftroyed. 
26  Lotswifeisapillaroffalt.  30  Lotdwel- 
leth  in  a  caue.  31  The  inceftuous  otiginal! 
of  Moab  and  Atnmon. 

iJ5D  there  came  ttbo  %k 
gels  to  ;§>oDomc  at  eucn, 
anb  ILotfate  in  the  gate  of 
5>oDomc  :anD1Lotfeetng 
them,tofcbp  to  meet  them, 
anD  he  botbcbhunfeUe  tbith  hisfaceto-- 
tbarbthegrounb. 

%  ^nD  hffeiD,  BcholDc  notti  mp 
IL02DS,  rurne  m,  "5  p?ap  pou,  mto  pour 
feruantBhoufe,anDtancallntght,auD 
*  tbafl)  pour  fecte ,  anD  pe  (ball  rife  bp 
cartp anD  goe  onpour  tbapcs.^nD  thep 
(atb,  i!5ap :  buttbctbilabibcmthcdreet 
ailnigbt. 

3  ^nDhcp^cuxD  bpon  them  greatlp, 

anD  thep  turncD  m  bnto  hun ,  anD  en^ 

treDinto  hishoufc:  anD  he  mabethnn 

25  3  afeaft, 


Chai 


Lotshoufebefet.        Genefis.  Sodomc  burnt! 


"WifJ.  !p. 

1 6. 


"Chjp.lS. 


t  Hri.art 
[•uaJ. 

ment. 

•Wlfd.10. 

6. 


afcaft,  anb  bib  bane  bnlcaucnebbicab,  | 
anbtbcybiocatc. 

4  c  2Sut  bcfojc  ttjcy  la?  boibnc, 
tbc  men  of  tbc  cttic,  euen  tbemen  of  ^>o- 
u'oni,  compaflcb  tiic  boufc  rounb,  botb 
oid  ant)  yong,  all  tbc  people  from  cucry 
quarter. 

5  3nbtbcycaucbbntoHot,anbfaib 

bnto  Dim ,  tttycre  arc  tlje  men  lbljtclj 
came  tn  to  tljcc  tljis  nigljt*  tying  tljcm 
out  bnto  bs ,  tljat  ibe  map  UnoU)  tljcm. 

6  3lnb  Hot  incut  out  at  tl)c  boojc 
nMotbcm,*fl)uttnctioo2caftctlnm, 

7  3tnbfaib,  3Jp2ayyou,tyctb?en, 
bocnotfolbicftcbly. 

s  26cbolbnoib,3Jbauctibobaugb< 
tcrs,  ibbicljbaucnot  Itnotbcnman;  let 
nice ,  3  p:av  you ,  tying  tbcm  out  bnto 
you,anbbocyctotljem,  asisgoobm 
your  eyes :  oncly  Ditto  tbefc  men  bo  no= 
tiling:  fiw  tbcrcfo2C  tame  tljey  bnber  tlje 
fljaboibofmyrooff. 

9  3lnb tljey  faib,<a>tanb batltc, 3mb 
tljey  faib  againe ,  %tys  one  fellow  tame 
into  fotournc,  anb  belbillncebsbcea 
gjubgc :  iftoib  ttnl  Uic  beale  ttwfc  lbitb 
thec,  tben  lbtfb  tbcm.  3tnb  tljey  p2Cffeb 
fojebpon  tbc  man,  euen  Hot,  anb  came 
nccrc  to  bzeatte  rftcboozc. 

io  Buttbemcnputfiwtbfbcirbanb, 
anb  pullet)  Hotmto  tbc  Ijoufcto  tftnn, 
antifluittotbcboo2c. 

n  3lnb  tljey  fmotc  tbc  mm  *  tbat 
were  at  tbc  booze  of  tl)c  boufc ,  Jbitlj 
blinbncs,  botl)  ftnall  anb  gr  cat :  fo  tbat 
njcy  ibcancb  tljcmfclucs  to  finbe  tlje 
boo^c. 

n  c  3lnb  tf)c  men  faib  bnto  Hot, 
li?aft  tl)ou  here  any  bcfibcs  <  fonne  in 
laib,  anb  tljy  fonnes,  anb  tfty  baugb* 
tcrs ,  anb  lbtjatfocucr  tbou  baft  in  tbc 
rttic,  bang  them  out  of  tbts  plate. 

13  -fojrocuJillbcftroytbispiatc,  be* 
caufe  tlje  *  crtc  of  fljem  is  lbaren  great 
befoze  tDe  fate  of  tlje  H£>K3> :  anb  tlje 
H  <S>  ft  £>  barb  fent  bs  to  beftroy  it. 

14  3uioHotibcntoiit,anbfpaBebn 
tol)islbnncstnlaib,Vbl)itl)marncbIjis 
baugbtcrs,  anb  faib,  3Up,getyceoutof 
tbis  plate :  fo2  tbcH£>&S>  Unl  beftroy 
tills  tmc :  but  bee  fectneb  as  one  tljat 
motUcb.bntobisfonnestnlaib. 

15  C  3tnb  ibben  tlje  niomtugarofe, 
tbcntljc3lngelsbaftcncb  Hot,  faying, 
3nfe,  taltc  tljylbtfc,  ^tbytlbobaugb 
tcrs,ibbtcb f  arc  here, left  tftou  be  totmi 
nteb  in  tfje  ||  iniquitie  of  the  ntic. 

16  3nb  *  ibbilc  be  lingrcb ,  tlje  men 
laib  Ijolo  bpon  lj#  banb ,  anb  bpontftc 


hanb  of  Ijis  ibtfe,anb  bpon  tbebanb  of 
bis  tibo  baugljtcrs,tljc  H£>ftS>  being 
nicrcifullbnto  ljun :  anb  tljey  tyougbt 
bun  fo2tb,anb  fct  ftim  Mtbout  tlje  citie. 
17  C^nbittamctopaffcibbcntljcy 
nab  tyougljt  njem  fojtij  atyoab,  tljat  Ijc 
faib,efcapc  fo?  tljy  Itfclooac  not  bcljmb 
tbec,  neitljcr  ftay  tljou  tn  all  tlje  piainc : 
efcape  to  tt>c  mountaine ,  left  tljoubce 
confumeb. 

18  ^nbHotfaibbntotl)cm,£)l)not 
fo,my|Lo?b. 

19  alBcbolbc  notb ,  tljy  feruantbatl) 
founb grate mtbyfigijt,  anb  tljou Ijatt 
magttifieb  n)y  mercy,  ibljicl)  tliou  Ijaft 
nicibeb  bnto  mc,in  fauing  my  Itfc ,  anb 
gj  cannot  cftapc  to  tbc  mountaine,  left 
fomc  cuiUtaBcmcanb  3  &k« 

20  2orijolbnolb,tbisciticisnccrcto 
flee  bnto,  anb  it  is  a  litlc  one :  £>lj  let  me 
cfcapctt)injcr,(isitnotalttlconeOanb 
myfoulcfljallliue. 

r\  3liib  be  faib  bnto  rjim,5>cc,5Jljanc 
atccpttb  +  njee  concerning  tljis  tljtng, 
tljat  3J  mill  not  oucrtrjjotb  tljis  citicfo? 
nje  lbbicl)  njou  baft  fpoUen. 

n  ^aftenjee,  efcape  tbitljci;:  foi3 
cannot  boc  any  tbm  g  till  tljou  bee  tome 
tlntbcr  :  tbcrefo?e  tbc  name  of  tbccitic 
ibastaiicbZoar. 

i?  C  %\)t  funne  Vbas f  rifen  bpon 
tJ)c  eartl),ibben  Hot  cntrcb  into  zoar. 

Z4  Xben*tljcH£)3K2?rainebbp5 
on  5>obomc  %  bpon<5omo?rab,bmn* 
ftonc  anb  fire,  fromtbeHj©&2?out 
ofljcauen. 

15  2nbbcottettb?eibrbofceittcs,anb 
all  tlje  piamc,  anb  all  trjc  ttibabitants  of 
the  cities,  anb  tbat  ibbitb  grelb  bpon 
tbegrounb. 

z6  C25utbistbifclooBCbbatlicfrom 
bebmb  bim,  anb  ftjc  became  apiliar  of 
fait. 

17  C  3nb  3fb2abam  gate  bp  carely 
intbcmommg,  totbcplacc,  rbbctcljcc 
(toobbcfojctbcH€)3R2). 

28  ^nbljelooUcbtotbarb^obomc 
anb  (5omo2rab ,  $toibarb  all  tbclanb 
of  tbc  plaint,  anb  bcbclb ,  anb  loe,  tbe 
fmoRC  of  tliecountrcylbent  bp  as  tlje 
fmoRc  of  a  furnace. 

29  C2nbttcamctopaac,tbbcn<!5ob 
ocftroycb  tbc  cities  of  tbe  plaint ,  tbat 
<3ob  tcmcmbico  2biabam,  anb  fent 
Hot  out  of  tlje  nnbft  of  njc  oucrtbjotb, 
Uibcn  be  oucrtlj2Clb  tt)c  cities ,  mtljc 
ibljicbHotblbclt. 

30  C^nbHotibcntbpoutofZoar, 
anb  btbcltm  tlje  mountaine,  anabts 
tibo 


f  Hetjhy 
fact* 


forth. 

*Deut.  19. 

z ;.  'uk.  17, 
29.ifa.13. 
19.ier.50. 
40.amos  4 

I  I-lLiJc  7. 


Lots  inceft. 


Chap.xx.    Abraham  in  Gerar. 


t  He h.  TTtar- 
icdtoun 
husband. 


two  baugl)ters  Wttl)  Dim :  foz  Dec  fca- 
rcD  to  bWcll  m  zoar,  anb  IjcDVbclt  in 
aeaucDc  anb  ins  two  baugDters. 

31  3ltit>  tl)c  firft  bomc  fame  bnto  tDe 
pougct,  &>ur  fatDcr  is  olo,  ano  tlicrc  is 
not  a  man  tn  tlic  cartD ,  to  tome  in  bnto 
bs,  after  tl)c  mancr  of  all  tfjc  cartD. 

31  Come ,  let  bs  masc  one  fatDcr 
bmiUc  Wtnc ,  ano  wc  will  Ipc  WitD  Dim, 
tDatWcmappicfcrucfccb  of  our  fatDcr. 

33  3lnb  tl)cp  mace  tljeir  fatljer  onnUc 
Wtnc  tDat  ntgDt  ,<?  tDc  firft  b02itc  went 
in,  ano  lav  WttD  Dec  fatDcr :  ano  De  per; 
ccitteb  not,  WDen  u>c  lapboWttc,  no? 
WDcnfDcatofc. 

34  31nbtttainctopa{reotttDemo2 
tow  ,tDat  tl)c  firft  borne  faib  bnto  tDc 
pottger ,  25cInMb  ,  3  &V  pcftcrnigbt 
Witlj  mp  fatDcr :  let  bs  make  Dun  bzinlic 
Wmc  tins  mgDt  alfo  ,anb  goc  tDou  in, 
anb  Ipc  WitD  Dim,tDat  Wc  map  pjefcrtte 
fecb  of  our  fatDcr. 

35  3lnb  tDep  mabc  tljcir  fatDcr  bnnac 
Wine  tDat  mgDt  alfo,  anbtDcpongcra= 
rofcanb  lap  WitD  Dim :  anb  Dcpertct- 
ueb  notWDcn  fD  c  lap  bo  Wnc,no?  WDen 
fljearofc. 

36  lEDus  were  botD  tDe  baugljtcrs 
of  Hot  WitD  tDtlbe  bp  tDctr  fatDcr. 

37  3nbtDc  firft  bo2nc  bare  a  fonnc, 
anb  tailcbDisnamc  $3oab :  tDefamcis 
tDc  fatDcr  of  tDc  fipoabttcs  bnto  tljts 

bap. 

33  3nb  tljc  monger,  fljc  alfo  bare  a 
fonnc,  anb  callebDtsnamc,2Scn-ammi: 
tDefamcis  tDc  fatDcr  of  tlje  cljilb.zenot 
3Dnmon,bMotDtsbap. 

CHAP.    XX. 

1  Abraham  foiourneth  at  Gerar,  i  denied! 
his  wife,  and  lofethlier.  3  Abimelechisre- 
prouedforherinadreame.  9  Herebuketh 
Abraham,  14  reftoreth  Sarah,  16  and 
reprooueth  her.  17  Hee  is  healed  by  A- 
brahams  prayer. 

esasaBSg  0Q  3fb2aDam  iourncpcb 
"if  from  tDcntc,  towarb  tDc 
M.  S>outD  -  Countrcp  ,  anb 
^NgfbWcileb  bctwecne   Cfc 
,.£^rbe(D  anb  £>Dur ,  anb  fo- 
tourncbln<i5etat. 

z  2mb  3Cb2aDam  faib  of 5>araD  Dts 
Wife,  S>Dc  ismp  fitter :  3Dtb  3lbnnclecD 
latng  of  d5crar  fent,  anb  tooltc  £>araD. 
3  25ut  d5ob  tame  to  3bitnctctD  in  a 
bjeame  bp  mgDt ,  anb  faib  to  Dim,  75t- 
Dolb,tDoua"butabeabman,fo2tl)cwo 
manWDttD  tDou  Daft  tattcn :  fo;  fleets 
f  a  mans  Wife. 


4  26ut  ^IbimeletD  Dab  not  tome 
uccrc  Der :  anb  Ije  faib ,  %  £>  H  2D,  Wilt 
tljou  flap  alfo  a  ngDteous  nation  < 

5  £>asbl)enotbntoine,£>rjetgmp 
fitter  ^anb  ftjccucu  flic  Dcrfelfc  faib^ee 
ts  nip  tyotijcr :  m  tDc  ||  integrate  of  mp 
Dcart,anb  mnotencic  of  mp  Danbs  Datte 
3fbonctD5S. 

6  anb  <5ob  fatbc  bnto  Dim  tn  a 
bjeame,  j'ca,  3  Know  tlwttDoubibft 
tilts  in  tDc  mtegritic  of  tlip  Dcart :  foz  3 
alfo  Witljljclb  tUce  from  fitunng  againft 
nice,  tDcrcfc>2c  fuffereb  3  tljec  not  to 
toucfjDer. 

7  JRoW  tI)crcfo:c  rcfto2C  tDe  man 
Dis  Wtfc:fo2Dctsa02opDct,anbbe  foal 
pwp  fo?  tljec,  anb  tDon  fljaft  hue :  anb  if 
tDou  rctto2c  Der  not ,  ftnoW  thou  tDat 
tDou  fbalt  furelp  btc ,  tDou,  anb  all  tDat 
aretDine. 

8  '£Dcrcfo2c3fbitncIctD  rofc  earelp 
in  tDc  morning,  anb  taiieb  all  Dis  fcr^ 
uants,  anb  tolb  all  tbcfe  tDmgs  m  ttjctr 
cares :  anb  tDc  men  Were  fo;c  af ratb. 

9  %\)t\\  StbtmclccD  cailcb  3tbza^ 
Dam,anb  faib  bnto  Dtm,n9ftat  Datt  tDou 
bone  bnto  bs^  anb  WDat  Daue  3  ofFcn 
beb  tDcc,  tDat  tijou  Daft  bjougDt  on  me, 
anb  on  mp  bingbome  a  great  finite  i 
tDou  Daft  bone  beebs  bnto  mcc  tDat 
ougDtttottobcbone. 

io  3lnb  3lbimclccD  faib  bnto  ^b2a^ 
Dam,b9DatfaWetttDou,tDat  tljou  Daft 
bonctDiStDiugi 

ii  %\\n  Ttbjktwm  fatb ,  26ecaufc  3 
tDottgDt,  furelp  tDe  fcarc  of  <5ob  ts 
not  intDtsplatc :  anb  tljep  Wtli  flap  mcc 
fozmpwtucsfafte. 

it  3nbpct  mbecb  fl;cc  is  mp  fiftcr : 
fl)C  is  tDebaugDtcrofmp  fatDcr,  but  not 
tDc  battgDtct  of  mp  motDer ,•  anb  fljee 
became  ntpwtfc. 

13  ^nb  it  tame  to  paflc  WDen  <5ob 
caufeb  mc  to  wanbcrfrommpfatDcrs 
Doufc,  tDat  3  fetb  bnto  Der,  XDts  is  tDp 
Uttibncfrc  WDtcD  tDou  fljalt  ftjcW  bnto 
mc; at cucrp  place  WDitDcr  wee  fl)all 
comc,*fap  ofme,$c  is  mpbzotDcr. 

14  3lnb5lbimclecDtoolieft)cepcanb 
orcu,anb  mcn-fcruants,anb  Women 
fcruants ,  anb  gauc  tliem  bnto  ^bja 
Dam,anb  rctto2cb  Dim  ^>araD  Dis  ibtfe. 

15  ^nb  3tbtmclecDfaib,BcDolb,mp 
lattb  is  befoje  tljec ;  bWel '  Wljcre  tt  plea- 
fctDtDce. 

16  3nb  bnto  ^araD  Dec  faib  ,  t&& 
Dolb,  3  Ijauc  gtuctt  tDp  b2otDcr  a  thou- 
fanb pieces  of  filuer :  beDolb,Dc^totDce 
atoucring  oftDecpes,bnto  all  tDat  are 
^ wnD 


\\Or.pmfh- 

cttieorjin- 

Cfriti;. 


*  Chap.  IS. 

'3- 


f  Heir. mi-; 

goodtnthiKt 

ejett 


Ilfaacisborne.  Genefis.      Hagar  comforted. 


■ch.3p.17 

9. mi  18 

10. 

•  Afls7  8 

Gal. 4.1:. 

Hcb.ll.ii 


Chjp.17. 


■Gal. 4  jo 


itoitl)  ti)tc,  anDVDttl)  all  other :  thusfbee 
itoagtcpjoucb. 

17  C  £>o  Sitoaham  pjapcb  bnto 
©ob :  anb  ©ob  hcaieb  3lbimelech,  anb 
htstonfe,  anbhismaib-feruants,  auto 
il)cp  bate  clitlDicit. 

is  f  oj  the  It  £)  IS  2D  hab  fall  cloCcti 
topaUthcltoombcsoftbchoufcof3ibi= 
mclech ,  becaufe  of  3>arah  3b?aham0 
itoife. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  Ifaac  is  borne.  4  Heiscircumcifcd.  6  Sa- 
rahs ioy.  9  Hagar&Ifhmael  are  calt  forth. 
J5  Hagarm  diitieffe.  17  The  Angel  com- 
fortethher.  11  Abimelechscoucnantwilh 
Abraham  at  Bcer-fheba. 

SSlkYB?  S>arahashehabCatb,anto 
^gtDefl^D  bib  unto 
35pf£^$  &arah*ashchatofpoftcn. 
t^m%££  1  iro?5>aral)*tonccb 
uc&,  ano  bare  3Uuabam  a  fount  m  his 
olD  age ,  at  the  frt  nine ,  of  ibhich  ©ob 
habfpo&cntohim. 

3  3Jnb  Slbzaham  caileb  the  name  of 
bts  fonuc,  that  ibas  borne  tonto  hun, 
ibhom  5>arah  bare  to  htm,  3Jfaat. 

4.  2nb  2b.iaham  ctrcumctfcb  f)ts 
fonne  gjfaac,  bring  eightbapcs  oUV  as 
©ob  hab  tommaubcto  l)tm. 

5  2lnto  3lb.Mham  itoas  an  huntozeb 
rccrcsoib,  ibhcnhis  fonnc^faatibas 
bomc  tonto  him. 

6  c  3lnb  ia>atah  fatb ,  ©ob  hath 
inabc  me  to  laug!),  fo  that  all  tljat  Ijeare, 
itoill  laugh  ttuth  me. 

7  3mbibcfatb,  aahoibouibhauc 
fait)  bntoatyahan^that&atah  fboiilto 
hauc  giuen  tljilbzen  fucKc*  fo:3J  hauc 
bomc  him  a  fonne  in  his  o  lb  age. 

8  3nbthcehUbgrclb,anbltoasitoca; 
neb:  anbSOuafjammabc  agreatfeaa, 
tDe  ftme  tap  that  3Jfaac  itoas  itocancb. 

9  C  3nb  £>arah  falb  tfje  fonne  of 
Dagacthctfgpptian,  itohichfbcchab 
borne  bnto  abMhamjuocluitg. 

10  naherfojc  (be  fatb  tonto  3taabam, 
*Caft  out  this  bonb  lboman,  anb  her 
fonne :  foz  tl)t  fonne  of  this  bonb  ibo- 
man  (l)all  not  be  beire  lbttb  nip  fonne, 
euenttnth3?faat. 

n  3lnto  the  thing  itoas  tocrp  grieuous 
in  atoabams  fight,  bttaufc  of  b«s 
fonuc. 

u  C3mb©obfaibbnto:3nMabam, 
!Lmt  not  be  grimousmtbp  fight,  be-- 
caufc  of  the  iab,anb  brtanfc  of  tbp  bonb 
ltooman.  ;jn  all  that  £>arab  bath  faib 


bnto  thee,  beatsen  tonto  bet  tooice ;  fo? 
in  j$Uw  fbau  tbp  fecb  be  taiieb. 

ij  2mtoatfo,oftbefonneoftbebonB 
tbonianitoili^inatteanation,  betaufe 
beistbpfecb. 

14  2in&  3tt#abam  rofe  top  catelp  in 
the  morning ,  anb  tooac  bzeao,  anb  a 
bottle  of  ltoater ,  anb  gauc  it  tonto  $& 
gar,  (putting  it  on  berfboulbcr,)  an!) 
the  tbilb ,  anb  fent  ijee  aroap :  anb  fljee 
bepartcb,  anbitoanbcreto  in  the  Unlace 
mfeofasecrOjeba. 

15  3inbtbe  ltoater  itoas  fpent  m  the 
bottle,  anb  thee  tali  the  tbflbtonber  one 
oftbefbmbs. 

16  aubfbetbcnt.anbfatebecboitone 
oner  agamft  him,  agoob  ltoapofif,  as  it 
itocrcaboibfijoot:  foifbefaib,fLetme 
notfcctbcbeatboftbccbilb.  3lnbfbce 
fate  oucr  agamft  him,  auto  lift  top  Ijet 
tooicc,antoitocpt. 

17  3mb  ©ob  beatb  the  tooite  of  tbt 
lab,  anb  n>  ^ugcl  of  ©ob  callcb  to  $a> 
gar  out  of  Ijcaucn ,  anb  faito  tontoljer, 
aal)atartctht!)ce,i?agarifearenot:fo? 
<Sob  !jatt)  pearb  tlje  tooite  of  tt)c  labtoe, 
itohcreljeis. 

18  3rife,Ufttoptnelato,an&ljoH)f)iui 
mrtjme  Ijanb :  fo?  3  ibill  mafee  !)ima 
great  nation. 

I?  ^nb  ©ob  openeb  Jjetcpefi,  anb 
fl)efaitoattrtlofujatcr,anbfl)Ccitoent, 
anb  fillers  the  bottle  Witl)  ltoater,  anb 
gauc  tlje  lab  b^nue. 

10  3lnb  ©ob  ltoas  tbitl)  the  lab,  anb 
Dcgreito,  anbbttocltut  the  itoilbcrncffc, 
anb  became  an  archer. 

21  3nb  hec  brortt  in  the  tbtlberncffe 
of^aran:  anb  his  mother  toobe  him  a 
\toifc  out  of  thclanb  of  Cgppt. 

rx  C  ^nb  tt  came  to  paffc  at  that 
tunc,  thatSbtmclceh  anb  ph«c!)ol  the 
chicfe  captame  of  hts  hofte  fpafee  tonto 
^bzaham,  faptng,  ©oto  h  itolth  thee  in 
allthatthouooelT. 

i  j  iBoito  thevefoze  froearc  tonto  nice 
here  bp  ©ob,  that  thouitoiitnot^calc 
falflpltotthme,  nontoitlj  mp  fonne,  no? 
itoith  mp  fonncs  fonne :  but  acceding  to 
the  Binbneflc  that  J>  hauc  bone  bnto 
thee, thou  fhaltboc  tonto  me,  anb  to  the 
lanbibhcrcin  thouhattfotoumeb. 
m  24  ^nb  ^b?aham  faibe ,  3  ltoUl 
finearc. 

25  3nb  Slbiaham  repjoueb  abime^ 
lech,  becaufc  of  a  itocll  of  ltoater,  itohich 
^buueiechs  fcruants  hab  toiolentlpt* 
Ucn  aroap. 

26  3Jnb  ^totmelech  faibc,  3J  tbotc 
not 


f  Hehrrxjf 
thoupxUt  ht 
vntt  me. 


Abrah 


am  is  tempt* 


:d.  CI 


ia 


p.xxij, 


Ifaacfpared. 


(Ttatij, 
The  well  of 
thtelhc. 


{Or.Trtc. 


•Hcbr.n. 
■7- 


t  Hitr.Bc- 
hehlmt. 


notlbbohatbbonc  this  thingrnctthct 
bibli  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  Dcarb3i 
ofit,buttobay. 

vf  ^inbSityabamtooBefbcepeanb 
orcn,anb  gauc  them  bnto  ^bimclcch: 
anb  both  of  them  mane  a  toaenant. 

is  #nb  ^bzaDam  fet  fcucn  elbe 
lambes  of  the  flotne  by  themfelucs. 

19  2nb  3lbimclcch  fatb  bnto  3fbja; 
Dam ,  nsftat  meanc  thefc  feuctt  elbe 
lambes ,  ibbtcD  thou  haft  fet  by  than 
fciucs  • 

jo  ^nu  he  faib,  jf  o*  tfttfc  feuctt  elbe 
lambs  a)au  thoutaBcofmyhanb.tDat 
tljep  ntav  be  a  ibttneu"c  bnto  mcthat  3 
Dattebiggebthistbcll. 

31  n9hcrcfo:e  he  taileb  that  plate, 
||28eet  (beba:  becaufe  there  theyfoiate 
both  of  them. 

jx  %\)\xs  they  mabe  a  toucttattt  at 
Bccct-fbeba:  then  abimelecDtoftbp, 
anb  #hichol  the  chiefe  taptamc  of  his 
hoftc ,  anb they  tetutneb  into  tDe  lanb 
ofthc0btltftutes. 

j j  C  3nb  Abraham  piantcb  a  ||  gtouc 
m  ascct-fbeba,  anb  taileb  there  on  the 
/Same  of  the  %  £>  ft  2D ,  tt)e  cucrla* 
fttngd&ob. 

34  3mb  abjaham  fofoutneb  in  tDc 
^htliftines  lanb  ,many  bayes. 

CHAP.    XXIL 

I  Abraham  is  tempted  to  offer  Ifaac.  }  Hee 
ei'jcch  proofe  of  his  faith  and  obedience. 
ii  The  Angel  ftayeth  him.  13  Ilaac  is 
exchanged  with  a  ramme.  14  The  place 
is  called  Iehouah-ijreh.  15  Abraham  is 
blefledagaine.  10  The  generation  of  Na- 
horvnto  Rebekah. 

415b  it  tame  to  paffe  after 
thefe  things, that *<£ob 
bib  tempt  Slbzaham  ,anb 
faibbnto  him ,  :ab2aham. 
3utbhccfaib,  T25cholbc, 
Deere  3  am. 

x  3inb  he  fatb/Cauc  noib  thy  tonne, 
thine  onclyiormc3j  faac,\bbomthouio; 
ucft,  anb  get  thee  into  the  lanb  of  $)o- 
rial) :  anb  offer  Dim  there  fo:  a  burnt 
offering  bpon  otic  of  tbcil3ountaincs 
which  If  ttnii  tell  thee  of. 

5  C  3Cnb  3toaDam  rofc  bp  carcly 
m  the  morning,  anb  fablcb  his  affe,  anb 
tooucttbo  of  his  yong  men  iMhhim, 
anb  3Haae  his  fonnc ,  anb  tlauc  the 
iboobfo?  the  burnt  offering ,  anb  rofc 
bp ,  anb  ibent  bnto  the  place  of  ibhich 
(Bobhabtolbhim. 


4  Xhen  on  tljc  thirb  bay  abzaham 
lift  bp  his  eyes ,  anb  faVb  the  place  a 
farrcoff. 

5  3lnb  ^biaham  faib  bnto  Dteyong 
men,^bibcyouhercibiththc  affc,am> 
3  anb  the  labibillgoc yonber  ano  Xbo? 
(T)ip,anb  come  agame  to  you. 

6  3lnb3lb2abamtooKetbeiboobof 
the  burnt  offcrtng,anblayb  it  bpon^j 
faathisfonne :  anb  he  toolte  the  fire  ut 
his  hanb ,  anb  a  tmife :  anb  they  lbettt 
both  of  thetn  together. 

7  2lnb3JfaatfpaRcbnto3{h2ahain 
Dtsfatl)er,anbfaib,  £0y father: anb  he 
faib, f  i^crc  am  %  my  fonnc.  3inbhec 
fatb ,  Beholb  tfje  fire  anb  lbooo :  but 
inhere  is  the  Ulambefo?  a  burnt  offring* 

8  2lnb  3lb2aham  faib ,  flpy  fonnc, 
d5ob  tbill  pjouibc  himfclfc  a  lambc  foi  a 
burnt  offering :  to  they  lbettt  both  of 
them  together. 

9  3lnb  they  tame  f  o  the  plate  ibhich 
00b  Dab  tolbe  him  of,  anb  3b?aDam 
built  an  3Itar  there,anb  layb  the  iboob 
in  02bcr ,  anb  bottttb  3Jfaat  his  fonnc, 
anb  *  laybe  him  on  the  3lltar  bpon  the 
iboob. 

10  3nb  SfbjaDam  ftrctchcb  foozth 
his  hanb,  anb  toofee  tl;c  unifc  to  flay  his 
fonne. 

11  2utb  the  3utgcl  of  the  %  D  &  3D 
caiicb  bnto  htm  out  of  Dcauct^attbfaio, 
^b«tDam,3lb?aham.  ^inb  he  faib ,f?cre 

ant^- 

n  7Mb  he  faib ,  Hay  not  thine  hanb 
bpon  tDe  lab,  neither  bo  thou  any  tiling 
bnto  him :  foz  nolb^  KnoM)  that  thou 
feared  d5ob,fccing  thou  haft  nonbttij 
hclbc  thy  fonne ,  thine  ottcly  fonnc 
frommee. 

13  ^nb^b?aham  itftcb  bp  his  eyes, 
anb  loolteb ,  anb  bcholDe ,  bchmbc  him  a 
Eammc  caught  in  a  thitttct  by  hts 
homcs:^ttb  ^bzahant  ibent  anb  tooue 
the  Hamme  ,anb  offer cb  him  bp  fo?a 
burnt  offcrmg,tn  theftcab  of  his  fonnc. 

14.  3nb3lb2ahamtallcbthcnameof 
thatplatc||3lcl)ouaD  t)teh,asit  tsfaib 
to  tDis  bay ,  3fn  tljc  Q3ount  of  the 
%  &  ft  5>  it  fbalbc  feenc. 

15  C3lnbthe5lngclofthc1LS>BD 
caiicb  bnto  ^bzaham  out  of  Ijcaunt  the 
fctonbtimc, 

16  3lnb  faib ,  *  25y  my  fclfc  Dane  3 
fioomc,  faith  the  %  ®  3S  3D,fozbecaufc 
tljou  haft  bone  this  thing,  anb  haft  not 
ibithhcio  thy  fonnc,  thine  ottcly  fonnc, 

17  Xhat  in  blcffutg  3  ibtll  blcffc 
thee,  anb  m  multiplying,  3  ibtll  mul 
ttply 


f  Hch be- 
hold tit. 


i  That  is, 
The  L0R7) 

■til fee,  ar% 
froHtdt. 


•Pill.  10  j. 
9.ecclus. 
44  si.  lukr 
1.  7  j.hcbr. 

5.12. 


Sarahs  death. 


Gcncfis. 


Herbunall. 


>  TU.Kppe. 

'Chap. II. 
;.  and  18. 
lS.ecclus. 

j.xj.gjlat. 
3.8. 


•  Called 

Ronvp.IO. 

Rebecca. 


t  Heir.* 
P.-itve  of 
God. 


tvply  thy  feeb  as  tf)c  fiacres  of  the  fiea- 
ucn,  anb  as  the  faub  Which  isbponrijc 
fca1  fliozr,  arm  toy  fceb  OjaUpofrefTc  ttje 
gate  of  his  enemies. 

is  *  3UW  m  tliv  f«t>  ftjaU  all  the  nati- 
ons of  the  earth  be  blcffto,  becaufc  thou 
haft  obey  cb  my  boice. 

19  So  ^bjaham  returneb  bntoOis 
yongmen,  anb  they  rofcbp,  anb  went 
together  to  Scer-fheba ,  anb^b?aljam 
bwcltati5ccrfl)cba. 

20  c  titbit  tame  to  paffe  after  fhefe 
things,  thattt  wastolb3W,2aham,fay/ 
mg,  26cliolb  £Biicah,  fhee  Oath  alto 
borne  rfiiityen  bnto  thy  brother  iBa- 
ho?, 

it  fiit5  Ins  firft  borne ,  anb  Sirs  01s 
tootljer ,  anb  Bcinuel  the  father  of 

21  3lnbChcfcb,anbfia50,  anb  $il 
bafl),anb  3hbiapo,  anb  ascthuel. 

23  3mb  iocthuel  begate  *  Bcbcuao : 
thefc  eight  i^ilcahbtbbcarcto  /3aho?, 
3lb2ahamsb2otlicr. 

24  3nohts  contnb'.nc  Whofc  name 
Was  Scumah,flie  bare  alfo  Hcbah,anb 
<5aham,anb%hahau),  anb  fipaachah. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

1   The  age  and  dcadi  of  Sarah.  3  Thepurchafe 
of  Machpclah,  icp  whereSarah  was  buried. 

jftb  Sarah  was  an  hun 
■w  DztbanbfcttcnanbtWcnty 
ws  yccrrs  olbc :  thefc  were  the 
^el*t>A?  vecrrsofthe  life  of  Sarah. 
'■z^vmzg  2  3nb  Sarah  bieb  m 
Biriati)  arba,tl)t  fame  is  ficb2on  m  toe 
lanbof  Canaan :  3lno  3b:aham  came 
to  mourncfo:Sarah,anbtoWccpcfo«! 
her. 

j  C  3mb  3b2aham  ftoob  bp  from 
before  hisbcao, « fpahe  bnto  the  fonncs 
officth,faymg, 

4-  51  am  a  firanger  anb  a  fotonrncr 
wuhyou:  guie  me  apofrefftonof  abn- 
eying  place  with  you,  that  3  may  bury 
my  bcab  out  of  my  fight. 

5  3tnb  the  chilbitn  of  ficfh  aufwer cb 
3b2aham,faymgbtito  him, 

6  ficarc  bs ,  my  llozb ,  thou  art  a 
'  mighttc  #2tnce  amongft  bs  :  m  the 
thoifcof  our  fcpulchjcs  bury  thy  bcab : 
none  of  bs  fiiail  lbtthholb  from  thec  his 
fcpulch:e,  but  tlj.it  thou  mayefi  bury 
thy  bcab. 

7  3nb3b2auamftoobbpanbbow 
cbhimfelfetothc  people  of  the  lanb,  e- 
ueri  to  the  chilb:cn  of  ficth. 

8  3Wb  hre  tomnnmcb  with  them, 


faymg,  if  it  be  your  nunb  that  3  fhoulb 
bury  my  bcab  out  of  my  fight,hcare  me, 
anb  entreat fo.zmc  to  epljzon  the  tonne 
ofzohar: 

9  Xhathc  may  giue  me  the  tauc  of 
s^achpeiah,  Which  he  hath,  Which  » in 
the  cub  of  his  ficlb :  fin f  as  mud)  money 
as  it  is  W02th  ficfhaligiue  ttmee,foza 
poflcflion  of  a  burymg  place  amongft 
you. 

io  stub  cphjon  btbelt  amongft  the 
chiibicn  of  ficth.  3ltib£ph2onthefiu> 
tttc  anfroercb  Sltyahani  in  the  *  auW 
cute  of  the  cl)ilb2cn  of  fietl),  eucn  of  all 
that  went  tn  at  the  gates  of  his  title, 
faymg, 

ii  /i?ay,my  I02b,liearemcc :  the  ficlb 
giue  3  thecanb  the  cane  that  is  therein, 
3  guic  tt  thee ,  m  the  p2cfcnce  of  the 
tonnes  of  my  people  giue  31  it  thee :  bu 
ry  thy  bcab. 

12  3lnb  3to;tahani  boWcb  boWne 
rjiinfclfcbefojc  the  people  of  the  lanb. 

13  3nb  fie  fpattc  bnto  cplnon  m  tl)c 
aubicnce  of  thcpcoplc  of  the  lanb ,  fay- 
mg, 25ut  if  thou  Wtlt  g>uc  it,  3  pjay  thee, 
hcaremee :  3  will  giue  thee  money  to? 
tlit  ficlb :  tafte  tt  of  mc,  anb  3  mill  bury 
my  beab  there. 

i*\.  3lnb  epfijon  anfWcrrt)  ^bja- 
ham,faymgbntohim, 

15  £)9y  102b,  hcarRcn  bnto  nice: tlje 
lanb  is  wojth  fotire  hunbjcb  njrUcls  of 
filuct :  what  is  that  bctWirt  nice  anb 
ti)ta  bury  tliercfo2C  tl)y  beao. 

16  3Jno  ?lb2aljam  ficarfteneb  bnto 
£ph2on,anb  3ft)2aham  Wcigl)eb  to€- 
ptoon  the  filucr ,  lbhtcfi  he  hab  namcb, 
tn  the  aubtcntc  of  tlje  tonnes  of  fietlj, 
fourc  hunbjcb  n)cuels  of  filucr,  currant 

money  With  tl)C  merchant. 

17  C3lnbtf)eficlbof€ph20tiWfiich 
was  tn  £0art)pelalj ,  which  was  before 
<55anirc,thc  ficlbcanb  the  taut  Which 
^•isthcrem,  anball  thetrcesthatwerc 
mtficfielb  ,thatwere  iuail  trjcbo.2bcrs 
rouubabout,Wcremabefurc 

18  ?IInto^b2aham to: a pofTcfuon in 
the  p2cfcncc  of  tlic  thslbjcn  of  fieri),  be 
fiwaii  tljat  went  mat  thegates  of  bis 

19  3uw  after  tfiig  ^bjafiam  buricb 
Sarah  his  Wife  m  ri)e  cane  of  the  ficlb 
offiPad)pelah,bcfo2cQ3amre:thcfamc 
is  ficb;on  m  the  lanb  of  Canaan. 

20  3inb  riic  ficlb, anb  the  caue  riiat 
■sriicrem,  were  mabc  fine  Dnto3lb2a- 
ham,fo;  a  poftcfTion  of  a  burymgpiate, 
by  thefonucsof  fieri). 

CHAP. 


\H.-h.fuH 

mar.er. 


\Iittr.tem. 


Care  to  prouide        Cfiap.xxiiij.         a  wife  for  Ifag 


aac. 


t  Hebr.^one 
tntQiUycs. 


Chap.  47 
*9- 


*  Chap,  i  z. 
7.  and  i ;. 
1  5.  and  15 
1  S.and  16. 


lOr.A.^ 


CHAP.    XXIIII. 

Abraham  fweareth  his  feruant.  10  Thefer- 
uants  iourncy :  11  His  prayer:  14  His 
fignc.  15  Rebekahmectcthhim,  1S  lul- 
filleth  his  figne,  ^•-  receiueth  iewels ,  13 
fticweth  her  kinred,  2.5  and  inuiteth  him 
home.  16  The  feruant bleileth  God.  iS  La- 
ban  enterceineth  him.  34  The  feruant  fhew- 
ethhismeffage.  50  Laban  and  Bethuel  ap- 
proue  it.  58  Rebekah  confeuteth  to  goe. 
6z  Ifaacmeetethher. 

0ti  3ib?aftam  ibas  olbc 
and 1  men  ftrtcRcn  in  age : 
stnbtftc  n  <£>££>  tifio 
blcffcb  3ib?al)am  tn  all 
_  tilings. 
z  30tt>3UHal)amfaiDl)ntohis'rtDcft 
feruant  offtis  ftoufc,  tftat  rulcb  ourr  an 
tftat  ftcftab,*0ut,  3Jp2aptftcc,  tl)p 

ftanbimbcrmptotgo*. 

3  3lnb 31  mill  maUc  tnce  fiucarc  bp 
tt)t%&>3£5>ti)c6ob  offtcaucmanb 
flje  ©od  of  toe  eartl) ,  tftat  tftou  fftait 
not  take  a  ltnfc  unto  mp  fonnc  of  tfjc 
oaugfttcrs  of  tftc  Canaamtcs  amongft 
mftom^Jbibcll. 

4.  25ut  tftou  Cftaii  go  bnto  nip  toutfc 
trep ,  anb  to  nip  ftmrco.anb  tafec  amtfc 
bnto  nip  fonnc  3lfaat. 

5  3nb  tf)e  feruant  faib  tmto  ftim, 
$crabucntur  c  tftc  woman  Ibill  not  bee 
Willing  to  follow?  nice  bnto  tftisianb : 
nraftginccbcsbmig  flip  fonnc  agatne, 
tntto  tfte  lanb  from  licence  tftou  ca? 
meftf 

6  3ittb  3lb?aftam  faib  bnto  \)im,T&p 
ware  tftou ,  tftat  tftou  b?uig  not  nip 
fonnc  tftitftcragame. 

7  CXftc?L£>3a2!>Gobofftcaucn 
Wfticft  toolic  met  from  mp  fathers 
ftoufc,anb  from  tfte  lanb  of  mp  lunb?cb, 
anb  ibrjtrrj  fpaRc  Dnto  nice,  anb  tl)at 
fware  unto  mc,  faping,  *  Slnto  tftp  fecb 
ttttll31  giitc  tftisianb ,  ftc  fbail  fenb  ftis 
^ngrtbefojctfjccanbrlioiifljaittaHea 
Wifebnto  mpfonncfroni  tftence. 

3  3nb  if  tftc  Woman  WilnotbcWtV 
ling  to  follow  tftcc ,  tftctt  tl)ou  fftait  bee 
tlcart  fromtftismp  othc :  onclp  bnng 
not  mp  fonnc  tftitftcr  agamc 

9  2nb  tnc  feruant  put  ftis  ftanb  bn 
bcr  tl)e  tftigft  of  3ib?aftani  ftts  maftcr, 
ano  ftbart  to  ftun  contenting  tftat 
matter. 

10  C  3nb  tftc  feruant  toofec  tcuta^ 
mcls,of  tftc  camels  of  fits  matter,  anb 
bcparttb,(  ||fc>2  all  tftc  goobs  ofhis  ma- 
tter Were  m  ftis  ftanb)  anb  ftc  arofc,anb 


Went  to  £0cfopotamia,  tonto  tlje  nne 
ofifiafto?. 

11  3lnbftemabcftiS  camels  to  Unecle 
bownc  Vbittjout  tftc  cine ,  bp  a  well  of 
mater,  at  tnc  nine  of  thceucnuig,  euen 
tftcnnic 1  tftat  Women  goe  out  to  D?aW 

water. 

11  3uibncfatb,£>iL!©3aiD)Gobof 
mp  matter  3b?aftam ,  3  P^V  tftcc  fenb 
mc  goob  fpeeb  tins  bap,aub  fftcw  Ruib 
iicffc  bnto  mp  matter  ^tbjaljam. 

13  aScftottVJJ  ftanb  ftrrc bp  tftc  Well 
of  mater;  anb  tfte  baugfttcrs  of  toe 
men  of  tlje  Citic  come  out  to  b;atb 
mater: 

14.  ^nblct  it  come  to  pafTc,  tljat  tlic 
bamfcll  to  U)I)om  3  fljall  fap ,  %et 
botbnctUppitcl)cr,3Jp2aptl)cc,tl)at3 
mapbnnltc,  anb  fl)c  mall  fap,  3>2uirc, 
anb  %  rbillgiuc  top  camels  bJinbc  alfo, 
let  rife  fame  be  (oec  tljat  tijou  Daft  ap 
pomtcb  fo:  tl)p  feruant  'Jfaac :  anb 
toercbp  ttjail  31  bnotb  tljat  tOou  Ijaft 
foclbcb  RiubncfTc  bnto  mp  maftcr. 

\%  C3lnbittamctopaffcbcfo2cl)ce 
tjab  bone  fpcalung ,  toat  bcljolb,  3Kcbt 
sal)  came  out,  woo  was  borne  to  26c? 
tourt,  fonnc  of  £0ileal),  toe  rbifc  ofiI3a? 
Oo?  ^bjaljams  bjotljer ,  Vbitl)  l)er  pit 
coerbponljcr  fooulbcr. 

is  ftnb  t!)c  bamfcll  mas x  bcrp  fairc 
tolooBCDpon,abirgitic,neirt)croab^ 
np  man  nnottim  otr ;  anb  fljee  mem 
bolbnctotljcU)cl,anbnllcbI)erpitcl)cr, 
anb  came  bp. 

17  ^nb  toe  feruant  ramie  1 0  mcete 
oer,anb  faib ,  %tt  mcc  (^Jpjaptljcc) 
b?inBcalittlcibatcr  of  tljppitcljcr. 

is  3nbtt)cfaib,2D2inKc,mp  102b :  anb 
ftjc  oattcb,  anb  let  bottine  Ijcc  pucljcr 
bpon  Ocr  Ijanb,  anb  gaue  oimtymBC. 

19  3}iiblbI)enft)ecoabboncguUug 
mm  b2inftc,tt)cfaib,5j  mill  b2am  inatcr 
fo?  top  tamcls  alfo ,  tntiil  tljcp  oaue 
boncb2lnlung. 

10  ^nb  foe  l;aftcb  anb  emptieb  fjet: 
pitdjer  Into  toe  trougo ,  anb  ramie  a* 
gaine  bnto  tlje  tbell  to  biarb  water,  anb 
bictbfo?  all  pis  camels. 

2 1  3nb  toe  man  lbonbcruig  at  Ijcr , 
lielfic  Ws  peace,  to  ibit,  Iboctljcr  tlje 
%&&$>  l)ab  mabc  I)is  iourneppjofc 
pcrous,02not. 

iz  ^nb  it  tame  to  paffc  as  tlje  camels 
Dab  bone  bnnlnng,  toatri)c  numtooRC 
a  golbcn  ||carc-rmg,  of  Daife  a  ftjeftcl 
Vo  cigl)t#  rtbo  b2acclcts  fo?  ft  cr  ftanbes, 
of  ten  fhekeis  rbrtgftt  of  solb, 

23  3nb  faib ,  ©ftofc  baugl)tcr  art 

rhoui 


\I1fLr.tk.\t 
Jvomc  irbtib 
dr.iTv  water, 


A     J 


or!  1). 


*Vcrr43. 


I  He br,  gco 
ofccuntc- 


\  Or,  icrreK 
far  the  fore- 
head. 


Abrahams  feruant,     Genciis.  and  Rebekah. 


tbou*  tell  nice,  3  pjap  rtjee :  is  tbece 
roome  tn  rt)p  fattjers  Ijoufc  fo:  bs  to 
lobgemi 

-4.  anb  (be  fatb  bnto  Dint,  gj  am  tbc 
baugbtcr  of  loctbucl  tbc  fonnc  of  s33il; 
cab.ibhicb  fl)t  bare  bnto  /3a1)oz : 

2 5  5>bcfatb mojcoucr unto bun,iBe 
bauc  botb  (train*  p20uctibcrpnougb, 
anbroomctolobgcut. 

i6  aim  tbc  man  bolbcb  bourne  \)ie 
bcab,anb  nwfbippcb  tl)c  %  •£>  K  Z>. 

17  anb  bec  fame ,  Slcffcb  bee  tlje 
!L£D8£>C5obofmpmaftctab2abam, 
lbbo  batb  not  left  beftmtte  mp  matter 
of  bis  merchant)  Instruct!) :  3  being 
m  tilt  lbap,tbc  %  j£>B  D  let)  me  to  tlje 
Ijoufc  of  mp  matters  bjettyen. 

2S  aim  tlje  bamfell  raunc ,  ana  tolb 
iheniofheiMiiotl)crsrjoufe,t!)cfctl)utgs. 

29  C aim  Bcbcttab  I>ib  another, 
atmbts  name  was  fLaban:  anbfLaban 
ranne  out  Imto  tbematt,bnto  tbclbcll. 

jo  aim  u  tame  to  paffc  mben  be  fam 
tbe  carc-rtttg,  atm  bracelets  Upon  Ijts 
filters  Ijanos,  anb  lbbcn  Dee  beam  tbc 
ib02bcs  of  ftcbcltab  ins  Offer ,  faring, 
XDns  fpanc  tbc  man  bnto  mc,  tbat  be 
came  bnto  tl)c  man  •,  anb  bcbolb ,  bee 
ttoobbptbc  camcis,at  tbclbcll. 

31  aitbbcfaib,Comcui,tboublc(rc& 
of  tbc  %&&£>,  lbbcrcfojc  ftattbett 
tbouibttbout;  fojj  bauc  pztparebttjc 
boufe,anbroomcto2tbecamcls. 

ji  C  anb  tlje  man  tame  into  flic 
Houfc:  anb  lie  bngitbcbbis  camcis,atm 
gauc  ftralb  anb  pmuctmcc  foz  tfje  cfc 
nieis, aim  water  to  ibalbbisfcet,  atm 
tlje  mms  feet  tljat  were  mitb  bint. 

35  3lnbtl)erclbasfetmeatbcfo.:cl)un 
to  catc :  but  be  faib  ,3  Mil  not  eatc,bn 
Ml  gi  banc  tolbc  tunic  ccranb.  aubbec 
faib,£>pcaUcon. 

3+  aim  \)t  faib,gj  am  abialjanis  fev 
uaut. 

35  aim  tbc  %  <©  £  £>  batb  blcffeb 
mp  matter  grcatlp,  anb  bee  is  become 
great:  anb  btc  batb  gmen  bun  floxus, 
anobcarbs,  anb  fiiucr,  anb  golb,  anb 
nicnfctuants,atibmapbfcruaiits,aitb 
tantcls.anbaflcs. 

j6  anb  £>atab  mp  maffcrs  lbifc 
bare  a  fonnc  to  mp  maftcr  lbbcn  (bee 
mas  olb :  anb  Imto  bnn  batlj  bee  gmen 
aiitbatbcbatlj. 

37  anb  mp  matter  mane  mc  Trocar  c, 
facing,  Xbott  (bait  not  taltc  a  lbtfcto 
mp  fonnc,  of  tbc  baugbtcrs  of  tbc  Ca^ 
naanttf  0,m  rbbofc  lanb  33  bibcll : 

38  2Sut  tbou  (bait  goc  Dnto  my  fa 


tbers  boufc,  aitb  to  mp  Kuircb.anb  tattc 
aibifebtitompfotmc. 

39  aim  3  faib  bnto  mp  maff er,  0cr- 
abucnturc  t\)t  Uioman  ttiill  not  follolbe 

mc  „  „, 

a.0  aim  bec  faibc  bnto  ate ,  %l)t 
H£)B  3D,bcfo2ciUbom3J  inaifee,\bill 
fcitbljis  angel  ibitb  tljcc,  anb  pjofper 
tbp  map :  anb  tbou  fbalt  taltc  a  lbifc  fo  j 
mp  fonnc,  of  my  Btttteb,  anb  of  mp  fa 
tljers  boufc. 

41  Xbcn  H)att  tbou  bec  clearcfrom 
tins  mp  oatb ,  lbbcn  tbou  commeft  to 
mp  binr cb,  anb  if  tl)ep  gate  not  tbee  one, 
tbou  (bait  be  clearcfrom  nip  oatb. 

42  3lnb3J  tame  tbis  H^  bnto  tbc 
U)cll,anb  fatb,S>  %  £>  ft  S>  @ob  of  mp 
maftcr  3lb2abam,  ifttoVb  tbouDoep.201 
pcrmp  ibap,ibbtcb5goc : 

43  *25cbolb,3JfTanbbptbetbcllof 
ibatcr ;  anb  it  (bail  tome  to  paffc ,  tbat 
lbbcn  tlje  Uirgtnc  commctb  £oo2tlj  to 
b2aib«acer,anbgjfaptobcr,  ®iuc me, 
gj  piap  tbcc,aiitlc  ibater  of  tbp  ptteljcr 
tobntiuc,- 

44  anb  (be  fap  to  mc,  2Botb  bnnbe 
tbou,  anb  gilbtll  aifo  bzalb  foMbpt* 
mcls:  tcttbcfamcbetbclboniatt,  ibbo 
tbc  ?l£)B2D  batb  appointcb  out  fo? 
mpmaftcrsfonne. 

45  anb  befojegjbab  bone  fptafeing 
m  nunc  bcart,  beljolb,  ftebcuab  came 
fo2tb,lbttl)  bcr  pitcber  on  ber  (l)oulbcr ; 
anbfl)Clbcntbolbnct)nto'tbcibell,anb 
b2rtb  water.-  anb  3  faib  bnto  bec,  ILct 
mcbnnbcgipdaptbce. 

46  anbfl)cmabcbaftc,rjlctbolbnc 
bcr  pitcber  frombcrOiouider,  an&faibe, 
S>2iiiBe,  anb  3  ibill  giuc  tljp  camels 
D2utueaifo :  fogj  b2anfte,  anbfl)cmabc 
tbe  camels  miuHcalfo. 

47  anbgiafBCbbcr,anbfatb,tt)bofc 
saugbtcr  art  tbou  <  anb  (be  faib ,  %\)t 
baugbter  of  Sctbucl,  iRabozs  fount, 
ibbom  £!3iicab  bare  bnto  bun:  anb  3 
put  tbc  catering  bpon  bcr  fact ,  anb  tfje 
b2acclctsbponbcr  banns. 

4S  anogj  boftcb  boibnc  mpljcab, 
anb  ttwmjppcb  tbc  H£)Bs>,anb  blcf- 
feb tbc  3L<D£S>  Gob  of  mp  matter 
abjabam,  lbbtcb  bab  let)  nice  in  tbc 
rigbt  ibap  to  taltc  mp  matters  b20tbcrs 
baugljtcr  bnto  bis  fotttte. 

49  attbnoibtfpouibitbcalcltinDlp 
anb  truelp  ibitb  mp  mattcr^cll  mc :  anb 
if  not,  tell  mc,  tbat  3  map  tumc  to  tlje 
ngbtbanb,onotbclcft. 

50  Xbcn  iBlaban  nub  Sctbucl  atv 
fmcrcb  anb  faib ,  Xbc  tbmg  pjocccbetb 

from 


"Vcrfc  13. 


She  becommeth       Chap.xxv.  wifetolfaac. 


\Hth.vtf- 
fib. 


Vcrf  jtf. 
md  5?. 


0r,*f«3 
jcrre,  or,  ten 
monetht. 


•Oup.i« 

14. and J5. 

II. 

[1  Orjopray. 


front  tl)c  fl  ©  ft  S> :  lbc  tannot  fpca&e 
bntotbcebaoojgoob. 

$1  26cbolb,  ftcbeftab  is  before  thee, 
tanc  her,  anb  got,  anb  let  her  be  thy  ma- 
ttersfonncs  ibtfc,as  the  ILjSDBH)  bath 
fpoltcn. 

51  3nb  it  tame  to  paffc,  tl)atlbften 
^bjaljanus  fcruantbearb  their  tbo?bS, 
be  lbojfl)ippeb  tl)e  ?fc,£>3RS> ,  bowing 
bimfelfe  to  the  earth. 

53  2lnb  the  feruant  brought  foo#b 
'teitocls  of  Bluer,  anbicibclsofgolb, 
ant)  raiment,  ant)  gaue  them  to  Kcbc* 
Hal) :  ii?egauc  alfo  to  l)er  biotljcr,  anb 
to  betmotbet  pzectous  things. 

54.  3mb  tbey  btb  eate  ano  bnn&e,  be 
anb  the  men  that  iberc  luttb  him,  anb 
tarieb  ailnigbt,  anb  tbcytofebptntbe 
morning,  anbbcfatb,  *;5>cnbmeaibay 
bnto  my  matter. 

55  3lnb  her  brother  anb  her  mother 
faib,  %tt  tbebamfcll  abibc  Tbttb  tos 
||  a  tew  aayes,  at  the  lead  ten ;  after  rijat, 
tbefbailgoe. 

56  3nb  fte  Gib  into  them ,  tyinber 
msnot,  feeing  the  %  £>  &  2>  barb  pjof- 
perebmytbay :  fenb  me  atbay,  that  3 
may  goe  to  my  matter. 

57  3nb  they  fatb ,  aacc  tbill  tail  rue 
SDamftll,  anb  enquire  at  tier  mouth. 

5S  3ttbtbcycallcb3&cbcRab,anbfaib 
bmo  tier,  nailt  thou  go  tbitb  this  man  t 
anbfl)cfa(b,3Jibtllgoc. 

59  anb  they  tent  albay  ftebtbab 
their  Otter,  anb  tier  nnrfc,  anb  'M;^ 
hams  feruant,  anb  bts  men. 

60  3no  tbey  blcttcb  3aebcnab ,  anb 
tatbbnto  bet,  %\m  art  our  fitter,  bee 
thou  the  mother  of  tboufaubs  of  milli- 
ons, anb  lettbyreeopoO'cl&thegateof 
tbofcibbtcb  bate  them. 

6i  c  3lnb  ftcbeftab  arofe,  anb  her 
bamfeis,  $  they  robe  Dpon  the  camels, 
anbfolloibebtheman:  anbtbeferuant 
toofee  JRebckah,  anb  rbent  his  may. 

6z  3mb  3lfaac  tame  from  the  tbay 
of  the  *  ibcll  Habat-roi ,  fo?  be  Wbclt  m 
tbe&outbcountrey. 

6  ?  3tnb3faaenjcntout,to|!mebitate 
mtbcfielb ,  attheencntibe:  anbbeeUft 
bp  his  eyes,  anbfarb,  anbbcbolb,tbe 
camels  tbetccomming. 

64  anb  ftebefcab  lift  fcp  Dec  ms, 
anblbhcnlhcfatb3faat,n;cughtcb  off 
the  camel. 

<>5  :fo?  (be  babfaibtmto  the  feruant, 
nahat  man  is  this  that  tbalfeetbintbe 
fitlb  to  meet  tos  i  anb  the  feruant  hab 
feio,  3lt(s  my  matter:  therefore  fljce 


tooucatoaticanbeoucrcbbcrfelfe. 

66  3nb  the  feruant  tolbc  3faac  all 
things  that  he  hab  bone. 

67  Znn  3i£aac  brought  her  into  his 
mother  Sarahs  tent,  anb  tooReftebc^ 
Rah,  anbflje  became  bisttstfcanb  l)clo- 
neb  her :  anb  3ifaac  ibas  comfbzteb  af- 
ter btsmothersJ«t.h. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  The  fonnesof  Abraham  bvKeturah.  ',  The 
diuifion  of  his  goods.  7  His  age  and  death. 
9  His  buriall.  12  The  generations  of  Ifh 
mael.  17  His  age ,  and  death.  19  Maac 
prayeth  for  Rebekah  being  barren,  it  The 
chiMrenfrriueinhcrwombe.  14  The  birth 
of  Efau  and  Iacob.  xy  Their  difference.  19 
Eiau  fellcdi  his  birthright. 

§ggf^l$J?ctt  agame   ^bjaham 


m 


i?  toouc  arbtft,  9  her  nan«e 
ttjasBetural). 
z  ^nb  (bee  bare  him 
■^^^  Zunran,  anb  3Jofe(ban, 
anb  ^0eban,anb  £0ibian,  anb  'JUbbaa, 
anbdbuah. 

3  ^nb*3Joblbanbegat^>hcba,anb 
S>rban.  ^nbthcfonncsofS>ebanv.eie 
^abunm,anb|Lttu(bim,  anbUcum- 
uwm. 

4  3tnb  the  fonnes  of  fi^ibian ,  c* 
pljah,  anb  €pber,  anb  ?)anoch,  anb  %- 
biba ,  anb  cioaah :  all  tbcfe  tbcre  the 
chilb^enofBcturah. 

5  C3Cnb  ^b?abani  gaue  all  that  he 
hab,bnto3faac. 

6  25ut  bnto  tUc  fonnes  of  the  ton-- 
cobines  tbhith  ^toabam  hab ,  ~Mm 
Ijam  gaue  gifts,  anb  fent  them  ainay 
from  3Ifaac  his  fotmc  (iibhuc  be  yet  u- 
\xtn)  cafiibarb,bnto  the  call  country. 

7  !3nb  tbeic  are  the  bayes  of  the 
yercs  of  ^bjahams  life  ftbich  be  liucb , 
anhunbjcb,th?ccfcoicffiftecncycercs. 

8  1Lbcn3lb?abam  gaue  bp  the  ghott, 
anb  bicb  in  a  goob  olb  age ,  an  olb  man, 
anb  full  of  yeeres,  anb  Ibas  gatbcre&to 
bispeople. 

9  2Cnb  bis  fonnes  35faac  anb  'JuV 
mael  burieb  him  in  the  caue  of  fi^atb- 
pciah ,  uubc  ficlb  of  €ph?onthcfonnc 
of  zobat  the  pittite,  tbhwh  ■* before 
#amce; 

10  *Xhc  fielb  tbbstb  ^bjaham  pur^ 
chafeb  of  tbefonnes  of  ^eth :  tljcrcibas 
^b^abam  burieb  ,ans£>atabtnG*b*ft'- 

11  C  3Inb  it  tame  to  paffc  after  the 
beath  of  3U»abam ,  that  <sob  bieffcb 
his  tonne  31faac,  anb  ^fiiac  btbelt 
bytbc*ibcUllabai-roi. 

C       iri[0QVo 


'r.Chro.i. 


"Chip.  1  j 
t*. 


•  Cfiap- 1*. 

14.  a.ullj. 


Ifhmaeldieth.  Gcnefis.   Efaus  birthright  fold. 


•i.Chron 


iHchrfiS. 


"Rom  .p. 
12. 


■ore.  i 


I.J. 


iz  CiiSoibthcfcaretbcgcncrattons 
of  SJftmacl  3ib?abanis  fonne,  rbbom 
$agar  the  Cgpptian  Sarahs  hanb? 
ma?b,barcbnto  Sibtabam: 

I?  ^b'tbcfc  arc  the  names  of  the 
fonnes  of^Junnacl  ,by  their  names,ap 
cotfmig  to  their  gmctationSiXbe  firft 
bome  of  IJfbmaci ,  /3ebaiotb,anblkc; 
bar,anb  ^Dbccl,anD  flj9ibfam, 

14  3nbiPttbma,anbS>umah,anb 
spiffa, 

15  $abar,anb1!:ema,3Jetur,.0as 
pin(h,anDlEttbemab. 

16  Shcfc  arc  the  fonnes  of  3Kbma; 
el,anbtbcfe  arc  their  names ,  bp  their 
toibnes  ant)  bp  their  tattcis ;  tvbcluc 
princes  aewbing  to  their  nations. 

17  3lnb  tliefc  are  the  pceres  of ti)c  life 
of  3Jfl)mael;  an  l)unb?cb  anb  ttjirtv  anb 
fcticnpeercs :  anb  be  gauebptbegboft 
anb  unto,  anb  ibas  gatbereb  bnto  his 
people. 

is  2inb  fbcp  Mbctt  from  $autlab 
bnto  £>but ,  that  is  before  Cgppt,  as 
tbon  gocft  totbarbs  3ffpna :  and  hec 
tmcnmtlK  pjefenteof  aflrjisbjetbjen. 

19  C  31tib  tbefe  are  the  generations 
ofpsatj  abiabamsfonnc^tyabam 
bcgateUfeac. 

20  3lnb3!raacYbasfojtiepeercsolb 
lbben  bee  toonc  Bebcaabto  lbife,  the 
bangnter  of  25ctbucltbc;£>pnan  of  i&a* 
ban  ^cain ,  the  Oder  to  lLaban  the 
-Sjpuan. 

21  ^nb3faatuttreatebtftc!L£>E2r> 
foj  bis  IbTOJbtcauft  (be  was  barren:  anb 
the  H£>3&2>  Tbasmtrtateb  of  him, 
anblScbcbabbisibtftconcciueb. 

22  ^btbetbilbmtftrugglcbtoge* 
tberibitbm  her  j  anbfljcfaib,  3Jfitbc 
to,  ibftpam  3  $!#•  anbfbcctbcntto 
cnquitcoftbc  %£>&$>. 

23  3mbtbcfL<j>  BSD  fatb  bnto  her, 
%U)0  nations  aretnrbptbombc ,  anb 
ttbo  nianct  of  people  (ball  be  fcparatcb 
fcom  tbp  botbcls :  anb  the  one  people 
fbaibe  ttrongcr  then  the  other  people: 
anb  *  the  clbcr  (bail  fcrtie  the  pongcr. 

24  canbibbrnbcr&apestobcbc* 
liuecebTtrctefuifiiieb^eljolbjtljcrewerc 
Obinnes  in  her  ibonibe. 

25  3utb  the  firft  tame  ontreb,  alio* 
ucrliUcanbatrp  garment:  anb  thepcal* 
lebbisnamcefau. 

26  2nb  after  that tame  bis  toother 
out,  anb*bis  banb  toolic  bolbc  on<fc 
fans  bcclc ;  anb  Ins  name  ibas  cailcb 
3Iatob:  anb  9ifaat  ibastftjccfto?e  peres 
oib,  lbben  fljee  bare  them. 


27  anbthebopes  gretb;  anb  efau 
tbas  a  tunnmg  hunter ,  a  man  of  toe 
ficlbc:  anb  3lacob  ibas  a  piainc  man, 
otbellmgin  tents. 

28  2nb3Jlaaeloneb€faa,betatuV!)c 
mb  cate  of  bis  benifon:  but  Bcbcbah 
loueb3facob. 

29  C^nb3Jatob  fob  pottage: anb 
€feu  catne  from  the  fielb,anb  bee  ibas 
faint. 

30  2mb<£fauraibto3IatobJTecbme, 
3J  pjap  tbec, t  ttjttt)  tijat  fame  reb  pot.] 
cage :  fo?  3  am  taint ;  tt)crcfb2e  ibas  bis 
name  calico  <£Dom. 

31  3nb3latobfatD,;§ellmcthiSbap 
tbpbtrtbngbt. 

32  ^nbCfauJaib^eDoib^am+at 
the  point  to  bie :  anbibhat  p?ofit  (ball 
tt)t5  btrfbngbt  boc  to  me  i 

33  3lnb  3Jatob  faib ,  ^ibeatc  to  nice 
tins  bap :  anb  l)e  froarc  to  l)im :  anb  *!)c 
folb  ins  btrt!mgi)t  imto  3Jacob. 

34  %l)tn  "J&ob  gauc  <£fan  bjtab 
anb  pottage  of  lentilcs ;  anb  Dc  bib  eatc 
anbbnnUc,  anbrofebp,  anb  *bent  l)ts 
ibap  :tl)us€faubcn)ifcb  his  uttttmgijt. 

CHAP.  xxvr. 

i  Ifaacbecaufe  of  famine  weiitto  Gerar.  i  God 
iiiftrudeth,andbleflechhim.  7  Heeisre- 
proued  by  Abimefech  for  denying  his  wife. 
12.  He  gtoweth  rich.  18  HediggethE/ck, 
Simah,andRehobotL  13  Abimclechma- 
kethacouenantwich  him  at  Beeriheba.  34 
Efaus  wfues. 

^5bt!jcrc  Vbasafaniinem 
tt)c  lanb ,  befibes  il)t  firft 
famine  tnat  ibas  in  tlje 
n>\vsbapcs  of^lbwljam.  ^nb 
#^^^  3ICaac  lbcnt  bnto  ^btmc* 
led)  lEtins  of  tl)c  ^Inliftims ,  bnto 
dscrar. 

2  ^nbtnc|L£)3n5)appcarcbbn5 
to  l)im  anb  faib,  C5oe  not  boibnc  into 
cgyptjbibcUfn  tl)c  lanblbljiflj^fball 
tciltljceof. 

3  5>otonmcintljisianb,anb3J«jti 
betbito  tljcc,  anb  ibill  bleffc  rtjee :  fo? 
bntotljcc,  aub  bnto  tftv  ftfb  *  35  ibill 
giucalltl)riffonntrcvs,anb3Ilbilper* 
fomtc  tljt  otbc,  mtiicl)  3J  froarc  bnto  ^ 
tyaftamtfjp  father. 

4  ^nbJibflmaBctfivfeebtonnil' 
riplp  as  tlje  ftarres  oflicauen,  anb  rbill 
giucbnto  rbpfeeb  all  tbefctomttreps: 
anb  in  thp  S>ccb  (ball  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  be  *blciTeb: 

5  2Secaufc  that  iSbjabam  obevtb 
mv  boptc ,  anb  ncpt  mp  cljargc, my 

Com 


nifanWM  tl 
humouth. 


that  red, 

tnththaired 

pottage 


\  Hcbr.gp- 
tnl  to  dte. 


•Hebr.IL 
16. 


'Chzp.fj. 
1  s.^::J  i  5. 
18. 


•Chap.u.  i 
J.  and  1  5. 
18.  jndii. 
18. 


Jlfaacfoioumeth        Chap.xxvj.         at  Beer-flieba. 


\Hchf«uJ. 


t  Hth.vent 


lOr.huf- 
baadij. 


f  HcbMuing 


Commanbemcnts,  my  Statutes  anb 
mylLatbes. 

6  canb  3Jfaac  Dtbcltin  (Scrar. 

7  3tnD  the  men  of  the  place  affteb 
him  of  bis  Ibifc :  anb  befatb,  Ja>bc  i;smy 
fitter :  fb?  be f car co  to  fay ,  she  is  my  ttitfe  i 
Ufl.faid  he,  the  mm  of  the  place  (boulD 
toll  me  fo?  ftebenab,  becattfc  (bee  ttas 
faitctoloonetopon. 

8  anbtfeametopafferbbenbebab 
bene  there  a  long  time,  that  abuneleeb 
aing  ofttje  i&biltfhma  lookeo  out  at  a 
tbinbolb,  anb  faib,  anb  bebolb,  3Jfaac 
was  fpozting  tbitb  ftcbc&ab  his  unfe. 

9  anb  abuneleeb  caileb  gifaac  anb 
faiO,2Bebolb,of  a  furetie  (be  ts  thy  mfe: 
anb  botb  faibft  thou ,  ,&be  (s  my  fitter  * 
anb  3(faac  faib  tonto  bun,  2Bccaufe3J 
fatb,lLeft3Jbtcfo2ber. 

io  anb  abuneleeb  faibjenat  is  tyi$ 
thou  baft  bone  bntotosi  oneof  tbcpeo* 
pie  might  ugbtly  ijattc  licit  vbitb  thy 
Mrifc,  anb  thou  (boulbeftbauetyougbt 
gtffltineffebponbs. 

u  an&  abuneleeb  cbargeb  ail  his 
people,  faying,  J?cerbat  toucheththts 
maw  02b(stt>tfe,  (ball  fur  cly  bee  put  to 
beat!). 

12  Zbcn  3!faac  fottieb  m  that  lanb, 
amVreeetucbm  the  famcyccrcanbun* 
b?eb  folb :  9  the  %  0  &  2>  blcffeb  him, 

13  anbtbemanibajceb  great,  anb 
f  tbent  fbtftoarb,  anbgrelb  bntillbcbe; 
tame  ijcry  great. 

14.  ifo?  he  bab  poflcfuon  of  flotus, 
anb  poffemon  of  bcarbs,  anb  great 
ttojc  of  H  feruants ,  anb  the  ^IjiUOint^ 
cnuteDfiun. 

15  ;ffoiaUtbcTbcfstbbicb  bothers 
leruantshal'  biggeb  m  the  bayesof  a 
bjabam  his  father ,  tbe^biufhmsbab 
ftoppeb  them ,  9  fillcb  them  Hurt)  earth. 

i6  anb  abimrteebfatb  onto  3ifaac, 
d5oefrombs:  fojtbouart  much  ""Sh- 
tiertbentbe. 

17  canb^lfaaebepatteb  thence, 
anbpttchebhistent  tntbetoaueyof  <&t- 
tar,anbbrbflttbcrc. 

18  anbgjfaac  biggeb  againctbctbels 
of  ttjater,  ibbicb  they  bab  biggeb  m  the 
bayes  of  abiabam  bis  father :  fo?  the 
#hfl»ftuns  bab  ftoppeb  them  after  the 
beatb  ofab;abam,anb  bccailebtbctr 
names  after  the  names  by  Ibhtch  his 
fatberbabtaliebtbem. 

19  3nb  3JCaacs  feruants  biggeb  in 
the  bailey,  anb  founb  there  a  lbcll  of 
^tngmgibatcr. 

20  anbtbebear&men  of  <25erar  bib 


firms  Tbitb  35faats  be&rbmcn ,  faying, 
%l)t  tbater  15  ours ;  anb  bee  taiieb  the 
name  of  tbeibctl ,  I!  ©feU ,  became  they 
ftrouc  until  him. 

21  anb  they  biggeb  another  tbeilanb 
ftrone  fo;  that  alfo :  anb  bee  caileb  tlje 
name  of  it,  ||£>stnab. 

22  anbbercinoueofromtbeiueanb 
biggeb  another  lbell,  anb  fc>;rbat  they 
ftrotte  not :  anb  be  caileb  the  name  of  it 
llftcbobotb:  anb  bcfaib,  ifo;nou)tbc 
?L£HiiaDbatbtnnbcroomefo2bs,  anb 
lbe  (ball  be  fruttfull  m  the  lanb. 

2j  anb  he  lbcntbp  from  thence  to 
2Seer-(beba. 

24.  anbfhe!L£>&S>appearCbbn; 
to  him  the  feme  night,  anb  faibe,  $  am 
the  C5ob  of  atyabam  tbv  father :  feare 
not,  foi  3  am  *bttb  thee,  anb  ibill  bf  effe 
thee,  anb  multiply  tb y  feebe,  fo;  my  fer= 
uantabjabamsfabe. 

25  anbbebuilbebanaitarfbetcanb 
caileb  bpon  the  name  of  the  %  €>  B  a>, 
anb  pttcl)eb  his  tent  tljcre :  anb  there 
^Gtacsferuaritsbiggebavbell. 

26  CXbenabunclccbibenttobim 
from  Gerar,  anbabU55atb  oneof  bis 
frienbs,anb  ^htrijol  the  ebiefe  captamc 
ofhisatmic. 

27  anb  3ffaac  faibe  into  tljem, 
lehcrefoie  come  pe  to  mt,fccing  ye  bate 
me,  anb  bauc  fent  me  arbay  from  you  i 

28  anbtbcyfaib,  'nDefavbcertamly 
that  the  %  4>  3a  2>  inas  ibith  thee :  anb 
tbcelaib,  ILettherebenoVb  anothebe^ 
tmirt  bS,  cucn  betttitrt  bs  anb  tbee,anb 
let  bs  mane  a  couenant  tbith  thee , 

29  fZbat  thou  tbiltboebs  no  hurt, 
as  tbe  bauc  not  toucbtb  tljee,  anb  as  lbe 
bauc  bonebnto  thee  nothtngbutgoob, 
anbbauefent  tbeeatbayinpcacc:  thou 
art  notb  the  blcffeb  of  the  %  £>  B  3>. 

jo  anb  he  mabe  them  a  feaft ,  anb 
they  bib  cateanbbzuiKC. 

31  anb  they  role  bp  betimes  in  tlje 
morning,  anb  ftuare  one  to  another: 
anb  ^jfaac  fent  them  aibay,  anb  they 
bcpartcbfrombtminpeace. 

32  anbttcametopafletbefamebay, 
fbat  3faats  feruants  came,  anb  tolbc 
btm  concerning  the  Tbcll  ltobich  they 
bab  biggcb,anb  faib  bnto  htm,i©e  Ijaue 
founbibater. 

33  anb  becailtbit||£>bebab:  there* 
fo?e  th  e  name  of  the  citie  is  II  26eer  ftjeba 
bntothisbay. 

34  €anb  efeu  tbas  fo?ty  yceres 
olb,n)benbetooBetD  ibife  3lubith,  the 
baugbtcr  of  25eeri  tlje  pittite ,  anb 
1  €  2  2Bafl)e 


||  That  is, 


1' That  is, 
Haired. 


Thati: 


f  ftcb.fcts/Sjr 


\Hib.iftbcu 
[htlt&c. 


[Thatis,<r, 
toth. 

||Th3t;.,r4( 
•rttllof  the 

tab. 


Efauhunting,  Gencfis.  Iacob  is  bleffed. 


Chip.  27. 
t  HrfrJit- 

rernrjfe  of 
firit. 


\Hti.hm,!. 


iBafhcmath  the  baughtec  of  eion  tt)c 
t>)rtnte: 

35  nah«h  * Ibere +  agricfe  of  minbe 
tonto  3ifaac  anb  to  ftcbeftah. 

CHAP.   XXVII. 

IfaacfendethEfauforvenifori.  5  Rebskah 
lnltnifteth  Iacob  toobtainetheblelsing.  15 
Jacob vnder  the  perfon  ofElau  obteineth  ic 
30  Efau  bringeth  venifon.  33  Ifaactrem- 
bleth.  34  Elaucomplaineth,andbyimpor- 
tumticobtainetha  ble(sing.  41  Hethreat- 
neth  Iacob.    41.   Rebekah  difappointethir. 

00  it  tame  to  paffc  that 
ibbcn  3Jfaat  ttias  olb.anb 
fits  eyes  lberc  bimme,  fo 
that  he  coulb  not  fee,  hec 
calleb  efau  his  ciocft  foti, 
anofaibbnto  him,  £Py  fonne.  3inb  hee 
feibbntol)tm,2Sci)oiD,lietcam3!. 

i  ^riu  he  foib ,  25cholb  noi\»,  3J  ant 
olo,3  fcnoib  not  the  oap  of  my  Death. 

3  j!2ott)tijcrcfo!eta&e,3!PWD<:e, 
thy  ttieapons,  thy  cwiuct,ano  thy  boib, 
anbgoeoutto  the  ficlb,  anb!ta&cmce 
ibmcbentfbn. 

4  :^bmaftemcfauotttymeat,fuch 
as  3}  loue,  ano  tying  it  to  nice ,  that  3! 
may  catc,  thatnty  foulc  may  bleiTe  ttjee 
bcfott^Jbic. 

5  3inD  ftcbebah  hcarb  ttiften  3Jfaac 
fpaKcto  €lati  liis  fonnc:anti  €fan  ibent 
to  the  ftclbe  to  fount  tor  bentfon,  and  to 
bzittgir. 

6  C3utb3Rcbc6ahfpaBcbnto3Ja: 
cob  her  fonne,  faymg,  28cholb,3!  hcarb 
thy  father  fpeafee  bnto  efau  tf)y  bjo= 
tfocr,faymg, 

7  Bnngmcbenifon,  ano  tnattc  nice 
fauoury  meat ,  that  5  niay  catc,  anb 
blcffc  thee  befiwthclL£I)&3I>,  before 
mybcatf). 

8  0o\\>  therefore,  my  fonne,  obey 
my  boyte,  accojbing  to  rijat  Ibfoicl)  3 
tommanbthec. 

9  <5oc  tiott)  to  the  flocSc ,  anb  fetch 
me  from  tbenee  tibo  goob  nibs  of  tl)c 
goatcs^nb'Jttnllmakcthcintauoury 
meat  foi  thy lather  ,fuch  as  he  toucth. 

io  3inD  thou  (halt  bung  it  to  tftyfa^ 
thcr  .that  he  may  cate,  anb  rtjat  hemay 
blcffc  thee,  before  his  bcath. 

ii  3inb  gjatob  faib  to  Sebcltaft  his 
mother,25cholb,  efau  my  toother  isa 
hairy  man,anb  3ama  fmoot!)  man. 

ii  fi^y  father  pcrabucntuce  null 
feelc  me,  atiD^  ftjalifccntetohimasa 
bctciucr,anb<jn)ailbungatur(cbpon 
mc,anbnotabteffmg. 


13  2nb  his  mother  fatb  tmto  hint, 
Upon  me  bethy  curie,  my  fonne :  oncly 
obey  my  boice,anb  goc  fetch  m*  *«"• 

14  3wb  hee  tbent,  anb  fetcheb,  anb 
brought  them  tofois  mother,  anb  ftts 
mother  mabc  tauoury  nieat,wth  as  his 
father  loucb. 

15  ^nbBebcKahtooBe'gooblytai? 
ment  of  her  dbeft  fonne  efau ,  rofoirt) 
tticrc  ttjith  her  Ui  tfoe  houfe,  anb  put 
them  bponljatob  ijec  yongcr  fonne : 

16  3no  uiee  put  the  futnnes  of  the 
tnos  of  the  goats  bpon  fots  hanbs,  anb 
bpon  the  fmooth  of  hiSnetBc. 

17  anblfoegauethefauoutymcate, 
anb  the  bjcab,  ttiljich  the  hab  p?epareb, 
utto  the  iwnb  of  her  fonne  ^acob, 

18  C  ^nb  he  came  bnto  his  father, 
anb  fasb ,  ^y  father :  ^nb  lit ten,  $?ere 
am  3  ♦  ttiho  art  thou ,  my  fonne; 

19  3nb  ^atob  taib  bnto  his  father, 
3  amCfou,thy  t5rftbomei3  Jjauc  bone 
accojbmg  as  ttjou  babefl  mee :  artfe,  5 
p:ay  thee, fit,  anb  catc  of  my  bcnifon, 
that  thy  fou!e  may  blcffc  me. 

io  ^nb  Jlaat  fatb  bnto  his  fonne, 
$ott>  is  it  that  thou  haft  founb  tt  fo 
nuictily,  my  fonne;  3inDhe  laib,  25e* 
caufc  the  12,  £>  B  2D  thy  <5on  bjought 
tt'tome. 

ii  3inb  Jlaac  &ibe  imto  3?acob, 
Comcnccrc^p^thee,  that  %  may 
fcclcthce,  myfonnc,  Ibhether  thoubee 
my  bery  fonne  €fau,o?  not. 

xz  Smb^Jacob  ibcnt  ncerc  bnto  % 
taachts  father :  anb hec  felt  him,  anb 

fatb,1Lhcboyceis3acobsijoyte,butflie 
hanbs  are  tl)c  hanbs  of  €lau. 

13  ^nbhcbi(icrnebhimnot,ottaufc 
his  hanbs  ibcre  hairic,  ashistyoflier 
<£faushanbs:5)0  heblcffcbhim. 

24  ^nbhefoib,  ^rtfhoumybery 
fonne  €fou  i  ano  he  fatb,3f  ant. 

15  ^nbhc{aib,2S?ingitneevetome, 
ano  3  lbtli  catc  of  my  fonnesbentfon, 
that  my  foulc  mayblcffe  thee:  anb  hec 
b2ougl)t «  ncerc  to  him,  anb  he  bib  catc: 
anbhctaonghthtmlbme,  %  heb^mhe. 

16  3inb  Ins  father  3ifaac  faibc  bnto 

him.Comcnccrcnofti^iDmiTemcmy 
fonne. 

27  ^nb  hee  came  neerc,  anbtuffeb 
him :  anb  he  fmctleb  the  fmell  of  his  rai? 
mcnt,anb  blcfieb  him,anb  taib,S»cc,thc 
fmell  of  my  fonne  is  as  the  fincll  of  a 
ficlb,tt)bich  the  %  £)  B  S»  hath  blcffeb. 

28  lLhetefo?e*<3oDgwctheeofthe 
bcib  of  hcaucn,  anb  the  fatneffe  of  the 
earth,  ano  plenty  of  tome  anb  ibine. 

29  Uet 


fHrfr.ir- 

fircdlc. 


t  Hth.ic- 
for  em:. 


'Hcb.II. 


Efaumourneth.     Chap.xxviij.    Jacob  is  fent  away. 


fflWr. 
ircmhltd 
\tbagreMr 

email. 

]"  Hcer.hftX' 

icJ. 


That  iSjC^/ 


\Or,fmpyn 
ttd. 


-Hcb-IJ. 

•Vcriia8. 

\Or,efthc 

fuiujfe. 


29  H-et  people  ferue  thee ,  anb  nan 
onsbotb  Dottmc  to  ttjee :  bee  lojb  oner 
thybjetlnen,?  Icttijp  mothers  formes 
boibbeibne  to  thee :  Cutfeb  bee  cucry 
onefhat  nirfcth  thee ,  anb  bicflcb  be  hec 
that  blcffcth  thee. 

30  C^sibitcametopafrcafifoonc 
as  3jfaat  has  mace  an  enbe  of  blefling 
3Jacob,aiib3Jacobibasyctrcarccgonc 
out  from  tl)c  pjefence  of  3Haac  his  fa* 
thtr ,  ttjat  <£feu  Ijts  toother  tame  tn 
fromhis  hunting. 

31  3nb  hee  alfo  hab  mabe  fauoury 
meate,anb  toought  it  bnto  his  father, 
anb  faibbnto  ins  father  Jlet  my  father 
arifc,anb  cat  ofhts  formes  bcmfon,that 
thy  foule  may  bleffe  me. 

31.  3lnb  3faac  h*s  father  faib  bnto 
htm,  ©ho  an  thou  i  anD  JicfatD,3J  am 
thy  foune,thy  firtt  borne  <£  fan. 

33  2lnb3jfaac + ttcmbleb  bcry  creee=> 
bingly,anb  faib.naho;  ibhercis  hefhat 
hath '  taken  bcnifon,anb  toougbttt  me, 
anbjJJ  haue  eaten  of  all  befoje  thou  ca 
mcttTanb  haue  blclTeb  him  i  yea  anb  he 
fl)albcbleffcb. 

3+  3nb  ibljcn  £fauhearb  the  tbojbs 
of  Ijis  father,  he  cticbibithagrcatanb 
erteebtng  bitter  cry,  anb  faib  bnto  hts 
father,  26leflcmce,euenmcalfo,£>  my 
father. 

35  3nbhec  faib,  Xhy  brother  came 
ttnth  fubMty  ,anb  hatl)  taken  atbay  thy 
buffing. 

36  ;anbhcfeib,3Jsnothcrightipnfc 
nebjl  3atob  i  fo?  he  hath  fupplantcb  me 
tJjrife  tibo  times:  hec  toofte  atbay  my 
birtlmght,  anb  bcholb,  noib  he  hath  ta 
ften  albay  my  blcfftng :  anb  hee  faib, 
$aft  thou  not  referueb  a  bleGing  fo? 
titter 

37  ^Xnb  3Jfaae  anfrocrcb  anb  fatbc 
bnto  efau ,  Bel)olb,3)  haucmabe  hmt 
thy  lo?b ,  anb  all  his  toetlnen  haue  3  P> 
um  to  htmfb?  feruants :  anb  ttuth  tome 
anb  Tbine  haue  31 II  fuftemcb  him :  anb 
tbhatthall  35 boc  noib  bnto  thee,  my 
fount; 

38  3nb  €faufaib  bnto  hts  father, 
Ijaft  thou  but  one  blefling ,  my  father  < 
bicfle  met,  euen  nice  alfo ,  *D  my  father. 
%nn  <£&u  lift  bp  his  boy  tt*  anb  ibept, 

39  ^nbJJfaac  his  father  anftbereb, 
anbfiaib  bnto  htm,  ffieholb  ,*  thy  Mbcfc 
hngfhall  be||  the  fatnefle  of  the  earth, 
anb  of  thebetb  ofheaucn  front  about. 

+0  anbbythyfu)o?bfl)altthouliuc, 
anb  (halt  ferue  thy  toother :  anb  it  fball 
tomctopafleibhoi  thohfbaithaue  the 


bommion ,  that  thou  (halt  bzeafee  Ins 
yofte  front  oft  thy  ncc&c. 

4-1  C3tnb€fauhateb3Jaeob,becarae 
of  the  blefling ,  ibhcrcibith  Ins  father 
bicflcb  hun :  anb  Cfaufaib  in  hts  hsart, 
Xhc  bayes  of  mourning  fo*  my  father 
are  at  hanb ,  "then  tbiil  J  flay  my  b?o> 
ther^acob. 

42  ^nbthefctbozbsofelaulmi* 
bcrfonncrbcrc  tolbtoBebeliah :  ^nb 
iheefent  anb  eaiieb  3lacob  hcryongcr 
feme,  anb  faib  bnto  hun,  Bcholb,  tby 
brother  cfau  ,as  touthmg  thecboetl) 
totnfo?t  hunfeifcpurpofiiie;  to  aillthee, 

43  0oW  therefor  my  fonne,  obey 
my  botes:  anbartfc,flccthouto  Haban 
myb?othcr,to^aran. 

44-  ^nbtatynjithhimafrtbbayes, 
bnnilthy  Mothers  tuneturncalbay; 

45  llntill  thy  b^othersanger  tucne 
aibay  from  thee,  anb  hec  forget  that, 
Ibhith  tiiou  haft  bone  to  hun :  then  31 
ibfll  fenb ,  anb  fetth  tljcc  from  thence : 
ibhy  fhouib  31  be  bepnueb  alfo  of  you 
both  m  one  bay; 

46  3nbBcbcaahfaibto^faac,*3J 
am  ibeary  of  my  life,  bccaitfe  of  the 
Daughters  of  $cth :  3Jf  gjatob  tafee  a 
Unfe  of  the  Daughters  of1?cth,  fitch  as 
tl)cfcibhicl)  arc  of  the  Daughters  otthc 
lanb,tbhatgoobu>UtnyitfcDoeine; 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

1  ifaac  UefTcth  ljcob,andiendeth  himtoPa« 
dan  Aram.  6  Efau  marrieth  Mahalal  the 
daughter  ot  IthmaeL  10  The  Villon  of 
Iacobs  ladder.  18  The  ftonc  of  Bethel. 
ro   lacobs  vow. 

MMSWC  iHb  ^Jfaac  eallcb  ^atoo, 
P  anb  bleffcbhmi,anbcl)ar* 
gcb  hmt ,  anb  latbc  bnto 
him  ,  %how  ihalt  not 
tafee  arbtfc,  of  tljc  baugh 

tcrs  of  Canaan. 

2  *3nfe,gocto0aban:3ram,to 
the  houfc  of  25cthurt  thP  mothers  fa^ 
tl)er ,  anb  tafee  thee  albifc  from  thence, 
of  the  Daughters  of  fUban  thy  mo^ 
thcrs  brother. 

3  3lnb  <sob  Almighty  blcffc  thee, 
anb  mafecthec  fruttfuU,  anb  muinply 
thee,  that  thoumayeftbe  *a  nmltituDe 
of  people: 

4-  3utDgiue  thee  the  blefling  of  & 
toaham,  to  thee  anb  to  thy  fecbevbith 
thee,  thattljoumayefturhcritthclanbe 
+ ibherein  thou  art  a  Granger ,  tbljich 
d5ob  gauc  bnto  ^toahant 

€  j  5  Swb 


•Obad.  10. 


*Chap.u6. 


•Ofc.Ii. 


t/Wr.<« 


thyfoimr- 
mngl. 


Jacobs  dreamer 


Genei 


is. 


Hemeetetli 


emUiriihe 
e]ei,&c. 


«  Called 
A&7.1. 

Cnarran. 


•Chap. ; 5. 
1.&48.3.. 


\H,b.lrtsk. 
forth. 

•Deut.I». 

.?• 

•Cha.u.j 

and  18.18. 
andai.  18. 

and  zf-.-y. 


5  3inD  gifaac  fern  aruay  gjacob, 
anb  hce  lDcnt  to  toaban -3ram  into 
lUban,  fonne  of  25cthucl  thc£>ynan, 
the  bjothct  of  Scbcfeah ,  Jacobs  anD 
efaus  mother. 

6  c  nshen  cfau  fame  that  5faac 
haD  bUffcD  gjacob,  anD  fait  hmtarbay 
to  0aoan -3cam ,  to  talte  him  a  ibifc 
from  thence;  anb  that  asheblclTcb  htm, 
he  gauc  htm  a  charge,  faying,  Xhoit 
(halt  not  tauc  albife  of  the  Daughters 
of  Canaan; 

7  3lnb  that  gjaeob  obcyeb  ins  fa* 
thcr ,  anb  his  mother,  anb  ibas  gone  to 
0aban-3ram; 

8  3nb  cfau  feeing  that  the  baugfr 
tcrs  of  Canaan 'plcafeD  not  gjfaathis 
father. 

9  1LhmiDmt€&iubntb3J(hmacl, 
anb  took  Ditto  the  Unites  lbhich  hec 
haD ,  SDahaiath  the  Daughter  of  gifh 
mael  ataaftams  fonne,  the  fitter  of  fit* 
baioth,tobchtsibtfc. 

10  c  3nb  gjacob  Went  out  from 
ZBeer  rt)Cba,anb  lbent  tolDarb  *  §aran. 

11  3lnb  hce  ItghtcD  Dpon  a  tertatne 
place,  anb  tancb  there  all  night,  becaufe 
thcumnctbasfet:  anbhec  tooltcof  the 
ftoncs  of  that  place,  anb  put  them  fo? 
his  ptlloiDcs,  anb  lap  bonmc  in  that 
place  to  fltepc. 

ii  anb  he  Djeameb ,  auD  beholbe,  a 
labbcr  fctbp  on  the  earth,  anb  the  top 
of  it  rtachcb  to  heaucu :  anb  btholbe 
the  Angels  of  <5od  afcenbing  anb  be* 
fcenbmgonit. 

i}  *3lnbbcholb,thc|L^>3a£)ttooD 
abouc  it ,  anb  fatb,  3  am  the  ft  £)  &  &> 
(5ob  of  Sflwaham  thv  father,  anb  the 
<5ob  of  gjCaac :  the  larib  Vbhcrcon  thou 
liett,  to  thee  Will  3  giuc  it,  anb  to  thy 
frebe. 

14  ano  thy  fteb  fhali  be  as  the  Dull 
of  the  earth,  anb  thou  (halt *  fpjeaba 
b:oao  *  to  the  nacft,  anb  to  the  eatt,  anb 
to  the  4i3cwth,  anb  to  the;S>outh :  anD  m 
thee,  anD*mrhv  fteb,  niailalitijefami' 
lies  of  the  earth  be  bicflcD. 

1$  ^nbbchoib.gjamrbithrhecanb 
ttnllBccpc  thee  mall  pia«s  iDhithcr  thou 
gocft, anb  mil  bung  thee  agamc into 
this  lanb :  fo  1 3  lbtll  11 0 1  leatie  thee,  ton; 
mi  3  hauc  Done  thanbhich  3  hauc  too* 
hen  to  thee  of. 

i6  C  3(ud  Uacob  avbalteb  out  of  his 
flecpc,anbhcfaib,S>urciv  the  HOES) 
is  in  this  place,  anb  3  mtemttuot. 

17  3nbhen>asafratb,anbfaib,froib 
Dicabfulii  this  placc^thisis  none  other, 


but  the  Ijoufc  of  cob,anD  this  b  the  gate 
ofheauen. 

18  ;ano3Jacobrofe  Dp  carrty  in  the 
momutg,  anD  toonc  the  ftontthat  hec 
haD  putfo?  his  ptttoVbes,  anD  fct  it  Dp 
to?  a  pillar ,  anD  poVfceD  oUe  Dpon  the 
top  of  it. 

19  3lnD  hec  callcD  the  name  of  that 
plate  *  2Scth-  el  t  but  the  name  of  that  ci- 
nemas callcb  |lu5,  at  the  &rft 

io  ^nb^acobbOibeDaDott),  fay; 
ing,  31  ©obnnllbeibith  me,  anbiDUl 
Ucepc  me  in  this  Vbay  that  3  3** ,  anb 
mill  giue  uie  tyeaD  to  cate,  anb  raiment 
to  put  on, 

ii  5>o  that  3  tome  againe  to  my  fa- 
thers houfe  m  peace :  then  ftjall  the 
IL^DKJBDbemyiSob. 

21  :3ub  this  ftoneiDhicf)3J  hauc  fa 
foj  apiliar,  (hall  be  (Sods  houfc :  anD  of 
allthatthoufhaltgiuemc,  gjflmiuiro 
lygiue  the  tenth  bnto  thee. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

j  Jacob  commeth  to  the  well  of  Haran.  9  He 
taketh  acquaintance  ot  Rachel.  13  Laban 
cnterteinetli  him.  18  Iacobcouenantethfbr 
Rachel.  13  He  is  decerned  with  Leah.  rS 
He  marriethallb  Rachel,  and  ferueth  for  her 
/euen  yeeres  more.  31  Leah  bearcth  Reu- 
ben, 33  Simeon,  34  Leui,  35  andludah. 

^cngjacob^entonljis 
toitrncy,anD  tame  into  the 
lanb  of  the 'people  of  rtje 
«aft, 
i  3mbhelooHeD,  anb 
bdjoio,aibcllinfhcnelb,anbloe,  there 
were  tlwce  floens  of  fljeepe  lying  by  tt :  fo? 
out  of  that  rbel  they  rbatcrcb  the  floras: 
anD  agrcat  ftoticibasbpon  thcibrtles 
mouth. 

3  2md  rliulier  lDerc  all  the  flotfees 
gathcreb.anb  tljcy  rollcb  flic  ttoncfrom 
tlicibrtsmoiuh,  f  ibatercD  tijc  (heepe, 
anD  put  thettoncagamcDpoutljelbrts 
month  m  his  place. 

4  3nb  gfatob  faib  bnto  them,  fl^y 
b:ctl)?en,  vbhcuccbeyc^anbtijeyfaibe, 
^Df^aranareibc. 

5  3tnb  l)c  faib  bnto  them,  lanotb  ye 
Haban  the  fonne  of  iftaho?<  ^nbthey 
faybciocUnoTDchim. 

6  3inD  he  Cud  bnto  them,  ^shee 
m\U  aiiDthci'f<tib,^ctsiDrtl:  aubbc< 
holb,  Rachel  Ijis  Daughter  tommcth 
Vbitl)tl)cnKcpc. 

7  ^nD  hec  fatD ,  Hoe, 1  >'t  isyethi'gh 
bay,  neitljee  is  it  time  that  the  cattcll 

fliouib 


tThiti?, 

I  he  houfe  of 

god. 


\Heb.r.ft 
vphiifcel. 

I  H,l.cM. 
dren. 


t Heir.  It 
iherepene 
to  him? 


\Heh.jet 
thedajli 
eredt. 


with  Rachel,  Chap.xxix.        andmariethher. 


\Hek.he, 


}Hetr.tm»- 
netb  of dtie  I. 


fhoulD  be  gathctcD  togcttjee :  tbatcr  pet 
thc(hccpc,anb  goc  anD  feeb  them. 

8  3lnb thcyfaiD,  roc cannot ,  tittrtll 
all  the  fiothes  btt  gachcteb  together, 
anD  till  they  tollc  the  ftone  from  the 
Welles  mouth :  then  idee  ifoatet  ttjc 
(hcepe. 

9  €  3nb  tbhilc  hce  yet  fpafte  Until 
them ,  3&athcl  tame  tbith  her  fathers 
fbcept:  fojfbc&eptthem. 

10  3nDitcametopa{re,tbhcn3Jaeob 
fatbBarhclthcbaughtcroflLabanhis 
mothers  toother, anb  thefl)ecpc  of  %&< 
ban  his  mothers  toother;  that^jacob 
totntnecrcanb  rollcb  the  ftone  from 
tl)e  Vbtls  mouth,atTti  rbattrcb  tljc  florUc 
of  ILaban  his  mothers  toother. 

1 1  3utb  3latob  fetfCrtj  Bactjci,  anD  itf> 
ttb  bp  his  boyecanb  tbept. 

ii  ^itD3atobtolbBatftrt,tf)atftce 
tbas  her  fathers  toother ,  anD  that  hce 
ttjas  &cbeliahs  fonne :  anD  flbe  rannc, 
anbtolb  her  father. 

13  2utb  it  tame  to  paffc,tbhcn|Labatt 
rjeatotlje  + Wrings  of  35acob  hisftfrers 
fbnnc,  that  he  rannc  romcctehun,aub 
imtoaecb  lnm,anb  Kiffcb  him,?  toought 
htm  to  his  houfc :  anb  hce  tolbc  Haban 
ailttjcfctrnngs. 

14  3inb  ILaban  faib  to  him ,  Purely 
tfjou  art  my  bone  anb  my  fled) :  anb  he 
about  urith  himthe  ^aecofamoneth. 

H  C3nD  ILaban  faib  bnto  3Jacob, 
fficcaufe  thou  art  my  toother,  fyoulDcft 
ttjou  therefore  feme  mc  fo?  nought  <  tell 
mctuftat  (hail  thy  ibagts  bc< 

16  2inb  ILaban  Dab  tibo  baugljtctS: 
tfcc  name  of  the  elber  tuasHcah,  anb 
filename  ofthcyongcr  was3Ratl)cl. 

17  iLcar)  tbas  tenber  eyeb :  butfta* 
cfjcitbas  bcautifuianbibciifauourcb. 

is  2lnD  3iacob  loucb  ftadjei ,  anb 
faib,  3J  tbtll  feme  tl)ec  feuen  yccrcs  fo: 
Sac^mnyyongct  Daughter. 

19  ^nbfLabanfatbJtis better tfjat 
J  giuefter  to  thee,  then  that3Jfl)0ulb 
glut  her  to  another  man :  abibe  tbith 
mee. 

io  ^nb  3Jatob  ferucb  fcuen  yeercs 
foj&achcl :  anb  they  feemeb  bnto  him 
but  a  fctb  bayes ,  fo?  the  louc  hce  hab 
tofter. 

ii  C  3nb  'Jacob  faib  unto  ILaban, 
(Siutme  my  »jife(fo?my  bayes  arcful- 
filleb)that^  maygociubntofttr. 

xx  ^nb  ILaban  gather  cd  together 
all  the  men  of  the  place ,  anb  mabe  a 
feaft. 

23  3tnD  it  came  to  paffe  in  tfje  cue 


mtig,thathetookc!Lcahhisbaughtcc, 
anDtoougljthcrtoh>.m,anDl)cibcntin 
unto  her. 

24  3lnb  ILaban  gauc  bnto  ftis 
Daughter  Ileal; ,  Ziipahl)ismaybc,fo2 
ahaubmayD. 

25  ^ud  it  came  to  paffefhat  in  the 
morning ,  bcholb  it  tbas  ILeah :  anb  pe 
faib  to  ILaban ,  xohatisthts  tl)ou  haft 
Done  bnto  mee  <  bib  not  3  fcruc  tbith 
thec  fo:  Kachel  <  tbljercfoje  then  Ijatt  t«w.^< 
rhoubegiulcDmc? 

26  anDHabanfaib,3Jtmuftttotbc 
fo  bone  in  out  *  countrey ,  to  giue  the 
yongcr,bcfo:e  the  firft  borne.. 

27  ifuiffll  het  tbeeue ,  anb  tbet  tbill 
giue  thee  this  alfo ,  fo:  the  fcrutecttthtth 
tl)ou  O^alt  feme  tbith  mee,  yet  feuen  o< 
thcty  ceres. 

2S  3lnD  3}acob  did  fo ,  anD  tulfillcD 
licr  rbeefee:  anD  he  gauc  himasacftel  h»s 
Daughter  to  tbsfc  alfo. 

29  3tnb  ILaban  gaue  to  Kacrjelnis 
baughtcr,25ilhahWsljanbmayb,tdbc 
hermayb. 

30  3(nb  Dec  tbent  in  alfo  fcnto  5Ra^= 
chcl,anb  he  loucb  alfoKachel  mo:c  then 
ILtal) ,  anb  fcrueb  tbiflj  ijim  yet  feuen 
other  y  ceres. 

31  C3tnbibI)enthelL£>m»t>fatb 
tljatlLeahtbas  hatcD,  tjee  opencD  ficr 
ibombe :  but  B&achel  ibas  barren. 

32  "MD  Heah  concciucD  anD  bare  a 
fonne,  anD  fljec  calleD  Jjis  name  ||  Ben = 
bentfo?  a)efatD,5»urely,the|L£)m2) 
hath  loobeD  bpon  my  affliction ;  nolb 
rl)crcfo2cmy  hufbanDtbtllloueme. 

33  ^nb  ftjee  concelucb  againe,  anD 
bare  a  fbnnc,  anb  faibe,  26ccaufc  tfjc 
|L^!>352D  hathheatb  ttjat  3)tbasl)a* 
teb,  Ijec  t»atl)  tljcrcfoir  giuenmec  this 
fonne  alfo,  anb  U)c  calleD  htsnamc||5>t? 
mcon. 

34.  5(nD  fhec  toncetucD  againc,  anD 
baccafonnc,anbfaib,  iPotbtfjtstunc 
ibilimyhufoanbbeioyneDtoitome,bcs 
eaufc  3  hauc  bo?nc  ^itw  ttnee  founts : 
thtrctozctbashtsnametallcblllLcut. 

35  3lnb  fl)ce  concctucb  agatne,  anb 
bate  a  fonne :  anD  (he  faiD,  Jiotb  tbil  3 
pwifc  ttjc  H  £>  5R  SD :  therefbze  fbe  cal* 
icb  tjis  name  *  ||  ^uDal) ,  anb f  left  bta* 
ting. 

CHAP.   XXX. 

1  Uachel  in  gricfc  for  her  barrenncfTe^iueth  Bil- 
hahhermayd  vnto  hcob.  5  Snebearcth 
DaaaudNaphtali.  9  LeahgiuethZilpah 
her  mayd,who  beareth  Gad  and  Afber.   1 4 

Reuben 


i;  That  is. 
Seed  join •  e 


JThatij, 
Hearing. 


J  That  is, 
iopudt 

•Matili.i 


J  Thar  is, 
Pntfe. 
f  Hetr.jhod 
"ombe^riro 


fi- 


Mandrakes. 


Gcncfis.  lofeph  is  borne. 


\Hcb-.tr 
htiltky  htr. 


|, That  is, 


Viib.-xr-f- 
Ungt  cj  God. 


||  That  is, 

(J!/;  TtTAtt- 

llng. 

*  Called 
Matt. 4. i  j. 

A'ephshtt- 

tm. 


IT)>3tis, 

or  comp*irij. 

t  Hthr.in 
my  lj.topwej 

That  is, 
Htfff. 


Reuben  findeth  Mandrakes ,  widi  which 
Leah  buveth  her  husband  of  Rachel.  17 
Leah  beareth  liFachar ,  Zebulun ,  and  Di- 
nah. •---  Rachel  beareth  lofeph.  is;  la- 
cob  defireth  to  depart.  17  Laban  fhyeth 
himonanewcouenant.  37  Iacobspolici?, 
whereby  hee  became  rich. 

^aSrX{©Sg  Bb  ttihen  3SacTjel  fell) 

!M4wI  ^at  $«  oarc  3acob »° 
^M«  cbilbjcn  ,  3£acbcl  cnuicb 

^#^^r  Jacob ,  <aue  mee  chil* 

x  2hib  Jacobs  anger  ibas  ttfnbttb 
againft  Sacbcl  ,anb  be  faio ,  3(m  J  »n 
©ods  ftcab  ,UjJ)d  ijatl)  ibithbclbfrcm 
ttjtc  the  fruit  of  the  Sbombt* 

3  3lnb  fbc  Cub ,  iScbolb  nip  mapbe 
BiUjaD  :goc  in  bnto  bcr,  anb  (be  fl>all 
bearebpon  nip  ftnecs,  tljat  3J  »iap  alfo 
♦  haue  cbtibjcnbp  her. 

4  Znn  fbec  gauc  him  ffiiibah  Dec 
banbmapb  to  ibife :  anb  Jacob  Ibtnt  tn 
bnto  her. 

5  3inb  23tihah  concciueb  anb  bare 
Jacob  a  fonnc. 

6  anbftacbel  Caib,<£ob  hath  iubgcb 
me,  anb  bath  alfo  bcarb  nip  bopec,  anb 
hath  stutnnteafonncj  therefore  cailcb 
the  his  name  ||£>an. 

7  anb 25ilbab  Sachets  mapb  ton- 
cciucb  agaute  ,anb  bare  Jacob  a  tcconb 
fonnc. 

s  SfnbBachelfaibt,  noith1  great 
ttnaftltngs  haue  J  ibjattleb  lbith  mp 
fiftcr,anb  J  haue  pmiatleb  :anb  flje  cat* 
leb  his  name  II  *  4!5aphtaiu 

9  nabmlLcabfambatChchablcft 
bearing,  (bee  toobc  ztlpab  her  mapbe, 
anb  gauc  her  Jacob  to  ibifc. 

io  anb  ztlpah  ILeabs  mapbe  bare 
Jacob  a  fonnc. 

n  21ub  ILcah  faib ,  3i  troupe  touts 
nieth :  anb  the  calico  his  name  ||  <5&n. 

u  3lnb  zupah  ILeabs  mapbe  bare 
Jacob  a  fctonb  fonnc. 

ij  anb!LcaI)lauVtyapppamJ,fo? 
thcbaugbtcrsibill  calimcblclTcb:  anb 
fl)c  taiicb  hie  name  j|  afyer. 

14  OubKcubcnibcntintbcbapcs 
ofibhcat  barucft,  ?  founb£Danb2aUc£ 
m  the  ficlb ,  anb  bzought  them  bnto  his 
mother  fLcab.  Xhcn  &aebcl  faibe  to 
Hcah ,  <5uicme,  J  pjap  thee ,  of  flip 
fonncs  £}9aitb2ai.ts. 

15  3lnb  fbee  faib  bnto  her ,  Js  it  a 
fmail  matter,  that  thou  baft  taken  nip 
hufbanb  t  anb  lboulbft  thou  taite  aibap 
mpfonncs  ^antya&csaifo  .•  anb  && 


chclfaib,  Xbecefcje  h«  fl)all  ipctbithl 
thee  to  night ,  fo?  thp  fonncs  4)9an> 
bzaltcs. 

16  3nb  Jacob  came  out  of  the  ficlb 
mtbe  euening,  anb  fLeahlbcutoutto 
meet  him,  anb  fatbXbou  muft  come  In 
bntomee :  fo?  fttrelp  Jbauebirebtbcc 
ibirh  mp  fonncs  <3j3anD2ancs.  3nb  bee 
lap  ibitbher  that  ntght. 

17  ^nb@obhcarliencbbntoHcah, 
anbfl)c  conceuteb,anb  bare  Jacob tljc 
ftft  fonnc. 

is  3lnb  %ta\)  faib ,  00b  hat!)  gtuen 
1  mcc  nip  h« c ,  becaufc  J  haue  gutcu  utp 
!  mapben  to  mp  bm"banb :  anb  fbecalleb 
jhtsnamclijltachar. 

19  ^nb|Leahconcciuebagaine,aub 
i  bare  Jacob  the  firth  fame. 

io  ^nbSLcahfaib^ob  hath  enbucb 
!  me  with  a  goob  boibjp :  /I5oib  Ybili  mp 
hufbanbbtt)cltt)lthJnc,bccaufcJhauc 
J  borne  htm  fire  fonncs :  anb  ftjee  calico 
hisnamc!l*zcbulun. 

21  3lnb  aftenbarbes  tyec  bare  a 
naughtcr,anb  calico  her  name  iDinah. 

ii  C  3nb  ©ob  re'memb?eb  ©achel, 
anb  <5ob  htarfteneb  to  her,  anb  opencb 
heribombc. 

2}  ^inb  fbec  conceiueb  anb  bare  a 
fonnc,  anb  faib ;  ©ob  hathtanen  aibap 
mprcpioth: 

14  ^nb  ftjec  calico  his  name  ||  Jo^ 
feph ,  anb  faibe,  %ht  1L&&2D  Ojali 
abbe  to  meanothcr fonnc 

15  Onbitcametopaft"ctbhcn&a' 
chel  Iwb  borne  Jofcph,that  Jacob  faib 
bnto  ILaban ,  ;§>cnb  me  aibap,  that  J 
map  goe  bnto  mute  otbnc  place,  anb  to 
mptountrcp. 

26  (3iue  mee  mp  ibiues  anbmp  chte 
b?cn,foj  lbhom  J  haue  ferucb  thee,anb 
let  me  goe :  fo?  thou  hnoibeft  mp  feriucc 
ibhtcfjjhaueboncthec 

17  5lnb  Uaban  faib  bnto  him ,  J 
pzap  thee,  tf  J  haue  founb  fauour  in 
thine  cpes,tary:  fo?  J  haue  leameb  bp 
crpecicnce ,  tljat  the  %  £>  B  2>  hart) 
blc(f:bmcfo2thpfaBc. 

28  3nb  he  faib,  Appoint  me  thptba^ 
gts,anbjibillgmeit. 

29  3lnb  hee  faib  bnto  him ,  1uhou 
hnolbcft  hotb  J  haue  ferucb  thee,  anb 
boib  mp  cattcll  was  ibtth  me. 

30  irozitibaslittlctbhichthonhabft 
befoje  J  came ;  anb  it  is  now » mtrcafeb 
bnto  a  mummbe  s  anb  the  %jD&® 
hath  blcfteb  U)cc  tfince  mp  coiramng: 
anb  noib  Xbhcn  (hall  J  p?ouibe  fo? 
i  mine  onmchoufc  alfo* 

31  5lnb 


3  That  i J, 


•\  That  Is, 

'  Called 

M  4:111  4. 
I  ;.  ~.'i.i- 
lort. 

(Thatis, 
InJftnttrt, 


ilThatls, 
zdddmg. 


jHelr.hn. 
myfoolr. 


Iacob  and  Laban.      Chap.xxxj.  lacobs  leruice. 


\Hrbr.to 


31  ;^rjccfaiD,$2tyatujaU3Jgiue 
tljcc  <  anb  ^acoti  faib,  Xljou  ftjait  not 
gmcmeany  tJjmg;  iffhduxtnltftoetijis 
ttjutg  fo?  nice,  3J  Will  agaute  fees  and 
uctpctrjyfloclu. 

3^  3  HjU  paffe tij^ottgt)  ail  ti)v  f!o cfec 
tobay  ,tcmoowng  from  ttjence  all  tlje 
fpccaleD  an&  fpotteb  cartcll:  ana  ailtljc 
tyoJtone  eattell  among  tlje  fhcepc,anb 
tlje  fpottco  ana  fpccalcb  among  tijc 
goates,anto  otfuch  ftjalbcmy  Ijire. 

33  £>o  fljail  my  ngljieowncfte  an- 
froere fo2tnec  *  sn  time  to  come ,  Vo\)tn it 
Ojail  tomefo?  mv  t)ict,  before  trjpface: 
cuetyonetljat  tsnotrpccnlcbanBfpot: 
tea  amongft  trjc  goates ,  ant)  tyoJtonc  a? 
mongfttlje  Cljecpe,  tljat  fljalbe  counteb 
ftollcnibittjinc. 

34  ^no|Ubanfait)e,25el)oloc,3 
ltooulb  it  mtgljt  bee  aceojbmg  to  tljy 
u>o?d. 

35  anbljercmoucb  tljat  bay  tljcijcc 
goates  ttiat  Ibcre  ting-ftraReb ,  anb 
fpottca.ttnbautljcvljccgoats  tljat  ibere 
fpctnleb  ana  fpottcb,  and  cuery  oncttjat 
fjaaibmetbrjitcin  it,anaalltljeb2oibnc 
amongft  tile  ttjeepe,  anb  gauc  them  into 
tljcljanaofljisfonncs.  > 

36  ^nbljecfettljjccaayestoumey 
betttrirt  Uimfelfc  ana  3!aeob:ana3Ja= 
tobfeb  toe  reft  oOLabansflotte?. 

37  C  3na  3lacob  toofec  fjim  robs 
of  grcencpoplar ,  anb of ttjcljafclana 
cliefuuttrcc,anapiUcatbijitcftraBCSut 
ttjem ,  anb  maae  tlje  rbtjtte  appcare 
itotjitljitoasuttfjeroas. 

38  amaijcfettljcroaslbljidjljefjab 
pfflca,  before  rtjeflocaes  in  tlje  gutters 
in  tlje  tbatcring  trougljes  ibljen  tlje 
floras  tame  to  bnnue ,  tljat  tljcy  fljouia 
conccuiclbljenrrjcycametoannEe. 

39  3lna  tlje  flotnes  coneciuca  before 
tUc  robS,anb  bjougtjtfotflj  tattell  ring* 
flrafteb,fpecBicb  anb  fpottcb. 

40  3inb  3lacob  ata  fcparate  tlje 
;iambcs,anbTct  thifaccs  of  tlje  flocftcs 
toibatb  tfjc  ring-ftrauea ,  anb  all  tlje 
bzoIbncintljcfiotRC  of  ?Laban:anblje 
i  putljis  olbncfloessby  tljemfclues.anb 
I  puttljcmnot  bnto  ILabans  cattcll. 

41  3nnitcamctopaffciM)cn!bcucr 
tl)e  ftcongcr  cattcll  aia  conceiuc ,  tljat 
■facot)  laya  tlje  roas  before  tUc  eyes  of 
ttjc  cattcll  in  tlje  gutters  ,  tljat  tljcy 
mtgljt  conceiuc  among  tlje  robs. 

a.z  2Suttt)ljentljc  cartel  were  feeble, 
nee  put  them  not  in:  fo  tlje  feebler  Ibcre 
3Ubans,  anb  tlje  ftrongtt  Jacobs. 

43  3lnatljemanincceafeb  ercecbing- 


ly,  anb  Ijaa  muclj  eattell,  anb  mayb-- 
fmtants ,  anb  men  fcruants,  anb  ca- 
mcls,anbaftcs» 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

1  Iacob  vpon  dilpleafure  departeth  feaetly. 
\j  Rachel  ltealech  her  fathers  images.  11  La- 
ban  purfueth  alter  him,  7.6  andcomplai- 
neth  of  the  wrong.  34  Rachels  policie  to 
hide  the  images.  36  lacobs  complaint  ol 
Laban.  43  The  coucnant  ol  Laban  and 
IacobatGaleed. 

^M/^H  iftbijctjcarbtijclbojbsof 
ya\5£*>  ^Labans  fonnes ,  faying, 
■Jacob  ijatts  taken  aiaay 
all  tljat  ibas  ourfatljcrs, 
_  anb  of  trjat  lbljiclj  rbas 
of  our  tatijers ,  ijatlj  tjee  gotten  all  tljis 
glow. 

z  ^nb  3Jacob  bdiclbc  the  counte- 
nance of  ILaban,  anbbeljolb,  it  was  not 
toiDarb  ^tm  ^befoe. 

3  3lnb  tlje  H€)  IS  2>faib  bnto  3Ja* 
cob,  3Rctutne  bnto  dje  lanb  of  tljv  fa« 
tljcrs^nbtotDvbiubJcb  •,  anb  3  ibil  be 
lbitljtl)ce. 

4  ^nb'3acobfcntanbcailcbiaacDcl 
anb  Heal),  to  tlje  fielb  bnto  l)is  flocUe, 

5  ^nbfatb  bnto  tt)C!n,5f«  your  fa- 
trjers  countenance ,  tljat  it  is  not  to- 
«jatb  mec  as  before :  but  tf)c  ©ob  of  my 
fatljcr  rjatlj  bcncttntlj  me. 

6  ^nbyce  nnott) ,  tljat  Jtbitlj  all  my 
potber  3  Ijauefcruebyourfattjcr. 

7  3mb  your  fatljcr  Ijatt)  becciueb 
mee,anu  trjangcb  my  images  ten  times : 
but  ©obfuffercb  Ijimnotto  Ijurtme. 

8  3Ffrjeefaibtijus,  3Clje  rpccftleio 
ftjallbetljylbages,  tljcn  all  tlje  cattcll 
bare  fpccfelcb :  anb  if  Ije  fatb  tljus,Xljc 
ring-ftraBcb  fljalbe  tljy  litre ,  ttjm  bare 
all  tlje  cattctlring-ftraftcb. 

9  1DbuS(I5obljatl)taUenaU)ayrIjc 
eattell  of  your  fatljcr ,  anb  gtucti  them 
tomee. 

10  ^nb  it  came  to  pafTc  at  tlje  time 
tljat  the  eattell  coneciucb ,  tljat  3  nfteb 
top  mine  eyes  anbfaiP  in  abicamcanb 
beljolb  ,tlje  ||  ranmiesibUtclj  leapeo  top; 
ontjjc  eattell  were  nng-ftra6eb,fpccRlcb 
anbgrtfleb. 

11  ^nbtljc^ngcloftSobfpabctonto 
me  in  a  tozcame,  fiying,  3^ob;3lnD3 
faib,^cream3f. 

ii  3nbhecfaib,1LutbpnoHnnmc 
eyes,  anb  fee,  all  the  rammes  itotjutj 
leapctopontlje  cattcll  arertng-ftcabcb, 
fpccWeo  anb  gcifteb:  fo?  3  Daue  feme 

ail 


Hebr.Al 
y(Utrd.\y 
iUidthcd-tj 

btfare. 


\  Or ,  he: 
gaateu 


Iacob  fleeing,  is  Genefis.     purfuedbyLaban. 


"Chap.  18. 
18. 


\Hehr.Tc- 
rapbim. 

\Htbr.tht 
hetrrtef La~ 


J  fiehr.Jtm 


t  Ht br.  htift 
fttiUnmc 


all  rtjat  ILaban  boetb  bnto  thee. 

13  ;jamthe(5obof23erbcl,*tt)herc 
thouattnopntcbft  the  pillar,  and  tbbcre 
tljon  boibcDftaboibbntomecnunba; 
nfe,sct  thee  out  f com  th#  lattb,  anb  r  e= 
turne  bnto  theianb  oftl)^  Umtyeo. 

14.  anb  3Ratt>el  anb  ILeat)  anftbt; 
reb,anbtatb  bntobtm ,  3&  tbercpcta- 
nppojtiou  01  inheritance  to?  bstn  out 
fathers  houfev 

15  are  lbe  not  countcb  ofbhn  (Icatx? 
gcr^fo2bclwtbfolObs,anbbathcMite 
bcuourcb  alfo  our  moncp. 

16  if  0?  all  the  rirtjcsibDich  <3ob  bath 
tnnett  from  our  father,  tl)at  is ours, 
anb  our  cbilbzcns :  noU)  then  iDDatfo- 
cuct  <sob  hath  faib  bnto  thce,boc. 

17  CI^Dcn  3lacou  role  tip,  anb  fct 
Ijts  tonnes  ant)  bis  lbiucs  upon  camels. 

18  anbbecanebatbapallbiseattell, 
anb  all  his  g^obsibbicbbehab  gotten, 
the  eattcll  of  bis  getting ,  lbbtcb  bee  bab 
gotten  in  ^abanaram,  fo?  to  goeto  %■ 
faacbiSfatbcrtn  tbclanbofCanaanT 

19  anb  ILaban  ibent  to  tbeare  bis 
ft)eepc:anb3&acbcibab  ftollen  tlje f  3J* 
mages  that  were  her  fathers. 

20  anb  3Jacob  dale  away  t  bna= 
tuarestolUbantbc&pitimMntbathe 
toibhtmnottbatbeflcb. 

21  dobceflcbibitbautbatheebab, 
anb  he  rote  bp  anb  paflcb  oner  ti)e  Bi- 
tter,  anb  fet  his  face  toward  the  mount 
©ueab. 

22  anb  tt  tnas  tolbe  ILaban  on  the 
tbicboap,tbat3jiacobiuasflcb. 

23  anbbcctooReb:sb2cthmi\bttb 
bim,anbpurfuebaftcrbimfcucnbapcs 
lournep,anbtijcpouertooBcbtmintbc 
mount  <£ileab. 

24  anb  <2>ob  came  to  ILaban  the 
£>puaninab2eame  bp  night,  anbfatbc 
bnto  him,  %&U  beebtbattboufpeanc 
not  to  3Jacob f  either  goob  0:  bab. 

25  C  Xben  ILaban  ouertooltc  3Ja- 
cob.  iI5oib  3Jacob  bab  pttcbcb  his  tent 
m  the  mount :  anb  lLaban  lbitb'bts  b?e; 
tbtfn  pitches  ut  the  mount  of  <Meab. 

26  anb  ILaban  faib  to  3Iaeob,}©bat 
ball  thou  bone,  that  thou  Daft  ftollen  a* 
ibap  bnaibares  to  me,  anb  caricb  atoap 
mp  baugbters,  as  capmtes  taken  rmth 
tbcfnwb* 

27  i©Derc&:c  btbft  tDou  flic  a\bap 
fccrctlp,anb f  Italic  albap  from  mc,ano 
btbft  not  tell  mce;  tDat  3  might  Dauc 
rent  thec  aibap  ibttb  nrirtb,  anb  With 
fougs,\bitbtab2ct,anbibtthl)arpc, 

28  anb  baft  not  fuffcreb  mc  to  Rifle 


mp  fonncs  anb  mp  baughtcrs  <  thou 
haft  novb  bone  fooltlblp  in  fo  boing. 

29  3t  is  m  the  poibcr  of  mp  Danb 
tobocpou  hurt:  but  the  ©ob  of  pour 
fatberfpaftc  bnto  mce  peftcrtugbt,fap' 
tug,  XaRe  thou  herb,  that  tbonfpeaRe 
not  to  3}atob  either  goob  0?  bab. 

30  anb  nolb  though  thou  lboulbcft 
necbcs  bee  gone ,  becaufe  thou  fo?e  ion- 
gebftaftcrtl)?  fathers  hoiufcyctttiDcrci 
fo?c  haft  thou  ftollen  mp  gobs  * 

31  anb  3lacob  anfwereb  anbfaibto 
ILaban,  23ccanfe  3  ibas  afratb :  foj'J 
fetb,^crabuenturcthouiboulbefttaftc 
bv  foice  rhp  baugbters  from  me. 

32  aaitb  lbhomfoeucr  thou  finbeft 
thvsobs,  let  Dun  not  Hue:  befoje  our 
b:ctlwm  bifecrne  thou  ibhat  is  thine 
rbttb  me ,  anb  tabe  it  to  thee :  fo?  giatob 
tuievo  not  that  Bacbel  hab  ftollen 
them. 

33  3mb  flaban  ibent  mto  Jacobs 
tent  ,anbmto|Lcahs  tent,  ana  into  th£ 
nbomatbfemants  tents:  buthefounb 
them  not.  Xbtn  lbcnthcout  oflLeahs 
tcnt,ano  entrebinto  ftachcls  tent. 

34  i]5oib  Rachel  Dab  tahen  the  if 
raagefi,  anb  put  them  m  thceamelBfhr' 
niture ,  anb  fate  bpon  them :  anblLa- 
ban f  fearcbeb  all  tt)c  tent ,  but  founb 

them  not. 

35  ^nb(heefatbtohcrfather,|Letit 
not  bupieafe  mp  io?b ,  that  3  cannot 
rife  bp  before  thee;  fo?  tlje  ntftomc  of 
ibomcn is bponmcc:  anb  he  fcarrheb, 
but  founb  no  t  the  images. 

36  C^b 'Jacob ibas uwth, anb 
chobe  lbtth  ILaban :  anb  ^acobanwjcs 
rcb  anb  fatb  to  ILaban,  rehat  >s  mp  tret 
paffe<  ibhatismvnnne,thatthouhaft 
fo  hotlvpwrfuebaftermei 

37  3©h«tas  thou  haft t  fearcheb  all 
my  ftuffe ,  ibhat  haft  thou  founb  of  all 
thv  houlholb  ftuffe  i  Ut  it  here  bcfo;e 
mpb,icthzett,anb  thv  b^ethjen^jat  thev 
map  tttbgc  betibtrt  b^;  both. 

38  Xhts  tlbentle  pecrcs  haue  3 
bene  lbith  thee :  thpclbesanb  tbp  (hee 
goatcs  hauc  not  caft  their  pong ,  anb 
the  rammes  of  tl;p  flothc  haue3j  not 
eaten. 

39  Xhattbhicl)ibast02neofbeaft.s3 
bzoughtnotbnto  thee :  3  bare  the  loftc 
oftt,-  of  *mphanb  btbft  thoureQuirett, 
lbhttlxr  ftollen  bp  bat»,  0?  ftollen  bp 
night. 

4.0  Thus3Jn)a$mpbap,thcmought 
tonfumeb  nice,  anb  the  froft  bp  night, 
aubmp  flccp  beparteb  from  mine  eyes- 

4J%\)US 


\Htbr.fclt. 


\Hch-.fch. 


Eiod 


Their  couenant.     Chap.xxxij.  Jacobs  prayer 


rarieb  alimgOtinfliemount. 

5$  anb  earcly  intlic  morning,  %&■ 
banrofe  Dp  anbrniTcb  Ins  fonnes,  anb 
UtSbaugliters ,  anb  blctTcb  tr)em :  anb 
ILaban  beparteb,  arm  returoeb  bnto 
iji^  place* 

CHAP.  XXXI  r. 

I  Iacobsvifionat  Mahanaim.  3  His  meflace 
to  Efau.  6  He  is  afraid  of  Efaus  comming. 
9  Heprayeth  fordeliuerance.  13  Hcefen- 
dethaprefenttoEfau.  14  HewrelHethwith 
an  Angel  atPeniel,  where  hee  is  called  Ifrael. 
3 j  Hehalteth. 

/9b  3Jatob  tttmt  on  ins 
ibay,  ano  flic  angels  of 
<5obmcttnm. 
x  anb  lbrjeu  ^atob 
_  farbttjem,  Jiefeib ,  Xtjtjs  is 
«5obstio(rc:  anbiieetallebrtie  name  of 
fliat  place  ll^afianaim. 

3  anb^aeobfemmcffcnsersbttojjc 
l)tm,to  efau  Ins  b?oflier,bnto  ttjcianb 
of  &ett,tiie  ^ountccy  of  ebom. 

4  anbneeommaunbeb  fl)cm , fey* 
ing,  Xliusfoailyefpeaftcbnto  my  lo:b 
efau ,  Xtty  fcrnant  37  acob  faith  tftns, 
5  liauc  fbtountcb  ibttti  &aban,  anb 
(taycbflicrcbittillnoib. 

5  anb  3  Dauc  oren,  anb  atlcs, 
flotfecs.anbmenferaantg  anbtbomen 
fcruants:  anb  3  haite  lent  to  tell  my 
lo?b,  tiiafj  may  finb  grace  tntliy  figlit. 

6  C  anb  flic  metrcngctsrctutncb 
to3fa«>^  faying,  trace  tame  to  rfjybjo* 
flier  <£Cau,anbaifo  lieeommctrjtomect 
flicc,  anbfoiireliunbJebmmHjttliinm. 

7  Xtjcn^Jacobibasgreatiyafraib, 
anbbtftrcfXeb,  anbrjebiuibcbtliepeoplc 
tt)atwasDjitlil)un,  anbtoefiocfecs,  anb 
rjetbcs,anb  t!it  tamcls  uuo  flbo  banbs, 

S  anb  feib,;3Sfefau  tome  to  flic  one 
company,  anb  finite  it,  trjen  rtje  oflier 
company  ibliftfiislett,  Oiallefrape. 

9  canb3acobfatb,jf>C5obofmy 
faflicrab2aI)am,anbC5obof  my  father 
■jjfaat,  fl)c  %  £>  £  2D  tbljicl)  faibO  tonto 
me,  *3&ctttrne  bnto  fliy  cottntrcy,  anb 
to  thy  feintcb ,  anb  3  m\\  beale  Ibeli 
Vbitfjtljee: 

io  1 5  am  not  tbortliy  of  the  lead  of 
all  toe  mercies,  anb  of  all  flit  trnefli, 
ttljiti)  tlion  Haft  Oietbeb  bnto  flip  fev? 
ttant :  fo;  lbttt)  my  ftaffc  3  paffeb  ouec 
tins  IJoiban ,  anb  noib  3  am  become 
ttbobanbg. 

n  3>t.nictmc,^p2ay  flicc,  from  flic 

haub  of  my  brother,  from  the  hanb  of 

€fau: 


[That  is, 
Theheafe 
ofwunetfe. 


[That  is, 
zsf  beacon : 
or  watch 


lOr.yW 
itajlt. 


^.i  Xljust>ue'3jbenetibentieyeres 
in  tl)y  lioufc :  3  Icirueb  tliee  fourteene 
ycetes  fozfliy  ttbobaugl)ters>  anb  fire 
yeresfb2tr)yeatteli  anb  tl)ou  Daft  diaiv 
geb  my  \bages  ten  times. 

4i  C]tcepttt)e(^obofmyfatl)cr,tl)c 
(5ob  of  abzarjam,  anb  trje  fearcof  3- 
faatliabbm  ibitt)mc,mrelytliouIiab(r 
fent  me  aibay  noib  emptic:  ©obrjatli 
ftene  mine  affliction,  anb  tnclabourof 
my  l)anbs,f  rebuutb  thee  ytftermglit. 

43  caiibl!iabananfttjercbanbfaib 
imto  Jlacob ,  Xljcfe  battglitersaremy 
baugljtcrs,  anbtl)cfc  flulbicn  arc  my 
crjtlbzen,  anb  tfjcfe  cattell  arc  nry  cat- 
tcll,anb  all  fliat  rtjou  feed,  is  nunc :  anb 
ibljat  can  3  boe  tins  bay  bnto  flicfc 
my  banglucrs,  o:  bnto  ttjctt  rtjilbjen 
ibljrtfj  rticyfiawe  borne  < 

44  Solb  ttjercfozc  come  tlion,  let 
bsmabeatoucnant,  3  anb  tlion :  anb 
let  ft  be  fojatbrtneffcbcttbecncmcanb 
tr)ce. 

45  anb^atobtootteaftoncanbfet 
itbprojaptliar. 

46  ^nb  3lacob  fatbc  bnto  I)is  tec- 
tt)?err,  (Satt)er  flones :  anb  tljcytoonc 
ttones,  anb  mabe  an  Ijeapc,  anb  tlicy 
bib  eatctl)crebponrt)cl)capc. 

47  anb  fLaban  caucb  it  ||  3Jegar- 
SarjabutDa :  but  3^^  taHtf) lt  ^^ 
leeb. 

48  anb Haban  folb,  lOjisrjeapc  is 
attitncire  benbeent  nice  anb  fljcetihts 
bay.  XlTcrefo?clbasflicnamcofitcal'> 
leb<saietb, 

49  anb  || fl0i5pali :  fojrjc tetii,  %X>t 
H;aD3a2D\batcl)  bcttbeenenieanbfliec 
alien  ibearcabftnt  one  from  anotlier. 

50  gjftliou  flialt  afflict  mybaugl> 
ters,  02  if  fl}ou  Cbalt  tafee  other  tbiues 
befibc  my  baugr)ters,no  man  ts  tbttJ)  bs, 
£>tt,  C5ob  is  KbitnclTe  bettbirtmee  anb 
ttjec. 

51  anblLabanfaibto^acob,  T8>v- 
DolbtliisDcapc,  anb  beliolbrtiis  pillar, 
Vbljitl)  3  liauc  taft  betttiijrt  me  anb  rtice. 

5z  XljislieapcbclbitnciTc,anbtliis 
pillar  beXbitnciTc,  fliat^ibfllnotpaiTc 
oucr  tlitsljeapc  to  tnee,  anb  fliat  tHoti 
(halt  uotpafft  oner  this  licapc,anb  ttjis 
pillar  bnto  me ,  foz  ftarme. 

53  Xlie  (Sob  of  abzaliam ,  anb  flit 
<Sob  of  Fallot ,  flic  (5ob  of  flieic  f& 
flier,  tubge  bettbtrt  bs.  anb  Jlatob 
froarc  by  tTje  fearc  of  Ijis  fattier  lliaac. 

54  XDm^arobllottrcbfacrultebp^ 
on  flie  mount,  anb  calleb  Ins  toetrjzen  to 
eate  bzcab,  anb  tljey  biU  cate  b?eab ,  anb 


JTliatis, 
mo  hojies 
or  compel. 

\Hci.frcU. 


"Chap.  31. 
'!• 

t  Heh.  lam 
U$e  tken  ait 
&c. 


Iacobs  prefent. 


Genefis.     He  is  named  Ifrael. 


(  ihb.-jfi*. 


r  Hii  r*j 
If*,. 


t  Hd.au- 
f,dtiptfi. 


)  Heir. 
m-g. 


efan :  fo:  3  featel)un,lcftncibiUtomc, 
anb  unite  me,  anb  tljcmofyctnbttfttljc 

cIiUb:cn.  _ 

iz  3nbrt)oufaiba,3Jibrtluirclyboe 
t\)tc  go  ob,anb  mafec  tt)y  fceb  as  tijc  fanb 
of  tlje  fta,  ibt)icl)cannotbenumb?cbfo2 
multmibc.  .       ,    , 

13  C^nbfcclobgcbrrjcretljatfamc 
ntgltt,  anb  toofee  of  that  lbbiri)  came 
to  liis'ljanb ,  a  p?efcnt  fo;  efau  Ijis 
biotijct : 

14  %Vbo  rjunbjeb  fljee goats,  anb 
tibenttc  Ijcc  goats ,  tibo  Ijunbzeb  elbes, 
anbrtbcntictammcs, 

15  lOjirnc  mild)  camels  ibitl)  t!)eu* 
colts,f o:tie  tone,  anu  ten  buUes,ttbcnty 
nice  allies,  anb  tcnfoaics. 

16  ^nO  1)CC  DCUUCtCD  them  into  tlje 

Danb  of  tns  feniants,  encry  bjoue  by 
tbemfcMcs,anb  faib  bnto  Ijts  fecuants, 
0afleoneTbcfojcmc,anbputafpacebC5 
tibirtbroncanbbjoue. 

17  ^nbrjccommanbcbtijcfomiott, 
laying,  asnen  efau  my  b2otl)et  mte* 
tctl)  tl)cc,anb  affect!)  $ec,faying,s©I)ofc 
artrt)oui  anblblnftjcr  goctttl)ou<  anb 

W)I)Ofcaretl)CfCbCfO?Ctt)CCi 

18  ^thcntt)oun)altfap,12hevbetl)p 
fetuant  Jacobs:  it  is  a  pjefcnt  fent  tonto 
my  lo:b  efau :  anb  betjolb  alio,  Ije  is  be= 
ijinbbs. 

19  Slnbfocommanbcbnctrjcfetonb, 
anb  ti)c  tbicb,  anb  all  tljat  follotbcb  tijc 
D2ones,fapmg,^)nthisnianctft)aivou 
fpcaftcbitfo€fau,lbt)cnyonfmbhtm. 

zo  3lnbfayycmo2coucr,25cf)olbc, 
tl)y  ftruant  31acobis  bchinbbs:fo:lje 
{a;b,3Hbill  appcafc  ijimlbitrj  tlje  we? 
fent  tnat  goctl)  before  me,  anb  after- 
tbatD^Jibill  fecftisfatCjperabucntnre 
Jjeibill  accept1  of  me. 

zi  5>o  ibent  tfte  pzefent  oner  befozc 
Ijtm:  anbljunfclfc  lobgebdjat  ntgljtm 
tlje  company. 

zz  3nbl)ectofcbptl)atnig!)t,anb 
toofee  Ijis  tibo  ttiucs,  anb  l)is  tibo  lbo- 
men  fcruants,  anb  l)is  clenenfonnes, 
anbpaffcD  ouct  tljcfoojb^labbofe. 

z  j  3nb  ije  toofee  tbem,anb + fent  tnem 
oucr  tlje  b;oofec ,  anb  fent  oner  tfjat  t)cc 
tjab. 

Z4  C3nb  ^Jacob  Ibas  left  alone: 
anb  tfjcr  c  itecftfcb  aman  Ibttfj  ljim,bn* 
nil  tlje !  bjcafeing  of  rnc  bay. 

z5  :&ibibncnljefarb,tl}atl)cp;tenai- 
icbnotagainttrjim,  Ijctoucbcb  njeijol? 
loin  of  Ijis  tl)lgt):  anb  tUc  ijollolb  of 
Jacobs  tljigliibasoutof  toynt,  asljcc 
ibzcfhcbibttlj.jtin. 


I  z6  ^nbhefaib,1Letmegoe,fo:tDc 
Daybzcaftetl):  anbljefaib,  *3ilbtllnot 
lettfjccgoc^cepttlioiibleffemc. 

Z7  3inb  f)c  faib  bnto  Dim ,  a^at  is 
thy  name?  anb l)cfaib,3Jacob. 

zs  3tnb  helatb,* %m  name fhallbe 
callcbno  niozc  Uacob ,  butjjjftact :  fo? 
asapnncc  ball  tfjonpoibetibithcsob, 
anb  ibithmcn,anbl}aft  piewailcb. 

Z9  Slnb'Jlacob  affecbhim,  anbfaioe, 
Xcllmc,  5fp^y  tl)ce,tt)vname :  anb  De 
fata,  naljerefoze  is  it,  tljat  tDou  bocft 
afitcaftcrmpnamcianbljcbleffebljim 

30  3lnb3JacobcailebtDenamcoftl)c 
place  ||  0eiiiel:  fo«t  3  Dane  feenc  <25ob  face 
to  face,  anb mplifcis pjefecueb. 

31  ^nbasljcpau*ebouct^enud,tljc 
funnerofebponfjim,  anb?)el)altcbbp-- 
onhistl)igf). 

3z  ^ctcfo?e  titjc  cfjilbjctt  of 3frael 
cate  not  of  tOc  fmelbe  Sbl)icD  a)2anfee, 
«?Wcl)is  bpontljcljollotboftijetljtg!), 
bmo  tt)is  bay:  becaufe  !)ee  toucftcb  tlje 
5)olloib  of  Jacobs  ttjis^,  mtijc  fmesbc 
tljatfl)?anfee. 

CHAP.    XXXIII. 

I  The  kindneffe  of  Iacob  and  Efau  at  their  mee- 
ting. 17  IacobcommethtoSuccoth.  j8  At 
Salem  he  buyeth  a  field,  and  buildeth  an  Al- 
tar called  Elohc  IfraeJ. 

jBb  ^acob  lifteb  bp  tjis 
x  eyes,  anb  loofecb ,  anb  be* 

*^^el  l)olb,€faucamc,anbtt)itJ) 
^mi  fourc  Ijimbjcti)  men : 
anb  ijec  bttubeb  tlje  d)U* 

bicnbnto  Heal),  anb  bnto  3Sart)cl,anb 

bnto  tlje  tibo  l)anbmaibs. 
z  3lnb  l)e  put  tl)c  ftanbmaibes ,  anb 

ti)ric  cbibjen  fojcmoft ,  anb  3UaI)  anb 

lier  djilbien  after,  anb  5Rac!)ci  anb  3Jo^ 

fcp!)l;intJcrmoft. 

3  2lnb  Ijec  paffeb  onn:  befo jc  tftein, 
anb  boibcb  liimfelfc  to  rtje  gtounb  fc^ 
uen  times,  bntilll)cc  came  nccrc  tol;is 
bjotljer. 

4  ^iib<£faurantomcctel)im,anb 
lmb:acebi)im,  anbfellonl)isnecfec,anb 
toffeb  Inm,  anb  tftcy  ibept. 

5  3(nb  l)c  liftbp  Ijis  eyes,  anbfaibe 
tfteibomcn,  aiiDtDecnilbzcn,  anbfatb, 
iPlio  arc  tljofc  ■  lbitl)  tlicc^  3lnb  Ije  faib, 
3Clic  dnlb?cn  mijtcrj  00b  fjartj  gracv 
oiiflygiucn  tby  feruant. 

6  ^IJjen  tlje  Iwnbmaibcns  came 
necr  e  ■,  t!)cy  anb  tbeic  cl)ilb?cn,  anb  tl)ey 
bolbcbthcmfeuics. 

-r  5lnb 


♦Ofs.ii.^. 


•Chap.  3; 
10. 


That  is. 


IKC'j 


t  HtiTo 
tktc. 


Jacob  and  Efau.         Chap.xxxnij.       Dinah  defiled, 


{  Heb.  wh*t 

•J  alltbu 
tandtotltoe? 


\  Heb.bec 
that  to  thee 

thut'athtnc. 


f  Heb.accor- 
dmg  to  the 
footeofthe 
wor^et&c. 
ef-  according 
lathe  foot  of 
the  children. 
1  Heb  Set, 
orpUce. 
\Hc6  wker- 
forciithht  ? 


That  if, 
boothe:. 

•Called 
Ads.  7. 16 
Sychcm. 


•  Called 

Aas.7.16. 

Emor. 

\{Or,Itrmbet. 
g  That  is, 
C/od ,  the 
God  of  if. 


7  3inD  3Leah  aifo  B)irb  her  cbUDjen 
tame  ncctc,anD  boiDf  D  rtjoiifelttcs:  anD 
after  taint  3Jofcpb  neere  anD  Barbel, 
anD  tbcp  bolbcD  tbemfclues. 

8  3uiD bcfaiD, + JBljatmcaneft thou 
bp  all  rijfs  Dzoue,  rotytl)  3  met*  3lnD 
t)e  faiD, Thcfe  are  to  &nD  gr ate  m  the  ftgljt 
ofmplo:D. 

9  3ud  efati  lain ,  3  bauc  enough : 
mp  ivotbcr , f  Iscepc  that  thou  bait  unto 
tbpfclfc. 

10  :sn&  3f  acob  faiDc ,  May ,  3  pjap 
tbee:  tfnoU)3f  \fcut  fomiD  grace  mtbp 
fight ,  then  retcittc  mp  pjefent  at  mp 
hanD :  foz  therefore  31  bauc  fcenc  tbp 
rate  ,as  though  31  hao  fecne  tlKfatcof 
d5ou  i  anD  thou  ruaQ  picafcD  ttntb  me. 

11  Xaftc ,  3  pjap  tliee,  mp  blctTmg 
that  is  brought  to  tbee,  betaurc  <Sob 
bath  Dealt  gtarionflp  Hntb  nice,  ana  be 
taufe  3  bauc  enough :  anD  bee  bzgeD 
IjuUjanDljetooheit. 

\z  ^uDbefaiD.ilctbstaftcouriour: 
tup , anD  ictPsgoe,  aiiD3JttuUgocbc; 
fojetbee. 

13  &nD  bee  faiD  bnto  him,  J^hnD 
tmoibctb,  that  the  ebtlDzenaretenDer, 
anD  the  flocRCS  anDbcarDSttnthpong 
arc  ibitb  nice  :  anD  if  mm  fboulD  o- 
ucr-Dziue  tljcm  one  Dap ,  all  the  flocHc 
Will  Die. 

14  HetmplojD,3Jpjapthee,pau*co' 
uer  befo:e  his  fcruant,  anD  3  tbill  lease 
on  forth?,  attotfmig f  as  the  cattcllthat 
goeth  before  me,anD  the  ehflD2cn  be  able 
toenbure,bntill  3  conic  bnto  mplojD 
tmto&clr, 

15  ^nBtffaufart^Hctmenoiibncauc 
ttiiththcc  feme  of  tbcfolBctbatambtfb 
met^nDbccfaiD/iBhatnccDethrtdct 
mc  finDe  grace  in  the  fight  of  mp  lozD. 

16  C£>oefaurcturncDtbatDap,on 
btstuapbnto&ctr. 

17  3tnD  3Jacob  iountcpcD  to  &m 
coth>  anDbUilthimanhoufc,  anDmaDc 
boothes  foi  his  cattett  :  tbetcfoze  the 
name  of  the  plate  is  callcb  1 5>uecotb. 

18  C3inD3!lacobcamcto£>balcm,a 
cttieof  *  ^>hcthcm,\bhuh  ismthe  lanD 
ofCanaan,  ibbenbecamcftom#aDan 
3(ram ,  anD  pitttjet)  his  tent  befectbe 
Cttle. 

19  3inD  he  bought  a  parcdl  of  a  ficlD 
Jbljert  Dee  baD  fpjeaD  his  tent,  at  the 
hanD  of  the  chittucn  of*  *?amo*  £>bc 
thews  father,  fo:  an  bunDjcD  II  pieces  of 

money.  _ 

zo  ^nD  hee  ercttcD  there  an  ^Itar, 
ianDtaileD  it  ||ci-cio!)c-3lfrael. 


CHAP.    XXXIIIL 

Dinah  is  rsuifhed  bv  Shechem.  4  Hefueth 
tomarrvher.  13  Theionnesotlacoboftei 
the  condition  of  Ciicumcrfion  to  the  She- 
chcniites.  10  Hamor  and  Shechem  per- 
fwade  them  to  accept  it.  15  The  Tonnes  ot 
Iacob  vpon  that  adtianta£;e  flay  them,  17 
and  fpoile  their  citie.  30  Iacob  reprooueth 
Simeon  and Leui. 

jftD  2>inah  the  Daughter 
offUah,$bbich  fhecbarc 
Dnto3!acob,Tbcnt  out  to 
fee  the  Daughters  of  the 
lanD. 
z  :3uDtt»hm  Shechem  the  fonne  of 
it?amo:  tlje  finite,  pmue  of  the  coun-- 
ttcp  fait)  her,hc  too&c  her,anD  laplbith 
hcr^nD^DenleDher. 

5  3nD  hts  foulc  riaue  Dnto  S>inab 
the  Daughter  of  3Jacob ,  ano  hee  loucD 
the  Damfcll ,  anD  fpauc f  fttnDIp  Dnto  the 
Damfell. 

4  3inD  ^>hed)em  fpattc  into  his  fa= 
ther  $amo2,  faying,  C5et  mce  tljiis  Dam* 
felltotbife. 

5  ^iid  fatob  htarD  tl)at  he  haD  De^ 
RleD  2>tnah  his  Daughter  ( note  hts 
fonncs  ibcrcibith  his  cartel  m  the  fieiD) 
anD  35atob  hclDe  his  v(^  Smtill  thep 
Ibcrc  conic. 

6  c  ^nDteamo?  tljc  father  of  £>ho 
them  ttient  out  imto  3Jatob  to  tom^ 
munctbithhim. 

7  ^nD  the  fonncs  of  3iacob  tame 
outof  thcftelD  tbhen  thephcarbisanD 
the  men  iDerc  grieueD:  anD  thep  ttcre 
Derp  Unoth ,  betaufe  hee  haDttijought 
follp  in  3Ifracf,  in  Ipingtbith  Jacobs 
Daughter  j  luhich  thing  ought  not  to 
be  Done. 

8  3mD  ^amo?  tommuncD  toith 
them,  taping ,  1£he  foule  of  mp  fonne 
5)hethnn  longeth  fo?  pour  Daughter  t 
3  p:ap  pougmc  her  him  to  Ibife. 

9  3nD  mafee  pc  manages  ttith  bs, 
anD  giuc  pour  Daughters  tonto  Ds ,  anD 
tafee  our  Daughters  tonto  pou. 

10  ^nDpcfhailDtt)cUtbitht)S,anD 
theianD  fl)all  be  bcfojcpou-.DiDelianD 
trabc  pou  therein ,  anD  get  pou  poftcfc 
fiens  therein. 

11  3lnD  5>heehem  faiD  bnto  her  fa> 
ther ,  anD  Dnto  her  bzcthjm  ,lLet  mee 
finDe  grace  tnpour  epes,  anD  ibhatpcc 
(ball  tap  bnto  mc,3J  ttull  gtue. 

11  ^ffee  nice  ncucr  fo  much  Dotbjie 

anD  gift ,  anD  3}  mil  gsuc  attoiDmgas 

?D  yee 


\Htbr.hurn- 
bkiher. 


j  Heir,  to 
her  hettrr. 


The  Sliechemites       Genefis. 


are 


fpoiled. 


•Qup.49. 

6. 
mouth. 


pec  (ball  fap  unto  met: but giuc  mctye 
tiamfctuoibifc. 

1  j  3nb  tye  Tonnes  of  SJacobammc; 
rcb  £>l)cri)cm ,  anb  $amoi  l)is  fatyer 
Dccntfuilp,anbfaib,  becaufe  fjcljabbc; 
filc&Dutar)  tyeir  lifter. 

14  3inb  t^cp  faibe  bnto  tycm ,  aacc 
cannot  boe  tyis  tying ,  to  giuc  our  filter 
to  one  tyat  is  bnctreumnfeb :  fo?  tyat 
lucre  a  report)  bnto  bs. 

15  25uttn  tyts  lbtlUbceonfent bnto 
pou:  3Jfpc  ibiUbeasibebe,tyatcucrp 
male  of vou  be  cireuinctfcb : 

16  XftenibiUbcgtuc  out  Daughters 
bnto  pou,anb  ibe  ttnl  taue  pour  baugfc 
tcrsto  bs,anbtbeibilimbeliibity  pou, 
anb  lbc  lbillbccome  one  people. 

17  23utif  pc  Mil  not  l)earben  bnto 
bs,to  bcnrnmietfcb,tyenlbilirbetaRe 
our  baugljter  ,anb  ibe  lbtll  be  gone. 

is  anbtyetrtbo2bsplcafcb$>amo2, 
anb  £>ljetyem  T?anto?s  fonnc. 

19  ^nb  tye  pong  man  beferreb  not 
to  boe  tye  tying ,  becaufe  r)c  Dab  bcltgrjt 
in  gjatobs  baugljtcr :  anb  rje  lbas  mo:c 
honourable  tyen  all  tye  ijoufc  of  Ijis 
fatycr. 

20  CSnb^ainojanb&fictyentyis 
fonnc  tame  bnto  tye  gate  of  tyeir  arte, 
anb  tomnmncb  Ibity  tye  men  of  tyeir 
eittcfaping: 

21  ifrjcfcmcnarcpcaceablcibitybs, 
tycrefo2C  let  tycm  blbcl  in  tye  lanb.anb 
trabctycreut:  fo?tyclanb,btyolb,  it  is 
large  enougl)  foz  tycm :  let  \>s  tane 
tyctr  baugntcrs  to  bs  fo?  Mmtcs,  anb 
let  bs  giuc  tycm  our  baugljters. 

2i  £>nelp  nerctn  ibill  tye  men  eon* 
fcut  bnto  bs ,  foz  toblbcll  ibity  bs  to  be 
oncpcoplc,  if  cucrpmale  among  bs  bee 
dreuntct&b,astyeparc  cirtumttfeb. 

2j  5>f)ail  not  tyeir  cattcll ,  anb  tyeir 
fubftanct,anb  cucrp  bcaft  oftyeirsbce 
ours*  onelp  letbsconfcnt  bnto  tyem, 
anbtyepttnllbibcllibitybs. 

24  ;snb  bnto  ^amozanb  bnto  £>ne 
ct)cm  nis  fonnc ,  IjearBcncb  all  tyat 
tbent  out  of  tye  gate  of  bis  cine;  ano 
eucrp  male  lbas  circumctfcb  ,  all  tyat 
ibent  out  of  tye  gate  of  bis  ntie. 

25  C  3nb  it  came  to  paffc  on  tye 
tyicbc  bap  ibhcn  tl)ep  iberc  fozc,  tyat 
tibo  of  tye  fonnes  of  "Jacob,  Sumcon 
anb1Lcui,Dinansbjrty2cn,toottccacli 
man  Ijisfioozb  anb  tame bpontyentic 
bolblp,  anb*  flcib  ailtyc  males. 

26  3nb  tycp  flelb  l?amo2  ano  £>bc 
tyem  rjts  fonnc,  lbtty  tye  ^bgcof  tye 
uoozb ,  anb  tooUc  £>inaj)  out  of  £>l)i 


tyems  !)oufc ,  anb  tbent  out 

17  %\)t  fonnes  of  35acob  came  bpon 
tye  flame,  anb  fpotlcotye  otic,  becaufe 
tyep  l>ib  Dcfileb  tyeir  filler. 

is  %\p%  toottc  tyeir  tbeepc  ,  anb 
tyeir  ojcen ,  anb  tyen;  afles,  anb  tyat 
\bl)ity  was  m  tye  titie ,  anb  tyat  iblnty 
wastntyeflclb. 

19  ^nbautycirtteaity,anbailtycir 
little  ones,  anb  tycirlbiucstooRetycp 
captiue,  anb  fpoilcb  eucn  ail  tyat  was  m 
tycljoufe. 

jo  smogjacobfaib  to  Simeon  anb 
|Lcui,J5e  Ijauc  troubleb  me  to  mane  me 
to  (hnne  among  tye  inhabitants  of  tye 
lanb,  amongft  tye  Canaamtcs,  anb  tye 
0crr55itcs :  anb  3  being  felb  m  num- 
ber ,  tycp  fballgatyer  tyemfelues  toge 
tyer  agamfl  me,anb  flap  mcanb  3  u)al 
be  beflr  opeb,5  anb  mp  rjoufe. 

ji  2nb tyep  faib ,  £>!joulb fjee beale 
ibity  our  fiftet,as  ibity  an  ijarlot  * 

CHAP.   XXXV. 

God  fendeth  Iacob  to  Bethel,  i  He  purgeth 
bis  houfe  of  idols,  6  Hebuiidethan  Altar  at 
Bethel.  8  Deborah dieth at  AllonBachuth. 
9  God  bleflethlacobatBethel.  i£  Rachel 
traueileth  of  Beniamin ,  and  dieth  in  the  way 
toEdar.  n  Reuben  lieth  with  Bilhah.  23 
The  fonnes  of  Iacob.  17  Iacob  commeth 
to  Ifaac  at  Hebron.  18  The  agc,death,and 
buriall  of  Ifaac. 

"*  ^nfe ,  goc  bp  to  JSctycl, 
anb  blbel  tycr  e :  anb  matee 
tycrc  an  ^Itar  bnto  (5ob, 
„.  tyat  appearcb  bnto  tyce, 
*  loDcn  tyou  flebbeu  from  tye  face  of  €- 
fautypbJOtycr. 

1  Xljtn  ^acobfatb  bnto  DiSljoufes 
Ijoio ,  aiib  to  all  tyat  lbcrc  Ibity  ftim, 
^>ut  aibap  tye  ftrange  gobs  tyat  are  a= 
mong  pou,anb  bee  cleane,anbtyange 
pour  garments, 

3  ^nb  let  bs  arife ,  anb  goe  bp  to 
zsetyci,  anb  3  lbnimaBetycrean^l^ 
tarbntoC5ob,iblioanm)ereb  memtyt 
bap  of  mp  biftr  effcanb  lbas  Jbity  me  m 
tyetuapMnty^Jibent, 

4  3nb  tycp  gaue  bnto  3Jacob  all 
tye  Orange  gobs  Jbljity  were  m  tyeir 
l)anb ,  anb  all  tyeir  care- rings  lblnty 
were  in  tyeir  cares,  anb  3l&ob  ijib  tyem 
bnbec  tye  obc  Xbljity  lbas  bp  ^>l;c> 
tycm. 

5  3nD tlyvp  iourncpeb :  anb  tyetcr* 
rour  of  C5ob  lbas  upon  tye  cities  tyat 

ltocrc 


*Chap.J7. 
43- 


Rachel  dieth.  Chap.xxxvj, 


Ifaacdictl: 


•Chap.  18. 

19- 

_  That  is, 

The  Cod  of 

Bethel. 


.That  is, 

Theokeof 
TBeepwTj, 


Chap.  3:. 
»8. 


t  Hebr.  a 
litte  piece  of 
oroutul. 


(||Th«is, 
Thefonne  of 
myftrrgw. 
JThatis, 
The  forme  of 
the  right 
hand. 


tbere  rounb  about  tJ)em,aut>  tbcpbib 
not  purfuc  after  ttjc  founts  of  ^jacob. 

6  &£>o3atobcamcto3U5,n)5)itD 

isint!)cianDof€tinaan(rl)atis26ctl)Cl) 
Dec  anb  all  tlje  people  tljat  were  tditl) 
mm. 

7  X\\t\  Dee  btult  tbere  an  Sltat, 
anb*taiicb  tlje  plate  i|ei-2Sctbci,becaufc 
tticrc  (5ob  appeareb  bnto  nim,tt)l)cnljc 
neb  from  tbe  fate  oftjis  bjotber. 

8  But  £>ebojalj  aacbeKabs  nurfe 
bteb)anbfl)eibasburicbbcncarl)25ett)' 
el  bnber  an  one :  anb  tpenamc  of  «  tbas 
callcb||3llon26acbutb. 

9  C  2tnb  <5ob  appeareb  bnto  3& 
cob  agatne,VbDcn  vje  tame  out  of 0aban 
^raiu,anbblcffcbl)un. 

10  3mb  <5ob  faib  into  Dun  ,  XDy 
name  is  3Jacob  :tDy  natnelbaunotbce 
tallcb  any  mo?c  3iatob ,  *  but  gifracl 
(nail  bee  tljp  name  i  anb  Ijcc  tallcb  Ijts 

namejjftaei  ,     „ 

11  3lnb  (5ob  fatbe  into  Dim,  3  ain 
<5ob  aimigbtic :  be  ft  uittull  anb  multe 
ply:  anation  anb  atotnpany  ofnations 
fbaiibe  of  thee,  anbBmgsfbail  tonic 
outoftbylovncs. 

12  3nbtf)ClanblMncn'f  gaue3tb?a^ 
Dam,anb3!faac,  to  rt)ee  fnnllgiueit, 
anb  to  tD?  feeb  after  tljec  lbtll  3  5111c 
tljcianb. 

u  3inb  (Sob  ibent  ftp  from  Dim,  m 
the  plate  tbDcr  e  ijc  taihcb  ibttb  bun. 

14  ^nb'jacobfctbp  a  pillar  tnrfte 
plate  lMhcre  bctalRcDKHtbbim,  euen  a 
pillar  offtone:anbl)cepoUwbabanBe 
offering  tDercon,  anb  Ije  ponwb  otic 
tbctcon.  ,  _ 

15  3inb  3Jatob  tallcb  tftc  name  of 
tbe  plate  m>vct  <5ob  fpanc  Xbit!)  Dim, 
aSetocl. 

16  C  3nb  ttjev  iournrpeb  from 
25ctbel :  anb  tl)creibas  but  a 1  litlerbap 
to  tonic  to  eprjiatl)  •,  anb  Batfiel  tr& 
ueilcb , anb  Q)c  l)ab  fiarb  labour. 

17  3lnb  it  tame  to  paffe  VbDcn  fljee 
toas  tnljarb  labour,  tljatttjcmibibtfc 
faibnnto  bet,  3rcarc  not: tfton  fyalt 
hauctl)i5fonncaifo. 

13  3£nb  it  tame  to  paffe  asDer  foulc 
U)astnbcparnng,(fo?fl)cbicb)rDatCl}c 
tallcb  bis  name  ||  25cn-oni :  butbisfa; 
tbet  tallcb  Dun  [|  asenianun. 

19  2wbKacDclbieb,anbivasburicb 
m  ti)c  rbay  to  (£pb#tb  ,tbbtcb  is  2Sctl> 
icljcm. 

20  3nb  J  acob  fet  a  pillar  bpon  Dec 
grant :  tDat  is  tl)c  pillar  of  Battels 
grauctontotbtsbap. 


ai  C  3lnb  35ftacl  tourneyco  anb 
fpjcab  Dis  tent  beyotib  trie  tott>:e  of 
€bar. 

2i  3tnb  it  tame  to  paffe  ililien  3Jf 
racl  biPclt  m  tljat  lanb ,  tbat  fteuben 
ment  ?  *  lapibitn  ssubab  l;is  fatlicrs 
concubine :  anb'3Jfcacl  Ijeatb  it.  ^Jolb 
tbefonnes  of^atob  Vbcrctibelue. 

2j  %\yt  fonncs  of  ?Lcal) :  Betiben 
3latobsfirft  bomc,  anb  Simeon, anb 
?lcui ,  anb  3Jubal) ,  anb  3Jffachar,  ant 
Zcbulun, 

24.  XDc  fonncs  of  3aatDcl:3Joftpl), 
anbBeiuamin. 

25  2lnb  tl)c  fonncs  of  aStlUal),  3Sa^ 
tDels  Danbmaib :  Dan  anb  ii5apl)tali. 

26  3Cnb  tljc  fonncs  of  zilpal),  %t 
afjs  Danbmaib:  €>ab,anb  ^(Dcr.Xijcfc 
are  tDe  fonncs  of  3Iacob,  VbljicDiberc 
bomc  to  Dim  m  0aban  ^trant. 

27  C  3lnb  ^atob  tame  bnto  3faat 
DisfatDer  unto  ^amrc,  Unto  tDetmc 
of^lrbaD  (ibDitD  is^cb;on)lbDcre^ 
biaDam  anb jjfaac  foioumcb. 

28  ^nbtDcbavcsof^faatibereatt 
Ijnnb?cb  anb  four  efcozcvecrcs. 

19  3Di&3JfaaegauebptbcgDoftanb 
bteb,anbibas*gatDcrcb  bnto  D«  peo- 
ple, being  olb  anb  Dill  of  baves :  anb  bis 
fonnes  €fau  anb  Sacob  buricb  Dim. 

CHAP.    XXXVI. 

1  Elans  three  wiues.  6  His  remouing  to  mount 
Seir.  9  His  (brines.  15  The  Dukes  which 
defcended  of  hisfonnes.  10  The  fonnes  and 
dukes  of  Seir.  14  Anah  findeth  mules.  31 
The  kings  of  Edom.  40  The  dukes  that 
defcended  of  Efau. 

338  j©tt)  tbcfc  arc  tDegencra 
ft  tions  of  Cfau ,  ibbo  «  e-- 
bom. 
2  ^fautooDeDiSVbiues 
„  oftbebauglitcrsofCana 
an:3lbabtDcbaugDtcrof€lontDc^it' 
we,  anu  ^Dolibamab  tDc  baugbter  ot 
^Inalj  tbe  baugDter  of  zibcontljc^ 
uitc: 
j  3nb2SawcmatD1Jfi)maclsbaiisI> 

ter,uacrof/!5cbaiotfj. 

4  ^nb  *  3lbab  bare  to  efau ,  ew 
plia5 :  anb  ffiafbematt)  bare  l&cuei. 

5  3lnb  3tbolibaniab  bare  3^h 
anb  Haalam,  anb  BomD  :  tftcft  arc  tbe 
fonncs  of  <£fau,ibrntD  lDtcc  bomc  fnto 
Dim  in  tDc  lanb  of  Canaan. 

6  Writ*  €fau  toonc  Dis  Unites,  anb 
Ins  fonnes,  anb  Ins  bangDtcrs,  anb  all 
tlic'pcrfonsof  l)ts  Doufc,  anb  Dis  cat 

S>  1  tell, 


'CI: 


iap.49 


'Chap.;  5 


•i.Chion. 
•-35* 


\HtkfoiU.. 


"I 


E£ms  offlpring:___Geneiist     Dukes,and  Kings. 


oft,.  2*$. 


\Hthr, 

Jen. 


•  i.Chro.I. 

!S.6:c. 


•i.Chio.i 
38- 


tell,  anb  alibis  beads,  anb  all  his  fub 
flame,  tbbu  n  he  hab  sot  m  the  lanbc  of 
Canaan :  ant)  lDcnt  into  the  countrep 
from  tl)c  fate  of  his  toother  3Jacob. 

7  ifo:  tbcir  rtrtjes  lberc  mo?e  then 
that  the?  ihtgln  bibcll  together:  anb 
rne  lanb  wherem  thcpiberc  ftcangcrs, 
conib  not  bearc  them ,  bctaufc  of  their 

tartcll 

8  XhusbuicltCfau  in 'mount  Me- 
tric-fail is  Oom. 

9  C  3nb  thefc  are  the  generations 
ofefan,  the  father  of  the  Cbonutcsm 
mount  £>ctr. 

10  Xncfc  arc  the  names  of  Clans 
fonnes  :  *  €lipha>  the  fonne  of  3lbah 
the  uxft  of  efau ,  Kcucl  tl)e  fonne  of 
z5afl)cmatl),tncVbifcof€faiL 

1 1  3lnD  tlic  fonnes  of  Clipbas  ibcre, 
Heman,  £>mar,  zepho,  anb  <satam, 
anb  Bcna?. 

ii  2nb  Xunna  lbas  toneubine  to 
Cliplm  €faus  fonne,  anb  (bee  bate  to 
cupDai  ^maicb:tlicfc  lb  etc  the  fonnes 
of^lbahcfansibife. 

13  3lnb  thefc  are  thefonucs  of  &euel: 
Jiahath  anb  zerah,  Smammah,  anb 
S0r55al) :  tlirfe  lberc  the  fonnes  of  25a* 
fl)cmatb,efausibifc 

14  C  3lnb  thefc  tbcre  the  fonnes  of 
3lholibamab,  the  bangbtcr  of  ^naft, 
baughtcr  of  Zibcon  efaus  lbifc:  anb 
flic  bare  to  efau,  35ni(b  anb  3Jaaiam 
anb  Bowli. 

15  CXftcfcweretuftesoftlicfonnes 
of  €fau :  tlic  fonnes  of  Cliphai  the  firft 
borne  fonne  of  cfau ,  buUc  Xeman, 
buncjJDmar,  buue  zepho,  buucl&c; 

1U15, 

is  2>urc  Bo:ah,  bulte  ©atam,  and 
buHc^maicU:  Xhcfearc  rticbnbestha 
omeof  Cltpba},  m  the  lanb  of  Cbom: 
Xhcfe  wac  the  fonnes  of  3lDah. 

17  C  3nb  thefe  are  tl)c  fonnes  of 
IReucl  efaus  fonne :  bube  jftabath, 
bube  Zctah ,  bnuc  £>hammah,  bultc 

CB'.^aJ).  XilCfe  areiljCbUUeS  that  came 

of  &euet,  m  the  lanb  of  Cbom :  theft 
a.e  the  fonnes  of  2Safl)cmath ,  Cfaus 
ibifc. 

18  C3lnb  thefc  ate  the  fonnes  of  3 
holibamah  efaus  Xbtfc :  bulic  3!cufl), 
bnhcjaalam,  bubcBozab :  theft  we.c 
the  buhes  that  cameof  3iholtbamahthe 
Daughter  of  2nah  Cfaits  lbift. 

19  Xhcfc  we  the  fonnes  of  Cfau, 
(ibho^ebom)anbtbcfearetheltbubcs. 

20  C*  Xhcfe  arc  the  fonnes  of  £>ctr 
thctyo2ite,ibho  mhabitcb  the  lanb.Ho- 


tan,  anb&hobal,  anb  zibcon,  aub;& 
nab 

21  2tnb  SDifliott,  anb  eser ,  anb  S>i- 
(ban :  ttjcfc  arc  the  bubesof  the  Iconics 
the  chilbicn  of  £>cir  m  the  lanbc  of  £- 
bom. 

22  3nbtbechilbjenoflLotan,ibcrc 
tyon,  anb  Remain:  anb  Hotans  fitter 
wasXtmna. 

23  3nb  the  tbtlbjen  of  £>hobal  were 
thefe:  3fluan,  anb  flJSanahatt),  anb  & 
bal,  5>hcpho,  anb  !©nam. 

24.  ^nb  thtfe  are  the  chilbjtn  of  Z.V 
bcon ,  both  3uah ,  anb  3(nah :  this  was 
that^nah  that  founb  the  mules  in  the 
rbUberncflc,ashefeb  theatres  of  Zibc 
on  his  father. 

25  5lnb  the  chiltycn  of  ^nah  were 
thefe :  ffiHlbon ,  anb  ^holibamah  the 
Daughter  of  3inah. 

26  ^nb  thefc  arc  the  rhilbzen  of  STH- 
fl)on :  ^cmban  anb  CChban,  %  3th;an, 
anb  Clicran. 

27  Xhe  thilbicn  of  C^er  are  thefe: 
ffiilhan  anb  zaauan,  anb  3fean. 

28  Xhcthilb^enofDifhan  are  thefc: 
sll5,anb5lran. 

29   Xhefc  are  fht  DUfeCS  that  came  of 

the  Routes:  bubc  Hotan,  nu&t  5>ho 
bal,  bnftc  ztbeon,  bubc^nah, 

30  S>ufec  ©tfbon,  bube€5er ,  bube 

Dlfbatt:  thefe  arcthCbUbeS  that  came  of 

l?02t,  among  thcttbubes  mthcianbof 
&tit. 

31  C  ^nb  thefe  are  the  feings  that 
tcigncb  in  the  lanb  of  (Ebom,  before 
there  rctgncb  anp  femg  ouer  the  thtl 
b«!cnof  jfracl. 

32  afiu>  ffiria  the  fonne  of  25eo? 
rctgncb  m  €bom :  anbttjc  name  of  Ijts 
ettiewjs^inhabah 

33  3inb  Bcla  bicb ,  anb  3Jobab  tlje 
fonne  of  Zerah  of  ®03ra  retgneb  m  hts 
flcab. 

34  ^nb  ^obab  Utn ,  anb  feutbam 
of  the  lanb  of  Xemam  vcigncb  m  h»s 
ftcab. 

35  3mb$u(t)ambicD,anbi)ababtr)c 
fonne  of  2Bcbab,  (ibljo  fmote  £0ibian 
m  tl)e  fielb  of  £0oab, )  rngncD  in  hts 
ttcab :  j  tlje  name  ofhis  tine  was  ^uirt). 

36  3uib  ^abab  btcb,  anb  &amlah 
of  ^0afceUah,rcigncb  mhis  flcab. 

37  3nb  ^amiah  bicb,  anb  ^>aul  of 
Bchoboth,  by  the  nucr,  rcigncb  m  his 
flcab. 

38  3nb£>aulbieb,anb2Baal-hanan 
tlje  fonne  of  ^ehbo:  reigneb  in  his  tteab. 

39  ?9nb  25aai  hanan  the  fonne  of 
2chbo; 


Iofeph: 


Cb 


ap.xxxvn. 


ircames. 


f  HttJ£&* 


}  Het.tff* 
fathers  fe- 

nxr  rungs. 


10r,;« 


acrjbojbieb,  anb  $abar  rctgneb  turns 
ftcao :  ano  tljc  tiante  of  l)ts  tine  was  ^au, 
atiD  l)is  lbtucs  name  was  £}9cl)etabel,tt)c 
bauglitcr  cf upatrcb,  ttjc  bauglitcr  of 
;flJ9c3a!jab. 

40  3no  tticfc  ^c  ttic  names  of  ti)c 
bnues  that  tame  of  cfau ,  accojbutgto 
ttjeic  famtlics,aftcr  trjeir  piares,by  tt)cic 
names :  but$e  Xutmarj ,  biiKc  3iuarj, 
bnije^ctnetl), 

41  H>uUc  3fjoltbamali ,  bufec  €iarj, 
bulte  $tnon, 

42  Sniftc  Bcna; ,  bur*c  Xcman, 
bnue  flJ9ib5ar, 

43  SDukc  £59agoiel ,  biiKc  3Jram. 
3Lncfcbettjcbuuesof<£bom,acco2bmg 
to  tljctc  habitations,  in  tf)e  lano  of  tlicir 
polTcvuon :  !)e  is  <£Cau  ttic  fattier  of  rtjc 
Cbomites. 

CHAP.    XXXVII. 

2.  lofeph  is  hated  of  Ins  brethren.  5  His  two 
dreames.  13  Iacob  fendcth  him  to  vilite  his 
brethren.  iS  His  brethren  confpire  his  death. 
11  Reuben  faueth  him.  16  They  Cell  him  to 
the  Ifhmeelites.  31  His  lather,  decerned  by 
the  bloodie coat,  mournethforhim.  36  Hee 
is  fold  to  Potiphar  in  Egypt- 

fin  35atob  bVbclt  in  the 
lanb  therein  fits  fattier 
ibas  a  ftrangcr  ,  tn  tt)e 
lanb  of  Canaan. 

2     XtjCfC  are  t$t  QC\W 

rations  of  3lacob :  3Jofcpl)  being  fcum- 
teencvctresoIb,lbasfccbingttieflocRc 
tblrti  tjis  b?etl)2en,anb  ttjc  lab  rbasibitt) 
trjc  tonnes  of  25tir)al),  anb  Vbitrj  trjc 
fonnes  of  Ztlpar),  f)is  fatrjers  lbutes : 
anb  3lofeprj  bzougrjt  unto  rjis  fattier 
ttjcvr  null  report. 

3  iftorb^Jftart  loneb  gjofcpl)  moje 
tr)en  aiifjis  crjtlb?en,bctaufc  t)c  ibas  ttic 
fonne  of  tilsolbage:  anb  rjemabcrjim 
a  coat  of  many  |l  colours. 

4  ^nbtbljenljisb^etlj^enfalbrljat 
trjetr  fettjer  loucb  Ijtm  mo?e  tfjen  alll)ts 
b2ett)2cn,rt)eyfjatcbj)im,anb  toulb  not 
fpeafccpcaccabtybnto  rjim. 

5  C^nblJoftpljbjeamcbabzcame, 
anb lie  tolb  ttttfs  bjett)2cn,  anb  the?  rja= 
tcbljtm  pet  ttic  mo2t. 

6  3ub  lie  taib  bnto  tfiem,$earc,  31 
p:ap  pou ,  tbis  became  tbrjirtj  3  5a"f 
b:eameb. 

7  foi  btrjolbe ,  ibec  mere  blnbing 
fticaues  in  trjc  fielb,  anb  loe,  mp  flieafe 
arofc ,  anb  alfo  ftoob  bpngnt s  anb  be- 
Ijolb,  yourOjeaues  ftoob  rounb  about, 


anb  mabc  obafancc  to  mp  flicafc. 

8  3inb  Ins  bjctbjcn  fatbc  to  rjim, 
5>liait  ttjott  tnDccb  rcignc  otter  bs;  oi 
(halt  ttiott  mbceb  liattc  bomtnion  oucr 
bs;anDti)cvr)atcbl)tmrcttHemo2e,fo? 
ljtsb2camcs,rtUD  foj  Ijts  lboaDs. 

9  €  3nb  lice  bzeamcb  vet  anoffjer 
bzeamc ,  anb  tolb  it  Ins  tertlwn ,  anb 
fatb,25eI)olb,3J  ijaucbicamcb  abicamc 
mole :  anb  bcrjolD,  tlje  funnc  anb  the 
moonc,  anb  ttic  clcucn  ftarrcs  mabeo 
balance  to  me. 

io  3inb  lie  tolb  it  to  fits  fattier,  anb 
to  Jjts  tyetttfen :  anb  hts  fattier  rebulteb 
!)tm,  anb  fato  bnto  him ,  w\m  is  rtits 
tycamertiattnoul>iftb2eamcb?n)ai3J, 
anb  clip  motfjer ,  ano  rtip  b:ctti2tn  m> 
beebtotne  to  fcoibboibucour  femes  to 
tticc,totrjccartti; 

n  3inb  liis  bzetfcen  cnuicbljim :  but 
llts  fattier  obfcruebtlicfapig. 

n  <T3tnbl)istoeth2enibenttofceb 
rtictr  fatlicrs  flotue  tn  ^licrtiem. 

13  3Jnb  -Jfiacl  fame  bnto  3Jofcpli, 
2>oenot  tlipb2Crti2en  fecti  tlie  flocKcm 
£>fjecl)cm  i  Come,anb  3  ibtll  fenb  tliec 
bnto  tlKtn:  s  Ijcfatb  to  l)tm,!9trc  am  % 

14  3lttbhefaibror<tm,  <5oe,  3Jp2ap 
ttice,  ^cclbljetlicrtt  bee  Vbclirbtttittip 
bjetti^en,  anb  lb  ell  ibirti  tljc  flotBes,anb 
b2ingmc  iboib  agamc:  folice  fcntliim 
outof  ttjcbaleof  ^eb;on,  anb  lie  tame 
to£>liethcm. 

15  C^nbacertaincmanfounbljim, 
anbbeljolb,  I;ee  tbas  rbanbjmg  in  tlie 
fleib,  anb  ttic  man  afUcb  Ijim ,  feptng, 
nstiatrccBcftrtiou; 

16  3{nbl)efatb,3JfeeBempb!ctti2en: 
tcllme,  3Jp?ap  ttjee,  ibficrc  tlie?  fecbe 
tiietrflo«es. 

17  Znn  the  man  Cam,  Xljep  arc  be? 
partcbrjmtc:fo23hcarbtticmfav,|Lct 
bSgoctoS>ottian.  3!nb  3?ofeplHbcnt 
after  I)is  b2ett)2eu,  anb  founb  tfiemtn 
SDofftan. 

is  3nb  lblien  tfiev  falb  inm  afarre 
off,  cum  bcfo?elic  tame  neere  bnto 
ttjem,  tljcv  tonfpireb  agamlt  litm ,  to 
Qapliim. 

19  3lubrt)evfatb  one  to  another,^ 
liolb^its^jcamcrcommetli.  vJ!'£'of 

20  Comenoib  ttierefojc,  aubletbs  7iZ/,, 
flap  rjim,anb  taft  fjtm  into  fotne  ptt,anb 
ibcibill  fay,  5>omc  cuill  beaft  liatli  u 
uourcbHun:anblbefl)allfeetuliatlbiU 
become  of  Iiisb2camc0. 

21  ^nb*Bcubenrjcarb:r,anbliebc?  "ch>P4= 
imcr  cb  Ijim  our  of  rhnr  ijanbs ,anb  faib; 
HetbsnotRUUitm. 

3>  ?         21  3nb 


t  Hcb.pt 

the  peace  of 
thy  krethnn 


lofephisfold. 


Gcnefis.         ludahs  marria 


c: 


\\  Or  pieces. 


f  Heir. 

hearkened. 


•Pfalio;. 
17.  wif  :o. 
1  j.ai5ls.7- 


•Ch; 


P--H 


22  ana  Scubcn  faiac  Ditto  them, 
£>hca  no  Wood  ,  but  cad  htm  into  this  j 
pit  that  is  m  the  iDiiacrneffcana  lap  no  | 
hanaaponhmi;  that  hcnnghtriahim 
out  of  their  l)an6s,to  aeliuet  him  to  his 
father  agame. 

23  canaitcamctopaaett)hcn5Q; 
feph  taascomc  Dnto  htstoethjen.thst 
tijev  ftnpt  3lofcpl)  out  of  his  coatc,  rjis 
toat  of  manp  ||  colours  that  was  onhun. 

24  ana  tljeptooBC  him  ana  tali  him 
into  a  pit :  ana  the  pit  was  cniptie,  there 
wasnotaatcrhiit. 

25  anathepfateaDlbnetoeattoeao: 
anathep  lift  Dp  their  epes  ana  Ioobcs, 
ana  behoia,  a  company  of  3Jfl)mcclitcs 
tame  from  <Blcaa,ibtth  their  camels, 
bcatiugfpiccrp.fbaum^anDmprtlK, 
going  to  tarpitaottmcto  cgppt. 

16  ana  Juaah  faiac  Dnto  his  to£ 
thmt.ndhatpwfit  is  itif  ujc  flap  out  too- 
fljer,ana  conccaichts  blooa* 

27  Come,  ana  let  Ds  fell  hint  to  the 
3  fhmccutcs ,  ana  let  not  out  hana  bee 
aponhini:fo»hctsout  toother  ,anaour 

flcfl)  i  ana  his  tocthiicn1  mere  content. 

28  Xhm  there  paffcabp£0taiamics 
merchant  men,  ana  thev  a^etb  anauft 
ap  ^jofeph  out  of  tfjc  pit,  ana  *  foia  3o- 
fepl)  to  the  3Jfl)mcelitcs  fa?  ttticutic  pie- 
cesoffrtucc:  ana  thep  toought  3iofcph 
into  egppt. 

29  cana  iSniben  returnca  Ditto 
the  pit,ana  bttjoia,  3Jofcph  rbas  nottn 
the  pit :  ana  he  rent  his  clothes. 

30  ana  Dee  returnca  Dnto  his  toe 
thien  ana  faia ,  Xhc  chiiac  is  not,  ana 
3J,U)l)itl)crfl)ail3Jgoe^ 

31  anathcptooRc3iofcphscoat,ana 
Kiiica  a  ma  of  the  goats,  ana  aippca  the 
coat  m  thcbiooa. 

32  ana  thep  fent  the  coat  of  manp  to* 
louts,  ana  thep  toought  it  to  then*  fa 
rtjee ,  ana  faia ,  Xhis  haue  iac  founa : 
ImoVD  110U)  rahcthct  it  bet  thp  fonncs 
coatomo. 

33  ana  hcttucYb  it,  ana  faia,  it  is  mp 
fonncs  coat :  an  *  mil  bead  hath  aeuou= 
tcahmijofcphisiuithoutaoubtrent 
m  pieces. 

34-  3na3Jacob  rent histlothcs, ana 
putfatBcioth  Dponhis  lotnes^mour- 
neb  fo2  his  fonne  manp  aapes. 

3$  ana  all  I)is  fonncs ,  ana  all  his 
daughters  rofc  Dp  to  comfort  Quit:  but 
lie  rcfufca  to  be  comfortea :  ana he fata, 
foi  31  null  goe  aotbnc  into  the  grauc 
auto  nip  fonncmourning  •>  thus  his  fo 
thcrrocptfozhmr. 


36  ^na  the  30caamtes  foia  mm  into 
<£gppt  Ditto  potiphac ,  an '  officer  of 
^araohs,  ^d 1 1|  captamc  of  tljeguata. 

CHAP.    XXXVIII, 

Iudalibegettetli  Er,Onan,andShelali.  6  Ei 
marriethTamar.  S  TherrefpaneofOnan. 
11  Tamar  ftayeth  tor  Shelah.  13  Shede- 
cciueth Iudah.  17  Shebearethtwinnes,Plu- 
rez  and  Zarah. 

J3a  it  came  to  paffc  at  that 
time ,  that  3Juaah  id  cm 
Dolbneftom  his  tocttr.cn, 
ana  turnea  m  to  a  tcr 
tainc  aauiiamttc ,  ruhofc 
nan  tewa  spiral): 

2  ^na  3Juaah  faia  there  a  aangfr 
tcr  of  a  tcrtaine  Canaamtc ,  lbhofc 
nanictaas*&huah:  anahetooBchcr 
ana  iDcntm  Ditto  her. 

3  ana  (he  concemta  f  bare  a  fonne, 
ana  he  caiica  his  name  €r. 

4  *  ana  fljcc  concciuea  againe,  ana 
barca  fonne,  ana  thectaileahtsnamc, 
C»nan. 

5  ana  (he  pet  agaute  tonteutea  ana 
bare  afonnc,  ana  cailea  his:  name  £>he; 
iah:anaheerbasat€i)C5ib,  ibhcnfbec 
barehhn. 

6  ana  3Juaah  toofec  a  rbife  fo?  cr 
his  firft  bojnc ,  Ibhofe  name  was  %& 
mar. 

7  ana*€r,1Juaahs  firft  borne  rbas 
ibicaca  m  tlic  fight  of  the  %  Q  B  3> , 
ana  the  %  ^D&D  flcra  him. 

s  ana  3Juaah  faiaanto  £E>nan,<soc 
utDiuo  thp  brothers  rbife,ana  marrie 
hcr,ana  raifc  Dp  feca  to  thp  toother. 

9  ana  ©nan  micta  that  the  feca 
(houianot  be  ijis^  ana  it  tametopafTc 
raheti  hec  tbent  in  Dnto  his  bzotljers 
tbifc,  thathec  fpiiica  it  onthegtouna, 
leafttljat  hec  fljouia  giuc  fcea  to  his 
brother. 

10  ana  the  thingrahith  he  aia, t  aif 
pleafca  the  !L^D5SS) :  iDhtrtforthcc 
Acta  hint  aifo. 

11  %\)tti  faia  3Jnaah  to  Xamar  his 
aaugliter  in  lata,  3&cmamc  a  tttaova  at 
thv  fathers  fioufc,  til  ^hclah  mp  fonne 
begroiaen :  (fo?he  faia,?lcft  peraauen* 
turehcaieaifo  as  hisbzet!)jmdid )  ana 
ICamar  racntatta  aiaclt  in  her  fathers 
houfe. 

12  C  ana  tm  pioccfTc  of  time ,  t!)e 
aaughtcrof^huah^uaahsibifcaica: 
ana^Juaah  laas  comfcntca,  anaiucnt 
Dp  Diuo  his  fljcepc-fljcarcrs  to  %im 

nath. 


\He'r  Fh- 
mch.  But 
iht  nni  Alii 

Ap"A' "»'""> 

l(/l  C'.4«eir- 

!.,ni,,Co«ni- 

ir.,  tndOffi- 

rtri. 

\  Heh.chiefr 


\Or,eh,efe 
(JrltrfitU. 


I.Chror,. 


'Num.  1^. 


•NWitf. 
I?- 


f  Heir,  vru 
enitltn  the 
eye:  of  the 
Uri. 


t  Heir.  The 

daretrvere 

multiplied. 


H 


lsincc 


ft. 


Chap.xxxix.      Iofeph  in  Egypt. 


\Heb.lhe 
dfforeofyrf, 
o:,cf£- 
wtitm. 


ofthfgo.us. 


\Htb.hc- 
come  a  con- 
tempt. 


natD,ljc  anD  ijis  fcienD  $traD  ttjc^0ul; 
lanutc. 

13  3nD  it  ibas  tolDXamar,  faying, 
25cDoID ,  rDy  fatijcriniaibgoctijbpto 
XimnatDtoujcarcDisujeepc. 

14  3DiD  ujce  put  Dcr  TCbiDotbcsgac* 
ments  off  from  Dcr,  anD  coucrcD  Ijcr 
lbitlj  abatle,  anD  itvappcD  Dcr  fclfcanD 
fate  in  'an  open  place,  ibljtclj  isby  tlje 
may  to  Xmmatlj :  fo?  fljee  faibc  tljat 
&ljciaDibasgromm,anDujett»asnot 
giucn  bntoDnntoibifc. 

15  seDen^uoaljfaiPlicr^etnougtK 
Dertobcan  Darlot:  becaufc  ujetjaDco- 
uctcd  Dcr  face. 

is  3nD  Dec  turncb  bnto  Dcr  by  tDe 
ibay,anDfaiD,  oocto,  ^pjaytDcc,  Jet 
mccomcmbutotljcc:(fo2Dcluicn)not 
tDat  fl)C  was  Dts  Dauglncr  ut  lam )  anD 
tDe  fatD,U3Dat  lbtlttDou  gtuc  nice,  tljat 
tljoumayelt  tome  m  bnto  me? 

17  2lnD  Dec  faiD ,  31  lDfll  fenD  tDee 
f  a  nib  from  tlje  flocHc :  anD  ujce  faioe, 
emit  tDou  gtuc  nice  aplcogc,  till  rtjou 
fcuDit; 

18  3nDDcfaiD,tt}DatpIeDgcujail  3 
gmc  tljcc  i  3lnD  ujc  faiDXDv  fignet,anD 
tDy  bracelets,  anD  tfiv ftaffe,  tljat  ism 
tljtucljauD :  auDDcgauc  itljcr,  fjtamc 
mbntoDer.anDfljcconcetucDbyDim. 

19  3lnD  ujec  arofc  anD  lbent  aibay, 
aiiDiatDbpDcr  bailefcomljcr,  anD  put 
ontDcgarmcntsofDerrbiDoTbDooD. 

10  3inD ^uDal)  fent the UiDDc  by  tlje 
DanD  of  pis  frtcnD  tlje  3lDuiiamttc,  to 
rctcuic  his  picDgc  from  tDe  ibomans 
IjanD :  Mt  Ijc  founD  Ijcr  not. 

21  Xljcn  Dee  afltcD  tDe  men  of  tDat 
plate,  faying,  naDcrcistDcDarlot,  tDat 
mas  ||  openly  by  tljclbay  ftDc  ?3nD  tljcy 
faiD.XljcrcibasnoljarlotmtDfSphce. 

2.2  3inDDcrcturncDto3JnDaD,anD 
foiD,  3f  cannot  finDc  Ijcr :  anD  alfo  tDe 
men  of  t!)c  place  faiD,  Xljat  tDcrcuJas 
noljarlotintliispi^e. 

23  3mD  3iuDal)  faiD,  ?Lct  her  tanc  it 
toljer,  iclttbc^ccwamcD :  beljolD,  3 
fcnttf)isHiDDc,anDtI;oul)aOnotfoimD 
Ijcr. 

14  c  3mD  it  tame  to  paffc  about 
tincc  monetljs  after,  tljat  it  lbastolDe 
3JuDal),  faying,  Xamae  tDy  DaugDtcr 
inlaibDatlj  plapcD  tDe  Darlot,  anDaifo 
beljolD,uje  is  ttntlj  cDilD  by  roDo.zcDom : 
anD  3luoaD  faiD,  z3?mg  Ijcr  foonD,  anD 
let  Dec  be  burnt. 

25  B&ljenujcloasbjougDtfojtD.ujc 
fent  to  Dcr  fatDer  m  lalb,  faylitg;25y  tDe 
manlbljofctDefcarc,  am3?mitfjrljilD: 


anD  ujce  fatD,  2>ifccrne,  3Jp;aytDce, 
lbbofc  arc  tDcfe,  tlje  fignct ,  anD  brace- 
lets, anD  flaffc. 

26  ^nD^uDaDacRnoibleDgeDthem, 
anD  faiD,  £>Dc  DatD  bin  mozerigDteous 
tljenSJ  -.becaufc  tljat  ^IgaueDer  notto 
^>Delal)  mp  fonnc :  anD  Dc  miett)  Ijer  a^ 
game  no  more. 

27  C3mD  it  came  to  paffc  in  tlje  time 
ofDer  trauaile,  tljat  bcrjolDe,tibitmcs 
ibereiuDcribombe. 

28  -^nD  it  came  to  paffc  ibljen  fljee 
trauaiicD,  tljat  tiieonepiuoutljisDanD, 
anD  tlje  miDmifc  toobc  anD  boutiD  bpou 
Dis  IjanD  a  fharltt  tl)rccD,laving,  Xljis 
came  out  firft. 

29  ^ud  it  came  to  paffc  as  Ijc  D2cttic 
bacUc  Ijts  DauD,fliat  bcDolD,Dis  biotDet 
came  out :  anD  fljcfaiD,  ||  l?oib  Ijaft  tljou 
broltcn  foozti)  i  ^k  toeadj  bee  bpon 
tDec :  Xljcrcfoje  Ijis  name  ibas  caiicD 
marc?. 

30  3lnD  aftcrlbarD  came  out  Dts 
brotDcr  tljat  had  tlje  fUarlet  tljzccDbp 
on  DisljanD,  anD  Ijis  name  ibastailcD 
zaraD. 

CHAP.   XXXIX. 

1  Iofeph  aciiianced  in  Potipharshoufe.  7  Hec 
relifteth  his  miftrefles  temptation.  13  He  is 
falfly  accufed.  1^  Hee  iscaftinprifon.  11 
God  is  with  him  there. 

I  ii3D3Jofcplj  ibasbjougljt 
^5  Dolbnc  to  <£rrppt,  anD  po 
.^SaSs  tipljar  an  Officer  of  m* 
w»m?ik% rao'''  raptainc  of  pguarD, 
tMw-Mxs  an  cgpptian,  bougDtDim 
of  tDcDanb  of  tlje  3jn)mceiitcs,  tbDict) 
IjaD  brought  Ijim  Domnc  tljttljer. 

2  ^nDtlje1L£)3KDlbasibitIj3JO' 
fcplj,anD  Ijec  lbas  aprofperonsman, 
anD  Dec  ibasmfljc  Ijoufe  of  DtS  matter 
tljccgvpnan. 

3  3lnD  Ijts  mailer  fatbe  tDat  tDe 
HC>BS)  was  tuitD  Dim,  anD  tDat  tDe 
H£)IiD  maDealltDatDcDiD,topro* 
fper  in  DisljanD. 

4.  ^nD  3?ofepD  founD  grate  tn  Dis 
figDt,  anD  Ije  ferncD  Dim  ■,  anD  Dec  maDc 
Dim  oucrfcer  oner  Ijis  Ijoufe,  anD  all 
tDatDeljaDDcputinto  DtsljanD. 

5  31nDittamctopaffcfromtDctime 
tDat  Ijcc  DaD  maDcDtm  oucrfcer  mljts 
Doufc,anDoueralltDatDcljaD,tDattljc 
US)BD  blcffcDtijcegpptiansDoufc 
fez  "JofepDs  fane :  anD  tDe  blcffing  of 
tDeH^DKSD  ibastoponailtljatDeljaD 
m  tlje  Doufc,anD  m  tDcficlD. 

6  31nD Deleft alltljatDeDaD, in^Jc- 

fepDsi 


\\Otti»here- 
fore  h*Fi 
ihoHm&de 
thu  breach 
agatnfiiheep 
|j  That  is, 
4  breach. 
*  I-Chron. 
:  <j.nu::. 
1-3* 


Iofcph  imprifoned,     Gencfis.  is 


profp 


erous. 


t Ilcb.gr TAt, 


fcphs  l)a»r» :  anb  hcftnclbuotDitghthc 
hab,  Gutcthc  b;eab  which  hebtb  cate : 
anb  giofcphmas  agoobip  pcrfon,  anb 
Ibrilfauourcb. 

7  canbttcamctopaffcaftcrthcfc 
things,  that  his  mailers  Ibifc  call  her 
ryes  upon  35ofcph ,  anblhcc  fatb,  ?Uc 
with  me. 

8  25iithcrcfufcb,anblatbtontohis 
» tafltrs  Mfc,  25eholb,  nip  matter  tbofc 
tethnotttwat  isibith  met  in  the  houfc, 
ant)  he  hath  commtttcb  all  that  behath, 
tompbanb. 

9  Xfjerc  ts  none  greater  in  trjis 
houfc  tlicn  3  :  neither  bath  bee  hept] 
bachc  aup  tiling  from  me,  buttbec,  be- 
caufc  thou  art  j)te  ibifc :  boib  then  tan  _J 
doc  this  great  ibicHcbncffc,  anb  finnc  a 
gamftdPobr 

io  anb  it  tame  to  paffe  as  flicfpaBc 
to  3Jofcpf)  oap  bp  bap,  trjat  bee  rjcatftci 
neb  not  bnto  her,  to  lie  bp  her,  or  to  bee 
with  her. 

ii  anb  it  came  to  paffe  about  ibis 
timc.trjat  Jofcprj tbent  in  to  the  boufe, 
tobocbtsbufmes,  anb  tfjercmasnone 
of  the  men  of  the  boufe  tber c  ttntbtn. 

ix  anb  (bee  caught  bun  bp bis gar- 
ment,fapittg,  Hieinttrjme:  anbrjclcft 
Ins  garment  tuber  hanb,  anbflcb,  anb 
got  Inm  out. 

ij  anbitcamctopaffe,ibbcnft)cfau) 
tlwt  lite  liab  left  l)ts  garment  m  bet 
hanb,  anb  mas  flcb  fojtb  -, 

14  Xbat  fbc  talleb  bnto  the  men  of 
l)et  boufe ,  anb  fpattc  into  trjtm,  Cap- 
mg,  £>cc,bc  rjatft  bzougbt  tn  an  $cb2rtb 
bntobs,tomocRcbs:  be  came  In  bnto 
me  to  lie  lbttb  me,  anb  _5  cuebttntba 
Moubbotcc. 

15  anb  it  came  to  pafle ,  tbrjen  bee 
rjcarb  that  J>  llftcb  bp  nip  boircanb  crv 
cb ,  that  rjclcfthts  garment  tbtth  nice, 
anb  fleo,  anb  got  Inm  out. 

i6  anb  flic  laib  bp  bis  garment  bp 
her,  bnttll  lier  102b  came  home. 

17  anb  flic  fpafcc  bnto  Inm ,  acco^ 
bin  g  to  tbcfc  iborts,  (aping,  Xljc  f?c- 
b2eib  feruant  lbbicb  thou  haft  biought 
bnto  be,  came  m  bnto  me  to  mocUc  me.  j 

1$  anb  it  came  to  parte  as  3  liftbp ! 
mp  bone,  anb  tricb,  that  he  left  his  gar; 
ment  tbtth  me,  anb  fleb  out. 

19  anb  it  came  to  paffe  ibhen  his  m& 
ltcrhcarbthclb02b£ofhtsrbifc,lbhich 
flic  fpalic  bnto  him,  fapmg,  after  this 
matter  bib  top  feruant  tome,  that  his 
tbjatbibasltmblcb. 

zo  anb  ;_0ofcpb£  matter  toonc  bun, 


anb  put  hun  into  the  pzifon,  a  plate, 
inhere  p  Rings  pjtfoncts  Iberc  bounb: 
anbbewas  therein  tbcpnfon. 

ii  <C2Suttbc?L_I>&£>ibas  tbtth 
3Jofepb,  anb  (bcibe&btmmcrcic,  anb 
gauc  hun  fauour  in  the  fight  of  the  Hce? 
pcrQfthtpnfon. 

ii  anbtbcfecepetoftbcpflfonconfc 
mtttcb  to  3lofephs  hanb  all  the  p?tu> 
tiers  that  weretn  the  pjifon,  anbtbbat 
foeucr  thepbib  there,  he  ibas  tbeboer 

ot  it: 

13  %t)t  Keeper  of  the  p.nfon  looHcb 
not  to  anp  thing ,  that  was  tonbec  bis 
hanb,  becaufc  the  ?L4Dl&3Drbasibith 
him :  ?  that  which  he  bib,  the  %&&$> 
ntabcutopiofper. 

CHAP.    XL. 

1  The  Butler  and  Baker  of  Pharaoh  in  prifon. 
4  Iofcph  hath  charge  of  them.  5  Heiiuer- 
prctcth  their  dreames.  io  They  come  to 
pafTc  according  to  his  interpretation.  23  The 
ingratitude  of  the  Butler. 

i!5b  it  came  to  paffe  after 
thefe  things  ,  that  the 
asutlerofthciungofe 
gppt,anDh1S2i3aHer,hab 
offenbeb  their  lo?b  the 

lamg  of  €gppt. 
1  3lnb  pharaoh  Ibasib^othagaitul 

ttbo  of  his  officers,  agatnft  thethtefcof 

tl)e  Outlets,  anb  agamfl  the  thtcfe  of 

theisaftcrs, 
j  ^nb  he  put  them  in  tbarb  in  the 

houfc  of  the  captame  of  the  guarb,  into 

thcp?tfon,tijcplaceK>here3Jofeph*bas 

bounb. 

4  anb  the  captame  of  the  guarb 
chargcb  3Jofcph  inith  them,  anb  he  fer< 
ucbthem ,  anbfheptontmueb  a  feafon 
in  nrnrbc. 

5  C  anb  thep  bjeamcb  a  became 
both  of  them  ,  each  man  his  bieamem 
one  night ,  each  man  aetojbitig  to  the 
interpretation  of  hisbjcamc,  rheffiut 
ler  anb  the  aBafccr  of  the  lung  of  Cgppt, 
Ibhtcli  lit  ere  bounb  m  the  pjtion. 

6  anb  giofeph  came  tn  tonto  them 
mthcmommg,  anb  looueb  bpon  them, 
anbbeholb,thepwerefab. 

7  anb  he  af&cb  Pharaohs  officers 
that  Vbcrc  Uitth  him  utthc  warbc  of  his 
lo?bs  houfe,  fapmg,  lehercfojtc  'Ioorc 
pcfofabiptobap^ 

8  anbthcpfatbbnrohutniBehaue 
bzeamcb  a  bjeame ,  anb  there  is  no  im 
tcrpzetcrof  it  anb  'Jofcph  faib  bnto 
them, 


t  Hcb.tx 

tended  kind- 
net  vnto 
htm. 


f/M.irc 
lewfitet 
emit! 


He  interpreted!         Chap.xl  j.        feuerall  dreames. 


Or,  rtckfn. 


\Hclr.T(<- 
member  mce 
with  thee. 


Or, fail  >f 
Met. 


\Hehr  mis: 
;f  ?hxr**h, 
the  works  of 

baker ',  or 
eoeks. 


\\Ortrecko* 
thee  ,and 
take  thy  of- 
fice from 
thee. 


Or,recke- 
ltd. 


them ,  SDoe  notmtcr  pjetottons  belong 
to  d5ob<  tell  me  them,  35p?ay  you. 

9  3nD  tlje  ehicfc  iSutlcr  tolbc  his 
beanie  to  3Jafcph,anbfaib  to  him  ■,  ^n 
my  bjcamr ,  beholbe ,  a  tome  ibas  before 
mcc: 

io  3nu  tn  ttjc  toinc  were  th#e  bzan- 
chcs,anto  it  was  as  though  it  imbbcb,anb 
her  blolTonts  (hot  foo?th ,-  and  the  cuts 
ftcrsthcreof  brought  fo?d)  ripe  grapes. 

n  2nb  toharaohs  cup  rbas  in  my 
hanb ,  anb  3  toofee  the  grapes  anb  prct 
feb  them  mto  l&hataohs  rup  :  anb  31 
gauethe  rup  mto  Pharaohs  hanb. 

n  2nb  jjofeph  faib  tonto  htm,Xhts 
is the  interpretation  of  tt:  the  th?cc  bran- 
ehesare  truce  bayes, 

ij  )3ctlbithintlttccbaycsihall$ha> 
raorj  llliftbp  trjincfjeab,anb  reftozctrjee 
bntothy  plate,  anb  thou  (halt  beliuct 
Pharaohs  tup  mto  hts  hanb,  after  the 
fomier  manner  itohcn  thou  Iball  his 
Butler. 

14  But  ||  thinfee  on  me,  Vbnen  it  than" 
belbclt  tt)itrj  thcc,anto  (herb  mnbenefle, 
3Jp;aythee,  tonto  mcc,  antomafeemen 
turn  of  metonto  0hara0h,anb  bang  me 
out  of  thishoufc. 

15  iFoz  tnbeeb  II  ttias  tlollcn  arbay 
out  of  the  lanb  ofthc  i)eb2Ctt)cs:anb 
here  alfo  ftauc  3J  bone  nothing,  that 
they  thoulb  put  me  mto  thebungcon. 

is  jehenthcehicfeBaucrfauxthat 
the  intcrp:ctationitoas  goob,hctaibton* 
to  3Jofcpn ,  5  alfo  tt>as  in  my  bieame, 
anb  bcfjoib,3J  hab  three  ||itohtte  baffeets 
onmyhcab. 

17  3no  in  the  topprrmoft  oaffeet 
trjerenjas  ofailmancrof  'baftc-meats 
fo20haraoh\antothebtrbs  bib  cat  them 
out  of  the  baf bet  bpon  my  h  cab. 

is  3lnb  3Iofcph  anfracrcb,  anb  laib, 
injts  is  the  interpretation  thereof:  the 
three  baffeets  are  three  bayes : 

19  J^ttnthmthrccbaycsihaii^ha^ 
raoh  II  lift  top  thy  heab  from  off  thec,anto 
(hail  hang  thec  on  a  tree ,  anb  the  bttbs 
Chan  cate  thy  flc(h  from  off  thee. 

io  C  3nb  it  came  to  paflc  the  thirb 
bap,which  was  pjaraohs  birth  bap^hat 
hec  mabe  a  frail  tonto  all  hisfcruants: 
anb  he  llufteb  top  thcheab  of  thechicfc 
Butler  ,anb  of  the  rhiefe  Bafecr  among 
hisfcruants. 

21  3nb  he  rcttorcb  the  thicfe  Butler 
bnto  his  Butlcrflnp  agame ,  anb  t)ec 
gaue  trjc  cup  mto  Pharaohs  hanb. 

n  But  he  hangcb  the  thicfe  Bafecr, 
as3Jofephhab  mteepretebtothciu. 


i$  jaet  bib  not  the  cfjicfc  Butler  re- 
member 3Jofeph,butforgatchim. 

CHAP.    XLI. 

i  Pharaohs  two  dreames.  9  Iofephinterpre- 
teththem.  33  Heegiueth  Pharaoh  coun- 
fell.  38  lolephisaduanced.  50  Hee  be- 
gettethManaiiehandEphraim.  54  The  fa- 
mine beginneth. 

M  $b  it  tame  to  pafTcatthe 

-  enbofttbofalyccrcs,that 

'haraoh  breameb :  anb 

:holbc,hecftoobbythe 

nuer. 

x  ^nbbeholb,  there  came  bp  out  of 
the  nucr  fmenibellfauoureb  Hme,anb 
fat  fleft)cb,anb  they  feb  m  a  mcbouj. 

3  3lnb  bcfjolb,feucn  other  feme  came 
top  after  them  out  of  the  nucr , ill  fauou^ 
rcb  anb  Icane  flefljcb,anb  Ooob  by  the  fr 
thcr  feine,bpon  the  b?infee  of  the  ruicr. 

4  ^nb  the  til  fauoureb  anb  icanc 
flrihtb  feme ,  bib  eate  top  the  feucn  itocll 
fauoureb  anb  fat  feme :  ^>o  Pharaoh 
aitoofte. 

5  3f nb  het  flept  anb  bjcamcb  the  fc* 
conb  tmie:  anb  beholbe,  feucn  cares  of 
tome  came  top  topon  one  ftaiac, +  ranfec 
anb  go  ob. 

6  ^nb  beholbe  ,fenen  thinne  cares 
ano  biafleb  rbith  tljc  caffrbinb ,  fp?ang 
top  after  them. 

7  £nb  the  fcuen  thinne  cares  bc^ 
uoureb  the  feucn  ranfic  anb  full  cares: 
anb  0haraoh  arbofee,  anb  beljolb,  it 
mas  a  became. 

8  3nb  it  came  to  paffe  in  themo^ 
ning,thathis  fpirititoas  troubleb,anb 
he  fent  anb  caileb  fo?  all  the  Magicians 
of  cgppt,  anb  all  the  itoife  men  thereof: 
anb  Pharaoh  tolbc  them  his  became ; 
but  there  Itoas  none  that  toulb  mttr> 
p?etc  them  tonto  Pharaoh. 

9  C  Xhen  fpafee  the  thicfe  Butler 
tonto  Pharaoh,  faying,  31  boeremem^ 
bermyfaultsthisbap. 

io  Pharaoh  itoas  Vb?oti)  ttrith  his 
feruants,  anb  put  nice  in  rbarbc,  m  the 
taptame  of  theguarbs  hotu"e,  both  nice, 
anbthechicfcBafeer. 

ii  ami  u>e  b^camcb  a  became  in  one 
night,3  anb  he :  itoe  meameb  each  man 
accojbing  to  the  mtcrpjetation  of  his 
b;came. 

ii  3lnb  there  was  there  tbithtos  a  yong 
man  an  D?cb?clb ,  feruant  to  the  tap 
tame  of  the  guarb :  anb  tbec  tolb  hmi, 
anbhe'mterpjctebto  tos  ourb?canies, 

to 


t  Hebr.fu. 


'Chip.^o 


Pharaohs  dreames      Gcneiis.  are  interpreted. 


"PlV.  105. 

20. 

\\ielr  mail 


!|  Or,  When 

tf>(n  hrtirefl 
A  dreome, 
thtmcotil 
interpret 


f  H'fr.come 
ttjthewwArd 
M'lsoftkem. 


■  Or,  Crnotl. 


to  cart)  man  acco?Dmg  to  his Dicamc,hc 
DtDtntcrpjet. 

1  j  3nD  it  tame  to  paffc ,  as  he  inter 
pzcteo  to  tos ,  fo  tt  ltoas .  inccJjc  rcftoico 
tonto  mine  office,  ano  Ijsm  he  hangco. 

14-  C*Xhcn  pharaoh  fentano  tai 
lets  giofeph ,  ano  the?  •  brought  htm  ha 
(hip  out  of  tljc  oungcon :  3lnD  he  fbaueo 
himfclfe,atU)  changeo  bts  raiment,  ano 
camein  tonto  pharaoh. 

15  2inD  pharaoh  fato  tonto  3fofcph, 
_J  hauc  D;eamcD  a  ojeame,  ano  there  ts 
none  that  can  interpret  tt:  ano  _3baue 
hearo  &v  of  thccAu  ||  thou  canft  nnoer- 
(lano  ao;eame,to  interpret  tt. 

i6  3nD3JofcpljanmjcrcDpbaraoh, 
faving ;  %t  isnotm  me :  Goo  fballgtuc 
pharaoh  an  anfmere  of  peace. 

17  :3nD  pharaoh  faio  tonto  3Iofeph; 
Thtmv  Djeamc,  bcljoio,  jllftooDbpon 
thcbanftcoftbcriucr. 

is  3nDbeholD,  there  came  top  out  of 
thcrujcrfntmmnc,fatfle(hcDauDlbcii 
fauouteo,  ano  thev  fco  m  a  mcoolb. 

19  3nDbeholD,fcuen  other  feitte  came 
bp  after  thcm,poojc  ano  berptUfauou- 
rco,  anoicane  flefheo,  futh  as3Jncucr 
faibin  au  theianoof<£gvptfo,JbaDttcs. 

20  3mDthcleanc,  9  the  illfauourcD 
Bine,  did  tattbp  tbefirOfcucnfatlttnc. 

21  3lnD  ltohcn  fhev  hao t  eaten  tl)cm 
top,tt  couio  not  bee  unoitoen  that  the? 
hao  eaten  them,but  tbcv  lucre  mil  ill  fa? 
uoureo ,  as  at  the  beginning :  &o  3 
altoot$e. 

22  3uio  3  fam  in  mv  oicamc,ano  be 
boID.fetten  cares  cametop  in  oncftaiRc, 
full  ano  goob. 

23  3itiDbeholD,  fcuen  cares  ||iQ)itht= 
rco,  thin  f  biaftco  lbtth  the  call mno, 
fpmng  top  after  them. 

24  3utD  the  thin  cares  ocuottrcD  the 
fcuen  gooo  cares :  ano  gj  toio  tbtstonto 
tljc  magieians,but  there  was  none  that 
couio  Declare  it  to  me. 

25  CanD^JofcphfaiDbntophara; 
oh,  Xhc  Djcamc  of  Pharaoh  ts  oncj 
(Sod  hath  fl)rtbcD  Pharaoh  what  he  ts 
about  to  Doc. 

26  Xfte  feucn  gooo  nine  arc  fcuen 
pccrcsMnDthcfcucngooDcarcsarcfc 
ucn  vecres:  thcDjeamcis  one. 

27  3lnD  the  fcuen  thin  ano  ill  fauou 
rcDRincthatcamcbpaftctthcm,arcre> 
ucn  vecres:  ano  tljc  fcuen  emptte  cares 
biaftco  Vbith  the  €aft  ttmio,  (ball  bee  fc 
ucn  vecres  of  famine. 

28  Xhts  is  the  thing  which  _7  haue 
fpohen  tonto  Pharaoh :  ttujatooDtsa 


bout  to  Doe,hclbctbetb  tonto  Pharaoh- 

29  aScholD,  there  come  fcuen  vecres 
of  great  plcnttc,tb.20ughout  all  tljc  lauo 
of  egvpt. 

30  3mo  there  (bail  arifc  after  them, 
fcuen  vecres  of  famine,  ano  all  the  pica- 
tic  (ball  be  fo:gottcu  in  the  lattoof  € 
gvpt:  ano  the  famine  (hail  confumc  tljc 
lano. 

3i3uDthcpicnfteft)ainotbcKno\licn 
in  the  lano,  bv  rcafon  of  that  famtne  fol- 
loltomg :  font  n-^ibe  oerv '  giieuottS. 

32  3utofo2  that  the  ozeamcibasDou; 
bleo  onto  Pharaoh  ttbttc,  it  isoecattfe 
the  tbmg  ts  ||  eftabltfhcD  by  <5oD  1  ano 
(SoDibUlfhomvbnugttto  paffe. 

33  /fJolbtherfozelctpbaraoblooRc 
otttamanOifcrcetanDUitfc^nDfcthtm 
otter  the  lano  of  Cgvpt. 

3+  lUtpbaraobooethis.anDlethiin 
appoint  i|  officers  oner  the  lr.tiD,  9  tahe 
bp  the  ftftpart  of  the  lanD  of  C-gvpt,  tn 
the  fcuen  plenteous  vecres. 

3$  3tnD  let  them  gather  all  the  fooo 
ofthofc  gooovecres  that  come,  ano  lav 
top  come  tonoec  the  hano  of  pharaoh, 
ano  let  them  fecepe  fooo  tntht  emes. 

36  3inDtbat  fooo  (hall  be  fojttojcto 
the  lano,  agatnft  the  feucn  vecres  of  fa 
mine ,  ibbtcb  (hallbecmthclanDof  <s> 
gvpt,  that  the  lano T  pertfh  not  through 
tljc  famine. 

37  *C3tttDthethmgitoasgooDinthe 
eves  of  Pharaoh,  atiDinthc  eves  of  all 
Ijisfcruattts. 

38  3lnD  pharaoh  faiD  tonto  bisfcr< 
ttattts,  Can  ibefntD  fitch  a  one,  as  this 
ts,  a  man  m  ibhom  the  fptrtt  of  <3oD  is 

39  ^uD pharaoh fatD  tonto gjofeph, 
jfwarmuch  as  <5oD  hath  (l)cibeD  thee 
all  this,  there  ts  none  fo  DifcrccteanD 
ibifcasthouart: 

40  *Xhou fhaltbc  otter  mv houfc 
ano  ateojDing  tonto  thv  iboiD  (hall  all 
mv  people  be f  rulcD  1  onlv  tn  tljc  th:onc 
ibtligi  be  greater  tljen  thou. 

41  3uto  pharaoh  faiD  tonto  3lofeph, 
S>ce,  31  ijauc  fctthec  oner  all  tljc  lano  of 
cgvpt. 

41  ^no  pharaoh  tooltc  off  his  ring 
fromljis  hano,  9  put  tttopongiofcpljs 
hano,  ano  aravco  him  tn  toefhircs  of 
jjftnc  ltnnen,ano  pitta  golD  cljautc  about 
Ijisnccltc. 

43  3lno  itc  maoc  him  to  rtoc  tntht 
fecono  cliarct  lbhtch  he  hao :  ano  tfttv 
crico  befojehun,  p26olto  the  Itnce :  auD 
he  maoc  htm  ruler  ouec  all  tljc  lano  of 
<£gvpt. 
44  3tuD 


Htb.heAU) 


\Q\\prrp* 
edofGoJ. 


Or,  oftcr- 


\  Hcb.be net 
:»totf. 


I 


•PfJ.  I05. 
21. 1. mac. 
l.ej.ia. 

7.>o- 
\Hei.ar. 
med :  ort 
kift. 


\OtJdks. 


]0r,  r.u- 
der fitter, 

!  lib.  Ai- 


lofeph  exalted.  Chap.xlij.  His  brethren. 


Or,  Prii:e 


*Chnp.45. 
10.&48.;. 

|]  Orfrinc!. 


jl  That  w, 


[Thnis, 
Frmtfrll. 


'Pfal.ioj, 
16. 


t  Heir,  t^l 
wherein 


44-  3tnb$haraon  faib  bnto  3Jofcpl), 
^ami&frataoMnbBntljouttfjiccajall 
no  man  lift  bphjs  Ijanbojfoote,  mall 
tftelanbofegppt. 

45  3mb  #ljaraon  callcb  3Jofrpl)S 
name,  zaplmatlj-^aancal),  anb  ty 
gattc  t)im  to  rbifc^fcnatlj  ttje  baughter 
of  0oti-pl)cral),  ||  pneft  of  s©n:  anb  3Jo- 
fcphtbent  outouer  all  rtjclanoeof  €> 

46  ( C  3nb  5Jofcpf)  ibas  toirtie 
metres  olo  tbUen  he  ftoob  bcfbze  0ljar&: 
oft  lung  of  Cgppt)  anb  IJofepft  xomt 
outfromtftepjefeneeof  pharaoft,  ano 
tbent tftozoibout  all  ttjc  lanD  of  Cgppt 

47  3lnbtnthcfcuettplcntcouspctcs 
tftc  eartft  b:ougfttfo;itbbpftanbfiils. 

4S  :£nbftcgatbcrcbbpailtftefoobe 
oftlje  fenutpeeres,  Ibfticft  mete  in  tl)e 
lanbof  €gppt,  anbiatbbptfte  foobein 
ttjc  tittes :  the  foobe  of  the  Gelb  tbfjici) 
HDascounD  about  rut  rv  title ,  lato  Ije  bp 
intftcfame. 

49  2(nb  Sfofepftgatftercb  corneas 
tftefanb  of  thefea.bcrp  much,  bntfll  he 
left  minifying  :  fo?  it  tbas  ibithout 
number. 

50  *  3nb  bnto  3iofeph  tbere  borne 
tsbo  fonncs,  befbjc  the  peeves  of  famine 
came:tbhith  &fcnath  tl)e  baughter  of 
0oti  pherah,  Deleft  of  £>n  bare  bnto 
pun* 

51  anb^Jofcphcallcbthcnameofthc 
firtt  borne  pJPanafleh :  fo?  C5ob,  &iJ  hee, 
hath  mate  me  forget  all  nip  tout,  anb 
ailmp  fathers  houfc. 

5x  anb  the  name  of  the  fctonb  tab 
leb  he  ||  ephzaim :  fo?  ©ob  Ijatf)  taufeb 
mee  to  be  fruitfull  in  ttje  lanb  of  mp  af- 
fliction. 

5 j  C  3nb  the  ftuen  pecres  of  plen* 
tcoufneCTe,  tfjat  ttas  in  the  lanb  of  €< 
gppt,tberecnbeb. 

54  *  ^nb  the  feuen  pceres  of  bcatth 
beganne  to  tome  attojbing  as35ofcpD 
hab  faibe ,  anb  tlje  beartl)  ibas  tn  ail 
ianbs:butmallthelanb  of  egppt  there 
tbasbzeab. 

55  anb  lbhen  all  the lanb  of  Cgppt 
Tbasfanulhcb,  thepeople  crtcbto£ha> 
raol)  fo?  bjcab :  anb  Pharaoh  foib  bnto 
all  the  egpptians,<5oebnto3Jofcph: 
tbhathctoithtopou,boe. 

56  :3nbthefemmctbasoucraUthc 
fate  oftlje  cartli;  anb  3Fofeph  openeb  all 
+ tlje  ttojehoufes ,  anb  folbe  bnto  tl)e  & 
gpptians:  anb  the  famine  ibarcb  foje  in 
theianbof€gppt. 

57  3inb  all  tountreps  tame  into  & 


gppt  to  3Jofcpt) ,  fo?  to  bup  tome ,  be* 
taufe  that  tlje  famine  ibas  fo  fo?e  in  an 
lanbs. 

CHAP.    XLIL 

1  Iacob  fendeth  histenfbnnes  to  buycornein 
Egypt.  6  They  are  imprifoned  by  lofeph 
fbrfpies.  18  Theyareietatlibertie,oncon 
dition  to  bring  Beniamin.  11  They  haue 
remorfe for  lofeph.  14  Simeon  is  kept  for  a 
pledge.  15  They  returne  with  come,  and 
their  money.  19  Their  relation  to  Iacob, 
}6  Iacob  reiufeth  to  fend  Beniamin. 

jDib  *bhcn*3Jacobfaib 

%  that  there  lbas  tonic  in  & 

gppt ,  3latob  laib  bnto  tits 

fbnnes,  naljpbocpelooBe 

oncbponanotl)er; 

%  ^nb  l)ee  faib ,  Beijolbc ,  31  ijaue 

l)earb  ttjat  tfjere  is  tonic  in  Cgppt :  get 

pou bottme  ti)itl)er  anb  bup  fo?  bs  fr om 

tl)ente,tl)atlbcmapliuc,anbnotbic. 

3  C^ubSJolcpSstcnb^ctl^enrbent 
bourne  to  bup  tomem  cgppt. 

4  36ut  26eniamin  3Jolcpf)S  b?o? 
tifjer  ,3f  atob  fent  not  roitQbis  bjettjicn 
fo?l)cfaib,?leftperabuenturcmsftl)icfc 
befell  ljun. 

5  ^nbtIjefonnesof3Jftaeltamcto 
bup  tome  among tljofe  tljat  tame:  fo? 
tlje  famine  n»as  in  the  lanb  of  Canaan. 

6  ^nb^ofepliibastDegoucrnonr 
ouerrlje  lanb, and  tjee  itwastljatfolbto 
all  tfte  people  of  tl)cianb:anb  5ofcpl)s 
tytibim  tame,f  bolbeb  botbnc  tl)em> 
feluesbclb;e  l)im,  with  ^jeir  fates  to  tlje 
eartl). 

7  3lnb  3lofepl)  fatb  l)is  tycttyen, 
anblje  Bnctbtljem,  butmabeljimftifc 
ftrangebnto  tljem,  anb  fpane 1  rougljip 
bnto  them ;  anb  !)ee  faibe  bnto  them, 
tehente  tomepe^  &nbtt)ep  faib,5from 
tftelanb  of  Canaan,to  bupfoob. 

8  3lnb  35ofepl)  toielb  his  tyetlwn, 
buttljcptaictbnotljim. 

9  5lnb  5ofepl)  *  remembjeb  tl)e 
b?eamcs  tbljicl)  jjeebjeameb  of  tljcm, 
anb  faib  bnto  tnem,  Pt  ar  e  fpics :  to  fee 
tlje  nafcebnes  of  tftc  lanb  pott  arc  tome. 

10  Slnbtfjcp  fatb  bnto  ljim,/!5ap,mp 
lo?b ,  but  to  bup  foob  are  tl)p  ftruants 
tome. 

11  nacare  all  one  mans  Tonnes,-  lbe 
aretruemenurjpfcruantsarcno  fpics. 

yl  2lnbl)cfaibbntotI)cm,5i5ap:but 
to  fee  the  nauebnetrc  of  tfte  lanb ,  pou 
are  tome. 

13  SlnbtlKp  fatb ,5Cl)p  fcruantsarc 

tuiclue 


"Afls.7. 

12. 


t  Helr.htrd 

thingsjrir^ 

them. 


•Clup.17- 
5- 


lofephtalketli 


Grenefis.       with  his  brethren. 


\HcU-nni 


lhtr<d. 


*  Chap.  ^3 . 
5- 


•Gliaji.  37. 

31. 


t  Hsbr.  an 
fHttrpretcr 
w*i  brtvectne 
them. 


ttDelue  b2tttS2eti,ti)c  fonnes  of  one  man 
m  the  iaub  of  Canaan :  anb  t»el)oit> ,the 
yongeft  >s  this  Day  u>ttt)  our  father ,  anb 
one  is  not. 

14  acnD  3Jofcpl)  fails  Dnto  them, 
Xhat  is  it  that  3  fpaac  into  you,fa^ 

mg,^CarefpitS. 

15  hereby  yc  fhail  bcp20ttcb :  by  tiic 
Itfcof  J&haraoh  yc  fhailnot  gocfoorth 
henccerceptyouryongettbrothcrcontc 

hlthCt. 

16  ;S>cnb  one  ofyou,anb  let  him  fetch 
yourbrother.anbyefhalbct&cptinpri' 
ton ,  that  your  iD02bes  map  be  prottcb, 
iDherhcr  there  be  any  truethmyou  :or 
elsby  the  life  of  Pharaoh  utrely  yc  ate 
fptcs. 

17  Smbftetpntiljemaiitogcrljertn; 
tolDatoctlnecoaycs. 

18  3ltu»  3fofcpl)  fata  Ditto  them  the 
thirb  bap ,  XiJiS  boe ,  ana  liue :  for  3} 
fcarc<!50D. 

19  3Jfyc  be  true  men,  let  one  of  your 
brethren  be  bounb  in  thchoufe  of  your 
p2ifon:  goe  yceatry  tornc  tor  th  e  famine 
ofyouthoufes. 

io  26ut*bruigyouryongci1brottiet 
Dnto  mee,fo  fhail  your  iDorbcsbcDc; 
nficb ,  anb  ycc  fl;au  not  ate :  ana  they 
bibfo. 

21  C3lna  they  faib  one  to  another, 
tt)c  arc  Dcrilyguuttc  tonterning  our 
toother  ,m  that  ibc  fan?  the  angutfl)  of 
his  fonlc,  ibhen  he  befough  t  Ds,  ana  rbe 
lbouianot  hcarc :  therefore  is  this  at- 
(IreCTc  coincDponDs. 

22  3na&eiibcttanfcjcecbffjcm,fay; 
mg,  *&pa&c  3  not  Dnto  you,  faying, 
Doc  not  fame  againltthcchtlbc,  anb  ye 
iDoulbttothearc  <  therefore  bchoia  ai^ 
fo,msblooa  isrcoutreb. 

23  3Jnb  they  ancYb  not  that  3Jofcph 
DnbctlTooD  them :  for  rl)ce  fpaltc  Unto 
them  by  an  interpreter. 

14  3lna  hec  turncb  hunfelfc  about 
from  them  anb  wept,  anb  rcturneb  to 
them  agamc  ,  anb  communcb  Uiitrj 
them,  anb  toolic  from  them  Simeon, 
anb  bounb  him  before  their  eyes. 

15  CXhcn  3tofcph  tonmtanbebto 
fill  their  tacltcs  ttJitft  tome,  anb  torc> 
fto2C  cucry  mans  money  into  his  facUe, 
anb  to  guiethcm  protufionfor  thclDay: 
anb  thus  bib  hcDnto  them. 

26  ^nb  they  labcb  their  affcsibiti) 
the  comc,anb  bepattcb  thence. 

17  3InD  as  one  of  them  openeb  his 
tacnctogiue  htsaffe  pzouenber  m  the 
3mnc,  he  efpicb  his  money  :for  beholb, 


J  Heir. went 
fourth. 


it  was  m  his  fac&es  mouth, 

23  31riD  he  faia  Dnto  his  b?ethrcn, 
$5y  money  isre(torea,anaioe,ic  is  eucn 
in  my  facitc :  ana  their  ftcart +  fatleu 
them,ana  they  iDcre'afraib,faying  one 
to  an  othcr,nahat  is  this  that  t5oa  hath 
bone unto  Ds* 

19  C  3ma  they  tame  Ditto  ^atob 
their  father,  Ditto  the  lanb  of  Canaan, 
anb  tola  him  all  that  befell  Ditto  them, 
faying. 

30  Xhc  man  who  is  the  lora  of  the 
lanb,  fpaftc f  roughly  to  ds,  anb  tooitc 
DS  for  fptes  of  the  tountrcy. 

31  3inb  iDe  faib  Dnto  htm ,  uae  ate 
true  men  s  iDearcno  fpies. 

32  nacbetu/elucbrethrcn,  fonnes  of 
our  father :  one  is  not,  anb  theyongeft 
is  this  bay  ibith  out  father ,  m  the  lanb 
of  Canaan. 

33  ^nbtf)emanti)eI02bofthetoun^ 
trey  faib  Dnto  Ds,I?creby  fhail  ^  nttott) 
tihatyearetruemen:  leaueonc  of  your 
brethren  here  tbitft  me, anb  tafee  food. 
for  the  famine  of  your  Ijoufl)olbs,anb 
begone. 

3+  ^nb  bring  y  our  yongedbrofher 
Dnto  me :  then  fhail  5  mtoiD  that  you 
are  no  fpies ,  but  that  you  aretcttemcn :  fo 
lDill'Jbclmcryouyourbrotlherjanbyc 
fhail  trafficiuc  m  tlje  lanb, 

35  C  3nb  it  came  to  paffc  as  rtjey 
empticb  their  faclts ,  thatbcholo,  eucry 
mans  bunble  of  money  was  m  hisfacfte: 
anb  iDhcn  both  they  anb  tljctr  father 
fatb  H)t  bimbels  of  money,  thcyttjcre 
afraib. 

36  ^nb'fatob  their  father  faib  Dnto 
them,  Q3chaucycbcTeaueDofinycfiil' 
D2en :  3Jofcph  is  not,  anb  Simeon  is 
not,anb  yeibtl  taltc  25cmamin  away:  all 
thefc  tilings  arc  agatnft  me. 

37  3ud  Bcubcn  fpauc  Dnto  his  fa< 
thcr^aying^laymytrbofonneSjif^J 
b:mghimnot  to  thee:  beliucr  him  into 
my  hanb ,  anb  3J  iDill  bringhim  to  ti)cc 
agame. 

3s  ^nb  he  faib ,  £©y  fotutc  fljailnot 
gocboiDnc  lntth  you, for  his  brotDcr  is 
bcab,  anb  he  is  left  alone :  if  mtfc&lefc 
befall  hun  by  the  Ibay  mtfjclbhtch  yce 
goethen  fliall  ye  bring  bottme  my  gray 
hairesiDtth  tbrroiDtotijcgcaiic. 

CHAP.  XLIII. 

1  lacob  is  hardly  pcrfwaded  to  fend  Benjamin. 
15  Iofcph  entcrtaineth  his  brethren,  31  Hcc 
makechthem  a  (cafL 

5(nb 


f  Heir,  with 
vs  hard 
thiftvs. 


Beniamingoeth      Chap.xlnj.        withhis  brethren.! 


Hek  yra- 

BroreJteJ. 

•Chjp.4». 

10. 


t  He  h  4*ki"g 
In  tike  J  it. 


\Het.mMth 
\  Hek.knorp- 
»n£  rWJ  we 


3»- 


I  Or.nwrt 
tylhu. 


gt»  il^o  the  famine  lbas  fo?c 
inthclanb. 

i  :3nbtttametopau"c 
tPben  thep  hab  eaten  top 
the  co?ne,  iPhtch  thep  hab 
b?ougt)t  ouc  of  Cgppt,  tljcir  father  faib 
bnto  them,  <5oc  againe,  bup  Psa  little 
foobe. 

j  3nb  3JuDat)  fpabc  bnto  tjitti,  Cap? 
ing,  1thc  man  did  '  f olemnlp  p«ro  ted  Pip 
to  PS,  toping,  l^e  (hall  not  fee  nip  fete, 
erccpt  pour  *  b?othcr  be  tbith  pou. 

4  3if  thou  lPilt  fenb  ouc  b?other 
\Pith  ps,  rpe  ttnll  goc  bourne  anb  buv 
theefbob. 

5  25ut if  thou Unit  notfenb  him ,  \pc 
tbrtl  notgoe  bottme :  fo?  the  manfaibe 
bnto  Ps,#cu)allnot  fee  mp  face,  crccpt 
pout  b?othcr  be  ipitl)  pou. 

6  3nb3Jfracltoib,ttJhcccfo?ebcalt 
pc  fo  ill  Vbitl)  me,as  to  tell  the  man  tbhc? 
thecpchabpctab?other* 

7  3nb  thep  totb,lLhc  man1  afbcb 
Ps  ftrattlp  of  out  (late,  anb  of  our  bin? 
b?cb,  toping,  3ls  pour  father  pet  altue? 
hauepec  another  o?othcr  <  anb  tbe  toibc 
htm  acco?bing  to  tt)e '  tenout  of  tbefe 
lbo?bs: '  Coulb  tbe  ccrtainelp  bnotbc 
trjat  he  iboulb  fap ,  2S?mgpour  b?othcc 
boVPnc* 

s  3lnb  3fubah  faib  Pnto  3Jfraclhts 
father,  S>enb  the  lab  tbtrh  me,  anbtbec 
iPill  anfe  anb  go ,  that  Ibc  map  l<ue,anb 
not  nit,  both  lbc,anb  rhou,anb  auo  our 
little  ones. 

9  3  ttnll  be  furctp  fo?  Ijim  ■,  of  mp 
hanb  (bait  thou  require  Ijim :  *  if  3 
bunghunnotPntothce,  anbfethimbe* 
fo?e  tljcCjttjcn  let  me  bear c  the  blame  fo? 
cucr. 

io  jfo?  ertcpt  tbe  hab  lingrcb,  furelp 
notb  tbee  hab  returncb  ||  thts  feconb 
time.  .     „ 

1 1  2nb  their  totljct  3Jfracl  faib  bnto 
tt)em,Jf  ttmaftbee  fo  notb,  boetbts: 
tabe  ofthc  bed  fruits  in  tl)e  lanb  m  pour 
pcflcis,anb  cariebotbnc  the  man  a  piv 
fcnt,alitlcbaimc,  anbalitlchomc,  fpfc 
tes,  anb  mp?rhc,  nuts,  anb  almonbs. 

u  ^nb  tabe  bouble  moncp  tnpour 
hanb,anbthcmoncpthattbasb?ought 
agatnemthemouthof  pourtotbes:  ea? 
neitagameinpourhanb,pcrabucnture 
ittbasanouerfight. 

i j  Xabcalfopoutb?othcr,anbatifc, 
goeagauicPuto  theman. 

14  3lnb  d5ob  ainugtme  gutc  pou 

mettie  befoze  the  man,that  he  map  fenb 

atbap  pour  other  b?othcr,  anb?3enta? 

J 


mm:  j|  3?f  3J  be  bcrcaueb  of  mp  cbilb?cn, 
3)ambcrcaueb. 

15  *[3inb  the  men  toobc  that  ¥>it< 
fent,  anb  ti)cp  toonc  bouble  moncp  m 
tl)cic  hanb,  anb  Z5rmanun,anb  rofc  bp, 
anb  tbentboiPnctoegppt,  anb  ftoob 
bcfo?e3Jofcpb. 

i6  ^nb  tbljcn  3?ofeph  fatbc  25tnia- 
mm  VPitl)  tnem ,  lice  faib  to  the  ruler  of 
Otshoufe,  I6:mg  tljcfc  men  home,  anb 
'  aap,  anb  mane  rcabp :  fo;  tljefe  men 
fljair  binctt)itl)mcat  noonc. 

17  3nbrhcmanbibas3Jofcp!)babe: 
anb  tljc  man  brought  the  men  into  3?o- 
fcphshoufe. 

is  ^nbtt)cmenibereafraib,becaufc 
tl)ep  rPcrc  brought  into'Jofcphs  honfe, 
anb  thep  faib ,  26ecaufcoftj)e  moncp 
thatrpasretumeb  mour  fatfecs  at  the 
firft  time  are  \Pc  toought  m,  that  hec 
map f  fecfee  otcafion  agamft  ps,  anb  fall 
bpon  Ps,anb  tanc  PS  fo?  bonbmen,  anb 
ouraflcs. 

i9  3nb  tljcp  tame  ncere  to  the  fte^ 
ibarb  of  3to{cphs  houfc,  anb  t!)cp  torn 
muncb  tOirf)  htm  at  rtjc  boo?e  of  the 
houfc, 

20  ^nbfaib^&ir/'lpccamein 
bcebboibneatthcfirflmnetobupfoob. 

ii  ^nb  it  tame  to  paflc  lPhcn  iPce 
tame  to  the  3Innc,  that  Ibce  openeb  our 
tatbes,  anb  bcbolb,  eucrp  mans  moncp 
was  m  the  mouth  of  his  fatbc,  ouc  mo- 
ncp in  ful  lPe  ight:  anb  tbe  hauc  b?ougl;t 
ttagatneinourhaub. 

ii  ^nb  other  moncp  hane  tbec 
b?onght  bolbnc  in  our  hanbes  to  bup 
foob :  tbe  cannot  telliPho  put  our  mo 
nepinouctatbes. 

13  ^nbhetaib,^eatcbetopou,fcarc 
not :  pour  etob,anb  the  <5ob  of  pour  fa^ 
ther,  hath  giuen  pou  trcafurc  m  pour 
facbes : 1 3  habpour  moncp.  ^nb  Ijcc 
b?ought  simcon  out  bnto  thenu 

14  ^nb  the  man  b?ought  the  men 
into  3Jofcphs  houfe,anb*gauc  them  ipa> 
tcr,  anb  thep  UiaOjeb  their  fcetc,  anb  he 
gauctheir  affes  p?ouenbcr. 

15  ^nbthepmabe  rcabp  the  0?cfent 
againft  ^ofeph  tame  at  noonc :  to?  thep 
hcarb  tljatthcp  (houlb  catcb?cab  there. 

16  C^nbtPhcn3Jofcphcamchomc, 
thep  b?ought  him  the  £?efcnt  tbhith 
ibasm  their  hanb,  into  the  houfc,  anb 
botbeb  themlclucs  to  htm  to  the  earth. 

17  anbhcafKcbthcmofthci^tbcl 
fare,  anb  faib, '  SJs  pour  father  \Pell,the 
olbman  of  ibhom  perpabe;3te  hep« 
altuc<  _    I 


||Or,«ni/. 
xi  i  htiHt 
bene  cv. 


\Hei.kil 
JHcbr.eate- 


t  Wo. nil 
hmr,lft 
zpo/t  vs. 


*Ghi.4:. 
t  Heb.  com-  I 
rmn^  donr.: 
we  CArm 
dtrwne. 


tw« 


•Chap.i3 
4.&14.P. 


f  Uet.fctct 
IHeir.    Is 
there  p.- see 
toiottr].  - 
thcr  • 


A 


cu 


pput 


m 


Gcnefis.        Bcniamins  facke. 


t  Hti.  the 


thdt  rrxi  0- 
utr  hu  beufc 


{ Or,  maty  h 
rrutii. 


is  anothcyanfrocteb.Xhyfcruant 
oucfatljtrisin  goobheaui),  hecisyctas 
line:  $  they  boibcbboibne  their  heabs, 
anbma&cobcifancc. 

29  anbhcliftbphiscyes,anbfaux 
his  toother  23cmanun ,  his  mothers 
tonne,  anb  fait) ,  3Js  this  your  yongcr 
bzothcr ,  of  lbhom  y  ce  fpanc  bnto  nice  < 
ano  he  faib ,  <3ob  be  gracious  bnto  thee, 
my  tonne. 

jo  3int)  "Jofcphmabe  haftc :  fojhis 
boibcls  bib  ycrne  bpon  his  toother : 
anbhcfoughtibhcreto  lbcepe,  anbhec 
cntccb  into  Ijis  chamber,  *  lbcpt  there 

31  3inbDciba(hcDl)isfaec,anbVtocnt 
out,  anb  rcfeaincb  Ijimfctfe,  anbfaibe, 
S>etontocab. 

31  3nbthcyfctonfo2himbyhimfelfr, 
anbfojtthcmby  fhcmfelues,  anbfoithc 
egyptians  lbhieh  bibcate  ibith  hun, 
by  themfewes:  bctaufcthe  egyptians 
might  not  eate  toeab  Ibith  the  §c* 
tocibcsrfoi  that  is  an  abomination  bnto 
the  Egyptians. 

33  ^bthcyfatcbefojehim,  the  full 
bozne  acco2bmg  to  his  birthright ,  anb 
the yongeft  aecozbmg  to  his y onth :  anb 
tljc  men  matueileb  one  at  another. 

34.  3tnb  hec  tooftc  anb  fat  meaffts 
bnto  them  from  before  him :  but  25cn* 
lamins  meaffc  was  mie  tunes  to  much  as 
any  of  theirs :  anb  they  toun&c,  anb 
tibcrc  merry  Ibith  him. 

CHAP.  XLIIII. 

1   Iofcplis  policic  to  ftay  his  brethren.   14  Iu- 
dahs  humble  fupplication  to  Iofeph. 

tSgWS^g  /Bb  hce  conunaunbeb  the 

*Bm&& ' ftcttiarD  of  ¥*  houfefay- 
^SS*  t»S,  fill  the  mens  facacs 
?yfet^A<&  withfoob,asmurhasthcy 
*££&zm£s  can  cane,  anb  put  euery 
mans  money  m  his  facfesmoutf). 

2  anoputmycup,theftlucrcup,m 
tftcfacttcs  mouth  of  the  yongeft\anb  his 
come  money  :  ano  he  bib  accozbing  to 
the  lbojo  that  31ofcph  hao  fpolten. 

3  2lftooncasthcmo2tungibasnght, 
!  the  mmibcrc  fent  auiay^ey.anb  their 
!  affes. 

4  3ub  ibhen  they  Ibercjonc  out 
of  the  cuicanb  not  y«  farrc  off,  35oftph 
fato  bnto  his  frcibarb,wJp,foUoibaftrr 
the  mot;  anb  lbhen  thou  bocft  oner* 
tafte  them, fay  bnto  them,  i©herefo;e 
haucyc  rcibarbcbcmllftngoob* 

5  3b  not  this  it,  m  tbhich  my  102b 
bnnbeth  i  anb  lbhercby  mbeeb  Ije  ||bf* 


uincth*  yehauebonc  cuillmfobomg. 

6  c  3no  X\t  ouettooRe  them ,  anb 
he  fpafte  bnto  them  thefc  fame  tt)02bs. 

7  3inb  they  faib  bnto  him ,  ©here* 
fo?e  faith  my  lo?b  thefeibozbs  f  <5obfo^ 
bib  that  thy  fcruahts  fhoulb  boe  aeco2* 
bing  to  this  thing. 

8  25eholb ,  the  money  ibhich  tbee 
founb  m  our  facftcs  monthes ,  ibec 
fought  agame  bnto  thee ,  out  of  the 
lanb  of  Canaan:  hoibthcn  fhoulb  ibec 
fteale  out  of  thy  lo?bs  houfe ,  ftwer  02 
goloe* 

9  reithlbhomfoeueroffhyferuants 
itbefounb,bothlethimbic,anb  ibcaito 
tbiU  be  my  lojbs  bonbmen. 

10  2nbhefaib,jfi2oibaltoletttbeac* 
tombing  bnto  your  Ibojbes :  hce  xbtth 
ibhomittsfounb,  (hailbcmyferuant: 
anb  ye  fhall  be  biamelcffe. 

11  Xhcn  they  fpcebily  toofee  botbnc 
euery  man  his  facBc  to  the  grounb,  anb 
openeb  euery  man  his  faefce. 

ix  3nbhcfrarthcb,anbbeganatthe 
elbeft,  anb  leftat  the  yongeft :  anb  ii)t 
cup  tbas  founb  in  ffientamms  facbe. 

13  %htn  they  renttheir clothes,  anb 
Jaoeb  euery  man  his  affc,  anb  rrturntb 
tothecitic. 

14  C^anb  3Jubah  anb  his  b?eth?en 
cameto  "Joftphs  houft :  (to?  he  Xbasyet 
there)  anb  they  fell  before  httn  on  ttjc 
grounb. 

1$  2wb3Jofeph  faib  bnto  them mW 
beeb  is  this  that  yehaucbone^rboteye 
not,that  fuch  a  man  as  3  can  certains 
lyllbiuinc^ 

i6  ^nb^ubahfaib.nahatfhanibtc 
fay  bnto  my  lo#  *  iWbat  thai  tbe  fpeaac^ 
ozhoibfballtbccleareourfelnes;  ©ob 
hath  founb  out  the  UUquitic  of  thy  fcr 
uants:  bcholbc,  lbee  arc  mylozbsto 
uants.bort)  ibc,anb  he  alto  Ibtth  ibhom 
the  nip  is  founb. 

17  3mbhcraib,d5oDfo?bibthat3l 
nioulb  boe  to :  but  the  man  in  Ibholc 
hanbthentpi£founb,hefbaJbemyfcr' 
uant ;  anb  as  to?  y on,gct  you  bp  in  peace 
bnto  your  father. 

is  C  Xhen  gjubah  came  neere  bnto 
hint,  anbfaib,  £>h  mylo?b,  let  thy  fcr< 
nam,  3  pjay  thee,  fpeabe  a  ibo;b  in  my 
lojbs  cares,  f  letnotthme  anger  bumc 
agamfl  tl)y  fcruant :  fo?  thou  arteuen 
as  Pharaoh. 

19  £0y  lojb  af fteb  his  fcrnants,  fay* 
<ng,$aucyeafatbcr,b?ab2othcr; 

20  3lnb  ibe  faib  bnto  my  I020,  naec 
haucafathCT,ano!beman,anbachtn>c 
of 


'jOr,tukf 


ludahs  fupplication.  Chap.xlv.     lofeph  is  knowen. 


'Chip.  43. 


•Chap.  37. 

a- 


"Chop.  43. 

9. 


XlkhrfxA: 
■nyftithtr. 


of  l)is  olD  age,  a  itttle  one:  anb  his  0:0 

ther  is  beats ,  ant)  lie  alone  is  left  of  hts 
mother,  anb  hts  father  loucth  hitn. 

21  ^nbthoufatbft  bnto  thp  fcruants, 
2S?tng  l;tm  botbne  bnto  mcc ,  that  3 
map  fet  mine  epes  bpon  htm. 

11  3inb  vat  faib  bnto  mp  lozb,  Xhc 
laD  cannot  leaue  his  father :  foz  *  hee 

fl)0Ulb  leaue  htS  father,  his  father  ttiOUlD 

Die. 

13  attbfhouraibftbntothpfcruants, 
€rccpt  pour  pongeft  bzotbet  come 

botbne  tbith  pou,  pou  (hall  fee  mp  fate 
nomoze. 

14  ^nn  it  came  to  paffe  tbhen  tbee 
came  bp  bnto  thpfcruantmpfathcr,tbc 
tolbhtm  thetbozbsof  my  lozb. 

15  3lnb  outfatherfatb,  (Eoeagaine, 
anbbupbsaltttieroob. 

26  anbtbefaibe,  i©ce  cannot  goe 
bourne:  (four  pongeft  bzothet  betbtth 
bs,thcn  tbtll  tbe  goc  botbne :  foz  tbee 
map  not  fee  the  mans  face ,  except  our 
pongeft  pother  betbtth  bs. 

17  3nbthyfcruant  my  father  faib 
bntobs,  Pc  fourth  that  my  ibtfcbare 

mettbOfonnes. 

18  ^bthe  one  tbent  out  from  mc, 
anb^Jfatb,  *  purely  he  is  tome  in  pie* 
ccs  :anb3J  fatb  himnotfmce. 

19  2lnb  tfyc  tabcthts  aifo fromme, 
anbmtfchtefe  befall  hun, ye  Changing 
botbnemygtayhaircstbith  fozroibto 
thegtauc. 

30  0oVo  thetcfozc  tbljengjcomcto 
thyferuant  my  father,  anb  the  lab  bee 
not  tbith  bs  3  ( feeing  that  his  Ufe  is 
bounb  bp  mthciabs  ufe.) 

31  gjtfhall  come  to  paffe,  tbhen he 
feeththatthclabis  not  tbtthb£,thathc 
tbill  bte ,  anb  thy  fcruants  than  bztng 
botbne  the  gray  hatres  of  thy  fcruant 
our  father  tbith  foztotb  to  the  srauc. 

31  iFozthyferuantbccamefurctyfoz 
the  lab  bnto  my  father,  faytng,*5f3J 
bzing  htm  not  bnto  thee,  then  ^ffhall 
beare  the  blame  to  my  farher,foz  eucr. 

33  $otb  thetcfozc,  3J  pzay  thee,  let 
thy  feruant  abtbe  in  fteab  of  the  lab,  a 
5jonbmantomylo:b;anblettheiabgoe 
bptUithhlsbzcthzen. 

34  #ozhotbfl)ail3Jgocbptompfa< 
ther,  anb  the  lab  be  not  tbith  mee,ieft 
perabuentureS!  fee  the  eutll  that  (hail 
'come  on  my  fathers 

CHAP.    XLV. 

1    lofeph  maketh  himfelfe  knowen  to  his  hie- 
thren-     5    Hee  comforteth  them  in  Gods 


prouidence.  9  Hee  fendeth  for  his  father. 
16  Pharaoh  confinneth  it.  11  lofeph  fur- 
nifheththem  for  their  iourney,  and  exhor- 
teth  them  to  concord.  15  Iacob  is  retimed 
with  the  newes. 

$cn3lofeph  coulb  not  re- 
frame  himfelfe  befoze  all 
them  that  ftoob  by  htm: 
anb  he  erteb,  €aufecuctp 
man  to  goe  out  from  mc , 

anb  there  ftoob  no  mantbtth  him,ibhtlc 

3tofeph  mabe  himfelfe  Hnoibcnbnto 

htsbzethzen. 
i  3nb  he j  tbept  aloub :  anb  the  & 

gyptians,  anb  the  houfc  of  Pharaoh 

hcarb. 

3  3Cnb  3Jofeph  faib  bnto  hts  bzc* 
tbzen,  *  3J  am  giofeph;  ©oeth  mp  father 
yet  Hue  <  anbhisbzethzeu  tottlbnotan* 
frocre  htm:  foz  theytbete  ||troublebat 
htspzefence. 

4  3nb  lofeph  faib  bnto  hts  bzc* 
thzen,  Come  neereto  mc  ,3  pzap  you : 
anb  they  cameneerc;  anbhefaib,3lam 
3f  ofeph  pour  brother,  tbhom  pc  folb  in- 
to egppt 

5  i3otb  thcrcfozc  bee  not  grieucb, 
'nozangrp  tbith  pour  fclues,  that  yee 
folb  mehithct:*  foz  C5ob  bib  fenb  me  be- 
fozepon,to  pzefcruelife. 

6  if  oz  thefe  tibo  pecrcs  hath  the  fe 
mmebenem  theianb:anb  pet  there  arc 
ftue  pcercs,  m  the  ibhith  ther  e  (hall  nci< 
ther  be  earing  nozhartteft. 

7  3mb  ©ob  fent  me  befoze  pou ,  to 
'pzeferue  pou  a  pofteritie  in  the  card), 
anb  to  fauc  pour  liucs  by  a  great  beli- 
ucrancc. 

8  ;§>o  notb  ft  tbas  not  you  that  rent 
me  hither,  but  C5ob :  anb  he  hath  mabe 
mc  afathcr  to  #haraoh ,  anb  lozb  of  all 
his  houfe,  anb  a  ruler  thzottghout  ail 
the  lanb  of  <egypt. 

9  $aftc  you ,  anb  goe  bp  to  my  fa* 
ther,  anb  fay  bnto  him,  Xftus  faith  thy 
fonnc  3tofeph ;  C5ob  hath  mabe  me  lozb 
of  allCgppti  come  boibnc  bnto  mc,ta- 
rpnot. 

io  3Jnb  thou  fhalt  btbell  in  nje  lanb 
of  <£o(hen,ano  thou  fhalt  be  nccr  c  bnto 
me,  thou,  anb  thp  chilbzen,  anb  thy  cbil 
bzens  chilbzen,  anb  thp  flotucs ,  anb  tljp 
hearbs,anb  ailthatfbou  haft. 

n  ^nb  there  ibtl  5i  nounft)  thec/foz 
pet  there  are  fiuc  pcercs  of  famine)  left 
thou  anb  thy  houfholb ,  anb  all  that 
thouhaft.comctopouerttc. 

n  3lnb  beholb  ,vour  epes  fcc.anb  the 

eyes  of  mp  biofhcr  2i5eniamin,  that  it « 

<g  i  my 


■th  ha 

voice  invec- 


A&17. 
>• 

Or,teni- 
fe<L 


Kehrme'i- 
thcr  lei  the  re 
b:  artfcr  in 

yeurcyci. 

Chap.  50. 


{  Heir,  to 

ptttfbrjcit 


lacob  being  lent  for     Geneiis.         goeth  to  Egypt- 


f  Href.  VM 
ftodintae 

rj.-fo/rha- 


not  jiur  cjt 


miuth. 


\Hitr.tnr- 

7MJ. 


\lM'.hu 


mymouththat  fpeatieth bnto  you. 

13  3lnD  youfbailtell  my  father  ofall : 
my  gtoy  "l  tfgypt ,anD  ofalithat  vou 
Dane  feme,  ant)  ye  Qjall  ijattc,  ant)  tying 
Doibnc  my  fad)cr  hither. 

14.  anDhefclbponhtStyorhetzSctv 
lanuns  nccfec,  ant)  lbcpt :  ant)  2Scnia? 
mm  lbcpt  bponhis  ncesc. 

!5  £0o2couet  hec  huTcd  all  his  biv 
ttyen,  anD  lbcpt  bpon  them :  ant)  after 
d)at,histycttycn  tal&cD  ibithh»n. 

16  C  3lnD  the  fame  thereof  ibas 
Deato  m  Pharaohs  houfe ,  faymg,  3Jo- 
fcphs  tyctl)zcn  are  tome:  ant)  it  *  plcnfcD 
pharaoh  ibcll,  ant)  his  feruants. 

17  3nDpbataohfatDbnto3Jofcph, 
£>ay  bnto  ti)y  tyctfjjen,  XhisDoc  ycc, 
laueyour  beans  anD  goc,  get  you  into 
the  lanD  of  Canaan. 

18  31no  tanc  your  father ,  anD  your 
houfl)Olt)s ,  ant)  come  tyito  mcc :  anD  3) 
lbil  guieyou  thegoob  of  thclanDofC- 
gypt.anD  ye  (ball  cat  the  fat  of  the  lanD. 

19  jRoib d)ou  art  tommantjct), this 
Docycc;  XaKcyoulbagonsoutof  tlie 
lauD  of  <Zfgypt  fojyour  little  ones, anD 
fozyout  lutucfi,  ant)  tyuig  your  father, 
anD  tome. 

10  3ifo f  rcgart)  not  your  fhiffc :  foz 
rljc  gooD  of  all  the  lant)  of  cgypt  is 
yours. 

11  3lnDthc  djilDzcn  of  3JfraelDiDfo: 
anD  3Iofeph  gauc  them  tbagons.atco^ 
Ding  to  the  t  coiumanDcmcnt  of  $ha; 
raoh ,  anD  gauc  them  pzouifion  fozthc 
ibay. 

11  Xoailofdictuhcgauecachman 
changes  of  raiment :  but  to  25cntanun 
hce  gaue  d)zcc  hunozeD  pieces  of  filucr, 
anD  fuic  changes  of  raiment 

13  3Uid  to  his  father  hce  fent  after 
thismanct :  ten  affes  tlaDenlbnb  the 
gooD  things  of  Cgypt ,  anD  ten  (hec 
affes  labcn  ibid)  coznc ,  anD  bzcaD  anD 
meat  to:  his  father  by  the  may. 

14  5)0  he  fent  his  tycdjzcn  aibay, 
anD  they  DepartcD :  anD  hce  fatD  buto 
them,  £>cc  that  ycc  fall  not  out  by  the 
ibay. 

15  C  2lnD  tljcy  lbcnt  bp  out  of€- 
gypt.anD  came  into  die  lanD  of  Canaan 
bnto^i^cob  their  father, 

t6  3wDtolD  him,  faying,  3lofcph  is 
yctaliucanDheisgouernouroucrail 
the  lanD  of  Cgy pt.  3lnD  t  Jacobs  heart 
fauitco,fozhcbelccucDthcmuot. 

17  3nD  they  tolD  him  all  d)e)bo?Ds 
of  3Jofcph ,  \uhich  hce  haD  faiDc  bnto 
them:  anD  ibheu  hce  faib  thclbagons 


lbhich  Tlorcph  haD  fent  to  cane  him.the  j 
fpintofjacob  their  father  rcuiucD. 

is  2(nD  3Ifracl  faiD  ,3Jt  is  enough 
3Jofcph  my  fonnc  is  yet  alrae :  3  ibtll 
goc  anD  fee  him  befoze  3  Die. 

CHAP.    XLVI. 

1  lacob  is  comforted  by  God  at  Beerfheba.  5 
Thence  hee  with  his  company  goeth  into 
Egypt.  8  The  number  of  his  family  that 
went  into  Egvpt.  iS  Iofeph  meeteth  lacob. 
31  Hee  inllruciech  his  brethren  how  to  an. 
(Were  to  Pharaoh. 

$3£/\S8£#D  giftacl  iooitc  his 

™5mXx»  tourney  lbitb  all  that  hee 
eAW?  na0  >  ant,  camc  t0  t$ccx, 

fbeba ,  anD  offercb  facrv 
nccs  bnto  the  cod  of  his 
father  3!faat. 

x  3lnD  cob  fpafee  bnto  IJfracl  in 
the  bifions  of  the  night ,  anD  faro  ,31a- 
cob,3iacob.  ^nDhcfatD,^ereani% 

3  3inDhcfaiD,'35amcoD,theCoD 
of  thy  father  ,fcarc  not  to  goe  Doibnc  i\v 
to  tfgypt :  foz  3  ibill  there  matte  of  thee 
a  great  nation. 

4  ^ftiiilgocDoibncibiththccinto 
egypt ;  anD  3  *btll  alfo  furely  tying 
thccbpagaineianDgjofcphajallputhis 
IjanDbpon  thine  eyes. 

$  3tnD  3Jacob  rofc  bp  from  25eer^ 
fl)cba:  anb  the  fonncs  ofju-aelcartcb 
3  acob  their  father,  anD  their  Utie  ones, 
anD  their  ibuics ,  in  the  Ibagons  rtiljuh 
Pharaoh  haD  fent  to  cacy  him. 

6  Znn  they  tooKcthctt  cattctl  ,anD 
their  gooDs  lbhich  they  haD  gotten  m 
the  lanD  of  Canaan,  anD  came  inta€; 
gvpt ,  *  3Iacob ,  ano  all  his  feeb  ibirh 
him: 

7  fyis  fonncs  ,  anD  his  fonttte 
fotmes  ibith  him,  his  Daugljtcrs,  ano 
his  fonncs  Daughters,  anD  anhisfceD 
tyought  he  Vbith  him  into  Cgypt. 

3  C3tnD*thefc  are  the  names  of  the 
cljilbzcn  of  "Jfracl ,  \bhtch  camcituo  & 
gypt ,  gjacob  anD  his  fonncs  :*  ficuben 
Jacobsfitllbozne; 

9  Znti  ti)t  fonncs  of  Kcuben ,  fca. 
nod), anc ph^llu,  anD  ^e5tou,  anD 
Carmi. 

io  C*3lnDd)cfonnes  of  Simeon: 
3Jnnucl,auD3}amm,  ano  £>oaD,atiD 
3Jad)in, ano  Zohar ,  anD  <&haul  the 
fonuc  ofaCanaamtifl)  ibomati. 

ii  C  3lnDd)e  fonncs  of '  Jleui:  Cer^ 
fl)on,Hohatb,anD  tl9eran. 

ii  €  3luD  die  fonnes  of  *  3JuDaij : 


<cTofr».J4. 
4-pfal.  ioj. 
13.elj1.52. 
4- 


Etod,  x.l. 

and  6. 1  .). 
num.  z6.  8. 

and  i.ehro. 

*  Num.  \6. 


ij.i.chro. 

■i.Chro.rf. 

1 . 

'  l.Chro.j. 

=h-p. ,8. ;. 


Iacobsoff-fpring.     Chap.xlvij.  lofephmectethhim. 


*  i.Chron. 
7.1. 


i.Chro.7. 


•Chip.  41. 

50. 

\\0r.7rmu. 

•  I.Chron 


•Dcut.lo. 
11. 

\HcbMgh. 


€c,  anb  £>nan,  anb  :3>bciab,anb  plja 
rcvinb  Zcrab :  But  <£r  ej£)nan  Dirt) 
tti  rtje  lanb  of  Canaan.  3nb  rtje  fonncs 
ofl&barf5,lbcrci:>c3ron,aub^amul. 

13  €  3nb  tljc  fonncs  of  ^(Tatljat: 
Xola,  anbi&ljuuab,  anb  Job,  anb 
Mefyimtmu 

14  C*3nbtbefonncsofzcbulun: 
3>crcb,  anb  eion,  ano  gabled. 

1$  Xbcfc  bee  tljc  founts  of  Heal), 
lbljiclj  fbebarc  bnto^Jacob  tn  paban- 
3ram,  Until  bis  baugljtcr  S>malj :  all 
tbe  foulcs  of  bis  fonncs  anb  Ijisbauglj^ 
tcrs.lberc  tljirtic  auD  ttyec. 

i6  C  3lnb  tljc  fonncs  of  <3ab :  Zt 
pI)ion ,  ant)  Iijaggi,  <a>bunt,  ant)  ©3bon, 
en,  ano  3r  obi,  anb  3r  clt. 

17  C  *  3nb  tbc  fonncs  of  3ifl)cr : 
3Jtumal),  anb  3W)nab,  anb  Jfnt,  anb 
2Senal) ,  anb  S>eral)  their  finer :  3nb 
the  fonncs  of  fficnalj :  $cbcr,anb  5j0at 
cfjicl. 

18  Xbcfc  arc  tljc  fonncs  of  Zflpalj, 
tbbomc  llaban  gauc  to  licab  bis 
baugl)tcr :  ano  tl)rfc  flic  bare  bnto  3Ja? 
cob,  cucnftrtccnc  foulcs. 

19  Xbc  fonncs  of  ftarijcl  Jacobs 
ibifc :  3lofcp')>  anbiScuiamiu. 

20  c^lnbbnto  3Iofcplj  tntbclanbc 
ofegppuiKrcbozneflBauaflebanbe; 
pbJatm,  *ibljicb  afcnatlj  tbc  baugbtcr 
of£on-pbcrab;|#.:icttof£>nbarebn> 
to  bint. 

21  C^nbtljc  fonncs  of  2Scniamin 
were  aselab ,  auD  zSccljcr ,  ano  Sifbbel, 
©era,  anb  iftaatnan ,  Cbi  anb  Kofi), 
^uppun.anb  l^uppiin,  anb  3rb. 

22  Xbcfc  are  tljc  fonncs  of  Bacbcl 
lbbirfj  iberc  bomc  to  3atob:  all  tljc 
foulcs  tticrcfourtccnc. 

23  C  3lno  tljc  fonncs  of  £>an :  ty& 
fl)tni. 

24  Onb  tiie  fonncs  of  /Bapljtaii : 
gjalBccl ,  anb  Gum ,  anb  3e5cr ,  anb 
5>l)illcni. 

2?  Xbefcarctbc  fonncs  of  2Silbab> 
tbbicb  Haban  gauc  bnto  Barbel  bts 
baugrjter,  anb  flic  barctbefc  bnto  3fc 
cob :  all  tbcfoulcslbcrcfcucn. 

26  3111  ttjc  *  foulcs  trjat  came  ibttb 
JJatobmto  egypt,  lbljiclj  canic  out  of 
ijte  t  lomcs ,  bcfibcs  Jacobs  fonncs 
tbiucs,  all  tljc  foulcs  .vere  tbjccEuw  anb 
fire. 

27  3nb  tbe  fonncs  of  3JofepbWtb 
lbcrc  borne  \)un  m  egppt,  were  ttbo 
foulcs :  all  tljc  foulcs  of  tljc  l)oufc  of  3Ja* 
cob  ,  ibljulj  came  into  egypt ,  tbetc 
tfyeefcojcatibten. 


18  C5tnb  be  fcnt^ubalj  before  bim 
tmto3Iofcpb,tobircctl)tsfatebnto<Ri 
fljen,  anb  tt)c-p  came  into  tljc  lanbc  of 

0Ofl)Ctl. 

29  JinbJJofepbmabcrcabybistba 
vet,  anb  went  bp  to  meet  gjfcacl  Ijis  fa- 
tber,to  Gofljctvinbpjcfcnteb  Ijimfeife 
bntobmr.  aubljcfclloubisuccfte,  ano 
lbcptoubtsnecKcagoobibhile. 

30  3tn'b  3Jfcaci  faibc  bnto  giofcpb, 
/5oib  let  me  bic,  fincc  3  banc  fcenc  ttjy 
faccbecaufc  tijouartyctaiiue* 

3 1  ^nb  "3/ofcpb  laib  bnto  Ijis b:cri)2en , 
anobntobisfatbcrsljoufcjibiilgoc 
bp,  anb  fljcib  #barao!j,  anb  fay  bnto 
bu»t,fi0pbietlj!cn,  s  my  fathers  boufc, 
lbbicbwere  m  tljc  lanb  of  Canaan,  arc 
come  bnto  me. 

31  3nbtbcmcnarcfi)capbcarbS,fo: 
t  their  trabe  batlj  bmc  to  feeb  cattcii : 
anb  tijep  baucbzougbttljcir  flotRS,anb 
tljcir  bcarbs.anb  all  tljat  tljev  baue. 

33  3nb  it  fliaii  come  to  pafTe  \bbni 
l&baraob  fljau  call  rou,  ano  fl^au  fay, 
n9bat  is  pour  occupanon  t 

34  Xbatpcflialifap.Xbyferuants 
traoc bart)  bene  about  cattcll  ,from  our 
routlj  eucnbittillnoib,botb  lbe,anb  ai 
fo  our  fathers:  tljat  ft  map  otbell  in  tljc 
lanb  of  Gofljm  •,  fo:  cucrp  fliepbearb 
IS  an  abomination  bnto  tljceg^'ptians. 

CHAP.    XLVII. 

Iofepb  prefenteth  fiue  of'his  brethren,  7  and 
his  father,  before  Pharaoh.  11  Heegiueth 
th:m  habitation  and  maintenance.  13  He 
gectcth  all  the  Egyptians  money,  16  their 
cattell,  18  theirlands  toPharaoh.  zz  The 
Prieflcsland  was  not  bought.  15  Hcclet- 
teththe  land  to  them  for  afiftpart.  18  la- 
cobs  age.  19  Hecfwearethloiephtoburie 
him  with  his  fathers. 

i)cn  iofepb  came  anb 
tolbepbaraob,  ano  faibc, 
©p  ratljcr  anb  mp  b;c> 
tb:en ,  anb  rbcit  fioches, 
anbtljcirbcarbs.anbaii 

tbattbcp  baue , arc  come  out  of tbc  lanb 

of  Canaan :  anb  beljolb ,  tljcv  arc  m  tbc 

lanbofc&oflien. 
2   :Snb  bee  tcoUc  fomc  of  bis  bje 

tb^en  ,cucnfiuc  men,  ?  piefcntcbtbem 

bnto^baraob. 
j  ^nb  ^Ijaraob  faib  bnto  bts  b:e 

S«n,robat  is  pour  otmpanou  1 3lnD 
epfaibbnto  ^baraob,Xbrfcruaius 
are  fbepbearbs ,  both  nne  ano  alfo 
outratbers. 

*!F  3  4  'fthe- 


Hetr.  thty 

'27  °f 


lacob  and  Pharaoh.    Gencfis. 


Lands  fold. 


\  J-Jeh.how 
man) are  the 
aajcfoftkc 
jeercs  of  thy 
life? 

Hcbu. 
9,13. 


tUcbitdcii 

nonripied. 
Ht\>.  accor 
ding  to  the 


4  %l)t?  faib  mo?coucr  bnto  pha  \ 
raoh ,  5fo?  to  foioumc  at  the  lanb  arc 
Vbc  come :  fo2  thy  fcruants  hauc  no  pa> 
fturcfb?  their  flocKes,  fo?  flic  famine  is 
fo?c  m  the  lanb  of  Canaan :  noib  there 
fo?eibep?aythcc,letfl)yfertiantsbibcl 
mthcianbofcBolhcn. 

5  2mbpharaohfpaKCbnto3tofcph, 
faying,  Xhy  father  anD  ttj?  b;ctt)?cn 
arc  come  bnto  thee. 

6  Xhc  lanb  of€gypttsbcfo?c  thee: 
in  the  bed  of  the  lanb  mane  flip  father 
ant  bjctlizcn  to  bibeli,  tnthcianbc  of 
oofben  let  them  bbjcll :  anb  if  thou 
tmoibcft  anymanof  acmutic  amongft 
them ,  then  malic  them  rulers  oner  my 
cattcll. 

7  2{nb  3fofcph  b2ought  m  3farob 
htsfathcr,anbfethmtbcfo?cpharaoh: 
anb 'JJarobblcficb  Pharaoh. 

8  3inb  pharaoh  fan)  bnto  3latob, 
t^oibolbartthou? 

9  2lnb  3Jacob  faib  bnto  pharaoh, 
*Xhe  bayes  of  flic  yccrcs  of  my  ptl 
grunage  arc  an  hunb?cb  %  tnirtic  y  cres: 
frtb  anb  cuill  hauc  the  bayes  of  the 
veer  cs  of  my  life  bene ,  anb  hauc  not  at> 
tauieb  bnto  flic  bayes  of  flic  ycctesof 
flic  ufc  of  my  fathers,  m  the  bayes  of 
tlieir  pilgrimage. 

10  3mb3Jacobblcffcbpharaoh,anb 
\bcnt  out  from  befcue  pharaoh. 

11  C^nb^ofepli  piaccb  Ins  faflicr, 
aiiol)isb2etl)2en,anbgauctl)cm  a  pof 
fcffionm  flicianb  of  cgypt,  m  flic  belt 
of  the  ianb,mtne  lanb  of  £amcfcs,as 
pharaoh  liab  commanbeb. 

11  ^nb^lofcphnourilVicb  his  father 
anb  Ins  tocrtuen,  anb  all  Ins  fathers 
hounioibibirtibjcabjaccojbtng  to  thcr 

families. 

13  C3nb  flierc  lbas  no  bzcab  in  all 
flje  lanb :  fo2  flic  famine  lbas  bcry  fo  je, 
fo  rtiat  flic  lanb  of  tfgypt  anb  all  flic 
lanb  of  Canaan  famtcb  by  rtafon  ofthc 
famine. 

1+  3(nb  3JofepIi  gaflicreb  bp  all  flic 
money  that  lbas  fotmb  m  flic  lanb  of 
<£gypt,  anb  m  flic  lanb  of  Canaan,  fo; 
flic  come  lblncb  flicy  bought :  anb  gjo 
fcpli  b:ouglit  flic  money  into  phara 
obs  lioufc. 

is  3inbibhcnmoneyfailcbinfl)eianb 
of  Cgypt,  anb  m  flic  lanb  of  Canaan, 
ailriic  {Egyptians  tame  bnto  3Jofcph, 
anbfaib,C5iucbsb2cab:fo?ibbyflioulb 
lPc  bie  m  fliy  picfcucc  i  fo?  the  monev 
faiierti. 

16  3lnb  Jofepli  faib ,  Giac  your  cat 


tell :  anb  3  ttnll  gutc  you  fo?  your  cat= 
tell.if  money  faile. 

17  3nb  they  b?otnjht  their  tatter  bit* 
to  3Jofeph :  anb  "Jofeph  gaue  theni 
bjcab  m  exchange  fo?  ho?fcs,  anb  fozthe 
flocncs,anbfo?  the  tattell  ofthc  hearbs, 
anb  foz  flic  affes,  anb  t  he  feb  them  Ibith 
b?eab,fo?aHtheirraftc!,fo?fhatycetc. 

is  B9hcnthatyectcibascnbeb,they 
came  bnto  fjlm  tDe  feconb  yeere,  anb 
faibbnto  him ,  secibillnothibeitfrom 
my  io?b,  hoibthat  our  money  is  fpent, 
my  lo?b  alfo  hab  our  hearbs  of  cattell : 
flier eis  not  ought  left  m flic  fight  of  my 
lo?b,  but  our  bobics,  anb  our  lanbs. 

19  i©hctfo?ciballibcbicbcfo?cthine 
eyes,  both  tbe ,  anb  our  lanb  *  buy  bs 
anb  oire  lanb  fo?b?cab,  anblbcanbour 
lanb  XbtU  be  feruants  bnto  pharaoh: 
anb  guie  vs  fetbe  thatibc  may  line  anb 
not  bie,  that  the  lanb  be  not  bcfolate. 

io  3mb3fofcph  bought  all  thcianb 
of  egyptfcu  pharaoh:  fo?theegpptt 
ans  folb  eucry  man  his  ficlb,bccarae  the 
famine  p?cuailcb  oner  them:  fothe  tanb 
becamepharaohs. 

21  2nbasfo?thcpcople,httcmoueb 
flicm  to  cities  from  oueenb  of  trjebo?- 
bers  of  cgypt ,  cum  to  ttjc  other  enbe 
rtjercof. 

2i  €>neiy  flic  lanb  of  flje  ||0ncfts 
bought  fjenot :  fo2fliep2icfts  habapoz- 
tion  affigncb  tfjem  of  |0l)araol),anb  bib 
catc  their  portion  Vblnerj^rjaraol)  gauc 
rtjem :  ibi)crefo?t  tftey  folbe  not  their 
lanbs. 

23  X!)en^ofcpli  faib  bnto  the  peo- 
ple, 2Scholb ,  3}  hauc  bought  youthis 
bay,  anb  your  lanb  fbj^haraot  s  %ot> 
here  isfeeb  fo2  you,  anb  ye  fbau  (oxa  the 
lanb. 

24.  3mb  it  fliall  tome  to  paffe  in  the 
mcrcafc,  that  you  (hail  guie  the  fift  part 
bnto$haraoh,anbfourcpart6fl)altbc 
yourolbne,  fo?fccbof  thcficlb,  anbfo; 
yourfoob ,  anb  fo?  them  of  yourhoufc- 
holb5,  anb  fo?  foob  fozyour  Uttt  ones. 

25  5lnb  they  faib ,  Xhon  haft  faueb 
ourliucs:lttbsrmbgratcmthcughtof 
my  lo?b,  anb  \be  lbillbe  pharaohsfer- 
uants. 

26  3lnb  ^ofeph  mabc  it  a  latt)  oucr 
the  lanb  of  egypt  bnto  this  bay,  that 
Pharaoh  flioulb  hauc  the  fift  part:  tf.- 
ccpt  thclaubofthei|p?ieCtsonely,  whkh 
became  not  Pharaohs. 

27  canb^fraclbibcltittthelanb 
of  cg>>pt  m  the  countrcy  of  Gofben, 
anb  they  rjab  poffcffious  therein ,  anb 
grcib, 


t  HAM 

them. 


lO'.PrhiCli 


1  Or, Prince: 


Jacob  blefleth  Chap.xlviij.        Iofephsfonncs. 


d*jrs  of  the 
V  teres  of  hie 


■  Chap. 


14.1. 


•Hcb.u. 
it. 


'Chap.  41. 
?o  iofli, 
1  j. 7. 


grero.anb  mulnplieb  crccebmglv. 

18  3lnD  3lacob  luieb  m  tl)c  lanb  of 
Cgvpt  fcuruttcnc  verts :  fo +rt)clDI)ole 
age  of  3)atob  ibas  an  hunbzebfoucne 
anoftuenvetres. 

29  3Jnb  thctune  bzcib  tugl)  thafjf 
ratl  mult  Die,  ano  he  calico  his  fomtc 
IJofeph,  ano  faio  Unto  Dim,  3Jf  noiij  2 
liaiie  foutiD  grace  m  thv  fight,  "put,  3 
piav  thee,  thv  haul)  bnber  nip  thigh, 
ano  bealc  mnoiv  aiio  truclv«bithmcc, 
burvmenot,3Jp:avtijee,mCgvpt. 

30  23ut  jfxa&l  Ire  roith  mv  fathers, 
ano  thou  (halt  carte  mee  out  of  <£gvpt, 
ano  burvmc  in  their  burvtng  place:  ano 
he  fatb,3  lbillboeasthou  halUato. 

31  3tnb  hefato,  £>lbcare  Unto  mee : 
ano  he  fwarc  bnto  htm.  3lno  *  3Jfracl 
boibcb  hunfclfc  bpon  tlje  bebs  hcab. 

CHAP.    XLVIII. 

1   Iofeph  with  his  fonncs  viGccth  his  ficke  father, 
r     Iacob  ftrensrtheneth  himfelfe  to  blefTc- 


them.    5    He  repeated)  the  promife 
takerh  Ephrafm  and  MunalTeh  ashisov 
7    Heeicllethhim  of  his  motlicrs^raue 
Hee  blefleth  Ephrami  and  ManalTeli 
Hee  pr 
it    He 


He 
vnc. 

9 

17 


•Chap.iS. 


•feireth  the  yongcr  before  the  elder, 
prophefieth  their  icturne  to  Canaan. 

3«§  /Bo  tt  caiuc  to  paffc  after 
theft  things,  that  one  tolo 
3loftph,23tholo,thvfa 

Stv'Jb&ki  UHthhmi  his  tlbo  (ounce, 
QJanaflch  ano  epbzatm. 

1  3lnoonttolo3acob,anDfaiD,2Se= 
holt),  thvfonnt^ofcph  eouimcth  bnto 
thee :  anb^lftacl  ftrcngthencb  himfelfe, 
and  fate  bpon  the  beo. 

3  3lno  31atob  faioe  bnto  3Jofcpb, 
<3ob  2Hmtghtic  appcareb  bnto  nit t  at 
*HU3  m  tljc  lanb  of  Canaan,anb  blcfltb 
mtc, 

4  i^bfaib  bnto  mc,23choIb,3i  roil 
matte  theeftuitfuil,  ano  multtpltt  thee, 
anb  3  tbill  made  of  thtt  a  ntnltttubt  of 
ptopit ,  anb  lbtli  giuc  this  lanb  tothv 
fttbt  after  thee ,  fo?  an  cueriafnng  pop 
feffton. 

5  C3motiorofhv*troofonncs,€s 
phjtafm  ano  tTSauaffth ,  rohtch  roete 
bozne  bnto  thtt  tn  tht  lanb  ofegvpt,bt= 
fozt  3J  tame  bnto  thtt  into  €gvpt,  ^e 
mint :  as  Bcubm  anb  Simeon ,  the? 
fhaibemmc. 

6  3no  thv  uTuc  rohtch  thou  beget- 
teft  after  them ,  (bail  bt  thmt,  anb  (hall 
bt  calico  after  the  name  of  their  tye 
tbzen  in  their  inheritance. 


7  3nb  as  fo2me,lbhcn3J  tame  from 
*£>aban,  Rachel  btebbv  meintbc  lanb 
of  Canaan,  in  the  roap,  ibhcn  vet  there 
was  but  a  little  ibav  to  tome  bnto  <£ 
pbzath :  ano  3  buncb  her  therein  the 
roav  of  ephzath  ,  the  fame  ts  Beth; 
lehem. 

8  3lnl>  IJfratl  bchcibc  3fofephs 
fount  s.ano  laio,  aoho  *e  thefc  < 

9  3tnb JJofeph faibbnto  bisfatbcr, 
Xljev  arc  mv  fonnes,  lbhom  ©00  hath 
giuen  mem  this  place:  anb  hefaib,23;mg 
them,  3J  pzav  thce,bnto  me,  anb  3)  row 
bltffctbtm. 

10  (0o\m  tljc  eves  of  3lfracl  mere 
t  Dimmt  fo2  agt ,  fo  that  he  coulb  not  fee,) 
anb  hee  bzougbt  them  nccre  bnto  him, 
anb  he  uiffcb  them,  anb  imbzaceb  them. 

11  2lnb3)fracl  faib  bnto  3Jofcph,3J 
habnotthougl)ttofccthvface:anbloc, 
<5ob  hath  (heibcb  me  alfo  thv  fctb. 

n  Tim  JJofrph  b:ougl)t  thnn  out 
from  betibccne  his  Bnees,anb  het  bou> 
to  himfelfc  ibith  hisfacc  to  the  earth. 

13  3(nD3JofcphtooKcthemboth,e 
Phjaim  m  his  right  Ijanb ,  tolbarb^f 
raels  left  hanb  ,  anb  i!0anaiTeh  m  Ins 
left  hanb  toibaros  ^fracls  rigljt  hano, 
ano  biought  them  nccre  bnto  him. 

14-  3no  3lfracl  ftrctcljcb  out  his 
right  hano ,  ano  lavb » bpon  Cphzamis 
heaoibho  was  tljc  vonger ,  anb  his  left 
hanb  bpon  £0anaffchs  heao ,  cmbing 
his  hanbs  ibittmgiv :  fo;  tpauaffeh 
wasthefirftbozne. 

15  <C  ZnXi  "he  bleffcb  3Jofcph  anb 
fait) ,  000  befozc  lbhom  mv  fathers^ 
bzahamanb^faac  btbtbalae.thecSob 
ibhich  febbe  mee  all  mvltfe  long  bnto 
rtjisbav, 

i6  Xhe  3uige!  tbhith  rebcemcb  mee 
from  all  tutll,blcu"e  thelabbes,anblct 
mpnamt  be  namcb  on  them,  anb  the 
name  of  mv  fathers  3fbzaham  anb^j' 
taac,  anb  let  them  groib  tmto  amulte 
tubcin  thcmioftofthc  earth. 

17  3mb  lbhen  3?ofeph  faro  that  his 
father  latbe  his  ngin  hanb  bpon  the 
hcab  of  ephzaiuut  bifplcafcb  htm  :aub 
he  helb  bp  hisfathcrs  hanb  ,to  remone 
it  from  ephzaims  hcab,bnto  i^anaf^ 
fchsheab. 

18  3lnb  3(ofeph  faibe  bnto  his  fa-- 
thcr,  5l2ot  fo  mv  father :  fbz  thtsr  the 
ficft  borne ;  put  thv  right  hanb  bpon  hts 
heao. 

19  31nbhis  fatlier  refufeb,  anb  fato, 
3J  tnioib  it.mvfonnc,3!  nuoro  it :  he  alfo 
(hail  become  a  people ,  anb  he  alfo  (hai! 

be 


-!!• 


t  Hti.hea, 


•Hcbr.11. 


f.'ltes  dtt  tn- 
cnaft. 


Iacob  bleflcth 


Gencfis. 


hisfc 


onncs. 


\Htbr.ful- 


\  Heh.aoc 

not  then  ex- 

ctlt. 

♦Chap.?? 

ai.  l.cliro. 

J.t. 

\Or,mf 

eowrfje  u 

^Or,lheir 
fwerdsare 
wsApons  cf 
violent?. 


{Or  houghed 
oxen. 


be  great :  but  timely  t)is  yonger  biothet 
(hail  be  greater  then  he-  anb  his  fetbe 
(ball  bctonte  a  tmultttube  of  nations. 

xo  3ubbeblc(rcbtbcmtbatbay,tay; 
tng,Jntbcc(bait'3JfraeIblefle,  faying, 
(5ob  mauc  thee  as  (Epbjaim ,  anb  as 
iBauaflcb :  anb  Ijc  fct  <£pb:atm  before 
i^atiaftcb. 

ii  ^nbjjfrael  faibe  bnto  giofrpb, 
Scbol^Jbtc :  but  ©ob  (ball  be  With 
you,anb  bnngyou  agatue  bnto  tbelanb 
of  pour  fathers. 

22  iipojeouer  3  baue  fiiucn  to  thee 
oncpoznon  abouc  thy  bzetbzcn,  which 
3J  tooKe  out  of  tbebano  oftbc3lm6?itc 
with  my  froozo,  anb  With  my  bow. 

CHAP.   XLIX. 

Iacob  calleth  his  lbnnes  to  blefTc  them.  3 
Their blefsing in  particular.  19  Hecharg- 
cth  them  about  his  burial).   33   Hedieth. 

iI5b  3Jatob  taileb  bnto 
his  fomtes,  anb  feib,  <m 
thee  your  fclues  together, 
that  J  may  teuton  that 
which  (bail  befall  yon  m 

the  laft  bayes. 
z  (Bather your  frtucs  together,  anb 

hear  e  ye  fonnes  of  Jacob,  anb  heathen 

butojfrael  your  father. 

3  <DRcubcti,thou  art  my  firft  borne, 
my  might ,  anb  the  beginning  of  my 
ftrcngfb ,  the  crcelieneic  of  bignitie,  anb 
the  crecllcucic  of  power: 

4  Unliable  as  water,  t  thou  (halt 
not  cjcccll,  became  thou  *Wcntcftbpto 
thy  fathers  beb :  then  befilcbft  thou  it. 
||  $c  Went  bp  to  my  eouche. 

5  C5>imeon  anb  fLcui  arc  bzetbzcn. 
Ilinftrunicnts  of  crueme  are  in  their  h* 
bitations. 

6  £>  my  foulc ,  tome  not  thou  into 
their  ferret :  bnto  their  aiTcmbly  mine 
honour  be  notthou  bmteb :  foz  in  their 
anger  they  fleib  aman,anbmtbcir  fclfe 
Will  they  |i  mggeo  bownc  a  Ibail. 

7  Curfcb  be  their  anger ,  foz  it  w* 
fierce  i  anb  their  lb?ath,foi  it  was  emell: 
J  Will  btuibttbcmtii  Jacob,  anb  (cat 
ter  tbeminjfracl. 

8  C  J ubab,  thou  an  he  whom  thy 
bzetbzcn  (ball  pzaifc:  tbybanb  ihaiibem 
tbencrticoftbuic  ennmes, thy  fathers 
cbilbzcn  (hall  bolb  bourne  before  thee. 

9  3Jubabtsa?LyousWhclpc:from 
the  pzay  my  tonne  thou  art  gone  bp :  he 
Iroupe 0  bowticbee  courheb  as  a  ILyon , 
anb  as  an  olblLyon :  Who  fbauroufe 
htmbp; 


10  Xbcfccptcr  (ball  not  bepatt  from 
Jubab ,  no?  a  $UW  -giuer  from  be- 
tweene  his  ftete ,  bntill  S>hilob  come : 
anb  bnto  him  (hail  the  gathering  of  the 
people  be: 

11  28inbing  his  foale  bnto  the  bine, 
anb  his  aflcs  colt  bnto  the  choice  bine ; 
hctbatheb  his  garments  in  wtnc,anb 
his  clothes  in  thebloob  of  grapes. 

12  5^ts  eyes  (hail  be  rcb  With  wine, 
anb  hts  teeth  white  With  milRe. 

i}  c  zebulun  (ball  bwell  at  the  ba^ 
uen  of  the  lea ,  anb  hce  (ball  be  foz  an 
l^auen  of  (hips :  anb  his  bozber  fhaii  be 
bnto  Zibon. 

14  C3Jfracbartsaftrongaflc,coueb' 
ingbowncbctwccnetwo  burbens. 

15  3nbbefawtbatrettwasgoob,anb 
the  lanb  that  ft  was  picafant :  anb  boWeb 
his  (houlbcr  to  beare,  anb  became  a  fcr- 
uant  bnto  tribute. 

16  C  ©an  (ban  (ubgc  his  people,  as 
one  oftbc  tribes  of  Jfracl. 

17  DanfbalbcaTcrpentbythcWay, 
an  tabber  m  the  path  >  that  biteth  the 
bozfcbccics,  to  that  his  nber  (hall  fall 
bac&Warb. 

is  3  hauc waiteb  foz  thy  (aluarion, 

19  C  ©ab ,  a  troupe  (hall  ouercome 
him :  but  he  (hall  ouercome  at  the  laft. 

20  $[£>utof  3(herhis  bzeab  fhatibe 
tat,  anb  he  (hall  yeelb  royau  oamttes. 

21  C  i!5aphtaii  is  a  btnbc  let  loofc : 
^egiucrbgooblyWozbs. 

22  C  Jofepb  is  a  fruitfull  bough, 
euenafruttfhll  bough  bya  Well,  wbofc 
t  benches  runne  ouer  the  wall. 

2j  Xhc  archers  bauefozclygricueb 
him,  anb  (hot  at  him,  anb  hatcb  htm. 

24  asutbtsbowabobciuftrengtb 
anb  the  armesofbts  bancs  Were  mabe 
ftrong,  by  thehanbs  of  thcmighty  God 
of  Jacob :  from  thence  is  tbc&bcap; 
hearb,  the  ftone  ofjfrael, 

25  Euen  by  the  (Sob  of  thy  father 
Who  (hall  hcipe  thee ,  anb  by  the  20? 
imghtie,who  li)ail  blcffc  thee  With  blcf 
Rugs  of  hcauen  aboue,  blcflingsofthc 
beepe  thatlytthbnber,blcfImgsofthe 
bzeafts  anb  of  the  wombe. 

26  Xhe  blcflings  of  thy  father  hauc 
pzcuatlcb  abouc  the  blefltngs  of  my  wo< 
gcnitojstbnto  thebtmottbounbofthe 
eucriaihng  hils,  they  fball  bee  on  the 
hcab  of  '3Jofrph,anb  on  the  rroWncof 
the  hcabofhtm  that  was  Hcparatc  from 
htsbjerhzen. 

17  C  26eniamm  (hall  rautnc  as  a 
__^_  Wolfe 


\I-2ilr.anar~ 
rcm-ftuike. 


t  Heir. 
daM^sers. 


His  death. 


Ghap.l. 


His  burial!.' 


•Chap.47. 


•Ctap.  2  j. 


t  Htk.  nn:. 


ibolfe :  3in  the  mozning  hee  (hall  DC? 
uoutcd)cpzay,anoatnighthcfhail  I* 
uioethcfpotlc. 

is  C^thefearcthettbcluctrrbcs 
of3Jfrael,ano  thiststtthatthettrathcr 
fpaHe  bnto  tt)tin,anl>  blcffeo  them :  eue 
ry  one  accozotng  tohisbleffitighcblct 
fcothcm. 

19  3lno  hee  thatgco  them  ant)  faio 
bnto  them ,  3  am  to  bee  gathcrco  into 
my  people :  *bnrtc  me  lbtth  my  fathers, 
inthecauc  thatistn  theficio  ofcphzon 
thc^ttfttc, 

30  3f n  the  taue  that  is  in  the  fieio  of 
£0achpclah,  lbhich  ts  bcfozc  $)amtc,tti 
the  lano  of  Canaan,* lbhich  3bzaham 
bought  ttJitt)  the  fieio  of  Cphzon  the 
fcittue ,  foz  a  poffcfftott  of  a  burying 
place. 

31  (1H)crc  they  bunco  3fbzaham  ano 
£>arah  his  ttnfc,  there  they  buncbgj- 
faacano&cbCKahhisibife,  anb  there 
gj  bunco  Hcah.) 

3x  Xrjc  purrrjafc  of  the  Brio  ano  of 
the  taue  that  is  therein ,  was  from  the 
ehtlozcnof??eth. 

33  2no  ibhen  gjacob  hao  mabc  an 
enb  of  commanbing  his  fonnes,  he  ga? 
thcrco  bp  his  fectc  into  the  bcb ,  anb 
yecioco  bp  the  ghoft,ano  masgathcteo 
bnto  hts  people. 

CHAP.    L. 

1  The  mourning  for  Iacob.  4  Iofeph  getteth 
leaueo!  Pharaoh  to  goe  to  bury  him.  7  The 
funcrall.  15  Iofeph  comforteth  his  brethren, 
who  craned  his  pardon,  it  His  age.  2.3  He 
fceth  the  third  generation  of  his  fonnes.  14 
He  prophefieth  vnto  his  brethren  of  their  re- 
tume.  15  He  taketh  an  oath  of  them  for  his 
bones.  z6   Hedietb,andischcfted. 

*|5o3Jofeph  fell  bpon  his 
fathers  face,  anb  tbept  bp^ 
on  him ,  anb  uiffcb  Dim. 
i  3nb  gjofeph  torn* 
_  manbeb  his  fecuants  the 
phyficians  to  tmbalmehis father:  anb 
the  phyficians  tmbalmebgjfracl, 

3  2nofozneoayes  lbere  fulfillcbfoz 
htm ,  ( foz  fo  are  fulfilleo  tl)c  oayes  of 
thofc lbhich  are  tmbaimeo)  another 
gypttans  tmourneo  fo?  him  thzeefcoze 
ano  ten  oayes. 

4  Slnoibhcntheoayesofhtsmour; 
mngtberepalr,  gjofcphfpaliebnto  tl)c 
houfe  of  Pharaoh,  faying,  3Jf  noib3J 
haue  founo  grace  in  your  eyes,  fpeane, 


3  pzay  you,  in  the  earcs  of  Pharaoh, 
faying, 

5  *^yfathermabemcuticarc,fay; 
tug,  fLoc,  gi  Oic :  in  my  graue  lbhich  3 
hauc  Oiggeo  fo:  me ,  m  the  lanb  of  Ca- 
naan,therc  (halt  thou  bury  me.  /ftoib 
therfozclctmegoebp,3i  pzay  thee,  ano 
bury  my  father,  ano  3  ibtll  come  a* 
game. 

6  3Jno  Pharaoh  fato,  <£oc  bp,  ano 
bury  thy  father,  aceozoing  as  hemaoc 
thcefrucare. 

7  CSuiogiofcphibcnt  bp  to  bury 
his  father :  ano  tbith  him  ibent  bp  all 
thefcruants  of  Pharaoh,  theelbersof 
h(shotife,anoailtheclbersofthelanb 
ofCgypt, 

8  3tnoailthchc>ufcof3fofcph,anb 
his  bzethzen ,  ano  his  fathers  houfe : 
onely  thctt  litlc  ones,  ano  their  flocftcs, 
ano  thetr  hearos,they  left  in  the  lano  of 
©ofhen. 

9  2nOfhcretbentbprbifhhimbofh 
tharets  ano  hozfemen :  ano  it  ibas  a 
bery  great  company. 

io  3nb  they  came  to  the  thzewing 
flooze  of  3tab,  lbhich  is  beyono  3Joz 
oan, ano  there  they  mourneo  ibith  a 
great  ano  bery  foze  lamentation:  ano 
he  maoe  a  mourning  fo?  his  father  fe* 
uenoayes. 

ii  ^noibhenthctnhabitantsofthc 
lano ,  the  Canaanites  faibe  tlje  mour* 
ning  in  the  floo?e  of  atao ,  they  faioe, 
Xl;ts  is  a  gtteuous  mouniing  to  tlje  e* 
gyptums :  tbherfo?e  the  name  of  it  lbas 
cauco,||^bcl  ilj9t5ratm,tbhich  is  beyono 
•Jo?oan. 

it  3nOhts  fonnes  bib  bnto  hunac? 
co?Oing  ashc  commatioco  them. 

13  5fo?  *  his  fonnes  carieo  htm  into 
the  lano  of  Canaan,  anb  burtcb  htm  in 
the  cane  of  the  fieio  of  $)aehpciah, 
tbhich^bzaham  'bought  ibith  thcfteio 
foz  a  poffeffion  of  a  burying  place,  of  €« 
phzon  the  pittite,  befoze  ^amre. 

14-  C^lnbgiofephreturncbmtoe^ 
gypt,  he  anb  his  bzetl^zcn,  ano  all  that 
Ibent  bp  Ibirt)  him,  to  bury  his  father, 
after  he  l)ao  buneb  hisfather. 

15  #C  ^no  lbhen  3Jofcphs  bzcthzen 
fatb  that  their  father  lbas  bcab ,  they 
faib,  3lofcph  tbill  peraoucntttrc  hate 
bs,ano  tbtll  certainely  requite  bs  all  the 
cutinohtchmcoiobnto  htm. 

i6  ^notheytfentameffengerbnto 
^ofeph ,  faymg ,  %lw  father  bio  com 
mano  befozc  he  otto ,  faying, 

17  5>oihallycfaybnto3Jofcph>:foz: 

gsue. 


P--V7- 


[Thitis, 

the  mot<r- 
mnq  of  the 
Egyptian*. 

*Acl;.  16 


"Chap.  13. 
id. 


Kibxka 


lofephs  kindnefle.      Exodus.     His  age,  and  death. 


•Chap.45. 


W<hr  to 
ihctr  hctrtl. 


"Gen. 46. 
S.cxQd.6. 


giue,  3  pjav  #«  nolto,  the  trefpaffe  of 
thv  bmtytn ,  anb  ttictc  Gnnc :  foz  tficv 
did  tonto  thee  cuill :  :3nb  noU)  itocc  pzav 
thee,  fozgtuc  the  trefpaffe  of  ti)c  fcr> 
uants  of  the  Ooo  of  thv  father.  :3nb 
IJofcpl)  itocpt ,  ibhen  thev  fpaac  tonto 
pirn. 

13  2lnb  Ijts  bzethzen  alfo  itoent  anb 
fell  bourne  bcfozchisface,anb  thevfaib, 
zechoib,  ibe  be  thv  fecuants. 

19  3nb  3Jofcph  faibe  tonto  them, 
*  Jfcarc  not :  foz  am  33  m  the  place  of 
Ooo; 

io  2Sut  asfozvou,vcc  thought  emu 
agaiuftmc,bm  ©obmcanttt  tonto  goob, 
to  bring  to  paffe,as  it  is  this  toav,  to  fauc 
much  people ahue. 

ii  /5oUi  thcrcfoze  fcarcvccnot:  31 
ttullnounft)  von ,  anb  pout  ittle  ones. 
3nb  hec  comfozteb  them,  anb  fpafce 
tuinblv  tonto  them. 


xz  C^nb3ofepl)0)totttui«gjpt, 
hc,attbhtsfathcrshoufe:  anb3tofeph 
uueb  an  hunbzcb  anb  ten  vectcs. 

23  *  3nb  gjofepfj  fatbc  <£pf)zatms 
ct)ilo;en ,  of  tne  thitb  generation :  the  1 
chilbzcn  alfo  of  il0achir,the  fonne  of 
$$anaffch  ibere  tbzought  top  topon  3f  o^ 
fephs  fences. 

24  3nb  3Jofcph  faibe  tonto  l)ts  \nv 
rhzen ,  *  3J  bie :  anb  ©00  itoill  fur  civ  toiOt 
Vou,anb  bang  von  out  of  this  laub,  bu^ 
to  the  lanb  ltohtch  nee  faare  to  3bz& 
ham,  to  3ifaac,anbto  3!acob. 

15  3uo3ofephtoofecanothcofrhc 
chilbzcn  of^ifrael,  favmg ,  *  ©ob  itoill 
furclv  totfttc  vou,anb  ve  ftjal  cane  top  mv 
bones  from  Deuce, 

26  do  3Jofcpfi  bicb,  being  an  gun* 
bzcb  anb  ten  veercs  olb :  anb  rhev  an- 
baltucb  Dim,  anb  tje  itoas  put  in  a  coffin, 
tuegvpt. 


Num.  1 


\Hcb.bjrn€ 


"Hcb.n. 


■Ezod.13. 

>9- 


T   u   r 

SECOND  BOOKE  OF 

Mofes ,  called  Exodus. 


chap,  r. 

The  children  of  Ilrael  after  lofephs  death  do 
multiply.  8  The  more  they  areopprefledby 
a  new  King.the  more  they  multiply.  15  The 
pjodlines  ot  theMidwiues,in  (auinf>  diemen 
children  aliuc.  11  Pharaoh  comnundeth 
the  male  children  to  be  caft  into  the  riuer. 

SDibc  thefc  arc 
the  names  of  tl)e 
*  chilbzcn  of  3)P 
racl, Which  came 
into  €gvpt,cucrv 
manethishoufc- 
nolo ,  came  Itoitl) 
_tfacob. 
1  Bcuben^t 
mcoiMLcm.auolmbah, 

3   "Jlflachar ,  zcbuluu  anb  2Seu> 
ianun, 

4-  Z>i\n ,  anb  jRaphtait ,  <5ab ,  anb 
3fl)cr. 
5   Stub  all  tije  foulcs  tljat  came  out 


ofthc  Uovncs  of  ^atob,  acre  *  fencn 
tie  foulcs :  foz  3Jofcph  mas  in  Cgvpt 

already. 

6  3nb  Hofepn  btcb,  anb  all  fits  bze^ 
thzen.anb  an  that  generation, 

7  C  *  3Cnb  tlje  chilbzcn  of  3Jfracl 
itocre  fcuitfuu ,  anb  mcccafeb  abonm 
bantlv ,  anb  multiplicb,  anb  ibarcb  er- 
cccbmg  mightv,  anb  the  lanb  ltoas  Wlcb 
itoitfttncm. 

&  j3oU)tlierearorctopaneitoi&ng 
oner  Ccji'pt,  itoDicf)  knell)  not  ^ofcpJ). 

9  ^InbDc  faib  tonto  Dispeople,  23c- 
Iiolb,  tDc  people  of  tlje  clnlbzcn  ofjf 
rael  arc  mo  c  anb  nnglmcr  then  itoe. 

10  €oineon,lettosoeaicitoifclvltoitn 
rncnuclt  tDevmuinplv,  anb  it  come  to 
paffc  that  ltoDcu  there  fallctD  out  anv 
itoarrc,  tljcv  tovnc  alfo  tonto  our  ene- 
mies, anb  fight  agamlt  tos,  anb  foget 
thcmtopoutoftljclaiio. 

u  Xhcrefanrthcv  bib  fctoucr  them 

tam  niaftcrs,  to  afflict  them  ltoith  rhcic 

burticns: 


\H,i.sh,gh. 
i7.dLuc, 

10.22, 


'Adj.7. 


Ph 


araohs  crucltie. 


Ch; 


w 


Mofes  is  found. 


\  Hetrrumd 
ttheyaf- 
fiiftedthfm, 
fothejmul- 
tipli/titO-ct 


*  Chipf. 
?"  num. 
»«  59. 


burbcns :  3lnb  they  built  fbjj&haraoh 
treafure  cities  ,$ithomanb  xwianifcs 

iz  t2gutthcmo?ctheyafflictebtbem, 
the  mote  they  multiplieb  anb  gmi> : 
anD  they  Were  grtcucb  becaufc  of  the 
ehilbjcn  of  3fracl. 

ij  anbthcegyptiattSmabefhcchil' 
bjen  of  "Jfcacl  to  ferue  ttnth  vigour. 

14  anbtheyiuabethaeunesbitter, 
tbith  harb  bonbagc ,  in  mooter  ano  in 
bncUc,anbM  allmanerof  fcmiceinthe 
uelbe :  all  then:  fcrutcc  tbheretn  they 
inabc  them  ferae,  wasibirh  rigour. 

15  C3nbtbcBmgof€gyptfpaUe 
to  the  i^ebzeU)  mtbtblues,(of  ttihich  the 
name  of  one  ibas  £>tnph?ah » anb  the 
name  of  the  other  #uah.) 

16  ^nbhcfaib,n9henvebotheofRte 
of  a  nnbttnfc  to  the  $?cbjeib-tt>omen, 
anb  fee  them  bpon  the  ftoolcs;,  tf  it  be  a 
lbnne,thmyciballRillhttn:  butifitbe 
a  Daughtecthcn  (hec  (ball  hue. 

17  25ut  the  mibtblues  feareb  <Sob, 
anb  bib  not  as  the  Bing  ofegyptcom* 
nuinbeb  them,  but  fautb  the  men  chil- 
bzcnaiiuc. 

18  3nbthcBingof<£gypttaliebfo? 
rhcttubrbtues,rjfaibbntothem,  nahy 
haueyebonethis  thing,  anb  haue  fa* 
ueb  the  men  chilbicn  aliue  < 

19  3Cnb  themtbUnucsfaib  bnto  $ha? 
raoh,  26etaufe  the  $etyclb  ibomen  are 
not  as  the  Egyptian  tbomen :  foj  they 
are  liuely  ,anb  arc  bcliuereb  ere  the  mu> 
ibtucs  come  in  bnto  them. 

xo  XhcrefojecPob  bealt  ibelilbtth 
thenublbtues :  anb  thepeoplemnltt 
plicb  anb  tbareb  bery  mighty. 

ii  anb  it  came  to  paffc,  becaufc  the 
mibtuiues  feareb  <pob ,  that  hce  mabe 
thcinboufes. 

zz  3lnb  Pharaoh  chargeb  all  his 
people ,  faying ,  €uery  fonne  that  is 
borne,  yec  than  tall  into  theriuer,  anb 
euery  baughter  ye  than  faue  aliue. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Mofes  is  borne,  3  and  in  an  arke  caft  into 
the  flags.  5  He  is  found, and  brought  vp  by 
Pharaohs  daughter.  11  He  flaycth  an  Egyp- 
tian. 13  He  reproueth  an  Hebrew.  15  He 
fleeth  into  Midian.  %i  Hee  marrieth  Zip- 
porah.  ti  Gerfhom  is  borne.  13  God  re- 
fpe<fteth  the  Ifraelites  cry. 

9g&B®£  j3bfhcreibent*amanof 
l?§i&JeS&  fhc howft  of  Hcut, 5 toofec 
BBAlYSJ  to  wifcabauBhttr  oOLetit. 
#f/flm^  1  anbthctbomancon? 
ceiueb,  anb  bare  afonnc: 


anorbbm  (bee  faib  bun  that  bee  ibas  a 
goobly  ehilbe,  thee  *hib  himtbjtcemo 
ncths. 

j  3lnb  tbhen  (hce  toulb  not  longer 
hibehlm ,  (be  tooaefo;  bun  an  arueof 
bul-rulbes ,  anb  baubcb  it  tbttb  atme, 
anb  ttiith  piteb,ano  put  the  thilbe  there* 
in,  anb  (hee  layb  it  in  the  flags  by  the  rt 
ucrs  tyinfte. 

4-  3nb  his  filler  lloob  afarre  off,  to 
tbit  Ibhat  iboulb  be  bone  to  him. 

I  C  3mb  the  baughter  of  pharaoh 
came  boibnc  to  ibafb  her  kite  at  the  n- 
uer,  anb  her  maybens  ibalacb  along  by 
theriuer  but :  anb  lbbcn  (bee  (alb  the 
arlte  among  the  flags,(be  lent  her  maib 
to  fetch  it. 

6  3nb  lbhen  (he  hab  openeb  it,  (he 
faib  the  chUbc:anb  bcholbe,the  babe 
ibept.  3lnb  (he  bab  companion  on  him, 
anb  faio,Xbis  isoue  of  thc^cbjctbcs 
chiltyen. 

7  Xften  faib  his  utter  to  Pharaohs 
bauglner,  ;£>bau3Jgoc,anbcautothcc 
a  nurfc  of  the  ^cbzeib  n)omen,that  (l)E 
mapnurfc  thechiibcfonhcef 

8  3no  Pharaohs  baughter  faib  to 
her,  <mt :  ^nbthemaybtbentanbcai 
leb  the  thilbs  mother. 

9  3nb  Pharaohs  baughter  faib  bm 
to  her  ,Xafee  this  chilb  att>ap,anb  nurfc 
ttfo?me,anb5ibiUgiue  thee  thy  tba* 
ges.  3lnbtheibomantooucthechUbe, 
anbnurfebit. 

10  3lnb  the  chilbe  grcib ,  anb  (hee 
brought  him  bnto  0haraohs  baugh^ 
ter,  anb  he  became  her  fonne.  ^nbOje 
cailcb  his  name  ||  ^9ofes :  ^nb  (he  faib, 
©ecaufe^  bietb  hhn  out  of  the  tbater. 

II  €  3lnb  it  came  to  paffe  tn  thofc 
bapes,ibhenfl0ofestbasgrotben,that 
he  lbent  out  bnto  his  bjethttn,  anb  loo- 
Ueb  on  their  burbens ,  anb  he  fpieb  an 
egypnan  hinting  an  tyetycib,  one  of 
histyethjen. 

11  ^nb  he  looacb  this  tbaj>  anb  that 
lbap,anblbhcnbefaib  that  there  Ibas 
no  man,  he  lleib  the  Cgyptian,  anb  hib 
hlmmthefanb. 

15  3nbtt)hcnhetbcntoutthcfeeonb 
bay ,  bcljolb,  ttbo  men  of  the  ^cbzetbes 
ftroue  together  :  3tnb  hce  faib  to  him 
that  mb  the  ttwong ,  ©hercfojeOnitdl 
thou  thy  fclioib? 

14  ^nbhefaib,i©homabcthccta 
^jince  anb  a  uibgc  oucr  bs  i  intenbeft 
thou  to  Rill  me ,  as  thou  atlicbll  the  e 
gyptian;  3nb  s33ofcs  feareb,  anb  faib, 
Purely  this  thing  is  ftnotben. 

15  0aXb 


*A«s7. 
lo.hcb. 1 1 


|!  rhjt  ij, 
'Drasvir.cxt 


\Jitb.. 

Pnnu. 


MofcsinMidian.       Exodus.     The  bufh  burning. 


JOl.Pfl 


•Cl«p.i8. 


•  Gene  15 

i.)  - ■..'  )'■■ 
4- 


\Hch.i»r*. 


•A&S.7. 
SO. 


15  /froibibbcn^baraohbcarDtbis 
thing ,  be  fought  to  flap£0ofcs.  25nt 
i#ofes  flcD  from  ttjc  face  of  pharaoh, 
anDDtbelt  in  the  lanb  of  £)9iDtan:  anD 
hcfateDotbnebparbcll. 

16  flovo  the  ||  0;felt  of  £0iDtan  baD 
frucn  Daughters,  anD  tbcp  tame  attt> 
mcib  toater,  anD  filieDthcttoughesto 
\batcr  rtjttc  fathers  flo  cue. 

17  anD  tt>e  fljepbearDS  tame  anD 
Djouetbcmaibap:  but  £0ofcsttooDbp 
anD  beipcDtbcm,$lbatrcD  their  flocac. 

18  3lnD  ibben  tljrp  tame  to  3Reucl 
their  father,  bcfaiD,$oibistttbatpou 
arc  come  fo  foone  to  Dap  * 

19  anD  tfiep  fain ,  Tin  egpptian  DeK- 
ucrcDDS  out  of  the  hanD  of  the  (hep 
hearts ,  anD  alfo  D?etb  roatcr  enough 
fx3?bs,ano  lbatereDtbcflochc. 

io  anD  be  JaiDbnto  biSDaugbtcrs, 
3inD  ibbcrc  is  he  <  tbtjp  is  it  that  pec 
haue  left  the  man*  Call  him ,  tbathec 
mapcatebjeaD. 

ii  anD^ofesibastontenttobtbel 
ibiththeman,anDhcgaue^ofcsZip* 
pojab  his  Daughter. 

it  anD  (he  bare  him  a  fonne,anD  he 
taiieD  hts  name  *  45erft)om :  fo?  he  fatD, 
3  haue  bene  a  ftrangcr  m  a  ftrange 
lanb. 

23  canDittametopatreinp2otc(Ie 
ofnme,tbattbcKmgof<£gpptDtcD,anD 
tbctbiUucn  of  3Jfrael  ftghcD  bp  realbn 
of  the  bonbage,anD  tbcp  cricD,anD  thtir 
erpcamcbpbnto©oD,  bpreafonoftbe 
bonDage. 

14  anb  Goto  heart)  their  grontng, 
anD  d5oD  remcmbjcD  his  *  Coucnant 
\bith  a^abam,  ibith  ^faat,  anDibtth 
"Jacob. 

i<,  anD  <£oD  looheD  bpon  the  cbfr 
Djen  of  ^frart,  anD  d5oD  tbao  refpett 

bntO  them. 

CHAP.     III. 

1  Mofeskccpcthlcthrosflocke.  r  God  appea- 
red to  him  in  a  burning  buffo.  9  Hefendeth 
himtodcliuerlirael.  14  Thenameof  God. 
15    Hismcflagctolfracl. 

_}££  ©wc  ££ofc3  Kept  the 

:£;  $  flOCKC  Of  3Jctl120  hlS  & 

tbcrmlaib,tbe#uc(tof 
„  tpDtan :  anD  bee  icd  the 
SSg&S&li  flotfte  to  the  badtcfiDe  of 
the  Defect,  anb  came  to  the  mountamc 

Of0OD,cucntO^O2Cb. 

2  anD  the  angel  of  the  fL©«© 
appear  CD  bnto  htm,  ma  *  flame  office 
out  of  the  miDft  of  a  bnfb ,  anD  be  loo* 


fteD,  anD  beholD ,  the  bu(b  burncD  ibith 
fire,  anD  the  bum  ibas  not  confameb. 

$  anD  ^ofes  fatDe,  3  Mil  noibe 
turnc  afibe,  anD  fee  this  great  fight, 
tbbptbcbuO)  isnot  burnt. 

4  anD  Ibben  the  %$>  ir©  falbe 
that  he  turneD  afibe  to  fee,  <5oD  talleD 
bnto  him  out  of  the  rniDft  of  the  bufb, 
anD  fatD,  £0ofes,^ofes.  anbijefaiDe, 
^cteam3J. 

5  ^nb  he  fatD ,  2D?atbe  not  nigh  hi* 
ther:  *  put  off  tbp  fhooes  from  off  thr 
fcete ,  fbz  the  plate  tbherconthou  ttans 
Deu\isbolpgrounD. 

6  #o?coucr  hec  faiD ,  *  3  am  the 
<£oD  of  tbp  father,  the  d5oD  of  abza? 
bam,tbe<5oDof  3Jfaat,  anDtbedEfoDof 
'Jacob.  anD  £0orcsbtD  bis  face:  to? he 
ibasafcatD  to  loonebpon  <5oD. 

7  canDtbe!Lois©faiD,3Jbattc 
ntrclpfeenc  tbcaffltetion  of  mp  people 
\bhtth  are  in  egvpt ,  anD  haue  hcatD 
their  trie  ,bvreafon  of  their  taffee-ma? 
(Jers :  fo?  ^imoib  their  fo?rorbcs, 

8  anD^l  am  come Dolbne to Deliuer 
them  out  of  the  hanD  of  the  cgpptians, 
anD  to  tying  them  bp  out  of  that  lanb, 
bnto  a  gooD  lanD  anD  a  large,  bnto  a 
ianbe  floibtng  Ibith  mflfee  anD  honp, 
bnto  the  place  of  the  Canaanites,  anb 
the^ittttcs,anDthcamo?ttes,  anD  the 
0crt55ites,  anD  rije  pittites,  anD  the 
Jcbnfites. 

9  i?oUJtlierefo?ebcholD,thctrieof 
th  e  chilDjeu  of  3Jfrael  is  comebnto  me : 
anb  3  haue  aUb  feene  the  oppicdton 
tbljcrctbitt)  the  Egyptians  opp?effr 
them. 

io  Comcnotbthcrcfo?e,anD3Itbiu' 
fenb  thee  bnto  Pharaoh ,  that  thou 
maveft  bmtg  fojth  mp  people  the  thil^ 
Djen  of  'JIfrael  out  of  «gppt. 

n  C^nD  ©ofes  faibe  bnto  (EoD, 
tt)ho  am  3 ,  that  3  fhoulD  goe  bnto 
pharaoh,anDthat5fl)oulDbnngfotfh 
the  rhtlDztn  oHIfracl  out  of  <£gppt* 

ii  3lnDhefaiD,€erta(ntlp3JlbUlbe 
ibith  thee ,  anb  this  (hall  be  a  touen  bn> 
to  thee,  that  3  haue  fern  thee:  ©hen 
tboubatttyougbtfootththe  people  out 
of  egvpt,  ve(haliferued5oD  bpon  this 
mountaine. 

u  anDU0ofcsfaiDebnto(l5oD,2Be* 
holD,  when  3  come  bnto  the  chtlDjcn 
of  gjfract,  anD  Qjall  fap  bnto  them, 
Xhc  ©oD  of  pour  fathers  hath  fent 
me  bnto  vou ;  anD  rt)ep  (ball  fap  to  me, 
ndhat  is  his  name?  ibbat  fhall  3  fap 
bntotbenu 

14.  3(nD 


•iofli.5.15. 
aas.7.53. 


*Matth.« 

;2.»as7. 


The  Name  of  God.  Cha 


pjuj. 


Mofeshisfip;nes. 

o 


\Ox,bntj 
firttfg  hand. 


•Oup.lt. 


II  Or, Eur 


14  anb  ©00  (aide  bnto  _3ofes, 
J  340  %$%%  _J  a^anbhc 
fato,  Xhusfhait  thoufay  bnto  the chtl 
tyenof_Jfrael,_J  aS0  hathfentme 
bnto  you. 

15  anb  (5oo  faib  mojeouer  bnto  ^o- 
fes,  1_hus  (halt  thou  lav  bnto  the  thil 
bjen  of  _jfracl ,  tthe  %  ©  is  ©  ©ob  of 
your  fethers.the  ©ob  of  ab2aham,the 
©ob  of  3Jfaat,  anb the  ©00  of  _}acob 
hatl)  fentmebnto  you :  tins  is  tup  name 
fiw  euer,  anb  this  IS  my  mcmonall  bnto 
all  generations. 

16  ©oeanbgathcrthccibcrsonjf 
raeltogcther,  anbfay  bnto  them,  Hhe 
%  ©  a  v>  ©00  of  pour  fathers,  the 
©ob  of  ab;aham,  of  3Jfaat,anb  of  3 a 
cob  appcatcb  bnto  me,  faying,  3  hauc 
utrelybtfttcbyou,  anb  feenc  that  Which 
is  bone  to  you  m  _ gypt. 

17  anb  3J  hauc  faib ,  _J  ami  bung 
youbp  out  of  the  affliction  of  €  gypt, 
bnto  the  lanb  of  the  €anaamtes,anb 
tlit  pittites,  anb  the  amoj  ites,  anb  the 
^cri5Mtes,  anb  the  tyiuitcs,anb  the  3c 
bufitcs.bnto  a  lanb  flowing  With  n  uibc 
anbhony. 

18  anb  they  (hall  hearken  to  thy 
boyce:  anb  thou  (halt  tome,  thou  anb 
the tflbersof  3Jfrael bnto  the  Bingof 
Cgypt,  anb  you  (hall  fay  bnto  him, 
Hhi  Hckp  ©ob  of  the  ^eb;eibcs 
hath  met  Withbs:  anb  now  let  bs  goe, 
(Wee  befceth  thee )  thjee  bayes  iour  ncy 
into  the  tbilbernes ,  that  the  may  facet? 
uce  to  the  H  ©  is  &  our  ©ob. 

19  C  anb  3  am  furc  that  the  lung 
of  Cgypt  ttiill  not  let  you  goe ,  ||  no  not 
byannghtiehanb. 

io  anb  _J  Will  ftr  etch  out  my  hanb , 
anb  finite  €gypt  With  allmy  Wonbers 
Which  H  ttull  boc  m  the  mibft  thereof: 
anb  after  that  he  ttrtll  let  you  goe. 

ii  anb  3  Will  gme  this  people  fa- 
uour  in  the  fight  of  the  Egyptians ,  anb 
it  (hall  come  to  paffc  that  When  ye  goe, 
ye(hallnotgoc  empty: 

it  *25ut  eucry  woman  (hal  bojrow 
of  her  neighbour ,  anb  of  her  that  fo 
iournethinhcrhoufe,  icwclsof  filucr, 
anb  ieWel  s  of  golb ,  anb  rayment :  anb 
yefhall  put  them  bpon  your  fonnes  anb 
bpon  your  Daughters ,  anb  yec  (hall 
fpoile  p.  the  Egyptians. 

CHAP.  IIII. 

1  Mofcs  rod  is  turned  into  a  Serpent.  6  His 
hand  is  leprous.  10  Heisloaduobeefent. 
14  Aaron  is  appointed  to  afsift  him.  18  Mo- 


fcs departethlromlethro.  ii  Godsmeffagc 
to  Pharaoh.  14  Zippoiah  circumcifedi  her 
tonne.  1.7  Aaron  is  fent  to  meet  Mofes.  ji 
The  people  beleeueih  them. 

#b  #ofcs  anuoercb,anb 
faib,  2fiut  beholb,  they 
Will  not  beleeue mee,  no: 
hearben  bnto  my  boice : 
ftuthey  will  fay,  Xhe 
%  ©  is  t>  hath  not  appcareo  bnto  thee. 

I  anb  the  %  ©  is  5>  faib  bnto  him, 
©hat  is  that  m  thine  hanb  i  ano  hec 
faib,  a  rob. 

j  anbhcfatb,Caftitonthcgrounb: 
anb  he  raft  it  on  the  grotmb,  anb  it  be 
came  a  fetpent :  anb  $)ofes  fleb  from 
before  it. 

4-  anb the  ?L©w _*  faib  bnto  $&o> 
fes,  0utfojrh  thine  hano,anb  tane  it  by 
the  taile :  anb  he  put  fiwth  his  hanb, 
anb  caught  it,  anb  it  became  a  rob  tn  ins 
hanb: 

5  Xhat  they  may  beleeue  that  the 
fLcwD  ©ob  of  their  fathers,  the  ©ob 
of  atyaham,the  ©ob  of  3Jfaac,anb  the 
©ob  of  3Jacob  hatl;  appeareb  bnto 
thee. 

6  C  anb  the  %  ©  is  _  faib  further? 
mo;c  bnto  htm,#utnoW  thine  hanb  m? 
to  thy  bofome.  anb  he  put  his  hanb  in- 
to his  bofome:  anb  ibhen  hec  too  he  it 
out,  beholb,  his  hanb  was  leprous  as 
fhoWc. 

7  ^nb  he  fatb,  ^utthine  hanb  into 
thy  bofome  againe.  anb  hee  put  his 
hanb  into  his  bofome  againe,  anb  pluc< 
Heb  it  out  of  his  bofome,  anb  beholb,  it 
ibas  turneb  againe  ashis  other  fled). 

s  anb  tt  (hall  come  to  paffe,  if  they 
tbil  not  beleeue  thee,  ncuhtt  hcarften  to 
the  botcc  of  the  firft  figne,  that  they  Jbrtl 
beleeue  the  boice  of  the  latter  figne. 

9  anb  it  il)  all  tome  to  pa(fe,  if  they 
tbill  not  beleeue  alfo  tljcfe  ttbo  Cgnes, 
neither  hearften  bnto  thy  boice,  that 
thou  (halt  take  of  the  water  of  the  n 
uer,anb  poW;e  it  vpon  thebnc  lanb:  anb 
the  Water  Which  thou  tabed  out  of  the 
rtuer.tfhallbccomcbloobbponthcbnc 
lanb. 

10  C  anb  <©ofes  (aibe  bnto  the 
|L©iso,  ©  my  lojb,  _J  am  nottelo? 
qucnt,tieithcr  heretofoje,no?tfince  fliou 
haft  (polien  bnto  thy  feruant:  but*3J  am 
(low  of  fpeach,  anb  of  a  (low  tongue. 

II  anb  the  IL  ©isr>  faib  bnto  him, 
©ho  hath  mabc  mane  mouth.'  onuho 
mabeththebumbe  m  beafc,  01  tl)c  (ee 
mg,  ojFblutb<haucnot3Ithe1_©w©; 

f        n  ftiM 


tndjhailbt. 


of  vecr&i. 

jrjhrhj 
nor  tine e  tkt 
tktrJ<L*j, 


Mofes  and  Aaron       Exodus.         goe  to  Pharaoh. 


"Ma[th.  10 
i  9. mar. I  3. 
I  '.luk.ll. 
1  I. 


jOr,  til 

i,n. 


'Chjp.  7.  i 


P'Jw. 


12  /3otb  therefore  goc ,  anD  3  ibill 
be'ttntl)  thy  mouth,  anc  teach  t|)ce 
Tbhatthou(haltCay.  _, 

13  anbbcfaib.&my&oib.fcnD,!) 

pjap  tlKC,  by  tl)C  IjanO  ot  him  whom  thou 

llibiltfcnb. 

14.  ano  the  angtt  of  the  !L© is© 
tbas  BtnblcD  againft  £0ofes ,  anu  hee 
faiD,  3?snotaaronrhc!Lcuitethyb20; 
ther  <  j  tmotb  ttjatlje  tan  fpeafee  tbril. 
anb  aub  bcholb,  he  commcth  feonh  to 
meet  thee:  anDtt)hcnhcCccthtbcc,hce 
null  be  glab  in  his  heart. 

15  anb  thou  (halt  fpeattc  bnto  him, 
anb  put  tboibS  m  his  nioutft,anb  3J IM 

be  tbtththy  mouth ,  ^ttbitt)  his  mouth, 
anbibill  teach  youUmatycfballboc. 

is  anDhcnjalbcthyfpoBcfmanbn; 
to  the  people:  anbhcfhallbceuenhcc 
(ball be  to  theemftcab  of  a  mouth, anb 
*  thou  (halt  be  to  him  inftcabofGob. 

17  anD  thou  (halt  tase  this  rob  in 
thine  hanb,  lbhctclbith  thou  (halt  doc 
Dgnes. 

18  C  anD  £0oftS  tbent  anb  rctur; 

neb  to  'Jjethjo  his  father  tn  latb ,  anb 
faiD  bnto  him/JLctmcgoc/lJpzay  thee, 
anb  rctumc  bnto  nip  bjetwett,  tblnch 
aremegypt,anb  fee  Whether  they  bee 
yctaliuc.  anD  3Jcthzo  faiD  to  i^ofes, 
Goc  m  peace. 

19  anb  the  lUmofaib  bnto  #ofcs 
(n  i*59tDtan ,  Goe ,  returne  into  Cgrppt : 
ftwaii  the  men  are  bcab  lUljiclj  fought 
thy  life. 

zo  anD  $)ofcs  toofte  his  ibtfc ,  anb 
his  tonnes ,  anb  fct  them  bpon  an  affe, 
anbheretumeb  to  the  lanb  of  Cgypt. 
anb  fl3ofes  tooftc  the  rob  of  Gob  in 
his  hanb. 

n  anb  the  %  ouofaib  bnto  G&q-< 
lies,  nahen  thou  goeft  to  returne  into 

gypt,fcc  that  thou  bot  all  rhofc  iboit 
bers  befozc  Pharaoh ,  lbhich  3  hauc 
put  m  thutc  hanb :  but  3  ibil  harben  his 
heart ,  that  hec  (hall  not  let  the  people 
goe. 

ii  anb  thou  fl)alt  fay  bnto  0hat& 
oh,  Xhusfaith  tlidLouc^fraelis 
my  fonnc,  eueo  my  ftrft  borne. 

23  anb  31  fay  bnto  tbcclct  my  fonnc 
goc,  that  he  may  fcruc  mcc :  anb  if  thou 
tcfufc  to  let  him  goc,bcholD,3i  Null  aay 
thy  fonnc,  dun  tl)y  ftrft  bo  ?nc. 

24-  C  anD  it  tame  to  paffc  by  the 
lbay  m  the  3Jnnc,that  the  %  s> 13  r>  met 
him,anbfouglHto  lull  him. 

15  XhmHippo2AhtooHeafliarpc 
||  ftoncanb  cutoff  rhcfo2cfUmncofhcr 


fonnc ,  anb  t  caft  it  at  his  fecte ,  anb  faib , 
Cutely  a  blooby  hufbanb  art  thou  to 
mee. 

16  <&>ohclcthimgoe:thcnvhefaiD, 
a  blooby  hufbanb  thou  art,  bceaufcof 
theCtrcumclGott. 

17  canbthcfLottafaibtoaa* 
ron,  Goc  into  theibilbernetTetomcete 
£J3ofcs.  anb  hectbentanDmet  h«n  in 
tlje  mount  of  Gob ,  anb  auTeb  him. 

18  anD  £0ofcs  tolbe  aarou  all  the 
EbozDcs  of  tlje  %  ©  u  © ,  ibho  hab  Cent 
hun,  anb  ail  the  figncs  lbhich  hee  hab 
tommanbebhim. 

i9  canD£0ofcsanbaarontt>nit, 
anb  gathereb  together  all  the  ciocrs  of 
thcchilb;cnof3fracl. 

30  anbaaronfpaBcallthclboibcs 
ibhtch  the  %qkv>  habfpOBen  bnto 
£J3ofcs,  anb  DiD  the  figncs  in  the  fight  of 
the  people, 

31  anb  the  people  beleeueb  :  anD 
lbhen  they  hearb  that  the  H©ise> 
hab  bifitebthe  chilDjcn  of  3Jfrael,  anb 
that  hehablooBeb  bpon  their  affliction, 
then  they  bottKD  their  hcabsaiiD  voop 
fhippcb. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Pharaoh  chideth  Mofes  and  Aaron  for  their 
meffage.  5  Hee  encreaferh  the  Ifraelites 
taske.  15  Hee  checketh  their  complaints. 
19  They  cry  out  vpon  Mofes  and  Aaron . 
ir    Moles  complaineth  to  God. 

§*£$&§&  iB&aftcnbarDQ9otcsanD 
aaronibentui,  anbtolDc 
Pharaoh,  ^h«s  faith  the 
U©sr>  Gob  of  3Jfracl, 
..  iLct  my  people  goc,  that 
they  may  hoioc  afcaftbntomce  mthe 
ttnlbctncffe. 

1  ^nb  &haraoh  fatb ,  naho  is  the 
ILois©,  that^fhoulDobcyhtsboycc 
to  let  3Ifracl  goc;  3J  bnorb  not  the 
%  o  ED,ncithcr  ibill  3  let^fcael  goc. 

3  3nb  they faiD,  "1Chc  GOD  of  the 
fyctocibes  hath  met  ibith  bs :  let  bs 
goclbcpzay  thee,  thJCCbaycs  iournq> 
into  the  Dcfcrt ,  anD  faenfice  bnto  rlic 
!l£mr>  our  god,  left  hec  fail  bpon  bs 
lbith  pcftilcncc,  o:ibtth  the  fnwD. 

4  anbthcBingofCgyptfaiDbnto 
them,  ttJhct  fo2c  boc  ye,  £0ofes  anb  aa= 
ron,  let  tlje  people  from  thnr  ibojlics  < 
gctyoubntoyourburDcns. 

5  anD  Pharaoh  faiD ,  23cholD,  the 
people  of  the  lanbnolb  are  many, <t  you 
malic  themrcftfromtheir  burbens. 

6  anb  0haraoh  commanDcb  tlic 

fame 


tt  touch  m 


•Chap.  J. 

|8. 


Ifrael  oppreiTcd.  Chap.vj.  Godspromife 


t  H.h.lcl 
thevorkebt 
heauy  Z'pon 
tbt  men. 


\\HAr.a 
;  mutter  of  a 
(  Aaj  in  hit 
\daj. 


fame  bap  the  tafbe-maftcrsof  thepco 
plc,anb  their  offiters,fapmg  •> 

7  l*ce  Cbailno  mozc  giuc  ttjc  people 
ftralb  to  mabc  bnebe,  as  her  ctof  ojc :  let 
them  goc  anb  gather  ftraib  foithem" 
felues. 

8  3nbthctalcofrt)cbucbestbhich 
thep  bib  mabc  herctofoie ,  pou  (hall 
lap  bpon  them :  pou  (hall  not  bimmiQ) 
ought  thereof:  fiw  thep  be  tblc ;  thetefiuc 
the?  crp,  feeing,  Hct  bs  goc  and  facn&ec 
toour<Sob. 

9  t  fLct  there  mo?c  tbojbe  be  lav&c 
bpon  tt)c  men,  that  thep  map  labour 
therein,  anb  let  them  not  regarbbatnc 
uwbes. 

io  C5(nb  tfjc  tafbe-mafters  of  the 
people  Vbcnt  out,  anb  their  offuers.anb 
thep  fpabc  to  the  people,  taping,  Xhus 
faith  pharaoh ,  3  ttfl*  not  giuc  pou 
ftralb. 

n  ci5oc  pe,  get  pou  ftraib  tbherc  pou 
tan  finb  ft:  vet  not  ought  of  pout  ibo?l$e 
fballbcbimmithcb. 

ii  £>o  the  people  iberc  ftattetcb  a* 
bjoab  throughout  al  tl)c  lano  of  egppt, 
to  gather  (nibble  mftcab  of  ttratb. 

ij  3lnb  the  tafbc  -mailers  hafteb 
them,  (aping ;  if  ulfill  pour  ibozbcs,  pour 
t  baplp  taf bes ,  as  tbhen  there  lbas 
ftralb. 

14  2nbthc  officers  ofthcehtlbjcn  of 
5fracl,ia>l)ftl)  Pharaohs  tafb-maftcrs 
Dab  fctouer  tl)em,tberc  beaten ,  and  nt 
manbeb,  B@herefo?e  haue  penot  fulfil 
leb  pour  taftte,  in  mabing  bntbc ,  both 
pcftccbap  anb  to  bap,as  herctofoie  < 

15  C  Xhcn  the  officers  of  the  ehfl 
bjen  of  Jfrael  tame  anb  trpeb  bnto 
Pharaoh ,  taping ,  n9l)crefo?e  bcaieft 
thou  thus  Ibith  tbp  fcruants; 

16  Xhereisno  ftralb  giuen  bnto  thp 
fcruants ,  anb  thep  fap  to  bs ,  ^9abc 
bnebe :  anb  beholbc,  thp  fcruants  arc 
beaten ;  but  ttjc  fault  is  m  thine  otbne 
people. 

17  26utl)tfaib,J3careiblc,vearcii)ic: 
therefore  pc  fap,  3Let  bsgocandtjocfa; 
tnntctotl)c1L©«B. 

18  ©oe  therefore  notb  and  ibojbc: 
fo?  there  Cbail  no  ftralb  bee  giuenpou, 
^tt  fljali  pc  beliucr  the  tale  of  bucbes. 

19  3lnb  the  officers  of  the  chiHHen  of 
5jfratl  bib  fee  that  the?  mere  in  cuiU 
tafe, after  it tbas  faib ,  Ptt  (hall not mfc= 
m(h  ought  from  pour  bzicbcs  of  pour 
baplp  tafbe. 

20  C3lnb  thep  met  33ofcs  anb3la? 
ton ,  ibl;o  floob  m  the  ibap ,  as  tljep 


camefoojth  from  Pharaoh. 

ii  3nb  tbep  faib  bnto  than;  Xhe 
|Ls>i533loobcbponpou,anouibgc,bC' 
caufe  pouhaucmabc our  fauour '  to  be 
abhoitcb  in  the  epesof  pharaoh,  anb 
in  the  epes  of  his  fcruants,  to  put  a 
fajojb  in  their  hanb  to  flap  bs. 

11  3nb  fi$)ofcs  rcturncb  bnto  the 
ILo  kd,  anb  faib,  H.o2b,  nahcccfoic 
haft  thou  locuill  mtrcateb  this  people; 
rbhp  is  ft  that  thou  haft  Cent  me  i 

2 ?  5foi  Gntc  3  came  to  pharaoh  to 
fpeabcinthpi!5amc,  he  hart)  bone  euill 
tothispeoplc ,  neither  haft  thou  t  Deli? 
ucrcbthp  people  at  all. 

chap.  vr. 

1  Godrenuedihis  proinife  by  his  Name  I  E- 
HOVAH.  14  The  genealogic  of  Reu- 
beii,  15  of  Simeon,  16  ofLeui,ofwhom 
came  Mofes  and  Aaron. 

tycn  the  |Lo«5c»  faibbtv 
to  £0ofes  ,  iI2oib  (bait 
thoufcelbhat^ibiUDoc 
to  pharaoh  :  foz  Vbith  a 
ftrong  hanb  (hall  Dec  let 

them  goc,  anb  ibith  a  fttong  hanb  (hall 

hebnuc  them  out  of  his  lanb. 
z   3lnb  ©00  fpabebnto  flPofcs,  anb 

faib  bnto  him,3J  am  the  %  $>  &  v> 

3  ^no^J  appcareb  bnto  3bjaham, 
bnto  3|faat ,  anb  bnto  3Jacob ,  bp  th 
Name  ot  ©ob  3llmightp ,  but  bp  mp 
name  i  e  h  o  v  a  h  njas  3  not  bnolbcn 
to  them. 

4  ^nb  3  haue  alfo  tftabhfhcb  mp 
Coucnant  ibith  them,  to  giuc  them  the 
lanb  of  Canaan,the  lanb  oftheir  pilgn 
magclbher  cm  thep  iber  e  ftr angers. 

5  3lnb  3  haue  alfo  hcarb  the  gro 
nmg  of  the  rhilbzcn  of  31fracl,  ibhom 
ti)t  egppnans  beepe  in  bonbage:anb 
3  haucremembjeb  mp  Coucnant 

6  nahcrcfojc  fav  bnto  the  chilbzcn 
of  3ifrael,  3  am  the  Hois  © ,  anb  33 
Ibill  bang  pou  outfrombubcr  the  bur 
bens  of  the  cgpptians,  anb  3  will  rib 
pou  out  of  their  bonbagc :  anb'Jibill 
rcbecme  pou  ttnth  a  ftrctchtb  out  armc , 
anb  ibith  great  mbgements. 

7  ^nb5!ttilltabcpoutomccfoja 

pcoplcanbljl  Ibill  be  to  pou  a  (5ot) :  anb 
pc  (hall bnoib  that  3  am  the  iloko 
pour  d5ob ,  lbh'.ch  bjmgcth  pou  out 
from  bnberthe  burbens  of  the  egpp; 
nans. 

8  3tnb31  ibtll  bnngpoufn  bnto  the 

lanbc  concerning  the  ibhuh  3  ™ 
f  z  tfdjrarf 


\Hchr  II 
hnkf 


\Htb.d,h- 

venng  then 
haft  not  dr~ 
Inter  td. 


Mofesisfcnt 


Exodus.         tokmgPharaoh. 


i  a.i.iift 

-p  mj  kxnd. 


'#    of  I 
HrAilncl. 


"Gtn^.o 

z.chro. y.;. 


"  i.Chron. 
f'4' 


•Num.;. 17 
1  thion-tf.i 


•Mum.  16. 
57.  i.chro. 
6.1. 


!,jp.2.1 

11.j4.5J 


t  frocar  c  to  giue  it,  to  abtfbam,  to  33fa 
ac,  anb  to  3Jacob,anb3  ibul  giue  tt  pou 
fo:  an  heritage^  am  tbeHois©. 

9  c^nb^ofesfpa&etbbntotbe 
cbilbjtn  ofJJftaet :  but  tbcp  bearbcncb 
not  bnto  £H5otcs,  fojtanguift)  of  fptrtt, 
anDfoitrucllbonbage. 

10  anortKlLaiaDfpafeebnto^os 
fcs,  taping, 

11  00c  in,  fpcatte  bnto  pbaraob 
Bing  of  <£gppt,tbat  Dcletrtjc  thilbmi 
ofjfracl  got  out  of  !)is  lanb. 

12  anb  #ofes  fpafee  bcfoje  the 
2,  ©«  ©,tapmg,  zscbolb,  tbcebflbzen 
of  gjfrarlbaue  not  bcartcncb  bnto  me: 
boll)  then  thai  Pharaoh  Ijcarc  mc,lbbo 
am  of  bnrtrctimafeb  ups< 

13  anb  the  lUDKofpaac  bnto  99ofcs 
anbbntoaaron,  eigauethcma  charge 
bnto  the  tbilbzen  of  3Jfracl ,  anb  bnto 
pbaraob  Btng  of  <£gppt,  to  tying  the 
cbtityen  of  3Jfracl  out  of  the  lanb  of  e 
gppt. 

14  circle  be  the  bcabs  of  their  fa* 
rbets  boufcs :  *  Xbc  fonnes  of  ftcuben 
the  tall  borne  of  3Ifrael,5?anorb,  anb 
Pailu,  tycoon,  anb  Carnu :  theft  be  rtjc 
famines  of  Jfteubcn. 

15  *  anb  the  founts  of  Simeon  :%t> 
muel,  anb^Jamm,  anb£)babanb3lai 
chm,  anb  Zobat,  anb  £>baul  the  tonne 
of  a€anaanm(blboman:  tbefearctbe 
families  of  £>uncon. 

i6  canbtbefc  arc  the  names  of  the 
*  fonnes  of  Hew,  acwbtngto  their  ge= 
titrations :  ©crfljon  anb  Bobarb  anb 
£0ctart :  anb  tt)c  pceres  of  tfjc  Itfe  of 
ILcui,  ibere  an  buntyeb,  tbirttc  anb  fc 
uenpecrcs. 

17  Xbc  fonnes  of  ©erfbon :  ILibni 
anb  £>himt,  atcozbmg  to  their  families. 

is  anb*  the  tonnes  of  Bobattyanis 
tarn,  anb  33bar,  anb  fccbion,  anb  3Uy 
5icl.  ano  the  pceres  of  the  life  of  Bo^ 
barb,tt>ctc  an  buntycD  tbirtic  anb  thiec 
peetcs. 

19  anb  t!)c  fonnes  of  £)9erari :  ^a- 
baii  anb  fl}9ufl)i:tbcfc  are  the  families  of 
2,eui,  accbzbing  to  their  generations. 

20  anb * amram toobc  bun3!otbc-' 
bco  bis  fathers  filter  to  lbtfc,  anb  (bee 
bare  Dim  aarou  anb  (©ofes:  anb  the 
pecrcs  of  tne  life  of  amram  iberc  an 
puntycb ,  anb  tlnrnc  anb  feucn  peer  cs. 

21  C  anb  the  tonnes  of 'tjtfjat:  Bo- 
rah anb  #2cphcg,aub  Zictyf. 

22  anb  the  fonnes  of  Cl^iel :  £p)i- 
fl)acl,anDCt5apnan,anb  zitftfi. 

xi  ana  aacon  tooae  him  CUfbeba 


baughtcr  of  ammmabab  Gtter  of  if5a^ 
a(bon  to  ttHft,  anb  (be  bare  him  iiSabab 
anbabibu,c  iea5ar  anb  IJthamar. 

24.  anbtbefonncsofBo2ab,aCur, 
anb  eibanab,anb  abiafaph :  ttjefe  *« 
the  families  of  the  B02bitcs. 

15  anb  cicasaraarons  tonne  toofec 
htm  one  of  the  Daughters  of  panel  to 
ttnfe,  anb  *  (be  bare  him  pbtnebas : 
tbefcaretbcbcabsoftbe  fathers  of  the 
ILcuitcs,  attoibmgto  thcirfamrtles. 

16  3Chcfe  are  that  ^arott  anb  ££o< 
fts,torbhomthe  ^©a&falb,  Bung 
out  the  ebilbien  of  3frael  from  the  lanb 
of  egvpt,attoibuigto  their  armies. 

27  ILbefe are  tDtP  ibhitt)  tpafte  to 
0baraob  bmg  of  Cgypt,  to  tying  out 
the  cbUbjen  of  ^frari  from  tfgypt: 
Xhefcarethats^ofcsanbaaron. 

2s  C^nbtttame  to  pafTe  on  the  bap 
Vbben  the  1La)«o  fpane  bnto  fl^ofes 
tntheianbofcgppt, 

29  Xhat  the  ^.©tt©  fpanc  bnto 
^ofes ,  tapmg ,  J}  am  the  1L©«© : 
fpcaticthou  bnto  pharaoh  lung  of  €- 
gppt,  all  that  31  fap  bnto  thee. 

30  anb#ofestaibbcfo?ethe1L©ai3, 
25eholb ,  31  am  of  bntlrtumttfcb  lips, 
anb  hoib  thall  ph^raoh  heat&cn  bnto 
mec^ 

CHAP.    VIL 

1  Mofes  is  encouraged  to  go  to  Pharaoh.  7  Hrs 
age.  8  His  rod  is  turned  into  a  Serpent.  11 
The  forcerers  do  the  like.  13  Pharaohshean 
isrurdened.  t4  Gods  meflage  to  Pharaoh. 
19  The  riuer  is  turned  into  blood. 

/pb  the  iL^isa  fatotm* 

tofi0ofes,S»ee,  5haue 

mabc  thee  a  gob  to  pba^ 

raoh,  anb^aronthptyO' 

thcrdjaibcthp  prophet. 

2  1Lhou  fhalt  fpeafte  all  that  J 

commanotbec,  anb^atonthphiother 

(hail  fpea&c  bnto  pharaoh,that  hefenb 

the  cbtlb2cn  of  'Jlfraci  out  of  his  lanb. 

j  ^nb  3J  ibill  harben  Pharaohs 
heart,  anb  multiplie  mp  fignes  anb  mp 
ibonbcrs  m  the  lanb  of  Cgppt. 

4-  But  Pharaoh  than  not  hearten 
bnto  pou,  that  3Jmapiapmpbanbbp* 
one  gppt,anb  biing  fo;th  mtne  armies, 
and  mp  people  flic  ebilbien  of  3lfrael, 
out  of  the  lanb  of  Cgppt,  bp  great  tubg- 
ments. 

5  anb  the  Cgppttans  fl)all  snolbc 
that  3J  am  the  %  o  a  s>,  ibhen  5  ttrctrb 
fb2th  mtne  hanb  bpon  <sgppt,anD  b;ing 

out 


•Num.ij. 
It. 


The  rod  aferpent.     Chap.viij.         Bloody  waters. 


out  tfte  ct)iUuai  of Jumi  front  among 
tl)cm. 

6  anDs$ofcsauD  "Eaton  Did  as  tl;e 
JL-fl)  as  eommanDcD  thcm,fo  Did  tbep. 

7  anDUPofesmasfoutcfcojepcrcs 
olbc,  anD  aaron  foureftojc  anD  tfyee 
pecrcs  olD,ttljen  tljrp  fpafec  tonto  $l)a 
taol). 

8  C  anD  (Jje  %$>& ©  fpane  bnto 
$)ofcs,anD  bnto  aaron,faping: 

9  uaiic n  pbarao!)  fballfpeafce  bnto 
pou,fapmg,  ;S>hcib  auuratlefojpou: 
ttontl)ou  (bait  lap  bnto  aaron,  Xa&e 
tbptob  anotatttt  before  pljatao!),  and 
it  (bail  become  a  fcrpent. 

io  canD  £0ofcs  anD  aaron  ibcnt 
in  Unto  pl)ataol),anD  tljrp  did  fo  as  roe 
ILojDfjaD  commanDcD:anDaatonta(t 
ootbne  l)is  toD  before  ^ftaraoD ,  anD 
before  bis  fctuants ,  anD  it  bctanic  a 
fetpent. 

ii  %\)m  0!)araol)  alfo  talleD  roc 
ibtfe  men  anD  ti)e  fosterers ;  noib  tbc 
tBagicians  of  €gppt ,  the?  alfo  did  in 
u&emanetibttt)  tneit  enchantments. 

it  jfoj  tljep  tatt  Doibne  nictp  man 
DistoD,  anD  tbep  became  Ccrpcnts:  but 
aatonsroDfroailotbcDbp  tbcittoDs. 

ij  ^nD  l)ce  hatDencD  ^Ijataolis 
beart ,  tbat  Ijcc  beatbeneD  not  bnto 
tljcm ,  as  tl)c  %  o  is  d  l)ao  faiD. 

14  G  3lnD  roc  H© gd  faiDe  bnto 
fi^ofes  ,^ataons  Ijeatt  isljatocneD : 
t)e  r  efufctb  to  let  ttjc  people  got, 

15  Get  tJjec  bnto  p&araob  (n  tf)c 
moming,loc,bcgoero  out  bnto  tbctba; 
tec ,  anD  tbou  (bait  ftanD  bp  tbc  nuers 
bnnftc .  agamtt bee  tome: anD tt)e roD 
ibbtct)  tbas  tutncD  to  a  fetpent,  ftjalt 
ti)outaRcuttI)incnanD. 

16  anD  tbou  (bait  fap  bnto  Dim, 
%X\t  flam©  <I5oD  of  tt)c  ??eb/eibes 
natn  fent  me  bnto  tbec,  faping,  iLct  mp 
people  goe,  tbat  rtjtv  map  ferue  nice  m 
rocMlDcrncfTe :  anD  bebolDc ,  hittjerto 
tijoutboulDeftnothcatc. 

17  innisfaitbtbelLcms/Jntftis 
tbou  Q)alt  tmolb  tl)at3I  am  tnclLouc: 
bebolD,  %  ibill  fmitc  tbiro  rtje  too  tbat 
isin  mpbanb  ,bpon  tbctbatersibhiro 
arctnroettucr,  anD  thepCbalbctuntcD 
toblooD. 

18  anD  t!)c  fid)  ttjat  is  in  rtjc  tract 
fbailDic,  anD  tl)e  ttner  (ball  QmtfecanD 
tl)c€gpptians  (ball  loartjc  to  Dnn&c  of 
tlictbatctoftbcnutt. 

19  C  3nD  tbe  %  ©a  ©  fpahc  bnto 
fi|9ofcs,£>ap  bnto  aaron,  Xabe  tbp 
toD,$fttettl)outtbinc  IjanD  bpon  tJ)c 


tbaters  of  €gppt,bpon  rocit  fttcanics, 
bpon  rtjeic  nuers ,  anD  bpon  tbett 
ponDs ,  anD  bpon  all  tljeir  t  pooles  of 
water ,  tbat  rtjrp  map  bctome  bloob, 
anD  roat  tljcre  map  be  blooD  though/- 
outalltbclanD  of  egppt,  botbmveiieis 
of  ibooD.anDmvefleisot  ftone. 

to  anDi©ofcsanDaaronDiDfo,as 
tbe&oK©  commanDeD:  anD  be  *uft 
bp tbe toD  anD  fmote  rt)c  tbaters  tbat 
ibere  inttje  nuer,  lit  trje  figljt  of  i&b& 
taon.anDin  trjc  figDt  of  bis  fctuants: 
anDalitnc'ibaterstbat  ibere  mtl)e  xv 
uer.rbcretumcDtoblooD. 

21  ^nD  rt)c  ftflj  ttjat  was  tn  t!)e  riiter 
DieD :  anD  tlje  nuer  ftunbe ,  anD  tfyt& 
gvpttans  conlD  not  Dnnbc  of  trjc  Vbatcr 
of  ti)t  nuer :  anD  tncre  Vbas  blooD 
tl)2ougl)outailtl)elanD  of  Cgypt. 

z%  *  3lnD  tlje  fi0agmans  of  «ffgvpt 
DtD  fo,  rpitt)  tl)eit  nicbantmcnts :  anD 
l&baraobs  rjcart  lbas  batDcneD ,  net* 
tljct  DID  be  neac&en  bnto  tljem,  as  ttjc 

JL©KBl)aDfaiD. 

13  anD  pbavaol)  turncD  anD  tbtnt 
into  bis  boufe,  neither  Did  fjee  fet  bis 
beart  to  tins  alfo. 

24.  anD  all  tbe  Cgppnans  DtggcD 
rounD  about  rtje  tiuer  foi  rbater  to 
Dnnbc :  fo?  ri)ep  coulD  not  Djin&c  of  tlje 
lbateroftbcnucT. 

25  anD  feucn  oapes  ibcre  fulfilleD 
after  ttjattlje  ?,£>«©  IjaD  fnutten  tb.e 


twer. 


CHAP.    VIII. 


t  m.  g„ 

thmngof 
cbnt  wa~ 


•Chap.  17. 


•Pfal.78. 
44- 


Froggessrefcnt.  8  Pharaoh  fueth  to  Mofes, 
12.  and  Mofes  by  prayer  remoueth  thein  a- 
way.  \6  The  dull  is  turned  into  lice,  which 
the  Magicians  could  not  doe.  20  The 
(warmes  of  flies.  15  Pharaoh  inclineth  to 
let  the  people  goe,    32.   but  yet  is  hardened. 

BD  tlje  H©iio  fpalte 
bnto  fi^ofes ,  C5oc  bnto 
^baraob  ,  anD  Cap  bnto 
font ;  Xbns  fapetb  t\)t 
_  llotto ,  !Lct  mv  people 
goc,tbat  tbev  map  fcruc  me. 

2  aiiDiftbourcfufetolettbemgoc, 
bcl)olDe ,  3  ibill  finite  all  tl)p  bo?Dcts 
tbuljftoggcs. 

j  ano  tlje  nuer  fljall  bnng  fooitb 
ftogges  abuuDantlp ,  lbbtcb  ftjallgoc 
bp  anD  come  into  tljme  boufe,  anD  m* 
to  rt)p  bcD  -  cbamber ,  anb  bpon  tbp  btD, 
aiiDintotbcboufc  of  tny  fctuants,  anD 
bpon  ttjp  people ,  anD  into  tl)me  ouens, 
aiiDmtotbP  llancaDing  ttougljes. 

f  5  ±  anD 


Wif.17.7 


ij  Or,  dougk 


PI; 


ap-ucso 


ffrogges,      Exodus.         oflyce,offlyes 


•wua.17. 

7- 


]  Or  h&te 
his  honour 

0H:rmc,&c 

I)  0rt  agitinfl 
'ben. 

|  Hebr.to 

cut  of. 
Ortagxinn 


4  2inb  the  frogges  (hall  tonic  top 
both  on  thee,  anb  topon  tiyp  people,  anb 
upon  all  thpfcruants. 

5  <[  anb  the  fL©ia©fpafee  tonto 
t$ofcs ;  £>ap  tonto  aaron ,  Stretch 
fooith  thine  hanb  tbith  thprotobeoucr 
rheftccames.oucrthc  nucrs,anboucr 
the  ponbs,anb  eaufe  frogges  to  tome 
top  topon  the  lanb  of  <£gppt. 

6  3lnb  3taron  ttretchcb  out  his 
hanb  ouct  the  waters  of  tfgppt ,  anto 
the  frogges  tame  top,  anto  coucrcbthc 
lanbofcgppt. 

7  *  anb  tl)C  $)agirians  toil)  To  tbith 
rtjetc  inchantments ,  anto  b?ought  top 
frogges  bpon  the  lanto  oftfgppt. 

8  C  Xhcn  pharaoh  tailcto  fo?  flJ9o- 
fcs.anbaaron,  anto  faito,  Entreat  the 
1L  o  a  © ,  tfjat  Dec  map  tauc  aitoap  the 
froggesfrommcantofrommp  people: 
anDjltoiU  letthepcoplegocthatthcp 
map  tooc  famfice  tonto  tfjc  H  ©  is  &. 

9  3lnb  UBofes  faitoe  tonto  pharaoh, 
||  (5loiv  oucr  >"ce :  Wen  fljall  3  ens 
treat  fo?tt)cc ,  anb  fo?  thpfcruants,  anb 
fo?  thp  people  ,to  tbeftrop  tl)c  frogges 
from  thec  >  anto  thp  houfes,  thatthep 
map  remainc  m  the  riucr  ottelp  i 

10  stnbhefaib,  ||Xo  mo?rotb.  3iib 
hec  fatD ,  Bee  it  acto?buig  to  thp  ibo?b : 
Zhat  thou  mapeft  tmotti  that  there  is 
none  hue  tonto  trje  %  ©  «  d  our  <z>ob. 

n  3lnb  the  frogs  (hall  Depart  from 
thee,  anto  from  thp  houfes ,  anto  from 
thp  fctuants ,  anto  from  thp  people  ■> 
ftjep  (hall  r  cmaine  in  the  riucr  onclp. 

u  3nto fi^ofes anto  aaronitocnt out 
from  pharaoh ,  anb  €9ofcscrteb  tonto 
tl)t  ILckd  toccaufcof  thefcogstbhich 
hchabb?ought  againft  pharaoh. 

13  anb  the  !L©tfDbibacco?bing 
to  the  itoo?b  of  £0ofcs :  anto  the  frogges 
Diet)  out  of  the  houfes  ,  out  of  the  toil* 
iagcs,anb  out  of  the  ficltos. 

14.  anto  tljcv  gathcrcb  them  toge- 
ther topon  hcapcs,anb  the  lanto  ftanue. 

1$  26ut  itohcn  pharaoh  fatto  that 
there  ltoas  r  efptt,  he  hartoncto  his  heart, 
anto  hearucneb  not  tonto  them,  as  the 
|L©K©habfaib. 

i6  c  3mb  the  %  ©wr>  faibc  tonto 
93ofcs,£>ap  tonto  aaron,  Stretch  out 
thp  roto ,  anto  finite  the  butt  of  the  lanto, 
that  it  map  brtomc  Utc,  fho?olboutall 
thcianbofcgypr. 

17  anb  thev  bib  fo :  foz  aaron  frrct 
thtb  out  his  hanb  itotth  his  rob ,  anb 
(more  the  bull  of  the  cart!) ,  anb  it  toe* 
tame  lite ,  m  man  anbm  bead :  all  the 


bull  of  the  lanb  became  lice  throughout 
ailthclanbof<£gppt. 

is  anb  the  Magicians  bib  fo  itoith 
their  enchantments  to  b?ing  foo?th  lice, 
but  the?  coulb  not :  fo  there  tbcre  lice 
topon  man  anb  topon  bead. 

19  Zhcn  the  Magicians  faib  tonto 
pharaoh ;  Xhis  >5  the  finger  of  C5ob. 
5lnb  pharaohs  heart  ltoas  harbneb, 
anbhehearuenebnottontothem,asthe 
ILuDttohabfaib. 

xo  c^lnb  the  ?L©ia&  taiDe  tonto 
a^ofes  ,©u1e  top  carlp  in  the  morning, 
anb  ftanb  before  pharaoh :  loe,  he  com* 
methfootfhto  therbater.anb  Cap  tonto 
him .  Xhus  faith  the  %  o  u  o,  Het  mp 
people  goe.thatthepmapfcrueme. 

ii  cis.tfthoutbtitnotletmppeo* 
pic  gocbcholbe  3  itoill  fenb  ||  ftoarmes 
of  flics  topon  thee ,  anto  topon  thp  frr 
uants,  anb  topon  thp  people,  anto  into 
thp  houfes :  anb  the  houfes  of  the  e* 
gpptians  than  bee  full  of  ftuarmes  of 
flics.anb  aifo  the  groimbibhcrcon  tljtp 
are. 

ii  ^nb3Jtbfllfeuerm  that  toap  the 
lanbe  of  d5o(hen  in  ibhich  mp  people 
bitoell,  that  no  ftoarmes  of  flics  ml\  be 
there,  to  the  cub  thou  mated  ftnotb  that 
3J  am  the  JLdk©  in  the  nutott  of  the 
earth- 

1$  3lnb  3  tbfll  put  t  a  Diuifion  be* 
truccne  mp  people  anb  thp  people:  ||to 
mo?r  oito  Cliall  this  ftgne  be. 

14  ^nb  the  %  ©  »  ©  bib  lb  :  anb 
*  there  came  agrtcuousfiuarmeof  flies 
mto  the  houfc  of  phataoh»anb  into  hts 
fcruants  houfes,  anb  into  all  the  lanbe 
of  cgppt :  the  lanb  ltoas  J  co?rupteb  bp 
rcafon  of  the  ftuarmc  of  flics. 

15  C3nb  Pharaoh  callcb  fo?  #0* 
fes  anb  fo?  3laron,  anb  faib,  d5oe  pee,  fa* 
enfice  to  pour  <5ot>  in  the  lanb. 

i6  ^nbflpofesfaib,3ltisnotmeetc 
fo  to  boe ;  fo?  itoc  a)al  fecrifitc  the  atoomt 
nation  of  the  egppnans,  to  the  IL©kb 
our  ©ob :  Hoc,  (hall  ltocfacrtficethea^ 
bomtnation  of  the  €gpptians  bcfo?c 
their  cpes,anbitoillthcpnotftonetos* 

17  nacitoill  goc  th?cc  naves ioimiep 
intothcltollbcrncffe,  anbfacnficctothc 
1L©kd  our  00b,  as  *  he  (hall  conv= 
manbtos. 

13  3nbpharaohfaib,3Jttoillctpou 
goc  that  pe  map  faenfice  to  the  H  ©  k  1? 
pour  (5ob,  in  tfjc  ttotlbemcs :  onelp  pou 
(hall  not  goc  tocrp  farrc  aitoap ;  mtceate 
fo?me. 

i9  ^nb  SPofcs  faib,  26cholb, 3}  goc 
out 


Or,  A  mix- 
ture cfttoy. 
fomc  buSl:, 


t  Hebr-a  re- 
dcmnticn. 

mcrroTP, 


vna.it. 


\\Or,ie. 
jhcjti. 


•Chap-?- 
IS. 


of  themurraine,         Chap.ix.     Pharaoh  obftinatc. 


out  from  thee,  anb  3?  unll  intreate  ttje 
%  ©  is  ©  that  ttje  froarmes  of  flies  ma? 
Depart  from  0haraoh,  from  his  Cer* 
uants,anb  from  his  people  to  morroib : 
but  let  not  Pharaoh  beale  beceitfully 
any  more,  m  not  letting  the  people  goe 
to  facrifice  to  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

30  3Cnb  S0ofes  ibent  out  from  pha- 
raoh,anbintrcatebthe  ?L©is©: 

31  3mDthclL©is©DiDactorDingto 
thcVborb  of  fiJMes:  anb  heremooueb 
the  froarmes  of  flies  from  ^haraoh, 
from  |)is  feruants,anD  from  his  people: 
there  r  en  uuueb  not  one. 

31 3mD$haraohharbracbhtsheart 
at  this  tunc  alfo,  neither  tboulbhcclet 
tfje  people  goe. 

CHAP.     IX. 

1  The  murraine  of  beafts.  8  The  plague  of 
boyles,  and  blaines.  13  His  meflage  about 
the  haile.  u.  The  plague  of  haile.  2.7  Pha- 
raoh fueth  to  Mofes,  35  but  yet  is  hardened. 

ggfeaggg)  ^cn  ti)c  fL  ©  »  ©  faib  bnto 
#ofes,  (Soembntqteha; 
raoh,  ano  tell  him,  Xhus 
faith  the?L©is©  <5on  of 

s-sJSt^s  the  $ebrcibes ,  !tet  my 
people  goe,  that  they  may  frrue  me, 

1  jFor  if  rijou  refufc  to  let  them  goe, 
ano  tbtlt  holt)  them  (Ml, 

3  25el)olD, the hanb of thell jdks 
tsbponthycattcll  ibhieh  tsmthefietD, 
bpon  the  horfrs,  bpon  the  alles,  bpon 
thcramcls,  bpon  the  oren,  ano  bpon 
the (hcepc:  there fhaii  be  a bcry gneuous 
murrain*. 

4.  3utDthe|L©KD(hallfcuerbe 
ttbecne  the  tattel  of  3fracl,anb  the  tat? 
tell  of  <£gypt ,  ano  tfierc  (hall  nothing 
Die  of  all  that  is  the  thilDrens  of  3?  ftaei 

5  ^nu  thcH  ©  a  ©  appointee  a  fet 
time,  faying,  Xo  morroib  the  |L  ©  is  © 
(hall  Doe  this  thing  m  the  lanD. 

6  3nD  the  %  ©  is  ©  did  that  thing 
onthemozrottj,  anD  ailthecattcllof  e= 
gypt  DieD,  but  of  the  tattell  of  the  ctjil- 
bren  of  IJfraelDieD  not  one. 

7  #nb0haraohfcnt,anDbeholDe, 
there  ttias  not  one  of  the  tattell  of  the 
35fraelitesbeaD.3lr.Dthehcartof$h2 
raohrbasharDcncD,  anD  he  did  not  let 
the  people  goe. 

s    €  3no  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiDe  bnto 
£0ofes,  anD  bnto  $aron ,  Xafee  to  yon 
hanDfulsof  albes  of  the  fomacc,  ansj 
let  fi^ofes  fpnnHlc  tttoibarDs  the  hca- 
urn,  m  tl;e  Bght  of  ^haraoh  • 


9  2nD  it  (hall  bee ome  fmall  butt  in 
all  the  lanD  of  <£gypt ,  anD  (hall  bee  a 
boyle  breaking  fo;rh  with  blames,  bpon 
man  anD  bpon  beau\throughout  all  the 
lanbof€gypt 

io  3lnD  they  tooRe  afhes  of  the  for- 
nace,  ano  (looD  before  Pharaoh ,  anD 
SJMesJpnnfcUD  it  bp  toibarb  heaucn : 
anb  it  became  a  boilc  brcaRingforth  Wlth 
blamcs,bponman  anD  bpon  bead. 

u  31nD  the  Vaginalis  toulD  not 
ttanb  before  ^ofes ,  bctaiu"c  of  the 
boilcs:fortheboilcibas  bpon  the  ma 
gtc»ans,anbbponallthc<£gypfians. 

ii  3nb  the  |L©«©  haroencD  tl)e 
heart  of  Pharaoh,  anD  hec  hcarfeeneD 
not  bnto  than  /  as  the %  ©  k  d  hao 
fpouenbntofipofes. 

13  C#nD  the  ft  ©is©  faiDc  bnto 
fl^ofes,  Sifebp  earclv  m  t\)c  morning, 
anD  ftanD  before  Pharaoh  ,ano  fay  bnto 
him,  Xhus  faith  the  ILcdud  <sod  of 
thct>ebretbes,1Letmy  pcoplcgoc,  that 
they  may  feme  mc. 

14  fw  3  Will  at  this  time  fenb  all 
my  plagues  upon  thine  heart , anD  bpon 
thy  fcruaunts ,  anD  bpon  thy  people  : 
that  thou  mayeft  tmoVbc  that  there  is 
none  Ubc  mem  all  the  earth. 

15  fo;  nolb  3J  ibill  ftrttth  out  my 
l)anD ,  that  3  may  fmitc  thee  anD  thp 
people,  ibithpclhlentc,  anD  thou  (halt 
be  rut  off  from  the  earth. 

16  ^nbtnbery  Dccoe,  C02  *rt)is  caufe 
bauc  5 f  raifeb  thee  bp ,  fo;  to  (heibe  m 
tljeemypolbcr^nDthatmynamemav 
bebctlarcD  throughout  all  the  earth. 

17  ^s  yet  eraitcft  thou  ttw  feife  a^ 
gamft  my  people,  that  tijoulbilt  not  let 
them  goe  i 

18  26cholD ,  to  tuojrolb  about  this 
nme,  %  Boil  raufe  it  to  rainc  a  bcry  gnc 
uous  haile,  furh  as  hath  not  bene  m  € 
gypt,  (mte  the  founoanon  thereof  cucn 
bntUlnotb. 

19  5»cnb  therefore  nolb,  anb  gather 
thy  tattell,  ano  all  that  thou  hall  mtbe 
ftelb  :  for  vpon  euery  man  anb  bead 
ibhirh  (hal  be  founb  in  the  fielD,anb  fljai 
not  bee  brought  home ,  the  haile  (hall 
tome  DoKme  bpon  them,  anb  they  (hall 
Die. 

zo  ^ectftat  fearcb  the  tborb  of  the 
1L©»©  amengftthefcruantsof  0ha 
raoh,maDchis  feruantsanb  his  tattel! 
flee  into  the  houfes. 

11  Znn  he  that  t  regarbcD  not  the 
tborb  of  tl)c!L©is©,  left  his  feruants 
anDhisrattellinthenclD. 

ii  <[^nb 


"ChaF.4 
1 1. 


'  Rom-9, 
'7- 

||  h'ef.  rntdt 
thce!liOni. 


ret  hu  he<zrt 
unto. 


The  plague  of  hailc.    Exodus.     Locufts  threatned, 


:  plague 


f  Mr. 

wyett  of 
Cod. 


•Pill.  54. 1 


t  H,br.  hid- 
dtit :  ert 


11  C  2taD  the  %£>&&  faiDt  bnto 
fi^ofts ,  ;5>ttetct)  fo?th  thine  hanD  to* 
ibarD  heauen,  ttjat  there  may  behatic 
in  an  the  lanD  of  tfgyyt,  bpon  man  anD 
bpon  beaft ,  anD  bpon  cucry  tjetbc  of 
the  ncuxthojoibout  the  lanD  of  tfgypt. 

13  3mD  ££o£cs  tttetchcD  foorth  his 
tot»  totbatb  heauen ,  ano  thcIL  ©  k  d 
fait  thunDet  ano  Ijaflc ,  ano  the  fire 
ranne  along  bpon  the  gr  ounD,  ant)  tijc 
|L©k©  tameD  hailc  bpon  the  lanD  of 
egypt. 

2+  ^0  there  itoas  haile ,  ano  fire 
mtnglcDtbttl)  the  haile,bery  gricuous, 
fucb  as  there  ibas  it  one  line  it  malltije 
lanD  of  tfgypt,  finee  it  became  a  nation. 

15  2iiiDthcbailefiuotcth:ougbout 
all  the  lanD  of  Cgypt ,  all  that  was  m  the 
6tlD  ,  Doth  man  anD  bead :  anD  the  hauc 
fmotc  cucry  hcrbe  of  the  fielDc ,  anD 
bjattc  cucry  treeof  thefielD. 

26  jJDncly  in  the  lanD  of  <So(bcn 
rohrcc  the  tb»lD?cn  of3Jftaclwerc,ibas 
there  no  hane. 

17  C  ^nD  pfiataoh  fcnt,anD  taiieD 
fo:  iT)ofcs  anD  33aton ,  anD  faiD  bnto 
thent,  3  hauc  fameD  this  time  :  the 
ILudud  is  righteous,  anD  3 anD  my 
people  are  ibicftcD. 

18  Cntrcatthe  fL©is©,(fo;ttis 
enough)  that  there  be  no  mo?e  t  mighty 
rhunbctings  anD  hailc,  anD 3  Hull  let 
you  gocanDve  fljail  flap  no  longer. 

19  3lnD  £0ofcs  faiDe  bnto  him,  %b 
fooncas  3  am  gone  out  of  thecmc,3J 
lbill  fp: can  abioau  my  hanDs  bnto  the 
%e>  wo ,  and  the  thunDer  (ball  tcafc, 
neither  0)all  there  be  any  mo?e  hailc : 
that  thou  mayeft  tmolb  bott)  that  the 
*carth'sthc13LouDS>. 

30  2But  as  fo?  thec  anD  thy  feruants, 
3  unoU)  that  ye  null  not  yet  fcare  the 
|L©isi>C5ob. 

3 1  2inD  the  flare,  anD  the  barley  tbas 
(mitten  s  fo;  the  barley  was  m  the  care, 
anb  the  flare  was  bolUD: 

31  zButtbctbbcatanDthcryeibcrc 
notfhnttcn:fo;theytt>erctnotgrolbcn 
bp. 

33  2nt>  fi^ofes  tbent  out  of  the  city 
from  Pharaoh ,  anD  fp:caD  abzoabhis 
hanDs  bnto  the  !Lotxr> :  anD  the  thuiif 
Dcrs  ano  hailc  ceafcb,anD  tlje  ratncibas 
ttot  po\bKb  bpon  the  earth. 

3+  3itiD  lbhcn  pbaraoh  t&Vo  that 
the  ramc ,  anD  the  hatic  anD  the  thutu 
ocrs  iberc  tcafeo ,  hcclmncDyctnuw, 
ano  harbcncD  his  heart ,  he  anD  hisfcr* 
uants. 


35  3ino  the  heart  of  phataoh  ibas 
batOtncD, neither  tboulDhelettoechiU 
D;cnof31ftacigoc,asthe^®»o  haD 
JpoKnvtbyWes. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  God  threatneth  to  fend  locufts.  7  Pharaoh, 
moucd  by  his  feruants ,  inclineth  to  let  the  11- 
raelites  goe.  1 1  The  plague  of  the  locufts . 
16  Pharaoh  fueth  to  Mofes.  11  The  plague 
ofdarkenefle.  14  Pharaoh  fueth  vnto  Mo- 
fes,  17  but  ye:  is  hardened. 

jI*Dthe1L©i<t»iaiDbnto 
i$o(cs,  ©oe  tnbntophas 
raoh:fo;*3haucharD- 
ncD  hts  heart ,  anD  the 
heart  of  his  feruants,that 

3J  might  (herb  thefc  my  ftgnes  bcfo;c 

pn: 

2  ^nb  that  thou  mayett  tell  in  the 
cares  of  thy  fbnnc  ,anD  of  thy  fonnes 
fonne ,  tbljat  thmgs  3  ftaue  Hwought 
m  egypt,  anD  mp  Ognes  ibhich  3  hauc 
Doncamongfl  them,thatye  may  tmolb 
hoibthatgjamthc1L©ttD. 

3  3no  t^ofes  anD  ^aron  tame  in 
bnto  Pharaoh ,  anD  (aioe  bnto  htm, 
1thus  tatth  the  %  €>  is  ©  C50D  of  the  fy& 
bribes,  n?oib  longibilt  thou  refute  to 
humble  tby  fclfc  before  mee  <  Hct  my 
people  goe,  that  they  may  fcrue  me. 

4  eisafthourcfufe  to  let  my  people 
goe,  bcholD,  to  mojrolb  thill  3J  bnng 
the  *  locufts  into  thy  toaft. 

5  ano  they  (hall  toucr  the  t  fate  of 
the  earth ,  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  fee 
tbccarth.anDtheymaileatcthereuDue 
of  that  tbhich  is  cuapcD ,  ibhich  rcmat 
neth  bnto  youfrom  the  hailc,  anD  (hall 
cate  cucty  tree ,  tbhirh  grolbcth  fo;  you 
outofthcflciD. 

6  ^iid  they  (ban  fin  thy  houfcs,attD 
thehoufcs  of  all  thy  feruants ,  anD  the 
houfes  of  an  the  Egyptians ,  Vbhtth 
neither  thy  fathers,  no?  thy  fathers  fa- 
thers hauc  feme,  ftnee  tijc  bay  that  they 
lbere  bpon  the  earth  ,  bnto  this  Day. 
3tnb  he  tuiucD  huiuelfe  ,anDibcntout 
from  Pharaoh. 

7  3lnt)  pharaohs  feruants  faiD  bn^ 
to  hm  t ,  Doib  long  Qiau  this  man  be  a 
marc  bnto  bs<  ILct  the  men  goe,  that 
they  may  fcructhcHowo  their  (5oD 
IXnoibcft  thou  not  yet ,  that  tfgypt  is 
beftrovcD? 

8  ^nD  £0ofc6  anD  ^aron  lbere 
brought  agamc  bnto  phataoh :  ano  he 
(aiD  bnto  them,  ©oc,  icnic  the  %  ©  is  » 

vour 


tkthtutdof 


*Chip-4- 
II. 


«  Wifl.  16. 

\Htlrrrjt. 


coucr  Egypt.  Chap.x|.        Thicke  darkenes. 


nedtocatf. 


\Htb.ftft. 
ned 


pout  <SoD :  but  t  H)l)o  aretbcp  that  (ball 

QOti 

9  2nD£PofesfaiD,i8eMlgoetbttb 
our  pons,  anDibtth  ourolD,  ibith  out 
Tonnes  anD  rbitb  out  Daughters  ,fl)itb 
our  flocbes  anD  ttnth  our  bcarDs  ttnll 
iDegoe:  foztbcmuAhoidafcattbntotbe 

flim©.  ^     , 

10  3inD  he  faiD  bnto  them  j  fUtthe 
H«d«©  bccfoMthpou,  as3J*biHlct 
pou  goc ,  anD  pour  btie  ones,  ftoobe  to 
lt,fozewllisbcfo.:cpou. 

ii  i!3ot  fo:  goc  no\bpce  that  are  men, 
anbferucrbc?L©ia© ,  foithatpousiD 
Defitc:  ant>  tbcp  \bcre  Dnuen  outfrom 
i&baraobsp?cfcnec. 

12  C3nDtbclL©ia5>raiDbnto^ 
fes,  dttettb  out  thine  nana  otter  the 
lanDof  egppt  foitbclocufts.tbattbcp 
map  tome  bp  bpon  the  lanDoftfgppt, 
anD  cateeuerpljcrbe  of  thcianD,  encn 
an  that  the  bailcbatb  left. 

13  anDSPofcsfttetcbeD  forth  his  rots 
ouer  the  lanD  of  egppt,anD  the  Ushs© 
bought  an  eattttnnDbpontbclanDail 
that  Dap,  anD  all  that  night:  anDibhcn 
tt  tt>as  morning,  the  call  ibinD  brought 
thclocufts. 

14  3lnD  the  lotuCS  tttnt  Dp  oucr  all 
tbclanDof  €gppt,  anDtcftcD  in  an  the 
coafts  of  <£gppt :  berp  gricuous  iberc 
thep:  before  them  there  ibercno  fuch 
locufts  as  thcp,ncither  after  them  (hall 

befucb.  ,    ,      -^ 

15  foi  tbcp  tonereD  the  fate  of  the 
tbholc  carth,fo  thattbe  lanbrbasoarte 
neD,anD  thcpDiD  catccucrphcrbe  of  the 
ianD,anDalltbefcuitoftbetcces,i(bhtrh 
the  haile  haD  left,  anD  there  tcmamcD 
notanpgrcene  thing  in  the  trees,  oitn 
thcherbes  of  the  ficlb ,  through  allthc 
lanbofegppt.  „  ^ 

16  c^hcn^harao!;ttailcDfo^O' 
fes anD3Iaronitt  battc :  anD  bcfaiD ,  3 
hauc  finncD  agauttt  the  %o&v>  pour 
d50D,  anD  agauttt  pou. 

17  /5ott>  therefore  fojgute ,  3  pzap 
thee,  mpfinnc  onelp  this  once,  anD  in- 
treat  the  %®kv>  pour  ©od  ,  that  hec 
map  tabc  avbap  from  mee  this  Death 

18  2lnDhctbcntoutfrom ^haraoh, 
anD  uitreateD  the  %  o  «  ©. 

19  ^nDthefLomBturneDamtghtp 
ftrong  naeft  ibtnD,  TDhith  toofecaibap 
thclocufts,  anD  t  raft  them  into  the  tcD 
fea :  tber  e  r  cmatneD  not  one  locuft  in  all 
the  coafts  of  <£gppt. 

20  2Sutthe3Lsm©hatDeneD$ha; 


raohs  heart,  fo  t!)at  hec  lboulDnot  let 
the  ebiiDjcn  of  3Jfraei  goe. 

ai  c  3nD  the  %  o  is  s  feiD  Dnto  $$o> 
fes,  Stretch  out  thine  hanD  totbarD 
heaucn,  that  there  map  be  DarbcncfTe 
oucr  tbc  lanD  of  cgppt,*  cucn  Darbencs 
ibbtchmapbefclt. 

22  3nD^ofesftTCtehcDfoo;tbbis 
hanD  toaarD  hcauen :  anD  tbcrettias  a 
rhitbe  Darbencffe  in  all  the  lanD  of  e- 
gppttbjecDapcs. 

2  j  Xhcp  faib  not  one  another,  net 
thcr  rofc  anp  from  his  plate  fo?  tb?cc 
Dapcs :  *  but  all  the  ebilDjcn  of  3Jfrael 
haD  light  in  their  Dwellings. 

24  C^nD  Pharaoh  caticDbnto^o* 
fes,  anD  faiD,<3oc  pcferue  thelL  ©  «  s: 
onelp  let  pour  flotbes  anD  pour  herDs 
be  (tapcD :  let  pour  litlc  ones  alto  goc 
tbttbpou. 

25  3lnD  £t)ofes  faiDc,  Xbou  muft 
gtuetbsaUbfarnfiecs,  anD  burnt  offo 
rings,  that  tUe map  facnfitc  bnto  the 
fLo«oour<5ob. 

26  £)ur  tattell  alfo  (hail  goe  rbith 
bs:therc(ballnotanboofe  bee  leftbes 
hinb:  fozthcreof  muftlbctafectofcrue 
ti)c%oi&&  our  ©oD :  anDibe  bnottc 
not  ibitb  tbbat  tbee  muft  ferue  tj)e 
%  ad  u  5o,  bnttli  rbe  tome  thither. 

27  €  2i5ut  the  |L ©is &  hatDcneD 
pharaohs  heart ,  anD  he  ruoulD  not  let 
them  goe. 

28  3utD  ph^aoh  faiD  bnto  bim,<Rt 
thecfcommctabeheeDto  thpfclfe:  fee 
mp  fate  no  mo?c :  fo?  in  that  Dap  thou 
fceft  nip  fate,  thou  (halt  Die. 

29  3mD£0ofcsfaiD,i:houhattfpo 
ben  tbcll,  3  n»ft  to th?  ^ce  againe  no 
mo2C. 

CHAP.    XL 

1  Gods  meflat;e  to  the  Ifraelites  to  borrow  jew- 
els of  their  neighbours.  4  Mofes  threatneth 
Pharaoh  with  the  death  of  the  firfl:  borne. 

&S83&®9  /3D  tiie  Hois©  faiD  bn^ 
3  to  fi@ofcs ,  Pet  tbill  3 
.  b,:ing  one  plague  mo?ebp^ 
mxtti  on  0haraob,  anD  bpon 
<£gppt ,  aftcrlbaros  hec 
tbillletpou  goc  hence:  tuhen  hec  (hall 
let  you  goe,  he  (hall  furelp  th;uft  pou  out 
bentcaitogethcr. 

2  ^>peabc  notb  in  the  earesof  the 
people,  anD  let  cuerpnian  twroibc  of 
his  neighbour,  anD  cucrp  Vboman  of 
hernctgbbour/teibels  of  Diner,  anD 
ietbelsofgoib. 
j  2nDtbe?LsDK£>gauc  the  people 

ffluour 


\Hrk.lhAt 
tncmajfeelt 


Wlfd.lS.I 


\Htb.iHU 

eurhiuidt. 


Chip.;. 

1.3c  ix. 


Mofc 


es  is  angry. 


Exod 


us. 


ThePafTeouer 


•Ecdus. 
4S.I. 


•Oup.  II. 
*9- 


Stltbjfet, 

\Hci.hc.a 
cfanfcr. 


fauour  in  the  fight  of  ti)e  egppnans. 
flPoicouer  the  man  *  ^ofcs  ibas  bcrp 
great  m  the  lanb  of  Cgppt,  in  the  fight 
of  pbataohsferuants,  anbtnthefight 

4  5lno <#ofcsfatb,Xhus  faith  the 
IL0U53,*  about  nubnight  Ibill  3  S°c 
out  into  ttjc  mibft  of  €gppt. 

5  ^nballthcfirftlwneinthcianbe 
of  egppt  (hall  me,  from  the  firft  borne 
of  Pharaoh ,  that  fitteth  Upon  his 
throne,  cuen  bnto  the  firft  borne  of  the 
maib  fcruantthat  is  behinb  tljc  null, 
anb  all  the  firft  borne  of  beafts. 

6  7m  there  (hall  bee  a  great  trie 
tfj?oughoutalltheianbof  <£gppt,  fuel) 
asthcrelbasnoncliBC  it,  no?  (hall  bee 
liBcitanpmojc. 

7  28utagainftanpoffheehilbtcuof 
3Jfracl,fbal  not  abog  mouchis  tongue, 
agamft  man  o?  bcaft:  that  ?c  map  bnoib 
hoib  that  the  %®mz  both  put  absfft 
rente  bctibeciie  the  egpptiansanogjf' 
tacl. 

8  3nb  all  thefc  thp  feruants  (hall 
eomeboibnebntomc,anbbolb  bottme 
themfelues  bnto  me,  facing ,  d5et  thee 
out,  anb  ail  the  people  that  t  folioib 
thetiano  after  thatgj  Ibtl  goc  out :  anb 
he  ibent  out  from  pharaoh  in  t  a  great 
anger. 

9  3lnbthe  ILoko  faib bnto  4&o< 
fes ,  Pharaoh  (hall  not  hcar&en  bnto 
pou,  that  mp  ibonbers  map  be  multe 
plieb  in  the  lanb  of  egppt. 

io  3nb  Q3ofes  anb  3aton  bib  ail 
thefc  ibonbers  bcfo:c  Pharaoh :  anb 
the  ILsms©  hatbenco  Pharaohs  heart, 
fo  that  he  tboulb  not  let  the  chilbjcn  of 
Jftacl  goc  out  of  his  lanb. 

CHAP.    X  1 1. 

:  The  beginning  ot  the  yeere  is  changed.  3 
ThePafleouerisinlhcuted.  11  The  Rite  of 
thePafleouer.  15  Vnlcauened  bread.  19  The 
fitft  borne  are  flaine.  31  The  Ifraclkes  are 
driuen  out  or  the  lande.  37  Theycometo 
Succodi.  43  The  ordinance  of  the  Paffeouer. 

rag#  /!2b  the  fUMsofpafeebn- 

■  to  upofes  anb  3aron  in 

the  lanb  of  Cgppt,  facing, 

i   *3Ebismonttl)  rtuibe 

_  bnto  vou  the  beginning  of 
moncttjs :  it  fljail  be  the  firft  moncth  of 
thcpccrctopon. 

3  C&Pca&epebntoailthcCongrc' 
ganonof  3Jfracl,fa>ung,  gin  the  tenth 
bap  of  this  moncth  tt)c?  (hall  tafec  to 


I  thnueuerp  man  aiambc ,  atcojbingto 
the  houfc  of  then-  fathers,  alliambcfo? 
an  houfe. 

4.  3!nb  if  the  ho«f)0lo  be  too  little 
foj  the  lambe ,  let  hint  anb  his  neigh* 
bout  ncjet  bnto  his  houfc,  tabekatto^ 
omg  to  the  number  of  the  foulcs :  cucrp 
manaccojbing  to  his  eating  fhall  matte 
pourcountfejthe  lambe. 

5  #our  lambe  (hall  be  ttrithout  blc« 
mifl),a  male  t  of  the  firft  peerc :  pec  0>aU 
tabett  out  from  the  fhccpeo?  from  the 
goates. 

6  ^nbpefhallbecpcitbpbntillthe 
fourteenth  bap  of  the  fame  moncth : 
anb  the  Vbhole  affcmblp  of  thetongte- 
gatton  of  ^ftacl  (hall  Bill it  t  in  the  cue* 
ning. 

7  3lnb  thepfhail  take  of  thcbloob 
anbftnBeiton  thettbofioepoftcs,  anb 
ontl)ebpper  booze  pofte,  of  thehoufes 
lbhetinthcpfhallcatcit. 

8  ^nbthepfhaileattheflcfhinthat 
night  rofte  ibith  fire,  anb  bnlcaueneb 
bieab,  and  ibith  bitter  herbes  thep  (tjall 
tateit. 

9  €atenotofitratb,no?fobbenat 
ailibith  ibater,  but  rofte  with  fire:  his 
hcab,U)ithhis  lcgs,anb  Ibith  thepurte* 
nance  thereof. 

10  ^nbpefbaillctnothingofttre; 
mamc  butill  the  morning :  anb  that 
ibhich  rcmaintth  of  it  bntrtl  the  mo^ 
nmg,pe  (hall  burnc  Ibith  Bte. 

11  C^nbthusfhalipecateit:  ibith 
pour  loines  gtrbeb,  pour  fhoocs  on 
pour  feet,  anbpour  ftaflempour  ftanb  • 
anb  pe  (hall  rate  it  in  hafte :  it  is  the 
%  «d  is  ©$>  paffeouer. 

i%  5Fo?5UbiUpafreth<2oughthelanb 
of  cgppt  this  night ,  anb  Ibill  finite  all 
the  fir  ft  boznc  in  the  lanb  of  €gppt,both 
manf  bcatt,  anb  againft  all  the  ||gobs 
of  cgppt  gi  ibill  erctiuc  iubgement :  31 

amthClLiDU©. 

u  ^nb  thcbloob  (hall  be  to  poufoj  a 
toftenbpon  the  houfes  Ibhcrepou  arc: 
anb  Jbhen  J>  fee  the  bloob,  JJ  VbtU  paffc 
oucr  pou,  anb  the  plague  (hall  not  bee 
bpon  pou  tto  beftrop  > ou.tbhen  31  finite 
thclanbofCgppt. 

14  3nb  this  bap  fljail  be  bnto  pou 
fo  2  a  mcmonall :  anb  pon  (hall  aeepe  it  a 
fcaftto  the  ILoko,  throughout  pour 
generations :  pou  (hall  feecpe  it  a  feaft 
bp  an  oibinantcfo?  cucr. 

15  S>euen  bapes  (hall  pe  eate  bnica^ 
ucnebb^cab,  cucn  the  firft  bap  pec  (hall 
put  aibap  Icauen  out  of  pour  houfes : 

fai 


\\Oz,kiddc. 


t  Hit.fcmi 
ofayttre. 


t  Hchrli- 
tweetuthe 


"&'• 


|Or,fJxn- 


titjirmiU- 


isinftitutecL 


Chap.xij.     Firft-borneflaine. 


iHti.fiuU. 


•Lcuit.  lj. 
5.num-i8. 
IIS. 


lOt&Jblc. 


«Hcb.ll. 
iS. 


•  Iofl>.4.«. 


Sfoi  tt)l)olocuct  eateti)  leaucneb  b:caD, 
from  tfjcfirftbapbnnitnefeuentpap, 
tl)at  foulc  fball  be  cut  off  fcoin^ftafl. 

i6  #nDtntl3C  firft  bap  tijereftaibe  an 
fjoip  conuocatton,  anb  m  tt)e  fcucntl) 
Da?  tijerc  flbaiibc  an&olp  conuoearton 
topoutnomancrofuxjjBefyalbcDone 
in  tl)em,  fane  ttjat  lbrjuD  cucrp  t  man 
mutt  catc ,  ti;at  onclpmap  becboncof 
pou. 

17  3tnb  pec  fball  obfcrue  the  feaft  of 
tonleauencb  bjcab  :fo?  tn  tljisfclfefamc 
bap  ftauc  3  tyougrjt  pout  armies  out 
of  tftelanb  of  <£gppt;  therefore  fball  pc 
obfcrue  this  bap  tn  pout;  generations, 
by  an  omittance  fo?  euer. 

18   C  *  3»t  fyt  firft  moneth,  Ott  tfoC 

fourteenth  bap  of  tJjemonctrjat  cuen, 
pc  fball  eate  bnieaucncb  b?ca&  bntill  the 
one  anb  Hbmtttth  bap  of  tbe  monetlh 
ateneu. 

19  £>cucn  capes  lbail  there  bee  no 
leauen  founb  in  pour  I)oufes:fo?rbI)o- 
foeucr  catetrj  tftat  Which  is  leaucneb, 
cuen  that  foulc  (ball  be  cut  off  from  the 
congregation  oPjfracl,tt)bcthtt  he  be 
a  ftranget  ,0?  borne  in  the  lanb. 

10  pccfballcatenotbtnglcaucncti: 
inailpourbabitattonslhau  pceatefcn* 
leaucneb  tocab. 

11  CXhcn  ^ofes  taileb  fo?  all  the 
€lbersof3Jfracl,  anbfatb  tmtothem; 
D?aU)  out  anb  taitcpou  a  lliambe ,  at* 
tojbing  to  pour  fanultcs ,  anb  Ml  ttjc 
teaffcoucr. 

n  *^nb  pe  (ball  tafcc  abunch  ofbp= 
fope,anb  btp  it  in  the  bloob  trjat  is  in  rtje 
bafon,  anbutiBctbclmtclanDtbcttbo 
fibe  poftestbtthtbc  bloob  that  is  tn  the 
bafon :  anb  none  of  pou  (ball  goe  out  at 
the  booje  of  hisbonfe ,  tontttt  the  mo?* 

u  5fo?the1L<£>isiDtt)iIpaffctb?ougb 
to  mute  the  <£gppttans :  anb  Ibbenhce 
fectb  ttjc  bloob  bponthc  lintel,  anb  on 
ttje  ttbo  ftbe-poftes ,  the  fLou©  VbiU 
paffe  ouer  the  boo?e,anb  tbillnot  ftiffcr 
the  bettropcr  to  come  in  tonto  pour 
houfes  to  unite  you. 

14  ana  ^t  (ball  obfetue  this  thing 
fo?  an  oibinance  to  tbec ,  anb  to  tbp 
fbnncsfo?cucr. 

1$  2(nb  it  (ball  come  to  paffe  tbf)«t 
pec  bee  come  to  the  lanb ,  .Dhtcb  the 
|L£>«©  Koillgiucpou,  aeco?btng  asbe 
bathp?omtfcb ,  thatpc  (ball  fceepcthis 

frtuice. 
16  *3inbitfballcomctopaffc,rbhen 

pour  chilb?en  (ballfapfcntopou,  nat^at 


meane  pou  bp  tbisfcrutee< 

17  %hatpe(baufap,3Jtisthefan* 
ficcof  ttjc  |toui3S>  ibancoucr,  tbbo 
pafTcb  oner  the  houfes  of  trjjc  tbilb?en 
of  Jfracl  in  Cgppt ,  rbljen  be  fmote  the 
Cgpptians,  anb  bdiucrcb  ourhouTes. 
%\\D  the  people  boibeb  ttjc  ijeab ,  anb 
ttJOjCbippeb. 

is  3nDtbcebilo?cnof3Jfraeirbcnt 
aibap,anb  bib  astbe  ILsde©  hab  com- 
nianbcb  fl^ofesanb  ^aron,  fo  bio  tljcp. 

19  C*^nb  tt  came  to  paffe  tljat  at 
mibnig^t  tt)t%s>iv&  fmotcalltijenrft 
borne  m  tl)e  lanbof  Cgppt,  *fromtl)c 
firft  bome  ofpharaol)  ttjat  fate  onl)is 
ttwonc ,  l?nto  tlje  firft  bomc  ofrljecap* 
tiuetljatrbas  in  tljetbungcon,  an&all 
ftft  firft  bome  of  catteU. 

jo  %nD  pljaraol)  rofe  bp  in  tijc 
ntgijt,  Ijccanball  l)tsferuants,anbau 
ti)c  cgppttans ;  anb  tljerc  Ibas  a  great 
trp  in  egppt:  fo;  tDtrc  ttsas  not  a  Ijoufe, 
ibfteretDerc  ibasnot  one  bcab. 

ji  C^Jib  Dec  taileb  fo?  ^ofesanb 
^aronbpntgljt,  anb  fails,  3Mebp,  and 
getpoufo?tl)ftom  amongftrnp  people, 
borb  pou  anbtrjc  d)ab,icn  of  Jftael: 
anb  goe,  fer  uc  tijc  %  s>  ke>,  as  pc  Ijaue 
faib. 

31  2U*o  tafec  pour  flocbes  anb  pour 
oearbs,  aspe  naucfaib :  anbbeegoue, 
anbbleffemcalfo. 

I  33  Anbtrjc  egpptianstberct)?Bcnt 
bpon  ti)c  people  tljat  tl)cp  mtgl)t  fenb 
tljem  ont  of  tbe  lanb  in  fjaftc :  fo?d)cp 
faib;iBebeallocaDnieD. 

34  ^nbrrjepcoplctooBetfteirbou^l) 
bcfo^ettVbas  leaueneb,tl)cit  ||  uncabing 
trougi)es  beeing  bounb  bp  in  tljeir 
clotDes  bpon  shetr  ft)oulbcrs. 

35  ^nbtftecl)tlb(!cnof3frac!bibac- 
co?bmgtotr)etbojboffi0ou>s:anbtl)ep 
bo?rotbcb  of  t\)t  €gpptians*tctbelsof 
filuer,anb  teiDcts  of  golb,anb  ramient. 

36  ^nbtl)c|Lo«ffi>gauctt)c people 
fauourintUc  figl)tof  tl)cegpptians,fo 
trjat  tljcp  lent  bnto  tijem  furl)  things 
as  tl)cp  rcciuircb :  aubtJjcp  fpoilcbtljc 
cgppnans. 

37  €  2uid  *  tnc  rhftbjen  of  ffracl 
tourncpeb  from  3Ramcfcs  to  ^urtotl), 
about  fire  rjunb^eb  tl)oufanb  on  footc 
that  were  men,bcftbccfjtlb2cn. 

38  ^nbatmirebmultitubclbcnttjp 
auorbittjtrjem,  anbftocBsanbljearbs, 
cuentjcrpmucrjcattcll. 

39  ^nbthepbaBCbbnleauentb  cases 
oftJ)c  bougt),  VbDtcl)  tijep  b:ougl)t  fetl) 
out  of  €gppt ;  fo?  it  Ibas  not  leaucneb : 

becaHfe 


*Chsp.  I!. 
4- 

•WiTdiS. 
11. 

\Hcb.baufc 
tfthifil. 


Oxjaltqh 


•Chap.?. 
12. and  II. 


•t4um.;3. 


\Hthr.. 
freai  mi. 


The  PafTeouer  mud    Exodus. 


>e  remem 


bred. 


•ccn.15. 

13. arts  7.6 
gal.5.17. 


t  Heir  A 
mght  ofob- 


'Numb  9. 
II. 

"  Ioh.  i?. 
3*. 

t  Htb.dce  it. 


becaufc  thep  tberc  thmft  out  of  €gppt, 
anbcoulb  not  tarrp ,  neither  hab  thep 
pjepareb  fo:  themfclucs  anpbtctuail. 

40  CJftoib  the  foiournmgof  the 
chilbzen  of  gjfracl ,  ibho  bibclt  m  € 
gppt,  was  *foure  hunbjcb  anb  thirtte 
pecrcs. 

41  :3nb  it  tame  to  paflc  at  tDc  rob  of 
the  fourt  hunbjcb  anb  thirtte  pceres, 
euen  the  fclfe  fame  bap  it  tame  topaffc, 
that  all  thchoftsof  the  H®«©  ibent 
out  fcom  the  lanb  of  cgppt. 

41  3Jt  is  a  t  night  to  be  mud)  obfer^ 
ucb  bnto  the  ?Lokd,  fozbnngmg  them 
out  from  the  lanb  of  Cgppt :  Xhis  is 
that  night  of  tl)c  JLo«£>  to  be  obferucb 
of  all  the  chilbjcn  of  Jfracl,  in  their  ge 
ncranons. 

4j  C  2uib  tt»t  %®i\v>  faibc  bnto 
<$ofes  anb  aaron ,  Xftts  ts  the  ozbu 
nance  of  the  ^affeouer :  there  (hall  no 
(trangcr  eate  thereof. 

44  Butcucrpmansferuantthatis 
bought  foj  moncp,  \bhro  thou  haft  tir^ 
tumnfeb  Him,  tfjro  fl)aiU)c  eatc  tlictcof. 

45  3tfo?reincr,anbanl)ucbfcruant 
(hall  not  eate  thereof. 

46  *  3Jn  one  houfc  (hall  it  be  eaten, 
thou  (halt  not  tatic  foojth  ought  of  the 
fled)  atyoab  out  of  the  houfe,  'neither 
(hall  pebzeaftc  a  bone  thereof. 

47  3tiifhe  Congregation  of  3ifracl 
fhailtRcepeit. 

4S  3nb  lbhcn  afttangcr  (hall  fo 
lournc  ibith  thee,  anb  lbill  Ueepc  the 
i^afleouct  to  the  !L<dir©,  let  all  his 
males  be  circumctfco,  anb  then  let  mm 
tome  ncer  e,anb  fteepe  it :  anb  he  fljail  be 
as  one  tliat  is  borne  untie  lanb :  fojno 
bncircumeifcb  pcrfon  (hall  eate  thereot 

49  4Dnc  latb  fliail  be  to  him  that  is 
home -borne,  anb  bnto  theftranger 
that  fotournefh  among  pou. 

50  XDus  bib  all  the  chilbicn  of  3Jf 
r acl :  as  the  %  s>  u  r>  tommanbeb  ^o- 
fes  anb  3lar  on,  fo  bib  thep. 

51  ^nbittamc  to  paffctftc  fclfe  fame 
bar,  that  the  %  ©  w  o  bib  bnngthc  chil- 
bjen  of  3Jfcaei  out  of  tlje  lanb  of  Cgppt, 
bp  their  armies. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  The  firft  borne  ate  fanftificd  to  God.  3  The 
memoriall  of  the  PafTeouer  is  commanded. 
1 1  The  hrftlings  of  beafis  are  fe:  apart.  17 
The  III  aclitcsc,oc  out  of  Egypt,  andcarylo- 
fcplis  bones  with  them.  10  They  come  to 
Etham.  11  God guidcth diem  byapillarof 
a  cloud,  and  a  pillar  of  fire. 


43b  tl)t  %o  n  b  fpaae  bn- 

tot©ofes,fapmg, 
x  *:3>anttiftcbntome 

all  the  firft  bo  me,  Vbljatfo- 

cuer  opcncththcibombe, 
among  the  chilbzen  of  3Jftacl ,  bott)  of 
man  anb  of  bead :  it  is  mine. 

j  €  3no  £0ofcs  faib  bnto  tlje  peo- 
ple, Remember  tins  bap,  in  ibhirt)  pec 
tame  out  from  €gypt,  out  of  tlje 
lioufc  oft  bonbagc:  fo?  bV  ftcengtfj  of 
rjanb  tlje  ?Loiss>  biougljt  you  out  from 
tl)is  pi^e :  tl;  ere  (Ijau  no  leaueneb  b?eab 
be  eaten. 

4  XDis  bap  tame  yee  out ,  m  tlje 
monetl)3fbib. 

5  C^nbitnialbeibnrotl)e1Lows> 
mall  bung  tljcc  into  tlic  lanb  of  the  Ca 
naanites,  anb  the  i)tttitcs,  anb  the  %■ 
montes,anb  the  ^uutcs,anb  tlje  'Jebu- 
fites,  ibhirt)  he  Quart  butothp  fathers 
to  giuc  rtjee,  a  lanb  floibing  roitli  miifee 
anb  honp,that  thou  (halt  neepc  tijis  ftr- 
uitcinthismoneth. 

6  <s>cucn  bapes  thou  fljalt  eate  bn- 
leaueneb  b;cab,  anb  mtlje  feucnthbap 
fhaii  be  a  fcaft  to  the  %  o  is  o. 

7  tanleauencb  bjeab  fl>all  be  eaten 
feuro  bapes :  anb  there  (hall  no  leaue* 
neb  b:eab  bee  fcenc  ibithrtice:  neuhcr 
(hall  there  be  icauro  fecne  fijul)  thcem 
all  thp  quarters. 

8  C^Jnb  thou  fhaltfhctt)  thp  fonne 
in  that  bap,  taping, This  is  done  bctaufc  of 
that  which  the  ILok©  bib  bnto  mec, 
Vbhen  3  tame  fouft  out  of  «gppt. 

9  3(nb  it  fljau  bee  fo?  a  figne  bnto 
thee,  bponthmchano,  anb  fo:  a  memo- 
nail  bettbecne  thmc  cpes ,  that  the 
%  0  is  ©  £>  lam  map  be  in  rhp  mouth : 
fo?  tbith  a  ftrong  rjanbe  hath  the 
%  e>  k  o  brought  thee  out  of  egppt. 

10  Xhou  (halt  therfo?cfeeepe  this  oj* 
binanteinhisfcafonfrompeeretopere. 

11  C^nbitaiaibtibhcnthefLoK© 
(hall  bzing  thee  into  the  lanb  of  the  Cfc 
naanites  as  he  froare  bnto  thee,  anb  to 
thp  fathers,  anofhallgiuettthcc: 

11  *Xhatthounia!ttfctapattbnto 
thcflouD  alithat  openeth  the  matrir, 
anb  roerp  firlrimg  that  tommeth  of  a 
bead,  which  thou  haft,  the  maiesfhall 
be  the  1L  ois  ©  £>. 

ij  3lnbeuerpfirftlingofana(rethou 
flialt  rcbeeme  ibith  a  ||  lambe:  anb  if 
thou  ibilt  not  rebecme  it ,  then  thou 
(halt  bjcauchis  necttc,  anb  all  the  firft 
borne  of  man  amongtt  thp  chUtyeu 
(halt  thou  rcbeeme. 
14  €3nb 


"Chap.u. 
19.  and  34. 
19.Icuit.27 
3  6. num.  3. 
I;  &8.16. 
hike  id}. 


\  Mhr.frr- 

MUtttt. 


•Chap.  11. 
-.9 -and  J4- 
19  czclc. 

44.30. 

.' .  ;*y  our. 


\Qx,\^ii, 


A  cloud  and  fire.       Chap.xnij.    Pharaoh  purfueth . 


Htk'.tO 


narar^e. 


•Gene   50 


"Num.33. 
«. 


'Num.  14. 
1  4.deuc.l. 
33.pW.78. 
14.  1  cor 
10.:. 


•NeliOT.J. 
19- 


14.  C  3uiD  u  fhalbc  tt>hcn  ttip  fonnc 
af  itcth  thee  tm  tunc  to  come ,  faymg, 
nahatisthis;  tftat  tljou  n>ait  fay  bnto 
him ;  25y  ftrcngth  of  hanD  the  3L  ©  is  © 
bzoughtbsout  from  tffgypt ,  fcomthc 
houfeofbonoagc. 

15  3nb  it  tame  to  paffc  tbhen  $ha 
raoh  VboulD  harDly  let  bsgoc,  that  the 
1L©is©  flctb  all  the  firft  borne  in  the 
lanD  of  egypt ,  Don)  the  firtt  bojne  of 
man.anb  thefitftbome  of  bcaft:Xhere* 
foze^facrificeto  ttjc  Horn©  all  that 
openeth  the  mamr ,  being  males :  but 
all  the  firft  borne  of  my  chtiDzcii  3J  xv 
Deciuc. 

is  ^nbit  fhall  be  foj  a  token  bpon 
thine  hanD.anD  foz  frontlets  betrbecne 
thine  eyes,  5f  oz  by  ftrcngth  of  hanD  the 
%  ©  k  ©  brought  bs  foozth  out  of  £> 
gypt. 

17  C2nD  it  tame  to  pafTclbhcn  Pha- 
raoh haD  let  the  people  goc,  that  ©oD 
leD  them  not  thzough  tf)c  tbay  of  the 
lanD  of  the  i&hiiifttues,  although  that 
tbas  neew :  tfoi  ©oD  faiDc,  Heft  pcr> 
abuenturc  the  people  repent  tbhen 
they  fee  tbarrc,anD  they  rcturnc  toC^ 

18  25ut  <sob  Icddc  the  people  about 
through  the  tbay  of  the  ttnlbcrncffeof 
the  Bcb  fca :  aiiDthcchiiDzcnofJfracl 
lbent  bp  H  hameffeb  out  of  the  lanb  of 
€gypt. 

19  3nD  Crofts  tooUc  the  bones  of 
IJofcph  ttJith  hun :  foz  hechab  ftraitly 
fioozne  the  chUDzcn  of  3Jfrarl ,  faymg, 
*  ©ob  tbill  fur  cly  bifuc  y  on,aub  yt  (hall 
cary  bp  my  bones  aibay  hence  ibith 
you. 

10  ftanD'thcytooticthctriourney 
from  Smccoth ,  anb  encampeb  m  €> 
tljam,  in  the  ebgc  of  the  Unlbcrncffc. 

ii  3nb  *  the  1L  ©  is  id  \bcnt  befoze 
them  by  bay  m  a  pillar  of  a  clouD ,  to 
leab  them  the  tbay ,  anb  by  night  m  a 
pillar  office,  to  gutcthem  light  togoe 
by  bay  anb  night. 

11  $?c  tooac  not  aibay  the  pillar  of 
theciouDbybay,  *noz  tlic  pillar  of  fire 
by  night/ron.  befoze  the  people. 

CHAP.    XII 1 1. 

1    God  inltrudeth  the  Ifraelites  in  their  iour- 
ney.    5    Pharaoh  purfueth  after  them. 


10 
The  Ifraelitcs  murmure.  i}  Mofcs  com- 
forteththem.  15  God  inftruifteth  Mofes. 
19  The  cloud  removiethbehindc  thecampe. 
11  The  Ifraelites pafle  through  the  Red-fea, 
13  which  drowncth  the  Egyptians. 


85M, 


S&SKflgjgg  $Dtbc?L©isE>  fpasebu- 
iflrmS  to^ofts-taping, 
^  z  S>pea&e  bnto  the 
chiiwcn  of  Jfrael ,  that 
_  they  turnc  anb  cntampc 
befoze  *  $i-hahiroth  .bettbeene  qftgool 
anb  the  tea,  oucc  agamft  26aal-5cphon : 
befozeit  fljailyeencampcbythefea. 

j  if  02  Pharaoh  ttrtll  fay  of  the  chil- 
Dzen  of  3lfrael,  Xhcy  are  mtangleDin 
the  lanb  ,  the  milDemcffc  hath  ihut 
them  in. 

4  3nD  3  M\\  harben  Pharaohs 
heart,  that  he fhailfollotb after  them, 
anb  3I  tbill  be  hsnoutcD  bpon  &hara; 
oh ,  anb  bpon  all  his  holle ,  Chat  the 
egypnans  may  anoni  that  3J  am  the 
?L©ib©.  2nDtheyDiDfo. 

5  C2nDittbastolDthelkuigof<C* 
gypt,that  the  people  flcb:  ^nb  the  heart 
of  Pharaoh  anb  of  his  feruants  tbas 
turncb  agamft  thepeoplc.anD  they  faib, 
why  Dane  tbec  bone  this,  that  rbc  hauc 
let 'jfrael  goe  from  fcrumg  bs j. 

6  ^nb  hce  mabe  rcaby  his  rtjarct, 
anbtooBchispeoplcibithhun. 

7  3nb  hec  tooac  fire  hmiDzcb  cho- 
;fcn  charcts,  anb  all  the  charrts  of  €-- 
gypt,  anb  captaincs  ouer  cuery  one  of 
them. 

8  3lnb  the  H©  is  id  hatDcncD  tjlc 
heart  of  Pharaoh  Sing  of  €  gypt,  anb 
hepurfueb  after  thechilbmiof  jfracl: 
anb  the  chilbjcn  of  3ffrael  lbent  out 
mithanhighhanb. 

9  25utrhc*€gyptianspurfueb after 
them(all  the  hoztcsajib  djarcts  ofpha- 
raoh,  anb  his  hozfemen,  anb  his  army) 
anb  ouertooac  them  cncanipuigby  the 
fea ,  beftoe  0i-hahitoth  befo;e  JSaal^ 
3cphon. 

io  C^tnb  ilihen  Pharaoh  bzeVb  ntgh , 
thcchilbzcnof  ^frartlift  bpthcincyes, 
anb  bcholb,  the  €gypnans  marciieb  af 
j  tcr  thcm,anb  tljcy  tberc  foie  afraib:  anb 
the  chilbzenof  3lfracl  lift  bp  their  eyes, 
anb  beholbc ,  the  Cgypnans  marcheb 
after  thctn ,  anb  they  lbere  foze  afraib : 
anbthechilbzcnof  Jfraclcncb  out  bn- 
to the  H©  is  id. 

n  3inD  they  faib  bnto  fi^ofes ,  2Be^ 
caufc  there  tberc  no  graues  m  <£gypr, 
haft  tljou  taftcn  bs  auiay  tobic  m  the 
ibilbem  cfTc  <  tehcrefozc  haft  thou  Dealt 
thus  ibithbs.to  tary  bs  tboztlj  out  of 
egypt* 

u  *3lsnottl)is  the  tdozD  that  ibec 

Did  tell  thec  in  €  gypt ,  faymg,  fLct  bs  a 

lone  .that  ibe  may  icrue  the  Egyptians? 

©  fo? 


"Num.  33. 


'    1  mace. 
4-9- 


•Clup.e. 
9. 


Thcfeadiuidcd.  Exodus.     Pharaoh  drowned. 


|j  Or,  For 
whereM  fox 
htwtfeene 
the  Egjf'im 
Mittodxi, 
O-e. 


Mo(h4. 

jj.pfalmt 

114.;. 

•Pfjl.78. 

I  J.l.cor. 

10,1   hebr 

11.19. 


$■  out  baD  bene  better  fo:  bs  to  feme  the 
Egyptians,  then  tl;at  weciboulDDicm 
the  WilDcrncffe. 

is  |[  3tnD  tWcs  faiDcbnto  the  pco- 1 
pit,  f  carcyenot,ftanDttill,anDfce  the, 
faluatiou  of  the  fL  ©  is  3P,Whteb  be  iCbill 
flicw  to  you  to  Day :  ||  fo:  the  £gy  pnans  1 
whom  ye  bane  fecne  t0  Day,yefbaufcc 
tlicm  agamc  no  mo:c  foi  cucr. 

14  XbcILois^aiailngbtfojyou, 
anD  ye  (ball  bolD  your  peace. 

h  f  3inD  the  HotiP  fame  bnto ! 
(JI9ofes,iJ0bercfo:ecric(t  thou  bnto  me; 
£>pcauc  bnto  the  cbtlDicu  of  3!Ctacl, 
that  tnc?  got  fo:warD. 

i6  i5ut  lift  thou  bp  thy  roDDe ,  anD 
ftrctch  cut  thine  banD  oner  tDc  Sea, 
anD  DiuiDc  it :  anD  the  cbilD.mi  of  Jfracl 
(bail  goe  on  D:y  groutiD  tbo:ow  tlje 
miDsoftbcSca. 

17  StnD  31 ,  beljolDc,  J  will  barDcn 
the  hearts  of  tl)c  Egyptians,  anD  the? 
(ball  follow  them :  anD  3)  Will  get  mce 
honour  bpon  tfmaraoh  ,anD  bpon  all 
his  boftc,  bpon  his  cbarcts.anD  Ppon 
btsbo:fcmcn. 

is  3lnD  the  (Egyptians  (ball  ImoW 
that  3  am  the  %  o  is  p.Mjcn'J  Dane 
gotten  me  honour  Ppon  Pharaoh,  Dp 
on  his  tharcts,  anD  Ppon  ins  bo:fcmen. 

19  C  3tnD  the  angel  of  god  Which 
Went  bcfo2c  the  tampc  of  3lfracl,  r  emo^ 
ucD  anD  went bcbiuDtbem,  anD tbcptl; 
larofthc  clout)  went  from  before  their 
facc,auD  frooD  bchinDc  tftem. 

20  3ud  it  tame  bcttticcnc  the  tampc 
of  the  (Egyptians ,  anD  the  tampc  of  3if 
rati,  anD  tt  mas  a  tlouD  anD  DarftcucfTc 
toihcm,butitgaucltgbtbynicirbttothefe: 

fo  that  the  one  tame  not  neerctbc  other 
all  the  night. 

ii  3mD  ^ofes  ftrctthcD  out  his 
banD  ouer  the  Sea ,  anD  the  %  ©  is  id 
caufcD  the  £>ca  to  goe  backe  by  a  ftrong 
<Eaft  WinDc  all  that  night ,  anD  maDc 
the  Sea  D:y  ianD,anD  tlje  waters  were 

"DlUlDCD. 

22  3tnD*thcthilD2cnof3fracnbcnt 
into  the  miDft  of  the  Sea  bpon  tbeD:y 
grounD ,  anD  the  maters  lbccc  a  mall 
bnto  them  on  their  right  banD,  anD  on 
tfjticleft. 

23  C  2nD  the  (Egyptians  purfueD, 
anD  went  in  after  them ,  to  the  miDft  0  f 
tbe5>ca,euen  allpharaobsbo:fes,  his 
tfjacets  anD  his  hojfnucn. 

24  2lnD  tt  tame  to  paffc.that  m  the 
momtng  watch  the  ILoisiDiooUcDbn 
to  the  hottc  of  tlje  (Egyptians ,  through 


the  pillar  of  fire,  anD  of  the  clouDe,  anD 
troublcD  the  bofrc  of  the  (Egyptians, 

25  3inD  too&c  off  their  cbarct 
rPrjcclcsJ'thatthcyDiaucthcmheauily: 
So  that  the  €  gy  ptians  faiD,H  ct  bs  flee 
fromrbefaceof  iJftael:  fo:tbcfL0isiD 
ftgbtetb  fo:  tbcm,  agamO  rtjc  egyptv 
ans. 

26  <r  anD  the  H  o  is  id  faiDc  bnto 
©ofes,  Stretch  out  rtjtuc  banD  oucr 
the  Sea,  that  the  maters  may  cornea 
gamebpou  the  (Egyptians,  bpon  their 
cljarcts,  anD  bpon  their  bo:fcmcu. 

27  3inD  £&oks  ftrettbeD  fooztljljis 
banD  oucr  the  Tea,  anD  the  fca  returncD 
to  bis  ftrcngtb  mben  the  morning  ap 
pcareD :  anD  the  Egyptians  fleo  agamtt 
it :  anD  the  ILo:D  t  ouertbzctt)  rtjc  cgyp- 
ttans  m  tlie  miDlt  of  the  fca. 

23  2lnD  the  maters  rctttrncD,anD  to 
ncrcD  the  tharcts,  anD  the  bojfcmcn 
and  all  the  bout  of  Pharaoh  that  tame 
into  the  fca  after  tbcm :  there  rctnatncD 
not  fo  much  as  *  one  of  them. 

29  23ut  the  chilDzcn  of  3JfracI  tbal 
ftcD  bpon  Due  lanD,  in  the  miDft  of  the 
fea,  aim  the  waters  were  a  tball  bnto 
them  on  their  right  banD,  auDontbttr 
left. 

30  Xbus  tlic  %  o  h  id  faucD  gifracl 
that  Day  out  of  the  banD  of  the  egypn 
ans :  anD  "jjfracl  fame  the  Egyptians 
DcaD  bpon  the  fca  fliojc. 

31  ^nDjifraclfam  that  great  fiboilic 
ibhicb  the  %  o  is  ©  Did  bpon  tlje  €gyp 
nans:  f  the  people  fcarcD  ttic  ?L«d  is  ©, 
anDbclccucDtbc  JLs)isp,  anD  tyis  fcr 
uanti$)ofcs. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  Mofcsfonc;.  1!  The  people  want  water.  13 
The  waters  at  Marah  are  bitter.  15  A  tree 
fweetneth  them.  17  AtElimaretweluc  wels, 
and  (cuentie  pahne  trees. 

C^*^9  ^cnfang'^olesanDtbe 
r^m  thtlD2cn  of  3Jfrael  this 
fong  bnto  the  ILff>5JC, 
anDfpaftcfaymg,  31  will 
Sfe^as  fmg  bnto  the  %  <&>  w  id:  fo: 
be  hath  triumpbeD  glonoufiy,  the  bozfc 
anD  his  riDcr  battjbc  tlj:oWen  into  the 
Sea. 

2  Xbe  ILoik  id  is  my  ftrcngtb  anD 
fong,anD  he  is  become  my  faluatiou :  be 
is  my  <5oD,  anD  31will  pjcparebmian 

habitanon,  my  fathers  OoD.anDjlbii 
trait  him. 

3  Xhc  1L  ©  k  id  u  a  man  of  warrc: 
the  %  o  k  3D  is  bis  /fiamc. 


■  OrlmaJt 


hramij. 


t  Heir. 

!hoek>  of 


•Pfil.io5. 
11. 


t  Hdr. 
h.md. 


•  VVifd.  » . 

10. 


Ifraelsfongof         Chap.xv.xvj.        thankcfg 


luing. 


J  Or,  rffif- 


\0r,  mighty 

OHftf 


•Dcut.i. 
ij.iolHj. 
9- 


'Dcuta. 
>9.iofll.>. 
J- 


4  Pharaohs  char  cts  anD  Ij)is  hoftc 
hathheeaQmto  tljcfca:  l)isrt)ofentap* 
taints  alfo  arc  Dzo  wncD  in  the  reD  £>ea. 

5  %\)t  Depths  l)auc  eoucccD  them : 
theyCankeintotbebortomcasaftonc. 

6  Xhytightha»D,Sir>?L©is©,is 
become  glozious  in  power ,  thy  right 
rjano,j©  3L©kp,  hathDafbcD  in  plo 
ccsthecncmie. 

7  2nD  m  the  grcatnelTe  of  thine  er 
eellcncic  thou  haft  ouctthzoWcn  them, 
tl)at  rofc  up  againft  thee :  ttjou  fentett 
fort)  ttiv  Vb?atl) ,  which  confumeD  them 
asftubble. 

s  3uid  with  the  blatt  of  thy  noftrfls 
the  waters  were  gathctcD  together : 
trje  floobs  Rood  bpzight  as  an  rjeape, 
and  the  Depths  were  congcaicD  in  the 
heart  of  the  S>ca. 

9  %\)t  enemte  faio ,  3J  B>fll purfuc, 

^  tbrt  outrtafte/5  Wil  DiuiDcthc  fpoilc: 

nip  lull  aiall  be  fattfncD  bpon  them :  31 

Will  Dzaw  my  froozD,  nunc  rjanD  (ball 

Dettroytbcm. 

io  XrjouDiDftbloti)  Wit!)  thy  WinD, 
the  tea  coucr  cb  them,  they  fenae  as  icao 
in  the  mighty  waters. 

ii  i©bO'snlicbntotbce,4[>1L©is£s 
amongft  the  ||  gobs  i  Who  >s  itfte  rbec, 
glonous  in  bolmciTc,  fcartfull  in  pzat^ 
fes,  Doing  WonDcrs! 

ix  Xbou  ftrctcbcDft  out  thy  right 
rjanb,  the  earth  fmaiioWcD  them. 

15  XbouintbymerctcbaftleDfoztb 
the  people  Which  thou  baft  rebectneb : 
rt)ou  had  guibcb  them  m  tt)v  ftcengtb 
bnto  thy  holy  bawtatton. 

14  *Xbepeopic(ballbcarf,andbca; 
fraib :  fozr  oW  (hall  taftc  boio  on  the  uv 
habitants  of  ^alctttna. 

15  Xbcn  the  Duties  of  <£Dom(bal  be 
atnafcb  :  the  mighty  men  of  SBoab 
trembling  (ball  tattc  boio  bpon  tbcm : 
autbe  inhabitants  of  Canaan  fljal  melt 
away. 

is  *  feareanb  DzcaD  (ball  fall  bpon 
them,  by  the  greatneffe  of  thine  armc 
they  (ball  be  as  mil  as  a  (tone,  till  thy 
people  paflc  oticr,  £>  %  ©in  ©,  till  the 
people  pa(Tc  oucr  Wbtcf)  thou  baft pur 
thafeb. 

17  Xbou  (halt  bztng  them  In,  anb 
plant  them  in  the  mountamc  of  thine 
mhentance ,  m  the  place,  50  fL©isir», 
which  thou  baft  mabc  foz  tljcc  to  DWell 
in,  in  the  Sanctuary,  <D  IL©i5£\  which 
thy banosbauc  cftabh'tbeD. 

15  XbeJLouDfbalrcigncfozcucr 

anb  eucr. 


19  iFoztbebozfc of  pharaoh umuin 
With  his  charcts  anb  Witt)  his  tymiv 
men  into  the  fca ,  ano  the  %®xxz> 
bzougbt  agamc  the  waters  of  the  £>ea 
bpon  them :  But  the  crjilDzcu  of  jjjfrael 
W  cnt  on  Due  lanb  in  the  mios  of  rlje  fca. 

20  c^nb  flJUiriam  the  pzopbeteffc 
the  fitter  of  3laron,  cooUc  attmbzclim 
her  hanb,  anb  all  the  Women  Went  out 
after  bcr ,  Witt)  mnbzels  j  Witt)  Dances. 

21  3nb  fiptnam  anfrocrcD  them, 
Sung  ye  to  the  %  ©  is  ©,  foz  he  hath  trt 
umphcD  alonoufly :  tiie  rjojCe  ano  h«s 
nDer  hath  he  thjoWcn  into  the  fca. 

22  5)0  43ofes  biought  3}fraclfrom 
the  r co  fca,  anb  they  went  out  into  the 
WUDcrtieiTc  of  S>hur :  anD  they  Went 
tl)Kc  oayes  m  the  WilbernelTe,  anb 
founb  no  water. 

23  c  ^nb  When  rtjcy  came  to  ^Sa- 
rah ,thcycoulb  not  bunftc  of  the  waters 
of  ii0arah,  fo:  they  Were  bitter :  there* 
foze  the  name  of  it  was  callcb  si  *35arah. 

24  3inb  the  people  murmureD  a* 
gamtt  C0ofcs,  faying ,  w\)at  (l;ail  Wee 
Dnnbc^ 

25  3nD  he  cricb  bnto  the  1L  ©  a  © : 
anb  the  ?L©ise>  (hcWcb  hun  a  *  tree, 
Whtch  Whcnhcc  haD  cart  into  the  wa* 
ters,  the  waters  Were  maDe  frocete : 
thcrehcmaDe  attatute  fan  ozDinauce, 
ano  rtjere  hcpzoucD  them, 

26  ^nD(aiD,3Ifthouwatbaigcnrty 
hcarben  to  the  boicc  of  rfjc  1L  ©  is  ©  thy 
C5ob,  anb  Wilt  boe  that  Which  is  right 
in  hts  fight ,  anb  Wilt  glue  care  to  his 
Commanbcmcnts ,  anD  Uccpc  all  his 
Statutes,  35  Will  put  none  of  tl)efc  Dtfc 
cafes  bpon  thecwhtch  3  hauc  b:ought 
bpon  the  €gypnans  :  foz  3  am  rtjc 
%  ©is©  that  hcaicth  thee. 

x7  C  *  ^3nD  they  came  to  €Um: 
Where  were  tWclue  Wcls  of  Water,  anD 
thzcefcoze  anD  ten  paimc  trccs,anD  rtjey 
encampcD  there  by  the  waters. 

CHAP.  XVI. 

i  The  Ifraclites  come  Co  Sin.  i  The  ttwr- 
mureior  wjntot  bredd.  4  God  promifeth 
them  bread  from  heauen.  11  Qtjailes  are 
fent,  14  and  Manna.  16  The  orderingot 
Manna.  15  It  was  not  to  bee  round  on  the 
Sabbath.  31  AnOmerot  it  is  preferued. 

e£«83*£"jg>  iI5Dthcytooltc  thclriour 
mFMm  ncrfroin cum.aiioalltrjc 
^^W^  Congregation  of  thechil 
|^\S  Dzenof  ^fracl  came  bnto 
the  wtlDcrneffe  of  5>m, 
which 


Tlut  ij. 

Ulttfr'nrfic . 


•  Ecclus. 
38.5. 


*  Num.  j  j- 
9- 


o 


Murmuring. 


Exodus.     Quailcs.    Manna. 


f  Hebr,  tht 

portion  of  A 
day  in  hu 


"Chap.  I  3 

11. 


\bhirh  us  bctnncnc  €  urn  anb  dtnai,  on 
tlie  fifteenth  bav  of  the  fcconb  moncth 
after  their  ocpamng  out  of  the  lanb  of 
egvpt. 

i  anb  tl)c  lbhote  Congregation  of 
trjc  cf)ilo;ni  of  "jfrael  murmureb  » 
gainQ  t^ofes  ano  aaron  in  the  XDilDer= 
ncfTc. 

$  ano  the  chflb;en  of  3Jfracl  faibe 
bnto  them,  looulb  to  <5ob  ibec  hab 
bicbby  the  hanb  of  the  IL©is©  mthc 
lanb  of  cgvpt ,  ibhcn  tbec  fate  bv  the 
flefl)pots,  and  uihen  tt>e  bib  catcb;cao 
to  the  full:  fo;vchaueb;onghtbsfo;th 
into  this  IMDcrnclTc,  to  Hill  tljts  rbbolc 
alTcmblvibitl)  hunger. 

4-  <f%hcu  faib  thefLoia©  bnto 
£0ofcs,  zScholb,  3Jtt)Ulramcb;eab 
from  heauen  fo;  vou :  anb  the  people 
(hall  goc  out ,  anb  gather  ta  ccrtamc 
rate  eucrpoav^atj  map  pjoucthcni, 
ibhcthcr  thev  tbill  lbaiHc  inmvUaib, 
o;no. 

5  anb  it  (hall  come  to  paffe,thaton 
the  firt  bap ,  tiirp  (hall  picparc  that 
ibhich  thev  b:mg  m,anb  tt  fliaii  be  tibuc 
as  much  as  they  gather  baplv- 

6  anbi^ofesano  aaron  faib  bnto 
all  the  chilD;cn  of  3Jfracl,  at  cucn.tbcn 
vc  (hail  fcnorb  that  the  &0ia©  hath 
bzought  vou  out  from  the  lanb  of  e> 

SVPt. 

7  anbmthcmo2ning,thcnpcfhaU 
fee  the  glo;v  of  the  %  ©  is  ©,  fo;  that  he 
hearcth  vour  murmurings  agatnfi  trjc 
JLohd:  ano  lbhat  ate  ibee,  that  pee 
mucmurcagatnftbsf 

S  anb  £|3ofcs  faib,  This  fhaibettmcn 
the  3U>is©  (bal  gute  vou  m  the  cucmng 
ftefhto  eate,  anb  in  the  morning  b;cab 
to  ttie  full :  fo:  that  the  %  sd  is  ©  hca= 
rcth  vour  murmurings  Ibhich  ve  mur- 
mure  agaiuft  him .  anb  ttiljat  are  wee  *. 
vour  murmurings  arc  notagamffbs, 
butagainftthc1L«Dis©. 

9  «Eanbi$)ofcsrpalscbntoaaron, 
£>avbnto  all  tlie  Congregation  of  the 
rhilbJen  of  Ufracl,  Come  necrc  bcfo;c 
the  1L  &  is  © :  fo;  hec  hath  hcarb  vour 
murmurings. 

io  ano  it  tame  to  pafTc  as  aaron 
fpaftebnto  the nmolc Congregation  of 
the  (htlb:en  of  Jfracl,  that  thev  looacb 
tottjarbthcttuiocriicfrcanbbcboib.thc 
gio;v  of  the  %  <s>  is  ©  *  appcareb  m  the 
tiouoc. 

ii  C  anb  the  H  o  is  ©  fpaac  bnto 
£)3ofcs,faving, 

ii  3  haue  hcarb  the  murmurings 


of  the  chilbzcu  of  3)frarl:  ^»peafte  bnto 
them,  laying,  at  tucn  vc  (hall  eat  flefh, 
anb  in  the  morning  ycfbaibc  nlieb  llnth 
b;cao :  anb  vc  thai  bnoib  that  3  am  the 
%<$>  is  ©vour  (Sob. 

ij  ^nb  ucametopafTc,  rhatatencn 
*  the  Quailcs  tame  bp.anocouetcbthc 
campe:  anb  mthc  morning  the  btlb  lav 
rounb  about  the  hoftc. 

14  anb  U>hcn  *the  betbe  that  lav 
ibas  gonebp,  bcholb,  bpou  the  face  or 
thelbilbcrncfte  tl)tre  lavafmallrounb 
thing,  as  fmau  as  the  hoare  froft  on  the 
gcounb. 

15  anblbhenthcchilb«nof3lfracl 
faib  u,  thcvfaib  one  to  another,  i|  Jt  is 
£0anna:  fo;theyttHft  notibhat  it  was. 


ano  Q)ofcs  faib  bnto  them,  *Xl)iSis 
the  b;cab  ibhich  the  &sDK©hath  gi 
ucn  you  to  care. 

16  c  Xftis  «  the  thing  ibhich  the 
%  o  is  ©  hath  commanbeb :  gather  of 
u  euerv  man  accoibmg  to  his  eating : 
anstDmer  1fo;  euerv  man,  accojbmgto 
t\)t  number  of  vour  t  pcrfons,  tafee  vec 
euerv  man  fo;  them  Ibhich  arc  m  tys 
tents. 

17  3lnbthcchilb2cnof^fraelbibfo, 
anb  gatl)trebfomc  mo;e,  fomc  leffe. 

is  anb  ibhcn  thev  bib  mete  ii  ttnth 
an£)mcr,*hcthatgathcrcbmuth,hab 
nothing  ouer ,  anb  he  that  gathcrcb 
luie,  hab  no  latbe :  thev  gathcrcb  euerv 
man  atco;bing  to  hts  canng. 

19  anb  ©ofcsfaibe,  Hctnoman 
leaueof  it  tiutlic  morning. 

io  /5otibtthftanbing  thev  hearse; 
neb  not  bnto  f0ofts,  but  fomc  of  them 
left  of  it  bnniithcmomuig,  anbub;cb 
tt)o;mcs,anb  ftantte :  anbJ^ofcs  ibas 
lb;othtt)Uhthcm. 

ii  anbthev  gathcrcb  tt  euerv  mot 
rung,  euerv  man  acto2bmg  to  his  ea^ 
ting :  anb  \bhen  the  £>mm  ibarcb  hot, 
itmcltcb. 

2z  It  anb  it  tame  to  paftic  that  on 
the  firt  bav  thev  gathcrcb  tibice  as 
ninth  bzeab,  tibo  £)mcrs  fo;  one  man: 
anb  all  the  rulers  of  the  Congregation 
tame  ano  tolo^9ofcs. 

ij  anb  he  faib  bnto  them,  Xhisis 
that  lbhtth  the  %  €>  is  ©  hath  faib ,  Xo 
mo;rott)  i^Ujc  reft  of  theljolv  S»abbatl) 
bnto  the  Hois©  :baiitti)atlbbtrt)  vou 
ibillbaRc,tobay,anbfccthcthatveibi!l 
fecthe,  ano  that  ibhich  rcmameth  ouer, 
laybpfo;  pouto  be  bcptbtmilrhcmo^ 
mng. 

24.  anb  tljcvlaib  it  bp  nil  the  mo; 
mng, 


•Numb.  1 1 

•Numb.  1 1 
7.P&I78. 

14. wild  I  0 
20. 


[OT.wktt  V 
this  ?  ottf  U 
a  pertiCK. 

"loh.tf  ;i. 

I  Co:.  10  3 


\Hcbh 

foUt 

\  Htb.foula. 


•  bjr'.e 
rkiAd 


.Cot.  8 


M 


annareieruc 


ferued.       Ch 


•Ioffi.j. 

i  i.nehtm. 


tung,  as  ©ofes  bane :  anD  it  DtD  not 
fhnfee,  neither  Xbas  there  any  lbo?me 
therein. 

15  3uiD£0ofesiaiDe,  care  that  to 
Day ,  foz  to  Day  is  a  §>abbatb  Dnto  tine 
lLoED:joDavyetfl)aUnotBnDcitin 
tbefielD. 

is  <6>ire  Dayes  ye  tball  gather  it,  but 
on  ttjc  fcucntb  Day  which  is  the  S>abbatb, 
in  it  there  (ball  benonc. 

17  C3nDttcametopafrc,that  there 
tbent  out  fome  oftljc  people  on  the  fc 
ucntb  Day  fojito  gather,  anD  tbev  founD 
none. 

is  :8uDtbe  &<£«£>  faiD  bnto  £@o* 
fee ,  ft  oil)  long  refute  yee  to  bcepc  my 
ComnianDcments,am>  myiurbes* 

19  £>ce,  fo?  that  the  ft  ©h©  bath 
gtucnyou  the  Sabbat!) ,  ttjetefo?e  bee 
gtuctb  you  on  the  Get  Day  the  tyeaD  of 
ttbo  Dayes :  abiDeyceracrymanlnbts 
place  :Ictnomatigoc  out  ofbisplate  on 
tt)e  feuentl)  Day. 

30  $>o  ttje  people  ttflto  on  the  fe 
ucntt)  Day. 

31  auDtJ)ef)Ottfeof5fraeltallcDtr)f 
name  thereof  ©anna :  anD  it  was  ufte 
CoaanDcrfceD,  lbbtte:auDtbetafreof 
it  w « libe  tbafers  maDe  tbttb  bony. 

31  C3nD©ofts  faiD,  1Cbis>s  the 
thing  Vbbicb  the  !L©is©tommanDetb: 
Jftll  an  jDmer  of  tt  to  bee  ftept  fo2  y our 
generations ,  that  they  may  fee  the 
bjcaD  tbbcreibitb  3J  haue  feb  you  in  the 
rotlDctnefie,tbhen  J  brought  youfojtb 
fcomthclanDofcgvpt. 

33  3nD  ©ofes  fayD  into  aaron, 
ICabcapot,  anD  put  an  £>mer  full  of 
©anna  therein,  anD  lay  it  bp  before  the 
%  ©  is  jz>  ,  to  be  bept  fo?  y  our  generate 
ons. 

34  ^sthelLfiDiBj©  tommaunDeD 
©ofcs,fo  3aron  layD  tt  bp  befo?e  the 
l£e(hmonie,tobcfeept. 

35  3nD  the  chrtDitcn  of  3IftaelDiD  eat 
©annafbnleyceres,  'bntill  they  came 
to  alanDtnbabiteD :  they  DtD  cate$)arb 
na.bMilltbey  came  bnto  tbebo;sDcrsof 
the  lanD  of  Canaan. 

36  flavo  an  Dmet  is  the  tenth  part 
ofanephah. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

The  people  murmure  for  water  at  Rephidim. 
5  God  fendeth  h  im  for  w ater  to  the  rocke  in 
Horeb.  8  Amalck  is  ouercome  by  the  hol- 
ding vp  of  Moles  hands.  15  Mofesbuil- 
deth  the  Altar  1EHOVAH  Nifii. 


Mu 


rmunn 


£■ 


Qf&H  J15D  atl  the  Congregation 
a  of  the  cbilDicn  ofjfrael 
tourneyeD  from  the  Boih 
Dement  ofc&tn  after  their 
_  iourncys,atfoJDmgtothe 
comniaiiDcment  of  the  %  £>  is  3® ,  anD 
pttebeD  in  JRepbiDim  :anb  there  was  no 
roatcrfoj  the  people  toDntiRc. 

i  nabctefoje  *  the  people  did  cbibe 
ibitb  ©ofes  anD  faiD,  <Bt\xt  bsibattt 
tbatibccmayDnnbe.  3lnD  €9ofes  faiD 
bntothem,  narjy  chibe  you  ibttbmee; 
D@herefo?eDoeyetemptthc  %  ©kjb* 

3  3nD  the  people  tbtrfreD  there  foj 
tbater ,  anD  tf)c  people  murmurcD  a? 
gamtl  ©ofes ,  anD  faiD ,  naberefoje  is 
this  that  thou  bafi  brought  bs  bp  out 
of  €gypt,  to  bill  bs  anD  our  cbilDjen, 
anD  our  cattelltbith  thirfU 

4  anD  ©ofes  criebbnto  tbefLosB©, 
faytng,D9bat  fljali  3  Doe  bnto  this  peo* 
pic  <  they  be  almofl  reaby  to  from  me. 

5  2lnD  the  %  a>  is  5©  faiD  bnto  ©o- 
its,  <Bot  on  before  the  people,  anD  carte 
ibitb  thee  of  the  cioersof  3lfracl :  anD 
thy  roD  ibbercibttb  *  thou  fmoteft  the 
riucr ,  tahc  in  thine  hanD,anD  goe. 

6  *25eholD,5tt)fllftanD  before  thee 
there ,  bpon  the  rotbe  in  $ojeb ,  anb 
thou  (halt  finite  the  rotbe ,  anD  there 
(hall  come  ibater  out  oftt,  tl)at  the  peo- 
ple may  Djinbe.  Zvm  ©ofes  Did  fo,m 
the  fight  of  the  cidccs  of  ^fracl. 

7  anD  hee  tallcD  the  name  of  the 
place  II  ©atfab ,  anD  ||  ©ertbah ,  be  caufc 
of  the  cljiDing  oftheehilDzcnof^fracl, 
anD  becanfe  they  temptcb  tije  %  0  is  ©, 
faying ,  3!s  the?,  ©is©  amongtt  bs, 
o?not< 

8  C*£hencame3male&#fbugbt 
ibtth^fi'ael  UiBepbiDim. 

9  !anD  ©ofes  fiiib  bnto  *3Jofbua, 
Choofebsoutmen,  anDgocout,  fight 
tblth  ^maleb :  to  mojrolb  3J  tbill  ftanD 
on  the  top  of  tbebiii,  toitbtberoDDeof 
©oDinminchanD. 

10  &>o  3JoO)ua  Did  as  ©ofes  haD 

faiDto  him,  anD  fougbttbitt)3tmaleb : 

anD  ^ofes ,  3aron,  anD  ^ur  Vbent  bp 

to  the  top  of  the  hill, 
ii  anDttcametopaiTcibbenWes 

helD  bp  hts  hanD ,  that  Hfrael  pzeuai 
leD :  anDtbhen  he  let  Dolbne  his  hanD 
3maiebp?cuailcD. 

u  ffiut  ©ofes  banDS  ibere  heauie, 
anD  they  toobe  a  fionc,  anD  put  it  btiDcc 
Dim,  anD  h«  fate  thereon:  anD^arou 
anDfturftaycD  bp  fjishanDS,  the  one 
on  the  one  GDc,  anD  the  other  on  the  0 = 
(35  3  ther 


1  Nurti.  ao. 


•Ch>P.7. 

10, 

•  Num.  jo. 
ii.pfal.78. 
1  j.ind  105 
-fi.wif.  : 
4  l.cor.io. 
4- 


II  Tint  i«, 

TentMtton. 

||  That  is. 
ChiiiiH':  or, 
ftrifi.  * 

'Dcut.  »j. 
17.wif.11. 

J- 

•  Called  h 
ful,A(ft».7. 
45- 


Mofeshisfonnes.       Exodus.      Iethros  counfell  to 


•  Num.  24 
20.1. fara, 

"5  3- 

Thati), 

The  Lord 

11  banner. 

Orjtecttnfe 
theh.tndoi 
Amalckw 
.terainU  the 
throne  of  the 
Lord,  ther- 
fore  c?  c . 
Heir. The 
hand 'j port 
the  throne  of 
the  Lard. 


•Chap.l. 
i<5. 


•Chap.  2. 

22. 

E  Thar  is, 

es4 '  jirnnger 

there. 

IJThatis, 

my  CjoduAn 

help. 


\Heb.je. 


rt)tr  (toe,  anb  his  banbes  were  tteabp 
tontill  the  going  bottnc  ofthc5>unuc. 

13  anb  3!ofl)ua  bifcomftteb  ama 
left,  anb  his  people,ttith  ttje  eDgt  oftije 
froo?b.  ^ 

14.  anb  flic  1L  if>  is  ©  fail)  tonto  fl)9o* 
fes ,  nD?ttc  tl)is  fo?  a  memo?iall  m  a 
bootte ,  anb  rebcarfe  it  m  flic  tares  of 
"JoiTiua :  fo?  *3J  ttill  totter lp  put  out  the 
remcmb?ancc  of  amaiea  fromtonber 
beauen. 

15  anb  4H3ofts  built  an  aitar ,  anb 
taiicb  the  namcof  it|l3ie$i©lia$ 
iI5ifTu 

16  jffo?bcfeib,||2Secaufctbe?L<DisE> 

l)atl)  fltWUe  that  tf)t  ft  ©IB©  will  haue 

ttarre  ttith  amalca  from  generation 
to  generation. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

1  Ietliro  bringeth  to  Mofcs  his  wife  and 
two  Tonnes.  7  Mofes  cntertainelh  him. 
13  Iethros  counfell  is  accepted.  17  Ie. 
thro  departeth. 

f£  $en*  3Jctb?o  the  pii(ft  of 
$j)tbian  ,J$)ofes  father  m 
latt,bcarb  of  all  that  ©ob 
bab  bone  fo?  s$?ofcs,anb 
fo?  3ifracl  bis  people, and 
trjat  the  %  ©is  jd  bab  brought  Jfrael 
outof€gppt: 

z  %i)tn  3Fetfj20  QDofes  father  in 
latb  tooftc  Zippo?ah  fi^ofes  ttife,  after 
bcbabfcntbcrbacBe, 

3  anbbertttofonncs.oftthtrbtbc 
*  name  of  the  one  was  ||  ©crlhom :  fo?  he 
faib,3  banc  bene  anaiictunafrcangc 
lanb. 

4.  anb  the  name  of  the  other  was  ||<& 
UC3er :  fo?  the  ©ob  of  nip  father /aid  he, 
was  nunc bripc,  anb  bcliuereb  me  from 
the  fruozb  of  Pharaoh. 

5  anb  J  ctb?oi$Qfcs  father  in  latt 
camcttitb  hisfonnes  anb  btstttfeton' 
to  20ofcs  into  the  ttiltocrnes,  ttljcrc  he 
encampeb  at  the  mount  of  C5ob. 

6  anb  he  faib  tonto  s^ofes,  3J  rt)v 
father  m  latt  gicflno  am  tome  tonto 
thee,  anb  flip  ttife,  anb  her  ttto  founts 
tttth  her. 

7  C  anb  £0ofcs  ttent  out  to  mecte 
his  faflicr  m  latt ,  anb  bib  obepfante, 
anbRiffcblnm:  anb  thep  afftcb  earho 
thcr  of  iiu-i.  t  Welfare,  anb  thep  came  in 
to  the  tern. 

8  ^nb  tWcstolb  bis  father  in  latb, 
all  that  the  Ho  is©  hab  bone  buto 
Pharaoh,  anb  to  the  egppnans  fo?  3lf 
racls  fabc,  and  all  rt)t  trauailc  fljat  hab 


•Chap.l. 
10, 16,12. 
and  j.  7. 
and  14. 18 


tcometopon  them  bpthetbap,anDiiow  t^jw 
the  %  ©  k  ©  beliucreb  them. 

9  anb  3lcth20  reioptcb  fo?  all  the 
goobnelTc  iul)icl)trje1LfiDi5jr>  babbouc 
to  gjfracl :  tthom  he  hab  beliuereb  out 
of  the  hanb  otrhc€gpptiaiis. 

10  anb3Jcthiofaib,26icHebbethe 
H©is©,ttho  ftatb  beliuereb  pou  out 
of  the  hanb  of  the  Egyptians ,  anb  out 
of  thchanb  ofpbaraob,ttbo  batbbeti? 
ucrcb  the  people  from  tmber  the  hanb 
of  the  (ffigpptians. 

11  iBott)  31  nnott  that  the  1L€ms© 
is  greater  then  all  gobs :  *  fo?  in  the 
thing  ttherem  tbep  bealt  pjoublp ,  hee 
wasaboucthem. 

u  anb  3Jcthio,  ©ofes  father  in 
latt,  toobt  a  burnt  offering  anb  fatn> 
fitcs  fo?  ©ob :  anb  aaron  tame,  anb  all 
the  fibers  of  3Jfrael,  tocatbjeab  tttth 
#ofes  father  mlattbefbie  d5ob. 

13  canbittamctopaiTeonthemo?' 
rott,  that  Ugtofcs  fate  to  mbge  the  peo- 
ple :  anb  the  people  ftoob  op  i10ofes, 
from  the  morning  tonto  the  eutmng. 

14  anb  tthen^ofes  father  in  latt 
fatt  all  that  he  bib  to  the  people,  he  faib, 
iBhat  is  this  thing  that  thou  botft  to 
the  people  <  J©hp  fitted  thou  thp  felfe  a 
lone,  anb  all  the  people  ttanb  bp  thee 
!  from  mo jning  bnto  euen< 

15  anb  £|9ofcs  faib  tonto  hts  faflier 
in  latt ,  iSctaufc  the  people  tome  tonto 
'me  to  enquire  of  d5ob. 

16  ©hen  thep  haue  a  matter ,  thep 
!  tome  tonto  nice ,  anb  3  tut>8c  betttcene 
t  one  anb  anoflier ,  anb  51  boc  mafee 
them  Riiott  the  fratutcs  of  (Sob  anb  hts 
ILattes. 

17  anb  ©ofes  father  in  latt  Taibe 
tonto  htm,  Xhe thing  that  thouboctt, 
isnotgoob. 

18  t  fThou  ttilt  furclp  ttcar e  attap, 
both  thou,  anb  flits  people  that  is  tttth 
thee :  fo:  this  thing  is  too  heaup  fo? 
thee ;  *  thou  art  notable  to  pcrfomte  it 
thp  felfe  alone. 

19  ^earHctt  nott  tonto  nip  toopte,  3J 
ttill  gtuc  thee  counfell, anb  <£ob  fliail 
bettithrtiec:  23e  thou  fo?  the  people  to 
(5obttarb,  that  thou  niapeft  b?uigrtic 
taufes  tonto  <5ob: 

20  anb  thou  fhalt  trad)  them  o?bi 
nances  anb  lattes,anb  (halt  fliett  them 
the  ttap  ttherem  thep  mud  ttalfce,  anb 
the  ttozUe  that  flirpmuft  boc. 

21  $9o?couer  thouflialt  p?otubcout 
of  all  the  people  able  men ,  fuch  as  fcare 
©ob, men  of  trueth ,  hatmg  couetouf* 

neffe. 


1  Hebra 
nun  attd  hie 
fellow. 


\Helr.Ft- 
Ainf  then 
■mltJAde. 


'Dcut.I.p. 


Mofes,obeyed.  The  Chap.xix.        peoples  promife 


•Aa$7.38 


*Dcut.  5  J. 


neffe ,  anb  plate  fuch  ouer  tijtin,  to  bee 
rulers  of  tboufanbs ,  anb  rulers  of 
bunb;eos,  rulers  of  fifties  ,anb  rulers 
oftenncs. 

n  2nb  let them iubgc  the  peoplcat 
allfeafons:  ano  tt  (bail  bee  rliat  cucrp 
great  matter  ttjrp  fliail  bnngbnto  thee, 
but  euerp  fniau  matter  thep  thai  iubgc : 
fo  (ball  u  be  caficr  fo?  ttj-p  felfc,  ano  thep 
(ball  bcare  the  burden  n)ith  thee. 

15  3!fthon  (bait  boe  this  thing,  anb 
(Sob  tommanb  thectb,  tbentboufbait 
bee  able  to  enbure,  anb  all  this  people 
rbaiiaifo  goetotbeir  piaccmpcacc. 

14  So  £0ofes  bearacneb  to  tlje 
boiec  of  Ijts  father  in  laib ,  anb  bib  all 
thathchabfaib. 

15  anbOBofcscbofcablemcnontof 
all3Jfracl,  anbmabc  them  heabs  ouer 
the  people,  rulers  of  tboufanbs,  rulers 
of  hunbjebs,  rulers  of  fifties,  anb  ru- 
lers of  tennes. 

16  3mbtbcpinbgcb  tbcpcoplcatau 
fcafons:  the  barb  taufes  rt)ep  b;ougt)t 
bnto  £0ofes,  but  cucrp  fmail  matter 
thep  iubgcb  tfjemfclues. 

17  C3wb^ofcs  let  his  father  tn 
laibbcpart,  anb  he  ibent  l)is  ibaptnto 
htsolbncianb. 

CHAP.   XIX. 

1  Thepeople  come  to  Sinai.  3  GodsmeiTage 
byMofesvntothe  people  out  of  the  mount. 
8  The  peoples  anfwere  returned  againe. 
10  Thepeople  areprepared  againft  the  third 
day.  u  The  mountaine  muft  not  be  tou- 
ched- \6  The  fearefull  prefence  of  God 
vpon  the  Mount. 

5i5  fhethirb  monetb  tbhen 
the  dnltyen  of  3lfracl 
iberc  gone  fo?tb  out  of  the 
lanb  of  Cgppt,  the  Came 
bap  tame  the?  mto  the 
IbUberncffe  of  Sinai. 

1  ifoj  thep  bjerebepartcb  from  Ute 
phtbtm,anbrbetccomcto  the  befcrt  of 
Sinai,  anb  hab  pitehcb  m  the  ibUber* 
neffe,  anb  there  3ifracl  tampcb  before 
themount. 

j  5tnb*^ofestt)cntbpnntod5ob: 
anb  the  %  ©  is  ©  tailcb  bnto  him  out  of 
the  mountaine,  faptng,  Xhustbalt 
thou  fap  to  the  houfe  of  3!acob,  anb  tell 
thcthilbjenof3tftael: 

4  *  jac  hauc  fecne  lbbat  31  m  bnto 
the  £gppttans,anb  boib  3  barcpou  on 
€agles  lbtngs,  ano  brought  pou  Unto 
mpfelfe. 


5  Jfrourtberfoieifpeibillobcpmp 
boitc  moceb,  anb  aeepc  inp  touenant, 
thenpefball  bcapeculiartrcafurcbnto 
ine  aboue  all  people :  foi  *all  the  earth 
is  mute. 

6  3nb  pe  (bail  be  bnto  me  a  *  atng 
borne  of  j&ieftcs,  anb  an  bolp  nation. 
Xhefearetlje  rbojocsujbicbtuoulhait 
{pcaac  bnto  tlje  rhttbmi  of  Jjfrael. 

7  C3nb  #ofcs  tame  anb  taiiebfo? 
the  €lbcrs  of  the  people,  ano  lapb  be 
fee  their  fatesail  thefc  ujojocs  ibhtth 
thelitis©  commanbebhlm. 

8  3nb*ailthepcoplcanfioercbtO' 
gethct,anb£aib,  3111  that  the  Jl©«© 
hathujoften,  Vbeibillboc.  3mb  Chores 
returneb  the  ibo;!bes  of  the  people  onto 
then©  is©. 

9  3nb theft© K©feibbnto $)o-- 
fes,  Hoc,  3  tome  bntotbeeinatbictte 
cioub.tbat  thcpcoplcmap  hearerbben 
31  fpealtc  ibith  thee.ano  belecue  thee  fo? 
euer  :  2inb  #ofcs  tolbthe  Ibojbcsof 
the  people  bnto  the  %  ©  s  ©. 

io  c  3no  the  2L  ©  is  ©  fatbc  bnto 
Q3ofcs,  d5oc  bnto  thepeople,  anb  fan; 
enfic  them  to  bap  anb  to  mojcoib ,  anb 
let  them  iba(b  their  clothes. 

ii  3no  be  rcabp  againft  the  thirbc 
bap :  fo?  the  thirb  bap  the  %  ©  k  ©  ibtu 
come  bourne  in  the  fight  of  an  tihcpco= 
pie,  bpon  mount  Sinai. 

u  3lnb  thou  (halt  fet  bounbs  bnto 
thepeople  rounb  about,  (apuig,  Xaae 
heebto  pourftlues,  thatpegocnot  bp 
into  the  mount,o?  touch  the  bozber  of  it: 
*  rbbofoeuet  touchtth  the  mount ,  (hall 
bcfurclpputtooeatb. 

ij  Xhcrc  (ball  not  a  hanb  touch  it, 
but  he  (ball  furelp  beftoneb  on  (hot  tho 
r  otb,Tbhether  it  be  beaft,  0}  man,tt  fl)aii 
not  liue :  ibhen  the  ||  trumpet  ibunbeth 
long,  thep  (ball  come  bp  to  the  mount 

14  CSnb^ofesibcntbottincfrom 
the  mount  bnto  the- people,  anbfanctt; 
fieb  the  people;  anb  thep  ibafticbthetr 
clothes. 

15  Smbbcclaib  bnto  the  people,  25c 
reabpagainftthethttb  bap:  comenot  at 
poutibiues. 

16  C^nbttcametopaffeonthctbirb 
bap  in  the  mowing ,  that  there  Xberc 
thunbersanb  lightnings,  anbatbicftc 
cloub  bpon  the  mount,  ano  the  bopce 
of  the  trumpet  crcecbtng  lotbb ,  fo 
that  all  the  people  that  ibas  tn  the 
campctrcmblco. 

17  3inb  flpofes  brought  fooith  the 
people  out  of  the  campc  to  meete  ibith 

cson 


'Dcut 


J  > 


"Dcut  to. 
4  pfal-2^. 

'  l.Pct.j.9. 
rcucl.1 .6. 


"  Chap.14. 
;, 7. dcut. 5 
■  7&:i6. 
■7- 


•Hcb.u. 


|Or,C«w« 


Th 


etenne 


Exodus.    Commandcments. 


•Dcut.4. 


\Htb.con.. 

t<n. 


*Dnir.j.«. 
pfal.81.  10 


1  Hch.fr. 

H.U.H. 


•Lfuir.  i(. 

i.f.fal.517. 

7- 


Gob ,  anb  thep  ftoob  at  the  nether  pact 
of  the  mount. 

is  Stub  "mount  jS>maiibas alto gc 
ther on  a  fmoBe,  becaufe the  JLouv? 
Dtfccnoeo  bpon  it  in  fire :  anb  thefmobc 
thereof  afcenocb  as  the  fmoae  of  a  fur- 
nace ,  ano  the  whole  mount  cma&eb 
gccatip. 

19  3lnb  lbhcn  the  bopte  of  the  trunt= 
pet  founbeb  long,  ano  ibajccb  lotbbcr 
anb  loibbcr ,  £JMcsfpaBe>anb  Gob  an- 
frocrebhimbpabopce. 

20  3mt>  thc?L©ia©  tamebolbne 
bpon  mount  &lnai ,  on  the  top  of  the 
mount:  ano  the  ?L©  is© calico Q9ofcs 
vp  to  the  top  of  the  mount ,  anD  £J9ofes 
ibentbp. 

21  anbtbclL©i3©(aibbnto£Po< 
fes,GoeDoibnc,tthargethepeople,lcft 
the?  bjcaftethojolb  bnto  the  !L©«© 
to  ga5e,anu  manp  of  them  pert(b. 

12  anD  let  the  0?icftcs  alfo  tt>i)irt) 
tome  neece  to  the  1L©is©  ,  fanttifie 
themfelues ,  left  the  %  ©  is  ©  fyeabc 
foo:th  bpon  them. 

23  anb  $)ofesraiD  bnto  thelL©iR©, 
Xhc  people  tannot  tome  Dp  to  mount 
£>inai:  fo?  thou  thargebft  bs,  facing, 
3>ct  bounbs  about  themount,  anb  fan^ 
etifieit. 

24  anbthc1L©iB©laibbntohim, 
a\bap,  get  thccbotbnc,anb  thou  (halt 
tome  bp,  thou ,  anb  aaron  tbith  tfjec : 
but  let  not  the  ^neftes  anb  the  people 
bzeabe  thJOtigh ,  to  tome  bp  bnto  the 
%  ©is  ©,  left  hec  bieafcc  foozth  bpon 
them. 

25  5>oi!J)ofcsibentborbnebntothc 
pcoplc,anb  (pane  bnto  them. 

CHAP.    XX. 

1  The  ten  Commandements.  1S  The  people 
arc  afraid.  10  Mofes  comforteth  them. 
11  Idolatrie  is  forbidden.  14  Ofwhatfort 
the  Altar  (Tiould  be. 


$M^£& tm'  ^of  >  luhich  hauc 
38ta$S(3*  biongbt  thec  out  of  the 
lanb  of  »£gppt,out  of  the  houfc  oft  bon- 
Dagc: 

j  Xhou  (bait  haue  no  other  Gobs 
before  me. 

4-  *  Xhou  (halt  not  malic  bnto  tbee 
anpgranmgimagcozanp  UUenefTe  of 
any  thin5  that  is  m  heaucn  abouc,o2  that 
ism  the  earth  beneath ,  02  that  is  m  the 


ttmtccbnbec  the  earth. 

5  Xhou  (halt  not  botb  botbne  th? 
fclfe  to  thcm,no2  fcrue  them :  jFo?  Ji  the 
!L  ©  is  ©  th  v  Go  0  am  a  tealous  Go  b  M 
Gtingtbe  imquitteof  the  fathers  bpon 
the  cbittuen,  bnto  the  tbirbe  anb  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  bate  me: 

6  anb  (betting  metep  bnto  thou 
fanbs  of  tbcmthatlouemce,anbBecpe 
mp  Commanbements. 

7  *  Xhou  (halt  not  tattc  the  /Ramc 
of  the  ft  ©  is  ©  tbp  Gob  in  bainc :  fo? 
tbdL©is  ©  tbill  not  bolbc  him  guilt 
lefte,  that  tabetb  his  /flame  in  batne. 

8  3Rcmembertbe<$>abbatbbap,to 
Becpcitholp. 

9  *  £>ire  bapes  (halt  thou  labour, 
anbboeailtbpttoifee: 

10  25ut  the  feucuth  bap  is  the  £>ab 
bath  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  tbp  Gob :  in  it  thou 
(baitnotbot  aup  ibo:fec,  thou, no?  tbp 
tonne,  no?  tbp  baughter,  tbp  manfer* 
uant ,  no?  tbp  mapo  feruant,  no?  tbp 
cattcii,  no?  tbp  ftranger  that  istttthin 
tbp  gates: 

11  jfo?  *  in  fire  bapes  the  U©  is© 
mabchcauen  anbcatth.thefea,  anb  all 
that  in  them  is ,  anb  refteb  the  fcucnth 
bap :  lbhcrefoic  the  %  ©  m  ©  bleflcb  the 
Sabbath  bap.anb  ha(otbeb  it. 

12  €  *  honour  thp  father  anb  thp 
mother :  thatthp  bapes  map  bee  long 
bpon  the  lanb ,  tbhtcb  the  %  ©  is  jd  thp 
Gob  giucfh  thee. 

u  *  Xhou  (halt  not  mil. 

14  Xhou  (halt  not  tommit  abutter  p. 

15  Xboulhattnotfteale. 

16  Xhou  (halt  not  bcarefalfclbitncs 
agamft  thp  neighbour. 

17  *Xhoufbaitnoteouetthpueigh 
boucs  houfe ,  thou  (halt  notcouct  thp 
neighboursibife,no2  his  man  feruant, 
no?  hismaib  feruant ,  no?  his  ore,  no? 
his  afle  ,1102  anp  thing  that  is  thp  nciQh^ 
bours. 

18  C  3nb  *  all  the  people  fatb  the 
thunbiings,  anb  the  lightnings,  anb 
the  noife  of  tbc  trumpet,  anb  the  moun 
taint  finoaing :  anb  Vbhen  the  people 
(arb  it ,  thep  remooueb ,  anb  ftoob  a 
farrcoff. 

19  ^nb  thep  faibc  bnto  €0ofes, 
*^pcaftc  thou  lbith  bs,  anb  ibte  ibrtl 
hcarc :  26ut  let  not  Gob  fpcanc  lbith 
bs,leftUjcbic. 

20  anb  flBofesfaiDbntothe  people, 
JFearc  not :  fo?  Gob  is  come  to  p?oouc 
pou ,  anb  that  his  fcarcmap  beebefojc 
pour  fates,  that  pe  fume  not. 

21  anb 


•Lcuir.  19. 
1 1.  dcut.  c. 

I  1  .  t:i3t[.  5  - 


"Chap.jj. 
1  z.ezcch. 
10,1  :.!ukf 
13.14. 


■Gene.!.'. 


•Dmc  j. 
\6.  mat.  1 5 
4.  cphci".  6 


•Matth.j. 
tl. 


•Rora.77 


•  Hcbr.  1 1 
.8. 


•Dnit  5. 
14.  and  iS 
16. 


Diuers  lawes, Chap.xxj.         and  ordinances. 


*Deut.:7. 
j.io(i.8. 

?'• 

\Htir.bmU 

hcvir.f. 


41.deuE.15 
1  j.icte.  34. 
I.f. 

\Hthr.m,lk 


Httr-fa- 


11  3(nD  the  people  ftooD  afarre  off, 
anD  ^Bofes  D2db  necre  bnto  tl»e  tlttcKe 
Darbcncs,  ibbcr  c  <5oD  rbas. 

11  C3tnD  the  lU^jDfasD  bnto  $to 
fes,  Xbus  tbeu  (bait  fap  bnto  the  ebu^ 
bienof  3lftart>  #«  haue  feme  rbat^J 
haue  tal&ebibttbpou  from  beauen. 

23  #efbaiinotmaKcibttbmegoD« 
of Glner  ,tuidjec  (ball  pe  maae  bnto  pou 
gobsofgolD. 

14.  c  3t"  3(ltar  of  earth  tbon  (bait 
mane  bnto  me,atti>  (bait  faerrfiee  there- 
on tbp  burnt  offerings,  anD  rhp  peace 
offerings,  tbpfbecpcanD  thine  oren: 
3Jn  all  places  finjerc  3  rcco2D  mp 
iBamc'j  ttnll  come  bnto  thee,  anD  3? 
ami  bieffc  thee. 

15  &nb  *  If  thou  Knit  matte  mee  an 
3Utar  of  tone ,  thou  (bait  not  t  btulD  it 
of  brlbrn  done :  fej  tf  toou  lift  bptbp 
toole  bpon  it£bou  baft  polluteo  it. 

16  /Scttber  (bait  thou  goe  top  op 
ftcps  bnto  ntinc3lltar ,  that  tbp  naaeb 
neue  be  not  Difrouereb  thereon. 

CHAP.   XXI. 

1  Lawes  formenferuants.  5  For  the  feruant 
whole  care  is  boared.  7  For  women  fer- 
uants.  11  Formanflaughtcr.  16  Forftea- 
lersofmeu.  17  For  curlers  of  parents.  18 
Fortiniteis.  11  For  a  hurt  by  chance.  18 
For auoxe that goareth.  33  Forhimthatis 
2n  occafion  of  harme. 

£>ib  tbefc  are  toe  3fuDgt* 
inrnts  lbbtcb  tbou  (bait 
fetbefbictbem. 

1  *3Jftboubupan$e; 
.  bjcvD  feruant ,  fire  pecrcs 
be  ft)aufemc,anD  in  the  fcuenth  he  (ball 
goe  out  free  fo2  nothing. 

5  3Jfnf  f^w  m  f  &V  binifclfcbe  (bai 
goe  out  bp  bmifclfc:ifbelberemarrtcb, 
then  bis  ttnfc  (bail  goe  out  tbitb  nun. 

4  'Jf  l)ts  matter  l)aue  gtucn  him  a 
tbtfc,  anD  fl)  e  haue  bonic  htm  fonnes  02 
Daughters  -,  the  ttnfc  anD  Ijcr  cftilD;cn 
(ball  be  her  maftcrs,anD  be  (hall  go  out 
bphlmfclfe. 

5  3tnD  if  the  feruant  t  (hall  plalnclp 
fap,3i  louf  >  np  matter ,  m  p  ttnfe.anD  mp 
chilbjen  ,3J  tbtll  not  goe  out  free : 

6  IDhenhts  matter  (ball  bnng  him 
bnto  the  3Jubges,  hec  (ball  alfobitng 
hun to  the  Doo2e,02  bnto  the  booje  poft, 
ano  his  niafter  (hall  boate  his  care 
through  tbith  an  aule,anb  he  (I>au  feruc 
htm  foi  euer. 

7  C  ^nb  if  a  man  fell  bisbaughter 


to  bcamapbfrruaut,  fljeenjallnotgoc 
outasthemcnfctiianteboe. 

8  3Jf(bctpica(e  not  her  matter  ,tbho 
hath  bctrotheD  her  to  h«mrcife ,  then 
(ball  he  let  her  be  tcbeemcb:  Xo  fell  her 
bnto  a  Orange  nation  hec  (ball  haue  no 
poiber,  feeing  he  hatlj  Dealt oeceitfuilr 
tt)ithher. 

9  3utb  if  he  banc  berrothcDbcr  bn 
to  hts  fonne,  hcfhallDcaictbsthheraf 
ter  the  mancr  of  Daughters. 

10  g?f  he  taftc  Ijtm  another  wife,  her 
fooD,hcr  rapment,anD  herDuetpofma- 
riagc  fhau  he  notDuntn'tfl). 

n  ^nDifheDoenottheferb^eehnto 
her,  then  (ball  (be  goe  outfrceibithout 
inonep. 

ii  <C*^ctI)atfmitethaman,fothat 
he  Die,  (baibe  furelp  put  to  Death. 

i}  &nD  if  a  man  Ipe  not  in  ibait ,  but 
<SoD  Dtlmer  him  mto  his  hanb,  then  *  3J 
mm  appoint  thee  a  place  ibbither  hec 
(ballflee: 

1+  25ut  if  a  jnan  tome  pjefumpru-- 
ouOp  bpon  hts  nnghbour  to  flap  him 
ibith  guile ,  thou  (bait  tabe  l;tm  from 
mine  Sltar ,  that  he  map  Dte. 

15  C  3nD  he  that  fmttetl)  his  father, 
0?  hts  mother ,  (bail  bee  furelp  put  to 
Death. 

i6  C3nDbetbatttealetbaman,anD 
ftlleth  htm,o?  ifhe  be  founb  m  his  hanD, 
he  (ball  fur  civ  be  put  to  Death. 

17  C  3lnD  *  bee  that  ||  curfeth  I)is  fa 
tbcro?bismother?fbflU  furelp  bee  put 
tobeath. 

18  C8nDifmcnflritictogetbcr,anD 
one  fmitc  |  another  rbtth  a  ftone ,  02 
ttHtb  his  ntt,anD  he  Die  not,  but  Ueepctb 
htsbcb: 

19  3f  hee  rif e  agatnc ,  anD  iDal&c  a 
bioaDbpon  h«s  ftaffe,  then  (ball  hec 
thatfmote  htm,benuit :  oncly  he  fliail 
papfxj2ttljc  loffe  of  his  tune,  auDfbail 
caufe  him  to  bctbiougbly  btaleb. 

io  OnDifa  man  fmitc  his  feruant, 
02  hts  mapD.Vbitb  a  rob  ,anD  bee  Dte  bit- 
Der  his  hanD ,  hec  (ball  bee  furelp  t  pu- 
nilbeD: 

11  /Bottbui)ftanDing,ifhe  continue 
a  Dap  02  tibo ,  bee  (bail  not  be  pumfljeb, 
fo2  he  is  bis  money. 

11  CIlfmcnttriucanDburtarbo- 
man  Ibith  cbtlD,fo  that  her  fruit  Depart 
from  her,  anD  petno  mifchtefe  fotlovb, 
he  (baibe  furelp  punt(l)eD ,  acco2Dingas 
the  Ibomans  bufbanb  Tbill  lap  bpon 
bun,  anD  bee  (ball  papas  tbc^JuDges 

determine. 

13  3nD 


fMdr.ie 
cutlitnihe 


'7- 

*  Dcut.  ip 
3« 


1  Lcu!r.  10 
9-prou.  20. 
70  much. 
■5  a  ms:h. 
7.10. 

Utk. 
I  Or   ku 

-Llour 


}ithr.  tea- 

fax- 


Htnfed. 


Diuerslawes, 


Exodus.  and  ordinances.! 


•  Lrulr.  14. 

O  dfut.l  9 

1 1,  match. 
S-38. 


•Gene. 9. 
5- 


25  31tiD  if anynufcbtefcfolloU),tbctt 
thou  (bait  guic  life  fo?  life, 

24  *<£ycfo2cye,tootbfo?toorb,banD 
fo?banD  ,footcfo2foote, 

25  iSucmng  fo:  burning.VbounD  fo? 
I  iliounD,  flnpc  foiflripc. 

i6  c^nbif  a  matt  finite  the  eve  of 
Ins  feruant ,  0?  tlje  eve  ofbtsmayD.tbat 
it  penfl) ,  bec  (ball  let  bun  got  ftcefo? 
btscyesfahc. 

27  3L\\n  if  be  finite  otit  btsmanfet*- 
uants  toot!) ,  0?  bis  ntayDc  fcruants 
tootl),  Dec  (bal  let  bun  goeftee  fo?  i)»s 
tooths  fattc. 

28  CJfanorcgojcamatt,  otaiDo* 
mau,tbattbcyDtc,tben*tbcocefbaibe 
finely  ftoncb,  anDinsflefbfballnot  be 
eaten :  but  the  oibner  of  the  ore  (ball  be 

ClllittC. 

29  aButtftbcorcUJcrcmonttopufb 
tt>ithbiSbo?nein  time  pad,  anb  it  hath 
bene  tefhficD  to  bis  oihncr ,  anD  l)e  Hart) 
not  Uept  bun  in  ,but  that  be  batb  HilleD 
a  man  0?  a  woman ;  the  ore  (bail  be  (to* 
neb ,  anc  bis  oVbner  alfo  (ball  becput  to 
bcatb. 

30  ^jfrbercbclaycbonbimafumme 
of  money ,  tben  be  (ball  giue  fo;  tl)c  can* 
fomc  ofljts  life,  lbbatfoeuccislaybbp' 
on  bun. 

j  1  nabctber  l)cc  t)*ue  go?cb  afonnc, 
02  baue  go2cb  a  baugbter ,  acco?Dtng  to 
tins  tubgement  (bail  it  bee  bone  bnto 
btm. 

32  3Jf  tbc  ote  fl)all  pttfb  a  man  fee* 
uant,  02  amayo  feruant,  bec  (ball  gtuc 
bnto  their  matter  tbtrty  fljcfeels  ,  anb 
tbcorcfbaibcftoncb. 

33  C-Hnb  if  a  man  (ball  open  a  pit,o? 
if  a  man  (ball  biggc  a  pit ,  anb  not  touec 
it,  anb  an  ore  0:  an  affc  fall  tbcrcin: 

34  Xbc  oibner  of  tbc  pit  (ball  matte 
it  qoob,and  giue  money  bnto  tbe  otbnct 
of  tbcm,ano  tbc  bcab  beatt  tbalbc  bis. 

35  C  ^nb  if  one  mans  ore  hurt  an- 
others,  tbat  be  bic,  then  they  (ball  fell 
tbc  lute  ore,  anb  buiibe  tbc  money  of  it, 
anb  the  ocab  ore  alfo  they  (baiibtutbe. 

36  5D2  if  tt  bec  imoilicit  tbat  the  ore 
bath  bfcD  to  pud)  in  tunc  part ,  anb  bis 
oUmcr  bath  not  ttcptbun  in.  becfl)all 
finely  pay  ore  fo:  ore,  anD  the  ocab  (ball 
bcbisolunc. 

CHAP.     XXII. 

1  Ofthefr.  5  Of  damma^e.  7  Of  trefpafTes. 
14  Ot  borrowing.  j6  Of  fornication.  18 
Of  witchcrafr.  19  Ot  beftialirie.  :o  Of 
idolatiic.    ri    Of  (hangers,  widowes,  and 


fatherlefle.  15  Ofvftirie.  2.6  Of  pledges. 
18  Of  reuerence  to  Magillrates.  ij  Of 
the  firft  fruits. 

Jf  a  man  fljai  ftealt  an  ore, 
o?a||(bccpe,anDthUit,o? 
Cclltt;befbalireft02cfiue 
ortnfo?  an  ore,anb  *  fonce 
(bcepefoiafbeepe. 
C3f  athlete  bee  tbttnbb?calung 

bp,  anb  be  fnuttcn  that  be  Oic,tbecc  (bal 

no  blooDbe(bcbfo?btm. 

3  3Jftbe£>unnebctifenbponbim, 
there  (ball  be  bloob  (beb  fo?  bun :  for  bee 
(boulb  malic  rallrcftitutton:  if  bebauc 
nothing,  then  he  (ball  bee  folbfo?  bis 
theft 

4  "Jftbe  theft  be  certamely  fottnD 
m  bis  banb  aiiuc ,  whether  it  bec  oce  o? 
affc,  02  fbccpcbc  (ball  retto?c  Double, 

5  C  iif  a  man  (ball  cauf c  a  Seltt  o? 
bntcyarb  to  be  eaten ,  anb  (ball  put  to 
bis  bcaft,  anb  (ball  fecbe  in  another 
tnans  ftclb :  of  the  bed  of  bis  olbne  fietD, 
anb  of  tbc  bed  of  bis  olbne  DthcyarD 
(ball  be  riiaHe  rettitutlon. 

6  C3ffireb?caRcout,ani)tatrbin 
tbo?ncs,  fo  that  the  ftatttcs  of  to?nc,o? 
the  (lanbtng  tome,  o?  tbe  fielb  be  confu 
mcb  therewith,  bee  that  btnDlcD  the  fire, 
(bail  finely  mahe  reftitution. 

7  C3)faman(balDcl(uettmtobis 
neighbour  money  o?  ftuffc  to  Kecpe,anD 
it  be  ftollcn  out  of  the  mans  houfctf  the 
tbtefc  be  founb,  let  bim  pay  Double. 

8  3Jf  the  tbicfc  be  not  founb ,  then 
themafter  of  the  boufc  (ballbc brought 
bnto  tbc^Jubgcs.to  fee  tbbetbec  be  baue 
put  bis  Tjanbe  bnto  bis  neighbours 
goobs. 

9  5fo?ailmaneroftrcfpafre,whether 
■tbe  fojorc,  fo?  affe,  fo?  (becpe,  fo?  rai 
ment,  or  fo?  any  maner  of  loft  thing, 
which  another  tballcngeth  to  bebis :  the 
taufc  of  both  parties  (ball  comcbefo?e 
tbc'Jjubgcs ,  and  ibhomc  riie  3Jubgcs 
fbaiiconDcnmcbcfballpap  Double  ton* 
to  bts  neighbour.  ■ 

10  3)f  amanbclmer  butobiS neigh- 
bour an  affc,  02  an  ore,  02  a  (beepe,  0? 
anybeafttoUccpc,anpttoic,o?bcburt, 
0?  D2iucn  away,  no  man  feemgit, 

11  Xbcn(baiianotbcoftbc!L<Pi3jr> 
be  bctibcenc  tbent  both ,  tbatbcebatb 
notputbis  banb  bntobts  neighbours 
goobs :  anb  the  owner  of  tt  (ball  accept 
thereof,  anD  be  (ball  not  mane  ttgoob. 

12  ^nb*  if  tt  be  ftollcn  from  bun,  be 
(ban  matte  refhtunon  tontotbc  oibner 
thereof. 

t±31 


[Or.^iwfr. 


i.Sun.i  :. 


•Gene.31. 


Diuerslawes,  Chap.xxiij.        and  ordinances. j 


'Deut.  21, 

:8. 


\H/l '.weigh 


•Dtut.13. 
13,14,15. 

I.C12C2.L4 

"Lcuit.  19. 
33- 


Z2C.7.10. 


'Lcuit.jj. 
37.dcu1.13 
19.pfal.15. 
J- 


*Ai),23  5 
Or,  luclgci 

Hrklhj 

fmhtfi. 

•Chip.i  3. 
2.H.&34 
•9- 


•Lcuir.n 
3'- 


13  3f  itb£tomcmpietes,thcnlcthun 
tying  tt  tor  Djtmcflc,  anb  hec  (hall  not 
matte  goob  ttjat  Which  mas  tome. 

14-  C  3nb  if  a  man  bojroWc  ought 
of  his  neighbour,  anottbehurt,  oibtc, 
the  owner  thereof  bttngnot  With  tt,  he 
(hail  furcly  matte  tt  goob. 

15  25uttf  tfteottinec  tljtceof  bcVbitl) 
tt,hcfl)aUnotniakc  it  goob :  3Jf  it  bee 
an  hircb  thing,  u  tame  to?  his  hire. 

16  C  3(nb  *  if  a  man  cntitc  a  matoc 
tljat  isnot  betrothcb,  anb  lie  With  her, 
Ijcrtjail  furely  enboW  her  to  be  his  Wife.  ] 

17  3f  her  father  bttcrly  reftifc  to ! 
giue  her  tonto  him,  he  fhail  t  pay  money 
attojbmg  to  the  bowjie  of  btrgins. 

18  CXhou  fhalt  not  fuffer  a  Witch 
to  Hue. 

19  C  J©hofoeuer  Ucth  tbitt)  a  beatt, 
(hall  fur  cly  be  put  to  bcath. 

10  C  *$ce  that  facrtficcth  bnto  any 
gobfaue  tonto  the  ILois©  onely,  hec 
fhau  be  tottcrly  beftroy  cb. 

ii  C  *  Xhou  (halt  neither  Pert  a 
Granger,  no?  oppjeffe  him :  fo?  ye  Were 
Itrangers  in  the  lanb  of  egypc 

11  C  *&tc  (hall  not  afflict  any  \x>v 
boW,o2fathcrlctTethtlb. 

2}  Jjf  thou  afflict  them  in  any  Wife, 
anb  they  tne  at  all  into  nice ,  3  Will 
furcly  hcarc  their  trie. 

24.  2nbmy  Wjath  (hail  ware  hore, 
anb  3  Will  bill  you  with  the  froozb : 
anb  your  Wtucs  fl)ail  be  WiUoWcs,  anb 
your  chtlbirenfathcrleffc. 

2$  C*3Jfthoulcnbnioncytoauyof 
my  people  that  is  poo?e  by  thee,  thou 
fhaltnotbc  to  himasanbfurcr  .neither 
(halt  thou  lay  Ppon  him  tofunc. 

i6  3if  thou  at  all  tafec  thy  neighbors 
raiment  to  plebge,  thou  (haltbcitticrit 
tmto  htm  by  that  the  fun  goeth  boibnc. 

17  :tfo;r  that  is  his  toucrtng  onely,  it 
is  his  raiment  fo?hisftunnc:  Wherein 
(hai  he  fleepe  <  anb  it  fljai  tome  to  paffc, 
When  he  tneth  bnto  mcc,that3J  ^M 
hcarc :  fo  j  3  am  gracious. 

18  C  *  1Chou  fhalt  not  reiulc  the 
||  C5obs,no2  curfc  the  ruler  of  thy  people. 

19  C  Xhou  (halt  not  belay  to  ofe 
the  tfirft  of  thy  ripe  fnuts ,  anb  of  thy 
tiinuois  :*  the  firft  borne  of  thy  founts 
(halt  thou  giue  tmto  me. 

jo  HibciPifc  fhalt  thou  bo  ibith  thmc 
orcn,  and  with  thyfheepe:  feuenbayes 
it  (hall  be  tbithhisbammcou  the  eight 
bay  thou  (halt  giue  it  inc. 

31  C3tnbye(hallbcholymcntonto 
mc  :*  neither  (hall ye  cate  any  flc(h  that 


is  tome  of  beafls  in  the  ficlb:  ycefljalli 
eafttttothebogs. 

CHAP.    XXIIL 


Dfu. 


Of  flanderandtalfewitnefle.  3.6  Of  iuftice. 
4  Of  chamablcnefle.  10  Oftheyeeteof 
reft,  iz  Of  the  Sabbath.  15  Of  idohtrie. 
14  Of  the  three  fealb.  18  Of  die  blood 
andthetatot  the  facntice:.  to  AnAngelis 
promifed,  with  a  blefsing,  it  they  obey  hini. 

^ou  (halt  not  ||  raife  a  faifc 
report:  put  not  thine  hanb 
With  the  WttBcb  to  btean 
bnrtghtcous  Witneffc. 
1  €  Xhou  fhalt  not 
tolloiu  a  multitube  to  boc  emll :  neither 
(halt  thou  tfpeattc  in  acaufc,  to  bertine 
after  many,  to  Voictt  tudgement : 

3  €  Neither  (halt  thou  tountcnauce 
apoojcmantnhistaufe. 

4  C  3If  thou  mtttt  thme  enemies 
ore  oihisaffc  going  aftray,  thou  (halt 
furcly  fcmg  it  bartte  to  hmiagame. 

5  *  3f  thou  fee  the  affc  of  him  that 
hatctt)  thee,  lying  tonber  his  burben, 
II  anb  Woulbeft  fozbearc  to  hclpe  htm, 
thou  (halt  furcly  helpc  With  him. 

6  Xhou  fhalt  not  lb?eft  the  uibge- 
ment  of  thy  poojc  m  his  taufe. 

7  Bccpethccfarrcfrcmafalfcmat 
ter:  anb  the  innocent  anb  rightconspf* 
(lay  thou  not :  fo<t  3  ibill  not  iitfhucfhc 
iPitbcb. 

8  C  ^nb  *  thou  (halt  take  no  gift : 
fot  the  gift  bitnbcth f  the  rbtfc,  anb  pci> 
ucrteth  the  ibo:bs  of  the  righteous. 

9  C3lfothoii(haitnotopp?cffca 
ftrangcr:  fo;  ycclmoib  thcthcartofa 
ftrangcr,  feeing  yce  inerc  (trangcrsm 
thelanbof^gypt. 

io  3lnb*fircycrcsthoufhaltfoil)thy 
lanb,  anb  fl)alt  gather  in  the  fcuites 
thereof: 

ii  25ut  tl)c  fcuenth  yfcr?  rl)ou  (halt 
let  it  reft,  anb  lie  (nil ,  that  the  poojc  of 
thy  people  may  catc,  anb  What  the? 
leauc,  the  beafls  of  the  fielb  (haileate. 
3!n  like  matter  thou  (halt  beale  ibith 
thy  bmcyarb,  and  unth  thy  !|  oltuc  yarb. 

12  *  £>trc  oayes  thou  fhalt  boc  thy 
tt)02tte ,  anb  on  the  feucnth  bay  fliou 
(halt  reft:  that  thine  ore  anb  thine  afle 
may  reft,  ano  the  fottnc  of  thy  hanb- 
mayb,  *  the  ftrangcr  may  be  rcfccflico. 

13  31nb  in  all  things  that  31  hauefaib 
Pntoyou,  benrcumfpett:  anb  matte  no 
mennon  of  the  names  of  other  gobs, 
neither  let  tt  be  hearb  out  of  thy  mouth. 

' i^J^Xhiee 


\Ortrgcntu 


jwcrt. 


ill 


I  Or  wilt 
thoMceaft  to 
hclpe  htm  ' 
or.  t3"  tbohI- 
tirjlcesfete 
ItAHe  tS  y 
,'  bultnefle 

houfh*lt 
/urelj/eau' 
u  toiovne 
with  him 
•Dci.c.  I  6. 
ip.ecclus. 

30.l8. 
\Hebr.the 

ftrtxf 

t  Hetf.fohlo. 


Lcuit. 


»r 


[j  Ort»ltHS 
tret*. 

'Chap.  io. 
Sdcut.5. 
1  j Juke  1 j. 
'4- 


G2 


Three  folemnefeafts.  Exodus.  Godspromife. 


•Dcui-16 
16. 

•Chip. I  J. 

i&M'8 


•  Dfut  \6. 

I  6  fitluj- 


?5-4- 


|  Or,/,.;/?. 


•Chap  ;4- 
:6  dcilt.14 


•Ch,p.j3. 


[Or,/»,// 

thie. 

•Chip.;}. 

2. 

'  lofll.l.). 


•Drut.7. 


•Dcul.7. 

»4- 


14  C*  £b2cc  times  thou  (bait  ftcepc 
afcaftbtuo  me  in  rticpecrc. 

15  'XboufbaitReepctbcfcaftofbn-' 
Icaueneb  bjeab:  tbou  (bait  tatc  tonics 
ucneb  b2eab  fcuenbaics,as3i  commatv 
bc&  tljet  m  the  time  appointed  of  the 
niDnetb3lbib:  foj  inn  tbou  earned  out 
from  €gppt:  *anb  none  (ball  appcare 
bcfojcmcemptte: 

i6  anbtbcfcaftofbatueft,tbefirft 
fruits  of  tbp  labours,  iDljtdi  tbou  baft 
foWcn  m  tbc  ficlb :  anb  tbc  feaft  of  mga 
tl)cring  which  is  m  tlie  cnb  of  tbc  vecrc, 
when  tbou  Haft  gatbereb  in  tljp  to 
boursoutoftbefietb. 

17  XIkcc  times  m  the  pecre  all  tl)v 
maiesibaiiappcarcbcfojctbcJLoiiHD 
Gob. 

13  IZbou  (bait  not  offer  the  bloob  of 
mp  fatrificc  Unto  leauencb  bzcab ,  net 
tlier  (ball  the  fat  ofmp  il  facnucc  re^ 
mamc  bntill  the  morning. 

19  *Xbcfirftoftfjcfirftfruitsoftbp 
lanb  thou  fbaltbnng  into  the  rjonfe  of 
the  %  &  is  ©  tbp  <5ob :  tbou  (bait  not 
fectbc  a  nib  (n  bis  mothers  mill!  c. 

20  C*25cbolD,3irenban3ngclbc 
fo2ctbectoHccpetbceiutbcWap,anbto 
bnngtbec  into  the  place  rt»l)ictj  3  banc 
pjeparrb. 

21  26eware  of  bim,  anb  obep  bis 
boiccpiouoltebimnot:  fo:  be  Will  not 
parbon  pour  traufgreffions :  fo?  mp 
namcisinlnm. 

22  26utiftbou(baitUibcebobcpbis 
boice,  anb  boe  all  that  3  fpcabe,  tben 
3  Wil  be  an  encmic  bnto  tbmc  enemies, 
anb  ||  an  abucrfane  bnto  thine  abucrfa 
nes. 

23  *Jto2mine3ngcl(baIlgoebefo2e 
tbec,anb*b2tngtbccinbnto  thc^mo- 
rites,  anb  tbc  pittites,  anb  tbc  peny 
5itcs,  auo  tbcCanaaiutes,  tbefyuttes, 
anb  tbc  3icbuDtcs  :  anb  3  Will  nit 
tbemoff. 

24  Xbou  flmlt  not  bow  boWnc  to 
tbeirgoos,no2frructbcm,no2Docaftcr 
their  W02UCS:  *but  tl)ou  (bait  bttcrlp 
ouertluoWc  tbcm ,  anb  quite  b2catte 
bownctbeir  images. 

i<>  3nbpccfl,alifcructbciLoi3r* 
pour  <5ob ,  anb  be  (ball  bleffr  tbp  b:cab, 
anb  tbp  Water :  anb  3  Will  tahc  ficHncs 
awap  f rom  tbe  mtbft  of  thee. 

2  6  C  *  Xbcre  (ball  notbing  taft  tbeir 
pong,  no2  bee  barren  m  tbp  lanb :  njc 
number  of  tbp  bapes  3  Will  fulfill. 

27  3JWillfenbmpfcarcbefo2ctbee, 
anbWillDeftropalltbcpcoplctoWbom 


tbou  tbait  come,  anb  3  will  mane  all 
tbine  enemies  turnetbnetbacbes  bnto 
tbec. 

2s  2nb  *  3  Will  fenb  b02nets  bcfoie 
tbec ,  Which  (ball  b2tuc  out  the  $iuite, 
tbc  €anaanite,  anb  n>  pittite  from  be 
fojerijec. 

29  3  Will  notbjiuc  tbem  out  from 
befojc  tbec  in  one  pecre,  left  ti)e  lanb  be 
come  bcfblate,  anb  tbebeaftof  tbc  fielD 
multiplpagamfttbee. 

30  25p  little  anb  little  3  Will  tyiue 
tbcm  out  from  beftue  tbec,  bnhlltbou 
bemcreafeb  anb  inherit  tbe  lanb. 

31  3nb3,  Will  Oct  tbp  bonnbs  from 
tbc  Bcb  fea ,  eucn  bnto  the  tea  of  the 
0biliftines ,  anb  from  tbe  befcrt  bnto 
tbc  r  mcr :  foj  3  Will  beluier  tbe  inbabi 
rants  of  the  lanb  into  pour  baub:  anb 
tbou (baitbjiuc them  out befoje tbec. 

32  *  Xbou  (bait  malic  no  couenant 
with  tbem,no2  With  their  gobs. 

33  Xbep  (ball  not  bWeilm  tbp  lanb, 
left  tbcp  maSc  thee  fmncagamft  me :  fo? 
if  tbou  feme  their  gobs,  "it  Will  fur  elp 
be  a  marc  bnto  tbec. 

CHAP.   XXIIII. 

1  Mofes  is  called  vp  into  the  Mountain?.  3  The 
people  promife  obedience.  4  Mofes  buil- 
dethan  Altar,  and  tweluc  pillars.  6  Hee 
fprinkleththe  blood  ol  the  Couenanr.  9 The 
glorv  ot  God  appeareth.  14  Aaron  and 
Hurhaue  the  charge  of  the  people,  is,  Mo- 
fes  goeth  into  the  Mountaine ,  where  he  con- 
tinueth  4o.daves,and  40.nights. 

MI^J§£  iBO  b«  faib  bnto  !S0ofes, 
A  y.l>  €onu  bp  bnto  p  %  <£>  is  e>, 
$&  tbou.ano^aron,  illabab 
anb  ^Hbibu,  anb  fcucntic 
of  tbc  Clbcrsof  3fracl: 
anowo:fl)ippcafarre  off. 

2  3no  J^ofcs  alone  (ball  come 
ncerc  the  %$>&■&:  but  tbep  (ball  not 
come  nicjrj,  neither  n^ailtlje  people  goe 
bp  With  bim. 

3  C  3mb  £0ofcs  tame  anb  tolb  tbe 
people  all  tbc  Wo2bs  of  the  %  o  u  n>, 
anb  all  the  mbgements:  anb  all  the  peo 
plcanfrocreb  with  out bopec ,  anb  faiD, 
*^u  the  wo2bs  wbttb  the  |Loiss>  barb 
faib,WillWcboe. 

4  3lnb  C^ofcs  Wjote  all  tbe Wo2bs 
ofthe|Loifiip,anbrofcbpearlpintbc 
mozmng,  anb  builbcb  an  ^itar  bnber 
tbc  billanb  t  Welue  pillars,atco2bing  to 
therwritie  tribes  of  3frael. 

5  3uibbcfcntpongmcnoftbecbil 

men 


\Hii.ncckj. 


loll 


1,  J4 


•Clup.54. 
1 5.dcm.7. 


'Dcut.7. 
16  iofh.^3 
1 3  mdg.  1 
3- 


"Cliap   19 
S.;nJ  14. 
1,7.  deut  5. 


The  people  promife.  Chap.xxv.  Free  offerings. 


Verfcj. 


•l.Pct.l. 

a-hcbc-9. 
10.    ■ 


"Chap.  34. 
1Z.dcat.9- 
9- 


men  of  3Jftacl ,  ibhich  offereb  burnt 
offermgs.anb  facn&ceb  peace  offerings 
of  ojcen,bnto  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

6  3lnb  sftofes  toofce  haife  of  the 
bloob,  anb  put  it  in  bafons,  anb  l>aifc  of 
the  bloob  he  fpnnfeleb  on  ttjc  ^Itar. 

7  anbhetooKethcboofecofthcto 
uenant,  anb  reab  in  the  aubicncc  of  the 
people :  anb  the?  faioe ,  *  3fll  that  the 
|L©ia©I)atl)faib,iCbiUtt)cboe,anb  be 
obebient. 

8  3nb  flpofes  toobe  the  bloob  anb 
ftmnblcbit  onthcpcoplc,  anbfaib,25e^ 
holb  *  rnc  bloob  of  the  Couenant  tbfjtrt) 
the  H  sd  is  ©  hath  mabetbith  pou,  con- 
cctningallthefe  rbozbs. 

9  CXhenibcntbp£Pofcsanb:3(a? 
ron,iilababa.ib:3bihu,  anbtcucntvof 
the<Slbersofgjfrael: 

10  3lnbtl)ev£aU)tncC5obof3frart: 
anb  therelbasbnbcr  his  fcct,as  it  rberc 
a  paueb  tbojbe  of  a  &aphtr  c  (tone,  anb 
as  it  tuerc  tf)c  bob?  of  heauen  in  hts 
ciearencffe. 

11  3nb  bpon  the  Cobles  of  tl)e  chll? 
bten  of  3Jftael  !)e  lapb  not  his  hanb :  al< 
fo  ri)cy  fatb  <5ob ,  anb  bib  rate  anb 
bnnbe. 

12,  C  3nb  the  fL£>wr>  fapb  bnto 
$)ofcs,Comcbpto  ntetnto  the  mount, 
anb  be  there,  anb  3J  Mil  giue  thee  1La? 
bies  of  (tone ,  anb  a  Havb  ,anb  Coin? 
manbements  lbnicD  J  haue  bitten, 
that  thou  may  eft  tcart)  them. 

1  j  2no  $Mcsro(e  top ,  anb  Ins  mi? 
ntllcr  3Jo(hua:anb*$ofcslbentbpin? 
to  tfjc  mount  of  <Sob. 

14  3lnb  hcctaibe  bnto  the  Clbcts, 
Xary  ye  hercfo2bs,bnrtlUbcc  cornea? 
gaine  bnto  you  '•  anb  bcholb,  3aton 
anb  four  are  ibitl)  you :  gjf  any  man 
fjaue  any  matters  to  boc ,  let  htm  tome 
bnto  them. 

1$  3Cnb  $)ofes  \bcnt  bp  into  tl)c 
©ount ,  anb  a  cloub  touercb  the 
#onnt 

16  3utbtheglojy  of  the  ?,£>«©  fc 
bobc  bpon  mount  S>inai,  anb  tiie  cloub 
coucrcb  it  fire  bayes :  anb  the  feuenth 
bap  Dee  tailcb  bnto  £J3ofes  out  of  the 
mibft  of  the  cloub. 

17  3mb  the  fight  of  the  glojy  of  the 
|L©h©  wasiiuebeuouringfirconthe 
top  of  tl)e  mouttt,tu  the  eyes  of  the  thtl? 
b^enof^fraeu 

is  2ttb  £0ofes  ibentinto  tl)c  nubft 
of  the  cloub ,  anb  gate  him  bp  into  the 
mount :  anb*  flSJofcsibas  m  tbemouut 
fb?ty  bayes,  anb  four  nights. 


CHAP.   XXV. 

What  the  Ifraclues  muft  offer  tor  the  making 
of  the  Tabernacle,  to  The  forme  of  the 
Arke.  17  The  Mercy-leat, with  the Che- 
rubims.  13  The  table, with  the  furniture 
thereof.  51  The  caadlefticke  ,  with  tile  111- 
ftruments  thereof. 

/5btheH©!8©  fpabc  bn- 
to s$)ofcs,  faying, 
i  £>peabcbntotbechil 
bjcnofjjjjfracl,  that  they 
t  bung  me  an  ||offcnng:*of 

cucry  man  tbatgiucth  i  I  ttniltngly  unth 

his  heart,  ye  (hall  tafec  ray  offering. 
j   3nb  this  is  the  offering  ibhieh  re 

(haiitaHeofthem;c;olb,anbfiluer,anb 

bjafTe, 

4  ^nb  bletb ,  anb  purple,  anb  fear? 
let,  anb  fine  ||  lmnen,anb  goats  hairc : 

5  3lnb  rammes  fbtnnes  bleb  reb, 
anb  babgers  ffeinncs ,  anb  ;£>rji£tim 
\boob: 

6  £>ilcfoJthelight,{picesfojanoin? 
ting  oile,anb  fo?  fraect  uuenfc : 

7  £>mr  liones ,  anb  (rones  to  be  fet 
in  the  *  Cphob,  anb  in  the  *  tyeft  plate. 

8  3lnb  let  them  matte  nice  a  £>an 
ctuary  ,  that  31  may  blbell  amongB 
them: 

9  ^eco,2bingtoallthat3(heibthee, 
after  the  pattcrnc  of  tDc  Xabernacle, 
anb  the  patterne  of  all  the  mfrruments 
thereof,  cucn  fo  (hailpcmafte  it. 

io  C*^nbthevfl)allmaltean5(rljc 
of  &>hittan  iboob :  ttbo  rnbttes  anb  a 
haife  fhaibe  the  length  thereof,  anb  a  tit- 
bite  anb  an  haife  the  bjeabth  thereof, 
anb  a  mbite  $  a  haife  the  h  eight  thereof. 

u  3lnb  thou  (halt  oucriap  tt  ibtth 
pure  golb ,  Xbithm  anb  tbithout  (halt 
thou  ouerlapit:  anb  (halt  maKe  bpon 
it  acroibncofgolbrounbabout. 

ii  ^nb  thou  (halt  tad  foure  rings  of 
golb  foj  it ,  anb  put  them  in  the  fourc 
comers  thcrcofanb  ribo  nngs  fhai  be  m 
the  oneGbe  of  it,  anb  tibo  ringsm  the  o- 
thcrfibeofit. 

ij  ^nb  thou  (halt  mafte  ttaucs  of 
£>hittnn  iboob,anb  ouerlav  tljcm  ibith 
golb. 

14  3nb  thou  (haltput  the  (tauesm= 
to  the  rings ,  bp  the  fioes  of  the  3lrfee, 
that  the  2rbc  mav  be  borne  iblth  them. 

15  XhefrauesihaUbcm  the  rings  of 
the  3rfte:tbey  (hai  no t  be  taben  from  it 

is  3nb  thou  flialtput  into  the  3cr*e 
the  STcfiimonic  Tbhiclj  3  (hail  gute 

th«-  ^. 

fo  17  3mb 


forme. 
^Or.heAU* 
iffinMg. 

'Chap.  J  5 
■>■ 


|  Or,f,!i>, 


•Clup,:3 
'  Chip.  2  3 


•Chap.  37 


The  Merciefeat,        Exodus.       and  Candlefticke 


j|  Or,  ofthr 

muncref 

:ht  Mergie 

ffAtc. 


89. 


'Chap.  37 


j|Or,  f. 

inrre  tmt 


17  3in&  thou  (halt  maae  a  £0crnc- 
fcat  of  pure  golb :  tibo  cutHtcs  anb  a 
haife  iha  ibe  tijc  length  thereof,  anua  en- 
bite  anD  a  halfc  the  bicabrt)  thereof. 

18  3inb  thou  (halt  mafectlboChcru 
bims  of  golb :  of  beaten  iboiftc  (halt 
thou  made  theni,  in  the  ttt>o  cnbes  of 
tj)c  ^erne-feat. 

19  :&nbmafeconcCherubottthconc 
enb,  anb the  other  Cherub  on  the  other 
enb:  ™™  \\  of  the  £0crcic-feat  (hall  yee 
matte  the  Chcrubims,on  the  tibo  cnbs 
thereof. 

20  ^nbrtjcCherubims  (hall  ftr  etch 
foith  their  wings  on  high,  toucrmg  the 
£I9ercte-fcat  lbith  time  lbtngs,  anb 
their  fates  1  ruii  lookc  one  to  another :  to 
tottarb  the  ^erne-feat  fhailthe  fates 
ofthcCherubtmsbe. 

21  Slnbtljou  (halt  put  tljc  ^ctetc^ 
feat  abonc  upon  the  5lrUc ,  anb  in  tl)c 
3rnc  thou  (halt  put  the  Xefnmonie 
that  31  (hallguie  thee. 

12  3nbthetc3Jlbtlmcctlbtththce,! 
anb  3JID1II  commune  lbith  thee ,  fromi 
abouc  the  £0cttic  fcat,from  *  bctibecnc 
thetnjo  Chcrubuns  Ibhich  are  bpon 
the  3Jrac  of  the  Xctttmonic ,  of  all 
things  ibhith'JJunli  guie  tl)cc  m  torn 
maunbement  tmto  the  chtlbieu  of  3)f 
rael. 

23  C  *  33)011  fl)ait  alfo  make  a  table 
of  £>hittimU)0DD:  tibo  cubitcsfhaii  bee 
the  icngrt)  thereof,  anb  a  tubitc  the 
b2cbththcreof,anb  acubite  anb  a  halfc; 
the  height  thereof. 

24.  3nb  thou  flialt  ouerlap  it  intth 
pure  golb ,  anb  malic  thereto  a  troibnc , 
of  golb  rouno  about 

2$  3nb  thou  (halt  mabe  bnto  it  a 
bobber  of  an  hanb  biebth  rounb  about,  | 
anb  thou  (halt  malie  a  golben  troiunc 
to  the  bobber  thereof  rouno  about. 

26  3(no  thou  (halt  matte  foi  it  fourc 
rings  of  golb,  anb  put  the  rings  mthe 
fourc  comers  tljat -re  on  the  fourc  feetc 
thereof. 

27  £tocragain(r  the  boibcr  (hall  the 
rings  be  fo;  plates  of  the  (taucs  to  bcarc 
the  table. 

zs  31  nb  thou  fhalt  maitc  the  ftaues 
of  dnittim  iboob,  anb  oucrlap  tt)ttu ; 
rotthgoio,  that  the  tabic  may  be  borne 
ujith  them. 

29  3lnb  thou  (halt  matte  rtie  btffies 
thereoranDfpooncsthcrof.anotoucrs 
thereof,  anb  bolblcs  thereof,  |l  to  toucr ' 
lbithaii :  of  pure  goto  (halt  thou  maitc 
tljem. 


30  3nb  thou  (halt  fetbponthcU:^ 
ble^heU)  bicabbcfoicmealibap. 

31  C*  3nb  thou  (halt  mane  a  Can; 
blcfhctte  of  pure  golb:  of  beaten  iboittc 
(hall  the  tanblcfhcae  bee  mabe s  his 
(haftanb  his  branches,  his  bottles,  his 
snops ,  anb  his  Homers  fhail  be  of  the 
fame. 

32  3tnb  fire  blanches  (hall  tome  out 
of  the  ftbesof  it:  thicc  bianthcs  of  the 
tanblcfhrftc  out  of  the  one  Qbe,anb  thiee 
blanches  of  the  canblcfhc&e  out  of  the 
ort)crfibc: 

33  Xhiec  bolblcs  mabc  Ittte  tmto  al- 
monos,  lbith  a  tmop  anb  aflovber  in 
one  bianch:  anb  thice  bolblcs  mabe  litte 
almonbs  in  the  other  bianch ,  lbith  a 
ftnop  anb  a  flolbcr :  fo  in  the  ftrc  bjan- 
thesthat  come  out  of  the  canblethctte. 

34  3lnb  m  the  canblclhctte  (hall  bee 
fourc  bolblcs  mabe  liuc  bnto  almonbs 
lbith  their  imops  anb  their  flotbers. 

35  2no  there  fhai  be  a  tmop  bnber  tibo 
bianthcs  of  the  fame,  anb  a  unop  touber 
tibo  bianthcs  of  the  fame,  anb  a  tmop 
bnber  tibo  bianthcs  of  the  fame,  actoi 
omg  to  the  fire  bianthcs  that  pioceebc 
out  of  the  canblethctte. 

36  Xhcir  ttnops  anb  their  bianthcs 
(hall  be  of  the  fame :  all  it  (hall  bee  one 
beaten  iboiHe  of  pur  c  golb. 

37  3mb  thou  (halt  matte  the  fcuen 
lamps  thereof:  anb  they  (hall  ||  light  the 
lampcs  thereof,  that  rtjep  map  giue 
light  oucragainftt  it. 

1%  3lno  the  tongs  thereof,  anb  the 
fnuffe  btfhcs  thcrof  (halbe  of  pure  golb 

39  £)f  a  talent  of  pure  golb  fl;ailhee 
mane  it,  lbith  all  thefc  beffcls. 

40  ^nb'tooaethatthouma&ethem 
after  their  patterne,t  ibhich  ibas  (heib- 
cbthccmthc  mount. 

CHAP.   XXVI. 

1  Thctencurtamesof  the  Tabern.iclc.  7  The 
eleuen  eurtauies  of  goats  hairc.  14  The  co- 
ucringot  Rammesskinnes.  15  Thcboards 
of  the  Tabernacle,  with  their  lockets  and 
barres.  31  TheVaileforthe  Arke.  56  The 
hanging  tor  the  doore. 

^t^^  iDicouer  thou  (haitmaac 
tl)e  Xabcrnarle  lbith  ten 
turtames  of  fine  tlbineb 
lmncn,anb  blclb,anb  pur- 
ple, anb  fcarlct:  lbith  Che 
rubims  of '  cunning  iboi&c  (l)alt  tljou 
mabe  them. 
2  %\)c  length  of  one  curtainc  (halbe 
eight 


«Char.37 
<7- 


J  Or,caufc 
toafccnJ. 

t  Hib.  (hi 
f.icc  ofu. 


•A&7-M 

htb.s.5. 

^Het. which 
thou  wa/} 
C**frJn 


t  Heb.  the 
werkecf  a 
cunning 

tr  Emiro- 
irrtr 


The  Tabernacle      Chap.xxvj.     and  apperti nances. 


j|  Ort40UC' 


\Htb.mtht 

remainder 
orfMrfU*f*gi 


eight  ant  twenty  cubtts.anb  tt)e  b^eUrtj 

of  one  curtainc,fourc  cubits :  anb  cucry 
oncofthecurtamcsfljaUhauconcmcaj 
fucc. 

j  ILhefiuecurtatncsfljalbccoupleb 
together  one  to  another :  anb  other  fiue 
curtames  fhaibc  coupleo  one  to  another. 

4.  :3no  thou  ft)att  ntaUe  loopes  of 
bletb  upon  the  cbge  of  ttjc  one  curtatne, 
from  thefclucbgc  tnthe  coupling,  anb 
lifecttnfe  fljalt  thou  mane  m  rtjc  bttcr- 
ntoil  cbge  of  another  curtautc,m  the  cou- 
pling of  trjefceonb. 

5  ififtie  loopes  fljalt  thou  matte  in 
thconc  curtatne,  anb  fiftte  loopes  fljalt 
thou  mane  tn  rtje  ebgcof  ttse  curtamt, 
mat  is  in  the  coupling  of  rtjc  feconb, 
that  the  loopes  may  take  holb  one  of  a< 
nother. 

6  3nb  thou  Cl)ait  matte  fiftte  tathes 
of  golb,  anb  couple  thcturtaincs  toge* 
tljer  Vbtrt)rt)e  tad)C0 :  anbttfyalibeonc 
tabernacle. 

7  C3mo  thou  fljalt  maUceurtainrs 
ofgoatshairc,tobcacouenngbpontt)e 
tabernacle :  elcucn  curtames  fljalt  thou 
mate 

8  Xhclcngth  of  one  rurtame  fluibe 
thittte  cubues,  anb  the  b?ebth  of  one 
curtamefourc  cubites :  anb  the  elcuen 
ihaibeallof  oncmcafurc. 

9  3nb  thou  fljalt  couple  fiue  cut* 
tames  by  themfctucs  ,anb  Ore  curtames 
by  thcmfclucs,anb  fljalt  botiblc  the  firt 
cuttame  tn  the  forefront  of  the  taber- 
nacie. 

io  3(tib  thou  fljalt  matte  fiftieloopes 
onthecbgc  of the  one  eurtaine,  tljatts 
outmoft  tn  the  coupling ,  anb  fifttc 
loopcstn  the  cbge  of  the  curtatne  tbhtch 
couplet!)  the  feconb. 

n  3inb  thou  fljalt  matte  fiftte  taches 
of  bzaffe,  anb  put  the  taches  into  tt»e 
loopes ,  anb  couple  the  ||tent  together, 
that  it  may  be  one. 

n  :3tnb  the  remnant  that  remained) 
of  the  curtames  of  the  tent,  the  haifc 
curtame  that  remained)  fljall  tjang  o* 
uer  the  bacueObe  of  the  tabernacle. 

i}  3nbacubtteonthconcfibe,anba 
cubitc  on  the  other  fibc  t  of  that  tbhich 
tcmatneth  tn  the  length  of  trje  cur* 
tames  of  thetmMtfljallhangoucr  the 
fibes  of  trje  tabernacle,  onthtsfibc,anb 
ontfjatfibetocoucrtt. 

i+  ^nb  thou  fljalt  matte  a  coucrtng 
fo?  the  tent  of  rammes  f  mtmes  bieb 
reb,  anb  a  toucrmg  abouc  of  babgcrs 
flunnes. 


15  C  3lnb  thou  fljalt  mane  boarbs 
fo?  the  lutbernaele  of  3>htttun  iboob 
ftanbtngbp. 

16  %tn  cubits  fliail  be  the  length  of 
aboarb,  anbatubite  attbanhalfe  fljail 
be  the  bjeaoth  of  one  boarb. 

17   %\\)0  TtenonS  fliall  there  be  |ft  OttC 

boarb  fet  m  o?ber  one  againft  another : 
thus  (halt  thou  matte  to?  all  the  boarbs 
ofthclEabcrnacie. 

is  2nb  thou  fljalt  matte  the  boarbs 
fo?rhe  Xabernacle.ttbcnnc  boarbs  on 
the  £>outhfibc  £>outhu>arb. 

19  3lnb  thou  fljalt  matte  fourtic  foe* 
Sets  of  filucr,bnber  the  twenty  boarbs: 
tibo  focaets  tonber  otic  boarb  fo?  his 
two  tenons,  anb  ttbo  focttets  tottber 
another  boaro  fo?  hts  trtio  tenons. 

io  3nbfo?  the  feconb  fibc  of  the  1Ca> 
bernaclcon  the  /i5o?thfibc  there  fraiibee 
twentte  boarbs, 

n  %n\)  their  fourtic  focaets  of  filuct: 
two  focttets  bnber  one  boarb,  anb  tibo 
foebctsbnber  another  boarb. 

ti  3nb  foz  tl)e  fibes  of  ttjc  Xaber- 
naele  aaettWarb  thou  fljalt  matte  fire 
boarbs. 

13  ^nbttboboarbsfljaitthoumafie 
fo?  the  comers  of  the  tabernacle  in  the 
tibo  fibes. 

24  3nb  they  than  be  t  touplcb  toge* 
ther  beneath,  anb  they  fljail  be  coupicb 
together  abouethchcab  of  tttontoonc 
ring:  thus  fljail  it  bee  fo?  them  both  ■, 
they  fljail  be  fo?  the  ttbo  comers* 

15  3ttb  they  fljail  be  eight  boarbs, 
anb  their  fbcBCts  of  filuer  lirtecne  foe* 
itets :  ttbo  fo  cttets  Pnbcr  one  boarb,anb 
ttbo  fbcltetsbnber  another  boarb. 

16  C^nb  tljou  fljalt  maitcbarrcs  of 
£>htmm  tboob :  fine  fo?  the  boarbs  of 
the  one  fibe  of  the  Xabcrnatle, 

17  ^nbfiucbarresfo2theboarbsof 
the  other  fibc  of  the  Xabematle,  anb 
fiue  barrcs  fo?  the  boarbs  of  the  fibc  of 
thelEabcrnaelc  fo?  the  ttbo  fibes  wtfc 
tbarb. 

18  ^nbthcmtbblebarremtljemtbs 
of  theooarbs,  ftjallrcach  fromenbeto 
enbe. 

19  3nbthouQ)altouetiaythcboatbs 
tbtth  golb ,  anb  mabe  tljctr  rings  of 
golb  foz  places  fo?  the  barrcs :  anb  thou 
fljalt  oucrlay  the  barrcs  Ibith  golb. 

jo  ^nbthou  fljalt  rcare  l)pthc1Ta< 
bcrnaclc  *  acco?bmg  to  the  fafljton  ther' 
of,  tbhtch  tbas  fljctbeb  tJjcc  tn  the 
mount. 

31  f"3tnb  thou  fljalt  mafee  a^latlc  ol 
%  1  blero, 


\Htb.bAnJ, 


HMjthm- 

neJ. 


*Chap  35 

jfls7  44 
-cb.8.s. 


TheAltarof 


Exodus. 


burnt  offi 


enn< 


Well),  ano  purple,  anD  ftatlet,  anb  fine 
tltomcD  Unnen  of  cunnmg  ibojfee :  tt>ith 
Chcrubuns  (ball  it  be  mabe. 

32  anb  thou  (bait  hang  it  bpon 
foure  pillars  of  £>bittim  Vboob,  oucr* 
lapb  ibtfb  golb :  their  hoofecs  Cbalbc  of 
golb,topon  the  foure  focfects  of  (duet. 

33  C  anb  thou  (bait  bang  Dp  the 
^ilailc  bnbet  the  taches,tbat  thou  mai£t 
bnng  m  tf)(tt»et  lbitbin  the  mailt,  the 
arftc  of  the  Xcfhmonp :  anb  the  static 
Qjall  buubc  bnto  you,  bcttbccncthebO' 
lp  place  anb  tfje  mod  holy. 

34  anb  thou  (bait  put  the  Gertie- 
featbpon  the  arise  of  the  Xdbmony, 
mthemoftftolppi^e- 

35  ^nb  thou  (bait  fcttbetabletbitb* 
out  the  ©aile,  anb  the  canblefhrfee  oucr 
agatnft the  table,  onthefibcoftbeina* 
betnaclctoibarbthe  &outb :  anb  thou 
Cbait  put  the  table  on  the  #0?th  &bc. 

36  anb  thou  (halt  mane  an  Ranging 
fo;thcboo:coftbe1Cent,  of  bletb,anb 
purple  anofcarlct,  anb  fine  ttbincblin? 
nemibzougbtimtbncebleiboj&e. 

37  anb  thou  (halt  mafee  to?  the 
Ranging  fiuc  pillars  of^>l)ittint  iboob, 
anb  oucriaytbemibitb  go!b,anb  their 
boobes  (haibe  of  goib :  anb  thou  (halt 
raQ  Bue  focfects  of  bjaOc  fo?  them. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

i  The  Altar  of  burnt  offering ,  with  the  vef- 
fels  thereof.  9  The  Court  of  the  Taber- 
nacle inclofed  with  hangings  and  pillars. 
18  The  meafure  of  the  Court,  zo  The 
oile  for  the  lampe. 

i!5b  thou  (halt  mafec  an 
aitar  of  £>hunm  iboob, 
fiuc  cubits  long ,  anb  fiuc 
cubites  bjoab :  tbeaitar 
(l)all  be  foure  fquare ,  anb 
tfje  height  thereof  fhaibethjcctubits. 

2  anb  thou  (halt  mafec  the  homes 
of  it  topon  the  foure  comers  thereof:  his 
homes  (hall  be  of  the  feme  s  anb  thou 
(bait  oucrlay  itttnthbKUTc. 

3  anb  thou  (halt  mafec  his  pannes 
to  rcccmc  his  a(bcs,  anb  his  ujoucls, 
anb  his  bafons.anb  bisfle(bhoofes,anb 
his  fircpannes :  all  the  brfTels  thereof 
thou  (bait  mafec  of  bzaffc. 

4-  anb  thou  (bait mafec fojita grate 
ofnctibozbcofbttu*c;anbbponthcnet 
(bait  thou  mafec  foure  bjafen  rings  in 
the  foure  comets  thereof. 

5  anb  thou  (halt  put  it  bnber  the 
tompatTe  of  tbeaitar  bcncath,that  the 


net  ma?  bee  euen  to  the  rnibit  of  the 
altar. 

6  anb  thou  (halt  mafec  (lanes  foj 
the  aitar,(laues  of  £>bittimtboob,anb 
oucrlay  them  Jbtthb?afle. 

7  anbtheftaucsfhaibe  put  into  the 
rings,  anb  the  ftaucsfball  bebpontbe 
tibo  fibts  of  the  aitar,to  beare  it 

8  tyollotb  nnth  boarbs  (halt  thou 
mafee  tt:  astttrbasfljelbeb  thee  in  the 
mount,fo  (ball  they  mafeeit. 

9  canb  thou  (bau  mafec  the  Court 
of  the  lEabernatie  fo?  the  A>ontbGbe, 
£>outbibarb :  there  (hall  be  hangings 
fo?  the  Court ,  of  fine  ttbineb  linncn  of 
an  fjunbzeb  cubits  long,fw  one  udc, 

io  anb  the  tibrnty  pillars  thereof, 
anb  their  tibcnty  focfects  ,  fhaii  be  of 
bjattc :  the  hoofecs  of  the  pillars ,  anb 
ttjeir  fillets  fbaibe  offiluer. 

11  anb  lifeetbife  fo?  the  i3o?thfibe  in 
length ,  there  fljafl  be  hangings  of  an 
hunbjcb  cubits  long ,  anb  his  tlbcnty 
pillars ,  anb  their  ttbenty  focfects  of 
bMe :  the  hoofecs  of  the  pillars,  anb 
that  fillets  of  ftiucr. 

12  c  3mb  foj  the  tyeabth  of  the 
Conrt,on  the  osicuTibe  (haibe  hangings 
of  fifty  cubits :  their  pillars  tenne,  anb 
their  fotfeetsten. 

0  anbtbebtcabtboffbeCourton 
the  <£aOfibe  CaSmarb  ,  (ball  bee  fifttc 
cubits. 

14.  %be  hangings  of  one  fibe  of  the 
gatetbaibc  fifteene  cubits:  their  pillars 
tb?ee,anb  their  focfects  tteec. 

15  anb  on  the  other  fibefhaibebang; 
ings ,  fiftccne  cubks :  their  pillars  rb?ee, 
anb  their  focfects  tmee. 

16  canb  foj  tfje  gate  of  the  Court 
fhaiibe  an  hanging  ofritocnty  cubits  of 
blcSb,anb  purple,  anbfcarlet,  anbfinc 
ttblneb  linncn ,  itojonght  Kitth  neeblc 
nwfee :  anb  their  pillars  (hail  be  foure, 
anb  their  focfects  foure. 

17  ail  the  pillars  rounb  about  the 
Court  frnibefiiietttb  ibtth  filwer :  then- 
hoofecs  fhaibe  ofulucr,anbtbeii;focfeets 
ofbiaffc. 

is  CXhe  length  of  the  Court  fhaibe 
anhunb;tebasbtts,anbtbcb2cabfbtfifc 
ticeucrvibhcrc,  anb  the  height  fiuccu? 
bus  of  fine  tibineb  Unnen,  anb  tfjeir  foc- 
fects of  bjafle. 

19  ailthcbrirelsofthcXabcmaclc 
in  all  the  feruicc  thereof ,  anb  all  the 
pmnes  thereof ,  anb  all  the  pmnes  of 
the  Court,  fhaibe  of  teafle. 

xo  canb  thou  malt commanb the 
cbiltyen 


t  Hub.  he 
fhnrtd. 


\Hekrfif,y 


Aaron  s  garments^     Chap.xxviij.       and  his  fonnes. 


t  H.hr  til 

afccndvp. 


^Orjmbrci 
dcred. 


chilTwnofJJfcael.tbat  the?  bnngtbce 
pure  o  vie  sDliur  beaten,  fojthelight.to 
eaufe  the  lampe  f  to  burne  aitbaycs. 

ii  *jn  the  Xabernacle  of  the  Cotv 
grcgauon  ibtthoutrtjcSaarte.tbhichiS 
befoje  the  Xeftimonp,  aaron  anb  51s 
tonnes  (hail  ojoet  it  from  eucnmg  to 
morning  brfo;ethe?LsDiS© :  3tQjaU 
be  a ttatute  foi  cucr ,  Ditto  ttjeic  genets 
nons,  on  ttje  behalfe  of  the  chiltyen  of 
JJftael. 

CHAP.  XXVIII. 

1  Aaron  and  his  Tonnes  are  fa  apart  for  the 
Pnefls  office,  i  Holy  garments  are  appoin- 
ted. 6  TheEphod.  15  The  brcaftplate, 
withtwelue  precious  ftones.  30  ThcVrim 
andThummim.  31  The  robe  ot  the  Ephod, 
with  pomegranates  aud  belles.  36  The 
plate  of  the  Miter.  39  The  imbroidered 
coatc.  40  The  garments  for  Aaronsfonnes. 

4!3b  tafte  thou  bnto  thee 
aaron  tt)v  b:ofhet ,  anb 
his  fonnes  Hurt)  l)tm, 
from  among  the  ehllb/en 
_  of5frael,trjat!)cmavmv= 
mftet  brito  me  in  the  ^zicBs  office,  euen 
aaron, $abab,  anb  abihu,  Slea^at, 
anb3thamar,aarons  fonnes. 

x  anb  thou  (halt  make  hoh?  gar- 
ments fojaaronthv  toother ,  fojglo?? 
anb  fo*  beauty. 

j  anb  thou  Cljalt  fpeafee  bnto  an 
that  ate  tbife  hcartcb ,  tbhom  3  hauc 
filleb  ibith  the  fptntof  tbifcbome,that 
the?  map  matte  Karons  garments  to 
confecrate  him ,  that  heemapminittcr 
bnto  me  in  the  thefts  office. 

4  anbthcfcarethcgarmcntsttjhich 
they  (hail  mafee .  a  tyeaftpiatc ,  anb  an 
«Sprjob ,  anb  a  tobc ,  anb  a  tyoibereb 
coat ,  a  Suiter ,  anb  a  girblc :  anb  they 
(hall  mafte  holy  ganncnts  fo?  aaron 
thy  toother,  anb  his  fonnes,  that  nee 
may  mintfter  bnto  mec  in  the  £neftcs 
office. 

5  anb  they  (hall  rase  golb  ,  anb 
bletb,  anbpnrpie,  ana  fcatlet,  anb  fine 
lumen. 

6  canb  they  (hall  mafte  the  €phob 
of  golb,of  blem  anb  ofpurplcof  fearlet, 
anb  fine  ttbmeb  Unnen,  tbiti)  tunning 
tbotfte. 

7  3Jt  (hall  haue  the  ttbo  fhoulbet 
pieces  thctcof,  ioynebattbettbo  ebges 
thereof;  anb  fo  it  (hall  bee  toyncb  to* 
gethcr. 

8  anbthellmrtouscjfrbieofthce 


phob  tbhich  ts  bpon  it,  (hall  bee  of  the 
fame ,  accojbmg  to  the  lbo^e  thereof, 
euen  of  golb,  ofbletb,  anb  purple,  anb 
fcarlet,anb  fine  ttbmeb  Unnen. 

9  anb  thou  (halt  taftenbojDnir 
ilones,anb  grauc  on  them  the  names  of 
thechiltoenof3lftael; 

10  £>ttc  of  theit  names  on  one  done, 
anb  the  other  fire  names  of  the  reft  on 
the  other  ftone,aeto;souig  to  their  birth: 

h  *  natch  the  ibojftc  of  an  engrauer 
in  (lone  ■,  i«fe«  the  engraumgs  ofafignct 
(halt  thou  engrauc  the  tibo  ftones, 
ibith  the  names  of  the  chiltom  of  3Jfc 
tael ;  thou  (halt  matte  them  to  be  fet  in 
ouches  of  golb, 

it  anb  thou  (halt  ptttthe  ttbo  (tones 
bpon  the  (houlbers  of  the  «phob ,  tbi 
ftones  of  mcmonall  bnto  the  chilbjen 
of  3Jfracl.  anb  aaron  (ball  bcarc  their 
names  before  the  H©ias> ,  bpon  his 
ttbo  (houlbers  fo?  a  mcmonali. 

ij  C  anb  thou  (halt  mafte  ouches 
of  golb; 

14.  anb  ttbo  chalncsofputegolbat 
theenbfcofttoeathcn  ibojfte  (halt  thou 
made  them,  anb  fallen  the  Itocathen 
chaines  to  the  ouches. 

15  C  ana  thou  (halt  mafte  the  toeft- 
plate  of  ^ubgettient ,  tbith  cunning 
tbo?fee ,  after  the  tboiftc  of  tl)c  «?phob 
thou  (halt  maUc it:  of  golb,of  blctb.anb 
of  purplc,anb  of  fcarlet,anb  of  fine  ttbl* 
neb  Unnen  (halt  thou  made  it. 

16  ifourefauarcitlhailbcbeingbou* 
bleb;  a  fpannefhaibe  the  length  thereof, 
anb  a  (pan  Ojaibe  the  tocabtf)  thereof. 

17  anb  thou  (halt  tfcttn  it  fettmgs 
of  (tones;  euen  foute  totbes  of  ftones : 
the  firft  r  otb  fhaibe  a  |[^arbtus,a  Xopa^, 
anb  a  Carbuncle :  this  (hail  be  the  fitft 
totb. 

18  £ub  tifje  feconb  rotb  (hail  be  an  €> 
meraube.a  ^>aphir  ,anb  a  SDtamonb 

19  ^nbthethirbrotba?,vgure,an 
agate,  anb  an  ^niethtft. 

20  ^nb  the  fourth  rotb,aiSertu\ anb 
an£)n(jc,aiib  a  'Jafper :  the?  fhalbcfct 
in  golb  m  their  tintlofiags. 

ii  anbthe  ftones  (hail  bee  tbith  the 
names  of  the  ehilbien  of  3jfraei,ttbclue, 
acco,ib(ng  to  their  names,i'kJthe  engra^ 
uings  of  a  Ognet:  cuerp  one  ibith  his 
name  (hall  the?  bee  accojbing  to  the 
ttbelue  tribes. 

xx  C  anb  thou  (halt  tnahc  bpon  the 
bjeftplatechames  at  the  enbs  .oftb^ea* 
then  tbo:Ue,  of  pure  golb. 

2$  anb  thou  (halt  made  bpon  the 
$  5 h?eftj 


« wifd.18 


\H<hr.fiMi> 

it  filings  of 


\H<ltfiU 


Aarons  garments,       Exodus.  an 


d  his  fc 


onncs. 


\Orjiirli. 


*Ecc!us. 
45.10. 


bjcfrplate  ttbo  rmgs  of  golb ,  ant  (halt 
put  the  ttbo  nugs  on  the  ttbo  enbes  of 
thcbjcfrpiate. 

14  3nb  thou  (halt  put  the  ttbo 
tbjeathen  chames  of  goto  m  the  ttbo 
nngs,  which  are  on  the  tnos  of  the  b#f> 
plate. 

15  ^nt»  the  other  ttbo  mats  of  the 
ni)ott)?tatl)enciiaines,  thou  Ojalt  faftcti 
in  the  ttbo  ouches,  anb  put  them  on  the 
(honlbcr  pieces  of  the  <£phob  bcfo?c  it. 

26  £3nb  thou  (halt  mafte ttbo  rings 
of  ejolb,  anb  thou  (halt  put  them  bpon 
the  ttbo  enbs  of  the  btcattpiate,  in  the 
bojbct  thereof,  which  is  in  the  fibe  of 
thc<£phobmtbarb. 

17  3inb  ttbo  other  rings  of  golb  thou 
(haltmaue,  ano  (halt  put  them  on  the 
ttbo  ftbes  of  the  ephob  bnberneath  to 
tbarbs  the  forepart  thereof,  oucr  a- 
gainft  the  other  coupling  thereof,  abouc 
the  curious  curble  of  the  ephob. 

18  3in&thcy  fball  binb  the  tucftpiatc 
by  the  rings  thereof,  bnto  the  rings  of 
thcephobtbithaiacc  of  blcibc,  that  it 
map  be  aboue  the  curious  girble  of  the 
tfphob,  anb  that  the  bJtafrpiatc  be  not 
loofeb  from  the  €phob. 

19  3lnb3aronfl)albearc  the  names 
of  the  chilbjcn  of  3fcacl  in  the  tyeaffc 
plate  of  iubgement ,  bpon  his  heart, 
tbhenhec  goeth  in  bnto  the  holy  place, 
foz  a  mcmonail  before  the  %  £>  m  je>  con* 
tmually. 

jo  C3tnb  thou  thatt  put  mthetecafc 
plate  of  iubgement,  the  drimanbthc 
Xhummim ,  ano  they  fljall  bee  bpon 
^aronsheart,tbhmhcgocthinbcfojc 
the  it  ©is©:  anb  3aron  (hail  beare 
the  iubgement  of  the  chilbmi  of  3ifrael 
bponhts  hcart,bcfo?c  the  %  ©  is  ©  con* 
tinuaily. 

5i  C3fobthou  fhalt  mafee  the  robe 
ofthc€phobailofblctb. 

31  ^nbthereChaUbeeanhoIeinthc 
top  of  it,  in  the  mibs  thereof:  it  (hall 
hauc  a  binblng  of  lboucn  tbojac,  r  ounb 
aboutthehole  of  it,  as  it  tbcre  the  hole 
of  an  habergeon,  that  it  be  not  rent 

3  j  C  3nb  beneath  bpon  the  ||  htmmc 
of  it  tljou  (halt  niaac  pomegranates  of 
blctb,  anb  of  purple,  anb  of  fcarlet, 
rounb  about  the  hemme  thereof,  anb 
belles  of  golb  bcttbcciic  them  rounb  a 
bout. 

34-  2golbcnbcllanbapomegranatc, 
agolbenbcliaub  apomegranate,bpon 
the  hemme  of  the  robe  rounb  about. 

35  *3Jnb  tt  (ball  be  bpon  aaton,  to 


mmitter :  anb  his  founb  fljall  be  hcarb 
tbhm  he  goethmbnto  the  horppi^e  be- 
fore the  % £■££> ,ano  ttrtjen he  tommcth 
out,  that  he  bie  not 

36  C3inb  thou  (halt  mane  a  plate  of 
pure  golb,  anb  graue  bpon  it,  like  the  en* 
graiungsofaugnet  ty&>JL3fie$> 

37  3nb  thou  (halt  put  it  on  a  bletbc 
late,  that  it  ma?  be  bpon  the  miter ;  bo- 
on  trjc  fojtefr  ont  of  the  miter  it  (hall  be. ; 

38  2tnb  it  fljall  be  bpon  Karons  fo?e^ 
heab,  that^aronmay  beare  the  tntquu 
tit  of  the  holy  things,  tbhich  the  d)fl* 
bjen  of 3Jfrael  (hall  hallotb,  in  au  their 
holy  gifts :  anb  it  fhallbc altbayes bpon 
bisfojehcab,  that  they  may  be  acccptcb 
before  theJL  «dk©. 

39  CShib  thou  (halt  embjoibet  the 
coat  of  fine  linncn,  anb  thou  (halt  mafee 
the  miter  of  fine  linncn ,  anb  thou  (halt 
mafee  thcgitbleof  necblctbo&e. 

40  c  3uibfo«?  Karons  fonnes  thou 
(halt  mafee  coats,  anb  thou  Cbaltmabc 
foj  them  gtrblcs,  anb  bonnets  (halt 
thou  mafee  foj  them,  foj  glcuy  anb  fo; 
beautie. 

41  3fnb  rhort  fhalt  put  them  bpon 
3aron  th?  brother ,  anb  his  tonnes 
tbith  i)tm:  anb  (halt annointthem,anb 
tconfecrate  them, anb  Cancttfic  them, 
that  the?  map  mmifter  bnto  mee  in  the 
^tefts  office. 

41  3lnb  thou  (halt  mafee  them  ttn* 
netib2ecches,to  couertthcir  nafeebnes, 
from  the  loines  earn  bnto  the  thtghes 
theyfbaiit  teach. 

43  anb  they  ttjall  be  bpon  3(aron, 
$  bpon  his  founts,  tbhen  the?  tome  in 
bnto  the  Xabcrnatlc  of  the  Congrega* 
tion,  oj  tbhen  the?  come  ncere  bnto  the 
3lltar  to  nrtmCer  in  the  holy  place,  that 
they  beare  not  (niqiuttc,  anbbic.  it  (hall 
be  a  ftatute  fo?  euer  bnto  him  anb  his 
fetbc  after  him, 

CHAl;.    XXIX. 

1  Thefacrificeand  ceremonies  of  confeaatiiig 
the  Priefts.  38  The  continual]  burnt  offe- 
ring. 45  Gods  promiie  to  dwell  among 
the  children  ot  Ilrael. 

/i*b  this  (s  the  thutcjthat 

thoufhaitbocbnto  them, 

to  hallotb  them,  to  mini 

ftcr  bnto  me  in  the  l&ncOs 

office :  *  £afec  one  yong 

buiiocbe ,  anb  ttbo  rammts  tbitljout 

blemlfb, 

i  ^nbbnleaamebb?eab,anbcafecs 

bnlea* 


\m.fiit 

theirhaudt 


t  ttth.ftp> 
cf  their  nc~ 
iejnefr. 
\HebMc. 


*  Leuit.o.J 


Theconf( 


leconiecration 


Ch 


ap.xxix. 


ofthePrieft 


s. 


"Chap.  3  c 
!5> 


\Hti.iinJ. 

t  Hit.  fill 
thehttrtdof. 
*Chap.j8. 
41. 

*Leuit.t.4 


'Leuit.3.3 

||  Ufccmith 
try  Anatomy, 
tutdthe  Hc~ 
Ireire'Do- 
iloKrt,  xabe 
thtmiariffir. 


bnlcauencb,  tcmpcrcb  iDitt)  ople,  anb 
tbafers  bnlcauencb ,  annotntcb  ltoit^ 
oilc :  of  ibhcatcn  ftoib?c  (bait  thou 
maftethcm. 

3  3nb  thou  (halt  pirt  them  into  one 
bafftet,  anb  b?mg  them  in  the  bafftet, 
ttnth  the  bulloefee  anb  ttjc  nbo  r  ammes 

4  Ztm  3aronanb  his  Connrs  thou 
(halt  bung  bnto  the  booze  of  the  Xabet- 
naclc  of  the  Congregation ,  anb  (bait 
lbafb  tbcmibttbibatcr. 

5  :3nb  thou  (bait  taftc  the  garments, 
anb  put  bpon  3aron  the  coat,  anb  the 
robe  of  tijc  <£pbob,  anb  the  €phob,anb 
the  b?cftplatc ,  anb  girb  Dim  Ibittj  the  cu* 
rlous  girblc  of  the  Cphob. 

6  anb  thou  (halt  put  the  $$itccbp^ 
on  his  !)cab,  anb  put  the  holy  Crolbnc 
bpon  the  flatter. 

7  Xhnt  (halt  thou  taftc  the  annouv 
ting  *  oyle,  anb  poib?c  tt  bpon  his  heab, 
anb  annoint  hint. 

8  anbthoufl)attb?utghisfomus, 
anb  pnt  coats  bpon  them. 

9  2tnb  thou  (halt  gtrb  them  lbith 
girblcs ,  ( :3aron  anb  his  fonnes )  anb 
tput  the  bonnets  on  them :  anb  the 
pnefts  office  (hail  be  theirs  fo?aperpe* 
tuail  ftatute:  anb  thou  (halt  t  *  conte 
crate  3(aron  anb  his  fonnes. 

10  anbtboufbaltcAufcabullocftcto 
bee  brought  before  the  tabernacle  of 
the  Congregation :  anb  *  3laron  anb 
his  fonnes  (ban  put  their  hanbs bpon 
the  heab  of  the  bullocftc. 

11  ami  thou  than  mu  the  bunoeftc  bc^ 
fo?c  the  1L©k©,  by  the  boo?c  of  the 
Xabctnacle  of  the  Congregation. 

ii  Sfnbthou  (halt  tafte  of  the  bloob 
of  the  bullocuc,  anb  put  it  bpon  the 
homesof  the  attar  ttr.thtbv  fmger,anb 
pord?eauthc  bloob  beftbe  the  bottome 
ofthcaitat. 

i}  2inb  *  thou  flialt  tafte  all  the  fat 
that  coucreth  the  inibarbs ,  anb  ||  tl)t 
caulethatisabouc  theiiucr,  anbthettbo 
fetbnets,  anb  thefat  that  is  bpon  tyem, 
anb  burne  them  bpon  the  altar. 

14  23utthenea)ofthcbulloc&c,anb 
his  Dunne,  anb  his  boung  (halt  thou 
burne  ibith  fire  Vbtthout  thetampe,  tt  is 
a  Cinne  offering. 

15  cXhoufbattaUotafteonerftm, 
anb  2aton  anb  his  fonnes  (ball  put 
their  hanbs  bpon  the  heab  of  the  ram. 

16  2nb  thou  (halt  (lap  the  ramme, 
anb  thou  fljalt  tafte  his  bloob,anb  fpnru 
ftle  >t  tounb  about  bpon  the  altar. 

17  anbthoulhattwtthetammeln 


pieces,  anbtbaOj  the  inibarbs  of  him, 
anb  his  legs,  anb  put  them  bnto  his  pie- 
ces, anb !!  bnto  his  heab. 

is  anb  thou  (halt  burne  thetbholc 
ranunc  bpon  the  aitar :  it  is  a  burnt  of 
fenng  bnto  the  %  ©  k  jd  :  3Jt  ■  >  a  ftbect 
fauour ,  an  offering  mabe  by  fire  bnto 

thCH©183E>. 

19  C^nbthou  (halt  talte  thcothcr 
ramme  :  anb  aaron  anb  his  fonnes 
(hall  put  their  hanbs  bpon  the  heab  of 
the  ramme. 

10  Xhcn  (halt  tljou  bfll  the  ramme, 
anb  tafte  of  his  bloob,  anb  put  it  bpon 
the  tip  of  the  right  care  of  3laron,anb 
bpon  the  tip  of  the  right  earc  of  his 
fonnes,  anb  bpon  the  thumbc  of  their 
nghtljanb,  anb  bpon  the  great  toe  of 
their  right  fo ot,  anb  fp?tncftle  the  bloob 
bpon  the  altar  rounb  about. 

11  anb  thou  (halt  tafte  of  the  bloob 
that  is  bponrheaitar,anb  of  the  anoiiv 
ttngoyle,  anb  fp?inftle  it  bpon  aaron, 
anb  bpon  hisgarments,  anbbponhis 
fonnes,  anb  bpon  the  garments  ofhis 
fonnes  rbtth  him ;  anb  heefhail  behalf 
loibeb ,  anb  his  garments ,  anb  his 

fonnes,anb  his  fonnes  garments  ibirlj 
him. 

xx  aifo  thou  (halt  tafte  of  the  ram 
the  fat  anb  the  nunpe ,  anb  the  fat  that 
coucreth  themtbarbs,  ?thecaule.aboue 
thcliuer,  anbthcttboftibiicis,  anb  the 
fat  that  is  bpon  them ,  anb  the  right 
fboulbcr ,  fojit  is  aramofconfecration: 

xj  ^nb  oncloafe  of  bieab,  anb  one 
raacof  o^leb  bzeab,  anb  onetbaftrout 
of  the  baffeet  of  the  bnlcaucncbbjeab, 
that  is  before  the  %  ©  b  ©. 
'24  3nb  thou  tt)ait  put  all  in  the 
hanbs  of  3(aron,  anb  in  the  hanbs  of 
his  fonnes ,  anb  (halt  I!  ibanc  them  for  a 
ibauc  -  offering  before  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

x<,  3lnb  thou  (halt  recetue  them  of 
there  hanbs,  anb  burne  them  bpon  the 
3itar  fo?  a  burnt  offcruig ,  fo?  a  froe et 
fauour  before  tlje  %  ©  is  w> :  it  is  an  offo 
ring  mabe  far  fir  e  bn to  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

x6  3lnb  tljou  Oialt  tafte  the  bzeft  of 
the  ramme  of  Karons  coiu"ecrations, 
anbibauett  to?  a  rbaue-offcrtngbefbjc 
thelL©K©,  anb  it  (halbcthppart 

17  Tint  thou  nialtfanctinc  the  bjett 
ofthcIbaue-offering,anbthe(houlber 
of  the  heaue  offtrnig,  ibhichisibaucb, 
anb  Ibhith  isheaueb  bp  of  the  ramme 
oftheeonfccratfon,euen  oftl)at  tutjieli 
is  to?  ^aron,  anb  of  that  tbhfch  is  fo?  his 
fonnes. 

as  3inb 


,1  Or^ttm. 


toandfre. 


The  con fc 


econiecration 


Exod 


us. 


ofthePricft 


s. 


fHA-.He 

ofhisfonnti. 


•Lcuii.8. 
jl.mscch. 
■  1.4. 


•  Num.  18. 
J- 


%%  anb  it  fhalbc  Karons ,  anb  his 
Ibnncs  bp  a  ftatutc  for  euet ,  from  the 
chilbicn  of  3Jftael :  fojitisanheauc  of* 
feting :  anb  u  (hall  be  an  heauc  offering 
from  the  chilbrcn  of  JJfracl ,  of  ti)c  fa- 
crtficc  of  their  peace  offrmgs,cuen  tljctr 
hcaueoffcrmgbnto  rhclLoisip. 

29  canb  the  holp  garments  of  aa* 
ron  (hail  be  his founts  after  him,  to  bee 
anopntebthctctn,atib  to  be  confecrateb 
in  them. 

30  anb  t  that  tonne  that  is  i&teft  m 
hisftcab.fhaiputthemonfeuenbapcs, 
ibheu  l)c  commcth  into  ttjc  1£abcraacle 
of  tijc  Congregation  to  mimftertnthe 
^olv  place. 

31  tanb  thou  (halt  tafte  the  rammc 
of  the  tonfeeranon^nb  fcethc  his  flclh 
inthe  holp  plate. 

32  anb  aaton  anb  his  tonnes  (hall 
eate  the  fle(h  of  the  ramme ,  anb  the 
*brcab  that  is  in  the  baffeet,  bp  tfje  boore 
of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Cogr  cgation. 

33  ^nb  the?  (hall  eate  thofe  things, 
tbhcrcibifh  the  atonement  ibas  mabe, 
totonfecrateanbtofamtifie  them :  but 
aftrangct(haUnot  eate  thereof,  becaufe 
thep  ate  holp. 

34.  anb  if  ought  of  the  fle(h  of  the 
(animations ,  0?  of  the  brcabrcmame 
bnto  the  mommg ,  then  thou  (halt 
butne  the  r  emamber  ibuh  fire :  tt  (hall 
not  be  eaten,  becaufcit  ts  holp. 

35  anbthusfbaltthoubocbntoaa; 
ron,  anb  to  his  fonncs,  accorbmgtoall 
things  ibhich  3  hauc  commaunbcb 
thee :  feucn  bapes  Q;au  thou  tonfeccatc 
them. 

36  anb  thou  (halt  offer  euerp  bap  a 
tralloefec  for  a  finnc  offering ,  for  atonc= 
nient:  anb  thou  (halt  clenfc  thcaitar, 
ibheu  thou  haft  mabe  an  atonement 
foi  it,  anb  thou  (halt  anopnttt,tofan-' 
ctifieit. 

37  £>cuen  bapes  thou  (halt  mafte  an 
atonement  fo:  thcaitar , anb  fanrttfie  it: 
anbitftjaibeanaitarmoftholpiibhat; 
foeucr  touchcththe  aitar,(hatbc  help. 

3$  €  iftoib  this  is  that  ibhich  thou 
(halt  offer  bpon  the  aitar;  *  tlbo  lambs 
of  the  firft  per  e ,  bap  bp  bap  ronnnuailp. 

39  Xhc  one  lambc  thou  (halt  offer 
m  the  morning :  anb  the  other  lambc 
thou  (halt  offer  at  euen: 

40  anoibith  the  one  iambea  tenth 
bcaicoffloibremingleblbtththcfoutth 
part  of  an  $111  of  beaten  oplc:anbtf)c 
fourth  part  of  an  J?m  of  Untie  for  a 
brtnltc  offering. 


41  anb  the  other  lambc  thou  (halt 
offer  at  Cucn ,  anb  (halt  boc  thereto ,  ae 
corbtng  to  the  meat  offering  of  themo;* 
mng,  ano  accorbmg  to  the  bnnue  of- 
fering thereof,  fo2  a  ftuect  fauour,  an 
offering  mabe  bp  fire  tonto  the  %£>%&, 

41  Tins  fhaibc  a  tonnnuaii  burnt  of* 
fenng  throughout  pour  generanons, 
at  tlje  boore  of  the  H^bcrnaclc  of  the 
Congrcganon  ,  before  the  2Lsdk©, 

ibherc  33  mil  mcetepo^tofpcaKe  there 
bnto  thee. 

43  anbtfierc^Jibai  meet  with  the 

rfflSmcn  Of  3fraCl  :  anb  ||  the  Tabernacle 

(baibc  (anctiftcb  bp  mp  giorp. 

44  3tnb  3  ttnll  Canetific  the  Xabcr* 
natle  of  the  Congregation ,  anb  the  ai 
tar :  3  ibtfl  fcnetifie  alfo  both  3aton 
anb  his  fonncs,  to  numttcr  to  mc  m  the 
priefts  office. 

45  Canb  "3  mill  blbeil  amongft 
the  chflbrcn  of  Jfraeijanb  ttnll  be  their 

©Ob. 

46  anb  thep  (hall  tmott>  that  3  am 
the  H  ©  13  ©  their  <3ob ,  that  brought 
thnufoorth  out  of  the  lanb  of  Cgypt, 
that  3  map  bibcli  amongft  them  5  j 
am  the  |L  ©  k  ©  thetr  <35ob, 

CHAP.   XXX. 

1  The  Altar  of  incenfe.  n  The  ran  Come  of 
foules.  17  Thebrafenlaucr.  il  The  ho- 
ly anoyming  oyle.  34  The  compofition 
o(  the  perfume. 

/5b  thou  (halt  make  an 
aitar  to  butne  tnccnfc  bp- 
on :  of  .Shitttm  ttoob 
(halt  thou  malic  it. 

2     aCUbltCifiillbeethe 

length  thereof,  anb  a  eubitc  the  bieabth 
rl)crcof,  (fourc  fquarc(hallttbce)anb 
tlbo  cubits  fiuibe  the  hnght  thereof:  the 
homes  thereof  fhaibe  ofthefame. 

3  ano  thou  (halt  ottcriap  it  Ibith 
purcgolb,tlK  Hop  therof.anb  the  tfibes 
thereof  rounb  about ,  anb  the  homes 
thereof:  anbthoufhaltmaaebntoita 
crottinc  of  golb  rounb  about. 

4  anb  tlbo  goibcn  rings  (halt  thou 
mane  to  it  bnber  the  croibnc  of  tt,  bp 
the  tlbo  t  comers  thercofbpou  the  tlbo 
fibesof  it  (halt  thou  mahctt :  anb  thep 
(haibe  for  places  fo;  the  itmts  to  bearc 
it  Ibithall. 

5  anb  thou  (halt  malic  the  ftaues 
of  smittun  iboob ,  anb  oucrlap  them 
ibithgoio. 

6  anb  thou  (halt  put  it  before  the 
<Uailc, 


|]Or,Ifrael. 


*Iejiti2<f. 
12.  i.eor. 
tit. 


\H,h.tl„ 
racfe  Jnithi 
waits. 
\Hcb.WA& 


\M.R>. 


Ranfomeoffoules.    Chapjooc.        A 


.nointin 


cenft  of  fae- 
ces. 

\  Or,fettetk 

vf.heb.etts 

ftthtoaf- 

cond. 

f  Hih.be- 

rvitm  lite 

two  CHCnl. 


1  Num.1. 
f  Hetr  them 

■  "."  .ir:  -\  i  ■ 

tombed. 


*Ltuit.  17. 
15.  num.  3. 
47.ezck. 
4J.IJ. 


f  hjeh.mnl- 
ttphe. 

mjb. 


Uasie,  that  <sbp  the  arte  of  theXettv 
niontebewe  the  i$ercu:  feat,  that<s,o* 
tier  tbeXcftimotueluhete3J  Stotil  meet 
ibiththee. 

7  anb  aaron  (ball  burnc  thereon 
t  facet  tncenfe  euerp  moaning :  ibben  he 
bjefleth  the  lamps  he  (bai  burucintcnXc 
bpontt. 

8  anb  Tbbcn  aaron  fl  llghttth  the 
lampestateuen,hc  (halibumc  mrtnfe 
bpon  (t,  apcrpetuall  mreitfc  befoze  the 
5L  €>  k  © ,  throughout  pout  generate 
ous. 

9  J3e  (ball  offer  no  Orange  tncenfe 
thereon,  nor  burnt  fatnto,  nor  mcatc 
offering,  neither  (ball  pe  pottyc  bnnftc 
offermg  thereon. 

10  ahbaaron (ballmafte an  atone- 
ment bpon  the  homes  of  it  once  m  a 
pcere,  ibtththe  bloobof  the  fmne  offe 
nng  of  atonements :  onte  in  the  pecrc 
(hail  hee  mafec  atonement  bpon  it, 
tbroughoutpour  gencrations:it  »ntoft 
bolv  bnto  the  %  fl> «  ©. 

11  canb  the  3ltf>38$>  fpaac  bnto 
^ofes,  facing, 

ii  *  ashen  thontaKcft  the  fumnte  of 
the  chtlbrcn  of  3Jfraci,aftCT  t  that  nnnv 
ber,  then  (hall  thep  giue  euerp  man  a 
ranfomefor  hisfoutc  bnto  the  ?L©e©, 
ibhenthoa  numtoeft  them,  that  there 
be  no  plague  amongftthem,  ibbenihou 
numbjeftthem. 

15  Xbis  they  (hall  glue,  euerp  one 
that  paffeth  among  them  that  are 
numbrcb:  balfeafl)  curl  after  the  (hcbel 
of  the  «g)antruarp :  *  a  (benel  is  tibentp 
gcrahs :  an  haifc  (beftci  (hail  be  the  offe* 
ring  of  the  1L©  13©. 

14  tfuerp  one  that  paffeth  among 
them  that  are  numtweb  from  ttbenne 
pecrcs  olb  anb  aboue,  (ballgutean  offe* 
nng  bnto  the %o  is©. 

15  Xhcrltbfbainottgwemorcanb 
the  poore  (hall  not  t  giuc  leffe  then  halfe 
a(hehcl,tbhcnthcvgiuean  offcrttigbtv 
to  the  %  <$>  is  ©,  to  mafec  an  atonement 
for  pour  foules. 

16  ^nb  thou  (halt  tafce  the  atones 
mentmoncp  of  the  ebtlbzcn  of  3Jfrael, 
ano  (halt  appoint  it  fonbeferutcr  of  the 
Xabernaelc  of  the  Congregation,  that 
it  map  be  a  memonall  bnto  the  cbtHwcn 
of  3!frael  befcuc  the  %  0  is »,  to  mauc 
an  atonement  for  pour  Goules. 

17  canb  the  Hffi  is  ©(pane  bnto 
£0ofes,fapmg, 

13  XhoulbaltalfomaRealLaucrof 
brafle ,  anb  his  footc  alfo  of  tyaffe,  to 


tbafh  withaii ,  anb  thou  (bait  put  it  be* 
tibcene  the  Xabernaele  of  the  Congr  e* 
gation,anb  the  altar , anb  thou  (halt  put 
ibatertberctn. 

19  Jfor  aaron  anb  his  fonncs  (ball 
lbafl)  their  hatU)s  anb  their  feet  thereat. 

20  aaben  thep  goetnto  the  Xabct* 
natle  of  the  Cougreganon,  thep  (hall 
lba(h  ttitfh  lbatet,tbat  they  Die  not :  0? 
Xbhen  tbep  come  ncere  to  the  altar  to 
mimlter,  to  burne  offenug  ntaoe  op  fire 
bnto  the  5L£)b©. 

ti  ^othtpChauxbafl)  their  banbes 
ano  their  feet,that  thep  btc  not:  anb  it 
(hall  be  a  flamtt  to;  euer  to  them,  eucn  to 
him  ano  to  his  &tb  throughout  their  gc* 
ucranons. 

zi  C£0o;eouerthe|L£Di5©fpaBe 
bnto  Q3ofes,  (aping, 

ii  Xabetljou  alfo  bnto  tljccpiinci? 
pan  (pices,  of  pure  mp;rbcnuebunDjeb 
Poefeels ,  anb  of  fioect  nnamonhalfc  fo 
much,  cnentlbo  hunb^b  anb  fiftp  (he. 
Ws,  anb  of  facet  calamus  ttbohunb^cb 

atlbflftiefhekels, 

24  anbofCataafutehunbKbfhekeN, 
after  the  (heftel  of  the  S>anttuarp ,  anb 
ofopleoliucatr^m. 

z5  anbthoufbaitmabcitanopleof 
Ijolp  opntment,  an  opntment  com 
ponnb  after  the  arte  of  the  H  apothctaf 
ne :  uflialbe  anholpanolnttngople. 

26  anb  thou  (halt  anoint  the  Xa 
bernaelt  of  the  Congregation  there 
ibtth ,  anb  the  arfec  of  tlje  %mm& 
me : 

27  anbrheXablcanbailhisbcfrrts, 
anb  the  Canbldhtfic,  anbhts  bedels, 
anbtheaitarofmtenfe: 

28  anb  the  aitar  of  burnt  offering 
ibith  all  his  beffeis,  anb  the  Hauer  anb 
his  foot 

29  anb  thou  (haltfancnficthem,tbat 
thep  map  bee  mod  holp :  ibbatfoeucr 
touchcth  them,  (hall  bt  holp. 

30  anb  thou  (halt  annoint  aaron 
anb  his  (bnnes,  anb  confetrate  them, 
that  tl)cp  map  minuter  bnto  mecin  the 
p:ie  (Is  office. 

31  anb  thon  (halt  fpeafec  bnto  the 
chilbzcnof  3Jfrael,  fapmg,  Xhts  (hall 
bee  an  holp  anointing  oile  bnto  mee, 
throughout  pour  generations. 

32  tUpon  mansflcth  (hall  u  not  bee 
pottneb,  neither  (hall  pe  malic  any  other 
litsc  it ,  after  the  compoOtion  of  it :  it  <? 
holp,  ^d  u  (hall  be  holp  bnto  pou, 

33  nahofoeuer  tompounbeth  anp 

Uhe  it,  02  lbhofoeuer  putteth  aI,y  of  it 

boon 


goyle. 


'Chap.  jy. 


Or,perJvi. 


Bezaleeland 


Exod 


us. 


Aholiab  called. 


\Htb.fJud 


•l.Chron. 

J.JO. 


IHtt.vtph 


topon  a  ttranger,  (ball  cum  be  cat  off 
from  dispeople. 

34  C  anb  the  TL©isip  Gilo  into 
Q3olcs,  Xabebnto  tJ)ec  frocctc  fplccs, 
£>tactc,anb  £mtcna,  ana  (Salbanum: 
ihefc  froccte  fptccs  tttttt)  puce  franbuv 
cenfc,  of  each  (hall  there  be  a  libe  weight. 

35  3nb  thou  fyait  mabe  it  a  perfume, 
a  tonfcctiou  after  tbc  arte  of  the  3ipo* 
tbecanc,  Uempereb  together,  pure  and 

holy. 

?6  anb  thou  (bait  beat  fome  of  it  bcry 
miail,anDputofitbefo?eti)ete(hntony 
in  tlje  tabernacle  of  the  Congrcganon, 
rt>ber  e  3  ttnll  meet  ttntb  thee :  it  (baibe 
bntoyoumoftboly. 

37  3lnb  as  fo?  the  perfume  tbljirt) 
tfjou  (bait  mabe,  you  (ball  not  mate  to 
youcfelues,accozbmg  to  tbctompofttv 
on  tftereof :  it  (ball  be  bnto  thee  ijolv  fo? 
tbefL©is©. 

js  iBbofoeuet  (ball  mabellbc  bnto 
rbat,to  fmcll  thereto,  (ball  cucn  bee  cut 
off  from  Dispeople. 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

i  Bezalecl  and  Ahoiiab  are  called  and  made 
meet  for  the  worke  of  the  Tabernacle.  nThe 
obferuation  ot  the  Sabbath  is  againe  com. 
manded.  1 8  Mofes  receiueth  the  twoTables. 

0n  then,  ©  k  ©fpabe  bn? 
to  #ofcs,  faying, 

z  5>ec,3rjauecailtb 
by  name ,  ascsaiecl  the 
*  tonne  of  fin,  the  fonne 
6fl?ur,oftbetribcof3Iiibah: 

3  anb  3  bauc  filicb  bun  ibtth  the 
S>pictt  of  <5ob,  in  ttnfcbome,  anbin  btv 
berftanbmg,  anb  in  bnovblcbgc,  anb  in 
all  maner  of  ibojbcmantbtp, 

4  %o  bcuifc  cunning  tbo?bcs,  to 
tboiKC  m  golbe ,  anb  m  uluer ,  anb  us 
b?au"c, 

5  anb  in  cutting  of  (tones,  to  fet 
tl)em,  anb  in  eanung  of  timber,  to 
tt)o?bc  in  ailmanrr  of  iboibemanQup. 

6  anb^I.brtiolb^bauegiunilbitb 
bun,  aboliab  tbc  fonne  of  ahtfamacb, 
of  tbc  tribe  of  3>an,  anb  in  the  hearts 
of  all  tbat  arc  rbifc  beartcb  3  Dane  put 
mifcbomc,  tbat  they  may  mabe  all  ttjat 
3  hauc  commanbeb  tbec : 

7  1Ebe  Xabcniacle  of  the  Congrc^ 
gation,anb  tbcarbc  of  the  Xefhmony, 
anb  tbc  ©erctc  feat  tbat  is  thereupon, 
$  all  the  t  furniture  of  tbclCabcrnacle: 

8  3lnbtl)eirable,anbbisfummirc, 
anb  tbc  pure  Canblcfhcbc,  ibttb  all  bis 
furniture,  anb  tbc  aitar  of  tnccnfc : 


9  anb  the  aitar  of  burnt  offering, 
ttntb  all  bis  furniture,  anb  tbe  ?laucr 
anbbisfootc: 

io  ^nb  the  clothes  of  feru(ce,anb  tbc 
holy  garments  fo?  aaron  the  ^neft, 
anb  the  garments  of  his  fonnes,  to  mi? 
mftcr  in  the  0?tcfts  office: 

ii  an&tbeanointmgoyle,anbfroeet 
tnccnfc  fo?  the  $o!y  place:  accojbingto 
all  that  3  haue  commanbeb  thee,  (ball 
thcyboe. 

i2  canb  the  ?,©B8>fpabe  bnto 
QDofcs,  faying, 

13  5>peabe  thou  affo  bnto  the  rbit 
o?cn  of  3Jfracl  Jaymg,Uerely  my  £>ab 
baths  ye  (hall  beepe :  fo?  tt  >s  afigne  be* 
tibecne  me  anb  you ,  throughout  your 
generations,  that  y  e  may  bnotb  that  3 
am  the  %  ©  is  ©,tbatbotb  fancctfie  you. 

14  *  #ee  (hall  beepe  the  Sabbath 
therefore  :fo:  it  is  holy  bnto  you:  €uery 
one  that  bcfilcth  it,  (ball  furely  be  put  to 
beath:  fo?  tbbofoeucr  both  a»v  ttwbe 
therein,  that  foule  (hall  be  cut  off  from 
amongfr  his  people. 

15  jSnrcbayes  may  ttio?be  bee  bone, 
but  in  the  feuentb  is  the  <S>abbatb  of  reft, 
t  holy  to  the  %  ©  is  © :  ibhofocuer  both 
anv  rbo?be  in  the  £>abbatb  bay,  he  (hall 
furely  be  putto  oeath. 

16  ffihercfo?etbecbflb?enof3Jrracl 
(ball  bcepc  the  5>abbarh ,  to  obferue  the 
Sabbath  throughout  their  generate 
ons,  fo?  a  pcrpetuail  touenaw. 

17  3t|sa(ignebettbeenemeanbthe 
chilbien  of Jlfrael  fo?  euer:  fo?  *  in  lire 
oayes  the  C©is©  mabe  bcaucn  anb 
earth,  anb  on  the  reuenth  oaybercltco 
anbibasrcfrcfbeb. 

is  canbhcgaaebnto£)!)ofes,tt)hen 
hce  bab  mabe  an  cnb  of  communtng 
ttitth  him  bpon  mount  £nnai,  *  tlbo 
tables  of  Xefhmonte,  tables  of  (rone, 
ttJ?irtm  ttntb  tbefinger  of  <5ob, 

CHAP.   XXXII. 

1  The  people  in  the  abfence  of  Mofes,caufe  A- 
aron  to  make  a  calfe.  7  God  is  angred  there, 
by.  11  At  the  intrcatieotMofes  he  is  appea- 
led. 15  Mofes  commeth  dosvne  with  the 
Tables.  10  He  breaketh  them.  xoHede- 
ftroyeththe  calfe.  11  Aaronsexcufcforhim. 
felfe.  1^  Mofes  caufeth  the  Idolaters  to  bee 
flaine.    50    He  prayeth  lor  the  people. 

S^KS?  ^tthen  the  people  faft 
that  fl^ofts  belaycb  to 
come  bourne  out  of  the 
mount,  the  people  gathc 
rtb  tbemfelucs  together 
bnto 


*  Chip.  10. 
S.dcui.^. 
u.exck. 
10,1 ». 


\Hth.k,L- 
luujft. 


•Gen. J. 31 

lid   1.2. 


•Dcut.p. 


The  molten  calfe.     Chap.xxxi).       Tables  broken. 


'Ads.y. 
40. 


•Pfal.IO*. 

1 9. 1  king. 
U.j8 


i.Cor.10. 

7- 


•  Dcut.p. 


'Dcut.s.8, 


•Chap.  35. 
3.  dcut $ 
'3- 


•proi.tos, 

t  Htir.ihe 
fact  of  the 


'Num.1 4. 
'i- 


bnto  3taron,  anb  feio  bnto  him,* Up, 
mane  bs  gobs  ibbieb  Qjali  goe  before 
bs:  foiasfoitbis  s$)ofes ,  the  man  that 
brought  bs  Up  out  of  the  lanb  of  €gppt, 
Uic  ttiot  not  tbhat  10  become  of  Dun. 

x  3ttD  aaron  faiDc  bnto  them, 
nSjea&c  off  the  goioen  caterings  Vbbicb 
areintbeeares  of  pour  ibutcs,ofpour 
Comics,  ano  of  pour  Daughters ,  ano 
bnngthembiuome. 

$  ZrXd  all  trie  people  biase  off  the 
goioen  caterings ,  lbbitb  lbcre  tntbeit 
eares,anb  brought  them  unto  aaron. 

4  *  3nb  bee  rcteiucD  them  at  their 
banb,ano  fafljioneo  tt  ibitb  agrauing 
toole ,  after  Ijec  bao  maoe  tt  a  molten 
taife :  anoibcp  faib,  Xbcfc  be  tbp  gobs, 
£>  3jfracl,\bbtcb  bzougbt  tljec  bp  out 
ofrftelanbofcgypt. 

5  &no  lbhen  2laron  faib  tt,  he  built 
an  altar  befo;e  u ,  anb  3ar  on  mabe  pzo - 
ciamanon ,  anb  faib ,  Xo  mozrolb  -s  a 
fcafttotbcfL©is©. 

6  anbtbcprofebpearlpontbemot; 
rotb  ,anb  offerco  burnt  offerings,  anb 
bjougfitpcate offerings: ano  the  "peo- 
ple (ate  bottrne  to  cate  anb  to  onnbe, 
anorofebptoplap. 

7  C  ano  the  |L€>ir©  faib  bnto 
fiPofes,  *  ©oc,  get  thee  botbne :  fro  tbp 
people  Ibbtcb  thou  bjougbteft  out  of 
tbciano  ofcgppt,  haue  tojrupteb  them- 

fclues. 

8  *Xbepbautturnebafioecmlefclp 
out  of  the  tbap  Vbrjtttj  3  tommaunbeb 
them:  the?  haue  mabe  them  a  molten 
Calfe ,  anb  haue  lbortbtppeb  it ,  anb 
haue  tacnfitcb  thereunto  ,  anb  faibc, 
Xbcfc  bee  tbp  gobs,  £>  ^frael,  ibhtrh 
haucb;ought  thee  bp  outofthclanbof 
tfgppt. 

9  anb  the  %  sff>  is  ©  faib  bnto  £0o- 
Ces  ,*  3  haue  fecne  this  people,  anb  be- 
holb,it  is  a  (hffcnetbeb  people. 

10  #olb  therefore  let  me  alone,  that 
mytbjath  maptbarebotagamfttbem, 
anb  that  31  map  tonfume  them :  anb  3 
Iblll  mabe  of  thee  a  great  nanon. 

11  *2nb$)ofcsbcfougbtttbe3LsDis© 
his  d5ob,  anb  faio.1L  ©  is  id,  ttihp  boeth 
thy  lbjatb  lbarc  hot  againft  tbp  people, 
ibhich  thou  haft  brought  foojtb  out  of 
tbelanb  of  tfgppt,  ibith  greatpolber, 
anb  tbith  a  might?  hanb  < 

12  *  nabcrefoje  flioulb  the  Cgypti 
ans  fpeabe  anb  fap,  foi  miftbicf  e  bib  he 
bbng  them  out ,  to  flap  them  in  the 
mountaines  ,f  to  tonfume  them  from 
the  face  of  the  earth;  Xurncfcomtbp 


fierce  ibjatb,  ano  repent  of  this  euilia^ 
gamfttbp  people. 

13  Remember  ^bial)am,5faac,anD 
3Jfrael  tbp  feruants ,  to  ibboni  tliou 
boarcft  bp  thine  oibne  feifc ,  anb  faioeft 
bnto  them ,  *  J>  bull  multipippour  fecb 
as  the  ftarrcs  of  heaucn :  anb  all  this 
lanb  tl)at  3  haue  fpoacn  of ,  ibiii  J 
guic  bnto  pour  fccb,anb  thep  (ball  uihe 
ntttfojeuer. 

14  3nbtbe1L€>is©rcpe!itcboftbe 
euill  tt/bich  ht  thought  to  Dot  bnto  his 
people. 

15  ft3no4pofestiirucb,anOtbctu 
botbne  from  the  i$)ount ,  ano  the  ttbo 
Xablcs  of  the  Xeftimonp  ibere  in  his 
banc  :  the  Xablcs  tbcre  Uuitten  on 
both  their  Goes ;  on  the  one  fioe,  ano  on 
the  other  Vbcre  thep  ibzitten. 

i6  auotlje'XableBlbcrcthcujojbc 
of(5ob ;  ano  rt)cib;utng  tbas  the  ton 
ting  of  ©oo ,  grauen  bpon  the  Xables. 

17  ^no  lbhen  "Jofhua  hcarb  the 
noife  of  the  people  as  tbeplbbutcD,  bee 
faio  bnto  fcTBofes ,  There  is  a  noife  of 
ibacreintbccampc. 

18  ^no  lie  feio,  it  is  not  tbebopceof 
them  that  (bout  fo;  mafterp,  uenher  is  ii 
the  bopce  of  them  that  trpfojt  being  0; 
ucrtomc :  but  the  nopfe  of  them  that 
fingboe^beare. 

19  C  Sub  it  rame  to  paae,afToone 
as  he  came  nigh  bnto  the  campcthat  he 
fatb  the  Calfe ,  anb  the  Dancing :  ano 
fl©ofcs  anger  Ibarco  hot,ano  he  call  tlj  e 
Xables  out  of  his  hanos,  anb  bjabe 
them  beneath  the  mount. 

20  *3uu>  he  tooae  the  Calfe  Ibhtch 
tbepbabmabe,  anb  burnt  it  in  the  fire, 
anb  grounb  it  to  polbbcr  ,anb  ftraibeo 
it  bpon  the  Ibater,  anb  mabe  tbcebit 
b,2cn  of  3Jft  ael  bnnbe  of  it. 

21  3lnb  ^0ofcs  faio  bnto  ^aron, 
nahat  oib  this  people  onto  tbee ,  that 
tbouhtift  bioughttb  great  a  Gnne  bpon 
them? 

22  anb^aronfaiO,1Letnotthean 
ger  of  nip  102D  tbarc  hot :  thou  fencibcft 
the  people ,  that  thep  ace  fet  on  mif 
thiefe. 

2  j  5F02  thep  Catb  bnto  me,  S9abe  bs 
gobsibhich  mail  got  before b0  :  fo:a0 
F02  thisi^ofes,  the  man  tljat  bzought 
b0bpoutofthelanoof«gppt,ibeibot 
not  Vbhat  is  betome  of  him. 

24  ^nb  J  faio  bnto  them,  nabofo 
euer  bath  anp  golb,  let  them  bKabeit 
off:5>othepgaueitmee  :tl)cn3Icaftit 
into  the  fire,<j  there  came  out  tbi0  Caiff . 

25  C^lno 


7  and  1  j 
and  q' 


.16. 


*  Chap. 3  1 

1  a. 


•Dcut?. 
21. 


Mofc 


cs 


>rayer: 


He    Exodus.        mlketh  with  God. 


t  Hthr.  theft 
that  rofe  vf 

_  linil 
them. 


jj  Or  ssfnd 
CMofesfMA, 
Cunjeeratc 
jQttrjclt^sto 
day  to  the 
LoKO.^f- 

CAiift  curry 
m.inhnU 
bent  dgatnsl 
his  forme, 
(tndagdinfl 
htsbrothtrl 

&c. 

\Mr.fll 
yoMr  hands. 


!•>  €3mDlbhenfcPoftsfaunhatthe 
people  ©etc  naltcD,  (fi»  aaron  haD 
maDc  thcmnaltcD  bnto  their  (bame,  a* 
mongftt  their  enemies) 

i6  Xhcn  Softs'  ftooD  m  the  gate  of 
the  eanipe ,  ant>  fatbe ,  B3ho  is  on  the 
ll£>K©§>  fiDc<  let  him  come  bntomec. 
3ttD  all  the  fonnes  of  %m\  gathcrcD 
thcmfclues  together  Unto  htm. 

z7  3lnD  Dec  fail)  onto  them,  Xhus 
faith  the  %  <d  is  ©  ©oD  of  3lfr acl,  $ut 
cuery  man  hts  fnwD  by  his ftbc,  aim  go 
manD  out  from  gate  to  gate  rlnougl) 
out  toe  tampe ,  anD  Hay  cuery  man  hts 
bzot!)cr,  anD  cutty  man  his  company 
on,  anD  cuery  man  hts  neighbour. 

28  ^nDthcchilDicnoflUuiDtDac' 
eozDing  to  the  uwd  of  £$ofcs  ■,  anD 
there  fell  of  the  people  that  Day  about 
th«ethoufanDmcn. 

z9  J|5Fo?i®ofeshaDfaiD,t€onrccratc 
your  fellies  to  Day  to  the  ft  s>  is  ©,euen 
cutty  mantopon  his  tonne ,  anD  bpon 
htshzotrjcr,  that  he  maybeftoib  bpon 
youablcffmgthlsDay. 

30  OnD  it  came  to  paffc  on  the  mor- 
row, that  fi^ofes  faibbnto  thcpeoplc, 
Pc  haue  unneD  a  grcatfmnc :  3lnD  now 
3!  ibUl  got  bp  bnto  the  %  ©  is  © ;  pcr- 
aDucntut e  3  fball  niaac  an  atonement 
fojyourfinnc. 

31  3nD  fl!9ofcs  rcturncD  bnto  the 
IL«d  5R  ©,anD  faiD,£>h>thts  people  haue 
fmneD  a  great  Dune ,  anD  haue  maoc 
thenigoDsofgolb. 

ji  pctnow.tfrtiouwtltfozgtucthctt 
tjuncianbifnot,  blotmc,  3  piaythcc, 
out  of  thy  Booftc ,  which  thou  haft 
wnttcn. 

33  3nD  the  %  ©  is  ©  ftiD  bnto  OBo- 
fcs,n9bofoeucthathfinncDagamftme, 
him  WU13J  blot  out  of  mp  aSooac. 

34.  Xhcrcfojc  now  goe ,  leabc  the 
people  bnto  the  place  of  ibbtch  3  Haue 
fpottcn bnto  thee  :2ScholD,nunc2lngcl 
a>ail  goe  befoje  thee;  jftcucrtbclcffetn 
the  Day  ibhcn  3  bifit,3J  ibill  bifit  their 
untie  bpon  them. 

35  3lnb  the  fLos©  piagucD  the 
people ,  becaufc  they  mabc  the  Caife, 
which  3arou  maoc. 

CHAP.    XXXIII. 

The  Lord  refufeth  to  goe  as  he  had  promifed 
with  the  people.  4  The  people  murmurc 
thereat.  7  ThcTabcrnaclcisremouedout 
ofthcCainpe.  9  The  Lord  talkcth  fami- 
liarly with  Mofes.  11  Mofes  dcfireih.  to  fee 
the  Glory  ol  God. 


$$  ii5D  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiD  bn* 

tO  ^0OfCS,S)epart,  and  goe 

vp  hence ,  thou  ana  the 
people  Which  thou  haft 
h:oughtbpoutofthelanD 
of  €gypt,  Ditto  the  lanb  Which  3  ftuare 
bnto3ltoahani,  to^faac,  9  tqjjacob, 
facing,  *  Onto  thy  fcebVbilljTgiutit. 

i  *3nb  3  tbill  fcnD  an  3fngtl  be* 
foje  thee ,  anDjJ  VbtU  Dnue  out  the  Ca* 
naanttc ,  the  ^mo?ite ,  anb  the  pittite, 
anD  the  $cri55ite ,  the  l^iuite,  anD  the 
gjebuftte : 

3  Onto  a  lanD  flowing  tblth  milbc 
anDhony:iFo23millnotgoebpinthc 
miDft  of  thec:  fo?  thou  art  a*ftiffenccfteD 
people,  left  3  tonfumcthecinthcibay. 

4-  C  3lnD  lbljcn  the  people  htatb!  '3 
theft  cuilinbings,  they  mourneD:  anD 
no  man  did  put  on  htm  hts  ornaments. 

5  if  o?  the  %  £D  is  ©  haD  faiDe  bnto 
Q9ofcs,  4E)ay  bnto  the  chUD;en  of 31 
racl,Pc  are  a ftJFenecRcD  people  -.3  ibil 
come  bp  into  themibft  of  thee  m  a  mo- 
ment, tKonuimcthee  :Xhcrcfo;cnoIb 
put  off  thy  oniamcntsfrom  thee,  that 
3  may  imoU)  tbhat  to  Doc  bnto  thee. 

6  3lnD  tl)e  c!)ilD?cn  of  3fracl  ftript 
thcmfclucs  of  their  ornaments ,  by  the 
mount  ii?o;jcb. 

7  3lnD  fJ9ofes  tooBc  the  Xaber* 
naclc,  j  pitthcb  ittbithout  the  tampca 
farre  off  from  tl)e  tampe,  anD  taiicDit 
theXabcrnacle  of  the  Congrcgatum: 
^nD  it  came  to  pafle ,  that  cuery  one 
which  fought  the  %  sd  »  © ,  ibent  out 
bnto  theXabcrnacleoftheCongrcga* 
tion,ibhtch  was  ibithout  the  tampe. 

8  3nbtt  came  to  pate  when  £J3ofes 
tbent  oiu  bnto  theXabcrnaclc,  that  all 
the  people  rofcbp,anb  ftoob  cuery  man 
athistcMDoo?e,anDlooBcDafter£0O' 
fes ,  bnnil  he  was  gone  into  the  Xa* 
bcrnaclc. 

9  3lnDttcamctopafrcas£0ofcsen-' 
trcb  into  the  Xabcrnaclc ,  the  clouby 
pillar  DcfcenDcD,  anD  ftooDattheDoo?e 
of  the  1-abcmacle,anD  the  Lord  tallicD 
ibith^ofcs. 

10  aim  all  the  people  faw  the  clouby 
pillar  ftano  at  thexabernacle  booze: 
anDallthcpcoplcrofcbp,anb\bo^n)ip' 
peD  eucty  man  m  his  tent  Doo?e. 

11  3nDthc3LoiH©fpaBcbnto£Bo* 
ft s  fate  to  face ,  as  a  man  fpcatieth  bnto 
his  frieuD.  3lnD  he  turncb  agatnc  nuo 
the  tampe, but  hts  ftniantgjoftniathe 
fonne  of  flan ,  a  yong  man,  DcparttD 
notoutofthcXabeniaclc. 
it  4T3lnD 


"  Gene.  i». 

7- 
*Dcut.7. 

1 2  loli-j^ 


Chap.  J  J 


God  notfeene.       Cliap.xxxnij.    Twonew Tables. 


•Rom.J. 


12  C  anb  $$oks  faibc  Unto  the 
SL©mi? ,  £>cc,  thou  fayeft  bnto  nice, 
aszmgbp  this  peoplcanb  thou  baft  not 
let  mee  tmoib  lbbome  ttiou  Unit  fenb 
ruitf)  me.  Pet  tboubaftfaib,  3>Bnolbe 
thee  by  name,  ant)  tljou  baft  aifo  fount) 
grace  in  my  fight. 

i j  /j3oibtbecefoze,3pwi>thee,'5f 
3J^auc  tounb  grace  m  thy  fight,  {beibe 
nice  noib  thy  ibay  that  3J  niay  BnoiD 
thee,  that  31  map  fine  grace  tn  thy  fight: 
ant»  eonfibcr  that  this  nation  is  thy 
people. 

14  anbbcfaib^ypzcfcnecfballgo 
with  thee,  ant)  31  Hull  giue  thee  reft. 

15  anbbefaibbntolnm,3JftbypzC' 
fence  goc  not  with  mee,  carte  bs  not  Dp 
heme. 

16  iFoz  ibbcrcin  fljail  it  becmtolbcn 
hcre,tbat  3J  ant)  thy  people  ftaue  fount) 
grate  in  tbyfigbt*  is  it  not  in  that  thou 
goettibitbbs;  £>o  (ball  ibe  befcpar& 
ttt),  3)  ant)  thy  people,  from  all  tijc  peo- 
ple ttjat  jre  ppon  the  face  of  the  earth. 

17  anbtbe^©is©fatbbntofi0o* 
fcs,3Ilbtllboe  this  thing  alfo  that  thou 
rjaftfpoBm:  foz  thou  haft  frbunb  grate 
tn  my  fight,  anb  3  tmoib  thee  bv  name. 

18  3int>  he  faio,  3  befeech  thee,  fbeib 
metb?giozy. 

19  ^nt)  he  faib,  5  tbUlmaac  all  my 
goobneffepafle  befoze  tftec,  anb31  lbtll 
pzociaimc  tbenamcof  the  5LfiDiB©be* 
foze  tibce :  *  anb  ibill  bee  gracious  to 
lbbom  3  Ibil  be  graeious,anb  ibil  (bclb 
mcrete  on  inborn  gjnnUtbettnncrcic. 

io  anbbefaib ,  Xhou  canft  not  fee 
myface:  fojttbetefbailnonianfeemce, 
anbliue.  ,      _ , 

21  anb  theft©  is  ©fatb,:zScholbe, 
there  is  a  plate  by  mee,  anb  thou  (halt 
ftanbbponaroc&e. 

22  anb  it  (ball  come  to  paffe,  tbljrtc 
my  glozypaOctb  by,  that 3  ibill  put 
tbecm  a  cltftoftbcrotfec,  anb  ibtllcouet 
thee  lbitb  my  banb,ibbue  3  paflc  by. 

23  anb  3  ttnl  tafec  atbay  nunc  hanb, 
anb  thou  (lialt  fee  my  batlte  pans :  but 
my  face  (ball  not  be  ftcne. 

CHAP.    XXXIIII. 

1  The  Tables  are  renued.  5  The  Name  of  the 
Lord  proclaimed.  8  Mofcs  intreateth  God 
to  °o  with  them.  loGodmakethacouenant 
with  them,  repeating  certainedueties  of  the 
firlt  Table.  2.8  Mofes  after  fourtiedayes  in 
the  Mount  commeth  downe  with  the  Ta- 
bles. 19  His  face  Qiiueth,  and  he  coucreth  it 
withavaile. 


ji5bthcH©is©faibbn* 
to  t©ofcs,*^ettj  thcctibo 
Xablcs  of  ftoncltue  bnto 
tbcnrft:ano3Jtt)iUuwc 
bpon  theie  Cables ,  the 
ibozbs  that  lbcre  in  the  tuft  Xables 
ibbtrbthoubzaBcft. 

2  anb  be  rcaby  tn  the  mozning,anb 
come  bp  m  the  morning  bnto  mount 
5nnai,  anbmefentthy  feife  there  to  me, 
inthctopof  the  mount. 

S  anb  no  man  fbali  *  come  bp  lbith 
thee,  neither  let  any  man  bee  feme 
tbzougbout  all  the  mount,  neither  let 
tbc  flocUcs  no?  herbs  fcebc  befoze  that 
mount. 

4  C  anb  he  belbcb  tibo  Xables  of 
ftoncliae  bnto  the  ficft,anb  99ofes  rofe 
bp  earely  tn  tbc  morning,  anb  ibent 
bp  bnto  mount  Snuai,  as  then  ©  u?  © 
habcommanbcbhmi,  anb  tooHCtnhis 
hanb  thctibo  tables  of  ftone. 

5  anbtbc3L©B©bcfccnbefiintbe 
cloub,  anb  ftoob  lbith  him  there,  anb 
p?oclaimcb  the /15ame  of  the  it  ©is  ©. 

6  anb  the  %  ©  is  ©  pafteb  by  be* 
foze  him,anb  pzoelamtcb,  %\\t  fL©iss>, 
Xhc5.©is©(5ob,mernfullanO  gca* 
cious,  longfurTering,  anbabunbanttn 
goobnefleaubtrueth, 

7  Itccptng  mercie  foz  tboufanbs, 
fozgiumg  mtautnc  anb  tranfgreffton 
anb  finite,  anb  tbatibiU  by  no  meancs 
clcercthe  guiitie,  *bifittngtheuticimtteof 
thefathersbpon  the  thilb?m,anb  bpon 
the  cbilbzens  cbilbzen,  bnto  the  thirb 
anb  to  the  fourth  generation. 

8  anb£0ofesmabchafte,anbbolb< 
eb  his  heab  torbarb  the  earth,  anb  ibo^ 
fluppco. 

9  anbhetaib,3?fnott)3Jhaucfounb 
graceinthy  fight,DH02b,letmy  jLo?b, 
Jpzaythecgoeamongftbs,  (tonttsa 
ftiffmccttcb  people,)  anb  parbon  our 
iniquitte,  anb  our  finnc,  anb  tatse  bs  foj 
thmcinhentante. 

10  canbhcfaib,25cholb,*3!maBe 

atoumant:befo2caitthypeople,5ibii 
boc  marucilcs,  fuel)  as  hauc  not  beme 
bone  tn  all  the  earth,  noz  inanynanon: 
anbalithepeople  amongft  ibbtcbtbou 
art,fl)allfccthcibozRCofthe1L©«©: 
fozitts  a  tcrnble  thing  that  3  vbiilboe 
lbith  thee. 

ii  £>bferuc  tl)ou that  ibbieb  3  com= 
manbthce  thtsbay :  2i5eholb,  3  bziue 
outbefozethee  thcamozitcanbthc  Ca 
nannite,anbthc$)itntc,anb  the  ^criy- 
Mtc,anbthcl)iuite,anbthe3cbufite. 
3  n  'Xabe 


'Dcut.  io 


*Chap.tj. 
it. 


•Exod.io. 
5. dcut. j. p. 

t8. 


Dcuc.5.1 


Againft  idolatrie.       Exodus. 


Mofesfacefliineth. 


3  j.  Jcuc.7. 


\Hifr.fti- 


•  Chap.10. 


*  I. King. 
11. J. 


•Chap.  J ; 
<5- 


•Chap.  15. 

"Chap. 22. 

19.C7CCH. 

4f3°- 


\Orkl 


"Chap,  2 ; 

'5- 

•Chap.  2; 

1  l.drur  •;  ■ 
I  a.lukc  1  3 
14. 

•Chap.  23 
16. 


\U,kr.rt- 
uotutton  of 
theytcrl. 
"Chnp.  23 
14.17.dcu 
16.16. 


•Chap.!!, 
18. 


12  *  %akc  hccD  to  thy  felfc,  left  thou 
mane  a  coucnant  tt>ut)  the  inhabitants 
ofttje  lanu  tbI)ttDet  thou  goctt,lcfttt 
bcfozafnatcutthcmiDftof  thee. 

i}  zsutycfljaii  Dcttroy  their  altars, 
bzeatte  their  t  images,  ant)  tut  Dottmc 
their  grottcs. 

14  f  oz  thou  (hait.Doifhtp  no  other 
goD :  foj  the  %  ©  a  s>,  tbhofc  name  IS 
f<cloits,tsa*3Jclous<15oD : 

15  ^LeftthoumattcacoucnantlDith 
the  inhabitants  of  the  lanb,  anD  the? 
gocavbhonngaftcr  their  goDs,anD  Doe 
raenfite  Ditto  their  goD£ ,  anD  one  call 
thce,anD  thou  eatc  of  his  fatriftte, 

16  3htD  thou  tafec  of*  theft  Daugh 
tcrs  Ditto  thy  fonnes ,  anD  their  Daugh 
tcrs  goc  a  lDhonug  after  their  goos, 
ano  mahe  tt)v  fonnes  goc  a  tbhonng afc 
ter  their  goos. 

17  Xhoufhaitniauethcenomoltcn 

goos. 

18  <[£he  fcaft  oPDnlcaucncDbjcaD 
(halt  thou  fceepe :  £>eucn  Daycs  thou 
(halt  catt  DnlcauencD  b:caD ,  as  3J  omw* 
manDcD  thee  m  the  time  of  the  moneth 
3btb:  fo2inthe*moncth3lbtbthouca* 
meft  out  from  Cgypt. 

19  *  3W  that  openeth  the  matrtte  is 
mine :  anD  cucry  firftling  amongft  thy 
cattell,iDhether  orco*(heepc,that  is  male. 

zo  2Sutthc  firftling  of  an  3fle  thou 
(halt  rcDceme  tbith  a  ||  lambe :  anD  if 
thou  rcDceme  him  not,  then  (halt  thou 
btcafcc  his  ncette.  2ill  the  firft  borne  of 
n)y  fonnes  thou  (halt  rcDceme :  anD 
none  (hall  appcarc  befozeme  *  empty. 

11  C* -t^c  Day  es  thou  (haltiDoztte, 
but  on  thefcucnth  Day  thou  (halt  reft: 
in  eanng  time  anD  in  harucft  thou 
(halt  reft. 

21  C  *  3lnD  thou  (halt  obferuc  tlje 
fcaft  of  .Dtebcs ,  of  the  firft  feints  of 
wheat  harucft,anD  the  feaft  of  mgathe* 
ring  at  the  t  peer  escnD. 

ij  C  *  Xhnte  m  the  yecrc  (hail  all 
pour  mm  chilDzcn  appeare  befoze  the 
Hozd  <5  «d  ©,  the  god  of  31  frael. 

24  f  02 31  lbill  taft  out  the  nations 
befoze  thee,  anD  enlarge  thy  bozDcrs : 
neither  (hall  any  man  Dcfircthy  lanu, 
tt'henthoufljaltgoc  Dp  to  appcarc  be 
fozc  the  %  o  k  ©  tljy  ood  ,  ttjjitcc  tn  the 
yecrc. 

25  *£hou  (halt  not  offer  the  bloob 
ofmyfatrtfttciD:thleaucn,nc'.thcr(hail 
thcfacnficc  of  the  fcaft  of  paflcoiicr  be 
,  left  Dnto  thcmoziung. 

26  %\)t  firft  of  the  firft  frutts  of  thy 


lanD  thou  (halt  bnngDntothchoufeof 
the  fL©is©  thy<soD.1Ehou(haitnot 
feethe  a*  ttfD  in  his  mothers  mtlfte. 

27  ^nDthe?L.iiDis©fatDDntofi0O'' 
fes  ,n9nte  thou*thefelbo?DS:fozaftct 
the  tcnour  of  thefe  tbozDcs ,  3J  haue 
maDe  a  coucnant  tbith  thee ,  anD  ttnth 
3Jfrael. 

is  *  3(nD  hce  iDas  there  ibith  the 
%  ©  iR  to  fozty  Dayes  anD  fozty  nights: 
he  did  neither  eatbzcab,nozDzfntic  lDa- 
ter ;  anD  he  tbzoteDpon  thcXablcsthe 
iDojDSof  the  toutnant,thc  tent  Com* 
manDcmcnts. 

29  €  3wd  it  tame  to  paffc  iDhen 
$)ofcs  came  Dolbne  from  mount  hv- 
nai  ( ttuth  the  tibo  Xables  of  ILctttmo* 
ny  m  Qtofes  haitD ,  iDhcn  hee  tame 
Dottrnc  from  the  mount )  fhatsBofcs 
tDtftnot  that  the  Run  of  his  fate  (hone, 
iDhilc  he  taiKcD  iDithhutt. 

jo  ^InDibhcn^aronanDailthcthtl 
Dienof  lifracl  fatb  flMe6,bcholD,the 
ftunnc  of  his  fate  (hone,  ano  they  VDcrc 
afraiD  to  come  mgh  htm. 

31  3lnD$3ofcscailcD  Dnto  them,  anD 
3iaron  anD  all  the  rulers  of  the  Con- 
gceganon  rcturncD  Dnto  him,anD  *^o* 
fes  talftcDVbith  them. 

3  2  2mD  afteribarD  all  the  thiftSTen  of 
3Jfraci  came  ntgh :  anD  he  gaue  thnn  m 
commatiDcmcnt  all  that  the  H© is© 
haofpofecniDithhim  in  mount  dinat. 

33  2lnDtiii5$ofcshaDDonefpca&tng 
rbith  them ,  he  put  *  a  Datle  on  his  fete, 

34  25irtVDhcn£0ofesiDcntinbefoie 
the  1L©«©  to  fpcabe  rblth  him,  hee 
tooUc  theDailcoff,  Dntill  he  tame  out: 
3lnD  hee  tame  out  anD  fpabe  Dnto  the 
chilDzen  of  3lfracl,that  Ui!)itl)heihas 
commanDcD. 

35  3nD  the  thilDzenof^fraelfatt) 
the  face  of  fcWcs ,  tljat  the  fhittnc  of 
99ofes  face  (lionc :  anD  flPofesputthe 
Daile  Dpon  his  face  agamc ,  Dntill  hee 
tticnt  m  to  fpcaue  iDith  Dim. 

CHAP.   XXXV. 

1  Tlic  Sabbath.  4  The  free  gifts  tor  the  Ta- 
bernacle. 10  The  readinelTe  of  the  people 
to  offer.  30  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  are  cal- 
led to  the  wotke. 

^I*  V?^  ®*  ^ofes  sathtrcTi  an 
^  >4\^>  t\)t  Congregation  of  the 
^£f^*£  thilD:en  of  Jfrael  togc* 
'  rhccatiD  fatD  Dnto  thnn ; 
Zhcfc  arc  the  iDojDcc 
lDbitbtbe  %  j©  is  jd  hath  commanDcD, 
. th_ot 


•Exod.ij. 
ly.dcut. 
1421. 
•Dcut.4. 


*  Chap.  14. 
i8.dcut.y. 
9- 


nordi. 


'  2.Cor.3- 


ree  eirts 


g 


-ft 


Ch 


ap.xxxv. 


arco 


fFcrcd. 


•Chip.:o. 
9-leu't-  13 
j.dcut.  5. 
11. hike  1  3. 

'4- 

I  Hrtr  He- 

tmefit. 


*Chap.  zy 


"Cliap.J*. 


*  Chap.  ;o. 
1. 


'Cl.ap.J7- 


tl;at  pecfboulbboe  rticni. 

I  'fiHtcbapcsfballibozKCbcbonc, 
but  otitic  feuentb  bap  there  (ball  be  to 
pou  an  t  bolp  Dap ,  a  £>abbatb  of  reft  to 
ri)cIL«Dfi  jd  :  ibbofoeuer  boctblbozbe 
therein,  (ball  be  put  to  bcatf). 

j  J9cfl>all  amble  no  fire  tbzougbout 
pour  habitations  bpon  the  S>abbatb 
bap, 

4  C  anb  Stoles  franc  bnto  all  the 
Congregation  of  tbecbilbzen  oHJftaci, 
tapuig,  1Lbis  is  the  ttnng  rb^irt)  the 
%  €>  w  ©  t  ommanbeb,  (aping, 

5  Xabepefromamougftpouanofc 
fnngtmtot^efL  o  H3E>:*n9t)ofocuer  is 
of  a  ibilltng  heart,  let  fjimbnngit,  an 
offering  of the  %  0  «  © ,  golo,  anb  u> 
uer,anbb2affe, 

6  anb  blcro,  anb  purple ,  anb  tear- 
let,anb  fine  Unncn,  ann  goats  ha.re, 

7  anb  r amines  ffeinnes  bieb  reb, 
«babgcrsfRinncs,anDS>btttimibooD, 

s  anb  ople  foz  the  Ugbt,  anb  fpiccs 
foz  anopnttng  oplt,  anb  foz  tijc  frueet 
tnetnfc: 

9  anb  Onlrttones,  anb  Hones  to 
befet  fo?  ttje  tfptjob ,  anb  foz  the  bzeffc 
plate. 

10  anb  eucrp  tbtCc  heartcb  among 
rou ,  (ball  come  anb  make  an  that  rt.ic 
%  ©  s  ©  bath  commanbeb : 

II  *Xbc  Xabernacie,  bis  tent,  anb 
biscouenng,  bifitacbes,  s  bisbarres, 
fjis  pillars ,  anb  fjts  foebcts : 

ii  ^rjc^rbcanDtfjeftaiicsttiercof, 
ttntbtbe  i$errp  feat,  anb  rbe?Baileof 
rbetonmng: 

13  Xbc  Xable  anb  fits  ftaues ,  anb 
all  fjis  toeffcls,  anb  the  -fcherbbzcab, 

14  Xbe  Canblcfticbe  alfo  foz  tfje 
ltgnt,anb  t»is  fumiture,anb  bis  lamps, 
tbitl)  tl)e  ople  foz  the  Ugbt, 

15  *anb  the  incenfe  aitar,  anb  bis 
ftaues,  anb  the  anopnttng  ople,  anb the 
tocet  incenfe,  anb  tbe  banging  foz  the 
booze,  at  the  entrmg  in  of  the  Xaber 
naclc: 

16  *  Xbe  aitar  of  burnt  offering 
With  bis  bzafen  grate,  bis  ftaues,  anb 
alibis  toeu*cls,tbc  fLaner  arib  bis  foot : 

17  XbebangtngsoftbcConrt,  bis 
pillars ,  anb  tbetr  foefeets,  anb  the  ban 
gmg  foz  the  Doozc  of  tbe  Court: 

is  Xbc  ptnnes  of  tbe  ILabcrnaclc, 
anb  the  pmncs  of  the  Court,  anb  their 
toarOs : 

19  Xheetoatbesoffcrcrtce,tobocfa> 
mcc  m  the  bolp  pi^c,  the  help  garments 
foz  aaron  the  02ieft,anb  the  garments 


of  bts  fonnes  to  mimlterm  rije^nefts 
offue. 

io  canb  all  tbe  Congregation  of 
tbe  cbtibzen  ofjjfcacl  beparteb  from 
tbepzefcnccof£$ofes. 

21  anb  tbep  came  eucrp  one  Ibbofc 
bcart  ftitreb  bun  top ,  anb  cuerp  one 
rbbombtSfptritmabelbtllmg,an&tbcp 
bzougbt  ftjc  %  <d  is  id  §»  offering  to  the 
rbozac  of  tt)c  Xabcrnatlc  of  tbe  Con- 
c#cgation,anbfozallbisferuicc,aubfoz 
rt)c  holp  garments. 

11  anbtbepcamcborbmcnanbibo; 
mcn,as  manp  as  rbcrc  tbilltng  bearteb, 
and  bzougbt  bzacclcts ,  anb  carerings, 
anb  rtngs,*  tablets,  all  icibcls  of  golb : 
anb  cuerp  man  that  offcrcb,  offered  an 
offering  of  goto  bnto  the  %  0  is  je>. 

23  ana  cuerp  man  Ibttb  inborn  tuas 
founbbleUj,anDpurpie,atibfcarlct,anb 
fine Unncn,  anbgoatcsiuire,  anbrcb 
fbinncs  of  rammes  ,  anb  baogcrs 
ffeinncs,  bzougbt  diem. 

14  €uerp  one  tbat  mn  offer  an  of- 
fering of  filuer  anb  bialTc ,  bzougbt  tbe 
5,£>ise>£>  offenng  :  anb  cuerp  man 
ibttfjlbbomlbasfoutib  S>bittimiboob 
foz  anp  Ibozbe  of  rbefenuccbzougbt  it. 

15  ^nb  all  tbe  Vbomen  tbat  lbcrc 
Vbifc  beartcb,bib  fpm  U)itb  tbeic  banbs, 
anb  bzougbt  tbat  tbbu1)tbcpbabfpun, 
both  ofbletb,anb  of  purple,  anb  of  fear'- 
Ut,anb  of  6nc  Unncn. 

16  anbailtlicibomcntbbofcbeart 
ftirreb  tbeni  bp  m  ibifcbome ,  fpunnc 

gOatShaire. 

17  anb  tbe  rulers  bzougbt  jDnir 
ftones,  anb  Cones  to  be  fet  foz  rt}c  %'< 
pbob,  anb  fez  tbe  bzeftplatc : 

28  anb  *fpice,  anb  ople  foz  tbe  light, 
anbfoztbeauopnting  ople,anb  fbzrtje 
Dtjecttntenfe. 

29  Xbetbilbzenof3fracIb2ongbt 
a  Ibilimg  offering  bnto  tbe  %  ff>  is  39, 
euerp  man  anb  lboman,  tbftofebeart 
inabe  tbcm  ibilimg  to  b2ingfozailma^ 
ncr  of  Vbozbe ,  tbrncb  tbe  %  ©  w  ©  bab 
commanbeb  to  bemabc  bp  the  banbs  of 
t^ofes. 

30  C.  anb  i$ofcs  faib  bnto  tbe  tbil* 
bzen  of  3Jfrael,  5>ec,  *  tbe  %owb  batb 
cailcb  bp  name  Scaled  tbe  fonne  of 
*an ,  tbe  fonne  of  $ur ,  of  tbe  tnbe  of 
3iubab. 

31  anb  be  bath  fillcb  bim  nnth  rtjc 
Spirit  of  <5ob,  inttifcoomctnbhbcT- 
flanwng,  aiiotnbnorblcbge,  anbtnall 
mantr  of  uiozbcmantbip : 

31  anb  to  Dcuiff  curious  Tbo?bes,to 
3?  i tt)02be 


"Chip.  )C. 
15- 


'Chi 


ip.  3  I 


Tl 


ie 


pcop 


le  libcrall.    Exodus.      Curtaines  ,boards. 


Vboz&cm  golb,$inGluer  ,anbuibzaflc, 
$3  3inb  m  the  cutting  of  (tones,  to  fct 
them ,  ano  in  earuing  of  lboob,  to  maae 
any  mancr  of  cunning  iboz&e. 

3+  anbbehathputinhisheattthat 
he  may  teach ,  both  he  anb  ahouab  the 
fonnc  of  2tl)ifamact)  of  the  tribe  of  2>an. 
35  ^hcin  hath  hec  filleblbithibu"c; 
Dome  of  heart,  to  iboz&c  all  manner  of 
lbozne,  of  tbemgtaucr,  anb  of  the  run; 
ntngibozncman,  anD  of  the  cmtyoioc'- 
rer,  m  blett),  ano  in  purple,  mftarlet, 
anb  m  fine  linncn ,  anb  of  the  rbeauer, 
cuenof  them  that  boe  any  lbojtte,  anb 
of  thole  tljat  bcuifc  cunning  uwfec. 

CHAP.    XXXVI. 

The  offerings  are  deliuered  to  the  workemen. 
5  The  liberalitie  of  the  people  is  retrained. 
8  The  curtaines  of  Cherubims.  14  The 
curtaines  of  goats  haire.  1 9  The  couering  of 
skinnes.  10  The  boards  with  their  fockets. 
31  Thebarres.  35  Thevaile.  37  The  hang- 
ing for  the  doore. 

$en  lbzought  2Se?alecl 
anb  ^holiab,  anb  cuery 
Voift  hearteb  man,  tn 
ti>homcthe?L£>ia©put 
Vbifcbomeanb  btiberftan? 
bmg,  to  mioib  hott)  to  ibo  jfee  all  maner 
of  itiozHc  foz  the  feruice  of  the  Sanctu- 
ary ,  accozbiug  to  all  that  the  %  ©  is  ?e> 
ijab  tommanbeb. 

z  3lnb  £0ofcs  talleb  2Sc5aieel  anb 
^Ijoltab,  anb  cuery  lbiTchcartcbman, 
m  lbhofe  heart  the  %o  is  id  hab  put 
!btfebonic,eucn  cuery  one  lbhofe  heart 
fhrrcb  htm  top  to  come  bnto  the  lbozne 
tobocit. 

3  3mbrneyrecciucDof£0ofcsallthc 
offering  lbhith  the  chilbzen  of  Itfcacl 
babbiought,  foz  the  Vbojfcc  of  the  fer 
uicc  of  the  ^anctuane,  to  mabe it  with. 

ail.  3nb  they  bzought  yet  bnto  hun  free 
offerings  cuery  mozning. 

4  3lnD  al  the  «nfc  men  that  bought 
all  the  lbozlte  of  the  Sanctuary,  tame 
cuery  man  from  hislb02Keibbicb  they 
mabe. 

5  C  3tnb  they  fpalic  bnto  Q9ofcs,  I 
faying,  Hhe  people  bang  much  mozc; 
thni  enough  fouhefenuteofthclbojHc! 
lbbich  the  JLoep  commauubcb  to! 
mauc. 

6  3mbQ9ofesgaucconimanDement,| 
anb  thev  caufeb  it  to  bee  pzoclatmcb 
tlnoiighoutthccampe.faymg.lLrtnet*! 
thcr  man  nozibomau  mahc  any  mozc! 


VbozBC  foz  the  offering  of  the  ^anctua- 
nc:  fo  the  people  ibere  reftramebfrom 
bzmgmg. 

7  f  02  the  miff c  they  hab  tbas  fuf 
fiticnt  foz  all  the  ibozae  to  maue  it ,  anb 

too  much, 
s   c*3nbeucrytt)ifcheartebman, 

among  them  that  bought  tbetbozfce 
oftheXabemaclcmabe  ten  curtaines, 
of  fine  tttnneb  imncn ,  anb  blctb ,  anb 
purple,  anb  fcarlet:  tbttb  Cherubuns 
of  cunning  tbozae  mabe  he  tJ)em, 

9  Xhe  length  of  one  turtaine  rbas 
ttbentle  $  eight  cubites,anb  the  bzcabtb 
of  one  curtainc  foure  rabitcs:  the  cur* 
tames  were  all  of  one  cife. 

10  anbbnouplcb  the  fiue  curtaines 
one  bnto  another :  anb  the  other  fiue 
curtames  he  coupleb  one  bnto  another. 

1 1  ^nb  he  mabe  loopes  of  blcttt,  on 
the  cbge  of  one  cuttamc ,  from  the  fel^ 
ucbge  m  the  couplmg :  libeibife  hce 
mabe  in  the  bttcrmoft  Gbt  of  anotha 
rartame,mtbe  coupling  of  tbefeconb. 

\z  '^tfnclooptsmabcheinonecw* 
tame,  anbfiftie  loopes  mabe  bee  in  the 
ebge  of  the  curtainc  Ibhich  was  in  the 
coupling  of  the  feconb :  tbeloopcsbcib 
one  curtame  to  another. 

13  anb  be  mabe  fiftietacbes  of  goto, 
anb  coupleb  the  curtaines  one  bnto  & 
nother  \bith  the  taches.  £>o  it  became 
one  tabernacle. 

14  C3lnb  be  mabe  curtaines  of  goats 
haire,  foz  the  tent  ouer  theXabernaclc 
eleuen  curtaines  he  mabe  them. 

15  Unc  length  of  one  curtainc  Vbas 
thirttecubites,  anb  foure  cubites  tbas 
the  bzeabth  of  one  curtame :  the  eleuen 
curtaines  tberc  of  one  cife. 

i6  3Uib  he  coupleb  fiue  curtaines  by 
thcmfelucs,  anb  fijee  curtames  by  tbcnv 
femes. 

17  3uto  he  mabe  fittie  loopes  bpon 
tbcbttcroioltcbgcoftbccurtamcmtbc 
coupling,  anbfiftie  loopes  mabe  be  bp^ 
onthc  cbgcof  the  airtamc,  Vbljicijcou^ 
plcththc  feconb. 

18  3nbbcniabcfiftietacbesofb;affe 
to  couple  the  tent  together  that  it  might 
be  one. 

19  3tnb  he  mabe  a  eoucring  foz  the 
tent  of  rammes  ffttnnes  bicb  rcb,  anb 
a  eoucring  of  babgcrs  ftunnes  aboue 

that. 

io  C  3iib  hec  mabe  boarbs  foz  the 
Xabernaclc  of  3>bittim  lboob ,  Can- 
bmgbp. 

21  £hc  length  of  a  hoat&  was  ^n 

rubirrc, 


*  Chap.  16. 
3-4- 


Chap.  16. 


TheVaile. 


Ch 


ap.xxxvn. 


The  Ark 


c. 


f  Heb.tww- 
■■ed. 


f  Hct.trp* 
Cocke  t 1,1190 

Cockfts  **** 

dt r one 
botrci. 
"Chap. 15. 
I&305. 


t  Heir,  the 
varkf  of  4 
needle  w/r- 

brotderer . 


cubttes,anotheb;!eaorb  ofaboaroone 
cubite  ano  a  halfe. 

it  ©tic  boaro  hab  ttbo  tenons,  e* 
dually  btftant  one  f com  another :  thus 
bib  he  mane  fo?  all  the  boares  of  the  ta- 
bccnaclc. 

23  anb  he  maoe  boarbs  fo?  the  X** 
bcrnaclc  :  tlbennc  boarbs  foj  ttjc 
£>outhfibe,  5>outhlbaro. 

14  anofourne  focfects  of  Miter  heo 
maocbnOcr  ttjc  ttOcntte  boarbs :  ttbo 
focfeetsbnocr  one  boarbfo2hts  ttbo  Xt> 
nons,  anottbo  focltcts  tonoer  another 
boarb,  fo:  Ijisttbo  tenons. 

15  ano  fo?  the  other  fioc  of  the  1-fc 
becnarte which  is  toiDarofhe/Boifhcoi; 
tier,  l)e  tnabe  tlbcnnc  boarbs. 

26  ano  rtjrtc  foncn'c  focfects  of  Gl* 
uer:  ttbo  focfeetsbnocr  one  boaro,  ano 
tlbofocftetstonOcranothetboarO. 

27  anofo:  the  fibes  of  the  ICabct- 
natlc  nacfttbarb,  he  niabe  fire  boarbs 

2s  ano  ttbo  boarbs  maoe  he  fo:  the 
comers  of  the  tabernacle,  m  the  ttbo 
ftbes. 

29  ano  they  tberctcouplcb  beneath 
anb  couplcb  together  at  the  rjcab  there* 
of,  to  one  ring:  thus  fjceuiD  to  both  of 
themmboththecomers, 

jo  ano  there  tberc  eight  boatos.ano 
their  focfects  tbcre  firtcene  focfects  of  GV 
ucr :  bnber  t  cuerp  boarb  ttbo  focfects. 

31  canohcmaDe*barresof£>htt' 
tini  rboob :  fiuc  fo:  tijc  boarbs  of  the 
one  fiOc  of  the  Xabcrnaelc, 

32  ano  fiuc  barrcsfozthe  boarbs  of 
rt)c  otfjcr  floe  of  ttje  Xabernaclc,  anb 
fiuc  bacccsfoi  the  boarbs  of  tljelEa* 
bemacic  fo?  thcnOesnacfttbaro. 

33  attbhemabcthcmiooiebartcto 
fhootthozotb  trjeboatbs  from  the  one 
enoto  the  other. 

34  2moheouetlaiDthcboarostbtth 
golb,  anbmabc  their  rings  of  golbc  to 
be  places  foi  the  barres,  anboucriaioc 
thcbarrcstbtthgoio. 

3$  CanbhcmaoeaSaailcofblctb, 
anb  purple,  anb  fcarlct,  anb  fine  ttbmcb 
lumen:  tbith  Cherabimsmaoehcit  of 
cunning  tbojfee. 

36  anohcmabcthcreuntofourepil' 
lars  of  £>rjtttim  wood ,  ano  oucrlaibe 
them  attfi  golbc:  ttjeit  hoofecs  were  of 
golb :  anb  he  caOfo:  themfoure  focfects 
offiluer. 

37  C  ano  hee  maoe  an  flanging  fo? 
the  Xabernacle  booze  of  blctb  anb  pur- 
ple, anb  fcarlet,  anb  fine  ttbmcb  unnen, 
tofnceblelbojfec, 


3S  ano  the  ftue  pillars  of  it  tbith  then: 
hoobs:  ano  he  oucriaib  their  chapiters 
ano  their  fillets  tbitl)  goio :  but  their 
fiuc  focfects  ibete  of  tyaflc. 

CHAP.    XXXVII. 

1  The  Arke.  6  The  Mercie  feat  with  Cheru- 
bims.  10  The  Table  with  his  veiTels.  17  The 
Candleftickc  with  his  lamps  .indml'txumenis. 
15  The  Altar  ot  incenfe.  19  The  anointing 
oyleand(wect  incenfe. 

/Bo  iSe^aleel  mabc  *  the 
atfec  of  dhitttm  Iboob : 
ttbo  cubttcs  ano  a  halfe 
tbas  the  length  of  it,  ano 
a  cubtte  anb  a  halfe  the 

bzeaoth  of  it,  ano  a  cubite  anb  a  halfe 

the  height  of  it. 

2  anb  he  oucriaib  tt  tbith  pure  golb 
tettfjtn  *  tbtthout ,  anb  mabc  a  crolbne 
of  golb  to  tt  rouno  about. 

3  3nb  hee  caft  fo;  tt  foure  rings  of 
golb,wbefet  bp  the  foure  comers  of  it: 
cuenttbo  rings  Opon  the  oncfibeof  it, 
ano  ttbo  rings  Upon  the  other  fibe  of  it. 

4  ^tib  he  ntaocftaues of  £>hittim 
tbooo,  ano  ouerlaiO  them  tbitl)  goio. 

5  ano  hee  put  the  ftaucs  into  the 
rings,  by  the  fibes  of  the  arfee,to  bcarc 
thearfee* 

6  C  ano  he  maoe  Hie  *  fipcrcie  feat 
of  pure  golb :  ttbo  cttbites  anb  an  halfe 
was  the  length  thereof,  ano  one  cubtte 
anb  an  halfe  the  b:caoth  thereof. 

7  anb  he  maoe  ttbo  Chetubims  of 
goio,  beaten  out  of  one  piece  mabehec 
them,  on  the  ttbo  enocs  of  thc:SJ9erclc 
feate: 

8  £>ne  Cherub  ||  on  the  cno  on  this 
fioe,  ano  another  Cherub  ||  on  the  other 
enb,  on  thatGbe :  out  of  the  asercie  feat 
mabc  hee  the  Cherubims  on  the  ttbo 
cnbs  thereof. 

9  ano  the  Cherubims  fpzcao  out 
their  tbmgs  onhigh, and  couercb tbith 
their  tbingsouer  the  terete  feat  tbith 
their  faces  one  to  another :  euen  to  the 
©erne  feat  tbaro  tberc  the  faces  of  the 
Cherubims. 

10  C  ano  hee  maoe  the  ICablc  of 
£>lHttnn  tbooo :  ttbo  cubttcs  was  the 
length  thereof,  ano  a  ntbtte  the  b:eabtl) 
thereof,  anb  a  cubite  anb  a  halfe  the 
height  thereof. 

it  ano  he  onerlato  it  ibtth  pure  goio, 
ano  maoe  thereunto  a  crolbne  of  goio 
ronno  about. 

11  aifo  hemabe  therettnto  abojber  of 
3j  3 an 


'Chap.  25 
to. 


•Chap.  ij. 
'7- 


\[Or,-H!cf 

6-c. 


TheCandlefticke,     Exodus.   AItar,brafenLauer, 


*  chap.25. 

'9- 

\\Or,tt 

"CIup.ij. 


'Chjp  jo 


an  banbtycabtb ,  rounb  about :  anb 
mane  a  crolbne  of  golb  fo.2  rtjc  bobber 
thereof  rounb  about. 

13  3iub  i)te  taC  fo;  tt  foute  rings  of 
goib,  anbputtbctmgs  bponrbc  fourc 
corners  tljat  were  m  tlje  foutc  fecte 
thereof. 

1-4-  jDucragatnfttbcbotfscrlbcrctbc 
rings  ,t!)c  plates  fo?  tl)c  ftaucs,  to  bcarc 
the  "Cable. 

H  3iubbcmabetbe  ftaucs  of£>I)tt= 
tun  lboob ,  anb  oucrlaycb  tljcni  tbitl) 
golb,to  bcarc  the  Xablc. 

i6  %m  bec  mabc  tlic  bcflxis  tbrjici) 
wevc  upon  trjcj:ablc,l)is*bin)cs,anb 
bis  fpooncs,  anb  l)is  boiblcs,  anb  bis 
coucrs,|tocouetmitball,ofpiiregolb. 

17  C  3inb  Ijc  ntaoc  tlic  "Canblcftic&c 
of  purcgolb ,  of  beaten  ibo2fte  mabc  nc 
tbe  Canblcltuuc,  Ins  fbaft  $  bis  biantl) , 
bis  boiblcs,bis  Enops,anb  l;is  floibcrs 
lbcrcoftbefamc. 

is  3lub  ftjee  bjanches  going  out  of 
tbeftbes  thereof :  flucc  branches  of  tbc 
canblcft.tKc  out  of the one  fibctbercof, 
anb  tlncc  branches  of  the  canblctttcUc 
out  oftbeotber  fibctbercof. 

19  %\)itt  boiblcs  mabc  be  after  tbc 
falbton  of  aimonbs,  in  one  branch,  a 
Itnop  anb  a  floibcr:  anb  tb2ce  boiblcs 
mabc  Itltc  almonbs,in  anotber  branch, 
itunop  anb  a  floibcr:  fotinougbout  tlic 
fire  branches ,  going  out  of  the  Canblc? 
ftitlic. 

20  3lnb  in  the  canblcftitKe  were  four c 
boiblcs  mabc  imcalinonbs,  bis  miops, 
anb  bis  floibcrs: 

ii  2(nb  aimop  bnber  tibo  branches 
oftbefamc ,  $  a  nnop  bnber  tibo  tyan* 
tbes  of  tbc  famcanb  anttop  bnber  tibo 
b2ancbcs  of  tbefame,  accojbing to  the 
fire  blanches  going  out  of  tt. 

22.  dmrlmopsaubfbeir  branches 
ibere  of  the  fame:  all  of  it  was  one  beaten 
lboiuc  of  pure  golb. 

23  3(nb  be  mabc  bis  fcucu  lampcs, 
anb  Ins  fnuffcrs ,  anb  btsfuttffc  bifhes 
of  pure  golb. 

24  iDf  a  talent  ofpurc  golb  mabc  be 
it,aubautbe  beflelstncrcof. 

15  C"  3ub  be  mabe  tbc  iuccnfc  3fltar 
of  £>l)ittun  lboob :  tbelcngtboftt  was  a 
tubit,anu  tbc  b:cabtb  of  tt  a  cubit :  it  w  as 
fourc  fauare ,  anb  tibo  tubitcs  was  tbc 
betgntof  it ,  tbc  bomes  thereof  ibere  of 
tbefame. 

26  Znn  be  oucrlayeb  it  lbitb  pure 
golb ,  both  tbc  top  of  it  anb  tbc  ubes 
tbeteof rounb  about,  anbtbebomesof 


it:  alfo  be  mabc  bnto  it  a  croibnc  of  golb 
rounb  about. 

27  3nb  lie  mabc  tibo  rings  of  golb 
font  bnber  tlje  croibnc  thereof,  bytljc 
tibo  coiners  of  it,  bpon  tbc  tibo  fibes 
thereof,  to  bee  plates  fc>2  tlje  ftaucs  to 
beareitibttball. 

28  2tab  be  mabctbc  ftaucs of&htt; 
run  iboob ,  anb  onctlapcb  tljcm  lbitb 
golb. 

29  C3inb  be  mabc  *  tbc  bolp  anovn* 
ting  oy  le ,  anb  the  pure  mcenfe  of  ftbect 
fpiccs ,  acco2bmg  to  tbc  lbojtftc  of  tlje 
3tpotbccarp. 

CHAP.   XXXVIII. 

1  The Akarofhumtoficrings.  8  ThcLauer 
ofbrafle.  9  The  Court.  1.1  Thefummc 
or  that  tlic  people  offered. 

e2L5jX€§s>  ii5b  *  be  mabc  tlic  3fltar  of 


IgLmXSm  burnt  offrutg  of  £>bitttm 
amK*£$8%  &0015 :  fiuc  n,l)lts  wastbc 
W/mmM  In|5tD  tljcrcof ,  anb  ttue 
t^a^s*  cubits  tbc  tyeabtb  there- 
of: it  was  fourc fquarc,  anb tbjee tubits 
the  height  thereof. 

2  3lnb  bee  mabc  the  homes  thereof 
on  tbc  fourc  to2tiers  of  tt :  the  homes 
tljcrcof  ibere  of  the  fame,  anbbcoucr 
laycbttibitbtyatTe. 

3  3(nb  be  mabc  all  tbc  beffcis  of  tbc 
^Htar,tbcpotsanbtbcfl)oucls,anbtbe 
bafons,  and  tbc  flcfliboo6es,anbtbc 
fircpanncs:  all  tbcbcflels  thereof  mabc 
be  of  b2aflc. 

4  2tnbbcmabcfo2the:auatab2a- 
fen  grate  of  netibojuc,  bnber  thecoma 
paiTc  tljcrcof,  beneatb  bnto  tbc  mibft 
of  it, 

5  3(nb  bee  caft  fourc  rings  foj  the 
fourc  cnbs  of  tbc  grate  of  tyaftc ,  to  bee 
plates  fo2  tbc  ftaucs. 

6  anbljemabc  tbc  ftaucs  of  ^t>btt 
tim  tboob ,  anb  ouctiaycb  tbcm  ibul) 
biaiTc. 

7  ^nb  bee  put  tbc  ftaucs  into  tlje 
rings  on  tbcfibcsoftbc3fltar,tobcate 
itibitbail;  bee  mabc  tbc^ltarljolloib 
lbitb  boarbs. 

8  C3lnb  l)tt  mabc  tbc  Haucr  of 
b2aftc,  anb  tbc  foot  of  it  of  b2affc,  of  tbc 
II  looHtug  giaflcs  of  the  women  taflcm- 
bliug,  llibtcb  afTnnblcbat  tbc  boo2c  of 
tbc  Xabcmarlc  of  tbc  Congrcganou. 

9  4T3tnb  lie  mabc  tlic  Court:  on  tbc 
£>oufbfibc  ^outbibarD,  the  bankings 
oftbc  Court  wcreoffinctlbincblutntu, 
a  buubicb  cubits. 

[o  Xbcir 


"Chap.  30 
55- 


Chap. 27. 


\\  Of ,  brzjtn 

1  Ho'br  Af- 
fjmbhnj  ujr 


Court,and  fumme  Chap.xxxix.       of  the  offerings. 


"Chap  17. 


10  Xheirprtiars were  twenty,  anb 
their  b2afen  focacts  tlbenttc :  the  ijooHs 
of  the  pmars,  anb  thctr  fillets  were  of 
filucr. 

1 1   3fllb  fOZ  trjC  JftOJfh  fibe.the  hangings 

were  an  hunbjcb  cubitcs,  their  pillars 
weretnjcnrit,  anb  their  foefeets  of  bzafic 
tibentic:  thehoopesof  thepillars,anb 
rfjtir  fillets  of  filucr. 

ix  £nbfo:then9eftfibe  were  hang; 
mgsof  fifttc  cubitcs,  their  pillars  ten, 
ano  tt)ctr  fotftcts  ten :  the  hooftcs  of  the 
pillars,  ano  their  fillets  of  filuer. 

n  3nbfoztyceaOGoc€aftibatbfif: 
tie  tubitcs. 

14  Xhc  hangings  of  the  one  fibe  of 
the  g.i  te  were  fiftcenc  tnbitcs,  th  cir  pillars 
thzce,  anb  their  focftcts  thjec. 

15  3nbfo:thcothcrfibeoftherourt 
gate  on  this  hanb  anb  that  hanb  were 
hangings  of  fiftcenc  cubitcs,  their  pil- 
lars th2ce,anb  their  focftcts  tl^ee. 

i6  3(U  the  hangings  of  the  tourt 
rounb  about,-^  ere  of  fincttbtneb  unnen, 

17  3nb  the  focftcts  fo?  the  pillars 
were  of  b2atTc,  the  hooftes  of  the  pillars, 
anb  their  fillets  of  filucr,  anb  the  ouet* 
laying  of  their  chapiters  of  filucr,  anb 
ailthcpillars  ofthecourtlbcrcfillctcb 
with  filucr. 

is  3tnb  the  hanging  fo:  the  gate  of 
the  Court  lbasnccblc  lbojfte,  of  bleib, 
anbpurple,anbfcarlet,anbfinctU)tncb 
lumen :  anb  tibentic  tubttes  ibas  the 
length ,  anb  the  height  in  the  tycabth 
Ibas  fiuc  cubitcs ,  anfrocrable  to  the 
hangings  of  the  Court. 

19  3nb  their  pillars  werefoure,anb 
their  focftcts  of  bjaflc  fourc ,  their 
hooftcsof  filucr,  anbthe  ouerlaymgof 
their  chapiters,  $  their  fillets  of  filucr. 

io  3lnb  all  the  *pinnes  of  the  Xfc 
bcrnaclc ,  anb  of  the  court  rounb  & 

bOUt,  were  Of  b^lTC. 

ii  C^hiSisthcfumnicofthcXa: 
betnatlccuenofthcXabcrnaeleofXe; 
Ihmontc ,  as  it  ibas  countcb ,  accojbtng 
to  the  conimaunbenicnt  of  &9ofes,  for 
thcfcruiccof  the  iLcmtcs,  by  thchanb 
of3Jfl)ainar,fonto2aronthc^ictt. 

11  ^nb  2Sc5alecl  the  fonnc  of  tin, 
the  fonnc  of  fetir ,  of  the  tnbe  of  3Ju* 
bah >  ti^bc  all  that  the  %  o  k  e>  com- 
manbeb$)ofes. 

1  j  3lnb  with  htm  was  3(hoIiab,  fonnc 
of  3hifamach,  of  the  tribe  of  SDan,  an 
cngrauec,  anb  a  cunning  wo:ftcman, 
anb  an  emtooiberer  m  bletD  ,  anb  in 
purple,  anb  m  fear  let,  anb  fine  Unnen. 


14-  3111  the  golb  that  was  occupteo 
m  the  ibojfcc  in  all  tbcibojBcoftbc 
holy  place,  euen  the  golb  of  the  otTrsng, 
wastibcnnc  anb  nine  talents,  anofc- 
ucn  hunbjcb  anb  thirnc  (bcftcls,  after 
the  fbeftel  of  the  Sanctuary. 

1$  3nb  the  filuer  of  them  that  were 
numtyeb  of  the  Congregation,  was  an 
hunbjcb  talents,  anbathoufanb,feucn 
hunbKb  anb  thzeefcoje  anb  fiftcenc  fi> 
ftcls,  after  the  fbeftel  of  the  Sanctuary. 

16  ^23cRahfoztcnervman,that.5, 
baifca  (bcftel,  after  the  tbcftcl  of  the 
Sanctuary,  fojeucry  one  thatwentto 
benumbjeo,  from  tibentic  yccrcs  olbc 
anb  bpibarb,ft»  fire  bunmco  thoufanb, 
anb  tbzee  thoufanb,  anb  fine  hunbjeb, 

anb  fiftiC  men. 

17  3mb  of  thehunbzcb  talents  of  fil- 
uer,  were  caft  the  focftcts  of  the  San? 
ctuary,  anbthe  fotftcts  of  the  baile:  an 
huntyeb focftcts  of  thchunbzcb talents, 
atalcntfozafocftct. 

18  Znn  of  the  thoufanb,  fcucn  hurts 
b:cb,feuenfieanbfiucfbeftels,  hemabc 
hooftcs  fo:  the  pillars,  anb  oueriaibc 
their  chapiters,  anbfilletcb  them. 

19  2ub  the  b2aflc  of  the  offrmg  was 
fcuentic  talents,  anb  tibo  thoufanb  anb 
fourc  huutycb  (bcftcls. 

jo  3nb  therewith  he  mabe  the  foo 
acts  to  the  booze  of  the  Xabcrnacle  of 
the  Congregation,  anb  the  bzafen  %Y 
tar,  anbthe  b2afen  grate  fojlt,  anb  all 
tbetotTelsoftheSUtar, 

ji  ^nbthcfocftetsoftheeourtrounb 
about,anb  the  focftcts  of  the  court  gate, 
ano  all  the  pinncs  of  the  ICabernaele, 
anb  all  the  pmr,;s  of  the  court  rounb  a? 
bout. 

CHAP.   XXXIX. 

1  The  clothes  of  feruice  and  holy  garments.  1 
The  Ephod.  8  The  Brelrplatc.  tx  The 
robe  of  theEphod.  2.7  The  Coates,  Miter 
and  girdle  of  fine  Imnen.  50  The  plate  01 
the  holv  Crowne.  3a.  All  is  viewed  and  ap- 
proued  by  Moies. 

jlSboftbeblew,  anbpnr< 
§  plc,anbfcarict,tbcymabc 
clothes  offcrmce,  toboc 
feruice  in  the  holy  place, 
anb  *mabc  the  holy  gar; 
mentsfoj^laroii,  asthclLoKPCom^ 
manbeb  ijT9ofcs. 

1  3utbbcuiabefhe<£phobofgolb, 
bleib,  anb  purple,  anbfcariet,  anb  fine 
twmeb  unnen. 

j  5tnb  they  bib  bcatcthe  golbe  into 
thmne 


\HttjftS. 


'Chap.  5 1 
10. and  JJ 


The  Ephod,and         Exodus. thcBreftplate. 


'Chap.  28 


•Chip.if. 


|  Or.Jlw.if. 


thtnne  plates,  ant)  cut  it  into  lmers,  to 
ibo;&c  it  in  ttje  biciu,aiibinthc  purple, 
ano  m  the  ftariet,  ana  in  the  fine  lumen, 
lbitb  cunning  lbojtte. 

4  Xbcy  mane  (houlber  pieces  fo? 
it,  to  couple  >t  together;  by  the  tlbo 
cbgestbasit  toupicb  together. 

5  3lnD  the  curious  girblc  of  his  C* 
phobthat  wasDpon  u,ibas  of  thefame, 
atcoibing  to  the  lbo?fte  thereof:  of  golb, 
bleib ,  anb  purple ,  anb  ftariet  ,anb  fine 
nbmto  lumen ,  as  the  %®k®  torn- 
inanbcbtWes. 

6  C  *  3lnb  they  thought  jDnijc 
(tones  cnclofcb  in  ouches  of  golb ,  gta* 
urn  as  figncts  are  graucn ,  lbith  the 
names  of  the  ehilbjen  of  3Jfrael. 

7  3lnb  nee  put  them  on  tftefljoufc 
bcrsofrhc€phob,that  ttjrp  fljoulbbe 
floncs  foi  a  *mcmo,uailtothechiUMen 
of  3tfraci,asthc  %&&%>  tommanbeb 
t^ofes. 

s  C  3mb  he  mate  the  tyeOpiate  of 
cunning  llwHcliac  the  ltoojfec  of  the 
tfphob ,  of  golb,  bieib,anb  purple,  anb 
ftaclct,anbfinctibincbiinncn. 

9  3Jt  ibas  fourc  fquare,  tljcv  ntabe 
the  bicftplate  bouble :  afpannc  ibas  the 
length  th  cr  of,  anb  a  fpannc  the  tycabth 
tljer^ofbein^bonblcb. 

10  3mb  the?  fct  m  it  fottrerotbes  of 
Hones :  the  fini  roll)  was  a  ||  £>arbms ,  a 
Xopa5,anb  a  Carbuncle:  this  was  the 
firftroib. 

11  3tnbthcfceonbrolbanCmcraubc, 
a  Capture  anb  a  2>iamonb. 

ii  3Cnb  the  thttb  r  oib  a  %  ygurc ,  an 
3lgatc,anb  an  amethift. 

13  2Mb  the  fourth  rotb,  a  26erill,an 
^Dnir  anb  a  3Jatpcr :  they  tbercenclO' 
feb  in  ouches  of  golb  in  rtjctr  mclofings. 

14  3lnb  the  (tones  were  aewbiug  to 
the  names  of  the  chilbmt  of  Jfrael, 
ttbclne  accojbmg  to  their  names ,  line 
the  mgrautngs  of  a  fignct,  cuery  one 
inith  his  name,  acco;bmg  to  the  tibctuc 
tribes. 

i^nbthevmabcbpon  fhetocflplatc 
chaines,  at  thccnbs,ofib?ethcnibomc 
of  pure  golb. 

i63{nbthcy  mabetibo  ouches  of  golb, 
anbtibo  golb  rings :  anb  put  the  tlbo 
rings  m  the  tluo  cnbsofthebjcflpiate. 

17  3inb  they  put  the  ttuo  ltwathcn 
chames  of  golbc  m  the  tlbo  rings  on 
fhecnbsofthcbzcftplate. 

is  3lnb  the  tlbo  tubes  of  the  tlbo 
tbjeathen  rhames  tbey  faltcucb  m  the 
tlbo  ouches  aiioputthcnionthefhouu 


bcr  ptcecsof  thc€phob,befo;cit. 

19  ^nbthepmabctlbonngsofgolb, 
anb  put  them  on  the  tlbo  cubes  of  the 
b^eft  plate  upon  thebojbetof  it,  lbhtch 
was  on  the  fibc  of  the  €phob  mibarb. 

20  3nb  thcymabc  tlbo  otha  golbcn 
rings,  anb  put  them  on  the  tlbo  fibcs 
of  tljcCphob  bnbetneath,  toibarbthe 
forepart  of  it,  ouer  againtt  the  whet  cou 
plmgthcreof,  about  the  curious  girblc 
ofthcephob. 

21  anb  they  bib  Wnb  the  bzeft  plate 
by  his  rings  bnto  the  rmgs  of  the  <£; 
Phob,tt)ith  a  lace  of  blcib,  that  it  might 
be  abouc  the  curious  gtrbie  of  thee- 
phob,  anb  that  the  b«(t  plate  migl)t  not 
bee  loofeo  from  the  *2phob,  as  the 
%  o  k  ©  tommanbeb  £0ofcs. 

22  Canbhcniabctbcrobcoftbce- 
Phob  of  ibouen  ibome,  an  of  biciD. 

2  j  3lnb  there  Ibas  a  hole  in  the  nubft 
of  thcrobc  as  the  hole  of  an  habergeon , 
ibith  abanb  rounb  about  the  holc,that 
itfhoulbnotrcnt. 

24  3uibtheymabe  bpon  the  hemmes 
of  the  robe  pomegranatcs,of  bletb,anb 
purple,  anb  fcarlet,  and  tibincb  lumen. 
2<;  3inb  they  mabe  *  belles  of  pure 
golb,  anb  put  the  belles  bcttbeenc  the 
pomegranates,  bpon  the  hemme  of  the 
robe,  rounb  about  betlbeene  the  pome- 
granates. 

26  ^belianbapomegranatc.abell 
anb  a  pomegranate  rounb  about  the 
hemmcof  thcrobc  to  mttufter  in,  as  the 
%  a>  is  j?  tommanbeb  $)ofes. 

27  C  3nb  they  mabc  toats  of  fine 
lmncn,of  tbouen  ibo?hc}fo;  3aron  anb 
fojhlsfonnes. 

28  3nb  a  miter  of  fine  linncn ,  anb 
goobly  bonnets  of  fine  lumen,anb  *  iirt* 
ncn  tocethes  of  fine  tibincb  linncn, 

29  ^nbagtrbleoffinctibmeblinnen 
anb  blcib  ,anb  purple,anb  ftariet  of  nee* 
bicft>o?Be,asfhc  ^ois^commanbeb 
i^ofes. 

jo  C^nbfhevmabctheplatcofthc 
holy  Crolbnc  of  pure  golb ,  anb  lb.iotc 
bpon  it  a  ibnnng,  like  to  the  engrarangs 
ofafignct,  *V>®%3&€£>  %£> 
%V}€  %&&}£>. 

j  1  5lnbthcpticbbntoitalaccofblctb 
tofaftcn  itouhigh  bpon  tlie  mitre,  as 
the  %  ®  a  ©  tommanbeb  £0ofcs. 

32  ClChnsibasallthciboJlicofthe 
Xabernaclcof  the  tent  of  thcCongrc^ 
gation  fimajcb :  anb  the  cljiioicn  of  3Jt 
raelbtb  accojbmgto  ai  tliat  the  ?Lois© 
conunanbeb  ^ofes,fo  bib  th'ei'. 
33  C^nb 


'  Chap.  28 

S3- 


•Oup..j8 


•Chap.  28. 


The  Tabernacle      Chap.xl, 


is 


reared 


V] 


]Hekthe 

tneertfeof 
Jmetjpku. 


"Chap.  2  6. 

'*•  . 

iHei.rbe 

order  there- 


33  C  aub  they  bought  the  Xabet^ 
nacle  bnto  £Pofes,  the  tent,  anb  alibis 
furniture,  his  taches,  his  boatbs,  fjts 
barres,anbhtspiliars,anbhtsfocims, 

34-  anb  the  touenng  of  rammes 
fBinnes  bicb  rcb,  aub  the  coucrtug  of 
babgers  fuinncs,  anb  t^e  baile  oftlje 
touenng: 

3$  XhearReDfthcXcttimom>,anb 
the  (taues  thereof,  aub  thcfiPerae  feat, 

36  XhcXable,  and  all  the  beffcis 
tljcreof,  anbtbe&betbtocab; 

37  Xh*  pure  Canblcfticbe.lbtth  the 
lampes  thereof,  cuen  ttnth  the  lampes 
to  be  fet  to  ojber ,  anb  all  the  btficls 
thereof,  aub  the  ople  fo?  light : 

38  3nbthcgolbcnattar,anbthean* 
otntmgo;plc,anotbetfibcctutecnfe,anb 
thebangingfo?  tbcXabcmatlebooje: 

39  Xbcb2afenaltar,anbbtsgrateof 
bjaffe ,  hts  flanes ,  anb  all  his  beffcts, 
thciaueranbhisfoote: 

40  Xbcba^ujingsoftbcCourt,his 
pillars,  anb  his  focuets,  anb the bang- 
ing fonbe  towtt  gate,his  coarbs,  ano 
hts  pumes ,  anb  an  the  bcffels  of  the 
fcruite  of  the  Xabcrnaclc>fo?tbe  tent  of 
the  Congregation: 

41  XbcclotbesoffeTUtcctDboefcr* 
uiccmtbebolp  plate,  anb  tbcbolpgat* 
ments  fo?  aaron  the  ®fit&,  anb  his 
fonnes  garments  to  minuter  in  the 
i&ucfrs  office. 

4z  accojbingtoalltbattbclLofi© 
tommanbeb  #ofcs,  fo  the  chilbjenof 
3Jfrael  mabe  all  the  tbo2Rc. 

43  anbfi0ofcsbiblooue  bpon  all 
theibo2be,anbbeholb,thtv?)abDoneit 
as  the?,  fSDSDhao  tommanbeb ,  cuen 
fobab  tbepboncit:  aub  fiI9ofcs  bleffeb 
thetn. 

CHAP    XL. 

1  The  Tabernacle  is  commanded  to  be  reared, 
<)  and  anointed.  13  Aaron  and  his  fonnes 
to  be  fandified.  16  Mofes  performeth  all 
tilings  accordingly.  34  A  doude  couereth 
the  Tabernacle. 

_  iBb  the  %  ©  n  x>  fpafte 
jBft  bnto£0ofes,fapiug, 
W122J&GL  i  £)n  the  firft  bap  of 
t"pPf>ithc  ficft  moneth  (halt 
SsH^aS  tliou  fetbp  tbcXaberna; 
tic  of  the  Xcnt  of  the  Congregation. 

3  anb  thou  (halt  put  therein  the 
acReof  tbeXcfhmonfe,  anb  coucc  tijc 
acbe  ttxtb  the  <Ha;lc: 

4  anb*  thou  (halt  bung  in  ft)t%& 
ble,anb  fet  tn  ojbet  mjctfjuigs  tljat  arc 


to  be  fet  m  o  jber  bpon  it,  anb  thou  (halt 
bung  m  the  CanbictocUc ,  anb  light  the 
lampes  thereof. 

5  anb  thou  (halt  fet  the  aitar  of  golb 
foj  the  mcenfe  before  the  arse  of  the 
Xemmonic ,  ano  put  the  hanging  of 
the  boo:c  to  the  Xabcrnacie. 

6  anbthoufbaitfettbeaitaroftbe 
burnt  offering,  befoze  the  boo:c  of  the 
Xabernaclc  of  the  Xcnt  of  the  Con< 
grcgation. 

7  anb  thou  (halt  fet  the  liaucr  be 
tlbceuc  thcXent  of  the  Congregation 
anb  the  aitar  ,  anb  (halt  put  lbater 
therein. 

8  anb  thou  (halt  fet  bp  the  Court 
rounb  about,  anb  hang  bp  the  hanging 
at  the  Court  gate. 

9  anb  thou  fbalttaRe  the  annoys 
ting  oyle,  anb  annopnt  the  Xabernaclc 
anbailthatistheretn,anb(halthalloib 
(t,ano  all  the  bcffels  tbereofcanb  it  (hai 
bchotp. 

10  ^ub  thou  (halt  annopnt  the  al- 
tar of  the  burnt  offering ,  anb  all  his 
bcfTcis ,  anb  fanttific  the  aitar :  anb  tt 
(haibc  an  aitar  t  mo(H)oh\ 

11  anb  thou  fhaltanuovnt  thefLa* 
ucranbI)isfoot,anotanetuleit. 

n  anb  thou  (halt  bung  aaron  anb 
bis  tonnes  bnto  the  booje  of  the  Xa* 
bernaele  of  the  Congregation  ,  anb 
toafbtbemtbitbibater. 

13  anb  thou  (halt  put  bpon  aaron 
the  holp  garments ,  anb  anoynt  bun, 
anb  fanetiuc  btm,tbatbemapmmi(ter 
bnto  memtbcfrnelTsoffice. 

14  anbthou(haitb?mghisfcnncs; 
anb  clothe  them  rbtth  coats. 

15  anb  thou  (halt  anopnt  them,  as 
tboubibftanopnttbettfatbcr,tbattbcp 
map  niintffcr  bnto  nice  m  the  $:icfts 
omre:jfo?  their  anointing  fbalinirclp 
bean  cucrialhng  0ncflboob,tb?oug!> 
out  their  generations. 

16  Xhusbib  03ofcs :  accozbmg  to 
all  that  tlje  %  e>  «  $?  commanbeb  bun, 
fobibhe. 

17  CanbitcanictopafTcintheftrft 
moneth,  in  the  feconbyecrcon  tbefrrft 
day  of  the  moneth  ,tbat  thcXabcrnatle 
tbasrearebbp. 

18  anb  £0ofes  rearcb  bp  the  Xfr 
bernaele,  anb  faftcncbhisfoclicts,  anb 
(ct  bp  the  boarbs  tbcrcof,anb  put  m  tl)c 
barrcs  thereof ,  anb  rearcb  bp  his 
pillars. 

19  anb  he  fpjeab  atooab  the  tent  o- 
uer  the  Xabernaclc,  anb  put  rhecouc 

ring 


Hel.Ho/i- 

nel  of  Halt' 
'ft. 


*  Num.7. 1. 


The  Tabernacle      Leuincus. 


is  reared  vi 


'Chap.  3  5, 
11. 


ting  of  tbeXcntaboue  bpon  it,  as  the 
%  e> »  ©  commanbeb  $$)ofcs. 

20  C^nbhctoofceanoputtbetetttJ 
monp  into  the  3rltc,  anb  fettljettancs 
on  the  3rfec,  anb  put  the  terete-feat  a* 
bone  bpon  the  3rKc. 

11  anbbcbwtgbttbe:3r&ctntotbe 
Xabccnaclc,  anb  *  fet  bp  the  Sialic  of 
tbc  coucrmg ,  ano  toutrcb  tbearfeeof 
the  Xclfimonp ,  as  the  fLsDis©  torn; 
manbebiJ0ofcs. 

ii  C  3nb  Dec  put  fbcXablc  in  the 
Xent  of  the  Congregation,  bpon  the 
ftbe  of  the  Xabecnacle  /ftojtbibacb, 
lbitljout  rt)c  Glatlc. 

13  3lnbhefcttbctycabino?bctbpon 
it,bcfo?c  tI)c!Lf©«©,  as  the  H©«jd 
rjab  tomnianbcb£0ofes. 

14.  C3uioheputthecanblcfheBCtn 
the  Xent  of  the  Congregation,  outta* 
gamtttbcXablcon  tbefibcoftbeXa* 
bcnuclc&outinbarb. 

25  3nbbcugbtebtbelampesbcuw 
the  ILsdis©  ,  as  the  ft,©isjp  conv 
manbeb$)ofcs. 

16  c^nbftcputtftegolben^ltarin 
tl)c  Xent  of  the  Congregation ,  before 
tbcHailc. 

17  3lnb  be  burnt  facet  intenfe  tber  v 
on,  as  the  Hois©  tomtnanbeb  $)ofes. 

18  C3nbbccfctbptbcbanging,at 
the  booje  of  the  Xabecnacle. 

19  2lnb  be  put  the  2fltar  ofburnt  ok 
fenng  bp  the  boojc  of  the  Xabernatle 
of  the  Xent  of  the  Congregation,  anb 
offcrcb  bpon  it  the  burnt  offering ,  anb 


the  meat  off  nng,as  the  ft,  ©  is  ©  torn; 
nianbeb  $)ofcs. 

jo  CHnbhefettbelLaucrbenbcene 
the  Xent  of  the  Congrcganonanb  the 
^Itar  ,9  piu  ibatcr  thereto  ibafb  withaii. 

ji  3nb$$)ofcs,  anb  barest  ano  bts 
fonnes ,  lbafhcb  their  hanbs ,  anb  rhnr 
feet  thereat 

ji  BabcntbcpibcntintotbcXentof 
the  Congregation  ,  anb  Ibhen  tbcp 
tanienecre  bntothe  ^Itar  ,rheriban^ 
eb ,  as  the  ft,£>B©  commanbeb  fij9ofes. 

3}  3nb  hee  reareb  bp  the  Court 
rounb  about  the  Xabernacle ,  ano  the 
3ltar,£  fet  bp  the  hanging  of  the  Court 
gate :  fo  s$ofcs  fintfbcb  the  ibojUc. 

34  <[  *  Xhen  a  tloub  coucreb  the 
XcntoftheCengrcgation,anbtheglO' 
tp  of  tl\t  %,£>m&  fillcb  the  Xabernarle. 

35  2nb£Po&sibas  not  able  to  enter 
uuo  the  Xent  of  the  Congregation,  be* 
caufcthe  tloub  abobe  thereon,  anb  the 
glojp  of  the  ft,  ©is©  fillcb  the  Xabcr- 
nadc. 

36  2ub  ttihcn  the  tloub  tbas  tafecn 
bp  from  oner  the  Xabernarle ,  the  chil* 
bjen  of  3Jfracl  t  mem  onlbarb  in  all 
their  ioumeps: 

37  25ut  if  the  tloub  Ibcrenot  tafeen 
bp,thcntbeptournepcbnot,ttlltbe  bap 
that  it  tbas  ta&cnbp. 

38   JfOJ  the  tlOUb  Of  thC  %  £>«  ©was 

bpon  the  Xabcmatlc  bpbap,  anb  fire 
ibas  on  it  bp  night,  in  the  fight  of  all  the 
houfe  of  3Jfracl ,  throughout  all  thctr 
lourncps. 


,THE  THIRD  BOOKE 

of  Mofes,called  Leuiticus. 


CHAP.     I. 

I    The  burnt  offerings    3  Oi  the  herd,  10  Ol 


•  Hockes 


Ot  ihetouljs. 


^othe  1L©ir© 
calico  bnto  fl0o- 
fes  ,  anb  fpahc 
bnto  hnu  out  of 
the  Xabcmatlc 
oftbeCongccga 
non,  (aping, 

1  dpcancbn-' 
totbccbtuwnof 


3Jfratl ,  anb  fap  bnto  them,  3f  anp 
man  of  pou  bung  an  offering  bnto  the 
ft,  ©  is  ip,  ^t  (hall  bung  pour  offering  of 
the  cattell,  cuenofthchcrb,  anb  of  the 
flocftc, 

3  *  3Jf  his  offering  be  a  burnt  fan* 
ficc  of  the  herb ,  let  htm  offer  a  male 
ttnthout  blemish :  he  (hall  offer  it  of  Ijis 
oibne  boluntarp  rbili ,  at  the  boo?c  of 
the  Xabcmatlc  of  the  Congregation 
before  the  ft,  ©  is  ©. 

4.  £nb  he  (hall  put  bts  bans  bpon 
the 


Eiod  jo. 


1  Numb.  9. 
y.i.king. 


\Hibr.itm- 
vtcjed. 


"Elod.  ij 
10. 


The  burnt  offnng.     Chap.i|.        The  meat  offnng 


\Ot,ftnch 
iff  the  head, 
with  the 
naitc* 


|Or  the 
fUth  thereof. 


the  heab  of  the  burnt  offering:  anb  it 
(ball  be  acccpteb  fo?  bun  to  mane  atone 
mentfojbtm. 

5  %nt)  he  fl)au  tall  the  builocsc  be 
foie  tHe  %  o  is  ?? :  an*  the  piiefts  3la* 
ronsfonnes  (balltying  the  bloob,  anb 
fpntiKlc  the  bloob  rounb  about  upon 
tbealtar,thatisbytbeboo?eofthc%as 
bcmatlc  of  the  Congregation* 

6  3lnb  Dee  (ball  flay  the  burnt  offe* 
ring,  anb  rut  it  into  bts  pieces. 

7  2lub  the  fonnes  of  Matron  tl)c 
0?irft  (bail  put  fire  bpou  tl)c  3lltar,anb 
laythciboobmojbcrbponthcfirc. 

8  3lnb  the  Qnttts  Sarong  fonnes 
fballlay  tbeparts,tbcbcab  anb  thefat 
inozbcrbpontheiboobtbatisintbcnrc 
ibhtcb  is  bpon  the  altar. 

9  26ut  tbc  mibarbs  anb  hislcggcs 
fbailhe  ttiaft)  in  ibatcr,  anb  tl)c  £?icft 
(ball  burne  ail  on  til  t  altar,to  be  aburnt 
faenfire,  an  offering  mabe  by  fire,  of  a 
frocct  fanour  bnto  the  %  ©  k  ©. 

ioCSnbifbtsoffnngbeoftheflotns, 
namely  of  the  fbcepco:  of  the  goatcsfo? 
a  bnott  facrifitc,  I)  c  (ball  bung  it  a  male 
fljitDoutblcmtft). 

ii  3(ttb  hec  (bail  tall  it  on  the  fibc 
of  the  3fltar  jRozthibarb,  before  the 
ILoisp:  anb  tbc  pneftes  Karons 
fonnes  (ball  fpminie  l)is  bloob  rounb 
about  bpon  the  altar. 

u  2inb  he fballcutitinto Ijifipteces, 
tbitb  bis  bcab  anb  Ins  fat :  anb  tbc 
teneft  (bail  lay  tbem  in  o?ber  on  the 
iboobtljatison  tl;c  fire,  ibl;ici;  «bpon 

13  25utbee  fl>au  roafi)  the  mibarbs 
anb tbc  legs  lbttn  water,  anb  tt)c0:ieft 
ftiallbimgit  all,  anb  burnc  it  upon  tl)c 
altar :  it  is  a  burnt  facrifice,  an  offering 
niabcbyfire,ofafroeetfauourbntothe 

i+  c  2(»b  *  tHe  burnt  facrifice  fo? 
his  off  ring  to  tbc  %  <&  b  id  be  of  foulcs, 
tl)enl)ea)allb?ingl)is  offering  of  turtle 
boucs,02ofyongp:geons. 

15  »nb  the  0?tcft  (bail  tying  it  buto 
the  altar,  anb  ||  tbnng  off  bisbcab,  anb 
burnc  it  on  the  altar :  anb  the  bloob 
thereof  tball  be  Vtyung  out  at  tl;c  fibc  of 

;i6a  Sib  be  Cballpluclte  amay  bis  crop 
tbttn  II  Ins  feathers,  anb  taft  it  befibc  the 
altar  on  the  caft  part,  by  the  plate  of 

rtJi7  &  bee  (ball  tleaue  tttbuU  the 
ibinas  thereof,  but  (balluotbiuibeit  a 
funbee :  3tab  the  pjleft  (hall  burne  it 


bpon the  altar,  upon  tbetboob  that  is 
bponthefire:  itts  a  burnt  facrifice,  an 
offering  mabfcbpfirc  of  a  from  fauour 
bnto  tbc  HtfmjD. 

CHAP.   II. 

The  meatc  offering  of  flower  with  oile  and 
incenfe,  4  eitherbakenintheouen,  5  oron 
a  plate,  7  orinafryingpan,  12.  Orofthe 
fiift  fruits  in  the  care.  13  The  fait  of  the 
meate  offering. 

/Sblbbcn  any  tbtll  offer 
a  meatc  offering  buto  the 
fL©m©,his  offnng  (bail 
bcoffineflottyetanbbee 
„  (bail  poityc  oylebpon  it, 
anbputfcantoncenfc  thereon. 

z  3lnb  he  (l)au  tying  it  to  Karons 
(bnncs  the  $»cfts:  anb  hec  (ball  taftc 
thereout  his  banbfull  of  the  floltyc 
thereof,  anb  of  tbc  otle  thereof,  with  all 
the  frantancenfe  thereof,  anb  the  frucft 
(hall  burnc  the  mcmojiail  of  it  bpon  tlje 
altar,  to  be  an  offering  mabe  by  fire  of  a 
ftoect  fauottr  bnto  the  %  ©  a  ©. 

j  ^nb*rhcrcmnantoftl)cmeatof 
fcring  (hail  be  Karons  anb  hts  fonnes : 
it  is  a  thinginofthnly  of  the  offerings  of 
the  fL©i3£>mabcby  fire. 

4  C^nb  if  tl)ou  bJing  an  oblation 
of  amcatc  offering  baben  m  the  ouen, 
it  fhaii  bee  an  bnlcaucneb  cabc  of  fine 
flotbzc  minglcb  tbttft  oyle,  o?  bnlcauc 
ntblbafersanotntcblbtth  oyle. 

5  C  3nb  if  thy  oblation  be  a  meate 
offer  utgbaken  ||  m  a  panne,  it  fljali  bee  of 
fine  flott>?e  bnlcaucneb ,  mingleb  Vbith 
oyle. 

6  Xhou  fl)ait partit  in  pieces,  anb 
potb?e  oyle  thereon ;  it  is  a  meatc  offc< 
ring. 

7  C  3nb  if  thy  oblation  be  a  meate 
offering  baken  m  the  frying  pan,it  (l)albc 
mabe  of  fine  flouw  rbith  oyle. 

8  3lnb  thou  (bait  b?mg  the  meat  of 
feringthat  is  mabe  oftbefe  things  bnto 
thclLoK© ,  anbibhenrt  isp?cfenteb 
bnto  the  ^icft ,  be  (ball  tying  it  bnto 
tbeaitar. 

9  3(nbtbe0?ie(t(bailtafecfromthc 
meat  offering*a  mcmoziall  thereofanb 
a)allburneitbponthe:aitar)'cisan*of 
fering  mabe  by  fire  of  a  frocct  fauour 
bnto  the  H«dk©.         m  ,  , 

10  3(nbthatlbhieh(sleftofthcmeat 
offering,  fhaibe  barons  anb  his  fonnes: 
n  is  a  thing  mod  holy  ,of  the  offerings 
ofrtic1L€>«i>  mabe  by  fire.         ^ 

11  00 


*  Eccius.7. 

31- 


[Or,o»^/rf 
phtt  or, 

pet. 


'VcrfeJ. 
"Exod.Jp- 


Lcat  offering.         Leuiticus. Peace  offering. 


afcend. 
49> 


"Eiod.  19. 

ti. 

\Or,ftttt. 


"fit  tmfr  iht 

Itntr,  and  "- 
urr  tht  kui- 
"I'- 


ll 0o  meat  offering,  ttbirbpefball 
b2tng  Unto  the  %®  ia©,  (ballbemabc 
tbitb  icaucn :  if o;  ft  (bail  burnc  no  leas 
ucn,noj  an?  bonp,m  an?  offering  of  th* 
?L  ©is©  mabc  bp  fire. 

n  casfoj  the  oblation  of  the  firtt 
fruits,  pec  (ball  offer  them  bnto  the 
%  ©  in  e>  ,  but  tbcp  fbaH  not  t  be  burnt 
on  the  sntarfb?  autiectfauour. 

13  3nb  euerp  oblation  of  thp  meat 
offering  *(bait  thou  fcafon  ibith  fait; 
umber  (bait  thou  fuffer  the  felt  oftbe 
Couenant  of  thp  <5ob  to  bee  lathing 
from  thp  meat  offering :  ttJitlj  all  tljine 
offeritms  thou  (bait  offer  felt. 

14  :^b  if  thou  offer  a  meat  offering 
of  titoj  6rfl  fruits  bnto  the  %€>»&, 
thou  (bait  offer  fo2tbc  mcatoffcrtngof 
thp  fitfr  fruits ,  greene  cares  of  tome 
bucbbp  tljcfirc,=ucntomcbeatenoutof 
full  cares. 

15  2lnb  thou  (bait  put  ople  bpon  It, 
anb  lap  franutnccnfc  tfjcron  ■>  it  is  amcat 
offering. 

16  Snbthci&neftmallburnetbcme* 
monail  of  it ,  part  of  the  beaten  tome 
thereof ,  anb  part  of  the  ople  thereof, 
tbirt)  all  the  franaintcnfe  thereof :  it  is 
an  offering  mabe  bp  fire  bnto  the 
U,©is£>. 

CHAP.    III. 

1   The  meat  offering  of  the  herde,    6  of  the 
flocke,   7   either  a  lambe,   u   or  a  goat. 

ragjg  iEto  if  his  oblation  be  afa= 
tnficc  of  peace  offering,  if 
bee  offer  it  of  tlje  herb, 
lbhcther  it  beantale  02  ft* 
maicbcfbai  offer  it  tbitb* 
out  blcmtfb  bcfo?e  the  ft  ©  is  ©. 

i  3lnb  be  (ball  lap  Ins  banb  bpon 
the  bcab  of  bis  offcring,anb  bil  it  at  tlje 
boo2e  oftbe  Xabcrnacle  oftbe  Congrc 
gation :  anb  Karons  fonncs  the  0jfclis 
(ball  fpnnt&ir  tijc  bioob  bpon  the  £l- 
tarrounb  about. 

?  2nb  be  (ball  offer  of  thefecrtfiee 
of  tbepcate  offering,  an  offering mabc 
bpfire bnto  the  1L©iB©;*the||fat  that 
couereth  tbe  tnibarbs ,  anb  all  tlje  fat 
that  is  bpon  tbe  inibarbs. 

4  3nbthcttbolitbncps,anbthcfat 
that"  on  them, Vbhirh  is  bptbeflanRS: 
anb  thc||cauie  abouc  the  Inter  ttmlj  the 
htbncps,  it  fballhc  tabe  aibav. 

5  3lnb  Karons  fonncs  (ball  burnc 
it  on  tbe  3ltar  bpon  tbe  burnt  facrtfiec, 
ibbtch  is  bpon  the  iboob  that  is  on  tbe 
fire:  it  is  an  offering  mabc  bp  fire  of  a 


ftocet  feuour  bnto  tlje  %  ©  a  9, 

6  C3nb  if  his  offering  fo?  a  fecrt* 
flee  of  peace  offering  bnto  ttje  %  ©  is  9, 
be  oftbe  flocfee,maieo2fcmale,hcfball 
offer  it  tbtthout  blcmtfb. 

7  3f  8**  offcc  a  lambe  fo?  fjis  o£ 
fermg ,  ttjen  (ball  he  offer  it  before  tbe 
fL©fijE>. 

8  anb  he  (ball  lap  bis  banb  bpon 
the bcab  of  bis  offering,  anb  bill  it  be- 
fore tbe  ITabcrnaclc  of  tbe  Congrega- 
tion: 3ub  barons  fonnes  (bail  fpzuiblc 
tbe  bioob  thereof ,  rounb  about  bpon 
theaitat. 

9  anbbe  (ball  offer  of  the  fecrifite 
oftbe  peace  offermg,  an  offering  mabc 
bvfirebnto  the  fL©iamtijc  fat  there* 
of  and  the  Tbholcrumpe,  ttu>all  be  tabe 
off  harbbpthebacfee  bone:  anb  thefat 
that  couereth  theinibarbs ,  anb  all  the 
fat  that  is  bpon  the  inibarbs. 

10  3lnDfbettbo!nbneps, anb  thefat 
that  is  bpon  them ,  tbhiih  «  bp  the 
flanbcs,anb  the  caulc abouc  the  ttucr, 
ibith  the  aibneps,  it  (ball  he  tafee  atbap. 

n  3nb the piittt  (ball  burneit bpon 
the  2ltar :  it  is  the  foob  of  the  offering 
mabe  bp  fire  bnto  tfjefLcjs©. 

n,  C^nbifhisoffcruigbeagoat, 
then  he  (ball  offer  it  befoze  the  H©k©. 

i}  ^nb  he  (ball  lap  his  hanb  bpon 
the  heab  of  it ,  anb  nai  tt  before  theX& 
bernaele  of  the  Congregation :  anb  the 
fonnes  of  aaron  fhafl  toincblc  the 
bioob  thereof  bpon  rhc3fltar,tounb 
about. 

14  anb  he  (ball  offer  thereof  his  of* 
fcrtng,euen  an  offtnngmabc  bp  Src  brt 
to  the  %  ©  is  ©  i  the  fat  that  couereth 
the  intuatbs,anb  al  the  fat  that  is  bpon 
theinibarbs. 

15  anbthettbotnbneps,anb  thefat 
that  is  bpon  them ,  tbhicf)  is  bp  tfje 
ftanctts ,  anb  the  caule  abouc  the  buer 
ttnth  the  Bibneps,tttt)aiihetabe  aibap, 

k  anbthe02ica  (bail  burnc  them 
bpon  the  3iltar:  it  is  the  foob  of  the  of= 
fmng  mabc  bp  fire,  fo?  afraect  fauour : 
•ailthefat  is  thelitis  jds>. 

17  it  (hail  be  a  perpetual!  flatute  fo* 
pour  generations,  thjougliout  all  pout 
bfrelimgs ,  that  pc  eat  neither  fat,  no? 
"bioob, 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  The  finnc  offering  of  ignorance,  3  for  the 
Prieft,  13  for  the  Congregation,  11  for 
the  Ruler,    17  for  any  of  the  people. 

Znn 


•Qiap.7. 

'Gtnt.p. 

+  ch«p7. 

■<•'.  j-.J  17. 


Offi 


cring! 


f< 


sror 


Ch; 


.p.MJ. 


fll 


>f 


nncsorip-norancc. 


•Chap.;.?. 


•Eiod.  19 
14  numb. 


\H.tr.Te 
vttbout ihi 
cumpr. 

•Htbij 
11. 


415b  tbc  %$>  is  ©  fpaftc  tin^ 
tofcT9ofcs,fapntg, 

i  3>peaftc  bnto  tl)e 
tljilbjcn  of  ^fracl,  fay 
ing,3If  a  foulcfl^all  finite 
tbjouglj  tgnojancc  agatntt  anp  of  tlje 
coinmattbcmcnts  of  tlje  %  0  a  ©  (con- 
ccrningtljmgsibbfcb  ougljt  not  to  bee 
none)  anb  (ball  do  agamfi  any  of  fljcm: 
j  ^jftbepjiefttbatisanointeb.boe 
finnc  accojbittg  to  ttje  finneof  tbe  peo- 
ple, tfjen  let  nun  bung  foi  bis  finne 
tbbielj  be  Ijatl)  finneb,  a  pong  bullocftc 
rbitboutblnnwj,  PntotbelL£>ia©foj 
a  finne  offering. 

4  anb  rjee  (ball  bjing  tbe  bullocftc 
bnto  tbc  boojeof  tbe  Xabcrnaclcoftbe 
Congregation  befojc  tbc  %  sd  k  ©,  ano 
(ball  lav  bis  lianb  bpon  tlie  buiiocftes 
beab,  anb  Kill  tlje  bullocftc  befojc  tlje 

?L£>1S©. 

5  anb  tbc  0jicft  djat  is  attomtcD, 
fljall  tafte  of  the  bullocks  bloob ,  anb 
bjtitgtttothc  ^bcrnaele  of  tbe  Con 
gecgation. 

6  ^nb  tbc  0jicft  (ball  bipbts  finger 
in  tbc  bloob,  anb  fpjtnftic  of  trjebloou 
fcucn  times  befoje  tlje  ILidis©,  befojc 
tbe  ftatle  of  trje  Sanctuary. 

7  ^ttb  trje  pjieft  (ball  put  fome  of 
tbe  bloob  bpon  tbc  Domes  of  tbc  aitar  1 
of  ftotct  uteenfe  befoje  flic  fLois©,) 
tbljiclj  is  mtljc  Xabccnatlc  of  tl)e  Con*j 
gcegation,anblbalpott>jc*ailflje  bloob 
of  tbe  bulioebe  at  toe  bottomc  of  tbc! 
altar  of  trjc  burnt  offering,  vunicfj «  at 
tt)cboozcoftl)e%abernaclcofttKCon« 
gecgation. 

8  anb  f)e  (ball  taftc  off  from  it  all 
trjc  fat  of  trjc  bullocftc  fo?  tne  finne  offe* 
ring:  ttje  fat  tbat  cottcrctb  trje  mtbarbs, 
anb  all  ttje  fat  ttjat  is  bpon  tlje  in? 
ruarbs, 

9  anb  trje  ttbo  ftibneis,  anb  trjc  fat 
tljat  is  upon  tljem ,  tbbub  is  bp  ttje 
flanftcs ,  anb  tne  caule  abouc  tfjeltucr 
tburjtrjembncis,it  (bail  be  tafte  atbap, 

10  astttbastaftenofffromtrjebul? 
lotfte  of  trjc  faenfite  of  peace  offerings : 
anb  tfje  0Jteft  (ball  burnc  tbcm  fcpon 
tlje  altar  of  tlie  burnt  offering. 

11  'anb  ttje  fftumc  of  rt)c  bullocftc, 
anb  all  bis  flcQ) ,  ttitb  bis  bcab ,  anb 
ttiWj  bis  legs,  anb  btsmruarbs,anb  bis 
boung, 

11  enen  tbeibbolcbullotfee  (bail  be 
carte  foojtb  t  rbitbout  tbc  catnpe ,  bnto 
a  cleanc  place ,  ibbcrc  tlje  aftjes  arc 
potbjeb  out ,  anb  *burne  fym  on  tJje 


iboob  ibitl)  fire:  tnujerc  tbc  atbes  are 
polbjeb  out,  (ball  be  be  burnt. 

13  Canbif  tbe  Vbljole  Congregation 
of  Jlfrael  Gnnc  tijjougb  ignojante.'anb 
tbetbmg  be  bib  from  the  epes  of  tbc  af 
femblp,anbthcp  baucbonc  fomelbbat 
againftanpoftljeCotnmanbementsof 
tbe  2L©  is©,  concerning  tbmgs  lbljicb 
fijouH)  not  be  bone,  anb  are  guiine : 

1+  t©ben  tbc  finnc  ibbttij  rtjep  bauc 
finneb  agamft  it,  is  ftnoiben,  tljett  the 
Congreganon  (ball  offer  a  pong  bul* 
locftefojtbc  finite,  anb  bJingbi'm  befojc 
tljeXabernaclcof  tbe  Congregation. 

H  anbtl)e(£lbcrsoftbcCongrega 
non  fliail  lap  tbeir  Ijanbs  topon  tlje  bcab 
of  tlje  bullocftcbcfojc  tlje  %  o  is  © :  anb 
tbe  bullocftc  fljall  be  ftilieb  befoje  ttje 
IL^is®. 

i6  anb  tbc  0jic(t  tbat  is  anointeb, 
fijall  bung  of  tijc  bullocftes  bloob  to  tlje 
Xabcmacle  of  tbc  Congreganon. 

17  anbtbe0neftfbalibipbtsfinger 
infome  of  tbe  bloob,  anb  fp^inhle  >t  fe 
uen  tunes  befojc  tbe  2Ls©ib3b,  cucn  be- 
fojc tljcbaile. 

is  anb  Ije  fljal  put  fame  of  tlje  bloob 
bpon  tbe  Ijojnes  of  tlie  altar ,  Jbbiclj's 
befojc  tbc  Item©,  tbat"  uttljcHIabcr 
nacle  of  ttje  Congregation ,  anb  (ball 
poiDjcoutall  tbc  bloob  at  tbe  bottomc 
of  tbc  altar  of  tbc  burnt  offrtng.ibbicb 
is  at  tbcboojc  of  tbcXabcrnacleof  tlje 
Congregation. 

19  anb  be  (ball  taftc  all  bis  fat  from 
bint,  anb  burnc  it  bpon  tbe  altar. 

zo  anbbefltfllbovbttbtljcbullocftc 
asbebtbibitbtbebullocftcfojafinncof 
fring,  fo  (tjall  fjc  Do  ttnttj  tljis :  anbtbc 
0jic(t  (ball  maftc  an  atonement  foj 
njent,  anb  it  (l)all  bcfojgiuen  tbcm. 

ii  anb  be  (ball  cane  foojtb  tbc  bul 
locfte  lbitbout  tbc  cantpc,  anb  burne 
bim  as  be  bnrneb  tbe  ftrfi  bullocfte :  it  «s 
a  finnc  offenngfoj  tbc  Congreganon. 

21  Cn^benaruler  batb  finneb  anb 
bone  fomcibbat  tbJougl)  tgnoiancc  a^ 
gainft  anp  of  tlje  Commanbcmntts  of 
tlje1L©iK©bis<5ob,conccrningtbuigs 
n)bidj(boulbnotbeDonc,anDisgmltp: 

ii  £)j  if  bis  finnc  ibberetn  bee  batb 
finneb,come  to  bis  ftnolblebge:  be  fljail 
bjmgbis  offering,  afttbof  trjegoates, 
a  male  lbitbout  bicniKb. 

xat  anbbcctballlapbisbanDbpon 
tbebeab  of  tbc  goate,  anb  hill  it  in  tbe 
place  tbbcre  tbcp  bill  tbc  burnt  offe 
nng  befoje  rtjc  1L  o  is  © :  it  <*  a  finnc  of- 
fcing. 

m         15  anb 


\Htt>  dtth; 
powrinpOHt 
oftheap,et. 

•  Chap  s 


Sinne  of  ignorance.    Leuiticus.  Arafhvow. 


t  Btbr.  « 

fnte. 

|  Hebr.  pet 

fie  of  the 

l*»J. 


'Lcuii. ;, 
M. 


•Exod.  19. 
18. 


15  anbthc£?iett(bailtaBcoftbc 
bloob  of  the  finnc  offermguntb  bis  fitv 
ger,  anb  put  it  bpon  the  bo:n cs  of  the 
aitar  ofburotofmng,anD  (ballpotbjc 
out  bis  bloob  at  the  bottome  of  the  al- 
tar of  burnt  offering. 

i6  anbbclbailburttcallbisfatbp; 
ontbeaitat,astbcfatoftbefacrificcof 
peace  offerings  :  anb  the  p?icft  Qjau 
maUe  an  atonement  fo:  t>int ,  as  corner; 
nmgbts  fimie,  anb  it  fljail  befozgiuen 
bint. 

z7  C  anb  if  t  an?  one  of  the  t  com* 
mon  people  finnc  tb?ottgb  ignorance, 
ibbtle  be  boctb  fomcibbat  agatnftany 
oftbccommanbemcntsoftbe?U>i3ji>, 
concerning  things  ibbich  ought  notto 
brboncanbbcguiltie: 

1%  4D?  if  bts  finnc  ibbich  be  bath  fin* 
neb  come  to  bts  ftnotblebge ,  then  bee 
(baub?mgbis  offering,  a  tnbbe  of  the 
goats,a  fctnaie  nutbout  blcmifb,tb?  bis 
fume  tbbteb  be  bath  finneb. 

19  anb  be  (ball  lay  bis  banb  bpon 
tbebcab  of  tlje  finnc  offering, anb  Hap 
the  fin  offering  m  the  place  of  the  burnt 
offering. 

jo  anb  the  #?tctt  (ball  tafec  of  the 
bloob  thereof  lbitb  his  finger,  anb  put 
it  bpon  roc  Domes  of  the  altar  ofburnt 
offermg ,  anb  (ball  poib?e  out  all  the 
bloob  thereof  at  the  bottome  of  the 
aitar. 

ji  anb  *  he  (ball  take  atbay  all  the 
tat  thereof,  as  the  fat  is  tahen  atbay 
from  off  the  (atrtfiee  of  peace  offerings: 
anb  the  j&tctt  (hall  burnc  it  bpon  the 
aitar ,  to?  a "  frocct  fauour  bnto  the 
%  £>  i\  9,  anb  the  0«efi  (hall  matte  an 
atonement  fo?  htm,  anb  it  (bail  befoj; 
gtucnhim. 

3z  anb  if  he  bnngalambe  foza  finnc 
offcrm  g,  he  (hall  bang  it  a  female  ibitb/- 
out  blcnufb. 

33  anb  he  (hail  lap  his  hanb  bpon 
the  hcab  of  the  finite  offering,  anb  flap 
u  foM  finite  offcnng,m  the  piaccrbhcre 
the?  bill  the  burnt  offermg. 

3+  am>  the  pneft  (hall  tatte  of  the 
bloob  of  the  fume  offering  \bitb  his  fin 
gee,  anb  put « bpon  the  boznesoftbe 
aitar  of  burnt  offnttg.anb  (bail  polbzc 
out  ail  the  bloob  thereof  at  the  bottome 
oftheTtitar. 

35  anb  he  (ball  tatte  atbay  all  the  fat 
thereof,  as  the  fat  of  the  lambe  is  tahen 
amay  from  the  faenftec  of  the  peace  of 
fcrmgs:ant)tbe0nc(tfiiailburnttbrni 
bpon  rtje  aitar  ,  atcojbing  to  the  of 


fenngs  mabe  by  fire  bnto  the  %  &  a  s», 
anb  the  p?teft  (ball  mabe  an  atonement 
fo?  h^  w»ne  that  he  path  tommttteb, 
anbtt  (baibe  fo?guunptm. 

CHAP.    V. 

i  He  that  /inncth  in  concealing  his  knowledge, 
r  in  touching  an  vncleane  thing,  4  or  in 
nuking  an  oath.  6  His  trefpajTe  offering, 
oftheflocke,  7  of  foules,  11  orofflowre. 
14  The  treipaffe  offering  in  facriledge,  17 
andiniinnes  of  ignorance. 

fib  tfafonle  finnc,  an* 
heare  the  boyce  of  fioea^ 
ring ,  anb  (s  a  tbttnefle, 
whether  he  hath  feene  o? 
„miDtbenofit,tfheboenot 
bttcr  it,then  he  (han  beare  bts  iniquity. 
1  iD?  tf  a  foule  touch  any  bncleatte 
thing ,  Whether  it  be  a  tareafe  of  an  bn< 
clcatte  bead,  02  a  carcafe  of  bttcleanc  cat? 
tdl,o:  the  tareafe  of  bncleanc  treepmg 
things,  anb  tf it  be  htbben  from  bun,  be 
alfo  (ball  be  bnelcane,anb  guilty : 

3  &?tfbctoucbtbebitcleamte(Ieof 
man ,  tbhatfoeuer  bneleanneffc  it  be 
that  a  man  (baibe  befileb  rbithall,anb  it 
behib  from  htm,  tbbenbe  bnotbetb°t' 
it.thcnhcfljalbe  guilty. 

4  $?tfafoulefrocare,p?onouncing 
nntbbts  lips  to  bo  cutll,  o?tobo  goob, 
tbhatfoeuer  it  be  that  a  man  (hall  p?o- 
nouncetbttb  an  oatb,anb  it  be  bib  from 
him ,  ibhen  he  tmotbetb  °t »,  then  he 
(halbe  gttflrytnoneofthefe. 

5  ^nb  it  thalbe  ibhen  he  (halbe  guil- 
item  one  of  tbefe  things,  that  he  than 
tonfeffe  that  hec  barb  finneb  in  that 
thing. 

6  anb  he  (hail  b?ing  bis  trefpaffe 
offering  bnto  the  %  s>  w  s>  fo?  his  fmne 
tbbieb  he  hath  finneb,  a  female  from 
tbcflocUc ,  aiambc ,  02  a  lubbe  of  the 
goates,  fo?  a  finnc  offering  :  anb  the 
#?<eft  lbaimaKeanatonemcntfo?hmt 
concerning  his  finnc. 

7  3lnbiftbcebenotabletob2tnga 
lambe,  tt>en  he  fljall  b?mg  fo?htstrcf 
paffc  tbhtch  hec  hath  committcb ,  trbo 
turtle  boucs ,  0?  tlboyongpigcons  bn* 
totbe?LoB£>:  onefo?afinncoffring, 
anb  the  other  foz  a  buntt  offering. 

8  3lnb  he  (hall  bztttg  them  bnto  the 
p2icu\u>bo  (hailofferthatibhichisfo2 
the  finnc  offering  firfi,anb  Ibring  off 
htsheabfrom  his  necbe,  but  (hailuot 
butibe'tafuuber. 

9  anb  he  djail  fpmicble  of  the  bloob 
of  the  fmne  offermg  bpon  thefibc  of  the 
aitar. 


tHelr.hu 

hand  CAnnot 
reach  to  the 

ffiritncie 
ofaivrdc. 


•Chjp.i. 

'5- 


Sinne  ofignorance.    Chap.vj.        Diucrs  offerings. 


\\Or,erit. 


"Chap.J.J. 
•Chap.  4 


•Chap-^. 


2ltar ,  anb  the  reft  of  the  bloob  Ojail  be 
ttwng  oat  attfjc  bottontc  of  the  altar : 
it  is  a  fmne  offering. 

10  anohccfoallofferthefeeonbfo;! 
a  burnt  offering,  accozbingto  thc||ma- 
ner :  ant)  the  02ieft  foal  niafet  an  atone* 
nient  fo2  him  foj  his  finnctbhtch  he  hab 
utmcb,  anb  itfhallbcfojgiuenhttii. 

1 1  C  2But  if  hee  be  not  able  to  tying 
ttbo  turtle  bones,  02  fltoo  yong  pige- 
onSithcnhcthatunneb,  ftjailbnng  t02 
his  offctttg  ttje  tenth  part  of  an  ephah 
of  fine  floitozc  foj  a  finnc  offermg:  hee 
(hall  put  no  oyle  bpon  tt,  neither  fhall 
he  put  any  franumcenfe  thereon :  fo?  it 
tsafmncoffcrtng. 

\%  Xhcn  niall  Dee  b:ing  tt  to  the 
#neft ,  ant)  the  #2ictt  (hail  tabc  his 
hanofuliof  it,  *cu=n  amemo2iailthcrc* 
of,  anbburnc  it  onthcaltar,*ateo2btng 
to  the  offerings  mabc  by  fire  tonto  the 
JL,  o  &  © :  it  is  a  fmne  offering. 

u  anb  the  l&tett  fhall  nta&c  an  at- 
onement foj  himastonthing  htsfinne 
that  he  hart)  Cnneb  m  one  of  theft ,  anb 
itfhallbefcugtucn  Dim:  anbtheremnaw 
(hail  be  the  i&ztetts,  asameat  offering. 

14.  C3nb  the  1L£>K©fpalie  tonto 
£0ofes,  faying, 

15  3Jfafoulecomtnitatrefpaffe,anb 
finnc  though  tgnozance,  fti  the  holy 
things  of  the  fL  ©  is  ©  i  then  hee  (hall 
b2mgfo;hts  trefpaffe  tonto  the  Hois©, 
a  rammc  nnthout  blemifh ,  out  of  the 
floc&cs,tbrththycfhmatton  by  (hearts 
of  Qritcr,  after  the  fheftci  of  the  £>anc< 
ruane,  foj  a  trefpaffe  offering. 

i6  3(nD  hee  fljail  inahe  ainenbs  foz 
thchanncthathchathtooncinthchoiy 
thing,  anb  (hall  abbe  the  fift  part  there* 
to,  anb  giue  it  tonto  the^ncft:  anb  the 
0nett  (hall  mabc  an  atonement  rbz  him 
muh  the  ramme  of  the  trefpaffe  offe* 
ring,  anb  it  (hall  be  fbjgiucn  him. 

17  C3nbifa*foulcfmne,anbeonv 
mitany  of  thefe  things  tbluch  acerb? 
bibbcn  to  be  bone  by  the  tommaunbe 
ments  of  the  1L  £>  k  © ,  though  he  tbift 
ttnot,  yctishccguittie,  anb  (hail  bcare 
hismiquitte. 

is  auto  he  (hall  bztng  a  ramme  ttnth 
out  blcmiai  out  of  the  flotfte ,  ifotth  thy 
ettimation,fo2atrcfpaffeoffering  tonto 
tl)  e  i&2te(l :  anb  the  ^jieft  (hail  maft e  an 
atonement  fo?  him  concerning  hisig- 
no:ante  itohcrein  he  erreb ,  anb  itoift it 
not:  anb  tt  (hall  bcfo2ginenhtm. 

19  *5tis  atrefpaffc  offemg: hehath 
certainly  trefpaffeb  agatnft  the  H<djs©- 


|[  Ort  m  dea- 
ting 

\Heb.  put- 
ting rftbe 
hand. 

Num.  y.tf 


CHAP.    VI. 

The  trefpaffe  offering  for  finnts  done  wit- 
tingly. 8  The  Law  of  the  burnt  offering, 
14  and  of  the  meate  offering.  19  The  ol- 
fenngattheconfecrationofaPrieft.  14  The 
Law  of  the  fmne  offering. 

fin  the  %  ©  13  ©  fpahe 
tonto  $)ofes,  faying, 

i  3fafoulcfmne,anb 
commit  a  trefpaffe  agatnft 
the  %  ffi  k  ©,  anb  lie  tonto 
his  neighbour  in  that  Ibhtch  ltoas  belt-] 
uereb  him  tofecepe,  02  in  [Ifelloitofhip, 
02  m  a  thing  ratten  altoay  by  ttotolence, 
02  hath  becctueb  hts  neighbour : 

3  £>?  hatte  founb  that  itohteh  Voas 
lofr,anblteth  concerning  tt,  anb  *froea* 
reth  falfly :  in  any  of  ail  thefe  that  a 
man  both ,  fmntng  therein : 

4.  Xhcnit(hailbc,bccauft  hehath 
finncb,  anb  is  gutltie,  that  Dec  fhall  re* 
ftoje  that  tblrtch  he  too&c  biolently  a 
ltoay.ozthethutgibhich  he  hathbecett* 
fully  gotten,  ozthatibhtchibasbeuuc* 
ccb  him  to  Reepe,oz  the  loft  thing  tbhteh 
he  founb: 

5  £>;  ail  that  about  tbhich  fjec  hath 
Duome  falfly :  hee  (hall  euen  *reffo2eit 
m  the  p2tnapail ,  anb  (hall  abbe  the  fift 
part  moze  thereto,  anb  gtttett  tonto  him 
totbhomttappcrtcineth,  ||uithebayof 
his  trefpaffe  offering. 

6  anbhee  fhall  bzutg  his  trefpaffe  \gfn 
offermg  tonto  the  %® is©,  a  ramme 
tbithoutblemtfh  ontof  thc'flocacttHth 
thy  eflimation,  to?  a  trefpaffe  offering 
tonto  the  #jieu\ 

7  3nb  the  \&2ieft  fhall  mane  an  at- 
onement fo2tnm ,  befoje  the  !L©i3©: 
anb  tt  fhall  bee  fojgiuen  him,  foi  any 
thing  of  all  that  hehath  bone,  in  tret 
patting  therein. 

8  C3lnbthc1LiDiiJ©fpa&etouto 
09ofes,fayuig, 

9  Commano^aronanbhisfonnes, 
faying,  1E^tSisthelaU)  of  the  burnt  of* 
fring:  (3Jt  is  t!)c  bunit  offrtng,||becaufc 
of  the  burrang  topott  tl)c  ^Itar  all  night 
tonto  the  mo2niug,  anb  the  fire  of  the 
altar  (hall be burningm it.) 

10  ^nb  the £ticftfi)ai put  on hisliu- 
ncn  garment,*  his  hnnen  b2eccljes  (hai 
he  put  topon  hts  flefh ,  anbtabe  top  the 
afhes  tbhich  the  fire  hath  confumeb 
itoith  the  burnt  offerutg  on  the  3ltar, 
anb  he  (hall  put  them  befttoes  the^ltar. 

11  5lnb  he  (hai  put  off  hts  garments, 
anb  put  on  other  garments,  anb  carry 

IS  1 fOQ2tt)_ 


"Chap. 5. 
»5- 


\\Qr,uithc 
Jay  of  hts 
being  found 


kutrejfaffr. 
Cliap.J 


\\Or,for 


Burnt  offering. Leuiticus.         Meat  offering. 


"Chap.  11 
i. num. I  y, 


•Chi 


;p.l.?, 


*Eiod.  19 
J7- 


•Elod  i< 


foojtb  tlje  attjes  tbttbout  tJ)t  Campc, 
bnto  a  cicanc  place. 

ii  anb  tbe  fire  bpon  tbe  aitarfljail 
beburningtnit :  tt  (ball  not  be  put  out  ■, 
anb  tlje  ppirtt  (ball  burne  iboobontt 
euetp  morning ,  anb  lap  ttjc  burnt  of- 
fering in  ojber  bpon  it ,  anb  be  Q)all 
burne  tbercon  tl;e  fatte  of  tbt  peace 
offerings. 

ij  %\)t  fire  ujalleucr  be  burning  bp 
ontbcaitar :  ttlbailneuergoeout. 

14  c  *  anb  tbis  is  tbe  latb  of  tbe 
meat  offering :  tlje  fonnes  of  aaron 
(ball  offer  it  befoje  tbe  %  0  k  j©,  before 
tbcaitar. 

15  anbbefbailtaaeofttrjisljanb; 
full,  ofttjc  floibje  of  tbe  meat  offcrmg, 
ano  of  tbe  oplc  tberof,anb  all  tbc  frank 
intenfclb!)ih)  «  bpon  the  meat  offrmg, 
anb  (ball  burne  it  bpon  tbcaitacfoza 
ftucct  (auour,cucn  tlje*memo;iail  of  tt 
bntotbcHsDis©. 

i6  anb  tbe  rcniainbet  tbereof  (bail 
aaron  anb  ins  fonncs  eat :  rbtttj  bnlea? 
ucneb  btcab  (tjallitbe  eaten  tn  rtjc  bolp 
place :  m  tfjc  court  of  tlje  Xabcrnaelc  of 
tlje  Congregation  the?  (ballcattt. 

17  3ft  (bail  not  be  batten  tbitt)  lea* 
ucn  :  3  ftauc  giucn  it  bnto  tbem  fo? 
trjeir  portion  of  nip  offerings  mabebp 
fire :  it  is  mod  Ijolp ,  as  is  tr)c  fin  offenng, 
anb  as  tlje  trefpaffe  offering. 

18  ailfbcmalcsamougtbecbflbjcn 
of  ^aronfijallcatof  it :  3!t(balbca(ta^ 
tutc  fiw  eucr  in  pour  generanons  con* 
termng  tbe  offenngs of  tbe Hob© 
maoe  bp  fire :  *  eucrp  one  tbat  toucljctb 
tbem  (balbc  bolp. 

19  CanbtbcfLsDisjDfpaaebnto 
i£totes,faping, 

io  xijis  is  tr)e  offering  of  aaron, 
anb  of  bis  fonncsibhirb  tbep  (ball  offer 
bnto  tlje  %  o  is  s>,  in  tbe  bap  lbtoen  be 
is  anopntcb :  Xbc  tend)  part  of  an  *€- 
pbal)  of  fine  floityc  foj  a  meat  offering 
perpemau ,  Ijaife  of  it  m  tbe  morning, 
ano  baifc  tbereof  at  nigbt. 

r\  3m  a  panne  it  fijaibeniabe ibitb 
oplcano  tbljcn  tttsbaBcn,tbou(balt 
bung  it  m :  anb  tbe  baben  puces  of  tlje 
meat  offering  (bait  tbou  offer  fo?  a 
fiucet  fauour  bnto  tbe  1L  ©  k  jp. 

ix  anb  tbe  pKctt  ofbis  fonnestbat 
is  anopntcb  m  bis  ftcab,(bai  offer  u:  JJt 
is  a  (latutc  fo:  eucr  bnto  tlje  %  o  m  jd, 
it  (balbc  lbboilp  burnt. 

zj  JFo:  eucrp  meat  offcrinot  fo?.  tbe 
UM'.cft  (bai  be  lbboilp  burnt :  it  (ball  not 
be  eaten, 


24  c  ^nb  tbe  |L£)K©fpabc bnto 
£j3otes,fapmg, 

15  5>pcabc  bnto  aaron  anb  to  rjts 
fonncs,  taping ,  %i)xs  is  tbe  laib  of  tbe 
Rune  offering:  3Jn  tbe  place  ibberc  tbe 
burnt  offering  is  billcD,(bali  trjefinne 
offering  be billcb before  il)t%o&&: 
tt>s  moll  bolp. 

16  ictje  f^?<ttt  tbat  offered)  tt  fo? 
finne,(ball  eat  tt^n  tbebolp  place  ujal 
tt  be  eaten,  in  tbe  court  of  tbeXabet; 
naclc  of  tbe  Congregation. 

27  leljatfocuer  (ball  touetj  tbe  fleuj 
tber  eof.ujalbc  bolp :  anb  ibben  tbete  is 
fpnncfclcb  of  tbe  bloob  tbereof  bpon 
anp  garment,  tbou  (bait  tbaflj  that 
tbbctcon  it  ibas  fpztntbleb ,  in  tbe  bolp 
plate. 

is  25uttbecartbenbefrcllibbercin 
tttsfoObcn,  "(ball  bcbzolten :  anb  iftt 
be  fobben  ui  a  b;afcn  pot,tt  fljail  be  botfe 
ftottycb ,  anb  rinfeb  tn  tbatcr. 

29  ailtbcmalesamongtbe^zicfts 
(ball  catc  tbereof:  it  is  mod  bolp. 

jo  *am>  no  finne  offenug  ibbercof 
anp  of  tbe  bloob  is  bzougbt  into  tbe 
Xabcrnaelc  of  tbe  Congregation  to  rt< 
conctlewnhaiiut  tbe  bolp  place,  (tjail  be 
eaten:  it  fljall  be  burnt  in  the  fir e. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  The  law  of  the  trefpaffe  offering,  m  andol 
the  Peace  offerings,  u  whether  it  be  for  a 
Thankcfgiuiog,  16  or  a  Vow,  or  a  Free- 
will-offering. 11  The  fat,  x6  and  the 
blood  are  forbidden.  18  The  Priefts  por- 
tion in  the  Peace  offerings. 

"  3Jaevbu"e  tljis  >s  tbe  latbe 
of  trjc  trefpaffe  offering:  it 
tsmoltl^olp. 
x  3ntrje  place  ibberc 
_  tbepbtl  tbe  burnt  offnng, 
(ball  tbcp  htl  tbe  trefpaffe  offering  -,  anb 
tbe  bloob  thereof  (ball  bee  fpsncble 
rounb  about  bpon  tlie  attar. 

j  anb  Ije  fl)all  offer  of  it ,  all  tbe  fat 
tbereof,-  tbcrumpr,anbtbcfatfhatto; 
ucrctbtljeinibarbs, 

4  anbtbetibobibneps,anbtbtfat 
tbat  is  ontb«n,lbbtclj  isbptbeflanbcs, 
anb  tlic  caule  that  is  abouc  tbe  luicr, 
n>itbtbcBibneps,uO)aiibetabeaTbap. 

5  anb  tbe  fimit  (ball  burne  tbcm 
bpon  tbe  aitar ,  fo?  an  offering  mabe 
bp  fire  bnto  tlje  %  o  up :  it  is  a  tref- 
paffe offcrmg. 

6  eucrp  male  among  tlje  t&ncftes 
(bail  cate  tljcreof:  it  (ball  be  eaten  tn  tbe 
bolp  place  :tt  is  mod  bol?. 

7  as 


•  Chip.  1 1 


•Hcbr.13 
■  1. 


Theeatingof  Chap.vij.     blood  is  forbidden. 


Ot,CHthc 

fiilpUtc, 
or,  fice. 


7  %s  the  Gnnc  offering  is,  fo  .s  the 
trefpaffe  offering:  there  is  onciavbfo? 
them :  the  0?icft  that  maHCtb  atont- 
ment  therewith,  (bail  bauc  it- 

s  3lnb  the  jD?tcft  that  offttctl)  any 
mans  burnt  offering,  turn  the  #?tcft 
(ball  bauc  to  btmfclfc  the  f  tnnnc  oftijc 
burnt  offenng  ibbicb  be  bath  offcrcb. 

9  2nb  all  the  mcatc  offenngtbat  is 
battcnintheoucn,anbautbatisb?cflcb 
in  the  frying  panne,  anb  !|  in  the  panne, 
(ball  be  the  pwefts  that  off er  ctrj  it. 

to  3nb  cucry  mcatc  offenng  ming 
leb  ibith  oyie,  anb  b?ic,  fl)all  all  the 
Cannes  of  2laron  fjauc,  one  as  much  as 
another. 

u  anb  this  «s  the  laVb  of  the  fatrifice 
of  pcate  offerings,  Uibicb  he  (ball  offer 
bntotbefL^iso. 

ii  3If  Dee  offer  it  fo?  a  thanfeef' 
gluing,  then  be  (ball  offer  ibitb  tlje  fa* 
tnfitc  of  tbauHcfgiuing  bnleautntb 
tabes  mmglcblbitb  oyle,  anb  bnleauc* 
neb  wafers  anotntcb  \bitb  otic,  anb 
tattesminglcb  lbith  oyle  of  fincflolb?c 
fricb. 

u  25eribestnctafees,  net  fbail  offer 
fo?  bis  off  ring  leauencb  b?eab,  lbitb  the 
fatrifice  of  tbanBefgmlng  of  bis  peace 
offerings. 

14  2lnb  of  it  be  (ball  offer  one  out  of 
the  whole  oblation,  fo: an  beaueoffe- 
ring  bnto  the  %  ©  is  jd,  anb  it  (ball  bee 
the  tfuiefts  that  vp?tuUictb  the  bloobof 
the  procc  offerings. 

15  anbtheflefb  of  the  faenfice  of  his 
peace  offerings  fo?  tbanncfguimg.fbaii 
be  eaten  the  fame  bap  that  it  is  offcrcb : 
he  (ball  not  leauc  any  of  it  bntffl  the 
mowing. 

16  zsut  if  the  fatrifice  of  bis  offering 
be  a  bow,  0?  a  boluntary  offenng,  it 
(bailbe  eaten  tbefamebay  that  bcoffe 
retb  bis  faenfice :  anb  on  tbe  mo?toWe 
alfo  the  remainber  of  it  (ball  be  eaten. 

17  25ut  tl)c  remainber  of  tbe  flefb  of 
tfjc  fatrifice  on  the  tbtrb  bap  (ball  bec 
burnt  With  fire. 

is  anbifanyoftf)cflclboftbcfaeri; 
fice  of  bis  peace  offerings  be  eaten  at  all 
ontf)etbir&bay,it(baunotbcaceeptcb, 
nctfbrcfbalitbcnnputcbbntobtmtbat 
ofTcrctrjit:  it  (ball  bean  abomination, 
anb  tbe  foitlc  tbat  catctb  of  it,  (bail 
bcarebismiciuitie. 

19  3tnb  tbe  flcfl)  that  toucbetl)  any 
bnricanetbmg,fbal  not  be  eaten:  it  fbal 
be  burnt  With  fire,  anb  as  fo?tbeflc(b, 
allthatbecleancfballcatctbcrcof* 


10  26ut  the  foulc  that  eatcth  of  the 
fled)  of  the  fatrifice  of  peace  offerings, 
that  pertame  bnto  the  %  <d  is  © , 
*baumg  his  bncleanncfTc  bpon  him, 
cucntbatfoulcfbaii  be  cm  off  from  his 
people. 

xi  09o?couer ,  the  foulc  that  man 
touch  any  bncleanc  thing ,  as  the  torn 
clcanncfreofman,o2  any  bucleatte'beatt, 
o?any  abominable  bncleanc  thing,  anb 
catcof  the  flcnj  of  the  faenfice  of  peace 
offerings  Which  pertame  bnto  the 
|ta>iHB,  cucuthat  foulc  (bail  be  cut 
off  from  hispcople. 

iz  C^no  the  %  ©  13  ©  fpaftc  bnto 
£0ofcs,faying, 

1 3  £>pcake  bnto  tbe  enmwen  of  31 
ran,  faymg,*  J3en)aiicatnomanerfat 
of  otc,o?  of  fbeepc,  0;  of  goat. 

i+  3fnb  the  fat  of  the  t  beaft  that 
bieth  ofitfclfc,anu  the  fat  of  that  which 
lsto?ncWitbbcafts,maybcbfebiuany 
other  bfc  :butyee  (ball  in  no  ibifc  cate 
of  it. 

15  5r02  rbljofoeucr  cateth  the  fat  of 
tbebcaft,ofwbicbmmotTcranoffrmg 
mabc  by  fire  bnto  the  fLoisja,  cunt 
the  foulc  that  cateth  "  >  (hall  be  tut  off 
from  hispcople. 

i6  *£0o?eoueryc(balleatnomancr 
of  bloob ,  whether  it  bec  of  foule  0?  of 
beaft  many  of  your  bWclluigs. 

17  isbatfocucr  foulc  it  be  that  cfc 
tetb  any  maner  of  bloob ,  men  that 
foulc  (balbc  cut  off  from  Ins  people. 

is  C2tuo tlje  %Qtiz>  fpaac  bnto 
C0ofcs,faymg, 

29  £>pcaltc  bnto  thcchilbjcn  of 3JD 
rati,  faying,  i^cc  that  offcrcth  the  facet- 
fice  of  his  peace  offerings  bnto  the 
%  o  is  &,  (hall  b;lng h's  oblation  bnto 
th c  %  ©  13  p,of  the  faenfice  ofbts  peace- 
offerings. 

30  $ts  oibne  hanbs  fljail  biing  the 
offerings  of  the  %  o  is  ©  mabc  by  fire, 
tf)cfaturitbtbeb,2ctt,tt  (ball  hccbnng, 
thafthc  b?cft  may  be  lbauco  fo?  a  ibaue 
offering  bcfo?ethe  IL015©. 

31  ^nbthc  0?ieft  fliailburncthefat 
bpon  the  3lltar:  but  the  b?cft(baibc:&v 
ronsanbhvsfonncs. 

31  3nb  the  right  (boulber  ftiall  ye 
gtue  bnto  the  ^?ieft  foz  an  hcauc  of- 
fenng of  the  faenfiecs  of  your  peace  of 
fenngs. 

33  ftecamongthefonnesofaaron 
that  offcreth  tlje  bloobof  the  peace  of 
fcrings,anbthcfat,n)ali  Ijauc  the  right 
(boulDcrfo?bisparr. 
1&  3        34-  JfQJ 


Chap.  I;, 


"Chsp.^. 
•7- 

t  Hub  Mr- 


*  Gene. 0.4 
chap.;.  17. 
and  17. 1^, 


•Exod.  jy 
14. 


The  confccration      Leuiticus. 


of  Aaron  ^and 


«Exod.j8, 

»4- 
•Exod.  30. 

>4- 


•Eiod.jJ 
4- 


34  jfojtbcrbauebjeftanbthcheanc 
(houioct  haue  3J  taben  of  the  chtlbjen 
of  3Jfracl,fromoffthc  facrifices  of  their 
peace  offerings ,  anb  haue  giuen  them 
bnto  aaron  the  pneft,  anb  bnto  his 
fonnes ,  by  a  ftatutc  fo?  cuer,  from  a* 
mong  thechtltyen  of3Jftael* 

35  CXbtS  is  the  portion  of  ti)tmOitl> 

ting  of  aaron,  anb of the  anointing  of 
his  fonnes,  out  of  the  offerings  ofthe 
%  ©  is  ts  maoe  by  6r  c,  in  the  bay  ibhen 
bepjefentebtbem,  tominifter  bnto  the 
IL.  ©  k  jstn  tbepnefts  office: 

36  i©btebtbe!L©i3E>commanbcb 
to  be  giucn  them  of  the  cbilbjen  of  3!f* 
rael,  in  the  bay  that  bee  anotnteb  them, 
by  a  ftatutc  fo?  cucr,  throughout  their 
generations. 

37  Hbisis  the  lalb  of  the  burnt  off v- 
ring,  of  tbemcatc  offering,  anb  of  the 
finne  offering,  anb  of  the  trrfpafle  ortc* 
rUig,  anb  of  the  confecrations,  anb  of 
the  facrificc  of  the  peace  offerings : 

38  nahieh  the  %  ©  is©  conmianbeb 
£0ofc£  in  mount  £>inat,  intbebay  that 
he  comtnanbeb  the  cbilbjen  of  3Jfrael  to 
offer  their  oblations  bnto  the  Hois©, 
in  the  Mlbcrncffc  of  &inai. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

Mofes  confecratcth  Aaron  and  his  fonnes. 
14  Theirfinneoffering.  iS  Theirburntof 
fring.  2.2.  The  ram  of  confecrations.  31  The 
place  and  time  of  their  confccration. 

/13b  then©  is  ©fpafeebn? 
to  fi^ofes,  faying, 

r  *£abc  aaron  anb 
his  fonnes  ibitb  iJlra,  anb 
_  tlje  garments,  anb  *  the 
anointing  oyle,  anb  a  bullocbe  fo?  the 
Onne  offering ,  anb  tlbo  ranunes,  anb 
a  baf  Bet  of  bnltauencb  b?cab. 

3  anb  gather  thou  all  the  Congre* 
gation  together  bnto  the  boo?c  of  the 
Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Congregation. 

4  anbfi0ofcSbibastbc1L©isjD 
commanbeo  him,  fj  the  aflcmbly  lbas 
gathcreb  together  bnto  the  boo?c  of 
the  Xabctnatle  of  the  Congregation. 

5  anb  fi^ofes  faibc  bnto  the  Con- 
gregation, "Xbis  is  the  thing  mijict) 
the  %  0  is  id  tommanbeb  to  bebonc. 

6  anb  fi^ofes  b?ougbt  aaron  anb 
his  fonnes,  anb  ttafbcb  them  ibltb  ib& 
ter. 

7  anbbeput  bpon  him  the  coatc, 
ano  girbeb  htrntbttt)  thcgirblc,anb  do- 
theb  him  ibitb  the  robe,  anb  put  the  €- 


phob  bpon  hmi,anb  he  girbeb  him  Ibttb 
the  curious  gtrble  of  the  Cptjob,  anb 
bounb  it  bnto  htm  therewith. 

8  anb  hce  puttbc  b?eftpiatc  bpon 
him :  aifo  be  *  put  in  the  b?ett  plate  the 
Silrim  anbtbeXbumnunt. 

9  anb  he  put  the  miter  bpon  his 
heab;alfo  bpon  the  outer,  cuen  bpon 
his  forefront  bib  hee  put  the  golben 
plate,  the  holy  troibnc,  as  rbeH,  ©  is  s> 
•comtnanbeb  fi^ofes. 

10  anb  fiJ9ofcs  toofee  the  anointing 
ofle,  anb  anointeb  the  tabernacle  anb 
an  that  ibas  therein ,  anb  fanctificb 
them. 

11  anb  be  fp?fnbleb  thereof  bponthe 
altar  feuen  times,  anb  anointeb  tbeafc 
tar  anb  all  his  beftcls,  both  the  lauer 
anbhisfoot,  tofanctific  them. 

ii  anbbc*polb?cboftbeanotnting 
oile  bpon  Karons  heab,  anb  anointeb 
btm,tofancfifiebim, 

13  anb  ££ofcs  brought  Karons 
fonnes,  anbputtoatsbpon  them,  anb 
girbeb  them  ibitb  gtrblcs,anbtput  botv 
nets  bpon  them,  asthc  H©jspcom« 
manbeb^ofes. 

14  *anbbeb?ougbttbcbullocbcfo? 
the  Onne  offering,  anb  aaron  anb  bts 
fonnes  laib  then;  hanbs  bpon  the  heao 
of  the  bullocbe  fo?  the  fmnc  offering. 

1$  ^nb  he  fleib  it,  anb  £0ofestoobc 
tbebloob,anbputitbpontbebo?ncsof 
the  altar  rounb  about  tbith  his  finger, 
anb  punfieb  the  altar,  anb  polbjcb  the 
bloob  at  the  bottome  of  the  altar,  anb 
fanenfieb  it,  tomabc  reconciliation  bp* 
on  it. 

is  anbhctoobeailtbcfattbatlbas 
bpon  the  uitbarbs,  anb  the  ball  aboue 
the  liucr,  anb  the  tlbo  bibncts,anb  their 
fat,  anb^9ofesbttrneb  it  bpon  tbcai 
tar. 

17  25ut  the  bullocfee,  anb  his  hibe, 
hisflcCb  anblnsboung,  he  burnt  tbith 
fire  lbrtbout  the  campe,as  the  %  ©  is  © 
*commanbeb£0ofes. 

18  canbbcb?ougbttbcrammefo? 
the  burnt  offnng :  anb  aaron  anb  his 
fonnes  laio  their  hanbs  bpon  the  heab 
oftheramme. 

19  anbbtbillcbit,anb©ofcsfp?inb> 
lebthebloob  bpon  the  aitar  rounba* 
bout. 

20  anb  he  cut  the  rammc  into  pieces, 
anbC^ofcsburnttbcbcab,  anbthepic* 
cts,  anb  the  fat. 

21  anbheibaftjebthcmibarbsanb 
the  legges  m  ibatcr  ,anb  fi}3ofcs  burnt 

the 


«Eiod.j8. 


•Eiod.18. 


•Ecclut. 
4j.is.p&I. 


\Hcb.bcmd 


"Exoiij. 
1. 


'Eiod.:?. 
■4- 


o 


fhisfc 


onnes. 


Ch 


ap.ix. 


A 


ffr 


aronsortnnp-s. 


'Exod.  39. 
J'- 


*Exod.  jo. 
14.&C. 


"Exod.  19 

2(5. 


Exod  ;0 


tl)cU)i)olc  ramme  Upon  thcaitar  :3ft 
wa.abutm  famficcfo?  a  frocct  fauour, 
and  an  offering  niabc  bp  fire  into  the 
%  ©  a  j?,  as  the  %  0  is  ©  commanbeb 
spofcs. 

ii  C  2lnb*  Ijee  bought  the  other 
ramme ,  the  ranime  of  tonfecration: 
anb  aaron  anb  his  fonnes  lapb  tfjrtc 
hanbs  npon  the  hcab  ofttjc  ramme. 

ij  anbhcflctt)it,anb££)ofestooRe 
of  the  Wood  of  it,anb  pnt it bpon  the tip 
of  Karons  right  care  ,ano  bpon  the 
thumbcofhtsnghthanb,anbbponthc 
great  toe  of  his  right  foot. 

14.  2nbheb?ought3laronsfonnes, 
ant)  quotes  put  of  tl)c  bloob  bpon  the 
tippc  of  tljelr  right  care,  anD  bpon  the 
thumbs  of  their  right  hanbs.anb  bpon 
the  great  toes  of  their  tight  fcetc:ano 
x^ofes  fp?tnRlcD  the  bloob  bpon  thc3l  V 
tar  romiD  about, 

15  3tnb  hec  toofte  the  fat ,  anD  the 
rnmpe ,  anb  all  the  fat  that  lbasbpon 
the  tnibarbs ,  anD the  cauleaboue  the  \v 
ucr,anDthc  trbo  RiDncps  anD  their  fat, 
anD  the  right  fhoulDcr. 

16  ^nDoutoftljebafttetofbnlcauc' 
ncbb?caD,thatwasbcfo?cfhc  ILois©, 
\)c  tooRe  one  bnlcauencb  cane ,  anba 
cane  of  opleb  b?cab,  anb  one  lbafcr,  anb 
put  them  on  ttjc  fat,  anb  bpon  the  right 
fhoulber. 

17  3lnb  hee  put  all  *  bpon  Karons 
hanb|,anb  bpo  n  l)is  fonnes  hanbs,anD 
VbaucD  them  fo?  a  ibaue  offering  before 
thc!L©m©. 

is  3nbfiPofestooRcthcm  from  off 
their  hanbs,  anb  burnt  them  ontlje^l-- 
tar.bpon  the  burnt  offertng:lLhep  were 
confccrations  fo?  a  frocct  fauour :  3lt 
is  an  offering  niabe  bp  fire  bnto  the 

19  3lno  i$ofes  toofte  the b?ett,  anb 
Vbaucb  ttfojattiauc offering  before  ttjc 
%  0  is  © :  For  of  the  rammc  of  confecra- 
tion  it  lbas  £0ofcs  *par  t,as  the  ILudisjd 
commanbcDajofcs. 

jo  anD  Q9ofcs  toofte  of  the  anopn* 
ting  oplc,  anD  of  the  bloob  ibhichtbas 
bpon  the  3lltar,  anb  fp?incftlcbitbpon 
3laron,andbponhisgarnients,anbbp* 
on  his  fonnes,  anb  bpon  his  funnes 
garments  lbith  him:  anb  fanetineb  %& 
ron,  jnd  his  gatments,anb  hisfonncs, 
anb  his  fonnes  garments  Ibtth  hint 

31  ft  3mb  £FJofcs  faib  bnto  2aron 
anb  to  his  fonnes ,  i5otlc  the  flefh  at  the 
boo2eofthcXabtrnatleofthe£ongrc< 
gation:  anb  there*  eat  it  unth  the b?cab 


that  is  in  the  bafftct  of  confccrations, 
as  31  conunanoeD,  fapmg,  aatonanb 
hisfonncs  fljall  eat  it 

ji  anD  that  which  rcmameth  of  the 
flcaj,  anb  of  the  b?eab ,  Ojall  pec  burne 
lbith  fire, 

»  3lnD  ve  than  not  goe  out  of  the 
Doo?e  of  the  Xabcrnatlc  of  the  Congrc^ 
gation  in  feuen  bapes,  bntill  the  bapes 
of  pour  confccration  be  at  an  cub :  fo? 
*feucn  bares  (hall  he  confeeratcpou. 

34-  as  he  hath  bone  thts  bap ,  fo  the 
%  0  k  ©  hath  tommanbeb  to  boe ,  to 
mane  an  atonement  fcupon. 

35  Xhercfo?c  fhau  pe  abtbe  at  the 
Doo?c  of  the  Xabcrnatlc  of  the  Conger 
gationDap  anb  night ,  feuen  Dapes,  anb 
ncepc  the  charge  of  the  flois©,  that 
pe  w  not :  fo*  fo  3  am  commanbeb. 

36  «&>o  ^aron  anb  his  fonnes  bib  all 
things  lbhich  tljeHfiDis©  comman? 
bebbpthehanbof^ofes. 

CHAP     IX. 

1  The  firft  offerings  of  Aaron, for  himfelfe  and 
the  people.  8  The  finne-offering,  ii  and 
the  burnt  offering  for  himfelfe.  15  The  of- 
ferings for  the  people.  13  Mofes  and  Aa- 
ron bleffe  the  people.  14  Fire  commeth 
from  the  Lord,vpon  the  Altar. 

fix*  tt  came  to  patTe  on  the 
eight  bap,  that  £0ofcscal^ 
leb^ar  on  anb  his  fonnes, 
anbtheelbersof3Jfracl. 
1  3nb  hee  faibc  bnto 
^aron ,  "Xattc  thee  a  pong  caifc  fo?  a 
Gnne  offering ,  anb  a  ramme  fo?  a  burnt 
offering ,  ibithout  blcmifl; ,  anb  offer 
them  before  the  ILfiP  is©. 

3  3lnb  bnto  tlie  eljilbien  of  3Jfracl 
thou  fhait  fpcaRe,fapmg,XaRc  pc  a  rid 
of  the  goats,  fo?  afmne  offering,  anb  a 
calfcanb  aiambe,  botl)  of  the  firft  pcere 
Ibithout  blcnufl),fo?  a  burnt  offering. 
+  3lfoabullocRcanbarammc,fo; 
peace  offcrmgs,  to  faenfice  befojc  the 
ft©  k©,  anD  a  meat  offnng  mtngteD 
lbith  oplc :  fo?  to  bap  the  fLois© 
rbiliappearcbntopou. 

5  C  2nb  tljep  b?ought  that  lbhich 
£p)ofcs  commanbeb ,  befoze  theXaber- 
naclc  of  the  Congregation:  anb  all  the 
Congrcgationb?elb  necrc  anbfloob  be^ 
fo?ethc^€)is©. 

6  ^no  £F)ofes  fatD ,  %W  is  the 
thing  winch  the  %$>  is  ©commanbeb 
that  pe  fhoulD  Doe:  anb  the  glotp  of  the 
%  0  is  ©  fl)ail  appeare  bnto  pou. 

7  ^nD 


•Exod.  15. 
55- 


"Exod. 29. 


Aarons  offerings.      Leuiticus.      His  formes  burnt. 


J  0rt9rd$~ 

rtdnte. 

his  hand  ent 
cfit. 

•Exod.2p. 
}8. 


7  3lnb  t!3ofcs  faiD  Unto  2laron, 
C5oe  bnto  the  2Utar ,  anb  offer  tbp  Rnne 
offcrtng,  anb  tt>p  burnt  offering,  ant) 
inaftc  an  atonement  foz  tin;  feife ,  ano 
fo?  the  peopIe:anboffcrtbcoffermgof 
the  people,  anb  malic  an  atonement  fo? 
them,  as  the fL  ©  kid  tommanbeb. 

8  C  2iaron  therefore  went  bnto 
tbe3Utar,anb  tleib  the  talfc  of  the  finite 
offcrtng,Tt)I)irhw3sfo?hunrelfe. 

9  3ltib  the  fonncs  of 3aron  brought 
the  bloob  bnto  bun ,  anb  bebtptbts  fin* 
gee  in  the  bloob ,  anb  put  it  bpon  the 
homes  ofthc3tltar,anbpott)«b  out  the 
bloob  at  the  bottome  of  the  3ltar. 

io  But  the  fat  anb  the  moneys ,  anb 
thctauleaboue  the  liuer  of  the  untie  of; 
fcrmgbe  burnt  Upon  the  3atar,astbc 
%  ©  is  ©  tommanbeb  Q9ofes. 

ii  3nbtbcflcfbattbtbebtbcbebuntt 
ttiitb  fire,HHthouttheeampe. 

ii  3mbbec  Oeib  theburntoffering, 
anb  Karons  fonncs  pafcntcb  bnto  bun 
fljcbloob,  ibhtch  be  fpanct»lcbroitttba; 
botitbpotithcSUtat. 

13  3lnb  they  p:efeuteb  the  burnt  of; 
fermg  bnto  htm ,  Uutb  the  pieces  there; 
of,  anb  the  hcab :  anb  he  burnt  them  bp; 
ontbc3lltar. 

14  ^tnbhebio  liiafh  rbcinibarbs, 
anb  the  legs ,  anb  burnt  them  upon  the 
burnt  offering  on  the  3Utar. 

15  C2hibhcb.:ougbtthcpcoplesof 
fcrbtg ,  anb  toolic  the  goat,  lbhith  ibas 
theftnne  offering  fo;  the  people ,  anb 
acTb  it,  anb  offcrcb  it  fo;  finne,  as  the 
firfl. 

16  31nbheb?oughttheburntoffrtng, 
anb  offcrcb  it  acco2bmgtothc|i matter. 

17  2Mb  bebiougbtthe  meat  offrtng, 
anb  t  tooftc an  hanbfull  thereof,  anb 
burnt  it  bpon  the  3ltat,  *  befibe  tlje 
burnt  facnfice  of  the  moating. 

is  $?e  acib  alfo  tbcbtiliocltcanbtbe 
rammc,fo2  a  facnfice  of  peace  offering's, 
ibhtch  was  fo?  the  people:  3lttb Parous 
fonncs  picfeutco  bttto  htm  the  bloob, 
(ibhtch  hce  fpanctticb  bpon  the  3Utat 
rounb  about) 

19  Swathe  fat  ofthcbiiUocltemibof 
tl)cratnmc,  tlje  rumpe,  ano  that  ibhtch 
coucreth  ^  inwards ,  anb  tlje  lubncys, 
anothecaulcai'ouc  thclutcr, 

io  ^nD  tljcy  put  the  fat  bpon  the 
b;cfls,ft  Ijc  burnt  tf)c  fat  bpon  the  altar: 

ai  3nb  the  U:ealts  anb  the  right 
flioulber,  2iaronU)aufbfo;an>aucof 
feitng  before  tlje  %  sdis  © ,  as  i|?ofcs 
tommanbeb. 


iz  Stub  aaron  lift  top  bis  banb  to; 
ibarbs  tlje  people ,  anb  bleffeb  them, 
anb  came  bottmc  from  offering  of  the 
fmnt  offering,  anb  theburntoffering, 
anb  peace  offerings. 

z j  2mb  $)ofes  anb  2faron  Vbent  ixv 
to  the  Xabcrnaele  of  tlje  Congrcga; 
tton,  anb  came  out,  anbblcffeb  tDepco^ 
pie:  anb  the  glojy  of  the  Hm©  ap; 
pcarcb  bttto  all  the  people. 

14  3tnb  *  tljerc  tame  a  fire  out  from 
befibe  the  %  ©  is©,  anb  confumcb  top? 
on  the  3Cltac  the  burnt  offering ,  anb 
the  fat:  ibljtcb  tbben  all  the  people  faib, 
thev  fbouteb^nb  fell  on  their  fates. 

CHAP.  X. 

1  Nadab  and  Abihu,for  offering  of  ftrange  fire, 
are  burnt  by  fire.  6  Aaron  and  his  fonnes 
are  forbidden  to  mourne  for  them.  8  The 
Priefts  are  forbidden  wine  when  they  are  to 
goeintotheTabernade.  ii  Thelawofea- 
ting  the  holy  things.  16  Aarons  excufe  for 
tranfgtefsingthereof. 

^e$WH  ®b  *  J!3abab  anb  Qfbi- 
'"  bu,tbc  fonnes  of  3taron, 
tooftc  either  of  them  his 
tenfer,  anb  put  fire  tljerc 
in,  anb  put  ineenfetljcre; 

on, anb  offcrcb  ftrange  fire  before  tlje 

IL<s>ia©,  ibhtch  bee  tommaunbeb 

tljcmnot, 
z  3uibthcrclbcntoiitfircfromtbc 

%  ®  13  ©  anb  beuoureo  them,  anb  they 

bicb  befotf  the  ILo  be*. 

3  %\)tn  £)9ofcs  faib  tmto  Staron, 
%tys  is  u  that  the  %  ©  a  ©  fpalie,  fay  ■■ 
mg  ,3J  null  bee  fanctifieb  m  them  that 
tome  nigh  me  >  anb  befoic  all  tbcpcoplc 
35  lDtll  be  glo^ifieb :  ^inb  ^aron  ijtlb 
his  peace. 

4  3ttb  £0ofes  cailcb  £0tfljael  anb 
«l3aphatithcfonncsofll3?tcl,thebtt 
clcof3larott,anbfatbbntotbent,(£omc 
ttccrc,  carp  pour  b2ctb2en  from  before 
tbcS>anctiiarp,otttofthetampe. 

5  5)0  thev  lbent  necrc ,  anb  caricb 
them  m  their  coats  out  of  the  campe,as 
SiPofcsbabfatb. 

6  3lnb  i©ofcs  faib  into  ^ar ott,anb 
bnto  ciea^ar  anb  bnto  lltbattiar  his 
fonnes,  Uncouer  not  pout  bcaos,nei; 
tbcrrenb  vottr  clothes,  left  Fouble,anb 
left  lb.'ath  come  bpon  all  the  people : 
23tttlet  your  bzetljjen.fbeibbolehotu'e 
of  "Jlfracl.beUiatlc  the  burning  Ibijicb 
tlje  ILoup  bath  bmbleb. 

7  3lnb  yt  fbal  not  goc  out  from  tlje 

boo:c 


i.king.18. 
38.  2.chio. 
7.1. 2. mace. 
10.11. 


•Num.j.4 
md  26.61. 

t-chion.:4 


tWinc  forbidden.       Chap.x],       Beafts  cleane,&c. 


•Eiorf.  19. 
*4- 


Doore  of  the  Xaberuade  of  the  Cotv 
grcganon ,  left  you  otc :  fortheanouv 
nngoyle  of  the  ?Ls>k©  is  Upon  you: 
anb  rtjrp  did  atcorbing  to  ttje  iborb  of 
i$ofcs. 

8  C  3nb  tfjc  H  ©  is  id  fpaac  into 
3ar  on,  faying, 

9  Doe  not  bnnfce  ibine  no?  fttong 
DiinUc,  thou, no;  thy  tonnes  ttnth  thee, 
tohenycgocinto  the  tabernacle  of  the 
Congreganon,  left  yee  Die:  it  (hail  bee  a 
ftamtcfor  cucr,  throughout  your  gent- 
canons : 

10  3nD  that  ye  niay  put  Differ  cnte  be 
tibcrncholyanbbnboly,anobcnbccnc 
bnticancanDelcanc: 

11  3nD  that  ye  may  teach  the  cbrtbjcu 
of  5frael  all  the  ftatutcs  tbhich  the 
ILsdis©  hath  fpoftcn  bnto  them  by 
thehanbof£0ofcs. 

ii  C3mbi$ofcs  (pane  bnto  3aron, 
anb  bnto  tflea^ar  anb  bnto^Ithamar 
hisfonnes  that  Vbcrc  left,  1-afce  the 
mcate  offering  that  rcmamcth  of  the 
offerings  of  the  Hois  d  niabeby  fire, 
anb  catc  it  lbithout  icauen ,  befibc  the 
altar:  for  it  ismoft  holy. 

ij  3inD  y  e  fhal  eat  it  in  the  holy  plate, 
betaufeltisthybucanbthyfonntsbuc 
of  the  faccinccs  of  the  |L©a©,  maDe 
by  fire :  for  fb  5  am  tonunanbeb. 

i+  3inb*theibaucb:cafranbhcauc 
(boulbcrthall  ye  catem  a  clcane  plate, 
thou,  anb  thy  tonnes,  anb  thy  baugfc 
tetsttnththec:  fortbeybctbybueanb 
thy  tonnes  bue,  ibhitharc  gtucn  out  of 
the  toenfice  of  peace  offerings,  of  the 
ehiimenofjfracl. 

1$  -Chchcauca)Oulbcr,anbthc\banc 
brcaft  (hal  they  bung,  ibnh  the  offnngs 
mabc  by  fire  of  the  fat,  to  lbauc  itfoza 
lbauc  offering  before  the  %  o  a  id  :  anb 
ttfhall  bee  thine ,  anb  thy  tonnes  ibtth 
thee,  by  aftatutcfo?euer,asthc3lOi3£> 
hath  tonunanbeb.  . 

16  C  3tnb  <$ofcs  biligcutly  fought 
thegoateof  the  fume  offering,  anb  be 
holb ,  it  vuas  burnt :  anb  he  ibas  angry 
lbith  «lta3at  anb3lthamar  ,thc  fonues 
of  2aton,  lbhuh  ««"  l* al,uc'  ™F 
mg, 

17  rahcrefojc  hauc  ye  not  eaten  the 
finnc  offering  m  the  holy  place,  fcctugit 
is  molt  holy,  anb  God  hath  giucn  it  you 
to  bear e  the  imciuitic  of  the  Congrcga 
non,  to  matte  atonement  for  them,  be 
fore  the ILore^ 

is  rScholb,  tDc  bloob  of  it  ibas  not 
brought  in,  lbithm  the  holy  place :  yee 


ftjoulb  mbeeb  hauc  eaten tt  intheholy 
plate,  *  as  5  tonunanbeb. 

19  3nb;SaronfatbbntoSPofcs,ri5c; 
holb,  this  bay  hauc  they  offcreb  thctr 
finnc  offering,  anb  their  burnt  offering 
before  the H© is© : anb futh  things 
haue  befallen  me :  anb  if  JJ  bab  eaten 
the  fmne  offenng  to  bay,  (boulbithauc 
bin  acteptcb  m  the  fight  of  the  lLois©  < 

20  anbtbhen  £0ofcshcarb  that,  he 
was  foment. 

CHAP.   XI. 

1  What  bcafts  may,  4  and  what  may  not  bee 
eaten.  9  Whatfilhes.  13  What Coules.  19 
The  creeps  things  which  are  vncleanc. 

43b  theflfi)i8D  fpafte  bn- 
to S^ofes ,  anb  to  3aron, 
toying  bnto  them, 
i  dpcaae  bnto  the  chil 
brcn  of  3frael ,  faying, 

*  IChcfe  arc  the  beafts  ibhlch  ye  (hal  cat 

among  all  the  beafts  that  ate  on  the 

earth : 
j  n9hatforaerpartcrhthehoofc,anb 

isdoucnfboteb,  &cheibeth  tub  among 

the  beafts ,  that  than  ye  catc. 

4  49cucrthelcffc,thtfcfhailycnot 
cate,  of  them  that  cbelbc  the  rub,  02  of 
them  that  bitnbe  the Ijoofe:  as  the  camel, 
becaufe  hee  ehclbeth  tile  tub,  but  Dun 
Dcth  notthehoofe,  he  is  bntleane  bnto 
you. 

5  3lnDthctome,betaufehechetbctl) 
the  cud,  but  DuuDcth  not  the  hoofe^c  is 
bncltane  bnto  you. 

6  ^nbthcharcbctautchethcvbcth 
thecuD,butbiujbcrhnotthehoofe,hci5 
burieanc  bnto  you. 

7  3nb*thefttnne,thoughhebiuibc 
the  hoofc,  anb  be  cloucn  footeb ,  yet  hee 
chelbeth  not  the  cub :  he  is  bntleane  to 
you. 

8  £>( their  fleft)  thai!  ye  not  eat,anb 
their  earcafc  (hall  yc  not  touch :  they  arc 
bntleane  to  you. 

9  CXhefc  thai  ye  cat.ofail  that  arc 
m  the  rbaters :  ibhatforaer  hath  finncs 
anb  ftalestn  thctbaters,m  the  fcas,anb 
m  the  rtucrs,  them  fbailyc  eate. 

10  2nb  all  that  hauc  not  finnes  nor 
fcaics  in  the  tcas,anb  tn  the  rtucrs,  of  all 
thatmoueinthetbatcrs,anbofany  li 
mug  thing  lbhul)  istnthcibatcrs,  they 
diaibc  an  abomination  bnto  you: 

11  XhcyCbalbccucuanabommanon 

bnto  you :  yc  (hall  not  eat  of  their  fle ih, 

but  you  (hall  hauc  their  tareafes  m  a 

bonunanon. 

1  n  cohat 


"Chap.lS. 
16. 


"DflK.  14. 


•i.Macc. 
«.|S. 


M 


eates  clean  e. 


L 


cuincus. 


andvncleane. 


ii  i©batfocucr  barb  no  finnes  raw 
fcaicsintbcrbater5,tbat  f^albc  anabo* 
initiation  bntopou. 

13  C  anb  tbcfe  arc  tijev  tbbicb  pc 
(ball  baue  m  abomination  anions  ti)c 
foulcs,tbep  (ball  not  be  eaten,  tbepare 
an  aboniuiation :  Xbe  eagle,  anbtbc 
sDffifrage,anb  the  ^Dftnap, 

14.  anb  the  Culture ,  anb  the  Hitc, 
after  bisbinbe: 

15  euerp  IRauen  after  bis  binbe : 

16  anb  tt)c  jaDtblc ,  anb  ttic  night* 
haube,$  tbcCucbolb ,  anb  tbe^aibbe 
after  bis  binbe, 

17  anbtbc  little  ©ible,anbtbe£o;t* 
movant,  anb  the  great  £>tt>le, 

is  anbtbe&ibanne,anbtbe0ellt' 
caue.anb  ttjc  <5ier  eagle, 

19  anbtbe&tojbctbetyeronafter 
her  binbe,  anb  the  fUpibing,  anb  the 
a5attc 

20  211  foiiles tbatereepe,goingbp< 
onallfourcfbalbeanabomtnanon&ti; 

to  ?on. 

ti  $Jetfbefemappcrat,ofcuctpfip; 
mg  trccptng  thing  that  goetb  bpon  all 
fourc,  tbbtcb  baue  legges  abonc  tbctr 
fect,to  leape  brttbail  bpon  the  earth. 

xi  Eucn  trjefe  of  them  pe  map  eatc: 
tlit  3Loruft ,  after  his  bmoe,  anb  the 
z5alb  lomft  after  bis  binbe ,  anb  the 
beetle  after  bis  burnt ,  anbtbc  ©raflc* 
popper  after  bisbinbe. 

23  25ntalothetflvingerccpingtl)ings 
rbbicbbauc  f our  e  feet,  ftjail  be  anabo* 
mutation  bntopou. 

24  anb  foJtbcfcpetbaibe  bncleane: 
tbbofocucr  touebctb  the  carbaffc  of 
them ,  (ball  be  bncleane  bnnll  the  eucn. 

25  anb  rbbofocuerbcarctb  ought  of 
the  tarbaffe  of  them ,  (ball  maty  bis 
clothes,  %  be  bncleane  bnttll  the  euen. 

2<s  Thearkafosofeucry  beaftibhirh 
otmoctb  the  hoofc,  anb  is  not  tiouen 
footcb,  no;  cbcibctb  the  rub ,  are  btv 
clcanc  bntopou :  cucrponetbattouct> 
eth  them,fhalbe  bnelcane. 

27  anb  Vbbatfocuct  goetb  bpon  bis 
pavbcs,amongaiimanerofbeafts,tl)at 
goeon  aiifoute,tbofearebncleanebnto 
pou :  lbho  Co  touchefh  their  tarbaffe, 
(hall  be  bncleane  bnnll  the  € uen. 

28  anb  he  that  bearctl)  the  tarbaffe 
of  them ,  (hall  U)a(b  hts  tlothcs ,  anb  be 
btitleanc  bntill  the  €uen  trbcparcbtt' 
cleane  bntopou. 

29  CXbcfealfo  (balbc  bncleane  btv 
to  pou,among  the  creeping  things  that 
crcepebpon  the  earth :  the  B9catell,anb 


the  flpoufc,  anotbeXojtots,  after  Ijts 
binoe, 

jo  anb  tbc5fCTtct,anb  the  Camels 
on,  anb  the  ILpjarb ,  anb  the  <S>naile, 
anbtbe£)?olle. 

jt  Xbcfcarebneleanetoptfnamong 
ail  fhatercepe :  Xbbofbeuerbotb  touch 
them  lbbro  thtp  bee  beab ,  (ball  be  bn> 
cleanebntilltheCuen. 

31  3UtD  boon  tbhatfbeuct  anp  of 
them,  tbbentbep  are  bcab,boeth  faiut 
(balbe  bncleane  ibbetbeeitbeanpbeffel 
ofttioob,02ratnient,o?  fbinne.oilacbe, 
ibbatfbeuct  betted  « be,  iwjerein  an? 
lbojbe  is  bone ,  it  mud  be  put  into  iba- 
ter ,  anb  it  (hail  be  bncleane  butt  u  the 
euen ;  fo  it  (balbe  eleanfeb. 

33  anbcuetpeattbcnbcffel,tbbctes 
into  anp  of  tbcnitalictb.ttibatfoeuetis 
in  it  (hall  bee  bncleane;  anb  "pee  (ball 
bicabeit. 

34.  ©fall  meat  tbbicb  map  be  eaten, 
that  on  luhteh  kch  tbatet  commeth, 
(ban  be  bncleane :  anb  all  bmibetbat 
map  be  biunbcut  eucrp  fuch  bcffell,(bat* 
be  bncleane. 

35  anbeuerptbttig,TbhcTcuponanp 
part  of  their  carbaffe  failetlj,  (ball  be 
bncleane ,  whether  it  be  oucn ,  0;  ranges 
to?  pots,rbep  tbalbc  bjoben  botbne :  tfy 
trjep  art  bnclcane,anb  (ball  be  bncleane 
bntopou. 

36  iBeucrtbeleffc.atountaweoipit, 
t  wherein  tijete  ts  plentp  of  ibatet,  fba  ibe 
rteane :  but  that  ibbicb  toucbetb  their 
carbaffe  (balbe  bncleane. 

37  anb  if  anp  part  of  their  carbaffc 
fail  bpon  anp  fotbtng  feeb  ibbtcb  ts  to 
be  foiben,it  ft»aibe  clcanc : 

3$  28utif  anp  ibater  beputbpon  the 
feeb ,  anb  anp  part  of  their  tarbaffe  fall 
tbcreon,ttfbalbebndeane  bntopou. 

39  anbifanpbeaftoftbbtcbpemap 
cat ,  tie ,  he  that  touebetb  the  tarbaffe 
thereof,  (ball  be  bntleane  bntai  tlje 
eucn. 

40  anb  h«  that  eatetb  of  the  car* 
baffeofit,ft)allibafh  his  tlotbes,aub 
bebnclcanebnttlthe<£uen:heailbthat 
bearcththccarba(leoftt,(balujan)  bis 
clothes ,  anb  bee  bncleane  bntUl  the 
cuetu 

41  anb  euerp  trcepmg  thing  that 
ctccpetl)  bpon  the  earth,  fbaibc  an  abo 
initiation :  if  fliailnot  be  eaten. 

42  udhatfocuergoeth  bpon  the  beU 
lie ,  anb  ibhatforacr  gocth  bpon  ail 
fourc  ,02  tbhatfoeuer  1 1)atb  moje feet  a* 
mong  all  tceeptng  things  that  tretpe 
bpon 


«  Chjp.tf. 
j8. 


tbrrwaiQtf' 
ttrs. 


f  Utbr.  doth 

mnltt'plj 

fee,. 


The 


pun 


fication 


Ch 


ap.xij.xiij. 


>f 


or  women. 


\H>b.f,*lt, 


•Chap. 19. 
I. and  10.7. 
I.pct.  I.15 


•Chap.  15 


•Luk.?  it 

iohn  7.12. 


t  Hth  /»«• 

tfbujtr* 


bpon  tbe  eat  tb,  tbem  pc  (ban  not  cate, 
fo?  tJjcp  ate  an  abomination. 

43  pccfliail  not  mane  pout  tfelucs 
abominable  Untb  anp  cteepmg  tbmg 
tljat  ttcepctb ,  ncitfjct  (bail  pe  inane 
pout  felues  bntleane  tbttb  tbem,  ttjat 
pe  fljoulb  be  bcfiico  tbetebp. 

44  jro:  31  am  t!ie  lL0K©pout 
<5ob :  pee  (ban  tlicr  efo2e  fauebne  pout 
felues,  anb'pe  (ball  be  bolp,  foi  5  »m 
Ijolp :  neitbet  (ballpcbcfilc  poutfelues 
rbttbanp  inauetof  etccpingtbingtbat 
crccpetb  bpon  tbe  earth. 

45  5ro?5amtbc?Lbis©tI)atbniv 
getlipoubp  out  of  tbe  lanb  of  tfgpptto 
be  pout  <5ob :  pe  (baitbetefojcbetjolp, 
fo?3^boip. 

46  XbtS"tbclan)ofttjebeafrs,anb 
oftnefbule,anbofcucrpliuingercatute 
ttjat  mount)  in  tbe  ibatets,  anb  of  cue* 
tie  cteatnte  tftat  ttcepctb  bpon  tbe 
earti): 

47  Xo  mane  a  biffetcnce  betibecne 
tt)e  bntleane  anb  tbe  tlcanc,  %  bettbecne 
rtje  bcaft  tbat  map  be  eaten,  anb  tbe 
beatt  tbat  map  not  be  eaten. 

CHAP.   XII. 

1   The  purification  of  women  after  childbirth. 
6   Her  offerings  for  her  put  living. 

/EJb  tbe  ISUmb©  fpanebn; 

to&?ou%faping, 
i    ^pcalic  bnto  tbe 

cb:lb2en  of  3Jftael,fapmg, 

3Jfa*lbomanbaue  ton* 
tciueb  feeb,  anb  borne  a  man  cbilb,  tben 
(be  fljal  be  bntleane  feuenbapes :  a«02* 
btng  to  tbe  bapes  of  tbe  fcparanonfo? 
Ijct  mfitnntie  (Ijall  (be  bebnrlcanc. 

3  3lnb  intbc*etgl)tbap,  tl)c  ftedj of 
fjis  fojef  tnnne  (ball  be  nt  cumeifcb. 

4  anb  fl)c(bai  tben  cominue  in  trje 
bio ob  of  bet  putupmg ttnee  anb  tbtrtic 
bapes:  Stycc  (ball  tonrb  noballotbeb 
tbmg,  no?  tome  into  tbe  £>anttuatp, 
bntill  tbe  bapes  of  bet  purtfpmg  be  ful- 
ffflcb. 

5  25ut  if  (be  beat c  a  matb  cbilb  ,t!)en 
(befbalbc  bntleane  nbo  ibeebes,  as  in 
l)tt  fcpatation :  anb  foe  (ball  continue 
intije  bloob  of  l)ctputifping  ttyeefcoje 
anbfitebapes. 

6  ^nbtbbcn  ti>bapcs  of Ijtr  pun 
fping  ate  fuifillcb,  fb2  afonnc,  02  foza 
baugbtet ,  (be  (bail  bang  a  lambe  of  tbe 
t  fit  ft  peet  c  fc>2  a  butnt  off  ring,  $  a  pong 
pigeon,  02a  tuttle  bone  foz  a  fmucoffc 
ting.  Unto  the  0002c  of  tbe  Xabet natlc 


of  trje  Congtcgation ,  bnto  tbe  pneft : 

7  iBbo  (ball  offet  it  bcfo2e  trje 
I  fL©isEs  anbtnabe  an  atonement  foi 

bet,  anb  ftjefhait  be  cleanftb  from  ttjc 

jtffut  of  her  bloob.  XbiststbciaTbfo2 

bet  tbat  fjatb  borne  a  male  02  a  female. 

s  '^nbifttbebenotablctobjmga 
lambe,  tben  (be  fljau  bnng nbo  turtles, 
0.2  tlbo  pong  pigeons,  tbe  one  fo2  the 
butnt  off  etmg,  anb  tbe  othc  t  foj  a  fume 
offering:  anb  tbe  ^nrftmaiimabean 
atonement  foj  t)ct ,  anb  Q)ce  (bail  bee 
cleane. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1    The  Lawcs  and  tokens  whereby  the  Prieft  is 
to  begmded  in  difccrningthe  Leprofie. 

i!5b  tbe  3toss  fpatte 

bnto  $3ofcs  anb  3laton, 

taping, 
%   naben  a  man  (ban 

baue  m  tbe  flame  of  bis 
flc(l),a||tifmg,afcabbe,  02b2tgljtfpot, 
anb  it  bee  m  tbe  f  bmne  of  Ins  ftefb  Ufee 
tbeplaguc  of  lepiofie,  tl)cnf)e  Ojallbec 
biougtjt  bnto  aaron  tbe  gmeft,  02  bnto 
one  of  bis  fonncstlic  Clefts. 

3  2inb  tbe  j&tett  fliall  loohc  on  tbe 
plague  m  ttjc  Dunne  of  tbe  flefb  :  anb 
Ibljcntrje pattern  tbe  plague  is turncb 
)bfnte,  anb  tbe  plague  m  figtjt  be  becpet 
tben  tbe  flun  of  l>is  fled)  ,it  >s  a  plagu  t  of 
lep2ofie:  anb  tl)e  #2ieft  fljall  loohc  on 
f)tm,anb  mouounechim  bntleane. 

4  3Jf  tbe  b2ial)t  fpot  be  lbhitc  m  tbe 
fhinneof  btsfiefl),  anbm  figbt  bee  not 
becpet  trjeu  tlje  flnnne,  anb  tlje  baite 
tbeteof  be  notturneo  ibrjite ,  tfjen  tbe 
^neft  (ball  (but  bp  him  tiwt  hath  trje 
plague,  feu  en  bapes. 

5  3Hbtbe02ieft(balUoolteonb'.m 
tbe  fcuentb  bap:  anb  beljolbe,  if  tbe 
plague  in  1ms  figJjt  be  at  a  flap,  md  tlje 
plague  fp;cab  not  m  tbe  fRinnc,tl)  en  tf)e 
0ueft  fljall  fl;ut  l)tm  bp  feuen  bapes 
mo2e. 

6  3tnbtbe^2ieftft)allloobconl)mi 
agatne  tbefeuentl)bap :  anb  bcl)oibc ,  if 
\t\)t  plague  be  fomeibbatbatfte,  anb  ti)c 
plagucfp2cab  notm  tije  fhin,  tljcpneft 

I  (ball  p2onounte  rjim  cleane :  it  is  but  a 

I  ftab :  anb  \)t  fljall  ibafl)  Ins  etc tJj  es,  anb 

be  cleane. 

I  7  But(ftbefcabfp2eabmucbab2oab 

I  in  the  fumne  after  tDatljccrjatb  becne 

fecneof  tl)cv>ncft,  foj  Ins  cleanfmgljee 

fl)ailbcfccncoftbe$2ic(tagame. 

8  ^nbsftlK^.'tcftfcctbatbcbolb, 
trjcfcabfpzeabctb  »i  tbe  fiuu,  tbentlie 
|&neft 


*  Luke  1 

T  Htlr  t-rr 


Or.frrl. 
l-i- 


H 


difc 


owtodiicerne 


L 


euiticus. 


theLeprofie. 


of  lining 
flcji. 


pnca  fl)  all  p ;  onouti  tc  bun  bin  itauc :  it 
uaicpioftc. 

9  Cflabentbeplagncoflepjoftets 
in  a  man ,  then  be  (bailbc  bzougbt  tonto 
tbci&icftj 

io  3nD  the  jDneft  (ball  fee  Dim :  anb 
bcbolb,if  tbecutug  beibbiteintbc  fbm, 
anb  it  baue  tucneb  the  Ijatrc  ibbitc,  ant) 
there  be  t  quiebe  raib  flc(b  m  tbceifing: 

ii  JJt  is  an  olb  Icpiofic  m  the  f  binnc 
of  bis  fltfb ,  anb  ttjc  #ncft  (ball  pjo- 
nounte  bun  bncleane,  anb  fbal  not  (but 
ijim  bp :  fo  j  be  is  bntleanc. 

ii  anbifalcpioficbjcabeoutabjoab 
in  the  f  hin.anbtbc  Icpioftccouec  all  the 
fbm  of  him  that  hath  the  piagucf  com  bis 
bcaocuen  to  bis  foot,  ibbcrefocnertbe 
i&rtcttloohetb: 

13  ILljcn  the  0ncft  (ball  tonfiber: 
anb  bcbolb ,  tf  the  lcp:oGe  l)auc  toner  eb 
al  bis  fled)  ,be  (bal  pjonounte  him  eieanc 
that  hath  the  plague ,  it  is  all  tucneb 
tbbttc;bcisclcane. 

14.  25ut  ttibcn  ratb  flefb  appcareth 
inbun,befba(lbc  bncleane. 

H  2inb  the  0ncft  than  fee  the  raib 
flcfb ,  anb  pronounce  inm  to  bee  ton* 
cleanc :  foube  ratb  flcfb  is  bntleanc :  it 
isalepzofie. 

i6  j£>;  if  the  ratb  flcfb  tucne  agamc, 
anb  bee  chaugcb  bntoibbite,  Dec  (ball 
tome  bnto  the  0nc&: 

17  3ubtbe#zie{t(ballfce  him :  anb 
beholbe ,  tf  the  plague  bee  tucneb  into 
ibbitc ,  then  the  l&neft  fballpzonounce 
him  ticane  that  hath  the  plague  •,  fjec  is 
tlcane. 

18  CXhcflefhalfo.mtbhich.^fnin 
the  f  iuuuc  thereof  ibas  a  bile ,  anb  is 
hcaleb, 

19  3inb  ui  the  place  of  thcbilcrhirc 
be  a  ibbitc  nfing,o:  a  bngbt  fpot  Vbhite, 
anb  fomeibbat  tcbbifb,  anb  itbefbcifr 
cbtotbc&ueft: 

10  anb  tf  rbhen  the  ftaeft  feeth  K, 
btholb ,  it  be  in  Ggbt  lower  then  the 
f  btnnc,  anb  the  banc  thereof  be  nirneb 
tbhitc,  the  0neft  (hall  pronounce  bun 
bncleane:  it  is  a  plague  of  lepioGc  b;o 
benoutoftbebile. 

21  25ut  if  the  piieft  Ioobc  on  it ,  anb 
btholb ,  thctc  be  no  ibbitc  haircs  there? 
m ,  anb  if  it  be  not  lolhcr  then  the  f  bin, 
but  be  fomcrbhat  barbc  ■,  then  rt)c  J&neft 
(ball  (but  him  bp  fcucn  bayes. 

2i  3htb  if  it  fpieab  nittth  atooab  in 
the  f hmnc ,  then  the  0ncft  (ball  pio- 
noun  te  him  bncleane ;  it  is  a  plague. 

25  23ut  tf  the  fytgbt  fpot  Cap  tnbis 


plate,  anb  fpieab  not ,  it  is  a  burning 
bile ;  anb  t  b  c  pit  ctt  (ball  p/o  no  utu  c  bim 
tlcane. 

14-  CdDnftbcre  beany  flcfb  in  the 
f  fern  tbbeceof  there  is  a  t  hot  burning, 
anb  the  qutcbe  flcfb  thatburnctbbaue 
a  ibbitc bngbt  fpot,  fomeibbat  r cbbtfl; , 
o:  White; 

25  Xbentbetencftfbaliloobebpon 
it :  anb  bebolo,  it  the  haicetn  the  bnght 
fpot  be  tucneb  ibhttc ,  anb  it  bee  in  fight 
beeper  then  the  fbtnne,  it  *  a  leprotic 
b2oken  out  of  the  bunting:  Vbheccfoie 
tbc^2itft(baipionouncchim  bncleane: 
it  is  the  plague  of  lepjofte. 

26  aSutiftbcpnclt  loose  on  it,  anb 
bcbolb ,  there  be  no  ibbitc  banc  tn  the 
bngbt  fpot,  anb  it  benoloibcc  then  the 
other  fbm,but  be  fomeibbat barbe,tben 
tbe02icft(bai  (butbtmbpfeuenbapes. 

27  3nb  the ^zleft fbatlloohebpon 
him  the  fcucutb  bay :  anb  tfttbcfpicab 
much  ab;oab  m  the  fbm,tben  the  idjicfl 
(ball  p;  on  ounce  bun  bncleane  j  u  1  tl;c 
plague  of  lepjofic. 

23  3lnb  if  the  bnght  fpot  (lap  mhis 
place^nd  fpjeao  not  in  the  f  hm,but  it  be 
fomeibbat  bathe ;  tt «  a  nfmg  of  the 
burntng,anb  the  #2ieft  (ball  pronounce 
rnm  cleane :  foi  it  is  an  inflammation  of 
the  burning. 

19  C  3i  a  man  oj  tboman  hath  a 
plaguebpontbebcabo:  tbebcacD, 

?o  Chen  the  0iieft  (ball  fee  the 
plagtu:  anb  betjolb,  ifit  be  m  fight  bee* 
per  then  the  ffein,andtherebctnuapel« 
loib  tbut  haire.then  the  0?teft  fliall  wo- 
nouncc  bun  bncleane ,  it  >  a  b;p  f ball, 
eucn  a  lepjofie  bpon  the  hcab  01  beatb. 

31  5lnD  if  the  tfmeft  100 tie  on  the 
plague  of  the  f  ball.anb  beholb,it  be  not 
m  Ggbt  beeper  then  the  dim,  anb  that 
there  is  no  biacfee  baice  in  tt  ■,  then  the 
0ucft  (ball  (but  bp  him  that  kith  the 
plague  of  the  (nail,  fcucn  bapes. 

ji  3litb  m  the  fcucnth  bap  the  02icft 
(ball  looUc  on  the  plague:  anb  bcbolb, 
if  the  (lull  fpzcab  not,  anb  there  be  in  it 
noyciioibbatrcanbtbc  (ball  be  not  in 
fight  beeper  tlicn  the  fkm; 

3}  ^e  (ball  be  (haucn ,  but  the  Otali 
(ban  be  not  (baue :  anb  the  pneft  (ball 

(but  bp   him  that  hath  tljC  f  ball,  fCUCU 

baytsmoie. 

34  3nomthtfcuentbbaythc02irft 
(batiloobe  on  the  (ball:  anb bcholb,if 
the  f  ball  be  notfpicab  in  the  f  bin,  no: 
bcmfiQbtbccpcctbcntbe  f  burden  the 
^;ic(l  (ball  pronounce  bmi  cleanc :  anb 

he 


t  air* 

burning  of 
firt. 


iDifc 


cernin£0 


f 


Cha 


a 


P-X11l- 


theleprofie. 


\Heir.htai 
ispiltetL 


•Num.y.l 
i.kjng.ij, 


1- 


t  \htr. 


hcthallltoafh  htselothcs,anb  be  clcanc. 

35  But  if  the  flail  fprcab  much  m  the 
fmnnc  after  his  cleatifing, 

16  SCDen  the  pneft  ttjail  loofcc  on 
hmt,anbbcholb,tfthefKailbcrprcabin 
the  nunnc,thc0rtcfr  (hail  not  fecfee  for 
yclloitohatrc:  he  ts  toncleane. 

J7  2£nt  if  the  f  sail  be  m  his  fight  at 
a  flap,  ano  that  there  is  blac&e  haite 
grolbcn  top  therein :  the  (Kail  tshealcb, 
heiseleane,  anb  tt)c  frrtcft  flh.au  pro- 
nounce him  eleanc. 

js  CJfaman  alfo  02  a  lboman  ftaue 
tnthe  ftmmcof  thntflclh  bright  fpots, 
cuen  lbljitc  bright  fpots, 

39  Xhcn  the  pritft  (hail  looltc:  anb 
bcholb.if  the  bright  fpots  mthc  ftumtc 
of  thctt  flcfl)  bee  bartufh  nilntc,  it  is  a 
fretWcbfpot  that  grolbcth  inthcffcin : 
he  's  clcanc. 

40  anothcniann)hofcthaitcisfal< 
len  off  his  heab,  he  is  balb :  yet » hee 
clcanc. 

41  ^nD  Ijc  tDtit  Jiatl)  Dis  Ijaire  fallen 
off  from  the  part  of  Ins  rjeaD  totbarb 
his  fate ,  he  is  forchcab-balb :  yens  hee 
clcanc. 

41  3fnb  if  there  be  in  ttjc  balb  heab, 
or  balb  forcheab  aibhitcrcbbtfl)  fore,  it 
is  a  leprotic  fpruugtoptnhisbalb-hcab, 
orhtsbalbforchcao. 

43  HHjen  the  0rtcft  (hall  loofte  top- 
on  it:  anbbeholbe,  if  thcttfing  of  the 
fore  bee  ltohttc  rebbtfl)  in  his  baioe 
heab ,  02  in  his  balb  forcheab ,  as  the 
leprotic  appear  eth  m  tlje  f  feutnc  of  the 

44  tytt  is  a  leprous  matt ,  he  is  bu< 
clcanc:  tlje  0rteft(hall  p2onouncehim 
tottcrly  toncleane ,  hts  plague  is  tn  his 
heab. 

45  3tnb  the  leper  tn  ltohom  the 
plague  is ,  his  clothes  (hall  be  tent,  anb 
his  heab  bare ,  anb  he  (hall  put  a  touc 
rutg  Upon  his  topper  lip,  anb  (hall  cry, 
^Unclcane,  toncleane. 

46  3tu  the  toayes  tbherem  the 
plague  (hall  bee  in  him,  he  (hail  bee  be 
Bleb ,  hec  is  toncleane :  he  (hall  toitoell  a 
lone  ,*  tbithout  the  campe  (hall  his  habi= 
tation  be. 

47  c  Xhc  garment  alfo ,  that  the 
plague  of  leprotic  is  In,  Whether  it  bee 
a  ltooollcn  garment ,  or  a  lumen  gar- 
ment, 

48  lOhethct  it  bee  in  the  itoarpc,  or 
itooofe  of  lumen  or  of  tboollcn,  ltohc 
thcr  tnaf  urn,  or  m  any  t  thing  maoc  of 
fmnnc: 


49  ^nbifthc  plague  be  geeemfl)  02 
rebbifih,  m  the  garment, 02m the  fUin, 
cither  tnthe  itoarpc,  or  mthc  itooofe,  or 
manvtthtttgof(Uumc,ttisapiagiicof 
leprotic,  anb  fl)all  be  fheibcb  touto  the 
pricft 

50  anb  the  ^ricft  (hall  loofte  bpon 
the  plague,  anb  (hut  top  it  that  hath  rj)c 
plaguc,fcuenbaycs. 

51  ^nbhefljailioofteonthcplagnc 
on  the  fcucnth  bay  :  if  the  plague  be 
fprcab  m  the  garment ,  either  tn  the 
itoarpc,  or  tnthe  Vtooofe,  onna  n»u,or 
m  any  tborfcc  that  is  mabe  of  [tonne, 
the  plague  is  a  fretting  leproGesttiston: 
clcanc. 

51  $cc  (hall  therefore  burne  that 
garment,  ltohctljcr  Xbarpc  or  tboofc,  in 
ibollcn  02  m  lumen,  or  any  thing  of 
fttinnc,  itohernn  the  plague «  for  itis 
a  fretting  leprotic-  it  (hall  bee  bucntin 
the  fire. 

53  3nb  if  thcfrricft (hall  loottc  ,anb 
beholb  the  plague  be  not  fprcab  tn  the 
garment,  either  ut  the  itoarpc,  or  tnthe 
itooofe,  or  tn  any  thing  of  f  fetunc; 

54  Xhcu  the  0jtdt  (hail  commanto 
that  they  Itoafb  the  thing  ibherctnthe 
plague  ts,  anb  he  (hail  (hut  it  top  fcucn 
bapesmorc. 

55  2nb  tlje  pricft  (hall  loobe  on  the 
plague  after  that  it  is  ltoafhcb :  anb  be* 
holb,ifthe  plague  haue  not  changeb  h<s 
colour,  anb  the  plague  be  not  fprcab,tt 
is  toncleane,  thou  (halt  burne  it  tn  the 
ftcc,it  isfcet  mitoarto,itohethct  ttbetbarc 
rbithtnorrbtthout. 

56  3lnb  if  the  #rieft  loohe ,  anb  bc< 
holb,thc  piame  be  fomcitohat  barHeaf 
ter  the  itoafhing  of  it ,  then  he  (hall  renb 
it  out  of  the  garment,orotttofthc  fltitt, 
or  out  of  the  itoarpc ,  or  out  of  the 
itooofe. 

57  anb  if  tt  appcarc  mil  in  the  gar^ 
ment,  cither  m  the  itoarpc ,  or  m  the 
iboofcor  many  thing  of  fmnnc,  ttisa 
fpreabmgpiac^ue ,  thou  (halt  burne  that 
ltohcrem  the'plagucis.itotthnrc. 

58  ^nb  the  garment,  cither  itoarpc, 
or  itooofe,  oritohatfocuet  thing  of  f  but 
it  bee,  luhtth  thou  (halt  itoafh  ,  if  the 
plague  be  beparteb  front  them,  then  it 
(hall  be  ltoafhcto  the  feconb  time, attb 
fhaibe  clcanc. 

59  Xhis  is  the  laito  of  the  plague  of 
leprotic  magarment  of  ltooollcnoilm 
tun,  cither  in  thcitoarpe,  orttooofc,  02 
any  thing  of  ftutmes,  to  pronounce  tt 
clcanc,  or  to  pronounce  it  toncleane. 

l  chap. 


jHd.vcjfc/! 


I  her  it  be 
blulA  ui  lbs 
heAdtke-t- 
cfcrtn  the 

fere^rfd 

tbmtf* 


Cleanfing  of  Lcuiticus.  the  Leproiie. 


•Matt.8.2 
mark.  1.40 


||Or  ff»r- 

roveei. 


\Hehr.vfon 
the  face  of 
the  fold. 


\}Ur.th, 
daughter  of 
her  yet  re. 


CHAP.    X1III. 

1   The  rites  and  facrifices  indenting  of  the  Le- 
per,   a  The  fignes  of  leprofie  in  ahoufc. 
(. !        The  denting  ofchat  houfe. 

0n  the  %  ©  13  ©  fpaac 
bntofcWcs,faymg, 

2  3Zbis(balbctbciatb 
of  the  leper,  m  the  bay  of 
bis  cleanfing:  be '(bail  be 
b2ougbtbntotbc02ic(r. 

j  and  tl)e  pitcft  Cball  goc  fiwrn  out 
ofthecampe,  and  the  piicft  (ball  looltc: 
andbcboldc,  if  the  plague  of  lepjofic  be 
healed  m  the  leper, 

4.  Xben  (ball  the  fc\rictt  command 
totahc  fo2l)im  that  ts  to  bee  clcanfcd, 
nbo  I  birbs  aliuc,  md  clcanc,and  Cedar 
ibood,andfcarlct,  anb  byfope. 

5  and  the  p2icft  (hall  command 
that  one  of  the  birbs  bee  hilled  m  an 
earthen  bcffcll,oucr  running  lbater. 

6  asfo2tbciiinngbird,bcfbaitaiic 
it,  and  the  Cedar  wood,  and  the  fcarlct, 
anb  the  byfope ,  anb  (hall  bip  them  anb 
the  Uumg  bird  mthc  blood  of  the  biro 
that  Idas  hilled  ouer  the  running 
lbater. 

7  and  he  (hall  fpiincKlc  bponhmi 
that  is  to  be  tleanfcdfrom  the  lrp2ofic, 
fcucn nines,  and  (ball  p2onounce  him 
clcane,  and  (hall  let  the  lining  bird  loofc 
t  into  the  open  field. 

8  and  be  that  tstobecleanfedfball 
ttiafbbis  clothes,  and  (hauc  off  au  his 
hairc,  and  lbafb  himfclfcm  lbater,  that 
he  may  be  tleanc :  and  after  that  hec 
(hall  come  uuo  the  Campcand  (hall  ta^ 
ry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  Ceuen  day  cs. 

9  But  it  (ball  be  on  the  feumtb  bay, 
that  he  (hail  (hauc  all  his  batrc  offhis 
hcadandhisbcard,andhi5cycb2oibcs, 
cucn  all  his  hairc  he  fbal  fljauc  off:  and 
he  (bail  mad)  his  clothes ,  alfo  he  (hall 
ibafh  his  flc(h  tu  lbater ,  and  he  (hail  be 
clcane. 

10  and  on  the  eight  day  be  (ball  taftc 
tibohec  lambcs  ttnthout  blcmifh,  anb 
one  cibc-iambc  of  t  the  firtt  ycerc,  With- 
out blcmilb  ,  and  tluee  tenth  dcaicsof 
fine  floibjc  fo2  a  meat  offcring,minglcd 
ibith  ovlc,  and  one  log  of  oylc. 

11  :Sno  the  v>2icft  that  mattctft  him 
clcane,  (ball  P2cfmt  the  man  that  is  to 
be  made  clcane,  and  thofc  things  bcfo2c 
tbc3Lor.r>,.utbcdoo2coftbe1-abcr 
naclc  of  theCongrtganon : 

11  and  the  p2iefi  (ball  taliconchcc 


lambe ,  anb  offer  him  fo2  atrefpaffe  of 
fenng,  and  the  log  of  otic ,  and  *  rbauc 
them  ft?  a  waue  offcrutg  bcfoic  the 

1  j  and  he  (hall  day  theiambein  the 
place  lbherche  malltaitbefin  offenng, 
and  the  burnt  offnng  m  the  holy  place : 
fo?  *  as  the  finnc  offering  ts  the  pjicfts, 
(b  is  the  trefpaffc  offering :  it  is  mod 
l?oIy. 

1+  and  the  pjieft  (hall  taltefomc  of 
the  blood  of  the  trefpaffc  offenng,  and 
the  p2ie(l  (hail  put  tt  bpon  the  ttp  of  the 
ngbtearcof  bun  that  is  tobcclcanfcb, 
and  bpon  the  thumbc  of  his  right 
hand  ,  and  bpon  the  great  toe  of  his 
right  foot. 

15  and  the  p2(c(t  (hall  take  Tome  of 
the  log  of  otic ,  and  porb2c  it  into  the 
paimc  of  his  oibnc  left  hand : 

16  and  the  p2icft  (ball  dip  bis  right 
finger  in  the  oilc  that  is  in  his  lefthand, 
and  (ball fp2incblc  of  tbcoileibitb  his 
finger , fcucn  times  bcfoic  the  %  o  is  s>. 

17  anboftberefrofrbcotletbat'stn 
his  hand ,  (hall  tbcp2tcfrputbpontbc 
npof  the  right  care  ofbim that isto  be 
rlcanfcd,and  bpon  the  thumbc  of  his 
right  handc,  and  bpon  the  great  toe  of 
his  right  foot ,  bpon  the  blood  of  the 
trefpaffc  offering. 

is  and  the  remnant  of  the  oilctbat 
is  ui  the  02icfrs  hand ,  he  (hall  pottuc 
bpon  the  h  cab  ofhim  that  ts  to  be  clean- 
fed :  and  the  p2iett  (hall  matte  an  atone- 
ment fo2  him  befo2e  the  %  <s>  is  t?. 

19  3lnd  the  p2ieft  thai  offer  the  (tunc 
offering,  andmahc  an  atonement fo2 
him  that  ts  to  be  cleanfed  from  his  bn 
cleanncffcand  aftcribard  he  (ball  mil 
the  burnt  offering. 

20  and  the  p2ieft  (ball  offer  the 
burnt  offering,  and  the  meat  offering 
bpon  the  aitac :  and  the  pnefr  (ban 
make  an  atonement  fo;  bint ,  and  he 
fljalbc  clcane. 

21  and  if  he  be  poo2C,and  t  cannot 
get  fo  much ,  then  bee  lhali  taite  one 
lambe  fo:  atrefpaffe  offrmg  t  to  be  lba 
ucd,tomahcanatoncmcntfo:htm)and 
one  tenth  dcaic  of  fine  floib2e  mingled 
ibith  oilc,  fo;  a  meat  offenng,  and  a  log 
ofoilc, 

2i  and  tlbo  turtle  doucs ,  02  nbo 
vong  pigeons,  fuch  as  he  is  able  to  get: 
and  the  one  (balbc  a  finite  offering,  and 
the  other  a  burnt  offering. 

2  3  and  bee  (ball  b2iug  them  on  the 
eight  day,  fo:  his  cleanfing  bnto  the 
. p2iett, 


*  Eiod.29. 

»4. 


Chjp.7.7. 


t  }hh  i, 

hdrJieti. 
not. 
\H>(r   for 


Cleanfingof  Cha 


p.xmj. 


Jieieprofic. 


$jieft ,  Dtito  the  booze  of  the  IZabct' 
naclc  of  the  Congregation ,  bcfo?e  tbx 

24  anb  the  0ncff  (ball  tattc  the 
lambe  of  tlje  trefpafft  offering,  ant)  toe 
tog  of  one,  anb  the ^jictt  (ball  ibauc 
them  fo2  a  toane  offering  before  tfjc 

25  anb  be  niall  lull  the  lambe  of  the 
trefpaffe  offering,  anb  toe  frucftrbau 
tafee  fomcof  the  blooD  of  tbetrefpaffe 
offering,  anb  put  itbpon  tlic  tip  of  the 
cigbteateof  nun  that  tstobctlcanfcb, 
ano  bpon  the  trjunibc  of  bis  r  ight  hanb, 
anb  bpon  the  great  toe  of  ins  right 
footc. 

26  anbtbepttcftfbailpoVbjc  of  the 
oyle  into  the  painie  of  ijts  ovbne  left 
hanb. 

17  anb  the  J&ieft  fbal  fpjmttle  lbitb 
bis  right  finger ,  fonic  of  the  oile  ttjatts 
ut  l)is  left  banb,  fenen  times  befo?etfjc 

is  anbtfie^ncftfbailputoftbeoilc 
that  ism  bis  banb ,  bpon  the  tip  of  the 
right  care  of  him  that  is  to  be  clcanfcb, 
anbbpon  the  tbumbc  ofbis  right  banb , 
anb  bpon  tlje  great  toe  of  Ins  right 
foot ;  bpontbcpiace  of  tfjc  bloob  of  the 
trcfpaltc  offering. 

29  ano  the  reft  of  tfjc  otic  that  ism 
rye  0ncfts  hanb,  lie  (ballput  bpon  tfjc 
beab  of  him  that  is  to  bee  clcanfcb ,  to 
matte  an  atonement  fo:  bint  befojc  the 

jo  anb  he  (bail  offer  the  one  of  the 
turtle  boues ,  02  of  tlje  pong  ptgeons, 
fuel)  as  he  can  get: 

31  Eucn  fuch  as  he  is  able  to  get,  the 
onefota Onne  offering,  anb  the  other 
foi  a  burnt  offering ,  ibith  the  meat  of 
fcring.  anb  the  j&icft  (ball  matte  an 
atonement  foj  him  that  is  to  be  clean- 
feb,befojcthcll©isip. 

ji  %\M&  is  the  laib  of  him  inrbbom 
is  the  plague  of  leprotic,  Vbbofc  hanb  is 
not  able  to  get  that  ibljtcb  pcrtamcth 
tohtstleanfmg. 

33  €  anb  the  1L  o  is  id  rpafcc  bnto 
Q9ofcs,anb  bnto  aaron.faytng, 

34  nabenyc  be  conic  mto  thcianbof 
Canaan,ibhifh'5giuetoT'oufo2apof 
feffion,  anb  'J  put  the  plague  of  lep^o- 
fie  m  a  houfc  of  tlje  lanb  of  your  pof 
feffion ,- 

35  anb  hec  that  oibcth  the  houfc 
(hail  come ,  anb  tell  the  0ncft,  faymg, 
3)t  fecmeth  to  me  there  is  as  itlbcrca 
piagueinthehoufe: 


36  Xhctt  the  idiieft  (ban  coinmanb 
that  they  llemptie  thchoufe,  bcfo:c  the 
pncffgoctntoit  to  fee  the  plague,  that 
all  that  tsmtbchoufe  be  notmabebn- 
tlcanc:  ano  afterlbarb  the  0neft  (ball 
gociu,tofcethe  houfc. 

37  anb  he  fbai  lo  ottc  on  the  plague: 
anbbeholb.ifthcpiaguebemthcibaiis 
of  the  houfcibith  hollolb  (tcattes,gree; 
nia}o:rcbbia),ibhichuifightarcloibcr 
thcutbcibaiL 

3S  Xhcn  the  #2ie(t  (bail  goe  out  of 
the  houfc ,  to  the  oooie  of  tfjc  ljoufc,anb 
(but  bp  tlje  houfc  fcucn  Daycs. 

39  anb  the  pneft  (bail  come  againc 
tlic  feucnth  bay,  anb  (ball  loottt :  aub 
beholb ,  if  the  plague  bee  fpzeab  in  the 
ibaitsoftheljoufe; 

40  Xben  the  ^2ieft  (hall  commanb 
that  they  taae  aibay  the  (Jones  in 
lbbtcb  tlje  plague  is  ,anb  they  fbaiieatt 
them  into  an  bncleane  place  tbitljout 
thcCibc. 

41  anbbec  (ball  caufe  the  boure  to 
be  fcrapcti  ibttljin  rounb  about ,  anb 
they  (ball  pottle  out  the  bud  that  they 
fcrape  off,  rbitbout  the  citic  into  an  bit* 
clcanc  plate. 

42  anbtbcyiljailtattcotbcrftoncs, 
ant)  put  them  m  the  place  of  thofe  (tones; 
anb  hce  (bail  takt  other  mooter ,  anb 
(bail  plainer  tlje  houfc. 

43  anb  if  the  plague  tome  againc, 
anbbjeatte  outm  the  houfc,  after  that 
he  hath  tafecuaibay  the  aottcs,anb  af- 
ter he  hath  ferapeb  thchoufc,anbafter 
itispiaflercb; 

44  Xhcnthc  02lc(t  (ball  come  anb 
loottc ,  anb  beholb ,  if  the  plague  bee 
frtfeaom  the  boufe,  it  i  a  fretting  lep?Oi 
fie  t\\  tlje  boufe :  it «  bncleane. 

45  anb  he  (ball  tyeattc  boibnc  the 
houfc,  the  (tones  of  it,  anb  the  timber 
thereof ,  anb  all  the  montt  of  tlje  boufe: 
anb  he  (baiuary  them  foo?tb  out  of  the 
city  into  an  bncleane  place 

46  i©o2Couer ,  he  that  goeth  into 
the  houfc  all  the  labile  that  it  is  (but 
bp,  fbalbe  bncleane  bntill  the  cucn. 

47  anb  hce  that  lictb  in  the  boufe, 
(ball  ibaft)  his  dothes :  anb  hce  that 
catcth  in  the  boure,  (bail  Ibafb  bis 
clothes. 

4S  anb  if  the  pnedt  (ball  come  in, 
anb  loohe  vPonit,anbbchoiD,thcpiagnc 
hath  not  fpjeab  in  the  houfc,  after  tlje 
houfc  ibas  piattcrcb  :  then  tl)c  iDncft 
njaii  p2onounce  the  houfc  clcanc ,  be 
caufe  the  plague  is  hcalcb. 
%  1  49  anb 


I0r.fr. 
fate 


\Uebr.tn 
corrjrmnf  in 
fhjll  cemc 


o 


ow  co  purge 


L 


euincus. 


vncieanemues 


So 


*CIiap.  13 


f  Hth.U  the 
d*y  of  the 
■vncltane, 
wlinthc 
day  of  the 
cteane. 


of  the  rand. 


\lM.irf<l 


49  ano  he  (hall  tabc  to  tleanfcthc 
hotirc.titoo  bitD5,anDCcDarruooD,anD 
fcarlct.anbhpfropc. 

50  anb  fjc  ftjaii  Bill  flic  one  of  the 
biros  m  an  earthen  toeffell,  oucc  run- 
ning Uiater. 

51  anbhelhautattethcCcbat  iboob 
anb  flic  hpfropc,anb the fcatlct,anb the 
liumgbirb,  anb  bip  them  tn  the  bloob 
of  tljc  name  birb,  anb  tn  ttjc  running 
Ibatcr ,  anb  fpztnHlc  the  hotifc  fcuen 
tunes. 

51  anbhcfhallrtmfcthehoulclbtth 
the  bloob  of  trie  bttb, anb  Ibith  the  run- 
ning mater,  anb  ibith  tfje  liutng  birb, 
anb  unto  the  Ccoar  iboob ,  anb  Ibith 
thchpffope,anbibu1)thcfcatlct. 

53  25ut  hec  (hall  let  goc  the  itutng 
birb  out  of  the  cute  into  the  open  ficlbs, 
anb  matte  an  atonement  fo?  the  houfc : 
anb  it  (hall  be  cleanc. 

54  Xhts  is  the  laib  fo:  all  manner 
plague  of  leprotic  anb  *  f  Hall, 

55  anb  fo:  the  lepzofie  of  agarment, 
anb  of  anhoufe, 

56  anb  foj  a  rtfing,  anb  fo?  a  fcabbc, 
anb  fo:abnght  foot: 

57  Xo  teach  t  rbhen  « is  bnclcanc, 
anb  ibhcn  it  is  fltane :  rtjxs  is  ttje  latbc  of 
leprotic. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  The  vncleannesofmen  in  their  iflues.  13  The 
denfing  of  them.  19  The  vnclcanneflc  of 
women  in  their  iflucs.   18   Their  denfing. 

(<&  i3othe!Loii5K>  fpafeebn= 
to£0ofes,anbtoaaron, 
facing, 
z  £>pcaftetontothechfl; 
b:cn  of  3lfrael ,  anb  Cap 
tonto  them ,  nahcu  anp  man  hart)  a 
||  running  iffuc  out  of  his  flc(h ,  becaufc 
ofhisiffuchcisVinelrane. 

3  anb  this  (hail  be  hisbnclcanncffe 
m  his  iffuc :  ibhether  his  flefh  r  tin  ibith 
hisiffuco:  his  flelh  be  ftoppcb  from  his 
tffue.it's  hisbnticanneffe. 

4  <£ucrpbebtt)hcrconhcucth,that 
hath  the  iffuc,  tsbncJcauc :  anb  cucrp 
tthiugU)hcreonhcfittcth,(hallbccbn' 
ricane. 

5  anb  Vbhofoeucr  touchcth  htsbcb, 
(hall  ibafl)  his  clothes,  anb  bath  Wmfdfe 
tn  ibatcr ,  anb  bee  bnclcaue  bntill  tl)c 
Cttctu 

6  anb  hec  that  fitteth  on  anv  thing 
lbhcrcon  hec  fate  that  hath  rt)c  iffuc, 
(hall  iba(h  his  clothes,  aub  bath h,ulfclft 


m  tbater ,  anb  bee  bucleane  bntill  the 
euett. 

7  anb  he  that  touchcth  the  fled)  of 
htm  that  hath  the  iffuc,  dm  tbafl)  his 
clothes,  anb  bathe  hiniieife  in  ibatcr, anb 
be  bnclcaue  bnttU  the  Cucn. 

8  anbifhethat  hath  the  iffue,fptt 
bpon  him  fl)at  ts  cleanc,  then  hec  (hall 
u>afl)  hts  clothes,  anb  bathe  himieitem 
Tbater ,  anb  bee  bnrtcanc  bniill  the 
enen. 

9  anblbhatfabblefoeuerheribeth 
bpon,  that  hath  the  iffuc,  (hall  beebtv 
rtcanc. 

10  ^nb  Ibhofceuer  touchcth  anp 
thmgthatibasbnberhlm,  (hall  be  ton 
cleane  bnttl  the  €ucn :  ^nb  he  that  bea 
reth  anp  of  thole  thmgs,(halliban)  his 
clothes,  anb  bathe  himfdtc  m  ibatcr,anb 
be  bncleanc  tmttll  the  Cuen. 

11  anb  ibhomfocuer  hec  touchcth 
that  hath  the  uTuc  (anb  hath  not  nn(cb 
his hanbs  tn  Ibatcr)  he  (hall  Ibaih his 
clothes,  anb  bathe  hrmfeife  tn  lbater,anb 
be  bnclcancbnttll  the  Cuen. 

ii  anb  the  *  beffell  of  earth  that  hce 
touchcth  ibhteh  hafl)  the  t(Tue,  (hail  bee 
b:oBcn :  anb  euerp  beffell  of  iboob  (hall 
be  rtnfcbtn  ibatcr. 

13  anbibhcnhcethathathantOuc, 
ts  cleanfeb  of  his  tffue ,  then  hec  (hall 
number  to  himtelfe  fcuen  bapesfo?  his 
rtcanung,anbiba(h  his  clothes,  anb 
bathe  hts  ncft)  tn  running  ibatcr,  anb 
(hall  be  cleanc. 

14  anb  on  the  eight  bap  hee  (hall 
tafec  to  him  ttbo  turtle  boucs,  o:  tibo 
pong  pigeons,  anb  come  befo:e  the 
1L  ©  is  s»,  bnto  theboozc  of  thelCaber^ 
naclc  of  the  Congregation,  anb  giuc 
them  bnto  the  pneft. 

15  anb  the  pnttt  (hall  offer  them, 
the  one  foz  a  fmnc  offering,  anb  theo- 
thcrfo:  a  burnt  offering,  anbthe#:teft 
(hail  matte  an  atonement  fo?  hint  before 
the  %  €>  s  ©  fo i  his  ifluc 

16  anb  tfanp  mans  Ctcbc  of  copula- 
tion goc  out  from  him,  then  hce  (hall 
iba(h  an  his  fle(h  mttater,  anb  bee  btv- 
flcancbnnll  the  Cuen. 

17  anb  eucrp  garment  anb  cuerp 
fbinne  ibhercon  is  rtjc  Cecbc  of  copula- 
tton,  (lialibcibanitbibtth  ibatcr ,  anb 
be  bnclcaue  tonnil  the  €uen. 

is  1Ehe  ibonian  alfo  ibith  ftfiom 
man  fljall  He  ibith  feeb  of  copnlatton, 
thep (hall  both  bath  themkiucsmibatci-, 
anb  be  bncicane  bntill  the  tftien. 

19  C^nbifaibomauhaiicanifJuc, 


•Chip.4. 


Vncleane  lflues,        Chap.xvj.        The  Scape  goat. 


herfcpjr 


and  bcriffuctnber  flcflj  be  bloob,  (bee 
(ball  bee  t  put  apart  fcucn  bayes :  anb 
U)l)ofoniet  toucher!)  ber,  (ball  becbm 
cleancbntiltbeeuen. 

20  anbcucrytbingtbatlbelietbbp* 
on  inner  fcparatton,fbau be bntlcane: 
euety  thing  aifo  tijatlhe  Ottetb  bpon, 
(balbe  bntlcane. 

21  anb  tbbofoeuer  toutbetb  i)ec 
beb,  (ball  tbafb  tnsrtotfjes,  anb  bathe 
himfeifeinrbatet.anbbebncleancbntill 
tbceucn. 

22  anb  tbbofoeucr  toutbetb  any 
tljing  tljat  fl)t  fate  bpon.ajail  ibaQ)  l)is 
clothes,  anb  bathe  himfeife  m  tbatcr,anD 
bebntlcancbnniltbcdien. 

23  anb  if  it  be  on  her  beb,  0?  on  any 
tbing  ibbctcon  n^  (itteth ,  tbben  bee 
touched)  it, be  (ban  be  bntlcane bntill 
tbetfucn. 

24  anb  if  any  tnan  lye  tbitb  her  at 
all,  anb  bet  flolbers  be  bpon  bint,  bee 
(ball  be  bntlcane  fcucn  bayes:  anb  all 
the  beb  tbtjereon  he  lycth,  (balibebm 
tleanc. 

<,  anb  if  a  tboman  banc  an  iffue  of 
bet  bloob  many  bayes  out  of  tbc  time 
of  bet  reparation,  o?tf  tt  runncbeyonb 
tbctimeofberfcparatton,aiitbcbayes 
of  tbc  iffuc  of  her  bntlcanncffe,  (ball  be 
as  tbebayesofber  reparation:  (he(bal; 
be  bntlcane. 

26  Cuery  beb  lbberconfbelyetb  all 
the  bayes  of  ber  iffuc ,  (ball  be  bnto  bet 
as  tbe  beb  of  bcr  feparation:  anb  tbbat^ 
foeucr  (bee  fittctb  bpon ,  (ball  bee  bit* 
tleane ,  as  rt)c  bntlcanncffe  of  bcr  fepfc 
ration. 

27  anb  tbbofocuer  touebctb  tbofc 
tbings,(balbebntlcanc,  anb  (bail  tbafb 
bis  clothes,  anb  bathe  himfeife  mtbatcr, 
anb  be  bntlcane  bntill  tbe  <£ucn. 

2s  iSiitiftycbcclcanfebofberiffue, 
tben  (be  (ballnumbcrtobtrfelfcfcuen 
bayes :  anb  after  tbat,(l)C  (balbe  clcanc. 

29  anb  on  tbc  eight  bay  (be  (ball 
tafcebntobctttbo  turtles  0?  ttbo  yong 
pigeons,  %  bung  them  bnto  tbc  0?ic(t, 
to  tbc  boo?e  of  tbe  Xabernaclc  of  the 
Congregation. 

30  anb  tbc  £?ieft(ball  offer  the  one 
fo?  a  finne  offering,  anb  the  otber  fo?a 
burnt  offering ,  anb  tbc  jJmcft  (bail 
matte  an  atonement  fo?  bcr  bcfo?e  tbe 
%  &  a  je>,  fo?  the  iffue  of  bcr  bnclcan= 
neffc. 

31  Xhtis  (ball  ycc  feparate  tbc  chrt 
b?cn  of  Jfrael  from  tbeir  bntlcanncffe, 
that  tbey  bic  not  in  their  bntlcanncffe, 


Vbbcn  tbey  Defile  my  Xabernaele  that 
is  among  them. 

32  1Ebis  is  the  latb  of  bun  tbat  bath 
an  iffue,  anb  of  him  tbbofefecb  goeti) 
from  bim ,  anb  is  beblcb  tbcretbitl) ; 

3}  anb  of  bcr  tbat  is  firtte  of  bcr 
flolbers ,  anb  o'f  Dim  tbat  batb  an  tfTuc, 
of  tbc  man,anb  of  tbe  tboman,?  of  bim 
tbatlyert)  tbitb  bet  tbbicb  is  bntlcane. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  How  the  hie  Priefi  muft  enter  into  the  Holy 
place.  11  The  fume- offering  for  himfeife. 
15  The  finne- offering  for  the  people,  zo 
The  Scape  Goat.  10  Theyeerely  Feaftof 
the  Expiations. 

&£$&$€  i%tbc2L£>i3i>*fpaiteb^ 
$|MNg$j  to  £0ofcs ,  after  the  Death 
||£f!§$><f  of  tbc  ttbo  fonncsof  aa* 
$$&w»^£  ron,tbbcntbcyoffcrcbbc; 
s£i#&3^  fo?e  tbclL©^©,  anb  DieD. 

2  anb  tbc  %  0 13  id  fayb  bnto 
Wcs,  £>pcabe  bnto  aaron  tbybw 
tljcr ,  tbat  bee  *  tome  not  at  all  times  in 
to  tbe  $oly  place  tbitbin  the  Silailc, 
befoje  tbc  #erry  feat ,  tbbttt)  is  bpon 
tbe  atfee,  tbat  bee  bic  not:  fo?3JU)tll 
appcarc  in  the  tlouo  bpon  the  i}3crcy 
feat. 

3  1Ebus  (ball  aaron  tome  in  to  the 
$oly  plate :  lbitb  a  yong  bullocbc  fo? a 
finne  offering,  anb  a  r ammc  fo?  a  burnt 
offering. 

4.  l?ec  (ball  put  on  rbc  boly  linncn 
coate,  anb  be  (ball  bauc  tbc  lumen  b?ec= 
tbesbpon  bisflc(b,anD  (bailbcgirbeb 
lbitb  a  linnen  girDlcatiD  lbitb  tbelm 
ncn^rtcraiallbcebcattircb.  Xbcfc 
are  boly  garments :  tbetcfo?e  (ball  be 
tbafb  bis  flctb  in  tbatcr ,  anb  fo  put 
them  on. 

5  anb  be  (ball  taftc  of  tbe  Congre^ 
gation  of  tbe  tbilD?cn  of  3Jfracl,  ttbo 
feiDDes  of  tbe  ©oatcs  fo?  a  finne  of 
fering ,  anb  one  ramme  fo?  a  burnt  of 
fenng. 

6  anb  aaron  (ball  offer  bis  buV 
loebe  of  tbc  finne  offcring,tbbirfiisfo? 
bmifclfc ,  anb  *  ma&e  an  atonement  fo? 
bimfelfc,  anb  fo?btsboufe. 

7  anbbcfballtabetbctibo  goats, 
anb  p?cfcnt  tbem  bcfo?e  tbe  %  ©  is  © 
at  tbc  boo?c  of  tbc  Xabcrnacic  of  tbc 
Congregation. 

8  anb  aaron  fliall  tatt  lottes  bp^ 
on  tl)e  ttbo  Goatcs  :  one  lot  fo?  tbe 
%  ©  is  © ,  anb  tljc  otljcr  lot  fo?  tl;c 
t  Scapegoat. 

%  3 9  anb 


•Exod.  jo. 

lo.hcb.p. 

7- 


*Heir.o.7. 


f  Mw.A- 


The  Scape  goat.        Leuiticus.  Afinneoffnng 


t  Hcbr.went 

Vf. 


*Heb.9.I3 

and  10  4. 


\  Hri  Jw,t- 

Uih. 
•Luk.t.io. 


9  3fnb 2aton  (ball  tying  the  goatc 
bpontbfttcft  ffte1L©«©£>lottfcU,anb 
offer  fttm  fo?  afinnc  offering. 

10  26ut  tfte  goat  on  mfticft  tfte  lot  fell 
to  be  tftc5>capegoatc,fbaibep?efcntcb 
aliue  bcfo?e  tfte  ?L©ia©,  to  mafee  an  at* 
oncment  ibitft  ftlm,  anb  to  let  hint  goc 
fo?  a  £>eape  goate  into  tfte  ttnibcr 
neffe. 

11  3mb3larond)aitylngtftcbullocfec 
of tftc finnc  offering,  mfticft  is  fo?ftitm 
fclfe,  anb  (ball  inane  an  atonement  fo? 
bimfclfc,  anb  fo?  ftis  houfe,  anb  fbai  fern 
tftcbulloefec  of  tfteunnc  offcringibfticb 
isfo?ftimfclfe. 

12  anbftcflialltafeeatcnfcrfullof 
burning  toalcsof  fire  from  off  tfte  Zh 
tar  before  the  Hsd  is©,  anbbtsftanbes 
full  of  (meet  incenfe  beaten  Dnall ,  anb 
tying"  HMftut  tftc  bailc. 

13  3nb  ftc  djail  put  tfte  intenfe  bpon 
tfte  fire  before  tfjc  Hsdis©,  tftat  tftc 
tloub  of  tfte  incenfe  map  toucr  tftc  met* 
tie  fcatctftat  is  bpon  tftc  tcthmonte,tftat 
hebicnot. 

14.  3mb*fte(ballta6eoftbebloobof 
tftc  btillocftc,  anb  *  fp?infeic'tiutfft  ftis 
finger  bpon  tftc  £©crcle  Teat  Cafllbarb : 
anb  befoze  tfte  fipcrcie  fcatc  fftall  ftcc 
fpzitiuic  of  tftc  bloob  mttft  ftis  finger  fe* 
ucn  times. 

15  CXftcnfftallfte  Hill  tfte  goatc  of 
tftc  nunc  offering  tftat  is  fo?tfte  people, 
anb  bang  ftis  bloob  lbltftm  tftc  SHatlc, 
anb  bocttutft  tftat  bloob  asftcbib ibitft 
tftc  bloob  of  tftc  bullotfec,  ano  fpnnftic  it 
bpon  tftc  £0ctnc  feat,  anb  before  tfte 
£0ercicfeat. 

i6  2lnb  ftc  (hall  mane  an  atonement 
fo2  tftc  ftoly  place,  bctaufe  of  tfte  btv 
cleanncfTc  of  tftc  rftiltycn  ofjffracl, 
ano  becaufc  of  tftctc  rranfgrcflions  in 
autftcirfmncs:  anb  fofljau  ftcc  bocfo? 
tftc  Xabcrnaclc  of  tftc  Congregation 
tftat  t  rcmamctft  among  tftcm ,  in  tfte 
mtbbcft  of  tfteir  bnclcanncdc. 

17  *3ltib  tftcrc  diau  bee  no  man  m 
tfte  Xabcrnaclc  of  tftc  Congregation, 
lbftcu  ftcc  goctft  m  to  mafee  an  atone 
ment  mtftc  ftoft'  place,  btmll  ftcc  conic 
out,  ano  ftauc  mabc  an  atonement  fo: 
ftunfclfc,  anb  fozftis  houfholb.anbfoi 
autftcCongrcganonof^fracl. 

is  3ln&  ftc  (ball  goc  out  bnto  tlic  Hi 
tar  tftat  is  beftue  tftc  Hoire>,  anb  mafee 
an  atonement  fozit,  9  (hail  take  of  tftc 
bloob  of  tftc  bullotfee,  ano  of  tftcblooo 
of  tftc  goatc,  anb  put  it  upon  tftc  t)02ttcs 
of  tftc  2lltar  rounb  about. 


19  2utbfte  (hail  ftytnfele  of  the  bloob 
bpon  it  ibitft  ftss  finger  teuen  times,anb 
rtcnfe  it ,  anb  ftailoib  it  from  tfte  bn* 
clcanneffe  of  tfte  cfttityen  of  3Jfrael. 

20  c  3lnb  mftcn  ftee  ftatft  mabean 
enb  of  reconnlmg  tfte  ftoly  plate ,  anb 
tfte  Xabcrnaclc  of  tfte  Congregation, 
anb  tftc  3Utar,  ftee  ffta(l  tying  tfteliue 
goate. 

21  3nb  2aron  fljail  lap  both  ftis 
ftanbs  bpon  tftc  ftcab  of  tfteliue  goatc, 
anbconfefTcoucr  fttm  all  tftcintquities 
of  tftecftiltycnof  3Jfracl,  anb  an  tftetr 
tranfgrefTlons  m  all  tfteir  fmnes,  put> 
ttngtftem  bpon  tfte  ftcab  of  tftc  goatc, 
ano  (ftad  f enb  ftun  albay  by  tftc  ftanb  of 
t  afitman into  tfte  rbilbccneult. 

22  3nb  tfte  goate  (hall  bcarc  bpon 
ftimailtfteirinlquitics,bntoaianbtnot 
inftabitcb,  anbftclftaii  let  goc  tftc  goat 
intljcibilbcrncCTe. 

23  3lnb3laron  (hall  come  into  tftc 
Xabcrnatle  of  tfte  Congregation,  anb 
fbai  put  off  tftc  linnen  garments  ibfticft 

ftcputon,mftcnftclbcntintotftcftoly 
place ,  anb  (ball  leaue  tftcm  tftcrc 

24.  ^nbftc  (ftalltbalh  ftis  fled)  rbftft 
ibater  m  tftc  ftoly  place,  anbputonftis 
garments,  anb  conic  foo?tft,  anb  offer 
ftis  burnt  offering,  anb  tfte  burnt 
offering  of  tftc  people ,  anb  mafee  an 
atonement  fo?  ftunfelfe,  anb  fo?  tftc 
people. 

2$  3lnb  tftc  fat  of  tfte  finnc  offering 
(hail  ftc  burnebpon  tftc  3ltar. 

26  3ftio  ftc  tftat  let  goc  tfte  goat  fo? 
tftc  ^cape-goat,  (bai  math  his  clothes , 
anb  batfte  ftis  fled)  m  mater,  anb  after- 
•barb  come  into  tfte  Campc. 

27  3lnb  tfte  bullocfecfo?  tftc  finnc  al 
fcring ,  ano  tft  c  goat  f 02  tfte  fin  offering, 
ibftofc  bloob  lbastyougfttm,  to  mafee 
atonement  m  tftc  ftoly  place,  (ball  one 
car?  foo2tft  *ibitftout  tfteCampe,  anb 
tftcy  (ftal  bunic  in  t\)t  fire  tftcic  (twines 
anbtftctr  flcfli , anb  tfteir  boung. 

23  3tab  ftc  that  burnctft  them,  d»au 
mad)  ftis  clotftcs ,  ano  batfte  ftis  fled)  tit 
mater,  anb  aftcribarb  ftc  fljall  come  im 
to  tlic  Campc. 

29  CSmotftisfliaiibcaOamtcfo? 
cucr  bnto  you :  tftat  tntftcfcucntftmO' 
nctft  ,on  tftc  tcntli  bay  of  tftc  moncth.ye 
(ball  afflict  your  foulcs,  *  boc  no  lbo?bc 
ataii,  lbftctftcr  it  bec  one  ofyour  olbnc 
countrcy  ,  02  a  (fcangcr  tftat  fotour 
uctft  among  you. 

jo  5^02  on  mat  bay  dial  thePr.cn  mabc 
an  atonement  (0?  you,  to  clcanfcyou, 

th.ir 


t  Htlrjz 
man  ofep- 
BortMnitte. 


*  Lni;t.6. 
jo.hcfa.i  3. 


for  atonement.  Chap.xvij.        No  blood  eaten. 


fHelr.fi.>; 
bu  band. 


•Exod.jo. 

icheby. 

7- 


that  pee  map  bee  tlcane  from  all  pout 
fmnes  before  tlje  %  ©  ih  jp. 
ji  3it  (hail  be  a  5>abbatb  of  red  bttto 

Sou,  anb  pe  (ball  affuctpoutfoulcsbpa 
atutcftycuer. 

31  anb  tbe  iDnefiibbom  be  (ballad 
opnt,  anb  rbDont  Ije  fliall  t  tontJccratcto 
mimtter  tn  tbe  $ucfts  of&cc  tn  bis  fa> 
tbers  fleab ,  (ball  mahc  tbe  atonement, 
anb  fbal  put  on  the  imncn  tlotljes,  cuen 
tbe  bolp  garments. 

33  2nb  be  fl)ail  matte  an  atonement 
fo:  tilt  bolp  S>anctuarp ,  anb  tice  (ball 
mafec  an  atonement  foz  tbeXabcrnaclc 
of  the  Congrcgation,anb  foj  tbc  3ltar : 
anb i  be  (ball  maltc  an  atonement  foz  rb  c 
jimetts ,  anb  fo?  all  tibc  people  of  tlje 
Congregation. 

3+  anb  tins  (ball  be  an  eucrlatting 
ftatutebnto  pou,to  maac  an  atonement 
fojtbc  cbtlbmtof  3Jfrael ,  to;  all  tbeir 
fmnes*  once  a  peer  e.  3int>bebibastbe 
%  ©  is  jd  commanbeb  £0ofes. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

Thebloodof  all  flainebeaftsmuftbe  offered 
to  the  Lord  at  thedoore  of  rhe  Tabernacle. 
7  They  mud  not  offer  to  deuils.  10  All  ea- 
ting ol  blood  is  forbidden,  15  and  all  that 
dieth  alone,or  is  tome. 

rrfgsH  /15bti)e?L©is©  fpaaebtv 
mm&¥  co£0ofcs,fapmg, 
m^<m  2  «S>pcabcbnto:Saron 
anb  bnto  bis  tonnes,  anb 
'?&&£  bntoalltbetbtltycnof3Jf' 
racl ,  anb  tap  bnto  tbem ;  Xftis  tstije 
tbing  ttibicb  tlje  %  ©  is  je>  ban)  torn* 
manbcb.favmg; 

3  nabat  man  foeuer  there  bee  of  tbe 
Doufc  of  3frael ,  tbat  btlletb  an  ore,  o; 
iambe,o;  goat  in  tbe  Campc,o;  tbat  Htl- 
Ictb'toutoftbeCampe, 

4  ^ttb  bnngetl)  it  not  bnto  tbe 
Boo;e  of  rtjclCabernacle  of  tbe  Congre- 
gation ,  to  offer  an  offering  bnto  tl)c 
%  ©  is  ©  before  tbe  Xabccnacle  of  rt)e 
?L©  is  ©,  bloob  (ball  be  imputeb  bnto 
tbatman ;  bebart)  (beb  bloob ,  anb  tbat 
man  (ball  be  tut  off  from  among  tyis 
people: 

5  %oti)cenbtbattbctbtUwenof3iO 
tael  map  tying  tbeir  facrtfites,  Vbljicb 
tl)cp  offer  in  trjc  open  ficlb ,  eucn  tbat 
tljcpmap tying  tbem bnto  tbe  ?L©R3e>, 
bnto  tbe  boo;c  of  tbe  Xabcrnaclc  of 
tbe  Congregation  bnto  tbe  tfmett ,  anb 
offer  tbem  to;  peace  offerings  bnto  rt)c 


6  3nbthc  0;icff  (bail  fp;mculc  tbe 
bloob  bpon  tbe  3lltat  of  tbe  %  ©  is  ©,ai 
tbeboo;c  oftbcluibernatlc  oftbeCon- 
gccganon,anb  burne  tbe  fat  to;  a'froect 
fauourbnto  tljcIL  ©  is©. 

7  3nbtbcp  fyallnomo^  offer  tbeir 
facrtBtcs  bnto  Deuils,  after  lbbom  tljep 
bauegonc  a  lbbonng :  Xhisfbailbea 
ftatutcfojeuer  bnto  tbem  ttyotigljout 
tbeir  generations. 

8  C  2nb  tbou  (bait  Tap  bnto  tbem, 
nabattocuer  man  there  be  of  tlje  boufe  of 
3Jfrael ,  o;  of  tlje  Arrangers  ttibtcl)  to; 
loutne  amongpou,tbat  offtctb  a  bunu 
offering  o;facufice, 

9  3mb  tyingetb  it  not  bnto  tbe  boo?c 
of  tbe  Xabcrnatlc  of  tbe  Congrcga^ 
tlon ,  to  offer  it  bnto  tbe  %  ©  is  jd,  cuen 
tbat  man  (ball  be  tut  off  from  among 
bis  people. 

10  c  3lnb  mbattoeucr  man  there  be 
of  tbe  boufcof  3frael,  o;of  tbettran 
gers  tbat  toiourocamongpou,tbatea' 
tetb  anp  mancr  of  bloob,  3Jibiileucn 
fet  nip  face  againft  tljat  foulc  tbat  ca^ 
tetb  blooo.aub  mill  cut  bun  off  from  a 
mong  bis  people. 

11  ifo;  tbe  life  of  tbe  flefb  is  m  tijjc 
bloob,anb3Jhaucgtucnittopoubpon 
tbe  3tltar ,  to  mabe  an  atonement  foi 
pour  foules  :fo?  it  is  tbe  bloob,  thatnia= 
aeti)  an  atonement  to;  tbefonlc. 

yl  Xbcrefo;e  31  feib  bnto  tbe  djtl 
tyen  of  3fracl,  j!5o  foule  ofpou  fljail  cat 
bloob ,  neitber  (ball  anp  (hanger  tbat 
foiournetb  amongpou,catbloob. 

13  3nb  mbarfomcr  man  tbcre  be  of 
tbcebtltycnof3ifrael,  0?  of  tlje  (trail- 
gers  tbat  foiournc  among  pou,  mbitb 
tbuntert)  anb  catcljctb  anp  bead  0?  foulc 
tbat  map  be  eaten,  be  (ball  cuen  povtyc 
out  tlje  bloob  tbereof,  anb  coucr  itmitb 
bull. 

14  fox  it  is  tbe  life  of  all  fled) ,  tbe 
bloob  of  it  is  foi  tbe  Ufetbtrcof :  tberc? 
ioit3  faib  bnto  tbe  cbiltycn  of  3ifracl, 
*^cfballnotcattbcbloobofnoniancc 
of  flcft) :  foi  tbe  life  of  all  flefb  is  tbe 
bloob  tbereof ;  mbofocucr  catctlj  it, 
fbaibccutoff. 

15  ^nb  cucrp  foulc  tbat  catctb  tbat 
mbtcb  fbicb  of  k  feifeyQjt  tl)atu»l)icb  mas 
tome  with  beafts,  mbctber  it  bee  one  of 
pouromnc  tountrcp ,  ojaffraugcr,  be 
(ball  botb  mafb  bis  clothes ,  anb  bathe 
himfeifc  tn  mater ,  anb  be  bntlcaitc  bntill 
tbe  Cum :  tben  fball  be  be  cleanc. 

i6  25uttfbemafb  themnot,no:batfie 
btsflefb,tbnibenjalbcarcbisiuiauitp. 


*  Exod.  29. 
iS. chap.  4. 
3* 


t  He&Jbtf 

htmtcthany 
hunting. 


'Gen.  9. 4. 


I  Hehjtc<tr- 

tmfi. 


Vnlawfull 


L 


cuiticus. 


marriages. 


*Ejck.  jo 
I  i.rom. 
10.5-gaUr 

3. 12. 


t  Heir,  rt- 
m*i»drr  of 
huflrfi. 


'Chap.  10. 


2hap.  jo 


»?• 


( h 


ap  30 


•C\u 


CHAP.    XVIII. 

Vnlawfull  Marnages.    19  Vnlawfull  lufts. 

iBo  the  %  0  is  ©  fpafee 
bntos$orcs,faymg, 

z    5>pcaHc  bnto  the 
cbilb2en  of  3Jfrael ,  anD 
fay  bnto  them  ,3  am  the 
?L©i3£>yout<l5ob. 

3  after  the  botngs  of  the  lanb  of  <£* 
gypt  lbbcrcm  ye  DVbclt,  thai  ye  not  Doe: 
anD  after  the  Doings  of  lanb  of  Canaan 
rbbitbcrgjhMigyo^fballycnotboc: 
nettber  (ball  pec  iDaiHc  tn  their  o?bi* 
nances. 

4  jacfballDoemyiuDgcment&anD 
heepe  nunc  o?Dinanc  cs,  to  ibalbc  there* 
tn:  3J  am  the  %  ©  is  ©  your  C5oD. 

5  *#ec(bautbctcfo2cfecepcmy{ta* 
tutes ,  anD  my  luDgcments :  ibblcb  tf  a 
man  Doc, bee  (bail  liuetntbcm:  Jam 
trjclLois©. 

6  C/Roncofyoufbaiiapp2ocbcto 
any  that  is  tnecrc  of  bmnc  to  bun ,  to 
bnroncr  their  nauemteffe  :  J am  the 
%$>■&&. 

7  XbenabeDncfFc  of  thy  father,  02 
the  nabconeffe  of  thy  mother  ,  (bait 
thou  not  bncouer :  (be  is  thy  mother, 
thou  (halt  not  bncouer  her  nabcDncffc. 

8  * Xbc  nabcDncflc  of  thy  fathers 
tbifc  (halt  thou  not  bncouer :  it is thy  fa* 
tbcrsnafecDitcffc. 

9  Xbc  nascDne  ITc  of  thy  fitter ,  the 
Daughter  of  thy  father,  02  Daughter  of 
thy  mother,  Whether  (bee  be  bo?nc  at 
homc,02bo2neab2oaD,euen  their  nabcD= 
ncfTc  thou  (halt  not  bncouer. 

10  Xbc  nabcDncffe  of  thy  fonnes 
Daughter,  02  of  thy  Daughters  Daugh- 
ter ,eueu  their  nauebneffe  thou  (halt  not 
bncouer :  fo?  tbctrs  is  thine  oibuc  na* 
bcDncffc. 

11  Xbc  nabcDncffe  of  thy  fathers 
tbiucs  Daughter ,  begotten  of  thy  fa* 
ther,(fl)C  is  thy  fitter ,)  thou (halt  notbn* 
coucrhernaheDnefTe. 

ii  'Xhou  (halt  not  bncouer  thena- 
bcDncfTc  of  thy  fathers  filler :  (he  u  thy 
fathers  ncercHtnfiboman. 

15  Xhou  (halt  not  bncouer  the  na* 
bcbncffe  of  thy  mothers  filler :  fo?  fbc  >s 
thy  tuothcisnccrcUinfmontan. 

14.  "Xhou  (halt  not  bncouer  the  tuis 
ItcDncffe  of  thy  fathers  b;othcr ,  thou 
(halt  not  app?ocbe  to  his  Ibife :  fljee  is 
thine  aunt. 

15  "Xboufbaitnot  bncouer  the na* 


Bcbnefleofthy  Daughter  miatb :  (bee  is 
thy  fonnes  ttnfc ,  thou  (halt  not  bnco- 
ucr  her  nabcDncffe. 

i6  *Xbou  (halt  not  bncouer  thenar 
bcDtteffe  of  thy  brothers  ttiife :  it's  thy 
brothers  nabcDncffe, 

17  Xhou  (bait  not  bncouer  tlje  na? 
fetDncffc  of  a  lboman  anD  her  Daugh- 
ter, neither  (halt  thou  tabe  her  fonnes 
Daughter,  02  her  Daughters  Daughter, 
to  bncouer  her  nabebneffe :  5*02  they 
are  her  nccre  Kinfetbotncn :  it  is  ibu> 
bcDneffe. 

18  /Rcitberfljaltthoutafeeaibifcllto 
her  filler,  to  bote  her,  to  bncouer  her  na* 
bcDnes  befibes  the  other,  tn  her  life  time. 

19  *3ll(bthou(haltnotapp20chcbn* 
to  atboman  to  bncouer  her  nabebnes, 
as  long  as  (bee  ts  put  apart  fo?  her  bn- 
clcanneffc. 

20  fl0o?eouer,  thou  (halt  not  lie  car 
nallyibith  thy  neighbours  Ibifc,  to  be 
file  thy  felfemttb  her. 

zi  3ttD  thou  (halt  not  let  any  of  thy 
fceD*paffctl)20ugh  the  fire  to*$9olcch, 
neither  (halt  thou  p2ophane  tbeiftamc 
of  thy  <5oD :  gj  am  the  %  ©  w  jp. 

22  Xhou  (bait  not  lie  lbith  man* 
KtnDc,asmttb  ujomanfeutDe :  it  is  abo* 
mination. 

xi  Neither (haltthou  beunth  any 
bcaft,  to  Defile  thy  felfe  therewith  :nct> 
ther  (ball  any  lboman  ftanb  befb?e  a 
bcaft  to  lie  Doibnc  thereto :  3Jt « ton? 
fufion. 

xat  35eftle  not  you  your  felues  in  any 
of  tbefc  things :  fo?  m  all  thefe ,  the  na? 
tions  are  Dcfileb  Ibbtcb  3  caft  out  be 
fo?cyou. 

25  3lnD  the  lanb  is  DcfUcD  :  Xberc* 
fo?c*3lDocbiftttheuuquitie  thereof  bp 
on  it ,  anb  the  lanb  it  fclfe  bomtteth  out 
her  inhabitants. 

26  Pc(balltbercfo?cbecpemy5>ta 
tutes  anb  my  ^uDgcments,  anD  (hall 
not  commit  any  of  thefe  abominations,- 
ncicher  any  of your  oibne  nation ,  no? 
any  Irrangcr  that  foiourneth  among 
you: 

27(5fo2alltljcfcabominationshauc 
the  men  of  the  lanb  Done,Tbhichlbere 
bcfo2eyou,anb  the  lano  is  Dcfileb.) 

28  Xhat  the  lanD  fpcibnotyou  out 
aifo,ibhcnyc  Defile  it, as  itfpelbcbout 
tl)cnation5  tljat  lberebefo2e  you. 

29  ;f  02  ibhorocucr  fljall  commit  & 
ny  of  thefe  abominations ,  cum  the 
fouics  that  commit  them , (hall  becut  off 
fconiamougthcir  people. 

30  Xhccc? 


•Chip.  jo. 

31. 


I1  Or,  one 
wife  f#  ano- 
ther. 

•Cliap.10. 


'  Chap.  30. 
3.  3. king. 
1  ;.!<». 

•Called 

AcU7.4». 

Moloc. 


"Chjp.io. 
'J- 


D 


mers  lawcs, 


Ch: 


ap.xix. 


44.&10  7. 

I.pct.1.16. 


•CfuP.i3. 


»E«od.  10. 
7.dcui.  5. 
u.  mau.  5. 
34.  iam.5. 
II. 

•Eftlfi.io 

7. dew.  14. 
1  4.  cobi.  4 


jo  Xhcrcfoietbalycbccpemme^);* 
binance ,  chat  ye  commit  not  any  one  of 
thefe  abominable  cuttomes  ,  .bbieft 
ibtte  comnuttcb  befoje  you,ano  that  ye 
befile  not your  fclucs  therein :  3  am  thf 
It  sums  ©  your  C5ob. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1    A  repetition  of  fundry  La  wes. 

§13^823  iftb  the  ?L  o  m  ©  fpabe 
,,?bntofcT3ofes,faying, 
x  £>pea&ebntoallthe 
Congtcganon  of  the  cbfr 
ozen  of  3tfrael ,  anb  fay 
bnto  them,*  IH  ftjalbc  holy  :fo?3J  the 
%  ©  is  ©  pout  <5ob  am  holy. 

$  C  **ec  (ball  fcarc  cwry  man  his 
mother,  anb  bisfatber,  anb  aeepemy 
Sabbaths :  JJ  am  tf)e  13L  o  is  ©  your 
©ob. 

4  CXurneycnotbntoiboles,no2 
mafceto  your  feluesmoltcngobs:3i  am 
the  H©  is  ©your  ©06. 

5  <T3nb  if  ye  offer  a  facriftce  of  peace 
offerings  bnto  the  ?L©s©,  ye  fljall 
offer  it,  at  your  oibneibill. 

6  IJtfbaiibeeatentbclamebayye 
offer  it ,  anb  on  the  mozroro :  anb  if 
ought  rcmauie  bntill  the  tbtrb  bay,  it 
(baibcburntin the  fire. 

7  3Cnb  if  it  be  eaten  at  ail  on  the 
thltbbay  ,it  isabonunablt;it  (ball  not 
beatccpttb. 

s  Xbcrcfoie  euery  one  that  eatefb  it, 
fbaibcarebis  imquitie,bctaufcbebatb 
pzopbaneb  the  balotbeb  thing  of  the 
%  c»  is  ©  s  anb  that  foule  Ojaibc  cut  off 
from  among  bis  people. 

9  €  3no  *  tbljcn  ye  rcapc  tije  bar* 
ucBofyourianb,tboufl)aitnotmbolly 
reape  tl)e  comers  of  tl)v  fieio ,  neither 
(bait  thou  gather  the  gleanings  ofttJ? 
haructt. 

10  3nb  thou  (bait  not  gleane  thy 
bmcyarb,neitbcr  fhaittbou  gather  cue* 
ry  grape  of  thy  bmcyarb ;  thou  (bait 
lcaueti)cm  foz  the  pooze  ano  Granger : 
31  am  the  %  ©  is  ©  your  ©00. 

11  C^elbalinottteate^icitberbcalc 
falOy,  neither  lie  one  to  another. 

ii  C3nb  ye  (ball  not 'fnicare  by  my 
iftamc  faiay ,  neither  (halt  tboupzo* 
phanctheiltiainc  of  thy  ©>b:  3  am  the 

H«D1R©. 

15  C  *  Xhou  (halt  not  befraub  thy 
neighbour, neither  rob  him:  the  tbages 
ofbimtbatlsbircb.fbalnotabibettntb 
thee  all  nigbt.bntill  the  mozmng. 


ll 


an 


dord 


inances. 


1+  C  Xhou  fbalt  not  curfc  the  beaft, 
*noz  put  a  Humbling  blocfee  before  the 
blinb,but  than  feare  tby  ©ob :  33  am  the 

Hfl>18©, 

15  O^efballboenobnrighteouQies 
in  lubgementi  thou  (halt  not  *  refpect 
the  perfon  of  the  poo?e,noz  honour  the 
perfonofthemightic:  buiin  rtghteouf- 
neflt  (bait  thou  iiibgc  tby  neighbour. 

16  ft  Xhou  (halt  not  goc  bp  anb 
bourne  as  a  tale-bearer  among  thy  pco< 
pic :  neither  (halt  thou  flana  againtt  the 
bloob  of  thy  neighbour :  3J  ani  the 
1L©.'S©. 

17  C*Xbou  (halt  not  bate  thy  bzo* 
ther  m  thine  heart :  thou  (halt  m  any 
ttufe  rcbiiae thy  neighbour,  ||anb  not 
fufferfinncbponhim. 

is  C  Xhou  (halt  not  auenge  no? 
beare  any  grubgc  agamft  the  ebsl02cn 
of  thy  people,  "but  thou  (bait  loue  thy 
ncighbo:  as  thy  felfe:  31  am  the  Hois©. 

19  €  *>«  (hall  Rcepe  mp  Statutes: 
Xhou  (halt  not  let  thy  catteil  genber 
ttnth  a  Diuerfc  fembe :  Xhou  (halt  not 
foibetby  fielb  ibitbmtuglebfccb :  il5ei? 
tljct  (hall  a  garment  mmglco  of  Imncn 
anb  Vboollen  come  bponthee. 

io  C^ubibhofocuerneth  carnally 
tblth  a  iboman  that  is  a  bonbmaib,||  be* 
trotbeb  to  an  huf  banb,  anb  not  at  all 
reOem.eb,no2fcceboincgmcnbcr,||(bc 
(hall  beCtourgeb :  they  (hall  not  be  put 
to  beath,  bteaufe  (bctbasnot  free : 

21  3ln&  he  fljall  bnng  his  ttefpafle 
offenng  bnto  the  Hois©,  bnto  the 
boojcoftheXabcrnactc  ofthcCongrc^ 
ganon ,  euen  aramme  fo?  atrefpaffe  of- 
fertng. 

iz  TlWb  the  ^itfl  (hall  mafee  an  at^ 
onement  fo?  him  tbith  the  ramme  of 
the  trefpaffe  offenng  brto2e  tl)t  H©w© 
fo?htsCnnc  ibhichhce  hathbone:  anb 
thefmnc  ibhtch  he  hathbone  (hall  bee 
fojgiucnhim. 

2  J  C^nbtbhen  yee  (hall  tome  in  to 
the  lanb,  anb  (hall  haue  pianteb  all  ma 
ner  of  trees  fo2  fooo,tl)tn  ye  (hall  count 
the  frnittherof  asbnnrcumnfeb :  th.2ce 
y  ceres  (hall  it  be  as  bncircumcifeb  bnto 
you:tt(hailnotbceatenof. 

24  But  in  the  fourth  yccre  all  the 
fruit  thereof  (hall  be  t  holy  to  pzaife  rijc 

ILfiDlS©  withall. 

25  mnn  tti  the  nftyecrc  (hall  ye  eate 
of  the  frntt  thereof,  that  it  may  yeclbe 
bnto  you  the  mcrcafe  thereof:  $  am  the 
|L©iH©yonr<i&oO. 

26  C^efhallnotcatcanythingibith 

the 


•  Dtut.  17. 1 
.8  I 


j.dcur.i. 
1  7- and  1 6- 

J  6  prou.34' 
z;. 11m. 2.9 


"i.Ioh.2, 
1 1. mat  3  y 
ecdu.  19.1  j 
'lOr,  that 
thou  hrtre 
not  ftancfir 
htm. 

•Marr.^-4  3 
and  iz.}9 
rom  I  j.y. 

giJar.v'4- 
1am.  3.8. 


(|  Or,  ahufed 
by  .vff.  H<b. 
rcprochtd 
by  I  or  far  J 
ma,!, 

\\Oi,tby. 
Heb.thcrt 


\lUhntJ*j 
Vratfittotht 

LOVsO 


Diuers  lawcs, 


L 


cuiticus. 


an 


dordi 


inances. 


*Chap.  II 
5- 


•  Dcut.«4- 


|  Heir,  pre 
pbattt. 


*Exod.  2:. 
II. 

Orjfprrjfe 

•Exod.  33 


•Prou.  it. 

!     1':.!   |6. 

I !.  and  30. 

10 

t  Hci.fimrt. 


•Clup.18 
11. 


thcblooD,  neither  rt>all pc  bfcmchant 
mctuNnozobferue  times. 

17  '^ctbalt  not  ronnb  die  comers 
ofyourhcabs.neitherfhaltdwimarre 
the  toners  of  thybearb. 

2S  #e  (hall  not*  ma&c  any  cuttings 
my  our  flefb  foz  tfjcbeab  ,noz punt any 
marfecs  bpon  you :  3 am  tl)c  %  0  h  ©. 

19  CDoenottpzofhtutetby&augl) 
ter,  to  taufebec  to  be  a  lbbozc,  left  the 
lanbfatl  to  lbhojcbome,  ano  the  lanb 
become  full  of  lbicKcoucffe. 

30  c  Pc  (ball  heepc  tny 5>abbatbs, 
anb  rcucrcncc  my  Sanctuary :  3 am 
SdjclLoajD. 

31  C  ftegarb  not  them  that  baueffc 
miliar  fpints ,  neither  fcefce  after  D3i-- 
5arbs,  to  be  befileb  by  them :  3  amd)c 

IlOH©V0UrG0D. 

31  C  Xrjou  fhait  rife  lip  before  the 
hoarv  bcab ,  anb  bononr  the  face  of  the 
ol&man,anbfearctby<5ob:3Jamtbe 

33  C  3(nb  *  if  a  ftranger  finournr 
i  ibid)  thee  m  your  lano ,  yee  (ball  not 
;|bercbmt. 

34  *  But  the  ftranger  that  bibclletb 
lbitbyou.fbaibeasoncbozneamongft 
vou ,  ano  thou  (halt  louc  him  as  th>1 
fclfe,fo: yt were frrangcrs  tn  tlie lano  of 
Cgypt :  31  am  the  %  0  ih  jd  pour  <3ob. 

3$  C^efljallbocnobttrigbteoufnes 
inuibginent,mmetcyatb,iuibctgbt,o,z 
mmeafure. 

36  *  gjuft  baiiautcs,  tuft  t  ibcigbts,a 
tuft  €pbab,anb  a  tuft  fcm  (hall  ye  banc: 
ll  am  the  It  oh  id  your  ©ob ,  tuhtch 
bzougbt  y  on  out  of  the  lanb  of  Cgypt. 

37  XhcrcfozcftiaUycobferucaUmy 
Statutes ,  anb  all  my  3Jubgements, 
anb  boe  them :  3  *m  t|)e  %  0  13  3?. 

CHAP.   XX. 

t  Of  him  th.it  giueth  of  his  feed  to  Molech.  4 
of  him  that  lauoureth  fuch  an  one.  6  Of 
qoingtoWizards.  7  Of  falsification,  9 
Ofhimthatcurfcth  his  parents.  10  Otadul- 
tcrie.  11.  14.  17.  19  Ollnceft.  13  OfSo- 
donu'e.  15  OfBcalh'alitic.  18  Ofvnclean- 
nefTc.  it  Obedience  is  required  with  holi- 
nefle.   27  V/izardsmulibeputtodeath. 

&$}Btf)@3  fib  the  %  0  is  s?  fpake 
ii^'/'X^J:  bnto  ilMcs&ymg, 
MgSraB  l  "Slgauicdioufbalt 
IV^-\\k  fay  to  the  chilbzcn  of  "Jf 
ssRVmeferael;  robofoeucrhebeof 
thcthitbzen  of  31fracl,  oz  of  the  ftrau 
gtrs  that  foioutne  m  3*ftael »  ^at 


gvued)  any  of  htsfcebbnto  £0olccb,he 
(bail  futely  be  put  to  btath  :tht  people 
of  the  lano  (hall  ftone  bun  ibid)  (tones. 

3  ^nb]tHb>lftt  my  face  agamft  that 
man, anb  lbiil  cut  bun  off  from  among 
Dispeople :  bctaufe  he  bad)  gmen  of  his 
feeb  bnto  tooled), to  befile  my  Sanrtu- 
ary.an&topzophanemyboly  /ftamc. 

4  3uibiftbcpcoplcofd)clanbboe 
any  ibayes  htbc  thctr  ms  from  the 
man ,  .bben  be  gtuen)  of  tjts  feeb  bnto 
^9olcrh,anb  hill  him  not : 

5  Xbcn  3)  uiill  fct  my  face  agamft 
that  man,  anb  agamft  hts  fanuly,  anb 
lbiil  rut  him  off,  anb  all  that  gocaibbo 
ring  after  him ,  to  commit  tbbozeoome 
ttiith  Molech  ,  from  among  thctr 
people. 

6  c  3nb  the  foulc  that  turneth  af 
ter  fuch  as  hauc  familiar  fptnts,anb  af 
ter  Ibivirbs ,  to  goe  a  Ibhozmg  after 
them  ,3J  Unll  cucu  fct  my  face  againtt 
that  foulc ,  anb  lbiil  cut  bun  offfrom  a 
mong  his  people. 

7  C  *  Sanctifie  your  fclues  there 
fozc ,  anb  bee  ycc  holy  :  fo?  3 lm  the 
|L0ia!Dyour<5oO. 

8  3tnb  ye  (hall  heepe  my  Statutes, 
anb  bo  tf)tm:  3  jm  tije  H  0  a  p  rbhirtj 
fanctifieyou. 

9  C*JFozcueryoncthatcurfettjhis 
father  o?  his  mother,  fhaibefurely  put 
to  beath :  hec  hath  turfeb  his  father  oz 
his  mother,- his  bloobfhaibebponhmt. 

io  C  3nb*  the  man  that  tommitteth 
abultcrie  ibith  another  mans  ibife,  euen 
he  that  committed)  abultcrie  ibid)  his 
neighbours  ibife,  the  abutter er,  anb 
the  abultcreffe  (hall  furely  bee  put  to 
bead). 

it  *3nb  the  man  that  lied)  truth  his 
fathers  lbtfc ,  hath  bncouercD  his  fa? 
thers  nahebneffe:  both  of  them  fhal- 
be  put  to  beat!)  i  djeir  bloob  ftulbebpon 
d)em. 

ii  ^nbif  a  manlicibitohisbaugl)'- 
tcrmlalb,  bod)  of  them  (hall  furely  be 
put  to  bead) :  they  hauc  lluought  con 
fufion;  their  bloob  fhaii  be  pponth cm. 

13  *  3?  fa  man  alfo  lie  ibid)  manhmo , 
as  hec  lycd)  ibith  a  iboman ,  both  of 
them  hauc  committcb  an  abomina^ 
don :  they  (hall  furely  be  put  to  bead); 
their  bloob  ftuttc  bpon  d)em. 

14  ^nbifamautaheaibifcanbhcr 
mother,  it>abitUcbnetic:  Xhcy  fliaibc 
burntibithfirr,  both  he  ant)  they,  that 
there  be  no  ibirtubuetTe  among  you. 

15  *3lnbif  a  man  lie  ibitha  bead,  he 

(hall 


"Chap.lt. 
44-  and  1  c 
3   1   pet. I. 

l6. 


"Exod.ll. 

17.  pro.  :o. 

lo.matth. 

lj.4. 

*  Dcut.  3  3. 

3  3.iohll8. 


"Chap.  1 S 


•Chap.  18. 


'Char 


Diuers  lawes, 


Ch; 


lOXXJ, 


an 


dord 


inanccs. 


'Chap.  I S. 
<?• 

+  Uch.nuUc 
naked. 


\Hel>..ifc- 
tarAHOn. 


•Chap.  1 8. 

a  6. 

•Chap.  18, 
25- 


'Dcut.p.5 


'Chap.!  1 
k.dcuc.24. 


I  Or/ncucth 

*Chap.  19. 
J. and  10.7. 
I.pct.l.18. 


(ball  for  evp  be  put  to  Death :  ano  pc  (ball 
dav  the  bead. 

i£  ^nDifaibomcinappjotlibntoa' 
nv  bead,  anb  Ite  bourne  thereto ,  thou 
Cbait  bill  tbciboman  anb  the  bead:  the? 
(ban  fucciv  be  put  to  Death,  tljctr  bloob 
(haibc  upon  them. 

17  3mb  if  a  man  (ball  tabebis  fillet, 
bis  fathers  Daughter ,  0;  his  mothers 
Daughter,  anb  fee  her  nabcbnelTe,  anb 
(be  fee  bis  nabebnclTe ,  it  is  a  lbufecD 
thmg,  anb  tbcv  (ball  bee  tut  off  m  the 
fight  of  their  people:  he  hath  bneouereb 
bis  fillers  nabebueffe,  he  (ball  bcarc  his 
tniquttic. 

is  *  3uD  if  a  man  (hall  lie  ltoitb  a  lbo* 
manbauingbcrficKcnclTcanDfljaibn; 
touer  her  ua&ebneflc :  he  hath  t  Dtfcouc* 
reb  her  fountame,anb  d>  c  hath  bncouc* 
reD  the  fountame  of  her  bloob :  anb 
both  of  them  (hall  bee  tut  off  from  a- 
mongtheit  people. 
19  3nD  thou  fhalt  not  bntouer  the  na* 
bebnelTe  of  tbp  motbctsudcr,no2  of  tbp 
fathers  filler:  foj  hce  bncouctetb  his 
neerc  binne :  the?  (hall  bcarc  their  mi- 
quitic. 

20  2nDifamanfi,aUlicnHtbbis 
bnclcs  ttnfe,  he  hath  biuoucrcb  his  tin* 
tics  nabebneffe:  the?  mall  bcare  their 
finne,  thep  maiibiccbtlbicfTe. 

z\  3lnD  if  a  man  fljaii  taae  his  bjo* 
thcrstbifc,itistanbiulcanething :  bee 
hath  bntonercb  t)is  biothcrs  naaeD* 
neffe,  tbcv  (bail  be  thilbleiTe. 

ix  CPcfl)alltbc«fo2CBCcpcanmv 
Statutes,  anb  all  mv  Itabgcments, 
anb  bocthem:  that  the  lanDctbbitber 
3IbniigvontoDrbellthetcm,*fpuevou 
not  out. 

25  ^nbrcfhailnottbaibcinthcma' 
ncrs  of  the  nation,  BjlHcb  3  cad  out  be* 
fo2C  pou :  fo2  tbcv  tommtttcb  all  tbcfe 
things,  **  therefore  5  abhozr  cb  them. 

24.  iSut'jbaucfaiD  bnto  pou,  fee 
(hall  inherit  their  lanb,  anb  3  tbill  glue 
it  bnto  Vou ,  to  poffeffe  it,  a  lanb  that 
fio  ,bcfb  Vbith  milttc  anb  how:  3  amrt)c 
?L©k©  pout  ©od,  which  batic  fcpa* 
ratcb  vou  from  other  people. 

25  *  Pc  (ball  fberefoze  put  biffcrence 
bcttbeene  clcanc  beads,  anbbnclcane, 
anb  bctlbccnc  bncleanc  foules  ,  anb 
clcanc :  <?  vcfliall  not  matte  poucfoulcs 
abominable  bp  bead  02  bp  foulc,  02  bp 
anp  mancr  of  lining  thmg ,  that  ||  crcc* 
pcth  on  the  grounb,ibhich3haucfe: 
paratcb  from  vou  as  bncleanc. 

26  2mbycfl)albebolpbntomc:*fo2 


3JtheHa)fipain  bolp ,  ?  banc  fcucrcb 
vou  fromothcr  people,  that  pc  (houlb  be 
mine. 

17  C  *2man  alfo  0:  iboman  that 
hath  a  familiar  (pint,  02  tbattsaibiy 
3arb,  (hall  fur  civ  be  put  to  Death :  thep 
d)all  done  them  ibttb  dones :  their 
bloob  it)  ^be  bpouthem. 

CHAP     XXI. 

1  Of  the  Priefts  mourning.  6  Ol  their  holi- 
nefli.  8  Of  their  efHmation.  7.  13  Ot  their 
Manage1;.  \6  The  Priefts  that  haueblemi- 
fhesinuftnot  minifleriiitheSajuftuarie. 

^Sftf^>  ii5bfhc|l©iRiDraiDbnto 


^X^03  ^ofcSi  3>peabcbnto  the 
*tSA3&  tfVtcds  the  fonnes  of  3a* 
mWaiM  ron, ana  (av  bnto  them, 
i^^s^f  Xbcre  djau  none  bebefc 
lcbfo2tl)cbcab  amonghispeoplc: 

2  26ut  fo2  h<s  binne,  that  is  nccre 
bnto  him,  that  is,  fo2bisniotber,  anb  fo2 
his  father ,  anb  fb2  his  fonne ,  anb  foi 
his  Daughter ,  anb  fo2  hts  bjothcr , 

3  3lnD  foj  his  fider  a  birgtn,  that  is 
nigh  bnto  him,  ibbicb  hath  hab  no  buf* 
bano :  fo2  her  map  he  be  befilcb. 

4.  26ut  hec  fljall  not  Defile  himfclfe 
li  being  achicfeman  among  bts  people, 
to  p?ophanc  himfclfe. 

5  *  Xbcp  fljaii  not  matsc  baibneffe 
bpon  their  hcao ,  neither  djatl  thep 
djaite  off  the  co2ncr  of  their  bearb ,  no? 
matte  anv  cuttings  in  their  fled) : 

6  Xbcvfliaibebolp  bnto  their  ©ob, 
anb  not  pzofane  the  name  of  their  ©ob: 
fo2  the  offrtngs  of  thefl  ©  «  jd  inabc  bv 
fire,  and  the  b?eab  of  their  C5ob  thepboe 
offer :  thcrcfo2e  thep  (hall  bebolp. 

7  Xhcp  fliaii  not  taae  a  lbtfe  that  is 
att>b02c,  02  P20fanc,  neither  fljautbcp 
taae  a  iboman  put  atbap  from  her  but 
banD  :fo2  be  "bolp  bnto  bis  Gob. 

8  Xhoud)aitfanctifichimtherfo2e, 

fo2hc  offerctb  the  b2eab  of  thp  Gob :  he 
fbaibeboipbiitotbcc:fo23Ithe?l&Bi2> 

lbhichfancttficpou.amholp. 

9  C3uiDtbcDaugbtcrofanp$jicfl, 
if  d)C  p2ofauc  her  fclfcbp  plapmg  the 
ibJwe ,  (he  p2ofaneth  her  rather :  (hec 
(baUbc  burnt  ttutb  fire. 

10  ^nb  he  that  is  the  high  J&icd  a* 
moug  his  b2cth?ni,  bpon  tbbofe  Ijcab 
the  anouutng  ople  ibas  polb?cb ,  anb 
that  is  tonfecratcb  to  put  on  the  gar* 
ments,  niallnotbncoucchisheab,  no2 
rcnthistlotijes: 

n  >3cithcr(hallhcgocmtoanvDcaD 
boby, 


•Dfut.18. 

1  i.i.Sam. 

»a7. 


\Or,bcingtb} 

mom  ha 
people  hes 
fiattnoi  de* 
fit  btmfttft 
for  his  wife 
&c. 
*Chap.  19. 

*7« 


Diuers  lawes. 


L 


euiticus. 


an 


dord 


inances. 


\Or,fni. 


"Chip. 
»3- 


\\Or,tM 
{Under. 


boo?,  no?  Defile  himfelfc  fo?  his  father, 
o:fbxt)isntoti)ci:: 

ii  /Neither  (hall  Dec  sot  out  of  the 
Sanctuary ,  no?  p?ophant  tljt  Sanctu; 
at?  of  ins  <Sou  j  to?  the  ecoibnc  of  the 
anointing  ode  af  his  Coo  isbpouhim : 

^amthtfLfiDS©. 

i}  anblKfljalitaKcaftifcmhcttfir 
gitutic. 

14  atbiDotb,o?aDtuo?ccDn)Qman, 
o?p?ophanc,oranhatlot,theftfl)allhe 
not  tatte :  but  De  (hailtaacabirgineof 
Ins  oilmc  people  to  wife. 

15  /Retrhet(haihcp?ophattehlsfecD 
among  h(s  people  :fo?  3  the  ?Lii>K© 
bocfanctifiehim. 

16  C^nDtljelLsDis©fpa&etmto 
£Pores,fa?tng, 

17  5>pcaue  Ditto  aaton ,  facing, 
tBhofoeuct  he  be  oftfjp  fecb  m  rtjctr  gc* 
nerations,  tijat  hath  an?  blemifh, ,  let 
huu  not  app?oehe  to  offer  the  ||  b?caD  of 
htsdSob: 

18  jfo?  ttihatfoeuerman  hee  be  that 
hath  a  blemifh,  he  than  not  appjothe :  a 
blinbman,  0?  a  lame,  02  he  thathath  a 
flat  nofco?  an?  thing  'fupetfluous, 

19  £)?  a  man  that  is  b?oKcnfbotcb, 
o?b?oRcnhanbcb, 

10  C*?ttooBcbatBt,o?a||otbarfe,o? 
that  hath  a  blemifh  in  hts  c?e,  0?  be 
fcutu? ,  0?  ftabbtb,  0?  hath  his  (tones 
b?onen: 

ti  ii5oman  that  hath  a  blemifh  ,of 
the  fees  of  aaron  the  $?ieft,  (hall  tome 
nigh  to  offer  the  offttngs  of  the  3L<dis© 
mabc  b?  fire:  he  hath  a  blemifh;  he  (ball 
not  come  ntgh  to  offer  the  b?cab  ofhis 
C5ob. 

ii  $e  (hall  cat  the  b?eabofhiS<£oD, 
both  of  the  mod  l^ol?,  anb  of  the  hoi? : 

13  £>nel?  he  (bail  not  goe  m  Dnto 
the  flJailc ,  no?  come  ntgh  lmto  the  al- 
tar, bctaufc  he  hath  ablemtfb,  thathe 
p?ophanc  not  mp  Sanctuaries :  fo?3f 
the  %  •$>  is  v>  boe  fauctific  them. 

a+  3Cno  £0ofestolb  it  Dntoaaron, 
anb  to  his  fonncs ,  anb  Unto  all  the  chu> 
b?cn  of  'JSfracl. 

CHAP.   XXII. 

1  The  Prieftl  in  their  vncleannefTe  muft  ab. 
ftaine  trom  the  holy  things.  6  How  they 
fhallbeedcanfed.  10  Who  of  thePriefb 
houfemay  eateof  thehoiy things.  17  The 
facrificcs  mud  be  without  blemifh.  2.6  The 
age  of  the  facrifice.  2.9  Thelawof  eating 
the  facrifice  of  thankefgiuing. 


0u  the  &©m©  fpaite  mi 
toQ3ofes,favtng, 

i  Spcalte  bnto  aa* 
ton ,  aim  to  his  Comics, 
that  the?  feparate  them* 
feiucstrom  thcholpthings  of  the  chil- 
D?en  of3?fcaci ,  aim  that  the?  p?ophane 

not  m?  hOl?  /|5amC,  in  cbofe  things  urtjul) 

the?  haloiD  unto  me:  3  am  thefL<Dis©. 
j  jB>a?nntothem,i©hotbcucthebe 
ofall?ourfecb ,  among  ?our  generati- 
ons, that  gocth  bnto  the  hoi?  things, 
HbhuD  the  djilbten  of  3Jfrael  halloiD 
into  the  %  <£>  k  ©,  hatung  his  Dntlcan 
neffe  Dpou  htm,that  fouie  (haibc  cut  off 
from  m?  p?crcncc  :3  am  the  %  ©  «  ©. 

4  nehat  man  (ocucr  of  the  fecb  of 
aaton  is  a  leper ,  o?  hath  a  t  running 
iffucbt  than  not  eat  of  the  hoi?  thuigs, 
nnttll  he  be  cleanc.  anb  *  rbho  fo  touch- 
eth  an?  thing  that  is  nnclcane  by  the 
bcab ,  o?  a  man  ibbofe  feeb  gocth  f com 
him: 

5  )D?fthofocuertouchcthan?erecs 
ptng  thing,  ibhcrebp  he  ma?  bemaue 
Dntleane,  o?  a  man  of  Whom  hcema? 
tane  Dneleamteffe ,  ibbatfocuct  tin* 
cleamtcffehcbath: 

6  Xhe  foulc  ibhich  hath  touchco 
an?  fuel),  (bathe  Dntleane  Dnttlieuen, 
anb  (hall  not  cate  of  the  hoi?  things, 
bnleffehcmafhhis  fled)  ttntb  iDatet. 

7  anDibhett  the  Stinnc  is  bourne, 
hctbaUbc  cleane,  anb  (hall  attcrtbarb 
eate  of  the  hoi?  things,  becaufe  it  is  his 
foob. 

8  *Xhatn)htchbtethofitfclfe,o?ts 
to?ne  with  beaib ,  hce  (hail  not  eate  to 
befile  htmfelfe  thcrcibtth  :  3  am  the 

9  Xhe?  (hall  thetcfo?c  ftcepe  mine 
€>?binance,  icfttlje?  beare  ftnnc  fo?  it, 
anb  bie  therefo?e,  if  thep  p?ophanc  it :  3 
U)c?L«i>iiJ5>  bocfanctificthcui. 

io  SLhercthallnourangereatoftlie 
hol?thing  a  fotourner  of thc&sicfls 
o?anhirebfetuant(hail  not  eateof  the 
hol?tlnng. 

ii  But  if  the  $?icfr  bit?  an?  (oule 
trbith  hismonc?,hefl)ailcatof  it.anb 
hcthatisbowe  m  his  houfe:tht?  (hall 
eat  of  his  meat. 

u  3!f  the  lanclls  baughtct  alfo  bee 
marrlcbbnto  ta  fttanger  ,Cl)e  ma?not 
eate  ofaitoffermgofthchol?thuigs. 

ij  But  if  the  i&?iettsbaugl)ter  be  a 
tt)iDon),o?btuo?ccb,attbhanenochilbc, 
anb  is  rcturneb  bnto  her  fathers  houfe, 
*asmher?outh,  (he  (hail  eat  of  her  fc 
there 


t  Hctr.mii 

ning  of  th* 

•Chap. ! ; 


'EioJ.22. 


44-J»- 


{  Hetrr.vitr: 
the  furchafe 
ef  human.?* 


|  Kri-i  mar. 
iJ/rjnfcT. 


"Chap.io. 


What  oblations      Chap.xxiij.         muilbcoftrcd. 


Or,  Ude 

themftfoss 
IVItktheirt- 
truiij  of tref- 
p*{p  in  their 
eating. 


*Deur.  1 5. 
11.Bt17.i- 


\pr.gul.: 


\OrMi<Ue. 

•Chap.  xi. 

18. 


thcrsmcat,  but  there  (ball  no  Granger 
eatc  thereof. 

14.  C^tiDifamancateofthcholp 
thing  bnwtttingip,tbcn  be  (ball  put  the 
fift  part  thereof  Ditto  it,  anD  fhall  gutc  it 
unto  the  ptf  eft ,  With  the  holp  thing. 

15  3lnb  tbcp  fhall  not  pzofanc  tf)c 
holp  things  of  the  thtlDzcn  of  3Jfracl, 
Wbuh  tbep  offer  Dnto  the  fL©  is©: 

is  £>zllfuffcrrbcm  to  bearetbe  iw 
qutttc  of  ttefpaffe.  When  tbep  cate  tbetr 
bolptbings :  foz3Itbe1L£>i3©Dofan-- 
tttfiethem. 

17  C2wDtbc?Lj©is©fpa&cbnto 
^ofcs.faptng, 

18  Uptake  Dnto  3taton  anD  to  his 
fonncs,  ano  Ditto  alltbccbtlDzcnonJt 
racl,  anD  fap  Dnto  them,  iDbatfocucr 
he  be  of  the  houfc  of  llfrael,  0?  of  the 
(Irangcrs  mjjfracl,  tbatWill  offer  bis 
oblation  fo?  all  his  DoWes,  anD  fozau 
his  free  mill  offerings,  Which  tbcp  Will 
offer  Dnto  the  %  o  is  ©  fo;  a  burnt  offe- 
ring: 

19  YefhaiofferatpoutolDnciDiiamale 
Without  bicmtfb,  of  tljc  bceucs,  of  the 
fbccpcoz  of  the  goats. 

10  But  wbatfocuct  hath  a  blcmtfh, 
that  fhall  pc  not  offer:  fozitfballnotbe 
acceptable  fozpou. 

1 1  *  ^nb  lDhofocuer  offcretb  a  faerv 
ntc  of  peace  offctmgsbnto  the  fL©ts©, 
to  accompiiCh  hts  Dow,  m  afrec  Wtu  of 
frmg  m  beeues  0 z 1|  fheepc,  it  fbaibc  pcr= 
feet,  to  be  acceptcD:  there  than  be  no  blc^ 
miff)  therein, 

22  2SltnD,  ozbzolten,  ozmatntcD.oz 
bauingawenne,  ozfeurute,  ozfcabbcD, 
pc  fhal not  offer  thefe  Dnto  the fLe>is©, 
no?  malic  an  off nttg  bp  fire  of  them  Dp- 
on  the  3lltar  Dnto  the  %  o  is©. 

23  Cither  a  bullocBcoz  a  ||  lambc  that 
hath anp  thing  * fupcrfutous  oz  lactung 
in  his  parts,  tbatmapeft  thou  offer  fo.z 
a  free  Will  off  ring :  but  fo.:  a  bo  W  it  fhal 
notbcacccptcD. 

24.  pefbalnotoffcrDnto  thelitis© 
that  Which  is  bztufeb,oz  erufbcD,  oibjo- 
ftcn,ozcut,  nctthcr  than  pou  make  anp 
offering  thereof  in  pour  lanb. 

15  Neither  from  a  Grangers  hanD 
(hail  pc  offer  the  bzcaD  of  pour  c>od  of 
anp  of  ttjefe ;  becaufe  their  corruption 
ism  them,  and  blemtfbcs  bee  in  them : 
tbep  (ball  not  be  acceptcD  fozpou. 

26  c  3nD  the  % 0 1&  jd  fpa&e  Dnto 
£0ofes,fapmg, 

27  raben  abullotfce,  oz  afbeepe,  0? 
agoatisbzougbtfoztb,  then  it  (hall  bee 


ftuen  Dapcs  Dnocr  the  Damme ,  anD 
from  the  eight  Dap  anD  tbcnccfooztb,  it 
fhal  be  acceptcD  foz  an  offering  ntaDc  bp 
fire  Dnto  the  %o  is©. 

2S  3htD whether tt be totbe 02 Heme, 
pc  fhall  notfttllit,  *auD  bcrpong.botb 
m  one  Dap. 

29  3lnD  when  pec  Will  offer  a  faeri 
ficc  of  thanncfgiutngDnto  the  %o)m>, 
offer  it  atpour  owue  Will. 

30  £>n  the  fame  Dap  it  (hall  be  eaten 
Dp,  pcfhall  leanc  "none  of  ttDntillthc 
mozrott) :  3J  im  the  1L  €>  is  ©. 

31  Xbcr  cfozc  (ball  pc  ucepc  mp  Com- 
manDements,  anD  Doc  them:  3  am  the 

2L©13©. 

31  iftcitbcrfbalpc'pzofancmpbolp 
iftamc,  but  li  Will  be  haiioYbeD  among 
tbccbtlDzcnof3fracl:3Jamthc?LOB© 
Which  hallow  pou, 

33  XbatbzougbtpououtoftbclanD 
of  <£gppt ,  to  be  pour  <5DD :  35  am  the 

flfiDlS©. 

CHAP.  XXIII. 

1  Thefeaflsof  the  Lord.  3  The  Sabbath.  4 
The  Pafleouer.  9  TheSheafeof  firftfiuits. 
15  TbeFeaftof  Pentecoft.  11  Gleanings  to 
beleftlorthepoore.  13  TheFeaft  of  Trum- 
pets. 1.6  The  day  of  atonement.  33  The 
Feaft  of  Tabernacles. 

ji3D  then©  is  jDfpaiicDn; 
to^ofcs,fapmg, 
1  <§>pcat5cDntothccbtl' 
Dzen  of  35ftacl,anD  fapDu^ 
_  to  them,  Concerning  the 
fcafts  of  the  H  0  is  3?,  Which  pec  fhall 
pzociaimc  tobehoipconuocations,  cuen 
thefcarempfeafts. 

3  *^>ireDapesfhaliWozfecbeDonc, 
but  the  feucntt)  Dap  is  the  Sabbath  of 
reft,  an  holp  conuotation  ■,  pc  fl)all  Doe 
no  Wozfec  therein:  it  isthc^>abbath  of 
the  %  €>  is  ©  m  all  pour  Dwellings. 

4  C  Xhcfe  arc  the  fcaflcs  of  the 
%€>  53©,euen  holp  eonttocattons,which 
pc  fljall  pzoclamtc in  their  fcafons. 

5  "JntlicfourtccnthDapofrhefirft 
moncth  at  cuen ,« the  %®  is  £>£>  ^affo 
oucr. 

6  ^nD  on  the  fifteenth  Dap  of  the 
fame  moncth,  >s  the  feaft  of  DnleaucneD 
bzeaD  Dnto  the  ?1©k©:  fencn  Dapcs 
pc  muft  eatc  DnlcauencD  bzcaD. 

7  ^nthcfirftDappcfhallhauean 
holp  conuocation :  pc  (l)aUDo  no  fcrutlc 
W02Uethcrnn. 

8  2Sutpc  fhal  offer  an  offringmaDc 
bp  ficebnto  the  % ©is©  fcucn  &apes: 

<3B  m 


\OrJit, 

go.  jr.  . 
'Dcu.ji.i5 


1  Chap. 7. 
J- 


•Exo.io.j 
dcuc.5. 1 3. 
Iu]kci5-14- 


*  E10d.11. 
'7- 


Xhefirllfruites.        Lcuiticus.   Solemne  fealls,and 


J  OrJi-mJ- 
frll:  Hrir. 

anOSicr. 


•Deur,  \6 
9- 


tntbefcucntb  bay  «  anbolyconuocatt; 

OU.PC  fliallDOC  no  fCtlltlC  IbOJBe  therein. 

9  C3lnbtijc2L©isjDfpaBCbttto 
<Bofcs,faymg, 

io  5>pcaue  bnto  the  cljilbzen  of  3if 
rati,  ana  fay  bntotlicm,  nabcnpccbc 
tonic  mto  tljt  lanD  ibbtclj  3J  giuc  bnto 
you,anbflbaircapetbcbarueft  thereof, 
tbcnycftiaii  bung  a||ujcafe  of  the  firft 
f  nuts  of your  barucft  unto  tljc  pncft : 

n  ^nbbccfbaii  ibauc  tljc  fl)cafcbc= 
fo:etbc1L©iR?Dto  be  accepted  fo:  you: 
on  tbcnio:roib  after  the  Sabbath  the 
jtmeftwailibaucit. 

1 1  3nb  ye  (ball  offer  that  bay  ,ibbcn 
ye  ibauc  the  flicafc ,  an  l)cc  lambcibttb 
out  blcmtmoftbc  firft  ycerc,fo:  a  burnt 
offering  bnto  the  &  ©  is  3D. 

13  5lnb  the  meat  offnug  thereof  u\iii 
be  tlbo  tenth  bcalcs  of  fine  flottw,  uum 
gleb  ibtth  oile ,  an  offenngmabe  by  fire 
bnto  the  1L  ©  is  c>,fo2  afrocct  fauour : 
ano  tljc DzinUe offering  thereof  rtiaibe of 
lbinctbc  fourth  pan  of  an  i^tn. 

i+  2inb  ye  (ball  catc  neither  b:cab, 
no?  parcbeb  come ,  no:  grcmc  cares, 
bnttll  the  fclfc  tame  bap  that  yet  banc 
b:ougbt  an  offering  bnto  your  00b : 
3itfbaibcaftamtefojmct,tlijoughout 
your  gencranons ,  m  all  your  bibel- 
lings. 

15  C  3nb  *  ye  fbail  count  bnto  you 
from  the  mo:roib  after  the  &abbatb, 
from  the  bay  tbatycb:ougbttbcfbcafc 
of  the  ibauc  offering,  fmen Sabbaths 
(baibe  complete. 

i6  eucn  bnto  the  mojroib  after  the 
ftucnth  S>abbatb,fball  ye  number  fifty 
baycs,anbycfl)ailoffcranelbnicatof 
fenng  bnto  the  %  ©  it  ©. 

17  Pc  fbail  bjmg  out  of  your  babtta 
nous  tlbo  ibauc  loaues,  of  tlbo  tenth 
bcalcs:  tbcyfbalbc  of  fine  flolb?c,  they 
(bail  be  baftcn  ibtth  leaucn,  they  arc  tljc 
firft  friuts  bnto  the  1L  ©  is  id. 

is  3lnbyr  (bail  offer  lbitb  the  b:eab 
fcucn  lambes  without  blcmtfb ,  of  the 
firft ycerc,  anb  one  vong  bullocticano 
tlbo  rammes :  the)'  (bail  be  fo:  a  burnt 
offering  bnto  the  ?L©isr,  Until  their 
meat  offung  anb  their  bmtuc  offvtngs, 
euen  an  offering  niabc  by  fire  of  (meet 
fauour  bnto  the  ft  ©  kid. 

19  Xhcn  vc  fliail  faenfice  one  luo  of 
the  goatcs,  fo:  a  fume  off ermg,atib  tlbo 
lambes  of  the  firft  ycerc,  fo:  a  faenfice  of 
peace  offerings. 

20  3ubrbe0:teft(nailibauethcm 
With  the  b;eab  of  the  firft  fruits,  foja 


'Chap.  ij. 


W 


]  *  N'um.  i} 


ibauc-offrtngbcfo:e  the  %  o  k  id,  with 
the  tlbo  lambs :  they  fliaibc  holy  to  the 
^©KBfojrhe^ncfts. 

21  3uibyc(baip:otlamicontbefclfe 
tame  bay ,  that  it  map  bean  holy  conuo 
cation  bnto  you :  ye  (bail  boc  no  fcruile 

lb02BC  therein  :  it  thall  be  a  (iOtlltC  fo:  CUf X 

nnillyourbibelungsuj:ougboutyour 
gntcrattons. 

2i  ft3lnb  *ibben  ye  reapc  tljc har- 
utftofyour  lanb,  thou  ftjalt  not  mahci 
cleane  nbbance  of  tlje  comers  of  the  | 
fielb.ibhcntljourcapcft/neitherfljalti-Dcut.M 
tliou  gather  any  gleaning  of  thy  bar 
urft :  thou  fljait  leauc  than  bnto  the 
poo?c,  anb  to  the  ftrangrr  :  3)  amtbc 
|L©  is  id  your  ©ob. 

23  <T3{n&thelL©i5©  fpahebnto 
££ofes,faymg, 

24.  5>pca&e  bnto  the  rh:ib:cn  of  $1 
racl,iaymg,  3Jn  the  'feumtb  monetb,; 
in  the  firft  bay  of  tljc  moneth  than  yec 
haue  a  £>abbatb ,  a  mcmonail  of  blow- 
ing of  trumptts,an  holy  conuotation. 

25  J3cft)allbonofcrnilcibo:Rethere- 
injbut  ye  (ball  offer  an  offering  mabc 
byfircbutotbe1L©KiD. 

26  C3mbthe?L©itiDfpaBebuto 
£0ofes,faymg, 

27  *^lfbonthctcntJ)bavoftliisfc 
uentlj  moneth,  there  fliaibc  a  bay  of  at 
onnncnt,  it  fijaibcan  holy  conuocation 
bnto  you,  *  yefhail  afflict  your  foulcs, 
anb  offer  an  offenng  mabe  by  fire  bnto 
then  ©bid. 

28  3nbycfl)ailboenoibo:Bcmthat 
fame  bay :  fo;  it  is  a  bay  of  atonement, 
to  mauc  an  atonement  fo.:  you,  bcfo:e 
the  ?L©  13  r>  your  Gob. 

29  foi  lbhatfoeuer  foulc  it  bee  that 
ftjallnot  bee  afflictcb  m  that  fame  bay, 
hec  fbail  bee  cut  off  from  among  his 
people. 

30  3nb  lbhatfoeuer  foulc  itt.ee  that 
boeth  anyibo:licin  that  fame bav,  the 
fame  foulc  ibill3Jbcftroy  from  among 
h:s  people. 

31  Pc  (ball  boc  no  matter  of  ibo:Bc :  I 
u  (hail  be  a  ftatutc  fo:  ntcr  th:oughout 
your  gencranons ,  m  all  your  bibel; 
lings. 

31  3lt  ihalbe  bnto  you  a  Sabbath  of 
reft,  anb  yccfljall  afflict  vourfoulesm  I 
the  ninth  day  of  the  monetii  at  €urn, 
from  €uen  bnto  €ucn  ftiailye  t  ccle>  r «*■•«« 
btatcyourSabbarli. 

33  C  3lnb  tljc  JL  ©  13  p  fpalte  bnto 
^ofcs.faving. 

3  f  £>pcaHe  bnto  the  tlnlb:m  of 

ffltael, 


'Chip.  1 5, 
;o.  num. 
19-7- 


hdh 


lioly  conuocation  s. 


3Jfcacl ,  faying,  *%\)t  fifteenth  bayof 
tins  fcuenthmoncth,  fhaiibethcfeattof 
Xabcmaclcs  for  fcucn  napes  unto  the 
ILoisid, 

3<  ©nthcfititbayfhaibeanholycons 
uotation :  ye  fhallboc  noferuilelbowe 
therein. 

36  £>euenbaycsye(haUoffcranok 
frmg  mabc  by  fire  bnto  the  3L  ©  s  ©,on 
the  eight  bap  fhall  be  an  holy  conuocati- 
on into  you ,  anb  ye  mall  offer  an  offe- 
ring mabe  by  fire  Unto  the  %  ©  is  m  31 1 
is  at folcmncaiTcmbly,  anbycfhallboc 
no  feruile  lbowe  therein. 

37  lLhcfearethcfeafrsofthe?L©K© 
lbhich  ye  fhall  pzodaune  to  be  holycon- 
notations,  to  offer  an  offering  mabe  by 
fire  bnto  the  %  ©  is  s?,abttrnt  offering, 
anu  ameat  offering,  a  faenficcpnnbe 
offerings,  euery  thing  bpon  his  bay ; 

38  2Sefibe  the  Sabbaths  of  the 
%,  ©  is  ©,  anb  befibe  your  gifts,  anb  bc- 
fioc  all  your  Doilies,  anb  befibe  all  your 
free  null  offerings,  lbhich  ye  giucbnto 
the  2.  ©is©. 

39  3llfo  in  the  fifteenth  bay  of  the  fc* 
ucnth  nioncth  tbhen  y  ce  hatie  gather  cd 
mthe  fruit  of  the  lanb ,  yefbailfccepea 
feaftbnto  the  H©isiDfcuen  bayes.  £>n 
the  firft  bay  ftuii  bee  a  Sabbath,  anb  on 
rtje  eight  bay  fhall  bee  a  Sabbat!). 

40  ^nbycfhalltafeeyouonthcficft 
bay  the  tboughes  of  goobly  trces.btfin- 
chesof  0ainie  trees,  anb  the  boughes 
of  thieae  trees,  anb  tbillolbcsofthc 
b200fte,  anb  yce  fhall  rctoycebefoje  the 
%  ©  is  ©  y  our  <3ob  feutn  bayes. 

41  3fnbycefl>au&ccpcitafeaftbnto 
tbeH©  89  fcuen  bayes  m  the  yecre: 
3lt  fhaibe  a  Statute  foj  ener  tnyour  ge- 
nerations, ye  fhall  celebrate  itmthcfe* 
ucnthmoneth. 

41  m  fbaiibibell  in  boothes  feuen 
bayes:  all  that  arc  31iraehtcs  bowc> 
(hailbtbcllmboothesj 

4t  Xhat  your  generations  may 
mtoib  that  3  mabe  thechfflwen  of  3If 
tad  to  bibell  in  boothes ,  rbhen  3 
brought  them  out  of  the  lanb  of  figypt: 
<j  am  theft  ©  is  w>  your  <250b. 

44  3lnb  ^ofes  beelareb  bnto  the 
chiityen  of  3irrart  the  fcaftes  of  the 

11  ©IS  3D. 

CHAP.  XXIIII. 

1  Theoyleforthelampes.  5  The  Shewbread. 
10  Slieloniiths  fonuc  blafphemcth.  13  The 
Law  of  Blafphemie.  17  Ol  Murther.  18  Of 
Damage.  13  The  blafphemci- is  Itemed. 


Chap.xxmj.    The  Shew  bread. 


•Num. 19- 
1  2.iohn7. 
57- 


ffW.day 
ofrcflrAutt. 


\H4.ftm,t. 


^m^H  ii5btheHoisjs>fpancpn^ 
"  co  «J0ofcs,  faying, 
x  eoimuaiu)  cijc  chil 
torn  of  3Jfrael,  that  ti)cv 
_  bmigbiuo  thee  pure  oyle 
£>liuc,beatcu,  foj  the  Kgftt,t  to  caufc  the 
lampcsto  biirne  contuiuaily. 

3  nsithout  the  sialic  of  the  Xefii 
monic,  m  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Con 
grcganon,fhai2{aronowcrtf  from  the 
cuctung  bnto  the  mowing,  before  the 
H  ©  is  3D  connnually :  3Jt  foa  n  be  a  £>ta^ 
tutefojeuer  tnyour  generations. 

4  $e  (hall  ower  the  lampcs  bpon 
*  the  pure  Canblefhrac  befoze  ttjc 
%  ©  is  c>  contuiuaily. 

5  C3uibthon  (halt  talic  fine  floibjc, 
anb  babe  tlbclue  *  cab.es  thereof:  tlbo 
tenth  beaies  (hall  be  m  one  cauc. 

6  2inb  thou  (halt  fct  them  in  nbo 
tolbeslire  on  a  roib  bpon  the  pure  %& 
ble,bcfojcthe?L©is3D. 

7  ^nbthoufhaltptitpnrefratimti' 
cenfebpon  cthroib,  that  it  may  bee  on 
the  tycab  fo?  amemonall,  euenanoffc 
ling  mane  by  fir  e  bnto  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

S  Cuery  Sabbath  he  fhall  fct  it  in 
owcr  before  the  %  okjb  connuuauy, 

beins;  taken  frOlll  the  ChllbjOl  Of  J0fraCl 

by  an  euerlafting  couenant. 

9  anb*itO;ailbe^aronsanohis 
fonnes,  anb  they  fhall  catc  it  in  tljc  holy 
place :  fo?  It  is  molt  holy  bnto  him.of  the 
offerings  of  the  Ho  is  3D  mabe  by  fire, 
byaperpetuallftatute. 

10  C^nbthefonneof  an^Jfraelittn) 
ltooman.lbhofc  father  ibas  an^gypn 
an,  lb  cut  outamong  the  chtlbjcn  of  3jf 
rael :  anb  this  fonne  of  the  ^jfraclttttti 
B)oman,anb  a  man  of  3Jfrael  (Iroue  to- 
gether m  the  tampe. 

11  ^nb  the  3ifraclrtifhitoomans  fonne 
blafphemeD  the  name  of  the  Ho  is  id, 
anb  curfeb,  ano  they  bwnght  htm  bnto 
*©ofes :  anb  his  mothers  name  lbas 
£>hclonuth,  the  Daughter  of  £>ibn>  of 
the  tribe  of  £>an. 

iz  ^nb  they  *  put  him  in  tbarb,t  that 
the  minbe  of  the  Hoisjd  might  bee 
(heibebthnu. 

13  anDthc?Lsi>iS2DfpaKcbnto£0O' 

fes,faying, 

14  25nng  fo:th  hint  that  hath  nirfeb, 
Tbithout  theCampe,  anb  ut  all  that 
hearbhim,*lay  their  hanbs  bpon  his 
heab,  anb  let  all  the  Congreganon 
ttonehnu. 

15  ^nb  thou  fhalt  fpeaae  bnto  the 
chilbJcnof  33frael,  faying,  tohofoeucr 

1®  i         curfcth 


t  Hcb.  n 


'txo.  ;i.3 


Exod.  : 


*Exod.  ?9, 
33-chap.S. 
3  I  mjt.i  j. 


*issurnb.l  5 
H- 

pound  vnte 
themuear- 
dmg  to  die 
mouth  ■>'  toe 

LOT^D. 

■Dfltt.  !  ;. 
9.andl7 .7 


'Againftmurder.        Lcuiticus. 


Thelubile. 


•Exod.  21 
i  j.dcu.19. 
it. 

t  Hcbr.fmi. 
ttththe  life 
of.x  m,m. 
\  HdrMfe 
fvr&fi. 
•Exod.  21 
24.deu.19, 
21. match. 

j.38. 


•Exod.  12 
4S>- 


t  Hibr  r,n 

Exod.  a : 


rurfctbbistfob,  (ball  beare  bis  finnc. 

16  3JnD  bee  that  blafpbcmcth  the 
Statue  of  ttjc  ?l0is  ?D,  he  (ball  furcly 
be  put  to  bcafh,anb  alltbcCongrcga< 
tion  (ball  ccrtamcly  (lone  him:  ^froctl 
the  ftrangcr ,  as  be  that  is  bo?nc  in  the 
lanb  ,rohcnbcblafphcmcth  thejftame 
oftbclLsDisjp,  (bail  be  put  to  Death,. 

17  C^nbbcthattmilctbanyman, 
fyail  furcly  be  put  to  beath. 

18  3nb  he  that  teillctbabcaft,  (ball 
maftc  it  soob ;  t  beallfo?  beaft. 

19  ^nb  if  a  man  caufe  a  blcmifb  in 
hisncigbbour .  asijcbathDonc,foibal 
it  be  bone  to  him: 

20  2S2cartj,fo2 b?eatb , eve  fo?  eye, 
tooth  fo?  tooth :  ashchatbcaufcDable^ 
nufl)  in  a  man ,  fo  (ball  it  be  bone  to  him 
agame. 

21  3(nb  bec  that  ftiUcth  a  beafl,  hec 
(ball  refto?c  it :  anb  hec  that  Mirth  a 
man,hc  (ball  be  put  to  beat!). 

22  }3e(bailhauc*oncmanctoflatb, 
auuell  fo?  the  ftrangcr ,  as  fo?  one  of 
your  oUmc  counttcy  :  fo?  3  am  ttje 

Jl01S£>yOUr<5Ob. 

23  Onb  fi^ofes  fpabe  to  the  tbilb?cn 
of  3Jfracl,that  they  (boulb  b?mg  foo?tb 
him  that  bab  cucfeb ,  out  of  the  Campe, 
anb  HonchunttJith  (tones:  anb  the  ctoifc 
bjen  of'3?fraci  ud  as  the  %  ®  is  jd  torn- 
manbcbiipofcs. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  The  Sabbath  of  the  feuenth  yeere.  8  The 
lubilc  in  the  fiftieth  yeere.  14  Ofopprcl- 
fion.  18  A  bleffing  of  obedience.  13  The 
redemption  of  land,  19  Of  houfes.  35 
Compaffionoffhepoore.  39  Thevfageof 
bondmen.   47  The  redemption  ofleruants. 


2  Spcaite  bnto  the  chil- 
D?enof3ifracl,auDfaybfr 
to  them  :  nabcu  yee  rome  into  the  laub 
lbhtch  3}  giuc  you ,  then  (ball  the  laub 
tucepe  *i  Sabbath  bnto  the  ILo is©. 

3  Sire  ycercs  thou  (halt  folb  thy 
fielb ,  aiio  fire  ycercs  thou  (halt  p?unc 
thy  tlmcyarb ,  anb  gather  m  the  fctut 
thereof. 

4  25ttt  in  the  feuenth  yecrcfbalbc  a 
Sabbath  of  reft  unto  the  lano,  a  Sab 
bath  fo?  tl)e  TLon& :  thou  (halt  net 
trier  Com  tby  fielb,  no?pumetbyflme. 
yarb. 

5  3Tbatlbhiih  groibethof  it  oibne 


atto?b  of  thy  haruett ,  thou  (halt  not 
rcapcnettbcrgatbcrthegrapestoftby 
£ltncbno?cffcb:  fo?  it  is  a  yeere  of  red 
bnto  the  lanb. 

6  31nb  thrSabbath  of  the  lanb  aiail 
be  meat  fo?  you ;  fo?  thee,anb  fo?  thy  fer- 
uant,  anb  fo?  thy  mayb,  anb  fo?  thy  fifc 
rco  fcruant.anb  to?  thefttanger  that  fo- 
iournetbibtththee, 

7  3mbfo?thyeattci,anbfo?  the  bead 
that  arc  in  thy  ianb,(bai  an  tljc  encrcafc 
thereof  be  meat. 

3  C  3Cnb  thou  (halt  number  feuen 
Sabbaths  of  ycercs  bnto  thee,  feuen 
times  feuen  yecres,  anb  the  (pate  of  the 
feuen  Sabbaths  of  yccrcs,fbali  be  bn- 
to thcefouttie  anb  nmc  yecres. 

9  ICben  fhait  thou  taufc  the  trum- 
pcttoftl)c3Jubtlctofoimb,onthetenth 
bay  of  the  feuenth  monctbj  m  the  bay  of 
atonement  (hall  ye  matte  the  trumpet 
founb  throughout  all  your  lanb. 

10  anu  yc  (ball  hailolb  the  fiftieth 
yeere,  anb  p?oclaimc  nbcrric  rh?ougb= 
out  all  the  lanb.bnto  al  the  inhabitants 
thereof  :Jt  fhaibe  a  Nubile  fcnto  you, 
anb  yc  (hall  returnc  cucry  man  bnto 
his  poOcflion,  anb  ye  (ball  returnc  eue* 
ry  man  bnto  his  family. 

11  3  Subtle  mall  that  fiftieth  yccre 
bebntoyou:  jae  Cbailnotforb,  nctthcr 
reapc  that  lbhitl)  groibetfj  of  it  fclfciu 
it,no?  gather  the  g>  apes  m  it  of  thy  <Htnc 
bnb?c(Tcb. 

12  ifo?  it  is  the  Subtle,  it  (hall  be  ho; 
ly  bnto  you :  ye  (hall  eatc  the  encrcafc 
thereof  out  of  the  fielb. 

13  3ln  the  yeere  of  thts  3fubilc  ftt 
(ball  returnc  cucry  man  bnto  his  pof 
fcflion. 

14  3(nbtfthou  fell  ought  bnto  thy 
neighbour ,  o?  buyeft  ought  of  thy 
neighbours  banb,yc(balluotopp?c(rc 
one  another. 

15  ^ccojtnngto  theuumber of ycrcs 
after  the  public,  thou  (halt  buy  of  thy 
neighbour ,  anb  acco?Dmg  bnto  the 
number  of  yecres  of  tljc  fruits,  be  (ball 
fell  bnto  thee. 

i6  :3tcco2btng  to  the  tuultitubc  of 
ycercs  ,  thou  (halt  encrcafc  the  pace 
thereof  ,anb  acco?btng  to  the  fcibncffc 
of  yecres,  thou  (halt  Dimimfl)  the  p?tte 

Of  It  :  fo?  accordimg  tO  tljenumbCCuf  the 

yce.es  of  the  frmtes  boeth  Ijcc  fell  bnto 
thee. 

17  #ce  (hall  not  thcrcfozc  oppjeffe 
one  another ,  but  thou  (halt  fcare  thy 
<SoD:  fo:  3 am  the  %  o  is  ©your  <J50D. 
18  Cohere 


\Hdr.of 


loTtdt  of 

fund. 


Redeeming  of         Chap.xxv.      lands  and  houfes. 


\Ortrvhee 
awte  cut  eff 
Htdr.far 
tutting  of. 


\  H4r.hu 

handhath 
a-  tAtned, 
and  found 
fufficicncie. 


t  Heir. re. 
demotion 
behngeth 
vntctlm 


18  Ct©bcrcfo2epe(ballbomp£>ta> 
tutcs,  anDKtcpcmp3JuDgcmcnts,anD 
Doc  tbem,  anD  pc  (ball  Dlbcllin  tbe  lanD 
in  fafctie. 

19  3nD  tbe  lanD  (ball  peclD  bet  fruit, 
anDpcfbalcatpourfill.anDDtbclltbcp 
ininfafenc. 

10  3nt>  tfpc  (bail  Cap,  naftat  (ball 
ttjeeatctbe  (euentb  pecre*  26cbolD,rbc 
(ball  not  fotu ,  no?  gatbec  m  out  nv 
create: 

ii  3Lbcn  3  mil  commanD  mp  blcf 
Gng  bpon  pou  m  ti)c  Ort  pcete,  anD  it 
(ball  biing  fojtb  fnttt  fo?  clyee  pecrcs. 

xx  anDpefyallfomtbeetgbtpeete, 
anD  cat  pet  of  olD  fruit,  bntuittjc  nmtl) 
peetc :  bntill  ber  routs  conic  in,  pe  (ball 
eatcoftbcoiDfUue. 

23  ft  Zbc  lanD  (ball  notbcfolDllfo? 
euec :  fojtbc  lanDts  nunc,  fo?  peibetc 
ftrangcrs  anD  foiourncrs\bttb  me. 

14  3lnD  in  all  tbe  lanD  of  pour  pot 
fcflion,  pc  (ball  grant  a  reDemptioufb? 
tljcianD. 

i5  C3ff  tbpb?otberbcti)ajt;cnpoo?e, 
anD  bat!)  CblD  aibap  fonic  of  bis  poffcf 
Ron,  anD  if  anp  of  bis  tonne  come  to  ro 
Decmcit,  tben  (ball  bee  reDecmc  tbat 
rubicbbtsfootbcrfoiD. 

26  2(nDiftbetnanbaucnonctorc= 
Decnie  it,  anD  tijutifclfc  bee  able  to  re* 
Deemeit: 

27  'Cbtnletbimcounttbepcetesof 
ti)t  falc  tberof,  anD  rcOo?c  ttjc  onerplus 
bntotbeman,toibbombcfolDit,  tbat 
hemap  returne  bnto  btspofreCuott. 

28  2Sutifbebcnotabletotcfto?eit 
tob"n,ti)ent|attt)bicbtsfolD,(ballre* 
maine  in  tbe  banD  of  &im  tbat  barb 
bougbt  it ,  bntill  tbe  peetc  of  Nubile : 
anD  m  tbe  3Jubile  it  (ball  goe  out,  anD 
be  (ball  rcturnc  bnto  bispoffHTion. 

29  :3mDifamanfellabibetungboufe 
in  a  ttiailcD  eifie,  tben  be  map  tebeetne  it 
tbtrtnn  a  ibbole  peere  after  it  is  folDc: 
withinamllvecremapbcreDccmeit. 

so  3inD  if  (tbe  notreDeemeD  ttittbin 
tbefpace of  a  full  pecre,  tben  tbe  boufc 
tbat  is  in  tbe  roalleD  ntie,  (ball  be  (tabu- 
fbeD  fo:  euec  to  bmi  tbat  bougbt  it, 
tbjougbout  bis  generations :  it  (ball 
notgoeoutintbc3lubile. 

31  28ut  tbe  boufrs  of  tbe  tillages 
tbbirb  baue  no  aalles  rounD  about 
tbem,  fliall  bee  counteDas  tbeficlDS  of 
tbe  conntrcp :  t  tbep  map  cc  rcDcemeD 
anD  tbep  (ball  soe  out  m  tbe  3!nb(le. 

ji  /liottbitbftanDtng ,  tbe  cities  of 
tbe  Hcuites,  and  tbe  bowfes  of  *bE  tittcs 


of  tbeir  poffcflion,  map  tlje  Hcuitcs  re^ 
Dccmcatanpnme. 

33  2lnD  if  i|  a  man  purcbafe  of  tbe 
Hcuitcs,tbcntbc  boufc  tbatmasfolD, 
anDtbc  cine  of  bis  pofTctnonujali  goe 
outmtbcpccrcof  public:  fo?  tbe  bou- 
fes  of  tbe  cities  of  tbe  fleuitesarc  t'bcir 
poffcfuon  among  tbe  rt)ilD?eu  of  3J& 
racl. 

34  ^ut  tbe  ficID  of  tbe  fuburbs  of 
tbctr  ones  map  not  be  folD/o?  ttis  tb«r 
pecpetuailpofTcfuon. 

35  C  3wd  if  tt^y  b?otbct  bee  maren 
poo?e ,  anD  t  fallen  in  Dccap  ibitb  tljce, 
tben  tboufbaittrclieuebim,  yea  though 
hebea(rcattgcr,02afotoumer,tbatbce 
map  liuctbitb  tbee. 

36  *%akt  tbouno bfuric  of bim,  oi 
incrcafc :  but  fcarc  tbp  <SoD ,  tljat  tbp 
biotbcr  map  hue  tbittj  tbee. 

37  1Cboufl)aitnotgiueh(mrbpmO' 
nepbpon  bfurte,  no?  leuD  fjimrbptac* 
tualsftmnereafe. 

38  3  am  tbe  fL©wi3  pour  <SoD, 
tbbicb  b?ougbt  pou  foonb  out  of  rt)e 
lanDof  Cgppt,  to  giuepou  tf)c  lanD  of 
Canaan,  anD  to  be  pour  <5oD. 

39  C3nD*iftbpb?otbcrtbatDtt)cl 
letb  bp  tbec  be  ibarcn  poo?e;anD  be  folD 
bnto  tbee.tbou  (bait  nottcompellbun 
to  ferueas  a  bono  feruant. 

40  25nt  as  an  btreD  feruant,  and  as 
a  folourner  be  (ball  be  ibitb  tbee,  and 
(ball  feme  tbee  bnto  tbe  pcrc  of  JJubile. 

41  2lnD  tben  (ball  bee  Depart  from 
tbecbotb  be  anD  bis  cbilD?en  ttiitb  bim, 
anD  (ball  returne  bnto  bis  ottmc  rami; 
lie,  anD  bnto  tbe  pofTewon  of  bis  fa= 
tbers  (ball  be  returne. 

41  jfo2tbepatempfcruants,ibbicb 
J>  biougbtfojtb  out  of  tbe  lanD  of  €- 
gppt:  tbcp  (ball  not  be  Colo  tas  bonD 
men. 

43  *  %\m  (bait  not  rule  ouer  btm 
tbttb  rigour,  but  (bait  fear c  tbp  C5oD. 

44  isott)  tbp  bonDmen,  anD  tbp 
bonbmatDS,  Ibbicb  tljou  (bait  baue, 
(ballbeof  tbe^eatben,  tbat  arerounb 
aboutpou:  of  tbem  (ball  pe  bup  bonD- 
men anD  bonDmaibs. 

45  ^o2eoncr,oftbecbilD?enoftbe 
Orangcrs  tbat  Do  foiournc  among  pou, 
of  tbem  fbabpebup,  anbof  tbtir  fanu= 
lies  tbat  are  iDitbpou,tbbicb  tbep  begat 
mpouc  lanD  :anD  tljep  (balbepour  pof 
fefnon. 

46  3nD  pe  Qiall  tabe  tbem  as  an  itv 
bentantefo?pourcbilD2cnaftcrpou,to 
mhente  them  fo:  a  pofTcffion,  t  tbep  (l)ai 

©  3 bee 


|j  Or,  one  */ 
the  Ccmtet 

redttme 
chem. 


t  Htb.  h* 
handfatleth 
\Hetr. 
ftrtngthen. 

'  Exod.12. 
35  dcut.tz 
19. pro. :8. 8 
ciek.18.8 
and  is.  1 1, 


txo.si.z 

dcut  1  5.1 ; 
letem.  ja. 
14. 

J  Hef.feriee 
thyfflfe 
vw  ib  him 
tV'thtbefer. 


^Hfhr  with 
the  fide  efc 
btmdmun . 

*Ephc.t).g 

a.i..  i;  41. 


t  Htbr ye 
lhatifrru* 
w*trfel**tJ 
a  uh  them. 


Ofred< 


emotion. 


'p 


,euincus. 


Blcfs 


sin 


§!P 


romi 


ifed. 


&c. 


\\Or,hihefc 


•Exod.  30 
4. dent  5.8 

and  1  '■  j  1 
pM.97-7- 
\Or,plUr. 


bee  your  bonbmen  foi  cutt :  but  otter 
your  b2efb2cn  the  tbilbzen  of  gjfracl,  yc 
(ball  not  rule  one  oucr  another  ibitb 
rigour. 

47  C3mbifafotourncro2drangcr 
tibarc  rich  by  tbce,anb  thy  bzotbet  that 
bibciictb  by  bun  ruarepooje ,  anb  fell 
bimfclfcbntotbcdrangcro2foiourner 
by  thec,  02  to  the  docuc  oftt)c  dcattgers 
faintly: 

4-S  Sifter  that  be  is  folb,  bee  may  be 
rcbccmcb  agamc :  one  of  ijts  bzctbjcn 
mayrcbcetncbim. 

49  Cither  Ijis  bnclc,  02  J)is  bnclcs 
fonnemay  rcbccmelnm,  02  any  that  is 
nigh  of  Rtnncbntoljim,  of  bis  family, 
may  rcbeentcrjttn:  oz  if  be  be  able,  bee 
may  rcbcemebmifclfe. 

50  anb  Ije  (ball  retfton  ibttrj  I)tm 
that  bought  i)im  ,from  tlje  yeete  tljat 
heibas  folb  to  htm,  bnto  the  yccre  of 
Jubilc,  anb  ttjc  pztec  ofrjis  falcdjaibe 
attozbing  bnto  the  number  of  yeeccs, 
acro2bmg  to  the  time  of  an  l)ireb  fer< 
uant  fliall  it  be  rbitb  hint. 

51  giftbcrcbcyctmanyyecrcsbe; 
bmbc,  accozbtng  bnto  trjem  Ijcc  djail 
gtuc  agaute  the  pzice  of  ftis  rebemp- 
non,  out  of  the  money  tJjatljce  ltoas 
bought  foz. 

51  3lnb  if  fljetc  rcmatne  but  fell) 
yecr cs  bnto  tJjc  ycere  of gjubtlctbcn  be 
djall  tount  ibitb  Dim,  and  attozbing  bn* 
to  bis  y  ceres  fliall  lie  giue  ljun  again c 
the  pzicc  of  bis  rcbemption. 

5j  3lnb  as  a  ycerely  Dtrcb  fentant 
fljall  be  be  ibitb  him:  anb  the  other  (ball 
not  rule  Vbitlj  rigour  oucr  bun  in  thy 
fight. 

54  3lnb  if  Ijcc  be  not  rcbccmcb  ||  to 
tljcfcvcdcstljcn  Ije  (ball  goc  out  mtbc 
ycere  of  3lubilc,both  i)c,anb  biscbilbzen 
lbithbtm. 

5$  JP02  bnto  me  the  tbtlbzcn  of  3Jfca< 
cl  are  fcruants ,  they  arc  my  fcruants 
lbbom  3J  b20iiglitfo2th  out  of  theianb 
of  €gypt :  3J am  W>  %o\ajD  y  our  <5ob. 


A  blefsing 


CHAP.   XXVI 

Ofldulatry.   t   Religioufnes.    3 
to  them  that  keepe  the  Commandements.  14 
Acutfe  rothofe that breakc  there.   40  God 
promifcth  to  remember  them  that  repent. 

■  €c  fl)ail  malic  you  *  no 

1  gibolcs  1102  gcaucu  % 

'  mage ,  neither  rearc  you 

bp  a  ||  (tanbmg  image,  ncu 

tljer  (ball  yce  fct  top  any 


gjmageof  Bone  in  your  lanb,tobolto 
bourne  bnto  it :  Jf  02  3  w  tt)c  %  ©  is  © 
your  <3ob. 

x  *.Pcu)alnccpemy£>abbaths,anb 
reuerence  my  Sanctuary  :  3J  am  the 

ILfiDIH©. 

5  C  *  3Jf  ye  lbalfec  in  my  statutes, 
anb  Uccpe  mv  Commanbements,  anb 
boethent; 

4  Xbcn  31  itoill  gtuc  you  raine  in 
buc  fcafon ,  anb  the  lanb  (hall  yctUi  bet 
intrcafc ,  anb  the  trees  of  the  ficlb  (ball 
yeclbtbcic  fruit. 

5  3mb  your  ti);e(l)tng  (ball  rcath 
bnto  the  tointagc ,  anb  tbctointage  (ball 
reath  tonto  the  foibing  nine :  anb  yec 
(bal  eat  your  bzcab  to  the  full,anb*bitocl 
m  your  lanb  fafcly. 

6  3nb3litoilglucpcaccintbcianb, 
anbyc  (l)alilyeboibne ,  anb  none  (ball 
matte  you  afcalb :  anb  gj  rbill  tnb  cuill 
beads  out  of  the  lanb,*  neither  (ball  the 
ftoo2b  goctlnough  your  lanb. 

7  3nb  ye  fljall  chafe  your  enemies, 
anb  they  (ball  fall  bcfo?c  you  by  the 
Iroozb. 

8  ^nb*fiueofyoun)aithafcanhun5 
H;tH ,  anb  anhunbzcbof  you  (Ijall  put 
ten  thoufanb  to  flight :  anb  your  cne* 
nucs  fliall  fall  bcfo2c  you  by  the  fraozb. 

9  5fozgjtbilhaucrcfpett  tonto  you, 
anb  maUc  you  friutfull,  anb  multiply 
you,?  cflabli(bmytoucnantlbithyou. 

10  3nb yce djaiicateoib doze, anb 
bzmg  fo2tl)  tlie  olb,  bctautc  of  the  urtto. 

11  *^nb3ln)illfctmy3Cabernatie 
amongd  you :  anb  my  foule  (ball  not 
abht)2rcyou. 

ix  *3mb3Htortllbaiae  among  you, 
anb  tbill  be  your  00b ,  anb  yc  fljallbc 
my  people. 

1  j  5  am  the  %  ©  «  jd  youroob, 
lbhich  b2ougl)t  y  ou  fo2fh  out  of  the  lanb 
of  <£gypt  ,that  yccdjoulb  not  be  their 
bonbmen,  %  g}  hauc  b20bcn  the  banbes 
of  your  yohc,anb  mabc  you  go  topztght. 

14  C*25utifycU)illnothcarbcn  ton- 
to me,  anb  ltoilinotbocailtbcfcCom: 
manbements: 

15  Stub  if  yc  djail  bcfpifc  my  5>ta^ 
tutcs  ,  oz  if  your  foule  abbozrc  my 
giubgcmcnts.fothatyeitoilnotbocau 
my  Commaimbcmcnts ,  but  tljat  yce 
b2caKcmv€oucnant: 

16  5  alfo lbill boe  this  bnto  you,  31 
tbill  cum  appoint  t  oucr  you  tcrrour, 
tonfumption ,  anb  the  bunting  ague, 
that  diau  confumc  the  o'cs ,  anb  taufc 
fozroU)  of  heart :  anb  yc  djailfoib  your 

feebe 


I  Ortfigttrt:d 
jhne.  Hehr. 
a  jloite  ffpi- 
flurt. 
•Chap.  19. 


Dcut.18. 


•  !ob  1  r. 


t  Heb.  eauft 

to  ceafe. 

"lob i i. 


•Ioih-JJ. 
10. 


•Ezccri.  37 
xS. 


•iCor.tf. 
\6. 


•Drut.  ,8. 
1 5  lamrnf. 
:.i7.maJi. 


f  Hthr.  vpan 


Plagues  threatned    Chap.xxvj.      fordifobedience. 


\Or«laZ 
aducntHret 
with  met& 
fo  vcr/c  2.}. 


•Pro.iS  .1. 


*  i-Sim. 

11.17.pljl. 

1S.16, 


*D<ut.  j8. 
55- 


"  J.Chto. 
547 


fccbc  in  toame ,  fo;  your  enemies  (ball 
catc  it. 

17  anb  3  Hull  fet  my  fate  agatuft 
you,anb ye  (bail  be  flame  befoze  your  e* 
uenites:  they  tbatbate  you  (ball  tcigne 
oucr  you,  anb  *  ye  thaU  Ace  Urfjen  none 
purfuctbyou. 

is  anb  if  ye  tbtll  not  ret  fo;  all  this 
fjeatnen  tonto  me,  then  3  Uwllpunifl) 
you  fcucn  times  mozefo;  your  fumes. 

19  anb  3  Will  bzcahe  the  p;ibe  of 
your  polbcr,  ana  3  ttiill  maaeyour 
beauen  as  y;on,  anb  your  earth  as 
b;aflc: 

20  anb  pour  fttengtb  (ball  be  fpent 
tnnamc:  feu  your  lanb  (ball  not  yeelb 
ber  mcccafe ,  neither  fl)all  the  trees  of 
the  lanb  yeelb  time  fruits. 

ii  C  anb  ifycvbau«!|  contrary  tmto 
mc,anb  ttminotbcarBcn  Dntomee,  3 
Mil  bzmgfcuentimesmoe  plagues  l>p 
on  you,  accozbmg  to  your  fumes. 

22  3  ttnll  alio  fenb  ttnlbc  beads  a* 
mongyou,  rufjtcl)  (ball  rob  you  of  your 
chtlb;cn,  anb  beftroy  your  tattcll,  aub 
matte  you  felb  in  number , anb  your  high 
Vbaycs  (ball  be  befoiate. 

23  anbifyen»llnotberefc>;mcbby 
thefe  things,  but  Mil  tbalue  contrary 
bntome: 

24  *%1)tn  Ml  51  alfo  tbalke  con* 
trary  into  you,  anb  anil  pumlb  you 
yet  fcuen  times  fo;  your  fumes. 

25  anb  3  rum  bang  afroo;b  bpon 
you,tbat  (ball  auengc  tljc  cutarell  of  my 
couenant :  anb  tbbenyce  are  gather cb 
together  tbitbtn  your  ntics,5i  Uni  fent 
thcpeflilenceamongyou,  anbycfljalbe 
bcliuercb  into  the  banb  of  the  encmie. 

i6  3nb  tbben  3  haue  bzonen  tlje 
ftaffe  of  your  b;cab,  ten  tbomen  (ball 
base  your  b;cao  in  one  oucn,  anb  they 
(hall  bcltuer  you  your  b;eab  agameby 
tbeight :  anb  ye  (ball  eate,  anb  not  bee 
fanffieo. 

27  anbifyetbiluotfozalltbisbear; 

fcmtmtotne,  but  tbaluc  contrary  bnto 
nice, 

2S  1Chen3Jtbiltbalfee  contrary  mv 
to  you  alfo  m  fury,  anb  %  euen  3  ttnll 
cha(hfeyoufeuentimesfo;your  fmnes. 

29  *anbye(baleatctbefle(bofyour 
fonncs,anb  the  fled)  of  your  baughtcts 
(ballyccate.  .    , 

jo  anb  3  totu  beftroy  your  high 
plates,  aub  'cut  botbneyonr  images, 
anb  caft  y  our  carfeeifcs  bpon  the  car  bet 
fes  of  your  iboles ,  anb  my  foule  (hall 
abbozreyou. 


31  anb3JUHima&eyourcitiestt)afte, 
anb  bnng  your  fanctuanes  tonto  befo- 
lation,  ano  3  null  not  fmcll  the  fauour 
ofyourfracetobours. 

jr  anb  3  Unll  bung  the  lanb  into  be= 
Eolation:  anbyout  enemies  ibbub  OVbcl 
therein,  (hall  beaftom(bcoat  it. 

33  anb  3  VOM  fcattcr  you  among 
the  heathen,  anb  null  bzaib  out  a  (roozo 
after  you:  anb  your  laiibfljallbcbefo- 
late,  anb  your  dues  lbatte. 

34  Xhen  (hall  the  lanbc  emoy  her 
£>abbatbs,  as  long  as  it  Itetb  befoiate, 
aub  ^et  bem  your  enemies  lanb,  euen 
then  (bail  the  lanb  reft,  anb  emoy  her 
Sabbaths. 

35  aslongasitlicthbefolate,tt(halI 
reft:becaufeUbibnotrcttinyour£>ab 
baths,tt)hen  yc  blbelt  bpon  it. 

36  anb  bpon  them  that  are  left  & 
Uueofyou,3ibiUfenbafaintnefrcmto 
their  hearts  in  the  lanbs  of  their  ene- 
mies ,  anb  the  founb  of  a  t  (batten  leafe 
(hall  chafe  them,  anb  they  (hall  flee,  as 
fleeing  from  afmozb :  anb  they  (hall 
fall,  when  nonepurfueth. 

37  anbtheythallfallonenponano' 
tber,  as  it  tbcre  befo;e  a  fioozb ,  tbhen 
none  purfueth :  anb  ^ct  (hall  haue  no 
polber  to  Oanb  befo;c  your  enemies. 

38  anb  yet  (hall  pcrtfl)  among  the 
heathen,  anb  the  lanb  of  your  enemies 
(ball  eate  you  bp. 

39  anbtheythatareleftofyoulhail 
pine  aibay  in  their  intcuutie  in  your  ene* 
mies  lanbs,  anb  alfo  m  the  imqumes  of 
their  fathers  (ball  they  pme  atbay  ibith 
them. 

40  31  they  (hall  confefle  the  miqui 
tieof  their  fatbers,tt>itb  their  trefpafle 
Which  they  trefpafleb  agamft  me,  anb 
that  alfo  they  haue  rbaiueo  contrary 
bntomc: 

41  anb  that  3  alfo  haue  tbaifeeb  coiu 
trary  Dnto  them,  anb  haue  b;ought 
them  into  the  lanb  of  their  enemies:  if 
then  their  toneircumnfeb  hearts  bee 
humblcb,  anb  they  then  accept  of  the 
puniujment  of  their  iniaume : 

42  %hen  Ibill  3  remember  my  co? 
uenant  Sbtth'Jatob,  anb  alfo  my  couc< 
nantlbith  Jfaacano  alfo  my  couenant 
U)Uh  abzahamunll  3  remember,  anb 
3Jttniiremembertheianb. 

43  Xhe  lanb  alfo  fliaibe  left  of  them, 
anb  (ball  emoy  her  Sabbaths,  itohue 
(he  Ucth  befoiate  tbithout  them :  anb 
they  (ball  accept  of  the  pumfbment  of 
their  micmme :  becaufe,  euen  becau(c 

they 


1Hrb.<*->- 


Of 


vowes,an< 


Lcuiticus.     their  redemption. 


♦Deut.^. 
1 1  .rom. 
1 1.1$. 


tbcybcfptfcbmyJuBgcmcnts,  anb  be* 
eaufe  their  foulr  abhoircbmy  Statutes 

44  anbyetfoiaUthat,ibhenthcy 
beinthcianboftbeircncmtcs,*3lunll 
not  tail  them  atbay,  neither  tbUl^fi  ab= 
hojrcthem,  to  bcttroy  them  bttetly, 
anb  to  bieabc  my  coucnantlbith  them : 
fo?  'J  am  the  %  ©  is  ©  their  ©ob. 

45  asufjibiifojthtitlafeestetTicnv 
bee  the  toucnant  of  their  anceftours, 
rbftom^i  bioughtfiwthout  of  thtianb 
of  «£5rppt,  in  the  fight  of  the  fyeathen, 
that  3  might  be  their  ©ob :  31  am  the 
?L©«iD. 

46  iChefcace  the  Statutes,  anb 
giubgcmcnts,  anb  fUlbes  tbbith  the 
%  ©  b  £>  mabe  bcttbeene  htm  anb  the 
chrtbicnof Jlfraci,  tnmotutt&tnat,  by 
thehanbofi$ofes. 

CHAP    XXVII. 

1  He  thatmaketh  a  fingular  vow  muft  bee  tlie 
Lords,  i  The  eftimation  of  the  perfon.  9 

■  Ofabeaftgiuenbyvow.  14  Of  anoufe.  \6 
Of  a  field  and  the  redemption  thereof.  18 
No  deuoted  thing  may  be  redeemed.  31  The 
tithe  may  not  be  changed. 

/Bb  the  %  ©  is  ©  fpafte 
bnto#ofes,faying, 

2  £>pcaHe  bnto  the  chil- 
b  «n  of  3Jftael,anb  lap  bn* 
_  tothcnt,t0hcnamanlhal 
maBcafmguiatbotb,tbeperfons(ball 
be  foj  the  IL  ©  k  id,  by  thy  eftimation. 

3  ^nb  thy  eftimation  (hall  be :  ©f 
the  male  from  ttbenneyecces  olb,  euen 
bnto  firttc  yecrcs  olb :  encn  thy  cftmia^ 
tionfhaiibcfifncflicBelsof  filuct,  after 
theft)  efeel  of  the  Sanctuary. 

4  anbifitbeafmiale,rt)ettthyefh* 
mation  n>all  be  tljittic  flicfeels. 

5  anbifltbefromfiueyeercsolbc, 
encn  bnto  ttbentic  yecrcs  olb,  then  thy 
eftimation  (hail  be  of  the  male  ttbentic 
(hearts,  anb  fo:  the  female  ten  (heads. 

6  anb  if  it  be  from  amoncth  olb,  c 
ucn  bnto  fine  yecrcs  olb ,  then  thy  cftv 
mation  (hall  be  of  the  male,  fiue  (hearts 
of  filucr,  anb  fo  j  the  female,  thy  cttima.- 
tion  fhaii  be  tmcc  (bends  of  filuer. 

7  anbifitbefromGrtieyeercsolb, 
anb  aboue,  if  it  be  a  male,  then  thy  cfti- 
manon  (hall  be  fiftcene  fbcftds,  anb  fo? 
the  female  ten  (hearts. 

8  25ut  if  he  bee  poo2er  then  tin;  efti- 
mation ,  then  he  (hall  picfent  litmfrtfc 
brfoic  tbcjtmcftano  tbc^ncftfbailba- 
luc  him :  atwbmg  to  his  abihttc  that 


boa>eb,  (hailthe  &ueft  baiuehttn. 

9  anbtfttbeabeafttt>heteofmen 
bang  an  offering  bnto  the  %  ©  a  ss  all 
that  any  man  gtueth  of  CucD  bnto  the 
?L£>H&,(hailheholy. 

10  ^e(hallnotalterft,no2thancjeit, 
agoob  fiw  a  bab ,  02  a  bab  fo?  a  goob : 
anbtf  hee  (bail  at  all  change  beaft  foz 
beaft,thenit,  anb  the  etrhangc  thereof 
(hail  be  holy* 

11  anb  tf  tt  be  any  bncleane  beaft,  of 
Ibhich  they  bo  e  not  offer  a  fatrincc  bnto 
then ©«©,  then  he  (hall  pzefent  the 
beaft  before  the  i&ztcft : 

ii  anbthcpnettlhallbalnelt.ibhe* 
ther  tt  be  goob  02  bab:  as  thou  t  baiueQ 

Itwho  art  tlje  &2(ett !  fO  (hallttbC 

ij  ffint  tf  hee  ibill  at  all  rebeetne  it, 
then  he  fljail  abbe  a  oft  part  thereof  biv 
to  thy  eftimation. 

14  canbibhenamanftjaiifanett; 
fiehishoufeto  be  holy  bnto  thelLoK©, 
then  the  &ncft  (hal  eftunate  it,  tWjetrjcc 
ttbegoobo2bab:asthe^cftfljailcftu 
mate  (t,  fo  (hail  ttftano. 

15  anbifhcthatfanetracbtt,Jbilltc< 
beemchis  houfe,  then  he  (hall  abbcthe 
fift  part  of  the  money  of  thy  cftimattou 
bnto  if,  anb  tt  (ball  be  his. 

16  anb  if  a  man  ftjall  fanetifie  bnto 
the  %  ©  is  id  fomc  part  of  a  fielb  of  his 
poffeflion,  then  thy  eftimation  (ball  be 
accojbmg  to  the  fceb  thereof:  pn»o* 
mer  of  barley  feeb  (hall  be  valued  atnftle 
(beads  of  Giuer. 

17  3if  hee  fanetifie  his  fielb  fromthe 
yeerc  of  ^lubile,  acrojbmg  to  thy  euV 
mation  ttftjaiiftanb. 

is  25utifhee  fanetifie  his  fielb  after 
the  Nubile,  then  the  #2ieft  ttmlltec&on 
bnto  him  the  money ,  actojbing  to  the 
ycercs  that  remamc,  euen  bnto  the 
yccreof  the  giubilc,  anb  it  (hall  be  aba* 
tcb  from  thy  eftimation. 

19  anb  if  he  tbatfanctifieb  thefidb, 
tbill  in  any  rbtfc  r cbccmc  it,  then  he  (bal 
abbe  the  fift  pan  of  the  money  of  thy 
eftimation  bnto  it ,  anb  it  fhall  be  aftu- 
rebtohim. 

to  anbtfheeibillnotrebccmethc 
fielb,  02  tf  he  haue  fblb  the  fielb  to  ano-- 
ther  man ,  tt  fhall  not  be  rcbeemeb  any 
mozc 

ii  25ut  the  fielb,  tbhen it gocth  out 
in  the  Nubile ,  ftjall  be  holy  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  id,  as  a  fielb  beuoteb :  the  poffcfr 
fion  thereof  (baibcthc$2iefts. 

ii  anb  if  a  man  fanetifie  bnto  the 
%  ©  &  ©  a  fielb  ibhich  he  hath  bought, 
ibhich 


1  HchM- 

thjtfitTHAti- 
n.OPntli, 


II  Or,  the 
!andtf/Vi 
Homer ,&c 


Red 


eeminp-o 


>f 


Ch; 


W 


theTyth 


es 


•Exod.  ja 
13.  num.  3. 
47.  czcch. 
4j.Il. 

\Hebr.frn 


*Exod.  30. 


IDllltl)  IS  ItOt  Of  the  fidbCS  Of  |)10  pofc 
fcflion : 

13  Xbcn  tlje  ^iett  fbail  retfeon  bn= 
tobimtbeiboitb  of  tljp  rihmation,  & 
uenbnto  the  pecre  of  the  Subtle,  anb 
fjee  ujail  giuc  thine  rihmation  in  that 
nap ,  as  a  boh?  thtnfl  bnto  tlic  IL  ©  is  w. 

14.  3Jntbcvcere  of  the  3Jubile,tbe 
fielb  (ball  rcturne  bnto  htni  of  lbbom  it 
rbas  bought,  cuen  to  him  to  ibhom  the 
poflcflion  of  the  tanti  bib  belong. 

15  3nb  ail  thy  rihmations  (ball  be 
accojbing  to  the  (bcncl  of  the  danc 
tuaric:  *ttbcntic  ©crabs  (ball  bee  the 
fbcfecl. 

i6  c  €>nclp  ttjc  t  firming  of  the 
bcafts  ibbtrb  (boulb  be  the  |L  ©  is  ©  £> 
Settling,  no  man  (ball  fanctific  it,  ibbe* 
ther  it  bee  ote ,  0?  fbeepe  :  3Jt  is  the 

17  3nb  if  it  be  of  an  bnclcanc  bcaft, 
then  bee  (ball  rebceme  it  atco«!bing  to 
thine  rihmation,  anb  (hall  abbe  a  fifth 
part  of  it  thereto:  ^ifitbenotrcbee* 
meb,tben  it  fbalbc  folb  atcozbmg  to  thp 
rihmation, 

18  *  jftottbifbfranbtng ,  no  bcuoteb 
thing  that  a  man  (ball  beuotcbntotljc 


H©«?&,  of  an  that  he  hath,  both  of 
man  anb  bcaft,anb  of  the  fielb  of  his 
poffeflion,  (hall  be  folb  0;  tebeemcb: 
cucr?  bcuoteb  thing  is  mod  hoi?  bnto 
tije  IfiL  o  k  jb>. 

19  iftonc  beuotcb ,  tbbith  (baibc  Dt- 
notcb  of  men,  (hall  be  rebcemeb :  but 
(ban  furclv  be  put  to  bcatb. 

30  3mballtbe  tithcof  tbcianb,  whe- 
ther of  the  feco  of  the  lanb,  or  of  the  fruit 
of  the  tree ,  is  tbe  12,  €>  is  ©  ^ :  ic  is  holp 
bnto  the  1L© is©. 

3'  3tnbif  a  manibill  at  alirebeeme 
ought  of  his  tithes,  he  (ball  abbe  there- 
to  thefiftb  part  thereof. 

31  2lnb  tontertimg  the  tithe  of  the 
berbc,  01  of  the  floefce,  cuen  of  ibbatfo 
eucr  paffeth  bnber  the  rob ,  the  tenth 
(baibc  holp  bnto  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

33  $e  (ball  not  fearcb  ibbctber  it  be 
gooo  02  bab,  neither  (ballbccbangctt: 
anb  if  he  change  it  at  all ,  then  both  it, 
anb  the  change  thereof,  (ball  be  bolp ;  it 
(ball  not  be  rebcemeb. 

34  ^Ebrtc-irctbe  Commanbements 
tbhich  the  %<$> is©  commanbeb  flDo* 
fes ,  foz  the  cbilbicn  of  Jftacl  in  mount 
Sunat. 


^THE  FOVRTH  BOOKE 

of  Mofcs,called  Numbers. 


CHAP.    I 

God  eommaundeth  Mofes  to  number  the 
people.  5  The  Princes  of  the  Tribes.  17 
The  number  of euery  Tribe.  47  TheLeuitcs 
are  exempted  for  the  Seruice  of  the  Lord. 

/ftbtbclLiDis© 
(pane  bnto  iS&o- 
fcsmfbettiilbec* 
nriTcof&inaMn 
the  ^Tabernacle 
ofthcCongrcga; 
tion ,  on  the  firft 
day  of  the  feconb 
motiefb,tntbcfe' 

tonb  y cere,  after  the?  Ibcrc  come  out  of 

the  lanb  of  €gppt,faying, 
1  *  Xauc  yec  the  fumme  of  all  the 

Congregation  of  the  cbiltycn  of  3lfc 


tael.after  their  fanulies.bp  the  houfe  of 
their  fathers ,  ibith  the  number  of  their 
nanies.cuery  male  by  their  pollc : 

3  Jfrom  tlbcntie  yeeres  olb  anb  bp; 
tbatb,  all  that  arc  able  to  got  fiwtb  to 
ibarre  inljftaci:  thou  anb  3laron  (ball 
number  tfjem  by  their  armies. 

4  ;8nbibitbycutherc(baibcaman 
ofeueryXnbe :  euery  onebeab  of  the 
houfe  of  his  fathers. 

5  C  3nb  thefe  aietfjcnamesof  the 
men  that  (ball  (lanb  ttiitb  you :  of  the 
tribe  of  Reuben ,  cirjur  the  fonnc  of 
5>bcbcur. 

6  j©f  Simeon :  £>hclumicl  the  fou 
ofztitifbabbau 

1  £>f3Jubab:/f5ab(bon,  the  fonnc 
of^mmmabab. 

8  £>f  3J(Tachar :  i5etl)aneel ,  the 
fonnc  of  znar. 

9  £>t 


Menofwarre  Numbers.  arc  numb  red* 


9  £>f  Zcbulun :  Cltab  the  fonnc  of 
$clon. 

10  £>f  the  rfnltacn  of  3Iofcph :  of  e 
Phraim,«lithamathc  Conntof31mm^ 
Duo :  of  ^anafleh,  <samaiicl  thefottne 
ofpebabwr. 

n  )3Df26Enuinun:^otDan,ti)efonnc 
of<5ibconi. 

iz  j©f  S>an :  ^htc?.cr ,  the  fonnc  of 
$mmi(babbat 

13  _Df  3lhct :  0agicl  the  fonnc  of 
£Dcran. 

14  _Df  <sab :  Cltalaph ,  the  fonnc  of 
SDcucl. 

15  £>f  /ftaphtail :  3hira  the  fonnc  of 
enan. 

16   "£l)CfC  were  the  miOlbneb  Of  ti)t 

Congregation ,  ^nnecs  of  ti)t  tribes  of 
time  fathers ,  heabs  of  thoulanbs  ut 
Jfracl. 

17  C^nb^ofesanb^arontooae 
fbcfe  men ,  ibbich  ate  erpzriTeb  bp  their 
names. 

18  3inb  thep  affcmblcb  all  the  Con- 
gregation together  on  the  firft  bap  of 
ti)t  fttonb  nioncrb ,  anb  thep  berlareb 
their  pebegrces  after  their  familtcs,bp 
the  houfc  of  their  fathers,  atc02blng  to 
the  number  of  tl)c  names ,  fcom  ttb  cn= 
tppercsolDanObpibaro  bp  their  pollc. 

19  %s  the  %  o  k  ©  tommaunbeb 
£0ofcs  ,fo  l)c  numbjeb  them  m  the  vote 
berncu"eof£>lnat. 

10  3inb  thcthittHcn  of  Heubcn3lt 
racis  clbcft  fonnc,  bp  their  generations 
after  their  famines ,  bp  the  houfe  of 
their  fathers,  acco2bmgto  the  number 
ofthenames,bpthctrpollc,cuerpmaie 
from  ttbcntp  peercs  olb  anbbpibarb, 
all that  iberc  able  to  go  fo2th  to  ibarre : 

21  Ithofc  that  lbcrc  numtycb  of 

tl)Cm,  euen  Of  thCtnbC  Of  HCUben,  were 

fburrp  anb  fire  thoufanb  anbfiuehun- 
bjeb. 

zz  C  -Df  the  thilbien  of  Simeon  bp 
their  generations ,  after  their  fanrtlies, 
bpthehoufcoftbcirfatbcrs,thoftthat 
lbcrc  numbicb  of  them ,  actozbmg  to 
the  number  of  the  names  ,  bp  their 
poUes.cucrpmalc  from  rtbentppecres 
olb  anb  bpibarb ,  all  that  Iberc  able  to 
gocfoo2tb  to  ibarre: 

zj  Hlhofcthat  were  numbjcb  of  them, 

euen  Of  tlje  tCtbC  Of  ;§>imCOll  ,  were  fiftie 

anb  nine  thoufaiio,aubib2ccbunb2Cb. 
Z4.  C)aDfthcthilb2ni  of  Gabbp  their 
gcneranons,aftcr  their  famtltes  bp  the 
houfc  of  their  fathers  ,acco:btngtothe 
number  of  the  names,  fcom  nbentp 


peercs  olb  anb  topibacb,  all  thatibere 
able  to  goc  footfb  to  ibarre : 

z$  %hofc  that  iberc  numtycb  of 
them,euen  oftije  tribe  of  <sab,were  four= 
tp  ano  flue  thouCano ,  Ore  huubjeb  anb 
fiftie. 

16  C  iDf  the  chilbjcn  of  Juoal)  bp 
their  generations,  after  their  families 
bp  the  houfc  of  their  fathers,  atcozbmg 
to  the  number  of  the  names ,  from 
ttbcntp  pcetes  olb  anb  bpibarb,ail  that 
lbcre  able  to  goc  foojth  to  ibarre: 

Z7  Xhofe  that  iberc  numbjeb  of 

them,  euen  of  the  tribC  Of  iJllbah,  were 

th^cefcoic  anb  fourtecne  rffoufanb,  anb 
firehunb2eb. 

zs  C£>f the  thilbicn  of 3Iu*acbar  ,bp 
their  generations,  after  their  families 
bp  the  houfc  of  their  fathers ,  att02bing 
to  the  number  of  the  names,  from 
ttbcntp  pcrcs  olb  anb  bpibarb,  all  that 
Iberc  able  to  goc  fooitb  to  ibarre: 

Z9  £hofe  that  iberc  mmib2Cb  of 
them,  euen  of  the  tribe  of  Uflathar,  were 
fiftie  anb  foure  thoufanb ,  anb  foure 
hunbjeb. 

30  C£>fthcchilb2cnofZcbulun,bp 
their  generations,  after  their  families, 
bp  the  houfc  of  their  fathers ,  at  tombing 
to  the  number  of  the  names,  from 
ttbcntp  peres  olb  anb  bpibarb,all  that 
lbcrcabletogoefoo2thto  ibarre: 

31  Ithofe  that  ibecc  numbjeb  of 

thCm,euen  ofthetribC  Of  ZCbUlUll,  were 

fiftie  anb  fcuen  thoufanb  anb  foure 
hunbjeb. 
31  C  -Df  the  thilb2en  of  3fofeph; 

namely  Of  the  thfltyCn  of  €ph2aUll ,  bp 

their  generations,  after  their  families, 
bpthchoufe  of  their  fathers,  art02bing 
to  the  number  of  the  names  ,  from 
ttbentppcres  olb  anb  bpibarb,  all  that 
Ibereable  to  goefoojthto  ibarre: 

33  IChofc  that  iberc  numbjeo  of 

thCm,  euen  Of  the  trlbC  Of<ffph2aim,  were 

fourtp  thoufanb  anb  fiuehtmbzeb. 

34  C  £Df  the  thUb2en  of  ©anaflch 
bp  their  generations,  after  their  fanu* 
lies ,  bp  the  houfe  of  their  fathers  ac- 
co2bmg  to  the  number  of  the  names, 
from  ttbcntp  peercs  olb  anbbpibarb, 
all  that  ibereable  to  go  foith  to  ibarre: 

35  Xhofe  that  lbere  numbjeb  of 
them ,  euen  of  the  tribe  of  £j3anafTch, 
werethlrtp  anb  tlbo  thoufanb,anb  ttbo 
hraib2eb. 

36  C€>fthethilb2cnof25ettiamin, 
bp  their  generations,  after  their  fami- 
lies, bp  the  houfe  of  their  fathers,atto^ 
bmg_ 


The  Leuites 


Chap.i).        office  and  charge. 


btngto  the  number  of  the  names  from 
rtbentp  pceres  olb  anb  bptbarb  ,aii  that 
Were  able  to  goe  foonh  to  tbatre : 

37  Xhofc  rtjat  tbere  numbjeb  of 
them,  enen  of  the  tribe  of  25emamut, 
were  thirttc  anb  ftue  thoufanb,anb  foure 
hunbjeb. 

js  C£>fthecbilb.2ctt  of  3>an,bp  their 
gcncrattons.aftcr  their  familics,bp  the 
houfc  of  their  fathers,  aceojbing  to  the 
number  of  tl)e  names,  from  ttbentie 
pceres  olb  ano  bptbarb,ail  that  lbcrc  a* 
bletogoefonhtotbarre: 

39  Xhofc  that  rbere  numbzeb  of 
them ,  cuen  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  tbere 
tluccftoze  anb  tibo  thoufanb,  anb  feuen 
hiuttycb. 

40  €  ©f  toe  ehilbzen  of  3Khet ,  bp 
tljcir  generations,  after  their  families, 
bp  the  houfc  of  tl)cir  fathers,  accotfnng 
to  the  number  of  the  names ,  from 
ttbenttcpcrcsolb  anb  bptbarb,all  that 
tbere  able  to  goe  fojth  to  lbarrc : 

41  ^Ctjofc  that  lbcrc  numbjeb  of 
them,  cucn  of  the  tribe  of  3l(bcc,  were 
four  tie  anb  one  thoufanb,  anb  ftue  htm 
men, 

4^  C  £>f  the  ehiuwen  of  /ftaphtait, 
throughout  their  generations ,  after 
thettfatmliesbp  the  houfc  of  their  fo 
thers,  aetozbing  to  the  number  of  the 
names,  from  tibentic  pceres  olbe  anb 
bptbarb,  ailthatlbereabletogoefozth 
to  lbarrc: 

43  Xhofe  that  tbere  numbzeb  of 
them.eucn  of  the  tribe  of  i5apbtali,wcre 
fiftie  anb  thzee  thoufanb ,  anb  fonrc 
hnnbjeb. 

4+  Xhefc  "ethofc  that  tbere  num< 
bzeb ,  tbhtch  Azotes  anb  2aron  num- 
bzcb,  anb  thei&mtcsof  35fracl,  being 
Ubcluemen:  each  onetbasfozthchoufc 
of  his  fathers. 

45  do  tbere  all  thofe  that  tbere 
numbjeb  of  the  ehtlbjen  of  3iftael,  bp 
the  houfc  of  their  fatl)crs,  from  ttbcntp 
pceres  olb  anb  bptbarb,  all  that  tbere 
able  to  goefojth  to  lbarrc  in  3frael: 

46  eucn  all  fhep,  that  tbere  num- 
bzeb,tberc  ftrchimmeb  thoufanb ,  anb 
thue  thoufanb ,  anb  fine  hunbzeb  anb 
fiftie. 

47  C  But  the  fLcuites  after  the 
tribe  of  their  fathers,  tbere  not  nunv 
b?eb  among  them. 

4S  5FozthcfL©is3DhabfpoBcnbn< 
tofl0ofes,faping, 

49  ^nclpthoulhaltnotnumbctfhe 
trtbe  of  fLeut,  neither  taftc  the  fummc 


ofthcmamongtlicthUbjcnof'lifracl. 

50  26ut  thou  (halt  appoint  the  V~t 
tutes  oucr  the  Xabcrnatlc  of  Seftimo^ 
nic,  anb  oner  all  the  luflelsthetcof.anb 
ouer  all  things  that  belong  to  it :  thep 
Q)au  bcare  the  Xabcrnaclc,  anb  an  the 
bcffels  thereof,  anb  thep  (hail  mmtfter 
bnto  it,  anb  (ball  entampt  totmb  about 
theXabcrnacle. 

51  3lnbluhcnthcXabcrnaclcfettcth 
fojtbarb,  the  fLcuites  (hall  tafeeit 
Dottine :  anb  tbhen  the  ICabccnaclc  is  to 
be  pitrheb,  the  fLcuites  than  fetitbp : 
anb  the  ftranger  that  tommeth  nigh, 
(ballbcputtobcatb. 

51  3nbthccbilbiettof3Jfrael  foaH 
pitch  their  tents  cucrp  man  bp  his  otbn 
campc ,  anb  cucrp  man  bp  his  otune 
flanberb,  thzottghouttheic  holies. 

5  J  But  the  fLcuites  fl)allpitchrounb 
about  the  Xabernacle  of  Xelhmonie, 
that  there  be  no  tbzatl)  bpon  theCoiv 
gregation  of  the  cbtlbjen  of  3ftacl: 
anb  the  iLetutes  (hall  Ucepe  the  charge 
of  the  Xabcr  naclc  of  Xcmmonic. 

54  31nb  the  thilbzcn  of  3Ktacl  bib 
acto2b!itg  to  all  that  the  ILokjd  com- 
manbeb  s^ofes,  fo  bib  thep. 

CHAP.   II. 

The  order  of  iheTribes  in  their  cents. 

Js  /]5b  the  HoaD  fpaftc 
'  bnto  ^ofes,  anb  bnto  7L 
aron,  fapmg, 
%  tfuerp  man  of  the 
_  chilbzen  of  gifraci  (hall 
pitch  bp  his  olbnc  ftanberb ,  tbith  the 
enfignc  of  their  fathers  houfc:  tfarre  off 
about  the  Xabernacle  of  the  Congee- 
ganonfl)allthcppitcl). 

j  2(nb  on  the  €aft  fibe  totbarb  the 
rtfing  of  the  £>unnc,  (hall  thep  of  the 
ftanberb  of  the  campeof  3iubal)  pitch, 
throughout  their  armies :  anb  iftah- 
(l)on  the  fonnc  of  ^nimmabab ,  (bail  bee 
captautc  of  tl)c  chtibicn  of  3Jubah. 

4.  ^nb  his  hoOc,  anb  thofe  that 
tbere  numbjeb  of  them,  were  thjeefcojc 
anb  fourtcmcthoufaiib,anb(irc  huu- 
bzeb. 

5  3inbthofcfhatboepttcbnertbnto 

him ,  frail  be  the  tribe  of  3liTachar :  ano 
il5cthanccl  the  fonnc  of  zuar ,  dull  bee 
taptamc  of  the  cbilbzenof  ^((Uachar. 

6  ^nbhishoucanbthofcthattberc 
numbicb  thereof,  were  ftftic  anb  fourc 
thoufanb.anbfourelnm&Jeb. 

7  Then  tlie  tribe  of  Zebulun :  anb 

Cliab 


Theorderof 


Numb 


ers. 


the  Tents. 


euabtpefonneoB?elon,(haibetaptainc 
oftDecpilbzcnofZebuiun. 

s  3ln&DisDoftc  anb  tbofe  tDat  tbcre 
numbzeb  tDcreof ,  were  fiftie  anb  fcuen 
tboufanb,anbfoureDunbzeb. 

9  311  that  tbcre  numbzeb  in  tDc 
Campe  of  ^uuafj ,  tbcre  an  Dunbzeb 
tDoufanb,anbfourcfcozctDoufano,anb 
fire  tDoufanb  ,  anb  foute  IjuntyeD, 
tbzougDout  tDetc  armies  s  tljcfc  Abaft 
fitftfctfooztD. 

10  C  £>n  tf)C  SoUtDfibC  fhall  be  tDe 
ftanberb  of  tDeCampe  of  Seubcn ,  at* 
coding  to  tDcir  armies :  anb  tDc  tap* 
tame  of  ti)c  cDiibzen  of  Eeuben  (ball  be 
euvxt  tbe  fonttc  of SDebcur. 

ii  3utb  Dis  botte.anbtbofc  tDat  tbcre 
numbzeb  thereof,  were  fourtie  anb  fire 
tii  o  ufano  ,anb  Sue  Dunbzeb. 

ii  3nb  tDofc  tbDieD  pitel)  bp  Dim, 
(bail  bee  the  tribe  of  Simeon ,  anb tDc 
captame  of  tl)c  cDiibzen  of  Simeon  (hail 
be  Sbelumicl  tl)c  fonne  of  Zunfbab- 
bai. 

13  3Jnbf)isI)ofte,anbtl)ofcrl)atiberc 
numbzeb  of  tDem ,  were  fiftie  anb  nine 
tboufanb,anbtt)zcel)unbzeb. 

14  XDcn  the  tribe  of  ©ab : anb  tDe 
captainc  of tljc  fonncs  of  ©abihaiibec* 
liafapl)  tl)c  fonne  of  Bcuel 

15  3nb  ins  bofte ,  anb  tDofc  fiw 
iberc  numbzeb  of  tDcm.were  fourtie  anb 
fiue  tDoufanb  ,  anb  fixe  Dunbzeb  anb 
ftftie. 

16  3UI  tDat  tbcre  numbzeb  in  ti)t 
Campc  of  Beuben  were  an  Ijunbzcb 
tDoufanb ,  anb  fiftie  anb  one  tDoufanb, 
anb  foure  Dunbzeb  anb  fifttc  tbzougb- 
out  ttjeit  armies :  anb  tljcp  (ball  fct 
foozt!)  m  tDcfcconb  ranfte. 

17  CEDcntDcXabernacleoftDe 
Congregation  mall  fct  foztbarb  tbitD 
tne  Campc  of  tfjc  fLeuitcs,  in  toe  nubft 
oftDc  Campc:  astbevcneampe,fo  (ball 
rlKV  fct  f  ozwarb.ciierp  man  in  his  place 
bptbetrftanberos. 

18  €  €)n  the  nacfl  fibe  (ball  bee  tDc 
flaiiocrb  oftfjc  Campe  of  €pDzaim,ae< 
cozbing  to  tDcir  armies :  anb  trjc  tap- 
tame  of  tne  fonncs  of  <£pbzaim ,  (hail  be 
Clifbama  tDc  fonne  of  3mmiDub. 

19  3nbDtsDoftc,am)iDofetDatibcre 
numbzeb  oftnem.werefourtic  tDoufanb 
anb  fiue  Dunbzeb. 

io  3inb  bv  Dim  (hail  be  tDe  tribe  of 
flDanaflcD :  anb  tDc  taptamc  of  tDe  eDil- 
bzen  of  CBanaffcD ,  fbalbc  Gamaliel  tDc 
fonne  of  j&cbaDwr. 

ii  3nb  Dis  Doftc ,  anb  tDofc  that 


tbcre  numbzeb  of  tDem,  were  tDtrtte  anb 
ttbo  tDoufanb ,  anb  ttbo  Dunbzeb. 

n  %$m  tDe  tribe  of  ffieniamin: 
anbtDctaptaine  of  tDc  fonncs  of  25en* 
iamtn ,  (hail  bee  ^biban  tl)c  fonne  of 
<Stbcon(. 

13  3nbDisDofte,anbtDofctDattbcrc 
numbzeb  of  tDem,  were  tDirtie  anb  fiue 
tl)  oufanb,anb  foure  Dunbzeb, 

14  31H  tDat  tbcre  numbzeb  of  tDc 
Campe  of  «pDzatm ,  were  an  Dunbzeb 
tDoufanb,  anb  ctgDt  tDoufanb,  anb  an 
Dunbzeb  ,  tDzoujJDout  tbetr  armies: 
anbtDepfDail  goe  foztbarb  in  tDe  tfjitb 
ranfte. 

15  <E  1CDe  ftanberb  of  tDe  Campe  of 
2>an  (hail  be  on  tDt#oztDfibe  bp  tDcir 
armies:  anb  tDc  taptamc  of  tDc  cDiibzen 
of  2Dan  fhaibe  ^Die5cr,tDe  fonne  oRJnt* 
mitbabbat. 

16  3nb  DisDottc,anb  tDofe  tftat  mere 
numbzeb  of  tDem ,  were  tDzccftozc  anb 
ttbo  tDoufanb,anb  fcuen  Dunbzeb. 

17  3nbtDofe  tDateneampcbpbsm> 
(baibe  tDc  tribe  of  3ttber :  anb  tbe  cap* 
tame  of  tDe  rDUbzcn  of  3(Dcr,  (haibe^ 
girt  tDe  fonne  of  £>cran. 

18  3(nb  Dis  Doftc ,  anb  tDofc  tDat 
iberc  numbzeb  of  tDem ,  were  fourtie 
anb  one  tDoufanb,  anb  fiue  Dunbzeb. 

i9  C^Dentbc  tribe  of  iftapDtali: 
anb  tDe  captame  of  tDc  cDiibzen  of 
jftapDtau ,  (hail  bee  abtra  tDc  fbnnc  of 
<£nan. 

30  3tnbDtsDofte,anb  tDofc  tDat  tbcre 
numbzeb  of  tDem ,  were  fiftie  anb  tDzce 
tDoufanb  ,anb  foure  Dunbzeb. 

31  311  tljcy  tDat  tbere  numbzeb  in 
tDc  Campe  of  ©an,  were  an  Dunbzeb 
tboufanb.anb  fifty  anbfeuen  tDoufanb, 
anb  fire  Dunbzeb :  tDcp  (ball  goe  Dun> 
mott  tbttb  tDetr  ftanberbs. 

31  €  ICDcfe  are  tDofc  tbDicD  tbcre 
numbzeb  of  tDe  cDiibzen  of  3lfracl,  bp 
tDe  Doufe  of  tDcir  fatDers;  all  tDofc  tDat 
tbere  numbzeb  of  tDe  Campes  tDzougD 
oirttDeirDoftes,  were  fire  Dunbzeb  tbou 
fanb.anb  tDzee  tDoufanb ,  anb  fine  Dmv 
bzcbanbfiftie. 

33  23ut  tDe  ILeuttcs  tbcre  not  nunv 
bzcb  among  tlje  cDiibzen  of  3Jfrael,  as 
tDe  How  E>  tommanbeb  fl0ofes. 

34  3nb  tlje  tDilbzett  of  3Jfrac!  bib 
ateozbmg  to  an  tDat  tDc  %  ©  is  ©  tom- 
manbeb QiJofcs:  fo  tbci? jutebcb  bp  tDcir 
ftanberbs  ,anb  Co  tDev  (ctfoztbarb  cuc^ 
rpone  after  tDnr  families,  ateozbmg  to 
tfjc  Doufe  of  tDcir  fatDers, 

CHAP 


rrhcL 


euites 


Ch; 


Lp.Uj, 


arcnum 


bred. 


•Erod.f. 
»3- 


f  Hch.vehcfc 
bzndhefilled 

♦Leuit.io. 
I. chap.  i<5. 
tfl.i.chro. 


CHAP.    III. 

The  formes  of  Aaron.  5  TheLeuitesaregi- 
uen  to  the  Priells  for  the  feruice  of  the  Ta- 
bernacle, 11  in  (lead  of  the  fii  ft  borne.  14 
The  Leuites  arenumbrcd  by  their  families, 
ii  The  families,  number  and  charge  of  the 
Geifhonices,  17  OitheKohathites,  53  Of 
the  Merarites.  3S  Theplace  &charge  of  Mo- 
fes&  Aaron.  40  Thefiift  borne  arefreedby 
theLeuites.  44  Theouerplus  are  redeemed. 

f  ink  alfo  ace  the  genctati* 
!  ons  of  3aron  anb  fiJ9o* 
I  fcs,  m  the  Dap  that  the 

J  fesm  Amount  £>inai. 
3inb  thefc  are  the  names  of  the 
fonncs  of  2aton :  iftabab  the  *  firft 
borne,  anb2ibihu,  eieajat  anu  Jjtha* 
mar. 

3  Xhefcarethcnamcsofthcfonnes 
of  3iaron  the  ®nctts,  ibbitb  ibere  an* 
ointeb, t  u>hom  he  confeccatcD  to  mini* 
ftetinthc&ueftsoffitc. 

4  *  3tnD  ii5aoab  anb  ^Cbilju  hith  be* 
fojc  t!)elt)3DiB©,«)l)en  the?  offctcb 
ftcangc  fire  before  t!;c  %  c>  is  ©  m  the 
ttnlbcrncfle  of  dmai ,  anft  the?  Dab 
no  chilbien :  anb  cicasat  anb  3tha* 
mar  miniftrcb  in  thei&.ricfts  oSfuc  in  the 
fight  of  3aron  their  father. 

5  C3nb  the  ILsdibjd  (pane  bnto 
g^ofes,  faying, 

6  Bnngtbctribeof3Lcuineere,anb 
picfent  them  before  3(aron  the  ^jticft, 
that  thep  may  muuftct  bnto  him. 

7  anbtijtp  (ball ftecpe  his  charge, 
anb  the  charge  of  tbcibhole  Congrtga* 
tionbcfoJcfhcXabcrnadcof  tije  Con 
grcgation,  tobocthefcruiceof  tbcXa* 
bcmatlc. 

8  ^nbrtjcpfliaiiKcepcalltbcfnfttu* 
ments  of  t^c  Xabernade  of  the  Con* 
grcgation,  anb  tlje  charge  of  the  chil* 
bzenof  3Jfracl,  tobocthe  feruice  of  the 
Xabernade. 

9  3lnb  thou  (bait  gittc  the  fLcuites 
bnto  5taronanb  to  bis  fonncs:  thep  are 
ibhollp  giuen  bnto  Ijim  ont  of  the  cbtl* 
Djenofjfrael. 

10  3mb  thou  (bait  appoint  ^aton 
anb  ttis  fonncs,  anb  fhep  (ball  Ibaitc  on 
their  pjicfts  office :  anb  the  fttanger 
that  commeth  nigh ,  (bail  bee  put  to 

ocath.  M 

11  ^nbtl)c!L€)i3jDfpabebntofl^o* 

fcs^ivtng, 

ix  ^nb5J,bcbolb,1!hauctaKenthe 
ILcuttcs  fcom  among  the  cbUOJen  of 


3JftatMti  ttcab  of  all  the  firft  borne  that 
opencrh  the  matmc  among  tljjc  thil* 
bjen  of  3Jftacl :  therefore  the  ILcuttes 
(ball  be  mine, 

1  j  25ccaufe  all  the  firfl  bontc  ar  emmc : 
*  for  on  the  bar  that  3  fmotc  all  the  firft 
borne  in  the  lanb  of  egppt.gjbaioNjeb 
bnto  nice  all  the  firft  borne  tn  girrad, 
bot!)  man,  anb  beaft.minc  thev  (l^all  be : 

^jamthelLfiDffi©. 

14  C^nbthc!LfiDis©fpaUcbnto 
Wcs,tntherbtiberncuc  of£>inai,fap* 
mg, 

15  iBumber  die  ehilbzcn  of  JUui,  af* 
ttr  the  houfc  of  their  fathers,  bp  their 
families :  cucrp  male  from  a  monctlj 
olb  anb  bprbarb  (halt  thou  number 
them. 

u  3nb  *  £0otcs  numb2cb  them  at* 
cobbing  to  the  tibozb  of  ti)c  %  £>  is  je>, 
as  heftias  commanbeb. 

17  ^nb  theft  were  the  fonnes  of  ILc* 
ra,bp  their  names:  ©erfbon,  anb  Bo* 
hath,  anb  ^crari. 

18  2wa  theft  arc  tlje  names  of  the 
tonnes  of  dserthon,  bp  tbrtt  families: 
Hibm,anb^>htnict. 

19  ^nbthefonnes  of  Bobafh  bptljcir 
families:  ^mram,  anb  3f5Cl)ar,  i^c* 
bjonanb«0(53tel. 

20  ^itbthefonnesof  Q9ctari by  their 
faimncs :  #abli,  anb  £pufln :  there  ate 
the  families  of  the  Heuitcs,  attojbmg 
to  the  houfc  of  their  fathers. 

21  ®fd5er(bottwasthcfamwcoftbe 
fUbuites  y  anb  the  famine  of  the  £>j)t 
nutes:  thefeare  tlje  families  of  the  €»er* 
(honites. 

22  %hofe  that  tbere  numb^eb  of 
them ,  accojbing  to  the  number  of  all 
the  males,  from  a  moneth  olb  anb  bp* 
ibatb,  eucnthofcthatvbcrenumbjeb  of 
them,were  ftucn  thoufaub  anb  fiue  hun* 

25  Xhc  families  of  the  d5cr(bonites 
ftjal  pitch  behinb  the  Xabernarte  ©eft* 
ttiarb, 

24.  ^nbtbccbicfcofthehoiifeofthc 
fattier  of  the  (Rnhonitcs,  (hail  be  ciia* 
faphthcfonneofliael. 

25  ^nb  the  charge  of  the  fonncs  of 
d5erft)on,mtheXabemacleoftheCon* 
grcgation,  Oiaii  be  the  Xabernarte,  anb 
the  tent,  thetoucring  thereof,  anb  the 
hanging  fo?  the  booje  of  the  Xaberna* 
cle  of  the  Congregation : 

26  3tnb  the  hangings  of  the  Court, 
anb  the  curtaine  to?  the  booze  of  the 
court,lbhichisbytbeXabernaclc,anb 

ja bp 


*Exod.  1 5. 
t-lcuir.27. 
:6.chap.  8. 
i<5.!ukc  2. 
a3- 


*  Gene  46. 

1  j.exod  6. 

K5.chap.2t5 

c7-i.chro. 

0.1 1. 

\Mr. 

month. 


10 


IThcLeuitcs  Numbers.        fcucrall  charges  J 


tfti.A 

tfictaflbe 
charge. 


by  the  2Utar  rouno  abont,ano  the  coros 
of  it,  for  all  the  fcruice  thetof. 

17  C3m0  of  isohath  was  the  fonifc 
ltcofthc^mramitcs,anothefamilicof 
the  3hcharitcs,  ant>  tlje  famiitcof  the 
i?cbrouitcs,anD  the  famine  of  tlic  3Il55i- 
clttes :  tljcfe  arc  the  families  of  the  Bo* 
hathitcs. 

is  3Jnthc  number  of  all  the  males, 
from  a  moneth  oioc  ano  opmaro,  were 
eight  thoufano,  ano  Ore  hunorco,  ftcc* 
ping  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary. 

29  Xhc  families  of  the  fonncs  of 
Hohath,  Chan  pitch  on  the  uoe  of  the 
Xabcrnacle&outinoaro. 

jo  $nO  the  chicfe  of  the  houfe  of  the 
father  of  thefamilics  of  the  Bohathttcs 
(haibe  <En3aphan  the  fonne  of  S353icl. 

31  ^nt)theicchargefliaiibethc3tr6e, 
ano  the  ©ible,  ano  the  Canoietticfcc, 
ano  the  altars,  ano  the  Oeffeis  of  the 
5>auctuanc,  \Dhcr  eiDith  they  miniftcr , 
ano  the  hanging, ano  all  the  feruite 
thereof. 

32  Stnoeieasar  the  fonne  of  3laron 
thc^ricft,  fhailbechicfcouctthe  chicfe 
of  the  ILemtcs,  an  a  haue  the  ouerfight  of 
them  that  nccpc  the  charge  of  the  £>an* 
ctuary. 

33  C€>fffl5erariwasthefamilpofthc 
99ahlitcs  ,  ano  the  family  of  the  $ta* 
(hues :  thefe  are  the  families  ofSDcratl. 

34  3(nothofc  that  mere  numbreo  of 
thcm,aaorOingtothenumberofauthc 
males  from  a  moneth  oio  $  toptbaro, 
wereOre  thoufano  ano  t\bo  hunorco. 

35  2no  the  chicfe  of  the  houfeof  the 
fatljer  of  the  families  of  tfjlerari ,  was 
zuriel  the  fonne  of  3ibihail:  thefe  (hall 
pitch  on  the  Roc  of  the  Xabernade 
jfjorthroaios. 

36  3no  Hmocr  the  euftooy  ano  charge 
of  the  fonncs  of  30erart ,  (hall  bee  the 
boaros  of  the  ICabcrnaele,  ano  the 
barrcsthcrcof.anothepiliarsthercof, 
ano  the  rochets  thcrcof,$ail  thcoeffcls 
thereof,  ano  all  that  fcrueth  thereto: 

37  3no  the  pillars  of  the  Court 
rouno  about ,  ano  their  foefcets,  ano 
their  pmncs,anofhctr  coros. 

38  iC  2Sut  thofc  that  encampe  before 
thcXabcrnacle  toiuaro  the  call,  euen 
before  the  Xabernacic  of  the  Congrc* 
gatton  £aftibaro ,  frdibe  *$ofcs  ano 
3iaron,  ano  his  fonncs,  beeping  the 
chargcofthc&anctuary,forthechargc 
of  the  chiiorcn  of  ^Jfracl :  ano  the  ftran 
gcr  thatcommcth  nigh,  fliallbeputto 
ocafh. 


39  #11  that  were  numbreo  of  thclLc* 
uitcs,  Ybhtth  fiPofcs  ano  3aronnum; 
brco  at  the  commaunocment  of  the 
ftsDis©,  throughout  their  families, 
all  the  males  from  a  moneth  oio  ano 
bptbato ,  were  twenty  ano  tibo  thou- 
fano. 

40  C^lnothe  H©K©faiot)nto 
£J9ofes,  dumber  all  the  firft  bome  of 
the  males  of  the  chiiorcn  of  3ffraci, 
from  a  moneth  oio  ano  bpttraro ,  ano 
tahc  thenumber  of  their  names. 

41  2mothou  rbaitta&e  the  Smites 
foj  me,  (3  am  the  %  <s>  is  ?d  )  in  fteao  of 
all  the  firft  bome  among  the  chiiorcn  of 
3)fracl ,  ano  the  cattell  of  theilcuites, 
m  fteao  of  all  the  firftlmgs  among  the 
cattell  ofthc  chiiorcn  of  3Jfracl. 

41  3Cno  i^ofes  numbreo  as  the 
ILsDiR©  commanoeo  hini,  ailthcfirft 
borne  among  the  chtiortn  of  JJfrael. 

43  3no  all  the  firft  borne  males ,  by 
the  number  of  names,  from  a  moneth 
oio  $ bpwarD,  of  thofe  that  voctt  num* 
brco  of  tl)em,werettbentv  ano  two  thou* 
fano ,  two  hunorco ,  ano  thrcefcore  ano 
thtrteene. 

44  c^nothc  Hsdisjd  fpauetintij 
;G)9ofcs,  laying, 

45  %£kt  the  Heuites  in  fteao  of  all 
the  firft  bome  among  the  chtioren  of  3Jf> 
rati,  ano  the  cattell  of  the  Hcuitcs  m 
fteao  of  their  cattell,  ano  the  ?Uuitcs 
fhalbe  nunc :  3 am  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

46  2no  for  thofe  that  are  to  be  re* 
oecmeo  of  the  tibo  hunoico  ano  three* 
fcore  ano  tljirtccne ,  of  the  firft  borne  of 
theehiioren  of^ftael,  Uihich  arc  more 
then  the  Heultes; 

47  Xhou  ft)ait  euen  taftc  fiue  ft)e* 
Hclsap(ccc,bythcpollc,afterthcfbebel 
of  the  Sanctuary  ftjait  thoutalte  tljeni; 
*  the  fhclicl  is  tlbcnty  gerahs. 

48  3no  thou  flialt  giuctlje  money, 
VbhcreVbul)  the  oOOc  number  of  them 
is  to  be  rcoecmco,  tmto  2laronanoto 
his  fonncs. 

49  3lno  £$ofcs  toofec  the  reoemp* 
tion  money  ,  of  them  that  tberc  oner 
ano  abouc  them  that  Xberc  tcoeemco 
bythcHcuttcs. 

50  £)f  the  fir  ft  bome  of  theehiioren 
of  ^ifracl  tooUe  he  the  money ;  a  tl)ou* 
fano,  tljrechunOrco ,  ano  threefcore  ano 
fine  flu-ids,  after  the  fhclicl  of  thc5>au* 
ctuary.     - 

51  3fno  l^ofcs  ganc  the  money  of 
them  that  llicr c  rcoecmco,  bnto 3(aron 
ano  to  his  fonncs ,  accoroing  to  the 

U)oro 


»Eioi5c 

17.25. 
thap.  18. 
l6.czcL 
45. IJ. 


rrkL 


euitcs 


Chap.iiij.         fcuerali  charges. 


•Esod.tj. 
jo. 


|,  Or.fmrr 
out  wilhalt. 


•Exod.zj. 
,Exod.J5. 


ibojbofthe1L£>iB  Esastije  %  ©  is  s> 
commanbcb  J^ofes. 

CHAP.    1 1 1 1. 

i  The  age  and  time  ot  the  Leuites  feruiee.  4 
The  carriage  of  the  Kohathites  when  the 
Prieftes  haue  taken  downe  the  Tabernacle. 
1 6  The  charge  otEleazar.  17  The  office 
ot  the  Priefts.  2.1  ThecamageoftheGer- 
fhonites.  if  The  carriage  ot  the  Meraritcs. 
34  Then  umber  ot"  the  Kohathites,  38  of 
theGerfhonites,    41  andoftheMerarites. 

J15b  t\)t  %  &  is  £>  fpafee 

bnto  fl^oCcs ,  anD  Unto 

aarott,  facing, 
2  Xaae  the  fumme  of 

the  fonnes  of  Bohatb, 
from  among  tbe  fonnes  of  fUui,  after 
their  families ,  bp  the  houfe  of  their  fa* 
thets. 

j  jfrom  tbittyyectes  olb  anb  bp* 
tbarb,  eumbntatnTypcresolb,allthat 
enter  into  the  hodc ,  to  Doe  the  Uwrc  in 
the  Itabctnacle  of  the  Congrcganon. 

4  %W  foaii  hee  the  feruiee  of  the 
tonnes  of  iStohatb,  tntbeXabcmacic 
ofthcCongregation,abouttI)emo(t^o= 
nothings. 

5  canbtbhenthceampefettcth 
fojtbarb ,  aaron  (bail  tome,  anb  i)is 
formes,  anb  they  fbantaKcbottmethe 
tottering  tftaile,  anb  couer  the  arbcof 
Xcbwonplbttbtt: 

6  anb  (ball  pnt  thereon  the  tone* 
rtngofbabgersfHinncs,  $  d)allfp2cab 
oner  kactotbibhoUyofbleib,anbd)ail 
put  in  tbe  daucs  thereof. 

7  anb  bpon  the  *  table  of  5>hctb 
b?eab  ti)cy  (ban  fpjeab  a  cloth  of  bletb, 
anb  put  thereon  the  t>ityt&,  anb  the 
fpoones.anb  the  botbles,anb  touers  to 
Hi couer  tbitbad:  anb  tbecontinualtycab 
fliaibe  thereon. 

s  anb  they  djanfpjcab  bpon  them 
a  clothe  of  fcarlet,  anb  toner  the  lame 
ttrtth  a  couertng  of  babgcrs  f  Uinnes, 
anb  (ban  put  in  tbe  daues  thereof. 

9  anb  they  (ball  tafte  a  cloth  of 
bletb.anti  couerthe'tanbledicfecoftbc 
light,  anb  hisiampes,  anb  his  tongs, 
*  anb  his  muff  e  mfbes ,  anb  all  the  oyle 
bedels  thereof,  tobcrcttiith  they  mint 
dttbntolt. 

10  anb  they  (ban  put  it ,  anb  an  the 
bedels  thereof ,  ibitbin  a  couertng  of 
bangers  fainncs ,  anb  (ball  put «  bpon 

ii  anb  bpon  the  golben  aitar  tljey 
(baiifp;eaoaclotl)ofburb,anb  couerit 


ibttb  a  couertng  of  babgcrs  f  annus, 
anb  (ball  put  to  the  daucs  thereof. 

12  anb  they  (ball  taite  all  tbemdrtt' 
ments  ofmiradcrp,  tbhcretbitb  they 
mintdcr  m  the  Sanctuary ,  anb  put 
them  ma  cloth  ofblett),anbcoucr  them 
tbttb  a  couertng  of  babgcrs  f  tunncs, 
anb  (ball  put  them  on  a  batre. 

13  anb  they  (ban  taite  aibap  the 
aOjcsfrom  theaitav ,  anbfp:eab  a  pur- 
pie  doth  thereon: 

14-  anbtheyfbanputbponitantbc 
bedels  thereof,  ttibcrcbritb  tl;cy  mini- 
fter  about  it ,  euen  the  tenfers ,  the  fled)* 
hoofces,  anb  tbe  (boueis ,  anb  the  j|  ba? 
fons,  all  the  bedels  of  the  aitar :  anb 
they  (ball  fp2ca&  bpon  it  atoucrtngof 
babgcrs  f  atnncs,  anb  put  to  the  daues 
of  it. 

1$  anbtuhenaaronattbhisfonncs 
haue  mabe  an  cnb  of  couertng  the  San- 
ctuary, anb  all  the  bedels  of  theSan< 
ctuary,  as  the  campe  is  to  fee  fotfbarb , 
after  that,  the  fonnes  of isobath  (ban 
tome  to  bearc  it:  bnt  tfjcp  dial  not  touch 
any  hoty  thing ,  left  they  bie.  Xhcfe 
things  are  tlje  burben  of  the  fonnes  of 
Bohathin  tlje  Xabernacte  of  the  Coiv 
grcgation. 

i6  C  anb  to  tbe  office  of  Cleajar 
the  Tonne  of  aaron  the  ^icd,  p«tem«h 
tbe  oflefo?  the  light,  anb  the  'fmeetm* 
cenfc,  anb  the  bayly  meat  offering,  anb 
the*anopnting  oyle,  and  the  oucrftght 
of  all  the  Xabernacle,  anb  of  an  that 
therein  is,  in  tlje  Sanctuary,  anbtnthe 
bedels  thereof. 

17  Canb  thelitis©  fpafee  bnto 
4J&ofes,anb  bnto  aaron,  (aping, 

18  Cutyenotoff  the  tribe  of  the  fa; 
milies  of  the  Bobathitcs,from  among 
tbelLcuitcs. 

19  But  thusboe  bnto  them  ,  that 
tbeymayliuc,  anb  notbic:  tbbenthcy 
appjocbe  bnto  the  mod  l>oly  things, 
aaronanb  bis  fonnes  (badgoe  m,anb 
appoint  them  eucry  one  to  bis  feruiee, 
anb  to  his  burben. 

20  25ut  they  (ball  not  goc  in  to  fee 
tbhenthc  boly  things  are  touereb,  led 
ttjeybie. 

21  c  anb  tbe  ILoisjDfpa&e  bnto 
$)ofes,faptng, 

22  Xafee  ado  tlje  fntnmc  of  the 
fonnes  of  <Scr(bon ,  throughout  the 
houfesof  their  fatbers,  b?  tljar  fenw* 
lies: 

2 j  ifrom  thirttc  yctres  on>  anb  bp 

lbarb,bntinfiftierccrcs  olb  djaltthou 

0  2  nunif 


\[Or,U  3*j. 


"  Eroijo 
'Btoi.  30. 


10  2 


suites  charge.  Numbers.        Theirnumber. 


t  HrtT.tc 
w.in-e  th: 
wtrfttre. 


|  Or,  c.tr- 


mombt 


H.er.rrar. 
five. 


'Exod.l6. 
'J- 


number  them :  all  that  enter  to  no  pet* 
fcmnc  the  fcruicc,  to  Doc  the  rbo?ftein 
tbcXabctnaclcofthc  Congregation. 

24  %his  istijc  fcruicc  of the  familtcs 
of  the  ©crfhonitcs ,  to  fcruc ,  anb  fo? 
Ilburocns. 

15  3mb  trie?  (hall  beare  the  cur* 
tames  of  tbeXabcrnaclc,  aubtbeXa* 
bernaele  of  the  Congregation,-  rjss  to- 
uenng,anbthecoucungofthcbabgcrs 
f  tonnes  that  tsaboue  bponit,anbthc 
hanging  fo?  the  boo?c  of  the  Xabcr* 
naclc  of  the  Congregation : 

2  6  ;Snb  the  hangings  of  the  Court, 
anb  the  hanging  fo?  the  boo?c  of  the 
gate  of  the  Court  ibhot)  ts  by  fl)c%a* 
bcntacie,al^bbythc3fltarrounbabout, 
anb  tljcir  cojbs.anb  all  thetnftrumente 
of  their  fcruitc ,  anb  all  that  ts  mate  foz 
them :  fo  (hall  they  fcruc. 

27  £t  the  t  appointment  of  3aron 
attbhisfonnes,(hallbcallthcfcrtoccof 
the  fonncs  of  the  ©crfbonites,  in  all 
their  burbens ,  anb  to  all  their  fcruitc : 
anb  pec  (hall  appoint  bnto  them  to 
charge  all  their  burbens. 

28  Xhigis  tbefermtcofthefamilics 
of  the  fonncs  of  <Seribon,ui  the  Xabcc* 
natlc  of  the  Congregation :  anb  their 
charge  fhaibe  untjcr  the  hanbe  of  3?tha 
mar  thefonne  of  ^aronthc^ncft. 

19  C  3s  fo?  the  fonncs  of  ^crart, 
thou  (halt  number  them  after  their  fa* 
mtlies,  by  the  houfc  of  their  fathers : 

jo  if  com  thirty  yecres  olb  anb  bp* 
ibarb,  eucn  bnto  fiftic  yecres  olb  (hair 
tijou  number  them ,  cuery  one  that  en* 
trcthmtothctfcruicc,tobcctheibo;2Kc 
of  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Congrcga 
tton. 

3 1  3lnb  this  is  the  charge  of  their  bur 
ben,  atcozbing  to  all  their  fcruicc ,  m  the 
Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Congregation,  *  the 
boarbs  of  the  Xabcrnaclc ,  anb  the 
barrcs  thereof ,  anb  the  pillars  thereof, 
anbfocltcts  thereof: 

32  3nb  the  pillars  of  the  Court 
rounb  about ,  anb  their  fotftets ,  anb 
the ir  pmnes,  anb  their  coarbs,  nnth  all 
their  tnuTuments ,  anb  lbith  all  tlicir 
fcruicc :  anb  by  nameyce  Qjallrcclion 
the  inftruments  of  the  charge  of  their 
burben. 

33  Xhisi  the  fenucc  of  the  families 
ofthcfotmcsofsJ0erari,acco2bingtoail 
time  (enure  m  the  Xabcrnacle  of  the 
Congregation ,  bnber  the  hanb  of  31 
thamat  the  founc  of^aron  the  pnclfT 

3+  C  31n&  i]9ofc0  anb  3aron,  anb 


the  chicfc  of  the  Congregation ,  num* 
btcb  the  fonnesof  thei&ohathites ,  af 
tcr  their  families,  anb  after  the  houfc  of 
their  fathers; 

35  if  torn  thtrtiey ceres  olb  anb  bp* 
Vbarb,  eucnbnto  fiftic  yecres  olb,  cuery 
one  that  enttcth  in  to  the  fcruiccfoi  the 
ttwae  mthc  Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Con* 
grcganon. 

36  3nb  thofe  that  tberc  numtycb  of 
them  by  their  families,  iberc  ttbo  thou 
fanb,fcuen  hunb2cb  anb  fiftic. 

37  Xhefeiberethcythatibctenum* 
bzcb  of  the  families  ofthclkohathitcs, 
all  that  might  boc  fcruicc  m  the  Xaber* 
nacleoftheCongcegation,ibhith^o* 
fesanb  3aron  bib  number,  accoibmg 
tothccommanbenientofthcHflD  js  jd, 
bytbebanbof^ofes. 

3s  2lnb  thofe  that  iberc  numbieb  of 
the  fonncs  of  <5erfhon ,  throughout 
their  families,  anb  by  the  houfc  of  their 
fathers, 

39  if  torn  tfjirtic  yecres  olb  anb  bp 
Vbarb,cucn  bnto  fiftte  yecres  olb ,  cuery 
one  that  cntreth  to  to  the  feriuce ,  fo? 
the  ibo?fec  in  the  Xabernacle  of  tlhe 
Congregation: 

40  eucn  thofe  that  Sbcre  numtyeb 
of  them  ,  throughout  their  families,  by 
tbchoufes  of  their  fathers,  Iberc  tlbo 
thoufanb,anb  fire  hunbjeb  anb  thtrtie. 

4.1  Xhcfc  arc  they  that  ibere  num 
bicb  of  the  families  of  the  fonncs  of 
(Scrfbon,  of  all  that  might  boefetuice 
in  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Congrega* 
tton ,  ibbom  £J9ofes  anb  3aron  bib 
number ,  accoibing  to  the  commanbe* 
mmtoftliell©Hst. 

41  C3tnb  thofe  that  ibere  numtyeb 
of  the  f  amines  of  rtjc  fonncs  of  ^ctart, 
tlnourjbout  their  families,  by  the  houfc 
of  their  fathers: 

43  i^rom  thirttc  yecres  olb  anb  bp* 
lbarb,  eucn  bnto  fifhe  yecres  olb ,  cuery 
one  that  cntrcth  in  to  the  fenucc ,  fo? 
the  ibojbe  in  the  Xabcrnacle  of  the 
Congregation : 

44  eucn  thofe  that  iberc  numtyeb 
of  them  after  their  families,  were  tfucc 
thoufanb  anb  nbo  hunbjeb. 

45  Xhcfc  be  thofe  that  ibere  num* 
bicbofthc  families  of  the  fonncs  office 
rari,ibhom  fiPofcs  f  3laron  numb:cb 
acwbutg  to  tlic  lbo  jb  of  the  %  o  is  s> 
bythcbanbofiWes. 

46  ^ll  thofe  that  iberc  mimbicb  of 
the!LeuitC£,iblionifiraofcsanb^aron, 
anb  tlje  dnefc  of  3)fracl  numbzeb,  after 

their 


Ofrefhtution. 


Cli; 


ap.v. 


their  families,  anb  after  the  houfe  of 
theirfathets : 

47  if  roni  thirty  ?ccres  olb  anb  bp^ 
tbarb,  cum  bnto  fifty  peercs  olb,  enery 
one  that  came  to  Doe  the  ftrutee  of  the 
nuntttery ,  anb  the  feruicc  of  the  burben 
tn  the  Xabemacle  of  the  Congrcga* 
tion: 

4$  Ctten  thofc  that  iberc  numb?cb 
of  them ,  tbcre  eight  thoufanb,  attb  Sue 
hunb?eb,anb  tour  cfeo?e. 

49  3(cco?bmgtotbccomntanbcmcnt 
of  theH  ©is®,  theyUicrenumbzebby 
the  banb  of  sipofes,  euery  one  acco?butg 
to  h»s  ferutce,  anb  aeco?btng  to  his  bur* 
ben  :Xhustbcre  they  numbzto  ofhmi, 
as  the  %  €>  k  &  conmianbeb  $9ofes. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Thevncleaneareiemoued  outofthecampe. 
<i  Reftitution  is  to  be  made  in  trelpafles.  1 1 
Thetrialloflealoufie. 

/13b  the  %  &  «  je»  fpafee 
bntoi©ofes,(aying, 

2  Commaunbthethil? 
b?enof^fcacl,  that  the? 
_  *put  out  of  the  campe  eue* 
ry  leper ,  anb  euery  one  that  hath  an 
*  iffne ,  anb  lbhofoeuer  is  befileb  b?tbc 
*beab: 

3  2i5othmaieattbfcmale(l)al?cput 
out,  Ibtthout  the  campe  (hall  ?ce  put 
them,  that  the?  befilenotthetreampcs 
tnthemibbettrbhcreof^bibcll. 

4  3nb  the  thilb?cn  of ^fracl  bib  fo , 
anb  put  than  out,  ibtthout  the  campe: 
as  the  %  €>  is  &  fpaae  bnto  £JMes ,  fo 
btb  the  chilb?en  of  llfcacl. 

$  C3tnbthefli©is3Dfpafeebnto 
£pofes,fa?ing, 

6  £>ptatte  bnto  the  chao?en  of  %b 
racl ,  *  ©hen  a  man  o?  tboman  (ball 
commit  an?  fmne  that  men  commit,  to 
bo  e  a  trefpaffe  agatnft  the  %®  is  jssanb 
thatperfonbeguiltte; 

7  Xhen  they  (hall  confeffe  their 
finne ,  Ibhich  the?  hauc  bone:  anbhec 
(bail  recompenfe  hts  trefpaffe ,  *  ttuth 
the  pnnetpail  thereof,  anb  abbe  bnto  tt 
the  fifth  part  thereof ,  anb  gtue  it  bnto 
hunagainftujhom  hehathtrefpaffeb. 

8  asuttf the manhaue  no  ftinfman 
to  recompenfe  the  trdpaflc  bnto  ,  let 
the  trefpaffe  be  recompenfeb  bnto  the 
ILots©,  euen  to  tl)c  0?teft :  befibetbe 
ranune  of  the  atonement ,  tbhereby  an 
atonement  (hall  be  mabe  fo?  hmt. 

9  2mb  euery  I!  offering  of  all  the 


LP 


Ofiealoufie.l 


*Lcuit.t3. 
3- 

•Lcuit.ij. 
j. 

*  Lcuit.  2  1 


'Leu'a.6. 


*Lcui.<S.j. 


^GrJie.'.HC 
ffffiriip. 


holy  things  of  the  chtlb?cn  of  3Jfcael, 
lbhtch  they  b?tng  bnto  the  #?tcft,(bau 
be  his. 

10  3nbcuer?ntanshaiott)eDtljings 
(ball  be  his :  ibhatfoeuer  an?  man  gt- 
uethtbcf>?teu\tt(baube  *fy£. 

11  C  ftnb  the  %  €>  k  ©  (pase  bnto 
^ofes,fa?mg, 

iz  3>peaue  bnto  the  ebtlb?m  of  fjjfc 
raei,  anb  fa?  bnto  them,  3Jfam>  mans 
iuiftgoeafibe,anDcommitatcdpaffc& 
gainffhtm; 

13  3fttb  a  ntan  lye  tbitft  her  carnally, 
anb  it  be  htb  from  the  eves  of  hcrbuf; 
banb,anbbeaeptelofc,  anb  (hcbebcB- 
leb,  anb  there  be  no  Kbttneffc  agamft 
her,  neither  (l)e  be  tafeen  with  the  maneri 

14  3utb  the  (pint  of  leloufic  come 
bpon  htm,  anb  he  be  telous  of  hts  ttnfe, 
anb  (bee  be  befileb :  o?  tf  thcfplrttoftc; 
loufie  come  bpon  him ,  anb  ijcc  be  ic? 
lous  of  hts  ibife,  anb  (he  be  not  befileb : 

15  Xhen  (ball  the  man  b?tng  hts 
Ibtfe  bnto  the  f&icft ,  anb  he  (hail  b?mg 
her  offering  fo?  her ,  the  tenth  part  of 
an  <£phah  of  barley  meale :  |jee  (ball 
poib?e  no  o?Ic  bpon  it,  no?  p  ut  franatn* 
cenfe  thereon ;  fo?  it  is  an  offering  of  tc> 
loufie,  an  offering  of  memo?tail,  bnng 
ingintewttie  to  rentemb?ancc: 

i6  3utb  the  0neft  ftali  b?tng  her 
neer  c,anb  fet  her  befo?e  the  n©  is  ©. 

17  ^nb  the  ^?teft  (ball  take  holy 
tbatcr  in  an  earthen  bedell ,  anb  of  the 
butt  that  is  in  the  floo?eof  the  Xabcr> 
nacic  the  $?ielt  (tjaii  tafec,  anb  put  it  in 
tothclbatce; 

18  3inD  the  0?(cff  a^ail  fet  the  ibo 
manbcfo?ethe  JLoir©,  anbbneouer 
thelbomansheab,anD  ptrtthe  offering 
of  memo?iailinher  hanbs,lbl)tch  is  the 
3Jcloufie  offcrtng :  anb  the0?teft(l)au 
hauc  in  hts  hanb  the  bitter  Ibatcr  that 
caufetiithecurfe. 

19  3inb  the  0?teft  Ojall  charge  her 
by  an  othc,anb  fa?  bnto  the  tbontan, 
3Jf  no  man  hauc  l?cntbiththec,  anb  if 
thou  haft  not  gone  afibe  to  buclcan^ 
neffc  ||  with  another  in  ftcab  of  th?  huf- 
baub,  be  thou  free  from  this  bitter  Vbfr 
tct  that  caufeth  the  curfe. 

20  25ut  if  thou  haft  gone  afibc  to  an- 
other tn  fteab  of  th?  hufbanb,aub  tf  thou 
bebefilcb,atU3fomcman hath  lien Jbith 
thee  befibe  thine  hufbanb : 

ii  Xhen  the  ^?teft  (ball  charge  the 

tboman  tbitl)  an  othe  of  turfing ,  ano 

the  0?ieft  (hall  fa?  bnto  the  ibomatt, 

Xljc  %  o  is  js  maht  tljce  a  curfe,anD  an 

/I5  _j othc 


'  Leuit. ; 

13. 


in  the  pawgr 
ofthjhuf- 
band.  HeW. 
vndcrlbl 
husband. 


iThelawofieloufle.  Numbers. 


The  law  of 


f  Hebt.fdL 


othc  among  thp  people ,  tbben  the 
fLsDisisborbmaftetbptbigb  to  trot, 
anbtbpbcllptofrocll. 

2i  anbtfjissbater  that  taufctb  the 
turfe,  (bail  go  into  tbpboibels,tQ  mane 
iw  bellp  to  froell,  anb  thy  thigh  to  rot : 
anb  the  rboman  (ball  fap,  amen, 
amen. 

u  anb  ti)e  i&neft  (ball  tbrite  tbcfe 
curies  in  a  boose,  anb  net  (ball  blot 
them  outibitb  tbebitter  ibatcr : 

24  anbbcfballcaulctbeibomanto 
tyinKctbc  bitter  tbatcr,  that  caufeth  tijc 
curfe :  anb  the  tbater  that  caufetb  the 
turfe  (ball  enter  into  get,  and  become 
bitter. 

25  ■£!)£«  the  l&fltft  tball  tafte  the 
icloufic  offering  out  of  tbe  lbomans 
hano,  anb  (ball  Ibaae  tbe  offering  be* 
fojetljc  3L$DiBj2>,anb  offer  it  bpon  the 
altar. 

26  anb  the  ^nctt  fbal  tafte  an  hanb* 
full  of  tl)c  offering,  cuentbcmemojtiall 
thereof,  anb  burne  it  bpon  tbe  aitar, 
anb  afterxbarb  (ball  caufe  thelboman 
tobsinfeetbeltoater. 

27  amis  when  be  batb  niabe  bet  to 
finite  the  r»atcr,  tben  it  (hall  come  to 
padc,  that  if  (bee  be  befileb,  anb  bane 
bone  tttfpaffe  againft  her  hnfbanb, 
tbat  the  ibater  tbat  caufcth  w  nttEe, 
(ball  enter  into  her,  and  become  bitter, 
anbbcr  bellp  (ballfrocll,  anbbcr  tbtgb 
(balrot:  anbtbeibomanfbaibeacurfe 
among  her  people. 

28  anbiftbcttjomanbcnotbefiltb, 
butbetleane,  then  (be  (ball  be  free,  anb 
(bailconcciucfeeb. 

29  %X?£  is  the  latb  of  ictouGcs, 
ibben  a  ibife  gocth  afibe  to  another  m 
ttcab  of  bcr  bufbanb,  anb  isbefilcb : 

jo  £)?\bhcnthcfpiritoficIouGeconi* 
met!)  bpon  bmt,  anb  bee  be  iclous  ouer 
bis  lbifcanb  fballfettbettjomanbefoite 
tbe  1L  ©  is  jd,  anb  tbe  #nett  (hal  cr  ecutc 
bponberautbislaib. 

31  itbcn  (ball  tbe  man  bee  gmltlefTe 
from  uumiitie,  anb  this  iboman  (hall 
bcarcbetmiqmtte. 

CHAP.  vr. 

1  The  Law  of  the  Nazarites.  n  The  forme 
of  blefsing  the  people. 

M©\35C  /Bb  the  1L  ©  is  je>  (past 
*bnto<&ofcs,taping, 
2  &pealu  bnto  the  cbifc 
bren  of  3Jfrael,anb  fap  bn-- 
to  tbem,i©ben  cither  man 


0?  iboman  (bali||feparate  themfeiues  to 
botbabott)  of  a/9a5arite,  to  feparate 

themfeiues  bntO  the  fL  fiD  K  ©  : 

3  $ee  (hall  feparate  himfclfe  from 
lbinc,anb(lcongbnnRe,anb(baib?mhc 
no  bineger  of  Xbine,oj  bineger  of  ftrong 
bnnRe,neitber  (baibe  bjinhcanp  liquoj 
of  grapes,  no?  eatemoift  grapes,  0? 
tyitt). 

4  ail  the  bapes  of  bis  ||  reparation 
fballbeeatnotbuigtbatts  mabeoftbe 
t  bine  tr er,  from  the  Kernels  euen  to  tbe 
bnffee. 

5  ailtbebapesoftheborbofhisfc; 
paration,  there  (ball  no  *  rafour  tome 
bpon  \)is\it$Xi :  bntiiltbebapesbeeful* 
filleb  in  the  lbbieb  bee  feparatcth  him* 
felfc  bnto  rhc?L  ©  is  ©,  befbaii  be  bolp, 
and  (ball  let  the  locHcs  of  the  batrc  of  bis 
beabgrotb. 

6  ail  the  bapes  that  he  feparatetb 
himrelfe  bnto  the  1L©»jD,!)ce{bail 
tome  at  no  beab  bobp. 

7  ©ee  (ball  not  mafec  himfclfe  bit* 
cleanc  fo?  I)i8  father,  o«tfo?his  mother, 
fo?  Ins  brother,  ot  ft?  his  filler,  ibben 
tbep  bte :  becaufetlje  t  confttratton  of 
bis<!5oMsbponbtshcab. 

8  ailtbebapcsofhtsfcparationbe 
isbolpbntotbe!L©iB©. 

9  anbtfanpmanotfberpfubbenlp 
bphim,anbhcbatb  befileb  the  heab  of 
his  confetration,  then  he  (ljail  n)aue  his 
beab  in  the  bap  of  W  cleanQng,  on  the 
feucntb  bap  njaii  be  fbauett. 

10  ^nbontbecightbapbefbalbnng 
tlbo  turtles  0;  ttbo  pong  pigeons  to  the 
£neft,  to  the  boo?e  of  the  3CabcroaeU 
oftbeCongrtgation. 

12  anb  the  i&nett  (ban  offer  tbe  one 
fo;  a  Gnne  offering,  anb  the  other fo?  a 
burnt  offering ,  anb  mafte  an  atone; 
mcntfoiibuti,  fo?  that  bee  finnebbp  the 
beab ,  anb  (bail  hallotb  his  heab  that 
fame  bap. 

11  anb  bee  (ball  confecratt  bnto  the 
&•  o  is  ©  tbe  bapes  of  his  feparation, 
anb  (ball  tying  a  lambe  of  the  firfl  pecre 
fo?  atrefpafle  offering :  but  the  bapes 
that  ibere  before  (ball  be  tioft,  becauJe 
bisfeparationvbas  befileb. 

u  CanbthtsisthefLatbcoftbe 
ilia^arite:  tbbcntbf  bapes  of  bisfcpa 
rationarefulfillcb ,  he  (l)allbe  bJought 
bnto  the  boojc  of  the  ICabernacle  of  the 
Congregation. 

14  anbbefballofferbtsoffcingbu; 
to  the  fLc>«©,  one  bee  lambe  of  the 
firttpcere  rbithout  blnmfb,  fo?  a  burnt 
offering, 


Or,  m.ik<  l 
chcmfclucs 

NiK-tritei. 


||Or,Ar««*- 

ritffhip. 

\Hik.ViM 

ofikcmsr. 


Tudg.t;. 

5.!  Uai.I. 


I  Htir.fi- 

ftratHrt. 


\HAr.fA 


theNazarites. Chap.vij.     The  Princes  offer, 


'A*!!. 

34- 


*ElCO<J.  2p. 

S7- 


offcnng,anb  one  elbe  lanibe  of  the  fitC 
pcere  ibtthoutblcmtfb,  fo:  a  unncoffc 
ting,  anb  one  lambe  tbithout  blemith 
f02  peace  offerings, 

15  3nbabafi$etof  bnleauenebtyeab, 
cases  of  fine  flotbze  mingles  tbith  ople, 
anb  ttiafcrs  of  bnleauencb  bzeab  anouv 
ten  tbtth  opte,anb  their  nieatc  offering, 
ano  ttieit  ounbe  offerings. 

16  ^nDrrje^neftfljailbnngthembe* 
foze  the  Hsdbjd,  anb  ftjali  offer  his 
ftttnc  offering,  ano  his  burnt  offering* 

17  3nb  lie  fliail  offer  the  ramme  fo? 
a  Catrifite  of  peace  offerings  bnto  tijc 
%€>&  jd,  ttntb  ttje  baffeet  of  bnleauc* 
neb  tycab :  the  #2ielifbau  offer  alfo  his 
meate  offering ,  ano  his  banae  offe- 
ring. 

18  *  anb  the /l^arue  thai  fbaue  the 
hcab  of  his  fcparatton,  at  the  booie  of 
the  Xabernacle  of  the  Congregation, 
anb  fban  ta&ethc  haite  of  the  heab  of 
his  reparation,  anb  put  it  m  the  fire 
tbftich  is  bnber  the  faenfite  of  the  peace 
offerings. 

19  %vfo  the  tenctt  fhail  tabc  thefofc 
ben  fljoulber  of  the  rammc,anb  oncbn* 
leauencb  cane  out  of  the  bafftct,  anb 
one  bnleauencb  ibafcr ,  anb  Chan  put 
them  bpon  the  hanbsof  the  i!3a5artte, 
after  the  ha  ire  of  his  fcparatton  is  fba* 
urn. 

io  3nb  the  pjicft  than  tbaue  theni 
*fb2  a  ibauc  offr  lug  befo:e  theft  0  is  w. 
this  is  holp  foj  the  #2ieft,  iblfh  the 
ibauc  bicaft,  anb  heauc  fhoulber:  anb 
after  that,  the  /3a5arite  map  bzin&c 
ibinc. 

ii  Xhls is  the  fLaru  of  the  /Rasarite, 
tt)ho  hath  bovbcb,anb  of  his  offering 
bnto  the  lLms©fo2hls  reparations 
ftbes  fhat,that  his  hanb  (ball  get :  acco^ 
bmgtothcboiblbhlchhc  boibeb,fohe 
muff  bo  after  the  laib  of  his  reparation, 

22  C3nb  the  HsDKJDfpaKC  bnto 
^ofesjapmg, 

2j  £>pcaKc  bnto  3laron,  anb  bnto  his 
fonnes,  faplng ,  €>n  this  Ibtfe  re  wall 
blcflcthe  chilbien  of  3lfrael,  fapingbn* 
to  them: 

14  Xhc  1L©isjd  bleffethcc,  anb 
Hecperhee: 

15 XhefL<DisiE>ma&e  his  face  tbme 
bpon  thee,  anb  be  gracious  bnto  thee : 

26  Xhe  1L0ia©  lift  bp  his  counts 
nante  bpon  thee,  anb  giue  thee  peace. 

27  3lnb  the?  fhail  put  mp  >l5anic 
bpon  the  chrtbicn  of  3Jfrael,anb3J  lbill 
blcffcthem. 


CHAP.    VI f. 

The  offering  of  the  Princes  at  the  dedication 
of  the  Tabernacle,  jo  Their  feuerall  of. 
f  rings  at  tile  dedication  of  the  Altar.  851  God 
fpeaketh  to  Mofes  from  the  Mercie  feat. 

«3&  ^»  it  tame  topaffconthe 

M§?m  fct  *>P  the  Xabernacle, 
anbhabanouttcbit,anb 
_  fanctificbtt,  anb  ail  the  in- 
ttcuments  thereof,  both  tbeaitar,  anb 
all  the  beffcls  thereof,  anb  habanouv 
tcb  fiietn,anb  fancttficb  them : 

2  Xhat  the  juices  of  3Jfi:acl,heaDS 
of  the  houfc  of  their  fathers,  ( ibho 
lbcte  the  juices  of  the  tribes,  t  anb 
iberc  ouer  thciji  that  iberc  numbjcb) 
offercb: 

j  3nb  they  brought  their  offering 
before  the  %  o  is  £>,  fire  couereb  iba* 
gons,  anb  nbclueorcn:  a  wagon  fo; 
nboofthe02iuccs,anbfo2eaclioncan 
ore,  anb  the?  brought  them  before  the 
Xabernacle. 

4  3tnbtheK,©iEjDfpaBebnto^05 
fes,  Caving, 

5  XaBeitoftbenuhatfbepmapbe 
tobocthc  fcrutcc  of  the  Xabernacle  of 
the  Congregation,  anb  thou  (haitgiue 
them  bnto  the  ?Leuitcs,  to  euerp  man 
aceo2Dingtohisferulce. 

6  3uib  ££ofcs  tooae  the  Vbagons, 
anb  the  orni,  anb  gaue  them  bnto  the 
Hcuttcs. 

7  Xiboibagonsanbfotireojtenhe 
gaue  bnto  the  fonnes  of  <5er{bon,ac* 
cozbingto  their  ferulce. 

8  3Jnb  fourc  tbagons  anb  eight 
oren  he  gaue  bnto  the  fonnes  of  £0cta* 
ri,  acco2Ding  bnto  their  feriuee, bnber 
the  hanb  ofjjthamarthefonneof^a* 
ronthc^Jlelt. 

9  But  bnto  the  fonnes  of  Bohath 
hegaucnone:  becaufetheferuice  of  the 
Sanctuary  belongmgbnto  tljcm,  was 
thatthcpCboulbbeare  bpon  their  fboufc 
bers. 

10  C3nbthc$2mecsoffcrcbfo2be* 
bicahng  of  the  ^itar,  in  the  bap  that  it 
tbasanointeb,eucn  the  Ounces  offercb 
their  offering  beftue  the  3Htar. 

11  ^nb  the  %  o  m  ©  faib  bnto  flJ9o* 
fes,  Xhcp  fljall  offer  their  offering  cche 
^2incc  on  his  bap  ,fo2thcbcbicatingof 
tht^ltar. 

12  C^nbhc  that  offcreb his offemg 
the  firff  bap,  Ibas  ii5ahfl)on  the  fonne 
of  3mnunaDab,of  the  tribe  of  31  u&ab. 

15  ^nb 


*  Hxod.40, 


{ Heb.  who 
fiood. 


The  offerings  Numbers.         of  the  Princes. 


'Lcuit.j.i 


'  Lcuit.^. 


13  ^nt)  IjiS  offering  teas  one  filucr 
cijargcr,  tlje  ibctgljt  tfjereof  ibas  an 
tjimozeD  anu  fljirtp  fhekels ,  one  filucr 
boibleoffcucnftefl)Cfecls,aftecrt)eu> 
feel  of  tlje  5>anctuarp  -,  botlj  of  tfjem 
tbcre  full  of  fine  floib?e  mingleb  ttiitlj 
oilcfo?  a*mcatoffering: 

14  j©nc  fpoonc  of  ten  fbefeeis  of 
golb,fullofutccnfc: 

15  iDnc  pong  bullocfee,  oneramme, 
onciambc  of  tfje  firft  peerc,  fo?  a  burnt 
offering, 

i6  4E>ncfeiboftfjcgoatsfo?*afinnc 
offering: 

17  3nb  fo?  a  fatrtficc  of  peatc  of 
fcrmgs,ttbo  orcn,fiue  rammes,fiue  fjee 
goats,fiuc  lambcs  of  tfje  firft  pecre:  tfjts 
wastlje  offering  ofi3afjujontfjcfonne 
of3lmmmabab. 

18  C  £>n  tbc  fctonb  bap  ii5ctl)ancel 
tbc  fonne  ofzuac^uueof^ffatfjar 
bib  offer. 

19  $e  offcreb  fo?  fjis  offering  one  fi> 
ucr  cijargcr,  toe  ibcigijtttrfjcreoftbas 
an  Intnbzcb  anb  tfjirric  fhekeis,  one  fiV 
tierbottile  of  fcucntp  fbcfeeis,  after  tijc 
fl)cfeel  of  tlje  £>anttuarp,botnoftljcm 
full  of  fine  fiouw  mingleb  mtfj  otic,  f 0 ,2 
a  meat  offering: 

io  jDncfpoone  of  golb  often  ftekeis, 
fulloftneenfe: 

21  4Dnc  pong  bullotfee,oneramme, 
onciambc  of  tlje  firft  peerc  fo?  a  burnt 
offering: 

22  £me  feib  of  tfje  goats  fo?  afinne 
offering: 

23  3nb  fo?  a  fatrifice  of  peace  ofc 
fcrings,m)oorcn,fiuerammes,fiucf)ec 
goats,fiuelambesoftijefirftpcerc:tfjts 
v/as  tfje  offering  of  iftctfjancel  tfje  fonne 
ofzuar. 

24  CDn  tf)c  tljirb  bap  €liab  tfje 
fonne  of  $clon,tf>?inte  of  tfje  cljtlb?en  of 

ZCbUlUU  did  offer. 

25  tyis  offering  was  one  filucr  ct)ar> 
get,  tlje  ibeigbtlbljereof  ibas  antjtm* 
b?cb  anb  toirne  ftiekeis,  oncfiluer  boiblc 
of  fcucntic  fbcfeeis,  after  tnc  fl)cfeel  of 
tuc&attetnarp.botf)  ofrocmfulloffinc 
floibjc  mingleb  lbttlj  otic,  fo?  a  meat 
offering: 

26  £>ucaolbcn  fpoone of  tcnfhekeis, 
fullofmccnfc: 

27  &>nt  vong  bullotfeconc  rammc, 
onciambc  of  tlje  firft  peerc  fb?  a  burnt 
offering: 

2s  £)ne  feib  of  tfje  goats  fo?  a  finite 
offering: 
29  3nb  fo:  a  faenfice  of  peace  of 


fecings,fibo  ojecn,fiue  rammes,fiucfjce 
goats ,  fiuc  lambcs  of  tl)c  firft  peerc: 
Xljis  was  tlje  offrtng  of  Cliab  tfje  fonne 
of^clon. 

30  C  £>n  tlje  fourrtj  bap  eiisur  tfje 
fonne  of  £>fjebcur,  l&ince  of  tfje  tljii* 

b?Cn  Of  BCUbClt  did  offer. 

31  $is  offering  was  one  filucr  cfjar^ 
gerofanljunb?cbanbtfjirtpfhekcis,onc 
filucr  boiblc  of  fenentte  fbcfecls ,  after 
tlje  ujefeel  of  tlje  £>anctuarp ,  botfj  of 
tfjem  full  of  fine  floib?e  mingleb  ruttfj 
ople,  fo?  a  meat  offering : 

32  £)negolben  fpoone  of  tenne  flie- 
keis.fullofincenfc: 

33  £>ncpong  bullocfec , one  rammc, 
onciambc  of  tlje  firft  pecre  fo?  a  burnt 
offering: 

34  4Dnc  feib  of  tlje  goats  fo?  a  finnc 
offering: 

35  3mb  fo?  a  fatrtficc  of  peace  ok 
fertngs,tU)o  orcn,fiuc  rammcs,fiuc  fjee 
goats,fiuc  lambs  of  the  firft  pere:  Xijis 
was  tl)c  offering  of  €lt$ur  tlje  fcrnnc  of 
5>ljebeur. 

36  €£m  tfje  fifth  bap  ;§>fjelumicltfjc 
fonne  of  zurifhabbai  te?tnce  of  tlje 
cljilb?  en  of  Simeon,  did  offer. 

37  J^is  offring  was  one  filucr  cbargcr, 
tfje  ibeigfjt  ibljereof  tbas  an  fjunbzcb 
anb  tljittic  fhekels,  oncfiluer  bottle  of  fc> 
ucntie  fl)CHcls,  after  ttjc  fbcfeel  of  tlje 
£>anctuarp,  botlj  of  tljcm  full  of  fine 
flotb?c,  mmglctiibttlj  ople,  fo?  amcate 
offering: 

33  )©nego!bcnfpooneoftcnfhekeis, 
fullofmcenfe: 

39  £)nc  pong  bullocfec,  one  rammc, 
onclambe  of  tlje  firft  peerc  fo?  a  burnt 
offering: 

40  <©ne  l^mt  of  tfje  goatcs  fo?  a 
finnc  offering: 

41  3lnb  fo?  a  facrificc  of  peace  ofte 
rings,  tvbo  orcn,fiuc  rammes,  fiuetjee 
goatcs,  fiuc  lambcs  of  the  firft  pecre 
Xtjis  was  toe  offcrmg  of  <§>ljclumicl  tfje 
fonne  of  ZurtCbabbai, 

42-  C£m  tbc  fits  bap,  CliafapD  tlic 
founc  of  3?cucl,  #?mce  of  tlje  cljtlb?eu 

Of  (5ab,  offered: 

43  ^is  offmng  was  one  filucr  rnar 
gcr  of  tlje  lbctgnt  of  an  l)tinb?cb  anb 
tlnrric  fHekeis,  nfiiucr  boiblc  of  fcucntic 
fl)cfecls,aftcr  tlje  fljcft  el  of  tbc&anctua 
ric,botl)oftbcmfuloffincflolb?cmtng  I 
leb  Vbitli  ople,fo?  a  mcatc  offenng : 

44  €)ne  golbcn  fpoonc  of  tcndic- 
keis,  fullofmcenfe: 

45  £)ncpong bttllocnconerammc,' 
one  I 


The  offerings  Chap.vij.  of  the  Princes. 


one  lambe  of  the  firft  peered  a  burnt 
offering : 

46  £>neluboffhcgoatcsfo2afitmc 
offering: 

47  3tno  fo?  a  fatnfice  of  p wee  offc- 
nngs,tttooren,  fiuc  rammes,  fiuehee 
goatcs ,  fine  latnbes  of  the  firft  pecre. 
Xhts  was  tljc  offtnng  of  eiiafaph  the 
fonne  of  Deuel. 

48  <r©nthcfcunithbap,eiift)ama 
the  ftnnc  of3immiub,$2mce  of  the  chif 

B^Ctt  Of  CphWirn  offered. 

49  $ts  offering  was  one  filuer  char- 
gcr,  the  ibeigUt  tthercof  ttas  an  hun* 
b2eb  anb  thtrtte  <"hckds,  one  filuer  bottle 
of  feuentic  fljrttcls,  after  tlic  fhebcl  of 
the  £>anetuanc,  both  of  ttjein  full  of 
fine  ftottjc  mmglcb  ttith  oilc  fo?  a  meat 
offering: 

50  Cmegolbcn  fpoone  of  tenfhekeis, 
fiillof  mtenfe: 

51  £mc  pong  bullorftc,  one  rammc, 
onciambeof  the  firft  peere,  fojabucnt 
offering: 

5t  4Dnc  Ktb  of  the  goatcs  fo? a finne 
offering: 

53  3ino  foi  a  fatnfice  of  peace  offcings, 
ttto  ornt,  fiue  rammes,  fine  hec  goats, 
fiue  lambcs  of  the  firft  pecrc.  Xrjtsv.as 
tfje  offering  of  enfhamathc  fonne  of 
3mmtub. 

54  €  j£>n  tfjc  eight  bap  offered  <&& 
maiiclthc  fonncof  peba5iir,  $2iuccof 
thechiKucn  of  i©anaflrh. 

55  ^isoffenngw«  one  filuer  crjargcr 
of  anhunbjeb  anb  thirtie  fhekeis,  one  Gfc 
iter  bottle  of  feuentic  thcRcls,  after  tfjc 
fhcftelof  thc£>ancfuarp,  both  of  them 
full  of  fincflottw  mmglcb  ttith  oile,fo? 
a  ntcatc  offering: 

56  £)ncgolbcn fpoone  of  tenfhekds, 
fullofmccnfc: 

57  £>ncpongbullocRC,  oneranunc, 
one  lambe  of  ttjc  firft  pecre ,  fo?  a  burnt 
offering : 

58  £>ne  bib  of  the  goatcs  fo?  a  Rune 
offering: 

59  3nb  foz  a  fatnfice  of  peace  offe- 
rings, ttto  oren,  fiue  rammes,  fiuc  fjee 
goats,  fiuc  lambcs  of  roc  firft  pecrc. 
Xhis  was  tfjc  offering  of  ©amalicl  tljc 
fonne  of  ^cba^ur. 

60  C£)n tfjc mntlj bap, Slbiban the 
fonne  of  ©ibeoni,  pnnce  of  the  chilbjm 
of  23eniaimn  offered. 

6i  f?is  offering  was  one  filuer  char- 
ger, the  tteight  tthercof  ibas  an  fjun- 
bzcb  anb  tljirtie  (hekeis,  a  filuer  bollile  of 
feuenne  ftjeheis,  afte  r  the  Che  feel  of  the 


Sanctuary ,  both  of  them  full  of  fine) 
flottjc  mingicb  ttith  oplc ,  fo2  a  meate 
offering: 

6z  ©ncgolbcn  fpoone  of  ten  hekeis, 
fullofmcenfe: 

6}  £>ne  pong  builoche ,  one  rammc, 
one  lambe  of  ttje  firft  pccrefo2aburnt 
offering: 

64  £)nc  uib  of  tfjc  goats  fo?  a  finite 
offering: 

65  3mb  fo2  a  fatnfice  of  peace  offe 
rings,  ttto  orm,  fiue  rammes,  fiue  hee 
goatcs,  fiue  lambcs  of  the  firft  peere. 
Xhiswasthe  offering  of  3ttiban,  the 
Tonne  of  <3tbcout. 

66  c £>n  tlje  tenth  bap Switscr  the 
fonne  of  3tmmtfbabbai ,  0?mte  of  the 

ChHbiCn  Of  3Dan  offered. 

67  ^tsoffnugwas  one  filuer  charger, 
the  tteight  thereof  mas  an  hunb?eb 
attb  thirtie  foekeis,  one  filuer  bottle  of  ft 
ttcnttc  thcRcls,  after  the  fhe&cl  of  the 
£>anctuanc,botft  of  them  full  of  fine 
floft)2c  mmglcb  tttth  ople,  fo2  a  meate 
offering : 

68  £>ncgolbenfpooneoftcnniekeis, 
fullofmccnfc: 

69  -©ncpongbtillocfte,  one  rammc, 
one  lambe  of  the  firft  peer  c,  fo2aburnt 
offenng: 

70  £>ncRibofthegoatcsfo?aiumc 
offertug: 

71  3lnb  fo?  a  faenfice  of  peace  offe- 
rings, tibo  orcn,  fiuc  rammes,  fiuc  hce 
goats,  fiue  lambcs  of  the  firft  peere. 
Xljts  was  the  offering  of  3l)ie3cr  tljc 
fonne  of  3lmmifhabbat. 

72-  €  €>n  the  eleucnth  bap,  $agtcl 
the  fonne  of  £>ccan>  $?mce  of  njceljtf 

b2Cn  Of  ^fljCr  offered. 

7$  $ts  offering  was  one  filuer  char 
gcr,  the  lbcight  tthercof  ttas  an  hutv 
b2cb  anb  thirtte  ftiekeis,  one  filuer  bottle 
of  fcunitic  fheUels,  after  tljc  fljeRcl  of 
tljc  ^anctuaric,  both  of  them  full  0" 
fine  flott?e  mmglcb  ttith  ople,fo?a 
meat  offenng: 

74  €>negolbcnfpooncof  tenfhekek, 
fullofmcenfe: 

75  £DnepongbuHorRe,  one  rammc, 
one  lambe  of  tlje  firft  pecrc  fo?  a  burnt 
offering : 

76  sDne  Uib  of  tljc  goatcs  fo?  a  fume 
offenng: 

77  ^nbfojafaerificcofpeaccoffe 
rings,tttooren,  fiuerammes,  fiueljcc 
goats,  fiuc  lambes  of  the  firft  vecre. 
Xhis  wa,  tlje  offenng  of  pagiel  tlje 
fonne  of  Strati. 

78  CiDn 


Princes  offerings.     Numbers. The  cleanfing 


\  i.gu 


78  C4DntbtttbcIftbbap>  3bira 
tt>e  fbnnc  of  Cnan,  $?ince  of  tbe  rt)il- 
b?cn  of  iftapbtab,  offered. 

79  $is  offering  was  one  uluerrtjar^ 
gcr,tbe  tbcigbt  tbbercof  ibas  an  bun* 
b?ct>  ant)  rbtrbe  fliekds ,  one  fuuee  boiblc 
of  fcncntic  fbcftcis,  after  the  fbebei  of 
tbeS>anctuarp,botboftbem  full  of  fine 
floib?cnunglcb  tt)ttft  oplc,  fo?  a  meate 
offering: 

80  £)ncgoli5enfpoonc  often  ftekeis, 
fulloflneenfe: 

81  iDnc  pong  bulloebe,  one  rammc, 
onclambc  of  tlje  firft  pecrc  fo?  a  burnt 
offering: 

8i  £>ne  Ktooe  of  n)cgoats  fo?  a  funic 
offering: 

83  3uid  fb?  a  faerifitc  of  peace  of- 
fringe,  ttbo  orcn,fiuc  rammes,  fiue  bee 
goats,fiue  lambs  of  tbe  firfl pccrclChis 
was  the  offering  of  3ljira  tl;c  fonne  of 
Cnan. 

84  ICbtewastheDeoicationoftfie^i 
tar(intbcDapibbenitibasannointe&) 
bptbe$?mccs  of  Sifracl:  ttbeluecbar* 
gers  of  ftlucr ,  ttbeluc  bluer  boiblcs, 
ttbelue  fpooncs  of  golb : 

85  Cacb  cbargct  of  filuer  weighing 
an  ijunojcD  anb  tbirtte  fhekeis ,  eacb 
boiblc  feuentie :  all  tbe  Ifluer  bcffcls 
tbcigbcbttbotboufanbanb  foure  bun? 
ojeb  fhekek.after  tbefbefeel  of  tyc&aw 
ctuarp. 

86  Xbegolbcnfpooncsweretibelue, 
full  of  incentc.weiehingtcnftiekeis  apiece, 
after  tbe  fbebel  of  tbe  £>anctuarp:  all 
tbe  golb  of  tbe  fpooncs,  wasan  bunD?cb 
anb  ttbentic  fhekeis. 

87  2fll  tbe  orcn  fo?  tbe  burnt  of 
fcring ,  were  ttbeluc  bullocbs ,  tbe  rams 
ttbelue,  tbe  lanibcs  of  tbe  firft  pecre 
ttbelue ,  untb  tbeir  meat  offering :  anb 
tbeRiDsofibcgoatsfo?finncoffcruig, 
tibelue. 

88  3tnb  all  tbe  oren  fo?  tbcfaerifice 
of  tbe  peace  offerings ,  were  tibentp  anb 
foure  bullorfts.tbe  raimnes  firtic,  tbe 
bee  goates  firtie ,  tbe  latnbes  of  tbe 
firft  peerc  firttc.  Xbis  was  tbe  bebicatis 
on  of  tljc  3ltar ,  after  tbat  it  ibas  an= 
opnteb. 

89  Suibtbbcn^ofrs  ibas  gone  into 
tbe  Xabcrnaclc  of  tbe  Congregation, 
tofpeabe  Mrl)  tbun,tbcnbebcarbtbe 
bopceof  onefpeabtngbntobim ,  from 
off  tbe  £©crne  feat ,  tljat  was  bpon  tbe 
3lrkc  of  Xeftimonp  from  bctlbccnc 
tbe  ttbo  Chcruutms :  anb  Ijc  fpafccbn? 
to  Dim. 


CHAP.    VIII. 

How  thelampes  aretobeligh:cd.  5  The 
confecration  of  the  Lenites.  13  The  age 
and  time  of  their  feruice. 

jftb  tbe  %  ©  is  ©  fpabe 
bnto£0ofcs,fapmg, 

i  £>peabe  bnto  3a* 
ron ,  anb  fap  bnto  bun, 
i©ben  tbou*ligbtctt  tbe 
lampcs,  t\)t  feuen  lampes  ftyall  giue 
bgbt,ouer  agatnfttbc  tanblefttcbe. 

3  3Cnrs  3aron  bib  fo  ■,  be  ligbteb  tlje 
lampes  tberof,oucr  aganift  tbecanblc* 
ftub,as  tbe  3Lois©  *c6manbeb  *$ofcs. 

4  3mbtbistbo?bcoftbecanblctticS 
was  of  beaten  golb,  bnto  tlje  Cbaft  tbete* 
of , bnto  tbe  floib?cs  tbereof  ttias*bca* 
ten  Vbo?bc:  aceo?t)ing  bnto  tbe  paternc 
lbljtcb  tbe  %  ©is©  bab  fbelbcD  £0o- 
fcs.fo  bemabctbccanblcftubc. 

5  C  3tnb  tbe  %  0  js  ©  fpabe  bnto 
£0ofcs,faping, 

6  Xabc  tbe  Metrites  from  among 
tbe  cbilb?cu  of3Jfcacl,anb  clcanfe  tbem. 

7  3nb  tbns  fbalt  tbou  Doe  bnto 
tbcm,to  deanfc  tbem:  fp?lnblc  tbatct  of 
purifying  bpon  tbem ,  anb  t  let  tbem 
fbaue  all  tbeir  flefb,  anb  let  tbem  tbafi) 
tbeir  clotbcs,  anb  fbmabctbcmfclucs 
cleane. 

8  %l)m  let  tbem  tabe  a  pong  bul> 
loebe  tbitfj  bismeat  offering ,  euenfine 
flottw  minglebibitb  op!e,anb  an  otber 
pong  bullocb  fbalt  rijou  tabe  fo?  a  fittnc 
offering. 

9  2nb  tbou  (bait  tying  tbe  %v- 
uites  before  tbeXabernatlc  of  tbe  €on= 
grcgation,-  anb  tbou  fbalt  gatljer  tbe 
lbboic  affcmbl?  of  tl)e  chabjen  of  30 
racltogetbcr. 

10  ^nbtboufbaltbn'ngtbefLem'tes 
befoze  tbe  it  ®  k  m ,  ann  tlje  cbilDjcn  of 
^fracl  Qjau  put  tbeir  hanos  bponttje 
fLcuitcs. 

1 1  3inD  ^aron  Ojail  t  offer  tbe  %& 
uites  befcuc  tbc?L  o  is  ©  fo?  antoffrtng 
oftbe  cbilbzcn  of  3lfracl,  tbatttbev  map 
crccute  tbe  feruice  of  tbeft  e>  is  ©. 

u  ^tib  tbe  ILcuitts  (ball  lap  tbeir 
banbs  bpon  tbe  bcabs  of  tbe  bullocbs: 
anb  tbou  (bait  offer  t\)t  oncfo:  a  funic 
offering,  anb  the  otber  fo?  a  burntof- 
fenng  bnto  tbe  %  ©  k  © ,  to  mafee  an 
atoncmentfo?tbe1Lcnitts. 

13  3lnb  tbou  fbalt  fct  tbe  fLcuitcs 
befoje^aron,  anb  befo?e  bis  fonnes, 
anb  offer  tbem  fo?  an  offcruig  bnto  tbe 
Hois©. 
14  Xbus 


37.  and  40. 
*5- 


'Exod.;i5. 


*Exod.l5. 
18- 


\Hcbr,let 
than  cauft  A 
rdftr  tepajfr 


offering. 
f  Hdr.xhcj 
may  be  to 
execHte,&-c. 


:heL 


cuitcs. 


Ch 


lap.ix. 


LP 


The  Pafleouer. 


'Chap.j. 
4J> 


I  ;.i  lukt 
1.1!. 


\Hcb.gi»:n. 


jHeb.f 

voire  the 

VAT^ATC  cf 

&c. 

\Hcbr.rt- 
ttirnefrom 
the  vr.trf.Tre 
tfthefermce 


14  XhusfhaitthonfcparatcthelLe; 
uitcs  from  among  tlje  chilbzcn  of  3J£ 
racl  t  anb  the  Hcuttcs  fljaibc*  nunc. 

15  anb  after  that,  itym  the  ILcmtes 
gocin.toboc  ttjefcrutctof  theXabct; 
natlc  of  tfic  Congregation :  anb  thou 
(haltclenfcthcm,anb  offer  them  fozan 
offenng. 

16  f;o}  tljrp  arc  vbbolly  gtuen  bnto 
me,fcom  among  the  thUbmt  of  3Jfracl: 
inftrab  of  fuel)  as  open  euecy  lbombc, 

euen  in  flead  of  the  tuft  bOmC  Of  all  the 

chiibien  of  Jfracl,  hauc  3J  fatten  them 
bnto  me. 

17  jfozailthefirftbomcofthcchil 
bjen  of  3Jfracl,  avc  mute,  both  man  anb 
bcaft :  on  the  bap  that  3  fmotc  cucty 
fir  (t  borne  in  the  lanb  of  Cgy  pt,3J  lane* 
nficbthemfozmyfelfc. 

18  3lnb  31  Ijauc  taken  the  Uetutcs 
foi  all  the  firft  borne  of  the  chilbzen  of 
llfracl. 

19  anb  3J  hauc  giticn  the  iLcuites  as 
atgtfttoaaroh,anbtohisfonncs,from 
among  tlic  thilbzcn  of  3Jfracl,  to  bo  the 
fcruicc  of  the  cfiilbmt  of  3u"raci,  m  the 
Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Congregation,  anb 
tomaac  an  atonement  fo?  thcthilbzcn 
of  SJfrael:  that  there  bee  no  plagues 
mongthcclnlbzcnof  3iftacl,  Vbhentht 
chilbzcnof^fraclcomcmgh  bnto  tt)e 
£>anetuarie. 

20  anb  $0oUs  anb  aaron.anb  all 
tf)c  Congregation  of  the  chilbzen  of^If 
racl  bib  to  the  Heuitcs  accozbingbnto 
all  that  the  %®  wjd  tommanbeb  ^o- 
fes,  contenting  the  ILciutcs,  fo  bib  the 
rbilbzen  of  3Ifrael  bnto  them. 

21  anb  the  Heuitcs  iberc  punfieb, 
anb  they  ibalbcbthett  clothes :  anbaa* 
ron  offcreb  them  as  an  offering  before 
the  %  ©  is  jd,  anb  aaron  mabc  an  at= 
oncmcntfozthcmtoelcanfcthem. 

2i  anb  after  that,  ibent  the  ILnntcs 
tn,tobothcirfcruiccttttbcXabernaelc 
ofthcCongccgationbcfozeaaronanb 
anb  before  his  Tonnes :  as  the  %  ©  k  jd 
hab  tommanbeb  fiBofrs  concerning  the 
heuitcs,  fo  bib  the?  bnto  them. 

2}  canb  tlje  3Zr£>K£>fpaftc  bnto 
^ofes,  faying, 

24  iChis  is  *  that  belonged!  bnto  the 
Heuitcs:  from  nbenttc  anb  fiucyeercs 
olb,anbbp\barb,  theylhall  goeintto 
Tbaite  bpon  the  fernicc  of  the  Xabcrna* 
clc  of  the  Congregation. 

25  anbfromtheageoffiftieyecrcs 
they  (hall  tceafc  tbamng  bpon  the  fcr* 
nice  thereof,  anbfoailfcrucnomoze: 


26  2Sut  thall  mimlrcr  ibtth  their  bze* 
thzen  in  the  Xabernaclc  of  the  Congre- 
gation,  to  acepe  rhe  charge,  anb  (ball 
boenoferutecuhusfoaltthouboebnto 
thc?Uq;tcs>touchingtbc;r  charge, 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  The  Pafleouer  is  commanded  againe.  6  A 
fecond  Pafleouer  allowed  for  them  that  were 
Vncleaneorablent.  15  Thecloudeguidcth 
the  remouings  &  incampings  of  the  Israelites. 

i5b  the  it©  k©  fpauc 

bnto  i39ofcsm  the  nrilbce; 

bcrncfleof£>mai,mthc 

firft  moncth  of  the  feconb 

_  ycerc ,  after  they  iberc 

come  out  of  the  lanb  of  cgypt,  faying, 

z    %tt  the  chtlb^cn  of  ^fracl  alfo 

fceepe*  the  pafleouer,  at  htsappomteb 

feafon. 

j  3Jn  tijc  fourtcntth  bay  of  this 
moneth  t  at  cucn,yc  fljau  Kccpe  tt  tn  his 
appointcb  feafon:  accojbtng  to  all  the 
rites  of  it,  anb  atcozbtngto  aiithcccrc? 
monies  thereof  (ball  ye  Rccpe  it. 

4  3inb  £}3ofcs  fpafee  bnto  the  chit 
b?en  of Jjfrael  that  thry  ft;oulb  fecepe 
thc^aucoucr. 

5  3Jnb  they  nept  the  palTeoucr  on 
the  fourteenth  bay  of  the  lira  moncth 
at£uen,m  the  lbilDctncflc  of^mai: 
acco^bingtoail  that  the  Horn©  com- 
manbeb  ^ofts,  fo  bib  the  thiibjen  of 
Dfcacl. 

6  C  3mb  tl)ctc  tberc  ccrtainc  men 
tbhoiberc  bcfilcb  by  thebcab  bobvof  a 
man ,  that  they  couib  not  ftcepe  the 
^affcoitcc  on  that  bay:  anb  they  came 
befoje  £{9ofcs,  anb  bcfo:c  3taron  on 
that  bay. 

7  :3ttbthofc  men faib  bnto  htm, tee 
re  befiieb  by  the  beab  boby  of  a  man: 

ibhcrcfozearcibc  iteptbacfte,  thatlbec 
maynot  offer  anoffrtng  of  tfjeftflMs© 
m  hts  appomttb  feafon  among  tlje  chtl- 
bjcnofjfraek 

8  ^nb  £0ofcs  faibc  bnto  them, 
£>tanb  ton,  anb  5  mm  hearc  ibhat  the 
%<s>wz>  lbtl  commano  conccnung  yon. 

9  C  ,^nb  the  %  ©  is  jd  fpalje  bnto 
£{9otcs,  faying, 

io  <5>peafec  bnto  the  thrtbJtn  of  31 
frael,Ciying,3Jf  any  man  of  yon,  ozof 
your  poftcrmc  fljail  be  bnclcane  by  rea- 
fonof  abcab  boby,  oj  bee  in  aiourney 
afarreoff,  yctbclbaii  beepc  tlje  paffe^ 
oucrbntothe|li©«5?. 

ii  %\)t  fourteenth  bay  of  the  feconb 

moneth 


•Exod.u. 

i.&c.leuit. 
2;. 5. chap. 
:8  itf.dcuc. 
16. s. 
\  Hcbr.be. 
nvecne  the 
two  e:tc* 


Cloud  and  fire.        Numbers.         Siluer  trumpets. 


•Exod.u. 
46.  ioh.  1$. 


'Exod.I  J. 
4?- 

*  Exod.  40, 
3* 


•  f.Corin. 
10.1. 


j  Hrir.fr, 
longed. 


j  Htbr.VM. 


nionctbat<£ucnthep(ballbcepett,anb 
cat  itibitb,  bnieaucnebb?cab  anb  bitter 

herbes. 

ii  %\w  (ban  Icaue  none  of  it  bnto 
the  morning ,  no?  b?caac  any  bone  of  it: 
*acco?fcmg  to  all  the  o?bmanccs  oftljc 
|&aflcouct  thep  (hall  beepe  it. 

1  j  26ut  tlje  man  that  is  cleanc,  anb  is 
not  m  a  tourncp ,  anb  fo?bcarctl)  to 
beep  the0affeoucr,euenthe  fame  foutc 
(ball  be  ent  off  from  hispcople,bctaufe 
hec  b2ong!)t  not  tl)c  offering  of  the 
%  <$>  is  ©  tn  his  appointee  feafon :  that 
man  (ball  bcate  bis  finne. 

14.  anb  ifaftranger  (ball  foiournc 
amongpou ,  anbibill  fceepe  rbc^affc 
oucc  Onto  tlje  ILtDmjD;  atco?bing  to 
tbc  ojbmance  of  the  ^affeouer,  anb  at 
wblngtotbemancrthcrcoffo  (bailbc 
boc :  *  pe  fbailhauc  one  o?Dmanec,both 
fo?  the  ftcangct,  anb  fo?h»nthatibas 
borne  mtbelanb. 

15  C  3nb  *  on  tl)e  bap  that  the  %& 
bernacic  mas  rcatcb  bp,tbc  cloub  tone* 
reb  tl)eirabernaelc,n.«ne!vtl)eXcntof 
the  5Ecftononp  :  anb  at  eucn  tbece 
tbasbpon  tfteXabernatle ,  as  ittberc 
the  appearance  of  fire,  bntill  themo?* 
ning. 

16  £>o  it  was  aiibap :  the  cloub  to  we- 
rebit  by  day,  anb  the  appearance  of  fire 
bp  night. 

17  3inb  lbncn  tfie  cloub  ibastafeen 
bp  from  the  ICabernaclc ,  then  after 
that ,  the  ehtlb?cn  of 3Jfraet  toumeveb, 
anb  in  the  place  ibbere  the  clonb  abobc, 
there  the  chilb?cn  of  3Jfrart  pitcheb 
their  tents. 

18  Tit  the  commanbement  of  the 
|L©ib©  the  ehilb?en  of  ^fracl  tour* 
ncicb,  anb  at  tlje  commanbement  of  the 
ILsdisjd  theppitebcb:  *aslongastbe 
cloub  abobe  bpon  the  Xabcrnaclc,thcp 
rcfttbitt  the  tents. 

»  3nb  ibhcn  the  clonb  t  taricb  long 
bpon  the  Xabcmaclc  manvbaics,then 
tbecbiibjcn  of  3Jfracl  fecpt  the  charge 
of  the  %  <©  is  ©,  ano  tourwrveb  not. 

20  3nb  fo  it  tt>as  lbheh  the  cloubc 
ibasafeibbaicsbpontbcXabcmacle, 
aewbing  to  the  commanbement  of  the 
%  £>  is  jd  ,  thep  abobe  tn  their  tents,anb 
acco?bmg  to  the  tommanbementofthe 
%$>  is  jp,tbcptourncpcb. 

xi  3Jnb  fo  it  ibas  ibhen  the  clonbe 
t abobe  from  Cuen  bnto  themommg, 
anb  that  the  cloubc  ibas  taken  bp  m  the 
morning,  then  tbcp  tournrpcb  :  lbbe 
tljcntibas  by  bapo:  bp  night  that  the 


cloubc  ibasta&enbp,thcptourncpcb. 

22  jDnbhethet  'twere  trbo bapes,o? 
a  moneth ,  0?  a  pern  that  the  cloubc 
tartcb  bpon  the  Xabcrnaclc ,  remap* 
mngthercon,thechilb?cnof3Jftael  *a* 
bobc  in  their  tents,  anb  iourncpcb  not 
but  tbljen  it  ibas  taben  bp ,  thep  lour* 
nepeb. 

25  Tit  the  commanbement  of  the 
%  o  is  jd  thep  rcfleb  in  the  tents,anb  at 
the  tommawnbement  of  the  %  ©  is© 
tbeptournepctothep  bept  tlje  charge  of 
the  ?L  ©  a  jd,  at  the  commanbement  of 
the  %  €>  is  jd  bp  the  ijanb  of  fiPofcs. 


•Exod.  40. 
36-J7- 


Thelf- 

14  The 


CHAP.    X. 

1  Thevfeof  the  filuerTrumpets.  n 
radices  remoue  Irom  Sinai  to  Paran. 
order  of  their  march.  15  Hobab  is  retrea- 
ted by  Mofes  not  to  Icaue  them.  53  The 
bleffing  of  Mofes  at  the  remoouing  and  re. 
fling  of  the  Arke. 

!f/^S3£ iHb  the  IL ©is jd fpafee 
bnto£!Mcs,faping, 
2  £0abe  thee  tibo  tram* 
pets  of  filuer :  of  an  ibhole 
.piece  (halt  thou  matte 
litem  jam  thou  mapeft  bfe  them  fo?  the 
caUmg  of  the  affembrp,  anb  fo:  the  tour* 
nepingofthecampcs. 

3  2nb  ibhen  thep  fljaii  biotb  ibith 
them ,  all  the  affemblp  (ball  affemble 
themfclucsto  thee,  at  theboo?c  of  the 
ICabcntacie  of  the  Congregation. 

4-  3nb  tf  thep  bloU)  but  «)ith  one 
mmpet,thentbe$2inecs,which  are  fjcabs 
of  the  thoufanbs  of  3frael,fi;au  gather 
themfelues  bnto  thee. 

1  aaben  pe  bloib  an  aiatmc ,  tl)en 
the  rampes  that  lit  on  the  Caftparts, 
fbaligocfojibarb. 

6  JBhcnpoublotbanalarmcthefc* 
tonbttme,  then  tlje  campes  that  Ipc  on 
roc  §>9nthftbc,{balitasc  their  ioutnev: 
thep  fljafl  bloib  an  aiatmc  fo?  their 
iourneps. 

7  ffiut  ibhen  the  Congregation  is 
to  be  gathcreb  together ,pou  (bai  bloib : 
but  pou  (hall  not  founb  an  alarmc. 

8  3tnb  the  fonncs  of  3aron  tl)e 
^ieftsajail  bloib  ibith  thctrnnipctSi 
anb  thep  fbaibcto  pou  fozan  ozbinancc 
fo?  euer  fh?oughout  pour  generations. 

9  3nb  if  pe  goc  to  ibarrc  in  pouc 
lanb,againarhecnctuicthatopp?cuctl) 
pou,thcn  pe  fljall  blotb  an  alarmc  ibith 
thctriimpcts,anbpefl)albcremcmb.'cb 
bcfb?cthc!L€)isjD  pour  <5ob,  anb  vec 

fliaibc 


Tl 


leremouino's 


*y 


ci 


lap.x 


P- 


o 


fth 


c  cam  pc 


p< 


•Chip.*.;. 


'CbF.i  7 


*Cliap.4.4. 
\ThMu, 

the  Gerjho- 
mtestandthe 
MerArilcl, 
Sccv.  1 7. 


fbaibc  fauco  from  your  enemies. 

10  3ufo  in  ti)ttiav  of  your  glabncffe, 
anb m your  folcmnc  bayes ,  anb m the 
beginnings  ofyourmonethes,  ytfhail 
blott)  Until  the  trumpets  ouer  your 
burnt  offerings,  anb ouer  thcfacrificcs 
ofyour  peace  offerings,  that  they  may 
bee  to  you  foj  a  mcmonail  before  your 
<5ob :  3 3m  tl>c  %  0  is  b  your  ©ob. 

1 1  c  2wb  »t  tame  to  paffc  on  t!)c 
twentieth  bay  of  thefetonb  moncth,tn 
the  feeoffl)  ycerc ,  that  the  clonbe  iDas 
taken  Dp  from  off  the  Xabernacic  of 
theXcftimony. 

ix  2lnb  the  thtlbien  of  girracl  toofec 
their  tourneys  out  of  the  nnioe  weffe  of 
<§>mat ,  anb  the  cloub  rcfteb  mthcttnl' 
berucfTc  of  0aran. 

13  3nb thcyfirfttooKethcir  iourncy, 
acwbuigto  the  tommatibctucntofthe 
H  o  is  id,  by  thchaubof  S9ofes. 

14.  Clin  the  n'rltpLiccibent  the  (tan- 
berb  of  the  campe  of  the  thtlbien  ofjlu- 
bah,  accozbmg  to  their  armies ,  aubo 
ucrhtshoftc  w«  *  i!5ahfbon  the  fount 
ofJlmnunabab. 

15  3luboucr  the  hoftc  ofthc  tnbeof 
the  thilbmt  of  Tiffathar,"  as /i5tthanecl 
the  fonnc  of  zuar. 

16  3nb  ouer  the  hoftc  of  the  tribe  of 
the  chilbicn  of  zcbulun.waseuabthc 
fonnc  of  $clon. 

17  3ltib  the  Xabernacic  Ybas  fatten 
botbnc,anbthcfonnesof(5crn)on,anb 
the  founcsof  Qerari fct  foiibarb,  bea- 
ring the  Xabernacic. 

is  C  3lnb  the  ftanberb  of  the  campe 
of  Hcuben  fct  foflwarb  accoibmg  to 
their  armies :  anb  ouer  his  hofte  *  as  €- 
U3ur  the  fonnc  of  £>hcbcur. 

19  :3nboucrthehofrcofthc  tribe  of 
thethilbien  of&tmcon,  was^helumttl 
the  fonnc  of  Zurifhabbat. 

io  3inb  otter  the  hofte  of  the  tribe  of 
the  chilbien  of  <sab,  was  euafaph  tlje 
fonnc  of  Deuel. 

ii  anb  the i^ohathitesfetfozroarb, 
bcarmgthc  *  Sanctuary,  anb  ihetother 
bib  fct  Dp  the  Xabernacic  agatnftthey 
came. 

22  C^nbthcQanbcrbofthecampc 
ofthc  chilbmt  of  eph:atmfctfoM)arb, 
accoibmg  to  their  armies,  anb  oner  his 
hofrc  was  eufhama  the  fonnc  of  3lm 
nuub. 

23  3nb  ouer  the  hoftc  of  the  tribe  of 
the  chilbjcn  of  ©anaffch  was  (Gamaliel 
thefonneofj&cbaMtr. 

24  anb  ouer  the  hoftc  ofthc  tribe  of 


the  chiibzcn  of  iscntamm,  was  abtbam 
thcfouneofOibeont. 

25  C  anb  the  ftanberb  ofthecampc 
of  tlje  chilbmi  of  Dan  fet  fojibatbj 
ibhith  ujas  the  rere  ibarb  of  an  the ! 
cahtpes  throughout  their  holies:  anb 
ouer  his  tjo&cwasahiejec  the  fonnc  of 
ammtfhabbai. 

26  anb  ouer  the  hofrc  of  the  tribe  of 
the  chilbmt  of  afber,  was  ^agtcl  the 
fonnc  of  £Dcran. 

27  anb  ouer  the  hofte  of  the  tribe  of 
thechtlbzcnof  Jfraphtali  wasahtra  the 
fonneofenan. 

28  t  Xhus  lberc  the  iournr vtngs  of 
the  rhilbien  ofJfraeUecortring  to  the  it 
atmits,ibhenthcyfetfo2ibarb. 

29  Canb  fiPofes  faib  bnto  $>obab 
the  fonnc  of  3Ragucl  the  ^ibiamteQ9o; 
fes  father  m  !aib,  usee  arc  tourneying 
bnto  the  place  of  lbhtth  the  %®  is  © 
fatb,  31  BjU  giue  ttyou :  tonic  thou  ibith 
bs,  anb  ibe  mill  boe  thee  goob  :ft>2  the 
%  <s> «  to  hath fpoUen  goob  concerning 
gjfracl. 

30  5lnbhefaibbntohim,5U»illnot 
goc,  but  '31  ibfli  bepart  to  mine  oibne 
ianb,anbtomylunreb. 

31  ^nb  he  faib,1Lcaucbsnot,3Ip2ay 
thee,  fo:afmuchas  tijouBtiottiefthoib 
ibearcto  cutampe  m  the  Unlbetucffe, 
anb  thou  mayeft  bee  to  tos  m  fteab  of 
eyes. 

32  3Iub  it  (l)ali  bee  if  thou  goe  tbith 
bs,  yea  it  (hall  be,  thanDhatgoobncffe 
thc1L0i3iDlhailboebtitobs,thefame 
ibilltbcboebntothee. 

33  C  3iub  they  bepartcb  from  the 
09ount  of  the  %  ©  a  ©  thzce  bayes 
|tountey:anbthe3irlieoftheCoucnant 
i  of  tlic  V-  0  is  jd  lb  cut  befoic  them  tn  the 
rhzee  bayes  lourncy ,  to  fearc^  out  a  re- 
tting place  foz  them. 

34.  3no  the  rtoubc  of  the  JL<dk© 
wasbponthembybay,U)hcnthcylbent 
out  ofthc  campe. 

3-5  ^na  it  came  to  paffe  tbhen  the 
3rRC  fet  fo:Uiarb  ,  that  flDofcs  faib, 
*  Btfe  top  %  oiB©,  anb  let  thme  ene- 
mies be  fcattereb  ,  anb  let  them  that 
hate  thee,  flee  befojethee. 

36  ^nblbhenttreftcb,  he  fatb ,  IRt 
tunic,  <£>  ILoisb,  bnto  the  t  many 
thoufanbsof3lfrael. 

CHAP.    XI. 

1  Theism ninsz  at  Taberah c]uenchcd  by  Mofcs 

pravcr.     4    The  people  lull  for  fled) ,  and 

loth  Manna.    10  Mofcs  coniplayncth  of  his 

O  charge. 


(  Htbr. 
Th.fi. 


>pai.6S 


t  H,Lr  <rr. 

t'oOHJarm 


Manna  is  loathed.      Numbers.       Seuenty  Elders. 


[  Or,  were 

Ai  ifwrrc 

compUt- 

tterf.. 

\  Het>.itrrai 

ntiUinthc 

f.trtl  of&c. 

•PIJI.78. 


t  Hrh. 

ftmks* 

That  11, 
btrrmn?. 

AsExoc! 
1  J.  38. 
Hchd»f:d 
Ixjl. 

\H,hrrc- 
tHrnedand 
wept. 

t.Cor.io. 
6. 


•Ejcd.iS. 

»4.3'- 
jMr.tjt 

tf  it  ,04  the 
•7"/ 


charge.  16  God  diuideth  his  burden  vnto 
feucntie  Elders.  31  Qiiailes  arc  giuen  in 
wradi  at  Kibroth  -  Hattuauah. 

j|3d  when  the  people  II  corn* 
piaineD,  t  itDifplcafeD  the 
%  ©  is  © :  aim  the  %<DWZ> 
bcarD  it :  anD  his  anger 
ibas  umDlcD,  anu  the  fire 
of  tl>e  fL€>m©  burnt  *  among  them, 
anD  confumcD  them  that  were  in  ttjetotter^ 
mod  pacts  of  tljecantpe* 

z  7Mb  t\)i  people  ericD  into  fij^ofes, 
anu  ibbcn  £Pofcs  prayeb  bnto  the 
%  ®  is  id,  the  fir  e  t  tbas  quenchcD. 

j  £nD  hce  callcD  the  name  of  the 
place  ||  Xabctah :  betaufe  the  fire  of  the 
H  €>  a  ©  burnt  among  theni. 

4.  C3inD thCmijct  multituDethat 
lbas  among  them,  tfeii  a  lulling,  anD 
the  chllDren  of  3Ifcacl  t  aifo  ibept  a= 
gaine,anD  Gud,*  a>ho  tbalgtuc  be  fietb 
to  eate* 

5  10c  remember  the  fill)  lbljtditbee 
DiD  catein  egypt  freely :  the  cucumbers 
anDthentclons,anDthelceRes,anDthe 
onions,  anD  the  garltrae. 

6  ffiutnoibourfouleiSDrtcDatbay, 
there  is  nothing  at  ail,  befibes  this 
£)9anna,bcforc  our  eyes, 

7  anD  *  the  Manila  tbas  as  Co# 
anber  fecD,  anD  the  t  colour  thereof  as 
the  colour  of  25Deliunt: 

8  And  the  people  ibent  about ,  anb 
gathcrcDit,  anDgrounDit  tnmtlles,  or 
beattttnamorter,anDba&ebitinpans, 
anDmaDc  canes  of  it :  anbthctafteof  it 
was  as  the  tafte  of  fcefl)  0  vie. 

9  3lnD  tbhen  the  Deib  fell  bpon  the 
tanipeinthcmght,the  £0anna  fell  bp= 
on  it. 

10  ciEhcnfi0ofeshearD  the  people 
lbcepc  throughout  their  ramilies,cucty 
man  in  the  Doo2e  of  his  tent,  ano  the 
anger  of  the  %  €>  is  50  ibas  innDlcD 
greatly,  {©ofcsalftnbasDifplcafcD. 

11  anD  ^ofcstaiD  bnto  the  JLsdeid, 
therefore  haft  thou  afflicteD  tbv  fer? 
uant<attDibhcreforehanelfnotfounD 
fauour  m  thy  fight,  that  thou  layeft  the 
burbenofalltbispeoplcbponme* 

ir  ^aucjtoncetuebailthispcople; 
haue*j  begotten  them,thatthou  (l)oul^ 
Deft  lay  bnto  me,  Cary  them  m  tbybo* 
fome  (as  a  nutting  father  bcaretb  tile 
fucUmgchUD)bnto  tocianb  U)I)icIjtt)ou 
fiuorcll  bnto  their  fathers  < 

13  nahence  fljouiD  3J  hauc  fled)  to 
glue  bnto  all  this  people  i  for  they  ibecp 


bnto  me,feying,  d5iue  bs  fletb,  that  ibe 
may  eate. 

14  5  am  not  able  to  beare  all  this 
people  alone,  betaufe  u  is  too  heauie  for 
nice. 

15  anbifthouDealethusrbithmee, 
mil  me,  3  pray  thee  out  of  hanb,  if  3 
hauc  fonnD  fauour  in  thy  fight,  anD  let 
inc  not  fee  niy  tteettheDnefle. 

16  C  3nD  the  ?U>ia©laiD  bnto  ©0* 
fes,  gather  bnto  me  feuentie  men,  of 
the  eibers  of  3Jfrael ,  lbhome  thou 
ftnoibeft  to  be  the  clDersof  the  people, 
anb  officers  ouer  them :  anD  bring  them 
bnto  thelCabernacle  of  the  Congrega? 
tion,  that  they  may  ttanb  there  ttnth 
thee. 

17  7Mb  3  Mil  tome  Dotbne  anD 
taine  lbirb  thee  there ,  anD  %  rum  tafte 
of  the  fptrit  ibhirh  is  bpon  thec,anD\btl 
pnt  it  bpon  them,  anD  they  (ball  beare 
the  butben  of  the  people  ibith  thee,that 
thou  bear  e »  no  t  tpy  felfc  alone. 

is  7Mb  fay  thou  bnto  the  people, 
3>anetifte  your  lelues  againft  to  mo;- 
rotb,  anb  vtt  (hall  eate  flelb :  (for  you 
hane  ibept  in  the  cares  of  the  %  ©  ra  5©, 
faying,  rehofhallgtuebs  fiett)to  eater 
for  it  mas  ibell  ibith  bs  in  €gypt : ) 
therforethe1L©«©ibagraeyouflett), 
anDyen)aileate. 

19  Pefhall  not  eate  one  Day ,norttbo 
Dayes,nor  fiue  Dayes,neu1)ertcn  Dayes, 
nortlbentleDayes: 

io  Buteuenattbholemoncth,bntill 
itcomeoutat  your  noftrels,  anD  itbee 
loathfome  bnto  you,  betaufe  that  yce 
i ) Mt  d r fpifc 0  rh c  %  o  13  r«  lblurl)  is  a 
mongyou,  anDhaue  tbept  betore  him, 
laying,  i©hy  came  rbe  foo^h  out  of  C* 
0ypt< 

ii  ^nb  fl^ofes  laiD ,  Xhe  people  & 
mongfl  lbhome  3  ^m,  are  firchunDreD 
tboiifanD  footmen,  anD  thou  had  faib, 
3  ibffl  giue  them  fleth,  thattrjeymay 
catealbholcmoneth. 

22  ja>hallthcflotResanDtheherDS 
be  Oatncforthemto  fufficcthenu  orfl)ai 
all  the  fiftj  of  the  fca  bee  gathereD  toge 
tber  foi  them,  to  fufiice  them  < 

23  ^nDthe?LiaDs©laiDbnto^o^ 
fes ,  *  3s  the  %  ©  is  ©  £>  hanD  VbareD 
fhortr  thoufl)alt  fee  nolb  Vbhcther  my 
rborb  fl)alltometopaflcbntothce,or 
not. 

2+  C3lnb  fi^ofes  lbcnt  out,  anb 
tolDe  the  people  the  iborbes  of  the 
%  0  is  ©,aiiD  gathereD  thefcuenty  men 
of  the  CIDers  of  tlje  people ,  anD  fet 
them 


f  Tie h  w> 
rtcthof 

dAJtS. 


andjp.i. 


EldadandMedad.      Chap.xij.       Miriam  leprous.] 


*E«>d.t«. 

13.pfaJ.78. 

t  Heir  4! 
It  were  the 

WA]  ofit  tljlJ. 


•Pfa!;?. 
3'- 


,\Th*tu, 

ThclTAHet 

efMI. 


-t  Httr 
xrtretn 


them  rounb  about  tt»c  Xabentatie. 

15  3nbthcIL©iH©cameDolbncin 
acloube,anbfpafecbntohun,anbtooftc 
of  the  rpicit  that  mas  bpon  him,  anb 
gauc  tt  Unto  the  teucntu  ffi  10  ers :  anb  it 
tame  to  pafle  that  When  tl)e  fptnt  r  eltcb 
bponthcm,thcyp,2ophcGeb,anbbtbnot 
ceate. 

26  2Sut  there  remameb  ttbo  of  the 
mm  in  the  tampe,  the  name  of  the  one 
was«ibab,f  the  name  ofthe  other  SjEte 
bab:anbthe  £>ptrttrettcb  bponthem, 
(anb  they  ibere  of  them  that  were  tbnt- 
ten,  but  lbcnt  not  out  bnto  the  Xaber= 
nacle)attb  they  pzophcfieb  m  the  tampe. 

27  3nD  there  ranne  a  yong  man, 
anb  tolbc  i$ofes ,  anb  faib ,  <£lbab  anb 
fipebabboepjopheuemthe  tampe. 

2$  3nb  3o0nta  the  fonne  of  iBun 
the  feruant  of  i3ji)ofcs,oneof  hisyong 
men,  anftocrcb  anb  faib,  £0y  lo?b  fi0o- 
fcs,jFozbibthem. 

29  3tnb  fipofes  faib  bnto  l)im ,  €n^ 
uteft  thou  fo?  my  fafec  <  oaouib  <5ob 
that  all  the  1L©is©£>  people  Vbere 
£:ophcts,anb  that  the  %  ©  k  ©  lboulb 
put  his  Spirit  bponthem. 

30  3lnb  i$ofes  gate  htm  into  the 
tampe,  he  anb  the  fibers  ofjfrael, 

31  C3nb  there  ttintt  forth  a *itunbe 
from  tiie  %  ©  is  ©,anb  brought  quailcs 
from  the  tea ,  anb  let  them  fall  by  the 
tampe,  tastttbercabayes  tourney  on 
thisfibc,  anb  as  it  iberc  a  bayes  tour- 
ney on  the  other  fibe  rounb  about  the 
tampe ,  anb  as  tt  ibere  ttbo  tubits  high 
Upon  the  fate  of  the  earth. 

32  3lnb  the  people  ftoob  bp  all  that 
bay,  anb  all  that  night,  anb  all  thenert 
bay,  anb  they  gathcreb  t\\t  quailcs :  he 
that  gathcreb  leaf! ,  gathercb  ten  ho- 
mers: anb  they  fpzeab  them  aliabioab 
foi  themfelucs  rounb  about  the  tampe. 

33  3nbVbhtle  thc*flefn  ibas  yet  be? 
ttbeene  thctr  teeth, yernibastheibeb, 
the  ibzath  of  the  1L  ©  is  ©  ibas  tunbleb 
agamft  the  people ,  anb  the  1L©15© 
fmote  the  people  ibith  a  bcry  great 
plague. 

34  3nb  he  talleb  the  name  of  that 
plate ,  ||  leutyoth-^attaauah  :  bctaufe 
there  they  butteb  the  people  that  lufteb. 

35  3inb  the  people  lourucyeb  from 
Bibzoth  5?attaauah,  bnto  l^croth: 
anbtabobeat^croth. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1    God  rebuketh  the  fedicion  ol  Miriam  and  Ai- 
ron.    10    Miriams  leprofte  is  healed  at  the 


prayer  of  Mofcs.    14   Godcoiumandethher 
to  be  (hut  out  ot  the  holte. 

0n  Miriam  anb  ^aron 
fpafecagaintt  fi0ofcs ,  be> 
taufe  of  the  j|  Ethiopian 
iboman ,  lbhom  hee  hab 
marrieb :  foz  he  hab  t  mar 
r ieb  an  Ethiopian  tt»oman. 

2  3nb  they  feib ,  $?ath  the  JL  ©  is  © 
inbeeb  fpofeen  oncly  by  G0oksi  It^ath 
hee  not  fpofeen  alfo  by  is  <  %m  the 
|L«D«©fjearbit. 

3  (i!5ott)theman^ofestbas*bcry 
Smeefee,  abouc  ail  thcmetnbhithvbcre 
bponthe  fate  of  the  earth.) 

4  3lnb  the  %  ©  13  ©  fpaitc  fubben 

:  lybnto  fi^ofes,  anb  bnto  3larou,  anb 
:  bnto^tnam,  Come  out  ye  thzeebnto 
ItheXabernatlc  of  the  Congregation: 
|  anb  they  thzec  came  out. 

5  3nb  the  1L  ©  k  ©  tame  bottme  in 
ithcpiliaroftliecloubc.anbltoobinthc 

booze  ofthe  Xabcrnatlcanb  tallcb^a- 
1  ron  anb  Miriam :  anb  tljcy  both  tame 

fooifl). 

6  3lnb  hee  faibe ,  I?carc  nolto  my 
ibozbs :  5)f  therebca0zophctamong 
you,3J  tytJL  ©a  ©  ibillmaUemyfclfe 
ftnolbenbnto  hun  mabiGon,  and  rbill 
fptabe  bnto  htm  mabieame : 

7  '^Pyferuant^ofcsisnotfo^ho 
is  faithfull  m  all  nunc  houfe. 

8  naith  hmiibill  5  fpeafee  *  mouth 
to  mouth  cuenappacantly  ,aub  not  m 
barftefpccches,anbtheunulitubcofti)c 
!L©is©  fljail  hee  bcholb  :  mhcrcfoze 
then  ibere  yee  not  afrato  to  fpeafee  a* 
gaintt  my  feruant  fi^ofes  < 

9  3lnb  tlje  anger  of  the  %  ©is© 
tbasfembleb  agamft  them ,  anb  he  be- 
partcb. 

10  3nb  tlje  tloub  bepartcb  from  off 
theXabernatlc,  anb  bcholb ,  Miriam 
became  lepjous ,  white  as  fnotb  :  anb 
^aaronloofecb  bpon  Spiriam,  anb  be- 
holb.lhe^asiepzflus. 

1 1  ^nb  3aron  faib  bnto  ;£0ofcs,  a* 
las  my  I02D,  31  befceth  thee,  lay  not  the 
finne  bpon  bs,Tbherein  tbe  hauebonc 
foolilhly,  anb  lbheccm  Vbehauc  finneb: 

11  iLet  her  not  bee  as  one  bcab ,  of 
lbhom  the  flcth  is  rjalfc  tonfumcb, 
ibhcn  he  tommcthout  of  hismothers 
ibombe. 

13  ^nb  ^0ofes  crpcb  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  © ,  faymg ,  H)eale  her  nolb ,  j© 
(Sob^bcfecchthcc. 

14  C  ^nb  the  %  ©  iR  ©  Catb  bnto 
4ioCes ,  Jf  her  father  hab  but  fpit  in 

j©2 her 


I  Or  Cm- 
Hill, 

t  Hrtr.  in- 


4 


•Hcbt-j.i. 


Eiod.;3. 


Spies  are  fent  to         Numbers.  fearch  the  land . 


•Lcuit.  13. 


her  fact,  (houiofhenotbcc  aftjamebfe^ 
ucn  bayes  t  let  Ijcr  be  *  font  out  front  the 
cantpe  fcutn  oayes,  ano  aftct  that  let 
her  be  recetuco  ut  agatne. 

15  3noi$iriantibasft)ut  out  from 
the  campefcuenoayes :  anb  the  people 
toutneteb  not,ttl  i^irtam  Ibas  brought 
magame. 

i6  ^0  aftctVuaro  the  people  rcmo^ 
uco  front  li?a}crotl),  ana  pttchcotnthe 
ibilbcrncu'cof^aran. 

CHAP     XIII. 

1  The  names  of  the  men  who  v\  ere  fent  to  fearch 
the  land.  17  Their  inftructions.  n  Their 
actes.    2.6    Their  relation. 

^30  the  %  €> »  id  fpaue 
bnto  #ofcs,  faying, 

z  £>cnothoumcn,fbati 
they  may  fearch  thelantc 
of  Canaan,  lbhtch  5  gnic 
bnto  foe  tmiojcn  of  IKracl :  ofeuery 
tttbeofthetrfathersftiaiycfcnbaman, 
cutty  one  a  ruler  among  them. 

5  3lnb  fi^ofes  by  the  commaunbe' 
ment  of  the  3L©B*0,fent  than  from 
theibuocmcsof  0atan:  alltholc  men 
lucre  heaos  of  the  ehtlbien  of  3lfrael. 

4  3utD  thefe  were  tljetr  names.  jDf 
the  tnbeof  Kcubcn,  ^>l>atntnua  tt»c 
tonne  of  zaeeur. 

5  £>f  the  tribe  of  Smncon,  5>h& 
phat  the  tonne  of  l^ori. 

6  ^f  the  trtbe  of  3Juoah,  Caleb  the 
tonne  of  ^Jcphunneh. 

7  dDfthc  tnbe  of  3Jflachar ,  3Igai 
the  tonne  of  3fotrph. 

8  £>fthe  tribe  of  Cphtfim,  £>fbea 
rt)e  tonne  of  /font. 

9  jDfthc  tribe  of  Bentamin,  $aitt 
the  tonne  of  Kaplnt. 

to  ^f  the  tribe  of  zebiilun,0abOiet 
the  tonne  of  S»obu 

II   €>f  thC  tribe  Of  3f0fCph  ,  namely  of 

thctnbcoft$anaffch,(£ttbbtthctomie 
of&uft. 

ii  C>fthetnbeof^u,3unmiclthe 
fount  of  ©cmaiit. 

i j  £>f  the  tribe  of  3fl)cr,!S>ethur  the 
tonne  of  i$)ichael. 

i+  £>f  the  tribe  of  i}aphtali,/i3ahbt 
the  tonne  of  Olophfi. 

15  £>f  the  tribe  of  cab,  ©cucl  the 
tonne  of  fl^athi. 

i6  Xhc'reare  the  names  of  die  men 
ibhith  Cflofts  fent  to  fpic  out  the  lanb: 
anb  CPofcs  taiicb  £>fljta  tlje  tonne  of 
ifJu^gjehofhua. 


17  C^nbiJ9ofcs  rent  them  to  fpie 
out  the  lanb  of  Canaan,  anbfaib  bnto 
them,  <5ct  you  bp  this  way  S>outh; 
ibatb,attogoebpmtofbemountatne : 

18  3lno  fee  the  lanbe  tbhat  it  is,  ano 
dtc  people  that  onmieth  therein,  ibhe< 
ther  they  bee  ftrongo?  Sbeaae,  feujeo.z 
many : 

19  3nb  ibhat  the  lanbe  is  that  they 
btbcll  in, lbhcthct  it  be  goob  0?  bab,anb 
ibhat  cities  they  bee  that  rheyoibcllui, 
rbhethcr  in  tents,  0?  in  ftr  ong  holbs : 

io  :SnbMjatthelanbis,u>htthcrtt 
befatojleane,  tbhethet  there  be  lboob 
therein,  01  not  3(nb  be  ye  of  goob  cott; 
rage,  anb  bung  of  the  fruit  of  the  lanb : 
(iBoibthc  time  was  the  time  of  the  firft 
npc  grapes) 

ii  C£>otheyTbcntbp,anbfearcheo 
the  lanb,  from  the  JbtibemetTe  of  ztn, 
bnto  Behob,  as  men  tome  to  $amath. 

n  ^n'otheyafccnbcbbythe5>outh, 
sub  came  bnto  f?cb:on :  ibhere  JSxjfc 
man, 5>hefha<,  ano  Xalmai,  the  tljifc 
02en  of  3tnaft  iberc :  i!5otb  i^ctyon 
ibas  built  fenen  yeercs  before  Zoanm 
Cgypt. 

13  *3nOtheycamebntothe||bjooBe 
of  €fl)toI,  anbcutootbne  from  thence 
a  bzanch  tbtth  one  clutter  of  grapes,ano 
they  bare  it  bettbeene  ttbo  bpon  a  ftaffe, 
ano  they  brought  of  the  pomegranatts 
ano  of  the  figs. 

14  Xhe  place  ibas  caileb  the  I!  bjoofee 
|| « th col,becaufe  of  tht  clutter  of  grapes 
lbhtch  the  chub,:cn  of  31frael  cut  bourne 
from  thence. 

15  3lno  they  returncb  from  fear* 
thing  of  the  lano  after  four  ty  oayes. 

16  C  3uD  they  Jbent  ano  came  to 
Q9ofes,  ano  to  ^aron ,  ano  to  all  the 
Congrcganon  of  the  chtltyen  of  Jfrati 
bnto  the  uiilbemefleof  0aran,  to  Ba* 
oeft) ,  anb  bzought  bacne  Uiozb  bnto 
them,  ano  bnto  all  the  Congregation, 
ano  (heibeo  them  the  fruit  of  the  lano. 

17  3wotheytolOhim,anofaio,  ioe 
camebnto  the  lano  ibhither  thou  fen^ 
tcitbs,fj  finely  it  floibcth  Untii*niflbe 
ano  honte  i  ano  this  is  the  fruit  of  it. 

18  .^eucrthcleue ,  the  people  bee 
ftrong  that oibell ut  the  ianb,anb  then^ 
ncs  are  ibailro  ano  bcry  great :  ano 
moK  oucr,bjc  faib  the  thtlbjtn  of^naa 
there. 

19  Xhe  ^maleHttes  otbcll  ut  rl)t 
lanb  of  the  £>outh :  anb  the  pittites, 
anb  tltc  Jtbufitcs  ,  anb  the  3bnontes 
bibcll  in  tl;c  mottutaincs :  ano  the  Ca 

naamtes 


•Dcuc.i. 
14. 


||  Oryatcj. 
ef  £TdftJ. 


■Enod.  ;j. 


M 


urmunn 


& 


Ch; 


ip.Xlll), 


Mofi 


espra 


t  Heb.men 

of features. 


naamtes  Mbeii  b*>  the  fca ,  anb  by  the 
toattof3Io?banc. 

jo  2nb  Caleb  ftillcb  the  people  be* 
fo?c#otcs,  anb  faib,  %et  bsgoebpat 
oncc,anb  potTctTe  it,tb?  tbe  ar  c  ibcll  able 
toouertomcit. 

ji  Buttbe  men  that  ibentbptbitb 
him,  fart  >  naeebe  notable  to  goc  bpa* 
gamft  tt)c  people ,  fo?  tljrp  arc  ftrongee 
tbcnlbc. 

3x  3tnb  they  b?ougbt  bp  an  cuill  xv 
po?t  of  the  lanb  ibbicb  they  bab  fear* 
ebcb,  bnto  the  cbilb?cn  of  3Jfracl,  fay* 
mg,Xrje  lanb  tb?ougbibbtcblbcbaue 
gone,  to  fcarcb  it,  is  a  lanb  that  catctb 
bptrje  inhabitants  thereof,  anb  all  tbe 
people  that  ibe  faib  in  it ,  ate  t  men  of  a 
great  ftaturc. 

v,  3ltrt there  rbc&vtt) tbegiants,the 
fonncs  of  2tna& ,  which  come  of  the  o> 
ants :  anb  ibce  tberc  in  out  ottinc  fight 
as  gratboppcrs ,  anb  fo  Ibce  Tberc  tn 
their  fight. 

CHAP.    XI 1 1 1. 

The  people  murmure  at  the  ncwes.  6  Io. 
fhuaandCalcblabourtoftikhem.  it  God 
threatneth  them.  13  Mofes  pcrfwadeth  God 
and  obtaineth  pardon.  2.6  Themurmureis 
are  depriued  of  entring  into  the  land.  36 
The  men  W  ho  tailed  the  cuill  report ,  die  by  a 
plague.  40  The  people  that  would  inuade 
the  land  againft  the  wilol  God,  arc  fmitten. 

4l5bail  the  Congregation 
liftcb  bp  tbcit  boyce  anb 
cctcb;  anb  the  people  lbcpt 
that  night. 
1  3ltrt  all  trje  cbilbmt 
ot  3Jfrael  nutrmureb  againft  S0ofcs, 
anb  againft  3laron :  anb  trje  lbbolc 
Congregation  faib  bnto  them,t0oulb 
<3ob  that  lbc  bab  bicb  m  tbclatrt  of  €> 
gypt,  0 ?  lb  0  uib  <3ob  ttic  hab  bicb  in  this 
lMbcrncfle. 

3  3irtlbbcrefo?cbathtbc'?L©iB2D 
b?oughtbsbnto  this  lanc,tofallby  the 
froo?b,that  our  tbmes,anb  our  tbtlb?cn 
{boulbbcap?ay*  lbcrc  it  not  better  fo? 
bstoreturnc  into  <£  gypt? 

4.  3nb  ttjerp  faibc  one  to  another, 
Hetbs  ma&c  acaptainc,  airtletbsrc? 
turnemtocgypt. 

5  Xhett  £©ofcs  anb  3Jaron  fell  on 
their  faces  before  all  tl)c  affcmbly  of  tbe 
Congregation  of  tbe  crjuTsen  of Ufracl. 

6  CStrtTJonniathefonncofiRun, 
anb  Caleb  tbe  fonnc  of  gjepbunneb, 
tbbtch  tberc  of  tbcm  that  fearcbeb  tlje 
iairt,rcnttbcir  clothes. 


prayed 


7  3inb  they  fpafee  bnto  all  tbe  com 
pan?  of  tbccbtlbzcn  of  gifrael,  laying, 
Xbclanbibbicb  ibce  paflcbtbojoib  to 
fcarcl)  tt,  is  an  crcecbinggoob  lanb. 

8  3Hf  tbe  %  ©  is  jd  bdtgbt  in  bs, 
then  he  lbill  tying  bs  into  tins  lanb  ,anb 
glue  it  bs,  a  lanb  lbhub  floibcth  ib:tb 
mil&c  anb  bony. 

9  £>ucly  rcbell  not  ycc  againft  tbe 
?L©  e  id,  neither  feare  pec  tbe  people 
of  tbe  lanb ,  fo?  they  arc  b?cab  fo?  bs 
ttjeir  t  oefencc  is  bepartcb  from  tbcm, 
anb  trje  %  ©  is  jd  is  ibitb  bs :  feare 
them  not. 

10  But  all  the  Congregation  babe 
ftone  tbcm  Ibitb  ftoncs:  anb  tbcglo?y 
oftbefL©isjD  appcarcbintbc  Caber- 
nacle  of  the  Congregation ,  befoze  all 
tbccbittycnofjfracl. 

11  C  3lnb  the  %  ©  is  id  fart  bnto 
Q9ofcs,  ^olb  long  lbill  this  people  p?o- 
morc  me  i  anb  boYb  long  lbill  it  bee,  y  cr 
tbey  beleeuc  me,fo?  all  the  figncs  ibljicl) 
3lrjaucfl)cibcbamongtl)cm; 

ii  3}  mil  Dnitc tbcm  tbitl)  tlje  pefti 
leutc,  anb  bifinbente  tbcm ,  anb  *bM 
mabc  of  ttjee  a  greater  nation ,  anb 
mightier  tbcnfhcp. 

U  C  5tnb  *  09ofes  faib  bnto  the 
!L©iSE),  Xhcn  the  (Egyptians  fliau 
hearc  it,  (fo?  thou  b?oughteft  bp  this 
people  m  tbp  might  from  among 
them:) 

14  2tnb  tljeplbill  tell  it  to  the  inha- 
bitants of  this  lanb:  for  they  bauc  bcatb 
that  thou  ft©  is  jd  an  among  this  peo- 
ple, that  thoult  ©  K5D  artfccncfaceto 
fate ,  anb  that  *  tb*>  cloub  ftanbeth  ouer 
them,  anb  that  thou  goeft  bcfo?cthnn, 
by  bay  time  m  a  pillar  of  a  tloub,  anb  tn 
a  pillar  of  fire  by  night. 

15  C  /RoU)  if  tboulhalt  Mian  this 
people,  as  one  man,  then  the  nations 
tbbtcb  hauc  hcarb  thefameof  thcc.ibill 
fpeabe,  faying, 

i6  25ccaufcthc|t©isiDibasnot*aj 
ble  to  b?ing  this  people  into  the  lanbe 
lbhich  he  froarc  bnto  thcm,thercfo?e  he 
hath  flainc  themm  the  lbilbcrncftc. 

17  3nbnoib,3Jbcreccbtbcc,icttbe 
polber  of  my  %  ©  is  id  be  great,  acto?- 
blngastbouhaftfpottcn,faping, 

•is  Xhe1t©is?Dis*longfiifferiitg, 
anb  of  great  mcr tie,  fo?guungiiuQuitle 
anb  tranfgrcrTton,  anb  by  no  mcancs 
clearing  the  guiitie,  *  bifiting  the tnto,uity 
of  the  fathersbponthe  thilb?en,  bnto 
the  thirb  anb  fourth  generation. 

19  parboil ,  3  bcfccch  tbee,  the  tot* 
€>  5  miine 


tHch.fl*. 

dow. 


.;». 


*  Esod. 


•Dcut.y. 
18. 


•Exod.  7.}. 
5.pial.  io, 

8. 

*Eiod,20. 
5.jndj4.7. 


Infidelitieis 


Numbers. 


threatened.! 


^Or.hltyei 


t  Hrtr.  ./ 
thejfet  the 
W. 


Mofh  I 


•Chlp.76 
<■<,  and  3  l 
■  o. 


•Dcut  i 


t  Mi  hfifd 


(|  Orf.ti 


quUie  of  this  pcoplc,acco2btng  bnto  the 
great  ucfTe  of  thy  metric,  aim  as  thou 
hattfojgiuen  this  people,  fcomCgypt, 
eucniibnttlluoib. 

20  3nD  tt)c  ?L  €>  a  ©  faib ,  3J  haue 
patboncb,aceo2bing  to  ttjp  ibo:b. 

21  ©ut  as  trucly  as  J  lute,  all  the 
cart!)  (balbe  ullcD  ibtth  the  glo:y  of  the 

2i  ©ccaufe  all  thofe  men  Which 
haue  fecne  my  glojy ,  anb  my  miracles 
tbbith  U  bibmcgypt ,  anbintheibil* 
bcrncfTc ,  anb  haue  temptcb  mee  notb 
thefe  ten  times ,  anb  haue  not  hearfce- 
ncbtomybotcc, 

23  t  £>urely  they  (ball  not  fee  the 
lanb  lbbtrb  3!  froatc  bnto  their  fa^ 
thets ,  neither  (hall  an?  of  them  that 
pjonoBcbmcfcett. 

24.  © utmyferuant'  Caleb,  becanfe 
bee  bao  another  fpint  ibttbbtm,  (anb 
hath  folloibeb*ice  fully)  butt  null  3 
bnngintotbcianb,lbbctetntobeibmt, 
anD  his  feeb  fljail  pofltfle  it. 

25  ( jftoib  the  ^malebttcs,  anb  the 
Canaatutcs  btbclt  m  the  ballcy)to  map 
roU»  tume  you  ano  get  you  into  the 
Vbilbcrncflc ,  by  the  tbay  of  the  3&cb  Tea. 

26  C3nuthcH£>B©rpat«tmto 
Cj9ofcs,anl)  bnto  ^aron,faytng, 

27  ^OTblOngrhjlUbearewiththiSeUll 

congregation  mhithmurmnrcagatnft 
nice  <  J  haue  ftearb  the  murmurings 
of  the  cbilb;cn  of  3Ifrart ,  \bbitf)  they 
murmureagauiitmce. 

28  S>ay  bnto  them,*  3ls  trucly  as  3J 
liue,  faith  the  JL  ©  m  »,  as  ye  haue  fpo 
Ueum  nunc  eares.fb  null  J  Dot  to  you: 

29  jJour  tarcafes  (hall  fall  m  this 
VbtlbcrncOe ,  anb  all  that  Were  *  mint; 
bzcb  of  you ,  attommg  to  your  Ibbole 
number  from  tlbcntic  yccrcs  olb  anb 
bpibarb ,  Vbhuh  bauc  murmurcb  a 
gainftmee, 

30  s>oubtlcfTc  ye  fhail  not  tome  into 
the  laub  tontcrnutg  tbbicb  3J f  ftuar  c  to 
maftc  you  blbcll  therein, fauc  Caleb  the 
fonuc  ofJJepbumub ,  anb^folbuatbe 
fonne  of /Run. 

31  ©ut  your  little  ones,  lbhtchyec 
faib(houlbbcap?ay,thmiibtll5b2mg 
in ,  anb  they  (hall  Knott  the  lanb  lbbici) 
yehaueoefpifeb. 

32  ©tu  as  fo:  you ,  your  carfeafes, 
tbey  fl)ail  fall  in  this  lbilberncu*c. 

33  3nb  your  cbilbmt  (ball  llibanbec 
m  the  ttulberncs  fo;ry  y  trcs,  anb  bcare 
your  \bboicbomcs ,  bntfllyout  car&a^ 
fcsbclbaftcb  intbclbilberncu'e. 


3+  after  the  number  of  the  bayes  in 
tbbicb  ye  fearchcb  tbeianb,euen*fome 
oayes  (each  bay  fo:  a  yeere)  (hall  yee 
bearc-your  miquities,<uen  fojtp  yetres, 
anb  yee  (hall  fenolb  myfbieatbofpjo 
nufc. 

35  3J  thelitis©  haue faib,3i ami 
furcly  boe  it  bnto  all  this  euill  Congre- 
gation, that  arc  gatbereb  together  a? 
gainft  mee :  ut  this  ibilbcrncffe  they 
(haibc  confumcb ,?  there  they  (hailbte. 

36  3nb  the  men  ibbtcb  #ofes  fent 
to  fcarth  the  lanb,tbho  teturntb ,  ano 
mabc  all  the  Congregation  to  mitt- 
mure  agatnlt  him ,  by  bitngmg  bp  a 
dancer  bpon  the  lanb, 

37  €uen  thole  men  that  bib  bung  bp 
the  cutll  report  bpon  the  lanb,  *  bieb  by 
the  plague,  befoie  the  1L©  is©. 

38  ©ut  3Jo(hua  the  fonuc  of  #un, 
anb  Caleb  the  fonne  of  3icpbuitncb, 
vshich  wfre  of  tT)e  men  that  tbcut  to 
fcarchthelanb.liucbiwi. 

39  3lnb  £0ofcs  tolb thefe  fayntgs bn 
to  all  the  chtlbjcn  of  3Jfracl,  anb  the 
people  ntouraeb  greatly. 

40  C3nbtheyrofc  bp  early  in  the 
morning ,  anb  gate  them  bp  into  the 
topofthemountatne,faying,  floe,  tte 

*  be  here.anb  tbill  goc  bp  bnto  the  plate 
ibhtth  the  %  ©  is  jd  hath  pwuifeb :  fo; 
Ibehaueunncb. 

41  3nb$)ofesfato,t©hercfojcnoib 
boe  you  tranfgreffe  the  tommaunbe 
metit  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  i  but  it  (hall  not 
pjofper. 

42  ©oe  notbp,fo2thc|L©ts©is 
not  among  you,  that  ye  be  not  fnuttcn 
befoje  your  enemies. 

4J  5f02the^malcbitcs^nbtheCa 
naanites  are  there  befo:e  you ,  anb  yc« 
than  fall  by  the  foort),  betaufe  yee  are 
tutntb  aibay  from  the  %  ©  k  v»i  thcre> 
fo:c  the  %  ©  is  js  ibtll  not  bee  lbtth 
you. 

44  ©utthcypKrumebiogobpbn 
to  the  hill  top :  nctter  theles  the  3r  bc  of 
the  Countant  of  the  ?L  c>  is  zp,anb  £0o- 
fes  beparteb  not  out  of  the  campe. 

45  Xhen  the  StmalcRttcs  tame 
bolbne ,  anb  the  Canaanitcs  lbhuh 
oibclt  in  that  hill,  anb  fmote  them,  anb 

*  bifcomfitco  the  m ,  euen  bnto  lf?ojmah- 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  The  law  of  the  meat  offering  andtheJunke 
ortriug.  1  j.  1  j  The  (banger «  vnder  die  fame 
law.  17  The  law  of  the  firllof  the  dough 
lor  a  Iicjuc  offering,    u.  The  laaificc  for 

(inne 


•Eztch.4. 
d.pfal-93. 


Or//,. 


■  1  Cor.  1  o 
10.  hebr.  j 
1  D  iild.  £. 


1«- 


•  Dcut. 1 


Offi 


enngs. 


e 


Ch; 


LD.XV. 


Offi 


ennp-s. 


•Lcuit.  J  3 


"Lcuit.  is. 

21. 

'[Htt.f.fA- 

rating. 
■Exod.  ip. 
.8. 
"Leuit.3.1. 


finne  of  ignorance.    30    The  punifhment 
of  prefumption.     32.   Hee  that  violated  the 
Sabbath,Jsrtoned.    57   The  law  of  fringes. 
am*mm  ji3o  tl)C  ft  ©  K  ©  fpafte 

bntotiPofcs,fapmg, 

i  *  £>peafec  bnto  tl)c 
cljtltycn  of  3ffrael,atn>  fap 
bntotliem,  i©l)cnpebe 
tome  tnto  tlje  lanb  of  pour  Ijabitanons, 
tbrjttl)'3su»tbniopou, 

j  2ub  Mil  mafecan  offering  by  fire 
bnto  ff)cft©is®,  a  burnt  offering  o: 
afacri&cc*mtpccfo2mingaboib,o?ina 
free  tt)tll  offering,  oz in pour  folcmnc 
feafts,to  matte  a*froect  fauour  bnto  tfje 
ft  ©  is  ©,  of  tf)c  rjerb  0?  of  tl)c  flotUe : 

4  Xljen  *  (ball  be  tbat  offereti)  Ijis 
offcriugbntotl)cft©isjp,tymgamcat 
off  ring  of  a  tenth,  beale  of  floftvemmg* 
leb  with  the  fourth  part  of  an  $pn  of 
ople. 

5  3mb  the  fourth  part  of  an  $pn  of 
tbinc  fo:  a  tymae  off ring  n?ait  thou  pjc* 
pare,  tbttb  the  burnt  offering  ozfacri* 
ficefoionclambc. 

6  £>}  fo?  a  ranune,  thou  (halt  p?c* 
pare  fo?  a  nicatc  offering  tibo  tentl) 
bcalcs  of  flottye  minglcb  Until  the  tbitb 
part  of  an  $pn  of  ople. 

7  3nb  fo?  a  b?inae  offering ,  thou 
(bait  offer  the  tbirb  part  of  an  $pnof 
ibine ,  fo?  a  frocctc  fauour  into  the 
ft©is©. 

8  3tnb  ibhcn  thou  pzeparctt  a  bul* 
locac  fo?  aburnt  offcrmg,  o?  fo?  a  fatrt* 
ficeinperfo?mingabouj,  o?  pcateoffc* 
rings  bnto  the  ft  ©  m  © : 

9  %\)tn  (bail  bee  tying  ttntb  a  bul* 
lottte  a  nicatc  offering  of  tb?ce  tent!) 
bcalcs  of  floib?c,mingleb  ttntf)  baifc  an 
$pnofople. 

10  2nb  tDou  (halt  bung  fo? atyinae 
offering  baifc  an  D?pn  of  tumc,  fo?  an 
offering  mabe  bp  fire  of  a  froeet  fauour 
bnto  the  ft  ©is©. 

11  Xl)usfl)all  it  bebonefo?  one  bul> 
lotfte,  o?fo?oneramme,  o?fo?aiambe, 
o?atubbe. 

ii  3(cto?bmg  to  tl)c  number  that  pec 
(baUp?eparc,  fo  (bail  v«  boc  to  cucrp 
one,  acco?bing  to  their  number. 

u  Sllltbat  arebomc  of  the  countrcp 
(ballboetbefe  things  after  tbismanet, 
inofferinganoffermg  mabebpfireof  a 
froeet  fauour ,  bnto  the  ft  ©  is  ©. 

i4r  anbifalrrangcrfoiourttc  tbitb 
pou ,  02  ttibotbeuer  bee  among  pou  m 
pour  generations,  ann  ttnll  offer  an  of* 
fcrtng  mabe  bp  fire  of  a  froerte  fauour 


bnto  the  ft  ©  is©:  as  pc  boc,  fohce 
(baiiboe. 

15  *£>nco?binantc(ball  be  bot!)  fo: 
pou  of  the  Congregation,  anb  alfb  fo: 
the  ftcanger  that  fotoumctb  with  you, 
an  o?bmanec  fo?  cuct  m  pour  gencrati 
ons :  as  pc  arc,  fo  fyall  tfjc  ttrangcr  bee, 
before  tf)eH©  is®. 

i6  ^Dnclaib,anbonemanerff)aUbc 

fojpou,anbfo2tljeflrangertt)atfoiour 
ncttjttntnvou. 

17  C  ^nb  t!jc  JL  ©  is  ©  fpafee  bnto 
fiPofcs,  faying, 

18  5>peafccbnto  ti)t  tljilbien  of  l&i 
rael,  anb  fap  bnto  tftcm,  DDljm  ye  tome 
tnto  the  lanb  \bf)it!)cr  3  tying pou, 

19  Xfjcnitfballbctfjatib^enpecate 
of  tf)eb2eab  oftfje  lanb,  pec  fyatl  offer 
bp  an  ncaue  off  ring  bnto  tfje  %  ©  is  id. 

20  j9efl)ailoffcrbpacaReof  tljefirll 
of  pour  bougt),  fo:  an  fjeauc  off  ring :  as 
peboe  tlje  fjcaueoffenng  of  tj)cttj2cu> 
mgfloo2c,fo  (bail  peljeauctt. 

21  £)ftf)c6rftofpourbougI)pcfl)al 
giuebnto  t!)c1L©K©,  an  ijcaut  offe* 
ring  m  pour  generations. 

ii  C3nbifpeel)auecrrcb,anbnot 
obferucb  alltljcfe  Commaunbanents 
ibfjitl)  tlje  ?t©isjD  Ijatlj  fpoftcn  bnto 
£0ofcs, 

i}  Euen  all  t!)atff)e!L©iBE>  rjatlj 
eommanbeb  pou,  bp  tlje  Ijanb  of  #ofes 
fromtl)ebaptljattt)etL©isjPtomman= 
beb^3ofes,  anb  l)cntcfo2ttiatb  among 
pour  generations: 

1+  lLljenitfl)albe,ifougi)tbctottv 
nuttcb  bp  tgnojantc  t  ibttljout  tfje 
bnoiblebgc  of  tlje  Congregation,  tfjat 
all  tlje  Congregation  fljail  offer  one 
pongbullotfec  fo?a  bunit  offering,  fo? 
a  froeet  fauour  bnto  tfje  %  ©  h  jd,  ibittj 
Ijfsmeatc  offering,  anbl)tsb2inlieoffc; 
ring,acto?bingto  tlje  ||  manner,anb  one 
aib  of  tlje  goatsfo?  afinne  offering. 

15  3nbtl)e#2icfHball  mane  an  at* 
onement  fo:  an  tlje  Congregation  of 
tnc  rl)ilb2en  of  ^fracl,  anb  it  ftjal  be  fo:* 
giuen  tl)cm,fo?  it  is  igno2antc :  anb  ttjcp 
fl)allb2ingtDciroffnng,a{atnfitemabc 
bpfirebnto  ttjc|L©isjD,anbtljeitfmnc 
offering  befo?c  tlje  U,©isjp,  fo?  their 
tgno?ante. 

16  ^nb  it  fljall  bee  fo2gtucn  all  the 
Congregation  of  tfje  d)ilb2cn  of  3lf 
racl,  anbtljc  ftranger  that  foiournctb 
amongtl)cm,fcemgalltl;cpeoplciberc 
migno2ante. 

17  C3nb"ifanpfbttlefinncfb20ugl) 
igno2antc,  then  Ijce  (ball  tying  a  (bee 

goat 


49.  ch.lp.p 
'4- 


f  Hcbrfiam 
thfejeJ. 


J  Or.ardi- 


'  Lcuit  4. 
»7- 


11: 


Sabbath  broken.       Numbers.     Korahs  rebellion. 


}  Tfcir. 


\  tlrl-  mil, 
an  hi?h 

hmi. 


"Lruii  14 


'  DtUt.il. 

I  i.matih. 
'1  5- 


goat  oftlje  firtt  peere  fo?  aDmte  offring. 

18  3nD  the  0nctt  (hall  matte  an  at- 
onement fo?  the  foule  that  Cnneth  tgno- 
rantlp  ,  tbhen  he  unncth  bp  tgnozante 
before  the  H  o  m  ©,  to  maae  an  atonc> 
mmtfo?hmi,?itfhalbcfo?ginenhun. 

19  mou  (nail  hauc  one  lalb  fo?  bun 
that  t  finneth  through  tguojance,  bo* 
tor  him  that  is  borne  amongtt  the  djfl? 
bun  of  3*fr acl,ano  to?  the  Granger  that 
fotountetl)  among  them. 

30  Cffiutthe  foule  thatboeth ought 
t  pufumpntouflp ,  tbhether  he  be  borne 
in  the  lanb ,  0?  a  Granger ,  the  femcre^ 
p?ochcth  the  Hois© :  anD  that  foule 
(hall  be  cut  off  from  amongbis  people. 

31  23ecaufchehMhbefptfebthe»jo2b 

of  the  ?L£>b©,  anb  hatl)  bzoaen  his 
tommanbcmcnt  ,thatfoulc  (halibtter- 
ip  be  rat  off :  his  ttuqutttc  Cbaii  be  bpon 
him. 

31  C  2nb  rbhtle  the  thilb?en  ofp 
rael  lb  ere  in  tlje  ibilbernes,  the?  founb 
a  man  that  gathereb  (tubes  bpon  the 
^abbatt)  bap. 

33  3nb  the?  that  founb  him  gathe 
ring  ftitfts ,  bwught  him  bnto  fl3ofcs 
anb  3aron ,  anb  bnto  all  the  Congre- 
gation. 

3+  Slnbthep  put  htm  *in tbarb.be- 
caute  it  ibas  not  bcciarcb  ibhat  H)  oulb 
be  bone  to  him. 

35  3nD  then  o  is©  Guo  bnto  Q3o< 
fes ,  "She  man  (ball  bee  furelp  put  to 
Death :  all  the  Congregation  ihail  (lone 
him  tbith  (tones  Without  tl)e  campc. 

36  :8nbailtbcC6gregationb?ougbt 
hmi  ibtthout  the  tampc,anb  (loncb  him 
ibitb  (tones,  anb  he  DicD,as  the  Hois  © 
tommanbeo^ofes. 

37  C  3nD  theH©  is  ©Ipafee  bnto 
£{9ofcs,fapmg, 

33  5>pcatte  bnto  the  ebUbzai  of  3lf- 
raei ,  anb  bibbc  *  than  that  tbcp  mane 
than  fringes  in  the  bozbers  of  their 
garments,  th?oughout  tlieir  general 
otis.anDtbattbcp  put  bponfhcfnngc 
of  the  bo?ber  s  a  ribbanb  ofbieib. 

39  3tttb  it  (l)all  bee  bnto  pou  fo?  a 
frmgc ,  thatpe  maplooltt  bpon  it ,  anb 
remember  all  the  commanbements  of 
tin  H  o  is  id  ,  anb  Doe  them :  anb  that 
pc  feche  not  after  pour  otbnc  heart,anb 
pour  oibnc  cpes,  after  Vbhtth  pc  bfe  to 
goeaibhonug: 

40  Xhatpcmapremembcr,anbboe 
all  mp  commauDanencs,  anD  be  bolp 
bnto  pour d5ob. 

41  3J aui  the  H  o  k  ©  pour  God, 


iDfjirh  brought  pou  out  of  the  lanb  of 
€gppt ,  to  bee  pour  <SoD  :  3J  am  tbf 
Hob  ©  pour  ©00. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  The  rebellion  ot  KorahJDathan  and  Abiram, 
15  Mofcs  feparateth  the  people  from  the  re- 
bels tents,  u  The  earth  fwallowcthvpKo- 
rah,  and  a  fire  confumeth  others.  36  The 
ceiifersarereferucd  toholy  vfe.  41  Foure 
tceue  thoufand  and  feuen  hundred  are  llaine 
by  a  plague  for  murmuring  againft  Mo- 
fesand  Aaron.  46  Aaron  by  iucenfe  ftay- 
cth  the  plague. 

£>rb*fi*o?ah  the  tonne  of 
3fthar,  thefonnc  of  Bo- 
hatl),  the  fonne  of  Htm, 
anb2Dathan,anb^biram 
tht  fonntsof€ltab,anb 
jaDn  the  fonne  of  0elctb,lbnnes  of  Beu 
bm.tooaemen. 

i  3ltib  thep  rofe  bp  bcfb?e  fiBofcs, 
lbith  tertame  of  the  th(lb?en  of  3Jfracl, 
ttbo  hunbitb  anD  fiftie  0?inces  of  the 
alfemblp,  *  famous  in  the  Congregate 
on.mcnofrenoibne. 

3  3lnDthepgathcrcDthemrclucsto^ 
gether  agamft  ^ofes ,  anD  againQ  :31a- 
ron,  anD  fatD  bnto  them,  t  pt  tattc  too 
much  bpon  pou ,  ftetng  all  the  Cotv 
grtgation  areholptuerp  one  of  them, 
anb  the  H  o  is  ©  is  among  them: 
ttherfou  then  lift  pou  bp  pour  felues  a- 
boue  the  Congregation  of  the  Hois©  < 

4  anDlbhcngMcshtarDit.htfcll 
bpon  his  fate. 

5  3nDhtt  fpauc  bnto  Bo?ah,anb 
bnto  all  his  companp,  taping,  Cuento 
mozroib  the  H  oa  ©  ibill  ajeib  tbho 
^e  his,  nnblbho  ^holp,  anb  ibill  taufc 
him  to  eomencerc  bnto  him  :  euen  him 
Vbhomhthath  thofat,tbtll  hetauft  to 
tomt  neere  bnto  him. 

6  Xljtsboe :  talu  pou  carters,  Bo- 
rah ,anb  all  his  companp : 

7  3luD  put  fire  therein ,  anD  put  in 
ctnfc  in  than ,  befou  the  Hois©  to 
mo?r  olb  ■,  ^nb  it  (hall  be ,  that  the  man 
lbhom  the  H  o  is  ©  Dotth  thoofc ,  hee 
(hatlbeholp :  y>tc  tattetoo  much  bpon 
pon.pe  fonnts  of  Htut. 

8  3inD  ^ofts  fetDt  bnto  Uojah, 
I^eart,3l  pjappou,pcfonuesof  Heut. 

9  ^ecmcthttbutafmallthtngbit' 
to  pou,  that  the  ©ob  of  'Jfrael  hath  fc- 
parateb  pou  from  the  Congregation  of 
■Jfrael,  to  b?ing  pou  neere  to  himfelfc 
to  Doe  thefermce  of  the  Xabernatlcof 
the  H  ok ©,  anb  to  flanD  befou  tlie 

Cotv 


"Chap  37. 
;■  ccclus. 
45.11.1ud. 
II. 


•Chap  »6 
9- 


J   Hlhr    It  U 

mmrbfer 
J9H. 


He,  Dathan  &c.        Chap.xvj.     are  fwallowed  vp. 


Congrcgatumtonumlicrbntotbetm 

io  anb  he  hath  toought  thee  neere 
to  him,  anb  ail  thy  bjcttncn  the  fonncs  of 
%tni  tbith  thee :  anb  fcefec  ye  the  ^?tt  fc 
hoobaifo* 

ii  5fo?ibhich  taufc  both  thow.anb  all 
tl)v  company  are  gatbereb  together  a? 
gainft  the  !L  ©  e©  :  anb  ibhat  is  ^a= 
ton,  tftat  y  c  murmure  againft  tjtnt  < 

ii  C  3nb  ^ofcs  fent  to  tall  D& 
tbananb  abiram  the  fomtes  of  enab : 
ibhicbfatb,  aaennli  not  tome  top. 

13  3s  it  afmall  thing  thatthou  haft 
bought  bsbp  out  of  a  lanb  mat  fionj 
eth  ttiitt)  nulKC  anb  hony ,  toftillbsin 
the  UnlbernefTe,  ercept  thou  mafte  tby 
fclfcaltogctherapnnceouetbs* 

14.  fl|9o;(couct,mouha(tttotb;tought 
bs  into  a  lanb  that  flotbctb  tbitt)  miifee 
anb  hony ,  0?  giuen  bs  inhcritante  of 
ficlbs  anb  bineyarbs :  ibtlt  thou  t  put 
out  me  eyes  of  ttjcfcmeit^  tuc  lbillnot 
tomebp. 

15  3tnb$ofcsibasbetynjK>th,anb 
fatb  bnto  the  %  ©  is  ©,  *  Bcfpcet  not 
tbou  mcit  offering :  3  Dane  not  taaen 
one  affe  from  mem ,  neither  haue  3 
hurt  one  of  them. 

16  anb  ^ofc0  faib  bnto  mo:ah,25e 
thou  anb  all  thy  tompany  before  the 
%  €>  is  ©,  thou,  anb  they  ,anb  3laron  to 
mojrotb. 

17  2wbtaBccucrymanhisccnrer, 
anb  put  intcnfein  them,  anb  bnngyec 
befo:c  the  fLoiKiDCuerpiuan  his  ten- 
fccttbo  bunbjcb  anb  fiftic  tcnfcrs,thou 
alio  anb  2iaton,  earn  ot  you  his  tenfcc. 

18  anb  they  toobe  cuery  man  Ijis 
cenfer ,  anb  put  fire  in  mem,  anb  latbe 
intenfe  thereon,  anb  ftoobtn  the  booje 
of  mc  Habernacle  of  me  Congregate 
on  tbith  £0ofes  anb  aatou. 

19  anblSwah  gathers  all  the  Con- 
grcgation  agamfl  mem,bnto  tbeboojc 
of  me  Xabcrnatlc  of  the  Congregate 
on :  anb  tfje  glow  of  me  ?Lois©  appea 
reb  bnto  all  mc  Congregation. 

10  3nbthelU>K©fpal$cbntoSpo< 
fes,anb  bnto  ataron,  faying, 

ii  Separate  your  felucs  from  a? 
mongtbis  Congreganon,  that  3  may 
tonfume  mcmln  a  moment. 

zz  3Cnb  mey  fell  bpon  mcir  fates, 
anbfaib,^)  d5ob,tbe<!5ob  of  tbefptrits 
ofalincfl),fl)aionemanfinne,anbibilt 
tboubetbjoth  With  ailtljc  Congccga* 

i?  c^lnb  the  &£>«©  Inane  bnto 
£0ofes,  faying, 


\H,h.h. 


'Gen.  4. 4. 


14.  5>pcahcbnto  mc  Congregation, 
faying,  (Set  you  bp  from  about  tbetfc 
bernatle  of  iswaij ,  Daman ,  anb  %- 
biram. 

15  3mb£0ofesrorebp,anblbcntbn; 
to  Daman  anb  2biram :  anb  mc  Cl 
bcrsof  ^ifraelfolloibcbbtm. 

is  &nbheefpafee  bnto  the  Congre 
gation,  faying,  Depart,  3  pjay  you, 
from  the  tents  of  tbcfcVbicHeb  men,anb 
toutb  nothing  of  theirs,  lelt'ye  be  ton; 
fumeb  mall  mcir  finnes. 

17  ^omcygatebpfromthctaber; 
naclc  of  Bojab,  Datban,  anb  abiram, 
on  eucry  Gbe:  anb  Daman  anb  3biram 
tameout,anbltoobinmeboo?eofmeir 
tents,  anb  meirtbiues,  %  mcirfonnes, 
anb  tljcir  little  mtlbicn. 

28  ^nb^3ofcslaib,  hereby  ye  fljatt 
Bno\bmatmcHfi[)isj©Damfnumcto 

bOCalimcfClbOjlteS:  f0?Uiaue  not  done 

them  of  mine  otbne  nUnb. 

19  3?f  ftrfe  men  Ut  ttlje  tommon 
beam  of  all  men,  0?  if  mey  be  bifiteb  af* 
tcr  me  bifitation  of  all  men ,  ttjen  mc 
%  0  m  ©  Ijatl)  not  fent  me : 

30  zSutifmclLoiBiDtmaBeaneU) 
thing,  anb  the  cart!)  open  rjcr  moum. 
anb  froalloib  tljcm  bp,  Vbitl)  all  ma  t  ap 
pcrtainebnto  mcm,anb  tbey  go  boibne 
auirftcinto  the  pit:  men  ycfballbnbcr^ 
Canbmattl)cfcmen5auep?ouoBcbmc 

31  C*^nbitcametopau"easljcihab 
mabe  an  cube  of  fpeafting  all  mefe 
lbodbs,  mat  the  grounbtlaucafunber 
that  lbasbnbcr  them: 

31  Slnbthe  earth  openeb  Ijcr  mouth, 
anb  froalloibcb  mem  bp,  anb  mcir  hou^ 
fes,  anb  all  tl)c  men  that  appertameb 
bnto  l&o?ah,  anb  all  their  goobs. 

33  %\)vp ,  anb  all  that  appertains 
to  them,  tbent  boibncaiiue  into  the  pit, 
anb  me  earth  clofcD  bpon  them :  anb 
tljcy  pcrilbeb  from  among  mc  Congrc* 
gation. 

34  iBnb  ail^lfrart  that  lbere  rounb 
about  mem,  flcb  at  mc  trie  of  them :  foj 
thcyfaib,?»elr  mc  earm  froalloib  bsbp 

alio. 

3$  ^bmeretamcoutaficefromthc 
ILsde®,  anbtonfumcb  mc  tibo  hun^ 
b?cb  anb  fiftie  men  that  offcrcb  in* 
tenfe.  ,  ,   t 

36  C  31nb  the  %  ©  is  ©  fpaBe  bnto 
fl^ofes,  faying,  , 

37  ^pcabe  bntocica^ar  the  foune 
of  ^aron  the  l&icft,  that  he  tahe  bp  the 
tenters  out  of  the  bunting,  anb  natter 

thou 


f  Hc$r.  as  t 

utryman 

citeth* 


\  Hehr.cre 
ateacre*- 
tttre. 


*Chap.l7. 
j.dtut.  1 1. 
6.pfai,io5i 
17- 


The  plague  flayed.    Numbers.  Aaronsrodde. 


thou  the  fire  yonber ,  fo?  rtjcv  arc  hau 

lOlbeb. 

38  Xhc  centers  ofthefc  fmucrsfc 
gamft  trjcir  otbne  foulcs,let  them  matte 
rhem  b2oab  plates  fo?  a  coucring  oftDc 
21ltar  :fo2  they  off  etcbtbem  before  the 
%®  is£>,therefo2e  they  areijallorucD, 
anbtbey  (bail  be  a  Ognc  bnto  tbccbtl 
b2enof3JfraeI. 

59  Slnbeicajar  the  ®K'eft toofec  the 
bjafen  cenfers ,  ibbcreibith  they  that 
iberc  burnt  haboffereb,  anb  they  ltoctc 
mane  tyoab  plates  fb2  a  couccmg  of  the 
3Utar: 

40  To  bee  amemo:iallbntotbccbil; 
bjen  ofJfrael,tbatno  fttangcr,  \bbicb 
is  notbttbefcebof  aaron,  tonic  ncere 
to  offer  inccnfcbcfo2c  the  %o  is  ©,  that 
he  be  not  as  itojah ,  aub  as  his  compa^ 
ny,  as  the  %o  is  ©  faib  to  him  by  the 
hanbof^ofes. 

41  C  2Sut  on  the  mojtoib,  ail  tl)c 
Congregation  of  the  cbilb?cn  of3JfracI 
niurmureb  againft  £0ofcs  anb  againft 
3aron,  faying,  Pc  hauc  fetllcb  the  pco 
pic  of  the  ft©  is©. 

4z  3lnb  it  came  to  paffe  tbhen  the 
Congregation  lbas  gathcrcb  agamft 
fl^ofes  anb  againft  3laron,  that  they 
looKcb  toibarb  the  Xabcrnacle  of  the 
Congregation:  anb  beholb,  the  cloub 
coucrcbit,anb  the  glojy  of  the  %  &  is  © 
appeareb. 

4J  3lnb£0ofcsanb:3aroncanicbe; 
fb2C  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  the  Congceg* 
tion. 

44  C2(nbtbc?l£>  is  ©fpaftebnto 
£0ofcs,faying, 

45  <5ct  you  bp  from  among  this 
Congregation ,  that  5  may  confume 
them,  asinamomcnt:anbthcy  fell  bp- 
on  tljctr  faces. 

46  C3nbfi©ofcsfaibbnto:3iaron, 
Xabe  a  ccnfcr,anb  put  fire  therein  from 
off  the  3fltar,  anb  put  on  uuenfe,  anb 
goe  quicKly  bnto  the  Congregation, 
anb  mane  an  atonement  fo:  them :  fo2 
there  is  Vbjath  gone  out  from  the 
3L<D  is©;  the  plague  is  begun. 

47  anb  aaron  toouc  as  fi{9ofes 
commanbeb,anb  rannc  mtothcmibft 
of  the  Congregation :  ant>  beholb ,  the 
plague  lbas  begun  among  the  people, 
aub  he  putonincenfe ,  anbmabcanat^ 
oucmcntfo2  the  people. 

48  3mDhcftoobbetibeenetbcbeab 
auo  the  liutug  ,  anb  the  plague  lbas 
ftayeb. 

49  jftoib  they  that  biebi'nthcplague, 


ibetc  foutetccne  tboufanb  anb  fcucn 
bunbjcb ,  bcCisc  them  that  bicb  about 
the  matter  of  Bozah. 

50  3(nb3aron  returneb  bnto  fi$o-- 
fes.bnto  thcboo2c  of  the  3Cabcrnarte  of 
the  Congregation s  anb  the  plague  lbas 
ftayeb. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1  Aaronsrodnmongallrherods  of  the  Tubes 
onelyflourifhcih.  10  It  is  left  ("or  a  monu- 
ment agaiuft  the  rebels. 

/3b  the  Hspis©  fpaue 

bnto  ££ofes,  faying, 
i  £>pcake  bnto  the  chil= 

bjen  of  Jfrael  ,anb  tane  of 

cucryoncofthcmarob, 
acco2bmgto  the  houfe  of  their  fathers, 
of  all  thctr  princes ,  actoibtng  to  the 
houfe  of  their  fathers ,  tlbcluc  robs: 
Umtctboueucry  mans  name  bponhts 
robbc. 

?  Zm  thou  (bait  tbnte  barons 
name  bpon  the  rob  of  ILeui:  fo2  one  rob 
ftiau  be  fo?  the  heab  of  the  houfe  of  their 
fathers. 

4  anbthoufbaltlaythembpuithc 
Xabcmarle  of  the  Congregation,  be- 
foie  the  1Eefttmony)*ibherc3Jrbiu"  *e,0«u5. 
meet  lbtth  you. 

5  anbttthalltometopaffe,rhatthc 
mans  rob  lbhomji  fhail  choofe,fhali 
bloffome :  anb  3  ibill  mane  to  ceafe 
from  mee  the  muruiurtngsofthe  rt)U^ 
bjen  ofjfracttbhereby  they  murroure 
againft  you. 

6  c  3nb  q^ofes  fpanc  bnto  the  ctjtl* 
bjenof  3Jfrael,  anb  euery  one  of  their 
02incesgauchimtarob  apieccfo;  each 
pnnte  one,  acco^bing  to  their  fathers 
boiifes,euenttbeluerobs:anbthcrobof 
3laron  mas  among  their  robs. 

7  atnb  £0ofes  layb  bp  the  robs  bc< 
fo2e  thc^tsDis^m  thcltabcrnaclc  of 
JBitncflc. 

8  5tnb  it  came  to  paffe  that  on  the 
mwrolb  Scores  tticnt  into  tbelLabcr 
naclcofa)ttneffe,anbbeholb,thcrobof 
3taron  fo2the  houfe  of  fLeiuibas  bub 
b«b,anb  b2oughtfo2thbubs,  anbbloo- 
meb  bloffomcs,  anb  ycclbcb  almonbs. 

9  3lnb  fi0ofes  b;ought  out  all  the 
robs  front  before  the  |L  o  is  ©,bnto  all 
tl)e  chilb2cn  of  3Jfracl:  anb  they  looUcb, 
anb  toobe  cucry  man  his  rob. 

10  C  3(ub  the  U  0  is  ©  fatb  bnto 
tl3ofcs,*252tng  Karons  rob  agame  be-  *Hcbr.9.4. 
fo;e  the  1-cfhmony,  to  be  bept  foj  a  to-  t  //<*•  m. 
Uen  agaiuft  tlje  t  rebels , anb  thou  (halt  *•«••/' 


rod  fffr  one 
Prtnie ,  a 
rod  for  one 
Brtntc. 


quite 


beUtoi 


The  Priefts  charge,  Chap.xviij. andportion. 


45- 


quite  taue  atbay  their  murmunngs 
from  me,  that  tljrpntc  not. 

II  3nD$)ofeSDtDfo:aStbCflG>IB© 

commanbeD  him,fo  Did  he. 

iz  3nDtheebiiD;tmof3Ifraeifpa&c 
bnto  #ofes,  faying,  26ebolD,  tbccDic, 
ibcperifb,tt>eallperi(b. 

13  ©bofoeuer  commctb  any  thing 
nectc  bnto  the  Xabetnacle  of  tljc 
%  sd  is  ©,  (bail  Die :  £>hau  XDec  be  ton- 
fumcDttntb  tying  < 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

The  charge  of  die  Priefis  and  Leuites.  9  The 
Priefts  portion,  n  The  Leuites  portion. 
15  The  heaue ottering  to  the  Prieftsout  of 
the  Leuites  portion. 

5Jteee2S  /3b  the  1L  ©  is  ©  faybbn* 
^i&xPl  t0  3aron,  Hbou  anDtby 
feA^fonneg,anD  thy  fathers 
I^Doufe  tbitb  thee,  (ball 
,  $£&  bcare  the  mictuitie  of  the 
Sanctuary :  anD  tbou  anD thy  fonnes 
tbitb  tbec,  (ball  bearc  the  intqnitie  of 
yout0;tcflbooD. 

i  3lnD  thy  tyetbjcn  alfo  of  the  tribe 
of  ?Lcui,  the  tribe  of  thy  father,  tying 
thou  ibitb  tb  ec,tbat  they  may  be  ioyneD 
bnto  thee,  anD  minttfer  bnto  thee :  but 
thou  anD  tby  fonnes  ttJitb  thee  (hail  mini- 
iter  before  the  icabcrnacle  of  naitncfTc. 

3  3fnD  they  (ball  fteepc  thy  charge, 
anD  the  charge  of  all  the  ICabcrnaclc : 
onely  they  (ball  not  tome  ntgb  the  bef- 
fcisof  the  S>anetuarie,  anD  the  3ltar, 
that  neither  they,  no?  youalfo  Die. 

4  3inD  they  (hall  bee  ioyneD  bnto 
thee ,  anD  neepc  the  charge  of  tbc£a> 
betnacle  of  the  Congregation,  fo?  all 
the  feruice  of  the  Xabcrnatle :  anD  a 
ftranger  (hail  not  tome  nigh  bnto  you. 

5  3tnD  y  ce  (hall  ftcepc  the  charge  of 
the  Sanctuary ,  anD  the  charge  of  the 
3litar,  that  there  be  no  ttyath  anymore 
bpon  the  chilDjen  of  3Jfrael. 

6  3lnD3f,  bebolDe,  3Jbauc*taBen 
yourb;cth?cntheHcuttcsfromamong 
the  thUD^enof  gjfrael:  to  youtheyare 
giuen  as  a  gift  fo?  the  %  ©  is  jb,  to  Doe 
the  feruite  of  tljc  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation. 

7  Xbercfojc  thou  anD  thy  fonnes 
tbith  thee,  fball  ucepe  your  fyietts  ofc 
ficc  foj  eucry  thmg  of  the  3lltar ,  anD 
tbtthin  the  Hafle,  anD  ycc  (hall  fcruc: 
IBhaue  giuen  your  pnefls  office  bnto 
you,  asafcruitcof  gift:  anD  the  ftcan= 
gcr  tbatcommetbnigb,  (ballbecputto 
Death. 


s  C  3lnD  the  %  ©  h  ©  fpabc  bnto 
3faron,25ebolD,3J  aifo  hauc  giucntbte 
the  charge  of  mine  bcauc  offerings,  of 
all  thchallolbeD  things  of  the  cbUDjen 
of  3Jfrael,bnto  theehanc3(  giuen  them 
by  reafon  of  the  anointing,  anD  to  thy 
fonnes  by  an  ojDinance  fo;  cuer. 

9  1Cbis  (ball  bee  thine  of  the  moft 
holy  things/eferued  from  tbefire :  eucry 
oblation  of  theirs,  euery  meat  offering 
of  theirs,  anD  euery  Dune  offering  of 
theirs,  anD  euery  trcfpafTe  offering  of 
thcics,tbbich  they  (baircnDcr  bnto  me, 
fhall  be  moft  holy  fo?  thee,  anD  fo?  thy 
fonnes. 

10  ^n  the  moft  holy  place  (halt  thou 
eateit,  euery  male  (ball  eateit:  it  (ball 
be  holy  bnto  thee. 

11  3nD  this  ie  thine :  thebeaucoffe* 
ring  of  their  gift,  ibitb  an  theibauc  of* 
friugs  of  the  tbiUven  of  3Jfrael :  %  bauc 
giuen  them  bnto  thee ,  fjto  thy  fonnes, 
anDto  thy*  Daughters  tbitb  thee,  by  a 
ff  atute  fo?  cuer :  euery  one  that  is  tlcane 
intbyboufcfbaiieateoftt. 

ii  ^llthc^efloftheoylcanDauthc 
bed  of  the  mine,  anDof  tlje  rbheat,  the 
firftfruttsof  them  ibhirl)  thcyfljail  of- 
fer bnto  the  %  ©  is  *>,  them  hauc  3  gfc 
ucnthce. 

13  ^InDVbhatfoeuerisfirftripcinthc 
lanb ,  ibbich  they  fljall  b«!mg  buto  the 
3L©  is©,  fhall  be  thine,  euery  one  that 
is  cleane  in  thine  houfc,  (ball  eat  of  it. 

14-  *CuerytbingDeuoteDm3Jfrael, 
(ball  be  thine. 

15  €uery  thing  that  opcuctb*thc  ma* 
tritcinailfiefl),  tbhich  tbcybnngbnto 
thelt  ©is©,  tbhetbec  it  btcof  men  o? 
beafts,  (hall  be  thine:  iRcuertbelesthc 
Srflbome  of  man  (halt  thoufurcly  re* 
Deeme,  anD  the  ftrffling  of  bnclcane 
beads  (halt  thou  rcDecme. 

i6  3lnD  thofe  that  are  to  be  r  cDecmeD, 
from  amonetholD(balt  thou  rcDeeme 
acco?D(ngto  thine  emmation,  fo?  the 
money  of  ftue  fbettcis,  after  ttje  (hebel 
of  the  Sanctuary ,  *  Vbhirt)  is  tibentie 
gerahs. 

17  asutthcfirftlingofatolbe^thc 
ficfHing  of  a  fljeepe,  0?  the  firming  of  a 
goat  thou  fhalt  not  rebceme ,  the?  are 
holy :  thou  fhalt  fpzinclrtc  their  bloob 
bpon  tbe3iltar,  anD  (halt  burnc  rl)cir 
fat  fo2  an  offering mabc  by  fire,  fo?  a 
froectfauourbntothe  H  g>  «©. 

is  ^iiD  the  flefh  of  them  Qjail  bee 
thine:  as  the  *ibaue  hicafr,  anD  as  the 
right  (houlDer  are  thine. 

19  mix 


'  Leuic  ie 
t  M.f4t. 


*Lcuit.  J7. 
>8. 

J.&2,.:<). 
Kuit.i7.1tf 
chaf.3.i3. 


*  Exod.50. 
t;.lcuit.i7 
25.chaD.j. 
47.czck.4s 
11. 


•Exod.  zg. 
16. 


The  tythes  giuen      Numbers.  to  the  Leuites. 


*  Drill.  I  o. 
9. and  1 3.2 
iofli.t;. 

M   3J- 
r7.ccb.44. 

:3. 


f  H:ir.  10 
Mr. 


littrfmt 


19  31U  the  hcauc  offerings  of  the  ho 
ly  things  ,tbhich  the  chilbzen  ofjfracl 
offer  bnto  the  ?L  £>  is  ©  ,  haue  3J  giucu 
thee  anb  thy  fonnes,anb  thy  oaughtcrs 
lbith  thee ,  trp  a  ftatutc  foz  cuer :  it  is  a 
couenant  of  fait  foz  cute ,  brfozc  the 
%  0  is  jd  bnto  ttjee ,  anb  to  thy  fceb 
iDttl)  thee. 

20  c  3nb  the  %  &  is  ©  fpaitc  bnto 
3aron,lLhou(balt  hauc  no  inheritance 
m  their  lanb ,  neither  (halt  tl)ou  hauc 
any  part amongtbenu'^Jamthy  part, 
atm  thine  inheritance  among  tlje  tljtl 
bzenoflifcael. 

ii3ubbchQlb,3Jhauegtucnthechtl 
bzen  offlcut  all  the  tenth  tujfractfoz 
an  inheritance,  foz  their  fcruitcmhich 
tfjcp  feme ,  men  the  fenuce  of  thclEa^ 
bernatlc  of  tnc  Congregation. 

21  Neither  mud  the  thuozen  of  3Jf 
raclhenecfoozth  comentgh  the  Xabrc 
natlc  of  the  Congregation,  lcit  they 
bcarc  finnc,t  anb  btc.  • 

23  :z6iittbe?Lctutcsmailbocthcfer 
uttc  of  thcXabcrnaclc  of  the  Congrc 
gation.anb  they  fbal  bcarc  their  miqut 
tic:  it  mall  be  a  ftatutc  foz  cner  thzough 

out  your  generations,  that  among  the 
rhdozen  of  Jfcael  tbey  Ijaueno  mhm 
tantc. 

24  But  the  tithes  of  the  chrtbzcnof 
Wracl  ibhich  the?  offer  as  anlhcaiie  of 
recmg  bnto  the  %  0  is  e\3J  hauc  guicn 
to  the  Hemtcs  to  iiiheritc :  thcrcfozc  3 
hauc  fa.b  bnto  tbcm  ,  ^mong  thccbil 
bzcti  of  jifracltbcy  (hall  hauc  nombc- 
ritante. 

25  C3mbthe?l0KP  fpalicbnto 
tDofcs,  faying, 

26  Xhus  fpealtc  bnto  the  Hcuites, 
aim  fay  buto  them,  omen  yc  taiic  of  the 
crulbzcu  of  Jfracl  the  titties ,  lbhtrh  31 
haucgiucn  von  from  them  foz  your  in 
hentante  ,thcn  y  c  flial  offer  bp  an  hcauc 
offering  of  it  foz  the  JLoisjd,  cuena 
tenth  part  of  the  ttthc. 

27  2lub  this  your  hcauc  offering 
fhailbetccUoneb  bnto  you ,  as  though 
«  were  thecozne  of  the  tbzeflnug  floozc, 
aim  as  the  fuhicffe  of  the  unnc  p2cffc. 

2s  Xhusyou  aifo  thai  offer  an  hcauc 
offering  bnto  the %o hid ofall  your 
tithes  \bhith  ye  rcccluc  of  the  crjtlbzen 
of  Jfrael,  aim  yc  (nail  gtue  thereof  the 
1Lois©&>  heauc  offering  to  Tlaron 
thcpzicfr. 

29  £>ut  of  all  vour  giftsyc  fljai  offer 
eucrv  hcaue  offering  of  thcILotsi?, 
of  all  the  t  belt  thereof ,  «ien  the  hai- 


lotbcb  part  thereof,  out  of  it. 

30  Xhercfozc  thou  (halt  fay  bnto 
them ,  gaheu  ycc  hauehcaucb  tihe  beft 
thereof  from  it,  then  it  fljail  be  countcb 
bnto  the  flcuites,  as  the  cntrcafc  ofrfie 
rhzeCrnng  floozc ,  aim  as  the  enctcafe  of 
thclbmepzcffe. 

31  3mbyefl)all  catc  it  in  curry  place, 
yc  aim  your  houfbolbs:  foz  it  is  your  re- 
ibarb  foz  your  feruitc ,  m  the  Xaber- 
nacle  of  the  Congregation. 

32  31tm  ycc  (hall  bcarc  no  fmnc  by 
rcafonofit,ibhcuychauchcaueofcom 
ttthcbcfl  of  it :  neither  (ball  yc  pollute 
the  holy  things  of  the  chilbzen  of  3Jf- 
r  art,  left  ycbie. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  The  water  ol  fepai  anon  made  of  the  afhejot 
a  ted  heifer,  n  The  law  for  the  vie  of  it  in 
purification  of  the  vncleaue. 

$£$&&&&*  tlic  Hois©  fpafee 
^Z^eS?  ^uto  ©ofes ,  anb  bnto 
W£$$f4  3lar  on, faying, 
fA^fut  z  XhiS'sthcozbinance 
s^CwUS*  of  the  Ham ,  ibhich  the 
Hchhd  hath  tommaimbeb  ,  faying, 
5>pcafec  bnto  the  chilbzen  of  3Jfrael, 
that  they  bztng  thec  a  rcb  heiferlbitl> 
outrpot,ibhcreiuisnoblcnufb,andbp= 
on  ibhich  ucucr  cameyofee. 

3  3lnbye  (hall  giuc  her  bnto  Gltfc 
3ar  tlic  0zieft,  that  hec  may  bztnghcr 

*  fozth  mitiiout  t!ic  tampc,  anb  one  fljau 
flay  her  befoze  his  face. 

4-  3mb  eicwt  the  0zieft  mall 
tahc  of  her  bloobibith  h«s  finger  ,ann 

*  fpztnrtilc  of  her  bloob  bircctly  befoze 
the  lEabcrnatlc  of  the  Congregation 
feuni  tunes. 

5  3lnb  one  fljail  bumc  the  heifer  m 
his  fight :  *her  fumue,  anb  her  flcm, 
anb  her  bloob,Unth  her  boung  ,fhall  l;e 
burnc. 

6  ^no  the  pitca  man  taitc  Ccbar- 
moob,anbhyfopc,atiDfcarlrt,aubca(r 
it  into  the  nubfl  of  the  burning  of  the 
heifer. 

7  Xhen  the  ^zicfl  (hall  mafb  his 
clothes ,  anb  hec  mall  bathe  bis  flefb  m 
ibater ,  anb  aftcrruarb  he  (ball comem 
to  the  tampc,  anb  the  pztett  (baibe  bu- 
clcaiicbutiiitheeuni. 

s  ^(nb  he  that  burnetii  her ,  mall 
lbafl)  his  clothes  m  lbatcr,  anb  bathe 
hisflcfl)iiHbatcr,anofl)allbebnrleaue 
bimiithctfucu. 

9  3tnb  aman that  is  clcanc,  fhall  ga 
thcr 


•  Hcbr.13 


•Hcbj.ij 


*Exod.;9. 
14-lcuit.^. 
ii.li- 


Purifications. 


Ch 


ap.xx. 


M 


dictl: 


inamdieth. 


}  Hrb/nle. 


•  HcUitw,£ 
vntttrsjhalt 
itftuin. 


thct  top  the  afhes  of  the  hnfer,  ano  lap 
theinopttnthout  thecampe  matlcanc 
place,  ano  tt  Qiail  bee  kept  foi  the  Con- 
grcganou  of  the  tUtlDicttof  jjjftacl.fo; 
a  toatet  of  reparation :  tt  is  a  purttfeatt* 
onfojfmnc. 

10  2Lnx>]yt  tnat  gathered)  the  afljes 
ofthehctfer,Q)aiUDan)histlotbcs,anD 
be  Oncleanc  until  the  €unt:anOtt  (hall 
be  unto  the  ehiiojcn  of  3fracl,ano  Onto 
the  Granger  that  fotournnlj  among 
them,  fo;  a  ttatutc  fo:  euer. 

n  C^c that toucheth the  oeaoboov 
of  anv  t  man,  (ball  bee  Oncleanc  feuen 
oaves. 

n  ^cfyalipunfichimfelfcttiftfjiton 
the  thiro  oav,anO  on  thefntnuh  Dap  he 
(ball  be  tleanc :  but  tf  he  punfie  not  hint- 
fclfcthethirooav,  then  the  feumthoav 
Ijclhallnotbecleane. 

15  Bahofocuer  touchcth  the  bean bo< 
btc  of  anv  man  that  is  bcab,  ant)  purifi- 
er!) not  himfclfc,  Defeictljtljt  SCabenta* 
tic  of  the  %  o  e  ©,  anb  that  foult  ujall 
betutofffrom  3Jfracl,  bccaufethciba* 
tcr  of  reparation  loas  not  fpnncklco 
oponftim  :\)t  fhail  be  Oncleanc,  fttsbn* 
ricannefle  is  pet  upon  him. 

14  IChts  is  the  \sxo,  ttrijen  a  man  bi- 
ttl)  m  a  tent ;  all  that  tome  into  the  tent, 
ant)  all  tljat  is  m  t^c  tent,  fl)albc  Dntlean 
feuen  Daves. 

15  3nDcncrvopmt)effdn)fjtchbatl) 
nocoueringbounbOponit,isontlcane. 

16  3nbtt)hofocucrtouchtth  one  that 
is  name  tt)  trh  a  froojb  m  the  open  ficios, 
ozaocaoboOv,  0;  a  bone  of  a  man,  02  a 
grauc,  (l)ail  be  tmtleanefeuen  oaves. 

17  3lno  foz  an  bncleane  perfon  ti)cv 
fball  take  of  the  t  afhes  of  tfte  burnt 
hetfer  of  purification  fo:  fmnc,ano*run'' 
ning  ttiatcr  (hall  bee  put  thereto  in  a 
Dentil: 

18  3nO  a  tleanc  perfon  (hall  take 
hvfopc,  anb  oippcit  m  the  ttiatcr,  ant) 
fp;incfelCitbpon  the  tent,  anb  Oponall 
thcbeffcls,  anb  topott  the  pcrfons  that 
l&etert)crc,anooponhfmthattoutf)cD 
a  bone,  02oncGainc,  ojoncocao,  02a 
grauc. 

19  3(nD  the  clcanc  perfon  (hal  fpnnble 
bpon  the  bncleane  on  trjctrjtto  oav,ano 
on  the  fcucnth  bav :  anb  on  the  fcucnth 
oav  be  fball  punfie  bimfctfe,  anb  ibafl) 
\)is  clothes,  anb  bathe  huntclfc  in  iba* 
tcr,  anb  (ball  be  tleanc  at  cunt. 

io  2Sut  the  man  that  (hail  beebn* 
tlcane.anb  fltallnot  punfie hunfclfc, 
tj>atfoulc  (hall  bee  cut  off  from  among 


thcCongreganon:  becaufehe  hath  be- 
fileb  the  5>anctuarv  of  the  JL  <©  w  w, 
tbelbatet  of  feparanon  hath  not  bente 
fp2inhieDtoponhim,  hcibncleane. 

21  3in0tfmailbeaperpetttailftatute 
Onto  thnn,  that  he  trjat  fprniaicththe 
ibatet  of  feparanon ,  ftjau  njafb  his 
clothes:  anb  he  that  toucheth  the  ttia 
tec  of  feparanon,  fhall  be  bncleane  ton< 
nil  dim. 

iz  ^nb  lbl)atfonicr  the  bnrlcane 
perfon  toutbnb,fballbebnclcane:ano 
the  fouic  that  touched)  it,  (hall  bee  bn  - 
tleanc  bntillCuen. 

CHAP.    XX. 

1  The  children  of  Ifrael  come  to  Zin,  where 
Miriam  dicth.  i  They  murmur-  for  want 
of  water.  7  Mofes  firming  the  rocke  brin- 
geth  forth  water  at  Menbah.  14  Mofes  at 
Kadefh  defircth  palLgc  thorow  Edom , 
which  is  denied  him.  ir  At  Mount  Hor  Aa- 
ron refignethhisplacc  to  Eleazar,  and  dieth. 

ften  came  tf)c  rijtUncn  of 
31fracl,  euen  the  lbhoie 
Congregation,  into  the 
ocfertof  zin ,  m  the  firit 
monetl):  anb  the  people  a* 

booe  m  Baocfl),  anb  $h'rtam  bicb 

tfjerc,  anb  tbas  bunco  tljete. 
z  3ino  there ttias  no  ttmrcr  fo2  the 

Congregation  :  ano  thev  gathereo 

thcmfclucs  together  agatnft  fi^ofes 

anoagainff^acon. 

j  ^nothcpcoplcd)ooevbtth^9ofes, 
anofpake.faving,  leouio  ©ootljatioc 
hao  Oico  *  ibhcn  our  bmh?en  oteb  bo  "Ch^.n 
fo?crhc!L©a©. 

4  3nO*tt>!^hattevcctyonghti)p  * 
the  Congregation  of  the  fLoasunto 
thtstbtlocrncfTc ,  that  toe  ano  out  cat- 
tcllfhouiooietfjcrc; 

5  3no  tbhtrcfoje  Ijaue  ve  maoc  \>s 
tocomebp  outof  cgvpt,  tobmtgbsin 
tonto  this  mil  places  it  n  no  place  of  feco, 
0;  of  figges .  0?  bmes,  0.2  of  pomegra^ 
nates,  neither  is  there  an?  ttjatte  to 
ozinkc. 

6  3nO  fi0ofcs  anb  ^aron  ttmit 
fcomthcpicfenccoftheaffcmblv,  Onto 
thcboo2cofthe  tabernacle  of  the  con= 
gcegation ,  aiio  thev  fell  bpontljcic  fa- 
tes: ano  the  glozv  of  the  ILoe©  ap-- 
peareo  Onto  them. 

7  C3(notf)e?Lo;tOfpakcOntoC19o'- 
fesjaving, 

8  xakc  the  roooc,  anb  gather  thou 
the  affemblv  togctl)et,tl)ou  ano  3laron 
_^ thj 


Therockefmitten.    Numb 


umbers. 


Aaron  dieth. 


•Pf.il.  106 
JJ.&c. 
WTkiiit, 
firifc. 


t  H.h. 
fomitd  vi. 


thp  toother ,  anb  tpeaue  pee  bnto  thej 
rocftc  bcfoie  their  epes ,  anb  it  (hall  giue 
fooith  his  lbater ,  anb  thou  fljait  bung 
foorth  to  them,  lbater  out  ofttjcrotbe: 
fo  thou  (halt  giuc  the  Congregation, 
anb  their  bcaflsbjfntie. 

9  33nt»  £0ofcs  tooUc  the  rob  from 
before  the  3tflDE^,asl)ccommanbcb 
him. 

io  3nb£0ofesanb2Carongathcceb 
the  Congregation  together  brfoje  ttje 
roefec,  anb  bee  faib  into  them,  §carc 
noib,pc  rebels,  muftibc  fetch  pouiba? 
teroutofthtsrocRc; 

1 1  3nb  t^ofes  lift  bp  hishanb ,  anb 
ttnthhisrob  be  fmote  tijcrocbctrbtcc: 
anb  tfie  lbater  came  out  abunbantlp, 
anb  the  Congregation  bjanbe ,  anb 
rftcir  beads  jHo. 

ix  C^lnbtbcfLoiSBfpaftebnto 
^ofcsanbStaron,  fficeaufcpcbclccuc 
me  not ,  to  fanctifie  me  in  the  eves  of  the 
cbtlbjcn  of3lfracl,tbercfo:cpc  mall  not 
bung  this  Congregation  into  the  lanb 
lbbicb  IJbauegiucntbcm. 

13  *  Xbts  is  the  lbater  of  ||  fi0eribab, 
betaufc  the  cbilbicn  of  Iffrael  ftrone 
lbitb  the  %  €>  e  w>  j  anb  be  ibas  fancte 
ficbtntbem. 

1+  C  3fnb  £0ofcs  fent  mclFengers 
from  l&ibefl),bnto  the  l&tng  of  <£boni; 
XDusfattn  tbpb:otber  gifracl.Xbou 
tmoibctt  all  tbcttauailctbat  batbtbe* 
fallenbs: 

15  ^olbourfatlicrsibentbolbncins 
to«gppt,anbibcbauebtt>eltmegppt 
along  time:  anb  the  Cgpptiansbcrcb 
bs,anb  our  fathers. 

i6  3lnb  lbben  ibee  erpcb  bnto  the 
%  a>  k  jd  ,  be  bearb  our  bopec ,  anb  fent 
an^ngcl,  anb  bath  biougbtbsfoojtb 
out  of  £gppt:anb  bcbolb,  lbcc  arc  in 
Babelb,  anne  m  tbebttermofl  of  thp 
bobber. 

17  ?Letbspau"e,3Jpiaptbec,tbo?olb 
thp  countrcp:ibe  mill  not  patTetbojoib 
the  fielbs ,  01  tlwoib  the  ^Jincparbs, 
neither  ibill  Ibebitnfcc  of  tfjc  lbater  of 
tbclbells:  tbec  Ibill  goe  bp  tbclSungs 
high-ibap,  lbc  Vbtl  not  tunic  to  tfjc  right 
hanb  no?  to  the  left ,  bnffll  Ibee  haue 
paflcbtbpbojbcrs. 

is  ^nb€bomfaibbntohim,Xhou 
ftjaltnot  paffebpme,Ufl3l  tome  out  a^ 
gatnft  thee  lbitb  the  frooib. 

19  ^btbcriiilfcenoHJfraclfaibbn 
to  him ,  roc  Vbill  soc  bp  the  bigb-ibap : 
ano  if  3  anb  mp  tattcll  bnnue  of  thp 
lbater,  then  J  ibill  papfo:  it :  3  ibill 


onelp  (tbtthout  doing  anp  thing  eife)go 
tfwoibonmpftet. 

20  2mbbctatb,Xbou(baitnotgoe 
thojoib.  ^nb  Cbom  came  out  agamfi 
him  lbith  nrach  people ,  anb  lbitb  a 
ftronghanb. 

21  Xbus€bomrefufebtogiue3Jf 
rael  paflage  tbozolb  his  bo?bcr  iibbere* 
fo?e  3ftflf  l  tumcb  atbap  from  hinu 

22  Onbtbcchtlbjenafjfraet.eucn 
the  lbholc  Congregation ,  lournepcb 
from  *BabeCh,  anb  tamcbntomoimt 

23  3nb  the  %  d>  a  55  fpafte  bnto 
£0ofes  anb  ^aron  in  mount  $02,  bp 
ri)c  eoaft  of  the  lanb  of  eoom,  taping ; 

24  3aron  (ball  bee  gathcreb  bnto 
his  people:  fo?  hce  fhall  not  enter  into 
the  lanb  ibhtth  3J  haue  gtuen  bnto  the 
cliiiojen  of  3lfracl ,  betaufc  pee  rebel- 
leb  againtt  mp  tibojb  at  the  lbater  of 
#cribah. 

25  *3Cauc  ^aron ,  anb  Clcasar  his 
fonnc ,  anb  bzlng  them  bp  bnto  mount 

26  ^nb  Orippc  ^aron  of  his  gar* 
ments.anb  put  them  bpon  <£lea5ar  his 
fonnc,  anb  3iaron  Qjallbc  gatijerebvn. 
to  his  people,  anb  (hall  bic  there. 

27  3lnb  £0ofes  bib  as  the  %  ©  k  © 
commaunbeb :  anb  thep  lbentbp  into 
mount  1^0?,  m  the  ugiitof  ailthcCon- 
grcgation. 

28  3tttb  ^ofes  ftrippcb  ^aron  of 
his  garments,  anb  put  them  bpon  €■■ 
lea^ar  hisfonnc,anb*^aronbicb  there 
m  the  top  of  the  mount:anb  flQoftsanb 
<£lea5ar  came  bolbne  from  the  mount 

29  5lnb  rbhen  all  the  Congregation 
faib  that  3aron  ibas  beab,  tljcp  mour* 
ncbfo:^aron  thtrtpbapcs,euenailthc 
houfcof^jfracl. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  Ifrael  with  fomc  loflc  deftroy  the  Canaanite;. 
at  Hormah.  4  The  people  murmuring  are 
plagued  with  fiery  fcrpents.  7  Theyrepcn- 
tingarehealedbyabrafenferpent.  10  Sun- 
dry iourneyes  of  the  Ifraelites.  xi  Sihonis 
oucrcome,  33   andOg. 

W$®§&  iBbtbhcn*hing3(rabthc 
%f$Y$f  Canaanttc ,  ibhich  btbelt 

jS/w5s  m  tlJC  §)0Ut!J  >  to*™ trtl 
W£§§\S  ®M  Hfracl  came  bp  the 
P^^^i  ibapofthefpics, then  hce 
foughtagainfl3Jfracl,anbtooRefonie 
ofthcmpjifoners. 

2  ^nb  Jfrael  boibeb  a  botb  bnto 
the 


57- 


t  H<!r. 
meuth. 

•Chap. }  j. 

;S.  dcut. 
31.50. 


•Dcut.  jo. 
6.iad  31. 
5°- 


•Clup.33. 


Ficneferpents.  Chap.xx).  Sihonfmitcen. 


JtjltH- 

Sirnt. 


\Or. Ite- 
med. Heir. 
(hortentd. 


'  Chip. 
II  .6. 
•WlfJ.Ki. 

i,  j.  i.  cor. 
10.0. 


*l.King.tE 
4  ioh.  J.14. 


•Chap.  3; 
4S- 

\  Or,h?,ipel 
tfesfhxrm. 


[Ot.Vjhrb 
tn  Sufh/ib. 


the  ft©  is  ©,  anb  faib,  3ff  thou  lbiltm 
bceb  Drtiuct  tljis  people  into  my  hanb, 
then  3  Nnl  tottrrly  befrroy  tlieir  cities. 

j  anb  the  il©is©  hearacneb  to 
the  boytc  of  "Jfraei,  anb  bcliucreb  top 
tfjc  Canaanites :  aim  they  utterly  t>o 
freoyeb  them,  anb  d)cir  cities ,  ant)  hee 
caiicb  the  name  of  the  place  |  ^o?mafj. 

4-  IC  anb  ttjrp  lourneycb  from 
mount  fyoz,  bydje  ltoay  of  the  ceb  fea, 
to  compaffe  the  lanb  of  <£bom :  ann  the 
fouie  of  the  people  itoas  mart)  !i  Difcou- 
tageb  becaufc  of  theibay. 

5  aiibtbcpcoplefpaUeagaintt<5ob 
anbagamftfipofes,  nahercfozchaucye 
brought  bs  top  out  of  »£gypt,  to  biem 
the  tbiioetneffc  <  fo2  there  isnobzeab, 
neither  ts  there  any  Ibatcc,  anb  our 
foulc  *  loathed)  d)is  light  bieab. 

6  3lnb  *  the  %  ©  is  ?d  fent  fietie  fcr* 
pents  among  the  people,  anb  thev  bit 
the  people,  anb  much  people  of  31fcael 
bicb. 

7  C  Xhcr efozc  the  people  came  to 
$)ofcs,  anb  faib ,  nae  bauc  Gnneb :  fo2 
ltocc  banc  fpobrn  againft  d)c|L©«jD, 
anb  againft  thee :  pzay  tonto  thelL©iR© 
that  hce  tatte  atbay  the  ferpents  from 
tos:;anb  sfMespzayeb  fo:  thcpeople. 

8  3nb  the  jL  ©  w  ©  faib  tonto  SQa- 
fes,  fl^aRC  theea  fierie  fcrpent,anbfct  it 
topon  apole:  anb  it  (hall  come  topaffc, 
that  euery  one  djatis  bitten,  Tbhen  hce 
looKcth  topon  it,  thall  liue. 

9  £nb  *  £0ofcs  mabc  a  ferpent  of 
biafTe ,  anb  put  it  topon  a  pole,  anb  it 
came  to  pafie,  that  if  a  ferpent  Dab  bit= 
ten  any  man,  tbhen  hct  bchclb  tbefct' 
pentofbzaiTcheluub. 

10  c  2nb  the  chilbzen  of  3Jfrael  fet 
foztbarb,  anb  *pitcbeb  in£>both. 

ii  3lnb  they  lourneycb  from  ©both, 
anb  pitchcb  at  ||  31ie-3ibartm,m  the  toil- 
bcrncs  lbhtth  is  before  fiJ3oab,  torbarb 
ti)e£munc  ruing. 

12  C  5from  thence  they  remooueb, 
anb  pitcheb  m  the  toallcy  of  zarcb. 

ij  5Fromthcnced)eyremooueb,anb 
pitchcb  on  the  other  fibe  of  arnou, 
ltohtct)  is  in  the  rmlbrrncfle  that  tom- 
med)  out  of  the  eoatts  of  thc^montes: 
fo:  atnon  is  the  bozbet  of  40oab ,  be* 
trbeenc  Q3oab  anb  the^montcs. 

14  seherefozettisfaibinthebooae 
of  the  ltoar  res  of  theft©  is  p,||  tbhat  he 
bib  m  the  3&eb  fea,  anb  m  the  bzooaes 
of  3trnon,  .  , 

15  SinbattheateameofthcbiooRes 
djatgoeth  tooibnc  to  the  bVbellmg  of 


ar,  5 1  lied)  topon  the  bozber  of  £0oab 
i«s  anb  from  djence  thev  went  to  2Sccr: 
d)at  is  the  Ibell  rubereof  the  ft  ©is© 
fpaae  tonto  £0ofcs,  ©atber  the  people 
together,anb  3  lbill  gmc  dmutbater. 

17  C  Xbcn  3Jfracl  fang  this  fong, 
tj&pnngbp  £)  lbcll,!|  ^mgyc  tonto  it : 

18  Xbc  Ounces  biggcb  the  roell,  the 
nobles  of  the  people  biggeb  it,  by  the  di- 
rcd.on  of  the  fUVb  giuer ,  rwtb  their 
ftaues.  3tnb from  dje  lbilbcrncffeihcy 
wentto^attanah: 

19  anb  from  ©attanah,  to  4??aha< 
liel,  anb  from  iSabauel  to  26amotb : 

20  ^nb  from  25amoth  ^  the  bailey, 
thatisintbeteountrcyof  $)oab,  to  the 
toppe  of  ij  tfifgab,  tbb'.ch  looKeth  to 
tbatbllUeftnmoh. 

21  <fj  3lnb  'Jftacl  fent  mefTcngcrs 
bnto  5>ihon  tang  of  the  ^mojucs, 
faying, 

2i  *  ILet  me  paflx  thozolb  thy  lanb, 
itoctbrtl  not  turne  into  the  ficlbs,  02  into 
thctomcyarbS,tbelbillnotb2inUeofthe 
itoatersof  thetbcll:  buttbc  lbill  goca^ 
long  by  the  lungs  high  ruay,  tontill  ibce 
bepaftthybozbers. 

23  *3Cnb  §>ihon  tboulb  not  fuffcr 
51fracltopaffetho20lb  hisb02bcr :  but 
&ihon  gad)ereb  all  his  people  toge- 
ther, anb  ltoent  out  againft  ^jfracl  into 
thetbilbcrncs:  anb  he  came  to  3*b&» 
anb  fought  agatntt  ^frael. 

24  ^nb^fraclfmotehunlbiththe 
cbgc  of  the  utio2b ,  anb  poffeffeb  his 
lanb  from^rnon  tonto  ^faboB,  cuen 
tonto  the  chilbzen  of  ^mmon :  602  the 
bo2ber  of  djc  djUbzen  of  Amnion  itoas 
frrong. 

25  2lnb  Sifrael  tooftc  all  thefc  dries : 
anb^lfraclWbcltin  ailtijc  rides  of  the 
^mo2itcs ,  in  $cfl)bon ,  anb  in  all  the 
ttoiiiagestheteof. 

26  f  02  iMhbon  W^  ^c  citieof  &i? 
hon  the  Btng  of  thc^nwttes,  ibho 
hab  fought  againft  the  fo2mcr&tng  of 
i35oab,  anb  taken  all  his  lanb  out  of  his 
hanb,  cuen  bnto  3rnoru 

27  •tehcttfozc  they  that  fpeaae  m 
P20ucrbcs,  fay,  Come  into  $cft)bon : 
j  let  the dtic  of  5>ihon  bee  built  anb  p2c- 
parcb. 

28  JFoz  d)crc  is  a  fire  gone  out  of 
$e(hbon,  a  flame  from  the  otic  of  &t- 
hon :  u  hath  tonfumeu  3r  of  ©oab, 
and  the  lozbes  of  the  fngh  Prices  of 
aroon. 

29  naoctodjecfiBoab.thouattton* 

bonc,€>  people  of  *€rjcmofb:  he  hath 
^9  2  giuen 


t  Heh.lu 
nerh. 


\M.*fcni 

\{Or,af- 

[were. 


t  H'h.fieli. 

||  Or,  Ml 
||  Or, the 
wt'.dernetfe. 


•  Dcut.3. 
:7.iudges 
11.10. 


*Dtut. 
19.7. 


•ioQi.il. 
P&I.135. 
r  i.urtos 
»o. 


\Melr. 
daughters. 


•  I.King  II 
7.H- 


Ogflaine.  Balak      Numbers,  fendetli  for  Balaam. 


*Dcut.3.i, 
ami  19.7. 


giurn  lyis  fonncs  that  cftapeb ,  anb  i)is 
baughtets,into  raptiuiticbnto,£>ihon 
Bmgofrheamo?itcs. 

30  nae  Ijauc  fyot  at  them ;  Uetybon 
ispcrifbeb  men  bnto  2>ibon,  anb  lbe 
haue  lapbe  them  tbafteeucnbnto  jfto* 
phah,ibbich  reachethbnto  40cocba. 

31  CXhusSfftaclblbeltuitheianb 
oftheamontes. 

31  anb  ^ofes  fcnt  to  fpp  out^Jaa* 
3cr,anb  rtjcp  toofee  fhcbiliages  thereof, 
anb  tyoue  out  the  amojites  that  were 
there. 

33  C  *  ami  thep  tutneb  anb  ibent 
bp  bp  the  ibap  of  25a(ban :  anb  3Dg 
the  lung  of  2Ba(ban  tbentoutagamft 
tJpem ,  he ,  anb  all  his  people,  to  the  bat* 
tell  at  €b?ei. 

34-  anbrhdLsDiK©  faib  bnto  $k>* 
fes,  if  catehimnot:  fo?  3!hauebeliue* 
rebhim  into  thphanb,  anb  all  hispeo* 
•pr.i.  ijj.  ple,anbhisianb,anb*thoufbaltboeto 
him  as  thoubibtt  bnto&thonl&ngof 
tbc5tmo?rtC0,tt»I)tet)  btbelt  at  ^eftybon. 

35  *§>o  tljrp  Onotc  Dim  1  his  fonncs, 
anb  all  his  people ,  bntill  there  ibas 
none  left  him  altue,anb  thep  poffeffeb 
hisianb. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  Ba!ak.<  firftmeffage  for  Balaam  is  refu/cd.  15 
KisfecondmefTageobtainethhim.  ir  An 
Angel  would  haue  fiaine  him  ,  if  his  afle  had 
notfauedhim.   36  Balak  intertainech him. 

jftbthcchilb:enof3Jfrael 

fet  fojibarb.anb  pitclicb  in 

thcpiainesof£j3oab,on 

this  fibc  3Jo;tbane  bp  31c* 

„  richo. 

z   C  anb  25alait  the  fonnc  of  Zip* 

poj,  faib  au  that  3Jfraci  hab  bone  to  the 

Ttmotitts, 

3  anb  H}9oab  \bas  fo?e  afraib  of  the 
people ,  bctaufc  they  ibere  many ,  anb 
4>oab  ibas  biftrcffcb ,  becaufc  of  the 
ehtltycuofjfracl. 

4-  anb  upoab  faib  bnto  the  tlbcrs 
of  ^ibtan,  jftotti  fljau  this  companp 
lithe  bp  all  that  are  ronnb  about  bs,as 
toe  ore  itcltcth  bp  thegralteofthc  fielb. 
anb  25aian  the  fonnc  of  Zlppo;,  was 
Bing  of  the  *3l9oabttes  at  that  time. 

5  *$cfmtnteiTengcrsthercfo;ebn* 
to  Balaam  the  fonne  of  25eo2 ,  to  £c* 
thoj.ibhichisbptheriucrofthelanbof 
thecbiUwt  of  his  people ,  to  tall  him, 
raping,  iscbolb,  there  tsapeopletomc 
ont  from  Cgppt :  bcholbe ,  tjicp  toutr 


ioih.14. 

9- 


the  t  fate  of  the  earth ,  anb  th*p  abtbe  o* 
ueragainttme. 

6  Come  notb  tfjexefo?e,3J  pjap  thee, 
turfc  mcc  this  people ,  foi  thep  are  too 
mightie  foj  me:  perabuenture^  (hall 
pjcuaile ,  that  me  mapfmitethem,anb 
thatjj  mapbnucthem  out  of  thelanb: 
fo?3fibot  that  he  rbhonithoublefleft, 
is  bleffeb ,  anb  Dec  Ibhom  ttjon  turieft, 
is  curfeb. 

7  anb  the  clbcts  of  i$oab,  anb  the 
elbers  of  ©ibian  bepartcb.ibith  the  re* 
ibarbs  of  btntnatton  m  their  hanb; 
anb  thep  tame  bnto  25alaam,anb  fpane 
bnto  him  the  ttwbs  of  asalaa. 

s  anb  hee  faib  bnto  them,  Hobge 
here  this  night,  anb  3  tbtll  bnngpou 
lbojbagaineasthe  jCsr>is©fbaifpcahe 
bnto  nice :  anb  the  ^tntts  of  #oab  a* 
bobeibtth  Balaam. 

9  anbd5obeamcbnto2Saiaam^nb 
faib.iehat  men  are  thefe  tbtth  thee  < 

10  anb25alaamfaibbnto<eob,2Ba* 
lafethe  fonne  of  Zippo?,  BingofC^o* 
ab,hath  fcnt  bnto  me,  tying ; 

11  25eholb,thercisapeopletomcont 
of  egppt,tbhteh  couer  eth  the  fate  of  the 
earth :  Come  notb,ntrfe  me  them,  per* 
abtienture  1 3fhalbcabletoouertome 
them,  anb  bnue  them  ont. 

ii  ^nb  <3ob  faibe  bnto  25alaani; 
Xhou  flwit  not  goe  ibiththcm ,  thou 
fljaltnot  mrfe  thepeople :  fo?  thep  are 
bleffeb. 

13  anb  25alaam  rofe  bp  in  the  mo?* 
mng,  anb  faib  bnto  the0nntcsof  25a* 
laft,  Oct  pou  into  pour  lanb  :  foj  the 
ItiDis©  reftifeth  to  gtue  mec  leaucto 
gocibitl)pou. 

14  anb  the  $nnccs  of  ^oab  rofe 
bp ,  anb  thep  ibent  bnto  asaiau ,  anb 
faib,26alaam  refufeth  to  tome Ibith  bs. 

15  C  anb  iSaiaft  fcnt  pet  againe 
^nnccs,  mot,  anD  mojc  honourable 
thcntlKp. 

i6  anbthcptameto2Saiaam,anb 
faio  to  him,  Xhus  faith  26aiaft  the  fon 
of  Zippo? ;  t  fLetnothlng,3  p^pthte, 
htnber  thee  from  tommmgbnto  me: 

17  5Fo?3Jibil  promote  thee  bnto  be* 
rp  great  honour,  anb  3  ibtll  boibljat- 
focuerthonfaicUbntomcrComethcre* 
fojcgi  pjaptljeccnrfe  me  this  people. 

18  ano  Balaam  anfrocrcb  anb  tub 
bnto  the  feruantsof  25aiaft/3f25a* 
laaniouiogiuc  me  his  houfcfuTi  offii* 
ucranb  golb^  cannot  gocbeponbthe 
tbo2D  of  the  % &  3s  je>  mp  <5ob,  to  boe 
lcdeo;mo;e. 

19  fiavo 


|  Htfa\  tjr 


infighting  *- 


t  HcbrXt 
rtftlfxtu  lei 
tedfromo- 


•Chap.:4. 
I}- 


The  afle  fpeaketh.     Chap.xxij.     Balakand  Balaam. 


•  l.ptn. 

16.  lu.ic  II 


\  liter,  vhe 
hufi  riiden 
vpow  me. 
II  Or,ruer 
f!a:e  ikoM 
•Jl.&l. 


19  /l5otbtberefo2e,3Jp?appou,tatie 
pec  alfo  Ijcre  tbts  night ,  that  3  map 
ftnott)  vutjat  the  1L  £»  is  ©  ibtll  fap  bnto 
mc  mo:e. 

zo  anb  €>ob  tame  into  Balaam  at 
night,  anli  faib  bnto  him,  3Jf  tbemen 
tome  to  call  thee,  rife  top,  ano  gocibitb 
them :  but  pet  the  ibojb  rbbicb  3  (ball 
lap  bnto  thee,  that  (halt  thou  Doe. 

ii  anbBaiaamrofetopintbemoi 
ning,anD  fablcb  his  affc,anb  ibeut  Ibitb 
thepmucsof^oab. 

11  C  anb  ©obs  anger  tbas  hlnb 
leb,  becaufe  he  Sbcnt :  anb  the  angel  of 
the  ?L  <2>  is  ©  ftooo  m  the  map  fo:  an  a\y 
ucrfarte  agamft  him :  jftoVb  he  Ibas  tt* 
Ding  upon  bis  affe,  anb  bts  nbo  fet 
uantswcreruithhun. 

13  ^nb  *  the  affe  fatbe  the  angel  of 
tht  %  sd  is  ©  Oanbmg  m  the  ibap,  anb 
his  fawbbjaltocninhishanb :  anb  the 
affe  turneb  afibc  out  of  the  Vbap,  anb 
tbent  into  the  fielb :  anb  Balaam  fmote 
the  atfe,  to  turne  her  mto  the  ibap. 

14  But  the  angel  of  the  %®  is© 
ftoobtnapatbof  tbebincparbs,  aitoall 
being  on  this  Gbc, «  a  ibailontbatftoc. 

15  anblbbentbeaffcfaitotbcangel 
oftbdL©i3©,(betbMftbcrfelfebnto 
theftjall,  anb  trufbt  Balaams  foote  a? 
gamtt  the  mall :  anb  bee  fmote  ber  a* 
game. 

16  anb  the  angel  of  thesis© 
tbent  further ,  anb  ftoob  tn  a  narrotbe 
place,  tbbcre  ibas  no  lbapto  turne,  ci 
rhertothenghthanb,  02  to  the  left. 

17  anb  tbben  the  afTe  fatbe  the  an* 
gel  of  tbe?L€>is©,  (bee  fell  botbneinv 
Dec  Baiaam,anb  Balaams  anger  ibas 
fcmbleb,  anb  bee  fmote  the  affetbitba 
ftaffe. 

18  anb  the  %  ©  is  ©  openeb  the 
mouth  of  the  affe,  anb  fbee  faibebnto 
Baiaam,t©hat  haue  3  bone  bnto  thee, 
that  thou  haft  fmitten  nice  thefc  tb;ee 
times* 

19  anb  Balaam  faib  bnto  the  affe, 
Becaufe  thou  haft  moefteb  mec :  3 
itooulb  there  ltocrc  a  froojb  tn  mme 
hanb,  fojnxrttoiboulbU  lull  thee. 

30  anb  the  affe  faib  bnto  Balaam, 
Am  not  3  thine  affe,  t  bpon  tbbicb  thou 
haft  ribben  ||  eucr  Once  3  mas  thtnc, 
bnto  this  bap*  ibaslJ  eucribonttobo 
fo  bnto  thee  *  anb  heTaib,  Bap. 

31  n:hentbe?LfiDiK©opencDtbccpes 
of  Balaam,  anb  bcefatb  the  angel  of 
the  %  €>  is  ©  ftanbing  in  the  ibap,  anb 
hisfrooibbiarbenmhishanb:  anb  hee 


\HtU.tohc 
an  aebtcrfk* 
rtc  vnto  thee 


hill  in  thine 


boibeb  bottone  his  beab,  anb  ||fell  flat  wb™* 
on  his  face.  ht«j*. 

31  anb  tlje  angel  of  the  !l  so  is© 
faib  bnto  hint .  i©t)Ctcfo:c  haft  thou 
fmitten  thine  affe  thefc  ttnee  times*  Be* 
bolb,  3Jibent  out  tto  tbtthftanb  thee, 
becaufe  rhy  ibap  is  peruerfc  bcfoie  me. 

33  anb  the  affe  faib  me,  anb  turneb 
frommc  thefc  thiee  times:  bnleffe  (hee 
hab  turneb  from  mcfurclpnotb  alfo  3 
Ijab  ftame  thee,  anb  faueb  her  aliue. 

34.  anb  Balaam  fatb  bnto  the  an> 
gel  of  the  %  <$>  is  ©,  3  haue  fmneb :  fo? 
3  Unctb  not  that  thou  ftoobeft  tn  the 
tbapagainft  mec:  /Bolb  tberefiMC  if  it 
t  bifpleafe  thee,  3  tt"11  Stt  mec  bacfte  a?  t 
game. 

35  anb  the  angel  of  the  %  ®  is  © 
faib  bnto  Balaam,  ©oetbttbtbeinen: 
but  onelp  the  tbojb  that  3  (bail  fpeattc 
bnto  thee,  that  thou  (bait  fpeabe :  £>o 
Balaam  Vbcnt  itoitb  the  pontes  of 
Baiab. 

36  c  anb  tbben  BalaRbeatb  that 
Balaam  ibas  tome,  her  went  out  to 

meetchiin,bnto  aritieof  #oab,ibhich 
ismtbebojberofamo^lbbieb^infbe 
btmottcoaft. 

37  anb  Baiab  faib  bnto  Balaam, 
2Dtb  3  not  eameftlp  fenb  bnto  theeto 
call  thee  *  tbberefojc  earned  thou  not 
bnto  me*  am  3  not  able  tnbeeD  to  p:o< 
motetbeetobonour* 

38  anb  Balaam  faibe  bnto  Baiafe, 
Ttoe,  3  am  come  bnto  thee:  haue  3 
notb  anp  potber  at  all  to  fap  anp  thing  * 
the  tbozbc  that  00b  puttctb  tn  mp 
mouth,  that  (ball  3  tpeafee. 

39  anb  Balaam  tbent  lbitbBaiaB, 
anb  thep  came  bnto  ||  Btriatb  -  $U50tb.  - 

40  anb  Baiab  offcreb  orcn ,  anb  •^ln"'- 
ft)ccpe,  anb  fent  to  Balaam,  anb  to  the 
pjinccs  that  were  tbttb  him- 

41  anb  it  came  to  paffe  on  the  moi« 
roib,  that  Baiab  toofee  Balaam,  anb 
brought  hnnbp  mto  thehtgh  places  of 
Baal,  that  thence  hec  might  fee  tbebt* 
moftpartofthcpcople. 

CHAP    XXIII. 

1.13.18  Balaksfacnfice.  7. 18  Balaams  parable. 

4Bb  Balaam  faibe  bnto 

Baiab,  Bttilb  me  herefc* 

ucn  altars,  anb  p2cparc 

mec  here  feucnoren,  anb 

,  feuenrammes. 

1  anb  Baiab  bib  as  Balaam  hab 

fpoben,  anb  Baiab  %  Balaam  offereb 

on  euerv  aftat  a  bullocbc  anb  a  rammc. 

t&  3         3  ano 


Balaam  bleiTeth         Numbers.      the  Israelites,  and! 

»    ! 


J  Or,bt  vttrJ 
(drtxn* 


foulej  cr  mi 
life. 


Or,lkl 
ill. 


•G12p.ll. 

3J- 


3  anb  25aiaam  fait)  unto  UalaH, 
S>tanb  by  th?  burnt  oflting,  anb  3  Wil 
goe :  perabuenture  tJjc  fL  0  a  s> will 
comctomeetcmee,  anb  Whatfoeucrhe 
fpeweth  me,  3!  will  tell  thee,  anb  ||  he 
Went  wan  high  place. 

4.  anb(!5obmet2Saiaam,anbhc 
faib  bnto  him ,  3  haue  pjeparcb  fcuen 
altars,  anb  33  haue  offereb  bpon  euery 
altar  a  bulloc&e  anb  a  rammc. 

5  anbthelL£>s»putaWo;tbin 
Balaams  mouth ,  anb  laib,  l&etutne 
bnto  25aiaft,  $  thus thou  Q)ait  fpealse. 

6  ^nb  he  retutneb  bnto  Dim ,  anb 
tocheftoob  brhts  burnt  {acruuc,  hee, 
anb  ail  the  0mues  of  $9oab. 

7  anb  hetooBc  bphisparablcanb 
faib,  asaiafc  the  l&ng  of  £0oab  hath 
b^ugtjt  mee  from  aram ,  out  of  the 
mountaincsof  thc€aft,  raying,  Come, 
rurfeme'Jatob,  anb  come,befie  3Jfratl. 

8  $ow  (ball  3  turfe ,  whom  <Rib 
hath  not  cur  feb  <  01  how  (hall  3ibefie, 
whom  the  %  <s>  is  ©  hath  not  befieb  i 

9  ifo?  from  the  top  of  the  rocuesjj 
fee  him,  anb  fromtbchtUes  3  beholb 
him  :loe ,  the  people  (hall  bWell  alone, 
anb  (hall  not  bee  recfeoneb  among  the 
nations. 

10  i©hocaneountthebuftof3facob, 
anb  the  number  of  the  fourth  part  of 
■JfraeW  jOLct  t  mecbietbebeath  of  the 
righteous,  $  let  rm>  laft  enb  be  liBe  his. 

1 1  anb  25aiatt  faibe  bnto  2i5aiaam, 
nabat  haft  tljoubone  bnto  mu3  toone 
tljee  to  eurfe  nunc  enemies,  anb  beholb, 
thou  haft  bleffeb  them  altogether. 

ii  3tnbhcanutjercb,anbfatb,fl0uft 
3J  not  tafte  becbe  to  fpcafee  that  Which 
then  sd  is  id  hath putmmpmouth  t 

15  atib2BaiaBfaibbntohuu,€onic, 
3  pwy  thee,  With  me,  bnto  another 
place,  from  whence  thou  mapeftfee 
them  :  thou  (halt  fee  but  the  btmoft 
part  of  them,  anb  (halt  not  fee  them  all: 
anb  curie  me  them  from  thence. 

1+  C  anb  hee  toought  htm  into  the 
fielbc  of  zophun,  to  the  toppeof||0it 
gah ,  anu  built  fcuen  altars ,  anb  offt* 
reb  a  bullocUe  anb  a  r amine  on  euery  ai* 
tar. 

15  anb  he  faib  bnto  isaiafe,  5>tano 
here  by  tbp  burnt  offering ,  While  3 
meete  the  l  o  r  d  yonber. 

i6  anb  the  %  ad  is  ©  met  Balaam, 
anb  *  put  a  wort)  in  his  mouth ,  anb 
faibe ,  ©oe  agatne  bnto  asalafe ,  anb  fap 
thus. 

17  anb  When  bee  came  to  him,  be? 


holbjjeftooobv  his  burnt  offnng,  anb 
the  0?mcesofi^oab  With  him.  anb 
saiah  faib  bnto  him,  naijat  hath  the 
?(,)©«©  (po&cn* 

18  anbhctooBCbphisparable,anb 
faib ,  aauebp  asaiaB,  9  heart -,  hearken 
bnto  me,thou  tonne  of  ztppo? : 

19  <Boto  is  not  aman  that  he  (houlb 
lie,  neither  the  fonne  of  man,  that  hee 
Choulb  repent :  hath  he  faib ,  anb  than 
henotboe  it?  o?,hath  bcefpoBtn,anb 
(ball  henot  make  it  goob  < 

10  ffieholb^hauerceeiucbcomman. 
dement  to  blcffe :  anb  hee  hath  bleffeb, 
anb  3  eannotrcucrfett, 

21  $ce  hath  not  bchelb  iniqnitie  in 
3Iacob,  neither  hath  he  fceneperucrfc; 
neffcin  3ifrael :  the  1ts>fj©  his  @ob 
is  With  him ,  anb  thefhoute  of  a  Bmg  is 
among  them. 

tz  *  (5ob  bjought  them  out  ofe- 

sn>pt ;  he  hath  as  it  were  the  ftrength  of 
an^Jnttome. 

zj  Purely thcteis  no  iuchantment 
lagainft  3Jacob ,  neither  (s  there  anv 
biuinarion  agamft  3Jfrael :  acco:btng 
to  this  time  it  fbaibe  faib  of  ^atob,anb 
of  3ffraci,  tehathath  (5ob  wrought  i 

24  ffieholbe,  the  people  n)aiinfcbp 
asagreat|Lion,anblift  bphimfelfeas 
a  yongJLion:  tjee  (hall  not  lie  boWnc 
bntill  he  catc  of  the  p?ap>  anb  bJinBe  the 
bloob  of  the  flame. 

15  C  anb  asatab  faib  bnto  Balaam, 
Neither  curfe  them  at  an ,  no:  blcffc 
them  at  all. 

26  2Sut26alaamanmjcrcb,anbfaio 
bnto  asalab,  Xolb  not  ^thec,  facing, 
ail  that  the  %®  is©  fpeateeth,that  3 
muftboc* 

27  C  anb  25alaft  faibe  bnto  26a^ 
laam,  Conie.lpjap  thee,  3J  Will  bung 
thee  bnto  another  place,  perabucnturc 
it  Will  pieafe  ©ob ,  that  thou  maveft 
mrfe  me  them  from  thence. 

28  anb  zsaiau  brought  salaam 
bnto  the  top  of  0eo?,  that  loottethto 
warb3cfl)imon. 

29  anb  ffiaiaamfaibc  bnto  2Baiaft, 
ffiuilbmee  here  fcuenaltars ,  anbpjc- 
pare  mehcre  fcuen  bullocfes ,  anb  fcuen 
rammes. 

30  anb  ffiaiafe  bib  as  asaiaam  hab 
taib,anb  offrcb  a  bullocftc  anb  a  ramme 
on  euery  altar. 

CHAP.   xxmr. 

1   Balaam  leauingdiuinations,  propheCcth  the 
happrneffe  of  Ifrael.   10   Balak  in  anger  dif- 

mifleth 


'Nubi.:j 


[Or,/, 


prophefictli.  The    Chap.xxiii).        Starreoflacob. 


•ciup.13. 

3'5- 

f  Het  "the 
mcelttW  of 
iachdnl- 
metitt. 


•Chap.  I?. 
7.18. 

t  Htb  w'10 
hadha  ties 
fi*r.  buc 
now  open. 


Clup.l; 


*Gtn  -jo. 
9- 


mifiethhim.    is,  Hcprophefiethof  iheftarre 
oflacob.and  the  deftruiftion  of  fome  nations. 

j$t>  ibhen  zsaiaam  faibe 
that  it  pleafeb  the  1L©ia© 
to  blefle  gjftael ,  hee  ibent 
not,as  at  other  *nmesto 
„  t  feebc  foi  inchantments, 
but  hee  fet  bis  fate  toibarbthelbilbe^ 
neffc. 

x  51nD  asalaatn  hfttop ftiis  rptfi,anl» 
he  CaU)  Jfcacl  abibmg  m  bts  tents,  at 
tombing  to  their  Xnbes:  anb  the  3>ptrtt 
of  oon  tame  upon  inn  i. 

5  *3MbbetooHcbpbiSparable,anb 
faib,  asaiaam  the  fonne  of  ffieoi  hart) 
faib,anb  the  man  t  lbbofe  cpes  ate  open 
hath  CaiD : 

4  $ce  hath  faib ,  which  bearb  the 
ibojbsof  ©ofi,  ibbtcb  £a\b  tbebiQonof 

the  3lmightlC ,  falling  into  a  trance,  but 

bautng  bis  epes  open: 

5  $o\bgooblparetbptents,03la 
tob,  and  tbp  Xabcrnatles,  £>  gjfcacl  \ 

6  %s  the  ballcpcs  are  the?  fp?cab 
fojth.  as  garbens  bp  tbcritter  fibe,  as 
the  trees  of  ?Lign-3locs  Vbhith  the 
|L c> kip  bath  planteb,  and  as  Cebar 
trees  befibc  the  lbatcrs. 

7  $c  (hall  pottne  the  tbatcr  out  of 
bisbucBets,aubbisfecb  (hall  be  mmanp 
maters ,  anb  bis  tung  Chail  be  higher 
then  3lgag,anb  his  Bingbomefballbe 
eraiteb. 

8  d5ob  brought  hint  fo:th  out  of  €> 
gppt ,*  be  bath  as  it  tbete  the  frrcngtb  of 
an  Hmcojttt :  he  (bail  eate  bp  the  nan 
ons  his  enemtes,  anb  (ballbjeatie  their 
bones,  anb  pierce  them  tbojolb  ttitb  his 
atrotbes. 

9  *$ee  toutheb ,  beiapbotbnc  as  a 
ILpon.anb  as  a  great  Upon :  lbbo  fbal 
(here  him  bp  i  aBleffeb  isftce  that  blef 
feththee,  anbeurfeb  is  bee  that  turfetb 
thec. 

10  C3nb  asalalts  anger rbas  Uinb 
lebagatnft  Balaam,  aubheefmotchts 
banbs  together :  anb  ffiaiafe  faib  bnto 
Balaam,  gjtaileb  thee  to  turfe  mme 
encnucs,  anbbcholb,  tboubaftaitoge 
ther  bleffeb  them  thcfcthJce  tunes. 

11  Xbcrefojc  noib ,  flee  thou  to  tbp 
plate :  II  thought  to  p:omote  thee  bnto 
great  honour,  but  loc ,  the  %  s>  a  © 
hath  Hcpt  thee  bartse  from  honour. 

ix  3nb  Balaam  faib  bnto  2Balaft, 
£>pafee  3  not  alfo  to  fbp  mcOengcrs 
tbhtel)  thou  fenteft  bnto  me.fapmg, 

1  j  gif  isaiau  lboulb  giue  nice  his 
houfc  fuiloffilucranb  golb,  gitannot 


goebeponb  the  tommanbement  of  the 
JLoix£\  toboe  either  goob  o:  bab  of 
mine  olbneuunbf  but  rbbattbelLi&iBjD 
ratth,thatU)Ul  3J  rpeabe. 

14  3lub  noib  bcholbe ,  gj  goe  bnto 
mppeople:  tome  therefore,  anoghbiil 
abuectife  thee,  tbbat  this  people  (ball 
boc  to  thp  people  in  the  latter  bapes. 

15  C^nbrjeetoouebp  his  parable, 
anb  faib,  Balaam  the  fonne  of  z5eo: 
hath  fatb,  anb  the  man  whofe  epes  ace 
open,  hath  faib: 

16  i?e  hath  faib  ibhith  bearb  the 
Uwbs  of  ©ob,  anb  aurtbe  the  knolb 
lebgc  of  the  molt  fcigb ,  wh.ch  fatbc  the 
bi&on  of  the  3llmigbtte,  falling  into  a 
trante,  but  haiung  his  epes  open. 

17  3  fbail  fee  htm ,  but  not  nolb :  gi 
fhallbtholbhim,  but  not  nigh:  Xhere 
fhall  tome  a  Rarre  out  of  giatob,  anb  a 
5>ttpter  (hall  rife  out  orjfrael ,  anb 
(hall  lifmite  the  corners  oft^oab,  anb 
beftropail  the  thilbzen  of  5>heth. 

18  ^nbGbomfhallbeeapolTeffion, 
5>eiraifo  Ojail  be  a  pou"cu"ion  fojfnse; 
ncmies ,  anb  3frael  (hall  boe  ball 
antlp. 

19  £>ut  of  giatob  (hall  tome  he  that 
fhailhaucbommion,  anb  fballbeflrop 
him  that  remained)  of  the  ntie. 

xo  C^ubibhenheloobebon^ma^ 
left,  hetooRt  bp  his  parable,  anbfapb, 
3(maleft  was  ||  the  firft  of  the  nations, 
but  his  latter  enb  |  (hail  bee ,  that  hee  pe- 
n(l)fo2euer. 

xi  3lnb  hee  looheb  on  the  Benites, 
anb  toobc  bp  his  parable,  anb  faibe, 
Strong  isthi*  bibellingpiate,anb  thou 
puttcft  thp  ncft  m  a  rothe : 

xx  i5euettheIcu"e,tthcBenitefhau 
be  tbatteb ,  ||  bntil  3lffhnr  fhai  tane  thee 
aibaptaptiue. 

X3  3lnb  he  toobc  bp  his  parable,  anb 
faib,  3Uasi  ibljo  (hall  liue  tbhen  <5ob 
boeththts^ 

14  ^nb  (hippes  fhail  come  from  the 
toad  of  Chitnm,anb  thai  afflict  Arthur , 
anb  (hall  afflict  <£bcr,  anbheeaifo  (hail 
pertfl)  F02  euer. 

x  5  3lnb  Balaam  rofe  bp ,  anb  tbent 
anb  retnrneb  to  his  place:  anb  25aiab 
alfo  H)ent  his  tbap. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  Ifrael  at  Shittim  commit  whoredome  and 
Idolatrie.  6  Phinehas  killech  Zimri  and 
Cozbi.  jo  God  therefore  giueth  him  an 
euerlafting  Pricfthood.  \6  The  Midianites 
are  to  be  vexed. 

3lnb 


]Or,fmi.'f 
rhrouftit!  t 
Princes  «f 
AUaL 


\Thfftrilof 
tktndtions 
that  wxrreA 

'Z*>»ft  if- 

r4cl,ExeJ. 

'7- 

||Or,^/i.- 

fitfttta'de- 

fintElion. 

f  He  b.  K*in 
\  Orfavf 
t<mg  fhall  ic 
be  ere  A- 

ft: HT  carry 
thee  tcwAj 
{jpttue. 


Phinehas  killeth       N  umbers.    Zimri  and  Cozbi. 


•Chap.  33. 
19- 


Dcut.4.;), 
iDfh.u.17. 


•Pfal.ioS. 
jo.i. mate. 

2.45. 


'i.Cor.io. 

8. 


•Pfal.jotf. 
5° 


•Ecclut. 
4J.14.  1. 

mace. 3. 54. 


/Bb3Jfraclabobein*£>hit; 
nm,anb  the  people  begun 
to  conimtt  U)l)o:coomc 
tblth  the  baughtcrs  of 
_  $)oab. 
i  3iitu  rhep  calico  ttjc  people  bnto 
the  faenfices  oftbetr  gobs :  anb  the  pco- 
plebtbeate,  anb  boibebboibneto  their 
gobs. 

3  3lnb  3Jfcael  fopneb  himfelfc  bn- 
to iiSaal-^eo,! :  anb  the  anger  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  ibas  huibleb  agamft  3Jfracl. 

4  anb  the  2L©ia©  fait)  bnto  fl0o= 
fcs,*3CaUeall  the  beabs  of  ttjc  people, 
anb  bang  tbem  bp  befojc  tt»c  %  ©  e  © 
agamft  the  .Suinne ,  that  the  fierce  an* 
gee  of  tije  1L©»©  map  be  turncb  &= 
rbapfcomgjfrael. 

$  ^nbJ3pofesfaibbntotI)egjubgcs 
of^fracl,  3>lappc-euetp  one  his  men, 
that  ibere  iopneb  bnto  25aai  #coj. 

6  C3lnbbebolb,Dneoftbccbilb2Cn 
of  3Jftael  came  anb  brought  bnto  bis 
brethren  a  £©ibianiti£b  lboman ,  in  the 
figtjt  of  ^9ofes,anbm  the  fight  of  all  the 
Congregation  of  the  ebilbjcn  of  3Jf= 
racl ,  ibbo  ibere  ibceping  befoje  toe 
boojc  of  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  tlje  Con- 
gregation. 

7  2nb*ibhmi&ljinebastbcfonneof 
Clea^ar,  tbefonneof  2aron  tljc^neft 
falb  it ,  bee  rofe  bp  from  amongft  tlje 
Congregation,  anb  toottc  a  tauelin  in 
bisbanb. 

8  3mbbelbcntaftertbcmanof3!£ 
racl  into  the  tent ,  ana  tbnift  both  of 
them  tboioTb,  the  man  of  gtfracl,  anb 
tl)Clboman,trjo?o.b  bet  bellp:  £>otbe 
plague  ibas  ftapcb  from  tljcctJilu^mof 
'^rcacl. 

9  3mb*tbofetbatbiebintbeplague, 
iberctibcnticanbfoutetbottfanb. 

10  <T3lnbtbc3L£>iK©  fpakebnto 
i!r3ofcs,faping, 

1 1  *0bmcha£  tbefontwof  Clea^ar, 
tlic  fonnc  ofSlaron  the  ^ncft,  bath  tur* 
neb  mplbjatbaibap  from  toe  rt)ilb;cn 
of  gjfcacl,  ( While  bee  ibas  ^eaiousfo: 
mp  fafte  among  them )  that  gj  confu- 
mcb  not  tlje  ebilb.jcn  of  'Tif racl  m  nip 
leloufie. 

n  n3l)e«fo}erap  /ascbolb ,  3  giuc 
bnto  him  mp  Coucnant  of  peace. 

13  3mbhefballhaucit,  anubisfccb 
after  bim,euen  the  Couenant  of  an  eucr? 
lading  $ncttbooo ,  becaufe  he  ibas  }ea^ 
ions  foz  his  00b ,  anb  mabcan  atone 
ment  fo?  tbcrtNlbzmoHJfracl. 

14  iftolbtbcnamcoftbcSfracIite 


that  Tbas  flaine ,  euen  that  Ibas  Came 
ibitb  the  sDibtantttfb  lboman ,  was 
Zimri  thefonne  of  5>alu,a  p?incc  oft  a 
cbiefe  houfe  among  the  <S>imeonites. 

15  anbthcnameofthefipibiamnft) 
lboman  that  tbas  flaine,  wasCosbi,  the 
banghtcr  of  zuc ,  bee  was  heab  oner  a 
peoplcanb  of  a  thtefc  houfe  in  fi^ibtan. 

16  C  3nb  tbc1L©ia©  fpaac  bnto 
£)3ofcs,faptng, 

17  *^w  the  i$ibianttcs,  anb  finite 
them: 

is  ifo?  thep  bete  pon  Ibitb  their 
ttrtlcs,  tbhcrcrbtth  thep  hauebeguileb 
pou,  in  the  matter  of  $toh  anb  m  the 
matter  of  Co?bi ,  the  baughtcr  of  a 
i>nnce  of  flPiUfira  their  fitter,  tbbitb 
tbas  flame  m  the  bap  of  the  plague,  fo; 
^eojsfafte, 

CHAP.  XXVL 

1  The  fumme  oi  all  Ilrael  is  taken  in  the  plaines 
otMoab.  51  The  law  of  diuidine  among 
them  the  inheritance  of  the  land.  57  The 
families  and  number  ot  the  Lcuites.  65  None 
were  lett  of  them  which  were  uumbred  at  Si- 
nai, but  Caleb  and  Iofhua. 

/!5o  it  came  to  pafic  afc 
tcr  the  plague ,  that  the 
%  sd  is  ©  fpase  bnto  fiJDo* 
fes  ,  anb  bnto  eieajar 
_  the  fonne  of  ^aron  the 
iDncft,  toping, 

x  Xabe  the  fummc  of  ailtheCon- 
grcganon  of  the  rhilbicn  of  3fcacl, 
•from  ttbcntppeeresolbanbbpibarb, 
throughout  thcirfathershoufc,alithat 
are  able  to  goc  to  ibarre  m  3lfrael. 

3  2nb  £0ofcs  f  cicasar  the  i&neft 
fpaue  abitl)tl)em  m  theplamcsofSpo- 
ab  bp  ■Jorbanc  neere  3jericho,faping, 

4     Take  the  fumme  of  the  pCOplC  f  COm 

tibentppeercs  olbanb  bputarb,asthe 
%  o  is  ©  *  commanbeb  #ofes,anb  the 
rtTtlwen  of  3fracl  ibhicl;  ibent  foojtlj 
outofthelanbof<£gppt. 

1  €*Keuben  the  elbeft  fonne  of  33f 
racl :  the  chilbmi  of  Hcuben ,  ^anoch, 

or  whom  commeth  the  familp  Of  tljC  ^a^ 

nochitcs :  of  pawn  the  family  of  the 
taalluites : 

6  £)f  V)ttzon  the  fanulp  of  the  V)tU 
ronites :  of  Carmi  tlje  familp  of  the 
Carmites. 

7  IChcle  are  the  families  of  the  3Rcu- 
benites:  anb  thep  that  iberc  numb«b 
of  them,  mere  fourne  anb  tfwee  thou^ 
fanb.anbfruenhuno^ctianb  thlrtie. 

3  3lnbthe  founts  of  pallu,citab. 
9  3nbi 


\H4.hmfe 
ofifathrr. 


*  Chap.  31. 


•Cl.ap.i.j. 


'Chap. I. 


'  Gene.  46. 
3.  ciod.«. 
14. I. thro. 
5.1. 


Ifrael 


isnum 


bred       Ch: 


a 


r 


XXVj. 


by  their  tribes. 


•Clup.itf. 


fccmd^. 


9  3lnbtbcfonncs  of Cltab Lemuel, 
anb  2>arban,  anb3lbiram :  this  is  that 
JDatljanj^tHcam.wh.chiDerefamoufi 
m  the  Congregation ,  lbbo  *fttoue  te 
gamft^ofes  anbagatnQ  3aronmtbc 
companicof  Hozab,  tbbcu  tbepftrouc 
agatnlttbe3L£>K©r 

10  2nbtbe  cacti)  openeb  her  mouth, 
anbfrdallolbcb  tbembp  together  ibitb 
Bozab  tbbentbat  companicbieb,tbbat 
timetbc&rebeuourcbttbobunbzcbanb 
fiftie  men :  ant)  tbep  became  a  Ognc. 

u  /3otttnrtjftmibing,tbecbilbzenof 
Bozabbicbnot. 

ii  C  Xbe  Cannes  of  Simeon,  after 
their  families :  Of  /5emuel,tbe  family 
of  the  /fremuehtes :  Of  3f  amm,  the  fa 
mtuc  of  tfte3Janmutes :  Of  3aebin,tbe 
familie  oftlje  3Jacbinttes : 

ij  Ofzerab,tbcfamilieoftbczar< 
bites:  Of  5>baul ,  the  famine  of  the 
&hauiitcs. 

i+  Itljcfc  aretlje  families  offbeat- 
meonites,  ttbeutic  anb  ttbo  tboiifanb, 
anb  ttbo  btmtycb. 

15  <L  ICbecbilbzen  of  <sab  after  their 
families :  Ofzcphon,tbe  famine  of  the 
Zepbonltcs:  of  $?aggt  the  famine  of  the 
fyaggitcs :  of  £>bum  the  famine  of  the 
£>bunitcs. 

16  OfOsni,  the  famine  of  tl)e  &>y 
nitcs :  Of  €n  the  famine  of  the  etites. 

17  Of  3lr  ob  the  famine  of  the  3ro* 
bites :  of  3CteIi  the  famine  of  the  %tt> 
lites. 

18  £hefe  «e  the  families  of  the  cbu> 
men  of  <5ab ,  atcozbing  to  rbofc  that 
ibere  numb;eb  of  them,  fourtic  rtjou- 
fanbanbnucbunbjeb. 

19  C  *Xbc  fonnes  of  3Jubab,  were 
€r  anb  ©nan :  anb  €r  anb  Onan  bicb 
in  the  lanb  of  Canaan. 

xo  anb  the  fonncs  of  3Jubab  after 
tbcirfamiltestbctc  :Of£>belabtbefas 
mate  of  the  3>belanites :  Of  Shares 
the  familic  of  tl)c  ^barMtes :  Of  zc- 
rah  the  famine  of  the  zarhites. 

n  3nb  the  fonncs  of  0bare5  tberc : 
Of  $cfron  the  famine  of  the  $efro- 
nitcs :  Of  $amul  the  familie  of  the  $* 
mnlites. 

n  Xhcfca"  thcfamilics  of 3Jnbah 
accozbing  to  thofc  that  Tbere  numbzeb 
of  them,  tbzeefcoze  anb  firteene  thou- 
fanb anb  fiuebunbzcb. 

ij  C  Of  the  Tonnes  of  3Jfracharafc 
tcr  their  families :  Of  Xola  the  familic 
of  the  Xoiaitcs :  ofpua  the  famine  of 
the  ^unites. 


24-  Of  3alhub  the  familie  of  the 
3JaQ)Utntes :  of  5>bimroti  the  famine 
oftbeS>bimronitee;. 

15  Xhcfe  arc  the  families  of  3HIatbar 
accozbmg  to  thofethat  tbere  numbzeb 
of  trjctn ,  trj2cefco2e  ano  four  e  tljoufann , 
anbtbzcebunbzeb. 

z6  COf the  fonnes  of  zebuiun  af ' 
tcr  their  families,  of  ;§>ereb  the  familic  J 
of  the  Sorbites :  Of  <£lon  the  familie 
of  the  cionites :  of  ^ahleel  the  familie 
ofthe^Jableeutes. 

17  Xhefc  are  the  families  of  the  Ze^ 
bulunitcs,  accozbmg  to  thofe  that  Ibere 
numbzeb  of  them,  tbzeefcoze  thoufanb 
anb  fine  hnnbzeb. 

is  €  Xhc  fonncs  of  3lofepb  after 
their  families,  were  HJ9anan*eh  anb  e* 
ptjiaim. 

19  Oftbefonnesofi3}9anaffcb:Of 
*Q3achir  tl)e  familic  of  the  2J3acbirites : 
anb  £0acbit  begate  d&ileab :  €>f  ©tleab 
come  the  familie  of  the  (Meabltes. 

30  Xbefe  are  the  Tonnes  of  dftleab : 
Of  IJee^er  the  family  of  tbc3Jee3entes: 
Of  deleft  the  familie  of  the  ^eleRites. 

ji  ^nbof^fnclthefamilvofthc5lf 
riclites :  anb  of  S>becbem  the  famine  of 
thc£>becbemitcs. 

ji  3tnb  of  S>bemlba  the  familie  of 
the  &bemibattes :  anb  of  $cpber  tlje 
familie  of  the  ^epberitcs. 

J3  C  ^nb*  Zclophchab  the  fonne  of 
l?cphcr  hab  no  fonncs,  but  bangbters : 
anbthenamcsofthcbaughtcrsofzc^ 
lopbebab,  were  ^ahial) ,  anb  /5oalj, 
^ogiah,  ^ilcah,anb  Xinah. 

3+  Xljefe  are  the  families  of  ^9anaf^ 
feb,  anb  thofethat  ibere  numbzeb of 
tbem,fiftte  anb  ttbo  thoufanb  anb  (cum 
bunbicb. 

35  CXheftaretl)efonncsof€pb2a= 
im,aftcr  their  families :  €>f  5)huthclah 
tije  familie  of  the  ^>buthaibitcs :  £>f 
Bcthcr  the  familie  of  the  25acbJites: 
Of  H^h^n  the  familic  of  the  Xaba-- 
nites. 

36  ^nb  thefc  are  the  tonnes  of  ^>hu 
tbdah :  Of  Cran  the  familic  of  the  e* 
ranttes. 

37  Xbcfe  are  the  families  of  rlie 
fonnes  of  *£ph2aim,  actozbing  to  tboft 
thattt»crenumb«bofthcm,thirticanb 
ttbo  tboufanb,aub  fiue  hunbzeb.  IChcfe 
are  the  fonnes  of  "Jofepb  after  their  fa 
milics. 

38  CXbefonnesofBeniaminaftcr 
their  families :  Of  *6eia  the  familic  of 
tbezselaites:  Of  3lft)bel  tlje  familic  of 

the 


•lofh.  17.1 


"Gup. 17. 
t. 


12 


llfraelisnumbred       Numbers.  by  their  tribes. 


•chap.35. 

54- 

\Heh.mnl. 
tply  his  in- 
heritance. 


tfte  2mbclites:  £5faft(rami1jc  famtly 
oftftcaftlramitcs: 

39  £)f  £>ftupnam  ti)c  fannly  of  tfte 
&ftupoamites:£)f§upftamtftcfanuly 
oftftctyupftamitcs. 

4.0  ant)  the  fonnes  of  ffieia  tttetc 
3tro  ano  4!3aaman :  ot  Ard,tftefamtly  of 
thermites:  and  of  jBaaman  tfte  family 
oftftc/Saamitcs. 

41   Xfttfe  are  tfte  fOtttttS  Of  26ttt(fc 

nun  after  tftctr  families ;  anbtfteytftat 
lucre  numbjcb  of  tftem,  were  fourty  anb 
fine  tftotifanb,  anb  Grcftuntyeb. 

4z  CXftefcaretftcfonncsofSDan 
after  tftctr  familtcs :  5©f  5>ftuftam  tfte 
family  oftfte&ftuftanutcs.  Cftcfcare 
tfte  families  of  Dan  ,  after  rftcir  fa; 
milics. 

43  311  tfte  families  of  tfte  &ftuft& 
mites  ,  accojbmg  to  tftofe  tftat  acre 
nttmbjcb  of  tftem ,  were  ti);te  fco?c  anb 
fourc  tl)onfahb,anbfoure  ftunbzcb. 

44  C&ftftccfttlbzenofafJbcr after 
tftcic families:  £>f3itmnatfte  family  of 
tf)c1Jimtutcs:tDf  3icfui  the  family  of 
tfte  iJefuttcs :  £>f  25er  iaft  tfte  family  of 
tftcascrtitcs. 

45  4Df  tfte  fonnes  of  zsertaft ;  of $e- 
bcr  rnc  family  of  tfte  ^ebentes:  of  £Rak 
tfttcl,tftc  famtly  of  tfte  s33alcfticlitcs. 

46  anb  tfte  name  oftftcbaugfttcr  of 
3ttt)cr,n.as£>araft. 

47  Xhcfe  are  tfte  families  of  tfte 
founes  of  3Jfl)er,atto,ibingto  tftofe  tftat 
lbcrcnumbjcb  of  tftem  jlbftolbercfifhe 
anb  fft.zcc  tftoufanb, anb  fourc  ftunbzcb. 

4S  £>ftfte  fonnes  of  jBapfttali.aftcr 
tijeir  famines,  of  %ift5cel  tfte  family  of 
tfte  %il)5cclitts:  «©f  ©uni,  tfte  famtly 
of  trjc  dilutes: 

49  ^f^er,  tfte  famtly  of  tfte  3te 
writes:  £>f£>fttllem  tftcfamtly  of  tfte 
£>i)illcmttes. 

50  Xftcfe  are  tfte  families  of  /3apl> 
taii,acco2btng  to  tftctr  families : anb 
tl)ey  tljat  mere  numbjeb  of  tbcm  ,tt»trc 
fourtp  nub  fuie  tftoufanb ,  anb  foure 
ftunbzcb. 

51  Xncfc  mere  tlic  nuntbzeb  of  the 
cfttlbzen  of  3Ifracl ,  fire  ftunbzcb  tftou< 
fanb  ,  aub  a  tftoufanb,  feucn  ftunbzcb 
anbtfttrtie. 

5z  c  3nb  tfte  1L 0  is je>  fpauc  bnto 
C0ofcs,faytng, 

53  tlnto  tftcfe  tfte  lanb  fftallbcbutk 
bebfozantnfteritatue,  accozbtngtotfte 
number  of  names. 

54  *^o  manv  tftou  fftalt  tgiuttftc 
mozemftcr;tancc,ano  to  fcU)  tftou  (ftalt 


fgiue  tfte  leffe  mftcritante :  to  cucry  one 
(ftall  ftis  inftcrttance  be  giucn,aeto?bmg 
to  tftofe  tftat  iberenumbieb  ofrjtni. 

55  ^otibitftftanbtng  tfte  lanb  (bail 
bee  *  biuibco  by  lot :  attorning  to  tfte 
names  of  tfte  tribes  of  tftctr  fatftcrs, 
tfteyfftaiiinfterite. 

56  accozbmg  to  tfte  lot  mall  tfte 
poflcmontftcreof  be  biuibcb  bcttbccnc 
many  and  ftm. 

57  C*2tnbtftefe  are tftcy tftattberc 
numbzeb  oftftcHenitcs,  after  tfteitfa* 
milics :  £Df  <£cr(fton ,  tfte  family  of  tfte 
©erfftonites:  Cf  Boftatft  tfte  fanuly  of 
tfte  Boftatftites:  £>f  Spctan  tfte  family 
oftfte^9craritcs. 

58  Xftefc  are  tfte  families  of  tfte  %t 
uitcs:tftefamilyoftftc?Libtutcs,tftcfa? 
nuly  of  tfte  $ebzonttcs,tftc  family  of  tfte 
i©ahiites,the  famtly  of  tfte  ^uflntes, 
tfte  family  of  tftcBozatftitcs:  anb  Bo- 
ftatftbegatc^mram. 

59  3lnb  tfte  name  of  3unramstbtfe 
lbas  *3Joeftebebtftcbaugftterof?Lcut, 
Ibftont  licr  naother  bare  to  ftzui  in  €> 
gypt :  3lnb  fbec  bare  bnto  Entrant, 
aaron  anb  £J3ofts,anb  Miriam  tfteir 
fitter. 

60  3tnbbnto^aronlbasbome/Ba« 
bab  anb  ^btftu,  €ica5ar  anb  31  tftamat. 

6i  3Jnb  *  i5abab  anb  ^tbtftn  hitu, 
Vbftcn  tftey  offcreb  ftrange  fire  bcfo;e 
tfte?L«>ifijP. 

6z  ^nbtftofetftatlbercnumbjebof 
tftcm,Vbercnbcntyanbtft:cctftoufanb, 
all  males  from  a  monetft  olb  anb  bp^ 
rbarb :  fo?  t\)t^  tberc  not  numb?cb  a« 
mongtfte  tftilbjen  of  "Jfrael ,  betaufc 
tftcrc  rbas  no  tnftcritante  gtucn  tftem 
among  tfte  cfttlbjcn  of3}frael. 

63  CXftcftarctfto'tftatUicrenum* 
b?eb  by  £l9ofcs  anb  <Elca5ar  tfte  ^neft, 
ibfto  numbjeb  the  elulbjen  of  ^fracl  in 
rl)cpiamesof^oab,by3o?bane  neere 
'Jericfto. 

64  But  among  tftefe  tftcre  tbas  not 
a  man  of  tftem ,  ibftom  £&oi cs  anb  31a- 
ron  tfte  0:£eft  numbzeb ,  ibftcn  tftcy 
numbjeb  tfte  cfttibjcn  of  lifrael  in  tfte 
lbilbernefrcof5>inai. 

65  5roztftc?l£>«©ftabfaiboftftcm, 
%\)cy  *  fljail  furely  bie  in  tfte  ttnlbcr; 
ncflc :  anb  tfterc  Vbas  not  left  a  man  of 
tftem , few  Caleb tlje  fonnc  of  3Jcpftun* 
neft^no  3Joflmatftelbnnc  of|5un. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

1   The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  fue  for  an  in- 
heritance.    6    The  law  of  inheritances. 

!•_  Mol« 


r  Htbr  d>- 
mimfh  hti 
inheritance. 


'Chap.  33- 
y4-ic(h.i  1, 
13.  and  14. 


*Eiod.«. 
16.17,18, 


•Exnd.j.i, 
and<5.  zo. 


*  Lcuit.  TO, 
i.cl.ap.3.4. 
1 .  cliro.  24. 


•  Chap.  14. 
38. 1.corlo. 
105.;^. 


Zclophehad. 


Ch 


•Chap.  16. 
;  r .  iofli. 
17.}. 


•Chap.  14 
3^.  and  a6. 
64,6$. 


mutifhtd. 


'  Dcut.  31 


Mofes  beeing  told  of  his  death,  fueth 
for  a  fucceflour.  >S  lofhua  is  appointed 
tofucceedhim. 

<p£f^&  ^"*  tame  the  Daughters 
vjilt  §f|w  of*relopbcbaD,fbcfonnc 
*  of$epber,tne  tonne  of  <5t> 
leaD,tbe  tonne  of  $39arl)ir, 
.  tbefonncofi^anaffcb.of 
tbe  families of  sJJ9anaiTeb,  tbetotmeof 
'Jofepb  -,  attD  tliefc  arc  the  names  of  I)is 
Daughters :  £0abiab,  /3oah>atiD  l?og* 
iab>anD  t$ticab,anD  Xmab. 

i  :3nDtbey(rooDbcto2c£0ofcs,anD 
before  e  lea^ar  tbc  p2icu\attD  befo/e  tbe 
0nnces,  anD  all  tbc  Congregation,  by 
tbtooojeoftljc  Xabcrnacle  oftbcCon* 
gregatton.fayittg, 

j  £>ur  fatber  *  DieD  in  tbc  lbilDer; 
ncffe,anDbeibasuotintbecompattyof 
tbcm  tbat  gatbcrcD  tbcmfclucs  toge- 
tljec  agatnfi  tbc  %  o  is  id  tn  tbc  com* 
patty  of  Bozab  :  but  DieD  tn  bisottate 
Cnncano  ban  no  fonnes. 

4  naby  (boulD  tiie  name  of  our  fa* 
tberbctDoncaibay  front  amongbis  fa 
mily .  bctaufe  ije  bath  no  tonne*  <5iue 
bnto  bs  therefore  apoffcffionamongtbc 
bjetbJCtt  of  our  father. 

5  3nD  fi^ofes  bought  tbeir  canfe 
bcfo?ctbelLowp. 

6  C.  3nD  tbc  %  €>  k  ©  fpafte  bnto 
^ofesJaytng, 

7  Xbe  Daughters  of  ZdopbcbaD 
fpeafee  right  :  thou  (bait  fitrcly  gate 
them  a  poffeffioh  of  an  inheritance  a* 
mong  their  fathers  b:eth2cn,anD  thou 
(bait  canfe  tbe  inheritance  of  their  fa- 
tbtt  to  paffc  bnto  them. 

s  3lnD  thou  (bait  fpeafte  bnto  the 
cbUDjen  of  'Jffracl,  faying,  'Jf  a  man 
Die,  anDhaue  no  fontte,  then  yee  fball 
caufe  bis  inheritance  to  paffe  bnto  bis 
Daughter. 

9  ^nD  if  be  h'lwt  no  Daughter , then 
pec  (bail  gmc  his  inheritance  bnto  bis 

bJctbJcu. 

10  3tnDifbchaucnob2Cthjen,then 

yee  (ball  gate  his  inheritance  bnto  bis 
fathers  bjcthzcn. 

11  Unn  if  bis  father  bane  no  toc< 
tb2en,tbcnpc(bailgiuebisinberitance 
bnto  bis  Utnfemantbat  is  nejtt  to  him 
ofhis  family,  anD  bee  (ball  polTefleit: 
3(nD  it  (ball  be  bnto  tbe  cbiiD2eu  of  3Jt 
rael  a  ftatutc  of  uiDgemcnt ,  as  the 
%<s>  is  id  commanDcD  £3ofcs. 

12  C  3nD  the  %  o  as  id  faiDe  bnto 
99ofes ,  *<3ct  tbecbp  into  this  mount 
3bantn,auD  fee  tljc  lano  ibbicb  3  Dane 


ap.xxvi). 


lofhuarul 


cr. 


gtucn  bnto  the  chtttucn  ofjfcaei. 

13  3(nDtbbcnthouhalneencit,tboii 
alfofhalt  bcgathercDbnto  thy  people, 
as  *  3aron  thy  bjotber  ibas  gatbereD. 

1+  5To2ye*rebelleDagain(rmy  Com 
tnattDemcnt(tntbcDcfartof:zm,tntbe 
flrife  of  the  Congregation )  to  tonenfie 
me  at  the  ibater,  befo2C  their  eyes :  that 
k  the  *  ibatcr  of  t©ertbab  m  BaDefl)  in 
tbeibtlDcrneffcofzttt. 

15  C  3nD  £0ofes  fpabe  bnto  the 
JLs>w  3D,  faying, 

16  HettbefLsDKEstbedEoDoftbe 
fpirits  of  all  flefb ,  fct  a  man  oucc  the 
Congregation, 

17  tBbtcb  may  goc  out  befiw  them, 
anD  lbbtcb  may  goc  in  bcfo2C  them,  anD 
rbbtrb  may  leaD  them  out,  anDtbbttb 
J  may  b2tng  them  m ,  that  the  Congrega- 
tion of  tbc  %  o  k  ©  bee  not  as  fbeepc 
ttrntcb  batte  no  fbcpbearD. 

is  C  3nD  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiDe  bnto 
flMes,  Xabe  thee  5Io(l)tta  the  tonne 
of  /Butt,  a  man  in  ibbom  is  the  fptrtt, 
ano  lay  thine  battD  bpon  bun. 

19  3JnD  fct  bint  befoie  eicasat  the 
#2ieft ,anD  bcfo2e  all  the  Congregation: 
anD  gtuc  htm  a  charge  in  their  bgbt. 

20  3(nD  thou  (bait  put  fome  of  thine 
honour  bpon  him,  that  all  the  Congre- 
gation of  the  ebilDjen  of  3f  ftacl  may  be 
obeDtent. 

2 1  3!nD  he  fball  ftanD  bcto2C  Clca^ar 
thci&neft,  mho  (ball  aftte  cottnfeli  foj 
bun,  *  after  the  itiDgementof  JllcunbCi 
fojetbefL  ©  is  s»:at  hisib02D  fljal  they 
goe  ottt,anD  at  hts  H302D  they  dial  come 
in,bothhe,anDaithccbtlD2cnof3fracl 
ttJlth  him,  cuen  all  the  Congregation. 

zi  ^nDi55ofcsDtDastbefL©ut© 
commanDcDhim:attDbetoolic3Jo(bua 
anD  fct  bun  bcfo2c  £lea?ar  the  0?teft, 
anD  befo2c  all  the  Congregation. 

23  3nD  bee  layD  his  fanncs  bpon 
htm,  anD  gatte  hint  a  charge,  as  the 
%  ©  is  s>  commautiDeD  by  the  banD  of 
£0ofcs. 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

1  Offerings  are  to  be  obferued.  3  Thecon- 
tinuall  burnt  offering.  9  Theofferingon 
the  Sabbath,  n  on  the  New-moones,  \6 
atthePaffeouer,  16  in  the  day  of  fii  ft  fruits. 

*£!&&£&  ir5D  the  IL©  k  ©  fpafte 
MJlW  bnto  s^ofes,  faying, 
$/£$tW\  1  Commano  the  clnl- 
F^r#^!K^  D:cn  of  3lfrael,anDfay  bn< 
SeNsp^*  to  tbetn,£Py  offering,  and 
my  b;caD  Fo;  my  facrificcs,  maoe  by  fire 

to: 


'Chap.  10. 

'4- 

'Chap.  20. 

4- 


E.tod, 


17 


Exod.18. 


12  2 


Sol 


oiemne 


fcafc 


Numbers,      and  their  offi 


rings, 


X  Heir.  A 

JM*0W  of 

mt  rejL 


•Eiod.  29. 
58. 


7  Hfhtna 

J,,. 


t  HWrif 

tween:  the 
rrro  turning. 
'  Lcuit.2  I 

*ExoJ.  2? 


foza  tfrocet  fauour  bnto  mee,  (hall  pec 
obferuc,  to  offer  bnto  me,  m  their  Due 
fcafbn. 

?  3(nD  tljou  malt  fap  bnto  them, 
*  Xhts  '5  file  offering  mabe  by  fitc, 
Which  pc  (ball  offer  bnto  the  Ho  is  jd: 
XWo  lambes  of  tt)c  firtt  peere  Without 
fpot  t  bap  op  Dap,  foz  a  tontmuall  burnt 
offering. 

4  Xhconeiambefhaltthouoffcrln 
tlie  mowing,  anb  the  other  lambe  (halt 
thou  offct  t  at  Cuctt. 

5  3(nD  a  tenth  part  of  an  Cphah  of 
floWzc  foz  a  *meate  offering,  nunglcD 
with  the  fourth  part  of  an  *  J?pn  of  bca; 
ten  ople. 

6  it  is  a  continual!  burnt  offering 
Which  was  ozbetneb  in  mount  £>tnat 
foz  a  frocctc  fauour,  afacrtficemabebp 
fire  bnto  the  |L£>  is©. 

7  3Utb  tl)c  bzlnHc  offering  thereof 
(hall  be  the  fourth  part  of  an  5?pn  foz 
the  one  lambe  tin  the  holp  place  (halt 
thou  caufcthe  ttrong  WiuctobccpoW: 
rcb  bnto  the  %omw>  foz  a bziulte  of- 
fring. 

3  3lnb  the  other  lambe  (halt  tfjou  o£ 
fet  at  Cuctt :  as  the  mcate  off  ring  of  the 
morning ,  anb  as  the  dzuikc  offering 
thereof,  tl)ou  malt  offct  it,  a  facrifice 
mabebyfireof  a  from  fauour  bnto  the 

9  C3mbonthc£>abbathbap,tWo 
lambesof  trjc  firtt  ycerc  Without  fpot, 
aim  two  tcntl)  bcaics  of  flowze  foz  a 
mcatc  offering  mtttglcb  With  ople,  anb 
thebzinltc  offermgthcrcof. 

10  Xhls  is  tl)c  burnt  offnng  of  cucry 
£>abbath ,  befttic  the  tontmuall  burnt 
offering,  anb  his&zmhc  offering. 

11  C3lnb  tit  trjc  beginnings  of  your 
moncths.yc  (hall  offer  abumt  offering 
bnto  the  Uokp:  XWo  yong  bullocks 
anb  oneratmne,fcuni  lambs  of  thefirtt 
ycere,  Without  fpot, 

ii  3lnb  thzee  tenth  beales  of  floWzc 
foz  a  mcate  offcrtng.mingtcb  With  oyle, 
foz  oncbullocUc,  aim  two  tcntl)  bcaics 
of  floWzcfoz  a  meat  offering,  mmgltb 
With  ople,  fo:  one  rammc : 

ij  anb a feucrai  tcntl)  beale  of  floWzc 
minglcb  With  oyle  foz  a  mcate  offering, 
bnto  one  lambe,  foz  a  burnt  offering  of 
a  {meet  fauour,  a  facrifice  mabe  by  fire 
bnto  the 31  o in©. 

14  anbtheirbzmitcoffcrmgsfhalbe 
haifc  an  Dm  of  mine  bnto  a  bin  iodic, 
anb  the  tl)irb  part  of  an  fitn  bnto  a 
ramme,  anb  a  fourt!)  part  of  an  Dm 


bnto  alambc:  Xhis  is  the  burnt  offrmg 
of  cucry  moneth,  throughout  the  mo- 
neths  of  the  ycere. 

15  ZLno  one  nibbe  of  the  goatcs  foz  a 
finne  offering  bnto  tl)c  %  o  is  3D  ttjaibc 
offcreb,bcftbcstl)etontinuaiiburntof^ 
fring  anb  his  bztnftc  offering. 

16  *  31nb  m  the  fourteenth  bap  of  the 
firtt  moneth,  "the  #affcouer  of  the 
?lois©. 

17  2nb  m  the  fifteenth  bap  of  this 
moneth  « the  fcaft :  feuen  bapes  (hall 
bulcaucncb  bzcab  be  eaten. 

18  ^n  the*  firtt  bap  (hail  bee  an  holp 
conuocatton,  pee  (haliboeno  maner  of 

fcrUllCWOZfcC  therein. 

19  2Sut  pc  (l)ail  offer  a  faertfice  mabe 
bp  fire  for  a  burnt  offering  bnto  the 
TL©K©,tWovongbullocKes,  anbone 
ramme,  anb  ftuen  lambcs  of  the  firtt 
pcerc :  they  (hall  be  bnto  pou  Without 
blcmifh. 

io  3nb  their  mcate  offcringfhailbc 
of  flowze  mmgicb  ibith  ople :  thzec 
tenth  bcaics  than  pe  offer  foz  a  bulloefce, 
anb  tibo  tenth  bcaics  foz  a  ramme. 

21  a  feueraii  tenth  beale  matt  thou 
offer  foz  eucrp  lambe,  throughout  the 
fcueu  lambcs: 

22  ^nboncgoatfojafumeorTeriug, 
to  mafecan  atonement  foz  pou. 

23  Pc  thai  offer  thefebrfiue  the  burnt 
offering  m  the  morning,  ibhichisfoja 
contuuiaii  burnt  offering. 

24  after  this  matter  pee  (hall  offer 
baplp  throughout  thefenen  bapes,  the 
meat  of  the  facrifice  mabt  bp  fire,  of  a 
frocet  rauour  bnto  tljc  %  ©  is  n> :  it  thai 
beoffrebbefiDe  the  continuail  burnt  of- 
frmg, anb  hisozmUe  offertng. 

25  ^ub  on  the  feucnth  bap  pee  (hail 
haucanholpconuocation:pee(hallboe 
nofcruiletbozltc. 

26  C^lfomthebap  of  the  fir  ft  fruits 
mhcnpebzingancibmcat  offenngbn* 
to  the  ?Lo«3d,  after  pour  tbrcttcsbee 
out:pc  (haiihauean  hoip  conuocatton, 
pefhallboe  no  ferutlcibozht. 

27  2But  pec  (hall  offer  the  burnt  ofc 
fertng  foz  a  froecte  fauour  bnto  the 
%  e>  k  £>,  two  pong  bttilocUcs,  one 
ramme,  fcueniambes  of  the  firtt  pcerc. 

23  ^nb  their  meat  offering  of  flotbze 
minglco  ibith  ople,  thzce  tenth  bcaics 
bnto  one  bullocKe,  ttbo  tenth  bcaics 
bnto  one  rammc, 

29  %  fencrali  tenth  beale  bnto  one 
lambcthozoiboutthcfeucn  lambcs, 

30  And  oit£  aibbe  of  the  goatcs,  to 

mabe 


«E*od.n. 

18. 

Icuit.23.5. 


'Lcuit.j:. 


(Solemnefeafts,        Chap.xxix. 


and  rheir  offerings. 

o 


'Lcuit.  2  J 


•Leuit.  1 6. 
19.  aid  >J. 

*7- 


maitc  aw  atonement  fo:  pou. 

31  jaedjall  offer  them  beOocstljecon 
tinnail  burnt  offenng,  anb  bis  meat  of 
fenns,  (tt)cp  Cljall  be  Ditto  pou  Without 
bletmfl))  anb  their  b;mttc  offerings. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

The  offering  at  the  feaft  of  Trumpets,  7  at 
the  dav  of  afflicting  their  foules,  i)  and  on 
the  eiehtdayes  of  the  feaft  of  Tabernacles. 

115b  tnthefcuentb  moneth, 
on  the  firtt  day  of  the  mo- 
netise (ballbaucanholp 
conuocation,  ytt  (ballboe 
»J  no  feruilelbo?fee :  *  it  tsa 
bapofbioibmgtbetrumpetsbntopou. 
2  3lnb  pe  (hall  offer  a  burnt  offering 
fo;afroeet  fauour  unto  ti)e  ILoibb, 
one  pong  bullotUc ,  one  ramme ,  anb 
fcuen  lambcs  of  thefirttpeeretbithout 
blemifl). 

j  3tnb  their  meat  offenng  (hall  be  of 
flourc  mmgleb  lbitb  ople,  tb:cc  tenth 
beales  fo;  a  bullocuc ,  and  ttbo  tenth 
beales  fo;  a  ramme: 

4  anbonctmthbcaieto;onc!ambe 
tho;oibout  the  feuen  lambes: 

5  2nb  one  tttbbe  of  the  goats  fo;  a 
fume  offering  to  matte  an  atonement 
fo;pou: 

6  aseubc  the  burnt  offering  of  the 
moncth,anb  his  meat  offenng,  anb  the 
baplp  burnt  offering ,  anb  his  meat  ofc 
fering,anb  their  bmtfce  off  enngs,acco;^ 
bing  bnto  their  matter,  fo;  a  ftoeetfa? 
uour ,  afaen&ce  mabe  by  fiec  bnto  the 

2L<D13P. 

7  C3nb*pe  mall  hatte  on  the  tenth 
bap  of  this  feuettth  moneth  an  holp 
conuocation;  anb  pee  (hall  afflict  your 
fbules :  pee  Cljail  not  boe  any  ttwue 

therein. 

8  zsutpctballofferabttrntoffcring 
bnto  the  %  o  ts  p  fo;  a  fujeet  fauour, 
oncyongbuUotU,oncrammc,andfeuen 
lambes  of  the  firftpeere,  they  (ball  bee 
bnto  you  Without  blemifb. 

9  3lnb  their  mcate  offering  (ball  be 
of  flourc  mmgleb  With  ople,  tb:ee  tenth 
beales  to  a  bulloctte ,  and  «bo  tenth 
beales  to  one  ramme: 

10  a  feuerail  tenth  bcaie  fo;  one 
lambc,  thozottiout  the  feuen  lambes ; 

11  jDnctnbbeofthcgoatsfozafinne 
offering,  befibe  the  Dnnc  offenng  of  at- 
onement, anb  the  conttnuall  burnt  of 
fcrittg ,  anb  the  meat  offenng  of  it,  anb 
tbctrbmmc  offerings. 


u  C  3nb  on  the  fifteenth  bap  of  the 
feuenth  moneth,  pee  (hail  hauc  an  holp 
conuocation ,  pee  (hall  boe  no  feruile 
ibo;Uc,  anb  yt  (ball  fecepe  afcattbnto 
the  1L  o  n  p  fcuctt  buyts. 

13  3nbpe  (hail  offer  a  burnt  offnng, 
a  faenfice  mabe  bp  fire,of  a  facet  fauour 
bnto  the  %  0  k  p ,  tbirtcntc  pong  bul 
locks  ,  ttbo  rammes ,  and  fbuncene 
lambes  of  the  firflpeere :  1£bep  Cljali  be 
Without  blemifl), 

14.  anb  their  meat  offering  (lull  be 
of  flourc  mmgleb  tbith  oplc,th:cc  tenth 
beales  bnto  nierp  btmortic  of  tfjctrjtrs 
tecnebullocUs,tibo  tenth  beales  to  each 
ramme  of  the  ttbo  rammes: 

15  3nb  a  feuerail  tent!;  btalc  to  each 
lantbc  of  the  four  eteene  lambes : 

is  3lnbonetubbeoftbegoatsfo;a 
Cinne  offnng,befibe  the  continual  burnt 
offenng,  his  mcate  offenng ,  anb  bis 
bunhe  offering. 

17  C3fnb  on  the  feconb  bap  ve  fhal  of- 
fer ttbeluepongbulloclts,tibo  rammes, 
fottreteene  lambcs  of  the  ficft  peere 
ibtthotttfpot. 

18  3lnb  their  meat  offring,anbtbctr 
bzinbe  offenngs  fo,:  the  bullorftcs,  fo? 
the  rammes,  anb  to;  the  lambcs,  fhaii  be 

acco;bing  to  thetr  number ,  after  the 
maner : 

19  3lnb  one  Uibbe  of  the  goats  fo:  a 
fume  offering ,  befibe  the  conttnuall 
burnt  offering ,  anb  the  meate  offering 
thereof,anb  their  bnnbe  offerings. 

20  C  3nb  on  the  tbirb  bap  eleucn 
bullocks ,  ttbo  rammes ,  foureteene 
lambs  of  the  firft  pcre  rbithout  blemifl). 

21  anb  their  meate  offering ,  anb 
their  bnttfte  offerings  fo:  the  bullocfes, 
fo:  the  rammes,  anb  fo;  the  lambcs, 
fhaii  be  accoibtttg  to  their  number  after 
themaner: 

i2  anb  one  goat  fo;  a  Gnnc  offering, 
bcDbe  the  contmuail  burnt  offering, 
anb  Ijts  meate  offering,  anb  hisbunae 
offering. 

23  C^nbontbefouttbbaptenbul* 
locus,  ttbo  rammes ,  and  foureteene 
lambs  oftbefirftpm  Without  blemifl). 

24.  %\)tit  meat  offenng,  anb  tbetr 
bztttKC  offerings,  fo;  the  bullocks,  fo; 
the  rammes ,  anb  fo:  the  lambcs,<haii  be 
acco;btng  to  their  number  after  the 
matter: 

25  ^nb  one  lubbc  of  the  goats  fb;  a 
fin  offenng ,  befibe  the  contmuail  burnt 
offenng,  his  meate  offenng,  anb  his 
b;tnae  offering. 

£t  26  Oub 


Offringsatfeafts.      Numbers. OfVowcs. 


•Lcuioj. 


Or.cfrr. 


26  C3mbonthefiftbap,nmebul' 
loefecs,  ttbo  tainmes,  and  fourteen* 
lambes  of  the  firtt  peere,  itottijout  Cpot : 

z7  anbtbeirmeatoffriuganbthctt 
biintte  offerings,  ft>2  the  bullocfecs,  ft>2 
therammes,  anbfo2thelambes,fhatibe 
atco2bing  to  their  number  aftet  the 
maner: 

z8  ^bortegoatefo2afmneoffrmg, 
bc&DethecontmitfWburmoffring,  anb 
Ins  meate  offering  anb  his  biinfee  of' 
feting. 

X9  C^nbonthetfet  bap  eight  bul* 
locftcs,  ttbo  rammes ,  and  fourtcent 
lambes  of  the  nrft  peere  tblthotrt  ble* 
nitty: 

jo  3nbthcitnieatoffring,an6their 
bnnfte  offerings,  fb2  the  bullocBes,  fb2 
the  rammes,  anb  foz  the  lambes,  ftwii 
be  attojbtng  to  their  number,  after  the 
maner: 

31  3nb  one  goat  fiw  a  Gnne  offering, 
beObt  the  contuiuail  burnt  offeting,his 
meate  offertnganbhtsbjinfec  offering 

31  C3noonthefenenthbap,feuen 
bullocfees,  ttbo  rammes,  and  fourteene 
lambes  of  the  6rft  peere  tbrttjout  ble* 
mill). 

33  3mb  their  meate  offrmg,anb  their 
brtntse  offerings,  fo?  the  bullocUes,  fi>2 
therammes,  anbfo2thclambes,fhaiib 
ano;bmg  to  their  number, after  tlje 
maner 

34  ^nbonegoatfo?afnmcoffring, 
bcuDetheconhnuaUbuntt  offering,  his 
meate  offering,  anb  bisbjtnfteoffring. 

3$  C£>n  the  eight  bap,pc  (hail  haue 
a*folcmncaffmiblp:pe(hallbono  (er* 

UtlCttJOlfte  therein 

36  25utvefl)alofftrabnmtoffnng, 
afatrinttmabcbpfire^faCttJcetfeuour 
bnto  the  %  $>  33  jd,  one  bullocfte,  one 
ramme,  feuen  lambes  of  the  firft  peere 
lbtthoutblemifh: 

37  Cheir  meate  offering,  anb  their 
bjtafte  off  rings,  foz  the  buliotae,fo  2  the 
rammcanb  fb2  the  lambes  flwii  be  atto^ 
bing  to  their  number,  after  the  maner : 

3$  3nb  one  goat  fc>2  a  fmne  offering, 
bcut»crt)ecoimnuallburntoffrtng,anb 
his  meate  offering,  anb  his  bjtnae  of= 
feting. 

39  Xhcfe  things  pc  (hall  J  boe  bnto 
the  %  £>  is  ©  m  pour  fet  feaus,  beftbes 
vour  fooibes,aiib  pour  free  tbill  ofc 
ferings ,  foj  pout  burnt  offerings,  anb 
fo2  pour  meate  offerings,  anb  fo2  pour 
bnnbe  offerings,  anb  foj  pour  peatc  of* 
ferings. 


40  ^n&^ofcstolbethethilbjtenof 
3Jftaei,aeco2bing  to  all  that  the  Hsdus© 
tommanbebQtofes. 

CHAP.  XXX. 

Vowesarenottobcbroken.  3  Theexcepti- 
on  of  a  maids  vow,  6  Ofawiues,  9  Or" 
a  widowes,  or  her  that  is  diuorced. 

/Bb  fipofesfpaltebnto  the 
hcabs  of  the  tribes,  eon* 
cerning  the  chiasm  of  3J£ 
rati,  Taping,  IChiSisthe 
thing  Xbijtcf)  the  %  0  is  b> 
hathtommanbeb. 

1  J>i  a  man  botbe a botb  bnto  th: 
1L©uu>,  o2fa)careanothctobinbhis 
foule  tbith  a  bonb ;  he  fhailnot  t  bjcafce 
hismo2b,  hee(hailboeaet02bingtoall 
that pjottcbeth  out  of  hts  mouth. 

3  3Jfatt)omanalfobolbabolbbn' 
to  the  %  ©  is  je»,  anb  btnbe  her  reife  bp  a 
bonb,  beingtn  her  fathershoufein  her 
pouth,- 

4  3tnb  her  father  htare  her  botb, 
anb  her  bonb  tbhetctbtth  (hee  hath 
bounb  her  foulc;  anb  her  father  (hall 
hoibe  h^  peace  at  her :  then  all  her 
botbes  (hall  llanb ,  anb  enerp  bonb 
tbheretbtth  (hee  hath  bounb  her  foule, 
(bailOanb. 

5  26ut  if  her  father  buallolbher  in 
thebapfhathehearethi  notanpof  her 
boibes  0?  of  her  bonbs,  tbheretbtth  uje 
hath  bounbherfoulc,  (hall  ftanb:  anb 
the  1L©  is  w>  (hall  fo2giue  her ,  betaufe 
her  father  bifaiiotbeb  her. 

6  3nb  if  (he  hah  at  an  an  huf  banb 
il»hcnta)cboU)eb,o2bttercb  ought  out 
of  her  lips,  tuhercibtth  ttjecbounbher 
foule, 

7  ^nb  her  hufbanb  hwtb  it,  anb 
hclbhtspeace  atherinthebap  that  hee 
hearb  it :  then  her  boibcs  (hall  ftanb, 
anb  her  bonbs  tbherctUith  (hee  bounb 
her  foule,  (hall  danb. 

8  2Suttfhrchufbanbbtfauotbchcr 

onthebapthathehearbit,  thenhefl)au 
maUeher  boibetbhiehfljtboibeb,  anb 
tl)attbhith  fliebttercb  tbith  h^lippcs 
ibhcreTbirt)  (hee  bounb  her  foule,  of 
none  effect,  anb  the  %  ad  asp  (hall  foj- 
giue  her. 

9  28uteuerpbotbof  atbibotb,anb 
ofherthattsbtuo2ceb,tbheren)tththcv 
haut  bounb  tljeit  foules,  (hall  ftanb  a 
gamfther. 

10  3!nbtf(hcbotbebinherhtu"banbs 
houfc ,  02  bounb  he*  foule  bp  a  bonb 
nmhanoath; 

11  aw> 


\  If eir.  pro- 
fane. 


fW/*r.  her 
vpon  her. 


OfV 


owes. 


Ch 


ap.xxxi 


Balaam  fl 


ainc. 


"Chap.  17. 


^  Heir,  a 

tl.'CMf.tnaof, 
tribe. a  theft- 

trtt-e. 


1 1  3lnb  her  hufbanb  heart)  it,  anb 
heib  his  peace  at  per,  and  mfaiiomeb  her 
ttot:thntailhetfcowcsfl)allftant),aub 
euerp  bono  therewith  thee  bounb  her 
foulcfhailftanb. 

u  26ut  if  Ijjer  hufbanb  hathtotterlp 
mabcthemtoopb  on  the  bap  Dee  heart 
them,  then  tbrjatfoenerpioteebeb  out  of 
her  lips  tonecrnmg  her  Domes,  02  con 
cernmgthebonoof  her  fonle,  fl)ailuot 
ftanti :  her  hnfbanb  hart)  mabc  theni 
toopb.anb  the  %  o  is  jd  (hai  fozcjmc  her. 

13  Cuetp  bom ,  ano  euerp  burning 
othe  to  afflict  the  foulc,  her  hufbanb 
map  cftablifh  it,  0:  her  huf bant)  map 
mafeeitPopt). 

14.  25ut  tf  hec  hufbanb  altogether 
holb  htspeacc  at  her,  frombapto  Dap, 
then  he  cftablitheth  all  her  Pomes,  02 
all  her  bonbstbhich  arc  Dpon  her  :hee 
confirmeth  them,  becaufc  hcchclb  his 
peace  at  her,  in  the  bap  that  hce  heart) 

them. 

1$  ffiutif  hec  fliauanp  mapes  mane 
them  popb  after  that  he  hath  hcarb  them, 
then  he  than  bear  c  her  iniquitic. 

i6  Xhcfc  are  the  ftatutcs  which  the 
HV©k©  commanbebSMcsbetwccne 
a  man  anb  his  wife ,  betwecne  the  fa> 
tlicr  anb  his  Daughter,  being  yet  in  her 
pouth,  m  her  fathers  houfe. 

CHAP.  XXXI. 

1  The  Midianites  are  fpovlcd,  and  Balaam 
flaine.  15  Mofes  is  wroth  with  the  officers, 
for  failing  the  women  aliue.  19  How  the 
fouldiers  with  their  capnucs  and  fpoile,  are  to 
be  purified.  15  The  proportion  whereby  the 
prayistobcdiuided.  4  is  The  voluntary  ob- 
lation vnto  theTiealury  otthe  Lord. 

&x>  the  !Lok©  fpafee 
Dnto£Pofcs,fapmg, 

i  *;Hucngcthechilbjcn 
ofUfraclof  the  £&m& 
tutes  :  aftcrwart  fhalt 
thou  *  be  gathereb  Pnto  rtip  people. 

j  3tnDS|MesfpaHetontothcpeoplc, 
faputg  ,3ltme  fomc  of  pour  fcluesbnto 
the  warre,  anb  let  them  go  c  agamft  the 
£0ibiatutcs ,  ano  auengc  the  JL  ©  it  © 
of^Pibian. 

4  t  £>f  eucrp  tnbe  a  thoufanb, 
throughout  all  the  tribes  of  3Jfcaet, 
(hall  pefenb  to  the  warre.  I 

5  ts>o  there  Were  Dcltucrcb  out  of 
the  thoufanos  of  3Jfracl ,  a  thoufanb 
of  eucry  tribe ,  twehu  thoufanD  armcc: 
fozwarre. 


6  3ub  ^9ofes  fent  them  to  the 
Ibarre ,  a  thoufanb  of  enerv  tribe ,  them 
anb  tthmehas  the  foune  of  €  lea^ar  the 
pntd,  to  the  warre,  With  the  holpm* 
ftruments,  ano  the  trumpets  to  blow, 
mhishanb. 

7  3hu>thcpWarrebagamftthe£^ 
btanites,  as  the  Hois©  commanocb 
fcT9ofes,anbthepfleW  all  the  males. 

s  3lnD  rtjep  flew  the  lungs  of  <3&\- 
biau,befibethe  reft  of  them  that  Were 
flame;  namely  *<guf ,  ano  Hcftcm ,  anb 
zur,anb  $nir,an&8cba,fiucBmgsof 
f0ibian;  25alaam  alio  the  fomic  ofiSc- 
02  thcyflew  With  the  ftuort. 

9  Stub  the chilb2cn  of  3Jfracl  toofec 
all  the  Women  of  tT9ibian  captmts,  ano 
their  little  ones ,  anb  tooUc  the  fpoile  of 
all  their  catteli,  anb  an  their  floras,  anb 
all  their  goobs. 

10  3tnb  thep  burnt  all  their  ntles 
wherein  thep  bib elt,  aub  all  their  goob-- 
Ipcaftlcs  With  fire: 

11  3mbtheptoofecall  thcfpoilc,  anb 
all  the  p2ap,both  of  men  anD  of  beafts. 

ii  3nb  thep  brought  the  taptiues, 
anb  the  p2ap,anb  the  fpoile  bnto  $)ofes 
anb  <eiea5ar  the  ptttft,  anb  Pnto  the 
Congregnnonofrt)ethilb2tnofJfracl, 
tonto  the  campe  at  the  platncs  of  *$oab, 
Ybhtch  areb?  3f02banneere  Jericho. 

13  C  ^nb  i^ofcs  aub  cica^ar  the 
02left,  anb  all  the  02inccs  of  the  Con^ 
gregation  ibent  fcozttj  to  meetc  them 
Vbithout  the  campe. 

14.  ^nb£0ofesrbasn)2othtbtthtlje 
officers ofrt)e  hofte,  with  the  captatnes 
oucr  rtjoiuanbs ,  anb  taptames  oucc 
hiinb2tbs,ibhichcamcfromthetbattt1. 

15  3uibfi0ofcsfaibtontothem,l?auc 
pcfauct)  all  the  tbomen  aliue  i 

16  25eholb,*thcfccaufebthcthflb2en 
of  JfracUhJough  rtje  *counfellof  25a? 
laam,  to  commit trefpaffc  agatnft  the 
JL  o  h  ©  in  the  matter  of  0co2 ,  anb 
there  mas  a  plague  among  the  €on= 
gregation  ofthefloB©, 

17  /ftotb  tljctefore  *  bill  euerp  male 
among  the  little  ones ,  anb  mil  euerp 
tt)o  man  that  hart)  bnoiueu  man ,  bp  lp; 
mgHjittjtfjun. 

18  2But  all  the  momen  chiUwen  that 
hauc  not  bnoftcn  a  man  bp  Ipmg  Vbith 
him,Heepc  almc  fo2  pour  felucs. 

19  3nb  boc  pee  abibe  without  the 
campe  feuen  bapes :  tbhofoeucr  hart) 
UtlleD  anppcrfon,anb*H)hofocucr  hath 
toucheb  anp  flaine ,  purine  both  pour 
fclucs  ,  anb  pour  capnues ,  on  rtie 

£l  1  tl;irb 


•101KJ3. 


t  Hthr.htft 
ofvarre. 


'  Chap.  >j. 

*  2. Per.  1. 
'5- 


•ludg.  Jt. 
II. 


\Hthr.4 


•  Chap.  ip. 
1 1. Sec. 


Thediuiding  Numbers. 


o 


fth< 


pray. 


(  Heir.M- 
jirumtHt  or 

Xf fell  of 


t  Heir.  of 

the  citptwuj 


■,goui. 


tbirb  Dap,,a«b  on  tbefeucntbDap. 

20  3nD  purtfic  all  your  raiment,  anD 
all  that  ts  Tmaue  of  ffcmnes,  anD  an 
lbojltc  of  goatcs  haire,  anD  all  things 
mabeofibooD. 

21  C3tuD€iea5attbei&jfcdfaiDbn? 
to  the  men  of  ruarrcttJljirt)  ibent  to  the 
battcll ,  Xbis  is  the  omittance  of  the 
latt)  lbbich  tbc3L£>isjE>  eommaunbcb 
t^ofes. 

ii  £)nelp  the  solD,anD  the  filucr  ,tbe 
Ujaffc,  tlje  v<ton,  the  tinnc,anD  tft  e  Itao, 

13  <£uery  thing  that  map  abibc  the 
fice,  ycefljaii  mat$e  it  goe  through  the 
fire,  anD  u  (ball  be  tleanc :  neucrtbclcfrc 
it  (bail  be  pnnficDibith  tbcibatcrof  fc? 
paration:  anD  all  tbatabtDctb  not  the 
fire,  ycc  fljall  inaKe  goe  tb.:ougb  the 
urntcr. 

14  3fttD  ye  than  tbafl)  your  clothes 
ontbcfcucntbbay,attD  ycfljalbe  clcanc, 
anD  aftcribarD  pec  (ball  tome  into  the 
campc. 

15  C  3f  nD  tlje  %  &  ib  3D  fpabc  bnto 
££ofcs,  faying, 

26  Xafee  the  funtmc  of  the  pjay, 
t  that  ibas  taken ,  both  of  man  anD  of 
brad,  thou  anD  cicasar  the  $ned,  anD 
the  cbicfe  fathers  of  the  Congcega? 
tion: 

27  3tnD  DiniDc  the  pjay  tttto  rlbo 
parts,  bctlbccnc  them  that  toobe  the 
ibarrc  bpon  them,  tuijo  ibent  out  to 
battcll,  anb  bctlbccne  all  the  Congee- 
gation. 

28  3(nb  lenie  a  tribute  bnto  the 
Iokd  of  the  men  of  ibarrc  lbbich 
ibent  out  to  battcll:  oncfouleoffittc 
hunDJCD,  both  of  the  perfons,  anD  of 
the becucs,  aim  of  theatres,  anb  of  the 
fbecpe. 

29  Cane  it  of  their  bade ,  anb  giuc  it 
bnto  eieasar  the  pned,  foj  an  hcauc 
offering  of  the  H©  kip. 

jo  anD  of  the  chiuyett  of^ffracls 
halfe,  thon  flialt  taUe  one  portion  of  fif 
tit,  of  the  perfons,  of  the  becucs,  of  the 
ades,  anD  of  the  llflocltcs,  of  all  matter 
of  beads,  anb  gutc  them  bnto  the  He? 
uites,  lbhith  liccpc  tbe  charge  of  the 
Xabcrnacle  of  the  %  ©  is®. 

31 3tnb  iIBofcsano  ciea?ar  the  tfmed 
bib  as  the  Houd  commaiibcD  t$)ofes. 

31  31nDtbcboottCbein<;tbcrefroftbc 
pjayibbtcbtbc  men  of  lbarhab  taught, 
ibas  fir  butiD.'Cb  thoufanb,  anD  fcucnty 
thoufanD,  anb  fine  tbotifatiD  fbecpe, 

33  3tnD  tbjcefcojc  anD  tibelue  thou 
fanbbcciies, 


3+  3nbtbrtcfcortanD  one  thoufanD 
attics: 

35  2fnD  tbittie  anD  tlbo  thoufanb 
perfonstnail ,  oftbomcntbatbaDnot 
tmoibcn  man  by  lying  tbitb  him. 

36  3nb  the  halfe  which  was  the  portion 
of  them  tbatlbent  out  to  tbarre,tbasin 
number  tbrte  bunbrtD  thoufanD ,  anD 
fcuen  anD  thirtte  thoufanD  ,  anb  fiuc 
hunD?eDfl)cepe. 

37  3mb  the  %<£>  m  ©^tribute  of  the 
fbcepeibasurc  bunDrtD  anD  tbjeefcort 
aiiDfiftccne. 

3s  3nD  the  beeues  were  thirtie  anb 
fire  thoufanb,  of  ibbtcb  theft©  is  ©£> 
tribute  was  tbrtefcort  anb  tlbcluc. 

39  3faD  the  aflcs  were  thirtie  thou- 
fanD  anD  fine  bunDrtD ,  of  tbbicb  the 
%£>&&8s>  tribute  was  tbrtefcort  anb 
one. 

40  7Lnn  the  perfons  were  fittecne 
thoufanb,  of  ibbtcb  the  %  ©  m  ©  $>  trt? 
bute  was  thirtie  anb  tibo  perfons. 

41  3ttiD  £0ofes  gaue  the  tribute 
which  was  the  %  ©  is  &fs>  heauc  offering, 
bnto  tfieasar  the  pned,  as  the  &©«£> 
commanbeb  fllftofes. 

41  3tnb  of  tlje  cbtlD,:en  of  ffracis 
halfe,  lbbich  £J9ofcs  bimbebfrom  the 
menthatlbarreb: 

43  ( iI5otb  the  halfe  that  pcrtcineb 
bnto  the  Congregation,  was  tfoeeftun* 
mn  thoufanb,  anb  thirtie  thoufanD, 
and  feucn  thoufanb ,  anD  fine  hunD^D 
fljeepe: 

44  3fnD  thirtie  anD  fire  thoufanb 
becucs : 

45  2fnD  thirtie  thoufanD  affes,  anD 
fiucbutiDjcD: 

46  ^iiD  fittccne  thonfanD  perfons ) 

47  dienoftbccbilDjcnof^fracls 
halfe,  $>ofcs  toobc  one  po?tion  of  fiftie, 
both  of  man  aub  of  bead,  anb  gaue 
tbcm  bnto  the  Heuitcs ,  ibbicb  ftcpt 
the  cliarge  of  the  Xabernaclc  of  tt)e 
%  ©  k  je»,  as  the  %  ©  is©  commanbeb 
t^ofes. 

4S  C^nb  the  officers  Vbljich  lbcre 
oucr  thoufanbs  of  the  bode,  the  tap? 
tames  of  thoufanDs,  anD  captaiues  of 
bimbjcDscamc  necrebnto  £{9ofcs. 

49  ^nD they faiD  bnto  £0ofcs,Xhp 
fcruantshaue  taben  the  fuminc  of  the 
men  of  ibarrc  lbhith  arc  bnber  our 
t  charge ,anb  there  lacltcth  not  one  man  t  muii. 
ofbs. 

50  lecc  Ijaue  tljcrefojc  biougbt  an 
oblation  fo?  the  |L©ii5p,  ibhat  euc? 
ric  man  bath  t  gotten ,  of  icibcls  of  \ 
goioe,  ' 


I  -u 


Therecjuellof        Chap.xxxij.    Reuben  and  Gad. 


f  Heh.heaue 

efiirittf. 


gol&e  tbaincs,  ano  btacclcts,  rings, 
earnings,  ana  tablets,  to  matte  an 
atonement  to?  out  Cbuies  before  the 
1L©is©. 

51  2no  £0ofes  anb  eteasat  the 
02tcft  toofte  the  goib  of  them:  euenau 

TbJOUghttClbClS. 

52,  anbatitbcepiboftbetoffring 
that  they  offtreo  bp  to  the  %  ©  b  ©,  of 
the  taptames  of  tboufanos ,  anb  of  the 
captatnes  of  hunbjebS,  tbas  (ijttccnc 
tboufanb ,  feucn  hunbjeb  anb  fifttc 
Cbeftcts. 

53  (Forthemcnofibartehabtattcn 
fpotlc,  cucrymanfozhtmfclfc.) 

54.  3lnb  J$)ofes  ano  cteasat  tijc 
0«cft  toobe  the  golb  of  the  captaincs, 
of  tftoufanos ,  ano  of  bunbjebs ,  ano 
bzought  it  tnto  the  ILabcrnacle  of  the 
Congregation,  foz  amemojiailfo?  tipt 
chilb;en  of  3Jftart  before  the  %  ©  «  ©. 

CHAP.    XXXII. 

1  The  Reubenites  and  Gaditesfue  for  their  in- 
heriunce  on  that  fide  Iorden.  6  Mofes  re- 
proueth  them.  16  They  offer  him  conditio 
ons  to  his  content.  33  Mofes  afsigneih  them 
the  land.   39  They  conquere  it. 

®vo  tht  thfltyen  of  fteu* 
ben,  anb  the  chilbicn  of 
©ab ,  haD  a  bery  great 
multttubc  of  fatten :  anb 
Vbhcntheylarb  thclanb  of 
3ja3cr,  anb  the  lanb  of  d5tleab,  thatbc> 
hoio,  the  plate  Vbas  a  plate  fo?  tattcll ; 

x  Xhethilbjmonsab.anbthethil'- 
b?en  of  Beubcn ,  tame  anb  fpabe  bnto 
5©ofcs,anbto  €lea;attheiD2tctt,  anb 
bnto  thepiinccs  of  the  Congregation, 
faying,   , 

3  atatoth,  anb  &>ibon,  anb  gja?ec, 
anbifttmtah,  anbtyefbbon,  anb<£lca< 
leh,  anbS>hebam,  anbiftcbo,  anb 
©eon, 

4.  Euen  the  counttcy  tbhich  the 
%  ©  is  ©  ftnotc  before  the  Congregate 
on  of  3Jfracl,  is  a  lanb  fo?  tatttll ,  anb 
thy  fcr  uants  haue  tattcll. 

5  nahcrcfojcfaib  they ,  if  ibec  haue 
fbunb  grace  in  thy  fight,  let  this  lanoc 
be  giucnbnto  thy  fctuantsfo*  a  potTcf- 
fion,and  bzingbs  not  oner  gjojbane. 

6  C3mb£0ofcsfaib  bnto  the  chil- 
b?en  of  ©ab,anb  to  the  ehiltyen  of  &cu? 
ben,  Shailyour  b?cti)jcngoetolbarre, 
anb  (ball  ye  fit  here* 

7  3lnb  ibhcrefojc  t  otfeonragc  yee 
tlje  heart  of  thcthtlb2enof3ifcaclfroni 


going  ouer  into  the  lanoe,  nrfjtch  the 
%  ©  b  ©  hath  giucn  thenu 

8  Xhus  bib  your  fathers,  tbhen  3 
fent  them  from  i&aoclh  zsaenca  to  fee 
tlje  lanb. 

9  ifortbhen  they  tbentbp  bnto  the 
bailey  of  etbeot  ,ano  faib  the  lanb,tbey 
biftouragcb  the  heart  of  the  ehittucn  of 
gjftacl,  that  they  fhoulb  not  goe  into 
the  lano  tt>htch  the  ?L  ©  is  ©  hab  criucn 
them. 

io  Znh  ti)t  %a>  is  ©£>  anger  ibas 
binblcb  tlje  fame  time,  anb  bee  ftoare, 
faying, 

ii  Purely  none  of  the  men  that  came 
bp  out  of  €gypt,  *  from  ttbcntic  y  ceres 
oioanbbpibarb,  than  fee  the  lanbc 
ibhich  3  froare  bnto  atyaham,  bnto 
3Jfaac,  anb  bnto  Jacob ,  bctaufc  they 
haue  not  t  lbholly  follolbcb  me : 

ix  5>aue  Caleb  the  fonnc  of  gj rphun= 
neh  the  menc3ite ,  anb  3Joft)ua  the 
tonne  of /!2un  s  fo*  they  haue  wholly 
follolbcbthclLsDBJD. 

u  3nb  the  fL©is©£>  anger  ibas 
iutibleb  agama  gjfrael,  anb  bee  mabe 
them  tbanber  iu  the  tutioetncffefourty 
ytercs ,  bntill  all  the  generation  that 
hab  bone  euill  in  the  ughtof  the  %m® 
ibastonfumeb. 

14  3tnb  beholbe,  ye  are  rifen  bp  in 
your  fathers  ftcab ,  an  mcreafe  of  On* 
full  men,  to  augment  yet  the  fierce  an* 
ger  of  the  H  ©  is  ©  toibaro  IJfrael. 

15  jFo2ifyccrumcaJbayrrom  after 
him,  hee  ibtll  yet  againeleaue  them  in 
theibiibcrncu~c,  aubycu^aubeOroyau 
this  people. 

i6  C3mbfhcytamenecrebntohim, 
anb  fatb ,  i©ec  ibill  builb  theepfolbes 
here  fo?  our  tattcll,  anb  cities fo?  our 
utlconcs. 

17  25utrbcourfe!uesibiiigoercaby 
armeb  befoie  the  chUtocn  of  ^frael,bn« 
till  ibee  haue  brought  them  bnto  their 
place:  anb  our  title  ones  (hall  btbell  in 
the  fenecb  cities,  becaufc  of  the  inhabit 
tantsofthclanb. 

is  ©ee  ibill  not  returne  bnto  our 
houfes ,  bntill  the  thilbzen  of  3Jfrael 
haue  tnhcrttcb  cuery  man  his  mheri? 
tancc: 

19  jfo:  tbee  Ibill  not  tnhertte  \bith 
thnii  on  yonber  fibe  3o2bane,  02  fo?^ 
Vbarb,bccaufe  our  inheritance  ts  fallen 
to  bs  on  this  Dbe  3 o:banc  caQibar d. 

zo  C  3tno*$ofc5fotD  bnto  them, 
3Jfye\billboetbistbing,ifpcibtllgoc 
armeb  befo?e  the  %  o  k  ©  to  marre, 
£>  3  21  ano 


•Chap.  13 


"  Chap.  1 4. 


\M.h.fmlfd. 
Ud  after me. 


Vofli.|.* 


Reubens  and  Gads  Numbers,     inheritance.  The 


lofh  41 ; 


*P«ur.v 

I  1.10O.1  ;, 
8. and  12-4 


n  3uibibillgQeaiiofyouatmcbo; 
tier  ^Joibauc  befoze  the  %  o  is  £>,bntiU 
he  hath  bnucn  out  his  enemies  from 
before  Dun, 

n  3lnb  tl)c  lanb  bec  fubbucb  befoje 
thclLois©:  then  aftctibarb  ye  ujall 
retutne ,  anb  bec  gutltlclTc  bcfo2C  the 
%&  ml  id,  anb  btfozc  l3Ktacl;  anb  this 
lanb  fljall  be  your  poflcflioii  befojcthe 
2LOJHID. 

i?  23ut  ifyc  mill  notboefo,beljolb, 
yce  hauc  Cmncb  agamtt  the  ?Lo  is  id: 
anb  bee  fore  pout  fume  ibill  fmbc  you 
our. 

14  ffiuilbyenticsfoiyourlitlcones, 
anb  folbs  foi  your  iheepe,  anb  boe  that 
which  Ijatlj  pioecebeb  out  of  your 
mouth. 

15  3ubthcthrtb2enof<£ab,anbthe 
dnlDJeti  of  Reuben  {pane  bnto  $9ofes, 
faying ,  Zhy  feruants  Bull  boe  as  nip 
lozbtonunanbettj. 

z6  £>ur  little  ones,  our  ibiucg,  out 
flocks,  anb  all  our  cattcllfhallbctrjcre 
uithcnticsof<5ileab.  > 

17  25ut  *  thy  feruants  tbill  paflc  0- 
ucr,cucrymanarmcbfo2Vbarrc,bcfo2e 
the  1L  o  a  id  to  battcll,a5  my  lozb  faith. 

is  &oconccniingthcni£0ofcscoini 
tnaunbeb  eiea^at  the  $ztcu\anb  3Io- 
flma  tbefonne  of /i5un ,  anb  the  rtncfc 
fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the  thtlbjen  of 
lifracl: 

19  2nb£Pofesfaib  bnto  them ,  3Jf 
tI)ctI)tlb2enof  cab,  anb  thcthilb2cnof 
Bcubcn  tt)Ul  pafTc  lbtrh  you  owe  tjwv 
oane,eutrv  man  armcb  to  battcll  bcfo2C 
trie  %  o  is  3D ,  anb  the  lanb  ftjall  be  fate 
bucb  bcfo2e  you,thcn  ye  QJaii  gmc  them 
the  lanb  of  CUlcab  fo2  a  pofleffion : 

30  26ut  if  they  mill  not  paffe  oner 
mithyouarmcb,thcyfbaiihancpou'cfc 
fions  among  you  ut  the  lanb  of  Ca- 
naan. 

31  3nbtnctmlb?enof<3ab,anbtoc 
chiUwcn  of  ficuben  anfaicrcb ,  faying, 
3lsthe  Hoh©  bath  Cub  bnto  thy  fer- 
uants,fo  Hull  ibe  boe. 

31  nacctbtllpaflcouer  armcb  befoic 
rl)e  How  id  into  the  lanb  of  Canaan, 
that  the  poffcfTion  of  our  uiherttantc 
on  this  fibc  Jtooane  may  be  ours. 

33  3tnb*q9ofcsgaucbntotr)ein,aien 
to  trje  cljiibjcn  of  cab ,  anb  to  rbc  cbil 
bjen  of  Keubcn ,  anb  bmo  halfc  the 
tribe  of  s^anaffeh  rbc  ronne  of  3Jofcpb, 
the  Ringbomc  of  Snhon  Bmg  of  the 
3lmo2ttcs ,  anb  the  tungbomc  of  £>g 
isung  of  Kaftan ,  rljc  lanb  rbtth  the  ti- 


nes thcrcof,m  the  coaltes,^cn  trje  cities 
oftljecountrcyrounb  about. 

34-  C  ^nb  tlje  tl)iib2cn  ofcabbuilt 
2>tbon,ano3ltacotb,ano3lrocr, 

35  3nb3ltroth,3>bopban>anb3Ja 
a5er,anb3Jogbcrjah, 

36  3ino  25etrjnimrah ,  anb  2Scn> 
rjaran ,  fenteb  cities  :  anb  folbes  fo? 
ftcepc. 

37  3mb  the  chimin  of &eubcn built 
tyeftbon  ,  anb  <£lealerj  ,  anb  Wx\& 
trjaun, 

33  ^nbjBebo,anbz5aalmeon(tfjeit 
names  being  cbangcb )  anb  S>bibmah : 
anb  t  gauc  other  names  bnto  trje  crtics 
lbbtebtbcybutlbeb. 

39  3nb  the  cbilbjcn  of  *  $)aehit,  tlje 
fonnc  of  ^analTerj ,  lbcnt  to  <5ilcab, 
anb  tooue  it ,  anb  bifpofTcfTcb  trje  3lmo* 
ntcibrjitrjibasmit. 

40  ^nb  £0ofcs  gauc  ©ileab  bnto 
©acbirthcfonneof^anaffch,  anb  he 
bibclt  therein. 

41  3lnb  *  3Jair  the  fonne  of  ($)anafc 
feh  tbent  anb  toohc  the  fmail  tottmes 
thereof,  anb  caucb  tijem  5?auoth-3fair. 

41  ^nb  iSobaii  lbcnt  anb  tooue 
Bcnath,anbthe  billages  thereof,  anb 
taileb  it  /Bobah.aftcr  fjis  oibne  name. 

CHAP.   XXXIII. 

1   Two  and  founie  iourneyes  of  the  Kraelices. 
50  TheCanaanitesare  to  be  deftroyed. 

^efc  are  the  iourneyes  of 
the  tbilojtcn  of  Jifrael, 
lbhirh  lbent  foojthoutof 
thelanbofCgypt,ibirh 
_  tljcit  armies ,  bnber  the 
Ijanb  of  ii^ofes  anb  3aron. 

i  ^nb  i0ofcs  ttwtc  their  goings 
outatt02btngto  thctriountcycs,by  the 
conmianbcment  of  the  %  o  k  jd  :  anb 
thefc  are  their  iourneyes  actoibing  to 
their  goings  out 

3  3tnb  they  'beparteb  from  ftamc* 
fes  in  the  nrft  monctr),  on  tlje  fifteenth 
bay  of  rhenrltmoneth :  on  thcmonrolb 
after  tile  ^aiTcoucr,  tl)e  thilb2en  of  3?f- 
racl  \bcnt  out  lbith  an  high  Ijanb  m  tlje 
fight  of  an  the  Cgypnans. 

4  ( foi  the  Egyptians  buricb  all 
their  firft  b02iic ,  ibhich  tlje  Hoih  jd 
Dab  fmitttn  among  them :  bpon  their 
goosaifo  the  Ho  kid  crcrutcb  iubge= 
ments.) 

5  3inb  the  chiltycn  of 3fracl  remo 
ucb  from  ftamefes ,  anb  pitcl)cb  in 
button). 

6  51nD 


t  Hih.  i/aj 
CAkfd  by 
njnuilbt 
Httmct  of  the 
cmet. 

'Gene.  50, 
23- 


•Deut.3. 
14. 


Exod.il. 
J  7- 


rcmouingso 


f 


Ch 


ap.xxxm 


thelfraelitcs. 


*Eiod.  13 
10. 


Eiod.15. 


•Exod.15. 
>7- 


Exod.tC.i 


'Exod.17-1 


•Exod.ro.  1 


*Chap.i  1. 

HThacis, 

cfMl. 
•Chap.  1 1 

3J» 


6  anb  they  bepartcb  from  *£>uc 
coth,  anb  pitri)cD  m  et&am,  Uifjici)  >sin 
the  cbgc  of  the  lbilbetncfTe. 

7  anbthcyrcmoucbftomCtham, 
anb  turncb  agatne  bnto  i^itjatjirotfj, 
toljicl)  is  before  ffiaal  jcphon :  anb they 
ptttijcb  before  Q);gbol. 

8  anb  thep  bepartcb  from  before 
jDthahtroth ,  ano  *  pafleb  thojolb  the 
mtbft  of  thcfca,into  the  ibtlbernes,ano 
lbent  ttecc  ti&ycs  tourney  tn  the  HMoer* 
neffeof  etham,  anb  pttcheb  m  Ararat). 

9  anb  they  r  cmottcb  from  £{3arah, 
ano*tamcUnto  €lun,ano  m  €UmU)ctc 
ttbelue  fountaincsof  lbatcr,  anbthiec 
feojeano  ten  palme  trees,  anbtheyptt* 
cljcb  there. 

10  anb  ti)rp  remooueb  from  Clint, 
anu  entampcb  bp  the  r  eu  fca. 

n  anb  they  remooueb  from  thcreb 
fca,  ano  entampcb  m  rt)c  *  ibtlbcrocile 
of^»tn. 

iz  anbthcytooRethettiourneyont 
oftfjc  ttnlbcrncfic  of  Suit,  anbcncam? 
peb  m  3DophKah. 

13  anb  they  beparteb  from  S>opI> 
Bah,  anb  entampcb  in aiuth. 

14  ^no  they  rcmoucb  from  aiud), 
ano  encampeb  at  *  &ephtbim ,  tbhete 
tbas  no  tbater  fo?tt)c  people  to  bztnfee. 

15  anb  they  beparteb  from  Bcpl> 
mm,  ano  pttcheb  tn  the  *  rbtmerneffr  of 
S>tnai. 

16  anb  they  remoneb  from  the  be* 
fcrt  of  <§>mat>anb  pttcheb  *at||  l&tyoth 
ijattaauah. 

17  anb  thep  bepartcb  from  Bttwth 
$attaauah ,  anb  *  entampcb  at  $a3C' 
roth. 

is  anb  the?  bepartcb  from  ijajc; 
roth, anb  ptfthcb  tn  mtthmah. 

19  anb  they  bepartcb  from  Mitt) 
mah ,  anb  pttcheb  atBtrnmon  $are5. 

zo  anb  they  bepartcb  from  Butt- 
mon  #are5,  anb  pttcheb  tn  fLtbnah. 

21  anb  tl)cv  remoneb  from  lUbnah, 
anb  pttcheb  at  &tflah. 

zz  aub  they  tournrycb  front  KuTah, 
anb  pttcheb  tn  i&ehciathah. 

z3  ano  they  lbent  front  mehcia= 
thah ,  anb  pttcheb  m  mount  3>hapher. 

z+  anb  they  rcmoucb  from  mount 
£>haphcr,anbcttcaiitpcbtnloarabah« 

z5  anb  thep  remoottcb  from  $ar& 
bah,  aub  pttcheb  tn  s#aUhcloth. 

z6  anb  they  rnitoottcb  from  spafe 
hclofh,  anb  entampcb  at  Xahath. 

Z7  anb  they  bepartcb  frottt  %* 
haft),  anb  pttcheb  at  Xarah. 


zs  ^nb  they  rcmoucb  front  Xarah, 
anb  pttcheb  m^ptthtah. 

Z9  anb  they  tt>ent  from  fiptthcab, 
anb  pttcljeb  tn  ^afbmonah. 

30  anb  titer  bepartcb  from  $au> 
monat),  anb*  entampcb  at  cpofcroth. 

31  anb  rtjcr  bepartcb  front  fipofc 
roth,  anb  pitcljcb  in  aScnc  Slaaltan. 

31  anb  ttjcftemooueb  from  25cnc 
^aattan,  ?encampebatl?02iia5ibgab. 

33  anb  tljtp  lbent  from  ^ojljagib 
gab,  anb  ptttltcb  tn  ^otbatlja^. 

34-  anb  rijev  rtmooueb  from  5ot- 
batljal),  anb  entampcb  at  Cbzottah. 

35  anb  tDcv  bepartcb  from  €b?o- 
naJ),  anb  entampcb  at  €5ton  -  gabcr. 

36  anb  tfjcp  remoneb  from  C3ion 
gabcr,  aub  pttt!)cb  tn  tlje  *  ttiflbemes  of 
ztn,ttihitt)tsBabefl). 

37  anb  tl)c?  remooueb  from  *  Ha? 
bcfl),  anb  ptttltebtn  mount  1^02,  tn  t!)e 
ebgeoftlje  laribofCbom, 

38  anb*aaront!)c##eft  lbent  bp 
tnto  mount^o?,attlic  commatibcment 
of  tl)e  H  €>  is  ©,  anb  bteb  tttcre  ut  the 
fourttetDpecrcafter  the  tfttlbjcn  of  3lf 
raellberc  tome  out  of  the  lanbe  ofc? 
gppt.tn  the  firB  bap  of  the  fiftmoneth. 

39  attbaaronlbasanhunbztbanb 
tMnttcanbttoeevectcsolb,ibhetthce 
bteb  in  mount  #0?, 

40  anb*BtngarabtltcCattaanttc 
(ibhtch  btttclt  in  the  ^outh,  tn  the  lanb 
of  Canaan)  hcarb  of  the  comtning  of 
thcchtlbzenofjfracl. 

41  anb  they  bepartcb  from  mount 
*  !^o?,anb  pttcheb  tn  zalmonah. 

42  anbthcpbcpartcbfromzaimo^ 
nah,  anbpttfhebin^ttnon. 

43  anb  they  beparteb  from  button, 
anb  pttcheb  in  £>both. 

44  anb  they  bepartcb  from  £>both , 
anb  pitthcb  in  ||  ^tc-abanm ,  in  the 
bo?bcrof#oab. 

4^  anb  they  bepartcb  from  3Jtm, 
ano  pttdKb  in  2>ibon  <^ab, 

46  anb  they  remoneb  frottt  SDtbon 
csab,  anb  cntampeb  tn  aimon  -  Dibla* 
thatm. 

47  anb  they  remooueb  from  ai- 
mon -£>tbiathatm,  anb  pttcheb  tn  the 
mountautcs  of  abartm,bcfbjc  /I5ebo. 

48  anb  they  bepartcb  from  the 
mountatttes  of  abartm,  anb  pttcheb  in 
theplatnesof  ^oab.by  ^o?ban  neerc 
IJcrttho. 

49  anb  they  pttcheb  by  gio2battc 
from  ffieth  -3fcumoth,  encn  bnto  ||  *  a- 
brt  ^intttm,mthepiatnesof  fi^oab. 

50  canb 


•Deu.lo.<5 


•Chap.  20. 


'Chap.jo. 


•Chap.jo. 
2j.deur. 

Jl.JO. 


•Chap.ji. 


Cha.ji.4 


jj  Or,ffeirpei 
tftyibarm 


\\Or,t',: 
vlttittei  of 
Shtttim. 
*Chap.  35 


The  borders 


Numbers. 


o 


fC 


anaan. 


*  Dent. 7.1 
lolh.i 1.1  J 


*  Chap.  j6 
Si- 

f  Hihr.tml. 
tip/y  hu  m- 
htr  nance. 
t  Heir.  <4- 
mt>:ifi  hit 
ii'ncntinct. 


•lofti.n. 

I  J.  hldg.  ; 
J- 


•lofli.ij. 


50  C3lnDt!)e!L£>tfE>  fpafcetonto 
fl}i)ofes,intbepiainesofi$oab  ty^op 
bane,neere  Jericho,  faytng, 

51  £>peafcebntotbecbilb2enof3Jfc 
rael,  anb  fay  unto  them  ,'nabcn  yc  arc 
paffeb  oucc  3Jo;Dane  into  the  lanD  of 
Canaan ; 

51  Xbcnyefliaiibnueoutaiitbeuv 
habitants  oftbe  lanD  from  ocfoje you, 
ano  beftcoy  all  time  pictures,  anb  tic* 
ft  roy  all  their  molten  imagcs,anb  quite 
plucKebomnc  author  btgbplaccs. 

53  3Ulb  ye  fhall  blfpoffcftf  the  inhabi- 
tants of  thcianb,  anu  bibell  tberetnifoj 
Jbaiiegiuenyoutbclanbtopoffcffcit. 

54  3tnb  *  yc  (hall  biuibe  the  lanb  by 
lot,fo2  an  mDcntantc  among  your  fa- 
milies, anu  to  rbemoeyeflialltgiuetbe 
mo2c  mhentante ,  ano  to  the  fetter  pec 
fliall  t  gmc  the  leffe  mhentance:  cucry 
mans  mhentance  fliall  bee  m  the  place 
Where  bis  lot  failcth ,  acco2btng  to  the 

tribes  of  your  fathers,  yc  (ball  mhertte. 

55  23utifye  Will  not  b2iuc  out  the  uv 
habitants  of  the  lanD  from  betbje  you, 

then  tt  fhall  tome  to  paffe  that  thofe 
Which  yc  letremamcof  them ,  (ball  be 
*  pncBCS  in  your  eyes ,  anu  thomes  in 
your  fibes,anu  thai  t»e,re  you  m  the  lanb 
Wherein  ye  Dwell. 

56  flaojcoiier ,  it  (ball  tome  to  paffe, 

that  3  (bail  do  bnto  you,as  31  thought 
toDoetnttotbcm. 

CHAP.    XXXIIII. 

1   The  borders  of  the  land.     16  The  names  of 
the  men  which  fhall  diuide  the  land. 

^£V3$g  IftD  the  %  ©  b  ©  fpaae 
u.mfe^  bnto£0ofes,faymg, 
2LY»|  1  Commanb  the  ebib 
-«*\i»  D2cnof3Jfcacl,anDfaybn* 
-  j*&£$  totbem,n9benyecomeuiJ 
to  the  lanb  of  Canaan,  ( this  "the  lanD 
that  (ball  fall  bnto  you  foz  an  inhcrt 
tanrc,  euen  the  lanb  of  Canaan  ,  With 
the  coafts  thereof.) 

j  Shciryour&outb  quarter  fhall 
befromtbe  Wtlberncffc  of  zm,  along 
by  the  coaft  of  €  bom,  aim  your  £>outb 
boiber  (bail  be  the  outmoft  toaft  of  the 
faitScacaftwarb. 

4  31tiD  your  bcuDcrftiaiturnc  from 
the  5>otith  to  the  afcent  of  attrabbtm, 
anb  paffe  on  to  zm :  anb  the  going 
foout)  thereof  fliall  befromtbc&outb 
to  Babefl)-23arnca,anb  fhall  goe  onto 
Da^ar  3DDar,anDpaffconto3l3mon. 
31ttb  the  bobber  (ball  fetch  a  com- 


<*>£& 


compaffc  from  asmon  bnto  the  rtuer 
of  <£gypt ,  anb  the  gomgs  out  of  it  tball 
beatthefca. 

6  3tnb  as  fo?  the  nacfterne  b02bcr, 
you  (ban  euen  haue  the  great  fea  rb2  a 
bo  jber :  this  (ball  be  y  our  nacft  bo?bcr. 

7  2mDtbtsfbailbcyour/f3o2tbbo;i' 
bet :  from  tfjc  great  fea,  you  (ball  point 
out  fo?you,mount  D?02. 

8  ifrom  mount  tyoi,  ye  fliall  point 
out  your  border  bnto  the  entrance  of  H?a- 

math  :anbrbe  goings  foojtboftbebo?; 
bcrvbalibctozcbab. 

9  C  3(nb  the  bobber  (ball  goe  on  to 
Ztpb2on,anD  the  goings  out  of  ittbail 
bee  at  I^ar  enan:rbis  (ball  be  your 
/13o2tbbojbcr. 

10  2nb  yc  fliall  point  out  your  <£att 
bojber ,  from  l?a5ar  <£nan  to  $>X>v 
Pham. 

11  3fnb  the  toaft  fliall  goe  Dottmc 
from  S>bcpbam  to  ftiblab,  on  the  caft 
fibc  of  3iin:  anb  the  bojbcr  (ball  beftenb 
anb  (hall  reach  Unto  the  tfibe  of  the  fea 
of  Cbinncrctb  caflwarb. 

u  3nD  the  b02ber  fhall  goe  DoWnc 
to  3Jo2banc,  anb  the  goings  out  of  it 
(ball  be  at  tlie  fait  fea :  this  fliall  be  your 
lanb  With  the  coaftcs  thereof  rounb 
about. 

13  ^nb£0ofcstommanbebthechil- 
b2cn  of  ^frael  ,faymg,  Xbis  » the  lanb 
wbtcb  ye  (ball  mhentc  by  lot,Wbicb  the 
?L©«©  commanbeb  togtuebuto  the 
nine  tnbes,  anb  to  the  haife  tribe. 

14  *foi  the  tribe  of  the  rbilb2cn  of 
Bcubcn,  aecojbingto  tbeboufc  of  their 
fatliers,  anb  the  tribe  oftbe  cbilbjen  of 
©ab,  acco;bmg  to  the  boufe  of  there  fa 

therS,haUC  rCCCtUCb  their inhcntancc,anb 

haifethe  tnbe  of  ^anaffch  baucrctct= 
uebthctr  inheritance. 

15  Xhc  two  tnbes ,  anb  the  halfc 
tnlic  hauc  rettiucb  their  mhetuance  on 
tl)tsfibe3lo2bancncerc3lencho,€a{r 
macb,  toibarb  the5>unnc  rifmg. 

i6  ^nbtheHoKE'fpafecbnto^o* 
fcs,faying, 

17  Xhcfe  are  the  names  of  the  men 
mhicb  fliall  bmtbc  the  lanb  bnto  you : 
*  <£lca3ar  the  fttftft ,  anb  3(o(bua  the 
fonneofi!5un. 

18  ^nb  yec  fliall  tasc  one  ^nnteof 
euery  tribe,  tobiuibe  the  lanb  by  uu> 
ntancc. 

19  ^nb  the  names  of  the  men  are  thefc: 
€>f  the  tribe  of  3!ubah,Calcbtbefunne 
of31tphunneh. 

10  anb  of  the  tnbe  of  the  tbilbjcn 
of 


f  HeU. 
fhouUfr, 


•Chip.}; 

;3.io{Kl<f- 


•Iofli.ij. 


The  Lcuitcs  cities.    Chap.xxxv.       Cities  of  refu o-e. 


•Iott.il. 


of  ;§>tmcon,S>bauucl  the  fount  of  am* 
mibub. 

ii  &>ftbe  tribe  of  23auamm,£Ubab 
tbcfonneofCbtflon. 

12  anb  the  &rincc  of  the  tribe  of  the 
ditiDjm  of  2>an,  25ubtu  the  fbime  of 
^oglt. 

ij  Xbcpjmccoftbccbilbienofgio 
Ccpl):  fo*  the  tribe  of  the  ebiioicn  of  itJa- 
nafjcb,$aiuucl  the  fonnc  of  Cpbob. 

14  anb  the  #2mceoftbe  tribe  of  the 
ri)iimcnof€pb2atm/!iiemueltbefonnc 
of£>b«Pbtan. 

15  anbtbe#2inteoftbctribcofrbc 
cbittncn  of  zcbulun ,  <£ii3apban  the 
fonnc  of  jDarnaeb. 

16  anb  the  02inee  of  the  tribe  of  the 
cfmuztn  of  3  fEacljar  ,i&auicl  the  fonnc 
ofa^san. 

17  anbtbctfmnceoftbctribcoftbc 
dnlDJcn  ofa(bcr,abibub  tbefonneof 
dbetomi. 

23  anbtf)c0nnccoftbetrtbcofthe 
ebiibmt  of  j^apbtalt ,  pct>aijcl  tpe 
fonnc  of  ammibub. 

29  XfjffC  are  they  &!)0mtfoe2r£>KJD 

tommaunbebto  biutbc  the  inheritance 
bnto  tbtcbtlbicn  of  Jfrael  in  the  lanb 
of  Canaan. 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

Eight  andfourtie  Cities  for  the  Leuites  with 
their  fuburbs.andmeafure  thereof.  6  Sixeot 
them  are  to  be  cities  of  refuge.  9  Thelawcs 
of  murder.   31  No  falisfa&ion  for  murder. 

$&%&&&  iBb  the  %  o  is  jd  fpabc 
miMS&H  bnto  ti{5ofcsui  the  plaints 

^^\^of  &0Ab  b?  Uortiane, 
*%w*^&  ncerc3Jcn.cbo,faptng, 
S^^^ak  1  "Comnianbtnccbtl; 
bjen  of^ifracl,  tbattbep  gtuebntotbe 
fLcuncs  of  the  inheritance  of  their  pof-  \ 
fcwon ,  cities  to  blbcll  m :  ano  p cc  (ball 
giue  alfo  bnto  fbeflcuttcs  fuburbs  fa? 
the  ones  r  ounb  about  than. 

j  anb  the  nties  (ball  tbcp  hane  to 
Mbcllm,  anb  the  fuburbs  of  them  (ball 
bcfo2tboccattell,  anb  fonbatgoobs, 
anbfozall  their  beads. 

4  anb  the  fuburbs  of  the  cities, 
Ibhtcb  pec  (hall  giuc  bnto  the  Hcuitcs, 
(hail  reach  from  the  \ball  of  the  cmc,  anb 
outtbarb ,  a  rboufanb  rubttcs  rouub 
about. 

5  anb  pc  (ball  tncafur e  from  ttnth- 
out  the  citp  on  the  £aftube  tibo  thou 
fanb  cubitcs,anb  on  the  <S>outbfibc  nbo 
tboufanb  tubitcs ,  anb  on  the  teeftubc 


ttbo  thoufanb  cubitcs,  %  on  the  i3o2tl> 
fibenbotboufano  cubnes:  anb  the  cine 
rtwiibe  tnthe  tnibft;  this  (baibe  to  than 
the  fuburbs  of  the  cmes. 

6  ano  among  the  ctttes  tbbirb  pec 
(bai  giue  bnto  tbelLcun  cs,tbere  (balbc 
*  fire  ones  foj  refuge,  ibbtcb  pc  (hail  ap 
point  fo?  the  manflapcr ,  that  her  map 
flee  thither :  anbtotbcmpclballtabbc 
fburtp  anb  tlbo  ernes. 

7  s°alltbecuicsibh(ebpe(bailgiue 
to  tbc?Lcuttes,(baUbc  fburtp  anb  eight 
nttcs:  than  (hail  yeecmeUntb  their  fub 
urbs. 

8  ^nb  the  rities  ibhich  pe  (bal  giue, 
fhaibeof  the  poffeflion  oftbccbilbzcnof 
33fracl:from  them  that  bauc  nianppc 
(ball  giue  manp ;  but  from  than  that 
banc  fctb,pe  (ball  giuc  feib.  tfucrponc 
Qjai  giuc  of  his  ones  bnto  the  ILoittcs, 
aecojbtngtobis  inheritance  ibhich  trie 
tnberitctb. 

9  C2lnbtbe?L0is©fpaliebuto 
$3ofcs,faping, 

10  £>peaHebntotbecbflb2enof'jr 
racl,  anb fap  bnto  them,  *n9benpc bee 
conic  ouer  3Jo2bane ,  into  the  lanb  of 
Canaan: 

11  Xbcn  pc  (bail  appoint  you  riftes, 

to  be  cities  of  refuge  fo:  pou;  that  the 
flapec  mapflee  thither  tbtjicl)  feilletlj  a 

np  perfon  f  at  bnatbar  cs. 

12  anb  the?  (bail  be  bnto  pou  tittcs 
fo:  refuge  from  the  auenger ,  chat  the 
man-flapcrbtenot,  bnnu  he  (lanb  be 
fo?e  tt)t  Congrcganon  in  iubgancnt. 

13  anb  of  thefc  nnesibhicb  pc  (bail 
gmc,firc  ones  fbailpe  haue  fo2  refuge. 

14-  Pet  (ball  giuc  tfnee  titles  on  this 
fibc3(02banc,  anb  th2ce  nties  (ball  pec 
gmc  m  the  lanb  of  Canaan,  ibhtcb  (ball 
bcctties  of  refuge. 

15  Xhcfe  fire  rirtcs  (ball  be  a  refuge, 
both  fw  the  cbilb2en  of  91frael ,  anb  fo2 
tljeftcanger  ,  anb  fo?  the  foionrnera^ 
mong  them :  that  cucrp  one  that  mi 
leth  anp  perfon  bnarbarcs ,  map  flee 
thither. 

16  *  anb  if  he  fmltc  him  tbifb  an  in-- 
ftrument  of  3Jton ,( fo  that  he  bie, )  hec 
isamurberer :  the  murbcrcr  fl)all  furc- 
ipbeputtobcatb. 

1 7  anb  if  he  finite  bun  t  rbitl)  tlnoib- 
mg  a  (lone,  (ibherctbith  hec  map  btc) 
anbbebtebe  isamurberer:  themurbc 
rrr  (ball  furelp  beput  to  bcath. 

13  £>2  if  he  (mite  bun  ibith  an  ijanb 
ibeapon  of  lboob,  (tbberenmb  he  map 
btc  )anb  he  btc,  hec  is  a  murbcrcr :  the 

muebcrer 


'Dcur.i). 
41  iofh  20 
1-  and  ji.  j, 
t  Hrlr.A- 
bvut  themyt 


1  Hdr.tht) 
inhcritc. 


'  Dcur.  19, 

:.iofn.20. 


1  Heir  i; 
rrsr. 


•E10d.11. 
14. 


f  Hthr.v.tl, 
a  jl one  of  the 

htuui. 


,awes  for 


fc 


Numbers,    lhedding  of  blood. 


*Dcut.i°. 
11. 


*  Eiod.  »i 


JWflulbc 
tehtm. 


"Dcut.17 

6  Uld  19. 

I  5. man. 18 
\6.  j. cor. 
I  j.t.hcb. 
io.iS. 

to  du. 


nutrDcr  er  (ball  futcip  be  put  to  Death- 
19  Xt)c  rcuenger  of  bloob  btmfclfc 
(ball  flap  the  murtberet :  tbh*  n  he  nice; 
tetb  bun,  ftc  (ball  flap  him. 

10  * 2i5uttf  he  thnifthtm  of  batreb, 
oibtirteathtmbpiaping  of  tbattc  that 
he  Die, 

ii  $>i  in  enntitic  fntite  himttntb  his 
bano ,  that  he  Die :  bee  that  fmote  bun 
(ball  furelp  be  put  to  Death,  fo?  bee  is  a 
murDerct :  the  rcuenget  of  bloou  (ball 
flap  tbemurberer ,  xbhen  bee  mcctctb 
bun, 

11  ©tit  (f  hce  tbiuft  bun  fuDbenlp 
"lbttbout  cnmitic,  0?  haue  taft  bpon 
hinianp  thing  rbttboutlaputgof  ibatt, 

23  &i  lbitb  anp  ftone  ttJbcreibttb  a 
man  map  Die,  feeing  him  not,  anocafl 
it  bpon  hint,  that  he  me,  anDibasnot 
his  eromic,  neither  fought  bis  banne : 

14  Xben  the  Congregation  (ball 
tuogc  betibccnc  the  flapcr,  anb  the  re- 
uenger  of  blooD ,  acco?Dlng  to  tbcfc 
tuDgcnicnts. 

i<,  3nD  the  Congregation  (ball  Deli 
ucc  the  flaper  out  of  the  hanb  of  the  re; 
uenger  of  blooD,anD  the  Congrcgatton 
(bai  r  cttotf  him  to  the  ntp  of  his  refuge, 
lbbtther  he  tbas  flcb :  ano  he  (ball  abibc 
in  it  tonto  the  beath  of  the  high  #zieu\ 
tbbieh  tbas  annopnttb  ibttb  the  holp 
ople. 

16  33ut<ftbeflapfr(ballatanpttmc 

come  without  the  bozber  of  the  title  of 
hisrefuge.Ibbltbcr  helbasfleb : 

17  3lnD  the  reucnger  of  bloob  finbe 
bun  Without  the  bo?Dcrs  of  the  eitie  of 
his  refuge ,  anb  the  reuengcr  of  bloob 
lull  the  flaper,  he  t  fliall  not  be  gutltic  of 
bloob: 

28  26ccattfebc  (boulbhaucrtniaineb 
m  the  cttte  of  his  rcfugcbnnil  the  beath 
of  the  high  tfVtctt:  but  after  the  beath 
of  tbcbte^Hcft,  the  flaper  fbalrcturne 
into  the  lanb  of  nispoflrflion. 

19  fi>o  tbefc  things  (ball  be  fo;  a  (to 
tutc  of  tuDgmcnt  bnto  pou,  tlwoibo  ut 
pour  generations  ut  ai  pour  Dwellings. 

30  nabo  fo  lullcth  anp  perfon ,  the 
muroerer  (hall  be  put  to  Death,  bptht 
•mouth  of  ibitncflcs:  butoneUiitnefTe 
(ball  not  tefhae  againfl  anp  perfon ,  to 

caufehinitODfC. 

31  £j3o,!Coucr,pcc(balitabtno&ttif 
faction  foj  the  life  of  a  murDerrr.lblncb 
is  t  gutltic  of  Death,  biu  he  (balbc  (urelp 
put  to  Death. 

31  3nD  pee  fli  an  tabe  no  (atiffaction 
fo?  him  tjjat  is  flcD  to  the  cine  of  his  re 


fuge ,  that  hce  (boulD  come  agame  to 
Dibcliui  the  lanD,  bntu  rt)e  Death  of  the 
0?ic(t 

33  do  pc  (hall  not  pollute  the  lanDc 
Wherein  pe  arc:  fo2bloob,UDcfiictbtbc 
lanb :  anD  the  t  lanD  cannot  bee  clcanfcD 
ofthc  bloobthat  is  (bcD  therein,  butbp 
the  bloob  of  bun  that  (beD  it, 

3+  JDcfilc  not  therefore  the  lanbe 
ibhtcl)  pec  (hail  mbatnte,  Wherein  3 
DWcfl:  fo?  3  the  %  ©  is  ©  DTbell  among 
tberbilDjenof3Jfttirt« 

CHAP.    XXXVI. 

1  The  inconuenience  of  the  inheritance  of 
daughters,  5  is  remedied  by  marying  in 
their  owne  tribes,  7  left  the  inheritance 
fhould  be  remoued  from  the  tribe.  10  The 
daughters  of  Zelophehad  marrie  their  fa- 
thers brothers  fonnes. 

il5b  the  rbtcfc  fathers  of 
the  families  of  the  ebilDjen 
of  <5tleab,  the  fonne  of 
t!£acbir,  the  fonne  of  £$& 
,.  naflcb ,  of  the  families  of 
the  fonnes  of  giofepb,  came  nccre,  anb 
fpafee  before  ^0ofes ,  anD  before  the 
0;intcs  the  chicfe  fathers  of  the  cbtl' 
D?cnof3(fracl. 

1  3nbthcplatD,*3Cbe&fir>«?D 
commanDcD  mp  lo?D  to  giuc  the  lanDe 
fotan inheritance  bplot  to  the  cbiUwcn 
of  Ufracl :  anD  nip  low  tbas  contman- 
DeD  bp  the  %  ©  «  ©,  to  glue  the  inhere 
tance of  zelopbebaD  our  brother, bnto 
his  Daughters. 

3  3lnD  tf  tl)cp  bee  marrlcb  to  anp  of 
the  fonnes  of  the  othertnbesof  tbcehil 
tycnof  'Jfracl,  then  (hall  their  tnbert 
tancc  be  talicn  from  the  inheritance  of 
ourfathcrs,  anblhail  bee  put  to  them 
hcrttancc  of  the  tribe,  t  wbcreinto  tt)ep 
are  rccctucD:  fo  (bai  it  be  taben  front  the 
lot  of  our  inheritance. 

4  3inDWbciitbc3lttbilcoftbcebfl 
bzcnof  3Jfrael  (ball  be,  then  fliall  their 
inheritance  be  put  bnto  the  inheritance 
ofthc  tribe,  Wbcrcunto  tbep  arc  rccci- 
ucb:  5)0  fljal  their  mhentance  be  taben 
atbapfrom  theinheruanccof  the  tribe 
of  our  fathers. 

5  3lnD  s©ofes  tommanbeD  the  chit 
Djcnof  IJfrael,  acco.:Ding  to  tbcibortje 
of  the  lTc>  w  *>,fapmg,Xbc mbc of  tljc 
(bnnes  of  3Jofrph  hath  (atb  lbell. 

6  Xhis  is  the  thmg  Jbhich  the 
%$>  is  ©  Doeth  commanD  concerning 
rtje Daughters  of  ZelophehaD,  faptng, 
ILet 


canbenoex- 

pialionfcr 

thelvid. 


'  Oiip.17. 
I.io/h.17.3 


Trpevt  ihej 
flail bi. 


Lawes  for 


Ch 


a 


p.j. 


inh 


entances. 


vfiuet. 
•Tob,  I.?- 


fff*. 
elcAMe  19 
the  &c. 


%tt  them  tmarry  to  ibhotn  the?  thmfcr 
belt :  *  onely  to  the  family  of  the  tribe  of 
their  father  (bail  they  marry. 

7  £>o  (ball  not  the  tnberitante  of 
the  tbilbicn  of  llfrart  remooue  from 
tribe  to  tribe :  fo?  cuety  one  of  rbetbtl 
bjcnof  3ftael  Ojail *  Heepe  bimfcifc  to 
rt)c  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  bis  fa< 
there. 

s  3nb  euery  baugbter  rtjat  poffcfc 
fctljan  mberttante,inany  tribe  of  rtjc 
cbUbjcn  of  3Jfcael ,  (ball  be  ibifc  bnto 
one  of  the  fanulv  of  the  tribe  of  l)cr  fa= 
tl)tr ,  that  the  cbilbJen  of  ^jfrael  may 
enioy  cucry  man  the  uiberitante  of  bis 
fathers. 

9  Neither  (ball  the  inberitante  rc< 
moue  from  one  tribe  to  another  tribe: 
but  cucry  one  of  the  tribes  of  the  cbil* 


ojen  of  3fratl ,  (hall  fterpc  huufelfe  to 
bis  otbne  inheritance. 

io  €ucna6theIL€>iss»tomman'' 
beb  tT9ofcs,fo  bib  tlje  baugljtcrs  of  ze* 
lophebab. 

ii  *ifoi  #abiab, Xtnab,  anb i?og 
iab,anb^)ilcab,anb,0oabtbebaugl) 
tcrs  of  zclophchao,  ibere  marrieb  bn- 
to their  fathers  brothers  fonnes. 

ii  3nb  they  ibere  marrieb  t  into  the 
families  of  the  fonnes  of  #anau*eh,thc 
fonne  of  3Jofeph ,  anb  their  inheritance 
remaineb  in  the  tribe  of  the  family  of 
their  father. 

13  Xhcfe  a^  the  commanbements 
anb  the  iubgements  lbhith  the  %$>ym 
tommanbeb  by  the  hanb  of  <©o{cs,bn 
to  the  ebtlbjcn  of  35frael  in  the  planus 
offl^oab^by'Jozbancneercgjcntho. 


Chap.  >7 


tfWr.to 
fomeihat 
were  of  the 
families* 


%TUE  FIFTH  BOOKE  OF 

Mofes,called  Dcuteronomie. 


\[Or,Zufh. 


CHAP.    I. 

Mofes  fpeech  in  the  end  of  the  fortieth  yeere, 
briefly  retaarfiiig  the  (lory,  6  olGodspro- 
niife,9  ofgiuingthein  officers,  19  offending 
the  (pies  to  fearch  the  land,  3  4  of  Gods  anger 
for  their  incredulitie,   41  and  dilobcdience. 

V)C£>€  bee  tlje 

tboojbcs  lbhith 
fi^ofcsfpaBebiii 
toail^ftael,  on 
tbtsubc3to2bane 
intbeibiiocrncs, 
tnthepiaineoucr 
againft||tbeftcb 
rea.betibccnt^ 

ran,anb  Xopbel,  anb  lLaban,  anb  $a* 

3troth,anbS)i5ahab. 

Z    (There  are  ettUCn  baieS  lourney  fCOtll 

$02Cb,bytbelbayof  mount  S>elr,bnto 
^abefl)  25amcao       _      ,   e 

j  3lnb  it  tame  to  pafTe  m  the  four- 
ticth  yeere,  in  the  clcuentb  moneth,  on 
the  fttftday  of  the  moneth,  that  fi^ofes 
fpaHe  bnto  the  ebittwcn  of  3Jfracl,aeeo2* 
bingbnto  all  tljatthe  2L€>ise>  hab  gt; 
ucu humn  tommanbement  bnto  them: 


4.  '^fteThcthabOain^dihonthe 
Bing  of  the  2unontes,  lbhith  bibelt  m 
^en)bon,anb€)gthcBingof2i5a{han, 
lbhith  buje«at^llaroth,in  Cbjct. 

5  jDn this fibejlozbancm the lanb 
of  fl^oab,  began  #ofcs  tobetlarethis 
lalb,faying, 

e  3Che?l€>K©ottr<5obfpa&cbnj 
to  bs  in  5?02eb ,  faying,  J'ebaueblbcU 
long  yttough  in  this  mount : 

7  ICurne you,  anb  taReyouriour= 
ney,anb  goetotbcmountoftbtSlmo; 
rites,  anb  bnto  t  all  the  places  nigh  there? 
unto,intheplame,mthehiUs,anbtnthe 
bale,  anbmthe&outh,  anbbythefea 
fiDe,tothelanboftheCanaamtes,  anb 
bnto  ILtbanon ,  bnto  the  great  riuer, 
thttiucrCuphwtes. 

s  25cholb,3lhauctfctthelanbbe* 
fo2cyon:d5ocin,anb  poireffe  the  lanb, 
ibhtch  the  H©k©  froarc  bnto  your 
fathers,  *2b2aham,3faac,anb%icob, 
to  giuc  bnto  them ,  anb  to  rbeirTccb  afc 
tcrthem. 

9  C  2mb  3  fpane  bnto  you  at  that 
time ,  twing ,  3  am  not  able  to  bcare 
you  my  fclfe  alone: 

io^lhc 


*Nuro.2i. 
24. 


f  Hetr M 
hie  neigh' 
pours. 


\Htbr. 


•Gene.  15. 
i8.jnd  17. 
7,8. 


A  repetition  of     Deuteronomie.      former  things 


j  H<t--i<i<c. 


t  Hti.gM 


•Ioh.7. 14 


•  Lmit.io. 
1 5.  chap.  16 
1 9. 1  Jim. 
16.7.  pro. 

»4-*?- 

\  Hlbr  ,c- 

fitcei. 


10  %\)t  1L©is©  pout  ©ob  hath  mul 
npitco  vou ,  anc  beholbe,  ton  Ace  tine 
bap  as  the  ftarrcsof  heauen  foj  mulfr 

tllOC. 

11  ( 1thc  HaDfi  jp  ©ob  of  pour  fa* 
thers  niabe  pou  a  tboufanb  runes  fo 
manpmocaspeare.anbbleflepouashe 
hath  pjonufeb  pou.) 

ii  Uo*b  tan  3  nip  Crtft  alone  beare 
pour  tumbjant  e,anb  pour  burben,  anb 
pour  ft  rife  v 

13  t  %mt  pe  tbtfe  men ,  anb  bnber 
ftanbiug,  anb  anoibcn  among  pour 
tribes,  anb  3  ibill  mabe  them  rulers 
ouerpou. 

14  &nb  pe  antroereb  me,  anb  taibe, 
Xhc  thing  lbhich  thou  haftfpoften,  is 
goobtorvstoboe. 

15  £>o  J  toobe  the  tfjicfc  of  pour 
tribes ,  ibifc  men,  anb  Hnotbcn ,  anb 
t  nwbc  them  Ijcabs  ouer  pou,  captatnes 
ouer  thoufanbs,  anb  taptames  ouer 
rjunbjcbs,anbtaptaines  ouer  fifties, 
anb  taptames  ouer  tennes,  anb  officers 
among  pour  tribes. 

i6  3nb  3  tljargcb  pour  3Jubgesat 
that  time,  faping ,  8?care  Jk  caufc  be^ 
ttbecne  pour  tycthiien,  anb*iubge  rlgfr 
teouflp  betibccne  euerp  man  anb  his 
brother,  *  tf)c  ftrangcr  that  isrbittj  him. 

17  *jBc(bailnottrefpcctperfonsin 
iuogement,but  pou  (ball  rjeare  the  fmau 
afrocll  as  ti)c  great :  pou  (ball  not  bee 
afraib  of  ttjjc  fate  of  man ,  fiwtl)cuibg 
ment  is  ©obs :  anb  tnc  caufe  trjat  is  too 
harb  fo;  pou,  bung  itbnto  me,  anb  3 
lbillhearcit. 

18  3nb  31  eommanbeb  pou  at  that 
rune  all  the  things  lbhtch  pe  (boulb  boc. 

19  C  3nb  ibben  Vbee  bepartcb  from 
?>o:cb ,  \bc  ibcnt  though  all  that  great 
anb  terrible  ibilbernes,tt)l)itl)  pou  faib 
bp  the  map  of  the  mountamc  of  thc^ 
montcs,  as  the  1L<£>K©our©obtoni; 
manbeb  bs :  anb  tticc  tame  to  Babefb 
Barnea. 

io  3lnb3J  faib  bnto  pou^earecome 
buto  the  moutitamc  of  the  $mo#tes, 
lblnth  the  3L©is©our  ©obbotbgiuc 
bnto  bs. 

n  25cholb,  the  Horn©  thp©ob 

hath  fct  the  lanb  before  thee:  ©oc  bp, 

nd  poCTcfle  't,as  the  lL©is©  00b  of  tbp 

fathers  hath  faib  bnto  thee :  jf  earc  not, 

neither  be  bifcoutagcb. 

ii  C  3nb  pe  tame  mere  bnto  mee 
euerp  one  of  pou ,  anb  faib,  noe  ttoll  fenb 
menbefoze  bs,  anb  thepftjail  fearthbs 
out  the  ianb,anb  bung  bs  uwb  agatne, 


bp  tbhat  Ibap  ibe  mull  goe  bp,  anb  into 
\bhat  titles  ujc  (hall  tome. 

1  j  3nb  the  faping  pleafeb  mee  tbcll : 
anb*3ftoouctrbelue  men  of  pou,  one 
of  a  tribe. 

14  3nb  *thep  rurneb  anb  ibcntbp 
into  the  moimtame,  anb  tame  bnto  the 
bailep  of  €  fljtol,  anb  fearehcb  it  out. 

15  3nbtbcptooUcoftbefruitofthc 
lanb  in  their  hanbes,  anb  brought  u 
bottmc  bnto  bs,  anb  brought  bs  ibo;be 
againc ,  anb  (aib ,  3Jt  is  a  goob  lanbc 
ibhith  the  %  ©  is  ©  our  ©ob  bocth 
gluebs. 

16  /i3otlbithftanbfng,pciboulbnot 
goe  bp ,  but  rebclleb  agamft  the  com- 
manbement  of  the  %  ©  m  ©  pour  ©ob. 

17  &nb  pe  mur mur cb  m  pour  tents 
anb  fato ,  25eeaufc  the  1L  ©  «  ©  bateb 
bs,  hchathbjoughtbsfo^houtofthe 
lanb  of  €gppt,  to  bcliuer  bs  into  the 
hanb  of  tl)e  3montcs,to  bettrop  bs  : 

is  nabithct  (bail  lbee  goe  bp  <  our 
bjetlttcn  hauc  tbifcourageb  our  heart, 
faping,  %$t  people  is  greater  anb  tafc 
ler  then  .be ,  the  cities  are  great ,  anb 
ibailcb  bp  to  heauen,  anb  mojeouer  tbe 
hauefeenethcfoimesof  the'anatums 
there. 

19  Xhen  31  (aib  bnto  pou ,  £>;cab 
not,  neither  be  afraib  of  them. 

30  %\)t  %€> is©  pour  ©ob  tbhith 
gocth  before  pou,  he  maufight  foi  pou, 
attojbmg  to  all  that  hecbib  fb?  pou  in 
Cgppt  before  pour  epes: 

31  3nbinthetttlbcmes,U>herethou 
haft  fcene  hotb  that  the  fLoa©  thp 
<5ob  bar  e  thee,  as  a  man  both  hearc  his 
fonnc.tnailtherbapthatpeibcnt.bnnl 
pe  came  into  this  plate. 

31  ^ctlnthisthingpebibnotbriecue 
the  H©«  ©pour  <5ob, 

3J  *i©hoibtntinthelbapbcfo?epou 
tofearthpou  out  a  plate  to  pitch  pour 
tents  in,  in  fire  bp  night,  to  fl)db  pou  bp 
ibhat  ibap  pe  (boulb  goe,  anb  m  a  cloub 
bpbap. 

34  3nbthcfU>tR©rjcarbtheboiee 
of  pour  ibo^bs,  anb  Ibas  lb?oth,  anb 
froarcfapmg, 

3$  *  5>ureip  there  (hall  not  one  of 
rhefc  men  of  this  euill  generation  fee 
that  goob  lanb,ibhich3I  froare  togiuc 
bnto  pour  fatljers: 

36  S>auc  Caleb  the  Connc  of  ^ephun- 
neh,  hedian  fee  it,  anb  to  him  ttnll^j 
giuc  the  lanb  that  he  hath  troben  bpon, 
anb  to  his  tbilbjen ,  becaufe  Ijrc  hath 
t  ibhollp  folloibcb  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

37  *3tlfo 


1  Num.!  3. 


*  Num.: J 


\H<1 


wxt. 


*Num,ij. 
»9- 


•E»octi3. 


*  Num.  1^. 


\Hrh.fulfl. 
ltd  to^oc 
after. 


A 


repetition  o 


•p 


f 


ci 


la 


p-y- 


f< 


ormertnin^s. 


•  Num.  jo. 
I  j.  and  17. 
14. 

•Chap.  }. 
;6.and4. 
11.  and  3.4- 
4- 


'  Num.14 
40. 


t  Hth.yeit 
verepre- 
fumytttoKi 
and  vrent  vp. 


37  *  3lfo  the  IL£>is©  ftas  angry 
toith  mc  fo?  your  fases,  favmg,  *  Xhou 
alfo  (halt  not  goe  in  thither. 

3s  Buc  gfo(l)ua  the  fonne  of  iftun, 
tohtch  ftanbeth  before  thee,  he  (hall  goe 
in  thither,  entourage  tjim :  fo?hc  Q)all 
caufe  3iftael  to  tnhertteit. 

39  tJ£o;:couer,yourlitlcones,tohich 
ye  fato  fhoulb  be  a  pzay,  anbyour  chil- 
b?cn,  tohtch  m  that  bay  habno  tmoto 
lebgc  bettoccne  goob  anb  euil,they  (hall 
goe  in  thither ;  anb  Dnto  them  toill  3 
gtue  it,ant)  they  (hall  poffclTe  it. 

40  2Suta£fojyou,turncyc,anbtaBe 
your  tourney  tnto  ti)c  lbiloernetTc ,  by 
thctoayofthc&cbfca. 

41  lfchcnyean&DereD,anDfaibDn; 
to  mec ,  *i©eehaue  fmneb  againft  the 
%  o  ib  ©,  mc  toill  goe  Dp  anb  fight,  at* 
coining  to  all  that  the  %  ©is  j?  our 
<I5od  commanbeb  bs.3nb  tohen  y  e  hab 
gtrbcb  on  cuery  man  his  toeapons  of 
toarrc ,  yce  toere  reaby  to  goe  Dp  into 
thchill. 

41  31nDtliefL©tssifaH)bntome, 
£>ay  Dnto  them ,  ©oenotDp ,  neither 
fight.foj'J  am  not  among  you :  leaftye 
be  fmitten  befojc  your  enemies. 

43  5)0  3  fpahc  Dnto  you ,  anb  you 
tooulb  not  heatc ,  but  rebellcb  againft 
the  commanbcment  of  the  ?L£>isJD,anD 
t  toent  pjefumptuoufly  Dp  into  the  hill. 

44  3nb  the  ^monies  tohich  btoelt 
in  that  mountaine ,  came  out  againft 
you ,  anb  chafeb  you ,  as  28ces  boe,  anb 
beftroyeb  you  in  5>ctt ,  cuen  Dnto 

^onnah. 

4-5  ^nbycrcturneb  anb  lDcpt  before 
tlje  %  o  is  id ;  but  the  %  o  is  ©  tooulb 
not  hearHcn  to  your  Doycc ,  no?  giuc 
care  Dnto  yon. 

46  5>o  ycc  abobc  in  Babefh  many 
Daycs,aeco?bingDntothcbayesthatye 

abObC  there. 

CHAP.   II. 

The  ftory  is  continued ,  that  they  were  not  to 
meddle  with  the  Edomites,  9  nor  with  the 
Moabites,  17  nor  with  the  Ammonites,  14 
butSihontheAmoritewas  fubdued  bythem. 

^enrbcturncb,anbtooUc 
our  iourney  into  the  toil; 
berncfl*e,by  the  may  of  the 
£ebfca,asthe!L£DiRjD 
fpalte  Dnto  mcctanbtoec 
compalTeD  monnt  5>eir  manv  bay  cs. 

i  3nDthc?L0WPfpaRebntome, 
faying, 
j   ^ee  haue  tompaffeb  this  moutv 


tame  long  enough :  tumcyou  i^ojtli- 
toarb. 

4  3nD  commauub  thou  the  people, 
faymg,j3c  arc  to  pafte  through  the  coaft 
of  your  b?eth?en  the  chilbjcn  of  «fau, 
tohichDtocllin&cir,  anb  they  (hall  be 
afratb  of  you:  tane  ye  goob  heeb  bnto 
your  fclues  therefore. 

5  pebble  not  toith  them  ,fo:3J  toill 
not  giue  you  of  their  lanb,  t  no  not  fo 
much  as  a  foote  tyeabth ,  *  becaufe  % 
haue  giuen  mount  £>cir  bnto  CCau  fa: 
apofleffion. 

6  pe  (hall  buy  meat  of  them  fojmo= 
ncy,  that  yc  may  cat,  anb  yee  fhaliaifo 
buy  toatcr  of  them  to?  money,  thatyec 
maybntiBC. 

7  if 02  tlje  ?L©is©thy<£ob  hath 
blcffcb  thee ,  in  all  the  toozftes  of  thy 
hanb:  hec  Rtiotoeth  thy  toaibmg  tl)o- 
roto  this  great  totlbcrncflc:thefe  four 
ttcyctes  thcH©is?D  thy  (Bob  hath  bene 
toith  thee,  thou  haft  lacfecb  nothing. 

8  3lnbtohcntoepaflcbby  from  our 
bzethjen  the  chilb?en  of  efau,  tohich 
btoeltm&cir,  thozotothc  toay  of  the 
plainc  from  <£iath ,  anb  from  €5ion- 
dSaber ,  tocc  tnmeb  anb  paffebby  the 
toay  of  the  toilbetncffc  of  09oab. 

9  ^ub  the  %  ®  is  3D  faib  bnto  mec, 
liaDtftceffe  not  the  Moabites ,  neither 
tontenb  toith  them  in  batten :  fo?  3  toil 
not  gtue  thee  of  their  lanb  fojapoflefc 
fion ,  becaufe  3  Oaue  giuen  ^r  tmto  the 
chiltycn  of  Hot  fo?  apoffctuon. 

io  Xhc  €mims  Dtoelt  therein  in 
tunes  paft,  a  people  great,  anb  many, 
anb  tall,as  thc^lnaUims : 

1 1  nahich  alfo  toere  accounted  g> 
ants ,  as  the  ^nahims,  but  the^oa^ 
bites  call  them  Cmims. 

ii  *Xhe^o?imsalfobtoeltin5>eir 
btfo?cttme,but  tl)e  chilb?en  of  €fautfuc 
ceebcb  thetn  tohen  they  hab  beftroyeb 
them  from  befo2C  them,  f  btoelt  in  their  - 
||  fteab ,  as  IJfrael  tub  Dnto  tlje  lanb  of 
his  poffefuot^tohtch  the  %  sd  is  jd  gaue 
bnto  them. 

13  /Roto  rife  Dp,  raid  i,  anb  get  you  o< 
uet*thc||b200Ke  zcrcb :  anbtoetoent 
oucrthcbujoRCZcrciJ. 

14  3lnb  the  tpace  in  tohich  toe  came 
fcomBabefl)  ffiaruca,  Dntill  toetocre 
come  otter  the  bjoohcZcrcb,toasthir' 
ticanbcightycetcS;  DntiU  ail  the  gene 
ration  of  the  men  of  toarrc  toere  toa 
fteboutfromamongthchoftc,  as  tlje 
%OK&  froar  e  Dnto  tl)cm. 

15  5fo?tnbccb  the  hanb  ot  the  Hois© 

3R toae 

13 


|  HA-r.tutn 
to  the rrca- 
dir.sof  the 

folc  of  the 

foote. 
"Gene.  j6. 


\\Or,vfim 
hofttlititA- 
gtVnUtWo- 
k 


•Gen.jiJ. 

»o. 

t  Hek r.i*. 
hinted 
hem. 

;  Or,  raimc. 


*Num.  it. 
it. 

[  Or, valley. 


KingSihon         Deuteronomie.         is  ouercome. 


HMct 


•  Num.  11, 
l.ti. 


tbas  againft  them ,  to  Deftrop  them 
from  among  tlie hoftc,bntill fhcp  Ibetc 
coumiiicd. 

i<s  C&o  it  came  to  paffe,  tbhen  all 
ttjc  men  of Vbarrc  ibccc  confumcD  anD 
Deao  from  among  the  people, 

17  Xrjat  tt)e  3L<£>as>  fpa&c  bnto 
me,  farms, 

18  Xhou  art  to  paffe  oucr  tho;ott> 
%v,  tt)e  coaft  of  fi^oab,  tijis  Dap. 

19  3nD  tbhen  thou  commeQ  nigh  0^ 
ucr  againft  the  thilD;en  of  ammon,  Di? 
(frcffc  them  not,no;  mcDDlcibith  them: 
fo;  3  ibtii  not  sine  thee  of  the  lanDe  of 
tlje  cjnuwn  of  Simmon  any  poffcflion, 
becanfc  3  haue  giuen  it  bnto  the  thu> 
D;cn  of  Cotfo;  a  poffcflion: 

ao  (XhatalTotbasaceountcDalanD 
of  ©units :  giants  Dtbclt  therein  m  olb 
time,  anD  the  Ammonites  tail  them 
zatwummims. 

21  3t  people  great,  anD  many ,  anD 
tali ,  as  trje  anaftims :  but  the  %  ©  a  © 
DetttopcD  them  before  them,  anD  thcp 
futceeDeDthcm$  Dwelt  in  their  fteaD :) 

2i  %&  he DiD  to  the chilD;en of  <2(an 
Ibbich  Dwelt  in  deicWhenheDcftrop* 
eD  the  i>o$ms  from  before  tbem ,  anD 
tbep  fuetecDeD  them,  aiiDDWeltm  their 
QcaDeucnbntotbiSDap. 

2}  3mD  the  3uims  Which  DrocU  in 
$a3erlm,cuenbnto  235ah,  the  Capfc 
tonms  Which  eamefooJth  out  of  Caph= 
to?,  DefttopcD  them,  anD  Dwelt  in  their 
ftcaD. 

24  C£ifepebp,taBcpouriournep, 
anD  paffe  ouer  the  nuet  3lrnon :  Be* 
holD ,  3  t)a«c  giucn  mto  thp  hanD&u 
hontbe:3mo;iteBmgof  fycthbon,  anD 
his  lanD :  t  begin  to  pofleffe  it ,  anD  ton* 
tenb  With  him  in  battelU 

15  Xhis  Day  will  3  begin  to  put 
the  tveao of  tbee,  anD  trjc  ftareof tbee 
bpon  tl)e  nations,  that  arc  bnbet  trjc 
whole  hcauen,  who  (ball  heare  report 
of  thee,  anD  fliail  tremble,  anD  be  in  an; 
guifbbccaufcofthec. 

16  canD^fentmeffengcrsoutof 
the  WUDerncffc  of  BeDemotb,bnto  5>k 
hon  bing  of  t?efhboii,  ttntl)  wo;Dcsof 
peaccfaping, 

27  *^ctmcpaffcth20ughtbpianD: 
3  null  got  along  bp  the  high  wap,  3 
Mil  neither  turnebnto  the  right  hano, 
no;  to  tbc  left 

28  Xhoufhatt  fell  me  meat  fo;mo' 
ncp,  that  3  n^l?  tatc,  ano  giue  mc  wa 
ter  ro:  moncv  tl)at  3  map  D?mbe:  £)nlp 
3  lbiu  paffe  th;crog|)  onmpfeet: 


29  3ls  the  thtlDicn  of  «feu  Whuh 
Dwell  in  <£>eir  ,anD  the  fijaoabites  winch 
DWcllln:ar,DiDbntomc>bnnll3Jfball 
paffe  ouer  5ozDan,intotbcianb  which 
the  %  jd  a  ©  our  <S5oD  giueth  bs. 

jo  25ut  £>ihon  Bmg  of  $efhbon 
WoulD  not  let  tos paffe bp  him :  foitrje 
fL©iss>  thp(5oDlt)arDcncD  Ijis  fpint, 
anD  maberjis  heart  obfttnate,  that  hec 
imgbt  Deliuer  f)im  into  thp  hanD ,  as  ^p- 

pearcth  thiS  Dap. 

31  5tnD  the  ia,€>«DfaiD  bnto  mee, 
!5cholD,3lhaue  begun  to  glue  £>thon 
anD  ^tslanD  before  thee:  begin  to  pof- 
leffe, thatthoumapeft  inherit  his  lanD. 

32  *%hcn3>lhon  tame  out  againff 
bs4)e  9  all  bis  people  to  fight  at  3Jaba5. 

33  auDtbe?l€>K©our(5oDDcliue; 
rcDhimbefoiebs,  anD  tbee  fmotchim, 
anDbis  fonnes,anDailhispcople. 

34  ^nDibetoobeailhiscuicsatthat 
time,  anD  btterlp  DeflropeD  tlje  t  mm, 
anD  ttje  ttomen,  anD  tbe  litle  ones  of  v 
ucrpeitie,tbeleftnonc  toremaine: 

35  £>nelp  tlje  cattcll  ibee tooae  to;  a 
p?ap  bnto  our  felues,  anD  the  fpople  of 
tijerttits.ttJhtchttJCtoofee : 

36  Jfrotn  3lroer,  Ibhtch  is  bp  tijc 
bjmftc  of  tl)c  rtuer  of  ^rnon,  anD  from 
the  titie  that  isbp  the  riocr  tuen  bnto 
(SileaD,  there  ibas  not  one  title  too 
ftrong  fb;  bs :  the  %  ®  is  je>  onr  <J5oD  dc^ 
UuercD  an  bnto  bs. 

37  £>nerpbutothelanbofthechifc 
D?en  of  Amnion  thou  tameft  not ,  no; 
bnto  anp  plate  of  the  nuer  3»abbob,no; 
bnto  tbe  titles  in  the  mountaines,  no; 
bnto  tbhatfoeuct  the  %<s>  m  p  our  <^ob 
fo;baDcbs. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  Thcftory  of  theconqueft  ofOg  king  of  Ba- 
iVun.  11  The  bigncs  of  his  bed.  ir  The 
diflribution  of  thofe lands  to  the  two  tribes 
andhalfc.  15  Mofes  prayer  to  enter  into  the 
land.   16  He  is  permitted  to  ice  it. 

tytn  vot  tumeD,  ano  lb ent 
bp  tl)eibapto25an)an: 
anD*£)gtf)elxnigof2Ba^ 
than  came  out  again  ft  bs, 
fjee,  anD  all  his  people  to 
battcliat$D;et. 

2  2nD  tlie  %  ©iRBfatD  bnto  mee, 
jpearc  hun  not:  fo;3f  Vbill  Dclmcrljim, 
anD  ail  hispcople,  anD  l;is  lanD  into  thp 
hano,  anD  thou  (halt  doc  bnto  him  as 
thou  DiDll  bnto  *  3>ihon  King  of  the  & 
mo;itcs,  tbhich  Dibclt  at  ii?cll)boii. 

3  5>o  the  %  ®  a  ©  our  ©ob  Dcliuc* 

rcD 


"Num.  11. 
«3- 


t  He h.  titer) 
eirie  of men 

■iiJw  ticn 
nntiltllg 


*  Num.11. 
2  3,ecc.c)u. 


'Num.  al. 


Ogisvancjuilhed.      Chap.iij.  Moles  prayer. 


Num. 


•Num. ; 

3  3.10II1. 1 

8. Sec. 


*Num.  32 


reD  into  our  bants  *  j=Ds  alfo  the  l&mg 
of  Bafban,  anb  all  hts  people :  anb  ibee 
fmotc  bimbmili  none  ttwts  left  tol)ini 
remayning. 

4  anbibctooUcaiibiscihesattbat 
time ,  there  lbas  not  a  cme  lbbitb  ttice 
toobenot  from  tbcm ,-  tb2eefco2ccmes, 
all  the  region  of  3trgob,  rbeaingboinc 
of^Dgmffialban. 

5  3ill  tbefe  ttties  rberc  feneeb  tbitb 
high  italics,  gates  anb  barrcs,  befibe 
Dnlballcbtottmesagreatmany. 

6  3nb  tbe  btteriy  bcttroyeb  them, 
astbebtbbntoSnbonBiug  of^cfl)- 
bon,  bttcrly  bcttroyiug  tl)c  men ,  lbo- 
men.anb  cbiityen  of  cuery  tine. 

7  25ut  ail  the  tattell ,  anb  tbc  fpoilc 
of  the  cities ,  lbc  toofcc  ft?  a  p?ay  to  our 
felues. 

s  3inb  lbc  toofee  at  that  time  out  of 
tliebanboftbetrboISingsoftbe^mo^ 
rites,  flic  lanb  tbat  tbas  on  tbis  &be 
'5lo:ban,fromtbcriucrof^rnon,bnto 
mount^crmon: 

9  ( which  Sermon  tbe  &ibontans 
call  Syjion :  anb  tbe  3mo?ites  call  it 
S>bcnir.) 

10  311  tbe  rules  of  the  plaiuc,  anb  all 
0ileab,anb  all  25a(ban,bnto  5>aicbab, 
anbCbjet.ntiesoftbcamgbomeofDg 
m25afban. 

11  foi  oncly  £>g  "filing  of  25afban 
remameb  of  tbe  remnant  of  giants;  bc> 
bolb,bis  bebftcb  ibasa  bcofrcb  ofpzon : 
is  it  not  m  Kabbatb  of  tl)c  cbiltucn  of 
Simmon  ?4!?mc  cubites  ibastbc  length 
thereof,  anb  fourc  cubites  the  bjcabrt) 
of  it,  after  the  tubite  of  a  man. 

12  Sinbtbis  lanb  which  vot  pofTeffeb 
attbattimcfrom  3tocrlbbicb  » by the 
ruiev  ^Irnon,  anD  baifc  mount  ©ilcab, 
anb  *  the  cines  thereof,  gauc  3  bnto  the 
JXcubcmtes,anD  to  the  ©abitcs. 

13  3uiDtbcrefrofc?ilcab,anbail2iSa; 
fl)an,bcinSthcUingDomcof^g,gauC3J 
bnto  the  balfc  tribe  of  £0anaffcb :  3tll 
the  region  of 3rgob  tbitl)  ailioafban, 
tbbicb  mas  cailcb  the  lanb  of  Giants. 

14  5iair  tbe  fonnc  of  £0anau"ch 
tootic  all  the  countrcy  of  3rgob,  bn- 
to the  coaCes  of  GrfljurUnb  £0aacba- 
tbi ;  anb  caiieo  them  after  his  otbne 
name,  ©afban  *  sauotb  3^ >  bnto 

15  Stub  3  gauc  Gilcab  bnto  93acbir. 

16  31nb  unto  tl)c  Bcubcnites,anb  bus 
to  the  Gamtcs,  3  gaue  from  Giicat, 
euen  bnto  the  nuer  3rnon ,  balfc  the 
bailer, anb  tbebo;ocr ,  euen  bnto  the 


nuer  3labboR ,  lbbitb  is  the  bozber  of 
the  cbilDzen  of  Amnion : 

17  Xhc  plauic  alfo, anb  3fo2ban,anb 
tbe  coaft  thereof,  from  Cbumerttb,  euen 
bnto  the  fea  of  tbepiamc,  euen  the  fait 
fca,bnDer||3fbbotb  iMgabealttbarb. 

is  C3hib3kommanDctyouattbat 
time,  facing,  Xbe  %  o  n  1?  your  ©crt 
hart)  guicn  you  this  lanb  to  poffeflett : 
*yc  (ball  pafTc  oucrarmet>bcfo2cyour 
bjetbjentbc  cbtlb2en  of  Jfracl,  allth.n 
^etmcctfoitbcibarre. 

19  26ut  your  lbiucs,  anb  your  little 
oncs,anb  your  cattcll  (fo;  3  tmoib  that 
ye  hauc  much  tattel)  (ball  abibe  m  your 
cttiesAbbtcb  3  baue  giucn  you : 

20  Clntill  the  1Lok-&  bawcguien 
rellbnto  your  bjertuen ,  as  lbell  asbn 
to  you ,  anb  bntill  rt)ey  alfo  pofTeffe  the 
lanb  which  the  %  ©  is  ©  your  Gob 
hath  giucn  them  beyonb^iojban :  anb 
then  (ball  yc  *  rettirne  cuery  man  bnto 
bispou"cn*ion,ibhicb3I  bauegmenyou. 

x\  C^nb*3JcommanbeD3Joibua 
attbatttme,  faying,  Xbme  eyes  baue 
feme  all  tbat  the  IL©k©  your  00b 
hart)  bone  bnto  tbefc  tibo  ikings :  fo 
fbal  rt)c1i€)K©bocbiitoautbeBmg 
bomes  lbbirtiec  thou  paffctt. 

22  m  (l)all  not  fcarc  them: fo2rt)c 
ILoisoyour  ©ob.be  fl)aifiginfo2you. 

25  3nb'3lbcfougbttbe?L£>K3Dat 
thatnme,faymg, 

24  £>llo?b(5fi)©)tbouba(Ibtgun 
to  (betb  thy  feruant  thy  greatneffe,  anb 
thy  mighty  banb :  fo?  ibbat  d5ob  is 
there  in  hcaucn,  02  in  earth,  that  can  bo 
acco2bmgto  tl)y  ib02Rcs,anb  acc02bmg 
totbymigljtf 

2-5  3ip2aytbcc lctmcgocouer,anb 
fee  the  goob  lanb  tbat  is  beyonb  3op 
ban,  tljat  goobly  mountamc  anb  %t 
banon. 

26  2SutrhclL€>E©  *rbas  lb?otb 
tt>itbmcfo2yourfat$cs,anDiboulbnot 
bcarc  mec :  anb  the  %  o  a  jd  faib  bnto 
me,  ILctit  fuffitc  rt)cc,  fpcabe  no  mozc 
bnto  me  of  rtus  matter. 

27  Get  thee  bp  into  the  top  of  ||  0if- 
gab,  anb  lift  bp  tbmc  cyesnacftibarb, 
anb/i5o2rt)lbarb,anb^)outblbarb,anb 
eaftibarb ,  anb  bebolbe  it  tuttb  tbme 
eyes:  fo?  rtjou  (Ijalt  not  goe  oucr  tl;is 
3lo2ban. 

28  Butcbarge 5Jon)iia,anb entou 
rage  him,  anb  ftrengtben  bmnfo?  bee 
(hall  goe  oner  befo2e  tins  people,  anb 
be  (ball  caufc  them  to  inft entc  tbe  lanb 
tbhtcb  thou  (bait  fee. 

'     %  :  29  &Q 

13: 


Or,vnJsr 
thejprinet  of 

the  hit. 


\  Heb.fcnnct 
of  purer. 


Io(k  J», 


"  Num.17. 
18. 


*  Num.50. 
1  l.chap.i, 
J7- 


Or.thcbir.. 


(Exhortations        Deuteronomie.        to  obedience. 


"Ch3[>.  Ii. 
31.ioft1.17 
pro.  50.6. 
rcu.  12.  |S. 


*Num.  15. 
4&c. 


19  5>o  wcaboDe  intheballcp,  oucr 
agamftaseth-pcoz. 

CHAP.   IIU. 

1  An  Exhortation  to  obedience.  41  Mofes 
appointeth  the  three  Cities  ot  refuge  on 
that  fide  Iordan. 

sDwe  rt)«tfojc  hearken, 
sD3Jfracl,  Dnto  the  3>ta= 
tutes,anD  Dnto  the  3f  uug- 
ments  Which3J  teach  pou, 
fo?  to  Do  them.tljat  pc  map 
Due,  anD  goe  in  anD  pofTcfTc  the  latiDe, 
Which  the  fU>K©<E»oD  of  pour  fathers 
giuethpou. 

2  *jncft)allnotaDDcbntotheWo?D 
Which  3J  commanD  pou,  neither  fhail 
pou  Diminish  ought  from  it,  that  pc  map 
ucepe  the  CommaunDcmcnts  of  rtjc 
3L<dis©  pout  <5od,  Whith  3  conunanD 
pou. 

j  jaour  cpes  hane  feene  ruljat  the 
?L  €>  is  ©  DiD  Dccaufe  of  *  ?Baal$co  ? :  fo? 
all  the  men  that  folloWcD  26aai0eo?, 
tftc  iLoia©  thp  <5oD  hath  DcttcopcD 
tijem  from  among  pou. 

4  25ut  pee  tl)at  did  tleauc  bnto  the 
3L<DiB©pour  €>oD,areaituecucryone 
of  pon  this  Dap. 

5  zScholD,  31  hatte  taught  pou  <§>tfc 
ttttcs,  anD  3mDgcments,  cum  as  the 
%  €>  k  ©  mp  <5oD  commanDeD  mc,that 
pelhoulDDo  fo ,  in  the  lanD  Whtthetpc 
goetopoffeflcit. 

6  inccpethcrcfinc,  anD  Doc  them ; 
fo2  this  ^  pour  WtfcDome  anD  pour  ton- 
DerftanDing  in  tfjc  fight  of  the  nations, 
Which  mallhcarcallfhcfcftatutcs,  anD 
fap,  Smrclpfhts  great  nation  is  a  Wife 
anDDtiDcrftanDingpeoplc. 

7  if  02  What  nation  is  there  f0  great, 
Who  hath  God  fo  nigh  Ditto  them,  as 
the  %  o  is  ©  our  <5oD  » in  all  tljiugs, 
that  we  call  Dpon  him  fo?; 

8  3lnD  lDhat  nation  is  there  fo  great, 
that  hath  Statutes  anD  IJuDgcments 
fo  righteous,  as  all  this  #aw  Whith  3 
fct  Define  pou  thtsDap; 

9  <©ncip  taUe  hccD  to  thp  felfc,  anD 
tteepc  thp  foule  Diligcntlp ,  left  thou  fo; 
get  the  things  which  thine  eves  hauc 
fcene ,  ano  left  thep  Depart  from  thp 
hear  t  all  the  Dapcs  of  thp  life :  but  teatl) 
them  thp  founts,?  thp  fonnes  fonues : 

io  Specuiiv,  the  Dap  that  thou  ftooDft 
befoze  the  %  ©  is  ©  thp  GoD  tn  $o?cb, 
when  the  %  ©  «©  faiD  Dnto  nice ,  <&& 
thct  mc  the  people  together ,anD  3  null 


matte  themhearempWo?Des,thatthcp 
map  learnc  to  fcarc  mee  all  the  Dapcs 
that  thepfballliucDpon  the  earth,  anD 
that  thep  map  teach  their  chUDjcn. 

ii  ^uDpc  tame  neere  ano  ftooDDtiDer 
the  mountainc,  anD  the  *  mountame 
burnt  With  fire  Dnto  the  t  miDft  of  hea* 
uen,wtth  Darutncs,  clouDcs,anD  thtcae 
DarBcneue. 

u  3nDthclL£>i3©fpaftcbntopou 
out  of  the  miDft  of  the  fire :  pe  hearD  the 
bopte  of  the  wo?ds,  but  faw  no  fnn<lt= 

tUDe,t  OilClp  ye  heard  a  DOptC. 

ij  3md  he  DetiarcD  Dnto  pou  his  coue= 
nant,  Which  he  tommanDcD  pou  to  pep 
fo?me,  euen  ten  tomanDcmcnts,  anD  he 
W?ote  them  bpon  two  tables  of  ftone. 

14  C^nDthcHfiDis©commanDeD 
mc  at  that  ttmcto  teach  pou  Statutes, 
anD  3JuDgemcnts,  that  pec  might  Doe 
them  in  the  lanD  Whither  pe  goe  oner  to 
pofTcfleit 

15  ICaae  yt  thcrfo?e  gooD  heeD  Dnto 
pout  fclucs,  ( fo?  pe  faw  no  mancr  of  fr 
milituDc  on  the  Dap  that  tljclLsDis© 
fpahc  Dnto  pou  inl£o?cb,  out  of  the 
miDftofthcfirc) 

i6  Heft  pee  comipt  y°"r  Glues ,  anD 
matte  pou  a  graucn  image ,  the  firntlb 
tuDe  of  anp  figure,  the  ntienes  of  male, 
02  female, 

17  Xhe  URcncfre  of  anp  bcaft  that  <s 
on  tl)e  earth,  the  liuencs  of  anp  lDmgcD 
foule  that  flicth  m  the  aite, 

is  %\)t  liHcncflc  of  anp  thing  that 
creepcthonthegrounD,  theliHcncfleof 
anp  fifl)  that  is  m  the  waters  beneath 
the  cacti): 

19  3lnD  left  thou  lift  bp  thine  epesbtv 
to  heauen,  anD  When  thou  fceft  tljefun, 
anDthemoone,anDfheftarrcs,euenaii 
the  hoftc  of  heauen,  flioulDeft  bcDjium 
to  Wo?fl)ip  n)cm,anD  feruc  thcni,Which 
the  Hois©  thp  god  hath  II  DlUlDCD  \>\v 
to  all  nanons  bnDcr  the  Whole  heaucu. 

zo  25ut  the  !Lok©  hath  taftcn  pou, 
anD  brought  poufoo:th  out  of  thepjon 
foznate,  euen  out  of  €gppt,  to  bee  bnto 
htm  a  people  of  inhcntancc,as  >e  are  tljis 
Dap. 

ii  ;ffurthcrmo2e,fhe?L£>i3©was 
angrp  with  mcc  fo?  pour  fattcs,  anD 
ftuarethat  J  flioulD  not  gocoucr  3Jo^ 
Dan,  anD  that  31  fboWD  not  goe  m  Ditto 
that  gooD  lanD  Which  the  %  o  u  ©  n)p 
C50D  guicfh  tlicc  for  an  inheritance. 

ii  2Sut  3  muft  Die  m  this  lanDc,  3 
muft  not  got  oucr  3)02Dan :  but  pe  fljaii 
goe  oucr  anD  pofTcfTc  that  gooD  lanD. 


•Eiod.19. 
1 8. 

t  Hibhtm. 


A  Vtjcc, 


ted. 


God 


s  mcrcie 


Ch; 


.p.inj. 


toward  Ifrael. 


•Cfcap.9-3 

hcbr.u. 


t  Mr. 

baucfluni 

ihtt. 


23  Italic  hccb  bnto  your  fclues,left 
yefozget  the  coucnant  of  the  %*>*& 
your  <5ob,  Which  hee  mabe  With  you, 
anb  matte  you  a  graucn  tmage ,  or  the 
libenes  of  any  thing  Which  the  jl  ©m© 
thy  C5ob  tjatl)  fiwbibbenthec. 

24.  jf02fhV?L©lS©thy<£0biSa 

confummg  firemen  a  teaious  ©oo. 

15  €  DBften  thou  fl)ait  beget  chil; 
bzen,  ano  chtHucnsehilbzen  ,  anb  (halt 
hauc  remaineb  long  in  the  lanb  ,  anb 
fl)ai  corrupt  your  fducs,  9  mane  a  gcauen 
image ,  or  the  Uftenes  of  an?  thing ,  anb 
(hall  bot  eutl  in  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
tl)?  C5ob,to  pzouotic  him  to  anger : 

i6  3J  call  hcancn  anb  earth  to  Wit- 
ncfTe  agamftyou  tins  bap,  that  ye  (hall 
foonc  Utterly  pcrtft)  from  off  the  lanb 
Whercunto  you  goe  oucr  3Jo?ban ,  to 
pofleffe  it :  pec  (hall  not  pzolong  your 
bayes  bpon  it,  bntfhall  utterly  bee  be- 
ftcoyeb. 

27  3nb  the  Hois©  (hail  fcatter 
you  among  the  nations ,  anb  ye  (hall  be 
left  fell)  tn  number  among  the  heathen, 
Whither  the  %  ©  is  ©  (hall  leab  you. 

23  3lnb  there  ye  (hail  fcrucgobs,the 
Wozttcofmcnshanbs.Woob  anb  done, 
Which  neither  fee,  no? heart,  no?  eate, 
nozftnell. 

29  25nt  if  from  thence  thou  (halt 
fecftc  the  %  €>  is  ©  thy  <3ob ,  thou  (halt 
finbe  him,  if  thou  fcelte  him  With  all  thy 
heact,anb  With  all  thy  (bule. 

jo  aahenthouartintnbuianott,anb 
all  thefc  things  t  are  come  upon  thee, 
cuen  m  the  latter  baycs,if  thou  turne  to 
the  %  ©  is  ©thy  c3ob,  anb  (halt  be  obc- 
btent  Unto  his  uotcc: 

31  (5Fo?thelLois©thy  (Sobisa 
mcrcifull  ©ob)hc  Will  not  fozfa&c  thee, 
neither  beftroy  thee,  no:  fojget  the  co- 
uenantofthy  fathers ,  which  fieitoare 
unto  them. 

j2  ifo?  af  fee  now  of  the  bayes  that 
arc  paft,  which  were  befozcthee,  fmce 
the  bay  that  <5ob  crcateb  man  upon 
earth ,  anb  askefcomthc  one fibe  of  hea* 
ucnDiuo  the  othcr.BDhcthcr  there  hath 
bene  any  fuch  thing  as  this  great  thing  ■*, 
ozhath'bcnehcarbliRctt; 

33  2>tD  cuer  people  hear c  the  Uoyee  of 
<sob  fpeaftittg  out  of  the  mtbft  of  the 
fir  e,as  thou  haft  hcatb  ,anb  Hue  < 

34  £>;  hath  <5ob  aflaycb  to  goe  anb 
tatte  him  a  nation  from  themibftof an- 
other nation,  by  temptanons,  by  fignes, 
anb  by  tt)onbcrs,anb  by  warrc ,  anb  by 
a  mighty  hanb,  anb  by  a  ftcetcheb  out 


armc,anb  by  great  tcrrozs,atcozbingtD 
]  all  that  the  %  ©  11  ©  your  <3on  bib  fo? 
I  youtnCgyptbcfozcyour  eyes  < 

3$  SUnto  thee  it  was  (heweb  ,  that 
thou  mighteftanoW,  that  the  %<£>  is© 
hec  is  ©Ob,  there  is  none  clfc  befibes 
him. 

36  £>ut  of  heauen  hec  mabc  thee  to 
hcarc  his  botce,that  he  might  mftruct 
thee :  anb  Upon  earth  hee  (heWcothec 
his  great  fire ,  anb  thou  hearbeft  his 
Wozbsout  of  themibftof  the  fire. 

37  3(nbbecaufchcloucbfhyfathcrs, 
thcrefoze  he  chofe  their  fecb  after  them, 
anb  bzought  thee  out  in  his  fight  With 
hismtghtic  power  out  of  €gypt : 

38  %o  bzmc  out  nations  from  before 
thee,  greater  anb  mightier  then  thou 
art ,  to  bzutg  thee  in ,  to  giue  thee  their 
lanb  for  an  mhcritanccas  it  is  this  bay. 

39  BnoW  thcrefoze  this  bay,?  ton- 
fiber  it  in  thine  heart,  that  the  %  €>  is  © 
hec  is  ©ob  in  heauen  abouc ,  anb  upon 
the  earth  beneath :  there  is  none  elfe. 

40  1Thou  (halt  beepe  thcrefoze  his 
Statutes,  anb  his  Commanbemcuts, 
Which  3  commanb  thee  this  bay  ■,  that 
it  may  goe  Well  With  thecanb  With  thy 
ehilbzcn  after  thee ,  anb  that  thou  may- 
eft  prolong  thY  bayes  Upon  the  earth, 
which  the  %<$>  is  ©  thy  <5on  gtueth 
thccfozcucr. 

41  C  1Chcn  £0ofes  feucreb  fhzee  ct; 
tics  on  this  fibe  ^ojban ,  towarb  the 
Sunnenfing: 

42  Xhat  the  flayer  might  flee  tht5 
thtr,  Which  fljouib  Hill  his  neighbour 
bnawarcs.anbhateb  hun  not  m  times 
pad,  anb  that  fleeing  bnto  one  of  thefc 
citieshe  might  Hue: 

43    Namely,  *T3t*,tt  til  the  WllbeT' 

ncfTcinthc  plaine  countrcy  of  the<Keu-- 
bcnltcs ;  anb  ©amoth  in  ©iicao  of  the 
<5abites  ■,  anb  C5oian  tn  25afhan,  of  the 
^anaflites. 

44-  C  3nb  this  is  the  flaw  Which 
^3ofcsfct  bcfo?c  the  chilbzcn  of  3Jfracl : 

45  'Xhefc  «e  tlje Xeftimotues,  anb 
the  Statutes ,  anb  the  3lubgcments, 
Which  £Dofcs  fpaftc  bnto  the  chilbzen 
of  "Jfrael ,  after  they  came  foojth  out  of 
^gypt,- 

46  £>n  this  fibe  35o?ban  in  the  bai- 
ley oner  agamft  2i5cth-0eo2,m  the  laub 
ofSihonBing  of  the3fmo2ttcs,  who 
bWclt  at  l^cfhbon,  Whom  ^0ofesanb 
the  chilbzcn  of  gifrael  *  fmotcafter  they 
Wcreronicfoonhoutofegypt, 

47  ^nbtheypofleflcb  his  lanb,  anb 

K  3       the 


"Iofli.  30. 


' Num.  ji. 
14. chap. i. 


The  Law  is  Deuteronomie.     repeated.  The 


*  Num.  l|. 
3 j.chap.J. 
J- 


*  Chip.  5 
«7- 


ta  dae  them 
'EioJ.  ip 
5- 


*Exod;o 
:,&c.!cuic 
26.1  pLI. 
81.10. 

\m.f,r. 


E10J.  34, 


•Icrcm.32 

18. 


the  lanb  of  *  3©s  lung  of  26a(han,ttbo 
tungsof  rhc  3mo?trcs,  which  mtrc  Dn 
tljisfitJCJo^oantoVUarotfte  fun  rums, 

4$  if  com  3lrocr,  ttihtch  u  bp  the 
bauue  of  rhe  note  arnon ,  turn  bnto 
mount  :t>ion,u>htth  'Sermon, 

49  3liib  all  roc  platnc  ofrhistoc 
'3o?baneaftVbarb,cuenbntothcu,a,of 
rhe  piamc  bnber  rhe  *  fpnngs  of  |&ifc 
gal), 

CHAP.    V. 

i  TheCoueruntinHoreb.  6  The  ten  Com- 
mandements.  u.  At  the  peoples  recjuefi 
Mofes  recciucth  the  Law  from  God. 

/!5b  40ofcs  calico  all  Jt 
rati,  anb  fapb  unto  tOcm, 
J?carc><£>3jfract,rhe  &t& 
tures  ano  ^uogements 
_ .  lbhtch  3  fpeake  m  your 
carrscbisbap,rhatpemapicarncrhcm, 
anb  t  fceepe  ano  toe  them. 

z  *u;hc?L©$uPour(3obmabea 
coucnaneibith  bs  in^ojeb. 

3  %he?lrDis©mabcnorrhlstoue 
nant  lbith  our  farmers,  bur  rbiro  bs : 
euen  bs,ibho  are  ail  of  bs  Ijctc  aiiuc  rhts 
bap. 

4  ICbelL^a^talftebtbirhpou, 
fete  ro  fate,  in  the  mount,  out  of  rhe 
mibftofrheficc, 

5  CJftoobbctUiccneroc1L!©K?D 
anbpou,atrhartimc,  to  (hem  pouthc 
\b02b  of  tlje  JLoivd  :  fojpctbcrc  afraib 
bp  rrafon  of  rhe  fire,  anb  ibenrnotbp 
into  rhe  mount,)  (aping, 

6  C*3Jamroc?l0KiDtopC5ob, 
lbhirh  b?ought  thee  out  of  thelanbeof 
<ffgppt,fcomrhehotifc  of  tbonbage. 

7  ICboufhaltbaucnoneothergobs 
before  me. 

8  Xoou  fhair  not  matte  nice  an? 
grauen  image,  or  anp  itfteucfTe  of  any 
iliing  that  ismheaucn  abouc,  02  roar  is 
tn  toe  earrb  beneath,  0;  that  a  ui  the  Ut- 
ters beneath  the  ear  rh. 

9  Xhou  (halt  not  boib  bolbnc  rhp 
felfc  bnto  them,  no:  ferue  rhem :  fo?*  31 
rhcH€>ws»rl)p  ©ob^ia  teious<j5ob, 
bifitingthcintqtttrpofrhcfarhcrsbpon 
rhc  ehtlb?cn,  bnto  rhe  rhtrb  anbfourrh 
generation  of  them  that  hate  me, 

10  ^uuyfhcibingmercp  bnto  rhou 
fanbs,  of  them  rbar  loueme,  anb  Ucepc 
nipcouimatibcmcnrs. 

11  1Thou  (halt  not  taftc  the  name  of 
the  %  0  «  ip  rhp  Oob  in  bauic :  fo?  rhe 
%  0  is  ip  tbili  nor  hoibr  him  guutlcffe 
that  taHeth  bis  name  in  bamc. 


ii  Bccpc  rhe  Sabbath  bap  to  fan; 
rtifie  tr,  as  rhc  %  01s  jd  thp<2fob  hath 
tommanbebtbec. 

i}  ;§>u;cbapes  rhou  (halt  labour,anb 
boealirhpibojitc. 

14  But  rhc  ftorarh  bay  is  rhc  *&>ab 
barh  of  rhe  ?L  o  k  3P  rrjp  (Sob :  in  it  thou 
(halt  uotooc  any  ttwac,  rhou,  nozrhp 
fonne,  nozrhp  baughrer,  no?  rhp  man 
fcruanr,tto.2rhp  maib  feruanr,  no?  thine 
ore,  no?  rhinc  afte  ,no?  anp  of  thp  tattel , 
no?  thv  ftranger  rhar  is  xbtthin  thp 
gates,  that  rhp  man  fetnant  anb  top 
maibfcruant  mapreftas  lbeliasthou. 

15  ^nb  remember  rhar  rhou  ibaft  a 
feruanr  tn  rhe  lanb  of  <£gppt,  anb  rhat 
rhe  %  <£>  e  &  rhp  ©ob  b?onghr  rhee  our 
rhence,  rh?oughamtgbttehanb,anbbp 
a  ftrcrchcb  out  armc :  Xhercfojc  the 
%  0  is  5?  thp  <3ob  tommaunbeb  thee  to 
ucepethc&abbarhbap. 

i6  |ri?ouourrhpfarheranbthpmo; 
rher,  as  the  floe©  rhp  <5ob  hath  com= 
manbeb  thecjhat  rljp  bates  map  be  p?o; 
longeb,  anb  rhat  tr  map  gocibell  ibith 
thecin  rhe  lanb  tufjtct)  the  %  0  is  ©  tl)p 
(5obgtuctorocc. 

17  *Xhou  (hair  nor  am. 

is  *iBeirher(hatr  thou  commit  abul- 
terie. 

19  *ii5cirhctfhaurhoufreaie. 

zo  Neither  (hatt  thou  beare  falfc 
njtmeffe  againft  tl)p  neighbour. 

ii  *  iftctrher  fhair  rhou  befire  thp 
neighbours  lbife,  neither  (halt  thou  to ; 
uct  thp  neighbours  houfe,  hisfielb,  0? 
his  man  feruanr,  o?hts  mmot  feruant, 
Ins  ore,  0?  hts  a(fe ,  0?  anp  rhmg  that  is 
rhp  neighbours. 

xz  C£hefelbo.2bcsrhe?L<0:ts?p 
fpa&c  bnro  all  pour  affembip  in  the 
mount  out  of  rhenium  of  the  Srcof  rhc 
rloub,  anb  of  rhc  rhufec  barkcnefTe,  w  ich 
agrcatboitt,aiibheabbcbuomo2e,anb 
heibiotcrhcmin  ribo  tables  of  ftoue, 
anb  bcliucreb  them  bnto  me. 

23  3(no  it  came  to  paffc  ibhcn  pee 
hearb  the  boitc  out  of  rhc  mtbft  of  rhc 
bart$enes(fo?  the  niountatnc  m  burnc 
ibirh  fire)  thatpc  tame  necre  bnro  nice, 
wen  all  t\)t  hcabs  of  ponr  tnbes,  anb 
poutrlbers. 

24  3uibpcfatb,25tholb, rhe  Hois© 
our  Gob  hat  h  Oicibcb  bs  his  glojp,  anb 
his  grcamcfTc,  ano  *ibehauc  hearb  his 
boicc  out  of  the  mtbft  of  rhc  fire :  lbee 
haue  fecne  this  ^  rhat  C5ob  both  taittc 
lbirhman,aiib"hcliiteth. 

25  ifroib  rlicrcfo.ie  tblipfhoulb  lbce 

bie; 


*Cen.?.2. 
hcb.4  4. 


'Mat.;. 11 

■Luke  18, 
to. 

Rom. 13  9 


'Rom77, 


*  Exod.19 


"Clup.4. 


people  is  afraid.  Chap.v).  Ofobedience. 


t  Kb.  addc 
Itthtxrt. 


"Elod.lD. 
I?- 


\Hekr.fajfe 


Die  i  fo?  this  great  fire  lbill  confumc  bs. 
^jfibctbeacctbebovceofthe  fLois© 
our  ©ob  anv  nio?e,tbcn  ibe  (ball  btc. 

i6  5F02  tbbois  thereof  all  flc(b  tfjat 
bath  bcarb  the  bout  ofrt)c  liumg  eob, 
fpcalungoutoftbe  mibft  oftlje  fire(  as 
ruciiaue)atrt)luietK 

27  ©oc  thou  neere ,  ano  bcare  all 
that  the  ?L©«©  our  000  (ball  lap, 
ant)  fpeaUc  thou  unto  bs  all  that  the 
3L&B©  our  (Pod  (bail  fpeafee  into 
tbtcanb  *  ibe  mil  bearr  tt,anb  boe  tt. 

28  3inbtbc12.©tt©hearbthcboi.ce 
ofvour\bo2bS,U)bcnvefpat$ebntomc, 
anu  tl)c  %  ©  k  ©  fait)  bnto  nte,  3I  bane 
bcarb  the  boice  of  tl)e  ttwbes  of  this 
people,  tt>bich  tbev  baue  fpoben  into 
thee :  rt)cp  ijauc  lbeil  faib,  all  that  thev 
hauefpoucn. 

29  £)tbat  there  lucre  fuch  an  heart 
in  them,  that  t^tp  Iboulb  fearc  me,  ant) 
ncepc  mv  tommanbements  aUbaves, 
thattt  might  beeibcU  lbith  them,  anb 
tbub  ttjnt  thilDjen  fo?  cuer. 

jo  ©oe,  fav  to  them ,  (Set  vou  into 
vour  tents  againe. 

31  2Sutafifo:thee,ftanDthouherebp 
mcanD^tbtll  fpeane  bnto  thee  all  the 
Commanbements ,  anb  the  Statutes, 
anb  tbc3?ubgcments,ibbttb  thou  Qjalt 
teach  them,  that  they  mavboetbemtn 
the  lanb  tbhteh  31  sine  them  to  pof 

32  jacfballobferucto  boe  therefor, 
astbe?L©is©Vom;  ©ob  hath  com- 
manbebvon:  vou  than  notturneafibc 
to  the  right  banb,ono  the  left. 

33  j9ou  (bail  vbalue  m  ail  the  Vbavcs 
Which  the  %  ©  is  ©  your  d5ob  hath 
commanbeb  vou,  that  vcmav  hue,  anb 
that  .t  may  beibcll  tbitb  vou,  anb  that  ve 
mav  pjolong  y<*"  baves  m  the  lanb 
tbbichve(ballpofleu'c. 

CHAP.   VI. 

The  end  of  the  Law  is  obedience.   3   An  ex- 
hortation thereto. 

£>ib  thefc  arc  the  Com; 
maunbements ,  the  £>t& 
tutcs,?tbCJuogements, 
ibbitbtbc?i©tt©vouc 
.  (Sob  commanbeb  to  teach 
Vou,  that  vc  might  boe  >hem  intheiant) 
ibhuhcr  ve  t  goe  to  poflefTc  it : 

2  Xbat  thou  niightca  feare  the 
%  <&  13  ©  thv  ©ob,to  ncepc  all  hts  £>ta 
tntes,anbbisCommanbenicnts  ibbicb 
3  commanb  thee ;  thou ,  anb  thv  fonne, 


janDthvfonnesfonnc ,  all  the  baves  of 
thv  life :  ano  tljat  thv  oaves  mav  tie  pzo 
longcb. 

3  C$eare  therefor,  £>33fcaei,anb 
obferuetoUo  MhatnmavbelbclttMh 
thecanbthatvemavmcrcafcmightilv, 
S as  the  %  ©  is  ©  ©ob  of  thv  fathers 
jhath  p:omifeb  thee,  m the  lanb  that 
I  flolbetb  lbitb  milfte  anb  honv. 

4  i^car  e ,  £>  gjfrael ,  the  %  ©  is  © 
our©ob'sone?L©is©. 

5  3nb*tbou(baitiouctbciL©iK© 
thv  ©ob  lbitb  all  thine  heart,  anb  lbitb 
J  all  thv  foule,  anb  ttntb  all  thv  might. 

6  2nb*tbcfcroo2Dstt)btcb3Jcom< 
manb  thee  this  bav ,  (baa  bee  m  thine 
heart. 

7  3nb  thou  tbait  t  teach  them  bill 
gentlv  bnto  thv  chtHwen,anb  thait  tame 
oftbeiMbbcntbouutteftinthinehoufe, 
anb  lbben  thou  lbal&eft  bv  the  lbav,anb 
lbben  thou  Ueft  bourne,  anb  lbben  tbou 
rtfettbp. 

8  3Cnb  thou  (halt  bmbe  tljetn  fo:  a 
fignebpou  tl)mc  hanb,  anb  tbev  Chaibe 
as  frontlets  bctrbeene  thine  eves. 

9  3tnb  thou  fbalttbnte  them  bpon 
the  polls  of  thv  houfc,anb  on  thv  gates. 

io  3nb  it  (ball  be  lbben  the  ?Lo  is© 
thv  <3ot>  ttjall  hauc  brought  tljcc  into 
the  lanb  Vbhich  bee  ftoarc  bnto  thv  &' 
thcrs,  to  SlbJaham,  to  Jfaac,  anb  to 
3Jatob  to  gtuc  trjee,great  anb  gooblv  ci 
ties,tbbich  tljou  builbebftnot, 

ii  ^nbhoufesfullofallgoobthings 
ibbicb  thou  ftllebft  not,  anb  ibellcs  btg 
gcb  lbbub  thou  biggebfl  not.bmevarbs 
anb  olmc  trees  Ibbicb  thou  plantebft 
not,  *ibhcnthoua)althaue  eaten  anb 
be  full, 

ii  Then  belbare  lefttbou  fojget  the 
%  ©  ik  ©tbbicb  bjougbt  thee  fouh  out 
oftbeianbof€gvpt,fromtbchoufeof 
tbonbagc. 

13  Xhou  (bait  *  fcarc  the  %  ©  is  © 
tbv  (3ob,  anb  feme  bun,  ?  (bait  frocarc 
bvbts/Bamc. 

14.  ptc  ftjall  not  goe  after  other 
gobs,  of  the  gobs  of  the  people  ibhich 
arerounbaboutvou: 

15  (foz  the?,  ©is  ©tbv  ©ob  is  a 
iclous  <5ob  among  vou)  left  the  anger 
of  the  H©k©  thv  ©ob  bectunblcba 
gamft  thee,  anb  beftcov  tl;ce  from  off 
the  face  of  the  earth. 

16  c^cfbalnottemptthelL©^© 
vour  00b ,  *  as  vee  tempteb  i»m  in 
t?)a(tab. 

17  J3ou  fljall  biligeutlv  fecepe  the 

Com 


"Chap.  10. 
Ea.niac  it. 
j7.1uar.11. 

jO.iukcIO; 

•Chap. 11. 


\Heb  w'utt 


*Chap.8-9, 
1  o^c. 


minor Jer 

'Chap.  10. 

I  1,20.  jr.  J 

13.4. 


•  Mat.4.7. 

"Exod.  17. 


Exhortations        Dcuteronomie.        to  obedience. 


t  Hdno 

tnOTTffVf. 


\Hthr.ml. 


Commanbcmcnts  of  the  IL&is©  your 
C5ob ,  anD  his  Xcttimomcs ,  anD  hts 
Statutes  ,U)tncl)  |)c  Ijatl)  commanbcD 

tt)CC. 

is  2nD  thou  fljait  uoe  tt»at  ibhtcb 
is  right  anD  goob  in  the  Cgtit  of  the 
1L©iRi?:thatitmaybeibellibtththce, 
anD  that  thou  mayeft  goe  in ,  anD  pof- 
feffe  the  gooD  lanD  ibhtch  the  H  ©  is  £> 
froare  bnto  thy  fathers; 

19  Xo  tad  out  all  thine  enemies  from 
before  thcc.as  fhc?L©iB©hath  fpoften. 

20  Andibljen  tl)y  Comic  affecth  thec 
tin  time  to  tome ,  taking,  tehatmeanc 
theXcfttmonies,  9  thc5>tanttcs  ,anb 
the  3Jitbgcmcnts,tt)l)ich  the  ?L£>is?d 
out  <I5od  hath  commaitDtD  you  ? 

21  Xhcn  thou  (halt  fav  bnto  thy 
fonnc,ti3eibcrei&haraohsbonDmcnin 
egypt ,  anD  the  ll©  is©  b?ought  bs 
out  of  egypttbtth  anughty  hanb. 

2i  3nD  the?L©K?DfbelbcDfigncs 
anD  lboubers,  great  anD  t  fo?c  bpon  & 
gypt,  bpon  0t)araoh ,  anD  bpon  all  his 
hou(bolD,bcfo?c  our  eyes: 

23  3nD  hec  brought  bs  out  from 
thence ,  that  hce  might  b?ing  bs  in,  to 
guicbstheianbibhich  hce  foarebnto 
our  fathers. 

24  3nD  the  HfiDis©  tommanbcD 
bs  to  Doc  all  tpefe  £>tattttcs,to  fear  e  the 
%  sdis 3D  our  <5oD ,  fo?  our  gooD  al< 
umy  cs,  that  he  migi)t  p?cf crue  bs  altuc, 
as  ins  at  this  Day. 

25  SinDtttballbcoutrighteoufncs, 
if  rue  obferue  to  Doe  all  thefc  Commas 
Dements ,  befojc  the  %  &  is  ©  our  GoD, 
as  he  hath  tommaiiDcD  bs. 

CHAP.    VIL 

1  All  communion  with  the  Nations  is  forbid- 
den, 4  for  feare  o(  Idolatrie,  6  tor  the 
hoIineiTc  of  die  people,  cp  for  the  nature 
ot  God  in  his  Mercie  and  lufhce,  17  for 
the  affurediieiTe  of  viftorie  which  God  will 
giueoucrthem. 

§S  tymthC*3L<2>i3iDthy<5oD 
^A  (ball  b:mg  thee  into  the 
lanD  lbbttbcr  thou  gocft 
to  potteflc  it,  anD  hath  tall 
^QSHgai  out  many  nations  bcfo?e 
thee,  the  Humes,  anD  the  C5irga(hitcs, 
anD  the  3Jmo?tf  cs,anD  the  Canaamtcs, 
anDtl)cperi3^trs,anDthcl)iiutcs,anD 
the  Ucbufitcs,  fcuru  nations  greater 
anDnugbttcrthcntbou: 

1     5ttlD  when  the  %  O  IS  ID  thy  (SOD 

(ball  Dcliuer  them  before  thee ,  thou 


(bait  fnutc  them ,  anDbttcrly  Dcftroy 
tljem,  *tbou  (halt  mane  no  touenant 
Mththmi,  no?  (herb  mercy  bnto  them. 

j  iBctttjer  (halt  thou  matte  mar- 
riages Vbirt)  them :  thy  Daughter  thou 
(bait  not  gme  bnto  his  fonne,  no?  his 
Daughter  (halt  thou  tatte  bnto  thy 
(bnne. 

4.  5fo?  they  ibill  tntne  avbay  thy 
fonue  from  following  mce ,  that  they 
may  feme  other  goos:  fo  iblll  the  anger 
of  the  IL©i3iD  bcfeinDleD  agamftyou, 
anD  Dcftroy  thee  fuDDcnly. 

5  23uttbus(halyeDcaiett>iththcm; 
ye  fhall  Dcftroy  their  altars,  anD  b?caue 
Dottmc  their  t  images,  anD  cutbolbnc 
their  grottcs ,  anD  burnc  their  graucn 
images  Unth  fire. 

6  *  Jfo?tbou art  an  holy people btu 
to  the  %  0  is  ©  thy  ©oD:  *  the  1L  ©  is  s> 
thy  ©obhath  chofenthee  tobcafpcnai 
people  bnto  himfelfc,  aboue  all  people 
that  arc  bpon  the  face  of  the  earth. 

7  Xhe?L<3>is2PDiDnotfctht5louc 
bpon  you,  no?  choofc  you,  becaufcyec 
iberemoc  in  number  ttjen  any  people: 
(fo?  ye  ibere  the  fcibcft  of  all  people,) 

8  25ut  bctaufc  tlje  %  <d  is  ©  loucb 
you,auD  becaufc  hce  iboulD  aecpe  the 
othc  ibhtch  hee  haD  fmo?ne  bnto  your 
fathers,hath  the  %  ©  is  ©  b?ought  you 
out  ibifh  a  migl!)ty  Uanb,  anb  tcDccmcD 
you  ontofthchoufc  ofbonDmcti,from 
the  hanD  of  0haraolj  King  of  Cgypt 

9  H3moibthercfo?ertjattheiL©isB> 
tl)y  (5oD ,  he  is  (Sod,  ti)c  faithfull  <3oD, 
Ibhtch  liccpctl)  Couenant  anb  £0erey 
mtth  them  that  louehim.auDBccpchis 
CommaiiDcmcnts ,  to  a  thoufouD  gc« 
ncrations; 

10  aiiDrcpatcththcm  that  hate  him 
to  their  faccto  Dcftroy  them:  he  ibtl  not 
bcaathctohimthathatcthhim4)cibill 
repay  him  to  his  fate. 

11  Xhou  (l)alt  thcrcfo2e  ftcepc  the 
CommanDcmcuts,anD  the  Statutes, 
anD  tlic  giuDgements ,  ibhuh  3  wnu 
numb  thccthisbay,to  Doe  them. 

ii  Cn3hcrcfo?cit(halcomctopaffe, 
t  if yc  hcarucn  to  thefc  iuDgcments,anD 
UecpcanDDothtm:Xhatthc  H©is© 
tliy<5oD  fhall  ucepe  bnto  thec  the  Co- 
uenantaiiD  the  ^crcy  Uihithljcfroare 
bnto  thy  fathers. 

13  ^nbhcdbill  lottctljce,  anDblcffc 
thee,  anD  miiinply  thee :  I^eelbiUalfo 
blcflc  tlic  fruit  of  thy  ibombe ,  anD  the 
fruit  of  thy  lanD ,  tl)y  co?ne,  anD  rliy 
Tbmc,  anb  thtne  otic,  tlje  nuctafe  of  thy 

ftuie. 


fi.and  54. 
11. 


"SHtbr.fta 
tuti,  or  p/- 


•Chap.  14, 
).x>di6. 

19' 

*  Exod.19 
j.i.pet.3. 
9- 


\Hdr.kt- 
CJufc. 


To  auoid 


Ch; 


ip.Vllj. 


ill  Idol 


atne. 


"Exod.i; 

J«,&C. 


"Exod.p. 
i+fcij. 

Itf. 


tone,  anb  the  flocRcscfthytbccpe^n  the 
lanD  lbhich  l)ec  troarc  bnto  ti)y  fathers 
togiucthee. 

14  Xhou  (bait  bee  blcflebaboueall 
people:  *  there  (ball  not  bee  male  0?  fe- 
male barren  among  you  0?  among 
yourcattcll. 

15  3lnb  the  %  o  k  ©  lbffl  tabc  atbay 
from  thee  an  Rtfteneffe,  anb  ibtu  put 
none  of  the  *  cuiil  btfeafes  of  cgypt 


(lbhich  thouttnoibcft)  bpon  thee:  but 

that  I 
thee. 


*Exod. »;. 
S3- 


*  Exod.13. 
~.io(h.z4 


1  fWr. 
flucke  off. 


t  W//'r.fe. 
fore  thy 
face. 


*Chap.  12. 

!. 

"Iofh.7.!, 

U,2.tnaC. 

U..JO. 


lbill  lap  Qjcni  bpon  ail  tljem  1 


i6  ^»d  thou  (bait  tonfumeall  the 
people  lbhlch  the  |L<oir©  thy  00b  fball 
bcliner  tfjee :  thine  eye  fhalihaue  no  pt- 
tie  bpon  tljem,  neither  (halt  thou  feme 
their  gobs,  fo?  thatwiiibea*fnarcbnto 
thee. 

17  3Jf  thon  (halt  fay  in  thine  heart, 
Xhcfc  nations  arc  mocthen  3>,  holbe 
can  3Jbifpo(TctTc  them  < 

18  Xhoulhaitnotbcafeaibofthem: 
but  (halt  lbcll  remember ,  lbhat  the 
%  ®  w  ©  thy  <25ob  bib  bnto  $haraof), 
anbbntoait<£gypt, 

19  Xhe  great  temptations  ibhieh 
thine  cycsfaibc,  anb  the  fignesanbthe 
lbonbers,  anb  the  mtghtic  haub,  anb 
the  ftrctcbcb  out  arme,  ibhcrcby  the 
!L  ©it?©  thy  ©ob  brought  thee  out:  to 
(ball  the  H©H©th?(I5obbocbntoall 
the  people  of  tbhotn  thou  artafraib. 

20  *  S30oicoucr,  tl)e  fLom©  ri)p  <5oti 
lbillfenb  the  ho?nctamong  fhem.bntill 
they  that  arc  left  anb  htbcthemfelnes 
from  thee,  be  beftcoyeb. 

21  %t)tm  (bait  not  bee  affrightcbat 
them:  fo?  the?L€>iK©  thy  <Sobisa^ 
mongyou,amtghtiC(!5ob,anb  terrible. 

22  3lnb  the  %  ©  ib  ©  thy  ©ob  lbili 
tput  out  thofc  nations  bcfo?c  thee  by 
litic  anb  litlc :  thou  may  eft  not  confumc 
them  at  once,  left  the  beaftcs  of  the  ficlb 
incrcafc  bpon  thee. 

23  25ut  the  %  c>  is  ©  thy  <5ob  fliau 
bcuiier  them  t  bnto  thee,  anb  fballbc- 
ftroy  themttuth  amtghttc  beftrucrion, 
bntilltbeybcbeftroreb. 

24  3lnb  he  (ball  bettuer  their  Rings 
into  thine  hanb ,  anb  thou  (halt  Ueftrov 
their  name  from  bnber  heauen :  Xhcce 
thai  no  man  be  able  to  ftanb  befo?e  thee, 
bntil  thou  haucbeftroyeb  them. 

i<i  Xhcgcaucn  images  of  their  gobs 
*  (hail  yce  bnrnc  ibith  fire :  thou  *  (halt 
not  befire  the  filuer  0?  golbc  that  is  on 
them,  no?  take  it  bnto  thec,  left  thou  bee 
fnareb  therein :  fo?  it  is  an  abomtnati 


on  to  the  %  ©  &  ©  thy  ©00. 

26  Neither  (halt  thou  tying  an  abo- 
mination into  thine  houfc,  left  thou  bec 
aturfebthing  like  it:  but  thou  fbattbt 
tctlybetcftit.anbthoufbaitntterlrab 
ho?rc  it,  fo?  'itisa  curfeb  thing. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

1  An  exhortation  to  obedience  in  regard  of  Gods 
dealing  with  them. 

%l  theeommannbements 
lbhich  Jcommatmb  thec 
this  bay,  fbailyecobfcruc 
to  boc,  that  pee  map  hue, 
_  anb  multiply,  anb  goe in, 

anbpofteuctbelatib  lbhich  thesis© 

fiuacc  bnto  your  fathers. 

2  3jnb  tljou  (halt  remember  all  the 
ibay  lbhich  the  %  ®  is  ©  thy  <£ob  leb 
thec  theft  fourrtcy  ceres  in  thcibilber; 
neflc,  to  humble  tljee,  and  to  p2ouc  thec 
to  tmolb  ibljat  was  in  thine  heart,  whe- 
ther thou  lboulbcftacepc  Jjis  commas 
bcments,o?no. 

3  3tttb  he  bumblcb  thec,  anb  fuffteb 
thcr  to  hunger,  anb  feb  thee  rbtth  ^aiu 
na,  lbhich  thou  hnclbcft  not,ncither  bib 
thy  fathers  ftnolb :  that  he  might  maac 
thee  fenoib,  that  man  both*  not  line  by 
b?cab  onely ,  but  by  cttery  word  that  p:o- 
eccbeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  %<de& 
both  man  hue. 

4  "Xhyratmenttbarebnotolbbp^ 
on  thecuetthec  bib  thy  footefmcll  tliefe 
fourticyeeres. 

5  Xhou  fl)au  alfo  confibcr  in  thine 
heart,that  as  a  man  ehaftcneth  his  fon, 
fo  the  3ta>KD  thy  <5ob  thafteneth  thee. 

6  Xhtttfo?c  thou  fljait  keepe  the 
Coinmanbements  of  the  %  £>  is  ©  thy 
Oob,  to  ibalfte  in  I;is  ibayes,  anb  to 
fearehim. 

7  ifo?  the  %  €>  m  ©  thy  <E-ob  b?in^ 
get!)  thec  into  a  goob  lanb ,  a  lanbcof 
bzooacs  of  ibater,  of  fountaines,  anb 
bepths  tljat  fp.nng  out  of  baileys  anb 
htUcs, 

8  %  lanb  of  ibhcatc,anb  barley  ,anb 
bines,  anb  Rg  trees,  anb  pomegranats, 
a  lanb  of  t  oyle  oliue,  anb  hony, 

9  3  lanbc  ibhcrein  thou  fhalt  catc 
toeab  ibuhout  fcarccnes,  thou  fljalt  not 
lactic  any  thing  in  it :  alatibc  ibhofc 
ftoncsarey?on ,  anb  out  of  lbljofc  hits 
thou  ntapeftbigge  bzatfe. 

10  *nDhcn  thou  haft  eaten  anb  art 
full,  then  thou  (halt  blcffe  the  %  ©ffi® 
thy  dSob,  fo2  the  goob  tanbe  ibhtcljljcc 
hatJ)giucnthee. 

11  28eibare 


"Chap  13. 
'7 


*  Mate.  4.4, 


•Nche.p. 

21. 


\Hclr.ef 
ohtte  tree 
'fojle. 


C!.. 


Of  ingratitude.      Deuteronomie.  God,arire. 


"Num.  jo. 
II. 


>d.i<5. 


ii  26erbarert)atthoufo?getnotrt)e 
%  <$> «  ©  tfjp  <©ob ,  in  not  beeping  his 
Commanbements  ,  anb  tils  3Jubgcs 
mcnts,anb  bis  Statutes  vt»t»trt>3J  com- 
manb  thee  this  bap: 

ii  fLeft  when  thouljaft  eaten  anb  art 
full,  anb  Daft  built gooblp  Doufes,anb 

DVbelt  therein; 

ij  3nti  when  thp  heatbs  anb  top 
flocks  multiply,  aim  tf)pGlueranbrt)p 
golo  is  multtpUcb,  anb  all  that  thou 
Dafttsniultiplieb: 

14.  Xhcn  thine  heart  bee  liftcb  bp, 
anb  thou  fbjget  the  3Ls>is©  t$rp  <Sob 
( rbhith  brought  thee  foo#h  out  of 
tlje  lanb  of  <£gppt ,  from  ttjc  Ijoufr  of 
bonbage, 

15  ©l)o  leu  thee  through  thatgreat 
anb  terrible  tbilbcmcfie,whcrein  were  fie* 
riefcrpents ,  anbfto.jpions ,  $  brought, 
Where  tfjere  ibas  no  ibater ,  *  mho 
brought  thee  footfh  water  out  of  the 
cotfee  offline, 

16  ©ho  feb  thee  in  the  rbilberneffc 
ibith*#anna,ibDicb  thp  fathers  Unclb 
not ,  that  Ijee  might  fumble  thee ,  anb 
thathcemightpjoouetDeejtoboethee 
goob  at  thp  latter  cnb:) 

17  3mbrt)oufap  in  thine  heart,  $)p 
potbcr,anb  the  might  of  mint  Daub 
Dart)  gotten  me  rt)is  wealth. 

18  25ut  thou  (bait  remember  ff)e 
%  ©  is  ©  thp  d5ob:  fo?  it  is  he that  giuert) 
rticepoibertoget  Wealth, that  hemap 
eftablifb  l)is  Couenant,which  Ijc  fitrarc 
bnto  thp  fatbets,as  it  is  this  bap. 

19  2nbtt(balbe,iftbouboeatallfo£ 
get  rt)e  %  0  is  ©  thp  (Sob ,  anb  waibe 
after  other  gobS,anb  feme  tbtm,anb 
tbonl)ip  tDem  ■,  3  tcfttfie  agamft  pou 
this  bap,  that  pc  than  furelp  periCb. 

io  3sthcnations  Which  the!U>is© 
beftropetb  befojepout  face,  fo  (ball  pec 
perifl) ;  becaufc  pc  ttioulb  not  be  obebi- 
cnt  bnto  tljebouc  of  tlje  3L<dis©  pour 
<S00. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Mofes  difTwadcth  them  from  the  opinion  of 
their  owne  ri^hteoufheiTe^Dyrcheaiiing  their 
feueull  rebellions. 

SSjfiG  care ,  ®  3Tfracl ,  thou  art 
M  V t0  P'W~C  ourr  3to2ban  tins 
.TTgn  $  bap,  to  got  m,  to  poflcflc 
£^51  1*  nations  greater  $  migb 
jE^^sl  tier  tDcn  thp  fclfe ,  Cities 
grcat,anb  feuteb  bp  to  hcaucn, 

r  31  people  great  anb  tall ,  tlje  chiV 
tycn  of  the  3lnaUinis ,  Wljom  thou 


bnoWeft,  anb  of  whomtbouhatt  bcarb 
/ay,  *©bocan  ftanb  befo?efl)eerjilb^cn 
of^nabi 

j  fllnberftanb  therefore  this  bap, 
thattbclL©is©tbp<!&ob  i>  he,  Which 
goetD  ouer  befojc  rt)ce,as  a  *tonfimung 
fire :  he  (bail  beftrop  them,ano  he  (ban 
bung  them  bowne  befojc  tbpfacc:  S>o 
(haltrtjonb;iuert)em  out,  anb  beftrop 
them  quicfelp,as  the  %  0  is  ©  hart)  faib 
bnto  thee. 

4  £>peabc  not  rtjou  in  tijine  heart, 
after  tbat  rt)e  H€>is©  tnp  d5ob  Dart) 
caftrtjem  out  from  before  tbec ,  faying, 
foi  mp  rigDteoufnefte  tlje  H  ©  ir  © 
Dart)  b^ougDt  mee  in  to  poffeffe  tDis 
lanb :  but  fo*  tDe  rbirttebncfTe  of  tDefc 
nations,  tlje  %  &>  is  ©  boert)  bnue  rtjem 
out  from  before  ttjee. 

5  iBot  fo?  tbp  rigDteoufneffc,  0?  fo? 
the  bpngDtncffc  of  ri)ine  Dtart ,  boeft 
tnougoe  topofleffert)eirlanb:2i5utfo? 
tDe  tbiebebnefle  of  tijefe  nations  rt)t 
%  «d  is  ©  rt)y  d5ob  boert)  b^iuc  tDem  out 
from  before  rtjee,  anbrtjatDemap  per? 
fomtc  rtjc  Ibo^b  tbDicD  rt)e  %  ©  is  © 
fraare  bnto  tDvfart)ers,^b?aDam,3 
faac  anb 'Jacob. 

6  ©nberftanb  tDercfoje ,  that  rtjc 
fL  «r>  is  je>  rt) v  d5ob  ginert)  thee  not  this 
goob  lanb  to  poflcfleit ,  fo;  thp  rigbte^ 
oufnefte  j  foj  rtjou  art  a  ftuTe-necbcb 
people. 

7  C^ememberandfo?gctnot,hoib 
rtjou  pjouoKebtt  rt)e  %  €>  is  ©  rt)p  d5ob 
to  tb?artj  in  the  ibilbcrneflc :  from  the 
bap  that  thou  bibft  bepart  out  of  the 
ianbofCgppt,bntill  pe  tame  bnto  this 
place,  pee  Daue  bene  rebellious  agamft 
tbcfL€>is©. 

8  TLtfa  in  ^o^cb  pee  p^ouofteb  the 
!Lc»i3©  tonwart),  fothatthe?l€>is© 
lbas  angrp  tbitDpou,tohauebcftrop= 
cb  pou. 

9  i©Dcn  3  lbas  gone  bp  into  rt)e 
mount,  to  rctctuetDclEablcsofftonc, 
euen  thclCablesof  the  Coucnant  lbhich 
the  %  ©  is  ©  mabe  ibith  pou,thcn*3J  a- 
booe  in  the  mount  fomc  bapes,  anb  fo^ 
tie  nights,  3  neither  bib  rate  tycab,  no? 
bnube  ibater: 

10  *3lnbtbe!L£Dis©bcliuctebbnto 
me  tibo  Xablcs  of  ftone ,  ibnttcn  lbith 
tljefingcr  of  <!5ob,  anb  on  tDem  was  wnt 
ten  ateojbtng  to  all  the  Ibojbs  ibDirt)  tDe 
Hob©  fpahe  lbith  pou  m  rt)c  mount, 
out  of  the  mioft  of  fire ,  in  the  bap  of  the 
aflcmblp. 

11  ^nb  it  tame  to  paffe  at  the  cnbof 

fome 


*Nuin.  13. 


*  Chap  4. 
i  +  hcbt.iJ, 


•Eiod.  14. 

18. and.  34 

iS. 


"Exod.  31 
i3. 


The  Tables  broken,  Chap.ix.x. are  renewed. 


*Exod.  3J 
7 


•Num-ii. 

•Eiod.  17. 

7- 

•Nam.  1 1. 

54 


frwtic  baycs,anb  fo?ne  nights,  thattlje 
3L©iBE>gauemcethctwoXablesof 
ftonc,  euen  the  Xabies  of  ttje  Couenant. 

u  ;#nb the 3L o is  s>  faib  bnto mec, 

3lrifc,  gtt  thee  bowne  Qiurtily  from 
hence  j  to?  ttrp  people  ttrturt)  thou  haft 
b?oughtfoo?th  outofegypt,  haucco?> 
ruptcts  tliemfciucs :  they  ate  quicfcly  tur; 
nebafibcont  of  the  Way  Which  3*  torn* 
maubebthem ;  they  haue  mabe  them  a 
molten  image. 

13  ;futthermo?e,  thelLoisBfpaKe 
bnto  me ,  faying,  33  haue  feene  this  peo- 
plcano  beholb ,  it  is  a  IhfhecKeb  people. 

14 1Letmcaione,tnat3imavDeftcoy 

thcm.aub  blot  out  their  name  from  bn- 
berheauen:  anb  3J  Will  mafce  of  thee  a 
nation  mighttcr  anb  greater  then  they. 

15  5>o  3J  turncb  anb  tame  bowne 
from  the  mount,  anb  the  mount  bur- 
neb  With  fire :  anb  the  two  1-ablcsof 
the  Couenant  Were  in  my  two  hanbs. 

16  3mb3JlooBcb,anbbcholb;ychab 
finneb  againft  the  %  ®  m  s>  pour  ©ob, 
and  hab  mabe  you  a  molten  eaifetyehab 
turneb  aftbc  quictuy  out  of  the  way 
Which  the  %  «d  is  &  hab  commanbeb 
you. 

17  3(nb  3  tooftc  the  two  Xablcs, 
anb  cattthcm  out  of  my  two  hanbs,anb 
b?aRCthembcfo?cyoureyes. 

18  Stub  31  fell  bowne  befo?c  the 
%  ©  is »,  as  at  tilt  fit(t,fo?tiebaycs  anb 
fo?tie  nights,  3J  bib  neither  eateb?eab 
no?  bjutfcc  tbatet ,  betaufc  of  all  your 
Gnncs  Whirl)  ye  finneb  ,  in  botng  Wit 
ttebly  in  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  js  je>,to  p?o< 
uofce  him  to  anger. 

19  (f  0?  3  was  af  eatb  of  the  anger, 
anb  Whot  bifplcafurc  Wherewith  the 
%  ©  e  ©  was  w?oth  againft  you,to  nt 
ftroy  you.)  But  the  %  ©  is  &  heattm  eb 
bntomeattlwtttmcaifo. 

10  3mb  the  IB,© is p  was bery  an- 
gry With  3aton,  to  hauc  bettroyeb 
him :  3uib  J  p?ay eb  fo?  3laron  alio  the 

Tame  time.  ,      _    _ 

n  anb3Jtt>oKeyour{mne,thccaifc 

Which  ye  hab  mabc ,  anb  burnt  it  With 
fire,  anbftampebtt,andgrounbitbery 
final!,  euen  bntill  it  wasasfmaltas 
butt :  anb  J  caft  the  miftthtrof  into  the 
b?ooUe  that  bcfrtnbcb  out  of  the  mount. 

11  3lnbat*Xabcrah,anbat*££a£ 
fah,anb  at*liub?oth-tyattaauah,ye  p?o< 

uoitcb  the  %  ©  »  &  to  wjath. 

n  HifteWifi  When  the  TL©K5D  lent 
you  from  inabcfh  25arnea,faymg,d5oc 
bp  anb  poffeffe  the  lanb  Which  3  !)*uc 


gtucn  y ou.then  you  rcbelleb  againft  the 
commanbemcnt  of  the  1L© kid  your 
©ob,anb  ye  bclccueb  him  no  t,no:  hear- 
bmcbtohisboyce. 

24.  J^ouhauc  bin  rebellious agamfi 
the  ?U>i5 v,  from  the  bay  that  J  luiew 
you. 

z5  Xhus  3  fell  bowne  befojc  the 
ILohjd  fourtie  bayes  ,  anb  fourtic 
nights^sSJfelboWneattiieH.n.betauft 
rtjeH^©haofctto>hfWouibbeftroy 
you. 

z6  3  P?ayeb  therefore  bnto  the 
%  0  is  ©,  anb  falb,  $>  Hoib  ©  ©  p,  be- 
ftroy  not  thy  people,  anb  thine  inheri 
taucc ,  Which  thou  haft  rcbeemeb 
ttoough  thy  grcamcs,  which  thou  haft 
brought  foonh  out  of  egypt,  Wirt)  a 
mightiehanb. 

17  3Remenibcrthyferuants,5tbia- 
ham,3ifaac,  anb  Jacob,  loobcnotbn^ 
to  the  ftubbuninefTc  of  this  people,  no? 
to  their  Wicteebnes,  no?  to  their  finne: 

18  Heft  the  lanb  wheutc  thou 
bioughtefl:  bs  out,  fay ,  *  usetaufe  the 
|L©a©  was  not  able  to  b?ingthem  m^ 
to  the  lanb  Which  hee  p?omifeb  thnn, 
anb  bccaufc  hee  hatcb  tl)em,  Ijee  hath 
b?ought  them  out,  to  flay  them  in  the 
Wilberncfte. 

19  ^etthey  are  thy  peoplc,anb  thine 
inheritance  Whith  thou  b?oughtcflout 
by  thy  mightie  power ,  anb  by  ttyv 
ftrttcl;eboutarme. 

CHAP.  X. 

Godsmercie  in  rcftoring  the  two  Tables,  6 
in  continuing  the  Prieftnood,  8  in  fepara- 
ting  the  tribe  of  Leui,  to  in  hcarkeningvn- 
to  Mofes  his  fuit  for  the  people,  ji  An  ex- 
hortation vnto  obedience. 

%  that  time  the  H«d«id 
faibbntomc/^eWthee 
two  fables  of  flone,ltfec 
bnto  the  fir ft,anb  come  bp 
,  bnto  mee  into  the  mount, 
anb  matte  thee  an  atfte  of  woob. 

i  %x&3  will w?ite  on  theXables 
the  Wo?bsthatWeremthefirai:ables 
Which  thou  bjaHcft,  anb  thou  (halt  put 
thctumthcSlruc. 

$  3mb3Jmabean:3trueof£>hittim 
Woob,anbheWebtwoXables  of  ftone 
lOte  bnto  the  firft,  attbwcntbp  into  the 
mouut,haumgrt)e  two  Xablesm  mine 
hanb. 

4  3uib  he  w?ote  on  the  Xables,  ac^ 
coibmg  to  the  firtt  W?iting,  the  tenne 

tcom- 


'  Num.  I^. 
16. 


•Exod.j^. 


Aaron  dicth.         Dcutcronomie.       Exhortations. 


T  Hikr. 
words. 


•Num.  3; 

30. 

*Num.io. 

28. 


'Num.  18. 


\Or,f>rlie 
d*yc. 


t  Hebr.goc 
tn  iottrrter. 


•PfJ.14.1. 


t  <£onimanbcments,lbbicb  ttjc  flflDa© 
fpauc  lr.no  vo  tun  roc  mount ,  out  ofthc 
mtbft  ofthc  tire,  in  the  bap  of  tbcaffcm 
bip:  anb  the  fl©  a  ©  gaue  them  bit- 
to  me* 

5  3nb  3J  turneb  mp  frtfe  anb  tame 
borbne  from  tljc  mount ,  ano  put  the 
Xablesm  tbe3r&e  ibbtcb  3  hab  mabe, 
ano  there  fbcp  be,  as  theft  d>  is  ©  torn- 
manocome. 

6  canbtbeebtttwenofJfraeltooHe 
tbetuottrncpfromBcerotb.oftbccbU' 
bjen  of  3Jaaban,to*^ofera  ;*t!)ere^a- 
ron  bteb,  anb  there  tje  tbasburieb,anb 
<eimat  bis  fonne  mimftreo  in  the 
pacfTs  office  in  his  ftciD. 

7  ;tfromtbcntctbeptoirrnepcbbtv 
to  (Subgobab ,  anb  from  ©ubgobab  to 
3totbatb,alanb  of  riuers  of  maters. 

3  C3ft  that  time  the  fL  ®  a  ©  fc< 
paratcb  the  tribe  offLeut ,  tobcaretbc 
ZxU  ofthc  CouenantoftbefLsDa©, 
toftanbbefo?etbcfL©a©,  tomimftet 
bnto  bun,  anb  to  bleffe  in  btsjframc, 
bnto  this  bap. 

9  *  vfyctdw  ftcui  hath  no  part 
noifnhcntancetoithhistyethjen :  the 
ft  €>  is  ©  is  his  inheritance ,  aecojomg 
as  the  %  €>  a  ©  rhp  ©ob  pjomifeb  him. 

10  3nb3Iftapebinthemount,atto^ 
bins  to  thcTfittt  time ,  tonic  bapes,  anb 
fonie  nights :  anb  the  %  o  a  ©  hearts 
nebbntomceat  that  time  aifo,  and  the 
%  d>  k©  ibouib  not  ocftrop  tljce. 

11  3nbtbcfL2>a©faibbntome,:3 
rtfc,Ua&e  thy  tournepbefoje  the  people, 
that  tbepmapgoe  in,  anb  poffeffc  the 
lanb  tbhieb  3J  noarc  bnto  their  fathers 
to  gtuc  bnto  them. 

ii  C^nb  noib  3Jrrari,\bbatboetb 
the  H  ©  is  ©  rhp  (Sob  require  of  thee, 
but  to  fearc  the  ft  ©  a  ©  tbp  (Sob ,  to 
tbaifte  in  all  his  ibaies^nb  to  loue  htm, 
anb  to  feme  the  %&>  a  ©  tbp  (5ob,ibitb 
alltbpbeart,anblbitbailtbpfoule, 

ij  %o  beepe  the  Commanbements 
of  the  V.  ©  a  ©,  anb  his  Statutes, 
lbhtrh  ^J  tommaunb  tbee  this  bap  fo? 
tbp  goob? 

14  26cholb,thchcaucn,5thchcauen 
of  heauensis  tbcfL©a©£>  tbptisob, 
•the  earth  a!fo,ibttbaurbat  therein  is. 

15  £>nelptbefL©a©bababeugbt 
in  tbv  fathers,  to  louc  them,  anb  bee 
ebofctbetrfeeb  after  rherit,  euenpou,a-- 
boutaiipeoplcas'tisthisbap. 

i6  Ctrcumttfc  therefor  the  fonf  bin 
of  pour  heart ,  anb  bee  no  tnojc  mffe 
neebco. 


17  $01  the floa© pour d500is<5ob 
of  gobs ,  anb  %  0  a  ©  of  loios,  a  great 
C5ob,  a  mtgbtp,  anb  a  terrible,  ibbtcb 
*  rcgarbcrt)  not  pcrfons,  no?  tabeth  re* 
ibatb. 

is  J?c  boeth  execute  the  iubgement 
of  thefathtrleffe,  anbibibotb,  anblo- 
ueth  the  Granger,  in  giuing  him  foob 
anb  raiment. 

19  Houc  pee  therefore  the  Granger : 
fojpec  lbcre  ftrangcrs  m  the  lanb  of  €- 
gppt. 

20  *  Xhott  (bait  feare  the  ft  ©  a  © 
rhp  d5oOi  him  (halt  thou  feruc,  anb  to 
him  (bait  thou*  clcaue ,  anbfracarebp 
hisiftame. 

21  ^e  is  thP  pjaife ,  anb  he  is  tbp  d5ob 
that  bath  bone  foj  thee  tbefc  great  anb 
terrible  things,tbbich  thine  epes  haue 
feene. 

22  3n#  fathers  tbent  botbnc  into 
«gppt  *  ibitb  rtMccfto^e  anb  ten  per* 
fons :  anb  notb  the  ft  ©a©  rhp  ©ob 
hath  mabc  thee  *  as  the  ftarrcs  of  hea? 
uen,fo?muititube, 

CHAP.    XI. 

1  An  exhortation  to  obedience,  i  by  their 
owne  experience  ofGods  great  works,  8  by 
promife  of  Gods  great  blefsings,  \6  and  by 
threatnings.  18  A  caretull  ftudy  is  required 
in  Gods  words.  %6  Theblef^ingandcurfe 
is  fet  before  them. 

$crefo?e  thou  (bait  louc 
the  %  0  a  ©  rhp  €>ob,anb 
Hecpe  his  charge ,  anb  his 
5>tatutes,anb  his3Jubgc^ 
mcnts,anb  his  Comman? 
bements  airuap. 

2  '^no  bnotb  pou  this  bap  s  fo?  i 
ipeake  not  ibtth  pour  tJjUDjctt  ibbtcb 
haue  not  bnoibm,  anb  ibbtcb  haue  not 
fecnethe  chafhfement  of  the  IK,  ©a© 
pour  d5ob,  his  greatneu"e,  h«s  mightp 
hanb.ano  his  ftrettbeb  out  armc, 

j  ^Hnbhis  miracles ,  anb  hts  actcs, 
\bbirt)  he  bib  in  the  mtbft  of  €gppt,bn- 
to  Pharaoh  the  Hing  of  Cgppt ,  anb 
bnto  all  his  lanb, 

4  3lnb  lbbatbre  bib  bnto  the  armp 
of  cgppt,bnto  their  ho;fes,anb  to  their 
charets,  holb  hemabetheibater  of  the 
&tn  fca  to  ouerfloib  tl)em  as  thep  pur* 
fucb  after  pou ,  anb  how  the  ft  ©a© 
hath  beftropcb  them  bnto  this  bap, 

5  Slnbibbathec  bib  bnto  pou  in  the 
lbiiocmcfTc ,  bntill  pee  came  into  this 
place, 

6  3nD 


•l.Chron. 
19-7-iob 
34.19.  arts. 
lo.34.rom. 
t.  ll.galar. 
l.6.cphcf. 
6.  p.  color), 
i  Jj.I.pct. 

1.1.7. 


•Chap.  6. 

I  J.nuit  4- 

10. In  I.  ('4. 

8. 

•  Chap.  13. 

4- 


*Geri€.4r5. 

a7.eiod.t. 

5- 

•Gcnc.lj. 

5- 


romilesto 


fc 


Ch 


ap.vnj. 


the  obedient. 


•Num.  16 
jl.and  :■). 
j.plil.iod 
17. 


jj  Or,  /»*/«/ 
fnkfl*me 
whichfol- 
ka.'i  them 

\Htb-TPAS 

at  their 
feet. 


\Heb  fee- 
ke-b. 


\Hei.  jjw 


6  %\\o '  ibljathc  bibbtuo  Dathan, 
anb  3lbirain,  tlje  fonncs  of  tEuab  the 
fonnc  of  Bcubeu:  horn  tlje  earth  opc^ 
neb  t)cc  mouth  ano  ftuaiioiDeD  them 
bp,  anb  their  houfboibs,  ant)  ttjeir 
tents,  anb  all  the  ||  fubftance  that  t  was 
in  tljctc  poffcffion  in  the  mibbeftof  all 
Jfrael. 

7  23ut  font  efts  Ijattc  fecne  all  the 
great  actsoftljclLiir>ra©,iubichhcbib. 

3  £hcrcfo?c  (ball  fee  aeepe  all  the 
Commanbemcnts  ibbtth3l  tonuuanb 
f  ou  tbisbaf ,  tliat  f  e  map  be  ftrong  anb 
goe  in,  anb  ppffcfft  tlje  lanb  tbhtther  f  e 
goctopofftucit: 

9  3nb  tliat  pec  maf  prolong  your 
Dafcstnthc  lanbe  tbljiclj  the  1L©is© 
froare  bnto  four  fathers  to  gtuc  bnto 
tbcm,auo  to  their  feeb  ,a  lanb  that  florb- 
etb  lbtth  mtuYe  anb  hottf . 

10  C5Foztbelanbrbbtthcrthcugo' 
eft  in  to  poffeffe  it,  is  not  as  tlje  lanbe  of 
€gfptfromlbhenecfccameout,tbherc 
thou  foibebft  thf  fteb,  anbtbatercbRir. 
ibith  thf  foot,  as  a  gatben  of  hetbes : 

11  26ut  the  lanbe  tbljither  f  e  goe  to 
poffefft  it,  is  a  lanbe  of  hillcs  anb  bai< 
lefS,  and  tytnBcthtbatet  oftbetaineof 
heauen: 

ii  %  lanbe,  rbhtch  tlje  %  <0  s  ©  thf 
(5ob  t  carcth  foj:  tlje  ef  cs  of  the  fLans© 
thf  ©ob  j  re  alibaf  es  Upon  it ,  from  tlje 
beginning  of  the  f  cere ,  encn  bnto  tlje 
cnbofrbcfecre. 

13  C  3lnb  it  (ball  tome  to  patTe,if  f  ou 
(ball  IjcatUen  biligentlf  bnto  nif  Com- 
manbctncnts  Ibbtcb  3  tonnnanbfou 
this  baf  ,to  louc  tlje  %®m>  four  <5ob, 
anb  to  feme  htm  lbitb  all  four  heart, 
anb  ibith  all  four  foulcj 

14  Xbat  33  ttullgiue  you  the  raine 
of  four  lanb  m  his  btie  fcafou ,  the  arft 
raine  anb  the  latter  raine,  that  thou 
mafctt  gather  in  thf  tome,  anbtbf 
rbine,  anb  thine  of  le, 

«  3(nb  3  null  t  fenb  graCDc  in  thf 
ficlbs  fo*  thf  tattcll,  that  thou  maf  ea 
cateanbbefuil. 

16  CaKe  heebe  to  four  fclues ,  that 
foutheartbenotbcrtiucb.anbfcturnc 
afibc,  anb  feme  other  gobs ,  anb  ibo^ 
ft)tpthcm: 

17  3nb  then  the1Lfir>K©§»lbjath 
be  tunbleb  againfl  f  ou,  anb  Ijec  ujut  bp 
thcljeaucn,  that  there  benorainc,  anb 
thatthcianbfeclbnothttfrutt,anblcft 
fe  pertfl)  auicUlf  from  off  the  goob 
lanb  lbbitb  the  Hoik  id  giuethfou.  , 

is  CXDcrcfozefhallfelafbpthcfe 


mf  Uwos  in  four  heart,  anb  tn  four 
foulc,  anb  *  bmb  them  foj  a  fignebpon 
four  hanb ,  tljattljcf  maf  bee  as  front* 
lets  betVbeene  four  efes. 

19  3nb  *  f  e  thai  teach  them  four  ebiV 
tym,rpeaiungoftbem,ibljcntljoiiut- 
teft  in  thtttc  bouft,  anb  vbhen  th  ou  ibai? 
ueft  bf  tlje  u>af  ,\bljen  thou  Heft  boibne, 
atiblbbcntbourtftftbp. 

20  3(tib  thou  Ibait  u>:ite  tljem  bpon 
the  boojc  pods  of  thmc  Ijoufe.anb  bpen 
thf  gates: 

n  1Chat  four  oaf  es  maf  bee  nnmv 
plieb,  anb  the  baf  es  of  four  chiHwen,m 
tljeianb  ibljttlj  the  %<s>  is  ©  ftoarc  bnto 
four  fathers  to  giue  them,  as  tlje  oaf  cs 
of  heauen  bpon  tlje  earth. 

22  C:ffo2tffcfl)allb!ugeiitlfRecpe 
all  theft  Commaunbemcnts  tbljiclj  % 
tommanb  f  ou,  to  boe  them,  to  louc  the 
fL©is©fout  C5ob,  tolbalbem  alibis 
Ibaf  es,  anb  to  tleauc  bnto  htm : 

2 j  Xljen  rbilltlje  %o  is  ©bmie  out 
all  theft  nations  from  befoje  f  ou,  anb 
f  e  mail  pofftfft  greater  nations,  anb 
mightier  then  f  our  ftlues. 

1 4  *  <& uerf  plate  lbljcreon  the  foles 
of  four  feetaiaii  treab,fl)ail  be  fours : 
from  the  ibtlberneffe,  anb  Hcbanon, 
from  the  riuer,  the  riuer  Cuph^tes,e^ 
ucn  bnto  the  bttermoft  fta,  njalif  our 
toaftbe. 

25  Xhere  (hail  no  man  bee  able  to 
ftanbbefo2e  f  ou :  for  tlje  %  ©  is  ©four 
©ob  (hall  laf  the  feare  of  f  ou,  anb  the 
bjeab  of  f  ou  bpon  an  the  lanb  that  fee 
(hall  treabbpon,  as  hee  hath  faib  bnto 

fOU. 

16  Cffitholb,  "5  ftt  before  foo  this 
baf,  a  blefftng  anb  a  tutft : 

27  *  %  blcffing,  if  f  e  obef  the  Com- 
manbements  of  the  %  <d  k  ©f  our  d5ob 
lbbichjj  tommanb  f  ou  thtsbaf : 

23  ^nb  a  *  turft,  if  f  e  tbill  not  obef 
the  Commanbcmcnts  of  the  ILsdis© 
four  C5ob ,  but  tume  aGbe  out  of  the 
ibaf,  which  3J  tommanb  f  ou  tljtsbaf , 
to  goe  after  other  gobs  rbhtth  fee  haue 
nottmoibcn. 

29  ^nb  it  (hall  come  to  paflc  luhen 
the  H©  a  ©thf  (5ob  hath  brought  thee 
tn.bnto  the  lanb  Vbhttljcr  thougoelito 
poffcfft  it,  that  thou  (halt  put  *  the  blefc 
fing  bpon  mount  (Sert5tm,  anb  tlje 
curft  bpon  mount  €bal. 

30  ^rc  thef  not  on  the  other  fibc 
3Jo?ban,bf  thetbaf  lbherc  the  Smttnc 
goeth  bolbnc,  tn  tlje  lanb  of  the  Canaa 
nites,  Vbljtcljbrbelltn  tlje  djampiono- 

£>  uct 


'Chap.  6.8 


'  Chap. 4. 
10  8<S  7. 


'Iofhi 


'Chao.aS. 


•Chap. »?. 


"Chap.  17. 
1  j.io(n.8. 


The  place  of         Deuteronomie.      burnt  offrings 


•ChSp.j. 


•Chap.  7. 
5- 

\Or,mhe- 
ruc. 


*  Tufjg.l.  2 
T  Hcb.irck, 
down;. 


•i.King.3. 
:92.chro. 

?J2. 


uet  againft  <5tlgai  ,befibe  the  plaines  of 

31  5fo;tpc(ballpaffcoucr3/ort)an,to 
goe  in  to  poffeffe  the  lanb  ibhich  tt)c 
It  ©  is  ©  pour  (5ob  giueth  pou,  anb  pc 
(hall  poffeffe  it,anb  bibcll  therein. 

31  3nb  pec  (hall  obferuc  *  to  toe  all 
tlic  £>tatutcs,anb  3Jubgcmcuts,ibhith 
5  fetbefoje  pou  this  bap. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  Monuments  of  Idolatriearetobedeftroyed. 
5  TlieplaceofGodsferuiceistobckept.  15. 
zj  Blood  is  forbidden.  17.  10.  2.6  Holy 
things  mull  bee  eaten  in  the  Holy  place.  1 9 
TheLeuiteis  nottobeforfaken.  1^  Idola- 
tric  is  not  be  inquired  after. 

iStffc  ate  the  Statutes, 
anb3mDgemcnts,  ibhich 
pett)alobfetuetobo,tnthe 
lanb  ibhich  tfjc  3L©ibjd 
©ob  of  thpfathers  giuetl) 
thee  to  poffeffe  it,  allthcbapesthatpce 
Hue  bpon  the  earth. 

x  * j9cc  (hail  bttctlp  bcffropail  the 
plates,  lbhctem  thcnanonsibhichpee 
(hall  ||  poffeffe,  ferueb  their  gobs,  bpon 
the  I)igli  uioiuttatncs ,  anb  bpon  toe 
hils,anb  bnber  cuerp  greenc  tree. 

3  3nb*  pou  (hall  toucrthjoib  their 
aitats ,  anbtycauc  tticir  pillars,  anb 
burnc  their  groucs  ibithfirc,  anbpou 
(hallhcibbolbne  the  gcancn  linages  of 
their  gobs,  anb  beflrop  the  names  of 
them  out  of  that  plate. 

4  Pet  (hall  not  Doe  fo  tmto  the 

JLsDMJDpOUrOOb. 

5  25ut  bnto  the  plate  ibhich  the 
%  ©  hud  pour  ©ob  (hall  *  thufc  out  of 
an  pour  tribes,  to  put  his  name  there, 
euen  unto  his  habitation  djail  pee  fteftc, 
anb  tintlicr  thou  (halt  tome : 

6  Znn  thither  pec  (hall  bjingpour 
burnt  offrtngs,anD  pour  facriftecs,  anb 
pour  tithes,  anb  hcauc  offrings  of  pour 
hanb,  anb  pour  boibcs,anb  pour  free 
ibil  oftettngs,anb  the  firttlings  of  pour 
hcatbs,anb  of  pour  flocKs. 

7  3lnb  there  pc  (ball  cate  befoje  tl)e 
?L©ikid  pour  ©ob,  anb  pee  (hail  re- 
topee  in  an  that  pou  put  pour  hanb  bn- 
to, pe  anb  pour  hou(holbs,ibhercin  the 
%  0  is  id  thp  C5ob  hath  blcffcb  thec. 

8  Pt  fljaii  not  bo  after  all  the  things 
thatibc  boehcrc  tins  bap,  cuetp  man 
ibhatfocucrisrightmhisoibncepcs. 

9  ifoj  pee  arc  not  as  pet  tome  to  the 
reft ,  anb  to  the  inheritance  ibhich  the 


%  ©  e  ©  pour  00b  gmcth  pou. 

10  26utibhenpecgocoucr3l02ban, 
anb  bibel  in  the  lanb  ibhich  the  1Lom> 
pour  00b  giucth  pou  to  mherttc,  anb 
lbhen  he  gmcth  pou  reft  from  ailponr 
enemies  rounb  about,  fo  that  pc  bibcll 
mtafctp: 

11  1Chmthcrc(haiibcaplaecibhich 
the  !L©H3D  pour  <5ob  (ball  thoofeto 
taufehisname  tobibell  there ,  thither 
(hail  pc  brtng  all  that  3  tommanb  pou 
pour  burnt  offerings,  anb  pour  fiicri 
fiecs,  pour  tithes,  anb  the  hcauc  offnug 
of  pour  hanb,?  ant  pour  choice  boibes, 
ibhich  pc  boib  bnto  the  %  ©  is  m. 

iz  3nb  pec  (hall  reiopce  befojc  the 
%®w&  pour  (5ob,pc  anb  pour  fonnes 
anb  pour  Daughters,  ano  pour  men  fer- 
uants,anb  pour  maib  ftruams,anb  the 
?Lcuite  that  is  ibithm  pour  gates,fo  jaf 
much  as  *hec  hath  no  part  no?  inhen 
tanccibithpou. 

13  %aftehceb  to  thpfclfe,  that  thou 
offer  not  thp  burnt  offerings  in  eucrp 
place  thatthou  fecit: 

14.  25ut  in  the  place  ibhich  the 
?L©ui3D  (hal  choofc  in  one  of  thp  tribes, 
there  thou  (halt  offer  thp  burnt  of- 
fcrmgs.anb  there  thou  (halt  bo  all  that 
3!  tommanb  thee. 

15  /Botibithttanbing,  thou  mapett 
Rill  anb  cate  fle(h  in  all  thp  gatcs.ibljat* 
foeuer  thp  foulc  lutteth  after,  accojbing 
to  tfjc  blcffing  of  the  %  ©  ih  id  thp  (5ob 
ibhich  he  hath  gmen  thee :  the  bncleanc 
anb  the  clcanc  map  cate  thereof,  as  of 
the  &oc  bucfec,  anb  as  ofttjc  §arr. 

16  *4Dnclppc  (hall  not  cat  the  bloob: 
pee  (hail  poitye  it  bpon  tlje  earth  as 
ibater. 

17  C  Xhou  mapett  not  cate  ttnthm 
thp  gates  thenthe  of  thp  comco?  of  thp 
lbme,  0,1  of  thp  bplc ,  o?the  firttlings  of 
thphcarbs,o:  of  thp  flotUe,uo?  anpof 
thp  boibes  ibhich  thou  boibcft,  no?  thp 
fcccibiii  offerings,  0:  ijcaue  offering  of 
thine  hanb : 

is  25ut  thou  mutt  eatc  them  befo?c 
the  %gam  thp  (5ob,m  the  place  ibhith 
the  %€>  k  ©  thp  (5ob  (hail  choofc,thou 
anb  tlipfonnc ,  anb  thp  baughtcr,  anb 
thpmanfcrirant.anbthpmaibfcruant, 
anb  the  Hcuitc  that  is  lbithin  thp 
gates :  anb  thou  (halt  rctoptc  before  the 
%  0  is  3D  thp  (5ob ,  m  all  tfjat  tl;  ou  put- 
ted thine  haubs  bnto. 

19  "Xaheheebtothpfelfcthatthou 
fojfahc  not  the  ?leuitc,astlongas  thou 
liuett  bpon  the  cartlj. 
loCiohcn 


t  Hth.tl;e 
choice  of 
joiit  vowtr. 


*Chap.  10. 
9. 


"Chap,  tj, 
'3' 


'Chap."  14. 
a7-ccc]us. 
7.  J I 

t  Hcbr..tl 
)y  djjel. 


Eate  no  blood.  Chap.xii). Fleeidolatne. 


'Gene.  18. 
1 4. chap. 
'99- 


f  Heb bee 


\H,b.mhr. 
ntefi  or  pi 
frffrHlbcn 

\Heb.jte 
them. 


t  H'bJio- 
mtnaliennf 
the. 


zo  c  ©ben  the  fLsus©  thy  (Bod 
{ball  enlarge  thy  bojbcr,  Ms  bee  bath 
pjomtfcD  thee,  anD  tliou  (bait  fay,  3 
Wtll  eate  flcfl)  (bccatifc  thy  fonle  longer!) 
to  cat  flcfl))  tljou  may  eft  cat  flcfl)  itotjat- 
foeuer  tl)v  foulc  Inflerl)  after. 

21  gjfrhc  plate  Which  thelitis© 
top  000  batb  tliofcnto  put  bis  ji5amc 
tberc,betoofarrefromtbcc,tbentbou 
(bait  mil  of  tbv  herb  anD  of  thy  flocfte, 
which  the  1L©iB©batbgiuentbcc,  as 
3  hauc  eommatntDcD  tl)cc ,  anD  thou 
(bait  catc  tn  thy  gates,  Wbaffocucttby 
foulc  luftetb  after. 

n  €ucn  as  the  ftoc  bucttc  anD  f|)c 
0art  ts  eaten,  fo  tl)ou  fl)alt  catc  them : 
the  bnrtcanc  anD  the  clcanc  fl)ail  catc  of 
thcmau&c. 

13  &nclyt  be  futc  that  tbou  catc  not 

tbcblooD :  fojtbe  bloobts  tbclifc,  anD 

thou  maveft  not  catc  the  life  With  the 

flefl). 
24  Xbou  (bait  not  catc  it;  thou  (bait 

poWje  it  bpon  tl)c  eartl)  as  water. 

15  XDou  fl)ait  not  catc  tt.tbat  it  may 
goc  Well  With  thec,  anb  With  thy  tl)il 
D:en  after  thec ,  when  thou  fl)att  boc 
that  Which  is  right  tn  the  fight  of  the 

fb<©18©.  .  ' 

16  4Dncly  thy  holy  things  Whirl) 
thou  Daft ,  anb  thy  toowes ,  thou  fljait 
tattc,  anb  goebnto  the  plate  Which  the 
5LCBB  fljall  cbufe. 

17  3lnD  thou  (bait  offer  thy  burnt 
offenugg,tl)cflc(battDtbeblooD,bpon 
the  altar  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  thy  C5ob :  anb 
the  bloob  of  tbyfacrtficcs  (ballbcpow^ 
rcb  out  bpon  the  attar  of  the  %  <©  a  © 
thy  <Bob ,  anb  thou  (halt  cat  the  flcfl). 

28  j©bfcmc  f  hear c  all  thcfctb02bs 
tbhtch  3  commanD  thec,  that  tt  may  go 
well  with  tljce,  anb  with  thy  cbittucn 
after  thec  fo?  euer  ,tbhcn  thoubocft  that 
which  tsgooDanDttgbt  mthc  fight  of 
tbell£>H©tby<BoD. 

19  c  naben  thelitis©  thy  <bod 
(hall  tut  off  the  nations  front  befotc 
thee,  fthither  thou  goeft  to  pofleflc 
theni,  anb  thou* futtccbeft  them,  anb 
DWciicfttntbcitianD: 

50  xabehcebe  to  thy  fclfe  that  thou 
be  not  fnarcb  t  by  following  them  ,aftcr 
that  they  be  beftroyeb  from  befojethec, 
anb  that  thou  enquire  not  after  their 
gobs,  faying ,  $oW  did  tbcfc  nations 
fcruc  thctr  goDs;  cucn  fo  anil  3  ooe 
littcWirc.  .  .     k  A. 

j  1  Xhou  flialt  not  boc  fo  Dnto  the 
%  e>  is  ©  thy  ©ob :  fo?  cuery  t  abomt 


nation  to  tl)c  %  o  is  ©  which  hec  ha 
tcth,haucthcy  bone  bntotljnr  gobs : 
fo?  cucn  their  fonncs  anb  thctr  Daugh- 
ters they  hauc  burnt  tn  the  fire  to  thetr 
gobs. 

31  nahat  thing  focucr  3  commanb 
you,  obfertte  to  boc  it:  *  thou  (bait  not 
abbe  thereto,  no:  Dimtntfl;  from  it. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Inticers  to  idolatrie,  6  how  necre  focuar 
vmothee,  9  aieto  be  ftoncd  to  death,  u 
Idolatrous  cities  are  not  to  be  fpared. 

f  there  anfe  among  you 
apjophet,  o?  aDJcametof 
D?camcs,  anD  gtuctb  tljcc 
afigncoiaWottDer: 
i  3lnbthcfigneo?thc 
WonDcr  come  to  parte,  Wbcrof  be  fpatte 
Ditto  thce,laying,fLrt  bsgo  after  other 
gobs  (Which  thou  haft  not  ItttoWcn) 
anb  let  bs  feme  them: 

3  Xhouflialtnothearlten  bnto  the 
W02DS  of  that  pjophet, 02  that  bjeamer 
of  bjeames :  fo?  the  H  ©  is  id  your  (Bob 
pjoonctb you,  to Unow  VDhctljcr  you 
loue  the  %  0  is  ©your  (Bob  lbitb  all 
your  heart,  anb  Ibitb  all  your  foulc. 

4  jsc  (hall  iDaitte  after  the  %€>mw> 
your  d5ob,  anb  fcarc  hmt,anb  Kecpc  his 
tommanbements,  anb  obey  his  boy  te, 
anb  you  (hall  feme  bim>  anb  *  clcanc 
bnto  htm. 

5  ,3nb  that  pjopbet  o?  that  bjcamcr 
ofDicamcs  fljalbc  put  to  Death  (btcaufc 
hec  h^th  f  fpoficn  to  tttrne  yon  atbay 
from  the  %®  is©  your  (Bob,ibbtcb 
brought  you  out  of  the  lanb  of  €gypt, 
anb  rcoecmcD  you  out  of  the  home  of 
bonbage,  to  trjutCt  tljce  out  of  tbcibay 
which  the  %.  €>  is  ©  tby  (Bob  tommam 
beb  thee  to  walfec  in)  S>o  (halt  thou  put 
the  cuill  albay  from  the  mibft  of  thee. 

6  C3Jftbyb2otber,tbcfotmcoftby 
mother,  02  thy  fonnco?  thy  baughtcr, 
0?  the  Wife  of  thy  bofomc,  ot  thy  menb, 
tDhtch  is  as  thmc  otbne  foule,  cntifc 
thee  fctrctly ,  faying,  Hct  bs goc  anb 
fetue  other  gobs  Which  thou  haft  not 
tmoWcn,tbou,no2  thy  fathers: 

7     Namely  of  tt)C  gObS  Of  the  pCOplC 

WhtcharcrounDaboutyott,  nigh  bnto 
thec,  0?  farre  off  from  thee,  from  the 
one  cnD  of  the  earth,  eucn  bnto  the  °th« 
cnD  of  the  earth: 

S   1Lhowfl)aKnotton^tttbntoniim 

no?  hearfecn  bnto  him,  neither  fljall 

thine  eyepttte  hun,  neither  flialt  thou 

£>  i  fpare, 


•chapel 

iofh.  1.7. 
pro.  jo.  6. 

rtuc  11.  lH 


"Chap.  1 1. 


t  H,bpks» 
euolt  a- 
'alnjilhe 

"Lord. 


Deftroyldolaters.  Deutcronomic.       Meats  cleanc. 


•Chap  >  7. 
7- 


\HcbrMond- 
men. 

♦Chap.17. 
ti- 


ll Or,n.wgh- 
tj  men. 


[  Or  JtH). 


fparc,  neither  (bait  thou  toneeaic  him, 

9  But  *  tbou  0)ait  furcly  mil  bun : 
Xbincbano  (ballot  t\ttttoponbun,to 
put  bun  to  ocath,  ann  afterVbaros  ttjc 
banc  of  all  tljjc  people. 

10  ano  tbou  fljalt  (tone  bun  lOitb 
(tones,  ttjat  bee  me :  bctaufc  Dec  bath 
fought  to  tbntft  the*  atbay  from  the 
IL^ihjd  tliv  <5oD,  Xbtjtclj  b;ou5l)t  tljct 
out  of  the  lauo  ofegypt,from  tlje  boufc 
oftbonbage. 

1 1  3mo*au  3Jftatl  (hall  btarc ,ano 
fearc,  ano  (ban  ooe  no  mo?c  anv  fuel) 
ttmclt  coneffe  as  this  ts,aniong  you. 

it  C3Jf  tbou  (bait  bcatcfayut  one 
of  tljy  ernes ,  iDbtcb  the  ILohjd  thy 
©00  bath  giucu  thee  to  Dtt)cll  there, 
facing, 

1  j  €crtatnemen,llrt)ecl)ilo?cnof25e^ 
hai.aregone  out  from  amongyou,anD 
baue  lDitbojaibcn  the  inhabitants  of 
tbett  atit,  faying,  fLet  os  goe  ?  ferue  o- 
tber  goDs,lbbicb  ye  baue not  ftnoincn : 

14  3*btn  (bait  tbou  enquire  ano 
matte  fcartb  ,auO  arse  Diligently  •  anD 
bcrjolD,if  itbetruetl),  and  the  thing  etc* 
taint.thatfutbabominattomsibjougbt 
amongyou : 

15  Xbou  (halt furcly fmitttbtinba 
bitants  of  that  citie  tbith  the  cogc  of  the 
froojD.DeftroyingttOtterly^nDalltbat 
is  therein, anotbccattcll  thereof,  tbith 
thecDgeofthcfwozD. 

16  3mo  thou  (halt  gather  all  the 
fpotlc  of  tt,  iuto  the  nuoft  of  theftrect 
thereof,  ano  (bait  burnt  tbith  nrctbe  ri 
ticano  all  the  fpoile  thereof  cuervlDhtt, 
ft>2  the  %  o  is » thv  (500:  ano  tt  lhall  be 
anhcapefo?  entr,it  (ball  not  bee  built 
againe. 

17  3mo  there  (ball  eleaue  nought  of 
thcllcurfco  thutgto  thtne  bano.tbattbc 
Hois©  may  turnc  from  the  fierce 
neffe  of  his  anger,  ano  tbcto  thee  mer- 
cy ,ano  banc  companion  bpon  thee,  ano 
multiply  thee,  as  he  bath  fiuomc  Onto 
thy  fathers, 

is  tt)bcn  thou  (halt  heathen  to  the 
toyce  of  the  %  a> is  jd  thy  <Soo,to  Uecpe 
all  his  CommatmDements  tbbtrb  31 
commauo  thet  this  Day ,  to  Dot  that 
ttrfjitb  is  right  m  the  eyes  of  tbc2L<Di33? 
thy  000. 

CHAP.    XI II  I. 

i  Gods  children  arc  not  todilfigure  thcmfclues 
in  mourning.  3  What  may,and  what  may 
not  be  eaten,  4  ofbeafh,  9  of  fifhes,  11 
ol  foulcs.    11   That  which  diet!)  of  it  lelfe, 


may  not  be  eaten,  2.1  Tithes  of  dmineSer- 
uice.  13  Tithes  and  firftlings  of  reioycing 
before  the  Lord.  18  The  third  yeeres  tithe 
of  Almes  and  Charitie. 

€t  «e  the  thilo?cn  of  the 
%  0  is  ©  your  (500  : 
*  yce  (ball  not  cuttc  your 
fclucs  ,  no?  mafte  any 
baioneffc  bcttbtcne  your 
eyts  (o;  the  Dtao. 

z  *jfo?  thou  art  an  holy  peoplt  Onto 
tht  %  «d  is  jd  thy  <£»oo,ano  tljt  %  ©  is  © 
hath  ebofen  thet  to  be  a  peculiar  people 
Onto  btmftlfe ,  about  all  tht  nations 
that  art  bpon  tht  earth. 

j  C  Xbou  (halt  not  tatt  any  abo- 
minabit  thing. 

4  *  Zbefc  arc  tht  bcalts  Vbbicb  yet 
(hail  tatt :  tht  ojet,  tht  (bf epe ,  ano  tht 
goat, 

5  ICbcl^anDtbt&ocbucltcanD 
tbcfaliott)  ocerc ,  ano  the  tbtlDc  goat, 
ano  the  |li&ygarg,ano  the  mice  ore,auo 
the  chamois. 

6  2nD  entry  bead  that  partctb  the 
hoofe.auo  cltautth  tt)e cttft  into  trbo 
ciaiocs,  and  cbctoctb  tht  cuo  amongft 
the  bcafts :  that  y  t  {ball  tatt. 

7  /RcucrthcltfTt  thtft  ytt  (ball not 
eate,  of  them  that  them  the  cuo,  oiof 
thtm  that  OiutOt  the  tloucnboofc,as  the 
camel ,  ano  the  hart,  ano  tht  cony :  fo? 
they  cbett)  the  cuooe,  but  oiuioc  not  the 

hOOfe ,  therefore  fl)ty  are  OnClCailC  On- 

to  you. 

8  ^nothefroine,bccaufettOiuiOetl) 
thehoofe,yet  chevoeth  not  the cuo,tt>s 
bnclcane  Onto  you  :yc  (ball  not  tatt  of 
their  flefb  ,no?  touch  their  otao  carhtule. 

9  C*Xbtftytcfbaiieatcofalifbat 
are  in  ttjcioatcrs :  all  that  bautfinnts 
anofcaicslbailyeeatc: 

10  3wo  ibbatfotuer  hath  not  fumes 
ano  fcaies,yc  may  not  tat :  it  is  Oucltant 
Onto  you. 

1 1  C  £>f  all  cleane  biros  ye  (bail  eate 

II  26ttt thCft are  thev  oflOblCll  Vt  0)311 

not  cat :  tlie  eagle ,  ano  tlje  ouifrage, 
anotbeofp^ay, 

13  ^no  the  gleoc ,  ano  the  feite ,  ano 
tbeOultureaftcr  his  ttinoe, 

14  3Jnocttery  rauen  after  his  mnbt, 

15  ^no the oU)ie,fftbe ntghtbaihlte, 
ano  the  airttoio ,  ano  tbebaioue  after 
hisltinoc, 

16  Xhe  little  onilc,  ano  the  great 
oiOlcanotbcfiuannc, 

17  ^no  the  pciltcanc,  ano  tlje  Gecr- 
cagie,anO  tlje  conno^ant, 

18  ^{no 


18. 


^■and  26. 
if. 


'Lcuit.li. 


1 1  0r,"3ifir. 
Hcb.Difien 


'Icuii.il. 


Tythes  and  offrings.  Chap.xv. 


'Lcuit.ii. 
19- 


•Exod.21. 
»j>.  and  34 
1*. 


tflhic. 


•Chap.is. 
19- 


is  3lnb  the  £>to2fcc,  anbtbc^eron 
after  her  JunD,anb  tbc  laptbmg,  anb  the 
'battc. 

I?  3(nb  cuerp  creeping  thing  that 
flpetb ,  is  bndcanc  bnto  you  :fbcy  (hall 
not  be  eaten. 

20  But  of  all  cleane  fouies  ye  may  eat. 

ii  €  Pt  (bail  not  cate  of  any  thing 
that  Dlctb  of  it  fclfc :  tbou  (bait  giuctt 
bnto  tlje  ftraugcr  that  is  in  thy  gates, 
that  be  map  eatc  it,  02  tbou  mavcttfell  it 
bnto  an  alien :  fo?  thou  an  an  bolppco^ 
pie  bnto  the  %  ©is  e>  thy  god.  *  £bou 
(bait  not  fectbe  a  Uibbe  in  l;ss  mothers 
milfte. 

22  Xboufbaittructp titbcallfbcm 
crcafc  of  fbp  fcebe ,  that  ttic  nelb  tying; 
etbfiwtb  yeere  by  yeere. 

23  2lnD  thou  ft)alt  cate  befoje  the 
|L  ©  is  id  tlip  oob,m  tfje  plate  rdljict)  be 
(bail  ebufc  to  plate  bis^ame  there,  tbc 
tithe  of  thy  tome,  of  thy  tbine,  anb  of 
tbine  oyle,  anb  the  firttungs  of  tijv 
berbes,  and  of  rtiv  flocfecs :  that  thou 
mayeftlearnctofcarctbc  3L©isjDtby 
Gob  alibayes. 

24  3lnb  if  the  Ibay  bee  too  long  fo? 
tbecfo  that  thou  art  no  t  able  to  carte  it, 
or  if  the  place  be  too  farrc  from  thec, 
lbbicl)  the  %  ©  is  s>tby  (5ob  (ball  cbufe 
tofetbisnamctbcre,tubcntbe2l©iBjD 
thy  Gob  bath  blcffeb  thee: 

25  Xftcn  (bait  trjontutnctf  into  mo- 
ney, anb  bmbc  bp  the  money  tntfjinc 
fjanb,  anb  (bait  goe  bnto  the  plate 
lbljtcl)  tbc  1L  ©  is  id  thy  C5ob  fl/al  crjufc. 

26  :StiD  thou  (bait  bcttotti  that  mo* 
ncyfo2  lbbatfocuet  tbyfonleluOetbafc 
tcr,  fo?  orcn,  02  fo?  fbecpe,  02  fo2  ttnnco? 
fo2ftrongD:umc,02fo2ibbatfocuertby 
fonle  t  befiretb :  anb  tbou  fbalt  cat  there 
bcfo2c  the  %  ©  is  ©  tbp  Gob,  anb  tbou 
(bait  rctoptc,  tbou  anb  tbincboutbolb. 

27  3inb  *tbe  Heuite  that  istbttbtn 
tbp  gates,  tbou  (bait  not  fojfahe  b"n: 
foi  be  bath  no  part  no?  inheritance lbitb 
thee. 

28  C3tttbccuDoffb2ecperestbou 
(halt  tying  fo2th  all  the  ntbe  of  thine  to* 
cr  cafe  tbc  fame  veer  e,  anb  (bait  lap  it  bp 
tbttbm  tbp  gates. 

29  3inbtbc1Leulte, becaufe  bebatb 
no  part  no 2  inheritance  Ibith  thec,  anb 
tbeftcangcr,anbtbcfatberlcflc,anbtbe 
ibtbovbe  Vbhitb  arc  lbitbnt  tty>  gates, 
(ball  come  anb  (bal  catcaub  be  (anfftcb , 
that  the  H  ©is©  tbp  Gob  map  bleffc 
thee,  in  all  the  lbojnc  of  thine  battDc 
n>tjtctjtl)ouDoc(r. 


Releaiingd 

. o 


c 


bts.l 


A- 


fler  of  the 
lending  of 
hi:  hand. 


\  Oryto  the 

end  that 
there  he  no 
posre  among 


CHAP.   XV. 

1  The  feuenth  yeere  a  yeere  of  releafe  for  the 
poorc.  7  Itmuftbenoletof  lendingorgi- 
uing.  11  An  Ebrew  feruaut,  i'<5  excerpt  hee 
will  not  depart,  muft  in  the  feuenth  yeere  goe 
foorth  free  and  well  furnifhed.  19  Allfirfr- 
lings males  of  thccattellaretobeeianclified 
vnto  the  Lord. 

Xtbeenbof'euervfeuen 

pecrestboufbaltma&ea 

rclcafc. 
2   2(nD  tins  is  the  ntfr 

tier  of  the  releafe :  €ucry 
t  crcbitour  that  lenbeth  ought  bnto 
bis  neighbour,  (hail  rclcafc  it :  ijcc 
(bail  not  cract  it  of  bts  neighbour,  02  of 
his  bother ,  becaufe  it  is  talleb  the 
%  ©  is  ©£>  rclcafc. 

?  €>f a  fb.2rcmer  tbou  mapeftcraet 
itagamc:  but  that  ibbtcb  is  tbincibitb 
tbp  bother,  tbmchanb  (ball  releafe. 

4  ||  £>aue  ibbcn  there  fl)all  bee  no 
poo2e  among  pou :  fo2  the  ?.©  b  ©  (bai 
grcatlp  blcOc  tlicc  in  t!jc  lanb  ibljich  the 
%  ©  is  3D  tbp  (3ob  gutctb  thee  fo?  an  tn* 
beritancetopoffeflcit: 

5  ilDnelp  if  thou  carcfullp  hearfecn 
bnto  tlje  boitc  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  tijp  (3ob, 
to  obferue  to  doc  all  tbefc  commanbe- 
Dements ,  ibljicl;  3  tommaunb  tl;cc 
tbisbap. 

6  5ronheH©«©thp0oDblc(retb 
thee,  as  be  p2omtfcD  tljce,  anb  *  tljon 
(baltlenb  bnto  manpnanons,buttbou 
fbaitnotbo2ron),aub  thou  fljaitreigne 
oucrmanp  nations,  but  thcpfhall  not 
rcigncoucrtbce. 

7  C3Jfthercbcamongponapoo2e 
man  of  one  of  tbp  bjethzenttntbin  anp 
of  tbp  gates,  in  tbp  lanbe  vbbfeb  the 
5t©kjd  tbp  (3ob  giuctb  tbee,tbou  (bait 
not  barben  tbp  heart ,  no?  (but  thine 
banbfrom  tbp  poo2e  b;otber : 

8  *z5utthou  Q)alt  open  thine hanb  «Mtt.5.4> 
ibibe  bnto  htm,  anb  (bait  lurelp  lenb  ^^.-^. 
him  fufficient  fo2  his  nccbe,  m  that 
ibhtchhetbantctl). 

9  25etbare  that  there  bee  not  a 
t  thought  in  tbp  tibtcltcb  heart,  fapmg, 
Xhc  feuenth  peer  e,  the  pcerc  of  releafe 
isatbanb,  anb  tljtnc  epe  be  emllagainft 
tbPP002e  biotbcr ,  anb  thou  giuctt  him 
nought,  anb  bec  trie  bnto  the  %  ©  «  ts> 
agamtt  thec,  anb  tt  be  fmnc  bnto  thee. 

10  llbou  fbalt furclpgiuc  bun,  anb 
tbmc  heart  fiiali  not  bee  gricucbibben 
tbou  gutcft  bnto  hutt :  becaufe  that  fo2 
tljts  thing  the  %  ©  is  jd  thy  <3ob  (bail 
&  3  bleffc 

14 


•Chap.  18, 
II. 


\  Hcb.wor.i. 
iHti.Stlul 


Of  freedome.      Deureronomie.     Solemne  feafts. 


•EioiJ.it. 
i.icrc.34. 


•Exod.  31, 
6. 


*E*od.  34. 


"Lcuit.  11. 
lo.cha.  17. 
1.  ecclus. 

3J.I3. 


"Chap.  1: 
tS.iJ. 


blcffc  tbee  in  all  tby  tbojbcs ,  anb  m  all 
tijat  tbou  putted  ttjme  Ijann  bnto. 

11  ifoitbepoojcujatlncucrccafeout 
oftlje  lanb:  rbcrcfo2c  3  coinmanD  tbee, 
raping,  Xljou  (bait  open  tinnc  banb 
Mbe  into  tt)p  bzothet ,  to  tbppooic, 
anbtotbpneebpintbelanb. 

iz  CAnd*iftf)ptyotbet,an$ctyctt> 
man,  0.:  an  $eb2cib  iboman,be  folo  ton? 
to  tbee ,  ant»  fecuc  tbee  ficc  peres,tben  in 
tbe  fcucntbpeece  tbou  fljait  letljimgoc 
frccfromtbee. 

ij  3mo  tbljen  tbou  fenbeft  l)im  ont 
free  from  tl)ec,t!jou  fljait  not  let  l)im  go 
albapemptic: 

14  XboufljaltrormfJjbim  liberally 
ont  of  tbyflocfte,  ano  outoftbpflooic, 
anb  ont  of  tby  ttnne  pzcOc ,  of  tbat 
ibbercibftlj  tbe  %  o  is  ©  $5?  (Sob  Ijtatl) 
bleffeb  tbee  tljou  fl)ait  giuc  bnto  l)tm. 

15  3roo  tbou  u)ait  remember  tbat 
tbouibaft  a  bonbman  in  tijc  lanb  of  €* 
gypt,  anb  tlje  3L<ois©  tljycsobribcc* 
mcb  tbee:tbcrefoze  31  tommanb  tJjte 
tljistljingtobay. 

16  :£nbit(bailbetfbcfaybntot!)ce, 
3J  tbill  not  goe  atbay  from  ttjccbecauEe 
be  louctb  tl)ee,  ano  r])incl)oufe}  betanfe 
fjeisibelUbitljtbcc: 

17  *%\)tn  tbou  ftjait  tafte  an  anle, 
anb  tljzuft  it  tbjougb  \)is  care  bnto  tbe 
ooozc ,  anb  bee  (ball  be  tljy  feruantfoz 
euer:  anb  alfo  bnto  tljy  maybferuant 
tboufbaltboeliBcibtfc. 

18  30tfl)all  not  feeme  barb  bnto  tbee 
ttiljentljoufenbcftbtm  albay  free  from 
tbee :  fo:  bee  Ijatlj  bene  Vooiti)  abowblc 
bireb  fcruant  to  tbee,  in  ferumg  ti)tt 
tin  y ceres :  anb  tlje  %  0  is  ©  tljy  <Sob 
fyaUMeffetlKeinalltbattijouboeft. 

19  C  *  3(11  tijc  firltlins  males  tbat 
tome  of  tljy  Dcarb,anb  oftby  ffoe&,tbou 
fl)ait  fanttific  bnto  tbe  itois©  tby 
<Sob:  tbou  fyaitbocnoBjozactbitb  tbe 
firftltngof  tby  bullocHc,  nozujeatctbe 
fitftluig  oftby  ujeepe. 

io  30)ou  (bait  cate  it  befoze  tbe 
%  0  is  ©  tb  y  (Sob  y cere  by  y cere,  m  tbe 
plate  ibbicl)  tbe  2L©is©  djallcboofe, 
tbou  anb  tby  boufbolo. 

21  *3nb  if  tber c  be  any  blc mid;  rljer v 
in;  asititbc  iamc,o:blinbc,orh.iueanyiii 
blcmify,  tbou  (bait  not  fatrificc  it  bnto 
tlje  3L  013  ©tby  (Sod. 

2i  3P)ott  (bait  cate  it  ibitljin  tftv 
gates :  tbe  bntlcancan&tljccieancpcr* 
£bn  (ball cat  (table,  as  tbc&ocbucae, 
anoastbcii?att. 

2}  "  £>ncly  tljou  (bait  not  rate  tbe 


bloob  tbereof:  tljou  (bait  poUtieit  bpon 
tbcgrounbasibatcr. 

CHAP.   XVL 

i  The  feaft  of  the  PalTeouer,  5  ofWeekes, 
13  of  Tabernacles.  16  Euery  male  mufl 
ofTer,asheisablc;,atthefcthreeFea/b.  18  Oi 
Iudges  and  Iuftice.  it  Groues  and  Ima- 
ges are  torbidden. 

2Sfctuc*tije  monctb  of^ 
bib  ,anb  neepetbepuTco* 
uctbntotbe  %  k>  is  ©  tby 
<Sob :  fo?  *  in  tlje  monetl) 
of  3lbib  tf)c  %  ©  is  ©  tljp 
d5obb2ougbttijee  foo^l)  out  of  Cgypt 
bpnigbt. 

z  Xbon(balttbcrefb?elartifitetbe 
|2>afJeoucc  bnto  tbe  1L0iB£>tbp0ob, 
©t  tbe  ftotbe  anb  tbe  bearb,in  tbe  *piate 
ttbitbtbe?l©-e©u)ailcl)oofctopiace 
bisnamctbere. 

5  *%bou{balteatnoleauenebb?eab 
ibirt)  it :  feucn  Myes  (bait  tl;ou  catbn* 
leaueneb  bicab  tbcreibttt) ,  cuen  tbe 
b?eab  of afflitrion,(fb?  tljou  tameft  font) 
ontoftbe  lanb  of  cgppt  in  baftc)tbat 
tbon  mapeft  remember  i^t  bay  ibben 
t^ou  tameft  foo#b  out  of  tlje  lanb  of  & 
gppt,ail  tbe  bayes  of  tbp  bfe. 

4  *^nbtberefbailbeenoleauencb 
b?eab  feenc  ibiti)  tbee  in  all  thp  eoafts 
teucn  bayes ,  ntttber  (ball  tfjete  any 
tbmg  of  ti)t  flefb ,  ibbitb  tbou  facrv 
fieebfl  t!)e  firftoap  at  cuen ,  remainc  all 
nipjbt,bnttH  tbe  morning. 

5  1tbou  mapeft  not  ||  fatrificc  tbe 
^affcouer  ibitljin  an?  of  tbr  gates, 
ibljirt)  tbe  %  0  m  ©  tby  ©ob  gmctb 
tljec. 

6  25ut  at  Ayt  place  ibbicbtbc?U>iB© 
tbv  ©ob  (ball  cboofc  to  place  bisjRame 
UMbcrc  tljou  ftjait  facrtficetlje  0afle< 
oner  atcuen,at  tbe  going  boibnc  of  tfjc 
<£»unne ,  at  tbe  feafon  tbat  tbou  tameft 
foojtboutofcgvpt. 

7  3lnbtbou(baitroftcanbeateitin 
tbe  place  ibljirt)  tbe  %  0  is  ©  tbr  ©ob 
(ball  cboofc,anb  tbou  fljalt  turnc  m  tbe 
moming^nb  goe  bnto  tbp  tnits. 

8  Sire  bayes  tbou  ftjalt  cate  bn- 
leaueneb  tyeab ,  anb  on  tlje  (encntlj 
bap  fhaii  be  a  t  foicmne  affemblp  to  tlje 
?L©is©  tbv  ©ob :  tljou  fljait  boc  no 

IbCjHC  therein. 

9  C  *  Seuen  ibeebes  (bait  tbou 
number  bnto  tbee :  beginne  to  number 
tbe  feucn  rbcefecs ,  from  fuch  time  as  tbou 
beginneft  to  put  tlje  fitnle  to  tlje  come. 

10  3nb 


"Exod.u. 
i.&c. 


'Exod.13. 


'Gup.11, 


"Exod.  is. 
r5- 


*Eiod.  j/j 
>5- 


i|Cr,yr. 


t  lUr.r 
ftrMnt. 


Louie.  33, 


Iudges  and  Officers.  Chap.xvij.  Of  idolatricj 


|]  Or,f*Jfn- 


\H,h.ftK 

tndrkj  art 


*  Exod.i;. 
1 4.  and  34. 


*Ecc!us. 
35-4- 

t  He&. accor- 
ding ta  tbs 
ttfiofhis 
and* 


•Eiod.;; 
8. 

\Ortmnttcrs 


10  ^no  thou  (halt  bcepe  rtjc  feaft  of 
mecltes  bnto  the  How  thy  <Sob  ibitb 
||  a  tribute  of  a  free  Mil  offering  of  thine 
banb,  tbbicb  thou  (bait  giue  bnto  the 
?L©isjd  thy  C50D,  attorning  as  the 
%  ©  «  id  trjp  (Son  bath  bleffcb  tbec. 

11  3nb  thou  (halt  rcioyte  before  tf)c 
!L©K©tby<50D,tbou,anbtbyfonnc, 
anb  tbp  baugbtcr,  aim  thy  manferuant 
anb  thymatb  fcruant,  anb  the  ILenttc 
that  is  ttutbnt  thy  gates,  anb  the  (tram 
ger,anb  the  father  lcffcanb  tl)e  tbtbotti , 
that  art  among  you,  in  the  place  rbtjicij 
the  1L  ©  k  £>  fby  00b  bath  ebofen  to 
place  bis  jframe  there. 

n  3nb  thou  (halt  remember  that 
thou  tbaft  abonbman  tn  cgypt:  anb 
tfjou  (halt  obferne  f  bothefc  Statutes. 

13  C  Xrjou  (bast  obferne  file  fcaft  of 
Xabernaelcs  feuen  bayes ,  after  that 
thou  haft  gather cb  in  thy  t  come ,  anb 
tbylbme. 

14.  3umtbonfbaUrctoiceintbyfeaft, 
thou,  anb  tby  fonne,  anb  thy  baugbtcr, 
anb  thy  mail  feruant,  ants  thy  maib  fer^ 
uant^iibthelLenitctijcftcanger.anb 
tbefatbeticlTc,  anbtbclbibolb,  that  are 
timbintby  gates. 

15  Pencil  bayes  (halt  thou  bcepe  a 
folemne  fcaft  bnto  the  %  ©  is  ©  thy 
<3ob,  m  the  p(acc  ibbtchtbc  %  ©  is  © 
(hall  thufc :  becaufe  the  H  ©  is  ©  tby 
<5ob  (hail  blcffc  thee  in  all  thy  mcrcafe, 
anb  in  all  the  ftwbcs  of  thine  banbes, 
tbcrefo2e  thou  (haltfurely  rcioycc. 

16  C*Xb2Ccttmesmayccre(balail 
tby  males  appearc  befoje  the  Hois© 
thy  Gob,  in  the  place  lbhicb  bee  (hall 
ehufe :  m  the  fcaft  of  Onlcattcncb  b2cab, 
anb  in  the  fcaft  of  Boccltcs,  anb  in  the 
feaft  of  tabernacles :  anb  they  thai  not 
appear  c  befo  2c  the  %  ©  is  b  *  emprie. 

17  eucry  man  (ball  gtue  tasbceis 
able,  acco2btug  to  the  bicJTmg  of  the 
%  ©  k  id  th V  <5ob,ibbicb  he  hath  guicn 
thee. 

is  Cfubgesanb  officers  (balttbou 
matte  thee  m  all  thy  gates  ibhich  the 
%  ©  is  id  tby  ©ob  gutctb  thee  th  jough- 
outtby  tribes:  another  (hall  mbgc  the 
peopletbith  mftiubgcment- 

19  5Cbou  (halt not Tmeftrabgcment, 
thou  maftuotrcfpmperfons/ncitbcr 
tafec  a  gift :  f  0?  a  gift  both  blmb  the  eyes 
of  the  ttnfcanb  pcrucrt  the  ||  momes  of 
the  righteous. 

io  Xhat  ibhuh  vs  t  altogether  iuft 
(halt  tnoufolloibe,  that  thou  mayeft 
uue,  anb  mbente  the  lano  ibhich  the 


%  ©  is  ©  thy  ©ob  gincth  thee. 

ii  C  Xhou  (halt  not  plant  thee  a 
groue  of  any  trees  neerc  bnto  the  3Utat 
of  the  %  ©  is  ©  tby  Gon ,  tbljicl;  thou 
(halt  mabe  thee: 

zi  Neither  (halt  thou  fetthcebpa; 
np  ||  imagcttibtch  the  %e>  is  ©  thy  ©ob 
hatcth. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1  The  tilings  faaificcd  mull  bee  found,  i  Ido- 
laters mult  bee  flaine.  8  H.ird  controuerfics 
aretobeedetermmed  bytlie  Pricftsand Jud- 
ges. 12.  The  contemner  of  t!ut  Detemiiua- 
tionmuftdie.  14  The  eleiftiuii,  it^  and 
ductie  of  a  K1115. 

l^ou  (Ijalt  not  fattifitc  bn^ 
to  tl)c  1L  o  is.  d  thy  ©00 
any  bullocbe ,  m  ||  (bcepe 
ibhercinlsblcm((l),oi  any 
cutifauourebnts:  foztljar 
ts  an  abomination  bnto  the  31©  is  © 
thy  ©ob. 

i  C3Jf  there  bee  founbamongyou 
ibithin  any  of  thp  gates  ruhtth  the 
|L©is©  thy  ©obgiucth  thee,  man  oj 
iboman  that  hath  tb?ought  ibtcbcbnes 
in  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  id  thy  <5ob,  in 
tranfgrcflinghis  couenant, 

j  :3nb  hath  gone  anb  ferucb  other 
goes,  anb  Sbozfbippcb  them,  either  the 
Snmnc,  o^oone,  02  any  of  tbehoftt 
of  heauen,  ibhich  3  bane  not  com- 
manbeb, 

4  3nbitbetolbtbce,anbtbouha(l- 
hearb  of  it,  aim  mquircbbiligcntly,  ano 
beholb,  it  be  trne,and  the  thing  ccrtamc, 
that  fuel)  abomination  is  Unougbt  tn 
3fracl: 

5  Xhcn  flialt  rt)ou  bung  forth  that 
man,  02  that  iboman  (ibhich  hauc  com- 
mittcb  that  ibtcftcb  thing)  bnto  thp 
gates,  euen  that  man,  02  thattbonwn, 
anb  (halt  (tone  them  rbitlj  ftones  till 
tlicybte. 

6  *3(t  the  month  of  tibotbltncff cs, 
02th2celbitnelTcs,(hall  he  tljat  istbo^ 
thy  of  beath,  be  pnttobeatli :  but  at  the 
mouth  of  one  lbitncffc  he  (hall  not  bee 
puttobcatb. 

7  XbebanbsoftbetbimclTcsfhaii 
be  firft  bpon  htm ,  to  put  him  to  bcarb, 
anb  aftcrlbarb  the  hanbs  of  all  the  peo- 
plc:fo  tl)ou  djalt  put  the  eutl  albaj' from 
among  you. 

8  cjftbcrearifcamattcr  too  barb 

foz  thee  in  lubgcmcnt,  bcttbcencbloob 
anb  bloob,bcnbccnc  plea  anb  plea,  aim 
bctvbeencftrobe  aim  CroUc.  being  mat 
ters 

14  2 


1  L:uit.a£. 
[. 

\Or.fixtutj 
irftlUr. 


[Or ,  gilt. 


•Sum.  55. 
^0  ch3p.»7. 
6.tc  19.15. 
mat. 18. 16. 
iohn8.l7. 
:. cor. 13. 1. 
Iicb.io.  28. 


The  cxcercife        Deuteronomie.         oftheKing. 


f  Htbr.noi 
to  hearktnt 


ters  of  couttouctfie  tbitbm  tby  gates : 
then  fbaittbou  artfc,anbgct  ttjcebp  in- 
to the  place , rbljicij  the  %&& ©  tby 
C5ob(ballcboofc; 

9  3nb  thou  fljalt  tome  tonto  the 
^nettstbelLcuttes,  $  into  tbe3lubgc 
that  fljai  be  in  thole  baycs.anb  enquire, 
attD  they  (ball  (bcU>  thee  the  fentence  of 
gjiiDgcnient. 

io  3inb  thou  (bait  boe  accojbing  to 
the  fentcntc  Xbbieb  they  of  that  place 
gb!)icl)t!)c1L0K£>  tt)allcboofc)(ball 
tberb  tt»cc ,  ano  tljou  (bait  obfetue  to  do 
atcojbtng  to  all  that  tl)rp  enfo?me  thee: 

ii  ^tto?D»ng  to  the  (entente  of  the 
?Latt)fl)!)ic!)  they  (ball  teach  thee,  anb 
aceo?bing  to  the  3Utbgcmcnt  vt>I)irt) 
they  (ball  tell  tl)ec  thou  (bait  boc :  thou 
(bait  not  betltne  from  the  Sentence 
Vbbitb  they  (ball  (bcib  thee,  to  tijc  right 
banb.nono  the  left. 

it  3no  the  man  that  ibill  boe  pjt- 
futnptuoufly ,  t  anb  1MI  not  hcatUen 
tonto  tne  $nett  (that  flanbetb  to  mU 
ntller  there  befrue  tlje  %  ©  ib  ©  thy 
C5ob)o?  tonto  tt)c  3hiogc,cucn  that  man 
(bail  bic,  anb thou  (bait  put  aitoay  the 
euillfcomgifrael. 

13  3nb  all  the  people  thai  bearcanb 
feate,anb  bo  e  no  mojc  pjefumptuoufty. 

1+  Cr©ben  thou  art  come  bnto  the 
lanb  tbhteh  the  %$>&•&  tby  <5oto  gi* 
urth  thee,  anb  (bait  poueu"ett,ant)  (bait 
btbell  therein,  anb  (halt  fay  ^  tbill  fet  a 
laying  otter  nice,  line  as  ail  the  nations 
that  are  about  me: 

15  Xbou  (halt  m  an?  ibife  fet  him 
Btng  ouet  thee ,  tbhom  the  1L©isjd 
tby  C5ob  (bailchoofe.  oncfromamong 
tby  b?etb?en  (l)alt  thou  fet  Hing  ouer 
thee :  tboumayctt  not  fet  a  Granger  0* 
tier  tbcc,ibbtcbisnot  thy  toother. 

16  25ut  he  (ball  not  multiply  botfes 
tohimfclfc ,  no?  caufe  the  people  tore> 
tunic  to  <£gypt,  to  the  cube  that  bee 
(bouib  nutmplybojfcs : forasmuch  as 
the  It^Kiro  hath  faib  bnto  you,  J^ce 
(ball  benccfootfb  rewrite  no  moictbat 
luay. 

17  /Neither  (ball  he  multiply  Unties 
to bimfelfc ,  that  his bcarttttrncnota* 
lbay:  neither  (l)ailbee  greatly  multtply 
tobtrnfclfcfilttcranbgolb. 

18  atttoitfyallbcitobntbenttctbbp* 
ontbeXb^oncofhtSHingoomcthathc 
(ball  tbnte  htm  a  copy  of  this  fUU)  in  a 
booftc ,  out  of  that  which  is  before  the 
\2mcftstbelLeuttcs. 

19  2lnD  it  (bail  be  tbitb  bun,  anb  bee 


(ball  reabe  therein  all  the  bayes  of  his 
life,  that  bee  may  learne  to  feare  the 
|L©  is  ©bts  ©ob,to  beep  all  the  itoojos 
oftbislLaito,anbtbcfc.!§>tatutcs>tobo 
them: 

zo  XbatbiSbcartbcenotuftetotop 
aboucbistoretbmi,  anb  that  hecturnc 
notaftoe  from  tht€ommanbement,to 
the  nght  hanb ,  0?  to  the  left :  to  the  enb 
that  bee  may  prolong  his  bayes  tn  his 
Bingbomc,bcc,anb  bis  cbiltyenintbc 
mibftof^frael. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

The  Lord  is  the  Piiefts  and  Leuites  inheri- 
tance. 3  ThePiicftsdue.  6  The  Leuites 
portion,  o  The  abominations  of  the  Nati 
onsaretobeeauoyded.  15  ChriftthePro- 
phet  is  to  be  heard.  10  The  prefumptuous 
prophet  is  to  die. 

^e  duetts,  the  llcuites, 
and  all  the  tribe  of  JLeui, 
*(ballhaue  no  part  no?  in* 
bcritanee  itotrb  3Jfrael 
they*  (bail  eate  the  offer* 

mgs  of  the  %  ®  as  ts>  mabe  by  tttc,  anu 

hiSinheruancc. 
r  5Thcrefo?e  (ball  tJbey  baue  no  in* 

hcritantc  among  their  b?eth?en :  the 

%  0  ts  ©  is  their  inheritance^  he  hatl; 

faiD  into  them. 

3  C  3tnb  this  fbalbc  the  $UOt8  but 
from  the  pcoplcfr  om  them  that  offer  a 
facrifice,  Ibbetbcr  it  bee  ore  o?  (beepc : 
anb  they  (baligiue  bnto  the  |t)?ieatbc 
(bouiber,  anb  the  nbo  cbeefees,  anb  tpe 
maib. 

4  n:hertr(tfruita]roofthyto?nc,of 
thy  ttnne ,  anb  of  thy  oyle,  anb  the  firlr 
of  the  fleece  of  thy  fbeepe,  (bait  thou 
gluebinu 

5  5To?thelL©ia©thy<Ipobhatb 
tbofen  htm  out  of  all  thy  tnbts.to  ftanb 
to  mintfter  in  the  jl5amc  of  the  %®  is  9, 
hini,anbhisfcnnes  fojeuer. 

6  C^nbtfafLeuttecomefromany 
of  thy  gates  out  of  an  3jfrael,ibhcrche 
foiourncb ,  anb  come  tbitb  all  the  beftre 
of  bts  mtnbe,  bnto  the  place  ttrijjtcb  the 
fL©B©  (bailchoofe; 

7  Xben  bee  (ball  miniller  m  the 
i!5ame  of  the  Hots©biS<*5oD,asail 
bis  bjctbjen  the  ILeuttcs  doe ,  i\)hu1) 
ffanb  there  befoje  the  JL  ©  a  jd. 

8  Xhcy  (ball  bauc  USc  portions  to 
eate.beObe  t  that  ibbtcb  commeth  of  the 
faleofbispammonie. 

9  C  naben  thou  art  come  into  the 

lanb 


•Num.lS 
20.  chap. 
10.9. 
*  I.Cotin. 
9.13. 


t  Hth,:hJ 
fain  hj  tit 
{Aihcri. 


Falfe  prophets.  Chap.xix.         Cities  of  refuge. 


'LcuimS, 


•  Lcuit.:o. 

*7- 

*  1  .Sam. 

:87. 


\\Or,vpn"hl 

11    ■  r  a 

orfmcere. 


*Ioh.I.45 
aib  3.11. 

SDd7. 37. 


*Esoi).  2C 


Iohn  1. 
4J.aas;. 
»i  &7-37 


lanb  Which  the  11  ok©  thy  <£ob  giuctb 
thee,  thou  (halt  not  lcarne  to  Dot  after 
the  abominations  of  fbofc  nations. 

10  %\ytx efl)all not  be  founb among 
you  anV  one  that  mabetb  bis  fonne ,  02 
hssbaugbtcr  *  to  paffc  tb02oibtbe  fire, 
ortljat  bfetbbuimanon,  or  an  obferuer 
of  times,  02  an  mcljanter,  oi  a  Hutch, 

11  *  £>:  a  el)anncr  ,02  a  confulter  ttntb 
familiar  fpirits,  02au.1y3.arD,  o:a*i?5e 
tromantcr. 

1 1  ^02  ail  that  bo  thefc  things,  ^  an 
abommanon  bnto  the  3L«dis© :  anb 
becaufe  of  fbcfc  abominations ,  the 
%  €>  is  ©  thy  <3oD  both  Dnuc  them  out 
frombtfojetnee. 

I  j  %\)o\x  (halt  bee||perfite  ttnththe 

J!.£>K©tby0OD. 

14  5foz  tlicfc  nations  Which  tliott 
(haltPpofTcffc,  bearbeneb  bnto  obfer 
uers  of  times,  anb  bnto  banners:  but 
as  foj  tl)cc,  tne  %  0  is  ©  tlrp  <5oD  bath 
not  fuffcreb  thee  fo  to  doe. 

15  C^fjefLotfPtny^obttnll 
raife  bpbnto  thee  a  i&opbctfrom  the 
mtbaofthee,ofthvb2Cth2cn,ltRebnto 
me,  bnto  him  ye  fl)au  hearten, 

16  3cco2Dlng  to  all  that  tbon  Deficcbft 
of  thc?LoiiJ©tbV  <5oDin$02eb,inthc 
bay  of  the  affembly,  facing,  *?Lctmcc 
notheareagaiutbeboiccoffbefUHs© 
my  <Sob,  neither  let  mec  fee  this  great 
fircanymo2e,that3ibienot. 

17  anD  the  %  £>  ih  id  faiD  unto  mee, 
Xhey  baue  Weil  fpoken  that  which  the? 
bauefpoueu. 

13  * 3  tbill  raife  them  bp  a^zopbet 
from  among  their  tyettocn,  line  buto 
thee ,  anb  ttnll  put  my  ID02DCS  in  bis 
mouth,  anDhecfballfpeaRCbnto  them 
all  that  3*  (ball  tommauD  bun. 

19  3nD  it  fball  tome  to  paffc,  that 
Ibbofocuer  Will  not  hearten  bnto  niy 
rb02DS ,  ibhteh  Dec  (hah  fpcahe  in  my 
namc,3i  Will  rcmnre  it  of  him. 

10  2Snttbep2opbct  Which  (baUpjc; 
fume  to  fpeafte  a  W02D  in  my  name, 
which  Uhaue  nottommanbeb  bimto 
fpeafte,  02  thatfhailfpeaUemthcnamc 
of  other  goDS ,  cucn  that  p?opbet 

fyailDie.  ,         ,.    ,^„ 

II  3inD  if  thou  fay  m  thine  heart, 
$oW  (hall  wee  fcnoW  the  W02D  Which 
the  %  ©  is  ©  hath  not  fpottrn; 

rz  naben  a  p2ophet  fpeaueth  in  the 
name  of  the  ILsdk©,  if  thcthmgfol 
!om  not,  no*  tome  to  paffc,  that  is  the 
thing  Which  the  ft  ©  «  ©  hath  not  rpo* 
Uen,  but  the  pzopbet  Ijatftfpo&cnttp?c= 


■  Cliap.i  2. 
y-9- 


*Exod.ai. 
1  5. num. 3  5 
10.10D1. 50 


fumptuoufl? :  thou  fljait  not  bee  afrato 
of  him. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  The  Cities  of  refuge.  4  The  priuiledge 
thereot  for  the  manflayer.  14  The  land- 
markeisnot  to  be  rcmooucd.  1^  Two  wit- 
nefles  at  the  leaft.  \6  The  punifhinent  of 
a  falf'e  witnciTe. 

l?en  the  %  o  is  ©  thy  (5oD 
*  hath  cut  off  the  nations, 
Wbofc  lanbe  the  %  o  is  © 
thy  <3ob  gtueth  thee,  anb 
tboutfucceeDcftthcm,anD  j  <  m  «i, 
bwciieftin  tbetr  cities,  anb  m  their \i"Jlfr!°f' 

houfes:  |/#J7 

z  *  Xhou  (halt  fcparate  t!j:ce  cities ; 
f02  thee  m  tlje  mibft  of  thv  laub,  lbhich 
the  HsDm©  thv  @ob  giucth  tl;ec  to 
poffcfTeit. 

j  Xhou  (halt  prepare  thee  a  tbay, 
anb  DiuiDe  the  toads  of  thy  laub  (ibhith 
the  %  <s>  is  ©  thv  ©ob  gtueth  thee  to  in* 
berit)mtoth2ceparts,tbateuery  flayer 
may  ficc  thither. 

4  Canbtbisis  the  cafe  of  the  (layer 
Ibljich  (hall  flee  thither ,  that  bee  may 
Hue :  tbbo  fo  tulleth  t)ts  ncighbonr  tg 
wnantly ,  ibhom  hchatcDnottmtime 
paQ, 

5     3(S  \bheit   a  man  gOCth  itltO  tljC 

tbooblbithhisneighbo.2,tohclb\booD, 
anb  his  hanb  fettheth  a  ftrofte  njitb  tlje 
aretocntbotbnethcrttcanbtlietheab 
(llppcth  from  the  t  helue,  anb  t  iigbteth 
bpon  his  neighbour  that  hebie,  he  fball 
flee  bnto  one  of  thofe  cities,  anb  liue : 

6  %t&  the  aucngcr  of  tUc  bloob 
purfue  tlje  flaier ,\bhs!e  hts  heart  is  h ot, 
anb  oucrtaftc  him ,  becaufe  tlje  lbay  is 
long,  anb  t  flay  him ,  ibhereas  he  tbas 
nottbojthy  ofbeath,m  as  much  as  hec 
hatcDhtmnottintimcpatt. 

7  aahercfoje^l  commanb thee,fay* 
tng,  %\)o\x  fbalt  fcparate  t1)?cc  ntics  fe? 
thee. 

s  ^ud  if  the  %  0  is  ©  thy  <Sod  ctv 
large  thy  toaft  (asbchatbfroomebnto 
thy  fathers)  anD  giue  thee  all  the  lanDe 
rbhich  hee  pjomifeD  to  giue  bnto  thy 
fathers: 

9  (3Jf  thou  fhait  *  ncepe  all  thefe 
commanbcmcntsto  Doe  them,  iblr.cl) 
Ji  commanb  tljct  this  Day,  to  lone  the 
1L  0  is  ©  tbv  <5oD,  anb  to  ibaiuc  cuer  in 
hisibayes)  Ttl)en  (halt  thou  abbe  tb;ce 
crttcs  motfo2thce,btfiDctt)cfctli2Cc: 

10  Xhatinnotcnt  bloob  brnot  (beb 
!  in  thv  laub  ibbicb  the  %  a>  is  ©  thy  eob 

gwerb 


I  IM.frtm 
je/ierJy 

the  third 
da,. 


\lleb.yron. 

t  Hcijm 
dctt. 


f  Heh.fmite 
htm  in  Uji 

t  Htb.fr cm 
jejicrd.;jl 

ihtrdiL]. 


•Chap. is. 


'Io/h.10.7 


A  faifewitneffe.    Deutcronomie.         Offer  peace. 


Hetr.i 


fy>. 


•Chap. 17. 
6.  hcbr. to. 
28.  numb. 
3  5. 30. mar. 
l8.ld.ioh. 
S. 17. j. cor. 
1  j.l.  hcbr. 
10.28. 

\\Or,fJti*g 


*  Prou.19, 
5,9. dan. 13, 
61. 


•Exod.  si. 

13.  Unit. 
i4.:o.mat. 

5. ,3. 


giucth  thee  foz  an  inheritance ,  ant)  to 
blooobcbponthce. 

11  C*Sut  if  anp  man  hate  his  neigh 
bout  ano  Itc  iulbaitfozhim,ano  nfe  Dp 
agatnft  him,  ant)  finite  himt  morally 
that  heebie,  ano  flccth  into  one  of  thefe 
Ctttcs: 

iz  Xhmthceioersofhisetricfbaii 
fenoauo  fetch  hun  thence,  anODcliuet 
him  into  the  tjanb  of  ttjc  auenger  of 
blooo,thathcmapOic. 

ij  %l)iat  epe  fljali notpittie i)un,but 
jhou  ftjait  putavbap  the  guiitof  innocent 
bloooftom35fracl,thatitmapgoelbcl 
tturtj  thee. 

1+  C£hou  fljalt  not  rcmoouc  thp 
neighbours  land  -  marUc,lbhich  tljcp  of 
olo  time  hauc  fet  in  thine  inheritance, 
which  thou  (halt  tnhcrite,  in  thcianO 
thatthcllfiDisjD  thp  ©00  giucth  thee 
topoffeffcit. 

15  C*£Hicroimcu1jfl)all  not  rife  bp 
agatnft  a  man  fo;  anp  iniqutrtc ,  0?  fo?  a^ 
np  finnc  ,tn  anp  finne  that  I1  e  finnctD :  at 
themouth  oftlbowimcflcs  ,0?  at  the 
mouth  of  tt»cc  n)ttncffcs,fballthc  mat= 
tcrbeftablifhco. 

16  C^ffatalfctbitncs  rife  tip  againft 
an?  man  to  teftifie  ||  againft  him  that 

which  is  VbJOlig: 

17  %l)tn  both  the  men  betroecne 
ibhom  the  tontrouerfic  is ,  Cballftano 
before  the  %  0  is  ©,  before  the  #;icfts, 
anothe^iiogcs.tbhichfhallbcinthofc 
oapes. " 

is  ano  the  3fnoges  tyairmabe&tfc 
gent  mquifition :  ano  bcholO,  if tt)c  tbifc 
neffebe  a  faifeibitncflc,  and  hath  teffc 
fico  faifip  againft  his  brother : 

19  *3thcnfballpc  00c  bnto  him,  as 
he  hao  thought  to  hauc  bone  bnto  his 
brother  :foft)ait  thou  put  the  cmlattiap 
fromamongpou. 

20  3no  thofc  lbhtch  rcmaine  n^aii 
hcare,  anb  fearc ,  ano  ft)a!l  hcnccfoojth 
comnutnotnojeanp  fuel)  eiull  among 
Von. 

zi  3tno  thine  epe  fhall  not  pitic ,  but 
*Ufe  Hull  ^oe  foz  nfe,cpc  fo?  eve,  tooth  fa: 
tootl),T)tinb  Co;  Ijanb,  fo  ot  to:  foot. 

CHAP.    XX. 

1  The  Priefts  exhortation  to  encourage  the 
people  to  battel).  5  The  officers  proclama- 
tion who  are  to  be  diimiffed  from  the  warre. 
10  How  to  vfc  the  Cities  that  accept  or  re- 
fufe  the  proclamation  of  peace.  \6  V/ha: 
Cities  mud  bee  deuoted.  19  Trees  ot  mans 
meat  mull  not  be  deilroyed  in  the  fiege. 


£$&§&  ^enrhougocftout  to  bafcj 
F^Sf^'A  tell  agatnft  thine  enemies, 
mw$  ano  feeft  hotfes  ano  cfja? 
>/%&}  rets ,  and  a  people  rnojc 
%&  thcnthou.benotafraioof 
rrjem :  fo:  tl)c  ?L  ©  is  je>  tl)?  00D  is  ttJitfj 
thee,  which  brought  thee  bp  out  of  the 
lanoofCgppt. 

i  3lnDit(hanbcc\bhenpcarceomc 
nigh  bnto  the  batten,  that  the ityicft 
than  approach  ano  fpcaac  bnto  the 
people, 

j  3no  mail  fa?  bnto  them ,  ??eare 
£>  Jfrael,  pou  approach  this  oap  bnto 
battcll  againft  pour  enemies :  let  not 
pour  hearts  t  faint,  fearc  not,  anb  ooc 
not  t  tremble ,  neither  be  pe  ter  nfico  be; 
raufcofthem. 

4    ^OitljCfLOlBIPpOUrcSOOishee 

that  gocth  with  pou,  to  fight  foj  poua* 
gamftpour  cncmtcs,tofaucpou. 

5  C  3ino  the  Officers  than  fpeafec 
bnto  me  people,  faping,  nahatmanis 
ttjercttiat  Ijatlj  built  a  ncibljoufe,  ano 
Ijatlj  notOcoitatcOitY  let  l)im  goeano 
rcturnc  to  f)is  Ijoufc,  leftl)eebtetntl)e 
battellanoanotljermanoeoicateit. 

6  3tno  Vbljat  man  is  |)ee  tijat  fjafh 
plantcoatlincparo ,  anoijat!)  not  pet 
t  eaten  of  it  <  let  Him  alfo  go  ano  r  ctumc 
bnto  l)isl)oufc,lcftl)coie  inttjcbattell, 
ano  an  otljtr  man  catc  of  it. 

7  *  3luo  lbliat  man  is  there  tfjat  fjatl) 
betrotneo  a  tbife ,  ano  Ijatljuottafien 
Ijerf  let  him  goc  ano  rcturnc  bnto  his 
houfclcft  he  Oie  in  battell,  anO  another 
mautaltehcr. 

8  ^nothc^DffirersfhalifpeaKcfur^ 
thcr  bnto  the  peoplc:anothepaiaiifap, 
*B9hatman  is  there  that  is  fear efull  ano 
faint  hcartcOf  let  hun  goe  anoremrnc 
bnto  hlshoufc  ,left  hisbzcthjnisheart 
t  faint  as  lbcll  as  hishcart 

9  3tnoitfl)allbcibhennjc<©mtcrs 
haue  maoc  an  eno  of  fpeaiung  bnto  the 
people,  that  thep  Chall  maftc  Captamcs 
of  me  aniucs  to  Ucaoe  the  people. 

10  4Cn3htnthoutommcft  nigh  bnto 
a  Citp  to  fight  againft  it,  then  pjotlaune 
peace  bnto  it. 

11  ^ino  it  fljall  be,  if  it  mane  thee  an* 
[  uuerc  of  peaccano  open  bnto  thecthen 
u  ftjalbc  that  all  the  people  that  is  founo 
therein,  (hall  be  tributaries  bnto  tljcc, 
ano  thcpfbaii  feructhec. 

n  SmOifttibillmaBe  no  peace  lbtrl) 
t!)ec,butibillniaReibartcagaUiftthcc, 
then  thou  (halt  befiege  it 

1  j  3nOlbhcnthcH0K£>thp<5oO 
hath 


\Htlr.t, 

tinder. 

\Hilr.*tialt£ 

htslc 


it  comm.H  ■ 
SeeLcuir. 
lp.jj. 

*Ch>i 
5 


»F  M 


*iuc!g.  7.3 


tHcfr.Bc/r. 


f/ZccVrobe 
1*1  ththcxJi 
eftbepctfte. 


Ofmurdcrthac        Chap.xxj. 


is 


notk 


nowen. 


•lorti.8.». 
\Heb.[je,tU 


I  Or,  far,  O 
man  tin  tree 
of  the  field 
is  to  be  em- 
ployed in  the 

fa'- 

f  Heb.togot 

from  before 
thee. 


\Hebr.tl 
come  dtnrne. 


harDDcUuctcDitiutothtnchanDs,thou 
(halt  finite  cttery  male  tOcrcof  Unth  tlje 
cDgeoftbcfuwD. 

14  23ut  the  iboiucu ,  anD  tljc  lute 
ones,  anD  'thetattell,  anD  all  that  15  in 
the  cute,  enen  all  the  fpoile  thereof,  fljalt 
tDou  t  take  buto  toy  felfcauD  tDou  fliait 
eate  tDcfpoilcof  t'Dute  enemies,  lbljicD 
ttte  %  ©  a  ©  tDy  god  Dafh  gtucu  tDcc. 

15  ZDus  malt  thou  doc  unto  an  tDe 
nncsiblncOarc  bee?  far  offfromtDcc, 
iWbirbarc  not  of  the  cincs  of  tljcfen& 
tions. 

i6  ffiutoftDc  cities  of  tDcfc  people 
tbDicD  the  %  ©  a  ©  thy  Gob  Dotlj  gtue 
theefo:  an  inheritance,  tl)ou  flbaitfauc 
aime  nothing  that  bzeatheth : 

17  23ut  thou  malt  btterly  beftroy 
then!,n3meiv,tht^ittitcs,anDthc^tno 
rites ,  the  Canaanstes ,  anD  tiic  ^ctiv 
5*tcs,  the  Diuitcs,  anb  the  '3Jebufitcs, 
as  the  H©  a  jd  thy  Gob  Ijath  commam 
oeDthec: 

18  %\w  the?  traclj  you  not  to  Do  af 
tet  all  their  aboinmanons,  ibDtcD  they 
hauc  Done  Dnto  their  goes, fo  fhoulD  ye 
finne  againltthc?L  ©  is  -©your  ©ob. 

19  C  nahen  tDou  fDalt befiege  antic 
a  long  tunc,  in  matting  ibarre  agamft, 
it  to  tattcit,  thou  (halt  not  Dcllroy  the  j 
treestDercof,  byfomnganarc  agamft) 
tljeni :  fo:  thou  mayeft  catc  of  tljem,anD 
tDoumaltnotcuttDcinboibnc(||fo?the 
tret  of  the  nclD  is  mans  life) 1  to  employ 
them  m  the  fiege. 

xo  £)nly  the  trees  Vo\)it\)  tDou  unoil^ 
eft  that  they  be  not  trees  fo2mcate,tDou 
(halt  beftroy,  anb  tut  them  Dottme,  ana 
thou  Cljalt  buriD  bulibarUes  agamft  tDe 
city  that  n  uinetl)  tbarre  ibttD  tDeeAmtrt 
titbembbueb. 

CHAP.   XXI. 

1  The  expiation  of  an  vncertaine  murder.  10 
Thevfageof  acaptiuetakentowiie.  15  The 
fir  ft  borne  is  not  to  be  difinheritedvponpri- 
uate  afte&ion.  18  A  ftubburne  fonue  isto 
bee  ftoned  to  death,  n  The  malefa&our 
mull  not  hang  all  night  ona  tree. 

^  Jr one  bee  founb  ftainc  in 
;thc  lanbe,  lbDicD  the 
,!L0K3Dfhyci'ODgiueth 


PfM  f&S*  thee  to  poffeffe it,  lymgm 
iMz&M  the  fielDt,  and  u  bee  not 


ftnoibcn  lbDo  Ijatl)  ftamc  him . 

x  Xhcu  thy  ciDcrs  anD  thy  gjufr 
ges  fhall  conicfonD.anb  tl)ey  fball  mca 
furebnto  the  ernes  ibhich  are  rounoa 
bout  hmuhat  is  name. 


j  3Jno  it  fJbail  be  that  the  cttie  lbljicD 
is  new  buto  the  Qasne  man,eucn  the  €1- 
Dcrs  of  that  erne  fljail  tabe  an  heifer 
WJhuhharhnotbencUjJoughtttittlj.ind 
ujl)it!)  hath  not  DjaVUen  tn  the  yoiie. 

4  3mD  the  €iocts  of  that  cine  than 
bung  Doinne  the  heifer  bnto  a  rough 
bailey,  ibhtch  ts  neither  careDnojfoni' 
en,  anDfball  ftnbeofftlje  heifers  nec&e 
therein  the  bailey. 

5  ^nbtijcpneOsthefonnesofllcm 
fljall  come neere  (foz  them rlje  %  o a  © 
thy  (Sod  ijath  chofen  to  mmiftet  bnto 
him,  anD  to  blcflc  m  tijc  il^ame  of  the 
%o®&: )  anD  by  their  t  ibojDc  ftjail 
euery  coutroucrfie  anD  encry  ftroHc 

bet  tried. 

6  #nnaurt)c<£lDersofthatc:fythat 
arenert  bnto  the  name  man.fbai  ibafb 
rt)C!c  Daubs  ouer  tl;c  Ijcifcr  tljat  ts  be 
heabeDtn  the  bailey. 

7  3nl)thcyfl)flllanfn)ctc,  anbfay, 
£)ucDanDShauc  not  CljeDDc  this  bloob, 
neither  Dane  our  eyesfecne  ir. 

s  23'cmeretful,)aD?LoK©,bntotl)y 
people  3!frael,  ibhom  thou  DaftrcDce^ 
meb,  anD  lay  not  innocent  bloob  t  bnto 
thypeople  of  |Ifraels  rljargc ,  anb  tfje 
bloob  fballbewguicnthcm. 

9  jS>o  fl)alt  thou  put  aibay  the gu.it 
of  innocent  bloob  from  among  you , 
U)ljtn  tDou  fhalt  bo  that  ibhul)  is  rigDt 
intDcDgDtofthe?LoH?D. 

io  CD3i)tntDougocftfoa1)tou3arTe 
agamft  thine  enemics,ano  the  %  0  k  © 
tljy  <5oD  DatDbelutcrcD  them  into  thme 
Daubs,  $  tljou  Daft  taken  them  capnuc, 

11  ^nD  fecft  among  the  captmes  a 
bcauttfull  Rioman,  anD  Daft  a  beftre  v>n> 
to  Dct,  that  tDou  iboulbeft  Daue  Dcr  to 
tDyibife: 

u  ItDentDou  ftjait  bung  Dcr  Dome 
totDineDoiu"e,  anDfljccnjail  ftiaucDcr 
DeaD,anb  ||  par  e  Dcr  ttailes. 

13  ^ud  fljee  ftjau  put  tljc  raiment  of 
Dcr  captnntic  from  off  Ijcr.anb  fl>aii  re 
mame  in  tDute  Doufe,  anD  beibailcDcr 
fatDcr  anD  Der  motDcr  a  full  monctD : 
anb  after  tDat,  tl)ou  Ojalt  go  in  bnto  Der 
anD  bcDer  Duf  banb.anb  fijc  fljau  be  tljy 
ibifc. 

1+  3JnDitfljallbeiftDouDauenobC' 
ligDtmDer,  tDenrDou  ftjalt  lctl)crgoc 
IbDitDcr  fhc  \bill,  but  tDou  fliait  not  fell 
Dcratalfojmonn,,fDoufl)aitnotmaae 
mercDatiDi^e  of  her ,  becaitfc  tDou  Daft 
DumblcbDcr. 

h  C  ^f  a  nian  Daue  tlbo Ibmes^ine 
bcloueb  anb  anotDec  Ijateo ,  anD  tDey 

Daue 


\Hcb  miuih 


f  Uth.in  the 
middefi. 


to  grow  hei>, 
mxkc  or 
drift. 


Thcfirftborne.     Deuteronomie.  Apparell. 


f  Wtbr.tlmt 
u  found 
vrtlh  hwn 


•Gal. J. 13. 

curfe  of 
god. 


Exod. 


Ijauc  borne  him  chtlb?en,  both  the  belo- 
ucb,  anb  rticljatcD :  anb  ifttjc  ttrft  borne 
fonne  be  hers  rtiat  itoas  hatcb : 

i6  %\)tn  it  (hall  bc,itohcn  he  mabetft 
his  fonnes  to  mhente  that  lbhith  l)cc 
hath,fhat  he  map  notmafec  the  foriue  of 
the  bclottcb ,  firft  borne,  before  the  fonne 
of  the  hatcb ,  wh.ch  is  mbeeb  tftc  firft 
borne: 

17  23ut  hec  (bail  acHtioiblcbgc  the 
fonne  of  the  hatcb  fo?  the  firft  b02tic,bp 
gtuinghimaboublcpo2tionofailtthat 
hee  Dart) :  fo?  Dee  is  the  beginning  of 
his  fttength ;  the  right  of  the  firft  borne 
ishis. 

18  ClJfamanhaueaftubbomc  anb 
rebellious  tonne,  lbhith  ttnllnotobep 
the  bouc  ofljis  fathct  ,02 tfte  boiee  ofhis 
mother,  anb  thattbhentfacphauccha; 
ftcneb  l)etii,tbfl  not  heatfcen  totito  them: 

19  Xhcn  fljaii  his  fattier  anb  his mo- 
ther lap  Dolts  on  him,anb  b?mg  Dun  out 
bnto  the  fibers  of  Ijts  citic,  anb  bnto 
the  gate  of  his  place: 

10  3(ub  thep  fliall  Cap  bnto  the  ex- 
acts ofhis  ntie ,  Xhis  out  fonne  is  ftute 
bomcanb  rebellious,  hee  tbtll  not  obey 
our  boite  :l)e  is  a  glutton,  fabmnbarb. 

zi  2tnb  all  the  men  of  hts  tttp  (hall 
ftonchim  ltotth  ftoncs,  ttjattjee  Die :  fo 
(halt  thou  put  euillaibap  fromamong 
pou,anb  all  gifrael  (hall  hcarc,  ?  fcare. 

ii  C3(n&ifamanhauecommittcb 
a  fmnc  ttwthp  ofbeath,  anb  hebe  to  be 
put  to  bcafh,  anb  thou  hang  fjim  on 
attcc: 

1?  $ts  bobp  (ball  not  reinaine  all 
night  bpon  the  tree,  but  thou  (halt  in  a- 
np  tbtfc  burp  him  that  bap :  fo?  *  he  that 
is  hangeb,ts  t  accurfeb  of  <3ob :  that  thp 
lanb  be  not  bcfilcb,  Which  the  %  ©  is  © 
thp  ©obgtucth  thee  fo?  an  inheritance. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  Ofhumanitictowardbrethren.  5  Thefexe 
is  to  bee  diftinguifhed  by  apparcll.  6  The 
dam  is  not  to  be  taken  with  her  yong  ones.  8 
Thchoufemufihauebattlemems.  9  Con- 
fufionis  tobeauoyded.  12.  Fiingesvponthe 
vefture.  1}  The  punifhment  of  him  that 
flandcreth  his  wife.  10. 11  Ofadulteiiej  15 
ofrape,   18  and  offornicatioa  30  Inceft. 

li>ou*n)aitnotfcethpb?o; 
tilers  ore,  o?hts  (hcepc  go 
aftcap ,  anb  hibc  thp  felfe 
from  them:  thou  (halt  in 
anp  tafc  bnng  them  a-- 
game  bnto  thpb20ther. 


z  2lnb  if  thp  b?othcr  be  not  nigh  ton- 1 
to  thee,  02  tf  thou  ftnoxb  him  not ,  then 
thou  (halt  b?mg  it  bnto  thine  oitonc! 
houfc,anbit(haubeUnththcc,bnttlthp 
bjotljer  feene  after  it,  anb  thou  Chaltrc- 
(to^cittohtinagatnc. 

j  31nliKcnianctfl)aitthouborbith 
his  arte ,  anb  fo  (halt  thou  boc  ttnth  his 
raiment:  anb  Ibith  all  loftthmg  of  rt)p 
brothers  ibhtth  he  hath  loft,  anb  thou 
haftfounb.fhait  thou  bo  UUeVbife :  rtjou 
mapeft  not  htbtthp  felfe. 

4  CXhou  (halt  not  fee  fhpb2others 
aftc  02  his  ore  fall  bottmc  bp  the  ibap, 
anb  Ijtbe  thp  felfe  from  them  :  thou 
(halt  furelp  helpc  htm  to  lift  them  bp 
agame. 

5  C  Xhc  Vboman  (hall  not  \beare 
that  ttihuh  pcrtameth  bnto  a  man,  nci 
thcr  ftjail  a  man  put  on  a  lbomans  gar- 
mcut :  fo2  all  that  boe  fo,ar  e  abommari' 
on  bnto  the  %  ©  is  tz>  thp  <5ob. 

6  C3lfabitbs  neft  thanteto  be  be- 
fore thee  m  the  ibap  m  anp  t  rce,oi  on  the 
grounb,  tbhether  thep  be  pong  ones,02 
egges ,  anb  the  bamme  fitting  bpon  the 
pong,  02  upon  the  egges,  thou  ftjalt  not 
tanc  tlic  bammcibith  the  pong. 

7  25ut  thou  (halt  in  anp  lbife  let  the 
bamme  goe ,  anb  tahe  the  pong  to  thee, 
that  it  map  bcttmiVbiththee,  anb  that 
tljou  mapeft  p2olong  thvbapes. 

8  <Et8hentheubutlbcftanetbhoufe, 
thenthou  (halt  matte  a  battlement  fo? 
thp  roofcthat  thou  b?mgnotbloobbp^ 
on  thine  houfc,<f  anp  man  fall  from 
thence. 

9  C  Xhou  (halt  not  foYb  thpbine* 
parb  nnth  bmersfccbs:  left  the  t  fruit  of 
thp  feeb  lbhith  thou  haft  fotben ,  anb 
the  fruit  of  thp  tUlmeparb  be  befileb. 

10  CXhouflialtnotpiorbibithan 
ore  anb  an  aiTe  together. 

11  C*Xhou(haitnottbcarcagar^ 
mentofbuicrsfoiits.asofiboolleH.anb 
linncntogctljcr. 

11  CXhou  fljaltmaBethec  *fringes 
bpon  the  foure  t  quarters  of  thp  toe* 
fturc,\toherettuth  tljou  couereft  thv  felfe. 

ij  Cllf  anp  man  tahc  a  Unfe,  anb  go 
in  tonto  her,  anb  hate  her, 

14  3(nbgiue  oceafions  of  (peach  »■ 
s;ainrther,anb  b?tng  bp  an  eutll  name  top^ 
on  her,  anb  fap ,  5  tooae  this  itooman, 
anb tt)hcn3J tame  to  her^founbbtr 
notamapb: 

15  1Chcn(hal  the  father  of  the  bamo 
fell,  anb  her  mother  tafte,  anb  tying 
fo2ti)  thctohrns  of  thcbamofelstoirgi 
time, 


Hthr.fml- 
rjfrcftht 
ficd. 


•Lcuit.iy. 

19- 


•Num. 15. 

,8 

\H<hr. 


Thepuniihmcnt      Chap.xxnj.       ofwhoredome. 


'Lcuit. 


J  Or,  r*k? 
Jfrong  ho.'d 
ef  her. 


nmc&ntothe  Clbersof  the  rttiemthc 
gate. 

i6  ^intt  tfie  isaiiiofels  fatftcr  ajauCa^ 
btuothceibers,  31gaue  mp  Daughter 
buto  t\)\z  man  to  wife,?  he  hatcth  Ike  : 

17  3lnb  loe,  he  hath  giuen  occaftotiB 

Of  fpted)  againfl  her,  taping,  3  fOUllb  HOt 

ttjp  oaughtcr  amatb :  anb  pet  thefearc 
the  tokens  of  mp  baughtcrs  bit gmitp ; 
anb  thep  Ctiallfp?car)  the  cloth  before  tlje 
fibers  of  the  citte. 

is  3tnn  the  cibets  of  ttiat  rittc  (hall 
taUe  that  man,  anb  thaftue  htm. 

19  3nbthep(hallameanchiminan 
iitmBJcDftiekcisof  ftlucr,  ano  giuethem 
unto  the  father  of  the  bamofell,  beeaufe 
hchatlj  bought  up  an  cuillnamenpon 
atoirgtncofjjfraeuanbfhcfhailbehis 
Wife,  hecmapnot  put  herawapailhts 
bapes. 

io  But  if  this  thing  be  true,  and  the 
tofcens  of  btrgmitie  be  not  fount)  fo?  the 
oamofcl : 

zi  icijcn  tf)ep  (hall  bn'ng  out  the 
bamofell  to  the  boo?c  of  her  fathers 
honfc,anb  the  men  of  her  cttp  fljal  (tone 
her  With  Hones  that  fl)e  Die,  bctaufe  (he 
hath  w?ought  foil?  in  3Jfrael,  toplap 
the  \bl)ozcin  her  fathers  houfc :  fb  fljait 
thou  put  null  awap  from  among  pou. 

n  C'lJfamanbcfounblplngWith 
awomanmaracbtoanhufbanT),thcn 
thep  (hall  both  of  themtju,^*  the  man 
that  lap  Hurt)  the  Woman,  anb  the  Wo- 
man :  (b  (halt  th  ou  ptu  atbap  cuill  from 
gjfracl. 

ij  C  31f  a  bamofell  that  is  a  birgm  be 
bctrotheb  bnto  an  huf  banb.anbainan 
finbher  m  the  tmc'anb  he  Wither : 

24  Xhcnpccfhallbjmg  them  both 
out  tonto  the  gate  of  that  cine,  ant)  pee 
(ball  (tone  theni  Wit!)  ttones  thatthep 
me,  thebamofcl,  bctaufe  Cbeemcbnot, 
being  ut  the  ejttt^j  anb  thcman,betaufc  he 
hathhumbieb  his  neighbours  Wife:  fo 
thou  (halt  put  awapcutll  from  among 

pou. 

15  C  But  if  a  man  fmb  a  bctrotheb 

bamofel  m  thefielb,  ant)  the  man  ||  fo?cc 
her,  anb  lie  With  D« :  then  the  man  on 
Ip  t^at  lap  With  her ,  (hall  bte. 

16  But  bnto  thebamofcl  thou  (halt 
bocttothing,  ti)crc  is  in  thebamofcl  no 
fmne  Wo?thp  of  Death :  fo?  as  When  a 
mannfeth  againfihis  neighbour,  aub 
Oapcth  him,  cuen  fo  is  this  matter. 

17  ^oihefounbhcr mtljenelt) ,  and 
the  bctrotheD  bamofel  crteb,  anD  there 
was  none  to  faue  her. 


■Exod.aa. 
16. 


Leui:.j3 


•Nchero. 
13.1. 


is  C*3tfanianunbeabamofelthat 
is  a  btrgin,  wtnthtsnot  betrotheb,anb 
lap  holb  on  heir ,  anb  he  With  her,  aub 
thepbefounb": 

19  XhenthcmanthatlapWtthher, 
(hall  gttte  bnto  the  bamofcis  father  fiftp 
fhekeis  of  filuer,  anblbefhaibchtswife, 
bctaufe  he  hath  humblcb  her :  he  map 
not  pm  her  awap  an  his  bapes. 

jo  c*3man  (hail  not  tafcehtsfa; 
thers  Wife ,  no?  Difcouer  his  fathers 
ffetrr. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

1  Who  may  or  may  not  enter  into  the  Congre- 
gation. 9  VncleannefTeto  bee  auoided  m 
the  hofte.  15  Of  the  fugitiue  feruant  17 
Of  filthineiTe.  18  Of  abominable  facrifices 
19   Of  vfury.  li  Ofvowes.  i40ftrefpa(Tes. 

€c  that  is  Wounbeb  ih  the 
(tones,  o?  hath  his  p?tu(e 
member  rut  off,  (ball  not 
enter  into  the  Congr  egati- 
onofthe|Li©K5>. 
1  31  baftarb  (ball  not  enter  into  tlje 
Congregation  of  the  31©  is*©:  eucnto 
his  tenth  generation  (hall  he  not  enter 
otto  the  Congregation  of  the  %  ©  «  ©. 
j  *^n^mmonite;02!Q9oabitefl)ail 
not  enter  into  the  Congregation  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©^uen  to  their  tenth  generation 
(hall  thepnot  enter  mto  the  Congreg& 
tionofthc3L©«E>fo?euer, 

4  23ecaule  thep  met  pou  not  With 
bjeab  anb  Uutlj  water  in  ft) c  wap  when 
pecamcfo?thoutof€gppt;anb*becaufc 
thep ljtreb agauift  thee  Balaam  thefon 
of23eojof0etho?ofQ9efopotanua,to 
mrfethee. 

5  iftcucrthelcfle,  the  %  ©  «  5>  thp 
Cob  woulb  not  heathen  btuo  Bala- 
am :  but  the  %  c»b  ©  thp  ©ob  turncb 
tl)c  curfc  into  a  bleffmg  bnto  thee,  be* 
cattfc  the  %  ©  K  id  thp  ©ob  loutb  thee. 

6  Xhou  (halt  not  feen  their  peate,no? 
their  t  piofpcrttp  all  thp  bapes  foz  eucr.  t  K'is.«"i- 

7  CXnoufhalt  not  abhoire  an  <£* 
bomitcfoz  he  is  thp  b.20tl)er :  thou  (halt 
not  abhojr  c  an  €gpptian,  bctaufe  thou 
waO  a  ftcangcr  in  his  lanb. 

8  lE:hcchilb2cntl)at  are  begotten  of 
d)cm,  (hal  enter  into  the  togcegation  of 
tl)e  !L  ©  13  m,  in  their  tl)irb  generation. 

9  CnDhenthehoBcgoetlifoojtha- 
gainft  thine  enemies,  then  neepc  tljee 
from  eucr)>WtcRebtl)ing. 

10  C  31f  there  bee  among  pou  anp 
manthatisnottleancbpreafonofbtt' 
cleanneffc  that  thantethhim  bpnsght, 

•2:  then 


•Num.ii. 


iOf 


vov/es. 


Deuteronomie. 


Ofd 


iuorce. 


\HebrtHr- 
r.ethttvPAra, 


t  Hcbr.fi- 

ttsldorvr;. 


f  Hc&r.wh 
kedttifjc  of 
anj  thing. 


\HeBrM 
gtodfcr 
him. 

[|  Ort  Sodo- 
mite §e. 


"Exod.:2. 
f  y  Icuic. 
>S.3<5.pfil. 
'5.J- 


"Ecdes  $. 


tlicti  ftjaii  lice  goc  abmab  out  of  tfjc 
tampe ,  Ijce  fljail  not  tome  mitljtn  tlje 
tampe. 

11  i5ittttfl)aibeU)I)cncucntttgtcottv 
mctl)on,Ucfl)aurbafl)him(eit"e«jitl)n)a'' 
tct :  ant)  lbljcn  tl)C;§>uunctsi)omtie,l)c 
ujail  tome  into  ujc  campeagatnc, 

11  C  Xliou  malt  liauc  a  plate  alfo 
mitl)outtl)ccampc,wljitljcrtfjoufljalt 
goefoo2tl)ab2oab. 

13  3itm  tljou fbalt  I)aucapabblebp< 
on  tljy  weapon :  anb  tt  ftjaii  be  Umcn 
njou  fault  cafe  tl)v  felfc  atyoao ,  tljou 
fljait  Dtgise  tljcr  cibitl) ,  ano  fljalt  turttc 
batfcc  aim  toner  tljat  aujitlj  commctfj 
from  thee. 

14  jfo2  tl)c  %  0 13  ©  tny  Gob  Wai 
Ucrt)  in  flic  mtbfr  oftljv  tampe ,  to  ben 
uerujee,  aim  to  gittc  Dp  tlnttc  enemies 
befozc  tljee :  njerefcue  mall  tl)v  tampe 
benoly  ,njatlje  fee  fuobticleattcnjtng 
m  ujecaub  tunic  amay  from  tljee. 

15  C  Xliott  fljalt  not  bcluicr  fcnto 
ins  mafter,tl)c  fcriiannbljtrij  iscftapcb 
froiunis  matter  lmtofljce. 

16  m  fljall  smell Hurt)  njee ,  eucn fc 
mong  you ,  m  that  plate  mljitlj  Ik  ujall 
tnoofc,  in  one  of  tljy  gates  mijercit  tit 
ftctl)  rjtm  belt :  tljou  fljalt  not  oppjeffe 
Ijini. 

17  C1~ljerefl)aibeno!|a)I)02Cofrije 
Daughters  of  3Ifracl,  no:  a&obontttc 
ofthcfonncsofjfracl. 

18  Xfiou  fliait  not  bang  djc  hire  of 
a  mnoze ,  0:  tlie  pate  ofaboggc  into  the 
Ijottfc  of  tlje  %  ©  is  ©  ujy  €>ob  fo:  anv 
bom :  fo2  euen  botlj  njcfearcabomuia 
tion  unto  tlie  %  0  is  ©  tby  Gob. 

19  CXDou  malt  not  letibbponb; 
fury  to  tny  bjotljer ,  bfury  of  money, 
bfury  of  bittttais ,  bfury  of  any  tljing 
that  ts  lent  bpon  bfury. 

io  tlntoaftratigcrthotttnaicltlctm 
bpoti  bfury,  but  bnto  thy  b20f  her  thou 
fljalt  not  lenb  bpon  bfury  :  that  the 
ft  ©  in  ©  thy  c>ob  may  blcfTc  thcc,m  all 
that  ttiou  fctteft  thine  hanb  to  ,  m  tlje 
latmmhithct  tliougoeft  to  poflcfleit. 

21  ITametttljou  fbaltbomaboa) 
btitotnc  ILob  ©  thy  <5ob,  thou  (halt 
not  flatlie  to  pay  it:  foz  the  %  o  is  ©  tliy 
Gob  null  finely  reciuire  it  of  tljee;  anb 
itaioiilDbcfuiiictnthee. 

ii2outtftlioufl)aitfo2btarctol)om, 
it  fliau  be  no  fmnc  in  tlict. 

23  £hat  mind)  is  gone  out  of  thy 

lippcs.thott  fliait  heepeatibptrfo2mej 

uen  a  frrcUnll  offering  attorning  as 

tljou  Ijaftbomeb  unto  tlje  %  ©  is  ©  tljy 


j  ®ob  ,  mh'.ch  tljou  haft  p2omifcb  ttntl) 

thymottttj. 

I    24  C  ©hen  thou  eommeft  into  thy 

neighbors  ittneyaro,  then  thou  mayeft 

I  tate  grapes  tljy  flit ,  at  tljmt  oamc  plea- 

;fttre,but  tljou  fljatt  not  put  anytti  tljy 

beflell. 

25  rohcu  thou  tommeft  into  the  ftatu 
,  Ding  to?ne  of  thy  neighbours,  *  tljcn 

1  tljoumateft  plucKc  tlje  cares  luitljtljuic 
|IjanD :  btittliounjaitnotmooucaficUle 
unto  tljy  neighbours  ftanbmg  to?nc. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

1  Ot  diuorcc.  5  Anewni.uicJnianooethnot 
towarrc.  6.  10  Of  pledges.  7  Of  man- 
ftealers.  8  Olleprofie.  14  The  lure  is  to  be 
giuen.   \6  Otlufhce.   ip  Of Cliaiitie. 

fi^^4®<^  DcnMman  Ijarij  taunt  a 
rnife  anb  marriebljcr,anb 
tt  tome  to  paffc  tljat  ftjee 
^finbtiofauourmljiseycs, 
xsX^^tQ  bctaufc  l)cc  Ijatlj  foium 
fomc  t  ynclcatmcirc  in  Ijcr :  tljcn  let  Ijtm 
unite  Ijcr  a  bill  of  t  biuojtcmcnt,  aim 
gute  it  m  Ijcr  Ijatm ,  anb  fctm  Ijcr  out  of 
Ijtsljoufc. 

2  Sltmnnjcn  flj  ee  is  beparteb  out  of 
ijtsfjoufe,  fl)C  may  goc  anb  be  anotljcr 
mans  wife. 

3  Sum  if  tlic  latter  ntif banb  ijatc 
l)cr,atmm2itcljcrabillofbttto2temcnt, 
anbgittetl)  it  mljcrlianb  ,  aim  fenbctlj 
Dcr  out  of  l)ts  l)oufc:  £>2  if  tlje  latter 
ljttfbatm  btc,\l)lj:cl)  too&eJjcr  to  bchis 
ujtfc, 

+  ^er  fonucr  fjufbanb  iblittf)  fent 
Iiccaibay ,  may  not  taltc  lieragamcto 
bcljis  ibtfc,  after  tljat  fl)c  tsbcftleb  :foz 
tljat  is  abomination  beftcc  tl)c  ?Udis  ©, 
aim  tlioti  fljait  not  taufe  tlje  lattb  to 
funic  ,Vbl)ttl)  tlje  %  ©is©  tljy  Gobgt- 
uctl)  toccfoiati  utlKritancc. 

5  €  *  toDcn  a  man  Ijatlj  taUcn  a 
ucii)  ibtfc,  lie  fljai  not  goc  out  to  lbarrc, 
ncttljcr  tfliall  Ijcc  be  tliargcb  mitt)  any 
biiftttcflc:but  lice  fljali  be  free  atliomc 
one  y  cere,  aim  fljail  cljcerc  up  Ijis  UJifc 
\ui)icl)l)cl)atl)taiien. 

6  C  iI5o  man  ftjall  tahc  tlje  ttctljcr 
02tl)cbppcrniilflotietoplcbgc:fo.2ljcc 

taltCtfj  a  mans  lift  tO  plCbge. 

7  C31fatnatibccfottiiDltcalitiga 
ny  of  l)ls  b2etl)2cii  of  tlie  cliilbicu  of  JIf 
racl,  aim  maltttl)  inertl)atmi5c  of  nun, 

02  fcllctl)  Ijim :  tlien  tljat  tluefe  fljail  btc, 
anb  tlioti  fljait  put  emll  aUjayfroma- 
mong  you. 

3  CXaUe 


'Matt.  1 2 
l.mar.3. 

ij.lukc6. 


"Mate.  5. 
p. and  19' 
7.ni3r,io.4- 


I  llcbr.mxt- 
\  Heir.  Cht- 


*Cliap.  20. 
7- 

\  Heir,  net 
any  tliinj 

/pon  him. 


Oflending. 


Chap.xxv.  Railing  feed. 


'Lcuil-IJ. 


•Num.  12 
10. 


t  HetJttid 
the  iuAttf  of 
tuij  thing  to 


•leuit  19. 

1  ;  rub  4. 

f  Hib.hte 
tiftrlb  hit 
faulcvrtlott. 


*  j.Kinjs 
14.6.2. clir. 
Jf^-icr. 
3l.i9.)0. 
culciS  20 


•Lcuit.ip. 
9. Si  23 u. 


t  Hcl.ihc, 

fh*llnol 
boHghtl  af- 
ter thte. 




S  CICafecheeDe,  in*  the  plague  of  1 
Icpzofic,  ttjat  thou  obfetue  Diltgentip, 
anD  do e  aeco;Ding  to  all  that  the  #ncOs 
the  ILeuites  fljail  teach  pou :  as  3  torn- 
mattDcD  thentfo  pe  (hall  obtietuc  to  Dot. 

9  Remember  ibhat  the  H©k© 
thp  ©ob  bib  *bnto  Miriam  bp  thcibap, 
after  that  pec  lbcrc  tome  fo;tt)  out  of 
Cgppt. 

10  cnahenthouboefttienDthptoO' 
thcr  any  tfjmg,  thou  (halt  not  got  into 
I)i0  Dome  to  fetch  Ins  plebge. 

n  1Ehou  (halt  ff  anD  atooab,  anb  tt)c 
man  to  lbbome  thou  bocft  lenb,  (hall 
toing  out  the  plebge  abjoab  bUto  thee. 

ii3mDifthemanbepoo:e,thoufhait 
not  dccpeibith  his  plebge : 

13  3Jnanptafethou(haltbeuucrhim 
the  plebge  agautc  tbhen  the  £>un  goctl) 
borbnc,  that  lie  map  flccpe  in  Ins  ottme 
raiment,  anb  blclTc  thee :  anb  it  fl)au  be 
rigl)tcoufneffc  bnto  thee  before  the 
2L<£>is©thp<i5oD. 

14  C^houfbaltnotoppjeireanhi 
reb  feruant  that  is  poojeanD  nceop,  whe- 
ther he  be  of  thp  tocth?cn,  02  of  thp  (tram 
gers  that  are  m  thp  lanbc  tbtthm  tl>v 
gates. 

15  ^tnifit3av»*tl)cuft)altgiuch.mi)is 
hire,  ueitl)cr  (hall  the  S>imgocDotbne 
bpon  it,  fi>2  he  is  pooze,  anD  tfetteth  his 
heart  bpon  it,  left  Dee  me  agamft  thee 
bnto  the  %  ©  is  jd,  anb  tt  bee  finnc  bnto 
tljee. 

16  *%\>t  fathcrsfhallnotbeeputto 
beath  fozthc  chtttoen,  neither  (hall  the 
thilDiten  be  put  to  Death  fiw  the  fathers ; 
tuerp  ntan  (hall  be  put  to  Death  fo:  his 
olune  finite. 

17  €  Xhou  fljait  not  peruert  the 
lubgement  of  the  llranger ,  nor  of  the 
fathcties,no?  tafcc  a  tbiDoVbcs  raiment 
topieDge. 

18  JSut  thou  (halt  remember  that 
thoutbaft  a  bonbmanin  «£gvpt,anb  the 
1L£>is©  thp  <5ob  rebeemcb  tljee  thente: 
therefore  3J  tommanbthec  to  Doc  this 
thmg. 

19  C  *  aahen  thou  tutteft  Doibne 
thineharueft  mtbp  uelD ,  anD  haufo^ 
gota(heafeinthcaclD,tboufhaltnotgo 
agatne  to  fetch  it :  it  fbaibc  fo:  the  ftraru 
ger.  fouhc  fathetleffc,  anD  foi  then* 
boti) :  that  the  %  ©  is  ©  thp  <sob  map 
bleffe  thee  in  all  the  ttwfec  of  thine 

hanbs. 
zo  lohenthoubeatcathineoliuetrcc 

thou  (halt  not  t  got  outr  the  boughes  & 

game :  it  (hall  be  fo?  the  (tranger,foz  the 


fatherleffc,  anb  fo:  the  ibtDolb. 

zi  naben  thou  gathered-  the  grapes 
of  t!)P  biiicyatD,thou  (halt  not  girane 
it  taftcrlbarb,  tt  lliaibe  foz  the  Qrangct, 
foz  the  father  lelTe,  atiDfoztbetbtDoib. 

2i  3{nb  thou  (halt  remember  that 
thon  lbaft  a  bonbman  m  the  lanD  of  c- 
gppt :  therfoje  3  tommanb  tljee  to  Doe 
tl;is  thing. 

CHAP.   XXV. 

1  Stripes  muft  not  exceed  fortie.  4  TheOxe 
isnoltobemufled.  ^  Of  raifingfeedvncoa 
brother.  11  Of  the  immodeft  woman.  13 
Of  vniuft  weights.  17  Thcmemoneof  A- 
malek  is  to  be  blotted  out. 

5F  there  bee  a  tonttouerue 
bctlbccnc  men ,  anD  ttje-p 
come  bnto  uiDgment,that 
the  hid^esmapiubgt  tijem, 
theiuhcptballiulhncthe 
righteous, aiiDconDemncthclbicBcD. 

i  3nDit(baUbe,tftheibicHeDman 
be  \bo  jthp  to  be  beaten,  that  the  3f uDgc 
(hall  taufc  him  to  lie  Doibne ,  anb  to  bee 
beaten  befo;c  his  face,  accojDutg  to  his 
fault,  bp  a  tertaincnumber. 

3  *  jrourtie  (tripes  he  map  giue  him, 
anb  not  trcecD :  left  if  hethoulDcrcceDc, 
anD  beate  mm  aboue  theft,  ibith  manp 
ftnpcs,  then  thr  brother  uioulb  fcemc 
bile  bnto  thee. 

4  C  *  £hou  (halt  hot  muffell  the 
oreibhenhctreabcthout  the  come. 

5  C  *^f  bzetturn  DTbrll  together, 
anb  one  of  them  Die,  anD  haue  no  chtio, 
thetbife  of  the  Deao  (hall  not  marrie 
lbithout,  bnto  a  (Iranger:  her  II  hut 
banbs  bzothcr  (hall  go  in  bnto  her,  anb 
tahcher  to  him  to  ibife,  anb  perfojme 
the  Ductteof  an  huf  banbs  brother  bn 
to  her. 

6  ^Inb  it  (hail  be, that  the  firtt  borne 
tbrjidj  (hebearcth,(hall  futceeDe  m  the 
name  of  his  toother  Which  ts  Deao  ,that 
hisnamcbcnotputoutof^ftaei. 

7  ^nb  if  the  man  hfee  not  to  tafte 
hts]|b2othersibife,thenlethisb2others 
(bite  go  bp  to  the  gate,  bnto  the  <£ibers, 
anb  fay ,  *  s$p  huf  banDS  toother  rem- 
fcth  to  raife  bp  bnto  his  toother  a  name 
m^lfrael:  he  lbillnotpcrfo;mct!;cDu 
tic  of  mv  huf  banDs  toother. 

8  XhentlicClDersofhisntieuTali 
call  him  anD  fpcahe  bnto  him :  anD  if  he 
OanD  to  .t,aiiD  tap  3  Urc  not  to  take  her : 

9  Xhen Qjai  his  toothers  ttnfe  come 
bnto  himinthep^efenccof  the  eioers, 
anD  loofe  his  (hooe  from  off  his  foote, 

%  2  ann 


\Htl., 

tb„ 


•  i.Cot.li. 


"l.Cnr  9  9 
i.tim.j.iS 

iH'ir. 
tbrtfitth. 

•Matt  11. 

24. mar.  12 

ija  [uk,20. 

18. 

U  Or^rttxt 
ktnfemxfi. 


\\Or,next 
kiiifemATts 
m/c. 
■Rutli  ;.9 


Iuft  weights  &c.    Dcuteronomic.  Fiiit  fruits. 


fiorear.dA 
Jims. 

|l  Hch  m 
Efh*h,and 
an  Epbah. 


,Exod.:7 
8. 


anu  fpit  m  bts  face ,  anb  (nail  anuuer  c, 
anb  fay,  S>o  (ball  it  bec  bonebntotbat 
man  tljat  lbtll  not  builB  Dp  bts  tyo- 
rtjershoufe. 

io  3tno  bis  name  fijali  bec  callcb  in 
Ufrael,  the  Ijoufc  of  bttntbatljatbbis 
(l)ooc  loofeb. 

1 1  C  oaben  menftriue  together  one 
ibttb  another,  ana  tbc  lbtfcof  tljcone 
maibctb  nccrc,  fo;  to  belmccbcrbut 
banb  out  of  tlje  banb  of  Dim  tljat  tntfc 
tctb  ljun,anb  puttctlj  foonlj  bec  banb 
anb  talictb  Ijtm  by  the  fecrcts: 

ii  %bcn  tbou  (bait  cut  offber  banb, 
tbinc  eye  (bail  notpitieh«. 

ij  «[  Xbou  (bait  not  banc  in  thy 
baggc  t  biucrs  \bctgljts ,  a  great ,  anb  a 
fmail. 

14  %\)qw  (bait  not  banc  in  thine 
boufctbiucrs  mcafures,  a  gccat,anb  a 
fmail. 

15  But  thou  (bait  Ijauc  a  perfect  anb 
tuft  ibctgljt,apcrfect  anb  itiftmcafurc 
(bait  tbou  bauc :  tbat  thy  bayes  map 
bec  Iciigtbcncb  in  tnc  lanb  ibhicb  tlje 
HoiK©  thy  ©ob  giucrt)  tljce. 

16  fo}  all  that  boc  fuel)  things,  and 
all  tbat  boc  bnrigbtcoufly,  areanabo^ 
mmation  bnto  the %  £>  is  3D  thy  ©ob. 

17  |[  *  33ctncmber  JDljat  3tmaleU 
bib  bnto  tbec  by  tbc  )bay  ,ibben  yc  tber  c 
tome  foojtb  out  of  egypt : 

18  i)oib  be  met  tbec  by  rtjettjay,  anb 
fmotc  tbc  bmbmott  of  tbec,  eucn  all  tljat 
Were  feeble  bcljmbc  tljce,  tbftcn  tbou 
waft  faint  anb  weary ;  anb  Ijc  fcarcb  not 
©ob. 

.19  Xljcrefcrte  it  (ball  bee  nmen  tbc 
%  o  «  3D  thy  ©ob  batb  gmctt  tbec  reft 
from  all  tbinc  enemies  r  ounb  about,  in 
tbc  lanb  lbbtclj  tljc1L©is3D  tljy  ©ob 
ctiuctb  tbec  fo:  an  inheritance  to  pof- 
fcffcit;  tbat  tbou  (halt  blot  out  the  re? 
memhzance  of  3unaleli  from  bnber 
Ijeaucn.-tbounjaitnotfo^getit. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  The  confefsion  of  him  cli.it  offered)  the  baf- 
kctofFnltliuits.  12.  The  prayerof  him  that 
giueth  his  third  vecre  Tithes.  16  Thecoue- 
naivt  berweene  God  and  the  people. 

$3$^$$  ^Dlt  n>allbc  lbben  tbou 
9afMxSK  m  tomc  m  ^nt0  ti]e  ,a,1b 

£«S|NS nibicb  the  ilohd  gi 

W^ffis uct,)  tncc  fo:  au  u,ncri 

$ZsJ&-~d£i  tantt,anbpou"cfrtftit,anb 
oibcllcft  therein: 
z  %\)nt  tljou  (bait  taitc  of  tbc  tuft 


ofaiirtjefnut  of  the  earth  ,ttibtcb  tljou 
(bait  bang  of  tby  lanb  tbat  tbc  %  &  is  3D 
tby  00b  gutctb  tbec,anb  (bait  put  it  in  a 
bal"Kct,aub  (halt  goc  bnto  tbc  place 
ibljiclj  the  %  0  is  3D  thy  ©ob  (bai  cboofc 
to  place  I)i0/I3amc  tljccc : 

j  3lnb  tljou  (lialtgoc  bnto  tbc  0ncft 
tljat  (bail  be  m  tbofc  baves,  anb  fap  bn^ 
to  Ijim  ,  3  PJofcflc  tl)is  bay  bnto  trje 
%  o  ib  id  tbp  ©ob,tl)at  3  am  come  biv 
to  tbc  tountrcy  ibljiclj  tfje  %  ©  k  jd 
fraare  bnto  our  fatbers  fo?  to  gitte  bs. 

4  ^nb  tijepneft  fbau  taftctbebat 
bet  outof  tbinc  Ijanb,  anb  fctit  bolbnc 
befoje  tfjc  3iltar  of  tlje  %  e>  m  jd  thy 
©ob. 

5  3mb  tbou  fljait  fpcaftc  anb  fay  be 
fo?c  the  %  &  is  ©  tljy  ©ob ,  3C  &ttism 
rcaby  to  peritTj  was  mp  fatlier,  anb  bec 
ibent  bolbnc  into  #gypt,anb  foiourncb 
there  ibith  a  frtb ,  anb  became  there  a 
narlon,great,mtgbfy,anbpopulous. 

6  3bibthc€gyptianscuilmtrcatcb 
bs,  anb  afflicteb  bs,  anb  layb  bpon  bs 
harobonbagc. 

7  3!nb  Vbhcn  tbee  crycb  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  3D  ©ob  of  our  fathers  ,  the 
3L$>DiB3D  hcarb  ourboyce,  anblooKcb 
on  our  affliction,  anb  our  labour,  aub 
ouroppjcflion. 

8  3hib  the  %  ©  m  id  b?onght  bs 
foonh  out  of  Cgypt  Ibith  a  nughtie 
hanb,anbibithanout-ftretchcbarme, 
anb  Vbitl)  great  ter  nblcnclTe ,  anb  Vbitlj 
figncs,  anb  ibith  ttJonbcrs. 

9  3lnb  he  hath  brought  bs  into  this 
place,  anb  hath  giucu  bsthts  (ann,euen 
a  lanb  that  flolbetb  lbitlj  mtlKc  anb 
bonie. 

10  ^nbnolbbchoIb,3lhaucb:ought 
theifirftfruusofthelanb.Vbhichthou, 
Q  ft  sr>  is  3D,  haft  ginen  nice:  anb  tbou 
(halt  fct  it  before  the?L  -©  its  3D  thy  ©ob, 
anb  ttwfbtp  before  tlje  %  ©  k  3d  thy 
©ob. 

1 1  3lnb  tljou  fljait  retoyce  in  cucry 
goob  tljuig,  ibbtcb  the  1l)©iH3D  thy 
©ob  hart)  guicn  bnto  tljec ,  anb  bnto 
thine  houfc ,  tljou ,  anb  tljc|Lcuitc,anb 
the  ftranger  that  is  among  you. 

iz  C  iSljcn  thou Ijaft maoe an enb of 
tithing  all  the  tubes  of  tljmc  (ncreafe, 
the  thtrb  ycerr,  which  is  *tl)c veerc  of  ti'- 
thing  ,  ano  haft  gtnen  it  bnto  tbc  %t 
uitc ,  the  ftranger,  the  fatherlcflc  ,anb 
the  lbiboib ,  thatthcymay  catclbuljin 
tljygatcs,anb  befillcb : 

ij  SLhcn  thou  fljait  fay  bcfo:c  the 
IL  ©  is  3D  tljy  ©ob  ,  3  banc  brought 
albay 


1  Chap.f^. 


»8. 


Exl 


riortations 


Ch 


ap.xxvij, 


too 


bedi 


icncc. 


•Efa.tf3.15 


*Cnip.7.S 


•IoIh.4-1 


aibay  the  halloibcb  tbtngs  out  of  mm 
houfc,  anb  alfo  hauc  giucnthcm  bnto 
tljc  ILetute,  ano  bnto  the  ftranger,  to 
tftcfatI)cclefre,anD  to  the  lbtboib,  actoj 
bingto  alltby  commanbements,ibhich 
thou  haft  commanbcbmc:  3lbauenot 
tranfgrcftcb  th?  comiuatibcmcnts,  nei* 

tftCt  1>1UC  3  fOigOttClt  them. 

14  3  rraue  not  eaten  thereof  in  my 
mourning,  neither  hauc  3  taken  aibay 
ought  thereof  fouihy  bnclcane  vfe,  no? 
giuen  ought  thereof  foj  the  beab :  but 
3  hauc  hcarUencb  to  the  boyce  of  the 
fL©is©  my  <j5od,  and  hattc  Bone  at* 
cojbmgto  all  thatthouhaft  commautv- 
oeo  me. 

15  *&ooBebolbncfromfhyholyha< 
bttation,from  hcaucti,anb  bleffc  thy 
people  3Jfrael,  anu  the  lanb  ibhteh  thou 
haftgiucnbs.asthouftuarcftbntoout 
fathers,  a  lanD  that  flo\beth  ibith  uttitjc 
anbhony. 

\6  C1£hiSbaythc2L©iii£>thy<5ob 
hathcommanDcbthcctobocthcfcSta; 
tutes  anb  giubgcmcnts :  thou  (bait 
therefore  feeepe  anbboc  them  tbith  all 
thine  heart,  anbibith  all  thy  foulc. 

17  1Ehou  haft  aubucbeb  tljc  |L©is© 
this  bay  to  be  thy  <5ob,  anb  to  Ibaifec  in 
his  way  es,  anb  to  Uccpc  his  Statutes, 
anb  his  €onuuaunbements ,  anb  his 
3hibgemcnts,  anb  to  hcarHcnbnto  his 
boice. 

is  3lnb  *the  %  ©  k  id  hath  auoutheb 
thee  this  bay  to  be  his  peculiar  people, 
ashehathpjomifeb  thee,  anb  that  thou 
(houlbcft  beepc  all  his  Commaunbe* 
ments: 

19  3nb  to  mane  thee  high  abouc  an 
nations  ibhich  he  hath  mabe,  in  pjatfc 
anb  m  name,  arib  in  honour,  anb  that 
thou  may  eft  be  an  holy  people  bttto  the 
%  ©  is  ©  thy  C5ob,  as  he  hath  fponcn. 

CHAP.   XXVII. 

1  The  people  are  commanded  to  write  the 
Lawvpon  ftones,  5  and  to  build  an  Altar  of 
whole  {tones.  1 1  The  Tribes  diuided  on 
GerizzimandEbal.  14  The  curfes  pronoun- 
ced on  mount  Ebal. 

i!5b  4©ofes  tbith  the  ei* 
bers  of  3Jfrael  commauns 
beb  the  people, ,  faying, 
Bccpc  all  the  Comman* 
btments  ibhich  3  tow 
manb  you  this  bap. 

z  3tnbit(haUbeonthebay*lbhen 
you  flKHlpaffcouer  3Io?ban,  bnto  the 
lanb  Ibhich  the  &©ibje>  thy  ©ob  gitteth 


thee,  tl;at  thou  (bait  fet  thee  bp  great 
ftones,  anb  plaiftcr  them  ibtthpiaiftcr. 

3  3(nb  thou  Ojalt  ibnte  bpon  them 
allthctbozbsof  thtsllaib  ibhen  thou 
artpaffcoouer,thatthouniayeftgoein 
bnto  the  lanb  winch  tljc  %  ©  is  ©  thy 
<5oo  giueth  thee ,  a  lanb  that  floibetl) 
lbitbmiiftc  anb  hony,  as  then  ok  © 
Gob  of  thy  fathers  hath  pzomifeb  thee. 

4  IChcrcfojcltlhailberbhenycbee 
gone  oucr  3to2ban,  that  vtt  (hail  fet  bp 
thefc  (tones,  Ibhich  3  commanb  you 
tbisbay,inmouiu€bal,anbthou(hait 
piaifter  them  ibith  piaiftcr. 

5  3lnb  there  (bait  thou  butib  an  %v 
tar  bnto  the '•■%  ©  is  jd  thy  <5ob,an  altar 
of  (tones :  *tbou  (halt  not  lift  bp  any 
yjontoole  bpon  them. 

6  IChoutbaitbuilbfheSfltaroffbc 
%  ©  is  ©  thy  (5ob  of  Ibhole  (tones :  anb 
thou  (halt  offer  burnt  offerings  theron 
bnto  thell  ©isiDthy  <25ob. 

7  3(nb  thou  (halt  offer  peace  offe< 
nngs,  anb  (halt  cate  there,  anbrcioyce 
befoze  the  %  ©  is  id  thy  <5ob . 

s  %m  thou  (halt  ibnte  upon  the 
ftonesalltheibojosofthis  Slalbbery 
plainely. 

9  C 3mb  ^ofes ,  anb  the  incites 
rhclLeuitcs,  fpaHebnto  au^rraeUfey^ 
mg,  Xalte  hcco,anb  hearfeen  £>5frael, 
this  bay  thou  art  become  the  pcopleof 
the?L©is3Dfhy(!5ob. 

io  n:hou  fl^ait  thertfojc  obey  the 
boyce  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  thy  d5ob,  anb  boe 
his  Commanbcments,  anb  his  Sta- 
tutes ibhich  3  commanb  theethisbay. 

ii  C31nb$)ofcschargcbthcpeople 
thefamebay,faying, 

\i  Xhefc  (hall  ftanb  bpon  mount 
©er(55im  to  bleffe  the  people,  ibhen  ycc 
arccome  oucr  3Jo?bau:  Simeon,  anb 
ILcut,  anb^Jubah,  anb  3Jffachar,  anb 
3lofcph,  ano  aseniamin. 

u  ^nb  thefc  (hall  ftanb  bpon  mount 
€bait  to  curfc :  ©euben,  ©ab,  anb  %> 
(her,  anu  zebulun,  2Dan,f  /Baphtaii. 

14.  c^nb*the!Lcuitcs(haifpeabc, 
anbfay  bnto  aiithemm  ofJiftacHbul) 
aloubboyte: 

15  CutfrbbethcmanthatmaKctha* 
nygraucn  0?  molten  image,  an  abomi? 
nationbnto  tl)e1L©i5£>,  thctboiHeof 
thehanbesof  the  craftefman,  anb  put 
tcthitmafcccct  place:  anb  all  the  peo* 
pie  (hallanfrocrcanbfay,  ^men. 

i6  Curfcb  be  he  that  fcttctlj  light  by 
his  father  oj  his  mother :  anb  all  the 
people  (1)311  fay,  ^mcn. 

1E  1       17  €ur^ 


•Exocfjo. 

i;.iofli. 

8.31. 


\  Heir. fir 
a  citr(in?t 

•Dln.5i.II 


Blcflings  for        Deuteronomie.  the  obedient. 


*Ezcch.ji 
(2. 


•Gal-J.io. 


'Lcuit.  16. 


Or,dou^ht 
treugbet. 


17  CurfeD  be  htthatremoouethhts 
neighbours  lanb-marfee :  anD  all  the 
people  (ball  fap^men* 

18  CurfeD  be  hee  that  maiteth  tlje 
blmoe  to  VbanDer  out  of  the  tbap :  anD 
all  the  people  (hall  fap,:3mcn. 

19  CurfeD  be  hec  tljatpcmctttrti  tlic 
tuDgcmcnt  of  the  ffrangcr,fathcrlcffe, 
anD  nuDoib  :  anD  all  the  people  (hall 
fap,3(men» 

20  CurfeD  be  hec  thatlteth  ttitth  his 
fathers  ttnfe,beeaufe  hetmtouercth  his 
fathers  ffeirt:  anD  all  ttje  people  (ball 
fap,:#mrn. 

21  CurfeD  behec  tfjat  lieth  tblth  anp 
mancr  of  beaft :  anD  all  the  people  (bail 
(ap,3mcn. 

21  CurfeD  be  lice  that  lieth  tbirt)  bis 
u(ter,tbcDaugbterof  bis  father,  ojtbc 
Daughter  of  bis  mother :  anD  all  tt>c 
people  (ball  fap,3mcn. 

23  CurfeD  be  jjee  that  Kerb  lbith  his 
mother  in  latb :  anb  all  the  people  (hall 
lap,3lmen. 

24  CurfeD  be  hec  that  fmitcth  his 
neighbour  fecretlp :  anD  all  the  people 
(balifap,3(mcn. 

25  *Curfcbbebetbattaltetbretbarb 
to  flap  an  innotcnt  pcrfon :  anD  all  the 
people  (ball  fap,3mcn. 

26  *  CurfeD  be  bee  that  tonfirmetb 
not  all  the  iuojds  of  this  JLavo  to  Doe 
them:  anD  al  the  people  fbaifap 3nen. 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

1   The  bleffings  for  Obedience.    15   Tliecur- 
(es  for  difobediencc. 

.  ^Dttfbaii  come  to  parte, 
MM  *  if  thou  (halt  hearken  bt 
lK$g  ugcntlpinuotbc  bopec  of 
tbc&©isjDtbp<5oD,  to 
_  obferuc  and  to  Doe  all  his 
CommauDcmcnts  Uibicb  3  commanb 
thec  this  Dap  ;that  the  ?L©  is  ©  thp  <sob 
mill  fet  thec  on  high  aboueallnattons 
of  the  earth. 

2  3lnD  all  thefc  bleffings  (ball  come 
on  thee,  ano  oucrtahc  fbee,  if  thou  (bait 
hear  Ken  bnto  the  boicc  of  the  %  ©  is  jd 
tbp@oD. 

3  28lcffeD  fhait  tiiou  bee  m  the  cirie, 
anD  blcffeb  f>iak  thou  be  m  tl)c  ficlb. 

4-  2i6leffeD  fhaii  be  the  fruit  oftlip  bo 
by,  anb  the  fruit  of  thp  grounD ,  anb  the 
fruit  of  thp  tattell ,  the  uureaTc  of  thp 
hine,anbtheflocUsofthvfl)ccpc. 

5  23Ieffcbnuiiberl)vbafhetatibthr 
tflo;e. 


6     2SleU*CD  (halt  rt)OU  bee  Xbt)Ctl  tljOU 

tonmteft  in,  anD  blefleD  (halt  thou  bec 
lbbcn  thou  goril  out. 

7  Xhe  %  ©  s  jd  (hall  caufe  thmc 
cncmicsthatrtfetopagamllthcc,  tobtc 
fmittcn  befoje  tpp  fate :  the?  (hall  come 
out  againft  the*  one  Ibap,  anD  flee  be- 
fore thee  feuenibapes, 

8  Xhe|LsDms>(hailcommanbthe 
blcffmg  bpon  thec  in  thp  p  ttoje-boufes, 
anb  in  all  that  thou  ftttcft  thmc  hanb 
bnto,ano  he  (hall  blrifc  thcem  the  lanD 
ibbtcb  the  %®  a  w>  thp  <sod  giueth 
tljce. 

9  XheHsDia©  (hall  eftablifh  thee 
an  holp  people  bnto  himfelfc ,  as  hec 
hath  Ctoome  tmto  thee ,  if  thou  (halt 
feeepe  the  CommaurtDcmotts  of  the 
fL©is©  thp  0on, anb  Xbalae  m  his 
ibapes. 

io  ^nb  all  people  of  the  earth  (hall 
fee,  that  thou  art  caileb  bp  the  i5amc  of 
the  %  ©is  w,  anb  tbep  (hall  bee  afcaib 
oftbee. 

ii  anD*tbe?l©i5©(balinaitert)cc 
plenteous  II  in  goobs ,  to  thefruit  of  thv 
t  bobp,anb  in  the  fruit  of  thp  cattell,anb 
ut  fhcftmr  of  thp  grounb,  in  thclanb 
tt)hichthc2L©is©  fmare  tmto  thp  fa- 
tbcrstogtuetbee. 

12  "£hc1i©i3£>fhalopenl)ntothee 
his  goob  trcafure,  the  heauen  to  gtue 
the  ramc  tmto  thp  lanb  m  his  fcafon, 
anD  to  blcffc  all  the  rbojftc  of  thme 
hanD :  anD  *  thou  (halt  lenD  bnto  manp 
nanons,anb  thou  (halt  not  borrow. 

u  3nD  the  31©  is  £>  (gall  mane  thee 
the  heab ,  anD  not  the  taile ,  anb  thou 
(halt  be  aboue  onelp,anb thou  (halt  not 
be  beneath :  if  that  tljou  hcarfeen  bnto 
the  Commanbements  of  theft  ©is© 
thp  <Sou ,  which  3!  commanb  thee  this 
bap,to  obfcnie,anb  to  Doe  ibem : 

14  31nD  thou  fl)alt  not  go  afiDc  from 
anpofthcibo;bes  Vbljtd)  3  commanb 
thec  tins  bap, to  the  right  hanD,  ojto 
rlirleft.togoc  after  otljcr  goos,to  feme 
them. 

1 5  C^Sut  it  fhai  tome  to  paffc,*if  thou 
\DUtnothcarhen  bnto  the  bopce  of  the 
?l  ©  is  id  thp  C5ob,  to  obferue  to  boe  all 
his  CommanDcments  anD  his  5>ta 
tutcs,lhhtch3l  commanD  thec'thisDap, 
that  all  theft  curfes  n^all  tome  bpon 
thte,anboucrtauethee. 

is  CurfebiTiaiitl)oubetnthcntp,anb 
tnrfcDiiuiithoubcmthefielD. 

17  CurfeD  (hail  be  thpbafUetanDthp 
fto;c. 

is  CurfeD 


\Or.btmet. 


*  Chap. 50. 
9.&C 

good. 


•Chv.r5. 

6. 


•Lcuir.>t5. 
I^.  lament. 
2. 17.  mala, 
z.i.baxuci 

j. 20. 


Curfcs  for 


ci 


is  Cnrfcbfraibe  the  fruit  of  thy  boby, 
anbthcfruitof  tbpianb,  theincrca(JcDf 
thy  bine,  anb  the  (tortus  of  tup  fhccpc. 

19  Curfeb  fozk  thou  bee  ftijm  thou 
commeftm,  attb  curfeb  ftuk  thou  bee 
ibljcn  thou  gocft  out. 

20  %})t  %®kw  (hall  fonb  bpon 
thee  turfing,  beration ,  anb  rebufcc ,  in 
an  that  thou  retted  tbwe  hanb  Unto, 
tfQ?toboc,bntiUthoubtbettcoyeb,anb 
bnttll  thou  pcri(b  ciuieftciy ,  beeaufc  of 
the  ibickcbnrifr  ofttrp  boings,  M)crc 
by  thou  Daft  fojtaftcn  me. 

ii  ^)clt©i3iE>(haU  make  the  pc* 
fttlencc  cleaue  bnto  thee,  bntUlhe  haue 
confumcb  thee  from  off  the  lanb, ibb> 
t\yx  thou  goeft  to  poffeffc  it. 

21  *  Xhe  Ham©  (hall  finite  thee 
K)ith  aconfumption ,  anbibtthafcuct, 
anbtbith  au  inflammation,  $ttKth  an 
erttemc  burning,  anb  tt>ith  thcllfruozb, 
anbtbith  biafting,  anbibithmribcibc: 
anb  they  (hall  purine  thee  bnttll  thou 
pttl(h. 

13  3mb  the  fteautn  that  is  ouetthp 
heab  (hall  be  b?afle ,  anb  the  earth  that 
isbnberthecfhaiibeyjon. 

24  Xhe  %  ®  ib  »  (halt  mane  the 
tame  of  thy  lanb  poibbcr  $  bull:  from 
heaucnthallit  tome  botbne  bpon  thee, 
tmrtllthonbcbcftroycb. 

25  Utile  3L  ©  is  ©  (hall  t aufc  thee  to 
be  fmittcn  before  thine  enemies :  thou 
(haltgo  outoneibajagamft  them,  anb 
flee feucn  ibay cs  before  them ,  anb  (halt 
betremouebinto  all  the  mngbomcsof 

the  eartl). 

26  2Cnb  th?  tarfeeife  (haibc  meat  bn< 
to  all  foules  of  the  aire ,  anb  bnto  the 
beads  of  tibe  earth,  anb  no  man  (hall 
fray  them  atbay. 

27  3Ehe*^«»  roil  finite  thee  fttth 
the  botch  of  cgppt,  anb  tbith  the  erne* 
robs,  anb  ibtth  nie  ftabbe ,  anb  iwth 
the  itch,  tbheteof  thou  eanft  not  bee 

28  iche  %®ft®  fbarl  fmrte  t^ee 
ttnth  mabneffe ,  anb  buitbneffe,  anb  a- 
(lontftoment  of  heart. 

29  3lnb  thou  (halt  grope  atnoonc 
saycs.astheblmbgroperhmbarlmcs, 
anbthoumaltnotpjofperinthvtbaies: 

anb  thou  (halt  be  onely  oppjefleb,  anb 
fpotlebeuetmo?c,anbnonian(hauaue 

thtt 
30*  Xhouflialtbetrotheaibifcanb 

another  man  (battue  ttitbher:  thou 
(haitbuabanhoufe,anbthou(haltnot 
mbell  therein :  *  thou  (halt  plant  a  bine* 


lap.xxvii]. 


difobedience. 


J  Hcl>. which 
thou  won/- 
dcjl  dec. 


"Lcuit.  :i5. 
I<5. 


[Ortdroti£ht 


\Hcb.for* 
rcmcmig. 


*Dcut.20, 
6. 


yarb,  anb  (bait  not  t  gather  the  grapes 
thereof. 

31  Xljinc  ore  lhau  be  flaiue  before 
thine  eycs,anb  thou  (halt  not  eat  there* 
of:  thine  a(Te  (ball  be  Violently  taken  a* 
ttmy  from  befo?e  tbp  fate,  anb  t  ftjai  not 
be  tettojeb  to  thee:  thy  (beepc  (ball  bee 
giucn  bnto  thine  enemies ,  anb  thou 
(halt  haue  none  to  refcuc  them. 

32  XhP  tonnes,  anb  thy  Daughters 
(hallbegtucnbntoanoti)erpeople,anb 
thine  eyes  thai  looRe,anb  fatlc  ttMth  ion* 
gingfo?  tbemaithebay  long:  anbthere 
(ballbeno  might  m  thine  hanb. 

33  Xhc  fruit  of  thy  lanb,  anb  all  thy 
labours ,  (hall  a  nation  tbfjich  thou 
Unotbcft  not,  catc  bp :  anb  thou  (halt 
be  onely  oppjcflcoami  ctnfbeb  airoay : 

34  £>o  that  thou  (halt  bee  mab,  to? 
the  fight  of  thine  eyes  Xbhich  thou  ftjait 
fee. 

35  %\)t  %  ©  is  jb  (hall  fmitt  thee  in 
theftnces,anb  inthcleggesibithafojc 
botch  that  tannot  beeheaieb,  from  the 
fole  of  thy  foot.bnto  the  top  ofthi'  heab. 

36  Xhe1L&a?Pfl)aib2ingrhee,anb 
thp  ftingtbhich  thou  (halt  fet  ouer  thee, 
bnto  a  nation  ibhich  neither  thou,  no? 
thv  fathers  haue  fenotben,  anb  there 
(halt  thou  feme  other  gobs ,  iboob  anb 
(lone. 

37  3(nb  thou  (halt  become*  an  ado* 
ni(hntcut,ap2onerbe,anb  aby  -  lbo?be, 
amongaunationsTbhitherthe1l€'isjD 
(hall  leabe  thee. 

38  *1Chou  (halt  carte  much  teebe  out 
into  thcfielb,  anb  (bait  gather  but  litic 
in :  foz  the  lotuft  (hall  confume  tt. 

39  IChouthaltpiantbmeyarbs  anb 
tycffc  them,  out  (halt  neither  bjinfeeof 
the  tbine,  no?  gather  the  gtapes :  fo?  the 
ibo?mcs  (hall  eate  them. 

40  Xhoii  (halt  haue  jSDhue  trees 
thjoughoutai  thy  coafts.but  thou  (halt 
not  anoint  thy  k\k  ibith  the  oyle :  fo? 
thtnejDline  (hallcafthishuit. 

41  Xhon  H)ait  beget  Tonnes  anb 
daughters,  but  tthou  (halt  not  entoy 
them :  fo?  they  (l)allgoc  rnto  capriuitic. 

'41 3tuthy  trecsanbfruitofthplanb 
(hail  the  locuftst  ronfume. 

43  XheftrangerthatiSTtoithtnthee 
fljau  tietbpabonethee  beryhtgh:  anb 
thou  ("halt  come borbne  bery  loib. 

44  ^e  (hanienb  to  thee ,  anb  thou 
(halt  not  lenb  to  htm:  he  (hall  bee  the 
heab,  anb  thou  (halt  be  the  tatie. 

45  J$o?eouer,  all  tljefe  curfes  (hall 
comebponthec,  anb  (hall  purfuc  thee, 

anb 


t  Hefo.  pre- 
ohan*ter  vfe 
a  aicom- 


not  retvrw 
to  thee yZ-c. 


*  1.  King.  9 
7-ier.  34  9. 
and  25.9. 


•Mica.6. 
X.6. 


fHefr.tbej 

(!}(Clnotbe 
thine* 

Or}  pofijfe 


PI: 


agues  an 


g 


euteronomie. 


threatening. 


\HtlJutm. 

\  Heb.fhong 

cffrcr. 


•I.ruic.26. 
,9.  i.king. 
5.29.  Iain. 
4.  10.  ba- 
iuc-a.3. 
tflWr. 
bcllj. 


anbouertaRethce,ttltboubebeftroicb: 
bctaufc  thou  hcarfecncbftnot  tontothe 
boiceoftbelLsDis©  tbv<5ob,tofteepe 
his  Commanbcments ,  anb  his  5>ta- 
tutesibhich  he  commanbcbthcc. 

46  anbthevibailbcbpontbeefoja 
figne,  andfo?  aibonber,  anbbpontbv 
feebfojeuet: 

47  iSccaufe  thou  feruebft  not  the 
|L  sd  is  ©  thy  C5ob  with  iovfulneffe,anb 
vbith  glabncffe  of  heart,  to?  the  aboiuv 
Dante  of  all  things. 

43  Xhctefojefbaltthouferucthme 
cncnues,ibhiththc1L©is©  ftjaiifenb 
againft  thee,  in  hunger,  and  inthirft, 
anb  in  nahebneflc ,  anb  ut  tt>ant  of  all 
things  :anb  he  than  put  a  volte  of  iron 
bpon  th?  ncttte ,  bntill  l)c  Ijauc  beftro^ 
ebthee. 

49  Xhe  3L©is©  (ball  tying  a  n& 
tion  agamft  thee  from  farrc ,  from  the 
cub  of  the  earth,  as  fw.it  as  the  eagle 
fleeth ,  a  nation  lbbofe  tongue  thou 
(baitnottbnbcrftanb: 

50  %  nation  t  of  fierce  tountenante, 
lbbtth  fbal  not  regarb  the  perfon  of  the 
olb,no:  (hew  fauoiit  to  the  pong: 

51  3nb  fjec  than  eat  the  fruit  of  thp 
catteli,anb  the  fruit  of  thv  lanb,  tonnil 
thou  be  beftrovcb :  which  alfo  (ball  not 
leaue  thee  either  tome,  llnnc,  02  ople,or 
themcreafe  of  thv&mcoj  flocfeesof  thv 
fbecpcbtittllbehaucbeftrovcbthce. 

51  3hib  he  (hall  bcfiegc  thee  m  all  thv 
gates  .bntill  thv  high  anb  feneeb  lbailcs 
tome  bourne  Wherein  thou  truftebft 
throughout  ail  thv  lanb :  anb  hec  (ball 
beficge  thee  in  all  thv  gatcs.ttwottghout 
all  thv  lanb  which  the  %<s>  is  je>  tbv 
(5ob  hath  giuenthee. 

5  j  2Mb  *  thou  (halt  eatc  the  frutt  of 
thine  owue  t  bobv  ,  the  fled)  of  thv 
fonnes,  anb  of  tbvbaugbters  (which 
the  %®  is  v>  thv  <Pob  hath  giucn  thee ) 
m  the  fiege,anb  m  the  fttaunefTe  lbhcr  v 
WithtbmccncnueslbaUdiftrc(rcthcc. 

54  So  that  the  man  that  is  tcuber  a- 
moug  vou ,  anb  nerv  Delicate ,  his  eve 
fhaibc  ciull  towarb  his  brother,  anb  to- 
warbthe  Wife  of  his  bofome ,  anb  to< 
Wards  the  remnant  of  his  cbilbrcn 
Which  be  (bail  icane: 

55  3>otbatbeWiluotgiuctoanvof 
them  of  theflcfb  of  his  children  Whom 
he  (hall  eatc  :becaufc  hec  hath  nothing 
left  him  m  the  fiege,  anb  m  the  ftrau 
ncfTc  wherewith  thine  enemies  (bai  br- 
(treflc  thee,  in  ail  thv  gates. 

56  %l)t  tenbecanbbelicatc  Woman 


among  vou,  ibhich  Woulb  not  abucn- 
cure  to  Cct  the  fole  of  her  foote  upon  the 
grounb ,  for  beUcatcncffc  anb  tenber- 
neffe,  her  eve  (ban  be  tuill  towarbS  the 
huf band  of  her  bofome,  anb  towards 
her  fonnc,  anb  towards  her  daughter, 

57  3ud  towards  belong  one  that 
comiucth  out  from  bctweene  her  fecte, 
anb  totbarbs  her  ebUbrcn  Which  (bee 
fl>ail  btare :  for  (bee  (ball  eate  them  for 
want  of  aU  things  fecrctiv  m  the  fiege 
anb  ftraitnes,  Where  With  thine  cncinie 
(ball  bifrr  cfle  thee  m  thv  gates. 

5s  3tftbouWtltuotobfccuetodoc 
all  the  wordes  of  tins  ?Law  that  are 
w?ittmmthisbooiic,tbattboumaveft 
fcarc  this  glorious  anb  rcatcfull/Ramc, 
%$<s  ?Lc»isjd  %®y  ©©©: 

59  Xhcnfhc?Ls0»£>ttHlmaftethv 
plagues  roonberful!,  anb  the  plagues 
of  thv  feed, cue11  Steat  plagues,  anb  of 
lougcontmuance,  anb  fore  Gchncuts, 
anb  of  long  continuance. 

co  fi^orcouer ,  hec  will  bung  upon 
thee  all  the  mfeafes  of  egvpt ,  Which 
thou  luaft  afraid  of,anb  tfjev  (bal  tlcauc 
bntothee. 

6i  'Mq  tuerv  GchencOrc ,  anb  euerv 
plague  ibhich  is  not  lbiitten  in  the 
boo&e  of  this  fLaib  ,  them  ttnll  tije 
IL€>H©t  b;ing  bpontljcc,  bntuithou 
bebeftroveb. 

61  ^nb  ve  fljall  be  left  felb  innum^ 
bcr,ri>ocreas  vetbcre'astheliarresof 
heauen  foi  multitube  :  becaufe  thou 
lboulbeS  not  obev  the  bopce  of  t!jc 
!L©tt£>thV<!50D. 

63  ^ubitfhaiicomctopaue,  thatas 
the  %$> kid  rciovceb  ouer  vou  to  boe 
vougtob,  anb  tomultiplwou ;  fo  the 
ft©  is  ©  lbill  rciovce  ouer  vou  to  be* 
ntov  vou ,  anb  to  b;mg  vou  to  nought ; 
anb  vc  lhaibe  plucHcb  fcom  off  the  lanb 
ibhithcr  thou  gocll  to  pofletTc  it. 

64  3lnb  the  ILfiDK©  fljall  fcattet 
thee  among  all  people,  fcom  tfjc  one  tub 
of  the  earth ,  euen  bnto  the  other  ■  anb 
there  thou  (bait  fcruc  other  gobs, 
lbhicl)  neither  thou  no?  thvfathers  ijaue 
tmotben,  eueniboob  anb  (tone. 

65  3ind  among  thefe  nations;  (halt 
thou  Bnbe  imeafe  .neither  (hall  the  fole 
of  thv  foote  haue  reft:  but  the  Ha>is© 
fljall  giuctheethereatrembluigheart, 
anb  failing  of  eves,  $  fojroibofnnnbe. 

66  ^nbtljvlife (hall  hang  uiboubt 
before  thee ,  anb  thou  (bait  fearc  bav 
anb  night ,  anb  (bait  haue  none  aOte 
rauceofthvltfe. 

673(11 


\Heir.sf- 
tcr-hnh. 


t  U,ir. 
caufttonf- 

"Chap. 10. 


Sihon  and  Qg.         Chap.xxix.        Godscoucnand 


•Eiod.ip. 


•Chlp.^.tf. 
I. Icing. i.i 
wfti.1.7. 


67  5n  the  moating thou  Ibaitfay, 
xooulD  (5oDU  lb  ere  <£uen :  anb  at  €ucn 
thou  fbalt  fay  ,i©oulb  (Kid  it  were  mo:* 
tung,fo?thtfearcof  thuteheartlbhero 
ibith  tljou  (haitfcarc,anb  fo?  the  Ogi)t 
of  thine  eyesibhichthou  fiialtfee. 

6%  anb  the  |i©  is  ©fljall  tying  thee 
into  egypt  againc,  Ybtth  (bips,  by  the 
lbay  whereof  3J  fpascbnto  thccxhou 
(bait  fee  itno  mojc  agamc :  anb  tljerepc 
fball  bee  folb  unto  your  enemies  fo: 
bonbmen,  anb  bonbtbomen,  anbno 
manfbaiibuyyou. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

Nlofes  exhorteth  them  to  obedience,  by  the 
memorie  of  the  workesthey  hauefecne.  10 
All  areprefenced  before  the  Lord  to  enter  in- 
to his  Couenanr,  18  The  great  wradi  on 
him  (hat  flatterethhimfdfein  his  wickednes. 
ii)   Secret  things  belong  vnto  God. 

^»'cgS»  ??cfe  arc  tt>c  tboojoes  of 
^  toe  Couctiant  which  the 
i  iLiDisjE*  toninianbeo^o' 
fes  to  mast  Witb  the  ehti* 
b:cn  of  3Jfcacl  m  the  lanb 
of  i$)oab ,  befibe  the  Concnant  which 
hcinabe  With  them  in l?o?*b. 

z  C  anb  $$ofcs  caueb  bnto  all  3C 
rael,  anb  faib  bnto  them,  *&u  haue 
fttnc  attthat  the  3L©taiE>  bib  before 
your  eyes  m  the  lanb  of  Cgrpt  bnto 
Pharaoh,  anb  bnto  all  his  feruants, 
anb  bnto  alt  Ijis  lanb, 

j  Xhe  great  temptations  Which 
thine  eyes  ijauefecne,  thefigncsanb 
thoftgteatmiraeles: 

4  PcttbclLiSmishathnotgutcn 
you  an  heart to  perce(ne,anb  eyestofce, 
anb  cares  to  ncare,  bnto  thisbay. 

5  anb  3  ijaue  leb  you  fourheyeres 
tnthcWilberaes :  your  clothes  arc  not 
tbarcn  otb  bpon  you ,  anb  thy  fhooe  is 
not  tbajcen  olb  bpon  thy  foot. 

6  $?e  hauc  not  eaten  b:eab,  neither 
&aucyoubmnBeU)ine,ojftrongbfln8: 

that  yee  might  fcnowc  that  3  am  the 
|LtDis©yourd5ob. 

7  ^nb  When  yee  tame  bnto  this 
plaee,SthonttKRing  of  i?efbbon,  anb 
£>g  theiaung  of  25a(ban,  tame  out  a* 
gainft  bs  bnto  battcll ,  anb  wee  fmotc 
them. 

8  anb  wee  toose  their  lanbe ,  anb 
gauc  it  fo?  an  inheritance  bnto  d)c  &eu- 
bcmtcs,anbto  the  (5abites,anbtothe 
haifctnbcofipmaiTcb. 

9  *t8ttepcrt)crefowtDetto;besof 


this  Coueuant  anb  boe  them,  that  yee 
may  pjofpet  in  all  thatye  boe. 

io  CJ9cttanbtlusbayauofyoube* 
fojc  the  1L  &  «  ©  your  (5ob :  your  tap* 
tames  of  yourtrtbes,your€lbcrs,anb 
your  omtcrs,with  all  tlje  men  of  ^fracl, 

ii  jsourlitleones,  your  Unties,  anb 
thy  ftranger  that  is  in  thy  tanipe,  from 
tljeheWetof  thy  Woob,  bnto  thetyaw* 
crofthyibater: 

ii  Xhat  thou  fboulbefl  tenter  into  t^M>. 
Couenant  With  the  %  <d  k  *©  thy  ©ob, 
anb  into  his  othe  which  thefLsDtsjD 
thy  (5oo  ma&cth  With  thee  this  bay : 

13  IChathtmaycftablifbthcetobay 
foj  apeople  bnto  htmfclfe ,  anb  thathee 
may  be  bnto  thee  a  d5ob,as  he  hatljfatb 
bnto  thee,  anb  as  he  hath  faiome  bnto 
thy  fathers,  to  ab?al)am,  to  Jfcac.anb 
to  3Jatob. 

14.  ilietther  tbith  you  ontly  boe  3J 
ma&e  this  tonenant  anb  this  othe : 

15  asutibtth  htm  that  ftanbeth  here 
ibith  bs  this  bay  before  ttje  ILsdis© 
our  (Bob,  anb  alfolbithhim  tijatisnot 
htrelbithbs  this  bay: 

is  (Jfo^yeftnoiUhorbtbehauebrbeU 
inthclanb  of  <2gypt,anb  horb  Ibetame 
thojotb  the  nations rbhtthyepaOcbby. 

17  anb  ye  hanefirenc  their  abonuna? 
tions,  anb  their  t  tooles,  Sboob,  anb  \m.im. 
ftoue,  ulutr,  anb  golD ,  ibhith  iberca*  v"^- 
mongthem.) 

is  Heft  there  ftjoulb  be  amongyou 
man  oniiotrtan,  0;  famitte,  01  tribe, 
ibhofeheartturntth  axbay  this  bap  fro 
the1L€>KS»out(i5ob,  to  goeand  fernc 
the  gobs  of  thefe  nations:  left  there 
fhoulb  bee  among  you  a  root  rhatbea* 
reth  I  galianb  Vbomttajoob, 

19  anbitwmctopaffcttjhenhehea* 
reth  the  tbo^bes  of  this  curie,  that  hce 
bleffe  himfelfc  in  his  heart ,  faying,  3 
fl)ailhauepeace,thmtgl)'5tbalKcinthe 
I! imagination  of  mute  heart,  to  abbe 
t  bjunBcnneffe  to  third : 

zo  5ChdL»iDis©rbnnotrparehim, 
but  then  the  anger  of  the  %  &  a  ©,  anb 
his  telouGe  fljau  ftnose  againft  that 
man,  anb  all  the  curies  that  are  ibjitten 
in  this  boose  than  lie  bponhtm,anb  the 
%  ©  is  jd  fbau  blot  out  his  name  from 
bnberhcaucn. 

i\  anbthe^LiDissajallftparate 
htm  bnto  euill,  out  of  an  the  tribes  of 
iffrael,aeto?bing  to  all  the  curfts  of  tlje 
Couenant,  that  tare  Xb?itten  in  this 
boose  of  theltatb: 

ii  £>o  that  the  generation  to  come 

of 


15 


|IOr,/«.?- 

bormufft. 
t  Hcb./i./ 

tbetbirjhct 


\Htlr.i, 
wrtilffK 


Mercicto  Deuteronomie.       the  repentant. 


t  tub. 

l/hercsrtth 
the  LOXp 
hash  trw.de 
itftckf. 


*Grn.T9. 
24,35. 


*  1. King. 9 
8.icrc.22.8 


|  Heh.  dt 
uuicJ   Or, 
who  had  not 
{?JWf.I  to 

ihtm  any 
portion. 


of  your  chtltycn,  that  (hall  rtfc  bp  af- 
tec  you ,  anb  die  ftrangcr  rliat  (hall 
conic  from  a  farrc  lanb,  (ball  fay  ,ibhcn 
they  fee  the  plagues  of  that  lanb ,  anb 
the  fitKneffes  tvbhich  thclL  ok©  hath 
laybbpontt; 

15  Slubthatthc  ibhole  lanb  thereof 
is  tyunftonc  ant)  (alt,  and  burning ,  that 
tt  is  not  (blben  ,  nozbearcth ,  no:  any 
graffe  groibeth  therein ,  *  liftc  the  otter- 
ttyoibof£>obomc,atibGomo2ah,2lb' 
mah,anb  Zcbotm,ibhith  tbelL  o  k  id 
ouerthzcib  m  his  anger ,  anb  m  his 
rtyatlj: 

14  Cuenai  nations  (halfay,*nahcrc 
frue  hath  the  %  o  is  ©  Done  thus  bnto 
thts  lano  i  What  mean«h  tl;c  heat  of  this 
great  anger  i 

15  lEhcnincnfliailfay^ctaufrthcy 
iiauc  foifancn  the  Couenant  of  the 
Ho  a©  Gob  of  their  fathers ,  ibhich 
he  ntabcibith  them  lbhcn  he  tyought 
them  foo2th  out  offbc  lanb  of  Cgvpt. 

26  ifoitbtyibcntanbfcntcb  other 
gobs,  <t  lbo:fl)tppcb  them,  gobs  lbhom 
they  Rtictt)  not,  anbtwhoai  he  hab  not 
gtucn  bnto  them. 

27  3(nb  the  anger  of  the  !Lois© 
lbasfcitiblcbagaiuft  this  lanb,to  tying 
bponttali  thecurfes,  that  areltyittcn 
tnthtsbooRC. 

is  5tnb  the  1!Lokid  rootcb  them 
out  of  their  lanb,m  anger  anb  mibzath, 
anb  m  great  mbignatton,  anbeafttbem 
tttto  another  lanb,as  it  "this  bap. 

29  Xhcfctret  things  belong  bnto  the 
It  ok  id  our  Gob  :  but  thofc  things 
ibhttl)  are  rcucaicb  belong  bnto  bs,  anb 
to  our  chtib2cn  fo:  cucr,  that  ibee  may 
boc  all  the  ibozbs  of  this  JLaib. 

CHAP.   XXX. 

1  Gre.it  mercies  promifed  vmotlie  repentant. 
1 1  The  Conimaundemcnt  is  mamteii  15 
Death  and  life  are  (ct  belore  them. 

^%}&%p  ^mt  flial1  con,c  t0  Paflc 
WsM, \^M  tt|)enall  thefc  tilings  are 
^S^NaS  fomebpon  tlicc ,  thcblef 
W/mM^M  dug,  anb  flic  rurfc,  ibbtch 
3#«*%yfe  3  haue  fct  beftye  tbecanb 
thou  (halt  tall  them  to  mmbe  among  all 
thcnattonsibhithcr  the  H-okjd  thy 
Gob  bath  bziucn  thec, 

2  3nbfhaltrcturnebntothc?LOK© 
thi1  god  ,anb  (halt  obey  his  boyce  ateoz 
bing  to  all  that  3!  commanb  thee  thts 
x><\\>,  thou  anb  thy  thtlbien  lbith  altbmc 
heart  ^nbibttb  all  tljv  foulc : 


I  j  'EbatthcntheflOKiDthyGoo 
i  lbill  turttc  thy  captiutttcanb  haue  conv 
paffion  bpon  thee,  anb  lbil  r  cturnc  anb 
gather  thec  from  all  the  nations  lbbi 
thec  the  %  o  k  p  tby  Gob  bath  featte 
tcbthec. 

4.  *3If anp  oftbinebetyiticn  otttbtt 
to  the  outmoft  parts  of  heaucn ,  from 
thcucc  lbill  the  fLo  kid  thy  Gob  ga^ 
tber  thec , anb  from  thence  Vbill  he  fetch 
thee. 

5  3lub  the  ILokid  thy  Gob  lbill 
tying  thee  into  the  lanb  ibbicb  thy  fa? 
thers  pofftffco,  anb  thou  (halt  poffefle 
it :  anb  he  lbill  boc  thee  goob ,  anbrmu> 
tiply  t  bee  abouc  flip  fathers. 

6  3nb  the  %  o  k  id  flip  Gob  lbill 
circuntcifc  thine  heart ,  anb  the  heart  of 
thy  feeb,  to  lone  the  %  o  k  id  flip  Gob 
lbitb  all  tljutc  heart ,  anb  lbitb  all  thy 
foulcthat  thou  may  eft  liuc. 

7  3inb  the  %  o  k  ©  thy  Gob  lbtu 
put  all  thefe  curfes  bpon  thine  enemies, 
anb  on  them  that  hate  thcc,ibhithpcr- 
fccutcbthce. 

3  3lnD  thou  (halt  returne  anb  obey 
the  boitc  of  the  %  o  k  ©,anb  boc  all  his 
Commanbemcnts  ibljich  3  commanb 
ttjec  tins  bay. 

9  *  anb  the  Hokd  thy  Gob  lbill 
maue  tlicc  plenteous  m  eucry  ibozac  of 
thine  hanb.m  the  fruit  of  thy  boby,aub 
m  the  fruit  of  thy  cattclUnb  m  the  fruit 
of  thy  lanb ,  foz  goob :  foi  the  fl  o  k  id 
lbill  agaiuc  rcioyte  ouer  thcefo:goob, 
as  he  reioytcb  ouer  thy  fathers: 

io  3Jf  thou  fhait  rjearaen  bnto  the 
boyccofthclLoKJDthyGobtoKeepc 
his  Cominanbcmcuts  ,  anb  hts  Sta- 
tutes lbhich  are  lbnttcn  in  this  booftc 
of  the  H'aU),and  if  thouturnc  bnto  the 
It  o  k  id  thy  Gob  lbttlj  all  thine  heart, 
anb  With  all  thy  foule. 

it  C.  5ro2  this  Commaunbemcnt 
lbhtth  3  commanb  thec  this  bay,  it  is 
not  hibben  from  thee ,  neither  is  it 
farrc  off. 

ii  *  3ft  is  not  in  hcaneu ,  that  thou 
n)0iilbcftfay,n3hofhalgocbpfo2bsto 
heaucn ,  anb  tymgit  bnto  bs ,  that  tbee 
mayhcarcit,anbbocit; 

ij  Neither  is  it  bcyonb  thefca,  that 
flioti  (houlbcftfay  ,39ho  (hall  goeoucr 
flic  fca  fo:  bs,  anb  tying  it  bnto  bs,that 
ibcmayheareit.anbboeitf 

14-  25utthc  Ibozb  is  bery  nigh  bnto 
thee,  m  thy  mouth,  anb  in  tby  heart, 
that  thou  niaycftboctt. 

15  C5>ce,3Jhancfetbcfo2ethecthis 
bay^ 


Nclie 


••Chaf. 
II. 


:l 


•Rom. 
6.8c». 


(Life  and  death.  Chap.xxxj.   lofhuaincouraged. 


»6. 


'Num.  10. 
1 1. chap  3. 
»7- 


•Num.  17. 
21. 


Dav,Ufe  anb  goob, ano  beath,  anb  null 

16  3jn  that  31  commanD  thee  tins 
bay  to  louc  tt)C  ILiPIS©  tl)v  <S°o  > t0 
lbaifee  in  his  lbaycs  ,  anb  to  Rccpc  his 
Commanocments ,  anb  his  Statutes, 
ano  his  3Jubgcmcnts)  tljat  thou  niaictt 
liue  ano  muinply :  ano  tlje  ?L  ©  is  ©  thy 
(5oo  fnail  bltffc  thee  mtbe  lanD  ,ibht 
therthougocftto  pottcflint. 

17  iButifthtne  heart  turncaitoay  ,10 
that  tDou  toilt  not  hear e ,  but  (halt  bee 
b?a\bcnaibay,antoU)0H'hip  other  gobs 
ano  fttue  them: 

18  3  Denounce  tonto  you  this  bay, 
tl)at  ye  (hall  furely  perid),  ano  tl)at  yec 
(l)au  not  prolong  your  bayes  topon  tl)c 
lanb ,  \tol)ithet  tliou  pafftOt  ouet  3lo?' 
toan,togoetopou"cu"eit. 

19  *  3  tall  hcaucn  ano  cart!)  to  rc^ 
rojb  this  bay  agamftyou,  that3i  haue 
fct  before  you  lift  anb  tocath  ,  bltffmg 
anbturfmg:  therefore  ehooft  life,  that 
both  thou  anb  thy  feeb  may  Hue : 

loXhatthoumaicftloucthelLois© 
thy  ©ob ,  and  thatthou  mayeft  obey  his 
tooyce,  anbthat  thou  maycQcleatie  ton; 
tohim:fo?h« 1S  thy  hfe,  anb  the  length 
of  thy  bayes ,  that  thou  may  cO  otoell  m 
the  lanb,  tbhith  the  It  ©  is  ©  heart  ton* 
to  thy  fathers,  to  Stbjaham  ,to3)faat, 
anb  to  3Jaeob,to  giuc  them. 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

Mofcs  incourageth  the  people.  7  Heein- 
coiu-ageih  loftiua.  c,  Hee  delmercth  the 
Law  vnto  the  Pnefts  to  reade  it  in  the  feuenth 
yere  to  the  people.  M  God  giueth  a  charge 
tolofliua,  19  and  a  fongtoteftifieagamft 
the  people.  14  Mofes  deliuereth  the  bookc 
oftheLawtotheLeuitestokeepe.  18  Hee 
rruketh  a  protection  to  the  Elders. 

/Bb  £0ofts  itoent  f  fpafee 
thcfcitoo?bes  tonto  all  3Jt 

rati. 
i  3lnb  hec  faibc  tonto 
„  thtni ,  35  am  an  hunbjcb 
anb  ntoenticy  teres  olb  this  bay,  3  tan 
nomojc  goc  out  ano  tome  in :  alio  the 
%®ml ©  hath  faib  tonto  mee ,  *£hon 
(halt  not  goe  oucr  this  33ojban. 
3  %i)t  %®wn  thy c5ob ,  hf c ttui 

got  ouer  bcfoK  thee ,  and  he  itofll  beftroy 
theft  nations  from  before  thee ,  ano 
thou (haltpoucffc  them:  md  "Jolhua, 
hecfhall  goc  oucr  bcfbje  thec,  *as  the 
fL<D«©hatI)faio. 

a.  anb the  ?L©is© (hallboctonto 
them,asheebiDto&>ihon ,  antoto£>g 


leungs  of  the  Anionics ,  ano  tonto  the 
lanb  of  them,  itobom  he  ocftroyeb. 

5  3nb 'thesis  ©(hail  glue  them  *ch.P: 
top  befoje  your  face,  that  ye  may  boc  toiu 
to  theni  accojDing  tonto  all  the  Com- 
manbements  itohich  3ihauccommatv 
bebyou. 

6  25c  ftcong,anbofagoob  courage, 
fear  c  not,  no?  be  afraib  of  them :  fo?  the 
%  £>  is  ©  thy  <5ob,hc  >t  is  that  boetj)  got 
ltoifl)  thee,  he  ltoill  not  fade  thecnoj  foz* 
feBcthec. 

7  IE  3lnD  S0otts  taileb  tonto  3io; 
(l)iia ,  anb  faib  tonto  him  in  the  fight  of 
ail3Sfraci,  23ec  ttrong,  ano  of  a  gooo 
touragc :  to?  thou  mutt  goc  ttnth  this 
people  tonto  the  lanb,itohtch  thesis© 
hath  fraomc  tonto  their  fathers  to  gme 
thtm ;  anb  thou  (halt  tauft  them  to  m 
hente  it. 

8  ^nbti)c?L«Dis©,hC'tisthatboth 
goc  bcfojethecheunll  betbitl)  thechee 
njillnotfatle  thee,  neither  fo^BC  thee: 
ftarc  not,  neither  be  bifmaycb. 

9  C^nb#oftstto?otcthis!Larb, 
anb  Dcltueteto  tt  tonto  the  0zictts  the 
fonnes  of  fLcui,lbhich  bare  the  arfte  of 
the  Coucnant  of  the  %  ©  is  ©,  anb  totu 
to  all  the  eibcts  of^fracl. 

io  ^nb  fi^ofes  commanoeb  them, 
laymg,^t  the  cnbof  cuery  ftnenyceres, 
in  the  folcmmtic  of  the  *yeere  of  rcleaft,  *  c^p  >  *• 
m  the  f  eaQ  of  ILabcrnaclcs, 

1 1  nahen  ah  35fracl  ts  tome  to  ap* 
peace  before  the  |L©fi©thy(0ob ,  tn 
the  place  \tohuh  hee  (hall  cljooft ,  thou 
(halt  rcabc  this  Haib  befo?e  all  3ifrael, 
m  their  hearing. 

ii  (5athcrfhcpeoplctogcthcr,men, 
anb  itoomcn  anb  chilb?cn,anb  thy  ftran^ 
gcr  that  is  ltotthm  thy  gates,  that  they 
may  hearc  ,■  anb  that  they  may  Icamc, 
anb  fcare  the  H  ©  is  ©  your  <sob ,  anb 
obftrue  to  boc  all  the  tbo?ocs  of  rtjts 
fLaito: 

ij  ^nn  that  their  chtlbjcnltohichhauc 
not  Unoltocn  any  thing,  may  hearc,  anb 
icamc  to  ftarc  the  fL©  is©  your  ©ob, 
iaslongasyeeliue  in  the  lanb,  ibhithcr 
yegoe  oucr3Jojbantopou"cfftit. 

14  |T  ^nb  the  Hc>  is  ©  faibc  tonto 
fi0ofts,  Kcholbe,  thy  bayes  approach 
that  thou  muft  Hit :  tall  3Jofbua,anD 
pzefent  your  ftlucs  m  the  Xabernacle 
of  the  Congregation ,  that  3  may  giuc 
him  a  charge,  anb  ^oftsanb^ofbua 
incnt  anb  pieftnteb  thcmfclucs  in  the 
Xabctnacle  of  the  Congregation. 

15  ^nb the fL© is©  appear cbtn the 

ICabcr- 

la2 


Iofhuas  charge.     Deuteronomie.         Mofes  fong. 


\Hehr 
iffwne. 


1  Httr.fixk 
them. 


ffftir.h- 
fore. 


\Htb.dn. 


loth.  1.6. 


Xabcrnacle  in  a  pillar  of  a  rloub :  anb 
tlje  ptliac  of  njc  cloubc  ftoob  oucr  nje 
booze  of  nje  Xabernacle. 

16  e.  Tint)  tlje  H©k©  raiDc bnto 
fcT3orcs,2Stl)olb,tl)ou  fljaltt  fleepe  ibirtj 
tliv  fatljcrs.anb  njts  people  ttnl  nfc  top, 
attbgocamrjoiiug  after  njegobsofnje 
Grangers  of  tlje  lama  tdlnttjtr  tljcp  goc 
to  be  amongft  tljcm,anb  ttnl  fojfaltc  me, 
anbb:caftcmy  coucnant  ibljicbSHjauc 
mabcibitnnjcm. 

17  X\)t\\  my  anger  fball  be  Hinbleb 
agatnft  tijem  m  njatbay ,  ano  3  mill 
fanatic  tijem,  anb  3  Unll  Jibe  my  fate 
from  tijem,  anb  tljey  ftjall  be  beuoureb, 
anb  many  cutis  anb  troubles  fljall  t  bc< 
fall  tijem ,  To  tljat  tljey  ibill  fay  m  tljat 
bay,31rcnottl)efe  eutiscomc  bponbs, 
becattfe  our  Gob  is  not  amongft  bs< 

is  3nb  3  ibill  fttrcly  Ijtbc  my  fate  in 
tljat  bay ,  fo?  all  njc  cutis  ibljielj  tljey 
fljalljaue  ttHOuglit,in  tljat  tljey  are  rur< 
neb  butootljer  gobs. 

19  i2oibnjcrcfo2C,\butcycnjiSfong 
fo?you,  anbtcadj  u  tljccljtibzcnonjt 
racl :  put  it  m  tnetr  montljcs ,  tijat  tfjis 
fo ng  may  be  a  rottnefle  foi  mec ,  agatnft 
tijecijtibzenofgjfracl. 

io  iFojlbljcn'J  ftjall  Ijauebjougljt 
tijem  into  nje  lanb  ibljiclj3Jftoare  bn* 
to  njeir  fathers ,  that  floibcn)  ibirtj 
milac  anb  Uony  ,•  anb  tljey  ftjall  nauc 
eaten  anb  fiftcb  tljemfclucs ,  anb  ibaren 
fat;  tljcn  mill  tljey  turne  bnto  otljcr 
gobs,  anb  feme  tijem,  anb  p?ouottc  me, 
anb  tacattc  my  coucnant. 

u  ^nbltfballtomctopaffe,lbr)en 
many  cutis  anb  troubles  arc  befallen 
tijem ,  tljat  rtjis  fong  ftjall  tcfttfic  t  a? 
gamft  tlictn  as  a  lbttttcflc :  fo?  it  ftjall 
not  bee  forgotten  out  of  tlic  mounjes  of 
their  feeb :  fo?  3  Bttolb  njeir  imagine 
ttott  tbUtel)  njeytgocabotttcttcnnoib, 
before  3  Dane  b?ougljt  tijem  into  tlje 
lamuimtch'Jfmare. 

ii  C  tlBofcs  njerefo?c  ib?otc  rtjts 
fong  tlje  fame  bay ,  anb  taugljt  it  nje 
clnlb?en  of  Jfrael. 

u  ^tibncgaucgjoujuarticfonneof 
jrhm  a  Charge,  anb  fatb,  *  i5eeftrottg, 
anb  of  a  goob  courage :  fo.:  thou  fljalt 
bang  the  thilbicu  of  Jlfracl  into  tlic 
lanb  mind)  3  fmarc  bnto  fljem :  anb  3 
unllbcibithtljce. 

14  Oub  it  came  to  pafle  lbnen  fi0o« 
fcsliabmabc  an  cube  ofiburtng  tlje 
lbojocs  of  tl)is  ILaib  m  a  booBe,btUtll 
they  mere  finiujeb, 

1$  £hat  iBofcs  commatinbeb  tlje 


?Lcuttcs  ibljiclj  bare  tlje  Htkt  of  tlje 
Coucnant  of  tlje  %  ©  is  cfaymg, 

16  %aU  this  boouc  of  rtjc  Haib, 
anb  put  it  in  tlje  fioe  of  tlje  3irRe  of  tlje 
Coucnant  of  tlje  !L  0  is  ©  your  <3ob , 
trjat  it  may  bec  tljere  fo?  a  ibmieflc  a 
gamfttliee. 

17  5fo?3I  Knott)  tiJV  rebellion  ,aub 
tljy  fttffc  nccftc :  aSebolbe,  lbljtlc  3  am 
yet  aliue  ibttlj  you  tljts  bay ,  yee  Ijanc 
bene  rebellious  agatnft  hJcILsdhjd; 
anb  Ijoib  mitcH  mo?c  after  my  bean)  < 

28  C  ©atljer  bnto  mec  all  tlje  «l- 
bersofyour  tribes,  anb  your  ^Dfttcers, 
tljat  3  may  fpeabe  trjefc  *bo:bs  tn  tijeir 
eares ,  anb  call  Ijeauen  anb  eartl)  to  re* 
co;b  agatnft  tijem. 

19  5fo?3JRnom,tl)ataftcrmyacatlj 
yectbtll  bttcrly  corrupt  your  fdues  ,anb 
turne  aftbc  from  tlje  \bay ,  ibljirt)  3 
liauccommaubeb  you:  anb  eutllbtlbe* 
fall  you  intlje  latter  bay  cs,  becaufe  yee 
lbtt  boc  entl  in  tlje  ftgl)t  of  tftc  %  ©  is  ©, 
to  pjououc  l)im  to  anger  tl)?ougt)  tlje 
ibo?Ucofyournanbs. 

30  ^nb  fpofesfpaue  in  njc  cares  of 
altoeCogcegationof'JfracinJclbojbs 
oftl)isfong,bnmittjcyiLberccnbeb. 

CHAP.    XXXII. 

1  Mofes  fon^,whicli  fctteth  foorth  Gods  metcy 
and  vengeance.  46  Heexhorteththemto 
fet  their  hearts  vpon  it.  48  Godfendethhtm 
vp  to  mount  Ncbo,to  ice  the  land,and  die. 

^uccare,  £>yccncauens, 
anb  3  ibill  fpcaue ;  ^ttb 
nearc,£>  eartl),tl)clbo?bS 
,  oftnymottrl). 
W$sb^&  1  *$y  boctnnc  fDait 
b?opastljeramc:myfpcatf)fl)ailbifttll 
as  tlje  beam,  as  tl)c  final  rattte  bpott  tlje 
tenber  fierbc,  anb  as  njc  fbolfyes  bpon 
njegrafte. 

3  25ecattfc  3  \brt  publifl)  rijc  0amc 
of  tlje  %  0  is  jd:  afcrtbc  yee  gccatncflc 
bnto  our  cob. 

4  He  .s  tfic  rocKe ,  Ijts  lboiKe  is  per 
fcct:fojalll)isibaycs  ^  3}tiogcment 

3eoboftcucrn,anb\birt)outimcuuty, 
tuft  anb  rigljtislie. 

5  t  xijcy  Ijatte  tojrttpteb  rtjem- 
femes ,  ||  njcic  fpor  is  not  the  rPot  of  Ijis 
crjtltycn:  thc>  arc  a  pcrucrfcanb  crooUcb 
gcttcranon. 

6  £>ocyetfiusrcqttitcriie?LiDis©, 
£>  foolifl)  people ,  9  bnibifc  <  3s  not  lie 
tljy5ratl)erthati)atl)bonglutl)ee^*)atf) 
Ije  not  mabc  tljec  ,anb  eftablinieb  tljee  t 
7  C  Kemcui' 


tHrlr.ht 
hath  corr»a~ 
teltohtm. 
feife. 
tiOr.dm 
they  arc  *& 
his  children 
ibatittbcir 
Not. 


Theft 


on 


Ch 


ap.xxxi], 


o 


fMofc 


oles. 


|  Heb.  gene- 
ration and 
generation. 


\Btb.»rd. 


[\0r,  com- 
vatfedhun 

*4<  ■-'■. 


|J  Or,  whicli 

werenflf 

qui. 


||  OrJUfji. 
fid. 


7  C  Remember  thebapes  of  olbe, 
confibec  the  pceres  of  tmany  generate 
ons :  af  fee  thv  father,  anb  hcnniifhelbc 
thee,  thp  eibcrs,  and  tticp  tbti  tell  thee. 

8  uatien  the  moft  $tgh  biutbeb  to 
thenationsthclrmherttance ,  lbhcnhe 
feparated  the  fonnes  of  3dam ,  hecfet 
the  bounds'  of  ttje  people  according  to 
tlje  number  of  the  children  of  Jlftacl. 

9  5roul)elLi©iB©5)poznonisf)is 
people:  Jacob  isttjc  tiot  of  his  inherit 
tattce. 

10  tyefoundhimmadefcrtiand,and 
m  thctbafte  hoTbltngidilberneflc :  $ec 
||lebbchlmabout,heitiftruttcbhim,hcc 
Bcpthimasthcappieof  his  eye. 

ii  %s  an  eagle  fttrrcth  top  hernctt, 
fluttcreth  oner  tjtr  yong,  fpjcabcth  a* 
bjoabhctJbings,  taferth  them,  bear  cth 
themonhetlbtngs: 

ii  so  tt)c  ?Isdih©  alone  bib  leadc 
him,  and  there  ibas  no  ftrange  <5tib 
lbtth  him. 

13  ijemabehimribeonthchighplas 
ecs  of  the  earth,  that  he  might  eate  the 
tnereafe  of  the  ficlbs,  anbhemabcbtm 
to  fuefee  honp  out  of  thcrotfee,  anboptc 
outofthcfltnttcrocfee, 

14  26uttcrofftine,<tmtlfeeoffhecpe, 
Tbtfh  fat  of  lambes,  anb  rammes  of  ttjc 
bjeebof  20afb,an,$  goats,ttnth  the  fat 
of  fetbnets  of  ibhcat ,  anb  thou  biddeft 
b?infec  the  pure  blood  of  the  grape. 

15  C  But  3Jeutrun  ibated  fat,  anb 
feicfeeb:  Xhott  artibajccnfat,  thou  art 
grolbcn  ttjtcfee ,  thou  art  toucreb  with 
fatnes :  then  hefoifoofee  ©ob  which  mabe 
htm,  anbltghtlvcftccrnebthc  Kocfeeof 
!)is  faluation. 

16  Xhey  pjtouoftcb  him  to  teloufie 
tbith  ftrange  §ods ,  nnth  abominations 
pzouoftcb  they  him  to  anger. 

17  1Lhci?  faenftted  bnto  deuils,ll  not 
to  d5od :  to  gods  tbhom rticp  feneib  not, 
to  neU)  gods,that  came  neiblv  bp,  tt)l)om 
pour  fathers  feared  not. 

18  £Df  the  &OCRC  that  begatc  thee 
thouartbnmutbfull,anbhattfo2gotten 
C5ob  that  fanned  thee. 

19  3Jnd  ibhen  the  %  0  b  ©  faib  it,  he 
llabhojred  them ,  bctaufc  of  the  pjouo- 
fetttg  of  htsfonnes, «  of  his  daughters. 

zo  3ind  !;c  faid,  3  tt)Ul  hide  mpfaec 
from  them,  gjibtll  feelbhattheir  endc 
(hail be :  faj  the?  are  a  dcry  froibarb  gc* 
neranon,chtlbzcnmibhomtstio  faith. 

21  IChcy  hauc  moouco  me  to  ietou; 
fieibith  Aat  which  is  not  gob ,  they  haue 
p:ouotiebinc  to  anger  lbtth  their  bant- 


'Rcm.io.p 


„  Or,  hath 
burned. 
||  Or,  hmth 

Qonfumed. 


\Heb.bur'- 
ning  coalet. 


Heb.fr am 
the  cham- 
bers. 

\  Hih.bc 


tits:  3tnb*3l  ibiUmDuethenitoiclou* 

fiC  lbtth  ihole  which  are  ttOt  fl  people ,  3 

ibili  pjouofee  them  to  anger  rutth  a  foo- 
Itfb  nation. 

n  Sm afireisaittblcbtntnp anger, 
anb  ||fl)ail  burnc  bnto  tlje  loidefthcll, 
anb  than  ronfumc  the  earth  ibith  her 
tncrcate,  anb  fct  on  fir  e  the  founbattons 
ofthemountatnes. 

ij  3  tbill  hcape  mtfehtefes  bpon 
them,3}uiilfpenbmincarrolbcsbpon 
tljem. 

24  They  fhaii  bee  burnt  lbtth  hunger 
and  deuourcd  lbtth  tburntngheat,  and 
lbith  bitter  beftruttton:3J  lbillaifo  fenb 
thettcthof  beaasbponthcin,  U)ttl)tl)e 
pou*on  of  ferpents  of  the  butt. 

15  3UhefttWbU)ithout,anbterrour 
tiblthm  fljau  t  beQrov  both  the  pong 
man ,  anb  the  birgtn ,  the  fucfeltng  aifo 
tbuhthemanof  gravhatrcs. 

i6  3  (aib,  3  mould  fcatter fhemitv 
to  comers,  3  ibould  maftethcremem' 
bjante  of  them  to  teafc  fro  among  men: 

17  naere  it  not  that  31  feared  the 
tt)?arh  of  the  enemie ,  left  their  abuerfa* 
rtesfboulbbehaucthemfeluesftrange^ 
lp,anaicftthci»thoulbfai>,  ||£>ur  hanbe 
ts  htgh>anb  the  %  e>  is  &  hath  not  bone 
all  this. 

28  5r02  the?  are  a  nation  boibe  of 
tounfel,  neither  is  there  an?  bnder  ftan- 
btnginthem. 

19  £>  that  the?  tbere  tbtfc,  that  the? 

bnderftood  this,  that  the?  Iboulbtonft 
bcr  their  latter  enb. 

3o^oxb  u^ttlb*one  chafe  a  fhoufanb, 
and  tibo  put  ten  thouland  to  flight,  cp 
cept  their  8orfee  hab  folb  them,  anb  the 
H©H©habfl)utthcmbp^ 

31  Jfo?  their  rocftc  ts  not  as  our 
Bocbc,  ettm  our  enemies  thcmfclues 
bctngiubges. 

32  fo;  their  bine  is  ||  of  the  bine  of  t°'j>™fi 
^>obome,anb  of  the  fields  of  Gomojah: ,h 
their  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall ,  their 
clufters  are  bitter. 

33  XheirYbineisthepoifottofb2a: 
gons,  anb  the  trucll  beninte  of  3tfpcs. 

34  5s not  this laibcbp  in  fto:e lbtth 
me,  andfealeb  bp  among  m?  treafures j. 

35  IComebelongeth*  bengeance,anb 
retompence,  their  footlhall  fltbcinbue 
time  :fonhe  bap  of  their  calamine  ts  at 
hand,  and  therhingsfhatfhal  come  dp- 

on  them,  matte  haftc. 

36  foi  the  |LflD«©  (ball  ttidge  his 
people,  and  repent  himfclfe  fozhtsfer 
uants,lbl)cn  he  feeth  that  then  tpo\ber 

U  ts 


I  Or,  car 
high  hand 
ilndnettoc 
LO-Xp 
hAtkd&ie 
all  Ml. 


I0Q1.I3. 


vine  of  So- 
dsme.&c. 


Ecc!us.j8 

j  1  .rom.12. 

19.hcb.10. 


\MAmd. 


Mofesfong:  He  Dcutcronomie.    may  fee  Canaan. 


f  Hfhr.an 
btdtr.g  far 

jm. 

•  I.  Sam. 3. 
6.  fob.  1 5. 2 
Wild.  1 6 . 
')■ 


|l  Or.f-riife 
h:t  people  Jy 
nutans.  0rt 

Mr- 

«Mait.7.<5. 
rain. I  5.10. 


||  OrJafiiiA. 


Chsp.«.«. 
and  11.  |8. 


"  Num.  17. 
11- 


isgone,  anD  there  is  uone  fbutbp,  oj 
left. 
37  ^nD  Dc  Cljau  fap ,  nat)cte  arc  tljctr 

gobs  «  thctr  3Rocfcc  in  ibhom  ttje? 
tcuttcD; 

3s  nahuhDiDcatthefetofthercfacri' 
fices,  $  DzanKe  the  lbme  of  their  tmnU 
offerings  *  let  them  rife  bp  ant)  helpe 
V0u,and  be  t  pour  protection. 

39  5>eenoiu,tl)at3!,c^n3}aml)e, 
anDthercisnogoDttiithmcc;  *  5  toll, 
ant)3J  make  aluie :  3IiboiuiD  ,  anD3I 
heaie:  neither  is  there  anp  that  can  Dc; 
Inter  out  of  nip  hanD. 

40  jFo?  3  lift  bp  nip  hanD  to  |)ta? 
uen.atiD  fap,3J  Uuc  foj  ener. 

41  Jfjibhctmp  glittering  froojD, 
anD  mmc  hanD  taHc  holDc  on  ^liioge 
mcnt.^J  JUffl  rctiDcr  bengeance  to  mine 
enemies ,  ant)  lbill  rcibarD  them  that 
Interne. 

41  3  ibill  mahe  mmc  atroibcs 
Dnmttc  lbitl)  blooD,  (anD  nip  froojb  (bai 
Dcnoure  flelb )  and  that  )Ditl)  the  bloob 
of  the  (lame ,  anD  of  the  capnues ,  from 
the  beginning  of  rcuenges  bpon  ttje 
enemie. 

43  ||  &eio pte,  »©  *  pc  nations  with  his 
people,  fb:  he  ibill  aucttgethe  bloobof 
hisferuants ,  anD  lbill  rcnDcr  benge= 
ante  to  his  aDucrfanes,anD  ibil  be  met* 
tifullbnto  l)is  ianD,and  to  dispeople. 

44  C  3lnD  99ofcs  tame  anD  fpa&e 
all  tHetb02Dcs  of  tins  fong  m  the  cares 
of  the  people,  he  anD  ||  l>?o(hca  the  fonnc 
of  /Bun. 

45  3lnD  £0ofes  maDc  an  enD  of fpea* 
tong  all  thefe  uwds  to  all  33ftacl. 

46  3lnD  hce  faiD  bnto  them,  *  Set 
pour  hearts  bnto  all  theibojDcs  lbhttb 
3  temfie  among  pou  tl)is  Dap,  tblncb 
pee  (hail  tommaunD  pour  cbilDmi  to 
obferue  to  Doe  all  the  tbojDcs  of  this 
Haib. 

47  5foj  it  is  not  a  bamc  thing  ft>2 
pou :  becaufc  it  is  pour  life,  anD  through 
this  thing  pee  (hall  prolong  vour  Dapes, 
mthclauD  lbhithetpee  goc  ouer  301 
Dantopofleffeit. 

4S  3ltiD  *  the  H  o  is  1?  fpafte  bnto 
fl^ofes  that  fclfc  famcDap,fapmg, 

49  <3et  thee  bp  into  tins  mountamc 
^barim,  bnto  mount  0cbo,  ibbich  is 
m  the  lanD  of  i^oab  ,  that  is  ouer  a- 
gamft  Jericho,  anD  bcholD  thelanDof 
Canaan  which  3  su»c  bnto  the  cbtl 
Dzmof  JfraclfoiapolTcflion: 

50  3utD  Die  m  the  mount  whither 
thougocft  bp, anD  bee  gathcreD  bnto 


thpptoplc,as*^aronthpb20thcrDieD 
in  mount  tyot ,  anD  ibas  gatljercD  bnto 
Ijts  people: 

51  25ccaufc*pctrcfpa(rcDagauiftme 
among  the  chilDzcn  of  Jfcacl,  at  the 
waters  of  ||  £0cnbah  BaDrih ,  in  tlje 
VbilDcrncCTc  of  Zm :  bctaufe  pcefanctt- 
fieD  mee  not  m  the  miDfl  of  tlje  chilDJcn 
ofjfrael. 

51  Pctthoti  (halt  fee  the. anD befoje 
thec,but  thou  (halt  not  goc  thither  bnto 
the  lanD  lbhtch  3  giuc  the'chtlDzen  of 
Jftael. 

CHAP.  XXXIII. 

1   TheMaieftieofGod.    6  The  hie/Tings  of  the 
twelueTribes.    16  The  excellency  ot'Ifrael. 

^^^H  $&  tijis  is  the  blcflmg, 
%f'M^i  mherexbitf)  fl^ofes  the 
' "  W  man  of  god  WeiTcD  ttjc 
jffi8£$%  thtiDJcn  of  ^fracl  before 
is^^^*  insDeath. 

z  anDhcfaiD,1i:he1Lfi)is©tame 
from£>mai,anDrofc  bpfrom  S>cirbn; 
to  them  ,hce  (hmeD  foo?th  from  mount 
^>aran ,  anD  hee  tame  ibtth  ten  thon< 
fanos  of  faints :  from  his  UStghthanD 
wem  a  t  Rene  Haib  foz  them. 

3  J3ca  hce  ioucd  the  people ;  all  his 
Saints  -ire  ni  thp  hatiD :  anD  thepfate 
Doibneat  thpfcctCi  t\\tt]>  one  (hailre? 
teiucoftbpttwDcs. 

4  4©ofcstommaunDcDbsalLaib, 
euen  the  inheritance  of  the  Congrega- 
tion  of 'Jacob. 

5  3lnD  hce  tbas  l&ng  in  ^cfnrnn, 
when  the  heabs  of  the  people,  and  the 
Xnbcsof  Jfrael  IbcrcgathcrcDtoge^ 
ther. 

6  C  Het  Bcubcn  line,  anD  not  Die, 
anD  let  not  ins  men  be  fcib. 

7    <l3nDtblSistbeblcfsing0f3IUDah: 

anD  he  faiD  ,l?earc,  %<£>  is  2>,thc  boice  of 
3luDah,anDbnng  him  bnto  hispcople: 
let  his  hanos  bee fumncnt  fo:  him ,  anD 
bee  thou  an  hdpc  to  htm  from  his  cnc= 
nucs. 

8  C 3lttDoflLciuheefaiD,  *Lecthp 
XhummimanD  thp  tUlrun  beibith  tljp 
holponc,ibnomthouDiDDcftp20oucat 
il©afl*ah ,  &  w.thibhomthouDiDflOTiue 
at  thcibatcrsof  tl3cribah . 

9  ttwofaiD  bnto  his  father  %  to  his 
mother ,  3  hauc  not  fecne  htm ,  neither 
DID  hce  aclmoibleDgc  his  b2ctl)2cn.;no? 
Knew  his  oibnc  cl)UD2cn :  fo:  thep  hauc 
obferucbthp  lbo?D  ,  anD  hept  thpCo^ 
uatant. 

10  iimiicp 


*  Num.ao, 
25,28. and 

n.38. 

*Num.20. 
12, 13.  and 

27.14. 

\Or,ftrifia 

KaJefi. 


t  Heir  j,  fir 


'  Erad.  jS. 


Mofes  blefleth         Chap.xxxiiij.    the  tribes  of  Ifrael. 


§Or  lit  thtm 

them  fa: 
incenfe. 
\Htb.Mthj 
mfc. 


*Gtu.49. 


forth. 
\H,br. 


•Gcn.^j. 
\6. 


HAftlcd. 


io  |)  Xbe?  (bal  teacti  3Jacob  ttft  mug- 
ments,  anb  3jfrael  thy  lLarbe :  ||  rt)C)> 
(ballputmcenfetbefo2etbec,anblbboU 
burnt  facrtficc  upon  tbutc  3Utar. 

ii  BlcfTc,?l©is©,hisfubftance,attb 
accept  the  lbozfce  of  his  hanbes,  ftmte 
tbotoib  tijc  lomcs  of  them  that  rtfea* 
gamlr  torn,  anb  of  them  that  hate  him, 
that  the?  rife  not  agame. 

ii  CAndof2SentamuthefaiD,  Xbe 
beioneb  of  the  %  ©  k  ©  (hall  btbcil  m 
fafctic  by  hun,  and  the  l  o  R  d  (bail  coucr 
him  all  the  bay  long,  anb  he  (tyallbibell 
betmecnehtB  fboulbers. 

13  C^nbof3fofephhefati'>*26let 
feb  of  the  ft  ©  k  ©  be  his  lanb,  fo?  the 
pzteious  things  of  heauen,  fo?  the  beib, 
anb  fo:  the  beep  that  eouchcth  beneath  , 

14. 3tnbto?thcp.2cctousfruitsbroughi 
forth  by  tbemnne,  anbfo2tbep?ecious 
things  t  put  fojth  by  the  t  moone, 

15  3(nbfo;  the  chttfc  things  of  the  an? 
cient  mountatnes,  anb  fo?  the  precious 
things  of  the  tailing  bus, 

i6  3nbfoubep2Cciousthingsoftbe 
earth,  anb  rulncflc  thereof,  anb  fo?  the 
goobVbillofhimthatblbcUinthebuft): 
lctJn;bic!siD2;comcbpontheheabofSO' 
feph,  anb  bpon  the  top  of  the  hcab  of 
him  dm*  was  fcparatcb  fro hisb.zethjcn. 

17  ^isgIo?pisiikethcfirftlingofhis 
buiiocfec,  jhtshomcsareiikethehomcs 
of  tfttticojnes:  ibifbtbembc(ballpu(b 
the  people  together,  to  the  enbs  of  the 
earth :  anb  they  arc  the  ten  rhoufanos 
of  €ph2atm,anb  they  arc  tbetboufanbs 
of^anafTeh. 

18  <C3nb  of  zebulun  he  faib ,  3£to 
ioyte,  zebulun,  in  thy  going  out;  anb 
3Jffachar,in  thy  tents. 

19  Xbey  (hall  can  the  people  bnto 
the  mountame,  there  they  (bal  offer  fa? 
etifiecs  of  rtghtcoufnefle :  fo?  they  (hall 
fucfte  of  the  abunbance  of  tbefeas,  anb 
of  trcafures  i)rt>  in  the  fanb. 

20  C3tnbofc5abhefaib,2Slcflebbc 
he  that  enlargeth  ©ab :  beblbelletb  as 
a  lyon,  anb  teareththe  arme  mtttj  ttje 
crottmeoftbebeab. 

21  5(nb  he  p20tubeb  the  firftpartfo? 
himfelfc,becaufethcre,inapo2tionofthe 
lavbgiueribashetfeateb,  anbheecamc 
with  the  heabs  of  the  pcoplche  erccuteb 
the  tuthec  of  the  %  0B2>,anohisiubg< 
mcntsib!th3jfraci. 

22  C  3lnb  of  3?an  he  faib ,  2>an  is  a 
flyons  wbelpc :  hee  (ball  leapc  from 
Bafban. 

23  C3nb  ofj3aphtaiihcfaib,£> 


i5aphtalt,fatiInebttitthfauoiir,anbfuil 
mitt)  the  blcumg  of  the  %  ©  k  © :  pot 
feffedjoutheiEeQanbtbe&outh. 

24.  C3tnb  of  ^Ojer heefato ,  let  %-- 
(bcr  be  blcffcb  ttntb  cbilbzen,  fUtbim 
be  acceptable  to  his  b?etb?en,  anb  let 
him  biphis  footm  oile. 

2$  Xby  II  tboocs  (ball  bee  y?on  anb 
biade,  anb  as  thy  oayes,  k  fhaii  thy 
ftcengtb  bee. 

26  C  Xbere  is  none  Iflte  bnto  the 
d5obof  3Jcfurun,  who  ribeth  bpon the 
beauenmtbybelpc,  anbinbisercellen* 
neon  the  ffeie. 

27  Xhe  eteroail  ©ob  is  thy  refuse, 
anb  bnberncatb  are  the  euerlafhng 
amies:  anb  he  mall  thmftouttheene* 
mic  fcombefo?e  thee,  anb  fbailfay,  2Dc# 

(troy  them. 

28  *  3Jftaei  then  (ball  bibcll  in  Cafe* 
tic  alone :  the  fountamcof  3faeob  *albe 
bponaianb  of  conic  anb  mine,  alfohjs 
heauens  (hallbzop  boibnebeaib. 

29  $appy  an  thou,  €)  3Jfrael :  wlto 
is  lifeebnto  tl)ce,jD  people  1  Caueb  by  the 
%  ©  is  © ,  the  (hielb  of  thy  helpe,  anb 
lbho  is  the  Ctno2b  of  thy  crcellencte :  anb 
thine  enemies  ||  (baibefounbuarsbnto 
thee,  anb  thou  (halt  treab  bpon  their 
high  places. 

CHAP.   XXXIIII. 

1  Mofes  from  Mount  Ncbo  vieweththelande. 
5  He  dieth  there.  6  His  buriall.  7  His  age. 
8  Thirty  daves  mourning  for  him.  9  lofhua 
fucceedeth  him.  10  The  praifc  of  Moies. 

fib  ^ofcsibeiit  bp  from 
the  plaincs  of  ^oab,bnto 
the  mountainc  of  if2ebo, 
tothctopof0tfgah,that 
ts  oueragainlt  Jericho: 

anb  the  ftfiDis©  (Ijcroeb  Dim  *ail  the 

lanb  of  d5ileab,bnto  Dan, 

2  3inb  all  /Baphtali,  anb  the  lanbc 
of  €ph:aim,  anb  flj9ana(Teb,anb  all  rJje 
Uinbof  3Jubah,bnto  tbcbtmottfca, 

3  ^nb  the  South,  anb  the  piame  of 
the  bailey  of  SJericbo,  tbecitic  of  paimc 
trees  bnto  Zoar. 

4.  ^nb  the  %  ©  is  ©  faib  bnto  hint, 
*  Xhts  ts  the  lanb  mbirh  3  froar  c  bnto 
3tbtaham,  bnto  3Jfaac,  anb  bnto 5a- 
tob,faymg,  ^1  lbtll  giue  tt  bnto  thy  feeb : 
3  bauc  caufeb  thee  to  fee  tt  ibith  thine 
cycs,butrt)oufl)alt  not  go  oucr  thither. 

5  C  So  S0oke  the  fcruant  of  the 
H©K©bicbtbereinfhcianbof$)oab, 
accoibing  to  the  lbotb  of  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

SI  2  6     3tlb 


|  Or,  vndcr 

thyfltooes 

Jbalhe)r<m. 


•Icr.13-6 


j  Or,  fhtlbi 
fnbdtad. 


\OrtH«l. 


•Chap- J. 
37  2.raac* 
2.4. 


*Gcn.Z2.7 
and  13*15 


Mofes  age,death,         lofhua.  and  fucccfTour. 


t  Htlr.mci- 

fiur.: 

\Hrfr.ftd. 


•Dcut.:, 

38. 


*Dcur.  1 1 

:.).t!tat". 
MP- 


6  3nb  tjee  burteblnm  in  abauepin 
rtjclanu  of ©oab,  oucr  agamftaSetD- 
iDeoz:  but  no  manimotbetboftns&c* 
pulclne  bnto  tins  Dap. 

7  C  3uiD  £0ofcs  tbas  an  fnuibjeb 
anb  tibentie  peer  es  olbeJbijrn  fte  bicb: 
tjistpe  ibas  not  btmmc,  no?  ins  t  nam* 
rallfojtetabateb. 

8  C  2tnb  the  tinibjen  of  Jrtracl 
vbept  fo?  QMes  in  tin  planus  ofs$)oab 
tinrtpbapes :  £>o  tin  bapes  of  ibeepmg 
and  mourning  fc»i$olisibercenbcb. 

9  C3nb3lofl)uatlnfonneofJftun 
was  fall  of  tin  Spirit  of  Ibifcbome  :fb? 


gpofcsfiab  lapbtns  banbesbpontnm, 
ant)  tbc  tt)tlb?cn  of  3(fracl  bearKencb 
bnto  tnm,anb  bib  asti)e3Lsi>  is©  torn- 
manbeb#ofcs. 

10  C3mbtljercarofcnota$?opbet 
(hue  in  3&ael  libe  bnto  ^ofes>tt>l)om 
tlje  fL©K©feneU)  fate  to  fate: 

11  3n  ai  tin  fignes  anb  tin  lbonbers 
Vbincif tin  Hqisjd  fent  tjnn  to  boc  m 
tinlanbof€gppt,  toi&ljaraol),anbto 
all  Dis  fcr  uants ,anb  to  all  ins  lanb, 

ii  :#nbmalltfjatmtgl)tpl)anb,anb 
in  all  tin  great  tctrout ,  ibtncl)  £)3ofes 
fycibeb  in  tin  figljt  of  all  3Jfrael. 


fTHE  BOOKE 

lofhua. 


OF 


CHAP.    I. 

The  Lord  appointeth  lofhua  tofucccede 
Mofes.  3  The  borders  of  the  promifed  land. 
5.  9  God  promifeth  to  affift  lofhua.  8  He 
giueth  him  mft ruttions.  i  o  He  prepareth  the 
peopletopafleouerlordan.  11  Iofhuaput- 
reth  the  two  tribes  and  halfe  in  minde  of  their 
promife  to  Mofes.i6They  promife  him  fealty. 

£>rbc  after  tlje 
bcatrj  of  £JMes 
tinferuant  of  tin 
%$>  »©,  it  tame 
topafTctfjattUe 
fL&ia©  toast 

bnto  IJofbua  tin 
fonne  of  /i5nn, 
i!0ofes*nmufter, 
fapmg, 
z  $3oftsmpferuant  is  beab  :noib 
tftetcfojc  anfe ,  goc  oucr  tins  3!o?ban, 
ti)on,  anb  all  tins  people ,  bnto  tlje  lanb 
Tbhidj^lbocgiuctotfjem,  euentottn 
tbtlDjcnofJfracl. 

3  *€ucrp  plate  tljat  tin  Cole  of  pour 
footc  (bail  trcab  bpon ,  that  rjane  %  gi 
nenbnto  pou,  as  3  faw>  bnto  £0ofcs. 

4  ifroin  tlje  lbilberncuc  anb  tftis 
^Lebanon ,  cuenbnto  tin  great  &tucr, 
tbe  riuer  dtpinates ,  all  tlje  lanb  oftfjc 
fcitntcs,anb  bnto  tin  great  fra,toU)arb 


tijegomgDoibneof  tfje&unnc,  fyaibc 
ponrcoaft. 

5  %\)ttt  fball  not  anp  man  be  able 
to  ftanb  before  tf)ee  all  tfjc  bapes  of  rt)V 
life:  as 3  *bas  ibitD  s^ofes,  fc  3  rt»m  be 
K)tr!)  tffee :  *3JttHllnotfaile  tficc ,  no? 
fotfaltetlne. 

6  *  25ee  fftong ,  anb  of  a  goob  ton 
rage :  fo?  ||  bnto  tins  people  tyaittijou 
mnibcfo?aninl)eritantctl)elanbttitjttl) 
3  fraare  bnto  Ante  fatljcrs  to  giue 
tijem. 

7  €>nelp  bee  tijon  frrong,  anb  bcrp 
courageous,  rDattbonmaveftoWitrne 
to  boe  atwbmgto  all  ttje  itittb,  ibf)id) 
$3otcsmpfcruantcommaunbcDtl)cc : 
*tnrncnotfromittotl)e  rigl)tf)anb,o? 
to  tin  left ,  tfjat  tbou  mapc(r||pzotocr 
rbintber  foeuer  tt)on  gorfh 

8  %J)isboobcoftHe?lattifl)alnot 
bepartout  oftbynioutl),buttr)oufl)alt 
mebitate  tftcretn  bap  anbnigljt,  that 
tnou  mapeft  obrcruc  to  boe  attojbing 
to  all  tljat  is  tbjitten  ttieretn :  fo?  tljcn 
tboti  Ibait  mabc  tin*  tbap  pjofperons, 
anb  rlien  tljou  (bait  ||ljaue  goobfuctcfTr. 

9  ^aucnot^tominanbcbtftcefbe 
(rtong,anbofagoobtonrage,beenota 
fraib ,  ncitDcr  be  thou  Difmayeb :  fo?tl)e 
ft  ©is id  tbv C5ou  is  tbtti)  tl)ce,lbijirt)tr 
foeuer  tbougotft. 

io  CXfiro 


•Hcb.i;. 
6. 

'Dcut.  }!. 

I'Or.lhcj 
JhMt  CAHfe 
thu  pcopltto 
inherits  tht 
la»d,£-c. 


and  28. 1^. 

'  Or,,itt 

nfclj. 


\\CrM 


iSp 


fe 


ics  are  lent  co 


Ch; 


ap.ij. 


viewlencho. 


•Num  31 


I  Hcl.  msr- 

jlaRcdtj 

ftte. 


♦Hckll. 
31  iam.i. 

\lU.Uj. 


10  CXben3iofbnacommanOcDtbe 
Officers  of  ttje  people,  facing, 

11  0atfetb?ougbtbebofte,anOcom' 
mano  tfjc  people,  fapmg,  f^epare  y>oa 
btetuals:  fejvbitbtnthtceoapespcfbal 
paAe  ouer  tI)is5o2i>an,to  goe  in  to  pot 
fefle  the  tano  tbbtrb  the  %  <s>  a  ©  pour 
<3oo  giuctD  yon,  to  poffefle  it. 

11  C3nDtotbcfeeubcnttcs,anoto 
lt)e  elites ,  ano  to  baife  the  tribe  of 
^anaflcb,  fpabc^lofbua,  facing, 

15  »&mcnibcrtbeibojbibb»eb$te; 
fes  the  feruant  of  the  %®m>  tomman- 
beb  pou,  Taping,  1^he!L©m©  pout 
Cpod  Ijatfj  giucn  pou  reft,  anu  hatbgt; 
uenpoutbisianD: 

14.  j9outtbtucs,pourlitle  ones,  ano 
pour  tattcll  (ball  rcmainc  in  tbelanoe 
ibbicb  fij9ofcs  ganc  pou  on  this  Cbe 
■JJojoan;  butpe  (hall  pafle befcue  pout 
toetbJen  tarmeb,  all  the  nughtie  men 
of  balour,  anb  belpc  them : 

15  Untill  the  U, ©is©  baue  S*uen 

pOUt  b?Cth?CU  tell,  aShehathgiuenpoU, 

ano  the?  alfo  banc  poffefleo  the  lanoe 
ibbtch  the  fL©  wid  pour  ©oo  giueth 
them:  then  pee  (hall  returne  bnto  the 
lanb  of  pour  poffeflion,  anb  ettiop  it, 
tbhith  SJ9ofts  the  %  ©  is  ©  &  feruant 
gaue  pou  on  this  fibc  3Jo?oan  ton>aro 
tbe&unnenfmg. 

16  C  3no  thep  anftuereb  3Jo(bua, 
faping,  311  that  thou  commanoeft  bs, 
rbe  mm  boe,  aub  tbbitbet  foeucr  thou 
fcnoeftbs,luett>iUgoe. 

17  3cc ojbing  as  ibebcatfeencobnto 
fi^ofesm  all  thutgs,fo  ihill  Vbe  hcarften 
bntotbee:  onclp  theft©  is  ©tbpdsoo 
bcibitbtbee,  asbe*basibitb#otes. 

is  nahofoeuerhebethatbothrebeil 
agamft  thp  commanoenieut,  anoibUl 
not  beatftenbnto  thp  tt/ojos,m  all  that 
thou  tonimanbeft  bun,  betballbecpnt 
to  Death :  onefp  be  fttong,  ano  of  a  goob 
courage. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Rahab  receiueth  and  concealeth  the  two  (pics 
fentfromShiuim.  8  Thecouenantbetwecne 
her  and  them.  i}  Theirreturneandrelatioa 

4120  3Jofl)uatbc  fonnc  of 
iBun  fent  out  of  &bttttm 
tvbo  men,  to  fpie  fectetlp, 
faping,(5o,bicjb  the  lanb, 
cucn  ^ericljo :  anb  thep 
ibcnt,ano*  came  mto  an  harlots  houfe, 
nameb  Babab,  ano  t  loogeb  there. 

x  3nOtnbastolDtbetungof3Jen' 
cbo,fajung,2SebolD,  there  camemenm 


bitbertoiugbt,oftbetbilo,!cnof3ffca 
el,  to  fcarrh  out  the  coutitrep. 

5  3no  the  Ring  of  Jericho  fentbn- 
to  Sahab,  fapmg,  25nng  fo?tb  tb  c  men 
tbataeetomctotbee,  abicb  areentreb 
into  thine  boufc:  foj  thep  bee  come  to 
Search  out  all  the  couutrep. 

4  31nD  the  iboman  toohe  the  tibo 
men.anobiotbein,  ?ratDtbus:%bcre 
tame  men  bnto  mee,  but  J}  ibid  not 
ibbencetbepibetc: 

5     3fa0  It  tame  tO  paffC  about  the  time 

of  (hutting  of  the  gate,  robot  it  teas 
oarfce,tbat  the  men  \bcnt  out :  tbhitljer 
tbemenibcnt,  ^jibote  not:  purfue  af- 
ter them  qtucfeelp,  fo?  ^t  (bail  oucrtakc 
them. 

6  26ut  (bee  bab  brought  them  top  to 
the  roofe  of  the  boufc,  ano  IjiD  them 
nntbthcftautcsof  flare,  lbbtcbfbcbao 
laib  in  02bet  upon  the  roofc. 

7  3nb  the  men  purfueb  after  them 
the  tbap  to  3Jojoan,  bnto  the  foojtos: 
anb  afloone  as  thep  ibhicft  purfueo  af- 
ter them  Ujerc  gone  out,  thep  Chut  tlje 
gate. 

8  C  3no  before  thep  mere  laiDe 
bottmc,  ftjee  came  top  bnto  thnnbpon 
thctoofe. 

9  ^nb(hcfaibl)ntothemen,3Imtott» 
that  the  fL©«©  barb  giuen  pou  the 
lanb,  anb  that  pour  tctt out  is  fallen 
topontos,  anb  that  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  lanb  t  faint  becaufc  of  pou : 

10  jpoj  Ibec  bane  hearb  botb  t!)c 
%  ©  is  &*n;itis  bp  the  ruatcr  of  the  rcb 
5>cafo,rpou,  ibhenpoucame  out  of  <£* 
gppt,  anb  ibbat  pou  bib  bnto  tbcttbo 
Stutgsof  the  ^montes  that  were  on  the 
other  0be  5o?ban,  *  ^>ihon  anb  £>g, 
lbbom  pe  bttcrlp  beftropeb. 

11  ^nbafloone  as  ibe  bab  hearb  theft 
things,  our  hearts  bib  melt,  neither  bib 
tberetremame  anp  mojc  tourage  inanp 
man ,  becaufe  of  pou :  fo?  the  %  ©  js  © 
pour  <sob,  he  is  (Sob  in  beaucn  about, 
ano  in  earth  beneath. 

ii  ii5otbtberfoie,3Jp?appou,frocarc 
bnto  me  bp  the  %  &  is  b,  Gntc  %  hauc 
fbetbeb  pou  bmbnefTe,  that  pc  ibill  alfo 
(hero  mnbncffe  bnto  mp  fathers  houfe, 
ano  giue  meatruetoben: 

1  j  ^(nbtbat  petbill  fauc  aliuempfa^ 
thct,  anb  mv  mother,  anbmpbjetbiien, 
ano  mpQIlers,  ano  all  that  thep  hauc, 
anO  Otlhter  our  \\m%  from  oeath. 

14  2mDtbemman(toereobcr,4Dur 
life  tfo:  pours,  if  pee  btter  not  this  our 
butmeuTr.  £no  it  (ball  bee  ibbcn  the 
"USX  j        TLsdikjz) 


\Htb.mch. 


*Exod.t4 
n.chap.  4, 


'Num.  st 


fHci.nfi 


tread  of  jnt 
to  dtt. 


Rahabs  couenant.        Iofhua.        The  Arke  borne. 


t  Hcbr.gt. 
ibrr. 


\Hct>rjndt 


%  <s>  is  d  hath  giueu  tos  tfjc  lano ,  tijat 
tbeeibiliocale  fetnoely  auo  truelpiuirt) 
thee. 

15  Xhenfheeletthemooibncbya 
coaro  thojotb  the  tbinootb  :  fb?  her 
houfe  was  bpon  tijc  totbnetball,anO  (he 
oibelt  bpon  the  rball. 

i6  3lno  (be  farti  into  them,  (5et  yon 
to  the  ntountainc ,  left  the  purfucrs 
mcctcyou;  ano  Ditie  your  felucs  tfjerc 
tbjee  oayes,  tmnll  the  purfucrs  bcetc* 
tumeb,ano  afteribarO  may  yegoe  your 
tbay. 

17  3no  the  men  feio  bnto  her,  aacc 
tbill  bee  blamclrffc  of  this  thine  oath 
ruijtct)  thou  baft  maoc  bsfroeate : 

18  2Sef)olB ,  tbljen  tbc  come  into  the 
lano.tboufljaltbinoctbisiineoffcarlct 
th«eo  m  the  MnOorbtbhich  thou  Dtoll 
let  bsootbne  by:  ano  ttoulbaittbnng 
thy  father  ano  tljr  mother,  anb  thy  toe* 
th.jen ,  ano  all  thy  fathers  houlholo 
home  bnto  thee. 

19  :3nOit(ballbee,thatlbbolbtuet 
(bailgocoutof  tbeooojes  of  thy  boufc 
into  the  Greet,  his  bloob  fhaibe  bpon  his 
heao,  anb  ibee  Hull  bee  gmltleffc :  anb 
Tbbofocuer  (hall  bee  ibitb  thee  in  the 
Doufchts  bloob  (haibc  on  our  ^eab,if  any 
hanbbctoponhim. 

10  3lno  if  thou  totter  this  our  buG= 
nctte,then  iheibilbc  quit  of  thine  oath 
ibhith  thou  halt  mabc  bs  to  (toearc. 

21  3mo  ftee  faibe ,  3ftto;tOing  bnto 
y our  tuo^bs,  fo  be  it.  3(n0  (he  fent  them 
aibap ,  1  they  beparttb :  anb  (he  bounb 
tbefcarlctuhemthelbinootb. 

11  3ino  they  tbent,  anb  tame  bnto 
themountatne,  anb  abobc  there  tlnce 
bay  est,  bntill  the  purfucrs  tbcre  return 
neb.  3lno  the  purfuers  fought  them 
thojoibout  all  tlje  ibay ,  but  founb 
them  not. 

13  <r<a>o  tlje  two  men  returneb,anb 
ocfccnbcb  from  tlje  mountaine ,  anb 
paffeb  oucr ,  anb  tame  to  "Jofhua  the 
fonncof  jRun,  anbtolb  him  an  things 
thatbefellthem.  v         J  * 

14  3mo  they  faibe  bnto  iofhua, 
Xruclythc!L©KiPhath  Oeliucreoin* 
to  our  hanbs  all  the  lanb }  (01  euen  all 
tht  inhabitants  of  the  rountrey  boe 
t  famt  becaufe  of  bs. 

CHAP.    III. 

1   Iofhua  commcth  to  Iord.in.   i  The  Officers 
inftruftthe  people  for  the  pafTage.    7  The 
9   Iofhua  in- 


Lor  d  incourageth  Iofhua. 


courageth  the  people.     14    The  waters  ol 
Iordanarediuided. 

j]5b3Joflma  rofe  early  in 
the  monnng,  anb  tljcyrc- 
mooueb  fiom  £>l)itnm, 
anotameto3Jo;ban,hce 
„  anb  ail  the  chiuuen  of  3lt 
taei,  anb  loogcb  there  before  theypaf 
ftOouer. 

1  3lno  it  tame  to  pafle  after  thiee 
oayes,  that  the  Officers  u)cnttbo?oU) 
tljehofte; 

j  ^nbthevtommanbeb  the  people, 
faying ,  nabenye  fee  the  3trfee  of  the  Co- 
ucnant  of  the  ?L  ©  k  ©  your  (5ob ,  anb 
tlje  duetts  the  fLcuites  bearing  it,  then 
yee  (hail  remoouefromyour  place,ano 
goe  after  it. 

4  ^etthcrefhaibcafpatebctrbecne 
you  ano  it,  about  ttbo  thoufanb  cubites 
by  mcalute :  tome  not  ncere  bnto  it, 
that  ye  may  tmorb  the  Ibay  by  ibhith  y e 
mutt  goe :  fo?  yee  baue  not  paffco  this 
Vbaytucretofoje. 

5  2n03Jo(buaraiOtontothepeople, 
*ja>anrttficyout  felues:  fojtomojroib 
the1L©iR©lbilDo  Ibobers  among  you. 

6  3mo  3Jo(bua  (pane  bnto  the 
0;tefts,  faying,  Xafee  bp  the  Srfceof 
the  €onenant,anb  paffc  oucr  before  the 
people.  3mo  they  too&etopthc3lrRcof 
the  Couenant ,  ano  tbent  before  the 
people. 

7  €3ln0  the  fC©K©laiDe  bnto 
3o(hua,Xhis  bay  ttnl  U  begin  to  mag* 
ni8ethec<n  the  tight  of  aiijffraet,  that 
they  may  mtotb  that*asji[basibith 
fij&ofcs/o  J  ibill  be  unth  thee. 

8  3ino  thou  (halt  commatmo  the 
fd^ieQs  that  beare  m  airaeof  the  Co^ 
uenant,  faying ,  nahen  ye  are  tome  to 
ti)e  bjinftc  of  tl)c  lbater  of  3o?oan ,  yee 
(hall  fhmo  (hll  injtooan. 

9  C3lnogio(huafaiObntothcthil' 
0:en  of  3lfraei,  Cwne  hither,  ano  hcarc 
the  ibo^Ds  of  the  %  sd  h  ©  your  C5oo. 

10  ^nb3Io(l)uafatb,  hereby  ye  (hall 
fcnolbthat  the  liuing  ©oots  among 
y  ou,ano  that  he  Ibtll  ibithout  (ailc  b^iuc 
out  from  before  you  the  Canaanitcs, 
anothe^ittitts,  anb  the  routes,  ano 
the  j&ermites,  ano  ®rrga(hitcs,  ano 
the  3lmontes,ano  the  ^ebuOtes. 

11  26eholo,  tbc  ame  of  the  Coue* 
nam ,  euen  the  fU»o  of  all  the  earth, 
paflcth  ouer  before  you,mto3Jo;oan. 

11  jfftoib  therefore  tafteycetlbcluc 
men  out  of  the  bribes  of  3Jfracl,out  of 
eucrylCribeaman. 

u  3(uo 


\  Htbr.ftnct 
jeflerdxy  ti- 
the third 
day. 

"Leutr.  10. 
7. num.  1 1. 
1  8.  chap.  7. 
1  M.  fain, 

16.J. 


"  Chap.  1 


Iordan  is  dried  vp.      Chap.mj.  Twelue  itones. 


•PR  IM 
»• 


'Afls745 


•i.Cbron 
ll.Ij.cc- 

clus.j4.30. 


•Dciit  17, 

2. 

*Chap.3. 
l>. 


i j  anbitfl)aucomctopaffc,affoonc 
asthcfolcs  of  the  fcctc  of  the  i^icftcs 
tbatbeatctbcarBeofthefLsDisiestbc 
jLoin  of  all  the  earth ,  (ball  reft  in  the 
lbaters  of  _[l02ban,  that  the  ibatcrsof 
30o2banfl)aii  be  cut  off,  from  the  lbaters 
ttjat  comcboibnc  from  aboue:  anbtbep 
*  (hall  ftanb  bpon  an  beapc. 

14  C  anb  it  tame  to  pafTc  lbhen  the 
people  reniooueb  from  their  tents,  to 
pane  ouer  30  joan,  anb  tljc  ^nefts  bm 
ring  the*  ante  of  the  Couenant  before 
the  people, 

15  anb  as  thep  tfjat  bare  tlje  arbc 
tbere  comebnto  3J02ban,anbrije  fcetof 
tljc  jkiettcs  that  bare  the  arfee,  mere 
bippebtn  thcb2immeof  tbeibater,  (feu 
*_flo2ban  oucrfloUjctljau  htsbauBsat 
tljc  time  of  barucft) 

i6  Xbat  the  ibaterg  Vbhich  tame 
botbne  from  aboue,  ftoob  and  rofe  bp 
bpon  an  beapc  bcrp  farr  c,  from  the  titp 
abam ,  that  is  bctfbc  narctan :  anb 
tbofc  that  tame  boibnc  tomarb  thefca 
ofthepiattic,'-uentbcfaltfca,fatleb,and 

ibcr  e  tut  off:  anb  toe  people  paffeb  ouer 
rigbtagainft_0cncbo. 

17  anb  the  pjicftcs  that  bare  tljc 
arise  of  tljc  Coucnant  of  tljc  ?L©kb, 
ftoob  firnieonb2ie  grounb,  in  tbcmibft 
of  _0o2ban,  anb  all  the  _0fraclitespaf 
feb  ouer  on  bne  grounb,  bntill  all  tljc 
people  Vbcte  paffeb  clcanc  oucc_0o2ban. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  Twelue  men  are  appointed  to  take  twelue 
ftones  for  a  memorial!  out  of  Iordan.  9 
Twelue  other  ftones  are  fet  vp  in  the  middeft 
of  Iordan.  10.  19  The  people  paffe  ouer. 
14  Godmacnifiethlofhua.  10  The  twelue 
ftones  are  preened  in  Gilga!. 

/15b  it  came  to  paffe  lbljen 
all  the  people  ibere  tlcane 
paffeb  *  ouer  3l02ban,tbat 
tne  iLoibid  (pane  bnto 
*_j3ofoua,fapmg, 

2  "XaKe"pou  tibelue  men  out  of  the 
people,  out  of  cucrp  tribe  a  man, 

3  anbcommanbpoutbcm,  facing, 
Xaue  pou  hence  out  of  roc  nnbs  of^lo^ 
ban,  out  of  tbe  place  lbbcretbe^nefts 
feet  ftoob  fitme,  tibelue  ftones,  anb  pec 
ujal  carp  them  oner  lbttb  pou,anb  icauc 
tljcm  m  tljc  longing  place  ttiljerc  von 
ujalllobgetbismgbt. 

4  Xhcn  Ifoftiua  caileb  tlje  tibrlue 
mcn,ibhombcbabp2epateboftbethft 
b2cn  of  Jfrael  ,out  of cuerp  tribe  a  man: 


5  anb  Jolhua  tub  bnto  tbcm,paffe 
ouer  befojc  tfje  arse  of  tbe  It  ©  k  jd 
pour  ©ob  into  tljc  mtbs  of  3Jo:baii  ,anb 
tabe  vc  bp  cuerp  man  of  pou  a  ftonc  bp 
on  IjiB  ujoulbcc,  acco2bmg  bnto  tbe 
niuuber  of  tlje  tribes  of  tlje  council  of 
3Jfrael: 

6  3Cl>Tttoismapbeafigncamong 
pou,th.uU)hcnpoucchslb2en  afbc  tljcir 
fathers  t  m  tune  to  come,  faying,  nabat 
mcane  ran  op  thefe  ftones  < 

7  Xljen  pee  (ball  anfrocre  rtjem, 
Xbat  tljc  ibaters  of  3o2bau  ibere  tut 
off  before  the  ante  oftbe  Coucnant  of 
tlje  %  o  is  ©,  lbhen  it  paffeb  ouer  502 
ban,  the  ibaters  of  'Jo2ban  mere  cut 
off :  anb  theft  ftones  ftjaii  bee  fo;  a  mc- 
monail  bnto  thccbiltyen  of  _0fracifo2 
cucr. 

8  anb  tlje  tljiib2en  of  __Jfracl  bib  fo 
as_floftmatommanbro,  anb  toofcebp 
tibelue  ftones  out  of  tOc  mibft  of  jo; 
ban ,  as  the  %  ©  is©  fpa&e  bntoJJo 
fl)iia,  acco2bmg  to  tlje  number  oftljc 
tribes  of  tOc  tfnltacn  of  Sflfrael,  anb  ca 
rteb  them  ouer  ibtth  them ,  bnto  the 
place  inhere  tljtp  lobgeb,  anb  laib  them 
bolbne  there. 

9  anb  gjofbua  fet  bp  tibelue  ftones 
in  the  mibft  of  3Jo2ban ,  tn  the  place 
lbbcr  e  the  feet  of  the  #2iefts  rurjicl)  bare 
die  arfee  of  the  Coucnant,  ftoob :  anb 
tljcp  arc  there  bnto  thiSbap. 

10  C  if  02  the  0?tefts  lbbich  bare  the 
ante,  ftoobinthemibftonio2ban,bn; 
till  euerp  thing  ibas  fininjeb  that  the 
ILcisiDtommanbeb'Joftiuato  fpeabc 
bnto  the  people,  aecojbtng  to  an  that 
S^ofes  tommanbcb  JJofl)ua :  anb  the 
people  haftcb  anb  paffeb  ouer. 

1 1  anb  it  tame  to  paffe  lbhen  all  the 
people  tbcretlcancpaffcb  oucr,tbat  tljc 
arbcof  the  ?L©is©  paffeb  ouer,  anb 
thepneflsm  tljc  pjefence  of  the  people. 

it  anb*tliethilb2cnofiaeubcn,anb 
tnctntib2euof  ©ab,  anb  halfethc  tribe 
of  SJdauaffeb,  paffeb  ouer  armeb  befo2e 
thccbilbjen  of  3frael,as  ^ofes  fpabc 
bnto  them: 

«  aboutfourtpthoufanb||p2eparcb 
fo?  ibar  ,paffcb  ouer  before  the  fL  ©  is  © 
bntobatteil,tothcplainesof3Jrncho. 

1+  C5Dnthatbaptbc?L<0i3©niag 
mfieb^Jofhuam  the  fight  of  all  3Jfrael, 
anb  thep  feareb  him,as  thep  fearebfi^o 
fes  all  the  bapes  of  his  life. 

I-;  anbthe3L£>i35Dfpatiebnto3Jo 
fl)ua,favmg, 

16  Commanb  the  #2itfts  tfjat  beave 
the 


raw. 


*Num.  31 
*7- 


1 1  Or  rcsdy 
armed. 


Stones  in  Gilgal.         Iofhua. 


M 


annacca 


feth. 


\  Hehr. 
t  Hehr. 


1  Hthr.t, 


'Exod.  14. 


t  Uehr.  all 

dojtt. 


•Exod.4. 


the  arbe  of  thcXefrtmonp,  that  tljcp 
comctopoutofjozban. 

17  3!oQ)ua  tbcrcfoje  tommaunbeb 
thcp2ttfts,fapuig,  Come  pee  top  out  of 
jjfozoan. 

18  anb  it  tame  to  paffc  Vbhcn  the 
0ziefts  that  bare  the  ante  of  the  Coue? 
nam  of  the  jLoia  ©,itocrc  tome  top  out 
ofthcmibs  of  IJojban,  and  the  foicsof 
tbc^netts  feetcitoerc  tuft  top  tonto  the 
djv  lanb ,  that  the  itoaters  of  llozban 
tetttrneto  bntotheir  plate ,  anbfflotbcb 
oner  all  his  ban&s,as  thep  bib  before. 

19  C  anb  the  people  tame  top  out  of 
gjtwban  on  the  tenth  bap  of  the  firft  mo? 
neth,  anb  entampcb  m  <5ilgal,  in  the 
€aftb02bcrof3Jrricho. 

xo  anb  rhofe  nbelue  (tones  ibhith 
tbcptooBe  outof3iQ2ban,  bib3foftnia 
pitch  mtsilgai. 

ii  anbhcfpaac  tonto  the  cbilbjcn  of 
3Jfracl,faping,i©bcn  pout  cbilto2cn  fhai 
aflte  their  fathers  tin  time  to  tome,  tap? 
ing,u9hatmcancthcfc  (tones? 

21  ILhcn  pec  (hall  let  pout  chilbzcn 
tuioib,  faping,  gjfrart  tame  oucr  this 
3io2banonb2pianb. 

ij  5?02the  fl  <sd  is  ©pour  Gob  tyieb 
top  the  itoaters  of  3Jo2ban  frombefoze 
pou,  tontiUpeeitoerepaffebouer,asthe 
?L^  is  ©pour  00b  btbtothc&ebfea, 
•ibhichhecbneb  top  from  before  tos,ton? 
ffllltocitocre  gone  oner: 

24.  Xhat  all  the  people  of  the  earth 
might fcnoito  the hanb  ofrhefLiOis©, 
that  it  is  nnghtp,that  pc  might  feare  the 
ft  ©  is  ©  pour  ©ob  t  ft>2  cuer. 

CHAP.    V. 

TheCanaanitesarcafrai.:!.  2.  Iofhua  renu- 
ethCircumcifion.  io  ThePaffeoueriskcpt 
atGilgal.  12.  Manna  ceafcth.  13  An  An- 
gel appearech  to  Iofhua, 

fib  it  tame  to  paffe  ibhen 
all  the  Bings  of  t!)e  amo 
rites  ibhith  ibere  on  the 
i  aocofjoibantocfritoarb, 
£  anb  all  the  Bings  of  the 
Canaanttcs ,  ibhith  ibere  bp  thc&ea, 
hearb  that  the  1L«di»©  hab  bztcb  bp 
thcibatersof '3lo2ban  from  befoje  the 
thilbicnofJfrael.tontiUbeuicrepaiTcb 
oucr  ,that  their  heart  mcltcb ;  neither 
ibasthcrc  fp:nt  m  tbcmanpmoje,  be? 
taufc  of  the  thilbjcn  of  Jfracl. 

1  Cat  that  time  the iLo  is ©faib 
tonto  Joflnia , •  italic  thec  ||  fljarpe 
Unities,  anb  nrctimcife  agamc  tlje  rt)iU 
D:cn  of  Jlfracl  the  fr  conb  nine. 


j  anb  3loft)ua  mabe  htni  (barpe 
bniues ,  anb  nrcumcifcb  the  tbiltyen  of 
jjfrael  at  1!  the  fjilt  of  the  fojefbmnes. 

4.  anbtbtststbccau(eitobp'3Jo(l)ua 
bibcircumeifhailtbc  people  that  tame 
out  of  tfgppt,  that  were  males,  euenall 
the  men  of  ltoarr  c,bicb  in  the  vuilbernes 
bp  the  ibap  after  thep  tame  out  of  & 
gppt. 

5  /5ott>  all  the  people  that  came  out, 
lb  ere  rirrumcifcb,but  all  the  people  that 
ibere  borne  m  the  itoaberncffe  bp  the 
ibap,  as  thep  tame  foo2tb  out  of  <£gppt, 
them  thep  hab  not  circumeifcb. 

6  j?o2thethilbJcnof3JfraclitoaiUeb 
fourtic  pecres  tn  the  ltoilbcrncffe,  till  all 
thepeoplc  that  weremen  of  lbarrc  Ibhith 
tame  out  of€gpptlbetc  confumcb.bc* 
taufc  thep  obepeb  not  the  toopte  of  the 
fLsDis©,  tonto  mbomethc  Hois© 
froarc  that  Ijct  *  itooulb  not  (bclb  them 
the lanb  ibhith  the  %®  is  ©fiuarc  tonto 
tbctr  fathers,  thatheiboulbgiuetos,  a 
lanb  that  floibctb  ibttb  tmlbc  $  honic. 

7  anb  their  ebilbjeu,  whom  bee  rat? 
feb  top  in  their  fteab,  them  3Jothua  tit? 
cumnfeb,  fo2  thcplbcrctontircumtifcb 
became  thep  hab  notcircumtifcb  them 
bptheibap. 

s  anb  it  tame  to  paffc  t  ibhen  thep 
hab  bone  nrmmnfmg  all  the  people, 
that  thep  abobe  m  tljctr  plates  m  the 
cantpe,  nil  thep  iberc  lbholc. 

9  ^nbthcHois©faibctonto3Io? 
fhua,Xhisbaphaue3J  roliebaibapthe 
repzoch  of  €gppt  from  off  pou :  oahere* 
fo2c  the  name  of  the  plate  is  cailcb  ||  <Sil- 
gal  tonto  thisbap. 

io  C  3nb  the  chflb2cn  of  5lfracl  in? 
tampeb  mdlgal,  anb  fecptthe^afreo? 
net,  on  the  fourteenth  bap  of  the  mo* 
ncth  at  ctten ,  m  the  plamcs  of  3Jcrtcho. 

n  ^nb  thep  bib  eate  of  the  olbc  tome 
of  the  lanb,  on  the  mo2toib  after  the 
paffcoucr,  tonlcaueneb  cabes,  anb  par? 
cheb  com c  m  th c  fcifc  fame  bap. 

12  CC3nb  the  S0amta  ccafeb  on  the 
mojroib  after  thep  hab  eaten  of  the  olb 
tome  of  the  lanb,  neither  hao  the  thtl? 
b2en  of  ^frael  #atma  anp  moje,  but 
theptiib  catcof  the  frtut  of  the  lanb  of 
Canaan  that  pcerc. 

i}  €E3lnb  it  came  to  patTc  ibhen  3Jo- 
fljua  ibas  bp  3Jcrtcho,that  he  lift  top  his 
epes,  anb  loolicb,  anb  bcholDc,  there 
ftoob  *a  man  oucr  agaiuft  hmt,ibith  his 
fujoib  bavurn  m  his  hanb :  anb  3Joflnia 
nmitbnto  him,  anb  fatb  tonto  him,  art 
thou  fo?  us,  02  foi  our  abucrfancs^ 
14-  anb 


I)  Orfjihc. 
ah-biur*' 
loth. 


:  Num.14. 
'3- 


t  Hck  vhat 
thi'  people 
had 'made 
aji  endtept 
circ/md/ed. 


||/.M%. 


•Eiod.  23. 


Howlencho 


Ch; 


ip^j. 


is  befieged. 


\\Or,Pn 


•Exod.j.j 


\H,br.i,d 
/But  vp^nd 
WAljhtlt  Vf. 


\Helr.  wi- 
der 11. 


14  ^nD  Ik  faib,ii5ay,but  »  1  captainc 
of  tDe  Dofte  of  the  %  c>  is  ©  am  35  noib 
tome,  3nb  3tofhua  fell  on  his  fate  to 
the  ea«D,anb  bib  ibajfbip,  anb  faib  tat* 
to  Dim ,  ©Dat  faith  mj  ILojb  t>mo  his 
feruant* 

15  3nb  the  captainc  of  the  &<dise>£> 
Doffe  faib  bnto  jJofbua ,  *  Hoofe  tDy 
(Dooe  from  off  thy  footc,  foj  the  place 
Ibhcreon  thou  ftanbeft,  is  holy:  ano 
3Jofhuabibto. 

CHAP.   VI. 

1  Ierichoisfhutvp.  i  Godinftru&ethlofhua 
how  to  befiegc  it.  it  The  citie  is  comparted. 
17  Itmuftbeaccurfed.  10  The  walles  fall 
downe.  12.  Rahabisfaued.  i&  The  buil- 
der of  lericho  is  curfed. 

©ui^ericDottbasllrait; 
ly(Dutbp,bccaufeoftDe 
thiuwiof^fracunone 
ibent  out,$  none  tame  m. 
%  3Dib  the  %  ©  is  ■& 
fatbbnto^Joflnia,  £>ee,3Jhaucgiuen 
mtothtnchanb^Jcticho,  anbtheBmg 
thereof ,  and  toe  mighty  men  of  balout. 

3  3mbycn)allcompaffcthetity,aii 
yeemenoflbarrc,  and  goerounb  about 
tHe  dtp  ontc :  thus  fhait  tDou  boe  Itre 
bayes. 

4  3nb  feuen  $m&£  fljall  bear  c  bc^ 
fojetDe  ^rbc  fetien  trumpets  of  rams 
Domes :  anb  the  fcuenth  bay  yec  Ojail 
totitpafft  tDe  city  feuen  tnms  ,  anb the 
^rteftsfDaUblorbttntDtDe  trumpets. 

<,  3inb  It  fljall  tome  to  paffe  tDat 
tbrjeu  trjep  mahe  a  long  biaft  ibttD  the 
rammes  -  Dome ,  and  tbhen  ye  Dearc  ttje 
founb  of  the  trumpet ,  all  the  people 
fball  fbout  Ibith  a  great  fbout :  anb  the 
lball  of  tl)c  rtoe  fball  fall  boibne  t  flat, 
anb  tne  people  fljali  aftenb  bp  euery 
manftraiohtbcfoiehun. 

6  canblfofyuatDc  tonne  of  i!5un 
callebtDci&iefts ,  anb  faib  bnto  them, 
Xafee  bp  the  3true  of  the  Couenant, 
anblctfcucn^ncftsbtarc  feuen  trum- 
pets of  rammes -Domes ,  befo?e  tDe 
3lrBeoftDcll€)is©. 

7  3mbDcfaibbntotDepcopIe,$afrc 
on,  anb  tompafTe  tDe  city  ,anb  let  Dim 
tDat  is  atmcb  paffe  on  betojtc  tDe  Sirac 
oftl)e?L€>isj®. 

8  CHnb  it  tame  to  paffe  ibDen^o= 
fbuababfpo&cn  bnto  tlje  people ,  tDat 
ri;e  feuen  l&ncftcs  bearing  tDe  feuen 
trumpets  of  rammesDomes,paffeo  on 
before  the  %  ad  is  w,  anb  blcib  ibitD  tDe 


trumpets :  anb  the  ^rhe  of  the  Coue* 
j  uant  oftDeHoao  folloVbcbtDeuu 

9  C  3iub  tDe  armcb  men  ibentbe? 
foic  the  pucQs  that  bletb  Unth  tDe 
trumpets :  anb  the  t  rcrelbarb  came  af 
jtcr  the  3trUe,  the  priefts  gomg  on,  anb 
blowing  IbitD  the  trumpets. 

10  Znn  3toflmahabcommanbcbthe 
people,  taping,  Pcfbaiinot  Ojout,  no? 
tmaftc  anp  noife  U)itD  vout  botce,  net 
tljer  fDail  atrp  ibo?b  p:o  tteb  out  of  your 
montD,bntilltl)cbap3  bib  pouu)outc, 
tljenlDallptlDoute. 

11  S>otrjc^racoftDcH©K©tom 
paffcbtlje  titie,  goingabout't  ontc:  anb 
tljey  tame  into  tlje  tampe,  anb  lobgcb  in 
tDetampe. 

u  C^nblJonjuarofeearclvintDe 
morning,  anb  tDc^iefts  tooRC  bp  tl;e 
^rfteoftDclLois©. 

13  3lnb  feuen  02ufts  bearing  feuen 
truinpetsoframmcsDomcsbcfojetlje 

^rfte  of  tDe  %  ©  h  jd,  ibent  on  continue 
any,  anb  blcib  lbitD  tlje  trumpets :  anb 
tDe  armeb  men  ibent  bcfojctljcm,  but 
tDe  rcrclbarb  came  after  tl)e3lrKe  of  tlje 
3La>i33D,  the  Pucfts  going  onanbbloib- 
mgibitDtlie  trumpets. 

14.  31nb  tlje  fctonb  bap  tljcp  compat 
febtDe  tine  ontc,  anb  rcturneb  into  tDe 
tampe :  to  tDe?  bib  ftreoapes. 

15  ^nbittamctopaffcontDcfcunitD 
bap,tDat  tDev  rofc  early  about  tDe  baibs 
ntngof  tDcbap,  anb  tompaffeb  tDe  tine 
after  tDe  fame  maner,  feuen  times:  on; 
D>  on  tDat  bap  tl;ev  tompaffeb  tlje  title 
feuen  times. 

16  3mbittamctopaffeattDcfeucnth 
time,tUDen  tDe^nefts  bleibe  ibitDtDc 
trumpets,3foftniafaio  bnto  tlje  people, 
$>Dout,fo?  tlje  %  €>  is  jz>  Datlj  giucn  pou 
tDe  titie. 

17  C^nb  the  tine  fl)aibc  ||atturfeb, 
euen it,  anb  all  tbat  are  therein ,  to  tlje 
%  ©  is  © :  onclp  KaDab  tt)c  Darlot  0)ai 
Uuc ,  fl)C,  anb  all  tDat  are  ruitD  her  m  the 
Donfc,  bctaufe  *fl)cDibtDcmcffengcrs 
tDatibefcnt. 

is  31nb  you,  in  any  ibife  Ucepe  your 
fclues  from  tDcatturfeb  tDing,  left  ?  cc 
mabe  your  fclues  ateurfeb ,  tuijcn  ycc 
taftc  of  tDe  acturfeb  tDmg,anb  maac  tDe 
tampe  of3Jfraciaturfc,  anb  trouble  tt. 

19  2fiut  ail  tDe  filncr,  anb  golb,  anb 
bcffclsofbzaffeanby^on.arcttonfccra' 
tcb  bnto  tDe  %  e>  is  © :  tDcy  fliali  tome 
into  tlje  trtafimeof  the  %  £>  is  jd. 

20  £>o  the  people  ftjoutco  ibhcnthc 
pjlcfts  blclb  ib«D  tlje  trumpets :  anb  it 

tame 


hertnf  holt 


f  Heh.mike 
your  voyce 
to  be  heard. 


\\  Or t deno- 
ted. 


"  Cfiap.2.4 


f  Mr. 

iiolmtjfc. 


Ierichois  taken.  Iofhua.     Ifrael  repelled  at  Ai. 


■Hcb.n 

3°-  , 

t  Hc?r,  vn- 

aer  tl. 


"Chap.  2. 
l^.hcb.  i 1. 


jHttr.fr- 
mtl.tt. 


•I  King. 
I«.H- 


*Cbjp.  ia. 
30  i  chron, 
1.7. 


came  to  patTe  rbhen  the  people  hearb 
the  founD  of  the  trumpet,  anb  the  peo- 
ple (houteb  tbith  a  great  fbout,tharthc 
iball  fell  bolbnc  tflat  ,fo  that  the  peo- 
pic  ltocnt  top  tnto  the  ntic ,  cuery  man 
ftraight  before  him ,  anb  tt)cy  toouc  tlje 
erne. 

21  5lnD  they  bttctly  beftroyeb  all 
that  ttjas m tDc  city ,  both  man  anb lbo- 
man,yonganb  olb,aub  orcano  (heepe, 
anb  atTclbith  tDc  ebge  of  the  fuwb. 

11  2Sut  giofrma  hab  faib  bnto  the 
ttbomen  that  hab  fpicb  out  the  conn- 
trey;  ©oeinto  the  harlots  houfe,  anb 
bJing  out  tl)cncc  the  lboman  anu  all 
that  (he  hath,*  as  vc  froare  bnto  her. 

13  3mt)  the  yong  men  that  mete 
fpics,tbcntitt,anb  brought  outBahab, 
anb  hcrfathet,mibhcr  mother  ,anb  her 
bzethmt, anb  allthatfhehab:anb  they 
bzought  out  all  Dec  t&mrcb ,  anb  left 
them  ttnthout  the  campe  of  3Jfracl. 

14  ^nbthct  burnt  djenty  forth  fire, 
anb  all  that  foas  therein :  oncly  the  Gfc 
uer  f  the  golb ,  anb  the  beffcis  of  bjaffc 
anb  ofy?on,they  put  into  thcXrcafury 
of  the  houfe  of  the  %on  ©. 

15  3inb  ^ofhtta  faucb  Bahab  tl)e 
harlot  altne,anbhcr  fathers  houlholb, 
anb  all  that  (he  hab :  ano  (he  bfoclleth 
m^Jfracl  cucn  bnto  tins'  bay ,  becaufe 
(he  hsb  the  meffengers  fohich3Jofhua 
fent  to  fpy  out  Jericho. 

16  c  3lnb  Joflnia  abtnreb  them  at 
that  time,  faying ,  *  Curfcb  be  the  man 
bcfo2CthclL<t>is£\  that  rifethbp  anb 
builbcththts  city  Jericho :  he  (hall  lay 
the  founbanonthcrof  m  his  firft  borne, 
anb  in  his  yongeft  Tonne  (hailhccfJctbp 
the  gates  of  it. 

17  „  0  the  %  &  k  ©  foas  forth  "Jo- 

nma  anb  his  fame  foas  noifcbthjough* 
outallthccountrcy. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  Thelfraclitesare  fmirtenat Ai.  6  Iofhuas 
complaint.  10  God  inftriiLteth  him  what 
todoc.  \6  Achan  is  taken  bv  the  Lor.  10 
His  confcffioti.  11  Hcc  and  all  he  had  arc 
deflroyed  in  the  valley  ot  Achor. 

^tthcclnttumof^fraci 
'  committcb  a  trefpaffe  m 
&  the  ateurfeb  thing :  foi  *  7L-- 
;  than  the  fonne  of  <£armi, 
_«,^yv<£  the  fonne  of  zabbi ,  the 
tonne  of  ncrah,  of  the  tribe  of  3Jubah, 
toohc  of  the  actuifcb  thing :  anb  the 
anger  of  the  JL  o  k  i?  ibas  tunblcb 


agamathe  chilbzcn  of  ^jfracl. 

I  ^Inb'JoCbua  fent  men  from 31^1 
ruho  to  3lt ,  fohtch  is  bcftbcz5eth-auen, 
on  tl)e  eaft  Gbcof  fficthel ,  anb  fpaac 
bnto  them,  faying,  ©oc  top  anb  biefo 
the  countccy.  3lnb  tl)c  men  focnt  bp, 
anbbiefoc&:2t. 

3  3lnb  they  rctttrncb  to  3Jofbtta, 
anbfaib  bnto  htm,  fLctnotauthcpco' 
piegoc  bp :  but  let  t  about  tfoo  o?  tlncc 
thoufanb  men  goe  bp ,  anb  finite  ^i, 
anb  make  not  ah"  the  people  to  labour 
thither,  fo:  they  are  but  fcfo. 

4  £>othercibcntbp  thither  of  the 
people  about  thjee  thoufanb  men,  anb 
they  flcb  before  the  men  of^i. 

5  3lnb  the  men  of  3ifmotcofthcm 
about  thirty  anb  fire  men :  fo;  they  cha^ 
feb  them  from  befoze  the  gate  cucn  bnto 
„hcbanm,an&rmotcthcmm  the||  go- 
ing boibnc :  nahercfoie  the  hearts  of 
the  people  meltcb,  $  bccaineasfoatcr. 

6  c  5lnb  3JoQ)ua  rent  his  clothes, 
anb  fell  to  the  earth  bpon  his  face ,  be-- 
fo?c  the  3lrKC  of  tl)t%  &  is  jE>,bntm  the 
enennoe,  he  anb  the  fibers  of  Jfraei, 
anb  put  buft  bpon  their  heabs. 

7  ^nb  3Jofhna  faib,  ^las,  j©  ILojb 
<5  €>  © ,  ibhetcfo?e  haft  thou  at  ail 
brought  this  people  ouer  gjbzban,  to 
bcliuer  bs  into  the  hanb  of  the  3Jnto* 
rites,  to  beftroy  bs  <  naoulb  to  d5ob  lbe 
hab  bene  content,  anb  bibclt  on  the  o 
thcrubc3fo2ban. 

8  ^Dh  H€>s©!lblwt  (hail  J  fay, 
tbhtn'Jfraeltuntcth  their  tbacaes  be- 
fore their  enemies  < 

9  foi  the  Canaamtes ,  anb  an  the 
inhabitants  of  the  lanb  (hall  hcareot  it, 
anb  (hall  cnuiron  bs  rounb ,  anb  cut  off 
our  name  from  the  earth  J  anb  ibhat 
ibilt  thon  boe  bnto  thy  great  iBame  i 

io  C  3(nb  the  %  o  is  m>  fatbe  bnto 
3onma,oct  thecbp ;  U)hcrcfo2etucft 
thoutlnis  bpon  thy  face? 

I I  3ifcaei  hath  finncb,  anb  they  haue 
alfo  tranfgreffeb  my  Couenant  lbh'th 
'Jjcommaunbebthcm :  fonhcyhaucc* 
ucn  taiicn  of  the  ateurfeb  thmg ,  anb 
haue  alfo  flollcn,  anb  bifTemblcb  alfo, 
anb  thry  haue  put  it  cucn  amongft  tljnr 
oibncduffc. 

u  Hherefoic  the  chilbzcn  ofgjfracl 
coulb  not  (lanb  befoje  tlietr  enemies, 
bnttiirncb  their  barks  before  their  enc; 
mics ,  becaufc  they  rberc  accurfeb :  net- 
thtnwii'Jbccibith  yon  any  mo?c,  ct? 
cept  ycc  beftroy  the  acciufcb  from  a- 
mongftyou. 

n  %ip, 


\  Hft>.  tboHt 

3  00O.  TTIOI 
tt  .  about 


\0rtiriM9- 


mckft. 


\  Htb.f&p. 


Achans  trefpafle,       Cbap.viij.       and  punifliment. 


8  Or,  ww 


\Hch.torrgn: 


15  33p,  fanctific  the  people,  ano  tap, 
danetific  pour  fclues  agamft  to  nio^ 
to«) :  fo?  thus  faith  tljc  ?L  o  is  ©  ©oo 
of  3ircacl,  There  is  an  accurfeo  thing  m 
thcmioft  of  thec,  $)  3frael :  thou  eanft 
notftanD  before  thtnccncmtcs,bnnilpc 
taut  albap  the  accurfeo  thing  from  a; 
mongppu. 

14.  'Jnthcmomingthcrefozepcinai 
be  brought,  aecozomg  to  pour  tribes: 
ano  it  than  be  that  the  tribe  ttJhtchthc 
|l£>is©taRCth,  ftjall  come  atcojomg 
to  the  families  thereof ,  ano  the  familic 
rbhuh  the  ILeus©  (hall  taltc,(hal  tome 
bp  IjoulholOcs :  ano  the  hou(holDcs 
ibhich  the  !LoKJDfl)alltaKc,(hai  come 
man  by  man. 

15  3mDtt(haibcthathcthattstaKen 
roith  the  accurfeo  thing,  (hall  bee  burnt 
uiith  fire,  he,  ano  ail  that  hec  hath :  bc^ 
caufehehathtranfgrcflcDthctoucnant 
of  the  ft  01s©,  ano  becaufc  hec  hath 
bought  ||  follp  m  3)fracl. 

16  C  £>o  'joflniarofc  bp  carelp  in 
the  morning,  ano  bzought  3ifracl bp 
their  tribes,  ano  the  tribe  of^uoah 
rbastattcn. 

17  2nD  fjee  b:ought  the  familic  of 
3Juoah,  ano  he  toottc  the  famtlte  of  the 
zarhttes :  ano  he  bzought  the  familic 
of  the  zatljitcs,man  bp  man,ano  zate 
otmastafecn. 

is  ano  l)cc  toouejht  his  houtholo, 
man  bp  man ,  ano  3chan  thefonneof 
Carnu,  the  fonnc  of  zabotthc  fonne  of 
zcralj ,  of  the  tribe  of  3Juoai) ,  mas 
tafecn. 

19  StnD'JoimiafaiDnntoSfthan,^ 
fonnc,  giuc,  3  piaptljec ,  glo:p  to  the 
It  ©  is  id  Goo  of  JfraeUiiD  make  con 
fcflion  bnto  him,  ano  tel  me  nom,tt>hat 
thou  haft  tJonchiocitnotfrom  me. 

10  ano  3lchan  anfioerco  gioflnta, 
anDfaiD^nocco  3  hauefmneo  agamft 
the  %  0  m  ©  000  of  3Jfrael,  ano  thus 
ano  thus haucgj  Done. 

21  nahenlffaw  among  the  fpotles 
a  gooblp  Babplontfl)  garment ,  ano 
ttbo  hunozeo  fljcRds  of  filucr,  ano  a 
tmcogcofgoiooffifucmcRClsttictght, 
then  jjtouetcothem,  anotooRt  them, 
anobchoio,  thcparchiD  in  the  earth  in 
thcmioft  of  mp  tent,  ano  ti)t  filucr  bn 

oer  it. 

22  C^>o3Ioir>uafentme(fcngcrs, 

ano  tlicv  ran  bnto  the  tent,  ano  bchoio, 
it  \bas !)« in  his  tent,  ano  rtje  filucr  bit 
ocrit. 
25  3tnu  thep  toouc  them  out  of  the 


nuoft  of  the  tent,  ano  brought  them  bn 
tojoftma,  anobntoailthechiiozenof 
Jfrael,  ano  t  laiothcm  out  before  the 
H©«©. 

24  anojtolhuaanoaii^fracimith 
him  tooac  3lchan  the  fonne  of  Zecah, 
aiiDthcfilucr,anothegarmmt,anothe 
lbeogc  of  goioe ,  ano  his  fonncs ,  ano 
his  Daughters ,  aim  his  oren,  ano  his 
affcs,anohisfl)cepe,  ano  his  tent,  ano 
all  that  he  hao :  ano  thep  bought  them 
bntothctoailcpofacho:. 

25  ano3Jomua(mD,t0hphaftthou 
troubleo  bs  <  the  %  <p  ik  ©  (hall  trouble 
thcethisDap.5luo  all  3Jfracl  ftonco  hun 
ttnthftones,anDburueO  them  tbith  fire, 
after  thephao  ftoncothem  mitl)  ftones. 

26  3mo  thep  raifco  ouer  him  a  great 
hcapc  of  ftones  bnto  this  oap:  fo  the 
%  ©  ib  id  turnco  from  the  ficrccncflc  of 
hisaugcr:  tehercfo:c  thenamcofthc 
place  mas  caiicD,£hc  ballcv  of  ||  3(ch02, 
bnto  tl;ts  oap. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  Cod  mcouragech  Iofhua.  3  Theftratagemc 
whereby  Ai  was  taken.  :ji  The  kins;  thereof 
is  hanged,  ^o  lolliua  buildeth  an  Altar,  31 
writeth  die  Lawe  on  rtones,  33  propounded 
blelsingsand  curlings. 

^S$£5*  flu  the  %®  is  ?p  fatotmto 
^;/A#f  'lioflma, *  ^carcnot,  net 
SKSjaS  therbethouO!finaib:taBt 
W'M$w4&  aH  fy*  people  of  mar  re 
^s&tfQs  Unth  tin,  ano  arifc,  goc 
bp  to  ?&x :  S>cc ,  3J  hauc  gtuen  into  thp 
hanothCRingof3(i,anohispcople,ano 
hiscitic,  anohtsiano. 

2  3mothou  fljalt  ooc  to  ^i  ano  her 
mng,  as  thou  Oiooeft  bnto  *  Jericho 
ano  her  Ring:  Dnclpthcfpoile  thereof 
ano  *  the  cattcli  thereof  (hall  pe  tahe  fo? 
iapzapbntopourfclucsilaptheeanam 
bud)  foz  the  ntte,  belnnD  it. 

j  C^o  3lo(l)ua  arofe ,  ano  all  the 
I people  of  tbarre,  togocbp  agamft 3i : 
ano^othua  chofeoutthirtie  thoufano 
mightp  men  of  baiour,  ano  fent  them 
jalbapbp  night: 

4  3nohctommanDcbthem,Capmg, 
25eholo,  pethalllic  m  ibait  agamft  the 
citic,euenbehtnO  the  one:  gocnottocrp 
far rcfrom  tlie  tine,  but  be  pc  alt  r eaop : 

5  ano  5  ,ano  ail  the  people  that  arc 
ftnth  mec,  Unliapp?ocl)  bnto  the  cute: 
ano  it  (hall  come  to  paffe  when  thep 
comeoutagainftbs^satthefirft.tfjai 
ibe  mill  flee  before  them, 

6  (jFoa 


\Hcl.jtn 
red. 


ITIutis, 

•rouble. 


"DtUt.t. 

2i.&7.i£ 


"Cliap.f.Jt 

'Dcut.jo 
'4- 


Ai  is  befieged,  Iofhua.  an 


dferonfireJ 


Wth.f-J- 


Ortftsfi 


\Hcb.thcir 
lying  tn  wuti. 


6  (foi  they  tbtll  come  out  after  tos) 
tillibchaue  tbiawen them  from  theci* 
tic;foi  they  tbill  fay,  ^ljcp  flee  befbic 
bs,  as  at  the  ficfl :  therefore  tbc  nnii  flee 
bcfo?cthcm. 

7  Xljcn  yce  (hall  rife  Dp  from  the 
ambufh ,  anb  feifc  bpott  tl)c  tunc :  feu  the 
1L  ©  is  jo  pour  <sob  ibill  beliuer  it  into 
your hanb. 

8  anbitfballbctbhcnycchaueta; 
fern  the  one ,  that  yc  fhau  fct  the  nrtc  on 
fire ;  atco?bing  to  tt)c  cominanbcmcnt 
of  the  %  o  is  p  than  ye  bo.£>cc,3I  hauc 
comnianbeb  you. 

9  C  Itodnia  therefore  fent  them 
foo?rt),  anbtheyiDentto  ucmambufh, 
anbabobc  bctibeenc25cthclanb:at,on 
theiBctt  fibeof  £i:but3Jofl)uaiobgcD 
that  nigftt  among  the  people. 

io  anb  3Jothuarofe  Dp  earlputtlje 
morning ,  anbnumtycb  the  people,  anb 
ibentbp  i  l)e,anb  the  fibers  of  3Jfrael, 
befojethe  people  to  %i. 

1 1    2lnD  all  tl)e  PCOplC  ,  euen  the  people 

of  tt>ar  re  ttjat  Uterc  lbttl)  I)un,tbcnt  bp, 
anb  b;tctt>  ntgh.anb  came  befinc  the  city, 
anb  pttchcb  on  the  /Rojth  fibe  of  2i: 
novu  tljerctuas  a  Pallet  bctibccuc  ttjem 
anb^u. 

ir  anbhctooRcaboutfiucthoufanb 
men ,  anb  fct  them  to  lye  in  ambud)  be* 
tvbeene  25ctl)cl  anb  ^i ,  on  tlje  i©eQ  fibe 
||  of  the  title. 

ij  Stnbibhentheyhabfctthepeople, 
eucn  all  tf)e  l)olle  tDat  lPas  on  tl)e^ojtt) 
of  tbc  ttty,attb  tl)eir  titers  in  ibatt  on  the 
wctt  of  the  ntic : JJofljna  ibent  that 
night  into  thcmtbltof  the  bailey. 

14.  <r  3ino  it  tame  to  pafle  lbhen  the 
3*ing  of  3tifaiP  it,that  they  hatteb.anb 
rofc  bp  early  ,  anb  tl)c  men  of  the  eitic 
ibctitoutagamtt3Jfracltobattell,hcc, 
anb  all  htspeoplc  ,atanmeappointeb, 
befoze  the  piatne,  but  hceibttt  not  that 
there  lbcrc  liers  mambufl)  agattitthim 
belnnb  the  city. 

1?  anb'Jofhuaanbail^Jfraclmabc 
as  if  tljey  iDcre  beaten  bcfoic  them,  anb 
fleb  by  theibay  of  the  lbilbcrneflc. 

16  3tnb  all  tne  people  that  lbcrc  in 
2u,  lbcrc  tailcb  together  tc  purfuc  after 
them :  anb  they  purfucb  after  3Jo(hua, 
anb  lbcrc  toaibcn  albay  from  the  city. 

17  aubthece  lbasnot  a  man  Icftin 
31  01 fficthel ,  that  Ibcntnotoutaftcr 
3Ifracl  :anb  thev  left  the  ctttc  open  ,anb 
puvfucb  after  gifracl. 

is  3nDthe  %  ©  is  id  fatb  buto  3Jo- 
tyua,  Stretch  out  the  fpravc  that  is  in 


thy  hanb,  toibaro  3U ;  foz 3  Will  gtue « 
into  thine  Ijano.  anb  3Jofl)iia  Qrctcheb 
out  the  fpcarc  that  hce  hab  tn  his  hanb, 
toiParbthectty. 

19  3lnb  the  ambud)  arofc  quicfelv 
out  of  their  place ,  anb  they  ramie  as 
fooncashchab  ftcetcljcb  outhisljano: 
anb  the?  cntrcb  into  the  eit?,anbtooRe 
tt,anb  haftcb.anb  fet  the  eitic  on  fire. 

io  3utbibhcttthcnictt  of auooRcb 
behuib  them,  the?  falb,anb  bcholb,  the 
fmoRc  of  the  cicv  afccnbcb  fcp  to  hc& 
ucn,anb  the?  hab  no  t  polDct  to  flee  this 
ibap  ojthatlDay :  anb  the  people  that 
fleb  to  the  ibilbcrncfrctumcb  bacne  Pp- 
onthepurfucrs. 

21  2tib  lbhcn  'Jodjua  anb  all  3Jfc 
racl  fatb  thattljc  ambuO)  hab  talien  the 
citv,anb  that  the  fmobc  of  the  titp  afcen- 
beb,  then  they  turncb  againe  anb  flclb 
the  men  of  2u. 

it  3lnb  the  other  UTucb  out  of  the  ci- 
ne againft  them ,  fo  they  lbcrc  in  the 
nubft  of  3fracl,  fomcon  this  fibe, anb 
fome  on  that  fibcanb  they  fmotc  them  •, 
fo  that  the?*  let  none  of  themrcmaine 
o?cfcapc. 

ij  anb  the  "Sing  of  3i  they  tooKea; 
liue,anb  bzoughthtm  to  33ofl)iia. 

24.  ^nb  it  tame  to  paffe  lbhcn  3f- 
raclhab  mabeanenb  of  flaytng  all  the 
inhabitants  of 3Ji,m  the  6elb,m  the  ibu> 
berneffe  iblKteluthcy  thafeb  them,anb 
^henfljevtbere  all  fallen  on  thcebgcof 
thefroojb ,  bntill  they  mere  tonfumeb, 
that  all  the  3Ifraclitcs  rcturntb  bnto 
^1,  anb  Onotc  it  tbith  the  cbgc  of  the 
mwb. 

25  ^nb  fo  it  ibas  that  all  that  fell 
that  bap, both  oftutnanblbomctt,  were 
tlbeluc  thoiifanb,euen  all  the  men  of  30. 

16  ifo;  gjoftjua  b2cib  not  his  hanb 
bacftelPhcrettuth  hee  ftretchtb  out  the 
fpearc ,  tonrtllhc  hab  btterlp  Dcftropeb 
all  the  inhabitants  of  3i. 

27  *  Onciv  the  tatteli,  anb  the  fpoilc 
of  that  city  gifracl  toohe  f  oi  a  p?ap  bnto 
tliemfclucs,accojbingbntothelbo?bof 
rlic  %  ©  is  3D ,  ibhtch  he  *  tommaunbeb 
3ioama. 

2s  3tnb3!oO)ua burnt ^i,anbmabe 
it  an  heapc  foj  cucc ,  eucn  a  bcfoiatton 
bnto  this  bay. 

29  3JnbtheUtngof3lihchangcbon 
a  tree  bn  til  cumtibc:  anb  afToonc  as  the 
funnciuasboiimc,  lionntacommauti' 
beb  that  they  (houlD  tauc  his  tarUeifc 
boibnc  from  the  tree,  anb  caQ  tt  at  the 
cntnng  of  the  gate  of  tlje  citic,anb*ratfc 
tlicreon 


jHft.hMd. 


'Deut.7  J. 


*  Num.  31. 


'Vcrfcj. 


j  'Chip  7. 
II. 


The  law  read.  The     Chap.ix.        Gibeonites  crafr. 


*ExoH.  jo. 
jy-dcuc. 
17.  J. 


*Dcut.  u. 
sy.&  17.12 


*Dcut.  ;i 

I  7. 

t  Mir. 


\H.b.moath 


thereon  a  great  bcapc  of  (tones  Aacre- 

mainethbtltOtblSbay. 

30  c  Xhcit 3Jofl)t»a  built  an  3atar 
into  tl)c  3Lokjd  <Sob  of^fraelm 
mount  Cbai, 

si  3s  $)ofcs  the  fcruant  of  the 
%  okd  tommaunDcD  the  cbslb?cn  of 
3lfi-ael,  as  it  tsuwttcn  m  the  *  booUe  of 
the  itarb  of  vlMcs,  an  3Utar  of  lbbole 
ftottes,  once  \bbtcb  no  man  hath  lift  bp 
any  y2on :  anb  they  offreb  theron  burnt 
offerings  Unto  the  %  ©  is  ??,  anbfarrtrV 
ccb  peace  offerings, 

jx  C  3lnb  be  tbtotc  there  bpon  the 
Rones  a  topic  of  the  Haibc  of  t^ofes, 
which  bee  Unotc  tn  tl;c  pjefeweof  the 
chilbjenofjfracl. 

3?  3itib  all3fracl,anb  their  eibcrs, 
anb£>mtcrs,  attbtbetrjubges,  Ooob 
on  this  fibc  the  3lrKc,  anb  on  that  ftbc, 
before  the  #2icfts  the  fLcuttcs,  ibbicb 
bare  the  SCrbc  of  the  Coucnant  of  the 
%  ©  is  jD,atoeU  the  fttattger,as  he  that 
tt>as  bomc  among  them :  baife  of  them 
oner  acjamfl  mount  (3cri3tm,anb  halfc 
of  them  oucr  againft  mouutcbai,  *as 
09oTcs  the  fcruant  of  the  %  o  is  jb>  I>ib 
tommanbcb  before,  that  they  Cbeulb 
blcffc  the  people  of  gjfracl. 

34  3tnb  aftcribarb  bee  rcab  all  the 
Vbozbs  of  the  ILaib ,  the  bleflings  anb 
mrritigs,acco2btngtoalltbattsib2ttten 
intbcbooIicoftbcJLaib. 

35  Xberelbasnotauwbofalltbat 
fljtofcs  tommanbcb,  ibbicb  3Jofbua 
rcab  not  bcftncalltbc  Congregation  of 
3Jfracl,*Mththc  ibomcn  anb  the  ntic 
oncs,anb  the  Grangers  that  tlbcte  ton- 
ucrfaut  among  them. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  The  kings  combine  againft  Ifrael.  3  The 
Gibeonites  by  craft  obcaine  a  League.  \6 
For  which  ihcy  arc  condemned  to  perpe- 
tual bondage. 

i3&ttcatnctopau"cibbcn 
m^ms.  rtUthe  lungs  Which  Were 
;^3£j  on  this  f>bc3Jo2batttntbc 
11  biiics.atibtn  the  baileys, 
aubuialltbccoaftsoftbc 
great  fca ,  oucr  againft  JUbanott,  the 
pittite,  anb  the  3mo2ttc,  the  Canaa 
ntte,  the  0crt53itc,  the  finite,  anb  the 
3Jcbufitehearb  thereof: 

i  %\m  the?  gathcrcb  themfclucs 
together  to  fight  With  5ofl)ua,  anb 
lbtth3Jfrael,ibith  onctactojb. 
3  €  3no  When  the  inhabitants  of 


(Sibcon  hearb  Wbatlfofhuababbonc 
bnto  Jericho,  anb  to  .3i, 

4  itbcybtowojuewtuiy,  anb  went 
anb  mabc  as  if  they  habbecne  embafla 
bours,  anb  tooltc  olb  facUesbpon  their 
atTes,  anbWittc-bottcls,olb,  aubrcnt, 
anbbounbbp, 

5  3(nb  olb  fbooes anb  clowteb bpon 
their  feet,  <*  olbe  garments  bpon  them, 
anb  all  the  b:cab  of  their  pzoiuGon  ibas 
b2featibnioulbtc, 

6  3lnb  they  Went  to  IJoOma  bnto 
the  cantpe at  <5ilga!,  anb  fatb  bnto  him, 
anb  to  the  men  of  3Sfrael,  Dace  be  come 
fromafarrecotmtrcy:/3oWtbcrcfo2C 
masc  ye  a  league  until  bs. 

7  3ltib  the  men  of  3lfracl  faib  bnto 
tl)e  $?tuitcs,  0erabucnture  y  ee  bWcu  a 
mong  bs,  anb  bow  fljaii  wee  mane  a 
league  With  you* 

8  3lnb  they  faib  bnto  3Ion)tia,iDcc 
are  thy  feruatits.  3ttb  3Jo(hua  faib  bn 
to  tlicm,  udIjo  are  ye  <  anb  from  Whence 
contcye* 

9  3lnb  they  fatb  bnto  htm,  f  roma 
bcry  farrc  tountrey  thy  feruatits  arc 
come,  bceaufc  of  the  i5amc  of  the 
HoKDthy  ©obiftuWccbaucbearb 
the  fame  of  btm,  anb  nil  that  hecbtbm 
cgypt, 

10  3utb  an  that  bee  bib  to  the  t\bo 
lungs  of  the  Almontes,  that  iberc  be 
yonb^lozban,  to  S>ftjon  Utttgof  $eft> 
bon,  anb  to  sDg  Rtttg  of  iSafljan,  ibhtclj 
wasat^fl)tarotl> 

n  tt3hcrcfo:cour€ibcrsanbailtlic 
inhabitants  of  our  tountrey,  Cpafee  to 
bs,  faying ,  Haftc  bictuais  t  mtth  you 
foi  the  tourney,  anb  goc  to  mecte  them, 
anb  fay  bnto  them,  race  are  your  fer^ 
uantsitbcrefojcnoWmalicyealeaguc 
ttiitljbs. 

a  Xhis  our  b?cab,  ibec  toobchote 
fo?our  p20utfton  outof  ourhoufes,  on 
the  bay  ibe  tamefozth  to  goebnto  you : 
butno\bbcholb,ttisb.2y,?tttsmoulby. 

13  ^nb  thefc  fcottcls  of  ibtneU)htch 
lbcfillcb,werencU),  anbbcholo,  they  be 
rent :  anb  thefc  our  garments,  anb  our 
(hoots  are  bccomcolb,  byrcafonoftbc 
bcry  long  tourney. 

14  31nbl|  thcmcntooKc  of thctrbit- 
rttcils,  anb  afbcb  not  counfcll  at  the 
mouth  of  the  IL  ok  id. 

15  3lnb  3!ofliua  mabc  peace  ttitth 
them,  anb  mabealcaguen)iththcin,to 
let  them  line :  anb  the  pnnces  of  the 
Congregation  froarcbtuo  them. 

ic  C^nbttcamctopalTeattheenb 
I of 

16 


t  Hrk  MI 
jer/r  hand. 


prfhrjrt. 

ctiurd  1  be 
mm  I J  rc.l- 
fb/iof  ihetr 


IGibeonitesflaues.       Iofhua^        Gibeon  befoged. 


1  V«fe  J ! 


i  Htlr.not 
be  cut  off 
frtmjou. 


'DcutJ.l 


1  of  tl)2tc  napes ,  after  they  hab  mabe  a 
league  lbith  them  ,that  they  hcarb  ttiat 
tijcy  were  their  neighbours,  anb  that 
they  bibelt  among  them.     . 

17  anbthe  thtibjcn  of  IJfraei tonp 
ncyeb,anb  eamc  bnto  their  cities  on  the 
thirb  Dap :  noil)  their  cities  iber  e  <5ibe* 
on,anbChephirah,  anbzseeroth,  anu 
Bftiath  icarim. 

is  3lnb the  chUDjen  of  Hfrael  fmote 
them  not ,  becaufe  the  0nnecs  of  the 
Congregation  hab  fioomc  bnto  them 
bythc?U>i3©  <5obof3Jfrael:3roball 
the  Congregation  murmureb  agamft 
tfje^intes. 

19  n&ut  ail  the  ^inccs  faib  bnto  all 
fheCongrcgahon,i©chaucntJo:ncbn; 
to  them  by  the  %  o  is  ©  d5ob  of  "Jftael: 
nolb  thercfozc  tbc  map  not  touch  them. 

10  XhisibcibiU  toe  to  them,-  tbee 
ibill  eucn  let  them  liuclctt  ib,:ath  be  top- 
onbs,  bctaufc  of  the  oath  ibhich  ibee 
froatc  bnto  them. 

11  3nb  the  ^mtcesratb bnto  them, 
ILct  them  lute ,  (but  let  them  bee  hc»> 
ets  ofiboob.anb  bribers  of  tt)ater,bn« 
to  all  the  Congregation,)  as  the  $n& 
ccs  hab  *  piomifcb  them. 

11  C  3utb  3Jofl)ua  callcb  foj  them, 
anbhefpaftcbntothcntfaying.Baljcrc; 
fojchaueycbeguilcb  bs,  facing,  naeare 
beryfarrc  from  you*  lbhcnycbibclia; 
mongbs. 

15  i]5oibthcrcfo2eyeareeurfcb,anb 
thcr  efballt  none  of  you  bee  frceb  from 
being  bonbmen,  anb  Berbers  of  lboob, 
anb  betters  of  ttiatcr ,  foz  the  houfe  of 
myesob. 

14  3tnb  they  anfroercb  3Ioflnta, 
anb  faib,25ccaufc  ittbas  tcrtaincly  tolb 
thy  feruants,  hoib  that  the  %®mz>  thy 
(Sob  *eommaubcb  pis  fcruant  £0ofcs 
to  giuc  you  authc  lanb ,  anbtobcltroy 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  lanb  from  be* 
foje  you  /therefore  ibe  tberc  foje  afraib 
of  our  uues  becaufe  of  you,  anb  hauc 
bone  this  thing. 

15  3lnb  nolb  bcholb ,  \be  are  in  thine 
hanb :  as  it  fecmefh  goob  anb  right  bit* 
to  fljec  to  boe  bnto  bs.boc. 

16  3mbfo  bibhebnto them,  anbbe^ 
liucrcb  than  out  of  the  hanb  of  thethil- 
bjen  of^fracUhatthcy  ficib  them  not. 

17  3nb  3Jofl)iia  mabe  them  that 
cap,  heibcrsof  lboob,  anb  bribers  of 
mater  fo?  the  Congregation ,  anb  fo? 
the  3lltar  of  the  %  o  is  ts>  ,  cum  bnto 
this  bay,  in  the  place  lbhtch  he  fljoulb 
choofe. 


CHAP.    X. 

1  Fiuc  Kings  wane  againrt  Gibeon.  6  Iofhua 
refcueth  it.  10  God  fighteth  againft  thein 
witli  haileftones.  12.  TheSunne  andMoone 
ftand  full  at  the  word  of  Iofhua.  16  The 
fiue  Kings  are  mured  in  a  caue.  11  They  are 
brought  forth,  14  fcornetully  vied,  16  and 
hanged.  18  Seuen  Kings  more  are  conque- 
red.  41  Iofhua  retumetn  to  Gilgal. 

**^8ji&  €>uj  it  came  to  pafTc  lbhen 
&^&i  I  3boni  5CbeU  i^ng  of^Jc 
^*\N|I  \  rufalem ,  hab  hcarb  ijoib 
^Wf\  Oofl)ual)abtaHcn^i,anb 
&k&&L  hab  bttcrly  beftroycb  it, 
( *ashe  hab  bone  to3Jcricho,  anb  her 
Butg  ,fo hechabboncto *%\ ,  anb  her 
Bing)  anb  hotb  the  inhabitants  of  <5t- 
beon  hab  mabe  peace  Vbith  Jfrael,  anb 
ructe  among  them, 

1  1Chat  they  fcareb greatly  becaufe 
dSibeon  was  a  great  citic ,  as  t  one  of  tlje 
royall  cities,  anb  becaufe  it  was  greater 
then  ^i,  anb  all  the  men  tl;ertof  were 
mighty. 

j  leherefoje  3(boni-5ebeB  Bing  of 
3Jerufalcm ,  fent  bnto  l?oham  Bmg  of 
^cb?on^inbbnto  ^iram  ,ftmg  of  liar ! 
mutlj ,  anb  bnto  3Japhia  lung  offLa-! 
ehifb,  anb  bnto  2Debir  umgof  eglon, 
faying, 

4  Comcbpbntome,anbhelpeme, 
that  tbe  iJiay  unite  ©ibeon :  fojithath 
mabe  peace  ibith3Iofl)ua,anbibitl)  tlje 
cpb?cnof35frael. 

5  Xljcrefo?e  the  fine  l&ngs  of  the 
^monies,  tlje  tungofjcrufalcm,  the 
fting  of  i^ebion ,  thcUuig  ofjarmuth, 
tliCRing  of  ILachifl^.tljelung  ofcglon, 
gathereb  themfclues  together ,  anb 
lbnubp,thnNanbailtheirhofres,aub 
encampeb  befoje  ©ibcon  ,  anb  mabe 
ibarrcagainftit. 

6  C^nbthcmenofcSibeonfeutbii' 
to  3Joflnia  to  the  campc  to  C5ilgai ,  fay - 
nig ,  £>iacKc  not  tljy  hanb  from  thy 
feruants,  come  bp  to  bs  cnutRly,  anb 
faue  bs ,  anb  helpe  bs :  fo?  all  the  Umgs 
of  the  SCmontes  that  blbell  in  the 
niountaincs,arc  gathcrco  together  a- 
gainftbs. 

7  5>o  3Joflnta  afcenbeb  front  <5\V 
gai,hc,anbalitljcpeoplcofibarreibith 
him,  anb  all  the  mighty  men  of  balour. 

8  C3tnbthe1L0i3©faibbnto1!o 
(hua ,  jfearc  tljcm  not :  fo?3  hatic  belt 
uer  cb  tljcm  into  thine  hanb ;  there  ujail 
not  a  man  of  them  ftanb  before  tljee. 

9  3Joflnuuhetefo?tcamebntottKm 

fubbcnip. 


•Chap.  6. 

IS- 

*Chip.S.3 


\  Heir. cities 

oftheki»l- 

dtrrK.- 


TheSunftandeth.       Chap.x. 


Fmc kings  hanged. 


•Efa.j8.il 
rectus, ^.4 
\Hcb.bu 


\Or,lhe 
vpripj't? 


'jfri^b 


theuiiU. 


fubbcnlp,and  ibcntbp  from  <25ilgai  all 
ntgt»t. 
10  3lnD  tile  fL€>iKBM>ifcoi»RtcD  tljewi 

befozc  ^Jfracl,  anb  delbc  them  lbith  a 
great  daughter  at  d5ibcou,  anb  cbafeb 
them  along  the  ibap  that  gocth  bpto 
zscthozon,  anb  fmotc  them  to  :3t5C&ah 
anb  bnto  £0aRRcbah. 

ii  3tno  it  came  to  pafle  as  thep  flcb 
from  before  3)fracl,  a.uiibcrc  mtljcgo- 
mg  bolbne  to  ffiefbozon ,  that  the 
%  0  is  tz>  tadbolbne  great  (lotus  ftonr 
hcauenbpon  them,  bnto3t5CRah,  anb 
thep  bieb:  thep  were  moc  ibhith  bieb 
\btri)  Ijailcftoncs,  then  tl)cv  Vbftomc  the 
crimen  ofjjfracl  flcib  lbith  the  froozb. 

ii  C  H^fiett  fpabt  3Jod)ua  to  the 
%  ©  is  ?d  in  the  bap  ibhcn  the  1L  &  k  & 
bcuueteb  bp  the  3mozttcs  befozc  the 
cbilbzeuoHifracI,  anb  hec  fatb  tttthe 
fight  of  3Jfrael,  *3>unnc,  t  ftanb  thou 
dtil  bpon  dftbeon,  anb  thou  s3Poonein 
thcbailcpof3lialon. 

ij  3nbthc&tmncttoobdill,anbthc 
iftoonedapeb,  bnttllthe  pcoplehaba* 
ucngcb  thcmfclttcs  bpo  their  enemies. 
3js  not  this  Ibzittcn  m  the  boolte  of 
||  ^father  <  £>o  the  S>unnc  doob  QiU  in 
thenubft  of  hcaucn,  anb  hadeb  not  to 
go e  boibnc,  about  a  ibholc  bap. 

i+  2mb  there  ibas  no  bap  URc  that, 
befoze  it,  oz  after  it ,  that  the  %  ©  is  © 
hcarKcneb  bnto  the  bopec  of  a  man :  foz 
the  %  ®  is  w  fought  foz  31fracl. 

15  C3tnb;lJoflntarcturucb,anbau 
3jrraciibithhim,  tfttto  tfyt  tampcto 
©iigal. 

i6  ffintthcfcfiuc  Rings  flcb,  anb  hib 
thcmfelucs  in  a  tauc  at  ^a&Bcbah. 

17  ^nbitaastoib3JoQ)iia,faping, 
Xhc  fiue  Rings  arc  founb  hibm  ataue 
atflQaRRcbah. 

18  anb3Iofl)uafaib,  Koule  great 
ftoncs  bp  on  the  mouth  of  the  cane,  anb 
rctmcnbptt,fozto  Rccpcthcm. 

19  3Cnb(lappounot,butpurfucafter 
pour  memics,  anb  tfmite  the  htnbmod 
of  them,  differ  them  not  to  cuter  into 
their  cities :  foz  the  %  £>  is  ©  pour  <£»ob 
hath  bcliucr  cb  them  tnto  pour  hanb. 

20  3nb  it  tame  to  pafle  ibhcn  3Jo« 
fljua  anb  tl)c  ehtlbzcn  of  3Jfracl  hab 
mabean  cnb  of  Qaptng  them  lbith  a  be* 
rp  great  daughter,  till  thepibcre  con< 
fumeb,  tljat  the  reft  which  rematneb  of 
tljcm,  cntrcb  into  feneeb  cities. 

21  ^nbailthepeoplcrcturncbtothe 
campc  to  3Jofl)ua  at  U^ab&cbah  tn 
peace :  none  mooueb  his  tongue  againd 


anp  of  the  chtlbzcu  of  3Jfracl. 

22  Xbcn  faib  3Joflma ,  £>pcn  the 
mouth  of  the  tauc,  anbbzmgouttbofc 
flue  lungs  bnto  me  out  of  the  eaue. 

23  3Jnb  thep  bib  fo  ,anb  bzougbt  foul) 
tbofcfiuc  Rings  bnto  htm  out  of  the 
cane,  the  Ring  of  3ferufalcm,  the  Ring 
of  I?ebzon,  the  Ring  of  SJarmuth,  the 
Rtngof3Lachtfl),andtheRingof€glon. 

24.  3inb  it  tame  to  pafle  ibhenthey 
bzougbt  otitthofc  Htngsbnto  3Jofl)ua, 
that  Sfloflma  caiieb  foz  au  the  men  of 
3ffrael,  anbfaibebnto  tbccaptautcsof 
tbemen  of  ibac  ibbteb  ibcntibtfb  him, 
Come  neerc ,  put  pour  fcete  bpon  the 
nccbes  of  thefc  Kings,  3mb  thep  came 
neerc,  anb  put  their  feet  bpon  the  nccUs 
of  tljcm. 

25  3inb  3Joflwa  faib  bnto  them, 
Jfearc  not,  noz  be  bifmaib,  becdrong, 
anb  of  goob  courage :  foz  tbusfbail  the 
ILois id  boc  to  all  pour  enemies  agatnd 
ibbompc  fight. 

26  3(nb  aftertbarb  3Jod)ua  fmotc 
them,  anb  deib  them,  anb  hangcb  them 
on  fiuc  trees:  anb  tljcp  Iberc  hanging 
bponthctcecsbntili  thceuening. 

27  3(nb  it  came  to  pafle  at  the  time 
of  the  going  boibnc  of  thc&unnc,  that 
IJodjua  tommanbeb,  anb  thcp*tooRe 
thcmborbncotTthctrccs,anbcadthcm 
into  the  caue,  whercm  thep  hab  becne 
htb,  anb  laib  great  doncs  in  thecaucs 
mouth,  wiiichremaiiibntil  this  bcrpbap. 

23  C  3mb  that  bap  3Joflnia  toohc 
^aftUcbah,  anb  fmote  it  lbith  the  cbge 
of  thcfinozb.anb  the  hing  thereof  hec 
btterlp  bedropeb,  them,  anb  all  the 
foulcs  that  \bcrc  therein,  he  let  none  re- 
maine :  anbhc  bib  to  the  Ring  of  $9a& 
Rcbah,*as  Ijcc bib  bnto  the  Ring  of 
Kcrtcho. 

29  Xhcngioflnia  paffeb  from  Q5afc 
bebah,  anb  all  3lfracl  lbith  him,  bnto 
2Libnah,anbfougbtagainft?Ubnah. 

30  ^nb  the  %  ©  is  ©bcliucrcb  it  alfo 
anb  the  Ring  thereof,  into  the  hanbof 
3fracl,  anb  he  fmotc  it  miti)  the  cbge  of 
the  froozb ,  anb  all  the  foulcs  that  wer, 
therein:  l?c  let  none  rcmamcinit,  but 
bib  bnto  thcRingthcrof,ashcbib  bnto 
thCRingof^ftscljo. 

31  C3m&3Iofl)uapaflcbfrom1Ltb 
nah  anb  all  gifrael  lbith  h:m,bnto  Ua 
chifl),  anb  encampeb  agatnd  it,  anb 
fougbtagamftit. 

32  3lnb the  ILok© bclmcrcb  %a 
cl)id)  into  the  hanbeof  3ifrael,  ibhtch 
toobc  ttonthefcconbbap,  anb  fmote  tt 
1  X  z ibrth 


•Dcur.  21. 
J ;. chap.  8. 


•Chap.*. 
11. 


16  J 


lofliuaconquereth     Iofhua. 


ki 


luersKinps. 


'Drut.  \6 
6.1J. 


ttutt)  the  cDgc  of  tljc  fnjo^D,  anb  all  the 
fottlcs  ttjat  ibetc  therein,  acco?btng  to 
allthathchabbouctolLibuah. 

33  C  ICijcn  $?o?am  Rmg  of  <5c5Ct, 
came  bp  to  !)clpcH,acI)ift),anu  3JoQ)ua 
fnio  te  him  anD  his  people,  bnnii  he  hab 
left  him  none  remaining. 

34  c  3lnb  from  Hachtfl) .  Ilodnta 
pafab  bnto  €glon,anb  all  3lfracUbith 
htm,  anb  the?  encampcb  agamft  it,  anb 
fought  agamQ  it. 

35  3tnbfheytoofecitonthatbay,anb 
fmote  it  Vbiththecbgeofthefnwb,  anb 
all  the  foules  that  were  therein  he  bttcr* 
ly  befttoyeb  that  oap,  aceojbing  to  all 
thathchabboneto  Hachtfh. 

36  3nb  3Jofl)ua  went  top  feomtfg* 
ion,  anb  all  3Jfracl  lbith  him,  bnto  $c* 
b!on,anbthcyfoughtagamftit. 

37  3md  they  tooRc  tt,  ano  fmote  it 
lbith  tl)c  coge  of  the  fuwb.anb  the  Ring 
thcrcof,anb  all  the  cities  fhcreof,anb  all 
the  foules  that  were  therein,  he  left  none 
remaining,  aecojbing  to  all  thathchab 
boncto<£glon:butbeftroycbitbtterly, 
ano  allthc  foules  thatwere  therein, 

3S  C3no3fofhuarcturncb,anball 
3Jfrael  ibtthhimto£>ebir ,  anb  fought 
agaiuQit. 

39  3tnb  hec  toofec  it ,  anb  the  Uing 
thereof,  anb  all  the  cities  thereof,  anb 
they  fmote  them  lbith  the  tbgc  of  the 
fioojb ,  anb  bttcrly  bcttroycb  all  the 
foules  that  were  therein,  he  left  none  re- 
maining :  ashe  habbonc  to  $ctyon,fo 
he  bib  to  £>ebir ,  anb  to  the  king  there* 
of,ashehab  boncaifo  to  'it:bnah,  anb 
to  her  Ring. 

40  C&o  3ofl)uafmotc  all  the  eouu* 
trcyofthchils,  anb  ofthe£>oufh,anb 
of  the  bale,  anb  of  the  fpnngs,anball 
their  lungs, hec  left  none  rcmaymng, 
but  btterly  bcltroycb  all  that  bjcatheb, 
as  theft®  is  3?  (Sob  of  3Jfracl*eom* 
manbeb. 

41  3tnb  3?ofl)ua  fmote  them  from 
Babcfl)-25amca,  cucn  bnto  d5a?a, 
anb  allthc  countrey  of  (Sofhcn ,  euen 
bnto  Gtbcon. 

4z  3tnb  all  thefc  Bings  anb  their 
lanb  bib  gjofhua  tafte  at  one  tune :  be* 
tauft  the  %qm%>  ©ob  of  JJfracl  fought 
fo?3!frael. 

43  3tnb3tofl)uareturncb?al3Jfra. 
el  tbith  htm.bnto  the  campc  to  <Silgai. 

CHAP.    XL 

r   Diuers  Kings  oner  come  at  the  waters  ofMe- 
Totn.    10  Hazor  is  taken  and  burnt.    16  All 


the  countrey  taken  by  iofhua.    11   TheA- 
nakims  cut  oft. 

ji2biteametopau*e,lbhen 
Jabm  Ring  of  J?a3o?$ati 
ncarb  thofc  things,  that  hec 
fent  to^Jobab  Sing  of  i39a* 
„  oon ,  anb  to  the  Uing  of 
<S>htmron,  f  to  the  Ring  of  achfljaph, 
z  3nb  to  the  Rings  that  were  on  the 
iiSotfh  of  the  mountaines ,  anb  of 
the  piames  £>outh  of  Cinneroth ,  anb 
in  the  bailey , anb  in  the  bobbers  of  3>o}, 
onthciecfi:; 

3  And  to  the  Canaanite  on  the  caft 
anb  on  the  mttt,  anb  to  the  ^monte, 
anb  the  pittite,  anb  the  #crt55itc,  anb 
thejebufitcin  the  mountaines, anbto 
the  finite  bnber  Sermon  in  the  lanb 
of£p3pch. 

4  3nb  they  tbent  out ,  they  anb  an 
their  hoflesibith  them ,  much  people, 
euen  as  the  fanb  that  isbponthe£>ca- 
fhojc  in  multitube,U)ith  hotfesanb  cha* 
rets  bcry  many. 

5  ^nbnjhenaiithefeBi'ngstbere 
tmrt  together,  they  came  anb  pitches 
together  at  the  maters  of  ^crom,  to 
fightarjainft'Jfracl. 

6  C3nb  tl;e  !l©isBfaibe  into 
Uoft)ua,2iscnotafraibbccaurcofthcm: 
fojto  monroib  about  this  time  ibiii3l 
bcliuer  them  bp  al  Oainc  before  Sfrael: 
thou  (halt  hough  their  hotfes ,  anb 
burnctheircharctslbirhfire. 

7  S>o3tofhuacamc,anbalithepco* 
pleofibarreWithhim,againttthcmby 
the  waters  of  heroin  fubbenly ,  anb 
they  fell  bpon  them. 

8  3nbthclL©i3?Dbeu'uere&them 
into  the  hanb  of  JJfrael ,  lbho  fmote 
them,  anb  chafeb  them  bnto  j  great  Zi* 
bon,  anb  bnto  ||  ffl3ifr  ephothmaim,  anb 
bnto  the  bailey  of  flJBijpdj  cafltbarb, 
anb  they  fmote  them ,  bntill  they  left 
them  none  remayning. 

9  3nb  Uofhtta  bib  bnto  them  as 
the  H©iR?D  babe  him :  hce  hougljcb 
tfjctr  ho^fes ,  anb  burnt  their  chatcts 
lbithfirc. 

10  c  Km 3Jofl)iia  at  that  time  tur* 
neb  bacftc ,  anb  tooRe  J?a50?,anb  fmote 
the  Ring  thereof  Ibith  thefnwb  :  fin 
mm  bcfo?ctimc  ibas  tl;c  heab  of  ail 
thofcRingbomes. 

11  ^nbthcy  unorcailthcfoulcsthat 
mere  therein  ibith  tl)t  cbgc  of  the 
uoo?b ,  tottctly  befiroymg  them  •  there 
Vbas  not  t  any  left  to  b?cathe ;  anb  he 
burnt  $a50(t  ibith  nre. 
ii  3tnb 


femt'ied  by 

.ippctnt- 

ment* 


\\Or,Zidcn 

■Rgiktb. 

\OrJtk 

fill:  Hch. 
liurmng  of 
VAtcn. 


fHrt-r  irnj 
tivalh. 


I 


Diucrs  concjuefls       Chap.xij.        madebylofliua. 


•Num.;  ?. 
jj.deut.  7. 
I. and  20. 

f  Hetr.o» 
thetrhettpe. 


•EX0A34 
II. 

'  DclK.7  2 

\Htb.hert- 

monedno- 

thittg. 


Or, the 
fmooihe 
mountains. 


*Chap  J  3 


•Numb  ttS 

In- 


ii  anDautoccittes  of  rtjofc  Kings, 
anD  alltljc  Kings  of  ttjem,  DtD  3Ioujua 
tafte,  anD  fmote  tljcm  ibitljtljecDgcof 

tl)CftdO?D,andl)CUttCClpDCSCOtCDtl)Cm, 

*  as  spofes  tt»c  fcruant  of  tlje  £  ©  is  © 
eommanDcD. 

ij  25utasfon!)ectttesti)atl!ooDftai 
t  in  tljetr  ftrcngtlj,  3tfraelburncD  none 
of  ttjem,  fauei^a50?  ottely  f  that  did  30; 
djuaburne. 

14  3tnD  alltljc  fpotle  of  tljcfc  cities, 
anD  tlje  cattcll,  tlje  cIjtlDjcu  of  3Jfracl 
tooKe  foi  ap:ay  bnto  fljemfclues :  but 
cutty  man  tljey  fmote  JDitl)  rtjecDgcof 
ttjc  udoxb,  tmtui  tijey  OaD  DcftroycD 
tljetn,  netrtjer  left  tl)cp  any  to  bjcafljc. 

1$  C*3stljefL©isiD  tommanDcD 
QfJofes  Uts  fcruant,  fo  *  DiD  $)ofcs  torn* 
manD3ou)ua,anDfoDtD^ofl)ua:  Ijee 
t  left  not  Ding  tonDone  of  all  tliat  ti)t 
%  ©  is  ©  tommanDcD  £^ofes. 

16  <§>o  gfofljua  tooKe  all  tljat  tanb, 
rtjcljiUes,  anD  all  rtje&outOtountrcy, 
anD  all  toe  lanb  of  <sofljen,anD  tlje  bai^ 
lcv,aubtljcpiatnc,  anD  tlie  mountaiuc 
of  3Jfcacl,  anD  tilt  bailey  of  tljcfamc : 

17  Euen  from  tlje  ||  mount  $alaK,tljat 
goctljtopto&ctr,  bnto  26aal-d5aD,  m 
tl)c  bailey  of  ILebanon ,  bnbec  mount 
Sermon:  anD  allthett  Kings  UctooKc, 
anD  fmotc  tDcm,anDHclb  tljcm. 

18  3Iou)uamaDctuarrealongttmc, 
Vbtto  all  tljofc  Kings. 

19  Xtjcre  mas  not  a  ntic  tijat  maDc 
peate  tbitl)  toe  cbiiujcn  of  3ifracl,  *  faue 
roc  Smites  toe  inhabitants  of  ©tbcon , 
all  other  tljey  tooKc  m  battcll. 

xo  ifonttt)asoftOefL©iR©tol)ar' 
Den  tfjcir  Oearts,  trjat  tljey  fljoulD  come 
agamtt  3Jfracl  tn  battcll,  tljat  ijc  mtgOt 
DeGcoy  tliem  tottcrly ,  &  tftat  toey  migOt 
Oauenofauour:  buttijatljcemtgljtDej 
(troy  tljem,  as  tlje|L©iB3D  tommanDcD 
U0ofes. 

xi  C2nbattljatnmctame3Joflina 
anD  cut  off  tOe  3inaKims  from  tOc 
mountames,  from  $eb:on,  from  SDc- 
btr ,from  3luab,anD  from  all  tfjemoun< 
tames  of  3uDalj,  anD  from  all  toe 
mountames  of  3ifrael :  gioOjua  De- 
ttroycDthembttctlyttHtOtDcir  noes. 

xx  Xoercttiasnoneof  toc^nafttms 
left  in  tl)e  lanD  of  tOe  tOUDjen  of  3fracl: 
onelyin(5a5a,m©atI),anDtn3lfl)DoD, 
ffjeccrcmauteD. 

xj  &o;5omuatooRertjctt>ljolelanD 
aecojDtngto  all  tOattOe  %  ©  is  v>  fatDc 
bnto  fi$3ofes,  anD  Uoftma  gauc  it  fo?  an 
tnljeritance  tmto  Jfrael,  *accojDtngto 


tljetr  Duufions  by  tljetr  tribes :  anD  tlje 
lanDrefteDfromrbarrc. 

CHAP.  XII. 

1  The  two  kings  whole  countreys  Mofes  tooke 
and  difpoled  of.  7  The  one  and  thirty  kings 
on  the  other  fide  Iordan  which  Iofim.i  fmote. 

C>U)tI)efeare  tljc  Kings  of 
tOclanD,  ibOtcljtljectjil 
Djen  of  5lfracl  fmotc,  anD 
poflctTcD  tljetr  lanb  on  tljc 
ottjer  fiDc  3Jo?Dan,  to- 
Uiarb  toe  rtfing  of  tljc  &unnc :  from 
tljc  nucc3irnon,bnto  mount^ermon, 
anD  all  tljc  piaine  on  tljc  call. 

x  *&iljonKmgofttje:8mo;titestbfio 
Dwelt  m  ^efobon ,  and  ruleD  from  %- 
rocr,  VbljtdjisbpontOe  banKc  of  tOeri- 
uer  of  3lrnon ,  anD  fromtOc  miDbleof 
thenuer,  anD  from  IjalfecsfleaD  Dnto 
tl)eriuer3JabboK,  which  is  tlje  bo?Der  of 
tlje  cljilDjcn  of  Simmon : 

3  ^nD  from  toe  piaine,  to  tlje  S>ca 
of  CinncrotOon  tljeeatt,  anD  bnto  tlje 
fca  of  tlje  plamc,  eu«i  tlje  fait  fea  on  tlje 
€aft,tljc«)ay  to  fficto-^efoimotD:  anD 
from  tlje  lldoutt) ,  bnber  ||  *  SiajDotl)- 
jMgalj. 

4  €  ^nD  tlje  coatt  of  sDg  King  of 
iSafljan,  which  was  of  tlje  *  remnant  of 
tlje  otants,  tljatDrbclt  at  afljtarotlj, 
atiDat€D2n, 

5  ^nD  reigneD  in  mount  Sermon, 
anD  in  S>aleah,  anD  in  aiWaujan,  bnto 
tlje  bojber  of  tlje  ©efljurttes ,  anD  tlje 
ii0aatljati)ttes,  anD  Ijalfe  ©tleaD,  tije 
bo?Der  of  5)iUon  King  of  5?cfobon. 

6  Xljem  Did  iDotcs  tlje  feruant  of 
tlje  %  ©  is  js»,anD  tlje  tljiltyen  of  3?frael 
fmtte,  anD  *  fl©ofes  tlje  feruant  of  ttjc 
IL©i8©gaucitfo2apoffcmont)utotOc 
Beubcnttcs,  anD  ©aDttcs.anD  tlje  Ijalfe 
tnbcof^anaffcO. 

7  C  3(nD  tOefe  are  tlje  Kings  of  tOc 
eountrcy  ruijtclj  llofljua  anD  rtjc  erjtl 
Dien  of  3Jfracl  fmote  on  tots  CDe  3Joj 
Dan  on  toe  iBeft,  from  25aal  ©aD  in  tlje 
bailey  of  fLcbanon,  cuen  bnto  *  tlje 
tnount  ^aiaK,  tljat  goetlj  top  to  5»etr, 
i\»lnclj  3}oll)ua  gauebnto  tljetnbesof 
Ijfracl  fo?  a  potTcflion,  atto^Dtng  to 
their  Duufions: 

8  3jn  ttjc  mountames  anD  in  tOe 
baileys,  anD  tn  tlje  planus,  anD  tntlie 
fpUngs,  anD  tn  tlje  tbilDcrnefTe,  anDm 
toe  S>outl)  tountrey :  tlje  pittites,  tOe 
^mojites,  anD  ttjc  Canaanites.tljc  $t 
rl35ites,  tlje  ^tuites,anD  tlje^cbiifites. 
%  3        9   C*Xlje 


Num.  ii 


\\  Or, Timor. 
II  Or,  the 
Iprmgmf 
Ptfgah,or 
the  hUt. 
'  Dcut.J. 

t7.Scf-4?- 
•Deut.j. 
1 1. chap. 
13.1:. 


•Num.  3:. 
29.dcuc.  3. 
ll.thap. 
.j.8. 


'Chap.  Ii. 
17. 


Kings  conquered.        Iofhua.     Reubens  and  Gads 


"Chap.  6.1 

•  Cliap.  8. 

*  Chap.  10 


'  Chap.  I  o 
13- 
'Chap.  10, 


*Chap.  io. 
•Chap.  10. 


|  OrtS«rat). 
•Chap.  11. 


'Gcnef.14 


t  Heir.tt 


9  €  *  Xbc  lung  of  3Jeruljo ,  one . 
the  *  Mug  of  3tt ,  lbbub  is  beftoe  flSctbcl, 
one: 

io  ^ijcRingof^Jcntfalcm.oncitlje 
Rmgofl?cb2on,onc: 

1 1  Xbc  uing  of  3Jarmufb,  one:  the 
UmgoflLacbis,  one: 

u  XbelungofCglon,onc:*tbcRing 
of<5C5cr,onc: 

13  *Xbe  lung  of  2>cbtr,onc :  tlje  Ring 
of(3cber,onc: 

14  Xbc  Ring  of  tyonnab  one :  tbc 
Umgof3lrab,onc: 

15  *  Xbc  King  of  ?Ltbnab,onc :  the 
Kmgof3buliam,onc: 

i6  *Xbc  Ring  offi3aRKcbab  one:  the 
Rmgof26efbcl,onc: 

17  XbcRtngofXappuab,one:fbc 
lung  ottKpner,  one: 

18  XbcRmgof3lpbcR,onc:tbcRittg 
ofllflafbaron,  one: 

19  Xnc  Ring  of  £0abon ,  one:  * the 
Ring  of  1*1502,  one: 

20  XbeRtngof£>bimron-s3l9cron, 
one:  flic feing of 3triifl)ap!),onc : 

21  XbctungofXaanatb,onc:tbc 
lungofsB9cgibbo,onc: 

22  XbchmgofBcbcfb,onc:fbcRtng 
of3JoftrieamofCannel,onc: 

23  Xbc  Ring  of  2D02  ,mtbc  coattof, 
2Doj,  one :  the  Ring  of  *tf)c  nations  of 
C5ilgal,one: 

24  XbcmngofXir5ab>one:ailtbc 
lungs  tbirtic  anb  one. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

i  The  bounds  ot  the  land  not  yet  conquered. 
8  The  inheritance  of  the  two  Tribes  and 
h.ille.  14.  33  The  Lord  and  his  faciifices, 
are  the  inheritance  ofLetii.  ic.  The  bounds 
of  the  inheritance  oi  Reuben.  11  Balaam 
flainc.  24  The  bounds  ot  the  inheritance  ot 
Gad,  2.5;   andofthehalfcuibeofManaflch. 

gSg  £>U)3i0fl)UaitoS0lD  and 

*  -|  (trtcRcnm  yccrcs,  and  the 
<?  1L  ©  is  p  fatbc  bnto  bun ,■ 
jao  ?  Xl)ouartolD,andaticRcn 
&£*#  mycrcs,  anb  there  remain 
nrtl)  pet  bcry  mucl)  lanD  tto  bee  pot 
feffeb. 

2  Xbis  is  the  lanb  that  pet  remai' 
uctb :  an  the  borers  of  tlje  phiiiumcg, 
anbalioctburi, 

3  Jfrom  £>ibo2 ,  lbbtcb  is  befoic  e- 1 
gvpt.eucn  bnto  tl)c  bo2bcrsof€Uron 
/i5o;timjarD,whKhi£countfbtotl)eCa' 
naam'tc :  fine  loins  of  tl)c  tehilillmcSi 
the  ©a3atl)itcs,  aub  the  afbbotbttcs, 


tbc  efl)&alonitcs,tbe  dftttitcs,  anb  tlje 
ejbronitcs ;  ZMo  ttjc  Suites. 

4  3fromtlje5>outb,aiitbeianbof 
tbcCanaaiutes,  anb  ||5JJ9caraljtbatis 
befibe  tlje  diDomans ,  bnto  SJpljcb ,  to 
tlje  bojbcrs  of  the  Almontes: 

5  3lnb  tt)c  lanb  of  tlje  ©ibhtes,  ant 
al  Hebanon  toruaro  tl)c5>unnt  rifmg, 
from  26aai-@ab  bnber  mount  i?cr- 
mon,bntotbcentringintol?amatb. 

6  2111  the  inhabitants  of  tlic  lull 
countrcy,  from  ?Lebanonbnto  $&iiw 
pbotbmatm ,  and  all  tlic  ^ibonians, 
tbcmibtlljl  nunc  out  from  befoze  tlje 
rbilbzcn  ofjfwtl :  onelp  btuibe  thou  it 
by  lot  bnto  tbe3Jfcaclitcs,fo2anmlje 
ritanccas  3J  hauc  commanbeb  thee. 

7  il5ottt  therefore,  biuibe  this  lanb 
foj  amnberitantc  bnto  the  nine  tnbes, 
anb  tlic  baifc  tribe  of  ^anaffeb, 

8  naitb  lbbom  tlje  3Rcnbenires,anb 
tljecSabitcsbauerccciueb  their  inherit 
tancc,  *  lbbicb  £0ofcs  gauc  them ,  be* 
ponb^JozbanCaftiuarb ,  euenas^o- 
fes  tlje  feruant  of  tlje  JLsDis  ts>  gaue 
ttjem: 

9  ifrom  ^rocc  tliat  is  bpon  tl)r 
banlttof  tnertuer  ^rnon,  anb  tlje  tine 
tliatismtfte  mibbcltof  tl)e  riuct ,  anb 
ailtljeplaincof^ebcbabntoSOibon: 

io  3inb  all  tlie  titles  of  £>tl)on  King 
of  tl)c  ^montcs',tt)J)td)  reigneb  in  foeuy 
bon ,  bntotljcboibetof  tj)c  t^ilbmiof 
Amnion: 

1 1  3lnb  (Kileab,  anb  tlje  boiber  of  the 
d5e(nuritcs,anb  ^aatliatlutes,  anb  all 
mount  Sermon ,  anb  all  asafban  bnto 
Saitab: 

12  3iu  tbc  ftingboitic  of  ^Dg  in  25a? 
fl)an,ibbitb  rcigueb  in  ^(l)tarotbanb 
in  Cbjci,  lbbo  remamcb  of  *  tlje  rem* 
nant  of  tl)e  giants :  fo2  tljefc  bib  #ofes 
finite,  anb  tafttftem  out. 

13  /i5cucrtUcleflc ,  tbc  tbilbzcn  ofgjf 
rael  crpclicb  not  tbe  (Pefijuritcs ,  noi 
tbc  flSaarbatbitcs :  buttfic  ©cfbun'tes 
anb  tbc  upaacbatbttcs  btbcl  among  tbc 
3lfraclitcs  bnrill  tl)ts  bap. 

14  £>ncli)  bnto  tbc  tribe  of  ILeui  bee 
gauc  none  inheritance:  thefaenfitcsof 
the  %  ©k©  Gob  of  3Jfcacl  mabe  bp 
fire,  arc  tljetr  inhentancc,  as  he  faib  bn 
to  them. 

15  C^nbiJ9ofcs  gauc  bnto  the  tribe 

Of  tl]C  tl)ilb2Cn  Of  BCUbeit  inheritance  3C^ 

coding  to  their  families: 

i6  3nb  their  coafl  ibas  from  ^roer 
that  is  on  the  banbe  of  the  riuer  Triton, 
anb  tlje  nty  that  is  in  the  mibftof  tlje  rv 

ucr, 


t  Ortthc 


•Num.  32 
H-dcut.  a. 
1^. chap. 22 


•Dtut.;, 
1 1  .chap. 
11.4. 


inheritance. 


I  Or,  the 
highyUcet 
of  But,  ami 
htr.ifcof  Ba- 
tilmton. 


'Dcut.J. 

I  Or.fpringt 
•f'P'Ig'h  or 
the  hill. 


"Num.31 


\\Otfdii/ii 


utr ,  anD  all  the  plainc  by  $)cbcba. 

17  $cfl)bon  anD  all  her  tints  ttjat  are 
tn  the  plainc :  3Dibon ,  anD  f|  zBamoth- 
zsaal,  anD  26cth  -  iSaabncon, 

18  anD31aba3ah,  anD  BcDcmoth, 
anDflPephaath, 

19  anDBiriathaim,anD£>ibmah, 
anD  zarcth-  ujaljar ,  m  the  mount  of 
the  bailey, 

20  2nD  Bethpco; ,  anD  *  ||  aibboth 
jMgab,  anD  aSctl)  icfbtmonj : 

ri  £nD  all  ti)c  cities  oftlje  plaincanD 
alitl)t  feingDomcof  ^uhonaingof  the 
aniontcs,  ibbieh  rtigncbm  ^cfbbon, 
lbhom  lJPofcs  fmote*rbiththc  puntts 
offl3iDian,  £ut,anD  &CKcm,anDZur, 
anD  V)\xt ,  anD  &cba,tbhieh  rbere  Duties 
of  £>ihon,  Duelling  m  the  countrey. 

n  C26aiaamaifotl)t  fount  of  2Scoj 
the||&ooth-faycrDiDthccbilD:cnof3J£ 
rati  flay  tbith  thefioojD,  among  them 
that  tbete  aamt  by  them. 

13  3lnDthe  bojbcr  of  tlje  chilDjenof 
Btubcn,  ibas  3lMban  anD  ttjc  bozDcr 
rherof :  Zhistbas  the  inheritance  of  the 
chilDjcn  of  fteuben  after  their  families, 
the  cities,  anD  biliagts  thereof. 

24  ^nD  £P0ftSgaUt inheritance bntO 

thctcibeof  <©ab,  euenDntothechilD?en 
of  C5aD,accojmngto  their  families: 

25  anD  their  coaft  toaster,  anD 
an  the  titles  of  ©ileaD ,  anD  hatfe  the 
lanD  oftlje  chittucn  of  ammon,  bnto 
arocrtbatisbefoje  Habbah: 

16  3lnD  from  $eO)bon  bnto  &fc 
math-fil9i5peh ,  anD  ffietonim :  anD 
ftom  ^ahanatm  bnto  the  bobber  of 
2E>ebir. 

17  anD  in  the  bailey ,  fficth-aram, 
anD  2Setlj  -  nimrah,anb  £>uctoth ,  anD 
zaphon  the  reft  of  tlje  mngDome  of 
5>tbon  hmgof  i^tft)bon,3Jo?Dan,  anD 
hisbojDer,  eucn  bnto  tlje  eDge  of  thefea 
of  Ctnneroth,  on  the  other  fiDc^JojDan 
eafhbarD. 

is  Xhisistheinhcritanttofthcchil 
Djcn  of  d5aD  after  their  families :  tlje  ci- 
ties anD  tl)cir  tillages. 

19   CHtlD  Q3oftS  gailC  inheritance tm* 

to  the  halfe  tribe  of  s$)anau*eh:  anD  this 

VbaSthe  poflefsion  ofttje  halfe  ttibCOf 

S|9anau*ch,by  ttjeic  families. 

30  ^nD  their  coaftibas  fro  s^abana- 
tin  all  isafban,  all  tlic  ftmgDomc  of  £)g 
amgof  isafhan,  anD  aiitDctoKbnesof 
3lair,  ibbtcharcin  isaujan,  tbjecfcojt 
cities: 

31  anbbaifccSileaD.anDauJtarotb, 
anD  emu  cities  of  tlje  ftmgDom  of  £>g 


Chap.xinj.        Leui  hath  none. 


m2&afl)atl,  were  pcrteimngtontO  tbetbll' 

D;enof  J^acDir  tljtfonncof  ^anaffti), ! 

euen  tO  t|)tOnC  IjalfCOf  UJC  *  Cl)UD?Cn  Of  '  Num.3 : 

spathic  by  their  families, 

31  XljCfe  are  tljC  countreyes  ibbtcb 

^ofcsDiD  Diftnbutc  foi  inheritance  in 
the  plaints  of  i^oab,  on  the  other  uDe 
3Jotf>an  by  ^Jericho  eaftibarb. 

33  *28utbnto  the  tribe  of  fleut^to 
fes  gauc  not  any  inheritance :  tlje 
It©  is  ©  ©oD  of  3Ifracl  ttias  tljtic  mljt 
ntante,  *  as  l)c  faiD  bnto  tljtm. 


CHAP.   X1III. 

1  The  nine  tribes  andahalfeare  to  haue  their 
inheritance  by  lot.  6  Caleb  by  priuiledge 
obtaineth  Hebron. 

^5D  tljCfe  are  the  country's 

a»f)t'cl)  tlje  cljttmcn  of  3Jf> 

caclmljenteD  tntljcianDc 
of  Canaan,  "ibljtrft  cica= 
3artl)e^neft,f5onma 
tl)c  fonnc  of  jftun,  anD  tl)c  DeaDs  of  tlic 
fathers  oftlje  tribes  of  tlje  cJWDjen  of 
3Ifracl  DittributcD  fo?  mfteritante  to 
them: 

i  *  25p  lot  was  their  inheritance,  as 
then©  is  ©  commanDeD  bpthehanbe 
of  £0ofes,fonhcninetribcs,anD  fo?tIje 
haifctnbe. 

j  Sfoi  ^0ofes  haD  giuen  the  inherit 
tante  of  tvoo  tnbes  anD  an  Ijaife  tribe, 
on  the  other  Gbc  3Jo?Dan:  butbntothe 
Heuites  h«  gauc  none  inheritance  a^ 
mongthem. 

4.  jfo?tljechilDjenof31ofcphlberc 
ttbo  tribes,  ^anaffch  anD  €ph;aim: 
therefore  njcv  gaue  no  part  bnto  the 
Hcuitcs  in  the  lanD,  fauc  nties  to  Dtbcll 
in,  tbith  tljeir  fuburbs  fo?  their  cattell, 
anDfouheirfubftance. 

5  *as  the  ILfiDis©  tommaunbeb 
f^ofes ,  fo  the  chilDjen  of  3lfrael  Did, 
anD  they  DiuiDeD  the  lanD. 

6  c  Xhen  the  chilDjcn  of  3Jubalj 
came  bnto  ^ofl)^  m^ilgal:  anDCa^ 
leb  thefonneof 'Jephunnch  the  Bene* 
5ite,faib  bnto  him,  Xhou  tmotbeitthe 
thing  that  the  %  ©  is  p  faiD  bnto  fi^o* 
festljcmanof  (BoDtonterningmcanD 
tljee.m  naDcuJ  iSarnea, 

7  f ourtie  y ceres  olDe  was  5  fthen 
^ofesthtferuantof  the  HiDJSJDiait 
mcfromlcMDclb  Barnta,  toefpicout 
theianD,  anD3J  bought  h»"  >bo«!Dca^ 
gatneas  it  ibas  in  mine  heart. 

s  /|5euertheleu"c,  my  toctlucn  that 
VbcntbplbithmcmaDethcljeartofthc 

people 


39- 


*Chap.i8. 


'Num.  18. 


"Num.  34. 
■7- 


*Num.itf 
5S&33- 
54- 


•Num.  3  5 
J.  chap. 
11.1. 


Calebs  inheritance.      Iofhua.         The  lot  of  ludah. 


•Num.  14. 


t  H-ir.mll- 


•Ecclus. 

46.9. 


12. 1  .mace, 

2.56. 


"Chap. 1  5. 


■Num.  •$. 
)• 

•Num.3;. 
J'5 


)  H,ir. 

tontHt. 


people  melt :  but  3f  tPhollp'folloiPeP 
th  c  Hois©  tup  <5op. 

9  3lnP  spofes  fwarc  on  that  bap, 
fapmg ,  Smrclpthcianb  tuherconthp 
fectnauc  troben,  fljallbc  chine  inherit 
tantc ,  anb  flip  chiip2cnsfo,j  tucr ,  be* 
caufc  thou  haft  ibhollp  folloiPcb  the 
?L4Di5©mp<3oo. 

10  3nb  noib  bcholbe ,  tlie  %  ®  is  © 
hath  kept  me auuc,ashefaib,thelJcfo2; 
tp  ant)  fiueper  cs,eucn  futcc  rhc  %<s>  is  © 
fpabc  this  iP02b  Pnto  ^ofcs,iPhiic  the 
ct)(lD2tit  of  ^frael  t  ipanbrrcb  in  the 
lpiibcriieffc :  anbnoiPloe ,  3  am  this 
bap  fourcuwanb  fiuc  pcercs  olb. 

11  *3lspct3Jamasftrougrhisbap, 
as  1  was  m  the  Dap  that  ^ofes  fent  mee : 
as  mp  ftrcngtl)  ibas  then,  cuen  fo  ts  mp 
ttrength  noiP,  fo:  VParre,  bott)  to  goc 
out  anb  to  come  m. 

ii  jftoib  thcrefozc  giuc  mee  this 
monntatnc,iPhcrcofthclL©i33E>fpaKC 
in  that  Pap,  ( fo?  thouhearbctt  m  fljat 
PapholPthe  3tnafeimswere  ttjere ,  anp 
that  the  cities  were  great  andfenceb)  iffo 
be  the  %  ©  ik  ©  ttnll  be  lbitft  mctljcn^ 
(nail  bee  able  to  Pnuc  tljcm  out ,  asrfjc 
fiowjDfaiD. 

ij  3nD  3ofl)ita  blcfTco  htm  ,  anp 
gaue  Pnto  CalcP  the  fount  of  ^Jeppun- 
neg^ebzon  fo2  an  inheritance. 

14  *$cb2onthcrcfo2ebccamctheins 
hentancc  of  Caleb  the  fenne  of  3Ic= 
phunnch  the  Bcnc^ttc  Pnto  this  bap : 
Pctaufe  that  hec  ibhollp  folloiPcp  tlje 
H,(Di3©GoPof3)fcacl. 

1$  3lnP*thcnamcoflf)eb2onbcfo2e, 
wasBinath  3ltPa ,  ibhuh  A.ba  lpas  a 
great  man  among  the  3hiafeims:  anp 
the  lanp  hab  reft  from  ibarrr. 

CHAP.    XV. 

i  The  borders  ofthc  lot  of  ludah.  13  Calebs 
portion  and  coiic|Ucfi.  16  Othniel  for  his 
valonr,hath  Achfah  Calebs  daughter  to  wife. 
iS  Shre  obtaineth  a  blefsing  of  her  father, 
u  The  Cities  of  ludah.  6}  The  Icbu* 
fites  not  conquered. 

HKthcntPasthclotofthc 
f&$  tnpeof  thetlv.ib2cnof3!u 


l ;"&$  bah  bp  then  famtUes,*euen 
8\  to  the  bo2ber  of  €oom 
._  the  *  lPsibcrncffc  of  zm 
£>ottrlrtParb , « as  the  bttcrmoft  part  of 
the  South  coaft: 

i  3lnb  their  South  boiber  ibas 
fromthcfhoicof  tlie  faltfea ,  from  the 
t  Pap  that  loohcth  SouthiPatb. 


j  3mbitlPentouttothe<§>outh&be 
to  |!  ^aaiehacrabbim,anb  paffeb  along 
to  zm,  anb  afcenPep  Pp  on rhcSonrh' 
Roe  Pnto  Babcflj-25arnca :  anp  paffeb 
alongto$e3ron,anb  lb  cntPp  toolbar, 
anb  fctrhcP  a  compaffe  to  Bataaa. 

4  ifrom  thence  tt  paffeb  totParb 
^mon.anb  tbent  out  Pnto  the  riucr  of 
egppt,  anb  thegomgs  out  of  that  coaft 
Vbcrcat  the  fea:tl)ts  tfhaibe  pour  South 
coaft. 

5  3mDrnc£aftb02Dcrroas  the  fait 
Sca,cucnPnto  the  enb  of  3J02ban  :anb 
their  b02bcr  in  the  jftorth  quarter,  was 
from  the  bap  of  the  fca,at  tlje  Pttermoft 
partofJ02ban. 

6  3nbthcbo2bertPcntPpto2i3cn> 
hogla ,  anb  paffeb  along  bpthe  ii5o«h 
of  25cth-arabah,  anb  the  bo2bcr  ibcnt 
pp  to  the  ftone  of  25oljan  nje  fonnc  of 
&cuPen. 

7  ^nb  the  bo2bcr  tbent  Pp  torbarb 
S>cbirfromtl)ebailcpof^cfao2,  anb  fo 
jRo2thiParb,  loo&mg  torbarb  ©ilgai, 
that  is  befoje  tl)c  going  Pp  to  Knurre 
mim,rphtch  ison  the  5>outhftbc  of  the 
riucr :  anb  the  b02ber  paffeb  toibarbs 
rhetpatcts  of  Cnfljcmcfl),  anbthego* 
tngs  out  thereof  vptre  *  at  €n-3Rogcl. 

8  ^nb  the  bojber  ibcnt  Pp  bp  tljc 
Pailepofrhc  fonnc  of  fetnnom,Pntott)e 
^outliftPcofthCJcbufite ,  thefamets 
3/erutalem :  anPtljcbojbcrlPcntPpto 
the  top  of  the  mountame ,  that  i«th  be* 
fo?c  thepallep  of  ^tnnom,  teeftibarp, 
vPhicfttsat  tftecnb  of  the  Pallep  of  the 
giants,ii5onhiParb. 

9  ^nbthcbo2DerrbasP2aiPmfrom 
thetop  of  the  hill  Pnto  thefountatne  of 
therpaterof /Bcpl)toah,  anbiPentout 
to  the  cities  of  mount  €ph2on ,  anb  the 
bo2bcriPasP2atPento25aalal;,iPl)icl) 
iSBiriathiearim. 

10  3lnp  the  Po2bct  compaffeb  from 
2Saaiah  nacftibarp  Pnto  mount  5>cir, 
anbpaffeb  along  Pnto  theftbe  ofmount 
5lcanm,  ( Which  is  Chefelon)  on  tlie 
4ao2thubc,  anb  lPcntboiPneto23cth- 
ft)emcfl),anbpaffebontoXunual).  ' 

1 1  31np  the  Po2ber  ibcnt  out  Pnto 
tliefibe  of  «EUroniBo2thnjarb:aiibthe 
b02ber  \Pas  P2aipen  to  5>hicron ,  anb 
paffeb  along  to  mount  asaalao ,  anb 
ibcnt  out  Pnto  "Jabnecl ,  anb  the  go- 
ingsoutofthcPojbcnpcreatthefca. 

ii  3inb  the  i©cftbo2ber  rbas  to  the 
great  fea,  anb  the  coaft  therof :  this  *  ttje 
coaftofthtchab2enof3?ubarjrounPa* 
bout,  acco2bmg  to  tljeir  families. 
8  C3tnb 


l|  Or{tlif go- 
ing %/bzi 
%/iarsbban. 


i.Kjig.i, 


Achfahs  rcaucft.  Chap.xv.  luadhs  cities. 


"Chap.  lq- 

||  Or,  Kin- 

ath-arbx. 

"ludq.I.IO 


i}  C  anb  tonto  Caleb  the  fonnc  of 
3Jcpbunnch,  hegaucapartamongthe 
chittucnof  Jubab,  accoztnug  to  the  to 
manticmetuof  thcJLcnia^toJoflnia, 
wen  *  j|  the  cine  of  arba  the  father  of  a 
na6,ftl)jtticuieis^eb?on. 

14  anD  Caleb  bjnue  thence*  the  th2ec 
founts  ofanab,&hefl)at,anDahunan, 
anD  Xaltnai,  tht  thtttuen  of  anaK. 

15  anb  hcibcnttip  thence  to  them 
habitants  of  Debit :  anb  tt)t  name  of 
Debir  bcfo:c  was  Btnatb  -  £>cphcr . 

i6  canb  Caleb  fatb,5>ctbatfnutetb 
Biriath-£>cpbtr,anDtaKcthit,tohun 
lbfll  3}  giuc  3lcl)fal)  my  Daughter  to 
rbtfe. 

17  anb<J?tbniclthcfonncofBtna5, 
the  brother  of  Caleb ,  toobe  tt :  anbhtt 
gauc  hint  achfab  his  Daughter  to  ibifc. 

is  anD  it  came  to  paffc  as  fljee  came 
vmohun,  tbatfbc  moucD  htm  to  af  be  of 
het  fathct  aficiD,anD  flic  ughtcb  off  hct 
affc;  anb  Caleb  faib  bnto  btr,  lEbat 
lboutDcfttbou; 

19  D9ho  anfiuercD ,  (5tuc  nice  a  blcf 
fingfo:  thou  haft  guicnmccaS>otm> 
lanb,gmc  me  alfo  fpnngs  of  lbattr  anD 
hegauehet  tht  bpptt  fpnngs,  anD tht 
nether  fpzmgs. 

20  Xhis  is  the  inheritance  of  tht  tnbt 
of  tht  chiibitn  of  3JuDab  accojDtng  to 
tlitir  families. 

ii  anb  the  bttermoft  cities  of  the 
tribe  of  the  clnlbzenof  Jubah  toibarD 
tbecoaft  of  CDom  5>outhibarb,  iberc 
Bab>ccl,  anb  «bcr,  anb  ^jagur, 

ii  ^tnb  Btnab,  anb  Dimonah,anb 
aoabab , 

15  ^nb  Btbeft),  anb  1^502 ,  anb 
3Jtljnan, 

14  zipti,attD  Hcicm,anD  25ealoth, 

15  anb  Mw ,  $aDattab,  anb  Be-- 
riotl) :  and  j»tM:on,lbrnclnstoa%02, 

16  amain ,  anb  £>bcma ,  anb  33o- 
labah, 

17  anDfoasar-  <3aDDab,  anD??cfb 
mon,  anD  Beth  palct, 

28  anbi?a^atn)ual,anb2Sccrajt' 
ba,anb26r$iothiah, 

29  2Saaiah,anb3im,anba^em, 

30  anb  Cltolab   anb  Chcfil,  anb 

$02tnab, 

31  anbZiUiag,anbC19abmannah, 
anb*anfannah, 

32  anbUebaoth^nb5)htlhtm,anb 
am,  anb  Simmon: all  the  emes  are 
ttbentie  anb  ntne.ibitrj  thttr  biliagcs. 

33  And  m  the  bailey ,  Cftbaol ,  anb 
Zozeah.anbaChnah, 


34.  anb  zanoah  >  anb  <£ ngannim, 
jXappuah,anbCnam, 

35  3tarmuth,anbabuUam,£>ocoh, 
anD  actual), 

36  anb  #haraim ,  anb  abithaun, 
anb  (Srberah ,  II  anb  ©cberotbaim : 
fourtccne  ernes  lbith  their  Pillages. 

37  zenam,  anb  l)aba(hah,  s  09ts 
baigab, 

38  anb  Dileam ,  anb  £0t5peb,  anb 
Jofithccl, 

39  Hacbtfb.anD  Bo^katb,? cglott, 

40  anb  Cabbon,anb  Hahmam,anb 

Bithuni, 

41  anb  ©ebcroth,  23eth  -  bagon, 
anb  i!5aamah,anb  ^aUHcbalj:  Qrtccuc 
cities  lbith  their  Pillages. 

41  1iebnah,anb€thcr,anbafl)an, 
43  anb  Jipfjta ,  anb  afl)nalj ,  anb 

i!5t?tb, 
4+  anb  Bcilah,  anb  aclmb,  anb 

£Parcfbab :  nine  tines  lbith  their  bil 

lages. 

45  citron  lbith  htt  toibncs,  anb 
httbtliagcs. 

46  i'rom  Citron  cucn  bnto  tht  fta, 
all  that  lay  tnccre  afbbob,  lbith  their 
btliagts. 

47  afbboD  lbith  her  toibnts  anb 
her  biliages,  ©a^a  lbith  her  toibnts 
aubhtr  Pillages,  bnto  the  ruier  of  €- 
gypt,  anb  the  great  fca  anb  tbebojber 

thereof. 

48  C  anb  turtle  mountauies,S>ha 
mir,anb3attir,  anb  £>otob, 

49  anb  Dannah,  <?  Btnatb -5>an; 
nath,iblnchisDcbir, 

50  anbanab,anbafl)temoh,  anb 
antm, 

51  anb(5oft)cn,anDI!>olon,anb(5i? 
lot) :  clcucn  nttcs  Huth  their  biliages. 

52  arab,anbDumah,aubCfl)can, 

53  anb >l  planum,  anD  2Seth-tappti; 
ah,anbaphcttah, 

54  anD^umtah,anb*Birtarharba 
(lbhich  is  l?cb2on)anb  Zt02,  mnc  cities 
lbith  their  btliagcs. 

55  fl?aon,  Carmcl,  anb  Ztph ,  anb 
ijuttah, 

56  3Jnb3Jc5rcel,anb3JoRbcam,anb 
zanoah, 

57  Cam ,  ©ibbeah ,  anbXtmnah: 
ten  cities  lbith  their  Pillages. 

58  teaihul,  ioeth  -  5ur, anb  <RD02 , 

59  anD  sJBaarab,  anD  iBcthanotb, 
j  Cltebon :  fir  cittesibith  their  biliages. 

60  Btrtath  -  baal,  ibbtth  is  Btnath 
learim,  anb  Kabbah :  tibo  nties  lbuh 
their  Pillages. 

6i  CUn 


\°> 


t  Hitr.h 
1  be  ylacc  of. 


'Chap.  14. 
'5- 


Iofephs  borders.  lolhua* 


ManafTehs  lot. 


\Hch.wtnt 
facrtb. 


•Iudg.I. 
>6. 


6i  C3mtbcibilDctnetre,z8ctb-ara; 
bah,£0iDDin,aitD  £>ccacab, 

6i  3nD  iRibfhan  ,  anD  ttjc  city  of 
£>att,anD  CngcDt:  fire  emes  ibtth  their 
towages. 

63  3ts  fo:  the  3}cbuutcs  the  inbabt 
tatttsof3Jcrufalem,tbecbilD?enof3Ju' 
Dal)  coulo  not  D?iuc  tbeni  out:  but  tlje 
3kbufitcs  Ditocll  ltoith  the  chiiB?cn  of 
jjuoah  at  3Jctufaicm  tonto  tljts  Da?. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

i  The  qcnerall  borders  of  the  Tonnes  of  Iofeph. 
5  The  border  of  the  inheritance  of  Ephra- 
ini.   io  The  Canaanites  not  conquered. 

/i*Dt0Cl0t0fttiCti)tlD2CU 

of  3lofcpl)  t  fell  front  3J02; 
Dan  bp  Jericho ,  unto  rt)c 
ltoatcr  of  Jericho  on  the 
call ,  to  trjc  itoilDcrncfle 

tljat  goetfj  top  front  3Jeritbo  thzougl)- 

outmount26etbcl;  * 
z  3nD  goctb  out  front  2Bctbcl  to 

*JLit5,  anD  paffctb  along  tonto  the  bo?; 

Ders  of  3ircbi,to  3ltarotb> 
j  3lnD  goctb  Doitonc  nDeftltoarD,  to 

tbccoattof3Japrjleti,  tonto  tfjc  toaftof 

25ett)02on  the  nether ,  anD  to  C5c?cr: 

anD  the  goings  out  thereof  are  at  the 

5>ea. 

4  ^othethtlD2cnof3Iofeph,H0ai 
naflch,  anD  Cphjtaun,  tooftc  tljctr  ttilje= 
ritancc. 

5  C  3nD  the  bo?Dcr  of  the  thflD?cn 
of  epb?aim  acco?Dmg  to  their  famtlics, 
tbasthus:eucntrjc  bo2Dcr  of  tbettinbc 
ritantc  on  thc£att  fiDc  itoas  3ttarotb 
2iDDar, tonto  2i5ctbo?ott  the  topper. 

6  3nDtbebo?DctitocntouttoibarD 
tbe&ca,to^iri)mctbabontbe/5o?tb; 
fioe ,  anD  the  bo2Dcr  ltocnt about  call- 
itoarD  tonto  Xaanatb  £>btlob,  anD  pa£ 
fcDb?itonthc€altto3Ianohah : 

7  3nb  tt  ltocnt  Doitonc  front  IJano- 
hah  to  3(tarotb  anD  to  iftaarath ,  anD 
tame  to  ^Icrtcbo,  anD  ltocnt  out  at  310?; 
Dane. 

8  1Tbcbo?Dcr  ltocnt  out  from  1Eap; 
puah  nacftitoarD  tonto  tljc  nucr  B* 
nan :  anD  the  goings  out  thereof  itoere 
at  the  £>ca.  3Cl)is  is  tlje  inheritance  of 
the  tribe  of  tbcchtiD?cnofepb?aimbp 
their  families. 

9  3lnD  the feparate cities  fo:  tijc tnfl- 
D2en  of  <£pb?aini  were  among  tilt  mhe- 
ritante  of  the  thilD2cn  of  <©anafleb  >  all 
the  cities  ibitb  their  toiliages. 

10  3lnD  they  D?auc  not  out  the  Ca= 


naamtesthat  Dltoelt  in  <5e5Ct :  tout  the 
Canaanites  Ditocll  among  the  £pb?a; 
nntcs  tonto  this  Dap ,  anD  feruc  ton? 

Dec  tribute. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1  The  lot  of ManaiTeh.  8  Hiscoafr.  k.  The 
Canaanites  not  driuen our.  14  Thechil- 
drerj  of  Iofeph  obtaine  another  lot. 

j^gjfcgggs  ^cteitoasaifo  aiotfo2thc 
3  M  tribe  of  i$anaflcbK*fo? 
!§§&  hec  itoas  the  firft  b02nc  of 
||sj  3Jofeph)towit,fo2fi0achtr 
jg^§  the  firft  bo?nc  of  #anaf; 
fch  tijc  father  of  CpilcaD :  becaufe  he  was 
a  man  of  itoarrc,  tbcrefo?c  bee  bao  ©t 
lcaDanD2Sa(l)an. 

2  Xhcre  itoas  alfo  a  lot  fo?  *  tijc  reft 
of  the  cbtlD?cn  of  ^anavTch  by  their  fa; 
nnlics ;  fo2  the  thilD2cn  of  ^lbic?er ,  anD 
fo?  the  chilDjcn  of  $elcfe,anD  fo?  the  cbil; 
D?cn  of  ^frtcl ,  anD  fo?  the  cbtlD?cn  of 
S>bccbcm ,  anD  fo?  the  cbtlD?cnof  $c; 
phcr,  anD  fo?  the  cbtlD?cn  of  5>bcmtDa : 
thefc  were  the  male  tbtlD?cn  of  iJ0anaf; 
fet) ,  the  fonne  of  3Jofcph  by  their  fa* 
mates. 

3  <DSut*zrtophcbaDthcfonncof 

$cpbet,  the  fonne  ofOileaD,  the  fonne 
of  fl9acbtr  ,tbefonnc  of  ijpanaflcb,  baD 
no  fonttes  but  Daughters :  3nD  thefc 
are  the  names  ofbts  Daughters,  S&aty 
lah ,  anD  /i3oab  ,$oglab ,  i$ilcab>  anD 
Xir^ah. 

4.  3nD  the?  tame  nccre  bcfo?e  Clc? 
a5artbe0?icft,  anDbcfo?c1Foft)uathe 
fonne  of  iI5un,  anD  bcfo?c  the  0?tntcs, 
Javing.Xhe  %®  is  id  commatiDcD  fl0o- 
fes  to  gttte  tos  an  inheritance  among 
our  b?ctb?en:  thcrcfo?c  atto?Dtng  to  the 
commauttDcmcnt  of  the  3L€>bip,  hec 
gauc  tljcm  an  inheritance  among  the 
b?ctb?cn  of  their  father. 

5  3nD  there  fcl  ten  po?tions  to  £0a^ 
naOch ,  befibc  the  lanD  of  ©ileaD  anD 
asaiban ,  tbljich  were  on  the  other  fiDc 
3Jo2Datt; 

6  26ecaufe  the  Daughters  of  Q&& 
naflch  h^D  an  inheritance  among  his 
Tonnes  :  anD  the  reft  of  ^attaflchs 
fonncshaD  the  lanD  of  OilcaD. 

7  C3nDtbctoaftof£0anaflcbltoas 
from3lfl)crto  !30tchmethah,thatlietli 
bcfo?e^)hcchntt,  anD  thcbo?bcritontt 
along  on  the  right  hanD,  tonto  the  inha- 
bitants of  eutappuarj. 

8  Now  fiOanaffctj  haD  the  lanD  of 
Xappuah  :  but  Xappuah  ontlje  bo?; 

Der 


*  Gene.  41. 
5 1  .and  46. 
20. and  50. 

13.  num. 


*  Num.  io\ 
*9- 


¥  Num. 3(5. 
33.  and  »7 
I.  and  36.1 


Tl 


leir  cities. 


Chap.xvii].   The  Tabernacle. 


|[  Or,  faockc 
of  reeds. 


\\OvtRciJ.A- 
%ms. 


bcr  of  i^anaffch  btlongeb  to  the  chit 
bzcnofephiarm. 

9  3lnb  the  toad  bcfccnbcb  bnto  the 
||  nuer  Banal) ,  £>outrjibarb  of  the  tr- 
uer :  thefe  cities  of€ph2aun  arc  among 
the  citit s  of  ^anaffeh:  tl>c  toad  of  ^9a- 
naffch  aifo  >™ < on the  /Rozth  fibeof  the 
nuer,  ano  the  outgoings  of  it  lbereat 
the£>ca. 

io  £>outh*batb  it  was  <£phzaims,anb 
jftoztinbarb  'twas  fl3anatfchs,  anb  the 
tea  is  hts  bozbec,  ano  the?  met  together 
m^ft)eronthe/!5o.:th,anDm3Jirachar 
onthecaft. 

ii  31nb  ©anaffeft  hab  in  ^ffathar 
anb  m  3fbcr  ,2Sethft)ean  f  her  toibncs, 
ant)  ^iblcam  anb  her  totbnes,  anb the 
inhabitants  of  £>oz  anb  her  totbnes, 
anb  the  inhabitants  of  <£ttboz  anbher 
toibncs,  anb  the  inhabitants  of  H^a= 
nach  anb  her  toibncs,  anb  the  inhabi- 
tants of  U0cgtt)Do  anb  her  toibncs,  t- 
ucnthzcccountrcycs. 

n  >et  the  chilbzcn  of  asanaffch 

COUU)  not  OZlUC  OUt  the  inhabitants  Of  t!)Oft 

ernes,  but  the  Canaanttcs  tbouib  bibell 
mthatianb. 

13  #ct  it  came  to  pafTelbhen  the  chil- 
bmi  of  Jfraelibcrc  ibarenftrong,that 
the? put  the  Canaanitcs  to  tribute :  but 
bib  not  utterly  bztuc  them  out. 

14-  Stub  the  chttbzcn  of  Jiofeph  fpaue 
bnto  3Jofl)iia ,  faying,  nahV  haft  thou 
giucnmc  but  one  lot  anb  oncpoznonto 
mhcrtt,fecing<Jamagrcatpeoplc,fo:- 
afmuth  as  the  %  ©  is  jd  hath  blcffcb  me 
hitherto? 

1$  2nb3Jomuaannt}crcbthcm,3Jf 
tljou  be  a  great  people,  then  get  theebp 
tothtTboobcoumrcy,  anbctitboujncfo: 
thyfclfe  there  mthe  lanb  of  tl)c  0criy 
Mtcs,  anb  of  the  li  giants,  if  mount  €- 
phzatin  be  too  narrolb  foz  thee. 

16  3iiib  the  chilbztn  of  "Jofephfaibc, 
Xhe  hill  is  not  enough  foz  bs:  anb  all 
the  Canaarates  that  bibell  in  the  lanbc 
of  the  bailer  ,haue  charcts  of  yzon,both 
thcylbho  JIC  of  i5ethfl)ean  anb  her 
toibncs,  ano  they  lbho  arc  of  the  bailey 
of  Stored. 

17  3mb3fofhuafpaRc  bnto  the  houfc 
of  3Jofcph, eucn  to  cphzatm ,  ano  to 
i"0anaffch,  faying,  3Chou  art  a  great 
people ,  anb  haft  great  poltoer :  Ithou 
fhaltnothaueonclotoneiv. 

is  26utthc  mountamc  fl)albe  thine, 
foz  it  is  a  iboob,  anb  thou  (halt  tut  it 
boibnc :  anb  the  outgoings  of  it  (halbc 
thine:  foz  thou  fyau  bztue  out  the  Cana 


anitcs, though  they  haucyzon  charcts, 
and  though  they  be  ftrong. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

1  The  Tabernacle  isletvpatShiloh.  2.  The  re- 
mainder ot  the  land  is  dclcribcd,and  diuided 
into  feuen  parts.  10  Iofhua  diuideih  it  by 
lot.  11  The  lot  and  border  of  Benjamin. 
21    Their  cities. 


PS£ 


$$  /rJbthcibhoicCongrega 
tionofthcchiibzenofijf' 
£  rati  affcmblcb  together  at 
5>huoh,  9  fct  bp  the  Xa= 
;  bernaclc  of  the  Cougre^ 
gation  there,  anb  the  lanb  lbasfubbucb 
befozcthem. 

z  3nb  there  rcmaineb  among  the 
chilbzcn  of  Jifracl  feuen  tnbes,  lbhich 
hab  not  yet  r  ecefucb  their  inheritance, 
j  3nb  3Jofl)iiafaib  bnto  the  chtlbicn 
of  Jfrarl,  hoiblong  are  you  flacUcto 
goc  to  pofleffe  the  lanbe  lbhith  the 
%  &  ia  ©  0ob  of  your  fathers  hath  gt- 
ucnyoui 

4-  (Sine  out  from  among  you  tlnec 
men,  foz  «ch  tribe :  ano  3  ibill  fenb 
them,  anb  they  fhail  rife, ft  goc  though 
the  lanb,  anbbcfcnbcitacco2bmgto  the 
inheritance  of  thcm,anb  they  Qjai  come 

againe  tO  ttlC. 

5  3utbthcy  fballbitubc  it  into  feuen 
parts:  3fubah  fballabibc  in  their  coaft 

ontl)cS)outh,anbthchoufeof5Jofeph 
(hall  abtbe  m  their  coafts  on  the  /ftozth. 

6  Pt  fhail  thcrfo2ebefcnbc  the  lanb 
into  feuen  parts,  anbbzing  thedefcription 
hither  to  me :  that  3  may  call  lots  foz 
y on  here  bcfoic  the  !L  ©  ir  ©  out  ©ob. 

7  Suttljc  Ucuttes  hancno  part  a; 
mongyoti,fo2  the  0zicfthooo  of  the 
%  3>m©  is  their  inheritance :  anb  <sab 
anoftcubeii,anbhaifethetribeof£l9a 
naffch,  haucrecnueb  their  inheritance 
beyonb  35ozban  on  the  call,  ahicl) 
Q5ofcs  the  femant  of  the  %  ©  is  ©gaue 
them- 

8  C  ^nb  the  men  arofc,  anb  ibcnt 
auiay  :ano3}oflniachargco  them  that 
Vbentto  btftribe  the  lanb,  faying,  dpoe, 
anblbalHethzough  the  lanb,  ft  befenbe 
it,  anb  tome  againe  to  me ,  that  3  may 
here  caft  lots  foz  you,befo2c  tl;c  ?L  €>  K3D 
m£>hiioh. 

9  3lnb  the  men  tbent,  anb  pafftb 
thozotb  the  lano,  anb  bcfcrtbcb  ttbyci 
tics,  into  feuen  parts  in  a  boohc ,  anb 
came  aSame  to'joftn'a  to  the  hoftc  at 

£>hiloh. 

io  C^lnb 


Thclot^bordcrs^and    Iofh 


ua.      cities  of  Beniamin. 


*  Chap. i  5 
6. 


|1  Or,  the 


\Htkr, 

tongtt:. 


10  c  3lnb  ^loujua  tall  lots  foz  tljcm 
in  £>Ijilolj ,  before  tlje  %  ©isjd :  ant) 
tljere  3JouJuabuut)cb  tlje  lanb  bnto  tlje 
ttjilbmi  of  3ifcacl  act02bing  to  tljctr 
miuftons. 

1 1  C  3lnbtijc  lot  of  tljc  tnbc  ofttjc 
cljilbjcn  of  zscniamin  tame  top  actoz; 
Ding  totljcit  families:  anb  ttjc  toad  of 
tljeir  lot  tame  foo?tlj  bctitoccnc  tljc  cTbtl- 
bzcnofjubalj  ,  anb  tlje  cljilb2cnof3lo< 
feplj. 

ii  3Jnb  tljeir  bojber  on  tlje  jftojrt)- 
fttjc  tt)asfrom3Joioan ,  anb  tljc  bobber 
itocntbpto  tljc  fibe  of  3lencljo,on  the 
j3o?tIj  fine ,  anb  lbcnt  bp  t!j2ouglj  tfje 
mountatncsa9cfUbarb,anb  tljc  goings 
out  tljcrcof  itoerc  at  tlje  lbtlbcrucffcof 
26ctl>ancn. 

13  3nb  tlje  bojbcr  lbcnt  ouer  from 
tljcntc  tolbarb  H115 ,  to  tljc  fibc  of  IU5, 
(lbljiclj  is  aserhel)  <s>outI)itoatb,  anb 
tlje  bojbcr  btfccnbeb  to  3twroftt  -3bar, 
ncctc  tljc  Ij.ll  tljat  lieth  on  tl)c  doutl) 
fibc  of  tl)c  netljetffictlj-ljojon. 

14  3inb  tljc  bojber  ibas  bjatuen 
thence,  anb  toinpaflxb  tljc  comet  oftijc 
£>ea  £>outljibarb ,  from  tljc  Ijill  tt)at  ii- 
cth  before  26ctl)*lj02on  £>outljtbarb: 
anb  tljc  goings  out  thereof  iberc  at  W- 
ciatf)-baal(U)l)itl)isiSnriatl)  icanm)a 
titp  of  tljc  tlnlbjcn  of  3Jubal) :  Xljis 
ibas  tljc  nactt  quarter. 

15  3iub  tljc  5>outlj  quartet  ibas 
from  tlje  cnb  of  Binatlj-icarim,  9  tlje 
bobber  lbcnt  out  on  tlje  leeft,  anb  lbcnt 
out  to  tljc  rbcll  of  waters  of /ficpljtoat). 

16  ^tibtijcbojocreameboibnctotlje 
enboftlje  mountainc,  tljat  !<«h  before 
tljcbailcv  of  tftc  fonncof  ^tnnom,  and 
lbljiclj  is  at  tljc  toailev  of  tftc  <stants  on 
tljcifto2tIj,anbbcfccnbcb  to  tljebailep 
of  tyumomto  tljefibc  of  3Jcbufi  on  tlje 
Eolith ,  anb  brftcnbcb  to  Cn-Bogel, 

17  3nb  ibas  bjaiben  fro  tije/Roztlj, 
anb  lbcnt  footflj  to  €nfljcmcflj ,  anb 
lbcnt  foojtl)  tolbarb  0clilotft,tbhitt)  is 
oucr  agaiiilt  tljc  going  bp  of  3buni; 
mtm,anbbcfccnbcb  to  *tljcftoncoD6o; 
l)an  tljc  fonnc  of  Bcuben, 

is  3lnb  paffeb  along  tolbarb  r|)e 
(ioc  oucr  agamft  3trabal)  i5o2tljlbarb, 
anb  lbcnt  bolbnebnto  ||  ^rabaft. 

19  3lnb  tljc  bozber  paffeb  along  to 
tneftoe  of  zSctlj  -  Ijoglalj  jrJojttjibarb : 
anb  tljc  outgoings  of  tljc  boibcr  lberc 
at  tljc  ftotlj  t  bap  of  tljc  fait  S>ca  at  tljc 
S>otift)  cnb  of  3Jo2banc:  %ty&  was  tlje 
S»outljtoaft. 

20  2inb3Jo2bancibastljcbo2betof 


it  on  tljc  call  Obc :  tljis  was  tlje  tnljeti^ 
tance  oftlje  tljilbzcn  of  Beniamin ,  bp 
tljc  toads  tljcrcof  rounb  about,  atto^ 
bing  to  tljeir  families. 

ii  jftoitottje  cities  oftlje  tribe  of  tlje 
cljilbicn  of  23cniamm  aeco2bing  to  tljelt 
families,iberc  3Icrtcljo,  anb  25etD!Jog^ 
lal),anb  tljcbailcv  ofBC5t5, 

11  ainb  25ctljatabalj ,  anb  Zema? 
raim,anbz5ctljcl, 

2 s  3tnb^uim,anb^aralj,anb^ 
pl)?at), 

14  3nb€bcpl)ar-$aammottat,anb 
)BDpljni,anb(5aba,  tlbeluc  cities  lbulj 
tljeir  billages. 

15  ©ibeon,anbBamaI),  anb25ee« 

rotlj, 

16  Znn  £0i5pc& ,  anb  Cljepljtral), 
anb^o?alj, 

27  3lnb  Keftcm,  anb  3Jrpeel,  anb 
ILaralah, 

18  ^nbZeia,€iepD,anb5etmC, 
(rbljitlj  is  3Jenifalcm)  d5ibcatlj,a>id  %\? 
riatlj ,  fourcteene  cities  tbitl)  tljeir  btl= 
lages.  XDis  is  the  inljentante  of  tlje 
tljilbjcn  of  25cmamui  artozbmg  to  tfteir 
families. 

CHAP.   XIX. 

The  lot  of  Simeon,  10  OfZebulun,  17  Of 
Iflachar,  14  Of  Afher,  31  Of  Naphtali, 
40  Of  Dan.  46  The  children  of  Ifraelgiue 
an  inheritance  to  lofhua. 

/Bb  tljc  fctonb  lot  tame 

fOOJttJ  tO  ^mtCOn  ,  euen 

fo:  tlje  tribe  oftlje  tljilbzcn 
of  Simeon  accojbmg  to 
tljeir  families:  anb  tljeir 

inljentante  ibas  ibttljut  tljc  inljentante 

oftlje  cljiibicn  of  ^ubaft. 

2  anbtljeyliaomtljrirmftcrttantc 
25eer-fl)cba,02  S>ljcba,aub  fi^olabalj, 

3  3nb$a5acttjual,anb25aialj,anb 

^5em, 

4  ^nb  citoiab,  anb  Bctfiul,  anb 
i^omial), 

5  ^nb  Ztalag,  anb  2S5ett)-matca^ 
botlj,anb^a5arfulalj, 

6  2nb25etlj  lebaotlj,  anb  StJjatu- 
Ocn :  tlnrtccne  nttcs  anb  tljeir  billages. 

7  Bin,  aaemmon,  anb  €tljcr,anb 
3tujan :  fourc  cities  anb  tljeir  billages, 

8  3nb  all  tlje  billages  tljat  ibere 
rounb  about  tljcfe  titles ,  to  25aalatlj- 
25ecr ,  JXamatlj  of  tlje  Soutlj :  Xljis  ts 
tlje  inljcntancc  of  tljc  tnbc  oftlje  cljfb 
biren  of  Smiicon  acto?Dmg  to  tljeir  fits 
nulics. 

9  ^Dut 


Zcbuluns^Afliers,    Chap.xix.     Naphtalis  portion. 


Or,tvhicb 

uefr.tjvcrt. 


9  £>ut  of  ttjc  portion  of  the  chil* 
b?en  of  3Jubah  was  the  inheritance  of 
the  chittwen  of  Simeon :  forepart  of 
the  cljilbjen  of  Jubah  ibas  too  much 
foj  thcni :  thcreiwe  the  chilbten  of  Si- 
meon hab  their  inheritance  tbithm  the 
inheritance  of  them. 

10  c^nbthethirb  lot  came  bp  to? 
the  chilbjen  of  Zebulun,  acco:btng  to 
their  families :  anb  the  bozber  of  their 
inheritance  tbasbnto  £>anb. 

ii  ^nbthetrbozbcrtbcntbptotbatb 
the  S>ca,  anb  £0araiah,  ano  rcacbeb  to 
SmbbaOieth,  anb  rcactjeb  to  the  nuer 
that  is  before  3Joftneam, 

12  2nb  turncb  from  £>arib  eafc 
toarb,  totbarb  the5>unnc  rtfing,  bnto 
t!)c  bozber  of  Chin  oth  Xabo?,anb  t!)cn 
ijoeth  out  to  S>aberath,anb  gocth  bp  to 
'Jfapbia, 

13  3Jnbfromti)entepafiJrt!jonaiong 
on  the  eatt  to  <3utah  -  $cphcr,  to  Jt- 
tai)-na;(n,  anb  goeth  out  to  ftem* 
mon||#ethoartoj13eah. 

14  3tnbthcbo;zbcrcontpaflcthiton 
the  j|2o?thubeto  Dannathon:  anb the 
outgoings  thereof  are  m  tijc  ballcv  of 

gfiphthah-cl. 

15  3lnbBattato,anb|3aoaual,anb 

S>himron ,  anb  gjbalah ,  anb  ffiet&le* 
hem:  ttbeluc  cities  tbith  thcirbtllages. 

16  Xhisisthctnheritanccoftbcchifc 
brcn  of  zebulun  accozbtng  to  their  fa* 
milics,  thefe  cities  tbith  their  btliagcs. 

17  CAndtlic  fourth  lot  came  out  to 
^flachar  foj  the  chtlbzcn  of  33u~achar 
acrozbing  to  their  families. 

18  3nb  their  bo?bcr  ibas  totbarb 
gbreel,  anb  Chefulloth,  anb  £>bunem 

19  2nb$apharaun,anb<a>hion,anb 
3inaharath, 

20  2inb  3&abbith ,  anb  Btujlon,  anb 
21bC5 

ii  anb  IRcmcth,  anb  engannim, 
anb  «nrjabbal),anb2i5etl)pa55e5. 

22  2nbthccoattrcachethtolLabo:, 
anb£>haha5imath,  anb2i6cthftjemeaj, 
anb  the  outgoings  of  their  bozber  tbcre 
at  3Iotf»an,  ujetecne  cities  tbith  their  bu* 
lages. 

23  %rjis  is  tfjc  inheritance  of  tfje 
tribe  of  the  chtlbzcn  of  3Juacljar  accoit* 
bing  to  trjeir  families,  the  cities,  anb 
their  billages. 

24  c  anb  tljc  fift  lot  came  out  foz 
tfjetrtbe  of  the  chtlbzcn  of  3tther  accoz* 
btng  to  tljeir  families. 

25  3lnb  their  bozber  ibas  Jjcinath, 
anb  $ali,anb  z6etcn,anb  achfljaph, 


16  anb  aiammcleeh ,  anb  amab, 
anb  $)itbeai,  anb  reacrjeth  to  Carmel 
tbettlbarb,  anb  to  &hihoz  ILtbnath, 

27  anb  turncth  totbarb  the  5>utme 
rtfmg  to  2Setr>bagon,  anb  reacfictfj  to 
Zebulun,  anb  to  tljc  bailey  of  of  3Hpt> 
that)  el  totbarb  the  iBonljfiDe  of  zsetlj- 
emcR,  anb  j|5ciel ,  anb  goetl)  out  to  Ca> 
bulontbelcfthanb, 

2$  anb  ^cbzon,anb3Xchob,anb 
gammon,  anb  ikanah,  «ien  bnto  great 
Zibon: 

29  ^nbthentfjccoaftturttctfttoHas 
mah,anbtotheftrongcitlet3Eyzc,  anb 
thecoattturnethto  loofah :  anb  the  out* 
goings  thereof  are  at  the  £>ea  from  the 
toafttoaeh5ib. 

30  <Hmmah  auo ,  anb  ^pijeft ,  anb 
Behob :  ttbentle  anb  ttbo  cities  ibtth 
thcirbtllages. 

31  Xfjisisthcinhcritanccof  thetribe 
of  the  chilbren  of  ^(her  accojbtng  to 
their  familics,thcfe  ctttestbulj  their  bil* 
lages. 

32  CXhefijttlotcameouttofljcchil- 
b;en  of  il2aphtail :  cucn  fo2  tlje  chilbjcn 
of/I5aphtaiiacco?bingtotl)cirfamilics. 

33  ^nbthcircoafttbasfrom^eleph, 
from^Sllon  to  zaanamum,  anb  ^ba* 
mi,ii^eBcb,anb3Jabnecl  bnto  fUfeum: 
anb  tlje  outgoings  thereof  tberc  at 
3Jojban. 

34  3nbthcn  the  coaaturnethtbcft> 
tbarb  to  3i3noth*1Cabo;s,  anb  gocth  out 
from  thence  totyuBftoMnb  rcacheth  to 
zebulun  on  the  £>outhfibe ,  anb  rea* 
chcth  to  ^fljer  on  the  jeeftObe,  anb  to 
g?ubah  bpon  Jo?ban  totbarb  the  5>un 
tifing. 

35  3nb  the  fenceb  cities  are  Zibbim, 
zcr,  anb  feammatl),  3RafeRath,  anb 
Cmnereth, 

36  ^nb3Cbamah,anb3Ramah,anb 
^350?, 

37  anbBebcuj,anb€b;ei,anb€n= 
ha50?, 

3S  ^nb  3Jron,  anb  ^tgbafctl,  fyo 
rem,anb28cthanah,anb25cthQ)cmeuj, 
nmcteene  cities  tbith  tljeir  biliages. 

39  Xhts  is  the  mhentance  of  the 
tribe  of  thechilbjen  of  iftaphtaliaeeo^ 
bing  to  their  families,  the  cities  anb 
their  btliagcs. 

40  <C3nb  the  feuenth  lot  came  out 
fo?  t^t  tribe  of  the  chilbjcn  of  SDanac- 
cobbing  to  tljeir  famates : 

41  ^nbrljecoaft  of  tljeir  inheritance 
tbas  zo?ah,  anbeftjtaol,  anb  3iru)e* 
rnctlj, 

&  42  Znn 


Hd>.Tur. 


Dans  portion. 


Iofhua.  Cities  of  refuge. 


Ort  oiler  n- 

||0r,/»/f4, 
Aai.916. 


Tudg.18. 


•Chap.  34, 


'Num. 34. 
'7- 


■  Exod.  1 1 
I  3.  num. 
J5.<,ll. 

i^.dcut. 
19  1. 


41  3ttu»  :3>haalabbin,  anbaualon, 
auDSethlah, 

4?  3uid  Clou,  anb  Hhunnathah, 
auDCftton, 

44  2(nD  Cltcach ,  anb  ©ibbefhon, 
attoasaaiah, 

4$  SuWJehuD  ,  anu  26cne -betas, 
atuxRtth-nmmon, 

46  3inD  t$)etarfton,  anu  &a&&on, 
tUitt)  the  bojbcr  II  before]  3Japho. 

47  3nb  ttjc  coatt  of  the  chtlbjen  of 
2>an  Went  outtooiitdefouhcm:  there* 
fozc  the  chilbien  of  2>ati  went  Dp  to 
figtit  agamft  fLcfhem,  anb  toonc  it,  anb 
fmote  u  Until  the  cogc  of  t!ic  fiuo:b ,  at  ib 
poffc  (Tcb  tt,anb  bWclt  therein,  anb  cal- 
leb  Uefh  cm ,  *  Dan ,  after  the  name  of 
2Dan  their  father. 

48  Xhis  is  the  inheritance  of  the 
tribe  of  the  chilb:cn  of  Dan  acwbutg 
to  their  families,  thefc  cities  with  their 
billagcs. 

49  Cnahen  they  hab  mabe  an  enb  of 
Diuibmg  the  lanb  foi  inheritance  by 
that  coafts,  thcchilbzcn  of  31frael  gauc 
an  inheritance  to  3Jofhua  the  fonnc  of 
/Bun  among  them: 

50  Retorting  to  the  Wo:b  of  the 
%  ©  k  £>,  they  gaue  him  the  ctttc  which 
he  aftteb,  cum*  Ximnath-5»ecah  in 
mount  ephjaim:  anb  he  built  the  cltie, 
anb  bibclt  therein. 

51  *3ChercarethcinhcntanecsWhich 
Clcasar  the  0?left ,  anb  3Jo(hua  the 
fonnc  of  /Sun ,  anb  the  hcabs  of  the  fa 
thers  of  the  tribes  ofthcchilb2cnof3Jf 
racl.bitubeb  fiw  an  tnhentance  by  lot,m 
5>htloh  before  the  1L  <s>  m  © ,  at  the 
boojc  of  the  Xabcrn  aclc  of  the  Congrc^ 
ganomfotheyniaDcancubofbiiubing 
thecountrey. 

CHAP.   XX. 

1   God  commandcth,  7  and  the  children  ol'If- 
rael  appoint  the  fixe  cities  of  Refuge. 

$>*^f^^  V)t  %o  h  ©  alfo  fpabc  bn^ 
»iy?  to3Jofbua,fayiug, 
s&m    i   5>pca&c  to  the  chil 
¥M  D2cn  of  ^fracl ,  faying, 
^t£?  *  Appoint  otu  fo:  you  ct* 

tics  of  refuge ,  whereof  3J  fpaftc  Dnto 

vou  by  the  hanb  of  iBofcs : 

3  Xhat  the  flayer  that  tullcth  any 
pcrfon  Unawares  and  unwittingly, 
may  flee  thither:  anb  they  (hail  be  your 
rcfugcfrointhcaitcncjerofbloob. 

4  3lubWhcnhcthatbocthflccbnto 
oucofthofc  emes,  fliailftanbatthectv 


trtng  of  the  gate  of  thecity  ,anb  (hall  be* 
clarc  ins  caufc  in  the  earcs  of  the  CI 
bers  of  that  cttie;  they  (hail  tafee  him  m* 
to  the  ntie  Dnto  them ,  anb  giue  him  a 
piace,that  he  may  Dwell  among  them. 

5  3nb  if  the  auenger  of  blooo  pur; 
fue  after  him,  then  they  fhai  not  bcliucr 
the  flayer  Dp  into  his  hanb :  becaufc  hce 
fmote  his  neighbour  bnWtttingly,anb 
hateb  him  not  befozetime. 

6  fan  hee  (hall  Dwell  in  that  citie, 
Dntill  he  ftanbbcfozc  the  Congregation 
foaubgement,  and* Dntill  the  bcath  of 
the  htgh  $nctt  that  (hall  bee  in  thofc 
Daycs:  then  (hall  the  flayer  retunic,anb 
come  Dnto  hts  o  Wne  city ,  anb  Dnto  his 
ownchoufc,butothc  citie  from  Whence 
hefleD. 

7  C  3nD  they  t  appointcb  BcDcfl) 
in  ©alike ,  m  mount  /Baphtaii ,  anb 
S>hcchcm  in  mount  Cplnaim,  anb  Bt 
riath-arba  ( which  is  Ijcbzon)  in  the 
mountaincof^ubah. 

s  3lnb  on  the  other  Hoc  3Jo2ban  by 
^Jericho  eaftwarb.fhev  au*igncb*28e; 
?er  m  the  Wtlbcrncflc  bpotuhcplame, 
out  of  the  tribe  of  Keuben ,  anb  3&a> 
mot!)  in  <3ilcab  out  of  the  tribe  of<J>ab, 
anb  ©olan  in  asafhan  out  of  the  tribe 
of£0anaffch. 

9  Xhcfe  Were  the  cities  appointcb 
fo:  all  the  chilbicu  of  ^fcael,  anb  foz  the 
fttangcr  that  foiourneth  among  them, 
that  Whofocuer  Hilled)  any  pcrfon  at 
DnaWarcs  might  flee  thither  ,*  not  Die 
by  the  hanb  of  the  auenger  of  bloob,btt 
till  he  ft 00b  befoze  the  Congregation . 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  Eight  and  tortie  cities  giuen  by  lot ,  out  of  the 
other  tribes,vnto  the  Leuites.  4^  God  gauc 
the  land,  and  reft  vnto  the  Kraelites,  accor- 
dingtohispromile. 

I?en  came  nccrc  the  hcabs 
ofthe  fathers  of  the  JLe 
uitcs  Dnto  €ica?ac  tljc 
p:teft ,  anb  Dnto  ^Joflnia 
the  fonnc  of  /Bun,  anb  bit; 

to  the  hcabs  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes 

ofthechilbjenofjfrael. 

i  3lnb  they  fpanc  Dnto  them  at 
£>hiloh  in  the  lanb  of  Canaan,  faymg, 
*  %\)t  %  0  is  d  commaunbcD  by  the 
hanb  of  i^ofes  ,  to  guic  Ds  Cities  to 
Dwell  m  ,w«h  the  fuburbs  thereof  fo; 
our  cattell. 

)  anb  the  thilbzen  of  jjfracl  gaue 
Dnto  the  Hcuitcs  out  of  their  itiherr 

tance 


'  Num. 


iHttr.fim 
BifSoL 


*  Dcur.4. 
4  3-  3. duo. 
6.78. 


'Nun 


IG 


ltiesgiuen 


Ck 


p.xxj. 


tot 


heL 


euites. 


colled. 


\\Or,Kiri- 


•Chap.  14 
l^.i.chro. 
tf.jtf. 


tance  at  the  tommanbemeut  of  the 
ILcus  £>,tbefe  aties  anb  their  fuburbs. 
4.  anb  the  lot  came  out  foi  the  fanu 
lies  of  the  mobatbttes :  anb  the  chuv 
bjcnof  aaron  tbe^nett,  which  were  of 
the  ?Uuites,babbp lot  outof  tbetribe 
of  3mbab,  anb  out  of  the  tnbt  of  Si- 
meon, anb  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benta- 
min,tbitteene  cities. 

5  anbtberc&oftbecbtlb?enof!&o* 
hath  had  bp  lot,  out  of  the  families  of  the 
ttibe  of  €p!)^um,anb  out  of  the  ttibe  of 
2>an,anboutof  tbcbalfetrtbe  of  Qfrfr 
naffeb,  ten  cities. 

6  anb  the  rbiltycn  of  <5erfbon  had 
bp  lot  out  of  the  families  of  tlic  tribe  of 
3Jffatbar,anb  out  of  thetcibe  of  atber, 
anb  out  of  the  tribe  of  /Bapbtaii,  anb 
out  of  tt)e  baife  tribe  of  :SPanaffeb  in 
Baftjan,  tbittccne  cities. 

7  %ht  cbtlbjsen  of  fi^erari  bp  tbeit 
farmlies,had  out  of  tbetribe  of  Sleuben, 
anb  out  of  the  tribe  of  d5ab,  anboutof 
tbetctbeof  zebulun,  ttbeluc  cities. 

S  ^nb  the  thfltycn  of  3Iftacl  gaue 
bp  lotbnto  tbcllcuttes  tfjefe  citicstbitb 
tbeit  Juburbs,  as  the  fL©ig£>  tomman- 
Hen  bp  the  banb  of  ©ofes. 

9  canb  tbep  gaue  outof tbetribe 
of  tfje  cbrtbjen  of  3mbab,anb  out  of  tfie 
tribe  of  the  chiiozcn  of  S>imeon,tljefc  ci* 
tutstbbicbareheretmentionebbpname, 

10  nabtcbfbctbtlbzenofaaronbe' 
ingof  the  families  of  the  Bobatbitcs, 
tbbo  tbere  of  the  djiiojen  of  ?Lctn,  bab : 
(fo?  theirs  tbas  the  firft  lot.) 

11  ^nb  the?  gaue  them  ||  the  titie  of 
arbab  the  father  of  anas  ( which  dtie  is 
^ebjon)  inthchill  countrcpofgjubab, 
tbith  p  fuburbs  thereof  rounb  about  it. 

n  But  the  Bclbs  of  the  titie,  anb  the 
billages  thereof,  gaue  the?  to  *  Caleb 
the  fonne  of  ^Jephunneh.fojhispoiM; 
Ron. 

13  C  Xhusthcp  gaue  to  the  chflbzen 
of  aaron  the  #2tctt  ^etyon  tbith  her 
fuburbs  to  bee  a  citit  of  refuge  foj  the 
flaper,  anb  fLibnab  tbith  her  fuburbs, 

14  anb  giattir  tbith  her  fuburbs, 
anb€ft)temoatbithhcr  fuburbs: 

15  anb  ??olon  tbith  berfuburbS,anb 
20ebir  tbith  her  fuburbs : 

16  anb  am  tbith  her  fuburbs,  anb 
3luttah  tbith  net  fuburbs,  anb  Beth' 
Chemett)  tbith  her  fuburbs,  nine  cities 
out  of  thofcttbo  tribes. 

17  anb  out  oftbe  tribe  of  Bcntamin, 
©ibeon  tbith  hex  fuburbs ,  ©cba  tbitb 
her  fuburbs, 


is  anathoth  tbith  her  fuburbs,  anb 
aimon  tbith  bet  fuburbs,  foure  cities. 

19  ail  the  cities  of  the  thiibjcn  of  aa- 
ron the  ^nefls,  tbete  thirteene  cities 
tbith  their  fuburbs. 

10  C  anb  the  families  of  the  cbilbzen 
of  Bohath  thefLeuitcs,  tbhich  remain 
neb  of  the  cbilbjen  of  ikobatb,  eucn 
thtp  hab  the  cuics  of  their  lot  out  of  the 
tribe  of  ephjaim. 

it  foi  thep  gaue  them  S>h«hcm 
tbith  her  fuburbs  in  mount  epluaim, 
to  beantieof  refuge  fo?  the  flaper :  anb 
<5e5cr  tbith  her  fuburbs, 

11  anb  Bib3aim  tbith  her  fuburbs, 
anb  fficfh'hojon  tbith  bet  fuburbs, 
foure  cities. 

13  anboutof  the  tribeof  Dan,  eh 
tekeh  tbith  her  fuburbs,<!5ibetbon  tbith 
her  fuburbs, 

14  atjaion  tbith  bet  fuburbs,<!5att> 
rimmon ,  tbith  her  fuburbs :  foure 
cities. 

i<>  anb  out  of  the  balfe  tribe  of  ^ 
naffeh,  ICanacb  ttntb  her  fuburbs,  anb 
<Satb?lnunon  tbith  her  fuburbs ,  ttbo 
cities. 

16  ailthecitiestberetentbith  their 
fuburbs,  fonbefamilicsof  the  cbtltyen 
of  Bobatb  that  rcmaineb. 

17  C  anb  bnto  the  cbittyc n  of <2>et= 
flion  of  the  families  of  the  ILeuitcs,  ont 
of  the  other  haife  tribe  of  ^anaffebAy 
gaue  ©olan  tn  Bafban ,  tbith  her  ftu> 
utbs,  to  be  a  citie  of  refuge  fo?  the  flaper: 
anb  Beefl)terab  tbith  her  fuburbs,ttbo 
cities. 

18  anb  out  of  the  tribe  of  3HTacbar, 
■feifbon  tbith  her  fuburbs,  SDabareb 
tbith  her  fuburbs, 

Z9  3amutbtbitbbetfuburbs,en; 
gannmt  tbtth  her  fuburbs,  foure  cities. 

30  anboutoftbetrtbeofafl)erfi0t 
(hal  tbith  her  fuburbs,  abbon  tbith 
her  fuburbs, 

31  $el&abtbttbbcrfuburbs,anb2te 
hob  tbith  her  fuburbs,  foure  cities. 

31  anb  outof  tbetribe  of  jlSapbtali, 
Ikebeft)  in  ©alilee  tbith  her  fuburbs,  to 
be  a  titie  of  refuge  fo?  the  flaper ,  anb 
$ammotb'boj  tbith  her  fuburbs,  anb 
Bartan  tbith  herfuburbs,th?eecittes. 

33  ail  the  cities  of  the  ©erfuonites 
aetojbing  to  their  families  were  thirteen 
cities  tbith  their  fuburbs. 

34  c  anb  bnto  the  families  of  the 
cbitbicn  of  £0 erari  the  reft  of  the  %t- 
uitcs ,  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun , 
3Jotmcam , tbtth  bet  fuburbs, anb 

p  i  i&at 


The  Leuitcs  cities.       Iofhua.       Reubens  &c.  altar. 


"Chap. 23. 
M.'5 


I&artahttuti)  her  fuburbs, 

35  2>itnnal)  lbitij  herfuburbs,  iI5a^ 
haiai  ibith  l)f  r  fuburbs,  four  r  emes. 

36  3nb  out  of  trjc  tnbe  of  &cubcn, 
25c5crU)irt)fjcrfubutbs>anb3al)a5at) 
ibith  hct  fuburbs, 

37  iscbcmoth  lDitt)  net  fuburbs, 
anb£}9cphaarhlbith  l)cr  fubutbs,fourc 
cities. 

38  3nboutofthctnbcof(l5ab,&a; 
mot!)  m  C5tlcau  lbith  I)cr  fuburbs ,  to  be 
a  city  of  refuge  foi  the  (layer ;  anb  30a- 
hanatm  With  her  fuburbs, 

39  !?cfl)bon  ibith  her  fuburbs,  3te 
5cribttr)Jjtrfuburbs,fourcaticsmau. 

40  ^>o  alltljc  cities  fo?  tftc  rijtltj^cn  of 
££erart  by  their  families,  tbhitfj  iberc 
remayntng  of  the  families  of  the  %t 
uitcs, were  by  tljctr  iot,tibcluc  cities. 

41  3(11  roc  cities  ofthcHeuitcsibith 
in  the  poffemon  of  the  cDUDzni  of  Sff 
raci,  Were  fourty  anb  ng!)t  cities,  untl) 
tljcir  fuburbs. 

4.1  Xhefc  cities  mere  cucry  one 
tDitl)  tfjeir  fuburbs  rounb  about  them : 
thus  ibere  all  thefc  ntics. 

43  C  2(nb  the  3L©  is  ©gauc  bnto 
Jfraciail  the  lanb  lbhtchhecfraarc  to 
giue  bntothctr  fathers :  aub  they  pot 
fefieb  tt,anb  mbelt  therein. 

44  Stub  the  %  o  13  id  gauc  them 
reft  rounb  about ,  accojbtng  to  all  that 
hcfiuarc  bnto  their  fathers,  anb  there 
ftoob  not  a  man  of  all  their  enemies 
before  them :  the  %  &  is  ©  beliucrcb  all 
tfjeir  ciiemtcs  into  their  hattb. 

45  *  Inhere  faileb  not  ought  of  an? 
goob  tfjing  lbhtth  the  %  0  is  ©  ijao 
fpoHcn  bnto  the  Ijoufc  of  3Jfrael :  all 
camctopafte. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  The  two  Tribes  and  halfe  withablefsing  are 
femhome.  9  They  build  the  Altar  ofTe- 
flimonv,  in  their  iourney.  u  The  Israe- 
lites are  offended  thereat,  ii  They  giuc 
them  c;ood  Satisfaction. 


Iff 


Ben  3Joflma  calicb  the 

»cubeiiitcs,aiibtl)c<5a; 

bites,  anb  the  halfe tribe 

ofsj^anaflch, 
r  3lnbfai&  bnto  them, 
J'cc  Dane  Kept  all  that  s29ofcs  njefer 
uant  of  tl)c  %  ©  is  ©  commaubeb  you, 
anb  hauc  obey cb nip  boy cc m  all  that  31 
cominanbcbyou. 

3   ^ec  hauc  not  left  your  b:etl)jcn 
tljefe  many  bares  bnto  tljis  bap,  but 


fjauc  fcept  the  charge  of  the  commanbe^ 
ment  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  your  ©ob. 

4  3lubnoU>tl)cfL0i3©pour(£ob 
hath  giuen  reft  bnto  your  bjerh^en  ,as 
Dec  pzomtfeb  them  :  therefore  nob)  re* 
turnc  yce ,  anb  get  yce  bnto  your  tents, 
anb  Unto  the  lanb  of  your  poffeflion, 
*  Ibhicl)  s39ofes  the  feruant  of  the 
%  <d  is  ©  gauc  you  on  the  other  Gbe 
3Jo#>ane. 

5  26uttafecbiligenthccb,toboernc 
Comtnanbemcntanb  tlje  flaib.rbhtch 
£0ofcs  the  feruant  oftfjcltsD  is  ©  char* 
gcb  y  ou,*to  lotte  the  fL©is©  your  <sob, 
anb  to  ibaltic  mall  his  lbayes,anbto 
fecepe  his  Commatinbcments ,  anb  to 
clcauc  bnto  him ,  anb  to  ferue  him  ibith 
all  your  hcart^nbibith  ail  your  foulc. 

6  5>o  3tofl)ua  blelTeb  them  ,  anb 
fent  them  aibay :  anb  they  Ibcnt  bnto 
their  tents. 

7  C  0or\)  to  the  one  Daifc  of  the 
tribe  of  40anaft"eh  G&oks  hab  gtuen 
poifefsion  masafljan :  but  bnto  the  other 
haifethcrofgauc3}oujuaatnong  their 
bietlnru  on  this  fibe  3Io?banc  oaell 
lbarb.  ^iibtbhengjoflnia  fent  them  a* 
may  alfo  tonto  thnr  tents,then  hccblet 
febthent, 

8  3lnbl)cfpafte  bnto  them,  faying  ■, 
Jacturnc  Vbtth  much  tithes  bnto  your 
tents,aub  rbtth  bcry  much  cattell,ibith 
frtuer  anb  rbirt)  golb  ,anb  ibttf)  bzatTe, 
anb  rottl)  iron,anb  lbithbery  much  tai- 
ment:  SDiuibcthe  fpoile  of  yout  cne- 
nues  ibttl)  your  bjcthzcn. 

9  C  5lnb  the  ehilb;en  of  Reuben, 
anb  the  thilbioi  of  (5ab ,  anb  the  haife 
tnbe  of  ^anaflch  returneb,anbbcpar 
tcb  from  the  tt)ilb.2cn  of  3Jfrael  out  of 
Smilohibhich  ismthclanb  ofCanaan, 
to  goebnto  the  eountrcy  ofCpfteab,  to 
the  lanb  of  thnr  potTciTion ,  ibhcreof 
they  ibcrc  poffeffeb  ,  acco^bmg  to  the 
ttwb  of  the  1L®  is  ©  by  tlje  Ijanb  of 
^ofes. 

io  C  ^nb  Vbhen  thep  came  bnto  the 
bozbers  of  3Foiban ,  tliat  are  m  t!)c  lanb 
ofCanaan,  the  chilbjcnof  3Rntben,anb 
thethilbmi  of  (©ab  ,anb  tljcljaifc  tribe 
of  £0anaffch  built  there  an  altar  by 
3ojban,a  great  altar  to  fee  to. 

ii  C  3nb  rhe  rl)Ub;ni  of  llfracl 
hcarb  fay,  23cholb,thc  clulbKti  offteu 
ben ,  anb  the  chilbjen  of (5ab ,  anb  the 
halfc  tribe  of  ^ana(fch,hauc  built  an 
altar ourragaitifttlic  lanb  ofCanaan, 
in  the  bobbers  of  5o2ban,at  thepaffage 
ofthcchilbmioff/frarl. 

ii  3nb 


3  J.chap. 
I3.8. 


'Dcut.  10 


Bcingreproucd,        Chap.xxij.  they  make  anfwerc. 


t  M.hmfr 
afthefathcr. 


*Num.  25. 
4- 


*Chap.7. 
I.J. 


ix  ^nu mijen  ttjc ri)tlD;ni  of  JJfracl 
Dcatb  of  it,  the  ibhole  Congregation  of 
tlje  chilbjcn  of  Jfracl  gathercb  them- 
felues  togctDcr  at  ^>Ijttotj,to  goc  Dp  to 
ibarrc  agamft  tDem. 

13  3no  the  rijiiDicn  of  3Jfrael  fent 
bnto  thcchtiojen  of  Reuben,  atib  to  the 
chitiwn  of  Cab,  atib  to  the  haifctttbe 
of  £0anaffeh  into  the  lanbc  of  Cilcab, 
^hmehasthefonofeica^arthci&ieft, 

14  3nb  lbith  him  ten  pnntcs,  of  eel) 
tthiefe  houfc  a  pnncc,  throughout  an 
the  tribes  of  3Jfrael,  anb  each  one  ibas 
anhcabofthchoufcofthcirfathcrs,a 
mong  the  tlioufaubs  of  3*fracl. 

15  C  3no  thev  tame  bnto  the  thil- 
bzen  of  Reuben,  anb  to  the  chtitycnof 
©ab,anbto  thehaifctnbcof  ©anatTch 
bnto  the  lanb  of  Ctleab,  anb  they  fpaac 
lbith  them,  faying, 

16  XhusfaiththclbholeCongrcga 
tion  of  the  %  0  k  ©,  nahat  trcfpafTc  is 
this  thatpc  hauc  committcbagamftthe 
©ob  of  3)ftacl ,  to  tur  tie  albap  this  My 
from  folloibmg  the  %  0  «  ©,  in  that  pe 
hauc  butlbeb  you  an  altar ,  that  pec 
might  rebtll  this  My  agamft  the 

|L©K©? 

17  3&  the  uuouittc  *of  ^coztoo  \\ 
tlefo:  bs,  from  ibhich  ibe  arc  not  clean- 
fcbbntiithtsbap,falthough  there  ibas 
a  plague  in  the  Congregation  of  the 

|L©13©) 

18  Butthatpemuft  turne  albap  this 
bap  from  folloibmg  the  %  ©  k  ©  <  anb 
it  lbill  be,  fedns;  pee  rcbcll  to  bap  agamft 
the  %  0  k  ©,that  to  mojr  oib  he  lbtll  be 
uwoth  lbtth  tlje  ibhole  Congregation 
ofDfcael. 

19  /fonbithftanbing,  if  thclanbcof 
pourpoffeflton  bebncleane,  thenpafTe 
pee  oucr  bnto  the  lanb  of  thepoffeflion 
of  the  Hois  ©,lbhcrem  the  H©k©&> 
Xabcrnatlc  bibelleth,  atibtaBepoffef 
fion  among  bs:  but  rcbcll  not  agamft 
the  ?Lok©,  1102  rcbcll  agamft  bs,  m 
builbmg  pou  an  altar,  bcfibctDc^ltar 
of  the  £©  is  ©our  00b. 

20  3>ibnot3lchanthcfotmcof  ze- 
raD  commit  a  trcfpafTc  m  the  accurfeb 
tDmg,  anb  mzatt)  fell  on  *  all  the  Con- 
gregation of  Jfrael j.  anb  that  man  pe? 
riflieb  not  alone  m  his  inicuutic. 

ii  CXhenthe  thtlbicn  of  Reuben, 
anb  the  thtlbmi  of  cab,  anb  the  halfc 
tribe  of  03anafleh,atiftuereb  anb  faibc 
bnto  the  Utaits  of  the  thoufanbs  of 
3Jfiaci, 

22  XhcHiiH^Cobofgobg,  the 


H©k©  cob  of  gobs,  heetmoibeth, 
anb  3Jrcaeihelhaii8noib,if  it  bee  m  re 
bellion,o2  if  in  tranfgreftion  agamft  the 
%  0  k  ©,(  fane  bs  not  this  bap,) 

23  Xhat  tbee  haue  built  bs  an  altar 
to  turne  from  following  the  11  0  in®, 
02  if  to  offer  thereon  burnt  offering,  0,2 
meatoffering,  02  if  to  offer  peace  off? 
rings  thereon,  let  tlje  %  0  is  ©  htmfelfc 
require  it. 

24  3lnb  if  ibe  haue  not  rather  bone  it 
for  feare  of  this  thmg,fapmg,  1 3Jn  time 
to  comepouc  thtlb2cn  might  fpeauebu 
toourchilb2cn,faping,B0hathaucpou 
to  boc  lbith  the  How©  cob  of  3Ifraeu 

25  ifo2  tlje  ?L©k© hath mabejo: 
banaborbcr  betibccuebs  atib  pou,  pec 
chilbjcn  of  Reuben ,  anb  rhilbjeu  of 
Cab,  pee  haue  no  part  m  the  JLok©: 
fo  (Dai  pour  crjtlbzen  make  our  chilb2en 
ccafc  from  fearing  the  %  0  k  © :' 

26  Xhcrefcueibefatb,  Het  bsnolb 
P2cparc  to  liuilb  bs  an  altar,  not  fo2 
burnt  offering,  1102  fo2  fatrifice, 

27  23ut  that  it  map  bee  *  a  lbitnelTe 
bctlbccnc  bsanbpou,  anb  out  genera 
nottsafterbs,thati(bcmightbothefer 
nice  of  the  It©  ir  ©  befo2c  him  lbtth  our 
burnt  offrmgs,  anb  lbith  our  facriftccs, 
anb  lbith  our  peace  offenngs,that  pour 
cl)il02cn  map  not  fapto  our  chilb2cn  in 
time  to  come ,  Pe  hauc  no  part  lu  tlje 

H©K©. 

28  Xhercfojefatbibcthatitfhaibe, 
ibhen  thep  fhoulbfo  fap  to  bs,  02  to  our 
generations  in  time  to  tome,  that  ibee 
mapfapagame,  2Scholoc  the  patcrne  of 

the  altar  of  thcH  ©kb,  ibhuD  our  fa-- 
thersmabe,  not  fo2  burnt  offrings,no2 
fo?  facr  ifices,  but  it  is  a  ftntnes  benbecne 
bs anb pou. 

29  Cob  fozbib  that  rbefhoulbrebell 
againft  the  IL0  is  ©,anb  turne  this  bap 
from  folloibmg  the  H©k©,  to  built) 
anaitar  fo:  burnt  offerings,  fo2  meate 
offerings,  02  fo:  facrifices,  befibes  the 
3lltar  of  the  %  0  m  ©  our  cob  that  is 
befo2chtsHabernacle. 

30  C3tiblbhcn£hiuehasthe02left 
anb  the  p2tnccs  of  the  Congregation, 
anb  titans  of  the  thoufanbs  of  gjfrael 
ibhithibereibitl)him,hearbtheibo2bs 
that  tl)c  chiHwti  of  Reuben  anb  the 
chilbzen  ofcao,atib  the  chilbren  of  t^a- 
uaffeh  fpaUe,t  it  pieafcb  them. 

31  ^nb^ljinehasthefonneofiffle 
avu  tlic  p:te(l  fatbbnto  thechilb2enof 
Reuben  ,nnb  to  the  chilb2en  of  Cab, anb 
tothcchtlb:euof<Manafrrh,  3Chisbap 

p  3  tte 


\Hek-. 


"Ctn  51. 

4S.chap.14 
i7.vcr.  J^. 


\  lUr  it 
Itf/rtjri. 


17 


Exh 


ortationsto 


lofh 


ua. 


theloueofGoch 


\Hebr. 
Then. 


||7*4t* 


t  Heh.  come 
intedttjei. 


•Exod.14. 
4- 


\lMr.1 
thcSttnne 


*  Pcut  5 
■4 


iTbcpcrmue  that  the  %o  is  ©isamoug 
bs,  bccaufcpcbauc  notcomnuttco  tbts 
tr  efpaffc  againft  the  ?L  o  is  © :  t  noib  pe 
bane  bcuuercb  the  ebtlbzen  of  3Jfraei 
out  of  the  banb  of  the  3L  £>  a  ©. 

ji  C  3tno  0bmcbas  the  fonne  of  «* 
lea^ar  the  |2>zictt ,  arib  tl)c  pzmecs ,  x& 
turneb  from  the  ctjilDztn  of  &euben, 
ant  from  the  cbilbzcn  of  <5ao,  out  of  tftc 
lanb  of  (5il*ab ,  bnto  the  lanb  of  Cana? 
an,  to  the  cbilbzenofjjlfraei,?  bought 
tbemtbozbagainc. 

33  3nbtbetbmgplcafcbtbecba&zcn 
of  ijftart  ,  am>  the  cbilbzen  of  3Jfracl 
bieffeb  (5ob ,  anb  mo  not  intent)  to  goc 
bpagatnQ  them  in  battel,  tobrirtoptbt 
lanb  tbbcrcm  the  cbilbzcn  of  Scuben 
anb(5abbtbelt. 

34  3nb  the  cbilbzcn  of  Ecubcn,  anb 
the  cbilbzcn  of  (5ab  caiieb  ttjc  altar  ||€b: 
foz  it  (ball  bee  a  ibttncffc  betlbccne  bs, 
that  the  |L u> b ©  is (5ob. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

1  Iofhuas  exhortation  before  his  death,  3  by 
former  benefits,  5  by  promifes,  11  and 
by  thrcatnings. 

$*^3>  ji5o  it  came  to  paffca  long 
timcaftertrjattbelLflDiH© 
rjab  giuen  reft  bnto  gjfra; 
el  from  all  tbetc  enemies 

*,  ee-^afr  routibabout,tbaf3Jolbua 
Vbarcb  olb,  and  tftruncmnage. 

z  3ub<3fo{buacallcbfozail3JfraeI, 
and  foz  their  Clbers ,  $  foz  their  li^eabs, 
anb  foz  tbcicjmbgcs,  anb  foz  their  Of- 
ficers ,  anb  faib  bnto  them ;  gj  am  olb, 
andftruneninage. 

3  anb  pec  haue  feene  all  that  the 
JL  ip  k  ©  pour  00b  hath  bone  bnto  ail 
thefe  nations ,  becaufc  of  pou  -,  foz  the 
*3L<dib©  pour  ©ob  is  hec  that  hath 
fought  foz  pou. 

4-  asebolb  ,  3J  haue  btuibcb  bnto 
poubp  lot  thefe  nations  that  remame, 
to  bee  an  inheritance  foz  your  tribes, 
from  giozbanAbith  all  the  nations  that 
3J  haue  cut off,eucn bnto  tbcgrcat&ca 
fnaclttbarb. 

5  3nbtbc?L<Di3©  pour  (5ob,  bee 
(hall crpell  them  from  befozepou,  anb 
bmictbem  from  otitof  pour  fight,  jpe 
(bail  pofTcfTc  their  lanb,  as  the  !L©  is  © 
pour  (5ob  bath  pzonufeb  bnto  pou. 

6  25e  pc  thcrcfozc  bcrp  courageous 
toliecpeanbtobocaiitbatisibzittcnin 
tbebooRc  of  tljcHaib  of  t©ofcs,*tbat 
pee  turnc  not  afibe  therefrom,  to  the 


tight  banb,  oz  to  the  left, 

7  Xbat  pee  tome  not  among  thefe 
nations ,  thefe  that  remame  amongft 
pou ,  neither  *  maac  mention  ot  the 
name  of  tbett  gobs,  noz  caufc  to  fraeare 
by  them ,  neither  feme  them ,  noz  botb 
pour  feiues  bnto  them. 

8  ||  25ut  cleaue  bnto  the  %  ©  is  © 
pour  ©ob ,  as  pec  bauc  bone  bnto  this 
oap. 

9  ||  jfoz  the  Hois©  bath  bztuen  out 
frombefozc  pou,  great  nations, anb 
ftrong:  zBut  as  foz  pou ,  no  man  hath 
bcenc  able  to  ftanb  befozc  pou  bnto 
thisbap. 

10  *  £)nc  man  of  pou  (ban  chafe  a 
tboufanb :  foz  the  HL©is©  pour  ©objhe 
it  ts  that  fightcth  foz  pou ,  as  bee  hath 
pzonufebpou. 

1 1  XaKc  goob  hceb  thcrtfoze  bnto 
pourtfclues,tbatpclouetbeltxDia© 
pour(5ob. 

n  cife.ifpcboinanptbifcgobacae, 
anb  cleaue  bnto  the  remnant  of  thefe 
nations,euen  thefe  that  reinauie  among 
pou,  anb  fbail  mane  marriages  lbith 
them ,  anb  goe  in  bnto  them ,  anb  tbcp 
to pou: 

13  Bnotb  foz  a  ccrtauietp,  that  the 
%  s> »  ©  pour  (5ob  mill  no  moze  bzme 
out  anp  of  thefe  nations  from  befoze 
pou:  *buttbepfbalbefnares  anb  traps 
bnto  pou ,  anb  fcourges  m  pour  fibes, 
anb  tboznes  in  pour  vpts ,  bnnil  pee  pc= 
n(b  from  off  this  goob  lanb  ftbteb  the 
1L«dis©  pour  (5ob  bath  guien  pou. 

14.  ^nbbeholb,thisbap3famgoing 
the  ibap  of  all  the  eartb,anb  pe  hnorb  m 
all  pour  hearts,  anb  in  all  pour  foufes, 
that  *not  one  thing  bath  faueb  of  all  the 
goob  things  tubtcb  the  fLo  is  ©pour 
(Sobfpafee  toncentmg  pou;  all  are  come 
to  pane  bnto  pou ,  anb  not  one  thing 
bath  faileb  thereof. 

15  lEbcrefozc  tt  (bail  come  to  pafle, 
that  as  all  goob  things  are  come  bpon 
pou,tbbicbtbc  ?L£>is©pout(5obpzo* 
mifeb  pou :  fofbail  the  JLovs,®  bzmg 
bpon  pou  all  cum  tbmgs,bntai  be  haue 
beftropeb  pou  from  off  this  goob  lanb 
which  tbc  %  ©  is  ©  pour  <5ob  bath 
giuen  pou. 

i6  naben  pec  haue  tranfgrefTeb  the 
Coucnant  of  the  H©i3©  pour  (Sob, 
tbbieb  \^t  conmiaunbeb  pou,  anb  haue 
gone  anb  ferucb  other  gobs ,  anb  boib- 
cbpour  feiues  to  them :  then  (ball  the 
anger  of  the  %  o  is  ©  bee  Umbleb  a? 
gamft  pou ,  anb  pee  (ball  penfl)  qmcHlp 

from 


•pfai.16.4. 


[Or fir  if 

yet*  will 
cleaue  ,£■?. 


|l  Or,  !hm 
the  lOTl.T) 
mllartM. 


*Leuit.  stf. 

f.Jrur.  ji. 
jo. 


\Hei.fe„U,. 


*Exod,  13. 
jj.uumb. 

7- 1«. 


*  Cbap.u 
15- 


Gods  benefices        Chap.xxni).         onthelfraelites. 


*Gcn.lt. 

5 1  ludit.  j. 
S.7- 


•Gen. 21. 2 

*  Gen. 25 

*Gen.j6.8 

*  Gen.  ^66 

*Exo.j.  ro 


•Exod.u. 
37- 


'Exod.14. 


'Num.  2 1 
S3- 


*  Num.  1  2 


from  off  the  goon  lanb  iPhich  hec  Dattj 
giuen  Pnto  you. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

1  IofhuaalTcmbleth  the  tribes  at  Shcchem.  2.  A 
briefe  hiftoneof  Gods  benefits  fromTcrah. 
14  He  renevveth  a  couenant  betweene  them 
and  God.  -r6  A  rtoiie  the  witnefle  of  the  co- 
uenant. 29  lolhuasa^e,  death  and  burial]. 
31  Iofephs  bones  are  buried.  3;  Eleazardieth. 

&&W2&&  #°  2o(1'ua  satl)creD  all 
SmM  the  xribes  of  3ifracl  to 
^M£$$  £>hcchcm ,  anb  calleb  for 
"  ^|tl)cciDrrsof3fr'irt,ano 
st^fetf^foitlietc^caDS,  anb  for 
their  'Jubgcs,  anb  for  their  iDfftccrs, 
anti  they  prefenteb  thcmfelucs  before 
Coo. 

i  3uib'lJofl)uafaibPnto  alithepco- 
plcXhus  faith  the  ?L©  is  ©  <5ob  of  3If 
racl/Pour  fathers  blPclt  on  the  other 
fiocof  tljcflooo  inolDtimc,  cuenXcral) 
thefather  of  Abraham,  ano  the  father 
of  Jftaehor:  ano  they  fcrucD  other  gobs. 

j  3tno  3  tookc  your  father  abra* 
ham  fro  the  other  fibc  of  the  floob,  ano 
let)  him  throughout  all  the  lanb  of  Ca- 
naan,anbmuinplicDhisfecb,anb*gauc 
himjjjfaac. 

4  3nb3JgaucPnto3Jfaac,*3Jaeob 
ano  efau :  ?  3  sane  Pnto  *  (fffauinount 
S>ctr ,  to  poffeffe  it :  *  but  3Jatob  anb 
his  chtttuen  lPent  oottmc  into  <£gypt. 

5  *  3  fent  iJ0ofes  alfo  aim  ^ar  on, 
ano  3  plagueu  cgypt ,  accorbing  to 
thatiPhich  3  bib  amongft  them :  anb 
after Vbarb,  3  brought  you  out. 

6  3lnb  31  *  broughtyour  fathers  out 
of  cgypt :  anb  you  tame  Pnto  the  fea, 
anDtheCgyprians  purfueb  after  your 
fathers  iMft  tljartts  anb  hbrfemen  bn= 
to*thercbfca. 

7  3lnt>  tbhen  they  trieb  Pnto  the 
1L©kjd,  hec  putbarkeneffcbctlbcene 
you  anb  the  (Egyptians,  anb  brought 
the  fea  Pponthem,  anb  couercb  them, 
an&  your  eyes  hauc  feenc  lbhat  31  haue 

boncin€gypt,anbycblbcltinthctPtl; 
Dernesalongfcafon. 

8  ^inb^jbjought  you  into  the  lanb 
ofthc3mo2ttes,iPhichbujcltonfheo' 
rtjer  fibc  3o:ban :  *  anb  they  fought 
iPtfhyou,  anb  3  saue  them  into  your 
hanb ,  that  ye  might  poffeffe  their  lanb, 
ant)  3  beftr oycb  them  from  bcfo2C  you. 

9  £hcn  rsaiak the fonnc  of  Ztppor 
lung  of  4©oab,  arofe  anb  rbarreb  a 
gamft^frael,  anb*  fent  antiraiieb2!5a^ 


laamthefonnc  of  2Seo2  to  turfcyou : 

10  23ut3J  woulb  not  hearken  Pnto 
Salaam,  thercfoiche  bleffeb  you  QUI: 
fo  3  belmercb  you  out  of  his  hanb. 

11  3inb  ye  incut  ouer  3Jo:ban ,  anb 
tame  Pnto  'JJertcho :  anb  themen  of  Jc 
ntho  fought  agamftyou,thc3uno2ites, 
anb  thepenwtes,  ?  the  Canaanttcs, 
anb  the  pittites,  anb  the  eirgafhitcs, 
the  If>iuttcs,anb  thc^Jebutttes,  anb  3 
beltuereb  them  into  your  hanb. 

ix  3lnb*3J  fent  the  hornet  bcfoie  you, 
iPhichbraue  them  but  from  before  you, 
cLienthetibo  kings  ofthe5lmo2ites:but 
notnnththyfttio2b,  norttnththyboiP. 

13  3nb3  haue  giucn  you  a  lanb  fo: 
tbhtthye  bibuotlabour,  ft  cities  IPhich 
ycbuiltnot,  anb  ycc  blbclim them:  of 

thcbmq'arbsanb£)liue^yarbsibh«ch 
yeplantcbnot,boeyeeate. 

1+  C  /5ott)  therefore ,  feare  the 
H©  is  5D,anb  feruc  him  in  fmcermcanb 
mtructh,anbputaU)aythtgobslPhich 
your  fathcrsfcrucb  on  the  other  fibcof 
thefloob,  anb  in  Cgypt:  anb  feme  ycc 
rhclL©i3©. 

15  31nb  if  it  fceme  euill  Pnto  you  to 
ferae  the  %  ©  15  w>,  thoofc  you  this  bay 
lDhomc  youtbill ferae , mhcthtr  the 
gobs  tbiv.ch  your  fathers  ferueb  that 
ibcr  c  on  the  other  Obe  of  the  floob,02  rtjc 
gobs  of  the  3mo2ites,  m  lPhofelanbe 
ycbibcll:  but  as  fo2meeanbmyhoufe, 
lPc  lPill  feruc  the  %  ©  h  jb. 

i6  3lnbthcpeoplcanfroerebanbfaib, 
©obforbibthatibeefhouib  forfakcthc 
%  ©  is  c,  to  feme  other  gobs. 

17  J?orthcH©i53Dour<5o&,hcicis 
that  brought  bs  Pp  anb  our  fathers  out 
of  the  lanb  of  Cgypt,  from  the  houfc  of 
bonbage,  1?  lPhith  bib  thofe  great  Ogncs 
m  our  fight,  anb  prefcruebPs  in  all  the 
rpayibheremtbetbent,  anb  among  all 
rt)c  people  through  Ibhoni  ibc  paffeb. 

is  3inb  the  1L©K©brauc  out  from 
bcfoiePsailthc  people,  cucn  thc^mo- 
rites  VPhich  brpelt  m  the  lanb :  thereto,  e 
lPill  lPc  alfo  feruc  the  %  ©  as  £>>  for  he  is 
ouroob. 

19  3mb3Jcjfl)nafatbPnto  the  people, 
J9ctannotIcructhcfL©isjD:  forhecis 
an  holy  (Bon :  he  is  a  telous  <3ob,hc  1P1U 
not  fo2giue  your  tranfgteffions  1102 
your  fumes. 

20  3Jfyeeforfakcthe!L©ia£sanb 
feruc  Orange  gobs,"  then  lie  U)tll  turne, 
aub  boc you  hurt,  anb  ronfumr  you,  af 
terrtjathchathboncyougoob. 

zi  3lnb  the  people  faib  Pnto  3oflnia, 
/Say, 


•EmJ.  j 3. 
18  dcut.7, 
20. 


«Cl.aF.- 
'5- 


172 


Iofli 


uas  exhortation, 


Iud 


gcs. 


His  age,and  death. 


0a\\  but  ibe  Ml  feme  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

ax  3tnb  3Jofliua  fmo  Ditto  the  peo- 
ple, Pee  arc  tbitnclTes  againttpour 
mixes ,  t^at  pee  haue  ehofctt  pou  the 
ft  ©  is  © ,  to  feme  Dint.  3lno  thep  faib, 

WearclbltttellCS. 

13  iBoifotherefojeputatbap.faidhe, 
the  ttrangc  gobs  itoljttl)  are  among 
pou,  anb  encime  pour  heart  Unto  tlje 
jLoKBeoDofJfcael. 

14-  3nb  tl)c  people  faibe  bnto  3Jo- 
lima  i  Xbe  H  ©  is  ©  out  ©on  null  tbe 
fcruc,anb  hisboice  ibiu  Vbe  obey. 

%<,  £>o  JJofhua  mabe  a  touenant 
ttnth  the  people  that  bap,anb  fet  them  a 
Statute,  %  an  finance  in  ^hethem. 

16  €  3ltib  3lofl)ua  lfyotc  ttjefc 
tbotfs  in  the  boole  of  the  ?Latt)  of  ©ob, 
anb  tooac  a  great  flotte,  anb  fct  tt  top 
there,  bnber  an  oafee,  that  was  bp  the 
£>anctuar  p  of  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

17  2lnb  3fofl)ua  faibe  bnto  all  the 
people,23cljoU),tl)is  Cone  (haibeavbifc 
neflebntobS;  foj  it  hath  hearb  all  the 
tbojbs  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  vbbuh  Dec  (pa&c 
bntobs,  itfljall  be  there  fo?  arbttncOc 
bnto  you.leftpcocnppout  (gob. 


2S  £>o3Jolhuaietthepeoplebepart, 
euerp  man  bnto  his  inheritance. 

Z9  C^nbttcametopafle  after thefe 
things,  that3FoCbtta  thcfonneof/Iiun 
the  fcr uant  ofthe  %  ©  is  ©  bleb ,  being 
an  ljuntyeb  anb  ten  peetes  olb. 

30  ^nbthcpbtmebhimmthcbojDet 
ofhtsinheritaneein*SCimnath  5>erah. 
rbl)icl)  is  m  mount  <£ph?aim ,  on  the 
4l2o?th  Obc  of  thehtll  of  ©aad). 

31  anb3fraelfcruebtfie!L©iB©aU 
the  bapes  of  3Joftma,  $  au  rheoapes  of 
tftecibers  thattouetltucb  3}oflnia,anb 
vbhirhhabfenolbcnaitljc  mwbs  ofthe 
%  ©  is  ©,tl)at  he  hab  bone  fo?  3lfrael. 

3i  C  3inb  *  the  bones  of  3Jofeph, 
lfchich  the  cf)rtD?cn  of  3Jfracl  tyought 
bp  out  of  Cgppt ,  burtcb  thep  in  &i)t- 
thcm,m  a  partell  of  grounb  rbbtcb  3f  a* 
tob  bought  of  *  the  fonncs  of  $amo? 
tbefatber  of  dbecbemjoj  an  hunb^eb 
||  pieces  of  Gluer ;  anb  it  became  the  tnbe; 
ritantc  of  the  cbilbzen  of^foCeplj. 

33  ^nb€lea3arthefonneof^aron 
bieb,anb  thep  buriebbunin  a  hill  that 
pertatnebto^bmebas  his  fon,  ibbicb 
ttms  gtucn  htm  m  mount  €ph?aim 


tfTHE  BOOKE   OF 


Iud 


§ 


es. 


CHAP.    I. 

The  a<ftes  ofludah  and  Simeon.  4  Adoni- 
bezekiuftly requited.  8  Hierufalem  taken. 
10  Hebrontaken.  n  Ochniel  hath  Ach- 
fahto  wife  for  taking  of  Debir.  16  The  Kc- 
nitesdwelinludah.  17  Hormah.Gaza,  Af- 
kelon  and  Ekron  taken.  «  TheatfbofBen- 
iamin.  it  Ofthe  houfe  of  lofeph, who  take 
Bethel.  30  OfZcbulmi.  31  OfAfher.  33 
OfNaphtali.    34  Of  Dan. 

^£>na  after  the 
§Sbcathof3Joflnia, 
3*  it  came  to  paftc, 
that  the  chllbjen 
t^s of  3}fracl  af neb 
^itheHoHPjap 
^(tng.ieholhaigoc 
,>- \  ^a^P  foibsagamft 
O-m^^it  tlic  Canaanitcs 
firft,to  figljt  agamfl  them; 


1  3nb  the  ft-  ©  is  ©  fapb ,  3mbah 
fhaiigocbp :  25cholb,5hauebeliuereD 
the  lanb  into  his  hanb. 

3  3lnb  ^ubah  faibe  bnto  Simeon 
his  brother,  Come  bplbith  me  into  mp 
lot , that  lbcc  map  nghtagamftthcCa; 
naamtcs,  anb  3  ItKcrbife  ibill  goe  tbith 
tljce  into  thp  lot.  &0  Simeon  lbent 
Vbtthhim. 

4-  3inb  gjubah  lbent  bp ,  anb  the 
IL  ©  is  ©  beluiereb  the  Canaanites  anb 
the  #cri33ttcs  into  their  hanb  :  anb 
thep  fleib  of  them  m  Be^eh  ten  fhoit 
fanbmen. 

5  3lnb  tliep  founb  ^boni-be?efe  in 
33C3CB :  anb  thep  fought  agania  him, 
anb  thep  acib  tlje  Canaamtcs,  anb  the 
^cri^ites. 

6  But  3bom-be}CB  fleb ,  anb  thep 
purfurb  after  him,anb  caught  hmi.anb 
cutoff  histljumbcs^nbhts  great  toes. 

7  ^nb 


*  Chap.  19. 
j  o.  judg. 


f  Hebr.  pro- 
longed their 
dayei  after 
lojhiut. 

•Gen. 50. 
ly-exod. 
13. 1J. 


•Gene.  33. 
\Or,Uunit. 


Anakslonnes  flame.     Cha 


PJ' 


Caleb* 


port 


ion. 


\  Heir. the 

thumbes  of 
thetr  hands 
and  of  their 
fette. 

|]C?r, gleaned 


Mofli.io. 
36. and  1 1, 
21.  and  1  5 
«3« 

\\OrJme 
countrej. 

'J- 


Num.  ii 


Or,  hepnf- 
feffedthe 
mountains 


7  2Mb  about  >  bc^cfe  faiD ,  %%&& 
fco2c  1  ten  Kings.haumg  ttftctt  thumbs 
anb  their  great  toes  cut  off,  llgarbcrcb 

their  meare  DtlDCt  Ittp  tHUt  J  35  3  h^UC 

Done,  fo  C5ob  tjatt)  rcquitcb  mec,  ant) 
the?  brought  huu  to  Jcruralem ,  anb 
there  he  btcb. 

8  (J3olbtheehilD?cnof3mDahhab 
fought  agamft  3Jcrufalcm,  ano  hab  ta- 
fecn  it,  anb  fmitten  it  ttnth  the  cbgc  of 
thcfrooib,  anbfettheetttconure) 

9  C  *  3tnu  aftetibarb  the  chrtb?en 
ofJJubah  tticnt  bottme  to  fight  agamft 
the  Canaanites  tljatotbtic  tnthemou- 
tame,?  in  the  £>outh,anb  m  the  ||bailcy. 

10  anb^ubabttmitagainfttheCa; 
naanttcs  thatmbclt  m  J?cb:on  (noroc 
the  name  of  $ebion  befoze  was  *  Birt 
ath  >  arba )  anb  they  flcib  Shefhai,  anb 
3fhiman,anbl£aimat. 

h  anb  from  thence  hetttcnt  agamft 
the  inhabitants  of  2Dcbtr,  (stbenamc 
ofSttbitbefojcttiasBtrtath-fepbcr) 

ii  3lnb  Caleb  fatb,  $cc thatfmiteth 
BirtatlHcphcr,  anb  taKcth  it,  to  him 
ttull  3  giuc  achfolj  nip  baughter  to 
ttnfc. 

15  anb  iDthnicl  the  fonne  of  Bcna5 
Calebsyongcr  b20thertooKCtt :  anb  he 
gauc  htmachfah  his  Daughter  to  lbifc. 

14  anb  it  tantc  to  paffc  ttifjen  Ihee 
tame  to  him,  that  flic  moucb  him  to  afnc 
of  her  father  a  ficlb :  anb  flicc  lightcb 
from  off  heraffe,  anb  Caleb  fatb  bnto 
tier,  BDliatU»tlttl»oitf 

15  anb (he fatb bnto Dim,  Giuemca 
bleffing :  foz  thou  haft  gmen  mce  a 
South  ianD,gtucmcaifofp2>ngsofttia; 
tcr.  anb  Caleb  gauc  l)er  t!)e  bpper 
fpjmgs,  anb  the  nether  fpzmgs. 

16  canbthcchtlbzcnofthelkettite, 
Q3ofcs  father  tn  laib,  ibent  bp  out  of 
the  citic  of  paimc  trees ,  ttnth  the  chtl 
bmtof  3Jubah  into  the  ttnlbemefle  of 
3jubah,  ttibtch  ii«b  in  the  South  of  a- 
rab,  anb  the?  ibent  anb  bibclt  among 
the  people. 

17  anb  3mbah  went  ibith  Simeon 
tnsbtothcr,  anb  they  flcib  the  Canaa* 
nitcsfhat  inhabitcb  zephath,  anbbt* 
tcrlybcftroycb  it,(anb  the  name  of  the 
*  etne  lbas  caiicb  $onnah.) 

is  aifo  gjnoah  toone  ©a?a  ibith  the 
toad  thereof,  anb  afftclon  ibith  the 
coaft  thereof,  anb  Cnron  ibith  the  coaft 
thereof. 

19  anbthelL^iDibasibifhlto' 

bah ,  ailb  h«  ||  bJaiie  Otit  the  inhabitants  of 

the  mountatuc,  but  toulb  not  btfuc  out 


the  inhabitants  of  the  bailey ,  becaufc 
theyhabcharctsofyjon. 

xo  anb  they  gauc  $cb2on  bnto  C«u 
leb,  *as££)ofcs  faibc:  anb  hcccrpcllcb 
thence  the  thjccfonnesof  ^nafe. 

zi  anbthcchtlb2cnof26tniannnbib 
notbmicoutthe^cbufitcsthat  inhabit 
teb  5ler  tifalcm :  but  the  J,  cbufitcs  bibel 
ibith  the  chilb?cn  of  25cniamm  m  3fe* 
mfalcm,  bnto  this  bav. 

zi  c  3mb  tht  houfe  of  3lofeph,the|> 
alfo  ibent  bp  agamft  23cthcl:  anb  the 
%  &  m  ©lbasmtth  them. 

2 j  anb  the  houfe  of  3Jofcph  fent  to 
beftrie25ethcl  (nolb  tlje  name  of  tlje  ci* 
tte  before  ibas*fLu?) 

24  3Cnb  the  fptcsfatbc  a  man  come 
fo2th  out  of  the  arte,  anb  the?  fatb  bnto 
h'.m,  5>helb  bs,  lbce  p:av  thee,  the  cn^ 
trance  into  the  etne,  anb  *  ibe  ibtll  fl;etti 
thee  mer  etc. 

25  stub  lbhen  hee  ftjeibeb  them  the 
entrance  into  the  citic,  thep  fmotc  the  tu 
tie  ibith  the  coge  of  the  froojb :  but  the? 
let  goc  the  man  anb  an  hisfamtlte. 

26  anbthemanibentinto thclanbc 
of  the  Btttttcs,  anb  built  a  etne,  anb  cai- 
icb the  name  thereof  Itu5 :  ibhtch  is  tlje 
name  thereof  bnto  thtsbap. 

27  C*  Neither  bib  J^anaffch  bnuc 
out  the  inhabitants  of  25ethfbeatt,aiib  her 
totbncs,no2H:aanachanbhcrtott(nes, 
no?  the  inhabitants  of  ©02,  anb  her 
tottmes,  no?  the  inhabitants  of  gjblc 
am,  anb  her  tottmes ,  no:  the  inhab7^ 
tants  of  #cgibbo ,  anb  her  tottmes : 
but  th c  Canaanites  ttioulb  btticl  in  that 
lanb. 

28  3nbiteamctopaffctt)hen3Jfracl 
Ibas  ftrong,  that  rfjcv  putthc  Canaan 
nitcs  to  tribute,  anb  bib  not  bttcrlp 
b?iue  them  out. 

29  C  *  Neither  bib  €pfnaim  bnuc 
out  the  Canaamtcs  that  bibclt  m  Gc- 
5er :  but  the  Canaanites  bibclt  in  ec* 
5cr  among  them. 

30  C  ^either  bib  zebulun  b:iuc  out 
the  inhabitants  of  Citron,  no:  the  in 
habitants  of  iBahaiol :  but  the  Canaa- 
nites bibclt  among  them,  anb  became 
tributaries. 

31  Ci3ctthcrbtb3ifbcrbuucoutthc 
mhabttants  of  3tcbo ,  no:  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Ztbon,no:  of  3lh!ab,  no23lch 
5,1b ,  no:  i^clbatlj,  no;  ZplyJlx ,  no?  of 
Behob: 

32  25ut  the  aiherttcsbibelt among 
tlic  Canaanites,  tbemhabitants  of  the 
ianb:fo2tlievbibnotb2iuethcmout. 

3J  C^«' 


*  Num.14. 

:4-ioin.t4 
1  j.8ilj. 
14. 


•Ga,.i8. 
19. 


'Iofli.a.14 


'Iofti.17. 


•Iolh.iS. 
10. 


llfrael 


is  re 


proue 


d.         Iudges. 


Iolhuas  bunall. 


\Or,mtJfn< 


Deui.7.:. 
'Dcut,  13. 


•Iofli.i;. 

>?• 

•Exod.  13. 
3  3.  and  54 
11. 


wctpcri- 


jj  C^ettherbibiSaphtaiibnueoutj 
the  inhabitants  of  nBctbfhcmctt) ,  no:  ] 
the  inhabitants  of  25ethanatb ,  but  hec 
bibcltamongthc€anaanttcs>thcinhafc 
bitants  of  the  lanb :  neucrthclelTc ,  the 
inhabitants  of  JScththemctt) ,  anb  of 
jScthanath ,  became  tributaries  bnto 
them. 

34.  2Cnb  the  3(mo?itcs  fo?ccb  the  chil- 
b?cn  of  2Dan  into  the  mountainc :  fo? 
they  iboulb  not  fuffer  them  to  tonic 
bonmc  to  the  bailey. 

35  26ut  the  Simojites  iboulb  blbelt 
in  mount  ^cres m3luaion,$  m  5>haai- 
bim:  pet  the  hanb  of  the  houfc  of  3Jo- 
feph  tpmtailcb,fo  that  the?  became  trfc 
butanes. 

36  3nb  the  toad  of  the  3linontes  was 
from  !|  the  going  bp  to  3srabbim,from 
therotBc.anbbpibarb. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  An  Ange!  rcbuketh  the  people  at  Bochim. 
6  The  wickednefleof  the  new  generation 
after  lofhua.  14  Gods  anger  and  pitic  to- 
wards them.  10  The  Canaanites  are  left 
toproouelfrael. 

9ffA$4£  ffi*  au  II  ^ngtf  of  the 
-Mwt  12*  ©is©  came  bp  from 
**^\**  <5iisai  to  aSochim ,  anb 
faib,3Jmabcyoutogoe 
bpoutof£gypt,anbhauc 
btougbt  you  bnto  the  lanb  ttihich ' 
froar e  bnto  your  fat!)  ers,  anb  3  laib, 
tbill  neuer  bjcaftc  my  Couenant  lbifh 
pou. 

i  3mb  *  ycc  fl)all  mane  no  league 
tt»  th  the  inhabitants  of  this  lanb,*  you 
(hai  th?otb  boibne  their  altars :  28ut  ye 
hauc  not  obey cb  my  boyce;  nahyhauc 
ye  bone  this  i 

3  nahetefoje^auofaib^nnllnot 
bnuc  tl)em  out  from  beftue  yon :  but 
they  fbalbe  *  as  thornes  inyour  fiocs,anb 
their  gobs  Chaibc  a  * fuare  bnto  you. 

4  3inb  it  came  to  pafTc  mhen  the 
3ngci  of  the  %obb  fpaue  thefe  flwbs 
bnto  all  the  ehilbmi  of  31  fracl ,  that  ttic 
people  lift  bp  their  boiccanbibcpt. 

5  3nbthcy  eailcb  the  name  of  that 
place  *  2Sochmt :  anb  they  famficcb 
there  bnto  the  H©  is  n?. 

6  C2nbibhni3Jott)ttahabletthc 
people  goc,  the  chilbzen  of  3Jfracl  lbent 
cuery  man  bnto  hts  inheritance,  to  pof- 
feflc  the  lanb. 

7  -^nbthcpeoplcfcniebthc|L©is© 
all  the  bayes  of  3Iolhua ,  anb  all  the 


bayes  of  the  fibers  that  t  outuueb  gjo*  I  ]?'%%;, 
thua ,  ibho  hao  fecne  all  the  great  l£  ;.;« 
ibo?Kcs  of  the  %  ©  is  ?d,  that  h'ce  mo  foj 
^jfracl. 

8  3inb  3Iofl)ua  the  tonne  of /Bun, 
theferuantofthe?l©is©  bieb,  being 
an  huntaeb  anb  ten  yeeres  olb. 

9  Suibthcyburiebhtmmthebojbcr 
of  his  inheritance  in  lttmnath-$?eres, 
in  the  mount  of  €ph?ami,on  the  J5o?tt) 
fibcofthchill<5aavh. 

io  ^nbaifoailthatgenerationlbcre 
gatheteb  bnto  their  fathers:  anb  there 
arofc  another  generation  after  them, 
ibhich  Uneibnot  the  iQLfiDisjD,  no?  yet 
the  Yboojftcs  ibhich  hec  hab  bone  to? 
35frael. 

n  C  3nb  the  ehflbzen  of 3Jfracl  bib 
rail  in  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  m  ©,anb  fct-- 
ueb  25aalim: 

it  3nb  they  fotfooRC  thefL©is© 
d5ob  of  their  fathers,  tbhteh  brought 
them  out  ofthe  lanb  of  <Egypt,  ano  fol- 
lolbeb  other  gobs ,  of  the  gobs  of  the 
people  that  ibere  rounb  about  them, 
anb  boJbcb  themfcluesbnto  them,  anb 
p.iououtb  theft  ©  is  ©  to  anger. 

13  3nbthcyfo,u"boKcthe?L©is©, 
anb  fcrueb2Saalanb3tfbtaroth. 

14.  c  Stobttje  anger  of  the  |L©is© 
tdas  hote  agamft  3!fracl,anb  he  beliue^ 
r  eb  them  into  the  hanbs  of  (pollers  that 
fpoilcb  thcm.anb  Tie  fblb  them  into  the 
hanbs  of  their  enemtes  rounb  about,fo 
tl)at  they  coulb  not  any  longer  flanb  be^ 
fo?e  their  enemies. 

15  r©hithcrfbracttheytbentout,the 
hanb  of  the  fL  0  is  ©  ibas  agatnll  them 
fo?  euiii,asthefL©K£>  habfaib,anb 
*  as  thclLoisjDhabftoomebnto  them: 
anb  they  iber c  grcatlybittrclTcb. 

16  C  /BcuerthclelTe ,  the  %  ©is© 
rayfeb  bp  "Jubges ,  Vbhiefj f  beliucreb 
them  out  of  the  hanb  of  thofc  that  fpoy; 
lebthenr. 

17  3nb  yet  they  tboulb  not  bcarfecn 
bnto  their  JJubges ,  but  they  tbent  a 
ibhonng  after  other  gobs,  anbboibcb 
themfclucs  bnto  them  :  they  turncb 
quicRly  out  of  the  Vbay,  Ibhtch  their  fa- 
thcrsibaiKcbin,obcyingtheComman* 
bemeuts  of  tlje  ?L©EJ2>;  but  they  bib 
uotfo. 

13  3nb\bhratf)c!LfflK£>raifebthem 
bp5ubges,thcn  the  H©ibjd  ibas  lbuh 
t!)c3Jubgc,  anbbeliuereb  them  out  of 
the  hanb  of  thetr  enemtes,aiithe  bayes 
of  the  3Jubge  (  fw  it  tepenteb  the 
%  ©  is  ©  ,becaule  of  thetr  graftings  by 

reafon 


•prj.44. 
1  j.ui.50. 


*  Lcu'il  \6. 


t  Hthfa- 

th'd. 


Ifrael obftinatc.  Chap.ii).       Othniel.    Ehud. 


"c&ip.3. 
11. 

U  Or,  ivcre 
corrupt. 


\Hehr.thej 
Itt  nothing 
fttllof  their. 


\\OrJ»ffrcl 


rcafon  of  them  that  oppjtffcb  them, 
anb  bcrcb  thctn:) 

19  anb  it  came  to  paffc  *  tbhen  tt>e 
3dtbgeibas  Drao,  that  thcvreturncb, 
anD  ||  cozruptcD  thcmfclucs  mow  then 
their  fathers ,  in  following  other  gobs, 
to  ferue  them,  anb  to  bott)  Dottutc  bnto 
them:  ttljtv  ccafeb  not  from  their  olbuc 
boings.no,:  ft  om  their  ftttbbomc  xo&\\ 

20  ctanb  the  anger  of  theft  ©is© 
tbashotc  againft  3)fracl,  anb  he  fain , 
zsecaufc  that  this  people  hath  tranfc 
greffeb  my  Couenant  ibhttl)  31  com= 
manbcb  tliric  fathers,  anb  haucuot 
hearfcenebbnto  my  botce : 

11  3J  alfo  ibill  not  hentefotfh  bnttc 
out  an?  front  beftw  them  of  the  nati- 
ons ibhich  3f  oftnta  left  lbhcn  hebteb : 

22 1Chat  through  them^f  maypjonc 
3Jfrael ,  Whether  they  lbtll  fceepe  the 
tbay  of  trjc?loB!D,to  ibalUe  therein, 
as  their  fathers  did  Hccpc  >t,02  not. 

2  j  1Chcrcfo:cthc!L©i3©||leftthofe 
nations,  lbifhoutoniuugthem  outha- 
ftfly,  neither  DclmcrcD  l)c  them  into  the 
hanDof3Jo(hua. 

CHAP.    III. 

The  nations  which  were  left  to  proouelfrae!. 
6  By  communion  with  them  they  commit 
idolatne.  8  Othuieldeliuereth  them  from 
Chufhan-Rifhathaim.  iz.  EhudfromEg- 
lon.   31    ShamgarfromihePhiliftines. 

•Dibthcfc  ne  t!)c  nations 
which  the  %  ©  11  ©  icfuo 
piootic  35frael  by  them, 
(cucnas  many  of  3Jfrart 
ashaonotBnolbcnaiifhc 
ibar  res  of  Canaan; 

2  £Dnely  that  the  generations  of 
thcchtfbjcnof  jjfracl  might  Knoibto 
teach  them  ibarrc ,  at  the  leaft  fitch  as 
befojcuncib  nothing  thereof:) 

j  gamely  Rue  lojbs  of  the  0hite 
ftittcs,  anballthcCanaanitcs,  anb  the 
S>ibontans,  anb  the  ignites  that  bibclt 
intnount|Lcbanoh,frommount25aal- 
$ermon  ,  bnto  the  cutting  in  of  toa- 
math. 

4  anbthev  were  topzoouegjfract 
bythcnuoKnbibibhcthcrthcyibouib 
hearken  btuo  the  Commanbemcnts  of 
the  ft  ©ire*,  Which  hec  commaunbeb 
their  fathers  by the hano  of93ofes. 

5  C  3mb  the  thilb2cn  of  3Jfracl 
DibcitamongthcCanaanttes,i)ittites, 
anb  ^monies,  anb0err>5ttes,anbl?i= 
uitcs,anD3Jebuutcs, 


6  aub  the?  tooKc  their  Daughters 
to  be  thcirttJturs.anb  gaue  their  baugb 
tcrs  to  their  fonncs ,  anb  fmiebthctr 
gobs, 

7  aub  the  ehilbicn  of  33fraei  bib  e 
will  in  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  e>,  anb  for 
gate  the  %  ©  is  ©  their  <sob,anb  ferucD 
26aaiim,anb  the  groucs. 

8  C  Xhercfoie  the  anger  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  was  hotc  againft  gjfracl,  anD 
he  fo!b  them  into  the  hano  of  ChuQjan 
&ifhathatm  King  of  t^efopotamta: 
anD  the  rhilb'.en  of  3Jfracl  fcrucbChu; 
than  Utfhathaun  ctghtyecres. 

9  anb  lbhcn  the  chtlbzcn  of g?fcael 
crycb  bnto  the  %  ©  jb  ©,  the  %  ©  is  sr> 
raifeb  bp  a  tDeliucrettothc  chilb^en  of 
3frael,ibho  DriiuercDthem ,  euen  £)«> 
nicl  the  fount  of  Bena5,Caicbs  vottger 
biother. 

10  anb  the  Spirit  of  the  |L®isjd 
t  camcbponhim,anb  hetubgeb  ^Jfracl, 
anbibentoutto  ibarre,  f  thc|L0K5D 
DeuuercD  Chufl)an-3aifhathatm  King 
of  t  sJMopotaiuia  into  his  hanb ;  anb 
his  hano  pjcuailcb  againft  Chufban- 
Ki(l)athatm. 

11  atiDthelanDhaDreflfo«j>petes: 
anD  Othniel  tlK  fonne  of  Bena3  Dieb. 

\i  C  ^nb  the  chilb^en  of 35frael  bib 
cuill  agamc  m  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  id: 
anbthe?L©!KE>ftrengtheneb  eglon 
the  King  of  £0oab  againft  3?frael,  be-- 
taufc  the?  hab  bone  cuillm  the  fight  of 
thelL^is©, 

13  ^nb  hee  gathcrcb  bnto  him  the 
thilbicn  of  amnion ,  anD  3faialcB,  anD 
ibentanb  fmote  3Jfracl ,  anb  poffeffeb 
thcntvof|tWUmc-trces. 

14  ^othechilbJniof^JfraclferucD 
Cglon  tlje  ismg  of  S0oab  cig!jtcenc 
t>eeres. 

15  iSutlbhen  tl)e  chiUucnof3Jfrael 
tricb  bnto  the  lL©H3D,tljc  %&mz> 
ratfcD  them  bp  abeliucrcr,  Chub  the 
fonne  of  ©era ,  ||  a  26eniamttc,  a  man 
||  left  hanbeD:  anb  bv  him  the  chtlbjen  of 
"Jfrael  fent  a  ^dtfent  bnto  Cglon  the 
Kmgof^oab. 

i6  26ut  €hub  mabe  hint  a  Dagger 
( ibbuh  hab  tibo  ebges )  of  a  etibtte 
length ,  anb  he  bib  girb  it  bnber  his  rat 
ment.bpon  his  right  thigh, 

17  anb  he  brought  the  pzefent  btuo 
Cglon  King  of  fi)3oab :  anb  Cglon  ibas 
abet?  fat  man. 

is  anb  lbhcn  he  hab  mabe  an  cub  to 
offer  the  ^zefent,  he  fent  aibay  the  peo 
plcthatbarcthci&efcnt. 

19  23ut 


t  Heir.  zA- 


\  Hetr.ft. 

HIOHT. 


\  Hebr.  tpm. 


t  Heir.zA- 


\\Or,t!ie 

fonne  of  le. 

mini. 

t  Heir.fiut 

ofhurifht 

hand. 


EhudkillethEglon.     Iudges.        Deborah,  Barak. 


imagts. 


\  Hfb.afar- 

/-.-..,'   COO- 


Img. 


|]  0rt  it  came 
em  at  the 
fundament. 


10x,{Uth 
Ktafcmcnt. 


UMfit- 


19  25ut  bee  bimfelfe  tutneb  agame 
from  the  ||  quarries  that  lbcre  by  (EM* 
gal,anDfaib,3Jbaucafctrttcrranbbn* 
to  tlicc  ,£D  tungrtbbo  fato,Bcepe  filente. 
3(nb  all  that  ttoob  by  bun,  lbcnt  out 
frombim. 

zo  Tlnn  €hub  tame  bnto  him ,  anb 
be  was  fittmgmta&ummcr  parlour, 
ibbitb  bee  ban  fo?blmfclfe  alone:  3nb 
<£bub  faib,3J  hauc  a  meflage  from  <5ob 
into  tbec.  3nb  bearofe  out  of  his  frat. 

n  3nb<£bub put fo?tbbis left hanb, 
anb  toone  trje  nagger  from  bis  right 
thigh,  anb  tftmll  it  into  his  belly. 

n  3nb  the  haft  alfo  ibent  in  after 
thcblabc:  anb  the  fatte  tlofeb  vponthc 
biaoe,  fo  that  hec  toulb  not  o?attetbe 
Dagger  out  of  his  belly ,  anb  the  |  birt 
tame  out. 

13  Cbm£bubtbmtfb?thtb?ougb 
the  po?tbe,  anb  fbut  the  boo?cs  of  the 
parlour  bpon  him,  anb  lottteb  then:. 

14  nahen  he  tbas  gone  out ,  bis  fcr* 
uants  tame,  anbtbben  they  Jam,  that 
bcbolb,  the  boo?es  of  tfte  parlour  ttiere 
lotfeeb,  they  tatb,  Purely  he  II  couercrb 
his  feet  in  his  Summer  rhamber. 

15  3nb  they  taricb  till  they  tberca* 
fyamcb  :anbbebolb,  heoptnebnotthe 
boozes  of  the  parlour ,  therefore  they 
toofee  a  bey,  anb  openeb  them :  anb  be* 
holb,  their  lozbibasfailcnboUmcbeab 
on  the  earth. 

i6  atnD<£bubc&apebibbfictbcyta* 
rieb:  anb  paffeb  btyonb  the  quarries, 
anbeftapeb  bnto  Scirath. 

17  2wd  it  tame  to  paCTe  rbhen  hee 
lbas  tome,  that  hee  blcib  a  trumpet  in 
the  mountamc  of  <£pb?aim,  anb  the 
cbilb?en  of  3?fraci  ibent  boibnc  Unth 
bimfrom  the  mount,? be bcfo?ctbem. 

is  ^nbbccfaib bnto  them,  jfolloib 
after  me :  fo?  the  %  0  «  s>  hath  beliuc- 
reb  your  enemies  the  Q9oabitcs  into 
your  banb.  3lnb  they  ibent  boibneaf- 
ter  htm,  anb  too&e  the  fiwbsof 'JJo?* 
bantoibaro  SPoab,  anb  fuffcreb  not  a 
mantopafTeouer. 

19  3mbtheyflctbcof$)oabatthat 
time  about  ten  thoufanb  men,ail  t  lufty , 
anb  allmen  of  balour,anb  there  efeapeb 
not  a  man. 

30  5)0  fl{9oab  lbasfubbueb  that  bay 
tonber  the  hanb  of  ^frael :  anbtljc  lanb 
hab  refrfotircfcojeyecrcs. 

31  C3nb after  him ibas&hamear 
tbefotmc  of  3lnatb,  tuhith  (leib  of  the 
phiufhncs  fire  bunb?eb  men  ibith  an 
orcgoab,  anb  IjcaiCo  beliucreb  JfraeL 


CHAP.   IIII. 

1   Deborah  and  Barak  deliucr  them  fromlabin 
andSifera.   18  Iael  killeth  Sifera. 

H  m  tbetbab?ett  of  3Jfrael 
againc  bib  enilin  the  fight 
of  the  %  0  is  © ,  ibhen  e* 
hubtbasbeab. 
1  ^nbthelL©i3©folb 
them  into  tne  hanbe  of  3Jabin  Ring  of 
Canaan :  that  tefgncb  m  ^a5o?,tbc  tap* 
tame  of  ibbofc  bolt  tt»as  fulcra,  ibtJtcp 
blbeltm^arofheth  of  the  ©entiles. 

3  ^nb  the  chtlb?en  of  3Jftaei  crieb 
bnto  the  %  0  ts  © :  fo?  he  hab  nine  hun* 
D?eb  tharets  of  y?on :  anb  tibentie  ytres 
hee  mightily  opp?eu*eb  tljc  fbrtb?en  of 
3lfrael. 

4.  €  2nb  3>cbo?ab  a  p?opbctcfle, 
the  Vbift  of  Hapibotb ,  thee  tuDgeb  JJf 
rael  at  that  time. 

5  3fnb  Ojee  btbelt  bnber  the  palme 
tree  of  2>ebo?ah,betibccne  Kamah  anb 
aSethel  m  mount  €ph?atni :  anb  the 
rbiHwen  of  3Jftael  tame  bp  to  her  fo? 
tubgement. 

6  ^nb  (hee  ftut  anb  caileb  ffiarab 
thefonne  of  abinoam,  out  of  IBicbeQ)* 
iT5aphtali,  anb  latb  bnto  him,  i^ath  not 
the  %  0  s  ©  ©ob  of  3Ifrael  tommaun* 
Deb, faying,  <5oe,anb  b?aibc  toibarb 
mount  Xabo?,  anb  tabe  Ibith  tbceten 
thoutanb  men  of  the  rhab?en  of  ii5aph 
tali,  anb  of  the  thilbzen  of  zebulun  < 

7  3nb  5  an  b;a«j  bnto  thee  to  the 
*nutr  Bifhon,  5>u*era  the  raptamcof 
3Jabins  army ,  With  his  tharets,  anb 
his  multitubc  anb3J  ^brtl  beliucr  htm 
mtorhtnehanb. 

8  ^nb  25arab  faib  bnto  her ,  3Jf 
thou  Ibilt  goe  Djith  mc,then  31  Ibil  goc : 
butif  thou  ttnltnotgocibttb  nice,  then 
3tt)Ulnotgoe. 

9  ^tibfhcfaib^ibtlfurelygoujul) 
thee,notibithftanfimgtl)eioiirnepthat 
thou  tabtft,  (hal  not  be  fo?  tlunc  hono? : 
fij?  the  HfiDK©  than  feu  <3>ifcra  into 
the  hanb  of  a  tboman.  ^nb  2>ebo?ah 
arofe,flbentlbith26arabtols;eDefl). 

10  c  ^nb  carafe  callcb  zebulun, 
anb  il5aphtalt  to  Hebety ,  anb  he  ibent 
bp  ibith  ten  thoirfanb  men  at  msfeetc : 
anb  2>cbo?ah  ibentbp  Ibul)  hmu 

ii  5l5ott)  l^eber  the  istenite,  ibhiti) 
ibas  of  thcchilb?tn  of  *^obab  the  fa 
thcr  in  laib  of  ^0ofes,  hab  feuercb  him 
felfefcomthc  memtes,  anb  ptttbebhis 
tent  bnto  the  plaine  of  Zaanaim, 
VbhuhisbyBebeft). 
.    12  ^nb 


•Pfal.8j. 


'Numb.io 
'9- 


Sifera  is  flainc.  Chap.v.  Thankefgiuing, 


ihcrtdbycr] 
procU- 


10. 


j  Hebr.  imta 


\0r,ru*gtt 
or  blanket. 


*  Chap.  j. 


t  Hebr.fut. 


ii  3lnb  tt»c^  fheibeb  Sifera ,  that 
ffiaraft  the  fonnc  of  abmoam  tbas 
gone  Dp  to  mount  Xaboj. 

13  3lnb  5nfeta  t  gatljcrcb  together 
all  his  ctjarcts ,  rant  nmc  hunbjteb  ctja= 
rctsofiron,anbaithcpcoplcthatroere 
nnth  him  ,fcomi^arofl)cth  of  ttjc  ©en* 
tiles,imto  the  rtucr  of  ixilhon. 

14  3mb£>cbo?ahfaibbnto28aralt, 
Up ,  foj  this  is  the  Dap  in  tbljtttj  the 
fLcm©  hath  bcltuereb  Sifera  into 
thine  Dane i :  3Js  not  the  %  0  is  ©  gone 
out  befoje  thee  f  foJSara&UjentboVbnc 
from  mount  Itabo?,  anb  ten  thoufanb 
men  after  him.  .     . 

15  anb  t^e  *  %  0  is  3?  bifcomfitcb 
Sifera,  anb  all  his  clarets,  anb  all 
his  ijoftc  lbitl)  the  cbge  of  the  frao2b,  be- 
five  Barafc  :  fo  that  S>u"era  lightcb 
bourne  off  his  tharct,  anb  flcb  attmp  on 
his  feet. 

16  25ut2SaraUpurfueb  after  the  tha* 
rets,  anb  after  the  hofte  bnto  $aro- 
fljeth  of  the  ©entiles,  anb  all  the  hott  of 
difera  fell  Upon  the  cbge  of  theftuojb  ; 
and  thereroas  not  t  a  man  left. 

17  i^ombcit&ifcraflcbaifoaponhis 
fcct,to  the  tent  of  3Jaci  the  Vbifc  of  m> 
bcrthcBenitc :  fojthcw  tbas  peace  be- 
ttbecnelJabm  the  lung  of  $350?,  anb 
thehoufcof  $?cbcr  the  Benitc. 

is  C  anb  gjacl  went  out  to  mcete 
£>ifcra,  anb  faibbntohim,  %wmtin, 
mv  lo?b,tutnem  to  me,  fcarc  not.  anb 
tbhen  hec  hab  turncb  m  Ditto  her  ,m< 
to  the  tent ,  fyee  toucreb  him  ttnth  a 
||  mantle. 

19  anbhcfaibbntoher,<l5iueme,3J 
pjapthce,  a  iitleiDatcrtob?inftc,foj3l 
amthirmc.  anbfyc  opcneb*abottleof 
milftc,  anbgauc  pn  bnnne,  anb  touc- 
rebhim. 

io  againchctaib  bntohcr,  S>tanb 
inthcboojcof  the  tent,  anb  it  (hall  bee 
Ibhen  anp  manbocth  tome  anb  enquire 
of  rhec  anb  lap,;3Jstherc  an?  manhere* 
thatthott(haitfap,il5o. 

zi  5Chen3JaeH?cbersn)ifc,ttooBC 
anatlc  of  the  tent,  anb  toofec  an  flam* 
merinhcrhanb,  anb  lbcntfoftlpbnto 
him ,  anb  fmote  the  naile  into  histcm- 
pics,  anb  faftcneb  it  into  the  grounb: 
(fo?  ht  was  faft  aflcepe,  anb  Xbcarp,) 
fo  he  bieb. 

xx  anb  bcholb ,  asisarab  purfueb 
£>ifera,3jael  tame  out  to  meet  l)im,anb 
faib  bnto  htm,  Come,  anb  3  Will  ftjetb 
thee  the  man rbhom  thou  fecftctt.  anb 
Vbljenh  e  tame  into  her  tent,  beholb,  $>v- 


fera  lap  beab ,  anb  the  naile  was  m  his 
temples. 

25  £>o  Gob  fubbueb  on  that  bay, 
SJabm  the  Ring  of  Canaan,  before  the 
chiltycnof'JIfracl. 

24.  ^nb  the  Ijanb  of  the  ehilbjen  of 
3[fracl  t  pjofpereb ,  $  pzcuaileb  agatnfl 
■fjabin  the  King  of  Canaan ,  Dtitili  thep 
hab  beftcop eb  3Jabm  lung  of  Canaan. 

CHAP.    V. 

The  Song  ofDeborah  and  Barak. 

f*S*^2^  $en  fang  2>cbo?ah ,  anb 
!Sev  26araB  the  fon  of  abmo? 
am,on  thatbap,fapmg, 

x  tejaifepctheSLoiB©, 
fo?  the  aucngmg  of  33f 
rael ,  tuhen  the  people  tbillingip  offer  eb 
thcmfciues. 

5  if)carc,jaDpelrings,gtuccarc,4Dpe 
Ounces:  31 ,  «ien  3  mm  fing  Unto  the 

fU>KP/fj  Uniting  praife  tO  thC  %0W2> 

©obof^fraei. 

4  HOE©,  *  tbhen  thou  roentcflt 
out  of  £>eir,  Ibhen  thou  marthebft  out 
oftheftclb  of <£bom,thc  earth  trcmbleb, 
anb  the  heauenstyoppeb,  the  cloubsal 
fotyoppebmater. 

5  *1LhemountaincstnieUcbfrom 
befojc  the  %  0  «  ©,  euen  *  that  5>mai, 
from  before  the  IL©kd  <5ob  of  Jfracl. 

6  3Jn  the  bapes  of*  5>hamgar  tl)c 
fon  of  anath,inthebapesof*3(ael,the 
high  tbapes  tbcre  Dnocnipieb ,  anb  the 
ttraueilers  ibalbeb  thojoib  tbp-ibapcs. 

7  The  inhabitants  of  the  DlllagCS  tea- 

feb,  thep  teafeb  m  gjfraci,  Dntrtl  that  3 
SDebojah  arofe,that  3Jarofc  a  mother 
m^jfracl. 

8  ShtpthofenctbgobSithcnlbas 
tbarre  in  the  gates :  ibas  there  a  (hielb 
0?  rpcarc  fecne  among  fourtic  thoufanb 
m^JfraeW 

9  ^p  heart  is  toVbarb  tl)e  goucr= 
nours  of  3Jfottl>that  offcreb  them- 
(clues  Vbillmglp  among  the  people : 
asicffcpcthefLsDis©. 

10  ||  &pcahe  pee  that  ribc  on  Vbhite 
affes ,  vtt  that  Ot  in  3Jubgement ,  anb 
ibalKcbptheibap. 

1 1  They  that  are  deliuered  from  tl)C  nOlfC 

of  arthers  in  the  plates  of  bjaibmg 
mater  s  there  Ojaii  thep  rehcarfc  the 
righteous  arts  of  the?L  0  is  £>,  eucn  tlje 

t  UghtCOUS  attS  towards  the  inhabitants  of 

his  billagcs  in  3lfrael :  then  (hall  tiic 
people  of  the  %0m>  got  bomne  to  the 
gates.  _ 

z         11  avbabe, 


\IUrgo. 
tr.g,  Trent 
andvrM 

hard. 


'  Dcuc. 


'Pfal.97.5. 

t  Heir, 

flowed. 

"Exod.iy. 

18. 

•Ch3P.3. 

?•■ 

*  Chap.^. 
iS. 

t  Heir,  wal- 
kers cf paths. 
t  Heir, 
eroded 


J  Orrtudi- 


\Heir.riah. 
lecuf*e^es 
of  the  Lord 


Thefongof 


Judges.     Deborah  and  Barak. 


\Hti.dr.m, 
with  the pent 
Cnr. 


\  Hetr.hu 

feete. 
\\Ortvtthe 

dimjiomt 

&c. 

\  Htbr.  hn- 

pre/stcns. 

\Ortt>:. 


\\Or,p?rt. 
\OrtcreckS' 


\Heb.expa~ 
fed  to  r;- 

oroch. 


\Htb.pxthi 


hnas,  cr 

pinngw^! 


f  Htb.h.\m- 
mereJi. 


ii  3m>a&c,aiDa&cS>ctwah:an)aRc, 
aiDane,  Dttet  a  fong :  anfe  26arau,  anD 
leaDc  thy  captiutttc  captiue ,  thou  fonnc 
of3btnoam. 

13  Xtyn  hcc  mane  him  that  rnnat 
ncth,haut  Dominion  ouet  the  ifrobles 
among  tijc  people :  the  %  a>  is  p  maDc 
me  hauc  Dominion  oner  the  mightte. 

14  £>ut  of  t£ph2atm  urns  there  a 
toote  of  them  agamft  3malCK ,  after 
thec25etuamm,ainongthypcoplc:£>ut 
of  £lj)achir  came  DoiDtte  goucrnours, 
anD  out  of  zcbulun  they  tljat  t  ijanDlc 
rtjc  pen  of  the  ttuitcr. 

15  3nD  tDc  p2tnccs  of  IJffatljarwere 
iDithSDcboKih :  eucngjflachar.aiiDai' 
fo  35araft,  Dc  ibas  fent  on  t  foot  into  the 
Dailey:  II  fo?  the  Dilutions  of  ftcuben, 

there  were  great  t  thOtightS  Of  l)CMU 

16  m\)v  abobeft  thou  among  the 
fhccpcfolDs,  to  hcarc  the  blcatmgs  of 
the  flocks  i  ||  for  thcDtuifiotis  of  Reuben 
there  were  great  fc'artOmgs  of  Dcart. 

17  <5ilcab  abobc  DcyottD  ^o;ban : 
ano  lbhy  did  3>an  rcmame  in  thips  <  Z- 
(hcrconnttucD  on  the  fca||(bo2e,  ana  a* 
boDctnhis!|b2carhcs. 

is  zcbtilunanD  Jftaphtait  were  a  peo- 
ple that  ticoparbeD  their  hues  Dnto  the 
Death,  m  tDc  high  plates  of  t!)c  fielD. 

19  3Lhc  Kings  tame  and  fought,  then 
fought  tijc  Kings  of  Canaan  m  Xaa- 
naci)  Dy  tl)c  waters  of  £0cgiDDo ,  they 
toottcno  game  of  money. 

20  Xhcv  fought  from  hcauctt ,  the 
ftarrcsmthcir  Uourfcs  fought  agamft 
5>tfera. 

11  Xhc  rtner  of  B'.fhon  fiucpt  them 
au?ay,  that  ancient  rtucr,  thcruicr  1*1- 
fhon  :  £>  my  foulc ,  thou  haft  troDen 
Dotbnrftrcngfh. 

22  Xhcntticrcthc  Ij02fcIioofesb2o 
Ken,  bythemeancs  of  the  llpjanfmgs, 
the  pzanfmgs  of  their  mightie  ones. 

23  €itrfeyc^cro5  (faiDthc3tngel 
of  the  %  jd  is  p)  ttirfc  ye  bitterly  the  in 
habitants  thereof :  betaufc  they  came 
not  to  the  heipe  of  the  %  &  is  e»,  to  the 
hclpcofthefLoiRiDagamftthcmighty. 

24  i5ic(rcDabotic)Uomcnfl)ai3laei 
the  lbtfc  of  tycbrr  the  lactate  be,  blefTcD 
(hallfhcbcaboucibomcttmthctcnt. 

25  ftc  af neD Vbater.-ind  ft>c  gaiic  him 
milUc,  fl)cc  b2ought  fooulj  butter 'in  a 

l02DlyDlfl). 

26  &hcc  put  her  haiiD  to  the  uaiic, 
anDhcr  right  hanD  to  thcttiojucmens 
hammer :  anD  Until  the  hammer  fljrc 
t  fmote  £>ifera,  (hce fmotc  off  Ins  IjeaD, 


ahenfljehabpcarfcDfftuKcnthiough 
his  temples. 

27  t^t  her  fecte  he  botbcD,  he  fell, 
helayDottne:  atherfeethcboilicD,  he 
fcU;mhcrchcDoibcD,thetchcfciDotbn 
tbeaD. 

28  Zhc  mother  of  £>ifcra  loofteD 
out  at  a  iDmDoiD,  anD  crteD  thiough  the 
lattcffc ,  oahy  is  his  charct  fo  long  in 
eomming*  B3hy  tarte  the  iDhccics  of 
hischarctSi 

29  $cr  ttnfe  laDics  anfmcr eD  hcr,y ca 
(he  retumcD  t  anftuereto  her  fclfe, 

30  ^auetheynotfpeDdjaucthcynot 
DituDcD  the  pzay  t  to  cucry  man  aDamo 
fell  02  tmo  i  %o  5>ifera  a  p?ay  of  Diucrs 
tolours,ap2ayofDiucrstolours,ofncc- 
DlclD02fee,  of  Diuers  colours  of  nccDle 
U)02ne  on  both  uDcs.inect  t  fo?  fhcncrUs 

Of  them  that  take  thcfpOllC  i 

31  §»o  let  all  thine  cncmicsperifl),© 
%  &  «  id  :  but  let  them  that  louc  htm ,  he 
as  the  Auntie  lDhcn  he  gocthfoo2t!)in 
his  might.  3uiD  tijc  lanD  hab  reft  four 
tieyceres. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  The  Ifraelites  for  their  flnne  are  opprcfied  by 
Midian.  8  A  prophet  rebuketh  them,  n  An 
Angel  fendeth  Gideon  for  their  deliuerance. 
17  Gideons  Prefent  is  continued  with  fire. 
14  Gideon deftroyethBaalsaltar.andofr'reth 
a  facrifice  vpon  the  altar  lehouah-fhalom.  18 
Ioafh  defendeth  his  fon,&  callcth  him  Ierub- 
baal.  33  Gideons armie.  36  Gideons fignes. 

il33D  the  thilD2cn  of  3Jf 
racl  Dib  null  m  the  fight 
of  thc|L©is©:anD  the 
!L<0iRiDDeuuercD  them 
into  the  hanDe  of  j^idi 
an  fcticn  yceres. 

2  3nD  the  hanD  of  £J9iDian  t  p2cuav 
leb  agamft  3(frael :  and  becaufc  of  the 
£)3iDiatutcs ,  the  thUD2cn  of  Jfracl 
maDe  them  the  Demies  ibhtth  are  m  the 
mountamcs,anD  taues,?  ftrong  holbs. 

3  ^nD  fo  it  ibas  mhcu  3)fracl  hao 
foibcn,  that  the  Q3iDiauitcs  came 'Dp, 
«thc  3lmairtiitcs,  9  t&crlnitymof  the 
€aft,  ctien  they  tame  Dp  agamft  them, 

4-  ^nDtheyencampcDagamfttliem, 
anD  DcftroyeD  the  cncrcafc  of  the  earth, 
till  thou  tome  Ditto  ©a^a,  anD  left  no 
fuftcnancc  fo2jJfracl,  neither  ||ft)eepe, 
nojotc.noiaflc. 

5  ^02  they  came  Dp  iDtth  tljctr  cat 
I  tell  aitD  their  tents ,  anD  they  tame  as 
©raflioppcrs  fo2  muintuDe ,  fo2  both 
njcy  anb  their  camels  lDcre  lDtthout 

number : 


trvceic. 


r  Hei  d,. 
jlnjetl. 


'  Heb.wordi 


t  Heb.tothe 
htadof \ 


f  Heir  fo 
the  ncekfi 
of  the  fpoile. 


Heb.vrM 
Pro,,,. 


\Or,giMr 


Gideon  and  the  Chap.vj.      Angel.  Baals  altar 


\Hebr.a 

m<M)  a  Tro- 
•bct. 


i.King- 

icrcm.io.3. 


'Hcb.u. 
3  1.  called 
Gedton. 
1  Heir  to 

CAufc  It  tQ 


Or, my 
thoufmdis 
the  mcMcfl. 


number:  antothep  entreb  into  the  lanb 
tobcflroptt. 

6  ^nbjfraelibasgrcaflplmpoucs 
rtlhcb,becaufc  of  the  Q3ibtanites,anb 
tfjc  chilb?cn  of  Iffrael  crpcb  tonto  the 

U©13©.  ^       , 

7  c  2Mb  it  tame  to  paffe  ltohcn 
the  chilbitcn  of  3Jfracl  crpcb  tonto  the 
?L  ©  is  ©,bccaufc  of  the  $)ibtanltes, 

8  %$at  the  |L  ©  is  w  fent  t  a  $}& 
phct  tonto  tilt  cbtlb?cn  ofjfracutbhich 
fatb  tonto  them,  Xhus  fairt)  tl,ie?L©i3© 
(SoD  of  jifracl,  3!  t)iousi)t  von  top  from 
€gvpt,anbb:oughtpoufo?th  out  of  the 
hotifeofbonbage, 

9  2inb  3  bcliuercb  pou  out  of  the 
hanb  of  the  egppttans ,  anto  out  oftf)e 
hanb  of  al  that  oppzefftb  pou,anb  tojaue 
them  out  from  before  pou ,  auto  gauc 
pou  their  lanb: 

io  3WD3  fatb  tonto  pou ,  3  am  the 
?L  ©  is  ©  pour  d3ob,*fcarc  not  the  sobs 
oftlje  3uno?itcs  m  itotjofc  lanb  pc  blbel: 
2Sut  pc  haue  not  obepcto  mp  tooice. 

1 1  C  3into  there  tame  an  %mt\  of 
the  %  ©  is  ©,  anb  fate  tonber  an  £)auc 
Tto!r.tl)wjsin^>pl)?an,tnatpertjinedton; 
tolloafh  the  3tbi  e?nte:  anb  his  fonnc 
*  (Sibeon  tl»cu)Cb  ibheat  bp  the  ltomc; 
pjcftV  to  htbe  ^from  the  £0ib:anitcs. 

ii  3tnb  the  3ingel  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
appear cb  tonto  ftun , anb faib  tonto  him, 
Xhc  fL  ©  is  ©  is  itoifh  tbee,  thou  mtgl> 
tiemanoftoalour. 

13  ^nb<5tbconfaib  tonto  him ,  $>\y 
mvILo?b,iftDe  1L©k©  beetuitbtos, 
U»bp  then  is  all  this  befallen  tos  *  anb 
ibbcrc  be  all  bis  miracles  ibbitb  our  fa? 
thers  tolbc  tos  of,  faring,  2Dtb  not  the 
Hois©  tauig  tos  top  from  Cgpptfbut 
noito  the  !L©  ut©  hath  foifafecn  bs,  anb 
bcliuerebtos  into  the  ban&s  of  the  $te 
Dianites. 

i+  3(nto  the  fL©is©looBeto  topon 
btm,  anb  faito ,  ©oc  in  this  tbpmigbt, 
anb  thou  (halt  fauc  3Jfracl  from  the 
hanb  of  the  ^pibianitcs :  baue  not  3 
fenttheef 

15  3lnb  bee  faib  tonto  him,  $©bmp 
lo^b,  ltoberclbttb  (ball  3  fane  3Jfraek 
bebolD,||mpfamtlpispoo:cin4©anaf: 
feb,  anb  3  am  the  lead  in  mv  fathers 
boufe. 

i6  3Cnb  the  %  ©  is  ©  faib  tonto  htm, 
Smrelp  3  tbill  be  ltotth  thee ,  anb  thou 
(haltfmitc  the  £0«bianites,as  one  man. 

17  3nbheraiDtotttohmvJ!fnott>'3l 
haue  founb  grate  mthvfight,thenfhcib 
me  a  Ggnc.that  thou  taiBctt  ttiitlj  me. 


i  Or  meat 


t  Htlr  a 
kjAefthc 


•Exod.j  j. 

zo.  chap, 
13.22." 


is  ^Depart  not  hence ,  3  p:ap  thee, 
tontU3l  tome  tonto  thccanbbmigfouh 
mp||£*cfent,ano  fet  itbefozethcc.  ^nb 
hccfatbe,3inmitac}>  tontill  thou  come 
agatne. 

19  C^nbcSibeonitoentm^nbmabc 
reabrtaBsb,  anb  tonlcaueneb  cases  of 
an  Cphah  of  flottre :  the  flefh  he  put  tn  a 
baf  uc  t  ,anb  he  put  the  bjoth  m  a  potanb 
brought  it  outtonto  him  tonber  the  oafec, 
antopjcfcntebit. 

20  ^nbthe  ^ngel  of  (Sob  (apb  ton- 
to him,H^ahc  the  flc(b,anb  the  tonlcaue- 
neb cahes ,  anb  lap  them  bpon  this 
roche,anbpottt?coutthcbjoth.  5lnb  Ijc 
bibfo. 

zi  C1Chenthe^ngclofthc?l©is© 
putfoo?ththe  cnb  of  the  Haffc  that^s 
in  his  hanb,  anb  toucheb  the  flefh,  anb 
the  tonlcaueneb  ca&es,anb  there  rofc  top 
fire  out  of  thcrocBcanbconfumcbthc 
flen)*anb  the  tonlcaueneb  cases :  then 
the  3wgcl  of  the  %  ©  is  e>  bepartcb  out 
of  his  fight. 

ii  2utDlbhen(5ibeonperccMebth3t 
hec  ltoas  an  3(ngcl  oftlje  %  o  is  © ,  <Bv- 
bcon  fatb,  3llas,  £)  jLo:b  G  o  jd:  *fo? 
bctaufe  3  t)a"c  ftcne  an  3ngcl  of  the 
H©  is  ©face  to  face. 

X3  3nb  the  %  ©  js  ©  faib  tonto  him, 
#cace be  tonto ffjce,fearenot,thou(halt 
notbie. 

24  %\)tn  (Sibcon  built  an  ^itar 
there  tonto  the  It  ©is©,  anb  calleb  it 

3Jchouah  fhaiom:  tonto  this  bap  it" 
pet  in  £)ph?ah,  of  the  ^bt  ewtes.    • 

15  C  3lnb  it  came  to  paffc  the  fame 
night,  that  the  %  ©  is  ©  laib  tonto  him, 
luiftc  thpfathcrspongbuUotBc,||  cucu 
the  feconb  bullocae  of  feucn  pecrcs  olb , 
anb  th?ott>  boitonc  tljc  altar  of  zsaal 
that  tljp  father  hatlj,anb  nit  bottom  the 
groucthatisbpit: 

16  3lnb  builbc  an  ^Itar  tonto  the 
H  ©is©thp©obbponthe  top  of  this 
trocftc,in  ||  thco?bereb  plate,  anb  taaelt  w^. 
the  fctonb  bullotfee ,  anb  offer  a  burnt  {"M: 
fatrifitc  tbith  the  ltooob  of  the  grouc,  «■ 
wjljith  thou  (halt  cut  boitonc. 

17  1Lhcn  (Sibeon  toose  mx  men  of 
his  fcruants ,  anb  bin  as  thelL  ©  is  © 
hab  faib  tonto  him :  3nD  fo  it  tuas  be* 
caufc  hectcareb  his  fathers  hou(holb, 
anb  the  men  of  the  dtp,  that  he  eoulb 
not  boc  u  bp  bap ,  that  ijcc  bib  it  bp 

ntsht.  „ ,    .^ 

18  C^nbtbhcn  the  men  of  the  title 

arofc  carelp  m  the  morning,  bcholb,thc 

altar  of  zsaairbasraQ  boitonc,  anb  the 

Z  2  groitc 


That  1?, 
The  Lord 
fttndpcatt. 


!  Or,  and. 


Gideons  fleece: 


Iud 


es. 


H 


isarmie. 


t  Htir.rlc- 
mri. 

•Num.  10 
;.chip.}. 

27- 

\  Heb.rvM 

catlcdaf- 


•Gen.!  8. 


grouc  ibas  tut  bolbnc  rtjat  was  by  tt,ano 
tftc  fctonb  bullotfee  ibas  ofterco  upon 
rtjc  altar  rtjatibas  built. 

29  3nbrtjeyfaioonctoanotDcr,naDo 
DartjbonctDis  fltinjj*  3nb  lbljcn  rtjcy 
enqmreb  anbaffecb,  rtjcyfaib,  ©ibeon 
tlje  fonne  of  3Joaftj  ijartj  Done  rtjis 
tljtng. 

30  XDcntDcmmoftDeritiefaibbn; 
to3Foafb,  2iS?tngouttbyfonnc,tDatDc 
map  Dec :  bctaufc  be  Dart)  call  bolbnc  rtjc 
altar  of  Baal,  an t>  bctaufc  Dec  Datljtut 
bolbnc  tDc  grouc  tljat  was  by  it. 

31 3lnb  3Joafb  faib  bnto  all  tljat  ftoob 
agamft  Dun ,  statu  ye  plcaoe  fo*  Baal  * 
lbtii  ye  fauc  Dim  <  l)c  tDat  ibtll  plcab  fo? 
Dun,  let  Dim  bcputtobeatDlbDtlcltitis 
vet  morning  ufljc  be  a  gob,let  Dim  pleab 
fo:  Dimfclfe,  bctaufc  one  ijartj  tall  boibn 
Ijis  altar. 

31  XDcrcfojcon  rtjat  bayDcccailcb 
Dun  gicrubbaal ,  faying ,  ?Lct  Baal 
plcab  agamft  Dun ,  becaufe  hee  DatD 
tlj:oibcn  bolbnc  Dis  altar. 

33  C^Dcnautbc  ^ibianitcs,  anb 
the  3tmaicfeitcs,  anb  rt)c  cpilbjcn  of  tDc 
i£  aft  lbcr  c  gatDcrcb  togctber  ,ano  lbcnt 
oucr ,  anb  pitcDtb  in  tlje  bailey  of  3fe^ 
reel. 

34  But  tDc  Spirit  of  tDc  1L  ©  is  © 
teamebpon  <5tbcon,  anb  Dce'blctbea 
trumpet,  anb  3lbic5cr  tmas  gatDcrcb 
after  Dim. 

35  ^nb  Dc fent meflcngers  rtttonglj' 
outaIlC0anafjrcD,lbbo  alfo  lbasgartjc; 
rtb  after  Dun,  anb  Dec  fent  meffengers 
bnto  3tft)cr,  anb  bnto  zebulun,  anb 
bnto  jfJapIjtali,  anb  rtjcy  tame bp  to 
mcctctbem. 

36  canbGibcon  faib  bnto  (5ob,3Jf 
tDou  ibtlt  fauc  3iftael  by  mine  Danb,  as 
tbouDallfaib, 

37  Bcboibc ,  3  Mil  put  a  fleece  of 
\booll  in  tDc  floo?c:and  if  tl)c  bcaib  be  on 
tbeflcctc  oncly,  anb  it  bee  bnc  bpon  all 
tDc  cartD  befide,  tDcn  fljauU  ftnoib  tljat 
tDou  lbiit  fauc  3Jfraci  by  my  Ijanbc,  as 
tDouDaltfaib. 

38  %\\D  it  ibas  fo :  fo?  De  rofc  bp  car* 
ly  ontbcmojroib,  anb  tDmft  tDe  fleece 
togctDcr,anb  llmngcb  tbcbeaiboutof 
rlje  fleece,  a  boiblc  full  of  lbatcr. 

39  3lnbGibconfaibbnto<5ob,*!Lct 
not  rtnnc  anger  be  Dote  agamft  me,  ano 
Hibill  fpcaUc  but  tins  once:  JUt  mcc 
p:oouc,  31  pjay  tDcc,  but  tins  once  IbitD 
tbcflcccc.lLctitnclbbcDnconclybpon 
tDc  fleece,  anb  bpon  all  tDc  grounb  let 
tbcrcfctbcaib. 


40  3nb  d5ob  bibfo  tDat  nigDt:  fo; 
it  ibas  one  bpon  die  fleece  onely ,  anb 
rtjcrelbasbeaib  on  an  tlje  grounb. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  Gideons  armie  of  twoandthirtiethoufandis 
brought  to  three  hundred.  9  He  is  encoura- 
ged by  the  dreame  and  interpretation  of  the 
barley  cake.  \6  His  ftratageme  of  trumpets 
andlampes  in  pitchers.  14  The  Ephraimites 
take  Oreb  and  Zeeb. 

'$en3Icrubbaal(ibbois 
«£  <5ibcon)anoailtDcpcoplc 
gfia  tljat  iberc  rbirtj  Dim,  rofc 
Sl\  bpearcly,  anb  pitcDcb  be; 
J^  fibc  tDcibeliof  l?aroo :  fo 
tljat  tlje  Doftc  of  rtjc  Q9i0ianites  iberc 
ontljc/i2o?tD  bbeof  tljcm  by  rtjeijillof 
S9o?cD,  in  rtic  bailey. 

z  3lnb  tlje  %o  is  Dfaib  bnto  <5tbe; 
on,  Xbcpcoplc  rtjat  arc  lbirtuDce,  are 
too  many  fo?  me  to  giue  rtje  Q3ibiamtcs 
into  trjeir  Danbcs,  left  Jfraci  baunt 
tDcmfelucsagatnftmec,  faymg,  S^ine 
oibncDanbljartjfaucbme. 

3  Ji3oib  tbercfojc  go  to ,  pjortaimc 
tntDeearesofrtjcpeople,faymg,*D3Do 
foeucr  isfearcfull  anb  afraib,  let  Dun  re* 
tume  anb  bepart  earely  from  mount 
©ileao :  anb  rtjercreturncb  of  tlje  pco= 
plctttienticano  tibo  rtjoufanb,  s  rtjerc 
remaincb  ten  tDoufanb. 

4  3nb  tDe  !L©K©ratb  bnto  Gibe- 
on,XDcpeopleaieyettoomany:  bnng 
tDem  bolbnc  bnto  tDc  lbater,anb  3  um 
tncrtjcmfo:rtjectDcrc:  anb  ttftjaiibce 
tbatof  lbbonie  3J  fay  bnto  rtjccXDis 
fbailgoc  rbirt)  tDec,  tDe  fame  fbail  goe 
tbirtj  tDcc:  anb  ofmljomfoeuer  3  fay 
bnto  tljccXDts  ft)al  notgocttmlj  tljcc, 
ttjcfamcfliaiinotgoe. 

5  £>o  De  b?ougDtbonjncrtjcpcople 
bnto  tDc  lbatcr :  anb  tDe  %  ©  is  jd  fayb 
bnto  Gtbcon,  Cucry  one  tljat  lappctlj 
of  tDc  lbatcr  ibttDDiS  tongue  as  a  bog 
lappctD,  Dim  ftjait  tDou  fet  by  Dimfclfe, 
Ubcibifc  eucry  one  tDat  boibertj  bolbnc 
bponDisbnecsto  bjinbe. 

6  2inb  rtjc  number  of  tlj  em  tljat  lap« 
peb  putting  ttjctr  Danb  to  tDctrmoutD, 
iberc  tDiccDunb^cb  men:  but  all  rtjereft 
of  rtjc  people  boibcb  bolbnc  bpon  rtjeir 
fences  to  biinfec  lbatcr. 

7  3lnb  rtjc  %  ®  is  jd  faib  bnto  <BU 
bcon ,  By  tDc  tljzcc  Ijunbzcb  men  tDat 
lappcb,ibiU3lfaucyou,anDbcltucrtDc 
©tbianites  into  tl)ine  Danb :  anb  let  all 
tDc  other  people  goe  eucry  man  bnto  D«s 
place. 

8S>0 


*Dcut.io8 


A dreame  declared.    Chap.vij. 


Midiandeftroyed. 


\\Ortrankff 
trffme. 

Chtp.6. 
J3- 


\Hehr.the 

breaking 

thereof. 


\Hibr. 

trumpets  in 
the  hand  of 
all  of  them. 
lOrffirt- 
brands:  or 
torchet. 


8  $>o  the  people  toofec  tnctuals  in 
their  hanb.anb  their  trumpets  rant)  he 
Cmtau  the  reft  of^jfrael,  cuecpntanW^ 
to  his  tent ,  auD  retemeb  ttjofe  thr« 
hunbrebmen:anb  the  hoftcof  fi]9tbtan 
tbas  beneath  him  in  the  Dalle?. 

9  C  3ud  it  tame  to  paffe  the  fame 
night ,  that  the  %  o  a  jd  faro  bnto 
him ,  strife ,  get  thee  bourne  bnto  the 
hoftc,  for  3  l>auc  bcliueteb  it  into  thme 
hanb. 

io  But  tf  thou  fearc  to  goe  ootbne, 
goc  thou  With  0hurah  tl)p  feruant 
bourne  to  the  hofte. 

1 1  Slno  thou  fhalt  heare  tbhat  tftrp 
far,  ano  aftcrluarb  fhail  thme  hanbes 
befteengthenebto  goeoolbnebntothe 
hofte.  %l)tn  Ibent  bee  bolbne ,  ttritb 
^burab  his  fetuant,  tonto  the  outfibe 
of  tbe||armet)  men ,  that  Vbcre  in  the 
Dofte. 

n  2nb  the  fl0iDianftes,  ant)  the  ^ 
maleUitcs,  ano  *ail  the  tbilbrcn  of  the 
ea&,  lav  along  tn  tbeDallevliftegtafc 
hoppers  for  mttltitube ,  anb  their  ta* 
mcls  Jbere  tbitbout  number ,  as  the 
fanD  bp  tbe£>ea  fibe  for  multttube. 

ij  3no  Sbben  (Sibeon  tbas  tome, 
bcholbe,  there  ruasa  man  tbattolbea 
brcametmto  bisfellolb,  anb  fapb,  26e< 
bolt) ,  3  meamcb  a  breame,  anb  loe,  a 
tafee  of  25artev  breab  tumbleb  into 
the  heftc  of  fipibian,  anb  tame  bntoa 
tent,  anbfmote  it  that  it  fell,  anb  otter* 
turneb  it,  that  the  tent  lap  along. 

i+.  3nb  Dis  fciioin  antroereo ,  anb 
faib,Xbis  is  nothing  els  faue  the  ftuorb 
of  (Sibcon  tbefonne  of  Stoafl) ,  aman 
of  3Jfrael :  for  into  bis  hanb  hath  ®ob 
Dcliucteb  £0tbian,anb  allthehofte. 

15  C2mbitH)asfo,rbheu  ©iDeon 
hcarb  the  telling  of  the  breame ,  anb 
t  the  interpretation  thereof ,  that  hec 
tt)orflnppcb,  anb  returneb  into  the  holt 
of  3Jftacl ,  anb  fayb ,  strife ,  for  the 
ILsd  a  ©hat!)  beltucrebinto  pour banb 
theholtof^ibian. 

i6  ^nb  he  biuibcb  the tbrccbunbreb 
men  into  three  companies,  anb  bee  put 
at  trumpet  in  cuerp  mans  hanb,  tbith 
empty  pitchers ,  anb  ||  lampes  ttutbm 
the  pitchers, 

17  3nbbcefaib  tmto  them ,  liooUe 
onmee ,  anb  boc  iifeOPife  ■,  anb  bcholbe, 
lWhen  3  come  to  the  outfibe  of  the 
eampe,ttu>llbetbatas3iboc,fofball 
pctsoe. 

is  UDbcn  3  blom  ttntb  a  trumpet, 
3  anu  all  that  are  Unth  mec,thcn  blolb 


ye  the  trumpets  alfo  on  cuerp  uoe  of  all 
the  tampe ,  anb  fap ,  The  lWd  of  the 
%  o  is  e>  ,  ano  of  ©ibeon. 

19  CC  £>o  oibcon  ant)  the  hunbreb 
men  that  rbere  linrh  htm,  came  bnto 
the  outubeof  the  tampe,  in  the  begin 
ntng  of  the  mCbblc  ibatcb,  ano  the?  hab 
but  nevbly  tetthc  rbatth,  anb  thep  bletb 
the  trumpets,  anb  brake  the  pitchers 
tbattbcremtbeirbanbs. 

io  3nb  the  three  tompames  blerb 
the  trumpets,  anb  braae  the  pitchers, 
anb  helb  the  lampes  in  their  left  hanbs, 
anb  the  trumpets  in  their  right  hanbs 
to  blott)  withaii :  anb  the?  trpeb ,  %tyt 
uuorb  oftheH«!)K©,anbof  ©ibeon. 

xi  3nb  the?  ftoob  euerpman  inbts 
place,  rounb  about  the  tampe :  anb  all 
the  holt  ranne,anb  trieb,anb  fleb. 

xx  %xto  the  three  hunbreb  bletb  the 
trumpets,  anb  *the?L©M©  feteuerp 
mans  fioorb  agamft  his  fellovb ,  cuen 
throughout  all  the  holt :  anb  the  holt 
fleb  to  25cth-ft)tttah,||  in  Zererath.anb 
totlie  tborbctof  3bel  ^eholah,nnto 
Xabbath. 

23  3tnbthemenof^fraeIgathereb 
themfelues  together  out  of  i3aphta^ 
li,anb  out  of  ^fljet ,  anb  out  of  ail  £©a; 
naffeh ,  ano  purfueb  after  the  2&m 
anites. 

i+  C^nbdFibeonfentmcfTcngers 
throughout  all  mouut  eptnaim ,  fav 
ing,-  Come  bolbne  agamB  the  fi^ibi- 
anites,  anb  take  before  them  the  ita 
tets  Pnto  ffieth-barah ,  anb  Jlorban. 
Xhen  all  the  men  of  ephraim  gather 
reb  themfelues  together ,  anb  tooite 
the  luaters  Pnto  25etl)  -  baral) ,  ant) 
3forbane. 

i5  ^nb  theptoobe  'ttto  ^rintes  of 
tlieC0ibiatutcs ,  £>;eb ,  ano  zeeb  .ant) 
the?  fletb  €>reb  t>pon  the  rotfee  £>reb, 
anb  Zeeb  the?  fletb  at  the  tbinepreue 
of  zeeb ,  ano  purfueb  flJ9tbian ,  anb 
brought  the  heatjs  of  jDrcb  anb  Zeeb, 
to  0ibcou  on  the  other  &oc35o:bau. 

CHAP.   VII r. 

i  Gideon  pacifieth  the  Ephrafniites.  4  Succoth 
and  Penuel  refufe  to relieue  Gideons  armv. 
10  Zcbah  and  Zalmunna  are  taken.  1;  Suc- 
coch  and  Penuel  are  deftroyed.  17  Gideon 
reuengeth  his  brethrensdeath  on  Zcbah  and 
Zalmunna.  it.  Hec  refulcth  goucrnment. 
14  His  Ephodcaufe  of  Idolatry.  18  Midian 
fubdued.  19  Gideons  children,  and  death. 
33   The  Ifraelites  idolatry ,  and  ingratitude. 

Z  ?  3Jnb 


•Efay?.4. 


\Or,to- 
t  HdrAf. 


•PlV.gj. 
ll  cfa.10, 
16. 


Zebahand 


Iud 


cs. 


Zal 


munnanaine. 


a 


tktng\$thlf, 
thonhill 
done  ZTjro 


t  «•*>■. 


}  Hrfj/^n/. 


\H<b.lhrcP, 


\,Ortanhi<n- 
drelbnnd 
twenty  thou- 
fund,  entry 
one  dretveim 
*Jjrord. 


t  Hcb.terrt- 
fied. 


0b  the  men  of  cphzatm 
fain  bnto  him ,  f  tohy  haft 
thoufcrttcb  ds  thus,  that 
thou  callebfltbs  not  rohcn 
thou  rbcntcft  to  fight 
VUitl)  t\)t  40ibtanitcs  <  3utb  they  btb 
chibelbithhimt  fljarpely. 

2  3tno  hefatb  Ditto  them.uahathauc 
35  bone  noro  m  companion  of  von  <  3is 
not  tl)c  gleaning  of  tf)c  grapes  of  €-■ 
phmim  better  then  the  bintagc  of^bie- 
5cr< 

j  <5od  hath  bciiucrcb  into  your 
ftattDs  the  pnttecs  of  £0ibian,£>2cb  anD 
zeeb :  anb  lDnatiDas  35  aw*  to  doc  tn 
tompanfon  of  you?  then  their  t  anger 
mas  abatcD  toibarb  him,  Vbhctt  he  Dab 
faib  that. 

4  C  5tnD  OiDcon  tame  to  3teban, 
andpaffcboucr,hcc,  anb the  twee  Dun* 
D:cD  men  that  were  mth  Dim,  faint,  vet 

purflling  them. 

5  3lnbDcfaiDbntotDcnicnof £>\\t 
cotl),  (Sine,  35 PJay  yotUoaucs  of  tycab 
bntotDepeoplctDatfolloibme,fo2tDcy 
bee  faint,  anb 5  am purfuing  after  Zt; 
bah  anD  zaimunna,  Rings  of  93tbian. 

6  C  3lnD  tfje  p;mues  of  £>ttccoth 
faib,  3lre  the  Ijanbs  of  zcbaD  anb  zafc 
munna  ttolb  in  thine  Danbs,  tljat  tUcc 
fljoulb  gmc  teeab  bnto  tltinc  armie  < 

7  3Mb <3iDeonfaib/£Dcrfo2CYbDcn 
the  %o  as  ©hath  bciiucrcb  zebah  anb 
zaimunna  into  nunc  lianb,tncn35  ibtl 
ttearc  vonr  flem  ibitl)tl)etl)o;nes  of  tl;c 
tbilberueflc,  anblbtthbncrs. 

8  C  3ltib  he  lbcntbp  thence  to  pe« 
uuel  ,anb  fpahc  bnto  them  lifeclWfc:  anb 
the  men  of  #cnuel  anfrocrcb  him,  as 
tljc  men  of  £>uttoth  Dab  anfincrcD  Dint. 

9  3Cnb  Dc  fpaltc  alfo  bnto  the  men  of 
0cmtcl,faying,ODhen3Fcomcagautem 
peace,  11  ui(llbjeafteboU)ncthistott»2c. 

io  C  iSotb  zebah  anD  zaimunna 
were  in  i&arBoi,  anb  their  ftottcs  ibtth 
them,  about fiftcmctDoufanbmcn ,  all 
that  Vbcr  c  left  of  all  the  holf  s  of  the  thifc 
bzen  of  the  <£aft :  fo:  there  fell  ]  an  Dun* 
bzcb  anD  tiDenttc  tI;oufaub  men  that 
b;cibfiuo2D. 

u  M  3uD  GiDeon  lbent  Dp  by  the 
may  of  themthatDttielttu  tents,onthe 
eatt  of  i3obah ,  anb  3Jogbchah ,  anD 
fmotc  the  holt :  foz  the  holt  mas  fecurc. 

ii  3ltiDtt)hcu  zebah  anD  zalmuiv 
na  fleb,  he  purfueb  after  them,  anb  toolt 
the  tlbo  Kings  of  *J0;bian,  Zebah,  anb 
zaimunna ,  $  t  Difcomfiteb  all  the  holf. 

ij  C3(nb<i5ibeouthefonneof3oafl) 


rcturneb  from  battel  before  the  £>unnc 
tbasbp, 

14.  3nD  taught  a  yong  man  of  tnc 
men  of  £>uccoth,  anb  cnquircD  of  him : 
anDhctDcfcnbcb  bnto  htm  the  pnnccs 
of  £>uccotD  anb  the  elbers  thcrcof,ctten 
tl);ecfco?c  anb  fcuctttccnemen. 

15  3tnbhecamcbntothcmcnof5)uc; 
corl),anbfatb,2Scholb  zebaljanb  zal= 
mttntta,  lbith  ttthom  ye  bib  bpbzaib  me, 
faying,  3irc  thehattbes  of  Zebah  anb 
zaimunna  nou.itnthinc!)attb,thatftie 
(houlb  giuc  b.zcab  bnto  thy  men  that  are 
Vbcaric* 

i6  5{nb  Ijcc  toone  the  Clbcrsof  the 
cttie,  anb  thomesof  the  ibtlbernes,anb 
biters,  anb  tbith  them  Ijcc  f  taught  the 
mcnof&ticcoth. 

17  ^nb  he  beat  bolbnc  the  toU)?e  of 
*  0cnucl,  anb  OcVb  the  men  of  the  atic. 

18  C  Xljcn  faib  he  bnto  zebah  anb 
zaimunna,  i©Dat  tnancr  of  men  rbcre 
they  lDhom  ye  (leib  at  Xabo?^nb  they 
anlnjcrcb,  3is  thou  art,  fo  were  they,  cch 
onctrefcmblcbthc  chilb^en  of  aning. 

19  ^nbhccfatb,1Eljcylbercmyb;cj 
th?cn,  cuen  the  founcsof  my  mother: 
asthe?t€>K  ©ittteth,  if  ycc  habfaucb 
them  aiiue,  3I  lDottlb  not  nay  you. 

io  ^nbhcfatbbnto3Jcthcr|)isfir(t 
bo?nt,?Hp,and  flay  them :  butthcyottth 
bjcib  not  his  froo?b :  fo?  he  fcarcb,  be- 
caufeljc  ibasyctayouth. 

xi  3Ehcn  zebah  anb  zaimunna 
faib,  Btfc  tl)ou,  anb  faiibpon  bs :  fo:  as 
the  matt  is,  fo  isliisftrcttgth.  3lttb  C5ibc 
on  arofe,  anb  flettic  zebah  anb  zal 
munna,  ^tooac  amay  the  ||  ojnamntts 
that  were  on  their  camels  necUcs. 

i%  C  £hen  tljcmcn  of 3fracl  faibe 
bnto  <3tbcon,3Sttlc  thou  otter  Ds,  both 
thou,  anb  thy  fonttc,  $  thy  fonnesfonne 
alfo :  foz  thou  haftDclttter  eb  bs  from  the 
hanbof  £0iDiau. 

2  j  ^nb  <5ibcon  faib  bnto  them ,  3 
mill  not  rule  oucr  you,  neither  fljall  my 
fonncrule  oner  you:  t!je1Lo«jDfl;all 
rule  ouer  you. 

24.  C2(nb  ©tbconfaib  bnto  them, 
3  iDoulb  befire  a  rcqucft  of  you ,  that 
youlboulb  gutemceuery  man  the  care- 
rings  of  hispjay.  fox  tljty  Dab  golbctt 
care -rings,  becaufc  they  Iberc  Jfl)- 
maclites. 

25  3ttb  they  anfincrcb,  tor  nmivbtl 
lingly  giuc  them.  3nb  tliey  fpjeaba  gar 
ment,  anb  bib  caft  therein,  cuery  matt 
the  ear  crtngs  of  his  p2ay. 

26  3inD  ttje  rbcight  of  the  goioen 

eare- 


\Hci 


f  Heb.  made 


*  I.  King.  1 3 
25- 


\Heb.aceor* 
formtfi-c. 


\  Or,  oma-    I 
mcntsltlte 

themsont. 


Gideon  dieth. 


Ch 


ap.ix. 


loth; 


arris  parable 


i 


bi< 


|  Or,  fimtl 

tewch. 


\  Heb.gotng 
out  efhu 
thigh. 


\Htt.ftt. 


care-rings  that  hee  tcQuctrcb,  tbas  a 
thoufanb  anbfcutnhunbjcb  fhekeis  of 
golb,  beGDe  ornaments,  anb  ||  collars, 
^purple  raiment  tl)at  was  on  the  Rings 
of  $Hbian,  anD  bcubc  the  chauicsthat 
were  about  their  camels  nedts. 

17  ^nD  d5iDcon  maDc  an  CphoD 
thereof,  anD  put  it  in  Ins  titft ,  euen  ui 
£»phial) :  anD  all  3Jfrael  mentthtfher 
a  itohoaug  after  it ;  ibhich  thmg  became 
afnatetonto  <5ibton,anbto  hishouft. 

18  C1£hus  ibas  S^tbtan  fubbueb 
before  the  crjtlt»<tcm  of  3fracl,  fo  that 
they  Itftebtopthcirheabsnomotf  :anb 
the  countrcy  ibas  m  ennctneffc  routfte 
yecrcs,in  thebayesof  <J5ibeon. 

i9  C3nb  3Jcrabbaai  the  fonnc  of 
3JoaQ)itoent(jbitoeltmhisoitonehoufe. 

30  ^nb  0tbeon  hab  thjceftojtc  anb 
ten  fonnes f  of  his  boby  begotten :  fo? 
hehabinanyibiues. 

31  £nb  \)is  concubine  that  tbas  in 
3>hechem .  A)"  &fo  bare  tJttn  afbnnc, 
itohoft  name  he  t  calleb  aounelech. 

31  C3nb@ibconthcfbtincof3Joath 
Dicd,  m  a  goobolbc  agc,anb  was  burteb 
m  the  ftpuithjc  of  3Joafh  his  father,  in 
j2Dph?ahofthc3lbt-e5titcs. 

33  3nb  it  came  to  paffe  as  foone  as 
d&Dcon  was  beab ,  tljat  the  rtjtliwcit  of 
■Jftaeltutneb  agamcanbibcntaibho 
ring  after  25aalun ,  anb  mabc  25aal- 
JScrith  their  gob. 

J4-  ^nb  the  chtlbjcn  of  3Jfracl  remenv 
bjebnot  tlje  fLam©  their  d5ob,  itoho 
Dau  beiiucrcb  them  out  of  thchanbsof 
all  their  enemies,  on  euery  Gbe: 

35  4Bcithcrmeltocbtheylilnbnet&to 
ti)t!)oiifc  of  Jcrubbaal,  namely  ©ibeon, 
accojbmg  to  all  tl)c  goobnefft  Which  he 
hab  tbeweb  tonto  31fratl. 

CHAP.    IX. 

Abimelech  by  confpiracie  with  the  Sheche- 
mites,  and  murder  of  his  brethren,  is  made 
Km".  7  lodiam  by  a  parable  rebuketh  them 
and  foretelleth  their  ruine.  it  Gaal  confpi- 
reth  with  die  Shechemites  againft  him.  30 
Zebu]  reuealeth  it.  34  Abimelech  ouer- 
commeth  them ,  and  foweth  the  citie  with 
fait.  46  Hecburneihtheholde  of  thegod 
Beridi.  50  AtThebezheisflainebyapiece 
of  a  milftone.   56  Iothams  cuife  is  fulfilled. 

*a«fc^g£^)  iI5b  3lbtmclech  the  fbnnc 
%J»A<M  of  3jerubbaal  went  to 
^%A§4  ^>l)«l)cm,  tonto  his  mo* 
!m$l  rt'ers  tyt&frtn ,  anb  com- ! 
-tW^tnuucb  With  them,  aubl 


With  all  ttjc  family  of  tt»e  haute  of  his 
mothers  fathcr,fayutg; 

1  £>pea&e,3Jp:ay  you,  in  the  cares 
ofallthcmenofs>hechem;  t^etber 
isomer  fouyou,  cither  that  all  the 
Cannes  of  ^erubbaal  (Which  arc  th?ee< 
fcojeanD  tenpetfons)reignc  oucryou, 
0?  that  one  retgncouer  your  Yemeni; 
bcr  alfo ,  that  31  am  your  bone,  anb 
your  flcfl). 

3  3nD  his  mothers  tyctfnen  fpafte 
of  him  in  the  ear  cs  of  all  the  men  of 
£>h«bem,  all  theft  wotfies,  anb  their 
hearts  inclines  tot  follow  5tWracleth« 
fo?  they  Caib ,  l^cisoirr  brother. 

4  3tnb  they  gauc  him  th?eefco?e 
anb  tcnpiecesof  filuer ,  outof  thchouft 
ofiSaai-Benth,  Vbhereibtth  5lbime? 
lech  hirebbainefjUghtpcrCons,  tbhich 
folloltoeb  htm. 

5  ^nb  het  ibtnt  tmto  his  fathers 
houfc  at  ^Dph^7  anb  fletbe  his  b?c^ 
th?en  the  fonnes  of  3Jenibbaai,  bona; 
thtfeftoite  anbtennepcrfbns,bpon  one 
Hone :  nottbtthttanbing,  yet  Gotham 
thtyoungeft  fonne  of  ^jcrnbbaai  ibas 
left;fo?hfhtbhtmfelft. 

6  ^tnbailthcmcnof^hcthemga? 
thcrcD  together,  anb  all  the  houft  of 
^illo,anb  tbent,  anb  maoc  ^bimclcrh 
Buig,  ||  by  the  piainc  of  tljc  pillar  that 
wasut5>h*chem. 

7  C^nb  iphen  they  tolb  it  to  %& 
tham ,  ht  Xbrrtt  anb  ftoob  in  the  top  of 
mount  C5ert3im,  anb  lift  top  his  toouc, 
anb  crleb,  anb  faib  tonto  them,  J?earfttn 
tonto  mec ,  you  men  of  £>hcchem ,  that 
<5ob  may  hearken  tonto  you. 

3  Xhetreesibcntfoo?thonatimc 
to  annotntaiRingotterthem,anbthey 
faib  tonto the£>lutetrec,  Bcignc  thou 
ouertos. 

9  25ut  the  €)liue  tree  fatbc  tonto 
them,  dhoulb  3 leaue  my  fatncfTc, 
ltohcreltotth  by  mec  they  honour  (Sob 
anb  man ,  anb  J  goe  to  bee  pjomoteb  o= 
u*r  the  trees* 

io  ^nb  the  trees  faib  to  the  jfiggc 
tree,  Come  thou,anb  rtignc  oucr  tos. 

ii  25ut  the  5Ftgge  tree  faibe  tonto 
them,  ^>houlb  3  fo?faltc  my  fracetci 
neffe,  anb  my  goob  fruit,  anb  goe  to  be 
pjomotcb  ouer  the  trees* 

ii  Xhett  faibe  the  trees  tonto  the 
<llme,  Comcthou,  and  rcigneouer  tos. 

13  ^nb  tlje  Zlmt  fatb  tonto  them, 
5>houlb  3J  leaue  my  mint,  Ttohirh  chea^ 
ren)<l5obanbman,  anbgoc  tobeep?o- 
moteb  ouer  the  trees  * 
14  Xhen 


\Hct  irhtt 
u  g*od?wbc- 


Htb.tfttr. 


[  Orfytht 
eke  oftbc 
ptJltr.  See 

:6. 


Or,  goeVf 

nddcmnc 

for  other 
trees. 


Gaalconfpircth Iudges.     againft  Abimelech: 


\Or.thjtlt. 


f  Hrt.CAjl 
halifr. 


\Hrbr. 
jlrcnJtlirncd 
huhjntbti 
kill. 


14  Xbcu  fail)  all  tbetrccs  tonto  the 
|]  25?amUlc,  Come  thou,  anoreignco; 
uctbs. 

15  2InD  the  gamble  faib  bnto  the 
trees,  3Jf  mtructhye  anoint  me Bmg 
oucr  you,  then  come, » »d  put  pout  ttuft 
m  my  CbaDotti :  anDif  not,  Ictntccome 
out  of  the  gamble ,  aim  bcuoute  the 
Cetiars  of  Hctmnott. 

i6  jSoibtbcrcfozcifyccbaucDonc 
truely  anD  fmccrcly ,  m  that  pec  Ijaue 
maDe  3bimcletb  Km,  anD  if  pee  banc 
bcatt  Vdell  voixl)  3icrubbaai,  anD  his 
Doiu"c,  anb  hane  bone  bnto  himatcoib 
bmgto  the  Defeating  of  bis  banDS : 

17  (if ot  my  father  fought  fo?  you, 
aub  '  abuemurtbljts  Itfcfarre,  anDDc* 
UuereD  you  out  of  the  hanD  of  £j3iDian : 

18  3lnD  yec  are  nfen  top  againft  my 
fatbersboufc  this  bay,  anDbauefiame 
bisfonnts ,  troecftojc  auDten  pcrfons, 
bpononcftoncanbhauemaDe^bimc* 
lech  tbefonucofbismaiDfetuant,  lung 
ouer  the  men  of  £>bccbcm,  betaufe  he  is 
your  toother.) 

19  3jfyccrl)cnfjaucbcalttruclyanb 
fituerely  U)itb3toubbaai,anb  ttutb  his 
boufc  this  bay,  then  rcloyce  ycc  ut&bi- 
meletl) ,  aub  let  him  alfo  rcioytc  in  you. 

io  26utifnot,  letfirecomeoutftom 
3bimctcrh,  aub  bcuourc  the  men  of 
^hcthent  anb  the  houfc  of  $)lllo :  anb 
let  fire  come  out  from  the  men  of&hc 
chein.anD  from  tlic  houfc  of^tllo,  anD 
bcuourc  3bunclcch. 

21  3mb3IotbamranaU)ay,anDfleD, 
anbibcntto  25ccr ,  anD  Dlbclt  there  fo? 
fearc  of  3tbunclcch  his  toother. 

11  Cnahcn ^ibimelctl)  hab  rcigncD 
tljicc  y ceres  oucr  'Jfracl, 

13  XhcnCob  fent  an  ctullfpititbe' 
tfteenc  Abimelech  ?  the  men  of  £>bc> 
them  :  anD  the  men  of  Smecbem  Dealt 
trcaebcroufly  ttutb  Abimelech: 

1+  n:hat  the  crucitte  bone  to  the 
tineefcoic  anb  ten  fonnes  of  Jlerubbaai 
might  tome,  aub  their  bloob  be  laib  bp- 
on  3b;mclccb  their  toother  which  Hew 
them,  anb  bpon  the  men  of  £>bctbcm 
Which  f  atDtD  him  m  tljjc  lulling  of  his 
toethjen. 

15  3nb  the  men  of  Sbeebem  ret  Iv 
ers  m  lbaitfo:  him  m  the  toppc  of  the 
mountames,  anb  theyrobbeb  all  that 
tame  along  that  way  by  them :  anb  u 
wastolD  Abimelech. 

16  3nD  Gaal  the  fonnc  of  Cbcb  tame 
ttuth  his  toctlncn ,  a\\h  Vbeut  ouer  to 
£>hctbcm :  anb  the  men  of  Shechem 


put  their  tonfiDcucc  in  him 

27  2nD  they  Went  out  into  the  fielDs, 
anD  gathcrcD  their  tomeyarbs  ,  anD 
troDc  the  grapes,  anD  maDe  ||  mer ry ,  anD 
went  into  the  houfc  of  their  goo,  anD 
DiDeateanD  Dnnae,  anD  turfeD^btme- 
lecb. 

2s  ^nD(5aaithefonneof€bcbfaiD, 
nDfjo  is  Abimelech,  anb  Who  is&hc- 
thcni.thatrbcfljoulbferuchim^snot 
he  the  fonnc  of  3Jcrubbaai  t  anb  Zebul 
bis  officer  srferue  the  men  of  tyamoj  the 
father  of  £>bcchcm :  f°?  tttby  fboulD  ibc 
fetuehim? 

19  3nb  woulD  to  C5oD  this  people 
Were  UtiDcr  my  hanD ;  then  WoulD  3  w* 
moue  abimelccb.  3nD  he  faiD  to  ISbfe 
melcch,3lncccafe  thine  armt'c  anb  come 
out. 

30  C3mb  When  Zebul  the  ruler  of 
the  title  bearD  the  wo;Des  of  ©aaltbe 
fonnc  of  ebeb,hisanget  Was  ||Uinbleb. 

31  ^nbhefmtmeffcngcrsbnto^bi' 
meleehtp2iiuiy,  faying,  zseholb,  <saal 
thcfonncofcbeb,  anDhistoetlwn.be 
tome  to  5>hcebem,  anb  beholD,tbcy  foi^ 
tifie  tl;c  ettteagainft  thee. 

31  ii5oVbtherefo2Cbp  by  night,  thou 
anb  the  people  that  is  ttuth  thee,  anb  lie 
uiwattinthcficlD. 

33  3htD  it  fbaibcthat  m  the  morning 
affoonc  astbeSmuneisbp,  tboufbait 
rife  earcly,  anb  fct  bpon  theeltie:  anb 
beholD,  when  he  anD  the  people  that  is 
with  him,  come  out  againft  thee,  then 
mayeftthouDoeto  them  t  as  thou  (bait 
finDcottafion. 

34-  C^nD  Abimelech  rofc  Dp,  anb 
all  the  people  that  lbcrc  Wttb  him,  by 
night,  anb  they  laib  wait  againft  3>he s 
chemin  fourc  companies. 

35  5lnD  ©aaltbc  fonnc  of  CbebiDent 
out,  anb  ftoob  m  tlje  entring  of  the  gate 
of  the  erne:  anb  Abimelech  roftbp,anb 
the  people  that  tbere  ibith  him,from  ly- 
ing in  ibaitc. 

36  3lnD  lbhcn  (Saal  faib  the  people, 
he  faiD  to  Zebul,  23ebolD ,  there  tome 
people Dotbne fro  the  topof  themouit' 
tames.  3uid  zebul  faibe  bnto  htm, 
Xhou  feeft  the  fbaboib  of  tljc  moun- 
tames,  as  if  they  were  men. 

37  3tnb  C5aal fpabc  againcanb  faiD, 
3>cc,  there  ccmc  people  Dolune  by  the 
t  nubble  of  the  laub,  anb  another  torn; 
pantc  come  along  by  the  piainc  of  ||  fi^e- 
oncnun. 

38  Xhen  faib  Zebul  bnto  hhn,ie>btt e 
tsuouj  tljy  mouth,  whcrwith  thoufaibft, 

DDho 


Or,fiu£t, 


'|  Orjtote. 

\Hekctaf- 
titijorto 

Tcr/rMb. 


\  Hchr.to 
t hint  hand 

/i*/tfifj. 


faretm  cf 


He  is  ouercome.         Chap.x.       Abimelech  flaine.j 


t  Kit.  J 


naijots  Sibimelcrf),  tljat  Jbee  fljoulb 
feructjum  iJsnottljiSfljepeopletljat 
tljouljaft  bcTptfeb*  <5qc  out,  3  P^P 
nolb,  anb  figljt;  Voitfy  tljem. 

39  3lnb  <5aal  metit  out  bcfozc  tlje 
men  of  S>Decljcm ,  anb  fougljtruitlj  & 
bimelcclj. 

40  3mb:8bimclecl)  cljafcbljim,  anb 
Ijcc  flebbe  before  Ijtrn ,  anb  many  Vottt 
ouerrtjJoJbenanoibounbeb,  cuenbnto 
tlje  cutting  of  tljc  gate. 

41  3mb  ^bimcleclj  Mbclt  at  ^ru* 
mah :  anb  Ztbul  thuift  out  (5aai  anb 
Ijts  b;etl)jm,tt)at  tljcy  fljoulb  not  bibell 
tn£>ljccljcm. 

41  3mbttcamctopau"contJ)cmo^ 
rotb,tljat  tljc  people  lbcnt  out  into  tljc 
ficlb,  anb  tfjey  tolbc  StWmeiecf). 

4  j  3lnb  tie  toofcc  tlje  people,  anb  nv 
uibcbtljcm  into  tmcc  tompanics,  anb 
latbe ibaitc in t lie  ficio ,  anb  10 0 net), anb 
bcljolb,tljcpeopleiberc  conic  fo:tlj  out 
of  tlje  titie,  anb  Ijc  rofc  bp  agamft  tljcm, 
anb  fmotc  tljcm. 

44  2nb  3bimclcel),anb  the  tontpa- 
nic  toatwas  lbitljljtm.rulbebfozibarb, 
anb  ftoob  in  tljc  cutting  of  tljc  gate  of 
tljc  title:  anb  ttjctlbo  other  companies 
ranne  bpon  all  the  people  tljat  were  in 
tljcficlbs,anbflcib  tljcm. 

45  2lnb  3lbimcleclj  fougljt  againft 
tlje  tine  ail  tljat  bay ,  anb  ijc  toone  tlje 
titie,  anb  fletbe  tljc  people  tljat  ibas 
tijerctn,  anb  beat  bolbnc  tlje  titie,  anb 
foibcbitibitljfalt. 

46  C  3mu  tbljcn  all  tlje  men  of  tfjc 
toibct  of  £>ijccljcm  Ijcarb  that,  tljcy  en- 
treb  into  an  holbc  of  tljc  houfe  of  tlje 
gob  Bcrttlj. 

47  anbitiLbastolb3Cbimclcclj,tf)at 
all  tljc  men  of  tljc  toib:c  of  ;§>hechcm 
tbetc  gatljcrcb  together. 

48  2lnb  3lbunclcdj  gate  hint  bp  to 
mount  zalmon,  tjee  anb  all  the  people 
tijatwere  rbithhim,  $3ftjimelcchtooHe 
an  arc  in  his  Ijanb,  anb  tut  boibne  a 
bough  from  tljc  trees,  anb  toottc  it,anb 
latbc  it  on  his  ftjoulbcr ,  anb  faib  bnto 
the  people  that  were  tbitlj  Dim ,  nahat  ye 
IjauefecnctmcboCjmafeeljaQejanbboc 

{IS  31  hauedone. 

49  3lnb  all  the  people  lifcettiife  tut 
botbnc  eucry  man  his  bouglj,  anofofc 
loibcb3lbuuclcch,anbput  tljem  to  tljc 
Ijolbc,  anb  fct  the  holbe  on  fire  bpon 
them :  fotljat  all  tljc  men  oftljctotbze 
of  ^Ijccftcnt  bicb  alfo ,  about  a  tljott* 
fanbmcnanblbomcn. 

50  c%ljcu tt)cnt3lbtmclcclj  to  %\ya 


be5,anb  encamptb  agamft  Xljcbc5,aub 
tooUeit. 

51  25ut  tljcre  ibas  a  ftrong  totb^c 
iblthmtlje  city,  anb  thither  flcb  an  tlje 
men  anb  ibomcn,anballthcyof  tl)e  ct> 
tie, anb  ftjut  it  to  them,  anb  gate  them 
Dp  rothc  top  of  ttjctoibze. 

<,%  ranb  ^bimelcclj  tame  bnto  tlje 
toibze,  anb  fougljt  agamft  ft,  anb  ibcnt 
Ijatb  bnto  the  booze  of  tljc  tovbzc,  to 
burnt  it  tbttjj  fire. 

53  3lnb  a  tcrtainc  tboman  *  taft  a 
ptetc  of  a  mtlftonc  bpon  ^bimcletljs 
Ijcab ,  anb  all  to  b?afec  Ijis  fcull. 

54  Xljmljce  tallcb  Ijaftilpbnto  tljc 
young  man  l)is  armour-bearer,  anb 
fatb  bnto  Ijtrn,  2DWU)  tljy  fibozb ,  auo 
aapmctljatmcnfaynotof  tnc ,  3libo 
man  fletbe  Jjmt :  anb  Ijtsf  young  man 
ti)mftl)imtlj2ouglj,anbljc  bicb. 

55  3tnbrbljentl)cmenof3lfraelfaU) 
tljat  3lbimclctlj  lbasbcab.tljcy  bepar- 
tebcucryman  bnto  Ijis  plate. 

56  C1Cl)us  ©ob  rcnbzcb  tlje  lbit^ 
aebnetlc  of  ^buneletf)  tbljirt)  fiff  btb 
bntoljtfi  fatljer,  m  flaying  Ijis  fcucntie 
bzctljicn. 

57  3tnb  all  tlje  cufll  of  tlje  men  of 
£>Ijccljcm,  bib  ©obrenberbpon  tljcir 
Ijcabs :  anb  bpon  tljcm  tame  tlje  turfc 
of  SJotljamtlje  fonnc  of  3lcnibbaai. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Tola  iudgethlfracl  in  Shamir.  3  Iair.whofe 
thirtie  fonnes  had  thircie  cities.  (>  The 
Philiftines  and  Ammonites  opprefTe  Ifrael. 
10  In  their  miferie,  God  iendeth  them  to 
their  falfe  gods.  15  Vpon  their  repentance 
hce  pitieth  them. 

/i5b  after  ^btmelcd)  ,tljcre 
u  arofe  to  ||  befenb  j^fracl, 
1  Xoia  tljc  fonnc  ofpualj, 
HH  tljc  fonnc  of  SDobo ,  a  man 
Mm*&&  of  3Kratljar,anbljcb\belt 
in  5>ljamir  m  mount  cpljzaim. 

1  3lnb  Ijc  iubgcb  3Jfrael  ttbeuty  anb 
tljzec  yccrcs,anbbieb  ,anb  \bas  burtcb 
m5>ljamir. 

3  C^lnb  after  Ijim  arofe  3?air  a  <Sv 
lcabite,anbtubgcb3lftacl  tujcnttc  anb 
tibo  yceres. 

4  ^nb  ijcc  Ijab  tljirtie  fonnes  tljat 
robe  on  tljitnc  aflc  -  colts, anb  tljey  ijab 
tljirtie  tittcs,  tbljitlj  arc  calico  ||  l)auotlj- 
3iair  bnto  tljis  bay ,  ibljiclj  are  in  tljc 
lanbofotlcab, 

5  ^nb  3f ate  bieb ,  anb  ibas  buneb 

in  Camon. 

c  C5(nb 


11. it. 


\0r_JiUtifr 
Hit.ftm. 


J  Or.tbc  :■,!■ 
Ugit  of  lit.' 


Ifraclpuniflied.       ^Judges,       lephthah  expelled 


•Chap.  a. 

l  I.ind  3.7, 
and  4.1  ■& 
6.1  Sc.131 

•Chap.a. 


i  Mbr. 

crnjhed. 


*Deu:.  32. 
1  £.iecciil.2i 

■5- 


\Hehr.u 

eccdmlhtne 

I  Htbr.  pads 
cffirangers 

f  Htbr.  rras 
fbortcncd. 


\Hfbr  cried 
tcetf.cr 


e  C3nD*tftecl)UD;!cnof3ifraclDtD 
ciull agamcm  tljc  fight  of  the  %  ©  is 3D, 
anb  ferucb  ffiaalim  anb  *  3fl)tarotIj, 
ant>  thcgobs  of  &yifo,  anb  thegobs  of 
zsbon ,  anbthegobs  ofi33oab,anbthc 
gobs of the  chiiozeu  of3lmmon,anb  tlic 
gobs  of  the  $hiuftmcs ,  anb  fojfooBC 
the  %  ©  is  3D,  anbferucn  not  him. 

7  3JnD  the  anger  of  the  ?L©  is  3D 
Vbasljot  agamft  3lfracl ,  anbbecfolbc 
them  mto  tljchanbsofthc^hiliftmcs, 
anb  mto  the  hanbs  of  the  rtnl&en  of 
3tinmon. 

s  3lnb  that  veretbevbereb  anb  top* 
piefTeD  rlje  rMO?cn  of  35frael:  etgiitccnc 
vecrcs ,  all  tljc  tljilbzen  of  lifrael  tljat 
ibercon  the  other  fibe3totf>an ,  in  the 
lanij  of  the  3lmo;ltes ,  ibhich  iSinGi; 
icab. 

9  s^ojeouer ,  the  tbiltyen  of  Am- 
nion paflebouer3Jo,!ban,  to  fight  alfo 
agamft  3Jubah,anb  agamft  25eniamtn, 
ano  agamft  the  boufc  of  Cpljzaim ;  fo 
thatjfracnbasfiwbtftecflcb. 

10  c  3lnb  tljc  cbilbJcn  of 3Jfrael  trfc 
co  bnto  the  %  ©  is  s>,  facing,  usee  baue 
finncb  agatnll  tbec ,  both  becaufe  Bjcc 
banc  foifafecn  our  Gob ,  anb  alfo  fcrucb 
usaaimt. 

11  3hib  the  1L©is3d  faib  into  tljc 
ebsttuen  of3Jftael,£)ibnot3  ddmerpou 
from  tljc  Cyprians ,  anbfrom  tbc3t= 
inozitcs ,  from  the  tbilbjen  of  Amnion, 
anb  from  tljc  $ljtltttincs  < 

n  %\)t  ziboutans  alfo  anb  the  %-- 
malclutcs ,  anb  tljc  fi!3aonitcsbib  op- 
pjefTc  vou,anb  vc  cricb  to  me,  anb  31  be- 
Ituercb  vou  out  of  their  nana. 

ij  *$ictvcljaucfo.2fal5cnmc, anbfer; 
ucb  otljcr  gobs :  ibbcrcfoje  3J  Mil  belt* 
uervounomozc. 

14  Go.anbtrvbntorbcgobStbbtcb 
vc  bauccbofen,  let  them bcltuervoum 
tljc  time  of  your  tribulation. 

15  C  Stub  tljc  rljtlbjen  uf gjfracl  faib 
bnto  tljc  %  ©  a  id,  tee  Ijatic  finneb.boc 
tliou  bnto  bs  ibbatfocuct  t  fecmctb 
goob  bnto  thee  ,bcliucr  bs  onclv ,  ibee 
pzav  thee,  this  bav« 

i6  2inb  tljcv  put  aibav  tbetftrangc 
gobs  from  among  tbcm,anb  fcrucb  the 
ft©  is  3D  :  anb  bis  fouleUbasgctcucb 
foifbcmifcrvofllfracl. 

17  Xljcn  the  cljilbicn  of  Simmon 
\bcrc  tgatbereb  together,  anb  cntam 
pcmuGilcab  :  anb  the  cbllbjcn  of  3Jf 
rati  affcmbicb  tbcmfclucs  together, 
anb  encampeb  m  tl9i3pclj. 

is  2inb  the  people  and  Winces  of  Gt 


icab,  faib  oncto  anotljcr ,  naljatman 
hee  tljat  mill  begin  to  fight  agamft  tljc 
cljilbjen  of  ammotti  hcfliairbcl^cab 
oucr  all  tljc  inhabitants  of  ©ilcab, 

CHAP.    XI. 

The  Coutnantbetweene  lephthah  and  the 
Gi!eadites,that hce  fhould  be theirhead.  n 
The  treaty  ot  peace  betweene  him  and  the 
Ammonites  is  in  vaine.  19  Iephthahs  vow. 
31  Hisconqueftof  the  Ammonites.  54  He 
perfbimethhis  vow  on  his  daughter. 

®u)*3Jcphthah  the  €>iic; 
abiteibas  a  mtghtic  man 
of  baiour,  anbhcibastljc 
fonnc  oft  an  harlot:  anb 
Gilcab  bcgatc3(cpljthah. 
i  2inb  (5ilcabs  ibifc  bare  btm 
foimes,anbljtsM)utcsfonncsgr:ibbp, 
anb  thev  tljzuft  out  'Jcphthah.anb  faib 
bnto  Ijtm ,  Xhou  fbait  not  mheritc  m 
our  fathers  Ijoufc,  fo?  tljouartthcfon 
ofaftrahgclboman. 

3  Xljcn  lephthah  fleb  t  from  his 
b?cth?cn,anb  blbcltmtljcianb  of  Xob : 
anb  tljcrc  iberc  gatljcrcb  bamemen  to 
3(epljthah,anbU)cntoutibithhtm. 

4-  C  3lnb  it  tame  to  paflc,  t  m  p20* 
ccftc  of  tunc ,  that  tljc  rhilb2tn  of  3hn 
monmabcibarrc  agamft  ^fracl. 

5  ^nb  it  ibas fo ,tljat ibljcn  tljc  thil^ 
b?cn  of  Amnion  mabc  ttar  agamft  3!f 
racl,  the  €ibcrsofC5iicabibciitto  fetch 
3fepljthah  out  ofthclanb  ofXob, 

6  3inb  tljcy  faib  bnto  Jcphthah, 
Comcanb  becour  Captatne ,  thatibcc 
mav  fight  ibtth  thcthtlbmi  of^mmon. 

7  3lnb  3Jcphthalj faib  bnto  tlje€i= 
bets  of  Gilcab,  S>ib  not  vc  hate  mc,anb 
erpcll  me  out  of  my  fathers  houfe^nb 
Ibljp  arc  vc  tome  bnto  mecnoiblbhen 
vcarcinbiftrcflc; 

8  3lnb  the  cibcrs  of  Gilcab  faib  bn* 
to  3Jtphtl)ah  ,  1Lhcrcfo?c ttie  tunica* 
game  to  tljcc  nolb,  that  thou  maveft  go 
rtrith  bs ,  anb  fight  agamft  tljc  chilbicu 
of  Amnion ,  anb  bee  our  hcab  oucr  all 
tljcinhabitants  ofGtlcab. 

9  3tnb  Ucphthah  faib  bnto  tlje  e\< 
bcrs  of  Gilcab  ,3Jf  vc  bung  me  home  a« 
gainc  to  fight  againft  tlje  thilbzcn  of 
3(mmon,  anb  the  1L©is3d bcliucr  them 

befo?cniC;ft)ail3Jbevour$eabf 

10  ^nbthecibcrsofGileabfaibbn' 
togiephtl)ah,Xhc|L€)is3Dtbclbitncs 
bctibecnc  bs,if  ibe  boe  not  fo  atcoibmg 
tothvvbojbs. 

11  Xhen3Jcpljtljahlbentn)irtjthe<£l' 

bcrs 


'Chap.11. 


•Hcbr.l:. 
3  7 .  calicd 
hfhte. 

\  Hchjtvo- 
m.mt.vt  har~ 
hi. 


\  Hch-.frtm 
thrfict. 


iHihr.tfltr 


t Bcbr.ii 
the  hearer 
betweene 
vi. 


lephthah  captaine.      Chap.x).  Hisraflivow. 


•Num.: 
'3- 


'Deud.y 


*Num.; 


*Num.  zi, 
1 3.  and  3  2. 

•DeBt.!. 

26. 


Decs  oft&lcab,  ants  tlje  people  mace 
DimDeabanb  captaine  oucrtljem:  anb 
3JcpDtDaDDttcccbailijisrb02DSbcfo,:c 
tljc  %  <$>  a  3&tn  i0i?pcD. 

11  CStnb^JcpDtDaljfcntmcffcngcrs 
Unto  tDc  tang  of  tfjc  cDilbicn  of  Sim 
mon,faying,S0Dat  Daft  tDou  to  do  vuttt) 
me,  tDat  tDou  art  conic  agamft  nice  to 
ngDtutmyianDt* 

13  3tno  tDe  tang  of  tljc  fymen  of 
Amnion  anfocrcb  Pnto  tDe  meffen 
gcrs  of  IJcpDtDaD;  *25ccaufe  3Jfracl 
toofec  aibaymy  lanb  Votytn  tljcp  tame 
top  out  of  €gvpt,  fromSlrnon  cucn  x>w 
to  33abbo& ,  anb  unto  3fo?ban :  noR) 
t!)etfo?e  tefto?e  tDofe  lands  agatae  pcate- 
ably. 

14  Swb^jcpDtDaDfcntnicffcngcrs 
agame  t»nto  tljc  tang  of  tDc  cDtlbjcn  of 
Simmon: 

15  Sinb  Cam  fonto  Dun ,  ITrjus  faitii 
3fepDtDaD;  *3Sfraei  tooftc  not  away 
tDe  lanb  of  £j3oab,  no?  tljc  lanoof  tDc 
ci)ilb2cn  of  Simmon: 

16  25ut  tt>Dcn  3ffrael  came  top  from 
Cgypt,  anb  ibaltab  tDjotigD  tDc  ibtl 
bcrneffc,  Pnto  tljc  rebfea,  anb  came  to 
BabcfD; 

17  1LDtu  *gifraelfcnt  meffengcts 
t>ntotDctangof<£Domfapmg,lLcti«u, 
gj  piay  tljec,  paffe  tijzougD  tDy  lanb. 
2Sut  tDc  tang  of  <£bom  iboulb  not  Dear; 
Kcnchereto :  stub  mliHcmanertDcy  fent 
bnto  tDe  tang  of  *©oab :  butljccvboulb 
not  conienc.^^Jfracl  abobe  miaabcuj. 

is  Xljen  tDcy  ibent  along  tDiougD 
tDc  ttulbernes ,  anb  compaffeb  tDe  lanb 
of  <£bom ,  anb  tDc  lanb  of  *©oab,  anD 
came  by  tDc  caftfibc  of  tDc  lanb  of  ODo^ 
;  ab ,  anb pitcDeb  on  tlje  ofljer  fibe  of  Sir* 
I  non ,  *  but  came  not  ttntDui  tDe  bojbcr 
of  fi^oab :  fo?  Simon  was  tljcboJberof 
£0oab. 

19  Smb  *  3Jfracl  fent  meffengers  \>n> 
to  £>iDon  tang  of  tDeSlmojttes,  tDc 
tang  of  J?cfl)bon ,  anb  3Jfracl  fatb  bnto 
DunJLcttospaffcnjcpitaytljcCjtDoioib 
tDy  lanb,tonto  my  place. 

to  But  £>Hjon  truftcb  not  giftael, 
to  paffe  tijwugD  tys  coaft:  bnt^iljon 
gatDereb  all  Dis  people  togcrljer ,  anb 
pitcljcb  iu^a'Daj,  anb  fougljt  agamft 
3JfracI. 

11  Sinb  tDe  %  ©  s  ©  <5ob  of  3Jfracl 
bcuucrcbS>iDon  anb  ail  Ins  people  nt= 
to  tljc  Danb  of  33fracl ,  anb  tDcyfmote 
!  tDem :  fo  gffraet  poffeffeb  all  tDe  lanb  of 
ItDeSlmoutcs,  tljc  inhabitants  of  tfjat 
countrey. 


22  SmbtDeypoffcffcb*autDecoafts 
of  tDeSimontes,  fromSirnoneucn  bn 
to  3Jabbota  anb  from  tDc  ttrdbcrneffc 
cucnbnto3Jo2ban. 

23  $>o  nolbetDc  JLow®  Gob  of 
llfracl  DatD  bifpoffeffeb  tDc  Almontes 
from  before  D»s  people  3?frael,  anb 
fli  oulbcft  tljou  poffeffc  it  < 

24  nMt  not  tDou  poffeffc  tDat  BjIjicD 
CDcmouJ  tDy  gob  giuetD  tDce  to  pof 
feffe  <  fo  ltoDonifbeucr  tljc  %  &  is  3©  our 
<5ob  ftjai  bnuc  out  from  before  bs^Dem 
null  rue  poflcuc. 

15  *^nb  nolb,  art  tDou  any  tljing 
better  thenasaian  tDcfonneofZtppo? 
tangof^0oab;  SDibDcceucr  Urine  a* 
!  gatnft  Israel ,  o;  bib  Dec  cucr  figDt  a 
gatnfttDcm, 

i6  otitic 3Jfracl  matin  ^cOjbon, 
anb  Dcr  tolbnes,  anb  in  ^roer,  anb  Ijcr 
toibncs ,  anb  m  all  tDe  cities  tljat  bee  a* 
long  bprtjccoaftsof3imon,tDJccDun> 
b^cbvccrcs;  ©DvtDerefozc  bib  pec  not 
rccoucr  tDou  ibitDm  tDat  nmc  < 

27  naDcrcfoic^Daucnotfinncba; 
gamft  tDce,  but  tDotibocftmctt):ongto 
ibarrc  agamft  mec :  tDc  %  o  is  ©  tljc 
3Jubge,  bce35ubgc  djts  bap  bctlbechc 
tDc  tDilbzen  of  3fraet ,  anb  tljc  cljtltyctt 
of  Simmon. 

28  $?otbbetf,tDetangoftDccDilb2en 
of  Amnion  Dearfecncb  not  bnto  tljc 
Iboibs  of  Ucpljtljalj  Uiljiclj  fjee  fent 
Dim. 

29  CXDcntlje5)ptritoftDc1LfiDw® 
tame  Ppon^JcpDrDaD,  anb  De  paflcD  0^ 
ucc  ©ilcab  anb«©ana{rcD,  anb  paffeb 
oner  ©i5pcD  of  ©tleab,  anb  from  Sghy 
pcD  of  GilcabDcc  palTcboucr  bnto  tljc 
cDilbicn  of  Amnion. 

30  ^Inb^JepDtDaDDoibcbaborbc 
bnto  tljc  %  o  is  3D,  anb  faib ,  3?f  tDou 
(DalttbifDout  faile  bcliucr  tljc  cljtlbicii 
oPlmmon  into  mincljanbs, 

ji  Xljcn  it  ujau  be ,  tDat  t  rbDatfoc 
ucr  commctD  fojtlj  of  tijc  boozes  of  my 
Ijoufc  to  mcctcmc ,  ibljcn  3  rcturncin 
peace  from  tljc  cDilbjm  of  Simmon, 
ujail  furcly  be  tl)c  %  sd  is  w>  £>,  [j  anb  3 
Ujill  offer  ttbp  fo?  a  burnt  offering. 

32  C£>o3JcpDtDaIj  paffeb  oucrbn 
to  tDc  tDilbzcn  of  Simmon  to  figDt  a 
gamft  tDcm,anb  tDe  %  ©  is  j>  bcltucreb 
tDem  into  DisDanbs. 

33  llxtii  Dc  fmotc  tDem  from  Siroer, 
ntnt  till  tljou  come  to  tDmuitD,  euer 
tibcnttc  nttes,  anb  unto  tljc  Hpiaine 
of  tDc  bmerarbs,  lbitD  a  bcry  great 
flaugDtcr :  tljus  tDe  tDUtyeu  of  Sim 

mon 


'Dcui.j, 


'Mum.  32. 
:.dcut.22. 
j.iolh.24  5 


\Hcfo 


that 

which  com- 

mtlbforll) 

(bahcomc 

forte. 

\Ot,Imil 

offer  it ,0-c. 


\  Or,  lAbt 


IS: 


lephthahs  daughter :    Judges. 


His  death.! 


]  Or,  be  had 

fffvnt  ruber 
fonne  or 
<LtM?htfr. 
Het.ofhutl- 
fitfi. 


4ndf3C 


[j  Or,  ordt- 

HAMCe. 


\Htkfrom 
jeert  tejere. 
\Qxtt*talke 
mth. 


\  Htb-.wrre 
:.i2ed. 


mon  \bere  fubbueb  before  tl)e  ttjilbjen 

34.  c  anb  SJeprjtljarj  came  to  ^ty 
pcD  bnto  his  fjoufc,  anb  beljolbc,  l)is 
Daughter  tame  out  to  meetc  tjtm  iDittj 
timbjrts  anD  rbitti  Dances,  anu  ft)  c  ibas 
Ots  onelp  ctnlbc :  II  bcGbe  tjcr  l)C tjaD  nci^ 
fljct  fonne  no?  Daughter. 

35  anb  tt  tame  to  paffc  rbljcn  Ijc  falb 
tier,  tgat  fie  rent  Ijis  clothes,  anbfaib, 
aias,  mpbaugntcr,  tnouljafttyougbt 
me  bcrp  loU),  anb  thou  act  one  of  rrjem 
that  trouble  me :  fo?3J  ftaue  openeb  mp 
ntouftj  bnto  tljc  %  ©  k  &  ,  anb  3  ran* 
notgocbacKc. 

36  anb  ujc  fatb  bnto  rjim,^y  fatljer, 
if  tljou  tjatt  openeb  ftjp  mouttj  bnto  the 
%  o  m  is ,  boc  to  mc  acwbtng  to  that 
ibrjtrt)  natlj  pjotccbcb  out  of  tt)p 
moutrj  ;fo?afmutl)  as  trje?,€)isiDt)att) 
tafcen  bengeancc  fo?  tljce  of  tfjtnc  ctu> 
mics,euen  of  tnctrjilDjcn  of  amnion. 

37  anbfycfaibbtnoljctfatfjct.fLet 
tuts  trjmg  be  bone  fo?  me:  ILet  mc  alone 
tibo  monetljs,  ttjat  3  mar t  goe  bp  ano 
boibnc  bpon  tljc  mountames,  anb  be; 
Vbaiic  mv  bitgntttte,  3,  anbmp  fcfc 
lotbcs. 

3S  anboefaib.O'oc.anbUefcnthet 
a)bap  tortibo  monctfjs,  anbujeclbcnt 
ibittj  tjet  companions,  anb  betbatlcb 
get  birgmme  bpon  tl)c  mountames. 

39  anb  it  came  to  parte  at  the  enbe  of 
ttbo  monetljs  ttjat  fljec  teturneb  bnto 
rjer  father ,  ibljo  bib  tbttf)rjcr  according 
toljisborb  vblncrj  tje  rjab  botbcb:  anb 
fbeftneU)  no  man:  ?itibasa||cuftome 
mUfracl, 

40  That  tl)c  battgljtcrs  of  3Urael 
rbent  t  pecrelp  II  to  lament  the  Daughter 
of  3Jcprjtrjal)  ujc  oilcabitc  fourc  baves 
mapecrc. 

CHAP.    XII. 

The  Ephraiimtcsciuarrellingwithlephthah, 
anddifLeinedbySnibboleih.areflaineby  the 
Gileadites.  7  lephthahdieth.  8  Ibzan/Ano 
had  thiriie  fonncs  and  thittic  daughters,  11 
andElon,  13  and  Abdon  \\ho  hadfourtie 
Tonnes,  and  thirticnephewes,  nidged  Ifrael. 

38©Vl35  fib  tl)c  men  of  cptyatm 
SSSSaXS* t  gathcreb  fbcmfciucs  to; 
getrjer,  anb  lbcnt  fionl) 
ibarb^faibbntolicpn 
,  thai) ,  barjcrcfojc  pafTebft 
thou  oucr  to  fight  agamft  rue  tljilbjcn 
of  amnion,  anb  Dibit  noteaiibstogoc 
ttnthtbec  <  loccunllbiirnc  thine  Ijoufc 
bpon  tljccttutlj  fire. 


Wk 


ojm 


z  anb  3itpi)thal)  fatbc  bnto  than, 
35  anb  tup  people  ibctc  at  great  ftrtfc 
Vbith  the  crjilbjen  of  amnion  :  anb 
Vbljcn'Jeailebpou.pcbeuucrebntctiot 
out  of  their  hanbs. 

3  3lnb  ibhcn  3  fatbc  tljatpc  bclme- 
rcb  me  not,  3  put  nip  life  in  mv  rjanbes, 
anb  paffeb  oucr  agamft  tt)c  tljilbjcn  of 
amnion,  anb  tljc  Hsdib©  beltucrcb 
them  into  mp  banb :  reljcrfoje  then  arc 
pe  tome  bp  bnto  mc  tljtsbap,  to  fight  & 
gamftmc* 

4  Xhcn^epDtrjarjgathtrcbtoge 
tl)er  all  roc  men  of  ©ileab,  anb  fought 
ibltl)  ffiph;aim:  anbrJjemenof  <3iieab 
Dnotc  eph^rni,  bcraufe  tl)epfatb,}9cc 
Otlcabites  arc  fugittues  of  €pl;?aun, 
among  tljc  Cphzaimttes  anb  among 
tl)efi0ana(ntes. 

5  anbtfjc<25tleabttestooftctDcpaf 
Gigcs  of  3!o?ban  before  the  cphii 
imucs :  anb  tt  tbas  fo  tfjat  Jbrjtn  tljofc 
<£ph?atmitesibl)iti)rbere  eftapcbfaibe, 
ILet  me  go  oucr,trjat  tl)c  men  of  ©ilcab 
faib  bnto  hmi,art  tOou  an  Cphwimttej 
3Jfhcfaib,il3ap: 

6  5Chcn(aibtfjcpbntol)tm,  5>ap 
noib,  5>l)ibbolct}) :  anb  I)c  faib,  £>ibbo< 
Itti)  :  fo?  fjee  toulb  not  frame  to  pjo- 
nountc  it  right,  ^cntoeptooachmi, 
anb  ftetbc  hint  at  tfje  paflagesof  5o? 
ban :  anb  there  fell  at  tfjat  time  of  tljc 
Spljyumucs,  fourtic  $  tibo  thoufanb. 

7  anb  ^epljthaOmbgcb^frael  fire 
peeres:  thcnbtcb^cpfjtibalj  rhcdJiica^ 
bite,  anb  ibasburieb  m  one  oi  tljc  tines 
of  (5ileab. 

8  canbaftcrf)tm3lb3anof28etl)' 
lehcmiubgeb31fracl. 

9  anb  hceljab  tfjtrtic  fonnes,  anb 
tihtrtic  baugljteTS,  uujome  rjee  fent  a^ 
bzoab,  anb  toofee  mtljirtte  baugrjters 
from  abjoao  foz  tits  fonnes.  anb  Ijcc 
uibgebJJfracl  feuenpecrcs. 

10  iDjcnbteb  3Jb5an,  anb  ibas  bit- 
riebatJSctljlelicm. 

11  Canb  after  fjtm,  «lon,  a  zebu^ 
lonitctubgco  3Jfracl,  anb  tje  uibgeb  Jf 
racltcnpcercs. 

ii  anb  «ion  tljc  Zcbulonitc  bteb, 
anb  ibas  burteb  tnauaion  mtljetoutp 
trepofzcbulun. 

13  C  anb  after  Dim,  abbon,  tDe 
fonne  of  Jniicl  a  |Diratljonite  tubgtb 
3)fracL 

14  anbfjc Ijab  fourtp fonnes,  anb 
tlnrne  t  ncpljcibcs ,  tljat  robe  on  rtocc- 
fcojeanb  ten  affe-tolts:anb  Dciubgcb 
3lftacicigljt  peeres, 

i«;  anb 


f  ffei/m 
[crux  I. 


Samfons  birth 


ci 


lap.xn 


I  dedtocc-n- 

\/THtt&C 

i  "Chap. 2. 

I  ii. and  7.7. 
!  and4  1, 

2nd  6.x.  and 

io.5. 


'  Num. 6, 


*  Num.  6  5 
.  fjm.  1 . 


15  anD  abDon  the  foutic  of  $illcl 
the  y>trat!)omtt  DicD.anD  ibasbutieD 
marathon  mrhciatiD  of  £ph,2aim,tn 
the  mount  oftheamaietutcs. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

Ifracl lsinchc  handof  thePhilirlmes.  i  An 
An^cl  appcamhtoManoahswife.  8  The 
AnaelappearethtoManoali.  15  Manoahs 
faenfice  ,  whereby  the  Angel  is  difcouered. 
14    Sainton  is  borne. 

^DthcthilDjenofJu-acl 
®)MC#f  t  *  did  cutliagamc  in  ttjc 
^v^v^  ftgt)t  of  the  H  o  is  ©,  anD 
gjJ^O^  the  Horn©  DcliucreD 


them  into  the  hanD  of  the 
phiUftuies  fo2tpycercs. 

i  CanDthcrcibasacertaineman 
of  zo:aJ),  of  tl)e  family  of  tl)e  3>atutes, 
ibhofc  name  Ybas  £0anoah ,  anD  his 
ttnfc  lbas  barren,  anD  bare  not. 

3  anD  the  angel  of  the  Hois© 
appeareD  bnto  the  iboman ,  anD  faiD 
bnto  her,  25cholD  uotb ,  thou  art  bar* 
r  en,anD  beared  not:  but  thou  (halt  con* 
ceiueanDbearcafonue. 

4.  j3oib  therefoicbelbarc  "3  P#V 
fhee,atiD  Danac  not  lbinc ,  no:  ftrong 
Djinfte,  anD  eat  not  any  bnclcanc  thing. 

5  iroj  loc  ,  thou  (halt  concciuc,  anD 
bcarcafonncanD  *no  rafo2  (hall  tome 
onhtsheaD :  foitncchtlD  (hall  be  a  /i5a* 
?aritc  bnto  ti5oD  from  thetbombe:  anD 
he  (hall  begin  to  Dtltuer  31  fracl  out  of 
the hanD  of  the  phiitttmcs. 

6  c  XOett  the  woman  tame ,  anD 
tolD  her  hufbanD,  faying ,  a  man  of 
<Sod  tame  bnto  mee ,  anD  his  counts 
nance  was  uitc  the  countenance  of  an 
angel  of  God  ,  bery  terrible :  but  3 
aflteD  himnotibheuceherbas,  nettfjee 
tolDhemehisnamc: 

7  25ut  he  faiD  bnto  mee ,  25eholD, 
thou  (halt  toneeiuc  anD  bcarc  a  fonne; 
anD  noib ,  Dzinfee  no  Unite  no?  ftrong 
D2inlie,neithetcatcanybnclcane  thing: 
foi  tlje  chtlDe  Rial  be  a  ii5a5aritc  to  ©od, 
from  the  ttjombc ,  to  the  Dap  of  his 

Death- 

8  C  XJien  SBanoah  tntreatcD  the 
H  o  k  ©,  anD  fatD,  £>  my  H  o  is  ©,  let  I 
theman  of  (5oD  tbrjicfj  thouDiDttfenD,  j 
come  agatue  bnto  bs,  ?  teach  bsibhatj 
Vbefhali  Do  bnto  the  chUDc  that  (hall  be 
bojne. 

9  anDGoDheatfccneD  to  theboyce 
of£0anoah  ;  atiD  the  angel  of  ©od! 
came  agaiuc  bnto  trie  iboman  as  fhee  | 


p.xnj. 


is  foretold 


c. 


(atcinttjefielD :  23utfl9anoahherhuf 
banoibasnotibithhcr. 

io  ^nD  the  rbontan  maDc  haftc ,  anD 
tannc,  anD  fyrtbcD  her  hufbanD, anD 
fatD  bnto  him;  2Stf)olD,  the  man  hath 
appeareD  bnto  me, that  tame  bnto  me 
tlje  other  Dap. 

1 1  anD  (panoat)  arofe,  anD  \bcnt  af 
terhtsttnfe,  anD  came  to  theman,  anD 
faiD  bnto  him ,  art  thou  the  man  that 
fpaseft  bnto  the  iboman;  anD  hefaiD, 
3  am. 

ii  anD  ^anoali  faiD ,  0ovo  let  rtjv 
VbozDS  come  to  pafle :  t  $oib  (hall  mee 
o?Det  the  rl)ilDc,anD  ||  how  fljailibcDoc 
bntohtmr 

13  anD  rile  angel  of  tlic  fL©i8© 
fatD  bnto  iJQanoal) ,  €>f  all  rljat  3  faiD 
bnto  tlje  Vboman.lctljcrbcibare. 

i+  £>I)c  map  not  catc  of  anp  tfjing 
rrjatcommetl)  of  tlje  <Lltnc ,  nntljcr  let 
tier  DjtnUc  tbmc  02  ftrong  Dnnbe,  no? 
cat  anp  bnclcanc  tljing :  all  tljat^f  com* 
manDcD  l)cr,letner  obferue. 

15  C  anD  ^0anoalj  fetDc  bnto  tlje 
angel  of  tlje  H©  «©,  3Ip?aptt)cclet 
bs  Detciuc  tDee ,  bntill  ibec  ftjail  Ijaue 
maoc  rcaDp  a  InD  t  fo?  tljee. 

16  anD  tlje  angel  oftrje!L€>is© 
faiD  bnto  £0anoal) ,  XJjougli  tljou  dc* 
tone  nice,  3  Will  not  eat  of  tljp  b2taD : 
anD  if  tl)ou  tbtlt  offer  a  burnt  offering, 
thou  nmft  offer  it  bnto  the  Ho  in  ©: 
roi  Q9anoal)  unctt)  not  that  ije  ibasan 
angel  of  tlje  Ho  u©. 

17  aitb  QBanoal)  faiD  bnto  tlican* 
gel  of  the  Ho  k©,  uahatisthpname, 
that  lbhen  thp  fapttigs  come  to  pafle, 
ibe  mayDoetljechonour* 

18  anD  the  angel  of  the  Hois© 
faiD  bnto  him ,  nahP  afaeft  thou  thus 
after  mpnamclccingit  is  |]t"ceret; 

19  5)0 £panoahtoottc  a  ttiu ,  tbith a 
meat  offering ,  anD  offercD  it  bpon  a 
rorttc  bnto  tlje  Hois©:  anD  tlje  Angel 

DtDttionDerou(lp,anD  £0anoah  anDhis 
SbifclooftcDon. 

20  ^02  it  tame  to  pafle,  ibhcu  the 
flame  ibent  bp  totuarD  hcaucn  from 
off  the  altar,  that  the  angel  of  the 
Hois©  aftenDcD  in  the  flame  of  the 
altar :  anD  ©anoal;  anD  his  tuife  loo* 
6eD  on  it ,  anb  fell  on  their  races  to  tlje 
gcounD. 

ii  (25ut  the  angel  of  the  Ho  is© 
Did  no  mo2C  appearc  to  tDanoah  anD 
to  hte  tbift : )  then  £0anoal)  anelbe 
that  he  was  anangclof  the  Ho  is  ©. 

22.  anD  ^3anoah  faiD  bnto  hisibife, 
a  a  'oat 


\Hebr.what 
fia/i  be  the 
mjntr  of 
the,  c*T. 
\Ortnbat 
fhall  he  dee? 
Heir.Vlha 
fhallbcfe 
workft 


\Hebr.k- 
ftrethee. 


( Or,mn- 

ittpt 


Samfons  mariage :        ludges. 


Hisnddl( 


\Heh.Jhci4 

Tight  mmir.f 


t  HAr  i 

mn  :;■'■' 

htm. 


*  ma  (hall  fur  cly  Dtc,  bccaufc  ltoeehauc 
fccncOoD. 

z j  asut  his  tbifc  fatD  fcnto  Dim ,  3Jf 
tlic  ft  «d  is  ©  Vbcrcplcafcu  to  bill  b0, Ik 
iDouid  not  hauc  rccciucD  a  burnt  ofTc^ 
ring  anD  a  meat  offering  atourhanDS, 
neither  moulDhcc  hauc  (hcibeDbs  all 
thefc  things ,  nozlboulDasatthisttmc 

hailttOlDDS  fuch  things  astljcfc. 

14  ft  3inD the  uioman  bare  afonne, 
anD  tailcD  his  name  ,£>amfon :  anD  the 
chtlD  gtcU),*  the  It  o  hd  blcflcDhim. 

15  3nD  the  Spirit  of  the  ?L©  is© 
beganuc  to  moouc  him  at  ttmesinthc 
tampc  of  2>an,  bettDcenc  Zojah  anti 
<£thtaol. 

CHAP.   X 1 1 1 1. 

Samfon  defircth  a  wife  of  die  Philiftines.  1 
In  his  iourney  heekilleth  a  Lion.  8  In  a 
fecond  iourney  hec  findeth  hony  in  the  car- 
keis.  10  Samfons  marriage  feaft.  il  His 
riddle  by  his  wife  is  made  knowen.  19  He 
fpoileth  thirtie  Philiftines.  20  His  wife  is 
married  to  another. 

$m§  #D£>amfonUuntDottm 
P&?%  to  Ximnath ,  anD  fauic  a 
t  woman  m  Ximnath,  of 
I  the  Daughters  of  the  0hi* 
?r&z£  Uftatcs. 
%  3ttib  hce  came  bp,  anDtolDhisfo 
thcranbhts  mother,  anDfaiD,  gihaue 
fecne  a  woman  m  Ximnath ,  of  H)t 
Da«gl)ttrs  of  tlic  philiftmcs :  nowc 
thcrcfojc  get  her  fo:  me  to  Wife. 

3  Xhcn  his  father  anD  his  mother 
fatD  bnto  hnn ,  Sis  there  neutr  a  wo* 
man  among  the  Daughters  of  thy  tye* 
thjm.oiamongallmypcoplc^thattfiou 
goeft  to  tauc  a  llnfc  of  thcbnctrcumn- 
fcD  ^hiliftmcs;  3nD  Samfon  faiD  bit? 
to  l)ts  father ,  Oct  her  fo:  me,  fo?  t  ft)ee 
pleafcthnicWcil. 

4  23ut  his  father  ano  Ins  mother 
ftnrtb  not  tljat  it  was  of  the  Ho  is©, 
that  hec  fought  an  occafion  agamft  rt)e 
fthiliftmcs :  fo:  at  that  time  the  0hl' 
Ufttncs jiat)  Dominion oner  Jfracl. 

5  <[  Xhcn  Went  Samfon  Dottmc, 
anD  his  father  5  his  mother,  to  Xim- 
nath ,  anD  tame  to  the  biucyarDs  of 
Xmmath:  anDbcholD,  a  voting  ?lton 
roarcDt  agamft  him. 

6  3lnD  the  Spirit  of  the  H  <r>  is  © 
came  mightily  bpon  him ,  anD  hec  rent 
himashcwouiDhaucrcntauib.anDhc 
haD  nothing  m  his  hauD  :  but  hec  tolD 
not  his  father  0:  his  mother  What  hce 
haD  Done. 


7  3nD  hec  went  Dolbnc  anD  tallicD 
With  the  woman,anD  djc  plcafcDSam- 
fonWell. 

s  C  3nD  after  a  time  Wtt  r ctur neD 
to  taut  her,  anD  he  turncD  afiDe  to  fee 
thecarucis  of  the  ?Uon :  auDbcholDe, 
there  Was  a  ftbarme  of  26ccs ,  anD 
home  m  thecarucis  of  thcfLion. 

9  3lnD  hec  toouc  thereof  in  his 
hanDcs,anD  went  on  eating,  anD  cairn 
to  his  father  anD  mother,  anD  hec  gauc 
thcm,anD  the?  DiD  catc :  buthetolD  not 
them  that  he  haD  taucn  thchony  out  of 

thecarucis  of  thcHiou. 

10  CSohisfathcrWentDoWnctnv 
to  the  woman,  anD  Samfon  maDc 
thcrcafcaft:  fozfo  PfcDthevoungmcn 
to  Doc. 

11  3tnD  it  came  to  paffe  ttihcn  thev 
fall)  him,  that  thev  brought  thirttc  com- 
panions to  be  Vbith  him. 

12  C3inD  Camion  faiDbnto  tljcm, 
gj  ibill  noib  put  foo?th  a  nDDlc  bnto 
vou :  if  you  can  ccrtcinly  Declare  it  me, 
n)ithinthcfcucnDapcsofthcfeatt,anD 
finDc  it  out,  thcn^iDillgiuc  you  chit 
ttc||fl)cctcs)  anDthirtic  thangc  of  gar*|io»« 
iitents: 

13  2Sutifve  cannot  Declare  it  mc,fhen 
(hall  pee  gtue  me  tijirne  fljcctcs,  anD 
thirtie  change  of  garments.  ^nD  they 
fatD  tmto  htm ,  $vit  foo?tt)  thy  nDDlc, 
thatiDcmayhcarctt. 

14  3inD  hec  fatDbnto  them ,  £>ut  of 
the  cater  tame  foojth  mcatc,  anD  out  of 
the  (rrong  came  foojth  ftDcetncfTc^nD 
tljcy  cotilD  not  in  thjee  Daycs  crpounD 
the  nDDlc. 

15  ^nDitcametopafleonthcfcucnth 
Da?,that  thev  faiD  iinto  Samfons  rotfc, 
entice  thy  hufbanD ,  that  hce  may  Dc- 
clarc  bnto  bs  tl)c  nDDlc ,  left  \bc  buntc 
thee  anD  thy  fathers  houfc  Uiitl)  fire 


$>anc  ycc  talleD  bs,  t  to  tauc  tljat  Uicc 
haue^isttnotfoi 

i6  3mD  Samfons  tbifclhcpt  before 
Dim.anDlaiD^houDocftbuthatcme, 
anD  loucft  mc  not :  thou  haft  put  foojth 
ariDDlcbnto  thcchilDjcn  of  my  people, 
anD  haft  not  tolDc  itmc.  ^InDhecfaiD 
bnto  hn\  BeholD ,  5  Dane  not  tolDe  it 
my  father  no;  my  mother ,  anDfhall  gj 
tcllitthee^ 

17  3luD  fl)ce  ilicpt  before  him  U  the 
feutn  Daycs ,  ibljtlc  the  fcaft  laftcD :  anD 
it  tame  to  parte  on  ti)c  feucnth  Day,  that 
hctolDc  her,  faccaufcfl;ec  lay  fine  bpou 
him :  anD flictolDc  the  riDDlc  to  thcchil- 
Djcn of  her  people. 

is  ^nD 


jMektffpfff- 
fcfft  vst  or  to 
impoucrijh 


ol  che/r«.-ff 


Hisfi 


oxe-taiies 


Ch; 


ap.xv. 


P 


H 


-b< 


lsiaw-bone. 


»k/- 


\UeUcl 
her  be  thins 


Q  Or,  now 
jhalllbct 
hlamcUfic 
from  the 
"Phthftmes, 
though,  C"C 
[Or,  tor- 
ches. 


is  3lno  the mcnofthetityfaio  t>nto 
Dun  on  tDe  feuentt)  oay  befo jc  tlje  funnc 
iocntoottme,  naliat  is  fmcctct  tljmljo- 
ntc^anoiDDatisftrongcrtDcnalLiom 
3ino DcfatODittotDcm,  3if  yeljaonot 
ploiDeo  nnth  my  heifer ,  yce  Dao  not 
fotmooutmyrtODlc. 

i9-  C^luotDc  Spirit  of  tDc  1L€>iS© 
came  Opon  him,  ano  Dec  lDcut  oolDne 
to3mjKclon,  ano  flcioethirttc  men  of 
tl)em,  ano  tooSc  tljctf  ||  fpo:ic,anD  sane 
change  of  garments  Onto  them  iDljtcli 
crpounocotDctiDOlc,  ano  his  anger 
ujasiunoico,  anD  hec  lDcut  Dp  to  \)is 
fathers  hcufc. 

20  asut&amfonsttnfcioas giuen to 
his  companion ,  iDhomheehaOtofcDas 
hfefneno. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  Samfon  is  denied  his  wife.  5  Heburneththe 
Philiftines  corne  with  foxes  and  firebrands. 
6  His  wife  and  her  father  are  burnt  by  die 
Pruliftines.  7  Samfonfmiteth  them  hip  and 
thigh.  9  Heisboundbythemenof  ludah 
anddeliueredto  the  Philiftines.  14  Heekil- 
leth  diem  with  a  iaw  bone.  18  Godmaketh 
the  fountaine  En-hakkore  for  him  in  Lehi. 

VLt  it  came  to  paCR  lDithin 
aujlnie  after ,m  tDc  time  of 
wheat  harueft,that£>am; 
fon  Oifttco  Ins  lout  iDith  a 
tuo,ano  he  fato,33  lOiilgoc 
tn  to  my  nnfc  into  the  chamOci:  J5ut  her 
father  Vbouionotfuffcr  Dim  to  gocm. 

i  3luo  Ijcr  father  faioc,  3J  Derily 
thought  that  thou  haooctt  Dttcriy  D& 
tea  l)cr^{)crfo?e  3J  gane  l)cr  to  tljy  com- 
panton :  isnotDcr  younger  fitter  fatrer 
then  Wye  ^  ta&c  hct,3J  pjay  thcc,ut  flcao 
ofljcr. 

3  C^no  damfon  faio  concerning 
them,  ||4i2otb  fbal  3J  be  mojc  oiamclcffc 
tfjen  tlje  0  J)iWnnes,ti)ougij  3j  do  rljem 
aoifpicafurc. 

4  3ln0  £>amfim  lOent  ano  taught 
tt)?ce  hunojeo  fores ,  ano  iookc  Unto 
bjanus ,  ano  turnco  tailc  to  tatle ,  ano 
put  a  fircb:ano  in  tijc  mioft  bctioecnc 
tiootatlcs. 

5  SinDiDljcn  Dec  rjau  fetthebjanos 
onficchcietrhemgocttuotDcftanOing 
tome  of  the  philiftines,  ano  burnt  Dp 
both  the  (Domes ,  auo  aifo  the  ftanoing 
comciotth  tlje  Dincyaros  and  oliues. 

6  c  %l)tn  tlje  $l)Mttmcs  faioe, 
nsljo  hath  oonc  tl)is  <  ano  they  mv 
ftuereo,  5>amfon  the  fonne  m  lam  of 


theXimnitc,  becaufc  hec  hao  taken  his 
Unfc,  anogtucuhceto  his  companion. 
3tno  thcphiliftmcs  came  Dp,ano  burnt 
her  ano  lice  father  ibit!)  fire. 

7  C  3m0  £>amfou  faio  Onto  them, 
XDougD  ye  haue  ooncthis,  yet  loui  3J 
bcauengco  of  you,  ano  after  tl)<xt3  tt»tl 
ceafc. 

8  ^noljefmotcthemhipanorhigl), 
Vbitl)  a  great  flattghtcr ;  ano  Dee  ibeut 
botbn  auooxbeit  m'tljctop  of  the  roclte 
etam. 

9  ftXhenthc^hihmnesiDentop, 
ano  pitrijeo  tn  3Juoaij  ,ano  fp?eao  them 
fcluesmlLcht. 

io  3(no  the  men  of3f uoal)  faio,  ml)? 
are  vc  come  Op  agamft  os  *  ano  t\w>  an 
finereo.Xo  bmo  ^amfonarcioc  come 
Dp,toOoetohuu,asDchathoonetobs. 

1 1  XDcn  thzecthoufano  men  of  3m- 
oaDtmenttothetopofthcrocfecCtam, 
ano  fayo  to  Camion  5  BnoVbcfS:  tDou 
not  that  the  ^hthftinesare  rulers  otter 
bsf  lehat-s  this  that  thou haitoonc  On 
to  os;  3(no  he  faio  Onto  them,  Zs  they 
oio  onto  me,fo  hauc  3J  oone  Onto  them. 

ii  ^no they fato Onto hun,aDcc are 
come  ooione  to  binoe  thee,  that  10c  may 
oeliuer  thee  into  thcljanodf  the^hili^ 
(lines.  3lno  S>amfon  faio  Onto  them, 
;t>XDcarc  Onto  mctljatyee Una  not  fall 
Dponmcyottefelues. 

ij  3lno  they  fpa&c  Onto  him ,  faying ; 
Bo :  but  tbec  Uitu  binoetfjee  faft,  ano 
oeliuer  tljce  into  their  hano :  but  furely 
iDc  mill  not  fetll  thee,  ^no  they  bouno 
htm  lOith  ttb  o  nem  tojoes,  ano  bzought 
himOpfcomthcrocfte. 

14  c^no  lOljcn  he  came  Onto  ILehi, 
the  0hihftmes  (houteo  againft  ijint: 
ano  the  Spirit  of  tDc  3L€>ir£>  came 
mighctly  Opon  him,  ano  the  C02OCS  that 
mere  Opon  his  amies  became  as  flare 
that  TOas  burnt  with  fire ,  jrjisbanos 
tioofco  from  off  his  ijanos. 

15  3nD  he  founo  a  t  neio  iaiobonc  of 
an  arte ,  ano  put  foonh  his  hano,  ano 
roofocit,  ano  fleioc  a  thoufauo  men 
thereioith. 

i6  3no&amronfoio,n3ifOthciatt}- 
boneof  an  afl"c,tDcapcs  Opon  Dcapes, 
ibith  the  laio  of  an  affe  DaucJI  flame  a 
thoufanomen. 

17  3mo  it  came  to  paffc  \oheu  he  Dao 
maoe  an  cno  of  fpcaamg ,  tljat  Dee  call 
aioay  the  taio  bone  out  of  his  hano,ano 
calico  that  place  ||  &amatl)  -  ?Leln. 

18  C5Inohcett)asfo:eathirft,anO 
caiieoonthefCiiDis©,  anofaio,  Xhou 

%  a  2  hafl 


f  Hcp.recttt 

denrne. 


\  Htbr.veerc 
melted. 

\Heb.motft. 


t  Hea.  an 
heapettwa 
heapef. 


U  That  15, 

The  lifting 
Vp  of  the 

tATT-bunc, 
or,cajlw? 

uwaj  rfthe 


Samfon  and  Delilah:     Iudges.    Shebetrayethhim. 


\Or,Lelu 


That  is,tl 

well  of  htm 

thai  called 

cried. 


\  fh'f.  area- 
rt  an  bar- 
lot. 


t  Hcb.filcnt, 


ticl.tnc 


Or  Jj  the 

IrookS' 


ble. 


t lOr.N.'n  * 
cQsrds.hcb. 
y»oiil. 


haft  giucn  tins  great  Dcltuctance  into 
the  bauD  of  thy  fcruant :  anD  no\\)  fbail 
j  Die  fo?  thtrft,  anD  fall  mto  the  hattD  of 
the  bnnrcumcu'cD; 

19  23nt  eoD  clauc  an  hollow  place 
that  ibas  m  ||  thciaibc ,  anD  there  came 
mater  thcr  cout,  ft  ibhcn  he  l)aD  Dnmfte, 
his  fptritramcagaincanDhcrcutucD : 
ibhcrcfozc  lice  taiicD  the  name  thereof 
I!  cn-ljauii02c ,  lbhieh  ts  m  Hcljt ,  unto 
this  Day: 

2o3iuDhcutDgeD3JfracltnthcDaycs 
of  tlje  phtltftmcs  ffljentte  yccrcs, 

CHAP.    XVI. 

Samfon  at  Gaza  efcapeth,  and  carieth  away 
the  gates  of  the  city.  4  Delilah  corrupted  by 
the  Philiihncs,enufeth  Samfon.  6  Thrift 
ihe  is  decerned.  15  At  laft  fhec  ouercom- 
methhim.  2.1  The  Philiftines  take  him,and 
put  out  his  eyes,  n  His  ftrcngth  renewing, 
hee  pulleih  downethe  houfe  vpon  the  Phi- 
JiAincs ,  and  dicth. 

^3p  ocnibcnt&amfontocsa; 
Is »  vi,  anD faib  there  t  an hap 
*(M  lot,  atiDibcntitt  bnto  her. 

f^\       1     And  it  was  told  thC  ©a- 

s&k  jitcs,  faying,  Samfon  is 
tome  hither.  ^nD  they  compaffcD  him 
ui,anDiayDibattfo?htmaiinightinthe 
gate  ofthc  nttc  ,anD  lbcrc  t  (meet  all  the 
ntght,faytttg,3in  the  ntomutgibhcn  tt 
isDay,lbcfl)allKtllhim. 

3  3lnD  Samfon  lay  till  mlDnight, 
anD  arofc  at  niiDuight,  anD  tooUc  the 
D002CS  of  the  gate  of  the  city,  anD  the 
tibopofts ,  anD  lbctttaibayibith  them, 
t  bar  re  anD  all ,  anD  put  them  upon  hts 
fhoulDcrs ,  anD  tartcD  them  Dp  to  the 
toppc  of  an  hill  that  ts  befoic  I?cbjon. 

4  C3lnD  it  came  to  paffc  aftcribarD, 
that  he  loueD  a  lboman  ttt  the  bailey  ||  of 
&02C&  .lbhofc  name  ibas  Delilah. 

5  3inD  the  102DS  of  the  philiftmcs 
cantc  bp  bnto  her ,  anD  fatD  bnto  her 
entice  htm ,  anD  fee  lbhercin  hts  great 
ftrcngth  li«h,  anD  bylbhatmcancsibc 
may  pzcuailc  agatuft  him ,  that  ibe  tnay 
btnD  him, to!| afflict  him  :  anD  lbeibtll 
giuc  thee  cucry  one  of  bs,  clcucn  hurt 
Djetl)  pieces  of  fiiucr. 

6  i[  31ud  Delilah  faiD  to  Samfon, 
Helmed  pzavthccibhercut  thy  great 
ftreugth  ly«li ,  anD  whcrcibith  thou 
mighteft  be  boimD,to  afflict  thee. 

7  3inD  Samfon  faiD  bnto  her ,  'Jif 
they  biuDe  nice  ibtth  fcticn  ||  greruc 
lbiths  that  lbcrc  ncucrD2icD,thcn  (ball 


tHrt.fmtl- 
I,ih. 


\Hth,vhev 
ritljjvorkf 
'■iMh  mi  bin 
ionc. 


3J bcibcaticauDbcas  f anothcrman.  \\H<t.««. 

3  %hnubclo2Dsofthc$htltftincs| 
biottghtbp  to  her  fcucn  grecne  ibitbs, 
lbhtch  haDnot  bcncDncD ,  $  fbc  bounD 
him  ibtth  them. 

9  ftovo  there  tberc  men  lying  in 
lbait,abiDing  ibith  her  in  the  chamber : 
anD  ft)c  faiD  bnto  him,  Xhe  0hiuftmes 
be  bpon  thee ,  Samfon.  3ltiD  he  bjaftc 
the  ibiths ,  as  a  ttyccD  of  toibisb2o; 
ftcn ,  ibhcn  tt  t  touchcth  the  fire :  fo  his 
ftrcngth  ibas  not  inioibcu. 

10  2tnD  Delilah  fatDbnto  Samfon, 
zScholD^bouhaftmocucDmcatiDtoiD 
nice  lies :  nolb  tell  nice ,  3  VW  thee, 
ibhcrclbith  thou  mtgbteft  be  bounD. 

n  3nD  he  fa.D  bnto  hcrjlf  they  btnD 
mc  fall  ibtth  ncibc  ropes  t  that  netter 
lbcreoccuptcD,  then  than  3J  bee  ibca&c, 
anD  be  as  another  man. 

ii  Delilah  therfo2c  toobc  nclb  ropes, 
anD  bounD  him  thcreibtfh,  anD  faiD  bn- 
to htm ,  Xhe  ^hiltfhncs  be  bpon  tljcc , 
g>amfon.(:3mD  there  ibercltersinvbait 
abiDtng  in  the  chamber. )  anD  hec  tyanc 
them  from  off  hts  amies,  liUcath.2tcD. 

ij  3inD  Delilah  faiD  bnto  Samfon, 
hitherto  thouhaftmocKCDmc,auDtolD 
meltes:  tell  mclbhcrcnntl)thoumtgh 
teftbebouttD.  3utDhc  faiD  bnto  her,  3(f 
thou  lbcaucft  the  fcucn  locltes  of  my 
hcabibtththcibcb. 

i4.5ltiDn)efafttueDttlbttl)tljcpttine, 
anD  fatDbnto  him,  1-he  phtlifttncs  be 
bpon  thee,  Samfon.  5?ud  Ijec  aibancD 
out  of  htsflcepe,  attDibeut  aibayibtth 
tljc  ptnnc  of  the  bcamc  A  ibtth  the  ibeb. 

15  C3nD  (hee  faiD  bnto  him ,  i?otti 
canft  thou  fay,  31  louc  thee,  lbhcnth'.nc 
heart  isnotibithmcc^Xhouhaftmoc 
HcDntectliefcthw tunes,  anD  haft  not 
tolD  mc  ibhcrtu  thy  great  ftrcngth llC[h- 

16  3lnDtt  camctopaffc,n)hcn(hcp2cf 
feb  htm  Daily  ibith  hcrlboiDcs,  anDb? 
geD  him ,  (o  that  his  foule  ibas  t  bcrcD 
bnto  Death, 

17  XhathctolDherallhiSheart,anD 
fatDbnto  her ,  Xhcrc  hath  not  tome  a 
rafozbponnunchcaD:  fcj?^  i»uebenca 
j^a^antc  bnto  <3oD  from  my  mothers 
lbombe :  3ft~  3  bet  fljauen,  then  my 
ftrcngth  ibtll  goe  from  me,  aub  3  Q)^ft 
become  ibeauc ,  anD  bet  liKc  any  otiicr 
man. 

i8  3lnD)bhcnDcltlahfarbti)athchaD 
tolD  her  an  his  hcar;,thc  fcntanD  taiicD 
fo2  the  H02DS  of  thcphtliftuics,fayutg, 
€omcbpthisontc,fo2hcchathfl)eibcD 
mc  all  his  heart.  Xhcnthclo2Dsof  the 

IDhtU- 


1  M.Jhtrt- 


Samfon  is  taken:        Chap 


.XVI). 


His  death. 


|  Heir.  he.t- 
rtdout 


\  Orju  when 
be  nvuJ&A- 
uen. 


\  Heir. and 
who  mulif 
fited  our 


\Hebr-be- 

farethim. 


\\Orthc  lo- 
tted on  them. 


philiftutes  tame  bp  Dnto  f)cr ,f  brought 
moneput  their  hanb. 

19  anbfhemabchimflccpcbponhct 
tmees,  anD  (he  callcb  fo?  a  man,  anb  (he 

i  caufcbhtnitofbattcoff  the  fcuen  locttes 
of  his hcab.anb  fl)t  began  to  afflict  him, 
ana  his  ftrength  ID  cut  front  him. 

20  3tnt)fbcfaiD,Xnep!nuftmcsbc 
bpott  thec,  Samfon.  3iiib  hec  aibotte 
outofhisflecpc,anbfatb,3IttnUgoout 
as  at  other  tunes  befoje,  anb  fhaRemp 
felfe.  3nb  he  mitt notthat  tlje  %o  is  £> 
Vbas  bepar  tea  fromh  tin, 

21  C26uttI)tpinumnc£tooKc!)tm 
anb  t  put  out  his  cpcs,anb  brought  htm 
bottmc  to  (5aja,  anb  bounb  htmiblth 
fetters  of  b:affc ,  anb  he  bib  gemb  ut  the 
pnfott  houfc. 

22  $ott)bctt,thehaire  of  htshtab 
began  to  groib  againe ,  ||  after  hetbas 
fhauett. 

23  Xhcn  thcloibsofthe^hiltfhncs 
gathercb  them  together,  fo*  to  offer  a 
great  faenfice  bnto  SDagon  their  gob, 
anbtoreioptc:  fo:  thep  faib ,  <aDurgob 
hath  bcliuercb  Samfon  our  enemp  in- 
to our hanb. 

24.  ^nb  Vbhen  the  people  fatb  him, 
thep  pjatfeb  thctc  gob :  fo?  the?  fatb, 
£>ur  gob  hath  beltuer  cb  into  our  hattbs 
our  enemy ,  anb  the  beftroper  of  our 
countrcp,  f  tt>ljict>  fletb  many  of  PS. 

25  2ttbtt  came  to  paffclbhcn  their 
hcartsiberc  mctrp,fhatthepfatb,Cail 
fo?  Samfon ,  that  hec  map  matte  bs 
fpo?t.  3lnb  thep  talicbfo?  Samfonout 
of  the  pnfon  hottfe,  anb  he  mabe  t  them 
fpozt, anb thep  fet him  betmeene  the 
pillars. 

26  3{n&  Samfon  faib  bnto  the  lab 
that  licit)  htm  bp  thchanb,Sur?et  nice, 
that  3  map  fecit  the  pillars  tbherc= 
'upon  the  houfc  &aribcfl) ,  that3lmap 
llcanebponthcm. 

27  /Bom  the  houfc  mas  full  of  men 
!aub  ibomctt ,  anb  all  the  1020s  of  the 

phlltfttneS  f> ere  thCtC:   anb  there  were 

bpon  ti)e  roofc  about  truce  thouianb 
men  anb  women ,  that  bchclbc  while 
Samfonmabcfpo2t. 

28  3lnb  Samfon  taiicb  bnto  the 
%  0 13  jp,  anb  faib,  <©  2lo2b  <5  ©  £>,  rc^ 
member  me,  3?  pzav  thee,  f  ftrengthnt 
mec,  3  VM?  rhec,  onelp  this  once,  £> 
Gob ,  that  3  map  be  at  once  aucugcb  of 
the  $htliflutcs,fo2  mp  two  epes. 

29  3utb  Samfon  toouc  holb  of  the 
troo  mtbble  pillars,  Ppott  U)i)ict)  the 
houfcttDOb^nbilonWhirhttwas  borne 


top ,  of  the  one  With  his  right  hanb ,  anb 
of  the  other  Until  his  left. 

30  3nb  Sainton faib,1Let  hue btc 
Until  the  philtfttncs:  $  heboweohim; 
felfe  With  all  he  ntight :  anb  the  hottfe 
fel  bpon  the  l02bs,  anb  bpon  all  the  pco 
plethatwcrethcreuufothcbcab  winch 
he  OcW  at  his  Death,  Wcremoc,  then 
thep  tt)htch  he  fleU)  m  his  life. 

31  Xhcn  his  b?eth?en ,  anb  an  the 
hottfe  of  his  father,  tame  bovbnc,  anb 
toobehun,anbb?oughtri]mbp,nnbbu^ 
ncbhimbctuieenezojahanbcnitaol, 
m  tljc  burping  place  of  QDanoahhis  ffr 
thet :  anb  hec  wbgcb  Jfracl  twcntic 
pecrcs. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

x  Of  the  money  that  Micah  firltrtolc  _,  then  re- 
ftored,  his  mother niaketh  Images,  5  and 
hee  ornaments  foi  them.  6  HehiiethaLe- 
uitetobehisPtiert. 

'm  mount  €phwtm ,  whofe 
S8in!m  name  mas  fl^icaft. 

2  3mb  he  fatb  bnto  his 
,  mother,  Xhcclcuctthut^ 
b?eb  fhekds  of  fiiucr ,  that  lbcrc  taken 
front  thee,  about  ttihtch  thou  ntrfebtt, 
anb  fpa&cft  of  alfo  in  mine  eares,  be 
holb,  the  Outer  is  vbtthmcc.JJtooKctt. 
3ttb  his  mother  faib ,  26icffcbbcthott 
of  tljc  1L  o  13  2D,  mp  fottne. 

3  3lnD  rbhenhee hab  rcttojeb  the  t> 
leucn  hunbzcb  Eckels  of  ftiiter  to  his  mo- 
ther ,  his  mother  Hub ,  3  hab  ibhoUp 
bebtcatcb  the  fiiucr  bnto  the  %  0133?, 
from  mp  hanbjoj  mp  fount,  to  matte 
a  gratten  image  anb  a  molten  image: 
nott)  therefore  3  mil  reftozc  it  bnto 
t!;cc. 

4  J^et  hec  redojeb  the  monep  bnto 
htsmother,anbhismothcrtooRc  tVbo 
hunbjcb  (Tiekeis  of  fiiucr,  anb  gaucthem 
to  ttje  founber,  ruho  mabe  thereof  a 
graucn  image  anb  a  molten  image,  anb 
thcplbcre  in  the  houfe  of  finical). 

5  3nb  the  man  fl0icar»  hab  an  houfe 
of  gobs,  anb  mabe  an  *  cphob ,  anb 
*  Xeraphim ,  anb  t  confccratco  one  of 
his  fomtes,  U)ho  became  his  pnell. 

6  *3Jntftof£bapcstheiewasnotnng 
in3Ifracl,btttcucrpmanbibtl)atruhtch 
Vbas  right  in  his  omnc  epes. 

7  C  3nb  there  ibas  a  poung  matt 
outof25ethlehcm3mbah,  of  the  famt- 
ip  of^Jtioah,  tbho  Vbas  a  ?Leuttc,  anb 
he  foiourncb  there. 

3  ^nbthemanbeparteboutofthc 
31  a  3  citie 


\  Hckr.mj 
fottle. 


2p.6, 


*Gcn.  5 1, 
19.ofc.3-4 
t  Htbr. filled 
the  hxad. 
•Chdp.18. 
r.  and  11. 


Spies  of  Dan 


"Iud 


s 


es. 


fcarch  Laifli. 


\Heb.;nina- 
kinghitieay. 


\\0r>  adott- 
blefuU,&c. 
Heb.  an  or- 
der of  gar- 
ment t. 


6.2nd  21. 


\Heh. 

fonncs. 


erne  from  aSethlehem  gittDah,  to  fo* 
iourne  Vbi)crcl)e  coulD  finDe  a  place :  anD 
hceamctomotmt£ph?atmtothchoufc 
of  s^ical),  tashctounteyeD. 

9  anos^cahfaio  Ditto  him,09hencc 
commettthou*  3lnDhe  faiD  Dnto  him, 
3J  am  a  Hcutte,  of  Bethlehem  gjuDah, 
anD  3J  goe  to  fotournc  lbherc  5  may 

fitlDCaplace. 

10  2nDi$)itahfatDDtttohtm,2inbcU 
ibtth  mc,  ano  be  Dnto  me  a  father  anD 
a  i&teQ,  anD  3  unU  giuc  thee  ten  ftwkcis 
offilucr  by  the  yecre,  anD  1!  a  fuitc  of  ap; 
parcll,  ano  thy  bictuals.  3>e  the  He* 
uttevbentm. 

11  3lnD  the  Hcuitc  lDas  content  to 
DYbell  Mth  the  man.atiD  tfjc  y  ong  man 
ttias  Dnto  him  as  one  of  his  fonncs. 

ii  2lnD  Qj)itah  confccratcD  the  %t-> 
uttc,  ano  the  young  man  became  bis 
02icft,  ant>  ibas  ut  the  boufc  of  QBicab. 

13  Xben  faiD  40icab,  4l3ott)  Htiolb 
31  that  the  fLfiHiPiMlDoemcgooD, 
feeing  31  baue  a  iLcmte  to  my  &ncfr. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

The  D  .mites  fend  fiue  men  to  feeke  out  an  in- 
heritance. 3  At  tliehoufeoi  Micah  they  con- 
fult  with  Ionathan ,  and  are  incouraged  in 
their  way.  7  They  fearch Laifh, and  bring 
backenewesot  good  hope.  11  Sixehundred 
men  are  fent  to  furprize  ir.  14  In  the  way 
they  robbe  Micah  of  his  Pi  ieft  and  his  confc- 
crate  things.  17  They  win  Laifh  and  call  it 
Dan.  50  They  fetvpldo!auie,whereinlo- 
nathan  inherited  the  Piiefthood. 

Sjl^^S  fa  *tt)0fC  DavCS  there  was 

no  Ring  m  3Jfracl :  anD  in 
thofc  Dates  the  tnbe  of  the 
Damtcs  fought  them  an 
^»£?-§«5  inheritance  to  DlDclinrfo.z 
Unto  that  Day,  ail  thrtr  inheritance  baa 
notfallcn  tonto  tl)cni,  atnoncjtlje  tribes 
ofjftael. 

i  ^nD  the  cbilDmt  of  3Dan  fent  of 
their  family  ,fiur  men  from  their  coafis, 
t  men  of  Dalour ,  from  Zoiah ,  anD 
fromCfbtaol,  tofpyotittbclatiD,  anD 
to  feartb  it ,  anD  ttjcy  faiD  Ditto  them, 
C5oc,  fcartl)  the  latiDtreboibbcnthcy 
came  to  mount  <ffpb#um ,  to  the  boufc 
of  fiPtcab.thcy  lobgeD  there. 

J    HDllCU  thCV  were  by  tl)C  bOllfC  Of 

Q3tcab,tbcylmcibthcDotccoftbcyong 
matt  the  JLnntt :  anD  they  tnrncD  tn 
tf)itbcr,<ifaiD  Ditto  him, nabobjougbt 
tbecbttber;  amnbbatinahcfttbouin 
this  place  i  anD  what  baft  thou  here  i 


4  StaDbcc  faiD  Ditto  them ,  Xbus 
anD  thus  Dcaietb  £0ieah  tbitb  ntc ,  anD 
hatbbireDmc,auD3Jambisf^iefr. 

5  3ttD  tbey  favD  Dnto  iiim ,  3f  be 
counfctl,ibep:ay  thee,  of  <soD,  that  rue 
may  fcnoib,  lbhetbec  onr  Vbay  iDbtch 
lbe  goe,  fball  be  pjofperous. 

6  3lttD  the  ^zteft  latD  Dnto  tnem, 
<5ot  in  peace:  before  tlje  %,<£>  is  d  is  yont 
iDayrbneremyegoe. 

7  C  %\\c\\  tfte  fine  men  DcparteD, 
ano  came  to  Hani) ,  anD  falb  tlje  people 
tltat  iDcrc  tltcrem  ,  l)ott)  ttjey  DlDtlt 
carclcffe,  after  tlje  ntancrof  rfjertDo- 
tttatts,  QutetatiDfccurcanDttjeretDas 
notmagittrate  tn  the  lanD  that  might 
put  tltcm  to  fhamc  m  any  thing,  ano 
they  were  farrc  from  the  ZtDonians, 
attDljaDno  buBncffciDithauyman. 

8  ^nD  they  came  Ditto  their  bit 
tl)jen  to  zo:ah  ,  anD  tffbtaol :  anD 
their  tyethjen  faiD  Ditto  tljcm,  aahat 
fay  pee* 

9  3nDtheyfaiD,3ru*c,thanbcmay 
gocDp  agatnft  them :  fo:  vot  hauc  fcene 
the  ianD,anD  beljolD,lt  1  Dery  gooD:anD 
are  ye  mil  1 25ce  not  aothfull  to  goe,and 
to  enter  to  poffefferijeiatiD. 

10  i©htnyegoe,ycfhaUcomeDntoa 
pcoplcfecure,  anD  toalargelanD :  fo: 
d50D  hath  giuen  tt  into  y  onr  hanoes:  a 
place  iDhere  there  is  no  ibant  of  any 
thutg,thatismthc  earth- 

11  C^tnD  there  iDent  from  tijence  of 
the  famtlv  of  the  SDamtts  out  of  zc 
rah, anD  out  of  efhtaol,  fire  hunD?eD 
men,  tappoynteD  lDtth  ibcapons  of 
rbatre. 

u  3nDthcyibctttDp,anDpitchcDin 
Htrtath-icaniu,m^uDah :  tehcrefoje 
they  calico  that  place  S^ahanch  £>att, 
Dnto  this  Day :  bcholD,  it  is  bchmDe  %v 
rtathicartm. 

13  3nD  tltcy  paffeo  thence  Ditto 
mount  €ph;aim,  anD  came  Dnto  the 
houfcof£@icah. 

1+  CXheu  anflbcrcD  tlie  fiue  mni 
that  iDcnt  to  fptc  out  the  tottntrcy  of 
Hatfl) ,  anD  fatDc  Dnto  tljnr  bjethmt, 
3Doc  y c fettolD  tljat  there  Is  tn  thefe  hou 
fes  an  cphob ,  anD  Xcraphim ,  anD  a 
graucn  image,  anD  a  molten  imager 
0o\\)  therefor  conSDer  iDhatychaue 
toDoe. 

15  ^ud  they  ttirncD  thitheribarD.anD 
came  to  the  houfc  of  the  yongman  the 
Hcuite,  euen  Dnto  the  houfe  of  fl^ital), 
aitDtfaiutcDhtm. 

i6  ^inD  the  fir  huuD:eDmen  appoln 

ttD 


W,  or  hetre 
aj  rvJlrMflt 


I  Htb.tit 

A,i.     & 


robMicah,and 


Ch 


ap.xix. 


fetvp  idol 


oiatrie. 


t  Heb.that 
than  art  fa- 
thercd  to- 
gether ? 


t  Heb-  bitter 
effcule. 


tcb  ttnth  their  ibcapons  of  ibar,  ibhich 
rbcre  of  the  cljinyen  of  Dan,  Soob  by 
the  cntrmgofthcgatc. 

17  3lnb  the  fiuc  men  that  ibent  to 
fpie  out  ttjc  lanb, ibent  bp  and  came  m 
thither,  md  toofec  the  grauen  image, 
anbthc£phob,anbthe1i:crapbtm,anb 
the  molten  image :  anb  the  0jicttftoob 
tnthccntringof  thegate,  tbithtlje  fire 
hunb:cth  men  that  lbere  appointcb 
ibitlj  Ibcapons  of  ibarrc. 

18  ;3uib  ttjcfe  ruent  into  ^ieahs 
Ijottfc,  anb  fetchcb  tljc  earucb  image, 
the  Cphob,anb  thcXeraphini,  a«ts  the 
molten  image :  then  faib  the  $ntft  biv 
to  them,  aaljatbocyc* 

19  :^b  they  Taibbnttj  him,  $olb  thy 
peace,  la?  thine  hanb  bpon  tlrp  mouth, 
anb  goeibith  bs,  anb  becto  bs  a  father 
anaatfmeik  SJsttbettcrfojthcetobcc 
a^nefl:  bnto  the  houfc  of  one  man,  02 
tijat  thou  be  a#«cG  bnto  a  tribe  ansa 
family  infftatli 

20  %wa  the  $2teQs  heart  ibas  glab, 
anbhctooUethc£phob,anbtheXcra; 
pt)im,anb  the  grauen  image,  anb  ibent 
inthenubbcftofthc  people. 

n  £>o  they  turncb,  anb  beparteb, 
anb  put  the  little  ones ,  anb  the  eattcu, 
anb  the  tariage  bcfo2C  them. 

21  CAnd*bhm  they  ibereagoeb 
tbayfromthchoufeof^ieah,thcmcn 
that  iberc  in  the  houfes  nccre  to  $&v 
eahs  houfe,  iberc  gathctcb  together, 
anb  oucttooue  the  chilbtcn  of  Dan. 

ij  ^nbthcycncbbntothcchiUwcnof 
Dan :  anb  they  turncb  their  faces,  anb 
ratbbnto^icah,n9hataiicthfhee,tthat 
thou  conimcftibitij  Tilth  a  company 

14  3lnb  he  fatb ,  Ptc  hauc  taften  & 
ibay  my  gobs  rbhirfj  3  mabc ,  anb  the 
0:iett,anb  ye  arc  gone  albay:  anb  what 
haue  3  11102c  i  anb  ibhar  is  t1jts  thatyce 
fay  bnto  mc,  uahat  ailcth  thee  < 

25  3lnb  the  rttflbicn  of  Dan  faib  bn- 
to  him,  ?Lct  not  tl)y  boyce  bccljearba* 
mongbs,  left  t  angry  fclloibcs  runbp- 
on  tj)ec,  anb  tl)ou  loCc  thy  life,  \bith 
the  itues  of  thy  houujolb. 

16  3lnb  the  cbtlb2m  of  Dan  tbent 
their  tbay :  anb  Ybhcn  99'.cah  faibe  that 
rl)cy  iberc  too  ftrongfo2l)tiu,  l)e  turncb 
anb  tbent  bacHe  bnto  Ijishoufe. 

17  StnbtljcytooBethcthmgslbhith 
<J0itah  hab  mabt ,  anb  the  pnea  tt)l)tc!) ; 
occfta'b ,  anb  came  bnto  Haul) ,  bnto  a; 
people  that  iberc  at  quiet ,  anb  fecure,  I 
anbtney  Quote  tljcm  lbttl)  tlje  ebgc  of! 
tljc  ftuo2b,  anb  burnt  tljc  rttfe  lbttl)  fire,  j 


is  ^nb  tljerc  ibasno  bcliuerer,  be 
caufc  it  ibas  farre  from  Sibon,  anb 
tljcy  Ijab  no  buOncnc  ibitU  any  man: 
anb  it  ibas  m  tljc  bailey  tljat  fieth  by 
25ctl>rcl)ob,  anb  tfjcy  built  antic ,  anb 
blbclttlicrnn. 

19  3tnb  tl)cy  cailcb  tljc  name  of  the 
*  city , Dan,  after  tljc  name  of  Dan  their 
rather ,  ibho  ibas  b02ttc  bnto  3Urael : 
hoibbcit  tlje  name  of  tljc  ntic  lbas  jLa 
tujatthefirft. 

jo  c  Znn  tljc  cbilb2cn  of  Dan  fct 
bp  the  graucn  tmagc :  anb^Jouatljau 
the  Tonne  of  Gcrdjom,  the  Tonne  of 
s59ana(rch  >  h«  anb  his  Tonnes,  iberc 
|&2tcfls  to  tljc  tribe  of  Dan,  bnnil  the 
bay  of  the  captiuitic  of  tljc  lanb. 

31  3mb  they  fet  tljcm  bp  fiPicahs 
grauen  image,  ibhich  hce  mabc,  au  tljc 
time  that  the  houfc  of  ©ob  lbas  m  ^>lji= 
lot). 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  A  LcuiccgoetluoBcdiiehenito  fetch  home  his 
wife.  16  AnoldmaneiKeruinethhimatGi- 
beah.  ir  The  Gibeonites  abu/e  his  concubine 
to  death.  19  He  diuidcth  her  uno  tweluc 
pieces  to  (end  them  to  the  tweluc  tribes. 

J15D  it  came  to  paffe  m 
tljofc  bayes,  *  ibijcn  tljcrc 
was  no  fSting  in  3Tracl, 
thatthcrcibasacertame 
t  JLtxntt  Toioumingon  the 
fibc  of  mount  ephitaim ,  ibho  tooUc 
to  Jjuu  t  a  concubine  out  of  2Sethichcm 
Jubah. 

1  3nb  JjiS  toncubinc  playcb  tljc 
lbhoje  agama  Ijim,  anb  rbent  albay 
from  him  bnto  her  fathers  houfe  to 
asethlcljem  3Jubah,  anb  lbas  there 
Hfoucelbholemoncths. 

3  3tnbherl)ufbanbarofc,anbibent 
after  her  to  fpcafee  tfncnbly  bnto  her, 
anbto  b2ingljcr  againc,  haumghtsfcr 
uant  ibitlj  Ijnn ,  anb  atonpieof  affes: 
anbfljee  b2ougljtljiminto  Ijct  fathers 
houfe,  anb  tbhen  tlje  father  of  the  bam 
fell  fatt>  him,  he  reioyeeb  to  meet  him. 

4  3nbhtsfathcr  m  lalb,  tljc  bamo 
fclsfather,retelncbhun,anbhccabobt 
vovA)  him  thJcc  bayes :  To  they  bib  can 
anb  b2inl»c,  anb  lobgeb  there. 

5  C  3lnb  u  came  to  paffc  on  rl)c 
fourth  bay,ibhcn  they  arofc  carcly  in 
the mo2nmg, tljathc  rofc  bp  to  bepart : 
anb  thcbamofels  father  fatbc  bnto  Iks 
Tonne  in  laibc ,  tcomfot  thmc  heart 
ibttlj  amo2rcll  of  b^cab,  anb  afteribarb 
gocyourlbav. 

6   ^(nb1 


•ioih.19. 

47- 


'Chap.  1 7. 
«.andl8. 1 
and  zl.  25- 


'  Heh.  atc]- 
mun  A  ctnt- 

bwe. 


\  Or,  A  ytcre 
undfowc 

mor.tlhs. 

fnirems 
ntlk/. 

\Heb.:oher 
hcMrt. 


rHeb.jlrmg- 
Ihcn. 


The  Lcuitcs  wife         ludges.        is  forced  to  death. 


\Htb.tttlht 
day  declt' 

wed. 


\Hrh.i: 
Vftakt. 

t/&f.ifcis 

the  pitching 

time  of 'the 
d,j. 

\Hcb.n 

thy  tent. 


f  Heh.  to  o- 
urra^ainf} 
Itbut. 


6  3inatheyfateaoWne,anaatacat 
anD  a;int$c  both  of  them  together:  fo? 
the  aamoftis  father  haa  fatae  bnto  the 
ntan,25ceontent,;3J  piay  thcc,anatary 
ail  night,  ana  let  thine  heart  be  metric. 

7  ^nawhcnthcmanrofcbptoac; 
partes  father  tniaw  bjgea  bun :  ther 
fojehe  loagea  there  agame. 

8  3ina  t)ct  atofc  early  m  the  mot' 
ning  onthefift  aay  toaepart,  ana  the 
aamoftis  father  faya ,  comfozt  thtne 
heart,  31  pjay  thee.  3no  they  tariea 
t  bnttii  after  noonc ,  ana  the?  ata  cate 
both  of  them. 

9  3na  when  the  man  rofebp  to  ae> 
part,beeanabisconcubute,anahisfcr; 
uant ;  his  father  in  law,  tlic  aamfels  fa- 
ther, fata  bnto  htm ,  aschoia,  now  the 
aay  ttyaweth  towaraes  eucntng,  'J 
pjay  you  tarie  all  night :  behoia  ,t  the 
aay  groweth  to  an  enac,  loage  hcetc, 
that  thine  heart  may  be  mcrnc ;  ana  to 
mozroW  get  pon  early  on  your  Way, 
rhatthoumayeftgocthomc. 

io  usutthemanwouianottarythat 
night, but  he  rofc  bp  ana  aepartca,  ana 
came  t  oucr  agamft  3febus  (Which  is 
gjctufalcni : )  ana  tKcrewere  with  him 
twoaffcslaaiea,  histoncubmcalfo  was 
With  htm. 

ii  3Jna  When  they  were  by  3lebns, 
the  aay  was  farrc  fpent ,  ana  the  fcr* 
uant  faia  bnto  his  matter ,  Come ,  gi 
pjay  thee,  ana  let  bs  turnc  m  into  this 
rificofthc3Jcbnfitcs,anaioagcuut. 

ix  2lna  his  matter  fata  bnta  bim,t©e 
will  not  turne  afiae  hither  into  the  title 
of  a  ftranger ,  that  is  not  of  the  chiiajen 
of  Jfracl,  we  Wtlpafftoucr  to  ©tbcah. 

13  3lna  hee  fayac  bnto  his  (truant, 
Come,  ana  let  bs  awvb  nterc  to  one  of 
thefe  plates  to  loage  all  night,  in  ©t» 
bcah,onn£amab. 

14  3uia  they  pafTca  on  ana  went 
their  way,  anatbcuinncWcnt  aoibne 
bpon  them  when  they  were  by  c>ibeah, 

lbljith  belonseth  tOBCUiamin. 

15  ana  they tumca afiae  thither ,  to 
go  m  and  to  loage  in  dftbeah :  ana  When 
bcWctUinJhcfatchunaoWnemaftrcet 
of  the  tine  :foj  there  lbas  no  man  that 
toohe  thrm  into  his  houfe  to  loagtng. 

i6  C3lnabcboia,therccaincan oiac 
man  from  his  Woifteoutof  tbeficioat 
cucn ,  Which  was  alfo  of  mount  Cptaa 
tm;  ana  hec  foiourneo  m  ctbeah,  but 
the  men  of  the  plate  Were  ffientanutcs. 

1 7  3lno  ibhen  he  haa  lift  bp  his  eyes, 
hefaw  a  wayfaring  man  mthc  ttrcete 


of  the  title:  ana  the  oia  man  fata,  w\)\- 
ther  goettthou*  ana  Whenrc  tommeft 
thouf 

18  3nahcfaia  bnto  him,  i©e  arc  paf 
(ing  from  Bethlehem  3Iuaah,  toWara 
toe  fiac  of  mount  eph?aim,from  thence 
am3J  :ana3J  went  to  Bethlehem  3Iu* 
aah,  but3J  am  now  going  to  the  houfe 
of  the  %  0  is©,  ana  there  is  no  man 
that  t  v ccciucth  me  to  houfe. 

19  Pet  there  is  both  draw  anapjo? 
ucnaer  fo?  our  affes ,  ana  there  is  tycaa 
ana  wmeaifo  fozme  anafojttby  hana< 
mala,  ana  to?  the  young  man  which  is 
with  thy  fecuants :  there  is  no  want  of 
anything, 

io  anatheoiae  man  fata,  #eatebe 
With  thee;  hoWfocuer,ict  all  thy  wants 
lie  bpon  me ;  only  loage  not  m  the  ftrcct. 

ii  ;§>o  he  brought  htmintobishoufe, 
ana  gauc  pjoucnacr  bnto  the  aflts:  ana 
they  walbca  their  feet,  ana  aia  cate  ana 
annfce. 

11  Cii5oW  as  they  were  mailing 
their  hearts  mcrrie,  behoia,  the  men  of 
thecitie,  tertamefonnes  of  26eliai,  be- 
fet  the  houfe  rouna  about ,  and  beat  at 
thcaoo:r,anafpaBcto  themaftet  ofthc 
houfe,  the  oiae  man, faying,  ffinng 
foo?th  the  man  that  tame  into  thine 
houfe,  that  we  may  Hnow  him. 

13  3lna*theman,  the  matter  of  the 
houfewent  out  bnto  them,ana  fata  bn^ 
to  them,  j]2ay  my  b?cth?en,  nay,  3  PW 
you  aoe  not  fo  wicfecaiy,  feeing  that 
this  man  is  tome  into  nunc  houfe,  aoe 
not  this  folly. 

24.  Behoia ,  here  is  my  aaughter,  a 
ntatacn,anahisconmbmc,them3IWii 
bung  out  now,  ana  humblcycc  them, 
anaaoewith  them  what  fecmeth  gooo 
bnto  you :  but  bnto  this  man  aoe  not 
tfo  bile  a  thing. 

25  But  the  men  Wouia  not  hcarfceti 
to  hinufo  the  man  tooaehis  conmbtne, 
ana  biougln  her  foonh  bnto  them,  ana 
they  Knew  her,  ana  abufea  her  all  the 
night  bntu  the  morning :  ana  when  the 
aaybrgantofpiing.tbcylctbctgoc. 

26  %{\m  catne  the  Woman  in  tlic 
aawmng ofthc  aay, ana  fcliaoWncat 
theaoo2Coftlicmanshoufe,Whcreher 
lo:awas,till  it  Was  light. 

17  3lna  her  102a  rofe  bpm  tl)c moa- 
ning, ?openea  thcaoojesof  the  houfe, 
ana  went  out  to  goc  his  way:  ana  be 
hoia ,  the  woman  his  concubine  Was 
fallen  aownc  attheaoojeof  thehoufe, 
ana  her  hanas  were  bpon  the  tbjemolD. 

28  TlnXi 


\nebr.ga. 
thergtht 


*  Genef. 


\Hrhr.lhe 
matter  pf 
thufollj. 


ThcLeuites 


Ch; 


ao.xx. 


•p 


com 


-™" — • 

plaint. 


\Hekthe 
man  the  Le- 


I  \Htt. ham- 
tied. 


28  anb  Ijefaib  bnto  t)cMilp,anb  let 
bSbegoing.:»Sutnoncanfujctcb:trjen 
thcmautooBeijcc  vP  bponanatfcanb 
rf)e  man  rofe  bp ,  ant)  gate  him  bnto 
j)ts  place. 

29  c^nbiWhenljcibas  tome  into 
l)tsi)onfe,  bee  tooUc  amufc,  anblapb 
jjolb  onljts  concubine,anb  biuibcbljer, 

together  tt)ttt»  tytt  bOtteS  ,  UttO  tlbClUC 

pieces ,  ant>  fent  Ijer  into  all  tljc  wafts 
of^frael. 

30  anbiUbasfotbatantnatfavbit, 
(aib,  lOberelbas  nofucrjbccbbonenoj 
fecnc ,  from  rtjcbap  ti)at  ttjc  cbilbjcn  of 
3Jfracl  tame  top  out  of  toe  lanb  of  e- 
gvpt  ,tonto  tihis  bay :  tonfibcr  of  tt,taae 

abUU"C,anb  fpeafeC  your  mindes. 

CHAP.    XX. 

The  Leuite  id  a  generall  alTembly  dedareth 
his  wrong.  8  The  decree  of  the  dlTembly. 
11  The  Benianutes  being  cited,  nuke  head 
againft  the  Ifraelites.  18  The  Israelites  in 
twobattelsloofetourtythoufand.  t6  They 
dcflroy  by  a  ftratageme  all  the  Beniamites, 
except  fixe  hundred. 

^enaiifljcrfnib2enof3Jfc 
racl  umit  out ,  anb  tljc 
Congregation  ibas  ga 
ttjctcb  together  as  one 
man ,  from  Dan  men  to 

isccr-ujcba,  Vbttlj  tl)c  lanb  of  (5tlcab, 

bnto  tljc  %  0  is  id  tn  $)i5pcl). 
2  ^nbtljctl)iefcofaltI)tpeoplc,euen 

of  all  tljc  tribes  of  Ufrael ,  mefenteb 
tljcmfclucs  in  tljc  aflcmbly  of  the  peo- 
ple of  d5ob ,  fonre  Ijunbicb  fljoufanb 
footmen  that  bjett)  fwo?b. 

j  ( Jftorb  tlje  cotlbjscn  of  ffieniamin 
hearb  tljat  tl)cttjiibjcttof3tftaclu)crc 
gone  bp  to  S0i3pcl).)£rjcn  faib  tljc  toil- 
b2cnof3Jfraci,  %clltos,ljoU)tt>asftns 
ibWRcbncffci 

4.  3lnb  t  tljc  Hctutc  tljc  ijuf  banb  of 
the  lboman  that  ltoas  flame ,  anftacrcb 
anb  fatb  ,3  wmc  into  oibcalj  tljat  be- 
longethto  26eniaiuin ,  3  anb  tag  concur 
binc,tolobge. 

5  3inb  tlje  men  of  Oibcalj  rofc  a 
gainfl  me,  anb  bcfct  tljc  Ijoufc  rouub  a» 
boutbponmcby  nigljt,  anbtljougUtto 
Dauc  flaine  mcc,  and  my  toncubinc  ijauc 
tljcy t  fo?teb  tt>at  ft)C  ts  bcab. 

6  3tnb  3  tooncmy toncubinc ,  anb 
tut  Ijcr  in  pieces,  anb  rentljctfljjouglj- 
out  ail  the  tountrcybf  tljc  inljcritancc 
of  3Jfracl :  fo*  tbey  ijaue  committcb 
icujbncireanbfollvtn^fcacl. 


7  25el)olb,  yeareailerjtlbjen of  3Jf 
rael,gtuerjereyourabuifeanbeouniell. 

s  canbaiitbepcopiearofcasone 
man,  (aping,  naevbtll  not  any  of  Vi  goe 
to  t)is  tent,  neitljcr  ibill  itoce  any  ot  vs 
turtle  into  his  Ijoufe: 

9     25llt  IXOVO,  tl)tS  fhall  bee  ttJC  tfting 

ibijitl)  rbc  ibill  boc  to  ©ibcah,  we  will  3oe 
vpbylotagainttit: 

io  3lnbibcH)il  take  ten  mcnofabiuu 
bzcb  tlj?ougljout  all  the  tribes  of  31 
racl,  anb  anljunbicbofatljoufano,anD 
atboufanboutof  tentrjoufanb,  to  fetch 
bicmail  fo?  tlje  people,  that  fljey  map 
boc,Vbtjcutheycometo<5tbcabof2i5cn; 
iamin ,  accozbing  to  all  tljc  folly  that 
tijey  Ijauc  ltojougljt  m  gjfrael. 

ii  5>oallthcmenof3lfraelibcrcgtii 
tnereb  againil  tljc  cine ,  t  imit  together 
as  one  man. 

12  C  3lnb  tljc  tribes  of  IJfrael  fent 
men  ftjozolb  all  the  tribe  of  aSettiamin, 
faying,»3bat  vbicKebneflc  is  this  tljat  is 
bone  among  you  < 

u  jBoibtljcrfojebcuuerbsttjemen, 
tlje  ctjilbjcn  of  aScltai  Jbljicf)  are  m  <&{'- 
bealj,  thatrbecmavputthemto  bcatlj, 
anb  put  atbap  euill  from  3lfrael :  but 
the  clnlbtcn  of  2i6eniamin  tboulb  not 
ncarnen  to  tiic  boicc  of  tljcit  b.jctljzen 
tljecljilbicnof^ifracl. 

14  23ut  tljc  ehilbjcn  of  23eniamin 
gatrjereb  tljcmfclucs  togetljcr  out  of 
tlje  cities,  bnto  Oibcalj,  to  goc  out  to 
battcll  againft  tlje  cljilbjen  of  3Jfracl. 

15  ^nb  tljc  tljilbtcn  of  26cniamm 
Vberc  numbzeb  at  that  tunc  out  of  the 
cities,  trbcntie anb  fife  fijoufanb  men 
thatb?cib  fiiJ02b,  bcfibc  tl)c  inhabitants 
of  0ibealh,W)rjicljibcrc  numbzebfeuen 
!juubjcbcl)ofenmcn. 

16   ^ClllOlig  all  tlllS  pCOpIC  there  were 

fcucn  Ijuiibzcb  cljofcn  men  *  left  ijan^ 
beb ,  cuerp  one  coulb  fling  floncs  at  an 
ijaircbreadth,anbnotm:flc. 

17  3tnb  tlje  men  of  3Jfrael,  bcfibc 
iBcniamin ,  lbcrc  numbicb  fourc  ljuiv 
b?cb  tboufanb  men  tljat  bzcibe  fiuozb, 
all  ftjcfc  were  menof  Uiarrc. 

18  C^nb  tljc  cljilbjcn  of  IJfracl  a* 
rofc,  anb  ibent  bp  to  tljc  houfc  of  00b, 
anb  aflteb  counfcll  of  Gob ,  anb  faibc, 
DDljiclj  of  t>s  fljali  goebp  firftto  tljc  bat 
tell  agamft  tljccljabzcn  of  iScmamuu 
3lnb  tljc  %  0  is  3D  faib,  3iiibalj  ft;all  go4 

vpfitft. 

19  %\\b  tljc  cDilbicn  of  Sifrael  rofe 
bp  in  tl)e  mommg,  anb  eucampcb  a* 
gamft  ©ibealj. 

20  anb 


\Hetr.fel- 
towef. 


'  Chap.  3. 


Thclfi 


raeiircswarre 


Iudi 


res. 


withBeniamin, 


f  !T<tr.  it 

rrn: -.''  i ■  \ 
ffopltwor.tl- 
drd<UAt 

I  Orjtrkcl 


20  3uiDthcmcnof3Jfraclweutout 
to  battcll  agamft  Bctuamut ,  aim  the 
men  of  Jfracl  put  thcmfclucs  m  aray 
to  fight  agatnft  them  at  Gibcah. 

21  %\\Q  tlje  thiKuen  of  Bcmamin 
camefo2thoutof0ibeah,atibbcftrotcb 
boWnc  to  tljegrounb  of  thc^jfraelitcs 
thatbay ,  twenty  $  two  thottfanb  men. 

22  3wbfhepeoplethcmenof3irracl 
tncourageb  th  cmfclucs ;-$  fet  their  battel 
agaute  m  aray ,  in  the  plate  Where  they 
put  themfelues  in  aray  the  firft  bay. 

23  (3nb  the  tollmen  of  3Jfracl  went 
Pp  anb  wept  befoje  thelLo  kid  Pnttll 
cuen,  anbaffteb  tounfel  of  thc1L©itiD, 
faying,  Shall  31  goe  Pp  agaute  to  bat- 
tell  agamft  the  cntlDien  of  Bcniamm 
my  b20ther  <  3tnbthcH<DB52fatDe, 
ooebp  agamft  him.) 

24  31ud  the  tlnitocn  of  JJfracl  tame 
neereagainftthechtlbJcnofBcmanim, 
thcfccotibbay. 

25  3lnb  Beniamtn  went  foojth  a< 
gainft  them  ont  of  Gibeah  the  feeonb 
Day,  %  beftroyeb  Down  to  the  grounb  of 
the  chtlbjen  of  ^frael  agamcctghteenc 
thoufanbmcn)allthcfeb2ewthemj02D. 

i6  CXhcn  all  tlje  chilD2cn  of  3(f- 
rati,  attDail  the  people  ibent  Pp,  anD 
tame  bnto  the  houfc  of  god,  anb  wept, 
anD  late  there  before  the  %  £>  k  e\  anb 
fafteb  that  Day  Pntill  ettcn,  anb  ofFercb 
burnt  offerings,  anb  peace  offerings 
bcfojctheJL©m©. 

27  3!nb  the  chtlbjen  of  3Jfrael  encmi; 
r  eb  of  the  %<s>  it  j?,(fo2  the  3rtte  of  f  to- 
uenant  of  Gob  was  there  in  thofe  bates, 

18  3inb  phmehasthe  fonne  of  €; 
lea^ar  thefonne  of  3laron  ftoobbefoje 
it m thofe bayes.)  faying>  Shall  3Jyet 
agame  goc  outto  battelagainlt  the  chtl- 
bjen of  Bcmamin  mp  brother,  02  than 
3J  tcafe i  ?lnb  the  %  o  n  m  faib ,  Goe 
bp ;  foz  to  uumow  3  *bill  beliucr  them 
into  thine  hauo. 

29  3inD  gjfrael  fet  lycrs  in  watte 
rounb  about  Gtbcah. 

jo  3tiDthcchtlD2en  of  ^Jfracl  went 
bp  agamft  the  thtlbjen  of  Bemamtu  on 
the  thirb  bay,  anb  put  themfcluestn  a 
ray  agamft  cibcah ,  as  at  other  times. 

31  3lnD  the  chtlbjen  of  Beniamtn 
Went  out  agamft  the  people,  and  were 
biawcn  away  from  the  cine ,  ant)  the? 
began  to '  fmueofthepcopte  andumas 
at  other  ttmes ,  in  the  high  wayes,  of 
Which  oue  goerb  bp  to  ]|  the  houfc  of 
<3ob ,  anb  the  other  to  Gtbeah  m  the 
ficlb .about  thirtir  men  of  Jfrael. 


32  3lnb  the  cbtlbjcn  of  Bcniamm 
faib,  Xbey  arc  fmitten  botbne  befoje 
bs,  as  at  tlje  firft :  But  the  chtlbjen  of 
5Jfraelfait),|Letbs  flce;anb  maw  them 
from  the  ettie,bnto  the  high  wayes. 

33  3lnD all themen of SJfracl  rofc bp 
out  of  their  plate,  anb  put  themfelues 
in  aray  at  Baal  Xamar :  anb  the  ly  crs 
m  ibaitc  of  35frM  tame  foo.ztli  out  of 
their  plates,  cueuout  ofthemebotbes 
of(5ibcah. 

34  5lnb  tljere  came  againft  csibeah 
tctt  tlioufanb  chofen  men,  out  of  all^jf- 
rael ,  anb  toe  battel!  ibas  fo?c :  but  the? 
tinctt)  not  that  eutll  tbas  ncere  them. 

35  3fubthc?toitji)fmote25en!amm 
bcfo2c3lfrael,attbtI)ctl)ilb.2enof3(frael 
beftrovcb  of  tljeBentamites  that  bay, 
ttbeutte  anb  fine  thoufanb,  anb  anfinn* 
b?eb  men,  ailthefcbjcibtheuuojb. 

36  So  the  chUb2cn  of  Beniamm  fatt> 
that  they  lbere  fmtttni :  foi  the  men  of 
31fraei  gaue  place  to  tlje  Bemamttes, 
becaufc  they  trufteb  Pnto  thelyers  m 
iPaitAbhtch  thn'  has  fet  befibc  ©tbeah. 

37  ^ub  the  Iters  mttiaithafieb,  anb 
rufheb  bpon  Oibealj ,  anb  the  Hers  in 
tt>ait||b2ciD  themfeiucs  along,  anbfmote 
all  tlje  citicrbttl)  tlje  cbgc  of  thcfuio2b. 

38  il5oU)C  there  was  an  appointcb 
I!  ftgnc  between  tl;c  men  of  3Jfrael  t  anb 
tlje  Iters  in  lPait,  that  thev  fl)onlb  maac 
a  great  t  flame  wul)  fmofte  rife  bp  out 
oftljetitte. 

39  3lnb  when  themen  of  35fraelre> 
tireb  m  the  battel! ,  Bcmamin  began  to 
tfmttc  anb  Kill  of  the  men  of  3ffrael  a- 
bout  thtrtic  perfons ;  fo?  they  fatbe, 
Surely  they  arc  fmitten  bowne  before 
bs,  as  i"  the  firft  battel!. 

40  But  when  the  flame  began  to  a- 
rtfc  bp  out  of  the  elite,  With  aptliar  of 
fmolic,  the  Bentamttcs  looUeb  bchtnb 
tljem,  anbbcholb,  the  t  flame  of  the  er- 
ne afcenbeb  bp  to  heaucn. 

41  3lnb  When  the  men  of  35frael 
tnrntb  agame,  the  men  of  Benjamin 
were  amafebifo?  thcyfaw  tljat  eutll 
twas  come  bpon  them. 

42  '£hercfo2ethcyturneb  thcirbacks 
bcfo2Cthc  men  ofjlfracl,  Pnto  ylbay  of 
the  wilbcrnes,but  the  battel  oucrtooKC 
them:  $  them  whtthcamcoutof  the  tt; 
ncs,they  Dcftroycb  in  tlKmibtt  of  them. 

43  Thus  they  melofebthcBcntamites 
rounb  about,and  chafeb  thcm,aub  trooe 
them  bowne  ||  With  cafe  t  otter  agamft 
©ibeah  towarb  the  futmcrifing. 

4  4  Zwo  there  fell  of  Bcntamtn 
ctghtccne 


ji  Oz}m.tde 
a  IcngfojirA 
with  the 
trumpet. 
i!  Or, time. 
|  He b.  with, 

\HcbMw 


U  the 

ir.ded. 


tw. 


ho/ectat' 
fumgtton. 


f  Hebjou- 
cbedthem. 


\  Ori  from 

AteHHcbabt 

Or. 

I  Hcb.  vnto 

otter  arainjt. 


and  fmitethem.  Chap.xxj.  Care  for  wiues. 


*Chap.»i. 
«3« 


t  He b.  was 

found. 
\  Hckwcre 
fwnd. 


cightccnc  thou&MD  mw;  all  thcfe  were 
mcnofbaiour. 

45  anDthepturneDanDflcDtolbarB 
tlje  nnlDcrncffe  bnto  tt»c  rocfec  of  Jftini* 
mon*.  anl>  tljcp  glcaneDof  tljem  in  tljc 
high  ibapes  fine  thoufanD  men :  anD 
purfucD  IjarD  after  them  bnto  ©iDom, 
anD  dem  ttbo  thoufanD  men  of  them. 

46  &o  that  all  ibhichfcii  that  Dap 
of  2Scniamin,  ibere  tibentic  anb  fine 
thoufanD  mm  that  Djcib  the  ftbo?D  ;  all 
thcfe  were  men  of  baiour. 

47  *But  firt  IjunDjeD  men  turncD 
anD  flcDDc  to  the  ibilDcrncflebnto  the 
rocBe&immon,anDaboDcinthcrocBC 
JUimnion  fonr  e  moneths. 

4S  anD  the  men  of  3SfracI  turneD 
agame  bpon  thcthilDzcn  of  25cniamin, 
anu  ftnotc  them  Ibith  the  cbge  of  the 
fnjo2U,  as  tbcllttje  men  of  euctp  rule,  as 
toe  bcaft,  ant)  all  ttjat  tcamc  to  hanb: 
alio  thep  fet  on  fire  all  tlje  cities  that 
t  they  came  to. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  The  people  bewaile  thedefolationof  Benia- 
min.  8  BythcdeftruitionotlabefhGilead 
they  prouidc  them  foure  hundred  wiues. 
1 6  They  aduife  them  to  furprife  che  virgines 
thatdaunced  at  Shiloh. 

^0M  &tt>c  tlje  men  of  Hfracl 


haD  fraoznc  in  i$i5PCh, 
s.  I  faptng,XIjerciball  nota- 
ry1 I  npofbsgiuc  his  Daughter 
WMi&sl  btuo25ciuammtoibtfe. 
z  anD  the  people  tame  to  the  houfc 
of  d5on,  anD  aboDe  there  till  euen  be; 
fojeCSoD ,  anD  lift  bp  their  boiccs,  anD 
tbeptfoje: 

3  ^nDfaiD,^)  fLtf>1R£>  (SODof^f 

rael ,  lbhp  is  tljts  tome  to  paffc  in  3ff 
racl ,  tljat  there  fljoulD  bee  to  Dap  one 
tribe  lataingin3JftacW 

4  anD  tt  tame  to  paffe  on  the  mo^ 
rolb ,  that  tl)c  people  rofe  carlp ,  anD 
built  there  an  aitar ,  anD  offer  eD  burnt 
offerings,  anDpeate  offerings. 

5  anDthethilD:cnof3JfraeffavD, 
naho  is  there  among  all  the  tribes  of  "$l 
rael,  that  camcnotbptutth  the  congrc* 
gation  bnto  tl)c  %  o  b  30  <  fo?  tljep  UaD 
maDc  a  great  oath  ronctrning  Dim  that 
came  not  bp  to  the  %  o  ©  jd  to  £>3'.3pch, 
faping,  $e  (bailfurelp  btput  to  Death. 

6  ana  the  chUDJcn  of  33fracl  r  epen* 
teD  them  fo?  aseniamtn  their  toother, 
anD  GaiD  /£here  is  one  tribe  tut  off  from 
JfraelttjisDap: 


7  $ott>  (ball  Jbcc  Doe  fo?  ibiucs  foj 
them  that  rcmainc ,  feeing  ibec  hauc 
ftbomc  bp  tlje  %  <©  js  ©,  that  Ibce  ibill 
not  gtue  them  of  our  Daughters  to 
lbtucs* 

8  C3CnDtftc\'faiD,i©l)atoncisthere 
oftfje  tribes  of  3lfracl ,  rijat  came  not 
bpto^t5peh  totlje1L€>K©f  anbbc* 
holDc,  tljcre  eame  none  to  tbc  campe 
from'ifaben)  ©leabto  tljcaffcmblp. 

9  ^0?  tlje  people  Vbcre  nnmbteD, 
anD  beljolD,  tliereibere  none  of  tlje  in* 
Ijabitants  ofJabcH)  ©ileaDtljerc. 

10  anD  tlje  congregation  fenttljirtjer 
tlbcluc  tljouianDmen  of  tlje  banantctt, 
anD  tommaunDtDtljcm ,  feping,  <5oe, 
anD  finite  tlje  inljabitants  of  gjabeft) 
<5ileaD  ibitlj  tlje  cDge  of  tlje  froo?D,lbitlj 
tlje  Vborncn  anD  tlje  tljilD^en. 

11  ^nD  tljts  « tlje  tljing  tljat  pec  (ball 
Doe,  *Ptt  fljail  btterlp  Dcftrop  euap 
male ,  anD  tucrp  Jboman  tljat  Ijat6 
t  lien  bp  man. 

ii  31nD  tljep  founD  among  tlje  inlja* 
bitants  of  3Jabeflj  <5»leaD,  foure  ljun 
D?cDtpongbirginsttjatljaDlmolbnino 
man,  bp  Iping  ibitl)  anp  male :  anD  tijep 
bjougljt  tljcm  bnto  tlje  tampe  to  ^bi* 
lolj,  ibljiclj  is  in  tlje  lanD  of  Canaan. 

13  3lnD  tljelbljolc  Congregation  fent 
fome  t  to  tpcaltc  to  tbe  ttjaDjen  of  25enia- 
min  tljat  werem  tlje  rocfec  Simmon, 
anD  toll  call  pcaccablp  bnto  tljem. 

14  anD  25eniamin  tame  againe  at 
tljat  time,  anfc  tljep  gaue  tljem  tbiucs 
tbljicfJ  tljep  IjaD  faueo  aliue  of  tljeibo 
menof  ^abefl)  0slcaD:  anDpetfo  tljep 
fufficcD  tljem  not. 

15  anD  tlje  people  rcpcntcD  tljem  fo? 
2Eeniamin,  becaufc  tljat  tlje  fLois© 
ijao  maDe  a  bjcarjj  in  tljctribcsof  3if- 

rael. 

16  cgljcntbeeiDersoftljcCongrc; 

gation  faiD,^otb  fljail  WcDoe  fo?  tbiues 
fo?  tljcmtljat  remained  feeing  tlje  Ibo* 
men  are  DtftropcD  out  of  zscniamin. 

17  anD  tljep  faiD,  Xbere  mutt  be  an 
inljeritancefo?  tljem  tljat  bee  cfcapebof 
25eniamin,tljat  a  tribe  be  not  DeftropeD 
outofUftael. 

18  ©orbbeitmecmapnotgiuetljem 
.  ibiucs  "of  our  Daughters,  lo?  tlje  chifc 
iDzen  of  3Jfrael  Uauc  froome,  fapmg, 
CurfcDbe  Ijc  tljat  giuetlj  albsfeto  25cn* 
liamin.  ,     . 

19  Xljen  tljep  Cain,  zscljolD,  there  is  a 
featt  of  tlje  H©  «  &  in  £>bilolj  t  pcrelp, 

in  a  place  VDljltl)  >s  OU  tlje  jftO.itljfiDC  Of 

bethel  on  the  |!  eaft  fiDe  1!  of  tljebie  tbap 
I  that 


*  Num.  31. 
17. 

I  Hcb.know- 
rth  their- 
>g  witn 
man, 

t  Hebr.yottg 
wemett  vir- 
gin. 


Hekr.and 
ftaic«nd 
czEtd. 
iOrtfTd' 
c'.i*m?fCACe, 


jeers  to 
yeere. 

\\Or,tavrards 
ibtSutvtc 

Or,on. 


VViuesfor 


Ruth. 


thcB 


eniamites. 


VS  in  them, 


uUged. 


that  goett)  l>p  frotn  scthcl  to  ^>Dt= 
ehcm.anb  onthe£>outh  of  fUbanon. 

20  Xhercfoiethcpcommanbcb  the 
rhilb2en  of  25cmanuu,faping,  ootano 
lie  tnroatt  in  ci)e  bmcparbs. 

zi  3Jno  fee,  ano bcholb,tf  the baugh* 
ters  of  £>hiloh  conic  out  to  Dauncein 
battnces,tbcn  come  pec  out  of  the  bine* 
parbs,  ano  catch  pou  cucrp  man  hts 
roifeof  the  Daughters  of  £>htloh,  anb 
goe  to  the  lanD  of  fficntamin. 

n  ano  it  fJball  bee  rohen  their  fa* 
thers  o,!  their  bictl)int  cometmto  fcs  to 
compiaine,  that  roe  rotll  fap  bnto  them, 
II  Z5cc  fauourable  bnto  them  to?  out 
fattes:  becaufc  roereferucb  not  to  cart) 
matt  his  roifc  tn  the  roar  re :  fo?  pec  bib 


not  giuc  unto  them  at  this  time,  that 
pouwoulbbcguiltie. 

ij  3uib  the  chiltycti  of  zseniamtnbib 
fo  ,anb  loose  themroiues  accozbmgto 
their  number,  of  them  that  bannccb, 
rohome  thep  caught :  anb  thep  rocnt 
anb  returncb  tmto  tljeir  inheritance, 
anb  tepaiteb  the  cities,  anb  aroelt  m 
them. 

14  ^nbthetliiibzenof^fcaelbepat^ 
teb  tljcnee  at  that  nme ,  cuerp  man  to 
his  tribe,  anb  to  his  fatnilp,  anbtbep 
rocnt  out  f  com  thence  cuerp  man  to  his 
inheritance. 

25  *3jn  tnofe  bapes  there  roas  no 
Bing  in  Ijfiml :  cucrp  man  bib  that 
rohub  roas  rigtjtin  his  orotic  eves. 


*Cnap.  17. 
6.  and  1 8. 
T.  and  19.3. 


jTHE  BOOKE  OF 

Ruth. 


MJtly.wirt 


CHAP.    I. 

Elimelech  driuen  by  famine  into  Moab, 
dieth  there.  4  Mahlon  and  Chilion ,  ha- 
uin?  married  wiues  of  Moab ,  die  alfo.  6 
Naomi  returning  homeward,  8  diflwa- 
dcth  her  two  daughters  in  law  from  going 
with  her.  14  Orpah  lcaueth  her  ,  but 
Ruth  with  great  conftancie  accompanieth 
her.  19  They  two  come  to  Bethlehem, 
where  they  arc  gladly  recciued. 

<©roe  it  came  to 
pafTetn  the  bapes 
rohen  p  3Jubgcs 
truleb,  that  there 
roas  a  famine  in 
the  lanb  :  anb  a 
ccrtame  man  of 
Bethlehem  3Ju< 
..  bah ,  rocnt  to  to* 
lourne  m  the  countrep  of  £0oab,hc,anb 
htsrotfc,aub  his  troo  fonncs. 

1  ^tttbtrjeiiaincofthemanwaseiis 
mclcch,  anb the  name  of  hisrotfe,  >f5ao* 
mi ,  anb  the  name  of  his  troofonnes, 
©anion,  anb  Chilton,  Cptoathitcsof 
Z3ctl)lcl)cm3ubal) :  anb  thep  came  to* 
to  the  countrep  of  £0oab,  anb  t  toute 
nucb  there. 
3  3lnb  Climclccb  jiSaomics  huf- 


banb  bicb  ,anb  fhee  roas  left ,  ano  her 
troofonnes 

4  3lnb  rtjeptooBC  them  routes of 
thcroomcnof$)oab:  the  name  of  the 
oncwaS£>2pah,  anbtfjc  name  of  rtjto* 
rtjer  ftuth :  anb  thep  brocllcb  there  a= 
bout  ten  peeres. 

5  3nb^ahlonanb  Chilton  bieb  at 
fo  both  of  them ,  anb  rtje  woman  Ibas 
left  of  her  troo  formes,  anb  he*  hut 
banb. 

6  c  Xhen  thee  arofe  rotth  hct 
baughters  mlaro ,  that  thee  might  re* 
tutne  from  the  countrcpof£©oab :  tot 
fbeehab  hearb  in  thecountrep  of  ©o- 
ab,  hotb  that  the  Hois c>  Ijab  btutcb 
his  people,  tn  gtutng  them  b?eab. 

7  lEherrfottfljeibentroojthoutof 
thcplaccmherefbe  ibas,  anb  her  ttbo 
baughters  tn  laro  mirtj  her :  anb  thep 
tbent  on  the  tbap  to  returne  tmto  the 
lanbof^ubah. 

s  ^ub  /!3aomi  fatb  bnto  her  ttbo 
baughters  tn  laro ,  d5oe ,  returne  each 
to  her  mothers  houfc :  the  %  ©is  id 
tjcaicfeinbip  roith  pou ,  aspehaucbcalt 
roulj  the  bcab,anb  roirtj  me. 

9  Xhc  %  <s>  h  ©  grattnt  pou ,  that 
pou  map  finbc  reft  each  of  you  m  the 
houfc  of  hcrhufbanb.  XijetifhcBiffcb 

them, 


Ruth 


continued! 


ci 


!d 


on. 


wit 


hN; 


aorni. 


S  Or,  if  I 

wtrt  irttb 

n  husband. 
\Hcl>.hop:. 


\Hthr.l 
hAHt  much 
kit I err-;. 


\0r,  if!  mt 
agtunnme. 


\Htbr. 

ftrengthcn- 
tdherfetfc. 


|Thit  is, 

fifaftMt. 

J  Until, 

ittTfr. 


them,  anb  they  lift  Dp  their  boyce  anD 
lbcpt. 

io  3(nb  they  taiti  bnto  Ijer ,  £>urcly 
Ibcclbill  rctuntc  ibith  thee ,  bnto  thy 
people. 

ii  ^nb/RaotmfaiD.Xurncagatne, 
my  Daughters  :lbby  lbtiiyou  gocibith 
nice;  3irc  there  yet  any  moc  tonnes  m 
my  lbombc,  that  they  may  be your  huf 
bancs < 

ii  Xurncagame,my  Daughters,  go 
vour  wav ,  foz jfl  am  too  olD  to  haue  an 
huf banD :  tfff  (boulb  fay  3  haue  nope, 
if  5  (bomb  ||  hanc  a  bufbanb  alto  to 
ntgbt,anb  (boulb  alfo  bcart  tonnes : 

ij  naoulb  ye  t  tary  fo?  them  till  tbey 
Were  gcolbcit;  lboulbye  (lay  fo?  them 
from  haumg  bufbatibs;  nay  my  baugb' 
tttfi:fo;  Ut  gricuethmcmucbto?  your 
fanes,  tbattbehanbof  theism©  is 
goncoutagamftme. 

14  3inD  they  lift  Dp  tbett  boy tc,  anb 
Vbcpt  againc :  anb  jDipab  Biffeb  Ijcr 
mother  m  laib ,  but  Stith  tiauc  bnto 
bet. 

15  3mbfbcfaib,  Bebolb,tbyfi(tct(n 
laib  is  gone  bat&c  bnto  bet  people,  anb 
bnto  her  gobs :  rcturnetljou  after  tl)y 
Gdcc  inlaw. 

16  3tnb  Hud)  faib ,  ||  3Jntrcate  mee 
not  to  leaue  tljce,  or  to  tcturne  from  fol 
loibmg  after  thee :  foz  Whither  tl)ou 
gocrt.Ji  Wtll  goc ;  anb  Where  thou  lob; 
geft ,  '3 Will  lobgc :  tl)y  people  (ball  be 
my  pcoplc,anbtby<5obmyc5ob : 

17  nabcretboubicft,Wil'3Jcic,anD 
there  Wtll  35  °ce  buricb :  the  1L  ©  ir  jd 
boefo  tome,  anb  tnojc  alfo,  if  ought  but 
bcatbpatttbceanbmc. 

is  naben  (bee  fawe  that  (bee  t  was 
ftebfallly  minbeb  to  goc  With  Ijer,  then 
fhee  left  fpcattutg  bnto  her. 

19  C[£>o  they  two  went  bntilltbcy 
tame  to  Bethlehem :  3nb  it  tame  to 
parte  When  they  Were  tome  to  Beth- 
lehem ,  that  an  the  citic  was  mooueb  a- 
bout  tbcm,  anb  fyey  faib,  3lsthis/!5a= 
omw 

io  3lnb  flje  faib  bnto  them,  Call  me 
not  ||  /Eiaomi ;  tail  nice  ||  QDara :  foz  the 
^inughne  hart)  Dealt  bcry  bitterly 
Wirt)  me. 

xi  3JWcntoutfull,anDtbeXU>tH© 
hath  brought  me  home  agatnc  emptic : 
D9hy  then  call  ye  me  iftaomi,  feeing  the 
%  ©  a  ©  hath  telhfieb  agamft  me,  anb 
the^lmighty  hath  afflictebmc* 

ii  &o/i5aomircturncb,anb:&utb 
the  ©oabitcffe  l)cr  baugbter  in  larb 


With  her,  Which  retumeb  out  of  the 
countrey  of  s$3oab  :  anb  they  came  to 
Bethlehem,  in  the  beginning  of  barley 
harucft. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Ruth  glcinelh  in  the  fields  of  Boaz.  4  B037 
taking  knowledge  of  her,  8  fiieweth  her 
great  fauour.  18  That  which  (lie  got,  fhee 
caiicth  to  Naomi. 

S8©^5£  $°  /5aomi  Ijab  a  Uinfc 
^A%t ,nan  of  !)cr  hufbanbs,  a 
|3^XS  J"iShtymanofiPealth,of 
Ekvf  the  famine  of  cmnclcch, 
anb  his  name  \pas  soa^. 
1  ^nb  Buth  the  £0oabitcfTc  faibc 
bnto  /Saomi,  Hct  menotbgoc  to  the 
fielb ,  anb  gleaue  cares  of  come  after 
Him,mibhorc  fight  3J  Qjanfinbe  grace, 
^nb  fhee  faibcbnto  l;cr,  C5oc,  my 
Daughter. 

3  3lnb  fl)elbent,anbtame,anb  glea 
nebm  the  fielb  after  the  reapers:  anb 
her  thappe  lbas  to  light  on  a  part  of 
the  fielbc  belonging  bnto  ||  25oa3,  vbljo 
was  of  the  Kinreb  of  Climelcth. 

4  C^nbbchoib,  25035  came  from 
Bethlehem,  anb  faib  bnto  the  reapers, 
Xhc  H© is©  bee  with  you,-  anb  they 
anflbcreb  Ijim,  Xljc  JL©  is  jd  bleffe 
tljce. 

5  %l)tn  faib  Boa3  bnto  his  fer uant, 
tljat  tbas  fet  ouet  the  reapers ,  nahofc 
DamofeHisthts; 

6  ^nb  the  feruaunt  that  lbas  fet  o- 
ucr  the  reapers, anflbcreb  anb  faib,  3ft 
is  the  S^oabiufh  bamofeli  that  came 
bacUe  ibith  jl^aomi  out  of  the  countrey 
of£0oab: 

7  ^nbfbcfaiD, 31  pjayyon, lettuce 
gleane  anb  gather  after  the  reapers  a* 
mongft  the  fljeaues:  fon^cecame,  anb 
hath  connnucb  cuen  from  the  mojning 
bntninoib,  that  ffietarieb  a  little  in  the 
houfe. 

3  Xhen  faib  Boa?  bnto  Huth,^ca^ 
reft  thou  not,  my  baughter*  <soc  not 
to  gleane  in  another  fielb,  neither  goe 
from  hence ,  but  abibe  here  fad  bp  my 
maibcns. 

9  lict  thine  eyes  be  on  the  fielb  that 
they  boc  reape,  anb  go  thou  after  them : 
$?aue  3  not  thargeb  the  young  men, 
that  they  (ball  not  touch  thee;  anb 
ttihcn  thou  act  athirft,  goc  bnto  the 
beffeis,  ano  Dnu&e  of  that  ibhtch  the 
y  ong  men  hauc  bzaiben. 

10  Xhen  (he  fcl  on  her  face  ,anb  botb 
eb  her  fclfe  to  the  gcounb,atib  faib  bnto 
BD him, 

19 


huBBctled, 
Mrt.t.f. 


Boazhiskmdnes  Ruth. 


toward  Ruth. 


f  Orjfinde 


\hfeb.toth, 
heart. 


\Hcb.p>Wi 
h'rnot. 


\\  Or  fine 
that  haiU 
rt^httire. 
dtttltt. 


bun,  a)hy  Ijauc  3  founb  grace  m  tl)mc 
eves,  that  thou ajouiticit take imoib* 
lebgc  of  mcfccmg  r$  am  a  ftrangcr  < 

ii  2iubz5oas  aufibcrcb  ana  faib  bn* 
to  hit ,  3Jt  hatlj  fully  bene  fljcibcbmc, 
all  tljat  tljou  Daft  Done  bnto  thy  mo- 
ther in  laib  fintcthc  Death  of  thine  huf* 
banb:  anb  how  tljou  haft  left  thy  father 
ant)  thy  mortjcr,anb  the  lanb  of  thy  na* 
tiutttc,  anb  art  come  bnto  a  people, 
Vbhiclj  tljou  tmelbcrtnothcrctofo2C. 

ix  HThc  %®vuz>  rctompenfe  tl)V 
ibojnc ,  ant)  a  full  rcibarb  be  giuen  tljee 
of  tlje  %  ©  is  r>  Gob  of  3Jfrael ,  bnber 
lbhofeibtngs  tljou  act  tome  to  truft. 

13  Xften  (lie  faib ,  \\  JLit  me fmbe  fa* 
nour  in  tljv  fight,  my  Iojd,  fo?  ttjat  tljou 
Ijaft  comfo?tcbmec,  anbfo?  that  tljou 
Ijaft  fpoken  t  fricnbly  unto  tljlne  Ijano- 
maio,  tljougnlJ  be  not  Ulte  tmto  one 
of  thy  Ijanb-maibens. 

14  3nb  2Soa5  faybc  bnto  her,  %t 
meaicttmc  come  thou  Uithcr,  anb  cate 
of  tlje  bjcab,  anbbip  thy  mo2fcll  in  the 
btnegcr.  3inb  fljee  fate  beftbc  tlje  tea* 
pcrS:atiblje  reattjebher  parcijeb  tome, 
anbftjc  bib  cate,  anbibasfuffitcb,anb 
left. 

>5  3lnb  ibljcn  fljee  ibas  rifen  bp  to 
gleane ,  26oa5  tommanbtb  Ijts  young 
men,  faying,  ?Lct  her  gleane  men  a* 
mougtncfl)caucs,«trep«jofl)ljernot. 

i6  3lnb  let  fall  alfo  feme  of  tljehanb* 
fulsofpurpofcfo2her,anblcauertJciii 
ttjat  llje  map  gleane  them,  anb  rebuke 
her  not. 

17  «S>o  flicglcancb  m tlje  ficlb  bnttii 
cuen,anb  beat  out  that  flic  hab  gleaneb: 
anbitibas  aboutan  cpljalj  of  barley. 

18  C^ubfljectoolteKbp  anbibent 
into  the  cute:  anb  her  mother  in  laibei 
fatb  tbhat  fljee  hab  gleaneb ;  anb  fljccj 
bought  foo2th ,  anb  gaue  to  her  that  i 
fljchabtefcrucD, after  fljcibasfufficcb. 

19  3mbljer  mother  m  laib  faib  bnto 
her ,  nahcre  ijaft  tljou  gleaneb  to  bap/ 
anbibhcre  ibjougljtcft  thou  i  blefTeb  be 
hec  that  bib  tafte  nnoibicbgc  of  tljee.1 
Znn  fbee  fljclbcb  her  mother  mlaibc 
lbith  lbhom  tyct  hab  lbjougljt,  anb 
faib,  Hhe  mans  name  lbithlbljom3J 
tb;ougbt  to  bap, is  25oa5. 

xo  ^nbiFJaonufaibbntoljerbaugh 
ter  in  laJb ,  23  leffeb  be  he  of  the  How©, 
ibbo  Ijartj  not  left  off  his  KinbncfTc  to 
theliuinganbtotl)ebcab.3mD/15aomi 
fatbbntohcr  ,Xfjeman  isnecreof  Kin 
tmto  bs,  lloncofournert  Iimfemcn. 

xi  3lnb  ffuttj  the  *$oabitcflc  faib, 


$e  faib  bnto  me  alfo ,  Xhou  fljait  fecepc 
fall  by  mp  pong  men ,  tontill  they  haue 
cnbeballmyljarucft 

xx  ^nb  i5aomi  faib  bnto  Buttj  her 
baughtcrmiaJb,3lttsgoob,mpbaugl> 
tcr ,  tljat  thou  goe  out  ruttt)  Ijts  mat* 
bens,  that  they  ||mcetettjcc  notm  an? 
other  fieib. 

xi  5)0  fljee  Bcptfaftbytijemaibens 
of  26oa3  to  gleane,  bnto  tlje  enb  of  bar* 
ley  harucft.aubof  lbhcatharucft,  anb 
bJbcit  ibtthhcrmotljertn  laib. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  By  Naomi  her  inftru<ftioi),  5  Ruth  lietli  at 
Boazhisfeete.  8  Boaz  acknowledg;eth  the 
right  ofakinfeman.  14  He /endeth  her  a- 
way  with  fixe  ineafures  of  barley. 

f£g»gg»  $en  Jfraomi  her  mother 
Wj&  |5M  m  laib  faib  bnto  her ,  S{3y 


„  baughtcr,fljai  $  not  fceuc 
%-i  S  reft  fo;  tljee,  that  it  map 
-o^^^t  be  ibcll  lbith  thec^ 

x  3nibnoibtsnot2Soa5ofourKin; 
reb,  lbitlj  ibljofc  masbens  tljou  VbaftV 
25cholb,l)crbinnoibctljbarlep  to  mgljt 
mthethzcfl)ingfloo?e. 

j  road)  thp  fclfe  thcrefo?c ,  anb  an* 
noint  thee ,  anb  put  tljp  raiment  bpoti 
tljce,anb  get  tljee  boibne  to  the  flopic: 
but  mafte  not  tljp  fclfe  nnoibcn  bnto  the 
man ,  bnttll  hce  fljail  Ijauc  bone  eating 
aubbjinfeing. 

4  ^nb  it  fljall  be  lbhcn  Dec  ltetlj 
boibne,  that  thou  fljaltmarhethcpiate 
ibljcrc  Ucc  fljall  lie,  anbthoufliait  got 
m,  anb||btuoucrljtsfcetc,  anbiaptrjee 
boibne,  anb  Ijc  Ibill  tell  tljee  ibljat  thou 
fbaitboc. 

5  3inb  fljee  faib  bnto  fter ,  m  tljat 
tljou  fay  eft  bnto  me,  3  lbillboc. 

6  C3uibfljclbcnt  boibne  bnto  tlje 
floozc,  anb  btb  aceojbing  to  all  ttjat  her 
mottjcrmiaib  babe  her. 

7  3nb  ibhen  25035  hab  eaten  anb 
bnmlic,  anb  his  heart  tbasmerrie,  Uee 
ibent  to  lie  boibne  at  ttjc  enbe  of  the 
hcape  of  tome :  anb  flic  camefoftly,  anb 
bncouereb  his  fcct,aub  laib  her  boibne. 

s  <E3lnb  it  came  to  paffc  at  mu> 
night,  ttjat  the  man  ibas  afraib,  anb 
„  tunicb  hmifclfc :  anb  beljolb,a  iboman 
lapattjisfectc. 

9  Slnbhecfatb, toho  artthou^  ^nb 
flieanfujcrcb,  31 ,m  Kuttjthmeljanb* 
maib:  fpjcab  thcrefoie  ttjp  ffeitt  outr 
tljmc  Ijanbmaib,  fo?  tljou  art  ||  a  ncarc 
tttnfcman, 

10  3lnb 


Or.fdlvf- 
mibec. 


[  Or:  lif:  Vf 
the  dothci 
that  ure  aa 
hufcete. 


|!  Or,  toel^e 
boldc  on. 


>Ot,etierkttt 
hath  rtgfa 
to  rcdecme. 


Boaztalkethwith       Chap.ni|.         Ruthskinfman. 


f  Hit,  gte- 


[Or, flea  r 
or,  after,. 


io  anb  heefaiD,  BlcffcD  be  thou  of 
the  ILowd, mp  Daughter :  for  rbou 
Daft  iheibeD  moitftinDnclTc  mthc  latter 
enDe,then  at  tlic  beginning,  in  as  much 
as  ttioufollolbcbttuotyongmen, whe- 
ther poojcon'icr). 

1 1  anD  noibmp  Daughter, fcarc  not, 
3!  \bill  Doe  to  thecail  that  thou  rcqui 
reft :  fo:  all  the  t  titic  of  mp  people  Docth 
UnoU) ,  that  thou  art  a  bcrtuous  mo 

12  anD  no\b  it  is  true ,  that  31  am 
thy  nearc  lunfeman :  hombett  there  cs  i 
a  tunfemau  nearer  then  %  \ 

13  Harp  this  night,  auD  it  (hall  bctn 
the  morning,  that  if  hccibtll  pcrfomic  I 
bnto  thee  thepart  of  a  lunfeman,  men,  | 
let  him  doc  the  uinfemaus  part :  but  if  j 
hce  milluotboethcpart  ofatunfeman 
to  thee ,  then  Will  3  Doe  the  part  of  a . 
lunfcmautothecasthcfi-oispliuctlj: 
lieDomnebuttll  the  morning. 

i+  canb  fl)ce  lapatbisfcctcbntai 
the  morning :  anD  the  rofc  bp  bcfo:c  one 
coulD  Uuom  another.  anD  he  taiD ,  ILct 
it  not  bclmomen ,  that  amomaucamc 
into  the  flooje. 

15  aifohcfaiD,B:mgthe  bailcthat 
tliouhaftbpon  thee.auDholDeit.  anD 
mhen  flic  helDc  it,  he  mcafureD  fire  mca- 
fures  of  barley,  anD  laiDc  it  on  her :  anD 
he  Ybent  into  the  cine. 

i6  anb  mhen  thee  tame  to  her  mo ;' 
thcriniaib,fticfaiD,ttBho  ^t  thou,  mp1 
Daughters  auDfhctolDchcr  all  that  the 
man  haD  Done  to  her. 

17  anb  fbefaiD,  Xhefe  fire  meafures 
of  barlep  gauc  he  tnc,  fo:  he  faiDto  me,  I 
<5o  not  cmptie  bnto  tln>  mother  in  lam.  i 

18  Chen  faiD  (he,!§>itftUl,mpDaiigh  ! 
tcr,  btmu  tbouhnomhom  the  matter 
Ujill  fall :  fo:  the  man  mm  not  be  in  reft, 
bntu  he  hauc  finin)eD  the  thiugthis  Dap- 

CHAP.    IIII. 

i  Bo.i7  callcth  into  judgment  the  next  knifeman. 
6  He  refufech  the  redemption  according  to 
the maner  in  llracl.  9  Boazbuycth  the  inhe- 
ritance. 11  MemaniethRuth.  13  She  bca- 
reth  Obcd  the  grandfather  ol  Dauid.  1 8  The 
generation  ot  Pharez. 

Dcnmcut  Boa;  bp  to  the 
gate,  anD  fate  htm  Domne 
there :  anb  bcholDe ,  the 
lunfeman  of  mhome  Bo- 
as fpalie ,  came  bp ,  bnto 
ibhomhc  faiD ,  i?o ,  Cttth  a  one :  turnc 
aftDe,  fit  Domne  here.  anb  hec  turncD 
afiDc,anDfatcDomnc. 


1  aubheetoo&ctenmenof  the  fi- 
bers of  thccitic,atiDfaiD,!§>itpcDomne 
here.  anbtbep  fate  Domne. 

3    anb  he  faiD  bnto  the  lunfeman : 
jftaomithat  is  come  agamc  one  of  the 
countrcp  of  5Jt9oab,  fcllcrh  a  parcel!  of 
latiD,  mhtch  mas  our  toother  einnc 
lechs. 

4-  anb  f  3  thought  to  abuerhfc  thee, 
fapmg,  Bup  it  befo:c  the  inhabitants, 
anbbefo:e  the  fibers  of  mp  people.  3lf 
thou  Unit  rcDecmc  it ,  rcDecmc  it,  but  if 
thou  ibtltnotrebeeme  it,  then  tell  nice, 
that 3J  map  Jmoib:  fo:  there  is  noneto 
rcDecmcK,bcfiDesthcc,  anD  3i-»m  after 
thee.  anbhefaib,3Jlbillrcbccmeit. 

5  Chen  faiD  Boa;,  nahat  Dap  thou 
bupeft  thtficlD  of  the  hanD  of  tfaomi, 
thou  muft  blip 't  alfo  of  ftuth  theflBoa 
biteffc,  the  mife  of  the  DcaD ,  to  ratfc  bp 
the  name  of  the  DcaD  bpon  his  tnhen 
tancc. 

e  C  anD  the  lunfeman  faiD,  J,  can 
not  r  cDeeme  ■  i  fo:  mp  felfc,  left  J,  marrc 
mmcomnc  inheritance :  rcDecmc  thou 
mp  right  to  thpfclfe,  fo:  31  cannot  re 
Dcemeir. 

7  "  iftom  tl)IS  mas  rhe  manci  Ut  fo: 

mer  time  in  3Jfracl ,  concerning  rcDec 
ming  anD  concerning  changing,  fo:  to 
confi'rme  ail  things :  a  man  piucUcD  off 
his  fhooe,  anD  gauc  it  to  his  neighbour: 
anbtbts^ateftunomem3ifracl. 

8  Cherfo:e  the  lunfeman  faiD  bnto 

Boa;,Bup'tfo:thce:fohcb:cmoffhis 
jfliooe. 

9  41 anb  Boa;  faibc  bnto  the  £1 
Dcrs,anD  bnto  all  the  people,  Pc  are  mit 

ueffes  this  bap,  thatjhaue  bought  all 
thatmas^lunelcchs,  anb  all  that  mas 
i  €htifons,anD£0ahlons,  of  the  hanbe 
;ofii5aomt. 

io  tTr)o:coucr,5lutIi  the  tl^oabttclTr 
the  mife  of  fipahlon,  hauc  3J  purchafcD 
to  be  nip  mife ,  to  raifc  bp  the  name  of 
the  DeaD  bpon  his  inheritance,  that  the 
name  of  the  DeaD  be  not  cut  off  from  a 
monghis  b:eth:cn,  anb  from  the  gate 
of  his  place :  pe  are  muneffes  this  Dap. 

ii  anb  all  the  people  that  mere  mthc 
gate,  anbthe€lbcrs  faiD,  wee  areUnt 
neffes:  ChcfLsnaJDmafcetbciboman 
that  is  come  into  thmc  houfc,  UUc  &a 
chcl  anD  iiUciLeah,mhtch  tmo  did  bmlD 
the  houfe of  Jfrael :  anD  ||  Do  thou  tbo: 
thilpm  <£ph?atah,anb  tbec  famous  in 
Bethlehem. 

ii  anb  let  tnp  houfc  be  lihe  the  houfc 
of  $harc;,  ('ibhom  Xamar  bare  bn 
Bb  z to_ 

19  2 


■  Heh  I  fad 
lirilrelictile 


Dcm.  25. 
■9- 


\\0r  crl 

ih.'encha 

ci  potter. 

iffeh-.fr: 

clttmcthj 

r.&v.t. 

*Gcn.;S. 
•v*.  t.chro 
1  4  matt. 
1  ■? 


Elkanali,and 


i.s 


amue 


I. 


hi 


lswowiues. 


f  Hcbr  cau- 
fed  to  ce/tfe 
vntothte. 
\Or .redee- 
mer, 

\  Hcbr  to 
rtottriPi. 
\  Heb.thy 
grajhaires. 


to  3(ttoal))of  tljc  Icco  U)l)itl)  toe  %$>m> 
tbail  fliur  ii)cz  of  tljispong  Woman. 

15  C£>o  25035  to  one  £utl),  anbfbe 
lbasnts  lbifc:  anb  VDl)cnI)c  Went  in  bn* 
to  uer ,  toe  ?L  ©  is  ©  gauc  bcr  conccpti- 
on,anbflicbarcafonnc. 

14  3inb  toe  women  faib  into  0<u>> 
mi,  23icu"cd  bctbe  ILo  is  ©Which,  bath 
not  t  left  tljcc  this  bay  Without  a  ||  funfe* 
man,rt)atbisnamcmai>bcefamousin 
1/fcacl : 

1$  ^nbbefltfibcbntofbcearcftozer 
of  thy  ufcano  ta  nouritbct  of  tfljiitc  olb 
age:  foj  thy  oaugbtcr  inlaw  Which lo* 
uctb  tbec,  Which  is  better  to  tJjcetfjcn 
fcttcnfonncs,batb  luuncbnn. 

is  3nb/l2aomitooRctbccbiibe,anb 


lam  it  in  lire  bofome ,  anb  became  mirfc 
bntoit. 

17  3tnb  the  Women  bee  neighbours 
gaucitanamc,fapmg,Xbetetsafonnc 
borne  to  /iSaomi,  anb  ttjep  taiicb  bis 
name  £>bco:  l)ce  is  the  father  of  3cfTe 
the  father  of  2>amo. 

is  Clftowtbefcarctbegcnerations 
of  0bar  C5:  *  #bar  c$  begatc  Jjesr  on, 

19  £nb  l^csron  begatc  ftam ,  anb 
&am  begate  ^mminabab, 

io  3nb  3mminabab  begate  i5al> 
fljon,  anb/Babtbon  begate  ||  Salmon, 

21  3nb  Salmon  begatc  260a?,  anb 
asoa?  begatc  £>beb, 

11  2nb£)beb  begat  3Jcu"e,anb3Jcfre 
begatc  SDauib. 


"i.CIiron. 
2.4.  matt. 
I.}. 


Or,  SaI. 
mAh. 


,THE  FIRST   BOOKE 

of  Samuel,  otherwife  called,  The 

firfl  Booke  of  the  Kings. 


CHAP.    I. 

Elkanah  a  Leui:e  hauing  two  wiues ,  wor- 
fhippeth  yecrely  at  Sbiloh.  4  H.e  che- 
rifheth  Hannah,  though  barren,  and  pro- 
uokedbyPeninnah.  9  Hannah  in  griefe, 
prayeth  for  a  childe.  12.  Eli  firfl  rebuking 
her,al'r.erwards  blefletli  her.  19  Hannah  ha- 
uing borne  Samuel,  ftayerh  at  home  till  he 
be  weaned.  14  Sheprefenteth  him,accor- 
dingtohervow,to  the  Lord. 

4DW  there  was  a 
ccrtamc  man  of 
UamatljainiZo* 
pbim,  of  mount 
Gpbjaim ,  1  Dig 
name  was  Glttfc 
nab,  tberotmeof 
3Jcrol)ani  ,  tl)c 
fonnc  of  Clibu, 

tbcfoiincof%obu,tbcfonncofzupb, 
an€pl)2atl)itc; 

2  3nb  be  bab  two  Wfucs,  filename 
of  tl)c  one  was  tyannab  ,anb  the  name 
of  the  other  peninnab  :  anb  £cnin< 
nah  babcbUbjen,  but  Manual)  rjab  no 
cl)Jlb:cn. 


j  3inDtbismanWentbpoutofbis 
citic  *  tpcerely ,  to  wo?Q)ip  anb  to  facet* 
See  bnto  the  %  ©  is  w  of  holies  in  £>bi* 
lot),  anb  the  two  fonnes  of  €ii,$opi> 
nt ,  anbfl&nnejhas ,  the  pncGs  of  the 

|[,iI)lSlP,weretl)eCC. 

4  C31nb  when  the  time  was,  that 
€luanab  offercb,ftcgaueto|5cntnnaI) 
bts  wife ,  anb  to  au  her  fonncs,anb  her 
baugbtcrs,  portions. 

5  26utbtuo^amia!)fjcgauc||atbo^ 
tlip  ponton :  ( fo:  he  loucb  Hannah ,  but 
tbc?L©is©  baoanitbpberWombe. 

6  ^nb  bee  abucrfarv  aifotpjtououeb 
bcrfozc,  foj  to  make  ber  feet,  betaufc 
the  %®  is©  bab  flntttopber  Wombe.) 

7  3lnb  as  ijc  bib  fo  yccre  &P  yecrc, 
||  tbfjen  flic  lbent  bpto  tftc  rjoufcof  tl)c 
fLois  ©,fo  fliepiououcbher,  t!;crcfoJC 
flje  tbept.anb  btb  not  cat. 

8  XfjcnfatbeiBanaDhetljufbanb 
to  hcr,^annat),tbf)v  tbeepefttbou  t  anb 
i\)!)V  catctt  rfjou  not;  anb  tbhp  istrjp 
heart  gricneb  <  ^m  not  31  better  to 
thec-,  then  ten  fonncsi 

9  C  5>o  Dannah  rofc  Dp  after  tbcp 
Dab  catm  in£>l)ilolj i  ,anb  after  ftep  Dab 

bnmbc, 


•Dcut.iiS. 

t  Heh-.from 
ye;rt  to 
JttKt 


\0r.  a 
double  por- 
tion. 


f  Hebr.an 
gredher. 


\\Or,jrom 
the  time 
thatfhe,&c. 
Heer.  from 
ber  going  vp. 


Hannahs  prayer,        Chap.ij.        andthankfgiuing, 


\Hebr.bit- 
rcroffox!:. 


\  Hebr.fecd 
ofmen. 

iiiHg.13.5. 

J  Hibr.rmil- 
tiplied  to 


\Hchr.hnri 
sfjfirit. 


\0r,m:Mt.: 

tKlt. 


\Hebr.re- 
uelaxun  of 
tUyet. 

IIThatis, 

clkrdofCjcd. 


bmnltc;  (notb  en  ttic^-zitft  fate  bpon 
a  feat  bp  a  poftc  of  the  Xcmplcof  the 

fLi©i3©.) 

10  anb  thee  tbas  t  utbitterneffe  of 
fonlcanb  pjapcb  bnto  the  %®  h  ©anb 
tbeptfozc. 

1 1  anbthebotbeb  aboib,  anb  fatb, 
<©  Horn©  of  hottcs,  if  thou  tbtltin* 
becb  looftc  on  the  affliction  of  thine 
hanbniapb,anbtcmembecme,anbnot 
fojgct  tl;me  hanbmapb,  but  tbilt  giuc 
bnto  thine  hanbmapb  t  a  man  chtibe, 
then  3  lbtll  giuc  htm  bnto  tfjc  %  ©  ts  © 
all  the  bapes  ofhis  life,  anb  *  tljcrc  tball 
no  rafo?  tonic  bponhlshcab. 

ii  anb  it  tatneto  paflc  as  the  tcon- 
tinttcb  pjaptng  bcfo?c  rt)c  %  o  is©,that 
eiimacRCb  her  mouth. 

13  /Botb  Hannah,  fbecfpaKe  in  her 
heart;  onelp  her  uppes  niooucb,  but 
herbotcelbasnot  hearb:  thcrcfo?e€li 
thought  flKijau  becne  bjumtcn. 

14  anb  tflifatb  bnto  bet,  $oiP  long 
ibilt  thou  be  bnmftcn*  put  atbap  tf)P 
ibtne  front  thec. 

15  anb  $annah  anfiuercb,  anb  fatb, 
J3o,mplo?b,  ^amatbomantofafo^ 
roibfull  fpint:  3  hauebmnbe  neither 
ttnncnoiftrong  bnh&e,  buthauepou> 
reb  out  nip  foulc  befoje  the  %  so  h  id. 

16  Count  not  thine  hanbmatbfo?  a 
baughter  of  2Selial :  fo?  out  of  the  abun 
bance  of  nip  ||  complaint  anb  gttcfe, 
hauegifpoRen  hitherto. 

17  Xhcn  €lt  anftbereb ,  anb  faib, 
<5oe  fn  peace:  anb  the  ©ob  of  ^jfracl 
grant  theethp  petition,  that  thou  haft 
affccDofhuu. 

18  anbmcfafljJLctthhtchanbmatb 
finDegcaeemthpGgbt.  3>othevboman 
tbent  her  *bap ,  anb  bib  cate ,  anb  her 
countenantctbasno  mo?cfad. 

19  C  anb  thep  rofe  bp  in  the  inc^ 
ningcarlp ,  anb  lbo?ftnppcb  befo?e  the 
flfiDS©,  anb  retttrneb,  anb  came  to 
their  houfe  to  &amah :  anb  cifta? 
nah  ttnelbe  Hannah  his  ibtfe,  anb  the 
fL  b  K  ©  remcmb?eb  her 

20  i©bcrcfo?eiteamctopau"eibhett 
the  t  time  tbas  come  about ,  after  JS?an* 
nah  *)ab  tonccmcb ,  that  fhee  bare  a 
(bnnc,  anb  cailcb  his  name  H  Samuel , 
faying  •,  Becaufc  3  haue  affecb  him  of  the 

1L&3B©. 

it  anb  the  man  Claanah,  anb  all 
his  houfe ,  Tbcnt  bp  to  offer  bnto  the 
%  <s>  is  ©  the  pecrelp  faen&ce ,  anb  his 
botbe. 

22  25ut  Hannah  lbent  not  bp;  fo? 


f\)tc  fatb  bnto  her  hufoano,  i  will  not  goe 
vp  bntillthcctnlbe  beibcancb,  anb  then 
3  ttnll  bang  him,  tbatbemapappcarc 
bcfo?ctbe?L©  is©,  anb  there  abibcfo? 
cuer. 

zj  ^nb  ei&anah  her  hufbanb  fatb 
bnto  her,  3>oibbatfcemctbtbccgoob, 
tatpbntuitboubauctbcancbbiim.onip 
tlie  %  2D  ii  ©  eftablift)  his  ibojb :  fo  the 
tiioman  abobe,  anb  gauc  her  fonne 
fucfee  bnttll  flic  ibeancb  him. 

24  C  anb  Ibheu  tytc  liab  Ibcaneb 
him,fl)CCtooBChunbp  Vbtthhcr,tbith 
tlwcc  bullocbs,anb  oncephah  of  floure, 
anb  a  bottle  of  ibmc,  anbbjotightbmt 
bnto  the  houfe  of  the  %  ©  is  m  ixi&ty 
loh:  anbthccbtlbc  was  poung. 

25  anb  the?  flctb  a  bullocfee,  anb 
b20itgbttbcchtibcto€li. 

26  anb  the  fatb,  £>h  mp  lo?b,  as  thp 
Cottle  liucth,  mv  lo:b ,  3  am  the  Iboman, 
thatftoob  bp  thee  heetc,  p?apuigbnto 

tl)t?L©lB©. 

27  5fo?thisthilbc^pjapeb,anbthc 
fL©n©  hath  giuen  me  mp  petition, 
ibhtch^afHcbofhim: 

zs  Xhcrefo?eaifo3}hauc||lcnthim 
to  the  %  ©is ©  as  long  as  hee  itueth, 
||  he  fliail  be  lent  to  the  %  0  33  ©.  atib 
hc!bo?fl;ippcb  thc?L©iB©thcre. 

CHAP.    ir. 

1   Hannahs  fong  in  thankefulnefie.    it   The 
finne  of  Elies  fonnes.   18  Samuels  minifte- 
10  By  Elies  blefsing,  Hannah  is  more 


||  Or.  mm- 
ned  him, 
whomlhaxe 
obtainedby 
petition  to 
thLOT^p. 
I  Or,  hie 
vhem  Ihaue 
obtetnedly 
petition, 
ihadbe  re- 
turned. 


Eli  reprooueth  his  founes. 
jainft  Elies  houfe. 


18 


fruitfull, 

A  prophecie  a: 

iBb  Hannah  pzaptb ,  anb 
fatb ,  £@p  heart  rciopceth 
m  the  2L©iB3D,mtnc  home 
is  eraiteb  in  the  %  £>  is  3D : 
mp  mouth  is  iniargeb  o* 

iter  mine  enemies :  betaufe  3  teiopce  in 

thvfaluation. 

2  Xbcrei>  none  holy  as  the  Hr>K3D: 
fo?  there  is  none  befibe  thee :  neither  is 
there  any  Bottse  use  our  ©ob. 

j  ICaibe  no  mo?c  fo  erccebing  pjoub? 
Ip,  let  not  t  arroganeie  tome  out  of  pour 
mouth :  fo?  the  1L  £>  a  ©  is  a  d5ob  of 
Kitotblcbge,  anb  bp  hint  actions  arc 
lbctghcb 

4  Xhe  botbes  of  the  mtghtic  men 
ace  b?oben,anb  ttjepthat  ftumbleb  arc 
girtlbithftrcngth. 

5  1Chcp  that  were  full ,  hauc  hircb 
otitthemfelucs  fo2  bjeao :  anb  thep  that 
were  l)imgcp,  teafcb:fothatthe  barren 

216  b  3  hath 


\Hibr.hud. 


Elisfonncs  wicked.  '  I.Samuel. 


Elitherefi 


ererore 


'Dcut.  ;i 
3S».»ifcl. 

16.1  j.tob. 


•Pl'il.  1 1  J. 
7. 


■Chap.7. 


cnthc  dx 


•Exod.  in 
4- 


ljatlj  bojnc  fcucn,  ant)  fljc  tljat  hath  ma; 
up  thilb2tn,ts  Ibarcb  feeble. 

6  *£hc^£>is©feiilethanbmafecth 
alute,  he  bzmgeth  bourne  to  the  grauc, 
anbbnngcthbp. 

7  X|)c?t©iRomaRctl)poo2e,anb 
mafeeth  rirt) :  he  bjuigcth  lovb,  anb  lif 
tctljbp. 

8  ??c*ratfcthbpthcpoo2coutofthe 
buft,  and  uftcthbpthc  begger  from  the 
bitnglv.il,  to  fet  them  among  pmues.anb 
to  mafec  tljciu  inherit theth2oncofglo 
rp:  fo?  the  pillars  of  the  earth  aiethc 
H  c»  it  ©  *>,  anb  hee  hath  fct  the  lbo2lb 
Dpontl)tm. 

9  i?eibtllfeccpethefcetofhisfaints, 
anb  tl)c  lbtcfecb  (hall  bee  filcntinbarftc; 
nctTc ;  foj  bp  ftrcngth  (hall  no  man  p:e= 
uaiic. 

io  %\)t  abttcrfartcs  of  the  %  o  is  © 
(halbc  b20fecn  to  pieces :  *  out  of  hcaucn 
fljal  hcthunbcc  upon  thcimthc  2L£>is© 
fhailiubgc  tlje  cnos  of  tlje  cavtl),anb  lie 
fljai  gmc  ftrcugtlj  bnto  his  lung,  anb  ci> 
altfhc  home  of  his3tnomtcb. 

ii  2Mb  €lfeanah  inent  to  Batualj  to 
IHs  houfe,  anb  the  thii'o  bib  mmtftcr  btu 
to  tlje  ?Loitiobcfo2C(£iitl)c^ncft. 

u  C  iBott)  the  fonnes  ofcitlbcrc 
tonnes  of  zScltal,  thep  fenerbc  nottl;e 

2L£>1S©. 

ij  3utb  tl)c  pnclts  cttftome  ibitlj  tlic 
people  was.that  lbljcn  an?  man  off rcb  fa; 
trificc,  the  p?ie(tcsfctttant  came,  lbljtlc 
the  flefli  lbas  m  fcctljmg,  ibitlj  aflcfi> 
hoofecofthjcctcethtnljishanb, 

14  3tnb  he  ftroofec « into  the  panne, 
02  nettle,  o2taib2on,  02  pot:  all  that  the 
flefh  hoofecb2oughtbp,thcp2iefttoofec 
fo2  hunfclfc :  fo  tl)cv  bib  tn  £>htloh  bnto 
all  the  gifraclitcs  that  tame  thither. 

15  3llfo  befo2C  thep  burnt  tlje  fat,  tlic 
P2tctts  fernant  came,  *  faib  to  the  man 
tljatfacnfhcb,  <5iucflcfl)  to  roltc  foztUc 
P2icft,fo2  Ileum  not  haucfoobcu  flcflj  of 
thee,  but  ratt). 

i6  2Mb  if  any  man  faib  imto  l)im, 
ILct  tlKm  not  fane  to  bumc  tlic  fat  tp2c^ 
fcntlp,anb  torn taltcas  much  as  t!)j>foulc 
beftreth :  thcnhceiboulbanfu»erchlm, 
/5ap,  but  thou  fljalt  guic  it  nice  novb : 
anb  if  not,  3  mil  tafec  it  by  fo2tc. 

17  nahcrcfojc  the  finnc  of  tlic  pong 
mm  ujasberp  great  bcfo2c  the  ILois©: 
foz  men  abfjojrcb  tlje  offering  of  the 
1L  ©  is  ©. 

is  CiSttt Samuel  miniftrco  bcfbjc 
tlic  JLo  ib  ©,bcmg  a  chub,*  girbcbibith 
aiinncucpljob. 


19  Q3o2Couer,fjismotDermabe  him 
a  Iitle  tbate,  anb  b2ougljt  it  to  him  from 
pterc  to  peerc,  lbhcn  fl)e  camebpibith 
her  hufbanb,  to  offer  the  pccrclp  fa- 
enficc. 

20  C3ttb£libleflcbCifeanah,anb 
his ibifc,  anb  faib,  Xhe  %  0  is  ©  guic 
thcefeeb  of  this  iboman,  fo?  the  1  loanc 
Which  is  lent  to  the  %&  is  ©.  3lnb  thep 
ibent  bnto  their  ottmchomc. 

ii  3inb the %o it ©btfiteb Hannah, 
fo  that  fl)tc  concemeb ,  anb  bare  tlnce 
fonncs,anb  ttbo  baugljters :  anb  tlje 
thtlb  Samuel  gtcin  bcfo2e  the  jL©ta)P. 

ii  Cil5oib€Iti«asbervolbc,  anb 
hcarb  all  that  his  founts  bib  bnto  an 
3fracl,anbhoibrt)eviaytt)iththcibo 
mnuhattaffcmblcbatthcboo2Coftht 
Xabernaclc  of  tlic  Congrcganon. 

2j  ^nb  he  faib  bnto  them,  nahyboe 
vefurii  things^  fo2||3l  hcare  ofyour  cuil 
bcalutgs,bp  all  tins  people. 

14  jSapmyfonucs:  fo: itisno goob 
repo2t  that  3}  heare  j  ytt  mafec  the 
%  €>  it  ©  ^>  people  to  I  tranfgrtfTe. 

15  5Jf  one  man  finnc  agamft  an- 
other , the  5iuoge  (hall  uibge  htm :  but  if 
a  man  finnc  agamft  the  %  <&  is  jd,  Tnho 
(hall  mtrcat  fo:  him  i  j]5otlbitl)ftan; 
b.ngthcyhcarRcncbnotbntothcbotce 
of  tlKir  father  ,  betaufe  the  11 01s  p 
iboulb  flap  them. 

16  (3tnb  tlje  thilb  Samuel  gretb  on, 
anb  lbas  in  fauottr  ,  both  lbith  the 
%  o  is  ©,  anb  alfo  tt)ith  men.) 

17  CC  ^nb  there  came  a  man  of  <5ob 
bnto  Cli ,  anb  fame  bnto  him,  Xhus 
faith  the  %  ©  it  3D,  2Dib  3  plamclp  ap. 
pcarc  bnto  the  houfe  of  thp  father, 
\bhcn  thep  mere  in  Cgypt  m  pljara^ 
ohs  houfe; 

18  3tnb  bib  gi  chufc  him  out  of  all 
the  tribes  of  ^jfracl,  to  be  mp  ^2ieft,  to 
offer  bpon  mine  altar ,to  burnc  intcnfe, 
to  Vbcarc  an  €phob  bcfo2C  mec*  anb 
*bib  gj  giuc  bnto  the  houfe  of  thp  fiv 
thcr ,  all  the  offerings  mabc  by  fire  of 
thcthtUncuofgjfracl? 

19  ffi)hcrcfb2CRttlicpcat  mpfacrtficc, 
anb  at  mine  offering,  lbhtch  3  'J^uc 
tommatmbcb  in  my  habitanoti ,  anb 
honoured  thp  founts  abouc  mcc,  to 
mafec  pour  {clues  fat  lbith  tlje  thiefeft 
ofailthcoffriugsofgjfraclmppeopici 

jo  u3hercfo2c  tlic  Hsdis©  (3ob  of 
llfraci  faith,  3  favbmbctbc,  that  thp 
houfe,  d  the  houfe  of  thp  father  flioulb 
lbaiiie  bcfo2e  mcfbzcutT:  butnoibthc 
%  <$>  is  ©  faith ,  Be  it  farre  from  mce , 

fo; 


\Ort  petition 
which  hec 


f  Hclr.af- 
ftmbUdfy 
troHpci. 

\OrJheare 

millTcorcLi 


'Leult.  10. 
14. 


is  threatened.  Chap.nj.    God  calleth  Samuel. 


Orjheaf- 
fliftion  of  the 
Tabernacle, 
for  all  the 
wealth 

ktch  God 
wo»ldhajie 
gttten  Ifrael. 


\Keb.mm. 


\  Hebjtjne. 
"  Or,  Some- 
what about 
the  Prteft. 

hood.. 


foz  them  that  honour  mc ,  3 lbill  ho^ 
nour,  anD  they  that  Dcfpifc  mc,  (hall  be 
lightly  cftcemcD. 

31  2ScholD ,  thcDayes  tome,  tt)at3l 
lbill  tut  off  thine  armc ,  anD  thcarinc 
of  thy  fathers  houfe,  ttiat  ttjece  fljall 
not  bean  olD  man  m  thine  houfc. 

3i  3tnD  thou  fhait  fee  ||  an  encmic  m 
my  habitation,  m  all  the  wealth  lbhirh 
d5ob  fhall  sine  3$fracl ,  anD  there  fhall 
not  bee  an  oibcman  m  thine  Ijoufcfo? 
euer. 

33  3mD  the  man  of  thine,  whom  3 
(hall  not  rat  off  from  mme^ltac,  fh.nl 
be  totonftimc  thine  eves,  atiDtogrtcuc 
thmchcart :  anDallthcinctcafc  of  thmc 
houfc  ftjail  Die  t  m  the  floure  of  their 
age. 

34  3tnD  this  ft)all  bee  afignc  bnto 
thee,  that  fhall  tome  bpon  thy  tibo 
fonncs,  on  ^ophtu  auDphmchas :  m 
one  Day  thcvfliall  Die  both  of  them. 

35  ^nD  3  ttull  raifc  mc  Dp  a  faith- 
full02ieu\  that  than  boc  atcozbtng  to 
thac  which  is  m  my  h cart  anD  m  my  n  unD, 
anD  3  rbill  biulb  him  a  furc  houfc,  anb 
hce  fhall  tbaiuc  befoje  mine  auoiutcb 
fozcuer. 

36  3inb  it  fhall  tome  to  pafTc,  that 
eucry  one  that  is  left  tn  thmc  houfc,fljal 
come  and  crouch  to  him  foz  a  piece  of  fil 
ucr,anDamozfclofbzcaD,anD  fhall  fay, 
t^ntmcCJ  pzay  thee)  into  II  one  of  the 
£zicfts offices,  that  3  may  rat  a  piece 
of  bzcaD. 

CHAP.    III. 

i  How  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  firit  reucaled 
to  Samuel.  Ii  God  tclleth  Samuel  the  de- 
ftrudtion  of  Elies  houfe.  15  Samuel,  though 
loth,  telleth  Eli  the  vifion.  19  SamueJ 
£T,rowefh  in  credit. 

j|5d  the  chilD  Samuel  xw 
tuftrcD  Dnto  the  %  0  ti  © 
befozc  eh :  anb  the  ibozD 
of  the  lL<Di3£>ibasp2c; 
_  ciousmthofebaies;  there 
ibasnoopenbuum. 

2  Slno  it  came  to  paffc  at  that  time, 
tbhen  en lDas layD  bourne  m  his  place, 
anD  his  eyes  beganne  tolbarc  bimmc, 
thathccoulbnotfec; 

3  3no  ycr  the  lampc  of  d5oD  ibent 
out  m  ti)c  Xcmplc  of  the  2l0is£>, 
ibhercthe3lr&eof  (SoDlDas,  anDS>a= 
muelibaslayDDolbnetonecpe ; 

4.  Xhat  the  %  0  h  ©  cailcD  &a= 
nmcl.anD  bcanfroereb,$>crcani3I. 
5  3lnDhcranncbnto£u,anDfayD, 


D?ere  am  %  foz  thou  callebft  mc.  3lnD 
he  faib/J  caiicb  not ;  lie  Doibnc  agamc. 
3(nb  he  vucntanD  lay  DoiDnc. 

6  3tnD  the  %  0  a  p  calico  yet  a 
game,  Samuel,  3tnb  Samuel  arofc, 
anblbcnttoeii,  anDfaib,  l)ercam  3, 
foz  thou  biDocftcaume.  ^iDhcanfroc- 
rcD,  3  calico  not,  my  fonne ;  lie  Doumc 
agame. 

7  lUfJotbSamuclDiDttotyetmioVb 
the  %  0  is  s>,  neither  ttias  the  idozd  of 
the  %  0  k  s?  yet  rcucalcb  Dnto  him. 

8  3lnD  the  ?LsDHjscallcD  Samuel 
againc  the  thirDtime.  3Jnb  hce  arofc, 
anDibcntto€li,  anDfaiD,  $crcam35, 
to:  thou  DiDDcttcail  mc.  2lnD  <eit  per 
ccuicd  that  tl;c  %  o  is  ©  haD  caiicb  the 

ChllDC. 

9  Xhcrefozc  Cli  faib  Dnto  Samuel, 
(5o,  lie  boibne,  <$it  thai  be,ifhe  call  thec, 
that  thou  (halt  fay,  SpcaHc  %  o  is  3?, 
fo?  rhyferuant  hcarcth.  ^>o  Canine! 
lbcnt,anD  lay  Dorbncm  his  place. 

io  3nDthc&0E2?camc,anDftooD 
anb  cailcD  as  at  other  times ,  Samuel, 
damuel.  Xhen  Samuel  anfrocrcb, 
^pcaftc,  fo?  thy  fcrnant  hcarcth. 

1 1  <r  ^nD  the  TL  ©  k  h  fapb  to  ^>a-- 
inucl,  23eholb,  3  lbill  Doe  a  thing  m 
JJfrael ,  attbhtcfrboth  the  earcs  of*c: 
ucry  one  that  hcarcth  it,fhau  tmgle. 

it  gin  that  bay,  3  lbill pcrfomie  a= 
gamft  €ii,  allthingsiDhich  3  hauc  fpo 
feen  concerning  his  hoitfe :  t  when  31  be- 
gin,  3  iMialfo  mafecan  cnb. 

n  fifo?  3  hauc  tolbehim,  that'll 
thill  mbge  his  houfe  foz  euer,  foz  the 
mtquitie  tbhith  \)tc  bnorbeth :  becaufc 
htsfonnesmabcthcmfclucs  ||Dtlc,  anb 
he  trcftratneb  them  nor. 

14-  ^nDthcrcfojc'lihauenDozncbn 
to  the  houfe  of  €li,  that  the  mtquttic  of 
(Slics  houfc  fhall  not  be  purgcD  iDitlj 
facriftccnozoffermg  foz  mcr, 

15  C  3no  Samuel  lay  Dnrill  the 
mozning,  anD  openeb  the  Doozcs  of  the 
honfc  of  thejl0is£>:  anb  Samuel 
fear  cD  to  fhclb  €li  the  Difion. 

i6  Xhen  €li  cailcD  Samuel,  anb 
faiD,S>amucl  my  fonne.  ^nbheanfmt' 
rcD,Dcreamgj. 

i7  ^nDhefaiD,  iBhat  is  the  thing 
that  the  H  0 is £>  hath  faiD  bnto  thee  < 
3pzay thcchiDcitnotfrommee :  <5ob 
Doe  fo  to  thee ,  anD  tmoze  alfo ,  if  thou 
hiDc  any  ||  thing  from  mc,  of  all  the 
things  that  hecfatb  bnto  thee. 

is  3inD  Samuel  tolbc  htm  t  cuery 

HDhit,anb  hib  nothing  from  him.  ^nb 

hee 


Samuel,  be- 
fore he  fyew 
the  LORD; 
andbrftrc 
hevordof 
the  LOUT) 

reuea 
lei  vnto 
htmt 


2.Kin.2l. 


t  Heir,  h- 

Hrmmfund 

ending. 

i|  Or,  and  I 

jtiiltellhtm, 

&c. 

■Clup.i. 

&c. 

j  Or,  accttr. 
Yed. 

t  Heb.fr  Jto 
tied  not  vpon 
them. 


'  Hdr.fo 
aide. 

Or,xrord. 
\  Heb  alllht 
'.hvt^st  or 
vords. 


Ifrael  is  ouercomc.     I.Samuel. 


Elidieth. 


\Or,fiutb- 

ftU. 


\Ortcjm.':o 


\Hcbr.thi 

tttilellnrM 

firrifi. 

\lUr.ihc 

araj. 


Hfir.iolu 


I)cfat6,gjt  is  tljcU.  o  «  ©  :fUtDunaoc 
ibljatfccmetljDun  gooa. 

19  cana  Samuel  grctt) ,  ana  tDe 
%<d  is©  Vbas  lbttD  Dim  ,  ana  ata  let 
none  ofl)ts  laozas  fall  to  tljc  gcouno. 

10  ana  ali3Jfcacl  from  Dan  cum  to 
J5cer  -  ujeba ,  luteta  tDat  Samuclibas 
||  eflabliujca  to  bee  a  $;opbct  of  tljc 
Jlois©. 

21  ana  tDe  ILokp  appcarea  a< 
game  m  SDttoD:  fo?  tljc  ?L  sd  is  ©  rcurt- 
lea  Dimfclfe  to  Samuel  in  j&fiflofi,  by 
tljc  «jo?u  of  tlje  ?L  sr>  is  ?r>. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

i  Thelfraelitcs  areouercomeby  the  Philiftines 
at  Aben-Ezer.  3  They  fetch  the  Arke,vnto 
the  terrour  of  the  Philiftines.  10  They  are 
fmitten  againe,  the  Arke  taken,  Hophni  and 
Phinehasare flaine.  12.  Eliatthenewes.fal- 
ling  backward,  brcaketh  his  necke.  19  Phi- 
nehaswife,  difcouiagedin  hertrauaile  with 
Ichabod ,  dieth. 

/i2b  tDe  ttwa  of  Samuel 
||camctoail3ifracl.Ji5ott> 
•  3ifcacl  lbtnt  out  agatnlr 
fi  trjc  ^Diliftmcs  to  battcil 
ana  pitcDca  befibc  Cben- 
csec :  ana  tlje  pljiltflincs  pudjeb  in 
Bpfiefc. 

z  ana  tl)e  |5Dilimncs  put  tljenv 
felues  in  aray  agauuT3Ifracl:ana  Ibljcti 
ttljey  loyncabattcil ,  fifrael  laasfmit; 
ten  before  tDc^Diiimncs:  ana  tljey  flcia 
ofttDcarmtc  m  tljc  ficlb ,  about  foutc 
tljouCanamen. 

3  OnaibDcn  tDe  people  tbere  tome 
into  tl)c  campc ,  tljc  €iaers  of  3Jfracl 
faia  ,t©Dcrcfo2c  Datlj  tDe  %  «d  is  ©  fmit* 
tcnastoaaybefa?ctDc0Dmmncsf?Lct 
us t fctclj  tljc  amc  oftDcCoucnantof 
tDe  %  o  is  ©  out  of  SDiloD  auto  as, 
tDatibDcu  it  commetD  among  as,"  map 
fauc  as  out  oftlje  Ijana  of  our  enemies. 

4  So  tDe  people  fent  to  SDUol), 
tDat  tDcy uugDt  bung  from  tDcncc  tDe 
arUc  of  tDe  Coucnant  of  tl)c3L£>is© 
of  Doftes,  lbDnD  aiactlcrt)  betweene  tDe 
CDcruauus:  ana  tljc  tiao  fonnes  of  e< 
it,  J?opDnt,  ana  v>Duiel)as  were  tDcrc, 
laitDtDcaihcoftDcCoucnantofiSoa. 

5  anaiaDcntljcarUcofrDe<£ouc< 
nant  of  tDe  Ho  «  ©  tame  mto  tDe 
campe ,  ail  3ifracl  fl)outeaibitD  a  great 
fljoutfo  tDat  tDe  earth  rangagainc 

6  ana  lbDcn  tDe  $Dih(hncs Dcara 
tDe  noife  of  tDe  fDout  ,tl)cy  faia,  nanat 
meatictOtljcnotfcofrtjtsgrcatiDoutm 


tDe  tampe  of  tljci^cbjciacs  *ana  tDcy 
anacrltoon  ,  tDat  tDe  arfec  of  ttje 
%  0  is  ©  iaas  come  into  tDe  tampe. 

7  ana tDe  pDilttrtncs  Were  afraia, 
fo?  tljey  faiae ,  C5oa  is  tome  into  tDe 
campe.ana  tDcy  fata,n3oc  anto  as  s  foj 
tljctcDatlj  not  bene  furJjatDmg  tijcrc- 
tofoje. 

3  naoc  anto  as :  tbDo  ujali  acliuer 
as  out  of  tljc  Dana  of  tljefe  migDttc 
<5oas<  tljefc  are  tDe  <3oas  tDat  fmotc 
tDcegypttans  ttnrtj  all  tDe  plagues  in 
tljciaiiacrncffe. 

9  23ee(tcong,  ana  Qiiityour  femes 
linemen,  <©  ye  0D'.ulhncs,  tDat  yeebe 
not  fcruants  anto  tlje  l^ebjciaes,  *as 
tDcy  DaueDcneto  you:  tquit  your  fclttcs 
line  men, ana  figDt. 

10  c^natDc^DilimnesfongDt,ana 
3Jfracl  iaasfmitten,ana  tfjcp  flea  cuery 
man  into  Dis  tent :  ana  tDcrc  teas  a  ac^ 
rp  great  flaugDter,  fo?  tljcrefeil  ofjt 
racltDirnctDoufanafoonncn. 

11  ^na  tDe31rfieof(l5oaiaastaftcn, 
ana  tDctruo  fonnes  of  <£Ii,^opDni;ana 
^D'ntHSstjaere  flame. 

ii  OnatDcrcranamanofzBcnite 
mitt  out  of  tDe  army ,  ana  tame  to  SDi? 
loDtDc  famcaayiattD  DistlotDcsrent, 
ana  ibitD  eartl)  apon  DisDeaa. 

13  ana  ibDcn  Dee  tame,  loe,  Cli  fate 
bponafcatby  tDe  tt>apGac,iaatcI)ing: 
fo?  Ijis  Dcarttrentblea  foj  tlje  ^rfec  of 
©oa.  ^na  vaDen  tljc  man  came  into  tDe 
titicana  tola  it,all  tDe  nty  trica  out. 

14  anaiaDcn<£ltDcaratDcnotfcof 
tDe  trying ,Dtc  fata ;  UDljatmcanetl)  t\)e 
notfc  of  tDis  tumult  <  ana  tDe  man 
came  in  Daftily,ana  tola  cit. 

15  ii5oia  €li  ibas  ntnctic  ana  eigl)t 
ycer  cs  oia,ana  *  Ijis  eyes  t  uicrc  afmme, 
tijatDccouianotfcc. 

i6  ana  tDe  man  fata  bnto  €li,  3$  am 
Dc ,  tljat  tame  out  of  tDe  army ,  ana  gj 
flcatoaayoutoftDearmy.auaijcfaia, 
naljat  t  ts  tDcrc  aone,  my  tonne ; 

17  ana  tDe  mcflcnger  anftoerea,ana 
faia ,  3)fracl  is  flea  before  flic  pljtii* 
ftmes ,  ana  tlicte  Dart)  bettc  alfo  a  great 
flavgDtcr  among  tDe  people,  ana  rtiy 
tiao  fonnes  alfo  ,$opljni  j  pDtttcDas, 
are  acaa.ana  tDe  arDc  of  00a  is  taken 

18  ana  it  tame  to  paflc  WDcn  Dec 
iuaaetnctttionofrt)earDcof(5oa,tDat 
Dc  fell  from  offtDe  feat  batuuiara  by  rtie 
ftbc  oftlic  gate,  ana  Dis  nccfte  bzaDcana 
Deeaica:  fozDccibasan  oiaman ,  ana 
Dcautcatta  Ijcc  ijaa  magea3Jfraclfo^ 
tieycercs. 

19  crana 


\Hdrjt- 
{ltrtL\ytoi 
thethiid 


*  ludg. 13. 
t. 

\Hihr3c 
nun. 


\HtbAcl 


•Chip.  j. 

2. 

t  Hth. 
pctd. 


t  Hch.ii 
tbething. 


Dagonsfall.  The    Chap.v.vj.    Philiftins  plagued 


\Or,tomt 


\  Hehr.werc 
ttcmceL 


t  Heb.fet 
net  her heart 

\\Thatu, 
vhere  u  the 
elory  ? 
|  Or,  there 
unoelory. 


thjpttrt. 


66. 


19  C  3lnD  t)is  Daughter  in  lalb  pbi 
ncljas  ibifc  ibas  ibirb  riiiiuc  neere  ||  to  be 
DcliuctcD :  anD  lbben  fbec  beatotbete 
mngsttjat  tljc^rbc  of  0oDtt)as!  taltcn 
ano  tbat  Dec  fatljer  m  Uttb,  ano  bet  Hut 
bant)  iberc  oeao ,  (bee  botbeo  bet  felfc 
ano  traucplco >  fo?  bet  paints  t  tamt 
bponljer. 

io  3tno  about  tbc  time  of  bet  ocatb, 
tbclbomcn  tbat  ftooobp  bet,  fatbbnto 
her:  iFcarc  not,  foj  ttjou  baft  borne a 
tonne.  25ut(be  anTroerconot,  tnettber 
DiolbcrcgarOit. 

ii  Suio  ft)c  nameo  tbc  tbftuc  ||  5ltba* 
bob, faping,  ||Xbcgl02pis  Dcpartco 
ftom5fvacl,(bctanfetbc^rftfof<15ob 
tttas  tafttn,  ano  becaufc  of  bcr  fatbet  in 
lalb  ano  bet  bufbano.) 

n  3nDft)craiD,Xl)egl02pisDcpat; 
tcDfrom  jftart:  foz  tbc  atacof <5oD 
i$  taken. 

CHAP.  V. 

The  Philiftincs  hauingbrought  the  Arke  into 
Afhdod.fetitinthehoufeof  Dagon.  3  Da- 
gon is  fmitten  downeandcut  in  pieces,  and 
they  of  Afhdod  fmitten  with  Emerods.  8  So 
God  dealeth  with  them  of  Gath,  when  it  was 
brought  thither:  10  and  fo  with  them  of  Ek- 
ron  when  it  was  brought  thither. 

/ftb  tbc^bibflmestooRC 
tj)c  3trKc  of  <3ob ,  anb 
bjousbt  it  from  Cbnv- 
c3Ctbnto  ^(l)0oo. 
z  nabciubcf^bdittines 
toohctbc^rKCofeoo,  tbepbtougbtit 
mtotbc  boufc  of  SDagon,  ano  fct  tt  bp 
SDagon. 

5  CHno  ttljen  tatjev  of 3(bDob  arofc 
carclpontbcmo?toib,  brijoio,  SDagon 
Vbas  fallen  bpon  bis  fate  to  tlje  cartb, 
befo?c  tbc  3tKC  of  tbc  %£>&&:  ano 
tbcp  tooftc  SDagon ,  ano  fct  bun  in  bis 
place  agame. 

4  atiD  tbljcn  tbcp  arofe  carelpon 
tbcmoirolb  mommg,  bcljolb,  ©agon 
mas  fallen  bpon  bis  face  to  tbegtouno, 
bcfo2C  tbc  3trHc  of  tbc  %omi£> :  ano  tbc 
ljeaDofSDagon,anDbotbtbcpalmcsof 
bis  banos  iberc  rut  off  bpon  tbc  tbie* 
ft)oiD,onip|ltIjcuumpeof3Dagonibas 
left  to  Htm. 

5  Xbctcfcuc  neitbet  tlje  pztcfts  of 
©agon,  no?  anp  tbat  tome  into  SDa? 
gons  boufe ,  treao  on  tbc  ttycfbolO  of 
Dagohin2l(bDoDbntotbisDap. 

6  z3uttbebanDoftbcfL©!BE>tt>as 
bcaup  bpon  tbcm  of  3bbDoD,anD  he  De* 
ftropeDt^em,anDfmotetbcmibitb*e? 


meroos,  euen afyuoo ,  ano  tbe  toaftes 
tbctcof. 

7  3lnD  tbben  tbe  men  of  afbooo 
favb  tbat  it  was  r0 ,  tbcp  faio,  Xbc  2rHc 
of  tbe  ©00  of  3Jftael  (ball  not  abibe 
ibitb  bs :  fo:  bis  bano  is  foje  bpon  bs, 
ano  bpon  ©agon  out  goo. 

8  Xbepfenttbetefb2C,anogatbc; 
t eo  alltbe  lo?os  of  tbe  #batftmcs  bnto 
tbem.ano  fato,  nabat  Ibalimc  ooc  tbitb 
tbe  ante  of  tf)t  ©00  of  3Jftael<  3mo 
rijep  anftueteo ,  fLet  tbe  arfce  of  tbe 
©00  of  3Jn*aei  bee  tartco  about  bnto 
©art),  ano  tbe?  tarieD  florae  of  tbc 
©00  of  3Jfrael  about  thither. 

9  3mD«tbasfo,tbataftertbeybao 
cartcD  it  about,  tbe  bano of  tbe?U>iB© 
tbas  againft  tbe  title  tbub  a  bcrp  great 
ocftrurtion:  ano  bee  fmote  tbe  men  of 
tbe  cine  botb  fmail  ano  great,  anbtbep 
bao  €iueroos  in  ttjetr  ferret  parts. 

10  CXberfozetbevfcnttbe^rfeeof 
<5ooto  £ftron :  anotttamc  to  paffeas 
tbe^lrfte  of  d5oo  came  to  Cbron,  tbat 
tbe  Cferonitrscrieo  out,  faputg,  Xbn> 
baue  b:ougbt  about  tbe  ?.mc  of  tbe 
C50D  of  ^fracl  to  bs,to  ftap  bs,anb  our 
people. 

11  5)0  tbe?  Tent  anb  gatbercb  toge> 
tber  all  tbe  lojos  of  tbc  pfiiitfhnes,  ano 
faiO ,  S>enD  aibap  t\)t  ^rbc  of  tbe  4500 
of  gifcacl,  ano  let  it  goe  agame  to  bis 
oibnc  place,  tbatit  flap  bsnot,  anoour 
people:  fc>2  tberc  ibasaDeaDlybcflTue 
tton  tl)?ougl)out  all  tbc  citic :  Xbe  banO 
of  (5od  ibas  bcrv  bcaup  tbere. 

11  3uiD  tbc  men  tbat  Dico  not ,  tber  t 
fmitten  tbitb  tbc  Cmerobs :  ano  rt)e  crp 
of  tlje  title  Xbcnt  bp  to  bcaucn. 

CHAP.    VI. 

After  feuen  moneths  the  Philiftincs  take  coun- 
fell.howtofend  backe  the  Atke.  10  They 
bring  it  on  a  new  cart  with  an  offering  vnto 
Bethfhemefh.  19  The  people  are  (mitten  for 
looking  into  the  Arke.  tl  They  fend  to  them 
of  Kiriath  -  iearim  to  fetch  it. 

iI5  2D  tbc  3(r&c  of  tbc 
%  ©  is  ©  ibas  m  tbc  toun* 
„  trcv  of  tbe  ^bUifttnes  fe= 
"ucnmonctbs. 

x  5lno  tbe  ^btliftincs 
calico  fo?  tbc  p2iefts  ano  tbc  banners, 
facing,  b@bat  fl)ailtbc  doc  to  tljc^rUc 
of  tbc  ILfiDisjD  i  Xell  bs  ibljcrcrbitb 
ibe  (ball  fenb  it  to  bis  place  < 

5   3lnDtbepfaiD,  3Jf  pec  feno  att)ap 
tbc^lrlic  of  tbc  ©00  of3Jfracl>renDtt 

not! 


The  Arkeis  fent        I.Samuel.       toBechftiemelh. 


f/ft&cbw 


proctifttlbf. 

*£xod.  12. 
\Heb.thtm. 


\Or}u. 


not  empty :  but  in  anp  ttnfe  return*  him 
a  trefpaffe  off  ring :  then  ye  fljatl  be  hea? 
leb,anbitfl)ailbcluiott)cntoyou,  lbljv 
his  hanb  is  notremoouebfrom  you. 

4  •Xhen  fatb  they,  aooat  h^c  the 
trefpaffe  offering,  lbljuh  lbec  ft)  all  re* 
turne  to  him?  Xijcv  aufibereo ,  JFiuc 
golben  £mer  obs,  ano  fiue  golbcn  mice, 
according  to  the  number  of  the  lozbcsof 
the  i&hiUftines:  fo?  one  plague  lbas  on 
tyouau,anb  onyourlo.zbs. 

5  DSlicrefojc  vc  than  mane  imager 
of  yonceiinerobcs.anb  images  ofyour 
<fl9ice,thatmatrcfhclano,  anbye  fhail 
guie  glozy  bnto  th  e  C5ob  of  3ifrael :  per 
abttenturc  hee  lbill  lighten  his  hanb 
from  off  you,  anb  from  off  your  gobs, 
anb  from  off  your  lanb. 

6  nahercfozc  then  boc  pec  hatben 
pour  hearts,  as  the  egyptians  anb 
jDharaohharbcnebtheirhcartsrtbhen 
hehab  tbjougrjt  ||  inonberfullyamong 
them,  *bib  they  not  let  t  the  people  goc, 
anbtljcvbepartcbi 

7  iBoibthcrcfcucinaBcancibcart, 
anb  tauc  tlbo  milch-sine,  on  ibhtch 
there  hath  tome  no  yofte,  anb  tic  the 
tunc  to  the  tart,  anb  bzmg  the  tallies 
home  from  them. 

8  3tnbtaftethc3lrKcofthc1!liDi3JD, 
anb  lap  it  bpon  the  tart,  anb  put  the 
ieiucls  of  golbc ,  ibhich  yereturnehtm 
fo?  a  trefpaffe  offering,  in  a  coffer  by  the 
Cbe  thereof,  anb  fenb  it  attjay,  that  it 
map  goc, 

9  3nbfce,ifitgoethbpbythcibay 
of  his  oUnie  coaft  to  2i5efhthemefh,fheu 
||  he  h«th  bone  bs  this  great  eutll :  but  if 
not,  then  lbec  (hall  Knott)  that  ttisnot 
his  hanb  that  futotebs;  it  was  a  chance 
that  happcueb  tons. 

io  ct  3nb  the  men  Jiib  fo :  anb  toouc 
tlbo  milch  nine,  anb  tieb  them  to  the 
cart,  anb  (hut  bp  their  tallies  at  home. 

ii  3mb  they  laybc  the  Slrltc  of  the 
1L©kjd  bponthc  cart,  anb  thecoffcr, 
ibiththcnnte  ofgolbe,anbfhe  images 
of  their  tfmcrobs. 

ii  3lnb  the  Htnc  tooltc  the  ffraight 
lbay  to  the  lbay  of  aScfhfhemeCh ,  anb 
lbcnt  along  the  high  inay ,  lolbing  as 
they  ibent,  anb  turtieb  notafibeto  tijc 
right  hanb,  o:  to  the  left :  anb  the  lozbs 
of  the  ph'.umnes  lbcnt  after  them,  un- 
to  thebozberof  iScthnicmefl). 

13  3iiib  they  of  23ethlhemcfli  lucre 
reaping  their  ibhcatharueft  m  the  bai= 
lev :  anb  thev  Ufteb  bp  their  eves ,  anb 
farb  the  3r  lie,  anb  re.oycebto  fee  it. 


14.  3lnb  the  tart  came  into  thcfielb  of 
3JoO)iia  a;6cthft)emice,  gtftoob  there, 
lbhccc  there  was  a  great  ftone :  anb  they 
clauethe  ttioob  of  the  cart,  anb  offcreb 
the  nine,  a  burnt  offering  bnto  the 

15  3inD  the  fLtuites  tooae  bottme 
the  3irite  of  the  %  0  is  £>,  anb  the  toffer 
that  was  xbith  it,  ttihereintheicttJcls  of 
golbc  were ,  anb  put  thent  on  the  great 
ftone :  3lnb  the  men  of  Z6efhfhemefl) 
offcreb  burnt  off nngs,anb  fatrificebfa; 
ctifices  the  fame  bay  bnto  the  %  ©  k  ;©. 

16  3nblbhfltthcnuclo2besof  the 
$hiliftines  hab  feene  it,  the?  tcturocb 
toeitronthcfamcbay. 

17  3lub  thefc  arc  the  golben  Cmc* 
robstt)hichthc0hmftmcsretutncbfo2 
a  trefpaffe  offering  into  the  ?Loisjd  ; 
fo.z  3fhoob  one,  fo?  ©asa  one,  fo?  at 
Uelon  one,  foz  <z?ath  oncfo?  <£nron  one. 

18  3lnD  the  golben  finite  according  to 
thenumbcr  of  all  the  cities  of  the  §ty 
UmncSjbciong.ngtothefiueloibes^oth 
of  fenteb  cities,  anb  of  countrcy  toiluv 
ges,  euen  bnto  the  ||  great  ftone  of  £bcl , 
ibhcreon  they  fct  bottme  the  Struc  cf 

tlje  %■  O  &  3D;  which  ftone  remainech  JM' 

to  this  bay,  m  the  ftelb  of  3Jou)uatI)e 
2Scthfhemite. 

19  icanbhefmotcthcmcnofffiech 
nicmeft),  becaufc  they  hab  looaeb  into 
thc^rUcofthcfL©irUD,cuenhcfmotc 
of  the  people  ftftic  thoufaub ,  anb  thjet' 
fco;eanbteunemcn:  anb  thepeople  la 
mentcb,  becatife  the  % o  «  jd  habftmt 
ten  many  of  the  people  xttitl)  a  great 
flaughter. 

20  3lnb  the  men  of  2Sefhfhemcfl) 
fatb,  naho  is  able  to  ftanbbefo:c  this 
holy|L©«©  (Sob^anbtoibhomfhai 
IjegocbpfrombSi 

21  C  ^nb  they  fent  meffengers  to 
tijc  inhabitants  of  lljtinath-icartm.fay' 
ing,  Xhc  philifhncs  hauc  b,20ttghta= 
game  the  Sitae  of  tljc  itois©;  tome 
y  c  boibne,  anb  fetch  it  bp  to  you. 

CHAP.   VIL 

1  They  of  Kiriath-  iearira  bring  the  Aikeinto 
thehoufeof  Abinadab,andfaniflifieEleazar 
liisfonnetokeepeit.  i  After  twentieyeercs 
3  The  Ifrae!ites,by  Samuels  meanes/olemnly 
repent  at  Mizpeh.  7  While  Samuel  prayedi 
and  facrificeth ,  the  Lord  difcomhteth  the 
Philiftines  by  thunder,  at  Eben  -  ezer.  13  The 
Philiftinesarefubdued.  15  Samuel  peaceably 
and  religioufly  iudgeth  Ifiael. 

2(nb 


y?«--. 


prat 


Ifrael  repenteth.      Chap.vij.viij.      Samuels  Tonnes. 


•Io(K:4. 

M>»3- 

•ludg.j. 

M- 

•Dcuc.6.4. 
matt.  4.  10 
!ukc4.8. 

Mudg.i. 


t  Heh.hentt 

fiLtntfram 

Vsfromcrj- 


||  Or,»ifiie- 
rcd. 


/15D  the  mm  of  Biriatb 
icanm  camc,anD  fctcbtPp 
the  31rfeeofti)c?L€>is3E>, 

anD  bjougbt  tt  into  ti)t 
bonfc  of  abinabab  in  the 
tjilt  ,~anD  fanctifteD  eiea^at  l)is  fonnc, 
to  fecepe  tl)C  ac&c  of  tt>C  3L  ©  K  1\ 

i  anD  it  tame  topaffe  Vbtjile  t!)e 
arttc  aboDc  in  Btriath  icarim,tbat  the 
time  IMS  long :  fo?  it  mas  tiDentic 
peercs:  anoall  rheboufe  of  3lfracl  la^ 
mentcb  after  tl)c  %<$>kw. 

j  C^DSamiicifpafeePntoailfbc 
boiifc  of  3?fracl,  facing,  3Jf  pe  doc  rp 
tunic  Unto  the  ?L  ©  is  ©  ttntf)  all  pour 
bearts,then*putatt>ap  the  (tcange  gobs, 
anD  *afbtatotb  from  among  pou,  anD 
pzeparc  pour  hearts  Pnto  the  ft  ©kb, 
anD  *  feme  bun  onelp :  9  be  ibill  Dcliuer 
pou  out  of  the  banb  of  the  ^bilitttncs. 

4  ILtjmttje  rt)UD2cn  of  gjfracl  did 
putaTDap'zSaalim^nDaibtarotb^anD 
ferucD  the  ?L  ©  m  jp  onelp. 

5  anD  Samuel  ratD,  ©atbet ail gjD 
tael  to  £0i3prt) ,  anfi  3  ibill  pjap  foj  pou 
bntotbe?L©jB©. 

6  anD  thep  gatbcreD  together  to 
$$i$peb,  ano  nicvo  tbater,  anD  pouwcD 
it  out  befojc  tlje  !L  ©  is  ©  ,  anD  faftcD  on 
that  Dap,  auD  faiD  tljerc  ,nae  banc  finncD 
againfttbelL©i3iD.anD  Samuel  tub; 
geD  tlje  tljUDzm  of  gjfracl  m  t©i3pcl> 

7  anD  tDDm  rfic  pbiuftmcs  bearD 
tbattbccbilDJCiiof  gjfracl  ibere  gatbe* 
reD  together  to  £0i3pcb  ,tbc  lojDs  of  tlie 
pbiltttmes  lDcnt  Pp  agamlT  gjfracl: 
anDVbbcn  tlje  cbUDicn  of  gjfracl  bearD 
it,  thrp  tbere  afraiD  of  the  jlbilittmcs. 

8  anDtbccbilDjcnofgjfraelfaiDto 
Samuel ,  t  Ccafe  not  to  cne  tonto  tlje 
!L©k©  ourd5oDfo?Ps,  that  he  mil 
fauc  PS  out  of  the  hanD  of  the  pt)HU 
(hues. 

9  C^nD  Samuel  toofec  a  niching 
lanibe,  anD  offer eD  it  foj  aburntoffc* 
ringibhollpPnto  theU©K?D;  anD^a* 
mucl  tncD  Pnto  the  ?L©ia©fo?  gjfracl, 
anb  the  !L©k©||  bearD  bun. 

10  anD  as  Samuel  ttias  offering 
Pp  the  burnt  offering ,  the  #bili(hncs 
D:cftc  necrc  to  battell  agatnft  gjfracl : 
but  the  1L  ©  ts  ©  thunD;cD  U)ith  a  great 
thuuDer  on  that  Dap  ppon  the  $bili; 
(lines,  anD  DifcomfiteD  them,  anbtljcp 
Were  (mitten  before  gjfrael. 

11  anbtbemenof  gjfraclujentoMof 
Q)rjpri),  anD  purfucD  the  ^hililttnes, 
anD  fmotc  them ,  Pntill  they  came  pnber 
26ethtar. 


ir  XbcnSamueltooftcartonc,anD 
kt  tt  bctlPcmc  s^i5pch  anD  Sben, 
anD  taucDthe  name  of  it  ||<£bm  €?cr, 
(aping,  hitherto  hath  the  31  ©is© 
IjclpcDPs. 

1  ?  €  So  the  i&ftilimnes  tbere  fubbu- 
CD  ,anb  thep  tame  no  mozc  into  the  coaft 
of  gjfracl :  anD  the  hanD  of  the  %<s>  is  © 
ibas  agamtt  the  i&biuttmcs,  all  the 
Dapes  of  Samuel. 

1+  anD  the  cities  iDfttrt)  the  ®\>\\i 
nines  baa  taftcn  from  gjfracl,  tbererc^ 
ftoicD  to  gjfracl ,  from  <£feron  eum  bn- 
to  c5ath,anDthc  toads  thereof  did  gjf 
rael  Deliucr  out  of  the  hanDS  of  the  0h^ 
lilhncs :  anb  there  ibas  peace  bettbeene 
3JfracianDthe3lmontcs. 

15  ^nD  Samuel  mDgcD  3Ifracl  all 
thcDapcsofhishfe. 

16  anD  heibmt  from  peere  to  peere 
tin  nreuit  to  Bethel,  anD  cstlgai,  anD 
fi©i5peft ,  ano  luDgcD  Jfraci  in  all  tljofe 
places. 

17  ^nb  his  returnc  was  to  Bamah : 
foz  there  was  his  houfc :  anD  there  hce 
mDgeo  ^fracl ,  anD  there  bee  built  an 
altar  Pnto  then©  is  5?. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

By  occafion  of  die  ill  gouernmeQt  of  Samu- 
els Tonnes,  the  Israelites  aske  a  King.  6  Sa- 
muel praying  in  griefe  is  comforted  by  God. 
10  Hec  telleth  tlie  manner  of  a  King.  19 
God  willcth  Samuel  to  yeeld  vnto  the  im- 
portunitie  of  the  people. 

/I5D  it  tame  to  patTe,  tbben 
SamuclibasolD,  that  he 
maDc  hisfonnes^uDgcs 
oner  gjfrael. 
%  /3olb  the  name  of 
his  firft  borne  ibas  33oci,  anD  the  name 
ofbtsfcconD,abtab:  they  were  'JuDgcs 
inisccr-fbcba. 

3  anbhisfonnesibalfteDnotmhis 
vpapes,but  turncD  afiDc  after  lucre,  anb 
*  toonc  bnbes ,  %  pcmcrtcD  lUDgcment. 

4  %Xp\  all  the  eiDers  of  gjfracl 
gathcrcD  thmifclues  together  ,  anD 
tame  to  Samuel  Pnto  iSamah, 

5  anD  faiD  Pnto  hun,  2i5eholD,thou 
art  olDe,  anD  thp  fonncs  maiftc  not  m 
thp  Ibapes:  uolb  *maUcPs  aBmgto 
iuDgePs,UUe  all  the  nations. 

6  C  26ut  the  thing  t  DifplcafeD  Sa^ 
mucl ,  iPhen  thep  fatD,  C5iuc  bsa  Bmg 
to  tuDge  Ps :  anD  Samuel  p«iapcD  Pnto 
thc|l©mjE>. 

7  anD  the  %  ©  ik  ©  faiD  Pnto  Sa 

muei 


i  Vliat  i?, 

he  pane  of 


\Heh.atd 
he  circuited. 


"Deut.  16. 


*Ofc.i?.ro 

Jvt,  1^.2  1. 

Heo.-HJj  e- 
utU  tn  the 

eyet of Sa- 
muei. 


Akingdefcribed.       I.Samuel.      Saul  feeking  affes 


3  Or^hej. 
\0r,  mt- 

dxnf^hen 
thou  baHfo- 
temnlypro- 
ttUcda- 
gatnjithem, 
then  thou 


\HehZH- 
rmckct. 


mart,  Dcarfecn  unto  tDe  boyce  of  the 
pcoplcin  alltitat  tDcy  fey  bnto  tDcc:  to? 
tDcy  ttaac  not  rcicctcu  tDcc,  but  tDcy 
Dane  reieeteb  mce,  rtjat  $  IDoulb  not 
ceigncouertDcm. 

8  aceozbtngtoalltbeibojRSibDitD 
rijcp  Daue  Done  Gnce  tlje  bay  tDat  3 
tyougDt  tljent  top  out  of  egypt  turn 
bnto  ti)i&  nap,  ibDercibitD  tDcy  Dauc 
tojfaftcn  me,  anb  fcrucb  otlj  et  gobs :  to 
boetDey  alto  bnto  tDee. 

9  i&oibc  tDcrcfoje  |J  IjearUen  bnto 
tijeir  boyte :  ||  Doibbeit ,  pet  pjoteft  to* 
lemnly  bnto  tDem,  anb  flicib  tDem  tDe 
manec  of  tDe  Bing  tDat  than  rcigne  o* 
ucrtDem. 

io  canbSamucltolbaiitDcttwbs 
ofrtjcfLDK^bntotljepcoplCjttjatafs 
aebofDimaBiug. 

ii  anbDeefeyb,XDiS»MlbetDc 
maner  of  tDe  lung  ttjat  IDaii  retgne  o* 
uet  von :  $ce  ibill  tafte  your  tonnes, 
anb  appoint  them  to?  Dinifclfc  to?  Ijis 
crjarcts,  anb  to  bee  Dis  Dojfemcn,  anb 
fome  (halltunne  before  Dis  cDarets. 

it  anb  Dec  mil  appoint  Dim  Cap* 
tames  ouct  tDoufanbs,  anb  captaines 
ouct  fifties,  anb  will  fa  them  to  care  Ins 
grounb,  anbtoreapcDisDarucff,anb 
to  matte  Ijis  inttruments  of  rbarr  e,  anb 
tnttrumentsofDtscDarcts. 

i j  anb  Detbill  tane  rout  battgDtcrs 
to  beconfeetionaries,  anbtobecoones, 
lanb  to  be  bakers. 

14  anbDeibiiltalteyourfi"elbs,anb 
your  bineyarbs,anb  y  our  oliuc  -  yarbs, 
cuen  tl)c  belt  of  them ,  anb  giue  them  to 
Disfcruants. 

15  anbDcibilltaRctDetcntDofyour 
fccb,anbofyourbincyarDS,anbgtucto 
Dis  t  oftucrs,anbto  Dtsftruants. 

16  3Cnb Dec  Xbtll  tabc  your  menfer- 
uants,  anb  your  maybfer  uants,  anb 
roue  gooDlttft  young  men,  anb  pout 
affes,anb  put  tDem  to  Dis  Vbozftc. 

17  $ec  ibill  taftc  the  tent!)  of  your 
fjjeepe,  anb  yc  fball  be  l)is  fcruants. 

13  atm  ye  (nail  try  out  in  tDat  bay, 
betaufe  of  your  tungtbljtdj  ye  (bal  Dauc 
cDofcn  you;  anb  tfte  %®$i$>  ibill  not 
Dearc  you  m  tDat  bay. 

19  CifrcucrtDclcffc,rDcpcoplcrcfu* 
fto  to  obey  tDe  boyce  of  Samuel;  anb 
tney  faib ,  iRay  ,but  tte  ltaUjauc  a  l&ng 
ouer  bs : 

20  injatmcaironiaybcliBcautrjc 
nations,  atm  tDat  our  Using  may  tubgc 
bs,an&goeoutbcfo;tebS,anDfigDtour 
battels. 


ii  anb  Samuel  DcarbaiitDetbojtosi 
of  tt)epeople,  anb  DcrcDcarfeb  tDem  m 
tDe  cares  of  tlje  %  ©  is  3©. 

i%  anb  trjc  ILoejd  faib  to  Samuel, 
$eatRcn  bnto  rDctt  boyce ,  ann  mane 
tDemaBtng.  anb  Samuel  faib  bnto 
tDemcnofgjfrart,  ©ocyeccucryman 
butoDtStitie. 

CHAP.    IX. 

Saul  defpairing  to  finde  his  fathers  affes,  6 
by  the  counfell  of  his  feruaunt,  u  and  di. 
re&ion  of  young  maidens,  15  according  to 
Gods  reuelation,  18  commeth  to  Samuel. 
19  Samuel  entertaineth  Saul  at  ihefeaft.  15 
Samuel  after  fecret  cornmunication,bringeth 
Saul  on  his  way. 

^Dtbtfjerclbasamanof 
2Scniamm,  tbljofe  name 
tt>as*Bifli,  tDe  tonne  of 
abiel,  tDe  tonne  of  zero?, 
trje  tonne  of  ©cthozatD, 
tDe  tonne  of  apbiaD ,  a  ||  2Beniainite ,  a 
nugl)tymanof||poiber. 

x  anbDcDabatonnc^  ibDofename 
tbas&aul,  acrjoiceyoungman,  anb  a 
goobly :  anb  there  was  not  among  trjc 
ri)ilb?cn  of  3Jfracl  a  gooblier  pcrton 
ttjen  Dec :  from  Dis  ujoulbcrsanb  bp^ 
ibarb ,  hee  was  Digger  tDcn  any  of  fyt 
people. 

j  anb  tDe  aCTcs  of  istiu),  Sauls  f& 
tDcr,«jcrcloft;  anb  Bift)  fatbto  Saul 
Dis  tonne ,  ^afte  noibe  one  of  tDe  tor* 
uants  lbui)  tDec,anb  artfegoe  tecne  the 
alTcs. 

4  anb  Dc  paOcb  tDojorb  mount  e« 
pDzaim ,  anb  paffeb  tDowib  tDe  lanb  of 
Sljaunia.but  tljey  founb  them  not:  tDm 
tDcy  paffeb  tljojoib  tlje  lanb  of  SDaiuu, 
anb  there  tljcy  were  uot :  anbDcc  paffeb 
tDojotb  tDe  lanb  of  tDe  26cntamites, 
but  tljey  founb  them  not. 

5  And  «)Den  tDcy  ibere  come  to  tDe 
lanb  of  ZupD,  Saul  faib  to  Dis  fcruant 
tljatibas  ibitD  Dim ,  Come,  anb  let  bs 
rctumc,  left  my  fatDcr  leauc  caring  fojt 
tlje  affes,  anb  tanc  tDougDt  to?  bs. 

6  anb  Dee  Imq  bnto  Dim ,  ascDoiD 
nolb,  there  is  mtDiS  ritie  a  man  of  d5ob, 
anb  Dc  is  an  Donourable  man ;  all  tDat 
Dc  fattD,commctD  furcly  to  paffe:  /5oib 
letbs  goc  tDitljcr ;  pcrabucnturc  Dc  can 
fl)C\b  bs  our  ibay  tDat  ibe  IDoulb  goe. 

7  XDcn  faib  Saul  to  Dis  ternaunt, 
25utbcDolb,  if  ibegoe,  ibDat  IDailibce 
bjingtDemanf  fo?tDeb2caotisfpentin 
oucbcffcls,anbtDcteiSnotap?elcntto 
twing 


•C!i:p.i4. 
51. i.ehto. 
8.  j  3. 

||  Or,  the 
nxzjiof  2(m 

JtflM. 

\OrjHb- 
Jiatxe, 


\Hebrt 
^one  out  ef 


is  by  Samuel  Chap.ix.x.  anointed  king. 


f  Hekr  . 


^Hebrt  ha- 
lt found  i  n 
n,y  hand. 


f  Ht&r.thv 

word  to  vood. 

\Hebr.iH 

the  afcent  of 
thctitie. 


!  Or, fan. 


\Heb. today 


"Chap.  15. 
1.  acts.  1  j. 
II. 

t  Heh  rt- 
11 riled the 
care  of  Sa- 
muel. 


IHeh.te- 

JtratKe  in. 


bung  to  the  man  of  ©on :  nahat  t  hauc 

YOZti 

8  ano  the  fcruant  anfroereb  Saul 
againcatibfaib,  tseholb,  31  liaticliccc 
at  banb  thefotttth  part  of  a  flieuci  of  ftl 
tier,  that  Wtl  31  giuc  to  the  matt  of  <5ob, 
to  tell  tos  our  way. 

9  (25ffojettmctn  Jftael ,  When  a 
man  went  to  enquire  of  ©00  ,  thus  he 
fpahe ,  €omc,anb  let  tos  go  to  the  Seer: 
fo:hethansnoWcaiieda0:ophet,Was 
bcfotctimecaiicbaSccr.) 

to  u:hen  faro  Saul  to  fits  fcruant, 
tnael faib, come, let tosgo:fo  they  went 
tonto  the  city  whet  e  tDc  man  of  C5oo  ww. 

1 1  4C  anb  as  rt)ev  went  top  t  the  hill 
totfiet'ty ,  they  founD  yong  mayoctts 
goingout to  biawwatecanto faib  tonto 
them,3fstheSccthcrci 

12  anb  they  anfroereb  them ,  attD 
faib,^eis:beholb,heisbcfo2cyou,maKc 
hafte  noUi :  fo:  he  came  to  bay  to  the  n 
tie  i  fo:  there  is  ||  afacrtfice  of  tfjc  people 
to  oar  in  til  elite  place. 

ij  attbonc  as  re  be  come  into  the  ti> 
tic,  ye  fliail  ftraightway  finbchim,  be^ 
fo:chcgoetoptothchigb  place  tocatc: 
fo?  the  people  Will  not  catc  totttill  lice 
comcbecatifchcbotlibleffcrtiefacrince, 
andaftccwarbsthcyeatthatbebibbcn: 
/Row  therefore  gctyou  top  ,fo:tabout 
this  time  re  mall  finbe  hint. 

14  anb  they  Went  top  into  the  ritte: 
anb  When  tljcv  were  come  tnto  the  a-- 
tic,  beholb ,  Samuel  came  out  agamQ 
them,fo:togoc  top  to  thchte  place. 

H  <i:*i!5oitotl)c?L©K©habttoib 
Samuel  in  fjtsearc  a  bay  before  Saul 
came,  faring, 

16  Xo  mo:row  about  this  time  3 
mill  fenb  thee  a  man  out  of  the  lanb  of 
2i5entamin,  anb  thou  (bait  anornt  him 
tobeCaptatnc  ouer  my  people  3Jftacl, 
tljat  he  mar  fauc  my  people  out  of  the 
hano  of  the  tehtufhnes:  fo:  3J  hatte  loo- 
fteb  topon  my  people,  becaufe  their  cry 
ts  come  unto  me. 

17  anb  \tohen  "Samuel  faw  Saul, 
the  %  ©  «  ©  fatb  tonto  btm,2i5cbolo  the 
man  Whom  3J  fpaac  to  thee  of :  this 
fame  (hall  t  reigne  ouer  mr  people. 

is  Xhett  Saul  b:cW  necre  to  Sa^ 
muel  tn  the  gate,  anb  fatb,  Xellme/J 
pzaytbecWbete  the  Seers  houfe  is. 

19  ^nb  Samuel  anfroereb  Saul, 
anbfaib ,  3  am  the  Seer :  <soctop  bc^ 
fo:emc  tonto  the  high  plate,  fo,!  ye  (hall 
eateWitb  metoDay,anbtomo:roW3l 
Will  let  thee  goe ,  anbtbui  tell  thee  all 


1  dujes. 


\  Hrbrac- 

cording  :o 
ihn  ward  I 


fOr. 


,fir- 


tbat  is  m  thine  heart. 

20  anbasfo:  thme  affes  that  mere 
lofttth2cebayesagoc,fctnotthymmbe|i^r.« 
on  them ,  fo:  they  arefounb  :  anb  on  J-'"hr 
itohom  tsall  thebefirc  of3Jfrael  <  is  it 
not  on  thee,?  on  an  thy  fathers  hottfc  ; 

21  anb  Saul  anfrocrco  ,  anb  faib, 
am  not  31  a  aSeniamtte,  of  the  totalled 
of  the  tribes  of  ^Jfcacl  <  anb  my  family 
the  leaft  of  authc  families  of  the  tribe  of 
iScniaintn  <  tt)bctcfo:c  tljen  fpcattett 
thoutfotome? 

12  anb  Samuel  rooUe  Saul ,  ano 
l)ts fcruant,  anb  brought  them  tnto  the 
parlour ,  %  mabc  them  ftt  m  the  cbtcfeft 
place  among  them  that  mere  bibbett, 
which  mere  about  thirnepcrfo  its. 

23  anb Samttelfaib tonto thecooKc, 
BnngthepotttonujhichlJgaucthcc.of 
which 3J  faib  tonto  thcc.Set  it  by  thee. 

24.  anbthe  cooltetoohtopthcfljoul 
ocr ,  anb  thatwijichitoastopon  it,  anb 
fetttbefoje  Saul,  anb  Samuel  faib,  ffic- 
holb.that  Which  is|ilcft,fct  it  before  thee, 
and  eate :  foz  tonto  this  time  hath  tt  bene 
Keptfo2tl)ce,fincej  faib  3}  haucmuttcb 
the  people :  So  Saul  bib  eat  With  Sa^ 
muel  that  bay. 

25  C  anb  When  they  were  come 
boWnc  from  the  high  place  tnto  the  ct> 
tie ,  Samuel  commutteo  With  ^>aul  topon 
thetopofthchoufe. 

26  ano  they  arofc  early:  anb  it  came 
topaffeaboutthefpnngofthebay.that 
Samuel  calleb  Saul  to  the  top  of  the 
houfe,fayuig,(Iilp,that  3/  mar  fenbthec 
away :  anb  Saul  arofe,anb  they  Went 
out  both  of  them ,  hee  ano  Samuel, 
abjoao. 

27  anb  a>  they  were  going  oownc 
to  the  cnb  of  the  city,  Samuel  faib  to 
Saul ,  Btb  the  ferttant  pafTc  on  beftne 
tos,  (anb  he  paffeb  on)  but  ftanb  thou 
mlltawhile,that3jmarfbewthcethc 

W0200f<50b. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Samuel anoyntethSiul.  t  Hceconfirmeth 
him  by  predidion  at  three  hgaes.  9  Sauls 
heart  is  changed.and  he  propheciedi.  1 4  He 
concealeth  the  matter  ot  the  kingdome  rroni 
his  vnclc.  17  Saul  is  cholenat  Vlizpehby  lot. 
16   The dirfe tent  arledionsot  his  (ubieCls. 

teen  Samuel  coobc a  toiall 
of  oilcanb  poW«b  it  topott 
his  heao,f  aiffcb  him,  anb 
faib  ,  is  it  not  becaufe  the 
!Lfl>8©  hath  anoynteo 
thee  to  be  captain  ouer  hismhentancc  t 
C  c  2  tehen 


t  Httrto 
Jmj. 


Saul  prophecieth,      LSamucl.     and  is  chofen  king. 


«Ccn.  35 

20. 


f  Heb.the 
bllfifejfe. 


'Heb.ivie 
heetf  peace 


t  Heb.and 
(halleome  to 
taftclhat 
when  thefc 
fiapei  Q-e. 
\Heb.dofor 
thee  as  thine 
hand/hall 
find*. 

"Chap  l;. 


iHtiJiiu/- 

der. 

t  Heb.wr. 

ned. 


man  to  his 

netght'oxr, 

*  Chap.  1 9 

:4. 

t  Hcb.fr cm 

thence. 


i  i©bcn  thou  art  acpartca  from  mc 
to  nap,  then  tijou  fliait  fina  ttbo  men  bp 

3Sacbels  fepulct)?c  in  the  bojtact  of 
aseiuamln,  at  zcijab:  ana  tVjcv  ibill 
fap  bnto  thee,  Xbc  aCTcs  lbbicb  tl)ou 
ibenteft  to  fcenc,  art  founa  s  ana  loctbp 
father  bath  left  t  the  care  of  ttje  aiTcs, 
ana  uwouictb  fo?  pou,  raping >  &W 
(ball  3faocfo?mp  Tonne* 

$  Xhenfbalt  tbougoe  on  fojrtbarb 
from  theme,  ana  thou  ftjait  come  to  the 
plantc  of  Xaboz,  ana  there  fbailmeetc 
thee  ftnee  men,  going  bp  to  ©oa  to 
iSctfjcl,  one  taring  tlnee  bias,  ana  a* 
uotber  carping  tbzee  loaucs  of  b#aa, 
ana  another  carping  a  bottle  of  Vbuie. 

4  3lna  tljcv  tbtll  tfalute  tftce ,  ana 
gmctncctn)oioauesofb?eaa,lbl)irl)tl)ou 
(halt  r  etciue  of  their  banas. 

5  Sifter  that  thou  (bait  tome  to  the 
bill  of  <3oa,  latere  is  the  ganfon  of  the 
pbiWhncs:  ana  tt  (ball  tome  to  paffc 
lbhen  thou  art  come  thither  to  the  tittc, 
that  fboulbaitmcct  atompanpof  pjo* 
pl)etstonuntng  aolbne  from  the  high 
piaccunth  a  pfaltetic,  ana  a  tab?et,ana 
a  pipe ,  ana  a  barpe  before  tbtm,  ana 
tbeprbaiipjopbccie. 

6  3lna  tne  Spirit  of  the  !L«r»  is  © 
njtll  tome  bpontbec,  ana  thou  fljait 
pjopbecie  ibttbtbem,  ana  (bait  bcrnr* 
nca  into  another  man. 

7  anatietttbeibbcntbeTcGguesarc 
come  bnto  thee,  t  that  thou  aoc  as  otca? 
Qon  feruc  thee,  m  <5oa  is  ibitb  thee. 

8  3na  thou  (halt  got  Bonnie  befb?e 
me  to  (Silgai,  ana  bei)oia ,  31  mill  tome 
bourne  tonto  thee,  to  offer  burnt  offe* 
rings,  and  tofatrtnte  famfices  of  peace 
offerings :  *fcuen  aapes  (bait  thouta 
ric,  till  3J  tome  to  thee ,  ana(bcu>tbcc 
tbhat  thou  (bait  aoc. 

9  C  3taa  it  ibas  fo  that  lbhen  he  baa 
tunica  bistbacfeeto  go  from  Samuel, 
<3oB  t  gaue  him  another  heart:  ana  all 
tbofc  figncs  came  to  paffc  tbat  Bap. 

io  3na  lbhen  tbep  came  thither  to 
the  hill,  bcbolB,  acompanp  of  thcp:o- 
pbets  met  him,  ana  the  fpint  of  <5oa 
tame  bpon  him ,  ana  bee  pjopbcGeBa; 
mongtbem. 

it  3lna  it  came  to  pafTe  tbhen  all  that 
kncib  him  befoenme,  falb,  that  be? 
hoia ,  hce  p;ophcfiea  among  the  pjo- 
pbcts,  then  the  people  faia  t  one  to  ano< 
tb  cr  ,iBbat  is  this  that  is  tome  bnto  the 
fonnt  of  laifl)  <  *  JfsSaul  alfo  among 
the  prophets < 

n  3(nB  one  tof  the  fame  place  an? 


frocrca,  ana  fapa,  2Sutibbo  is  their  fa* 
thcr?  Zbercfojc  it  became  apjouerbe, 
3is  Saul  alfo  among  the  02opbets< 

13  ^naibhenhehaamaaeanenaof 
pjopbcfptng ,  he  came  to  the  high  Place. 

14  c  3lna  Sauls  ancle  faiae  bnto 
htm,  ana  to  his  fcr  uant,  nabitber  ibent 
pc  i  3tna  hefaia,Xo  fcebc  the  aiTcs :  ana 
lbhen  Bjcfaib  that  they  were  no  \bhtrt> 
Vbetamc  to  Samuel. 

15  3tna  Sauls  ancle  faia,  Xellme,3l 
p?a?  thectuhat  Samuel  faia  bnto  pou. 

16  ^na  Saul  fapa  bnto  his  bnele ; 
tyt  tola  bs  piatnelp  that  the  affes  ibere 
founa.  26ut  of  the  matter  of  the  btng? 
aome,  ibljcreof  Samuel fpafee,  he  tola 
him  not. 

17  C  3na  Samuel  tailca  the  peo- 
ple together  bnto  the  %  0  »  ©  to  #iy 
pch; 

18  3ma  feia  bnto  the  tbiia?en  of  3D 
raci,  Xhus  faith  the  %® is©  ©oaof 
^frael,  gj  bought  bp  J  fracl  out  of  € 
gppt,  anaaeliuerca^ououtof  tbebana 
of  theegpptians ,  ana  out  of  the  hana 
of  aiifemgaomes,  and  of  thtm  that  op* 
pzeffcapou. 

19  3lna  pe  haue  thtsaap  rciectea  pour 
C5oa,ibhohimfelfefaucapou  out  of  all 
pour  aauerfmes  $  pour  tnbularions 
ana  pe  hauc  faia  bnto  him,  Nay ,  but  Ctt  a 
lung  ouer  bs.  i^olb  therefore  p?efent 
pour  felucs  befoje  the?lfi>is©bppour 
tribes,  ana  bp  pour  tboufanas. 

20  3int)  lbhen  Samuel  haa  taufea 
all  the  tribes  of  3Jfrael  to  tome  ncete, 
tljttrtbcof  25eniamumiastaHcn. 

zi  nahen  he  haa  taufea  the  tribe  of 
Benianuu  to  tonic  ncerc  bp  their  fami 
lies,  the  famine  of  H0atri  teas  tauen, 
anasaul  tliefonnc  of  Biflnbas  taaen 
ana  \bhcn  tl)ep  fought  btm,bc  couianot 
be  founa 

zi  Xherefo^c  thep  cnquirca  of  the 
%  0  is  ©  further,  if  the  man  tbouiapet 
tonic  thtthtr:  ana  rile  Hois  ©anfroe* 
rca ,  25choia ,  ijee  hath  h«a  htmftife  a 
mongtheflnffc. 

ij  ^na thep rannc, ana fctchea him 
tbente,  ana  lbhen  he  llooa  among  the 
people,  he  ibas  higher  then  anp  of  the 
people,fromthcfliouiaers?bpibara. 

14  5(na  Samuel  fata  to  all  the  pco 
pic,  Sec  pe  him  ibbome  the  Hois© 
hath  ebofcn,tbattbcrc(snone  Uftc  hun 
amongall  the  peoples  3lna  all  the  pco 
picfboutca,  ana  faiac ,  t  ©oa  fauc  the 
Bmg 

15  Xhcn  Samuel  toiac  the  people 
the 


t  Heb  let 
tkclemlUui 


The  Ammonites     Chap.xj.xi],        aredifcomhted, 


[  Or,heu.ist 
as  though  he 
had  b  tene 

\cafe. 


t  Hetr  ftr- 

beta  (  vs. 


\  Heh  as  one 


the  matter  of  thcftingbomc,  anbityote 
it  m  abootie,  anbiapb  it  top  before  the 
%  e>  is  es  anb  Samuel  fent  all  the  pco- 
pic  atbap  ,nir  rp  man  to  Ins  houfe. 

26  C  3lub  Saul  alfolbcnt  home  to 
(5ibca|) ,  anb  there  lbent  lbith  him  a 
banb  of  men,  ibhofe  hearts  <3ob  hab 
toucheb. 

17  i5ut  trie  chtlbzcn  of  JSeuaifapb, 
$>oibc  (hall  tins  man  faue  bs  i  anb 
thep  befptfcblnnt,  anbbzouBntljtmno 
pments :  but'lhchelDhispcace. 

CHAP.   XI. 

1  Nahafh  oftereth  them  of  Iabefh  Gilcad  a  re- 
prochtull  condition.  4  They  lend  meflen- 
gersandaredeliueredbvSaul.  11  Saul  there- 
by is  confirmed, and  his  kingdome  renewed. 

V)cn  j^ahafl)  the  3(mmo- 
nitc  came  Dp ,  anb  meant- 
ptb  againft  3Jabe(h  (5i* 
leab  :  anb  all  the  men  of 
Jabefl)  fapbe  bnto  && 
hafh ,  iBauc  a  coucuanttbith bs, anb 
ibettNllferucthce. 

z  3lub  /Saftafh  the  3fm»ionitc  an- 
fmercb  them,  £>n  this  tonbinonrbill3J 
maBcatoucnaittttJithpou,that38map 
tlmift  out  an  vour  right  eves,  anb  lap  it 
fo:  arep:otl)  bponairjjfracl. 

3  31nb  the  Clbcts  of  31abcfi)  favb 
bnto  him,  tcmc  bsfcucn  baicsrcfpite, 
tDat  lbcmapfcnb  meflengers  bnto  all 
the  coatts  of  Jfracl :  anb  then,  if  there 
be  no  man  to  fane  bs,  ttieVbtll  comcout 
to  thee. 

4  CinjmcaniethcmcflcngcrGto 
Oibcal)  of  Saul,anb  tolb  tl)c  tibingsin 
the  caves  of  tl)c  people :  anb  all  tfjc  peo- 
ple lift  bp  their  boptcs,anb  ttoept. 

5  3iub  bcholb,  Saul  came  after  the 
herb  out  of  tl)c  ficlb,  anb  Saul  fapb, 
B9hat  ailctl)  the  people  that  tt)Cf  Vbeep  i 
anb  tljcy  tolb  hun the  ttbaigs  of  the  men 
of3Jabcfl). 

6  3lnb  tile  Spirit  of  (5ob  came  bp< 
on  Sattl,tt>hcn  he  hcarb  trjofe  tpbutgs,  '• 
anb  l;is  anger  ibas  Btnblcb  grcatlp. 

7  3lnbhctooUcayokcoforcn,anD 
hrtbcb  them m pieces,  anb  fcut them 
throughout  all  the  coaffs  of  3frael  bp  J 
thchanbsofmeflengcrs,fapmg,  w\w 
focuer  commcth  notfooith  after  Saul 
anb  after  Samuel ,  fo  (hall  it  bee  Done 
bnto  his  oxen  :  anb  the  fcare  of  the 
%®&w>  fell  on  the  people,  anb  the? 
came  out  t  lbith  one  confent. 

s  3nD  tbhen  he  numtycb  them  in 


z5c?cb  ,  the  clttltycn  of  Jfracl  Were 
three  hunbjeb  thoufanb,  anb  the  men 
of  3Jubah  thirty  thoufanb. 

9  :3nb  thep  faib  bnto  the  meflengers 
that  came ,  Hlnis  (hail  pec  fapbnto  the 
men  of  3Jabcfh  ©Ucab/iTo  mozroib  bp 
that  tune  the  funuc  be  hotc,pc  thai  haue 
ilhclpc.  3Cnb  the  meflengers  came,  anb 
(heibcb  tt  to  the  men  ot  3labcfh ,  anb 
thep  mere  glab. 

10  Xhcrfo2cthemmof3Jabclhfa!D, 
Ho  morrolb  Ibcc  Ibill  come  out  bnto 
pou ,  anb  pc  (hail  boe  lbtth  bs  all  that 
fecmeth  goob  bnto  pou. 

11 3nbttll)asfoonthcmo2rolb,that 
Saul  put  thcpcoplc  ui  tlncc  copatues, 
anb  thep  came  into  the  mibft  of  the  hod 
m  the  morning  ibatch,  anbflcluc  the 
Ammonites,  toutill  the  heat  of  thcoap: 
anbtt  came  to  paflc,  that  thep  ibir.ch  re 
mamcb  ibere  fcattcrcb ,  fo  thattibo  of 
them  lbcrc  not  left  together. 

ii  <E3nb  the  people faib  bnto  Sa- 
muel, naho  is  he  that  faib,  Shan  Saul 
reigncouerbsf  bnngthcmcn,thatibc 
mapputthem  to  bcath. 

ij  3utbSaulfaib,  Xhcrefliallnota 
man  be  put  to  bcath  this  bap :  fo;  to  bap 
the  TL®  is  ©  hath  ttizought  faluation  m 
Jfracl. 

1+  Xhcn  faib  Samuel  to  thcpeople, 
Comc,anblct  bsgoctocilgai,  anbrc- 
neib  the  Umgbomc  there. 

15  3tnb  all  the  people  tbent  to  ©ilgal, 
anb  there  tl)cpniabc Saul liimgbcfoze 
the  !L©isDm(5ilgal:  anb  there  thep 
faenfieeb  faenfiecs  of  peace  offcrmgs  bc- 
fo:c  the  %  ©  is  b  :  anb  there  Saul  anb 
ail  the  men  of  3Jfraclrciopccb  grcatlp. 

CHAP.    XII. 

i  Samuel  teftifieth  his  integntie.  6  Hee  re- 
prooueth  the  people  of  ingraucude.  \6  He 
ternfietluhem  with  thunder  mharuefr.  time. 
10  He  comtorteth  them  111  Gods  mercy. 

HIA1§£  &  ®  Samuel  faibc  bnto 
^AXwaii  3)fraci,  Bcholbc,  *jj 
oV^^^Ngl  haue  hearhncb  bnto  pour 
|%5fe*  v$  boicc  m  all  thatpefatb  btt= 
^^?^i  to  mcc,  anb  haue  mabc  a 
Bing  oner  pou. 

z  2inb  uoTb  bcholb ,  the  Bmglbat 
Hetlj  hcfo;e  pou :  anb  3J  am  oibc,  anb 
grap  heabcb,  anb  bcholb,  mp  founcs 
are  Xbttb  pou :  anb  J  rjauc  tbalaebbCi 
fo2cpou  from  mpchilbhoob  bnto  this 
bap. 

3  Z3cholD,  *  here  3  am,  tbtmefle  a^ 
Cc  z  gatnft 


\\Gr,J,U- 


CClUJ. 

•9- 


>amuels  v 


p"g 


htnes:  I.Samuel.       His  exhortation.! 


\Hrir.rMx- 
fame. 

\Or,lha:I 
jhantdhidc 
mint  eyes  at 
At  him. 


\  Or, made. 


\Hctr.righ- 
teottfneflei, 
Or ,  bciK- 
fit. 

f  Heb.rvith. 
•Gen.  46. 

$.«■ 

*Eiod.4. 
1(5. 


•IuJp 


1  : 


*Iudg  it. 


gamft  me  bcfotc  tbcfL©  is© ,  attu  tic= 
fo;cbis:anopntcD :  nabofcore  bauc3J 
taken  *  0?  tbljoCc  affc  Dane  5  taken  i  0; 
n>bombauc3IDcfrauDeDnbbombauc 
3J  opp;cfleD  1 02  of  vuijofc  bann  bauc  3 
rccciucD  anp  t  b;ibc  ]  to  blmDc  mine  epes 
tbercibttb  t  anD  3  ibiu  reltoc  it  pou. 

4.  anDtbepfan^XboubaftnotDe; 
frauDeDbs,  no;  opp;cflcD  bs,  neither 
baft  thou  taken  ought  of  an?  mans 
banD. 

5  3urt>  Dec  faiD  into  them ,  %\)t 
3L©is©  is  ttJitncCTe  againft  pou,  anD 
bts3lnotntcD  is  lbttncfle  this  Dap,  that 
pe  bauc  not  fount)  ought  in  mp  banD: 
3tnD  tbep  aimuereD,  $  e  is  lbltnciTc. 

6  C3tnD£>amucifatD bnto  the  peo- 
ple,ii  is  tbelL©  a  ©  tbat!|aDuaneeD  fi0o< 
iesauD3laron,  anD  that b2ougbt pour 
fathers  bp  out  of  the  lanu  of  €  gppt. 

7  iftoib  therefore  ftanD  mil ,  that 
3  map  rcafon  tbtti)  pou  befoje  the 
ft  ©  a  © ,  of  all  the  t  righteous  acts  of 
the  !L  ©  13  ©,  ibbub  he  Did f  to  pou  ant) 
pour  fathers. 

8  *  naben  "Jacob  tbas  tome  into  c- 
gvpt,  anti  pout  fathers  crteD  into  the 
JLo  is  ©,tben  the  ft©  is  ©*fcnt  SJ3ofcs 
anb  :aaron,tt)b:cb  b;ougbt  foozth  pour 
fathers  out  of  egppt,  ant)  mauetbem 
DVbcllm  this  plate. 

9  auDibbcntbcpfo;gat thelitis© 
their  (Sod,  *  he  folD  them  into  the  banD 
of&itctacaptatncoftbeboftcof^o;, 
anD  into  the  banD  of  tbc£btUftmcs,anD 
into  the  banD  of  the  king  of  £J3oab,  anD 
fbcp  fought  againft  them. 

10  2nD  tbep crico  bnto  the &©  is©, 
auDfaiD,  naccbauefmncD,  bctaufeibe 
bauc  fo;fakcn  the  %<s>  is  id,  anb  bane 
fcrucD  asaaiim  anD  3fl)tarotb :  but 
noib  Dcliuer  bs  out  of  the  banD  of  our 
cnemies,anDibc  null  feme  thee. 

11  anDfljelLoisiDfcnrllerubbaai, 
anD  25eDan,anb  *  3Jepbtbab,  ano  && 
muel.anDDchucrcDpououtoftbebanD 
of  poor  enemies  on  cucrp  fiDc,  anD  pec 
DtbetleDfafc* 

ix  3lnD  ibhen  pe  faru  that  iRabafi) 
tbekmgof  tbetbiiDJcn  otSmmon  tame 
aganrtt  pou,pc  (aiD  bnto  me,  49ap,but  a 
Bmg  (ball  rcignc  ouer  bs ,  lbben  the 
%  ©  s  ©  pour  e»o"D  was  poor  Bmg. 

13  /I5olb  therefore,  beholb  the  Btng 
ibbompceljanc  thofen,  ana  tbhompee 
haucDefireD:  anDbcbolb,tbe?L©i3© 
hath  let  aBing  ouer  pou. 

14  3ifpeibiilfcaretbcfL©is©,anD 
fcruebim,  anb  obep  hiSboite.anD  not 


rebcll  agatnft  tbet<£ommatiDementof 
the  %o  is  ©,  then  (ball  both  pe  anD  aifo 
the  Bing  that  reignctb  oner  pou,  tcotv 
tunic  folioibmg  the  2L©is©  pour  god. 

1^  26utifpcibilnotobcptheboiceof 
tljcH©  is  ©,but  rebel  againft  the  Com> 
nianDement  of  the  %  ©  is  ©,  then  (ball 
tbcbanDoftbe?L©i3©  beagainftpou, 
as  it  was  agamft  pour  fathers. 

it  C  iBoib  therefore  ftanD  anD  fee 
this  great  thing  iDbtcb  the  1L©is© 
lbiii  Doe  befo;epour  cpes. 

17  UsttnotibbcatbaruefttoDap* 
3  mill  can  bnto  the  %  ©  is  ©,  anD  bee 
(ball  fcnD  tbunDcr  anD  raine ,  that  pe 
mappercciueaiiD  fee  tbatpounbickeD- 
neflc  »  great,  tbbicb  pcbaueDoneinfbc 
fight  of  the  %  ©  is  © ,  m  af  king  pou  a 
Bmg. 

18  5>o  Samuel  ralleD  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  © ,  anD  the  %  ©  is  ©  fent  tbun^ 
Dcr  anD  ramc  that  Dap:  anDailtbcpco^ 
pie  greatip  feareD  the  %  ©  is  ©  anD 
Samuel. 

0  ^nD  ail  the  people  faiD  bnto  £>& 
muel,  p?ap  fo;  tljp  feruants  bnto  the 
ft  ©is©  tbpd5oD,  that  ibe  Die  not  :fo; 
lbe  bauc  aDDeDbnto  all  out  limits,  this 
euiUoafkebsaBtng. 

xo  f  Mb  Samuel  laiDe  bnto  tl)e 
pcoplc,5fearenot:(pcbaueDoneaitlus 
lbickeDiieffe,  pet  turne  not  afiDefrom 
folloibmg  tbe!L©is©,  but  feme  the 
H©  is  ©lbitb  allpour  heart: 

20  ^ud  turne  pe  not afiDt.fo? then 
mould  ye  goe  aftcrbaitie  rtnngs,  Ibbub 
cannot  pjofit ,  no;  Dcliuer ,  fo;  tbep  are 
bame.) 

21  iroube|L©is©lbilnotfou"akc 
his  people,  foi  l)ts  great  Sanies  (ake: 
becauft  tt  ban)  plcafeD  tlje  |L©is©  to 
make  pou  bis  people. 

1  j  *J0o;couer,asfo:mc,<5ODfo2biD 
that  3  ftionlD  fm  againft  nje  %  ©  is  ©, 
t  m  ceafing  to  p?ap  To;  pou :  but  3  lbill 
teach  pou  the  gooD  anD  tlje  right  ibap. 

24  iDnelpfeare  tbe!L©iS©,  anD 
feme  bmunttuetb  with  all  pour  heart: 
fo;  tonfiDer  ||  boib  great  tbmgs  he  bath 
Done  fo;  pou. 

25  26ut  if  pee  fliall  ftill  doc  ibitkefc 
ip.pce  fljall  be  tonfumeD ,  both  pee  anD 
pour  Bmg. 

CHAP.   XIII. 

t  Sauls  felr&ed  band.  3  Heecalleth  dieHc- 
brewes  to  Gilgal  againft  the  Philirtines,whofe 
gamfon  lonathan  had  finitten.  5  ThePhili- 

ftincs 


\Hehr. 
month. 

\Hebr.bc 


\Htbr.frcm 


\Ot,tvhata 
*r?At  thlti^ 


Sauls  prefumption.    Chap.xnj, 


Heisreproued. 


t  Hekr.the 
fanne  of  one 
leer;  in  hu 
r"im"l- 


[Or.the  hill. 


t  Heir.  did 
fink£. 


t  Heb.:r;m- 
Wedaper 
him. 

•Chap.  10. 
8. 


■}  Hti.Ucfl 

him. 


ltinesgreathofte.  6  The dirtrelTe ot 'the Kra 
elites.  8  Saulweaty of  flaying  tor  Samuel,fa- 
enficeth.  n  Samuel  reproueth  him.  17  The 
three  lpoiling  bands  ot  the  Philiftines.  19 
The  policie  of  the  Pbilillines ,  to  fuffer  no 
Smith  in  Ifrael. 

3tul  t  tcigneD  one  yeete, 
anD  when  he  haD  rcigttcD 
two  veer  cs  oucr  3iftacl, 
2  £>aulehofchimthzcc 
so.  ttjoutant)  men  of  3)ftacl : 
whereof  two  thoufatiD  were  With  ;£>anl 
m  QEKehmavb,  anD  in  mount  nSctljcl, 
anD  attjoufanD  mere  With  'Jonathan 
in  ©Deal)  of  ascmanun :  anD  the  reft  of 
the  people  he  fent  cucry  man  to  bis  tent. 
3  :attD3fonathanfmotethcgatifon 
of  tl)e  ^htltftmcs  that  was  m  ||C5cba,attD 
the  #hiliftmcs  hcatD  of  it :  anD  £>aul 
blew  the  trumpet  thoioWottt  all  the 
lanD,  faying,  ILet  the  $ebteWcs  hearc. 
4-  3lnD  all  ifrael  hcarD  fay ,  that 
5>aul  haD  fnuttcn  a  garu"on  of  trje  #rji* 
Uftines,  attDthat  'Jfraclalfot  was  haD 
in  abomination  With  the  |&hiliftiucs: 
anD  tfjc  people  tberc  tailtD  together  afc 
tet5>aulto<3ilgal. 

5  C3mD  the  philiftines  gathercD 
thcmfclttcs  together,  to  fight  With  if- 
rael, thirhcthoufanD  thatets,  anDitre 
tl)oufanDl)o?fnucn,  anD  people  as  the 
fanD  which  is  on  the  fcathoje  inmulte 
tuDcanD  they  came  Dp,  anD  pitcheD  in 
sptehmath,  caftwatD  from  zsctl)- 
aucn. 

6  rahmthemenofgjfraelfawthat 
they  tberc  in  a  ftratt :  (fo:  ttjc  people 
mere  DiftrcflcD:)  then  the  people  Did 
hiDc  thcmfclues  tn  taues,  anD  in  tfjic* 
Bets,anDinrocns,  anDinhtgh  places, 
anD  in  pits 

7  3nD  feme  oftfjc  l?cb;teWcs  Vbcnt 
ouer  3Jo?Dane,  to  the  lanD  of  <5aDanD 
(E;ileaD.asfo2S>aul,rjewasyctinC5ilgal, 
anD  allthepcopIctfollowcD  him  item* 
bling. 

s  C*3utDhctaricDfcuenDayes,ac* 
cojDingto  thefet  titnethat&amuclhad 
appointed:  but&atnuclcamenotto  <5ll= 
gal,  anD  the  pcoplcwerefcattcrcD  from 
hum 

9  3nD  5>aul  fatD ,  25nng  hitfjer  a 
burnt  offrmgto  mc,anD  peace  offrtngs. 
2lnD  I)c  offercD  trje  burnt  offering. 

10  3tnD  it  came  to  paffc  tnat  atToonc 
as  he  rjab  utaDcau  cud  of  offering  the 
buntt  offering,  bcl)olD,  Samuel  came, 
anD  £>aui  went  out  tomceteljim,  that 
hcnughttfalutehim. 


11  C  3utD  Samuel  faiD,  nahat  hall 
trjonDoncf  3lttD  <S>aulfatD,  zsecaufc^j 
fame  that  ttje  people  were  fcattcrcD 
from  me,  anD  that  thou  canted  not 
within  the  Daycs  appomtcD,  anD  that 
the^htliftmcsgathercDthctiifelucsto; 
gcthcrto£0tthtnafh: 

12  Xherfo?cfaiD3l,Xhe^hnilhncs 
Will  tome  Downe  now  Dpon  me  to  <3tl- 
gal,  anD3Jhaue  not  tmaDc  fuppltcati 
on  Dnto  the  %£>  is  id:  3  fozccD  my 
fcife  therefore ,  anD  offercD  a  burnt  of- 
fcrtng. 

ij  3fnD5>amuelfaiDto£>aul,1Ihou 
haft  Done  foolifhly:  thou  haft  not  nept 
the  coninianDemcnt  of  the  %  o  k  jd  thy 
God,  which  hee  comnuniDeD  thee:  foz 
now  WoulDthe  %$m  jd  haue  cftabli- 
fhcD  thy  Eingbome  bpon  ifrael  fo.:e; 
ucr. 

14  2ButnowthyBingDomcft)annot 
continue :  the  %®  is  5e>  hath  fought  htm 
a  man  after  his  owne  heart,  aho  the 
JL®  is  jd  hath  tommanDcD  htm  to  bee 
captatnc  otter  his  people,  becaufe  thou 
haft  not  feept  that  wijtch  the  3t©3i»p 
commanDeDthce. 

15  3inD<t>amuclarofc,anDgatchint 
Dp  from  €ftlgai,Dnto  (Stbcahof  26en- 
iamtn ,  anD  5>aul  numbzcD  the  people 
that  Were  tpjefent  with  him,  about  Djcc 
IjunDjcD  men. 

16  3lnD  5>aul  anD  Jonathan  his 
fonnc,  anD  the  people  that  Were  pjefent 
With  them,  abobe  in  ©tbeah  of  26cnia^ 
mm :  but  the  ^hilttttncs  ettcampcD  in 
©ichmaft). 

17  C  ^nD  the  fpoflers  tame  out  of 
the  eampe  of  the  ^ritliftincs,  in  th?ec 
companies :  one  company  tnmcD  Dnto 
the  way  that  leaDcth  to  £)ph?ah ,  Dnto 
thelanoof&huau 

18  ^nDanothercompanyrnrneDthe 
Way  to  fficthojon :  anD  another  compa- 
nic  turncD  to  the  Way  of  the  bojDer, 
that  looHCth  to  the  Dailey  of  Zeboim 
toiDarD  the  WilDcmefte, 

19  CiBowthcrcwasnofmtthfounD 
thojolDotit  all  the  lanD  of  35fracl:  fo? 
the  ^hiltttincs  fatD,  3lcftthe^eb;ewcs 
maftc  them  froo?DS  0?  Ipcares. 

xo  25iit  all  the  3ffraelitcs  went 
DoWnetotl)ei0hiliftmcs,  to  ftiarpen  t> 
uery  man  his  fljarc  anD  his  coulter,  anD 
his  are,  anD  hts  mattocae. 

xi  juct  they  haD  a  t  aic  fo?  the  mat- 
tortts,anDfo2the  coulters,  anD  fo?  tljc 
fozKes,anD  fo?  the  ares3anb  t  to  ftjarpni 
thegoaDS. 

€c  j        xx  ^>o 


t  HeirJn- 
trcaledtht 


\Htk.fwni 


\Hehr.t 
f'.e  with 
momhel. 
\tUb.lo[et. 


"0 


Ionathan  and  his        I.Samuel.        armour-bearer: 


iprjo- 

dr-g  campe. 


I  Or,  •hm 
jr-u  a  daj. 


Cltap.^. 


j  Htbimh. 


ix  &o  it  tame  to  paffe  in  the  bap  of 
battcll,  tljat  there  rbas  neither  fuwb 
no?  fpcarc  founb  in  the  hanbof  anv  of 
the  people  tljat  iberc  lbith  £>aul  anb 
j  onathan :  but  mth  £>aul  %  roith  'Jo- 
nathan his  fonnt  tuas  there  fount. 

23  3nb  the  ||  gatifon  of  the  0hite 
ttincsibcntouttothc  paOagcof  upich* 
math. 

CHAP.    XIIIL 

1  Ionathan,  vn witting  to  his  father,  the  Prieft, 
or  the  people,  goeth  andmiraculoufly  fiiu- 
teth  the  Philiftines  garrifon.  15  A  diuine 
terrour  maketh  them  beate  themfelues.  17 
Saul  notftayingthePriefhanfwere,  fetteth 
on  them,  it  The  captiuated  Hebrewes, 
and  thehidden  Ifraelites.ioyne  againft  them. 
z4  Sauls  vnaduifedadiuration.hindreth  the 
vidrory.  31  Heereftraineth  the  people  from 
eating  blood.  35  He  buildeth  an  Altar.  36 
Ionathan  taken  by  lot ,  is  faued  by  the  peo- 
ple.  47  Sauls  ftrcngth  and  family. 

<©tb  ||  it  tame  topaflc  top-- 
on  a  nap,  that  "Jonathan 
the  fonnc  of  £>aul  faib  bn- 
to  the  yong  man  that  bare 
his  armour ,  Come,  anb 
let  bsgoe  ouer  to  the  philiftines  gari* 
fon,that  is  on  the  other  (ibe:  buthcctolb 
not  his  father. 

i  3nbS>aultaricbutthebttetmoft 
part  of  <5ibcah,bnbcr  a  pomegranate 
trcctbhich ls  in  £0tgron:anbthepeo* 
pie  that  were  ttnth  him ,  ibereabout  fire 
jnmtyebmen: 

3  3tnb  3lhiah  the  fonne  of SChitub, 
*3Jchabobs  brother,  the  fonnc  of^bi 
nchas,  tljc  fonne  of  €u,  the  %  ©is  ©  £> 
$nctt  m£>hiloh,  ibcartng  an  <fphob: 
anb  tljc  people  hnctt)  not  that  3Jona= 
than  ibasgonc. 

4  C^nbbettbeencthcpaflages,b? 
lbhich  Jonathan  fought  to  go  ouet  torn 
to  the  philiftines  ganfon ,  there  ibasa 
IbarpcrotKeonthconeubcanbalharp 
rotfcc  on  the  other  Gbe :  anb  the  name 
ofthconcibas25o5C3,  anb  the  name  of 
the  other  £>cnch. 

5  xhc  t  forefront  of  the  one  Vbas  Q 
mate  /ftojthibatb  ouer  againft  U0ul> 
man),  anb  the  other  3>outhibarb  ouer 
againft  Gibcah. 

6  3nb  3Jonathanfaib  to  the  young 
man  that  bare  his  armour ,  Come, 
anb  let  bs  got  ouer  bnto  the  ganfon  of 
thefc  bnrtrcunmfcb;  it  mar  be  that  the 
%  0  is  3D  tbill  lbo?Uc  fo?  bs :  fo?  there  is 


no  rcftraint  to  the  %  ©  is  jd  ,  *  to  fauc 
bpmanp,o?bpfett). 

7  3lnb  his  armour  bearer  fapb  bit* 
to  him ,  2Doc  all  that  is  m  thmc  heart : 
turnethec,bcholo,3J  amibiththee,  at* 
cojbmg  to  thy  heart. 

8  Xhen  Cam  Jonathan ,  aseholb, 
tbcibill  paflc  ouer  bnto  thefc  men ,  anb 
Ibe  nwi  bifcoucr  our  fclues  bnto  them. 

9  31  thcyfay  thus  bnto  bs,t%ary 
bnttll  ibe  tome  to  you  •  then  tbccibill 
ftanb  mil  in  our  plate,  anb  lbill  not  got 
bpbmothcm. 

10  25m  if  the?  fay  thus,  Comcbp 
bnto  bs :  then  ibe  ttiill  goe  bp ;  fo?  *  the 
%  ©  as  jd  hath  beliuercb  them  into  out 
hanb :  anb  this  fhaiibc  afignc  bnto  bs. 

11  2mb  both  of  them  Dtfcoucrcb 
themfelues  bnto  the  garuon  of  the  0hi' 
uftmes:  anb  the  pfniiftuiesfayb,  H5t- 
holb,the$ebjcibes  tome  foojth  out  of 
the  holes,  ibhcre  they  hab  hib  them- 
fclues. 

u  3nb  the  men  of  the  gartfon  an* 
finer  cb  gjonathan  anb  his  armour  bca= 
rer,anbfaib,  Come  bptobs,  anbibee 
rbillfljcttivou  a  thing.  3nb  Jonathan 
(aib  bnto  his  armour  bearer,  Come  bp 
after  me  i  fo?  the  1L  ©  e  ©  hath  Delate- 
reb  them  into  thehanb  of 'Jfrael. 

13  3inb  Jonathan  tlimeb  bp  bpon 
hishanbs,  anb  bponhisfeete ,  anb  Ins 
armour  bearer  after  him:  anb  the?  feu 
befo«3lonati)an  j  anb  his  armour  bea- 
rer fleib  after  him. 

14.  ^nb  that  firft  Oaughtcr  tbhith 
3lonathan  anb  his  armour-bearer 
mabe,tbasabouttibcntiemen,  ibitljin 
as  itu)ere||anhalfcatreof  ianb,Vbhtth 

a  pOftC  of  oxen  might  plow. 

15  3lnb  there  tbas  trembling  in  the 
hofte,in  the  ficlb  ,anb  amongaii  the  peo- 
ple :  thegarifon  anb  the  fpoilcrs,  they 
alfo  tremblcb,  anb  the  earth  quabcb : 
fb  it  Vbas  t  abcrv  great  trembling. 

i6  3nb  the  lbatthmcn  of  £>aul  in 
d5ibcah  of  25eniamm  loofteb :  anb  be? 
holb.thc  multitube  meltebavbap,  anb 
th  eplbent  on  bcatingboibncone  another. 

17  ^Lhenfaib  £>aul  bnto  the  people 
that  were  ibith  him,  il5umbernoib,anb 
fee  \bho  is  gone  from  bs.  3nb  \bhen 
tl)ej>  hab  numbjeb ,  bcholb,  Jonathan 
anb  his  armour  bearer  iber  c  not  there. 

is  ^nb^»aulfaibbnto3lhiah,25mig 
hither  the^rfee  of  <5ob:  (fo?  the  3rlic 
of  ©obibas  at  that  time  ibiththechib 
b^cnofjfratl.) 

i9C3lnbittametopafl:clbl)!lc5>aui 

taiutb 


*  1.  Chron 
14  n 


\H,b.bc 
fill. 


"i.Macc. 
4.30. 


\Or,h-Alfc* 
fumwof  OH 
acre  of  land. 


\K.h.4 
fremlilt»£ 
pfGtd. 


Hetaftethhonie.       Chap.xmj.         Calling  of  lots. 


\\Ortt  ttmuli . 


\Heb.rvire 
crjed  toge- 
ther. 
Mudg.7. 
U.i.chro. 
20.23. 


!  Or.-wttrie. 


talltcb  bnto  rtjc  £ucft,  that  the  |  noife 
thatibasm  tbchoftcof  the  phtumncs 
ibcnt  on,  ant  mcreafcb :  3mb  5>aul  faib : 
bnto  tlie0?icft,  naithbjaib  thine  hanb. 
20  3tnb  £>aul  anb  all  the  people  ttjat 
Iberc  vuitn  him  t  affcmblcb  themfrtues, 
anbthep  tame  to  tlic  battel,  anbbehoib,  I 
*  enerp  mans  ftuo:b  ibas  againft  his  fet=  | 

lOlb,  and  there  was  3  bCrpgreat  blfC0JJl> 

finite. 

11  $33o;tcouer,  the  fccbjcibes  that 
lbcrc  lbith  tlje  ^tjtlrthnts  befoze  that 
time ,  lbhith  ibent  bp  lbith  them  into 

tlJC  tatlipe  fro'"  the  coimtrcy  tOlltlb  abOUt ; 

ettcnthcpalfo  turned  to  bettnththc  3Jf> 
raelitcs,  that  were  iblth£>aul  anb  jo- 
nathan. 

22  iLtfettbtfc  all  the  men  of  3ifracl, 
lbhith  Ijabhtb  themfelucs  in  mounts 
phjatnt,  when  thep  hearb  thatthc  phfti- 
(rates  fleb,cuenthepalfofollolbcbharb 
after  them  m  the  batten. 

23  £>othe  3L©k£>  faucb  3Jftacl 
that  bap :  anb  the  battell  paffeb  oucr 
bnto  2Seth-aucn. 

24  C3mb  the  men  of  3Jftael  iberc 
biftreffeb  that  bap;  fat  £>aui  Dao  abut; 
rcbthe  people,  taping,  Curfcbbeethc 
man  that  eateth  anp  foobe  bnnil  cue- 
ning,  that  3J  ma?  be  aucngcb  on  mine 
enemies :  fo  none  of  tlje  people  tafteb 
any  foob. 

25  2uibail  they  of  the  lanb  tame  to  a 
lboob ,  anb  there  Ibas  home  bpon  the 
grounb. 

26  2mbibhen  the  people  iberc  come 
mto  the  lboob,  bcholb,  thehomebzop* 
peb ,  but  no  man  put  his  hanb  to  his 
mouth :  fo:  the  people  f  earcb  the  oath. 

27  zsut'Jonathatthearbnotibhcn 
his  father  chargeb  the  people  lbith  the 
oath  j  tbhetefojeheput  foouhthcenbe 
of  the  robbe  that  was  m  his  hanb ,  anb 
bipt  it  in  an  honp  combe ,  anb  put  his 
hanb  to  hismouth,  anb  his  eves  iberc 
cnlightencb. 

28  Xhcn  anfibcrcb  one  of  the  peo; 
pic,  anb  faib.  Xhp  father  ftrattlpchar; 
gcb  tl)e  people  ibtth  an  oath,  taping, 
Curfcb  be  the  man  that  catcth  anv  foob 
this  bav.  3tnb  the  people  iberc  ||  faint. 

19  Xhcnfatb3fonathan,Q3pfathcr 
hath  troublcb  the  lanb :  fcCJ  pjappou, 
holb  nunc  epcshaucbccuc  cnlightencb, 
bctaufc  3  taftcb  a  little  of  this  home : 

jo  $?oib  much  mote ,  if  haplp  the 
i  people  hab  eaten  ftccipto  bap  of  the 
,fpoilc  of  their  enemies  lbiKch  thep 
founbi  fo?  hab  tljeccnot  becne  noiba 


much  greater  Haughtcc  among  tt)c 
l&hiliftmcsi 

3i  3uib  thep  fmote  the  ^hiUfhnes 
that  to*?  from  £0tchmafl)  to  3liiaion: 
anb  the  people  lbcrc  bctp  faint. 

32  3lnb  the  people  flcibc  bpon  the 
fpoilc,aiibtooKcfl)ccpc,aub  oren,  aub 
tallies,  anb  ncib  them  on  the  grounb, 
anb  the  people  bib  catc  them*  lbith  tl)c 
bloob. 

33  CXhcnthcptoIbcjSwuiUaping, 
26cholo ,  the  people  fitine  againft  the 
ft  ©is  3D,  ut  that  tljcy  cate  lbith  the 
bloob.  Znn  he  faib,  jacc  haue  ||  train" 
greffeb:  roulca  great  ttonc  bnto  nice 
tijisbap. 

3+  Unit  £>aul  faib ,  SMpcrfc  pour 
fclucs  among  the  people,  anb  fay  bnto 
tljcm,  26;mg  me  hither  eucrpmanhis 
ore,  ano  euerpmanhis  fbccpcanb  flap 
them  ijcre,  anb  eat,anb  ftnne  not  againft 
the  %  ©  is  ©  in  canng  with  the  bloob. 
2(nball  the  people  brought  eticrp  man 
his  ore  t  lbith  hnn  that  night,  anb  aclb 
them  there. 

35  3nb  £>aul  built  an  altar  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  © :  t  the  fame  ibas  the  firft  ai- 
tar  that  he  built  bnto  the  %  ©  is  s>. 

36  <E  3lnb  £>aul  faibc,  Het  bs  goc 
bottmc  after  the  #htltftincs  bp  night, 
anbfpoilethcmbntilthcmomtnglight, 
anb  let  bs  not  leauc  a  man  of  them.2mb 
thcvfaib,Do  lbhatfocucr  fecmeth  goob 
bnto  thee.  %\)tn  faib  the  piiett,  ILctbs 
b^alb  necr  c  hrthcr  bnto  d5ob. 

37  3nb£>aulaffeebeounfeUof<!5ob, 
S»hall  3  goe  boibnc  after  the  ^h'l^ 
Cincs?  naiitthoubcliuer  tljnn  Into  the 
hanb  of  3JfcatU  25ut  he  anfroercb  him 
not  that  bap. 

38  2lno£>aulfaib,  2);aib  pec  nccre 
hither  *all  the  t  thtcfe  of  the  people :  anb 
tmoibanb  fee,  ibhernn  ttjisfmnehath 
becnctlusbav. 

39  5fojastheH©i5jDliucth,lbhich 
fauctlj  3Jfracl ,  though  it  bee  in  'Jona* 
than  nip  fonne,  he  fljail  furelp  bic :  26ut 
there  v,  as  not  a  man  among  all  the  people 
that  anfracrcb  him. 

40  Xhcnfaibhcbntoail3frael,25c 
pc  on  one  fibe,  anb  3} ,  aub  Jonathan 
mpfonncibtUbcon  the  other  fibe.  3lnb 
the  people  faib  bnto  &aul,  SDoc  lbfjat 
fenneth  goob  bnto  thee. 

41  Xhcrcfozc  £>aul  faibc  bnto  the 
IL©fir>  Gob  of  SJfracl,  ||  <5iuc  a  perfect 
lot.  3nb£>aul  anb  Jonathan  lbcrc  ta 
ben :  but  the  people  t  efcapeb. 

41 3inbS>aulfaib,Caftiutsbctrbcenc 

me 


*  L^Liit.y. 
.6.  and  19. 


'  Or  t  J- *  [t 
trexchi- 

rcftjlj. 


h.wd. 


t  Hebr.that 
Altar  he  be- 
Canne to 
bmid  vrtto 
theLQTtg). 


*Iuijg.?0.2 

f  Heb.eor- 


nc  innocent 


Ihb.jrent 


Jonathan  is  refcued.  LSamuel.      SaulfparethAgag. 


\Ottvi>rogh\ 
nighttly. 


me  anD3lonathanmp  fonnc.  3nD3l0' 
nathanibasta&cn. 

4?  %hcn  £>aul  faiD  to  Jonathan, 
Xell  me  mhat  thou  haft  Done.  3lnt>  3Jo 
nathan  tolDe  him ,  anD  CaiDc,  3  DtD  but 
talle  a  title  honpibtth  the  cud  of  tlic 
roDDcthat  wasm  nuncljanDjandloc,  3 
muftDie. 

44  3nD;a>aulanuucreD,<SoDDofo, 
anDnto«aifo :  fo?  tt)oufl)aitfurclvDit, 
Jonathan. 

4  5  3inD  the  people  fart)  bnto&aul, 
.Shall  Jonathan  Die,  ibho  hath 
Ibjought  this  great  faluatton  in  3^ 
r  aefc  <SoD  fo^biD :  as  the  %<s>wz>  Itttcth , 
there  fljal  not  onchatrc  of  his  hcaD  fall 
to  the  grounD :  fo?  hce  Dart)  ibjottght 
tbith(E>oD  this  Dap.  £>o  the  peoplercfc 
cucd  ^Jonathan,  that  heeDicDnot. 

4.6  Xhcn  £>aul  ibent  top  from  foh 
lotting  tyc^hiliftutcs:  anD  the  0hilt* 
ftmes  Vbcnt  to  their  otbnc  plate. 

4.7  C3>os>aultoo&cthctongDom 
oner  3Ifrael ,  anD  fought  agatnft  all 
t)ts  enemies  on  eucrp  Cdc,  agatnft  £00- 
ab,anD  againft  the  chtlDjcn  of  3mmon, 
anD  againft  £uom,  anD  agatnft  tiic 
tongs  of  Zobah,  aitD  agatnft  the  0htlt 
(tines:  anD  lbhttherfoeucr  hee  turncD 
himfclfe,hebcrcDthem. 

4-8  3lnD  he  ||  gathcteD  an  hofte ,  anD 
rmotcthe:3maletotes,  anD  DelraereD 
itfracl  out  of  tt)t  hatiDes  of  them  tt>at 
fpoileDthcm. 

49  #oibfhcfonncsof£>aul,  were 
Jonathan,  anD  3Khut ,  anD  $)cltlfc 
ftjua :  anDthenamcsof  histtboDaugh 
ters  were  thefe :  the  name  of  the  firft 
borne  $)crab,  anD  the  name  of  the  pon^ 
gerfi)9ichal: 

50  anDthcnameof&aulsibifcwas 

aajmoam ,  the  Daughter  of  ahimaav 
anD  the  name  of  the  taptatne  of  his  hoft 
was  3bncc,  the  fonnc  of /tier,  Sauls 
bnele. 

51  3nDmifl)wasthtfothcrof<a>attl, 
anD  /Rcr  the  father  of  ^bner  was  the 
fonnc  of  3lbicl. 

51 3lnD  there  lbas  fotcibarrc  againft 
the01)iliftmes,  all  the  bapes  of  Saul: 
anDibhcnSaulfaib  anp  ftrong  man, 
ojanpbaliantntan ,  hctooUc  himbnto 
him. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  Samuel  fendeth  Saul  to  deftroy  Amalct.  (• 
Saul  fauoureth  the  Kenitcs.  8  Hcefparcth 
Agagaudthe  beitol  the  fpoile.  10  Samue 
denouncethvnto  Saul  commending  and  ex- 


cusing himlelfe,  Gods  reie&ion  of  him  (or  his 
difobedience.  »4  Sauls  humiliation.  51  Sa- 
muel killeth  Agag.  34  Samuel  aud  Saul  part. 

"  (m  3ritucl  aifo  fatDc  bnto 
[<P  Saul,  *Xhc1LfiDis©fent 
me  to  annotnt  thee  to  bee 
3J^  tungotterhtspcoplcoucr 
5a  3Jfracl :  nottie  thcrcfo:c 
hcarucn  thou  bnto  the  bopce  ofttjc 

lDO?DSOftl)e!LflDli?JE>. 

x  Xhusfaiththe?L©t53Dofhofts, 
3  remember  thatibhith  ^maieftDiD  to 
gjfracl,  *holbttclatD  wait  fo?  himuttj)e 
map  Vbhcn  he  tame  Dp  from  egppt. 

3  i5omgoc,attDfmitc3imaicB,anD 
bttetip  bcttropall  that  thephauc,  anD 
fparethemnoti  but  flap  both  man  anD 
ibomatt,  mfant  anD  fucuimg,  ore  anD 
fhcepccantclianDaffc. 

4  &nD  Saul  gathercD  the  people 
together,  anD  numbjcD  them  in  %v 
latm.tlbo  imuDitD  thoufanD  footmen. 
anD  ten  thoufanD  men  of  3JuDah. 

5  3tnD£>aulcametoaettieof:3m& 
left,anDi|iaiD  ibaitetnfhebailep. 

6  C  3tnD  5>aul  fatDe  tonto  the  Ue^ 
nites,©oe,Depart,gctpouDoihncfroni 
amongthe  ^maietotes,  left  3  Deftror 
pou  Vbith  them :  fo?  pec  fljelbeD  feinD' 
neffc  toailtlje  thtlD?cnof3}fraclibhen 
the?  tame  Dp  out  of  Cgypt.  &0  the 
H^nttesDcpartcD  from  among  the  3fc 
ntaicbites. 

7  3nDS>aulfmotcthe3Cmaictotcs 
from  i^autlah ,  vntiii  thou  tommeft  to 
5>hur ,  that  is  oucr  agatnft  €gppt 

8  3lttD  hec  toofec  3Jgag  the  fetng  of 
the  ^ntaietotcs  altue ,  anD  tottcrlp  De^ 
ftrovcD  ail  the  people  Ibith  the  eDge  of 
tljcnao?D. 

9  25ut  S>aul  anD  the  people  fparcD 
3lgag,anDthebcft  of  thefheepe,  anD  of 
theoren ,  anD  oftije  ilfatltngs,  attDthc 
lambcs ,  ano  all  that  teas  gooD ,  anD 
iboulD  not  Dttcrlp  Dcftrop  them :  but  v 
uerp  tl)tng  that  lbas  bfle,  anD  refufc, 
that  thep  DeftropcD  Dttcrlp. 

to  CXljnx  tame  the  rbo?D  of  tlje 
%  ©  is  ©  Dnto  £>ainuclfaptng  ,• 

ii  "Jt  repenteth  me  that  3  hauc  fct 
bp  5>aul  to  be  tong :  foz  hec  is  turncD 
bacttc  from  folIoibtngmcanD  hath  not 
perfomicD  nip  tommanDcmcnts.  ^ttD 
it  grtcueD  -Samuel ;  anD  he  crtcD  bmo 
tl)c|L«r>K©  all  night. 

ir  ^nD  Vbhcn  5>amucl  rofe  earlpto 
meet  £>aul  m  tlic  mozning, it  lbas  tolDc 
&amnel,(apmg^aul  came  to  Carmcl, 
anDbel)olD,l)c  fct  Dm*  bp  a  plate,  anD  is 
gone 


«  Clup.ff. 


"Exod.17. 

8. num.  24 


{Or,faht. 


Or,ofih! 
fecotvifvrt. 


Saul 


rcproue 


d. 


Ch; 


cor.jiime 
thtm. 


'  Ecclcs. 
4.i7.ofe.6 
7.  mati-9« 
l  3.  and  1  2. 
7- 

\Htb  dttti- 
ntttten . 


gone  about,  anD  paffeb  on ,  anb  gone 
boiDnc  to  <5Ugal. 

i}  anb  Samuel  tame  to  Saul,  anb 
Saulfaibbntohun,  isicflcbbethonof 
the  ft  ois©:  3  hauc  pcrfcmncb  the 
commanbcmentof  the  ft©ia©. 

14  anb  Samuel  faib ,  nahat  mca= 
neththeitthisblcatmgof  the  fJbcepe  in 
minccates,ano  thclolkng  ofthcorcn 
UjJjicft^  t)carc< 

15  anb  Saul  fapbe ,  Xhcy  hauc 
brought  tl)cnt  front  the  amaicRites : 
fo?  the  people  fparcb  the  bctt  of  the 
fl)cepe,  anb  of  tl)e  orcn,  to  fatrtneepnto 
the  ft  ©  k  jd  thy  C5ob,  anb  the  reft  u»e 
hauc  tottcrlv  beftroyeb. 

16  Xhen  Samuel  fayb  tonto  Saul, 
Stay ,  anb  3  lbtll  tell  tl)ec  ibhat  the 
ft  ©ke>  hath  faib  to  mec  this  night, 
anb  he  fatb  bnto  him,  Say  on. 

17  anb  Samuel  fatb  ,  nahen  thou 
Vbaft  litle  in  thuie  oUmc  fighUDaft  thou 
not  mabe  the  l^cab  of  the  tubes  of  3b 
racl ,  anb  the  ft  ©k  s>  aiiotutcbthcc 
Bmgouet^frael; 

is  anb  tl)c  JLjdird  lent  thee  on  a 
tourney,  anb  fatb,  C5oc,  anb  utterly  bc« 
ftroy  rhefinncrsthc  amalcfettcs ,  anb 
fightagainftthcm,  Pimtl  ttheybccoit; 
fumtb. 

19  nshcrcfoje  then  btbft  thou  not  o; 
bey  the  Pottcof  the  Jl^us,  butbiott 
flic  upon  the  fpotlc,  anb  bibfteuui  in  the 
QghtDfthcft©is©? 

20  anb  Saul  faib  bnto  Samuel, 
J^ea,  3  hauc  obeyeb  the  Pottc  of  the 
ft©  is  ??,aub  haue  gone  the itoay  lbhich 
the  ft  o  s  ©  fetu  me,anb  hanc  b:ought 
agag  the  lung  of  3maicR,  anb  hauc  ut- 
terly beftroyeb  the  amaicRites. 

11  zSutthcpebpletooRcofthefpotlc, 
thcepc  anb  orcn,  the  chtefc  of  the  things 
lPhtch  fljoulb  hauc  bene  tottcrlv  be; 
fttoycb  ,  tofaenfuc  two  the  ft©  e  5? 
thy<5obm<3ilgal. 

22  ^nb  Samuel  fatbt ,  ftath  the 
ft  ©  is©  as  erc.u  Delight  in  burnt  offer; 
tugs  anb  faennces  ,  as  ut  obepmg  the 
Potcc  of  the  ft  ©is  id?  26eholb,*toO' 
bey,  is  better  then  faenftec :  and  to  hear- 
kcu,thcn  the  fat  of  ramnies. 

23  if  o?  rebellion  is  as  the  fin  of  tUntrh- 
traft ,  anb  mibburnncfTc  15  as  mtqulru 
anb  iboiatrtc :  becaufe  thou  haft  rcicc 
tcotheiiio2Dofthcft©i3£>,hehathal; 
forctctteb  thee  frontons!  ftmg. 

24  C  ^nb  Saul  faib  bnto  Samuel, 
3  hauc  fmncD :  fo:  3  haue  traufgrcfTcb 
the  <£oimnanbement  of  the  ft©K?D, 


Lp.XV), 


Agagflaine. 


anb  thy  tbo?bes;  becaufe  3  fcarcbthc 
pcoplcanbobeycb  their  boicc. 
I    25  iftottuhcrefiwltpjaythccpar 
bon  my  finnc ,  anb  turnc  agamc  With 
ine,that31  may  iPozfljip  tl)c  ft©  is  ©. 

26  anbSamuclfatbPntoSaui,3J 
(lbill  not  rcturnc  Vbtth  thee :  foi  thou 
jhaftrcicetcbtheibo2bofthe  ILob^, 
,  anb  the  ft©isjD  hath  retcctcb  thec  from 
bcuiglungoucr^lfracl. 

27  anb  asSamuelturncb  about  to 
gocamay,hc  laib  holb  ppou  the  fturt  of 
his  mantle,  anb  it  rent. 

18  anb Samuclfaib  bnto hun,Hhc 
ft  ©m©  hath  rent  the  mngbomc  of 
3Jfracl  from  thee  tins  bay ,  anb  hath  gt 
unuttoancighbour  of  thine, thatisbct 
tcr  then  thou. 

29  anbalfothc!lftrcngrliof3Jfracl 
ttulluot  lie ,  noz  repent :  foz  he  is  not  a 
man  that  hcfhottlb  repent. 

30  Xhenhe fatb, 3 haue finneb, yet 
honour  me  nott),3i  p«2ay  thee,befo2e  the 
eibctsofmypcople)anobefo2c3Jfracl, 
anb  tuntc  agame  tbith  me,  that  3  map 
iboilrnp  thefL  ©  a  ©  thp  <5ob. 

31  So  Samuel  turneb  againc  af 
tcr  Saul ,  anb  Sam  ttwfhtppcb  the 

?L©1SE\ 

31  CXhnifaib  Samuel,  Buitgpou 
hither  to  me  agag  the  Ring  of  thcama 
lelutes:anb  agag  came  bnto  hunbclt 
tatclv.  anb  agag  faib ,  Surclp  the  bit 
temeffe  of  bcath  is  paft. 

;j  anb  Samuclfaib, *as  tliv fmoib 
hatli  mabclbomcn  chilblcfle,  fo  fl)all 
thy  mother  bee  rhilDieffe  among  1P0 
men.anb  Samuel  htUieb  agagm  pte 
ccsbcfoic  the  %.  ©  k  iDin  ©ilgal. 

34.  C  Xljeit  Samuel  lbcnt  to  IRa 
mah,anb  SauUPentbp  to  htshoufcto 
<5ibcahofSaul. 

35  anb  Samueltamc  no  mo?e  to  fee 
Saul  bntill  the  oap  ofhis  bcath :  ncuer 
thcleu"c ,  Samuel  mottrneb  fo2  Saul : 
anb  the  ft  ©«  ©  rcpentcb  thatljeljab 
mabe  Saul  Ring  oner  3Jfraeu 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  Samuel  lent  by  God  ,  vnder  pretence  of  a  fa- 
crifice,  comnieth  to  Beihlehem.  6  His  hu- 
mane Judgement  is  reprooued.  n  He  an- 
ointeth  Dauid.  15  Saul  lendedi  tor  Dauid 
to  quiet  his  eu ill  fpirit. 

HPQSfh  f^  the  ft  ©  is  ©  fatb  bnto 
-  'w&fc  Samuel,  ftoiP longibilt 
^^VC  thou  mournc  foi  Saul, 
w/^U\C  feeing  3  haue  reiecteb 
htm  from  reigning  oucr 
3fn\c\i 


Orteterni- 


'  Expd  17. 
1  I .  num. 

m  ■ij- 


Samuel  is  lent,and      I.Samuei.     annointethDauid. 


t  Ticir.m 


\  Hehr.me: 


\Ulbr.ejc>. 

"  I .  Chron. 
l8  9-pfal- 
7-a.icrcm. 
1  1 . 30. and 
17.10.arvi 

20.  J  2. 


•l.Sam.7, 

8.pUl.78. 

71. 

\Htlj  rtuni. 

\Hrir.fur, 


gifrad;  ifill  thine  hozncibitboilcanD 
goc,'5  ibillfraDfhceto35ctTethc26ctl> 
lehcnute:  ioi3  hauc  pzouiDeD  mcca 
Bms  anions  his  tonnes, 

z  3tno  Samuel  fatD ,  fcolb  tan  3 
gocilf  Saul  heare  it,  he  lbtll  aillmcc. 
7Mo  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiD ,  Xabean  heifer 
t  Ybith  thecanb  U\y,3  am  tome  to  facri- 
6ectothe?l©i3©. 

3  2nDtall3JeiTctothcfacrificc,anD 
3  lbillCbeib  thee  lbhat  thoufbaitDoc : 
anD  thou  (halt  anoint  unto  mtc  him 
ttihom'Jnamebntothcc. 

4  3lnD  Samuel  did  that  ibhich  the 
3L©is©  fpa&c ,  anD  tame  to  2SethlC' 
hem:  anD  the  elDers  of  the  totbne  trem* 
blcoathis  tcomnung,  anD  faiD,  Com- 
men  thou  peaceably* 

5  3lnD  hec  faiD ,  peaceably :  3  am 
tome  to  facrt&cebnto  then  ©  is  © :  fatv 
ctificyourfclucs,  anbcomcibithmc  to 
the  fatnfitc :  anD  he  fanttifieD  3fcffe,anD 
his  tonnes  ,  anb  calico  them  torheffc 
tnfite. 

6  c^nDittametopafferuhenthcv 
iberc  tome ,  that  he  Iookcd  on  <£uab, 
anD  faiD,Surcly  the  %  ©  k  ©  £>  anom* 
teDts  bcfo?e  him. 

7  26ut  theft©  is  ©faiD  bnto  Sa* 
mud,  Hoobe  not  on  his  countenance, 
02  on  the  height  of  his  ftaturc ,  becaufe 

3  h^Ue  rcfUlCD  him  :  fc)2  the  L  o  r  d  feeth 

not,asman  fceth  ■<  5fo?manlooUethon 
the  t  outibarD  appearance ,  but  the 
?L©k©  loolteth  on  the*  heart. 

8  Xhcn^lcflccaileD^biuaDab.anD 
maDehun  paffe  before  Samuel :  anD  he 
faiD ,  ^either  hath  the  2,  ©is©  cbo* 
fen  this. 

9  Xhcn  gjeCTc  maDeShammah  to 
paCfcbp:  anD  he  faib,  /Bother  hath  the 
1L©is©chofcntbis. 

\o  3tgamc  ^JcfTc  maDc  fcucn  of  his 
fonncs  to  patfe  before  Samuel ;  anD 
Samuel  faiD  bnto  3  cflc/SEhe  %  ©  m  © 
hath  not  thofenthefe. 

1 1  3lnD  Samuel  faiDe  bnto  ^clfe, 
3rc  here  all  thy  cbtlDjcn?  ^nohefaiD, 
Xhcrcrcmaincthyet  the  yongeft,  anD 
beholD,  he  uecpeth  the  fliecpc.  3lnD  Sa? 
muel  faiD  bnto  lIclTc,  *  ScnO,anD  fetch 
hinufojibcibiliuot  uttDolbnc,  till  hec 
come  hither. 

11  3inD  hefent ,  anD  bzoughthimin : 
noib  he  was  ruDDy,  .nd  ibithai  tofa  beau- 
tifuiltoiintenaiucanD  goobly  to  loohe 
to :  Znn  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiD  ,3lrifc,anoint 
him -.to*  this  "he. 

13  Xben  Samuel  toose  the  home  of 


oile,  anD  annomteD  him  inthcmtDftof 
his  bjethjen :  anD  the  Spirit  of  the 
%  ©  is  id  tame  bpon  SDautD ,  from  that 
Dap  fonbatD :  So  Samuel  rofc  bp  anD 
tticntto&amah. 

14.  c  ®ut  tljc  fpirit  of  the  %  ©  is  id 
DepartcD  from  Saul ,  anD  an  cuil  fpirit 
from  theft,  ©  is  ©  ||  troubleDhim. 

15  3lnD  Sauls  feniants  faiD  bnto 
him,  25eholDnoib,  ancutll  fpirttfrom 
©oDtroublerhthce. 

16  JUt  our  lojDnotb  commanDthy 
ftruants  which  arc  before  thee,  to  fcekc 
outaman,ibho  is  a  tunning  play  er  on 
an  harpe :  anD  it  than  tome  to  pafTc 
ibhenthceuill  fpirit  from  <5oD  is  bpon 
thee,  that  hcett)aiipiayn»thhishanD, 
anDtljoufljaitbctbcll. 

17  stuDSauifaiDbntohisferuants, 
0?omDe  nice  noib  aman,  that  tan  play 
ibcll,anD  bjmg  him  to  me. 

13  Xhen  anfmcrcD  one  of  flic  fer^ 
uants.anDfaiD^cholD^haftfeenea 
fonncof  3Jeffc  thcBethlehemttc,  that 
is  cunning  in  plaping,anD  a  mightp  ba? 
liant  man ,  anD  a  man  of  tbarrc,anD 
pmbent  m  ||  matters ,  anb  a  tomelp  pcr< 
fon,anD  the  H  ©  is  ©  fs  tbul;  htm. 

19  CC  tt)hcrcfo?e  Saul  fent  mellin-' 
gersbntoSJcfTcanDfaiDScnDmcDa* 
uiD  thvfonne,)bhichis  lbiththefl)ecpe. 

10  ^nD  3Jtfl"c  toofec  an  aflc  laden 
ttnth  b:caD,anD  a  bottle  of  lbinc,  anD 
a  biD,  anD  fent  them  bp2>autD  Ijis  fonne 
bnto  Saul. 

z\  ^ud  2>auiD  tame  to  Saul ,  anD 
ftooo  before  him: anD  hec  loucD  him 
greatly ,  anD  hec  became  his  armour 
bearer. 

2z  3mD  Saul  fent  to  3e(Tc,  faying, 
Het  2>atuD ,  3  pzay  thec ,  ftanD  before 
me:  fo?  hec  Ijati)  founD  fauour  in  nip 
fight. 

23  3mD  it  came  to  pa(re,rbhetifhe 
eu.11  fpint  from  ©obibas  bpon  Saul, 
that  ©auib  toofee  an  harpe,  anD  playcD 
ibith  his  hanD :  So  Saul  lbas  rcfre* 
fl)cD,anDibasibcll,anD  thenull  fpirit 
DepartcD  fromhtm. 

CHAP.   XVIL 

1  The  armies  of  che  Ifiaelites ,  and  Pluliftines 
beeing  readie  to  battel!-,  4  Goliath  com- 
meth  proudly  torth.tochalenge  acombate. 
u  Djuid  (eat  by  his  lather  to  vifit  his  bre- 
thren, taketh  the  chalcnge.  18  Eliab  chideth 
him.  30  He  is  brought  to  Saul.  32.  He 
fheweth  the  reafon  ot   his  confidence.   38 

Without 


1 1  Or,  fetich. 


Goliath  deiieth  the    Chap.xiii  j.         armies  of  Ifrael J 


5  Or.  the 
caiflcf 


t  Hob.  ran- 
ged the  foi- 


led. 


\Ueb.cha- 
thed. 


!  Or,  gor- 


'  Cfiap. 
K.I. 


Without  armour, armed  byianh.heflayeth 
theGianr.    ss    Sauhakechnoticeof  Dauid 

Ese^3g  €>rbtI)t^I)iUftinessart)^ 

wt®  rcb  together  tfjeic  armtcs 

to  battell,anbiberegatbc; 

rebtogetherat&hochoh, 

Vt)l)ltt)  belonacth  tO JJUDal), 

ano  pitchco  bcnbccnc  £>hoehohanb  % 
3cBab,  m||<£phcs-2>ammtm. 

%  anb  £>ml  anb  the  men  of  3u*raci 
ttierc  gathcrcb  togctbcr,anb  pitcbeb  br 
the bailer  of  <£lah ,  anb  tfetttje  battel! 
in  araragamftthc^biuttines. 

j  anb  tlic  0I)tlrihne8  ftoob  on  a 
mountatnc  on  rt)conefibc,  anb  ifrael 
ftoob  on  a  mountain  e  on  toe  other  fibe : 
anb  there  was  a  baiter  bctibeenc  them. 

4  C  anb  there  tticnt  out  a  cham? 
pion  out  of  tl)e  tampe  of  thc^hiliftines, 
nameb  (5oliathof<5ath:tt)hofehetght 
was  fire  cubitcs  anb  a  fpan. 

5  anbhehadanhetmctofbzaflebp' 
onhtshcab,  anb  he  ibas  t  armebttnth 
a  coate  of  male:  anb  thettieightof  the 
toat  ibas  fiuc  thoufanb  fbcBcis  of  bzaflc- 

6  anb  i«  had  greaues  of  bjaffc  bp- 
on  his  legs,  anb  a  ||  target  of  bjaflJe  be= 
ttbeeuebisfboulbcrs. 

7  anb  the  ftaffe  of  his  fpear c  ibas 
Une  aibeauersbcame,  anbhtsfpeares 
hcab  weighed  fire  hunbzeb  (hearts  of  p= 
ton :  anb  one  bearing  a  fbielb,  tticnt  be* 
fojehint. 

3  anb  nee  ftoob  anbtricb  bnto  the 
armies  of  jjifrael,  anbfaibbnto  them, 
i©hr  arc  pee  tome  out  to  fet  vour  batten 
m  arar  ^  am  not  51  a  $mUftinc,anb  ron 
fttuants  to  £>aui<  chafe  rott  a  man  fo? 
rou,anb  let  him  tome  bottmc  to  me. 

9  3Jf  he  be  able  to  fight  tbith  nice, 
anb  to  Billme,rhenttnllttieberoutfcr; 
uants  :  but  if  3  PJeuafle  agamft  l)im, 
anb  Bill  him ,  then  ftjall  pee  be  our  fee* 
uants,anbferuebs. 

io  anb  the  0biliftine  faib,  3J  befie 
thcarmtes  of  ^jfraclthts  bar  ■,  gmeme 
a  man,tfjat  tbe  map  fight  together. 

ii  nahen  £>aulanball  ^fraelrjearb 
thofcnwbsoftbc0bUtttmc,thertt)ere 
bifmapcb,anb  gecatir  afraib. 

n  CiBotb  ©autb  was  'theforme  of 
thatephMthiteofBetfHehemgtobah, 
ttihofe  name  ibas  3le(te,  anb  bee  jjao 
eujht  fonncs  :  anb  the  man  lbcnt  a* 
mongmenfo?  an  olb  man  mtbc  bapes 
of&aul. 

i  j  anbthethzeeelbcftfonnesofjicfl'e 
tticnt,  and  follotticb  5>aul  to  the  battell : 
anb the  names  of  his  thtcc  founts  that 


tttcnt  to  thcbattcll,  were,€uabthcfirft 
borne,  anb  ncrt  bnto  bun,  abuiaoab, 
anotbetbiro,:§>bamniab. 

14.  anb  £>auib  ibas  tberongeft*  anb 
the  thjee  elbeft  f  olloibcb  3>aui. 

15  ffiutSDauiblbent,  anbrctumtb 
from  S>aul,  to  feeb  bis  fathers  (hcepe 
at25ctl)lchem. 

16  anb  the  0hiliftine  bJrtbe  necrc, 
morning  anb  cuetung,  anb  picfenteb 
bunfelfefoztr  bares. 

17  3mb  3fefle  faib  bnto  S>amb  his 
fonne,  Xafte  notb  foi  thr  bietbjen  an 
ephal)  of  this  patehebcome,  anbtbefe 
ten  loaues,  anb  run  to  the  tampe  to  thr 
bzerhjen. 

is  anbtaricthcfctcntthcefcsbnto 
the  t  Captamc  of  the.r  thoufanb ,  anb 
loone  horb  thr^cthjen  fare,  anb  tafee 
their  plcbge. 

19  iI5oib5>aul,anbthn',anbauthe 
men  of  3Jfrael  were  m  thcbaiitr  of  €-- 
lah,fightingttnththci2>hiliftincs. 

20  C^nb  SDaiub  rofc  bp  carelr  in 
themommg,  anblcfttbefbeepcttntha 
beeper,  anb  tooac ,  anb  tticnt ,  as  3>efie 
hab  commanbeb  htm  ■,  anb  he  tame  to 
the  II  trcnch,as  the  hoftmas  going  fo^th 
to  ||thc  fight,  anb  fhoutcb  fiw  the  bat? 
tell. 

zi  foi  3Cracl  anb  the  ^hfttftmes 
hab  put  the  battel  in  aray,atmp  againft 
armic. 

2z  anb  2>amb  left  this  cartage  m 
the  hanb  of  the  Keeper  of  the  tariage, 
ano  ranne  into  the  armie^nb  tame  anb 
tfaiutcbhisbjeth;en. 

2 1  anb  as  he  taiBtbttnththem,  be* 
holb,  there  came  bp  the  thampion  (the 
i&hiUftine  of  <5ath,  ©oliath  b^  name) 
out  ofthc  armies  of  the  ^htiifttnes,anb 
fpaBe  atcoibmg  to  thefame  tt)o?bs:  anb 
2>auibhcarbthem. 

14  anballthemenof3fracl,tt)hen 
thcr  fatb  tlic  man,  f[tn  t  from  him ,  anb 
tticrefoze  afraib. 

15  anbthcmcnof5fraelfaib,$aue 
ree  fecne  this  man  that  is  come  bp; 
3>urclrto  befic  "Jfrael  is  he  come  bp: 
anb  it  (ball  be  that  the  man  ttiho  killcth 
huu,tbe  femg  ibil  enrich  him  ttiith  great 
aches,  anb  *lbtll  giuc  him  hts  baugj> 
tec,  anb  maBe  his  fathers  houfefree  in 
3!rrael. 

26  anbSDauibfpaBctothementbat 
ftoob  br  him ,  faring ;  iDhat  fl)ail  bee 
bone  to  the  man  that  Billcth  this  ^I)i* 
liftmc,  anb  taBctb  aibar  the  tepioch 
from  3Jfrael*  foi  ibho  is  this  bntir 

cunmfcb 


fei  of mitke- 
\Hcb.ctf- 

ttttW  Of  A 

thoufand. 


\Or,fU£cof 
the  cartage. 
(Or,  battel 
rajf,orpUct 
offght. 


t  Heir,  the 
vtftdifrom 
vpenhtm. 

\Heb.  liked 
hu  brethren 
of  peace. 


\Heb.po, 
huface. 


'IoQmj. 
6. 


Dauids faith:  He       I.Samuel.         killeth Goliath. 


vord. 


htm. 


\Or.kji. 


( Kt h.  dot 
thriific. 
with  t/u 
clomhef. 


cumnfeb  pDiitftinc,  that  he  fboulb  nv 
fit  the  armies  of  the  luung<3ob  < 

zj  3ltib  tijc  people  anfibcreb  Dim 
after  rlnsmancr,  faymg ,  st>o  fbauitbc 
Done  to  theman  that  utllctb  Htm. 

28  C2inb  <£Uab  Jus  clbclt  toother 
hcarb  ibhcn  Dcfpancbnto  the  men?anb 
e  uabs  anger  ibas  fctnblcb  agamft  2Da= 
usb.anb  hefatb,  m\y?  camclt  thouboibn 
Dither*  anbibtth  ibhom  haft  thou  left 
thofc  fell)  Ojccpe  m  the  tbilbcrncffc  1 3 
Imoib  thy  pnbe,anb  thcnaugDfmcffc  of 
thtnc  heart;  fo?  thou  art  conic  bottmc, 
that  thou  migbtcftfee  the  batteU. 

19  3lnb  2Dauto  faioc,  i©l)at  hauc  3 
noil)  Done*  ^fetficrcnotacaufc? 

30  C3JnD  Dee  tutneb  from  Dim  to< 
marcs  another,  ana  fpatte  after  tDc 
fame  t  matter :  anb  the  people  anfibcreb 
l)im  acr?.mc  after  tDc  fanner  maner. 

31  anbibDcntDcnwbsibcrcDcarb 
tbDicD  £>atttb  fpaftc ,  tbev  tcDcarfeb 
tljcm  befoje  £>aul :  ano  he  t  tent  foi  hint. 

3  z  C  3nb  S>attiD  faio  to  3>aui,  Hct 
no  mans  heart  faile,  becaufe  of  Dun: 
thy  feruant  IMI  goc  an  0  fight  rbitl)  ttjis 
^btltfttnc. 

33  ^nb&auiraibtOiiDauib.lCpoa 
art  not  able  to  goc  agamft  ttjis  wfiW 
(ftnt,  to  figDt  ibttl)  fjmi :  fa?  thou  art  but  a 
y outl),  anb  he  a  man  of  ibacrc  from  his 
youth. 

34  ,3tnb  2>auib  fatb  bnto  5>aul,1Ehy 
fcrnant  nept  his  fathers  (hecpe,  anb 
thcrceamc  a  Upon,  anb  aasearr,  anb 
toofec  a  ||  lambc  ont  of  the  flocltc : 

35  3lnb  3  tbent  out  after  htm,  anb 
fmotc  Dim,  anb  bcltucrcb  nont  of  Dts 
month :  anb  ibhcn  lie  arofc  agamft  me, 
3  caught  him  by  his  bearo,  anb  fmotc 
htm,  anbfleibhmt. 

36  £hy fcrnant flelb  both tbe Hyon 
anb  the  Scare :  anb  this  bnctrcumtifcb 
0biUftmcfl)alIbcasoncofthcm,fcctng 
he  hath  befieb  ti;c  armies  of  tDc  luting 

GOb. 

37  SDautb  fatbc  mo^couer,  XDc 
%<$> isr>  that  bcliucrcb  me  out  of  the 
paib  of  the  Upon,  anb  out  of  the  paibc 
of  tl)C23carc,  Ddbtll  bcUticr  me  out  of 
the  Daub  of  this  0DtiElhne.  3nb  S>aul 
fatb  bnto  £>aiub,  <5oc,  atib  tljc  Hsdihjd 
be  Until  tDec. 

38  C3mb  Snttl  t armcb  5T>auib  tbifh 
his  armour ,  anb  hec  put  an  helmet  of 
biaftcbpouhfshMO,aifohcarmcbDim 
lbuhatoatofmaic. 

39  3inb5>ambgtrbfbh«£fu>02bbp; 
onhisarmouv,  atib  he  aflaycb  to  goc, 


fojhc  Dab  notpionco  it :  ano  3Dautb  fatb 
bntoS>aul,  3  cannot  goc  ibith  thefe: 
fo?  3  hauc  notpjoucb  them,  ^inb  2>a= 
tub  put  them  oft  htm. 

40  2ino  hec  tooUc  his  ftaffc  in  his 
Danb,anDchofc  hun  fine  fmootheftones 
out  of  the  liteooKc,  ano  put  them  m  a 
fhephcarbs  t  bag  lbhtch  he  Dab,  cucn  in 
aftrtp,  anbhtsftmgvbasm  his  haubc, 
anbhcb^cttinccrcto  the  ^Dtltftine. 

4.1  ^nb  the  iMnliftinc  tame  on  anb 
bjcib  necrc  bnto  5>autb ,  anb  tlic  man 
that  bare  the  ftjiclb,  went  befojehtm. 

41  3(nb  ibhcn  the  i^litltfhnc  loobcb 
about,  anb  faru  S>atttb ,  Dee  bifbaineb 
Dimifo^DcujastutavoutDjanbrttbbp, 
anb  of  a  faire  countenance. 

43  3nbtDc$Diliftincfaibbnto2Da' 
!  uto,  ^nigjabog,tDattl)outonimclrto 

mclbttDftaucs;  anb  thc^hiliftlnccnr^ 
feb  3Dauto  bp  Dis  gobs. 

44  3JnbtDcphUtftincfaibtoS>auib, 
Come  to  me,  anb  3  ibtll  gutctljvflcfl) 
bnto  the  foules  oftljc  aire,  anb  to  the 
beads  of  tbcfitlb. 

45  Xhcnfatb  ©auibto  the  |t>hilt- 
ftinc,  1Chou  tommeft  to  nice  tbitl)  a 
ftuojb ,  anb  ibttlj  a  fpcare ,  anb  ibith  a 
fl)iclb:bttt3comctothccmthci2ante 
of  the  HfiPisjD  of  Doftcs,  tljc  <5ob  of 
tlic  armies  of  3Jfracl,  ibDom  thou  Daft 
beficb. 

46  ^hiSbayibflthcHsDiaBtQcii;; 

ucr  tljcc  into  nunc  Danb,  anb  3  lbtll 
finite  tDee,  anb  taHc  tljtncDcab  from 
tDcc,  anb33UnlgiuctDccarKcu"csof  tDc 
Doft  of  tDc  iDDtltfttncs  tDis  bap  bnto  tlic 
fonlcs  of  tlic  aire,  anb  to  tDc  ibilb  bcaQs 
of  tlic  earth,  that  all  tDc  cacti)  may 
ImotbtDatthcrcisaoobin^fracl. 

47  anbailtDtsaffdnblpfbaimioib 
that  tDcH<0iR£>  fauctD  not  ibttD  fino^b 
$  fpcare  (fox  rtjc  battcll  ts  tlic  H©isjd^>) 
I  anbDcnnllgiuc  j>ou  into  our  Danbs. 

4s  3Jnb  it  came  to  paflerbDcn  tDc 
0Diliftiuc  arofe,  anb  came,  anb bzcibc 
ntgl)  to  meet  2>atub,  that  SDauib  Daftcb, 
anb  rantoibarb  tljc  armtcto  mcctctljc 
lt>D»ktti»c 

49  3lnb  2>autb  put  Dis  hanbe  in  Dis 
'  bag,  anb  toofcc  rDcntc  a  ftonc,  anb  flattg 
it,  f  fmotc  tDc  pDtliftinctn  DisfojcDcab, 
that  tDc  ftonc  funftc  into  Dis  fozehcab, 
anb  he  fell  bpon  Dis  fare  to  tDc  cartl). 

50  §>o  *  SDautb  p;cnatlcb  oucc  the 
iMKltfhnc  rbith  a  flmganb  llntha  ftonc, 
anb  fmote  thciDhilimnc,  ano  flelb  hmi, 
but  there  lbas  no  froo^bm  tljc  Danbcof 
S>auib. 

' 51  UDerc 


[Or,-vaSrj. 
fHei.wf- 


thee  vp. 


•Ecclus. 
47.4.  I, 
macc.4.50. 


Ionathansloueto     Chap.xvnj.    Dauid.SauIsenuie. 


51  %\)tvcfo}t  2>autb  ran  anb  ftoob 
Upon  the  ^IjiUttinc ,  anb  toonc  his 
Cnwb,  anb  WVot  it  out  of  tiic  (heath 
thereof,  anb  fleib  him ,  anb  cut  off  his 
hcab  tlicreu»itlj».  3lnb  lbbcn  the  ^l)ili 
mncs  fatbc  their  champion  ibas  beab, 
tbcyflcb.  ^^^ 

51  3inb  the  men  of  gjfracl,  ant)  of 
3!iibab  aro(c,anb  (bouteb,anb  purfueb 
tbc^biiilhnes,  bntill  thou  tome  to  the 
bailey,  ano  to  the  gates  of  CUron :  anb 
tlie  ttounucD  of  the  |&bilimnes  fell 
borbneby  the  tbay  to  Sbaaratm ,  euen 
bnto  <satb,  anb  bnto  €bron. 

53  3tnb  the  cbilbicn  of  3Kracl  return 
neb  from  chafing  after  the  v>hili(hncs, 
anb  they  fpoilcb  their  tents. 

54.  ^ubUPauibtoonethcheabof  the 
^bihfhnc ,  anb  brought  tt  to  3Jcrufa< 
lem,  but  he  put  his  armour  m  his  tent. 

55  C  3no  lbbcn  5>aul  faibc  S>auiD 
gocfotfb  againft  the  ^bilifttue,  he  fayb 
bnto  2bncr  the  taptame  of  the  hoOe, 
3ibner,tbbofe  fonneistbis  youth;  3nb 
3(bnct  faib,  As  thy  foulcliueth,£>  King, 
31  cannot  tell. 

56  3lno  the  lung  faib ,  € nquirc  thou 
ibbofc  fonne  the  (tripling  is. 

57  3nbas3>auibrefurocb  from  the 
aaugbtetoftbc$bili(hnc;?lbncrtoobe 
bun,*  toought  him  before  S>aui,ttJitl) 
the  heab  of  the  0hiltftinc  m  his  hanb. 

58  3nb  Saul  fatbc  to  him,  nabofc 
fonne  art  thou,  thou  pong  man  i  3nb 
2Dauib  atifnicrcb,3J  am  the  fonne  of  thy 
fcraant^cffc.thcascthlehemlte. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

Ionathan  loueth  Damd.  s  Saulenuiethhis 
praife,  10  Seckcth  to  kill  him  in  his  furie, 
11  Feareth  him  for  his  good  fucceffc,  17  Of- 
fereth  him  his  daughters  lor  a  fnare.  ri  Da- 
uid  perfwaded  to  be  the  Kings  fonne  in  law, 
giuethtwo  hundtedforeskinnesofthePhih- 
ftinesfor  Michals  dovvrie.  18  Sauls  hatred, 
and  Dauids  glory  increafeth. 

0a  itcamcto  paflcibbtn 
hec  mabc  an  cube  of  fpcas 
King  bnto  Saul,  that  the 
foulc  of  Jonathan  ibas 
tmttrbifb  the  foule  of  2>a- 

uib,  anb  Jonathan  loucb  him  as  bis 

oibnc  foule. 
z  3(ttb  Saul  tooMe  him  that  bay, 

anbtboulb  ictbtmgononwc  home  to 

his  fathers  houfe. 
3  'SCbcn'JonatbananbSDauibmabe 

a  couenant,  becaufe  he  loucb  btnt  as  his 

olbnc  foule. 


4  3lnb Jonathan  ttnpt  hmtfelfe of 
the  robe  that  was  bpou  him,  anb  gaue  it 
to  2Dauib,  anb  his  garments,  euen  to 
htsftuoib ,  aub  to  btsbolb,  anb  to  his 
girble. 

5  C3nb 3>auib  tbent  out,ibbtther 
foeucr  Saul  fent  him, anb  ||  bchaueb 
himfelfe  tbtfcly :  anb  Saul  fct  him  oner 
the  men  of  lbarrc,  anb  he  ibas  accepteb 
in  the  fight  of  all  the  people,  anbalfo  in 
the  fight  of  Sauls  fcruants. 

6  3lnb  it  came  to  paffe  as  they  came 
lbbcn  SPautb  ibas  returneb  from  the 
Qaughter  of  the  ||  i&hflifttne,  that  the 
tbomencamcoutofallcitiesof3Jfrael, 
finging  anb  oannng,  to  meete  lung 
Saul,  Vbith  tabzets,  ibith  ioy  ,anb  ibith 
t  inflrumaits  of  muficfee. 

7  3lnb  the  tbomen  anfrucreb  one 
another  as  they  playcb,anblat&,*  Saul 
hath  flame  his  thoufanbs,  anbDauib 
his  ten  thoufanbs. 

8  3uibSaulibas  bcry ibioth ,  anb 
the  faying  t  bifplcafeb  him,  anb  he  fayb, 
Zbey  hauc  afcrtbcb  bnto  S)auib  tenne 
thoufanbs,  anb  to  me  they  haue  alert* 
beb  but  thoufanbs :  anb  what  can  he  haue 
11102c,  but  the  hmgbomc ; 

9  3lnb  Saul  eyeb  SDautb  from  that 
bay.anbfojtbarb. 

10  C3Jnb  it  came  to  paffc  on  the 
mo,2rolb,tbattbe  euill  (pint  from  <sob 
came  bpou  Saul,  anb  hcpjopbcctcb  m 
tbe  nubfl  of  the  houfe :  anb  £>autb  play 
eb  lbttb  his  hanb ,  as  at  other  times 
anb  there  was  a  taucttnin  Sauls  hanb. 

11  3lnb  Saul  call  the  laiielm ;  fo;  bee 
faib ,  3  lbill  finite  2>autb  euen  to  the 
iball  tbitl)  it :  anb  SDautb  auoibeb  out  of 
hisp?cfcncctibice 

u  c  ^nb  S>aul  Vbas  afraib  of  3Da 
mb,  becaufe  the  %ob&  ibas  ibith 
him,  anb  ibas  bepatteb  from  S>aui. 

15  Xhercfojc  5>aul  remooneb  him 
from  bun,  anb  mabe  himhiscaptaine 
oner  a  thoufanb,  anb  hee  tbent  out  anb 
came  in  b^fojc  the  people. 

14.  ^nb  SDauib  ||  behaueb  himfelfe 
ibifcly  in  all  btsibayes :  9  the  %  £>  is  w 

was  ibtth  him. 

15  nabercfoje  tbhen  5»aui  fa\b  that 
hee  bchaueb  himfelfe  bcry  ibifcly ,  hee 
ibas  afraib  of  him. 

16  2Sut  all  Israel  anb  3Jubahioueb 
S>auib,  becaufe  hee  ibent  out  anb  came 
111  before  them. 

17  C  ^nb  Saul  faib  to  5>auib,26e^ 
bolb.my  elbec  oaughter  Q9erab,  het 
lbill  3  guic  thee  to  ibifc :  onely  be  thou 

Db  tbanant 


I0r,fnfp 


Or,  Tbi. 
Ulnui. 


"t  Hfb.  three 
jbrinvedm- 
(IrHmems. 
"Chap.  2  (, 
1 1.  and  39. 
5-cccIus. 
47«- 

tnullw  his 


\Or.profbe- 


Michal  Dauids  wife.  I.Samuel.         Ionathans  loue. 


t  Hch.  a 
fount  of  va- 
lour. 


f  Heir. vr At 
right  in  hit 


\Htlr  .ac- 
cording to 
thtfc  words. 


t  Meh.f-l- 
filed. 


t  banant  fo?  mc,anb  fight  thc3L£>K©£> 
battels:  fin  5>aul  faib ,  Het  not  mine 
hanb  be  bpon  him ,  but  let  the  hanb  of 
thephtuftincs  bebponhim. 

is  anb3>autb  fam  bttto&aul,  naho 
am  3  <  ana  tbijat  is  mp  Ufc ,  or  mp  f* 
thers  famflp  in  3Jfracl ,  that  3  (houlb 
be  Conne  m  Mb  to  the  King  * 

19  25ut  it  tame  to  paffe  at  the  time 
ibhcn40erab£>auls  baughter  (houio 
hauc  becne  giuen  to  2>attib ,  that  ft)ee 
ibas  giuen  bnto  3b«cl  the  fi}9chola* 
thitctoibife. 

20  2nb^tchal  5>attls  baughter  lo* 
ucd  2>auib :  anbtheptolbe&aul,  anb 
the  thing  tplcafeb  him. 

n  3nb  5>attl fatb ,  3  ibill  giuehim 
her,  that  fl)e  may  be  a  marc  to  him,  anb 
thatthchanbof  the  j&htltftmcs  map  be 
agatnft  him.  iehercfojc  :t>aul  faib  to 
SDattfb,  1Chou  ttjalt  this  bay  be  mp 
fonnetn  laib,tnthe  one  of  thetlbaine. 

xx  CSn&£>aulcommattbcb  his  fer* 
uants,  faying.  Cornnnme  ibtth  2Dautb 
fccretlp,anbfap,:28eholb,thc  King  hath 
aclight  in  thee,  anb  all  his  feruants  loue 
thee :  nott)  therefore  be  the  tangs  fonnc 
m  laVb. 

xi  2tnb ;§>auls  feruants  fpafte thoft 
ibojbcs  in  the  cares  of  2>autb :  3lnb 
2>autb  fatb ,  £>a mcth  it  to  pott  a  light 
thing  to  be  a  Kings  tonne  in  larb,  feemg 
that  3  sn«  a  poojc  man,  anb  itghtip 
etteemcb* 

14  anb  the  feruants  of  £>anl  tolbe 
him,  faptng*  t£m  this  manner  fpaKe 
Dauib. 

i$  3inb  5>aul  fatb ,  Xhus  (hail  pee 
lap  to  2Dautb ,  1Cbc  Bmg  beftteth  not 
my  botbnc ,  but  an  htinb?cb  fiwefKtnnes 
of  the  0hilift(n«s ,  to  be  auengcb  of  the 
Kings  enemies.  25ut  &aul  thought  to 
ntaKe  2Dauib  fal  bp  the  hanb  of  the  phi* 
Itlhtits. 

x6  anb  tbhen  hts  feruants  tolb  2>a* 
inb  thefe  Ybo?bes,tf  plcafeb  SDautb  ibcll 
to  be  the  Kings  fonnc  in  laibc :  anb  the 
baprsibcrc  nottcrptrcb. 

i7  nahercfoie  2>auiu arofchee anb 
htsmctt,attb  (IciD  ofthc^htUftmcsttbo 
nunbzcb  mcn,anb  SDautb  bought  thctt 
fojcf Kinnes ,  anb  thep  gaue  them  in  full 
tale  to  the  King ,  that  hce  might  be  the 
Kings  fonnc  in  iatt)':anb3>aul  gauc  him 
Withal  h  is  baughttr  to  ibtfe. 

is  4E  3lnb  daul  faib  anb  Kneib  that 
thclL©  spibasttnth  2>atttb, anb  that 
*$ichai  ^anis  baughter  lottcb  him. 

i9  3lnb  3>auHbas  pet  the  inojc  & 


fraib  of  Soauib  j  anb  £>aul  became  £>a 
utbs  cnenue  continuallp. 

30  %\)tn  the  i&nntes  of  the  i&ftite 
ttincsttient  fiwth :  anb  it  tame  to  palfc 

after  the?  lb  cut  foo?thA»tDauibbefc& 
ucb  hinuelfe  moje  Ibifelp  then  all  the 
feruants  of  5>aul,fo  thathtsnameibas 
tmuthfetbp. 

CHAP.   XIX. 

1  Ionathan  difclofeth  his  fathers  purpofe  to  kill 
Dauid.  4  Hee  perfwadeth  his  father  to  re- 
conciliation. 8  By  reafbn  of  Dauids  good 
fucceffein  anewwarre,  Sauls  malicious  rage 
breakethoutagainft  him.  it  Michal  decei- 
ueth  her  father  with  an  image  in  Dauids  bed. 
18  Dauid  commeth  to  Samuel  in  Naioth. 
10  Sauls  meffengers  fent  to  take  Dauid,  n 
and  Saul  himfelfe,prophefie. 

4i2b3>aui  IpaKe  to3Iona? 
than  his  fonnc ,  anb  to 
all  his  feruants,  thatthep 
(boulbKtU2>auib. 
1 25ut  Jonathan  ^>auls 
fonnc  belightcb  mutp  in  2T>autb ,  anb 
3fonathantoibDautt),  taping ,  £>aui 
mp  father  fccKeth  to  bill  thee :  iBotb 
therefore,  3  PW  th^' tabc  bctD  t0  ft? 
felfcbntui  the  morning ,  anbabtbeiha 
fetret  platcanb  htbe  thp  fclfe : 

3  3wb3Jibillgoeoutanbflanbbe 
ftbemp  father  m  the  ficlb  vofyeve  thou 
art,  anb  3  lutll  commune  ibttl)  mpfa^ 
tljcr  ofthccanbujljat^l  fcc,that3l  lbill 
tell  thee. 

4  C 3(nb  Jonathan  fpaKe  goob  of 
3>att;Dbnto  S>aul  hts  father,  attb  fatb 
bntohtm ,  ?L.et  not  the  ISing  finne  a^ 
gatnfthts  feruant,  agatnft  2?atttb:  be* 
taufe  hee  hath  not  ftnncb  agatnft  thee, 

anb  bCCatlfC  hiS  M)0?KCS  haue  bene  tO  thCC 

tbarbbcrpgoob. 

5  5fo:hebtbputhiS*lifcinhiShanb, 
anb  aetb  the  i&l)Uiftinc,  9  the  %  t>  is  © 
ibjottght  a  great  falttation  fin  an  3)f 
rael:thou  lalbcft  it ,  anb  bibft  reiopec: 
nahetefottthcnlbilt  thou  finne  agamft 
innocent  bloob ,  to  flap  £>autb  tbithout 
acauftf 

6  3lnb  5>aul  hcarKcnco  bttto  the 
toopce  of  Jonathan;  anb  «§>attl  ftoare, 
5lsthc!Lois©liucth ,  htihallnotbe 
flame. 

7  3nb  Jonathan  callcb  2Dautb, 
anb  Jonathan  fljeibcb  hun  all  thofe 
things:  anb^JonathanbJoughtSDauib 
toSjaul.anbhcVbastnhiSp^cfcncc,  as 
tin  times  pad. 

8  Onb 


I  Hrbr.pre- 
CWH4, 


Mudg.9. 
I  7.  and  1  2 
5. chap.  28 
zi.plalm. 
ilp.iop. 


f  Hthr.je- 
fterdy, 
third  d at. 


\Hcb.hu 
face. 


Dauid  efcapeth.         Chap.xx.       Saulpropheiieth, 


8  C  2nD  there  was  warre agame, 
anD  2>auiD  went  out,  anD  fought  with 
tbe^biUftines,  ano  dew  them  With  a 
great  daughter ,  9  they  Acd  from  t  him. 

9  3nD  the  euill  Qjtctt  from  the 
|L  0  «  ©  was  bpon  S>m\ ,  as  be  fate  m 
bis  boufe  Wttb  bis  lauclm  m  bis  banD : 
anD  2>auiD  placet)  With  his  banD. 

10  3nD  Saul  fought  to  finite  2>auiD 
euen  to  the  Wall  With  ti)e  lauctm:  but 
hee  dipt  away  out  of  Sauls  pzefcncc, 
anDbcfmotetbeiaueun  into  toe  mall: 
anb  DauiD  fleo,  anD  cftapco  ttjat  tugbt. 

11  Saul  alfo  fcnt  mcffcngcrs  bnto 
SDauiDsboufcto  watch  btm,anD  to  day 
Dim  in  the  morning:  anD  $)icbai  2>a- 
uiDS  tdifc  tolDc  I)im, faying,  3Jf tbou 
faue  not  trjp  life  to  tugbt ,  to  mo2roW 
thou  fbalt  be  dame. 

iz  CSo£Picballet3r>atiiDDownc 
tl)020W  a  WinDoW :  anD  bcc  Went  anD 
flcD,anDcfrapcD. 

ij  31nD&)icbaitooltc  an  image,  ano 
laiD  u  mtbcbebDe,  anD  put  a  pillow  of 
goats  banc  foi  bis  bolder,  anD  coucreD 
it  With  a  cloth. 

1+  2inD  When  Saul  reutmcflengers 
to  take  2DautD,lbc  faiD,l?c  is  ftrttc. 

15  3inD  Saul  fcnt  the  metfengcrs 
agame  to  fcc3DauiD,  raymg,  2821115  bun 
bp  to  me  m  the  btDDc ,  that  3  may  flay 
bun. 

16  3nD  Vbhcn  toe  mcfrcngcrs  nitre 
come  in,  bcl)olD ,  there  was  an  image  m 
tfjc  beD ,  With  a  pillow  of  goatcs  banc 
fo:  Ins  bolder. 

17  3nD  Saul  faiD  onto  fl0iciial,nDln» 
baft  tbou  DcteitieD  mc  fo ,  anD  fcnt  away 
mine  cncmic ,  that  he  is  cfcapcD  t  3nD 
£0icbal  anfwcreD  Saul ,  tocefaiD  unto 
mc ,  ?Lct  mcc  goc ,  ©by  fl)oulD  J  Bill 
thee? 

18  C£>o2DauiDfleDDe,anDefcapcD, 
anD  came  to  Samuel  to  Bamah ,  anD 
tolD  him  all  that  Saul  haD  D  one  to  him: 
anDhecanD  Samueiwcnt ,  anDDtbclt 

m  jftaioth. 

19  3MDitWastolDSatil,faying,28e; 

holD ,  2>auiD  ^at  jiSaiotb  in  ftamab. 

io  3lnD  Saul  fcnt  mcffcngcrs  to 
tanc  SDatttD :  anD  When  they  taWe  the 
company  of  the  ^zophcts  pzophecping, 
anD  Samuel  ftanDmg  as  appotntcD  o- 
uer  them ,  the  Spirit  of  <3oD  was  Upon 
the  meffengcrs  of  Saul ,  anD  ttjev  alfo 
pzophecieD. 

21  SmowbcmtwastoiDe  Saul,  he 
fcnt  other  meffengcrs^no  they  pzopbe- 
ctcD  liRerbife:aiiD  Saul  fentmeflen 


gcrs  agame  the  tbirD  nme ,  anD  they 
pjopbencDalfo. 

11  Xbcn  Went  bcc  alfo  to  &amab, 
anD  came  to  a  great  Well  that « m  Se< 
ehu:  anDbc  afucD,  anD  faiD,  ©here are 
Samuel  anD  jDauio ;  3nD  one  faiD.aSC' 
bolD,tbey  bcat43aiotbin&amab. 

ij  3ud  bee  went thitherto  jftaiotb 
in  Hiamab :  anD  the  Spirit  of  <5oD  was 
upon  him  alfo,  anD  he  went  on  anD  pjo- 
phcclcD  bntill  hee  came  to  /fraiotb  m 
3&amab : 

2+  3nDbcdrtptotThisclotbcsaifo, 
anD  pjopheneD  bcfoic  Samuel  in  like 
manner , anD  t  lay  DoWnc  uaacD  all  that 
Day,  anD  all  that  ntght :  ibhcr  cfiwc  they 
fay,  *  3Js  Saul  alfo  among  the  pw 
pbcts; 

CHAP.   XX. 

1  Dauid  confuhcth  with  Ionattun  for  his  fife- 
tie.  11  Ionathan  and  Dauid  renew  their  co- 
uenantbyoath.  IS  IonathanstokentoDa- 
uid.  14  Saul  mifsing  Dauid,  feeketh  to  kill 
Ionaihan.  35  Ioiudianlouingly  taketh  his 
Ieaue  of  Dauid. 

ii5D  SDauiDflcDfromjftat-- 
otbm  &amab,  anD  came 
anDfaiDbcfo2cg)onathan, 
nahat  haue  3J  Done?  What 
is  mine  iniquity  ?  anD  What 
is  my  finnc  before  thy  father  ,ttjatf)e  fee 
BCthmylife* 

%  3lnDhefaiDbntohim,c5oDfo2biD, 
thou  njaitnotDic;  bcholDc,  my  father 
Will  Doc  nothing,  either  great  oi  fmail, 
but  that  he  Will  t  (hew  it  mc :  anD  Why 
fboulD  my  father  hiDe  this  thmg  from 
i  mentis  not  fo. 

j  ^nD2DauiDfwaremo2couer,anD 
faiD,  IChy  fatljet  tcrtcmly  nnoWcth 
ithat  "J  haue  foiuiD  grace  in  thine  eyes, 
;  anD  h  e  fay  th  ,1Lct  no  1 3  onathan  bno  w 
tins,  left  he  be  gcicucD :  but  rrucly,  as  the 
%  ©  «  ©  liucth,  ano  as  rhy  foule  liueth, 
there  '5  butaftepbctWccnemcf  Death. 
4.  Xhen  faiD  3  onathan  buto  2D* 
hid  ,  ||  nabatfocuer  thy  foulc  tDcCcctJ), 
J3  Will  euenboe  it  fozthec. 

5  3lnD  ©auiDfatD  bnto  Jonathan, 
25cholD,to  morrow  is  thenewmoone, 
anD  3  (homo  not  ratle  to  fit  with  the 
King  at  meatc :  but  let  mc  goe ,  that  3 
may  hiDe  my  fclfc  m  the  ficlDs  bnto  the 
tbitDDayatcuen. 

6  'Jf  thy  father  at  ail  mtffcmcthcn 
fay,  2DauiD  eamcQly  afBcD  icaueof  mc 
that  he  might  runnc  to  25etblebem  bis 

2>D  z  Cltie: 


t  Hei.frH. 
"Chip.  Io. 


f  Heb.  vnco- 

utrmtnc 

exre. 


tvbal  it  thy 
•ntni^itid  I 
wttldoe,&-c 

k?lh,ortbtr.. 
kt'h. 


Jonathans  couenant    I.Samuel. 


withDauid. 


\Ol,fcfi- 


•Chip.i! 
j.and  13. 
1 3. 


t  Htb.fitr- 
chtd. 


\H,b.vn- 
coucr  thine 
cert. 


\titi.t»t. 


lOt.bjhii 

loitetvwstrii 

him. 


\H<t.mifJ 


otic:  fo^there  is  a  veetci^  11  facnficc  ttjccc 
fo?ailtt)cfamtlp. 

7  jjjfbefapthti5,itistbcll,thpfct; 
uantfbalibaucpeacc:  butif  be  be  bet? 
tbjofb,  tljtnftcttttc  that  einll  is  Deter- 
mined  bp  bun. 

8  ^hercfomboufhaltbcaie&inblp 
nritb  tbp  fcruant)fo?*tboubaQ  brought 
tbp  fetuant  into  a  couenant  of  the 
1L©kj©  unci)  thee:  nonbitbttanbuig, 
if  there  be  in  me  uuguitic ,  nap  me  tbp 
felfc:  fo?  Vbbp  (bombed  thou  bjtngmc 
to  tbp  father* 

9  3md  ^Jonathan  fafb ,  if  arte  be  it 
ftomfbcctfo?  if  3  fenctb  ccrtainelp  that 
euill  tticrc  determined  bp  mp  father  to 
come  bpon  thee,  then  ibould  not3Jteil 
it  thee. 

10  •SCbcn  Caib  S>auib  to  Jonathan, 
naholballtellmc*  ojtbbat  if  tbp  father 
anfujercfbccrougblp* 

11  C  2mb  Jonathan  faib  totuo  Da? 
uib,  Come,  and  let  bs  goe  out  mto  the 
fielb.  3tnb  tbeptbent  out  both  of  them 
into  the  field. 

12  2(nd  Jonathan  raid  bnto  2>auid, 
£>  %®kw>  d5ob  of  gjfrael,  lbben  3 
bauc  t  founded  mp  father ,  about  to 
mojrotb  anptimc,ortbcrt)itddap,and 

bCl)Olb,if  there  be  gOOb  tOlbatb  2DaUld, 

anb  3  then  fenb  not  bnto  thee,  anb 
tfbeibitthee; 

1  j  3Ebe  ILfiDiR©  boc  To  anb  mud) 
mojc  to  ^Jonathan :  but  if  ttpleafe  mp 
father  to  boc  thee  cmll,then3J  lbtl  fliett) 
it  thee,  anb  fenb  thee  atbap,  that  thou 
mapeftgoclnpeace,anbtbe?L£[>i5©bc 
nritb  tijec ,  ajsbee  hart)  bcenc  ttritb  mp 
father. 

14.  3nb  thou  (bait  not  onelp  rbhrte 
vet 35  hue,  (helb  mcthcfembncfTe  of  the 
%  ©  a  »,  rtjat  3  btc  not : 

15  ffiut  aifo  thou  (halt  not  tut  off  tbp 
Htnbneffe  from  mp  houfc  fo?  cucr :  no 
nottt)hcnthcfLoi5©hathcut  off  the 
enemies  of  SDauib ,  euerp  one  from  the 
fate  of  the  earth. 

is  5>o  "Jonathan  tmaoc  a  couenam 
tbith  the  boufe  of  DauuVaying.lLettbe 
fL©i»£>  cucnreciuirc  itattbebandcof 
Dambs  enemies. 

17  3lnd  Jonathan  taufeb  2>auibto 
fiacareagamc,  llbccaufe  he  loucbhim: 
foi  hcloncb  bun  as  be  loucb  his  oibnr 
Coule. 

is  Hlben  gionathan  fatd  to  £>amd, 
%o  nwroib  is  the  ncibc  moonc :  anb 
tboufyaltbcmiflcD^ccaurcthpfcatrbil 

bctcmntir. 


betemprtc. 


19  31nd  ttrijentbou  haft  ftaped  tb?cc 
dapes  ,  then  thou  (halt  goe  boibne 
"  duicblp,  anb  tome  to  the  plate  tbbcte 
thou  diddctt  bide  tbp  fclfe,  t  lbben  the 
buuneffe  rbas  in  hand,and  Cbaitrcmaine 
bptbeftone|l<£5cl. 

20  ^nbgibtllfboottbjecatrorbes; 
on  the  Gbe  thereof,  as  though  3  tbotat 

21  3ndbebolo,3Jibillfendaiadde, 
faying,  (Sot ,  find  out  the  arroibcs.  3If 
3  crpieflp  fav  bnto  the  iaD,25cbolb,tbe 
artoVbes  are  on  this  fide  of  thee,  taue 
them:  then  cometbou,fo?tbcretspcace 
to  thee,  anb  t  no  hurt,  as  the  Hdisjd 
liucrt). 

12  26ut  if  3  Cap  thus  bnto  the  pong 
man,  ascbold,  thearrotbes  arebepono 
thee :  goe  tbp  ibap,fo2fbe  JUMS3e>hatb 
fnuthceaTbay. 

ij  anDastouchingthematttrrbbith 
thouano3)hauefpobenof,  bcholb,rhc 
1L©a©  bebetibecnc  ttjee  anb  mccfo? 
euer. 

24  CS>o3DauibWbhimrclfcmfbc 
fielb :  anb  tt»hen  the  netbe  moone  lbas 
tome,  tbeftingfatehun  bottsne  to  eate 
meate. 

25  ^nbtheftmgfatcbponhisfeatc, 
asat  ortjer  times, eucn  bpon  a  featcbp 
the  tbail:  anb^Jonathan  arofe,anb  ^b? 
ner  fate  bp  sauis  Obe,  anb  2>autbs 
plate  lbas  emptte. 

26  ji3euerthcleu*e,  5>aul  fpafec  not 
anp  thing  that  bap :  fo?  h«  thought, 
Something  hart)  befallen  him,  heels 
nottlcane ;  furelphetsnotrteane. 

27  ^nbittametopaHeonthemo^ 
roib  which  was  the  fecond  bap  of  rt)e 
moneth,  that  2Dauibs  piattibasemp* 
tic:  anb^aulfaib  bnto  Jonathan  his 
fonne ,  i©berefo?e  tommeth  not  rtjc 
fonncof  3fette  to  meat,  neither  peller 
dap  no*  to  bap* 

28  3nb3lonathananfrbtrcbS>aul, 
S>auib  eanicftlp  affecb  icaue  of  mc,to  goe 
toasctblcbem. 

29  ^nbhcfatb,|Letmegoe,5P?ap 
thee,  fo?  our  fanuue  hart)  a  facnficc  in 
the  cltie,  anb  mp  toother,  hec  hath  com 
manbed  mcc  to  be  there:  and  noib  if  3 
hauc  found  fauour  mthme  eyes,  let  me 
get  au>ap,3J  piap  thee,  andfec  mp  tyv 
th?en :  Xberefoje  he  tommcrt)  not  btv 
to  the  Rings  table. 

30  XhcnS>auls  anger  lbas  Btnblcb 
againll^onathan,  anb  hce  faid  bnto 
him,!!1l!houfonneofrt)epcruerfcttbfl5 
i  lious  woman,  noc  not  5  rmoib  that  tljou 

'     haft 


g'ftlj.  HcK 

grtttlj. 

|  Hekinthc 

cbtyofihe 

bn[>ncfie. 

\Or,thu 

finrcihthe 

V- 


f  HtijKl 


(Or,  that 

ptrurrfe 

rtbdt.Htb. 

feimtcfftr- 

MeTjtrthtU 


Jonathans  kindneflc.  Chap.xxj.         Dauid  at  Nob. 


\Hii.  inh 

fomeef 

death. 


t  Heir,  lo 
bin. 


\Hcb.i*. 

fintmejits, 
f  Heir,  ibu 
WIS  his, 


I1 0^  The 
Lord  be 
witticize  of 

ihet  which, 
drr. 


haft  chofen  the  tonne  of  JJcCTc  to  thine 

oinnc  confufion,  anD  tonto  the  confufion 
of  t|)v  mothers  naucDncflei 

31  jfojaslongasthefonneof'Jcffe 
liticthtopon  thcgrounD,thou  fbaitnot 
be  ftabIi(hcD,no?  thy  tringDome:  inhere? 
fo?e  nott)  fcnoanD  fetch  hiuumtomee, 
fo?  ftc  t  Ojall  furrtp  Die. 

J^  3lnD  Jonathan  anftbcreD  £>atil 
his  father,  ano  fatu  bnto  him,  Wbctt 
fo?c  Chaiihcc  be  Came*  ibhat  hath  hec 
Done; 

33  2(nt>  ;§>aul  eatt  a  iauclin  at  him  to 
finite  Dtm ,  ibhcrcby  Jonathantmcibc 
tljat  itlbasDctcrouneD  of  his  father  to 
aay2>auiD. 

34  ^ojottathanarofefcomthctas 
ble  in  fierce  anger ,  anD  did  eatc  no  meat 
the  fcconD  Day  of  the  moneth :  fo?  hce 
ibasgncucD  ft?  sxuiid  ,  bctaufc  his  fa* 
thethaD Done him  (haute. 

35  C3i'Dttcaiuctopaffeinthento;b 
ning,  thatjonathan  ibent  outtnto  tfjc 
fielD,at  the  time  appointco  ttuth  S>autD, 
anoaiittie  laDDcunth  him. 

36  3lnDhcfaiDtmtohisiaD,  Kttnnc, 
Rudc  ont  notti  the  arroincs  ibhich  3 
ffoootc.  3ntDasthe  iaDDcrantie,hcfhot 
anarrolbtbcyonDhim, 

37  3ttD  Ibljen  tlje  laDDe  ibas  tome 
totl)epiatcoftl)earrolb,tbI)icl)3ona5 
than  hao  fl)ot,  Jonathan  ttyeo  after 
thciaDDc,attDfatD,  31s  not  the  arrott 
bcyonDthec< 

38  3lnD  Jonathan  eryco  after  the 
.aDDc,^aBcfpccD,haftc,ttaynot.3lnD 
Jonathans  laDDe  gather  to  top  the  ar* 
roibcs,  anD  tame  to  his  matter. 

39  2Snt  the laD  Hnrtl) notatty thing : 
onely  Jonathan  anD3)atuD  anelbthe 
matter. 

40  3nD  Jonathan  gaue  his  tartil* 
tcrp  tonto  t  ijts  laoDcanD  faiD  tonto  him, 
<Soc,  carp  them  to  the  cific. 

41  C^nDaflboncasthelaDDclbas 
gone,  SDauiD  arofc  out  of  a  place  tolbarD 
the  S>outh ,  anu  fell  on  his  fate  to  the 
grouuD ,  ano  boitocD  himfelfc  ttnee 
tunes:  ano  they  RtffcD  one  another, 
anD  ibept  one  ibtth  another,  tonttll  3D& 

UiDCtCCCDCD. 

4x  2inD  Jonathan  faiD  to  2>atitD, 
(Socui peace,  Hfozafinuch as  ibeehaue 
finomc  both  of  tos  tn  the  j!5amc  of  the 
%  s>  is  ?D,faying ;  %i)t  %  o  is  &  be  be* 
titoccnc  meanbthccanDbetlbecnc  nip 
fceDcanDthyfccDc  fojeucr.  3lnDhce  a? 
rofe,  ano  DcpartcD  :  anD  Jonathan 
uocnt  into  the  ntie. 


CHAP.   XXI. 

i  Dauid  at  N  ob ,  obta  iuetli  of  Ahimelech  hal- 
lowed bread.  7  Doegwasprefent.  8  Da- 
uid takcthGoliathsfword.  10  Dauid  at  Gath 
faineth  himlelte  madde. 

$cn  tame  SDauiD  to  J12oo, 
to  3himcleth  the  |§neft, 
anD  3lhunciech  Ibas  a* 
fraiDc  at  the  meeting  of 
S>auiD,anD  faiD  Dnto  htm, 
a)h? art  thou  alone,  ano  no  manunth 
thecsr 

^  3tnD  SDauiD  faiD  nnto  Ahimelech 
tljc^neft,  %hc  Ring  hath  tomn«anDcD 
me  a  butmeOc ,  anD  hath  faiD  into  me, 
%tt  no  man  nnoiD  anything  of  the  bit* 
fmeffc  Whereabout  3J  feno  tljcc,  anD 
lohat^hauccommanDcD  tljce:  anD  31 
hauc  appomtcD  my  f truants  to  fuch  anD 
fuchapiacc. 

3  i5oVb  therefor  mhat  is  bnDer 
thine  hanD  ;gtiic  me  fine  loaucsotlBcaD 
mminchanD,o?H)hatthcrcistp?efent. 

4  :3nDthei&feftanfu)ereDDauiD, 
anDfaiD,  Xhere  is  no  common  tyeao 
bnDcrminchanD,butthcre(s*haUorb' 
eD  bjcao :  if  the  voung  men  hauc  sept 
themfciucs  atlcaftfcomiuomen. 

5  3lnD  2>auiD  anfujcrcD  the  ^?icft, 
anD  faiD  bnto  him,  <©fatructh*bomcn 
haue  bcenc  ucpt  from  bs  about  thefc 
thjee  Daves,  fincc  3  came  out, ano  the 
bcflelsof  the  young  men  arc  holy,  anD 
the  bread  is  in  a  manner  common ,  ||  yea, 
though  it  IDcrcfancttficD  this  Daym  the 
bcffcll. 

6  &o  the  $ncft ganchimhaiiotbeD 
bread;  fojthcrcrbasno  b?eaD  there,  but 
the  ;§>he-ibb?caD  that  Ibas  taaen  from 
before  tlje  %  ©  is  ©,to  pnt  hote  b?eaD  m 
the  Day  ibhcn  it  Ibas  taaen  aibay. 

7  iI5otti  a  tertaine  man  of  the  fer- 
uants  of^ani  wastherethatDay,Dctai* 
ncD  before  the  %®m&,  anD  his  name 
was  s>ocg  an  eDomitc,the  tbicftft  of  the 
hcarDmen  that  belonged  to  ibanl. 

8  C^ud  2>auiD  faiD  Unto  ^himt* 
led),  3nD  is  there  nothcreiJUDcrthmc 
IjanD  fpearc  oj  fmo?D  i  fo?  3  hauc  net? 
ther  b?ouoJS)t  my  frooiD  no?  my  ibea* 
ponsnnth  mee,  bctaufethe  amgs  buftv 
ucffcrcquircDhaftc. 

9  ^nD  the  ^neft  faiD,  Xhc  frao?D  of 
©oliath  the  pju^hne,lbhomc  thou 
fleU)eftin*theballeyof«iah,bcholD, 
it  is  hceteityapt  tna  cloth  bchmDe  the 
ephoD :  tfthou  UiilttaRc  that,  taken, 
fo?  there  is  no  other  fauc  that,herc.3lnD 

2DD  3  3>amD 


\HtifsurJL 


"Exod.iy. 
;o.  leuic. 
24  c.tnatt* 
12.4. 


ally  whe  thu 
d.Tj  there if 
OiheTfinSi* 
fieJmlhe 

vejptl. 


•Chap. 
17.2. 


Dauidfecmethmad.  LSamucl.         Doegsvillenie. 


•Chap.i?. 
7  and  29.5. 
ccclus.^7. 
6. 


||  Ormaie 
m*rkfi. 


\Or,pUytth 
the  mud- 


ttt/r.W 
a  crtdttottr. 
fHdr.i,,:- 
tcrofftmlc. 


2?atub  fatbe ,  Xhcrc  \s  none  itfcc  that, 
gtucitme. 

10  C3inb3>auibarofc,  anb  flcb  that 
bay,fo?  fcarcof  Saul,  anbrbcnttoSC* 
rittuVbelnngofoatb. 

1 1  3lnD  the  fcruants  of  3ichifl)  fayb 
bnto  him,  3}snot  tbts2>auib  the  King 
oftbeiattb;  2>tb  tt)cv  not  ftng  one  to 
another  of  htm  m  Banners ,  faying, 
*  Saul  bath  flame  his  tboulanbs ,  anb 
2DauiDhistcntt)oufanDS; 

ii  3utb  2>aniD  layb  top  tbcfc  lboibes 
in  bis  heart,  anbibasfoje  afratbof  ar- 
chill) the  fting  of  ©atb. 

ij  2tnb  he  cbangcb  bis  bebauiouc  be* 
f02Ctbem ,  anb  fatneb  btmfclfc  mab  tn 
tbeitbanbs,anb||rcrablet)ontbcboo2es 
of  the  gatcanb  let  Ijis  fptttlcfau  boibtte 
bponbtsbcarb. 

14  -Chen  faibe  Sicbifl)  bnto  bisfers 
uants,  2Loc,  yourcctbcman||ts  mab: 
lbbcrcfojc  then  fjauc  yce  brought  bun 
to  nice i 

15  Mnc3JnecbofmaDmen,tbatye 
bauc  brought  tins  fciiotti  to  play  the 
mab  man  tn  niy  pzeftnte  <  Shall  this 
feUow  tome  into  my  bottfe; 

CHAP.  xxir. 

1  Companies  reibrtvntoDauid  at  Adullam.  3 
AtMizpeh  he commendethhis parents vnto 
theKingofMoab.  5  AdmonifhedbyGad, 
heccommeth  to  Hareth.  6  Saul  going  to 
purfuc  him,  complainethof  his  fcruants  vn- 
taithfulneiTe.  9  Doegaccufeth  Ahimclech. 
11  SaulcomandethtokilthePriefts.  17  The 
footmen  refufing.Doegcxecutedi  it.  20  A- 
biathar  efcaping,bringeth  Dauid  thenewes. 

3tutb  therefore  bepartcbi 
thence ,  anb  eftapeb  to  the 
taue  3buliam :  anbibbcn 
bis  b2ct!)2en,anb  all  bis  fa« ! 
tbersboufcbcarbit ,  tbey 
ibcntboibnc  thither  to  htm. 

i  3htb  cttcry  one  that  wasmbiftcefle, 
ano  eticry  one  that  r  was  m  bebt,anb  cuc^ 
ry  one  that  was  ttnfcontcntcD.gatbcrcb 
fbcmrclucsbnto  htm ,  anb  he  became  a 
taptamc  oner  them  :  anb  there  lbcre 
Untb  htm  about  four  c  hunbjcb  men. 

3  C  3lnD  2>autb  went  thence  to 
£0i5pch  of  H]9oab;  auD  hcfaibbntothc 
hingoftBoab,  Itetmy  father,  anbmy 
mother  ,5  piay  thcc,comc  fcwtb,^  be 
Untbyoti,  tui3J  imoibibljatGobrbtli 
Doefojuie. 

4  3lnD  he  brought  them  befojetbe 
luugcfiJPoab:  anb  they  blbclt  lbirh 


htm  all  the  tuhilc  that  2>autb  lbastn 
tbcbolb. 

5  €  3utD  the  i&opbct  Oab  fatb  bn 
to2r>autb^bibenotmtheholb,bcpart, 
anb  get  thee  into  the  lanb  of  3uibab. 
1Chen  2>auib  beparteb ,  anb  came  into 
tbefo2reftof$aretb. 

6  C  naben  Saul  bcarb  that  2>antb 
ibas  bifcouercb ,  anb  the  men  that  were 
lbttb  hint :  ( ttotb  Saul  abobe  in  c5i= 
beat)  bnbet  a  |  tree  tn  Sternal) ,  baiting 
blsfpcarein  hishanb ,  anb  all  his  fee* 
uantsibcrcftattDtng  about  him.) 

7  %\)t\\  Saul  faibc  bnto  his  fcr; 
uants  that  ftoob  about  htm ,  $care 
noib,  ye  26etuamitcs :  nartl  the  fonnc  of 
3felTegiuc  cuery  oneofyouficlbs,anb 
5lltncyarD6,  and  maftc  you  all  captaines 
of  thoufanbs,  anb  captaines  of  hnn= 
b2ebs: 

8  3Ehat  all  of  youhaue  confpircb a* 
gatnlt  mc,anb  there  is  none  that  t  njcuj- 
cth  mee ,  that  my  fonnc  hath  mabe  a 
league  Vbtrt)  the  fonne  of  3Jcu*c ,  anb 
there  is  none  of  you  that  iswjy  fo*  me, 
0?  O^rtbcth  bnto  me  that  my  fonnc  hath 
Oirr cb  bp  my  fcruant  againft  mc,  to  lye 
inrbatt,asatthtsDay< 

9  C  Xhcn  anfracreb  IDocg  the  €< 
bomitc ,  ( Vbhifh  ibas  fct  oucrthefee* 
uants  of  S>aui)anb  tatbe ,  3  fa\b  the 
fonnc  of  3Jcu*ctommingto  |5ob,  to^= 
himelcth  the  fonnc  of  ^httnb. 

io  2lnb  hec  cnciuircb  of  the  %e>  n  2> 
f02  him ,  anb  gauehmt  bictuals ,  anb 
gauc  htm  the  froojtb  of  ©oltatlj  the  phf 
Uftinc. 

n  XhenthcKtngfenttotall^himc* 
lech  the  £2tcu\  the  fonnc  of  3Jhitub,anb 
all  hts  fathers  houfe ,  the  p2icfts  that 
were  m  i!5ob :  anb  they  came  all  of  them 
tothefttng. 

ii  anb&anlfaib,i)?earenotbthou 
fonnc  of  ^httub :  anb  hee  anftocreb, 
t^crc3Jani,mylo2D. 

ij  3Mb  s>aui  fatbc  bnto  him ,  naby 
hauc  yc  confpircb  agamftmc ,  thou  ano 
thcfonncof'Jcu~e,mthattboubaftgi; 
ucn  htm  bjcab,  anb  a  frooib,  anb  haft 
enqutr cb  of  <E»ob  fo2  hitn,tljat  he  fboulb 
rife  agatnft  mee,  to  lye  m  rbaitc,  as  at 
this  bay? 

14-  1Ehen  3fl)imclech  anfwereb  the 
Sing,  anb  fatb,  3lnbtbho  is  fo  faithfuil 
among  all  thy  feruants ,  as  2>auib, 
ibhtchis  the  lungs  fonne  tn  latti ,  anb 
gocth  at  tljy  biobtng ,  anb  is  honou- 
rable in  chute  houfe; 

15  2Dtb  3)  then  begmne  to  enquire  of 

<BDH 


\Or,froue  in 
a  hit  place. 


f  Hclv.vn- 
coucreth 
mint  (art. 


t  Heb.it~ 

hoidme. 


Sauls  crueltie.  Chap.xxiij.      Dauid  in  Keilah. 


\HtbrMtlc 

cr great. 


(Or,  giurd. 

Hcb.ihc 


d5obfo?lnm  i  be  it  farre  from  mee:  let 
not  ftje  Btng  impute  an?  tiling  into  Ijis 
feruant,  nor  to  all  tl)c  Ijoufe  of  in?  fa= 
tber :  fojtbv  feruant  imcibnotbmg  of 
ailtljts,tlcueo?nwe. 

16  2inbtbc  ftingfaibc ,  Xbou  (bait 
furelp  etc,  2Ujimclcclj,  tbou>ahb  all  tljy 
fatljcrsboufc. 

17  c  3tnb  tljc  fting  fait)  fcnto  ti)t 
J  footmen  tbat  ftoob  about  bmi.Xutne 
anb  flap tbepnetts  of  tbe?LomjD,be; 
taufc  tbeir  banb  alfo  is  ttntlj  £>auib,anb 
bccaurctljcvmtcn)ibbcnljeflcb,anbbib 
not  fbcib  it  to  mcc.  But  tl)e  fcruants 
of  tljc  King  iboulb  not  put  fiwtl)  tljetr 
Daub  to  fall  upon  tljc^nclrcs  of  tijc 

18  3nbtbcfetngfaibto£>ocg,Xurnc 
tljou  anb  fall  bpon  tljc  piHcfrs,  3lnb 
SDocg  tljc  CDonutc  ttirneb,  anb  Ijce  fell  | 
ppontbc  i&icfrs,  anb  flctt)  on  tbat  bay ! 
foure  fco?c  anb  fine  pcrfons  tbat  bib 
iPcarcaunncn€pljob. 

19  3inb  0o\3  tljc  citic  of  tijc  i&lefts 
fmotc  ije  ibifb  tbc  cbgc  of  tlje  froo?b, 
botb  men  anb  ibomcn,  cljilbjcn  anb, 
fucKlings ,  anb  open  anbaffes,  anb 
fliccpc,  totlj  tljc  cbgc  of  tljefroojb. 

20  C3luboneoftbefonncsof3fni; 
mclcclj,tbcfonnc  of  3tbitub,  namcbSi* 
btatljar,  eftapeb  anb  fleb  after  2>auib : 

21  3nb  abiatbar  ujeibcb  2Dauib 
tljat  5>aul  tab  aamc  tlje  %&&&& 

i&nefts.  M     , 

22  aiib&aiubraibbnto^biafOar, 

3  tmclb  it  tl)at  bay,  ibben  2E>ocg  tlje  <&-- 
t>omitc\bastbcrc,  tljat  be  lboulbfurcly 
tell  Saul:  3  baue  occafioncb  the  death 
of  all  tbc  pcrfons  of  tljvfatbcrsboufc. 
2j  Slbibe  tijou  lbitfj  me ,  fcatc  not : 
fo?  Ije  tbat  feebctb  my  life,  feebcttj  tliv 
life :  but  tttittj  me  tljou  fbalt  bee  tn  fate 
garb. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

Dauid  enquiring  of  the  Lord  by  Abiathar, 
refcueth  Keilah.  7  God  (hewing  him  the 
comming  of  Saul  and  the  trecherie  of  the 
Keilites,  he  efcapeth  from  Keilah.  14  InZiph 
Ionathan  commeth  and  comfoi  tech  him.  i<? 
The  Ziphites  difcouer  him  to  Saul.  15  At 
MaonheisrefcuedfrornSaulby  theinuafion 
of  thePhiliflines.  19  He  dwclleth  at  En-gedi. 

teentbcytolb  2Dauib,  fay* 
tng,  26cDolbe,  tljc  pbxfc 
(hues  figl)t  againft  ikei* 
iab,anbtIjcyrobtbetb?e* 
a  fl)ingfloo2CS. 
2  XbercfojclMuibraquitcboftbe 


fLiBJRPjayingSbaiigjgoanbfinite 
tljcfe  0biUlmics?  3iub  tbc  iteisjsfaib 
bntoDauib,<soc,  annfmttc  tljc  $ljn> 
(lines,  anb  fane  laetlal). 

j  3lub  SDauibs  men  faib  bnto  bim, 
Bcfjolb,  \u  be  afcasb  ijerc  m  3Jubalj : 
Ijolb  mttclj  mozctbcniflbec  come  to 
mciialj  againft  tljc  armies  of  tijc  $\)\iv 
fhncs? 

4.  Xben  2Dauib  cncuiitcb  of  tljc 
%  <d  r>  d  vet  agatnc :  2lnD  tn  c  %  o  b  © 
anfiocrcb  l)im,aiib  faib ,  3Jnfe,go  boibn 
to  Berialj :  fin  3  ibtil  beliucr  tljc  y>Du> 
mucsititotl)mcl)anb. 

5  5)0  S>autb  anb  lus  men  \bcnt to 
Beilal),anbfouglnib:tl)  tljc  ^miimns, 
anb  biougUt  aibav  tfjcircattcll,anb 
fmotc  tncmibttl)  a  great  flauglncr:  fo 
S>atub  faucb  tljc  inDabitants  of  3&ci= 
lal). 

6  3lnb  it  tame  to  paffc  ibftcn  ^fbia^ 
tbar  tl)c  fonne  of  ^Ijimelccfj  *  fleb  to 
2Dauio  to  isciial),  tlut  ijcetamcbovbne 
with  an  €pl)ob  m  l)is  Ijanb. 

7  C3nbitibastolb<§>aultl)ats>a? 
uib  lbas  tome  to  Bciial) :  anb  £>m\ 
faib,  <3ob  Ijatl)  bcliucrcb  Ijim  into  mine 
l)anb :  fod  fjc  is  ftjut  in ,  bp  en tr mg  into  a 
toibnc  mat  ijatn  gates  anb  bar  r  cs. 

8  3mb£>anlcallcb  all  trje  people  to^ 
gctljcr  to  ruarre,  to  goe  boVbnc  to  Bet* 
lal),  to  bcficgcSDauib,  anb  bis  men. 

9  C3mb  ©atub  Hticibc  tfiat  Saul 
fctrctlv  p^amfeb  tmfctjicfc  againft  Ijim, 
anb  Ijcc  faib  to  ^biatljar  tljc  pnift, 
25jing  l)itl)crtfje€pljob. 

io  %\)tn  faibc  2>atub ,  £>  %  isdk© 
Cob  of  3ifraci ,  tby  fcruaut  i)atlj  tcr« 
tauilv  bcarb  tljat  5>aui  fccUctl)  to  tome 
to  l&ctialj ,  to  beftrop  tljc  citic  fo?  my 
fahc. 

1 1  i©iil  tljc  men  of  Bcilan  bcliuer  me 
bp  into  Ins  Ijanbc*  ibtll&atil  tojne 
Doibuc,  astljv  fcruaut  Ijatlj  bcarb ,  ^D 
fL©m©  d5oo  of  3fraeli  3  befceeb 
tbec  tell  tbv  fcruaut.  ^nbtljc  JL©iaj2> 
faib,  m  U)ill  tome  boibne. 

12  iLljcnfaib2>aiiib,n3illtbeniniof 
l&ciiabtncitucr  me,  anb  my  men,  into 
tbcljanb  of  S>mu  ^nb  tljc  %&&%> 
faib,XbcvU)iUbcliucrtbccbp. 

13  CXbcnSDauibanbbismen^vhich 
were  aooututc  Duubzeb,  arofe,  anb  be? 
partcb  out  oflkcilab ,  anb  Ibcnt  lbbi* 
tljcrfoeucr  tljcv  toulb  goe:  anb  ttvbas 
tolb  5>aul  tljat  Dauib  was  efcapcb 
from  Beualj ,  anb  Dee  fo?barc  to  goe 
foojtb. 

14-  ^nb  2Daaib  abobc  in  tfje  tbilbcr- 

neffe 


•Chap.  J 1. 


\HibrJhut 
vg. 


DauidUWiuered,       I.Samuel.  fparcthSauI. 


t  He  br.  on 

theri^ht 

hand. 

Or.thevril- 
iernege! 


t  Hebfeolc 


ncucmtrronghoios,  anb  remamcb  in 
a  mountameinthclbtlbctnes  of  Ziph: 
.mis  Saul  fought  him  euety  bay,  but 
©ob  bcliucrcb  tjini  not  into  his  hanb. 

15  2nD  Damn  fatb  that  Saul  ibas 
come  out  to  fecttc  his  life :  anb  SDauib 
wasmtheibtlbcrnesofztphinaiboob. 

16  C2lnb  Jonathan  Sauls  fonne 
arofc,  %  ibent  to  SDauib  uitothciboob, 
ant)  (tr  cngtheucb  his  hanb  in  ©ot). 

17  Slnbhefaib  bnto  himJFearc  not; 
fo?  tDc  hanb  of  Saul  nip  father  fbail 
notnnbcfhee,anbthoufbaltbclungo'' 
uer  Jfrael,  anb  3  fl)all  be  nert  bnto 
thee :  anb  that  alfo  Saul  my  father 
unotbeth. 

is  3lnb  they  ttbo  mabe  a  untenant 
bcfc»c  the  %  o  13  id  :  anb  SDauib  abobc 
in  the  lboob ,  anb  Jonathan  ibent  to 
hishoufc. 

19  C  XOen  tame  bp  the  Ziphitcs  to 
Saultoc5:bcah,faying,SDofhiiot2Da' 
utb  htbc  himfelfe  tbith  bs  m  ftrong 
holbs  in  the  lboob ,  intibelnlt  of  l?ach^ 
iah,ibhtch  "  ton  the  South  of  ||3ieu> 
won* 

io  jlMb  therefore,  £>  lung,  tome 
bolbncaccojbmgto  all  thebefice  of  thy 
fouic  to  tome  boibncanb  out  pact  (hail  I 
be  to  belincr  him  into  the  Kings  hanb. 

11  3nb  Saul  faib ,  2Sleflcb  be  pee of 
theH  jdisp,  fo?  yec  hauc  tompafTion 
on  int. 

11  cSoe^Piayyoiwcparcyewub 
bnolb ,  anb  fee  his  place  lbhcre  his 
t  haunt  is ,  and  tbho  hath  fecne  htm 
there :  fo?  it  is  tolb  nice  that  he  bealefh 
betyfubtilly. 

15  See  therefore ,  anb  tafec  Uttotb; 
lebgc  of  all  the  writing  plates  where  he 
i);bcth  himfelfe,  anb  conicyeagatncto 
me  lbith  the  certainty,  anbjunllgoc 
ftnth  yoir.anbttfhall  comctopaCfc ,  if 
he  be  m  the  lanb,  that  3J  ibill  fcarch  him 
out  th2oughout  all  the  thoufanbs  of 
Jubah. 

14  31nbtl)eyarofc,f  IbcnttoZiph 
befoje  Saul :  but  SDauib  anb  his  men 
wcrcw  thcibtiocrocffcoffipaoii,  mthc 
piaine  onthcSouth  ofjefotmon. 

15  Saul  alfo  anb  his  menibcnt  to 
fecfee  him ,  anb  they  tolb  SDauib :  Where; 
fo2t  he  came  bovbne  into  a  recite ,  anb  a^ 
bobc  in  the  lbtlbcrncflcof  *©aon:anb 
When  Saul  hcarbthat,  hepurfucbafc 
tcrDaiiibtnthcU>tlbcntccofsJl3aon. 

z6  ^nb  Saul  lbcnt  on  this  Obc  of 
tocmountamcatibSDaiubanbhismcn 
on  that  Cibc  of  the  mouiuamc :  anb  SD& 


uibmabehaftc  to  get  atbay  foifcate  of 
Saul:foJSanianbhismencompau"cb 
SDauib  anb  his  men  rounb  about  to 

tafecttjem. 

17  C25«t  there  tame  a  mtfTenger 
bnto  Saul,  faying ,  $afte  thee,  anb 
tometfoz  the  0hiWhnts  haue  t  uwabeb 
theianb. 

18  uehcrcfoze  Saul  rcturntb  from 
purfuing  after  SDauib,  9  Ibcntagainlt 
the  ^hiufttnes;  therefore  they  taiieb 
that  place  ||  Scia -^ammahlcftoth. 

19  C  3nb  SDauib  ibent  bp  from 
thence,  anb  Mbclt  in  ttrong  holes  at 
en  gebt. 


\Hebr. 
Ipread  ibem- 
felneivfon 


J  That  is, 


he  rocirr  o] 


dmthoni, 


wfio> 


kecf 


CHAP.  xxmr. 

Dauid  in  a  caue  at  Engedi ,  hauing  cut  off 
Sauls  skirt,  fpareth  his  life.  8  Heefheweth 
thereby  his  innocencie.  \6  Saul  acknow- 
ledging his  fault,  taketh  an  oath  of  Dauid, 
and  departeth. 

"  il5b  it  tame  to  paffclbhen 
Saul  Vbas  returneb  from 
tfoloibingthc  iDhiliftmes, 
thatitibas  tolb  him,  fay- 
mg,2Scholb,2?auib  ism 
tl;e  ibilbcrncffc  of  «n-gebi. 

i  Xhen  Saul  toohc  thjee  thoufanb 
chofcnmenoutofail3Jfracl,  anbVbcnt 
to  feebe  2>auib  anb  his  men  bpon  the 
rotuesofthetbilbcgoates. 

$  ^nbhee  tamctothcfl)eepccoatcs 
by  the  tbay,tuherc  was  a  taue,anb  Saul 
lbent  m  to  toucr  his  fcttc :  anb  ©autb 
anb  his  men  remamcb  in  the  ftbes  of 
the  cane. 

4  3nbthcmcnof2Datubfaybbnto 
him  ,  2i5cholbc  the  bay  of  lbhtth  the 
%  ©  is  jd  fayb  bnto  thcc,2Schoib,  j  tttil 
bcliucr  thine  enemy  into  thine  hanb, 
fhatthou  mayeftboc  to  him  as  itfliall 
fecmegoob  bnto  thee.  Xhen  2)awba^ 
rofc ,  anb  tut  off  the  fhirt  of  tSauls 
robcpmuly. 

5  2lnb  it  tamt  to  paffe  aftcribarb, 
that  2DauibShcart  fmotchtm,  becaufc 
he  hab  cut  off  Sauls  ftort. 

6  3inb  hec  fayb  bnto  his  men^he 
ILowjd  fozbib  thatjfljoiiibboethis 
thing  bnto  my  mailer  the  Hoihjd^ 
3lnoyntcb,to  ttrctchfojth  mine  hanb  a 
gauift  hun,fceuig  he  is  the  ^noyntcb  of 
theHsDis©. 

7  So  2>auib  t  ftayeb  his  fcruants 
Vbith  thefe  ibozbes,  anb  fuffcrcb  them 
not  to  rife  agamft  Saul :  but  Saul  r  ofe 
bp  out  of  the  caue,anb  ibent  on  h  istbay. 

s  SDauib  alfo  rofc  afteribarb ,  anb 

lbcut 


XHeb-tftir. 


t  Uebr.the 
robe,  wl:u  h 
Wis  Sttnlt. 


T  Hebr.cu: 


Sauls  confcftlon.       Chap.xxv.  Samuel  dieth, 


|  Hckwdfe 


\Kcb.JIMt 
If. 


ibent  out  of  the  eaue,  anb  crpeb  after 
5>aul,  lading,  fi)9plo?b  thefting.  3lnb 
ibhcn  £>aul  loofteo  behmbehtm,  2>a* 
utb  ttoupcb  lbtth  his  fate  to  the  earth, 
anbboibebhhnfelfc. 

9  CHnb  Dauib  faib  to  S>anl,«@hcr 
fo?eheareft  thou  mens  ibo?bS,  (aping, 
zseholb,  2>auib  fccKcth  thp  hurt* 

10  28eholb ,  thisbapthme epes hauc 
fecne,hoib  that  the  ?L£>m©  habbeli* 
ucrrDtliceto  bap  into  mute  hanb  in  the 
taue:anl)  Tome  babe  me  mil  thee,  but 
mmecyefoareb  thee,anb3ifaib,3J  ttnll 
not  put  toorth  mine  hanb  againft  mp 
lo?b ,  fo?  hee  is  the  %  ©  »  £>  $>  acnout; 
tcb. 

ii  $?o;!eouctmpfathcr,S>ee,pcafcc 
the  ffeirtof  thp  robe  mmphanb:fo;tin 
that  3  tut  off  the  f  fetrt  of  rhp  robe,anb 
tullcb  thee  not,  nnotb  thou  anb  fccthat 
there  is  neither  curtl  no?  tranfgreffton 
mnuhehanb,  anb^haucnotfinncba* 
gamft  thee;  pet  thou  hunteftmpfoulc, 
totafecft. 

u  Xhe?LsaDiB©tuogcbetrbccncme 
anb  thee,  anb  the  %  o  is  id  aucnge  me 
of thee:  but  mtnchanb  (hall  notbe  bp* 
on  thee. 

>5  Tie  faith  the  pjouerbc  of  the  ante 
ems,  nsuiixbncflepjoeccDeth  from  the 
ibitaeb:  but  nunc  hanb  (hall  notbebp- 
on  thee. 

14.  ^eribhom  is  the  lung  of  3Jftael 
come  out?  after  rbhom  boeft  thou  put* 
fue<  3(fterabcabbogge,aftcraflea. 

15  n:i)cfL€>iBjDtf;erfo?cbe3Jubgc, 
anb  iubgc  bctibeene  me  anb  thee,  anb 
fee,  anb  pleab  mp  taufc,anb  t  beliuer  me 
out  of  thine  hanb. 

16  c^bittamctopau*eibhen2>a* 
uib  hab  mabc  an  enbe  of  fpeatung  theft 
motfjs  bnto  £>aul,  that  ^aulfaib,  3s 
this  tt)v  botce ,  my  fonnc  2Dautb  i  3nb 
£>aul  lift  bp  his  botccanb  tbept. 

17  3fabftefaibto3Dautb,  Xhou  art 
mojc  righteous  then  3 :  fo?  thou  haft 
rctbarbcbmccgoob,  H)hcreas3J  haue 
retbarbeb  thee  emu. 

18  3nb  thou  haft  fhctbeb  tins  bap 
hoib  that  thou  haft  Dealt  tbcUtbith  me: 
fojafrnuch  asibhen  the  %®  as  9  hab 
tbeiiucreb  mcintothtnehanb^houftifc 
lebftmenot, 

19  Jf  0?  if  a  man  finbe  his  cnemictbill 
hcclct  him  goe  ibeliaibap*  tbherefoje 
the  %  ©  ik  5D  rrtbarb  thee  goob,fo?  that 
thouhaftbonebnto  mcthisbap. 

zo  acnb  note  bcholb ,  3  bnotb  tbeft 
that  thou  (bait  fur  el?  be  i&ng,anb  that 


the  fungbomc  of  3Jfrael  ft)ail  be  cftauib 
(hebinthinchano. 

11  £>ibcarenoib  therefore  bnto  me 
bpthelt€)  k©,  that  thouibilt  not  tut 
off  mp  feebc  after  nice,  anb  that  thou 
ibtlt  not  beftcop  my  name  out  of  nw  fa? 
thershoure. 

xx  3nb  2Dantb  ftoare  bnto  ^>aul, 
anb  3>aul  tbenthome :  butSDautb  anb 
hismen  gatcthcmbpbntotheholbe. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

:  Samuel  dieth.  i  Dauid  in  Par.in  fendeth  to 
Nabal.  10  Prouoked  byNabals  churliih- 
nefle.heemindethtodeftroyliim.  14  Abi- 
gail vnderftanding  thereof,  18  taketh  a  pre- 
sent, 13  and  by  her  wifedome  jl  pacifi- 
ethDauid.  56  Nabal  hearing  thereof, di- 
eth. 39  Dauid  taketh  Abigail  and  Ahinoam 
tobehiswiues.  44  MichalisgiuentoPhaki. 

4f2D  *  Samuel  bieb,  anb 
all  the^jfraelitcsibcrc  ga? 
thercb  together,  anb  la* 
menteb  h«n,  anb  burtcb 
htm  in  his  houfc  at  3Ra* 
mah.  ^nb  SDaufb  arofe,  %  ibent  bottinc 
to  the  lbilbemcflcof  l^aran. 

z  ^nb  there  was  a  man  in  £0aon, 
ibbofc  ||  pofTeflions  were  in  Carmel,anb 
the  man  was  berp  great,  anb  hte  hab 
th?ee  thoufanbfhecpe,  anbathoutanb 
goatcs:  anb  he  was  (hearing  his  ujeepc 
mCarmel. 

?  iBotu  the  name  of  the  man  was 
jiRabal,  anb  the  name  of  htsibifc,  -%W 
gailtanbfheewas  aibomanofgoobbn* 
berftanbtng,  anb  of  abcautifull  counte* 
nance :  but  the  man  was  churltfb  anb 
eum  in  hts  botngs,  anb  Dee  was  of  the 
houfe  of  Caleb. 

4-  C^nb53>auibhcarbinthe5baber* 
nefl*e,that  i5abal  bib  (hear c  his  ftj eepe. 

5  ^nb2Dauibfcntouttcnpongmcn, 
anb  Dautb  fain  bnto  the  poung  men, 
(Rtpoubpto  Carmcl,  anbgoctoi5a* 
faal,  anb  t  grcetehiminmpnamc; 

6  ^nbthusfljalipefaptohuiithat 

UUCth  in  profperi  tie,  0eatC  be  DOtl)  tO  thee, 

anb  peace  be  to  thinchoufc,  anb  peace  be 
bntoauthatthonhaft. 

7  3lnbnoib,3hauchcarbthatthou 
haft  (hearers :  nolb  thp  fljephcarbs 
>bh{fh  Vbcrcibith  bs,  Ibec  thurt  them 
not,  neither  ttsas  there  ought  mifllfng 
bnto  them,  all  the  Ibhile  thep  r&ere  in 
Carmel. 

s  ^facthppongmen,anbthepitbfll 
(hettJthec;  tbherefo?e  let  ti;e  pong  men 

finbe 


•t-hap.jS. 
j.ccclus. 
46. :  j,  so 


iOr.lupntl. 


htninTTiy 
iiamatof 
peace. 


m-kju. 


21 


|N abals  churlifhnes.  LSamuel.     Abigails wifdome. 


jHtkre- 
fteL 


t  Heir. 
jlwehter. 


tHeir. 

flcwvfon 

them. 

\Hcb.Jha- 

nud. 


,OrtUmf/. 


{tube  fauouc  in  tbtne  ey  es :  (fo?  Vo  e  tonic 
tnagoobbay)gtnc,3Jp?aytbcc,  ttftat- 
rocuercommetbtotbincbanb,bntotby 
fccuants,  anb  to  thy  fonne  SDautb. 

9  anb  ibben  2>auibs  pong  men 
tame,  tbcyfpa&cto4i5abaiacco?bingto 
authofc  luojos  rathe  name  of  SDautD, 
anbttcafeb. 

10  C3mb#abalanfcoercbl>autDs 
fcruaras,  anb  fatb,  i©bo  isDaufo*  anb 
tbbo  is  the  tonne  of  3Jcflc  t  %bcte  bee 
many  f c r nan t s  noU)  abates  that  b? cab c 
aibay  cucry  man  from  his  matter. 

1 1  S>baU  3  tijen  tabe  my  b?cab  anb 
my  ibatet,  anb  my  tflefb  that  3J  bane 
hillcb  fo?  my  theaters,  anb  gtue  ubnto 
men,  tbbom3J  bnotb  not  whence  the? 
bce< 

12  5)0  2>aufl)S  yongmenturneb  thcit 
Jbay,  anb  ibent  agatne,  anb  cante  anb 
tolbhanauthofe  ravings. 

13  3tnb  SDautb  tatb  bnto  his  men, 
<Btrb  you  on  euery  man  bis  fuio?b.  3nb 
the?  glrbcb  on  cucry  man  his  fmo?b, 
anb  Datub  alfo  glrbcb  on  his  fiuozo : 
anb  there  tbent  bp  after  2>auib  about 
fonrc  bunb?cb  men,  anb  tibo  bunb?cb 
abobebytbettuffe. 

14  C  But  one  of  the  pong  men  tolb 
Abigail  jBabatstuifc,  faying,  Bcbolb, 
2>auibfcnt  meffengers  out  of  the  Ibtt* 
benteffe  to  falute  our  matter:  anb  the 
tatlcbonthem. 

15  2Buttbcmentberebcrygoobbnto 
ts,anbibcibercnotthurt,neitihermtf' 
feb  tbc  an?  thing  aslongas  lbeelbere 
conucrfantibith  them,  tbbcnibcibcrc 
tntbeftrtbs. 

16  %\)cy  Motet  atball  bnto  bsbotb 
benight  anbbay,ailtbeibbilelbciberc 
ibitb  them  beeping  fhecpe. 

17  |5otb  tberefo?cbnolb  anb  eonfc 
bcrvbhat  tboutbtltboc:  foz  entll  tsbc^ 
termincb  againft  our  matter ,  anb  a* 
gatnfl  all  his  houfl)Olb :  fo?  he  is  fuch  a 
fonnc  of  asclial,  that  a  man  cannot 
fpcaHctohtm. 

18  G1Chcn3tbtgailinabchafte,anb 
tooftc  tibo  bunD?cD  loaucs,  anb  tibo 
bottles  of  mine,  anb  fine  fljeepe  reatne 
D?cfl"cD ,  anb  ftuc  mcafurcs  of  parthcb 
come,  anb  an  Dunbjcb  ||  clutters  of  rai< 
fins,  anb  tibo  bunb?cb  cases  of  figges, 
anDlatbihcmonafles. 

19  3Jud  u>  faib  bnto  her  fcraants, 
d5oconbcfojcme,bcholb,3Jtomcafter 
you:  butfbctolb  notbec  bufbanb/fta- 
bai. 

io  3Jnb  it  lbas  fo  as  fl;c  robe  on  the 


affe,  that  the  came  boibne  by  the  coucrt 
of  the  bill,  anb  beholb,  Dantb  anb  his 
men  came  botbne  agamtt  her,  anb  the 
met  them. 

21  (iftoro  2>auiD  hab  faib ,  Purely 
in  baine  haue  3  bept  all  that  this  fcU 
lorn  hath  fit  the  lbilbctncfle,  fo  tbatno- 
thing  tbas  tntffcD  of  all  that  pertaineb 
bnto  bun :  anb  he  bath  rcquiteb  me  eutl 
fo?goob. 

22  &>o  anb  tno:e  alfo  boe  Cos  bnto 
tf)e  enemies  of  2Dattio,  if  31  leauc  of  au 
that  pertainc  to  him  by  the  momma 
light,  any  tbatpuTctb  agamtt  the  mail) 

23  anb  tbben  Abigail  fatb  2>auib, 
fl)Chattcb,anbltghtcbofftheaffe,anb 
fell  before  2>autb  on  her  race,  anbbolb= 
ebber  felfe  to  the  grounb, 

24  3tnbfcHatbisfcct,anbfaiD,t!3p5 
on  me,  mylo?D,vponmclctthismiquttte 
be^nb  let  tbtncbanDmatb,3Jp?ay  tbee, 
fpeaKcut  dime  taubtcutc,  anb  heart  the 
ibojbs  of  thine  banbmafb. 

25  3Utnotmylo?b,3Jp?aytbee,tres 
garb  this  man  of  ffielial,  euen  4!3abai : 
fo?  as  his  name  is,  fo  is  he :  i3abai  is  fyis 
name,  anb  folly  is  ibtth  him :  26ut  3} 
thine hanbtnatb  fatb  not  tbcyong  men 
of  my  lo?b,  tbhom  thou  bibtt  fenb. 

26  5i5oib therefore,  my  io?b, « the 
IL©iB©lmcth,anbas  tbyfoulctiuctb, 
feeing  the  ILspisjd  hath  ttntbbolDcn 
thee  from  tomming  to  ftedbloob,  anb 
from  tanengtng  thy  felfe  Ibtth  thmc 
olbne  hanb :  nom  let  thine  enemies  anb 
they  that  feebe  cutfl  to  my  lo?b,  bee  as 
/Babal. 

27  ^nb  notti  this  ||  bleffittg  tbhich 
tbincbanbmaibbath  brought  bnto  my 
lo?b,lettt  men  begtuen  bnto  tijeyong 
men  that  t  follolb  my  lo?b. 

23  3p?aythce,fo?giucthctrcfpaffc 
of  thine  hanbmatbe :  fo?  the  %  e>  m  5? 
tbtll  ccrtainely  mafic  my  lo?b  a  fure 
houfc,  bctaufe  my  lojbngbtetbtbcbat* 
tels  of  tl)e  %,  ©  n  3?,  anb  emll  hath  not 
bcncfounbinthcc^ithybayes. 

29  Pctamanisrifcntopurfuethce, 
ano  to  feebe  thy  foulc :  but  tbcfoule  of 
mylojbfballbc  bounbin  the  bunblc  of 
life  ibitb  the  fL0iB©thy<25ob,  anb 
the  fottlcs  of  thine  enemies,  them  (bail 
he  fltng  out,  t  as  out  of  tljc  nubble  of  a 
Otng. 

30  anbitfljailcomctopaffcibhcn 
the  H  €»  k  ©  flialhattcboncto  my  102b, 
acco?btngto  all  tljc  goob  that  bee  bath 
fpoben  conccmingthee ,  ano  (ball  Ijauc 
appomtcb  thee  ruler  ouer  31  fracl  ,- 

31  Xhat 


i  Hehjtrtt 


fHet.LjH 
to  bit  bcArt, 


\Heh-.f,- 
mng  iky 
felfe. 


\Ot,frefen: 


\Heh.reslhe 
al  the  feet  ef 


t  He},  milt 
mi  tf  of  the 

boHlht  of  e. 


Nabaldieth.  Dauid  Chap.xxv). 


maricth  Abigail. 


t  Heir,  m 

or,  j}nm- 
blinr. 


31  XhattfHSvrjail  bcc  not  gnefe  Un- 
to tljec ,  no?  offence  of  heart  bnto  my 
102b ,  either  that  thou  haft  ft)CD  bloob 
caufcicfl*c,02  that  my  lo?b  hath  aucngcb 
Ijunfclfe :  26ut  llthen  the  %  ©  is  ©  ujall 
hauc  Dealt  lbcllibitb  my  lozb ,  tljcnrc; 
member  thine  banbmayb. 

n  ft  3uib  £)auib  fayb  to  Abigail, 
2Bleu"cDbethe2L£>KJD  C5obof3iftacl, 
lbhtcb  fent  thec  this  bay  to  meet  me. 

33  3nb  blcflcb  bcc  thy  abuite,  anb 
blcffcb  be  tbou.ibbtth  haft  itcptmc  this 
bay  from  commmgto  fbcb  bloob,  anb 
from  aucngmg  my  fclfc  lbith  mint 
oibncbanb. 

34.  ;fo2iubcrybccb,asfhc!L©iK?D 
©obofjfracl  liucth ,  lbbicljbathBcpt 
nice  backc  from  hurting  thee ,  crrcpt 
thouhabfthaftcb  aub  come  to  meet  me, 
furcly  there  hab  not  bene  left  bnto  i!5a- 
bai.bytbcnumung  light,  any  thatptf 
fctljagauifttbcibail. 

35  5>o  2>autb  rccciucb  of  her  hanb 
thattbljicb  ujee  hab  brought  him,  anb 
fayb  bnto  her ,  d5oc  bp  m  peace  to  thine 
houft;  £>tc,3Jhauc  hcarlicncb  to  thy 
boycc,anb  hauc  acceptcb  thy  per  fon. 

36  C  Una  Abigail  came  to  $abal, 
anb  bcholb,hchclb  afeaft  m  Ijisboufc 
libethcfcaft  of  ahing;  $  Cabals  heart 
was  merry  lbitbtnljim,  fo:  hec  was  bery 
bnuvbeu:  ibljcrcfojc  ihcctoibebimno; 
tbutg,lcflc  02  mo;tc ,  bntill  the  morning 
light. 

37  2Sut  it  came  to  pattern  the  mo?- 
ntng ,  lbhcnthc  lbmc  lbas  gone  out  of 
jfrabai,  anbhis  ibifc  hab  tolb  him  trjcfc 
things,  that  his  heart  b:cb  lbitbin  htm, 
anb  be  became^  a  ftonc. 

38  3lnb  it  came  to  paffc  about  ten 
bay  cs  after,  tijat  the  %o  is  p  fmotc  && 
bal,tljathcbicb. 

39  ft  3nb  ibbcn  2>au:b  hearb  that 
il5abaitbas  beab^cfaib^lclTcb  be  the 
%  0  is  ssthat  hath  plcabcbthc  caufc  of 
my  repjoch  from  the  hanb  of  iI5abai, 
anb  hath  bept  his  fcr  uant  fr  om  euil :  fo2 
the  %  0  n  ©bath  rctttrncb  tljc  lbicftcb- 
ncfTc  of jRabal  bpon  h».s  olbne  hcab. 
Zwa  £>atub  fent,  anb  conuntmcb  lbith 
3bigail,to  taut  her  to  him  to  lbtfe. 

40  3tnn  ibbcn  the  fcruants  of  3Da? 
uib  iberc  come  to  Abigail  to  Carmcl, 
tbey  fpauc  bnto  Ijcr  ,  faying  ,  2>auib 
fent  bs  bnto  tljcc ,  to  taHc  thec  to  him 
to  ibifc. 

41  ^nbfncc  arofc,  anb  boibeb  her 
rclfconhcrfaccto  the  earth ,  anbfayb, 
iocholbc,  let  thine  hanbmayb  becafcr* 


uant  to  lbalb  the  feet  of  the  fcruants  of 
my  102b. 

41  3ltib  Abigail  Ijafteb ,  anb  rofc, 
anb  robe  bponan  afft  ,ibithfiucbamo* 
fcls  of  hers  that  ibent  t  after  her,  anb 
ujc  ibent  after  the  mcfTcngcrs  of  Das 
uib,anb  became  his  ibifc. 

43  2>autb  alfo  toofte  3thtnoam  *of 
3Jc5rccl ,  anb  they  iberc  alfo  both  of 
tljcmljisibtues. 

44  c  25ut  5>aul  hab  giucn  *  ^ 
chai  his  baughttr ,  SDauibs  lbtfc,  to 
mm  the  fonnc  of  3UiOj ,  lbhtcb  was 
ofeailun. 

CHAP.  xxvr. 

Saul  by  thedifcoueryofthe  Ziphites,  com- 
meth  to  Hachilah  againft  Dauid.  4  Da- 
uid comming  into  the  trench  ,  ftayeth  A- 
bifhai  from  killing  Saul  ,  but  taketh  his 
fpeare  and  crufe.  13  Dauid  reprooueth  Ab- 
ner,  is  and  exhorteth  Saul,  zi  SauJac- 
knowled^ethhisfinne. 

Jftb  the  Ziphttcs  came 
bnto  Aaul  to  ©ibeah 
faying,  *2Doeth  not2T>as 
tub  hibc  htmfclfc  m  tbt 
_  hui  of  ^aehuah ,  which  is 
befozt JJtujimon  < 

%  Xbcn  5>aul  arofc ,  anb  lbcnt 
boibnc  totbcibilDcrncflcof  ziph,  W 
uuig  thjee  thotuanb  chofen  men  ofjf 
rael  lbith  hun,to  fccbcSDauib  in  the  ibil- 
bcrncflc  of  ztplj. 

3  3lnb  5>aul  pitchcb  nt  tljc  hill  of 
hachilah,  lbljich  «  before  ^cfljunon  by 
thcibay:but2Dat«babobc  m  tljc  ibil> 
benicffc ,  anb  he  faib  that  5aul  came 
after  hun  into  the  ibiiocrncfTe. 

4  2>au»D  thcrcfo2C  fent  out  fpies , 
anbbnberftoob  that5»aul  lbas  come  in 
berybceb. 

5  C3mb2Dauib arofc,  anb  came  to 
the  place  lbhcrc  £>aul  hab  pittheb :  anb 
2>auib  bchclb  the  place  lbhcrc  £>attl 
lay ,  anb  *3tbncr  ti)c  fonnc  of/Rerthc 
taptamc  of  hts  hoftc :  anb  5attl  lay  lit 
the  II  trench ,  anb  tljc  people  pitchcb 
rount)  about  hun. 

6  Xhnianfibeteb2Dau:b,anbfayb 
to3fliimcIccb  the  ^ithtcanb  to  ^biftjai 
thcfonncofzcru!aJ)b2otl)crtol/oab, 
faying,  n3holbillgoe  boibnc  lbith  me 
to  ^aulto  the  campe*  ^nb  ^b;a;ai 
fayb,3I  ibtllgoc  boibnc  lbuh  thee. 

7  5>o  2>auib  anb  3lbifl)ai  came  to 
the  people  by  night,  anb  bcbolb,  5aul 
lay  flcepmg  lbithm  tljc  trend),  anb  Ijis 
fpeare  ftuebe  m  tljc  grotutb  at  his  boi- 
ftcn 


\Heb.tt 
nerfce:. 

•ion,  15. 
5*. 


*  ;  Sam.  j. 


'Chap.lj 
I?- 


11  Chap. 14, 
50.  andl7 

55- 

\Or,midSl 
of  hit  cur- 


Dauiddeckreth 


I.S 


amue 


1. 


hisi 


innocence. 


ttt*./5«( 

Vf. 


|  a  '  the 
fennt  ■  of 


fter :  but  3lbncr  anb  tljc  people  lap 
rounb  about  Dun. 

8  XDmfaib3lbiftjaito2Dauib,<s;ob 
Ijatb  t  belntcrcb  tljinc  enemie  into  ttjinc 
Daub  tDiSbay :  noibtDcrcfojc  let  mec 
finite  Dim,  3  p;ay  tljee,  HMD  the  fpcarc, 
euen  to  tlje  cartD  at  ontc ,  aub  3  will 
not  finite  Dim  tDc  feconb  time. 

9  3inb  SDamb  fays  to  3bifl)ai ,  Site 
ftroy  Dun  uot :  foz  Wjfio  tan  ftretcD  fotfD 
Disljanb  againfttDe'fL£>is£>£>  &nouv 

tcb,anbbcgutltlcflc* 

io  SDautb  faib  furtDcrmoje ,  %s  flje 
%  sd  is  ©  littcrD ,  tl;c  1L  sd  h  ©  fbai  fmtte 
Dun,  o?  I)ts  bap  (Dall  totne  to  r»tt,  oi  Dec 
(Dall  brfc  enb  into  battcll,  aub  pcrift). 

ii  3E:i)c?Lo«iDft)?bJbtDat33(liouib 
ftretcD  fooztl)  mine  Daub  agamft  tDc 
%  £>kjd£>  Slnointcb :  but3Jp?ay  tDce, 
tafectfjotutoib  tDc  fpcarc  fljat  is  at  Dts: 
bolftcr,  aub  tDc  trufc of  ibater ,  aub  let 
bs  goe. 

iz  5>o  SDamb  tooUe  tDc  fpcarc  anb 
tDc  trufc  of  ibater  from  5>auls  bolftcr,  I 
anb  tDcy  sate  tljcm  aibay,  anb  no  man 
faib  tt ,  no:  tmcib  it,  neither  aibafceb :  I 
fo:tDey  ibcrcalia{lccpc,bccanfc  abeepe  I 
neepe  from  ttjc  %  £>  is  ©  lbas  fallen  bp- 1 
ontljcm. 

13  CXl)en  SDauib  ibent  oucr  to  tDc  I 
otDcr  fibc,  anb  ftoob  on  tDc  toppc  of  an 
Dill  afarrc  off  (a great  fpatc  beingbc= 
tlbcenctDcm:) 

i+  3inb  SDautb  tryebto  tljcpeople, 
anb  to  Obiter  tl;e  fonnc  of  ^I5cr  ,faymg, 
3ufibcrcft  tDou  not,  3ibncr?  XDcn 
3bncr  anftocrcb ,  anb  fayb ,  naljo  an 
tDou  that  cry  eft  to  tDcBing? 

15  3lnb  SDauib  faib  to  Slbncr,  Art  not 
tDou  a  baltant  man  *,  anb  ibDo  >  >  liftc  to 
ttjec  fit  3Jfracu  naljcrcfiw  tljcn  Daft 
tDou  not  fcept  tDy  lo:b  tDc  tang*  foj 
tltcrc  came  one  of  tDc  people  in ,  to  be- 
drop  tDc  ftingtDylojb. 

i6  XDfetDirig  ^  not  goobtDatfDou 
Daftbonc :  as  tDc  jIoikid  lmctD,yc  arc 
twonDy  to  bic,  beeaufc  pec  Dane  not 
Ucpt  your  matter  tDc  Hadis©^  ifxv 
ouitcb :  anb  noib  fee  ibDcrc  tDcBings 
fpcarc  is ,  anb  tl)c  trufc  of  ibater  tljat 
lbas  at  Di0  bolder. 

17  3liib  Saul  Unclb  Dauibsboyce, 
ant)  faib ,  13s  tDis  tDy  boicc ,  my  fonnc 
SDamb;  Stub  SDauib  faibc ,  3it  is  my 
boicc3myl02b,iDluug. 

is  3Jnbt)cfaib,  iDbcrefozeboctDmy 
lo;b  tljuspurfuc  after  Disfcruant;  fo: 
ibDat  Dane  31  bout;  ojlbljat  cum  is  in 
mine  tjanb ; 


19  ^oibrDcrc^e^pzayrDec,  let 
my  lojb  tDcmngDcarctDeibo?bSof  |)is 
feruant:  3lf  tDc3L©is©  Dancfttrrcb 
ttjcebp  agamft  mcc,  let  Dim  tacccptan 
oftcrutg :  but  if  tDcy  be  rDe  cDUbjen  of 
mcn,curfcbbc  tDcybefo?etDc2L©is©: 
fo:  tljcy  Dauc  bziuen  me  out  tDis  bay 
from  t  abibing  in  tDc  inDentantc  of  tDc 
|L©is3E>,  faying,  d5oc  fcrue  otDer 
gobs. 

io  i5oibtDcrcfo2C,letnotmybloob 
fall  to  tlje  eartD  before  tDc  fate  of  ttjc 
%  €>  is  w> :  fo.:  tDc  lung  of 3Jfrael is  tome 
out  to  fcebe  a  flea,  as  ibDcnonc  boctlj 
Dunt  a  partnbgeintDcmountames. 

21  C  XDen  faib  5>aul ,  3J  Dauc  Bn* 
neb:  3Retunte,myfonne3Dauib,  fo:3l 
ibtll  no  mo:e  boe  tDec  Darmc,  became 
my  foule  lbas  precious  m  tDmc  t^ts 
tDis  bay :  bcljolb,  3  D^»c  piaycb  tDc 
foolc,  anb  Daue  crreb  cjccccbingly. 

ix  3tnb  SDauib  anftucrcb ,  anb  fayb, 
25eDolb  tDc  mngs  fpcarc,  anb  let  one  of 
tDcyongritcn  tome  ouer  anb  fcttl)  it. 

13  XDc  %  a>  is  ©  renber  to  eucry 
man  Dis  rtgDteoufnciTe ,  anbDis  faitlv 
fulucflc:fo?tDc?t£)is©  beliuercbtDcc 
mtomyDanb  to  bay,  but  lilboulb  not 
ftrcttD  foo?tD  mine  Danb  againft  the 
H©K£>%>3tnomtcb. 

i4  3fnbbeDoib3astDylifeibasmucD 
fct  by  tD»s Day  in  mine  eyes:  fo  let  my 
Itfc  Dec  mucD  fct  by  in  tlje  eyes  of  tDc 
%  ©  is  jd,  anb  let  Dim  bcltucr  me  out  of 
all  tribulation. 

25  XDcn  Saul  faib  to  SDauib,  ©lef 
feb  be  tDou,my  fonnc  SDauib:  tDou  (Dait 
botl)boc  great  thinrrs,  anbaifofljalt  ftill 
p?euatic.  ^>o  SDatiib  ibent  on  Dis  ibay, 
anb  5>anl  rcturncb  to  Dts  plate. 

CHAP.   XXVII. 

i  SjuI  !ie.in'nc;Dauidtobe  in  Gath,  feeketli  no 
more  for  him.  5  Datiid  beggeth  Zikljg  of 
Achifh.  8  Hee  inuading other  countreys, 
perfwadeth  Achifh  he  fought  againft  ludah. 

J5S®R©  &  S>  SDauib  fayb  m  Ijis 
&M&  k  Dcart,  3J  fljau  noib  t  pe, 
n(D  one  bay  by  tDc  Daub 
of  £>aul :  tljcrc  isnotDtng 
„  better  fo?  me,  tlmitDat  3 
fliouib  fpccbily  efcape  into  tDelanb  of 
tbc$D»liftmcS;anb^aulfDalbcfpairc 
of  mc,  to  fccltc  me  any  moze  in  any  coaft 
of  Jfrael :  fo  fl^all  3  cftapc  out  of  i)is 
Daub. 

i  31nb  SDauib  arofe,  anb  Dec  paflcb 
oucr  ibitlj  tlje  fire  Dunb^eb  men  tljat 

were 


\Hcb.fmtt 


\Htb.cU»- 


i-fu&fc* 


\H,br.h 
confttmed. 


Achifh  decerned.     Chap.xxvuj.       Saultrembleth. 


jHcb.thc 

r.KTtiberoj 

oUyer. 

t  Heir,  a 

yeerto/ 

daja. 

JOr.Cw- 
caef. 


\Ox,dUytih 
not  mak? * 
rode,  &e. 


\Htbr.tQ 
ftiris. 


were  ibithhim,bnto  ^rtjiQ)  thefoune  of 
tT9aoch&uigof(!3ath. 

s  3tnD  SDauio  Dibeit mt\y ^cinft)  at 
(5atb,he,anDht£mcn,euerymanibith 

1)10  t)0Ull)0K>,  euen  £>aillD  XDltt)  1)10  tU)0 

lbiues,3lhinoamthe3!c5reelttcffe,anD 
Abigail  tnc  <£armelueffe  j!3abaisibife. 

4  3nDltibastolD:§>aui,thatS>a; 
utDibasflcbto(Z>afh>  anD  he  fought  no 
mo2eagamefo2hnn. 

5  €  3nD  Damn  fail)  bnto  3chiib, 
3if  3 haue  nolb  fount)  grace  m  tome 
eyes,  let  thcmgiue  mcc  a  place  in  fome 
tolbnc  in  tile  countrcy  ,  that  3  may 
Dibcl  there :  fo:  lbhy  fl)oulD  thy  fcruant 
Dibcll  in  the  royail  cittc  ilnrh  thee  * 

6  Xrjen  3cbtft)  gauc  bun  "-tfelag 
that  Day :  lbhernxzc  Ztftlag  pcrtauictrj 
bntothc  kings  of  3Hioal)  bnto  this  Day. 

7  3uid t  thctime  tbatSDauiDDibclt 
in  the  countrcy  of  tljc  0hiliuincs ,  was 
ta  mllyccre,anDfourcmoneths. 

8  C  ^ni>  2>auiD  ano  his  men  tbent 
top  ant)  muaoct)  the  <5cft)untcs,anb  the 
||  ©writes,  ant)  the  ^maleaites  :  fo? 
tDofc  oMcnstbtrc  of  olD  the  inhabitants 
of  tbelanb,  as  thou  gocft  to  ^hur,  c> 
ucnbnto  the  lanD  of  £gypt. 

9  3lnD  Dauio  fmotc  the  iaiiD,anb  left 
neither  man  noz  lboman  aliue,  anb 
toofec  albay  tl)e  (heepe,  anD  the  orcn, 
anb  theatres,  anb  the  camels,  anb  the 
apparcll.aiiDreturncD,  anbeameto^ 

tihifi). 

io  Znh  3cbtfl)  faib ,  ||  nahithcr  haue 
yemaoearobc  to  bay  ^3lnb  Dauib  faib, 
3lgainft  the  £>oufb  of  3JuDah ,  anb  a* 
gamft  the  5>outl)  of  the  gjcrahmee- 
Utes,  anb  agauift  the  &outhof  the  %t> 
nttcs. 

1 1  3lnD  SDauiD  faueo  neither  man 
noz  lboman  aliue ,  to  bzmg  tiding  to 
©ath,  faymg,  ILefl  they  (houlD  tell  on 
bs,  faying,  ;§>oDto  2>autb,  anb  fotbtll 
bchismancr,  ailtheibhilc  DeDibctleth 
in  tj|)e  countrcy  of  the  philiftines. 

ii  3uiD 3lcbifl)  btlecucb  DauiD,  fap 
ing,  i^ce  hath  mabe  his  people  gjfrael 
tbttcriyto  abhojrc  htm,  therefore  hee 
fhail  be  my  fcruant fo?  cuer. 

CHAP.  XXVIII. 

i  Achifh  putteth  confidence  in  Dauid.  3  Saul 
hauinadeftroyed  thewitches,  4  and  nowin 
his  feare  forfaken  of  God,  7  feeketh  to  a 
witch.  9  The  witch  ,  encouraged  by  Saui, 
raifethvp  Samuel.  15  Saul  hearing  his  njine, 
famteth.  11  The  woman  with  his  feruants 
refrcfh  him  with  meate. 


0  2>  u  tame  to  paOc  m 
thofe  Dayes,  that  the  0bi; 
littmcs  gathcreb  their  ar- 
mies  together  fo?  lbar^ 
farc,to  fight  ibith'Jfrael: 
3md  Achifh  faio  bnto  2DauiD,  muoibc 
thouamirebly,  that  thoufbait  goeout 
Ibith  me  to  battcll,  thou,  anb  thy  men. 
z  3nb2DauiDfaib  to  Achifh, Purely 
thou  (halt  fmoib  ibbat  thy  fcruant  can 
boe.  2uib3chtfb  faib  to  SDauiD,  Xher- 
fo2c  tbill  gj  maac  thee  beeper  of  mine 
heabfozcucr. 

j  Cil5oHj*  Samuel  tbasbcab,  anb 
all  gjfrael  hab  lamcntcb  him,  anb  burt^ 
cb  him  in  Hamah,eucn  m  htsoVbucO' 
tic :  anb  £>aul  hab  put  aruay  thofe  that 
hab  familiar  fpirits,  anD  thObysarDs, 
outofthelanD. 

4  ^nb  the  0hihuines  gathcreb 
thcmfelues  together,  anD  came  anD  pte 
cheDin  ^>hunem:  anD  ^aul  gathereD 
aiigjfracltogethcr, anD  they  pitcljcD  in 
Gilboa. 

5  5tnD  ibhen  £>aul fa)b  the holte  of 
the^htlimnes,  he  lbasafratD,  anDljis 
heart  greatly  trcmbleD. 

6  3tnD  ibhen  ^aul  enquireD  of  the 
%  ©  k  b  ,  the  %  &  ih  ©  aufiocreD  h»n 
not,  neither  byDjeamcs,  no?  by  ulrim, 
uo2by02ophcts. 

7  C  Xhcn  faiD  5>aul  bnto  his  fer? 
uants,  ^eefec  me  a  lboman  that  hath  a 
familiar  fptrlt,  that3  may  goe  to  her, 
auD  enquire  of  her.  3lnD  his  feniant 
faiD  to  him,  25rholbc,  there  is  a  lboman 
tl;at  hath  a  familiar  fpint  at  €tib02. 

s  3tuD^>aiilDifguifcbhimfclfc,anD 
put  on  other  raiment,  anD  hee  Sbcut, 
anD  tibo  men  ibitli  him,  anD  thry  came 
to  the  lboman  by  night ,  anb  he  faib,  31 
p?ay  thee  Dutinebnto  me  by  the  famili- 
ar fpirit,  anD  hzing  me  him  bp ibhom  gi 
ajail  name  bnto  thee. 

9  ^nD  the  lboman  faioe  bnto  him, 
2SeholDe,  thou  Imoibea  ibhat^>aul 
hath  Done,  hoib  hee  hath  rat  off  thofe 
that  haue  familiar  fpirits,  anb  thetby; 
5arbsout  of  the  lanD:  ibhercfoze  then 
lay  eft  thou  afnarc  fo?  my  life,  to  caufc 
me  to  Die  < 

10  ;&nD  £>aul  unarc  to  her  by  the 
|L©iS2D,faymg,  :3stI)c?Lois£?Uucti), 
tl)cre  than  no  pumftjment  happen  to 
theefo2  this  thing. 

11  Xljen  faiD  the  lboman,  iBhome 
(haligj  b;ingbp  bnto  tljee^anD  hefaiD, 
Bjmgmebp  Samuel. 

iz  2lnD lbhcn tSjc  lboman  fatt)£>a> 
<Sc  muel. 


'Chap.  25 


Sauliswiththe  I.Samuel.         witch  atEndor. 


\Hebr.whxt 
u  bafirmtl 


the  hind  of 
Prophets. 


\\Or,fir 

hirr.felfe. 

*  Chap.  15 

28. 

\  Hchr.mlrtc 

hand. 


f  Hc&.maJe 
hsfleandfef 
veith  thefut- 
nejfe  tfkii 
Jr*twre. 


muel,tbe  mcb  With  aloWbboycc :  anb 
the  Woman  fpafec  to  Saul,faying,nahy 
haftthoubceciuebmc<fo2thouartSaul. 

13  anbthcfemgfayb  bnto  her,  25c 
notafraib  :fo2Whatfawcft  thou?  3nD 
the  woman  fait)  bnto  Saul ,  3  faw 
gobs  afccnbing  out  of  the  earth. 

14  anbhcfaibbntoher,tn9t)atfo2me 
is  he  of i^nD  ft)C  falD,^n  olD  man  tonis 
meth  top,  anb  he  is  eouercb  With  a  mans 
tic.  3lnb  Saul  pmeiucb  that  it  was 
Samuel,  anbhecftoupeb  Withhisfacc 
to  the  grounb,  anD  boWeb  himfclfc. 

15  C3inb  Samuel  faib  to  Saul,nDhy 
haft  thoubifquietebmcto  bnngmcbp  < 
2lnb  Saul  anfrocrcb,  3  am  fo?c  biftccfc 
fcb,fo2  the  0hiliftms  mane  war  agatnft 
me,anb<5obtsbcpartcbfeomme,anb 
anuocrcthmcnoino2C,neithertby#2o; 
phcts,  no:  op  b2camcs :  therefore  3 
hauc  calico  thee ,  that  thou  mayft  make 
BnoWcnbntomc,What3Ju)allboe. 

16  Xhcn  faib  Samuel,  nahcrefcue 
thenbocftfhou  afftcofmcc,  feeing  the 
3L  €>  is  e>  is  beparteb  from  thee,  anb  is 
become  thine  enemy; 

17  3lnb  the  %  £>  is  ©  hat!)  Bone  II  to 
htm ,  *  as  hec  fpaac  by  tmce :  fc>2  the 
1L©is©  hath  cent  the  fcingbomc  out 
oftjuttchanb,  anb  giucnit  to  thy  ueig!> 
bour,euen  to  SDauib : 

iS25ecaufctl)ouobcicbftnotthcl)oice 
of  the  %  sd  is  j?,  noz  crccutcDft  hts  fierce 
W2ath  bpon  3MialcK ,  therefore  hath 
the  %  ®  is  £>  bone  this  fhtngbnto  thee 

this  barn 

19  £9o2coucr,d)c1L©i3?DWiliaifo 
bcliucrgjfracl  With  thee,  into  thchanb 
of  thcphiuftincs :  anb  to  mo2roW  fhalc 
thou  anb  thy  fonncs  bee  withmec:  the 
ILois©  alfo  fbau  bcUucr  thchofteof 
3Jfracltntothehanbofthe#h:uftmes. 

20  XhcnSaultfcllftratghtWayail 
along  on  the  earth  ,anb  Was  fo2C  afraib, 
bctaufc  of  the  wo?bs  ofSamuel,?  there 
was  no  ftrcngthinhun  :fo2  hchab  ca? 
ten  no  bicab  all  the  bay,no2  al  the  night. 

21  C  3nb  the  Woman  came  bnto 
Saul ,  anb  faw  that  he  wasftnetron* 
bleb,  anb  fayb  bnto  him,  2Bcholb,thine 
hanbinayb  hath  obeveb  thy  boiee ,  anb 
3  ha«c  put  my  life  in  my  hanb ,  anb 
hauc  hcarBcneb  bnto  thy  wo?bs  Which 
thou  fpattcft  bnto  mc. 

22  iBoibthcrcfo2c,'5  p2ay  thechears 
ben  thou  alfo  bnto  the  boyte  of  thine 
hanbmaib,  9  let  mc  fct  amo2fcl  of  b2cab 
bcft2C  thee  ;frcat,thatfhoumaycft  hauc 
ftcength,  Wljcn  thou  gocft  on  tf)y  way. 


23  ffint  hcererafeb,  anb  faib,3J  Will 
not  catc.  26ut  his  fcrnants  together 
With  the  Woman  comprtlebhun ,  anb 
rjchcarfeeneb  bnto  their  boyee:fbhca 
rofefcomthe  earth,  9  fate  bpon  the  beb. 

24  anb  the  tboman  hab  a  fat  caife 
m  the  houfcanb  fbchaftcb,anb  Billcb  it, 
anb  tooBe  floWct  anb  tmcabeb  it ,  anb 
bib  baBebnlcauencbb2eab  thereof. 

25  3nb  fbe  b2onght  *  befo2cSaul, 
anb  bcfo2c  his  feruants ,  anb  they  bib 
catc:  then  thep  arofebp ,  anb  ibciita= 
tbap  that  night. 

CHAP.   XXIX. 

1  Dauid  marching  with  the  Philiflines,  }  is 
difalowed  by  their  Princes.  6  Achifh  diimif- 
feth  him  with  commendations  of  his  fidelity. 

£>tbthcg»hfttftincsgathc* 
reb  together  all  their  ar* 
micsto^phcU:anbthe3t 
raclttcspitchcb  bva  fouip 
taineib^ichisin^rccl. 

2  ^nb  the  lo?bs  of  the  ^liiliftincs 
paffeb  on  bp  hunb2cbs ,  anb  op  thoiu 
fanbs :  but  SDauib  anb  \yis  men  paffeb 
on  in  the  rcrc-rbarb  Ibith  achifl). 

3  £hcn  fatb  the  p2mccs  ofttjc  $hi? 
liftmcs ,  nshat  doe  theft  ^ebjetbes  here  ? 
Zixn  3tct)ifl)  faib  bnto  the  ponces  of  the 
l&hiiifhncs ,  is  not  this  3Dauib  tljtfcr^ 
uantofSaulthebingof3Jfrael,Jbl)iri) 
hath  bene  tbith  me  rljefe  bapes,  02  ffrefe 
pecrcs ,  anb  3  hauc  founb  no  fault  in 
himfincehefellvncome,bntothtsbap< 

4  anbthcp2intesofthc0ljiliftmcs 
Were ib20th  With  him,  anbthepjuues 
ofthe^hiliftincsfaib bnto  him,  fi^ase 
tljis  fellow  rcturncthat  Ijemavgoc  a- 
game  to  his  place  Which  thou  fjaftap* 
potntcbhim,  anb  IcthunnotgoboWnc 
With  bs  to  battcl,left  in  the  battcll  he  be 
an  abucrfarp  to  bs  :  fo2  Wljcrcwith 
fljouiu  hec  reconcile  himfclfc  bnto  his 
matter  i  fljonib  itnot  be  With  the  hcabs 
oftljefcmcn; 

5  isnotthis2Damb,of  Whomtljcp 
fang  oncto  another  in  baunccs,  faying, 
*  Saul  flew  his  ftjoufanbs ,  anb  2>awb 
Ijtstnithoufanbs; 

6  C"Xhcnaci)t(hcallcbSDauiD,anb 
faibbnto  ljun,  Surclp.as  then  ad  is  © 
liueth,  thouhaftbcnebp2ight,  anbthp 
going  out  anb  thp  eomming  m  With  mc 
in  the  hoftc  is  goob  in  my  fight :  fo2  3 
hauc  not  founb  cuil  in  thccfinccthc  bay 
ofthy  eomming  bnto  mebnto  thisbay: 
neuerthclcs.thc  t  io2bsfauour  trjee  not. 

7  i©hcrefo2cnoWrcturncanbgoe 

01 


1 1.Chron. 
11.1?. 


•Chap.  18. 
7.andii. 
■  I. 


\  Hch.  thou 
art  not  good 
txthecyet  of 
the  Lrdt. 


1  He \rr.  doe 
nat  ettill  m 
he  eyes  of 
he  lords. 


\  Hebr.  be- 
fore thee. 


Ziklagburnt.Dauid  Chap.xxx.         purfueth  them. 


in  peace,  that  thou  tmfplcafc  not  the 
lojbsofthe^biliftines. 

8  C  3utb  SDatub  faib  bnto  3Ccht(h , 
asut  tbjjat  hauc  3  Done  <  anb  tbt)at  haft 
thou  founb  tn  thy  fctuant  fo  long  as  3 
haucbcnctibtth  thee  bnto  thisbay,that 
3  map  not  soe  fight  againft  the  eue* 
mies  of  iny  lorb  tlje  feing  < 

9  3nb3chitt)anftuereb,anbfaibto 
2>autb,  3ifcuo\b  eljat  thou  art  goobtn 
my  figbt,as  an^tngel  of  <5ob:  ttonbith- 
ftanbing  the  prunes  of  thcphtlittincs 
hauefaib ,  $ccihailnotgocbpnnthbs 
to  the  battel!. 

io  nahetforc  noib  rife  bp  early  inthe 
morning,  ibith  thy  matters  feruants 
that  arc  tome  tbtth  thee:  anb  aflbone 
asyecbebp  early  m  tljc  morning,  anb 
hauc  light,  bepart. 

1 1  5>o  3Danib  anb  fjis  men  rofc  bp 
early  to  btpart  tn  the  morning ,  to  re* 
turnc  into  toe  lanb  of  the  £biutttttcs; 
anb  thc^htltftinesibcnt  bp  to  Stercel 

CHAP.   XXX. 

The  AmalekiteslpoileZiklag.  4  Dauid  li- 
king counfell,  is  encouraged  by  God  to  pur- 
fuediem.  11  By  the  meanes  or  a  reuiued  E- 
gyptian,  he  is  brought  to  theenemieSjand  re- 
couereth  all  the  fpoile.  12.  Dauids  law  to  di- 
uide  the  fpoile  equally  betweene  them  that 
fight,  and  them  that  keepe  the  ftuffe.  16  He 
fendeth  prefents  to  his  friends. 

0n  it  came  to  pafic  Ibhen 
Dantb  anb  his  men  Vbere 
tome  to  Zifelag  on  the 
thirb  bay ,  that  fije^ma- 
_  lefeites  hab  tnuabeb  the 
Soiith  anb  zibtag,  anb  (mitten  Zite 
lag,  anb  burnt  it  ibith  fire : 

t  2lnb  hab  taken  the  tbomen  cap* 
tiucs,that  were  therein,  they  lleibe  not 
any  cither  great  02  final,  but  caticb  them 
aibay ,  anb  tbent  on  their  tbay. 

j  C  So  2Dauib  anb  his  men  tame 
to  the  titie ,  anb  beholbe,  it  tbas  burnt 
ibith  fire,  anb  their  bjiues,  anb  their 
fonnes,  anb  there  baughtetsibereta' 
Ken  tapnucs. 

4  ILhenSDautbanbthepcoplcthat 
tberc  ibith  hbn ,  bft  bp  their  boitc,  anb 
ibcpt,bntilltheyhabnomo:e  poxberto 
Tbccpc. 

5  3nb  SDauibS  ttbo  tbiuestbert ta* 
fern  taptatcs,  ahmoam  the  Jwette 
teftc ,  anb  3fbtgail  thettnfe  of  0am  the 
Carmelite. 

6  anb  Dautb  tbas  greatly  biuret 


feb :  fo?  the  people  fpafec  of  (toning  him,  I 
betaufe  the  foule  of  all  the  people  ibas 
t  gncucb,  cucry  man  fo?  htsfonncs,anb 
fiwhts  baughtcrs :  but  SDatub  encoura* 
geb  himfclfc  in  the  It  ©  is  ©  his  ©ob. 

7  3nb  Dauibfatb  to  abiathar  the 
0ricft  3fhimelcchs  fonne ,  3  pray  thee, 
bring  mcc hither  the  <£phob :  anb  %W 
athar  brought  thither  the  ephob  to 
2>autb. 

s  ^nb  Dautb  enqttirrb  at  the 
%  0  is  ©,faying  ;  Shall  3  purfuc  after 
this  troupe  <  (ball  3  oucrtanc  them* 
3lttb  he  anfrocccb  him,  purfuc,  for  thou 
(halt  fucely  ouertafec  them ,  anb  ttitth- 
outfatlerecoucraii. 

9  S>o3Daiubrbcnt,hcc,anbthefirc 
himbrcb  men  that  were  until  him ,  anb 
tame  to  the  broofte2Scfo2,  tbhetctbou: 
thattbere  left  bchinbc,  ttay  cb. 

10  2Sut2>autbpnrfueb,  he  anb  four e 
buntycb  men :  (fortlbo  bunbrcbabobe 
behmbe ,  lbbtch  iberc  fo  fatnt  that  they 
coulb  not  got  ouec  the  broolsc  usefor.) 

1 1  C  2nb  they  founb  an  Egyptian 
in  the  ficlb,  anb  brought  him  to  SDatttb, 
anb  gaue  him  b2cab,anb  he  bib  eate,anb 
they  mabc  InmbzinHcibater. 

ii  ^nb  they  gaue  him  a  piece  of  a 
cane  of  figges,  anb  ttbo  flutters  of  rai- 
fins:  anb  ibhcnhechab  eaten,  his  fpirtt 
tame  againe  to  him :  fozhechab  eaten 
nobjcab,no2  bmntte  anylbatcr,  three 
bayes  anb  three  nights. 

1  j  ^nbS>auibfaybebntohim,  Xo 
ibljonie  beiongeif  thou;  anb  ibhence  an 
thouf3(nbhcfatb,3lamayongmanof 
€gypt ,  feruant  to  an  ^maleftitc ,  anb 
my  matter  leftmc ,  betaufe  three bayes 
agonc3Jfellf!tbe. 

14  aace  mabe  an  inuafion  vpon  the 
£>oufh  of  the  Cherethites,  anb  bpon 
theeoaft  lbhith  beiongethto3Jubah,anb 
bpon  the  South  of  Caleb ,  anb  Xbec 
burnt  zifeiag  ttnrh  fire. 

15  ^nb  3>amb  faybe  to  him ,  Cantt 
thou  bnngme  bolbnc  to  this  company  ? 
^(nb  he  faib,  Sibcare  bnto  me  b^  ©ob, 
that  thon  ibilt  neither  hill  me,  nor  belt- 
uermee  into  tlie  hanbes  of  my  matter, 
anb  3  KMl  bnng  thee  bolbnc  to  this 
company. 

16  csmbifohenhehabbronghthun 
bovbne,  brholb,  they  were  fprcab  abroab 
bpon  all  the  earth,  eating  anb  bringing, 
anbbauncmg,  becaufc  of  all  the  great 
fpoile  that  they  hab  taftcn  out  of  the 
lanb  of  the  ^htlittmes ,  anb  out  of  the 
lanbof3Jubah. 

<£t  i         i7  3tnb 


XUehiUtir 


Dauids  frolic I.Samuel. Sauls  death. 


t  Hcl,  thli 


\\Or,nskrd 
them  kowc 
:hey  did. 
f  Hcl}.  men* 


t  HeUr.d 
forward. 


t  Hit.  Utf. 


17  anDE>auiDunotetljcmrromtbc 
nbihgbt,cucn  bnto  the  euening  oftttje 
ncrtDap:  ano  there  cfcapcDnot  a  man 
of  them ,  faucfourcbunDjcDvongmcn 
which  r  one  Upon  camels,  ant)  fleO. 

is  ;3ttDI>auiT)rcrouercDallthattbe 
3ltnau1tttesljaD  caricbaibav:  anD2Das 

UlD  CCfcUCD  1)15  ttbO  lbtttCS. 

19  3ttiD  there  lbas  nothing  lacking 
todjmt,nettbcrfmalltt02grcat,neitbcr 
Tonnes  no;  Daughters,  neither  fpotlc, 
no?  anv  thing  that  fbcv  bao  taunt  to 
them :  DautD  rccoucrcball. 

io  3{nD  SDauiD  tooue  an  the  flocfees, 
ant)  ttic  IjerDs ,  which  tljev  Dzauc  befoje 
tiiofc  other  tattcll,  anD  fatD,Xhts  is  3>a* 
tubs  fpotlc. 

21  c  5CnD  £>auiD  tame  to  the  tVbo 
bunDjcD  mcttJbbicb  mere  fo  fatuttljat 
tljev  conlt)  not  folloib  JDatttD,  ibbomc 
tljev  baD  inaDe  alfo  to  abtDe  at  tljcbiooft 
28cfb2:  anD  tbcv  tttcnt  fotfb  to  meet  5>a- 
uiti,  ant)  to  mcetc  the  people,  tljat  were 
ibith  bum  anD  ibljcn  £>autD  came  nccrc 
to  the  people,  be  ||  falutcD  ri)cm. 

it  Xbcn  anfiucret)  all  the  ttncfecD 
men,  anD  men  of  26eltal,  of  t  tljofe  that 
tticnt  tbttb  2DattiD ,  anu  fait),  26ccaiue 
tbCfmnUtiotmitbbs,ibcibtlnotgiuc 
them  ought  of  the  fpoilc,  that  ibec  bauc 
rccoucrcb,  fane  to  cttcrv  man  Ijisibifc 
ant)  bis  cljilDKn,  that  they  map  lcabe 
diem  aibay,  anD  Depart. 

ii  Xbcn  fatD  2>autD,jae  fljail  not  Do 
fo,  niy  bjctlucn ,  Ytntl)  that  ibljtcb  tljc 
%<£>  is  ©  bath  guicn  bs,  ibho  rjatrj  p^ 
fcruebbs,  anD  DelmercD  tljc  compante 
that  came  agatnft  bs,  into  our  IjanD. 

24  iroi  vbljo  lbill  hearken  bnto  you 
in  this  matter t  But  as  bis  part  isfljat 
goctb  Doibne  to  tlic  batten,  fo  fljaurjts 
part  bee  tljattartctb  by  the  Ruffe:  tljcy 
fljailpartaiiUc. 

25  3nD  it  waste  front  that  Dap  tfoj; 
ibarD,  tbatljemaDcitaltatutc,  anD  an 
02Dinanccfo2'3ifrael,btito  this  Day. 

26  c  3lnD  when  SxuitD  came  to 
ZtUiag,  lice  fent  of  tljc  fpoilc  bnto  the 

€IDCIS  Of  UllDa!) ,  euen  to  btS  frtCttDS, 

(laving,  fficbolb  atji>2cfcutfo2you,  of  I 
the  fpoilc  of  tljc  enemies  of  tljc  ?L<m  jd)  | 

27  XO  them  lbtjlCl)  wee  Ut  26Ct!)Cl, 

anD  to  tiicmtbrjicl)  were  in  S>oucb  Bas 
moth,  anD  to  them  tbrjicfi  were  inflatttr, 

28  ^nDtothcmibljicl) wcrcui  3lrocr, 

aitD  tO  them  lbfjtCl)  were  m  £>ipl)m0tlj, 

anD  to  themibhtcb  were-  m  eEfljtcmoa, 

29  ^nb  to  them  miitcfj  were  m  Radial,  j 

anD  them  IDljicl)  wcrcmtbCCttlCSOf  tljc 


^^fougijt 


3crarjtncelttes,  atuito  them  nxbttfj  were 
tn  the  ntics  of  tljc  Bcnttes, 

JO   ^tlD  tO  them  rbfjtel)  were  in  tyQp 

mafj,  anD  to  them  vbljicrj  were  in  Crjotffc 
fban,  anD  to  them  wrjieh  weretn  ^tljacrj, 
ji  ^nDtothemfijrjicfjwerein^ebjon, 
anD  to  all  tljc  places  lbtjcrc  t>att id  l)tm 
fclfcanb  Ijismenlbecelbontto  Ijannt. 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

i  Saul  hauing  loft  his  arnne,  and  his  fonnes 
flaine  ,  he  and  his  armour  bearer  kill  them- 
felues.  7  The  Philiftmes  poffefle  the  forfa- 
kentownesoltheliraclices.  g  They  triumph 
ouer  the  dead  carkeifes.  u  Theyof  Iabdh 
Gilead ,  recouering  the  bodies  by  night, 
burne  them  at  Iabefh ,  and  mournfully 
buric  their  bones. 

ttjc  i&ntitfhncs 
agamtt  3Jfrael: 
anD  tljcmcnofJfraclflcD 
from  before  the  iDDtit^ 
fhnes,  anD  fell  borbnc 
||  Uame  m  mount  ©tlboa. 

2  ^nDtDcpniltftincsfolIolbcDftarb 
bpon£>aul,antj  bponljts  fonnes,  anD 
tbe^ljibOmcs  Oetbe  gjonatljan ,  anD 
^btnabab,  anD  £0aicl)iu)ua,  5>auls 
fonnes. 

i  3tnD  the  battcll  tbent  fojc  againft 
Saul,anb  tljie  t  arcljcrs  t  fjit  ftim,ant  l;c 
ibas  fojc  \bounDcD  of  tljc  arcljcrs. 

4  Xncn  faiD  §>aul  bnto  Ijts  armour 
bcarer,3);aibtlJvfroo2D,attDtljmftmc 
tmouglj  tljcrcibttlj,  left  rtjcfebnnrcum; 
rifcD  conic  anD  tljjult  me  tl)2ouglj,  attD 
||abufc  mcc.  But  Ijts  armour  bearer 
VboulD  not,  foz  be  mas  fo2c  afraiD :  tljcr- 
fo?c  £>aui  toobe  afroo2D,  ifcllbpontt. 

5  3nD ibljcnljis armour bcarcrfaib 
ttjat  )S)atii  masDcab,  be  feu  ufterbifcbps 
onh.<  fmo2D,  anD  DicDlbitlj  turn. 

6  &oS>auiDicD,anDnistl)2eefons, 
anD  ins  annour  bearer ,  aitD  all  Ijts  mni 
tljat  fame  Dav  together. 

7  C  3lnD  iblKtt  tljc  men  of  3Ifracl 
tl)atwereotttlicotljcrnDcoftI)cballc\', 
anD  thev  that  were  on  the  other  ftDc  3I02 
Dane,  fam  thatthe  men  of  3jfracl  flcD, 
aitD  that  S>aui  anD  bis  fonnes  iberc 
DeaD,  rljcv  finfooke  the  ntics  auDflcD, 
anD  the  pbtUfhnes  came  anD  Dlbeit  in 
them. 

8  3nD  tt  came  to  paffc  on  the  mo2^ 
roib  lbhen  the  plnuitines  came  to  ftrsp 
tljc  name,  that  tljcy  foitnD  ^>aul ,  attD 
his  tlj2cc  fous  fallen  in  mount  ©Uboa. 

9  ^nD  they  cut  off  his  Ijcab  ,  anD 
ftnppeb 


'  1.  Chron 
lo.t. 


]  OrtWQUT,  • 

icd. 


\  Hcbfioo- 

tcrtt  men 
vtih^ovei. 
\  Kcb.ftfitKd 

Urn. 


||  Or,  weeks 


iDauidheareth 


Ch; 


.p.). 


of  Sauls  death. 


[J  Ortconccr- 


'I.Sim. 
30.17. 


t  Mcl>.  what 

Y.'M  &C. 


Urtppcboff  Ijts  armour ,  anb  fent  into 
ti)  c  lanD  of  t^c  ptjsUftincs  rounbabout 
topubitfl)  ^  mtijc  Doufcof  rtjctctnoicje, 
anb  among  fl)e  people. 

10  stun  tDcvput  t)ts  armour  in  tijc 
Doufe  of  3fl)tatotlj:  anbtljevfaacneb 
his  boby  to  tlje  Ubau  of  zsetljfljan. 

1 1  C  3lnb  SW&en  tlje  inhabitants  of 
3jabcaj©tlcabi>arb|ioftl)ati)Jljid)  tlje 


pljtliftmes  Ijab  bone  to  £>aul : 
11  3fll  tlje  baltant  men  arofe,  anb 

rbent  allnigljt ,  atibtoottetljcbobv;  of 

<&>aul ,  ano  tlje  bobics  of  Ijts  fonncs 

fromtjjelbau  of  2Sctljfljan,  anb  tame 

to35abcfl))anb*bunuttjcmtl)crc. 
13  3nb  tljep  tooKc  tljcit  bones ,  anb 

*buncb  thembnber  a  tree  at  UaUea?,i*»  sam.». 

anbfafjtcbfeucnbapcs. 


Mere,  j^f. 


,THE  SECOND   BOOKE 

of  Samuel,  otherwife  called,  The 

fecond  Booke  of  the  Kings. 


CHAP.    I. 

i  The  Amalekite,  who  brought  tidings  of  the 
ouerthrow  ,  and  accufed  himfelfe  or  Sauls 
death, is flaine.  17  Dauid  lamentethSaul 
and  lonadian  with  a  long. 

£>ro  it  tame  to 
paffc  after  pbcatl) 
of  £>aul ,  n)t;cn 
2Dautb  tt>as  xt- 
turncbftom*tl)c 
flaugljtct  of  tl)c 
^maieKites,anb 
2Dambl)ababobe 
ttJjo  bates  in  Ztfe 
lag, 

z  gjttameeucntopafjfeonffjetfjlrb 
aap,  ti>itbcl)olb,aman  tame  outoftlje 
campc  from  £>attl ,  ttntlj  his  tlotljcs 
rcnt,ano  cartl)  bponljts  Ijeab :  anb  fo  it 
luas  ibljen  l)c  tame  to  ©atub ,  tijat  ijee 
fell  to  tlje  earth,  anb  bib  obepfance. 

3  :3nbDambfatbbntoIjim,5Ftom 
iWjeute  tommcfJt  tljou  <  Ztis  lie  fatb  bn= 
toljun ,  £)ut  of  tljctampeof  Jfraclam 
3(efcapeb. 

4.  3inb3l>anibfaibfcntoI)im,t$ott) 
iDenttljc  matter*  31  p?ap  thee,  telimee. 
^nbfteanfttjereb,Xl)attpe  people  are 
fleb  from  tlje  batttll ,  anb  man?  of  tlje 
people  alfo  are  fallen  anb  fccab ,  anb 
£>aut  anb  Ijonatljan  ijss  fonnc  are 
beabalfo. 

5  3lnb  £>auib  fatb  Dnto  tt>  pong 
mantl)attolbl)tm,^ott)6noU)efttl)ou 


ttjat  £>aul  anb  ^Jonathan  ijts  fonne  be 
bcab* 

6  3lnb  tlje  pong  man  tfjat  tolb  him, 
fatb ,  3ls  3J  Ijappcncb  bp  tljantc  Upon 
mount  (Stlboa ,  beljolb ,  ^aul  leaneb 
bpon  his  fpcarc :  anb  loc,  tlje  tljarcts 
anb  ljo?fcmcn  folloibcb  Ijarb  after  Jjsm. 

7  ^nbVbljeulKlooKebbeljtnbDtm, 
Ije  fam  mc,anb  taiicb  Dnto  mec :  anb  3J 
anfn)crcb,t$ercam3f. 

8  3lnb  nee  fatb  tonto  mee ,  mho  arr 
thoui  anb  jianfajcreb  ijun,  3J  am  an 
3maletute. 

9  ^efatbbntomcagaine,^tanb,3J 
pzap  tljcc,bponmc,anb  dap  me:  fo?  ||an* 
gutQ)  ts  totuebpon  mcc,bctaufc  mp  Itfe 
■spetlbljolcinme. 

10  £>o3lftoobbponijim,anbfleU) 
J)im,bccattfe3Jttiasfuretl)atl)cctoulb 
notliucaftcrtljatljeeDjasfailcn :  3(nb 
3  tooue  tht  trorbnc  tijat  wasbpontys 
Ijeab,  anb  tlje  b?atelct  tijat  was  on  his 
armc ,  anb  Ijaue  b?ougljt  tfjem  jjitljcr 
bntomplo?b. 

11  Xl)ena>anib  tooae  nolb  on  ha 
tlotl)es,anb*rettt  rl)an,anb  Ufteujife  all 
tDemcntljatwereVbitl)  l)im. 

ii  ^nbtl)evmoutncbanbtbept,anb 
faOtb  tjntill  €ucu,fo?  5>aul  anb  fo?  Uo^ 
natljanljis fonnc,  anb  fonljc  people  of 
tlje  1L  €>ir jp,  anb  fo?  tl)e  lioufc  of  3fr 
rati ,  becaufe  tDep  Vuere  fallen  by  ttje 
fiuo?D. 

u  C^nb2r>autbfaibi3ntottjeyong 

maurDat  tolb  Dim,  seljeute  m  xhoxu 

€e  2  3(nb 


\Hebr.t,i- 
bo/Jmc, 


\\Or,m) 
com  ofmcle, 
( or,  mj  em- 
broidered 
coAt)hinde- 
rcthmte3 
thatmj,&c. 


*Cbp.?. 

i  l.aii'i  JJ 
J  I. 


Dauid  lamcntcth.     I  LSamucl. 


Saul  buried. 


Pdl  105. 
'5. 


\\Or,ofthe 


'Micalil. 
10. 


j[  Or,  fwcct. 


aWDlje  anfroetcD,  3  am  tbefonne  of  a 
ftcanger,an3(maicttite. 

14  2wDSDautDfaiDbntobtni,*fco\b 
tbaft  thou  not  afraiD  to  ftcttcl)  foojtf) 
thine  banD ,  to  Deft  roy  the  %  ©  is  P  £> 
3mointcD* 

15  3nD  SMuiD  talUD  one  of the  yong 
mcn,attD  fayD,  (Socnccre,  andfaii  bp* 
on  Dim.  SmDbcc  miotcbim,  that  bee 
DycD. 

16  3lnD  2>auiD  fait)  bnto  him ,  Xby 
Wood  be  bpon  tbybcaD:  fo;ttby  mouth 
hati)  tcflifitu  agatntt  thee,  faying ,  3* 
baucUainc  the  3L$£>i3p3>  Sinnoyn* 

17  cSnD3>auiDiamentcDibitbtbis 
lamcntahonoucr&aul,  anD  oucr3lo* 
nathan  bis  fonne: 

18  caifo  bee  baoc  them  teach  the  cbil* 
D?cn  of  3iuDah  the  vfe  of  the  boib  :  be* 
bolD,ttistt>nttm*intbcbooltc||of3la* 

tbcr.) 

19  IHjcbeautyoflJfracltsflainebp* 
on  toy  high  places :  hoibarc  the  nugb* 
tie  fallen! 

20  *  Xcll  it  not  in  <£>atb ,  public  it 
not  in  the  ftrectcs  of  ^ffielon:  left  the 
Daughters  of  the  pbiliflmcs  retoyte, 
left  the  Daughters  ofthcbnnrctmictfcD 
ttinmph. 

xi  Pec  monntaines  of  <£ilboa,lct 
there  bee  no  Drtbe,  neither  let  there  be 
rauicbponyou,no?ficlDSof  offerings: 
fo?  there  the  fhiclD  of  the  migbtlc  is 
bilcly  caft  atbay,  the  (htelD  of  ;§>ani, 
as  though  hec  hab  not  becne  annomtcD 
Xbith  oilc. 

2i  jFrom  the  Wood  of  tbeflauicfrom 
tl)c  fat  of  the  intgbtie.thc  bo\b  of  31  ona* 
than  tnrneD  not  bathe,  anD  the  froojD  of 
£>aul  rctumtD  not  emptic. 

2j  £>m\  anD  Jonathan  were  loucly 
anD  II  pleafant  in  their  Unes,anD  in  their 
Death  they  lbcr  e  not  DiuiDcD:  tbey  ibere 
frotftct  then  €agles,thcy  iber  e  ftronget 
thcnUtons. 

24  jhc  Daughters  of  3JfracUbcepe 
oucr£>aul,ibboclotbcD  you  infcarlet, 
ibith  othn  Delights ,  lbbo  put  on  oma* 
ments  of  golDcbponyour  apparell. 

25  fyolbarctbemtgbtic  fallen  in  the 
mtDlt  of  the  batttll '^r>3Jonathan,thou 
ttiaft  Oaine  in  thine  high  places. 

26  3)  am  DiftrefTcD  fojtbcc ,  my  Wo* 
tber3Jonathan,bcryplcarant  haft  thou 

beene  bnto  mee:  thy  lone  to  nice  ibas 
ibonDerfulUpaffingtbcloucofibomcn. 

27  ^oibarcthcmigbttcfallcn,  anD 
the  weapons  of  tt>ar  r  e  penfhcD  1 


CHAP.    If. 

1  Dauid  by  Gods  dire&ion,  with  his  companre 
goeth  vp  to  Hebron ,  where  he  is  made  Kins 
ofludah.  5  He  commendeth  them  ofla- 
befh  Gilead,  for  their  kindneffe  to  Saul.  8 
Abner  maketh  Ifhbofheth  king  of  Ifrael. 
it  A  mortall  skirmifh  betweene  twelue  ol 
Abners.andtwelueofloabsmen.  18  Afahel 
isflaine.  25  At  Abners  motion  loabfoun- 
dediaretreat.    32.   Afahelsburiall. 

j!3D  it  came  to  paCTc  after 
this,  that  DauiD  enauircD 
of  the  %e> is©,  faying, 
£>ball33gocbpintoany 
of  the  Cities  of  3niDahf 
3inDtbe  Hois©  fatD  bnto  htm,  ooe 
bp.  3lnD  2DauiD  fatD ,  nahithcr  than  31 
goc  bp  <  3tnD  hcfaiD,  SLlnto  $eWon. 

1  £>o  SDauiD  Vbcnt bp  thither ,  anD 
hfsnboiWttcsalfo,3ihmoamthc  Hev 
recliteffc,  anD  Abigail  Cabals  ibtfe  the 
Carmelite. 

j  2nD  bis  men  that  were  frith  him, 
DiDSDauiD  Wingbp.cucry  man  tbitl)  his 
houfbolD :  anD  they  DVbelt  in  the  cities 
of  J?eWon. 

4  3inD  *  the  men  of  3JuDab  tame, 
anD  thercthey  anomtcD2>auiDlnng  0* 
tier  the  houfc  of  3JuDah :  anD  they  toioc 
S>auiD ,  faying^  %bat  *  the  men  of  3Ja* 
bed)  (SilcaD  were  they  thatburicD;§>aul. 

5  €5fnD2DatriDfcntmeffcngcrsbn# 
to  the  men  of  gjabefh  GileaD,  anD  faiD 
bnto  thcm,2BlefTeD  beye  oftbc  JLspkjd, 
thatyehauc  fljelbcDthis  tonDncffcbn* 
to  your  I02D,  euen  bnto  5>aul,  anD  Ijauc 
bur  itb  him. 

6  3fno  notb  the  %  ©  is  ©  fljeibe 
WnDncffc  auDtnieth  bnto  you:  anogi 
alfo  Vbill  r eciuitc  you  this  hmDneffe,  be- 
taufeychaueDone  this  thtng. 

7  unjcrcfoje  notti  let  your  hanDes 
be  itrcngtbcncD ,  anD  t  be  ye  baitant :  fo? 
yonrma(tcr5)aul  iSDcaD,  anD  alfo  the 
houfc  of  3IuDah  hauc  anotntcD  me  fctng 
oucrthem. 

8  C  2Sut  ^bner  the  fonnc  of  i5cr, 
captaincoft^aulshofle^ooucjnibo; 
fheth  the  fonne  of  S>aul,  anD  Wougbt 
Ijimoucrto  S9ahanaim. 

9  ^3nD  bee  maDc  him  hing  oucr  <Bit 
leaD,  anD  oucr  the  3fburitcs ,  anD  ouer 
3lC5rccl,  anD  oucr  €ph?aim,  anD  oucr 
26en<atmn,  anD  oucr  all  ffracl. 

10  3Jfl)bofbetb  5>auls  fonne  was  fo?* 
ticycercs  oiDcibbenbc  began  to  rcigne 
oucr  3Jfracl,anD  reigncD  tibo  ycresfbut 
the  houfc  of  3 uDab  folloibcD  Daiub . 
11  (3mp 


1. Mace. 
•57- 

I.Sam. 
II.13. 


t  lick  be 

thefamtsof 

vMonr. 


\Hekthc 
hofie  which' 


Dauidswarre  Chap.ij.        withllhbofheth. 


\Hcb num- 
ber of  dajes, 


f  Heb At 
together. 


|  That  is, 
the  field  of 
ftrong  Ken. 


i  Heb.  of  hi, 
feete. 

\Heb.  as  one 
of  ibexes 
that  it  tn  the 
field. 

tHeb.from 
after  sAb- 
tier. 


Or,  Ifeilc. 


h  (3lub  the  ttime  that  SDauib  mas 
Bingini)cbion  ouer the  honfc  of  3& 
bah,wasfcumpeercs,anbfircnioncths) 

ii  C3tnb;3bncc  the  ronucof  jftcr, 
ant>  the  fcruants  of  SJfbbofljetlj  the 
fonncof  £>aul,Jbcnt  out  from  ^alja^ 
naim,to<5tbeon. 

13  3lnb3Joabfhcfonncof:zctuiah, 
anb  tl)c  fcruants  of  2DauiD  tbent  out, 
anb  met  t  together  bp  the  poolc  of  <£fc 
bcon:anb  tljcpfate  bottmctfjc  one  on 
the  oncfibcof  the  poole,  ano  tlje  other 
onthcotherfibeoftljepoolc. 

\4r  3nb3lbncrfatbto3ioab,  Hct 
the  pong  men  noib  anfc,  anb  plap  be- 
fore Ps:  anb  3Joab  faibc,  ?Lct  tfjem 
arife. 

i$  Xljcn  thcrcatofc  anb  lbent  ouer 
bp  number  ttbeluc  of  2Scniamm,iPl)tclj 

pertained  tO  3Jfl)b0fbCtlJ  tUt  fonne  Of 

£>aul,  anb  tibctuc  of  tlje  fcruants  of 
2?auib. 

i6  3nbthcp  taught  cucrp  one  his  fefc 
loYbbpthchcab,  anbthrurt  htsft»02b  tn 
hisfcllolbcs  fibc,  fo  tljcpfcll  botbneto- 
gefher :  i©fjcrfo:ctIiat  place  lbaseallcb 
||  ^cifeart)  -  ha33uriin ,  Which  is  m  m 
beon. 

17  :3mbthereibasabcrpfo2ebattcll 
that bap:  anb  3lbncribas  beaten,  anb 
the  men  of  3iftacl,  bcfo:c  t!jc  fcruants 
ofSDamb. 

18  c^nbthercvbcrcthzccronncsof 
zenuaI)tlicrc,5Joab,anb^bifl)af,anb 
3tfahcl :  anb  mfahel  was  as  light  t  of  foot 
tasaMlbc&oe. 

19  3tnb3a"ahclputfucb after Sfbncr, 
anb  in  going  fie  turncb  not  to  the  tight 
Ijanb  no?  to  the  left  from  t  following 
3(bncr.  .      „ 

20  XhcnSlbnctlooltcbbchinbhim, 
anbfaib,  3ltt  thouStfahcU  anbhcaiv 

fujereb,^™-  _ 

21  3nb  3bncr  faib  to  him ,  Xnrne 
tljcc  afibc  to  thp  tight  hanb,  0?  to  tljp 
left,  anb  lap  tljcc  ijoioc  on  one  of  tlje 
pongmen,  anbtahc  thcchis  ||  armour. 
2i6ut  3U"ahcl  iboulb  not  turne  aQbe 
from  following  of  him. 

22  2inb  3lbner  faib  againc  to  3JI& 
Del,  Xurnc  tljcc  aftbc  from  follotbmg 
me:  B9berefo2Cft)OUlb  %  finite  tljceto 
the  ground  lio\b  thenfi)oulb3Jholbc 
Pp  mv  face  to  3Joab  tbpbjothcr  < 

23  %o\bbctf  rjc  refufeb  to  turne  afibc: 
Wherefore  3lbncc  With  the  hinbcrenbc 
of  ttjc  fpearc  fmote  htm  Pnber  the  fift 
ribbe,  tljat  trje  fpeare  came  out  befjitibe 
hiiii,anbheefellboWncthcrc,anbbieb 


mtfjc  fame  place :  anb  it  tame  to  pafTc, 
trjat  as  manp  as  came  to  tlje  place 
where  3Uabcl  fell  boWnc  anb  bicb, 
ftoobftilL 

24  Jloabalfo  anb  Sfbifljai  purfucb 
after  Hbnct :  anb  tlje  £>unnc  went 
boWnc  Whenthcp  Were  come  to  tlje  hill 
of  ^mmalj,tl)at  iieth  before  d5ialj  bp  the 
Wapof  tljcwilbcrucflcof  ©tbcon. 

25  c  3(nb  tlje  ehilbjcn  of  25cniamm 
gatljcrcb  themfclucs  together  after  %\>- 
net,  anb  became  one  troupe,  anb  ftoob 
on  tljc  top  of  an  hill. 

26  Xljen^bnet  cailcb  to  3Joab,  anb 
faib,  £>hall  tlje  froo?bbcuoure  fo?  cucr  < 
l&nowcft  tljou  not  tfjat  it  lbil  be  bittec> 
ncflc  in  the  latter  enb  i  ^ott>  long  ftjali 
tt  bee  tljen,  per  tljou  bib  tlje  people  rc^ 
turne  from  folloibingtljetr  bzetrjzcn  i 

27  ^nb51oabfatb,^S(5obliuctIj, 
bnlcffc  tljou  fjabft  fpofeen ,  furelp  then 
tin  the  morning  the  people  hab||gonc 
bp  cucrp  one  from  following  his  b?o- 
ther. 

23  5>o  3Joab  blcm  a  trumpet,  anb 
alltljepcopleftoobftill,anbpurfucbaf 
tec  3Jfrael  no  moicneithcr  fougljt  thev 
anpmoie. 

29  3tnb  ^bner  anb  his  men  tbaifteb 
all  that  night  tho?oJb  the  plaine,  anb 
pafTeb  ouer  3Io2bane,anb  Uient  thoioib 
all  25tth?on,  anb  the?  came  to  #aha 
naim. 

30  3lnb3toabretumebfromfoloJb' 

ing^fbner;  anbJbhenhc  hab  gatljcrcb 
all  thepeoplc  together,  there  latbebof 
2Dambs  fcruants  nmctecne  men,  anb 
3U"ahei. 

31  23ut  the  fcruants  of  2>auib  Ijab 
fmittcn  of  25miamm  anb  ofSlbncrs 
men.rochatthzccljunbzebanbthiceftoie 
men  bicb. 

32  C3tnbtheptoo6ebp^fahcl,anb 
burtcb  him  in  the  f  cpulchje  of  his  fath  er 
JbhiclJ  was  in  25ethlehem :  anb  31oab 
anb  his  men  tbent  all  night,  anb  thep 
tame  to  lr)cb2onatb2cafecof  bap. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  During  the  warre  Dauid  Aill  waxech  ftronger. 
1  Sixefonnes  were  borne  tohim  in  Hebron. 
6  AbnerdifpIeafedwithMTibofheih,  it  re 
uoItethtoDauid.  13  Dauid  requneth  a  con- 
dition to bringhimhiswifeMichal.  17  Ab 
nerhauing  communed  witli  the  Israelites,  is 
feaftedbyDauid,anddifmilTed.  xr  loabre- 
turning  from  battell ,  is  difpleafed  with  the 
king,  and  killeth  Abner.  xS  Dauidcuifeth 
Ioab,  31    and  mourneth  for  Abner. 

ii?Otli 


f  Ueh.fr cm 
the  morning. 

[[Or,  gons 
awaj. 


^b 


ncr  reuo 


ltcth       Il.Samuel. 


toDauid. 


'Chip. 21 


t  HtW.fi) 

"I- 


&vo  tftcrcwas  long  lbar 
bcnbcenc  tfte  ftoufc  of 
Saul ,  anb  tftc  ftoufc  of 
,  S>attib:  but£>autbibarcb 
.  M  Grongctanb  ftrongcr,anb 
tftc  ftoufe  of  Saul  ibajceb  ibcaacr  anD 
ujcaBcr, 

2  c  3nb  into  *Datub  mere  founts 
bonic  in$ct>;on:am>  ftisfirQ  borne  lbas 
^mnon,of^hmoamtnc3Jc?rcclitcu"c. 
j  2lnb  ftts  feconb,  Cfttleab,  of  %W 
gaii  tftc  lbifc  of  Jftabal  tftc  Carmelite : 
ann  tftc  tftirb ,  ^bfalom  the  fonnc  of 
ij0aacaft,tftebaugfttcrof£almailnng 
of<5cfftut; 

4  3lnb  tftc  four tft,3lbonuaft  tftc  fon 
of^aggttft :  anD  tljc  fifrtj ,  jS>t)cpDatsaJj 
tftc  fonnc  of  3bttal; 

5  3mb  tftcurtft,3ltftzcam  bp  Cgiaft 
2>autbs\btfc :  tftcfe  ibcrcboutctoSDa* 
mbttt^cbwt. 

6  cSitbitcatwtopafrcVbfttletftrre 
ibas  lbarrc  bctibcen  tftc  ftoufc  of  Saul 
anb  tftc  ftoufc  of  3Dawb ,  rijat  3lbnct 
mane  tjtmfclfc  ftrong  fo?  tljc  ftoufc  of 
Saul. 

7  3nbSaulftabaconeubine,ibnofe 
name  was*  3ai3pal),  tftc  baugfttcr  of  3- 
tali :  anb  ifhbofheth  faibc  to  ^bner, 
n9ftcrcfo?e  ftaft  tftou  gone  m  bnto  nip 
fatftcrsconcubmcf 

8  Hftcn  mas  2(bnct  betp  lbzotft 
fonfteibojbsofjjfftbofftctft ,  anbfaib, 
Amgjflbogsftcab ,  lbmcft  againft^u* 
baft  bocfftcib  ftinbnclTc  tftts  bap  bnto 
tftc  ftonft  of  Saul  tftp  fatfter,to  ftis  b^ 
tftjen,  anb  to  ftts  frtenbs ,  anb  ftauc  not 
beltucreb  tftec  into  tftc  ftanb  of  SDattib, 
tftat  tftou  cftargeft  mcc  to  bap  ibitft  a 
fault  concerning  tftis  lboman  < 

9  Soboe<5obto;3bnct,anbmo?c 
alfo  ,ercept,as  tftc  fL©  is  ©  ftatft  froome 
to  S>atub,cumfo'3l  bocto  fttm : 

io  Xotranfiatctfteluugbome  from 
tftc  ftoufc  of  Saul ,  anb  to  fct  bp  tftc 
tlnonc  of  2>auib  ouer  3Jfracl,  anb  oucr 
3jubaft,  from  2>an  cunt  to  asccr-fftcba. 

1 1  2lnb  ftc  coulb  not  auftuerc  3lbncr 
abwb  agamc,bccaufc  ftc  fearcb  ftim. 

ii  C3fttb3lbnccfctttmcflcngcrsto 
2>auib  on  ftts  bcftaifc,  taping,  osftofcis 
tftc  lanb  i  faptng  alfo ,  italic  tft p  league 
ibitft  me,  anb  bcftolb,  mp  ftanb  frail  bee 
ibitft  tftec,  to  bung  about  ail  3lfracl  btv 
totftcc. 

13  C^nbftcfaib.iDcll/jJibillmatiC 
a  league  uiufttftcc:  but  oue  tlnng^rc 
citurcofthce,  ttftatts,  Hftoufftaltnot 
feemp  face ,  ercept  tftou  nrft  bjtngOBt' 


eftal  Sauls  baugfttcr ,ibftcn  tftou  torn* 
mcttto  fee  mp  fate. 

14  3lnb  &>autb  fent  meffengcrs  to 
3Jfl)bofftctft  Saulsfonncfapmg,2Dclt 
ucr  mcc  mp  lbifc  £0ttftal ,  fljfttcft  3 
efpoufeb  to  mcc  foj  *  an  ftuntyeb  fo?e* 
f  tunncs  of  tfte  #>ftittmncs. 

15  3Jnb3fl)bo(ftetftfcnt,anbtooftc 
l)erfromftcrftufbanb,euenfront*^ftal' 
ttcltfte  fonnc  of  fLatfft. 

i6  3lnb  ftcr  ftufbanb  lbent  ibitft  ftet 
taiong  rbccpmg  beftittbe  fter  to  26aftu* 
rim:  tftcn  fain  3lbncr  bnto  fttm,  <5ot,w 
tutne.  3nbftcrcturncb. 

17  C  3lnb  ^bnee  ftab  communttfc 
nonlbitfttftc<£lbers  of  3U*racl,  taping, 
jacc  fougftt  fo?  SDatub  t  m  times  paft,  to 
betting  oucr  pott. 

18  |5ott)tftcnbocit,foitrftc|l©m© 
ftatft  fpoKCtt  of  SDatub,  faping;  Bptftc 
ftanb  of  mp  fcrttant  2Dautb  3J  Ibtll  fane 
mppcoplc  3Ifraci  out  of  tftc  ftanb  of  tfte 
^ftiitftutcs ,  anb  out  of  tftc  ftanb  of  all 
tftctr  enemies. 

t9  3mb3ibneralfofpaBCuitftecares 
of  25cntamin :  anb  ^bner  Ibcut  alio  to 
fpcauc  tn  tftc  cares  of  3>autb  m  ^cbjon, 
all  tftat  fecmeb  goob  to  3Jfracl,anb  tftat 
fccmcD  goob  to  tfte  lbftolc  ftoufc  of 
iScniamitt. 

xo  So  3ibncr  tame  to  2Dauib  to  %t> 
bjon,  anbtujcntp  mettflmft  fttnt :  anb 
SDatttb  ntabc  3ibncr,  anb  tftc  men  tftat 
wereiutthftmt,afcau\ 

ii  ^nb^bncrfaib  bnto  SDautb ,  31 
Vbtliaru*c,anb  goc,  anbujtllgatftcrail 
3lfracl  bnto  mp  lo?b  tftc  Ring,  tftat  tftcp 
map  mane  a  league  ibitft  tftec ,  anb  tftat 
tftou  mapedratgne  oucr  an  tftat  tft  tnc 
ftcartbeurctft.  3lnb  Dautb  fent  ^bner 
aU)ap,anbftelbcntin  peace. 

2x  C  3nb  bcftolb ,  tl)c  fctuants  of 
2Dauib ,  anb  IJ&abcamefrompurfuinga 
troupe ,  anbb^ougftt  in  a  grcatfpoile 
ibitft  tftcnt :  ( but  3bnet  was  not  ibitft 
2>autb  in  ^cb^ott ,  fo?  ftc  ftab  fent  ftitn  a^ 
Vbap,aub  ftc  ibas  goncin  peace.) 

23  HDftetfJoabattb  all  tftc  ftoft  tftat 
was  ibttft  fttm ,  lbcrc  come ,  tftcp  tolb 
gjoab,  faptttg,  ^bner  tfte  fonnc  of  iRer 
came  to  the  Umg,  anb  ftc  ftatft  fent  ftim 
avbap,anb  ftc  is  gone  in  peatc. 

14  Xftcttjoab  came  to  tl)t  lung.anb 
faib,nDftatftalttljouboneibcftolb,3lb' 
tier  came  bnto  tftec,  ibftp  is  it  tftat  tftou 
fta(lfcntfttmaibap,jftctsciuitcgotic; 

^<,  Xftoti  imoibcft  3bnct  tftc  fonne 
of  i!5cr,tftat  ftc  came  to  beccutc  tftcc,attb 
to  lutoib  tftp  going  out ,  anb  tftp  com- 
mtng 


*  1. Sam. 
18.j5.t7. 

•H  .I'LaIii. 


f  Hcbr.go. 
ing,  and 


\Mr.hoth 

And  ths 
third  (Uv, 


loab  flaycth  Abner.    Chap.iiij.      Ifhbofheth  flaine. 


•  I.King. 
l.j. 

j[  Or,pc.icc- 

Mj. 
•Chap. 2. 

n- 


{Hcbjloodi 


t  Hii.it 


"Chap. 2. 
»3- 


\H,b.M. 


\Hb.chil- 

drenoftni- 
<\tmtc* 


\Hcb.-KM 

Pood  in  their 

tja. 


mmgin ,*  to  fcnolb  all  that  thou  bocfi. 
i6  3utb  ltohcu  ^oab  mas  come  out 
fromJDautb,  hee  ftntmcffcngtrs  after 
3lbncr ,  ibhut  brought  htm  agatnc 
from  trjc  itocll  of  5>irtah  ■,  but  JDautb 
Hnetti  u  not. 

27  SnbibhcnSlbnerlbasrctumeto 
to  ^eb2on,*3Joab  toohehim  aftbc  tn  ttjc 
gate  to  fpealte  unthhtm  ||  quietly :  anb 
fmote  him  there  tonber  the  fift  nbbe,  that 
he  btcb,  fo:  the  bloob  oF^fahclhtsbifr; 
thcr. 

28  C  3nb  aftcribarb  tbhen2r>auib 
hearbit,  hccfaib ,  3>anbmy  ftmgbonic 
jre  guiltlcfft  before  the  |Lois©fo?  *■ 
uccftomthctbloobonibnerthctonnc 
of>15er: 

19  net  it  reft  on  the  hcab  of  3foab, 
anb  on  a!!  his  fathers  houft ,  %  let  there 
not  t  faiiefrom  the  rjoufeof  ^oab  one 
that  hath  an  tffue,  o:  that  is  a  leper ,  02 
that  Icanetl)  on  a  ftaffco  j  that  falieth  on 
the  fnjo2b,02  that  lachcth  tocab. 

jo  s>o'3?oab  anb  3tbifl)ai  his  brother 
flclb^bncr,  becaufchehab  Game  their 
brother  *  3tfahcl  at  (Sibeon  in  the  bat* 
tell. 

3  >  C  2hib  £>amb  faib  to  3Joab ,  anb 
to  all  the  people  that  ibere  ibtth  htm, 
Sentyour  clothes,  anbgtrbeyouitotth 
facftccloth ,  antomournebefoze  3bner. 
tubbing  SDainbhimfclfe  follotteb  the 
t  blcrc. 

31  Sdibthcybuticb^bnerin^cbjon, 
anb  the  Uing  lift  top  his  tooiee,  anb  itoept 
at  the  gcaucof  Obiter  ,  anball  the  pco- 
pleitocpt. 

3}  3nb  the  lung  lamenteboucr^ib; 
ner ,  anb  faib ,  Dicb  3bnet  as  a  fbole 

birth? 

34  1Ehyhanbsibcrenotbonub,no2 
thy  feetc  put  into  fetters :  as  a  man  fel? 
icthbefoietitoirtubmeti,  fofelleftthon. 
anb  all  the  people  itoept  agatne  ouer 
him. 

3<>  3lnb  lbhctt  all  the  people  came  to 
caufe  2>autb  to  catc  meate  tbhtle  it  itoas 
yet  bay ,  Dauibfroate,  faying,  £>oboc 
C5ob  to  mcc ,  anb  moje  alfo ,  if  3  taftc 
bjeab  02  ought  elfe ,  till  the  3>unne  be 
bourne. 

36  3nbauthcpcoplctooftcnottceof 
it,  anb  it  t  pieaf  cb  them :  as  ttohatfocucr 
the  Bing bib,  plcafcb  all  the  people. 
'37  3Po?aUthepcople,anball3Jftael 
tonberftoob  that  bay ,  that  it  itoas  not 
of  thcBmgtoaap3lbncr  thefonneof 
0tt, 

38  3tnb  the  mmg  faib  tonto  his  fee* 


uants,  Bnoibeyec  not  that  there  is  a 
pjtnce  anb  agreat  man  fallen  thisbay 
m^frael^ 

39  3tnb  3  am  this  bay  t  tbtafec, 
though  anowtcbBuig,  anb  theft  men 
the  fonncs  of  Zcruiah  be  too  harb  fo? 
me :  rhe  %  ©  w  tr  Ojall  rcibarb  the  bocr 
of  euill,  accojbtng  to  his  ibicKebncfft. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

The  Israelites  being  troubled  at  the  death  of 
Abner,  i  Baanah  and  Rechab  flay  Ifhbo- 
{heth.and  bring  his  head  to  Hebron.  9  Da- 
uid  caufeth  them  to  be  flaine  ,  and  Ifhbo- 
fhcths  head  to  be  buried. 

<§•  M  2T>  tbhen  3>auls  tonne 
hearb  that  Obiter  itoas 
bcab  m  i^etyon,  his  hanbs 
tttere  feeble,  anb  all  the 
3iftaclttcsibcretcoublcb. 

2  3nb  ;§>auls  tonne  hab  titoo  men 
that  mere  captaincs  of  banbs:the  name 
of  the  one  ibas23aftnah ,  anb  thenamc 
of  the  t  other  Sechab,  the  tonnes  of 
Simmon  a  26ecrothtte,  oftljechtlbmt 
of  aaeniamtn:  (fo?  aSecroth  alfo  itoas 
tccRoiicbtoaSentamln: 

3  %nx>  the  25eerothitcs  flcb  to  <&fc 
tamt,  ano  itocrc  foiourners  there  tontill 
this  bay.) 

4-  3nb  3fonatDan ,  5>auls  tonne, 
hab  a  tonne  that  itoas  lame  of  his  feetc, 
and  itoas  flue  yecres  olbc  ltohcn  the  rfc 
bings  tame  of  5>aul  anb3lonathan  out 
of  3lc5reel,  anb  his  nourcc  toofte  him 
top,  anb  flcb :  anb  it  came  to  pafft  as  (he 
mabehaftcto  flee,  that  hee  fell,  anb  b£ 
came  lame,  anb  his  name  was  Jlj&ephfc 
bofljeth. 

5  ^nb  the  tonnes  of  Simmon  the 
JBeerothite,  Scchab  anb  asaanah, 
ltocnt ,  anb  came  about  the  heat  of  the 
bay  to  the  houfe  of  3Jfhbofl)eth,  Itoljo 
layonabebatnoonc. 

6  ^nb  they  tame  thither  into  the 
nttDft  of  the  houft,  asthough  they  itooulb 
hauc  fctcljcb  itohcat ,  anb  they  fmote 
himtonber  the  fift  rib ,  anb  Sethabanb 
asaanah  his  brother  efcapeb. 

7  5fo;j  itohen  they  came  into  the 
houft,  hee  lay  onhisbebbe  mhis  beb- 
chamber,  anb  they  fmote  him,anb  fleito 
him,  anbbchcabcbhim,anbtooRC  his 
hcab,  anb  gate  them  atbay  tljo?oito  the 
piainc  all  night. 

8  3lnb  they  b2ought  the  heab  of 
Jflibofljeth  tonto  iDauib  to  Dcb:on, 
anb  faib  to  the  Bmg,  26cljolb  tlje  hcab 

of 


f  Heb.rm- 
Jtr. 


f  Hcb.fi- 
cortd. 


'Rechab&c,flainc.      Il.Samuel.      Dauids  children. 


•Chap.I. 

IS- 

t  Htk  hrt 

veto  in  his 

evrneeyti  as 

A  Wringer, 

&C. 

fl  Or, which 

wis  the  re- 

tvArd  I  g**< 
htm  for  his 
tidtnvs. 


•Cbp.J. 


•i.Chron 
ii. i. 


'Pfil.78. 
7'- 


'Chap.  11 


of3fl)bon)ctl)tl)cfonncofSaul,ti)mc 
cnciitic,  lDljlrti  fought  thy  u'fc>  anD  titf 
Hoik©  Dart)  aucngcu  my  Iojd  the  ftinjj 
tijisDav  of  Saul  anu  of  his  fceD. 

9  IC  anD  DauiD  anfweceD  ftcchab 
ant)  23aanal)l)is  dottier,  tbefonncsof 
Simmon  the  i5cctotbite,anD  faiD  bnto 
them,  a  s  tijc  it  o  is  je>  Uuctlj,  U)l)o  Dart) 
rcDecmcD  my  fonlc  out  of  all  aDuerfitic, 

10  nshen  *  one  tolD  me,  faying ,  2i5e* 
holD.SauiisDcaD.CttbinBingtobaue 
brought  gooD  tiDings )  3  toobc  bolD  of 
him,  anD  flcib  Ijjtm  in  ztbiag,  ||ibbo 
thought  that  3J  iboulD  hauc  giucn  l)un  a 
rcibarDfo2histiDtngs: 

ii  feolbmuchmozt,  tbhen ibtcRcb 
men  lime  flame  a  righteous  per  ton,  in 
Ills  oibncboufc,bpon  hts  beb?  Shall 
3  not  therefore  nolb  require  his  Wood 
of  your  hanD,  anD  taUc  you  away  from 
the  carta j. 

it  anD  3?autD  commaiiDcD  hisyong 
men,  anD  they  flcib  them ,  anu  rat  off 
their  Ijanos  anD  their  fecte,  anD  hangcD 
tlicmbp  oucr  thepoolcinfecbjon:  but 
thcytooftcthcheaDof3iihboiheth,anD 
bunco  it  m  the  *fepulcp(tc  of  aoncr,  in 
Sctyon. 

CHAP.    V. 

i  The  tribes  come  to  Hebron  to  annoint  Dauid 
ouer  Ifrael.  4  Dauids  age.  6  Hee  taking 
Ziou  from  the  Iebufltes  dv%  elledi  in  it.  n  Hi 

ram  fendeth  to  Dauid.  13  Eleuen  formes  are 
bornetohiminlerufaJcm.  17  Dauid  directed 
by  God  fmiteth  the  Philiflines  atBaalPera- 
zim,  it  and  againe  at  theMulberie  trees. 

^^^i^S  i?en*tamealitl)ctribcsof 
~W\t  jffacltoS)auiDbnto  fee 
bam,  anD  fpahc,  laying, 
iScholD,  lbc  arc  thy  bone, 

S^^auDthyflcfl). 

z  aifo  in  tunc  pad  ibhcn  Saul  mas 
Ring  oucr  bs,  thou  wart  hee  ttjatlcbbctt 
out  anD  bjoug'otcftm'Jfracl :  anD  the 
%o  i»  ©  faiD  to  thec,  *  £hou  IhaitfeeD 
my  people  3)fraci,  anD  thou  (bait  bee  a 
captamcoucr^fracl. 

j  So  all  the  eiDcrs  of  3Jfrael  tame 
to  tl)c  Bmg  to  fcetyon,  anD  Bing  JDa- 
uiD  11  uidc  aleaguc  rbtth  them  in  feetyon 
before  the  ft©  is  © :  anD  tljcy  anointcD 
2>auiD  Bing  oucr  3Jfracl. 

4-  CL  DauiD  ibas  tbirtie  vtttts  olD 
when  Ik  began  to  rcigne,  and  he  rcig- 
ncDfourncyccres. 

5  3ln  feebjon  he  reigncD  oucr  3ht< 
Dal)  *fcucn  yceres,  anD  Drc  monctl)S: 
ano  in  Jcrufaicm  he  r cigncD  thirty  anD 


thjecycrcsouer  all3JfraelanD3mDah. 

6  canD  rtjc  bing  anD  bis  men  lbent 
to  3Jcrufalcm,  bnto  tl)c  ^jebufites ,  the 
inhabitants  of  tlje  lanD  :  lbbicb  fpabe 
bnto  £>autD,  faying,  crccpt  thoutatie 
aibay  the  bhuDauD  the  lamctbou  (bait 
nottomcinfjitljceillXljinBing^auiD 
cannot  tome  inljuUcr. 

7  ii5euertl)elcire,  DauiD  tooat  rtje 
ftrongljolD  of  Zion :  ttjelame  «rtjie  ti* 
ticofSDauiD. 

8  3lnD£>auiDfaiDonrt)atDay,oai}o; 
focuer  gcttctl)  bp  to  tfjc  gutter,  anD  fmi- 
tetl)  tl)c  3Jcbufitcs,  anD  ttje  lame,  anD 
trjc  blinD,  that  are  jjatcD  of  2i>auiDsfoule, 

*hefhallbechiefeandcaptaine:  ||  DDljCrCfOJC 

fl)ty  faiD ,  % De  blinD  anD  th.e  lame  ftjall 
not  tome  into  rt)eI)oufc. 

9  So  DausD Dibcitm  tlje  fo?t ,  anD 
calico  ttti)crittcof  2>auiD,  anD  DaiuD 
built  rouiiD  about,  from  #illo  anD  itu 
VbarD. 

10  ^nDSDauiDtibenton,  anDgrctb 
great,  anD  ttje  ftoisjD  ©0D  of  Ijofts 
ibasmitOInm. 

1 1  C  5lnD  *  feirambing  of  Xy?c  Tent 
meffengcrsto  S>auiD,  anfi  CcDar  trees, 
anD  tarpenters,  anD  t  batons:  anD 
fljcy  built  SDauiD  an  Ijoufe. 

n  %nb  SDauiD  pcrtciucD  fljat  rtjc 
%  €> «  ©  IjaD  ellabltfl)CD  |)im  Bing  o* 
uergjfrael,  anDrtjatl)chaD  eraiteD  l)is 
HmgDoincfo2l)ispeoplc3ft'ielsfaltc. 

13  C3tnD*&>autDtooBe!)immocon< 
tubmes  anD  ibiues  out  of  3Jerufaiem, 
after  l)c  mas  come  fromfcebjon,  anD 
tljece  lberc  ^n  fonncs  anD  Daugfjtcrs 
borne  to  SDauiD. 

14  3nD 'rrjcfc  be  renames  of  toofe 
that  were  bojnc  bnto  rjim  m  ^erufaicnt, 
Sljammua,  f  si)obab,anD  /5atl)an, 
anD  Solomon: 

15  3Miar  aifo,anD  €lifbua,anDi5e? 
pl)cg,anD'^apI)ia, 

i6  ^nD  citfbama , anD  CliaDa ,  anD 
ciipftaiet. 

17  C  *  2Sut  \bhcn  ri)e  $ftflt(hnrs 
fjearD  tfiat  tbty  !)aD  anointcD  SDauiD 
Bmg  oucr  3Jfracl,  all  the  0fifliftines 
tame  bp  to  feefce  2)auiD,anDS)auiD 
IjearD  ot  it,anD  lbent  Doibnc  to  ti)t  I)olD. 

18  %i)t  0h*.limnes  alfo  came,  ano 
fpjeD  tl)cnu"clucs  m  tftc  bailey  of  Kc- 
pljaim. 

19  anD  2>aui8  cnciuitcD  of  flic 
?L©is©,  faying,  Shall  31  goc  bp  to 
tijc  pDtlifhncs  *  ibUt  tl)ou  Deliucr  them 
into  mine  DanD  <  anD  the  1L  o  k  ©  faiD 
bnto3>auiD,eocbp:  fo?3HbiUDonbt= 

icffc 


U  Or, faying 
DfUitdJbah 
not  &c. 


¥  I  .Chron. 
H.6. 

||  Or,leCMt[e 
they  hiAfiid 
enenthe 

blmd  &  tl:-e 
lame t  He 
/ha/ no:  come 
into  the 
houfe. 

\Heb,xccnt% 
going  and 
growing' 

*  I  Chron. 
14.1. 

\  Hcbr.hcw- 
ersof  the 
(lontoflhe 
•aH 


•i.Chron. 
}-9' 


♦I.Chron. 


*  r. Chron. 
il.itf. 


jTheArkcremoued.   Chap.vj.  Vzzahflainc. 


Efa.28. 


II  That  is, 
the  vl<une  of 
breathes. 

*  i.Chron. 
14-12. 
||  Or,  tooke 
t&emamtj. 


"i.Cliro 


J]  Or,  At 
rehichthe 
*V.iwf,cucn 
the  Name  of 
the  LOT^D 
of  boils  TTM 
cillcdvpon. 
|  He b.  m.tde 
to  ride. 
\\OrttbML 

"i.Samj. 


leflc  beltuec  the  pbtliftines  mto  tbme 
banb. 

20  2m  *  2Dauib  came  to  asaal -$t> 
ca5tm,  anb  2Dautb  fmotc  them  there, 
anb  fatD ,  Xbe  3t©ia©  bath  bjoKcn 
foo,!tbbponmiuccnemicsbcf6;temc,as 
tbebjcacb  of  maters.  Xbcrcuwcbetai' 
leu  tl)c  name  of  that  place,  ||  2Saal-#c> 
ra3im. 

ii  3nb  there  they  left  their  unages, 
anb  3>autD  anb  his  men  *  ||  burnt 
them, 

22  C  £nb  the  famines  came  Dp 
vet  agatneanb  fpjeab  tbemfelues  in  the 
bailey  of  ftepbatm. 

2 j  ^uDmbctiDairiDmauircDoftbc 
ft  ©  is  ©,  be  faiD,  Xbou  malt  not  goc 
top :  but  fetch  a  compafle  behinbe  them, 
anb  come  bpon  them  ouer  againft  the 
i23ulbety  trees. 

24.  3inD  let  it  be  tbben  thou  bcatcft 
the  founb  of  a  going  in  thctops  of  the 
mulbcry  trees,  that  then  thou  (bait  be* 
ftirre  thy  felfe :  fo?  then  thai  the  Jt©is© 
goeout  before  thee,  to  fmitcthebottof 
the  ^biuftmcs, 

25  3mb  2l>aufb bib fo,as  the  ft©  is© 
bab  commaunbcb  bun;  anb  Quote  the 
PUUiOinesfrom  C5eba,bntil  tljou  come 
tocher. 

CHAP.  VI. 

1  Dauid  fetched"!  the  Arke  from  Kiriath-iearim 
on  a  new  cart.  6  Vzzah  is  fmitten  at  Perez- 
Vzzah.  9  GodbleffethObed-Erlom  for 
the  Arke.  11  Dauid  bringingthe  Arke  in- 
to Zion  with  facrifices,  daunceth  before  it,for 
which  Michol  delpifeth  him.  17  Heepla- 
ceth  it  in  a  tabernacle  with  great  ioy  andfea- 
ihnc.  10  Michal  rcproouing  Dauid  for  his 
religious  ioy,  is  childleile  to  her  death. 

VH$»  ®Aint »  2>autD  satfteceb 
v/Mp£  together  all  the  ct)ofcn 
^men  of  3lfcacl ,  tbittie 
tboufanb: 
2  3mb  *  2>auib  arofe 
anbVbent  tutfh  all  the  people  that  were 
ibifb  him,  from  asaalc  of  3iubab ,  to 
bmigbpftomtbeucctbc2frKcof0ob, 
||  ibbofc  iriame  is  callcb  by  the  jftamc  of 
the  It  ©  is  3D  of  boftcs ,  that  Dibdleth 

betwecne  the  CbcrubfmS. 

j  3mbfbcytfettbc3lrBcof<!5obbp; 
on  a  nrtb  cart,  anb  brought  it  out  of  the 
boufe  of  ^binabab  that  was  m ||  ©ibcab: 
anb  Sfeah  anb  3tt)fo  the  fonncs  of  ^bu 
nabab,D:aucfi)cnctt)  cart. 

4.  2fnb  they  brought  it  out  of  *  the 


boufe  of  ^bmabab  Tbbicb  was  at  (Bp 
beal),t  accompanying  tlje  %vu  of  0ob  s 
anb  3fliio  tticntbcfojctbeStcRe. 

5  3nb  a>auib  anb  all  the  boufe  of 
3fracl  playcb  before  tije  ft©  is  ©  on  all 
manner  of  inftmmems  mabc  of  5ficrc- 
lboob,cuenonftarpcs,  anb  onpfalte- 
rtcs.anb  on  timbrels,  anb  on  comets, 
anboncimbals. 

6  c  3mb  "ibben  tljcp  tame  to  Ji5a? 
cl)onstbJc(l)ingfloo?c,^a33al)putfo?t!) 
bishandtotbc^rbcofdSob,  anbtoofee 
holb  of  it,foi  the  orcn  ||  moobe  it. 

7  3tnb  the  anger  of  the  ILoisjd 
mas  Hinbleb  againft  ?ll53ah,  anb  <3ob 
fmote  him  there  fo?  his  ||  errour ,  anb 
there  he  bleb  by  the  3(rac  of(5ob. 

8  3uib  2D>auib  ibas  bifplcafcb ,  be* 
caufetbc!L©is3D  hab  tmabc  a  tycacb 
bpon  tH35ah  :^nbhcc  callcb  the  name 
of  tlje  place ,  ||  ^crc5-^i35ah  to  tljic  bay. 

9  Ttnn  2>auib  mas  afcaibe  of  the 
5,  ©is  jDthatbav,anbfaib,  ^otblhail 
thc^rac  of  the  It©  is©  comcto  me; 

io  <§>o2DauibIboulbnotrcmouctbc 
^rbcoftl)e12,©i35D  bntohimmtotljc 
citic  of  2>auib :  but  SDauib  carteb  it  a 
Cbcmtothc  houft  of  £>beb£bom,  tlje 
©ttite. 

1 1  3nb  thc^rbc  of  the  It©  is  jd  com 
tinucbin  tbchoufc  of  Obebebomthe 
<5ittitc,th?ee  moncths:  anb  theft©is© 
bicftcb  £)bebCbom,  anbauhisljoufe- 
holb. 

ii  C^nbitlbastolbbingSDauib, 
facing,  *  %hc  %  ©  is  &  hath  bicflcb  the 
houfcof£)bcb€bom,  anb  an  that  per- 
tained bnto  him ,  becaufe  of  the^rftcof 
©ob.  S>o  2>auib  ibcnt,anb  brought  bp 
the  3rBcofC5ob,  from  tbcboufcof£>; 
btb  Cbom,  into  ti)c  citic  of  2>autb,  ibith 
giabnefTe. 

15  2tnb  it  mas  fo ,  that  XbDcn  tljev 
thatbarethc^rfte  of  thelt©isjD,hab 
gonefircpaces,  hec  factinccb  orcn  anb 
fatlings. 

14.  ^nb  2Dauib  baunceb  before  the 
ft  ©is©  mithailhis  might,anb3Dauib 
mas  girbcb  ibith  a  linnen  €pbob. 

1$  5>o  Dauib  anb  all  the  boufe  of 
3Jfrael  brought  bp  the  ^rbe  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  lbitb  ftjouting ,  anb  ibitl;  the 
founb  oftbetrumpet. 

16  ^nb  as  tlje  ^rftc  of  the  It  ©  is  © 
came  into  the  citic  of  2>autb ,  ipcbal 
5>auls  Daughter  loobcb  through  a 
vbinbom ,  anb  fam  lung  Dautb  leaping 
anb  bauncing  befozc  the  %  ©  is  ©,  anb 
(be  befpueb  l;im  in  bcr  heart. 

17  C^nb 


\Hebr.mtb. 


I-  Chron. 
\-9- 


\\Or.jimn. 
bled. 


\OrrA 


t  Hibrirf 

J  That  is, 
Thtbw.rh 


•i.Chron. 
15.15. 


Michalchiidlefle.      1 1. Samuel.  Godspromife. 


\Het.  fret. 

:b-J. 


*  i.Chron. 
16. i. 


Or,  ifealj. 


I  Or.nft/i; 
h.mJm.'j:ii 
ofmy  for- 
tunes. 


*  1  Chron. 
17.1. 


17  C^nDthep  brought  Ut  the  3lr&e 
of  the  %s>  is  3®,  anD  fctitm  Displace, 
tn  the  nuaft  of  thclEabcmacIe  that  £>a= 
tun  hao  t  pitcljco  foj  it :  anD  2>auiD  offt* 
r to  burnt  offerings,anD  peace  offnngs 

l)Cf02Ctlje?L£>K3D. 

18  ^nDaflboncasSMiiDhaDmaDe 
ancno  of  offering  burntoffcrtngs  anD 
peace  offerings,  *  hec  blcffcD  the  peo* 
pie  in  the  i!5amc  of  tfjc  %  ©  is  3©  of 
ijoftcs. 

19  3(nti  Dec  Dealt  among  all  tfje  pco- 
plccitm  among  the  ibholc  nuiItiutDc  of 
gjfracl,  as  well  to  the  momen  as  men, 
to  cucrp  one  a  cafee  of  bzcaD,anD  a  soot) 
piece  of  flefh,  anD  a  flagon  of  wine :  fo  all 
the  people  DepactcD  cucrp  one  to  his 
houfe. 

10  CXhcitSDauiDrcturneDtoblcflc 
his  liotiQjolD :  ant)  s^ichai  the  oaugl> 
tec  of  £>aul  came  out  to  mcctc  2>autD, 
ana  faiD,  J?oiDgio2ioustt>astheiisuig 
of  ^ifcacl  to  Dap,  lbho  bncouercD  him? 
fcifctoDapinthccpcsofthchanDmaiDS 
of  htsfcrttants,  as  one  of  trjcbaincfefc 
lotbes  ||  (hamelcffclp  toncoucrcth  him* 
felfci 

21  Znn  2>auiD  faiD  tmto  £0ichai ,  it 
was  bcfo2Cthc?L0isiD,lbhichehofcmc 
bcfo?c  rt)v  father,  $  before  all  his  houfe, 
to  appoint  me  ruler  oucrfhc  people  of 
the  %<$>  is  ©,  ouee  3Jfracl :  tljcrefo2e 
llnllJJpiapbeuwthc  H©ss>. 

2i  ^uDjIibillpctbcmojebilctfjen 
tfjus,  anD  Vtitii  be  bafe  in  mine  oibne 
fight :  anD  !l  of  the  matD  fcruants  rbhieh 
thou  haft  fpoftcn  of,  of  them  (Danube 
IjaD  in  honour. 

2?  %hcrefo2Ci$ichal  the  Daughter 
of  £>aul  haD  no  chtlDc  tmto  the  Dap  of 
her  Death. 

CHAP.   VII. 

1  Nathan  firft  approouingihe  purpofe  of  Da- 
uid  to  build  God  an  houfe,  4  after  by  die 
word  ofGodfoibiddeth  him.  11  Hepromi- 
feth  him  benefices  and  bleisings  iiihisfeede. 
18   Dauids  prayer  and  thankeigiuing. 

tSQ&QtSA  #  S3  it  came  to  pattc, 

4gfl3ffiAv35a»*ttlllMI  the  lEMntt  fate  tn 


When  the  iiv.ng  fate  m 

htshoufc,anDrI)efU>KJD 

haD  giucnhun  reft  rotuiD 

about  fro  ail  his  enemies  •, 

2   %iyat  the  lung  faiD  bnto  iiSathan 

tlje  02ophct,  ^ecnoiD^Dibcllin  an 

Doufc  of  Ccoar ,  but  the  Sirlic  of  <0oD 

DVbcilcth  uuthin  curtames. 

j  3uid  Nathan  fapDc  to  the  IWng, 


:# 


<So,Doe  all  thatis  tntijtnehcart :  fo?  the 
5Lo)s©isrbitt)tl)ce. 

4  cano  it  came  to  paflc  that  night, 
that  the  tbo?D  of  tljc  %  ©  is  ©  tamctjn* 
to  Nathan,  (aping; 

5  d5oe  anD  tell  t  mp  fcrnant  2>auiD , 
Xhus  fapth  the  U©  is©,  £>haittIjou 
builDmc  an  houfe  fo?  me  toDtticllin; 

6  nahereas  3  haue  not  Dibeit  in 
anp  houfcfmtc  the  time  that  3  bzought 
bpthe  cljilDicnof  3Jfracl  out  of  €gppt, 
euento  this  Dap ,  but  haueujaiUcD  ma 
tent  ano  in  a  tabernacle. 

7  'Jin  all  the  places  therein  %  hauc 
ibaibcD  ibith  all  the  chilDzcn  of  Jftael, 
fpascjl  aiD02Dtt)tth  il  anp  of  tljc  tubes 
of3iftacl,n)homc3J  commanDcD  to 
fceDe  mp  people  gjfraci ,  (aping,  ©hp 
builD  pc  not  ntc  an  hoitfc  of  Ccoar  < 

8  43ott>  thercfojc  fo  (halt  thoufap 
bnto  mp  fcruant  2DatuD  •,  1Chus  faptrj 
the  Hois©  of  hottcs,  *33tooUe  tljee 
from  the  fl)ccpc  -  cotc,tfromfollott)ing 
the  (heepc,  to  benilcr  oucrmppcoplc, 
ouer^Jfracl. 

9  ^nb 3  lDasibtth  thecmhitherfo* 
euerthou  Vbcntcft,  aim  hauc  mt  off  all 
thine  enemies  t  out  of  thp  fight,  anD 
haue  maDc  thee  agecat  name,  UKc  i)nto 
the  name  of  tljc  great  men  that  •>«  in 
the  earth. 

io  (£0o2couer  3  Ml  appoint  a  place 
fo:  mp  people  Jjfracl,  anD  mill  plant 
them,  that  thepmapoiDcllmaplaee  of 
their  ottme,  anDmoouc  no  mo?e :  net 
thcrujall  the  cljilDJcn  of  ibicncDncfle 
afflict  themanpmojc,asbtf02ctime, 

ii  3nDasfineethctimcthat3lcom 
matiDeD  JJuDges  to  bee  oner  mp  people 
HfracI ,  anD  hauc  caufcD  thee  to  reft 
from  all  thine  enemies : )  3flfo  the 
?U>K  jd  tciieththec,  thatheMlmafee 
tljee  an  houfe. 

12  C3lnD  *  lbhen  thp  oapes  be  fulfil 
leD ,  aim  njou  ftjalt  (leepe  ibttft  thp  fe* 
tljcrsjl  umifctbp  thpfecDe  after  tljee, 
lDhtcl)  (hail  pjocccDe  out  of  thp  boibcis, 
anD  3  mill  cftablifl)  his  ningDome. 

ij  *  $ec  (hail  builD  an  houfe  fo?  mp 
if5ame,  anD  3  tbillftablt(hthe  throne 
of  IjiSBingDomcfo:  cuer. 

14  *3 tt)illbchisfathcr,anDhc ftjail 
be  mp  fonnc:  *  if hce commit  miquitic, 
3  ttill  chaften  hmi  Vbith  the  roooe  of 
mcn,anD  tt)ith  tljc  ftripes  oftljt  tljUD?cn 
of  men. 

15  25ut  mp  mcrcic  (hall  not  Depart 
atttap  from  him,  as  3  toonc  it  from 
£>aul,  \DIjom3l  putatbap  befoze  thee. 

i6  3lnD 


f  Heir,  tj  my 
V.wiA. 


|lb  rfe  I. 
Cbro.  1 7.6. 
*rrj  of  the 
ludrei. 


*I.Sam  \6. 

Il.pfal.78. 

70. 

\Heb.f,m 

'fur. 


\ttei.fre 
llr/fxe. 


•I.King. 

3.jo. 


•i.Kiog. 

5-5.andrf. 

12.1.CI110. 

::  10. 

•Hcb.i.j. 
•Pfal.Sj, 
3'i3«- 


Dauidsthankes,        Chap.viij. 


and  prayer. 


\Hck.Lm. 


•Dcut.47 


t  Hel.opr- 
md  the  care. 


'Ioh.17. 
'7- 


i6  3tnb  thine  hoiifc ,  anb  thv  fetnjp 
borne  fball  be  ftablifbcbfo?  cttcrbcftnc 
tl)cc:  thv  th?oncfhailbccftablt(hcb  fo? 
cucr. 

!7  3tcco?bingtoailthcfcTOO?bs,anb 
aeco?bing  to  all  this  mfion,  fo  Dio  Na- 
than fpcaRc  tonto  3T>auib. 

18  CinjcnibcntRtng2l>auibin,anb 
fate  before  the  ?l©  is©,  anb  Dec  faib, 
!®ho  am  gj,  j©  ?Lo?b  <5©  ©  i  ahb  tbhat 
is  mv  ftoufe ,  that  thou  haft  brought  me 
Ijttljcrto  i 

19  3tnbthisroasvctafmailthtngin 
thv  fight,!©  ?Lo?b  ©ad©  :  butthouhatt 
fpoRenalfo  of  thvfcruants  houfc  fo?  a 
great  llthilc  to  come,  ant)  is  this  the 
t  manec  of  man,  <©  1Lo?b  <5  0  ©  i 

io  3nb  tbhat  can  SDauib  fav  mo?c 
bnto  thee;  fo?  thou ,  Ho?b  <B&>  ©, 
RnoiDett  thv  fcruant. 

21  jfo?  thv  ttio?bs  faRc,  anb  aceo?* 
btng  to  thine  otbn  heart  haft  thou  bone 
all  thefc  great  things,  to  ma&e  thv  fee- 

UantHttOlb  them. 

21  B9hcrcfo2c  thou  art  great ,  j© 
3Lo?b  <B  ©  © :  foi  there  is  none  ItRc  tl)ec, 
neither  is  there  anv  <sob befibc  thee,  at- 
co?bingto  all  that  ibc  hatie  hcarb  ibith 
our  cares. 

xi  2lnb  *  ibhat  one  nation  in  the 
earth  is  URcthv  people,  euenitRc3Jfracl, 
whom  <5ob  ibentto  rcbecme  fo?  a  peo- 
ple to  himfclfc,  f  to  maRc  him  a  name, 
anb  to  bocro?  vou  grcatthings,anb  tcr> 
riblc,  fozthvianbc,  bcfo?c  tfjp  people 
tbhich  thourcbccmcbft  to  thee  from  c* 
gvpt,  from  the  nations,anb  their  gobs j. 

24  ifo?  thou  haft  confirmcD  to  thv 
fclfc  thv  people  3ifracl  to  be  a  people  btu 
tothccfo?cucr :  anb  thou,  It  ©is  ©art 
become  their  (5ob. 

25  3nbnotb,j©1L<Dis©<!5ob,thc 
UwbthatthouhaftfpoRm,  concerning 
thy  fcruant,  anb  concerning  his  houfc, 
eftablilh  it  fo?  cucr,  anb  boc  as  thouhaft 
faib. 

x6  3nb  let  thv  name  bee  magntficb 
fo?  cucr,  faying,  Xhc1L©is©of  hofts 
is  the  ©ob  oner  3Jfracl :  anb  let  the 
houfc  of  thy  fcruant  2Dauib  bee  cftablt* 
ft)ebbcfo?cthcc. 

17  ;ffo2  thou,  £>&€>  is  ©of  hours, 
<Sob  of  gjfracl ,  haft t  rcucalcb  to  thv 
fcruant ,  faring ,  3  lbill  butlb  thee  an 
houfc :  thetfo?c  hath  thv  fcruant  founb 
in  his  heart  to  p?av  this  p?avcr  bnto 
thee. 

23  3nbnott»,4D?Lo2b(25©©,(thou 

art  that  ©ob ,  anb  *  thv  wo?bs  be  true, 


anb  thou  haft  pjomtfeb  thtsgoobneffe 
bnto  thv  fcruant.) 

29  1i:hcrcfo2cnoVbtiet  ttpleafc  thee 
to  blcffc  the  houfc  of  thv  fcruaut,that  it 
mav  continue  fo?  cuer  bcfo?c  thec :  fo? 
thou,j3D?lo?b  <25£>©,hattfpoRcnit,anb 
With  thv  bleffmg  let  the  houfc  of  thv 
fcruant  be  blcffcbfo?  cucr. 

CHAP.    VIIL 

Dauid  iubdueth  the  Philiftines  and  the  Moa- 
bites.  3  He  fmiteth  Hadadezer.and  the  Sy- 
rians. <?  Toi  fendethloram  with  Pre fents  to 
blefle  him.  n  The  Prelents  and  the  fpoile 
Dauid  dedicateth  to  God.  14  He  putteth  si- 
rifons  in  Edom.  16  Dauids  officers. 

jftb*  after  this  it  came  to 
Jjf  paffc,  that  SDauib  fmotc 
£$  the  ^hiliftines,  anb  tub* 
bucb  them :  anb  SDauib 
jtooRe||£)3cthcg-3unmah 
outof  rhchanb  of  thc^lnufrmcs. 

2  3lnb  he  fmotc  £I9o'ab,  anb  mcafu< 
rcb  them  with  a  line ,  rafting  them 
borbnc  to  the  grounb :  cum  tbttii  two 
lines  mcafurcb  he,  to  put  to  beat!),  anb 
With  one  full  Imc  to  Rccpc  aiiue:  aub 
fo  the  ^oabites  became  SDautbs  fcr- 
uants,  and  b?ought  gifts. 

3  C  2>auib  fmotc  alfo  I?ababe3cr 
thcfouneofKchob,liingofrobah,as 
he  ibcnttorccoucr  hisbo?bcratthcris 
ticrCupIuatcs. 

4  ^nb  SDamb  tooRe  |]  from  him  a 
thoufanb  ||  charets,  anb  fcucn  hunb?cb 
ho?fcmcn,  anbttticntiethoufanb  footc* 
men:  anb  2Dauib  houghcb  aiitljc  cfja^ 
tct  horfes ,  but  refcrucb  of  them  for  an 
hunb?cb  charets. 

5  3lnb  tbhtn  the  5>v2ians  of  Da< 
mafnis  came  to  fuccouc  ^ababeser 
King  of  zobah,2DambOelb  of  thc5>v 
rians  ttbo  anb  ttbentic  thoufanb  men. 

6  'EhcnaDautbputganfonsin&V1 
naof  2>amaftus :  3nbthc  <i>v?iansbc< 
came  fcruants  to  2>auib ,  and  b?ought 
gifts :  anb  the  %  ©  is  ©  p?eferueb  2>a? 
uib  ibhirhcrfocuer  hewent. 

7  %xfo  2Dauib  toofee  the  fbielbs  of 
golb  tljat  iberc  on  rt)e  feruants  of  $& 
babC5cr,  anbb?oughtthcmto3fcrufa* 
Icm. 

8  2(nb  from  25etah  anb  from  25cro= 
that,  nticsof  i^ababc?cr,  BtngSDaafl) 
too&ccrcccbingmuchb?affc. 

9  C  nahen  Xoi  Ring  of  I?amath 
hcarb  that  2>autb  hab  Onittcn  ail  the 
hoftcof^ababejer, 
jFf        10  Xhcn 


\H,!'.t,e 
thou  pltAfed 


tdblrffe. 


'  l.Oiron. 

18.I.&C. 

pfjl.60.2. 


^Or.thein- 
dle  of  Am* 


\Or,ofhU. 

|]Asi.Chr. 
iii.4. 


DauidskindnefTe      Il.Samucl.    to  Mephibofheth. 


\  Mr.  asks 
him  of  peace. 


\Bebr.rvas 
a  man  of 
wirrrcSTHtri. 
\Hcbr.in 
hit  band 


\  Heh.hu 
fmitinf. 


\\0r,  re- 
membran- 
cer,or  wri- 
ter of  Chro- 
nicles. 

\\Orfecre- 

tarj. 

*  l.CIiron 

18.17. 

^Or/Trm- 
ces. 


10  Xftcn  Xotfcnfjo  jam  ftis  tonne 
bnto  fetng  S>auiD  to  tfaiutc  ftun,  anD  to 
blcflcftun ,  bctaufc  ftec  ftaDfougftt  a- 
gatn0fc?aDaDC5Cv,anDfmtttenftim:(toJ 
^aDaDoec  t  haD  ttmrres  iDttft  XoO 
anD  ioram  tbzonsljcibtri)  Dim  DcfTcls  of 
ftluer,atiD  t»cflcls  of  golo,anD  DcfTcls  of 
bjaffe; 

1 1  BSfticft  alfo  bins  2>auiD  DtD  DcDt; 
tate  Dnto  tJje  JL  &  h  © ,  ttntt)  rtjc  fiiucr 
anD  goiD  that  fte  ftaDDcDtcate  of  all  tuv 
tionsibhichhcfubDucD: 

ix  <£>f  ©#»,  anD  of  £E)oab,  anD  of 
ttjc  chtlDjeu  of  Amnion,  anD  of  tftcpftt* 
limncs,?  of  3lniaicfe,anD  of  tftc  fpotlc  of 
$aDaDe5Ct  fonnc  of  3SchoD  fetng  of 
zoDah. 

13  3lttD  2>auiD  gate  him  a  name  lDftcn 
he  rcturncD  from  t  (miring  of  the  £>yjt; 
ans  in  the  Dalley  of  fait ,  being  ctghtccnc 

tttOtlfanDmen. 

14.  CHuD  he  put  garrtfons  in  CDont; 
fhojoiDoutailCDomputhcgarrtfons, 
anD  all  they  of  €Dom  bctamc  2DautDS 
feruants :  anD  ttjc  Hois©  pJtfctucD 
SDautD  iDhtthcttocuer  fte  ttient. 

1$  3mD  2?auiD  rclgncD  ouet:  all  5Jf- 
racl ,  anD  2DauiD  crccutcD  inDgcnicnt 
anDUttticcDntoallhispcoplc. 

i6  2wd  3Joab  the  tonne  of Zcrttiaft 
wasoucttfteftoMuD3Jtftofhaphatfhc 
fonnc  of  3hiltiD  was  ||  ftaojDcr. 

17  3nDZaDofethcfMtncof3iftttub, 
anD  SThtmclcchfhc  fonnc  of  abtatftar, 

were  tftC  $2ieftS,  3ltD  &Craiaft  wastftC 

llftribc. 

18  *3wD26cnaiaft  tftc  fonnc  ofjc: 
ftoiaDaiDas  oucr  botft  tftcCftcretftttcs, 
anD  the  $clcthitcs,anD  £>auiDs  tonnes 
ibcre||thicfc  rulers. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Dauid  by  Ziba,  fendefh  for  Mephibofheth. 
7  Forlonafhans  fake  heintertaineth  him  at 
his  table,and  reftoreth  him  all  that  was  S  auls. 
o  HemakcthZibahisfarmour. 

I  4!3D2>amD  fatD  ,3s  there 
'yet  any  that  is  left  of  the 
|fioufc  of  £>aui ,  that  "j 
,may  (hc\D  t)im  feitumcuc 
;foj3Jonafhansfafec< 
3lnD  tljtrc  lbas  of  ttjc  houfc  of 
£>aul,afcruant  lDhofc  name  IDas  Zfc! 
ba :  anD  lDhcn  tl)c  ?  ftaD  callcD  fttm  Ditto 
£>autD,tfte  fetng  faiD  Ditto  l)tm,  Art  thou 
ztba?3inDhcfaiD,Xhy  feruant  ishe. 

5  anD  tnc  feing  fatD ,  3Js  there  not 
ret  any of tftc  ftoufcof  &mi ,  that  3J 


map  (hetti  tftc  btttDncflt  of  ©oD  bnto 
ftim<  anD  Ziba  fatD  Ditto  tftc  lung,  gjo- 
natftan  hath  yet  a  totinc,lDfticft  is  'lame 
onftisfcctc. 

4.  anD  tftc  fetng  faibe  Dnto  ftun, 
leljcre  isftec  <  anD  Ztba  faiD  Ditto  tftc 
feing,  zScftolD ,  fte  is  m  tftc  ftoufe  of  ©a- 
eft  tr  tftc  tonne  of  3tmmicl ,  in  HLoDcbar. 

5  CICften  feing  3>auiD  fern,  anD  fct 
ftimoutof  tftc  ftoufcof  £0acfttc  tftc  ton 
of3mmtel,from1LoDcbar. 

6  i?ott)  iDftcn  Q9cpfttbofftctft  tftc 
tonne  of^onatljan  tftcfonnc  ofsaul, 
iDas  tome  Dnto  S>autD,  fttcfcllon  ftts 
fatcanD  did  rcucrcnte :  anD  SDauiD  faiD, 
flJfJcpfttbofftcfb  i  ^nD  fte  anfiuetcD,  25c- 
ftolDtftvtotuant. 

7  €E^nD  2>attiD  fatDc  Dnto  fttnt, 
jfeatc  not ;  to?  3  ibift  furelp  fftctb  tftce 
bmDttcffc ,  foz  ^Jonatftan  tftv  fatfters 
fafee,  anD  iDtll  reOo?c  tfttc  ailtftclanD 
of  £>aul  tftv  fatftet ,  anD  tftou  fl^ait  catc 
bjcab  at  my  tabic  continually. 

8  3inD  ftce  botbeD  fttmfclfe ,  anD 
faiDcnaftat  is  tftv  feruant ,  tftat  tftou 
CftoiUDeftloofeeDpon  futft  aoeaDDoggc 
as^am? 

9  C  3Cften  tftc  feing  taiicD  to  Ziba 
£>attls  fctuant ,  anD  fatD  Dnto  ftim  ,3 
ftauegiucnDnto  tfty  maftcrs  tonne  ail 
tftat  pcrtatncD  to  5>aul ,  anD  to  ail  ftts 
ftonfe. 

10  Xftou  tftcrcfo?c  anD  tftp  tonnes, 
anDtftyferuants ,  fljalitill  tftclanDfoz 
ftun  ,  anD  tftou  (halt  biing  in  the  fruits, 
tftat  tfty  matters  fonnc  may  ftattcfooD 
to  cate :  but  sjpepfttbofhctft  t!)y  ma* 
,  Iters  tonne  fball  cat  bjcaD  allDay  at  my 
table.  j(i5ott»  Ztba  ftaD  fiftccnc  tonnes, 
auDtiDcntyferuants. 

1 1  Xftcn  fatDc  Ziba  Dnto  tftc  feing, 
3cco2Dutgto  ailtljat  my  I02D  tftc  fetng 
ftatftconunatiDcD  ftts  feruant ,  tofliail 
thy  feruant  doc:  asfo?  ^epftibofljctft, 
faid  the  King,  he  (hail  catc  atmy  table,  as 
oncoffhefemgsfounes. 

yl  ^ud  £0ephtbo(hcth  ftaD  a  yong 
tonne  vbftofc  name  was  ^ttfta:  anoau 
tftatDiDtltintfteftoufcofZiba,werefeci 

uantsDnto  Mephibofheth. 

n  &o  iPcphibofhcth  DlDelt  in  3t 
rufalent:  foz  hccDiDeatctonnnuallyat 
the  feings  tabic,  anD  IDas  lame  on  both 
hisfecte. 

CHAP.   X. 

1  Dauids  mefTengers  fent  to  comfort  Hanun 
the  fonnc  ot  Nahafh,  are  villenoufly  intrea- 
ted.  6  The  Aimnoiiites.lhengthenedby  the 

Syrians, 


'Chai 


Hanuns  villcnie        Chap.x.xj, 


lsreuenp-e 


& 


xl. 


■  l.Chron. 
IJM. 


f  Heir,  in 
thine  ejel 
doth  T)a- 
Htd.  > 


Syrians,  are  ouercome  by  IoabandAbifhai. 
15  Shobach  making  a  new  fupply  of  the  Sy- 
rians at  Helam,  isflaifiebyDauid. 

j!5D  it  came  to  paflfc,  after 
this,thatthe*Btngofthc 
chtlDzcn  of  Amnion  Diet), 
anD  $amm  his  fonne  r  cig* 
^neDinhisftcaD. 
z  Xhen  fatD  2t>auiD ,  %  nnll  CheiDe 
BinDncsbnto  iijanunthc  ftinncof  i!5a* 
hafh ,  as  his  father  fhctticD  femtmes  bit* 
tome.  3nD  SDauiDfent  to  comfonhitn 
bp  the  hanD  of  his  fcrnants ,  foj  hts  fa* 
thcr :  atiD  2DautDS  fcruants  tame  into 
the  lanD  of  the  chiKuen  of  Amnion. 

j  3tnD  thcpjlnccs  of  the  tDittuen  of 
amnion  fatDc  Ditto  5>anun  their  lort>, 
tIChmUeft  thou  that  ©attiD  DoctftJjo* 
ttour  thp  father ,  that  he  hath  fent  torn* 
footers  Ditto  thec?  l^atijnot  DamDra* 
thcr  fent  hts  fcrnants  Dnto  thec,  to 
fearth  the  cine,  anDtofptcitont,  anD  to 
oucrthJoiDtt? 

4  nahcrcfoze^anuntoottca^auiDs 
fcruants,  anD  fhaucD  off  the  one  haifc 
of  tl)«r  bcarDs ,  anD  tut  off  their  gar- 
ments intncmiDDle,  eucn  to  their  but* 
tocfes.anD  fentthem  att>ap. 

5  nohen  thep  tolD  it  bnto  2DauiD,  he 
fent  to  meet  thcm,becaufc  the  men  tberc 
grwtlp  afbamcD:  anD  the  Buig  fatDe, 
Xarie  at  Jericho  Dnttll  pour  bearDs  be 
grotben,  and  thenrcfurne. 

6  C  3luD  ibhcn  the  dnlDicn  of  Am- 
nion faib  that  thcr*  ttanhe  before  £>a* 
uaD,  tijjc  chtlD:ett  of  Amnion  fent,  anD 
hircD  the  5>pjians  of  2Scth-ftehob, 
anD  tl)c  Spurns  of  roba ,  tvbentic 
thoufanD  footmen ,  anD  of  lung  Q3aa- 
eal),  a  thoufanD  men,  anD  of  Jfytob 
tlbclue  thoufanD  men. 

7  3lnDrbhcn2DaiuDhcarDofit,hc 
fcut3!oab,aitD  all  the  hottc  of  the  migl> 
tic  men. 

$  3lnD  the  thilDjcn  of  Amnion 
came  out,  anD  put  thcbattclltuarapat 
the  enmng  m  of  the  gate :  anD  tljc  £>p 
rtansofzobaanDofftchob.attDjfli 
tob,  anD  £0aatal),werc  bp  thcmfelues  in 
thcficlD. 

9  ©hcnJoabfaiDthatthcfcotttof 
tljcbattcinDasagamft  him,  before  anD 
bcoutD,  hechofeof  alltl)c  choifemenof 
Jfracl ,  anD  put  them  in  arap  agamft 

thC&pnaitS. 

10  anD  the  reft  of  the  people  lie  Deli* 
iter  cD  into  thcbauD  of  atnfhaihtsbio; 
thcr,  that he  migl)t  put  rhem  m  arap  ^ 
gamtt  tl>e  chUDjcn  of  ammon. 


11  anbhcfaiD,  Jf  tbe&pnans  bee 
too  ftrongfoi  me,  then  thou  ttjait  ftcipe 
me :  but  if  the  chilDien  of  ammoh  bee 
too  ftrong  foz  thec ,  then  3  toili  tome 
anD  helpe  thec. 

\z  25c  of  gooD  courage ,  anD  let  bs 
plap  the  men,  foz  our  people,  anD  fo:  rt)e 
cities  of  our  C5oD :  anD  the  Ho  is  d  doc 
that  nrtneh  fecmeth  him  gooD. 

1  j  ^ud  3Joab  DirtD  nigh ,  anD  tlicpco- 
pic  that  were  ibith  him,  Dnto  thcbattcll 
agaiult  tljc  5>v^ans:  anD  thep  flcD  bc-- 
fojcljim. 

14.  3nD  ibhtn  thcthilDjm  of^m* 
mon  faib  that  tf)e ^pjiatts lDcrc  flcDDc, 
thmflcDthcvaifobcfojcabifljat,  anD 
cntrcDinto  thentte:  fogjoab  returncD 
from  the  thilD^en  of  Amnion ,  anD 
cameto35crufaiem. 

15  C^nDiDhcnthc^>p;iansfaiDc 
tljat  tljcp  tticre  fmittcn  before  ^frael, 
thep  gathcrcD  thcmfelues  together. 

i6  3nD^aDare?crfcnt,anDbjougl)t 
outthcSpnansthatwerebeponDrijcru 
ucr,  anD  thep  tame  to  ^eiam.anD  Sho- 
bach the  eaptaiuc  of  the  hoftc  of  $?aDa* 
cc^cr  wentbcfojcthem. 

17  ^ttDibhenitibastolD£)auiD,hc 
gatljercD  all  ^ftacl  togctljer,  anD  pat 
fcD  ouer  JojDanc ,  anD  tame  to  l?eiam : 
anD  the  Jbpnans  fet  thcmfelues  m  arap 
agamft  ©auiD,  anD  fought  lbitJ)  htm. 

is  3md  the  5>p2iansfleD  before  JO 
racl,  anD  3DauiD  flcVb  tbe  men  of  feucn 
hunDjeD  charets  of  the  S>pnatts,  anD 
fonrtte  thoufanDhojfcmm ,  anD  fmotc 
§>hobach  the  taptautc  of  tljcir  hour, 
VbljoDicD  there. 

19  ^ttDlbhen  all  the  femgs  that  mere 
fcruants  to  i?aDarc5cr  farbe,  that  thep 
lbecc  fmittcn  before  Jfracl,  thep  mabe 
peace  ibtth  Jfrael,  anD  fcrucD  them  :fo 
the  ^pziansfearcDto  helpe  the  thilDjen 
of  Amnion  anpmoze. 

CHAP.    XI. 

1  While  loab  befieged  Rabbab,  Dauid  com- 
mitteth  adulterie  with  Bath-  fheba.  6  Vriah 
fjnt  for  by  Dauki  to  coucr  the  adulterie, 
would  not  goe  home  neither  (obcr  nor  drun- 
ken. 14  Hee  cariethto  loab  the  lettet  of  his 
death.  18  Ioabfcndeth  the  newes  thereof  to 
Dauid.  2.6  DauidtakethBath-fhebatowite. 

/2DtttamctoparJe,that 
t  after  the  peer cybascrpi-- 
rcD  ,  at  the  time  lbhcn 
Uings  goc  fooub  to  baueii, 
that  *  2>auiD  fent  3ioab 
anD  his  fcruants  Vbith  him,  anD  all  3ifc 
flz  racl; 


\HeiMthi 

returnr  of 
the  y: ere, 

"  l.Chron. 
20. t. 


Dauidsadultene,      Il.Samucl. 


an 


d  murder. 


J  Or,  and 
whcjie  had 
puriJUdher 
f'lfc.&c.lhc 
retHrntd. 

*  Leuit.  15. 
ip.  and 
■9- 


\ Htk  if  the 

praceej  C~<- 


onlafler 
him. 


rael;  anbtbeybcfttoycbtbc  chilbjenof 
amnion ,  anb  bcOcgcb  ftabbab :  but 
2Dauibtancb  trill  at  3Jcrufaicm. 

I  C  anb  tt  tame  to  paffc  in  an  cue- 
mngtibctbataDautbarofcfcomoffbis 
beb, anb  lbaihcbbpon  tbcroofeof  the 
Rings  houfc:anbfcom  ttjc  roofc  he  faib 
a  Woman  lbafljtng'ibetfelfe;  anb the 
woman  was  bery  beantifull  to  loo&c 
bpon. 

j  anb  2>auib  fent  anb  enquir  cb  af- 
ter the  Woman:  anb  oncfatb ,  3isnot 
this  25ati)-fl)tba  the  baugbtcc  of  €* 
nam,  tl)c  Wife  of  Uriah  the  l?itrtte  < 

4  anb  3Dautb fent  mcffcugcrs,anb 
tooUcbcr,  anb  (lice  tame  in  bnto  bun, 
anb  be  lap  With  Iier ,  ( ||  fo?  (be  was  *  pu= 
rifieb  from  net  bnclcanneffr)  anbfl)ec 
rcntrncb  bnto  her  boufe. 

5  anb  the  Woman  tontcmcb ,  anb 
fent  anb  tolbc  SDauib,  anbfaib,  3  am 
Witbcbilbe. 

6  C  anb  2Dautb  fent  to  3Joab ,  fay- 
in?,  5>cnb  me  Uriah  the  tyitntc.  anb 
3loab  fent  Uriah  to  SDauib. 

7  anb  When  Uriah  was  tome  bn- 
to nun,  £>auib  bemanbeb  of  rjim  t  bow 
'Joabbib.anbljoibtljcpcoplebtbjanb 
bow  tbe  ibar  re  p2ofpcrcb. 

8  anb  2>autb  faib  to  Uriah ,  <3oc 
boWnc  to  tby  houfcanb  ibafli  tby  f cctc. 
anb  Uriah  bepartcb  out  of  tlje  Btngs 
houfcanb  there  t  folloibcb  bunameffe 
of  meat  from  the  Ring. 

9  2Sut  Uriah  flept  at  the  boo2c  of 
the  Rings  boufe ,  With  all  the  fcruants 
of  his  io;b,  anb  Went  not  bourn  c  to  bis 
boufe. 

10  anb  WbcnfbcybabtolbcDatub, 
faying,  Uriah  went  not  boibne  bnto 
1)10  boufe,  2Daiub  faib  bnto  Uriah,  Ca 
melt  tl)ott  not  from  tbyiourncy<  Why 
then  bibbeft  tljou  not  goe  boibnc  bnto 
thine  boufe; 

II  ^nb  Uriah  fart)  bnto  Daucb,Xl)c 
arRcatWJfracl,  anb'Jubababibe  m 
tents, anb  my  102b  Joab,  anb the  fcr- 
uants  of  my  102b  arc  cutampeb  in  tfjc 
opcnficlbs;  (ball  3J  then  goemto  nunc 
Doufc ,  to  cate  anb  to  b2inRc,  anb  to  Uc 
With  mp  wife;  as  tl)ou  itucff,  anb  as 
thy  foulc  luicfh ,  "J  null  not  boc  this 
thing. 

ii  ^ub  Dambfaibto  Uriah,  Xary 
here  to  bay  aifo,  anb  to  1U020W  31  lbillj 
let  thee  bepart.  £>o  Uriah  abobemje 
rufaicm  that  bay ,  anb  the  mo?roib. 

i}  anb When Dautb hab  callcbbim,  J 
Dec  b:b  catc  anb  bunlic  before  him,  anb 


he  mabebim  bninbc:  anb  at  cucu  lire 
Went  out  to  lie  on  bis  beb  Ibttl)  the  fee- 
uants  of  bis  102b,  but  Went  not  boWnc 
to  bis  boufe. 

14  canb  it  came  to  paffcm  the  11102; 
mng,that  3?auib  Wjotc  a  letter  to^o- 
ab.anbfcnt  it  bythchanbof  Uriah. 

15  anb  helb2otc m  the  letter,  faying, 
£>ct  ycc  Uriah  in  the  fo?efront  of  the 
tbottcft  battcl,anb  renreye  tfrom  him, 
that  he  may  bcfmitten,anbbie. 

16  anbitcametopaffcVbhcn^Ioab 
obferucb  tlje  ntic ,  that  b  c  affigneb  5Un- 
al)  bnto  a  place  lbbxrc  bee  imclbe  that 
baiiant  men  ibere. 

17  anb  tl)c  men  of  the  city  tbent  out, 
anb  fought  lbitb  3Joab:  anb  there  fell 
fomc  of  tl)e  people  of  the  femants  of 
2>auib,anb  Uriah  the  imitate  bicbaifo. 

18  C  Xhcn  3Joab  fent,  anb  tolbe 
3)auib  all  tlje  tljmgs  concerning  tlje 
ibarrc : 

19  anb  chargcb  the  meflenger,  fay 
mg,  ODhcn  thouhatt  mabc  an  cube  of 
telling  the  matters  of  the  ibarrc  bnto 
tbeisungj 

io  anb  if  fo  be  that  the  Rings  ib2ath 
arifc,  anb  hec  fay  bnto  thee ,  D9hercfo2e 
app2ocl)cb  y  c  fo  nigh  bnto  the  nty  mhen 
ycc  bib  fights  BncVb  yccnot  thattljcp 
ttioulb  fhoot  from  the  iball  < 

21  n9hofinotc*abimelcchthcfonnc 
of  3Jcrubcfl)Cth'  2>tb  not  a  iboman 
call  a  piece  of  a  nuUtonc  bpon  him  from 
the  mail,  that  he  biebin  Xbcbe}*  tbhy 
rbentycntgl)  riiclbaik  Xhmfay  thou, 
Xhy  fcruant  Uriah  tbc^itntcisbcab 
aifo. 

xi  C5>o  the  mcffcngcrlbcnt,  anb 
tame  anb  fljcibcb  2Dauib  all  that  3!oab 
hab  fent  him  fo;. 

23  anb  the  meffenger  faib  bnto  2>a= 
uib ,  Purely  the  men  p2euailcb  agatnft 
bs,  anb  came  out  bnto  bs  into  the  ficlb, 
anb  \bc  ibere  bpon  them  cucu  bnto  the 
entrmgofthegatc. 

14  anbtbcfbootcrsfbotfromofT 
theibail  bpon  thy  femants,  anb  fomc 
of  the  Bings  fcruantsbe  bcab,  anb  tl)y 
fcruant  Uriah  the  tyitntc  is  bcab  aifo. 

z5  IChen  2>auib  faib  bnto  the  mcf 
fenger ,  Xhus  (bait  thou  fay  bnto  31o- 
ab ,  fLet  not  this  thing  t  bifplcafc  thee : 
fo2thcf\b02bbcuourcthtoncasibcllas 
another :  ^ahc  thy  battcll  11102c  llroug 
agauift  the  ritic,  anb  oucrth?oib  it ;  anb 
encourage  thou  him. 

i6  canb  tbljcn  thcibifc  of  Uriah 
Dearb  that  Uriah  her  bufbanb  ibas 

bcab, 


\Htkflrone 
\  Hrb-  from 
after  htm. 


Mudg9- 
S3- 


ctorfinthtn 

')-•'■ , 

and  'mch. 


Nathans  parable         Chap.xij.       Dauidrepenteth. 


nuHinthe 

eiesof. 


t  Hcb.mer- 


f  Or,  it  tpor- 
ikyiodie. 

"Exo.12.1 


*Sam.i6. 
"3. 


beab,  (be  mournco  fo:  her  hufbanb. 

z7  anb  ibhcn  the  mourning  mas 
pad,  t>auib  ftnt,  anb  fct  her  to  his 
tjoufcanb  (be  became  his  ttnfe,anb  bare 
him  a  fonnc :  but  the  tfjmg  that  S>auib 
hab  bone,  t  bifpleafcb  the  lLoisp. 

CHAP.   XI I. 

i  Nathans  parable  of  the  Ewe  lambe  ,  cau- 
feth  Dauid  to  be  his  owne  Iucfee.  7  Da- 
uid,  reproued  by  Natlun,confefledi  his  finne 
and  is  pardoned.  15  Dauid moumeth  and 
prayeth  for  the  childe,  while  itliued.  14 
Salomon  is  borne  and  named  Iedidiah.  16 
Dauid  taketh  Rabbah,and  tortureth  the 
people  thereof 

„  jBb  tftc  ILadk©  fent  ^Ba- 

UmWu  rtJan  ^nt0  a>aml) :  anl)  llc 
"/£&\m  tame  bnto  hun ,  anb  faib 

bnto  hun ,  %\ytn  ibere 

s^-yea*  tuio  men  m  one  tttic  -,  tlje 

one  run,  anb  the  other  pooje. 

i  %\yt  rich  man  hao  cjcccebing  ma* 

npflotkes  anb  herbs. 

3  But  tlje  poozc  man  hao  nothing 
fane  one  Utlcetbciambc,  ibhich  he  Dab 
bought  anb  nounfbeb  bp :  anb  it  grcib 
bp  together  ttittb  bun ,  anb  ibid)  bis 
cbtlb2cn,ttbib  eate  of  his  oibne  tnteate, 
anbtyankcofhisomnccup,  anb  lap  in 
his  bofomc,  anb  Ibas  bnto  him  as  a 
Daughter. 

4  anb  there  tamcatrancllerbnto 
the  nth  man ,  anb  he  fparcb  to  take  of 
bisoibneflockc,  anbofbisottmchcrb, 
to  bzefle  fo2  the  lbapfaring  man  that 
tbas  tome  bnto  him ,  but  tooke  the 
p  0  0 :  c  mans  lamb  c ,  aub  bjeffeb  it  fo;  the 
man  thatibastomc  to  htm. 

5  atlb  SDauibs  auger  mas  greatly 
kinblco  agatnO  the  man ,  anb  he  faib  to 
Nathan,  as  the  Ha>is©liueth,  the 
man  that  hath  bone  this  thing ,  ||  than 
furclpbie. 

6  anb  he  (hall  reft02C  the  fLambc 
*fourcfolb ,  bceaufc  he  bib  this  thing, 
aubbctaufehchab  no  pittie. 

7  C  anb  /ISatban  faib  to  SDauib, 
Xhou  art  the  man :  thus  faith  the 
|L©is©  <sob  of  3(frael,  ^Tanomteb 
thee  king  ouer  3Jfracl,  anb  3  beliuercb 
tbteoutoftbcbanbof£>aul, 

8  ^nb  3  gaue  thee  th?  Rafters 
boufe,anbtbp  ^afterstbiuesmtotbp 
bofome,  anb  gaue  thee  the  houfe  of  3Jf 
racl  anb  of  Jubah,  anb  if  that  hab  bene 
toolitle,38ft)oulbmo2eouerhauegiuen 
bnto  thecfuch  anb  futh  things. 


9  nahcrcfoze  haft  thou  befptfeb  the 
tommanbement  of  the  ft©  is  id,  to  boc 
cuill  in  his  fight  *  thou  haft  biiicb  Wvu 
ahthc^itntc  ttntli  tlKftbojo,  ano  haft 
taknt  his  lbife  to  be  tbp  lbtfc ,  aub  haft 
flame  him  ibttb  the  flbozb  of  the  rttfl5 
bzcit  of  ammon. 

io  /Boib  therefor  the  fibo;b  (bail 
tinier  ocpart  from  thme  houfe ,  bceaufc 
thou  haft befpifeb  me,  ano  haft  taken 
the  lbife  of  flUnab  the  pittite,  to  betbp 
lbife. 

ii  Xhusfaith  thc?t©KjD ,  ascboib, 
3Jibiilraifc  bp  cuiliagainft  thee  out  of 
ti)inc  oibnchoufcano  3  ibtll*  take  thy 
ibiucs  before  thine  eyes ,  anb  giuc  them 
bnto  thy  neighbour ,  anb  he  (hall  lie 
ibith  thy  lbutcs  m  tlje  tight  of  this 
dumie. 

ii  ifoz  thou  bibbeft  it  fecretly :  but 3J 
lbtllbo  this  thing  before  all  3)fracl,  anb 
bcfojctbe&untte. 

13  anb  3>attib  fatbc  bnto  jftatban, 
3J  hauc  finneo  agamft  the  flow©. 

^nb  jftatban  taibe  bnto  5>amb ,  ItXyt 
H©is©  alfo  hath  put  albay  thv  f«me, 
thou  (halt  not bic. 

14  ^olbbeit ,  bctaufe  by  this  hem 
thou  haft  giucn  great  occafiontofbec* 
ncmies  of  the  H©isK>  to  blafpheme,the 
cl)ilbc  alfo  that  is  borne  bnto  thee,  (hall 
furelpbte. 

15  C  anb  jftathan  bepattcb  bnto 
his  houfe: anb  the  IUmbb  ftrake  the 
chtlbc  that  Uriahs  lbife  bar  c  bnto  2D& 
uib,  anb  it  masbery  fteke. 

16  SDauib  therfo2e  befought  C5ob  fo? 
the  cbilbcanb  SDauib  t  fafteb,  anb  ibcnt 
m,anb  lap  all  night  bpon  the  cartlj. 

17  anb  the  «lbers  of  his  houfe  a* 
rofe,  and  went  to  Inm ,  to  raifehimbp 
from theearth: but  he  Vboulb not,  nei- 
ther bib  he  eate  tycab  ibith  them. 

18  ano  it  tame  to  pafle  on  the  fc- 
ucnth  bap,that  the  chilbe  bieb :  anb  the 
fcruants  of  SDautb  fearcb  to  tell  him 
that  the  cljilbtbas  beab  :fonhcpfaibe, 
35eholb,ibhilcthcchiibe»)aspetaUue, 
mefpakc  bnto  him, anohciboulbnot 
hearken  bnto  our  boice:holb  Vbill  he 
thmtbere  himfelfe,  ifibe  tell  him  that 
thcchilbcisbcab? 

19  But  rohen  SDauib  faib  that  his 
fcruants  lbhifpercb,  2>atub  pcrcciucb 
that  the  chilbcibas  beab:  therefore  S>a? 
uib  faib  bnto  his  fcruants,  3is  the  chuo 
beab  i  anb  ftc?  faib,  i^c  is  bcab. 

zo  Xhen  SDaiub  arofc  from  the  earth 

anbibaihcb,anbanomtcb  himfelte ,  anb 

ff3  changco 


•Dent  ,8 
jo.chap. 
16. ii. 


*Ecclus. 
47.U. 


]Heh.f«Jied 
aft!}. 


^H.b.dce 
hurl. 


Solomon  borne.        I  I.Samucl.  Amnons  lull:. 


'Matt.rtf. 


*  l.Chroa 
n.g.    ■ 
||  That  it, 

BrloHtdof 
the  Lord. 


\U,hr.my 

rumebtc*!- 

tedxtontt. 


'  I.Chron. 
JO.!. 


\  Hflr.verj 


chaugcD  his  apparcii,anD  came  into  the 
houtc  of  the  %  0  is  ©,  anD  VboifhtppcD: 
then  hee  came  to  his  oibnc  houtc,  anD 
when  he  rccuurcD,  theptet  bjcaD  befo/c 
t)tm,anDl)c  Dictate. 

21  %hcu  fatD  his  fcruants  bnto  him, 
<c©hat  thing  >s  this  that  thou  haftbonc-. 
thouoiDlttaft  auDibcepe  fo?  the  chilDt, 
lbhtlt  tt  urns  aliue,  but  when  the  chilDc 
wasDcao,  thouDiDft  rife  anD  eat  bicao. 

22  auDhcfaiD,  nahucthechtiDwas 
vet  alrne,  3  fafteD  ano  Wept :  foj  3  faiD, 
terjo  tan  tell,  whether  ooD  Will  be  graci- 
ous to  me,  that  the  chiiD  map  Hue  < 

zj  aoutnoWhccisDcaD.uahcrcfoic 
fl)oulD3fa{h  Can  3  biting  Dun  bactte 
agaiuc  i  3  ty&ll  sot  to  him,  but  he  fhail 
notrcturnetomc. 

14  canDDautDcomfcmcD26an> 
(heba  his  ibife,  auD  lbnit  in  bnto  her, 
anD  lap  With  her:  anD  "the  bare  a  tonne, 
ano  hecaiicD  his  name  Solomon ,  anD 

thClL©lK£>lOUtDhim. 

25  attD  hee  tent  bp  the  lianD  of  jj3a 
than  the  ^ophct,  ano  "hee  callcD  his 
nanic  igicDiDtal),bccanfeoftlK  ILoi33E>. 

26  canD3oabtoughtagainft&afr 
ban  of  the  cfjilDien  of  Amnion,  anD 
toofcc  the  ropaii  cine. 

27  ano  3Joab  fent  inctTcngcrs  to 
Z>aniD ,  auD  faib,3  hauc  fought  againft 
ftabbal; ,  anD  fjauc  ta&cn  the  tine  of 
maters. 

2$  >3oW  thcrcfoie,  gather  the  reft 
of  thcpeoplctogcthcr,  anD  encampea* 
gamftthe  ntic,  anD  taueit:  left  3ta&c 
tfje  citicanD  t  it  be  callcD  after  nip  name. 

29  anD  2>auiD  gathcrcD  au  the  pco? 
plctogcthct,anDWcntto&abbah,auD 
fought  againft  it,  anDtooacu. 

30  *anD  he  toohc  their  Rings  cro lime 
fromoffhtshcaD (the  Weight  Whereof 
was  a  talent  of  golD ,  nurh  the  vx nous 
Hones)  anb  ttwasiet  on  ©attiDs  hcaD, 
anD  he  bzought  fozth  the  fpoilc  of  the  cv 
tic f  m  great  abunDancc. 

31  anD  he  bjoughtfoonh  the  people 
that  were  therein,  anD  put  ihembtitiet 
fawes,  anD  btiDcr  harrowes  of  yion, 
ano  bnDcr  arts  0  f  p:on ,  anD  maoc  them 
pafTc  thiough  the  bnthcBtlnt:  anD 
thus  did  he  unto  all  the  tints  of  tlic  chti 
Dicn  of  amnion.  So  2>auiD  anD  all  the 
people  rcturncD  bnto  3crufalcm. 

CHAP.   XII L 

1  Amnon  louingTamar,  bylonadabscounfell 
faiiiinghimfelfeficke,  rauifheth  her.  r5  Hce 
haieihhcr,  and  lliamclully  turncih  her  a- 


way.  19  Ablalom  entertainer!!  her,  and 
concealeth  his  purpole.  15  At  a  llieepe- 
iheaiiug,  among  all  the  Kings  ionnes ,  hee 
killeth  Amnon.  30  Daurd  grieurng  at  the 
newesis  comforted  bvlonadab.  37  Ablalom 
flicth  to  Talin  ai  at  Geihiur. 

ji3D  it  tame  to  patte  after 
thts ,  that  ablalom  the 
fount  of  £>aii!D  haD  a  faitc 
ufter,jDhofc  name  *»*%& 
mar  :  anD  3lmnon  the 
tonne  of  DauiD  loncD  her. 

2  ^nD amnon  Ibas  fo  toercD,  that 
hefeliritaefo2his0fterXamar:  tbzflic 
!DasaDirgutc,anDt:3mnonthoughttt 
harD  tot  \)im  to  Doc  anp  thing  to  her. 

3  But  amnon  haD  a  fttcnD,  ibhofc 
name  was^onaoab,  the  fomie  of  5>h^ 
meah.  2>aniDs  brother :  anD^JonaDab 
wasatictyfubtillman. 

4  anDhcfaiDttontohim,  Vd\)yw, 
thou,  being  the  Bmgs  tonne,  t  leant 
t  from  Dap  to  cay;  nant  thou  not  tel  me; 
anD  amnon  fatD  tonto  him,  3  loue  %a- 
mar  mp  bzotljer  abfaioms  fitter. 

5  anD  3IonaDab  fatD  bnto  hun,|Up 
thceDoibne  on  thpbeD,  anD  mase  thp 
fclfc  ficac :  ano  rbhen  ti^>  father  torn- 
mcth  to  fee  thtt,  fay>  bnto  Inm ,  3  P #P 
tl)tt,  let  mp  Gftcr  Hatnar  tomt ,  anD 
guie  me  meat,  anD  Dzctte  the  meat  m  mp 
figl)t,  that  3  map  fee  u,  anD  tatc  it  at  her 
hanD. 

6  c  £>o  amnon  lap  DoiDnc ,  anD 
maoc  himfclfc  ucbc  :  anD  lhhen  the  King 
ibas  tome  to  fee  hint,  amnonfaiDtmto 
the  lung,  3  P^P  rt)« » w  %mat  mp  n> 
Iter  comt,  ejmaljc  meatoupltof  casts 
m  mp  Oght,that  3  map  eat  at  her  hanD. 

7  Xhcn  2>auiD  Cent  home  to  %& 
mar,  taping,  <soc  noVb  to  thp  brother 
amnons  houfe,  anD  D;effc  htm  meat, 

3  &o  Camar  lDcnt  to  her  b;othcr 
amnons  houft  (anD  htt  lDas  laiDt 
Dolbnt)anDfl)ftooKf||flowjf,anDBnfa* 
DtD  it, ano  maDt  cants  m  his  fight,  anD 
DiDbahttlitcartcs. 

9  anDfl)ftooBtapan,anDpotb;reD 
them  out  before  htm ,  but  hee  r tfuftD  to 
catt :  anD  amnon  fa»D,$auc  out  all  men 
from  mec :  anD  ttjep  lbcnt  out  cuerp 
man  from  htm. 

io  anD  amnon  faiDcbntoXamar, 
25nng  the  mtatt  tnto  tht  thambtr ,  that 
3  map  tatt  of  thme  hano.anD  Xamar 
tookcthe  tabes  ibhtth  O^ee  haD  maoc, 
ano  brought  them  mto  the  chamber  to 
amnon  her  toother. 

i  i  ano  ibhcn  thee  haD  btought  *em 

bnto 


t  Hrt>  it  w.43 

or  hidden  m 
the  fret  of 
tsfnmon. 


|  Heb .  mor- 


"0."}' 


\Oi,?*fie. 


Tamarrauifhed.       Chap.xiij.    Arnnon  murdered. 


anbfaib,25eholbnom,thpfcruanthath 
(heepe  fbearers,  %tt  theButg,  3be* 
fetch  thec,  anb ins  fcruants,  goc  ujitfj 
thpferuant. 

25  ami  the  lung  fapbe  to  abfaiom, 
i$ap,mpfonne,letns  not  ailnomgoc, 
left  me  be  rtjargeablc  tmto  tljce.  anb  he 
p;ctfebhim:hotbbetthemoulbttotgoc, 
butblcffcbhtm. 

i6  Xhen  faio  abfaiom ,  3Jf  not ,  3 
p?ap  thec,  let  mp  brother  amnott  goc 
mtthns.  anbthel&ngfatbbntohim, 
t©hp  (bouio  he  goc  tt>trt)  tjhec  < 

17  But  abfaiompjtflcb  him,  that 
helet  arnnon  anbailthc  tongs  fonncs 
goevbtthhim. 

28  C  jftomabfalomhao  commas 
Deb  his  fcruants,  fapmg,  £0ar&e  pee 
nom  lbhcn  amttons  heart  is  mcrrie 
ttnth  ibtne,  anb  mhcn3Jfap  unto  pou, 
£>mite  arnnon,  then  lull  hfm,  fcate 
not :  ||  hauc  not  31  conmianbcb  pou  *  be 
cour  agtous,  anb  be  t  ualiant. 

29  anbthcfcruantsofabfalombib 
tmto  arnnon  as  abfaiom  hab  com 
manbeb :  toenail  the  lungs  fonncs  as 
rore,anbcucrpmantgatchuitopupon 
hismulcanbfleb. 

jo  canDitcametopafrcmhtlcthep 
mere  uufje  map,  that  nbmgscamc  to 
2>auib,faptttg,  abfaiom  hath  flauteall 
rtje  lungs  fonncs ,  anb  ttjerets  not  one 
of  them  left. 

31  Xhmthctangarofe,anbtarchts 
garments,  anb  lap  on  the  earth :  anb 
ail  his  fcrnants  ftoobe  bp  mtth  their 
clothes  rent. 

32  ano  3onabab  the  fonne  of  &\yv 
mcah  2>autbstyothet,  anftbereb  anb 
tarn,  fLetnotmplojb  fuppofethatthep 
hauc  flame  all  the  pong  mat  the  lungs 
fonncs ;  foj  arnnon  onelp  is  beab :  fi» 
bp  the  t  appointment  of  abfaiom  this 
hath  becne  ||beternnneb ,  from  the  bap 
that  he  foncb  his  fitter  ICamar. 

33  il5omthcrefo?elctnotmplo?bthc 
lung  tafec  the  thing  to  his  heart,  to 
thiit&e  that  all  the  lungs  fonncs  are 
beab :  fo?  arnnon  onelp  is  beab. 

34.  2Sutabfalomfleb:anb  the  pong 
man  that  Kept  the  match,  lift  up  his 
epc6,anoiooBcb,anbbeholb,therecamc 
much  people  bp  the  map  of  the  hillGbc 
behtnbhtm. 

35  anb3Jonababfaibuntothctang, 
28eholb,the  kings  fonncs  come:  t  as  thp 
feruantfatb,fottts. 

36  anb  it  came  to  patte  affoone  as 
hec  liab  mabc  an  cube  of  fpcaiung,  that 

bchoib, 


\Hth.him- 
blcmt. 

Lcuit. 

8.9. 

\Hcb.It 

tqhtrtot  [0 
lobtdoae. 


t  Hth.nilh 
£rc*t  hatred 
gruttj. 


t  Htk.fit 

not  thine 
heart. 

\H*h.**d 
defo&tie. 


unto  htm  to  cate ,  hec  tooae  holb  of  her, 
anb  fatb  unto  her,  Comelpcttnthmec, 
mp  fitter. 

12  3Jnbfheanuuerebfnm,il5ap,mp 
b20ther,bocnottfo?cemc:fo2*tnofud) 
thing  ought  to  bee  bone  in  3}fcael  •,  boc 
not  thou  this  foUp. 

13  ano3J,miHther  fl)au3f  caufc  mp 
lbamctogoc*anbasfo?thce,thou(halt 
beasonc  of  thefoolesut  gjftael:  noiu 
thereto^  pzap  thee,  fpcaaebnto  the 
tang,  fojhelbtUttotlbithholo  mcfrom 

thee. 

14.  ^oiobettheerboulbnot  hearken 
unto  her boicc,butbcingftconger  then 
fticcfiweb  hcr,atu>  lap  ibith  her. 

15  CXhen  arnnon  batcb  her  teic* 
ccebinglp,  fo  that  the  hatreb  mheribtth 
hchatcbher,  juasgreatecrhenthcloae 
mhercttnth  bee  hao  loueb  her :  anb 
arnnon  faibUnto  her,  arue,  be  gone. 

16  3lnb the faibbnto hint ,  Xhcre  is 
no  caufe :  this  eutlim  fenbing  me  arbap, 
is  greater  then  the  other  tbattboubtb; 
otftuntomc:  25utbeiboulb  not  hear- 
lien  unto  her. 

17  '3Chcnhcecallcbhiisfcruantthat 
mimftrebUntohrm,anbfail),  #utnotb 
this  woman  outfrommee,  anbbolt  the 
booje  after  her. 

18  anbfbeebabagarmentofbiuets 
colours  Upon  her :  to*  mob  fuch  robes 
mmtbclungsbaugbters,  tbatmcrc 
Uirg(ns,apparelleb.  ILbenbts  feruant 
brought  her  out,  anb  boltebtbc  boojic 
after  her. 

19  C  anb  -Jtamar  put  afhes  on  her 
beab ,  anb  rentber  garment  of  omcrs 
colours  that  mas  on  her,  anb  lapbe  her 
hanb  onhcrheab,anbiucnton,cryutg. 

20  ^nb^bfaiom  her  mother  Capoc 
Unto  her,  sath  3mnon  thp  bjothcr 
beettc  tbith  theci  23ut  holbcnoujc  thp 
peace,  mp  fiflcr :  he  is  thp  brother ,  t  re-^ 
garb  not  this  thing.  £>oiLamar  rental- 
neb  tbefoiatcmher  brother  ^bfaloms 
houfc. 

21  C2ButVbhcnBing2)auibheatb 

of  all  thefe  things,he  mas  Ucrp  m«!oth. 

22  ^no^bfalomfpaftcuntohtsbjo^ 
tijec  ^mnon  neither  goob  no?  bab :  fo? 
abfaiom  hatcb  ^mnon,  becaufc  he  hab 
fozceb  his  fitter  Xamar. 

23  C  ^nott  tame  to  paffc  after  tmo 
full  pecres,  tl)at^bfalom  hao  fbeepe 
fl)carcrsin25aal-^a502,mhtch  «  beftbe 
€ph2atm:anb^bfalommuiteb  all  the 

tangs  fonncs. 

14  annabralonttamctothcBing, 


net,  fine  e  I 
hauc  com- 
mandedyou? 
\Hcb. founts 
of  vaUw, 

\Htb.rcde. 


\Hebsnouth 
\Or,fetUd. 


\Htb.acccr* 
ding  to  the 
tfordofthj 

fernunt. 


The  widow  of  Il.Samuel. 


Tckoah  sparable. 


\  Hcfr.Tfith 
a  great  wee- 
pnggreat- 

\Or,iAm- 
'mhur. 


corfumed. 


\Hch.fanr. 


\  Hebr.m 
dclmerer 
betweent 
them. 


beijolb,  the  bingsfonncs  came, aub  lift 
top  their  tootcc,  anb  vtocpt  i  anb  tljc  l*mg 
alfo  anb  all  bis  fcruants  itocpt  t  tocrp 
foje. 

37  C  2Sut;8btalom  flcb,  anb  itocnt 
to  Xaimat  ttjc  fonne  of  ||  3mnubub 
bang  of  ©cfljur :  anb  Dauid  mourncto 
ftntnsfonnccuerpbap. 

38  £>o  Abfalom  flco,  anb  itocnt  to 
<5cfl)ur,ano  Vbas  there  tlnccpcercs. 

39  £nb  the  fouie  of  bing  2Damb  I  Ion* 
gcb  to  goe  foojtb  tonto  Abfalom :  fozbc 
ltoas  tomfojtcb  concerning  Stnmott, 
feeing  be  itoasbcab. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

Ioab.fuborning  a  widow  oi  Tekoah, by  a  pa- 
rable to  incline  the  Kings  heart  to  fetch  home 
Abfalom  ,  bringcthhim  to  Hierulalem.  15 
Abfaloms  beautie,  haire,  and  children.  iS 
After  two  yeres,  Abfalom  by  Ioab  is  brought 
into  the  Kings  prefence. 

£>lto  3Joab  the  fomit  of 
zeeutab ,  pcreciucb  that 
the  bmgs  heart  was  to* 
lbarb  Abfalom. 
z  Znn  3toab  fern  to 
Xcboab ,  anb  fctcbt  thence  a  tuifcitoo* 
man,  anb  faio  tonto  net:,  3P#P  tfjet, 
fame  tbp  fclfe  to  be  a  mourner,  anb  put 
on  noito  mourning  apparel,  anb  anoint 
nottbp  fclfe  itotfb  otic,  but  be  asaitoo* 
man  that  bao  a  long  tune  moumeb  fo: 
tbebcab: 

3  &nb  tometotbc  bing,  ami  fpeabe 
on  this  mancr  bntobtm:fo3ioab  put 
the  llwbs  in  ber  mouth. 

4  C  3no  lbbcu  tljc  itooman  of Xc* 
boabfpabe  to  the  bing,  (bee  fell  on  her 
fate  to  tbc  grouno,  anb  bib  obepfancc, 
anb  faib,  t$>clpc,iD  King. 

5  3htb  the  lung  fatb  tonto  bcr,bDbat 
atlctl)  thec;  2lnb  (be  anfroerco,  3Jam 
mbecb  aibtboito  itooman,anb  mine  but* 
bantoisoeao. 

6  3tib  tbp  bantomapb  bato  titoo 
fonnes,anbtbcptitoo  ftrouc  together  m 
tbcfielb  ,  anb  there  ltoast  none  to  part 
them,  but  tljc  one  fmotc  tljcotljcr,  ano 
flcltoljim. 

7  3bibbcbolb ,  tbcibljolc  family  is 
rifcnagamfttbmcbaubmapb,anbtbep 
faib  ,  £>cliucr  bun  tbat  fmotc  bis  b:o* 
tber  ,tbat  Ibc  may  bill  Dim,  foj  tbc  life  of 
bis  bjotbet  itobom  be  flcito,anto  itoc  ltoill 
octtroptbcbetrcaifo:  ami  fotbcp  fliau 
quench  nip  cole  ltohich  is  left,  ano  than 
not  icauc  to  mp  ljufbaub  neither  name 


no?  rcmamtoer  t  topon  the  earth. 

8  3nb  tljc  ning  faibe  tonto  the  too* 
man,  d5oc  to  tbmc  ijoufe ,  anb  31  Hull 
giucchargeconcerningthce. 

9  3nb  the  itooman  of  Xeboab  lato 
tonto  the  btng,£0p  lo:b,£>  bmg,tbc  mfc 
qume  bee  on  mce ,  anb  on  mp  fathers 
Ijoufe :  anb  tbc  bmg  anb  bis  tbjone  bee 
guiltlefle. 

10  ^no  the  bmg  (aib  ,  nabofocuer 
faith  ou?ht  *"ttto  thee,  bung  htm  to  mcc, 
anb  he  ujail  not  touch  thee  anpmoje. 

ii  Xhcn  faib  flJe,3J  p«rap  thec,  let  the 
bing  remember  tbefL€>iB©  thp  (Sob, 
tthat  thou  lboulbeft  not  fuffct  the  re* 
ucngcrs  of  bloob  to  tocftrop  anp  moje, 
lefttbeptocftropmpfotme.  Slnribcfaito, 
3ts  tljc  %  ©  is  s>  buctlj ,  tljcrc  ttjaii  not 
one  banc  oftljp  fonncfall  to  the  earth. 

n  Xbcntbc itooman faib.flctrbuie 
Ijanbmapb,  3  PW  thec,  fpeabe  one 
itoo2b  tonto  mp  lojto  tljc  bing.  3nb  bec 
faib,^»apon. 

13  3lnb  tbc  itooman  faib ,  i©bctcfo:c 
then  haft  thou  thought  fuch  a  thing  a* 
gamft  tljc  people  of  ©ob  <  ftn  the  bmg 
boetb  fpeabe  tljis  thing  as  one  ltohich  is 
faultp,  in  that  the  btngboctbnotfetcb 
Ijomc  againc  Ins  bamujeb. 

14.  Jfo^itocmuftnccbsbicanbarcas 
Jtoatcr  fpilton  thegrounb ,  itohirl)  can* 
not  bee  gatbcrcb  top  againc :  ||  ncuher 
bocth  <5obrcfpcctanppcrfon,petbocth 
Ijcbcuifcmcanes,  that  his bamft)cb  bee 
not  crpclleb  from  htm. 

1$  ii5oito  thcrcfo?e  that  3J  am  conic 
to  fpeabe  of  this  fbutg  tonto  nip  lo?b  tljc 
bing,  itisbccaufetbc  people  haucmabc 
mcafraib :  anb  thp  hanomapb  faib,3J 
nun  noito  fpeabe  tonto  the  bmg;  it  map 
bec  that  the  bmg  ltoill  pcrfonnc  the  re* 
qneft  ofhis  Ijanbmapb. 

i6  jfojtbcbmgttilbcarctotocliuer 
his  Ijanbmapb  out  of  the  hanb  of  tljc 
man  that  would  tocftrop  mcc ,  anb  mp 
fonnc  together  out  of  the  inheritance 
of  Goto: 

17  Xhentljinc  hanbmaibfaib,1Chc 
\toojb  of  mp  lort)  the  bingfljailnoito  be 
t  comfo?table :  fo?  as  an  3Jngtl  of  (5ob, 
fo  is  mplojb  thchingt  to  bu"ccrnegooD 
anb  bab :  therfo?e  the  H^KJPtljP  <Eob 
ttitllbtitoiththec. 

18  Xhcii  the  bmg  anfroer  cb  anb  faib 
tonto  tbcltooman,  ftibenot  frommCj 
pwip  thee ,  the  tljuig  that  3  fliall  afbc 
thec.  3lnb  the  itooman  faib,fUt  mp  lo;D 
the  bing  noito  fpeabe. 

19  3lnb  tljc  bmg  faib ,  31s  not  the 

hanb 


\  Hebr  vpon 
the  face  sf 
the  earth. 


\  Heh-  that 
'hf  rcnengn 
■>} blood dye 
not  /milttplj 
todcflrtrf. 


■ Or \beeaufc 
(jodhath 
not  taken  »• 
y*,*}  his  /«/>, 
hehathMfo 
dew  fed 
m$dntst  0  c. 


f  Mr.for 

rell. 

f  Hebr.  to 

heart. 


Abfalomsbeaune.      Chap.xv. 


Hisfl 


attcrie. 


\Heb.  bUf- 
ftA. 


|  Or,  thy. 


f  Heb.tnt 

lom  there 

vtm  net  a 

beastnfull 

man  mall 

jfraeljo 

fr.nle 

grcatlj. 


f  Neb.r.eere 
my  place. 


hanb  of  3Joab  Xbitf)  thee  in  all  tt)is^ 
3nbthcibomanatrt"rocrebanbfaib;as 
thpfoulcliucth,  my  lojbthchmg,  none 
tan  tuntc  to  the  right  ^anu  o?  to  the  left 
fromoughtthatmplojb  ttjc  King  hath 
fpoRcn :  fonhpfctuant'Joatyhccbabc 
me,  ana  Uc  put  all  thefc  lb  ozb  ts  m  the 
mouth  of  thine  hanbmatb : 

10  5Co  fetch  about  tl)ts  fomtc  of 
fpecch  hath  th?  fcruant^loabbonc  this 
thutg :  emu  mp  lo?b  b  lbifc,  attozbing  to 
the  ibifebome  of  an  3ngel  of  <Sob,  to 
bnoib  an  things  that  are  in  the  earth. 

n  C3lnb  the  Ring  faib  bnto  3Joab, 
JBeholb  novb,  J>  haue  bone  this  thing : 
goc  therefo2C ,  tying  the  pong  man^o- 
talomagainc. 

n  2nb  3Joab  fell  to  the  grounb  on 
his  face,  %  boibeb  hintfclfc,  anb  t  thanR? 
eb  the  Ring :  anb  3Joabfatb,Xo  bap  thv 
fcruant  Rnoibcth  that  3  hauefounb 
grace  in  thy  fight,  mp  lozb  ©  Ring,  in 
that  the  King  hath  fulfillcb  the  r  equcft  of 
his  fcruant. 

13  5>o3Joabarofc,anbtt)entto<R* 
fl)ur#b20ught3bfalomto3Jcrufalem. 

14  3nbthcbmgfaib,iLcthimturnc 
to  his  oibnchoufc,  % let  him  not  fee  mp 
facc.&o  Stbfaiom r cturncb  to  his  olbne 
houfc ,  anb  fatbc  not  tl)e  Kings  face. 

15  C  t  i5ut  m  all  3Jfracl  there  lbas 
noncto  befo  much  p:aifcb  as^bfalom, 
fo2hisbcautic:fromthefoleofhisfoot 
cucn  to  the  croibnc  of  his  hcab ,  there 
ibasnoblemifbinhim. 

i6  3inbibhcnhcpoilcbhisheab,(fo? 
itlbasatcucrppercs  cnbthathcpollcb 
it:  becaufe  the  haire  ibashcauponhtm, 
therefore  he  polleb  tt)heeibcighcb  the 
haire  of  hts  hcab  at  tibo  hunbzcb  flje- 
Kds  after  the  Kings  ibcight. 

17  3inb  bnto  3bfalom  there  tbcre 
borne  thzee  fonncs,  anb  one  Daughter, 
tbrjofc  liame  was  Xamar :  fhee  lbas  a 
Vboman  of  a  fairc  countenance. 

18  C  £>o  3bfalom  bibclt  ttbo  full 
pecresm^jerufalcm,  anb  faib not  the 
Kings  fate. 

19  Xherefojc  3bfalomfcnt  foj3Jo? 
ab,  to  haue  fent  him  to  the  King,  but  hec 
lboulb  not  come  to  hint :  anb  ibhcn  tjee 
fentagaiuc  the  feconb  time ,  Ijce  lboulb 
not  come. 

30  Xherefozc  hee  faib  bnto  his  fer; 
uants,S>ee,l[ioabsfielbistnceremine, 
anb  he  hath  barley  there:  gocanbfetit 
on  fire:  anb^lbfaloms  fcruantsfctthe 
ficlbonfire. 

31  Xhcn  3Joab  arofc,  anb  tame  to 


3bfalombnto  his  houfe,  anb  faib  bnto 
him,  naherefiwe  ijaue  rhp  fctuants  fet 
mpficlbonfirc? 

31  anb  3ibfalom  anfroercb  3foab, 
ascholb,  31  fentbnto  thee.faptng.come 
hither,that  %  map  fenb  thee  to  the  Ring 
tofap,n3l)crcfo?cam3l  come  from  <5c* 
fbur*  35thab  bcncgoobfojmcc  to  haue 
bene  there  ftill :  noib  thcrcfoic  letmcfee 
the  Kings  face :  anb  if  there  bee  an?  mi? 
quitic  in  me,  let  htm  Kill  me. 

33  S>o  3Joab  cameto  the Bmg,  anb 
tolbhim:  anb  ibhcnhcc  hab  calico  f  02 
3bfalom,hc  came  to  the  Kmg.anb  boU)- 
en  hunfclfc  on  hts  face  to  the  grounb  be- 
fine  the  King,  anb  the  lung  Kiflcb  3Hj> 
faiom. 

CHAP.    XV. 

Abfalom,  by  faire  fpeeches  and  courtefies, 
ftealeth  the  hearts  oilfrael.  7  Vndei  pretence 
of  a  vow  he  obtaineth  leaue  to  go  to  Hebron. 
10  He  maketh  there  a  great  confpiracie.  13 
Dauidvpon  the  newes  fleeth  horn  lerufalem. 
19  Ittai  would  not  leaue  him.  14  Zadokand 
Abiathar  are  fent  backe  with  the  Arke.  30 
Dauid  and  his  companie  go  vp  mount  Oliuet 
weeping.  31  Hecurfeth  AhithophelscounfeL 
31   Hufhai  is  Tent  backe  with  initru&ions. 

/Bb  it  tame  to  paffe  after 
this,  that  Abfalom  p?epas 
reb  him  tharcts  anb  im 
fes,anbfifttemcnto  runne 
befo?ehim. 
1  3lnb  Abfalom  rofcbpearrtp,  anb 
ftoobbcfibctheibapof  the  gate:  anb  it 
lbas  fo,  that  tbhen  anp  man  that  hab  a 
contr  ouerGe,t  came  to  the  King  foz  tubg- 
ment ,  then  Abfalom  called  bnto  hun, 
anb  faib,  £>f  ibhat  tttie  art  thou^nb 
he  faib ,  Xhp  fcruant  is  of  one  of  the 
tribes  of  3jfrael. 

3  3nb  Abfalom  faib  bnto  htm,3>ee, 
thp  matters  aregoob  fright,  buttherc 
is  ||  no  man  deputed  of  the  King  to  hear  c 
thee. 

4.  ^bfalomfaibmo2eouer,£)hthat 
3Jiberemabe  ^Jubgcinthelanb ,  that 
cucrp  manlbhich  hath  anp  fuit  o;  caufe, 
might  tome  bnto  me,  anb  3  lboulb  bo 
htnuufhtc. 

5  ^nbitlbasfo,thatlbhcnanpman 
tame  nigh  to  him,  to  bochtm  obeifance, 
heputfoozth  hishanb,anb  tooKehim, 
anbKiffebhun. 

6  ^nb  on  this  mancr  bib  Abfalom 
to  all  ifrael,  that  came  to  the  mmgfo: 
inbgnnent:  fo  Abfalom  ftolc  rtjc  hearts 
ofthcmenof33frael. 

-*  7  C^nb 


f  Htlir.te 
come. 


||  Or, nous 
m/lbexre 
jtHfromthc 
ktng  down- 
ward. 


Abfal 


omstrc; 


afon.      II.SamueL 


Dauidflecth. 


\HthhruJI 


\Htk.cliKft. 


t  Hci.ia  hit 

ftete. 


7  e.  3ino  it  came  to  paffc  after  four- 
tte  yectes,  that  31bfalom  fatbbnto  the 
Umg,  3  p2ay  thee,  letinecgoe  anb  pay 
my  boil)  ibtiict]  3  hauc  boibcb  Pitto 
the  %oiat>  inlKteon. 

8  JFo?  thy  feruant  boincb  a  Polbc 
ibhiicj  abobc  at  <3cfbur  tn&yna.fay* 
ing,3Jf  the  ILoisjd  fbaubtfngmcc  a^ 
gamctnbeeb  to3Jcrufaicm,thcn3J  ibill 
fcruertjelLoKia. 

9  3lnb  the  Uing  fatbbnto  him,  ©oe 
m  peace.  £>o  hcarofc ,  anb  ibent  to  J?c* 
bjon. 

io  C25ut  3tbfaiom  fent  fpicsfho* 
rolbout  all  tl)c  tribes  of  Jfracl,  faying, 
3s  fooncas  ycchcarcthc  fount)  of  the 
trumpet,  then  ycc  n^ail  fay,  ^bfalom 
retgncthmfccb2on. 

1 1  3inb  itath  3lbfalom  lucnt  tVoo 
hunbzcb  men  out  of  3Jcrufalcm,  that 
mere  tallcb,  anb  they  ibent  m  their  Gm* 
plmtie,  anb  tbey  Uncib  not  any  tl)ing. 

1 1  3nb  :Waiom fcut ft» 3U)itl)opl)cl 
the  C5ilotute,Daiubscounfcllcr,  front 

1)IS  CttiC, euen ft 01U  GllOl), IDfjllC  l)C  OtTC^ 

rcb  faenfiecs :  anb  tlic  confptractc  loas 
ftrong,  fo:  the  people  cncrcafcb  confr 
nuailyilnthSlbfaiom. 

13  C^nbtlxrccamcameffcngcrto 
2>auib,faytng,  Xlic  hearts  of  the  mm 
of  jjjfracl  are  after  Slbfalom. 

14  3inb SDautb  faib  touto aunts  kv 
nants  that  were  unth  him  at  3Jcrufa- 
lem,  strife,  anb  let  bs  flee,  fojibcefhail 
not  eKe  efcapc  from  3lbfalom :  maUc 
fpeebe  to  bepart,  left  hec  oucrtaUe  bs 
fubbcnly,anbtb2ingcuillbponbs,anb 
finite  the  city  lbtth  the  cbgc  of  thcftuo2b. 

H  SCnbthcUtngsfcruants  faibbnto 
the  Umg,  ascholb  ,thy  fcruants  are  readie 
to  doe  ibhatfocttcr  my  102b  the  lung  (ball 
t  appoint. 

16  3nb  the  Umg  ibent  foo2tb,anb  all 
His  noufljolb  t  after  bun :  anb  the  Bmg 
left  tenne  ibotucn,  lbbtcb  lbcrc  concu- 
bines, to  ucepe  the  bouTc. 

17  :3mbtbcUmgibcutfo2tb,  anball 
the  people  after  I11111,  anb  tartebma 
place  that  mas  farrc  off. 

is  Anball  b:s fcruants  paffeb  on  be* 
fibebun:  anb  ailthc  Cbcrctbitcs,  anb 
all  the  ^cletliitcs,  anballtbc<5tttttcs, 
fire  lnmb2cbnicn,ibbtcb  came  aftcrbuu 
from  <3ath,paffcb  on  before  tlic  Umg. 

1 9  CXbcnfaib the lungto gittaithe 
Oittitc,  nohcreftuc  rjocfUboualfoluttb 
bs?  l\cturne  to  thy  place,  anb  abibc 
until  the  Bins :  fo?  thou  art  a  Granger, 
anb  alfo  an  crtlc. 


10  leftcreastftotuamcft  but  yefitr- 
bay,  fl)oulb3ftl)tsuaytmauctl)ec  goc 
bpanb  bolbneibttbto  5-  £>ccmg'5goc 
ibljithcr  3  may,returnctr)ou,anb  taue 
bacUe  thy  b2Ctb2cn:mcrctc  anb  tructb 

be  IDltJ)  tljCC. 

11  3nb  3fttat  antrocreb  tlje  using, 
anb  faib,  7ls  tin  %  ©  la  ©  iiuetb,anb  as 
my  lo?b  the  Umg  Iiuctb ,  fur  cly  m  ibhat 
place  my  102b  the  Uing  (hall  bclbbctbcr 
mbcatbojlifc,  cMcntbcrcaifo  ttrill  thy 
fcruant  be. 

22  3nb  SDautb  faib  tofttai,  ©oe, 
anb  paffc  oucr.  3nb3Jttattbe  Gttntc 
paffeb  oucr,  anball  his  mcu,anb  ail  the 
little  ones  that  were  lbttb  htm. 

23  Anball  the  countrcytbepttbith 
aioubcbotcc,  anball  the  people  paffeb 
otter :  rbefitng  alfo  btnuclfc  paffeb  0= 
tier  the  bzooUc  ||Bib:on,anb  all  the  peo- 
ple paffeb  oucr,  tolbarb  the  may  of  the 
ibtiocrncffr. 

2+  C3nbloe,zaboU  alfo,  anb  au 
the  iLcuttcs  were  lbith  hun,  bearing  the 
3ruc  of  the  Cottenant  of  (Sob,  anb  they 
fctboibncthe^rUeof  ©obi  anb  3bufc 
tbar  Ibent  i)p,  Dnttu  all  the  people  hab 
bone  paffing  out  of  the  citie. 

25  3ttbtheiaing  fatbtnto zaboU, 
Cary  bacUe  thc^rUe  of  ©ob  into  the  ti- 
tle :  if  3  fball  finbe  fauour  in  the  eyes 
of  tlic  %  o  as  ©,  he  ibil  b2(ngmc  agamc, 
anb  fl)cib  me  both  tt,anb  his  habitation. 

16  20uttfhcthusfay,3lhauenobc; 
light  m  thee:  bcholbc,  here  am  3,  let 
him  boc  to  me,asfccmcth  goob  vnto  him. 

27  3EheUtng  faib  alfo  bnto  zaboU 
thc02icft,  *3trtnottl)ou  a5>cer  <  Bc^ 
turne  into  the  citie  in  peace,  anb  your 
tibo  fonncs  vbtth  you,  3lhtmaa3  thy 
fonne ,  anb  Jonathan  tlje  fotme  of  & 
btathar. 

28  5>ce,  3  ibill  tarie  in  the  plainc  of 
the  ibiibcmcffc,  bntill  there  come  ibojtb 
ftomyoutotcrtificme. 

29  zaboU  therefore  anb  3btati)ar 
tartcb  the  3irUc  of  d5ob  agamc  to  Jcru- 
falcm  i  anb  they  taricb  there. 

jo  c  3lnb  2>autb  Ibent  top  by  the 
aftent  of  mount  C>Uuet,  t  anb  mept  as 
he  iDcntbp,  anbhabhishcabcoucrcb, 
anbhc  ibentbarefoote,  anball  thcpeo> 
pic  that  wjs  ibirh  htm ,  coucrcb  cucry 
man  hts  heab,  anbtljcylbctitbp.ibcc' 
pmgasthq'lbcntbp. 

j  1  C  3mb  one  tolbc  SDautb ,  laying, 
3hithophci  is  among  ti)t  coufpirato2S 
lbtth  5lbfalotn.  3lnb  SDautb  faytic ,  £> 
%  o  k  jd,3I  pjay  thecrurne  thccounfcll 

of 


ihie  wander 


[Cdlcdhk 

I8.I.CV- 

dron. 


"  I.Sam. 


I  Heb.  fair, 
vpjHslvse- 


Hufhais  friendfliip.  Chap.xvj.        Shimeicurfeth. 


of  3lbitbophclinto  foolifl)neu"c. 

jz  C^noittamctopaffctijatwhcn 
SDauto  ibas  come  to  the  top  of  the  mount, 
lbherc  be  uwthippco  ©oo,  bcholb,l?u 
fljairtjearchitecamc  to  mectpn,tbflJ) 
his  coat  rent ,  ano  earth  bpon  bis  heao: 

33  tmuolbhom^auiDfaio^fthou 
patten  onibith  me,  then  thou  fhaltbea 
buroenbntome. 

34  2i5ut  if  thou  returne  to  the  citic, 
ano  fapbnto  abfalomJJ  ttnl  be  tbp  fcr> 
uant,£>  Ring : «  3  haue  bene  $?  fathers 
fcruant  hitherto  ,fo  lbtllU  noib  alfo  be 
tbp  fcruant :  then  mapctt  thou  fojmee 
Defeat  the  counfcll  of  3htthophcl. 

35  2nb  haft  thou  not  there  ibith  thee 
zaooR ,  anb  3lbtathar  the  mtasi 
thcrefo?citfhaUbe,thatujhatt5ingfo' 
euer  thou  (halt  heare  out  of  the  Rings 
houfc,thou  {bait  tell « to  zaoolt  anb  7k 
biatl)arthc^?iefls. 

36  25C^0lb,they  haue  thCTC  tbitl)  thttll 

their  ttbo  fonnes,  Sfhitnaa*  zaooRs 
foDne,  anb3Jonathan  3biathats  fonne: 
anb  bp  them  pe  fballfcnb  bntomc  cue* 
rpthtngttjatpccanbcatc. 

37  S>o  ^ulhat  SDauios  frienb  came 
into  the  tittc,  ano  Slbfaiom  came  into 
^jcrulaicni. 

CHAP.  XVI. 

i  Ziba  by  prefents  and  falfe  fuggeftions  ,  ot- 
taineth  his  matters  inheritance.  5  AtBahu- 
rim  Shimei  curfeth  Dauid.  9  Dauidwith 
patience  abftameth  ,  and  reftraineth  others 
fromreuenge.  15  Hufhaiinfinuatethhim- 
felfe  intoAbfaloms  counfaile.  10  Ahitho- 
phelscounfaile. 

/fro  vo])tn  a>auib  ibas  a 

little  pall  the  top  of  the  hill 

26cholbc ,  ztba  the  fer 
uant  of  flpephibotheth 
met  him  ibith  a  couple  of 
affcsfableb,  anb  bpon  them  ttbo  bun; 
D?cD  loaues  of  bzeao ,  ano  an  huntyeb 
buncl)cs  of  raifins ,  anbanhunbjcb  of 
fummer  fruits,  anb  a  bottcll  of  mine. 

i  3no  the  Bing  fatbe  bnto  Ziba, 
nahatmcancttthoubpthcfc?  3tnozt 
ba  faibc,  1Lhe  affes  bee  fo?  the  Kings 
boufhoio  to  nbe  on ,  anb  the  bjcao  anb 
fummer  fruit  fo?  the  pong  men  to  eate, 
anb  the  Unncthat  furij  as  be  faint  in  the 
tbtlbcmeffc,  map  DnnRc. 

3  anothefetng faio ,  3ln0ttjhcreis 
tbp  matters  fonne  *  ano  Ziba  fato  bn^ 
to  the  King,  Bcboio,  beabiDctbatjJte 
r  ufalcm :  fo?  hec  faib ,  %o  bap  ttjaii  the 


houfe  of  3ffracl  tcttoje  nice  the  lung 
borne  of  my  father. 

4.  Xhen  faio  the  Ring  to  Ziba,  25c 
hoio,  thmc  arc  all  that  per tameo  bnto 
©ephibotbeth.  ano  ZtbafatOe,t3 
I  humblp  befeecb  thee  that  5  map  finoc 
grace  m  tbp  fight,  nip  lo:o,£>  Ring. 

5  CHnoibhen  bmg  SDauiO  came  to 
Bahurim ,  bcboio ,  rtjeneecamcouta 
man  of  thefanulpof  thchoufe  of&aul, 
tbbofe  name  ibas  £>hintci thefonnc  of 
<5cra :  ||  hce  came  foo;th,  ano  curfeb  ftill 
as  he  came. 

6  ano  he  call  ftoncs  at  ©auio ,  ano 
at  all  the  fcruants  of  Ring  £>auiO :  ano 
all  the  people,  ano  all  the  might?  men 
ibcreonl)isrighthano,anoonl)tslcft. 

7  3nothusfaiD&huneittrt)enhef 
curfco,  Come  out,tome  out  thou  t  bloo- 
Op  man,  ano  thou  man  of  aSeltal : 

8  1Che?L£>K©hafhretttrncObp< 
on  thee  all  the  bloob  of  the  houfe  of 
^auunwhofcftcabthouhattraigneo, 
ano  the  ?L©k©  hath  oeliuerco  the 
Rnigoomc  into  the  hano  of  abfalom 
tbp  fonne :  anb  t  bebolD,thou  art  taken  to 
rijpmifchtefe,becaufe  thou  artabloobp 
man. 

9  C  Xhcn  faib  3fbifbai  the  fonne  of 
zeruiah  bnto  the  Ring ,  nahp  fhouio 
thts*beab  bogge  curfemp  lojo  the  Ring* 
let  mee  goc  oucr,  3f  pjsap  thee,  anb  taRc 
off  bis  heao. 

10  ano  the  Ring  faio ,  nahat  haue  3 
to  Ooe  ibith  pou  ,pe  fonnes  of  Zeruial); 
&0  let  htm  curfe,  becaufe  the  %  £>  a  is> 
hath  faib  bnto  him,Curfe&>antb.J©ho 
{ball  then  Cap ,  i©hercfo;tc  batt  thou 
Donefttf 

11  ^noa>auiOfaiOto^bitt)ai,anbto 
all  his  feruants,  aSeholbc,  mp  fonne 
ibhich  came  foo?th  of  mp  boibcls,  fee 
Rett)  mp  life :  hotb  much  mo?e  nolb  mav 
thiszBcmamitedoeit  ?  ietl)imaione,anb 
let  htm  curfe :  fo?  the  %  &  m  jd  ^ath 
bibbenhim. 

n  3Itmapbcerhatthc?l€)is©Ibill 
looRconmmell affliction ,  ano  that  the 
%  ©is©  rbiii  requite  gooofo?his  cur 
ting  this  oap. 

13  3no  as  S>auio  ano  his  men  ibent 
bptheibap,S>himctrbcntalongon  tlje 
hillesfioeoueragatntthim ,  anocurfco 
ashceibent ,  anortj?tib  ttonesathim, 
anb  t  call  butt. 

14  3no  the  Ring ,  ano  all  tt)c  people 
thatibcreibithhim,  eametbearp,  ano 
rcfrcnico  therafelucs  there. 

15  C^no^bfalom  anb  al  the  people 

ttjc_ 


\HcW.l 

doe  obey- 
fence. 


pr,he(l%ll 
cartefecrrh 
andcurftd. 


I  Hebr.  raan 

of  blood. 


\Hebr 


be- 
bold  thee  m 
thy  etttll. 


*l.Sam.24. 
1 5. chap. 3. 


Hehr.ejt, 


Mielr.dn- 
(led  him 
mtb  anil. 


Ahichophels  and       Il.SamucI.       Huftiaiscounfel, 


\Hel.letthc 

■kt»£  fiHC. 


\  Hsb&ard. 


the  men  of  3Jfcacl,  tame  to  3fcrufa-j 
km,  anb^htthopheinnth  him. 

i6  &nDittamctopafiett)ncnS?uft)ai 
the^rchttc,  2>autbs  friend ,  mas  tome 
Ditto  3ibfaiom,  that  $?u(hai  fait)  tonto 
3bfaiom,t  <3ob  fauc  the  Hmg,©ob  faue 
the  lung. 

17  3lnd  3bfalom  faib  to  $ufhai ,  is 
tins  thp  mndneffe  to  tin?  friend  t  nahy 
lDciitcftthounotmiththy  friend* 

>8  7Mb  J?u(haifaid  bnto  3tbfaiom, 
|3ay,  butinhomthclLsDis©  and  tins 
people, anb all the men  of  ^Jfrael chufe, 
bis  rum  3  bee ,  anb  xuttlj  him  ttnii  3 
abide. 

19  3(nd  agantc ,  mhom  fhould  3 
ferue  <  fhould  3  not  f«ue  m  the  pzefcttte 
of  Ins  fonnc?  as  3  hauc  fctucd  tn  tijp 
fart)crsp?cfence,fomiu3Jbcmthyp^ 
fence. 

zo  c  Xljen  fatd  3bfalom  to  Smitho- 
phel,  ©iuc  tottnfcll  among  you  mhat 
tbc  fljall  Doe. 

n  5tnD^ttI)opI)rt  fain  tnto^tbfa^ 
lorn,  d5oc  in  hnto  tljp  fathers  coneu* 
bines,  mhich  he  hath  left  to  hccpcthc 
houfe,  anb  all  35ftaci  (hall  hcarc  that 
toon  art  abhoireb  of  thy  fatlicr ,  tlKti 
(hail  the  hands  of  all  that  areanth  thee 
befttong. 

xi  £>o  they  fpjead  3(bfaIom  a  tent 
hpon  the  top  of  the  houfcand  3lbfalom 
ment  m  hnto  his  fathers  tontubmes, 
m  the  fight  of  all  gjfrael, 

23  7M0  the  tounfcll  of  3hithophel 
ltohich  he  totmfelleb  in  thofc  day  es,tbas 
as  if  a  man  hab  enquir  eb  at  the  t  <£)2acle 
of  d5ob :  fo  was  all  the  tounfcll  of  3thi' 
thophci.both  ibith  2>auiD  anb  muh 
3bfaiom. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

1  Ahithophcls  counfell  is  oucrihrowen  by  Hu- 
lliais,.iccordingto  Gods  appointment.  15  Se- 
cret intelligence  is  lent  vntoDauid.  13  Ahi- 
thophel  hangcth  himfelfe.  15  Amafa  is 
nude  captame.  17  DauiJ  at  Mahanaim 
is  turnirtied  vvull  prouifion. 

v(&4?^r  Ojcouer  3lhithophcl  fatb 
mSMbMI  ttomo  3ftfi8om,jLttmtt 
I  %W^;  i  noinc  chufc  cut  twcltie 
%  PMm  W  Woufand  "icu ,  anb  3 
firf^wjca  Uull  anfc  anb  purftic  al 
tcr  SDaiud  this  night. 

i  3ln&  3  Ml  tome  upon  htm  mhilc 
hec  is  lbeanc  anb  meauc  hanbeb,  anb 
mil  malic  him  afraib:  anb  all  the  people 
that  arc  With  htm  than  flee,  anb  3  mill 
finite  the  lung  oncly. 


3  31nb3lU)tlb2ingbacUcaUthcpcO' 
pic  Unto  thec :  the  man  mhom  thou  fee; 
Kelt  ^  as  if  all  returned  :io  all  the  people 
(hall  be  in  peace. 

4  3lnb  the  faying  tpicafcb^bfalom 
Vbcil,and  all  the  fibers  of  3lfrael. 

5  Xhen  faib  31bfalom ,  Cailnom 
tyufbai  the  3rehue  alfo ,  anb  let  bs 
hcate  liftcttitfctibhathefatth. 

6  ^no  ttihen  5>u(hai  mas  tome  to 
abfalom,  3bfalom  fpatte  unto  t)(m, 
faying,  3lhUhophel  hath  fpofcen  after 
thismaner:  fbaumedoeaftcrhtstfay; 
mg?  if  not,  fpeabe  thou. 

7  3nd  $u(hai  faib  hnto  ^bfalom, 
Xrjc  tounfcll  that  2hitbophcl  hath  tgt= 
ucn,  isnotgooBatthtstime. 

s  5Fo2,  (faib  $u(bat, )  thou  tmoto; 
eft  thr  father  anb  his  men,  that  thev>  bee 
mightic  mcn,anb  tljep  betthaftb  in  their 
mtnbs,asabcarcrobbcbofhcrlbhelps 
in  the  ficlb :  anb  thp  father  is  a  man  of 
tttarrc,  anb  mill  not  lobgc  rbtth  the 
people. 

9  26cholb,hc  is  hib  nott)  in  fome  pit, 
onnfomcotiierpiacctanDitlMfometo 
paffc  mhen  fome  of  them  bee  t  otters 
th^omenatthe  firll,  that  ttihofocuer 
hearet!)  it,tt>U  fap,  Xhcrc  is  a  (laughter 
among  the  people  that  follolbe  Tto- 
falom. 

io  ^ubheaifo  that  isbaltant,  mhofc 
heart  is  as  the  heart  of  a&pon ,  fl)all 
utterly  melt:  fo?  aiigjfracl  fenolbcth 
that  thy  father  is  a  mightic  man , 
anb  they  luhich be  Unth  hun  >rc  baliant 
men. 

n  3^crcfoic3fcouttfell,thatail3Jfc 
rael  be  generally  gathereb  nnto  thee, 
from©ancuento25ect-fl)eba,  as  the 
fanb  that  is  by  the  fea  fo?  multitude,  anb 
tthatthougoeto  battcll  in  thtnc  oibnc 
perlbn. 

ir  «S>o  fl)all  rbee  tome  Upon  him  tn 
fome  place  inhere  he  (hall  be  fount)  ,auu 
tbe  mill  light  Upon  him  as  the  ncm  fai< 
lethonthc  grounb :  anb  of  him  anb  of 
all themen that  if  muhhim,thcrc (hall 
not  be  leftfo  much  as  one. 

13  £0ojcouer,ifhecbcgottcnintoa 
ntic,  tl)cn  (hall  all  "Jfntel  b:tng  ropes 
to  that  city  ,and  mc  mm  b?am  tt  into  the 
riucr,tontill  tljcrc  be  not  one  fmailttone 
founb  there. 

i+  3lnb3lbfalom  anb  all  the  men  of 
Jfrael  faib , Xhe  tounfcll  of  l)ti(l)ai  the 
Slrchitc,  is  better  then  the  tounfcll  of  -Jt 
ihithoprjel :  JFoj  the  fLoiss?  hab  tap 
pomtcb  to  befcatc  the  goon  tounfcll  of; 
1  3ilwho-i 


f  Hebr  k>4j 
rt^kt  tnthe 
ejei  of  0-c 


s  i«  his 


Hrb.word. 


t  Heb.cnm- 
fclltd. 


\Hcb.bitter 

of  fault. 


ItH. 


f  HrhU 

tkjf*CC  CT 

pre  fence  foe, 


t  Heb.com- 
vt^mJe.t. 


Ahithophels death.  Chap.xvnj.        Dauid  relieued. 


\Htkdor.e. 


\Heb.gane 
charge  con- 
cerning his 
houfe. 


21hf.thophcl ,  to  the  intent  that  the 
He*  is  p  might  bang  cuill  bpon  3Cb 
faloni. 

15  c^cnfaibMifhaihntoZabou 
anb  to  3biathat  tj)c  0ncftes,  Xhus 
anb  thus  bib  3hithophcl  tounfcll  3lb 
falom  anb  the  cibcrs  of  3Jfracl,  ant) 
thus  anb  thus  haue  3  counfellcb. 

16  ii5ottJtt)crcfo2crctiti  duicftl^ann 
td®autb,faying,1<Lobgenotthisnight 
mthepiainesoffhctt>tlbetncs,bntfpce; 
Dil-p  pafTc  ouec,  left  thci&ng  be  fmal^ 
loitoco  bp,  ant)  all  the  people  tljat  are 
Until  him. 

17  ji5otb  Jonathan  ano  3lhimaa5 
ttaycb  by  Cn-rogcl :  (fo?  they  might  not 
be  fcenc  to  tome  into  tlje  citte)  anb  a 
mend)  ibentanbtolbc  them:  anb  tfjcp 
rbent,  anb  toioc  lung  Dauib. 

13  jiSeucrthclefle,  aiabbcfalbthcm, 
anbtolbc3lbfalom:butthcy  lbcnt  both 
of  them  aibay  qnitncly,  anb  tame  to  a 
manshoufe  m  2Sahurim,ibhtchhab  a 
nacil  m  l)ts  court,  ibhtthcr  ttjev  ibent 
botbue. 

19  Slnbthcibomantoottcanbrpicab 
a  coucrtngouerthe  ibcllcsmouth,  anb 
fpjcab  grotinb  come  thereon;  anb  the 
thing  ibas  not  fenolbcn. 

20  3lnb  tbljcn  3tbfaioms  fcruants 
tame  to  thetboman  to  the  houfe,  tljcy 
faib,  r©hcce  is  3ihtmaa5  anb  ^Jonathan* 
3lnb  the  tboman  ratb  bnto  them,  Xhcy 
begone  oucr  thcb2ootiCoftbater.  3nb 
iblien  they  hab  fought,  anb  toulb  not 
finbe  them ,  they  rctntneb  to  ^aufo 
tern. 

21  3mb  it  tame  to  paffe  after  they 
lbercbepartcb,that they  came bpout  of 
ttjcojcu.anb  lbcnt  anb  tolbcbing2>a^ 
uib,  anb  fatb  bnto  2>auib,  3ttfc,  anb 
paffc  cinicltcly  oucr  the  ibatcr:  foithus 
Ijatf)  3u>thophcl  counfellcb.  agatnft 
you. 

22  Xhcn  3>atub  arofc ,  anb  all  the 
people  tljat  iberc  ibtth  Dim ,  anb  they 
paffeb  ouer3!o?banc :  by  the  morning 
light  there  latUcb  not  one  of  them  tljat 
ibas  not  gone  oucr  3Jo:banc. 

23  C  3nb  lbhen  3lhithophcl  faibc 
that  his  tounfellibasnottfollolbeb.hc 
fablcb  his  affc  ,anb  arofe,  anb  gate  him 
Dome  to  hishoufcto  his  tttie,  anbtput 
his  houfholb  in  ojber ,  anb  hangcb  huiv 
fclfe,  anb  bteb,  anb  ibas  burtcbin  the  ft- 
pulthtf  of  ms  father. 

2+  iLhen  SDauib  tame  to  £0ahan& 
im:  anb  Abfalom  paffeb  oucr  3f  ozbane, 
hcanuallthemenofjlracl  ttnthhim. 


25  C  3lnb  Abfalom  maoe  Sunafe 
captamc  of  the  Ijoftc  in  ftcab  of  3Joab : 
Vbijtctj  3unafa  was  a  mans  fonnc  lbhofc 
name  was  3)tl)jaan3Jfracittc,tliat  lbcnt 
in  to  3ibigal  thebaughter  of  jftaljafb, 
Ciftccto  zcru:ah3Joabsmothcr. 

16  &o;jfraclanb3lbfaiompitfhcb 
mthcianbof  Gileab. 

27  cr^nbtttametopaffcibljcnSDas 
utb  ibas  tome  to  iJ0ahanatm,that£>ho< 
bi  the  fonnc  of /ftahafh  of  Babbal)  of 
the  tfjilbjen  of  Amnion,  anb£Pachir 
tlie  fonnc  of  3lmimcl  of  JLobcbar ,  anb 
2i5ar5iliaitljceilcabtte,ofKogclun, 

28  fought  bebs,  anb  ||baftns,  anb 
carthcnbcffcls,anbibhcat,anbbarlcy, 
anb  flourc,  anb  parcheb  come ,  $  bcancs, 
anb  icntues,  anb  parcheb  puife, 

29  3lnb  honie,anb  butter  ,anb  fbeepe, 
anb  cljccfc  of  tune  foz2Dau:b,anb  fo?  the 
people  that  ibere  lbith  htm,  to  catc :  foz 
the?  faib,  Xhc people  is  hungne,anb 
Vbcarte,  anb  thirftic  inthe  ibUberncffc. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

1  Dauid  viewingthe  armies  in tlieii  march ,  gi- 
uethtliem charge ofAbfalom.  6  The  Isra- 
elites are  fore  fmitten  in  the  wood  of  Ephra- 
lm.  9  Abfalom  hanging  in  an  Oke,  is  flame 
by  Ioab,  and  caft  into  a  pit.  18  Abfaloms 
place.  19  Ahimaaz  and  Cufhi  bring  tidings 
to  Dauid.  33  Dauid  mourneth  for  Abfalom. 

i!5b  2Dautb  numfeto  the 
people  tljat  were  Bnfhhmi, 
anb  fct  taptatnes  of  tljou^ 
fanbs ,  anb  taptatnes  of 
hunbjebsouerthem. 
2  3lnb  Damb  fent  fojth  a  thirb  part 
of  the  people  bnber  thehanb  of'SJoab, 
anb  a  thirb  part  bnber  thehanb  of  ^Ibu 
fljai  the  fonnc  of  scruiah  3toabs  bro- 
ther, anb  a  thirb  part  bnber  the  hanb  of 
3Jttat  the  Oittrtc :  anb  the  sing  faib  top 
to  the  people,  3  Bjiufurelvgoc  foouh 
Vbithvoumvfclfcaifo. 

j  Buttljc  people  anfracrcb,  Xhou 
n)aitnotgocfoo?th:fo?iftt)eflecarbav, 
thep  lbill  not  tar  c  foj  bs,  neither  tf  halfe 
ofbsbtcvbtllthcpttaref02bs:butnoIb 
thou  ai  1 1  ujouh  ten  thoufanb  of  bs:tl)er^ 
fozcnotb  it  is  better  that  thou  t  fuccour 
bsoutofthentie. 

4  2(nb  tlje  Bing  fa^bc  bnto  fhem, 
m\m  fecmeth  vou  beft ,  3  mill  boe. 
^nb  the  iRutg  ftoob  by  the  gate  fibc, 
anb  all  the  people  tame  out  bp  hun- 
tytns,  anb  bv  thouCanbs. 

5  ^nb  the  htng  tommanbeb  3?oab, 

<5g  anb 


Ortatps. 


\Heb.fet 
their  heart 
on-vt, 

'Heb.Oiten 
honfmd 
of  vs. 

t  Heb.  be  to 
fuccour. 


Abfalom  flaine.         I  LSamucl. 


Abfaloms  p 


hi 


mar. 


\Hebr. mul- 
tiplied to  de- 


\H<b. weigh 
vpon  mint 
hand. 


f  Hebr.be- 
rvare  whofo- 


entry 

tf&c 


cbc, 


t  Hcbr. be- 
fore thee. 

\Hek.he*rl 


anb:Sbifhai,  ano  3Utat,  favmg,  D?aie 
gcntlrfojnipfafec  lOtth  thevongman, 
euen  lOtth  3bfalom.  #tiD  all  the  people 
heato  tt)l)eti  the  lung  gaticau  thecal 
taines  charge  concerning  2lbfaiom. 

6  c  Sortie  people  lOcnt  out  into 
the  fteio  agatnft  gjfracl :  ano  the  batteli 
loastntheioooo  ofephrauu, 

7  jeherc  the  people  oHJfraei  lOere 
nainebefo;icthcfcruantsofS>autb,ano 
there  tbas  there  a  great  daughter  that 
oavofttbentvthoufanomen. 

8  5Fo?  tlje  battell  ibas  there  featte^ 
reo  ouer  theface  ofall  the  countrev:ano 
thelbooot  Deuonrcb  more  people  that 
Oav,thcn  the  frooro  bcuourcb. 

9  iOnb3lbfalommctthefcruants 
of  2>auib ,  ano  ^bfaiom  robe  Opon  a 
mule ,  ano  the  mule  Went  Onbcr  the 
thicBC  boughs  of  a  great  £>&e,  anbhls 
heab  caught  holt)  of  thcjDae ,  anbhec 
Vbas  taken  Op  betvbecne  the  fieaucn 
ano  the  earth,  ano  the  mule  that  was  on= 
ocrhunAOentatbav. 

io  3tnoaccrtatncmanfatt)it,anotolb 
3Joab,  anbfaib,  fficholb,  3Ifai03bfa; 
lomhangcotnan£>Re. 

ii  3lnogjoabfaioontothemanthat 
toiohtm.^mobchoio.thoufaiocfthim, 

anoiohvbtoft  thou  notfmitchnn  there 
to  the  grounb ,  anb  3  toouio  hauc  gi- 
uen  thee  tenne  fhekeis  of  fiiuer ,  anb  a 
garble  < 

ii  3lno  the  man  faioe  Onto  35oab, 
Xhough  3  fhouio  t  rccrtucathoufano 
fhekdsof frtucrui  mmehanb,  yetiooulb 
3  nDtputfoorthnunehanoagainftthe 
Bmejs  fonne :  for  in  our  hearing  the 
Bmg  chargcothee,  anb  3ibifhai ,  anb 
gittat,fapmg,t26cn)are  that  none  touch 
rhcvongman^bfaiom. 

13  ^DthcrtOvre  ,  31  fhoulb  hauc 
torought  falfhooo  againtt  nunc  owne 
life :  for  there  is  no  matter  htb  from  the 
Bitig,anb  thou  thvfelfelOoulbeft  haue 
fctthpfelfeagainftmc. 

14.  -Chen  fait)  3loab,3J  map  not  tarv 
thustintth  thee.  anbhec  toofee  three 
tjarts  in  his  hanb ,  ano  thrutt  them  tho= 
roU)  the  heart  of  3tbfaiom ,  lOhtlehee 
ioasvetaiiucinthctmioftofthe£>Kc. 

15  3ln0  ten  vong  men  that  bare  310; 
abs  armour ,  compaffeb  about  anb 
fmotc^lbfalom,  ano  flcio  him. 

16  Suib'JoabblclOthctrumpe^ano 
thcpcoplc  retumtb  from  purfumgaf; 
ttt  3lfracl :  for  3Joab  hclbc  baclic  the 
people. 

17  3(nb  they  tooac  Abfalom ,  ano 


catt  him  into  a  great  pit  m  tlje  ibooo, 
ano  layo  a  oerv  great  hcape  of  ftones 
Oponhumano  ail^ftartflco  cuerp  one 
tohistent 

18  C  #010  Abfalom  m  h«s  life  time 
hao  fatten  anb  r  eateo  tip  for  himfeife  a 
pillar,  tbhieh  "sin*  the  Blngs  bale  :fo? 
hccfaio,  3  haue  no  fonne  tofceepenrp 
name  m  remembrance :  3nohee  calico 
the  pillar  after  his  oibne  name ,  ano  it 
is  calico  Onto  thisoav^blafomspiace* 

19  CXhcnfatoahtmaa?  the  fonne 
of  zaooft ,  fletmee  notb  wrote,  ano 
bearc  theBing  ttbings,  hotb  that  the 
ft  sd  is  ©  hath  t  aucngeo  htm  of  his 
enemies. 

20  #no3Joab  faio  Onto  hint,  £hon 
(halt  not  tbeate  ttotngs  this  oap ,  but 
thou  (halt  beare  tibtngs  another  oap: 
but  this  oav  thou  (halt  beare  no  te 
otngs,Oetaufe  the  Bings  fonne  is  Deao. 

zi  Xhcnfaib^oabtoCufhi,  <soc 
tell  theBingibhatthou  haft  feenc^nb 
Cufhiboibeo  himfeife  Onto  3oab,  ano 
ranne. 

ax  1Dhenfai0^hmiaa5the  fonncof 
zaoon  vet  agamc  to  ^oab,  ffiut  tholb* 
focuer,  letmee,  5P?avthcc,alforunne 
after  Cufhu  ^no  3oab  fato,t©herefo?e 
lOilt  thou  runnc,  mv  fonne,  feeing  that 
thou  haft  no  tibtngs  j|  r  caov  < 

13  2Sut holbfoeuer,  ( 6id  he )  letmet 
mnne:  3lnohecfaiObntohtm3Runne. 
%\)tn  3thunaa5  ratine  bv  the  rbav  of 
the  piamcanb  otierranne  Cnfl)i. 

24  3mo  Dauio  fate  bettbecne  the 
tttio  gates:  anothe  loatchmantbcnt  Op 
to  the  roofe  ouer  tlje  gate  Onto  the 
loan,  anb  lift  op  his  eves ,  anOlootteo, 
anObcholo,amanrumungalone. 

15  ^no  the  loatchman  crieo ,  ano 
toio  the  Bing.  ^no  the  6ingfatO,3f  he 
bee  alone ,  there  is  tioutgs  mhts  moutl). 
^no  he  came  apaccano  o?etb  ncere. 

i6  Znn  the  Vbatchman  faio  another 
man  running,  ano  theioatchman  cal* 
leoonto  the  porter,  ano  faio,  2Sehoio, 
another  tnan  ntnning  alone,  ^no  the 
Bingfato,^caifo  bzmgeth  ttotngs. 

27  Anothe  loatchman  faio ,  t  £0cc 
tltuiRcth  the  running  oftheforcmoft  is 
ItKcthcrttnningof^lhtmaa^thcfonnc 
of  zaoolt.  3lnotheBtngfaio,^ceisa 
goooman,  ano  commeth  voith  goob  n- 
bings. 

28  3lno3ihunaa5caueo,anofaioon* 
to  the  Bing,  ||  ^Uisioell.  ^tioheefcll 
boibnc  to  the  earth  Opon  his  face  before 
the  Btng,  ano  fatoe,  isicffeo  bee  the 


\Hetr. 

■dgedhin 
from  the 
hAr.d&c. 
t  Heb-.hu 
mar.  ojti- 
dtnvt. 


*Gene.i4. 
«7- 


tHetr.he 
■bat  may. 


I|  Ortconue- 
merit. 


f  Heir.  I 
fee  therm:- 
nwg. 


\Orft*u 

bcio  diet. 
Hibr-pejc? 


Dauid  mourncth.      Chap.xix.       Dauid  returneth 


f  Heb.fiut 

if. 

tbtrtptACt? 


t  Htbr.  ti- 
ding* is 

brought. 


Mittion  or  de- 
liHtnmce. 


%  ©  is  ©  tbp  <5ob  ibbicb  barb  t  Delmt= 
reuuptljetncit  tljat  Ufttop  their  banbe 
agatnft  nip  lo?b  the  i&ng. 

29  Smbtbctungfaib.tgjsfbcpong 
man:3bfalomfafe<  3inD  ^imaa;  an? 
ftuercb,  nabcn  3Joab  fcnt  the  Kings  fer* 
uant,anb  me  tbp  fcruant,3i  fati)  a  great 
tumult,but31  tmcib  notibbatit  was. 

jo  3nb  the  Ring  faibvmo  him  Xurnc 
afioeand  flano  here,  ^nbbecturncba: 
Cut,  atm  ftoob  Sill. 

31 3nDbcbolD,Cufl)icame,anbCufbi 
faib,  tXibmgsmp  lo?btbe  Ring :  fo?  the 
1L©m©rjat!)  auengcb  fljec  this  nap 
of  all  them  that  r  ofe  bp  agatnft  thee. 

n  3lnb the  bingfaib  bnto  Cumi/lte 
tbepong  man  3bfalom  fafe*  31nD€u; 
fbt  anfroereb ,  Xbc  enemies  of  mp  lo?b 
the  Ring,  anb  an  that  rife  againft  thee  to 
Doc  thee  j)urt,  be  as  that  pong  man  is. 

33  Onb  the  Ring  mas  much  moucb, 
anb  lbent  bp  to  ttje  chamber  ouer  the 
gate,  anblbept:  anb  as  be  lbent,  thus 
lice  fatb ,  &>  mp  fonne  ^bfalom,  mp 
tonne,  mp  tonne  3Cbfaiom :  iboulb  ©ob 
3  hab  bieb  to?  thee ,  <©  3ibfalom ,  mp 
fonne,  mp  tonne. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  Ioab  caufeth  the  king  to  ceafc  his  mourning. 
9  The  Israelites  are  earned  to  bring  the  king 
backe.  11  Dauid  fendeth  tothe  Piieils  to  in- 
cite them  ofludah.  1S  Shimei  is  pardoned. 
14  Mephibofheth.  excufed.  31  Barzillaidif- 
miiTed,  Chimhamhis  fonne  is  taken  into  the 
Kings  familie.  41  The  Ifraelites  expoftulate 
with  Iudah  lor  bringing  home  the  King 
without  them. 

il3Dtttbastolb3Joab,2Se< 
holbc,  the  Rtngibcepetb 
anb  mourncfb  fo?  3bfo 
lorn, 
i  3uibfbetbicto?ietbat 
baptbas  turncb  into  mo  anting  bnto  all 
tlje  people :  fo:  the  people  bcarb  fap  that 
bap,  ijoib  the  Ring  Vbasgrienebfo?  Ins 
fonne. 

3  3nDtf)epeoplcgatctbembpfrcaitb 
that  bap  into  the  nnc,  aspcople  beeing 
afl)ameb  ftcale  atbap  Ibben  tbcp  flee  in 
battcil. 

4.  zsutfbc  Ring  cottcreb  bis  faccanb 
the  Rmgcrtcb  lbith  alottb  boptc,  <Dmp 
tonne3bfalom,£>3lbfalommpfcnne, 
mp  fonne. 

5  3lnb3Joab  came  into  the  bouft  to 
the  lung,  anb  faib,  Xbou  baft  fbatneb 
this  bap  the  fates  of  all  tbp  fcruants, 


ibbtcb  this  bap  banc  faucb  tbp  uft ,  anb 
the  Uucs  of  tbp  tonnes,  9  of  tbp  baugh 
tecs,  anb  the  lines  of  tbp  ibtucs ,  atib 
the  Uucs  of  tbp  concubines, 

6  t3Jn  that  thou  loucft  thine  ene- 
mies, anb  hateft  thp  fttcnbsjfo?  thou 
baft  beciareb  this  bap ,  tthat  thou  re= 
garbed:  neither  pnnccs,  no?  fcruants: 
fo?tbiSbap  3  pcrccuicthatif  STbfalom 
hablmcb,  anbauibcbabbicb  tbtsbap, 
then  it  hab  pleafcb  thee  lbcll. 

7  iI5olbthercfo2cartfc,gocfb02th, 
anbfpcaltc  t  comfo?tablp  bnto  thp  fcr- 
uants :  fo?  3Jfrucarc  bp  the  %®m$>, 
tftbougoenotfo?tb,tberclbilnottartc 
one  ttiitb  thee  this  night ,  anb  that  ttnli 
be  \bo?fcbnto  tbcetbcnailtbc  ciulltrjat 
befell  thec  from  thp  pouth  bntill  noib. 

3  Xbcn  the  Btng  roft ,  anb  fate  in 
thegate:  anb  thcptolb  bnto  ailthcpco- 
pic,  faping,  ascbolb,  the  Hmg  both  fit  in 
the  gate :  anb  all  the  people  came  bcfo?e 
the  lung :  fo?  3Jfrael  hab  flcb  eucrp  man 
tohtstent. 

9  C3nDalltbcpeoplcftiercatffrifc 
th?oughontailtljctribcsofg!fracl,fap^ 
ing,  Xhe&uigfattcbbsoutofthchanb 
otouc  enemies,  anb  he  bcliucrebbs  out 
of  the  banb  of  the  0htbfhncs,anb  noib 
he  is  flcb  out  of  the  lanb  fo?  31bfaiom. 

10  ^nb^bfalomttihomlbceanoinj 
tcb  ouer  bs,  is  bcab  in  battcil :  notbc 
rt)crcfo?e  Vbhp^pca&cpenota  lbo?bof 
b?ingmg  the  Ring  batbe  < 

11  C  ^nb  Bing  a>auib  fcnt  to  Z& 
bofeanbto^btathar  the  p?itfts,fapmg, 
g>pcaBe  bnto  the  fibers  of  3Jubab, 
faping,  nahP^repe  the  latt  to  b?mgtbe 
Wng  bacfte  to  his  houfc*  (feeing  the 
fpeech  of  all  3Jfrael  is  come  to  the  Ring, 
eucntohisboufe.) 

n  Pec  are  mp  b?eth?en,  J'ec  are  mp 
bones  anb  mpflcfl) :  tbberfo?e  then  are 
pe  the  laft  to  b?ing  bacfee  the  Ring < 

13  3nbfappcto:3mafa:Artthounot 
of  mp  bone,  anb  of  mp  flefb  <  <Kob  bo  to 
to  me,  anb  mo?c  alto ,  if  thou  be  not  tap? 
taine  of  the  boftc  befo?c  me  contmuaiip 
tntheroomeof5Ioab. 

14  3tnbheboibcbthchea«ofalithc 
men  of  3Jubab,  cucnasthc  heart  of  one 
man,  fothat  thep  fcnt  tins  word  unto  the 
Bmg,  IKeturnc  thou  ano  all  thp  itv 
uants. 

H  £>o  the  Bingrctnrneb,  anb  came 
to  3Jo2ban:  anb^iubah  came  to  <aigai, 
to  goctotncctthcBuig ,  to  coubucttbc 
lung  ouer  ,35o2bane. 

16  C  3lnb  *  £>btmci  the  fonne  of 
<5g i <Erera 


J.O-r. 
f  Heb.  that 
orinccior 

nor  to  thee. 


\  Heb.tothc 
heArt  of  thy 
feruantt. 


■Hebt 
fUert) 


Sliimeisfubmiffion.  Il.Samuel.  Barzillaiaged. 


the  Btng  's  as  an  3lngci  of  <Sob :  doc 
tbctcfojc  What  isgooDm  thine  cpcs. 

18  JFo?  all  of  mp  fathers  boufc  were 
but  t  ocau  mm  befoje  mp  lo?b  the  btng : 
vet  biDDeft  tboufet  thp  fcruant  among 
them  that  btb  eatc  at  dime  ownc  table : 
what  rtght  therefore  hauc  3  pet  to  trie 
anp  moje  bnto  the  bmg j, 

19  3mDtbc  btng fam bnto  him.nabp 
fpeabefttbott  anp  mojc  of  tbp  matters  < 
3  hauc  fatb,  Xbou  anb  ztba  Duudc 
tbelanD. 

30  3tnb  <©cphtbofbctb  fatb  bnto  the 
bmg ,  J3ta,  let  htm  tabc  all ,  fojafmttch 
as  mp  lojbc  the  btng  is  comeagainc  in 
peace  bnto  bis  oWne  boulc. 

51  C  3taD  2Sar3tliai  the  ©tlcabitc 
came  boibnc  from  ftogclim,  anD  Went 
oner  giojDanc  Wtth  the  btng,to  conbuct 
him  oucr  3Jo;!Dane. 

31  JftoWiSamllaiWasaberpagcD 
man,  euen  fourefcoje  pecrcs  olbc,  anb 
*  be  bab  pjotttbcb  tbc  btng  of  fullenancc 
while  be  lap  at  ^ahanaun :  foj  he  was  a 
bcrp  great  man. 

33  3Cnb  the  btng  fatb  bnto  ffiarstliai, 
Come  tbou  oucr  With  mc,  anb  3  will 
fecbe  rbccwttb  mcm31crufaiem. 

34  3nb  asarjiliat  fapbe  bnto  the 
btng,  t  j^oib  long  baue  3  to  liuctbat  3 
tbouiD  goc  bp  With  the  Bing  bntojc; 
rufaicm* 

35  3  am  tftis  bap  fourefco?c  peercs 
olbc :  and  tan  3  btfeerne  bctWeenc  goob 
anb  ctnlh  (tan  tbp  fcruant  tafte  What 
3  catc,o?wbat3JDnnbe*  eangjheare 
anp  mojc  tbc  boicc  of fmging  men  anb 
tinging  ibomcn*  WhcrfojethcniboulD 
tbp  fcruant  bee  pet  a  burben  bnto  mp 
kuD  the  bing? 

36  ICbplcruantWill  goc  a  little  Wap 
oucr  gjo^bane  with  the  bing :  anb  Wbp 
fl)oulb  tbebmgrcconipcnfcit  mc  With 
fucbarcwarD* 

37  %et  thp  fcruant,  3  P*ap  thec, 
tttrnc  baebe  againe ,  tfjatj  map  bie  in 
mine  oibnc  cine ,  anb  be  buried  bp  tbc 
grauc  of  mp  father,  anb  of  mp  mother : 
but  beholb  thp  fmtant  Cbimbam,  let 
htm  go  oucr 'With  mp  lo?D  thebing,anD 
boe  to  him  What  than  fecme  goob  bnto 
thee. 

38  2InD  the  btng  anfWcreb,  Chun* 
ham  thai  goc  oucr  With  mc,  anb  3  Will 
Doc  to  bun  that  Which  (ball  fecnte  goob 
bnto  thee:  ana  whatfocucr  tboufbait 
t  require  ofme,  that  will  3  Doc  foj  thee. 

39  3nD  all  tbc  people  went  oucr 
3Jo;Danc:anD  when  the  bmg  was  come 

oucr, 


'  Chap. 
16.I. 


tffiJ.A 
gcidm  hit 


•Chap.16. 
'5- 


•Chip. 

,6.3. 


(Sera,  afficntamitcwhtcb  was  of  25a* 
burun,  haftcD ,  9  tame  DoWnc  With  the 
men  of  if  ubah,  to  meet  Btng  DautD. 

17  ^nDthcrcwereatlioufanDtncnof 
2Semamtn  Wtth  him,anD  *ziba  the  fee 
uant  of  the  boufc  of  £>aul,  auDbis&f* 
tecne  fonncs  ano  his  twentp  fcruants 
wuh  btm,anD  thep  went  oucr  3Jo?Dattc 
before  the  Btng. 

is  ^nbthcrcWentoucrafcrrp-boat 
to  carp  oucr  thcbtngshoufl)OlD,anDto 
Doe  t  what  he  thought  gooD :  anb  S>bt* 
mci  the  fonttc  of  <3cra  fell  DoWne  be* 
fiwcfbc  btng  as  he  was  tome  oucr  3(0?* 
bane  •, 

19  3(nD  fatD  bnto  the  btng ,  fLct  not 
mplojb  impute  intqutttebntome,  net* 
thcrDothou  remember  that  Which  thp 
fcruant  did  perucrflp  the  Dap  that  mp 
lojb  the  btng*  Went  out  of  3)crufalcm, 
that  tljc  bing  fboulD  tabc  tt  to  his  heart. 

io  fax tbp  fcruant Docth  bnow  that 
3  hauc  finncD:  tbcrcfojcbcbolD,3Jam 
come  the  firft  this  bap  of  all  the  boufc  of 
3Jofcph,togocDoWuctomcctcmplo?b 
tije  bing. 

11 2Sttt  Sflritbai  tljc  fonttc  of  zcruiab 
anfujcrcD,anDfapD,£>ballnot;§>bimci 
be  put  to  Death  fo;  this,  becaufc  hce  cur- 
fcD  the  %  0  is  id  %>  ^tlOtUtCD  i 

11  3JnDa>auiDfatD,tBhathaue3to 
Doc  With  pou ,  pec  fonncs  of  zcr  Utah, 
that  pee  fl)ottlD  tbts  bap  be  abucrfartes 
bnto  mc  t  fliall  there  anp  man  be  put  to 
Death  tljts  bap  in  ^fracl  t  foz  Doe  not  3 
bnow ,  that  3 ani  tljts  Dap  Bing  oucr 
3Jfraeli 

13  3Chcrfo2c the bingfaib  bnto  S>f> 
mct,Xhou  fljaltnotDit:  anD  the  Btng 
fmarc  bnto  htm. 

14  C^tiD^ephO)oa)Cththefonne 
of  5>aul  came  DoWnc  to  meet  tljeUmg, 
anD  haD  neither  DjctTcD  his  fcetc ,  no? 
trimmcD  his  bcarb ,  no?  WafljcD  hts 
clothes,  from  the  Dap  the  Btng  Dcpar* 
tcD ,  bnttll  tljc  Dap  bec  came  agametn 
peace. 

15  ^nD  it  tame  to  palfc  When  he  Was 
come  to^lcriifaicmtomcetc  the  Bing, 
that  tbcBtttg  tipD  bnto  hun,  nahcrc* 
fo:e  Wcntcll  not  tljou  With  me,  Q3cpl> 
bodicth^ 

16  3mb  hce  anftoercD ,  Q9p  Iojd  O 
bmg,  mp  fcruant  DctciurDmcc;fonhp 
fcruant  fapD,  3  Will  fcDDlenie  an  affc 
that  3  map  nbe  thcrcon,auDgocto  tljc 
but  g,  becaufc  thp  fcruant  ts  lame : 

17  3nD  *  hce  hath  flanbcrcD  thp  fcr- 
uant bnto  mp  102D  the  bmg,  but  mp  lo:D 


f  Htb.  men 
of  death. 


"Ch.p.17 

»7- 


f  Hew  fttAnt 
dajenerttht 
Jtere)  ofrtj 
life* 


\  Hebxhufe. 


Shebarebellcth.         Chap.xx.  Amafa  flame] 


\Htbr.fct 


•Chap.  1 6. 

22. 

\Hetn-.a 

hauft  if 
ward. 


oner ,  rtje  mng  fcuTcb  25ar5illawnb  blefc 
fcD  Ijun,anb  ljc  returncb  bnto  b&  ottmc 
place. 

40  iCbentbeBing  tbent  onto  (StV 
gal,  ano  Cbunbam  lbent  on  ttittft  ljun : 
ant)  allrtjc  people  of  5ubab  conbnctcb 
tbc  mng ,  ano  alfo  Ijaife  tbc  people  of 
Jfracl. 

41  C3mbbebolb,alltbemenof3JD 
rael  tame  to  ttjc  mng,  ana  faib  bnto  tlje 
mng,  nabP  bauc  our  b2ctb2cn  tbc  men 
of  jjuual)  rtoUciitljccatDap,  ano  banc 
bjougbt  tbe  Bmg  ano  l)is  bouftolb, 
ano  all  SDauibs  men  lbitlj  bun ,  ouet 
Jjoitwnef 

41  3lnb  all  t!je  men  of  IJuDal)  an; 
froerebtbemen  of  35fracl,  asctaufcrlje 
mngisnecrcofmuuctobs:ibljercfo2e 
ttjen  be  vc  angnc  fo2  tl)is  matter  <  $?aue 
voc  eaten  at  all  of  tbc  lungs  toft;  o:ljatlj 
begiucnbsanpgift? 

43  3nD  tlje  men  of  Jfracl  auuuc^ 
rcb  tbe  men  of  3Jubab,  anb  fatb,  tecc 
l)auc  ten  parts  m  tbe  mng,anb  lbc  bauc 
alib  tnozc  right  inSDautb  tljen  pec :  lbbp 
tften  btb  vec  tbcfotfc  bs,  tbat  our  abiucc 
ujoulb  not  be  firtt  Dab  in  bmiging  bacfec 
ourtung^  3nbtbeib02besoftbcmcn 
ofjubab  iberc  fiercer  rt)en  tljc  lborts 
oftbemcnof3ifracl. 

CHAP.    XX. 

1  Byoccafjon  of  the  quarrell,  Sheba nukeih a 
party  in  llracl.  3  Damds  ten  concubines  are 
(hut  vp  in  perpetual  prilon.  4  Amafamade 
captaine  ouer  Iiidah,  is  flame  by  Ioab.  14 
Ioabputfueth  Shebavnto  Abel.  16  Awiic 
woman  faueth  the  cine  by  Shebaes  head. 
z3  Dauids  Officers. 

®&  irita  there  nappencb  to  bee 
tberc  a  man  of  23eliai , 
lbbofc  name  was  S>bcba 
tl)cfouncof25irtm,a25en^ 
ianutc,?bccblclbatruni 
pet,  anofaiD ,  tocc  l)aueno  par  tin  ©a 
uib,neitl)er  baucibc  inheritance  m  tbc 
fonnc  of^JcOc :  cucrp  man  to  Ijis  tents, 
£>3fract 

1  £>q  cucr  v  man  oHlfracl  lbent  bp 
from  after  S>atub,  md  follolbcb  Slicba 
tljefonne  offfiulm :  but  tbc  men  ofjbi 
bat)  ciauc  bttto  tbctr  mug ,  fromjo^ 
banc  cucn  to  gierufalcnt 

3  C  3nt>  SDatub  came  to  bts  houfc 
atgicruraiem  ,  anb  tnc  Hmgtoonctrjc 
ten  lbomeu  bis*  coueubincs.ibbom  ljc 
ban  left  to  Keen  tbc  boufc ,  ant)  put  tbcm 
m  1  u>arb,anbfcDtbcm>buttt>eutnotm 


bnto  tljcm :  fo  tt)cv  iberc  t  font  bp  bnto 
tbc  bap  of  tbcit  bcatlj,  t  uumg  m  lbt 

bOlblJOOt). 

4  C  Xljen  faib  tbc  lung  to  fcmafa, 
1 SiTcmblc  me  tbc  men  of  Jubal)  ibitb- 
mtb2Ccbapcs,anbbetboubercp2ctcnt. 

5  5>o  3lma(a  Vbcnt  to  affcmble  tljc 
men  of  3niDab ;  but  bee  tancb  longer 
tbentbc  fct  tuncibbitb  be  bab  appoint 
tcb  bun. 

6  anbDauibfaibto^bifljai^olb 
(ban  £rt)cba  tbc  fonnc  of  26icbn  boebs 
ntozc  barme  tljen  bib  ^bfalom  :  tane 
tboutbp  l02bsfcruants,  anbputfucak 
ter  bim,  left  be  get  ljun  fcuccb  tities,anb 
tefcapebs. 

7  2lnb  tberc  lbent  ont  after  Ijjtm 
3Joaosmen, anb  tljc *Cbcretbites,anb 
tbc  pclctbitcs,anb  all  tbe  mtgbty  men: 
anb  tbcp  lbent  out  of  3fcrufaicm ,  to 
purfueaftcr^bebatbefonneof26icI)2i. 

8  naben  tbcp«  ere  at  tljc  great  Hone 
ibbieb  "  m  ©ibcon ,  Timafa  \bnit  befo  2c 
tbcm:  anb  Joabs  garment  rtjat  be  bab 
put  on,\bas  girocb  unto  bun.anb  bpon 
ttagublc  wnhafrao2b  famicbbponbis 
lopnes  in  tbc  Ibcatb  tljcrcof,  anbasljcc 
lbent  fo2tb,it  fell  out. 

9  ^nb  Joab  faibc  to  3maCa ,  3rt 
tboumbcaitb,mpb20tbcr  i  3tnbTJoab 
toobc  3tmafa  bp  tbc  bcarb  ibitb  tbc 
ngl)tbanbtobifreb»m. 

10  asm  3lmafa  tooftcuo  becb  to  tbc 
frao2t)  tbat  was  m^Joabs  banb :  fo  bee 
fmotc  buntbcrclbitb  m  tbc  fiftt)  Hb,  anb 
(beb  out  bis  bolbcls  to  tbc  grounb.anb 
t  ftrabe  bun  not  agatnc,  anb  be  bicb :  fo 
^oab  anb  3Jbifbai  bis  b20tbcr  purfucb 
after  5>bcba  tbefonue  of2i5irb2i. 

11  ^nb  one  of^Joabs  nicn  Qoobbp 
bun,anb  faib,i^c  tfiat  fauourctb  3loab, 
anb  bee  tbat  isf02  £>auib,  l«  him goe  af- 
ter 3loab. 

vl  ^nb  ^inafa  iballoibeb  in  bloob 
m  tbc  nubs  of  tbc  bigb  lbap :  anb  ibbcn 
tbc  man  faib  tbat  all  tbc  people  ttoob 
mil ,  be  remoucb  3mafa  out  ortlje  bigb 
lbap  two  tljc  ficlb ,  anb  catt  a  clotl)  bpon 
bun,  ibbcn  bee  faib  that  cucrp  ouctljat 
came  bpbmi,ftoob  mil. 

13  ttabcnhciuasrcmouebout  of  tbc 
bigijlbap,  all  tbc  people  lbent  on  after 
Jloab,to  purfucaftcr  5>ljcba  tljcfomu: 
of26icb2t. 

14  <r  ^nbljcc  lbent  t!)o:oiballtbc 
tribes  of  Jfrael  Dtuo  abel ,  anb  to 
2Sctl)maatbab,aub  all  tbc  2Smtcs:  ano 
tbcp  iberc  gatljercrHogctljcr.auD  lbent 

alfo  after  bun. 

Gg  3  isjinb 


t  Heir. 

bound. 
t  Hrtr.  „ 
wiJowhood 
tflife. 

t  H,lr. 


\H,trJt. 
/liter  htm- 
felfefrom 
otirtiei. 

•Chap8. 


t  Hrtr. 
drntledtut 

hu      l^lvf  r 


2S 


Shcba  beheaded.       I  I.Samuel.       Famine  in  Ifrael. 


lOt.it  flood 
*q>:in\l  the 
BMtmoji  rv,UI 
f  bfeb  mar- 
red to  threw 
dcirne. 


HOr.rA.r7 
pldinly  ff-akf 
imtbebegtr.- 

***£>&}*»£> 

fur  eh  they 
will  Ail^r  of 
Abe!,&r.d[o 
mAkf  tit  end 


\Hd.lyhu 


t  Utb.  rrrre 
fiailtrtd. 


•Clup.l 
I  6. 


f)r    Tt- 
mrm  rur.cer 


||Or,  a 
frt'cr. 


15  anb  trjer  came  anb  bcficgcb  turn 
mabeiof25ctbmaatbab,anbtbcycaa 
Dp  a  banftc  agamft  the  cmc,anb  ||it  ftooo 
mtbc  trcncb :  anb  all  rtic  people  that 
wcreiDitti^oob,  tbattcrcb  the  wall,  to 
tlnolb"boibnc. 

i6  CXhcnmcb  aibifc  lbomanout 
of  the  cmc,  ixarc ,  bcarc .  fay ,  3  pjay 
von,  tonto  Jioab ,  Come  ncerc  Ijirtjcr, 
that  Ji  map  fpcahc  antlj  tbec. 

17  anb  Wbcnbclbas  come  necrebn- 
tobcr.tbcibomanfatb.Antbou'Joab; 
3nb  be  anfrocreb,  gj-imhe :  Xbcnflicc 
faib  bnto  bun,  i&carc  the  wo2bs  of  tbmc 
ftanbmaib.  anb  l)c  anfmcrcb ,  3  boc 
bcarc. 

is  1H)cn  flic  fpaUc,  faying ,  ||  1-ibcy 
Were  lbont  to  fpca&c  m  olb  nine,  fay- 
ing, Xhcy  (ball  fuccly  affec  tounfeliat 

^bfl :  anbfOtlK?  CtlbCb  the  matter. 

19  3  moticof  tl)cmtl)at  arepcacca^ 
blc  and  faitbfulim  3Jfracl:  thou  fecfeeft 
to  beftroy  a  ntie,  anb  a  mother  m  if- 
rael :  tt3by  Vbilt  thou  fmailolb  bp  tfjc 
inheritance  of  the  %  o  is  p; 
,  20  anb  "J0'115  anfmcrcb  anb  faibc, 
irarrc  bcitjarrc  be  it  from  me,  that'll 
fljonib  ftuailoib  bp  02  beftroy. 

11  Xbc  matter  is  not  fo :  but  a  man 
of  monnt  <£ph:atm  ( Sbcba  the  fonnc 
ofiBicbntbynamc)  barb  lift  bp  Ins 
banb  againfltliclnng,  euen  agamft  2>a« 
uib :  bclmcr  him  oncly ,  anb  3  ttullbc; 
part  from  tbctuy.anb  the  iboman  faib 
bnto33oab,  2Scholb,  hts  hcabfl)aiibc 
tluoibcnto  thee  oner  tljciball. 

22  Hbcn  the  iboman ibent bntoail 
tl)c  people  m  her  ibifcbomc,  anb  they 
cut  off  thcheab  of  Shcba  the  fonnc  of 
23irhu,  anb  call  rt  ontto^loab:  anb bee 
blcib  atmmpct,anbtt)cy  t  rettrebftom 
tbccmceucry  man  to  his  tent:  $  3loab 
rctnrncb  to'ilcrufalcmbnto  tbe&mg. 

25  IT  #oib  *  3Joab  was  oner  an  the 
hoflcof'Jjfracl.anbBcuaiahthcfonnc 
of  '5choiaoa.v.,s  oner  the  Chcrethitcs, 
ano  oner  the  0cletl)itcs. 

24  anb  abojam  ^  oucr  the  tri- 
bute ,  anb  3Ichofbaphat  the  fonnc  of 
ahilnb  va<||£cco2bcr. 

25  anb  Sbcua  was  fenbe,  anb  "Zfc 
boli ,  anb  abiarhar  were  the  pjicfts. 

26  anb  lira  alfo  the  3!atntc,ibas 
||  a  chicfc  ruler  about  Dauib. 

CHAP.   XXI. 

1  The  three  yeeres  famine  forthcGibecmites, 
ceafe,  bv  hanging  leuen  of  Sauls  formes.  10 
Rizpahs  kindnes  vnto  the  dead,   u  Dauid 


3 


buneth  the  bones  ot  Saul  and  Jonathan  in  has 
fathers  fepulchrc.  15  Foure  battels  againft 
the  Philifhnes,  wherein  foure  valiants  of  Da- 
uid flay  foure  gyants. 

gjb&asjfcfiyea  s^en  rherc  ttvis  a  famine  m 
«K?  the  bayes  of  SDauib  rbice 
$fggi  yeeres,  yecre  after  yeete, 
U  bS^  anb  Dauib  t  cnquircb  of 
&5feSs5#  the  %ok&.  anb  the 
Hois©  anfmcrcb,  it  is  foj  Saul,  anb 
fbz  hii  bioobte  houfc,  becanfe  be  fleib  the 
©ibeomtcs. 

z  anb  the  Ring  cailcb  the  <5ibco- 
nitcs,  anb  faib  bnto  tbem,(notb  the  <5v 
bcomtcsibcrcnotof  tbecbiUuenofJk 
raci,but*of  the  remnant  of  the  amo- 
ntcs,  anb  the  thrtbitn  of  3?fratl  hab 
fmomc  bnto  them  :  anb  Saul  fought 
toflaythcm,  tn  bis  scale  to  rbcrb;lb?cu 
of3Jfcaclanb35ubal)) 

3  iDhcrcfozc  2Dautb  fatb  bnto  the 
<E>ibconitcs,tt3hatfl)aii'5bocfo2your 
anb  lbhcribith  fljaugi  mahctbeatone- 
mcnt,tbatycmayblcffcthcmhcntaucc 
oftbclLoisB* 

4  anb  the  Otocomtcs  fatbc  bnto 
bun,  llnDcibillhaucnofUuctnoigolbe 
I  of  Saul ,  no2  of  his  houfc,  ncttber  foj 
!bs  (bait  rtiou  mil  any  man  in  jfracl 
janb  be  faib,  iiDljat  you  (ball  fay,  that 
nuli3Ibocfo2you. 

5  anb  they  anfmcrcb  the  ftmg.Xbe 
man  tbatconfumebbs,  anb  that  Hbcui 
fcbagainftbs,thatibcfl)Oulbbcbc(lroi 
cbfrom  remaining  m  any  of  the  coafls 
of  Jfracl, 

6  Xtctfcijeu  men  of  hts  fonncsbce 
bcliucrcb  bnto  bs,  anb  tbec  Hull  hang 
tbnnbpbntotbe?l0K©in<3ibeabof 

Saul ,  ||  whome  the  %  €>  IS  O  bib  CbllfC 

anbtbemngfaib,3jibillgiuctiiem. 

7  2Sut  die  mug  fpareb  fiftcpbibo^ 
flictl)  tbefonne  of  Jonathan  the  fonnc 
of  Saul ,  becaufc  of  the  *  fLoisc^ 
otbetbatibasbctibcentbnn,bctibecne 
SDanib,  anb  Jonathan  ri)c  fonnc  of 
Saul. 

8  25uttbe  King  tooHtthcnbofons 
of1Ri5pahtbcbaughtcrofaiah,ibboni 
flic  bare  bnto  Saul,  armoni  anb  ©c- 
pbibofl)Cth,anb  the  fine  fonncs  of  ||  $&i? 
thai  the  baugbtcr  of  Saul,  mhomc  flic 
t  brought  bp  to2  abncl  the  fonnc  of 
26ar?tllai  the  SBcboiatbitc. 

9  anb  bee  bcliucrcb  them  into  the 
banbs  of  the  ©ibconucs,anb  tbey  ban 
gcb  them  m  the  hiilbcfojc  the  %  &  is  ©: 
anb  they  fell  all  fcucn  together,  aub 
ibere  put  to  bcatbmtbe  bayes  of  bar 

uc(t, 


\bleb  fought 
the  face  &c. 


•IofKp.3, 
16,17. 


||Or,/ftf 
not  flutter 
eo\d  that  we 
hauetodoe 
ToithSjuler 
htibonfe, 
neither  ptr~ 
tAtnesit  to 
is  to  ktl&c. 
■  Ort  chi  vi 


of  the  Lord. 


*l.Sim.f8 
J. and  30.8, 
4»- 


iW.  fifltr. 
t  Hrb.kre 
to  tyfdrul. 


Sauls  bones  buried.   Chap.xxi).  Dauidsiong. 


•Chap.;  7, 


"I  Sim. 
31.10. 


Orjtupk*. 
\H<b.lhe 
ftaffr,  or  the 
head. 


\Htb.cm- 
dU,or  lamfe 

•t.Chion. 
J0.4. 


\Or,R*pU 


•Seel. 

Chro.ic.j 


ucft,  tn  the  firft  dayes,  intljc  beginning 
of  barley  harucft. 

10  <[3nb  *  Jtopah  tl)c  nauglncr  of 
3lial)  tooRefacUcciotb.anbfpzcabit  fo: 
hcrbponfhcrocuc,fromrbcbcgmnutg 
of  harucft ,  bnttll  ibatct  bioppcb  bpon 
them  out  of  hcaucn ,  ant)  tiiffcrcb  nct^ 
ther  the  biros  of  the  air c  to  reft  on  them 
by  bay ,  no:  the  bcaftesof  the ftclbc  by 
ntght. 

11  anb  it  ibas  tolbc  2>atub  lbhat 
fttspah  thebangbter  of  3ual)  tl)c  ton? 
cubineof&aulbaobonc. 

u  C3nb  3>amb  ibent  anb  tooae  the 
bones  of  £>aul,  anb  the  bones  of  Jonfr 
than  ins  fonnc  from  the  men  of  Jabcfl) 
(Srtcab ,  lbbtch  nab  ftoilcn  them  from 
the  ftccctof  25tti)tt\mvol)txct\]t*pty 
Uftincs  hab  fjangco  them,  lbbcn  the 
^Ijinftints  hab  flame  S>aul  m  ouboa. 

13  anb  hec  brought  bp  from  thence 
the  bones  of  £>aul,  anb  the  bones  of 
Jonathan  Ins  fonnc ,  anb  the?  gather 
rcb  the  bones  of  them  that  lbcrc  Ijatv 
gcb. 

14  anbthebones  of 5>auianb  Jo- 
nathan h^  fonne  buricb  they  in  the 
countreyof  25entamtnmzclaih,  tnthc 
fcpulchjc  of  Bifh  his  father:  anb  the? 
pcrfourmcbali  tbatthc  lungcommatu 
beb :  anb  after  that,<3ob  ibas  entrcatcb 
fonheianb. 

15  C  $3o:coucr ,  the  j&htuflines  hab 
ycttbarrcagamc  lbith  3Jfraci,anb2>& 
utbibcntDolbtt,  anbhisfcruantsibtth 
htm,  anb  fought  agatnft  the  i^Diuatncs, 
anb  2>autb  lbarcb  fatnt. 

16  3nb  3Jft)bt-bcnob  lbhich  was  of 
the  fonncs  ot||  the  gyant,(tbctbeigbt  of 
tbhofc ]  fpearc  lbctghcb  thjee  hunbjcb 
thcBrts  oflwaflc  in  lbctgbOhc  being  git; 
bebibith  a  nrtb^ord,  thought  to  hauc 
flauicJDauib. 

17  25ut  abifhaithc  fonnc  of  zcr- 

utahfuteourcbhtm.ahbfmotcthc^h^ 
littincanbutlleb  hint.  Xhcn  the  men  of 
3>autb  froarc  bnto  hmt,  faying ,  Zhou 
(halt  goc  no  mojc  out  ttnth  bsto  bat 
tell,  that  thou  quench  not  the  t  light  of 
Jfracl. 

18  *  3nb  it  tame  to  pafTc  after  this, 
that  there  ibas  againc  a  battcll  tbtth 
the0htliftutcsatC5ob :  then  3>ibbecbai 
the  ^ufljathttc  flcib  £>apb,ibh:ch  was  of 
the  fonncs  of  ||  tlic  ©yant. 

19  3nb  there  tbas  agatne  a  battcll  tn 
©ob,  lbith  the  iMjtnttmcs,  ibhere  €1- 
hanan  the  fonnc  of  Jaarc^cgim  a 

BCthlehCtmtC,  flCVbe  *thebrodieroi  (50- 


itath  the  ©irtitc  ,tl)c  ftaffc  of  ruijofc 
fpearc  wasitbcaibeaucrsbcame. 

20  3Jud  there  ibas  pet  a  battcll  m 
<3ath,  ibhere  ibas  a  man  of  areac  fta 
turc,  that  hab  on  cucry  hanb'ftrc  fin 
gcrs,  anb  on  cucry  footcflrc  toes, fourc 
anb  nbcttty  in  number  ,anb  he  aifo  ibas 
borne  to  ||  the  0yant. 

11  3mo>bbcnhe  !|bcficb5fraci,gjo 
natljan  the  fonnc  of  *£>hmicathcb:o 
thcrof£>autb,flcibhtm. 

21  Xhefc  fourc  lbcrc  borne  to  the 
eyant  m©ath,  anbfcll  bytbebanbof 
3DautD ,  anb  by  tlje  hanb  of  !jts  fcr- 
uants. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

A  Pfalme  ot'thankefgiuingfor  Gods  powerful] 
deliuerancc,and  manitold  blcfsfngs. 

rK  /3b  2>autb  franc  bnto  the 
H?Lo  is  ©the  flwbcs  of 
-  this  fong ,  tn  tlje  nav  tha- 
thclL^s©  hab  bclutc 
„  rcb  htm  out  of  the  hanbof 
ail  his  cnanics,anb  out  of  thchanb  of 
5>attl. 

r  3utbhefa(b,*Zhc!L£>isE>ismy 
rocfec  anb  my  foztreffc,  anb  my  belt 
ucrcr: 

3  IChecSobofmyrocUctnhtmlbill 
3  truft :  hec is  my  ftHen>,  anb riuhojne 
of  my  faluanon ,  my  high  tolber ,  anb 
my  refuge,  my  ^>autour  ■,  tljou  fattcft 
mefrombtolcnce. 

4  J^iHeailonthclLsDis©,  tbho 
ts ttwthy  to  be piaifcb :  fo fl^ail 3  befa 
ucb  from  nunc  enemies. 

<,  ©hen  the  ||  tbaues  of  beath  torn 
paffeb  me :  the  floobs  of  t  bngobly  men 
mabc  mcafratb. 

6  %\)t  Hfoioibes  of  §cll  compaffeb 
mc  about:  tlje  fnarcs  of  beath  pjeucn; 
tebmc. 

7  3Jn  my  btftreffe  3  calico  bpon 
the  %® is©,  anb  cryebtomy  ©ob, 
anb  hec  bib  hcarc  my  boice  out  of  his 
Zcmple,  anb  my  trie  did  enter  mto  his 
cares. 

s  3£hen  the  earth  fl)Oobe  anb 
trcmblcb  :  the  fottnbattons  of  heattcn 
mooucb  anb  fhooUc ,  becaufc  Ijec  ibas 
ibzoth. 

9  Xhcrc  tbeutbpafmoaRc  f  out  of 
W>  noftnls ,  anb  fire  out  of  hfs mouth 
bcuourcb :  coaiecibcrc  Utnblcb  by  tt. 

io  $ec  bolbebthchcaucns  aifo  anb 
cameboibnc:anbbarItnicirc^^bnDcr 

his  fectc. 

ii  Hnx>\ 


jiOr,  rrjro- 
dirJ. 

*  I.Sam. 
|6.J>. 


•Pral.i8.j. 


t  Het.Be- 
lud. 

[  Or.coxrds. 


•Hit.lj. 


23  2 


The  long 


Il.Samuel. 


ofDauid. 


t  Ht&rJm* 

dino  ofn  4- 


Pr.gr,,,. 


t  Hrcr,  la 
htm. 


t  Hrhr  tr- 
fjrehti  e]c. 


J  OrwrrJI/t. 
pf.l8.j7. 


\Or.undlc. 

I|  Or,  Irolrn 
MiroHOr. 


11  3tnDheroDctopona£herub,anD 
did  flic :  anD  hec  ruas  feme  topon  the 
Wings  of  the  UmiDe. 

n  3Uid  Dec  maoc  DarRenefTcpauilt: 
onsrounD about  hint,  tDarue  maters, 
aniitljlCUC  clouDSof  thef  fitcs. 

13  £h:ough  the  bughtncfJfe  bcfoic 
him,\l>crccoaics  office  HmDleD. 

14  Xbc  %  o  a  ©  thunDzcD  from 
hcaum:  anD  themoft  high  DttcrcDhis 
tootcc. 

15  3nD  he  fent  out  arrorocs.anb  feat 
tercDthcm,  lightning,  anD  Difcomfttcb 
them. 

i6  2(ut>  the  channels  of  the  S>ca  ap< 
pcarcD ,  the  fouiiDanons  of  tl)c  ibozlD 
iberc  DifcouercD,  atthcrcbuUingofthc 
%  o  is  d,  at  the  biaft  of  the  b:cath  of 
his  noftrtls. 

17  J?cftntfrontabouc,hctooKcmc: 
he  Dzcttnnc  out  of  i|  many  maters. 

is  M  DclmercD  me  from  my  ftrong 
enemy,  ^d  from  them  that  hatcb  nice: 
foithcymcrctooftrongfojinc. 

19  ZhcypjcuentcD  me  in  the  Day  of 
my  calamine :  but  the  JLoisp  ibas 
my  flay. 

20  $cc  brought  me  fojth  alfo  into  a 
large  place:  he  DclmercD  mc.bccauft  hec 
DcligbtcDtnmc. 

21  XheULsusorcmarDcD  mce  at 
coding  to  my  rightcoufncITc:acco2Dmg 
to  the  tlcanncflc  of  my  hanDs, hath  hce 
rccompcnfcDmc. 

2  2  foi  Ji  nauc  licpt  the  ttiaycs  of  tlic 
1L  o  r»  iD,anD  hauc  not  UntucDiy  Dcpar 
tcDfcommyOoD. 

2 5  .f  01  all I)ts  uiDgcmcnts  \ a  e  befo :c 
me :  anD  as  fo:  his  Statutes,  J  Did  not 
Depart  from  tlicm. 

24  3JU>as  alfobpnglufbcfojclnm: 
anb  nauc  Ucpt  my  fclfc  from  nunc  rate 
quitic. 

25  £hctcfo:c  the  Uoud  hath  rcj 
tompcnfcD  me ,  accoMug  to  my  rightc^ 
onfneffe :  accoiDmg  to  my  clcanucfte 
tm  his  eye  fight. 

26  ttMtinhc  merciful  thou  Unit  (hem 
thy  fclfc  mcr  cifull,  and  ttntl)  tlic  bpnght 
man  thou  milt  (hem  thy  fclfc  bpnght. 

27  teirfj  tlic  pure  thou  milt  (hem 
tliv  fclfc  purc:anD  ttnth  tlic  fromarD, 
thou  Unit  i|  (hem  thy  fclfc  bnfauoury. 

28  3lnD  tlic  afflictcD  people  thou  ibiit 
taut:  but  thine  eyes  are  bpon  tlic  haunt, 
ilin  thoumayeft bung  tin  m  DolUnc. 

29  foi  thou  an  my  ||  lampc  ,  £> 
lLour<:  aim  the  %  o  u  pttM  lighten 
myDarlicuclTc. 


jo  #02  b?thce  "J  hauc  ||  ran  through 
a  troupe :  by  my  C5ob  haue  3  uapeb  0 
uerainail. 

31  %s  foi  <5od  ,  his  may  is  perfect, 
the  ibojD  of  thcIL  so  is  ©  is  ||  tricD:  he  is 
a  bucttlet  to  all  them  that  traft  in  him. 

ji  5Fo2U)hO|S<5oD,faucfhc|LfiDi3©; 
anD  mho  is  a  rocBcfauc  our  ©ob  < 

33  0oD  is  my  ftrmgtb  ™d  polDtr : 
anD  he  t  maftctb  my  umy  perfect. 

34  ^cetmabcthmyfectliBchinbcs 
feet :  anD  fettcth  nice  bpon  my  high 
places. 

35  $cteachcthmyhanDsttottiarTt: 
fo  that  a  boli)  of  Oeelc  is  b?0Bcn  by  mine 
amies. 

36  Xhou  haft  alfo  giucn  nice  the 
fljiciD  of  thyfaluation:  anD  thy  gentle; 
neffe  t  hath  mabe  me  great. 

37  XhouhaQcniargcDmyftepsfcri; 
Der  me :  Co  that  my  t  feet  Did  not  Hip. 

3S  3f  haue  purfucD  mine  monies, 
anb  DcftroyeDthcm  :anD  tumcD  not* 
game  Dntill/J  haD  tonfumcD  them. 

39  3JnD3Thauc  confumeD  thcmaiiD 
ibounDcDthcm ,  that  tlicy  couiDnota 
rife  :yca,thcy  arc  falim  miDcr  my  feet. 

4°  foi  thou  haft  girDcD  mce  ibttli 
ftrmgth  to  battel :  them  that  rofe  top  a 
gainftmchaftthoutfubDucDbnDcrme. 

41  Xhon  haft  alfo  guim  nice  the 
Hems  of  nunc  enmucs,that  3  might 
bcftroyrhcnt  that  hate  me. 

42  Xhcy  looHeb ,  but  there  Ibas 
none  to  faue :  eucn  bnto  the  Hoisjd, 
but  he  anfeocrcD  them  not. 

43  %\)m  Did 31  beat  them  asfmau 
as  thcbuft  of  the  earth:  3J  DiDftampc 
tlimi  as  the  myze  of  tlje  ftreet ,  and  did 
fp««aDtl)miab:oaD. 

44  Xhou  alfo  haft  Dcliutrcb  nice 
from  thcttruungs  of  my  people ,  thon 
haft  kept  nice  to  be  hcab  of  the  hcatlim : 
a  people  ibhich  3  fciicrb  not ,  (hall 
feme  me. 

45  t  Strangers  fhail  ||  fubmit  tlicm 
ftlucsl)ntomc:asfooncasthcyhcarc, 
thcyftjaiibc  obcDicutbnto  me. 

46  Strangers  Q)ailfaDcaU)ay:anD 
they  (hall  bee  afraiD  out  of  thctr  clofe 
plates. 

47  XhcHom©luicfh,anDbleflcD 
be  myrocRc:  anD  eraitcDbc  thecobof 
thcrotltcofmyfaiuation. 

48  3lt  is  cob  thattaumgeth  mce, 
anD  tii-it  bmigcthDoUmc  thcpcopleton 
Dcrmc: 

49  3nDthatb:itigcthmcfo2thfrom 
nunc  enmucs:  thou  alfo  haftliftco  nice 
^P 


H  Orjrrfrted. 


tHetr.riJ- 

ddh,  or, 

loofeth, 

'■  Heb.eat4ol> 

Utb. 

\Hcbr.fer 
the  rvtrrc. 


I  Hthr  Mttl- 

tipfteJ  m.: 

t  Heir,  on- 
clct. 


1  Me  br.  can- 
fed  te  PJW. 


1  Heb  founts 

rer. 
\Or,jttli 

TMncd  oje- 

hcace.Hcb 
lit. 


Hdr.gi- 

14ft    M       ■ 


Dauid 


sworthies. 


Chi 


p.xxnj, 


an 


d  valic 


lantmen. 


'Rom  15.0 


*Cha.7.i 


\\Or,bethcn 
ruler,  &t. 


\tlsb.  filed. 


\\Ot,h{heb- 
hjfeiet  the 
Tivhmcmle 
headoftne 
three. 
iSetl  chr. 
11.11 

\Heb.jUuic. 
.Chron. 
11.11 


top  on  high  abouc  them  tljat  rofcbpa 
gamftmc :  thou  haft  brttucrcb  me  from 
thebiolcntman. 

50  Xhercfcue  3  will  giuc  tljanaes 
tmto  tljcc,  £>  ?L©isE»,muong  *  the  Jjca- 
then :  anb  3  Will  Otig  pjsailes  tmto  thy 
/5ame. 

51  tr>etsthctoW2Cof  faluationfojhts 
bins  •  anb  fbcWetlj  mercy  to  l)is  anouv 
teD ,  tonto  JDatuo,  ano  *to  his  face  f  02 
cucrmojc, 

CHAP.  XXIII. 

1  Dauid  io  his  laft  words,  protefleth  his  faith  in 
Gods  promifes  to  be  beyond  fence  or  experi- 
ence. 6  The  different  ftate  ot  the  sucked. 
8   Acatalogueot  D.undsmightiemen. 

£>We  thefe  bee  the  latt 
W02OS  of  Dauio :  2>auib 
the  fonnc  of  3Jcfl*c  fatbe, 
anb  &)t  man  Who  Was 
»  raifcb  up  on  htgh>thc  H- 
nomtcb  of  the  <5obof  3Jacob,anb  the 
f«jcct0faiimftof  llfrael,  faib, 

z  Xhc  fptrtt  of  the  %  ©  »  ©  fpaftc 
bymc,  anb  his  Wo2bwasmmy  tongue. 
5  XljcC5obof3Jfraelfaib,thc3&ocfce 
of  3)fracl  fpaUcto  mc:  j|  hcthatruleth 
oucr  men  muft  be  m&\  ruling  in  the  fear  e 
of  00b: 

4  anb  i«  (hail  •*  a0  ttjc  light  of  the 
morning,  when  tlic  dunnenfett),  euen  a 
mo2iung,wtthout  cloubes  ■,  as  the  tenbet 
graffc  flinging  out  of  the  earth  by  cleare 
fl)imng  after  ratnc: 

5  although  my  Ijoufc  be  not  fo  With 
<5ob:  yet  he  hath  mabcWith  nice  anc^ 
ucriafiiugcoucnant,  02b2cb  m  al  things 
anb  furc :  fo?  this  is  nil  my  faluatiou,ano 
all  my  befire,  although  he  mafce  it  not  to 
grow. 

6     C25Utthefonucs0f25Clialfhallbee 

alloftljcmastho2ncsth2uftaway,bc; 
taufc  they  cannot  be  taken  With  Ijanbs, 

7  25nttI)cmanthatn)aitoucl)tt)cm, 
mutt  be  t  fentco  With  y2on,anb  the  ftaffc 
of  a  fpcarc ,  anb  they  fyall  bee  Utterly 
burnt  With  fire  m  tl)c  &me  plate. 

8  CXhefcbethcuamcs  oftljeimgl) 
tie  men  wtjonic  2Dauib  hab :  ||  1Cl)c 
Xachmouttc  that  fate  in  the  feat ,  tljiefc 
among  tbccaptaincs,  (the  fame  w  as  a* 

blUO  tl)C€5UUC:)  ||lieelitt  vp  his  fpearefl* 

gainft  eight  Ijunb2cb,t  whom  he  flew  at 

onetime. 

9  3lnb  after  htm  was  *  €lca5ar  tfjc 
fonneof  DoDotlje  ahohttc,  one  of  tfjc 
tlwcmtghticmcn  With  2>auiD ,  nrtjen 
they  befieb  tlje  pljtufttncs  rf^  were 


tljcrcgathcrcb  together  to  battel!,  anb 
the  men  of  Hfrael  Were  gone  away. 

lo^carofcanbfmotetfjcpljiltfhnes 
tontffl  Dis  Ijano  was  Weartc,  anb  Ins 
Daub  tiauc  bnto  the  fraozb :  anb  the 
%®  is  ©  Wjougljta  great  toitto2ie  that 
bay,  anb  tlje  people  rcturuco  after  Ijim 
onclytofpoile. 

11  ^nb  after  him  was  *;S>hantmah 
thcfonneofagcethe$araritc:anbthc 
^hUifhnes  mere  gathcreo  together 
||  into  a  troupe,  Where  ibas  a  piece  of 
grounbfullof  lennies :  anb  ttjc  people 
flebfromtl)c$I)iliftmes. 

ii  ffiittljceCoobinttjcnubftoftfje 
grounb,  anbbtfcnbcbit,  anbficuictjic 
^Ijuulines :  anb  tlje  %&m 9  rbjougtjt 
agrcatbict02ic. 

13  ano  lltljjce  oftlje  tl)irtic  cljicfc 
ibnitbolbnc  anb  came  toDauib  in  ttjc 
ljaruc(ltinie,bntotljecaucofabullam: 
anb  tlje  troupe  of  the  0ljilifhncs  pit- 
ctjeb  in  tfjc  bailey  of  Stepgaftn. 

14  anb  Dautb  was  tljen  in  an  ijolbc, 
anb  tfjcgarifon  oftlje  ^Ijtiifhncs  was 
ti)entn25ctl)lchcm. 

15  anb  2>attib  longco,  anbfaib,  £)lj 
tljatonc  rboulb  guic  mcc  bunnc  of  tlje 
rbatct  of  ttjc  mell  of  Bcttjlctjcm  Ibljiclj 
ts  by  the  gate. 

16  anb  rt)cti)2ccniigijtic  men  biabc 
ttj20tigl)  tlje  holt  of  tl)e01jiufhncs,anb 
tytV)  water  out  of  tfjc  nacll  of  Bcttjlc* 
tjcni,tljat  Ibas  by  tlje  gate,  anb  toobe  it, 
anbbiougfjt'tto  2Dauib:  neucrttjclcffc 
he  woulbnotbiinnc  tljercof,  but  potb 
reb  tt  out  bnto  tlje  %  ©  a  b?. 

17  anbtjcfaib.ascitfarrcfromme, 
&>  %  ©  is  ©,  ttjat  31  Ojoulb  boe  ttjis : « 
not  ttjts  tlje  bloob  of  tfjc  men  ttjat  tbent 
inicoparbicof  tljcir  liucs?  ttjcrcfiwehc 
tboulb  not  bjmbe  it.  Xtjcfc  tljmgs  bib 
tljcfc  tl)2ce  nuglmc  men. 

18  anb  *abuliai  the  b^offjer  of  JJoab, 
ttje  fonnc  of  zcruiah ,  tbas  ctjiefe  & 
mong  ti)2ce,  anb  he  lift  bp  tjis  fpeare  a- 
gainftttj2ccljunb2cb,tand  flctt)  them,anb 
tjab  tlje  natnc  among  tt)2cc. 

19  mas  Ijec  not  moft  honourable  of 
th?cc  i  tljcr  cfo2C  he  ibas  their  captamc : 
howbcit,  Ijceattamcb  notbntottjcfirft 
tlj2ec. 

20  anb  asenatah  tlie  fonnc  of  3Jc- 
hoiaba  tlje  fonnc  of  a  baltant  man,  of 
Babied,  ttbho  hab  bone  many  actcs, 
he  ficib  tVbo  ||  lion  Ubc  men  of  Q9oab : 
hec  Ibmt  boibne  alfo ,  anb  flclbc  a 
Hyon  in  thenubbeft  of  a  pit  m  time  of 
fnoib. 

it  anb 


*  1.  Chron. 
11.17. 


\Or,fcrfir. 


Or 


the 

three eap- 
tatnes  ener 
thethirtie. 


*  1.  Chron. 
II.20. 

\Het.JUire 


\  h'rb-  freai 
ehtB,. 

\  Hekrjion 
efCjod. 


Dauid 


s  worthies. 


Il.Samuel.         Ifracl  numbred. 


(jfcozntt:- 
wee  or 
fight :  cMlcd 
X.Chro.  II. 
.  am  ay.  of 
great  ft* 
turt. 


ri  Or,  honou- 
rable amsnj 
thithtrttt, 

||  Or,  Conn- 
ed: Hcb  st 
hucomm-ind 
•Chap.i. 
18. 


'  I.Chron. 
11.17. 


\  Or^alleji 


21  anohelleiban<£gppttantagoob= 
ip  man :  anb  the  Egyptian  hab  a  Ipcace 
tn  bis  batiD;  but  be  ibent  bottme  to  fju" 
tbttb  altafFc,  anb  plucfecb  tljefpearc  out 
of  the  Egyptians  ijaub ,  anb  actDtljim 
ttntbbtsoibncfpcare. 

22  3Cbcfc  things  bib  28enatalj  tlje 
fonneof  "Jcbotaoa,  ano  Ijaotije  name 
amongtbjee  migbttemen. 

23  iw  ukis  ||  moie  honourable  then 
tbetbuttc,  but  bee  attatneb  not  to  the 
firfi  th?ec :  ano  2>auib  fet  htm  ouer  Ijis 
llguarb. 

24  *  Wfyti the  brother  of3Joab  was 
one  of  the  tbtrtte :  eibanan  the  tonne 
of2Doboof2Sethlehem, 

25  S>bantmab  the  Jacobite ,  €\m 
tljc^arobttc, 

26  ^eiC5tljc*0aitite,3lrathcfonne 
of^RBclbtbcXcftoite, 

27  3ibic$er  the  3lncthotbitc ,  fi^c* 
bunnattbetyufbatbite, 

28  zaimon  tbcabohite ,  ^aharat 
tbciftctopbatbitc, 

29  $clcbthefonncof25aanah,ail3c= 
topbathitc ,  3Jttat  the  fonne  of  &ibat 
out  of  <Bbeah  of  the  cbtlbjen  of  23en? 
latntn. 

jo  fficnaiabtbc0iratbonitc$it>bai 
ofthe||bjoobesofd5aafl), 

31  abtaibon  thc3Ccbathitc,^5nta' 
ucfbtbcJSarljumtte, 

32  tfubabatbc&baaibomte :  of tlje 
fonncs  of  3JaQjen,  Jonathan, 

33  &bammab  fbe^ararttc,  abtam 
the  fonne  of  5>barar  the  l^ararite, 

3+  Cltpbclct  tDc  fonne  of  abafbai, 
the  fonne  of  the  fiHaacbatbtte ,  €ltam ! 
tbefonneof  abttbopbeltbc  ©tlonite,  I 

35  $e5tai  the  Carmelite,  teaarat  the 
atbitc, 

36  3Jgai thefonne  of /ISafhan  of zo= 
bah,28anitl)C(5abtte, 

37  zelcft  the  Ammonite ,  /!3abarai 
tbe25crotbitc,armour-bcarcrto3Joab 
the  fonne  of  zcrntab, 

3s  31ra  an  3Jtljntc,  <sareban  % 
tlmtc, 

39  <Urialj  the  pittite:  tljtctte anbte 
ucnmail. 

chap,  xxinr. 

1  Dauid  tempted  by  Satan,  forceth  loab  to 
number  the  people.  5  The  captaines  in  nine 
moneths  and  twcnticdayes.brine  themufter 
of  clcucn  thoufand  fighting  men.  10  Da- 
uid hauing  three  plagues  propounded  by 
Gad,  repentcth,  and  chufeth  the  three  dayes 
pcltilcncc.   15   Alter  the  dcadiof  tlueefcorc 


and  ten  thouland,  Dauid  by  repentance  pre- 
uenteth  the  deftru&ion  of  lerufalem.  18 
Dauid,  by  Gads  direction  purchafeth  Arau- 
nahs  threfhing-floore,  where  hauing  faaifi- 
ced,the  plague  ftaveth. 

il52>  agatne  tijc  anger  of 
J  the  %<&  ib  ©  mas  binbieo 

0agatntt3lfracl,anb||bee 
niooueb  DauiD  agamft 
tbem,to{ap,<[5oe,  num 
bergifraelanb'Jubah. 

2  ifoj  the  Ring  fatbto^Joab  the  cap 
tame  of  tbeljofte,  Kbhtth  WJ*  Vbith  hint, 
||  ©ocnoib  through  all  the  trtbes  of  3lf 
rael,  front  2Dan  cucn  to  2Secr -fljeba, 
anb  number  ve  the  people,  that  3  map 
imoib  the  number  of  the  people. 

3  :3nb JJoab  (apbe  bnto  the  Btng, 
jftotti  the  %  $  is  3D  thy  <5ob  abbe  bnto 
the  people  (boib  many  focuer  they  be) 
anbunbjeb  folbc,  anbthattlje  eyes  of 
mplojoc  the  btng  map  fee  tt :  but  ibbp 
bocth  mplojb  the  Ring  beltght  tn  this 
things 

4  jI5ottbithftanbing,thebtngstb02b 
pteuatleb  agauitl  3Joab,  anb  againtt  the 
captaines  of  the  Ijolte :  anb  ^oab  anb 
the  captaines  of  tlje  hoft  Tbent  out  from 
the  pjefente  of  the  Ring,  to  number  the 
people  of  3Ifracl. 

5  C3nb  the?  paffeb  ouer  3fo2banc, 
anb  pttchebtnaroer,  on  thcrtght  ftbe 
of  the  cittc  that  Heth  m  the  tmbft  of  the 
H  rtuer  of  C5ab,anb  toibaro  3Ja?cr. 

6  Xhen  thep  came  to  ©tleab ,  anb 
to  the  ||lanb  of  Xahtun-^obnjt'j  anb 
thcpcanicto3Dan-3Jaan,  anb  about  to 
Ztbon, 

7  ^no  came  to  the  Itrong  holbe  of 
Xptc,  ano  to  all  tlje  cities  of  the  l^untes, 
anb  of  the  Canaarates :  anb  thep  ibent 

OUt  tO  tl)e  5>OUth  Of^WD^h.  cut"  to 

23ccr-fl)eba. 

8  3>o  lbhcn  thep  hab  gone  through 
all  the  lanb ,  thep  came  to  3Jerufalcm  at 
the  enbe  of  nine  moneths,  anb  ttbentte 
bapes. 

9  ^nb  3(oab  gatte  bp  the  fttmmc  of 
the  number  of  the  people  bnto  the  btng, 
anb  there  Ibcre  tn  3Jfrael  eight  hun- 
bieb  thoufanb  bauant  men  that  b^cibe 
the  frooib :  anb  the  men  of  3iubalj  lucre 
nuchunbjeb  thoufanb  men. 

io  C3nb  2>autos  heart fntote hun, 
after  that  hee  hab  numbjco  the  people : 
anb  a>atttbfapbc  bntotljc  fLoup,  3J 
haue  Cnneb  greatlp  ut  that  3  Dane 
bone :  anb  noibc  3  befcech  thee ,  j© 
1Lfii)KjE),tabe  atbap  tlje  utiqtuttc  of 
thp 


I .  Chr»n, 
21. 1. 


J  Or,com- 
afft. 


|  Or.vJiey. 


J  Or,  nclhtr 

l*nd.nnely 

inhabited. 


Dauid  repcnteth,     Chap.xxiiij.  and  facnficcth. 


I  OrtmM). 


'  I .Sam. 
15.11. 


rtiv  feruant ,  fo?  3  hauc  Done  bcrv  foo 

uihip. 

11  5fo?  \bhen  JBDawb  lbas  top  in  the 
mo;mtng,chc  tbojb  of  the  %0  is  p  tame 
bnto  the  pjophct  0ao  2>atubs  &>cer, 
taping, 

ix  <soe  anb  fap  bnto  £>auib ,  Xhtts 
faith  the  %  0  ir  p ,  ^  offer  thee  ttyee 
things ;  chufc  thee  one  of  them,  that  3 
map  boc  it  bnto  thee. 

13  £>o  <5ab  came  to  2>atttb,  anb  tolD 
him,  ant)  faib  bnto  him ,  £>hall  fcucn 
pecrcs  of  famine  tome  bntotheeinthp 
lanb  <  0}  ibtlt  thou  flccthzce  moncrrjs 
before  tijtitc  cncmics,rbhile  thep  purfne 
ti)tti  0;  that  there  be  th?ccbapcs  petti- 
lente  in  thp  lanb  t  fltito  atmife,  anb  fee 
lbhat  anfiocrc  3  (ball  rcturuc  to  him 
thatfentmc. 

14  3nb  SDauib  faibc  bnto  (Sab ,  3 
am  in  a  great  ftrait :  let  bs  fall  noib  into 
thehanbofthe  fLsDispCfoibtsmcr* 
ttcsate  ||grcat,)anbletme  notfaiimto 
the  hanb  of  man. 

1$  c&otbcfLiSDiBP  fentapefti* 
lenccbpon3Jfracl ,  fromthe  morning,  I 
cucutothctime  appomteb:anb  there  i 
bicb  of  trie  people  from  2>an  men  to  i 
26ccTfl)Cba,fcucntictljonfantj  men. 

16  2lnb  lbhcn  the  2tngcl  ftrctchcbj 
ont  his  hanb  bpon  3Jcrufalcm  to  be *\ 
ftropit,  *  thcH  ©is  p  repentcb  him  of  I 
thccntll,  anb  faib  tothcSuigclthatbc  * 
ttropebthc  people,  3Jt  tspnough:  flap 
noib  thmchanb.  3inbthe3mgelof  the 
%  0  is  p  lbas  by  the  th?cfhuig  plate  of 
araunahtheUebuntc. 

17  2nb  SDauib  fpaue  bnto  the 
ILoisp  lbhcn  he  faib  the  SCngcl  that 
fmote  the  pcoplc,anb  fatb,  %oi,3  hanc 
fmncb,anb3J  hauc  bonclbtcfeeblp :  but 
thcfcfhccpcibbatbaucthcpbonc;  %tt 
thine  hanb,  3  piap  thce,be  againtt  mec, 


anb  againtt  mp  fathers  honfe. 

18  C3nb  Gab  came  that  bap  to  £>& 
uib, anb  faib  bnto  hun,Goe  bp,reare  an 
3(ltar  bnto  the  %  0  is©,  inrheth;cu> 
mg  flooje  of  #raunah  the  3kbufite. 

19  3nb  £>auib ,  aceojbmg  to  the  fay* 
mg  of  Gab,  ibent  bp,  as  tl;c  %  0  is  p 
commanbeb. 

io  3utb3traunah  loofecb,  anb  faib 
the  Bing  anb  his  feruants  comnung 
on  tolbarb  hmi :  anb  3raunah  ibent 
out ,  anb  bolbeb  hunfelfe  before  tljc 
Bmgonhisfatcbponthegrounb. 

21  2(nb  ^raunah  faib  ,  aahcrefojc 
is  mp  lojb  the  Bing  come  to  his  fep 
uant  <  anb  £>auib  fatbe,  %o  bnp  the 
thJclhmg  flooje  of  thee,  to  builban&l; 
tar  bnto  the  %  0  is  p,  that  the  plague 
mapUlrapeb  fromthcpcople. 

22  Ztto  ;&aunaft  faio  bnto  S>amb\ 
Het  mp  lojb  the  Iking  tattc  anb  offer 
bp  lbhat  fecmethgoob  bnto  him:2Se* 
holbe,  here  be  oren  foj  burnt  faenfiee, 
anb  th?e(l)tng  inftruments,  anb  other 
utftrutnents  of  the  oren  toi  iboob. 

25  211  thefc  things  bib  ^raunah, 
^  a  mng ,  giue  bnto  thcBing :  anb  %- 
raunah  faibc  bnto  the  "Sung ,  Xhc 
%  0  is  w>  thp  Gob  accept  thee. 

24  ^nb  the  Bing  taib  bnto  ^rau* 
nah ,  i!5ap,  but  3  Mil  furelp  bup  it  of 
thee  at  a  pjiee :  neither  ttnll  3  offer 
burnt  offerings  bnto  the  %  0  is  s>  mp 
d?ob,of  that  ibhic!)  boeth  collmceno' 
thing.  5)0  2>amb  bought  the  teething 
floo?e,anbthcoren,  fo?  uftica^ciicisof 
fiuicr. 

25  ^ub  SPauib  built  there  an  2ltat 
bnto  the  %0 is©,  anb  offercb  burnt 
offeruigs ,  anb  peatc  offerings :  fo  the 
1L©s©  lbas  intreateb  fat  the  lanb, 
anb  the  plague  lbas  ftapeb  from  3b 
ran. 


fTHE 


Abifhag.  Adonijah     I.Kings. 


his  trcafon. 


\Hibr.tn- 

Iredttilo 

d.tyet. 


\Hcb.Ut 
themfeel^e. 
\Hebr..i 
d.imfcltt.t 
"jirgmc. 
^  Heb.be* 
chertjher 
vnto  him. 


\Hcb.rctgn 


f  Heb.  frcw 
his  day  i 


,THE  FIRST  BOOKE  OF 

the  Kings,  commonly  called  The 

third  Booke  of  the  Kings. 


CHAP.   I. 


Abifhag  cheriiheth  Dauid  in  his  extreame 
ace.  5  Adonijah,  Dauidsdearling.vfurpeth 
the  kingdome.  n  By  the  counfelot  Nathan, 
15  Bath-fhebamoueth  the  king,  is.  andNa- 
than  fecondethher.  18  Dauid  reneweth  his 
oath  to  Bath-ftieba.  32.  Salomon  byDauids 
appointment,  beeing  annointed  King  by 
Zadok  and  Nathan  ,  the  people  triumph. 
41  Ionathan,  bringingthefenewes,  Adoni- 
iahs  gucfts  flie.  <>o  Adonijah  flying  to  the 
homes  or' the  Altar,  vpon  his  good  beha- 
uiour  is  difinifled  by  Solomon. 

^^  J0)b  Using  2Dft= 

'    UtDtt)aSOlDC,and 

tftrtBenmvccrcs, 
anb  tljcp  coucrcb 
bunibitbclotbcs, 
but  bee  gate  no 
Ijcatc. 

2     IBhCttfOJC 

„  l)is  fcruants  feib 
bntobun,  tfUt  tberc  be  fought fojmv 
lo2btbctungtavongbirgin,anbletber 
ftanb  before  tbc  i&ing,  anb  let  bet  t  cjje? 
rifl)  bun,  anb  let  bet  licmtbpbofonte, 
tijatmv  lojbtbcBingmavgctbeate. 

j  Sotbcvfougbtfojafaircbamofcl 
rtuougboiualltbecoafrsof3ifracl,anb 
founb  abtfljag  a  Sbunamnutc ,  anb 
bitougbtbcttotbei&ng. 

4.  3utb tbcbamofcllVbasbcrvfairc, 
anb  thcr  ifbeb  tbc  tung,anb  mimftreb  to 
bim :  buttbc  ftmgKnc\b  i)cr  not. 

5  CXben31bomtab  tbc  fonnc  of 
IDaggitb  eraltcb  bmifelfcfaymg,  3i  Ibfl 
t  be  King :  3nb  be  pzepareb  bim  cbar  cts 
anbb02tfcmcn,  anb  fifticmcn  totunnc 
before  bun. 

6  2no  bts  fatber  bab  not  bifpleafeb 
bun  tat  anv  tunc,  in  favmg,  JBbv  baft 
tbou  bone  fo  <  3nb  bee  alfo  was  a  bcrv 
go  oblv  man ,  anb  his  mother  bate  Ijim  at- 
tcr3U)falom. 


7  3wb  bee  t  conferreb  Ibitb 3oab 
tbefbnne  of  Zeruiab,  anbttntb  3Una> 
tbactbc  tencft:  anb  tbeyfoltotbmg^ 
bonuabJbrtpebhim. 

s  26utzabobtiK^ieft,anb2Se* 
naiab  tbe  fonnc  of  ^jebotaba,  anb  &a? 
tban  tbe  ^zopbet,  anb  &bimei,  anb 
3Rct,  anb  tbemigbtie  men  lbbttb  belon- 
ged to  3>auib,tttercnottbitb3lbonitab. 

9  3inb  ^bonualj  fleib  ftjeepe ,  anb 
orcn,  anb  fat  cattcll,  bv  tbe  ftonc  of  zo- 
bcletb,vbbttb  is  b?  ||  <£n  -3Rogcl,anb  cafc 
leb  all  bis  toctbjen  tbe  lungs  fonncs, 
anb  au  tbc  men  of  Jubab  tljc  lungs  fcc- 
uants. 

10  25ut  iBatban  tbc  &sopbct,  anb 
25cnaiab,  anb  tbc  migbtic  men,  anb 
Solomon  bts  bjotber  be  called  not. 

11  C  i©bcrefo?e5i5atbanfpalicbnto 
Batb'-tbcbatbc  tnotber  of  Solomon, 
laving, ^att  tbou  not  bearb  tbat^bo^ 
nuabtbc  fonof  *$aggttb  botb  rcigne, 
anb  2>auib  our  lo?b  bnoibetb « not  < 

\z  ifrott>tbercfo?etome,  letntec ,  3 
p2ap  thecgutetbec  tounfcil  ,rbattbou 
mavclrfaue  tbinc  olbnc  Ufc,anb  the  life 
oftbpfonncSolomon. 

13  d5oc ,  anb  get  tbee  in  unto  Btng 
3>amb,anbfapbnto  bim,  SDibbcft  not 
tbou,  mplojb,  *Dtung,  fiucarebnto 
tbine  banbmaib,faving,3lflurcblv  £>o< 
lomon  fbv  fonnc  fbail  rcigne  after  mcc, 
anb  be  (ball  fit  bpon  my  tb;onc;  ibby 
tbenbotb^bonuab  rcigne; 

14.  ascbolbc ,  Vbbtlc  tbou  vet  talfectt 
tberc  ibitb  tbc  bmg,3J  alfo  ibtu  come  m 
after  tbce,anbtconnnnctbyuwbs. 

15  C  3tnb25atb-fbebaibcntmton^ 
to  tbe  Bmg  mto  tbc  chamber :  anb  tbc 
Sing  lbas  bcrvolbc,  anb  3lbi(bag  tbe 
Sbunammitc  tntmftrcb  buto  tbc  King. 

i6  2mb25atbfl)Cbabonieb ,  anb  bib 
obevfantebntotbehmg:  anb  rtjc  feiug 
faib,  tiebat  mouibcfttbou; 

17  SlnbflKfaibbnto  bun,  ^3vlo?b, 
j tbou 


\Hcb.hit 

words  were 
with  lo*b. 
\Heb.helped 
after  Ado- 


lOrtthe 
wetfRfiffe/. 


*  J.Sam. 
3.4. 


\licb.fiilvy. 


t  Heb.  wbdt 
to  thee  ? 


ItistoldDauid.  Cha 


P± 


Sol 


omon  anointe 


d. 


f  Hebr.fin- 


fHeir.Le: 
nitab  line. 


f  Hebr.he- 
f 'ore  the 
kp,jr. 


thou  ftoarcft  bp  the  ft  ©  a  je»  thp  ©oD 
tonto  thine  hanbmaib,  faying,  aifurebip 
•Solomon  thy  fbnne  Oiall  reigne  aftcv 
me,  anD  he  fljall  fit  bpon  mp  tluone: 

is  anb nott) bcholb  ,abontiah relg< 
nett) ;  anD  nott)  mp  lo?D  the  bing ,  thou 
fenorbcft'inot 

19  anb  he  hath  flaine  orcn ,  anD  fat 
tattell,  anD  Chccpe  in  abunbante,  anb 
hath  talleb  all  the  fonncs  of  the  hmg, 
anbabiatharthc&ueft,  anb3Joabthe 
taptainc  of  the  ijoftc:  but  Solomon  thp 
feruanthath  he  not  talleb. 

20  ^nb  thou ,  mplojb  £>  bing,  the 
epes  of  all  "Jfracl  are  fcponthec ,  that 
thou  Cboulbcft  tell  thent  tbho  (hall  fit 
on  the  th?one  of  mp  lo?D  the  bing  af- 
ter him. 

ii  iDthertbifc  it  fhall  tome  to  pafTc, 
tbhen  mp  lo?b  the  sing  lhai  fleepe  iDtth 
his  fathers ,  that  31  anb  mp  fonnc  So> 
lomonmailbc  tountco  toffenbets. 

22  canbloctbhilcfhcepcttalbeb 
ttnth  the  bing ,  i!3athan  th  e  $tophct  ai= 
fo  tame  in. 

23  anb  thep  tolbc  the  bmg,  faping, 
2i5cholbc  /aatljan  the  #:ophct.  anb 
tbheiiheettjascomcin  before  thehtng, 
he  boVbcb  himfclfe  before  the  Rmgtinth 
hisfatctothegrounb. 

24  ^nb  /Bathati  faib ,  ^plojb  £> 
Ring ,  haft  thou  fatb ,  abonuah  (hall 
rcignc  after  mee,  anb  Dec  (hall  fit  topon 
mp  throne? 

25  ifo?  Dec  is  goncbottmc  this  bap, 
anb  hath  flame  orcn,  anb  fat  tattcl,anb 
(hcepc  in  abunbante,  anb  hath  talleb  all 
thebtngs  fonnes,  anbthctaptamesof 
thehoft,  anb  abiathartbc^ncft :  anb 
bcholb,  thep  eatc  anbbnnbc  befozehim, 
anb  fap,  t  ©ob  fauc  bing  abonuah. 

26  25ut  me,  euen  me  thp  feruant,anb 
zabob  the  0ncft ,  anb  26cnatah  the 
fonnc  of  3khotaba ,  anb  thp  fcruant 
Solomon  hath  he  not  talleb. 

27  3ls  this  thing  bone  bp  mp  I02D 
the  bmg ,  anb  thou  haft  not  (hclbcb  it 
bntothpferuant,tt)ho  (hottio  fit  on  the 
thjonc  of  mp  lojb  the  Rmg,aftct  hum 

28  dLhcnRingSDautbanfujcrcb, 
anbfaib.Caiimeffiathflicba.  anDftic 
tame  t  into  the  Rings  p?cfcncc,anb  fto ob 
before  the  Ring. 

29  anb  the  King  fiuare,  anb  fatb,as 
the  ft  01a  jd  lutcth,  that  hath  rebecmeb 
mp  foulc  out  of  all  biftcefle, 

30  cuenas^Jfroarcbntothccbpthc 
ft  013  ©  00b  of  3Kraci,  taping,  aftu^ 
reblp  Solomon  thp  fonnc  (hail  reigne 


after  me,  anb  he  thai  fit  boon  mp  throne 
mmpfteab;  euen  foibil3J  certainip  boe 
this  bap. 

31  XhenBathfliebaboibcbrbithiier 
face  to  the  earth,  anb  bib  rcuerenccto 
the  Ring ,  anb  faib,  ftet  mp  lo?D  bmg 
SDauiblinefojeuer. 

32  C  anb  Ring  Dauib  faib,  Call  me 
zabohthe^icft,anbii?athanthc0zO' 
phet,  anb  asenaiahthe  fonnc  of  3ieho- 
taba.  anb  thep  came  before  the  Ring. 

33  %\)t  bmg  alfo  faibe  tonto  them, 
XaRe  With  pou  the  feruants  of  pout 
Io?d,  anb  taufe  Solomon  mr  tonne  to 
rtbe  topon  t  mine  oibne  mule,  anb  tying 
turn  bourne  to  (£>ihou. 

3+  anb  let  zaooR  the  #ueft ,  anb 
jRathan  thc£?ophct,anoint  him  there 
Bmg  otter  ^frael:  anb  bloito  pc  lbith 
the  trumpet,  anb  fap,  ©obfaucButg 
Solomon. 

35  Xhenpc  (hall  come  top  after  hint, 
that  hce  map  tome  anb  fit  bpon  mp 
thtone ;  fozhefhall  be  bing  mmpfteab : 
anb^haucappointtb  him  to  be  ruler 
ouerjfrael,  anb  otter  3mbah. 

36  anb  JBmaiah  the  fonnc  of  3Jcho- 
iaba  anftnereb  the  Bing,  anb  faib ,  a? 
men:  Xheft  0  is  ©  d5ob  of  mp  lo?b  the 
bmg  fap  fo  wo. 

37  astheft©K©hathbcncn)ith 
mp  lojb  the  Bmg, euen  fo  be  he  ltotth 
Solomon ,  anb  mane  his  tlMouc  grea; 
tec  then  the  tt)?ont  of  mp  lo?b  lamg 
2>auib. 

38  ^>o  zabob  the  ^jicft ,  anb  ®& 
than  the  j&ophct ,  anb  ascnatah  the 
fonnc  of  31chotaba ,  anb  tlje  Chcrc^ 
thites.anbthc^clethitcslbcntboilinc, 
anb  eaufeb  Solomon  to  nbc  bpon 
Bmg  £>auibsmule ,  anb  brought  htm 
toOihon. 

39  anb  zabob  the  0ncft  tooRc  an 
homeofoilcontoftljclCabernaclcanb 
anointcb  Solomon:  anb  tljcp  blem  the 
trumpet,  anb  all  the  people  (aib,  ©ob 
tauc  Bmg  Solomon. 

40  anb  all  the  people  came  bp  after 
him,  anb  the  people pipcbtbtth  llptpes, 
ano  reiopccb  vbith  great  lop ,  fo  that  the 
earth  rent  ttiitlj  the  founb  of  them. 

41  canbabonnah  anballthcghefts 
that  were  ibtth  him ,  hcarb  it  as  thep 
hab  mabc  an  cnb  of  eating :  anb  ibhen 
gjoabhearbthe  founb  of  the  trumpet, 
hce  fatb,  i©herefozc  is  this  noifc  of  tlje  ct< 
tie,bemgin  anbp;oare? 

4.2  anbtbhtbhcepctfpaRcbcholb, 

^Jonathan  the  fonne  of  abtatljar  the 

$>  h  tf  Jieft 


\mb.wut, 

belongclh 
tome. 


I  Or. piles. 


Adoniiahyeeldeth.^LKings.  Dauidsch 


arge 


^2icft  came,  anb^bonuaD  faybc  unto 
Dim ,  Conic  m ,  fo*  tljou  art  a  toanant 
man,anbb2tngcftgoobnbtngs. 

43  3tab  iJonatDan  anuticreo ,  anb 
fato  to  3bon*aaD,  Slerily  our  I02DC  lung 
£>auib  DatD  maoc  Solomon  Umg. 

+4-  3nb  tljc  Ring  DatD  fcnt  tbitD 
linn  zaoob  fDe  02tctt,anb  /Batljan  trjc 
02opDct,anb  JScnaialj  tl)t  fonnc  ofJJc- 
Doiaba ,  ano  tDc  CDcrcrDitcs ,  ano  tDe 
^eictDitcs,  anD  tljcpljaue  taufco  Dun  to 
nbc  Upon  tljc  Ringsmule. 

45  3inbzaboutDc0.ttcu\anb  J3a^ 
tDan  tljc  0zopDet  Dauc  anomteb  Dim 
King  in  C5iDon:anb  tljey  arc  tonic  top 
from  tDctuc  rciopcing ,  fo  rfjat  rt)c  dtic 
rangagamc:  tljtststDc noyfetljat  pec 
Dane  Dearth 

46  3wbalfo  Solomon  GttctD  on  tljc 
tljJoncoftDcningbome. 

47  3uto  mo:coucr,tDc  Kings  fcr 
uants  tame  to  blent  our  lo;ot  King  £>a 
uiDjaping.ooomaUetDcnamcof  So- 
lomon better  tljcn  ti)p  name,  ano  malic 
DistD;oncgrcatcrtDcntDi>tDJonc.^nD 
tDc  King  bolbcD  Dnnfelfc  topon  tljc  bco. 

4S  3lno  alfo  tDus  faybc  tDc  Bsng, 
ffilefTcb  be  tDc  %  ©  li  ©  C5ob  of  3Jfracl, 
Urnielj  DatD  giucn  one  to  fit  on  mptlj2onc 
tins bay,  nunc  eyes  men  feeing  it. 

49  2lnb  an  tljc  gucfls  tDat  tberc 
mitD  3bomtaD ,  lucre  afraio ,  anb  rofc 
bp,  anb  ibent  cucry  man  Dismay. 

50  C  3nb  ^oontiaD  fearcb  becaufc 
of  Solomon, anbarofc,  ano  Uicnt.anb 
caugDtDolbontDcDo2iic3oftDt3tltar. 

51  3uibittt>astolbc  Solomon ,  fay- 
mg ,  BcDolb ,  3bonuaD  fcarctD  Btng 
Solomon  :fo2loc,DcDatl)  cau  gljtDoib 
on  tDc  Dozncs  of  tDc  3Utar,  faying,  ?Ut 
j^mg  Solomon  fmearc  bnto  nice  to 
bay ,  tDat  Dec  Will  not  flap  Ijis  fcruaiu 

U>ltDtl)CUU02b. 

51  3lnD  Solomon  fayb.'JfDcclbfll 
flicttic  Dnnfelfc  a  ib02tDy  man,  tDcce 
fDail  not  an  Dairc  of  Dun  fall  to  tDc 
cartD :  but  if  nntlicbucflc  fljail  be  founb 
inDim,Defl)aiibtc. 

53  So  Ring  Solomon  fcnt,  anb  tfjtp 
biougDt  Dun  bo\bnc  from  tDc  3iltar, 
anb  Dec  tame  anb  boibcb  Dnnfelfc  to 
lung  Solomon :  anb  Solomon  faybc 
bnto  Dim,  <Soc  to  trjmc  Doufc. 

CHAP.   I  r. 

1  Dauid  lulling  giucn  a  charge  to  Solomon, 
\  ofreligioulneflc,  s,  otloab,  7  ofBarzdlai, 
8  ofShiniei,  10  dietli.  11  Solomon  fuc- 
cecdcili.    15    Adoniiah.mouingBadi-fheba 


to  fue  vnto  Solomon  for  Abiihag,  is  put  to 
death.  3.6  Abuthar  hauing  his  Lie  giuen 
him,isdepriuedof '  the  Pneflhood.  2.8  Ioab 
fleeing  to  the  homes  of"  the  Alcar,  is  there 
flame.  35  Benaiah  is  put  in  Ioabs  roume, 
and  Zadokin  Abiathars.  36  Shimeiconfi- 
ned  to  Ieru(alem,byoccalion  of  going  thence 
to  Gath,  is  put  to  death. 

£>U)  tljcbaycsofSDattib 
b2cVbmgD,tDatDcfl)oulD 
bic,  anb  Dc  cDargcb  s>o\o> 
monljis  fount,  facing; 
1  Jlgoctljcttapofau 

tDc  cartD :  be  rtjon  flrong  tDcrcfo2c,  anb 

(DrtbtDyfelfcaman. 

3  3lnD  Bccpc  tDc  tDargc  of  tDc 
1L©  is  ©  trjv  45ob,  to  ibaifcc  m  Dis 
ttiaycs,  to  bccpc  IjisStatutcs,  and  Dis 
Conmianbcmcnts,f  Dis  3ubgoncnts, 
anb  Die  Xcfhmonics ,  as  it  is  ttmttcn 
mtDc!Laiboffll9ofcs,tDattDoumavcft 
*||pzofpcr  in  all  tljat  tDou  bocfl,  anb 
tbljittjcrfocucr  tDoutumcft  tljyfclfc: 

4  XDattDefLoisjDmaj'tontmiJC 
Dis  ttwb  ibDieD  Dec  fpabc  tontcrmng 
mc,  taping,  3Jf  tljytDiKncn  tabc  Dcebc 
to  tDcirmay,  to  ttiaiKc  befozc  nice  in 
tructD ,  VbttlialltDcirljcart,  anbttutD 
all  tDctr  foulc ,  *  tDcre  fljail  not  tfatlc 
tDcc  (faybDcc)  a  man  on  tljc  tJ)?onc  of 
Jfracl. 

5  £0o2coucr tDou  Knotbcit alfo  tt>Dat 
3oab  tDc  fonnc  of  zcruialj  bib  to  nice, 
andibDat  Dc  bib  to  tDc  two  taptaincsof 
tDcDoflcsof  3fracl ,  lmto*  3tbncr  ttje 
fonnc  of  jftcr,  anb  unto  *  3mafa  tljc 
fonnc  of  3f  ctDcr ,  iDDom  Dee  flrtbc,  anb 
tfDcbtDcbioob  of  marrcm  peace,  ano 
put  tDc  bloob  of  rbarrc  bpon  Dis  girblc 
tDat  «jn  about  Dis  lovnes,  ano  in  Dis 

fl)00C6tDat  were  OttljlS  ftCt. 

6  ©oc  tDerefo2c  att02btng  to  tDp 
tbifebome ,  anb  let  not  Ijis  Doaec  Deab 
goe  boilmc  to  tDc  grauc  m  pcatc. 

7  ffitit  fDtibe  lunbneffe  bnto  tDc 
fotmes  of  *  2Samliai  tDc  GtlcaDitcano 
let  tDem  be  of  tDofe  tDateate  attDv  ta 
blc :  fo:  fo  tDev  came  to  me  iDDcn  J  flcb 
bctaufe  of  2bfalom  rijv  b2otDer. 

8  3lnD  bcDolb,  tDou  hart  tbitrj  tDce 

*  Sl)imci  tlic  fouue  of  <3cra,  a  Bcniai 
mite  of  ffiaDursm ,  lbDirt)  nirfeb  nice 
ttntD  a  t  gricuous  nirfcm  tDc  bav  Umcn 
Uibcnt  to  iipaDanatm  :  but  Dec  tame 
Dolbnctomectcmcat'JoJbauc,  anb  *J 
froarc  to  Dim  by  tDc  |L«Dtt©,  faring, 

*  3  mill  not  put  tDcc  tobcatlj  ibitDtljc 

UU02D. 

9  iI5olbc  tl)crcfo2C  Dolbc  Dim  not 
giultlcffc : 


*Dcut.29- 
o.iofti.1.7. 
\Ot,des 
wifely. 


*  ;.Sam. 
7.11. 

t  Heb.  be 
cat  ojffrOTr: 
thee  from 
the  throne. 


*2.Sam.;. 

27. 

•  2. Sam. 

:oio. 


1  :.Sam. 
19.51- 


*  2  Sam. 

is.,. 

}  Heb  ftrong 


'  :  Sam. 

10.  2J. 


Adonijahsreaueft.     Chap.vij 


Ioabflaine. 


•Act: 
19.  and  13 

*  1.  Sum.  5.4 
!  .i'iiion.29 

36,17. 


•  1.  Cliron. 
29.13. 


f  Hsb.  lurne 
not  awar 
mjfacc. 


tjtultlc(Tc:font)ou  an  aftitfeman,  ana 
Rttolbcftn>hattbouottghtcfltoaocbu; 
to l)iiu ,  buthishoarcheaabmtgthou 
aoibnc  to  the  gcaue  vuttJ)  Wood. 

10  £>o  *  SDaiuo  flcpt  ibtth  hts  fa- 
thers, ana  mas  bunco  m  tljc  cmc  of 
Dauia. 

11  3ina  fhcaapesthat2>auia*raig< 
ttca  oucfjfracl,  were  fourtppcercs:fc* 
ticnpecrcsraigiicahectnif>eb2on,ana 
thtrtp  ana  ttycc  pccres  raigncahcc  m 
3Jcrufalcm. 

u  C*£henfate.!a>olomonl)ponthe 
tljjonc  of  3>auia  Ins  father,  ana  tjis 
Rtngaome  iaas  cftabltflica  gcedtip. 

13  C3tto3aonuah  the  fonnc  of^ag 
githtamcto  zsaththeba  the  mother  of 
5)olomon,anafl)e£ata,ConmttfttJ)ou 
pcaecabip  •  3tna  he  fata,pcaccablp. 

1+  $e  faia  mo2eoucr ,  3  hauc  forne^ 
rbhat  to  fay  into  thee,  ^fna  fl)Cfatac, 
£>ap  on. 

15  ana  Jjc  faia ,  injou  Rnotucft  ttjat 
thcRmgeomc  tbas  nunc ,  anathatau 
3Krael  fet  their  fares  on  me,  that  3 
Cbouia  ratgnc:hott>bcit  the  RmgBomc 
is  turttca  about,  ana  is  become  mp  b2o< 
thers:fo2ttiaas  hts  from  thelitis©. 

i6  ^nanolb^afRc  one  petition  of 
thee,taenpmcnor.  2wafl)CfaiDcbnto 
him,!a>apon. 

17  ana  hec  faiac ,  ;§>peaRt ,  3  p2ap 
thee,  bnto  Solomon  the  Ring  (fojhec 
ttill  notfap  thee  nap)  ttjat  he  giuc  me 
abtftjag  tlje  £>huuammttc  to  ttnfc. 

is  3lnaa5at6fl)cbafaia,nael,3}ttai 
fpcaRc  fo?  thee  bnto  the  Rmg. 

19  C^Satl)Q}Cbat|)ctefojelLbent bn- 
to Ring  Solomon,  to  fpeaRe  bnto  him 
fojaaonttah-.ana  tl)e  Ring  rofebpto 
mcctchcr,  anaboiaea  htmMe  bnto 
tier ,  ana  fate  aottme  on  his  throne,  ana 
caufea  a  fcatc  to  bee  fet  to?  the  l&tngs 
mother,  ana  (hefatcon  his  nghthana. 

20  ici)mfl)cfata,3J  acute  one  fmau 
pennon  of  thee,  3  pjap  thec  fay  me  not 
nap  : ana  theBing fata  bnto  her,  2tfRe 
on  ,  mp  mother,  fo?  3  law  not  fay 
thee  nap. 

ii  ana  flje  fatac,  %tt  aotlhag  the 
£>l)unamnutc  be  giuen  to  aaomtah  thp 
mother  to  tbife. 

n  ana  Ring  Solomon  anfiuerea, 
ana  faia  bnto  Iks  motber,3lnB  ibhp  ao> 
cftthouatecabimagthc&hunammite 
fo:  aaonitah  *3ifRc  foj  htm  the  Ring- 
aomc  alfo  (fo?  he  is  mine  elect  mother) 
euen  foz  him ,  ana  fo:  abiathar  the 
p2ieu\*fo23Joabthefonneofzcrtuah. 


13  Xl)cn  Ring  Solomon  ftuarc  bp 
ihe?L©iB©,faping,  ©oaaoefotome, 
ana  moje  aifo,ttaaonuah  hatte  not  fpo- 
Ren  this  ttwa  agatntthts  oibnc  life. 

14  jftoia  therefore  as  the  fL  0  is  & 
liueth,ibhtch  hath  ettabiifljea  tnee,  ana 
fet  mcconthe  throne  of  S>aiua  mp  fa? 
thet ,  ana  Vbho  hath  maac  me  an  houfc 
ashe'pjomttcB ,  aaomtah  fljailbe  put 
toacaththtsaap. 

15  3lna  Ring  Solomon  fent  by  the 
hana  of  ffienaiah  tbc  fonnc  of  ^cliora- 
aa,  ana  l)c  fcu  bpon  l)mi  tljat  I)c  aiea. 

i6  C^na  bnto  SUnatljar  thc^?tcft 
faiactljcBing,  <5ct  tljce  to3lnatl)otl), 
bnto  tf)ine  oian  ficias.fo?  tftou  ji  1 1  voop 
tl)V  of  acatl;:but  3  ttiOl  not  at  this  time 
put  thee  to  acath ,  becanfe  tljott  bared 
thcarRcofthcJlojaoojD  befo^eDa^ 
utD  mp  father,  ana  becattfc  thou  haft 
bene  afflictca  mall  ttn>mn  mp  father 
ttjasafflictca. 

27  S>o  Solomon  thmQ  out^bia^ 
thar  from  beemg  ^iictt  bnto  the 
?Lfi)is© :  that  l;ee  might  *  fulfill  the 
laoiaofthelLsifi©,  lbhwhhec  fpaRc 
conccmingthe  houfc  of€li  in^hfloh' 

18  C  Xljen  natngs  came  to  Joab 
(fo?  3Joab  Ijaa  turnca  after  3iaoniiah, 
though  heeturnea  notafter^lbfalom) 
ana  3oab  flea  bntotheXabccnaclcof 
tlje  %■£>■&&,  ana  caught  hoia  on  the 
homes  of  the  3Utar. 

19  3lnaittbas  tola  Ring  Solomon 
that  3ioab  ibas  flea  tonto  the  Xaber- 
naclcofthe?l€>is©,  anabchoia,hee>s 
bp  the  ^ltar:Xhcn  Solomon  fent 
25enaiah  the  fonnc  of^Jchoiaaa,  fap; 
tng,  00c  fall  bpon  him. 

30  ana  2Bcnaiah  came  to  the  %&< 
bcrtiacie  of  the  %  ©  is  © ,  ana  fata  bnto 
htm,Xhus  faith  tlje  Ring.Comcfoozth. 
3ina  h*  faia,  /Bap,but  3  ibill  Die  hecrc. 
3na  25enaiah  toougljt  the  Ringiboza 
againcfapmg,  IChusfatajoab ,  ana 
thusheanfrocreame. 

31  i^na  the  Ring  fatac  bnto  him,5)oe 
ashehathfata,  ana  fall  bpon  him,  ana 
burp  him,  that  thou  mapeft  taRcaiaap 
the  innocent  blooa  lbhtcli^oab  flica, 
from  mee,  ana  from  the  houfc  of  mp 
father. 

31  ^nathe?r«DiB©fl)aU  rerurne 
his  blooa  bpott  his  oibttr  hcaa ,  mho 
fell  bpon  trbo  mcn.mozc  righteous  ana 

better  thenhec,  ana  flclb  than  iDtth  the 
fmo2a,  mpfathcr  SDautanotRnoibfttg 
thereof,  to  wit,*^bner  the  fonne  of  j!5er , 
captatne  of  the  hofte  of  "Jfcaei ,  ana 
fth  1 *3tmafa 


*:.Sam.7. 
12,13. 


ofdcAlb. 


*itSam. ;. 


"  3.S301. 
3.27. 


loabisflaine. 


IK 


mps. 


s 


Shimcnsflaine. 


ki  $am.:o. 


•^matatDc  fonncof  3)etbec,  captatnc 
oftbebofteof^ubah. 

33  mjeir  Wood  ft;all  rtjerefoje  re* 
turnc  bpontbebeab  of  3Joat>,ant>  bp* 
on  tbc  ijeab  of  Ins  fecb  fo?  euer  t  but  bp; 
onSDamb,  anb  bpon  btsfecbcanbbp* 
on  l)ts  boufc,  anb  bponbts  tbitone, 
(bail  tbcrebcc  peace  fo?  ewer  from  tbe 
iLsom©.  „        amm , 

34  <S>o26cnaiai)tf)efonncof3Jcf)0' 

iaba  tbent  bp ,  anb  fell  bpon  bun ,  anb 
flcibe  b»m ,  anb  bee  ibas  burtcb  tn  J)is 
ottme  boufc  in  tbe  ibilberncffe. 

35  canbtbeRtngputBenatabtftc 
fonne  of  Jcboiaba  tn  |)ts  roome  oner 
tDc  boftc,  anb  zaboR  tt)e0neftbtb  tbe 
Ring  pnt  in  tbc  rounie  of  abtartjar. 

36  C3nb  the  Ring  fent,  anb  ealleb 
fo;  Sftttwi,  anb  (alb  bnto  him,  ffiuilb 
tbec  anhouuHn3Jcrufalcm,anbbibell 
tbcre,anbgoenotfo?tbrt)enccanytM> 
rtjer. 

37  foi  it  0)ail  be,  rt)at  on  tfte  bap 
tbou  gocft  out,*  patted  ouer  the  bjooRc 
X^iDjon ,  tljoiifljalt  Rnotb  fin  tcrtamc, 
tbatrt)ou(baltfurcIyDtc:tbybloob(bai 
be  bpon  rtjinc  onmc  l)eab. 

38  ^nbSbimcifaiDbntotbcmtng, 
£bc(ayingisgooD:asmylotf)tbeRmg 
batljfaib,  fottuiltbyfcruantboe.  Znn 
Sbmict  Mbclt  tn  3Jerufalent  many 
bayes. 

39  anbitcametopafleattbeenbof 
tmcey  ceres,  tbattibo  oftijc  feruants 
of  Apttef  ranne  atbay  bnto  :3ebift) 
fonne  of  ©aacbab  Rmg  of  ©art) :  anb 
ri)eytolb  Sbtmct,  faying,  25cholbe,tby 
feruants  be  tnoatb. 

40  3nt>  Sbimri  arofc,  anb  fableb 
IjisafTc,  anb  lbent  to  <satb  to  2rbt(b, 
to  fecRc  bisfcruants:  anb  Sbtmct  lbent 
anb  toougljt  bts  feruants  front  ©art). 

41  3nbttibastolDSolomon,tbat 
Sbtmci  bab  gone  from  3lcrufaicm  to 
©art),anb  ibas  tome  agatne. 

4  1  3tnb  tDc  Ring  fent  anb  taileb  foz 
Sbimet,  anb  Hub  bnto  bun,  Dib  "J  not 
maRc  tl)cc  to  frocarc  by  ti)t  3L©ib&, 
anb  pzotcftcb  bnto  tbec,  faying,  Bnolb 
foj  a  certainc,  tbat  on  tbc  bay  tbou  gorft 
out,  anb  ibaiRcttabtoab  anyibbttbcr, 
tbat  tbou  (bait  furclv  bie  <  3nb  tbou 
faibcft  bnto  me,  %\)t  ibojb  that  3  ijauc 
IjcarD^sgoob. 

43  U9liyrt)cnI)aQrt)ou  not  kept  tbc 
£>atb  of  tl)e  lLfir»is£> ,  anb  tbe  torn- 
manbement  tbat  3J  bauc  cbargcbrtjcc 

ttUtl)^ 

44.  £bcRingfcubmo;tcuertoSI> 


mci,1Cl)on  Rnoibeft  all  rtjc  tbitbebneCTe 
tt»l)«t)  ^Itnc  t)  cart  isf  p^imc  to,rt)at  tbou 
btbbeft  to  Dautb  my  father :  rtiercfoze 
rtjc  lL€>ts©  (ballrcturne  tby  ibicRete 
nefle  bpon  thine  otbnc  Ijeab. 

45  3nb  Ring  Salomon  fhaiibe  wefc 
feb.anb  tbe  rtwone  of  Dauib  (bail  bee 
eftabltmeb  before  tbe  %  ©  ts  ©  fo?  eucr. 

46  S>otl)eftingtommannbeb25o 
natal)  rtje  fonne  of  3Jehotaba ,  rbbicb 
lbent  out,  anb  fell  bpon  t)tm,  ttjatbebi^ 
eb.anbttje'Btngbomeibas  cftabltfbeb 
tntljeljanb  of  Solomon. 

CHAP.     III. 

Solomon  marieth  Pharaohs  daughter,  i  Hie 
places  being  in  vfe,  Solomon  facririceth  at  Gi- 
beon.  5  Solomon  at  Gibeon ,  in  the  choice 
which  Godgauehim,  preferring  wifedome, 
obtaineth  wifedome ,  riches ,  and  honour. 
16  Solomons  iudgementbetweenethe  two 
harlots,  maketh  him  renowmed. 

0  2D  *  Solomon  mabe 
afmittc  lbtrt)  iMjaraol) 
btng  of  €gypt,anb  toobe 
pl)araobs  baugl)ter,anb 
biougljt  !jcr  into  tbe  tmc 
of  2>auib,bnttlll)c  fjabmabeancnbof 
buiibingl)tsoibnel)oufc,  anbtljcboufe 
of  rt)e  %  ©  is  es  anb  tl)e  rbail  of  ^evw 
(alemrounb  about 

x  €>nly  tbe  people  fatttfitcb  in  b«gl) 
plates ,  bttanfe  tljcre  ibas  no  Ijoufc 
built  bnto  tbc  0ame  of  ttje  %  ®  a  © 
bnrtlltboftbayes. 

3  3nb  Solomon  loueb  tbe  fL«r>iss>, 
Vbaiutng  in  tbc  (latutts  of  SDautb  bts 
fatber:  onclybefacnficcbanbburntm* 
cenfetnbtgb  places. 

4  ^nbtbebingtbenttod5tbeonto 
Catrtficc  tljerc  ■>  fiw  that  ibas  tbe  great 
btgb  place :  a  tboufanb  burnt  offerings 
bib  Solomon  offer  bpon  tbat  aitar. 

5  C1Inc5ibconrt)clLfiDffi©appea' 
rebto  Solomon  tn  a  became  uyntgbt: 
anb  ©ob  fayb,  ^f  Re  ibbat  3!  (bail  gmc 
tbec. 

6  ^nb  Solomon  fatb ,  linjou  baft 
(l)Cibcb  bnto  rtjy  fcruant  2>auib  my  fa« 
trjcr  great  ||  mercy,  acco jbutg  as  be  Kbai^ 
Rebbcfoze  tbec  tn  tructb ,  anbinngbtc; 
ottfneffcanb  tn  bpjtgbtncfle  of  beart 
tbtrt)  rtjtc,  anb  tbou  baft  Rept  to?  bim 
tbts  great  btnbncffc,  tbat  tbou  baft  gi? 
ucn  butt  a  fonne  to  fit  on  bis  tbjonc?as 
itisrtjtsbay. 

7  ^nbnolb,^)1L€>K?Dmy<5ob, 
rtjou  Ijaft  mabc  tljy  fcruant  lEung  m 

ftcab 


•  J.Chron. 


'Cbap.7.8 


\Or,b<m«it. 


Solomons  petition.     Chap.iiij.       The  two  harlots. 


*2.ChroQ. 

I.JO. 

\Hetrhc*- 

ring. 


f  Hebr.  mi- 

nydajct. 


t  Hitr.K, 
heart. 


"Mmh.S. 
?3-wifd.7. 
II. 

\\Or,hjth 
not  bene. 


•Chap.  15 


tteaa  of  2>auta  mp  father :  ana  3  am 
but  a  rate  cbiiae :  31  bnoib  not  hotb  to 
goe  onto?  tome  in. 

8  ana  tbp  fcruant  is  m  the  nuaft  of 
tlip  people  ilifnri)  rliou  Iiart  rliofcu,  a 
great  people,  that  cannot  bcnumb?cb, 
no?  tountca  fo?  mulfttuae. 

9  *  <£>iue  therefore  tt)V  fcruant  an 
t  bnaerftanatng  Hcart,to  ttiDgc  tbp  peo* 
plt,tfjat3J  mapatfccrnebetibcencgooB 
ana  baa :  fo?  ibrjo  is  able  to  tuagc  this 
tbpfogrcatapeople* 

10  2nb  the  fpcacb  plcafea  rtjelLiDiR©, 
that  Solomon  baa  afftca  tbtstbing. 

1 1  3lnb  d5oa  faia  bnto  him,  zBctaufe 
thou  halt  afbca  tbtstljing,aua  baft  not 
af  sea  fo?  rtjp  fclfc  Uonglifcnctrijcr  halt 
afftea  riches  fo?  tfjp  fclfc,no?  baft  affecu 
the  life  of  thine  enemies,  but  Ijatt  afbea 
fo?  tbp  fclfc  bnactttanbtng  ttoatfecrne 
iuagnncnti 

iz  zscboia,  3  baucBone  aeco?Bing 
to  tbp  tbo?a  :loe ,  3  pant  giuen  trjee  a 
ibtfe  ana  an  bnbcrttanBing  heart,  fo 
that  there  tbas  none  line  thee  before 
thee ,  neither  after  tbec  fbailaiipartfe 
ItUe bnto  thee. 

15  3lnB  3  Ijauc  alfo  *  giuen  thee  that 
ibbtcb  tljou  baft  not  afbcB,botb  riches, 
ana  honour :  fotbattbercllfljall  not  be 
anp  among  tbeBings  urc  bnto  thee, 
aiiftjpBapes. 

14.  3lna  if  thou  ttrilt  tbaifee  in  mp 
rbapes,  to  feccpemp  Statutes  ana  mp 
Conimanacmcnts ,  *  as  tf)v  fatljec  3Da* 
uta  aia  ibaiftc ,  then  3  tmu  lengthen 
tbpaapes. 

15  3ma  Solomon  atbofte ,  ana  be* 
l)oia,it  was  a  a?eame:  ana  be  tame  to  3Je- 
rufalcm,  ana  ftooa  before  the  3rne  of 
ttie  Coucnant  of  the  ?L©  k  © ,  ana 
offer ebbp  burnt  offerings,  ana  offeree 
peace  offerings,  ana  niaacafcafttoali 
hisferuants. 

16  C  SOjcn  came  there  tiboibomcn 
fljattberc  harlots,  bnto  the  btng,  ana 
ffooabefo?eljim. 

17  Snathe  one  ibomanfaiB ,  ®  nip 
lo?a ,  3  anatlnsiboman  blbell  tn  one 
boufe,  ana  3  tbas  ocliuerca  of  a  cljtiac, 
ttJitbbermtbeljoufc. 

13  3meitcamctopaffctljc  tbtra  bap 
after  t\m3 tbas  ecuueree  ,  that  tljts 
rbomanibasbcltuereb  alfo :  ana  rbec 
were  together ;  there  was  no  ftrangcr 
rbitl)  as  m  the  boufc ,  faue  ibctvbotn 
the  boufc. 

19  3na  this  U)omans  cljiloe  BicB  in 
the  night :  betanfe  flje  ouerlaia  it. 


20  3ma  fbee  arofe  atmrtmigbt, ana 
toouempfonne  from  befibc  me ,  labile 
thine  ftanamaia  Ocpt,ana  lapa  it  in  her 
bofomc,anbiapbl)er  aeaa  djtl&etnmp 
bofome. 

zi  ^na Ibben  31  rofc  in  tijc morning 
togiuempcljilbe  fticfte,  beljolb,  it  Ibas 
acaa:butibl)cn3lbaa  confiacrca  it  in 
tfjc morning,  bebolbe,  it  ttiasnot  mp 
fonnctbtjicl)  3  bibbearc. 

zz  ^natbe otl)ctibomanfaia,/I5ap, 
but  tbe  liuing  is  mp  fonne,  ana  tbe  aeaa 
is  tbp  foime :  ^na  tljisfaiB,  ii^o,  but  tl)e 
aeaa  is  tljp  fonne ,  ana  tl)e  lining  is  mp 
fonne.ILbus  tljcp  fpabe  befoj  c  tbe  btng. 

23  %l)tn  faia  tlje  Bing,  XDc  one 
faitb,Xl)tsismpronne,tl)atliuerl),ana 
tftpfonneistl)eacaa:anatl)cotDerfaitl) 
iBap:butt!jpfonncistl)eaeaa,  anamp 
fonne  is  tbeliutng. 

Z4  ^na  the  Bing  faia ,  ssnng  mee 
afmoja.  3natl)ep  brought  afajoiBbc* 
fo?ctl)efting: 

z5  ^nb  the  bing  fata ,  HDiuibc  the  M* 
mug  tljilbe  in  tlbo ,  ant)  giuc  halfe  to  tlje 
onc,ana  haifc  to  tlje  other. 

i6  Xhcn  fpafte  the  iboman  lbljofc 
thcliuingchnacwas,  bntothcftmg,  (fo? 
herboibclstpcrnea  bpon  her  fonne) 
ana  (be  faia,  a)  mp  lo?a ,  giuc  her  the  li- 
uing thiiac ,  ana  in  no  rbife  Cap  it :  25ut 
the  other  fata  ,  Hct  it  be  nnther  mine 
no?  thine,  but  aiutaeir. 

Z7  Xhcn  the  Btng  anfuierca  ana 
fata,@tucher  theltutng  djiia,  anatnno 
rbtfc  aap  it:  (be  is  the  mother  thereof. 

z8  %wn  ail  3lfrael  hcara  of  the 
3luagcmcnt  ibhich  the  Sing  haauibg- 
ea,  ana  thep  fcarca  the  Btng:  fo?  thep 
fatb  that  tlje  Ibifcaome  of  d50B  wastm 
him,to  aoe  3}uagcmettt. 

CHAP.    I  III. 

1  Solomons  Princes.  7  His  twelue  Officers 
forprouifion.  10.  14  The  peace  and  large- 
nefleofliis  kingdome.  zi.  His  daily  proui 
Hon.  t.6  His  (tables.  19  Hiswifcdome. 

&>  Bing  Solomon  ibas 
lung  ouer  all  3lfracl. 

z  3ina  thefe  were  the 
0?ineesibbieb  he  h«a ,  3t= 
£s£i5anah  tlje  fonne  of  za> 
aoU,||thc^?tea, 

5  €iajo?cph,anb 5lhialj the fonnes of 
5>ljifl)a ,  ||  Scribes :  3}chofbaphat  tlje 
fonne  of^htluatljc  ||  Bcco?bcr; 

4  3lnB2Senaiab  the  founc  of 3Jcbo- 
taba  was  ouer  the  holt :  3MB  zaaob 
frh  j  ana 


t  Heh.mre 
hot. 


\tttbr.in 
the  mUH  of 
htm. 


1  Or, the 
chief e  Offi- 
cer. 

\\Or,Sccre- 
tariet. 
\Ortremen%- 
brancer. 


Solomons  officers,      I.Kings.  and  prouifion. 


•Chap.  5. 
I  Orjrme. 


1  Or, Bin- 

bur. 


I  Or.Btn- 
•Dtlyr. 


Or,  Ben- 
Hffit. 


■  Or.Srn- 
JibutatUb, 


'Or,Bm- 
C-'ber. 


\OrfoMn. 


•Eeclu 

47.IJ. 


anD  3biatfiar  were  tfie  t&icfts : 

5  3Jnt>  hartal)  tljc  fonnc  of  Jl5a* 
than  was  ouer tfic  officers:  anD  zabuD 
tfie  fonnc  of  ifratban  was  pjincipall  offi- 
cer, md  tfie  Kings  frtcnD. 

6  3nDafiifbatrbas  ouer  tfie  fiouf 
bolD :  ant)  *3tt>omram  tfiefbnneof  Tib- 
Da  Urns  ouer  tfic  fl  tribute. 

7  C  3nD  Solomon  fiaD  ttbclueofc 
fleers  ouer  au^Jfracl,  ibfiich  p?outbcD 
bictuaisfojtfie  Kmg  anD  fiis  bouffiolD : 
cat!)  man  fiis  monetftin  a  peere  maoe 
piouifion. 

8  3lnD  tficfe  arc  their  names :  ||  the 
fonne  of  ii?ur  in  mount  Cpbjaim, 

9  3Ebe  ||  fonnc  of  Debar  tn  fi)9aba?, 
anD  in  Sbaalbim ,  anD  25ctfilfiemefl), 
anD€ion-25etfibanan. 

10  %fie||fonneof  $crebin3lrttbotfi, 
to  him  pertained  Socfiofi,anballtfieianD 
of^epljer; 

11 1Lfic||fonmof  3(binaDabinailrfic 
region  of  £>02,tbfiicfi  fiab  Xapfiatfi  tfic 
Daughter  of  Solomon  to  Vbife : 

ii  'Baanatbcfonneof^btuuvohim 
pertained  %aanacb  anD  ipegiDDo ,  anD 
aiifficrt>tt)can,)bfiiefi  is  bp  zattanafi 
beneath  3Jc?reel,  from  asctfi-fbean  to 

^bCl-fl9«)Ola!),eUCnbntO  the  place  that  is 

bcvonb'Jobncam: 

13  5Ciic|fonncofc!5cberin1Ramor!) 
C5ilcaD,  tofiun  pertained  tbctoibnes  of 
3Jair  thefonneof  ££anaffch,  tbfiieb  are 
m  oilcaD:  to  bimaifo  pertained  tfieregion 
of  3trgob,)D!)itl)  is  in  aBafban^ecfcojc 
great  cities ,  ibitfi  lbailcs,  anD  tyafen 
barrcs. 

14  3!)inababtfiefonncof3fDDohad 
liflBafianaim. 

15  Slbimaas  was  m  /ftaphtaii  j ;  fie  alfo 
toouc  ffiafiuatfi  tfic  Daughter  of  Solo- 
mon to  ttnfe. 

16  isaanafi  tfic  fonnc  of  tyuCbai  was 
m3lfbcranDin3aotb: 

17  gjeboffiapfiat  tfie  fonnc  of  0ar- 
uafim'Wacfiar: 

18  Shimci  tfic  fonnc  of  dab  in  ffien* 
tamm: 

19  <5ebcrtbefonncof5i3ri  was  m  tfic 
countrcv  of  ©ileao,  in  tfic  eounrrep  of 
Sibon  hmgof  tfic3mo2itcs,anD  of  £>g 
lung  of  ffiafban  -,  ano  bee  was  tfic  onelp 
officer  lbbitfi  was  tn  tbclanD. 

20  C  3lnDafi anD gjfracl were  manp, 
as  tficfanDlbbicfiisby  tbcfcammulti* 
tube,  catmganD  DnnbmganDmabing 
nicrric. 

21  3lnD  *  Solomon  rcigucD  ouer  all 
UmgDoms  from  tfic  riuer  bnto  tfic  ianD 


of  tfic  pbtltfhncs,  anD  bnto  tfie  bo?Der 
of  cgppt :  tfiev  brought  pjefents ,  anD 
fcrueD  Solomon  all  tfic  Dapes  of  bis 
life. 

22  OnD  Solomons  tmouifionfo? 
Dnc  Dap,  ibas  tfiirtie  meafures  of  fine 
floure,  anD  tfijccfcoje  t  meafures  of 
meale, 

23  %m  fat  oren ,  anD  ttbentie  oren 
out  of  tfic  paftures,  anD  an  fiunDjeD 
(bcepe,  bcfiDc  $arts,  anbaaoe-bucbes, 
anD  falloxb  SDeerc,  anD  fatteD  foule, 

24  if  0?  fie  fiaD  Dominion  ouer  au  the 
region  outfits  fiDe  tfie  3£liuer,fromXtpf> 
fah  euen  to  3}5ah  ouer  all  tfie  bmgs  on 
tfiis  fioc  tfie  Bluer :  anD  ficfiaD  pcate  on 
ailGDesrounD  aboutfiim. 

25  3CnD  SuDafi  anD  3!fraet  Dibrtt 
t  fafelp,  eucrp  manbnDer  fits  31ine,anD 
bnber  his  ifigtrcc ,  fromSDan  eucn  to 
25eec-fbeba,ailtbcDapcs  of  Solomon. 

26  c  3nD  *  Solomon  fiaD  fourtic 
tfioufanD  ftalles  of  bojfes  fo?  fits  efia* 
rets,anD  nbcluc  tfioufanD  fiozfemen. 

27  ^nD  tfiofc  officers  pjouiDeb  bic* 
tuaii  fo?  King  Solomon,anD fo?  all  that 
came  bnto  bing  Solomons  table,  cue* 
tp  maninfiismonctb :  tfiepiacKcD  no* 
tfiing. 

28  usarlepaifo  anD  ftcaibfo?  tfic  fiot* 
fes  anD  ||  D^omeDaries^ougfit  tficp  bn* 
to  tfie  plate  ibficre  tfic  officers  ibete,  v 
ucrp  man  attojbing  to  fiis  cfiarge. 

29  C^nD*©oDgaucSolomonlbif* 
Dome,  anD  bnDerftanDing,  ercccDing 
mucfi,  anD  largencffcof  ficart,  eucn  as 
tfic fanD that  is  ontfiefca  fljoare. 

jo  ^nD  Solomons  ibifcDomc  creel* 
IcD  tfic  UitfeDome  of  all  the  rbiUwcn  of 
the  eaftcountrcv,anD  all  tfic  UitfcDomc 
ofegppt. 

3 1  5f 0?  ficc  ibas  ibifcr  tficn  all  men  -, 
tficnetfiantfic  e5rahitc,  anD^cman, 
anDCfialcol,  anD  2>arDa  tfic  fomtcs  of 
fi^afiol :  anD  fiis  fame  ibasin  all  nati* 
onsroutiD  about. 

32  3lnD fie fpabetbjcc tfioufanD  p?o* 
uerbes:  anb  fiisfongstbcre  a  tfioufanD 
anD  fine. 

33  3(nD  fiec  fpabc  of  trees ,  from  tfie 
Ccbar  trcctfiati^  tn1Lcbanon,nicnbn* 
to  tbcfoyffopc  that  fp?mgethoutoft!)e 
ibail:ficc  fpabealfb  of  bcafte ,  anb  of 
foule,  anD  of  creeping  tfiings,  anD  of 
fiffies. 

34-  51nD  tficrc  came  of  all  people  to 
fiearc  tficlbifcDomc  of  Solomon,from 
all  bings  of  tfie  eartfi,tbfitcfi  fiaD  fiearD 
offiisibifcDomc. 

CHAP. 


\Heb,Cn. 


I  Heb.  confi- 
dently. 


*  j.  Chion. 
P.15. 


||  Or,  rmla, 

Crfr,f, 

btmfi. 

»  Eccluj. 

47'-t.«J, 
16. 


Hi  rams  promife       Chap.v.vj.  to  Solomon.] 


«i.Chro. 
».J. 


*i.Sam.  7. 

13.  t.chro. 

11.10. 


\Hchr.fa. 


ffltfr. 

heard. 


\Hetr.fnd. 


CHAP.    V. 

Hiram  fending  to  congratulate  Solomon,  is 
certified  of  his  purpofe  to  build  the  Temple, 
and  dciired  to  furnifhhim  with  timber  there- 
to. 7  Hiram  blefsing  God  for  Solomon,and 
requeuing  food  tor  his  family  ,  fumifheth 
him  with  trees.  13  The  number  of  Solc- 
mons  wotkemen  and  labourers. 

/i3b  l&iram  Uiug  of  Xy?c 
fent  ijts  fcruants  bnto 
Solomon :  ( fo:  lite  Dan 
bcarb  tbat  ttjcp  Ijao  an- 
otntcb  Ijtni  imng  m  rt)e 
ronme  ofljis  fatbec, )  fo?  i^iramibas 
cucralouceof£>amb. 

1  3lnb*  Solomon  fent  to  $iram, 
faying, 

j  Xljou  bnotticft  Ijotb  tbat  £>auib 
myfatbcrcoulbnot  builb  an  boufe  bn* 
totfje  jBatne  of  tlje  %  ©  »  ©  t)ts  <5ob, 
fo?tbe  ibarrcs  tbbub  ibere  about  bint 
on  cuery  ftbc,  ttnttU  tbc  ILoisjd  put 
tbcm  bnber  tbc  folcs  of  bis  feet. 

4  25nt  notb  ti)c  %  ©  is  id  my  (Sob 
barb  gmen  mc  rrit  on  cuery  Got,  fo  tbat 
tbcretsncttbcrabucrfary ,  no?  cum  at- 
current. 

5  3lnb  bcbolb ,  39 1  purpofe  to  builb 
anboufebntofbc  /I5amcoftl)e1L©isjD 
my  C5oo,  *  as  tbe  %  €>  is  ©  fpa&c  bnto 
2>autb  my  fatber,  faying,  Xby  fonnc, 
mijom  3  ttrill  fet  bpon  rby  tb?onc  m 
tljy  roumebe  (ball  builb  an  Ijoufc  bnto 
my /frame. 

6  /|3olb  tbcrefo?c  tommanb  tbott, 
tbat  rtjcy  bctt)  mc  Ccbar  trees  out  of 
Hebanon,  anb  my  fcruants  (ball  bee 
ttitl)  tby  fcruants:  anb  bnto  tljcetbill 
3  gmc  litre  fo?  tby  fcruants ,  atco?blng 
to  all  tbat  tliou  fl)alt t  appoint :  fo?  tljou 
miotbclt  tDat  the.e  is  not  among  bs, 
any  tijat  tan  f  bill  to  Ijetb  timber,  ufce 
bnto  tbe  Stbonians. 

7  C  3inb  tt  came  to  paffc  Ibbcn^fr 
ram  bcarb  tbc  rbo?bcs  of  Solomon, 
tbat  bec  rcioytcb  greatly ,  anb  faib, 
Blcflcb be  tl;c  %  <d  is  ©  tbisbay,ibbtcb 
patfj  giucn  bnto  Daiuo  a  tbiic  fonnc 
oucrtbisgrcatpeoplc. 

8  attb$itamfcnttoSoloinon,{ay; 
tug,  3  rjauc  t  confibcrcb  tl)c  tilings 
tbljul)  tboufenteft  to  mc  fo? :  and  3  mil 
bocall  tliy  befirc  contccuing  timber  of 
€ebar,anb  eotucrmngtimber  of  firre. 

9  SJ9y  fcruants  (ball  b?ing  them 
botunc  from  fLebanon  bnto  tbc  Sea: 
anb  3  lbil  tonuey  tbcm  by  fea  in  flotcs, 
bnto  tbe  place  tljattljou  ujaittappomt 


mc.anbtoillcaufttbcmtobebifcbatgcb 
tlicrc,  anb  tboufbalt  rccctucthem-  anb 
rijou  (bait  accompiidi  my  befice,  mgi 
uingfoob  fo?  my  boufliolb. 

10  So  Strain  gauc  Solomon  Ceoar 
trccs,anb5Ptrrctrccs,aaoidin5toaiil)is 
befirc. 

11  anb  Solomon  gauc  Strain ttben 
tic  tlioufano  f  meafurcs  of  lbbcatc  fo? 
fcob  to  bts  boufliolb,  anb  tibentic  mea- 
furcs of  pure  oilc  :  tints  gauc  Solomon 
to  H?iram  yccrc  by  yccrc. 

11  3iubtl)c2L€>is£>gaucSolomon 
ibtfebome,*  as  lice  p?onufcb  bun :  anb 
tlicrc  mas  peace  bctibccnc  l?iram  anb 
Solomon,  aubtljcynboiuabcaicaguc 
togctljer. 

13  C  anbBtng  Solomon  ratfeb  a 
tlcute  out  of  all  gjfracl,  anb  tlje  leute 
ibastbirtie  tboufanb  men. 

14  3nb  bee  fent  tbcm  to  flebanon, 
ten  tboufano  a  monetb  by  courfes :  a 
monctbtbeyibcrcm?lcbanon,andtibo 
monctbsat  borne :  anb*  abomram  was 
oucrtbelcuic. 

15  anb  Solomon  babfb?cefto?c  anb 
ten  tboufanb  tljat  bare  burbens,  anb 
fourctco?e  tboufanb  bcibcrs  in  tbc 
mountaiucs: 

16  23cfibcs  tbc  tbiefc  of  Solomons 
omccrs  ibbtcl)  wcre  oucr  tbcibo?be,tb?cc 
tboiu*anbanb  tb?cebunb?cb,  tbljitbru^ 
leb  ouer  tlje  people  tbat  Jb?ougb't  in  tbc 
ibo?ac. 

17  anb  tbc  femg  commanbeb ,  anb 
tbcyb?ougbtgrcatllones,coflly  Hones, 
and  bcibcb  Hones,  to  lay  tbefounbation 
oftbeboufe. 

18  3fobSolomottSbuilbers,anbl?i-' 
rams builbcrs, bib  brtbctbcm,  anb  tbc 
||ftonc-fciuarcrs:lb  tbey  p?cparcb  tim- 
ber anb  (tones  to  builb  tbc  boufe. 

CHAP.  VI. 

1  The  building  of  SolomoDS  Temple.  5  The 
chambers  thereof.  11  Gods  promife  vnto 
it.  15  The  fielingand  adorning  of  it:  13  The 
Cherubims.  31  The  doores.  3d  The 
court.  37  The  time  of  building  it. 

/I5b  *  it  tame  to  paflc  m  tbc 
fourc  bunb?eb  anb  fourc- 
fco?e  yccrc  after  tbc  ebil- 
b?cnof  33fracl  lbcrc  tome 
,.  out  of  tlje  lanb  of  Cg>'pt, 
intbcfourtbyercofSolomonsrcigtic 
oucr3Ifracl,mtbcmotictl)  zif,  lbbtcb 
is  tbcTcconbmonctb,  tbat  be  t  began  to 
builb  tbe  boufe  of  tlje  %  sd  is  id. 

i  3tnb 


\H<t.Ccr,. 


*Chi.3.n 


\Hcktri- 
tu!to( 

men. 


Chip4.«. 


ror.^rf. 

litCS tAt  E- 


!.Chron. 


\  HA. built- 


The  building  LKings. oftheTempleJ 


:(Or,wi»- 
dnect  iraad 
within  and 
Harrow  TBith. 

edanich- 

fid. 

\Or,vp»*,ar 
iayntng  to. 
\Hib.pirti 
\Htisiii. 


f  titk.HV- 
rowittisttrt 
rthAtrminti 


itT 


\Or,thi 

V.wll  bcMHl 
and  the  [ti- 
lings with 
CldAT. 


*  2.Sam.7. 
I  3.  I.chio. 
11.  IO. 


2  ^tnD  tije  ijoufc  U)l)iclj  ftmjj  ^>o!o* 
mon  built  fo;  the  ILsdise?,  the  length 
thereof  was  tluccfcoje  cubitcs,  ano  ttjc 
toeabth  thereof  ttbcntie  cubits,anb  the 
height  thereof  thirtie  cubitcs. 

j  2f  nb  the  pouh  before  the  %tn\p\t 
of  the  houfc :  tlbcntie  cubitcs  was  the 
length  thcteof,accozbtngto  thebjeabth 
of  the  Ijoufc ,  anb  tcunc  cubitcs  was  the 
toeabth  thereof  before  tt)c  Ijoufc. 

4  2lnbfo?thchotu'ehcmabe|iibins 
boibcs  of  narrou)  lights. 

5  C  2inb  H  againtt  the  mall  of  the 
houfe  he  builtt  chambers  rounb  about, 
againft  thcibaucsofthc  houfe  rounb  a* 
bout,  both  oftheXcmple  anboftheiD* 
rack:  anb  hee  mabct  chambers  rounb 
about. 

6  XljcnctljcmtoCt  chamber  was  fiuc 
cubitcs  b;oab,  aub  thcnubblc  was  Ccc  eu* 
bites  tyoab ,  aub  the  thitb  was  fcuen  cu- 
bitcs bjoab :  fo2ibtthout  in  the  wail  of  the 
houfc  hec  ntabe  t  nar r olbeb  r  efts  rounb 

abOUt ,  that  chebeames  QjOUlb  notbtefo 

ftcneb  m  the  Iballes  of  the  houfe. 

7  2lnb  tljc  houfe  ibhen  it  Ibas  in 
builbutg,u>as  built  of  ftone,maoe  r  eaby 
before  it  ibas  brought  thither:  fothat 
therclbasnctther  hammer  no?  are,no? 
any  toolc  of  yjon  hcarb  in  the  houfe, 
ibhtlc  it  lbasin  builbiug. 

s  Xhc  booje  fo?  the  mtbble  eham- 
bet  was  m  tljc  tight  tfibc  of  thehoufe: 
ano  they  ibent  bp  ibith  Vbinbing  ttaircs 
into  the  nubble  chamber,  anb  out  of  the 
nubble  into  the  thirb. 

9  5>o  he  built  the  houfe  anb  Snllheb 
it :  anb  couercb  the  houfe  ||  Ibttb  beams 
anbboatbsofCebar. 

10  3nb  then  hee  built  chambers  a* 
gamlt  all  the  houfe ,  Sue  cubites  high : 
anb  they  reCcb  on  the  houfe  unth  tfm* 
bet  of  Cebar. 

11  C^ttbthctbotfiofthclLsDKjD 
came  to  5>olomon,faving; 

ii  Concerning  this  Ijoufc  Ibhirb 
tI)ou  artin  bmlbing,if  thouibiltibalUc 
in  my  S>tamtcs,  anb  crceute  my  3Iubg- 
ments,  anb  neepe  all  my  Commanbc* 
mentsto  iballtcm  them :  thenibill  Ji 
prrfozmc  my  wojb  ttntlj  thee,  *lbhich 
3  fpauc  buto  Daiub  thy  father. 

13  3ino  J  Unu  mbcii  an  iong  the  chil 
02cn  of  IJfraci,  anb  ibtll  not  fortaltc  my 
people  Ijfrael. 

1+  s>q  Solomon  built  the  houfe, 
anbfinifljcbit. 

15  3lub  hec  built  the  italics  of  the 
houfc  Unthm  Unth  boatbs  of  Cebar, 


both  the  floojc  of  the  houfc,  anb  the 
iballes  of  the  fieling :  anb  hee  couercb 
them  on  the  inKbe  Ibith  Vboob,  anb  eo* 
nereb  the  flooje  of  the  houfe  ibith 
planaesoffirre. 

16  3no  hee  built  tlbcntie  cubites  on 
the  fibes  of  the  houfe ,  both  the  floojc, 
anbtheVballcs  tttith  boarbsof  Cebar: 
he  euen  built  them  fo?  itubtthin ,  euen  fo? 
the€)wicle,  euen  fo^themoltholy  place. 

17  2inb  thehoufe,  thatts, the  xem* 
pie  before  it,  ttmsfbtfie  cubitcs  long, 

18  ^nb  the  Cebar  of  the  houfe  tbttl> 
m  ibas  earueovbith  1  bnops,anb  t  open 
floib?es:  all  was  Cebar,  there  ibas  no 
ftonefeene. 

19  ^nbthe^aclchepifeparcbinrhe 
houfe  ibtthin ,  to  fet  there  the  ^rncof 
theCoucnantof  the  !L©  is  9, 

io  3tnb  the  £D;acle  in  the  forepart, 
ibas  ttbcnty  cubits  in  length  anb  tlbcn= 
tie  cubites  in  bzeabth,  anb  tlbentie  cu- 
bitcs in  the  hctght  thereof :  anb  h« 
oucriayb  it  Ibtth  t  pure  golbe,  anb  fo  to* 
uereo  the  3lrar  which  was  of  Cebar. 

xi  5>o  Solomon  ouerlayb  the  houfe 
ibithm ibith  pur e  golbe :  anb  he  mabe  a 
partition ,  by  the  chaincs  of  golbe  befiw 
the£)?aclc,anb  he  ouerlaib  ttibith  golb. 

2i  3Inb the ttiholehoufche ouerlaib 
ibitl)  golbe  bntiiihc  habtuufhcballthe 
houfc :  alfo  the  tbfjolc  ^Itar  that  was 
by  thematic  heoueriaibeibtth golbe. 

v>  <[^nbibuhinthcC>?aclehemabc 
tibo  Cherubuns  of||  £>ltuc  tree,  each  ten 
cubitcs  high. 

24  ^nofiuccubits  was  thconctbing 
ofthcCl)erub,  anb  fiue  cubits  the  other 
Ibuig  of  the  Cherub :  from  the  btter- 
moft  part  of  the  one  ibutg,  bnto  the  bt 
termoflpart  of  the  other,  ibereten  m< 
bites. 

z5  ^nb  the  other  Cherub  ibastenne 
cubitcs :  both  the  Chcrubims  Ibcre  of 
one  mcafur  e,  anb  one  B5C. 

z6  %bc  height  of  the  one  Cherub 
was  ten  cubites,  anb  fo  was  it  of  the  other 
Cherub. 

17  3lnb  he  fet  the  Chcrubims  Ibith- 
in  the  inner  houfe :  anb  *  II  they  ftrctcheb 
foojth  the  Ibmgs  of  the  Cherubuns,  fo 
thatthcilnng  of  the  onctouchcb  the  one 
Ybail,anbthettmigofthcothcr  Cherub 
toiuhcb  the  other  ibail:  f  their  tbtngs 
touthcb  one  another  in  tljc  mtbft  of  tlje 
houfc. 

28  3fnb  he  oucriayb  tljc  Cherubuns 
ttntlj  golbe. 

29  ^nb  hec  caruco  all  tlje  Iballes  of 
the 


Or,  from 
he  fi>ore$f 

the  hot/ft 

vniethe 

A  ad  lover. 
\6. 


Or,fofo-Jj. 


Jtk,  M 


J  Heh.tft- 

ningsof 

flovmt. 


\\OrtejtU. 
Heb.  trets 

ofojU. 


*Exod.  ij. 
:o. 

||  Orjhe 
CberuUmt 

fjrrtchsd 
foorth  their 


TheCherubims.       Chap.vij.      Solomons  houle. 


f  Heb.op:- 
ttingsoffotv- 


Or.f.Ht 
fqu.w<: 

\\OrJtaues 
of  the  doores. 


|  Htbr.  opc- 
nings  of 
flowers. 


\Or,fonre 
fpiare. 


\\Or,  withall 
the  appmre- 
mncet  ther- 
ofand  roith 
altthe  ordi- 
nandi tker- 


'ciiap.9. 

TO. 


the  houfe  tounb  about  tbith  tarucb  ft- 
gures  of  Cherubims ,  anD  palme  trees, 
anb  t  open  flotbers,  tbifhtn  $  tbitbout. 

30  2inbfbe  floojc  of  the  houfe  heco* 
ucriaycb  tbitl)  golb ,  tbittjin  ano  tbith* 
out. 

j  1  C  3nb  fo*  the  cntring  of  thc£>> 
raclehcmabeboojcsof  jaDltiietrec:the 

lmttll  a»d  fibC  P0ftS  were  ||aflfthpartof 
che  wall. 
3X   Xl)C||nP0D00?CSalf0  were  Of)©' 

liuctrcc,  anb  he  tarucb  bpon  them  ear* 
rnngs  of  Cherubims ,  ano  paimc  trees, 
anot  open  flotbers,  ano  oucriaybthem 
tbith  golb ,  ana  fpjeab  golb  bpon  tfjc 
€hcrubims,anbbponthepaimc  trees. 

33  SoalfomaDchccfozthcboozcof 
t!)c  ICcmple  poftcs  of  jDUuc  tree  ||  a 

fOltrti)  part  of  the  wall. 

34  3lnb  the  tlbo  ooozes  were  of  6tre 
tree:  the  ttbo  leaues  of  the  one  boojc 
werefbimng,  anb  the  ttbo  icaucsofttie 

Ofljet  DOO!C  were  folbUtg. 

35  7WQ  he  carueb  thereonCherubims, 
ano  palntc  trecs,anti  open  flotbers:anb 
toucrcb  them  tbitb  golb,  atteb  bpon  the 
carueb  tbojfce. 

36  C3mbhcc  built  the  inner  Court 
tbith  tlnce  roibes  ofheibcb  done,  anb  a 
row  of  Ccbar  beanies. 

J7  €3n  the  fourth  pecrc  tbas  the 
founbation  oftrjtl)outc  of  tfjcfL  ©  a  & 
iapb,mthcmonefhZif. 

38  3nb  in  the  cleuenth  yecrc  in  the 
tuonctli  26ul  (tbhtch  is  the  eight  mo* 
ncth )  ibas  the  houfe  finifbeb  ||  tbiougb* 
out  all  toe  parts  tOcrof ,  anb  accotfnng 
to  allttjc  Won  of  it:S>o  tbas  befcuen 
pcetcstnbuilbingtt. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  The  building  of  Solomons  houfe.  1  Of  the 
houfe  of  Lebanon.  6  Of  the  porch  of  pil- 
lars. 7  Of  the  porch  of  Iudgemenr.  8  Of 
the  houfe  for  Pharaohs  daughter.  15  Hi- 
rams  worke  of  the  two  pillars.  13  Of  the 
molten  Sea.  17  Oftbetenbafes.  38  Of 
thctenlauers,    40   AndallthevefTels. 

Ht  Solomon  tbas  bufc 
bingtjis  otbnc  boufe*tbir* 
tccncperes,anbbenuiu)eb 
ailbisboufc. 
i  C  $ce  built  alfotbe 
Doule  of  the  fojreft  of  ^Lebanon ;  the 
length  thereof  was  abunbjcb  cubitts, 
anb  the  bjcabth  thereof  fAfttc  cubitts, 
anb  the  height  thereof  tbtrnc  cubitts, 
bpon  fourc  roibes  of  Ccbar  pillars, 


tbitb  Ccbar  beanies  bpon  the  pillars. 
3   TLrib  ii  was  couctcD  ttittrj  Ccbar  a* 
boue  bpon  the  t  beanies , that  lav  on  for- 
ticfiueptliars,ftftcenc  inarotb. 

4  3ttb  there  were  IblnbOtbCS  ill  ftlJCC 

roibes,  anb  t light  was  againtt  light  in 
thtfcranfees. 

5  3nb  all  the  ||  boozes  anb  police 
tbere  fquar  e,  tbith  the  ttnnboibcs :  anb 
light  was  againQ  light  m  tbzee  ranhes. 

6  Ono  he  tnabc  a  pozcb  of  pillars, 
the  length  thereof  wasfiftie  eubites ,  anb 
the  b?cabtbtbcrcoftbtrtiefitbites:anb 
the  pozcb  tbas  II  before  them :  anb  the  c- 
therpiiiars,anbtl)crhicltebcanieilicrc 
||bcfo?ctbem. 

7  CXbenbecmabcapojicbfojtbe 
tbzonetbberebe  might iubge,  cuenthe 
pojehofjubgement:  anb  it  ibastoue* 
reb  tbith  Ccbar  from  t  one  fibc  of  the 
flooze  to  the  other. 

8  C3liib  his  houfe  tbber  e  he  btbclt, 
had  another  court  tbithtn  the  po?cb, 
which  ibas  of  theli&c  ibozftc :  Solomon 
mabc  alfo  an  houfe  fo?  Pharaohs 
baughtet,Cibbomhehab  talicn  to  wife) 
ItBcbntotbispozcb. 

9  311  thefc  tberc  of  colHp  Hones, 
aao?bmg  to  the  mcafurcs  of  hcibcb 
tones,  faibcbibith  fatbes,ibithin  anb 
tbtthout,  eucn  from  th  c  f ounbanon  bn? 
to  the  coping,  anb  fo  on  the  outfibc  to* 
tbarb  tljc  great  court. 

10  3uib  the  founbation  was  of  cottlp 
{tones,  euen  great  ftoncs;ftoncs  often 
eubites,  anb  ftones  of  eight  eubites. 

11  anbabone  tbere  colHp Hones  (at 
tetthe  meafures  of  hetbeb  ftones)  anb 
CcbarS. 

u  Znn  the  great  court  rounb  about, 
tbas  tbith  th?cc  rotbes  ofhcibcb  ftones, 
anb  a  rotb  of  Ccbar  beames,  both  fo? 
the  inner  court  of  the  houfe  of  the 
fL^Ei^anbfbjthcpojchofthchoufe. 

13  C  3nb  mng  Solomon  fent  anb 
fet^lramoutoflCp^e. 

14  ^eewastatbibotbesfonneofthe 
tribe  of  iI5aphtali,  anb  his  father  wjs  a 
man  of  Xv?e,a  tbo?feer  in  b?au*e ,  anb  he 
ibasftlleb  tbith  tbitebome,  anbbnber* 
ftanmng ,  anb  tunning  to  tbo?ne  all 
tbo?kcstn  b?afle:anb  hcecamctonmg 
5>olomon,anb  tbjought  all  his  mo^e. 

15  fo;  t  he  eaftttbo  pillars  ofbjaffc 
ofcightecne  eubites  high  a  ptcce:anb  a 
line  of  trbelue  eubites  nin  compaflect* 
ther  of  them  about. 

i6  anb  heemabc  ttbo  Chaptters  of 
molten  bjaffe ,  to  fct  bpon  the  tops  of 

the 


\Hcb.rihi. 


\  Ht'jr Sight 

||Or,^«r« 
anipilUrt 
v.-re  fenare 


itOr.rtrrcr- 
dincttihfrn 
\Owcccr- 

ding  to  them. 


t  Heh.fie. 

ftooreto 

fioore. 


'Chap.j.1. 


\Hthr.tht 

forme  of  a 
widov  Tre- 
mor., 


\Hebr.fa- 
fhioned. 


fTh 


emou 


ItenS 


ca. 


IX 


1I12S. 


The  ten  bafe 


es. 


•a.Clir.j. 
>7- 


\Thmii,b. 

fia/left.l- 
iltfi. 

Thstiijn 
it  lijim'gtl) 


t  Hcb.front 
hit  irimme} 
tohttbttm. 


'  i.Cliron. 
4-h 


tlje  pillars :  the  height  of  the  one  clja* 
pitct  was  fine  cubitcs,  anb  the  height  of 
the  other  chapiter  was  fiuc  cubttcs : 

17  3uto  nets  of  cljcclicc  ibo?l$e,  and 
tbjrathcs  of  cljainc  lbojUe,  fo?  tJ)c  clja- 
pttcts  lblnclj  were  upon  the  top  of  the 
pillars:  feneit  foithc  one  chapiter,  anb 
fcncn  foitftc  other  chapiter. 

is  3nbhemabcthcpiliars,anbtH)0 
routes  rounb  about  bpon  tJ)c  one  net- 
uwfee,  to  coucr  the  chapiters  that  were 
bpon  tljc  top,Vbith  pomegranates:  anb 
fo  bib  lie  fo:  the  other  cljapttcc. 

19  :3nb  the  chapiters  that  were  bpon 
the  top  of  tl)cpiUars,were  of  UUietbo?fec 
in  the  poich  ,fourc  tubites. 

20  3tnb  tljc  chapiters  bpon  thctibo 

pillarS  had  pomegranates  alfo ,  abOUCOUCC 

agamtttljc  bcllplbhichibas  by  thcnct- 
ibozfec:  anb  the  pomegranates  lucre 
tibo  hunbjcb  m  roibcs  roimb  about, 
bpon  the  other  chapiter. 

ii  *3nb  he  fet  bp  tljc  pillars  in  tljc 
poulj  of  tljc  temple :  anb  hec  fet  bp  tljc 
right  pillar,  anb  caiicb  the  name  tljerof 
llJathin :  anb  he  fet  bp  the  left  pillar, 
anb  caiicb  tljc  name  tljcrcofjl  26oa5. 

11  3lnb  bpon  tljc  top  of  the  pillars 
wasiiiucttwBc:  fo  ibas  the  wojbc  of  the 
pillars  fituflKb. 

13  C  3nb  Ijc  mabc  a  moultcn  &>ca, 
ten  cubitcs  t  from  the  one  bum  to  the  o- 
tljcr :  it  was  rouiiball  about,?  his  height 
was  fine  cubits :  anb  a  line  of  tljirttc  ni= 
bites  bib  compaffc  it  roimb  about. 

24  3lno  bnber  tljc  bnmmc  of  it 

rOUllb  abOUt  there  were  feUOpS  COliipaf: 

fingit,  ten  in  a  cubitc,  *  compacting  tljc 
fcarounb  about :  thcUnopsibcrccalrm 
tVbo  rowes,wljcnitWastau\ 

15  3ltftoobbpontujclucoren,tI)icc 
looking  toibarb  tljc  ji5onl),  anb  tlj:ee 
loosing  toibarb  the  SDcft,anb  thjee  loo- 
mug  toibarb  the  south,  aub  tljwloo- 
lung  toibarb  tljc  tf  aft :  aub  the  sea  was 
fet  abouc  bpon  tljcm,anb  autljcirhuv 
ocr  parts  were  mibarb. 

16  3lnb  it  ibas  an  hanb  bjcabfh 
thichc ,  anb  tljc  tyimmc  thereof  ibas 
llnought  Uttc  tljc  bum  of  a  cup,  With 
floWjcsoflillicsatcoiitameo  two  thou- 
CaubaBatljs. 

27  C&w  he  mabe  teubafes  of  bjalTc, 
fourc  cubitcs  was  tljc  length  of  one  baft, 
anb  foure  cubitcs  thebjeabth  thereof, 
aubtlucc  tubites  tljc  height  of  it. 

28  3(nb the  worttc  of  tlic  bafesibas 

onthiSniancr:thcj)habboibcrs,anbthc 
bobbers  wen  bctibceuc  tljc  lebges : 


i9  £nb  on  the  bojbers  that  were  be^ 
ttbeene  the  lebges  « ere  lyons,  oren,  anb 
Cherubims :  anb  bpon  the  lebges  tljcre 
vo&s  a  bafe  abouc :  anb  beneath  the  ip 
ons  anb  oren  iberc  ccrtameabbitious 
mabeoftljmnctt'0?liC. 

30  3nbcucrybafehab  fourc  b:afen 
lbljcclcs ,  anb  plates  of  biaCfe :  aiib  the 
fourc  comcrstljerofhabbnbcrfettcrs: 
bnbcrthciaucribcrcbnbcrfcttcrsmol; 
ten,  at  tljc  fibc  of  eucrp  abbition. 

31  £nb  the  mouth  of  it  Vbithm  the 
chapiter,  anb  abouc,  wasa  tubttc :  but 
the  mouth  thereof  was  rounb  after  the 
Woznc  of  tljc  bale,  a  cubitc  anb  an  haifc: 
anb  alfo  topo  n  the  moutlj  of  it  ibere  gra 
uutgs  With  tljcir  bobbers,  fourc  fquarc 
not  roimb. 

32  2Htb  bnber  theboibcts  iberc  fourc 
lbljcclcs :  f  tljc  arlctr  ecs  0  f  the  Wheclcs 
wexctiopticb  to  tlje  bafe,anb  the  height  of 
a  wijccic  was  a  cubitc  anb  haifc  a  tutntc. 

33  3ln&  the  Wozfcc  of  the  Wheclcs  was 
line  tljc  WozHc  of  a  cljatet  Wijccic :  tljeir 
ajclettecs  anbthcirnaues,  anbtljeirfel 
lo  es,anb  their  fpones  were  all  molten. 

34  ^nb  there  were  fOUtC  bllbCTfCttCrS 

to  tljc  fourc  comers  of  onebafe :  anb  the 
bnbertctters  were  of  tljc  bcry  bafe  it 
fclfc. 

35  3lnb  in  the  top  of  the  bafe  was  there 
a  rounb  compaffc  of  haifc  a  cubitc  high : 
anb  on  tljc  top  of  the  bafe  the  lebges 
tl)ercof,anbtljebo2berstljcrcof  were  of 
i  tljc  fame. 

36  5F0?  on  the  plates  of  the  lebges 
[thereof, anb  on thebozbers thereof,  he 

,  graucb  Cherubims,  lions,  anb  palmc 
!  trees,  accoibmg  to  tljc  t  pzopojnon  of  e 
ucry  one,  anb  abbitions  rounb  about. 

37  lifter thismaner Jjemabcthc ten 
bafes :  all  of  themhab  one  cafhng,  one 
mcamrcanboncfee. 

3S  CXheu  mabc  hee  ten  lauers  of 
bzaCfe :  one  laucr  contcmcb  fourtie 
baths :  and  eucrp  laucr  ibas  fourc  cu 
bites,  and  bpon  cucrvoncof  the  tenba 
fes,  one  laucr. 

39  Public  put  fiuc  bafes  onthc  right 
t  fibc  of  the  houfc,anb  fiuc  on  tljc  left  fioc 
of  the  houfc :  anb  he  fet  the  sea  on  the 
right  fibe  of  the  Ijourc^aftwarb,  oner 
agamft  the  Boutin 

40  C3tnb^irammabc  the  lauers, 
anb  the  ujoucis,  anb  the  bafons :  ^>o 
Uiram  mabc  an  enbe  of  oomg  all  the 
iDojlic  thathec  mabeHingSolomon, 
fodthc  houfc  of  the  1L  ©  is  p. 

41  Xlje  tibo  pillars ,  anb  the  two 

boiblcs 


iHrt.wth/\ 

bttfi. 


\  Hrb.nj- 


t  HA.  %cul- 

Jtr. 


Diucrs  vefTels.  The    Chap.vii  j.    Temple  dedicated  J 


t  Hebr.vpot 
theface. 


t  Hebr. 
madebright. 
orfcottrcd. 
\  Hebr. in 
the  thick? 
^e  of  the 
around. 
t  Heir.for 
the  excee- 
ding mnlti~ 
tude. 

\Hebr.[c4T. 
ched. 


\Heb.«fb- 


\Heb.thwgs 
ofD.tmd. 

'  i.Chron. 
S.i. 


•i.Chton. 
j.z. 


\Mebr. 
Triitca. 


boiblesofthcdjapucrsthatwereonthei 
top  of  the  two  pillars:  anb  the  tibo  net  | 
morRcs.toeoucrthcttboboiblcsofthe ! 
chapiters  Xbhich  ibere  bpon  the  top  of  I 
tfjeptuarg : 

41  anb  foure  hunbrcb  ^omegra- 
natcsfozthctibo  nenbozfees,  eucn  ttbo  i 
rotbes  of  pomegranates  foz  one  net?  j 
iboruc,  toconcrrhetibobomlcsoffhc 
chapiters  that  were  t  bpon  th  e  pillars : 

43  aubthetcnbafes,anbtenlaucrs 
ontijebafes. 

44  Unbone  £>ca,  anbttbclueorcn 
bnberthc5>ea. 

45  anb  the  pots ,  anb  thcfhoucls,' 
anb  the  bafons :  anb  an  theft  beffcis 
u»huh  $tram  mabc  to  using  £>olo- 
mon,fo?tl)chjoufcofthcfL©)sjE>,  were 
oft  bright  bzafle. 

46  gjnt|)epiaiiicof3Jozbancbibthc 
tungeatt  tyemttn  the  clap  gtounb,  be* 
tibecne&uceothanb  zarthan. 

47  anb  Solomon  left  all  thebefc 
Ccls  vnwei^ied,  t  becaufe  thep  Jbere  crecc* 
bnigmanp :  neither  t&as  the  tbctghtof 
thebtfuTeTfounbout. 

4S  anb&olomonmaDcaiithebcfc 
fcisthatpcrtiined  buto  the  houfe  of  the 
%<dm®:  the  aitarofgolb,anbtbc 
table  of  golb ,  Whereupon  the  5>hcro= 
bzeab  was : 

49  ^nb  the  cattblettitfes  ofpnrcgolb, 
fine  on  the  right  i>de,anb  fiue  on  the  left, 
before  thcC>zacle,ibith  thcnoVbcrs,anb 
the  iampcs,anb  the  tongs  of  golb, 

50  anb  the  boulcs,anb  the  fnuff crs, 
anb  the  batons,?  the  fpoones,  anbthc 
t  centers  of  pure  golb :  anb  the  hinbges 
of  golb,  both  for  the  boozes  of  the  inner 
houfc  tfjc  moft  $olp  place ,  and  foz  the 
Doozcs  of  thchoufc,towit,of  the  temple. 

51  <t>ott)as  cnbcbaiithctborBc  tjjat 
King  Solomon  niabc  for  the  houfc  of 
the  ILfiDis©:  anb  Solomon  brought 
m  the  tthmgs*mhtchl>awbhtsfathcr 
habbtbicatcb,  cuen  the  fiiuer ,  anb  the 
golb,  $  tlje  bcflcis  bib  Ije  put  among  tlje 
trcafures  of  the  houfc  of  the  %  £>  is  jd. 

CHAP.    VIIL 

1  The  tcaft  of  the  dedication  of  the  Temple. 
11.  and  5  4.  Solomons  blefsing.  il  Solomons 
prayer.  &■<-  His  facrifice  of  peace  offrings. 

l?cn*£>olomott  affcmblcb 
the  cibers  of 3Jfracl ,  anb 
all  the  heabs  of  the  tribes, 
the  tthiefc  of  the  fathers 
ofthechiityciiof3Jfracl, 


bnto  King  Solomon  tn  ^erufaicm, 
that  thep  might  bring  bp  the  arUcof 
the  Coucnant  of  the  JLo  is  jp,out  of  the 
citic  of  2Datub,tt)huh  is  zton. 

%  anb  all  the  men  of 3!fracl  aflem- 
bleb  thcmfclues  bnto  Ring  Solomon, 
at  the  featt,  mthemonctf}  <£thamm, 
rbhirh  i  thefcucnth moneth. 

i  anbailtbctflbcrsofjlfraclcfltnc, 
anb  the  i&icfls  tooUc  bp  the  artic. 

4  anb  thep  brought  bprt)carnc  of 
the  %  ©  m  ©,anb  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  the 
Congregation,  anbatifheholpbefleis 
that  were  m  the  Xabcrnaclc,  cucnthofe 
bib  the  i&icfts  %  the  fleuitesbrmgbp. 

5  anb  rang  Solomon ,  anb  all  the 
Congregation  of  Jfracl ,  ttjat  ujerc  af- 
fcmblcb bnto  him,wcre  umh  htm  before 
thearfte,  faenficmglrjccpe ,  anborcn, 
tijat  coulb  notbcctolbnoznujubzcbfoz 
multltubc. 

6  anb  the  ^nefts  brought  in  the 
aracof  the  Coucnant  of  the  JLokc 
bnto  his  place ,  into  the  Oracle  of  the 
houfc  to  thcmoftholp  piacccuenbnbcr 
tl)c  Unngs  of  the  Chcrtibuns. 

7  5foz  the  Cherubims  fpzcab  fozth 
their  nbo  lbtngs  ouer  the  place  of  the 
arUe,  anb  theChcrubtmscouercbtfje 
ante,  anb  the  ttaucsthcrcof  abotie. 

8  anb  they  Dzctb  outthc  ftaucs,tljat 
the  tenbs  of  tjjc  ftaues  mere  fcenc  out  in 
the  ||  $olp  place  before  the  Oracle ,  anb 
thepibcrcnotfccncU)itljout:anotl;ere 
theparcbntothisbap. 

9  Xherelbasnotljinguithcarlic, 
*  fauc  the  ttbo  Xablcs  of  flonc ,  lbhich 
£0ofcs  put  there  at  i^oreb,  pblxnthe 

|LfJDM1PniabCaCoueiiantll)lthtl)CChili 

bicnof^lfracl ,  vbhen  thep  came  out  of 
tjjeianbofcgppt. 

10  anb  it  came  to  paffc  ibljcn  the 
0zicftsiberccome  out  ofthcholp  place, 
that  the  cloub  *fillcb  the  houfe  of  the 

11  £>o  that  the  pnttts  coulb  not 
(tanbtominifltr ,  becaufe  of  the  cloub 
for  the  glorpofthcfLensjD  Ijabfillcb 
thehoutt  of  thclL)©iS5E). 

\x  C  Xhcn  fpafec  Solomon  ■,  Xhc 
%  ©  k  &  *  faib  that  Ijcc  iboulb  bibell  at 
thetljicKcbacUcncflc. 

ij  gj  haue  furelp  built  tljce  an  houfc 
to  Mbcl  tn,a  fctlcb  place  for  tljce  to  abinc 
inforcucr. 

14  anb  tlje  iking  ttiruco  his  face  & 
bout,  anb  blcffcb  all  the  Congregation 
of^ifracl :  (anb  all  tyeCougreganon 
oflJfraeiaoob.) 

15  anb 

24  2 


\Hcb.bcid,, 

\Or,Arke, 
At  2 .  Chron. 


•Dcut.io. 
\  Or, where. 


».Chi 


Sol 


oiomons 


blcfsi 


ship* 


D7 


I.I 


vings. 


an< 


prayer. 


t.Sam.  7. 


'i.Chron. 
(J.IJ. 


•  i.M»cc. 

1.8 


"Chip  54. 

j.Sam.  7. 

1 1. 

t  Hthkert 

{htUmtbc 

cuteffvfta 

from  my 
fyh,. 
\  Hit.  cm- 


15  3itiD  He  faib,isicflcb  be  tl)t%®  is  © 
(5ot»  of  Jftacl,  tbhich  fpaac  until  Ins 
motif!)  bntoiDauibmy  fathcr,attb  bath 
lbith  l)is  IjatiD  fulfitleD  it,  faring; 

i6  <t>mcc  the  bay  that  3  brought 
footfb  my  people  5lfracl  out  ofegypt,  | 
2  cbofc  no  ctttcout  of  all  tlje  tribes  of 
gifracl  to  butlb  an  houfc  that  myiftame 
might  he  therein ;  but3J  rhofe*S>amb 
to  be  oucr  my  people  wael. 

17  3uibttibasmthcbeart  of SDauib 
my  father ,  to  butlbe  an  hottfe  fo:  the : 
j3amcofthc3L©mii5<5obof3]frael.  | 

18  3nb  the  %  <s>  13  3P  fayb  bnto  2D& ■ 
uib  my  father,  UDbereas  it  was  mthine 
heart  to  builb  an  houfc  bnto  my  JBamc,  I 
thou  btbbcft  Vbell  that  it  Vbas  m  thine, 
heart. 

19  irJeticrthclcffc,thoufl)altnotbutlb ; 
the  houfc,  but  thy  fontie  that  (hall  come 
foortb  outofthyloyncs,hcc  fballbutib 
the  houfc  bnto  my  j$amc. 

20  sinbtbe  fL©ia©  hathperfour; 
mcbhis  ibojb  thathclpaBC,  attb^j  am 
nfen  bpm  the  roumc  of  SDaiubmy  fa 
thcr,  aub  fit  on  the  thjone  of  3Jfracl ,  as  | 
the  %  ©  is  ©  pzomtfeb ,  anb  batte  built 
an  I)oufc  fo?  the  /frame  of  the  %  ©  r.  s> 
©obofjlfracl. 

ii  ^ub  3  bane  fct  there  a  place  foj 
the  3rBe ,  lbbcrcin  is  the  Coucnant  of 
the  ?L©  is©,  lbhich  he  mabcibith  our 
fathers,  lbbenbc  tyougbttbcm  out  of 
tbcianbofegypt. 

22  c  3hib  Solomon  ftoob  before 
*tbc3iltaroftbc  !L<0iB£>,intbcp?c; 
fence  of  all  the  Congregation  of  3Jfracl, 
anb  fpjcab  foojth  hts  hanbes  tolbarb 
hcaucn: 

2 j  3nb  becfaib,  *1L€>is©  <5ob  of 
■Jfracl,  there  isno45obuBefbce,inbca^ 
uenabouc,  o:on  earth  beneath,  ibbo 
Uccpcft  coucnant  anb  mercy  lbitb  thy 
fcruauts ,  that  lbaiKc  before  thee lbitb 
all  their  heart: 

24  o)ho  haft  Kept  lbitb  thy  fentant 
3>auib  my  father  that  thoupjomtfebft 
him  :tbottfpaucftaifoibitb  thy  mouth, 
anb  haftfuinllebitibitb  throe  pub,  as 
it  is  this  bay. 

25  XhcrcfoKttotb1L®K!?<5obof 
3lfraci,  hccpcibifbthy  fcruant  $>auib 
my  father ,  that  tlioii  pjomifcbft  him, 
faying,  *  1  Xbcrc  (hail  notfailcthcc  a 
man  m  my  fight  to  fit  on  the  XbJonc  of 
3Jfracl:Uo  that  thy  cbtiojcn  taltc  heebc 
to  their  lbay ,  that  they  lbailtc  before  me 
astnoubaftlbaiUcb  befo:cmc: 

26  3nbnoib,OOobof3UYacUct 


jthy  ibojbc  (3  P*ay  thee)  beeberifieb, 
jibbicb  thou  fpaftcft  bnto  thy  fcruant 
3?amb  my  father. 

27  26ut  Ibtll  ©ob  tnbeebe  blbcll  on 
!fl)ccarth<2Scholb,thehcauen,anbhea^ 
ucn  of  hcanens  cannot  contcuic  thee : 
hott)  much  leffe  this  i^oufc  that  3  haue 
bmlbebf 

28  pet  haue  thou  refpett  bnto  the 
player  of  thy  feruant,  anb  to  hlsfttppir 
cation ,  <2D  %  <s>  m  w>  my  (Sob ,  to  hear- 
Ben  bnto  the  trie  anb  to  the  player, 
ibbicb  thy  fcruant  pjayctb  before  tfjee 
to  bay: 

29  Xbat  thine  eyes  may  be  open  to 
ibarb  this  houfc,  night  anb  bay,  euen  to- 
ibarb  the  place  of  lbbtcb  thou  haft  faib, 
*  <Py  /frame  (hall  be  there :  that  thou 
maycfthearKcn  bnto  the  pjayct  lbhich 
thy  fcruant  (ban  mafec  ||  toruarbs  tins 
i  place. 

30  3fnb  bcaracn  thou  to  the  fuppli 

I  cation  of  thy  fcruant,  anb  of  thy  people 
j  jpfracl,ibhcn  they  than  pjay  ||  tovbarbs 
{tins  place :  anb  heare  thou  in  heancn 
I  thy  bibcllingpiaccanb  lbhen  thou  hea- 
ireft.fozginc. 

31  €  3Jf  any  man  trefpaffe  agamft 
his  neighbour,  t  anb  an  oath  be  latb  bp- 
!  on  him  to  rauft  htm  to  frocarc ,  anb  the 
j  oath  tome  before  rtjmc  3Cltar  in  this 
home: 

32  Xhcn  heare  thou uiheauen,  anb 
Iboc,  anbtubgc  thy  feruants,  tonbem 
Intngthe  ibicftcbtobung  hisibaybpon 
hisheab ,  anbttrthfymg  the  righteous, 
to  gute  htm  acco^bmg  to  his  rtghtcout 
neffe. 

33  C  ©hen  thy  people  3Jfrael  bee 
fmitten  boibne  before  the  enemie,bc 
canfe  they  haue  finneb  againft  thecanb 
ftiall  turnc  agatnc  to  thee ,  anb  confefle 
t!)y  /]5ame ,  anb  p«tay,anb  maftc  fuppli 
cation  bnto  thee  ||  in  this  houfe : 

34  Xljtnhcart  thoumheatten,  anb 
fingtuethe  finite  of  thy  people  Jfracl, 
anb  bung  them  againe  bnto  the  lanb, 
lbhicl)  thou  gaueft  bnto  their  fathers. 

35  C  nahen  hcaucn  is  (hutbp ,  anb 
there  is  no  raine,  becaufe  they  haue  fin- 
neb  againft  thee :  if  they  p?ay  tovbarbs 
thisplacc,  anb  confefle  thy  /frame,  anb 
tunic  from  their  finnt ,  ibhcn  thou  af 
flutcftthem: 

36  Xhcnhearethoninheaucn,  anb 
fozgutc  tlie  finne  of  thy  feruants,  anb  of 
thy  pcople3Jfrael,that  thou  teacb  them 
the  goob  lbay  inherent  they  fboulb 
ibaiuc,  anb  giuc  rame  bpon  thy  lanb 
lbhich 


*Dcut.  is. 


I  Ort  in  this 
place. 


\Hch.ani 
ne  recjHtre 

•IXOAthtf 


\  Orj  to- 


Solomons  prayer      Chap.viij.  for  the  people. 


Or,iitrif- 


\Htbr.thy 

Navne  u  cal~ 
led  vpoji  thtt 
hestfe. 


f  Hebr.  the 
way  of  the 
citie. 


\Ot .right. 

*  a.Chron. 
6.56.  ce- 
des.7.2  2. 
i.iohni.3, 
10. 


f  Heb. bring 
back?  to 
their  heart, 


Vblnth  thou  haftgtucn  to  thy  pcoplcfo? 
aninberttantc. 

37  C3Jf  there  be  in  the  lanb  famine, 
if  there  be  peftilentc,  biaftmg,  nulbetb, 
lotuft,  or  if  there  be  tatcrptllcr :  if  their- 
enemy  befiege  them  tn  the  lanb  of  their 
||  tities,ibhatfoeuct  piaguc,rbhatfocucr 

fiCBtteS  there  be; 

38  B9hat  p?ayer  anb  fupplitation  fo- 
eucr  bemabebyany  man ,  or  by  all  thy 
people  3}frael,ibhtth  fballHnoU)  cuery 
man  the  plague  of  ps  oibne  hear  t,  anb 
fp?eab  fo?th  his  hanbes  toibarbs  this 
houfe: 

39  Xhen  heare  tl)on  (n  heaucitthy 
mbellingpiatc,atibfo?gtuc,anb  bo,  anb 
glue  to  cuery  man  acto?bing  to  his 
lbay  es,lbhofe  heart  thou  fcnoibcft  (fo? 

thOU  ,  euen  tlJOU  OUCly  tUtOlbClt  tl)C 

hearts  of  all  the  thilb?cn  of  men,) 

4.0  Xhat  tljcymay  fcarc  tljec  all  the 
bayes  that  they  hue,  in  the  lanb  uMjich 
thou  gaucftbnto  our  fathers. 

41  #o?coucr,tottterntngaftrangcr 
that  is  not  of  thy  people  3jfracl ,  but 
commcth  out  of  a  farre  tountrcy ,  fo? 
thp  panics  fattc; 

41  (;ffo?  they  mail  heare  of  thy  great 
/!3amc,anbofthyftrongbanb ,  anb  of 
thyftretthcbout  atmc)niljcn  hccfl)all 
tome  anb  p?ay  toibarbs  this  h  oufc : 
»43  ^carethou  in  Ijeauen  thy  b\bel< 
Itngplate,  anbbocatco?btngto  all  that 
thcftrangerrailcth  to  thee  fo?:  that  all 
people  of  the  earth  may  bnotb  thy 
#amc,  to  fcarctljee,  as  doe  thy  people 
'jfracl ,  anb  that  they  may  ttnoibthat 
ttljis  houftibhich  3  hauebuilbeb,  is 
caUcbbythy/Rame. 

44  C3ffthy  people  gocouttobat* 
tell  agatnft  their  cntmic,Vbhitherfoeucr 
thou  (halt  fenb  them,  anb  (hall  p?ay  bn* 
to  the  %  <$>  ik  £>  t  totbarb  the  ritv  lbbtch 
thou  haft  thofen ,  anb  toward  theljoiuc 
tljat^J  haue  built  fo?thy  /Bame : 

45  Xljen  heare  thou  in  Ijeauen  their 
p?ayerf  their  fupplitation ,  anb  mam* 
tcme  their  ||  taufe. 

46  3Jf  they  Gmtc  agatnft  thee,  ( *  fo? 
there  is  no  man  that  ttnncth  not, )  anb 
thou  be  angry  ibith  them ,  anbbtliuer 
them  to  the  enemy,  fo  that  they  tary 
thcmaVbay  taptlucs ,  bnto  the  lanb  of 
theenemy,fatrco?neere; 

47  Yet  if  they  fhalltbctljinltctbcnv 
felues ,  Uithe  lanb  ibhither  tbcyiberc 
tarieb  taptiues,  anb  repent,  anbmalte 
fupplttation  bnto  thee  in  the  lanb  of 
them  that  tarieb  themcaptutes,faying 


naec  haue  unncD  ,  anb  hanc  bonepcr- 
ucrfly,XbehauetommittcblbitUtDncs; 

48  3lnb  fo  rcturne  bnto  thee  ibtth 
I  all  that  heart,  anb  ibttb  all  their  foule, 
m  the  lanb  of  their  enemies,  lbhttb  leb 
them  albay  tapnut ,  anb  p?ay  bnto  thee 
tovbarb  their  lanb,  ibhttlj  tijougaucft 
bnto  their  fathers,  the  rityibhtthtbou 
haft  thofen ,  anb  the  houfe  lbhtth  3 
haue  butlt  fo?  thy  jftamc : 

49  Xhcn  hearc  tljou  their  p?aycr 
anb  their  fupplttation  in  Ijeauen  thv 
Mbclling  plate ,  anb  mamtctnc  their 
1  taufe, 

50  3(nb  fo?gitte  thy  people  that  haue 
fmncbagamft  tljcc,  anb  all  their  trant 
grcfTions  ,  lbbercin  they  haue  tranf- 
grcflcb  agamft  tbec,anb  gme  them  tom^ 
paflton  bcfo?e  them  Vbho  tancb  them 
tapttnethat  they  may  haue  tompafllon 
on  them: 

5 1  Jfo?  they  bee  thy  people  anb  thine 
mheritantc ,  lbhitlj  thou  biougljtcft 
foojrljoiitofegypt,  fromthcmibsof 
thcfttrnatcoftron: 

51  Xbat  thine  eyes  may  be  open  bn< 
to  the  fupplitation  of  thy  fernant,  anb 
bnto  the  fupplitation  of  thp  people1?!^ 
rael,to  hcarben  bnto  themm  all  that 
they  tall  fo?  bnto  thee. 

53  5Fo?  thoubtbft  feparate  them  from 
among  all  the  people  of  the  earth,  to  be 
thine  tnhcritante, as  thou  fpabeft  bp 
thehanb  of  tWes  thyferuaut ,  \bhen 
tljou  *b?ougbteft  our  fathers  out  of<2> 
gypt,£)|Lo2b(50©. 

54  3nbttibasfo,thatlbhcn£>oto' 
mon  hab  mabe  an  enb  of  p?aytng  all 
this  p?ayer  anb  fupplitation  bnto  the 
It  ©  is  ©,ljc  ar  ofe  from  befo?e  th  e  311  tar 
of  the  %  ©  m  jd,  from  fenecling  on  his 
unces ,  With  his  hanbes  fp?cab  bp  to 
hcattcn. 

55  3lnb  he  ftoob,  anb  blefTcb  an  the 
Congregation  of  3Jfratl ,  ibith  aloibb 
boitc,  faying; 

56  2Sieffeb  be  the  H0K©, that  hath 
giuen  reft  bnto  his  people  3fracl,atto? 
bmgto  allthathcp?omtfcb  :therchath 
not  t  fatleb  one  tt>o?b  of  all  his  goob  p?o= 
mife,  tbhitii  hep?omifebby  tljehanbof 
{©ofesbisferuant. 

57  Xhc  %  <d  e  ©  our  <5ob  be  ibith 
bs.as  he  tbas  ibith  our  fathers:  let  him 
notleaucbs,tto?fo?falic  bs : 

58  Xhat  hce  may  entlme  our  hearts 
bnto  htm,  to  Vbaihe  mall  his  ibayes, 
anb  to  Uecpe  his  Commaunbemcnts, 
anb  hts  Statutes ,  ano  his  Sluuge 

3j ments 


{Or, 


"Esod.l? 
6. 


Wcb.fatUn. 


So! 


omons  orrrin£S. 


ffr 


IK 


mgs. 


Sal 


omons 


vifion. 


\Hcb.th< 
thm^  of  a 

Auy  m  his 


*  i.Chron. 
7.4. 


*  j.Chron. 
77. 


I 


OltthxH- 

d. 


mcntsibhirh  ijec  commaunbebourfa* 
thcrs. 

59  3nb  letthcfc  my  Hwbcsibhete* 
lbith  3  l)tiuc  mabe  fupplitanon  before 
the  1L  €>  is  s>,  be  nisi)  Unto  the  H©  is  © 
out  ©ob,  bay  anb  night,  tljat  hec  mam* 
taine  the  taufe  of  hisfcruant,  anb the 
taufe  of  tots  people  jfracl  t  at  all  rimes, 
as  the  matter  (hall  require: 

60  Xhat  all  the  people  ofttjc  cacti) 
map  fenoib  that  the  %  ©is©  is  d5ob : 

and  that  tl)CCCtSnonCClfC. 

61  Hct  your  heart  thcrcfo?ebe  per* 
fcet  with  the  31©  is  ©your  <5ob,to 
ibalfee  mrjt5  ^>tatutcs,anb  to  feeepe  l)is 
Commanbcmcnts,  as  at  tl)ts  bap. 

6i  C3nb*tljcKmg,ahbail3Jfrael 
ibithhtm,  offcrcb  fatrtficc  before  the 

63  3nb&olomon  offcrcb  a  faerifUc 
of  pcatc  offcrings,ibhtch  he  offcrcb  bn* 
to  the  %  c>  u  je>,  trbo  anb  tlbentic  thou* 
fanb  occn,  anb  an  hunb?cb  anb  tibcntie 
trjoufanb  fiiccpc :  fo  the  Ring  anb  all  the 
thubjen  of  3Jft3ci  bebicatcb  the  houfc 

0ftl)CfL©15B. 

64  Che  fame  bay  bio  the  Ring  hal- 
low the  mibblc  of  the  Court  that  was 
before  the  houfe  of  the  Hc> is© :  fo? 
there  hec  offcrcb  burnt  offerings,  anb 
meatofferings,  anbthefatof  the  peace 
offerings  s  becaufc  *  the  b?afim  3Utar 
that  was  befoje  the  %  ©  is  ©,  was  too  lit* 
tie  to  rcceiue  the  burnt  offerings,  anb 
meatofferings,  anbthefatof  the  peace 
offerings. 

6<,  3inb  at  that  time  £olomonhclb 
afeaft,anbail3jfracllbithhim,agreat 
Congregation,  from  the  cntrmg  in  of 
#amath,  bnto  theriucr  of  €gypt,  be* 
fo?cthc|L©isjD  out(5ob,feucnbaycs 
anbfcucnbaycs,  euen  fourtccncbaycs. 

66  £mthccightbayhcfcntthepeo* 
pic  away :  anb  they  IbletTcbthcicung, 
anb  Went  bnto  their  tents  loyfull,  anb 
glab  of  heart,  fo?  ail  the  goobneffe  that 
the  2-©kp hab  bone  fo:  £>auib  his 
fecuant,  anb  fo?3Jfracl  hispcoplc. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Gods  Couenant  in  a  vifion ,  with  Solomon. 
10  The  mutual  prcfents  of  Solomon  and  Hi- 
ram. 15  In  Solomons  workes  the  Gentiles 
were  his  bondmen ,  the  Ilraelites  honoura- 
ble feruants.  14  Pharaohs  daughter  re- 
mooucthto  her  houfe.  15  Solomons  yccre- 
lyfolemnefacrifices.  16  His  nauie  fercheth 
golde  from  Ophir. 


*&$&*&£$  i3b*itcametopafrc,when 
PW&^i  Solomon  hab  fimn)cb 
a  tlje  builbmg  of  the  houfc 
of  the  3L©ir©,  anb  the 
Rings  houtc,  anb  all  «§>o* 
(omons  bcdrc  which  hec  ibas  plcafcb 
toboc, 

i  Xhat  the  %  o  is  ©  appcareb  to 
Solomon  the  fctonb  time,  *  as  hec hab 
appcareb  bnto  him  at  ©ibcon. 

3  3lnb  tl)c  %  ©  k  ©  faib  bnto  him, 
3  haue  hearb  thy  p?aycr  anb  thy  fup* 
plication  that  thou  haft  mane  before 
me:  ^njauchaiiowcbthishoufc  which 
thou  haft  built,  *  to  put  my  /3amc  thetc 
fo?  euer,  anb  mine  eyes  anb  mine  heart 
than  be  there  perpetually. 

+  2lnb  if  thou  lbiit  waiftc  bcfo?c 
mc,asa>auib  thy  father  WalReb,  in  in* 
tcgcitic  of  heart, anb  lubpzightnefTcto 
boe  acco?bing  to  all  rfiatgjijauc  com* 
manbeb  thee,  and  wilt  Rccpe  my  £>ta* 
tutcs,anb  my  3fubgcmcnts: 

5  Xhcn  3  mill  cftabiifh  the  th?onc 
ofthyRingbomcbpon3lfraclfo?cucc, 

*  as  3  p2onufcb  to  3>auib  thy  rather, 
taying,Xhcrcfl)ailnotfaiiethcearnan 
bpontheth?one  of  3lfracl. 

6  But  if  you  (hall  at  all  turne  from 
follorb(ngme,youo?yourchtlb?cn,anb 
tbill  not  Rccpe  my  Commanbcmcnts, 
and  niy  Statutes,  Whtcl)  3  haue  fct  be* 
fo?e y ou ,  but  goe  anb  ferue other  gobs, 
anb  wozfhip  them: 

7  Xhen  lbtu  3  tut  off  JJfracl  out 
of  thcianb  Which  3  haue  giucn  them , 
anb  this  houfc  ibhich  3  haue  hailoibeb 

*  fo?  my  /15amc ,  tbill  3  taftoutof  my 
fight,  anb  3Jftacl  %^\\\  bee  a  p?ouerbe, 
anb  a  by-ib02b  among  all  people : 

8  3lnb  at  this  houfc  which  is  high, 
eucry  one  that  patrcthbyit,fl)aibeafto* 
nidicb.anb  (hall  hifle,anb  they  ft)ai  fay, 

*  nahy  hath  the  %  ©  k  jd  bone  thusbn* 
to  thisianb,anbto  this  houfe  * 

9  3tnb  they  (hall anfmere,2i5ccanfc 
they  fo?fooRe  the  %  €>  m  v>  time  ©ob, 
lbhobzougln  faith  their  fathers  out  of 
thelanbof€gypt,anbhauctaftcnholb 
bponotljcr  gobs,anb  haucibo?Q)ippco 
them,  anb  fcruebthem:  thcrcfo?e  hath 
the  fLiDisjD  bjought  bpon  them  all 
thtscuill. 

io  C^nb*ittamctopaffcatthcenb 
of  ttbenne  yceres,tbhcn  Solomon  hao 
built  the  tlbo  houfes,  the  houfc  of  the 
?,)©»©,  anb  the  Btngs  houfe, 

ii  (Now  $(ram  the  Ring  of  %ftt 
Ijab  furnitheb  Solomon  Ibuh  Cebar 

trees, 


*2-  Cluon. 
7.11. 


*Chap.j.5. 


■Cha.8.j9 


•  a.Sam.7. 
1  2.  l.chro. 
JJ.lo. 


«  Icr.714. 


"Dcut.  ip. 
>4.incm. 


*  J.Chron. 
8.1. 


Solomons  buildings.    Chap.x. 


HisN 


auic. 


not  right 
inhiteyt- 

||Th«is, 

tyU*fi*g 


IHrb.tbe 
dsfrc  of  So- 
lomon which 
he  dc fired. 


*Leuit.J5 
39- 


i.CIiron. 


8.1 1. 


trees,  anD  firrc  trees ,  ana  ibith  goltsc 
aceojOingtoaihisbcftre^hatthcnSo* 
lomongauc^irmntibcttnecltiestnthc 
lano  of  ©awe. 

ii  3nD$iramcame  out  froinXyjc 
to  fee  tf)c  cities  ibhich  Solomon  habgt* 
uen  him,  anb  they  t  pleafcb  hint  not. 

i j  3lnD  he  fatu ,  nahat  tmesarethefc 
ibhich  tljou  haft  gutcn  me,  my  toother  < 
3nb  he  cailcD  them  the  lanb  of  H  Cabul 
bnto  this  Day. 

14  ftnD  $?iramfmttothcKiugry:c 
feojetaicntsofgolD. 

15  C.  3mD  this  '5  the  r  cafon  of  the  le= 
uictbhieh  hmg  Solomon  raifcb,  fo?  to 
butlb  the  houfe  of  the  %  0  ir  s>,  ana  his 
oibne  houfe,anb  sJ0tllo , anb  the  iball  of 
gjcrufaicm,  anb  i^ajo?,  aub  spegiDDo, 
anD(5c?cr. 

16  For  Pharaoh  King  of  €gypt  hab 
gone  bp,  anb  tauch  Gtfcr,  anbburntu 
ibith  fire,  anb  flainc  the  Canaanttcs 
thatbtbcltinthecitte,  anbgtucnitfo?  a 
pjefent  bnto  his  baughter  Solomons 
ibtfc. 

17  3mb  Solomon  built  C*5er,  anb 
23cfh-hoionthcncthct, 

is  '^nb  25aaiath,anD  Xabrno?  in  the 
lbilDcrttcu~e,mthcianD. 

19  3lnDailtheciticsoflhwcthatSo< 
lomon  hab,  anb  tines  fo?  his  tharets, 
anb  tines  fiw  his  hozfetnen,  anb  t  that 
tbhith  Solomon  biftr  cb  to  builb  in  3  & 
rufalcm,  anb  in  Hcbanon,attD  in  all  the 
lanbofhisbommion. 

20  Andaiithepeoplcthattbcrcleftof 
the  ^linontes,  ^ittittcs,  pcn35ttes,  ^i^ 
uttes,  anb  gjebuutes ,  ibhich  ibere  not 
ofthechrtbicuoflJfrael, 

ii  Xhcic  cWttwn  that  ibere  leftafc 
teethemtnthcLinD,ibhomthcehilbjcn 
of  iifcacl  alfo  ibere  not  able  btterly  to 
beftroy,  bpon  thofc  did  Solomon  leute 
a  tctbntc  of  bonb-ferutec  bnto  this  bap. 

12  asttt  of  the  chtlD.:cn  of  3Jfracl  bib 
Solomon  *  make  no  fconbiuen :  but 
the?  v/crc  men  of  tbarrc,  anb  his  fcr* 
waits,  anb  his  pztnecs,  aub  his  tap- 
tames,  anb  rulers  of  his  charcts,  anb 
hishortcmen.  ■ 

23  Xhcfewercfyechiefcoftheofftters 
that  were  otter  Solomons  ibojfee,  fiue 
hunbzeb  anb  fiftte,ibhich  bare  rule  otter 
the  people  that  ibzoughtintheibojRc. 

24.  c  23ut  *  Pharaohs  Daughter 
tame  bp  out  of  the  title  of  2DauiD,  bnto 
her  houfe  rbhith  Solomon  hab  built 
fozher:  then  bib  he  builb  $)iUo. 

25  C2ud  th?ec  nmes  in  ayeereDiD 


Solomon  offer  burnt  offerings ,  anb 
pcate  offerings  bpon  the  3lltar  ibhich 
he  built  bnto  the  %  0  is  £>,anb  h  e  biirnt 
intenfetbpon  the  altar  that  was  befoje 
then  0  b  © :  fo  he  finifhcD  the  houfe. 
i6  C  3mb  Uing  Solomon  maoc  a 
nauie  of  Chips  in  ffi^ion  ©eber ,  ibh  tch  is 
Defuse  Cloth,  on  thctfhoare  of  thcrcD 
fea,  in  the  lanb  of  Cbom. 

27  3mD  $iram  fentutthc  name  his 
feruants,  Tbtpmcn  thathab  tutciblcbge 
of  the  Sea,  ibith  the  feruants  of  So- 
lomon. 

28  3inb  they  tame  to  £>phir,  anb  fct 
from  thentc  golb  foure  ininDjcD  anb 
ttbentie  talents ,  aub  brought'  it  to  nmg 
Solomon. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  The  QoeeneofShebaadmirefh  thewifdomc 
of  Solomon.  14  Solomons  gold.  16  His 
targets.  18  The  throne  of  luorie.  11  His 
veflels.  14  His  prefects.  16  His  chariots 
andhorfe.   18   His  tribute. 

iHb93henthc*^uceneof 
Shebahcarb  of  the  fame 
of  Solomon,  contenting 
thciftamcof  theHfiDKB ; 
thee  tame  to  p?ooue  him 
ibith  harb  qucftions. 

1  2inbfhc  tame  to  3Jtrnfalem  ibith 
a  bcry  great  traiue,  ibith  camels  that 
bare  fpites,  anb  bcry  much  golb,  anb 
precious  Hones:  anb  tbhen  fl)cc  ttias 
tomctoSolomon,ft)CtoutmuneDtbith 
htm,  of  all  that  was  m  her  heart. 

3  ^nb  Solomon  tolbc  her  all  her 
t  queftlons :  there  ttias  not  any  thing 
htbfroni  the  King,  ibhich  Dec  tolD  her 
not. 

4  ^nDibhcnthc^zuccneofSheba 
hab  fcene  all  Solomons  ibifeDome^nD 
the  houfe  that  hehaD  buflt, 

5  ^nbthemcatofhistablcauothe 
fitting  of  his  feruants,  anD  thctatten* 
Dance  of  his  miniftcrs ,  anD  tljctr  appa 
rcll,  anD  his  ||  ntp  bearers,  anD  tjis 
afcent  by  vuhicl)  hec  ibent  bpbntotht 
houfe  of  the  %  sd  as  m  there  aas  no 
mo?cfptritinhcr. 

6  ^nb  Oje  faib  to  the  Utng,  ^Jttbas 
a  true  t  report  that  3  hcarb  m  mine 
oibnc  lano,  of  thy  llactes  anD  of  thy 
Uitfebomc. 

7  i^oibbeit ,  3J  bclecueD  not  the 
ibojbs,  bnttligj  came  anb  mine  eyes 
hab  fcene « :  anDbeholbc,tl)c  haife  ibas 
not  tolb  me :  t  thy  ibu'cbomanb  p^ofpc- 
ritic  ercccbcth  tlje  famelbhtch  3  ftcarb. 
31  i  7      8   tyappte 


t  Hch.  zf- 
onit. 


1HM,p. 


*2.Chron. 
9.1  mat.  1 2 

4  :.I'.jU  I  I 
i'- 


\Hcki 


ding. 

lOr,Bxlcri 


t  HtkvorJ. 


\H,hihu 
htijiaddid 
wtfedome 
and  foodnu 
torhtf/irtt. 


Sol 


olomons 


power, 


IX 


HIP'S. 


and  magnificence 


|j  Or,  ratlcj. 
Hcb'd  proa. 


:.Chron. 
.10* 


t  Heh-M- 

r-ir.iiir  t ) 
the  ban  i  f 
k!*l  Sclo- 


■  Chap-7.1 


\Heb  en  i  he 
><ind<rp*rt 
thereof. 
\Hib.h*n<b. 


\H<b.fi. 


8  l?appieaiettjymen,happyjiethcfc 
thy  fernants,  Vbljict)  ftanb  continually 
bcfo?etfjce,anddjatheatctljyiMcbom. 

9  asicffeo  be  the  %  o  is  s>  tljy  (5ob 
mljich  Dclightcb  m  tljcc,  to  fettljecon 
tljctlj?one  of -JJfrael  bccaufethe?L£>ia£> 
loucb  3fcacl  fo?  cuec,  tljercfo?cmabc 
ljc  tljcc  Bmg,  to  Doc  uitjgcnicnt  anb 
tttlKee. 

io  znn  (he  gauc  the  King  an  Danwct 
anb  tuicntic  talents  of  goib,  anb  of  fpt- 
ces  tocry  great  fro?e,8p?enousftonc5: 
tljecccamc  nomo?c  luclj  abunbance  of 
fpiccs,  as  tljcfc,  ibljiclj  tlje  iBuecne  of 
•kfrtjeba  gauc  to  Ring  Solomon. 

1 1  3lnb  thcnauie alfo  of  l)iram  tt)at 
biought  golbfcom  iDpljtr,  b?ougl)t  in 
from  iDphir ,  great  plentie  of  £lmug 
trees,  anb  p2ccious  (tones. 

ii  3lnothcRtugmaDcoft!)c3Hmug 
trees,  || pillars  fo:  tf)e  houfc  of  the 
1La>aD,  anb  fo?  the  Bings  Ijoufc, 
toarpes  alfo  anb  0faltencs  fo?  fingers : 
there  tame  no  fuel)  *3Umug  trees,  no? 
Uirtefccnctontotljtsbay. 

13  3lnbRmg  Solomon  gauc  iMtothe 
iQuecnc  of  5>lKba,  ai  l)cr  befire  whatioe- 
uer  fbeafRcb,  befibesthat  tbljtth  5>oio^ 
mon  gauc  her  t  of  his  royail  bountie :  fo 
(he  tumcb  anb  ibentto  her  ottmecoun? 
trey,  (he  anb  her  fcruants. 

i+  C  4i3oU)  the  ibetght  of  golb  that 
came  to  Solomon  in  one  ycrc,lbas  fire 
hunb?cb,  rtuccfcozc  ?  fijc  talents  of  golb, 

i$  25cfitjes  tiiat  he  had  of  tl)c  merchant 
men ,  anb  of  the  tcafnouc  of  the  fptcc; 
merchants,  anb  of  all  the  Rings  of  3= 
rabia ,  anb  of  tlje  ||  gouernours  of  tlje 
cotmtccy. 

i6  C^nbRing^oiomonmabetTbo 
hunb?eb  targets  of  beaten  golbc:  fire 
hunbttb  (hekdi  of  golbe  ibetit  to  one 
target. 

17  3nb he m.de th?ce hunb:cb fhielbs 
ofbcatnigolb,th?cepoimbofgolbtt)ent 
to  one  flnclD ;  anb  the  Ring  put  th  cm  m 
the*houfc  of  thefozreft  of  ILcbanon. 

18  {C^OttouccthcRingmabeagrcat 
th?ouc  of  yuo?ic,  anboucriaibe  itMth 
tljcbcftgolb. 

19  Xheth?onc  had  fire  fieps,  anb  the 
top  of  the  thzonc  was  rounb  tbchmb: 
anb  there  werctftayes  on  cither  fibc  on 
the  place  of  the  fcate.anb  tVbo  lyons 
ftooobcfibcrhc  Hayes. 

io  ^tibtttjclttc  lions  froob  thereon 
the  one  fibc  anb  on  the  other  topontlje 
fire  ttcps :  there  was  no  1 1  the  URe  mabc 
manylungbomc. 


n  C^nbailRmg&olomonsbzmR- 
mgbeffels  were  of  golb,  anb  ailthebcfc 
feis  of  tlje  houfc  of  the  fo?rctt  of  Hcba? 
non  were  of  pure  golb,  ||  none  lherc  of  fit- 
uer,it  mas  nothing  atcountcb  of  in  tt)c 
bayes  of  Solomon. 

22  5fo?thcRuighadatteaanauicof 
5CljaruJifh,  with  tlje  name  of  l?iram : 
once  in  th?ec  yccrcs  came  the  name  of 
XharChiuj ,  bmigmg  golbe  anb  filuer, 
||  yuo?ie,  anb  apes,  anb  pcacocRs. 

23  3>a  Ring  Solomon  crcecbcb  all 
the  Rmgs  of  the  cartlj.fo?  riches anbfo? 
mifebomc. 

24  C  3fnb  an  the  earth  t  fought  to 
£>olomon,to  heare  his  ttnfcbom  mhich 
<s»ob  Ijab  put  m  his  heart. 

25  3nb  they  brought  cuery  man  his 
p?efent,bctrcls  of  filuer,  anb  bclTels  of 
golb,  anb  garments,  anb  armour,  anb 
fpiccs,ho?Ccs,anb  mulcs,a  rateycerc  by 
yeerc. 

26  C^nb  Solomon  gatherebtogc^ 
tljer  *  charets  anb  ho?femeu.  3tnb  hec 
habathoufanbanb  fourc  huubJCDclja* 
rets,  anb  tihelu:  thoufanb  rjo?femcn, 
whom  he  beftoweb  in  the  cities  fiwcha? 
rets,  anb  ibith  the  Ring  at  3lcrulalem. 

27  ^nb  the  Ring  t  mabc  filuer  w  be  in 
3lerutalemasftones,anbCcbarsmabe 
he  to  be  as  the  dy comoze  trees,  that  are 
in  the  bale  fo?  abunbance. 

28  Ct^nb&otomon  tjaDho?fes 
brought  out  of  €gypt,  anb  linen  yarne : 
the  Rings  merchants  recctueb  thelmcn 
yamcatapnee. 

29  3nbacharctcamcl)panbibcnt 
out  of  €gypt  fo?  fire  humweb  ftekeisof 
filuer,  anb  anhojfefu?  an  hunbjebanb 
fiftie :  anb  fo  fo?  all  the  Rings  of  the  $it= 
rites,  anb  fo?  tlje  Rings  of  £>y?ia ,  bib 
rtjcy  b?ing  them  out  t  by  tljeir  mcancs. 

CHAP.   XI. 

1  Solomons  wiues  and  concubines.  4  In  his  old 
age  chey  draw  him  to  idolatry.  9  God  threat- 
neth  him.  14  Solomons  adueifaries  were 
Hadad,  who  was  intcrtained  in  Egypt,  2.3 
Rezon  who  reigned  in  Damafcus,  16  And 
Ieroboam,to  whom  Ahiiah  prophelled.  41 
Solomons  actes.reigne,  and  death  :Rehobo- 
am  fucceedeth  him. 

^Ht  Bing^olomon  loucb 
*  many  ftrangc  ibomen, 
( ||  together  iDithpbaugh- 
ter  of  Pharaoh )  tbomni 
of  theil^oabitcs,  31mmo- 
nitcs^bonutcs^ibonians  &  pittites: 
I  2   £>f 


>\Or,tbtrr 
WIS  nofiluir 
ill  them. 


\0r.EU- 
iharat  teeth. 


\Heb.fmgh 
the  face  ef. 


'  t.  Chron 
1. 14. 


t  Heb.gAHC. 


2.Chron.i. 
|5.&9>8. 

t  Hei.aii 
the  going 
forth  of  the 
htrrfel  which 
t».u  Solo* 


f  Heir. by 
their  hand. 


*Deut.  17. 
17  ecclus. 
49.19. 
Or, be  [J  1 


Hiswiues,idolatnes,  Chap.x).  and  aduerfanes. 


•  Eiod.  34 
lb. 


*Iudg.2. 
«3- 


t  Heir,  fit/- 
filed  net  »/. 


*Chap.3. 

•Chip.*. 
■a. 


with  thee. 


'  Chip.  1 : 
>5- 


x  jDftbc  nations  concerning  which 
thelitis©  faiD  bnto  the  cbittHcn  of 
jfcacl,  **Jecfoau  not  goc  into  them, 
neither  fliail  they  come  in  unto  you ,  for 
ftitely  they  Vbill  turnc  away  pour  heart 
after  their  goDs :  Solomon  clanc  onto 
thcfcmloue. 

?  3nD  !jje  haD  fenen  hunDieD  Briues, 
0nneeffcs,anD  tlncc  bunDzcD  concu 
bines:  anD  his  WiuesturncD  away  his 
heart 

4  ifoi  iteamcto  paffcWhcn Solo- 
mon wasolD.rhat  htsWiuesturncDfr 
Way  I)is  heart  after  other  goos  :  anD 
his  heart  was  not  perfect  wttb  ttjc 
1L  ©  w  e>  his  <5od ,  as  was  the  heart  of 
2>auiD  hts  father. 

5  foi  Solomon  went  after  *3(ft> 
to2eth  the  goDDcffe  of  the  ziDontans, 
ano  after  flfjilcom  the  abonunation  of 
the  Gnomes. 

6  3uD  Solomon  Did  emu  m  the 
fight  of  the  |LoHP,anb  twent  not  fully 
after  the  %  ©  is  je> ,  as  did  2DauiD  his  6** 
tljer. 

7  Xhen  did  Solomon  builb  an  hie 
placefo:  Chemofb  the  abomination  of 
i^oab,  m  the  Ml  that  isbcfiwCJcrufa; 
lem,  am>  foi  £9olcch  the  abomination 
of  the  chilDjen  of  3mmon. 

8  3nD  ukewife  Did  hec  fo:  all  his 
ftrange  Wtues ,  Which  burnt  tncenfe 
anD  CatnfiteD  bnto  their  goDs. 

9  C  2nD  the  fL©  is  ©was  angry 
With  Solomon  ,bccaufc  his  heart  ii>as 
turneD  from  roc  %  ©  is  m  OoD  of  3)f- 
rae!  *  Whtch  haD  appcarcD  bnto  him 
twtfr, 

io  3(nD  *  hao  commatmDtD  him  ton? 
ecrntngthis  thing,  thathec  fboulDnot 
goc after  other  goDs:  butheeucptnot 
thatrbhtchthclLfiDisiDcommanDcD. 

1 1  Jtetytttfaic  the  %  ©  is  sr>  faiD  bnto 
Solomon ,  Jfozafmuth  as  this  tis  Done 
ofthec,  anD  thou  haft  notfteptmyCo- 
ucnant ,  anD  mv  Statutes  Which  3* 
hauccommanDcDthcc ,  *  3?  tbil  furcir 
renD  the  bmgDomc  from  thee,  anD  Will 
giuctttotbyferuant. 

n  4i3otWitbttanDtnginthyDaycs3J 
Wil  not  Doe  it ,  foz  2>auiO  thy  fathers 
fauc :  bm  5  uiil  renD  it  outofrhcbanD 
of  thy  fonnc. 

ij  ?>oWbcit,3JWil  not  renD  away  all 
the  mngDomr.bucWtlgiue  one  tribe  to 
tor  fonncfo?  sjaiuDmyfcruantsfafte, 
anD  fo:  'Jcrufaicms  faKc ,  Which  3 
hauechofen. 

14.  c^nDthefLfiDKpmrrcDbpan 


abuerfarv  bnto  Solomon,  5?aDaDtbc 
CDomitc :  tjee  was  of  the  tungsftcD  in 
€Dom. 

15  *5fo:itramctopatTeWhcnS>amD 
was  in€Dom ,  aiiDJoabtbe  captamc 
of  the  holt  mas  gone  bp  to  bury  the 
dame,  after  he  haDfmtttcn  eucryuiaic 
inborn: 

is  ( foi  fire  moncths  did  3loab  re 
mamc  there  With  all  3Jfrarl,  bntilhec 
hao  cut  offeucry  male  in  •CDom.) 

17  3Chat^aDaDfleD,hcanDccrtatne 
CDomites  of  his  fathers  fcruantsWitb 
hun,  to  goc  into  Cgypt :  J^aDaD  being 
yctaiitlccbilDc. 

18  3nD  they  arofe  out  of  SBiDian, 
ano  came  to$aran,anD  they  tooftc  men 
Wttb  them  out  of  0aran,anD  they  came 
to  v£gypt  ,bmo  Pharaoh  femg  of  <£- 
gypt,  Wbtcb  gaue  him  an  houfc ,  anD 
appomtcD  hun  btfailcs,  anD  gaue  bun 
lano. 

19  3lnD  $aDao  founb  great  fauour 
ui  the  fight  of  Pharaoh ,  fo  that  he  gaue 
him  to  Ibifc  tOeGftcrofbisoWneWifc, 
the  fitter  of  ICahpcncs  the  iUuccnc. 

10  3mD  the  fitter  of  ICahpcncs  bare 
him  (Senubath  his  fonne,  tbhom  %ai\- 
penes  ibeaneD  in  Pharaohs  houfc:  anD 
©cnubath  was  in  Pharaohs  houfholD 
among  the  fonncs  of  Pharaoh. 

21  3nD  When  tyaoao  bearD  in  €> 
gyptthatDauiDdcptibitl)  hisfatbcrs, 
anothafjoab  the  captamc  of  the  hoft 
mas  DeaD ,  ?>aDaD  faiD  to  pbaraob, 
tlLct  mcDcpart,that3J  may  go  to  nunc 
ottmccountccy. 

ii  Xhcn  pharaoh  faiD  buto  Jntn, 
25utU)hat  haft  thou  lacttcDujitb  nice, 
that,beholD,thoufccbcfttogoctothmc 
oVbnc  countrcy  <  ^nD  hec  anfwcrcD, 
toothing :  l^ottibnt ,  let  nice  goc  in 
awttufc. 

25  |C  ^nb  *  (5oD  ftirreD  him  bp  an- 
other aouerfary :  Hc5on,  the  fonnc  of  e> 
liaoah ,  which  fleD  from  his  I02D  ^aoa- 
Descrlungofzobah: 

1+  3lnDbcgathcrcDmcnbntohim, 
anD  became  captamc  oner  a  banD,ibhen 
DauiD  ttetb  them  ot  Zobah  :  anD  they 
tbent  to  SDamafcus,  anD  Dlbclt  therein, 
anD  reigneD  in  3>amaftus. 

2  5  ^no  he  was  an  aoucrfanc  to  31 
rael  ail  the  Daycsof  Solomon,  bcftDc 
the  mifchiefc  that  iiabao  ^-.  anD  he  ate 
hozrtD  ^ifract.anD  rctgncD  oucr  Syjia. 

16  canB '  IJcrobbani  the  fonnc  of 
>12cbat,'an€plwathitc  of  zcreDa,So- 
lomons  fcruaiit,(U)liofe  mothers  name 


'  a.  Sjiii.8 

1+ 


\Heb.fmi 
mc  ii*vitj. 


t  Hei.Xot. 


•i.Sam.S, 
r.and  IO, 
18, 


*  i.Chron 
15.<S. 


Ahijah.Ieroboam.      I.Kings.        Solomons  death. 


t  Hcbr.ch 

fid. 


t  Hekdid 

]  Hebr.  bur- 
den. 


•Chap. 


9r;a»dttt 


was  zcruahaWiboWWoman)tucnhe 
lift  bp  hi>  Dana  againftthe  bmg. 

27  ana  this  was  the  taufe  that  hee 
nftupins  hanaagamOthebmg:  Solo- 
mon built  fcT9iUo,  ^d  t  repaircathe  bm- 
chcsofthcciticofDauiahtsfathcr. 

28  ana  the  man  3Jeroboam  was  a 
mtghtic  man  of  balour :  ana  Solomon 
fectugthcyoung  man  that  hetwas  uv 
buftrious  hcemaaelnm  ruler  oucr  all 
the  t  charge  of  the  houfe  of  3Jofeph. 

29  aiiaitcamttopaffcatthattinic 
When  Jeroboam  Went  out  of  3)erufa; 
lem,  thatthc^ophet  ahuahrhe  Shi- 
lomtc  founa  him  in  the  Way :  ana  hec 
haaciaahnnfclfc  With  a  new  garment; 
ana  thev  two  were  alone  in  the  ficia. 

3c  anb  ahuah  caught  the  new  gar> 
ment  that  was  on  him,  ana  rent  it  m 
twcluc  pieces. 

5 1  ana  he  faia  to  Jeroboam ,  Xabe 
thee  tenne  pieces:  to:  thus  faptl)  the 
lLo  «  id  the  csoaofjftaci,  zSehoia, 
3J  Will  rent  the  bmgaomc  out  of  the 
liana  of  Solomon,  ant)  Will  glue  ten 
tribes  to  thee: 

32  (But  heefhan  haue  one  tribe,  fo: 
mp  fcruant  S>aiuas  fabc,ant>  to:  35  cm- 
faicms  fakc.thc  cmc  which  J  ftauc  tho* 
fen  out  of  ail  the  tribes  of  Jfracl :) 

33  26ctaufc  that  thev  haue  fotfaben 
mec ,  ana  hanc  Wojflnppea  ailitacoth 
the  gobbctfc  of  the  ziaonians,  Che- 
rnov the  gob  of  the  i©oabttes,ana0)il 
com  the  gob  of  the  chilbjen  of  ammon , 
anb  haue  not  Walbco  in  mp  wayes ,  to 
boc  thatWhfth  is  right  ut  mine  ryes, 
anb  to  keepe  my  Statutes ,  anb  mp 
33ubgemcnts,asdiJ  Dauib  his  father. 

34  DoWbctt,  Jwtll  not  tabc  the 
Whole  bmgaomc  out  of  Inshanb  :  but 
31  mill  malic  him  #2incc  all  theaapes 
of  his  life,  fo:  S>auta  mp  feruants  fane, 
whom  11  chofc ,  becaufc  hec  Kept  mp 
Commanacmcuts  aub  mp  Stanitcs : 

35  But  *  3)  Will  tabc  thetungbomc 
out  of  his  fonues  hanb ,  anb  Will  giue  it 
bnto  thee,  cucn  ten  tribes. 

36  ana  bnto  his  fonnc  Will  Jcjtne 
one  tribe ,  that  Dauib  mp  fcruant  map 
haue  a  t  light  alWap  bcfoie  me  m  Jc 
rufaiem,  the  nnc  which  J  haucchofen 
me  to  put  my  jlSamc  there. 

37  anb  31  will  tabc  thee ,  anb  thou 
flialt  rctgnc  acco2bmg  to  all  that  thp 
fouic  befucth,  anb  fljait  be  Bmg  oucr 
31frari. 

38  anaitfhalibc,  if  thou  Wilt  hear; 
bcnbntoallthat3Jcoiumanathcc,ana 


wilt  waibe  in  mp  wapes ,  ana  ooc  that 
is  right  m  mp  fight,  tobcepe  mp  Sta* 
tntes  ana  my  Commanaements,  as 
Dauia  my  fcruant  ata,  that  31  will  be 
with  thee,  anabuiia  thee  a  tore  houfe, 
as3J  built  foz  3DautB,anawiilgtue3lfc 
taclbnto  thee. 

39  ^na^willfozttjisatnirtthefeca 
of  Dauib,  but  not  fo?  cuer. 

40  Solomon  fought  therefojte  to 
bill  Jeroboam,  ana  Jeroboamarofe, 
ana  flcaae  into  cgypt,  bnto  Shdhab 
bmg  of  €gypt,ano  was  in  cgypt  bntUl 
the  acath  of  Solomon. 

41  canBthercttofthc||aitcsof 
Solomon,  ana  all  thatheaiB,  ana  his 
Wtfcaomc ,  arc  they  not  Wnttcnm  the 
boose  of  the  actcsofSolomon* 

42  ^nb  the  t  tune  that  Solomon 
reignea  m  3Jcrufalcm,oucrall3ifrael, 
was'fourncyecrcs. 

43  ana  Solomon  flrpt  Wirt)  his  fa- 
ther s,ana  was  bunca  in  the  ntic  of  2>a^ 
uia  hts  father :  ana  *  Rehoboam  his 
fonnc  rciguca  in  his  fleaa. 

CHAP.    XI r. 

1  The  Iiraelites  aflembled  at  Shechem  to 
crowne  Rehoboam ,  by  leroboam  make  a 
(Liiteoi  relaxation  vntohim.  6  Rehoboam 
rctufing  theolde  mens  coun/ill,  by  the  ad- 
uiccotvoungmen,anlwereth  them  roughly. 
\6  Ten  tribes  reuokmg,  kill  Adoram ,  and 
make  Rehoboam  to  flee.  2.1  Rehoboam 
railing  an  armie,  is  forbidden  by  Shemaiah. 
15  Ieroboamftrengthcnethhjmfelre  by  cities, 
io  and  by  thcidolatrieorthetwocalues. 

38C\25C  &  &  *  Rehoboam  went 
^mmffi t0  ^tJechem :  fo:  all  Jf 
^^vw|  racl  Were  come  to  She 
^tfCft  rtjem  to  mane  him  bmg. 
<3£?s  2  anbitcamctopa(rc 
When  Jeroboam  the  fonnc  of  iftcbat, 
Who  was  yet  in  *  €gypt,  hcara  of  it  (fo? 
hec  was  flea  from  the  pjefence  of  lung 
Solomon,  ana  Jeroboam  awelt  in  €- 
gypt:) 

3  Xhat  they  fent ,  ana  tailea  him : 
ana  Jeroboam  anb  ail  the  Congrega- 
tion of  Jfrael  came ,  anb  toabe  bnto 
JScljoboam,  faying; 

4  1Lhyfathcrmaaeour*yobtgtiCi 
uous  :noW  therefore,  mahe  thou  the 
gncuous  ferutcc  of  thy  father,  ana  his 
hcauy  yobc  Which  he  put  topon  bs,  Ugh^ 
tcr  ,ana  we  Will  feme  thee. 

5  ana hcefaia bnto tl)cm,2Depart 
yctfiwthjccaatcs ,  then  come  agamc  to 

me. 


|  Or,wer<k, 
or  thin?!. 


\Hci.idja. 

•j.Chron. 
51.30. 


*  Mat.  1.7. 

cut  d  Ro- 
bo.im. 


*  1.  Chron. 
10.1. 


*  Chap.  1 1. 
40. 


'Dur.47 


Rehoboamking.      Chap 


.XI). 


Ifraelrebdleth. 


\,Htb.hvd- 


•Chip.  n. 
II. 


mc.  anb  tbe  people  Departed 

6  4CanbRtttgBeboboamtonfultcb 
ibttb  tbc  olb  men  tliat  floob  befojc  S>o« 
!omottbisfatber,tbbilebcpetlineb,anb 
feb ,  fyovo  Doc  pou  abttifc ,  tbat  i  map 
anfuietctbtspeoplc; 

7  3utb  tbcp  fpabc  bnto  hint  .laving, 
3!  ftiiou  Unit  be  a  fcruant  bnto  ttiis  peo- 
ple tins  bap.anb  ibilt  feme  tbem ,  anb 
anftbere  tbem,  anbfpcaRc  goob  tbotbs 
to  tbem,  tbmtbepibillbctbpfcruants 
fo?  cucr. 

8  But  bee  fojfooRc  tiic  tounfcllof 
the  olb  men,  ibbtcb  tbcp  nab  gincn  butt, 
anbtonfultebibitb  tbepongmen,  tbat 
nbcrcgrolbcnbp  ibttbbim,  andibb'ttb 
Qoobbcfotcbtnt. 

9  2nb  bee  fatb  bnto  tbem ,  iebat 
eounfellgtucpe,  tbat  ibe  mapanfmere 
tbispeoplc,  ibbo  baue  fpoRcntomce, 
faptng ,  fitftaBc  the  poise  n>bttb  tbp  fa- 
tbet  bib  put  bpon  bs,  lighter  i 

io  3nb  tf)e  poung  men  tbat  Ibcrc 
groibmbpttntb  butt,  fpaRebnto  bint, 
Taping,  lObusfbait  thou  fpcaRe  bnto 
tbts  people  tbat  fpaRe  bnto  tbec,  fap* 
mg,  XbpfiatbecmabeourpoRebcaup, 
but  maRe  thou  tt  itgbtcr  bnto  bs ,  fbus 
fbaittbou  fap bnto  tbetn,  kittle  fin- 
ger fljali  bee  Anther  tljctt  mp  fatbers 
lopnes. 

ii  ^nbnotbibbetcastnvfatbctbtb 
labcpoulbtrbabcauppoRc,TJtt>ilabbe 
to  pour  p  oRc :  nip  father  barb  tbafnfeb 
pouibitb  ibbtppcs,  butjibillcbathfc 
pourbtthfrotptons. 

u  €U  £>o  ^Jeroboam  anb  all  the  peo- 
ple tante  to  5Reboboamtbcrbirb  bap  ,as 
the  Ring  babappomtcb,  faptng,  Come 
to  mc  agamc  the  tbtrb  bap. 

ij  ^nbtbcRtnganfujcrcbtbepcople 
trougbip,  anb  fozfooRc  the  olb  mens 
tounfell  tbat  tbep  gaue  bint : 

14  anb  fpaRe  to  tbem  after  thecoma 
fdl  of  tbc  poungmen,  faptng,  ©pfa< 
titer  mabe  pour  poRc  beaup,anb  3J  ibili 
abbctopourpoRCitnpfatbcrairotbam 
feb  pou  ibttb  ibbtps,  but  3J  ibtll  cbatttfc 
pouibttbftojpions. 

15  naberefojtc  the  Ring  bearRcncb 
not  bnto  the  people  :fot  tbetaufclbas 
from  tbe  Hots©,  tbat  bee  might  per; 
fonnc  bis  fapmg,  tubttb  tbciL€>K© 
fpaRc  bp  *  mutual)  tbe  Smtlotutc  bnto 
Jeroboam  tbe  fonnc  of /Sebat. 

i6  c  5>o  Vbben  all  3Jfracl  fatb  tbat , 
tbcRing  bcarRncb  notbnto  tbem,  tbCj 
people  anftbereb  tbc  Ring ,  faptng, ; 
aaljat  portion  ijauc  rue  in  2Dautb  <  net?  I 


i  thened  him 
\Or,fdU- 


"Chap.ll. 
>3- 


[tber  hauewc  inheritance  m  tbe  fonnc  of 
3Jcffc:  to  pour  tents,  £)3JfracI:uotbc 
fee  to  thine  otbnc  boufe,  £>auib.  £>o 
3Jfraelbcpartcb  bnto  their  tents. 

17  25utasfojtbecbiibmtof3ifraci 
tbbicb  btbclt  in  tbc  cities  of  3jubab, 
&cboboamrctgneb  oucr  tbenu 

is  XbcnRtngaacboboamfcttt^bO' 
ram,  lbbowjsoucc  the  tribute,  anb  all 
Ufracl  ftoncb  bim  tbttb  ftoncs  tbat  bee 
bicb :  therefore Ring Eeboboam t mabe  iHel „ 
fpecbtogctbunbptobiscbarct,  toflcc 
to^Jerufalcm. 

19  5>o  gjfracl  ||  rcbcllcb  agatnlt  tt)t 
bcufc  of  S>auib  bnto  tbtsbap. 

10  3inD  it  came  to  patTctbben  all  gjf- 
racl bcarb  tbat  Jeroboam  ibas  come 
agautc,tbattbcpicntanbcailcbbunbn# 
to  tbe  Congregation,  anb  mabe  btm 
Ring  ouer  all  JJfracl :  tbcre  tbas  none 
tbatfolloibcb  tbc  boufe  of  3Daiub ,  but 
tbctnbcofgiubab*onelp. 

21  C  3Jnb  tbben  Heboboam  tbas 
tome  to  3lcrufalcm ,  bee  afTcmblcD  all 
tbc  bottle  of  3Jubab ,  rbttb  tbc  tribe  of 
ascttiamut ,  an  bunbjcb  anb  fourrfcozc 
tboufanb  cbofen  men  lbbicb  Uicrc  ttiar^ 
rters,  to  figbtagatnft  tbe  boufe  of^f 
rael,  to  b:mg  tbc  Rutgboincagatneto 
Scboboamtbc  fonne  of  Solomon. 

22  26ut*tbctbo.2b  of  Gob  tame  bn- 
to 3>bematab,tbeman  of  ©ob,faping, 

23  £>pcabc  bnto  Bcboboam  tbc 
fonnc  of  £>olomonRutg  of  3Jubah,  anb 
bnto  all  tbc  boufe  of  3Jubab  anb  iScn 
utmut,anb  to  tbc  remnant  ofrtjepcoplc, 
faputg, 

24  Xbus  faitb  tbc  3LsDK© ,  J^c 
fballnotgocbp ,  no:  fight  agautlt  pout 
bzctbznt  tljc  cbilbzen  of  JJfracl:  rcntrnc 
cucrpmanto  bis  boufe,  foj  tbts  thing 
isfromme.  3CbcpbearRcncbtbercfo2e 
totbcib02boftbc?L©a©,  anbretur 
neb  to  bepart,  accoibmg  to  tbnbojb  of 
tbeHomiD. 

25  C  Xben  Jeroboam  built  £>bv 
tbem  in  mount  <£phmim ,  anb  bibclt 
tbcreut,  anbtbcntoutfromtbence,anb 
built  i&ntucl. 

26  ^nb^eroboamfatbinbishcart, 
^oibfbailtbcRingbomcrcttirnetotbc 
boufe  of  JDautb: 

27  3Iftbispeopicgocbp,tooocfas 
erifice  tntlte  botUc  of  tbc  lloistpat 
3)crufaicm ,  then  Ojall  the  heart  of  this 
people  turnc  agamc  bnto  their  lozoc, 
eum  tmto  Ucboboam  Ring  of  ^btbab, 
anbtbcpfljall  Rtllmcc,  anbgocagamc 
toBeboboamRtng  ofjubah. 

2s  nahcrc 


Chron. 


Icroboams  calucs.       I.Kings.     The  man  of  Go  J  is 


*Exod.  ;i. 
3 


[Or,  vent 
vptothctU- 

J  Or  toft- 
enjice. 


I  Or,vrst 
Vp  to  the  a/. 
rur  O-c. 


t  Heir  to 
burnt  ir.- 
cenfe. 


\0r,  to  offer. 


•  I.King. 
!J.17. 


zS  tBhcrcuponthcBwgtooBctoutu 
fell,  anb  mane  two  calucs  of  golb,anb 
fain  into  them ,  3itistoomuchfo2you 
togoebpto  Jcrufaicm :  *  Bcholbthy 
gobs,D3ifracl,Whtch  brought  thee  Dp 
outofthelanbof<£gypt. 

29  anb  he  fet  the  one  in  Bethel,  anb 
tilt  other  put  hemS>an. 

30  anb  this  thing  became  a  finnc : 
fo2  the  people  went  towoifhipbefojcthe 
onceuenbntoSDan. 

31  anb  he  mabc  an  Ijoufc  of  hie  pla- 
ces ,  anb  mabc  pziefts  of  the  loWeft  of 
tttc  people ,  Whirl)  Were  not  of  the 
fonnesoffUtu. 

31  anb  Jeroboam  oibcmcb  a  fcaft 
ui  the  eight  moncth  ,  on  the  fifteenth 
bay  of  the  moncth ,  hbc  Ditto  the  fcaft 
that  is  in  Jubah ,  anb  he  |j  offcrcb  Dpon 
the  altar  ( fo  DiD  he  in  Bethel , )  ||  factitV 
cmg  Ditto  the  calucs  that  he  habmabc: 
anb  he  placcb  m  Bethel  the  pnefts  of 
the  I^gh  places  Which  he  hab  mabc. 

33  S>o  hec  |i  offcrcb  Dpon  the  altar, 
which  hec  hab  mabc  m  Bethel,  thefif 
tccnth  bay  of  the  eighth  moncth,  cucn 
mthc  moncth  which  he  habbcmfcbof 
his  oWnc  heart:  anb  oibcmcb  a  fcaft  bn 
to  the  chilbicn  of  Jfracl.anb  he  offcrcb 
Dpon  tljc  altar  ,tanb  burnt  mcenfe. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  leroboams  hand,  diatoftercd  violence  tohini 
that  prophelicd  againft  his  altar  at  Bedicl, 
withcrcth,  6  and.it  the  prayer  of  the  Pro- 
phet is  reftored.  7  The  Prophet,  refilling 
the  kincs  mtcitainment  ,  departeth  rrom 
Bethel.  11  An  old  Prophet  Reducing  him, 
bnngethhimbacke.  10  He  is  reprooued  by 
God,  1;  fliinc  bv  a  Lion  ,  16  buried  bv 
the  old  Prophet,  31  Who  confirmcth  his 
prophecie.   5;   Icroboams  obitiuacie. 

$&$&&&  i^b  bcholb,  there  came  a 
eti&fflbXS&a  man  of  cob  out  of  llubah 
I^S^ySjg  bythcWojbofthclLoisiP 
&  Ditto  Bethel :  anb  Jero- 
boam ftooD  by  the  altar 
to  iiburnc  mcenfe. 

z  anb  hec  eneb  agantft  the  altar  lit 
tl)cW02b  of  the  floist^anbfaib  ,  £> 
altar ,altar,thus  faith  the  Hc>  is  ©,25c-' 
holb,a  chtlb  foaibc  borne  Dnto  the  horde 
ofsDaiub,  "Jofiahbyuamc,  anb  Dpon 
thee  (hail  he  offer  the  pnefts  of  the  high 
places  that  btirnc  mcenfe  Dpon  thee, 
ant)  mens  bones  (hall  bee  burnt  Dpon 
tl)cr. 

3  anb  hegaucafignethcfamcbay, 


faymg,  %\)\s  is  the  fignc  Which  the 
1L  sp  is  ©  hath  fpoben :  25chotb ,  the  ai^ 
tar  (hall  be  rent,  and  the  athes  that  ate 
Dpon  it,  fbaibc  porbicb  out 

4  anb  it  came  to  paffc  When  mng 
Jeroboam  hearb  the  faymg  of  the 
man  of  ©00,  Which  hab  cneb  agamft 
the  altar  tnBcthet,that  he  put  forth  his 
hatiD  from  the  altar,  favtng,  iLayhclb 
on  hun :  ^nb  his  hanD  which  heeput 
foozth  againfthmi,  bzicbDp,  fo  that  hee 
coulb  not  pull  it  m  againc  to  him . 

5  Xhcaltaraifo  was  rent,  anb  the 
afibespoWjeb  out  from  the  altar,  aceo? 
Ding  to  the  figne  Which  the  man  of  <3oD 
hab  giuen  by  the  Wojb  of  the  JL  ©  a  ©. 

6  anbtheBingaitfraercb.anbfatb 
Ditto  theman  of  ©ob^tttteat now  the 
face  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  thy  <5ob,  anb  pjay 
fo:  nice,  that  my  hanbmaybc  refrozcb 
nice  againc.  anb  the  man  of  C5ob  be- 
fought  t  the  !L©is© ,  anb  the  lungs 
hatiD  Was  reftojeb  againc,  anb  became 
asitwasbcfoje. 

7  anb  the  King  faib  Dnto  the  man 
of  <5ob,  Come  home  With  nice,  anb  tt-- 
frcQ)  thy  fclfc ,  anb  3  Wti  giuc  thee  a  xv 
Warb. 

8  anb  the  matt  ofoobfaib  Dnto  the 
Rutg,31f  thou  Wilt  giuc  nice  haifc  thute 
hotifc,  jwiiiuotgoctnwtththcc,  net* 
thcr  wuij  cat  bjcab,  no2b2inbc  Water 
in  this  place: 

9  if  02  fo  was  it  chargco  mec  by  the 
Woib  of  the  ft  ad  k©  ,  faymg ,  eate 
no  b:cab,no2  b2innc  Water  ,no2  turnc  a 
gam  by  the  fame  way  that  thou  catneft. 

io  £>o  he  Went  another  Way, anb  re 
turnebnot  by  thewaythathectame  to 

Bctl)Cl. 

ii  C  fiovo  there  Dwelt  an  olb  020- 
phctm  Bethel,  anb  his  fonne  came  anb 
tolbhim  all  the  Wojacs  that  the  matt  of 
cob  hab  bone  that  bay  m  Bethel :  thei 
Wo2bs  which  hec  hab  fpoltcn  Ditto  the ! 
lung,  them  they  tolbc  alfo  to  their  fa-i 
thcr. 

ii  anb  their  father  faib  Dnto  them, 
tehatway  went  he  rfoi  hisfonucshao  I 
fcettcWhat  waythemanof  000  Went,  j 
Whicli  came  from  jubah. 

13  ^tib  hec  fatbc  Dnto  his  fonnes, , 
babbie  me  the  affc.&o  thcr  fabicb  Ijon 
the  affcaub  he  robe  thcr  con, 

1+  anDWetttaftcrthcmanofc?oD, 
anb  founb  him  fitting  bnber  an  oUc; 
anbhcfatbDntohun.artthouthcman 
of  (5oo  that  cameft  from  Jubah  <  anb 
he  faib,  J  am. 
iiXhcn 


t  Hebrjht 
face  of  the 
LOUT). 


flainebyalyon.      Chap.xiij.xiiij.  Hisbunall. 


\Hthjt 
ward  was. 


I  Hrt.bra- 


i>  %\)tx\  Dee  fatb  bnto  hun,  Come 
Dome  Until  mc,anb  cate  teeau. 

i6  &nb  Dc  too,  3  map  not  tcturnc 
ttntb  t!)t  e,  nojgoc  m  ibitb  thee :  neither 
ibill  31  eat  tycao  ,noj  bnnttc  lbater  ttuth 
thcem  this  plate. 

17  50?  tit  lbas  faib  to  mec  by  the 
ibojb  of  tl)C  %  ©  is  ©,  Hbou  Ojait  eatc 
no  bzeab,  no,!  bnnfte  lbater  there,  no? 
nunc  agamc  to  go  by  the lbay  that  thou 
earned. 

is  ^efaibbntotmgjamapjopbet 
alfo  as  tl)Ott  jrc.ano  an  angel  fpafte  bnto 
mtby  the  ibojb  of  tbc  1L  ©  k  ©,  faying, 
i&tng  bun  batBettntl)  thec  mto  thine 
honfe,  that  he  may  eat  toeab,anb  tymfce 
lbater:  Bmhcltebbntobim. 

19  8>q  he Vbetubacftcitoith  hun,  anb 
nix>  catcbtcab  mbtsboufe,  anb  bjanfcc 
lbater. 

io  c  2nb  it  tame  to  paffc  as  they 
fate  at  the  table,  that  the  uwb  of  the 
fL©ts©  came  bnto  the  pjtopbet  that 
bjoughtbimbacfee: 

11  3inbbccrtcbbntotbcmanof<Sob 
that  tame  from  3lubab,  faymg,  Xbus 
faith  the  %  ©  «  £> ,  f  ojafmuth  as  thou 
haft  bifbbctcb  the  mouth  of  the  fL©K3D, 
anb  haft  not  Sept  the  commanbemrat 
ibbicb  the  %  ©  «  je>  thy  C5ob  tomman 
beb  thee, 

11  2SuttamcftbatRC,  anb  haft  eaten 
bjcab,  anb  b2unfec  lbater  ,m  the  plaecof 
the  tbbttb  the  %  o  is  ©  bib  fay  to  thee, 
eatc  nobjeab  ,  anb  bitnttr  no  lbater, 
thy  tarcaife  (ball  not  come  bnto  the  fe 
pulctoc  of  thy  fathers. 

13  C^nb  it  came  to  pade  after  he  hab 
eaten  bieab,  anb  after  bechabbmnfee, 
that  he  fableb  fozbimthe  affc,  to  wit,  fo; 
tbc02opbct,  tbbomc  bee  bab  brought 
bac&c. 

14.  2nb  mhen  he  lbas  gone,  a  lyon 
mctbtmbytbcibayanbflctbbtm  :anb 
his  tarcaife  lbas  caft  ut  the  tbay ,anb  the 
afft  ftoob  by  it,thc  lyonaifo  ftoob  by  the 
tarcaife. 

15  3(ubbcbolbc,  mcnpaCTcbby,  anb 
faib  the  cartaifc  caftm  the  lbay,  anothe 
lyon  ftanbmg  by  the  tarcaife :  anb  they 
came  anb  tolb  u  tn  the  cmc  ibhtrt  the 
olbp:ophctbibclt. 

16  3nb  ibhcn  the  pjopbet  that 
b:ought  him  bach  f  com  the  tbay  ,hcato 
thereof,  he  faib,  $t  is  the  man  of  000, 
lbbo  lbas  bifobebicnt  bnto  the  lbozb  of 
the  %  ©  is  e> :  tbcrcfo:e  the  %  ©  1*  id 
hath  bcliner  cb  htm  bnto  the  lton,ibhtth 
hath  1  tome  bim,  anb  (lame  hun,  axcoi 


bmgtotheib020oftbc2L©jsjp,lbbtch 
befpaftebntobun. 

17  3nb  he  fpaUc  to  his  fonnes,  fay; 
mg,S>abble  me  the  aflc:anb  they  fableb 

him, 

18  3inb  he  tbentanb  founb  hts  car= 
tatfe  caft  m  the  lbay  ,anb  the  affc  anb  the 
lyon  ftanbmg  by  the  cartaifc :  the  lyon 
bab  not  eaten  the  carcaife,noj  ttome  tlic 
affc. 

i9  3(nbtbep?opbettooHcbptbetar 
caifcoftbc  man  of  C5ob,aub  laib  it  bpon 
the  affc,  anb  brought  it  bathe :  anb  the 
olb  pjopljct  came  to  the  ctty,to  moume, 
anotoburiebmt. 

3°  3lno  htc  latb  hts  carcaffc  tn  hts 
oibnc  grane,  anb  tljey  mourneb  ouer 
hmt,(av.n2,^iasmybjothcr. 

31  3no  it  came  to  paffc  after  het  hab 
buricD!um,tbatbcfpaltctobiSfonties, 
faymg,  nahen  31  am  beab,then  bury  me 
m  the  fepulctye ,  lbhcrctn  rhe  man  of 
Gob  ts  bnrieb,  lay  my  bones  beftoe  his 
bones. 

31  jfo?  the  faying  mbtchheecrtcb  by 
thelbortt  of  tbe?L©is©agamfttbcafc 
tor  m  iSethelanb  agamft  an  tbcboufcs 
of  the  high  places  ibbicb  «e  in  the  titles 
of  £>amarta,  (ball  furcly  tonic  to  paffe. 

33  C3ftcrtbtsthmg,3Jcroboamrc-- 
turneb  not  from  hts  cuill  lbay,  but 
t  mabe  agamc  of  the  loibcft  of  the  peo* 
pit  pjufts  of  the  h«gh  Places :  ibhofoe- 
iter  iboulb,  he  t  confecrateb  him,  anb  he 
betame  one  ofrt)ep?iefts  of  the  high 
places. 

3+  ^nb  thts  thing  became  fume  bnto 
the  houfe  01 33troboam,  men  to  tutu 
off,  anb  to  beftroy  it  from  off  the  rate  of 
the  earth. 

CHAP.    XII1L 

1  Abijjh  being  ficke,  leroboam  fendcdi  his  wite 
diiguifed  with  Preients  to  the  prophet  Ahijah 
atShiloh.  5  Ahijah  forewarned  by  God,dc- 
naunceth  Gods  ludgement.  17  Abijahdieth 
and  is  buried.  19  Nadab  lucceedeth  Je- 
roboam. 11  Rehoboams  wicked  reigne.  15 
Shifhak  fpoilethlerufalem.  19  Abiiamfuc- 
cecdeth  Rehoboam. 

%  that  time  2bnat)  the 
fonne  of  Jeroboam  ftll 

fltRC. 

1  3mb3Jtroboamfatb 
to  his  lbife,  ^rift,3J  piay 
tljcc,  anb  biftjuife  thy  felfe,  that  tl)ou  be 
notanoibento  be  thettnfe  of  gierobo^ 
am :  anb  get  theeto  5>hll0?):  ^Beholb, 

there 


t  Hetiro- 
ksn. 


\Hih.rr- 
turntd  and 
mads. 
f  Hii.fi/ltd 
hit  bund. 


Ieroboams  Tonnes       LKings.        death  and  bunall. 


*Ctup.i  i 
3'- 

|  Ht!>  11 
hire  bnr.il. 
Or,a>kfi. 
|  Ot,beuit. 


for  hottrinei. 


Ihb.ha-d. 


■i.King. 
15.19- 

•Chap.  5 1 
11.  2. king 
9.8. 


rtierc's  ahtiab  the  pjopbct,  ibbub  toio 
met  that  *  J  fboulb  be  Utng  ouct  this 
people. 

j  2nb  taftc  t  unth  tbee  ten  loaues, 
ano  1  crattmeis,anb  a  Hcrufeof  Dome, 
ano  goeto  Dim :  be  (ball  tell  thee  ibbat 
(bail  become  of  tbecbiioe. 

4  3(nbJctoboamslbtfcbiofo,anb 
arofc,anbU)entto£>bitob,anbcamcto 
ttje  boufc  of  3huab :  but3lbtiah  toulb 
not  fee,fo?  tjts  eyes  t  ibcte  fct  by  r  cafon 
ofbtsage. 

5  C  2no  the  %  ©  is  id  faib  bnto  S- 
biiab ,  25eljolD,trjc  Xbtfe  of  Jeroboam 
tommetl)to  afttc  atbmgoftbcefojbcr 
fonnc ,  fo?  bee  ts  ftebe :  thus  ano  thus 
fbalttbott  fay  bnto  ijet:  fo2  tt  Ojau  be 
lbbenfbee  cotnntctbin ,  that  (bee  (ball 
fame  net  fetfe  to  be  another  ibomatt. 

6  Znn  it  tbas  fo ,  lbbcu  abtiab 
bearb  the  fotmb  of  tier  feet,  as  ft)  e  tame 
tnatfhcboojc,  tbatbcclaib,  Cometn, 
tt)ou  Ibifc  of  Jeroboam ,  umy  fainctt 
thou  tin;  fclfc  to  be  another;  fo?  J  am 
fent  to  thee  rbith  t  heauic  tidings. 

7  <E»oe,tcliJcroboam,in)usfaitb 
the  %.$>  is  ©  ©ob  of  Jfracl,  jFojafmucb 
as  3  cralteb  thee  from  among  tl)t  peo- 
ple, anb  mabc  thee  p^nce  otter  my  pco- 
piejfrael, 

8  3fnb  rent  the  htngbome  aibay 
from  the  boufc  of  2Dauib ,  ano  gaue  it 
tbec :  anb  y«  thou  baft  not  beeueasmy 
fcruant3Dauio,ibho  Ucptmy  Comman- 
bemeuts,  anbibbo  follolbcbmccti)itb 
all  his  heart,  to  boe  that  oncly  rbhub 
lbas  right  m  mine  eyes, 

9  25ut  baft  ooticctuilabouc  all  that 
iberc  befoic  thee :  fo?  thou  haft  gone 
anb  mabc  thee  other  gobs,  anb  molten 
images,  to  piouofee  me  to  anger,  anb 
haft  call  me  bebtnbe  thy  bacfec : 

10  Xhmfoicbcbolb/Jibtllbnng 
ciullbpon  the  houfc  of  Jeroboam,  anb 
ibill  cut  off  from  "Jeroboam,  *  him  that 
ptffethagamft  the  lbaii,  and  him  that  is 
fhut  bp  anb  left  in  Jfracl,  anb  \btll  rafec 
aibay  the  remnant  of  thehoufe  of 'Je- 
roboam, as  a  man  tauctb  alba?  bung, 
nil  it  beau  gone. 

1 1  $tm  that  bicth  of  Jeroboam  m 
the  cine,  (ball  the  bogs  cate:  ano  htm 
thatbicthinthcfielo,  fbail  thcfoulcsof 
the  aire  cate :  fo?ti)c|LoisjD  hatbfpo* 
Ren  it. 

u  artie  thou  tbcrefoze ,  get  thee  to 
rbme  oibnc  houfc :  anb  lbbcn  tby  fcetc 
enter  into  the  nne,  the  cbilb  (ball  bic. 

ij  3lnb  all  Jfracl  (bail  moume  fo; 


him,  anb  burp  htm :  fo?  he  oncly  of  Je- 
roboam fhai  come  to  the  graue.becaufe 
in  him  there  is  fotmb  fome  goob  thing 
tolbaro  the  %  ©  is  ©  ©oo  of  Jfrael,tn 
the  boufe  of  Jeroboam. 

14  a3o?coucr,  the  %  ©is©  fhail 
taifc  htm  bp  a  mug  ouer  Jfracl,  ibbo 
(baicut  off  the  houfc  of  Jeroboam  that 
bay:  butibbat?  cucnnoib. 

15  5fo?thc?L©i3©fbailfmrtc  Jfc 
rati,  as  a  recocts  (baUcninthelbatcr, 
anb  bee  (bail  root  bp^ifraeloutof  tins 
goob  lanb ,  Vbhtcb  bee  gaue  to  their  fc 
mers,anb  (ball  fcatter  tbcm  beyonb  the 
ftiucr,  bctaufe  they  baue  mabe  tbeir 
groues,  pjouokmg  the  %  ©  s  ©  to  au^ 
get. 

i6  3Cnbbee(bailgineJfraclbp,bc; 
caufc  of  the  fumes  of  Jeroboam ,  tbtjo 
bibfinncjibbo  mabc  Jfracl  to  fume. 

17  C3lno  Jeroboams  ibifearofc, 
anbbeparteb,  anb  cametoXinab :  and 
rbhenfhee  came  to  thethiefboio  of  the 
boojcthcchilbOicb. 

is  3lnb  they  buricb  him,  anb  all  Jf 
rael moumcb foz  bmi ,  accozbing  to  the 
ibo2boftbe  |L©is©,  lbbtcbhccfpabc 
by  the  banb  of  his  fcruantabtiab  the 
l&?opbct. 

19  3mb  the  reft  of  the  acres  of  Jero- 
boam ,  boib  bee  ibacreb ,  anb  boib  bee 
relgucb,  bcrjolD,  ttjcy  are  m?utcn  in  the 
bootte  0 f  tl)e  Chronicles  of  the  Umgs  of 
Jfracl. 

io  ^nb the bavesibbtth  Jeroboam 
rcigneb ,  were  ttbo  anbtibcntie  peeres: 
anb  be  t  Qcpt  ibitb  bis  fatbcrs.anb  fl&> 
bab  bis  fonne  rctgnco  in  bisftcab. 

21  €  3nb  Behoboam  the  fonne  of 
Solomon  rctgnco  in  Jubab :  *  3Rebo 
boam  was  foutttc  ano  one  peeres  olbc 
lbben  he  began  toretgne,  ano  beer  cig-- 
neofeucnteencj>eeresinJcrufaiem,tbe 
one  Vbbich  the  %  ©  is  ©  bib  cbufc  out 
of  all  the  trtbes  of  Jfracl ,  to  put  his 
/Bamc  there :  anb  bis  mothers  name 
ibas  j3aamaban3mmonttcffc. 

ii  3nb  Jubab  bib  ctullm  the  fight 
of  the  ?L  ©  is  iD,ano  tbev  p2ouoftco  bun 
to  teaioufic  ttoitt)  tbctr  finncs  Ibbtcl)  tbcv 
bao  commttteb ,  aboue all  tijat  tbctr  fa 
thcrs  bab  bone. 

u  iFonbcpaifobuiitthemhighpia 
ces ,  anb  ||  images,  anb  groues  on  cue 
ry  rjigl)  btll,  anb  briber  cuerv  geecne 
tree. 

24  2nbtijmtoeteaifo5>obomttc6 
in  the  lanb,  and  rt>ep  btbatco;bmg  to  an 
the  abonunattons  of  th  c  nations  lbh  irh 

tilt 


t  Hii  Iq 


*  2.CSron. 
12.:  3. 


JtHftmnfttj 

trttjlur:. 


Ieroboamdieth.         Chap.xv.  AbijamrAla.Baafha. 


'Chap.  10. 


\Htt. 
tteri. 


•2.Chro. 
11.12. 


the  H©ao  call  out  bcfou  the  chilDzen 
ofjfrael. 

15  cattD  it  tame  to  paffc  inthcfift 
yerreoftungftcfyoboam,  that  s>htfhafe 
lung  of  Cgypt  came  top  agautttjeru 
talent: 

16  atiDhctooSeatoaythctteafutes 
of  the  houfe  of  the  %  o  is  © ,  ant)  the 
trcafttrcs  of  the  tongs  houfc ,  hex  enen 
toottc  albav  all :  ano  he  toofec  atbay  all 
the  fhicios  of  golb  *  ibhirh  Solomon 
haDmaoc. 

17  anD  tong  Skhoboam  maoc  m 
their  fteaDbzafcnftnclos,  ano  commit* 
tto  them  tmto  the  hanos  of  the  rtncfe  of 
the  t  guart),  tuf)urj  fecpt  the  doom:  of  the 
Kings  houfe. 

13  anD  u  tt)as  fo,  Vbhcn  the  king 
tbent  into  the  honfc  of  the  iLosr*, 
that  the  guart)  bare  them,  ano  brought 
them  battte  into  the  guarD-chambcr. 

19  C/froiMthcttftofthcartesof 
Cchoboam,  anD  all  that  hee  mo ,  arc 
the?  not  ttmtten  tn  the  boofec  of  the 
Chzonttlcs  of  the  tongs  of  3Juoah  t 

jo  anDthcrcibasujarrcbcrmeene 
Kehoboam  ant)  ^Jtroboam  all  thdr 
nayes. 

ji  SinD  -Kehoboam  flcpt  forth  his 
fathers ,  ano  rbas  bunco  truth  his  fa- 
thers m  the  ttty  of  DauiD :  ano  his  mo- 
thers name  ttias  /ftaamat)  an  3mmo* 
ntteffc.  ano  abnam  his  fonnc  retgneb 
mhtsftcao. 

CHAP.    XV. 

I  Abiiams  wicked  rcigne.  7  Ala  fucceedeth 
him.  51  Afasgoodreigne.  \6  Thewarre 
betvvecne  Baafha  and  him,  caufeth  him  to 
make  a  league  with  Benh.idad.  2.5  Iehofha- 
phat  fucceedeth  Afa.  2.5  Nadabs  wicked 
rcigne.  2.7  Baafha  confpiring  againft  him 
executethAhiiahs prophecy.  31  Nadabs  acts 
and  death.   33    Baalrhas  wicked  1  eigne. 

s£>yjc  m  tl)e  eighteenth 
y  cere  of  lung  *3)croboam 
the  fonnc  of  jfrcbar,rcig  A 
neb  abuant  oner  35u ! 
oah. 
1  Ulncc  yccccsrngncbhccm^j 
rufalcm  :ano  his  mothers  name  was 
fljjaathah  ,  the  Daughter  of  abifha 

lom. 

j  atiDhcujalucDittaltthc  fumes  of; 
his  father,  which  hec  hao  ooncbefoze 
him :  ano  his  heart  luas  not  perfect 
iuith  the  IL  o  is  id  his  <3oD,as  the  heart 
of  ©auiD  his  father. 


4-  /i3euerthclcu*c ,  fo;  EDauiDs  fattc 
did  the  JL^kip  his  <!5od  gmc  him  a 
|j  lampe  tn  3Jcrufaicm  ,  to  fct  bp  his 
fonne  after rjim,  anoto  ettabltfh  Jem 
falem: 

5  BctaufcDatuDDiD  that  which  was 
right  tn  the  eies  of  the  %  <p  is  © ,  anD 
tunicDnotafiDcfromanythtngthathe 
1  commaiiDcD  hint  all  the  Dates  ofhis  life, 
•faueoncly  m  the  matter  ofOruatjtljc 
i)unrc. 

<r  anD  there  ibas  \uarrc  brniicrnc 
fiehoboam  ano  'JJcroboam  *H  the 
Daycsofhishfc. 

7  /iSoTOthcrcftofthcactcsofabi 
,  tarn ,  ano  an  that  hec  Did  ,  arc  thev  not 
lbnttcn  in  the  *  bookc  of  the  Chronicles 
'of  the  Btngs  of  3IuDab  <  ano  there 
I  Ibas  Ibarrc  bctibccue  abnam  ano  jjJc 
roboam. 

3  ano  abnam  aept  roith  his  fa- 
thcrs,anD  they  bunco  Dun  in  the  ntie  of 
!BDatuD:anD  afa  his  fonne  rcignco  tn 
hisfteaD. 

9  C  anD  *  m  the  twentieth  y  cere  of 
SIcroboamtongofJfracUrigneDafa 
otter  Juoah. 

10  anDfojtyanDoncycercsrctgncD 
hec  tn  3Jerufalcm  :  ano  his  ||  mothers 
name  was  fl^aachah ,  the  Daughter  of 
abtfbalom. 

11  ano  5lfa  DiD  that Which  was  right 
m  the  ctes  of  the  %  ©  »  s>,  as  Did  DauiD 
his  father. 

11  anD  hee  tooftc  away  the  £>odo- 
mites  out  of  the  lanD ,  anD  temooucD 
all  the  iDoies  that  his  fathers  hao 
maoe. 

ij  ano  auV^aachah  his  mother, 
euen  her  hec  rcmoucD  from  bang 
£iuceue,  becaufe  (he  hao  maoc  an  iDole 
tn  a  groucanD  afatDcftroycD  her  tDolc, 
anD  burnt  it  by  the  bioofec  BiD^on. 

1+  25ut  the  high  places  iberc  not 
ranooucD:ncucrthelcffc,afahts  heart 
iPas  perfect  luith  the  %  &  is  jp  all  Ijis 
Daves. 

15  anD  he  b.'ought  m  ti)c  t  tilings 
ibhich  his  father  hao  DcDicattD,  anD  the 
things  iPhich  hmtfclfc  haD  beDtcatcD, 
into  the  houfe  of  the  JLohjp,  fiiucr, 
anogolDiinDbcfrcls. 

i6  <T  ano  there  Vbas  iDar  bctibccnc 
afa  anD  25aaQ)a  Bmg  of  3'fracl  all 
their  oaves. 

17  ano  Baafha  lung  of  Jfrael  ibctit 
bpagainft  Juoah ,  ano  built  Uamah, 
that  he  might  not  fuffcr  anvtogocout 
ouomc  into  afa  tongofJInDah. 

13  Xhen 


•i.Sam.i  1 
4. and  1  2.9. 


.  Chron. 


>3J- 


; :.  Chion. 


That  ir, 


*  :.  Chron. 
15.16. 

f  He',. cut 


Hcb.hoi\ 


AfaandBenhadad.       I.Kings.        Nadab.  Baaflia. 


■  j.Chron, 
,6.1. 


f  Heir  £« 


'Hcir.pt. 


'  Maith  l . 
X.cttllcJ  lo- 


\Htbr.Tth- 

ntJ. 


is  Xhc n  3fa  tookc  all  tlic  filuer  aim 
the  golbc  that  were  left  in  thctrcafurcs 
of  the  Iioufc  of  tl)e  HoisD,ano  the  trc  a 
furts  of  the  lungs  houfc ,  aim  bcliucrcb 
than  into  the  hatm  of  ins  fmiants:  ano 
Kmgafa  fent  them  to'Bcnhabab  the 
fount  of  Cabmuon,  thefonne  of  fre^i 
on  King  of  5=>r;ta ,  that  bibclt  at  2>fc 
mafcus,faytng, 

19  There  is  a  league  bmi>tcuc  me  anb 
thee ,  and  bctWecnc  nip  father  anbthv 
fathcr:beholb,3lhaucfentbntothcca 
P2efcnt  of  ftlurr  ano  golb  .  tome  aim 
b:caKc  the  league  lbitl)  iSaafba  lung  of 
JfracUhat  he  may  t  Depart  frommt. 

10  s>o  zSenhabab  hearheneb  bnto 
hmgTlfa,  anb  fent  the  taptamesof  the 
hofts.iblnch  hchab,agamft  the  ernes  of 
jftacl,anbfinotc5ion,anbDan,anb 
2.bel-23ctf)maachah,  anb  all  Cinnc 
roth.tturh  all  the  lanb  of  jftaphtalt. 

ii  3lnb  tt  came  to  pafTc  mhen  z5a 
alba heacb  thereof,  that  hec  left  off  butl 
bmg  of  Hamah,anb  cmcirm  Xrr  wh. 

22  Hhcn  utng  3fa  mabc  a  ^:ocia 
marton  thzoughout  all  Jubah,  rnonc 
was  terempteb :)  anb  tinr  toottcamav 
the  ftoncs  of  Raman  ,  anb  the  timber 
thereof  lbhcrcibtth  saafha  h<m  butl 
beb  ,aub&mg3tfabuiinbiththcni(3cba 
of  iScmamtn  ,anb  CBi^pah. 

i  j  Xhc  reft  of  all  the  acts  of  %fo,  anb 
all  hts  might,  anb  all  that  he  bib  ,  anb 
the  cities  mhich  hec  built,  art  they  not 
mmtcn  m  thebootu  of  thcChmnuies 
ofthciaingeofJubalK/2cticrthcicflc 
m  the  time  of  his  olb  age,  hec  lbasbifca 
fcbtnhisfecte. 

24  3lnb  ^faflcptibith  his  fathers, 
anb  mas  buneb  Until  his  fathers ,  in 
the  citie  of  £>auib  his  father :  anb '  jc 
hofbaphat  his  fonnc  rctgucb  m  hts 
fteab. 

25  C  3nb  fiteab  the  fonnc  of Jc 
roboam  1  began  to  reigueouer  Jfrarl, 
in  the  ftconb  yecrc  of  ^fa  lung  of  Ju 
bah  ,  anb  rrigncb  oner  Jfrael  tluo 
yeercs. 

:6  3inbhe  bib  null  in  the  fight  of  the 
iLot;c\anbUiailubinthcUiavofhis 
father,  aiibm  hts  fume  mha'cmith  hce 
mabc  Jfracl  to  fume. 

27  IT  3nb  JSaaflia  the  fount  of  Z 
hiiah,  of  the  houfc  of  JfTachar ,  coufpi 
reb  agamft  htm  ,  anb  iSaaflja  fmotc 
himatcsibbethon,ibhichbetongcthto 
thephilimnes/fojjlababanbaii  jlf 
rati  lavbficge  to  Oibbcthou) 

is  Cueii  in  the  thirb  vecrc  of  Mi 


•Chi 
10. 


lung  of  Jubah ,  bib  JSaaflm  [lay  him, 
anb  rcigneb  m  his  fteab. 

29  2Mb  it  came  to  paffc  when  hce 
raigneb.that  he  fmotc  all  the  houfc  30 e* 

!  roboam ,  hec  left  not  to  'Jeroboam  any 
that  tveatheb  ,unttll  hechab  beftroycb 
him,  atcomutgtonto*  the  faying  of  the 
%  oh  jd ,  rbhich  hce  fpauc  by  hts  fcr> 
nan  t  3lhuah  thc&hiiouttc: 

30  25ccaufc  of  the  finncs  of  Jero< 
boam  mhtch  heftnneb ,  anb  Uihtchhcc 
inabe  Jfracl  ftnnc ,  by  htspmuocation 
therewith  he  p:ouoftcb  the  JLidisjd 
Gobofjfracito  anger. 

31  C/2onjrhcrcftofthcattsof/5a' 
bab,  anb  an  that  hce  bib  ,  are  they  not 
ttmttoi  m  the  booUc  of  tljjc  Cfjjioiucles 
ofthcBingsofJfracl; 

32  3nb  there  mas  marrebttmcenc 
'■  3faanb  asaafha  mug  of  Jfrael  ai  their 
loaves. 

33  3ln  the  thirb  yecrc  of  2fa  Bing 
of  Jubah ,  began  z5aafhathc  fonnc  of 

f^huahtomgncoucraliJfraclmXu;; 
i  jarj  ,ttt)cntte  anb  four c  pecrcs. 

34  3lnb  hce  bio  emu  m  the  fight  of 
the  5L© is©,  anb  lualftcb  m  tlje  leap 
of  Jeroboam ,  anb  m  his  finncU)l)crc= 
lbirhhcmabcjfracitofmne. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1.  7  Iehusprophcfie  againft  Bjafli.i.  5  Elah 
fucceedethlnm.  8  Zimn  con  fpiring  againft 
Llah  i  ilicceedcth  him.  n  Zimri  executedi 
Iehns  prophelie.  15  Onui made  King  by 
the  fouldiers  ,  lorceih  Znnri  defperatly  to 
burne  himfelfe.  ti  The  kingdome being 
diuided  ,  Omn  preuaileih  againl^  Tibni.  13 
Onui  buildeth  Samaria.  15  His  wicked 
reigne.  17  Ahab fucceedethlnm.  19  A- 
habsnioftwickedreigne.  54  lofhuascurfc 
vpon  Hid  the  bolder  of  lei  icho. 

f  neu  the  mo:b   of  the 

IP®  the  fonnc  of  lianam  ,  a^ 
■$\  gamrtioaafha,faytng, 
Vi^  2  fojafmuth  as  J  cr 
altcb  thee  out  of  til  c  bud,  anb  mabc  thec 
^:uuc  oucr  mv  people  Jfraclanb  thou 
haft  lbaiUcb  m  the  lbay  of  Jeroboam, 
anb  haft  mabc  my  people  Jfrarl  to 
funic ,  to  pjouoUc  mcc  to  anger  ujith 
their  fumes: 

3   25ehoio,Jilnlltaluaniaytl)cpo 
'.  ftcntic  of  iSaafba,  aub  the  poftentir  of 
i  hts  houfc :  anb  mill  mafic  thv  houfc  irhe  I 
'the  houfe  of  Jjeroboamthc  fount  of fc^p's 
J/5cbat.  *»■ 

j 4  *toim' 


Baafhadieth.  Elah.    Chap^xv).  Omri.  Tibni. 


•Chip.  14 

11. 


.  Chron- 


%  Or,  both 
hu  k}  ifrme/t 


\Heb.bjthi 
hand  of. 


4  *  foim  that  birth  of  BaaCba  in  the 
citic,  (hall  the  bogs  eate :  anb  htm  that 
bicth of  his m the &clbs,(ball tye foulcs 
ofthc  aire  eate. 

5  /Row  the  reft  of  theatres  of  28aa^ 
(ha,  anb  What  he  bib,anb  his  nught,ar  c 
the?  not  wnttcntnthc'boobeofthe 
Chronicles  of  the  bmgs  of  JJfracl  i 

6  5>o  26aafbafleptUMth1)is  fathers, 
ano  was  butieb  mXirvih,  anb  «lah 
his  tonne  reigneb  in  his  fteab. 

7  3nb  alfo  bp  the  hano  of  tfjc  pro- 
phet 3Jchu  the  fonneof  tyanant,  tame 
the  Wojb  of  the  %&>%&  agamttiBaa- 
(ha,anb  agamft  his  houfc ,  cucn  fo*  all 
the  eutll  that  hec  mom  thc&ght  of  the 
%€>  is  ©,  m  pzouobmg  htm  to  anger 
With  theWojbcof  hishanbs,  in  being 
libe  the  houfc  of  Jeroboam,  ano  bc- 
taufchcbillebhim. 

8  C3lnthetwenttcfhanbrirtr>ccrc 
of  3lfa  bmg  of  llubah,  began  <siah  the 
fonne  of  2Baa(hatoreipcoucr  "Jftatl 
mXir^aluwopccres. 

9  3lnb  his  fcruant  Ztmrt  ( taptaine 
of  haifc  his  rharcts)  confpircb  agamft 
him  as  he  iPas  m  Xir  sah  tainbmg  huii^ 
fctfc  bmnbc  in  the  houfc  of  Sir^a  t  ftcW; 
aroofhishonfcmXinah. 

10  3nb  Zimn  went  in  anb  fmote 
him.anbbiiiebhim,  inthcttbentieanol  I 
fcuenth  pccrc  of  3lfa  bmg  of3Jubah,j  | 
ano  retgncb  m  his  fteab. 

11  c.  anb  it  came  to  paflc  When  hee 
began  to  r  eigne,  afloonc  as  hec  fate  on 
his  throne,  that  hcflcwall  tyc  houfc  of 
JSaaflia :  her  left  hun  not  one  thatptf 
fcrtiagamftaWail,||tteithetofhisbmO 
folbcsjiorofhisfncnbs. 

12  Xhus  bib  Zunn  ocftrop  all  the 
hotifcofasaafha^tcorbmgtotheWorb 
of  the  1L  ©  is  e>,  which  he  fpabc  againft 
25aafl)atbp3Jchuthep2ophet, 

13  jroz  an  the  fmncs  of  25aa(ha  anb 
thcfmncsof  «iahhts  tonne,  by  Which 
the?  fmneb,  anb  bp  tbhul)  the?  maoe 
3lfracl  to  fmne ,  m  prouobmg  the 
%  €>  13  id  Gob  of  3Jftacl  to  anger  With 
their  toamttcs. 

14  jBow  the  reft  of  the  acres  of  e 
lah,  anb  all  that  he  bib,  arc  thep  not 
Written  m  the  booftc  of  the  Chronicles 
ofthchingsof^fracw 

15  C  lln  the  tweutic  ano  fcuenth 
pcereofafabingof^Iubafrbiozimn 
rcignc  fcucn  oapcstnXitBah :  anb  the 
people  were  encampeb  agamft  Gibbc- 
thou  Which  belong  to  the  ph'.lilhncs. 

i6  ant) the people  that  were  entam* 


pen,  heatb  fay,  zinm  hath  corapirtb, 
anb  hath  alio  ftaine  the  bmg :  naherfore 
all  IJfracl  mabc  £>mri  the  taptaine  of 
theuofte,  atngouer^fraci  that  bap,  in 
toccampc. 

17 '  ano  £>mrt  Went  bp  from  Gibbc- 
thon,anb  all^ifracl  Withhim,anbthep 
jbcQcgcbXtr^ah. 

I  is  anbittametopafl'ewhcnzimrt 
Taw  that  the  citic  was  taben,  thathce 
Went  mto  the  palate  of  the  lungs  houfc, 
|anb  burnt  the  bmgs  houfc  oucr  him 
,  With  fttc,  ano  bieb, 

19  jforhis fumes Which  he  ftnnebm 
ibotng  eutll  m  the  fight  of  the  II  €>ih  id, 
in  waibmgtn  the  map  of  Jeroboam, 
anb  m  hisOnnc  Which  hebib,  to  matte 
35fraclfumc. 

io  Bow  the  reft  of  the  acts  of  zmv 
n,  anb  histtcaton  that  hee  ipjought, 
arc  thep  not  ihnttcn  m  the  boobe  of  tije 
Chronicles  of  the  bings  of  3Jfracl  '- 

zi  <C  Xhen  iPcre  the  people  ofjlf 
racl  omibcb  imo  tibo  parts :  halfe  of 
the  people  follolbcb  Xibnt  the  fonnc  of 
©math ,  to  mabc  him  bmg:  anb  halfe 
follott)cb£)mrt 

2z  25ut  the  people  that  follotbeb 
C>mrt  pjcuaiicb agamft  the  peoplcthat 
folIoiPeo  Xtbnl  the  fonne  of  Gmath : 
fo  Xtbni  bicb ,  anb  j£>mri  relgneb. 

ij  CJuthethirticanboncpccrcof 
^fa  bmg  of  3!uDah ,  began  Cmn  to 
jreignc  oucr^fracltmcluc  pecres:  fire 
I  yccrcs  r cigncb  he  in  Xmah. 

24  3inb  hee  bought  the  hill  &>a- 
marta  of  £>hemcr,  fo?  trbo  talents  of 
filticr,  ano  built  on  the  hill,  anbtailcb 
the  name  of  the  titic  Vbfjirt)  hec  built,  af 
terthenameof  5»hcmcr,  olbncrof  the 
hill.t^aniaria. 

25  C26nt£>mtiltyonght  curt  in  the 
epes  of  the  %  &  is  B,aub  m  voo;k  then 
all  that  ^  ere  bcfojcljim. 

26  jfo?  he  inaibcb  m  all  the  ihap  of 
Deroboam  the  fon  of  /I5cbat,anb  mhts 
fmne  tuherclbith  hec  mabc  5)frart  to 
fume,  to  pzouobc  the  fLo«©  Gob  of 
^fratl  to  anger  with  their  Panitics. 

27  /Bow  the  reft  of  the  acts  of  &m* 
n,  which  he  bib,  anbhismightthathe 
QieWcb ,  arc  trjrp  not  written  m  tt)c 
boobc  of  the  Chzomclcs  of  the  buigs  of 
■gjfrach 

2s  5>o£)mriflcptWirlihisfatl)ers, 
anb  was  bur icb  m^amana ,anb  3hab 
Ijts  fonnc  rcigncbm  his  ftcab. 

29  C  ^no  m  the  thirtic  anb  eight 

pecrc  of  3fa  bmg  of  ^iubal) ,  began 

13i  b     %hab 


t  H.-i,Sho. 
rncrtm. 


Icricho  built.  Elijah     I.Kings.         fed  by  a  widow. 


tt  a  light 
tbmg  t  &c. 


Ioftl.<$.J«. 


<<m.Ei;- 

ubu.  Luke 

ctlled  Fh.is. 

Ecclus. 
48.  j.unics 
5.17. 


Ultiab  the  fonneof&mntoreignc  ouer 
• jfrael,  anb  3ihab  the  fonnc  of  £>mrt 
retgncb  ouer3Jfraeltn£>amaria,ttben; 
tic  anbrtbo  metres. 

50  3mb;ahabthcfonneof£>mtiBrt> 
emll  in  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  ©>  abouc 
ail  tttat  were  befoje  him. 

31  ;3nbittamctopalTe,tasifithab 
bcencalight  thmgfo?  him  to  ttalbe  in 
tftc  finncsofjeroboamthe  fonnc  of 
/riebat;  thathcetooltetoibifcStocbcl 
the  baughtct  of  cthbaal  Ring  of  the 
ztbonians,anb  tbent  anb  feruebzsaal, 
anbtbou"htppebhtm. 

&  3lnb  hec  rcareb  bp  an  Sfltat  fo* 
2Baal,inthehoufeof  2Saal,  Xbhichhec 
hab  built  in  Samaria. 

33  3inb  3habmabcagroue,  anb^ 
hab  bib  mojc  to  pzouoRe  the  !L  ©  K  © 
©ob  of  Ijfcacl  to  anger,  then  all tt>e 
Rings  oflJfracl  that  ibcrcbefo2ehim. 

34.  c^n  hts  bavcsbib^tclthc  t&v 
thcltte  bmlbjjctitho :  helatbthe  foun* 
batton  thcroftn  3biram  his  firfl  borne, 
anb  fet  bp  the  gates  thereof  m  ljis pon- 
geftfonne  £>cgub,  *  acco2bmgtothe| 
\bo2b  of  tlje  lL>Dis©,tt)hichhccfpa&e 
bv3Jofl)uatl)cfonneofiI5un. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

1  Elijah  hauing  propheciedagainft  Ahab,is  fent 
toCheruh,wheretherauensfeedhim.  8  He 
is  fent  to  the  widow  of  Zarephath.  17  Hec 
raifeth  the  widowes  fonnc.  1.4  The  wo- 
man beleeueth  him. 

$b  t  cutaJ)  t!)c  "3Cta)bitc, 
ttujo  lbas  of  tijc  inhabit 
tantsof  Gilcab,faib  bnto 
Slhab,  *3lsthe?L©is© 
_  Gob  of  gifraciiuieth,  be= 
fo2cibt)omc3lftanb,  thetelhail  notbc 
bcaib  no?  ramc  theft  percs ,  but  acco^ 
bmgtomj>ibo2b. 

i  3mb  tlje  lbozbc  of  tlje  %  €>  is  © 
tame  bnto  him,faymg, 

3  Get  thec  hence ,  anb  turne  thee 
eafhbarb ,  anb  hibc  thp  fclfc  bp  the 
bjoonc  CDentl),tl)atisbcfo?c  3fo2banc. 
4.  3utb  it  fl)au  bec ,  that  thou  (halt 
bnnbeoftDc  bjoofce,  anb  3  Ijattccom- 
manbeb  the  rauens  to  feeb  thee  there. 

5  £>o  hec  uicnt ,  anb  btb  atcojbmg 
bnto  the  tt>02b  of  toe  %  <s>  is  ©  :  fo2  hec 
TbcntanOMbcltbpthe  bjoofecChctttrj, 
that  is  befoje  3Jo;bane. 

6  3nbthcraiicnsb2oughthimb2cab 
anb  flcflnn  tl)c  mozning,  anb  b:eab  anb 
flrihinthc  cuenmg:  anb  hec  bjanRe  of 
thcb?oolie. 


7  3nbttcametopau*ctafteraibhtle, 
thatthcbjooRe  mytn  bp,  becaufc  there 
Ijab  becneno  tainc  m  tijc  lanb. 

8  C^nbtt)crbo?boftl)c?L©isjD 
tame  bnto  him,faping, 

9  2rtft,  get  thee  to  *  zarephath, 

ttlljitlj  belong*  tO  ZlbOtt,  3nb  DHJCH 

there:  beljolb,  ^l)auc  tommaunbeba 
Ibiboib  tboman  there  to  fuftatne  tljcc. 

io  -§>o  fjearofe ,  anbibentto  zarc^ 
pljatfj :  anb  ibften  Ijc  tame  to  tlje  gateof 
tlje  nttc ,  bcljolb,  tlje  ibiborb  Iboman 
tbas  tljere  gatljcring  of  mtacs :  anb  Ijc 
tailcb  to  her,anb  faib,if  ettij  me,^  p?ap 
tljce ,  aiittlc  Ibatcr  in  abelTcll,  ttjat  3 
ma^bjinltc. 

ii  ^nbasfhectbas going  tofettljtt, 
fjc  tailcb  to  ljcr,anb  Cam,  2Snng  nice,  3 
map  tljee,  a  mo?fcll  of  b;cab  tn  tljmc 
tjanb. 

12  ^nbu)cfaib,^srljc!L0is3E>  tljp 
Gob  littctl) ,  3  Oaue  notatauc,  but  an 
Ijanbfull  of  meale  in  a  barr  cll,anb  a  lit* 
tie  ovie  m  a  trufc :  anb  bel)olb,3(  am  ga= 
rtjenngnbo  mtRes,tljat3Jmapgocm, 
anb  DicfTcit  fozmc  anom?  fomic,  tljat 
Vbcmaveatctt,anbbtc. 

13  3lnb  Cltialj  (atb  bnto  her,  i^earc 
not,  goe,  and  bocastljourjallfaib:but 
manemcerljereofalittletaltcfirft ,  anb 
bnng  it  bnto  mcc,  anb  after  mane  fo? 
tljec,anbfo2tljp  fonnc. 

14  5*02  tHusfatth  tfte  %  ©is  ©  Gob 
of  jjifrael ,  Xljc  barrell  of  mcale  Qjail 
not  Vbaltc,  ncttljcr  fljail  tlje  trufe  of  oile 
faile,  bnttii  the  bap  that  the  H© ew> 
t  fenbctl)  ramc  bpon  tlje  cartlj. 

15  3nb  fl)ce  ibent,  anb  bib  actojbing 
to  the  faying  of  Cliiah :  anb  thcanb  Ijc, 
anbhcrljoufebibeatell  manvbapes. 

16  And  tlje  barrel!  of  mcale  nmflcb 
not,ncttoer  bib  the  trufe  of  ople  faile,  at* 
tojbing  to  the  iboib  of  tlje H© is©, 
lbljttlj  I)  e  fpauc  t  bp  tfliialj. 

17  C^nbtttamctopaflcaftcrtljcfe 
things ,  that  the  fonnc  of  the  Iboman, 
the  mtftreffe  of  tlje  Ijoufc,  fell  Ocfee ,  anb 
hts  ficRcnelTe  ttias  fo  fo?e,  tljat  tljere 
ibas  no  bjeath  left  m  him. 

18  3lnb  (hec  fapb  bnto  citiaij ,  nahat 
hauelltoboc  lbiththce*  €)thou  man 
of  Gob'  ^rtthoucomebntomc  to  tall 
mvfinne  to  rcmembjantc,  anb  to  flap 
my  fonnc  < 

19  ^nbhefaibbntohtt.GiHemcthp 
fonnc.  ^nbhc  tooHe  htm  outofher  bo* 
fomcanb  caneb  htm  bp  into  a  loft, 
ibherc  he  abobc,anb  latbe  Ijimbpon  his 
onmebeb. 

ro  ^nb 


\HfiMlbl 


'  Lul.c  4. 

:6.called 

SarcfU. 


nab. 


Or,  a  full 
jrerc. 


iH.khtbt 
h&tAof. 


Hegocth,and  Chap.xviij.        mceteth  Ahab. 


furtd. 


t  Hetr.into 
hit  inward 


f  HehrMt- 
dmbtt. 
f  Heh.  otter 
hu  houfe. 

\Hcbr.l^- 
itl. 


t  Hehr.  thai 
we  cut  not  off 
ourlelucs 
fiom  the 
beaSlt. 


20  anbDeccncbbntotDcJLiJDis©, 
ant)  tail) ,  <D  %  ©  is©  nip  C5ob  ,  Daft 
tDou  alfo  bjougt)t  nnll  bpon  the  ibt- 
boib ,  ibitD  ibDom  3J  foiourne ,  by  nap 
uiglKtfonnci 

ii  3ittb  be  tftrctrheb  bunfelfc  bpon 
the  cbilb  rDicc  times ,  anb  cricb  bnto  tbc 
#,©is©,  anb  faib;  £>  lL©is©niy 
0ob,3Jp2ay  tbcc  ,lct  this  cbilbcs  foule 
tonic  t  into  bint  agamc. 

xz  3nbtncHiDisE>uearbtocbottc 
of  <£litab ,  anb  ttic  foule  of  t!)e  ttnib  tame 
into  Dun  againcanb  he  reutueb. 

23  3itib einab  tooHe  thetluibt ,  anb 
b2ougbt  htm  boibnc  out  of  tJjc  ttjanis 
bet  mto  tbcboufc ,  anb  bcliucreb  Dim 
bnto  tjts  mother :  anb  eiuab  faib,  Sec, 
thyfonncliucth. 

24  c  2nb  ttic  Iboman  faib  to  <21t 
iafj,  /13oib  by  tbts  3  tmoib ,  tbattbou 
art  a  man  of  d5ob ,  anb  trjat  tbc  ibo2b  of 
the  %  ®  is  ©  m  thy  moutfj  is  trnetb. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

1  In  the  cxtremitie  of  famine  Eliiah  Tent  to  A- 
hab,meetethgood  Obaduh.  9  Obadiah 
bria^ctli AhabtoEluah.  17  Eliiah  repro- 
uingAhab,by  fire  ftomheauen  conuinceth 
Baals  prophets.  41  Eliiah  by  prayer  obtai- 
ning raine,followeth  Ahab  toleziecl. 

/3b  it  tame  to  paffc  after 
many  baics,that  trje  ibo?b 
of  tl)e  %  ©  is  ©  tame  to  € 
Ittab  m  tile  tbirb  y  ccrcfay 
ing ,  <3oc  fbclbc  thy  fclfc 
bnto  3bab ,  anb  3  lbill  Ccnb  tame  bp- 
on the  earth. 

2  3lnb  eiuah  lbcnt  to  fbeib  Dun- 
fclfc  bnto  3lbab,  anb  there v, as  a  fo?c  fa= 
mine  in  Samaria. 

3  3no3lbabtailebt<©babiabibbicb 
was  ttljc  goucrnour  of  Ins  houfe  :(nolb 
£)babial)  fcarcb  tbc  %  ©  is  ©  greatly : 

4  5f02it*basfo,K>!Knt3Je5ebeieut 
off  tbe$2opbets  of  the  1L©  is©,  that 
Obabiab  toonc  anbunb2cb02opbcts, 
anb  l)ib  them  by  fiftie  m  a  tatic ,  anb  fcb 
rj)emtbitrj  bzeab  anb  ibatcr.) 

5  Stub  2bab  faib  bnto  £>babiab, 
(5oc  into  tbcianb,  bnto  ailfountames 
ofibatct,anbbntoallb20oKrs:perab 
ttcntur  c  ibc  may  fnibc  graffr  to  faue  flic 
l)o?fes  anb  mules  aiiuc ,  tDat  ibc  t  lecfc 
not  all  fl)c  hearts. 

6  So  tDcy  bitubcb  flic  lanb  be- 
ttbecne  tbem  to  paffc  tb20itgbout  it:  %? 
Dab  lbcnt  one  ibay  by  bunfelfc ,  anb  & 
babiab  lbcnt  another  lbay  by  bimfclfc. 


7  C  3nb  as  -©babial)  rbas  in  the 
ibay,  bcbolb,  emab  met  Dim:  anb  Dee 
ftnelb  Dim,  anb  fell  on  Dis  fatc,anb  faib ; 
An  tDoutDatmy  loibClnaD^ 

8  3nODeatt&otrebDuu,3Jam:goc, 
tciltfiyio2b,2ScDolb,€luaDishere. 

9  3mbDcfaib,tDDatDaiic3Jfinncb, 
tDat  tijou  ibouiocft  bclutcr  thy  fcr 
uant  into  tDc  Danb  of  STDab ,  to  Gay 
nice; 

io  2s  tDc  %  ffl  k  ©  tDy  (3ob  luicrl) , 
tDcrc  is  no' nation  ojRiugoomc ,  Jblr. 
tDcrmylo2bDatD  notfcmtofecUcflicc: 
anbibDcntDcyfaib,  !f»ctsnot  there,  Dec 
toouc  an  oatl)  of  tDctungbomc  anb  ua^ 
tion,tDat  tDcy  fonnb  tDcc  not. 

ii  2nbnoibtDoufayeft,(5oc,tclltDy 

l02b,25cDOlb,€lliaD'shere. 

12  2nb  it  fliail  tome  to  paffc, « /bone 
as  3J  am  gone  from  tDcc,  tDat  tDe  fpirit 
of  tnt  %  £>  is  ©  (ball  tary  tficc  ibDitDcr 
5  bnotb  not ;  anb  fo  lbDcn  3f  tome  anb 
tell  3Dab,  anb  Dc  cannot  Rnbc  tDcc,  De 
(ball  Oay  mce :  but  5  tDy  feruant  fcarc 
tDc  %  0  is  ©  from  my  youfl). 

13  i©asltnottolbmylo2b,tt)Dat3J 
bib  IbDen  3c5tbel  fltm  tDe  02opDcts 
of  tt)c  %  ©  «  ©  <  Dolb  3  D»b  an  Dun 
b2tb  mm  of  tDc  % €>  is  ©^  02opDcts, 
by&fnc  in  a  taue,  anbfcbbctDcmibitD 
b2eabanblbatcr? 

14  3nb  nolb  tDou  fayeft,  d?oc,  tell 
tDy  102b,  25cDolb ,  €luaD  «  here  anb  Dee 
(ball  flay  inc. 

15  3lnb  CUiaD  faib,  ^stlje  TL  ©  is  © 
ofDoftcs  UuctD,  bcfo2CibDom3Jftano, 
3  Wnll  finely  fbcib  my  fclfc  bnto  Ijun 
to  bay. 

16  So  £>babiab  lbcnt  to  mectc  %-- 
Dab, anb  tolb  Dun:  anb  3Dab  lbcnt  to 
mccte<eiuaD. 

17  €  3nb  it  tame  to  paffc  ibbcn  %■ 
Dab  faib  CUiaD ,  tDat  3lbab  fatbc  bnto 
Dim ,  31ct  tDou  Dec  tDat  troubletlj  3if 
racl; 

18  3tnbDcc  anfrocrcb  ,  3  Dauc  not 
troublcb  gifrael,  but  tDou  anb  tby  fa 
tlicrsDoufe,  in  tDat  ycc  Daucfo2faHcn 
tlic  Commanbcmcnts  of  tDc  %  ©  is  ©, 
anb  tDou  Daflfolloibcb  ffiaaiun. 

19  /3oib  tl)crcfo2C  fenb ,  and  gather 
to  nice  all  'Jfrael  bnto  mount  Carmri, 
anb  flic  p2ophct5  of  Z5aal  fourc  htm 
b2eb  anb  fifnc,  anb  tbcp2ophctsofthc 
groucs  fourc  hunbzcb ,  lbbith  cate  at 
^ncbcls  tabic. 

20  So  ainab  fent  bnto  all  flic  cljil 
b2en  of  3frael,  anb  gathcrcb  tlic  p?o 
pDcts  together  bnto  mount  Carmci. 

1£tft  2  21  2nb 


25  2 


Baals  prophets,and      I.Kings.  Elnahfacrifice. 


II  Or. 
thoHthtt. 


\Hebr.the 
vtorditgeol 


Or, an* 

jwere. 
1 1  Or,  heir d. 
\\OrJeafcd 
Vf&dimr.t 
at  the  aJtar. 

f  Heb.vt'uh 
agreed  vowt 
\\Or,herx: 
dttdteth. 
\HAh..t'< 
\furfutt. 


\  Wbr.prv- 
redmtiUod 
Vfon  them. 


\HrbroLf- 
ccnduig. 
t  Heb.lt- 


n  2nD  ciuah  came  bnto  all  the  peo* 
pie,  ano  faib,  i?oib  long  halt  yee  be* 
ttbeenetibo  1 1  opinions  ^  ^f  tl)  e  ft  oisjd 
Dec  (500,  follotb  Dim :  butif  26aal,  then 
follotti  imn:  ano  the  people  atiuuctcu 
himnotarboiib. 

n  Xhmfaib€luahbntothepcopie, 
5 ,  cuen  3f  onely  rematnc  a  0?ophet  of 
tljc  3L©»© :  but  26aals  pjophets  are 
foucc  hunbjcb  anbfiftic  men. 

13  fUt  them  therefore  giuebsttbo 
bullocks,  anb  let  them  d)ute  one  bui 
locftefo;ithmu"clues,anbcuttf:inpieces, 
anb  lav  it  on  lboob,  anb  put  no  fire  bri- 
ber:  anb  3  tbill  bjefle  the  other  bul- 
loclte,  anb  lav  «  oniboob,  anb  put  no 
firebnber. 

14  atnb  call  yeonthenameof  your 
gobs,  anb  3hbill  tall  on  the /Same  of 
the  %  0  is  9 :  anb  tlje  <sob  that  arritoe 
tcthbyfire,  lethimbccStob.  3Cnballthc 
people  anuuereb ,  anb  faib,  1 3 1  is  Vbell 
fpoKcn. 

15  3nb  Cliial)  faib  bnto  the  pzophcts 
of  2Saal,  Chute  you  one  bullocue  fo: 
pour  fclues,  anb  bjeffe  it  firft,  fo;  yee  are 
many:  anb  call  on  the  name  of  pour 
gobs,butputno  firebnber. 

16  3nb  they  toou  the  bullocttettihteh 
ibas  giuen  them,  anb  they  bjefftb  it.anb 
callcbontlic  name  of  Baal  from  mo£ 
mng.eiicn  bntu  noonc,fay  tug,£>  asaai, 
I  hearc  bs.  2Sut  ttjeceibas  no  boyceno? 
any  tljat  ||anfrocreb :  3nb  they  ||  leapt 
bponthc  altar  lbhteh  ibas  mabe, 

17  &nb  it  came  to  patTe  atnoonc, 
that  <£luah  mocfteb  them,  anb  fatbc, 
Crie  t  aloub:  foz  t)e  is  a  gob,  eittjer  ||l)e  is 
taming,  o?  Ijetis  purfuing,o?rjcctsin 
aiourncy,  or  perabucnture  hcfleepcth, 
anbmuftbcaibarteb. 

18  Znn  they  eneb  loub,anb  cut  them* 
felues  after  their  mancr,  lbith  ftniues, 
anb  lancers,  till  t  the  bloob  gutbeb  out 
bponthem. 

29  3tnb  it  came  to  paffe  lbhen  mib- 
bay  tbas  part,  anb  they  pjopbefieb  bntil 

tf)e  time  of  tljC  t  Offering  Of  tljC  euening 
facnfiCC;  that  there  was  neither  bOitC,  UO? 

an  y  to  anftticrcnojtany  that  regar  Deb. 

30  3nb  Cluah  faib  bnto  all  the  peo* 
pie,  Come  neere  bnto  me.  Znn  all  the 
people  came  necre  bnto  him.  Smbhere* 
paircb  the  2ltar  of  the  3L<dis©  that 
lbasbjoften  boibnc. 

31  Zwn  dual)  tooftc  tibclue  ftones, 
accojbuigto  the  number  of  the  tribes  of 
tbefonncs  of 'Jacob,  bntoibhomethe 
ibojb  of  tlje  JL®kw>  came,  faymg, 


*  3fracl  (hall  bee  thy  name. 

31  3tno  lbith  the  ftones  hec  built  an 
altar  in  the  ii5ame  of  the  %  ©  h  ©,  anb 
hee  mabe  a  trench  about  the  altar,  as 
great  as  iboulb  containc  tibo  meafures 
offeco. 

33  ^nbbeputthcUJOobino?ber,anb 
rntthebttlloc&c  mpteces,  anblaibehim 
on  the  lboob,  anb  faib ,  if  ill  fourcbar* 
rels  lbith  tbater,  anb  poibdt  it  on  the 
burntfacnfice,anb  on  the  lboob. 

34  ^nb  hee  faib ,  2>oe  it  the  fetonb 
rime,  ^nb  they  bib  it  the  feeonb  time. 
3tnb  he  faib,  2T>oe  it  the  rinvb  time,  ^nb 
they  bib  it  the  thrrb  time. 

35  Smbthcibatcr tran  rounb  about 
the  altar,  anb  hee  filleb  the  trench  aifo 
lbith  ibatcr. 

36  3Cnbittametopaffeatthctimeof 
tljeoffenngof  theeuenmg  faenfice,  that 
ciuah  the  prophet  camencere  anb  faib, 
?L©is©  d&ob  of^feaham,3Jfaac,anD 
of  3JfracI ,  ?Let  it  bee  ftnoiben  this  bay 
that  thou  art  d5obtn3rfracl,  anb  thag 
a.nthyferuant,anbthat3ihaueboncau 
thefe  things  at  thy  lbo?b. 

37  ^caremc,£>?rflDis©,hearemc, 
that  tliis  people  may  ftnoib  that  thou 
artthc  H©E©(E>ob,  anbthatthouhafi 
tumcb  theitheartbatfteagamc. 

3S  Xhcn  the  fire  of  the  H©  is  ©fell, 
anbeonfumeb  the  burnt  faenfice ,  anb 
tljeiboob,  anb  the  ftones,  anb  the  bull, 
anblicUcb  bpthe  ibater  that  wasm  njc 
trench. 

39  3tnb  rbhen  all  the  people  falbe  it, 
tlicy  feu  on  their  faces:  anb  they  Cube, 
£he  H©K©,hc  is  the  ©ob,thc  %®x®> 
he  is  the  ©ob. 

40  ^nb  €inah  faibe  bnto  them, 
1Ca&c  the  pjophets  of  25aal,  let  not 

one  of  them  efcape:  ^nb  they  tooSc 
them,  anb  eitiah  teought  them  boibnc 
to  the  bootee  Biftjon,  anb  fieibc  ttjcirt 
there. 

41  €  3fnb  cuial)  faib  bnto  ^hab, 
<Kcttheebp,cateanbb:inltc,  fo? there  is 
||  afounb  of  abunbance  of  rame. 

41  5>o  ahab  ibent  bp  to  cate  anb 
to  bnnucanb  <£litah  ibent  bp  to  the  top 
of  Carmcl,anb  hctaft  hmifclfe  boibnc 
bpon  the  earth ,  anb  put  his  face  be; 
tlbcene  his  fences, 

43  ^nbfaib  to  his  fcruant,  ©oc  bp 
norb, loofec toibarb  the  5>ea.  3lnb  hee 
ibent  bp,  anb  loobtb,  anb  fatbc,  There  is 
nothing.  3inb  he  faib ,  <5oc  agamc  fc^ 
ucn  times. 

44  ^nb  it  tame  to  pafTe  at  the  ft; 

uenth 


*  Gcn.^i. 
:§■  2. king. 
17-34* 


•  Htb.  went. 


sppre- 


I  OrjzfourJ 
faimfccf 


Elijahfed.    He         Chap.xix.      talketh  with  God. 


crhmio. 


\ttih.tit 
thou  come 
tojezreel. 


\WA.fm 

hiiltfi. 


iHd.bci- 

ftor. 


uctit!)  time,  tljat  J)e  fatu,  iScDolb,  rtjcre 
anfetD  a  little  elouo  out  of  tbe  &ea,  une 
amansDanD.anbDetatb,  <£oebp,lap 
bnto  aDab,  t  i&epate  thy  charet,  anu 
gettDecboibne,tDat  tlje  taint  ftoptfjee 
not 

45  anbttcamctopatTeuttDcmcane 
tbl)ile,ti)attl)el)tautntt)asblatHcUntl) 
tlouoes  anb  iDmoc ,  anD  there  tints  a 
great  tame :  am>  aDab  tobc  anD  ibent 
touted. 

46  anb  tDe  Ijanb  of  the  Hotjb 
rbason<£IitaD;  anb  Dec  gtrbcb  bp  rjte 
lo^nes,  anb  tannc  befo?e  ^Ijab ,  t  to  fl)e 
enttantcof^tcrt. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  Eliiah  threatned  by  Iezebel ,  flceth  to  Beer- 
fheba,  4  In  the  wildemefle  being  wearie  of 
his  life,is  comforted  by  an  Angel.  9  AtHo- 
rebGod  appearethvntohim,  fending  him  to 
anoint  Hazael,  Iehu.andElilha.  19  Elifha 
taking  leaue  of  his  friends,  follo.veth  Elijah. 

ii52D^abtolb3e?ebel 
all  that  Cltia!)  rjab  bone, 
anbibttrjau  ,Dott»DecDab 
flatnc  all  tile  ^opljets 

lDitl)tt)CftDO(!b. 

2  Xljen  Jtocbcl  fcnt  a  tndTengtt 
bnto€luaD,fapmg;  £>olettDegobsbo 
to  me,  anb  mo?c  aifo ,  if  3  mane  not  tDp 
life  as  tlje  life  of  one  of  tDcm,bytomo?? 
tolb  about  trjts  time, 

5  3nb  iMhcnijcfatb  that,  rjccatofe, 
anb  ibent  f o?  Di£  life,  anb  tame  to  Beet* 
flicba,  icbljitljbeiongeth  toJubaD,  anb 
leftDisfcruanttDctc. 

4  C25utherjimfclfcibcnt  a  bapes 
ioutnepmtotfjclbilbcntetre,  anb  tame 
anb  fate  botbne  bnbet  a  3Jumpet  ttee : 
anb  bee  tequcftcb  t  fo?  Dsmfclfc  trjat  Dee 
migrjt  bte,anb  fapb ,  it  is  cnougD ,  noib 
£>  %&&&,  tafec  aibapmpnfe:  fo?  3 
am  notbcttcttbcninpfatDers. 

5  ^nb  as  Dec  lap  anb  fleptbnbct  a 
3Jtmipet  ttee ,  bel)olb  fben ,  an  angel 
toutbeDDim,anb  fapb  bnto  Dint,  anfe, 
andeate. 

6  anbl)elooBeb,anbbtrjolb,trjetc 
fbasa  cabc  bafecnon  tbceoaies,  anb  a 
ttufe  of  ibatct  at  fjts  t  fteab :  anb  Dec  bib 
catc  anb  bnnftc,  anb  latbe  Dimboibuc 
agame. 

7  anb  tbe  angel  of  the  %  ®  is  © 
tame  againe  tlie  feconb  time,  anb  tou- 
trjcbl)tin,  anbfapb,  arife,andcatc,  be* 
caufetDetourncp'stoogreatfojtDce. 

8  anb  Dec  at ofe ,  anb  ntii  eate  anb 


bjinfee,  ano  tbent  in  tbe  ftccngtf)  of  tbat 
meatc  fouttie  bapes  anb  fouttie  ntgbts, 
bnto  ^ojeb  trje  mount  of  <5ob. 

9  Ganbhetametl)itl)etbntoataue, 
anDloDgcDtbete,anbbebolb,tbetbo2t) 
of  tDe  %  ©  is  ©  came  to  Dim,  anb  be  fafb 
bnto  Dim,  x@Dat  bocft  tljou  bete,  c? 
liiaD* 

io  anbftec  fapb ,  3  Dane  beenc  betp 
ieaiousfoz  tbe  Harms?  ©obofDottes: 
fojtbc  tDtlbjen  of  3IftaciDauc  fotfaben 
tDp  Couenant,  tDzotticn  bourne  tlnnc 
altars,  anbflaine  ttjp  ^opbetsibttD 
tDe  froo2D :  anb  *  3J ,  euen  3  onelp  am 
left,  anb  tDe?  feeftempufe,  tota&cita? 
Ibap. 

n  anbDefapb,d5oefonD^nbftanb 
bpon  tDe  mount  before  tDe  %  ©  is  ©. 
anb  beDolbc ,  tDe  %  ©  is  jd  paffeb  bv, 
anb  a  gteat  anb  (ttong  rbinbe  tent  tDe 
mountaines ,  anb  btabe  tn  pictes  tDe 
to-tfees ,  before  tDe  |L<pis3e>;  bmtDe 
1Lfl)is©  was  notintDeibinbc :  anb  af 
tet  tDe  ttrinbe  an  eattDquafte,  but  tDe 
%  0  is  w>  was  notintDccattDquaBC. 

n  anb  aftet  tJ)c  cattDquaftc ,  a  fite, 
but  tDe  HsDis©  was  nottntDcfitc:anb 
aftet  tbc  fit e,  a  mil  fmali  boite. 

ij  anbitibasfo,ibDencittaDDtarb 
it,  ttjatDe  Sb;appebDisfatcin  Dtsman 
tie ,  anb  tbcut  out ,  anb  tloob  in  tlje  en? 
tting  in  of  tDe  taue :  anb  bcDolb,  there 
came  abottebntoDutt>anbfapb ,  i©Dat 
boefttDouDcte,€liiaDi 

14  anb  Dc  JapD ,  %  D^ue  becne  bet p 
ieaious  fo?  tDe  %  £>  e  ©  <25ob  of  Doftes, 
betaufetDc  tDilb?enof  ^ftaeiDaue  fo^ 
taken  tDp  Couenant,  tDiotbcn  boibnc 
tDmtaitats,  anb  flame  tDpl&^opDets 
ttitD  tDe  fnwb,  anb  %  «ien  5  oncly 
am  ieft,anbtDepfecbcmvlifc,totaaeit 
aibap. 

15  anb  tDe  %  ©  is  ©  fapb  bnto  Dim, 
<5ot,  tetumc  on  tDp  ibap  to  tDe  Unmet 
ncfle  ofDamaftus:  anb  ibben  tDou 
tommeft,  anoint  i^ajacl  to  btBing  o- 
uctS>vna. 

16  anb  3Jclju  tDe  fonne  of  ji?imfln 
(DalttDou  anoint  to  becbtngouet^f- 
tacl :  anb*€uaia  tDe  fonne  of  £>Da? 
pDat  of  abel  £0cboiaD ,  CDait  tDouan- 
nomt  to  be 0?opDct  tn  tD?  toumc. 

17  anb  *  it  fljall  tome  to  paffc ,  tDat 
DimtDat  cftapetD  tDe  frao2b  of  i^a^ael, 
(Dan  gicDtt  flap :  anb  Dim  tbat  cftapetD 
ftom  tDe  tujo;b  of  3eDu,  fl>au  CblDa 
flap. 

is  *#etj|  3 Daueleft  me  feuen  tDou? 
fanb  in  llftacl,  ail  tDe  fences  UilncD 
Bft  %        Dane 


'Rom.n.j. 


•Luk.4.57 
wiled  Eli- 
feus. 

« :.King. 

CIUS48.8. 


•Rom. 
11.4. 

\\OrJwill 
UiKe. 


Elifha  is  called.  I.Kings.    Benhadads  crucltie. 


\Hetr  g 
relume. 


Dane  not  boibcb  bnto  25aal ,  anb  eucry 
month  lbhtthhath  nottaffeb  him. 

19  C  5>o  hce  bepartcb  thence  ant) 
foimD  Cltfba  thefonneof5>haphat, 
U>ho  lbas  plowing  ruttt)  tXbclue  youe 
of  own  befoje  Dun ,  anb  hce  lDttri  the 
ttbclfth :  ant)  e  Utah  paffcD  by  Dim,  ano 
call  his  mantle  bpon  him. 

zo  anbhc  left  the  orcn,  anb  rannc 
after  <£luab,  anu  fain,  Hetmee,  3  pzay 
thee,  tafle  my  father  ano  my  mother, 
ano  then  3 unl  follow  thee :  anD  he  faib 
bnto  hun,t  <soe  bathe  agame ;  fo:  U)hat 
hane3bonctothce< 

ii  anbhercmrnebbaetafromhtm, 
anb  toota  ayoUc  of  orcn,  *  Herb  them, 
anb  boylcb  trjctr  fled)  lbith  the  mftru 
jncntsof  the  oren  ,  anb  gauebnto  the 
people ,  anb  they  bib  cat :  then  he  ar  ofc, 
anb  ibent  after  tfluah ,  anb  tmmttrcD 
bnto  him. 

CHAP,  XX. 

i  Benhadad  not  content  with  Ahabs  hom- 
mage,  befiegeth  Samaria.  i}  Bythedire. 
dionot  a  Prophet,  the  Syrians  are  ilaine.  n 
As  the  Prophet  forewarned  Ahab ,  the  Syri- 
ans milting  in  the  valleys ,  come  againft  him 
inAphek.  18  Byrhe  word  ot  the  Prophet, 
aud  Cods  Judgment ,  the  Syrians  are  lmitten 
againe.  31  The  Syrians  iubmitnng  them- 
felues,  Ahab  lendcth  Benhadad  away  with 
a  couenant.  35  The  Prophet  vnder  the 
parable  of  a  pnfoner  ,  making  Ahab  to 
ludge  himfelte  ,  denounceth  Gods  ludge- 
ment  againft  him. 

*&$)&&  ^D  25cnhabab  the  Bmg 
?^M\m  °f  £>y2iagathcreb  an  his 
"JM?S  hoftc  together,  anb  there 
M^  v$  were  thirnc  ano  two  tangs 
ss^sb  With  hmi,anohoucs,  anb 
charets :  anb  hec  Went  bpanb  beftegeb 
Samaria,  anb  warrcb  agamft  it. 

x  anb  hec  fent  mctTcngcrs  to  ahab 
lung  of  3ifracl ,  into  the  rtty ,  anb  faibe 
btuohim.XhusfaithBcnhabab, 

3  XIiv  filucr  anb  thy  golb  ismtne, 
thy  wiucs  alfo,  anb  thv  chiltycn ,  euen 
the  gooblicu,  arc  nunc. 

+  anb  the  Utng  of  ^ifraclanfiucrcb, 
anb  fatb,  <3dy  I02D  £>  lung ,  attoibtng  to 
thv  faying,  -Jam  thine ,  anb  au  that  3 
banc. 

5  anb  the  meflcngcrs  came  againe, 
anb  (iiibr,  Xlms  fpeafteth  Hocnhabab, 
faying  ,  Although  3  haue  fent  bnto 
thee,  faying,  Xhouflialtbeliucr  me  thy 
filucr  ,aub  thy  golb,  aubthyWiucs,anb 
tlivclnlbien: 


t  Htb.  Ikffi, 
nor  bucks 
frsm  htm. 


6  &  et  3  tbtu"  fenb  nry  fcruants  rm 
to  thee  to  mojro  W  abont  this  time,  anb 
they  fljail  fearth  thtnc  houfe ,  anb  the 
houfes  of  thy  fcruants  ;anb  tt  (hall  be, 
that  Wharfoeuer  is  t  pieafant  m  thine  \™M?~ 
eics,  they  (hall  put  u  m  their  hanb ,  anb 
tafeeitatbay. 

7  Xhen  the  tang  of  35frael  calico 
all  the  fibers  of  the  lanb  ,  anb  faibe; 
interne ,  3  pzay  you ,  anb  fee  how  this 
manfcehcthmu"chicfc:  fcu  hec  fent  Onto 
mefozmy  ttiiues,  anb  tbVmy  ehilbjen, 
anb  fo  j  my  filucr ,  anb  fo?  my  golb,  anb 
t'Jjbcnicbhtmnot. 

8  anb  all  the  fibers ,  anb  all  the 
people  faib  Unto  him ;  i^caraen  not  vnto 
him,no2confcnt. 

9  09hcrefo2c  hec  faib  bnto  the  met 
fengers  of  Bcnhabao,  Xell  my  102b 
the  tang,  ail  that  thou  bibbclUcnbfcn 
to  thy  feruant  at  the  ftrlr,  3  Will  boc : 
but  this  thing  3  may  not  boc.  3inbthc 
metTcngcrsbcparteb,  anb  brought  hun 
ibo?b  agatne. 

10  anb  26enhabab  fent  bnto  him, 
anb  faib,  Xhe  gobs  boc  fo  bnto  mc  anb 
mott  alfo ,  if  the  buft  of  Samaria  (hail 
fumce  fo:  hanbfuls  fo,:  all  the  people 
thattfoiloibmc. 

11  ^nb  rijc  tang  onifraclanfibcrcb, 
anb  faib ,  Xcll  him ,  Cct  not  him  that 
gtrbcth  on  ins  hameiie^oatl  himfcifc,  as 
hcthatpurtethitoff. 

11  anbittamctopaffctbhcnBenha- 
dad  hcarb  this  t  nteffage  (as  hce  ibas 
b:mtang,  he  anb  the  tangs  in  the  ||  paub 
lions)  that  hec  faib  bnto  his  fcruants, 

||  5>Ct  your  felues  in  aray.  5Htb  thCy  fCt  oiem- 

fciues  in  arav  agatnft  the  tuic. 

1  j  C anb  bcholb .there  t  tame  a^o- 
phet  bnto  ahab  tang  of  3ifracl,  faying, 
Xhusfaitl)  tiic  H©i3?p ,  n?aft  thou 
fecne  all  this  great  multitubc  <  bcholb, 
3  lbill  beiiner  it  into  thine  hanb  this 
bay ,  anb  thou  fhait  Hnoibc  tljat  J  am 
then®  11  b. 

1+  anb  ahab  faibe,  23y  mhom  t  anb 
he  faibcXhus  faith  the  How©,  Euen 

by  the  ]|  roung  men  of  the  pnntcs  of  the 
p20uinccs:Xhcnhcfaib,n9hoflialltoi= 
ber  tlje  battcll  t  anb  hec  auflbcreb, 
Xhou. 

15  Xhcn  he  numbjcb  the  young  men 
ofthc^nnccsofthcpjoumccs.anbthey 
Uier  c  nbo  hunb2cb  anb  thirty  tibo :  anb 
after  them  hec  numbjcb  ail  the  people, 

euen  all  tl)t  tl)llb2Cn  Of  JfcaCl  ,  being 

feucnthoufanb. 
i6  anb  they  lbcnt  out  atnoouc:25ut 
iscnhabab 


\Hcb.itcat 


f  Htb.yrord 

\\Or.Tcnt:, 


||Or,f/4re 

thcengins  : 

and  thejr 

pUre.icn- 

gines. 

T  Heb.*pfro~ 

chtd. 


\Or,ftr- 

U4V1U. 
\Heb.B]ndt 


ThcSy 


nans  are 


Ch 


ao.xx. 


puttofligh 


\Hc'\that 
■watfallen. 


t  ffei.to  the 
■wtjrre  with 
Jfreet. 
\Qrtveere 

VlBlHilltd, 


ascnhabab  was  bnnlnng  himfelfe 
bzunbe  in  toe  pauillons ,  hee  ana  the 
sings,  the  ttjtctv  anb  trbo  lungs  that 
helpebhim. 

17  anb  the  young  men  of  the^mv 
ccs  of  the  02ouinccs  went  out  firft,  ant) 
ascnhabab  fent  out ,  anb  they  toibhim, 
taping,  Xhcrc  are  men  tome  out  of  5>a* 
maria. 

18  anbheraib,t©hethctthcybecome 
outfiw  peace,  tafcethemaiiue:  02  Wh£ 
ther  they  be  tome  out  fozwatrc,  take 
thcmalme. 

19  £>o  theft  yong  men  of  thepnntes 
of  the  pjouintes,  tame  out  of  toe  title, 
anb  the  armic  Which  folloWcb  them : 

20  anbtheyfleWeueryonehisman: 
anb  the  Tynans  fleb,  anb^Jftacl  put* 
fucbthem:  anb  ascnhabab  the  lung  of 
S>y*ia  eftapeb  on  an  hozfc,  With  the 
hojfcmen. 

21  anbthemngof^ffaciwcntout, 
anbfmote  tfiehotfes  anbthatcts,  anb 
flewethe  ^yMansWithagtcatflaugh; 
ter. 

22  C  3toB  the  f&op&ct  came  to  the 
King  of  gjftael/anbfaibbuto  him,<soc, 
ftrcngthenthy  fdfc ,  anbmat&canb&c 
what  thou  boctt:  (01  atthe  tctutne  of 
thcyeere,  the  lung  of  £>ynawill  tome 
bp  againftthec. 

23  anb  the  fcruants  of  the  Bung  of 
<S>y«a  fatb  bnto  him ,  Xhcit  gobs  are 
gobs  of  the  hthes,  therefore  they  were 
ftrongctthen  wee :  but  let  bs  fight  a? 
gamft  them  m  the  plaint,  anb  futely  we 
(hall  be  ftrongctthen  they. 

24  anb  boc  this  thing,  "Cake  the 
kmgsaway,cucrymanoutofhtspiatc, 
anbpiitcaptaincstnthcir  toumes. 

25  anb  number  thee  an  armte,  like 
the  armictthat  thouhaft  loft,hon"efoz 
hotfc ,  anb  charct  fo?  chattt :  anb  wee 
Will  fight  agamft  them  in  the  plaint, 
and  fotely  Wee  than"  be  ftrongcr  then 
they.  anb  hec  heatkeneb  bnto  their 
bottcanbbibfo. 

26  anbfttametopafrcatthcretutnc 

of  the  yeete,  that  ascnhabab  numbjeb 
the  Tynans ,  anb  went  t>p  to  aphek, 
ttonghtagam(t3iftael. 

27  anb  the  tinuwen  of  3ffrael  Were 
numbjeb ,  anb  ||  wet  e  all  piefent ,  anb 
went  agamft  them:  anb  the  thtlbzcnof 
Ufrael  pittheb  before  them,  line  two 
little  flotkes  of  kibs:  but  the  Tynans 
fillebthecounttey. 

2s  canbthetctamcamanof<3ob, 
anb  (pane  bnto  the  kmgof  3tftael,anb 


fctyb ,  Xhus  fayth  the  %  $>  is  © ,  as* 
caufe  the  £>yzmns  haue  faybe,  Xhc 
!L©3S©is  d5obofthchiUcs,buthee  b 
not  d5ob  of  the  baileys :  therefore  will 
31  ocuuet  all  this  great  multtnibe  mto 
thine  hanb ,  and  yce  (hall  know  that  31 
am  the  HsDm©. 

29  ^nb  they  pitehcb  one  ouer  againft 
the  other  ftuenbaies,anbfo  itwas,that 
in  the  feucnth  bay  the  battell  was  ioy^ 
neb :  anb  the  chilbjcn  of  Jiftaci  ftcWe  of 
the&ynansanhunbzebthoufanbfoofc 
men  in  one  bay. 

30  asntthetcttflcbtoapheh,intothe 
titic,  anb  there  a  Wall  fell  bpon  twennc 
anb  feuen  thoufanb  of  the  men  that 
were  left:  anb  aSenhababflcb,anb  came 
mto  the  crae,  ||  into  an  inner  chamber. 

31  canbhtsfcniantsfaibbntohim, 
aSeholbnow ,  Wcehaueheatbthatthe 
Kings  of  the  houfe  of  3Jfrael  arc  merci- 
full  kings :  let  bs,  3  P#P  tljec,  put  fatfc 
cloth  on  our  lomes,anb  ropesbpon  out 
hcabs,  anb  goe  out  to  the  king  of  ?lf 
rael  •>  per abuentur  e  he  Will  fauc  thy  life. 

32  £>o  they  gitbeb  fackcloth  on  thctt 
loynes,  anb  put  ropes  on  their  heabs, 
anb  came  to  the  kmgof  3)fracl,anbfatb, 
Xhy  feruant  ascnhabab  faith ,  3  p?ay 
thee,lctmeliue.  anbhefaib,  3Jsheyet 
alines  he  is  my  brother. 

33  5l5oW  the  men  m  biltgently  ob* 
feme  whether  any  thing  woulb  come 
from  him,  anb  bib  hafttly  catch  it  =  anb 
theyfaibe,  Xhybzother  a5ciu)abab, 
Xhenhefatb,  00c  ye,  bzinghim :  then 
asenhabab  tame  fotfh  to  him :  anb  hce 
caufeb  him  to  tome  bp  into  the  charet. 

34.  anbBenhadad{aibbntohim,Xhe 
cities  Which  my  father  toofee  from  thy 
fathct,  %  Wfll  rcfto?e,  anb  thou  (halt 
make  fttectsfw  thcem^amafnis,  as 
mv  father  mabe  in  S>amarta.i:hen/aid 
Ahab,  3  will  fenbthee  away  Wrth  this 
coucnant.5)o  he  mabe  a  touenant  With 
hun ,  anb  fent  hun  away. . 

35  C  anb  a  tertatnc  man  of  the 
fonnesof  the  0?ophets,  Cube  bntohss 
neighbout  m  the  Wojb  of  the  H  €>  ik  ©, 
S)mitcmc,  3  pjaythce.  anb  the  man 
refufeb  to  finite  him. 

36  XhenfaiDhcbntohim,a3ccaiue 

thou  haft  not  obeyeb  the  boyce  of  the 
%®vti®,  bcholbe, afloone as  thou  art 
bepatteb  from  me,  a  lyon  (hai  flay  thee. 
anbaffooneas  hecwasbepartebftom 
hun,  a  lyon  founbhim,  anb  Ot w  him. 

37  Xhcn  he founb  another  man, anb 

fatb ,  finite  me,  3  P?*y  thee,  anb  the 

man 


J  Or,  from 

chttmhtrto 

chamber. 

Hfb.mtoA 

chamber 

mtkin* 

chamber. 


Ahab  reproued.         I.Kings.  Naboth  fbned. 


\Hrtr.fmi- 
ttxevd 

ndtng. 


f  Heh.veigh 

|  HtbMtt 

wd4  not. 


•Chap.: 
58. 


\Hrhr.bt 
geodinthtnt 

C]„. 


manfmote  tjmi,  fo  tljat  mtfnutinghee 
Xbounbebhim. 

38  £>o  the  piophct  bepartcD ,  anb 
iDmtcbfojthclnngbpthctbap,  anDDifc 
guifeo  hunfclfc  ttntlj  afbes  Upon  Ijts 
fate. 

39  anDasthcfcingpafTeDbi>,heerieD 
bnto  rtjc  ferns :  anD  he  faiDc ,  %p  fee- 
uant  tbent  out  into  the  mtDS  of  ttjc  bat 
tclt,anD  bcl)olD,a  man  turneD  aGDc,anD 
bioughtaman  bnto  me,  anbfaiD,lkccp 
tfjts man:  if  by  anpmcancs  hebcmifc 
img,then  (ball  tt>v  life  befo:  his  life,  0? 
elfe  thou  fbalt  t  pay  a  talent  of  Bluer. 

40  anb  as  ttjp  feruant  ttias  bufie 
here  am>  there,  the  ibas  gone.  anD  the 
Ring  of  3Jfcael  faibe  fcnto  l)im,  5>o  (bail 
thp  uiDgcmcnt  bee ,  thy  felfe  haft  Dtftfc 
Debit. 

4.1  anD  ne  haftcD ,  anD  tooftctrjea* 
(lies  aibap  from  l)is  fate,  anDtbcfetng 
of  gjfraei  DtfcemcD  him  that  hcewasof 
tt)c$2ophets. 

42  ano  hec  faiD  bnto  him.Xbus 
faith  tl)e  %  ©  is  ©,  *  2Sctau!e  thou  haft 
let  got  out  of  thy  hanD,a  man  lbhom  3 
appomteD  to  bttct  Deftcntftoi^tbcrfojc 
tbv  life  fbau  got  fo:  l)ts  life,  anb  thy  pco* 
pie  fo:  his  people. 

43  SwDtljeftmgoflJfracltbentto 
hishoufc,  hcaiuc,  anb  DifpleafeD ,  anD 
came  to  Samaria. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  Ahab  being  denied  Nabothsvineyardosgrie- 
ued.  5  Iezebel  writing  letters  againft  Naboth, 
he  is  condemned  ol  blafphemie.  15  Ahab 
takethpoflefsionot  the  vineyard.  17  Eliiah 
denounceth  judgements  againit  Ahab  and 
Iezebel.  15  Wicked  Ahab  repenting,  God 
deferred)  die  iudgemcnt. 

$*g$&^8  il5b  it  tame  to  paflc  after 
cSmXsft thefc  things,  that  iBaboth 
^^V^  ti)Cjc5rcclitc  hao  a  bine* 
7^P: ^v*|yarD,  which  was  in  3^ 
SsOShMS  reel,  haro  bp  the  palace  of 
ahab  lung  of  £>amaria. 

x  anD  ^rjab  fpaac  bnto  iftaboth, 
favmg,  <3iuc  me  thj>  bmcyarD,  tljafj 
may  liaue  it  fo;  a  garben  of  licrbcs,  be; 
caufc  it  Miecrc  bnto  my  houfc,  anD  JJ 
lbill  g.ue  thee  fo:  it  a  better  bmcyarD 
then  it:  or  if  ittfeemc  goob  to  tlice,  3 
Hull  giuc  thee  the  ibo:  th  of  it  m  money. 

3  atiD  #aboth  faiD  to  ahab ,  Xhc 
%  o  is  ©  fo2biD  it  met ,  that  3  fboulD 
giuc  thctnhentance  of  mv  fathers  bnto 
tliec. 


4  anD  3hab  tame  mto  his  houfe, 
heaute,  anD  DifpleafeD,  betaufe  of  the 
Tbo?b  Which  iBaboth  the  3ic5tetute 
haDfpoben  to  him:  fojhchaDfaiDe,  3 
rbillnot  gtne  thecthemhetttante  of  mp 
fathers :  anb  he  laiD  him  Dotbne  bpon 
hisbeD,  anD  rutncD  away  Instate,  anD 
iboulDeatenobjeaD. 

5  C2Sutgie5cbclhtstbtfetameto 
him,  anb  faib  onto  him,  nahy  is  thy  fpt 
rtt  fo  fab ,  that  thou  eateft  no  bieab  < 

6  ^nD  he  faiD  bnto  her,  asecaufe  3 
fpa&cbnto  /Baboth  theltareelttcanb 
faiD  bnto  htm,  <5iuc  mte  thybmeyarD 
fo?  money,  o:  eife  tf  tt  plcafe  rhee^JJ  ibtll 
giue  thee  another  btncparD  fo?  it :  anD  he 
anfmcreD,3ItbUnotgiueth«nn;bine^ 
yarb. 

7  anD  3Je5ebcl  his  tbife  faiDe  bnto 
htm,SDocft  thou  notb  goueme  the  amg- 
borne  of  JJfraeU  aruc,  and  catebjeab, 
anb  let  thine  heart  bee  mettle:  3  lbill 
glue  thee  the  Dmeyarb  of  iBaboth  the 
jtarcelite. 

8  5>o  Oicc  tbzotc  letters  in  ahabs 
name,  anb  fcaieb  them  tbith  his  fealc, 
anD  fent  the  letters  hnto  the  €lDets, 
anD  to  the  jBoblcs  that  ibere  mhts  titie 
bVbellmg  ibith  iBaboth. 

9  anb  (he  rb?otc  in  the  letters,  fay* 
tng,  ^oeiamie  a  faff,  anD  fetiftaboth 
^  on  high  among  the  people : 

io  anb  fet  tlbo  men,  fonnesof  25e^ 
Hal  before  him,  to  beare  ibitncs  agamft 
htm,  faymg,  Xhou  biDDefl  biafphcmc 
(5oD  anD  the  Ring :  anD  then  taric  him 
out,  anD  Hone  him  that  he  may  Die. 

n  anD  the  men  of  his  title,  euen  the 
tflDers  anb  the  /Bobles  tbho  tbere  the 
inhabitants  in  his  eittc,  Did  as'Joebel 
haD  fentbnto  them,  and  asittbasttnts 
tenmthclettersU)hithfhchabfentbn= 
to  them. 

\t  %\yvp  pjotiaimtD  a  faft ,  anD  fet 
iBaboth  on  high  among  the  people. 

13  anD  there  tame  in  ttbo  men,  chil 
bien  of  25eliai,anD  fate  befojtc  him :  anb 
the  men  of  Belial  tbitntffcD  agamft 
him,  enen  agamft  iI5aboth,  m  the  pie* 
fente  of  the  people,  faring,  JSabothbiD 
biafphcmc  ©ob  anD  tl)c  fting.  %hcn 
thn'  tancD  him  foojth  out  of  the  ritit, 
anD  ftoncb  hmi  ibith  ftones,  that  h« 
Dieb. 

14  XlmithcrfenttoSJc^cbel,  fay* 
mg,/i5aboth  is  ftoncb,  anb  ?s  bcab. 

15  canDitcametopaQerbhcnJc 
3ebcl  hcarb  that  iBaboth  ibas  ftoncb 
anD  ibas  Dcab ,  that  3Jc3cbel  fatb  to  a 
hab. 


\  Heir,  in  the 
top  of  the 
people. 


Ahabs  wickednes.     Chap.xxij.  lehofhaphat. 


*  Chap.  14. 
10.  z.  king. 

98. 

".I.Sam. 
25.22. 
"Chap.  14 
10. 

•Chap.  15. 
29- 
•Chap.  16. 

3- 


vKing.9. 
56. 

\\0l,dilck 


\Qrjmtcd. 


bab,  arifctaKepoacffion  oftbeillinc; 
yarbofirlabotb  tbc^tarccitte,  tujjirt) 
bee  rcfufcb  togiue  ttiec  foj  money  :fo: 
jftabotbisnot  aliue,butbeab. 

16  anb  tt  tame  to  pane  ibben  abab 
bearb  tbatiftabofh  rbasbeab,  tbata- 
babrofc  top  to  gocootbne  to  tytttrnt- 
yatbof jRabotb  tbcjjejrceiitc,  totabc 
pofTefftonofit. 

17  C  anb  the  ltoojb  of  thelitis© 
catne  to  dual)  the  Xtlbbitcfaymg, 

18  anfc ,  goebotbne  to  meet  abab 
lungof^frael,  ibbtrb  is  in  damana: 
btl)olD,  bee  is  m  the  Silineyarto  of  0& 
bo  tb ,  ibbitbet  be  is  gone  boitone  to  pot 
feffeit. 

19  anbtbou  fliait  fpeafcc  tonto  bim, 
faying,  Xbusfaitb  tfjc  !L  o  is  ©,  $aft 
tboubillcto,  anb  alfo  taken  poffcfuon; 
anbtbou  (bait  fpeabe  tonto  hint ,  fay^ 
tng,  Xbus  faith  til  e  %  ©  «  © ;  3Jn  the 
plate  ibljcre  bogs  bcRcb  rhc  bloob  of 
jftabotb ,  ftyail  bogges  lirRc  tljy  bloob, 
cucn  thine. 

io  anb  abab  faib  to  eiitab ,  $aft 
tboufounbinc,Dmineencmtc*anbbe 
anfrocreb,3J  bauc founb  ihee  =  betaufc 
thou  baft  folb  thy  felfetoVbo?Sc  euiilm 
the  fight  oftbcfL©  is©. 

21  26cl)olb,*3rbillb2tngeufllbpon 
tlicc,  anb  rbill  taRc  aitoay  thy  pofterttic, 
aiib  tbtlleut  off  from  abab  *btmtbat 
piffetb  againft  the  rball ,  anb  *  bun  that 
is  (buttop,  anb  left  in  3Jfracl, 

n  anb  itoill  mane  thmc  houfc  line 
the  boufe  of*  Jeroboam  tlie  fonnc  of 
<Rcbat ,  anbliBC  the  houfe  of*  ffiaalba 
$cfonncofabuab,foztbep20Uocanon 
itobetcttntb  thou  baft  pjouofccb  mee  to 
anger,  anb  mabc^fraclto  Rune. 

13  auto  *  of  3jescbel  alfo  fpabe  the 
^  ©is©,  faying,  Xbc  bogsvhailcatc 
3jeiebei  by  the  ||  mall  of  If  esrcel. 

14  l^im  thatbicth  ofabab  in  the  & 
hc,rbebogs  (ball  catc:  anb  htm  tbatbt* 
etb  m  tlje  fielb,  (hall  the  foules  of  the 
aire  cat. 

15  C25ntthcre\basnoneliHebnto 
abab,  tt»hich  btbfcllbunfclfctotbbiRe 
tbitBebncfTc  m  the  fight  of  the  !U>  m  ©, 
ibhom  ^taebcibis  ttoire  1 1  ftirrcb  top. 

16  anb  hee  bib  tocry  abominably  in 
following  3Jbolcs  ,  atcoibuig  to  all 
things  as  bib  the  anionics,  ltobom  the 
%  ©  K  ©  raft  out  before  the  rt)UD?cn  of 
3ifrael. 

17  anbittametopafle  mbenahab 
bcarto  thofc  ibozbes,  that  hec  rent  his 
clothes ,  anb  put  facbcclotb  upon  his 


fled) ,  anbfaftcb,  anb  lay  in  facRrtotb, 
aiibibcntfoftly. 

13  anb  the  rbojb  of  the  H©  is© 
came  to  Cliiah  the  Xifhbitc  ,Caymg, 

19  £>eefttbotibon)ababbiunbietb 
htmfclfe  before  mee?  becaufebee  bum; 
blctb  bmtfclfe  before  nice ,  3)  ibili  not 
bung  the  euill  in  his  bayes:  butm  his 
fonnesbayesibiU3i  bung  the  cuill  top- 
on  his  houfe. 

CHAP.   XXII. 

1  Ahab  feduced  by  falfe  prophets,  according  to 
the  word  of  Micaiah,  is  flaine  at  Ramoth  Gi- 
lead.  37  The  dodges  lickevp  his  blood, and 
Ahaziahfucccedethhim.  41  IeholTuphats 
goodreigne,  45  his  acts.  50  Iehoram  fuc- 
ceedethhim.   51  Ahaziahs  euil  reigne. 

0H  *  they  tontlnueb  tbjee 

yccres  without  itoarrebc; 

titoccne  S>yna  anb3Jfraei. 
i   anbittametopalTc 

onthethtrbyercthat^c 
hofljaphat  tlje  ifcxmg  of  3fubah  tame 
bolbne  to  the  lung  ofjftacl. 

j  (^nb  tlje  lung  of  ^frael  faib  bnto 
hisfcruants,  l&noib  ye  that  Bamoth 
in  (Silcab  is  ours ,  anb  tbee  be  t  (hll,  and 
tabe  it  not  out  of  the  banb  of  the  King 
of£>yna< ) 

4  anb  bec  faibtonto  ^choniaphat, 
tent  thou  goc  \bith  mc  to  battel  to  fta? 
mothC5ilcao?  anb  3Jchotliaphat  faib 
to  the  lung  of  3Jfrael ,  *3J  am  as  thou 
ai  t ,  my  people  as  thy  people,  my  bou"cs 
as  thy  hones. 

5  anb  IJcboihapbat  faib  tonto  the 
King  of  3)fcacl,€nquir c,3J  p?ay  tbee,at 
the  ltoozb  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  to  bay. 

6  XbenthcfeingofJJfracigafbercb 
tbcp2opbcts  together  aboutfourcbun'- 
nitb  men,  anb  faibtonto  tbcm,£>bai!  If 
goe  againft  5Elamoth  ©flcabtobattcll, 
ot  (hall  3  fozbeare  i  anb  they  faib,  <5oc 
top,  fo:  the  !L  ©  is  jd  thallbcliuer  it  into 
tbc  banb  of  the  lung. 

7  anb  3Icho(haphat  faib ,  inhere 
not  here  a  i&opbct  of  the  %  sr>  in©  bc-- 
Obes,thatItocmightcnciuircofl)inK 

8  anb  the  Ring  of  3lftael  faib  tonto 
^Jcbofliapbat ,  •Ehcrcisyctoneman, 
( fl&caiab  the  fonnc  of  Smlalj  )  by 
Whom  itoeniay  enquire  ofthc?L«r>i3E>i 
ontgj  hate  bun,  foj  he  both  not  piopbc^ 
ficgoobtonccrningmc,  bnteuill.  anb 
Jchofljaphat  fatb ,  3lct  not  tlje  Bins 
fayfo. 

9  %hm  the  Ring  of  Jixatl  taileb 

an 


i.Chroo. 
8.1, Btc. 


\iUrfv. 
lent  from  rj 


"iJCing.  3. 
7- 


Micaiah  prophecieth    I.Kings.    Ahabs  deftruftion. 


|  Or,  Eu- 
nuch. 


\Hct.pcrr. 


\PrJUui\u. 


an  ||4Dffucr,  anb  faib ,  fatten  iwhcr  fipt- 
caiab  tljc  foraic  of  3,mlalj. 

io  anb  tbc  Bins  of  Dfracl  anb  3Jc- 
boflbapbat  tljc  l&ing  of  3iubab  fate 
cad)  on  Ijis  tljzonc,  bauuig  put  on  tljctr 
robes,  inatboyb  plate  m  tljc  entrance 
of  tljc  gate  of  Samara,  anb  ailtljc 
^Vopbctspjopbccicbbefojctljcm. 

1 1  anb  zcbeRialj  tljcfonne  of  €be- 
naanab  mabc  Dun  Ijomes  of  won :  ano 
bcfayb,Xbusfaitbtljc12^is?D,ttMli 
tbefe  (bait  tboitpu(btbeS>ynans,  btv- 
till  tljou  Ijatic  eonfuntcbtljcm. 

u  anbailtljc#2opbetsp:opbccicb 
fo,faymg;  <3oebp  to  ftamotb  C5ilcat), 
ano  pjofpcr :  fo;  tt)c  %  £>  is  jd  (ball  belt- 
ucr  ittntotljc  Rings  banb. 

13  anb  tbc  meffenget  tbat  tbas  gone 
to  callfiPicatab,  fpaRc  bnto  bun,  fay 
mg,  2t3e^olb  nott),tbe  uwbs  oftlje  pjo- 
pljcts  declare  goob  bnto  tbe  Bmgibitb 
oncmoutb:  let  tbynwb,  3  p?av  tljcc, 
bccliRc  tljc  lbojb  of  one  of  tfjein,  anb 
fpcaRc  that  which  is  goob. 

14.  anb  fiPicatalj  faybc,  as  tljc 
%®  is  ©fiuetb\unjattbcl3L  ©ispfaitlj 
bnto  mctljatibill^j  fpca&c. 

15  <[^>ol)c  came  to  tbcRmg,anb  tfjc 
ftuigfaybbnto  ljun,  il0icaiab,lbailibcc 
goc  agatnft  ftamotb  dlcabto  battcll, 
ojfbalUbcftubearc;  anb  be  anfrocrcb 
Dun,  ©o,anb  piofper :  fo?  tljc  flos© 
Ojallbciiuer  it  into  tbc  banb  oftijeRing. 

i«  anbtbcbmgfaibbntobtm,l>>oib 
many  tunes  (ball  3  abiurc  tbec,  rtjat 
tboutciimc  norijmg  but  tbat  tbljicf)  is 
true.intbe jframeof the  %  0  is  jsn 

17  3(nb  ijce  fayb ,  3  fan,  auDfrael 
fcattcreb  bpon  tl)e  billcs,as  (beepe  tijat 
bauc  not  a  Ibepljcarb.  anb  the  %<£>  is  © 
faib,Xbclc  baue  no  matter ,  let  tbcm  rc= 
turne cucry  man  to  bis  boufc  mpcacc. 

18  anb  tbc  Bmgofjfracl  faib  bnto 
3  cljofbapbat,  S>ib  3  not  tell  thectftat 
be  Uio  ulb  pzopljccic  no  goob  concerning 
mc.butcutiu 

\9  anbljcfaio,  fycatctboutbcrcfoje 
tbc  Uiozb  of  tl)c  %  ©  is  id  :  3  faibe  flje 
%  o  is  id  fitting  on  bis  Xtyonc,  anb  all 
tbc  bode  of  bcaucn  ftanbmg  by  Ijun,  on 
bis  rtgbt  banb  anb  on  bis  left. 

10  ^nb  tbc  ?L£> is p  faib.nabo  (bail 
llpcrfibabc  aijab,tbatbcc  mar  goe  top 
anb  fall  at  ftatuottj  Gilcab  <  anb  one 
fayb  ontbismatuicr  ,anb  anotbtr  fatb 
on  tbat  manner. 

21  anbtbcrccamefotfljafpirtt,  anb 
(toob  befoje  tbe  1L  o  is  jd,  anb  faib ,  31 
UnllpcrfibabcJjuu. 


11  anb  tbe  %  €>  is  jb  faib  bnto  bun, 
i©ljeteibitb<  anb  bccfayb,;3l  null  goc 
foo:tb,anb  3  lbtil  be  a  lying  fptnt  in  tljc 
moutb  of  all  bis  mopbets.  anb  be  faib, 
Xljou  (bait  pcrubabe  bun ,  anb  p2t= 
uailcalfo:  Goefoztb.anbbocfo. 

13  >15oibtl)crfo«bebolb,tbe1LoisjD 
batbput  a  lying  fpintm  tbemoutlj  of 
all  tbefe  tby  PJopbcts,  anb  tbe  %  ©  is  & 
Ijatlj  fpouen  euill  concerning  tbee. 

14  25utzcbeRtalj  tljcfonne  of  Cbc^ 
naanab  ibent  nccre,  anb  fmote  G&\> 
taiab  on  tljc  tbecRe,  anbCaib,  "naljiclj 
way  ibent  tbe  £>piru  of  tlje  %s>  is  © 
fcomnictofpcaucbntotljcc^ 

15  ^nb  fl3icaialj  faybc,  iBeljolbe, 
tbou  fbait  fee  in  tljat  bay,  ibbcn  tljou 
fijait  goc  ||  into  an  inner  cbambcr ,  to 
ijibctljyfcife. 

16  anbtlje  Biugof^fracl  faybe, 
XaHc  i^icaiab ,  anb  cary  ljun  bacfec 
bnto  anion  tljc  goucrnouroftljccttie, 
anb  to  lloafbtbc  lungs  founc: 

17  anb  fay,  Xbus  faytlj  tbc  Bing, 
0ut  tl)is  fclloib  in  tbe  p:u"on,anb  feebe 
Ijimibitb  bzcab  of  affliction,  anbibitb 
ibatcc  of  affl»ctio,bntil  3  come  m  peace. 

18  anb  £j3icaiab  faibe ,  3Jf  tljou  re^ 
turncataii  in  peace,  tbciLoia©  Ijatlj 
notfpoRenby  me.  anb  be  faib ,  n^ear- 
Rcn,Opcoplc,eueryoncofyou. 

19  £>o  tbe  lamg  of  jpfracl,  anb  3v 
bofi)apbattI)clmigofjubab,ibcntbp 
toBamotljotlcab. 

30  anbtbc  Ring  of  3lfracl  faib  bnto, 
Ucbofyapljat,  1 1 3  u»l  bifguifcmy  fclfc,  I f 
center  into  tbc  batten,  but  put  rtjou  on 
tljy  robes,  anb  tljc  Bmg  ot  IJftael  btf- 
guu"cb  bimfcifc,  jUicntintotbcbattell. 

31  iout  tljc  Bmg  of  5>y2ta  command 
beb  bis  tljirtteanbtibo  Captauicstbat 
bab  nilc  ouer  bis  cbar  cts,fayutg,  jTigljt 
ncitljcr  Untbfmallnojgrcat,fauc  only 
rbitbtbeuutgofjfrael. 

31  anb  it  came  to  paffe ,  uiben  tbc 
captamcsoftbccbarctsfaib3Jcboaja^ 
pbat,  tbat  tbey  faib ,  Purely  it  is  tljc 
Ringof3Jfracl.  anb  tljcy  turncb  afibc 
to  figbtagamftbim :  anb'Jcboajapbat 
cryebout. 

J3  anb  it  came  to  pafle.ibbcn  tl)t  cap? 
taincs  of  tbe  cbarcts  pcrceiucb  tljat  tt 
ibas  not  tbc  Rmg  of  jfracl ,  rtjattbey 
turnebbacUcfcompurfuingbim. 

34-  ^nb  a  ecrtameman  bjcib  a  boib 
tatabcnture,anbfmotctljcRuigof'3Jf 
racl  bctlbccnc  tljc  ttoynts  of  tbc  bar 
neffe :  lbbcrefoze  Ijccfayb  bntotbebu 
ucr  of  bis  cljaret,  Xuruc  tljiue  banb, 
anb 


•i.Chi 

■  3.!3. 


Or,  from 
chamber  to 
chamber, 
lieb.  cham. 
ber  in  a 
chamber. 


Or.wht 

gmfe 

fetfe  and.cn- 

icrtntath 


vA 


\Hti.inbi 

:  'imottctfit. 
\  Heb  itJHtl 

And  the 

itrcjfpiutc. 


Ahabdicth.  Chap.xxi].    Ahaziah.  Ichoram. 


t  Hcl'.m.tdc 
fckf- 
\  Heir  ../- 


fomc. 


\H tli.  cave, 


•Chap. :  i 
<5- 


"  l-Chron. 
20.31. 


ant  carp  mc  out  of  the ijoile ,  fo.i 3J  am 
UtoounDcD, 

3-5  Znn  the  batten  t  mcrcafcD  tfjat 
Dap :  anD  the  Ring  itoas  ftapcD  top  in  his 
cham  agauift  the  Avians,  anD  DicD  at 
ctten:  anD  the  bloob  rannc  out  of  the 
itoounD ,  into  the  t  ntiDs  of  the  thacet. 

36  3MD  there  itoent  a  proclamation 
throughout  the  hoftc,  about  the  going 
Doitonc  of  the  £>unne,  taping,  cucrp 
man  to  his  citic,ano  eucrp  man  to  his 
oiimccotmtrcp. 

37  Clothe HsingDtcD, anD  t  itoas 
brought  to  Samaria,  anDthcp  burieb 
the  Ring  in  Samaria. 

38  ^nDoncitoaihcDthctharctinthe 
pooleof  Samaria,  anD the  bogges  lic= 
licb top  his  bloob ,  anD  thep  itoalhcb his 
armour ,  acwbtng  *  tontothe  ltoo?D  of 
the  %  ©  is  j>  ltohich  he  fpaue. 

39  /iSolto  the  rett  of  the  attes  of  ^ 
hab,  anb  all  that  he  did,  anb  the  ^Jtiwp 
houfc ltohich  he mabc ,  anb authc  titles 
that  he  built,  a-cthep  notitonttcnmthc 
ttoofec  of  the  Chronicles  of  thcBtngs 
of3Jfrack 

40  So  3hab  (lept  itoith  his  fa* 
tliers ,  anb  atrial)  his  fbnnc  rcigncb 
inhistteab. 

41  Cawgjchofhaphat  the  tonne 
of  3lfa  began  to  rcigncoucr  gjuDaom 
the  fourth  pecrcof  3hab  l&mg  of  3JD 
rael. 

42  3Jehofl)aphat  wjsthirtic  anb  fine 
pecrcs  olbc  itohcn  hec  began  to  rcignc, 
anD  he  rcigncD  tltoenttcanD  fiuc  pecrcs 
ingjerufalcm :  anb  his  mothers  name 
was  a^ubahthc  Daughter  of  Shilhi. 

43  3luDhc  itoaiucDin all thcitoapcs 
of  3lfa  his  father,  hec  turncb  not  adbe 
from  it,  Doing  that  ltohich  itoas  right  in 
the  epes  of  the  %  o  is  © :  ucucrthclcu*e, 


the  high  places  itocre  not  taken  aitoap . 
for  the  people  offereD  anD  burnt  uicenfc 
petuuhehigh  plates. 

44  3inb3Jchofl)aphatmaDe  peace 
ibith  the  amg  of  3Jfcacl. 

4$  i!5olto  the  rett  of  the  attes  of  3c 
holhaphat ,  anb  his  might  that  hec 
fhcibcD,  anb  hottihcibarreb,  arcthep 
notUmttcnfnthcbooltc  of  the  Chjom- 
tics  of  the  i&mgs  of  3JuDah  * 

4<s  3MD  the  remnant  of  the  Sobo 
mites  ltohich  remamcbm  the  bapes  of 
hisfather:£fa,hctootieoutoftheianD. 

47  Xhcrc  itoas  then  no  lung  me 

Dom:aDCpUflC  was  mug. 

48  3!chofhaphat  ||  maDe  fhippes  of 
Xharlhifh  to  goc  to  £>phir  for  golDc : 
but  they  itoent  not,  fo?  the  fhtppes  itocre 
broken  at  €5ion<l5cbcr. 

49  Xhen  faib  ZlmuM)  the  Tonne  of 
ahabbnto  gjchofhaphat,  ?Lctmpfer; 
uants  goc  itoith  thp  fcrttants  m  the 
fbips:26ut3Jchori)aphatitooulbnot. 

50  C  3uib  gjchoihaphat  ficpt  itoith 
his  fathers,  anb  itoas  burteb  tbith  his 
fathers  in  the  citic  of  SDauiD  his  father : 
anD  3ichoram  his  tonne  rctgneDin  his 
ftcaD. 

51  C^ja&ihthctonncofahabbc; 
gan  to  rcignc  oucr  3Jfracl  in  Samaria 
the  feucnteenth  pecre  of  Jchotbaphat 
mngof3uDah,anDreigncDtitoopcrcs 
ouer^frael. 

51  3lnD  he  DiD  euill  in  the  fight  of  the 
fL©iaiD,  anDitoaUtcDinthcibapofhts 
father ,  anD  m  tl)c  itoap  of  his  mother, 
anD  in  the  itoap  of  Jeroboam  the  fonne 
of  i!5ebat,  Itoho  mabc  3Jfracl  to  finnc. 

53  5ForhcfcrueD2Saai,anDltoorfhip; 
pcD  him >  anD  prouofeeD  to  anger  the 
3LSD1S©  <5oDof5fracl,act02Dington= 
to  all  that  his  father  haD  Done. 


^THE 


\OrMi 
ttnfliipi. 


Ahaziah  ficke.  II.Kings.      Fire  from  heaucn. 


J- 


\Hchjht 
bed,  u  linker 
then  art 
%enevpttboH 
fbtlt  net 
ceme  dorwne 
fiomtt. 


^THE  SECOND  BOOKE 

of  the  Kings,commonly  called^The 

fourth  Booke  of  the  Kings. 


CHAP.    I. 

Moabrebelleth.  t  Ahaziah.fendingtoBaal- 
zebub,  hath  his  Judgement  by  Eliian.  5  E- 
liiah  twife  bringeth  fire  from  heaucn  vpon 
them  whom  Ahaziah  fent  to  apprehend  him. 
1 3  He  pitieth  the  third  captaine ,  and  incou- 
raged  by  an  Angel ,  telleth  the  King  of  his 
death.    17  Iehoram  (uccecdedi  Ahaziah. 

§en£)3oab  rebel- 
lcoagainft3lfra? 
cl,*aftertbcbeatb 
ofabab. 

2  anbaba^ 
ah  fel  boibne  tho^ 
rolb  a  latteflc  m 
bis  bppcr  chant? 
ber  that  was  in-fea^ 
marta ,  anb  lbas  Reftc :  anb  be  fent  met 
fengers,  anb  faib  bnto  them,  €>oc,  en* 
quire  of  asaalscbub  tbegooof  <£Kron, 
Whether  3  fbairccoucr  oftblsbifcafc. 
j  26ut  the  angel  of  the  llsDiajDlatb 
to  tfuiab  the  Xtfbbtte ,  strife ,  goebp 
to  nieete  tbemcffengersof  the  fetng  of 
£>amaria,  anb  lap  bntofbem,  isttnot 
beeanfe  there  is  not  a  ©ob  in  3Jfrael, 
that^cgoc  to  enquire  of  25aar3cbub  the 
gobofcuron* 

4  ii3otb  therefore ,  tf)U0  fayctb  the 
%  ©  m  3P,tXbou  (bait  not  conic  boibne 
from  that  bcbonibbieb  tbou  art  gone 
bp ,  but  (bait  furelp  btc.  anb  c  mab  be? 
partcb. 

5  canb\bbcntbcmcu"engerstur 
neb  bacfec  bnto  bun,  be  faib  bnto  them, 
nab  v  ar  c  ye  noib  turncb  batfte  < 

6  anb  tticv  faiD  bnto  him  ,  inhere 
came  a  man  bp  to  meet  bs ,  anb  faib  bn^ 
tobs,  <J5oc,  turneagaincbntotbcRing 
that  fent  von,  anb  fay  bnto  htm,  Xbtts 
faith  the  2L  <d  m  tD,is  it  not  becaufc  there 
isnotadJobin^fracI.tHitrljoufcnbcQ 
to  enquire  of  25aat)cbubtbc  gobof€- 
Uron  *  therefore  thou  fbatt  not  come 


boibne  from  that  bebbe  onlbbtcbfbou 
art  gone  bp,  but  Ibalt  furcly  Die. 

7  anb  bee  faib  bnto  them,  tnabat 
manerof  man  was  he  tbijicf)  tame  bp  to 
mectyou,anb  tolbyoutbcfeuwbs* 

8  anb  they  anfocreb  him,  $eibas 
anbairyman,anb  gtrtlbttbagtrbleof 
leather  about  bis  loynes :  anb  \)t  faib, 
3Itis€UiahthcXin)btte. 

9  Xben  the  isung  fent  bnto  him  a 
captaine  of  fiftictbitb  hts  fifnc  '•  anb  he 
tbentbptobim,(anbbcbolb,bcfateon 
the  top  of  an  hill )  anb  bee  fpaaebnto 
him,  Xbou  man  of  €>ob,  the  Jung  hath 
fatb,€omebolbnc. 

10  ^nb  cuiah  anftbcreb,anbtaibto 
the  captaine  of  fiftie ,  3Jf  3 be  a  man  of 
<25ob ,  then  let  fire  come  boibne  from 
bcauen,anb  confumc  thee  anb  ti)v  fiftie. 
anb  there  came  boibne  fire  from  bca? 
uen,  anb  confumeb  htm  anb  his  fiftie. 

1 1  agameaifobccfcntbntobiman= 
other  captaine  of  fiftie,  lbitb  his  fiftie: 
anb  beeanftnereb  ,anb  faib  bnto  him, 
£>man  of  <sob ,  Xbus  hath  the  lung 
faib,  Come  boibne  quicttly. 

it  anb  Cliiah  anfrocreb ,  anbfaibe 
bnto  them,  3Jf  Iranian  of  (Bob,  let 
fire  come  bolbnctrombcauen,anbcon> 
fume  tljcc,  anb  thy  fiftie.  anb  the  fire  of 
<Sob  came  boibne  from  hcauen ,  anb 
confumeb  btm,anb  hts  fiftte. 

13  canbhte  fent  againc  a  captaine 
of  the  thtrb  fifttclbitb  hisfiftie :  anb  the 
thirb  captaine  of  fiftte  ibent  bp ,  anb 
came  anb  t  fell  on  his  Knees  befoje  <£li? 
iah  ,anb  befought  him,  anb  faibebnto 
him,  <£>h  man  of  Gob,  J>  pzay  thee,  let 
my  Itfe,anb  the  life  of  thefc  fiftte  tby  ftp 
uants,be  pjcnous  in  thy  fight. 

14  26cbolb ,  there  came  fire  boibne 
ifrom  hcauen ,  anb  burnt  bp  the  tibo 
captames  of  the  fomter  fifties ,  ibtth 
1  tl)etr  fifties :  Xhcr  efo^e  let  my  life  noib 
;  be  precious  tn  thy  fight. 

K  anb 


t  Heb.  -what 
ttm  the  ma- 
nerof the 
msnt 


\Heir. 

■  ■/...  J, 


Ahaziah  dicth.  Chap.ij.  Elijah  taken  vp, 


15  2tnto  the  3lugcl  of  the  ?L© is© 
fart)  tonto  <2luah,<3oc  boitonc  lbtth  hun, 
be  not  afraib  of  him.  3lnb  hearofc,  anb 
itoent  boitonc  ltoith  him  tonto  the  lung. 

i6  :&tbhefaibtontohim,lLhusraith 
tfjc  %  ©  is  ©,  fozafmuch  as  thou  haft 
fent  meffengers  to  enquire  of  26aal5e^ 
bub  the  gob  of  euron  ( istt  not  bctaufe 
there  is  no  Ooto  in  3Jfcael,  to  enquire  of 
his  ltoozb  i )  therefore  thou  (halt  not 
tomcboitonc  off  that  beb  on  ibljtctj  thou 
artgonctop,butft)altuirclpbie. 

17  C  £>o  he  bteb,  accojbtng  to  the 
itoo:be  of  the  ILfiDm©  ltolnch  <£iitah 
hao  fpoBcn:  anb  ^Jelwam  rcignco  m 
tjtsfteab,  in  the  fecono  peerc  of  3Jcho- 
tamthefonneof3!ehofl)aphatbingof 
3  ubah,  betaufe  he  hat)  no  fonnc. 

18  JBoltothercftoftheaetcsof2(ha; 
3tah,  tthtth  hec  bib,  arc  thep  notuwfc 
ten  in  the  booae  of  the  Chronicles  of 
tijcBingsofllfratli 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Elijah.ukinghisle.iue  of  Elifha,with  his  man- 
tle diuideth  Jordan,  9  and  gianting  Elifha 
his  requeft,  is  taken  vp  by  a  fierie  charet  into 
heauen.  u  E!ifha,diuidingIordanwithE- 
lijahs  mantle ,  is  acknowledged  his  fucceffor. 

16  The  young  prophets,  hardly  obtaining 
leaueto  feckeElijah.couldnotfiridehim.  ij 
Elifha  with  /alt,  healeth  the  vnwholefome 
waters.  Z3  Beares  delhoy  the  children 
that  mocked  Elifha. 

iI5b  it  tame  to  parte  itohcn 
the  !Lc>K©ltooulb  tatte 
top  Cltjah  into  heauen 
bp  a  itohirleibinbc ,  that 
Elijah  itoent  ltoith  eii> 
flja  from  ©iigal. 

i  ^nb€iijahfaibtonto€unw,Xas 
tie  here,  3J  pjapthec :  foz  the  ?L©k© 
hathfentme  to  asethel :  anbCEUfhafatb 
tonto  him ,  3ls  the  %  o  n  ©liucth,  anb 
as  thp  foulc  Imcth,^  itoil  not  icaue  thee. 
S>o  the? itoent  boitonc  to  Bethel. 

3  3nb  the  fonncs  of  the  ^zophets 
thatwereat  25ctf)c!,  camcfooztl)  toCte 
fha,  anb fatb tonto  him,  Bnotbeftthou 
that  the  %  ®  is  ©  itoill  talie  amap 
thp  maftcrfrom  thp  heab  to  bap*  anb 
hefaib,^ca,3ftnoito  it,  holbpoupout 
peate. 

4.  3lnD  £  li jah  faib  tonto  him  ,<£  lifba , 
tartehcrc^Jpjapthee:  fo2thc3L©iB© 
hathfentmcto^crtcho :  3Jnto  hccfaib, 
3(s  the  %  ©  is  ©  liucth ,anb  as  thp  fouie 
liucth,  giitoill  not  leant  thee.  ;§>o  they 
came  to  Jericho. 


5  3lub  the  fomtes  of  the  ^jophcts 
thatutrcatjericho  tameto  «£li(ha,anD 
faib  tonto  him,  lanoibcft  thou  that  the 
JtfiD  is©  itoill  take  aitoap  thp  mailer 
from  rtip  heab  to  bap?  anb  hec  anfroc- 
rcb,  ^ca,  31  unoibe  it,  holbc  pou  pour 
peace. 

6  3fnb€lnahCaibbntohim,i:arie, 
3  WV  thce,here :  fonhc  ?L©  u  ©  hath 
j  fcntmeto5ojban.  ^uohcfaib,3sthc 
!  %€>  is©  liucth,  anb  as  thp  foulc  imett), 
U  mm  not  leauc  thee.  3nb  the?  tltoo 
itoent on. 

7  3mb  fiftte  men  of  me  fonncs  of 
the  j&ophrts  itoent,  anb  ft  00b  t  to  totcito 
afarrc  off :  anb  thep  tltoo  ftoob  top 
'Jlotfjati. 

8  ^nb€ii)ahtooBchismantle,anb 
ibjapt  it  together,  anb  uiiotethcltofr 
tcrs.auo  thepitocre  btuibcto  hither  ano 
thither ,  fo  that  thep  tltoo  rbentouer  on 
bnegcouivb. 

9  CSuiDtteamctopaflcibhcnthrp 
Vberegonc  oucr,  that  einah  faib  tonto 
«lt(ha,:3U"ttcitohat3J  (hail  bocfojthct, 
befoze  3J  be  taben  amap  from  thee.  3nb 
•eufha  faib,  3  p:ap  thee ,  let  a  Double 
portion  of  tiiv fptrtt  be  topon  me. 

10  ^nb  hec  faib,  tXhouhaftafncba 
harb  thing :  neut  rthelefle ,  if  thou  fee  me, 
when  1  am  taueti  from  t\)ct ,  it  tt)all  be  fo 
tonto  thee:  but  if  not,  it  (hall  not  be  fo. 

11  3nb  it  came  to  paffc  as  they  full 
itoent  on  ano  taiUcb,  thatbeholbe,  the,e 
appeared  athatct  of  fire,  anb  hojfcs  of 
fircanbpartcbthetnboth  afunber,anb 

*  cujah  rbenttop  bp  aitohirleitoiub  into 
heauen. 

ii  4r.3(tib€lifbafaitoit,anbhccricb, 

*  fi0p  father ,  mv>  father ,  the  charet  of 
31frael,anb  the  hoifancn  thereof.  3lnb 
he  fiuto  him  no  mo2C :  anb  he  toofte  holb 
of  hisoitone  cloatijes,  anb  rent  them  in 
tltoo  pieces. 

13  $c  tooue  top  alfo  the  mantle  of  €> 
iqah  that  fell  from  him,  anb  itoent  bacit, 
anb  ftoob  bp  the  t  banue  of  3Jojoan. 

14.  3lnb  he  toofee  the  mantle  of  <sw 
iah  that  fell  from  him,  anb  finotc  the 
ltoaters,anDfaiD,i©hercisthc?t(3Di3© 
C5ob  of  Elijah  *  anb  ltohcn  hce  alfo  hab 
fnuttcntheitoatcrs,  thep  partcb  hittjer 
anb  thither :  anb  Cnfha itoent  ouer. 

15  ^anb  ibhenthe  fonncs  of  the  pio< 
phcts  lbhtch  w«e*to  toic\to  at  3Jencho, 
fam  him,  thep  faib, Xhcfpintofeiuah 
both  reft  on  caCha:  %\\n  thep  came  to 
tneethun,  anb  boltoeb  themfehies  to  the 
grounb  before  him. 

%l\        I6-C3M) 


t  Hchr.  ir, 
fghrt  or  otter 
igainfi. 


t  Heir,  thou 
hnj}  done 
h/trd  in  af- 


•Fcc!us48 
9. 1.  mac.  2. 
58. 

*  Chap.  I  3 


t  HcbrMf. 


'Verfc7. 


Waters  healed.  I  I.Kings.  Iehoram  King. 


t  flrbr. 
fennel  of 
ftrengtb. 

f  Htirr  one 
ef the rnokn- 
tAtmt. 


\  Htbr.caH- 

fngtomtf- 

cary. 


16  C3inb  the?  faib  bnto  mm,2iBc; 
holbnoib,  thctcbeeibtrbthyfcruants 
ftfcit  t  ttrongmen,ict  them  gocibcpiay 
thee,  anb  fecfee  thp  mattcc :  lefrpcrab; 
uencur  e  tljc  S>ptnt  of  the  %®  is  ©  Dart) 
taunt  Dun  Dp,  aim  caft  Dim  bpon  t  fomc 
mountaine,oi  into  fomc  bailcv.2inb  he 
faib,Pc  (hall  not  fenb. 

17  3nbmhmti)epb2gcbmm,ttllhe 
iuasaQ)amcb,hefaib,&cnb.Zbcpfent 
therefore  fiftie  men ,  anb  tljrp  fought 
ttyce  bapes,  but  founb  mm  not. 

18  3no  lbhcn  tbcp  came  againe  to 
mm  (to;  Dctaticoat  gjencho)  bee  faib 
bnto  them  ,  2Dib  3  not  fa?  bnto  pou, 
C5ocnot^ 

19  C3notm  men  ofthecitp  faib  bn^ 
to  CUflia,  ascboib/J  piav  tljcctlje  fitu-- 
attonof  tbisnty  plcafant,  asm?  102b 
fecth:buttbcU)ater<s  nought,  ano the 
grottnb  t  barren. 

20  3moheefaiD,2Snngmecanetb 
ernfe,  anb  put  fait  therein.  3nb  the? 
tooughttttorjim. 

ii  3nb  he ibcnt fojtb  bnto  the  fpjtng 
ofthctbatcrs,  anb  caft  the  fait  in  there, 
anb  faib ,  Xhus  faith  the  JL  ©  is  35, 31 
hanerjeaieb  thefc  Vbatccs,  there  fbatl 
not  be  from  tfjence  an?  11102c  bcath,  02 
barren  land. 

2i  £>othettiatcrsibcrchcaiebbnto 
this  bap  ,  acro;bing  to  ttjc  faptnrj  of  tff* 
lrfl)a,mhichhcfpauc. 

2 j  C  3no  he  ibcnt  bp  from  thence 
bnto  asetbcl :  anb  as  hce  ibas  going  bp 
bp  the  ttiay ,  there  came  foojtb  little  thU= 
bien  out  of  thecme ,  anb  mocfecb  him, 
anD  faibbnto  him ,  <3oe  bp  tbon  baib 
hcab,  cFocbptboubalbheab. 

24  3mohcc  tumeb  batftc,  anbloo^ 
heb  on  them  ,  anb  eurfeb  them  in  the 
iframc  of  the  loiss:  anb  there  came 
foonh  tibo  fhee  28carcs  out  of  the 
lboob ,  anb  tare  foincanb  tibo  rt)ilD;tn 
ofthem. 

25  2Cnb  hce  ibcnt  from  thence  to 
mount  Car  met ,  ano  from  thence  he  r  v 
turncbto&amaria. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  Iehoramst  eigne.  4  McftiaiebclJetli.  6  Ie- 
horam, with  Icholhjphat,ar.d  the  king  of 
Edoni,  bein<j  diftreflca  tor  wantof  watcr.by 
Elifha  obtained)  water  ,  and  promife  of  vi- 
ctory. 11  The  Moabitts  deceiued  by  the 
colour  of  the  water,  commit);:  10  fpoile,  are 
ouercome.  16  The  king  ot  Moab ,  by  L- 
crificing  the  king  of  Ldoms  fonne ,  railed) 
the  liege. 


<K^rf  £>ib  3ch02am  tt)c  fonne 

£S§s  i  °f  -a,)ab  bcsait  to  rc'5iic 

r|H?>OsH  3  oucr  3ifrael  in  Samaria, 
1 23!^  •  the  eighteenth  rcrc  of  3ic- 
*^&&JX  bofbaphat  tnng  of  ju< 
baf),  anb  rctgucbttbetuepccres. 

x  3nb  hr  ttvougfjt  cum  m  the  fight 
ofthc?LflpHjD,bntnot  Uac  his  father 
anb  litre  tns  mother ;  foi  hee  put  alba? 
the  t  image  of  Baal  that  bis  father  jjab 
i  mabc. 

3  4i5aiertbclcf& ,  rjet  rteaueb  bnto 
tiic  finnes  of  ^Jeroboam  tl)e  fonnc  0f 
/?5ebat,  tbhich  mabegifraeito  finnci  he 
bepartebttot  therefrom. 

4  C3mb£0cO)aamgof£13oabrbas 
afheepe  mafrcr  ,  anb  rcnbieb  bnto  the 
Bing  of  3Jfraei  an  huntyeb  thoufanb 
lambcs  ,  anb  an  tjuntycD  thoufanb 
rammcs,rbith  the  tbooll. 

5  25utftcamctopafrcibhcn*^hab 
tbas  beab ,  that  the  Btng  of  £0oab  re^ 
bcllcb  agamft  the  hmg  of  3Jftael. 

6  <[3mb  tung  3Jet)02anHbcnt  out 
of  5>amana  the  fame  tune ,  anb  num- 
b;cball3JfeaeI. 

7  ^nbhetbent,anbfenttoJJch05 
Qiaphat  the  Bing  of  3Jubah  ,  favuig, 
Xhe  tnng  of  #oab  Dart)  rcbclleb  a? 
gamftmec:  netltthou  goe  \b\tt)  nicea* 
gamfl  ^oab  to  battclU  anb  he  faib,  3 
Vbill  goe  bp :  *  3}  am  as  thou  art ,  mp 
people  as  th?  people ,  andmphojfesas 
thphortcs. 

8  anbhefaib,n9htcl)ibapfb.aiiibe 
goebp  i  :anb  he  anftocrcb ,  Xhetbap 
tluough  fheibtlbemcffe  of  €bom. 

9  ^>o  the  lung  of  3lfrad  lbcnt,  anb 
thehmgof  3fuoah  ,  anbtheftmgof  €> 
bom:anb  thev  feccht  a  compaffc  of  fcuen 
bapesiournep:  anb  there  ibasnotba- 

fcrfonhchoftc,  anb  fo?  the  cattetlt  that 
folloibcbthem. 

io  3mbthcmngof3iftaeifaib,^ias, 
that  the  %0  is  ©  hath  cailcb  thel'e  t!)2cc 
uuigs  together ,  to  bcliucr  tljem  mto  the 
hanbof£0oab. 

1 1  25ut  gjcDofhaphat  faib ,  is  there 
no  t  here  a  #2ophrt  of  the  ILcheb?,  that 
lbe  map  enquire  of  the  ^,©isp  bp  mm  < 
3lnb  one  of  the  tung  of  3Jftacts  fcr- 
uantsanfrocrcb,anbfaib,^crc^lifl)a 
the  fonne  ofSljaphat ,  lbhichpoibjcb 
ibatcr  on  the  hanbs  of  ffi Utah. 

ii  3lnb  JIchon)aphat  faibc ,  Xhe 
ibo2boftht1L0isi>  istbithhun.  5»o 
tl)eRtngof3Ifrael,fj3lchon)aphat,anb 
the  Sing  of  Cbom  lbcnt  bourne  to  htm. 

ij  ^nb<£lin)afaibebntott)cl»ingof 
3ifracl, 


\Hch 
ftarue. 


•Chap.  I. 


*  i. King. 
22.4. 


Hrtr.at 
thurfcet. 


TheMoabitcs  Chap.xvj.  areoucrcome 


\Hcb  gritxc 


]  He&,  w,~re 
crycd  toge- 
ther. 

j  HeB.jrird 
himfrlfs 

Me.    & 


■\  Heb.  dc- 
ftrojcd. 


Orfhcj 
fmote  mttt 

tin". 


Jjfrael,  ndhat  hauc  J  to  Hoc  Until  thce< 
©etthccto  the  prophets  of  thy  father, 
anb  to  the  prophets  of  thy  mother /3inb 
tl)c  king  of  Jfracl  faib  »mo  Hun,/!5ap : 
fo?  the  %  ©  is  id  hath  eaiicb  thefc  ttjicc 
kingstogcthcr,tobclutcrtheintntothe 
banbofii^oab. 

14.  anb€ii(bafaib,:3{£fhefL©iR© 
ofDofiesluictti ,  bcfojc  mhom  3  ftanb, 
Purely  mere  it  not  that  3  rcgarbtbc 
pjefcucc  of  ^Jcbofbaphat  the  imng  of 
3Jubab,31  iboulb  not  lookctotbatb 
tbee,noj  fee  thee. 

15  26ut  noil)  b2tng  mc  a  minftcell. 
3nb  it  tame  to  paffc  lbbcu  the  mmftrcll 
piayeb ,  that  the  banb  of  the  It©  is  © 
tame  bpon  fttm. 

16  3tnb  lice  faybc ,  Xhus  fayth  the 
%  ©  is  ©,  Qtakc  this  bailey  full  of  bit; 
ches. 

17  foj thusfaytb  the  !L  ©  K s>,  #cc 
(hall  not  fee  mmbc ,  neither  fliall  ye  fee 
ralnc,  yet  that  bailey  (hail  be  filitb  mitb 
mater,  that  ye  may  bunke,  both  ye,  anb 
your  tattcll,  anb  yourbcafts. 

13  3nb  this  is  but  a  light  thing  in 
the  fightof  the  ?L©  is  ©,  he  null  Deli 
ucr  the  £0oabites  alfo  into  your  hanb. 

19  3nb  ye  fbail  finite  eucry  fenteb  ei? 
tic, anb  eucry  choice  cmc,  anb  fball  fell 
eucry  goob  tree,  anb  ftopailibelles  of 
mater,  anb  tmarrc  eucry  goob  piece  of 
lanbttxthftoncs. 

io  3mb  it  came  to  paffc  in  the  moi- 
mng  lbhenthc  mcate  offering  mas  of 
fcrcb,tbatbcbolb,tbcrecamclbatcrby 
the  ttiay  of  €bom,  anb  the  countrey 
ttiasfiiicbibitb  mater. 

11  ft  3mo  mben  all  the  £)9oabitcs 
bcarbtbat  the  kings  mere  tome  top  to 
fight  agamfr  them ,  they  t  gathcrcb  all 
that  mere  able  to  t  put  on  armour,  anb 
bplbarb,anblroob  inthcbojbcc. 

12  3lnb  they  rofc  top  early  in  the 
morning,  anb  the  £>unuc  (bone  bpon 
tbemater,  anbthcQ5oabitcs  fame  the 
tbatcronfheothccfibcasrcbasbioob. 

2 j  ^Snb  they  faib,  Xbis  is  bloob :  the 
Rings  arc  finely  tflainc,  aubthcy  hauc 
fnuttcn  one  another :  noil)  therefore, 
fij9oab,totbcfpoiic. 
24.  ^nbibhcn  they  tame  to  thctampc 
of  3Jfcael,  the  'Jfraelitcs  rofc  bp  anb 
fmote  the  (jpoabites ,  fo  that  they  flebbe 
before  them:  but  [Ithcy  Ibcnt  fo:tbarb 
fmitmg  the  ££oabites ,  cucn  m  their 
countrey. 

25  3inb  they  beat  bomnc  the  cities, 
anb  on  cuecy  goob  piece  of  lanb  calf 


euery  man  bis  (tone,  anb  fillcb  it,  anb 
they  floppcb  all  tbcmcllcs  of  mater, 
anb  fellebail  the  goob  trees  i^onclyin 
Birharafcth  left  they  the  (tones  there; 
of:  hombetttheOingersmcnt about  it, 
anb  fmote  it. 

16  ft  3inb  mhenthe  Ring  of  £0oab 
fame  that  the  batten  mas  too  fozc  foj 
him,  he  tookelbitbbimfeucnbunbzcb 
men  that  bictbcfmojbes,  tob:cakctbo; 
rom  cucn  bnto  the  king  of  <2bom :  but 
they  coulb  not. 

27  Xhcn  bectooke  his  elbeft  fonne 
that  flioulb  hauc  reigneb  m  his  ftcab, 
anboffcrebhtmfozabitrntoffcringbp' 
on  the  mall:  anb  there  mas  great  m* 
oignation  againffjfracl,  anb  they  nt 
partcb  from  him,  anb  rtturncb  to  their 
omnclanb. 

CHAP.    1 1 1 1. 

1  Elifhamultiplietluhe  vvidowesoyle.  8  Hee 
giueth  a  fonne  to  the  good  Shunammite.  | 
]8  Hee  railcth  againe  her  dead  fonne.  38  ' 
At  Gilgal  hee  healeth  the  deadly  pottage,  i 
41  Hee  fatiifieth  an  hundred  men  with! 
twentie  loaues. 

^F  sDm  there  crycD  a  certaine 
"  &  moman  of  the  mmes  of  i 
I  thefonnes  ofrbeftzopbets ! 
I  bnto  tf  itlba,  faying,  Xby  i 
ifcruant  my  hufbanb  is  I 
bcao,  anb  thou  Unomeft  that  thy  fee; 
uantbib  fcare  the  2L©isp:  anb  the 
crebitour  is  tome  to  take  bnto  him  my 
tmo  Tonnes  to  be  botibmen. 

2  2hib  cufba  faib  bnto  her  >  nafjar 
(hail  3  boc  fo?  thec*  Xciimcc,  mhat 
haft  thoum  thchoufe?  ^nbfhccfayb, 
Xhtnehanbmaib  hath  not  any  thing  m 
the  houfc,  faue  a  pot  of  oyle. 

3  Xhen  hee  fatb,©oe,boirom thee 
bcffcls  ab?oab,  of  all  thy  neighbours; 
euen  cmptte  bcffels^lbo^romnotafcm. 

4  3lnbmhcnthouartcomem,thou 
(halt  (hut  the  doojc  bpon  thee,  anb  bp^ 
on  thy  fonnes,  anb  ftjait  pomzc  out  into 
all  thofc  bcffcls,  anb  thou  (halt  fct  afibc 
that  tbhich  is  full. 

5  &ofhccmcntfromhim,anbflnit 
die  booje  bpon  her,  9  bpon  her  fonnes : 
mho  brought  the  vends  to  her ,  anbfljee 
pomjebout. 

6  3lnb  it  tame  to  patfc ,  mhen  the 
be(Tclsmcrcfull,that  (hee  faib  bnto  her 
fonne,  25nngmcyet  a  bcfltll.  TMbytt 
faib  bnto  her,  There  is  not  a  beffel  mo?c. 
3(nb  the  oyle  ftayeb. 

%\  1         7  Xhen 


I  f  Hei  vnlJI 
he  left  the 
lionet  there- 
fin  Ktr. 

I  i.a-ifelh. 


*Si 


Or, font 


Elifha.and 


II.Ki 


inp-s. 


rheSl 


lunammite. 


\Or,crtd:- 
tottr. 

t  Hch.thtrt 
heldonlntn. 


•Gcn.iS. 

10. 

t  Htt.fit 

tunc. 


7  %\ym (Dc camc.ano  toio  tDe  man 
of  God:  anODcfaiD,  Goe,  fell  tl)e  oylc, 
anD  pap  tDyi|Debt,atiD  Hue  tljou  ano  tlj? 
rDilD?cnoftDerclt. 

8  C  3uD  fit  fell  onaoay ,  tljateip 
(Da  paflfcD  to  SUjuncm ,  lbDcrc  ujas  a 
great  iboman,  ano  (Dec  t  contttamcD 
Dim  to  catcbzeao:  anOfoitttias,  rtjat 
asoftasDepartcDby ,  DeetutneouuDfc 
tDcrtocatebzeao. 

9  3no  (Dec  faio  bnto  her  DufbanD, 
2ScDoiDnoib,3f  perccttietDattDis  is  an 
t)olp  man  of  Goo,  which  paCfetl)  by  bs 
continually. 

io  net  bs  matte  a  Utlc  chamber ,  3 
p?ay  tljcc,  on  the  Xball,  ano  let  bs  fet  to? 
him  tljcrc  a  bco ,  ano  a  table ,  ano  a 
Goolc,  ano  a  canoicmc&e :  ano it  Qjau  be 
ibDcn  \)t  tommctl)  to  bs ,  tljat  Dee  ftjall 
turncintDttDcr. 

ii  %nb  u  f ell  on  a  Day  tDat  fjce  tame 
tljitljcr,  ano  Dec  turnco  utto  tl;c  tDam? 
ber,<moiaytDcre. 

ii  ZWQ  He  faio  to  GcDa3iDtsferuant, 
CalltDis  &Dunamnutc.2lnD  ibDcnDcc 
Dao  calico  Der,  (Dc  ftooo  bcfoze  Dun. 

i?  3MD  Dctaio  onto  Dim,  Say,  noib 
bnto  Dct,  26enolD,tDouUattbccne  care* 
full  foj  bsibitD  all  tDis  care  iistjat  is  to 
beooncfoztDcc?  naouiocfttDoubefpo- 
Uen  fo:  to  tDc  fetng,  o?  to  tDc  captatne  of 
tDeDoftc*  3nD  flje  anfrocte0,3l0lbrtl 
among  nunc  oibnc  people. 

14  3inDDefaiO,iBDattDenistobtt 
bone  fo?  Dec*  3lnD  GeD&5<  anftoerco, 
(lleciiy  QjeDatDno  clnlo,  ano  Der  lju£ 
banotsoio. 

\<,  3inD DcfaiO,CallDcr.  2nD  lbDen 
De  Ijao  calleo  Der,  fljc  Q00O  IntDeOoojc. 

16  ^noDcfatO,*^bonttDtstfcafon, 
acco?Dutg  to  tDctimcof  life,  tDou  fDalt 
imbzace  a  fonnc.  3lnD  (Dc  fato,  /fray  my 
lojo,dioumanof  Gob,  ooe  notucbnto 
tDmcDanOmaio. 

17  3inD  tDc  lboman  eonteiueo ,  ano 
bare  a  fonnc  at  tDat  feafon,  tDatCIitya 
Dao  faio  bnto  Der,  a«o?Dmgto  tljetime 
of  life. 

is  IT  SlnoibDcn  tDc  cDflotbas  grotto 
en,  itfcllon  a  Day  tDat  Dccibentoutto 
DtsfatDcr,  to  tDc  reapers. 

19  3tnODc  fato  bnto  Dis  fatDer,  £0y 
Dcao,  my  Deao :  ano  De  faio  to  a  laooe, 
CancDun  tolnsmotDcr. 

20  3tnoibDenDcDaotaScnDtm,anO 
bzougDtDuntoDtsmotDcr,  Dec  fate  on 
Der  Unecs  till  noonc,  anOthen  oico. 

21  3mofl)ctticntbp,anDlaiODimon 
tDc  bco  of  tDc  man  of  Goo,  ano  ftwt  the 


idoorcbponntm,anDU)cntout. 

22  ^nouic  calico  bnto  Der  Dufbano, 
anbfaio,  £>cnDme,3Jp?aytDee,  one  of 
tDe  y  ong men,  ano  one  of  tDe  affes.tDat 
31  map  runnc  to  tDe  man  of  GoO ,  ano 
comeagaine. 

2  3  ano  De  faio,  n9Dercfo?e  mat  tDon 
goe  to  Dmi  to  Day  i  it  is  ncitDtr  nelbc 
mooncno2fi>abbatD'  3no  (Dec  faio,  it 

(halbe  tlbCll. 

24  XDcnfl)efaoleoanafie,anDfaio 
to  Der  fcruant,  2Dnue,anogoefb;lbarO: 
t  nacHc  not  thy  nomg  fo?  met ,  ejecept  3 
biDtDee. 

25  ;§>o(Detbcnt,  ano  came  bnto  tDe 
man  of  Goo  to  mount  Catmcl:  ano  it 
tame  to  paffe  ibDen  tDe  man  of  Goo 
tarn  per  afarre  off,  that  Dec  feio  to  Gr 
Da5tDis  feruant,  26eDolb ,  yondens  tDat 
&>Dunamnntc: 

26  3£unnenorb,3Ip?aytDee,tomect 
Der  ,ano  fay  bnto  Der,is  .t  ibcl  ttiitD  tDetf 
1  s  it  rbel  untD  rDy DufbanD;  is  it  tbclUKtD 
tljecDilbf  2(nD  (DeanfracccD,  ituibell. 

27  3nbibDen(DcecametotDemau 
of  Goo  to  tDe  DUl,  tDee  taugDt  t  Dim  by 
tDe  feet:  but  GeDav  tame  ncere  to  tD?u  h 
Dccaibay.  3lno  tDe  man  of  Goo  faioe, 
?Let  Der  alone,  fo?  Dct  foule  is  tbcrco 
ttinDm  Der :  ano  rf)e  %  ©  is  ©  DatD  DID 
itfronimcanDDatDnottolome. 

28  3CDcn (Dcefaio,  IDiolfDtDtea 
fonne  of  mp  %  ©  is  &i  010  3  not  fay>, 
S>oenotocceiueme; 

29  XDen  De  faio  to  GcDatf,  GitO  bp 
tDplomcs,  ano  ta&e  mpttafrc  in  trnne 
Dano,anO  goe  tDplbap:  if  tDon  meete 
any  man,  falutc  Dtm  not ;  ano  if  any  fas 
lute  tDee,  anfroeccDimnotagamc :  ano 
lapmpflaffebpon  tDcfaccof  tDccDuoc. 

30  ^notDcmotDeroftDetDilOcfaiO, 
3s  tpc  %  ©  is  ©  UuctD,ano  as  tDy  fonic 
liuctD ,  3  Will  not  icaue  tDee.  3lno  Dc  & 
rofcanofollouJCDDcr. 

31 3lnoGeDa3ipafleD  on  bcfoze  tDem, 
ano  laio  tDc  ftaffc  bpon  tDc  face  of  tDc 
(DUD,  but  there  was  nettDcr  bopec ,  no? 
t  Dcaring :  ibDercfo?e  Dc  ibent  againc  to 
mcctcDun,anDtolDcDmi,  fapmg,XDc 
(DUDisnotaibaaco. 

32  3nb  lbDen  ciiQjaibas  come  into 
tDc  Doufe,  bcDolo,  tDe  rijUD  ibas  Ocao, 
and  laio  bpon  Ins  bco. 

33  ^erbcntmtl)crefo?e,anoirinttDc 
Ooo?e  bpon  tDem  tibame,  ano  p?ayco 
bntotDcHflDiB©. 

34  ^no  De  ibent  bp,  anD  lay  bpon 
tDe  cDUb,  ano  put  DismoiitDbponDis 
moutD,  ano  Dis  epes  bpon  Dis  eycs,ano 

Dis 


t«i;«/. 


\»,b.rt. 
fhuirte  not 
for  mtto 

tfc. 


\Hri.ijtu 

fictc. 


t  Htt.tir.er 


f  Hebjtnm- 

ItOM. 


a 


lap.v. 


lP 


N 


aaman  leprous. 


p1 


f  Heb.oncc 
hither ,and 
once  thither. 


\Hebr.eu.t 
thing. 


\\  Or,  in  hit 

fi"f,"S"' 
mentt 


«IoW. 
n. 


ijts  hauos  bpon  l)is  hanbs,  anD  be  fttet 
chcb  Dutifclfc  bpon  the  cbUD,  anD  the 
Reft)  of  t!)c  cbUD  lbareD  Ibatmc. 

35  XbcnhcreturncD,anDibalBcDm 
tbcboufcttoanDfco,anDlbcntbp,anD 
Ctcctct)ct)  bunfclfc  bpon  him:  ano  the 
rtjiio  nccfeD  fcucn  times,  ano  the  cbUD  o- 
pcncD  bis  eyes. 

j6  5tno  Dec  calico  Gcbasi ,  ano  faiD, 
Call  this  £>l)nnammite.  £>o  bee  calico 
bet:  anD  ibben  (hecruas  come  in  bnto 
bim,befaiD,i:aBctoptbyfoniic. 

37  Xbenlbeibentin.anDfcilatbis 
feet,  ano  boibcDbcr  fclfc  to  tbcgrounb, 
ano  tooue  bp  her  fonnc,  ano  ibent  out. 

38  C3nD£Ufl)acamcagautcto(5tl- 
gai,  auDfbcrcrbasaDcartbtntbclanD, 
anD  the  fonnes  of  the  0?oplicts  were  fit 
ting  before  him :  ano  bee  faiD  bnto  l)ts 
feruant,S>etontbcgccatpot,anDfcctbc 
pottage  fo?  the  fonnes  of  the  0zopbcts. 

39  3nDoneltoentoutmtotbcnclDto 
gather  tjerbes,  anD  founDaibilD  tome, 
anD  gatbcrcD  thereof  lbilDc  gourbs 
bis  lap  full ,  anD  tame  anD  ItycD  them 
into  fljepot  of  pottage :  fojtbcy  fenctt) 

them  not. 

40  ;§otbcypoib;jcDoutto:tbemen 
to  cat:  anD  it  tame  to  paffe  as  fbey  to  etc 
eatmg  of  rtjc  pottage ,  that  they  ettcD 
out,  anD  faio,  0  thou  man  of  <£»ob,there 
is  Death  in  the  pot.  2lnD  tfjcv  toulD  not 

tate  thereof. 

41  2SutljefaiD,  Zbenbzingmcalc. 
3mDbceaftitmtofbepot :  31nDbcfaiD, 
l&oibie  out  fo?  the  people,  that  they 
ma? cat.  StnDfbcrctbasnQtharmcm 
tbepot. 

41  <r3mD  there  came  a  man  from 
2Saal-£>baiifl)a ,  anD  brought  tftc  man 
ofeoDbzeaD  of  fbefirftfrtuts,  ttbenne 
loaues  of  barley, anD  full  cares  of  come 
tmtbchufliefbcrcof:anDbefaiD,<l5iue 
bnto  the  people,  that  they  ma?  catc. 

43  3lnD  hts  fcrutf  our  faibc ,  nabat 
fJbotilD  3  fct  this  before  an  hunDzcD 
men*  ?>c  faiD  agame,  ©iue  the  people, 
tliattrjcv  mw  catc :  fo:  thus  faith  tlje 
%  o  k  9 ,  "j:bcy  (ball  catc ,  anD  (hall 

ICaitC  thereof. 

44  S)ohefctubefozethem,anDthc? 
did  catcanb  left  thereof,  accojDiugtotbc 

UJ02D0ftheJl£DKP. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Naaman  ,by  the  report  ol  acaptiucmayd.is 
fenttoSamaiia  [obecuredofhi'sleprofi'e.  3 
Elifha,  fendinghimtoiordan,  curethhim. 
i>    Herefufing  Naamans  gifts  ,   granteth 


him fomeot the  earth.  20  Gehazi ,  abu- 
fing  his  matters  name  vntoNaaman,  isfmu- 
ten  with  leprofie. 

®Vo  iftaaman  captamc  of 
tbcboftoftbcHmgof£>y: 
ria  ,  ibas  a  great  man 
t  lbith  hts  matter , anD  !!ho- 
nourablcbctaufc  by  him 
the  1L<s>  w  ts>  haD  gtucn  \  [Deltucrauce  bn 
to  S>yzia :  is?c  ibas  alio  a  mighty  man  in 
baioucbuthewasaicpcr. 

I  3tiD  the  Syrians  haD  gone  out 
by  companies,  anDbaD  brought  albay 
tapmieout  of  theiauD  of  ^jfracla  utlc 
maiD,?  (be  t  lbattcD  on  Naamans  lbsfe. 

3  3lnD  fl)cc  faiDc  bnto  her  nuttreffe, 
naouiD  ©oD  my  Iojd  were  t  tout)  the 
£zopbet  that  is  m  Samaria ,  fo?  he* 
lboulD  t  rccoucr  him  of  his  IcproGc. 

4  3lnD  one  ibent  in,  anD  toioc  his 
lo?D,  faymg,  XbusanD  tlius  faiD  the 
mayDthatisofthe  lanD  ofSIfracl. 

5  ^nDtljCKingof  £>yzialaiD ,  Goe 
to,  d5oe,  ano  %  ibtli  fcnD  a  letter  bnto 
thcHmgof^Jfraci.  anD  bee  bcpartcD, 
anD  tooBcUbttbbim  ten  talents  of  til- 
ucc,anD  fire  thoufano  pieces  of  golD,anD 
ten  changes  of  raiment. 

6  ^ud  hec  brought  thclctter  to  the 
King  of  5lfracliaymg,i3oib  lbhen  this 

letter  iscomc  bnto  thec,bcholD,3Jhanc 
thetewith  fent  i^aaman  my  fcrnant  to 
thee,  that  thou  mayeft  rccoucr  him  of 
hislepzofic. 

7  3tnD  it  tame  to  pafTc  lbhcit  the 
King  of  Tlfrael  haD  rcab  the  letter ,  that 
hercnthistlotbcs.anDfaiD.AmgjooD, 
to  Bill  anD  to  mane  aliue,  that  this  man 
Docth  fcnD  bnto  me,  to  rccoucr  a  man  of 
his  lepjofie*  iBhercft»e  conftDcr  f$  pwy 
you,  anbfeehott)  hcfccucth  a  quarreil 
agamftme. 

8  C^nDtttbasfotbhtn^liQiathc 
man  of  ©06  haD  hcarD,  tljat  the  uing  of 
■jfradhaD  rcntljis  clothes,that  he  fent 
to  the  Bingjaying^berefoje  haft  thou 
rent  thy  clothes*  %tt  him  come  notb  to 
mec,  anb  hefljall  tmotbthatthercisa 
^jophetmjjfracl. 

9  ^>o  |5aaman  came  lbith  bis  ho?- 
fes,  anD  lbith  his  rharet ,  anD  ftooD  at 
thcDoojeof  thchoufc  of  €lift)a. 

10  anDeiivhafcntamefreugcrtonto 
him,faying,OocanDibafl)iu^ojDanc 
feuen  tunes ,  anb  thy  flefl)  (ball  come  a> 
gamctothecanD  thou  Cbaltbe  clranc. 

II  2Sttt  i!5aaman  ibas  ib:oth,anD 
ibcnt  aibay ,  anD  faiDe,  fficholbe,  1 3) 
thought,  J?c  lbill  furcly  come  out  to  me 

%\  3    anD 


fir,. 

II  Or^ci- 
otu.  Hebr. 
ttftedvp,  or 
accepted  in 
OHntoutnce. 
U  Orlvict'jr'j. 


t  Hebr.tr m 
before. 


\H,br. be- 
fore. 

t  Hebr.e.i- 
thrr  hi. 


\Hebr.m 
hit  hind. 


\Htbr.flti. 
Or,  l[j,J 
wub  my 
fit fo,  He -will 
fttrr/i  come 
auttie. 


26 


Naaman  clenfed.       I  I.Kings.         Gehazi  leprous. 


t  HAr. 
maoue  vp 
tnddevr.c. 
II  Or,  *A- 


»7« 


\H<lr.« 

IttlcpUCCof 

frjuaj. 


\Htlr.U 

bacfeact 


anD  ftanD ,  anD  call  on  the  /3amc  of  the 
%  ©hp  hiSGoO.tanDftrtKebishanD 
ouer  the  plate,  ano  rceoucr  the  leper. 

ii  Are  not  ||  3bana  ano  £>harpar,rt 
tiers  of  2>amafcus,  better  then  all  the 
ibarcrsof  3Jftach  £pay3hiotiban)in 
rhcnuanDbeclcanc^ofJeturncDjanD 
mcntaibayinarage. 

13  ^nDhssfcruantscamettccrcanD 
fpaiiebntobumanDfaiD,  £0y  father,  1/ 
th c  friophct  hao  btD  thee  Do  tome  great 
thing,  iboulDettthou  uotbaueDoncit; 
Doibntuth  rather  tl;cn,ibhcnhce  faith 
to  thee,  naaib  ano  be  cleans 

14  Xhcn  lbent  he  Doibnc ,  ano  Dip; 
peD  htmfelfc  fcucn  ttmcsm^iojDan ,  &v 
cojDtngto  the  faying  ofrhc  man  of GoD: 
anDhis  flcfljeamcagaine  liuc  into  the 
flefl)  of  a  ntlc  rbilDe.anD  *hc  ibas  clcane. 

15  C^nDhcrenimeDtothetnanof 
GoD,hc  ano  ail  his  company  ,ano  tame, 
anDflooD  before  htnnanDhcfaiD,  n&t- 
!wiD,iion)5tmotbfhat  thercisnoGob 
in  all  rhc  earth ,  but  m  3Ifracl :  noib 
therefo?c,3J  pjay  thcctaiteablcnmgof 
thy  feruant. 

i6  25ut  he  faib  ,  3ls  the  %  0  is  ©  \u 
ucfh,  before  lbhom3JaatiD,1Jtbillrc' 
tctuc  none :  3tnD  hectygcDhunto  tauc 
it,buthcreftu*eD. 

17  3utD4i5aamanfaiD  ,£>hail  there 
not  then,  "J  pjay  thee,  begmen  to  thy 
feniant  tibo  mules  bnrDcn  of  earth  * 
fo?  rt)v  feruant  rbii  hencefonh  offer  ntv 
thcr  burnt  offering ,  no*  faenficebnto 
other  goDs,butbnto  the  %ok  ©. 

is  3Jtt  this  thing  the  %  o  is  ©  par< 
Don  thy  feruant ,  that  when  my  matter 
goeth  into  the  houfe  of  Simmon  to 
ibonlnp  there,  anD  heelcancth  onmy 
hatio , atiDjbommyfclfclntbchottfc 
of  Bttnmon :  lbhcn'SJ  bolb  Doibne  my 
fclfr  m  tl;c  houfe  of  Simmon ,  the 
fL©is©  parbon  thy  feruant  m  this 
thing. 

19  3mDhcfaiDbnto  !)im,Go  in  peace. 
;S>ohcDcpartcDfrombim,taiitlcibay. 

20  C 26ut  Gcha$i  tl)c  feruant  of  G- 
lifbathc  man  of(5oD,fatD,z5cholD.ui}> 
matter  hath  fpareDjaaaman  this  &r- 
nan,  m  uotrcttuungat  his  hanosthat 
lbhtcl)  hee  b:ought:  but  is  the  Hois© 
liuctl),  '|l  mil  nmnc  after  hmi,  anD  taltc 
fomclbhatofhun. 

1 1  &o  ocha?i  foIlolbcD  after  /^aa= 
man  :  anD  lbftcn  Naaman  faib  him 
nmnmg  after  him,  hec  UghteD  Dolbnc 
from  rhc  tham  to  nicer  him ,  anDfaiD, 
fisaiittjciK 


22  3lnDhefaiD,:3ai^ibcli:myma: 
Oct  hath  fciu  me,  taping,  23cholD,cucn 
noib  there  be  come  to  nice  from  mount 
ep!#aimtlboyongmcii,ofthefonncs 
of  the  i&ophets :  Guictbcm  ,3  P#y 
thcc,a  talent  of  uluer,  anD  tibo  tljangcs 
of  garments. 

13  3inD  j!5aaman  faiD,  Bee  content, 
tatte  tibo  talents:  anD  hec  bjgcD  hun, 
anD  bounD  tibo  talents  of  filucr  in  tibo 
bags,  ibith  tibo  changes  of  garments, 
anD  laybe  them  tpon  tibo  of  his  fer; 
uants,  anb  they  bare  tium  befo^  him. 

24  3uiDlbhcnhccamctothei!toib2c, 
httooBctheni  from  their  hanD,  anD  be; 
QoibcD  them  m  the  houfe,  anD  Ijce  let  the 
mcngoe,anDthey  DcpartcD. 

25  2Siu  he  lbent  in,  anD  ftooD  before 
tns  matter :  anD  <£li(ba  faiD  bnto  t)tm, 
tDhcnce  commeft  tbou,Gcl)a5K  ^nD  hec 
faiD,Xhy  feruant  lbent  t  no  lbhitbet. 

%6  'Mb  he  faiD  bnto  him ,  teem  not 
mine  heart  with  thee,  ibhcn  theman  tor? 
ncD  againe  from  tjis  tharct  to  mcetc 
thee?  isitatimc  to  retctuc  money ,  anD 
to  r  ccctuc  garments ,  auD  Oltuc  yarbs, 
anD  OmcyarDS,  anDflicepc,  aitDortn, 
anD  men  feruants,anD  majb  fcruants; 

27  Xhc  lep^ofie  rheTcf02e  of  iJ5aa* 
man  fliall  clcatu  bnto  tljec ,  anD  bnto 
thy  fccDc  fo2  ener :  3inD  f)ee  ibentout 
from  l)is  p?efenec  a  leper  as  white  as 
fnolb. 

CHAP.    VL 

1  Elifha  s,iuing  leaue  to  the  vong  Prophets  to 
mlarge  theii  dwellings,  caufcth  yron  to  fwim. 
3  Hee  difclofeth  the  king  of" Syria  his  coun- 
fell.  13  The  armie  which  was  fent  to  Do- 
tlian  to  apprehend  Elifha  ,  is  (mitten  with 
bhndncfle:  ij  Being  brought  into  Sama- 
ria, they  arc  dilmifled  in  peace.  24  The  fa- 
mine in  Samaria  ,  caufeth  women  to  eate 
their  owne  children.  30  The  king  fendeth 
to  (lav  Elifha 


sLwUt^?  thee,  is  too  ITrait  foz  bs : 

2  ILtt  bs  goe,  lbcc  p:ay  tfjee,  bnto 
3Jo2Danc,  ano  tauc  thence  cuery  man  a 
bcamc,  anD  let  bs  mafic  bs  a  place  there 
ibhcrclbcmayDlbcll.  anDhceanfroc- 
rcD,Gocyc. 

j  3mD one faiD,25c content, li p?ay 
thecauD  goe  lbith  thy  fcruantsanD  he 
anuuercD,3Ubili£oc. 

4  ^>o  Ijcc  lbent  lb!th  them  :  anD 
ibhcnl 


jj  Or.fecrtt 
p/acc. 


\Hct>r.N0t 

httheror 

thithtr. 


Iron  fwimmeth.         Chap.vj,  A  great  famine. 


\Htb.yi 


Or,ct\tam- 


M-iei.Xt 


\Hcb.h;a- 


'i.Chr, 

'•7- 


tbben  they  came  to^tebane,  tljev  cut 

DOMlClbOOD. 

5  lout  as  one  tbas  felling  a  beame, 
the  t  arc  heaD  fell  uito  the  tbatet :  anD 
heccrycD,  anDfayb,  alas mailer ,fo? it 
tDasb02rotbeD. 

6  anDthcmanof<3oDfaiD,t@hcrc 
fell  it J.  anD  hec  (hcttieD  htm  tlje  place : 
auDbe  cutDotbncafticRc,  anD  call  u  m 
tljuher,anD  tlbc  p;on  mo  fiuimmc. 

7  Xberefojc  faiD  tjc,  XaRcitbp  to 
tljcc :  anD  hec  put  out  Jjts  ijanD,  anD 
tooRcit. 

s  C  Xhcn  the  Sing  of  Syna  tbar- 
reD  agamft^fracl,  anbtooRc  counfcll 
ibith  bis  rcruants,faytng,  3>nfuth  anD 
fuel)  a  place  thai!  be  my  1 1  canipc. 

9  anbtljcmauofOoDfcntbntothc 
Ring  of  Jfraci,  facing ,  zBcibarc  that 
tboupaffc  not  fuel)  a  place,  foi  thither 
the  Sy2ians  are  come  Dotbne. 

io  anbthcRingofJu-acirenttotbe 
place  tbhich  the  man  of  0oDtolDe  him, 
anD  tbarncD  hint  of,  anD  faucD  himfclfc 
thetc,uotontcno2ttbu'c. 

ii  Xhcrcfo2e  the  heart  ofthe  Ring  of 
Syjta  tbas  fine  tr  ottbieD  fo?  this  thing, 
anD  be  callcD  hts  feruauts ,  anD  fatD  bn* 
to  them,  teillycnotmctbcmetbhichof 
be  is  fo2  tbcRmg  of  3ifrael* 

u  anD  one  of  his  fctuanrs  fayDc, 
t  j|5onc,my  ioid  £)  Ring ,  but  eiifba  the 
}2uopbct,  thattsin  3JfracI,  teller!)  rfje 
hmg  of  ^Jfrael ,  the  tbo?Dcs  that  thou 
fpeaRctt  in  thy  beD-chambcr. 

13  C3mDhcfaiD,©ocanDfpictbhctc 
he «,  that  31  map  fenD  anD  fetch  him. 
anDittbastoiDcbim,faymg>2SeholD, 
he  is  m  £>otban. 

14-  Xbctcfo2e  rent  he  thither  ho?fcs, 
anD  charets,  anD  a  t  great  hofle:  anD 
they  came  by  night,  anb  compaffcD  the 
cine  about. 

15  anb  tbhen  the  ireruant  ofthe  man 
ofCJoD  Idas  nfencarlv  anb  gone  frurb, 
bebolb,anboftcompafreDthecittc,both 
with  hojfcs  anD  charets :  anD  his  rer- 
uant  faiD  bnto  him,  aias  my  mailer, 
hotbfbainbcDoe? 

i6  anDhcanrcuertD ,  jf  care  not  :fo2 
*  they  that  be  tilth  bs,  are  moe  then  they 
that  be  truth  them 

17  anD  <£li(ba  mayeD ,  anD  CayDe, 
%  <©  «B,'5p2ay  thee,  open  his  eyes 
tbatbemay  fee.  3tnDtbc1L©«£>  ope> 
neb  the  eves  ofthc  young  man,  anDhec 
ratb :  attb  bcholb,tbe  mountatne  was  full 
of  hojfcs ,  anD  charets  of  fire  rounbfc 
bouteiilba. 


jc  after  me. 


18  ano  tbhen  they  came  Dotbne  to 
him,  €lifl)ap2aycD  bnto  the  %o  13©, 
anD  faiD,  finite  this  people,  3ip2ay 
thee,  tbith  blinDneffc.  anD  hec  fmote 
them  tbitb  blinDneffc,  acco2Duig  to  the 
ibo2bof€iilba. 

19  C  ^nD  citdja  faibc  bnto  them, 
XhiSMtot  the  may,  neither  is  this  tlje 
cttte:  tfoUolbmc,auD35lbilib2ingyou 
to  the  man  tbboinycfccRc.  ffiuthcclcD 
them  to  Samaria. 

20  anD  it  came  to  pafle  tbhen  they 
tberccomc  into  Samaria,  tbatcirtba 
faiD,Ho5iB,  open  tlje  eves  of  tljefc 
men  ,  that  they  may  fee.  anD  tlje 
?L©hjd  opencD  their  eyes ,  anD  they 
ratb,  anD  bcholDc,  they  were  m  the  miDs 
of  Samaria. 

21  3uid  the  Ring  of  3!fcaclfaiDc  bnto 
euORtbbenhefattitljem,  £0y  fatljer, 
fljaligj  fmitethem?  (hall 31  finite  them? 

22  anbbeanftnereDXhouuJaitnot 
finite  them :  tboulDcft  thou  finite  tfjofc; 
rbljom  thou  haft  tanen  captiuc  ibitlj  j 
thy  fiuoiD,  anD  tbitb  trjy  boib  <  ret  tyeaD 
anDtbatcr  befo2C  them,  that  they  may  i 
eatc,  anD  DiinRc,  anD  go  to  their  mailer.  I 

23  anD  hec  pjcparcD  great  pioutGoni 
fo2  tljcin,  anD  lbhen they  haD  eaten  anD  I 
D?unRc,  heefent  themaibay,  anD  they  \ 
tbent  to  thctr  mailer:  fo  tlje  banDs  ofi 
Swia  came  no  mo?e  mto  tlje  laiiDe  of; 
3lfrael. 

24  nation  came  to  paffe  after  this, ; 
that  ZBcnhaDaD  Ring  of  Sy2ia  gathc; 
rcDailhishofte^iiDibentbp.anDbeui 
gcD  Samaria. 

25  anD  there  tbas  a  great  famine  in 
Samarta  s  anD  bcbolD,tbey  befiegcD  it, 
bnwianaffcs  heab  ibasfoiaefo2fourcs 
ftoie  pieces  of  filuer,  anD  the  fourth  part 
of  a  aab  of  Doues  Doung  to?  fiue  piece^of 
filuer. 

26  anb  as  tlje  Ring  of  TJfracl  tttas 
paffing  bybpon  thetbali,  there  cricoa 
tboman  bnto  Ijun ,  faying,  i^clpe,  my 
l02D,£)feing. 

27  anDljefaiD,||3ftlK!L©K©Dor 
not  hclpe  t\)tt ,  ibhencc  fliall  3}  heipe  | 
tijee<  out  of  the  barneflooje,  02  out  of  r 
tljctbtncpjeflc^ 

2S  anDtheRingfaiDbntoher,D©bat 
ailetljthee?  anb  fijecanfrocrcD ,  Xljis 
tboman  faiD  bnto  me,  ©iuc  thyfonnc, 
that  tbc  may  eatc  him  to  Day,  anD  lbec 
tbill  eatc  my  fonnc  to  mo2r  otn. 

29  So*tbcboyleDmyfonne;anDDiD  "d«u 
eatc  him:  anb  3  faiDe  bnto  her  on  the  " 
t  ncrt  bay,  <Siue  thy  fonnc,  tljat  tbc  may 

cate 


,  Or,  Let  net 
he  Lord 

'.vie :  hec 


53 

\Hel  :thrr. 


26: 


Plenty  foretold.         I  I.Kings.       Tlie  Syrians  flee. 


t  Htb.   A 

Lwd  which 
belonged  r. 

the  King, 
'.'untnJ  vpot 
hitlj.vj.i. 


rate  htm :  ana  (he  hath  htb  her  fonne. 

30  C3tnD  ittamctopaffc  ibhcnthc 
tang  heart)  the  \\>om  of  the  Bjomatv 
that  he  rent  rjts  clothes ,  ano  rjec  paffcD  \ 
bybponthc  ttialt,  anb  the  people  loo  j 
Ucb,atib  beholb,hcc  hab  factaloth  Hurt); . 
m,nponhtsflc(h. 

3iXhciihcfaiD,<3obbocfo,anbmo2c, 
alfoto  nice,  ifthchcabof€u(ha  the 
fonne  of  5>haphat ,  fhallftanbonhun 
this  bay. 

31  i5ut  eitlha  fate  in  his  houfc  (anD 
the  ciocrs  fate  Until  l)im)anD  the  Htng 
fent  a  man  from  befoje  him :  but  yet  the 
meffenser  came  to  htm,  hccCatb  to  the 
Cibers,  £>cc  ycc  hoih  this  fonne  of  a 
murocrcr  hath  fent  to  ta&c  albay 
mmchcafriLootaibhctifhcmefrcngcr 
commcth,fl)ut  the  booze,  anb  holb  him 
faftat  the  boo:c :  is  not  the  Count)  of 
his  maftcrs  feetc  behtnb  him  i 

33  3nb  ibhlle  hec  vet  taiKco  Vbtth 
them ,  beholbe ,  the  meffenser  came 
bottmebnto  huu:  anbhcfatb,2iocholb, 
thtsctull  >i  of  the  1L  0  is  E>,rohat  flioulb 
3F  matte  fo2thc  %  o  is  ©  any  longer : 

CHAP.  VII. 

1  ElilTu  prophecieth  incredible  plenty  in  Sa- 
maria. 3  Foure  Lepers  venturing  on  the 
holt  of  the  Syrians ,  bring  tydings  of  then- 
flight.  11  The  king  rinding  by  fpies  the 
newes  to  be  true,  Ipoileth  the  tents  of  the  Sy- 
rians. 17  The  Lord,who  would  not  beleeuc 
the  prophecy  of  plenty ,  hauing  the  charge 
of  thegate.is  troden  to  death  in  the  prefle. 

,*i?£®  tint  €lt(hafatb,t:)careycc 

'!  W&&,  the  lbojbofthclLoH©, 

)&m  Xlms  fatth  the  1L  o  a  id, 

r^S  ^°  m(WU)C  flbOttt  tlltS 

^  time  thai  ameafurc  of  fine  j 
flomcr be  ai  fo2afl)citell,atit)ttt)o  mea  : 
furesofuarlcyfozalheKcUttthegatcof 
Samaria. 

z  XhctttaiojD  on  lbhofehanbthe 
tanglcaucb.aufujercDthcmanofCoD,: 
anoraiD.iiehoro.'ftheJL'Dispuioulo 
malic  iwmooiues  in  heauen,  might  this 
ttitngbee^atiotjefaiDc,  2H5choiD,  tfjotii 
(halt  fee  it  HJtth  thine  etcs ,  but  (halt  not  t 
eatetlicreof. 

3  C  ^iud  there  mere  foure  lepious ! 
men  at  the  cutting  in  of  the  gate:  ano  j 
they  fame  one  to  another ,  tt)hV  fit  mte 
here  lmttiiibc  Die* 

4.  3Jf  me  fay,  tt)c  mm  enter  into  the 
nnc,  then  the  fanune  is  tn  the  tttic ,  anb 
lbee  (hall  Die  there :  anb  if  me  fit  Hill, 
hcre.UJcbtcalfo. /5oU)thcrefo2Ctomc, 


anbIcthsfallDntothehofiofthc5>ynj 
ans :  if  they  fauc  tos  aitue,  tt>c  (hall  Hue ; 
anb  if  they  mil  tos,  Vbc  fljaltbut  Die. 

5  2lnD  they  rofc  bp  m  the  tunltght, 
to  got  totuo  thecampcof  thcSyHans: 
anb  mhen  they  ltoer e  come  to  the  totter* 
moft  part  of  thctampe  of  £>yjta ,  be* 
hotb,thcrcVbasno  man  there. 

6  fonhc?l£>E©haDmabcthchoft 
of  the  Tynans  to  hearcanotfc  ofcha^ 
rcts,anbanotfcofho«!fcs,  eucuthenotfe 
ofa  great  hoft:  anb  they  faibonetoam 
other,  Hoe,  the  tang  ofjfracl  hath  l> 
rcb againfttos the  tangs ofthc  Ithtntcs, 
antothctangsoithc€gyptians,to  come 
topontos. 

7  iQhcrcfozc  they  arofc  anb  flebm 
the  tttnltght,  anb  left  their  tents ,  anb 
their  hones,  anb  their  affes,  enen  the 
tampc  as  it  was.anb  ftcb  fo2  their  life. 

8  3lnD  lbhen  thefc  lepers  came  to 
the  tottcrmoft  part  of  the  tampc,  they 
mentutto  one  tent,  anb  bib  eate,  anb 
bnnttc,  anb  carricb  thence  Clucr,  anb 
go  lb ,  anb  raiment,  anb  went  anb  htb  it, 
anb  came  agamc,  anbcutrcbmto  ano= 
thcrtcnt,  anb  tarricbthenccalfo ,  anb 
tbcutanbhtbtt. 

9  Xhcn  they  fatb  one  to  another, 
ODeboc  not  lbett :  this  tA^  is  a  bay  of 
goob  tybtngs,anb  ibe  holb  our  peace :  tf 
ibetarte  till  the  morning  light,  t  fomc 
nufchtcfc  mill  come  topon  bs :  nolbc 
therefore  come,  that  mc  maygoe,  anb 
tell  tljc  tangs  houfholb. 

to  5>o  they  camcanbcaiicbbntotht 
poster  of  the  cmc:anb  they  tolb  them, 
faying,  uoc  came  to  the  campe  of  the 
Tynans,  anbbeholb,  there  was  no  man 
there,  neither  tootcc  of  man,  btttlwfcs 
tycb,  anb  aires  tyeb ,  anb  the  tents  as 

tl)Cy  were. 

it  3hib  hec  callcb  the  posters,  anb 
they  tolb  if  to  the  tangs  houfcUuthui. 

ii  C  3nb  the  tang  arofc  in  the  night, 
anbfaibDtuo  his  fcruants,3J  mill  now 
mcVbyouH>hatthc5>yuanshaucbone 
to  bs  :Xhcy tatom  that  me  be  huugrte, 
thcrcfo2carcthcvgoncoutofthecamp, 
to  Iitbcthciufclitcsui  the  ficlb ,  faying , 
itDhcu  they  come  out  ofthccmcihc  fljal 
catch  them  aiutc,  anb  get  into  the  cttte. 

13  2Mb  one  of  his  ferttauts  anftuc* 
rcb,  anbfaib ,  %et  fometalu ,  3  pjay 
tl)tc ,  fiuc  of  the  tiojfcs  tiiat  rcmame, 
mtjich  arc  left  t  m  the  nttc:  ( bchoib,they 
arc  as  all  the  nutintube  of 'Jjfratl  that 
arc  left  m  it :  bcholb ,  3  fay ,  they  are 
men  as  aiithemultuube  ofthc3ifiac< 

lues 


tHti.w 

p/dlfind  D«. 
mfimttl, 


\  Heb.init. 


Plenty  in  Samaria.     Chap.vii).         Ben  had  ad  ft  eke. 


•Chop. 
4  35' 


lttesthatatccotmimeb)attblctbBfenb,! 

aim  fee. 

i+  XheytooRCthcrcfo2Cfmochatct 
h02fcs,  aim  the  lung  Cent  after  the  Ijofte 
of  the  Syitans,  facing,  <5oc,  aim  fee. 

H  atm  they  ment  after  them  Ditto 
3Io2oanc,  ant)  loc,  ail  the  map  mas  full 
of  garments ,  ant)  beffels,  mhtcl)  ttjc  j 
5>y2tans  hat>  call  atttayut  thett  haftc:  j 
atmthemeffengcrsretunub,  atm  toib 

tlic  tting. 

i6  anbthcpcopletbcntoutanbfpoi' i 
leu  the  tents  of  tl)c  $>yiim&:  5>o  a  mea- ; 
fiircoffincflomzcmasroidfozanieBcii,1 
ant)  tmo  mcafurcsrif  barley  fo;  a  fbefeel,  | 
act02Dingto  the  mom  of  the  %  o  is  ©. 

17  c  aim  the  mng  appotntcb  tftc 
lom  on  mhofc  Jjanb  he  leanct) ,  to  hane 
the  charge  of  tVje  gate:  anb  the  people 
trobebponhiminthcgatcatibhcbicb, 
as  tl)e  man  of  O&ob  hab  fatb,  mi)o  fpaUc 
mhen  Hie  Ring  ramc  oomttc  to  him. 

is  3lnt)  it  came  to  paffc,  as  the  man 
of  Got)  hat)  fpolien  to  the  Ruig,fayutg, 
£il>o  mcafurcs  of  baric?  foj  a  fbcftcl, 
aim  a  mcafurc  of  fine  flonue  fo?  aflic^ 
bcKfhalbc  to  mozrom  about  this  time, 
utrhe  gate  of  Samaria: 

i9  ano  that  lo2b  anfiucrcb  the  man 
of  <Soti,  atm  fatb,  #om  bcholb,  if  the 
%o  is  id  fboulb  malic  lbtimomcs  m 
hcaueii,  might  fitch  a  thing  be  f  aim  he 
faib,i5cholb,thou  fliait  fee  it  mtth  thmc 
eyes,  but  (halt  not  catc  thereof. 

zo  anb  fo  it  fell  out  unto  him :  f02  the 
people  trobe  bpott  htm  m  the  gate ,  anb 
tjebtcb. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

i  The  Shunammite  ,  hauing  left  her  coun- 
trey  feuen  yeeres ,  to  auoide  the  forewarned 
famine,  for  Elifhas  miracle  fake,ha<h  her  land 
reltored  by  the  king.  7  Hazae!  being  Tent 
vvuh  a  prefent  by  Benhadad  to  Elifha  at  Da- 
mafcus,  after  he  had  heard  the  prophefic,kil- 
lethhismafter,  andlucceedeth  him.  \6  Ie- 
horams  wicked  reigne  in  I  udah.  zo  Edom 
and  Libnah  rcuolt.  13  Ahaziah  fucceedeth 
lehoram.  -.5  Ahaziahs  wicked  reigne.  18  He 
vifiteth  Iehoi  am  wounded, at  Iezreel. 

I»£®*«l&s>  ftmfpaRc^itfhabntothc 
\?M!  moman  (' mhofc  fonttc  he 
hab  r  eft02Cb  to  lifcXaymg, 
*  arife ,  anb  goe  thou  aim 
thmc  hottfholbe,  anbfo- 
ibiirnemhcrfocucrthoitcanflrolourue: 
foi  the  ?L  ©  is  m  hath  ralleb  fo;  afamm, 
anmtfhailaifo  come  bpon  the  latm  fe; 
ncny  ceres. 


I    i    atm  the  moman  arofe ,  anD  bio 
after  the  faying  of  the  man  of  ©ob :  anb 
the  ment  mith  her  houfholbc,  ant)  fo 
tourucb  m  the  latm  of  the  iDhikltuies 
feuen  yeeres. 

3  anb  it  tame  to  paffc  at  the  feuen 
yeeres  cnbe,thatthc  moman  returneb 
out  of  the  latm  of  the  #I)tiflltnes:am> 
,  fl)emcntfoo2th  to  crte  bnto  the  Ringfo; 
Iherhoufc,anbfo2hertatm. 
I  4  anb  the  King  taiKcbttnth<Scha3i 
theferuatttof  the  man  of  <3ob,  faying, 
Xell  mee,  J  p;ay  thee,  all  the  great 
thmgs  that  tflifha  hath  bone. 

5  attbttcametopaneashemastet 
img  the  Huig  horn  hec  hab  reftojeba 
;ocabboby  to  life,  thatbeholb,  the  mo- 
j  man  mhofcfonnehchabrclfo2cbto  life, 
I  rryeb  to  the  Hmg  foiljcc  houfcanbfo; 
j  her  latm.  anb  ocha5i  fatb,  £0y  io?o  £> 
I  Ring,  this  is  the  moman,  anb  rijtS's  her 
fotmemhom  enmarclfozcbto  life. 

6  anb  mhen  the  King  ariieb  the  moj 
man ,  fbcctolbc  him.  £>o  the  Biugap; 
po  ittteb  bnto  her  a  ccrtaine  ||  officer , fay; 
tug,  &cfto2c  all  that  mas  hers,  atm  an 
rhcfrttites  of  the  f(elo,finccthebay  ti)at 
fbcleft  the  lanb,etten  till  noib. 

7  €  anb  vEUflja  tame  to  2Damaf- 
cus ,  atm  zsenhabab  the  Ring  of  5>y2ta 
masficRcanbst  mas  tolbc  htm, faying, 
£hc  man  of  <3ob is comchuher. 

8  anb  the  Ring  fatb  tm'to  ^atacl, 
1i:aRcap2efcntin  thine  hanb ,  aim  goe 
mcete  the  matt  of  @ob,  atm  enquire  of 
the  Ho  is©  by  htm,  faying,  Shall  3 
rccouerofthisbiftafci 

9  So  i^asacl  ment  to  mecte  him, 
anbtooRcap2cfenttmtthhim ,  euenof 
euerygoob  thing  of  2>amafcus,fourtic 
camels  burben,  anb  camcanb  ftoob  be; 
fee  him ,  anb  faib ,  5Chy  ronttc  3Sniha= 
bab  Ring  of  5>wta  hath  Jem  me  to  thee, 
faying,:§>haii  3  rccouer  of  this  bifeafci 

io  atm  eiifha  fatb  bnto  him,  ©oc, 
fay  bnto  htm,  Xhou  mayeft  ccrtcmly 
rccouer :  hombett,tljc  |L©isid  hatfj 
fliemebmc,  that  he  fliailfurelybie. 

1 1  anb  hec  fctlcb  hts  countenance 
tftcbfaftly,bntillhcmasaQ)amcb:anb 
themanofoobmept. 

12.  anb  i^a5aci  faib ,  nah?  mcepcth 
my  loib^  anb  hcaiifmcrcb,2Sccaufe3f 
Rnom  the  einllthattf)oumntooc  bnto 
the  chilbjcn  of  ^fracl  :  tljetr  ftrotig 
holbs  milt  tlioufct  on  fire ,  aim  their 
young  men  mat  thou  flay  nut!)  the 
ftnom,  atmmiltbafhtheircbilb2Cti)aim 
rip  bpn)etr  mometitbuhcbitbc. 

13  anb 


OrXn- 

mb. 


\Hth. 
htvid. 


\HckmA 


Hazael  is  king.  II.Kings.       Ahaziah  wicked, 


•  2.Cbron 
11.4. 

ntd. 


*2.Sjm,7 
13. 

\H,lr. 

CAttdir,or 

Untpe. 


*:.Chron. 

31.1. 


15  3nb  l^aei  Caib,23ut What, > s  thy 
fct'uaiitaboggc,tljathefl)ouibboctbis 
grcattljing;3nb€ltfbaanftucreb,Xhe 
flouBhaflj  IhcWcb  nice  that  tljou 
(halt  be  lung  ouerS>y?;a. 

1+  £>ohcbcpartcDfrom£ufl)a,anb 
came  to  bis  matter,  Who  fatbc  to  Dun, 
iBbat  fatu  cufba  to  thee?  anb  hecan* 
fiocrcb ,  i?e  tola  me  that  thou  Ibotttbtt 
finely  rccouer. 

15  3lno  it  tame  to  paffc  on  the  moi* 
toil',  trjathctooKca  thicsc  cloth,  anb 
biptitittWatcr,anbfp2cab  it  onbtsfaee, 
fo  that  be  uicd  ,  anb  C^acltcigtiebtn 
htsftcab. 

16  C3«bintbcfutljyccrcof3fo2am 
the  fonnc  of  3fljab  lung  of31fracl,  31c* 
bofbapbat  being  then  lung  of  3J«bah, 
*3fcbo2am  the  fonnc  of  3Jcboft)apbat 
tung  of  3Jut>al)  t  began  to  rcigne. 

17  Xbtr tic  ano  two  y ceres  olb  was 
lie  When  be  began  to  rctgne ,  anb  bee 
rctgncDcigbtyccrcsm3Jcrufaicm. 

is  3ttD  be  waihcb  m  the  way  of  the 
mugs  of  3ifracl ,  as  bib  tftc  boufc  of  %■ 
bab  :fo2thcbattgbtcr  of  3bab  was  bis 
Wife,  anb  rjee  bJb  euill  in  the  fight  oftijc 

fLOlSID. 

19  Pet  the  ILoir©  Woulb  not  w 
ftroy  35ubab ,  fo?  ©auib  bis  fetuants 
faae,  ia£ljccp2omifcbto  guictohtmai* 
way  a  t  iigbt,anb  to  l)is  cbilb?cn. 

10  C3m  bis  oaycs£bom  reuoltcb 
from  biiber  tnc  Daub  of  3iubah ,  anb 
mabcattutgoucrtbrmfclucs. 

11  S>o 3J0M111  wentouet  to  zair, 
anb  all  the  cbarcts  With  btm  ,  anbbec 
rofcbynight,an&fmotctbc€bomitcs, 
Wbtcb  cotnpafTcb  l)un  about :  anb  the 
captatnes  of  the  cbarcts,  anb  the  people 
flcb  into  their  tents. 

n  Pet  e&om  reuoltcb  from  bnbet 
tlie  hanb  of  gjubali  buto  tins  bay. 
Xbcn  JLibnab  reuoltcb  at  the  fame 
time. 

13  3luD  tnc  reft  of  tnc  actes  of  3Jo- 
ram,  anb  all  that  licebtb,  arc  they  not 
Wnttcnm  tbeboobe  of  tljc  Clj2outclcs 
oftlic  lungs  of  Jubali; 

14.  3(nb  llo.jam  flept  With  liis  fa= 
tbcrs>aitb  was  buricbWith  Ins  fathers 
tu  the  ettt'e  ofSDautb :  3lnb  *3lba3tah  hts 
fonnc  rcigncb  m  hts  ftcab. 

25  ii  31"  tljc  twelfth  yecrc  of  3Jo- 
ram  the  fonnc  of  3lnab,  lung  of  Jjfracl, 
bib  3ba*,tan  ,  the  fonnc  of  3Jcho2am 
lung  oHJubah,  begin  to  rcigne. 

16  Hwo  aubtWcuncyecrcsolbwas 
3tbaMab  When  he  began  to  rcigne  ,anb 


he  tetgneb  one  yecrc  m  3Jctufalem,anb 
his  mothers  name  was  sttbaiiah  tljc 
baugljtcr  of  £>mn  Bing  of  JJfracl. 

17  ;anbheWalBebinthcWayofthe 
houfe  of  abab,  anb  bib  cutll  m  the  fight 
of  thcHsDisD,  as  did  tljc  houfe  of  3t= 
hab :  f02  hce  was  the  fonnc  in  law  of  tljc 
houfe  of  2lbab. 

23  C3inb  be  went  With  3Jo?am  the 
fonnc  of  3Ujab,to  tljc  watte  agaittft  $a-- 
?acl  Ring  of  Jayna  in  £amotb  (Silcab, 
anb  tljc  ^syjtans  wounbeb  302am. 

2  9  3tnb  King  3toam  Went  backc  to 
be  ijcalcb  in  3l£3tccl,  of  tljc  Wotmbcs 
t  which  the  §>y?tans  t  Ijab  guicn  him  at 
Ramah ,  When  beetbugbt  againtti?a= 
^acllnngof  ^>y?ia  :  3lnb  5flja3ialj  tljc 
fon  of  3Jcho?am  fttngofllubah,  went 
boWnc  to  fee  302am  the  fonne  of  3hab 
m'3ie5rccl,bccaufe  Ijc  was  fttac. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Elifha  fendeth  a  yong  Prophet  with  inftrudi- 
onsto  aniioint  Iehu  at  RamothGilead.  4 
The  Pi  ophet  hauin  g  done  his  mcfia ge,flicth. 
11  Ielm  being  made  king  by  the  (ouldiers, 
killethloramintheficldofNaboth.  17  A- 
haziahis  flaine  at  Gur,  and  buried  at  letufa- 
lem.  30  Proud  Iezebc!  is  throwen  downc 
out  of  a  window,  and  eaten  b)'  dogs. 

/15b  eiilha  the  0?opljet 
caUcboneofthcthilb?eu 
of  tljc  tf>?oprjcts ,  anb  faib 
bnto  ijim  ,  <3irb  bp  thy 
loincs ,  anb  tasc  this  bore 
of  one  in  tljtiic  ijanb ,  anb  goc  to  Ba- 
motljcBilcab. 

i  ^nbibhenthoucommcftthither, 
looRcout  tljcrc  3Jclju  tlicfonnc  of  31c 
hoflhaphat,  the  Tonne  of  iBiniQn,  anb 
goe  m,  anb  ma&e  him  arift  bp  from  a-- 
moug  his  b2cth?en ,  anb  carte  him  to  an 
tinner  chamber. 

3  Xheu  *  talietheborcofoilc ,  anb 
poibjeit  on  hishcab ,  anb  fay ,  Xhus 
faith  the  %  ok  id  ,  31  hauc  anomtcb 
thee  King  ouct  3Jfracl :  then  open  the 
boo,2c,anbflce,anbtarynot. 

4  C§>othcyongman,eumthcyong 
man  the  p?ophct ,  Went  to  Eamotlj 
(Stlcab: 

5  ana  When  heccamc,  bcholb,  the 
captatnes  of  the  hoft  Were  fitttng,  anb 
hce  fatb,  3  hauc  an  trranb  to  thec,  O 
captame :  31nb3Jchu fatb,Slnto  Wljirlj 
ofallbSi  3tnbhcfaib,  Xutljcc,C>cap; 
taine. 

6  3nb  hce  arofc,  anb  went  into  the 

houfe, 


\Hehr. 

wherervitb 

thcSyriattj 

dcd. 
\He6r. 

wottmied. 


her  i«  « 
t  l.A/nccr. 

•..King. 
I^.1 6. 


iehuannoynted.        Chap.ix.  lehoramflaine. 


*  I.Kings 
II.  15 

*  I.King'; 
14.10  an.i 
II.  II. 


«  I.King". 
I  .j. 10. and 
II. 52. 
'l.KingS 
itf.J. 


TfHA.rtig- 

xtth. 


*Cha.8.39 

\Hrb.lche- 

rum. 

t  Heb.fmsle 


\Hcb.lctn 
ejcxperpoe, 


houfc,  anD  hec  polbjeDtheoplc  on  Ijisf 
heao,anD  faiD  Unto  hint,  Xhus  fapth 
the  |L©i3  ©  (Sod  of  3lftael,  gj  l)auc 
anopntcD  thee  Ring  ouec  the  people  of 
the  it  01a©,  euen  ouctgjfrael. 

7  3inD  thou  (haitfmtte  the houfc  of 
3hab  thp  matter ,  thatgj  map  aucnge 
theblooDofmp  fcruants  the  j&ophets, 
ano  the  blooD  of  all  the fcruants  of  the 
%  o  1a  ©,*  at  the  hanb  of  Jtacbel. 

8  jronhntoholchoufeof^abuVl 
pcrtfl) ,  anD  *  $  Urillcut  off  from  3hab, 
him  thatpiffett)  againft  the  Vbali ,  anD 
htm  that  is  (hut  Dp  anD  left  in  31  fr  ael. 

9  3tttD 33 1MI  mane  the  houfc  of  %■■ 
hab,  liBcthc  houfc  of  '^Jeroboam  the 
fonnc  of  i!3ebat,  anD  liftc  rhehoufc  of 
*25aalhathc  fonnc  of  3thuah. 

10  3nDtheDoggcs(haieate3Je5ebel 
in  the  ponton  of  Scared,  anD  thcr  c  fbai 
be  none  to  buric  her.  3nD  he  opcncD  the 
Doo?e,anDflcD. 

11  CXhm3Ichucamcfoozthtothc 
fcruants  of  his  I02D ,  ano  one  faiDtmto 
him,  lis  ailtbcll  t  lhhcrefoic  tame  this 
maDDe  fcliom  to  thee*  3inD  hefaiDPtt^ 
tothem ,  ?3ec  ftnotb  the  man ,  anD  his 
communication. 

ii  2inD  titer  faiD,  it  isfaifc,  tell bs 
noro:  3lnDhcefapDe,  Xhus  anD  thus 
fpanchctomc,  fapmg,  Xhus  faith  the 
%  fiP  is  ©,  3  i)ane  anopntcD  thec  B'.ng 
oucrgifrael. 

15  Xhenthe?haQcD,anDtoouccuc 
rpman  his  garment,  anD  put  itnnDcr 
himoitthctopofthcftaircs,anDblenjc 
lbifhtrumpets,faping,3i  chilis  Ring. 

14  dogjchuthcfonncofjchoflja' 
phat,thefonnc  of  jSimfhi,  confpircD  a 
gainft^ioiam:  (noil)  3102am  haDRcpt 
Ramotb  <StlcaD,hcc,anD  all3ffracl,bc= 
caufc  of  j?avtel  King  of  £>p2ia : 

15  zsut  *  Ring  1 502am  ttjas  recur- 
neD  to  bee  hcaico  m  glared ,  of  the 
ibounDS  lbhuh  tl;c  £>p2ians  haD  t  Si, 
uenhim,  ibhen  he  fought  ttiith  $a5ael 
Rtngof£>p?ia.)  3uiD3JchufatD,3ifit 
bepour  tmnDs,  then  t  let  none  gocftmh 
nor  efcapeoutofrhecitic^ogoctotcll't 
in  Unreel. 

16  £>o  3Ichtt  robe  in  a  chaict,  anD 
went  to3torccl,(fo231o2am  lap  there:) 
anD  Siha-uah  Ring  of~3JuDah  Vbas  come 
Dolbnc  to  fee  5102am. 

17  3(nD  there  ttooo  a  matchmanon 
rite  tolh:c  in  Jl  cartel,  auDhccfptcD  the 
company  of  ^ichu  ashe  came ,anD  Quo, 
3  fee  a  companie.  3lnb  3102am  fapD, 
Xakc  an  ho?fcman,  anDfcnD  to  meetc 


them,  anD  let  him  Tap,  i»  it  peaces 

is  £>o  tljcre  ibent  one  on  hoifebac&c 

to  meete  him,  anD  taiD,  Xhus  faptl)  the 

'lung,  is«  peace?  2lnD3tehu  fata,  nahat 

j  haft  thou  to  Doctbith  peace;  tunic  thee 

IbchuiDctnc.  3nDthclbatehmantoiDc, 

iapmg,  Xhc  meflcngcr  cameto  them, 

buthc  commeth  not  agatnc, 

I    19  XhmhefcntoutafccouDonho2fc; 

i  bacue,  which  ramc  to  them ,  anD  fapD, 

Xhus  faptl)  the  lung,  is  it  peace j.  3lnD 

gjchuanmJcrcD.tOhathaftthoutoDoc 

I  rbith  peace  <  turnc  thccbchinDe  me. 

to  anDthcibatthmantolDcfaping, 

,  J?e  came  euen  bnto  them,  anD  commeth 

!  not  agatnc:  anD  the  ||D2iutngtsliRcthe 

Dziuiug  of  3Jehn  the  fonnc  of  jftunfht; 

fo?  he  Diiucth  t  furtouflp. 

ii  ^nDgjowinfaiD,  t^aUereaDtc. 
^nDl;is  charct  UiasmaDc  reaDp.  3nD 
gjo:am  femgofgifracl,  anD  ^hajiah 
lung  of  3JtiDah,  rbentout,  each  in  his 
charct,  anD  thcpnjcntoutagainftgjC' 
hu,anDtmethiminthcpo2tion  ofi^a; 
both  the  gter'ccute. 

%z  ^iiD  it  came  to  paffe  tbhen  gjo- 
ramfattejchtMhathecfaiD,  hit  peace, 
gjchu^uDhcanfuiercD,  nahatpeace, 
fo  long  as  the  ibhozcDomcsof  thptno- 
thftgi^cbcl.anDhetVbitchcrafrs  arefo 
manp  < 

Z3  ^nDgjozamturncDhtshanD.anD 
ftcD^nDfaiDto^hajiahiXhcreistrea? 
cheep,  iD^ha5tah. 

24.  3nD  gjehu » D;ctb  a  botbettnth 
his  full  ftrengtlj,  anDDnote'Jchozam 
bctujccuchts amies,  anD  thcarrotb 
lpent  out  athishtart ,  anD  hcctfunBc 
Doiimc  m  his  charct. 

%<,  XhcnfaiDieHuto2EiDttarhtscap^ 
tame,  Xafechp,  andcafthtm  tntltepo^ 
ttonofthc  ficlD  of  iI5aboththe3J^ree? 
lite:  fo?  remember,  hoin  tfjatrbrjeit^J 
anD  thou  roDc  together  after  Shab  his 
father,  tljc  3Lois©  iaioc  tl)ts  butDen 
Pponhun: 

x6  *  ^nrcip  gihaue  fecne  pefterDap 
the  t  blooD  ofji5aboth,  anD  the  blooD  of 
his  fotutcs,  fapD  the  %  o  m  id  ,  ano  3 
iumrcguitcthcctnthts!|plat,fapththe 
ILoisb.  i?Joib  thercfoietaUc  and  caft 
him  uito  tljc  plat  of  ground,  accoiDitig  to 
thctbojDofthe^oisi©. 

27  C25ittU)hcn^ha5iah  the  King 
of  35  uoah  faih  this,  hee  flco  bp  the  ibap 
ofthegarDcnhoufe :  anD3Jchufolloib' 
CD  after  him,  anDfaiD,  finite  him  alfo 
mthecharet;  and  theyd.d  fo,  at  the  going 
Dp  to  <Sur,lbhichisbp3!blcmn:  3foo 

hec 


.  Ortmar~ 
ching. 

t  Hib.it, 

madrttfc. 
\  Hcb.bmi. 


\  He  bf wind 


\Htt.fJUi 
habani 
with  a  Iww. 

f  Hcb.  bow 

a. 


*  I.Kings 
11.29. 

\HfbMoodi 

ji  Or,pcrtin 


Iezcbels  death.  1 1.  Kings.    Ahabs  Tonnes  flaine. 


eytl  in 
panting. 


H  Or.thanu 
btrLtir.ct. 


\Hti.lph, 
ktoidcf. 
*  I.King. 
II.  »3. 


ftccflcoto^cgibbo,anbbicOtfterc. 

23  3lnt>  l)is  fctuants  cancD  ftun  in 
a  cftarct  to  'Jcrufaicm,  anb  buncb  ftun 
in  bis  fcpulcDzc  tbitt)  l)is  fatftcrs,  mtftc 
cttieof2>auto. 

29  3tnmn  tftc  clencntft  yetre  of  Lo- 
rain the  foune  of  3U)ab,  began  31ha3^ 
ahtorcigneouecjjubah. 

50  C^nDtt)!)cn3Jcljutt)ascomcto 
^tercel,  gjc^ebcl  hcarb  ot  .t ,  anb  fbec 
tpainteb  ftcr  face,  anb  tyjcb  l)ec  ftcab, 
anb  loo&eb  out  at  aibmbouj. 

3 1  3titb  as  3  clju  entccb  in  at  the  gate, 
n)efa(b,$abZimtipcace,lbhoncU)his 
matter* 

32  3lnb  he  lift  Dp  his  face  to  the  tbtm 
botb,  anb  faib,  tt)ho  is  on  my  Dbcttifto; 
3nb  there  looRcb  out  to  ftun  tmo  or 
th2cc||»£unuches. 

33  3lnbhcfaib,  Xljjolb  hctboibnc. 
So  they  t!)2eVb  her  bourne ,  anb  fome  of 
Dec  bloob  tbas  fpnufeicb  on  tlje  nail, 
anb  on  tlje  Ijojfcs :  anb  l)e  trobc  Ikc bit- 
becfoote. 

3+  3nbmftenftclbascomcin,ftcc 
bib  eatc  ano  bziuRc,  anb  faibe,  <5oc,  fee 
nolbthismrfeb^oman,  anb  bunc  ^cr: 
foz  fl)e  is  a  Sings  banghtcr. 

35  3tnb  tftcyment  to  bune  her,  but 
fftcy  founb  no  mo?c  of  net  ft)  en  tftc  ffeul , 
anb  tfte  feete,  *  tftc  paimcs  of  h«  ftanbs. 

36  i©hctcfo2etftcy  came  againc,  anb 
tolbftim:  anb  he  faib,  XhiS'sfhcnwb 
of  tl)c  %  c  is  ©,mhich  l)c  fpaue  t  by  his 
feruant  €luah  tftc  Hifftbite,  faring, 
*  3m  tftc  ponion  of  Stored  fftali  Dogs 
eatc  tfte  flcfti  of  3tocbcl: 

37  3nb  tftc  tarftcifc  of  3teebel  wall 
be  as  boung  fcpon  tftc  fate  of  tftc  ftclb  in 
tftc  po  ztton  of  5lnr  ecl/o  that  tftey  (hall 
notfay^ftis^cscbcl. 

CHAP.    X. 

i  Ichu  bv  his  Ictcers  caufeth  feucmie  of  Ahabs 
children  to  be  beheaded.  8  Hcexcufcththe 
factcby  the  prophecic  ot  Elijah,  n  At  the 
ihcariiiohoufehcflayeth  two  and  fourtieof 
Ahaziahs  brethren.  15  Heetakethlehona- 
dab  into  his  company.  18  By  fubultieheedc- 
Jlroycth  all  the  woi  fhippcrs  of  Baal  19  Iehu 
followed)  Icroboams  finncs.  31  Hazael  op- 
preflethlliacl.  ;4lchoahazfucceedethIehu. 

f$Wg8$  fi  3D  ^iliab  ftab  reuenne 
^V^  fonnes  m  Samaria:  anb 
?«Ji»wl  Jlcftu  ni:otc  letters,  anb 
&aWx$%  lent  to  Samaria  nutotftc 
IssXWBBb  rulers  of  Unreel,  to  tftc 
fibers,  auo  to  Uftcm  tljat  b:ougftt  bp 
Ttftabsdiiidren,  faying, 


2  Boib  affoone  as  this  letter  com- 
mctft  to  you,  feeing  pour  matters  fons 
ai  e  rbitft  you,anb  tftcrc  are  nutft  you  cha 
rets  anb  ftotfes,  a  feneeb  ttticaifo ,  anb 
armour: 

?  Hoolic  cum  out  tftc  bctt  anb  mec; 
tcttof  your  matters  fonnes,  anbfctlmn 
on  ftts  fathers  thzonc,  anb  figftt  fo: 
your  matters  ftoufc. 

4-  23uttftcpibcrcertcebinglyafraio, 
anbfaiO,2Seftolb,tujoaings  ttoobnot 
before  ftim :  ftolu  tftcn  than  Vbc  ttanb  < 

5  3Jnb  fte  tftat  was  otter  tftc  ftoufe, 

anb  ftc  tftat  was  ouer  tftc  mic,  tftc  elbers 
alfo,  anb  tftc  tomgers  bp  of  the  ch.Mren, 
fentto  Jttyx ,  faying ,  met  arc  toy  fer 
uants,  anb  mill  boc  all  tftat  tftou  (bait 
bib  bs,U)c  lbill  not  mafec  any  Ring  :boc 

tftOU  that  which  is  gooO  III  tftUtt  CyCS. 

6  1Cftenftcuj:otc  a  letter  tftc  feconb 
ttmeto  tftcni,  faying,  "Jfyce  be  tnune, 
anb  if  ye  lbill  ftearUcn  bnto  my  boytc, 
tauc  ye  tftc  ftcabs  of  tftc  men  your  ma- 
tters fonnes,  anb  come  to  me  to  Iter  eel 
by  to  nwotb  tftis  time :  (nolb  tftc  Uuigs 
fonncsbeingfeucntypcrfons,weieibttft 
tl)egreatmcnoftftecity,tt)ftitftb:ougftt 
tftcmbp.) 

7  ^inbtt  tame  to  paflctbftcn  tftc  \tv 
tcr  came  to  tftcm,  that  tftcy  toofec  tfte 
Irings  fonnes,  anb  fltlbc  fcucnttc  pcr= 
fons,  anb  put  tfteir  ftcabs  m  bafftcts, 
anb  fent  ftim  them  to  ^axtel 

8  C  ^nb  rlKre  tame  a  racfTcngcr, 
anb  tolbe  ftnn ,  faying ,  ITftcy  ftauc 
b:ougftt  tfte  ftcabs  of  tftc  Rings  fonnes. 
Slnbftc  faib,  Hay  yc  them  in  tlbo  fteaps 
atthcentrtng  in  of  tftc  gate,  bnnu  tftc 
morning. 

9  3ttb  it  came  to  parte  in  tfte  moz- 
ning,thathe\bcntout,fjftoob,anbfaib 
to  all  tftc  people,  ^ebengntcous:bc^ 
holb,  3J  coiuplrcb  agatntt  my  matter, 
anb  ttcw  him :  lout  lbho  Qclb  all  tftcfe '. 

10  X^noibnoU»,  tftat  there  (ftailfall 
bnto  tftc  eartft  notftmg  of  tfte  lbo:bc  of 
the  H  vjd  k  3?,  ibhich  the  %  o  «  &  fpaRc 
concerning  the  houfc  of  ^Ihab :  foz  tlic 
H  ©kip  hath  bone  dutibfticft  he  fpa&c 
"tbyhts  feruant  cit'jah. 

11  So3!chu  flcm  all  that  remameb 
of  thchoufc  of  3ftab,  mjnrecl,  anb 
ailhisgrcatmcn,anbhislRmfefolUcs, 
anbhispnetts,  bntillfte  left  ftim  none 
remaining. 

12  <[3uibhec  arofc  ,anb  bepartcb, 
anb  tame  to  Samaria :  ^nb^  fte  ibas 
at  the  t  fhcartng  ftoufc  in  tftc  ibay, 

13  3Jcftu  t  met  iDitft  tftc  bjctlKcn  of 
M* 


t  H,b.pr 


« I.King. 

JI.:S>. 

\Hib.tjiht 

hviicj. 
|j  Or.ac, 

e^tt^inl-tKe. 


t  Htl  l>cuf. 
of '  fhifbcrdt 
binding 
fhcrpc. 

t  Htt.fmnt 


Iehudeftroyeth  Chap.x. 


Baals  pnefts. 


f  Hehr.lt 
thepeAce  cf 


t  Heir. 

found. 

\  Heir, 
ilejfed. 


t  Hetr.fi*- 

Bifie. 


\\Orfif*!l, 
that  they 
flooJ  mouth 
tomaah. 


3tba5iab  lung  of  3in0ab,ano  fatb,  D9l)o 
arcpe?  ^nbtberanfrocrcb,  naecaretbe 
tyctbicn  ofSbaMab.anb  toe  go  ootonc 
t  to  falutc  the  cbtiojen  ofrtjc  ixmg ,  anb 
tbc  rt)iiD2tn  of  tbe  SCiueene. 

i+  2lnobeefaio ,  Xahe  tficin  aliuc. 
3nD  the?  toofce  tt)cm  aliuc ,  ano  fteto 
them  at  ttic  pit  of  tbc  (bearing  boufe, 
euen  noo  ano  fourt?  men,  neither  left 
beauyofrbem. 

15  c  3no  toben  bee  toas  ocpartco 
tbtntt,  bet  ngbteo  on  3Jcbonaoab  tbc 
fonne  of  &ecbab ,  commmgto  meet  bun : 
anbbctfaiuteobim,  ?faiotobun,  3Js 
tbme  Heart  rigbt ,  as  my beart  is  toitb 
tbpbcart^nD^ebonaDabanfroerco, 
3Jt  is :  3Jfit  be,  gme  mec  tbme  banD. 
5lnD  bee  ganc  bim  fjiis  Ijano ,  ano  bee 
toofee  bun  top  to  hurt  into  tbc  tbaret. 

16  3mbbc£aib,  Come  told)  me,  ano 
fee  my  scale  fo:  ttje  %  okjd:  fo  ttjep 
maoc  bun  nbem  bis  tbaret. 

17  3no  toben  be  came  to  5>amaria, 
be  fleto  all  tbat  r  cmamco  tonto  3bab  m 
Samaria, ttllbebaooeftroyebbtm,ac; 
coibing  to  the  fa^mg  of  tbc  JLomp, 
itoljicli  he  fpaftt  to  tElual). 

18  C  3bib  3icbu  gatbereb  all  tbe 
people  together ,anb  faib  tonto  tbcm;& 
bab  ferueb  Baaia  Utle,  but  Jehu  (ball 
fcrucbunmutb. 

19  fiototberefo:c,  tail  tonto  mean 
tbepaphetsof  Baal,  allbisfcrnants, 
ano  all  his  pnefts,  let  none  be  toantmg: 
foz  3  bauc  a  great  fatnficc  to  doe  to 
Baal ,  tobofocner  (ball  be  toantmg,  be 
ftallnotliue.ButgichuoiOitmfiibnit' 
tic,  to  tbc  intent  tbat  bee  migbt  oeftcoy 
tbetoonTnppersofBaai. 

20  stnogjchufaib , 1 i&ociaime  afo- 
lemne  afftmbly  fo2  Baai.3lno  tljcy  p:o- 
rtatmcb  n. 

21  3nb  3dm  fent  tftjousb  an  lit 
rati,  anb  all  tbctoojfbippers  ofBaai 
tame,  Co  tbat  tbcrctoasnotamanleft 
mat  tame  not :  anb  tbc?  tame  into  tbc 
boufe  of  Baal ,  anb  tbe  boufc  of  Baal 
toas  llfnll  from  one  cnb  to  another. 

22  3nb  be  fatb  tonto  bun  tbat  toas 
oucr  tbe  beftne,  Bang  fo  Jtb  toeftments 
fozalltbetooiflnppcrsofBaal.^ubbc 
bzougbttbem  ftutb  toeftments. 

23  ^nogfcbtitoent.anogjebonaoab 
tbc  fonne  of  Retbab  into  the  boufc  of 
Baal,  anb  faib  tonto  the  toozfbtppers  of 
Baal,  <§>carcb ,  anb  looUc  that  there  be 
here  toitb  you  none  of  tbc  feruauts  of 
the  Horn©,  but  the  toojftnppcrs  of 
Baalonely. 


24.  3nb  toben  tbcyitocnttnto  offer 
facriaces,  ano  burnt  offerings ,  JJehu 
appomttofourefco2ementoitbout,ano 
faib,3Jf  any  of  the  men  tohomjj  baue 
bought  into  pour  banbs,eftapc,  bee 
that  icttctb  Dim  goe,  btsufe<haiibefo? 
tbeltfeofhtm. 

25  3nb  it  came  to  paffc  afToone  as 
bee  bab  maoc  an  cnb  of  offering  the 
i  burnt  offering,  tbat  gjebu  faibeto  tbc 
|gnarb,anbtothecaptaines,  oocm,arid 
flay  them,  let  none  tome  foojtb.  3lno 
the?  fmotethem  toitb  tbc  t  cbgc  of  tbc 
fmo:b,ano  the  gnarb,anb  the  captaincs 
cafttbem  out ,  anb  toent  to  tbc  citicof 
i  tbe  boufc  of  26aai. 

26  3no tbn'bjoughtfoojtbtbet^ 
mages  out  of  tbc  boufc  of  Baal,  anb 
bwrnttbem. 

27  2(nbtbeyb2aKeboitonctbcimage 

1  of  Baal ,  anb  tyakc  botonc  tbc  boufc  of 
26aai,anbmaocitab2augbti)ou(e,  ton* 
totbtsoay. 

2s  Xhusgjcbiioeftcoyeo  Baal  out 
of  3lfrae!. 

29  C^otobeit.fromtjjeOnnesofJc; 
roboamtbefonne  of  i?5cbat,tobo  maoc 
lifraei  to  finite ,  'Jehu  ocpartcb  not 
from  after  tl)em,towit,tbcgoloencaiues 

tbat  were  l\\  25Ctt)Cl  ,  anO  ttjat  were  m 

Dan. 

30  3(notbt1L©isjDfaiO tonto 3Jcbn, 
'  Bctaufc  thou  baft  Oonc  toell  tn  yctm? 
;  ting  that  tobtcb  is  right  m  mine  eyes, 
I  and  baft  bone  tonto  tbc  boufe  of  3lbab 
!  aceoiomg  to  all  tbat  was  m  mine  beart, 
irbpcbilbjenoftbefourtbg^ranon.Cbai 
1  fit  on  tbc  tbJoncof  Jfrael. 

31  But  3Jcbn  t  too&c  no  beebe  to 
toai&e  m  tbc  ?Lato  of  tbc  %  ©  is  ©  ©00 
j  of  "Jlfracl,  toitb  all  bis  beart :  tor  be  be 
ipartcb  not  from  tbc  fumes  of  "Jcro 
boam,tobicb  maoegjfraclto  fmnc. 

31  C  llntiiofc  bares  tbe %®m® 
began  ttocut3fraelfl)02t:anb^a5art 
fmotc  them  in  all  tbc  toafts  of  3Jfrael : 

33  5from  giozban  t  eafttoarb ,  all 
tbcianbof  c5iicao,tbe  ©aottes,ano  the 
Hcnbcnttes,  anb  tbc  £0anafrttes,from 
3roer,  ( tohicb  is  by  tbe  nuer^rnon) 
||  euen  Cileab  anb  Bafban. 

34  0oxo  the  reft  of  the  acts  of  5Fc- 
hu,anb  all  that  be  mo,  $  all  bis  migbt, 
arctbeynotto2itteninthcj)ooKCoftbc 
Ch2omcles  of  tbe  fitngs  of  jifrack 

3$  %nv  3jcbu  flept  toith  bis.  fa^ 
tl)ers,  ano  tber  bunco  bunm^ama 
na,ano  Jcljoabajbis  fonne  rctgneo  m 
hisftcao. 

ilOrn  36  ^no 


\Hchr. 

the  month. 


t  Hehr.fl.t- 


iHehr.ch- 
feruednat. 


t  Heh.lt 

cut  of  the 

ends. 

t  Heir.  It. 

tvtrdtbe  rr- 

fing  of  the 

Sierme. 

\\Or,eHcnto 
(jdcadAnd 

Etfhm. 


lAthaliahs  crueltic:       II.Kings. Shee  is  flaine. 


fHr*  the 
tUyet  Tverc. 


*  j.Chron. 

12. IO. 


\Heb.ftctlt 
tftheking- 

domc. 


*  i.Chton. 
23.1. 


I  Or,  (ran 
brt*k}n£"*f* 

||  Oryeompn- 
met  Hev, 
hands. 


36  3lnbt  the  tunc  that  3Jehurctgncb 
oucr  3Jfrael  tn  -Samaria ,  was  tXbentie 
anb  eight  yccres. 

CHAP.    XI. 

Iehoafh,  being  fauedby  Iehofheba  his  aunt 
from  Athaliahs  mailacre  ot  the  feed  royall, 
ishidfixeyeeresinthehouleof  God.  4  Ic- 
hoiada  giuing  order  to  the  captaines ,  in  the 
feuenth  yecre  anointeth  him  King.  13  A- 
thaliahisflaine.  17  Iehoiada  reflorcth  the 
worrtiip  of  God. 

S$S  5i5D  Hrfjen  *  3fthauah  the 
-  mortice  of  aiwiaft  faibc 
that  Ijec  fonnc  lbasbeab, 
(lie  arofc,anb  beftroyeb  all 
the  tfeeb  royall. 
25ut  iehofheba  the  Daughter  of 
Umg^02am,  ftftcc  of  3Uia5tal) ,  too&c 
3|oau)  the  fonnc  of  2lha5iah,  anbttaic 
Dun  from  among  the  Kings  fonncs 
tbhicl)  incrc  flame  ■,  ant)  they  htb  Dim, 
euen  mm  anti  Ins  nnrfe  m  the  bedcham- 
ber from  athaual),  fotftatljc  inasnot 
flame. 

3  3nDhctt)asibithhcrhiDbetnrtie 
ft  oufc  of  tlic  %  o  is  jp,  fire  y ceres :  ant) 
3tthauah  Did  rctgne  oner  the  lanb. 

4  C3uU)*tlicfcucnrt)pccrc3JcDo< 
iabafent  anb  fet  tfjc  rulers  once  bun* 
mcDs,ttirt)  tlic  captams,anb  the  guarb, 
anb taoughtthemto  htm  into  thchoufc 
of  the  %  o  is  © ,  ana  mabc  a  coucnant 
lutth  them,  anb  toouc  anothcofthem 
m  rtic  lioufc  of  tlic  %o  is  ©,anb  fheibcb 
themtlicBtngsfonnc. 

5  2uiDhecommanbcbthem,faymg, 
Xfjts  is  rtic  thutgtnatycc  (hall  boc;  3J 
thirb  part  of  you  tliat  enter  m  on  the 
Sabbath,  than  euen  be  Keepers  of  rtjc 
tbatcn  of  the  Rings  houfe: 

6  ^nbatlitcbpartnuiibcattlicgatc 
of  5>ur,anb  a  thirbpartat  rtic  gate  be- 
htnbe  tlic  guarb :  fo  fliall ycc&ccpc  the 
watch  of  thchoufc,  iltljat  tt  be  notbzo- 
nenbownc. 

7  %\\\s  two  ii  parts  of  all  you ,  that 
goe  foo:tI)  on  the  Sabbath ,  euen  they 
fhaiihccpcrticwatciiofthc  houfe  of  the 
ILokd  about  the  mug. 

S  3nb  yce  (hail  tompafTc  rtic  £~ung 
rount)  about,  cuery  man  With  bis  wca* 
pons  tn  his  lianb :  anb  lie  that  commeth 
Wttbm  the  ranges,  let  htm  bee  flame: 
anbbcyee  Wirt)  the  lung ,  astjecgoctb 
out,anbasl)ctommcthm. 

9  ^nb  the  taptames  oner  the  bun* 
bzebs  bib  actozbmg  to  an  things  that 


^dioiabathei&zteft  commanfleb:  anb 
tbey  tooae  cuery  man  bts  men  that 
were  tocomemontbe^abbatb,  Wttb 
them  that  flioulb  goc  out  on  the  5>ab 
bath,anbcamcto3Jchoiabathc^2tcft. 

10  3nb  to  rtic  captaines  oucr  bun- 
D2Cbs,  bib  the  purit  gme  lung  SDautbs 
(peaces  anb  fbielbs,  that  Were  m  the 
Xcntplc. 

1 1  3(nb  the  guarb  floob ,  cucry  man 
With  b«s  Weapons  m  bis  banb,  rounb 
about  the  Ring ,  from  the  right  t  cozner 
of  thcXcmpic,  to  the  left  comer  of  the 
ICcmpic ,  along  by  rt)c  3Utar  anb  the 
temple. 

u  31nb  he  bought  foojfb  the  Rings 
fonnc,  anb  put  the  crownc  bponhim, 
anb^ue  him  the  Xcfhmome,  anb  they 
tnabc  him  lsmg,anb  anomtcb  him,anb 
they  elapt  their  hanbs,anbfato,  t  god 
tauc  the  Bmg. 

13  C  3nb  when  3tbaiiabbearD  the 
ttoifcofthcguarb,.indofthepcople,uic 
tame  to  the  people ,  into  the  Xcmple  of 
thclLoiss?. 

14.  3(nb  rbhen  (hee  looKeb ,  bcholb, 
rticRmg  floob  byaptiiar,  asthemaner 
U)as,anb  thepntucs,  anb  rtic  tramp efc 
ters  by  the  Butg,  anb  all  the  people  of 
thcianbtcioyccb,  anb  blelbibirt)  tram 
pets:  anb  3thaliah  rent  her  clothes, 
anDtrycD,  Xrcafon,treafon. 

15  25ut  3Jchoiaba  the  ^neft  torn- 
manbeb  rticcaptamcs  ofthehunbzebs, 
the  officers  of  rtic  hoflt,  anb  faybe  into 
I  them,  ftaue  her  foonh  Without  the 
ranges;  anb  htm  that  follotbcth  her, 
sill  Uiith  rtic  fujo2b :  fo:  the^ncfthab 
(ayb ,  Hct  her  not  be  flame  tn  the  houfe 
ofthc!L<DBr>. 

i6  Znn  they  latb  hanbs  on  her ,  anb 
(lie  tticnt  by  rtjemay ,  by  the  which  the 
hozfes  came  into  thcRtngs  houfe,  anb 
there  mas  (he  flame. 

17  C  3mb  '^Ichoiaba  mabc  a  couc 
nam  bctmccnc  the  ILoko  anb  the 
lung,  anb  the  people,  that  they  flioulb 
be  the %&  k-d^ people,  bcttbccnc  rtjc 
Ringaifoanb  thcpcoplc. 

1 8  3nb  all  the  people  of  the  lanb  ibent 
into  rtic  houfe  of  ffiaal ,  anb  franc  it 
bottm ,  his  altars,anb  his  images  biabc 
they  m  pieces  tlnoughly  ,anb  flew  iBar 
tanthcpncflof23aalbcfo2Crtic  altars: 
anb  the  02ieft  appotnteb  t  officers  oucr 
the  houfe  of  the  %  o  «  o. 

19  3lnb  hec  toolic  the  rulers  oucr 
hunb.'tbs ,  atm  tlic  captaines ,  anb  the 
guarb,  anb  all  rtic  people  of  the  lanb, 

anb 


Httfiml- 


t  Hih.Ut 

thl  king 
llMC. 


'  Hci.  tffm 


(Prouifionfor  Cta 


ap.xij, 


the  Tern  d I 


2.  Cliron. 
24.1. 


\Ortholy 
things.  Heb. 
hohr.efics. 

\Hcb.the 
money  of  the 
foulcs  of hts 
eftimation. 
]  HeijifceK- 
deth  vpon 
the  heart  of 


\Heb.intht 
twentieth 
yeere*ar.d 
thtrdjecre. 


anD  they  thought  Doitonc  the  lung  from 
thchoufcof  tUcltOKiD,  anD  came  by 
the  itoay  of  the  gate  of  the  guatD,  to  ti)c 

fttngs  l)oiifc,anD  rjefate  on  tl)c  tl)2one  of 
the  mugs. 

20  3nD  all  the  people  of  the  lanD  xt 
ioyccD,  anDthcnticibas  tn  quiet ,  anD 
they  (letto  3lthaliah  ttiittJ  the  froozD,  be- 
fidetl)ctungsl)oufc. 

21  £>cueny  ceres  olD  tbas  3Jehoa(h 
Itohen  he  began  to  retgne. 

CHAP.    XH. 

1  Iehoafh  reigneth  well  all  die  dayes  ot  Ielio- 
iada.  4  Hcegiueth  order  for  the  repaired 
the  Temple.  1 7  Hazael  is  diuertcd  Irom  Ieru- 
falem  by  a  prelentof  the  halowed  treafures. 
i<)  Iehoalh  being  flaine  byhisleruants,  A- 
raaziah  fucceedeth  him. 

0  *  the  feuentf)  yecrt  of 
3fchu,  3Jri)oafl)  began  to 
reigne,anD  fburtteyecres 
retgneDhc  in  IJerufalcm, 
ano  l)ts  mothers  name 
was  zibial)  of  2Scerfheba. 

2  3nD  ^choafh  did  that itohtch  was 
right  in  the  fight  of  the  %  o  k  jt>  all  his 
Dayes,rbhetctn3JehotaDathe02irti  in- 
UructcDhtm. 

3  25nt  the  high  plates  ttocrc  not  ta 
BntaitoayithcpcoplcmllfamnccD^nD 
burnt  tntcnfe  in  the  high  plates. 

4.  c^nD3Jchoafl)faiDtothep:iefls, 
701  the  money  of  the  I  j  DeDicatcD  things 
that  is  bzought  into  the  houfe  of  the 
ILsdkjd,  euen  the  money  of  cuery  one 
thatpafTcfh tnc  account,  t  themoncy  that 
cuery  man  ts  fct  at,  and  all  the  money 
that*  tommeth  into  any  mans  hcart,to 
tying  into  the  houfe  of  theH  €>is©, 

5  %tt  the  piiclts  taRe a to  them,  e^ 
uery  man  of  his  acquaintance,  anD  let 
them  tepatrc  the  b2caches  of  the  houfe, 
itohcrcfoeuer  any  bzcach  (haibcfoutib. 

6  26utitibasfothattuttheth2ecanb 
ttbentieth  yeere  of  lung  llchoalh ,  the 
pacftshaDnot  repaircDthc  breaches  of 
the  houfe. 

7  Xheit  Ring  ^Iehoafh  tallcD  fo? 
3JeHoiaDa  the  pzieft,  anD  the  other 
pjiefts,  anD  fatDc  tonto  them,  n&hprc= 
patrcyenotthc  bzeaches  of  the  houfe* 
noito  thrrefozc  rcttute  no  mo2C  money 
of  your  acquaintance ,  but  Dcliucr  it  fo? 
the  tocathes  of  tlic  houfe. 

8  ^nDthepncftstonCenttDtoreteiue 
no  mo:e  money  of  thepeople.neitrjet  to 
tcpairethc  b2carhes  of  the  houfe. 


E 


e. 


\  Or,  fare. 


brought  it 
foar:b. 


t  Web.  went 
for:h. 


9  2Sut  3IehoiaDa  the  pzteft  toouc  a 
chcu\auD  bo2cb  a  hole  m  the  UD  of  it.aiiD 
fctitbcfiDcthc^itar,  on  the  right  fiDe, 
as  one  tommeth  into  the  Houfe  of  the 
ILoise),  anD  thepnefts  that  Kept  the 
fDoozc,  puttheremall  the  money  that  J "<<••<> 
tbas  tyattght  into  the  houfe  of  the 

10  5lnD  it  tbas  fo  tbhen  they  fatb  that 
there  was  muchmoncy  uitDc  chert,  that 
the  lungs  iifcrtbc,  anD  the  high  pneft 
came  top ,  anD  th  ey  f  put  top  tn  bags  anD  f^  >m 
tolD  the  money  that  tbas  fouub  in  the  ■■?■ 
houfe  of  the  %o  is  p. 

r  1  3lnD  they  gauc  the  money,  being 
tolD,  into  thchanDcs  of  them  tDatDiD 
the  iP02fec,tl)at  haD  the  ouerfight  of  the 
houfe  of  the  %  o  n  © :  anD  they  t  taiD  it 
out  to  the  carpenters  anD  btuiDcrs,that 
U)20ughtPponthchoufeofthc?l£>isK>, 

11  3lnD  to  ij^afons,  anD  helpers  of 
done,  anD  to  buy  timber,  anD  hevbcD 
ftonc  to  repatrc  the  bzeaches  of  the 
houfe  of  the  %  £>  is  ©,  ano  fo:  ail  that 
tujasiatDoutfo2thchoufcto  repatrc  it. 

ij  ^olbbeit,therclDcrenotmaDefo2 
tlic  houfe  of  r!;c  %  o  i&  j?,borbles  of  fiu 
ucr ,  fnuffers,  batons ,  trumpets,  any 
Pcflets  of  golD,  02  Peffcls  of  ftiucr,  of 
the  money  that  toas  bzottght  into  the 
;hou£coftl)e1L€»K©: 

14.  i5uttheygaucthattothetPo2he= 
:mcn,  auDrcpatreDthcrcrbtth  tfjchotu'e 
of  theft  £>K£>. 

15  SI9o2Coucr,  they recuneD not  lbith 
the  men,  into  ibhofc  hanD  tijey  Dcituc- 
I  rcD  the  money  to  be  beftolPcD  on  iPozfc 
men :  foz  they  Dealt  faithfully. 

i6  Xhc  ttefpaffc  money,  anD  finnc 
money  ibas  not  b2ougljt  into  the  houfe 
of  the?L£>tf.©:  itipasthc02icfts. 

17  C  1-hen  l^a^art  lung  of  £>ym 
id  cnt  top,  ano  fought  agatnQ  oath ,  anD 
toohetttanD  i^ajael  fct  his  face  togoe 
toptogicrufaiem. 

is  2md  3Jehoafh  Iting  of  3ltiDah 
tooucaiithe  haiioitocD  things  that^e^ 
hofliaphat,  anD  3Jcho2am,  anD^ha?i- 
ah  his  fathers,  Hings  of  JuDah  haD  dc- 
Ditatc ,  ano  his  otbnc  halloTtocD  tilings, 
anD  all  the  goio  tijat  ttoas  fomiD  m  the 
treafures  of  the  houfe  of  the  Hsdises 
anD  m  the  Rings  houfe ,  anD  fent  it  to 
Uasacl  ftmg  of  S»y2ta,  anD  Ijeetibeut 
aVbay  from  gjcrufalcm. 

19  C  Another  eft  of  the  actes  of  3Jc 

hoafl),anDalltliathcDiD,arcrhcynot 
lb2ittcn  intlic  boolic  of  the  Chronicles 
ofthcfesngsofJIuDahi 

$&m  2         20  ^nD 


\M.vcnt 

Vf. 


lehoafhflaine. 


ILK 


in£S. 


e 


Elifliafick 


c. 


{  Hcb.  m  the 

fxven'-icth 
ycereand 
thirdjcerc. 


io  zm  ifis  feruants  arofe ,  anD 
'  maDcaconfpirane,  ant  flciu'JcDoatb 
or.ari. \ta\\m  Dome  of  s$uio ,  ujDicD  goen) 
oowiic  to  £>ilia. 

ii  jFoj^JosacDar  n)e  fonne  of  S>hi 
meatD ,  ano  $t Do>abao  tDc  fonnc  of 
§Domcr,Disfcruants,fmotcDun,anD 
lie Dito. anD  tDcv  bunco DuntbitDDis 
fatDcrs  m  tD  c  cttic  of  DattiD,  ano  3tma> 
3talj  Dis  fonnc  rcigncD  m  Ijts  fleao. 

CHAP.   XIII. 

i  Iehoahaz  his  wicked  reigne.  3  Iehoahaz 
oppreffed  by  Hazael,  is  relieued  by  prayer. 
8  Ioafh  luccecdeth  him.  10  His  wicked 
reigne.  11  Ieroboam  fucceedeth  him.  14 
Llifha  dying  piophecieth  to  Ioafh  three 
victories  ouer  the  Syrians.  10  The  Moa- 
bites  inuading  the  land.Elifhas  bones  raife  vp 
a  dead  man.  2.1  Hazael  dying ,  Ioafh  get 
teth  three-vi&ories  ouer  Benhadad. 

sgasas^s  &H\)t  tD?cc  anD  tmmte 

]^H  l|gsi  rtl)  vtcrc  of  3Joati)  tlje 

"V  fonnc  of  Ztyxstify  lung  of 

fSM  'jwtjao ,  gicl)oal»5  tlje 

SStsZ  fonnc  of  3kIju  beganne  to 

rcignc  once  Jfracl  in  Samaria ,  and 

reigned  fencntccnc  veer  cs. 

1  SinDDceDiDtDanoDicD  vas  cntlltn 
tDcftg!)toftDc1L©isp,anDtfolioibcD 
the  funics  of  Jeroboam  the  fonnc  of 
ji^cbat,  lODicD  macc3Jfractto  fmnc,l)c 
DcpartcD  not  tnerc  from. 

3  C3mDtDcangcrofrDc?LoisB 
YbastuuDlcD  agatuft  JfracUtiD  Iicccc- 
liucrcb  tDem  mto  tDc  Dano  of  iwacl 
king  of  £>?}u\ ,  ana  mto  tDc  Dano  of 
aSenrjatwt)  tlje  fonnc  of  ^a?acl ,  all  their 
oapes. 

4-  3inD  3IcDoaDa*  befongnt  tDc 
%  <$>  is  © ,  ano  the  %  &  in  jd  Dcarucnco 
bnto  Dun :  fo?  Dec  faro  tDc  oppzcflion  of 
Jfrael,  becaufc  tlje  lung  of  £>v<"<*  op; 
pjclTcDtDcm. 

5  (3tno  tDc  %  0  is  r>  gauc  3Ifracl  a 
fauiour,fo  tDat  tDcv  went  out  from  bits 
Dec  tDc  Dano  of  tDc  Tynans :  anD  tDc 
cDilDzcn  of  Jlfracl  DUiclt  m  tDcirtents 
tasbefoje-ttmc. 

6  i^citcrtDcicffc,  tDcyocpartcDnot 
from  tnc  funics  of  tDc  Dotifc  of  J/crobo^ 
am,  lblio  mane  ^Jfracl  funic ,  but  uoai; 
luD  tDercin :  ano  tDcrc  t  rcmameD  tlje 
groucaifom  Samaria.) 

7  jRcitDcr  did  lie  leauc  of  tDc  people 
to^ftlioarja?,  but  fifttc  Doifcmen,  ano 
tciiiictt)arets,atiDtciiiictDoufanbfoot 
men.-fouljclungofSvnaljaDDcftrov 


ktdrf 


•a. rent- 


yefterdqi 

an<ir/;:ri 
day. 

f  HA.  he 

\Hckjlao.. 


cd  tijein ,  anD  DaD  maoc  tljtnx  line  tDc 
Duff  bv  rtjieujmg. 

8  C  /3orbc  tlje  reft  of  tDc  actes  of 
3JcDoaDa5,  anDaiitDatDcDiD ,  aiiDDts 
migljt ,  arc  tDcv  not  wwtcn  in  tlje 
booKeoftljcCljzonttlcsofttjcIiuigsof 
^frach 

9  3Did  gjcljoalja?  flcpt  ibitD  ljis  fa* 
rDers ,  anD  tDcv  bunco  Dun  m^ama» 
;  na,ano3(oan)  Ijis  fonnc  rcigncD  mljis 
fteao. 

10  C  3Iu  tDc  tliirtv  anD  fcumtD  ?ee re 
of3loafD  King  ofjuoalj ,  begannc^c- 
Doatt)  tDc  fonnc  orJcDoalja?  to  rctgnc 
ouer  3lfrael  tn  Samaria ,  and  reigned 
ujrtcenevccrcs. 

11  ^no  Dec  did  tDat  tbljid)  was  null  m 
tDcfigDt  of  tlje  IL©k©;Dcc  Dcpartco 
not  from  all  tDc  fumes  of  Jeroboam 
tDcfonncofiBcbat,  tt)ljo  maoc3ifracl 
Onnc :  but  Dec  UialbeD  tDercin. 

11  3tnu  tt)c  reft  of  tiic  actcs  of  3Joail), 
anD  ail  tDat  Dee  Did,  anD  Du»  mtgDt, 
rbDerciDitD  Dec  fougDt  agauifl  3tai* 
3taDmngof3DiDaD ,  are  tDcv  not  imifc 
tcnmtDcbooUc  of  tDc  tD^oniclcsoftDc 
Hmgsof3Jfracli 

I  15  ^no'Joafl)  flcpt  tbitD  DisfatDcrs, 
[anD  Jeroboam  fate  bpon  Dts  tluonc: 
ano  3!oafl)  ibas  bunco  in  £>amana 
;  iDitl)  tDc  lun  gs  of 3lfracl. 

14  C  iBomc  cuaia  rbas  fallen 
Gcfte,  of  Ins  fitlmcffc  lfiDcrcof  DcOtcD, 
ano  3Joafl)  tDe  blng  of  3Jfrael  tame 
DoiDne  tonto  Dun ,  ano  inept  ouer  Dis 
faccanofaiO,  £)mvfarticr,  mvfatDcr, 
rtjc  rtiarrt  of  3Jfratl ,  anDtl)ti)o?ftnim 
tDercof. 

15  ^tio  Cltflia  fato  unto  Dun,  Xauc 
(boiDcaitDarroiDrs.^nDDctooKcbnto 
DunbotticaiiDarrolbcs. 

16  ^no  Dc  fato  to  tlje  lung  of  3Jfracl, 

I I  ^ut  tlnnc  Dano  upon  tijc  boiDc.  ^uD 
Dc  put  Dis  Dano  vpon  K :  ano  <£Ufl)a put 
Dis  Danos  Upon  tDc  lungs  Danos. 

17  3iiDDcfai>D,£>pcntDcitouiDolo 
Caflioaro.  3lnD  Dec  opcncD  it.  XDcn 
€Ufliafavo,5)Dootc.5{uDDcfl)ot.3lnD 
Iicfaio  i  XDc  arromc  of  tDc  %  €>m  ©£> 
OcUiicrancc,  anotDearroine  of  Dcluic^ 
ranccfrom  £>v'ia:fo!tDou  fliaitfmttc 
tDc  S>vnans  m  ^pDclt ,  till  tljou  Dane 

COllUiniCDthcm. 

18  3lnDDcfavD,  XartctDcarrollics. 
31iiDDctoonc  them.  3nD  lice  faiD  bnto 
tDc  lung  of  Ufracl ,  finite  \)pon  the 
gcouiiD.^luD  Dc  fmotc  tlinfcanD  fia  veo. 

19  3liiD  tDctnaiiofGooibaslbioth 
iiDttlj  Dim,  ano  fatoc,  XDou  fliouiocfl 
I Dauc 


ibioek 
toride. 


Elifhadieth.  Chap.xni].        Amaziah  taken. 


f  Hth.  tcoi: 
downe. 
*Ecclus. 
48.14. 


\lUifMt. 


\Hcb.rc- 
tHmedttnd 
tech*. 


*  2.  Chios 

2J.I. 


Ijaue  unttten  fiuc  0?  ftrc  nmcs.thtn  Jjau 
Deft  thou  [mitten  <§>pjta  Ml  thouhaD- 
Deft  confttmcD  " :  lbljereas  nott)  t!jou 
fljalt  finite  S>pna  but  tljiicc. 

20  c^nDeiifljabtcb,  anDthcpbn; 
ricb  him:  Clothe  banbsof the  fipoa* 
bites  inuaDeD  the  lanoat  tlje  tomming 
inofthepcerc* 

21  3itiD  it  came  to  paflc  as  thep  iberc 
burping  amatt,thatbcholD,  thep  fppeb 
a  banb  ofmen  ,anb  tl)cv  tail  theman  into 
the  fepulch:c  of  €ltfl)a:  atHUbften  the 
mantibasletboibnc^  anDtoucheb  tlje 
bones  of  eiiftja,  *  he  reutucD,atiD  ftooD 
bponlnsftete. 

22  C25ut^a5acllimgof5>^ta>op'' 
pieffeD  Jfrael  all  tlje  Dares  of  Jefjoa* 
ha;. 

13  3nD  the  1L  <p  ik  ©  ibas  granous 
bnto  tljcm ,  anD  hao  tompaflion  on 
tbcm,  anD  IjaD  refpert  bnto  them ,  bv 
taufe  of  his  touenant  lbuh  ^bjahani, 
gjtaac,  anD  3Jatob,  anDJboulDnot  d^ 
ftroptfjem,  neither  tafthce  themfrom 
histpjcfcnceaspct 

24  <S>o$aiacitheKtngof.&>p2(aDp; 
cd  ,  anD  fficnhabaD  his  fonne  retgncb 
mljisfteaD. 

25  3inD  3fcI)oafl)  tt>e tonne  of  3Jcho< 
alia?  t  toobc  agatnc  out  of  the  IjanDof 
25cuhaDab  the  Tonne  of  Hwael,  tlje  ci- 
ties ibhich  he  haD  taken  out  of  tlje  hanD 
of  3Jel)oana5  Ins  father,  bp  ibarrc: 
thjec  nines  did  3Joaft)  beat  him,  anD  w 
coucrebthc  nnes  ofjnm 

CHAP.   X II It. 

1  Amaziah  his  good  reignc.  5  Hisiufticeon 
the  uiurderersof  his  father.  7  His  vi&ory 
ouer  Edom.  8  Amaziah  prouoking  Feho- 
afh,  is  ouercome  and  (polled.  15  Jeroboam 
fucceedcth  lchoafh.  17  Amaziah  flaine  by 
aconfpiracie.  2.1  Azariah  fucceedeth  him. 
13  Ieroboams  wicked  reigne.  18  Zacha- 
riah  fucceedeth  him. 

JX&  the  IceonbpeereoflJo' 

ng^aftj  fonne  of  3JehoaTja5 

*  Ringofl31fracl,rctgncD+a 

ma^tab  the  fonne  of^Joatlj 

§j£lungof3!uDab. 

2  i^ce  ibas  ttbentte  anD  fiuc  vecrcs 
olDc  lbbcn  Ijc  began  to  ragncanb  rrtg* 
ncD  tibentte  anb  tunc  vcercs  in  31c  rufa 
lent :  anD  Ins  mothers  name  was  3Jcljo- 
aDDanof'Jerufalcin. 

3  31nD be  Dtb  that lbb-tcl)  w*  right itt 
tDc  fight  of  the  ?Ioib©,  pet  »ot  line 
S>auiD  Dtsfatljcc  :Ijccdid  atcozbmg  to, 
all  things  as  Sloaftj  Ijis  father  did. 


4  ^oibbett ,  tlje  high  plates  tberc 
not  taucn  albap :  as  pet  the  people  did 
faenfice ,  anb  burnt  mtenfc  on  tlje  high 
places. 

5  OnDtttamc to paftc  aftboncas 
the  fcingDomc  lbas  coufirtneb  tn  his 
hanD ,  tljat  he  Oelb  his  feruants  *  ibbieb 
IjaD  ftainc  the  aittg  his  father. 

6  28wthechtlD2cnoftljenutrDcrers 
he  ficlbnot,  atcojbtngbntotbatibbiclj 
is  ibuttcn  in  tlje  boofcc  of  tlje  Harb  of 
£0ofcs,  ibherem  the  Iosb  cotn 
manbcD.fapmg,  *Xbe  fathers  fljai  not 
be  put  to  Death  to?  the  cljilD2cn,no2  the 
chilbicnbeputto  Death  to?  the  fathers: 
but  cuerp  man  fbau  be  put  to  Death  to* 
Ijisolbnefmne. 

7  $ellcibof€Dommtbebalicpof 
fait,  ten  tljoufanD,  anb  tooUcl|£>elah 
bp  ibarrc,  anb  calico  the  name  of  it, 
3Jouthccl,bnto  this  Dap. 

8  C  Xijen  3lma5tah  fent  mtffcn> 
gers  to  'Jjchoafh  tlje  fonne  of  3Jchoa- 
has  fonne  of  3Jehu  Umgof^Ifraci,  fop 
tng,  Come,  Ictbsioobc  oncanotijerm 
tlje  face. 

9  anD'JchoafljthcWttgofJfrael 
tent  to  3ma5iah  king  of  3luDah,lapuig, 
Xhc  tlnftlc  tljat  was  ut  Hcbanon,fent  to 
the  Ccbar  that  wasmlLcbanon^aping, 
©itic  thp  baughtcr  to  mp  fonne  to  Ibifc. 
3nb  thercpaffeb  bp  a  lbtibe  bead  that 
was  m  ^Lebanon,  anb  trobc  Dolbne  the 
njtftlc. 

10  XhouhaftinbeebfrnittcnCDom, 
anD  thine  hear  thath  lifteD  thee  bp :  gio 
rp  of  this ,  anD  tarp  t  at  home  :fo2  ttnjp 
fljoulbeft  thou  mebblc  to  thy  hurt,  that 
thou  ujoulbcftfall,  euea  tljott,  anD^u^ 
Dalnbtththee? 

1 1  25ut  ^ma^tah  tboulD  not  hcarc 
thercfo2c3khoatt)  Hing  of  3}fracl  ibent 
bp,  anD  Ijcc,  anD  SJmastah  fetng  of  3m= 
balj ,  looneb  one  another  m  the  face  at 
2Setljft)cmcuj ,  tbhich  beiongeth  to3u- 
Dah. 

11  3(nD  5nDalj  t  ruas  put  to  tlje 
ibojfe  befo^  3Jfrael,attD  tljtp  fleD  enerp 
man  to  their  tents. 

13  iSnD'Jchoawmngof^fraeltoo&e 
3ma5iah  Ring  of  JuDah ,  tljefotmcof 
JJehoauJ  the  fonne  of^ha5tahat25cth' 
memcuj ,  anD  came  tcjemtalcm,  anD 
bjabe  Dolbne  the  ibail  of  3)crufalem, 
from  tlje  gate  of  Cphjautt ,  bnto  the  co^ 
nergatc,fourchtuiD2ebntbitcs. 

14  ^ttD  he  toobe  all  rij  e  golDe  anD  fiV 
ucr.anD  ailriiebcfTels  tljatlberefouuD 
in  tlje  Ijoufe  of  rije  1L  o  u  ©,  anD  m  the 

$&m  3  trea= 


*  Chap.  1  2. 
20. 


*Dcur.  14. 
16. czek. 


\\Or,i!,i 

rotks* 


lHeb.il  thy 


tjCKl 


!JC. 


IHcb.wM 

jrmtltn. 


Amaziah.Ieroboam.  II.Kings.         Azariah  a  leper. 


hi.Chron. 
15.27. 


'  l.Cbron. 
id. I.  Hen 


"Macih.ii, 

3  9,40.  r.*/- 
Itd  foiw. 


treafures  of  the  lungs  houfe,anDhou\v 
ges,  anD  r  eturneD  to  £>amarta. 

15  C/3ott)tl)cre&oft!)eactsof3fr'' 
hoafl)  umtch  he  did,  anD  his  might,  anD 
bolDhc  fought  lDiri)  3lina3iab  lung  of 
3JuDah,  arr  they  not  tbzittcn  m  tljc 
booltc  of  the  Cb2onidcs  ofd)c  lungs  of 
Jhxtu 

16  3{nt>  ^Jehoafh  flcpt  tbiti)  his  fa* 
thets ,  anD  Urns  burteD  in  Samaria, 
iDith  tlic  lungs  of  5lfracl,ant)  ^Jerobo; 
am  Ins  fonne  retgncD  m  his  QeaD. 

17  C3htD2lma5iabd,)c  fonne  ofjo- 
anikingof3JuDah,liueDaftcrtbcDcath 
of3Jeboan)fonneof3Jchoaba3aingof 
3Jfrael,fiftccncycercs. 

18  3lnDthereftofd)eartsof3unaM* 
ab,  are  they  not  ttmttenm  the  boonc  of 
tl)c€l)2onidcs  ofd)c  lungs  of  3IuDab  i 

19  ji2oiD*d)eynuiDcaconfpiractca: 
gatnft  Inm  m  31  Erufaion :  anD  rje  fleu  to 
Jladnfl),  but  ri)ey  lent  after  bun  to  Ha* 
cbifl),anDfieu)bund)cre. 

20  3nDd)cyb20ugbtbimonb02rcs, 
ano  be  urns  burteD  at  3fctufalcm  Ibid) 
IJ10  fathers,  in  tl)e  city  of3>auiD. 

ii  C  3iuD  all  the  people  of  JIuDab 
toofec  *  hartal)  (  nwiri)  was  firtccne 
yccrcs  olD )  anu  mabc  bun  King  tn  QcaD 
of  bis  father  3ma3iab. 

ii  i?c  built  €iart) ,  anu  refloat)  it  to 
JJuDab ,  after  that  the  femg  Ocptuntb 
his  fathers. 

23  CUn  the  fifteenth  re  c  re  of  :31nia* 
5tahdiefouncof'Joafl}Kmgof'3lut>ah, 
•Jeroboam  tl)c fonne  of  3loa(b lung of 
Jjfracl  began  to  ratgne  ut  Samaria, 
and  raigned  fo2ty  ant  one  yccrcs : 

24  ^nt>  hec  Did  that  which  was  emu 
in  the  fight  of  the  fL©K©:beeDcpar* 
tcD  not  from  all  the  funics  of  jjferobo- 
am  the  fonne  of  flcUt ,  U)bo  maoe  3Jf* 
raeltofumc. 

15  $cc  reftocD  the  toaft  of  3Ifrael, 
from  the  cntrtng  of  tyamatb ,  Puto  the 
fcaof  thepiatne,  acco2Dmgto  theibojD 
of  the  V.  ©  m  id  cod  of  3Jfrael ,  tbbid) 
hefpahcbvtliehanDoflnsfrrnant'^IO' 
nah, die  fonne  of  3mittai  tljc Jfyopfict, 
\Phuh  wa  ofcsatb  iiepher. 

26  foi the %oii-D fai£b the  affile*! 
tion  of  31frarl,tliat  it  wjspcry  bitter  :fo2 
tbcrcipasnot  any  flnitPp.nojany  left, 
no2  any  helper  fo2  "Jfracl. 

27  3lnD  die  %  ©  is  id  faiD  not,  that 
hceWoulD  blot  out  the  name  of  3Jfracl 
fromPiiDcr  hcaucn :  but  hefaucothem 
by  the  hanD  of  IJcroboam  the  fbnnc  of 
Doafh. 


28  C  /ISotb  the  reft  of  the  attcs  of 
Jeroboam,  anD  all  that  he  DiD.anD  his 
might,  boYb  be  iDarrcD,anD  bofl)  be  r  e* 
toucreD  DamafcusanD  $>amath ,  which 
belonged  to  3luDah,  foi  31frael,  arc  d)cy 
nottbjitten  intlje  boofec  of  the  (Ehjont* 
tics  of  the  lungs  of  3lftael  < 

29  2inD  5eroboam  aept  ttntb  bte 
fathers,  cuen  rbtth  the  Kings  of  3ifracl, 
ano  zadjartab  his  fonne  retgncD  in 
hisflcaD. 


XV. 


CHAP 

Azariah  his  good  reigne.  5  He  dying  a  Le- 
per, Iothamfucccededi.  8  Zachanah,  the 
laft  ot  Iehu  his  generation  ,  reigning  ill,  is 
flainebyShallum.  13  Shallum  reigning  a 
moneth,isilaineby  Menahem.  icT  Mena- 
Iicm  frrengtheneth  himfelfeby  Pul.  ri  Pe- 
kahiah  (ucceedeth  him.  2.3  Pekahiah  is 
flaine  by  Pekah.  17  Pekah  is  opprefled  by 
TiglathPiIefcr,andflainebyHofhea.  31  lo- 
thamsgood  reigne.  36  Ahaz  fucceedeth  him. 

0  the  UDenty  anD  fenentl) 
vcere  of  Jeroboam  mng 
ofjfraci ,  began  3t5anah 
fonne  of  :ama5tab  bwtg  of 
•JJubalj  to  reigne. 
1  S>i;ctccnepecresolDtt>asbctt)hen 
he  began  to  rcigne ,  anD  he  retgncD  ttbo 
anD  fifty  yeercs  in  3Jcrufalem :  anD  his 
mod)crs  name  was  ^(ctholiah  of  jjc 
rufainn. 

1  ^nD  he  DiD  d)at  which  was  right  in 
die  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  © ,  acwDtng  to 
all  djat  his  father  ^ma^iab  haD  Done  ■, 

4  ^>auc  that  the  hifirf)  plates  ttjerc 
not  remoueD :  d)e  people  facnfitcD ,  anD 
burnt  mcenfe  Ihllon  thehigh  places. 

5  C  3inD  the  %  ©  «  id  fmote  the 
Hmg,fo  that  hcerbasafLcperPnto  the 
Day  ofhis  Death,  anD  Diueit  m  a  feucrall 
hoiu"e ,  anD  IJotbam  the  amgs  fonne 
was  ouer  djcljoufe,  tuDgmg  the  people 
oftbclanD. 

6  ^nDdKreflofdjcactesof^^ 
rtab,  anD  all  diathccbiD,  aredjeynot 
ttmtten  in  die  booHe  of  d)e€b2ontdcs 
ofthclnngsbf3luDah^ 

7  ^>o  ^artah  flept  iDith  his  ta> 
d)crs,  anD d)ey  bnrieD htm  ibid) his fa= 
thcrsmthectty  of£>auiD,anD  Gotham 
his  fonne  rcigncD  tn  hts  ftcaD. 

8  C  3In  the  thirty  anD  eight  ycer c 
of2ftariab  lung  of  3JuDah,DiD  zadja^ 
rial)  the  fbnnc  of  Jeroboam  rcigne  o^ 
ucr^ifracl  in  S-amariafircmonctbs. 

9  ^no  hec  did  djat  winch  was  euil  in 

the 


Shallum.Menahem.  Chap.xv.      PekahiahPekah. 


•Chap.lo. 
30. 


•  Msith.i 
9.  called  0- 

mcHcth  of 


M.Chron. 


t  Hcb.rcu- 
ftdtcccwi: 
forth. 


the  fight  of  the  %  ©  ih  ©,  as  Ins  fathers 
hab  Done :  he  beparteb  not  from  the 
finnes  of  3croboam  tlje  fonne  of  M- 
bat,  Who  mace  gifrael  to  finne. 

10  ^Cnu  £>hallum  the  fonnc  of  3* 
bcfh,tonfpircbagainllhim,  anb  fmotc 
him  befoze  the  people,  anb  aeibe  him, 
anb  tctgncb  m  his  fleab. 

11  3lnbtherettof  theactesofzacha- 
rial) ,  bcl)olbe,  thep  arc  WMtcn  inthej 
boottc  of  the  ct)2oniclcs  of  the  lungs  of 
3Jfracl. 

11  XhiSwas*thcWo2Dofthe3L©is© 
Which  he  fpane  bnto  Kehu,fapingj:i)p ; 
fonncs  (hall  fit  on  the  thionc  of  3Jftacl, ' 
tmto  the  fourth  gcticranon.  3lnb  fo  it 
camctopafTe. 

13  <E  ^nallutn  tilt  tonne  of  3Jabcfh 
began  to  reignc  in  the  nme  anb  rt)ir« 
ttethpeece  of*  2H^ial)  King  of  Jubah, 
[anb  he  retgncb  t  a  full  monefh  m  £>a< 
marta. 

14.  5Foj  £P)enal)em  the  fonnc  of 0am, 
Wmtt)pfrom%ir5ah,aubcamcto£>a; 
tnana,  anb  fmotc  £>hailum  the  fonnc 
of  IjabcQ) ,  m  3>atnar  1a ,  anb  flc  W  him, 
anb  ceigncb  in  l)is  fieab. 

15  2inb  the  reft  of  the  acres  of  £>hal^ 
lum,anb  the  confpiracp  Which  he  mabc, 
beholo,thcparcWzittcumthtboo&cof 
the  chjontclcs  of  the  lungs  of  'Jfrael. 

16  CXt)ena9enaDcin  fmotc  Xiph* 
fah,  anb  all  that  were  therein ,  anb  the 
toads  thereof  from  Xinah :  becaufc 
the?  opencb  not  to  him  ,tl)crfb?e  he  fmotc 
it,  and  all  the  women  therein  tljat  Were 
Withchilb,hcriptt)p. 

17  5!nthe  nme  anb  thirtieth  pecre  of 
3i5ariahtnngof  Jfubah,  began  ^ena- 
hem  the  fonne  of  Cabi  to  reigne  ouet 
3Ifrael,  and  reigned  tcnuc  percs  m  ,£>a; 
marta. 

18  3inb  he  bib  that  which  was  cmll  in 
the  fight  of  the  %  ©  is  £> :  hce  bepattcb 
not  all  his  bapes  from  the  finncs  of  31  e* 
roboam  the  fonne  of  j2cbat,Whomabe 
3Jfraeltofinuc. 

19  *  And  ^ul  the  lung  of  3lflp2ia  tame 
againfi  theianb :  anb  i^cnahem  gauc 
j^ul  a  thoufatib  talents  of  filucr,  that 
his  hanb  might  be  Wtthhmuo  confirm 
the  Hingbome  m  his  hanb. 

20  3nb  ^cnahemteractcbthemo* 
np  of  3Jftael,euen  of  all  the  mighrte  men 
of  wealth,  of  each  man  fiftic  fbcacls 
of  filucr,  to  giue  to  the  King  of  3ia*pzta : 
fo  the  feing  of  Stflpztaturncb  bactic,anb 
fiapcb  not  there  in  the  lanb. 

21  C3tnbthercOoftljcactsof^3c^ 


nahem,  anb  all  that  he  bio ,  ar  c  the?  not 
written  m  the  boose  of  the  Chronicles 
oftheRmgsof5ifracH 

22  ^iio^enahemaeptJDithhtsfa- 
thers,  anb  ^cbahiah  his  fonnc  ccigneb 
mhisftcab. 

23  C3mflje  fiftieth  pere  of  pariah 
fcmgof  3Jiioal),  ^cttahiah  the  fonnc  of 
fi^enahem  began  to  reigne  oucr  "Jfracl 
m  Samaria,  and  reigned  two  peercs. 

24.  3nb  he  bib  that  which  was  cutll  in 
the  fight  of  the  %.  ©  is  ©,  hce  beparteb 
not  from  the  finnes  of  Jeroboam  the 
fonne  of  jJ5cbat,  Who  mabe  Jfrael  to 
finnc. 

25  25ut  U>chah  the  fonnc  of  ftema- 
liah,acaptamcofhis,confpirebagamfl 
him,  anb  fmotc  him  in  Samaria, m  the 
palace  of  the  lungs  houfe ,  With  31r- 
gob.anb  3tncl),  anb  ibith  him  fiftic  men 
of  the  ©ilcabttcs :  anb  hce  luilcb  him, 
anb  reigncb  m  his  roiune. 

26  3mbthercftofthcactesof0CBa; 
Dial),  anb  all  that  he  bib,  behoioc,  tljcp 
arc  Wzittcn  m  the  booKc  of  the  chroni- 
cles of  the  Hings  of  3)fracl. 

27  C3m  the  two  anb  fiftieth  vecre 
of  pariah  Umg  of  3Jubah ,  pehah  the 
fonne  of  3Kcmaliah  began  to  reignc  0 
ucr  3lfracl  in  Samaria ,  and  reigned 
trbcnticj'cercs. 

28  ^nb  he  bib  that  winch  was  euill  in 
the  fight  of  the  %  o  is  ©,hce  beparteb 
not  from  the  finnes  of  Jeroboam  the 
fonnc  of  j]5cbat,ibhomabc31fraelto 
finne. 

29  3Jn  the  bap es  of  0cftah  King  of 
gifracl,  came  Xigiath  ^ilefer  Utng  of 
^ffpna,  anb  toonc  Ston,  anb^lbei- 
26cth  -maathah,anb  3Janoah,anb  Be- 
bed),  anb  i^a^o?,  anb  <silcab,  anb  ©au- 
l« ,  all  the  ianb  of  ii5aphtali,  anb  caricb 
them  captiuc  to  ^ttTpjia. 

30  3tnb  ^ofl)ca  the  fonne  of  i£lah, 
mabc  a  confpiranc  againfi  penal)  the 
fonnc  of  Bemaiiah.anbfmotc  htm,anb 
ficru  him  ,anb  rcigneb  in  his  ficab  ,tn  the 
twentieth  pecre  of  3otljam  the  fonnc 
of^5ialj. 

3i^nbthcrcfloftheattesof|i)cUah) 
anb  all  that  he  bib,  beholb,  tljcp  are 
tbnttcn  mthc  boobeof  the  Ctjiotuclcs 
oftheningsof^frael. 

32  C*3)ntl)cfeconbpcereof0cUah 
tl)c  fonne  of  Hemaiiah  6lng  of  5ffrae!, 
began  IJotham  the  fonnc  of  3LJ>3ial) 
btngof  ^Jubah  to  reignc. 

33  if  me  anb  trbninc  pecrcs  olbc  ibas 
he  When  he  began  to  reigne,  anb  hee 

reigneb 


Cliron. 


lothams  death.  1 1.  Kings.     Ahaz  his  idolatrie. 


•  2.Chron. 


•tt*y.t. 


reigncD  firtccnc  vcctes  in  Jcrufalcm : 
anb  his  mothers  name  was  3leru(ba, 
the  Daughter  of  zaboU. 

34.  SmohcDiD  that  which  wasrightm 
the  fight  of  the  %  ©  13  © :  hee  did  accoz* 
mngto  all  that  his  father  ^tahhan 
bone 

35  C  ^otbbctt,  the  high  places  mere 
notrcmoucb:  the  people  facnficcD  anb 
burnt  mccufcftillm  the  high  plates :  $?c 
built  the  higher  gate  of  the  houfe  of  the 
I?L£hb©. 

36  c  /BoU)  thcrcftoftheactesof 
,  gjotham,  atiu  all  that  hee  bib ,  arc  the? 
notmjittcnmthebooueofthe  Ch2om* 

I  ties  of  the  lungs  of  3!ubah  < 

37  (lJnthofcbayesthc1L<i>H©bc* 
ganto  fetibagainlrjubah ,  Se^ui  the 
Utngof  3>vzia,ano£eUah  thefonneof 
Semaiiah) 

38  3nb  Gotham  (lept  lbtth  his  fa? 
thers,anb  mas  bunco  iDUh  hisfathers 
in  the  one  of  Dauib  his  father,  anb^ 
hajhisfonncrcigncbmhisfleaD. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  Ahaz  his  wicked  reigne.  5  Ahazaflailedby 
Rezin  andPekah  ,  hireth  Ti^Iath  P  ilcfer  a- 
gainftthem.  10  Ahaz  fending  a  patemc  of 
an  Altar  from  Damafcus  to  Vrijah,  diuerteth 
die  brafen  Altar  to  his  owne  deuotion.  17 
Hee  fpoileth  the  Temple,  j^  Hezekiah 
fucceedeth  him. 

^^sg^gff  0  *  the  feucntccnth  were 
«f&  of^euahthefotmcofme, 
maiiah,  3u>5thcfonneof 
ar  JJotham  Butg  of  3Jubah 
began  to  retgne. 

z  Xvbcntic  yeeres  olbe  was  ^has 
when  hee  began  to  rcignc ,  anb  retgneb 
firtccnc  yeercs  in  3ierufaicm,  anb bib 
not  that  which  was  right  in  the  fight  of 
the  Ham©  his ©ob,  UUcDauib  his 
father: 

3  25ut  hccwaiUeb  in  the  way  of  the 
Rings  of  "Jfrael ,  yeasmabchtsfonne 
to  paiTc  thzough  the  fire,  accozbtng  to 
the  abominations  of  the  heathen, 
Whom  the  H®  m©  call  out  from  befoze 
thechilbzenofgjfiael. 

4.  2(nD  hee  faenftteb  anb  burnt  in* 
tenfem  the  high  places,  anb  on  the  hits, 
anb  nnber  eticry  greenc  tree. 

5  C*1£hen£toin  Umg  of £>yzta,anb 
0enah  fonncof  IXcmaliah  Umg  of  '3f- 
rael,tame  bp  to^Icrufalcm  to  warrc: 
anb  theybcficgeb  ^haj,  but  toulb  not 
ouercomchim. 


6  3it  that  tunc  &C5111  Umg  of  5>yzia, 
recmiercb  ciath  to  £>?iia , d  bzaue  the 
3}etbc5  from  eiath:  anb  the  Tynans 
tame  to  eiath ,  anb  Dibelt  there  tonto 
this  bap. 

7  ^o^asfentmeflcngerstoXtg; 
lath^ilcfcrUmgof^yzia,  faying,  3J 
am  thy  femant,anb  thy  tonne :  tome  top, 
anbfaucnicoittofthchanDofthcUmg 
of  £>yzta,anb  out  of  the  hanb  ofthc  Umg 
of  3Jfracl,Whlchru"c  top  againftmc. 

8  3hib  3lha5  tooUc  tljc  filucr  anb 
golb  that  was  fount)  m  the  houfe  of  the 
%o  kid,  anb  m  the  treafurcs  of  the 
Uings  houfe ,  anb  fenticforapzcfcnt  to 
thcumgof;affyjta. 

9  3nbtheUingof3lffyztahearUcnco 
bnto  htm :  foz  the  Umg  of  3luyzia  ltoent 
bpagainftDamaftus,anDtooUcit,anb 
carieb  the  people  of  it  tapnuc  to  Bir.anb 
flcrbSle^in. 

io  C3nbmuig3iha5wenttotD& 
mafens,  to  mccte  Xtgiath  0tlcfer  Umg 
of^flV2ia,anb(aU)  an  altar  that  was  at 
Damafcus :  anb  Utng3ha5fcnt  to  31ris 
iah  the  0ztcft  the  fathion  of  the  altar, 
anb  the  patcrne  of  it,atcozbmg  to  all  the 
WozUcmanlhip  thereof. 

it  SfnbtKruah  the  l&jieft  built  an  afc 
tar:  aecozbmg  to  all  that  Umg  3ha5  hab 
fent  from  Damafcus,  fo  Uruah  the 
0zicft  inabc  if ,  agamtt  Umg  3ha5  came 
from  Damafcus. 

ii  3tab  when  the  Uing  was  come 
from  Damafcus,  theBmgfawtheal* 
tar :  anb  the  Bmg  appzotheb  to  the  al- 
tar, anb  offereb  thereon. 

13  ^nb  he  burnt  his  burnt  offering, 
anb  his  mcate  offering,  anb  powzcb  his 
bzmUe  offenng,anb  fpzinUleb  the  bloob 
ofthtspcaceofferingsnpouthcaltar. 

14.  Znn  hee  bzought  alfo  the  bzafen 
altar  which  iDas  befoze  the  H©b#, 
from  the  fozefront  of  the  houfe ,  from 
betibecucthc  altar  anb  the  houfe  of  the 
%  0  ft  w> ,  anb  put  it  on  the  /t5ozth  Goc 
of  the  altar. 

15  3lnD  Uing  ^m  tommanbeb  ffl* 
ntah  the  0zieft,favmg,  tlpon  the  great 
altar,  burnt  the  mozmng  burnt  offe* 
ring,  anb  the  tucnmgmeate  offering, 
anbthciaungs  burnt  latnnce,  anb  his 
meate  offering,  Ibith  the  burnt  offc^ 
ring  of  all  the  people  of  the  lanb,  anb 
their  mcate  offering ,  anb  their  DzmUc 
offerings,  ano  fpzmUlc  bpon  it  all  the 
bloob  of  the  burnt  offering. anb  all  the 
bloob  of  the  fatrtfite:  anDthcbjafrnal* 
tar  (hall  be  fo;  mc  to  enquire  by. 
16  Xhus 


\HAX>*a 
mtftk. 


\Htk 

Hereby 


>.uh 


Ahazdieth. 


Ch; 


p.XVlJ. 


IfraeL 


scaptiuinc. 


ipt 


t  tiebr.  ren- 

drci. 

\\0r  .tribute. 


•Chap.  18 


i6  Xhus  bib  Uruah  the  ^tcfl ,  ac* 
toeing  to  all  that  Ring  30ja5  conv 
maunbeb. 

17  C3nbRing:3uja5Cittoffthebo^ 
bcrsofthcbafes,  anbrcmooucbtbcla; 
uer  from  off  tljcm ,  anb  tooReboibne 
tljc  fta  from  off  the  tyafen  orcn  that 
ibcrc  bnbcrtt ,  anb  put  it  bponapauo 
mentofftones: 

is  3mbtl)c  eouert  fo?  tlic  Sabbath 
that  thep  hab  built  m  the  houfe ,  anb 
tljc  lungs  cntrp  Without ,  tumeb  hee 
from  tljc  houfc  of  the  %  ©  is  ©>  fo?  tljc 
RfngofafTpna. 

19  C /from  the  reft  of  the  aetes  of  3- 
ha?,  mhiehhebib,arcthcpnotlb;Htten 
in  tljc  booRc  of  tljc  Cbjomcles  of  tljc 
Kings  of  Jubalj? 

io  ^nb^lja3flcpttbitn!jtsfatljcrs, 
anbibas  burlcb  uJith  Ijis  fathers  m  tije 
cttpof  3Dauib ,  anb  l?c3eRiahhisfonne 
rcigncbmhtsftcab. 

CHAP.   XVII. 

1  Hofhea  his  wicked  reigne.  3  Being  fub- 
diied  by  Shalmanefer,  hee  confpireth  againft 
him  with  So  King  of  Egypt.  <i  Samaria  for 
their  finnes,  is  captiuated.  14  Theftrange 
nations,which  were  tranfplanted  in  Samaria, 
beeing  plagued  with  Lions ,  make  a  mix- 
ture of  Religions. 

/Rthetlbclfthpccreofa'' 
Da5,  King  of  llubalj  ,bcgan 
hofhea  the  tonne  of  ffilalj 
tor  eigne  m  Samaria ,  o* 
„  uer  gifrael  nine  pecres. 
2  3lnb  Dec  bib  tljat  which  was  tuiii  in 
toe  fight  of  tljc  %  0  is  ©,  but  not  as  tljc 
Sings  of  gifrael  that  tticre  before  Ijim. 
j  C^gatnft  him  came  bp  Shamir 
nefer  Ring  of  3ftp»a ,  anb  $ofhca  be- 
camehisferuant,  anbtgauc  Ijim  ||  pje* 
fents. 

4  3tnb  tljc  Rtng  of  ^fflpnafounb 
confpiracie  m  i)o(bea :  fozhechabfent 
mcflengers  to  So  lung  of  €gppt  ,anb 
brought  no  pjefent  to  tlic  King  otTLwp 
ria,as  he  had  done  pcere  bp  pecre :  there* 
foic  the  Ring  of  ^flvnaujut  Dim  bp, 
anb  bounb  han  in  pnfon. 

5  CXhentbc  lung  of  affptfa  came 
bp  tftojottout  all  tbc  lano.ano  ibent  bp 
to  Samarta,anb  beficgeb  it  tlnce  pcrcs. 

6  C*1ln  the  ninth  peercofl^ofbea, 
the  Ring  of  ^ffpna  tooRc  Samarta,am> 
cancb^fracl  a\bap  into  3lflp2ia  ,  anb 
placebthetn  m  $aiah ,  anbini^abozby 
thcrtucr  of  ©ojan ,  anb  m  tljc  cities  of 
the  *$ebes. 


7  3fo2foitnjas,tbatthechi.02cnofi 
llfraci  ijab  fmneb  againft  the  %  <d  is  ©  I 
their  <sob,  which  hab  bioughtthembp 
out  of  tljc  lanb  of  €gy>pt ,  from  bnber 
the  hanb  of  Pharaoh  lung  of  £gypt, 
anb  hab  feareo  other  gobs, 

8  3nb  ibaiReb  in  the  ftanttes  of  the 
heathen,  (Whom  the  H©i3©  call  out 
from  before  the  chilbzcn  of  3Jfracl )  anb 
of  the  mngs  of  ^jfrael,  winch  thep  hab 
mabc. 

9  2nb  thcdjilbjcnof 3Jfrael bibfe* 
cr cttp  th  ofc  things  that  Were  not  right , 
againft  fhc|L©i3©  their  d5ob  :  anb 
thep  built  them  high  places  m  all  their 
ones ,  from  the  tower  of  the  watch 
mcn,tothefenccbeitp. 

10  ^nb  thep  fet  them  bp  Umages, 
anbgroucs  in  euerp  high  hill ,  anbbn= 
bereucrpgreenetree. 

11  :3lnbthcrethepburntintenfeinail 
the  high  plates ,  as  bib  the  heathen 
Whom  the  %  ©  is  ©  earicb  awap  before 
them,  anb  Wjought  WitRcb  thmgs  to 
pzouoRethe  %  tf>  is  ©  to  anger. 

n  3fo?  thep  fcrueb  iboles,  Whereof 
thclt  ©  is  ©  hab  taib  bnto  tljcm,  *  ^ee 
ujau  not  boe  this  thing. 

13  Pet  the  %  ©  is  ©  tcftifieb  againft 
gjfrael,  anbagamft^lubah.t  by  all  the 
V>2ophets,  and  by  allthc  Seers,  fapmg, 

*  Xurncpc  from  pour  euillibavcs,anb 
Reepe  mp  commanbcments,anb  mp  fta^ 
mtes,  actojbing  to  all  the  lam  lbhsch  3 
commanbeb  pour  fathers,  anb  ibhich 
3Jfenttopou  bp  mp  fcruants  tljc^o- 
phcts. 

\Ar  iRottbtthflanmng ,  ttjcp  lbouib 
not  hcare,  but  *  harbeneb  their  necRes, 
URc  to  the  necRc  of  their  fathers,  that 
bib  not  beleeue  in  the  ?.©«©  their 
<35ob. 

i$  ^nb  thep  rcicctcb  his  Statutes, 
anb  his  Couenant  that  hce  mabe  Hoittj 
thnr  fathers ,  anb  his  Xeftimonics 
Vbtnch  he  tcftifieb  againft  them ,  anb 
thep  follotbeb  banitic ,  anb  became 
baine,  anb  vbentaftectljcheathcn  that 
ibere  rounb  about  them,  concerning 
ibhom  the  %  ffl  is  ©hab  chargcb  tljcm, 
tljatthep  fl)oulbnotboc  URc  tljcm. 

i6  3inb  thep  left  all  the  Commanbe^ 
ments  of  the  ft  ©  is  ©  tljnr  0ob ,  anb 

*  mabc  tljcm  molten  images,  «»en  tibo 
talues,  anb  mabe  a  groue,anb  ibozftyp 
peb  allthe  hoftcof  hcauen,  anbferueb 
26aal. 

17  ^nb  thep  caufeb  their  fonnesanD 

their  baugljtcrs  to  pafft  though  the 

fire, 


lacs. 


•  Dcut-4 
9- 


tH'^byke 
hitr.dof  Aii. 

'  Icrcm.t8. 
1 1,  and  35. 


•Exod.jt. 
S.i. king. 
12.  s8. 


Lions  in  Samaria.       II.Kings.        Diuers  religions. 


fire,  anb  bfeb  bmtnatton,  atiDmdwnt- 
inents,  attbfoiMbcmfclues  toboc  null 
mtHefigDtoftrjclL^JiJP.topiouoKC 
bunco  auger. 

is  Xbcrcfo2Ctbc2L©i5£>ibasbcry 
angry  lbtth  Jffracl,  anbrcmouebtlmn 
outofbisfigtn,tnctcibasuoncleft,but 
tbe  tnbt  of  gjuoal)  onely. 

19  2bfo  3lubab  Kept  not  tin  Com- 
ntanbemeutsoftbc?L©i3£>tbnrC5ob, 
but  lbalfeeb  in  tl)c  Statutes  of  3Jfracl 
ibbicb  tbey  mabe. 

20  Subfile %OK-p reiccteb all tbe 
fc:bof  gjfrael,  anb  afflictcb  tbem,  anb 
beliuercb  tbem  into  t!)c  Ijanb  of  fpoi- 
Jccs,butillt)cljab  caft  tbem  out  of  Ijis 
figbt. 

21  5r 02  lie  rent  gjfrart  from  tfu  Iioufc 
of  2Muib",  anb  tbq>  maoc  ^Jeroboam 
tbefonneof  j3cbat  lung,  aub  3Jerobo= 
am  b?auc  jjfracl  from  follottung  the 
H©ujD,aubmabc  tljcm  Cmncagccat 
fume. 

22  foi  tile  cbmwnofjfraeiibal 
hcbtnaitftcfumesofjjeroboamuirjicl) 
btbib,tbcybepartebuotfromtbcm: 

23  tlntill  tUc  %$>  is  ©  remoucb  31  f 
rati  out  of  l)ic  ftgbt ,  as  Dec  bab  fatb  by 
allbisferttauts  tlje  02opbcts:  folbas 
gjfrael  tancb  aibay  out  of  tljnrolbue 
laub  to  3tuy2ui,bnto  tbisbay. 

24  ft  3inb  tbe  Butg  of  3tffy2ia 
biougbtmnt  from  Babylon, anb  from 
Cutbab,  aub  from  3lua,  anb  from  $a- 
math,  anb  from  St phantasm,  aub  pia 
ccb  them  m  flic  nt'.ts  of  Samaria ,  m 
ttcab  oftlie  cbtiDicn  ofgjfraeli  aub  tbey 
poffeffeb  Samaria,  attbbtticltintbcci: 
ties  thereof. 

25  3nb  fo  it  ibas  at  tbe  beginning  of 
tbctr  blbeiltug  rlicrc,  that  tbey  feareb 
nottl)c1LiME>;thcrefo.'ctl)c!LoK£? 
fcut  liions  among  tbem,  lbljiri)  flelb 
feme  of  tbem. 

26  tt)bercfo2C  tbcyfpaucto  tlieliing 
of  3MTv2ia,  faying,  %be  nations  lbbtcb 
tboubaft  remoueb,  aub  piatcbintlje  ti- 
tles of  Samaria,  Knott)  not  tl)cmaner 
oftbcGoboftbeianb:tbcrfo2Cbcbatb 
fent  Titons  among  tbem,  anb  bcholbc, 
tbey  flay  tbem,  becaufc  they  luioib  not 
tbe  maucr  oftbc  <3ob  oftbc  laub. 

27  Xbm  tbe  lung  of  My2ta  torn 
man&cb,faytng,Canetbithcr  one  oftbc 
piicftsibbomyc  b?ougbt  from  thence, 
anblrttljongocaubbiiifii  tbere ,  anb 
let  linn  teacl)  tbem  tlje  maucr  of  rfjc 
Cob  oftbe  laub. 

28  Xbcn  one  of  tlje  p?tefts  lbbom 


tbey  bab  cancb  aibay  from  Samaria, 
:  came  anb  bibeit  in  Betbtl ,  aub  taugbt 
tbem  bott)c  tljcy  fbouib  feare  tije 
ILOis©. 

29  *)oibbeit,cnery  nation  mabe  gobs 
of  tbeir  oibne,  anb  put  tbem  m  tbe  bou> 
fes  of  tbe  btgb  Plates  ibbicb  tbe  Sa- 
mantancfibab  mabe,  ruery  nation  in 
tbeicnttcsibbcreintbeybVbelt: 

30  3nb  tbe  men  of  Babylon  mabe 
Suctotb-2Scnotb,anb  tbe  men  of  Cutb 
mabe  jftergal,  anb  tlje  men  of  C?amatb 
mabe3(Q)ima: 

31  3lnb  tbe  Suites  mabe  j^tbba} 
anb  Xartat?  ;  anb  tbe  Sepbaruitcs 
burnt  tbeir  cbtttucn  in  fire  to  3b2am^ 
melccb,  anb3lnammelecb,  tbe  gobs  of 
Scpbaruaun. 

32  So tbey fcarcb tbe %o uses anb 
mabebnto  tbcmfrlues  of  tbe  loibeftof 
tbem  p?icfts  of  tbe  btgb  places,  ibbicb 
facrtftccD  fo?  tbem  tn  tbe  Ijoufcs  of  tijc 
bigb  places. 

33  *Xbcy  fcarcb  tbe  %®  -us©,  anb 
ferueb  tbeir  ottme  gobs  ,  after  tbe  mfc 
tier  of  tbe  nanons  |jtt)!jom  tbey  cancb 
away  from  fbence. 

3+  «£lnto  tljis  bay  tbey  boe  after  tbe 
fo2tner  maners  :  tbey  fcarc  not  tbe 
ILoks?  ,  ncitbcrboc  tbey  after  tbeir 
Statutes,  0?  after  tbtir£)2binances,02 
after  tbe  ?Uib  anb  Commaimbcmnit 
lbbub  tbe  ILoihjd  commaunbeb  tbe 
cbtib?cnof  31acob,  'lbljom  becnameb 
31fracl, 

55  iBttb  lbbom  tbe  iLsnis^bab 
mabe  a  Coucnant,  aub  tbargcb  tbem, 
faying, *J3eeffjail  not  fcarc  otber  gobs, 
no?bon)  your  fclucsto  tbem ,  noifcruc 
tbnn,no2  famficc  to  tbem : 

36  But  tbe  % <£>  is  e>  ,  tt>bo b;ougbt 
youbpout  oftlie  lanoofegypt,Uufb 
great  poibcr,  anb  a  ftrctcbcb  out  armc, 
bint  ibail  ye  fcarcanb  bun  lliailyc  lbo?  - 
flnp.anbtobimfliailycboefacnficc. 

37  ^itbtbeStanttes,anbtl)c£>2bi^ 
nances,  anb  tbe  Ha\b,  anb  tbe  Com- 
manbement  lbbub  be  ib;otc  fo:  you.yc 
fliail  obfeructoboe  fo2ntermo2e ,  aub 
ye  (ball  not  fcare  otber  gobs : 

38  2nb  tbe  Coucnant  rtiat^  battc 
mabeibitbyou,  yefliaii  uotfo2gct,un 
tber  fbail  ye  fcarc  otber  gobs. 

39  But  tbe  %s>  is  &  your  Cob  vet 
(ball  fcarc ,  anb  be  (ball  bcltun  yon  out 
oftlie  banb  of  allyonr  nicnues. 

40  if)olbbctt, tbci'bibuotbtarlien, 
but  tbey  bib  aftn-  tbeir  fo.'mermanrr. 

41  So  rtjefc  nanons  fcarcD  tbe 


*Soph3D,l. 

5- 

\\Orjrko 

ctrritdlhtm 

awarfrom 

thence. 


j8.  1. king. 
18.31. 


•Iiuig.<>. 

10. 


Hezekiah  king. 


Ch; 


Lp.X  Vll  | . 


s 


amana  taken. 


k< 


*  a.Chron. 
iS.  zy. and 
19.1.  hec 
is  called  E- 
ekias,Mat. 
1.9. 


tuet. 

•Numb 

11.8. 


t  Heh.fram 
aftcrhim. 


\Hci.Ai.- 


•Cha.17.3 


*Cha.r7« 


%®wz>>  anbferucb  their  grauenuna< 
ges,  both  their  cbtlb;en,  anD  ttjeic  cbiV 
ojens  ebUbjen :  as  bib  their  fathers,  fo 
boetbeybntotbisbay. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

Hezekiah  his  good  reigne.  4  HedeAroyeth 
idolame,and  prolpereth.  j  Samaria  is  caried 
captme  for  their  lins.  13  Sennacherib  inua- 
dingludah,  is  pacified  by  2  tribute.  17  Rab- 
(hakchfentby  Sennacherib  againe,  reuileth 
Hezekiah,  andbyblafphemousperfwaGoiis, 
follicueth  the  people  toreuolt. 

""  a©n)tttametopa(rcmtt)e 
tbirbycreof{?owcafonnc 
of  eiah  feing  of  3frael, 
that  *  labial)  the  fonne 
of  3ilja5  King  of  3!ubab> 
began  to  reigne. 

2  Xtbcntteanbuueyecresolbtbas 
he  ltoben  bee  began  to  reigne,  anb  lice 
reigneb  troentte  anb  nine  yeeres  mjic? 
tnfaiem:  ^ts  mothers  name  alfo  was 
2bt,  the  baugbtcr  of  zacbanab. 

j  3nb  he  bib  that  mbtch  was  right  in 
the  light  of  the  How©,  aecojbmgto 
all  that  2>antb  his  father  bib. 

4-  €  ^e  remooucb  the  high  plates, 
anb  bjafce  the  t  images,  anb  cutboJbne 
the  groues,anbbiabcmpteccstbe*  toa- 
fenferpent  that£E)ofcs  hab  mabe:  fo? 
bnto  thofe  bayes  the  chtlbjen  of  gjfracl 
bib  burne  incenfetoitranb  be  talleb  it 
Behuthtan. 

'  <;  ^etruftcb(ntbe1L©iK©<5obof 
3Jfcacl,  fo  that  after  him  tbas  none  like 
htm  among  all  the  aings  of  ^ubab^noj 
any  that  ibcrc  before  btm. 

6  5f 0?  he  tlauc  to  the  %  <s>  is  ©,  and 
beparteDnottfromfollo!butghim,but 
bept  his  tommanbements,  ibhich  the 
%  ©  is  ©  tommanbeb  $J0ofcs. 

7  anbtbe!L©K©rbastbtthhun, 
md  bee  pzofpereb  tbhithcrfocuet  hee 
Ibentfojth :  anb  he  rebelleb  agamflrbe 
bmg  of  3(Ty»a,  anb  fttueb  him  not. 

8  ^efmotcthetBniliftmeseuenbn* 
tot<i5a3a,anbtbcbojbcrstbercof,from 
the  tott)?e  of  the  tbatchmen  to  the  fenccu 
cities. 

9  C  3nb  *  it  tame  to  pad*  m  the 
fourth  yeere  of  bmg  ^cuebtab,  ( tbbicb 
teas  the  feucntb  yeere  of  fiofl)ea,fonnc 
of  dabbing  of  wad  )that^>haima- 
nefer  bing  of  mpzia  came  bp  agamft 
<S>amarta,  anb  befiegeti  tt. 

10  2nb  at  the  eno  of  rtnee  yeeres  fber 
toofte  it :  euen  m  the  (irt  yeere  of  ^ejefet* 
ah  (that  is  *  the  ntntb  yeere  of  l^ofbea 


tongof  3fraci)S>amariaibastabcn. 

1 1  3lno  the Ring  of  SJJIyna  bib  tacit 
aibay  ^frael  bnto  3ilTy?ja ,  anb  put 
them  m  i^aiah  anb  m  tyaboi  by  the  rtucr ! 
of  ©osan,  $  tn  the  cities  of  the  spebes : ! 

ii  ^ecaufc  they  obeyeo  not  the  boicel 
of  the  31  ©  b  ©  their  <5ob ,  but  trant  | 
grefTebbisCouenant,  and  all  fhatfij9o- 
fes  theferuant  of  the  %<s>m®  command 
bcb,anbU)onlbnot  bearechem,  nojboc 

them. 

ij  C  #ott>  *  in  the  fourteenth  yeere 
of  Hmg  i^cfttah,  bib  t  3>ennacbcrib 
btngof  ^iTpnacomc  bp  againftau  the 
fenceb  cities  of  3Jubab,anb  toobe  them. 

14  3iiib  ^C5ebtah  bing  of  3fat>ab 
fenttothc  bmg  of  3uTyMto  Hachtfb, 
faying,  3  haue  offtnbeb,returncfrom 
me :  that  ibbicb  tbou  putteft  on  me,  Ibil 
3  beare.  3inb  the  bmg  of  affyua  ap- 
pomtto  bnto  i*>C3cbiah  bmg  of  juuab, 
tXfitt  hunb^eb  talents  of  filuer,  anb 
thirtte  talents  of  golb. 

15  3inb  i>e5cftiah  gaue  him  an  the  Ou 
net  thatibasfounbiutbc  boiu"e  of  ttjc 
How©,  anb  in  the  treasures  of  the 
Kings  boufc. 

16  ^t  that  tunc  bib  $e3Cbiab  cut  off 
the  gold  from  tt)t  booses  of  the  temple  of 

the  tl  €>  k  ©,  anb  rrom  the  piUarsibhich 
^e^cbtah  bmg  of  giubah  hao  ouerlaib, 
anb  gaue  t  it  to  the  bmg  of  ^ftyna. 

17  C  ^nb  the  bmg  of  Slffwia  fent 
Xartan  anb  Eabfaris,  anb  Jaabtha- 
beh ,  from  ?Uthtft)  to  binct De?cbiah, 
tbith  a  t  great  hofte  agamltj  erufalem: 
anb  thep  ibent  bp,  ano  came  to  3?ernfa= 
lem:  ano  ibhcn  they  ibcre  conic  bp,tbey 
cameanbftoobbyrhcconbuitofthebp< 
per  poole,  ibhich is  tn  the  high  ibapof 
the  fullers  fielb. 

18  3nb  ibhcn  they  hab  caiieb  to  the 
bing,  there  came  out  to  them  <£Uabim 
the  fonne  of  l^elbiah,  tbhich  was  oucr 
the  boutbolD,am)  5>hcbna  the !  |S»cnbe, 
anb^oah  the  fonne  of  ^faph  thcEei 
comber. 

19  ^nb  Habfbabch  faib  bnto  them, 
&peabe  yee  noib  to  n^ebiab,  Xhus 
faith  the  great  bmg,tl)e  bmg  of  3lffy«a, 
UDhat  confibtnee  is  this  Xbhtmn  tibou 
truQdlf 

ZO   ZbOU  l|  fayeO,  (  bUt  'hey  are  but 

tbame  \b02bs )  ||  1  haue  totmfeii  anb 
fir ength  foz  the  rbarr c :  noib  on  tbhom 
boelrthou  truft ,  that  thou  cebellefta* 
gainltmt^ 

1 1  ^5olb  b?holb,thou  t  truaeft  bpon 
the  Uaffe  of  this  bmifeb  neb,  euen  upon 
Cgypr, 


*  ;.  Chron. 
I  :.i.efa. 
?(S.i.ecdu. 

48.1a. 

f  Feb.  Sm- 
htrth. 


\Heb.tkem. 


\  He b. heavy 


\\OrtSecrc 
tsrie. 


|  Htb.  word 
of  the  hpt. 
\\Or,bsit 
coun(eU*nd 

ccrth.-trt,r. 
tHrb.rr*. 
ReH  the. 


Rabfhakehs  outrage,  ILKings.        and  blafphemie. 


[  Or,  hcfla 


\Hci.iht 

WMcr  of 

their/Me  ? 


{Or.fctkf 

}ita.  r*M$c 
withmea 

\\n.  ,,■ 


<£gypt,onmhichifaman  leanc ,  it  mill 
got  into  ht£  ham) ,  arm  pierce  it :  fo  '5 
Pharaoh  lung  of  <£gypt  unto  all  that 
milt  on  htm. 

n  23uttfycfaybntomc,i©ctruftin 
the  1Li©KE>  our  ©on:  is  not  thathce 
U)I)ofc  high plates,  anbtbhofe  altars 
$?e5CRial)rjatl)  taken  amay ,  anb  hath 
CaiD  to  Jfuoal)  ant)  'Jcrufaiem,  Pt  (hall 
mojmip  befoje  tljis  altar  m  ^enrnv 
lem; 

13  ji3olb  therefore,  31  PJaythccgttte 
||  plcbgcs  to  my  lorn  the  femg  of  3uTyaa, 
anb  31  tbtllbcliucr  thee  tmo  thoufanb 
fjojfes ,  iftljou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  fct 
rtbersbponthem. 

14.  J)om  then  milt  thonturne  amay 
rt)t  face  of  one  captainc  ofttjc  lealt  of  my 
mailers  feruants,  ant)  put  flip  trufr  on 
Cgypt  fo?  tharets  anb  fo2  hoifetnen  i 

%<,  3m3Jnomcomct>pYbtthontthe 
%  a>  is  ©  agamft  this  place ,  to  befrroy 
it  i  Xhc  %  o  is.  ©  fayb  to  me ,  <5oc  top 
agamlr  this  lanb,anb  beftroy  it. 

16  Xhcn  faio  citatum  the  founc  of 
nilkiali.ano^Dcbua^inD^ioali.biuo 
Kabfhafceh ,  £>pcalte,  3Jpzay  thee ,  to 
thy  femants  in  the  £>y?ian  language, 
(fo:  mcctotmcrlranbH)aub  tame  not 
mith  bs  in  thegjemcsianguagcuithe 
earcsofthc  people  that  are  on  the  ltoall. 

17  26ut  Sabma&ch  fayb  bnto  them, 
S?ntf)  my  mafter  lent  me  to  tln> matter, 
aim  to  thee,  to  fpcaHe  thefc  rbornes? 
hat!)  he  not  fent  me  to  tljc  mm mhuh  fit 
on  the  mall,  that  they  may  eate  their 
oibnc  bottng,  attbbunUe  their  toume 
ptCfe  mith  you? 

13  XhenBabthaKChftoobanbcri' 
eomithaloubetooicetnthe3?eU)esiam 
gnagc ,  aim fpahc,  faying,  Dearc the 
mom  of  the  great  king, rlje  Kingof  afc 
fyua. 

19  mints faytfjrnc  lung,  Hctnot 
^CKWahberctttcyomfoJhcfhaiinotbe 
able  to  belutec  you  out  of  his  hanb : 

30  ^either  let  De^eluah  malte  you 
trult  m  the  %  <d  «  © ,  faying,  Xhe 
H©k?s>  mill  finely  Dclmer  tos ,  aim 
this  city  mall  not  bee  bcliucrcb  mtothe 
hanb  of  the  King  of  ^fly2ia. 

31  iicarUennot  to  l^e^cltiali:  fo:  thus 
faytl)  the  lung  of  3lffyna,  H^aUeana- 
a;rccnKiiatiul)  me  by  ap.:cfeut,  anb  come 
out  to  me ,  anb  men  eate  yer  cuery  man 
of  l)is  omnetome,  anb  eueryoncof  rjts 
ftggctrec,  anbbnnlicyec  euery  one  the 
matcrsofhtsllctlrcrnc: 

31  SLlnttll  3)  come  ano  take  you  a-| 


may  to  a  lano  use your  omne  lanb ,  a 
lanb  ofco?neanDminc,a  lanb  of  bzcab 
ano  btncyatbs.a  lanb  of  oilc  £Diuic,ano 
of  tjonic,  that  y ee  may  Hue,  anb  no  t  bie : 
anb  hearken  not  bnto  l)C5eliial),mS)cn 
hec  ||  perfmabetl)  you,  faying,  Xhe 
?L©i3©muibeliuerl>s. 

33  $ath  any  of  me  gobs  of  the  nati- 
ons ocuuercb  at  all  his  latmoutofthc 
hanb  of  the  hmg  of  ^ICfyna  i 

3+  natjere « the  gobs  of  l^amath, 
anb  of  3rpab  ?  mherc  are  the  gobs  of 
£>cpharuaun,  i?ena,  anb3Jualj J.  haue 
they  beliucreb  5>amana  out  of  mine 
hano; 

35  naho  are  they  among  ail  the  gobs 
of  thctountrcys.tljat  l>mc  belmeieb 
thctt  coimtrey  out  of  mine  hanb,  that 
the  %  o  « -o  fljoulb  beliucr  Jcrufalcm 
out of  mine hanb r 

36  23ut  the  people hclbc  their  peace, 
anb  anfincrcb  hun  not  a  mom :  fo?  the 
lungs  commaunbemeut  mas,  faying, 
^nfiuerchimuot. 

37  Xhenramc€ltaKimtl)cfonneof 
^iltnah.mhtch  \«s  ouerthehoulhoio, 
anb  S)hebna  the  £>rribc,anb  3'oah  the 
fonne  of  ^faph  theftecomer,  to  tytw 
biahmtth  their  clothce rent,  anb  tolbe 
hun  tljc  moms  of  BabChaKch. 

C  HA  P.    XIX. 

1  Hcz-kuli  Dioumingjfendcth  ro  E(ay  to  prav 
for  them.  6  Efay  cort;foitethrheni.  8  Sen- 
naclienb  2,oing  co  encounter  Tirhakah,  fen- 
deili  a  bhlpheioous  letter  to  Hczekiah.  14 
Hczfki.ih  his  prayer.  10  Efay  his  proplie- 
cieof  rheprideanildertiuflion  oi  Sennache- 
rib ,  and  the  good  of  Zion.  35  An  Angel 
ilayerh  the  Aflyrians.  36  Sennacherib  is 
(IaineacNineucn  bvhisownefonnes. 

98$G2&B  i"2o  "it  came  to  paffe  mhett 
X^/A^i  Sans  i^e^ekiah  hearb  n, 

/M^>&  that  lice  rent  Ins  clothes, 
ft  anb  couereb  himfcife  muh 
M&&, fiuueclotl) ,  anbmeutuuo 
thehoufcoftheil<pfir>. 

1  2lnbhee  fcnt€lia!um,  mhtch  w« 
oucr  the  houfljoib  ,  anb  5>hcbna  the 
<§>cnbc,  atm  the  © ibers  of  thcpnclts, 
couereomitl)fac!tcioth,to€faithcli);o' 
phcttl)c  fonne  of  3(mov 

5  3hib  t\)ty>  fayb  Ditto  hun ,  Xhus 
fayth  towtuat),  Xhis  bay  is  a  bay  of 
trouble,  anb  of  rebultc,  aim  ||  blafphe- 
mie :fo?  the  cljtlbicu  ace  come  to  the 
birth,  anb  there  is  not  ftrengthto  b.'iug 
foo?th. 
+  Ht 


tib. 


*  1  ;  i! .  5  — .  r 


■  :   •"- : 


The  prayer  of  Chap.xrx.      Hezekiah  is  heard 


\Heb.fn, 


Lukes 
called  E- 

faiai. 


4  3Jtmaybe,tDc?L©is£>tDy(i5ob 
Mil  Dcace  all  tlje  tb02bs  of  ftabftjaucD 
ibhomc  the  mng  of  ^tfTpjia  Dis  matter 
Ijart)  ftnt  to  repjotD  tDc  lutmg  <5ob,anb 
lbtll  repjooue  the  ttozbes  ibDitD  tDc 
ft  ©  is  ©  tDy  <Sob  Ijatti  Dcarb :  mDer  c- 
fozc  lift  top  thy  pjayer  102  tDc  remnant 
that  arc  t  left. 

5  S>othcfcruantsofDmgi|?e5eUiaD 
cameto^lfaiaD. 

6  c  3faD  *  3lfatat)  fata  bnto  fDcm, 
XhusfhaiyefaytoyourmaftecXDus 
faith  tDc  %  ©  m  © ,  26c  notafcaib  of  the 
lbozbcs  lbhttD  thou  Daft  Dcarb ,  ftitD 
tblitch  the  fcruants  of  tl)c  Umg  of  3ft> 
rta  Dane  biafpDcmcb  tnc. 

7  23el)olb,  3  lbtllfcnb  a  blaftbpon 
Dim,anb  Ije  (halt  Dcarc  a  rumour ,  anb 
(DallrcturnetoDis  ovbnc  lanb,  anb  3 
tbtll  taufc  l)tm  to  fall  by  tlje  fraoib  in  Ijts 
otbneianb. 

8  C £>o  HabfliaUcD  returncb,  anb 
fonnb  tDc  umg  of  Stflyzia  ibarrmg  a* 
gamft  fLibuah :  fozljceDab  Dcarb  ttjat 
Dc  Ybasbeparteb  from  HacDitb. 

9  SmbibDcnljc  Dcarb  fay  of  SCaDa* 
naD  Umg of  ^tDiopta ,  BcDolb,  Dec  is 
come  out  to  figDtagamftfDcc:  Dec  fent 
mcffengcrsagatne  bnto  $c3cmaD,fay 
mg, 

10  1EDusaiailycfpeaUefo!)?e?cUiaD 
btng of  3JubaD,  faying,  net  not tDy 
©ob  in  ibljomc  thou  truftcft,  beccme 
tljee,  laying,  gjcrnfalcmaiaiinotbcbcj 
Uuercb  into  the  Danbc  of  tDc  mng  of 
^ffrna. 

11  26eljolb  ,tDou  DaftDcarb  lbhat 
tDc  sings  of  Zfyn*  Daucbonc  to  all 
lanbs,  by  beftroymg  them  Utterly :  anb 
(halt  tDou  be  bclittereb; 

12  $auc  tljc  gobs  of  the  nationsbcte 
uercb  tljcm  tt)l)icDmy  fatlicrsDauebe- 
ftroycb  <  As  <DO?an,anb  fcaran,anb  ftc 
5cpD,  anb  tDc  cDUbmi  of  £bcn  rbljicD 
weiemXDclafar^ 

n  w\)ttc  is  tDe  umg  of  ??amatD,anb 
tDcUmgof  3irpab,  anb  tljcUmgoftDc 
titic  of  £>epharuaun,  of  $cna,  anb 
3JuaIj  < 

14  C3mbl?c;cUfaDrcteuicbtDclcfc 
terof  tljcDanb  of  tDc  mcflcngcrs,anb 
r  cab  it:  anb$e5eUiaD  lbcntbpmto  tDc 
Doufe  of  t!jc  Hokjd,  anb  fpzcabitbc* 
f02ctDe?L<DK©. 

H  3nb  ^cjeUtaD  p:aycb  befojc  tDe 
1Lc>is©,anDfatb,  <©lL«Dis©C5obof 
3Jfraci,  ibDttD  bmellcft  between  the  CDc 
rubmts,  tDouartthcd5ob,  euentDoua 
lone,  of  aiitljc  umgbomcs  of  tDc  cartD, 


f  llev.gmen 


tDouDaft  mabc  Dcaucn  anb  eartD. 

16  H ©is 3D, boib bourne tDmc care, 
anbljcarc:  opcu,!L£>B©,  tDmecycs, 
anb  fee :  anb  Dearc  tDc  lboibs  of  £>en« 
natDcnb  ibDtrD  DatD  fent  Dun  to  re 
pzotDtDcuuingoob. 

17  *£>fatructh,lL<Di3©,fhcUmgs 
of  aflyzta  Ijaue  beftroyeb  tljc  nations 
anb  their  lanbs, 

18  3inbDaucTcafttDeir  gobsintotDt 
fire:  foztDcy  wereno  gobS.butfDcibojU 
of  mens  Daubs,  ibooo  anb  ftone :  tljcr 
fozcthcyDauebcftroycbtDem. 

19  ii5olb  tDer efozc,  £>  %  0  n  ©  our 
(5ob,3J  bcfccrhtDccfauethoubs  outof 
DisDanb,  that  all  the  Umgbomsof  tDc 
eartlj  may  Unott),  that  tljou  art  tDc 

|LOK©0Ob,euentDOU  OUCly. 

wC  Xljcn  3f(aial)  tDc  fonne  of  %- 
mo$  fent  to'  ^c?eUtaD ,  faying,  IlIjus 
fattD  tDcIL©  is  ©  00b  of  3fracI,XDat 
ibDtcDtDon  Daftpzayeb  to  nice  agauttt 
5»cnnarDcrib  Uing  of  Stflyjia ,  3  Da«c 
Dcarb. 

21  ICDiSistDclbojbrliatfDcfLom© 
DatD  fpoUen  concerning  Dim,  XDc  ^Jir- 
gtn,tDcbaugDterofzionl)atDbcfpitcb 
tDce,  and  lauglieb  tDcc  to  ftomc,  tlje 
Daughter  of  3icrufalcm  hart)  u>Ucn 
DcrDcabattDcc. 

12  naljomc  Daft  tljou  rcpzocDcb  anb 
blafpDcmcbi  anb  againft  VbDomeDaft 
tDou  cralteb  thy  tooyte,  anb  lift  bp  tDmc 
eyes  on  Diglj;  euen  againft  tljc  l^oly  4Dnc 
of^lfracl. 

2j  t25^tDymcfrengcrstDouDaftrC' 
pjocljcb  tDc  U.o;b ,  anb  Daft  fatb,  U3itl) 
tDc  multitube  of  my  tljarcts ,  3  a»» 
tome  bp  to  tDc  DcigDt  of  the  moun- 
tames,  to  tDefibes  of  iLcbanon ,  anb 
;«)ill  cut  bolbnc  t  the  tall  ccbar  trees 
tDereof,  and  thccDotccfirrc  trees  rticrc- 
of:anb  3Jibtll  enter  into  tDelobgittgs 
of  Dis  bobbers,  and  mto  the  ||  fo?rcft  of 
,DisCarmel. 

24  3Daucbiggcbfb2imhcftrange 
ibatcrs,  anb  tuith  tDe  fole  of  my  fectc 
ihaue3Jbncbbpail  thenuersof  llbctic*  \\°r-f 
gcb  plates.  ft0'-1"/1 

25  1 1  $aft  tDou  not  Dcarb  long  agoe,  I  tZJ'L 
Doib  3)  Daucbonc  it,  and  of  ancient  \'>»< 
timcstDat^  Daucfonuebtt^noibDaue 
,  3  bjought  ittopaffe,  tDat  tDou  lljoul 
t  beft  be  to  lay  ibaftc  fcuccb  nttes  mto  r  ui- 
inousDcapcs. 

26  XDcrcfojc  their  gjnDabitants 
Xberc  t  of  (mall  povber ,  tficy  lbcre  bit 
maycb  anb  confomiocb  ,tljcy  Vbcrc  as  tDc 
graflc  of  the  ficlb,  anb  « the  grecne 

4i5n  Derbc, 


\Web.ljthl 
hand  of. 


\Htb.thc 
tafaej[e,&c. 


\\Or,lhefir- 
frmlfxIfcW 


it  Ion?  acce 
znAformtd 
it  of  Ancient 
umtt'fhouhl 
Inffwirimt 
it  tobcLudr 
nri/te.and 
fenced  cities 
10  be  Tui- 
noul  t'fjpeil 

t  H,i.  lim 
tfhmi. 


Sennacherib  flaine.     II.Kings.         Hezckiahficke. 


\Or,fumg. 


t  HAr.t'it 
efcapirig  of 
thehottfe  of 
lni.ih  :l)At 
rtmMncth. 


fHrfo.tbe 


•Hi.;  7-3*. 

tob.  I  -21. 

24. 1. mace 
7.41.   j. 
maccj.8. 
19. 


t  Htbr.A- 

TAT.lt. 


tjcrbc ,  athegcaffe  on  ttjc lioiifc  tops, 
anD  as  comeblafltDbcfojettbegrolbcii 
bp. 

27  23ttt  3  know  tin;!  abobc ,  ano 
thj>  gotng  out,anD  thy  totnmuig  m,  ano 
thyragcagainflme. 

zs  2£ecaufcrhyrageagautftmc,anD 
thy  tumult  is  come  Dp  into  mine  cares, 
therefore  3  ttril  put  my  Ijoofee  m  tin' 
nofc,  anD  my bnblc  in  tulips ,  anD 3 
ibill  ntme  thee  barttc  by  the  lbay  by 
lbhtchthoucamcft. 

19  3htD  this  ni.iibe  a  ftgttebnte  thec, 
^cefhali  catetlnsyeerc  fuel)  things  as 
groVDof  thcmfclues ,  anDtnthcfecotiD 
ycerethatiDhtch  fp?mgeth  of  thefame, 
anb  in  the  thirb  ycer  c  foib  vc  anD  rcapc, 
anD  plant  Umcyarbs ,  anD  catc  the 
fruits  thereof. 

jo  3nDttljc  remnant  that  iscfcapcD 
oftnehoufeofJuDah.fljait  vet  agame 
tattc  root  DoiDnciDarD,  anD  bcarc  fruit 
bpibarb. 

31  ^02  out  of  3Ierufalcm  (hail  goc 
fo:th  a  remnant,  anD  t  they  that  efcape 
out  of  mount  zion :  the  5ealc  of  rf)c 
%  ©  is  ©  of  hoftes  (hall  Doe  this. 

31  Hhcrtfo:c  thus  faith  the  H-disjb 
concerning  the  umg  of  3ffy:ta,$e  (hall 
not  come  into  tins  cup,  no:  Chootau  ar* 
row  there ,  no:  come  befo:c  it  ibith 
n)iciD,no:  caft  abanfec  agamftit : 

33  2Sy  thcibay  thathectamc,  bythe 
fame  (haihe  remote,  anb  thai  not  come 
into  this  nty,fatththc?LoBE>, 

34  5mj:  3  Will  DcfcnD  this  citic ,  to 
faucit,  foznuncoujnefaftc,  anbfozmy 
fcriiant2DauiDsfauc. 

35  €  2nb  *  it  came  to  parte  tljat 
night,  that  the  3ingcl  of  thelLois© 
ibent  out,auD  fmote  m  the  campc  of  the 
^rtyzsans,  an  hunbjtb  fourc  fco:catiD 
fiuc  thoiifanD :  anD  ibhcn  they  arofc 
catclymthemo2ntng,bcholD,  they  were 
allbeaDco:pfes. 

36  So^nnarfjcribKiitgofSlffyna 
Dcpartcb,  anDibentaiiD  rcturucD ,  anD 
Dibeitat/^incueh. 

37  3no  it  came  to  parte  as  hee  iDas 
U)o:flnppmg  in  tljc  houfc  of  iftifrocl) 
his  goo,  that5lD:amclech,  anb&hares 
scr  his  fonucs  ,  fmote  him  ibitl)  the 
fajo:b:  anb  they  cfcapcb  into  the  lanb  of 
:  Armenia,  anb  cfarhabbouhisfonnc 
rcigucDitthislrcab. 

CHAP.    XX. 

Hezekiahhauingreceiuedameflageofdeach, 
by  prayer  hadi  his  life  lengthned.    S   The 


Sunnegoeth  tenne  degrees  backward, (or a 
figneotthatpromife.  ii  Berodach  Baladan 
fending  to  vifitc  Hezekiah  ,  becaufe  of  the 
wonder.hath  noticed  his  treafures.  14  Ifa- 
iah  vnderftanding  thereof ,  foretellcth  the 
Babylonian  captmiue.  10  Manafleh  fuc- 
ceedethHezekiah. 

&  thofcDaycs  *ttms$e3C5 
inahucftebnto  Death:  anD 
the  0:ophet  3lfatalj  the 
fonnc  of  3lmos  tame  to 
_  htm ,  anD  faiDe  Dntohim, 
Xhus  faith  the  1L  <£>  is  © ,  t  e>ct  fymc 
houfc  m  o:Dcc:fo:  thou  (halt  Die,  anD 
not  hue. 

i  Xhen  hee  tunieD  his  face  to  the 
mail ,  anD  pjaycb  Ditto  the  %®m®, 
faying, 

3  3  befceel)  thee ,  4D  %  o  is  © ,  tv 
member  now  J)ott>3njanc  ibaiHcD  be* 
fojethce  m  tructlj  ,  anbrbith  a  perfect 
heart ,  anD  hauc  Done  tijat  rbfjith  is 
gooDm  thy  fight:  anD  $e5Clnaj)iDcpt 
tfo:e. 

+  3(nD  it  came  to  parte  afoic  Jlfaiah 
ibas  gone  out  into  tl)c  miDDlc  fcourt, 
tljat  the  ibozDof  tlje  JI^isjd  tamcto 
htm,fayiiig; 

5  Xurncagaine ,  anD  tell  i^c?cBial) 
tljecaptamc  of mypfoplc,  Jthusfaitlj 
the  %  €>  is  ©,  rl;e  ©oD  of ,2>auiD  tnp  fa- 
ther, 3  hauc  hearD  rhvp.:aver,  3  hauc 
fccnethptearcs:bchoiD,  3  unu  hcale 
tljcc  on  the  thtrD  Dap  thou  fhaitgoc  top 
Ditto  thchoufc  ofrt)elL€>is30. 

6  3tnb  3  will  aDDe  Ditto  thp  Dapts 
aftccne  peercs,  anD  3  rbill  bcliuer  thee, 
anb  tins  city,  out  of  the  hanb  of  the  lung 
of  3(rtV:ia ,  anD  3  ibill  Dcfenb  tins  citic 
fo:  mute  oibttc  fafec ,  anD  fo?  mp  fcruant 
2)atuD5falic. 

7  3lnD  3Jfaial)  faiD,  Xanc  a  lumpc 
of  figs.  3lttD  thev  toobc  anD  lapD  it  on 
the  boiic,  anb  he  rccoucrcb. 

s  C3ud  ^cscfetah  faiD  Dnto  3Jfa* 
lah ,  J©ljat  fhaii  bee  the  figtic  that  the 
%  sd  m  jd  tbil  heale  me,anD  that  3  fljall 
goc  Dp  into  tljc  Ijoufc  of  the  %  o  is  p 
thcthirD  Dap? 

9  ^nD  3Jfatalj  taiD,1Cl)is  fignc  (halt 
thou  haue  of  the  %  ©  is  £>,  that  tljc 
%  ©  is  £>  iDtll  Doc  the  thing  that  hee 
hatlj  fpoben:  ihailthelbaboibgocfo:' 
lDarb  ttn  begrecs ,  02  *  goc  bacftc  tenne 
Degrees; 

10  3(nDl»)C5cftiahatt&DereD,3Ittsa 
light  tlnngfo:  the  flmDolb  to  go  boiDnc 
tcuncDcgrees:nap,butletthc(haDoib 
rctuntcbacUibarb  tenne  begrees. 
11  5tnb 


*  l.Chron. 
38.1. 


j  Hebr.giHt 
charge  con- 
cermngthine 
honfe. 


\Mr.vith 
agreatwec- 
pmg. 
Or, at  j. 


*Ecdus, 


Hezekiahdieth.        Chap.xx).     Manafleh  wicked. 


jHit.de- 
grta. 

•Ifai.;?.!. 


\\0r>!F">7- 


\\0r ,iW;. 
Hekvejft/t, 


•Chap. 24. 
iere.27.19. 


\\Or,fhalL 
there mt  be 
pea.ee  axd 
tnieth!&-c. 


11  3tno  3tfatah  ttic  jDjopijet  cryeb 
onto  the  ?L©is©,  anb  hctaoughtthe 
fhaboin  teunebegrees  bacfecujarb ,  by 
tt>hich  ithabgone  bourne  mthc  t  biall 
of^hav 

11  C  *  3t  tliat  time  23erobach-2Sa^ 
laban  the  fonne  of  Baiaoan  latng  of 
asacylon ,  fent  letters  anb  a  pjefent 
Pnto  $c5rtuah :  fc?  hehab  hearb  that 
^e^ctuah  hab  becue  fictte. 

13  31nb  imefual)  hcarhcncb  bnto 
them,  anb  fhcibcb  them  tlie  houfe  of 
his  I!  pzcaous  tlnngs,  the  fuuec ,  anb 
thegolbc,  anb  tlje  fpttes,  anb the  p:c- 
nous  oynttnent,  anb  all  the  houfe  of 
his  llannout,  anb  all  thanuas  fotmb 
mhtstrcafurcs:  there  luasnothmgin 
htshoufc,no2inaiihisbominion,that 
I?c?ciuah  fhelPcb  them  not. 

14  C  Xftcn  tame  3Jfaiah  the  $20^ 
phct  Pnto  Butg  l^etnah ,  anb  faybe 
onto  him,  tehat  fayb  thefemen?  anb 
from  ibhcnce  tame  they  bnto  thee  < 
3tnb  $C5eluah  faybe ,  %\)ty  arc  tome 
from  a  farre  tountrey ,  cuen  from  2U5& 
bylon. 

15  2nb he faib  JBhathaue they  feene 
in  thine  houfe  *  3(nb  ^e^eutalj  anftoe- 
reb,  %\\  the  things'  that  are  m  mine 
houfe  haue  they  feene :  thcreisnothtng 
among  my  treafnrcs,  that  3J  haue  not 
(hciPcb  them. 

16  3lnb3Jfaiah  faib  bnto  $c?eluah, 
$eare  the  ino?b  of  the  %  ©  is  m 

17  25cholb,thebayestomc,  that  all 
that  is  M  thine  lioufc ,  anb  thatibhuh 
thy  fathers  haue  laybe  bp  in  ftoje  ton> 
to  this  bap ,  *fball  be  carteb  tonto  26a< 
bylon :  nothing  (hall  be  left,  fayth  the 
fL©is©. 

is  3lnb  of  thy  founts  thatfoalliQue 
from  thee,  tbhtch  thou  (halt  beget,  (hall 
they  taueaibay,  anb  they  (hail  bee  £u^ 
mithes  m  the  palace  of  the  king  of  Ba- 
bylon. 

19  Xfien  fait)  i^clitah  bnto  3Jfaiah, 
©00b  is  the  ibo?b  of  the  |L©  is  ©  Ibhith 
thou  haftfpoftcn.  3inbhcfaib,  ||  3Jsit 
not  gooo,  if  peace  anb  tructhbemmy 
bayes? 

20  c^nbthcreflofthcactesof^t 
5eUiah,  anb  aiihis  might,  anb  hoib  hee 
mabeapoolc  anb  a  conbiut,  ?  brought 
Uiatmntotfje  city , are  they  notttwitten 
in  the  bootte  of  the  Chjo  tittles  of  the 
l&ingsofjubah? 

ii  3lnb  i^ncfeiah  fleptibifhhtsfa; 
thcrs ,  anb  £0anaffeh  his  fonne  rcig- 
neb  m  his  ftcab. 


CHAP.    XXI. 

Manafleh  his  reigne.  5  Hisgreatidolatrie. 
10  His  wickednefle  caufeth  prophecies  a- 
gainll  Iudah.  17  Amon  fucceedcth  him. 
19  Anions  wicked  reigne.  13  Hee  being 
flame  by  his  feruants,  andthofe  murderers 
flaine  by  the  people,  lofiah  is  made  King. 

g^  ^nau"eh*was  tibelucycres 

I  oibe  lbljen  hee  begannc  to 

I  reigne,  anb  rcigncb  aftie 

g^^jSanb  Sue  yccres  in  3Jeni- 

o>raJ^;falcm :  anb  !)ts  mothers 

name  was  i?tph5ibah. 

x  3lnb  hee  bib  that  which  was  enill  in 
the  fight  of  the  %  ©  m  ©,  after  the  abo^ 
mmations  of  the  heathen,  ibhom  the 
iL  ©  is  ©  taflt  out  befoze  the  chUb^en  of 
3Jfraci. 

j  3! 02  he  built  up  againe  the  high  pla* 
tes,*rbhich^e5CKiah  his  father  hab  be 
Oroyeb ,  anb  Ijee  rcareb  Pp  altars  foj 
isaal ,  anbmabe  agroue,  asbib^hab 
king  of  3Jfracl,  anbiPoianppcbail  tlje 
Ijofteof  heauen,anb  ferucbthem. 

4-  3lnb  *  he  bmlt  altars  in  the  honfc 
of  the  %  ©  h  ©,  of  mhtch  the  IL  ©  is  © 
fayb,  *3Jtt  Jcmralem  null  %  put  my 
/I2ame. 

5  ^nbhcbutltaitarsfoiaiithehoft 
of  hcauni,(n  the  ttbo  courts  of  the  houfe 
ofthell©^©. 

6  3iiib  he  mabe  his  fonne  pafTe  tho? 
rotb  the  fire,  anb  obfemcb  times,  anb 
bfeb  enchantments,  anb  beait  Ibith  fa- 
mtliarfptnts^nbibtjarbstheipjouglit 
mucl)  ttHcKcbnefTc  in  the  fight  of  the 
%.  ©  «  ©,  to  pjouofee  inm  to  anger. 

7  3lnb  he  fctagraucn  image  of  the 
grouc  that  he  hab  mabe,  in  tlje  houfcof 
lbhich  the  %  ©  is  ©  faib  to  2>auib ,  anb 
to  Solomon  his  fonne,  *3Jn  tins  houfe 
anb  m  5/erufalem ,  lbhich  3  hanc  cho- 
fen  out  of  all  tribes  of  3  fracl,U)il  3  put 
my/!5amefo2Ciier: 

8  Neither  ibili^Jmaftcthefcete  of 
3Jfcacl  mooue  any  nio^e  out  of  the  lanb, 
fthich  31  gauc  their  fathers :  onely  tf 
they  null  obferuc  to  boe  acco.zbmg  to  all 
that  51  haue  tommatibcbthem ,  aubac= 
co2btngtoalltheEaU),thatmyferuant 
i]9ofes  commanbeb  them. 

9  25tu  they  hearlicneb  not :  anbl 
^anaffeh  febuccb  them  to  boe  ino2e 
euill  then  bib  the  nations,  tthonie  the 
%o is©  bellroyco  befojc  the  thtibjen 
ofjfracl. 

io  C51nbthc1L©is©fpaUcbphis 
feniantsthcp2ophcts,faymg, 
/3n  i         ii  *25c- 


.Chr< 


33.1. 


«C!ia.i8.4. 


*  Ierc.31. 

*  2.  Sam. 7. 


*  I.King. 
8.29. and 
9.3. chap. 
23.27. 


Manaffehdieth.        II.Kings. Amon  flaine. 


'icrc.15.4 


iSim.  3. 


int.  he 
vlpeth  jitd 
turntthit 
xponthe 
face  thereof 


•fHekfrc 

mouth  to 

match. 


*  1.  Chron, 
3J.-.0. 


1 1  *  ffiecaufe  {Danaffcij  urns  of  *$& 
Dai)  Ijatt)  bone  rtjcfc  abominations,  and 
Dart)  Done  ttntKebly  about  all  ttjatrtjc 
Almontes  Did,  rbDtdj  were  before  Dun, 
anD  Dart)  mabe  gjuoah  aifo  to  untie 
ttnrtjDistboics: 

ix  ICDerefoJCtDusfaitDtDelLsrm© 
<3ob  of  3frael,25eDolD,3  am  bunging 
fuch  etuiltopott3f  crufalem  anb  3Jttsalj, 
rtjatVbDofocucr  Dcaretlj  of  it,  bortj  *ijts 
cares  lhalinttgle. 

13  3inb  3  lbiU  ftcctdj  ouer  ^fernfe- 
lem  the  line  of  <§>amatia,anD  rt)c  plum; 
met  of  tt)c  Doufe  of  3iDab :  anD  %  null 
ibipe  SJcmfaiem  as  a  man  rbipcrt)  a 
Difl) ,  Ubipuig  it  anD  turning  «  bpGbc 
bottmc. 

14  3(nb  3 1MI  fozfaKc  rt)c  remnant 
of  mute  mDeritancc ,  anD  Dcliucr  fl)cm 
into  the  Danbofrtjcircncmtcs.anD  they 
mall  become  a  p?ay  anD  a  fpoilc  to  all 
rtjctr  enemies, 

15  25ecaufetDevDfl«eDonctDatwiiich 

was  euill  m  my  figDt,anD  Daue  pjouoRcb 
me  to  anger  fincetDc  bay  their  fatDers 
came  fotflj  outof  egypt,eitcnbnto  rtjts 
Day. 

i6  fl9o2eottcr,$tana(TeD  fl>cb  mno'i 
cent  bloob  bcry  mucD,  till  DcDaDfillcD 
3fcrufaicmtfrom  one  cnb  toanotDer,| 
befibc  Dis  fume  VbDerttnflj  De  mabe  3Ju; 
DaD  to  fitment  botng  rtjat  which  was  cuiU 
mtDcfigDtofrt)e!L©i3)2». 

17  C)3olb  tDe  reft  of  tDc  actes  of1 
99ana(TeD,  anDaiidjatDebiD,  anD  Dts 
funic  tDat  De  fmneb,  are  tDey  notttw< 
ten  itttDcbooKe  of  rtje  Cljjonttlcs  ofrtjc  1 
Kings  of  3JuDaljf 

18  3mb  *  ^anaflcD  flcpt  ttntl)  Dis  fa  ■ 
tDers,anDibasbuneDm  tDc  garbenof 
DtsottHteDoufcinrtjegarbcn  of  QXw- 
anD  3(mon  Dis  fonue  rctgncD  m  Dts 
ftcab. 

19  C  3lmon  Vbas  rtbentte  anb  tibo 
ycrcs  olD  lbDen  De  began  to  reigne,  anb 
De  retgneb  tibo  yecres  m  3iertifalcm : 
anb  Dis  mortjers  name  was  tpcflnillei 
mcrt),  tDc  DaugDtcr  of  J?arti5  of  3Jofc 
balj. 

20  3DtbDeDiDrt)at  which  was  emu  in 
tDc  fight  of  tDe  %  a>  is  p,  as  Dts  father 
£0anafTcDbiD. 

11  2Uib  Dc  rbalRebutail  tDc  ibayes 
that  I)i5  father  lbaiRcb  in,  anD  ferucb 
tDc  tbolcs  that  Dis  father  fcrueD,  anD 
tt)oul)ippcDthcm: 

ii  3lnDhefo2fool;crt)cIl0ii5jE»(I5ob 
of  his  fathers,  anD  ibai&eb  not  m  rtje 
lbayofrtjeSLoisp, 


13  C^nDtDefetttantsot^monton^ 
fpiteD  agamft  Dun,  anD  Oett)  rtje  tungtn 
Dis  olbne  Doufe. 

14  anD  tDe  people  of  rtje  lanD  OOfo 
ai  rtj  cm  tDat  DaD  cotttpir  eb  againft  Rtng 
3Jmon,anD  the  people  of  tl)e  lanD  maDc 
5  oftalj  Dis  fonnc  Ring  m  Dts  tteab. 

15  jBoibrtjercftoftDcactsofamon, 
rbDtcD  Dc  did  1  are  rtjcy  not  itoutten  in 
rticbooRc  of  rtje  rijjontdcs  of  tlje  Kings 
ofjubaljr 

16  anb  De  ttias  burtcbtn  Dis  fepul* 
rtwe,  in  tDe  garben  of  ©35a,  anb  *  J  oft- 
ah  Dts  fonnc  rcigncb  m  Dts  fteab. 

CHAP.    XXII. 


Iofiah  his  good  reigne.  3  Hetakethcarefor 
the  repaire  of  the  Temple.  8  Hilkiah  ha- 
uing  found  a  booke  of  the  Lawe,  Iofuh  fen- 
deth  to  Huldah  to  enquire  of  the  Lord.  15 
Huldah  prophcfieth  deftru&ion  of  Ierufa- 
le:vi,  but  refpite  thereof  in  Iofiahs  time. 

j£fiaD  *  ttias  eight  yecres 
olb  tbljcn  Dec  beganncto 
rcignc,  anb  Dec  rcigncb 
tDtrtic  anb  one  ycercs  in 
3fcrnfalcm:  anb  Dts  mo; 

tDcrsnamc  w.^gjebiDaD,  tDe  Daughter 

of3tDaiaDof2Sofcaflj. 

2  3MD  De  Did  that  which  was  right  in 
tDe  light  of  the  %  <s>  is  jp,anD  DiaiReb  in 
all  rtjcVbayes  of  3DauiD  Dis  father,  anb 
turncbnotafiDetott)engDtDanD,o?to 
rtje  left. 

3  C3nbitcametopaffcmrt)ceigD* 
tccntl)  ycerc  of  Ring  50031) ,  that  tDe 
King  fent  SmapDan  trjc  fonne  of  ^ait 
aD,rt)cfonneof^ca)iiliamtDc5»cribc 
to  the  Doufe  of  tDc  1L  ©  k©,  faying, 

4-  <sot  Dp  to  i^iibtah  tDc  high  pjtcft, 
tDatDe  mayfumme  rtje  flitter  IbDtrt)  is 
brought  into  tDc  Doufe  of  tDc  %  ©  k  ©, 
ibDtrt)  rtje  Keepers  of  the  f  booze  Daue 
gatljercD  of  tDc  people. 

5  ^nD  let  rtjem  Dcliuer  it  into  rt)c 
DanboftDcboersofrt)e  «)0?Ke,  tDat 
Daue  tDc  oucrOgDt  of  the  Doufe  of  tDe 
%  «r> is  © :  anD  let  them  giue  u  to  rt)CDo= 
ersof  thcibojUe,  Vbhi'thisinthc  Doufe 
oftDe  It  oKc,to  repaire  tDe  b?cart)cs 
ofthchoufe, 

6  3Hnto  carpenters,  anD  butlbers, 
anDmaCons,  anD  to  buy  timber  anb 
Dcttctt  ftone,  to  rcpatre  tDeDoufc. 

7  ^oU)beit,rt)crc)basnorccKoning 
mabe  ibttD  rtjem,  of  rtje  money  rtjat 
lbasbtliuercbintortjcir  Danb,  becaufe 
ttjcybcaitfairtjfully. 

s  C3utD 


'Mat.  i.  io. 
called  Io- 
fias. 


*2.Chtoo. 


tHei.thrt. 
Jbtll 


TheLaw  found,     Chap.xxnj.        and  read  openly. 


\Htbr.gar- 

mtntt. 

\\OrJ*tlir 

ftcondpart. 


lei. 


8  €  Stub  $iibiab  ttje  btgb  pntH 
faib  bnto  3>bapban  the  £>cnbe,3J  baue 
founb  the  boobe  of  the  fLarb  in  the 
boufe  of  tt>e  |L©i5P.  3(nb  $ilbiah  gaue 
the  boobe  to  £>hapban,anb  be  reab  it. 

9  3nb  £>bapban  the  3>cribc  came 
totbehing,  anbbzougbtthcbingrbo;tb 
agattte,  anb  faib ,  Xbp  fcruants  baue 
t  gathercb  the  money  that  was  founb 
in  the  boufe,  ami  baue  bcliucrcD  it  into 
tbebanb  of  them  that  Doc  ttjc  lbojbc, 
tnatbaue  the  oucrfigbt  of  the  houfcof 

thc!LflD131D. 

io  3{nDS>baphanfbc£>ccibcfbett)' 
eb  the  Ring,  facing,  Itnlbiab  the  $?ictt 
batbbeltuerebmee  a  boobe:  anb  ;§>ba' 
pban  reab  it  befojetlje  Ring. 

ii  3utf>  tt  tame  to  paffe  lbbcn  the 
btngbaDbcarbfberbD;iD£  of the boobe 
oftbe?La*b,tbatherentbisclotbcs. 

u  3mb  the  Ring  commanbeblijilRtah 
tbc^nett ,  anb  3tbibam  the  fonnc  of 
£»bapban ,  anb  3cbbo?  the  fonnc  of 
iJ19icbaiab,  anb  S>bapban  the  £>enbe, 
anb  3fabiab  a  feruant  of  tlje  33ungs, 
taping, 

13  d5oepec,  enquire  of  fbelLfiDiBiD 
foj  me ,  anb  fo?  the  people,  anb  fozall 
Jnbab ,  tontcmingtbcibo^bcsofrbts 
boobe  that  is  founb :  fo?  great  is  tlje 
ibjatb  oftbe?L©ia©fbatisRutirteba5 
gamftbs,  beeaufc  our  fathers  hauc  not 
bearbencb  bnto  tljjc  iboojbcs  of  this 
boobe ,  to  boc  arrowing  bnto  all  that 
which  is  lbnttcn  tonccrning  bs. 

14  do^ilbiah  the  #«cft,  an&3fbfc 
ban^anb^ebbo^anb  5>hapban,  anb 
3fabtab,  rbent  bnto  fculbab  the  0?o? 
pbcteffc,tbeU)tfcof&hailumtbcfonnc 
ofXibnab,thcfonneof$arbas,Recper 
of  tbe  ttbarbzobe :  nolb  (be  blbclt  in 
3Jerufalem  in  ||fbe  tollebgc  :3nbthcp 
communeDlbitbhcr. 

15  C^nDfbcfaibbntotbrm.Xbns 
faith  thc?L  0  is  jd  Gob  of  Jfracl,  Xell 
the  man  that  lent  pott  to  me , 

i6  Xbusfaitntbc&ojfj^JjScftoiD, 

31  rum  bung  emll  bpon  this  plate,  anb 
bpon  tbe  inhabitants  thereof,  euen  all 
tbetbojDsoftbebooRenibicbtbebing 
of3fubabhatbrcab. 

17  Becaufe  the?  banc  fbifaften  me, 
anb  haue  burnt  intenfe  bnto  other 
gobs ,  that  tbepmigbtp;touobemecto 
anger  rbitb  all  tbeiboozbcs  of  their 
hanbes :  therefore  mp  lbzatb  mall  bec 
btnbleb  agamfttbis  place,  anb  fbailnot 
bcctucncheb. 

18  Buttotbebingof^nbabvbbicb 


fent  pott  to  enquire  of  the  3L©is©, 
Xbusfballpee  faptobim,  3~hus  faith 
tbefL  ©  is  ©  d5ob  of  3Jfracl,  as  tou< 
cbmg  tlje  n>oo?bes  tbbitb  thou  haft 
hcarb: 

19  26ctaufc  thine  heart  tbastenber, 
anb  thou  hall  bumbleb  tbp  felfc  befoje 
the  %$>  is  ©,ibhen  thou  hearbeftibbat 
15  fpabe  agauift  this  place ,  anbagamft 
the  inhabitants  thereof ,  that  the? 
(boulb  become  a  befolation  anb  a  turfe, 
anb  haft  rent  thy  cioatbes ,  anbibept 
befoje  mti  3  alfohauchcarb  thecfoitb 
thelL©is©. 

20  aseljolb  therefore,  51  lbill  gather 
tbeebntotbpfatbcrs,atibtbouu)aitbc 
gathercb  into  xXpg  graucin  peace,  anb 
thine  eves  ibalnotfecali  the  cutltbbttb 
31  lbill  bung  bpon  this  place.  2wb  tljep 
brought  tljcR(ngrbo?bagaine. 

CHAP.  XXIII. 

1  Iofi  Ji  caufeth  the  booke  to  bee  read  in  a  fo- 
Iemneaflembly.  3  Herenevveththe  Coue- 
nancof  theLoRD.  4  Hedeftroyeth ido- 
latry. 15  He  burnt  dead  mens  bones  vpon 
the  altar  of  Bethel,  as  was  foreprophefied.  u 
He  keptamoft  folemne  Pafleouer.  14  He 
put  away  witches ,  and  all  abomination.  16 
Gods  finall  wrath  againftludah.  ij  Iofiah 
prouoking  Pharaoh  Nechoh,isflaine  at  Me- 
giddo.  31  Iehoahazfucceedmghim,isim- 
pnfoned  by  Pharaoh  Nechoh ,  who  made 
Ioiakimking.  36  Ioiakim  his  wicked  reignc. 

il5D*tbc  btngfent,anbthep 
gathercb  bnto  him  all  the 
cibersof3Jubah,anbof 
3ierufalcm. 

_  z  Znn  the  Ring  rbettt 
bp  into  the  boufe  of  the  H©  a©, 
anb  ail  the  men  of  3ubah ,  anb  all  the 
inhabitants  of  3Jcrufalem  Ibith  him, 
anb  the  friieftcs ,  anb  the  j&opbets, 
anb  all  the  people  t  both  fniail  anb 
great :  anb  he  reab  in  fh«r  cares  all  the 
lbojbcs  of  tlje  boobe  of  the  Couenant 
vbhich  tbas  founb  in  the  boufe  of  the 

3  C  3lnD  the  Bing  ftoob  bp  a  pit 
lar ,  anb  mabe  a  Couenant  befi>2e  the 
H  ©  a  is,  to  lbalbe  after  the  %  o  is  ©, 
anb  to  beepe  his  Commaunbements, 
anbhisXcftmionies,?  hts  Statutes, 
ibith  all  their  heart,  anb  all  their  foule,  to 
perfonncthe  lbo^bsof  this  Couenant, 
that  Vbere  lb?itten  m  this  boobe :  anb 
aUfhepeoplcftooDtotbeCoueuant. 

4  SmDtbcbmgcommanDcD  i^ubiah 
ftn  3  the 


•i.Chron. 


f mall  e urn 
vntogrea:. 


fofiahs  zeale. 


ILK 


in£S. 


id  rcfc 


ana  reformation: 


\Hcb.cmfcd 
to  c?,lfe. 

]Hit.Cht 

rruirim. 


\\Or,rcfelnr 
pints  or  con 
ficlUttor.s. 

"CllJ.21.7 


t  HebJitmfc. 


\\Or,Ea. 

»uchterOf- 
Jim 


"Chl.ll., 


the  high  p:ieu\anb  the  pncrts  of  tl)e  fe 
conb  02ber,anb  the  beepers  of  thcboo2C 
to  b:mgfo2tl)  out  of  the Xemplc  of  tht 
%  0  ib  ©  all  tht  btfftls  that  Vbcrc  mabc 
finisaal,  anb  fo2  the  groue,  anb  foz  ail 
tljchofte  of  hcaueu :  anb  he  burnt  them 
Unthout  31  erttfalemin  the  fi'cibs  of  Bi- 
b2on,anbtartebthcaaiesofthembnto 
Bethel. 

5  3inb  hec  t  put  bottwc  the  t  itioia- 
trous  pncfts  inhome  the  lungs  of  3lu- 
bah  habo2bemeb  to  burnctnccnfcm  the 
high  plates,  in  the  ernes  of JJubahanb 
in  the  plates  rounb  about  "Jeruralem : 
them  alfo  that  burnt  interne  bnto  25a> 
ai,  to  the  £>unne,  anb  to  the  £0oonc, 
anb  to  the  ||  VMantts,anb  to  all  tht  hofte 
ofhtaucn. 

6  3inb  he  bjouglit  out  the  * groue 
from  the  houfe  of  the  %  ©  ra  ©,  tt>in> 
out  3Icrufalem,  lmto  the  bzooUc  M- 
bion ,  anb  burnt  tt  at  the  b:ooHc  Bt- 
02011,  anb  ftampt  tt  fmall  to  ponjbcr, 
anb  raft  tDc  poibber  thereof  bpon  the 
graues  of  the  chilb2cn  of  the  people. 

7  3inb  he  b2abeborbnc  the  houfes 
oftlie&obomitesthatwerebpthchoufc 
of  the  Hoise?,  iblierc  tl)c  ttiomen 
tboue  tiiangtngs  fo?  the  groue. 

8  3lnbheb2onghtail  thcp2tefrsout 
of  the  tittes  of  '3Jubali,  anb  bcfilcb  the 
f)tgl)  plates  inhere  the  p2iefts  hab  burnt 
incenfe,froin  C5ebato  Bccrfticba,  anb 
b2aUcboibnc  the  hie  places  of  the  gates 
that  lbcrcm  tljc  cntrtng  m  of  tl)c  gate 
of  "Joflnta  the  goucrnonr  of  toe  tme, 
which  were  on  a  mans  left  Ijanbatthc 
gatcofthetutc. 

9  ^eucrtncleflc ,  tljc  p2tctts  of  tne! 
high  plates  camenotbp  to  thc3Utar  of) 
the  lion  Din  3Jcrttfaicm,but  the?  bib 
catc  of  the  tonlcaucncb  b2eab  among 
thttr  b2cth;cn. 

10  2inb  he  bcfilcb  "Eophcth  Which  ^ 
mthcbaileyofthcchilb2cnofi?innom, 
that  no  man  might  malic  his  fonnc  02 
his  baughter  to  paftc  th20ugh  the  fire 
to  fl3oleeh. 

n  3inbhetooltcaibavthch02fcsthat 
the  lungs  of  3Jtibah  hab  giuen  to  the 
!§>unnc,atthccntrmgmofthchoufcof 
the  1L  o  k  to  ,  by  the  chamber  of  iRa* 
tbanmeicch  the  | !  chamber  lame,  Itolwh 
\bas  m  the  fuburbs,  anb  bin  ut  tljc  cha- 
rets  of  the  inline  Until  fire, 

12  3lnb  the  altars  that  were  en  the 
top  of  the  bppcr  chamber  of  31ha5, 
\blnch  the  lungs  of  jftibai)  hab  niabc, 
anb  the  altars  lbhicl)  *  iBanaffeh  hab 


mabe  in  the  tlbo  courts  of  the  houfe  of 
the  flow  je>,  bib  the  King  beat  bourne, 
ano  ||  b2abe  them  bourne  from  thence, 
ano  taft  the  bull  of  them  into  the  0200RC 
Bttnon. 

ij  2uib  the  high  places  rhattbercbe; 
foje'Jmtfaiem.tthtchwereontheright 
hanb  of  tljc  ||  mount  of  eo2ruption, 
which  *  Solomon  the  Hmg  of  "Jfrael 
hab  bmlbcb  f02  3lft)toretlj ,  the  abonns 
nation  of  thezibontans,  anb  UMGhe- 
moll)  tljc  abomination  of  the  £0oa; 
bites,  anbfo2^puchomthc  abominatt- 
on  of  the  chilbjeu  of  Amnion,  bibtlje 
fungbcfUc. 

14  ^ub  he  b;alte  in  pieces  th  e  t  ima* 
ges,  anb  nit  boibnetlje  grouts,  anbfil* 
leb  their  plates  ibith  the  bones  of  men. 

15  Ci0o2coucrthe  altar  that  w^  at 
iScthel,  and  tljc  htgh  plate  U)htth3lcro« 
boam  the  fonne  of  ii^cbat,  ibho  mabt 
Dfraclto  rmnc,  hab  mabt,  both  thatais 
tar,  anb  the  high  place  he  b2afce  boronc, 
anb  burnt  the  high  place,  anb  ftampt « 
fmall  to  poibber,  anb  burnt  the  groue. 

i6  ^tibas^Iofiah turnebhimfclfchc 
fpitb  the  fcpulch2es  tljat  were  there  in 
the  mount,  anb  tent,?  tooHethc  bones 
out  of  tljc  fcpuid)2cs,  anb  burnt  them 
bpon  the  altar,  anb  polluteb  it,  att02; 
btngto  thc*U)02bof  tI)cfLoH©ibhicl) 
the  man  of  <5ob  p2oclauncb ,  ibljo  wo* 
ciaimebthcfcrbo2bs. 

17  ^hen  ijec  fatb,  nsljat  title  is  that 
that  31  fee;  anb  the  men  of  the  cttp 
tolbhim,  gjt  is  thefepulclj2c  of  thctnan 
of  (5ob,tbl)tch  camefrom^Jubalj,  anb 
p2oclauneb  thefc  things  that  thou  haft 
bone  againft  thcaitar  of  Bethel. 

is  3inb  he  faib,  ?Lct  hun  alone :  let 
no  man  moucljis  bones :  fothep  let  his 
bones  t  alone,  lbith  tile  bones  of  the 
£2ophct  that  tame  out  of  §>amarta. 

19  %m  all  the  houfes  alfo  of  tl)c  hit 
places  that  ibtrtm  the  tittes  of  Sama- 
na,ibhitlj  tlit  lungs  ofjfratl  Ijab  mabt 
top20uoht  iHe  Lord  toangtr,  3Jofialj 
tooHcaTbai>,anbbibto  tlicmacco2bing 
to  ail  the  attcs  that  Ijct  Ijab  bout  in 
Btthti. 

20  3lnbl)t  l!  flctti  an  tht  p2itftsof  tilt 
high  piatts  that  were  there,  bpon  the 
altars ,  anb  burnt  mens  bones  fcpon 
thnn,anb  rcturntbtolierufaicm. 

21  C31nb  theisitig  commanbcbail 
the  people  faring ,  *  Bcepetlic  ^aflco* 
tier  bnto  tlic  ?L«d  ik  b  your  <5ob,  *asit 
is  ib2ittm  m  this  booUe  of  the  Coue; 
nant. 
22  Purely 


Or  rji 
from  thence 


\\TliAtujl:t 
mount  of  Q. 
likes. 

"I.King. 
1 1.7. 


t  Hcb.jix- 

IHCS. 


•l.K.ng. 
IJ.i. 


t  n,y.  t* 

cfcipc. 


Orfjcri- 
fked. 


*  z.Chron. 
j  5  1. 1. dd. 
1.  r. 
'Exo.li.j 

dcac.i6.z. 


Heisflaine.  Chap.xxmj.        Ichoiakimking 


||Or,7«M- 
fbim. 


Leuic: 
»7.dcut. 
lS.l  I. 


t  Hf  *.*••- 
gm. 


'  l.King.8 
29.&0.3. 
Chap. 
11.7. 


*2.  Chron. 
3s.jo. 


•a.  Chron 
3<S.i. 


22  Purely  tljcrc  tbas  not  boioen 
fucba^affcouer ,  from  tbeoaies  oftbe 
3Uiogcs  tbat  iitDgeo  3Jfran ,  no?  in  all 
tbcoapesoftbeRingsofJftacl,  no?  of 
tbc  Rings  of  31uoab: 

23  26ut  in  tbe  ctgbtecntb  ycetc  of 
Ring  'Jofiab ,  wherein  tbis  ^affeouer 
ibas  bol&eti  to  rtje  Hsdisjd  in  jww 
falem, 

Z4  C^0?C0Uett!jC  workers  vbitl)  fas 

miliar  fpirtts,ano  the  ibi;aros,  ano  tbe 
||  imagcs,ano  tl)c  iDolcs,  anD  ail  tbe  abo- 
muiattons  tbat  ibercfptco  ut  tbc  lano 
ofjlnoab,  ario  in  3Jcrufaiem,  D10  'Jofr 
ab  put  atba?,  tbatbemtgbt  perfomtc 
tbe  ttwocs  of  *  tbe  latbe ,  lbbtcb  lucre 
ttmttcn  in  tlje  boottc  tbat  lf)ilRiab  tlje 
pneftfbuno  in  tbc  botifc  oftbe  ILsdks?. 

25  2mu  tiUcbmoDtm  ibas  tbereno 
Ring  befoje  Dim,  tbat  turnco  to  tlie 
%  o  e  m  rbitb  all  ins  beart ,  ano  ttnrlj 
all  Dls  fonle,  ano  nut!)  all  bis  migbt,at< 
cojotng  to  all  tlje  ?Utb  of  $)ofes ,  nci= 
tber  after  him  arofe  tljere  any  ntte  l)im. 

i6  CiBornntnaanUmg.tneHsDisi) 
turnco  not  from  tbc  ficrceucffc  of  bis 
great  ibjariubbcribitb  bts  anger  ibas 
RtttDleO  againftjfuoab ,  becattfe  of  all 
tbctpiouorattons  tbat  i^anafft!)  bao 
pjouoReobimibtrbaiL 

27  5tni5tbclLsDKDfait),girk)illre< 
mouc  3fuoab  aifo  outof  mv&gbt,  as^J 
banc  rcmoueb  ^Jfracl ,  ano  Will  call  off 
tbis  titic  3Jerufalem ,  lbbtcb  3  bauc 
tbofen ,  ano  tbc  lionfc  ofibljttb  3  fayo, 
*<80pnamcfl)hlH)Ctberc. 

i%  iftotbtbcreltoffbcattesofjo' 
fiab,  ano  all  tbat  beeoiD,  atetbepnot 
imittcn  ut  tbc  booRe  oftbe  cb?omcies  of 
tbcRingsofJiiDah* 

29  C*'JnbES  capes,  ^bataob/Bfr 
cbob  Rtng  of  cgypt ,  lbentbp  agamlf 
tbc  Rtttg  of  3uTp:ia  to  tbe  rtucc  «2u- 
pbzates :  ano  Ring  Jofiab  tttent  againft 
bun ,  ano  bee  fleib  bim  at  Q9egiODo, 
Vbbcnbcbaofccnebim. 

jo  3tno  bis  feruantscaricobitntua 
tbarctoeao  from  U19cgiODo,  tbzougbt 
bim  to  gimifalrm ,  ano  bunco  bun  m 
hts  oibne  fepukI):c:ano*tbe  people  of 
tbc  lano  tooRc  gicboaba?  tbefonnc  of 
■Joftab ,  ano  anointeobun ,  ano  maoe 
bim  Ring  in  btsfatbers  ftcao. 

31  C  3ltboaba?wastttienty  anotbzee 
pccresoiocibbettbebegannetoreigue, 
ano  bee  reigneo  tbzee  moneths  in^Je* 
rufaicm :  anO  bts  motbers  name  was 
i?amitai,tbeoaugbter  of  3Jertmiab,  of 
Hibnab. 


32  ^no  beeoio  tbat  winch  was  eulil  in 
tbc  figbt  of  tbc  1L  ©  m  ■&> ,  acnwOing  to 
all  tbat  bisfatbcrs  bao  oone. 

33  3ltiD  0baraob  jBttboi)  put  bim 
in  bauoes  at  fttblab  in  tbe  lano  of  foa? 
matb,||tbatbcmigbtnotrngnem3Jej 
nu"alem,  anotputthe  lano  to  a  tribute 
of  an  bunOzco  talents  of  flitter,  ano  a  ta? 
lent  of  goioe. 

34  3tno^baraobiBeriiobmaOce' 
liaRtm  tbefonneof  ^ofiabRing,  in  tbc 
roumc  of  35ofiab  bis  fatl)cr,ano  turncb 
bis  name  to  *3JeboiaRim,anDtooRe 
3Jeboaba5  aibay :  ano  bee  tame  to  «- 
gypt,anDDteotbcrc. 

3$  3lno3JeboiaRtmgauetbeGlucr, 
ano  tbc  goioe  to  ^bataob,  but  be  tajeco 
tbc  lano  to  giue  tbc  moncv  atco^oing  to 
tbc  commanoement  of  ^b^raob '  $tt 
eraeteo  tbc  fiiiier  ano  tbc  goioe  of  tl)t 
people  of  tbc  lano,  of  euctv  oncacto?- 
omg  to  bis  taration,to  giue  >c  trntopb^- 
raob/I5etbob. 

36  C  3Jebofaftim  was  ttbenttc  anO 
Que  vecre  oioeibbcn  be  began  to  rcignc, 
ano  be  retgneo  clcucn  veercs  in  3Jcrufa* 
lem:  anObts  morl^ers  name  ibas  ze- 
buoab,tbcoangbter  of^coaiab  of3Ku- 
malj. 

3  7  5fub  \>tm  tbat  which  was  mill  in 
tbc  figbt  oftbe  ?L€mb©  ,  acco?Dtng  to 
aiitbatbisfatbtrsbab  bone. 

CHAP.   XXIIII. 

i  Iehoiakim,  firft  fubdued  by  Nebuchadnez- 
2ar,  dieD  rebelling  againfthim,  procurethhis 
owne  ruine.  5  Iehoiachin  fucceedeth  him. 
7  The  King  of  Egypt  is  vanquished  by  die 
King  of  Babylon.  8  Iehoiachm  his  euill 
reigne.  10  Ierufalem  is  taken  and  earned 
captiue  into  Babylon.  17  Zedekiah  is  made 
King,  and  reigneth  ill,  veto  the  vtterdeftru- 
clion  ot  Iudah. 

fi  bts  oapes  /EicbutbaO' 
nt55ar  Ring  of  asabylon 
tamebp ,  anb'JIebotaRim 
became  l)is  feruant  tbjec 
pcercs :  tben  l;ee  turnco 
anorcocueoagamftbim. 

2  3lnotbc|L€>KPfciitagain(tbim 
bancs  of  tbc  Cbaioces,  anObanoes  of 
tbc  Spjians,  anobauoes  oftbe  ti|3oa? 
bites,  ano  banos  of  tlie  tbiiozcn  of  2m 
mon ,  ano  fnu  them  agauul^Juoabto 
oc(lrovit,*acto20tngtotbcibo:Ooftbc 
%,  ©  is  ©,  ibbicb  bec  fpaRc  t  b?  \)ie  fer 
uantstbe^2opbcts. 

3  5)iirclvattbe  commanoement  ot 

tbe 


I:  Qrjbecaufe 
he  reigned. 
t  Met.  feta 
mulEl  vpon 
the  land. 


"  Match.  \. 
12  exiled 


"  Oiap.30 
if.  andaj. 

\Heb.bjihe 

h*ndof 


Ierufal 


em  is 


ILK 


inffs. 


g5 


befieged. 


•Djn.i  1 


f  Hebxane 

intojirge. 


|l  Or,  Fu. 
HMckef. 


*Cliap.ao. 
17.CIJ  19.6 


'  a.Chron, 
;6.io,cffh. 
-.6. 

\\Or.tu- 

nucha 


i\yt%®  is  &  tame  this  bpon^Iuoalj,  to 
ccmoouc  them  out  of  Ijts  fight,  foj  tlje 
fmncsof  4E)anaflct) ,  accojbing  to  all 
that  be  bib: 

4  3no  alfo  foi  tlje  innocent  bloob 
tljatljjec  ibcbbc :  (foj  Dee  filleo^Jcrutas 
IcmUutb  mnoccnt  bloob  junjlch  tlje 
1L  o  is  ©  iboulb  notparbon. 

5  C  /ftoibc  tt»c  reft  of  the  aetcs  of 
Jcbotaftun^nbailtbatbcbtD^rcttjcy 
not  ttmttcn  inrtjcbooaeof  tljc€tnom> 
tics  of  tlje  Bmgsof  3Jubab  t 

6  5>o3lct)oiatnm  flcptibirt)  tjisfa- 
tl)crs:anti  3iebotact)in  htsfonnc  rcig- 
nebmljisftcab. 

7  2Cnbtbemngof€gypteamenot 
agame  anymore  out  of  fjtsianoifozrtje 
Bins  of  Babylon  bab  ta&en  from  tlje 
rincr  of€gypt,bnto  tbenucr  <£uplj?ab 
tcs,  all  that  pcrtaineb  to  tlje  Bing  of 
•Egypt. 

s  C  3Febotatbiu  was  etgbteene 
yercs  olb  lbben  bebegan  to  rctgnc,?tje 
teigncb  m  3Jcrufalcm  rtjzce  mouetbs: 
f  Ins  mortices  name  was /j5cbuibta  tlje 
Daughter  of  einatban,  of  Jerufalem 

9  3mol)ccoit>  that  winch  was  cum  in 
tbcfigbt  oftljeHo  is  js,  atco^Dtngto  all 
that  bis  father  tjan  Done. 

10  c  *  3lt  that  time  the  feruants  of 
ji3ebutbaDnc5?ar  Bmg  of  Babylon 
tame  bp  agamft  Jcrufaicm ,  atvbtbe  ti- 
ne tibasbeficgeb. 

1 1  ^nbii5eburi>iDnc35armngof23a5 
bylon  tame  agamft  tlje  tine,  ano  bis  fcr- 
uants  bib  befiegctt. 

u  3tnb3Jcljotacljinrt)cBtngof3Iu= 
Dai)  lbcnt  onttotfjc  lung  of  Babylon, 
Dce,ano  btsmotljcr,  ano  bis  remains, 
anDhtspmucs,  ano  bis  ||  officers:  ano 
tbc  lung  of  Babylon  tooUc  bun  in  the 
cigbt yecrc  of  btsreiguc. 

1?  *3inDhcccarteD  onttbentcalltbc 
trcafurcs  of  the  l)oufc  of  tbc  TLoktd, 
anD  the  tr  cafur  c  of  the  Hmgs  boufcanb 
tut  in  pieces  all  tbcbcflcis  of  golD  ibbicl) 
Solomon  Bmg  of  ^ffrael  hnb  niabc 
in  the  Xemplc  of  the  3L  ok  £>  ,  as  the 
fLo«s>habfaib. 

14.  3Jnti  hec  raricbaibny  aii^Fcrnfa; 
lcm,anDailtbcpnnccs,*aiubcmtgbty 
men  of  balour  ,eucn  tenne  thoufaub  tap=  I 
tiues.atiD  all  the  trafrfmen,ano  fnuths :  I 
none  remameb,  fane  tljcpoojcftfonof 
thcpeopleofthelanb. 

15  3MD  *  he  caricb  albay 3Jcboiatbin 
toBabvlon,anDtbcUmgsmotbcr,aiiD 
the  lungs  ibiues,anb  his  [officers,  anb 
tlK  mighty  of  tl)eianb,tl)ofetartebl)cc 


into  capttuitte,  from  3Jcrufalem  to  26a* 
bylon. 

is  3lnb  all  tfje  men  of  migljt,  euen  fc« 
ucnrtjoutanD,anD  eraftefmen,?  fmitbs 
a  thoufano,aiithat  iberc  ftronganb  apt 
fo?  marrc,  encn  rtjem  rtje  feing  of  Baby* 
Ion  bzougjjt  tapnuc  to  Babylon. 

17  C3MD*the  lung  of  Babylon  mabc 
£0attantab  fjis  fathers  tyottjcr  bmgtn 
ijts  fteab,  anb  cbangeD  his  name  to  ze= 
Delnab. 

18  zebcbialj  was  tibcnttc  anb  one 
yccrcs  olbe  ibbcnljce  began  to  reigne, 
andhcrcigncbelcuenycercsm3Jcrufa* 
lem  :  anDbis  mothers  name  Ibas^a? 
mutal,  the  Daughter  of  3Jcrcmtatj  of 
fLtbnalj. 

19  3lnb  hec  bib  that  which  was  eufllin 
tlje  figbt  of  rtjc  %  o  is  jd  ,  acco?bing  to 
all  rtjatjlchoiachin  Ijab  bone. 

20  jfo?  ttjzougl)  tlje  anger  of  the 
%  o  is  ©  tt  tame  to  pafle  in  3Jcmfalcm 
anb  3lubal),  bntill  fjc  hab  taft  tfjem  out 
from  his  pjefence,  that  zcbcbiaf)  rebel- 
leb  agamft  the  lung  ofiSabylon. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  Icrufalcm  is  befieged.  4  Zedckiah  raken,his 
formes  flaine,hiscvcs  put  out.  S  Nabuzara- 
dan  defaceth  die  city ,  carieth  the  remnant, 
except  a  few  poore  labourers,  into  captiuitie, 
15  Spoileth  and  carieth  away  the  treafures. 
18  The  Nobles  are  flaine  at  Riblah.  11  Gc- 
daliah,who  was  (ct  ouer  them  that  remained, 
being  flaine,the  reft  flee  into  Egypt,  zj  Euil- 
mcrodach  aduanceth  Iehoiachin  in  his  court. 

4i5b  it  came  to  pade*  in  tl)t 
nmrt)  yecrc  of  his  retgnc, 
m  the  tnitl)  monetg) ,  in 
the  tenth  day  oftfjemo- 
net!),  tljat/i5cbtichabne5= 
garbing  of  Babylon  came,  tjjee,  ano  all 
I  his  hoftc,  againft  3Jerufalcm ,  anb  pit- 
!  cIko  againft  tt,  anb  they  built  fonts  & 
!gainfttt,roimb  about. 

r  Tim  tne  cine  ibas  beficgco  bnto 
tlje  clcuentb  yecrc  of  lung  zebemah. 

3  3lnb  on  the  nmrt)  day  of  the  *  fourth 
moncth,tlje  famine  pmiailcbmthc  city, 
ano  there  lbas  no  bzcabfo;  tlje  people 
ofrtjclano. 

4-  C^lnbrtjc  tine  lbas bjobeubp, 
anb  all  the  men  of  lbarrc  fled  by  night, 
by  the  lbay  oftbc  gate,  bctlbcenetujo 
niaiics,  ibotrn  is  by  the  Hiugs  garben, 
(noib  the  Calbccs  were  againft  the  title 
rounoabout)anb  the  KingUJcnttljclbay 
toibarbtbcpiatne. 
^  3(nb 


*  icre.57.1 


•Inc.;  9.1. 
and  52.4. 


'Icrc^l.tf. 


Zedekiah  taken.       Chap.xxv.         Gedaliahflaine. 


lodgement 
with  htm. 

|  Heb.  made 
ihnde. 


\\Or.chcfi 
Marihuil. 


ifftbr.fi/. 

/maw ay. 


'  Chap.io. 
I7.icrc.  57 


iHtir.tht 
tnefed. 


•I.King.7. 

I5.iere.51 


5  aubtheannyoftheCaioecspur; 
fucb  after  the  Bing,  anb  ouertooBe 
him  mthcpiaines  of  Jericho  :anb  all 
.115  anr.tc  Ybcrefcattcrcb  fromhuu. 

6  S>o  ttjcp  toohc  the  Bmg ,  anb 
b:  ought  rum  up  to  flic  Bing  of  Baby 
ion ,  to  tibial),  ano  they  gaue  t  wbges 
mentbponhtm. 

7  anb  they  fleib  the fonnes  of  ze- 
bcRiah  befoje  his  cycs,anb  t  put  out  the 
eyesof  zebeBtah,anb  bounb  hunttnth 
fetters  of  fcaffcanb  carcuD  him  to  Ba< 
bylon. 

8  C  anb  in  the  fifth  moncth,on  the 
feuenth  Jay  of  the  monctt)  ( ibhich  is 
the  nineteenth  ycerc  of  Bmg  /Bebu 
cnatme^at  Btng  of  Babylon )  came 
4J3ebu3araoan'[eaptame  ofthe  guarb, 
afcruant  of  thcRtngof  Babylon,  bnto 
3Jcrufalcm: 

9  anb  bee  burnt  the  Uoufe  of  the 
fLfir>H£>,  ano  the  Rings  houfc ,  ano  all 
the  houfts  of  3Jrcufalcm ,  ano  cuery 
great  mans  houfc  burnt  he  ttnth  fire. 

10  anb  all  ti)c  army  of  thcCalbccs 
that  tberc  tbtth  the  captautc  of  the 
guarb,  bjaRebottmc  thelbailcsofje 
rufalemrounb  about. 

n  /Botb  the  reft  of  the  people  that 
tbtrc  left  m  the  tine ,  ano  the  t  fugmues 
that  fell  atbay  to  the  Sing  of  Babylon, 
Vutth  the  remnant  of  the  mtiintube, 
m&  jftcbu^arabau  the  taptatne  of  the 
guaro  earyaway. 

12  But  the  captamc  ofthe  guaro  left 
ofthcpooieofthciano,  tobe&uu-bzcf -\ 
(ers.aubhnfbanbmcn. 

ij  anb  *  the  pillars  of  biaffe  that 
were  in  tl)e  houfc  of  the  !L  o  «  e>  ,  ano 
thebafes,  anb  thebiafcnfcathatwasm 
the  houfe  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  ,bib  the  Cal 
bees  bica&e  in  pieces  ,  anb  tarieb  the 
biafTe  of  them  to  Babylon. 

14  anb  the  pots ,  anb  the  fboucis, 
anbthcfnuffers,anothcfpooncs ,  anb 
allthc  betTcls  of  bzaffc  YbrjerciDitl)  they 
mtmttccb,tooRc  they  away. 

1$  anb  the  fire  pans,anb  thcbotblcs, 
%  futh  tilings  asibcrcofgoioe,  m  gome,  j 
anb  of  filucr  ,in  Olucr ,  the  taptainc  ofthe ! 
guarb  tooReatuay. 

16  Xhc  flbo  pillars ,  t  one  fca ,  anb 
the  bafes  Xbhich  Solomon  hab  mabc 
fo2  thehoufc  of  the  %  <£>  is  ©,  thebzaffe 
ofaltherebeffclsibasib.thoutlbetgbt. 

17  "^Lhe  height  of  the  one  pillar  ibas 
cighteene  tubus,  anb  the  thapttcr  bpDti 
it  ibas  tyafTe :  anb  the  height  of  the  cha 
pitet  thjee  mWteSi  anb  the  heathen 


|ib028c,anb  pomegranates  bpon  the 

I  chapiter  rounb  about,  all  oflnatTc :  anb 
Ufee  bnto  thefc  hab  the  fctonb  pillar 
'tttthttJicathenuJozBc. 

is  C  anb  the  captame  of  the  guarb, 
'tooRcScraiah  the  thicfe  0neu\anb 
zephantah  the  fcconb£ncft  ,  anb  the 
th.:ce  beepers  of  the  t  boo;c. 

19  anb  out  of  the  arte  hec  tooBe  an 

I I  Officer,  thatlbas  fetouerthemenof 
ibarre,anbfiucmenofthemthattibere 
;mthcRmgspiefence,ibhuhIberefounb 
tnthe  citic,  anb  the  Hpzinctpail  Scribe 
ofthchofte,lbhichmufterebtl)c  people 
lof  the  lanb,  anb  thzcefcojemen  of  the 
!  people  of  the  lanb  that  ibece  fouub  in 
ithentic. 

20  anb  /I5cbu?araban  taptamc  of 
the  guarb  tooUc  thefc ,  ano  brought 

I  them  to  the  Ring  of  Babylon,  toftib 

!iah. 

2i  ^nb  the  Bing  of  Babylon  fmotc 
them  ,  anb  fletti  them  at  ftiblab  mthe 
lano  of  fyamath :  fo  31ubah  tbas  carieb 

I  a>bay  out  of  their  lanb. 

22  C*3mbasfb:fhcpcoplcthatrc= 
mainebin  the  lanb  of  3Juoah  ,  ibhom 
if5cbuchabnc5?ar  Buig  of  Babylon 
hab  lefecuen  ouer  thtmhemabe  ©eba^ 
hah  the  fomie  of  2htRam ,  the  fonnc  of 
5>haphan,ruler. 

2$  ^nb  lbhen  all  the  *  taptaines  of 
thearmics,they,  anb  their  men,  hcarb 
rliat  thcBing  of  Babylon  hab  mabe 
(Scbanah  goucmour ,  there  came  to 
©ebaiiah  to  fflMpah ,  cuen  ^aimael 
thefonne  of  iI5ethantah,anb5ohanan 
the  fonnc  of  Carcah,  auo&craiabthc 
fbnnc  of  •f^inhumeth  the  /Betopha^ 
dntc ,  anb  ^Jaa^antah  the  fonne  of  a 
i^aachath(tc,thcy,anb  their  men. 

24.  ZLnto  Ocbaliah  ftoarc  to  them 
anb  to  theirmen ,  anb  faib  bnto  them, 
I  Jfeare  not  to  be  the  feruants  of  the  Cal^ 
oecs:btt»eil  m  the  lanb ,  anb  feme  the 
Bing  of  Babylon ,  anb  it  fljail  bee  ibcll 
ittrithyou. 

25  Butitcamctopacreinthefcucnti) 
moncth,tliat  'JChntacl  the  fonnc  of/ito 
thaniah,  thefonne  of€litbama,oftthe 
fceb  royal,camc,anb  ten  men  tbith  hnn, 
anb  *  fmote  ©cbaliah ,  that  he  web ,  anb 
thc3)cibcs,  anbthcCalbces  that  ncre 
ioithhimat09t5pah. 

26  anb  all  the  people  bothfmall  anb 
great ,  anb  the  captatnes  of  the  armies 
arofcanb  came  to  €gypt:  fo?  they  lbere 
afraibofthcCaibces. 

27  canbltcametopallemthefcuen 

anb 


f  fftlr. 
thrcJholM 

\\Or, Eu- 
nuch. 

\  Htbr.  far 
the  Kings 
faze. 

\\Or.fcr,bc 
ofthecaf- 
r.tmeoftht 
heflt. 


*  Tert  ^o. 
1,9- 


'  Iere.40. 


\Htbr.cf 
the  king' 
dome. 
MCIC.4I.2 


Ad 


am,an< 


I.Ch 


ron. 


hi: 


is  genealogies 


f  Hcb.good 
thtnct  with 


*Gcn-5 


'Gcn.lo.: 


fhalh.u  it 
it  tnfome 
cipiti. 

ttunta£Cor- 
rtin^iofome 

COfKl. 


•Gen  let 


anb  thirtieth  pcere  of  the  taptiuitte  of 
'Jeboiacbm  femg  of  3Jubab ,  m  the 
twelfth  moneth,on  the  tcuen  anb  tiben* 
tictl)  day  of  the  monett),  that  euilmeto* 
Dacl)  Ring  of  Babylon,  m  the  ytctt  that 
he  began  to  rcigne,  tub  lift  toptbebeab 
of  3eboiacbm  Ring  of  3Jubab  out  of 
pnfon. 
28  3nobefpaRctftuibhHobim,anb 


loi 


fctbis  tb?oneaboue  the  throne  of  the 
Rings  that  v  ere  tuitb  bim  in  25abplon, 

29  3tao  tbangcb  bis  p?tfon  gat* 
mrats:  ano  be  Did  eatc  bzcab  tontuut- 
alip  befoje  him  all  the  capes  of  hts  life. 

30  ^no  hts  allowance  was  a  tontmu- 
aualloinatucguicnbim  of  the  Ring,  a 
bapip  rate  fo?  cucrp  bap,au  the  capes  of 
his  life. 


^THE  FIRST  BOOKE 

of  the  Chronicles. 


chap.  1. 

1  Adams  line  to  Noah.  5  The  fonnes  of  Ia- 
pheth.  8  The  formes  of  Ham.  17  The 
fonnes  of  Shem.  14  Shems  line  to  A- 
braham.  2.9  lfhmaels  fonnes.  32.  The 
fonnes  ot  Keturah.  34  The  pofteritie  of 
Abraham  by  Efau.  43  The  Kings  of  E- 
dom.   51    The  Dukes  ot  Edom. 

2Dam,  *;S>hctb>! 
Cnofl), 

2  Bcnan,fl9a- 
baiaiccugjcreo, 

3  Henoch,  *©c-: 
thufl)elah,  %& 
tneth, 

4  4J3oab,5>bcm, ! 
Mm,?fgjapheth. 

5  IE  *  Xbc  fonnes  of  liapheth :  ©o< 1 
mcr,  ano  fl0agog,  anb  <$abai,  anb  3Ja? ! 
nan ,  anb  Xubai,  aim  tl^efljecf) ,  anb| 
Xtras. 

6  ^ub  the  fonnes  of  ©omer :  3Ju> 
tbena?,  anb  |j  Hipbath ,  anb  Xogar* 
mah. 

7  3lnD  the  fonnes  of  Jauan :  «te ' 
a)ah,anoXaril)ifl);Btttim,anb!|2)0' 
batum. 

8  C  Xhc  founts  of  foam :  Cufh, 
anb  £Bi5ratm,tf)ut,anD  Canaan. 

9  3ln0  the  fonnes  of  Cull) :  jaKba, 
anb  foauiiab  ,  anb  £>abta,  anb  &aa- 
mah,  anb  £>abtccha :  anb  the  fonnes  of 
llaamah:  £>beba,anbiDeban. 

10  3inb  Cufl) •  brgatc  /rhinrob :  bee 
began  to  be  tnightie  upon  the  earth. 

1 1  2Mb  Qrtoraim  brgate  JLubun,anb 


anamim ,  anb  Hcbabtm,  anb  iBaph' 
tuhtm, 

12  3In&  $atbmum ,  anb  CaHnhim 
(of  iDbome  tame  the  ^biltfttnes)  anb 
*  Capbtbojim. 

13  2ino  Canaan  begate  ztbon  his 
fitft  borne,  anb  foctb. 

14  XhcJtbnGtealfo^nDthe^nio* 
rite,  anb  the  Oirgafbttc, 

K  Tlnrs  the  foiuite ,  anb  the  arltitc, 
anb  the  finite, 

i6  3inbtbc3ltuabttc,anbthczcmas 
rite,  anb  the  foamatbtte. 

17  CXbcfonncsof  *£>bem:<£iam, 
anb  3t flnir ,  anb  3rpbarab ,  anb  Hub, 
anb  3tram,  anb  3U?,  ej  foul,  anb  <3cther, 
anb||fi0cfbccb. 

18  Stub  3irphajcab  begate  5>helab, 
anb&belabbcgatecber. 

19  3nb  bnto€ber  ihcrc  borne  ttbo 
fonnes -.thename  of  theonewas||pcleg, 
(becaufem  hfsbapes  the  earth  was  w 
uibcb)anb  hts  bjothersnamewas^ob- 
tan. 

20  3lnb  *3JoRtan  begate  3llmobab, 
anb  £>bclepb ,  anb  foa5ermauctb,  anb 
Uerab, 

21  foabojam  alfo  ,  anb  SHjal,  anb 
2DiUiah, 

22  3nb  coal,  anb  abimacl,  anb 
&beba, 

23  3lnb  Ophir,  anb  foauiiab,  anb 
Tlobab  :  all  tbcfc  were  the  fonnes  of 
gjoutan. 

14  C5)heni,arpharab,5)htiah, 

25  *<£bcr,pcicg,iachu, 

26  ,S>crug,ii2ab02,Xcrab, 
27  *3b:am 


•Deut.j. 
'3- 


*Gcn.io. 

3 ;  &.  1  1. 
10. 

\\0',M»H. 
Itn.XQ.li. 


Tha  l/.ii- 


*Gcn.io. 

J  6. 


*Lulce  J.J4 
•Gen. n. 
[5- 


Abrahams 


Ch 


ap.ij, 


g 


enerations. 


•Gen.17.5 

•Ccn.ii. 

2,3- 

«Gen.l6. 
11. 

'Gen.le. 
13,1017. 


Gen. 25. 14 


*Gen.  j<5. 
0,10. 


||0r  £epho, 
Gen.  36.  t  a 


Gen. 36. 22. 

||Or,^/<<j», 
Gen  36. 2$ 

Ocn.  36.2  5 
•Chap.  2. 


IIOrHe*- 
<faflGen. 
36.26. 
||  Or  .*{.!», 
Gen. 36. 27 

•Gen.jf. 
3'. 


17  "Slbzanuthcfameuabjaham. 

2S  Xhc  fonncs  of  ^btaham:  *3'- 
faac,anb*JJft)mael. 

19  C  Xhefc  are  their  generations : 
Xhc  *  firft-bome  of  3Jfbmacl ,  /5cb&- 
10th,  then  l&cbar,  anb  3bbccl,  anD 
ijptbCam, 

so  *0ifhma ,  ant)  2Dumah,  tlj9ana, 
pabab,attbXcma, 

si  3jetut,  ii5apfti(l),  anbBcbemah. 
Xhefc  arc  thefonncs  of  ^tttmacl. 

sx  C  ifroib tt)c  fonncs  of  Bctnrah, 
Slbtahants  €ontttbutc :  ff)C  bare  Zim; 
ran ,  anb  'JJoRman ,  anb  !$Jcban,  anb 
<$tbtan,  anb  'JlfhbaR ,  anb  5>huah 
Sinbthe  fonncs  of  3,oBu")an,  S>hcba, 
anbSDcban. 

ss  3lnb  the  fonncs  of  £Bcbtan:€* 
pl)al),anb  ephar,anb  $enorh,anb  ZW 
ba,anb€lbaah.  SUlthefcirethc  fonncs 
ofBctutah. 

5+  3lnb  3lb:aham  begate  gjf.iat 
Xhcfomtcs  of  3faac  :£fatt,  anb3Jfc 
racl. 

$5  CXhefonncsof*£fau:€upha5, 
&ettcl,  anb^euQ),  anb  3Jaalam,anb 
iwah. 

j6  XhcfonricsefeHpha5:Xcman, 
anb  4Dmar,  ||  zepht,  astb  ©atani,  Be* 
na5,anbXimna,anb  3ntaicB. 

37  XhcfonncsofBcnel:>i5ahath, 
zcrah,  £>hammah,anb  flPi^af). 

s8  ^nbthclimnesofScirjfLoran, 
anb  ;S>nobal,  anb  ztbeon ,  anb^naij, 
anb  Difl)on,  anb  €3er,anb2Dtfban. 

39  3uibthc  fonncs  of  ILotant^on, 
anb  ||IE)omam:anbXtmnawasKlotans 
fitter. 

40  Xhe  fonncs  ofS>hobal:  l|  3lian, 
anb^anahath ,  anb  <£bai ,  ||;§>hcpht, 
anb  <i)nam.  3nb  the  fonncs  of  Zibc- 
on:^!al),anb^nal> 

41  Xhc  fonncs  of  3nah  :* iDifbon. 
3nb  thcfomtcsofiI>iihon:||3lmram, 
anb  €fl)ban,anb31th2an,anb Cheratt. 

41  Xhe  fonncs  of  €$er:iStiham, 
anbZauan,and||5Jaftan.Xl)cfonncsof 
2>ffl)on:^l5,anb3lran. 

4$  Ci3ott)thcfearethc*Bingsthat 
rcigncb  in  the  lanb  of  €bom ,  befinc  attj> 
Ring  rcigncb  ouer  the  thtltycu  of  3$ 
ract.  25cia  the  fonuc  of  2Sco? ;  anb  the 
name  ofhis  nttc,tbas  aDttthabah. 

44  3utbtbhen:2Scunbasbcab,3Jo< 
bab  the  fonnc  of  zcrah  of  26ofra!),rctg- 
ncbinhisfteab. 

45  3mb  lbhen  'Jobab  ibas  beab, 
^nfljam  of  the  lanb  of  thcXemantrs, 
rcigncb  m  his  ftcab. 


46  Sutblbhcn^nfbamtbas  beab, 
l^abab  the  fonnc  of  aBcbab  (lbhtch 
fmotc  £)9tbian  in  tlje  ficlb  of  s39oab) 
rctgneb  tn  his  ftcab :  anb  the  name  of 
fjisntlcwis^uttl). 

47  3tnb  ibhcn  J^abab  tbas  beab, 
Manual)  of  i^afrcfeal),  rctgneb  mhis 
ftcab. 

48  3mbtbhcn  Manila!)  ibas  beab, 
5>f)aul  of  Bchoboth  *  bp  the  nucr, 
rcigncb  m  his  ftcab. 

49  ^nbibhcn&hanitbasbcab.Kt 
ai-hananthcfonneof;achbo:,  rcigncb 
in  his  ftcab. 

50  Tinn  tt>hen  2Saai  hanan  ibas 
beab,  l|  ^abab  rctgneb  in  Ins  ftcab :  anb 
the  name  of  hisntte  was||0ai:anb  l)is 
ibtucsname  was  fl0cl)ctabcl  ttjebaugV- 
tcr  of  i^atrcb,  tt)e  baugfotcr  of  i0c- 
sahab. 

51  C$abab  b^cb  aifo.  31nb  tlje 
*2>ubcs  of  «£bom  ibcre :  anifteXim* 
naJ),2DuRc  ^iiatj^Daae  3Jct!)ctl), 

52.  SDufee^ljoubamal),  Dnbecial), 
iDufee^tnon, 

53  2Dufee  Btna5  ,  DnBc  Xeman, 
2>nBC^0)3ar, 

54  ^>mt  ii^agbicl ,  2>u&c  JJram. 
XJ)tft  are  tDcDnaes  of  <£bom. 

CHAP.   II. 

1  The  ionnes  o(  Ifrael.  j  The  pofteritie  of 
IudahbyTamar.  13  The  children  oflefTe. 
18  The  pofteritie  of  Caleb  the  ibnne  of 
Hefron.  2.1  Hefrons  pofteritie  by  thedaugh- 
ter  of  Machir.  15  Ierahmeels  pofteritie. 
34  Shefhans  pofteritie.  41  another  branch 
ot  Calebs  pofteritie.  50  The  pofteritie  of 
Caleb  the  fonne  ot  Hur. 

^efe  are  ttjc  fomies  of  ||  SJt 
racl :  *&cubcn,  Simeon, 
fleui,  anb'JIubaf),  310^ 
ci)ar,anbZcbuiun, 
z  Dan,  3lofcpl),anb 
i5entamtn,  >I5apI)taii,(i5ab,  anb  ^fticr. 

3  C  Xl)c  fonncs  of  *  ^ttbal) :  cr, 
anb  ©nan,  anb  £>i)elal).  which  trjzec 
tticrc  bomc  bnto  i)im ,  of  tl)c  baugljtcr 
of §>ftua*tnc Canaamtes.  ^nber tl)e 
firft-boinc  of  3fuba!) ,  ibas  cum  tn  tlje 
figljt  of  tl)t  %  ©  is  J?,  anb  !)c flue  htm. 

4  ^nb  *  Xamar  h(s  baugl)tcr-tn 
lavb  bare  htm  0harc5,anb  zcralj.  ^u 
the  fomtes  of  3J»bah  wcrc  fine* 

5  Xhc  fonncs  of  *  0hare5  :  ^C5? 
ron,anb^amttl. 

6  2uibthefotmcsofZcrah:||Zim; 
rt,*  anb  €t!jan,anb  fccman,anb  Calcol, 
anb  1 1 2>ara.  f  tue  of  them  tn  all. 

7   3nb 


*  Gen.  36. 
37- 


j!Or,f/.i<Air, 
Gen. 2.6. 39 
|!Or,P.i«, 
Geu.36.39 


*Gcn.jtf. 


\\Ot,lAici. 

•Gcn.29. 

3  2.4:30.5. 

&?5.i8, 

22.8(46. 

8.&c. 


*Gen. 58. 

3.8C  46.I  2. 

"Gen.  38.2 


*Gen.;8. 
29,30. 
Mac. 1.3. 

*Ruth.4 
.8. 

I'M  1. 
•i.Kin.4. 

2 1  - 


Th 


e£enealo£ie 


I.Ch 


ron. 


ofludah. 


\\Or,Ackm 

Mofh.«. 
IS. and  7. 
1,15. 


tiOr.Aram. 
MAt.\.\. 
\\Or,CJ>b. 
vtr.  I  "i . 

•  Ruth.. 

■9- 


*I.Sam.i« 
6. 

\\Or,Shait- 
:,  I  .Sam. 

!■'•  ■■?■ 


*Exod.  31 


•f  Hrb.mokt. 


"Num.  12. 
41.  dcui.3. 
14  10O1.1 3 


7  Slnb  the  fonncs  of  Carnu :  ||  ;& 
char , the  tcoublcr  of  3ifraci,who  tranfc 
grcttcb  m  the  thing  *  accurfcb. 

8  3lnb  the  fonncs  of  cthan :  Sfea- 
rtah. 

9  Xhc  fonncs aifo  of  $c5ron ,  t!)at 
Were  bozncbnto  Dun :  3Jcrahmccl,anb 
||£am,anb||Chcinbau 

10  3no  &am  *  begate  Sttntnabab, 
anb  Siminabab  begat  jl3ahfl)on,p2tnee 
ofthechilbzcnofjubah. 

1 1  3inb  ii5ahfl)on  begate  5>alma, 
anb  5>aima  begate  2i3oa?. 

ii  Stub  25oa5 begate jDbcb ,  anb^ 
beb  begate  Ueflc. 

13  C  *  3lnb  3Jcu"e  begate  his  firtt- 
borne  €ltab,anb^bmaoab  the  feconb, 
anb!IS>himmathcthirb, 

14  /Bathanacl  the  fourth ,  ftabbai 
ttjcfifrti, 

15  £>*m  the  Gjctf) ,  SDauib  the  iv 
uenth : 

i6  nabofc  fitters  were  zcruiah,anb 
Abigail.  3lnb  the  fonncs  of  zeruiah : 
3tbtfljat,anb  gfoab.anb  SUahcUlnce. 

17  3nb  Slbigatl  bate  ^mafa.  3inb 
the  father  of  Slmafa ,  was  Jjcthcr  rt)c 
3JflnnccIttc. 

is  C  3tnb  Caleb  the  fonnc  of  $ev 
ron,  begate  children  of  Slsubah  ins  wife, 
anb  of  JJccioth :  her  fonncs  are  thefe: 
3Jcfl)cr,&hobab,anb  Strbon. 

19  3lnb  When  Sftubah  was  bcab,Ca> 
leb  toonc  bnto  him  «phjath ,  which 
bare  htm  Ifmr. 

20  stub  $ur  begate  Uri ,  anbUrt 
begate  *26c?alccl. 

21  C  3lnb  aftcrwarb  J^c^ron  went 
in  to  the  baughtcr  of  ^achir ,  the  fa? 
thcr  of  <5ilcab ,  Whom  lice  t  marrtcb 
When  he  wa  s  thjeefcoze  pcercs  olb ,  anb 
(bcbarchimi&cgttb. 

22  3lnb  £>cgnb  begate  3Jair ,  miio 
Ijab  tlucc  ano  twenty  cities  m  the  lanb 
of<5ilcab. 

23  *  Slnb  lie  tooHc  tfcantr ,  anb  St- 
rain, With  the  toibncsof  3Jatr  ,  from 
tlicm ,  With  Brnatl) ,  anb  thctoWncs 
tf)CrC0f ,  cuen  tl)2CCfC02C  titles.  Sllltbcfc 

belonged  to  the  fonncs  of  spathic  ,thc  f* 
thcrofGileao. 

24.  Slnb  after  that  t3c?ron  wasbcab 
in  Caleb  <£pl)jatah ,  then  Slbiah  $cy- 
rons  Wife ,  bare  hunSifljur ,  the  father 
ofUckoa. 

25  CSlnb  the  fonncs  of  ^Jcrahmccl 
tlic  firft-bomc  of  i)C5ron ,  were  £am 
the  firft-bomc, anb3unah,anbiDmi, 
anb05cn,andSU;iialj. 


26  gjcrahmeet  hab  atfo  another 
Wifcwhofc  name  wasSltarah ,  (be  was 
the  mother  of  4Dnam. 

27  Stno  the  fonncs  of  Ham  thefirffc 
bozneof  gjerabmcci,  Wcrc£0aa5,  anb 
3Jamm,anb  <£t$ar. 

23  3inb  the  fonncs  of  £)nam  were, 
£>bammat,anb'Jaba.  3inb  the  fonncs 
of  £>hammat :  j!3abab,anb  Sttithur. 

29  Slnb  the  name  of  the  Wife  of  ^ 
bilhnr  was  Slbihail,  anb  Ojec  bare  him 
Slhban,anbfi)9oIib. 

30  3nb  the  fonncs  of  Babab :  £>& 
lcb,anb  3lppaim.25ut  5>cieb  bicb  lbtth- 
out  clnlbicn. 

31  3nb  the  fonncs  of  Slppa(m,3ia)i : 
anb  the  fonncs  of  5 flu,  £>hcfl)an :  anb 
the  thilb?en  of  ^>hcfl)an,Slhlai. 

32  Slnbthc  fonncs  of  3labatheb?o< 
ther  of  3>hammai,  3Jethcr,  anb  3lonai 
than :  anb  Aether  bicb  ibithoiit  chil* 
bden. 

33  Stnb  the  fonncs  of  3fonathan,0e* 
lcth,anb  za3a,Xhcfettiercthe  fonncs 
ofUcrabmcel. 

34  4L/I5ott)S)hcQianhab  no  fonncs, 
but  baughtcrs:  anb  ^heflian  hab  a  fer= 
nam,  an  Egyptian,  ibhofc  name  was 
3arha. 

35  3inb  ^>hcfl)an  gauc  h«s  baugh^ 
tec  to  3larha  his  fcruant  to  Wife, anb 
flicbarchunSlttai. 

36  Slnb  attai  begate  i5atljan,  anb 
Nathan  begate  *  zabab, 

37  Slnb  zabab  begate  Cphlal,  anb 
Cphial  begate  £>bcb, 

3S  Slnb  €)bcb  begate  3Jchu,anb  3v 
hu  begate  Slsariah, 

39  3lnb  St;anah  begate  feclc?,  anb 
i^clc^bcgatccicafah, 

4.0  21nb  cieafah  begate  ^Oamai, 
anb  5>ifamat  begate  5>hauum, 

41  Stnb  jS>hallum  begate  "Jena; 
mtah,anb3ieuamiahbcgatc<!EUfliama. 

4^  C5I5oW  the  fonncs  of  Caleb  the 
brother  of^ierahniccl  were,  firjcflia  his 
ftrft-  bome ,  which  was  the  father  of 
ziph  :anb  the  fonncs  of  #arc(ba  the 
father  of  J?cb2on. 

43  Slnb  the  fonncs  of  $cbzon :  Bo> 
rah,  anb  Xappuafj,  anbftc&em,  anb 
^)ljcma. 

44  Slnb5)hcma begat  Baham,the 
father  of  JojRoam:  anb  fteRcm  begate 
dhammau 

45  3nb  the  fonnc  of  ;§>hatntnat  was 
©aon:  anb  i{9aon  was  the  father  of 
2i5cth-w. 

46  2lnb  €phah  Calebs  tonmbinc 
bare 


"Chap.n. 

41. 


Thcgencalogie 


Ch 


a 


p.nj, 


ofDauid. 


•hthly 
'7- 


[Orjietuh, 
chap. 4.  1. 
\\Or.halfe 
of  the  Me - 
rsichitety 
OrHatfi. 
hammtnu- 
chtth. 


||  Or,  Att- 

rites,  or, 
crownu  of 
thehmfe 
of  leal*. 

'Iud.  I.  id 
*kr.35.t. 


bare  $atan,  anb  £@05a,  anb  <s&<m: 
ant)  i^aran  begate  oa5C5. 

47  anb  the  fonnes  of 'Jahbaufte* 
gem,  anb  Gotham ,  ana  ©ethan,  anb 
$elet,anb  ephah,  anb  5>haaph. 

48  £©aarba  Calebs  concubine,  bate 
£>hebcr,anbi:irhanah. 

49  S>hce  bare  alfo  <a>haaph  thcfa< 
thetof#abtnannah,£>heuathcfathcr 
of  4J0aet)benal),  ?  the  father  of  <5ibea : 
anb  the  baughter  of  Caleb  *  was  ach- 
rat). 

50  CXhefe tbere  the  fonnesof  Ca- 
leb, the  fonne of  l&ur,  the  firtt  borne  of 
ephjatah :  £>hobai  tfjc  father  of  Bi- 
nattHcarim, 

$1  &aimathefather  of  Bethlehem: 
$a  wph  the  father  of  2Seth  *  gabet. 

5z  anb  £»hobai  the  father  of  Bitfc 
atfHearun ,  hab  fonnes ,  H^aroe,  and 
||  balfe  of  the  i$anahethites. 

5S  3nb  ti)e  families  of  ikirtathieas 
ttm,the3lfhntcs,  anb  the#uhites,anb 
the  S>humathites,anb  the  £0ifb?aites : 
or  them  tame  the  zareathites.anb  the 
(£Q)tautttes. 

54.  1Lhe fonnesof  5>almah:  Beth- 
lehem, anb  tf)e  jfretophatlntes,  ||3tta* 
roth ,  the  honfe  of  Joab,  anb  halftof 
the  t$attahethites,fhe  Zontes. 

5$  anb  thcfamiites  of  tiic  Scribes, 
ibljtch  bibeit  at  ^abC5 :  tlje  Xtrariwes, 
the  3>htmcathites,  and  <§)uchathites. 
Xhefe  are  tl)c  *  Benites  tfjat  tame  of 
$emath ,  the  father  of  the  houfe  of 
*&echab. 


CHAP. 

The  formes  of  Dauid 


*i.Sam.;.i 
•Iorkij. 

\\Or,  Chile- 

akflfam.l.l 


"i.Sam.J.J 


*  2.  Sam.; 
14. 

I  Or, Shim 
mt'.ct,l.S*Tn 
S'4- 


10 


III. 

His  line  toZede 
The  fuccefiors  of  Ieconiah. 

i£)\b  thefe  £bcr  c  the  fonnes 
of  SDauib ,  tbhteh  \btre 
bomebnto  hunin^ebzon. 
%{\t  firtt  borne*  amnon, 
_Dfahmoamthe*1Jefree; 
liteffc :  tt)e  fctonb  HDaniel,  of  abigail 
theCarmcuteu'e: 

x  Xhethirb,abfalomthefonncof 
iDaacha,  the  Daughter  of  Xalmai  ning 
of  ©efhut :  the  fourth,  aboniah  the 
fonntof^aggirh:  .^^ 

3  Xhe  fifth ,  5>hephatia  of  abttal : 
the  firth,  Uttoeam  bp*  cglal)  his  Wife. 

4  Thefe  fire  were  borne  bnto  him  in 
$eb;on,  anb  there  Dec  relgneb  fenen 
peeres,  anb  fire  moncths :  anbin^fcru 
faiem  he  rcigneb  thirty  aitb  fh:ce  ycres. 

5  *  ^nb  thefe  ibere  borne  bnto  htm 
m3Jenifaiem.||&himea,anb£>hobab, 


anbiftathan,  anb  Solomon,  foure,  of 
Batbfhua  the  Daughter  of  1 1  ammiel. 

6  3Jbhar alfo,  anb  ||  Cufijama ,  anb 
Cliphelct, 

7  anb  iHojga,  anb  JBephep;,  anb 
3iapbia, 

s  anbeuft)ama,anb||Cliaba,anb 
<£hpbelet,nine. 

9    Thefe  were  all  tfyt  fonntS  Of  SDaUlb: 

befiD  e  the  fonnes  of  the  toneubmes,anb 
Xamar*  their  filler. 

10  4C  anb  Solomons  fonne  was  *3Re* 
hoboam:||abtahisronnc:afah<Sfon: 
■Jehofljaphathtsfonne: 

1 1  gjozam  his  fonne :  ||  aha3tah  his 
fonnc :  3Ioa(h  htsfonnc : 

\%  amatfah  his  fonne :  liajanah  his 
lonnc :  3Jotham  his  fonne : 

15  aha?  h«s  fonne :  ^cseniah  l)(S 
fonne :  ij^anaffeh  his  fonne : 

14  anion  his  fonne :  3Joftah  his 
fonne. 

15  anb  the  fonnes  of  ^tofiahwere- 
the  firtt  borne  H'Johanan,  thefeconb 
njoaHtm,  thethitbllzcbeaiah,  the 
fourth  Vallum. 

i6  anb  the  fonnes  of  *3JoaRlm: 
.,3Fctoniah  his  fonne,  ||  zebe&iah  ¥& 
fonne. 

17  C  anb  the  fonnes  of  ||  ^etonialj, 
affir,  t&alatbierhtsfonne, 

18  fl^althiramaifo,  anb  ^cbaiah, 
anb5>hena3ar,  3etamiah,^ofama, 

anbjBebabiah. 

19  anbfhcfonnesof^ebaiah  were: 

zernbbabel,  anb  £>hunct :  anb  the 
fonne  of  zernbbabel,  ^efhuliam,  anb 
^anantah,  anb  5>helomith  their  fitter. 

zo  anbl?a3Ubah,anb  <Dhel,anb2Se< 
rethiah^^afabiah.^nftjabhefebjuc. 

x\  anb  the  fonnes  of  ^ananiah,$e; 
lattah,  anb  3Jefaiah :  the  fonnes  of  JRc> 
phaiah,thcuJnsof  arnan,  the  fonnes 
of  £>babiah,  the  fonnes  of  £>crhaniah. 

xx  anb  the  fonnes  of  £>crhaniah, 
^emaiah:  anb  thefonncs  of&ematah, 
t9attn(h,anb3(geai,  anb  Bartah ,  anb 
/3eanah,anb  5>haphat,fire. 

xi  anb  the  fonnes  of  Jl5eariah :  €\v 
oenal,  anb  t^cuiah ,  anb  a5raiam, 
thjee. 

14  anbtljefonnes of <£liocna»,werc : 
^obatah.anb  cualhib,  anb pelaiah, 
anbawtub,  anb^Johanan,  anb  2Dala^ 
iah,anbanam,feuen. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1.  11  Thepofteritie  of  Iudah  by  Caleb  the  fonne 

ofHur.  5  Of  Afhur the  pofthumus  fon  of Hez 

Oo  ron. 


ij  Orfitlh- 
faie,zjjm. 
II. 13. 

iOr.Etitm, 

\\Or,EhfiiM 
z.Sam.e.ti 
\\Or,Betu- 
(to,  1  .Ckro. 
'+7. 


*  I.Sam. 
ij.i. 

•i.King.n 
43&i5.r 
,Or,Abixmi 
1.^.15.1 
\Or>A*Atri' 
ahyi.ihr.li. 
6.&U.I-;. 
\Or,y*^j*h 

JO. 


\\Or,ha- 
cbttz.tljri»g. 
23.3a. 
\\Or£/i*. 

2!-34. 

Or.OIU- 
rhjryUjlJzin. 
14.17. 

"Maci.ii. 

\\Or,/ehou- 

M»,l.kwg. 

I4«. 

\\Or,CmUh, 

ier.1z.24. 

\HeiShc- 

alltel. 

*  2. King. 

i4.17.kmj 

tin  vncle. 

•Mjm.ii 


t  Hei.Hif- 
kph. 


Th< 


egenealogie 


I.Ch 


ron. 


ofludah.1 


•Gen.  3! 
39 .and 
46.11. 
I  Or,Cht 

z. p.  arC>i- 
UkCkuf. 

.18. 
||  Or,H*roe, 


•Cha.i.i.1. 


fl  That  is, 
forraafml. 


\Hfb.If 
ibmvri/t, 

\Htb.doc 
me* 


ifNahttjb, 


\Or,Hf 

Ateonoth.u, 
who  begate, 
&c, 

||  Or,  inlia- 
Imaniio/ 
thtvJUi. 
\Than, 
era  jit  (men. 
\\Or.Vknae.. 


ron.  9  Oflabez,  and  his  prayer,  2.1  The 
poftenue  of  Shclah.  14  The  pofteTiiieand 
cities  of  Simeon.  39  Their  concjueft  ofGe- 
dor.and  ofthe  Amalekites  in  mount  Seir. 

$<£  fonnes  of  3fuoah : 
*  *Dl)arc5  ,  !^c?ton ,  anD 
Carmt,  ano  $ur,  ano 
Sljobau 
i  3tno  ||Bcaiah,thc 
ton  of  £>hobal,begate3Jal)ath,anb  33a# 
hath  begate  3U)umai,  ?  3Uhao.  Xhcfc 
ace  the  families  of  ttje  zo?athitcs. 

3  3ino  thefc  were  of  the  father  of  €-- 
tam:3Je5rcel  *  3Jflima,f  3JDbafh:anb 
thenamc  of  ttjcir  filter  was  Da^cieiponi. 

4  3nb  }2>enuel  the  father  of  <5eD02, 
ano  €3cr  the  father  of  $umah.  Xhefc 
are  the  fomtcsof  fcur,  thefirft  borne  of 
ephjatah,  tfte  fatlier  of  Bethlehem. 

5  C  3nt>  *  ^Q)ur  tfic  father  of  Xc* 
ftoa,hao  tibo  Unites :  Ijciah,  f  /!3aarah. 

6  3lnD  ji5aaral)  bare  him  2lhufam, 
ano  l?cphcr,  ano  Xemcni,  ano^hafl) 
tan.  Xhcfc  were  tlje  fonnes  of  iftaaraj). 

7  3lnD  the  tonnes  of  I?eiah  were: 
zercth,  ano  zoar,ano<£thnan. 

5  31nb  C05  begate  3nub,  anb  zo- 
bebah,anod)cfamilicsof3lharhel,thc 
fonnc  of  $arum. 

9  C  3no  3Jabe5  ttiasmojenonou- 
rablc  then  his  tocrtucmanb  his  mother 
taiieb  his  name  ||  IJabc?,  facing,  28c* 
ca  ufe  3  bare  him  tbith  fiwotb. 

io  3inb  'Jabc?  ralleb  on  the  <£>ob  of 
'Jfracl,  facing. f  JaDhthatthott  tboul 
befi  bicffemcc  inbeebc,  anb  enlarge  my 
toaft,  anb  that  thmc  hanb  might  bee 
nntl)  me,anb  that  thotnDotiibeft  titcepe 
mce  from  emu ,  that  it  may  not  grtenc 
me.  3inD  god  grantcD  him  that  ttthich 
he  requcfteb. 

1 1  C  3no  €licmb  the  toother  of 
*>hiwh,  begate  £0clnr,  inhich  was  the 
father  of  €  ftiton. 

ii  3tnb  editon  begate  Bcth-rapha, 
anb  0afeah,anb  Xehnmah  thefather 
of  ||  3r-nahafl).  Xhcfe  are  the  men  of 
Kcthah. 

13  3tno  the  fonnes  of  Bena* :  4Dth 
ntel,  anb  5>arata :  anb  the  fonnes  of 
£>thniel,||li?athath. 

14  3lnb  ©eonothaibegate  4Dph2al): 
anb  S>cratah  begate  "Joab,  thefather 
of  the  ||  nancy  of  ||  eharafim ,  fo?  they 
lnerc  craftefmen. 

15  Stub thcfonnesofCaicbthc fonnc 
ofjcphuimch^ni.ciah.anbi^aam, 
anb  the  fonnesof  eiah,  || enen  i&cna5. 

16  3uib  tljc  fonnes  of  Jchaieleel: 


Ztph,ano  ztphah,Xtrta,ano3lfareel. 

17  ^nbthefonnes of €5ra  were ■.•$& 
thcr ,  anb  fiPereo,  anb  ephcr,  anb  Ja= 
Ion :  anb  fl)e  bare  &3trtam,ano  5>hanv 
mai,?3lfl)bah  the  father  of  Cfttfemoo. 

is  lino  his  vmfe  ||  3iehuDitah  bare 
3Jcrcb  thefather  ofcebo:,  anbi^eber 
thcfatljct  ofS>ocho,ano  5Ieftuthieithe 
father  of  zanoah.  3tnt>  tljefe  are  tlje 
fonnes  of  ffiithtah  the  bangljter  of 
^haraoh,tbhich  ^crcb  tooHe. 

19  ^nb  the  fonnes  of  hisiDifc ll^o 
otah ,  the  filler  of  /I5aham  thefather  of 
Beilah,  the  <3armite,  anb  €fl)temoa 
the^aaehathue. 

io  ^nb  the  fonnes  of  5»imeoi,i  were: 
3imnon,anD  Hmnah,  28cn  hanan,  anb 
Xilon.  ^nb  the  fonnes  of^Jfht  were: 
zoheth,ano  25en-50heth. 

zi  c  Xhe  fonnes  of  S>helah  *tt)e 
fonne  of  3Jnbah  were :  cr  the  father  of 
Hecah,  ano  Haabah  the  father  of  £0a^ 
rea)ah,anDthcfamiliesofthchoiifeof 
them  that  Uuotight  fine  imnen,  ofthe 
houfeof^fhbea. 

ir  3lno3oUim,anOthemcnof€hO' 
?eba,  ano  ffoafh ,  anb  Paraph ,  tt)ho 
hab  the  Dominion  inQ9oab,f  3jafhubi 
Hehem.  ^nothefe  are  ancient  things. 

2j  Xhefcwerethc^otters,anothofc 
that  Dtbelt  amongft  plants  ano  hcoges. 

XherethcyDibeltibiththeBingfo?hts 
tbojUe. 
Z4  C  Xhe  fonnes  of  Simeon  were-. 

1 1  Lemuel,  ano  3amin ,  3farib,  zcrah, 
and  dhaul : 

15  S>hailum  his  fonne :  £J9tbfaml)iS 
fonne :  Q3ifl)ma  his  fonne. 

26  3inD  tije  fonnes  of  £0ifhma :  l^a« 
mucl  his  fonnc ,  zacchur  his  fonnc, 
S»hmict  his  fonnc. 

17  3no;§>himei  had  firtecne  fonnes, 
ano  fire  Daughters,  but  his  bzcthjen 
habnot  many  tlnlDzcn,  neither  Dioail 
their  family  mulnply  t  UHc  to  the  d)il' 
bjcnof^Juoah. 

18  ^nb  they  bujclt  at  *  ffieer-njcba, 
anb^oiabah.anblia^ar  (l)iiai, 

19  3lnoat||2i5iiha,anoatC5cm,anO 
atllXolao, 

30  5lnrj  at 25ethuei,ano  at  ftomtalj, 
anoat  zihlag, 

31  ^no  at  aSeth-  martaboth  ,  ano 
||  l^a^ar  -  ^>nfim,  ano  at  Bethbirci,  anb 
at Smaaraim.  Xhefeibcrcthcir cities, 
Onto  the  reignc  of  £>atuo. 

31  ^iio their biuages were:  yctam, 
ano  %n,  Simmon,  ano  Xothcn,  ano 
Lilian,  fiue  cities. 
35  3mo 


\\Orfhe 
ftwcjfc. 


\\OrMn- 
diiakjneH' 
ttcoedbc- 
fore. 


•Cen.38. 


\\Or,U- 
mttcl-,Gen. 
46.10.  £x' 

ij'.C1  15 


\  Hib.z-ac. 
Mofti.19.; 


|1  Or^fU, 
M.I9.3. 

\\OryEtie- 
Ld,hf.i9A 


\\Or,Hnv 

SHfchfc. 

ip.j. 

1|  Or,  Ether, 
IoJb,lp.J, 


Si 


imeonspeneaio 


gle; 


Ch 


ap.v. 


and  Reubens. 


\\Or,1)M- 

lilh.lf.t. 
\\9rxiihty 
dtmJtd 
thrmftlues 
tyturum  &- 


\Hetr.ctrrt- 


'Gtn  jj- 


33  3nb  all  tl)eir  milages  that  were 
rounb  about  ttjefame  nncs ,  tonto  ||  25a^ 
at.  Xhefe  tbcrc  thctr  habitations ,  anb 
their  Hgcneaiogtc: 

34-  3in&  33rfhobab ,  anti  3Jamlcch, 
anb3oftahthefonneof;amaflitah, 

35  3no3oel,anb%hu  the  fonnc  of 
3tortbta,thefonneofil>erata,thcfonnc 
of», 

36  3nb  eitocnai,  anb  3?aaRobah, 
anb1Jefohatah,anb;afatah,anb2ibici, 
anb3leftmtei,anb  asetiaial), 

37  3nb  zisa  the  fonne  of  ;&>htphi, 
thefonneoraiion,the  fonnc  of  JJcbaia, 
thcfonnc  of&himn,  tfjcfonne  of&hc- 
maiah- 

38  Xhefetmentionebbpthcirnamcs,! 
were  Winces  m  their  families  ,  anb! 
the  home  of  tijcit  fathers  tncreafeb  j 
greatly. 

39  C^nbtheplbcnttothcentrante; 
of<5ebo2,eneni)nto  rhceattfibeofthc! 
toallcp,tofeeRcpalhtrcfo2  thctr  flotRs.  j 

40  3nb  tticpfounb  fat  palhtre  anb 
goob,anbthc  lanti  was ibibc, anb  quiet, 
anb  peaceable :  fo?  they  of  i?am  hab 
Mbelt  there  of  olb. 

4.1  3nb  thefc  lfyittcn  bp  name,tantc 
in  tfjc  bapes  of  $C3eRtah  Ring  of  3Ju^ 
tmh,anbfmotethcirtcnts,anbthchabi' 
tations  that  mere  founb  there,  anb  be^ 
ftropeb  them  bttcrlpnnto  thisbap,anb 
btbelt  m  rt)cir  roomes :  becaufc  there  was 
pafturc  there  fouficirflocRs. 

4.1   3Hlb  Conic  of  thCIlt  ,  euen  of  the 

fonnes  of  S>imeon ,  fine  hunb2eb  men, 
Ibent  to  mount  $>c\t ,  flatting  fo?  their 
eaptames  $clanah,  anb43canah,anD 
ftephaiah,  anb  £l5?iel,  the  fonnes  of 
3TO)t 

43  3nbtheptmotcthercltoffhe:& 
maieRitesthatVberccfcapeb,anbbtt)elt 
there  unto  this  bap. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  The  line  of  Reuben  (  who  loft  his  birthright) 
vntothecaptiuitie.  9  Their  habitation  and 
conqueft  of  the  Hat;antes.  n  The  chiefe 
men,  and  habitations  ot  Gad.  18  The  num- 
ber and  conqueft  ot  Reuben  ,  Gad,  and  the 
lulfeofMnnaffeh.  13  The  habitations  and 
chiefe  men  ofthathalie  tribe.  15  Their  cap- 
riuitk'  for  tlieir  finne. 


gSjj  £>1D  the  fonnes  of  &cu- 
^  I  ben  tfic  firft  borne  of  %l 


fsr  tael,(foj*  lice  wis  tlicfirft 
2  bomebut,  foiafmuth  as 
he  bcfilcb  fits  fathers  beb, 
tits  birtlj.zigh't  iDas  gmen  Dnto  the 


fonnes  of 'Jlofeph  the  fonnc  of  ^fracl : 
anb  the  gcncaiogic  is  not  to  be  retlto- 
neb  after  the  birthright. 

i  iFoj*5ubafi  pmiaiieb  abouc  his 
bzcthzen,  anb  of  hnn  tame  the  'clncfc 
I  rulers,  but  the  btrthnght  U>as*3l0' 
fephs. 

3  Xhe* fonnes, ifav, of Henbentfje 
ftrlt  twine  of  3lfracl  were  r^anocl),  anb 
l^aflu.Csrou.anb  Carmi. 

4  %l)i  fonnes  of  3ioei :  S>hcmatah 
Ins  fonne :  ©og  fits  fonne :  £>htmet  his 
fonnc: 

5  £I9icah  fnsfon :  Bcaiahts  fonnc: 
26aal  his  fonne. 

6  fficerah  fnsfonne :  ttthom  \\%iV 
gath-pilnefcr  Ring  of  ^Sflpna,  carricb 
arbaj»captiue:^e'as^;intcoftfieKcu' 
bcnitcs. 

7  3nb  his  bjcfhicn  bp  their  famt? 
lies  (ttihcn  the  gcncaiogic  of  thctr  gent 
rattons  lfcas  rctRoneb)  were  the  chtefe, 
3>ciel,anb  zeehartah, 

3  3inb  26cla  the  fonne  of  35ah,  the 
fonne  of  ||  £>hema ,  the  fonnc  of 'Joel, 
inhobtucltm*^roer,cuenl3mo^cbo, 
anb25aaimcon. 

9  3lnb  caffibart)  he  inhabiteb  bnto 
the  entring  in  of  the  ibilbernes,  from 
the  riuer  Cnphzates :  beeatrfe  their  tat^ 
tell  ibere  muftiplicD  m  tfjc  lattb  of  <5v 
feab. 

10  ^nbin  the  napes  of  £>aul ,  thep 
maacYtoatrcttnth  rhc!^agarttcs,n)ho 
fell  bp  thctt  hanb :  anb  rhep  btbett  m 
their  tents  t  tf)?ongf)out  all  the  eaft 
land  of  ©flcao. 

11  C  ^nb  the  d)ilb?en  of  <5ab  bVbctt 
oner  agamll  them,  mthelanbof  *26a* 
fhantonto&althah. 

ii  3JoeI  the  chiefe,  anb  &haphant 
thenert:  anb3Iaanai,anb^haphatm 
25aflian. 

1 3  3lnb  ttjetc  b?cth #n  of  the  houfe  of 
their  fathers, were :  Michael  ,anb  %v 
fhuuam ,  ano  S>heba ,  anb  gjojat ,  anb 
3Jachan,anb  zi«i,anb^>cbcr,feuen. 

14  Xhefearcthechilb?cnof^bihatl 
the  fonne  of  S?un,the  fonnc  of  3Iar  oah, 
the  fonne  of  ©ileab ,  the  fonnc  of  $&v- 
chad,  thefonneof  ^eftnthai^hcfonnc 
of  3Jahbo,  the  fonnc  of  26113 : 

15  2thi  tfic  fonnc  of^bbtcl,  the  fonnc 
of  <3unt ,  rtjiefc  of  fhetjoufeof  tfjcirta? 
thcrs. 

i6  anbthep  XiVotlt  in  c5Ueabin25* 
than ,  anb  in  her  tolbnes,  anb  m  all  the 
Suburbs  of  *  Aharon ,  bpon  t  their 
boibers. 

<3Do  r  17  3U' 


Ucn.49. 

,10. 
'  Mich  5. J. 
-natch. 2. 6. 

Or, Prince. 

Gfn.46. 
>J.cxod   6. 
14  imm.t6. 
S- 


\\OrTtg- 

luth-filtte* 
ftr,a  kpg. 
1  5  i$.And 
•  6.7. 


\\Or,Shma- 
"Iofh.13. 


\Hebr.vy:n 
ji'thr  face 
tftbe'Enft, 


'Chap.  27, 

2  0. 

iHetrr.thar 
Ccs  1;/ forth 


I 


'28: 


rrh, 


egeneaiosie 


lo 


I.Ch 


ron. 


oftheLeuitcs. 


*  2. Kings 


fHei.fmr 
of  valour. 


•Ceaij. 
»5- 


(  ffek/ed 


\Hch.fonle, 

of  men  ^u 
num.x  I.j  j. 


f  Heir,  mm 
of  nones. 


*  l.King. 
j  7.7. 


*  I.Kingi 
15.19. 


*  J.King. 
17.5. 


17  311  thefe  tbete  r  ecfeonca  bp  gene 
alogtes  m  theaapes  of  3Jotham  *taug 
of  fluaah,  ana  in  the  aapcs  of  JJerobo* 
amftmgofjfrael. 

13  CXhe fonncs  of  ftcnben,  ana 
fheeaaites,  anahaifcthettibcof  $&& 
nafleh ,  of  t  aaiiant  men ,  men  able  to 
beare  buclrtet  ana  fooja  ,  ana  to  fhoote 
ttrith  bolD,  ana  ftalfullin  Vbatre,  were 
foureana  foitrtiethoufana,  fcucnhun; 
a?ea  ana  tb;tcefcojc,thatrbcntouttothe 
ttiacre. 

19  ana  the?  maae  ibarre  ttrith  the 
tyagantes,  tblth  *  3Jetur ,  ana  Jftephifh , 
ana/frooab. 

io  ana  the?  ibece  helpea  againtt 
them,  ana  the  ^agarites  Ibcre  acliue- 
tea  into  their  liana,  ana  all  that  were 
tbitt)  them :  fo:  ttjcv  erica  to  ©oa  m  tt)c 
battcU,anb  tie  ltoastntrcatca  of  tljjcni, 
beeaufe  they  put  their  mitt  in  him. 

21  ana  they  i  toonc  araap  their  cat* 
tell :  of  their  camels  fiftte  thoufano,ana 
of  fheepe  trbo  hunajca  ana  fiftlefhou 
(ana,  ana  of  afles  tiao  thoufana.ana  of 
t  men  an  ijunajea  thoufana. 

it  jtoj there  fell  aonmemanp  name, 
becaufc  the  laarrc  was  of  Goa.ana  they 
amelt  in  their  fteaas  bum  the  capttutty. 

23  c  ana  the  chuazcu  of  the  fjaife 
tribe  of  sJDanaflch  albeit  in  the  lanac 
they  incrcafca  from  aSaflian  Unto  Z3a= 
ai-hecmon,ana  §enir,anabnto  mount 
sermon. 

24.  ana  thefc  were  the  hcaas  of  the 
houfc  of  their  fathcrs,cucn  €pher,  ana 
3fht,*i£lirl,ana33r!cl,ana3Icrcnttai). 
ana  $oaautab ,  aiio^Jahatei,  miglme 
men ofbalour,t famous  men,  fj  hcaas 
of  the  houfe  of  their  fathers. 

15  C  ana  they  tranfgrettea  againtt 
the  <5oa  of  their  fathers,  ana  iacnt*a 
Xbhonng  after  the  (5oasof  the  people 
of  the  lana,  tbhomc  <soa  acttroyca  be< 
foje  them. 

16  anathccsoaofUrraeltttrrcabp 
the  fpirit  of  *  0ul  tang  of  aftyna,  ana 
the  fpirit  of  Xilgath-pilncfer  Iiuig  of 
afTyna,  ana  he  carica  th  em  away  (euen 
the  ftciibcmtcs,  ana  the  <saaites ,  ana 
thehaifctribcoftaaanaOchOftyought 
thembnto  *  $aiah,ana  Dabo2,ana  $a< 
ta.anato  tljertucr  ©ojan,  bnto  this 
aay. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  The  fonncs  of"  Leui.  4  Thelineof  thePrieib 
vntothe  capuuitie.  16  The  families  of  Gcr- 
ftioni,Merari,an<.lKo!uth.  49  The  office  of 


Aaron  and  his  line  vnto  Ahimaaz.  54  The 
cities  of  thePrieftsand  Leuites. 

G*^f^f®  6efbnne£of?Leui:*||(I5er' 
Kg?  djon,  Bohath  9  39eraci. 
1  ana  the  fonncs  of 
Bohath :  amtam,  315a* 
har,?^eb?on,filll35iei. 

3  ana  the  chuajen  of  amram :  a* 
ron ,  ana  #o(cs ,  ana  Miriam.  %\\z 
fonncs  alfo  of  aaron :  *  jj3aaaa,ana  % 
bthu,  <£ica5ar,ana  3Jthamar. 

4  C«lea5atbegate^hinehas,^hi' 
nehasbegateabtfhua. 

5  ana  abilhua  begate  ffiu&tn ,  ana 
26uRtabegateU55f> 

6  3lna  ll55i  begate  zetahiah,  ana 
Zerahtah  begate  ^eratoth, 

7  ^ctaiotli  begate  3mariah,  ana 
^mariah  begate  ^hitub, 

8  3lna  *  ^hitub  begate  zaaos,ana 
zaaofe  begate  3hunaa5, 

9  3na  ^htmaa?  begate  3t5anah, 
ana  pariah  begate  3lohanan, 

10  ana  3Johanan  begate  a^ariah, 
(hce  itisthatereratca  thc^zicfts  office, 
jmtthe'templtthat  Solomon  builtin 
,  3}crufalcm) 

11  3na  asariah  begate  amariah, 
anaSmariah  begate  2hitub, 

ir  ana  ahitub  begate  zaaofe,  ana 
zaaoK  begate  11  £>hailum, 

u  ana  5>haiium  begate  5>iltaah,ana 
^tltaah  begatea?artah, 

1+  ana  a^ariah  begate  *  Jpcraiah, 
ana  S>eraiah  begate  3Jcho3aaaB, 

15  ana  3Ieho5aaan  tbent  into  captiui- 
tie,  *rbhen  the  H(£)a©  canea  aiaav  gju^ 
oah  ana  Jermaicm  bpthe  hana  of  m> 
buchaa-ne33ar. 

16  C  Xhe  fonncs  of  Hcui:* II ©er 
(horn,  Bohath,ana  ©erari. 

17  3na  thefe  be  the  names  of  the 
fonncs  of  <5erfhom :  ILibni,  %  5»himci. 

18  ana  the  fonncs  of  Bohath  were : 
amram,  ana3?har,ana^eb^on,  ana 
3a?3icl. 

19  %Wc  fonncs  of  £0erari:  99ahli, 
ana  S0ufl)i.  ana  thefe  are  the  families 
I  of  the  ?Leuites,  accojamg  to  their  f& 
;thers. 

10  £)f  Gcrfhom :  IBLibnt  his  fonne, 
IJahath  his  fonne ,  *  zimmah  his 
fanne, 

11  H^oah  his  fonne ,  ll^aao  his 
fonne,  zcrah  his  fonne,  ^eateraihts 
fonne, 

11  Xhe  fonnes  of  Bohath :  II  3m< 
minaaab  his  fonne .  BOJah  his  fonne, 
affir  his  fonne, 
13  glbanah 


"Gcn.4tf. 

.  I.  cxod-6. 

II  Or,  Ger. 
/Hom,vcr.l6 


'Leu  it.  10 


*  1.  Sim.  15 
*7 


t  Ht6rjn 
ihrhohff. 

*  i.Cnton. 
}. I. king. 6, 


||  Or,  Me- 

lxkrc.9.11 

"Nchera. 
11. 11. 


■  l-Kings 
Jj.t8. 


"  Exod.iS. 
17. 

||  Or,  Ger 

jhon,zer.  i. 


Vaf.A 


^Orfilhtn. 
ver,  2. 
\\Or,AiUit 
ver.^t. 
||  Orjvt- 
bdrfjer.  X, 
IS. 


Thegenealogie  Cliap.vj.  ofthcLeuites- 


Sec  JJ.& 
tf.vcrles. 


OrZuph, 
'l.S*m.  I.I. 


\\CllkdJfo 
loelver.  33. 
C?  t. Sum. 
8.2. 


'Chap. 
16.1. 


fHei.yW. 


•Eiod.<5. 
J4- 


z3  £iHanahhistonnc,anb€bia{aphj 
histonncans  3tflit  hts  tonne, 

14  Xahath  his  tonne ,  3ttnel  ijis 
tonne,  U53iah hts  tonne ,  ano  Shaul 
hisfonne. 

z5  inutile  tonnesofeiuanah:*^; 
mafai,anD3JhimotI). 

%6  as  to*  CIRanat) :  the  fonncs  of! 
€Utanah,!l  zophai  his  tonne,  anD^a-j 
hath  his  tonne, 

27  €ltab  his  tonne ,  31croham  hts  | 
tonne,  €lUanah  his  tonne. 

18  anb  tlje  tonnes  of  Samuel  -.thei 
firft  borne  ||  <ma(tyu,aub  abiah. 

29  %\)t  tonnes  of  £0erart:£0ahli, 
ILtbnt  !)ts  tonne ,  Shtmei  his  tonne, 
<B35al)is  tonne, 

30  <sbftimea  his  tonne ,  $aggiah  his  ( 
tonne  ,afaiah  his  tonne. 

31  atlD  tliefC  are  they ,  tbhom Dauib 

fetoucrthcfcruitc  of  tongiu  thchoufc 
ofthe?Lo2b ,  after that  thc*arltc  hab . 
reft. 

31  an&  they  mintftccb  befoje  the 
Dtticllmg  plaec  of  thcXabernacle  of  the 
Congregation ,  ttnth  tinging ,  bnttll 
Solomon  nab  btttlt  the  houfc  of  the 
%  &  is  j?  in  3Jct*ufalcm :  anb  then  thep 
ibaiteb  onthctr  offuc,aeco?bmgto  their 
ojbev. 

33  anb  thefc  arc  the?  that  ttbatteb 
ttnth  their  chtlbzcn  of  the  tonnes  of  the 
BohathiteSvtyemanafinget:thctoune 
ofjocuhc  tonne  of  Shcmucl, 

34  1Lhc  tonne  of<£manah,thetonne 
of  3Jcroham ,  the  tonne  of  €M,  the 
tonne  of  £oah, 

35  Xhc  tonne  of  zuph,  thctonntof 
ciitanah ,  the  tonne  of  £0ahath ,  the 
tonne  of  amafai, 

36  Xhctonnc  of Clftanah, thefonne1 
of  Uoetthctonncofajanah,  the  tonne! 
ofzephamah, 

37  Xhe  tonne  of  Hahath,  the  tonne 
of^tfTir ,  the  tonne  of  Cbiafaph ,  the 
tonne  of  l&ozah,. 

38  1Che  tonne  of  3i3har,  thefonne 
ofmohat^rhctouucofJLcui.thcfonne 
oflifrael. 

39  anb  his  bjoth  cr  afaph  (tbho  ftoob 
on  his  right  hanD>^»  afaph  the  tonne 
offficrachtaluhc  tonne  of  Shmtca, 

40  Xhe  tonne  of  Michael, the  tonne 
of26aafiah,thctonncoffl3eichtah, 

41  Xhctonncof€thnt,thetonncof 
Zerah,thetonncofabaiah, 

4z  Xhetonne  of  cthan,  the  tonne 
of  Zimmah,  the  tonne  of  Shunet, 
43  %\)t  tonne  of  3Jahath,thc  tomic 


of  d5crfl)om,thctonnc  of  ULcui. 

44  anD  their  bmlncn  the  tonnes 
of  tBcrart,ftood  onthe  left  hanb:  ethan 
thefonne  of !|  Unity,  thefonne  ofabbt, 
thefonne  of  &3ailuch. 

45  Xhc  tonne  of  fcathabtah ,  the 
tonne  of  ama3iah,thcfonnc  ofijuiuah, 

46  Xhc  tonne  of  am5i,  the  tonne  of 
26ani,the  tonne  of  Shamcr, 

47  %\)t  tonne  of  #ahli,thc  tonne  of 
smutty ,  the  tonne  of  i39eran,  the  tonne 
ofjletu. 

48  Xheir  mcrlNcn  alto  the  Hctuts 
tberc  appomtebPnto  all  matter  offers 
nice  of  the  Xabcrnaclc  of  the  houfc  of 
Gob. 

49  CSntaarott,  anb  his  tonnes 
offercD'bpon  the  altar  of  the  burnt  of- 
fering, anb  *  on  the  altar  of  mcenfr,  and 

were  appointed  fol'all  fl)C  ttWKe  Of  the 

place  tiiofthoiv,  anb  to  mafec  an  atones 
ment  foj  3frael ,  actotfnng  to  all  that 
£j9ofcs  the  feruant  of  Gob  hao  com- 
maunbeb. 

50  anD  thefc  arc  the  fonncs  of  aa* 
ron  :  eicaw  hts  tonne,  $hmchas 
his  tonne,  abtftyta  Ins  tonne, 

51  26uUlu  his  tonne,  «El35t  hts  tonne, 
Zerahiah  his  tonne, 

52  SQeraioth  his  tonne ,  ^marialj 
his  fonncQlhitub  his  tonne, 

53  zabolt  his  tonne ,  ^tynwa5  his 
tonne. 

54  C  i^oibthcfc  are  their  bipclltng 
places,  thzoughout  their  cartels  in  thctr 
coafts,of  the  tonnes  of  3aron,  ofthe  fa- 
milies of  the  i&ohathtfcs  :  fo?  theirs 
ibasrhciot. 

55  ^nb  the?  gauc  them  fccb:on  in 
the  lanb  of  3Jnbah,  anb  the  fuburbes 
thereof  rounbaboutu. 

56  23iuthefielbsoftl)ccinc)anbthc 
toiuagesthereof,rl)cvgauctoCaicbthc 
tonne  of^ephunnch. 

57  anbtothc  tonnes  of  aaronthep 
gauc  tht  nnes  of  "Jubah,  namelvl?e 
bzonthcctticofrcfugcanbllibnavbith 
her  fuburbes  ,  anb  3jamr  anb  Cll)^ 
moa,tbith  their  fuburbes, 

58  anbfl^tieniPith  her  fuburbes, 
SDcbir  tbitli  her  fuburbes, 

59  2nbi|3i(hanroifh  her  fuburbes 
anbioeth  (l)nne(h  lbitl)  her  fuburbes. 

60  anD  outofthc  tribcof  23enia: 
mm ,  Geba  mith  her  fuburbes ,  anb 
|j  aiemcfh  With  her  fuburbes  ,  ana- 
thotlUDtth  her  fuburbes.  3Ultheirrt 
ncstinoughoutthcirfanulieswercthtC' 
tccnecmcs. 

£)o  3         6i  anb 


wb.  chap. 
15.17. 


'Leult.i.p. 
*Exod. 


1 1  Or  Hvhn, 
Iojh.lt.  15. 

\\OrA.* 
hjl.Zl.lt 


A!mo„, 
11.  iS. 


The  Leuites  cities.      I.Chron.     Iflachar,BeniaminJ 


*Iofh-:i.5 


«Mh.«i. 
7,34- 


'Iofll.21 
II. 


6i  3ttbbnto  the  fonnes  of  Bohath, 
tbhieh  U>erc  left  of  the  family  of  that 

tttbC,  were  cities  giuen  OUt  Of  tljC  tjalfc 
ttfbt,  namely  Ottt  6f  fljCljalfC  tribe  of  $&fc 

naireh,bp  *  lot,teu  tines. 

6i  3lnb  to  the  founts  of  <5ctfl)om 
throughout  their  famtues,  out  of  the 
tribe  of  3nTachar,  anb  out  of  the  tribe 
of  3lfl)cr,  anb  out  of  the  tribe  of  i!5apii 
tali,anb  out  oftfjc  tribe  of  £0anaOeh  m 
I6a(han,thtrtecnc  ernes. 

63  tUnto  the  fonnes  of  £0crari  we. 
giuen  bp  lot,tr)?ougl)out  their  families, 
outof  the  tribe  of  Ecuben ,  anb  out  of 
the  tribe  of  <2>ab,anboutof  the  tribe  of 
zcbulun,  *  ttbetue  cities. 

64  3nbthetbilb2cnof'3Jfraclgaue 
to  the  ILeuitcs  rhefc  ntics ,  ttnth  their 
fuburbs. 

65  ^nb  the?  gaue  bv  lot ,  out  of  toe 
tribe  of  the  chilbjen  of 3fubah, a»n  out 
of  the  tribe  of  the  chilbzen  of  Simeon, 
anb  out  of  the  tribe  of  ttjc  thilbjcn  of 
35cniamin,tJ)cfc  cities,  tbljtc!)  ate  callcb 
bp  their  names. 

66    3ttlb  tl)e  refidue  Of  tf)t  faitUllCS  Of 

the  fonnes  of  Bohath,  hab  ntics  of 
their  coafts,oiitofthctribcof€ph2aiin. 

67  *3Jnbthevganebntothemoftbc 
cities  of  refuge,  £>herhcmin  mount  € 
phzautubith  her  fuburbs :  they  gaue  ai- 
fo  ©C5er  unthher  fuburbs, 

68  3nb  3)ottmcam  Until  licr  fub 
urbs,  ej  25ctfi-l)02on  Unthher  fuburbs, 

69  3luo  3taion  Unth  her  fuburbs 
anb  C?afh  rtmmonUnth  her  fuburbs. 

70  2nb  out  ofthchalfc  tribe  of  ig£)a 
nairch,3lncr  Unth  her  uiburbs,anb  21S1 
learn  Unth  l)cr  fuburbs,  (01  the  family  of 
the  remnant  of  the  fonnes  of  Bohath. 

71  tlnto  the  fonnes  of  <£>cr  thorn, 

were  giuen  OUt  Of  tllC  fatUilp  Of  tile  lialfe 

tribe  of  ©anaflch ,  Golan  m  zBatban 

Unth  her  fuburbs,  anbathtaroth  Unto 
her  fuburbs. 

71  3nb  out  of  the  tribe  ofjffathar, 
Bcoefb  unth  her  fuburbs ,  SDabcratl) 
lbitl)  her  fuburbs, 

7  j  2inb&amoth  Unthher  fuburbs, 
anb  3tncni  lbitl)  her  fuburbs. 

7+  3mb  outofthc  tribe  of  oilier, 
tT3afl)al  Unth  her  fuburbs,  anb  3bbou 
Unth  her  fuburbs, 

71  Stub  tyuitoft  lbttn  licr  fuburbs,1 
anb  Hchob  unth  her  fuburbs. 

76  inborn  of  the  tribe  of  ji3aphtali,' 
Beoefb  m  Galilee,  ttnth  her  fuburbs, 
anb  ftanuuon  ibith  her  fuburbs ,  atib 
Birtathaim  ttnth  her  fuburbs. 


77  SSntothctettofthechilbjenof 

$)Crart  were  giuen  OUt  Of  the  tHbC  Of  ZC= 

bulun,  Simmon  ttnth  her  fuburbs, 
Xaboz  ttnth  her  fuburbs. 

7s  3nb  on  the  other  ube3Jo2bcnbp 
3Jcrtcho ,  on  the  eatt  fioc  of  ^ozben, 

were  giuen  them  OUt  Of  tl)C  ttlbC  Of  SCU^ 

beu,l|25c5critttheU)ilbcrneffettnthhec 
fuburbs,  $3Jafj5arj  ibith  her  fuburbs, 

79  Bcbcmoth  alfo  ttnth  her  fub= 
urbs,  f  fi^cphaath  ttnth  her  fuburbs. 

80  3nb  out  of  the  mbe  of  Gab,  3Ra* 
moth  in  GtleabU>ul)  her  fuburbs,  anb 
SJDafianatm  ttnth  her  fuburbs, 

81  3tnb  tycfbbou  ttntb  h«  fuburbs, 
anb  Jajrr  rtiiti)tjtr  fuburbs. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  The  Ibnnes  of  MTachar,  6  OfBeniamin, 
13  OfNaphtali,  14  Of  ManafTeh,  10, 14 
And  of  Ephraim.  11  The  calamitie  of  E- 
phraimby  the  men  of  Gath.  2.3  Benah  is 
borne.  iS  Ephraims  habitations.  30  The 
fonnes  of  Afher. 

5©tb  the  fonnes  of  JUTa* 
char  were,*3Coia,  anb  pev 
ah^alhub.anb&hun; 
tonjoure. 
z  3no  the  founts  of 
1-ola :  H551 ,  anb  Hcpbaiah ,  anb  3te 
ncl,  anb^labmai,  anb  Jibfam,  anb 
;a>hmiurt,hcabsofthntfatbershoufe, 
to  wit,  of  Xola,they  were  baliant  men  of 
might  m  their  generations,  *ttihofe 
number  was  m  the  oayes  of  S>aiub  tlbo 
anb  tibentic  tljoufanb  anb  urc  hmttueb. 
j  ^nb  the  fonnes  of  H35i,^5rahi5 
ah :  anb  the  fonnes  of  3terahi<ih,$te 
thaci,anb  <©babiah,anb  3Joel,  3jfl)iah, 
fine :  all  of  them  chiefc  men. 

4  auonv.thfhcm.bythctr genera^ 
ttons ,  after  the  houfc  of  their  fathers, 
were  baitbsof  foulbiers  fozibarre,  fire 
anb  thittie  tljoufanb  mm  ;fo?thepi)ab 
mattp  Unites  anb  fonnes 

5  5luo  their  bzethjcnamongailthc 
families  of  3JlTachar  ,wcre  men  of  might, 
rechottcb  in  an  bp  their  genealogies, 
fouccfcoif  anb  feucn  thonfanb. 

6  CThe  foDnes  of*  25ctuanun :  25cia, 
anbi5ccl)tr,anb  3JtDtacl,thJtt. 

7  •&«>  tlic  founts  of  23t la :  C5bon, 
anbJLUv,  anb  Uwtl ,  anb^jenmoth, 
anb  3Iri,fiuc,heabs  of  thchoufcof  their 
fathers,  mightte  men  of  uaiour,  anb 
ibcrc  rccUoncb  bv  thnr  genealogies, 
tuicutic  anb  tUio  thonfanb ,  anb  thicttc 
anb  fottrc. 

8  Mn  the  fonnes  of  26echcr :  zc- 

intra, 


\\Or,Boz*r, 
lofi.lt.-^. 


•Gcn.41?. 
I  J.  num. 
*6.t}. 


'J.Sira.J4 
1, J. 


*Gcn  46, 

2t. 


ManaiTeh, 


a 


lap 


\Or,Iri, 
vsrf.?. 
\\Or,Abi- 

ramtrttm. 
I6.38. 


'i.Sam.Ii 


mtra,  anD3Joafb,anD£liC5er,anD  €lt; 
oenai,anD<Dmn,  attD^Jerunotb,  ano 
2lttat),  ano  anarbotb ,  anD  aiametb. 
ailtbefearctbefouncsofioecber. 

9  3MD  tl)c  number  of  tbem ,  after 
tbeir  gencaiogtc  by  tbctr  generations, 
beaos  of  tljc  boufe  of  tljcit  fatljcrs , 
mtgbtic  men  of  uaiour ,  was  nuentte 
tljoufanb  ano  tlDo  bunDzcD. 

10  xije  fonncs alfo  of  ^leDiacl,  23tl 
Dan :  ana  tbe  fonncs  of  26iiban,3Jeufl), 
ano  25eniahun ,  ano  HE  bub,  anD  (Cbcna 
anab,auD  z:ctljan,ano  Xljarftjifl),anD 
abifbabar. 

1 1  ail  tbcfctbc  fonncs  of  5cDiacl,bp 
tt)c  Ijcaos  of  tljcic  fatljcrs,  nugbtp  men 
of  uaiour ,  were  fcucntecnc  tboufanb 
ano  nuo  nuno?cbfonimers,nttogoe 
outfoz  ujarrcand  battaile. 

ii  jg>bupptmalfo,anDteuppfm,  tfjc 
d)aD2cnof|l3Jr,and^uu)im,tIje  fonncs 
of  libber. 

1$  CXbcfonncsof  ji5apbtali,  gjali 
5tcl,  anD  ©tun,  ano^jc^cr,  auD&bal- 
Uun,tfic  fonncs  of  Btlfjat). 

14  CXbe  fonncs  of  ^anaffeb: 
5(ft)2tcl,iubomQ)Ccbarc(butbtsconcn= 
bine  tbc  aramiteffc ,  bare  Q3acbtr  tbc 
fatber  of  ©icao. 

1$  ^nos©aclnrtooUctotDtfethefirtcr 

of^uppimanbS>buppim,Vbbofe  fitters 
nameibas  $©aaebab)  ano  tbe  name  of 
tbe  fceonb  was  zciopbcljaD :  anD  selo 
pbebaDbaDDaugbtcrs. 

16  anD  iTSaacljab  tbc  Vbtfcof  ^a 
tbir  bate  a  fonnc,  anD  flicc  taucD  bis 
name^erclb,  anDtbcname  of  bis  too- 
tber  was  £>bereflj,anD  bts  fonncs  were 
t&MamattDftaKem. 

17  anD  tljc  fonncs  of  ©lam ,  *25e* 
Dan.  Xbefewere  tbe  fonnes  of  ©tlcaD, 
tbc  fonnc  of  Q3atbir ,  tbc  fonne  of  2!9a< 

nafTeb. 

18  ano  bts  fitter  fcamtnolefeetb  bare 
3Jtt)aD,anD^bic-7cr,anDtT9abaiab. 

19  ^nD  tbc  fonnes  of  5)beimDa  were: 

3tbtan,anD£>ijccbcm,  anb  jXtubt,  anD 
antam.  .     . 

20  C  anD  tbe  fonnes  of  <£pb?amt : 
S>butbciab:anD23ereD  bts  fonne,anD 
Xabatb  bis  fonne,  ano  €iaeab  bts 
fonncanDXabatb  bts  fonnc, 

21  canD  zabaD  btsfonncanD  §>bn 
tbelab  bisfonne,anb  «3cr ,  anD  <£lcab, 
lDrjom  tbe  men  of  ©atb  1  tbat  acre 
bomemtbat  lanD  flcrbe,  becaufc  djev 
tame  Dotunc  to  tabc  aujap  tbeir  tattcll. 

22  anD  cpljiaun  tbctr  fatbermour 
neD  many  Daves,  anD  bis  b?etb?en  tame 


.V1J. 


an 


dEph 


raim. 


to  comfort  bint 

25  c;  anD  iDbcn  tut  lUcnt  m  to  bis 
lDife,  fl)cc  toncciueb  anD  bare  a  fonne, 
atiDbcrailcDbisnamc,25eriab,becaufe 
it  lUent  ciull  Vbitb  bis  boiu"e. 

24.  ( anD  bts  Daugbtec  inas  &\)t-- 
rab ,  tt>bo  built  asctbozon  tbc  nctljer, 
anbtbe  upper  ,anD^33cn5>ljcrab.) 

25  ano  -Rcpljab  was  bis  fonnc ,  alfo 
&C5cpb,  anD  Xcialj  bis  fonncanD  %a- 
banbisfomie, 

26  ?LaaDan  bis  fonne ,  amtfjuD bis 
fonnc,  €iifljama  bis  fonnc, 

27  II  /fron  bts  fonne,  3Jeboflnia  bis 
fonnc. 

28  C  anD  tbeir  pofTcfftonsanDba- 
l3itationswere,2Sctbcl,  anbtbetoiunes 
tl)ercof,anD€aftibarD*  iBaaran,anD 
nacftmarD  <5c3cc  ibitb  tljc  t  tolUncs 
tbercof.&bttbem  alfo  anD  tbe toibnes 
tbereof,  Unto  110353  anD  tbctoumes 
tbereof. 

29  anD  by  tbc  bobbers  oftbecbil* 
D?enof*^anaffcb,25etbfl)cananDbcr 
tottmes,  Xaanatb  ano  bcr  townes, 
*£E3cgiD&o  anD  bec  toibnes,  2>o?anD 
bertoUiucs.  3Jn  tbefe  DVbclt  tbc  tbtl= 
D.mtofjofepb  tljc  fonne  of  gjfrael. 

30  C  *  Xbe  fonncs  of  aibcr : ^nv 
nab,anD3fuah,anD3lfbuat,anD26e* 
riab,anb  5>erab  tbeir  fitter. 

31  ^nD  t\)t  fonncs  of  ascriab  :  l^e^ 
bee,  anD  £0alcbiel ,  ibljo  ^  tljc  fatljer  of 
25ic5auttb. 

32  ^nD  $eber  begate3Iapblct,  anD 
^>botner,anD  ^otljam,anD  5>buab 
tbctr  fitter. 

33  ^nD  tbe  fonncs  of  3Japbiet :  19& 
fatb,anD  2Simbai,  anD  3Q)uatb.  Xbcfe 
are  tbe  cbUD?cn  of  3Japblct. 

34.  ^nDtbefonncsof5>bamer:abi, 
anD  Bobgab,3Jebubbab,anD3ram. 

35  anDtbcfonncofbiSbjotbcc^e' 
iem:2:opbab>anD  3lnma}anD^)bclefb> 
anD^mai. 

36  %\)t  fonnes  of  zopbab :  £>uab, 
anD  i^arnepber,  anD  Styxnl,  anD  25eri, 
anD'jmrab : 

37  26C5er,anD$oD,anD£>bamma, 
anD  5>btlft)ab,anD3(tb?an,anD35ecra. 

38  3nD  tbe  fonnesof3ittben3te 
pbunncb,anD  ^ifpa,anD  ara. 

39  SutDtbe  fonnes  of  ^lia:^ral;, 
anD  Mantel,  anD  He3ta. 

40  an  tbefe  were  tljc  cftrttnen  of  % 
fbec,beaDsoftbcirfatbersbottfe,cboite 
and  migbtie  men  of  ualonr,  tbtefe  of  tbe 
pnntes.  anD  tbe  number  tlnougbout 
tbe  genealogicoftbem,  tbatujereapt 

to 


Or  Jim. 
nKTnb.  13,9. 


Iofli.lS.7 

t  Ucbr. 
daughters. 

J)r,cA- 

Jotfh  >  ■ 
rmc.-J.^. 

Iolh.17.7 


Molh.17. 


•Gcn.4(5. 
'7- 


Tli 


ie  penea 


lo 


ie 


I.Ch 


ron. 


.fB 


or  Deniamin. 


*  Gene.  4-6, 
2i.num.26*. 

38. 


I  Or,Ari, 


I  Or,  Shu- 
phtim.  Knot. 
*6.}9. 


'Cllsp.S. 

5J- 


J  Or+Shema, 


to  t!)ctt»acrc  and  to  battel! ,  was  ttbctv 
tic  anb  Ct^c  tbcmfanb  mat. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1    The  fonnes  and  chiefe  men  of  Beniamin.   33 
TheitockcofSaulandlonarhan. 

£>Yo  25cmamin  begate 
*25ciabisfirflbomc,;au> 
bd  the  feconb  ,  anb  aba* 
ral)tl)ct!Uro, 
x  ii5oljaI)  the  fourth, 
anb  Bapba  the  fifth. 

3  3mb  the  founts  of  ©cla  were:  \\%& 
bar,anb  C5era,anb3lbibnb, 

4  ^nu^bia)iw,anbii5aamau,anD 
3boab, 

5  3wb  <5tta ,  anb  ||  5>bepbupban, 
anbi?uram. 

6  3tnb  tbcfc  arc  tlje  fonncs  of  <£* 
bub :  thefc  arctic  bcabsof  the  fathers 
of  the  inhabitants  of  C5cba,anb  tljey  rc= 
moucb  them  to  *£0anabatb : 

7  3tnb  /ftaaman ,  anb  3lbiab ,  anb 
©era ,  be  tcmooucb  them ,  anb  btgatc 
3H35a,anb3llHlntb. 

8  2Mb  £>babaraim  begate  Md\  en  m 
r1)c  conntrey  of  $)oab.  3JfterIicc  bab 
fcnttbemaibay :  i?u(btm,  anb  2£aara 
ibcrcbtsibutes. 

9  Public  begat  of  ftobrfb  bis  Wife, 
giobab,  anbZibia,  anbi^ctba ,  anb 
Valebant, 

10  3lnb  3Jeu5 ,  anb  £>bacbia ,  anb 
fiBirma.  Xtjcfcwcreijisfonnes,  beabs 
of  tlK  fathers. 

1 1  3Cnbofl?ufl)tm  Ijc  begate  3fl)itub, 
anbcipaal. 

ii  %\)t  fonncs  of  CIpaai:€bcr,anb 
sSBifbam,  <jt  £>bamcb ,  lbbo  btult£)iio, 
ahb  Hob  With  the  toibncs  thereof. 

13  Bertab  alfo  anb  5>bcma ,  Who 
were  bcabsof  the  fathers  of  tbcinbabi 
tants  of  2liaion ,  who  bzouc  aibay  the 
inhabitants  of  oath. 

14  3mb3li)'.o,  ^Ijafljalt,  anbjen 
moth, 

15  3tnb  zebabfab,?  3lrab,<t  3bcr, 

16  Stub  tBtrbacl ,  anb  gjfpalj ,  anb 
gjoba  the  fonncs  of  aseriah, 

17  3tnb  zebabial) ,anb  £l3elbuUam, 
anblr>c5CKi,anbi>cbcr, 

13  Jjfbmcrai alfo, anb gf C3ltal), anb 
JJobabtbc  tonnes  of  eipaai. 

19  3JnbgjaUun.anbi:ttl):i,t Zabbt, 

20  stub  ciicnai, anb  ziltbai.ieuel, 
ii  3tnb 3lbaiali ,  anbi3craiah,anb 

S>bimrath  the  fonncs  of  [!  S>himbt, 
22  3lnb3lf!)pan,anbl?cber,ffCIicl, 


Z3  2(nb  Sibbon ,  anb  Zitbji ,  anb 
J^anan, 

24  3lnb  ^ananiab ,  anb  Clam ,  anb 
antotbuah, 

25  anbgjpbcbeiab^nbi&enucMhe 
fonnes  of  S>bafbaft, 

26  ;anbdbamfbcrat,anb£>beha- 
nalj,anb3lti)aliaft, 

27  3lnb  llarcual) ,  anb  tfliab ,  anb 
zicbutbe  fonncs  of^croham. 

28  iCftcftwereftcabs  of  the  fathers, 
by  their  gcncrattons,cbicfe  men.  %befc 
blbcitmllcrnfaiem. 

29  3lnb  at  ©ibeon  dwelt  the  Hfatbtr 
of  oibeon ,  ( lbljofc  *  ttnues  name  was 
spaatbabO 

30  anbhtsnrftbomcfonnc3lbbon, 
anbZur,anbltitCb,anb2Saai,?ii5abab, 

31  3lnbGibo2,f3lhto,anb||zather, 

32  anb  ^ifeioth  begate  ||£>btmcab. 
3nb  thefc  alfo  bmelt  With  their  tyc* 
tbjen  in  gjcrufalem,oucr  agamfttbem. 

3J  C  3mb  *  iEJcr  begateiuft) ,  anb 
Btfl)  begate  §>m\ ,  anb  £>aul  begate 
Jonathan,  anb  £Paichifl)tta,  anb2lbt* 
nabab,anb||€(hbaai. 

34  3lnb  thefonne  ofgionatbanwas 
Ii  99enbbaai  ,  anb  ^cribbaal  begate 
i39icah. 

35  3lnb  the  fonncs  of  fl0itah  were  ^ 
thou,  anb  Select),  anb  HXarca,  anb 
3lha5. 

36  3lnb3ll)a5bcgatgichoabah,anb 
3lehoabah  begate  3llcmcth,anb  3lfnia^ 
ucth,  anb  zimrt,  anb  Zimn  begate 
fi}3o5a, 

37  3lnbffl5o?a  begate  Binca:8apha 
was  his  fonne,€iafahtsfotme  ,3t5Cll)is 
fonne : 

38  3(nb  3ftcl  had  fire  fonncs ,  ibhofe 
names  arc  tljcfc,  3t5rtfeam ,  Bothcnt, 
anb^lfljmael,  anb^hcariah ,  anb  ©* 
babtah  ,  anb  Rattan.  31U  tljcfc  were  the 
fonncs  of3l3cl. 

39  3lnb  the fonnes  of  €(Iicb hisb;o- 

therwerctliam  his  firft  bomc,  I'thuO) 
tl)tfcconb,anb€liphclctthctl)irb. 

40  3nb  tlje  fonncs  of  tEliam  Vbcrc 
mighty  men  of  balour,  archers,  anb 
hab  many  fonnes,  anb  fonncs  fonncs, 
an  hunbjcb  anb  fiftic.  %\l  thefearc  of 
the  fonncs  of  23cinamm. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Theoriginalloflfraels  andludahs  genealo- 
gies. 2  The  I(raelites,  10  die  Puefts,  14 
and  the  Lenires.with  Nethiniras  which  dv\  ell 
in  [erufalem.  17  The  charge  ot  ccrtaine 
Leuites,  35  ThcRockeofSaulandlonathan. 

^>0 


||  CaUtin- 

hie/jl.Cbro. 
9-3J- 
*  Chap.p. 


\\Or£uh*- 

"■ik,>,  Chr. 

9-17- 

\\OrJU. 

metw%,ca.9. 

38. 

i.Sam.i^. 

$'■ 

\\Or,ip,lf 

lheth,J.. 

Sm.l.%. 

\\Or,Mc- 

phtbojhrth, 

z.Ssm.l.q. 

\\Orp-.,h- 
reAC.<j.£(\. 


Diuers  officers 


Ch 


Nehcm. 
II. I. 


ttemc/iof 


£>  all  3Jfraeliberc  rectus 
neb  bp  genealogies,  tj  be- 
holb,  the?  voctc  ttmttcn  in 
tbebooRcoftbeBtngsof 
■Jfracianb  3Jubab,who 

tocrccancb  atbap  to  asabyionfo:  their 

tranfgreflton. 
x  C  0oVo  tile  firft  inhabitants  that 

dwelt  m  th  etc  poffefuons,  in  their  cities, 

were  the  "Jftaelitcs^e  pucftfiMUui'ts, 

anbtbcJBetbtnims. 
j  2mb  m  *  3Jcrufalcm  btbclt  of  the 

ehtlbtcn  of  3fnbah ,  anb  ofttje  cbilbien 

of  asentamm,  anb  of  tfje  tfjilDien  of  <e - 

pb2aim,anb£©anau*eh. 
+  2Btbai  the  fonnt  of Zxaftitib,  the 

fonnc  of  €)mn ,  rtiefonneof  3Jmri,tt)e 

fonuc  of  25ani ,  of  the  cbtnnen  of  |Dija 

te3  the  fonnc  of  3Jubab. 
*  3nb  ofthc  -Sbtlortftes :  3Jfaiab 

the  firft  borne,  anb  his  fonnes. 

6  3mb  of  the  fonnes  of  Zcrah:3fc 
ucl,anb  their  bzethjen,  fire  hunbjeb  anb 
ninctte. 

7  :3ttbofthefonnesof23entamin: 
&aitu  tl)e  tonne  of  i20efl)uliam,tbe 
fonne  of  ibobamab ,  the  fonnc  of  $a 
fenuab : 

8  2nb  3Jbneiah  tftc  fonne  of  3Jcro- 
ham ,  anb  <£iah  the  fonne  of  H55< ,  the 
fonnc  of  £0ithzi,  anb  #c(buiiam  the 
fonne  of  Shepbattah,  the  fonnc  of  Be< 
ncl,  the  fonne  of  JJbntiah, 

9  3inb  their  bicthzen ,  attoabing  to 
their  gcncrafions,nine  bunbjcb  anb  fif 
tie  anb  fire.  #11  thefe  men  were  cljicfe  of 
the  fathers  in  the  houfe  of  their  fathers. 

io  C  3nb  of  the  duetts:  3Jebaiab, 
anb  3Jchotartb,anb  jathin, 

h  3nb  pariah  tfa  fonne  of  MRiab, 
the  fonne  of  flJDefbuliam ,  the  fonnc  of 
zabofe,  the  fonnc  of  £0eraiotb,  the 
fonne  of  31bitub  the  ruler  of  the houfc 
ofeob. 

ii  3nb  3ibaiab  the  fonne  of  3Jero* 
ham,  the  fonnc  of&afftnir,  the  fonne  of 
QSaubuab,  anb  J^aafia  tl)c  fonnc  of  7k 
biei,tf)c  fonnc  of  gjahscrah,  the  fonnc 
of  tiPctyullam,  the  fonnc  of  ^eflnlle- 
mith,thcfonncofjtnnicr. 

13  3lnb  their  b2cfb2cn,bcabs  of  the 
houfc  of  their  fathers,  athoufanb,  anb 
ftucnhunbzeb  anb  tlnccfcozcbcrp  table 
men  fojthc  lbojfec  of  tbefcruicc  of  the 
houfe  of  (5ob. 

14.  anboftbcfLeuttcst&hcmaiab 
thefonne  of  Dafflnib,  the  fonne  of  7k>xx 
bam,  the  fonnc  of  $afl)abiah>  of  the 
fonnes  of  ^erari. 


ap.ix. ofthc  Temple. 


15  #nD23afcbaBbar,li>etefh^nb(5a; 
lal:  anb£©attaraab  thefonne  of  i$hcab, 
thefonne  of  Zicbzi,tbc  fonnc  of  3lfaph. 

is  3inb  £>babiab  the  fonne  of  She- 
matab,tbe  fonnc  of  eaiai,  thefonne  of 
Jcouthun  :an025crcchiahtbcfounc  of 
3fa,  the  fonne  of  €lfcanab,  tbatblbelt 
in  tbcbtllagcsoftbciSetopbatbites. 

17  3notbe  poztcrs  were  s>balium, 
ano5lBlnib,aub3Calmon,anb^himan, 
anb  their  tyetbjen :  Sbaiium  was  the 
ctjicfe. 

is  (nabo  hitherto  waked  in  the  Kings 
gate  eattibarb)  the?  lbcrc  £>02tcrs  in 
the  companies  of  the  rbtlbjcn  offLcui. 

19  #nbS>ballum  thefonne  of  Boze, 
the  fonnc  of  <z? biafaph,thc  fonne  of  Bo- 
rah, anb  his  bjetbzcn  (of  the  houfe  of 
bis  father )  the  Bojabitcs ,  were  ouer 
the  toojbe  of  the  ferulec,  beepers  of  the 
t  gates  of  the  Xabcrnacle :  anb  their 
fathers  being  ouer  the  hour  of  the 

2,(013©,  were  bCCpeCSOf  ^tttltXlt. 

zo  3nb0btucbastbc  fonnc  of  <£lca* 
5ar  ibas  the  ruler  ouer  them  mttme 
paft,  and  theH  ©is©  was  ttjlthbim. 

n  And  zeehartah  the  tonne  of  £0c- 
fticlctmah ,  was  poztcc  of  the  booje  ofthc 
lEabcmatlc  ofthc  Congregation. 

2i  3llthefcibhtchlbcrctbofcntobe 
posters  in  the  gates,  were  tlbo  bunbjeb 
anb  ttbelue.  ILhefe  Ibcre  recfeoneb  bp 
their  gcncalogie  in  their  tillages: 
tbhom  2Dauib  anb  Samuel  the  5>cer, 
tmo  o?bcinc  m  their  II  fet  office. 

is  5>othep  anb  their  chilbzcn  had  the 
oucrfigbt  of  the  gatesof  tlje  houfc  of 

thC?L015©,  namely,  thC  hOUfe  Of  the 

Xabernacle,  bp  ibarbs. 

24.  3Jnfouceauartersiberethepo^ 
ters:toibarb  rtjc  Caft,  nacft,  i!5o;th, 
anb  South* 

25  ^nbthcirb^cflnen, wiwch weieui 

their  tillages,  were  to  tome  after  feuen 
bapes,  from  time  to  ttmettnth  them. 

16  foi  thefc  ?Leu(tes,the  fourc  tbteft 
poncrs,  iberc  m  their  |  fet office,  anb 
tbete  ouer  the  ||  chambers  anb  trcafu- 
rtes  of  the  houfe  of  ©ob. 

27  C^notheplobgcbrounb  about 
the  houfe  of  d&ob,  becaufe  tlje  charge 
rbasbponthem,anb  the  opening  therc^ 
of  cttcrvmomutg^crtcuicoto  them. 

28  3tnb  certa.ne  of  tljctti  ftaDttic  cljargc 
of  the  mimftcing  bcffels ,  that  tljcp 
a)Oulb  t  b;ing  them  m  anb  out  by  talc. 

29    Some  Of  thCUl  alfO  were  appOUUCb 

to  ouerfec  the  bcffels ,  anb  all  the  II  in* 
ftnimcnts  of  the  Sanctuanc ,  anb  the 

fine 


t  Htb.fcm 

did. 

\\Or,trMJt, 


\\Orttn,jl. 

\\Or,flcrt- 
houfrt. 


f  He h.  brim? 
them  in  bj 
talc,  and  CA- 
ritthrm  out 
by  tale. 
\\Or.zepit. 


Sauls  genealogie.        I.Chron. 


His  death. 


'Exod.jo. 


\\Or,lrnsl. 
jlictl. 


tfitt.imJ 


t  tftir.vpm 

them. 


•Cha?.8. 
'9- 


M.Cliio.S. 


•Cliap.S. 
3J- 


fine  flourc,  anD  thcttnne,  anD  thcoplc, 
anD  the  ftanfcuucnfcanD  tl)c  fptccs. 

30  ^inu  iome  of  the  fonncs  of  the 
pneHs  maoe  *  the  oyntment  of  the 
fpitcs. 

31  3tnD  ^attttljiah ,  one  of  the  %t- 
uttcsabhoibasthcflrftbojncof&hal; 
lumthciaowhitc)  haothc  1 1  fct  office  o> 
ucr  the  things  that  iberc  mace  ||  m  the 
pannes. 

31  3lnDoth«offi)eictecff)?enof  tlje 
fonncsofthe  f*ohathites,wcr£  ouctthc 
tsheib  tycao  to  prepare  «  cucryS>ab 
bath. 

33  2tnD tljefc me theftngers , chicfc of 

tfjefatljetS Of  t«e1LCUttCS ,  U)hO  remay- 

nmg  in  the  enatnbets,  ■•  crc  free:  foz  tthe? 
TbcrcimploycDin  that  lbojfec,  Day anD 
night. 

34  Hlfjcfc  chtcfc  fathers  of  tne  %c- 
uitcs,rbcrc  chicfc  tl)20ugt)outtlieir  ge- 
nerations tncfc  Dtbclt  at  3Jcnifalcm. 

35  C  3tn6  tn  Gtbcon  Ditocit  the  fa- 
fher  of  ©ibeon  ,;3chicl ,  lbhofc  lbiues 
nanic«is*^aacr)a: 

36  3lnD Ijisfirft borne  fotmc3bDon, 
then  Zur ,  anD  Bid) ,  anD  zsaal ,  anD 
/15cr,anDji3aDab, 

37  3lnD  GCD02,  anD3hio ,  anD  zc- 
crjanarhanDfcBftloto. 

38  3inD£0itUoth  begate  3>htmeam: 
anD  they  alfo  Dibeltibtth  their  bzettnen 
at  3Jcrufalcm ,  oucr  agamft  their  tyc- 
tfjjcn. 

39  *3hiD/l5cr begat lufl), anD Bifli 
begate  £>aui ,  anD  £>aul  begate  'Jona- 
fhan,anD  ©aichtlhua,  anD  3tbmaDab, 
anb€flibaal. 

40  3lnDrI)cfonncof3IonatlwnU)as 
©cnbbaal  :  anD  £0cnbbaal  begate 
£0icah. 

41  2nD  tl)c  fonncs  of  £0icah  iDerc 
#uhon ,  anD  Select) ,  anD  £ah2ca, 

*andAhaz. 

4z  3lnD  3fha5  begate  3Jarah ,  anD 
3jatan  begate  3ilemcth ,  *  ^Miiaucth, 
anD  zmiruanDZimn  begate  99o5a, 

43  2tiD  A0o3a  begate  25mca:  anD 
ftcphaiah  Ins  ton ,  eicafah  hts  fonnc, 
33Clhisfonnc. 

44  3lnD^clI)aDfircfonncs,rb!)ofe 
names  arc  tfjcfc :  ^nfcam ,  zSoeheru, 
ano  3Jftnacl  anD  £>hcartah  ,anD  £>bas 
D(a!),anD^anan.Xl)cfevvefcrl)cfonnes 
of^jel. 

CHAP.    X. 

1    Sauls  ouerthrow  and  death.    8    ThePhili- 
ftinestnumphouerSaul.  n  Thckindncsot 


Iabclb  Gilead ,  tow  ards  Saul  and  his  (onnes. 
13  Sauls  iinnc  for  which  the kingdome  was 
tranflatcd  from  him  Co  Dauid. 

jaDibc  *  the  tehtltftmes 
fought  agamft  Jjfcael, 
anD  the  men  ofjfracl 
flcD  from  before  the  #rji; 
.  iifhncs ,  anD  fell  Doibne 
flame  m  mount  (Silboa. 
x  3inD  the  i&hilittmes  follomcD 
harD  after  S>aul ,  anD  after  hts  fonncs, 
anD  the  0hiliftmes  flelb  "Jonathan, 
anDpbmaDab,  anD  ^alcrjinma,  rrjc 
fbnnesof&aul. 

3  ^no  tlje  battrtl  went  foic  agamft 
5>aui,anD  tlje  tareJ)ers  tfjit  Jnm,anD!)c 
lbasibounDeD  oftljcarcljers. 

4  XljenfaiDc&aulto  fjts  armour 
bearcr,S)2aU)  tl)i>uoo2D,anD  ttyuftmc 
tmougl)tl)ererbuf),lcfttl)efcbnrircum' 
cueDcome,anDi|abufemee:butl)isar'' 
mour  bearer  iboulD  not,fo2  rjctbasfojc 
afraiD.  £>o  ^>aul  toobe  a  froo?D ,  anD 
fell  Upon  it. 

5  2no  roften  fyls  annour  bearer 
faibtljat&aulibasDeaD ,  IjcefcUliS^ 
lbifc  on  tlje  UD02D,  anD  DieD. 

6  5>o  £>aul  DicD  ,  anD  })is  tfj;« 
fonnes,anD  aufjtsrjoufeDtcDtogetrjcr. 

7  3nD  lbljcn  all  ttje  men  of  3Ffracl 
tljat  we,e  m  tlje  Dalle? ,  farb  tfjat  tfje? 
flcD ,  anD  tfjat  5>aul  anD  l)is  fonncs 
VbercDeaD  ttrjen  tl)cp  fo2foobc  ttjeir  et< 
tics,  anD  flcD,  anD  tlje  plnuftmes  came 
anDDibcltintlicm. 

8  C^nDitcametopafleontljcmo^ 
toUMbrjcn  tlje  pljiliftmcscamc  to  ftnp 
tijc  flamctljat  tber  founDS>aui  anD  ftis 
fonncs  fallen  m  mount  (Silboa. 

9  ^iiDrbfjentljevljaDftnppeDljim, 
rljevtooHC  l)is  fjeaD,  anD  fjis  armour, 
ano  Cent  tntotftelanD  of  rljepljfliftmes 
rounD  about  ,to  carvtiDingsbuto  rljcir 
iDolcs,  anD  to  tfje  people. 

10  3nDtrjcp  put  l)ts  armour  to  tfje 
fjoufc  of  trjeir  goDs,  anD  faftcncD  l)is 
IjeaD  tn  tlje  temple  of  ©agon. 

11  C3lnD  iDDcn  ail  IJabcCb  ©rteaD 
DearDautJjat  tlje  ^IjuiftinesljaDDone 
to5>aul: 

ii  1Coeparofe,ailtnet>auantmen, 
anD  tooBc  aibap  the  boDp  of  5aul ,  anD 
tycboDirs  of  his  fonncs ,  anDb20tigfjt 
tfjem  to  3Jabc(l),anD  burlcD  tljnt  bones 
tonDcr  tlje  one  m  3abcfl) ,  anD  faftcD  fp 
ncnDapes. 

ij  C5>o5>auIDicDfo2htstranfgref' 
fion  tblnehrjecUommitteb  agamft  the 
%  q  a  J9, '  cucn  agamft  the  UwD  of  the 

ILflMRD 


'1  .Sam. 31. 

1,2. 


ded. 


\\Or,hfi*b 
1  Sam.\-\. 

49- 

ttrt  mth 

faowes. 

him. 


\\Ori7nocks 
me. 


t  fM.tr**f- 

grtffed. 
"  1. Sam, I  5. 


Dauid  made  King.     Chap.xj.       His  mightie  men. 


I. Sam. » 8 


\HeUfti 


•.Sam.  j. 


f  H eh  Moth 
yeftcrday 
and  the  thin 
day. 


\\OrntU. 


\Ueb.bythe 

harJof. 

*i.$ini.i<5. 

•i-Sain.j.6 


\Hebfral 


|  That  is, 

/'■■-<*ui.S.ir?i 

5-7- 


t  Ht'o.  rent- 

iteJ. 

I  Heb.  went 

ingoing  and 


\\Orheid 

flronglyynth 

him. 


%  sd  is  ©  \bhuh  Dcbept  not,auu  aifo  foj 
af  mng  counsel  of  one  that  Ijau  a  familiar 
fptrit,  *  to  enquire  of  it.- 

14  ;&tD  enqutrcb  not  Of  the  |L©b©: 
therefore  he  flrtb  Dim,  aiib  turneb  the 
tungbome  bnto  £>auib  the  fotmc  of 
t  'Jeffc. 

CHAP.   XI. 

1  Dauidby  .1  generall  content  isnudeking  at 
Hebron.  4  Hee  winneththe  caftleof  Sion 
from  the  Iebuhtes,  by  loabs  valour.  10  A 
catalogue  of  Dai  lids  migh  tie  men. 

Qen*  all  3Jfracl  gathered 
thenuclucs  to  SDamb  bu> 
l?cl)2on,  fayiug,  Beholb, 
luce  are  tl)y  bone  ano  thy 
fittl). 
x   3tub  mo2coucr  tin  time  paft,cucn 

when  £>au!  VHaS  klttg  ,  tftDU  waft  he  that 

lebbeft  out  anb  bioughtcft  m  ^fracl: 
ano  the  ?Low©  thy  <5ob  tatD  bnto 
thee ,  Xiiou  fljait  ||  fecoe  my  people 
3Jftacl,  ano  thou  tljalt  be  ruler  ouer  my 
people  Ufraet. 

3  £hercfo2ceatncallthc€ibcrsof 
3Jfrael  to  tlic  Ring  to  ^ebjou ,  ano  S)a=  | 
iiit)  tnaoe  a  toucnant  ibith  them  in  l)e- 1 
bion  be  foic  the  %  ©  a  ©,  anb  tljcv  an-  i 
nointeb  SDauib  tang  oucrJJfracl,  acco?;  I 
Ding  to  the  lbo.2b  of  the  %  0  «  & ,  t  by  j 
*S>amncl. 

4  C»nb&auibfjail1!fracl,*lbent 
to3Jcrufaiein,tb!jtth  i^ebus,  ibherc 
the  3Jebutites  were  the  inhabitant©  of 
thcianb. 

5  3lnb  the  inhabitants  of  jjlcbns  faib 
to  £>auib,  Xhou  fljait  not  tome  hither. 
i3eucrthelefleDauibtoobctbeeattlcof 

ion,  Vbbith  is  the  titte  of  £>auib. 

6  3lnb2>auibfaib,  Bahofoeucrfrra; 
teththCJebiifitesfirft ,  fljallbe  tchiefc, 
anb  captatne.  £>o  Tloab  tijefonne  of 
Zcraiahmcutfirftbp,anbU)astbiefc. 

7  3nb  Dauib  bmelt  m  the  taftcll : 
therefore  they  talleb  tit  the  titic  of  S>a* 
tub. 

8  3lnb  he  built  the  titie  rounb  about, 
eucn  from  £3illo  rounb  about :  anb 
Jfoabtrepaircb  tijerett  of  the  title. 

9  £>o  S>atub  t  ibarcb  greater  anb 
greater  :foj  fhe!L£>is£>  of  holies  was 
ibtthhun. 

10  C*1Chefe  aiftMethechitfeofthc 
mightiemen,lbhomS>auib  hab,  tt)ho 
llftccnthencb  thcmfelues  ibith  him  in 
his  tungbome,  and  ruith  all  Hfracl ,  to 
mane  him  King  accojbmg  to  thelbojb 
of  the  %  0  b  25,  concerning  3Jfrael. 


11  3inb  this  >s  the  number  of  the  migh' 
tiemcu,ibhoiu2>aiiib  had :  gjalhobcam 
||  an  ^athmomtc,  tbechiefeof  the  tap? 
tamcs:he  lift  bp  his  fptarc  agamft  tljzec 
bunbjeb,  flame  bv  him  at  one  time. 

12  3nb  after  him  was  eica3ar  the 
fonneof  2Dooothc  3H)oljitc,  ibljolbas 
one  of  the  rhjee  mighties. 

ij  ^eibasu)ith£>auioat|i0afoam' 
mini ;  anb  there  the  ^hiiiftines  lbcrc 
gatljcrcb  together  to  battcll,  ibhcre 
ibasapartell  of  grounbftill  of  barley, 
anb  the  people  flco  from  ucfozethcpht'' 
Uftrncs. 

14  3lnb  they  ||  fct  thcmfelues  in  the 
mibbeft  of  that  parcel!,  anb  ocliucr  eb  it, 
anb  Que  the  *  jDhiiiflmcs,*  the  %  o  is  © 
faueb  them  by  a  great  I  jbcluicrance. 

1$  Ci^omllthjceofthethutiecap? 
taincs,ibcntDoibnetothcrotUeofa>a* 
uib,  into  the  taut  of  3tbuiiam ,  anb  the 
hottof  tfK^hiiiftinecentampcb  mthe 
ballcyofHephaim. 

i6  3lnb3>auib  wastljcn  in  the  holb, 
anb  tljc  iMjiliftmcsganfon  wastljcn  at 
Bethlehem. 

17  3lnb  2>auib  longeb  anb faib,  ^>h 
that  one  iboulb  gmc  me  bnnfee  of  the 
ibatccofthcrdcllof25cthlehcm,thatis 
at  the  gate. 

18  3utbthcth;cc  b?afte  thzough  the 
hofl  of  the  ^huiftmcs,  anb  bzeib  lbater 
out  of  tljc  ibcll  of  Bethlehem ,  that  was 
by  the  gate,  anb  toofte  '«■  anb  brought  it 
toDauib.  BntSDauib  lboulb  notbiinfe 
of  it,but  polbjcb  it  out  to  the  %  0  hi  b>, 

19  ^nb  faib ,  #y  ©ob  fo?bib  it  mce, 
that^l  Ihoulbboethisthing.  5»hall3 
bnnUe  the  bloob  of  tljcfe  men,  t  tljat 
haue  put  their  lines  in  icoparbic  i  fo? 

Djith  the  reopardie  or  tljeiC  UUeS,    tt)ey 

bjoughtit :  therfozchclbonlb  not  tyintt 
it.  Xhcfe  things  bibthcfe  th?ee  migf> 
ticft. 

20  C3(nb3lbifl)ai  the  brother  of  30? 
ab.hcttas  thicfeof the th:ec.  ifo?  lif= 
tmg  bp  his  fpeare  agamft  thjee  Ijun* 
b?cb, he  flelb  them,  anbhaba namea* 
mongthetl)2ce. 

ii  *4Dftheth2cc,heeibasmo2eho* 
nourable  then  the  nbo  ,foj  he  was  their 
taptainc;hembeit,  he  attamebnot  to 
thefirftth;ce. 

zi  Benaiah thefonne  of  Jehoiaba, 
the  fonnc  of  a  baiiant  man  of  Bab5eel, 
tibljo  habbone  many  arts :  he  flue  nbo 
fLyon-li&e  nicnofCEtoab,  alfohelbent 
oolbne  anb  flue  a  fLyon  m  a  pit  in  a 
fnoiby  bay. 

23  3nb 


of  Hack, 
mom. 


\\Or.Epl,ts- 
l.SxmAJ.l 


\\0rftoad. 


*  2. Sam.  13 

l  V 

\\OrJkItta- 

tarn. 

\\Or, three 

Cjpuinet 

onrrtbe 

thtrtte. 


f  Heb.mrb 
their  hues? 


"  j5am.  a  j. 
19.&C 


f  Heh.gre*t 

of  deeds. 


Dauids  worthies,       I.Ch 


ron. 


an 


d  hd 


of m:.:.a'c\ 


|  Or,Hjro- 
dtrel  .Sam. 

-5- 


I  Or.lt  e 

najgerite. 


23  StnDheflucanCgFpttan.taman 
of  great  ttaturc ,  fiue  cubits  high ,  anDtn 
thccgypttanshanb  was  a  tpcarc  itftc  a 
scatters  beanie:  anb  Ik  lbcnt  boibne  to 
bimibithaftaffe,  anbplutfet  tbefpeare 
out  of  the  egyptians  hanb ,  anb  flue 
himibith  Ins  orbnefpearc. 

24  %\)tk  things  bib  zsenaiah  the 
fount  of  Jchotaba,  anb  ijab  the  name 
amongtbeftoeemtghties. 

25  25eholb,  hec  lbas  honourable  a 
mongthctbirtie,butattauicb  not  to 
tochra  tfjjce :  anb  SPamb  fct  him  oucr 
hisguarb. 

26  caifotbcbaliantmen  offbeat 
micsv.cc^lfalKl  tDc  toother  of  3oab, 
cibanan  the  fonue  of  2>obo  of  26crt)lc* 
hem. 

27  <S>hammoth  the  p?arontc,  fyv 
lC3t|)f0clomtc, 

28  giratbcfonncofJrt&emfheXt; 
ttoitc,  3bie3cr  thc31ntotbtte, 

29  dibbccairbc  Jm(batbitc,3naithc 
abobitc, 

30  £E)abaratfbcil3ctopbatbitc,?>ckb 
tl)c  fonnc  of JSaanab  tbc4i3etopbatbitc, 

31  gjtftai  the  fonnc  of  3&ibat  of  ©1- 

bCAl)  ,that  perteined  tO  tl)C  tbllbJCU  Of  BCll* 

ianun,  25cnaiah  the  ptratbonitc, 

32  vntrai  of  the  tyooftcs  of  ©aafl) , 
3btcltbc3(rbatbitc, 

33  2i5mauctb  the Baharumtte ,  <£lv 
habatbc&baaibomte, 

34  %ftt  fonncs  of  lament  the  <5is 
30tutc :  "Jonathan  the  fonnc  of  S>ba? 
gehtbcl>}arante, 

35  ahtfyam  the  fonnc  of  &aear  the 
$arantc,  eiipbai  the  fount  of  Mr, 

36  $cphcrtbc  ^ecbcrathitc,:3l> 
labtbc^clonitc, 

37  ^e?ro  the  Car  inclttc,42aarat  the 
fonnc  of  <£c5bat, 

3s  Joel  tlic  b:otbcr  of  iRafhan, 
£0ibbar  the  ||  fonnc  of  tyaggen, 

39  zclett  the  Ammonite ,  jRabarat 
the  25crothite ,  the  armour  bearer  of 
3foab  the  fonnc  of  Hernial), 

4-0  3Jta  the  3lfb#te,  csarcb  the  3J; 
thr.te, 

41  Slrtah  the  Jjittuc,  zabab  the 
fonnc  of  2fhlai, 

42  3lbina  the  fonnc  of  S>hi?a  the 
ftcubentte ,  a  captamc  of  the  JXrube 
tutes,  anb  thirtic  ttntb  hnn, 

4.3  $anan  the  fonnc  of  i13aacab,aiib 
3Jofl)aphatthctl9!thmtc, 

44.  3Hr,tatbc3lfl)tcratbttc,  S>bama 
anb  gielncl  the  fonncs  of  $othan  tlic 
3rocntc, 


45  Jcbiacl  the  ||  fonnc  of  Zunri,anb 
31  oha  his  bjothcr ,  the  Xisttc, 

46  cuci  the  tl3ahau(tc,  anb  3Jcr( 
bat,anb3Iofl)atuah  thefonncs  of  Clna- 
an,anb  3ltbmab  the  Hj)oabitc, 

47  tfliel, anb  £)bcb, anb  3faficl  the 
££cfobaitc. 

CHAP.   XII. 

1  The  companies  that  came  to  Dauid  at  Ziklag. 
13   The  armies  that  came  to  him  at  Hebron. 

<©tt)  *  fhCfC  are  they  tljat 

came  to  2>auib  to  Zittiag 
tibbilchee  vet  Kept  him; 
fcifc  tiofe,bccaufc  of  £>aul 
the  fonnc  of  isifb  '  anb 
they  were  among  the 
mightv  men ,  helpers  of  the  roarre. 

2  Xhev  ibere  armcb  Until  boibcs, 
anb  coulb  bfc  both  the  right  hanb  anb 
the  lcft,m  hurimg  (tones,  anb  iTiootin2ar^ 
roU)csoutofaboib,euenof5>aulsb2C' 
th?enof23cniamtn. 

3  Xhechiefewas3Uite5er,theng}oafl) 
the  fonncs  of  1 1  £>hcmaah  the  ©ibea; 
thitc,  anb  3Jc5ieI,  anb  pelct,  the  fonncs 
of  3JMnaueth,anb25erachah>  anb  3Jc= 
hutbe3ntoth;tc, 

4  3lnb  gjunaiah  the  <3ibconitc ,  a 
nughtieinan  among  the  thirtie,anbo? 
ucrthctinrtie,  ano5ercnuah,anb3fa 
haMciatuyjohanan^nb^ofabab  the 
ocbcratintc, 

5  <£lcti5ai,anb  3Ierunoth,anb  TBett 
bath,  anb  S>hcmar  ialj  >  anb  £>\)cy})att 
ahthe^aruphitc, 

6  €luanah,anb3Jefiah,anb3l3arr 
cl,  anb  3foc3cr ,  anb  Janjobcam,  the 
Bozhitcs, 

7  3lnb Ifoeiah,  anb  Zcbabiah  the 
fonnesof3Jci-oatnofC5cbo:. 

s  3lnb  of  the  ©abites  there  fcpara- 
ttt)  fhemfctucs  bnto  Datub ,  into  the 
holbtothcmilberncffe,  men  of  might 
and  men  t  of  marrcfit  fo?  the  battcuhat 
coulb  hanblcflnelb  anb  bucblcr,  lbhofc 
faces  were  hue  the  faces  of  iLyons,  anb 
lbcrc  t  as  fmift  as  tlje  Koes  Upon  tlje 
mountames: 

9  ^crthefirfl^babiahfhefctonb, 
<£liabthcthirb, 

10  £0afhmaunah  the  fourth,  $w- 
nnahthefift, 

1 1  ^tthaithc(trt,<£Iici  thefcuenfh, 
ii  gjohanan  the  eighth ,  <£l5abab 

the  ninth, 

13  Jeremiah  the  tenth,  tpachbanai 
thtclcuenth. 

14  Xljefe  were  of  tlje  fonncs  of  C5ab, 
captames 


pers. 

\Or.ZJm- 


' I.Sim. 

17.1. 

t  Heb.  beir? 
jttpmlvy. 


\Or,H*f 


Jhk.efthe 


\  He's.  *>  the 
Roct  veen 
thcmcwi- 
Hints  to 

mttkfhaslc. 


Dauids  helpers  to       Chap.xij.         make  him  king, 


lOr,<mcrh.it 
wot  teafl 
could  refift 
an  hundred, 
eadthegrea- 
teflathou- 
fand. 

\Heb.fdled 
euer, 
lortl.J.IS 


\Hcb.before 
them. 


\Heb.bc 


\\0r,  via- 
letKt. 


\Heb.thl 
Switch- 
thed  e/fma- 


*  i  .Sam. 

19-4- 

t  Heb.eneur 
heads. 


\\Or>witha 

band. 


\\Orteap* 

uiftestor, 

men. 

Heb.  heads. 


\\\Or,pnpa 
\red. 


eaptaincs  of  tljcfjofte:|!oneof  tlje  icaft 
ibas  otter  an ljunbzeb,  anb  tlje  greatctt, 
ottcratljoufanb. 

15  Xljefc  a^  tncy  tljat  tbent  otter 
■IJoibcn  m  tfjc  firft  monetl),tbljcn  tt  Ijab 
fouerfloiben  ailljts*banftes,  anbtljcy 
putto  mgl)t  all  trjemof  tljebailets,  both 
toibarb  tlje  calr,  anb  toibarb  theieclt. 

16  3uib  there  came  of  the  tollmen  of! 
2Smtamin,anb3Iubah,totheholbbns 
toSDautb. 

17  3inb  2DaiuD  rbentoutttomeete! 
them ,  anD  anfibereb  anb  fayb  bnto  1 
tijem:3Jf  yeebee  comepeaeeably  bnto 
metoljclpeme,mmcheartvhailtbclmit 
bnto  you: but  if  yce  be  tome  to  betray  J 
me  to  mine  enemies,  feeing  there  is  no; 
||  lb?ong  in  mine  Ijanbs :  the  ©ob  of  out 
fathers  looaethercomanbrebuftc  it. 

is  Xhentthefpirittame  bpon  3- 
mafot,  who  was  chtefe  of  the  captatnes,! 

and  he  fa  yd ,  Xhmeare  we,2T>aittb,  anb  Ott  | 

thyfibe,  tljoufonne  of3Jefle:|&eace, 

8eace  be  bnto  thee,  anb  peace  be  to  thine ' 
elper&foztrjy  (Bobljclpcththce.Xhen ' 
Dauib  rctciueb  them ,  anb  mabe  them 
captatnes  of  the  banb. 

19  ^nbtbcrcfcllfomcofflftanau'ch 
toSDauib,  ibljenhc  came  ibtth  the  $hi  A 
liftmes  agamft  £>aul  to  battel! ,  but! 
thcyhclpcb  them  not.  fai  the  flojbs! 
of  the  |SbUitnncs ,  bpon  abuifement, 
fent  ijlmaibay, faying,  *$eeibtllfailto 
his  matter  £>aui>  ttotheieopardicofout 
Ijtabs. 

20  3(shetbent  to  Zmiag,  there  fell 
to  Dim  of^anatTeh,3ttmah,  anb3Jo* 
5abab ,  anb  3Jebicl ,  anb  fiPicljacl ,  anb 
3to5abab,anb  £  Ulju,  anb  Ztltljai,  tap* 
tames  of  the  thou&mDs  that  were  of 
^janaflch. 

21  3tnb  they  helpeb  2Dauib  ||  agatnfl 

tfjC  batlb  of  the  Rollers  :fc)2  tljCy  were  all 

migljtv  men  of  baiour ,  anb  ibere  cap* 
tauicsutthcljoltc. 

22  5fozat  that  timebayby  bay,therej 
came  to  ©aura  to  hcipc  hint,  bnttllit; 
ibas  a  great  hofte ,  Hue  the  hofte  of  i 
d5ob. 

23  C3mb  thefc  arc  the  numbers  of, 
the  ||  banbs ,  that  ibere  rcaby  armeb to ; 
tljcibarrc,  anb  tame  to  2>autb  to  ^>c*| 
b.zon, to  turne  the ftingbomc of 5>aul  to  J 
him ,  aecoibing  to  tlje  tt)o?b  of  tlje 

24  Xhe  chtltocn  of  3nibal)  that  bare 
(l)ielb ,  anb  fpcarc,  were  fire  rhoulanb, 
aubeigl)tl;unbjeb,i'eabie||armebtotl)c 
Vbarre. 


2$£>ftl)ecljilb<:cnof^Mmeon,micjrj' 
ty  men  of  baiour  foj  the  lbarce ,  feuen 
trjoufanb  anb  one  Ijunbjeb. 

26  «©f  tlje  tbilbzcn  of  fleni ,  fonre 
trjoufanb  anb  fire  inmbieD. 

27  3inb  3lefjoiaba  ibastfje  leabec 
of  tlje  acaromts,  anb  lbitlj  ijim  were 
tijjcetfjoufanbanbfcucnijuiibieb. 

28  ^nbZaboBayoungmanmiglj' 
ticof  baiour,  anb  oflnsfatljers  Ijoufc 
tlbentte  anb  ttbo  captaines. 

29  ^nboftliccrjilbzen  of  iSeniamm 
trjetftinreb  of^aultljjce  tljoufanb :  foj 
fjltijerto  t  tlje  greateft  part  of  tnem  Ijab 
ReptthcHjarboftlieljoufeof^aul. 

30  3lnb  of  tnecljilbzcn  of  <£pluaim> 
tlbentie  tljoufanb,  anb  eigljtljunb:eb, 
migljtie  men  of  baiour  ,  t  famous 
tfjiougljoitt  tlje  l)oufe  of  tl)eir  fatljers. 

31  anboftljehaifc  tribe  of  99anau"el) 
ctgnteene  thoufanb  ,  ibljiclj  ibere  er- 
pjeiTeb  by  name,  to  come  anb  mabe  2r>a- 
uibbing. 

32  3lnbof  tDe  cljilbienof  3Jflathar, 
IbfticI)  Ibere  men  tljatrjab  bnberftan- 
bing  of  the  tunes,  to  bnotb  ibfjat  gifra? 
el  ougljtto  boc :  tlje  rjcabs  of  tljem  ibere 
ttbo  Ijunbjeb .  anb  all  tljeir  b;etl)2en 
ibere  at  tlicircommanoement. 

33  £>f zcbuiun,  fucfj  as ibentfoourj 
to  battell ,  i|  erpert  m  lbar  r  e,  ibitl)  all  m- 
ftrnments  of  ttiarrc  ■  fifty  thoutanb, 
rbbicl)  coulbll  fteepe  ranKc :  Xlicy  «<« 
tnotofboublclieart. 

34  2lnbof/i5apljtaliatl)oulanbtap 
tamesanb  lbitlj  them,  tbitl)  Qjielb  aub 
fpeare,trjirtie  anb  feuen  trjoufanb. 

35  3lnboftl)ca?anites,crpcrtinibar, 
ttbentie  anb  eigrjt  tljoufanb,  anb  fire 
ljutibzeb. 

36  ^nbof^ujer.fucljasibentfoojtlj 
to  battell,  ||  erpert  in  tuarrc,  fourtte 
thoufanb. 

37  ^nbontljcotljerfibcofjojben, 
oftrjeHeubcnites,  9  tl)cC5abites,  anb 
of  tlje  Daifc  tribe  of  fiPanaffetj,  lbitlj  all 
matter  of  inttrumcnts  of  ibarre  fo?  trje 
battell ,  an  Ijunbieb  anb  trbcntic  tl)ott- 
fanb. 

38  8lltrjercntmoftbarrc,tljattoulb 
fteepe  ranfte,  cameibitljaperfectljcart 
;  to  $cb20tt,to  mabe  2Dautb  ftmg  ouer  all 
3fracl:anball  tfje  reflalfo  of  3Jfraei, 
were  of  one  l)eartto  mafteS)auib  fttng. 

39  3nb  tljeretljey  ibere  ibitl)u)attib 
tfjjee  bayes ,  eaung  anb  bztnfttng:  foi 
tljeir  bzetljjcn  Ijab  p?epareb  fot  tljem. 

40  £J9o2Couer ,  tljevtljat  ttjcrcntcjrj 
tl)cm,cucnbnto3Jaatl)ar,  anb  zebu* 
j^p lun, 


XHtbbre 

tl:rcn. 
|  Heb.  a 
m-tlti:udec 


\  Reb.r 


1 1  Or  rj»?ert 

ofbaiietLar 

T&ngedtn 

bitted. 

\\Or,fett',e 

battell  met- 

r.ty. 

\Heb.trtth 

out  4  heJrt 

and  a  heart. 


WOr.keef.nl 
their  rankg. 


Vzzaflaine.  The 


iron. 


Philiftines  fmitten. 


|j  Or,vitaile 
ofmeale. 


\Httr.ltt 

vi  break? 
fvorth  and 
find. 

\Uebr.in 

the  at  in  of 

thetrfitb- 

urbs. 

\Heb.brw 

about. 


'  i. Sam. 7. 


*Iofti.i«-j. 


fHeb.madr 
the  /lrketo 
ride. 


I'.eb.fonr 


\\CtJkdlf* 

chon,l.S.Vti. 

fi.6. 

\\Or.f„oks 


■Num. 4. 
'S- 


lun ,  anb  /ftapbtait  brought  bzeab  on 
affes,  ana  on  camels,  anb  on  mules, 
anb  on  oren ,  and  ||meat,meale,  tabes  of 
figs,  anb  bundles  of  raums,  anbibuie, 
anboyle ,  ano  open ,  anbfbeepcabun* 
bantly :  fo:  there  was  10^  in  3Jftael. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Dauid  fctcheththc  A  rke  with  great  folemnitie 
fromKiriath-icarim.  9  Vzza  being  (mitten, 
the  Arke  is  left  at  the  houfe  of  Obed-Edom. 

&g$8ffl&&  il5b  2>auib  tottfulteb  with 
S«|£^Uhe  taptames  of  thou- 

^M^*$  fanbs ,anb  huntyebs,  and 
WffimM  ibith  entry  leaber. 
|^g|x|  x  anbSDauibfaibbtv 
to  all  the  Congregation  of  3Jftacl,3lf  n 
feeme  goob  bnto  you,anb  that  it  be  ottbe 
%  ©  m  ©  out  C50b ,  t  let  »s  fenb  abzoab 
bnto  out  bjctl)2cn  cucry  tbhetc ,  tijat 
are  left  m  all  the  lanb  of  3iftacl ,  anb 
ibith  them  aifoto  the  i&nefts  anb  %v 

tUtCSVbljttl)  are  tit  t  tlKlf  CltiCS  aiidflti> 

urbs,that  they  map  gather  themfetucs 
bntobs. 

j  3lnbletbstb2tngagainethe3trBC 
ofour  00b  fobs :  fonbeeenqmrebnot 
atittnthebayesofSaul. 

4.  3tiib  all  the  Congregation  Caibe, 
rliat  they  lboulb  boe  fo  :  fo:  the  thing 
lbas  right  m  the  eyes  of  all  the  people. 

5  So  *  2>atub  gathereb  all  3Jtracl 
together,  fromShihojofcgypt,  cuen 
bnto  the  eutrutg  of  l?cmath ,  to  bung 
tlje  3rttc  of  <5ob  from  Bulath  icarim. 

6  3mbS>auibU>cntbp,anball3J£ 
rael.to  *2i5aaiah,that  is,to  l&riath  -tea* 
rim,  ibhieh  beUcxdto  3Jubah,  to  tying 
bp  thence  the  3tUc  of  <3ob  the  ^Lok©, 
that  bibelleth  bettbecne  the  Chcru^ 
bims,\bbofe  ttamets  talleb  on  it. 

7  anbtheytcaricbthe3frhcof<!5ob 
in  a  new  tart,out  of  the  houfe  of  3Cbimv 
bab.aub  ta^a,anb  3lhto  bjauc  the  tart. 

s  3nb  £>aiub  anb  all  3lfracl  play eb 
befoje  dPob  lbtth  all  their  might ,  anb 
ttntb  tfuigtiiQ ,  ano  \lnth  harpes,  anb 
\bithpfaitenc5)anblbithtymh2cis,anb 
Ybith  cymbals ,  anb  With  trumpets. 

9  C2lnb  ibbenthcy  came  bnto  the 
thzcflmigfloojeofllChibon,  Xilwi  put 
fooith  hie  hanb  to  holb  the  Strut ,  fo2 
theoren!  munbleb. 

10  3tuD  the  anger  of  the  %oms> 
mas  lunblcb  againft  ©35a ,  anb  hce 
fmotehun ,  betaufcheeputhtshanbto 
thc*3irue:  aub  there  hcbieb  before  (5ob. 

1 1  3110  HDaiub  mas  bifpieafeb ,  be- 


caufc  the  fLoiKie*  hab  mabe  a  bzeach 
bpon  1155a ;  tbherefbjc  that  plate  is 
caileb  t  i&er  C5  ^l55a,to  this  bap. 

it  anb  2>auib  lbas  afraibe  of  <Sob 
that  bay,faying,$oib  (hall  31  bung  the 
^rse  of  d5ob  home  to  me  i 

ij  So  SDauib  thought  not  the  3trfee 
home  to  himfclfc  to  the  tit?  of  Dauib, 
but  tarieb  it  afibe  into  the  Ijoufc  of  & 
beb-<!3bomthec3tttite. 

14  ^nbthe  ^rfee  of  d5ob  remaineb 
ttith  the  family  of  4Dbeb-<2bom  in  his 
houfe  thjee  moneths.^nb  the  %  o  is  © 
bleffcb*thehoufeof£)beb-Cbom,  anb 
all  that  hehab. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

1    Hiramskindneflc  to  Dauid.    r    Dauidsfeli 
citie  in  people,  wiues  and  children.    8   His 
two  victories  againft  the  Philiftines. 

sag  <©rb  ^iram  mug  of  Xv?e 

m  fentmeffcngcrstoSDamb, 

anb  tunber  of  Ccbars, 

^>|r  tbith  mafons,anb  carpen* 

'mm  tersto  bmlb  him  an  houfe. 

•l  3tnb  2)auib  pcrtciueb  that  the 

%  €>  is  v>  hab  tonfirmeb  him  King  ouct 

5Jfracl4bj  his  tungbomc  lbas  lift  bp  on 

high,bccaufe  ofhispeople^Jfrael. 

3  C^nbSDauibtoorictmocibiues 
at^erufaiem  :anb  &>aiub  begatc  moc 
fonnes  anb  baughtcrs. 

4     i!50lb  thcfC  are  tljC  tiameS  Of  his 

chilb?tn  rbhich  hce  hab  in  3Jertualem: 
Shammua,  anb5>ljobab,  /5athan, 
anb  Solomon, 

5  ^nb3lbhar,anbClin)ua,  anbCi* 
paiet, 

6  ^nb  i!5oga ,  anb  iRepheg ,  anb 
llaphia, 

7  ^nbcunjamajanb  ||2!5eeUaba,anb 
cipaict. 

3  cana  ibhett  the  ^Diiiftines  hcarb 
tliat  *S)auib  lbas  anorntcb  tmtgouer 
all  5ifrael,  ailthc  ^DiUihnes  ibent  bp 
tofecUc  Dauib :  anb2>auib  hearbofu, 
anbinent  out  againft  them. 

9  3mbthephiUfhn'cscame  %  fpzeab 
thcmfciuesm  thcbailev  of  3Rephamt. 

io  3lnbiDaiHbenqutrcbof(5ob,fay< 
mg,  Shall  31  goc  bp  againft  tftef&tJflfc 
fhucs  i  anb  mnt  thou  bcliuer  til  em  into 
mmchanb^nbthelL  ©  n  v  faib  bnto 
him,  go  bp,  fo:  5  ibill  beliuer  themin? 
to  thine  hanb. 

1 1  So  tbcp  tame  bp  to  23aal-#cra* 
5im ,  aub  Dauib  Onotc  them  there. 
Xhen  SDauibfaib ,  <5ob  ijat'lj  bjoftcntn 
bpon 


\Hebireuh 
efVv*. 


\r!ehr.re- 

meoked. 


*  Asckap. 
16.,. 


•j.Sim.j. 
ii.&c. 


tHcbr.pt, 


\¥>r£lia<L> 
2. Sam.,. 
16. 

i.  Sam. 5. 
17. 


frkb 


n 


nging 


CI 


lap.xv. 


oftheArk< 


fffehh.1t 

a  pi ace  of 
breaches. 


.S2CQ.5. 


not  to  cvy 
theArkeof 
GedJ/utfor 
the  Lemtcs. 
'Num.  -if. 


\\OrJtinf*. 

men. 


bponmiue  enemies  by  mutehanb,  line 
the  leaning  foozth  of  maters :  there* 
fo:c  they  caileb  the  name  of  that  plate, 
t25aal-^era3im. 

12  3nb  alien  they  hab  leftthcir  gobs 
there,  2Dauibgaue  a  tommantiement, 
anb  they  Iber  e  burnt  lbith  fire. 

ij  3nb  the  0!)iltfhnes  yet  agamc 
fpicab  thenifelues  ab:oab  m  the  bal- 
ley. 

i+  Xhetfo:e2?auibenQuirebagainc 
of  <2»ob,  anbCPob  faibbuto  hun,  <3oc 
not  bp  after  them ,  tume  away  from 
them ,  *  anb  tome  bpon  them  oner  a? 
gatuftthe  mulbery  trees. 

15  3nb  it  njail  bee,  Uihcn  thou  (halt 
hearcafounbofgoutguithctopsofthc 
mulberytrees,  rhatthmthoufhaitgoc 
out  to  battatlc:  fo?  <3ob  is  gone  foonh 
befo;c  thec.to  unite  the  hoftc  of  the  £i> 
Ufhncs. 

16  3>auib  therefore  bib  as  ti5ob  com- 
manbeb  him :  anb  they  fmote  the  hoftc 
of  theiShiliftmes  from  ©ibeoneuento 
d5a5er. 

17  2nbthefamcof2>autbrbentout 
into  all  ianbs,anb  the  %  0  13  ©  b:ougl)t 
the  fearc  of  himbpon  all  nations. 

CHAP.    XV. 

Dauid  hauing  prepared  a  place  for  the  Arke, 
ordereth  the  Prieftes  and  Leuites  to  bring 
it  from  Obed-Edom.  15  Hee  perfourmeth 
the  folcmnitie  thereof  with  great  ioy.  x^  Mi- 
chaldefpifethhim. 

eg«§3«gi^  /I5b  Dauid  mabehimhou; 
^5  fes  in  flic  title  of  SOauib, 
&£  anb  pzepareb  a  place  to: 
,JS§?  theorise  of  <sob,  anbpit 


„  chebfontatcnt. 

2  Xhtn  2>autb  fayb,  t jtRonc  ought 
to  cane  the*^rbc  of  d&ob.but  thclLe 
uites :  fo?  them  hath  the  TL  ©  is  ©  cho* 
fen  tocarythc3ltucofC5ob,  anbtomi 
mftcr  bnto  him  fo2  euer. 

?  anb  3>atub  gathcreb  all  3lfracl 
together  to  3!ernfalem,  to  bung  bp  tlje 
arKc  of  the  %  &  is©  bnto  his  piace, 
tbhichhechab  pjepareb  fox  it. 

*  '3ltibS>aiub  aiTcmbleb  the  tfyil 
bmi  of  3taron,anb  the  fleuttes. 

'5  £>fthefonncs  of  i^ohath;  Uriel 
the  chicfe,anb  his  1 1  tyethjen  an  hunbjeb 
anbtibcnnc. 

6  £)f  the  fonnes  of  £0crarf :  3fa* 
iah  the  cI)iefc,ano  his  tyetfnen  tibo  hun* 
meb  anb  tibentic. 

7  <2Df thefonncsof ©crfbom :  3Jo- 


el  the  thtefc ,  anb  his  bjcthicn  an  Dun* 
bieb  anb  thirtic, 

8  <Dfthc  fonncsof  <£U5aphan:5>he 
maiahthechiefc,  aubhis  tycthientibo 
hunbzeb. 

9  £>fthefonnesofI>>eb2on:<£Uelfhe 
thiefc,anb  his  tyeth.icn  fourefco?c. 

10  £>f  the  fonues  of  <U3$tcl :  3unmi< 
nabab  tlje  ehiefe,  anb  his  tyethien  an 
hunbzebanbttbclue. 

11  3nb  2>autb  taiieb  fo?  zabou  anb 
abiathar  the  ^nefts,  anb  foi  the  %v 
uitcs,fo?  Unci,  afaiah  anb  3Jocl,£>he* 
maiah,anb  <£liel,  anb  ^mnnnabab, 

ii  3liib  fatb  bnto  them,  J^ee  are  the 
chicfe  of  the  fathers  of  the  Heuttes: 
fanctifie  pour  felues  both  pec  anb  pour 
bicthjen,  tliat  you  map  bang  bp  the 
2lrUe  of  the  3L£DE©C5oO  of  3}fra- 
el ,  bnto  the  place  that  3  haue  pjepareb 
font. 

13  fot  becattfe  re  did  lt  not  at  the  firft, 
thcILsDis©  our  <Bob  mabcabacaeh 
bpon  bs,foi  that  ibe  fought  hun  not  a& 
terthebueojber. 

1+  S>otheiDneftcsanbthe!leuttes 
fatunficb  themfducs  to  bztng  bp  the 
2rue  of  the  Hem©  ©obof  3fracl. 

15  3luo  the  chubzen  of  the  Iteiutcs 
bare  the  3truc  of  <Sob  bpon  their  fhoul 
bers,Vbifhfheftaues  tl)eteon,as*^0' 
fescommanbeb,  atco?bmg  to  thetbo,:b 
of  the  H<©  is©. 

16  3(nb  Dauib  fpafte  to  the  el)iefe  of 
the  JLeuttes,  to  appoint  their  bjethzen 
to  be  the  fingers  ttnth  tnfttuments  of 
mufitfec ,  j&faiteries ,  anb  i^arpes ,  anb 
Cpmbalcs ,  founbmg,  bp  liftutg  bp  the 
boiceibithiop. 

17  5>o  the  fUuites  appointcb  *  ©e* 
man  the  fonnc  of  lloel :  anb  ofhisbze? 
tfyffl, ,  *  3lfaph  thcToune  of  25erechiah : 
anb  of  thefonnes  of  i!J3erart  their  b?e* 
rhJcn,  *  €than  the  fottneof  Buftiaiah. 

is  3mb  lbith  them  their  bmh^cn  of 
the  feconb  begree ,  zathariah,  25en, 
anb3Ja5icl,  ?  5>hf»uramoth,  anb^c- 
hirt,  anb  «Dlnni,  €liab,  anb  26cnaiah, 
anb^aafiah,  anbfij9attithiah,anb€* 
liphalth ,  anb  QDifcniah ,  anb  £>beb  €- 
bom,  anb5lehielthe^02ters. 

19  5>othe5>mgers,^eman,afaph, 
anb  ethan,  ibere  appointed  to  founb 
Knith  tpmbaies  of  bzafte, 

20  3lnb  zathariah,  anb  ^3iel,  anb 
S>hnniramorli,anb5ehielanb<]ilnni, 
anb  €liab,anb  ^aafiah,anb  2Senaiah 
lbtth  ^falteries  on^lamoth. 

ii  3lnb  ^attithtah.anb  €iiphaieh, 
^p  2 anb 


*Exod.l5. 
"4. 


'Cfiip.tf. 
»V«r.3P. 

•Vaf.44- 


The  Arke  brought.    I.Chron. 


Thefonp 


tight  to  s>- 

Hcrfee. 

Or  not  for 
the  cartage 
he  mjcrtttled 
about  the 

cartage. 

\HefMfrir.j> 

z>[. 


•  2.  Sain.  6. 
12,13. &c. 


\\Or,c*ru> 


•  :.  Sim  6, 
'7' 


ano  tffhftmab ,  ano  sDbco  <goom,  ano 
3Jeicl,  ano  Stoastab ,  Uritb  barpes  on 
tbe||5>beminitbtoerccll. 

zz  3lno  Cbcnaniab  cbicfe  of the  %t- 
\x\tts  1 1  \  a'  fo?  tfong :  be  tnftructcb  about 
the  fong,  becaufc  be  was  ftulfull. 

15  2lno  2i5crechiab,  ano  <£lftanah 
were  0002c  beepers  fo2  the  3trftc. 

24  2lno  s£>bebatuab,ano  3JeI)ofl)a- 
pbat,  ano  iFiatbaneel,anD  3imafat,auo 
zacbartah,  anoffienaiab,  anociieser 
the  pnefts,  010  blouj  ttntb  the  trumpets 
before  the  3rfte  of  000 :  ano  j©beo<£-- 
Horn, ano  3Jebiab  were 0002c Keepers 
fo2tbc3(cfte. 

i<,  c £>o  *  2>auto  ano  the  cioers  of 
3Jfraci,  ano  the  captatnes  ouer  tbou- 
fauos,  roent  to  bzmg  bp  the ^trftcof  tfje 
coucnant  of  tlje  ILom©,  out  of  the 
boufe  of  jDbco  Cbomttittb  top. 

z6  3mo  tt  tame  to  paffc  ibbcn  C5oo 
belpco  the  Heuites  that  bare  the  3lrftc 
of  the  coucnant  of  tl)c  fLoiw,  that 
they  offcrco  fcucn  bullocfts,  ano  fcucn 
raunncs. 

27  3tn0  SDattto  ibas  clotbeo  lbitb  a 
robe  of  fine  linncn,  ano  all  tfjcfLeuttcs 
that  bare  the  3lr  be,  ano  the  ttttgers,ano 
Cbcnaniab  the  matter  of  the  |  fong, 
lbitb  the  fingers,  ©auto  alfo  hadppon 
him,  an  cpboo  of  lumen. 

28  Xhusaii'Jfracl  brought Pp  the 
3rite  of  the  Coucnant  of  the  H©  is )? 
With  (homing,  ano  Unth  fonnO  of  tlje 
comet,  ano  Unth  trumpets,  ano  ttntb 
cymbals,  mabtng  a  noifc  ttntb  pfaltc; 
ncsanoharpes. 

29  C^nDttcamctopaneasti)c5trUe 
of  the  coucnant  of  the  |L€>ih©  came 
to  the  cmc  of  SDauto ,  that  *39tcbai  the 
oaughtcr  of  Saul  looiuug  out  at  a  lbnt^ 
oott,  fan)  Bmg  SDauto  oauncing  ano 
placing :  ano  fhee  ocfpifco  bun  m  her 
heart. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  Dauidb  lefhuall  (aenfice.  4  Hec  ordereth  a 
Quire  to  (IngThankefgiuing.  7  ThePlalme 
of  Thanketgiuins;.  37  He  apponueth  Mini- 
fters,  Porters, Pi  leih  and  Mulitiam,  to  attend 
continually  on  the  Aike. 

Wfr^PQ  £>*tbeyb2ongbttbe3rftc 
\liwjmtf  of  (3oO,  ano  fct  it  m  the 
^^nw  miott  of  the  tent  that  SDa 
te^iv/p  mo  hao  pitchco  fin  tt :  ano 
8  Cswg&a  tbey  offcrco  burnt  facrtfv 
ces ,  ano  peace  offerings  befoic  <3oo. 
i   3uo  ttiben  2E>aiuo  hao  maoc  an 


cno  of  offering  the  burnt  off  ertngs,auo 
tlje  peace  offnngs,  be  blclfco  the  people 
m  the  name  of  the  %  €> m  ©. 

$  3no  hec  oealtto  euery  one  of  % 
rael,  both  man  ano  woman,  to  euery 
one  a  loafe  of  bzcao,anO  a  gooo  piece  of 
flclb,  ano  a  flagon  ot  wme. 

4  C^nohcappointcOcertaineofthc 
Heuitcs  to  nuniftcr  before  tbe^rftc  of 
the  ?t£>)B©,  ano  to  rccozo,  ano  to 
thanfte  ano  pjtaife  the  %  £>  m  ©  d5oo  of 

3Jftael, 

5  3fapb  the  chtcfc,  ano  nert  to  him 
zaehariah,  3Ieicl,ano  S>hemtramoth, 
ano  3lehtel,  ano  ^attithtah,  ano  €• 
liab,  ano  25cnaiah,  ano  ^DbeO  coon : 
ano  3!ctel  t  voift)  jMaltcries  ano  ibitij 
harpes :  but  3faphmaDeafotmott)tth 
cvmbals. 

6  Benaiah  alfo  ano  •Jaha^cl  the 
02teftcs,  Unth  trumpets  continually 
before  the  3r&e  of  tlje  Coucnant  of 
4500. 

7  CXhenonthatoap,2!>auiOOcu; 
uerco  firft  this  Pfaime  to  thanfte  the 
H£»3©,  mto  the  hano  of  3faph  ano 
hisbzethzen: 

8  *  d5iuc  tlianftcs  bnto  the  Hsdk©, 
call  bpon  his  name,  maftc  ftnoujenhts 
Occos  among  the  people. 

9  3>tng  bnto  him,  ling  pfalmes  \naa 
to  htm,  tain c  ron  of  all  Ins  Uiouoerous 
ujozftcs. 

10  (Siojp  vee  in  his  holy  jiSame,  let 
thcheart  of  themrctoyee  tljatfccftethe 

|L©1SJD. 

1 1  S>ccftc  the  %  st> «  © ,  ano  his 
ttrcngth ,  fecfte  his  face  continually. 

12  Bnnembcrhtsmarucilousnwfts 
that  be  bath  oonc ,  htsibonbcrs,  ano 
the  uiogcmcnts  of  his  mouth, 

ij  €>  ye  fceo  of  gjftacl  his  fcruant,yc 
cbiiozen  of  3Jacobhts  cljofcn  ones. 

14  $c  k the  %®kv>  our  <5oo,  his 
tuogemcttts  jre  m  all  the  earth. 

1$  26c  ye  mmofttll  ainjayes  of  h'S 
Coucnant :  the  ibozoe  which  bee  com* 
manoco  to  a  thoufano  generations : 

16    Euen  of  the  *  Couenant  Ibhttl)  iKC 

maoobith  3lb2aham,  ano  of  his  otbe 
bntojlfaac: 

17  3lnO  hath  confirmco  the  fame  to 
giacob fo2  a laibc ,  ano  to  gifraci  fo?  an 
cucriaftmgCoucnant, 

18  Saying ,  bnto  thee  mill  3  Siuc 
the  lano  of  Canaan,  the  t  lot  of  your  \xv 
hcrttancc. 

19  DDhcnyc  Vbcrc  buttfcib,  *  euen  a 
fcn),anottcamger£init: 

20  3Jno 


\Hcb.vtth 
t.iftrumcnfs 
ofTfalte- 
ri:s,&  harps 


'PfJ.105 


and26.;. 
&  18.13. 


\Htbth? 
codrd. 
f  Heh-rn: -. 
of  number . 
'Gen.  54. 


ofAfaph. 


Chapjcvij.     Pric(l:s,Porte  rs^&c 


•Gcn.u. 

1 7. and 

20.;. 

"Pfal.ioj. 

•Plil.pS.i. 


"Lcu.19.4 


*Pu.lo7.i 
and  11.:  1. 
and  136.1. 


"Deut.J7. 


20  an&tbhcntbepibcntrromnatfc 
on  to  nation ,  ant)  from  onetangbome 
to  another  people: 

21  $eefuffercbnomantoDoethem 
ib;ong:  pea  ,bec  "repjooucb  tangs  fo<r 
their  fanes, 

2i  Saying;,  *  Xouth  not  mine  anoint 
teb,anb  boemp  i&ophetsno  barme. 

2  j  *  £>mg  bnto  tbe  %  a>  is  &  all  tf)e 
cartl) :  (beib  foo^tl)  from  Dap  to  Dap  l)ts 
(aluatton. 

24.  a>etiatc  Ijis  glozp  among  the 
heathen  :  his  marueiious  tbo?&es  a* 
mong  all  nations. 

25  5Fo?  great  is  the  Hois©,  anb 
gtcatip  to  be  piaifcD :  be  alfo  is  to  be  fca* 
rcbaboucaiigobs. 

26  jFo?  ail  tt»c  gobs  *  oftftt  people 
are  moles :  but  the  %  ©  k  d  mabt  tfjc 
beauens. 

27  <Mo2p anb  Honour  are mhis  pjcj 
fence  :ftrcngth  anb  giabticffc  are  mljis 
plate. 

28  <Biucbntothe1!L€)i3iP,pcctan; 
tebs  of  the  people :  giuc  tonto  the 
%  ©  is  £>  glozp  anb  ft  r  cngth. 

29  ©me  bnto  tt)e  ?L  ©  is  ©  the  glo* 
rp  due  bnto  l)is  /|5amc :  bung  an  offc? 
ring,  anb  tome  befiwe  hun ,  nwfbip 
the  %  ©  is  jd  m  the  bcaunc  of  hote 
neffc. 

jo  ifearc  befoje  bint  all  the  earth: 
tbeMwib  airo  (ball  be  uable,thatit  be 
notmooueb. 

ji  ILet  the  heauens  be  glab ,  anb  let 
ttjc  earth  reiopte :  anb  let  men  fap  a* 
mong  the  nanons,  Xljc  %  ©  is  £>  rctg< 
neth. 

32  ?Lettbcfcaroatc,anbtbctuIncffc 
thereof:  lcttbcaelbcsrctopce,anbali 
that  is  therein. 

33  ICbenfiballtbctrcesofthctboob 
futgoutatthepjefente  of  the  ILsdis©, 
betaufe  bee  commctl)  to  tubge  the 
earth. 

34-  *£>8inctftanBSbnto  thcflsDisjD, 
fojbee  >s  goob:  to?  Ins  inert?  enbureth 
foz  eucr. 

3^  3tab  fa?  pec,  Sane  bs,  £>  Gob  of 
our  Carnation,  anb  gather  bs  together, 
anb  beliuer  bs  from  the  heathen ,  that 
Ibemapgiuethan&stothyholp/Ramc, 
andgio^mthpp?aife. 

36  Blefleb  be  the  ILsdib©  Gob  of 
JJfrael  fo?  eucr  anb  eucr :  anb  all*  the 
people  latbc,  #mra,  anb  p?aifcb  the 
Hsdis©. 

37  C  3>o  hce  left  there  befoje  the 
3rUcofthe  toucnantofthefLsDisjD, 


3tapb  ano  his  tyethtfn ,  to  mmiftct  be* 
fiw  the  arne  continually ,  as  cuerp 
bapesiboifee  requireb: 

38  anb  dDbebCbom  tbith  their  b?^ 
tbzen,  tinccuwc  anb  eight :  <©bcb  <£> 
bom  alfo  the  fonne  of  ^lebutbun,  anb 
loofah  to  bepoiters: 

39  3tnb  zabon  the  &ttcft ,  anb  his 
bjethzen  the j&ictts,  before  the  Xabcr^ 
nacle  of  the  %  ©  is  © ,  in  the  htsh  place 
tbatwasatdSibeon, 

40  %o  offer  burnt  offerings  bnto 
the  ftois©,bpon  the  20tar  of  the 
burnt  offering  continually  t  morning  t »*.***« 
anb  eucning,  anb  to  doe  aewbing  to  " 
all  that  is  tbntten  in  the  fLatbc  of  the 
3Lfi>isjE>,  ibhith  hec  tommanbcb  gjf 
racl: 

4-1  3mb  tbith  them  Iceman  anb  3v 
bttthun,  anbthercll  thatlberethoftn, 
lbho  ibere  erpjefleb  bpname,  to  giue 
tljatiRcs  to  the  1L£>ia$>,  betaufe  his 
mercv  endureth  fo?euer. 

42  ^nb  tbith  them  $eman  anb  $& 
bttthun  tbith  trumpets  anb  cymbaics, 
fo:  thofcthat  niouibmaRea  founb,anb 
linth  muftcail  inllruments  of  Gob :  anb 
the  fonncs  of  55ebuthun  ibere  t  $op  t^A- 
ters.  'h'ia"- 

43  ^nb  all  the  people  bepartcb  cue^ 
ry  man  to  his  home,  anb  Dauib  rctur- 
ncbtoblcfrcljishoufc. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1  Nathan  firft  approouing  thepurpofe  ofDa- 
uid,  to  build  Godanhoufe,  3  after  by  the 
word  of  Godforbiddethhim.  n  Heepro- 
mifethhimblefsingsand  benefits  in  his  feed. 
16   Dauids  prayer  and  thankefgiuing. 

Dtb  *tt  tame  to  paffe ,  as 
Dauib  fate  m  his  houfe, 
that  3>amb  fapbc  to  fi& 
tlian  the  0?ophct,  %  ot-3 
..bibeil  m  an  houfe  of  €t- 
bars,  but  the  3lrlic  of  the  Couenant 

Of  thC  %  SD  IS  3D  remaineth  bUbtr  HU> 

taines. 

2  5Cheni!5athanCapbbnto2>autb, 
2Doc  ail  that  is  ut  thme  heart,  fo?  <5ob 
is  tbith  thee. 

3  €  &nb  it  tame  to  paflc  the  lame 
night,  that  the  Jbo?b  of  d5ob  tame  to 
#athan,faying, 

4  <5oe  anb  tell  2>amb  ttvp  fcruant, 
ILlnisfaiththe  %e>  is ?e>,  XhouCbalt 
not  butlb  me  an  houfe  to  bibcll  in. 

5  foi  3  haue  not  bibclt  in  a  houfe 
Qhtc  thebap  tljat  3  brought  bp  3ifraci, 
0p  3 bnto 

29 


i.  Sam.  7 
,Hc. 


Dauids  thankes,        I.Chron. 


an< 


btnc. 


t  Hti.frm 
After. 


*  i.King.p. 


tmto  this  bap ,buttbauc  gone  from  tent 
to  tent,  anb  from  one  Xabcrnacie  to » 

nother. 

6  n3bcrcfoeuer3JbaucUjaiRebtt)ifb 
all  3  frae  J,  fpafee  3  a  moib  to  anp  of  the 
Images  of  3Jfracl(U>bom  31  command 
beb  to  fecD  nip  pcoplc)fapittg,s©bP  bane 
pc  ttot  built  me  an  boufe  of  Ccoars  i 

7  ji5oU)tbmfojc  thus  uiait  thou 
tap  bnto  mpfmiant3[>auib,Xbus  faith 
tbe&£>K©ofboQs,3ftoo!ictbcefcom 
theshcep  -  toat,  euen  t  from  fololbuig  the 
(beep,  that  thou  fljoulbcft be  ruler  ouer 
uippcopleWtael: 

8  3tnb 3  baue  bene  rbiti)  thee  tbJjp 
'.iicrfocutr  thou  bafttbai&cb,  anb  baue 
rut  off  all  thine  enemies  from  before 
tbee,  anb  banc  ntaoe  thee  a  name ,  like 
the  name  of  the  great  men  that  arem 
tbceartb. 

9  3JU"o  3  fl)M  ojbeinc  a  plate  fo?  mp 
pcople3JfracI,anbiuillpianttbcni,anb 
tbepfbailblbclltntbcirplace,  anb  (ban 
be  moueb  no  mo?e :  nettber  (bai  the  cbil 
bjen  of  ttrfefeebnefle  ttmttc  them  anp 
mo?c  (as  attbc  beginning, 

io  3in&  fmtc  the  tune  that  31  com* 
manbeb  3Uioges  to  bee  ouer  nip  people 
3Jfrael.)  spozcoucr,  3  mill  fubbucaii 
thine  enenrtcs.ifurtbernwc  3  tt\  thee, 
that  the  %  £>  is  ©  mil  butlb  tbee  an 
boufe. 

1 1 C  3tnb  it  fliall  tome  to  paffcroben 
tbp  bapes  be  ejepireb,  tbat  thou  mutt  go 
to  betbithtbp  fathers,  that  3  Ibtiiraifc 
bp  thp  feeb  after  thee,  ibbttb  mail  bee  of 
thpfonnes,anb  3  Vbtlftabltft)  t)ts  tong- 
bome. 

u  i)t  fliail  builb  me  an  houfc,  anb  3 
tt)ill  ftablifb  his  ttoone  fo?  eucr. 

13  3*tt)illbcbtsfatbcr,anDbc(bail 
bt  mpfonnc,  anb  3JttnH  not  taht  mp 
mcreic  aioap  from  him ,  as3Jtoolic  it 
from  him  tbatibasbeftuctbec. 

i4  25ut  3  iDrti  fettle  him  in  mine 
boufe,  anb  m  mp  ttmgbom  fo?  cuer,  anb 
his  throne  fbali  bcccftabltfbcbfojcuer; 
moje. 

K  ^eto?bingtoailthefclbojbS,anb 
accojbmg  to  an  this  biGon,  Co  bib  && 
tljan  fpcaftc  into  2>auib. 

i6  4C^nb2Dawb  the  King  tame.anb 
£tfcbcfo2efbc3L€>B©,anb£afl),  sabo 
•»^3J,£)  H©is®  <5ob,anbU)hatis 
mine  houfc,  that  thou  Ijafl  biougbt  nice 
hitherto? 

17  ^nbyetthisibasafmauthingin 
thine  epcs,j£>  ©ob:  foj  tbou  baft  jifofpo* 
fern  of  thp  fcrnants  boufe,  foz  a  great! 


tohiic  to  tome,  anb  haft  regarbeb  nice 
aceotfnngto  the  cftate  of  aman  of  high 
begrec,  £>%  <d  is  5?  ©od. 

is  sebat  tan  2>auib  fpeake  mo?e  to 
thecfo?  thebonour  of  thp  fcruanti  fo? 
tljoulmoibefttbpfcruant. 

19  j©  %  ©  is  ©,fo?  thp  fcruants  fafec, 
anb  accozbingto  thine  ottme  heart,haft 
tbouDoneailtbisgrcamcffctnmaKmg 
unoJbcn  all  tljefe  tgreatthmgs. 

10  <S>  %<£>  IS©,  there  is  UOnC  ItRC  thCC 

neither  is  there  anp  <5ob  beubestbec,  ae 
cobbing  to  all  that  ibcbauebearb  untb 
our  cares. 

21  3Mbibbatonenationuttbecartb 
is  itBc  thp  people  gifracl,  tbhomc  ©ob 
itocnt  to  rcbccmewbehis  olbncpcoplc, 
to  mase  thee  a  name  of  grcatneffc  anb 
tcrriblcneffc ,  \y^  bjiutng  out  nations 
from  before  thp  pcoplclbhom  thou  haft 
rebectneb  out  of  Cgppt  i 

ii  iPojtbppeopieSfraclbibfttbou 
maRe  thtnc  oibne  people  fo?  cucr,  anb 
tljou,  %  0  is  ©,  betameft  their  €>ob. 

2}  Xbcrcfojcnott)  ?Lsdis©,  let  the 
thing  that  thou  haft  fpoftcn  concerning 
thpfcruant,anb  concerning  his  boufe, 
be  cftabiifljcD  fo?  eucr,  anb  bocas  thou 
haftfaib. 

14  Hct  it  cucn  bee  cftablifljeb,  that 
thp  name  map  bee  magnifieb  fo?cuer, 
fapmg,  Xbc  ILfiDis©  of  hoftfiis  the  <J5ob 
of  Jfrael,  euen  a  ©ob  to  JJfrael:  anb 
let  the  houfc  of  3Dauib  thplctuant  be  v 
ftablifticb  before  thee. 

15  Jfoj thou, <£>mp<ipob,t baft toibc 
tbp  fcruant  that  thou  Unit  builb  him  an 
boufe :  therefore  thp  fctuant  hath  founb 

in h)shear[tOp(iap bCtb?e  ti)CC. 

16  ^nb  notb,  %  «©  is  ©  (thou  art 
dSob,  anbbaftp;omifeb  thisgoobnciR 
bntothPferuant.) 

17  j9ott)  therefore  Illctitplcafcthcc 
to  blcffc  the  houfc  of  tbp  fcruant,  that  it 
map  bee  before  tfjee  foj  cuer :  fo:  thou 

blCUCft,  3©  %  £•  IB  8>,  anb  It  ihalbe  bicffcb 

former. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

1  Dauid  lubdueth  the  Philiftines  and  the  Moa- 
bites.  5  He  fmiieth  Hadadezer  and  the  Syri- 
ans. 9  ToufendethHadoramwithprefents 
to  blelTc  Dauid.  nTheprefents  &  thefpoile, 
Dauiddedicatethto  God.  13  Hepurtethga- 
rifons  in  Edom.  14  Dauids  officers. 

"  ®Vo  after  this,  "it  came  to 
paffc,  that  SDautbfrnotc  the 
Pbilifttnes  $  fubbucb  them, 
anb  tooUe  ©ath,anb  her 
tolbncs. 


Ipraye 


a 


\Hii.grcif 


\Web.\>4 

repealed  the 
tare  of  thy 
feruant. 


Cr,irlutb 
ptcofidthu. 


I. See. 


Hisviftones. 


Ch 


ap.xix. 


H 


anunsviuemc. 


ii< 


]  Or,  Had.,. 

i.cr  m 
Sam. 


\rJri.D«r- 


jj  Called  in 
the  books  of 
Sam.  'Seta 
twdliero- 
tbai. 

.  King.7, 
2;. and  z. 
chro.  4.1  5. 

|>,7*«,i. 

Sast.%.9. 


J  Or  J  or  am 3 
i.SjwxS. 

10. 

\\Or,l.fa. 
fate. 
I  Hth.  to 

Oleffe, 

t  HtL  was 

ihcm&nof 
war  res. 


tottntcs  out  of  ttjc  rjanb  of  the  $hiii- 
(hues. 

I  3Inbhermote£Poab,anbthcSi9o- 
abttcs  became  SDautbs  fentants ,  and 
brought  gifts. 

3  C^tiD  DautD  fmotc  ||$abarc5ct 
Htngof  zobah  bnto  $amath ,  as  hce 
ibcntto  Gabltfl)  htsbommionbythc  n- 
tier  cuphiatc  s. 

4  2nb  SDautb  tootte  from  him  a 
thoufanb  charcts  anb  fcttcn  thoufanb 
hojfcmen,  anb  tlbcntic  thoufanb  foot 
men:  SDautb  alfo  honghcb  all  the  tha? 
ret  horfes,  btttrcfcrucb  of  theman  hun> 
bjcb  charcts. 

5  :3mb  Uifjcn  the  5>y2tans  of  t  Da= 
maftus  tame  to  hclpc  ^abarcKc  twig 
of  Zobah,  Dautb  flcU)  of  the  Tynans 
ttbo  anb  ttbentlc  thoufanb  men. 

6  %\)  en  SDautb  put  gari  fons  m  ;t>y  21a 
Damafcus ,  anb  the  £>y2tans  became 
Dautbs  fcruants,  anbb2ought  gtftes. 
Stjustftc  H£>b©  pjcfcrucb  SDautb, 
Umtthcrfocuccheujent. 

7  3no  SDautb  toohc  the  fhtelbsof 
golbe  that  ibercon  the  fcruants  of  $a* 
batcher,  9  bwigln  them  to  Jcrufalem. 

8  JUBClbtfe  from  ||  Xtbhath ,  anb 
from  Chun,  cities  of  ^abarc5cr,b2oght 
SDauib  bcry  mud)  tyaffc ,  lbhcrcibtth 
*  Solomon  mabc  the  b:afcn  Sea,  anb 
the  pillars,  anb  the  beffels  of  b;afft. 

9  C  43oU>iuhcniiXoutaigofI?a- 
matt)  heatb  liottJ  SDautb  hab  fmittcn 
ailthchoftcof  I?abarc5cr  Ring  of  zo- 
bal): 

10  j^ee  fent  II  $abo?am  I)is  fonnc  to 
aingSDautb,|itocnqutreofhislbclfare, 
anb  tot  congratulate  htm,  becaufc  hce 
hab  fought  agatnlt  ^abarescr ,  anb 
umtten  rjtm(fo2  Ijabamcr  thab  rbarrc 
Until  1Cou)  anb  with  him  all  manner  of 
beffels  of  golbe  anb  filucr,  anb  fcaffe. 

I I  CXhem  alfo  aing  SDautb  bebtea* 
tin  bnto  the  3Loke>,  ibith  the  filucr 
anb  the  golbe  that  he  bzought  from  all 
thefe  nations :  from  Cbom ,  anb  from 
Q3oab,  anb  from  the  cfnlDjcn  of  3m= 
mon, anb  from  the  ptjtltttines  >  anb 
from  3maleH. 

11  £0o2coucr,  3tbtfhai  the  fonnc  of 
Zeruiah,  fletb  of  the  Cbomitcs  tnthe 
bailey  of  fatt,  eightcene  thoufanb. 

1  j  C  3nD  he  put  gartfons  m  Cbom, 
anb  all  the  €bomites  became  2>awbs 
(truants.  3-hus  the  lLoiw  prefer* 
ueb&auibinhithcrfocucrhelbcnt. 

14.  C§)02r)auibrcigncbouecaU5If' 
racl,anb  ejeecutcb  tubgement  anb  tufticc 


among  an  his  people. 

15  ^nb^ioab  the  fonneof  zeruiah 
was  ouer  the  hoQe,  anb  "Jeholhaphat 
the  fonneof  2U)tlub, || Bccorticr. 

!6  3tnb  zabohthe  fonnc  of  3hitub, 
anb  1 1  ^tbimcltrh  thefonne  of  ^btatljar, 
were  the  ^ucfts ,  anb  H^hauflja  was 
Scribe. 

17  ^nbfficnaiah  the  fonneof  gjti 
hotaba  was  ouer  the  €fjcrctl)itcs ,  anb 
the  ^clcthttcs :  anb  the  fonncs  of  2Da« 
mo  were  t  tjjiefc  about  tl)t  Sing. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  Dauids  meflensers  fent  to  comtort  Hanun 
the  fonneof  Nah.ifh,  arevillanoufly  intrea- 
ted.  6  The  Ammonites  Arengihcned  by 
the  Syrians,  are  ouer  come  by  loaband  Abi- 
fhai.  \6  Shophach  making  a  new  lupply 
of  the  Syrians,  is  flaine  by  D auid. 

£>U)  *iteamctopatTeafc 
tcrthis,  that  j^ahaQi  the 
liung  of  the  chilbjcu  of 
^Immonbpeb,?  hisfonnc 
rcigncbmhtsftcab. 
z  Tixxb  S>amb  fapbc ,  3  ibill  ftjclbc 
lunbncffc  bnto  ^anunttjc  fonnc  of /3a? 
hafl) ,  becaufc  his  father  fheujcb  lunb 
nrile  to  mee.  ^Snb  SDautb  fent  meffen- 
gersto  comfouljim  concerning  his  fa- 
ther. 5>o  the  fcruants  of  SDauib  came 
into  the  lanb  of  tlic  chilbJcn  of  Amnion, 
to  J?anun,to  tomfon  hint. 

5  25utthcl&2incesofthcchilb:cnof 
Amnion  fapbe  to  i^anun  ,  tiLhtnaeft 
thou  tljat  Dauib  boctl)  honour  thp  fa- 
ther, that  he  hath  fent  comforters  bnto 
theci  3lrenot  his  fcruants  come  bnto 
thecfono  fcarch,  anb  to  oucrthjorb, 
anb  to  fpie  out  the  lanb; 

4.  tehcrcfort^anuntoolieSDauibs 
fcruants,  anb  Cljaucb  them,  anbattoff 
thnr  garments  in  the  mtbbcft ,  hacb  bp 
thetrbuttocUcs,anbfcntthemaU)av. 

<,  Hhcn  there  ibent  ccrtcmc,  anb 
tolb  SDautb ,  holb  themen  Vbcrc  fcrucb, 
anb  hec  fent  to  meet  them  (foj  the  men 
lbere  greatly  afljameb)  anb  the  Bmg 
favbc,  1Earv  at  3icrtciio  bttnll  pour 
bcarbs  be  groinen,  and  then  r cturnc. 

6  C3nbitohmthcchilb2cnof:3m; 
monfavbe,  that  they  hab  mabe  them* 
fclues  t  obtous  to  SDautb;  ftantut  anb 
the  chilbjcn  of  Amnion  fent  a  thoufanb 
talents  offtlucr ,  to  hire  them  charcts 
anbho2fcmcnoutofiI0efopotamta,anb 
out  of  5>?2ta  fipaathah,anboutofzo 

bal;. 

7   &o 

•29  2 


wniran- 

cer. 

||  CJkiA- 
himthchin 

S.tm. 

j|  CilltdSa- 

rataiuSam. 

miSi'x,  i . 

f  Htb.  a!  the 

hand  of  the 


vcr.I,&c. 


t  Hcb.  In 
thine  cyri 
dotth  Da- 
ttidi&c. 


iH~d.it, 


(The  Ammonites        I.Chron.  are  ouercome . 


\Hthr.the 
face  of  the 
battetlrvas, 
\\Orjong 


\HchrAb- 
Jbd. 


j  [  i.  Euphra 

Ltt. 

\\OrShe. 
bach,  I. fain. 
C.l6. 


7  <S>o  ttjep  Intel)  thirtie  anb  tibo 
thoufanb  eharets,anb  the  lung  of  £Paa= 
chah  anb  hispcoplc,  ibho  tame  anb  pit? 
ehcb  befoje  ^cbeba.  3mbthcehilb?cn 
of  3mmon  gathcreb  themfriues  toge^ 
thet  ftom  their  titles,  anbeametobat= 
taile. 

s  3mo  lbhen  a>auib  hcatb  of  it,  hee 
fcnt3Joab,anballthehottofthcmigh; 
tie  men. 

9  3mbtheehflb?cu  of  Amnion  tame 
out ,  anb  put  the  battellmaraybeftHc 
the  sate  oftijc  erne ,  anb  the  lungs  that 
lucre  come ,  wete  by  fhcmfclucs  in  the 
fielb. 

io  jBoil)  lbhen  gioabfalb  that  Uhc 
batten  ibas  fctagainfthim,  befojeanb 
behuibc:hccchofc  out  ofau  the  ||  choice 
of  3frael,anb  put  them  m  aray  agatnft 
the&wians. 

ii  3nb  the  reft  ofthe  people  hec  bete 
uereb  bnto  the  hanb  of  t  abifbai  his 
brother ,  anb  the?  fetthemfclucs  in  a? 
rap  agamllthethUbzcnofammon. 

\x  ^nbncfaib,3fthc^wiansbee 
too  ftcongfiwme,  tftctt  thou  fljalt  hclpe 
me:  but  if  tlic  ehtlbjcn  of  Amnion  be  too 
ftrongfojthee.fhcn'J  mil  hclpe  thee. 

15  26e  of  goob  touragcanb  let  bs  be; 
Dane  our  frttics  Dalian  tip  fo:  our  pro 
pic ,  anb  fo?  the  Cities  of  out  (Bob :  anb 
let  the  IL  o  is  ©  bo  that  *  hich  is  goob  in 
his  fight. 

14  <§>o  3foab  anb  the  people  that 
were  Ujitlj  film ,  bjelb  tugl)  before  the 
S>wtans,Diuo  the  battcll  ■,  anb  they  fleb 
before  him. 

H  3nb  lbhen  the  chiibjcn  of  %m 
monfaU)  that  the  5>ynans  uicrc  fleb, 
the?  liacttnfe  fleb  befojc  3bi(bai  his 
b20ther,anb  entrcb  into  the  city.  Xhen 
■Joab  tame  to  gicrufalcm. 

ifi  C  3lnb  Vbhcn  tiie  Tynans  favb 
that  they  ibetc  put  to  the  Vbojfc  before 
3Jfracl,thcy  fent  meffengers,  anb  bjclD 
forth  the  £>ynans,  that  were  bey onb  the 
l|  &tuer :  anb  II  Smophach  the  captaine 
of  the  hottc  of  if>abare;ec ,  went  before 
them. 

17  3mbitibastolbeiDauib,anbhcc 
gathcrcb  all  3Jftacl ,  anb  pafleb  ouer 
3Jo:banc,anb  tame  bpon  them,  anb  fct 
the  battel!  ut  aray  agamft  them :  fc  when 
©auib  hab  put  the  battcll  in  aray  & 
gaittft  the  Tynans,  tljcp  fought  tbith 
him. 

18  26ut  the  £>ynans  fleb  before  gjf 
raci,  anb  2>auib  Oeib  of  the  Tynans 
feuen  thoufanb  men,  which  fought  m  cha^ 


rcts,anb  fourth  thoufanb  footmcn,anb 
feiiicb  ;S>hophaeh  the  taptamc  of  the 
hotte. 

19  2nb  tbhen  the  feruants  of  $aba< 
re5er  fail)  that  the?  fterc  put  to  the 
rbojfc  befoze  3fftaci ,  they  mabe  peace 
ibith  SDauib ,  anb  became  his  feruants: 
neither  Iboulb  the  Tynans  hclpe  the 
ehilbicn  of  Amnion  any  mo?c. 

CHAP.    XX. 

i  Rabbah  is  befieged  by  Ioab ,  fpoiled  by  Da- 
niel ,  and  the  people  thereof  tortured.  4 
Three  giants  are  flaine  in  three  feuerall  ouer- 
throwes  ot  the  Philiftines. 

ii5b  *  it  came  to  paffc ,  that 
t  after  the  ycerc  mas  crpi- 
reb,  at  the  time  that  Rings 
got  out  to  batteii  ,3Joab  leb 
.  forth  thepotbeeof  fhear* 
mic ,  anb  iDaftcb  the  countrcy  of  the 
chilbjen  of  Amnion,  anb  came  anbbc^ 
ficgeb  Kabbah  ( but  Dauib  tarieb  at 
gierufalcm,)  anb  3Ioab  fmote  Kabbah, 
anbbeftcoycott. 

%  ^nb2Dauib*too6ethccrotbncof 
their  king  from  off  Jjts  hcab,  anb  founo  it 
tto  tbetgh  a  talent  of  golb,  anb  there  were 
Prtctousttoncs  mu\  anbttibasfetbp* 
on  2>auibs  heab ,  anb  Ijee  brought  alfo 
crcccbingmuth  fpoilc  out  of  the  city* 

j  3lnb  hee  brought  out  the  people 
that  were  in  u,anb  cut  them  tbith  faibcs, 
anbibith  harrotoesofyzon^nb  mitt) 
arcsmicnfobcalt  H)auib  ibith  all  the 
cities  of  the  ehiUncn  of  Amnion.  3inb 
SDauib  anb  all  the  people  rerarncb  to 
3Jerufaicm. 

4  C^nb  it  camctopaffe  after  this, 
*that  thcrellarofc  rbarrc  at|  |<5C5cr  ibith 
the  ^hiliftmcs,  at  Which  time  ^)ibbc^ 
chaithe  i^ufhathite  ,flcib  3>ippai,  that 
ibas  of  the  chilbzcnof  ||tljc  giant :  anb 
theprbctefubbucb. 

5  ^nb  there  Ibas  tbarre  againe 
ibtfhthe0hiUfhncs,  anb<£lhananthc 
tonne  of  |  l^lair  ,flelP?lahmi  the  b20thcr 
of  ©oltath  the©itttte ,  ibhofc  fpcarc* 
ftaffc  ibas  itftca  ibeaucrs  bcamc. 

6  3tnbr>ctagame*thcrelbasibarrc 
at  45ath,iDhcr  c  lPas  a  man  t  of  great  fla^ 
turctbhofe  fingers  anb  toes  were  foure 
anb  tibcntic ,  fire  on  each  hand ,  anb  fire  on 
each  foot.  2nb  he  alfo  Ibas  t  the  fonnc  of 
the  giant. 

7  asutitohcnhellbeficblJfracl,^ 
nathan  the  fonne  of  ||  5>ljimea  SDauibs 
brother,  flcibhnn. 
8  ILhcfe 


'  l. Sam.  11. 

\HctrM 

therelur-As 
ofthcjttrc. 


•j.Sam.Il. 
16. 

\Htlr.lh: 
weight  of. 


*!.Sam.2l, 
18. 

1 1  Or, conti- 
nued, Hebr. 
flood. 

Ilrfiob. 

Or,Rafhit. 


||  Called  dlfi, 
laarc-ere- 
gim.l.fam. 
21.19. 
*:.Sani.2l. 
10. 

t  Heir,  a 
nun  ofmeK' 
jure. 

\Hcbr.l'orne 
to  the  etxnt, 
or,R4ph,t. 
\\Or,rrpn- 
ched. 
\\CMcd 
Shjmmaht 
iSit/K.  \6. 
9- 


People  numbred.      Chap.xx).         The  peitilence. 


•Sam.J4. 
i.&c. 


f  Attdtt  T9AS 

eiuUmthe 

eyeiofthc 

LORD 

cenctminj 

thu  thine. 

•  2. Sam. 

24.IO. 


8  ILheft  lucre  borne  unto  the  d5t= 
antinoath ,  anD  tbcp  fell  bpthehanD 
of  SDauib  ,  anD  bp  the  hanb  of  his  fcr* 
wants. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  Dauid  tempted  by  Satan  ,  forceth  loab  to 
number  the  people.  5  The  number  ot  the 
people  being  brought ,  Dauid  repemeth  of  it. 
9  Dauid  hauingthreeplaguespiopounded 
by  Gad,  chufeth  the  peitilence.  14  After  the 
death  of  70000,  Dauid  by  repentance  pre- 
uenteththedeftruifhonoflerulalem.  iS  Da- 
uid by  Gads  direction,  purchafeth  Ornans 
threfhingfloore,  where  hauing  built  an  Al- 
tar, God  giueth.ifigneof  his  fauourbyhre, 
and  frayeth  the  plague.  18  Dauid  facnfl- 
ceth  there ,  being  refhaincd  itom  Gibeon  by 
feare  of  the  Angel. 

IfftWSgH  fib*  £>atan  ftooDe  bp  a 
"  gamft3Jfrael,anbp;ouo- 
HeDSDauiD  to  number  3Jf 
raci. 
i  3lnb  SDautb  fame  to 
3Joab,  anD  to  the  rulers  of  the  people, 
Ooe,  number  3)fracl  from  26ecr-fl)eba 
men  to  2>an :  anD  b2ing  the  number  of 
them  to  mc,tbat  3J  map  mioib  it. 

3  ^nb3JoabanfrocreD,Xl)e|Loi5© 
matte  bis  people  an  hunbjeb  times  fo 
many  moeasthep  bee :  but,  mp  102b  the 
Rtng,arc  tbcp  not  ai  mp  lozDsfcruantSi 
tbbp  then  boctb  mp  I02D  require  tins 
rtHng^ibbpibillbccbecacaufcoftrcti 
paffctqJJfraew 

4  jBeucrtbclciTc,  the  lungs  \b02D 
pmiatleb  agamlt  3Ioab  :  lbbcrcftuc 
3Ioabbeparteb,anbn)enttb20ughont 
all'Jfrael.anb  tame  to  3Jcrufaicm. 

5  C  3ud  3!oab  gaue  the  fumme  of 
the  number  of  tl)e  people  bnto  2DautD : 
anb  all  tbcp  of  3Jfrael  iberc  a  tnoufanb 
tboufanb ,  anb  an  ln»nb;eb  tboufanb 
men  that  D2clb  froojb :  anb  3}ubab  ibas 
foure  bunbjcb  tlwefweanDtentbou; 
fanbmen,thatb:eibfttJ02b. 

5  But  fLeui  anb  JSemamln  toun 
tcb  bee  not  among  tbcm t  foi  ttic  Huigs 
\bo2Dibas  abominable  tojloab. 

7  *  2nb  C5od  ibas  bifpieafeb  ttntb 
mtstblng,tberefo2Cbcfmote3ffrael. 

8  3lnb  2>autb  faioe  bnto  (Sob ,  *  3J 
bauc  OnncD  greatlp  ,  betanfe  3*  haue 
Done  this  thing :  but  uoib  ,  31  befteeb 
thee,  boc  aibap  tfie  mttmiticof  thy  fcr- 
uant,foj  3*  f)auc  bone  bcrp  fooiifblp- 

9  franbtbelLom©  fpafeebnto 
<5ab,S)auiDS^>ccr,fapmg, 

io  ©oc  anb  tell  Damb,faplng,in)us 


faith  the  %  ©  is  © ,  3J  t  offer  thee  tb2ec 
things,  choofc  tl)cc  one  of  them,  that  3j 
map  Doe  it  bnto  thee. 

ii  £>o<5abcameto  SDantb,anbfaiD 
bnto  Dim  ,  Xhus  faith  the  2L©is©, 
r  Choofc  thee 

it  €trf)cr  tbjee  pecres  famine ,  02 
tl)2cc  monetbs  to  bee  DcfrropcD  befo2e 
tbp  foes  (lbbilc  that  the  ftoo2b  of  thine 
enemies  oucrtaUcth  thee)  02  eife  rlncc 
Dapes  tfjcfiuo2b  of  the  JL©'ib©,  cucn 
thcpcfmencemthcianD,anDthc3ugel 
oftbc!L©»s©  Dcftroping  throughout 
all  the  coafts  of  Jlfraei.  /Botb  therefore 
abmfc  tbp  fclfe ,  lbhat  ibozb  3  (ball 
bung  againc  to  htm  that  Tent  me. 

1 3  3mD2>aiuDfatDbnto0aD,3Jam 
in  a  great  ftrait.  Ilct  mec  fall  noib  into 
tbcbanDoftbc1L©is©(fo2bcrvllgreat 
a"  his  mercies , )  but  let  me  not  fall  into 
tbebanDofman. 

14  CS»o the !L©k ©lent pefhletuc 
bpon3Jfracl :  anD  tbcrefcllofjjfrarl, 
fcucnncthoufanDmen. 

15  3nD  ©oD  fent  an  *  ^tngcl  bnto 
35crufaiem  to  Dettrop  it:  anD  as  be  ibas 
beCropmg,  then  ©  is  ©  bebciDianD  be 
rcpentcD  Dim  of  the  cutll,  anb  faiD  to  the 
31ngcl  that  beftropeb ,  ^t  is  pnough, 
frapnolb  thine  hanb.  ^nbthc^ngciof 
the  % o  kb  itooD  bp  the  tb2cfl)'.ng 
fiooje  of  |l£)2nanthe3Jebufite. 

i6  3inD  iDauiD  lift  bp  hts  cpes ,  anb 
fatb  the  angel  of  the  %  ©  s  ©  franb  b^ 
tibeme  the  earth  anb  the  beauen ,  ha 
uingab2a«jenfn)02bm  his  hanb  fleet 
theb  out  ouer3Icnifalem.irhm  SDauiD 
anD  the  eiDers  of  3ifrael,  Ibho  ibere 
tiotlieb  m  facftetloth ,  fell  upon  their 
fates. 

17  anDDantbfaiDbntocSoD.^sit 
not3hn-"tommanDeb  the  people  to  be 
;  numbjeb  < eum  3  it  is  that  haue  finneb, 
ano  bone  euill  mbeeb  ,  but  as  foj  theft 
flieepe,lbhatlwuetlicpDone;ILettir.nc 
hanb,3J  p2ap  thee,  <D  IIok©  mp  c?oD, 
be  on  me,  anb  on  mp  fathers  honfe,but 
;  not  on  tbp  people ,  that  thep  fboulbbte 
plagueD. 

18  <H%btn  the^angel  of  the  5L©b© 
tommanDcD  <5aD  to  fapto  DautD ,  tliat 
iDauibfbonlD  goe  bp  anb  fettopan^i 
tar  bnto  the  %  ©  e  ©,  m  t!)c  th;cfl)ing 
floo2e  of  £>2nan  the  3Icbufitc. 

19  :SnD3?auiDib£Mbpattbcfapmg 
of<pab ,  ibbtch  he fpafet  in  the  ftm\t  of 
thelitis©. 

20  i^nt>  £>man  tnrnet)  bartie  anb 
faib  the  angel ,  anb  his  foure  fonnes 
i  lbirb 


t  Heir. 

firclcht 


Heir. 
0 thtc. 


'Jr.nuny. 


*  1   Sam. 
14-1  6. 


||  Or,  ArM- 
>~th.  j.;.:m. 
.4.18. 


:.Oiroa. 


1 1  Or,  when 
Drn,,ntnr- 

u$a  .tip  .he 
Anftiy  rhen 
bcajidhu 
fotirefonnet 

u-srhhtm, 
hidthem- 
fcUts.     . 


Dauid  and  Oman.     I.Chron.    Dauids  preparation 


\  M-i 


■j.Sim.24. 
14. 


•Chap.  16. 
jp.l.Chro. 
1.  ;.I. king. 
it- 


tbitb  him ,  bib  tbemfelucs.  /ftotb£>: 
nan  lbas  tb:cfbing  \bbeat. 

21  3nb  as  £>auib  came  to  £>:nan, 
£>:nan  looheb  anD  faib  Dauib  ,  aim 
ibent  out  of  the  tl)2cfl)ing  floo:e ,  atiD 
bolbcb  bunfclfe  to  DauiD  ttntl)  bis  face 
totbegrounb. 

21  Xben  2>amb  fame  to  £>:nan, 
tyrant  nice  the  place  of  this  tb:c(bmg 
floo:c,tbat3Jinapbuilban:aitartbcrc; 
m  bnto  tlic  Eos©:  thou  (bait  grant 
it  nice  fo:  tlK  fullpncc,  that  the  plague 
map  be  (tap cb  front  the  people. 

2}  3lnD  -©man  Caioc  bnto  DauiD, 
XaUc  it  to  thecaub  let  mp  I02D  the  Hiug 
no  that  lbbitb  is  goob  m  bis  epes.  Hoc, 
7i  gntc  thee  tDc  orcn  alio  fo:  burnt  of 
fenngs,anbtljctr);cn)inginftriunent0 
fonvoob ,  aiibtbcmbeatfonbemcatc 
offcrmg,3Jgtucitaii. 

24  3nD  Ring  Dauib  faib  to  Oman . 
iftap.but'Jf  ttnl  bctilpbupitfo:  the  full 
pace :  foj'J  \btll  not  taltc  that  lbbicbis 
thine  foi  the  %  o  is  © ,  no?  offer  burnt 
offerings  ibitbout  colt. 

25  5>o  *  £>auib  gauc  to  £>:nan  foi 
tbc  place  ,  fire  buubJCD  (bcbcls  of  golb 
bp  weight. 

26  3nb3>autb  built  there  an  3ltar 
bnto  rtjc  Hs3  is  ©,anb  offercb  burnt  ok 
feruigs,  anb  peace  orTcrmgs,anb  callcb 
bponthc  ILsois  ©, anb  hec anftucrcb 
him  from  rjeaucu  bp  fire  bpon  the  311' 
tar  of  burnt  offering. 

27  3tnb  the  %  S3  is  ip  tommaunbeb 
tbc&ugci,  anb  becputtopbtsuDo:ba 
game  into  tlic  fbeatb  thereof. 

28  CHt  that  ttmcibbcnDauib  faib 
that  the  %  ©  is  id  bab  anfwereb  bun  in 
the  tbjeflnng  floo:c  of  £>:nan  tbc  3te 
buutc,  then  he  faenfieeb  there. 

29  5F01  the  tabernacle  of  tbc  Hspis© 
ibbicbfiOofcsmabcm  tbc  lbilbetncffc, 
ana  the  7*ltar  of  the  burnt  offcrmg  were 
at  that  feafon ,  m  rtjc  high  plate  at  *€fc 
bcon: 

jo  25utaDauibtoulbnot  goebefoje 
it  to  cuciuirc  of  d5ob .  fo:  be  lbas  afratb, 
becaufc  of  rtjc  ftuo:b  of  tbc  3lngci  of  the 

?lS31R©. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  Dauid  foreknowing  the  place  of  the  Temple, 
preparcth  abundance  fot  tlic  buildms;  of  it. 
6  Hec  inlhucleth  Solomon  in  Gods  pro- 
mifes,  and  his  ducry  in  building  the  Tem- 
ple. 17  He  chargetluhc  Princes  to  allil  this 
fonnc. 


m 


$*^>p*&  $cn  Dauib  faib  ,  XIjisis 

fW®  r"c  lj0ufc  of  the  ?L  SD 13  © 
Gob,  anb  this  <>  the  3ltar 
of  the  burnt  offering  fo: 
^s£^J  UfracU 

2  2Mb  Dauib  commanbeb  to  gather 
together  tbc  ftcangcrs  that  were  m  the 
lanb  of  "Jftacl :  anb  bee  fctniafonsto 
bcib  ib:ougbt  (tones  to  builb  tl)c  boufc 
of  000. 

3  3tno  Dautb  p:eparcb  pzon  m  a- 
bunbancc  fo:  the  naiics  fo:  tbc  boo:es 
of  the  gates,  anb  fo:thc  lopnings ,  anb 
b;affcm  abunbaucc  Without  weight 

4-  3Ufo  £cbar  trees  in  abuiibance : 
fo:  the  Ziboniaus ,  anb  tbcpofXpjc, 
b:ought  much  Cebar  iboob  to  2Dauib. 

5  3lub  Dauib  faib,  *  Solomon  nip 
fonnc  is  pong  anb  tenber ,  anb  tbc  boufc 
that  is  to  be  buiibcb  fo:  the  %  ©  is  ©,muii 
oeettecbmgiuagnificail,  offameanbof 
glo:p  thiougbout  all  tountrcps:  31  Will 
theieforc  now  niaftc  p:cpararton  fo:  tt. 
5)0  Dauib  picparcb  abunbantlp  bcfo:c 
btsbcath. 

6  CXbcn  hec  caiiebfo:  Solomon 
bis  fonnc,  anb  ebargeb  him  to  biulb  an 
boufc  fo:  the  it  £313©  <5obof  Jjfracl. 

7  3lnb  Dauib  faibc  to  Solomon 
»29p  fonnc ,  as  fo:  me,it  Was  in  mp  mmb 
to  builb  an  boufc  bnto  the  iBamc  of  the 
fLsoia©mp<l5ob. 

8  25ut  the  W02D  of  tbc  !Ls3is  © 
tame  to  nice,  fapmg,*  Xbou  haft  fbeb 
bioobabunbantlp.anbbaftmabcgteat 
warrrs:  thoufljaltnot  builb  an  boufc 
bntompiftame,  bteaufetboubaltfbcb 
mud)  bloob  bpon  tbc  cart!)  in  mp  fight. 

9  25ebolb,afonnefbaUbeebo:neto 
tbee,  ibbo  niailbce  a  man  ofteft,anD3l 
Unllgiucbim  reft  from  auhvscnemics 
rounb  about :  fo:  his  name  (baibc  I  So- 
lomon, anbj5  Vbilgiucpeate  anb  quitt 
neffe  bnto  3ifrael  in  bisbapefl. 

10  ^ee  (ban  builb  an  boufe  fo:  mp 
Jftamc,  anb  be  fljal  be  mp  fotmcanb  51 
will  be  bis  father ,  anb  3  ibilleftabuil) 
tbc  tb:one  of  bis  Uingbomc  oucr  3Jf 
raclfo:cucr. 

11  il5ou>  mp  fonnc,  XbcHs3i3©  be 
lbitb  thee ,  anb  p:o£pct  thou,  anb  builb 
tl)cboufcofthe?LoiH©tbp(3ob,asbc 
bad)  faib  of  thee. 

12  £>uclp  tbc  %  o  is  ©  giuc  tbee 
Unfcbome  anb  bnDcrltanbmg,  anb  giuc 
thee  charge  concerning  3lfracl ,  that 
thou  mapeft  ftcepe  ttje  %sxo  of  the 

ILfi3W©tbP(30b. 

i)  %\)t\\  njait  thou  p:ofpcr ,  if  thou 

taitcft 


Chip. 15 


'Chip. 28 
j.  i.fiin.  7 


||  That  is 

ft  Actable, 


for  the  Temple.        Chap.xxii).      Mofes  his  Tonnes. 


Orjn  my 
pour  r  tic. 


AsVcr.  J 


\\ThatU, 

Ma[om  one 

Qarpcjitnt. 


'Cha 


*Num.4.^. 


tafcefr  hecoto  fulfill  the  "Statutes  ano 
JnDgcmcnts  tbbich  tiic  H  o  is  ©  char? 
gcb  iJPofts  Ibirtj,  concerning  3ffracl : 
be  ftrong,  ant)  of  gooo  courage,  ojeao 
not,nojbcbifmayco. 

H  i5otb  beholbc ,  !!m  my  trouble 
31  hauc  pjepareo  fen  the  houfc  of  ttje 
%  ©  m  ©  an  IjunDKO  thoufano  talents 
of  goio ,  ano  a  thoufano  thoufano  ta 
tents  of  fuuer ,  ana  of  biafifc  ano  y?on 
ttnthout  *  lOetght :  ( foj  tt  is  in  abmu 
oancc)timbcr  alfo  ano  done  haue  3  W 
parco ,  ano  thou  mayeftaooc  thereto. 

15  ^ojeouer,thereareibo2HnienU)itt) 
rtjeetnabunoancchtiocrs ,  anb  ||Vbo? 
Hers  of  ftonc  anb  timber ,  anoailnta? 
net  of  tunuing  men  fo?  eucry  mancr  of 
ttuuuc: 

i6  juE>f the  golb , the  Diner,  anb  the 
b^fTc,anb  tljeyjon,  there  is  no  number. 
3ttfe  therefore ,  ano  be  Doing,  anb  the 
JL  !©  is  id  be  tbttl)  ttjec. 

17  C  SDauib  alfo  tommanbeb  ailrtjc 
pimtes  of  3 frail  to  hclpc  Solomon 
fjisfOnne,  faymg, 

18  is  not  thesis©  your  (Soottrith 
you  i  ano  hart)  he  not  gtuen  soared  on 
eucry  GOe*  foj  he  !jath  giuni  the  mftabu 
tants  of  tfje  lanb  into  mme  hano,  anb 
the  lano  isfubouco  before  the  %  0  is  jd, 
ano  before  his  people. 

19  4i5oio  fet  pour  heart  ano  your  foulc 
to  fcefie  the  ft  1©  is  jb  pour  <5oo :  artfc 
thcrfoje,  ano  bufio  ye  the  fi>anctuan>  of 
the  ILsd  is  ©  ©00,  to  tying  the  arfee  of 
the  Coucnant  of  the  Hois®,  $  the  holy 
Oeffcls  of  <3ob,tnto  the  houfc  that  is  to 
be  bunt  to  the  #amc  of  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

CHAP.  XXIII. 

1  Dauid  in  his  old  age  maketh  Solomon  King, 
r  The  number  and  diflribution  of  the  Leuites 
7  The  families  of  the  Gerfhomtes.  it  The 
fonnesof  Kohath.  11  The  fonnesof  Merari 
2.4  The  office  of  the  Leuites. 

&*tt)hen£>antO  tbas  olb 
ano  full  of  oayes,  he  mabe 
Solomon  his  fonne  king 
oucrgifraeL 
i   CSmohegathctcD 

together  an  the  Winces  of  3Jfracl,Unth 

rtje  $nefrs  ano  the  fLcuites. 

3  /Rotb  rtje  Hcuitcs  tberc  numbzeb 
from  the  age  of  thirtic  'yecrcs  anoop? 
ttiaro :  ano  their  number ,  by  their 
pollcs ,  man  by  man,  ibas  rtjirttc  ano 
eight  thoufano. 

4  joDf  Ibhich ,  ttbcntlc  ano  foure 


thoufano  were  M  to  fetfojioarothcuwR 
of  tfje  houfc  of  the  %  ©  is  id  :  anb  fire 
tljoufatio  were£)ffitcrs  ano  Juoges. 

5  ^ojeouct,  foure  thoufano  were 
posters,  ano  foure  thoufano  pzaifco  the 
ILsDW©  Vbirtj  the  mttruments  lOtjtch 

'J  tltaOe  ( (aid  Dauid )  tO  pjaUle  therewith . 

6  3ino  *  2>autO  biiuoeo  them  mto 
tcourfcs  among  the  fonnesof  ?Lcui, 
nameiv  ©etfhon,  i&ohath,ano  Merari. 

7  C£>fthe*d5crfhomteswere||jLa* 
aoan,ano£>himei. 

8  Xhcfonncsof?LaaDan,thcchicfc 
was  3Jchiei,  ano  zertjam ,  ano  3iocl, 
thicc. 

9  Xhe  fonnes  of  S>himet :  SAitW 
mtth,  ano  pastel,  ano  i^aran,  rtjjce. 
£hcfc  were  the  chute  of  the  fathers  of 
Haaoam 

10  3lnb the  fonnesof  §>himei were: 
35ahath,!l  Zma,  ano3Jcufh,'anb  26crv 
ah.  Xljefe  foure  were  the  fonnes  of 
S>bimet 

11  3fno  ^ahathibas  thechicfe,  anb 

Zi5a  the  feconotbut  3euO)  ano  26criah 
t  haonot  many  fonnes :  thcrcfinc  rtjcy 
ttieteinonerecKonmgjaccOiibmgto  their 
fathers  houfc. 

it  C  IChefonncs  of  Bohath :  2lm 
ram,  3J5har,^eb;on,  ano  tEl55»ti,foure. 

13  %X\t  fonnes  of  *^mram:^aron 
ano  fi^ofes :  ano  *  3aron  loas  fcpara= 
tco,  that  he  fljouio  fanttific  the  moQ  ho= 
Iythings,heanohts  fonnes  fo?cucr,to 
burnemcenfe  befo:ethe?LoisiD,  to  mi; 
niffer  Onto  him  >  ano  to  bleffc  m  h»s 
iliamefojeuer. 

14  *  ^5ott)  tontcming  d0ofcs  rtje 
man  of  ©00,  his  Cannes  ibere  nameo  of 
rtje  tribe  of  %mi. 

15  Xhe  fonnes  of  fij&ofcs  were :  *  ©ep 
fhomanO€lie5er. 

i6  j©f  rtje  Tonnes  of  d5crfl)om  ^h^ 
buelwasthcrtjiefr. 

17  3lnD  rtje  fonnes  of  Clieser  were . 
*»chabiah  II  rtje  rtjiefe.  ^no  €iic5er 
hao  none  other  fonnes:  but  the  fonnes 
of  ftehabiah  t  tbcre  hery  many. 

18  £)frtjefbtmcsof3J3har,S)hrto^ 
mirtjthechiefe. 

19  j©frtjc  fonnesof  ^eb?on,3criah 
rhefira,^manahrtjefccono,  5Jatja3ici 
rtjcrtjircanDjeUamiamthcfonrrtj. 

zo  ^Dfthcfonnesof  ^l55iel:fiI3ichah 
rtjefirft,anD3eaahthefeconD. 

xi  CXhefonncsof  fl0crart:J$ahli 
ano  fi0ufhi.Xhe  fonnes  of  spahn  :^le- 

a5aranoisufh. 
ii  ^no  €iea5aroieo,anoljao  no 

fonnes 


\\Or,t<,e 
utrfee. 


*Exod.6,l6 
I  chro  6.1. 
&c.  2. chro. 
S  H-and 

t  H<b.  dm,- 

[mm. 

"Chap.sS. 

21. 

\\Or,Ukni, 

chap.6.ly. 


I'lT.U, 


\Hrb.ild 

not  mulf illy 


fonnti, 


'  Exo  6.10 

»Exod.a8 
hcb.5.4. 


*Exo.:.i  j. 


*Exo.i8.3)4 


\\Orshcfirfi 
\  Heli .  were 
highly  mttl- 
ttp/teJ. 


The  Prieits  and         I.Chron.  Lcuites  offices. 


men. 


"Num.  IO. 
>4- 


'Num. 1.3. 


I]  Or,  and  hi 
dnelltlh  m 
Itrnfatem, 


t  Heb.nnm- 
tir. 

iHtt.'thnr 

finxim  was 
allbeb.oid 
cftne  fonr.st 
tfzyiaron. 


•Chap.?. 

i.-u.r.C.  21 


\)0r,fU 

y.A.c. 


I.pt::.lr..i 


fonnes  but  Daughters:  anD  ttjeir  \\Xnv 
th2cn  the  fonnes  of  Bifh  toofec  them. 

23  ICfjc  fonnes  of  U0uA)t :  S0at)U, 
anD€Dcr,anD'3Jcrmioth,th2ec. 

14  C  Xhcfe  ww the  fonnes  oP  %v 
ui  after  the  houfe  of  their  fathers,  «ien 
tlic  chicfe  of  the  fathers,  asthcylbcre 
counteD  op  number  of  names  by  their 
pollcs,  that  did  the  «Jo:He  fo?  the  fet* 
uueofthc  houfe  of  the  H0is©,  from 
tl)cagcoPttt)cnncycercsaiiDtoptt)arD. 

25  5fo2  DauiD  fayD ,  Xhc  %  0  is  © 
(50D  of  Jfracl  hath  suun  reft  tonto  his 
pcoplcJlThatthevmapDibeUmJcrufa 
icmfoKucr. 

26  anbalfo  bnto  the  ?Lcuitcs:  they 
fhallno  more  cary  thcXabcrnacie,  1102 
any  toeffclsofitfonhcferutcc  thereof. 

tl  Jfo2  by  the  latt  IU02DS  of SDautD, 
the  ILcuitcs  were  t  mimb2cD  from  tlben- 
tie  ycercs  olDc,  anD  abouc : 

28  26ctaufe  t  their  office  ibas  to  ttaft 
on  the  fonnes  of  3!aroii,  fo2thc  feruiee 
of  the  houfe  of  the  1101s©,  m  the 
courts,  anD  in  the  chambers,  anD  in  the 
purifying  of  all  holy  things,  anD  the 
mo2&cofthcfcrutccofthchoufeof<I5oD: 

29  26orh  fo2  the  *  fhctti-bjeao ,  anD 
fo?  the  fine  flourc  fo2  meat  offering,  anD 
fo2  tl)c  tonieauencD  cafees,  anD  to;  that 

which  is  baked  tntljCllpamit,  anD  f02  that 

which  is  fncD,anDfo2  ailmanerofmcas 
furesanDfi5e: 

30  3lnD  to  ftanD  eucry  tinning  to 
thanheanD  pzaifJc  tlje  %$>%$>,  anD 
tiftttMcatCucn: 

31  3ltiD  to  offer  all  burnt  faenntes 
tmto  the  H  0  is  ©  m  the  S>abbaths,  m 
the  nctt  moones ,  anD  on  the  fet  reacts, 
by  number,  acco2Dingto  the  o;Der  com* 
manDcD  tonto  them  continually  befozc 
the  12,©  is  jd: 

31  3InD  that  they  fhoulD  fecepe  the 
charge  of  the  Xabcrnaclt  of  the  Con* 
greganon ,  anD  the  charge  of  the  holy 
place,  anD  the  charge  of  the  fonnes  of 
3aron  their  b2rth2cn ,  in  the  fcruice  of 
the  houfe  of  the  %  0  is  0. 

CHAP.  xxmr. 

1  The  diuifions  of  the  fonnes  of  Aaron  by  lot 
into  loureaud  twenty  orders,  to  The  Koha- 
thites,  17  and  the  Merarites  diuided  by  lot. 

*k<&0X2£  £>ib  d.cfc  arc  rtjc  Diuifions' 
Wx&  i  of  the  fonnes  of  3aron.j 
I V^  i '  ^  fonnts  of  Siaron : ! 
SSkj  I  B^abauD^bihu,  Clea*, 
mms^U  jaranD31thamar. 


2  25ut  jfraoab  anD  ^bihu  DieD  *  be 
fozc  their  father,  anD  hao  no  chilDjen: 
Xhercfcue  €iea3arano  JJthamar  etc= 
cutcD  the  02icfts  office. 

3  3ltiD  2>auiD  DiftnbutcD  thcm,both 
zaDoHofthe  fonnes  of  €iea5ar,anD^; 
himclcch  of  the  fonnes  of  3ithamar,ac- 
co2Dmg  to  thctr  offices  m  their  feruite. 

4.  3nD  there  rucrc  moe  chicfe  mm 
founD  of  thel'onnesof  <£lea;ar,thcn  of 
the  fonnes  of  3Jthamar :  anD  thus  vbcre 
they  DiuiDeD.  among  the  fonnes  of  €■■ 
ica^ar  there  lbcre  firtccne  chicfe  men  of 
the  houfe  of  their  fathers,  anD  eight  a 
mong  the  fonnes  of  3thamar  acco2? 
Ding  to  the  houfe  of  their  fathers. 

5  Xhus  lbctc  they  DiuiDeD  by  lot , 
one  fo2t  lbtth  another ;  fo2  the  goucr 
nours  of  the  £>anctuaric,  anD  goners 
nours  of  the  houfe  of<5oD,«jcre  of  the 
fonnes  of  <£lca3ar ,  anD  of  the  fonnes  of 
■Jthamar. 

6  anD&hemaiahthefonncof/Ra; 
thanael  thc5>cnbc,  one  of  theHcuites, 
lb20te  them  bcfo?e  the  l&ng  anD  the 
$&2inces,anD  zaDohthc02icft,  anD  31; 
himclceh  the  fonne  of  3tbtathar,anD  be- 
fore the  chicfe  of  the  fathers  of  the  p2tcfrs 
anDfLeuites:  one  t  pimnpau  houfholD 
bnngta6cnfb2eiea5ar,  anD  oncra&cn 
foj^Jthamar. 

7  &0V0  the  firtt  lot  came  foo;th  to 
^ehoianb :  thcfcconD  to  3IeDatah, 

8  %\)t  thtrD  to  $anm ,  the  fourth 

tO  £>C020U, 

9  Xhc  fifth  to  spalchiiah ,  the  firth 
to^uamm, 

10  Xhc  frucnth  to  $a&605,  the  eight 
to*^biiah, 

11  Xhe  ninth  to  3rcfhua,the  tenth  to 
S>hccantah, 

11  Xhc  clenmth  to  eiiafhib,  the 
trbtifthto3laBim, 

13  Xhe  thirteenth  to  $uppah ,  the 
fourteenth  to  ^cfhcbeab, 

14  Xhcfiftcenthto28ilgah,tiKfir 
teenth  to  dimmer, 

I-;  Xhc  fencntccnth  to  $C5ir ,  the 
cigf)tecnthto3lphfcs, 

i6  Xhcnintccnthtoi&cthahiah,ti)c 
tttientiethto^Iehe^cKcl, 

17  Xhc  one  anDttticiiUcthto^a* 
thtn,tl)enbo  anDttbcnticth  to  <5amul, 

is  Xhe  th2cc  anD  tlbcntieth  to  JDe* 
laiah,  thefourcanDtU)cnticthto^aa^ 
5iah. 

19  Xhcfc  were  the  02Dcrings  of  them 
m  tlieir  feruite  to  conic  into  the  houfe  of 
the  H©  is  3D  acco2Dmg  to  their  maner, 

tonDcr 


'Num. 3. 4 

ind  :o.cc 


t  Hrk.hcufi 
ofthefalhrr. 


•Luk.i.j. 


TheL 


euites  an< 


Ch; 


ip.xxv. 


their  offices. 


*Chap.i3. 
I9.and  >6. 
31- 


\\Otljertrip 
called  lejhtt- 
relah,tj.l-\. 
\HtiAytht 
bandoftbe 


bnbec  aaron  tljetr  father,  asttje 
!L  sd  K  ©  ©ob  of  3lfraci  Ijab  commas 
beb  rjim. 

20  CSuibtfjerettoftljc  fonncs  of 
%tvn  were  tijefc:  of  tljc  fons  of  $mram, 
£>hubaei :  of  tt)c  fonnes  of  £>ljubael, 
3?ebcta&. 

21  Concerning  ©cljabialj ,  of  tlje 
tons  of  £etjabtalj,tl)e  firtt  was  3lfn)ia6. 

ii  j©f  tlje  3J5fjaritcs,  S>ljciomotr): 
oftlje  tonnes  of  £>l)elomotlj,  3laljatlj. 

u  ^notJ)eDjnmsot*Hcbro£?5ettali 
thefirft ,  ^matialj  tlje  feconb,  3fal)a5iei 
tljc  tI)lrb,3JeRameam  tljcfourtlj. 

24  j©ftfje  tonnes  of  <H35icl,^icljalj: 
of  tljc  fonncs  of  €9icljalj,  Shamir, 

15  XUeb2ort)erof£Bicljal)waS3jk 

anal) :  oftljctonnesof  3iuljialj,zcclja; 
rial). 

26  Xnc  tonnes  of  flpcrati  were  $)afr 
U  anb  fl@uujt:tljc  tonnes  of  3Jaa5ialj, 

25ct10. 

27  CX5etonnesof^cranbp3Ia^ 
a5tal),25eno,  anb  £>ljoI)am,  anb  zat* 
cur,anb'3Jb2i. 

28  €>f^al)iicame€iea5ar,ibf)ol)ab 
no  tonnes. 

29  Concerning  l&flj:  tljc  tonne  of 
BifljVbasScraljmeel. 

jo  Xlje  tonnes  alto  of  fl9uflji,£0ali 
Ii,  anb  <£bcr,anb  3Jtriniotlj.  Xljcfc 
were  tljc  tonnes  of  tlje  fLcwttes  after  tljc 
Ijoufcoftncirfatljers. 

31  Xljcfc  liKcibtfe  caft  lots  outr  a* 
gainlrtljcir  bjcttjjen  the  tonnes  of  a& 
ron,mtrjep2efenceof  SDatubtljeBing, 
anb  zaboa  anb  31)tmclccrj ,  anb  ttjc 
tl)tcfc  of  tljc  ratUcrs  of  tljc  pnetts  anb 
?Leuites,  cuentlje  pnnripau  fatljcrs  & 
ucr  agamft  tljttr  y  onger  b2ctt)2en. 

CHAP.   XXV. 

1  The  number  &  offices  of  the  fingers.  S  Their 
diuifion  by  lot,  into  ioure  and  twentic  orders. 

I%j8§<p^  iDjeoucr  2>auib  anb  tlie 
ffc^^fl  fl  taptatnes  of  the  Ijofte  te 
parateb  to  tlic  fecuite  of 
tlic  tonnes  of  3tfapD ,  anb 
„  oB)cman,  anb  of  ^ebn- 
tljun ,  wrtjo  fljoulb  p2opijeftc  rbitl) 
Uarps,  ibttljpfaltencs,anb  tuitlj  cym< 
bais :  anb  tljc  number  of  tl)eib02nmcn, 
accojomgto  tijeir  fcraice,  tbas : 

2  £>f  rt)c  tonnes  of  2faplj :  zaceur, 
anb  3tofeplj,anb  /j5ctljaniaij,  anb  3fa* 
tela!),  tlje  tonnes  of  SUaplj  bnbec  tljc 
Ijanbs  of  3tfapl),tbljicljp2opI)cneb  t  at= 
tozbtng  to  tlje  o?bcc  of  tljc  lung. 


3  £>f3cbut!)un:tl)ctonncsof3j^ 
butljun,  d5cbalialj,anb  ||  zeri,anb3k' 
(baiaU,  Jjafljabialj,  anb  ^attutjialj, 
llOre,  bnber  tljc  Uanbcsof  ttjetr  fatrjer 
3icbutl)un ,  Vbl)o  pjopljcOcb  ibittj  a 
ljarpe,to  gtue  tljanltes  anb  to  p?aife  tljc 

4  £>f  Fenian :  tljc  tonnes  of  $e-- 
tnan ,  ssuhBialj,  ^attaniab,  HtSteicl, 
II  £>ljebucl ,  anb  3Jcnmotij,l)anaman, 
l^anant,  eitatlja,  ©ibbaiti,  anb  Bo- 
mamtt-€5er,  jjjoajbcfcaftjajj ,  ^allo- 
tlji.feotljtr,  and  ^al)a5totl) : 

5  3tll  tfjcfe  ruete  tlje  tonnes  of  $e* 
man  tljc  Iimgs&eerintlje  ||tt>o?bes  of 
d5ob,  to  lift  bp  tne  Ijoznc.  2Cnb  <5ob 
gane  to  $cman  fourtccne  tonnes  anb 
ttyecbaughtcrs. 

6  ^utljefcibcrcbnbertljeljanbsof 
tDctc  father,  foz  tong  in  tlje  Ijoufc  of  tlje 
%  ©  «  ©  rbitl)  cvmbals,  ptoltctles  anb 
Ijarpcs,  foi  tljcfcrutce  of  tDc  noufe  of 
©ob,  tattoibing  to  tljc  Rings  o?bcr,  to 
3tfopl),3icbutljun,anb  ^cman. 

7  &o  tljc  number  of  ttjem,  ibitl) 
tljeir  b2Ctlj2cn  tljat  acre  uiftruttcb  tn 
tljc  tongs  of  tlje  %  o  is  ©,  euen  all  tljat 
iberc  running,  was  tlboljuntycb,  fourc 
fcojeanbcigljt. 

8  C^notljcvcafllotstbarbagainfl 
ward,asJbciiti)efmatlast!)egrear,tljc 
tcacljcrastljcftljollcr. 

9  ^oib  rne firft  lot  came  fooitlj  fo? 
3tfapb  to  3Jofepl),  tbe  fctonb  to  Ocbali^ 
alj,  lbljo  uutlj  Ijis  b?etlj2en  anb  tonnes 
were  tib  clue: 

10  %])t  tljirb  to  zatnn-.he,  ijis  tons, 
anb  tjis  bzctfj2cn  were  tJbclue : 

11  Xljctourtljto35ri,he,i)istonncs 
anb  Ijis  b:ctli2en  were  tibeluc : 

11  XUc  aft  to  iftetrjama!) ,  hee ,  t)ts 
fonncs  anb  Ijis  b2ctl)2cn  were  tlbciuc : 

13  XlJC  ftCt  tO  2StlKRtalJ,  he,  l)l£  fottS 

anbljt£b2ctlj2cnwerctlbcluc. 

14  Xljcfcucntlj  to  3JcfljareiaU ,  hee, 
fjisfonncs?  l)tsb2Ctt)2cnweretibciuc : 

15  Xlje  ngljt  to  ^eujaial) ,  hee ,  tjis 
fonncs  anb  l)isb2Ctrj2en,  were  tibeluc: 

16  Xljenmtljto ^attanialj,he .ijts 
fonncs  anb  Ijis  bjctljjen  were  tibeluc : 

17  Xtjc  tcntlj  to  £>ljtmci,he,  ijis  foils 
anb  Ijis  b:etlj2cn  were  nbeluc : 

18  Xljc  eleucntlj  to  parcel,  hee,  ijts 
fonncs  anb  Ijis  b2Ctlj.2cn  were  nbeluc : 

19  Xljcnbciftflto$atyabial),he,!jts 
fonncs  anb  Ijis  b2Ctl)2en,were  ttbelue : 

20  xijc  tljirteentlj  to  <§>rjubacl,  hee, 
fjisfoiincsanbljtsb2Ctlj2cnwcrettbeluet 

21  Xljc  fourtcentu  to  ^attitljiat), 

£lq he, 


\\Or,lvi, 
ver.l  I. 
||  mthShi- 
met  mentio- 
ned ver.l  7. 


\\Cr,  A*.*- 
reeL,vtr.\%. 
\\Or,ShltU 
etjVgr.zQ. 


Or,rmt- 


\Hei.Sythe 
bands  of  the 
King. 


(TKa: 


euites  an< 


I.Ch 


ron. 


orters 


offi 


ces. 


||  Or,ShIe- 
mUhav*r, 
14 

||  Or,Aki*- 
/4pl',chap.ff. 
19.&6. 
37- 


IThacis. 

abci-E- 
diTi^ichey. 


hce,  his  fonnes  anb  his  bjethjcn,  were 
tibclue. 
11  XijcfifttentljtoSJcttmotJj^ee, 

his  fonnes  J  his  tycttxicn.werettbeUie: 

23  Xhc  fifteenth  to  li^anamah,  hee, 
his  fonnes  j  his  biethtfn,  were  titoeluc : 

24  Xhc  fcuentecnth  to  3Ioft)bcKa* 
(hah ,  he ,  i|ts  fonnes  anb  his  bjethjen, 
were  tibclue: 

25  Xhc  eighteenth  to  $anant:  hee, 
tjus  fonnes  $  his  bjcthjen, *  ere  tibclue : 

z6  Xhc  nineteenth  to  £Pallothi,hee, 
hss  fonnes  *  his  bjethjen,  were  tibclue : 

27  Xhctummethto^uathahAe, 
his  fonnes  ?  his  bjethjen,  were  tibclue : 

is  Xhe  one  anb  tibenticth  to  5?o- 
tftir,he,i)is  fonnes  anb  his  b?ctl)?en  w«e 
tibclue. 

29  Xljetibo  anb  tibenticth  to  d5ib- 
baiti,  hee,  his  fonnes  anb  his  bjcthiten, 

werettbelUC. 

jo  Xhc  thjec  anb  tibenticth  to  £0a-- 
Ija5iotl),he,i)is  fonnes  anb  his  tycthjen, 
we.etibelne. 

31  Xhe  foure  anb  twentieth  to  £o* 
mamtt-€3tr,iie,i)ts  fonnes  anb  htstye; 
tl)?cn,weietU)elue. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  The  diuifions  of  die  porters.  13  The  gates  af- 
ilgned  by  lot.  10  The  Leuites  tluthad  charge 
ofthctrcafuies.   zy  Officers  and  Iudges. 

<?^z§5%  £)ntcrnmg  ttic  biniftons 

oftbepo2tcrs:  of  theBoj' 

httes  was  ||  £5)cfbelcmiah 

the  fonne  of  I&02C,  of  the 

fonnes  of  liafaph. 

1  anb  the  fonnes  of  :S0cfbcIcmiah 

were  zechanahthc  firft  borne,  ^lebtaei 

thefecotib,  zebabiah  the  tbirb,3Jath; 

ntcltbefourtb, 

?  €iam  the  fifth ,  3Irt)of)anan  the 
Gjtrrij  A  Uoenat  the  feucnth. 

4  fl9o2couer  tl)c  tonnes  of ^DbebC= 
bom  w«  e  Shcmaiah  die  firftbo;me,3Je< 
twabab  the  feconb  ,gjoah  thctbirbe, 
anb  S>acar  the  fourth ,  anb  /Rcthancel 
the  fifth. 

5  ammicltiiefirtf)/fffacharthefc; 
nenth ,  Ocultljat  the  eighth  :  foi  <5ob 
bleffcbihtm. 

6  aifo  bnto  ^nemaial)  his  fonne 
tbcre  fonnes  boznc,  that  rulcb  tiuoujrj^ 
ont  the  boufc  of  their  father :  fo,2  they 
were  might?  men  of  toaiour. 

7  XbefouncsofSmcmatalr.jDth; 
ni ,  anb  £epbacl ,  anb  <©beb  ,  £l5fc 
bab,tbhofeb2eth2en  lberc  ftrongmen; 


cithu,  anb£>emathiah. 

s  ail  thefe  of  the  fonnes  of  £>beb- 
€bom:  thep  anb  their  fonnes  anb  their 
bjethwt,  able  men  fo?  ftrcngthfoithe 
fcrntte,  were  th?ccft02c  anb  tibo  of  fo 
beb  ©bom. 

9  anb  QjJefhelemtah  had  fonnes  anb 
b;ethien,ftrong  mcn,cightcene. 

10  aifo  loofah  ofthechilbjcn  of  $®v 
rari,hab  fonnes :  £imr  i  the  rtjtcfc ,  (fo? 
though  herbas  not  the  firft  bomepet  his 
father  mabc  htm  the  rhicfc ) 

11  $ilKiahthcfctonb,  Xebaiiahthe 
thirbe,  zeehariah  the  fourth '  all  the 
fonnes  anb  bterhjjen  of$?ofah,were  thtr- 
tcene. 

11  among  rhefe  lberc  the  biuifions 
of  the  poztcrs ,  eucn  among  the  chtefc 
men ,  Ijatiing  ibarbs  one  agamft  an; 
other,  to  mtmftcr  m  tljc  houfc  of  the 

?LfiD13©. 

13  canbthevtaftiotsilasibellthc 
fmall  as  rl)c  great ,  atco2btng  to  the 
houfcof  their  fathersfo2  eucry  aate. 

14  anb  the  lot  caftumrb  fcl  to!  5>he' 
lemiah-  thenfoj  zcthartah  his  fonne 
(aibifetounfcllcr :)  thev  caftiots,  anb 
his  lot  came  out  Bozthibarb. 

15  Xo  £)bcb  (ebomSouthibarb, 
anb  to  his  Tonnes ,  the  houfe  of  t  a-- 
fupptm. 

i6  Xo  &huppun  anb  i)ofa ,  the  lot 
came  foorth  j@eftibarb  lbith  the  gate 
£>halicchcth,  \>v  the  tanfev  of  the  going 
||bp,U)arbagamftrbarb. 

17  Caftibarb  were  fire  fLeuites, 
^I5o2thuiarb  fonre  a  bap ,  S>outhibarb 
fourc  a  bap,  anb  tolbarb  afuppan  ttbo 

andttbO. 

18  anb  i^arbarieefttbarb, fourc  at 
thecaufep ,  and  tibo  at  0arbar. 

19  Xhefcarethcbuuftons  of  thepo^ 
ters  among  the  fonnes  of  B02C ,  anb  & 
mong  the  fonnes  of  £0eran. 

20  c  anb  ofthc?LctHtcs,ahuah  was 
ouertlietrcafurcs  of  thehoufcof  d5ob, 
anb  oucr  tljctrcafures  of  tljc  tbebitatc 
things. 

21  as  concerning  the  fonnes  of  I  IHa- 
aban :  the  fonnes  of  the  ©crfhonitc 
1iaaban,htefefathcrs;  euen  of  flaaban 
the  (Scrniomtcwn  c  ||  Jjehtclt. 

11  Xhc  fonnes  of  f  I  chicli,  zetham 
anb'Joel  his  bJother,whichwere  oucr  the 
trcauircs  of  the  lioufc  of  the  %  ©  is  r-. 

23  Of  the  amramitcs ,  and  thejv 
harites,  the  l?cb2omtes ,  and  the  ^5' 
5iclitcs: 

14  anb  S>hcbncl  the  fonne  of  <Sct> 
fljom, 


OrAfml! 
for  the  fmaS 
ai  for  the 
great. 
ICxJlcJAfe- 
[helemutk, 
ver.l. 


jHeh-.g*- 
therints. 


\SeelM*g- 
10.4.  i.ehr. 
9.4,11. 


tbinJt, 

\\Or,Lihi, 
h..f.6.l7. 


Or,lehiel, 
ch*p.t}.i. 


Officers  appointed  Chap.xxvij.  for  the  King. 


\HA.Mtof 
the  battels 
ttndfboiles. 


f  Hel>. otter 
the  charge. 


\  Heb.lh'tng. 


fyom,  tbe  rottne  of  £|9ofes,  was  ruler  of 
tbetteafures. 

%<,  3inD bis b2Ctb?cnby  <£liC5cr : &e< 
fiabiab  bis  fomte,  anb  3Jefbaiab  bis 
fonnc ,  anb  3fo2am  bisfonne ,  atib  zt- 
clj2i  ljts  fonnc,  $  £>ftclomitft  bisfonne. 

26  nsfjitb  Sbclomttb  anb  bis  bze< 
tl)?cn,ibereoucrautl)ctrcafurcsoftl)c 
bcbitatc  things ,  tbbicb  £>auib  tbc  bing 
anb  tbccbicfe  fatbcrs ;  tbc  raptamcs 
oucr  ttjoufanbs  anb  bunbjcbs,  anb  tbc 
captaines  of  tbc  boftc  ban  bcbicateb. 

17  t  £mt  of  tbc  fpc-plcs  tbonnc  in 
battels,  bib  tber  bcbitatc  to  tnaintaiuc 

tbC  l)OtlfCOftl)ClL  €)!"{©. 

28  Sltib  an  tbat  Samuel  tbc£>ccr, 
anb  £>aultbcfonne  of  Bifl),anb3tbncr 
tbc  fonnc  of  &tt ,  anb  3Ioab  tbc  fonnc 
ofzctuiabbab  bcbicateb ,  anbibhofo- 
cuerbab  bcbicateb  atnuljing,  it  wastm* 
bertbebanbof  5>belonutb  anb  of  bis 
bjctbjcn. 

29  c  €>f tUc  3f ?ljarttcjs,  Cbenatttafl 
anb  bis  fonnes,  were  foz  tljc  outtbarb 
bufines  oucr  3Jfracl,  fo:  officers  anb 
Jubgcs. 

50  And  of  tbe  $eb2onits ,  ^afyabtab 
anb|)isbzetb?cn,nienofDalour,atbou' 
fanb  anb  fcucn  bunbjcb,  were  t  officers 
among  tbem  of  3Jfraci  on  tbis  Gbe 
gjozbentbeftibarb ,  in  allbufincs  oftljc 
%  «d  «  ©,  anb  in  tbc  fcruice  of  tbe  btng. 

31  ^inongtlje  $eb2omtes  was  gieri; 
tab  tbe  cbicfc,  euen  among  tbc  $?rb20- 
nits,acco2bmg  to  tbc  generations  ofbis 
fatbcrs  :  tn  tbc  fourtictb  peereof  tljc 
reigncof  2Damb ,  tbey  tbcrefougbtfo2, 
anb  tberc  Vbcrc  fount)  among  tbem 
migbtte  men  of  baiour ,  at  3te5cr  of 
©ilcab. 

32  3mb  bis  bzetb?en,men  of  baiour, 
tberettbo  tboufanb  anb  feuenbunbzeb 
cbicfe  fatbcrs  ,  tbbom  i&ng  2>auib 
mabc  rulers  ouer  tbc  3&eubcnitcs,fbe 
oabites, $  tbc baifc  tribcof fcTSanafTcb, 
fomierpmatterpcrteiningto©ob;anb 
t  affaires  of  tbe  bing. 

C  H  A  P.   XXVI  t. 

1  The  twelue  Captaines  ,  for  euery  feuerall 
moneth.  16  The  Princes  of  the  twelue 
Tribes.  15  The  numbriiic;  of  the  people  is 
hindered.   15    Dauidsfeuerall  Officers. 

Cibe  tbc  cbilbicn  of  3Jf= 
rael  after  tbeir  number,  to 
wit,  tbe  cbicfe  fatbers  anb 
3j*5g8oi}£  captaines  of  tboufanbs 
J&R&M  anb  bunbzeos,  anb  tbeir 
officers  tbat  fecueb  tbe  bing  m  an? 


matter  of  tbecourfes,  Vbliicr)  cametn, 
ano  tbent  out  monetb  bp  monetb, 
tb,:ougbout  all  tbe  monetbs  of  tbe 
peace,  of  cuer?  courfc  were  ttbentie  anb 
fouretbonfanb. 

2  jJDuer  tbe  ftrft  cour fe  foi  tlje  Rrff 
monetb  was  "jafbobcain  tbc  fonnc  of 
zabbtel,  anb  in  bis  courfc  were  ttbentie 
anb  fourc  tboufanb. 

3  )©f  tbe  cbilbzcn  of  0ere?,  w»stbc 
cl)iefeofautbecaptainesoftbeboft,fo2 
tbe  firftmonetb. 

4.  :3iib  ouer  tbe  courfc  of  tbe  feconb 
monetb  TbasllSDobat  an  3bobi«>anb  of 
bis  courfe  tbas  S0iftlotl)  alfo  tbe  ruler : 
3fn  bis  courfc  iikcwifewcre  ttbentie  anb 
fouretbonfanb. 

<,  iLbctbubeaptatncoftbcIjoftfo? 
tlie  tbitbmontb  was  2ScnanUj  tbc  fonnc 
of  3Ieboiabaa||tbicfe  pueft,  anb  in  bis 
courfc  were  ttbcntp  anb  four  c  tboufanb. 

6  1CbiS  is  that  28cnaialj  ,  who  was 

*  migbtte  among  tbc  tbittie,  anb  aboue 
tbc  tbirtp :  anb  tn  IjiS  courfc  was  ;ami* 
sabab  bisfonne. 

7  1^btfOUrtbcaptainef02rbefOUrtb 

monetb  was  3fabel  tbebjotljerof  350; 
ab,  anb  zebabiab  bisfonne  after  bun : 
anb  tn  bis  courfe  were  ttbentie  anb  fourc 
tboufanb. 

8  %X)t  fiftb  captaine   foj    tl)C   fiftl) 

monetb,was  £>l)ambutb  tbc  Sfetabitc : 
anb  m  bis  courfc  were  ttbentie  anb  four  e 
tboufanb. 

9    XbC firt captaine  fo? tl)C G# UlOnCtb, 

was  gira  tbe  fon  of  3Jbbeft)  tbe  Xeboitc: 
anb  in  \yis  courfe  were  nbentic  anb  four  c 
tboufanb. 

io  Xbe  feucntb  captaine  fo?  ti)t  feuentb 
monetb  was$elc5  tjie  0elomte,  of  tbe 
ebilb2en  of  <ffpb2aim :  anb  m  \iis  courfc 
were  ttLicitttc  aim  fourc  tboufanb. 

1 1  Xbe  cigbtb  ^ptaine  foi  tbc  eigbtb 
monetb ,  was^ipbecai  tbe  I^ufbatljitc, 
of  tljc  zarljites :  anb  in  bis  courfc  were 
tlbentte  anb  foure  tboufanb. 

ii  %\)t  ntntb  captaine  fo:  t\\t  nintl) 
monetb ,  was^biC5ertbe3netotl)ite,of 
tbc26eniamites  tanbinljis  courfe  were 
ttbentie  anb  four  e  tboufanb. 

n   %\)t  tentl)  captaine  fo?  tllC  ttntlj 

monetb ,  was  ££)abarai  tbe  i!5etopI>T 
tbitc,of  tljc  zar bites :  anb  m  bis  courfe 
were  ttbentie  anb  foure  tboufanb. 

14  %\)t  eleuentb  captaine  foj  tbeelc? 
ucntb  monetb  was  26etiaiab  tbe  $ira- 
tbointc,  of  tbe  ebiUnen  of  Cphzaim: 
anbinbis  courfc  were  ttbentv  anb  foure 
tboufanb. 
SHqi k  Xbc 


\\OrfDsda.i 
Sam. I}.?. 


\\Or,prirrei- 

pa/toffier. 


*2.Sam.ij. 

IO.ll.3J. 

&i.Cliron. 
11.14. 


Officers  for  the  I.Chron.  Kings  feruice. 


\\Or,Hctfd, 
Chap.  n. io 


*  i.  Chron, 
2i.7.z.fam. 

245  &c. 

ccndcd. 


f  Hct>.  ouer 
that  which 
was  of  the 
vineyards. 


15  XhCttbClfthcaptainefoittjetlbelfth 

moueth\was||$clbaithe4l5ctophathitc, 
of  4Dthnicl :  anb  in  his  tourfc  were  nben* 
tic  anb  four  cthoufanb. 

16  C  furthermore,  oucr  the  tribes 
of  3Jfrael :  Xhc  ftulcc  of  the  Bcube; 
mtcs  was  e\\t*,n  the  fonnc  of  ztchn: 
of  the  £nmeomtes ,  £>hephatiah  the 
fonnc  of  sspaachah. 

17  £>f  thclUuitcs :  fcafbabiah  the 
fonnc  of  Lemuel ;  of  the  aaronites, 
zaboK, 

18  5Df3Jubah,«iihu,oneofthcb2e; 
tlwcn  of  2T>auiD :  of  3lffacl)ar  ,£)mn  tlje 
fonnc  of  £0tchacl. 

19  £>f  zebulun ,  3Khmaiah  the  fon 
of  Obabtah:  of  jRaphtalt,  3Jcnmoth 
tlje  fonnc  of  3l5rtel. 

20  ^Dfrt)cchUD,:cnof€pI)2atm,^)0' 
fbcathe  fonnc  of  3t5a55talj :  oftlit  Ijaifc 
tnbe  of  £0anaffch ,  3Ioel  the  fonnc  of 
pcbaiah. 

21  £>f  thchalfe  tribcofiipanafrchin 
<5tieao  ,3Jbbotbcfonncof  zecbattab: 
of 25emamm,3Jaau"cl  tlje  fon  of  3Jbncc. 

22  £)f3)an,  faciei  the  fonnc  of 
3krobant.1E;befcwerettjcpniucsoftbe 
tribes  of 3ifracl. 

23  CaSntSDauibtooKcnotthenum' 
bcr  of  them  from  tibentte  yecres  olbc 
anb  bnber :  becattfe  the  %®bjb  hab 
faib ,  hec  lboulb  mcrcafc  3Jfracl  UKe  to 
thefrarresof  the  heauens. 

24.  3Joab  the  fonnc  of  zcruiah  be? 
gan  to  number,  *  but  he  finifbcb  not,  bc- 
taufc  there  fell  ibjath  fwitagatnft'Jf; 
racl,  neither  tibas  elic  number  put  tn 
the  account  of  the  Chronicles  of  Bing 
Dauib. 

25  C3nb  oucr  the  Bingstreafurcs, 
was  ^maucth  tlje  fonnc  of  3lbiel:  anb 
oucr  the  ftoje-houfes  m  the  ftclbs,in  tl)e 
cmcs,ano  m  the  biliagcs,  anb  in  the  tfc 
ttlcs,  was  3Jchonatbanthc  fonne  of  %ly 
3tah. 

26  3ttb  oucr  them  that  bib  tbeibojlie 
ofthcficlb,fo,!  tillage  ofthc  arounb,  was 
€5rithc  fonnc  of  Chelub. 

27  3lnb  oucr  tlje  <Umcyarbs ,  was 
£>htmcithc  Kamathite :  t  oucr  the  in- 
tr  cafe  ofthc  bincyarbsfoj  tbelbine  cel- 
lars, lbas  £>abbt  the  Ztpbnute. 

28  3tnboucrtljc  jDltuc trccs,anbthc 
£>ycomo2C  trees  that  were  m  the  loibc 
piamcs,  wasBaai-hananthC(3ebcntc : 
anb  oucr  the  cellars  of  oplc  was  3Joafl). 

29  3ln0  oucr  thebcrbes  that  feb  in 
Aharon ,  was  £>hctrai  the  5>harouitc : 
anb  oucr  the  hcrbstbat  were  m  the bai 


leps,  was  5>baphat  the  fonnc  of  3blai. 

30  £>uec  the  camels  alfo ,  *as  £)oil 
the  3Ifbmaelite :  anb  oucr  tbe3uTcs,was 
3jehbetah  the  £J9cronotljttc. 

31  3no  oucr  the  flocKes,  was  53515 
the  If>agetite.  3tll  thefe  were  tlje  rulers 
ofthefubftanccibhKh  was  KmgSDautbs. 

31  31lfo  Jonathan  2>auios  bncle, 
Ujas  a  counfcllcr,  a  ibifc  man,  anb  a 
||^>cnbc:anb3ehielthc  Ifonne  of  i^arh' 
mom,  wasiDuh  the  Kings  fonnes. 

33  anb2bitopbcl  was  the  lungs  couiv 
feller,  anb$ufbat  theSlrchitc,  was  the 
Kings  companion. 

34  3inb  after  3lhitophcl ,  wasgfeho- 
tabathc  fonnc  of  2Scnaiah,  anb^bia^ 
thar :  anb  the  general  of  the  Bings  ar= 
miewas^joab. 

CHAP.  XXVIII. 

1  Dauid  in  a  folemne  ailembly  ,hauing  declared 
Gods  rauour  to  him,and  promife  to  his  fonne 
Solomon,  exhortedi  them  to  feare  God.  9. 
20  Hee  encburageth  Solomon  to  build  the 
Temple.  11  Hegiuethhimpaternesforthe 
forme,  and  gold  and  filuer  for  the  materials. 

$e4KaB397BS>2Dattffialfcn*tei>  all 
Sffiml  the  juices  of  3ifracl,  the 
Wr=i$&i  pmucs  of  thetrtbes,  anb 
ia\\^  the  captains  ofthc  compa* 
nics  that  mlniftrcb  to  the 
King  bp  tourfc :  anb  the  taptauics  oucr 
thethoufanbs,  anbeaptames  oucr  the 
hunb:cbs,anb  tlje  fteibarbs  oucr  all  ttje 
fubftancc  anb  ||  poffeflionof  theBuig, 
anb  of  htsfonncs ,  ibith  the  llofficcrs, 
I  anb  ibith  themtghtic  men,anb  ibith  all 
tbcbaitantmcn,bnto3Jcrufalcm. 

x  Xbcn2>amb  the  King  ttoobbpbp; 
on  his  feete,anb  faib,  $carc  mc,mv  bjc- 
th?cn,anb  mp  people :  Zs  fo?  mc,3J  hab 
tn  mine  hearttobutlbeanhoufe  of  reft 
fo?  the  ^rfte  ofthc  Couchant  of  the 
jfL©is^,anbfo2thc*footcftooleofour 
d5ob,$habmabcreabpfo2thcbuilbing. 

3  26ut(5obfaibbntomc,1thoufhait 
i  not  buiibc  an  ijoufc  fo?  mpi5amc,  bv 
taufe  thou  haft  been  a  man  of  ibarrc,  anb 
hartflKbtbioob. 

4  $olbbctt,thcfL©iKiP<5obof3f 
iracl  thofeme  befoje  all  the  houfcofmp 
ratlicr,  to  be  King  ouer  3Jfracl  fo:  cucr : 
fojhchatf)  chofen  *3liioahtobcthcru^ 
let ;  $  ofthc  houfcotjiibah ,  the  hottlc 
of  mv  father  ■,  anb  among  the  fonnesof 
mv  fattier  ,IjcliHeb  me  to  mafcemeiung 
|Oueraii3)fracl: 

I  $  *  #nb  of  all  mp  ronnes  ( fo;  the 
I  %  ©  k  ©  h<*th  guien  mc  man?  fonnes) 
Dec 


Or.fem- 
tjrie. 

Or,  Hack- 
momte. 


\{OrfjllfH. 

\\Or,Eu- 
nuchcl. 


"l.Sim.7. 
y,1 3. 1. kin 
5-5,l.chro, 
2J.8. 


\Hchikoit 


Gen.  49-S. 
i.fam.  \6. 
n.pfil.78, 
«7- 


'Chi.  23.1 


Dauid  exhorteth     Chap.xxix.   his  fonne Solomon. 


ftee  hath  chofcn  Solomon  my  fonne,to 
fit  upon the  th?oucof  the  KUigbomc  of 
tljelicua©  oucc  "Jfrael. 

6  3nb  he fait)  Unto me,  Solomon 
thy  fonne,  hecfliaiibiMomyhoufe  anb 
my  courts :  foz'J  hauc  chofcti hint  to  be 
my  fonne,  anb  gj  UMl  be  his  father. 

7  i$o?eouer,  3f  will  cftabltfl)  ljus 
rungbonicfo?  cuer,  if  he  bctcouftantto 
bo  my  commanbementsanb  my  iubge* 
nunts,asat  this  bay. 

s  &OVD  thercfoie  tit  tiie  Cgilt  of  all 
3mwl,tljccongrcgattonofthe}L£>iB£>, 
ano  in  the  aubicucc  of  oar  ©ob ,  itccpc, 
anb  fceKc  fo?  all  the  tommanDcmcnts 
of  flic  %  «5  is  i?  your  <5ob,  tliat  ye  may 
poffeffe  this  goob  lanb ,  anb  leauc  it  fa? 
an  inheritance  fo?  your  thtlb?en  after 
you,fo?euer. 

9  C*3uit>  tl)ou,:§>olomon  my  fonnt, 
ttnoro  thou  tile  ©ob  of  thy  fatlier ,  anb 
Ctruet)imibttliapcrnter)(art,anbrbitl) 
a  Vbtlling  minbe :  foz  tlic  %  «r>  is  ©  fear- 
chcthalUjcarts,  anDuubcrttaubeth  all 
the  imaginations  of  tlie  thoughts :  tf 
thou  fcclte  flint,  he  ttNflbcfouno  oftliec, 
bttt  tf  tnon  fo?fafee  l)im,  tjc  ibtll  taft  t»)cc 
off  fojeucr. 

io  XaKcliecbnott»,fo2trje!L€>m© 
hath  chofcn  thee  to  butlbcan  houfefo? 
the  £»anctuarte :  be  ftrong,  anb  boc  it. 

1 1  C  Xlien  2>autb  gattc  to  Solo- 
mon Hts  fonne  tlic  patcmr  of  the  po?tl), 
anb  of  the  fionfes  tljcreof ,  anb  of  trjc 
trcafurtes  thereof,  anb  of  the  bpper 
chambers  thereof,  anb  of  the  inner  par* 
lours  tljcreof,  anb  of  the  place  of  the 
flljcrcic  fcatc. 

ii  3nb  tlie  patctnc  rof  alltfiat  Ijcc 
rjab  fey  the  fptift ,  of  tlie  courts  of  tlic 
rjoufc  of  the  fL£>is£>,  anb  of  all  tlic 
rJiambers  ronnb  about,  of  the  trcafu- 
ties  of  tljc  lioufc  of  d5ob,anb  of  the  trea* 
furtes  of  ti)c  bebtcate  things : 

13  ^ifo  fb?  the  courfes  of  t!ic  ^ncfts 
anbthcfLcurtes,  f  fo?  all  tljc  U)o?rc  of 
the  ferutccof  trie  houfeofthefL<msn?, 
anb  fo?  all  the  bcffels  of  fcrutce  in  the 
rjoufcoft!)cfLs)iBm 

14  Hce  Saue  of  gofbc  by  lfectght,  fo? 
th.ngsofgolbcfojailtnftTuntentsofail 
manner  of  fcrutce:  timer  alfo  fo?  all  in- 
frruments  of  ulucr ,  or  ttmsfot  >  fo:  all 
mftrumcuts  of  euery  feinbe  of  frruite : 

15  £um  tlje  ibetghtfo?  the  Canbie^ 
mencsof  golbc ,  anbfo?  tlitiiiampcs  of 
golbc ,  by  weight  fo?  etiery  raublcftichc, 
anb  foz  trie  lampes  thereof:  anb  fo:  tljc 
CanbiemcKcs  of  Diner  by  weight,  both 


*  2.  Sam. 7. 
12.  z.chro. 


\Hct.JlTim£ 


•i.Sam.itf. 

7.  pfal.no. 
2. and  7.9. 
icrc.  1 1.20. 
and  17.  10. 
aod.20.  12. 


that  wa 
with  him. 


fo?  the  Canbiefticftc  anb  alfo  fo?  the 
lampes  tlieceof ,  atcojmng  to  thebfeof 
encry  eanblcmcUe. 

16  ^nbbylDcightiicegau?  golbc  fo: 
the  tables  of  fl)cib-b?cab ,  fo?  cttcry  ta? 
blc,  anb  liHcttitfc  filuer  foz  thctablcsof 
filuer. 

17  3lfo  pure  golbc  fo?  the  Reft)* 
hoofers,  anb  tlic  bolblcs,  anb  the  cups : 
anb  fo?the  golbrnbafuis  hee  ?aue  golbc 
by  ttetght,  fo?  euery  bafttt-  ant)  libc* 
tbifefiiutr  by  Vbetght ,  fo?  euery  bafin  of 
filuer. 

18  3Jnb  fo?  the  3iitac  of sntenfc ,  rctV 
ucb  golbe  by  ib«ght;  anb  golb  fo?  tlic 
paternc  of  the  charct  of  the  *  Chcru* 
btms,  that  fp?cab  out  then  wmsy,  ano  to* 
ucreo  tljc  ^racof  tljcCoueriantof  the 

19   Sill  tlltS,  M  Dauid,  tlje  %  SD  IS  ID 

mabemec  bnbcrCanb  inlb?ttiugby  his 
Ijanb  i)pon  nice,  euen  au  tljc  ibo?ltesof 
tljts  paternc. 

zo  ^nb  Dautbfatb  to  Solomon  rjts 
fonne,  26c  ftrong,  ano  of  goob  courage, 
anb  boc  it:  fcare  not,  no?  be  btfmayeb, 
fo?the|tfi)is©  <!5ob,  cuennty  d5ob, will 
be  nnththec ;  Ije  BiUlnotfatle  thee,  no? 
fo?faftc  thee,imttll  tljou  Ijatt  fmiujcb  all 
thettto?lte  fo?  tlje  feruice  oftlje  Ijoufc  of 
tljc  5L  c>  1S  32>. 

ii  2tno  beljolb,  ffjc  courfes  of  the 

#?ieftS  atlb  tfjeHCUiteS,  euen  they  (hall 

be  ami  thee  fo?  all  tlje  fcrutce  of  the 
houfc  of  ©ob ,  anb  tiicre  ^a!1  be  ttjitlj 
thtefo?  all  manner  of  mo?ftemanU)ip, 
euery  Uniting  f  utlfull  man,  fo?  any  ma- 
ner  of  fcrutce :  alfo  the  0?tncesanb  all 
tlic  people  win  bee  wholly  at  tljy  com* 
manbtment. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

1  Dauid  by  his  example  and  intreatie,  6  cau- 
leth  the  Trinces  and  people  to  ofter  willing- 
ly, io  Dauids  thankefgiuing  and  prayer, 
io  The  people  hauing  blefled  God  and  (z- 
cuficed,  make  Solomon  King.  z6  Dauids 
reigne  and  death. 

JElrthcrmo?e ,  2>auib  tlic 
l&utgfaibbnto  autljecon* 
greganon,  Solomon  my 
fonne ,  whome  alone  d5ob 
hath  chofen,  isyet*young 

anbtetiber ,  anb  thc!bo?fcc  !sgrcat:fo? 

the  palace  is  not  fo?  man ,  but  fo?  tlje 

?L©isp©ob. 
z  /Boil)  5  lianc  p?eparcb  tltitlj  all 

mvmightfo?  thcliourc  of  my  (Sob,  the 
3Eiq  3  golb 


"l.Sam.4^ 
i.  king.  6. 
«3,&C. 


•Cha.22.j- 


TheP 


nnces 


ifts.     LChron. 


Dauidj 


prayer. 


"i.king.p. 
18. 


\  Heir Ao  fill 
hi*  hand. 


•Mat.«.l] 

I. tun. 1. 17. 
J[)OC.  J.I  3. 


gOlD  ft)?  things  to  be  made  of  gOiO,  thC  Of" 

uer  fo?  things  of  Glucr ,  ano  the  b?atTe  to? 
tilings  of  tyafle,  tl)c  yjon  fo?  things  of  y- 
con,  anbtboobfo?  things  of  iboob  ,onijc 
ftoncs,  ano  ftones  to  be  fet,  gliftcrmg 
ftoncs, ano  of  Dtuets  colours,  anb  ail 
matter  of  pjecious  (tones,  ano  marble 
ftoncs  in  abunbantc. 

j  j$o;tcoucr,  betauft  3  banc  fet  my 
affection  to  the  rjoufe  of  my  (5oD ,  3 
baucofmtncoibncpjopcrgooo.ofgoio 
ano  filuec,  which  3  baue  giucn  to  the 
rjoufe  of  my  (5oo,  ouet  s  aboue  all  that 
3  baucpjcparcofojtbc  holy  rjoufe: 

4  Euen  tb?ee  tboutano  talents  of 
golb,  of  trje  goto  of  *  Dpbir ,  ano  feucn 
tboufanb  talents  of  tcfinco  Glucr, to  0 
uctiay  trje  iballcs  of  the  boufes  ibith 
all. 

5  Xbcgoio fo?  things  of  goioe ,  ano 
the  Gluet  to?  things  of  Oluet,  ano  fo?  all 
matter  of  ibonte  to  be  made  op  the  banos 
of  Artificers.  Anorbbotbenisibtlltng 
t  to  confccrate  bis  feruicc  this  bay  bnto 

ttjCfLSDiB©: 

6  C3Cbentbeebicfe  of  the  fathers 
ano  Ounces  of  tbc  tribes  of  3frati,ano 
ttjctaptainesof  tboufanosaito  of  bun* 
ojcds,  ttntb  the  rulers  ouer  tDe  Btngs 
uwfte,  offeree  lbillingly, 

7  Anb  gauc  fo?  trje  feruicc  of  the 
rjoufe  of  (Sob,  of  golb  fiue  tboulano  ta* 
lcnts,anb  ten  tboufanb  Ojammcs:  ano 
of  filuer,  ten  tboufanb  talents :  ano  of 
bjaffe,  ctgbtccne  tboufanb  talents :  anb 
one  tjunojcb  tboufanb  talents  of  y?on. 

8  Anb  they  lbttb  lbbom  p?enous 
ftones  ibetcfounb,  gaue  them  to  trje 
treafurc  of  toe  boufe  of  trje  ?U>  is  ©,by 
tlje  bano  of  3Jcl)lcl  the  (5ctfl)onitc. 

9  1Lhcntbcpcopicrcioyeco,fo2tbat 
tljey  offeco  willingly  ,bccattfcMtb  per 
fectfjeart  they  offcreb  lbillingly  to  the 
%  o  w  © :  anb  ©auiO  the  Bmg  alto  re- 
toyecoibitb  great  ioy. 

10  c  nabcrefozc  ©atuO  bleflco  tfjc 
!Lar)HE>  before  all  tfjc  Congregation : 
ano  Dattto  faioc ,  26leflc0  bee  tljou, 
%  ©  is  id  <sob  of  31fracl  our  father,  fo? 
eueranbeucr. 

11  ICbinc,  3©  !L  ©  k  jp  ,  is  the  great* 
ncs.ano  tbc  poftier,  anb  tbc  gio:y,$tbc 
bictonc,anb  tl)c  maieftic :  foMllthat  isin 
tbebeaucn  « in  tbc  eartij,  isthine:  tbinc 
is*  trjcbingoomc  j£)  %  ©  is  jD,anotl)ou 
act  craltcb  as  bcao  aboue  all. 

a  25otlmcbcs,ano  honour  comcof 
tbec,  anotbou  rcigncftoucrail,  ano  in 
thine  fjano  is  poibcr  ano  might,  ano  in 


throe  banc  it  is  to  matte  great,  ano  to 
giueftrengtlj  bnto  all. 

I  j  0o)to  tbcretbite,  our  (5ob,  tbee 
tbanfee  thee,  ano  pjaifc  thy  glonbus 
jftamc. 

14.  26uttbbo amgj, anotbrjatismy 
peoplctbat  lbetbouto  tbe  able  to  offer 
fo  Unlhngly  after  this  to?t4o?  all  tbings 
come  of  tbee,  ano  of  t  tbinc  otbne  bauc 
ybcgtucntbce. 

15  jfojibe  are  ftrangcrs  before  tbec, 
ano  foiourncrs,  as  were  all  our  fathers : 
*£>ur  oayes  on  the  earth  are  as  aftja? 
oolb,  ano  there  is  none  t  abioing. 

16  s©fU>ia3©ottr(5oO,ailtbiSftQ?e 
that  Ybebaucpjeparco  to  butio  tbec  an 
boufefo?tbmeboty>!2ame,commetbof 
tbinc  bans ,  ano  is  all  tbinc  ottme. 

17  3  bnolb  alfo,  my (5oo,tbattbou 
*truft  tfje  bcart.ano  baft  pleawrcmbp* 
rtcjbtnefle.  Asfo?mc,(ntbebpngbtncs 
of  mmebcart  3  b«»ue  ibrtlinglyoffereo 
all  tbcfc  tbmgs :  ano  nolb  bauc  3  feme 
ibitbioy,  tby  peopleibbicbaretp^fcnt 
berc,  to  offer  Vbillmgly  bnto  tbee. 

is  £>  %  0  !B  p  ©00  of  Ab?aljam, 
3Jfaac  ano  of  3Jfracl  our  fathers,  feeepe 
this  fo?  cucr  m  tbc  unagination  of  tfjc 
thoughts  of  the  heart  of  thy  people.ano 
||  prepare  their  heart  bnto  njee: 

19  Ano  giuc  bnto  Solomon  my  fonnc 
a  perfect  heart  to  bcepe  thy  Commauns 
ocments,  thy  teftimontes,  ano  thy  fta- 
tutes,  ano  to  Ooc  all  thefe  things,  ano  to 
buiio  the  pallacc,  for  flje  ibhuD  3  haue 
maoep2ouifion. 

xo  €  Ano  SDamofaiO  to  all  the  Con- 
gregation: ii5oU>eblclTetbe1L£>iB20 
your  (5oo.  AnO  all  the  Congregation 
blrfTeb  the  %  €>  k  ©  (5ob  of  their  fas 
tbers,  anobolbeo  oolbnc  their  heaos, 
anoibo^OjippeO  thc?L2DiBP ,  ano  the 
Bing. 

II  Ano  they  ticrificeofacrifices  bnto 
the  %  <d  is  ©,$  offcreb  burnt  offerings 
bnto  the  %  ©  is  1?  on  the  mojrotb  after 
that  bay,  euenatboufanb  bullocbcs,a 
tboiuano  rams.and  a  tboufanb  lambcs, 
lbith  their  Onnbc  offerings,  ano  faenfc 
ccs  in  abunoance  fo?  ail'Jfracl : 

zz  AnO  010  catc  ano  Onnfec  befoje 
the  %  a>  k  ©  on  that  bay  Ibttb  great 
glaoneffcano  tljey  maoc Solomon  the 
fonnc  of  2)auib  isitng  the  feconb  tune, 
anb*anomtco  himi)ntothe?l©tB©to 
bcthcchicfcgoucnjour,  ano  Zaoobto 
bc^ieft. 

2}  ichen  Solomon  fate  on  tlje 
th?oncof  tbeHiDiii©,  asbmginfteao 

of 


t  Hetr.re- 
taine  or  ob- 
tainjlrength 
t  Heir,  cf 
thinchand. 


Pf1l.59.il 
and  go. p. 
hcb.i  1.1  j. 
I.prt.l.ll. 

t  Hetr.ex- 

pctlauan. 


Cha.j8.p 
i.Sam.ltf.7 


f  Hci  found 


\\OrJliulijh 


1. King. t, 
33- 


[Solomons  royaltic.      Chap.].  Dauids  death. 


f  Htb.gtue 
thshindvn- 
der  Solomon. 


•l.King.3. 
1 3,  i.chro. 
i.i  2. ecdef 


I.King.  J. 

!tf. 


*  I  King.  3. 
4.1.Chro. 
KS.39. 
and 21.  2c. 

V7- 


*E%oi38, 


of  2>at«b  his  father ,  anb  pjofpcrcb, 
auD  all  3ffrael  obepeb  him. 

14  ^tto  all  the  pontes  anb  the  migh- 
tie  men,  anb  all  the  tonnes  liRcibifc  of 
King  2>auib,tfubmitteb  thcmfclucs  Vn 
to  Solomon  the  Btng. 

2*  £nb  the  ILsd  is  jd  niagmScb  So- 
lomon ercccbinglp  in  the  ftgtjt  of  all  35f 
racl,anb  *beftoibcb  Dpon  him  ruch  topal 
tnateftie ,  as  ftao  not  bene  on  an?  Ring 
before  him  in  SJfrael. 

z6  C  Xhus  SDauib  the  fonne  of 
3Jeffe,rcigneb  ouccail^fcael. 

27  3lnb  the  time  that  he  rcignebo- 
ucr  3Jfrael  ,was  fonrtiepcercs.  Seucn 


peercs reigneb  hce  in I^ctoon,  anb tljic- 
ticanb  thjee  pecres  reigneb  l)ec  in  3fc 
rutaicm. 

28  2inb  he  bicb  in  a  goob  olb  agcmll 
of bapes,  riches anb  honour :  anb  £>q< 
lomon  his  fonne  reigneb  in  his  fteab. 

29  0o\\)  the  acts  of2)auib  the  Bing 
firftanblaft,  bcholb,thev  are  xojitttn  in 
the  ||  boolie  of  Samuel  the  Seer ,  ann  in 
the  tboofee  of iftathan  tlje  ^ophct.anb 
in  tlje  booHe  of  <5ab  the  ^>eer, 

30  nattl)  an  his  r  eigne  Ann  his  might, 
anb  the  times  that  ibent  once  him,  anb 
ouec  3Jfcaei ,  anb  once  all  tlje  tung* 
bomcsofthccountrcps. 


,THE  SECOND  BOOKE 

of  the  Chronicles. 


chap.  1. 

The  folemneofferingof  Solomon  at  Gibeon. 
7  Solomons  choifeotwifdome  is  blefTedby 
God.   13  Solomons  ftrength  and  wealth. 

j3b£>olotuontht 
fonne  of  2l>auib 
ibas  ftrcngthncb 
in  his  iungbome, 
*anbfhc?L<DKS> 
his^obwasibith 
him ,  $  magmfieb 
htmcrceebinglp. 
2  XhenSolo* 
mon  fpaUebntoau3fftael,  to  the  cap- 
tames  of  thoufanbs  ,anb  of  hunbjebs, 
anb  to  tlje  "jubges,  anb  to  cuerp  goucr= 
noucinau  3lfracl,  thethicfe  of  thefa= 
thers. 

3  So  Solomon  anb  all  the  Cou= 
grcgattonibith  him,  ibent  to  the  high 
place  that  was  at  *  €>ibeon,fo2  there  ibas 
the  Xabernaclc  of  the  Congcegation  of 
«5ob ,  ibhith  ^ofes  the  fcruant  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  habmabc  in  the  ibilberneffe. 

4  *2Sutthe3itUeof(l5obhab2Da* 
nib  brought  bp  from  "ffiuriath-iearim, 
to  the  place  which  2>auib  hab  picpareb  fo? 
it :  fo?  he  hab  pitcheb  atcntfoj  it  at  3fc* 
rufaiem. 

5  ^o?couer*theb2arcn3lltarthat 


zscjaieel  the  fonne  of  tUci ,  the  fonne  of 
$ur,hab  mabc,  ||  heepntbcfo^ctheXa* 
beraatle  of  the  iC  e>  is  js> :  anb  Solo* 
monanb  the  Congcegation  fought  bn* 
to  it. 

6  3nb  Solomon  ibent  bp  thither 
to  the  tyafcn:3ltar  before  the  %  ©  a  ©, 
ibhtch  was  at  the  Cabernacle  of  the 
Congregation ,  anb  offcrcba  thoufanb 
burnt  offcringsbponit. 

7  C1Jn  that  night  bib  (Sob  appear  c 
bnto  Solomon ,  anb  faibc  bnto  !»tm 
3lffee  lbhat  3  Qjallgiuc  thee. 

8  3uib  Solomon  faibc  bnto  d5ob, 
Xhou  haft  thetbeb  great  meet?  bnto 
Dauio  mp  father  ,anb  haft  mabe*uic  to 
reigncin  his  fteab: 

9  ifrotb,  j©  H©ir©  <£ob,  let  thp 
pjomifebnto  Dautb  mp  father  be  efta* 
blifl)Cb :  *  to:  thou  haft  mabc  mce  l@nng 
ouer  a  people,  t  nHe  the  nuft  of  the  earth 
inmultittibe. 

10  <siuc  *  nice  no\b  lbifebomc  anb 
fenoibUbgc ,  that  3  map  goc  out  anb 
come  in  before  thtspeoplc.jFoiibho  can 
iubgc  this  tl)p  pcople,that  is  fo  greats 

11  3nb  d5ob  faib  to  Solomon,  2Se# 
caufe  this  ibas  in  thine  heart,  anb  thou 
haft  not  affeeb  riches,  ibeaith ,  0;  |jo> 
nour,  no2  the  life  of  thine  enemies,  net 
rhec  pet  haft  affecb  long  life ;  but  haft 

afucb 


\\Or,l,in<y 
rit. 

words. 


\\0r,vris 
thirt. 


•i.Chto. 

2B.J. 


•i.King.;. 

Q. 

f  Hcb.  mtfch 
Mtbc  daft 
of  the  earth. 
•i.King.  3. 
II, II. 
num.  2J. 
'7- 


Preparation  for  I  I.Chron. the  Temple. 


*  I  .Chron 

clcf  1.9.  1. 
chro.  p. 2* 


'  i  .King. to 
ltj.&c.and 
^6. 


"i.King.io 
36.  2. chro. 
9.37.28. 


*  i.King.  10 

aS.i.chro. 
9.28. 
t  /fc£.  the 
goingfoorth 
of  the  horfes 
which  rp.u 
Solomons, 


\Hch.by 
their  h*nd. 


\OrJftr*m 
i.JCwrf.5-1 


afltcD  ttiifebome  anD  UttoiwicDgc  fo? 
tt)v  fclfctnatthou  maveft  tttbgc  mv 
people,  ouccn)ljom3J  Ijaucmabc  tljcc 
Btttg: 

11  UDifcDome  anDfinoVblcDgcisgran* 
tco  unto  ti)tt ,  anD  3  Brill  sine  tljcc  rt= 
tncs,attDn>eaitlj,anDljonotir ,  furl)  as 
MtoncoftljclungsttaucIjaD,trjatl)attc 
bccncbcfo?c  tljcc,  ncttljerfball  tljcrca; 
nv  after  tlKcnattetncliftc. 

13  c  Xncn  Solomon  came  from  his 
lourncv  to  tbc  nigl)  place  tljat  w«  at  ©b 
bcott,  to  'jJcrufalcm,frotn  bcfo?c  tnc 
Xabcntaclc  of  tlje  Congregation ,  attb 
rcigncD  otter  3ffracl. 

14.  *3lnD  Solomon  gatuercDcljarcts 
anonojfcinen:  anolKclMD  atboufatto 
aubfourcl)tmD?cDtt)arcts,  anb  tmciut 
trjoufanDl)o?fcincu,  iulltrl)l)c  placcD  m 
tIictl)arct-cmcs,anD\DtfljtljcBtugat 
jjentfalcm. 

is  *  3inD  tlje  Btng  t  maDc  ftluct  anD 
golb  at  3Jmtfaicrn  as  plenteous  as  Clones, 
anb  CtDar  trees  maDcljcc  as  tlje  Svco- 
n  to?c  trees,  tljat  arc  in  tlje  bale  fo?abun* 
Dance. 

16  *  3tnb  t  Solomon  Ijao  ljo?fcs 
b?ougntoutofegvpt,anDtutcnvarnc: 
tlKBmgs  mcrtljants  retetucD  tlje  litv 
ncnvarneatap?tcc. 

17  3nD  tiKv  fctctjt  ftp  anb  b?ottgljt 
foo?tlt  ont  of  egvpt ,  a  tljarct  fo:  we 
Hunbjcb  njcRclsof  filncr ,  anbannojfc 
fo?  an  ounb:cb  anb  ftfttc:anbfo  biongljt 
fnevont  ljo?fcs  fo?  all  tlje  amgsoftlje 
i>tttitcs,anD  fo?  tlje  lungs  of  Sv?ia,  t  bv 
tljcsrmcancs. 

CHAP.    I L 

1  and  17  Solomonslabourersfordiebuilding 
of  die  Temple.  3  HisembafiagetoHuram  I 
forworkcmenaiidprouifionofftuffc.  n  Hu- ! 
ram  fendcth  lum  a  kmdcanfwere. 

g^^S^R^S)  Solomon  Bctcrnii* 
Vi  neb  to  btulb  an  tioufe  fo? 
tf)cj3amcoftnc?L<s>is3D, 
anb  an  Ijoufc  fo?  Ijts  lung; 
come. 
1  31nb  Solomon  tolb  outth?ecfto?c 
anb  tcsmc  tnoufanb  mm  tobeare  bur^ 
bens ,  atibfottrcfco?ctlioitfauDtoDclDc 
mthc  mountamc ,  anb  tluec  tnonfanb 
anb  ftrc  hunD:cb  to  ouerfee  tljcm. 

3    C3lttD  Solomonfcntto  ||  Djttram 
thclwigof  £v*c,  faring,  3lstl)ouDiD;  \ 
bed  oeale  limit  DauiDtuv  farnct ,  anb 
biDbeft  fenb  lum  Ccbarsto  builDcIjim 
an  noufc  toDiucll  tljcrcm ,  cucn  fodeafc 

.•.uli  me. 


\  Het.tr,- 
ccrtfeaftyt- 


'  i.Ki 


ig.l 


lj.  2. chro. 


retained,  or 

obtained 

jirength. 


4  JScljolD,  3  butio  an  noufc  to  tlje 
name  of  tlje  %  <s>  is  5?  mv  <5ob,  to  DcDt= 
tatc  it  to  Ijtm,  anb  to  burnt  bcfo?c  Ijtm 
tfrocct  uucnfc ,  anb  fo?  tlje  tontmuail 
flicib  -  b?eab,  ano  fo?  ityt  burnt  offrmgs 
mojmng  anb  cuentng,  on  tlje  Sab 
batlis.anbontDcneiDsiPooncSjanbon 
the  folcmnc  fcafrs  of  tlje  %  £>ts&  our 

(50b.  XDtS  is  an  ordinance  ft)?  CUCrtO  3& 

tacl. 

5  ^nb  tijc  Ijoufc  itoljtcn  3J  buflb ,  is 
great:  fo?  great  is  our  <5on  aboue  all 
gobs. 

6  *  2Sut  rbljo  t  is  awe  to  buflb  fittit 
an  Ijoufc,  feeing  tlje  Deaucn,  anD  Ijca* ;  «..s. 
ucn  of  Ijcauens  cannot  tontcinc  l)im  <  \H'h-hah 
iDljo  am  3  tljcn  tljat  3  fljouib  butib 
l)tm  an  Doufc;  feae  onclv  to  burncfa= 
cnnccbefo?cl)mu 

7  Scnb  me  noiD  roereftne  a  man, 
cumnng  to  mo?Kem  golbanD  mfilucr, 
anD  m  b?affc,  anb  in  v?on,anb  m  purple 
anb  crmuon,anb  bie\D,anD  tljat  tanf  un  i 
to  tgrauc,  until  tlje  nuniing  men  tljat  t  ha» 
areiDitlj  me  tit  3JttDal),  anD  m  ^crufa^  ?' 
lem,  ibljomc  2)autDmvfatljerbtDp?o^ 
uibe. 

8  Scnb  mc  alfo  CcDar  trees,  firrc 
trees,  anD  H^igttme  trees,  out  of  %v  n 
banott :  ( fo?  3  mtotb  tljat  tD?  fcruants 
can  f  Hill  to  tut  tunber  m  Itebatton)  anD 
beljolD,  mv  fcruants  rhaibe  rbttl)  tl)v  fer^ 
uattts, 

9  etten  to  p?epar  e  mc  timber  in  a? 
bunbancc :  fo?  tlje  noufc  mrnth  %  atna^ 
bout  to  butlb.flialbctrbottDcrfull  great. 

io  anb  bclioiD/Jtbillgtue  to  tftv  fcr- 
uants tt»c  DelbcTS  rfcat  ntt  tunber, 
tlbcnnc  tDoufanb  mcafurcs  of  beaten 
ttincat,anDtibentictnouranDmcafUrcs 
of  barlcv ,  anDtiDcnttctDoufanDbaths 
of  \Dtnc,anDttt)ctuic  tljoutanbbatljs  of 
ovle. 

ii  C1i:i)en??nramtl)elungcfXv?c 
anftucrcb  m  m?itmg,  IDlttcI)  Ijcc  fctu  to 
Solomon :  ?6ctaufcthc!L£»i3iDrjatl) 
louco  lws  people,  ijcc  Ijatlj  mabe  tlKc 
Bmg  otter  tlicnt. 

xi  fturam  faib  mo?eotter,  25lcffcb  be 
tnc  %  €>  is  jd  ooD  of  3?fracl  trjat  maoc 
ncauctt  attb  cartl),tt»Bo  rjatl)  gmrnto 
£>attiD  tltc  Btttg  a  Vbtfc  fonnc ,  t  tnDncD 
Ybttn  p?ttocnte  anD  DnDerftaniJtng,tl)at 
migltt  butlb  an  notifc  fo?  the  %  o  is.  jd, 
anD  an  noufc  fo?  Ins  lungbomc. 

13  3tnD  notn  3  Itattc  fent  a  tunning 
man  (utDtteb  nuth  DttDcrftantr.ng)  of 
Dttrammvfatliers: 

i+  Xhc  fonnc  of  a  lDomatt  of  tlic 
Dauglv 


mngjtm,  1 . 
Ktn.lQAt. 


\Heb.  great 
AnitwcndfCT' 
fulL 


\}Ub.]t$en- 
tngpruJenct 
.rnd  Z'ndir- 
ftandmg. 


The  building  Chap.ii  j.  of  the  Tern  pleJ 


j  Hrltc- 
cordtnjto 
alllh  tired. 
\Hii.Ufhc 

•AiVcr. ;. 

\  Heir  the 
men  the 
(1,-nnoeri. 


'Alitis  vcr. 


•i.Kin  6.  l , 

\\Or,y,h,eh 
retu  feme  of 
Daui.ihu 
fxther. 


||0r,.4ra//- 
nah,  2. Sam 
24.18.1.?/*;-. 


21.18 


*  I.King.tf. 

2. 

f  Het.frm- 
ded. 


•t.King.6 
3- 


Daughters  of  2>an,  ano  hisfathct  was  a 
man  of  %yic,  f  ftiifuii  to  ibotfte  m  golbc 
anbmfiluer,in  bjaffc,  inj>jon,mftone 
anomttmber,inpurplc,mblelb,anbin 
fine  linen,  ano  tn  cmnfon :  alfo  to  gcaue 
anpmanec  of  grautng,  ano  tofinbout 
eucrp  beuice  ibhich  (hall  be  put  to  him, 
lbith  thy  cunning  men,  ano  lbith  the 
cunning  men  of  mp  lo;D  3>auiD  tfjpra? 
tJjer. 

15  0ovo  therefore  the  tbheatc  ano 
the  bartep,rhe  ople  ano  the  lbine,rbhtch 
mp  Iojd  hath  fpoben  of,  let  him  fenb 
bntohisferuants: 

i6  3lnb  ibec  anil  cut  iboob  out  of 
^Lebanon ,  t  as  much  as  thou  (halt 
ncco ,  ano  Vbcc  Mil  bnng  it  to  thee  tn 
flotes  by  fea  to  1 3Joppa,  anb  thou  (halt 
cane  it  bp  to  3Jtcufalcm. 

17  C*3no  Solomon  numbjeb  all 
t  the  Grangers  that  were  m  the  lanoe  of 
3Jfracl,afterthenumb2mgibhcrclbith 
soauib  his  fatljcr  hab  nnmbjeb  them : 
anb  the?  ibere  founb  an  hunb;co  anb 
fittie  thoufanb,  anb  thjtce  thoufanb  anb 
ftjeehunojeb. 

is  3nbhcfct*th?ecf««eanbtenthou; 
fanb  of  them  to  be  beaters  of  bucbens, 
anb rourefeojethoufanb  to  be hcibcrs m 
the  mountamcanb  thjee  thoufanb  anb  I 
firchunDttbouerfccrs  to  fct  the  people1 
atbojbe. 

CHAP.    III. 

i  The  place,  and  time  of  building  the  Temple. 
3  Thcmeafuicand  ornaments  ot  thehoufe. 
ii  TheCherubims.  14  The  vaile and  pillars. 

l^cn*  Solomon  began  to 
biulb  the  houfe  of  the 
!L  <&  k  ©  at  jerufalem  in 
d3oiinti$onah,!!*bhere 
the  Lord  appeareb  bnto 
2>auio  his  father,  in  the  place  that  Da* 
uib  haopjcparcbmthc  thjcfbmgflooje 
of  l !  £);nan  rt)c  3J  ebufitc. 

2  3lnOhcbcgantobuilOinthcfcconb 
davof  thefeeonbmoncth,  in  thefourth 
yectc  of  his  r eigne. 

3  Cil^OlbthefC  are  the  things*  wherein 

Solomon  lbas  tmftruetcb  fojthebutfc 
bmg  of  the  houfe  of  <5ob.  %ty  length 
by  cubues  after  the  firft  meafnre  was 
th?eefco2c  cubits,  anb  the  bjeabthtibetu 
tteenbttes. 

4  2nbtht*p02th  that  was  m  the  front 
of  the  houfe,  the  length  of  it  was  atwbtng 
to  the  taeabtb  of  thehoufe,  ttbennecu^ 
bttes,anb  the  height  wa  sail  hunb:cb  anb 


tibenty :  anb  he  oueriaib  it  lbithm,lbith 
purcgolb. 

5  3lnb  the  greater  houfe  ftee  fieleb 
ibithfirrctree,  Which  he  oueriaib  tlntrj 
fine  golb,  anb  fet  thereon  palme  trees 
anbehames. 

6  anbhctgarmfhebthchottfclbttb 
precious  (rones  foz  bcautie,anb  the  golb 
wasgoioof^>aruatm. 

7  i^ec  oueriaib  alfo  the  houfe ,  the 
beanies,  thepottes  anb  the  Ybais  there- 
of,  anb  the  boojes  thereof  lbith  golb, 
anb  graucb  ChetubtmsonthclbaUcs. 

8  ano  he  mabe  the  moft  holy  houfe, 
the  length  ibbcreof  lbas,  accojbing  to 
tfjebjcabth  of  theboiu'c,ttbcnty  cnbus, 
anb  the  bjcaoth  thereof  tlbrntie  cubits : 
anbhc  oueriaib  it  lbith  fine  golb  amoun- 
tmgto  fire  bimbjcb  talents. 

9  £nb  the  tbcight  of  the  naiies  tbas 
rtfttcfhchclsof  golb:  anbhc  oucriaioe 
the  bppcr  chambcrsibith  golb. 

10  3inb  tn  the  moll  holy  place  hce 
mabe  flbo  Chcrubuns  of  ||  image  ibo?K, 
ano  oueriaib  them  tbitt)  goio. 

11  C  3nb  the  ibmgs  of  the  Chcru* 
bints  were  tlbentie  cubites  long:  one 
ibingof  the  one  cherub  was  fiuecubitcs, 
reaching  to  thetball  of  the  houfe:  anb 
the  other  ibmg  tbas  liltetbtfe  Sue  nu 
bitcs,rcachingto  tljc  Vbmg  of  the  other 
Cherub: 

\z  ^nb  one  ibingof  the  other  Che- 
rub lbas  fiuc  cubites,  reaching  to  trje 
tball  of  the  houfe :  anb  the  other  ibmg 
aas  fiue  cubites  alfo ,  loaning  to  the 
Vbmg  of  the  other  Cherub. 

ij  1Che  ibings  of  thefc  Chcrubims 
fpzeabthemfelucs  fojtn  tibenne  cubits: 
anb  tfjcv  ftooo  on  their  tcet.anb  their  fa^ 
ceswere||mnjarb. 

14.  C^nbhcmabethc*bailcof  blue 
anb  purple ,  anb  crimfon,  anb  fine  linen, 
anb  t  lbzougbt  Chcrubtms  thereon. 

15  3Ufo  hee  maoc  befojc  the  houfe, 
*  trbo  pillars  of  rhtrtte  anb  fiue  cubites 
t  htgh,anb  the  cljapitcr  that  lbas  on  the 
top  of  each  of  them,  lbas  fiuc  mbitcs. 

i6  :3nb  he  mabcchamcs.js  m  the  st- 
earic, anb  put  them  on  the  hcabs  of  the 
pillars,  anb  mabe  an  hunbzcb  pontes 
granatcs,  anb  put  them  onthechaincs. 

17  »no  he  *rcarcbbp  the  pillars  bc= 
foze  the  temple,  one  on  the  right  hanb, 
ano  the  other  on  the  left ,  ano  calico  tljc 
name  of  that  on  the  right  hano,  H3Ja- 
chut,  anb  tJhe  name  of  that  on  tljc  left, 

H25035. 

CHAP. 


30 


\Htb  c alte- 
red. 


Or, (en 
JometbmkeJ 
of  ny/ouea- 
ble  tforkc. 


the  houfe. 
'Mat  17.5  1 

t  Het.  eau- 
fcdtojfceiid 

Mcr  j  1   :1 

l.kingyi; 
j  He  or  ton£ 


.King  7. 


||  Time  ie,he 
/hAlrjIth/ifl, 
\\rh*tu.  m 
1/  iiflrengrh 


Di 


mersvc 


ffdi 


Il.Chron.        for  the  Temple. 


•  I. King  7. 
J5.&C. 
\Hcbr  from 
h*  brim,  to 
t  brim. 


'  i  King 


\Or.lHfJ 
'llllicfitwt' 


jHcbrjkt 
worke  of 
turn!  of 


I  Or,btm/r> 


\\0r,bo*tn 

t  H,br  fi. 
itiPted  to 


CHAP.    IIII. 

i  The  Altar  ot  bi-alle.  I  The  molten  Sea  vpon 
twelueoxen.  6  The  ten  laucrs,canftJeiticks, 
andtables.  9  TheCourts&theinftrumcnts 
of  braflc.  19  The  inllrumentsol  go!J. 

f,  £>2couct  lie  mane  att  XV 
tat  of  bjafTctibentte  eu= 
bites  the  length  thereof, 
anb  tlbcnttc  cubues  the 
b2cabth  thereof,  anb  ten 
cubites  the  height  therof. 
z  C  *  3tlfo  he  mabc  a  molten  S>ca  of 
tencubttcs,  tfcomb2tmtob2im,  ronnb 
tn  compaffe ,  anb  fine  cubttesthchetght 
thereof ,  anb  a  line  oftfjirticcubttcsbtb 
compaffe  it  tounb  about. 

3  *  3tnb  bnbec  it  was  the  fitntlitubc  of 
oren ,  lbhich  bib  compaffe  it  ronnb  a* 
boutitcnhcm  a  cnbite  tompaffing  the 
5>ea  tounb  about.  Sibo  rolbcsof  ortn 
wei  e  taft,ibrjen  it  ibas  caff. 

4  ^tftoobbpontibclueoteititfjjec 
loofnngtoibatb  the  ji5o2th ,  anb  thjec 
loolung  tolbarb  tl)ea)eft,anb  tfnee  loo 
mngtoibarbthc£>outh,aubth2ccloo 
lung  tolbarb  the  €aft:  anb  the  £>ea  was 
letaboncbpontliem,  anb  all  their  hm? 
ber  parte  mere  mlbarb. 

5  3nb  the  rhtcUncs  of  it  was  auhanb 
bicabth,  ?  toe  bmnof  itliKCthcib02liC 
oftbctoimof  a  tup  ,  limit!)  ftoibcrs  of 
ILilucs :  and  it  rcceiueb  and  tjcib  thzec 
thoufanb  baths. 

6  ft  «?c  mabc  alfo  ten  TLauers ,  anb 
put  flue  on  the  right  banb  ,  anb  true  on 
the  lcft,to  lbafb  m  them:  furii  tilings  as 
thev  offercb  fo2  the  t  burnt  off nng,thcy 
ibafhebin  them  ,  but  tlje  £>caibasfo2 
riic  piietts  to  tbafl)  m. 

7  3lnb  lice  mabc  tax  eanblcfttcfts  of 
golb  accojbmg  to  their  fomic ,  anb  fct 
them  m  tbclEemplc ,  fiuc  on  the  right 
hanb  ,anb  fine  on  the  left. 

8  l>c  mabe  alfo  ten  tables ,  anb  pla- 
ccb  them  mi  tl)e  Xcmplcfiuc  on  tl)c  tight 
ftbc,  anbfiue  on  the  left:  anb  hecmabe 
an  huubJCb  ||  bafens  of  golb. 

9  C  .f  urtheriuojc ,  hec  mabc  the 
court  oftbcKmelts.anb  the  great  court, 
anbboo2esfo2  the  court,  aiiboueriayb 
thet)oo:esof  them  Until  b2aiTc. 

lo^nbhefetthe^eaouthcnglrtfibc 
of  the  craft  cno  oner  againfithc£>outh. 

1 1  3Hib  Kinram  mabc  the  pots ,  anb 
thcflioueis,  anb  the  i.bafeus ,  anbt?u- 
ram  I  fmiflieb  the  lbo.'kc  that  he  lbas  to 
mauefoiiyug&olomonfo?  the  houfc 
ofoob: 


ix  To  wit,  the  tibo  pillars  ,  anb  the 
pommels,anb  the  chaptters.tbhtclj  were 
on  tlje  top  of  the  tibo  pillars ,  anb  the 
tibo  Uucathes  to  coucr  trie  tibo  pom= 
mclsofd)echapuets,lbh!cf)  were  on  the 
topofthcptliars: 

i  j  3lnb  fotire  huntycb  #omegta; 
nats  on  tljctruo  rbzeathes :  tibo  roibes 
of  i&omcgranats  on  each  ibjeath  ,  to 
couer  the  tibo  pommels  of  the  chapfc 
ters.tbfjuh  were  tbpon  the  pillars. 

14  $e  mabc  alfo  bafes .  anb  1 1  lauets 
mabchc  bponthc  bafes. 

15  £>ncia>ca,$tibeiuc  oren  unbent. 
i6  Xhc  pots  alfo ,  anb  the  fboucls, 

anb  thcflefhhooiscs ,  anb  an  their  im 
ftruments,  bib  l?uram  his  father  mabc 
to  Bmg^olomon  foz  the  houfc  ofthe 
%  ©  k  ©,of  t  bright  b;affe. 

17  3Jn  the  piamc  of  31o:ban  bib  the 
Bmg caft  them,  m  the  tciay-grounb, 
bctlbeene  Smccoth  anb  zctcbathah. 

is  Xhus  Solomon  mabc  all  thefc 
bcffcls  m  great  abunbancc :  fo;  the 
lbeightof  thcb2affc  coulbnotbc  founb 
out. 

19  C  ^nb  Solomon  mabc  all  the 
beffcls ,  that  were  fo2  thchoufc  of  ©ob, 
the  goiben  ^itac  alfo,  anb  the  tables 
ibhcrcon  the  £>hcib  b2cab  was  fee. 

20  iipozcoucc  the  canblcfhcbs  Vbith 
their  lampcs.that  the  y  (honlb  burne  af 
ter  tlje  mancr,befo2c  tl)c  !©2aclc,of  pure 
golb: 

n  3fnb  riic  floibers ,  anb  the  lamps, 
anb  the  tongs  made  i.eofgolbc,  andtljat 
t  perfect  golb. 

a  ^nb  the  fnuffcrs ,  anb  the  ||  ba^ 
fens,  anb  thefpooues,  anbtheceufers, 
of  pure  golb.  3inb  tl)c  cntrp  of  the 
houfc,  the  tuner  0002CS  thereof  fo;  the 
inofli>olpplacc ,  anb  the  boo2esof  the 
houfe  of  the  Ilcmpic.wc.e  ofgolb. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  The  dedicated  treafures.  iThefolemneindu- 
clionoftlie  A  rke  into  the  oracle.  11  God  be- 
ing praifcd.wiuetli  a  vifiblcfiCTnc  of  his  fauour. 

^i?us  ai  the  1U02&C  tljatSo 
W  lomonmabefo;  the  houfc 


...things. 
I  mb  his  lather  hab  bebuatcb  ■>  anb  the  ni 
1  ucr ,  anb  the  golb  ,  anb  all  the  inftru 
ments,  put  he  among  the  treafurcsof 
tl)choufeofC5ob. 

2   C  *  £heu  Solomon  afTemblcb 
1  the 


f  Hehr  vpon 
theface. 
1 1  Or,  c at- 

droit. 


|  Heb.  modi- 
brioht>  or 
fcetered. 

t  ricb.thiclc 
neffet  of  the 
trroitnj. 


I  Hebr.ptT- 
fifftwHS  of 
gold. 
\\OrJ;oTtUt. 


•i.  King.  7 
51- 


'i.Kii 
1.8k. 


Solomon  facrificeth,  Chap.vj.       andpraifethGod. 


\[Or,lbty 

.ire  then  ,,u 

i  kt»g  8.8 
*Deut.  10 
1  !■ 

\\Or,»ktrc 


)  Ihbfaimd 


"id 


the  <£IDCC0  of  3JCrael ,  anb  all  the  heabs 
of  thcXnbes ,  the  clucfc  of  tl)c  fathers 
of  tfjc  chUb?en  of  Jfrael  Unto  'Jcrufa- 
lem,  to  b?utg  top  the  HtU  of  tbeCoue? 
nantoftbe  ?L  ©a©,  out  of  the  cme  of 
Dauib.lbbtch  is  zion. 

j  i©herefo?e  all  tt)e  men  of  gjfeart 
affembleb  themfeluesbnto  the  lung  in 
the  fcaft ,  ibbich  was  ta  the  feuentb 
moneth. 

4r  anb  an  the  fibers  of  Ufraci 
eamc,  anb  the  ILeuites  tooae  bp  the 
31rfee. 

5  3lnb  they  b20iight  bp  the  2c&e, 
anb  the  tabernacle  of  the  Congregate 
on,  anb  all  the  holy  beffcls  that  werem 
the  tabernacle,  thefe  bib  the  0?tetts  and 
tljclLcuttesbungbp. 

6  3ilfo  fttng  Solomon  anb  all  the 
congregation  of  "Jfraelthat  were  at 
femblcb  bnto  him  before  the  3trbe,  fa* 
crifueb  fliecpe  anb  oren ,  tbbuh  toulb 
not  be  tolb  no?  numbzeb  foj  multituoe. 

7  3lnb  the  pucfte  b?ought  in  the 
arltcof  the  Couenantof the  fL£>is© 
bnto  bis  place,  to  the  <0?aclc  of  the 
houfe,into  the  moft  holy  place,  euenbu= 
bet  the  lbmgs  of  the  Cberubtms : 

8  ifo?  the  Chcrubuns fp?cao  foo?tb 
then  lbingsouer  the  place  of  tbearftc, 
anb  the  Cherubims  couereb  the  arise 
anb  the  ftaues  thereof,  aboue. 

9  3lnb  they  bzetti  out  the  ftaues  of; 
the  3irbe,  that  theenbs  of  the  ftaues  | 
\berc  fecne  from  the  %  the  befo?e  the  £>> 
ratlc,  but  they  were  not  fcenctbitbout. 
3lnb  th  etc  ||  it  is  bnto  this  bap. 

io  There  was  nothing  in  the  3tac 
faucthc  tibo  tables  tbbich  £0ofes*put 
herem  at  &o?eb ,  ||  when  the  %  e>  is  © 
mabeawuenanc  tbtthtbc  tbtKuen  of  3)f; 
racl.tbben  they  came  out  of  tfgypt. 

r  i  C  3nb  it  came  to  paffr  ibhen  the 
02ieftstbere  come  out  of  tbebolyplace 
(foj  all  the  p;icGstbat  were  t  pzefent 
Were  fanctifieb,  and  bib  not  then  wait  by 
courfe: 

ii  rMotbcfteutteswhichWeretbe 
fingers,  all  of  them  of  3lfapb ,  of  tyi- 
man,  of  3fcbutbuu,  with  time  tonnes 
anb  their  b2etl)2cn ,  betng  arayeb  m 
White  Unnen  hautng  cymbals, anb  pfai- 
tenes,  anb  hatpcs,Ooob  at  thecal! 
enb  of  the  altar , anb  tbtth  them  an  hun- 
Dzeo  anb  trbentie  #?iefts  ,  founbing 
With  trumpets:) 

ij  3(tcameeuentopaffc,asthetrmn 
petters  anb  fingers  tbcre  as  one ,  to 
mafte  one  founbto  behcarmnpzaifutg 


anb  tbanlungtbe  %  ©  is  © :  anb  when 
tbey  lift  bp  their  boyce  With  the  trum 
pets,anb  cymbals,  anbmftriunentsof 
muficftc,  anb  p2aifeb  the  %&&%>,  faying 
*;Fo?be |S  goob,  fo?  hismerneenaureth 
fomtct:  that  then  tbchoufe  ibas  aiieb 
With  a  clonbe,  euen  the  boufe  of  tfjc 

fL€>H©. 

i+  So  that  the  0?iefts  toulb  not 
ftanb  ta  mmtfter  ,by  reafon  of  the  cloub: 
fo?  the  gio?y of  the  31  ©a©  bao  fitieb 
tfje  boiife  of  C5oD. 

CHAP.    VI. 

i  Solomon  hauing  bleiTed  the  people ,  blefTeth 
God.  ii  Solomons  prayer  in  die confec  ration 
of  the  Temple,  vpou  thebialen  fcatiold. 

S^j^^  V)tn  TfaibSolomon,i:he 

W&  mv  y~  ®  K  ®  5dt5  fa,° that  ft 
i^£?  §2^  iboulObvbellinthe'thicBc 
DarUencfTc. 
z  25ut3Jhauebuiltan 
boiife  of  habitation  fo?  tljce,  anb  a  place 
fojthpbibciiingfozeucr. 

3  3nbtheiamgtutnebhis  face  anb 
bleffcb  the  ibholc  Congregation  of  5f 
rael,  (anb  all  the  Congrcganou  of  Ijf 
raelftoob) 

4  3ubhcfatb^5ieiTebbethefL©is© 
©ob  of  Jfrael,  ibbo  hath  touh  his 
hanbes  fulfillcb  trjat  )bhirh  he  fpaHc 
With  his  mouth  to  my  father  Damb, 
faying, 

5  Since  the  bay  that  3  bzought 
foozth  my  people  out  of  the  lanb  of  & 
gypt,5<  chofe  no  cine  among  all  the 
tribes  of  Ufrael  to  builbcan  houfe  in, 
thatmyi5amc  might  be  there,  nm\)tt 
chofe  31  any  man  to  be  a  ruler  ouermy 
people  3/frael: 

6  2Sut  3J  haue  chofcn  llenifalem, 
tliat  my  name  might bt  there,  anb  haue 
chofcn  SDauib  robe  ouermy  people  3Jf- 
ran. 

7  iftom'itibasmthehcartof&a; 
uib  my  father  to  buUb  an  ijoufe  fo?  the 
/I5ame  of  the  IL  s>  is  ©  ©ob  of  3lfrael. 

8  26ut  the  1L  so  a  b  faib  to  SDauib 
my  father :  J?o2aDuuch  as  it  lbas  in 
thme  heart  to  bmlbe  an  houfc  fo?  my 
/^amc ,  thou  otbbeft  tbt  11  in  Ujat  it  tbas 
m  tl;me  heart. 

9  /Botibithftanbuig  thou  (halt  not 
builb  the  houfc,  but  thy  fonne  rbbicb 
(hall  com  e  foo2tb  out  of  thy  loynes ,  he 
(ball  biulb  the  houfc  fb2  my  i!5amc. 

io  li:he|l©iH©therefo2C  hath  pet- 
fonneb  hielbo2b  thatl)c  hath  fpolien: 

fo? 


Pfal.13*. 


*  i.King.  S. 

M&C. 

*Lcuit.i^. 


*  :  Sam.  7, 
'  1  chio. 


30  2 


fn 


lie 


prayer 


Il.Ch 


ron. 


o 


fSol 


omon. 


f  Hebr.  the 
tenpth  there 


'Exod.15. 


1 1.1  .king 
2  4  and  6. 

tHeb.  there 
PiaUn't  * 
mm  be  cut 

•PfaJ  rjj. 


"Chap. 5. 
6.  c  fay  66. 
■  .1&S.7. 
49- 


foj  3  am  rtfen  Dp  in  the  roomc  of  S>a 
uiDmp  father,  anD  anifctonthethjonc 
of  3ifraci,as  the  ?L©i3is>  paomifeD,  anD 
naue  built  fye  houfc  fo?  the /Bantc  of  the 
%  0  m  ©  <5od  of  gjfraeU 

1 1  3nD  in  it  haue  3  put  the  3tfee, 
tt)l)creui  is  tl)c  Coucnaut  of  thcfLois©, 
thathec  maoc  ttnth  the  chiltyen  of^f- 
racl. 

11  OnDhcftooDbefoictheSntaro^ 
thcILoia© ,  tn  the  pjefenceof  allfhci 
Congrcganon  of  3Jftael ,  anD  fpjcaD 
foojthhishanDs: 

13  (Jfoj £>oloiiion haDmaDc a bjafen 
fcaffolD  of  fitit  tubitcs  tiong,anD6uc  cu- 
bites  bdoao,  anD  thzce  tubitcs  high ,  anD 
haD  fct  it  in  the  nnDft  of  the  Court ,  anD 
Dponit  hecftooD ,  anD  bnceleD  DoiDne 
Dpontns  fences  befoje  all  the  Congee- 
gationof3!fracl,  anD  fpzeaofooitfjfjis 
hatiDstott>arDs  hcauen.) 

14  3nDfaiD,il>?LiDtis©C5oDof3Jf- 
racl,  * tijerc  is  no  (5oD  Ufec rtict  tn  the 
heauni,no2inthccarth  ,tt)htrb  beeped 
toucnant ,  anD  iheweft  mere?  Dnto  thp 
feruants ,  thanDalbcbcfozc  tljee  nmh 
all  their  hearts, 

15  Xhouttrtjtch  haft  hept  ttnth  thp 
fcruant  2>auiD  mp  father ,  thattbhich 
thou  haft  pionufcD  htm  :  anD  fpabeft 
lbith  thp  mouth  ,  anD  haft  fulfiiicD  tt 
ttnth  thine  hanD,as  it  is  tins  Dap. 

16  59oU)thctefo2e,iD?L0)H©(!5oD 
of  3)frael ,  beepe  ttnth  thp  fcruant  2>a 
uid  mp  father,  that  ttrfnch  thou  haft 
p:omifeDhim,fapmg,*1!n)crc  (hall  not 
t  faiie  tDcc  aman  tn  mp  fight,  to  fit  bpon 
thetluoncof  gifracl:  *pct  fo,  that  thp ' 
tlniDicn  tabc  hecoc  to  thctr  ttiap ,  to 
tt)aiKcmmpHatt),astfjouhafttt)albcD 
befojemc. 

17  i5ott)then,5D!L©i>5E»<5oDof 
■Jfraei ,  let  thp  ttwD  be  DertficD,  Vbhtch 
thou  haft  fpoben  Dnto  thp  fcruant 
DaiuD. 

18  (BntttnlGoDinDerpDceDDtbcll 
tt)itl)  men  on  the  earth  <  *2SeholD,hca; 
ucn,  anD  the  heanenofheauens  cannot 
contcmc  thee  :  hott)  much  IcfTe  this 
houfc  which  3  hauc  built; ) 

19  tyaucrcfpcctrhcrfojetothcpjapct 
of  thp  fcruant,  anD  to  his  fupplication, 
£>  fL  0  is  ©  mp  <3oD,  to  hearben Dnto 
the  crp ,  anD  thcpjapcriDhich  thpfrt* 
uant  p2apcth  befoje  thee : 

io  mhat  tlnnc  epes  nuip  bee  open 
bpon  tins  houfc  Dap  anD  night ,  Upon 
the  place  luhcrcof  thouhaftfaiDc ,  that 
thou  ttioulDcft  put  thp  i3amc  there,  to 


hearben  bnto  thcp,tapcr,tt)hich  thp  fcr> 
uantpzapcth  ItottiarDS  this  place. 

11  hearben  therefore  Dnto  the  fup- 
pltcanons  of  thp  fcruant ,  anD  of  thp 
people  3Jfrael,tt)ljich  thep  fljall  t  niahe 
tottiarDS  this  place:  In  arc  thou  from 
thpDttJellmg  place,  euen  fromheauen ; 
anD  omen  thou  heareft,  fojgiue. 

22  C  3Jf  a  man  fume  agamft  his 
neighbour ,  t  anD  an  oath  be  lapD  bpon 
htm,to  mabe  htm  ftucare ,  anD  the  oath 
come  befoje  thine  311tartn  thtshoufe: 

23  IChcti  hcarc  thou  from  heaucn, 
anD  Doe,  anD  tuDgcthp  feruants  bp  re* 
cutting  the  tbicbeD  ,  bp  rctompenfing 
his  ttiap  bpon  his  ottmehcaD ,  anD  bp 
tufttfping  the  righteous ,  bp  giutng  hutt 
aecojDtngto  hisrighteoufitcfle. 

24  C&nD  tf  thp  people  3lfrael  t  be  put 
tothciDojfe  before  the  enemp,  beraufe 
thep  haue  finneD  agamft  thee  ,anD  lhall 
returnc  anD  confefle  thp  fitim\c,  anD 
pjapanD  mabe  fupplication  before  thee 
1 1  in  this  houfc: 

25  Xhen  hcarc  thou  from  the  hea> 
uens,  anD  fo^gtue  the  Gnnc  of  thp  people 
3Jfracl,anD  bnngthemagame  bnto  the 
lanDibhich  njougaucftto  thcm,anD  to 
their  fathers. 

26  c  nahen the* heaucn  is  fbutbp, 
anD  there  is  no  rame,  becaufc  thep  haue 
finneD  agamft  thee :  yet  if  thep  pjap  to^ 
ttiarDs  this  place ,  anD  confeOc  thp 
jBame,  anD  tume  from  their  fimte, 
ttJljenthouDoeft  afflict  them: 

27  ILhenheare  thou  from  heaucn, 
anD  fingme  the  Gnne  of  thp  feruants, 
anD  of  thp  people  jjftaef  tDhen  thou 
haft  taught  them  the  gooD  ttmp,tbhcre< 
tn  trjcv  ft)oulD  ipalbe ,  anD  fenD  rame 
bpon  the  lanD  ,  rbhtch  thou  haft  gtuen 
Ditto  tiiv  people  fo?  an  inheritance. 

28  CltfthetCbe  Dearth  in  the  lanD, 
if  there  be  peftilence,  if  there  be  biaftmg, 
onmi  Dcib ,  locufts  0;  caterpiliersj  if 
their  cncmtcsbcficgc  tljcm  tn  the  t  cities 
of  their  lanD :  lhhatfocucr  Cbic,oi  iDhat- 
focucrficbncfTc  there  be: 

29  Thcnibhatpiapcr,oTibhatfup; 
plicanon  focucr  fljall  bec  maDe  of  anp 
man,  0?  of  an  thp  people  3lfracl,  ibhcn 
cucrp  one  thai  huotti  his  ottntc  fojc  anD 
fits  ottnic  gricfc,  anD  fltaii  fpjcaD  foozth 
hishanDsi|mtlnshoure: 

30  Xhen  hcarc  thou  from  heaucn 
thp  Dtticiiing  place ,  anD  fojgutc ,  anD 
rcnocr  bnto  cucrp  man  act02Dmg  bnto 
aiihtstt)apcs,tt)hofchcartthoubnott>: 
eft(fo;  thou  ontlp  *  hnottjeft  the  hearts 
of 


\\Or/ttbr§ 


f  HekpTAj. 


|  Heir. ad 
he  require 
an  oalh  ?f 
him. 


l\Or,he 

[mttun. 


\OrAo^artC:. 


'  1  .Kijig. 

7.1. 


Chap.  ;c 


\H<tr  w 

the  land  of 
their  gAtes. 


\\0r,„- 
ivjtJ  th/i 
hen  e. 


*  I  Chron. 

28.9. 


Solomon  prayeth,    Chap.vij.   and  offreth  facrifices. 


\Heh.aN 
the  dayes 
which. 
\Hchr.zpv 

the  face  of 
the t An  A. 
"lohnii. 

zo.aits.S. 

*7- 


|  Heb.  thy 
Name  t  seat- 
iedvfioniku 
kotifc. 


\\Ortfghr. 


*Prou.2o.o. 
ccclef.7.21. 
lames ;.!. 
i.iohni.S. 
f  Heb.  they 
that  take 
them  cay- 
tines  cart 
them  away. 
t  Heb.  bring 
boekto  thetr 
heart. 


\\Orrtghr. 


f  Heb. tithe 
prayer  oft  hit 
place, 


of  tl)c  chilDjcn  of  men ; ) 

31  Xhat  they  may  feare  thee ,  to 
lbalKem  tljy  mates  t  fo  long  as  tljcy  Uuc 
t  m  tlje  lanb  lbljich  thou  gaueft  unto 
our  fathers. 

31  c  £0o?couer  concerning  the 

ftranget*mhicljisnotofthypcople3if 
rael,  butts  come  from  a  far  re  counter? 
fo?  thy  great  fatties  faae ,  $  trjv  migh' 
ttcljanb,anb  thyftrctcljeboutaVmc:  if 
tljey  come  anb  p:ay  in  this  Ijoufe : 
-  33  Xhcn  hcarc  thou  from  the  hca? 
uens,  euen  from  thy  btbcllmg  place, 
anbboe  acco?bing  to  all  that  the  ttcan; 
ger  cailetlj  to  tljee  fo?  that  all  people  of! 
the  earth  may  snow  tljy  /Same,  anb 
feare  tfjee,  asboctl)  thy  people  ^Jfraei,1 
anb  may  unolb  that  t  tijts  Ijoufe  which : 
31  hauc  built,  is  calico  by  thy  jftatne.  I 
34.  'Jf  thy  people  goc  out  to  lbarrc 
againft  thetr  enemies  by  the  way  that 
thou  malt  fenb  them,  anb  tljey  p?ay  bit 
to  tl)cc  towarb  tfjis  citic  Which  tljou 
Daft  chofen,  anb  the  Ijoufe  which  3 
hauc  built  fo?  thy  iftame : 

35  %\)t\x  hearc  tfjou  from  me  hca* 
uens  thcxr  pzayer  anb  their  fiippltcatts 
on,  anb  mamtatnc  their  y  cattfe. 

36  3lftljeyfumtagaitiftthec(fo?  there 
is  *  no  man  lbhtth  finueth  not )  anb  tfjou 
be  angry  with  them,  ahbbeltucrrhcm 
oucr  befoic  their  enemies,  anb  t  tljey  ea* 
rytfjem  away  captiuesbntoa  lanbfar 
off  0?  neere : 

37  j3etittl)cytbetDuiBC  thcmfclucs 
in  the  lanb  whither  tljey  arc  carieb  cap; 
tine ,  anb  tume  anb  p?ay  bnto  thee  m 
tlje  lanb  of  their  captiuitte,  faying,  aaec 
haue  finuet),  i\)e  fjauc  Done  atniHc ,  anb 
IjaucbeaitwicKcbly: 

38  3Jf  they  rcturne  to  ffjee  with  all 
thetr  heart,  anb  With  all  their  foulc ,  in 
the  lanb  of  their  tapttuitic ,  Whither 
tljey  haite  earicb  tljem  captiues,  anb 
p?ay  towarb  their  lanb  Which  tljou 
gaueft  bnto  their  fathers ,  aitb  toward 
the  arte  ibhich  thou  halt  chofen,  anb  to 
warb  tlje  houfc  which  3  haue  built  fo? 
thy/13amc: 

39  Xljcn  heare  tljou  from  the  Ijc^ 
uens ,  euen  from  thy  bWellmg  place, 
thetr  p?aycr  anb  their  amplications, 
anb  maintame  their  ||  caufe,  anb  fo?giuc 
thy  people,  which  paue  finneb  agatnft 
thee. 

40  ii3ow,my<£ob,let(3Jbefeech 
thee)  thtne  cyesbeeopen,  anblcttljtnc 
cares  beattent  t  bnto  the  p?ayer  that  is 

made  Ul  tljiS  plate. 


'i.King.8 

54,&c.Ie- 
uic.9.24. 


41  ii5oU)*thercfo2canfc,£>  fLc^©!*™-^-? 
<3ob,into  tljy  refhttg  place,  tljou,  anb  I 
the  ZtU  of  thy  ftrength :  ?Lct  tljy 
£?iefts ,  $>  %  s©  a  ©  <5ob ,  be  clotheb 
with  faiuation,  anb  let  tljy  faints  re; 
ioycemgoobneflc. 

41  £>  3L©a©  Gob,  tttnte  not  a- 
way  the  face  of  thine  attomteb :  r  cmcm= 
bcr  tljemercics  of  Dauib  thy  feruant. 

CHAP.    VIL 

God  hauing  giuen  tcftimonie  to  Solomons 
prayerbyfire  from heauen, and  gloryinthe 
Templcj  the  people  worfhip  him.  4  Solo- 
mons folemnefactifice.  8  Solomon  hauing 
kept  the  feaft  of  Tabernacles  and  the  feaft  of 
the  Dedication  of  the  Altar,  difmiffeth  the 
people.  \z.  God  appearing  to  Solomon,  "i- 
ueth  him  promifes  vpon  condition. 

£>ib  lbljcn  Solomon  Ijab 
mabe  an  cube  of  p?aymg, 
the*firecamcboibnefrom 
Ijcatten,  anb  confttmcb  the 
buntt  offering,  anb  tljcov 

cnaces,  anb  tlje  glo?y  of  tlje  %q&z> 

fiUcbtljchoufe. 
x  3inb  tlje  0?icfts  coulb  not  enter 

into  the  Ijoufeof  tljelL  o  »© ,  becaufe 

the  glo?y  of  tlje  %®k&  ijab  fillcb  tlje 

?L©ia©&>houfe. 

3  Tim  lbhen  an  tlje  cljilb2en  of  3(f 
racl  falb  Ijoib  the  fire  came  boibne,  anb 
tlje  glo?y  of  tlje  ?ts>tH©  bpon  tlje 
Ijottfc ,  tljey  boibcb  tljenu"elucs  rbttlj 
tljeirfacestothegrounbbponthepauC' 
ment,anbUio?n)tppcb,  anbpzatfeb  the 

%®  IS©, faying,  5fO?ljCC  isgOOb,fO?lj(S 

mercy  endurethfo?eucr. 

4  CXhentljcBinganbailthepco; 
ple,orTerebfacnftcesl)efo?cthe|L©is©. 

5  3lnb  Bing  Solomon  offereb  a  fa^ 
crtficc  of  tbjenttc  anb  tibo  tljoufanb 
oren,anb  an  ljunb?cb  anb  tibentic  thou? 
fanb  ftjeepc.  ^>o  tlje  lung  anb  all  tlje 
pcople,bcbtcatcbthchoufeofd5ob. 

6  *  3inb  the  0?iefts  lbaiteb  on  their 
offices :  the  Ucuttes  alfo  ibtth  mftru; 
ments  ofmuftcUcoftljc1L©is©,  lbljtch 
SDamb  tlje  iSmg  hab  mabe  to  p?aife  tlje 
%  o  k  ©,  becaufe  his  mercy  endureth  fo? 
cucr,ibljcn  S)auib  p?atfeb  f  by  tljeir  mi- 
indent :  anbthe0?tcfts  fottnbeb  trutu* 
pctsbefozc  tljem,anb  aujfraelftoob. 

7  *Bo:eoucr ,  Salomon  hauoibcb 
the  nubble  of  the  Court ,  that  was  befo?e 
tlje  houfe  of  the  %  ®  a  © :  fo:  there  hee 
offereb  burnt  offerings,  anb  the  fat  of 
the  peace  offermgs ,  becaufe  tlje  biafcn 

£  r  altar 


'i.Chron. 
ij.i5. 


\»th.ty 
their  handy 


Gods  promifcs.        I  I.Chron.  Solomons  buildings. 


'Iofli.i;.; 

resh-aint. 


l.Klng.j. 


'Deiit. : : 
5- 


t  Helr.vpen 
Trhom  my 
Xtlftctt 
called. 


•Cl.jp.i5. 
40. 

\Hekto 
thepraytr 
ofthtt  place. 
•Cliap.6.6. 


*  Cli.ip.6. 

16. 

t  Hebr.tbere 

jhallnot  be 

tut  cjfto 

thee. 

•Lcuit.sC. 

l4.Jcut.38. 
'5- 


3HtarU)!)itl)^)OlomonIjaDmaDt,U)aB 
notable  to  recemctbc  burnt  offerings, 
anb  tDe  meat  offcnngs,ano  tDe  fat. 

s  C  3Clfo  at  tDe  fame  time  Solo- 
mon ftcpt  tDcfcaftfcncnbapes,  anb  all 
gjfracl  ibirf)  Ijttii,  a  bcrp  great  Congrc* 
gation,from  tDe  enmng  in  of  J^amatl), 
bnto  tDe  *  £iuer  of  Cgppt. 

9  2nbintDceigDtbaptDepmabcta 
folcmncaffcmblp  :fo?  tljcp  fecpttbebe* 
bttatlon  of  tbcaitatfcucnbapes ,  anb 
tOefeaOfcucnbapes. 

10  anb  on  tbe  thiee  anb  ttbcntietD 
bap  of  tDe  fcucutD  monetl),  Dc  fent  tfjc 
pcoplcavbap  into  tDctt  ttnts,  giabanb 
mcrrp  m  fjtatt  fw  tt)c  goobntffc  tDat 
tl)c  3L  ©  is  £>  Dab  fljeuicb  bnto  SDauib, 
anb  to  Solomon ,  anb  to  3lfrael  Dts 
people. 

1 1  XDus  *  Solomon  finiflieb  tDe 
houfc  of  tlic  %  €>  is  © ,  anb  tlje  Bings 
Doufc :  anb  all  tDat  tame  into  Solo- 
mons  fjtart  to  mane  in  tfje  Doufc  of  tDe 
%  o  «  s? ,  anb  in  Dts  0  *bne  Doufc ,  Dee 
p?ofpcrouflpcffcttcb. 

it  C  anb  tlje  fL  o  is  id  appeareb  to 
Solomon  by  mgDt ,  anb  faib  bnto  Dim, 
3  Dane  Dcarb  tDp  pjaper ,  *  anb  Dauc 
cDofcn  tDis  plate  to  my  fclfe  foj  an  Doufc 
offatrtfite. 

u  3if  3  fbut  bp  Dcauen  tDat  tDcrc 
bee  no  ramc,  0:  if  3  tommanb  tlic  10 
tufts  to  bcuourc  tDelanb,  0?  if  3  faib 
pcftilentc  among  mg  people : 

14  3Jf  mp  people  ttbDtrD  arc  tailcb  bp 
mp  /i5ame,  fljail  Dumblc  tDemlclucs 
anbpjap,  anb  fecbemp  face,  anbtumc 
from  tDcir  lbicttcb  tbapes :  tDcn  ttnii  3 
Dearc  from  Dcauen ,  anb  ttull  fojgtuc 
tDcir  fmncanb  ibtll  Dcale  tDclr  lanb. 

i$  jlSotb mmc cpesfliaibe open, anb 
nunc  *caresattent  t  bnto  tl;c  pjapec  thai 
is  made  m  tDi£  plate. 

16  5fo;noibDaue*3tDolcn,?fanctt 
ficb  tDis  Doufc ,  tDat  mp  #amc  map  be 
tDtrc  fo?  cucr :  anb  mmc  epes  anb  nunc 
Deart  (l)albc  tDcrc  pcrpetuailp. 

17  anb  as  fo?  tDcc ,  if  tDou  rbilt 
lbaibc  bcfb;c  mc,  as  2>auibt0pfatbcr 
ibalbcb,anb  boe  accojbing  to  all  tDat  3 
Daue  tomnuinbcb  tDec,  anb  fbait  ob* 
fcruc  mp  Statutes ,  anb  mp  3fubge 
ments: 

is  XDcnVbil3(ftablifl)tDctDjoncof 
tDpHmgDomc,aeco;bing  asU  baticco 
ucnantcb  Until  S)autb  tDp  fatbet ,  fap* 
mg,*  t  XDcrc  fbaiinotfaile  tljcc  a  man 
tobcrulcrtnjjfracl. 

19  *z5ut  tfpec  turne  aibap  anb  fo?- 


faue  mp  Statutes  anb  mpCommanbe 
ments  lbDitD  3  l)auc  fct  before  pou, 
ano  iDau  goc  anb  fcruc  otljcr  gobS,anb 
lbozfDiptDem: 

zo  XDcnibtll  3  plutftc  tDcm  bpbp 
tDe  roots  out  of  mp  lanb  ibljicD  3  Daue 
giucn  tljcm ,  anb  tDis  Doufc  VbDitlj  3 
Dauc  fanenfieb  fo?  mp  /B'amcttni  3  f  aft 
out  of  mp  figDt,  anb  lbill  mabc  it  to  be  a 
pjouerbc,  anb  a  bp  lbojb  among  allna? 
tions. 

ii  anb  tDis  Doufc  KbljicD  is  Ijijgrrj, 
(ball  be  an  aftomfl)tnent  to  cuerp  one 
tDat  paftctD  bp  it ,  fo  tDat  Dec  (Dan  fap . 
*n3DpbatDtDc!L0i3©  bonetDusbiv 
to  tDis  ianb,anb  bnto  tDisDoufe* 

ii  3lnott{Dalbcanfiijercb,25ccauic 
tDcpfo^foobc  tDe  %  o  us  $>  00b  oftfjcir 
fatDcrs ,  ibDitl)  bjougljt  tDcm  fojtfi  out 
oftDclanb  ofcgppt ,  anbiapbDolbon 
otDcrs  gobs ,  anb  ibozuuppcb  tDcm, 
aub  feracb  tDem:  Xljerefojc  DatD  Dec 
b?ougDt  all  tljis  cuil  bpon  tljcm. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  Solomons  buildings.  7  The  Gentiles  vvhic' 
wereleft,  Solomon  made  tribuuiies ,  butthe 
Israelites,  rulers.  11  Pharaohs  daughter  re- 
mouethtoherhoufc.  12.  Solomons yeerely 
folemne  facrifices.  14  Hee  appointeth  the 
Priefts  and  Leuites  to  their  places.  17  The 
Nauie  fetcheth  gold  from  Ophir. 

ii5b*ittamctopaflc(at 
tDe  cub  of  ttbcntic  pcercs 
ibDercut  Solomon  Dab 
built  tDe  Doufc  of  tDe 
?L€>i5i>,$  D&  omnDoufe) 
1  %lm  tDe  cities  IbDicD  ^utani 

Dab  rcfto^cb  to  Solomon ,  Solomon 

bunt  tDcm ,  anb  taufcb  tlje  tDiltyen  of 

3JfracitobibclltDcre. 
j   ^nn  Solomon  Vbcnt  to  J?amatD 

ZobaD^nbpjcuatlcbagainft  it. 

4  anb  Dc  built  Xabmo?  m  tDe  ibiU 
bcrneffc,anballtDefto?c-nties ,  ibDul; 
Ije  built  in  ^amatl). 

5  aifoDc built 2i5ctD-Do?on  tDe  bp^ 
per,  anb  23etl>Do?on  toe  nctDcr ,  fnifeb 
tittcs  lbitD  ibailcs,gatcs  anb  barres: 

6  3lnb25aaiatD,anbalitDcfto2e ti- 
nts tDat  Solomon  Dab,anb  all  tDe  tDa^ 
ret  ntics,anb  tDe  ntics  of  tlic  DonVmcn, 
anb  t  an  tDat  Solomon  bctircb  to  builb 
m  gicrufaicm ,  anb  in  ^Lebanon ,  anb 
tDwigDout  all  ti)c  lanb  ofDisbomi 
mon. 

7  C  ^s  fo?  all  tlje  people  tDat  iber  c 
left  of  tDe  pittites,  anb  tDcSunontcs, 

anb 


'Dcut.  29. 
8,5-. 


"I.King,  f 


t  Helralt 
the  dejire  of 
Solomon, 
which  he  etc 
foed  to 
bmU. 


Sol 


omonso 


ffrin^s:  CI 


lap.ix. 


Hiswifedome. 


»  I. King. 


\Hcb.k,U- 


•Exod.ip 

*Exod.  25. 
14.  dcuc. 


"l.Chron. 


'l.Chron 
0.17. 
\fiev.  Co  bmj 

thcCOTtlTTZtll- 

dcment  of 
'Dawdthe 
man  of  Cod. 


dtU.l.S. 


anD  the  0err53ites,anD  the  tyuutcs,anD 
the  3Jebufitcs,  ibhtch  mere  not  of  3Jfc 
racl : 

8  26ut  of  their  chilDzcn,  itoho  vottt 
left  after  thetn  in  the  lanD,  ibhom  the 
thtttncnof  3ifracl  tonfnmconot;  them 
did  Solomon  malic  to  pay  tribute ,  ton- 
ttll  this  Day. 

9  25nt  of the  chilDKtt  of  3lfraci  did 
Solomon  malic  no  feruants  fo?  his 
ltoozlte:  but  they  lberc  men  of  ltoarre, 
anD  ehiefe  ofhis  captains ,  anD  captains 
ofhischaretsanDho/fcmen. 

10  2inDff)cfc  wereti)ecl)iefcofUins 
Solomons  officers,  cuen  rtbo hunDjeD 
anD  fifty,that  bare  rule  ouer  the  people. 

n  C3nD  Solomon  *  brought  top 
toe  Daughter  of  £>haraoh  out  of  the  ct 
tie  of  2?auiD,bnto  tliehoufc  that  he  IjaD 
built  foz  her :  fc»  hec  faiD,  £0y  tbife  fl)all 
not  Dlbell  in  the  honfe  of  SDauiD  Uing  of 
gjfracl,  becaufe  the  places  arc  tholy, 
ujljcrcunto  the  arttc  of  the  %&&& 
hath  come. 

12,  CXhcn  Solomon  offereD  burnt 
offerings  tonto  the  How©  on  the  31- 
tar  of  tlic  %  &  is  &,  lbhich  he  haD  built 
befozcthepojeh: 

13  €ucn  after  a  certainc  rate  cuery 
*Dap,offcringatco2Dmgtotl)ccoinman; 
Dement  of  ©ofes,  on  the  Sabbaths, 
anDoitthcncib^5ooncs,anDonthcfo^ 
lcmnc5fcafts*th?eetimcsinthcyecre, 
euen  m  tljc  feaft  of  <3nleaucncD  bjcao, 
anD  inthc|fcafl  of  naccfecs,  anD  m  the 
fcattofXabemaclcs. 

14  Oud  he  appointeD,acco2Ding  to 
theo?DerofS>auiDhisfather,thc*tonr* 
fts  of  the  $nefts  to  their  feruice,anD  the 
ILeuites  to  their  charges,  to  pzaifc  anD 
minifrcr  befo2ethe#2tctts,  asthcDuety 
of  cucryDay  requircD :  the  *po?tcrs  alfo 
by  their  courfes,  atcucrygatc:fo2  tfo 
haD  2>auiD  the  man  of  <25oD  commas 
DeD. 

1$  3mD  they  DeparteD  not  from  the 
commanDcment  of  the  Bmg  tonto  the 
0ncftsanD  lUuitcs,  concerning  any 
mattcr,o2concerningfhetreafurcs. 

16  4!5ott)  all  the  Vooilit  of  Solomon 
ftiaspzcpareD  Dnto  the  Day  of  the  fouii- 
Dation  of  the  houfc  ofrtjc  H  ©  is  jp,  anD 
tontill  it  ltoas  finithcD :  fo  the  houfc  of 
<5od  ltoas  perfecteD. 

17  CXhenltoent  Solomon  to  €w 
on©cber,anDto  iieioth,  at  the  fcafiDt 
intheianDofCDom. 

is  3nD  D?utam  fent  him  by  the  hanDs 
of  his  feruants,  (hippes,  anD  feruants 


that  haD  Hnoiblcbge  of  the  tea  ano  they 
ltocnt  ltoith  the  fetuants  of  Solomon 
to£)phit,  anD  tootte  thence  fourehuiu 
d?cd  anD  fiftic  talents  of  golDe ,  anD 
brought  them  to  feiug  Solomon. 

CHAP.     IX. 

1  The  Queene  ofShcba  admircth  che  wife- 
dome  of  Solomon.  13  Solomons  golde, 
15  His  Targets.  17  The  throne  of  Iuo- 
ry.  10  His  veflels.  13  His  prcfents.  15 
His  chariots  and  horfe.  16  His  tributes. 
19   His  reigne  and  death. 

£^\$£&  /15D*U)henthc£iUecneof 

"|f  £>$&*  hcatDof  the  fame 

82  of  Solomon,  (bee  tame 

:M-%$k  ^  pjoouc  Solomon  ttjith 
m&zsg  hatD  quenionsatgjerufa* 
lent,  lbithatocry  great  compante,  anD 
camels  that  bate  fpiccs,  anDgolDcin  a* 
bunoance ,  ano  precious  ftones :  anD 
ltohcn  thctbascome  to  Solomon,  (hce 
communcDiDithhim  of  all  thatlbasm 
her  heart. 

z  TLvto  Solomon  tolDe  her  all  her 
queflions  :anD  there  ibas  nothing  htD 
from  Solomon,  lbhich  he  tolD  her  not. 
j  3mDtt>hcnthc£}ueeneofSheba 
haD  feene  the  lMcDomc  of  Solomon, 
anD  the  houfc  that  he  haD  built, 

4  3mD  the  meatc  of  his  table,  anD 
the  fitting  of  his  feruants,  anD  the  at* 
tcnDantc  of  hismimfters,  anD  rljett  ap* 
par  ell,  his  1 1  mpbearersaifo,  ahD  their 
apparell ,  anD  hvs  afcem,  by  iDhich  W 
ibent  top  into  the  houfc  ofthc  %  ©  is  s>; 
there  ltoasno  mo2e  fpiritin  htr. 

5  3nD  IhefatD to  tlieBlng ,  3It  was 
a  true  t  report  itohtcl)  31  hearD  in  mine 
otbne  lanD,  of  thine  ||  attes ,  anD  of  thy 
tbtfcDome: 

6  j^oitobeit,  3J  bclccucD  not  thctr 
tbo?Des,  tonnil  3Twmc ,  anD  mine  eyes 
hao  fecne  n :  anD  bcholD,thc  one  haifc  of 
the  gtcatneffe  of  thy  itou*cDome  rbas  not 
tolDe  mce :  for  thou  ercccDeft  the  fame 
that  3  hearD. 

7  n?appyarethyntcn,anDhappyare 
thefethy  feruants,itohich  ftanD  continu- 
ally before  thee ,  anD  hcare  thy  rbu"e- 
Dome. 

8  25ieflcDbc  the  %  <s>  is  ©  thy  <£od, 
tbhich  DehghteD  m  thee  to  fet  thee  on 
his  tlnone,  to  be  Hing  fo2  the  %  ©  is  id 
thy  <3oD  t  becaufe  thy  <©od  loueD  3Jrra> 
el,  toeftablin)  themfojeuer,  therefore 
maoc  hee  thee  Bmg ouer  them ,  to  Doe 
luDgcmentanDiufhcc. 

Brz        ?   5(nD 


"I.King. 
io.i.&c, 
mat.  1 2.42. 
lukc  11.31, 


\\Or,li,tlm 


\m.-roord. 
\\Or,ftjings 


Sol 


onions  riches: 


"ll.Ch 


ron. 


His  death. 


CbiuJ  ttntb  the  feruants  ofi^uram :  cue- 
ne  thjee  ycetcs  once  tame  the  ujips  of 
Xarujid)  Ringing  golbc,  ano  ftlucr, 
||puojie,anDapes,ant)peacortts. 

22  3inb  lung  Solomon  padeb  all 
the  lungs  of  the  earth  in  rubes  anb 
ibifebomc. 

23  C3lnb  ailtbctutigs  of  the  earth 
fought  the  p2efencc  of  Solomon,  to 
bcarcbiswifcbome,  that  ©obbabput 
in  bis  heart. 

24  3mbtbcyb2oughteuerymanbis 
parent ,  bcfTels  of  filuer,  ano  bedels  of 
golD,anbtaimcnt,barncflc,anDfptccs, 
bo?fes,anb  mttles,  a  rate  ycerc  by  ycerc. 

25  C3mbSoIomon*babfourethou; 
fanb  Italics  foj  b02fcs,anb  cbarets,  ano 
ttocluc  tboufanDbotfcmcn,  lubombcc 
bedoibcbintbecbatct  cities,  anblbitb 
tbcmngat3Jcriifalem. 

26  c  3lno  l)ce  rcigncb  oner  all  tljc 
kings,  *fromtbe||riucr,  cucnbntotbc 
lanoof  the  £ljiiidmcs,  anb  to  thebo^ 
bet  of  <£gypt. 

27  anbtncBtngtmabculttCTtn^Jc' 
tufalem  as  dones,anbcebat  trees  mabc 
heastbeSycomo2ctrees,rbataremtbc 
Iolb  plaines,  in  abunbance. 

28  *3nb  tbey  toought  bnto  Solo- 
mon bojfes  out  of  €gypt,anb  out  of  all 
lanbs. 

29  C4l2oibtberedoftfie*atttsof 
Solomon  firft  anb  laft,  are  tbey  not 
bitten  in  toe  tboolie  of  /Satban  tljc 
l&opbet,  anb  m  tbepiopbcfie  of  3fljitab 
tlic  Sbilonitc,  anb  mtbebifions  of 
*  3Sbbo  tljc  Seer ,  agamft  Jeroboam 
fbefonneof/Scbat* 

30  3(nb  Solomon  rcigncb  indent; 
faicin  ouet  an  'Jfraci,  four  tie  ytctes. 

31  3lno  Solomon  Qept  tbltb  bis  fa* 
tDcts,  ano  hec  ibas  but icb  in  the  eitic  of 
2>aiub  bis  father,  anb  JRchoboambt5 
fonne  retgneb  m  bis  fteab. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  The  Ifraclites  affcmbled  at  Shechem  to  crownc 
Rehoboam,  by  Ieroboam  make  a  fuiteof  re- 
laxation vnto  him.  6  Rehoboam ,  refufing 
the  old  mens  counfell,by  the  aduice  of  yong 
men ,  anfwereth  them  roughly.  \6  Tcnne 
Tribes  reuolting,  killHadoram  ,  and  nuke 
Rehoboam  to  flie. 

<&?WW$  ^D  *  fttfJoboam  ibent 
$^/i  V%f  to  Sbccbem  :  fouo  She* 
a  cbcm  ibere  an  gjfracl 
tometotnaltcl)imti:ng. 

2  3lub  it  came  to  patTc 
lbbcn  llcroboam  tljc  fonne  of /3cbat, 
( 11)1)0 1 


\\Or,/l.iiret. 
HciJngh 

WtTfCS. 


\\Or.e.tp- 
times. 


\MJhbuL 


\\Kel.pmt 
vt>. 

\\Or,there 
vmngfitHtr 

in  t'ttm. 


9  3art>fl)egauctbetnnganbunt)2a> 
anb  tibcntie  talents  of  golb,  anb  of  tpv 
ccs  great  abunoance,  $  pzenous  Hones : 
neither  tbas  there  anyfueb  fpieeastbe 
£luccuc  ofSbcba  gauc  Bmg  Solo* 
mon. 

10  3tno  foe  fcruants  alfo  of  J?utam, 
anb  tDc  feruants  of  Solomon,  which 
b2ougbtgolb  from£)pbir,  biougbtai* 
gume  trees  anb  -  p2cnous  ftones. 

1 1  Stub  tljc  bmgmabc  ot  tlje3tlgumc 
trees ,  t  terrtfes  to  the  bonfc  of  the 
ft  fl>»3B,  anb  to  tljc  Kings  palace ,  anb 
barpes  aubpfaitenes  fo?  fingers:  anb 
there  lbcrcuoncfucbfccne  before  mrbc 
lanbof^luoab. 

12  3inb  lung  Solomon  gane  to  ffte 
£Uuctnc  of  Sbcba,  all  Ijcr  bcfitc,ibbafc 
focuetaicaf&eb,befioestbatibbicb  uje 
Ijab  brought  bnto  tljc  Umg :  So  (be  tur* 
neb,  ano  ibent  away  to  Ijcr  o  Wne  lanb, 
ujc,anbbcr  feruants. 

13  C/i3ow  the  weight  of  golb  that 
came  to  Solomon  in  one yeere,wasfi;ce 
inmbjeoanb  tljjccfcoje  anb  fir*  talents 
of  golb: 

14  25efibcstf)atlbljicocliapmenanb 
mercliantsbiougln:  anb  all  toe  lungs 
of  Arabia ,  anb  ||  goucrnonrs  of  tljc 
countric,b:ougljtgolbanDfilucrtoSoj 
lomon. 

15  C^nbRingSolomonmabetmo 
OuiibzcD  targets  of  beaten  golb :  tire 
ounbjcb  fhekeis  of  beaten  golb  ibeut  to 
one  target. 

16   3U.ID  tblCC  OUnbJCb  flliClbS  made  lie 

of  beaten  golb:  tl)2ee  Ounb2cD  fhekeis  of 
golb  went  to  one  fbtelb :  ano  tbc  hmg 
put  tneni  m  tljc  Ijoufc  of  tOc  fojrcft  of 
jLebanon. 

17  i]9o2Couer  tbc  hmg  mabe  a  great 
tlnonc  of  vuonc ,  anb  oucriaib  itttitlj 
purcgoio. 

18    3lllD  there  were  fire  fitpS  tO  tftC 

tlj2onc,  ibuljafootttooleof  golb,  which 
werefallcucD  to  tI)ctl)2onc,  anbtftapes 
oneacOfibeoftOcfittuigpiaccanbtlbo 
ly  ons  daubing  b\>  tbc  daves. 

19  3tibttbeiuclyonsftoob  there  on 
the  one  fine  anb  on  tbc  other,  bpontbc 
fire  dcps.Xhereibas  not  tljeliKcmaoe 
mam'lnngDonic. 

20  c  3Md  all  the  bmilungbcffeis  of  I 
BmgSolomonwereofgolb,anbailtljc: 
beffrts  of  tlje  houfe  of  the  fitted  of  %t>  \ 
banon  wci  e  of  t  pure  golb :  ||  none  wereof 
filuer  tt  mas  not  any  thing  accouutcD  of, 
m  thebayes  of  Solomon. 

21  31 02'thcuings  fbipsibcnttoXacjl 


\\Or,clt- 
phw.icecth. 


*  lJCing.4. 
16. 


"Gen.15. 

18. 

\\Thatu, 

Euphrates. 

|  Heh.gASt. 


'l.King.io 

28.and2. 

chron.i.itf. 


"i.King.n. 
41. 

\  Heh. words 


'Chap.  1-. 
'S- 


1  .King.  1  j . 


Rehoboamsyo 


ke.      Chap.xj.  Ifrael  reuolteth. 


\tkt.Uiii. 


(ltoho  was  megypt,  mhithethce  hab 
flea  from  ttjc  p;efence  of  Solomon  the 
King)  ijcarmt,  that  Jeroboam  tetur* 
net)  out  of  tfgypt. 

j  3tno  ttJ«T  fctit  anb  tallco  him.  So 
Jeroboam  anb  all  "Jfrael  tame,  anb 
fpafteto  ftehoboam,faymg, 

4  IChyfathcrmabeoutyoiiegtfc 
nous,  nottic  therefore  cafe  thou  Tomes 
ibhat  the  gtteuous  fcruttuoe  of  thyfo 
thcr,anohi£hcauyyoftcfhatheputbp; 
on  bs,  ano  Ibe  Vbtllfcruc  thee. 

5  3nbheefaibbntothem,Comea; 
game  bnto  me  after  tljzec  toyus.  3lnb 
thepeoplebcparteb. 

6  c  ano  King  Behoboam  tooUc 
tounfel  tbith  t!)e  olb  men  that  hab  ftoob 
before  Solomon  his  father,  lbhilchcc 
yrtliueb,  faying,  lehattounfcll  giueye 
me,  to  r  etntnc  anfwer  c  to  this  people  i 

7  3inb  they  fpa&e  bnto  him,faying, 
3Jf  thon  bee  fcmoe  to  this  people,  anb 
pltafethcm,  anofpeaitcgoobtbo?bSto 
them,thcy  ibill  be  thy  fentants  fo«t  euer. 

8  26ut  he  fojfooftc  the  tounfel  ibljtclj 
the  olb  men  gauehtm,  anbtooftccoun* 
fell  tbith  tne  yong  men ,  that  mere 
brought  up  With  him,  that  ftoob  before 
him. 

9  3lnb  he  faib  bnto  them,  tt>hat  ab- 
uicegfueye,  thatibce  mayrcturoean< 
froere  to  this  people,  ibhich  haue  fpo< 
Hen  to  me,  faying,  (Safe  fomeibhatthc 
yolte  that  thy  father  bib  put  bponbs* 

io  3tnb  the  yong  men  that  tbere 
brought  bp  Ybithhun,  fpatee  bnto  him, 
faying,  Xljus  fhait  thou  anfroere  the 
people  that  fpaKc  Ditto  thee,  faying, 
Xhy  father  mabcouryoftc  hcauy,  but 
mane  thou  it  fomelbhat  lighter  fojtos: 
thus  fhait  thoufay  bnto  them,  $)y  litlc 
finger  (hall  be  thtmet  then  my  fathers 
loyues. 

1 1  fat  where  as  my  rather  t  put  a 
heauyyofcebponyou ,  3Jtt>illputmo?e 
to  your  yofec :  my  father  chafhfeb  you 

With  IblJipS,  bllt  5  Wl11  chalhfe  you  Witt) 

Cwptons. 

ii  Sojjeroboam  anb  all  the  people 
tame  to  Hfrhoboam  on  the  thirb  bay, 
as  the  Btng  babe,faying,  Come  againc 
tomconthcthtrbbay. 

13  3lnb  the  King  anfiuercb  them 
roughly  ,anb  lung  ft  choboam  foHoouc 
the  tounfcll  of  the  olb  men, 

14  3nb  anfrocreb  them  after  the 
abuitc  of  the  yong  men ,  faying,  "©y  fa; 
thcr  mabc  your  yottc  heany,  but  3J  tbill 
abbe  thereto:  my  father  thafmeb  you 


ibuh  Whips,  but  3J  will  chaftife  you  with 
ftojpions. 

15  So  the  lung  hcarlieneb  not  bnto 
the  people ,  fo?  the  taufe  was  of  ©ob, 
that  tlje  %®  is  jd  might  perfonne  his 
W020,  Which  he  fpafec  by  the  *hano  of 
3thuah  the  Shilontte  to3Jcroboam  the 
fonneofiSebat. 

16  €3tnb  u>hen  all  3JfraeUawe  that 
the  inhg  Woulb  not  hcarfeen  bnto 
thenuhcpcopleanfroerebthettuigfay' 
ing,  nahat  portion  hane  weetnSDauib? 
anb  wee  haue  none  Inheritance  in  the 
fonne  of  ■JtfTe:  €uery  man  to  your 
tents,£>  ^frael :  anb  notb  £>auib,fcc  to 
thine  oibnehoufc.  Soali^fracUbent 
to  their  tents. 

17  28utas  fo?  the  thfUnen  of  ifrael 
that  bibeltmthe  ones  of  3Jnbah,  Ke- 
hoboam  rcigntb  ouer  them. 

18  Xhen  Sing  a&ehoboam  fent  M< 
bo?am  that  was  oner  the  tribute ,  anb 
thethilbrtnof  3ifrael  flonebhtm  ttnth 
Hones,  thathebteb:  buttongBehobo- 
am  tmaoe  fpeeb  to  get  him  bp  to  his 
tharet,toffeeto3Jerufaiem. 

19  ^nb  f  ftacl  rebellcb  againtt  the 
houfe  of  2>auib  bnto  this  bay. 

CHAP.    XL 

1  Rchoboam  raifing  an  armie  to  fubdue  Ifrael., 
is  forbidden  by  Shemaiah.  J  Heftrengthe- 
nethhis  kingdome  with  forts  and  prouifion. 
13  ThePriefts  andLeuites,  and  fiich  as  fea- 
red God,  forfaken  by  Ieroboam,  fhengthen 
the  kingdome  of  Iudah.  18  The  wiuesand 
children  of  Rehoboam. 

iBD  *  rbhen  Rehoboam 
tbas  tome  to  ^etufalem, 
he  gathcreb  of  tlje  houfe 
of  3lubah  anb  Beniamin, 
an  hunbrtb  anb  fourcfto?e 
thoufaub  thofen  men,  rbhith  Vbcre  Vbar- 
ncrs,  to  fight  againtt  3Jfracl ,  thatljec 
might  tying  the  femgbomc  agamc  to 
ftchoboam. 

1  25nt  the  tbo?be  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
came  to  Shemaiah  the  man  ofd5ob, 
faying, 

3  Spcafte  bnto  Bchoboam  the  fon 
of  Solomon,  Wngof  3«bah,anb  to  an 
3Jfracltn3Jubah?26rmamm,  faying, 

4  XhusfaiththelLoHiD^cfljail 
notgoetp,  no?  fight  againtt  your  bit- 
tlncn :  retuntc  euery  man  to  his  houfe, 
foj  this  thing  is  bone  of  me.  3nbthcy 
obeyeb  the  lbojbs  of  the  %  <t>  is  id  ,  anb 
returncb  fcom  going  agamft  3frto 
boam. 

Br  b        5  ca&ra 


\Rcbfireng- 

thened  htm- 

fi/fi. 


*  1. King.  11 


•  i.King.i 


Rehob 


oamswiues: 


Il.Ch 


ron. 


Hisfi 


nnc. 


fHetir.pre- 
/cntrdthcm- 
fe!uel  to  fjim. 


'Chap.  I  J 


i.Kiiig. 
:;J. 


5  C  3tm)  Behoboam  Dwelt  m  3v 
tufalcm ,  anD  built  cities  foz  Defence  m 
3fuoaI). 

6  ^ebuiiteum^cthlehcmjanDe; 
tam.auDlTeRoa, 

7  anu  25erl)3uc,  anD  £>hoto ,  anD 
3Dullam, 

s  3uid  <5ath  ,  anD  sparclha ,  anD 

Ziph, 

9  3nD  ^D024tm,  anD  JLaehift),  anD 
25caah, 

io  3mDZO?ah,anD3tiaion,anD$c* 
bion,tt)hich  arem  juDah  anD  in  26enta- 
iniu.fcnceD  cities. 

u  2nD  he  fomfieD  the  ftrong  hoiDs, 
anD  put  captaines  in  ttjein ,  anD  doze  of 
Ditailc,  anDofoylcanDttnnc. 

u  3lnD  in  eucry  feuerail  otic  !ic  put 
frjtclDs  anD  fpear  es ,  anD  maDc  them  cr 
ceeDing  ttrong  ,  haumg  3hiDab  anD 
26eniammonhiSfiDC. 

ij  C  3lnD  the  f&iefts  anD  tl)c  ILe* 
uites  tl)at  wcreui  all  ^rratl.t  refo;teD  to 
him  out  of  all  their  coaBs. 

14.  $qi  the  fLeuites  left  their  fob- 
urbs,anDtl)cicpo(rcflion,  anD  came  to 
^JuDahanD^ferufaicnufoi^eroboam 
*  anD  his  fonnes  hab  cad  them  off  from 
erccuting  the  0ncfte  office  unto  tijjc 

15  3lnD  hec  oiDciueD  him  pjietts  fo? 
thehigh  places,  auD  fo;  tI)cDctuis,aitD 
foj  the  calues  which  he  haD  tnaDc. 

16  3(nD  after  them  out  of  an  tl)c 
tribes  of  JfracUieh  as  fct  thctr  hearts 
to feche  tTic  ILoejd  (5oDof3Jfracl, 
cameto3Jcruf4lmi,tofacti6ccbntothc 
|L©Br>  (5oD  of  fhett  fathers. 

17  3>o  they  ftrcngthcncD  the  ning^ 
Dome  of  Jubah,  anD  maDe  Echoboam 
tl)c  fonnc  of  Solomon  ftrong,  thiee 
peer es :  fo:  tl);ee  yeeres  they  maiBcD  m 
tljciuav  of  iDauiD  anD  Solomon. 

18  C  3lnD  Bchoboam  toofee  him 
t^ahaiath  the  Daughter  of  3Jenmoth  \ 
tl)e  fonnc  of  £>auiD  to  mifc,  and  3bihatl 
the  Daughter  of  Cliabthe  fon  ofjjcflc: 

19  a)l)icl)  bare  l)imcl)ilDjcn,  jcufl), 
anD  S>DamartaD,anD  zabam, 

20  ^uD  after  bcr ,  her  tooUe  *£Baa= 
tal)  the  Daughter  of  abfaiom,  iDDicb 
bare  Inm  Stbiiafi,  anD  attbat,  atiDZt; 
3a,anD  S>Delomitb. 

21  3inD  ffiehoboam  lottcD  £0aacab 
tlje  Daugluer  of  3lbfaiom,abouc  all  bis 
umiesanD  bis  connibiues :  fo:  lie  tooltc 
cigbteene  rinues ,  anD  tlncefco;c  concu 
fcmes ,  anD  begate  tibenne  anD  eight 
fonnes,anD  tbiccfcojc  Daughters. 


22  3tnD  &eboboam  maoc  3tbuab 
the  fonnc  of  £0aacab  the  cbtcfe3to  be  ru= 
let  among  IjiBbietljien :  to?  he  dwught  to 
malic  Dim  lung. 

23  3mDbe  Dealt  ttnfeiy,auDDifpctfrD 
of  all  bis  cDilDdcn  throughout  all  the 
countries  ofjuoab  anD26entamin,Dn? 
tocueryfenccD  citie:  anDbcgauetbem 
Ditaile  in  abunDance :  anD  Dec  Define 
tmanynnucs. 

CHAP.   XII, 

1  RehoboamforfakingtheLoR  D,ispunifhed 
byShifhak,  s.  He  and  the  Princes  repenting 
at  the  picaching  of  Shemaiah,  aredeliuered 
from  deftruction ,  but  not  from  fpoile.  13 
The  leigne  and  death  of  Rehoboam. 

4f5D  it  came  to  paflciDbcn 
3Retjoboam  Dab  cftablifJb- 
cD  rfjc  UmgDomc ,  anD  Dab 
ItrcngtDcncD  ljimfelfe,Dee 
fotfoone  tfte  Jlarb  oftfjc 
%,  0  is  T?,anD  augjftael  lbirt)  Dun. 

2  3lnD  it  came  to  pafle ,  that  in  the 
fifth  r  ere  of  &choboatn,;§>hifha&tung 
of€gypt  came  Dp  agauiQ  gientfalem, 
(*  becaufc  they  h^D  tranfgccu"eD  agamft 

thC?L01SJD) 

3  i©ith  tibclue  hunDjcD  tharets, 
anD  th^eefco^c  thoufanD  ho?fcmcn :  anD 
the  people  were  nuthout  number  that 
wme  IDit!)  him  out  of  €gppt:the?Lu^ 
bims,the  ^ubbtmis,^the  Ethiopians. 

4-  3nD  hee  toofte  the  fcnccD  emes 
lbhich  perteinedto^wfah.  ^»D  came  to 
3Icrufaiein. 

5  €  3Chen  tame  3>hcmaiao  the 
prophet  to  Behoboam,anD  to  the  pitn 
ccs  of  giuDah  that  lDerc  gatljcreD  to- 
gether to  'Jerufalem  becaufc  of  £>hi 
fljau,  anD  faio  pnto  them,  ILhusfatth 
the  JL  o  is  &,  Jflchaue  fodfabcii  mt,anD 
thetfo:ehauc3IaifolcftpouinthehanD 
of^htfljaa. 

6  toherenpon,  the  ^nnces  ofJJf 
raeI,anD  tfie  bmg  humblcD  thcmfclucs 
anD  thev  tmt,%\)c  %qk&  is  ngh 
teous. 

7  3mD  ibhm  the  TL  ©  is  p  falb  that 
thcyhumblcD  thcmfelues,  thclbo?D  of 
the  1L013P  came  to  3>hcmaiah ,  fa^ 
mg,  3Ehep  hauc  humblcD  thcmfelucs, 

therefore 3  \fy\W  tlOt  DCftrOV  them,  btlt 

3  Null  grant  them  ||  fomc  Dcliuetancc, 
anD  xwt  iDzatl)  fhail  not  bee  pouwD 
out  bpon  3jcrufaicm ,  bp  the  nanD  of 
£>hifliaR. 

8  >I5eucrthelciTcthei>n;aibch!Sfcr= 
uants, 


t  Heir,  a 
multitude 
ifwtttes. 


"LKing. 


\Or,alitli 
rhiic. 


His  death, 


Ch; 


•Ctu.p.is 


\\Or,<vt<lj/et 
1 IitcLih 
there  were 
good  things. 
'  I.King. 
1421. 


\\Or,fxed. 


\  Hebivord. 


*  I.King. 
I5.1AC. 


uants,  that  the?  map  hnoib  mv  fcrutcc, 
anD  the  fcrutcc  of  the  bmgbomes  of  the 
countrcys. 

9  £>o5>biujafefeingof<£gvptcame 
Dp  againtt  3fetufaicm ,  anb  toobc  & 
ibav  the  treafutes  oftfjc  houfc  of  the; 
%o  is  *©,anb  the  tccafurcs  of the  ftings  \ 
boufc,  lice  toofee  all :  lie  taricb  aibav  ai ! 
fo  tljc  ftjtelbs  ofgolb,ibl)ich  Solomon ; 
hab*mabe* 

10  gjn  Arab  of  lbhicb,feing  ftcljobo- 
am  mabe  ujiclbs  of  bjafTe,  anb  commit- 
ten  them  to  the  hanbs  of  the  cbicfe  of  the 
guarb, that Sept  tljc  entrance  of  tije 
Bmgs  boufc. 

1 1  3lnb  lbben  tljc  lung  cntteb  into 
tljc  boufc  of  tljc  %  o  is  © ,  tljc  guarb 
came  anb  fctthem,  anb  bzought  tbcm 
agamc  into  the  guarb-cbambcr. 

\z  ^nbibljcnljcljumblebljimfclfc, 
thcibjath  of  the  %  o  is  d  turncb  from 
htm,  that  bee  Uiouio  not  bcftroyhimal' 
together:  ||anb  alfo  in  3jubalj  things 
Jbcntlbell. 

13  <[  £>o  bing  *  £eboboam  ftrcng- 
tljcncb  hmifelfcm3Jcrufalcin,atib  rctg; 
neb :  fo? Kehoboam  was  one  anb  fourth 
yceres  olbc  lbbcnhce  began  to  rcignc, 
anb  he  rcigncb  fcucntcenc  yccrcs  tn^Jc- 
rufaicm ,  the  cmc  Jbbith  the  %  o  is £> ! 
ijab  thofen  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  3lfra= 
el, to  put  his  /ftame  there :  anb  Ijis  mo- 
thersname  was^aamah  an  ammonia 
tcfle. 

14  3nb  hce  bib  mill,  beeaufebec 
||p«!cparcb  notljis  Ijcartto  fccBctbc; 
H©is©. 

15  0oVo  the  acts  of  ftchoboam  6rft 
anb  laft,  arc  they  not  lbntten  in  the 
t  boofec  of  S>hematah  the  #?ophct,anb 
of  3Jbbo  the  £>ccr ,  concerning  genca? 
lo  gies  <  anb  there  were  marrcs  bettttecne 
&ehoboamf3tooboam  continually- 

i6  3nbBcboboamacptibithbtsfa< 
there,  anb  ibas  burieb  m  the  tine  of 
SDauib,  anb  3Cbualj  his  fonncreigncb 
tnhtslteab. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Abiiah  fucceeding ,  maketh  warre  againft  Ie- 
roboam.  4  Hee  dedareth  the  right  of  his 
caufe.  13  Trufting  in  God,  hee  ouercom- 
meth  Ieroboam.  2.1  The  wiues  and  chil- 
dren of  Abiiah. 

f^fr  £)Jbc  *  in  the  eighteenth 
g[|  %  vcerc  of  btng3Jcroboam, 

I  began  Abiiah  to  rcignc  o- 

\  tier  giubab. 
RM  %  l£crcigncbtlj2ccycrcs 


LD.X11J. 


andfuccefTour. 


m  3Jcrufalcm :  (his  mothers  name  alfo 
I  was  fipicbatah  thcbaughtec  of^nci  of 
I  <5tbca: )  anb  there  masibarrc betibccn 
iSbnab  anb  Jeroboam. 

5  3tab  Abiiah  t  fet  tljc  battel  in  aray 
tbtfh  an  army  of  baiiant  men  of  mar  re, 
cucn  fonre  hunbjeb  thoufanb  chofen 
men :  Jeroboam  alio  fet  the  battcll  in 
aray  agamft  Ijim  ibttlj  eight  hunb«b 
thoufanb  chofen  men,  being  migljnc 
mcnofbalour. 

4  4C  3nb  3tbtiah  ftoob  bp  bpon 
mount  zemaraim,  Ibhtcbis  m  mount 
ffpbzaim,  anb  faybc,  tyeare  ince  tljou 
3f  croboam,  anb  all  3}fracl : 

5  £>ugbtyounottofenorb,thattbe 
fLois©  <sob  ofjfraclgaue  the  fang 
borne  oucr^fracl  to  SDauib  fo;  cuer, 
cuentohimano  to  his  fonncsbyacone; 
nantoffait? 

6  ^ct  Jeroboam  the  fonnc  of  fit 
bat,tlje  fcruant  of  Solomon  tljefonnc 
ofSDautb,  is  nfcnbp,  anb  hath  *  rebel- 
lcbagainftljisH©Hjp. 

7  3lnb  tljcr  c  arc  gather  cb  bnto  him 
bame  men  the  tljilbrnt  of  zBdiai,  anb 
haueftrcngtljencb  thcmfelucs  agatnft 
Urhoboam  the  fonnc  of  Solomon, 
lbljen  Bcljoboam  JbaSpoung,  *  tenber 
hcarteb,anb  coulb  not  lbithQanb  them. 

s  3lnb nolb  }>cthinbc  to  Ibithttanb 
the  bmgbomc  of  the  ILsdjs©,  mtljc 
Ijanbof  the  fonnesof  ©autb.anbpcbe 

agCCatmilintUbC^inb  there  are ttjitlj^OU 

golbcn  caiucs,lbhith  3f  croboanf  mabc 
voufozgobs. 

9  *i?aucvcenottaft  out  the  quells 
of  the  !L©b©  the  fonnes  of  3laron, 
anb  tljc  !Lcuttes,  anb  hanc  mabc  you 
pnefts  after  the  manerofthe  nations 
of  other  lanbs*  fothattbhofocuercom- 
meth  to  t  eonfecratc  Ijtmfclfc  ibith  a 
voting  bullotKC  anb  fcuen  rammes,  t  he 
fame  map  be  a  pneft  of  them  that  arc  no 
gobs. 

10  2Sutasfo?bs,tIjc|LfiDis5©isour 
Gob,  anb  ibec  haucnot  fojfabcn  htm, 
anbrtje^ncfts  which  minifter bnto  the 
?Lsi>is©,  are  tljcfonncsof  ^arou,aub 
tljc  ILcuiteswaiteDpon  their  bufmeffc. 

11  *^nbthcvbumc  bnto  tljc  fLois© 
cucrv  morning,  anb  cuerv  eucning, 
burnt  faenficesanb  fibcctctncenfc:tlje 
•fhew-bjcabalfo  fet  they  m  ojber  bpon 
the  pure  table ,  anb  tljeCanblcmcbcof 
golbc  ibith  ttjc lampcs  tbcrof,  to  burnc 
eucrr  cuenlng :  fo?  lbc beepe  the  charge 
of  the  %  o  is  ©  our  ©ob ,  but  ycebauc 
fo?fabcnh»m. 


^Hef.  bound 
together. 


I.King. 
:i.:6. 


*  I.King. 
12.28. 

'Chap.II. 
■4- 


t  Hei.  lt>f:l 
biihmd. 


"Chap.,./;. 


'Leu.  24.6. 


Icroboam  dieth.        I  I.Chron.  Afa  his  vi&ory. 


memr.ry. 
■Chap.  12. 
'5- 


1  I.King. 
15.8.&C. 


IX  ^nDt>€t)0lD,  <150D  himiche  istbitfl 

bs  fo?  our  captatne,anD  hts^nefts  With 
founDiug  trumpets  to  crv  aiarme  a-- 
gamft  vou :  O  chtHwen  of  Jfrael ,  fight 
vc  not  agamft  the?U>iB©  <5oD  ofvout 
fathers,  fa?  pott  fbail  not  pjofper. 
~  1  j  €  25ut  Jjcroboam  cauftb  att  am- 
bufl)mentto  tome  about  bchinbethem: 
fo  thev  mere  befoze  3iuDah,anb  the  am? 
buftmicnt  wasbcfjtnatfjcm. 

14.  3nD  When  JuDah  looneD  bathe, 
beljolD,tl)ebattelwasbefo2canDbcl)uU) 
auDthcv  tn'co  bnto  theft  ©is© ,  anD 
thej&nefts  founDcD  With  the  trumpets. 

15  lEhenthc  men  of  3JuDah  gaue  a 
thout :  anD  as  themenof  JuDah  (hou; 
tcb,it  tame  to  paffe  that  <soD  fmote  5e> 
roboamanb  ail3Jfrael,  before  Zbml) 
aub3luDal). 

16  3tnt>  tt)c  rijtlDien  of  JJfracl  flcu  bt= 
fiWjubah:  anD  0oD  DcltttcrcD  them 
intothctrhattD. 

17  3uiD3b!tahanb  Ins  people  new? 
them  With  a  great  daughter  :  fo  there 
fcl  bo  Wne  flame  of  Jfracl,  flue  hunDjcD 
thoufanD  choftn  men. 

is  Xhtts  the  chtlDJcn  of  3Jfrael  Were 
b:ought  bnber  at  that  nine  ,anb  the  tftfl>  | 
DjcnofJIuDahpJcuailcD ,  becaufethev 
rciieb  bpon  the  JIdisp  Gob  of  their 
fathers. 

19  3nD  ^buahputfueD  after  ^tro- 
boam,  ftoonc  cities  from  him,  25ctl)  el 
With  the  towncs  thereof,  ano  ^cflia? 
nah  With  the  tottmes  thereof ,  anb<£; 
pl):aui  With  the  towncs  thereof. 

xo  ^either  Did  Jeroboam  retouer 
ftrcngth  agamc  m  the  Daves  of  &bilah : 
anD  the  1L  ©  is  ©ftrooRc  him,* he dicd. 

ii  C26ut^buahibajrcDmtghtv>anD 
marricD  fourtccne  Wtucs ,  anD  begatt 
tibcntie  anb  two  fonnes ,  anD  firtecne 
Daughters. 

xx  3lnD  the  rcfl  of  the  acts  of  3biiah, 
anb  his  ibaics,anb  Ins  fapmgs,ai  eVbnt? 
ten  tn  the  j  I  ttozv  of  the  l&ophet  *  3iDDo. 

CHAP.    XIIIL 

i  Afa  fucceeding dcltroicth idolatry.  6  Hauino 
peace  ,he  ftrengthencth  his  kingdome  with 
Forts  and  armies.  9  Calling  on  God,heouer- 
throwcthZcr.ih,and  Ipoileth  the  Ethiopians. 

Wff&nM®  3HHW&  fltpt  with  his 

v>j(^s^  fathers ,  anD  thevbuneb 
KCvm?  I"m  m  Mt  title  of  S>autD, 
p  anD  *  3ifa  his  fonne  rctg; 
§1  ncD  m  his  flcab  :  m  his 
Daves  the  lanD  ibas  Qiuct  ten  vecres. 
x    3lnD  31fa  DID  tljat  which  was  gooD 


anD  right  m  the  eves  of  the  JU>  is  ©  his 
d5oD. 

3  JF02  hce  toofceawav theaitats  of 
theftrangc  goDs ,  anD  the  high  plates, 
anD  bjauc  bowne  the  t  unages ,  anD  nit 
DoWncthegroucs; 

4  ariDtommanDeDjuDahtofteuc 
tbefLois©  <5od  of  thctrTathcrs,anD  to 
Do  ti;e  %avo,  anD  the  Commanbcment. 

5  2lfo he tooacawav  out  ofaii the 
cities  ofjubah ,  the  high  plates  anD  the 
t  images :  anD  the  umgDome  rbas  quiet 
befb?ehun. 

6  C  3taD  hec  built  fenteb  cities  in 
3JuDah  1  foj  the  latiD  haD  reft,  anbhee 
haD  no  warrein  thoft  veeres;  becaufc 
the  %  ©  is  ©  haD  gtucn  htm  reft. 

7  ICherefotf  hce  fatD  bnto  ^uDah, 
?Lct  bsbutibfyeft  cities,  ? matte  about 
them  ibaues,  anb  toujers ,  gates  anb 
bar  res,  While  thclanbis  vet  before  bs: 
becaufc  ibec  hauc  fought  the  %  0  is  © 
our  C5oD,  lnee  Ijaue  fought  him  anD  hee 
hath  giuenhsreft  on  cucrv  fibc :  fo  thev 
bmlt,anDp;ofpercD. 

8  ^nb  3lfa  haD  an  armie  ofmen  that 
barctargctsanbfpcarcs,outof3IuDah 
th?ce  hunD?eb  thoufano  ,  anD  out  of 
2Seniamm,  that  bare  fhtelbs  anD  bzctb 
boines ,  ODo  hunDjeD  anb  fourcftojc 
tljoufauD :  all  theft  were  tntghtv  men  of 
naiour. 

9  C*3(nDtherctameoutagainfttI)em 
zcrah  the  (Ethiopian,  with  an  holt  of 
a  thoufanD  thoufanD ,  anD  thjee  htm 
D?eo  tharets,anD  tamcbnto^atelhah. 

10  lilhen^faiutntoutagamfthttu. 
anD  the v  ftt  the  battel  m  arav  in  the  bai- 
lev  of  zephathah  atfi0arefhah. 

11  3inD  ^fa  trieD  unto  the  %  e> «  © 
hisdSob ,  anbfaiD,!L©i3jD,  itis*no- 
tljtngujuD  thee  to  helpc,  Whether  with 
manv,o?  With  them  that  haue  no  po  W* 
er.  J^clpc  bs,  £)  |L  ©  is  is>  our  ©oD,  fo? 
we  reft  on  thee,  anbinthv  #amc  Wee 
goe  agamft  this  multttube:  €>  %  €>  is  © 
thou  art  our  ©ob,let  not  I  |man  p?euaile 
agamft  thee. 

11  £>o  the  %o  is  ©fmote  the  ethio= 
pums  befoic  ^fa ,  anb  before  ^uoah, 
anDtliccthiopiansflcD. 

tj  3nD3UaanD  the  people  tljat  were 
With  him ,  purfueD  them  bnto  <5crar : 
anD  the  (Ethiopians  were  otiertlnown, 
tliat  tljcv  touID  not  retouer  tliemftlucs, 
foz  thev  Were  t  DeftroveD  before  the 
%  o  13  ©,  anD  befo;e  his  hoftc,  anb  tljcv 
cartcb  awav  bcrv  much  fpoile. 

14  3lnb  thev  fmote  all  the  ernes 
rotuiD 


t  H.-lr.Jl*. 
luel. 


t  Hci.Sm. 


Chap.  1(5. 


"(i. Sam. 14. 
6. 


Or.mortaH 


\Hdr.lrc- 
kc*. 


Ifrael 


scouenant 


Ch; 


ap.xv. 


ronnb  about  ©erar,  fouhcfeareof  the 
fL©ia©  came  Upon  them:  anb  they 
fpoilcb  allthc  ctties,  fo:  there  was  ercec* 
bmgmuchfpoilc  in  them. 

15  Xhcy  Quote  aifo  the  tents  of  tat* 
tell,  anb  taneD  away  fljeepe  ami  camels 
mabunbancc ,  ano  rcturncb  to  3Icru* 
falem. 

CHAP.   XV. 

1  Afa  with  Iudah  and  many  of  Ifrael,moued  by 
the  prophefie  of  Azariah  the  fonne  of  Oded, 
makeafolemnecouenantwithGod.  16  He 
putteth  downe  Maachah  his  mother,  for  her 
idolatry.  18  He  bnngeth  dedicate  things  into 
the  houfe  of  God,  and  enioy  eth  a  long  peace. 

#*^  0  3D  the  Spirit  of  ©ob 
^\#f  came  Upon  ajariah  the 
'•^feASft  fonne  of  Ooeb. 

z  ^nbhcWentouttto 
_  meet  3fa ,  ano  faio  bnto 
him,if>careye  me,  3fa ,  anball^jubah, 
ano  23ctuamm,  Xhe  ?L£>ib©  is  with 
you,  While  yce  be  with  him:  ano  tf  pee 
feehe  Dun ,  he  Will  be  fount)  of  you :  but 
if  ye  fojfabe  htm,  he  Will  fojlase  vou. 

3  jBoibfojalongfcafbn'Jftaclhath 

bene  WltllOUt  tl)C  tTUC  ©Ob,  3Ub  With* 

out  a  teatlnng  pneft,  anb  Without  lain. 

4  26ut  When  they  in  then;  trouble 
bibnirnc  tonto  tnelL  ©  is©  (5ob  of  if- 
rael, anb  fought  him,  hec  was  founb  of 
them. 

5  3nb  in  thofe  times  there  was  no! 
peace  to  him  that  Went  out,  no?  to  hun 
that  tame  tit,  but  great  notations  were 
topon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  toun* 
treys. 

6  3lubnationWastbcftroycbofna* 
tion,anbnticof  citte:  fo?©ob  bibbcrc 
tlicm  with  all  abuerfitie. 

7  26e  ye  ftrong  therefor ,  anb  let 
not  your  nanus  bee  weattc:  fo;  your 
wozfec  fhaiibcrcwarbcb. 

s  3tnbWhen3tfaheatbthefeW02bs, 
anb  the  pjophefic  of  £>bcb  the  prophet, 
he  tootte  courage,  anb  put  away  the 
t  abommablcibolcs  out  of  all  the  lanbe 
of 'Jubah  anb  asemaimn,  anb  out  of 
the  cities  Which  hec  hab  taken  from 
mount  €ph:aim,  anbteneWcb  tlic  211* 
tar  of  the  %■■&  k  © ,  that  was  befo?e  the 
po;chofthe?Lois©. 

9  3wb  he  gathcrcb  all  3Jubah  anb 
25eniamin  ,  anb  the  ftrangcrs  With 
them  out  of  Cphauni  aub  i©anaiTcb, 
anb  out  of  Simeon :  (tbzthev  fell  to  him 
outof  3ifrael  mabunbantc  When  they 


P 


with  God. 


t  Hei.m 


"Dcut.i3.y 


fain  that  the  ?Lsd  is  ©  his  ©ob  was  with 

htm.)  ■* 

10  So  they  gathcrcb  themfciues  to* 
gctherat  3Jerufaiem,  in  the  thirb 
moncth>  m  the  fifteenth  veere  of  the 
rcrgncofSCfa.  v 

it  3nb  they  offereb bnto  thelitis© 
I the  fame  tune,  of  the  fpoile  which  they 
hab  brought,  feucn  huntycb  orcn,  anb 
feuenthoufanbfbeepe. 

11  3lnb  they  entreb  into  acouenant 
to  feeHc  the  %  ©  is©  ©ob  of  their  fa* 
thcrs,  With  all  their  heart  anb  With  all 
their  foule: 

ij  XhatWhofoeuerWoulbnotfeeue 
the  ?u>s©  ©ob  of  Jfrael,  *niouib  be 
put  to  beath,  Whether  hnail  o?  great, 
Whether  man  0?  woman. 

14-  3lnb  they  froarebnto  the  ?L©is© 
With  a  loub  boice,  anb  With  tbounng, 
anb  With  trumpets,  anb  With  comets. 

15  2nD  all  3mbah  reioyceb  at  the 
oath :  fo?  they  hab  froomewith  ail  their 
heart,  ?  fonght  him  With  their  Whole 
beftrc,  aub  he  was  founb  of  them :  anb 
the  &013©  gaue  them  rett  rounb  a* 
bout 

i<s  Onbalfotoncernmg*^aarhah  mjom 
thtmothec of 3tfathekutg,hcremoo*  <$«3. 
ucb  her  from  beeing  &uecue,  becaufc 
inchabmabeantiDoleiiiagroue: anb  tw<«*™- 
^facutboWnehcribolcanblfampebit, 
anb  burnt  it  at  the  b?oobc  Bibjon. 

17  Butthe  high  plates  Were  not  ta= 
benaway  out  of  3JfraeI :  ncuerthetcflc 
the  heart  of  2tfa  was  perfect  au  his 
bayes. 

1 8  C  3tnb  he  brought  into  the  houle 
of  ©ob  the  things  that  his  father  hab 
bebicattb,  anb  that  he  himfcifr  hab  be- 
bicateb ,  filuer ,  anb  golb,  anb  betTcls. 

19  3tnb  there  was  no  more  warre  bn* 
to  the  fiuc  anb  thirtieth  ycere  of  the 
ceigneof^fa. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

Afa,  by  the  aide  of  die  Syrians,  diuerceth  Ba- 
jfha  from  building  of  Ramah.  7  Being  re- 
proucd  thereoi  by  Hanani,  he  putteth  him  in 
piifon.  n  Among  his  other  acles  in  his  dif- 
eafc  he  feeketh  not  to  God,  but  to  the  Phyfi- 
tuns.  13  His  death  and  burial!. 

0  *  the  fire  anb  thirtieth 

S|«  ^Miyeercofthereigncof^fa, 

ftfi  S® '^aalha  mug  of  JJfou-i 

came  bp  againfl  3ubah, 

anb  built  Jlamah ,  to  the 

intent  ttjat  hce  might  let  none  goe  out 

0?  come  m  to  ^fauitigof  Jubah. 

i   Xhen 


*  I.Kii 

ij.t7 


C^ 


Afa hisdeath^and       Il.Chron.  burialLIchofhaphat. 


f  H'h.-Dar- 


\Heb.-*Wuh 
were  hu. 


'Chi.  1 49. 

\'leb.tn  *- 
twniLiKe. 


la  holJe  nilh 


f  H'tj.  OH- 
Shed. 


%  XtjcnAfabjoughtoutuluetanb 
golbe  out  of  the  tccafuresof  the  houfc 
of  the  %  ©  is  Esano  of  the  btngshoufc, 
ant)  fent  to  fficnhaoabBtngof  £>?2ta 
that  MPelt  at  t  s>amafcus,  faptng ; 

j  There  is  a  league  btttDcenc  me  ant) 
thee,  as  there  was  benneenc  mp  fattjer 
anb  thp  father :  beholbc ,  3  hane  fent 
thee  Bluer  ano  golbe,  goe,  totabe  th? 
league  lPith  25aaCha  Ring  of  3Jfrael, 
that  Ije  may  Depart  from  me. 

4  2mb  Benhababhearbeneb  bnto 
bing  Afa,  anb  fent  toe  captames  oft  his 
arnncsagamOthcciticsof^frael  anb 
the?  fmotcTJion,  anb  Dan,  anb  Abel- 
maun,*  aUtncfhw-titiesofjBaphtali. 

5  Ano  it  tame  to  paffe ,  tbhen  25aa* 
(ha  hcarb  it,  that  Sec  left  off  butlbing  of 
&amah,anblcthtstb02beceafe. 

6  XhenAfatheRmgtoobeail^Ju: 
bah,  anb  they  tanebaiPaptDe  (tones  of 
&amah,anb  the  timber  thereof  .Where? 
ttnth  20aatbatuasabuiibtng,  anb  hee 
built  therewith  ©eba  anb  £J9i5pah. 

7  C  Anb  at  that  time  fcanant  the 
S>cer  tame  toAfabmgof  3Jubah,anb 
faibbntohim,2occaufctlioul)aftrclveb 
on  th  e  Ring  of  £>ym ,  anb  not  retycb  on 
the  1L  o  is  ©  thp  ©ob ,  thercfo2c  is  the 
holtcoftbeHmgof&pnaefcapeooutof 
thine  hanb. 

8  uecre  *  not  the  (Ethiopians  anb 
the  fUibuns  a  thugehofte,  ibtth  Per? 
man?  charcts  anb  hojfemeu  t  *>et  be? 
caufr  thou  bibbed  relic  on  the  %  ©  k  ©, 
hcbeliuereb  them  into  thine  hanb. 

9  5fo2  the  eyes  of  the  fLots©  run 
to  ano  fro  tlnougnoutthc  Whole  earth, 
1 1  to  (heme  huufelfcfrrongm  the  behaifc 
of^en1(ibhofeheartisperfitctort)arbs 
him.  herein  thou  haft  bone  fooit(hiy; 
therefor ,  from  hcnccfoo2thtl)oufhait 
banewarrcs. 

io  Xhcn  Afa  was  ttnoth  with  the 
S>ccr ,  anb  put  him  mapjifon-houfe. 
fo2  hewast'n  a  rage  With  him  becaufc  of 
this  thing.  Anb  Afa  t  oppjcfTcb  fome  of 
the  people  tlic  fame  time. 

1 1  CAtfl)  bcl)olb,thcactcsof  AfaBrft 
anb  laft,  lo  ,they  ^  Wntten  in  the  booUc 
of  the  mugs  of  3JtibahanD3Jfracl. 

ii  Anb  Afa  inthctbirttc  anb  ninth 
veercof  hisrciguc,  wasoifcafcb  mhis 
fectc,  Pntiil  his  bifcafc  was  etcetbuig 
great:  yctmhts bifcafrhtefoughtnotto 
the  %  a is 3\but  to  the  phyfictans. 

ij  C3nb  Afa  flcpt  With  Ins  fathers, 
anbbiebm  the  one  anb  fourticth  ycerc 
of  Ijtc  rcignc. 


i4  Anb  the?  burteb  him  m  his  oibne 
ftpnlchjes  Which  he  hab  tmabc  fo?  bun? 
feife  m  the  tunc  of  SDauib ,  anb  laibc  him 
in  the  beb,  Ibhich  was  fillcb  with  froctt 
obours.anb  biuers  binbcsot  rpicespje* 
pareb  by  the  Apothecaries  arte:  tjthcy 
mabe  apery great  burning  fo?  htm. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

Iehofhaphat  fucceedingAfa,  reignechwell, 
andprofpereth.  7  He  fendetb.  Leuites  with 
the  Princes  to  teach  Iudah.  10  Hisenemies 
being  terrified  by  God,  fomeoftheru  bring 
him  prefents  and  tribute.  11  His  grcattiefle, 
captaines  and  armies. 

1B2>  *3lehofl)aphathfs 
fonne  reigneb  tn  his  fteab, 
anb  fttcngtheneb  bunfclfc 
agamtt^fracL 
i  Anbhcpiaccbfbjces 
m  au  the  feneeb  cities  of  3fubab,  anb  fct 
garifons  in  the  lanb  of  3Jnbah,  anb  tn 
the  cities  of  <Eph:aim,  ttj^icfj  ACa  Ijis  fa^ 
thethabtaben. 

j  3nbthelL©isE>ruasrbtth3Ie 
hofl)aphat ,  becaufe  hee  ibalRcb  tn  the 
firft  ibapes  of  his  father  2>auib ,  anb 
fought  not  bnto  ffiaalim : 

4.  28utfoughttothcl2,fDis©©ob 
of  his  father ,  anb  ttmiRcb  in  his  com> 
manbements,  anb  not  after  thebomgs 
of  3Jftael: 

<,  Xherefo2ethe?L0K©Oablinieb 
the  bmgbomc  tn  his  hanb ,  anb  all  3Ju 
bahtb2oughtto3Jchofhaphatp2efents, 
anb  hehab  riches  anb  honour  mabun^ 
bance. 

6  3fnbhishearttbas||l(ftbpfnthe 
tbapes  of  the  %  ©  is  © :  mozeouet  t)re 
toobe  atba?  thehigh  piatcsanb  groues 
outof^ubah. 

7  C  Alfo  m  the  thirb  ?ccrc  of  his 
rctgne ,  hee  fent  to  his  pjmccs ,  euen  to 
Sothatl,  anb  to€)babtah,  anb  to  ze= 
chanah,  anb  to  jftcthancel ,  anb  to  £|9b 
cljatah,  to  teach  in  the  cittes  of  3Juoal) : 

8  Tint)  IPtth  tljnn  hee  fent  jLcuitcs, 

euenShemaiah ,  anb  ir2cthamah,anb 
zebabiah ,  anb^fahcl,  anb  §»hemtra 
moth ,  anb  'Jehonatlian ,  ano  Abotu 
iah,  anb  Xobuah,  anbXob  abouuah, 
Ucuttes:anbiPtththnn  cunjamaanb 
3eho2am,p2telts. 

9  Ano  they  taught  m  3ubajh ,  anb 
had  theboobofthelUPjofthe  |L£>is© 
ttnth  tli  cm ,  anb  ttient  about  th2ough 
out  all  the  nttcs  of  3iubah ,  anb  taught 
the  people. 

10  C&nb 


gei. 


*  1  .Kiog. 

15.14. 


t  Hihgaue, 


Tvtu  encoii- 

TOffi. 


His  captaines. Chap.xvii|.       Ahabs  prophets. 


\lhb.v 


]\Or,fa/.icet 


fffcb.itthv 

band* 


« l.King." 

2. 

\IUketthe 

endofjctret. 


io  C  anb  tDe  fcarc  of  tlje  %  to  k  w> 
t  fell  topon  all  tlje  tangbomcs  of  tt>e 
lanbs  tDat  were  rounD  about  3f  ubaD ,  Co 
tl>at  tDep  inaoe  no  tbarrc  agaioQ  3Je* 
ijofDapDat. 

ii  aifo  romeoftl)c0ljiliQincsb?ongnt 
3Jcbofl)apl)atp;erentaf,  anb  tribute  fib 
tier ,  anb  tDe  Arabians  bjougDt  Dim 
flotus,  feuctt  tDoufanb  anb  feuenfjun 
bzeb  rammes ,  anbfeuen  tDoufanb  anb 
fcucnDuntycbljc  goats. 

\z  canbgjeDofDapDatibaicebgceat 
cjcteebinglp,  anb  ljc  built  in  3Jubat)  ||  t a* 
files,  ano  titles  of  froje. 

i j  anbDcDato  mucl)  bufineffe  in  tljc 
titles  of  Jubatj :  anb  tt>e  men  of  ibarce, 
migDtte  men  of  balout,  were  in3Jccu- 
falcni. 

14  anb  tl)cfe  ue  ttje numbers  of  tljem 
attozbmg  to  tlje  Donfe  of  tDcir  fatljcrs : 
Ctf^DibalMDecaptamesoftDoufanos, 
abnaD  tljc  tl)tcfc,anb  MtD  Him  migDtp 
men  oftoalour,tD2ceDnnb2cb  tljoufanb. 

15  3lnbtnejrttol)imwas3Jel)ol)anan 
ttje  taptaine,  ano  tt>itl)  Dim  tibo  ljun= 
b?cb  anb  fourefwe  tljoufanb. 

16  anbnertDim  ibasamafiaDtlje 
fonneof  Ziclj2l,lbDo  ibillmglp  offereo 
Dimfelfe  bntotDe  !L©irb,  anbVbitl) 
Dim  tibo  ljuntyco  tljoufanb  migljtie 
men  of  baiour. 

17  anb  of  26cniamin,€liaba  amigo' 
tie  man  of  baiour,  ano  ttntD  Dim ,  ar> 
meb  men  ttntD  bott»  anb  flnclb  ttt>o 
Dunb2eb  tDoufanb. 

18  3nb  nert  Dim  was  gjcDofbabab, 
anb  ttntD  Dim  an  ljunbjeb  anb  fourc 
fcoictDoufanb ,  rcabp  pjepareb  fo?  tljc 
ttiarrc. 

19  XDcfc  tt>atteto  ontDe  tang,befibcs 
tljofc  lbDom  tDe  mug  put  m  tljc  fenccb 
titles  tD?ougDout  all  Jiuoalj. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

1  Ichofhaphat  ioyned  in  affimtie  with  Ahab, 
is  peifwaded  togoe  with  him  againft  Ra- 
rnoth  Gilead.  4  Ahab  feduced  by  falfe 
prophets,  according  to  the  woide  of  Mica- 
iahis  llaine  there. 

^^^M  £Nb  3IcDofl)apDatDabn^ 
^e:'  £  cDcs  ano  Honour  inabiin 
S£<$.\  ^banccantoiopncbaffimtic 
,ttntljaDab. 

Ji      1     *3lnl>t  after  certaine 

pcercs,Dett>entbottmc  to  aDab  to  &a 
marta:anbaDabtallcb  fDeepe  anb  or 
en  foz  Dim  m  abunbante,anb  fo;  tDe  pco 
plctljat  Ijcljao  nritljijmt,  anopcrftua 


beo  Ijim  to  go  c  bp  ttutlj  Dim  to  asamotlj 
(Pilcab. 

3  anbaijabtangof^fraelfaibbn 
to3JcDofDapDat  tang  of  3fiioaD,  nam 
tDou  goc  ttntlj  me  to  BamotD  <5ilcao  < 
anb  Ijcanfroercb  Ijim,  5  am  as  tljou  arr, 
anb  mp  people  as  tljp  people,  anb  we  will 
be  ttntD  tfjee  in  tDe  ttiarrc. 

4  C  anb  'JcIjofDapijat  faibe  bnto 
tDctang  of  Jfracl ,  enquire ,  3J  p;ap 
tDee,attDeib02b  of  tDe  %o  is  id  to  bap. 

5  lEljerefojc  tDe  lung  of  ffracl  ga* 
tljereb  togetljtr  of  pzopDcts  fourc  Dun= 
b2cbmen,anbfaibtontotDem,5)Daiibc 
goctoBamotIjC5ileabto  battels  fJjai 
3  fojbcare  i  anb  tljcp  faib,©oc  bp,  fo? 
©ob  ttnll  bcliuer  it  into  tDe  tangs  Ijanb. 

6  25ut  ^Jeljonjapljat faibc,  is  tDcre 
notljcre  a  p2opDet  of  tDe  %  o  is  w>  t  be= 
fibes,tDatibcmigDtenquireofDmK 

7  anbtDetangofgjfraclfaibbuto 
^ieljofljapDat,  There  ispet  oncman,bp 
ibDom  ttie  map  enquire  of  tlje  %®mz : 

bnt3D«tteDim,fozDeneuerp2opDeficb 
goob  bnto  me,  but  attbapes  emit:  tDe 
fame  is  $)iraiaD  tljc  fonnc  of  3umla. 
anb  'JcDonjapDat  faibe,  ?Lct  not  tlje 
tangfapfo. 

8  ano  tDctang  of  3ifrael  callcbfoj 
one  of  Ijis  ||  officers,  ano  faibe,  t  jfetclj 
quicalp  ^0icaiaD  tliefonne  of  3Jimia. 

9  anbtl)etangof3Jfraclanb'JeDO' 
fliapljat  tang  of  3JubaD  fate,  eitljer  of 
tDcm  on  Ijis  tD:one,  clotljcb  m  tljcir 
robes,  anb  tDcp  fate  m  a  1 1  boibe  place  at 
tljc  cntring  m  of  tDe  gate  of  Samaria, 
anb  all  tljc  pjopljcts  pjopijefieb  before 
tDcm. 

10  anb  ZcbctaaD  tDe  fonue  of  <£lje 
naanaD,  Dabmabc  Dun  Dojncs  of  pion, 
ano  faib ,  Ulius  faitlj  tDe  H€>ke>,  naitD 
tDefc  tDou  fijait  puftj  5>pna,  bntil  t  tljep 
beconfumeb. 

1 1  anb  all  tDe  pzopljcts  pzopDcficb 
fo,famug,  <!5oc  bpto  KamotD  ©Ucao, 
anb  piofpcr:  foi  tDc!L€)iHB  fljall  tor 
liner  it  into  tDe  Ijanb  of  tDe  tang. 

ii  anb  tDe  meflcnger  tDat  lbcnt  to 
call  09icaiaD,  fpafee  to  Dim,  raping,  25e= 

D0l0,tl)Ctt)02bS0f  tljC  P20pljCtS  declare 

goob  to  tDe  tangUbitlj  one  afient:  let 

tDptbo20tDcrcf02C,3Jp2aptDee,belt&e 
one  of  tljcirs,anbfpeaRetDou  goob. 

13  3luba3icaiaDfaib,astDe?lsE>isjE> 
liuctD,  eucn  \bDat  mp  (3ob  faitD,  tDat 
\bill3)fpcabe. 

1+  anbibDcuDecibascomctotDc 
tang,  tDe  tangfapo  bnto  Dim,  s39tcaial), 
Qtallibcgocto  3KamotD  <5ileab  to  bat 

tell, 


\F.cb.jcto 


\\Or,Eitm- 

ches. 

\Hcb.h*n!» 


\\0r  ,Jhcre. 


f  /Wr.  thou 

confitm: 

them. 


\  Heb  with 
one  month. 


Micaiahs  prophecie.  Il.Chron.  AhabflainCc 


\\OtJmtfor 

emit. 


Mob.i.^. 


|  Or,  from 
chamber  to 
chamber : 
Heir. cham- 
ber in  a 
chamber. 


tell,  01  mall  3  fob;care*anb  he  fayti, 
©oc  yccbp,  anb  pjofper,  anb  they  (hail 
be  Delittcreb  into  your  banb. 

15  anotbe  King  fayb  to  him,  $oibc 
man?  times  (ball  3  atmire  tljct ,  tfjat 
tbouraynotbmgbuttbetrutbtomc,m 
tbenamcoftbelLois©? 

16  Xbcn  be  favu,  H  btt»  fee  all  3Jfra- 
el  fcatteteb  bpoutbcmoutitaines,  as 
(becpefbat  Ijaucno  (bepbearb :  ants  the 
%o\z®  faybXbefebauc  nomafter,lct 
tijenuetunte  thn  efore,cuervman  to  l)ts 

boufempcatc. 

17  (anb  the  King  of  3Jfrael  fayb  to 
<3cbofbapbat,2>ib3Jnot  tclltbce,  that 
Dee  lboulD  not  pjopbeuc  goob  bnto 
mccllbutcmllO 

18  agatnc  be  fayb ;  Xberefojc  beare 
the  lbozb  of  the  %q-&®:3  faibctbc 
%  £>  is  ©  fitting  bpon  l)is  tblonc ,  anb 
all  the  boftcof  bcaucnftanbmgon  bis 
right  DanD,anD  on  ijis  left. 

19  anbtbc1L©i5iDfayb,g3bofbaii 
entife  abab  King  of  llftacl,  that  bee 
may  goc  bp  anb  fall  at  3Samotb  <£fc= 
leab^anb  one  fpaKc,  faymg  after  this 
nianer,  anb  another  faying  after  that 
maner. 

zo  Xbcn  there  tame  ont  a  *  fptrit, 
anb  ftoob  brfcuc  the  TL  <d  is  ©,anb  fayb, 
3  lbiu  etmfc  bun.  anb  the  %<£>%%> 
fayb  bnto  bim,nabcrclbitb  * 

21  anb  lice  fayb/J  null  goe  ont,anb 
be  a  lying  fpint  m  tl)c  moutl)  of  all  bis 
pzophcts.anb  tbe?l  ©  is  i>fayb,Xbou 
(halt  entife  him ,  anb  thou  fhaltalfo  p?e- 
itailt :  goc  ont,anb  doc  euen  fo. 

22  0oYoc  tocrcfo2C  bcbolb ,  tije 
ILobb  bath  put  a  lying  fpint  m  the 
mouth  of  tbcfctby  pjopbets,  anb  tlje 
ft  ©  is  ©  bath  fpoben  ciull  againft  tbec. 

23  Xl)enZeoeHiafttl)cfonncofCl)c^ 
naauab,  tamencccc,  anb  fmotc  JBtra- 
iab  bpon  tbccbecKe,  ana  fayb,  aabtcb 
may  Went  the  fpint  of  the  2L©is© 
from  inec,  to  fpcaKc  bnto  tbee? 

24.  aim  09itaiab  fayb  ,  2iScbolb, 
thou  (bait  fee  on  that  bay,  lbbcn  tlion 
(l)alt  go  1 1 !  into  an  inner  chamber  to  btbc 
tbyfclfc. 

i<,  Xbcn  the  King  of  3Jfracl  farb, 
Xaitc  vec  iT)tcaiab,anb  carte  bmi  bacRe 
to  amon  the  goiternonr  of  the  titic,anb 
to'JIoaflithcRtuccsfoiutc: 

26  ano  fay,  Xbus  faith  tlic  King, 
£>ut  this  fclloUnn  tbcpnfon,  anb  rccoc 
llint  iDitl)  bicati  of  nffStctiou ,  anb  Hutu 
mater  of  affliction ,  bntill  3  rcturnc  in 
peace. 


27  ^nb  fiPicaiabfayb,3Jfrboutct; 
tatnly  returne  m  peace ,  then  bath  not 
tbelL  ©  is  ©  fpoRen  by  mee.  anb  bee 
fayb,ll?carRen  all  pee  people. 

28  &otl)emngof3Hracl,anb3)c; 
bofbapbat  the  King  of  3lubab,  ibent 
bptoftamotbOtlcao. 

29  anb  the  King  of  3Jfracl  fayb  \i\v 
to3Ie})ofbapl)at,3}ibill  bifgiufc  my 
lelfe,anb  lbtll  goc  to  t!)c  batten,  but  put 
tljou  on  ttft  robes.  SottjcKmgof  3& 
;  raci  buguifcb  i)unlclfc,anb  tljcy  ibettt  to 
tlje  batten. 

30  i!5otti tljeHtng of^ynaljab com 
maunbeb  tlje  captames  of  tljctftarcts 
tftat  were  \m\)  l;im,faymg,5Fight  ye  not 
lbitl)  fmaii  0?  grcat,faue  onely  ibitlj  the 
Kiugof^Jfrael. 

31  anb  tt  tame  to  paflc  lbftcn  tlje 
taptamcsoftlic  cljarcts  farb^Jeljoaja^ 
pDat ,  tbat  tl)cy  fayb ,  3Jt  is  tnc  Kmgof 
5fracl:tf)erefojerncy  compaffeb  about 
mm  to  fight,  asm  3)el)oQ)apl)at  trycb 
out,  anb  tl)c  %,  ©  is  jd  ijclpeb  Ijim,  anb 
d5ob  moucb  rtjem  to  depart  from  l)im. 

li  fo;  it  tame  to  paffc,  tnanbftcn 
tftc  taptaiues  of  the  cljarctspcrcciueb 
that  tt  ibas  not  the  King  of  3lfracl,  they 
turncb  batftc  agamc  t  from  purfutng 
htm. 

33  anba  cenaine  man  b?eib  a  boibc 
t  at  a  bcnture,anb  fmote  the  King  of  3Jf 
racltbcttbcenc  the  toints  of  the  har= 
neffe :  thcrefoic  hec  fayb  to  h^  charct- 
man ,  Xurue  thine  hanb,  that  thou 
mayefrtanemeout  of  the  hoQe ,  fo2^ 
amtmounbeb. 

34  ^nb  the  battclliucrearcb  that  bay: 
hovbbctttlie  Kmgof  3Jfrael  flay  cb  him- 
feife  bp  in  his  tharct  againft  thc^yn 
ans,  bntill  the  euen :  anb  about  the 
tunc  of  tljc  funnc  going  Dottmc ,  Ijee 
byeb. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

i  Ichofhaphat ,  reproued  by  Iehu,  vifiteth  his 
kingdome.  5  His  inltiudions  to  the  Iud- 
ges,   8   TothePrieftsaiidLeuites. 

&8&G$b&*  3fchofl)aphat  the 
J8ffl&SlE&  Hinet  of  3J"bah  rcttmtcb 
^±^M^  to  his  hottfc  m  peace  to 

Mg^Herufaicin. 
»^W.OE  2  anb3lehuthcfonne 
of  I)anam  thefeer,  ibetttottt  tomcete 
htm,  anb  fayb  to  King  gjebofljaphat, 
S>houibeathou  helpcthc  bngouiy,anb 
lone  them  that  hate  the  %  &  is  w>< 
XhcrefozcisUijath  bpon  theefrombc 
fo2Ctbc?Loisjp. 
?  iBeucrthcleffe, 


\Heb.from 
afierhint. 

t  Heb.inbn 
/imp/iattc. 

\Hcb.  be. 

twtcnt  the 
lomti  and 
Betvreenethc 
kreftfUte. 

t  He  b.  tn.idc 
fcke. 


Iehofhaphat:  His      Chap.xx.         faft,and  prayer 


•Clup.  1 7- 
4.«- 


tttnt  em. 


f  rich-,  in 
tht  mutter 

mem. 

•Deut.  10. 
17.10b  14. 
io.rnft.  10. 
54.rom.2- 
11.  Col.  1. 
6. 1  .pet,  I. 

a- 


\Hebr.uke 

doe- 


5  j!3cucttbcle(Ic ,  there  'arc  goob 
things  founbtntbec,  m  that  thou  haft 
fatten  avbap  the  gtoucs  out  oftlje  umD, 
an!)  hat*  prcpaccb  thine  heart  to  fcciic 

<50b. 

4-  3nb  iehofhaphat  Mbcit  at  3te 
rufalcm :  anb  t  ijec  tbent  out  agauic 
tlnougb  the  people ,  fromBccc  (heba 
to  mount  £ph?aim,anb  b?ougbttbcni 
baefce  bnto  tt)e?LsDi3?D  45ob  of  their 
fathers.  _ 

5  C^nbhefctlJubgesintbelanb, 

throughout  all  tbeTenccbcmcs  of  3fu- 
t>ab,citybyetty, 

6  3u«)  fait)  to  toe  3Iubgcs ,  xatte 
bcct>n>batycboe:fo?  yceiubge  notfo? 
man,  but  foi  ti)c  %  0  is  3D,tubo  is  tint!) 
youtmfbciubgcment. 

7  n9bcrcfo?c  noib ,  let  the  fcacc  of 
toe  1L<dis3d  be  bpon you, ta&c  beeb 
anb  boc  it :  fb?  there  is  no  *  imciuittc  Ibtrb 
the  ?L©i5?d  out  <£tob ,  no?  tefpect  of 
pcrfons,no?  tailing  of  gifts. 

8  ft$)o?coucriii'3icrufalcmbib'3Jc; 
bofbapbat  ret  oftlic  Olenites,  anb  of  toe 
0?icfts,  anb  of  the  cbtefc  of  the  fathers 
of  gifrael ,  for  tlje  iubgement  of  ti)c 
%  01s©,  anb  fo?  conttoucrfies,Vbben 
they  retucneb  to  giccufalcm. 

9  3inb  bee  cbacgcb  tbcm ,  faying, 
Xbus  (ball  vce  boc  m  the  feace  of  toe 
%  0  h  3D  faithfully ,  anb  ttntb  a  perfect 
heart. 

10  3tnb  \bbat  taufc  focucr  fbal  tome 
to  you  of  your  brethren  that  bibcll  in 
their  cities  ,betU)ccucbloobano  bloob, 
bcttbccnclLatt)  anb  Commanbcmcnt, 
Statutes  anb  gjubgements,  yecfljaii 
men  Vbaruc  them  tt)at  they  trefpaffe 
not  againft  tljc  %  0  is  3d,  anb  fo  Wrath 
tome  bpon  you,  anb  bpon  your  brc^ 
tb?en :  this  bo  e,  ej  y  e  (ball  not  trefpaffe. 

11  3lnb  bcholb ,  3(tnartab  the  ehicfe 
$?icft  >5  oucr  you  in  all  matters  of  the 
%  0  is  d  ,  anb  zebatriab  tDc  fonne  of 

gjnmiacl,tl)eruieroftUeI)6urcof1Ju' 
oal),  foi  all  the  Btugs  matters  :3llfo 
the  Hetutcs  (hall  be  officers  bCf02CJ>0U. 
tDcale  touragioufly,  anb  the  %  0  is  3D 
fbalbcibttb  the  goob. 

CHAP.    XX. 

1  Iehofbuphac ,  in  his  fearc  proclaimeth  a  (id. 
5  His  prayer.  14  The  prophefieoi  laha. 
ziel.  10  Iehofhaphat  exhorrechthe people, 
and  fetteth  fingers  to  praife  the  Lord.  11  The 
great  ouerthrow  of  the  enemies.  16  The 
people  hauing  blelled  God  at  Berachah ,  re^ 


turne  m  triumph.  31  Iehofhaphats  rcigne. 
55  Hisconuoyoffhips,whichhemadewith 
Ahazi.ih  .according to  theprophefieotElic. 
zer.vnhappilyperifhed. 

X  tame  to  paffc  after  this 
alfo ,  that  the  cbiityen  of 
£j9oab,  anb  the  cbtib?cn  of 
Amnion ,  anb  tbitlj  tbcm, 
,  other  bcfiDc  the  ammo? 
mtts ,  came  againft  3Jchoft)aphat  to 
battcll. 

2  Hlbcn  there  tame  fomc  that  tolbc 
3chofl)aphat,faymg,Xherccommcth 
a  great  mulrttubcagatnft  thee  from  be? 
yonb  the  £>ca  on  this  fibe  5>y?ia ,  anb 
bcholb ,  they  bee  m  i^ajon-Xamac, 
lbbtcb'>€ngebi. 

j  3lnb 3fcbofbapbatfeareb,  anb  kt 
thimfclfc  tofcebe  theft©  is  iD,anb  p:o- 
tlaimcb  a  faft  throughout  all  3Jubab ■ 

4-  3Jnb3mbabgathercbthemfelues 
together,  to  affec  heipe  of  the  %  0  is  3d: 
cucn  out  of  all  the  cities  of  3fubah  they 
tame  to  fccUc  the  %  0  is  3D. 

5  C3nb3Jchorjhaphatftoobint«c 
Congrcganon  of  ^Jubah  anb  5ferufa- 
lem,  in  the  houfc  oT  tlje  JL  o  is  3D  before 
the  ncib  Court, 

6  ^nbfaib,j©H©iS3D<5obofour 
fathers,  art  not  thou  (Sobinhcatten? 
anb  rulcft  not  thou  oucr  all  the  lung- 
boms  of  the  heathen '.  anb  in  thine  hanb 
is  there  not  potber  anb  might ,  fo  that 
none  is  able  to  ibithftanb  thee; 

7  ^rt  not  thou  our  d5ob,trbho  bibft 
bnue  out  the  inhabitants  of  this  lanb 
bcfo2C  thy  people  3Jfracl,  anbgaucfttt 
to  the  fccb  of  ^bjaham  thy  fricnb  fo? 
euct< 

8  3Inbfheybujcltthcrcin,anbhaue 
builtthcca5>anctuarie  therein  fo?  thy 
/Bame,  faying, 

9  *  3Jf ,  lbhen  cuill  commeth  bpon 
bs,  as  the  fuwb,  iubgement,  0?  pcfti- 
lencc,  0?  famine,  ibee  ftanbbcfozcthis 
rjoufe,anbin  thy  p?cfcncc(fo?  thy /Same 
is  m  thishoufc)  anb  cry  bnto  thee  in  our 
affliction ,  then  thou  ibtltheare  *  helpc. 

10  anbnoib  bcholb,  the  ehilb?cnof 
Amnion  anbfi0oab,anbmountS)cir, 
ttihoni  thou  "lboulbcft  not  let  jjfracl 
tnuabc,tbhenthcy  came  out  of  the  lanb 
of  Cgypt,  but  they  turncb  from  them, 
anb  beftroyeb  thnn  not : 

11  2Seholbc,  nay,  hoib  they  rtibarb 
bs,tocotmto  caftbsoutof  tbypoffcfli 
on,\bhtchthouhaftgiumbstomhcrit. 

11  £>our©ob ,  ibilttbou  not  iuosc 

thenu  fo?  Vbcc  haue  no  might  againft 

£>f  this 


31 


tfMrM 

[ate. 


\Hei.lht 


•Chip  6. 

j8.  l.kinc. 
S.37. 


'Dcuc.-.p. 


God  fighteth  ILChron. 


forludah- 


f  Helu  of- 

cent. 

||  Or,  W/r;. 


"Ifci  7-y. 


Heb.yrtb 
Cm. 


\Hcb  arnlm 
ihetimelhta 

tHct.wfii 

frtife. 


tins  great  company  fljat  conintcth  a 
gainftDs?  neither  UnolD  lbcc  what  to 
Doe  btttour eyesore Dpon thee. 

13  3htD  all  JuDah  ftooD  before  the 
ILoiai?,  With  their  Mlc  ones  ,  t|)tic 
WittesatiD  their  chiKuen. 

1+  OEhenDpon^Jahavclrhcfonnc 
of  -rcchariah ,  the  forme  of  iScttaial), 
thefonne  of  3Jehici, thefonne  of  flPat 
tamah,a?Lemtcofthefonsof3lfaph, 
came  the  Spirit  of  the  %  0  k  jd  m  the 
miDft  of  tf)c  Congregation : 

15  3lnDhefaiD,  l?earltenrcc,ail^n 
Dah,anD  ye  inhabitants  of  gjcrufaiem, 
anD  thou  lung  gjehofbaphat ,  Xhns 
fay  th  the  %  o  \\  jd  Dnto  you ;  lot  not  a 
fraio,  no?  DifmayeD  by  rcafon  of  tins 
great  mttltituDe;  fcu  the  battel!  is  not 
yours,  but  ©oDs. 

i6  Xo  mojrolbgoe  ye  DoWttc  againft 
them  :  oeholD ,  tlic>>  come  Dp  by  the 
t  cliffc  of  Z15,  attD  ye  (bail  fmbe  them  at 
rbccnD  of  tlic  ||  b200Uc,  bcfo2c  the  mm!- 
Dcrncffc  of  |f  cruel. 

17  Ptc  (ball not  neede  to  figrjtin  this 
batccii;  fct  your  felttcs,  ftanb  yet  rtiii,  anD 
fee  trjc  faitiatton  of  the  Hokd  Wttb 
you ,  <D  3IiiDal)  anD  3Jcrufaicm :  fcarc 
not,no2  be  DifmaycD ;  to  111020  w  goe  out 
againft  them,  fo:  the  JLoisjd  willbee 
With  you. 

18  3inD  gjchofbapbat  boWcD  his 
bcaD ,  With  bis  face  to  the  grouuD :  anD 
all'JuDab.anDtbc  inhabitants  of  3Jc- 
rufaicm ,  fell  before  the  %  o  is  js»,  luoj; 
IbtppmgthelLoKE*. 

19  ^nbtlic Smites,  oftbccbilDzen 
of  the  l&obatbttcs,  anD  ofthcchtUucn 
of  the  ixojbitcs,  ftooD  bu  topjaifctlje 
It  one  god  of  Jjfraci,  wttba  louDe 
boicconlngb. 

20  OtiD  they  rofe  early  in  themo?- 
ning,  attD  Went  foo2tb  into  the  WtlDcr 
neffe  of  Zclioa:  anD  as  they  Wentfo2tb, 
3fchofbaphatftooDanDfaiD,bcamne, 
iD^iuDali,  attDyce  inhabitants  of  jiv 
r ufalem ;  *  zSclecue  m  tl)  e  %  s>  13  jd  your 
GoD,fo  (ball  you  be  eftablifljcD ;  bclccuc 
bis02opbet£,fo(baiiycep2ofpcr. 

21  2hid  Wbcnfjc  baD  confnitcb  lbttl) 
the  people,  be  appotnteD  dingers  Dnto 
tl)cIt®KiD,anDttI)atn;oulDp2aifctlic 
bcatttie  of  bolinefle,  astbey  lbetu  out 
befoje  ttjearmiCi  atiotofay.pjaifc  tl)c 
%o  i;;  r\fc>2  l)is  mcinvikimctl)  foi  eucr. 

22  Ct3luD  When  they  beganttc  1  to 
fmg  attD  to  pjatfe,  the  %  go  is  9  fet  anp 
bufbmcitts  againft  tlic  cbtlDzcn  of  3tu^ 
mon,  «>]3oab ,  anD  mount  S>ctr ,  Wbtelb 


Were  tome  againft  3JuDah ,  anD  ||tbey 
Iberefmtttcu. 

23  5Fo?  the  tbittwcn  of  Amnion  anD 
£Poab,ftooD  Dp  againft  tl)c  inhabitants 
of  mount  ;§>cir,  Dttcrly  to  flay  anD  De 
fttopthem :  anD  XDDcti  tljcy  ijaD  maoc 
an  cnD  of  tfte  inhabitants  of  5>eir ,  cue 
ry  cue  DclpeDt  to  Dcftroy  another. 

14  3lnD  lDhcn  3!uDah  came  totbarb 
the  match  -to'lbccm  the  tbtlDerncfTc, 
they  loolteD  Dnto  thcmultituDc,anDbe- 
holD,  they  w  ere  DcaD  boDics  fallen  to  r!;c 
earth,  ano  t  none  cfcapcD. 

25  ^nDU)hcu5lehoil)aphatanDhis 
people  tame  to  taftcaibay  the  fpoilc  of 
them,  they  fouuo  among  them  m  atom* 
Danccbotl)  riches  UnththcDeabboDtes, 
anD  p^cnous  teibcls  (ibhich  they  ftript 
off  fo:  thcmfelues)mo2C  then  they  cottlD 
cary  aftiay :  anD  thcyibercthzce  Dayes 
m  gathering  of  tljc  fpoilc,  tt  lDas  fo 
nutclj. 

26  C  3uD  on  the  fourth  Day  they  af 
fcmblcD  thcmfclttcs  m  the  Dalicy  of 
II  26erachal)i  fo:  there  they  bleffeD  the 
H©is^:thcrfo2Cthcnameoffhefamc 
place  \DascailcD  thcDalley  of2Scracljah 
Dnto  this  Day. 

27  Xhctt  they  returncD,  ettery  matt 
of  giuDahaitD  Icrttfalem,  anD  'Jjeho 
thaphat  m  tlic  tfo2efront  of  them , to  go 
agameto'J/criifalcm  llnthioy :  fo:  the 
Hob  jd  hao  maoc  them  to  retoyeco 
ucr  their  ettemtcs. 

28  3litD  they  came  to  ^icrttfaicm 
lDith0faitcrtcs,atiDharpes,atiDtrtim' 
pcts,Dnto  the  houfc  of  the  %  o  is  jd. 

29  3!ttD  the  fear  e  of  (Bon  lbas  on  all 
theUtngDomsoftiioiccoutttreys.lDhcn 
theyhaDhcarDthatthclLoispfought 
agamfttljc  enemies  of  3ifrael. 

30  5>otI)c»eaimcof3Jchofhaphat 
Was  qutct;  fo2  Ijts  CoD  gattc  hint  reft 
rounD  about. 

31  *r.*3htD  feljofliaphat  reigneD 
oucr  3lttDah  :  $cc  was  thtrtic  attD  fine 
yccrcsolbc  When  hec began  to  reigne, 
ano  hcrctgttcD  tlbcutic  anD  fine  ycercs 
tu3Jcrufalem:  attDhis  mothers  name 
w.»  ^Mibahthcbaughterof  £>hilhi. 

32  3HiDhcibalHeDintheibayof3lfa 
his  fathcr,atiDDepartcD  not  from  tt,Do 
utgthat  lDhtch  was  right  in  the  figljtof 
the  #,<©!&£>. 

33  iDoiDbctt  the  high  plates  ibere  not 
tafteu  arbay :  fo;  as  yet  tl;c  people  hao 
notp2eparcD  thnr  heartsbnto  tl)e  <^od 
of  their  fathers. 

3+  i5oU)thcrenoftheactesof3it 
hofbaphat 


\\0r,th7 
jntote  one 
ttnelher. 


\H,L.for 
thedeflru- 
11  ion. 


■  hleb.  there 
r.unot  at 


Tkuu, 
blejTmi. 


t  Heb.he.ut. 


1. King. 
Mi,8tc. 


Ich 


oramscruelne: 


Ch; 


p.XXj, 


H 


is  great 


"l.KillgS 
16.1. 

made  to*j- 
cend. 


■i.King 
ll. 50. 


•  l.King.8. 
1 6,1 7. 


'Cha.u.j. 


bofbapbat  fitft  anD  laft,  bcbolD ,  tticp 
ace  tbnttcn  in  the  t  booRc  of  3c\)[\  tiic 
fonnc  of  ^anani;  Ubbotts  mcnnoncD 
intbcbooReoftbeBmgsofJfracl. 

3$  <C3lnb  after  this  Did  ?icbofb> 
pljat  Ring  of  3UtDab  tome  btmTclfe  lbith 
^Ija^iarj  Ring  of  3)fracl ,  vuijo  DtD  bcry 
lbttbcbly: 

36  3nb  be  ioyncb  bimfclfc  lbith  bun 
tomafee  fl)ips  togocto  lEatibrtb  :anb 
they  mate  the  fbipsui  <£?iou-  ©cbcr. 

37  Xbcn  Clicker  tl)c  fonnc  of  3Do= 
Dana!)  of  i$)arc(bab,  p?opbcucb  agatnft 
^jcbofbapbat,  faying;  25ccaufc  thou 
haft  toyncD  thy  felfc  With  3iba5iab,tbe 
%&  m  id  bath  tyoRcntby  IbojRes  :anb 
the  flnps  tbcee  bioRcn,  tbattbeyibcrc 
notable  to  goc  to  Xaclbift;. 

CHAP.   XXI. 

i  Iehoramfucceedinglchcfliaphat,  flayethhis 
brethren.  5  His  wicked  reigne.  8  Edom 
and  Libnah  reuolt.  11  The  prophecie  of 
Eliiahagainft  him  in  writing.  16  Philiftincs 
and  Arabians  opprefTe him.  18  His  incura- 
ble difeafe,  infamous  death,  and  burial). 

£>hj  *3Icbofl)apbat  Ocpt 
Vbitl)  bis  fatl)crs,anD  mas 
btmeD  Xbitb  bis  fathers 
in  the  citic  of  2>auiD :  anD 
3Jel;o?am  bis  fonnc  ccig- 
ncDmbisGcaD. 

z  3inD  Ijc  had  bzetbjen  the  fonncs  of 
gjebofbapbat,  pariah ,  anb  3Jebtel, 
anuzctba'cian ,  anD3l5ariab,anD£Pi; 
chart,  anD  £>bepbattab :  3111  tbcfe  were 
the  fonncsof  3cl)ofl;ap|)at  ftmgofjfc 
cacl. 

3  3tnD  their  father  ganc  them  great 
giftcs  of  fiiueranD  ofgolDe,  atmofpzc; 
cions  things ,  ttntb  fenteb  cities  in  ^u 
balj :  but  the  RmgDomc  gauc  hec  to  3te- 
bo:am,becaufcbc  was  tbefteft  borne. 

4-  iiMb  * luben 3Jelwam  lbas ti= 
fenbp  to  tbcRtngbomc  of  his  father  ,hc 
ftrcngtljcneb  bimfclfe,anD  flcttiall  his 
b:eth2ettU)iththeftuo?b,anb  diuas  alfo 
ofthc02intesof3)frael. 

5  C  3f  ebojant  was  thirtic  anb  tibo 
yeercs  olbc  ibhcnhec  began  to  reigne, 
anb  hec  rcigneb  eight  yccres  m  'Jew 
falcm. 

6  3nb  he  ibaiRcD  iu  the  lbay  of  the 
Rings  of  JfcaeMiRcasbtbthchoufcof 
3lhab :  foz  l)tt  hab  the  Daughter1  of  *  TS? 
hab  to  tbtfe:anb  be  ttuougbt  that  lbbicb 
was  eutll  in  the  eyes  of  the  %  ©  is  £>. 

7  $orubeittbe?L©is©iboulbnot 


Dcftroy  the  boufcof  £>auib,  bctaufcof 
the  coucnant  that  hec  hab  maoe  ttntb 
SDauiD ,  anD  as  hec  pzoimfcD ,  to  giue  a 
t  light  to  him  anD  to  Ijis'fons  foz  euec. 

8  C3"ibisDaycstbc€Doinitcsrc' 
uoltcD  from  bnDcr  the  t  Dominion  of 
3JuDah,anD  tnaoc  thcnifelucs  a  lung. 

9  -aChcnSJchowin*  Vbcntfo2th  lbith 
his  Winces ,  anb  all  his  tharets  ttntb 
h*.m:anb  herofebp  by  ntgbt,anDfmotc 
thc€Doinites  rbbicb  compaiTcD  hint  in, 
anb  tfjc  captaincs  of  the  tljarets. 

io  £>otbc<£DomitcsreuolteDfrom 
bnocr  the  hanD  of  3Jubab  bnto  this 
bay.  Xhc  fame  nmc  alfo  biD  Jlibnab 
reuolt  from  bnber  his  hanb,  becanfe  he 
hab  fojfaRcn  the  It  ©is©  Gob  of  bis 
fathers. 

ii  i©o?coucr,hcmaDchighplaccsm 
themountames  of  "JiuDab ,  auDcaufeb 
the  inhabitants  of  jcrufalcm  to  torn 
nut  fornication,  anD  compelleD  3fuDah 

thereto. 

B  c  3lnD  there  tame  a  lbntutg  to 
him  from  ciuah  the  ^opljct,  fapmg, 
Xhnsfaitlj  tbclL  ©  is  ©  ©ob  of  2DattiD 
thy  fathec,  25ctam"c  thou  haft  not  ibai 
ReD  m  the  lbaycs  of  gjebowapbat  thy 
father,  nozuuhcibaycsof  ^fa  Ring  of 
gju'Dab: 

13  25ut  baft  lbalRcb  in  the  lbay  of  the 
Rings  of  3fracl,anDbaft  maDe3JuDah 
anb  tlic  inhabitants  of  3Jecufaicjn  to 
goc  a  lbboring,  RRc  to  tbcibboiebomes 
oftbcbotifcof3fl)ab,anb  alfo  baft  name 

tbybjcthienoftbyfatbersboufclbbnh 
Ibcre  better  then  thy  felfe : 

14  2i5cbolD,iliith  a  t  great  plague  ibtl 
the  ILoejd  fmttc  thy  people ,  anD  thy 
tbilDjcn ,  anD  tijy  ibmes,  anD  all  thy 
gooDS. 

15  3tnDthon  niaiti.auegreatficRncffc 
by  Difcafc  of  thy  boibcls,  until  thy  boib= 
:  els  fall  out ,  by  reafon  of  the  ucRcncffc 
bay  by  bay. 

i6  CtT9o:coiier,thc?l©HE?ftirrcD 
bpagamftjjcbohim  tbefpint  of  the 
VMjiliftmcs,anD  of  the  Arabians ,  tljat 
:  were  nccrc  the  Ctljiopians. 

17  3lnD  they  tame  Dp  into  'Jubab, 
anD  b2ahemto  it,  anbttaneDarbayail 
the  fubftancc  that  lbas  founD  m  the 
Rings  boufc ,  anD  bis  fonncs  alfo  anD 
bis  lbuies ;  fo  that  there  mas  ncuer  a 
fonnc  left  him,  fauc  ||  3cl;oaha?,  tljc 
yongeftofhtsfonnes. 

is  C3lnDafteraUtbis,thc?L©isp 
fmotebtmmbisborDcis,  Uiithau  uuu 
cable  bileafc. 
^>fx         19  3inD 

313 


t^f^.  /amp, 
or  Cttndif. 

•t.Sam.B. 
1  king.u. 
j  6.1. king 
8.19.  pfil. 

t  Hcb.himd. 

•i.King. 

8.11. 


\lltk  .1 
gre.ir  ftrohf. 


]Hf!>jtricd 


\\nr,A':A- 
t.iahtcf>*p. 
12. \. or,  A- 
ciu  iabfier, 
6. 


Ahaziah  wicked:       I  I.Chron. 


Heisfl 


aine. 


fM.mtl 
cut  defirc. 


*C!up.  Jr, 
'7 


'Clup.il  6 


•  Hcb.whtr- 

tvith  they 

him. 

||  Olhrrmfc 

fr  teheahd*. 
lhap.ll  17. 
\Hslr.trci- 
■Mnf  (>wic 


•  •  Kill 
9.7- 


19  :3lnbitcametopaffe,  thatmpjo^ 
ccflc  of  time,  after  the  cnb  of  tiboycecs, 
Ins  boibels  fell  out  op  rcafon  of  his 
fiefceneffc :  fohec  bycb  of  Coze  bifeaics. 
2nb  his  people  mabc  no  burning  foj 
hun.lifte  the  burning  of  his  fathers. 

20  IChtrtie  anb  tiboyccrcsolb  lbas 
he*bhcnhebcgantoreignc,ant)l)creig'- 
neb  tn3Ierufaicm  cightycercs,  anb  be; 
partcb  tiuithoutbctngbcfircb :  holbbc- 
it,  they  bunco  htm  in  the  titic  of  SDauto, 
but  not  in  the  fcpulchjcs  of  the  lungs. 

CHAP.   XXII. 

1  Ahaziah  fuccceding.reigncth  wickedly.  5  In 
his  confederacie with Ioram  the fonneoi  A- 
hab.heisflaincbylehu.  10  Aduliahdeftroy- 
ing  all  the  feed  royall,  (auc  Ioafh,  who  leho- 
fhabeath  his  aunt  hid,  vfurpeth  the  kingdom. 

^ffV^,^  /5b  *  the  inhabitants  of 
^ % x'^-  jjctufalcm  mabe  ^ha5t= 
§^t^\s*?  ah  his  y  ongeft  fonnc,  mug 
&/gfh\§  m  his  tteab :  foj  the  banb 
#^ygCa££  of  men  that  tame  ibith  the 
Arabians  to  the  campc,  hab  name  all 
the'clbcft.  5>o  ^Itwsiah  the  fonnc  of  i 
3Jch02am  bmg  of  3Jnbah  r  cigncb. 

t  jfonrnc  aub  tibo  yccrcs  oio  ftas ' 
Shasiah,  lbhen  he  began  to  vtigne,aub ' 
he  rctgncb  one  y  cere  m  3Icntfaicm:  his 
niothersname  aifo  lbas  *3thauah  the , 
baughterof£>inri. 

3  $ce  aifo  ibaiucb  in  the  lDaycs of, 
the  houfe  of  ^Ihab :  foz  htsmothcr  lbas 
ijis  tounfellcr  to  boc  ibicttcbly. 

4.  nohcrcfoje  he  bib  emu  in  the  fight 
of  t\)c1L®K  jD,lilte  the  houfe  of  3lhab: 
fb2  they  lbcre  his  connfcllers  after  the 
Dcathofhisfatl)cr,tohisbeltruttion. 

5  CtycibalUcbaifo  after  their  toun^ 
fellatio  Ibcntlbith31ch02amthc  fonne 
of  2lhab  King  ofjjffraci,  to  ibarrc  a- 
gatnft  itiasacl  lung  of  S>y;ia  at  I&v 
tnoth  ©tlcab :  anb  the  S>y:ians  fmotc 
3102am. 

6  3tub  he  r etunico  to  bee  heaicb  m 
3Jc5rccl,bccaiifeofthelbounbstlbhich 
lbcre  giuen  him  at  Hamah  lbhen  hee 
fought  ibith  Iwael  lung  of  S>pzia. 
3ub  ||  ^anah  the  fonne  of  'Jehoiani 
htngof  3luDah,lbent  Doibne  to  fee'Jc> 
hozam  the  fonue  of  3  hab  at  3IC5recI, 
becaufe  Ijc  lr»as  fir  lie. 

7  3lii0  t  thebeftruttion  of  3thauah 
lbas  of  <5ob  by  tommtng  to  jflojam: 
J7  0;  lbhen  he  tt>ag  tome,  t)te  lbentout 
ibith  ^tehoiamagamfl  31  fhuthefonnc 
of  ii^unflji,  "ibhomethefLoiajshab 


.  Kings 
.1. 


anouueb  to  cut  off  the  houfe  of  3hab. 

8  2Mb  it  came  to  paffe,  that  lbhen 
3ichu  lbas  crediting  uibgemcnt  bpon 
thchoufe  of  2ihab,  anb  founb  thepjm* 
ccs  of  3Jubah  ,aub  the  fonncs  of  the  toe- 
thmi  of  3ha?,iah,  tljjat  imntftreb  to  %° 
ha3tah,hcflcibthcm. 

9  *3lnb  he  fougl)t  3lha$iah:  anb  •Man» 
thcycaitghthim(fozhcil>ashiOm £>a;  ? !/- 
maria)  anb  brought  him  to  3Jchtt :  anb 
lbhen  they  hab  flame  htm,  they  burieb 
him :  bceaufe,faibthcy,hcc  is  the  fonne 
of  3Jchofhaphat ,  ibho  fought  the 
H©KjDil)ith  ail  his  heart.  j&o  the 
houfcof3ha5iahh-uinopoibcrtoRcepc 
mlltheUingbomc. 

10  c  *  25ut  lbhen  athaiiarj  tlje  mo? 
thcr  of  3(ha3iah ,  faibc  that  her  fonne 
ibasbcab,fl)cearofe,  anb  beftroycbail 
thcfcebroyaiiofthchoufcofJJtibah. 

1 1  26tit3[ehofl)abeaththcbaughtcr 
of  tlje  Ring,  tooRc  3Joafl)  the  fonnc  of 
3iha5iah,  aubflolc  him  from  among 
the  lungs  fonncs,  that  lbcre  flame,  anb 
put  him  anb  his  nurfc  in  a  beb  chamber. 
$>o  JJchofbabcath  the  batightcc  of 
ftiug3lch02am,  the  ibifc  of  3Jchoiaba 
tlje  p2icft  ( foz  flic  lbas  the  filter  of  3ha< 
3talj)  Ijtb  him  from  3ithaiiah ,  fo  that 
fljcflcibhtmnot. 

iz  ^ub  he  lbas  ibitlj  thnn  hib  in  the 
houfe  of  ©ob  fire  yeeres,  anb  athaiiah 
rcigncboucrthclaub. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

1  lehoiadahauingfet  things  in  order,  maketh 
Ioalh  king.  11  Athaliahisflaine.  1^  Ieho- 
iada  rcltoreth  die  worfhip  of  God. 

^Sft$tS»  ir)o  *m  tlje  fcttcutlj  yccre 
L®mS^I  jJcljoiaoa  flrcngtljcncb 
M@£&&  himfelfc ,  ano  tooUc  the 
WMM$&  captamesof  hunbjebs,^ 
it^W^A  pariah  the  fonnc  of  3Jcro; 
ham,ano<3flimael  the  fonnc  of  ^eho; 
hanau,anb3l3anahthcfoimeof£)beb, 
anb  <3£aafiah  the  fonne  of  3ibaiah,  anb 
iJiifljaphatthe  fonnc  of  Ztchu,mto  co- 
ucnantibitl)him. 

i  ^nb  they  lbent  about  in  ^ubah, 
anb  gathereb  the  ILcuites  out  of  all  the 
nticsofgjuoah.aiiDthcchicfcofthefa: 
thcrs  of  3Jfrael,  anb  tljcy  came  to  5c- 
cufaicm. 

3  3lnD  all  the  Congregation  mabe 
a  couniant  ibith  the  Bingm  tlje  houfe  of 
<5ob :  ano  hefaib  bnto  them,  uSeljolbc, 
the  Umgs  fonne  fball  reigne,as  tlje 
%  ©  is  ©  hath  "faib  of  the  fonncs  of 
3Datub. 
4  Xhts 


•  i .  Kings 
u..j,&c 


*  :  Sam.u 
I  ^.  i. kings 
2.4.ind?-5 
i.<iu.6.i<5. 

and  7.18. 


Ioafh  made  king.      Chap.xxiiij.        Athaliahflaine. 


\Htbrjbre- 

fioUs. 


t  rich, 
fho'.ilder. 
jHct>.hon/i 


•Dcut.T7. 

t  Heir,  le, 
he  King 
Ituc. 


f  Hsbr.  con. 
Jpir.wte. 


4.  Xhss  is  the  tDutg  tljat  ycc  fhall 
boc,  3lthirbpartof  you  cntringonthc 
Sabbath,  of  the  pnclts  ano  of  tt)c?Lc- 

UltCS,  fhalbe  p02tCCS  Of  ti)C  t  bOOZCS. 

5  3lnb  a  tbtcbe  part  than  bec  at the 
Kings  houfc  ,anb  a  thtrb  pact  at  the  gate 
of  the  founbation :  anb  all  the  people 
n-iaiibc  m  the  Courts  of  the  houfc  of  the 

6  isut  letnonc  tontc  into  thchoufc 
of  tlK  %  0  is  e»,  fauc  the  $:icfts>$  they 
that  inimftcr  of  thcllcuites, they  than 
goitt,fo:theyareholy:butailthcpcoplc 
than  Kccpc  the  match  of  the  ft®  bid. 

7  3hib  the  fieuttcs  Own  compaflc 
tl)c  btng  roiinb  about,  eticry  titan  1Mb 
htsibeapons  tn  hishanb,  anb  ibhofo- 
cure  clfccommethtnto  the  houfc ,  Ijcc 
fhaibc  put  to  Death:  but  bcyou  lbtth  the 
l&tng  when  he  commcth  m ,  anb  when 
hegocthout. 

8  So  tlic  Hcuitcs  anb  all  gjttbah 
btbaao:btng  to  ail  tilings  that  3Jcbo; 
taba  tlje  0ncfi  Dab  cotumatibeb :  anb 
tooKceuery  man  Ins  then  that  lbcre  to 
tome  tn  on  the  Sabbath  ,  Until  them 
that  lbcre  to  gocont  on  ti)c  Sabbath: 
fo?  3 chotaoa  the  0«ttctt  bumtu"cb  not 
thecourfes. 

9  fl^o'eoucr ,  3Jchotaba  the  02tcft 
bcltucrcb  to  the  taptatnes  of  hunbzebs, 
fpcarcsanbbucKlccs,attb  flnclbs  ,that 
hab  bene  BmgSDautbs,  iDhich  were  in 
thchoufc  of  <3ob. 

io  3nb  hec  fet  all  the  people  ( cucry 
man  hatting  his  ibeapon  m  his  hanb) 
from  the  right  tftoeof  thctxcmplcto 
thcleftfibcofflicXcmplc,aiongbythe 
mitar  anb  the  Xctnplc,  by  the  Btng, 
rounb  about. 

ii  Xhcnthey  brought  out  the  Kings 
fonttc ,  anb  put  topon  htm  th  c  Croibnc, 
anb*gauehimtheXeftimonp,anDmabc 
him  Bing  :  anb  ^Jchoiaba  anb  his 
fonncs  anomteb  htm,  atibfatb,  t^ob 
fauc  the  Bmg. 

u  C  ii5oU)  ibhen  SCthaiiaft  hcarb 
the  noifc  of  the  people  running  anb 
pzaiGng  the  Bmg .  flic  came  to  the  pco^ 
pie  into  the  houfc  of  thcH  0  in  jd. 

ij  3nb  the  loolicb,  anb  bcholb ,  the 
bmg  QooD  at  his  pillar,  at  the  cntrtng 
in,  anb  the  Winces,  anb  the  trumpets 
by  the  Bmg:  anb  all  the  people  of  the 
lanb  reioyeeb ,  anb  founbeb  lbith  trnnv- 
pets  i  alfo  the  fingers  lbtth  tntlrttments 
of  muficKc  anb  fuel)  as  taught  to  fing 
pjatfe.Xhcn^thaltah  rent  her  clothes, 
anb  faib,  1 Xrcafon,  trcafom 


14  Xhen  'JJchoiaba  the  puclt 
bioughtotitthctaptamcsofbunbjcbs, 
that  lbcre  fct  oucc  the  hott,  anb  faib  bn< 
to  thcm,l?auc  her  foouh  of  the  ranges: 
anb  lbbo  fo  folloibethhcr,  let  htm  bee 
flame  lbtth  the  fiuojb.  fm  the  ftztctt 
faib  ■  Slay  her  not  m  the  houfc  of  the 

15  Sb  they  layb  hanbes  on  her,  anb 
ibhen  ilicc  lbas  come  to  the  during  of 
tlje  ho:fc  gate,  by  the  Kings  houfc,  they 
flcib  her  there. 

i6  c  3lub  gjchoiaba  mabc  a  toqc* 
nantbctlbeetic  him,  anb  bctibccnc  all 
thepeoplc,  anb  bctibccnc  tlje  King,  that 
they  fboulD  be  the  %  0  it  ©  §*>  people. 

17  Xhcn  all  the  people  ibeuttothc 
houfc  of  ffiaal,  anb  b;aKcttboibnc,aub 
b;aKchts  altars  ano  hts  images  tn  pic- 
tes  ,  anb  flclb  *  Rattan  the  pneft  of 
26aaibcfo2c  the  altars. 

18  3Ufo3Jcboiaba  appomtebthcof 
ficcs  of  tlic  houfc  of  the  %  0  is  s>  by  the 
hanbofthc02te{tsthclUuttcs,ibbom 
2>autD  hab*  biflrtbutcb  m  the  houfc  of 
the  Ho  is  p,to  offer  the  burnt  offnngs 
of  the  %  0  is  id,  as  it  is  vmtttcn  m  the 
*  Haib  of  fl|9ofes,  lbtth  reioycing  anb 

liltth  fingitig,as  it  was  ordeined  tby  Daillb. 

19  3nbhcfctthe*po?tcrs  at  the  gates 
of  thchoufc  of  the  5L01SD,  that  none 
libhtch  lbas  bnclcanc  in  any  thing, 
!f])Quib  niter  tn. 

zo  anb  hec  tooKc  the  taptaines  of 
ihunbzcbs,  anb  the  nobles,  anb  the  go- 
1  ucrnoursof  thepcople,anballthc  pco; 
i  pic  of  the  lanb ,  anb  bzottght  boibnc  the 
King  from  the  houfc  of  the  %  0  is© : 
anb  they  came  through  the  high  gate 
into  the  Kings  houfc,  anb  fct  the  King 
toponthcthJoncoftbcKmgbome. 

11  3lnD  all  the  people  of  the  lanb  re* 
toyceb,anbthc  city  lbas  qtuct,after  that 
they  hab  flame  3tthaltah  to  thefioojb. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

1  Ioafh  rci^neth  wc!l,all  the  dayes  of  ichoiiuii. 
4  Hce  giueth  order  for  the  repaiie  of  the 
Temple.  15  Iehoiada ,  his  deadi  and  ho- 
nourable buriall.  17  Ioafh  tailing  to  idola- 
trie, flaieth Zechai iah  the  (onne of  Iehoiadj. 
15  loafli  is  fpoiled  by  the  Syrians,  and  flame 
by  Zabad  and  Iehozabad.  2.7  Amaziah 
fucceedeth  him. 

^)afl)  *  was  feucu  yecrcs 
olb  Bihcn  he  beganne  to 


Ss  rcigncuiubhcrciguebfo^ 
(Q8\  nc  yecrcs  m  3Jcrufalem: 


his  mothers  name  alfo 

si 


*Deut.  13 
1 3.  j. 


'  i.Chro. 
24.1. 


Num.  2S. 

trJch.ty 
chehandc  cf 
Timid. 
•i.Chro. 
Jtf.I.&c. 


*:.Kin.l2 
i.&c. 


Ioafh  his  zcale.  ILChron. 


Iehoiadadieth. 


I  Heh-ore- 
nnv. 


«Eiod.  30. 


\Heir.j. 
voice. 


was  zibial),  of  zSeer  -  fl)cba. 

I  2nb  3Joafh  mo  that  which  was 
rightinthcfightofthe|L©isjD,authc 
bapes  of  jetjotaua  flic  prtcft. 

3  anbjjchoiabatoobcfmljtmtwo 
Wiues,  attD  he  begat  founts  anb  baugt> 
tcrs. 

4.  C  3nb  it  came  to  paCfc  after  this 
thatJJoafrjWasmmbcbttorcpaircthc 
home  of  the  ?L©  is  p. 

5  3inb  l)ce  gathercb  together  the 
pnetts  anb  the  Heuites,  anb  faibc  to 
thcm,<5o  out  bnto  thccmesof31ubah, 
anb  gather  of  all  Jfracl  moncpto  re- 
parrc  the  houfe  of  pour  00b  from  pcetc 
to  per  c,  anb  fee  that  pc  hafte  th  c  matter : 
hotPbcu  tl)c  H  tuitcs  haftcneb  u  not. 

6  ^nb  the  femgcailebfo:  31  ehoiaba 
the  chicfc,  anb  faibc  bnto  hmi,tt)hp  haft 
tl)ou  not  rrquireb  of  the  JLeuttcs  to 
bUngm  out  of  Jubah  anb  out  of  3Jcru< 

faleilt,  the  COllCCnoU,  according,  to  the  com- 

mandemem  of  *  $?ofes  the  feruaut  of  tl)e 
JL  0  is  id,  anb  of  the  Congregation  of 
3ifrael ,  for  the  tabcrnatlc  of  naitncflc j. 

7  if  or  the  formes  of  athaitah  that 
Wicfteo  woman,  hab  bJoUcn  bp  the 
houfeof  ©ob,  anb  aifo  allthcbcbttatc 
things  of  the  houfe  of  the  %  0  k  id,  bib 
thep  bcftowbponzsaaitm. 

8  2nbatthcKingscommanbcmcnt 
thep  mabc  a  theft,  anb  fct  tt  without,  at 
the  gate  of  the  houfe  of  the  %  0  is  ©. 

9  3nb  thep  mabc  t  a  proclamation 
th20ugh3Iubah  j  3Jerufaiem,  to  brmg 
m  to  the  ?L©  is  id,  the  collection  that 
i#ofcs  tl)e  feruaut  of  Gob  laid  bpon  Jf- 
rati  m  the  Wiiberncfle. 

10  3nb  all  the  juices  anb  all  the 
people  r  nopccb,anb  brought  in  ,anb  call 
into  the  chcO ,  btuill  thep  hab  mabc  an 
cube. 

II  JftoWitcamctopaffcthatatWhat 
time  the  chclt  was  brought  bnto  the 
tuugsomcc,bpthehanbofthc3Leuitcs: 
anb  When  thep  faibc  that  there  was  nutth 
moncv :  the  lungs  £>cnbe,  anb  the  high 
piicQs  officer ,  came  anb  cmpticb  the 
chert,  anb  tooknt ,  anb  raneb  it  to  his 
place  agamc.Xhus  thep  bib  bap  bp  bap, 
anb  gathcrcb  moncv  m  abunbance. 

ii  3lnb  the  lung  anb  gjchotaba  gauc 
it  to  fuel)  as  bib  the  Wo:ttc  of  the  frrui'cc 
of  the honfc  of  the  1L  0  1;  ro ,  anb  hircb ! 
l^afons  anb  carpenters  torrpaircrhc 
houfe  of  the  V.  0 m  p ,  anb  aifo  fuel)  as 
wrought  p:on  anb  braflc  to  menb  the 
houfe  of  the  1L©K£>. 

13  5>o  tljc  woritemcn  wrought ,  anb 


t  the  Worse  was  perfecteb  bp  them:  anb 
thep  fct  the  houfe  of  cod  in  his  ftate, 
aubftrengthencbtt. 

14.  3inb  when  thep  hab  fuufhcb  it, 
thev  brought  the  reft  of  the  ntoncpbc 
fore  the  lung  anb  gichoiaba,  whereof 
were  mabc  beffcis  for  the  houtc  of  the 
i  %<s>  m  5>,euen  bcffcls  to  muufter  anb  to 
||offccWtthall,anbfpooncs,anbbcfrels 
of  golbe  anb  filuer :  anb  thep  offcrcb 
burnt  offerings  m  the  houfe  of  the 
i  H  ©  isid  continuailv ,  all  the  bapes  of 
3Jehoiaba. 

15  C26utUeholabawarcbolb,anb 
I  was  full  of  bapes  When  hec  bicb :  an 
hunbrcb  anb  thirttc  pecrcs  olbe  washee 
Whenhcebicb. 

16  ^nbthcpburlcbhrmmtlicctricof 
2>autb  among  the  tnngs,bccaufe  he  hab 
bonegoobm  3Jfracl,  both  towarbs 
©ob,  anb  towarbs  hishonfe. 

17  4B0W after  the  bcatfj  of  JJehoia; 
ba,  came  the  princes  of  3jtibah ,  anb 
mabc  obevfance  to  the  lung:  then  the 
femghcar&cncbbnto  them. 

is  3tnb  thep  left  the  houfe  of  t1)c 
%  0  m  id  ©ob  of  their  fathers,  anbfer* 
ucb  groucsanbibois:  anb  Wrath  tame 
upon  3Hibah  anb  3to  ufalem  fo:  this 
their  trefpaffe. 

19  Jflct  hce  feut  prophets  to  them  to 
bang  themagame  bnto  the  %oisjs>, 
anb  thep  tcftificb  agamft  them :  but  trjcv 
Woulb  not  giue  care. 

20  3inb the  fptrtt  of  C5ob  t  canicPp 
on  zechanah  the  fonnc  of  3Jchoiaba 
theprteft,Which  ftoob  abouc  the  people, 
anbfaib  bnto  them :  Xlms  faith  ©ob, 
aahv  tranfgrcffc  \'cc  ti)c  comnianbc--- 
ments  of  the  ft  ©  is  id,  that  pec  cannot 
profper?  becaufc  pee  haue  forfaticn  the 
%  ©  is  ©,  he  hath  alf  0  forfaben  vou. 

ii  ^nbtljevconfpireb  agamft  him, 
anbftonebhim  With  ftonesat  the  com- 
manbement  of  the  King,  m  the  tourtof 
the  houfe  of  rheH©  is©. 

22  Xhus  3ioafb  the  lung  remem 
breb  nottheKmbneffcibhich  3Jchoiaba 
his  father  hab  bone  to  hun,but  Hew  his 
fonnc:  anbWhcuhcbicb,hcfaib,  Xht 
%  ©  is  id  loofcc  bpon  it,  anb  rccuure  it. 

23  C^nbitcamctopaftetatthccnb 
ofthepecrc,  that  the  hoftcof  £>pua 
came  bp  agamft  him :  anb  thep  tame  to 
Jubah  anb  3Jerufalem ,  anb  beftropeb 
all  the  princes  of  the  people  from  a? 
mongthc  people,  anb  fcntalithcfpoile 
of  them  bnto  the  ftmg  of  t  Oamafcus. 

24.  ifor  the  armie  of  the  5>prians 

came 


^  Heir. the 
healing  went 

vpvpmrki 


OrtfiJlUl. 


\Heh.ch- 
tbed. 


\Heiwth 
rcHolutlon  of 
hey:  ere. 


tHelfDor- 


vfcki 


Ioafh  flaine.  Chap.xxv.         Amaziah  king. 


\\Or,IezJ 
char,  i.ki"g 

12.21. 

\\Or,Sho- 
mtr. 


\Htb. foun- 
ding. 

\\Or,Com- 
mtntttrte. 


j.King. 
I4-I,&c. 


firmedvpon 
hint. 


came  Mittl)  a  fmailcompanicofmen, 
anb  the  %  o  m  ©bcliucreb  a  bcr?  great  | 
hoftemto  their  hanb,  bccaufcthc?  hab 
fo?faucn  rtjc  %  ©  a  w>  C5on  of  their  fa- 
thers :  Co  the?  cretuteo  lUbgcment  a* 
gamttlJoatf). 

i5  3uib  lbhctt  the?  ibcrc  bepartcb' 
from  him  ( fo?  the?  left  him  m  sreat  Oif=  j 
cafes)  his  oibnc  feruants  confpircb  a=  \ 
gamtt  him ,  fo?  the  Wood  of  the  fonnes 
of  3(ehoiaoa  the  0ziett ,  anb  aetbc  him 
on  his  beb,anb  he  bicb :  ano  the?  bunco ! 
him  in  theciticofSDaiub ,  but  the?  bit? 
neb  him  not  in  the  fcpulchies  of  the 
Bings. 

26  3inb  thtfe  are  the?  that  c onfpireb 
againfthim  -,  ||  zabab  the  Comic  of  £>hi- 
mcah  an  3immonitcflc,  anb  3Jeh05fc 
bab  the  fonnc  of  ||  5>himrith  a  i^oabt 
teffc. 

27  C/I5oib  concerning  hisConncs, 
anbthcgccatncfl'e  of  the  burbensiaibe 
bpon  h«u,  anb  the  t  repairing  of  the 
houCcof<£5ob,bchoIb,thc?arcuj2itten 
in  the  II  do??  of  the  boobc  of  the  Hangs. 
3inb  3ma5iah  his  fonnc  rcigncb  m  his 
ftcab. 

CHAP.   XXV. 

Amaziah  beginneth  to  reigne  well.  3  Hce 
executethiufticeon  thetraitours.  5  Hauing 
hired  an  armic  of  Ifraclitcs  againft  the  Edo- 
mites,  at  the  word  of  a  Prophet,  helofelhche 
hundred  ta!ents,anddifmiffech  them.  11  He 
ouerthroweththeEdomites.  10.  ij  Thelf- 
raelites  difcontented  with  dieir  difmifsion, 
fpoile  as  they  returne  home.  14  Amaziah 
proud  of  his  victory ,  ferueth  the  gods  of  E- 
dom  ,  and  defpifeth  the  admonitions  of  the 
Prophet.  17  Hee  prouoketh  Ioafh  to  hiso- 
uerfhrow.  15  Hisreigne.  17  Hee  is  flaine 
by  confpiracic. 

«fc08$&2^g  ^3a5iah*  was  tibentte  anb 
Wt^jjL  nuc  ?cercs  olbctbhenhee 
W  began  to  reignc,  anb  hce 
r^A^  rcigncb  tibcntic  anb  nine 
.  £^l^?ccrcsm3erufaicm,anb 
his  mothers  name  was  3Jchoaban  of 
■Jcrufalcm. 

2  3nb  hce  bib  that  tbhieh  was  right 
in  the  fight  ofthc  %<d  is  3D,butnotlbtth 
apcrfitehcart. 

3  Ctfiolb  it  came  to  paflc  lbhcnthc 
mngbomcibastcftablilhcbtohtnt.that 
he  fleib  his  feruants,  that  hab  feilleb  the 
King  his  father. 

4  asuthec  ncibc  not  their  chilbien, 
but  did  as  it  is  umtten  m  the  ftaib  in  the 
booaeof  ££ofcs,U)l)ccc  the  Hois© 


commanbeb,fa?mg,*SE:hcfathcrsa)au 
not  bie  foi  the  chilbmi,  neither  fhail  the 
thflb?en  bie  foz  the  fathers;  but  cucr? 
man  than  bie  fo?  his  olbnc  Cmnc. 

5  C  £19o2Coucr,  Slmasiah  gathercb 
3Jubah  together,  anb  mabc  them  Cap; 
tames  ouer  thouCanbs,  anb  captames 
oner  hunbjebs,  aecoibingto  the  houCcs 
oftheicfathcrs,th:oughoutaii3Juoah 
anb  25eiiiamm :  ^nb  he  numb?eb  them 
from  tibentic  ?cercs  olbc  anb  abouc, 
anb  founb  them  tlwce  huiib2Cb  thou< 
tanb  choice  mm ,  able  to  goc  foojth  to 
lbarre,  that  coulb  hanble  fpearc  anb 
Cbielb. 

6  $cc  hireb  alfo  an  hunbzcb  thou= 
fanb  nughnc  men  of  baiour ,  out  of  %  £ 
racl,  foi  an  huntycb  talents  of  Bluer. 

7  25nt  there camcamanof  <5ob  to 
him,fa?ing,  <0  fting.lct  not  the  arrnie  of 
5Jfracl  goc  lbiththcc:  f02the3L©m?D 
is  not  lbith  3lfracl,  to  wk,  anth  all  the 
chilbienofcplnaim. 

8  25ut  if  thou  ibrtt  goe,  bocit,  bee 
ftrongfojthc  battell:  ©ob  (hall  mane 
thee  fall  before  the  cnem?:  foj  (5ob  hath 
poibcrtohclpe,  anbtocaflboibnc. 

9  ^nb  3lma5iah  faib  to  the  man  of 
©ob ,  Z5ut  lbhat  than  ibec  boc  fo?  the 
hunbicb  talents  lbhtch  3  h^ne  giucn  to 
the  tarmtc  of  3Jfracw  ^nb  the  man  of 
Gob  anfruercb,  Xhe  |L©isjd  is  able 
to  gmc  thee  much  nioje  then  this. 

10  Xhcn  ^ma?iah  feparatcbthem, 
to  wit,  the  atmie  that  tbas  come  to  Xjm 
out  of  Cphjaim ,  to  goe  t  home  againe, 
i©herfo?c  tJ)eirangettbasgrcatl?liin^ 
blebagamfitlJubah,  anbthe?returncb 
home  UU  great  anger. 

ii  C3lnb  ^ma^iah  Crengthcneb 
himfclfc ,  anb  lebbe  foozth  his  people, 
anb  Vbent  to  the  ballc?  of  fait,anb  fmote 
ottfyt  chilb?cn  of  £>ctr,  ten  thoufanb. 

12.  ^nb  other  ten  thoufanb  left  aituc, 
bib  the  chfltycn  ofjubahcatpaiua? 
captutc,anbb2onghtthembntothctop 
oftherot&c,anbcalUhemDoUme  from 
the  top  of  the  tocue ,  that  tljc?  all  Ibere 
bjoben  in  pieces. 

13  czsutthctfoulbietsofthearm? 
lbhifh  3tma5iah  Cent  bacftc,  that  the? 
(boulb  not  goe  .bith  hun  to  battell ,  fell 
bpon  the  cities  of  jJJubah,  from  dama- 
na  cucnbntoJScth-hoJOu,  anb  fmote 
th?ec  thouCanb  of  them,  anb  tooh  much 
fpoile.  _     . 

14  C  i!5olb  it  came  to  paffc ,  after 
that  3tma3iah  lbas  come  from  the 
daughter  of  the  Cbomitcs,  that  hce 

bzought 


*Dcur.  24. 
16.2  king. 
14. 6.  icrc. 
ji.?o.czck. 
18.20. 


|  Hcteand. 


\Hebt* 
their  f  lace. 

\Heb.n 

heat  of  at.' 
£"■■ 


\Hth.ih; 
found  of  thi 
bund. 


A 


h  take 


mazian  taken. 


Il.Ch 


ron. 


Heisfl 


amc. 


\Hcl., 
(tiled. 


J.King. 14. 
8,S>- 

I  Ortfurre 
bxfb ,  or 
rhorr.r. 

t  Hth.  a 

bciSlcfibt 

field. 


t  Htir/ml. 

ten. 


\  Heir  il-r 

°C'tr(:t  that 

luketb. 


bzougbt  the  gobs  of  the  tbilbjcn  of 
«>cic,  anb  frttbcm  up  to  be  bis  sods, 
anb  bolbcbbottm  bunfclfc  before  them, 
anb  burncb  inccnfcbnto  them. 

15  naberfojetbe  anger  of  the  Horn© 
ibaslnnblcbagainftamasiab,  anb  bee 
Cent  bnto  htm  a  0:ophct,lbbicb  fatD  bn= 
to  bun,  nabphafttboufougbtaftcrtbc 
gobs  of  the  people,  lbbicb  couib  notbc^ 
Itucr  then;  olbnc  people  out  of  thine 

16  anbittamctopatrcasbcctaiacb 
llntb  him ,  that  the  kiug  faibbnto  hint, 
31  rt  thou  mabcof  tbcBntgscounfclU 
fojbcarc  lbby  fboulbeft  thou  be  fmtt> 
ten;  Xhen  the ^jophct fozbarc ,  anb 
faib ,  3  buoU)  that  00b  hath  t  bctcrmi- 
neb  to  beftrop  thee ,  becaufc  thou  haft 
bone  thts,anb  haft  not  bcarKcncb  bnto 
mp  tounfcll. 

17  «LXben  3una5iahlung  of  JJubab 
toofcc  abmcc ,  anb  fent  to  JoaU)  tl)c 
fonnc  of  lichoaha^thcfounc  of  3Jcbu, 
fetng  of  Jlltacl,  faying,  Come,  letbs  fee 
one  another  in  the  fate. 

is  *  anb  35oafl)  tang  of  Ufracl  fent 
to  ama^iab  King  of  3ubab ,  facing, 
%\)t  ||  thtftlethat  was  m  ^Lebanon ,  fent 
to  the  Ccbarthatw.i:,  m  ^Lebanon ,  far- 
tttg ,  <5tue  thy  baugbtcc  to  niy  fonnc  to 
ibife  s  anb  there  paflcb  bp  a  t  nnlb  bcaft 
that  w^  m  Lebanon ,  anb  trobc  bourne 
tbetbtftie. 

19  3Choufaycft,!Loc,tboubaftfmit' 
ten  the  £bomttcs ,  anb  thmc  heart  lifc 
tcth  tljce  bp  to  boaft.  abibe  nolb  at 
home,  ibb>>  fhoulbeft  thou  nicbbic  to 

thmc httrt,  tOatthOUfhOUlbCftfall,  euen 

thou,  anb  JJitbah  lbtth  thee; 

20  25ut^ma5jainboulbnotheare: 
tot  it  came  of  (5ob,  that  be  might  bcliuct  [ 

thCtll  tntO  tllC  hant)  ot  their  enemies ,  be= 

taufc  thep  fought  after  the  gobs  of 
00m. 

zi  $>o  3Joafl)  the  laung  of  gjfract 
lbcnt  bp,  anb  tbcpfaib  one  another  tn 
the  face,  both  bee  anb  amaMal)  Bing  of 
ginbah  at  iSctb-tbcmcfb ,  ibbicb  beion. 
gethto  Jlubah. 

22  anb  giubah  Voas  t  put  to  the 
lbojfc  before  Iffracl,  anb  they  Rev  cue- 
ry  man  to  his  tent. 

23  3lnb  3foafl)  the  lung  of  lifrael 
toottcamaMab  lung  ofgiubah  the  fon; 
of  3Joafh,  thefon  of  3Joaha?,  atJSctfrj 
fbemem ,  anb  tooughthimto3ierufa 
lem,  anb  taaitcbottmc  tboballof'JIc 
rufaiem ,  froiiithcgatcof£pb:ainito 
tthctomergatc,fourchunojcbmbits.  | 


24  anbheecookealltbcgolbanbtbc 
filucr ,  anb  ail  the  bcffels  that  ibere 
founb  tntbeboufcofGobttmh  £)beb- 
€bom ,  anb  the  trcafurcs  of  the  tangs 
houfe,  the  hoftagcsaifo,  anb  retumeb 
to  Samaria. 

25  C  ^nb  ama5iah  the  fonnc  of 
Joaft)  Bmg  of  3Jubab  Itucb  after  the 
bcath  of  3oa(h  fonne  of  3!el)oaJ)a3 
&mg  of  <Jfrael,fiftecnc  yecrcs. 

26  iRoibtbcrcftofrbcaetsofama; 
?tah,firft  anb  laft,  bebolb,  are  they  not 
ttmtten  in  the  boofee  of  the  Butgs  of 
3?ubahanb3JfraeU 

27  C  &0V0  after  the  time  that  Ob 
masiahbtb  turnearbaytfcomfolloH> 
tngtheIL©!Bjp,  they  t  mabc  aconh> 
racic  agamft  htm  in  3J  cr ufalcm ,  anb  he 
flcb  to  Hathtft) :  but  thev  fent  to  3la- 
chifl)  after  hmt,anb  fieri)  him  there. 

28  anb  the?  bjought  him  topon 
ho?fcs,anb  buneb  bun  mitb  his  fathers 
mthcnticofH3)tibab. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  Vzziah  fucceeding  ,  and  reigning  well  indie 
dayesofZecharian,prorpererh.  16  Wax- 
intrproud,heinuadeduhePneftsolfke,  and 
islnncten  vvithleprofie.  12.  Hee  diech  ,and 
Iotham  fucceedeth  him. 

Den  all  the  people  of 
Jtibab'tooBe  ||3U53iah> 
mho  was  firtccne  vettes 
oib,  anb  mabc  him  isutg 
_  m  tljc  roonte  of  his  fa= 
tfjcr  amajiah' 

2  i^c  bunt  clot!) ,  anb  r cftojeb  it  to 
'Jubah :  after  that  the  Btngflept  ttntb 
his  fathers. 

3  Sirteenc  pcercs  olb  was  SL^tah, 
ibhcn  he  began  to  reignc ,  anb  he  retg 
neb  fiftie  anb  tttio  yeercs  m  3!crtifamn: 
his  mot!)ers  name  alfo  was  3Jetoliahof 
Jcrufaicm. 

4  anb  hec  bib  that  Vbhich  wa  s  right 
m  the  fight  of  the  %  ©  a  Esaccojbtng  to 
all  that  his  father  ama^tab  bib. 

5  anb  hec  fought  Gob  m  tl)c  bares 
of  zethanal),  lDho  hab  bnbcrftanbmg 
t  m  the  btftons  of  <3ob :  anb  as  long  as 
he  fought  tl;c  %  0 13  je>,  Gob  mabc  bun 
topjofper. 

6  anb  hec  ibent  foo?tb  anb  ibarreb 
agamfttbc^hiliftincs,  j  bjaUc  boilme 
theibaii  of  c?ath  ,anbtheiball  ofjab 
uch,  anb  the  rball  of  aajbob,  anb  built 
rtttcsllabont  afl;bob,  anb  among  the 
pbiliftmes. 
7  anb 


t  Htifim 

after. 

t  Heh.con- 

jptredaccn- 
fytnicit. 


||  rh«is, 

thecitie  of 
TJauid^u  tt 

10. 


*  2.  King. 
14-2  I  illJ 
I  S.I. 

\\Or.AiA- 

ruh. 


thc(eeiKPof 
Cod. 


f  Or,  in  the 
countrcy 
of Apfded. 


Vzziahsftrength:  Chap.xxvij.  He  is  leprous. 


■f  Het.vnt. 


red. 

||  Or,ait  oat 

/(ernes. 


\\0r,fr,(h- 

fa/lftM. 

\Hehr. 
ground. 


]  tMrjte 

tower  cf  .vi 
armie. 


\Heh.jh, 


Heh.  ! 
fxrlh. 


'Num.!  8. 7 


7  3tnb  oobhcipcb  l)un  againfttljc 
^iliftincs,  anbagamfttljc  Arabians, 
that  bwclt  in  <5uc  baal,  ano  tybfSfrt? 
huntms. 

8  2lnb  the  Ammonites  gauc  gifts 
to  ll3?tal),anol)is  name  %cab  abjoab 
cuen  to  the  cutting  ui  of  <Egppt:fo<thce 
ftrcngtheneb  tjunfclft  crcecbmglp. 

9  £0o?couct  fl3?ial)  btult  towers 
ui3Jerufalcmatthc  comer  gate,  anoat 
tljjc  bailc?  gate,  anb  attljc  turning  of  the 
wall,  anbffojtttneb  them. 

io  iSifohcbmlttoWers  in  thebefert, 
ano  IIDiggco  man?  Welles,  fojhcchab 
mud)  tattcll,  both  m  the  low  countre?, 
ano  in  the  plaincs :  hiif  banbtnen  ai/b, 
ano  bineb:elTcrs  m  the  mountames, 
ano  m  ||  Catmcl:  fo?  hec  loueb  t  ijuf= 
bautyic. 

n  £©o?coucr,3!lwahhabanhoftof 
fighting  men,  that  went  out  to  iuarre 
bp  banos ,  accoibing  to  the  number  of 
their  account,  bythchanb  of  33ctcltOc 
Scribe,  ano  $)aafiah  the  ruler,  bnber 
the  tjattt)  of  J^ananiai),  one  of  the  lungs 
captaines. 

n  Xhc  WjIjoIc  number  of  the  thicfe 
of  the  fathers  of  t!)c  mtghtic  men  of  b& 
lour,  were  two  thoufaub  anb  Grchutv 
btfh. 

13  3tnb  tmbct  their  hanb  was  t  an  ar* 
mic,  tl):ee  I)unti2ct)  tii  oufanb,  anb  ftuen 
ttjoufano,  anb  fine  hunbjcb ,  tfjat  tnabc 
tbarrc  With  mt'gOtic  power,  to  fjclpe 
thcKiugagainfttOcenenuc. 

14  3nb  Wlwah  pzepareb  fo?  them 
throughout  all  the  hoflt,  fljicibs,  anb 
fpeatcs,  anb  helmets,  anb  habcrgtons, 
anb  boWes,  anb  tfiutgs  a>  raft  (tones. 

15  3no  hec  mabc  m  ^crufalcm  en- 
gincsuutcnteb  bp  cimmug  men,  to  bee 
on  thctoWcrs ,  f  Upon  tl)c  bulwarKs, 
to  fl)ootc  arrowes  anb  great  (tones 
Withall:  anb Ins  namctfpzeabfarrca 
b?oab,  fozl)cibasmarueilouflpf)elpcb, 
tSUrjetbasftroug. 

i6  C26utl\)lKnl)eibasftrong,liis 
heart  was  liftcb  Dp  to  his  Dcftructton: 
for  he  tranfgreffeb  agamft  the  %  0  is  so 
his  00b ,  anb  Went  into  tnc  temple  of 
the %  o  is  d  ,  to  bur nc incehfc bpon  the 
altar  of  incenfe. 

17  3tnb  3ftariah  the  pnclt  Went  in 
after  him ,  anb  ltutt)  htm  fourefcojc 
pnefts  of  the  %  0  is  je>,  that  Were  ban- 
ant  men. 

18  3mbthcv  Withftoob  «HJ^ial)  toe 
mng,anbfaibbntohnn,3U*pertcineth 
not  tonto  tl)ee,  Z\x,ia\),  to  burnc  tnccufe 


unto  ttje  %  <&  &  b  ,  but  to  tftc  *  pjicflcs 
tl)c  fonncs  of  ^aron,  t'oat  arc  confecra^ 
ttXi  to  burnc  incenfe,  ©oe  out  of  the 
£>anctuarie  fo^  tnou  Ijaft  trefpaffeb, 
ncuDcr  fljaii  it  be  fo?  tijtnc  honour  from 
tlje|L©is©€«ob. 

19  %l)ti\  Mwti)  ibas  ibjotli, anb 
i"ci  a  tenfer  in  ots  oaub,  to  burne  uv 
cenfeanb  Vblnic  nc  Was  ib^oto  ibitl)  tDc 
pnefts,  rtje  iepzofie  eucn  rofe  bp  m  Ijis 
fecljcab,  bcfojethcp?tcfts,tn  tljeljonfc 
of  tl)t%  sdk©,  frombefibc  theuueufc 
altar. 

20  zm  hartal)  t!)e  cDiefe  p^iett,  anb 
ailtljcpjteftslooftebbponliun,  ano  bc^ 
Dolb,  l)i  lbas  lepzous  m  ins  fozcbeab, 
anb  tpep  tmuft  Jnm  out  from  tl)tncc, 
pea  l)tiraclfc  *  Jjaftcb  alfo  to  goe  out,  be; 
taufc  tlic  %  0  «  jp  l)ab  fmittcn  l)tm. 

ii  *  3tan Hiatal)  H)t  Ring  ttjasale-^ 
perbtttotl)coapofl)isbeati),anbbtt)elt 
m  a  *  fcucrail  ijoufr  being  a  leper,  fo?  lie 
was  cut  off  from  tlje  Ijoufe  of  tUc 
%  ok©:  anb  giotljam  Ijisfonncwas 
oucrtlje  Kings  Ijoufc,  iubgmg  tl)cpco- 
pleoftlidanb. 

ii  C  i5oib  tf)e  reft  of  tfte  actcs  of 
^55ial)  fira  anb  lair,  bib  ^jfaial)  t^c 
pjopDcttl)efonnc  of  3uno?  ltiiitc. 

23  5>o  3H35ial)  Oept  Vbitl)  Ijisfatljers, 
anbtl)cvburiebl)imrbitl)l)isfatl)crsin 

tile  ftClb  Of  tl)C  bUriall  which  belonged  to 

foe  lungs:  foz  tOcp  faibc,  I^cisalcpcr : 
3tnb  35otIjam  Ijisfonncreiguebin  his 
(Icab. 

CHAP.   XXVII. 

1    Iotham  reigning  well, profpcieth.   5  Hefub- 
clucrh  the  Ammonites.  7  His  reigue.  y  Ahaz 
'  lim. 

^Dtham  *  lbas  tVbcntv  anb 

futcpccrcsolbc,  iDOenoec 
began  to  rcignc ,  anb  l)ce 
&ra  rctgncb  firtccne  pecres  in 
'-^3!crufalcm:  His  mothers 
name  alio  was  ^lertrthal),  tlje  baugljtcr 
ofzabofe. 

2  3nbhewbthat which wasrightin 
the  figOt  of  ttjc  H01S©,  accozbingto 
allthathisfather^l5?iahbib:l)ottibcit 
hee  cntrcb  not  into  the  temple  of  the 
H©is©.  ^Inb  tl)c  people  btb  vet  to?^ 
ruptlp. 

3  ^c  built  the  high  gate  of  tOe  Oonfc 
of  the  Hoik©,  anb  on  the  wailof  ||<D* 
pl)cl,hcbuiltmucO. 

4  #o?coucr  hce  built  cities  in  the 
mountaincs  of  3luba0,  anb  m  tlje  frs?* 
rcfts  Oc  built  caflles  anb  towers. 

5  CDe 


*£xo,jo.7 


AsEftct* 

12. 

•J.Kings 

'5-5 

*Lcuic.i3. 

Ad. 

t  He t.  free. 


z  Kings 


\\Orthe 


lotham.  Ahaz.        Il.Chron. 


Ifraels  crueltie. 


\Hcbmml) 


\\Or,tJrM 
fied. 


■jJDng. 
i6.l. 


||  Or,  offered 
fecrtfice 
'Lcuit.  1 8. 


iHtirDar- 


<,  C  J?cfought  aifo  Withthc  tang  of 
the  2mmomtcs,  anb  p2CiiailcD  agamO 
them.3mb  tlje  cftilDJCii  of  Amnion  gauc 
ijtm  the  fame  peerc  an  hunbjcb  talents 
of  filucr,  anb  ten  thoufanb  mcafutcs  of 
Whcatc,  anb  tettnc  thoufanb  of  barlep. 
t&o  muthbib  tlje  chiibicnof  3lmmon 
pap  into  him,  both  the  feconb  peerc, 
anbthcthirb. 

.  6  '&o3Jothambccamcmightic,  be* 
eaufe  he  ||  pjepareb  his  Wapcs  befo?c  the 
ftsDisBhisCob. 

7  C  |5oW  the  red  of  tlje  attes  of 
Jotharn  anb ailhiswatrcs,  anb  his 
wapcs,  lo,thep  at  c  ttnttcn  tn  the  booRc 
of  the  l&ings  of  Hftacl  anb  3lubah. 

s  $ccwas  fine  anb  twentic  pecrcs 
olbc  When  he  began  to  rctgnc,  anb  rctg* 
neb  firtccnepccrcsin'Jcttiralcm. 

9  C  2mb  jotharn  flcpt  With  his  fa- 
thCTS,anbthcpburicbhunuuhccitpof 
SDauib:  anb  ahajhisfonnerctgncbm 
htstteab. 

CHAP.  XXVIII. 

i  Ahaz  reigning  very  wickedly ,  is  greatly  affli- 
cted by  the  Syrians.  6  Iudah  being  captiua- 
ted  by  the  Ifraelites,is  fent  home  by  the  coun- 
fellofOded  the  Prophet.  16  Ahaz  fending 
for  aide  to  AfTyria,is  not  helped  thereby,  it 
In  his  diftrefTc  >  he  groweth  more  idolatrous. 
16    He  dying.Hezekiahfucceededihim. 

'e%wm$  5)a5  *  Was  twentic  pecrcs 
olbc  When  Dee  beganne  to 
r  eigne,  anb  he  reigncb  fir- 
tccncpcrcsin'Jcruralcm: 
_  but  hec  bib  not  that  Which 
was  right  in  the  fight  of  the  Hois  jd, 
lifeciDaiub  his  father. 

z  if  02 Dc  walRcb in  the waves of rtjc 
mugs  of  3lfiael,anb  mabe  alio  molten 
images  foz  2Saaiim. 

3  ^ojcotter,l)c  ||  burnt  inccnfctnthc 
bailcp  of  the  fonnc  of  Jjinnom,  $  burnt 
*his  chtlbjcn  nunc  fire,  after  the  abo* 
minatsonsof  the  heathen,  Whomc  the 
%  ©  n  3d  hab  cad  out  befoje  the  chiibicn 
ofUfracl. 

4  t?ce  fatnficeb  alfo .  anb  burnt  in* 
cenfem  thchighpiaccs,aubon  thchils, 
anb  bnber  currv  grecne  tree. 

<,    IDl)Crcf02C  tl)C  %  0  K  id  his  Cob 

bcliucrcb  Hun  into  the  hanb  of  the  Ring 
of  £>pna ,  anb  they  fmotc  him,  anbea* 
rtcb  away  a  great  multitubc  of  them 
capmies,anb  brought  them  to  ts>amaf 
cus : 3nb  lie  was  alfo  bcliucreb  into  the 
hanbof  thcRuigcfJIfracl,  Who  fmotc 


him  Wich  a  great  daughter. 

6  CifojpcBahthcfonncofttema 
liah  Help  in  3Jubah  an  hunbzcb  $  tibcn 
ncthoufanbmoncbap,  which  were  all 
tpaiiantmcn :  becauic  thep  hab  fo?fa^ 
Ken  the  %  o  is  3d  cob  of  their  fathers. 

7  3lnb  zichu  a  mighttc  man  of  «E< 
phzaim.fluc  spaafetah  the  Rings  fonnc 
anb  3l5riRant  the  gouernour  of  the 
houfc,atib  ciRauah  that  Ibas  tnejetto 
the  ismg. 

8  ^nb  th  c  tf)Ub:en  of 3JfracI  tartcb 
avba?  captuic  of  their  b:etl)2cn ,  ttbo 
hunb2ebthouranb,ibomen,fonnesanb 
baughtcrs ,  anb  tooRe  alfo  amap  much 
fpoilc  from  thtm,anb  brought  the  fpoile 
to  Samaria. 

9  25ut  a  ^?ophttof  the  fLe>isiD 
ibas there,  ibfiofc name  ibas  &>Qtb'. 
anb  hce  rbentout  befoje  tlje  hofle  that 
tame  to  Samaria ,  anb  faib  bnto  them, 
2Scholb,  betaufe  the  %®&w>  ©ob  of 
pour  fathers  ipasifyoth  rbith^ubah, 
he  hath  behuercb  them  into  pour  hanb, 
anb  pec  hauc  flatne  them  ma  rage  that 
rcathctlj  bppntoheaucn. 

io  ^nbnoibpcpurpofctoftcepebn^ 
bcr  the  rtnlbzen  of  3Jubah  atibjerufa^ 
lemfo?  bonbmcn,anb  bonbUiomcnPU' 
to  pou :  But  are  there  not  with  pou,  etten 
with  pou ,  fumes agamft  the  %  ©is  je> 
pour  Cob  i 

1 1  iBoib  hearemetheref02e,anb  be- 
Uuct  the  taptiucs  againc,ibh«th  V*  haue 
taftcn  taptiucof  pourbjetfcen:  fo:  ttjc 
ficrtc  tbiath  of  cob  is  ppon  pou. 

ir  3Chcntertcincofthcheabsofthc 
chiibjcn  of  €ph?aim,  pariah  thefonne 
of  giohanan,  fficrethtah  the  fonnc  of 
^cflniicmoth ,  anbljehrituahthc  f0n 
of^hailum,  anb  ^niafa  the  fonnc  of 
ftabiai.ftoob  pp  agamft  them  that  tame 
fromthcibarre, 

13  ^tibfaibpntothem,  jacfhailnot 
bung  m  tlic  taptiucs  hither :  fb?  tbherc- 
as  \\>tt  haue  offenbeb  agaiuft  the 

% 0 13  3D  alreadv.pc llUCllb  tO  3bbC U102C 

to  our  fumes  anb  to  our  trefpaffe:  fo? 
our  trefpaffe  is  great,  anb  there  is  fierce 
ityathagaiuttjjfraci. 

i+  5)0  the  armcb  men  left  the  cap^ 
ttucs,  anbthcfpoilc  bcfo:cthc02inces, 
anb  all  the  congregation. 

i<>  3inb  the  men  Which  mere  crpjcflcb 
bp  name,  rofc  Pp  anb  tooRe  the  tap* 
tines,  anb  With  the  fpoilc  tlothcb  all 
that  were  naRcb  among  them ,  anb  a 
rapcb  them,  anb fhob  them,  anb  gauc 
them  to  eatcaubto  bunlie ,  anbanoin- 
tco 


\Heb, founts 
ofvahur. 


\Hch.the 
frcondtothe 
Kmg. 


Ahazan  idolater.     Chap.xxxix.        Hezekiahking. 


Dcut.J4- 


tHr/r.,1 


mcfek.- 


\\0r,ncjfer 


teo  them  ,  ano  caneo  all  the  feeble  of 
themOpon  affes,  ano  b2oitghttljcmto 
'Jericho , '  ttic  city  of  palmc- trees ,  to 
their  b;cth:cn :  tljeu  they  rctunteD  to 
Samaria. 

i6  c  %t  that  time  oto  teng  3Cha5 
feno  Onto  tlje  Kings  of  3KTy?ta  to  hclpe 
him. 

17  Jfo?  agame  the  eoomites  hao 
tome  ant  fmitten  3Juoah ,  ano  carieo  a* 
loaytcaptuics. 

18  Xhe  01)iiiftincs  alfo  hao  inuaoeo 
tlje  cities  of  tUelonj-tonntrcy ,  ano  of 
the  &outh  of  3mt>ah,  anD  hao  tafeen 
aBeth-uJcmcftJ  ,an03iaion,  anD<E»eoc» 
rotfj ,  anu  ^Iiotljo  ttrith  the  tillages 
thereof ,atio  Xtmnah  ttnththc  tillages 
thereof,  ©01130  alfo ,  ano  rhebiiiagcs 
thereof:  ano  they  oioclt  there. 

19  5*02  ttielLo  is  £>  bio  ugnt^Juca!) 
loiO,bccaufc  oraiiaj  lung  of  3lfraet  fo2 
l)cmaoc3JnoaljnaReo,  ano  tranfgrcfc 
feD  fo?c  agatnft  the  3L  <©  is  ?d. 

20  3lnD  Xilgafh-jDilncfcr  Ring  of 
3HTy?ta  tame  into  Dun,  anooiftrcu"co 
him.butftrcngtheuco  hint  not. 

2 1  5F02  3ha5  tooftc  atoay  a  portion 
our  of  the  hottfc  of  the  %  ©  k  id,  ano  out 
of  the  hotife  of  the  Bing ,  ano  of  tlje 
02uucs ,  ano  gauci:OntotheBingof 
3uy2ta:buthchc!pcDhminot. 

22  C3nOinthctimcofthiSDiftreu"e 
DID  hec  trefpaffc  yet  11102c  againft  the 
%  ©  is  t> :  Zhts  is  that  Umg  2flja5. 

2$  ;f02hcfacrificeDOnto  the  goosof 
t2>amafcus,Uihich  fmotchtm:  anohe 
faio,  iSccaufc  the  goos  of  the  mugs  of 
£>y?ia  hclpcthem,  tIiercfo2ctDtU5fa^ 
ccificc  to  them,  thatthcy  may  hclpc  me: 
but  they  ibere  tlje  mine  of  him,  anoof 
ailSfrael. 

24  ^no  31W5  gathcrto  together  the 
Ocffcls  of  the  hottfc  of  (5oo,  ano  cutin 
pieces  the  Oeffels  of  tl)c  houfe  of  d5oD, 
ano  Q)itt  Op  toe  D002CS  ofthchoufeof 
tnc  %  0  is  s> ,  ano  lice  maoe  him  altars 
ineuerywncrofjcrufalcm. 

25  ^no  in  cucry  feucrail  dtp  of  3Ju- 
oahhcemaoehighplaccsto  ||burne  to 
cenfc  Onto  otlicr  goos,  ano  pjououeo 
to  anger  tlje  %  o  kp  goo  of  his  fa- 
ttjers. 

26  c^oio  the  reft  of  his  acts,  ano 
ofailhistbaycs ,  firft  anoiaft,  bchoio, 

tljeV  are  tt)2tttCU  til  t!)C   bOOBC  Of  tljC 

utngsof  3lnoal)  ano  Jlfracl. 

27  3no  3UW5  flcpt  ttuth  his  fa< 
thcrs ,  ano  they  bunco  Inm  m  tlje  cine, 
cuen  m  3Jcrufalcni :  but  they  b?ought 


him  not  into  the  fcpttklncs  of  the  mugs 
of  Ufrael:  ano  Actual)  Ijis  Tonne  rag* 
ncoinljisftcao. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

1  Hezckiah  his  good  reigne.  3  Hereftoreth 
Religion.  5  HeexhortcththeLeuites.  n 
They  fanctifie  themfelues ,  and  cleanfe  the 
houfe  of  God.  10  Hezekiah  offereth  fo- 
lemne  Sacrifices  ,  wherein  the  Leuites  were 
more  forward  then  the  Priefts. 

&ff|  €5cftial)  *  began  tor  eigne 
fttihcn  ijcc  was  fiuc  ano 
L  tiocnnevecresolo,anol)c 
W^l  h  tcignco  nine  anotvbninc 
Ms^#sJ  vccrcsmjernfalcnuano 
his  motljcrs  name  was  ^bualj  tftc 
oauglitcrofzertjariah. 

2  ^no  tjee  OiO  tljat  I01)idj  was  ngot 
m  tfte  figln  of  the  %  o  is  jD,acco2Ding  to 
ail  that  Dauiotjisfathcr  ijaooonc. 

3  C^c,mtl)cfirllpcrcofblsrcigne, 
in  the  firft  monetrj ,  openeo  trjeooo2Cs 
of  the  Ijoufe  of  the  %  <£>  is  je»,  ano  repat 
rcotlicm. 

4  ^no  Ijec  bjongfit  in  the  $2tcfts, 
ano  the  Hcnites,  ano  gatherco  tljcm 
together  into  tlje  caftftteet, 

5  3tno  faio  onto  them,  !?earcme,yc 
ILcmtcs,  fanctific  nolo  pour  fclues,ano 
fanmfiethehoiile  oftlje  Hois©  <soo 
of  pour  fathers ,  ano  cary  foojtt)  tlje  fifc 
thineffc  out  of  the  holy  place. 

6  jFo?  our  fathers  Ijauctrcfpauxo, 
ano  oone  that  Vbftirtji  was  cinli  tn  the 
eyes  of  the  ?L  ©  is  ©  our  ooo,ano  hanc 
fojfafecn  him,  ano  hauc  tumco  albay 
their  faces  from  the  habitation  of  the 
ft  ©  is  ©,ano  t  tiirnco  their  backs. 

7  ^ifo  they  ljauefl)Mbp  the  ooojes 
of  the  £o2ch  ,  ano  put  otitthelampcs, 
ano  Ijaue  not  buntt  mcenfe,  ho?  offcrco 
burnt  offerings  in  theholyplatc,  Onto 
tlje<3ooof^frad 

8  i©hcrfo2ethen)2atIiofthc!L0isjD 
rbasbpon3Jiioahano3lerufaiein,ano 
hehathoeiiucreo  them  to  t  trouble,  to 
aftotufbment,  anb  to  IjtlTlng,  asyectee 
ibith  your  eyes. 

9  ifo?  loc ,  our  fathers  hauc  fallen 
by  tlje  fiuo2D ,  ano  our  founts  ano  our 
Daughters,  ano  our  Unties,  arc  in  capti 

UltlCf02tIjlS. 

10  &0V0  .tis  m  mincheart  to  mabca 
tottniantioith  tljdt  o  h  c  ooo  of  31f 
rael,  that  his  fierce  tti?atlj  may  tunic  fr 
VOayfromOS. 

n  ^yfonncs,||bec  not  nolo  ncglu 

gnu: 


"J  -King. 
18.1. 


ucn  the 
necks. 


fHtfr 


\OrJanaX 

tow  4c cn- 


Theclenfing  1  LChron.  of  the  Temple. 


"Num.  S.I  4 
md  iS.3,6 


fiCrtflCe. 


||  Or,  vith 
pufincs  c, 


Lord. 


efthe 


•tcu:t.4. 
'4- 


gent :  fo?  tt>c  %$>  is  jd  Ijatlj  *  tl)ofcn  pou 
to  ttanb  befoje  Ijim,  to  fcruc  nun ,  anb 
tljat  you  ujoulbmimfrcr  bnto  ljim,  anb 
Hburncinccnfe. 

ii  c  Xljen  tt)e  fLcuites  arofc,  39a* 
ftatJ)  n)e  fonnc  of  amaftjai,  ano  3loci 
tlje  fonnc  of  35anafj,  of  tlje  fonncsof 
the  ixoljatljitcs:  ano  of  tlje  fonncsof 
#cran,  Btfl)  tlje  fonnc  of  3bbt,  ano 
hartal)  tlje  fonnc  of  ^aljalclcl :  ano  of 
tlje  Gcrfbonitcs  3JoaJ),  ujc  fonnc  of 
Ztmmalj,anb©bcntljefonncof3Ioal): 

13  ^nboftljcfonncsofeiiyipljan, 
5>ljunti,anb3Jcljicl:  ano  oftnefonnes 
of  3tfaplj ,  Zccljanalj  ano  ££)attania!) : 

14  3inb  of  tlje  fonncsof  Ucman/Jc- 
Wei,  ano  S>ntmct :  ano  of  tljefonncs  of 
3Jcourt)un,  £>ljemaialj  anb  £l35tcl. 

15  3Jno tljey  gatljcreb  tljcir b:cflj?cn, 
ant>  fanenfieb  tijcmfclucs,  anb  came  m 
cojbmg  to  tl)c  commanbement  of  tlje 
King,  1 1  bv  tlje  lbojbs  of  tlje  1L  0  is  je>,  to 
clcanfc  tlje  Ijoufe  of  tlje  %<s>  is  jp. 

i6  ^nbtljcpncfts  lbnitinto  tlje  inner 
part  oftljc  ooufe  oftljc  ?l£>  is©,  to 
clcanfc  ic  anb  b?ougt)t  out  all  tlje  bn= 
clcanncsfljat  tljcpfounb  uttnc  temple 
oftljc?L£>is©,into  tlje  court  oftljc 
Ijoufe  of  tljefU)  is  ©.3tnb  ttjclLeuttcff 
tooftc  it,  to  cane  it  out  atyoab  into  tfjc 
bjoobcmibjon. 

17  iftoib  tljcp  began  ontftc  firft  daV 
or  tlic  urft  monctl)  to  fancttfie ,  anb  on 
tljccigbtbay  of  tfjc  monctl),  camctljcy 

tO  tijC  POJCl)  Of  tljC  JLfiDlB©.  £>OtlJC}> 

fanctificb  tlje  Ijoufe  of  tlje  ?l  01s©  m 
ctgljtbaycs,  anb  in  tl)c  urtccntljbay  of 
tlje  firttmonctfj,  tljcy  mabc  an  nib. 

18  lEljni  tljcy  ibent  in  to  $C5Cbial) 
tl)c  Uing,  anb  faib ,  10c  Ijanc  clcanfcb  all 
the  Ijoufe  of  tljclt  ©  e  jd,  anb  toe  altar 
of  burnt  offering,  lbitrj  all  tlje  bcffels 
tDcr  cof,anb  the  fljelb  -  b?cab  tablc.ibitlj 
all  tlje  bcffels  tljcrcof. 

19  £0o?coucr  all  tlje  bcffels  tbhicl) 
hfng  3U)a?  in  Ijis  rcignc  btbcaftaibay 
mliistranfgrelTion.fjaueibepzeparcb 
anb  fanctificb,  anb  bcljolb,  tljey  arc  be* 
fo?c  tlje  altar  of  tljcIL  o  is  ©. 

20  C  Xljcn  *?c5cluafj  tl)c  bing  rofc 
carciy,  anb  gatljcreb  the  rulers  of  tlje 
cittc,  anb  lbcnt  bp  to  tlje  Ijoufe  of  tlje 
%&  13  ©. 

11  3uintl)cyb:ougljt  feucnbuUotfts 
anbfmcn  rammes,  anb  feumlambes, 
anb  fmen  Dccgoatsfoja'fmncoffnng 
fouljebingbomc,  anbfo?  tl)c  5>anctu« 
anc,  anb  foi  "JubaU :  anb  Ijc  commaun- 
beb  tijc  pnefrs  tlje  fonucs  of  aaron  to 


offer  them  on  njc  aitar  of  tlje  %  o  is  ©. 

22  &otrjepbiUebfl)ebullocbcs,anb 
tlje  pntfrcs  rctnucb  tlje  bloob ,  anb 
*fp?inblcb  it  on  tlje  altar:  libeibifeibljcn 
tfjcy  Dab  tullcb  tlje  rams,  tljcy  fpnnbleb 
tlje  bloob  bpon  tlje  altar:  they  blllcb  al= 
to  tlje  lambcs,  anb  tljey  fpnnbleb  tlje 
bloob  bpon  tlje  altar. 

xi  3lnb  tljcy bzougUt t foojtrj tljcljec 
goats  foHljc  finnc  offering,  befoje  tlje 
bing anb  tf)c  congregation,  anb  laibe 
tljcir  *DanbSbpontljcm: 

14.  ^nbtl)epncftslnilcbtl)cm,anb 
tl)cp  mabe  reconciliation  lbitl)  tljcir 
bloob  bpon  tlje  altar , to  mabe  an  atone* 
ment  fo?  all  3Jfracl :  fo?  tlje  bing  corns 
manbebtljat  tlje  burnt  offiinganbtljc 
tinoffertng  ftouid  bcmadefoiau3lfracI. 

25  *^nbDccfcttljeHeuitesintl)c 
Ijoufe  of  fyc  %  0  is  ©  lbitl)  cymbals, 
ibitD  pfaitcrics,  anb  ibitlj  l)arpes,acco^ 
bing  to  tljeeommanbemmt  of  SDamb, 
anbof<5ab  tlje  ftings  3>ccr,  anb/5a= 
tljan  tlje  p?opijrt:  fo?  fo  was  tlje  command 
bement  t  of  tlje  JLjjdjs jd  tbp  ijis  p?o* 
pljets. 

26  ^InbtljelleuitesftoobJbittjtljc 
inttcuments  of  Dauib,  anb  tlje  pneftes 
lbitl)  tlje  trumpets. 

27  ^nb  ^e5eftial)  commannbeb  to 
offer  njc  burnt  offering  bpon  tlje  altar: 
anb  t  vo^cn  tlje  burnt  offering  began, 
tlje  fong  of  tlje  It  ©  is  ©  began  alio  ibitlj 
tlje  trumpets,  anb  lbittjtljctinlrru> 
mcntSordeincdbpSDauibbuigof^frael. 

28  ^nb  all  tUc  congregation  Voop 
ftjippcb,  anbtljctfmgcrs  fang,  anb  tlje 
trumpetters  founbeb :  and  all  this  conti- 
nued tottffl  tlje  burnt  offering  ibasfini- 
Ojeb. 

29  ^nbtbljcntljcpljabmabcanenb 
of  offering,  ttje  bing  anb  ailtljat  Jbcre 
tpjefent  JbitD  Dim,  botbeb  tljemfclues 
anbttwfljtppcb. 

jo  ^0o?coucr  ^esebialj  tlje  bing  anb 
njc  0jmccs,  commanbeb  tbe  fUtutes 
to  fing  pzatfc  bnto  tlje  floa©,  lbitl)  tlje 
tbo?bs  of  Dauib,  anb  of  2tfapl)tl)c<§>es 
er:  anb  tljev  fang  p?aifcs  Untl)  giabncs, 
anb  tljcp  bolbcb  tljcir  Ijeabsanb  Ibo?* 
fljippcb. 

31  SEDni^e?eKtal)anGticrcbanbfaiD, 
/15oib  pc  l)aue  t  confecratcb  pour  fclucs 
bnto  tlje  ILoisjd  :  tome  nccrc  anb  b?ing 
facrifices,  anb  tnanbe- offerings  mto 
rijc  Ijoufe  of  tflcfL  sdibp.  ^nb  tlje  com 
gecgatton  bjougljt  m  facrifices ,  anb 
tnanb-offrings,  anb  asmanpasibcce 
of  a  free  Ijcart,  burnt  offenngs. 

32  31nb 


*Lcu!r.8. 
'4.'  S-Jicb. 
S-JI. 


\Hch. 


c  Lcuit.4. 


"i.Chro.jiS 

4.and*j.6 


\Hehbjthe 
hand  of  the 
Lord. 
\Htiijth: 


t Meh.intht 
time. 

\Uih.hmii 

ofinjh-K- 
menu. 

\Heb.fm£. 


j  Hti.fnmd 


11*1 


lad. 


The  PaiTeouer         Chap.xxx.  is  proclaimed. 


\Heb.Jtre*g~ 

thettedtbem 


*"Num.  19. 
u. 


\  Heb.  rvxt 
right  in  the 

eyes  of  the 


jz  anb  tlie number  ofrijc  burnt offe 
nngstolitcotliecongregatmibjouglit, 
wasttjjeefcoicanbtenbuUockcs,anljuiv 
meb  rammes,  and  tibo  Ijutioicb  lambs : 
allttjcfc  were  foj  a  burnt  off  ring  to  tlje 

fl©lS5S>. 

33  anbttjc  confecratcb  tljmgs  were, 
Cite  Ijnntyeborcu ,  anb  tljzec  tljoufanb 
flicepc. 

34  2Snttljcpncftstt)erctoofclb,fo 
that  tijep  coulb  not  flap  all  tlie  burnt 
offerings :  ibtiercfojc  tijeir  b;ctli?cntlje 
ILenitcs  t  did  licipc  ttjem,  till  tlje  lbozkc 

IDaS  rubCb,  anb  DntllltllC  other  incites 

Ijab  fauctificb  njcmfelucs:  to?  tlic  ILt 
uites  were  mojc  Dpuglit  m  heart,  to  fan 
cttficthemfeiucs,tljcntlicpncfts. 

35  anb  alfo  the  burnt  offerings  were 
mabunbaiuc,  Mththc  fat  of  tlje  peace 
offenngs,  *  tlje  bnnRc  off  rmgs,  fo?  eue- 

r>  burnt  offering.  Sortie  fcruiceofthe 
Doufc  of  tljc  1L  &  ik  5?  lbas  fct  ut  ozber . 

36  anb  ^c?euial)  rcioptcb  ,  anb  all 
tlje  people,  that<5ob  Ijabpjcparebthc 
pcoplc:fo?tl)ctDing\l)asJoncuibi)culv. 

CHAP.   XXX. 

1  Hezekuh  proclaimeth  a  (blemne  PaiTeouer 
omhefccondmoneth.rorludah  and  IftaeL 
13  The  allembly  hailing  destroyed  the  altars 
ofidolatty,  keepe  the  feaft  fourteeue  dayes. 
2.7  ThePriefts  and  Leuitesblell'e  the  people. 

^59  B  3?  festal)  Cent  to  all 
"3JfraciauD3lubalj,anD 
yj2otc  letters  alfo  to  €-- 
pljzaiin  anb  <J$anaiTeh, 
_  tliat  tlicp  (houlD  tonic  to 
t|)c  Doufc  of  tlic  !L£>K©at3Jcrufa' 
lent,  to  keepe  tlic  paffcoucc  into  tlje 
3L©s£><3ot>of3Jfcael. 

x  5F0.:  tljc  king  liao  taken  tounfcll , 
anb  Distances,  anb  alltl)e  congrcga^ 
tionm  3lcrufalem,  to  keepe  tljcpaffc; 
ouec  in  the  feconu  *  niouetH. 

3  3f  oz  tijev  coulD  not  Hccpc  it  at  tliat 
time,  bceaufc  the  pnefts  Dab  not  fanctt? 
ficb  thcmfelues  fumcicntlp,nctfhcr  Ijab 
tftc  people  gatlicreb  thcmfelues  toge^ 
tljccto'Jcrufalem. 

4  anb  tlie  tiling  t  plcafcb  the  king, 
anb  all  tljc  Congregation. 

5  £>o  tlicp  cftabkfljeb  a  becree,  to 
make  pzoclamation  throughout  all  3it 
rael,  from  2SeerfDcba  cucn  to  Dan, 
tliat  thep  flioulb  tome  to  keep  thcpaiTe 
oner  bnto  tHe  IL^is©  (3ob  of  31fracl  at 
3krufalem :  foz  ttJev  Dab  not  bone  it  of 
a  long  time  in  fuch  fort,  as  it  lbas  \untten. 


6  So  n)cpoftcsU)entlbitlj  the  let= 
ters  t  from  tfjc  Bmg  anb  His  pnnces, 
tD?ougl)outaii3ifraeiaiib3iubal),anb 
accojbtttg  to  tljc  commanbemcut  of  tlic 
King, taping.  Pec  thilb?cn  ofjfrael, 
turnc  agamc  Ditto  the  ILo  is  ©  <3ob  of 
ab?aham ,  3Jfaac  anb  gjfrael ,  aim  hee 
ttnl  rewrite  to  tlic  remnant  of  pou  ,t!iat 
areefcapeb  outof  tljcljanb  oftljckmgs 
ofatrpna. 

7  anb  be  not  pc  like  pout  fathers, 
anb  like  pour  brethren ,  Which  trefpaf 
feb  agamfl  the  fLcus©  Gob  of  their 
fathers,  who  thcrcfozcgaucthcmbpto 
bcfoiation,aspcfce. 

8  il5olu  tbepecnot  ftiffc-ncclteb  as 
pour  fathers  lbere ,  but  t  peelb  pour 
felues  tm'to  tlic  It  o  v.  ©,  anb  enter  into 
rjis  Santtuaric,  lUljiclj  I}c  fjath  fancu 
fieb  fo?  cucr:  anb  feme  tlie  IIokj?  pour 
C50D, tliat  tlic  ficrteneffc  of  Ijis  ib.zatl) 
map  turnc  aibap  from  pou. 

9  jfoj  tf  pee  turnc  again e  bnto  tlie 
%  ©  is  ©,  pour  b?cfl)2cn  anb  pour  cijil 
bzcnfljallfiadc  tompamon  before  tljein 
ttjat  leabc  tljem  taptiuc ,  fo  tliat  tlicp 
fljall  come  agamc  into  ill  is  lanb :  fo  ttlj  c 
%  $>  is  ©  pour  d5ob  is  gracious  anb 
*  mcrcifull,anblbill  not  turnc  aibap  his 
face  from  pou,ifpcrcturnc  bnto  liim. 

10  So  tlie  potts  paffeb  from  ritieto 
cutc,  tlnouglitDc  coimtrepof  €pH:aim 
anb  £0auaffcli,  euettbnto  sebiilim: 
but  tljcp  laugljco  tljem  to  Iconic,  anb 
motkcbtlicm. 

1 1  iRtucrtDclefrc ,  biucrs  of  Oilier, 
anb£0attaffeli,anb  of  zebulun.  Hum 
bleb  tDcmfclucs ,  anb  came  to  3Jerufcv 
lem. 

11  aifoin3fubali,tl)el)anbof(15ob 
ibas  to  giuc  tljcm  one  Jicartto  ooctlic 
commanbnncnt  of  tlie  king  anb  of  tlic 
pnnces,bptljc«Jozboftlje|l0isiD. 

13  C  ^nb  tlierc  aiTemblcb  at  3Jcru- 
faicm  mutH  people ,  to  kecpetliefeaflof 
bnlcaucncbtocab  m  tlic  fecono  monctt), 
abcrp  great  congreganon. 

14  anb  tlicp  arofc  anb  tookcattjap 
tl)c*aitarstliatwercm3Jcrufaicm,anb 
all  tlje  altars  fo:  mccuCc  tookctl)cpa^ 
map,  anb  cafl  tiiemmto  tljcbzookcBt- 
b?on.  _ 

15  Xljcn  tlicp  MUD  tlie  paiTeouer 
onttjcfourtccntli  day  oftUcfcconD  mo 
nctl):  anb  tlic  pucflsanb  tlicjleuites 
lUerc  aujamcb ,  anb  fanctifieb  tlicm 
felues ,  anb  b:ougl)t  m  tiic  burnt  offe 
rings  into  tlic  lioufc  of  tlie  %  o  is  id. 

i6  anb  tljep  Qoob  in  t  tljeir  place  af 
1Dt  tcr 


Urtl.frM 
he  Ijnnd. 


t  HjrJfn 
nut  iinr 
ner^fi. 
\Htb  put 
ththmd. 


•Exo.34.5 


'Chap.i8. 
»4. 


f  Rti.  th:r 


ThePafleouer.         I  I.Chron.    Idolatry  deftroyed. 


\Htb.found. 


f  Hcbr.in- 
(irnminti  of 
jh-cttflh. 

the  htArt  of 


t  HtUifui 

to  or  ejjrcd. 


ttt  their  matter ,  accoibtng  to  the  %m 
ofs#ofesthcmanof<5ob :  Xhepuetts 

fpjinCBleb  tl)C  bl00b,>vhich  they  receiued  of 

the  hanb  of  thermites. 

17  if  0?  tljcrc  lucr  c  matip  in  the  Cott^ 
gecgatton  that  lbcrc  not  fanctt&eb: 
therefore  thcHcnttcshab  the  charge  of 
the  billing  of  the  ^affcouccs  fo;  cucrp 
one  that  lbas  not  tlcanc ,  to  fanmfic 
thniibntotljefLoisj?. 

is  foi a multitubc  ofttic  pcoplc,euen 
many  of  tfplnai'm  anb  i#anatfch>  3Jf 
fachar  anb  zcbulun  ,I)ab  not  clcanfcb 
themfelues :  pet  bib  thep  catc  the  0affc 
otiet  otljeninfc  ttjen  tt  lbas  nmttctt. 
2Butl?e5etual)  piapebfouhem,  taping, 
%t)t  goob  %  ©  is  ©  patbon  cuerp  one, 

19  %fjat  pjeparcthhis  heart  to  fectte 
C5ob ,  the  %  o  is  ©  C5ob  of  his  fathers, 
though  hee  be  notdeanfed  accozbing  to 
thepurtneatton  of  the  £>anttuarp. 

10  3Jnb  the  ILois©  hcar&cttcb  to 
l)C5cmah,anb  healcb  the  people. 

21  3lnb  rhcchiibjcnof^rraclthat 
vberc  t  mefent  at  3Jcrufaicnt ,  fecpt  the 
fcaft  or  tottieaucncb  bjcab  fenett  bares 
lint!)  great  giabucflc :  ant  the  ?Leuttcs 
anb  the  pnclrs  pzaifeb  the  %<s>  is  9  bap 
bp  bap,  Gnging  vbitlj  t  loibb  mfttuments 
btttothelLfiDH©. 

22  3lnb  $t?cluah  fpaKc  t  totnfo2ta- 
blp  bnto  all  the  Hctutes,  that  taught 
the  goob  Unotblcbgc  of  the  Hois©: 
anb thep  btb  eate  thzoitghout  the  feaft, 
feuen  bapes ,  offering  peart-  offerings, 
anb  matting  tonfefftonto  tlje  %&&  © 
Gob  of  their  fathers. 

11  3lttb  the  ibholc  afJemblp  toohe 
tounfel  to  Uecpc  other  fcuett  bapes :  anb 
thep  ttcpt  other  feuen  bapes  ibtthglafr 
ntffc. 

24.  foi  fyescluah  mug  of  3Jubah 
tbtbgntctothcCougrcganon,  a  thou- 
fanb  bullotucs  ,  anb  feuen  thoufanb 
fljeep:  anb  the  juices  gauc  to  the  Con 
grcgatton  a  thoufanb  bullotUs,attb  ten 
thoufanb  (hcepc,  anb  a  great  number 
of  ^ucfrs  fanmncb  themfelues. 

25  ^tnballthcCongreganottof^Iu; 
ball  ,u>tth  the  pnetts  anb  thcHcuites, 
anb  ai  the  Congrcganon  that  tame  out 
of  Jfrael ,  anb  the  ffrangcrs  that  tame 
out  of  the  lanb  of  llfracl ,  anb  that 
Mbclt  ttt  3lubah,rctoptcb. 

26  £>o  there  lbas  great  top  in  3Jeru- 
falcm :  fo:  ftitte  the  tunc  of  £>oIontoti 
the  fotmc  of  2>atttb  Butg  of  3Jfracl, 
dure  w.isnotthe  IiHcufJerufalnu. 

17  C^henthcv>nett5thclteuttes 


arofc  ,aub  blcffcb  the  people :  anb  their 
bottc  ibashcarb,anb  their  pjapename 
vp  to  t  his  Ijolp  bibclltng  placemen  Jwto 
ljcaucn. 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

1  The  people  is  forward  in  destroying  idolatry. 
2. Hezekiah ordereth  the  courfes ol  the priefts 
and  Leuites ,  and  prouideth  for  their  worke 
and  maintenance.  5  The  peoples  forward- 
nciTeinonvrins;sand  tithes.  11  Hezekiah 
appointeth  officers  to  di(pofc  of  the  tithes. 
10  The  llnccritie  of  Hezekiah. 

'&t  0\b  uihen  all  this  rbas  ft* 
&5f®!  SmHitD  ,  all  3Jftaei  that 
^»^|  aibcrctpjcfcmwbcntoutto 
the  nttcs  of  3Jnbah ,  anb 
*  b;at$c  the  t  images  m  pic* 
ces, anb  cut  boibtte  the  groucs,  anb 
thic\bboVbttc  the  high  places  anb  the 
altars  out  of  all  3jiuml)  anb  2Senta; 
nun,  m  Cph^aim  alfo  anb 530anafleh, 
t  bnnilthcp  habbtterlp  brifropeb  them 
all.  Xhcn  all  the  rhtltucn  of  gjfrael  re* 
turneb  eucrp  man  to  l)is  poffemon  into 
their  ovbncnttes. 

1  C  3lnb  ^c^ctitah  appotntcb  the 
courfes  of  the  0neQsanb  tljclLeuttcs 
after  their  courfcs.cuerp  man  acco^bmg 
to  his  fcrutce,  the  pncfls  anblLcuites 
fo:  burnt  offerings ,  anb  fo;  peace  offer- 
ings, to  mtntftcr  anb  to  giuc  thanhes, 
anb  to  ptfttfc  in  the  gates  of  the  tents  of 
tl)elL£>m©. 

I     He  appointed  alfo  tt)C  lUttgS  POlttOU 

of  his  fubfrance ,  fo;  the  burnt  offrtngs, 
w  wit .  fo:  the  morning  anb  eticnmg 
burnt  offnngs,  anb tlK  burnt  ofTrtngs 
fbz  the  Sabbaths ,  anb  fo?  thc/iUclb- 
moones ,  anb  fo;  the  fct  fcafts ,  asit^ 
rbJtttcn  in  the  ILatb  *  of  the  1L  o  is  s\ 

4  5©02eouer ,  he  commanttbeb  the 
people  mat  mbeltui3Icrufaletn,togiue 
thcpojttonof  the  $ncffs ,  anbthcJLe^ 
uitcs,  that  thep  might  be  mtouragcb  in 
thcHaibofthcHflDisjp. 

5  C  5tnb  affoonc  as  the  ronuitaun 
betnent  tcamc  atyoab ,  tlK  chtlb2Ctt  of 
IJfracl  bjottght  m  abuttbattcc  the  firft 
fruits  of  come ,  ibute  ano  otic ,  *  1 1  honp, 
anb  of  all  the  utcrcafcof  the  ftelb ,  anb 
the  tittic  of  all  things  b;ought  tljcp  m  a- 
bttnbantlp. 

6  3lnb  concerning  the  chtlbjnt  of 
Jfracl  anb3lubah  ,  that  blbelt  ttt  the 
tmesof3lubah,thcpi!io  brought  utthe 
nthesof  oren  anb  fljcepcanb  the  tithe 
of  hoip*  things,  Which  ibcrcconfccra; 

ten 


fHrir.tir 
habitation  of 
htt  hofinrjfe. 


\H,hf»mi. 


¥  a. King. 

18.4. 

t  HtirJI* 

IHCt. 


t  Htt.-MiU 

to  make  ari 
ttttt. 


•Nurn.28. 


t  Uttr. 

trmrhl 

■cr'th. 

'jr^datti. 


"Lcuic.i7. 
;o.Jcu.i  ^, 
18. 


Prouifionfor  Chap.xxxij, 


thepnefh 


teape/. 


Or,ftm. 
hutiftt. 


\Hci.atht 

bund. 


^Hii./itbu 
hMid. 


\\Or,Wltl. 


tco  tonto  the  %  ©  IS  ©  tl)Ctt  <50b  ,  and 
laybthemt  Scapes. 

7  3!ntljc tljirb  monttli  tljcv began 
toiavtijefounbationofthchcapcs,aub 
firafl) cd  them  m  the  fcucnth  moncth. 

8  :#nb*bhcn$c5cluahanbthcpHn' 
ces  came,  anb  faro  the  heapcs.tbcp  blct 
fcb  the  Hois©,  ants  tjis  people  3Jf- 
raei. 

9  ILhen  $C3eftiah  cjurihonco  Uutlj 
tlje  pneltsanb  the  jLeuttes  concerning 
the  Scapes. 

io  ^noSfcariahthechicfepncftofthc 
honfc  of  zabon,  anfrocrcbljtm  tjfaib : 
Since  the  people  began  to  bung  the  of; 
fermgs  into  the  houfe  of  the  £  ©  is  ©, 
lbechaucljab  cnougluo  eatc,  anbhauc 
left  pltntie :  fo?  tljc  1L  ©  is  ©  i)atl)  blcf 
feo  his  people ;  anb  that  tPhtch  is  left,  is 
tljts  great  fton. 

ii  CXhen$C5CBiahcommanbcbto 
pupate  ||  chambers  m  the  houfe  of  the 
%<$>  is  »,  anb  the?  pjeparcb  them, 

n  ^nbbjonghtm  the  offerings  anb 
thenthcs,anDthebebtcatctljings,faith' 
fully:  oucr  tbhith  Conomah  rtjc  flcuite 
was  ruler,  anb  Shtmei  hts  bjo ttjet  ibas 
thenert. 

13  3tnb3Ichicl,anb:S5a5iah,anbii5a? 
hath,  anb  afahel,  anb  ^crtmoth,  anb 
3Jo?abao ,  anb  eiicl ,  anb  gjfmaehiah, 
anb^Jahatlj,  anb  2Scnaiah  w«e  oners 
fcets  t  bnber  the  Ijanbc  of  Conontah, 
anb  Sljimei  hts  toother,  at  the  torn* 
manbeincnt  of  ^etnal)  tljc  lung,  anb 
Parian  the  mlcr  of  tljc  Ijoufc  of  <5ob. 

14.  %m  Bo?c  the  fonnc  of  3Ftnntai) 
thtHeutte  the  ponce  toibatb  the  call, 
was  ouer  the  free  tbill  offerings  of  <5ob, 
to  btOribute  ti)e  oblations  of  the 
1L  €>«©,  anb  the  molt  Ijolp  things. 

15  3lnb  tnert  nun  were  cben,  anb 
^uuamlu,anb3cn)ua,  anDSljema; 
iah,3maciah,anDShcchamah,inthc 
cities  of  the  pnetts,  tit  then  ||fct  office,  to 
glue  to  their  tycrlncn  by  conrfes,  asibcl 
to  toe  great  as  to  tljc  ftnau : 

i6  2Scfibe  their  gcnealogic  of  males, 
from  thnc  pectes  olb  anb  bptbarb,="en 
bnto  eucry  one  that  cntreth  mto  the 
houfe  of  the  %  £>  is  s?,his  uaplp  portion 
fo:  their  fennce  in  their  charges,  acco:- 
omg  to  their  conrfes: 

17  ffioth  to  the  gcnealogic  of  the 
pucQsby  the  noufe  of  their  fathcrs,anb 
the  Iterates  from  nbcntp  pecrcs  oloc 
anb  bpibarb,  in  their  charges  top  their 
courfes: 

18  ^nbtothegnieaiogicofailthcir 


lttleoncs,theirnmies,atiD  their  founts, 
ano  their  baughters,  through  all  the 
congreganomfojut  their  lifctomcctljey 
fancnficD  thcmfcluesmholmcffe. 

19  3llfo  of  the  fonnes  of  3taron  the 
pnefts,  lbhiclj  were  fti  thcnclos  of  the 
fuburbs  of  their  citics,in  cuerp  feuerall 
cittc ,  the  men  that  were  crpzeffeb  top 
name,  togiuc  pontons  to  all  the  males 
among  the  pnefts,  anb  to  all  that  mere 
recUoncb  by  genealogies ,  among  the 
literates. 
20  C3mbfhusDtb$c5eiuahtbjoiigh' 
out  ai  3Jubah,anb  lbjought  that  lbbtth 
was  goob  anb  right ,  anb  tructh  befon 
j  theft  £Dis©his<5oD. 

ii  3uibtncucrpiborticthathcbegan 
in  the  fecuice  of  thehoufc  of  ©ob,anbin 
;  the  laib,  anb  in  the  commanoements  to 
fecite  his  ©ob ,  he  bib  it  ibitl;  all  his 
heart,  anb  p?ofpcreb. 

CHAP.    XXXII. 

1  Sennacherib  inuadingludah,  Hezekhh  fortifi- 
cch  himfelfe  and  encourageth  his  people.  51 
Againft  the  blafphcmies  of  Sennacherib  by 
meflagc  and  letters,  Hezefciah  &  Ifaiah  pray. 
11  An  Angel  deftroyeth  the  holte  of  the  Af- 
fyrians.tothegloryof  Hezekiah.  14  Heze- 
kiah  praying  in  hisfickenes,  God  giueth  him 
afigneof  recouerie.  15  He  waxing  proud,  is 
humbled  by  God.  17  His  weahh  and  works. 
31  His  errour  in  theembaflagc  or  Babylon. 
He  dying,  Manaffeh  fucccedeth  him. 

5Fter  *thcfe  things  anb  tljc 
cflabUlhmcnttherof,  $>m- 

nachenb  femg  of  ^fTwia 
came,  anb  cntrcb  into  3Iu- 
^balj,  f  encampco  agamQ 
thcfcnccb  ntics^nb  thought  t  to  ibinnc 
themfo?hunfclfc. 

z  ^nb  lbljcn  i)C3Cftiah  fattoe  that 
Sennacherib  ibas  come,  anb  thattijee 
lbas  purpofeb  to  figljt  againft  3Jctu 
falem, 

3  ^c  tooHc  counfciVbitlj  Ijispzintes, 
anbhiSnughticmcn,toftopthcibatcrs 
of  the  fbuntames,  which  were  ipitbout 
tljc  title :  atm  tljc?  bib  Ijclpc  Ijun. 

4  So  there  ibas  gathcrco  mnch 
people  together,ibho(loptaiitl)efoun> 
tames  ,  ano  the  bzooUc  that  t  ramie 
thJOugl)  the  mibfl  of  the  lano ,  larmg, 
nahp  fljoulD  the  lungs  of  ^fTynacomc, 
auofinbcmuchibatcrf 

5  3lifo  he  ftrcngtheneb  hunfelfcanb 
built  top  an  the  ibail  tljat  ibas  bzohen, 
ano  raifcb  it  pp  to  tljc  tolbers,  ano  ano 

%t  z  thee 


);"<■ 


I  ;,&<:. cUi. 


t  Heir  to 

Ire.ikethem 

vp. 

face  wasra 
vr.'.rrc. 


Heb.oHfr- 

fi'AVcJ. 


s 


henb< 


ennacnenbs 


n.ci 


iron. 


blafph 


emie- 


\Or,fircr..'r: 


\Heb.hcc 

(paks  to  their 
heart. 


Merc.  17.5. 


\Het>.  lea- 
ned. 

"a.King. 

1  S.i  7. 


minioti. 


I  Or,i.t:'rf 
jlrort*  hold. 


thcr  lbaiittnthout,  anD  p2eparcD  tpuio 
m  the  tunc  of  DausD ,  anomaDc  UDarts 
anb  Oiicius  tn  abunbancc. 

6  :3nbheefctcaptaincsofrbarrco; 
ucc  ti)c  people,  anD  gathcrcb  themto; 
gcthec  to  hmi  m  tl)c  ftrcetc  of  the  gate 
of  thentp,  atiDfpaKct  comfojtabip  to 
them  fapmg; 

7  25c  ftrong  anD  couragious,bc  not 
afcaiDno2Diunapebfo2  the  King  of  ^f 
fp2ia,  no?  foi  ail  tl)c  muintubc  tljat  is 
ibitl)  l)im :  foi  tljere  bee  moc  ibitl)  DS, 
then  ibtto  hmi. 

8  'iBtthhim  isanacmeofflcn),but 
tbtti)  lis  is  the 2L<dise>  onr  ©ob  to  hclpe 
bs,  anbto  figtjt  onr  battels.  3lnb  the 
people  trcfteb  tDnttfclucs  bpon  the 
Hwds  of  ^esetaah  King  of  3HiDai). 

9  C  *  lifter  tins  Did  Sennacherib 
tangof3iTp2iafcnb  hisfcrnantsto3Jc; 
tnfaicni  (but  lie  himfeife  bide  fie -e  agatnft 
3Lacl)ifl),atib  all  his  t  polbcr  ibttlj  Dun) 
bnto  ^csetaah  tang  of  "Juban ,  anb  bn 
to  all  3'ubal)  that  were  at  gjerufalem, 
faptng;  1 

10  Ulnis  Capri)  Scnnathcriblung  of 
3iffp:ia ,  ©hereon doc  pe trull, that pee ; 
abibel  intneficgcm^JerufaicnK 

11  Doeth  not  $e?cluah  pcrfiuabc 
pou  to  gute  oner  pour  fclucs  to  bic  bp  fa=  i 
muuanDbptI)tttt,faping,'£I)c?U>K3D 
our  <5ob  (hall  bciiuer  bs  out  of  the! 
DaiiDofthetangof^ffpuaf 

11  J)atD  not  the  fame  fjescfttah  tsA 
Ken  amap  his  high  plates ,  anb  Ins  at 
tars ,  anb  tomtnanbeb  3hiDah  anb  ^t- 
rufaicm ,  Taping ;  Ptc  (hall  VbozOjtp  be; 
fo2Concaitar,<?burncinccnfcbponit? 

1  j  liuioiD  pc  no t  u>hat  51  anb  mp  fa- ' 
tilers  Dane  bone  bnto  all  the  people  of 
other  lanDS*  rocrc  tl)c  gobs  of  thenati ! 
ons  of  thofc  lanbcs  anpibapcs  able  to 
bcltucr  their  lanbs  out  of  nunc  Daub  i 

1+  nai)o  was  there  among  an  tDc  gobs 
oftDofcuanons.tDatmp  fathers  bttcr 
Ipbefrroprb,  tDattouib  bcltucr  Dispeo- 
ple out  of  nunc  Daub,  tDatpour  cob 
flioulb  bee  able  to  Deltucr  pou  out  of 
nunc hanb; 

1$  j^olb  tDercfo.'c  let  not  J)C3ctaah 
occciuepou,  no: pcrfiuabcpou  on  tins 
manner, neither  pet  bciccuc  Dun :  fo2  no 
gob  of  auv nation  02  taugbomcibasa- 
blc  to  bciiuer  Dis  people  out  of  nunc 
Daub ,  <*  our  of  tDc  Daub  of  mp  fathers : 
Do)b  much  telle  (hail  pour  CoDDcliucr 
vououtofmmchanD* 

16  ;jhid  his  fcruants  fpaUc  pet  more 
agamft  the  %o  is  v>  Cod ,  anb  agaiuft  j 


ih!Sferuant^c5ctaah. 

17  $ccib2otcalfo  letters  to  raile  on 
the  %o  a  jd  ©ob  of  3Jfracl,f  to  fpea&c 
agam(ihun,fapiug,2lsthcgob5ofthe 
nations  of  other  lanbshaue  not  bcliuc 
rcb  their  people  out  of  mine  hanb :  fo 
(hall  not  the  00b  of  ^esctaal)  bciiuer 
his  people  out  of  nunc  hanb. 

18  %l)tn  thep  ctpcb  lint!)  a  loube 
boitc  m  the  3rtne s  fpeeth  tutto  the  peo- 
ple of  3ferufalcm  that  Vbere  on  the  ibal, 
to  affright  them,  anbto  trouble  them, 
tljat  thepnught  taKe  the  citp. 

19  3lnb  thep  fpaKc  againftfhc  Cob  of 
^Jcrttfalcm,  asagainft  thcgoDsofthc 
people  of  the  earth  which  were  the  lb02$$c 
ofthehanbsofman. 

io  foi  tins  caufe  fcc^etaah  the  tang, 
anb  the  #2ophet  3Jfatah  the  fount  of 
3mo5,  p2apcb  anb  crpcb  to  heaucn. 

21  C*3lnb  tlje  %  o  is  p  fent  an  Zn- 
gel,  ibhtch  cut  off  all  the  mighttc  men 
ofbalour,anbtl)cleabcrsanbtaptams 
m  the  tampc  of  the  King  of  3lflp2ia :  fo 
hccrcturncb  Vbithfliamcof  fate  to  his 
oionc  laub.  3lnb  lbhen  Dec  ibas  come 
into  tl)c  houfc  of  his  gob,thcp  that  tame 
foo2tl)  of  his  oibuc  bolbcls ,  t  nclh  Ijun 
there  ibitl)  the  to02b. 

iz  %\)uz  the  !L©i3E>  faucb  l}&v 
taaij,  anb  the  inhabitants  of  3Jcrufa- 
icm,  from  the  hanb  of  Sennacherib 
the  tang  of  3HTp2ia ,  anb  from  the  hanb 
of  another,  anb  gwDcb  them  on  eucrp 
ftbe. 

aj  ^nbmanpb:ougl)t gifts  bntoti)c 
fLoisp  to  gjcrufaicm,  aubtpjefents 
to  ^e3eKiah  tang  of  Jubah :  fo  that  hec 
Vbas  magnificb  m  ti)e  fight  of  all  nati- 
ons, from  thenccfoth. 

24.  C*3JntJ)ofcbapcs^r5cKtahibas 
ficftcto  tlic  Death » anb  p2apcb  bnto  the 
1L  ©  is  p :  anb  he  fpaKc  bnto  him,  anD 
hellgauchmiaCgnc. 

25  23ut  $?C5CtaahrcnD2CD  notagauie, 
att02bingto the  bencfitbone  bnto  him: 
fo2  his  heart  mas  liftcb  bp,  thcrcfo2c 
there  lDasUnathbponhim,  anb  bpon 
•Jubah  anb  ^Icrufaiem. 

26  ji5otUMh[taubuig,fce5ctaaD  Diuu 
blcbDunfelfcfo2ttDcp:ibcoflnsDcart, 
(both  Dec  anb  tDc  inhabitants  of  3Jcru 
falcnOfo  tDattlie  \b:ath  of  the  %  ok© 
came  not  bpon  them  in  the  bapes  of  l?e- 
5ctaah. 

27  C  3»d  fte^eftiah  hab  crcccDtng 
mud)  riches,  anb  honour :  anD  he  maDc 
hnufclfc  treafurtes  fo:  filtier ,  anD  fo2 
golbc,  anb  fo2p:cnousftoncs,  anb  foi 
fplces, 


"  2.  King. 
I9-Jj,&c. 


f  He  h.  m.\Ac 
himf.-M. 


tH'i.pn 
tuns  things. 


"2. King  Jo. 
1.  iiai.38.1. 


I J  Or,»regbt 
amtr.icle 
for  htm. 


\Hcb.the 
tifxingvp 


Hezekiahdieth:      Chap.xxxiij.  ManaiTeh  wicked. 


\Htbr.m 
ftrwnentt  cf 
defrc. 


\HthrM- 
terpreterl. 

*  i.King. 

20.  Il.llj. 

;?■'• 


'[Heir-k-d 


\\0r,UghcH. 


*  1.  King, 
It.l.&c. 


*Deut.i8. 


f  Heir  bee 

returned 

.-Tndbmlt. 

*3.King. 
1 8.4. 


fpices,anD  fo?  fbielDS,anb  foj  all  manec 
oftplcafantieibelS; 

x%  5>bKe-boufesaifo  foj  tbe  mtteafc 
of  tojne,  anD  tbme  anD  one ,  ano  ftailcs 
fojaiimaner  of  beatts ,  anD  coatesfo? 
flocas. 

29  40o?eouer ,  fjec  pjouiDeD  bim  & 
tics.anti  poffeflions  of  flotfees$  Ijcatbs 
m  abunoancc :  foi  god  bae  giucn  bim 
fubftancebcrymucb. 

jo  Xbisfame$c5etaabatt"bfloppcD 
tbe  bpper  ibatet-  courfe  of  <£>ibon ,  anb 
bzougbt  it  ftcatgbt  Doibneto  tbenaeffc 
fibc  of  tbe  City  of  Datno.3fnD$e5c&iab 
pjofpeccb  in  all  bis  tbojUes. 

31  C  $otbbert ,  in  the  bufineiTe  of  tbe 
tembaflabouts  of  tfyt  $i\ntts  of23a= 
bylon,n)bo  *ftnt  bnto  bim  to  enqmee  of 
tbe  ibonber  tbat  ibas  bone  m  tbe  lanb, 
<I5oDttftbtoi>totrybtm,fbatbemigbt 
bnoVb  all  tbat  ibas  in ibis  beart. 

3t  <[J9ou),tbetettoffbeacts;ofi!?c> 
5ebiab,anb  btstgoobneffcbcbolD,  tibcy 
are  ttyitten  in  tbebifton  of  3Jfatab  tbe 
^jopbet,  tbe  fonne  of  3mo5,  ^d  m  tbe 
boobe  of  tbe  mngs  of  3JuDabanD3£ 
rati. 

33  ^nb  H?e?elriab  Oepttbttb  bis  t& 
tbets,anb  tbeyburicb  bim  intbcllebie* 
ftft  of  tbe  £>cpulcb?es  of  tbe  fonncsof 
SXiuid:  anDatrJuoab  anb  tbe  mbabt 
tantsofJcrufaieniDtD  bim  honour  at 
bis  Dcatb  :  anb  Q3ana&b  bis  fonne 
rcipcbmbiSfteaD, 

CHAP,  xxxnr. 

i  ManaiTeh  his  wicked  reigne.  3  Heefetteth 
vp  idolatry,  and  would  not  be  admonifhed. 
11  Heiscaried  into  Babylon.  11  Vponhis 
prayer  to  God  hee  is  releafed,  and  putteth 
downe  idolatry.  18  His  ads.  ro  Hee  dy- 
ing, Amon  fucceedeth  him.  n  Anion 
reigning  wickedly  is  flaine  bv  his  letuants- 
15  The  murtherers  bceing  flame  ,  Iofiah 
fucceedethhim. 

^Jnaffcl)  *  ibas  ttbelne 
yceresolDlbben  bebegan 
to  reigne,  anD  berciguco 
fiftic  anb  fine  yctes  m3Je- 
rnfalcm: 
x  But  bib  tbat  ibbitb  was  cuil  in  tbe 
figbt  of  tbe  %  <©  a  © ,  libc  bnto  ttjc  abo- 
jnmationsoftbebeatben,  *ibbomtbe 
%<£>  is  w  bab  taft  out  befo?e  tbe  rt)ilb?cn 
ofJfraeL 

3  €  fm  t  bee builtagatnetbebigb 
places  ,U)bitb  $e5e&iabbisfatbcrbaD 
*btoltenbottme,anD  be  teareb  bp  attars 
to?  Kaaiun ,  anb  niabe  groucs ,  anb 


lbortbippeDautbc  boOof  beaucn,  ano; 
fecucbtbetn. 

+  3Ufo  bee  built  altars  in  tbe  bonfc 
oftbc?L€>is©,  ibbcrcof  tbe  It  ©is© 
bao  faibe,  *  3n  ^crufalcm  (ball  my 
it5amcbefb?euer. 

5  ^nb  be  built  altars  fo2  all  tbe  boa 
of  beauen ,  in  tbettbo  Courts  of  tbe 
boufeoftbc3L©iB©. 

6  anDbecaufeDbisebittuentopaffc 
tbjougbtbefiretntbe  bailey  of  tbe  fon 
of  i^ninoni :  alfo  be  obferucD  times,anb 
bfcDincbantmcnts,  anb  bfeb  ibtteb 
craft, ano  Dealt  ruub  a  familiar Ipmt, 
anbrwtb  U)i5arbs:  be  ttwugbt  niuri) 
cutilmtbe  ftgbtoftbe  Hjdk©,  topjo* 
uofte  bun  to  anger. 

7  3nb  bee  let  a  carucD  image  ( tbe 
ibolevbbicbbc  bab  ntabe)  mtbeboufe 
of<J5oD,  of  ibbitb  (Bob  babfaibto  2Da^ 
uib ,  anD  to  Solomon  bis  fonne :  3ln 

tbisboufc,anDin3cnu"aiemlbbitr]5 
bauc  cbofen  before  all  tlje  tribes  of  %b 
rael,ibill3J  putmp  i5ame  fo?eucr, 

8  il5ntberTa)ili3anpmo?ercmoue 
tbe  foot  *  of 3ifrac!  from  out  of  tbe  lanb 
ibbtcb  3  haue  appouiteD  fo?  pour  fa* 
tbtts ;  fo  tbatfbcf  mill  tatte  beeD  to  Doe 
all  tbat  5  baue  commanDeD  tbcm ,  ae 
cojDmgto  rbeibbolefLarb,  anb  tbefla- 
tutcs,  anb  tbe  ojbinancesbptbebanD 
of^ofes. 

9  So$)anau"ebmabe3mDa!j,anD 
tbembabttants  of  51trufairm  to  erre, 
^nd  to  Doe  tborfe  tben  tbe  beatben, 
robom  tbe  ILsdis  ©  bab  DeftropeD  be^ 
fo?c  tbe  cbrtb^en  of  llfrae!. 

10  3nD  fbe  ILflpis  ©  fpabe  to  $&& 
naffeb ,  anb  to  tys  people :  but  tbey 
tboulbnotbearben. 

11  Cn9bcrfo2etbe1L©iS©b?ougbt 
bpontbcm  the  taptaines  of  tbe  bofttof 
tbefemgof  3lflVna,ibbttb  toobfi^anat 
fci)  among  tbe  tbomes ,  %  botmo  btm 
ttntb  1 1  fetters,?  carieb  bim  to  26abylon, 

ii  ^nbtbbenbee  mas  tn  affliction, 
be  befougbt  t^t  %<$>  is  ©  \)is  6ob,  anb 
bumbleb  btmftlfe  greatly  befo?c  tbe 
d5obofbtsfatbcrs, 

13  3lnDp2aycDbntobim,anDbetbas 

mtreattD  of  bun ,  anb  bearD  bis  fuppli 
cation,  anD  fcougbt  bimagame  to^c 
rufalcm  into  bis  bmgbome.Xben  #a^ 
naffeb  bnett)  tbattbc  H©is©  bee  was 

d50D. 

14  0oM)  after  tbisi,  bee  built  a  mail 
Tbttbout  tbe  cite  of  a>auib,on  tbe  xecft 
fibcof(!5ft)on,m  tbe  bailey,  euento  tbe 
entrtngtn  attlje  fifl)-gatc,  anb  compaf 

Xt  3  feb 


'Dtuc.u. 
11.  1. king. 

9.  v2.chro. 
6.6.  aid  j. 
16. 


*P61.I3! 

4- 


.Sam. 7. 


fHel.yrhicb 

wercth; 
\OT:ch*inu. 


3-2 


Manafleh  dicth.         I  I.Chron. 


lofiahszeale. 


Or,  ihl 

tcvtr. 


\\Or,H°[ai. 


•j.  Kir..  2 1 
IJ.&C. 


phed  trrf- 

rJT>- 


fcDaboat||£Dpt)cl,  anttraifcDUtopatoc* 
ry  great  height,  ana  put  taptaines  of 
tbatr e  in  all  the  fencct)  cities  of  3luDal). 

15  ano  bee  toofee  albay  the  ttcange 
gotts  ant)  the  ibol  out  oftlje  boufe  of  the 
H  ©  is  ©,  ano  all  tljc  altars  tjjat  l)e  Dao 
built  in  the  mount  of  the  boufe  of  the 
fL©  is©  ,  anD  in  3Jcrufalcm ,  ano  tail 
them  outof  the  cute. 

i6  ant>  beerepaireb  tbealtar  oftbc 
Hsdib©,  ant)  fatnfiteo  thereon  peace 
offcrutgs ,  ano  ttjanue  offerings,  anb 
toniinaunoeu  3wt)ab  to  ferue  the 
3L©is©(5ot)of3Jfcael. 

17  il5eucrtbclcflc,tbepeopIebtbfas 
trifite  fttllin  the  high  plates ,  >■«  tonto 
the  %  0  is  ©  their  00D  only. 

is  C  iftotDe  the  reft  of  the  attcs  of 
^anaflci),  f  hts  pzaycr  nntobts©oo, 
anu  the  *bo?us  of  the  iters  that  fpafte  to 
liim  in  the  name  of  the  %  ©  «  ©  C5oD  of 
3tt"racl,  bcbolt) ,  they  are  written  mtbe 
boofte  of  the  lungs  of  3fraet : 

19  l?is  pjaycr  alfo  ,ano  bo  lb  God  ibas 
tntceateoofbim,  anoallbtsGnnc,  ano 
bis  trcfpafle,anD  the  places  Ibberetn  be 
built  high  places , ano  fet  Up  gr  oucs  an  b 
grauen  images  befojebee  Ibas  rjunu 
blet) :  bebolo,  they  areu«itien  among 
tlje  fayings  of  II  ttje  5>cers. 

20  £5)0  ^anaucbflcptlbttbbis 
fathers ,  anb  they  buncb  bun  in  tjis 
olbncboiuc :  anb^mon  ftlsfonneretg- 
neoinrjisftcatj. 

21  C*^montbastVboanbtIbtntie 
yeercsolb ,  Ibbenbebeganncto  reigne, 
ano  reigneft  ttbo  ycarcs  in  Jerufalem. 

22  2Sutbcbit)tl)atn)l)ttt3waseuillin 
ttje  Ggfjt  of  toe  iL©iB©,  astnt)  Q9as 
naflcb  bis  father :  to?  3lmon  facrificco 
unto  alitbc  tarucb  imagcs,tt)btcb  ©a? 
naflcb  l)is  father  hao  matjc,  ano  fcruco 
tljem 

2 j  3ln&  bumbleo  not  bimfclfe  before 
the  %  £>  is  © ,  as  ©anaffeb  hts  father 
haDbumblcohimfclfertutamoiittrefc 
paffcti  11102c  anb  1110  :r. 

24  3lnD  hts  fcruants  tonfpireD  a? 
gatnft  him ,  ano  fletb  htm  m  his  clone 
boufe. 

25  C25uttbepcoplcofthclant)flctb 
all  them  that  hao  confptrco  agauift 
tung^mon,  ant)  the  people  of  the  lanD 
mabe  3Jofiab  his  fonnc,  lung  m  his 
Ocab. 

CHAP.    XXXIIII. 

1    Iofiah  his  good  reigne.    3    He  deifroyeth  I- 
doiatry.   8   Hee  taketh  order  tor  the  repaire 


of  the  Temple.  1 4  Hilkiah  ruuing  found 
a  booke  of  the  Law,Iofuh  fendeth  to  Huldah 
toincjuireottheLord.  13  Huldah  prophe- 
cieth  deftru&ion  of  Ierufalem,but  re/pit  tncr- 
ofinlofiahstime.  2,9  I  ufiahcautlngir.ro  be 
read  in  a  folemne  aiTembly ,  reneweth  the 
couenant  with  God. 

*jDGab  was  eight  yeetcs 
olb  Ibhen  hex  begaraie  to 
reigne,  ano  be  reigncbtn 
IJcrufaiem  one  ano  thirty 
yeeres. 

2  ^nb  he  bib  that  ibhith  w«  right  in 
the  fight  of  the  %  o  is  ©,  anb  ttaiucD  in 
tljciuaycsof  2>auit)  hts  father,  anDDc; 
clmcb  nether  to  ttjc  right  hanti  no<i  to  the 
Uft. 

J  C3Fo;i  in  the  nght  yeare  of  his 
rctgne,tt>btlcben>asyct  young,  hee  be- 
gannc  to  fecfecafttrthc  Oot)  ofiDauiD 
his  father :  anbtnthcttbtlfth  vecrchce 
beganne  to  * purge'JuDab  anb  ^crufa; 
lem  from  the  high  platts  anu  the 
groues,ant>  the  tarueD  images,anu  the 
molten  tmages. 

+  *  3Cnt)  they  twattc  tiottne  the  ai« 
tars  of  26aaiim  m  htspjefentcant)  ||  the 
images  that  tbere  on  high  abouethem, 
hetutboibne,  anothegroues,  anothe 
tarueo  tmages,  anDtbemoltenimagcs 
hebwue  m  pcetes,  ant>  mabe  tiuft  of 
them,anD  ftromeb  it  bpon  the  t  graues  of 
them,thathat)  facnateb  bnto  them. 

5  3Wb  hee  burnt  the  bones  of  the 
pztcftstopon  their  altars,  anbtlcanfco 
"Juoahanbjlerufaiem. 

6  Znn  (o  d.d  he  m  the  cities  of  $to 
nafleh,  ant)  €ph?aim ,  ant)  Simeon, 
euen  hnto  /I5aphtali ,  ibith  their  ||  mat- 
tocBes,romtt>  about. 

7  ^uiDtbhenhchabbwfeenboujne 
the  altars  ano  the  groucs,  anb  hao  bea- 
ten the  grauen  tmages  t  mto  pouocr, 
anb  tut  DoiPnc  all  the  tbolcs  tlwougfr 
outauthelanbof3Jfracl,  hcercturnct) 
tollcrufalem. 

3  C  iI5oU)  in  the  eighteenth  yecrc  of 
his  reigne,  Ibhen  hee  hao  purgeD  the 
lanb ,  anu  the  houfc ■,  ftefrnt&baphan 
thefonne  of  ^aliah ,  anb  fi^aauah  the 
goucrnour  of  the  erne,  ano  Joah  the 
fonne  of  3?oaha5  the  rctojocr ,  to  re* 
paire  the  houfc  of  the  H© is©  his 
©ob. 

9  Tinn  HJben  they  tame  to  tytltnab 
the  high  p2tcft ,  they  beltucrcb  the  mo- 
ney tljat  luas  brought  into  the  houfc  of 
(Sot) ,  Ibbtth  the  flcuttcs  that  kept  the 

tJOOJCS, 


J.  Kin.il 

:.fcc. 


'  1  .Kin. 
Ij.J. 


'  Lcuit.  zS 
\\Or,/m. 


tbegraxct. 


I  Or,makUi 


f  Htb.  to 
makfpOH- 


The  Law  found.    Chap.xxxnij.  Huldahs  propheiie 


\\Orytoraf 
ter. 


*2.Kings 

22.8.&C. 

\Htb.by 
the  hand  of 


\Reb.totke 

hand  of, 
\  Heb.pow- 
red«ut,or 
vtted. 


\Heb.wu. 


\\OrtAch- 
bor^l. kings 


Doozes,  hao  gathcrcD  of  the  haiiD  of 
«39ana£fch,  ano  €ph2avm ,  anD  of  all  the 
remnant  of  3iftael,  anD  of  aii3!uoah, 
ano  zscniamtn ,  ano  they  rcturneo  to 
3icrufaiem. 

io  anD  they  put  un  the  hanD  of  the 
U)02Remcn  that  hao  the  ouctfight  ofthc 
houfc  of  the  %  ©  is  »,  ano  they  gauc  it 
to  the  \b02Kemen  that  nuonght  in  the 
houfc  of  the  IL  o  is  © ,  to  repatrc  anD 
menD  the  houfc. 

ii  Cuento  the  artificers  anD  builoers 
gauc  they  it,  to  buyheibcn  ftone,  ano 
timber  ftn  couplings,  anD  !!to  flooze  the 
houfcs,tbhtch  the  Kings  of  3iuDah  haD 
DcftroycD. 

u  ^nDtlicmenDiDthclbozbcfaith^ 
fully,  anD  the  ouerfcers  of  them  were 
3Jabath,anD^DbaDiah,thc|Lcuites,of 
the  fonncs  of  #cran,  ano  £>cchanah, 
auDQWhuuam,  ofthc  founts  ofthc 
Bohathitcs,  to  fet  it  fonuaco :  anD  o- 
rher  of  the  Hciutrs,  all  that  coulD  f  Rill 
of  mftrunicntsof  muficRc. 

ij  atfo  they  were  oucr  the  bearers  of 
buroens,  ano  were  ouctfeers  of  all  that 
ibzought  the  rbozRe  m  any  manner  of 

fcrUlCC :  ailD  Of  the  HCUlteS  there  were 

Scribes,  anD  officers,  anD  posters. 

14  <[  anD  ibhcn  they  b:ought  out 
the  money  that  Ibas  bionghtmto  the 
houfc  of  the  ?L©irid  ,  l^iiRiah  the  pneft 
*  founo  a  boohc  of  the  latbc  of  the 
%0  is  ©,t?uen  t  by  QDofcs. 

15  anb  J?ilRtah  anfrocrcD  anD  faibc 
to  ««>haphanthc  fenbe:  3  haue  fonnD 
the  boost  of  thelaib  m  the  houfc  of  the 
?LoiR3D.  anD  $tlktah  DelmcrcD  the 
booReto&haphan: 

16  ano  £>haphan  cartcD  the  booRe 
to  the  King,  anD  brought  ttic  lung  Ib020 
bacRcagame,faymg,ailthatibasconv 
nuttcD  t  to  thy  fcruants,  they  doc  it. 

17  anD  they  haue  t  gathcrcD  toge; 
thcr  the  money  that  mas  founD  in  the 
houfc  of  thcIL  0  is  ©,  anD  haue  Deling 
reD  it  into  the  hanD  of  the  ouerfcers, 
anD  to  the  hanD  of  the  \P02Bcmcn. 

is  Xrjen  £>haphan  the  fertbe  tolDe 
thcRrng,faynig,MRiahthep2icfthath 
gntcntncabooRe.  anD  ShaphanrcaD 
tit  before  the  Bing. 

19  anD  it  tame  to  pafTc  tbhen  the 
RinghaD  hearD  the  tborts  of  the  lauw, 
that  he  rent  his  clothes. 
'  zo  anD  the  Ring  commanDcD  tyilkv 
ah ,  anD  ahtRam  the  fonnc  of  £>ha- 
phan,ano  labDon  the  fount  of  £0tcah, 
anD  £>haphan  thefceibe,  anoafaiaha 


fcruant  of  the  Kings,  faying, 

21  C5oc,  enquire  of  the  %$>  is  ©fo2 
rac,  anD  £02  them  that  arc  left  in  ^fraei 
anoingiuDah,  concerning  the  ibojoes 
of  the  booRe  that  is  founD :  fo:  great  is 
theuuath  of  the  %  0  is  id  that  is  poib 
rcD  out  bponbs,  becaufc  our  fathers 
liauc  not  Kept  the  tbo2D  of  the  Ho  is  ©, 
to  Doc  after  an  that  is  nmttcn  ut  this 
booRe. 

22  anD  JjiiRiah  anb  they  that  the 
King  haD  ^pointed  ibentto  $ulDah  the 
P2ophettffc,  thcibifc  of  Shaiium  the 
fonnc  of  XiRuath ,  the  fonnc  of  IS  $a£ 
rah,  Keeper  of  the  tmarD20bt  (novo  (he 
Dibclt  m  %rufatcm  m  the  !|collcDge,) 
anD  they  fpaRc  to  her  to  that  effca. 

23  C  anDfycaiunjcreDthcntXhris 
faiththc1i,ois©(5oDof3lfracl:  Xcll 
yctheman  thatfeut  youto  me, 

24  1Er)usfaitl)thclL©is©,beholD, 
3  ibtll  bzmg  euill  bpon  this  place,  anD 
Dpon  the  inhabitants  thereof,  euen  all 
the  curfes  thatarc  ibzittcn  m  the  booKe 
ibhich  they  haue  reaD  before  the  King  of 
■Juoah: 

2$  25ecaufc  they  haucfo2fahen  mcc, 
anD  haue  burneb  mcenfe  bnto  other 
goDS,  that  they  might  pjouoRc  nice  to 
anger  itnth  an  the  Vbo;Kcs  of  their 
hanos,  therefore  my  ibjath  lhaii  bec 
potbzeD  out  bpon  this  place,  ano  (hall 
notbequtnchcD. 

16  3nD  as  foi  the  King  ofjuoah, 
tbho  Cent  you  to  enquire  of  the  H©ib£\ 
fo  that  ye  fay  bnto  him:  Xhus  faith  the 

%  ©  K©  ©OD  Of  ^ifraCl,  concerning  t^C 

tb02Dsibhtch  thou  haft  hearD : 

17  2SceaufethinchcartbjastenDer, 
anD  thou  DiDft  humble  thy  fetfe  befiw 
<5oD, tbhen  thou  hearbeft  his  Xborns 
agamft  tliis  place,  anD  agatnft  the  inha- 
bitants thcrcof^nD  humblebft  thy  fctfe 
befo2emc,anDDtDDeft  rcnD  thy  clothes, 
anD  tbeepe  bcfo2c  me ,  3J  haue  cum 
hearD  thee  alfo ,  faith  the  %  <£>  m  ©. 

25  BcholD,^  iDill  gather  thee  to  thy 
fathero,anDtl)oua)ait  bee  gathercDto 
thy  grauc  m peace ,  neither  fhali  thmc 
eyes  fee  all  the  euill  that  3  tbill  bang 
bpon  this  place,  anD  hponthe  mhabi- 
tants  of  the  fame.  $>o  they  brought  the 
Ktngi\)02bagatnc. 

29  <E  *  3Chen  the  King  fent,  anb  ga- 
thcreD  together  ail  the  ctbers  of  Jin 
DahanD3Jcrufaicm. 

30  anb  the  Rutg  lbtnt  bp  into  the 
houfc  of  the  %  ©  is  e\  anb  all  tlic  men 
of  3JuDah,  ano  the  inhabitants  of  3t 

rnfaiem, 


2  J.I  4. 

tHrtg*- 

mtnit. 

\\Or,,nthe 

fchmlfy  or  in 

thfjecend 

p-vr. 


.mgs 


32  2 


Iofiahkeepeth 


Il.Ch 


ron. 


thePaflcouer. 


f  Heb.from 
great  en  en 
(mail. 


\  Heb.ftwl 


f Heb.from 
after. 


*  2. King. 
23.11,21. 


*Exo.ii.'S. 


"i.Chron. 

9. 10. and 

chap.ij, 

14  *  ^  ,uid 

26. 

*  i.Chron. 

8.14- 

\Heb.th* 

hotter  uf the 
fathers. 

■  ■ 
forma  ■'  ."'.< 
people. 


rufalcm,  anb  the  pzyrds  ano  the  He 
uitcs,  anb  all  the  people  »  great  anb 
fmall :  atiD  Ik  teat)  m  riKir  cares  all  the 
mo.'Ds  of  theboofec  of  the  couenant, 
tliat  lnas  founb  m  the  houfc  of  tt.K 

31  3lnb  the  l&ng  Boob  in  his  place, 
j  mabc  a  Couenant  bcfo:c  tt)e  fL©  is  w, 
to  tbame  after  the  %  ©  a  s>,anb  to  Keep 
his  Commanbcments,  anbhis  Xclfc 
monies,  anb  his  Statutes;,  tbith  all  hts 
Heart,  rjiMhailhisfoule,  topcrfbzme 
the  ibozbs  of  the  Couenant  rbhich  are 
Untttcntntnisboofcc. 

3 1  3lnb  he  taufeB  all  that  iber  e  t  pze* 
fent  tn^Jcrufaicm  ano  28eniamin,  to 
ftanb  to  k.  3inb  the  inhabitants  of  3Je* 
rufaietn  bio  accozbmg  to  tJ)c  couenant 
of  (5ob,thc  (5ob  of  thctt  fathers. 

33  anb^Joftah  toofceatbay  ail  the 
abominations  out  of  all  thctountteys 
tt)at  pertcined  to  the  chtlbzen  of^Jfracl, 
anbmabe  ailthatujerepzefrntmgjfra' 
el  to  ferue ,  euen  to  ferue  the  fL©is© 
their  (50b.  And  ail  his  bayes  tljcv  be* 
partcbnottfromfolott>uigthe?U>iBjD 
the  (5ob  of  their  fathers. 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

1  Iofiah  keepeth  a  moft  folemnePaffeouer.  20 
Hee  prouoking  Pharaoh  Ncchoh ,  is  flaine  ac 
Megiddo.  15  Lamentations  tor  Iofiah. 

^aj^Ojeouer  *  3Jofiali  feept  a 

•*  Hi  it>affcoucrtontop?L©i3© 

m  3Jcrutaicm :  anb  they 

Uillco  tl)e  ^affeouet  on 

thefourtecnth*da>ofthc 

'arftmoneth. 

1  3lnb  hec  fet  the  incites  m  their 

charges ,  ano  cntourageb  them  to  ttje 

feruicc  of  the  houfc  of  the  %  €>  is  ©, 

3  3ltto  faib  into  toe  fLcuttcs,  tl)at 
taiigltt  all  3Jfrael,ttihich  mere  holy  ton* 
to  the  ?L©ir©,  #ut  the  holy  SJrttc m 
the  houfc,U>hich  Solomon  the  fonne  of 
3>aiub  lung  of  "Jfracl  bibbiulb;  mh 
not  be  a  burben  bpon  yout  flioulbcrs: 
ferue  noUithclLois  w>  your  ©ob, anb 
hispcopie  3frael. 
-  4  3lnbpzcpareyourfJucsbvthchoU' 
fes  of  your  fathers,  after  yourtourfes, 
accozbmg  to  the  'mzttutg  of  SDattto  King 
of  gifracl ,  anb  accozbmg  to  the  *  ton- 
nng  of  Solomon  his  fonne, 

5   3lnb  ftanb  m  the  holy  plate  acco p 
bmg  to  the  bmifions  of  the  t  families  of 
the  fathers  of your  tbzethzen  the  peo 
pie,  anb  after  the  buufion  of  the  fanu- 
liesoftheSLeuitcs, 


6  Sotoiithei&afleouer.anbfanttp 
fit  your  felues,  anb  pzeparc  your  toe 
thzen,that  they  may  boc  accozbmg  to  the 
lpozb  ofthcfL©i3£>,  bythehanbof 
G&ohs. 

7  3nb  gjofiah  tgaue  to  the  people, 
of  the  florae,  lambcs  anb  wbbes,  all  foj 
the  f^aflcouer- offerings,  foz  all  that 
mere  pzefent ,  to  the  number  of  thirtte 
thoufano,anb  thzec  thoufanb  bullocfes: 
tijefe  were  of  the  Kings  fubftancc. 

8  ^nbhis0?ituestgauetbillmgly 
bnto  the  people,  to  thep>ziefts  anb  to 
thermites :  $iuuah,anb  zathanah, 
anb^lchiel,  rulers  of  thehoufeof  (5ob, 
gauc  bnto  the  0iicfts  fo:  thc^affcoucr- 
orTenngs,  tlbo  thoufanb  anb  Grehun-- 
bjcb  finaii  catteii,  anb  t\)itc  hunb?eb  orcn. 

9  Conanuih  aifo ,  anb  Shcmaiah, 
anb  iBcthanecl ,  his  bjethzen,  s^ama* 
btah ,  anb3lchtel,anb3Jofhababchtefc 
of  thelLcuitcg,  t  gauebnto  the  fLcuttcs 
foz  ^affeouer-  offerings,  Bue  thoufanb 
fmaii  c.ute!i,anbfiuchunb?eborcn. 

10  So  thefcrutee ibas piepareb, anb 
the  0ne(ls  ftoob  in  their  place ,  anb  the 
ILeuitcs  m  their  tourfes,  accozbmgto 
the  Rings  commanbement. 

11  2nbthcyBillcbfl)e$au"eoucr,anb 
the  ^zicftes  fpnncftleb  the  blood  from 
their  hanbes,  anbthclUuitcs  *flayeb 

them. 

ii  ^nb  they  remooueb  the  burnt  t& 
ferings,  that  they  might  giue  aeeozbmg 
to  the  buutions  of  the  families;  of  the 
people,  to  offer  Unto  the  %o  k  ©,  as 
it  ts  Vbnttcn  in  the  boose  of  fl0ofcs :  anb 
fo  did  they  ui«h  the  oren. 

13  3nb  they  *  rofteb  the  ^affcoucr 
lhith  fire,  accozbing  to  the  ozbinauce: 
but  the  other  holy  offerings  fob  they  in 
pots,  anb  tncanlb? otts,  anb  in  pannes, 
anb  t  biuibcb  them  fpecbily  among  all 
the  people. 

1+  3lno  aftetmarb  theymabereaby 
foz  themfclues,anbfoz  thc£zie{ts:bcr 
taufe  the  ^zicfts  tljc  fonncs  of  ^aron 
were  bulled  in  offringof  burntoffritigs, 
ano  the  fat  tmnil  night :  thcrefbzc  the 
ILcuitcs  pzepareb  foz  thcmfclues,  anb 
foz  thcjDzicfts  the  fonncs  of  ^aron. 

15  Staothc  fingers;  tljc  fonncs  of  ^ 
faph,  were  m  their  t  plate  accozbing  to 
the  *  commanbement  of  Dautb,  anb  ^ 
faph ,  anb  i)cman ,  anb  "Jebuthun  the 
6mgs  Seer :  anb  the  |2>ozters  *  waited  at 
eucry  gate  :tl)cy  might  notbepartfrom 
their  fenuce,  foz  their  bzcthznithellLe^ 
uttcs  pzepareb  foz  them. 

16    SO 


\m.°frti 


\Hcb.ofreJ. 


iHtli.cjfrtd. 


"  Sec  Chap. 


"E»od.  1  j. 
8,9. 


\Heb.mMt 
them  Ttcnne. 


\U<kj}.ttim 

*  i.Chron. 

*  I.  Chron. 
^.17.  and 
ifi.14. 


Iofiahflaine.  Chap.xxxvj.        lehoahazking. 


f  Hckfomd. 


I.King. 
•-..zg. 
$  Hlb.houfc 


\Bebr.lht 
hoitfecfmy 


]  Hebrjnad? 

/&{.<■■ 


tkefepitl- 
chres. 
*Zach.i:. 
II. 


16  S>oautl)effru!ctoftl)c|lfl>s© 
tbas  pjcparco  ti)t  fame  Dap,  to  Rcepe 
thepafTeoucr,  anD  to  offer  burnt  offe- 
rings bpon  the  altar  of  the  ?L©isjd, 
aecotfmtg  to  the  commaunDcmcnt  of 
taiig3foRal). 

17  3nDthc  chittuen  ofDfracl  that 
tbcre  t  pjcfrnt ,  fecpt  the  toatfroucr  at 
that  time,  ano  the  fcaft  of  PnlcaucneD 
bKaDfcuenDapcs. 

18  :SnDtherelPasnD£affcotterHRr 
to  that,  feeptm  ^jfrael, from ttic  capes 
of  Samuel  the  friophct :  nattier  Did 
all  the  l&ngs  of  jlfraci  ncepc  fuel)  a 
0au"couer ,  as  'Jouah  Rept ,  ano  trie 
&ue8sanD  the  fUuttcs,anD  all  3luiah 
anD  3Teaci  that  iPcrc  pjefent ,  ano  ttjc 
inhabitants  of^crufaiem. 

19  3n  rtie  eighteenth  peerc  of  the 
reigncof  3ofial) ,  lbasthispaireoucr 
Kept. 

io  C*3Cftcrailtl)is,ibf)cn35onaD 
hab  pjcparcD  the  t  Xemplc ,  Mn\)o 
feing  of  egppt  came  Pp  to  fight  agamft 
Carchenua)  bp  euphjatcs :  anD  3& 
Gal)  rbent  out  agamft  him. 

ii  25ut  hce  fent  CmbafTaDours  to 
hmt,faping,  ttDhat  hauc  3J  toboettnfh 
thee, thou  Ring  of  5ubah'  i  come  not  & 
gamfr  thee  this  Dap ,  but  agamft  toe 
houfc ,  t  ibhcrciPith  31  hauc  tParrc :  foz 
OoDtommaunDcDmcctomaRchaur: 
ftwbearc  thee  from  mcdiing  ipith  <sod, 
Sbho  ulPtth  mce,  that  hec  beftropthec 
not. 

n  jScuertoeicffc  3fofiah  VbotilD  not 
turnchisfacefrom  rjuu ,  butDifsiufcD 
ijimfclfc  that  lie  might  fight  lbifh  h"n, 
anD  hearRcncDnor  Pnto  theibojDcsof 
jfiecho  from  the  mouth  of  C5od  ,  anD 
tame  to  fightm  the  toalicp  of ^cgiDDo. 

13  3nD  the  archers  fbot  at  Ring  31o- 
fiah :  anD  the  l&tng  faibc  to  his  fer- 
uants ,  $aue  met  aibap,  foz  3J  am  tfo?c 
TPounDCD. 

i4.T?tsfcrnantsfhcrcfojctooRchfm 
out  of  that  d;ar  et,  anD  put  him  m  the  ft- 
conD  charct  that  hec  had  :  ano  thep 
bzought  him  to  3Jerufatcm  ,  anD  hec 
DieD,anD  ibas  bunco  ||tnoneofthe  <§>c; 
pulch:esofhisfathcrs.^nD*all3}uDah 
anD3lcriu"alcmniourneDfo2'Jofiah. 

15  C  3lnD  Jeremiah  lamentcD  foj 
Joftah,anDaUthcftngmgmcnanDthe 
fiitgmgtbomenfpafee  ofjofiah  in  their 
lamentations  to  this  Dap ,  anD  niauc 
them  an  02Dinaneem3Jfracl.  anD  bc= 
holDe,  thep  arc  iPnttcn  in tftcfLamat'- 
tations. 


i6  i5orb  the  reft  of  the  acts  of  3Jo 
uah.anDhistgooDncsaccojDingtothat 
lPhtch  was  lpztttcn  in  the  JLaxo  of  the 

7 1  3triDl)is  DeeDes  firft  ano  lalt  ■■  be- 
holD^ep-'^ibntten  m  the  boose  of  ttjc 
Rings  of  3Jfraei  anD  Juoah. 

CHAP.   XXXVI. 

Iehoahaz  fucceeding.is  depofed  by  Pharaoh, 
and  caried  into  Egypt.  ^  lehoiakimraigninc 
ill,iscaried  bound  into  Babylon,  jleboiachin 
/uccetdmg  reigneth  ill,and  is  brought  intoBa- 
bylon.  n  Zedekiahfucceeding  reigneth  ill, 
and  deipifeth  the  Prophets ,  and  rebtllech  a- 
gainft  Nebuchadnezzar.  14  lerufalem  for 
the  finncs  of  the  Priefts  and  people,  is  whole- 
ly  deftroyed.  11  The  proclamation  o!  Cyrus. 

the  people  of  the 
zB£S  lanDtoohc  giehoaha^  the 
<gm  fon  of  3Jo0al) ,  anD  maoc 

^K 1)llu  ^m3  m  ^  Others 

^SflcaDin3}erufalcm. 

1  Jjchoaha*  was  ttbentic  anD  thzec 

pcercs  olD ,  ibhcu  hec  began  to  rcignr, 

anD  heercigncD  th?ec  moncths  m  3lc 

rufalem. 

3  3nDtheRtngofegppttputhim 
Doibueat3lcrufalcm,anDtcouDcmneD 
thcianb  manhunD?eD  talents  of  filucr, 
anD  a  talent  of  golD. 

4  3ttDthclungofegpptmaDc€iia' 
funi  his  toother ,  Rmgouer  3JuDaIj  anD 
3Jcrufalcm ,  anD  turncD  his  name  to 
5ehotafeun.  ^nb  jftccho  tooRr  5Jehoa^ 
0a;  his  bzother ,  anD  cartcD  him  to  €; 
gppt. 

5  C^choiamm  was  tvbentu  ant»  fiue 
peres  olD  ibhcnhcbrgantorcigncauD 
he  ccigncD  etcuen  pcercs  in  3Jcrufalcm: 
ano  hec  did  that  ibhith  was  euill  m  the 
fightofthclioisiD  hisoob. 

6  Stgamft  hun  cainc  Pp  i^cbuchab- 
ne;;ar  Bmg  of  25abplon ,  anD  bounU 
him  m  I  Ifrttcrs  to  carp  him  to  2Sabplon. 

7  *  /I5cbuchaDite;;araifo  cartcD  of 
the  PcrTcls  of  the  twifc  of  thelitis© 
to  25abplon,anD  put  them  in  his  temple 
at26abplon. 

8  i2oU)fhcrcttoffhcactsof3Icho 
lattim,  anD  his  abominations  iPhich  he 
did,  anD  that  ibhtch  was  founo  mhim, 
bchotb,thcparciP?ttttnmthcbooticof 
thcBingsof  gifracl  anb  3Juoah :  anD 
II  3Jel)otarhm  his  fonnc  rcigncD  mljis 
ftcao. 

9  C  *1Jchoiachm  was  eicjht  pcercs 
olDttJljcnhcc  beganto  rctguc,  ano  hec 

rngncD 


\Hcbritni- 


■J.King 


t  Hih  rt- 
mc-cKtoihtT. 
t  HcbrjwU- 
tied. 


\Ortchain> 

'i.King. 
34.1 5.  dan. 
1.1,1. 


\\OrJud- 
»uh,l.cIiro. 

-.t6.crICc~ 
r^tb,irr.22. 

■4- 

''•King. 

-.4-8. 


Ifracl 


cane< 


Il.Ch 


ron. 


intoca 


ptiuitie. 


\Hcb.«t 

the  return 

of  the  yeere. 

\Heb.ve[- 

fets  ofdefire. 

'  {Or,  Mat 

tantalt^j^in. 

24.17.1rr. 

37.1. 

•Ier.jl.I, 

bo. king 

14.18, 


•fcr.jj.3. 

«nd  3  J.  If. 

\Heb.bjthe 
hand  of  hU 
teffrngers. 
II  •/>««. 
conltrmaUl 
andcarefulbi 


t  ffii.  hea- 
Imr. 

a.Kmgs 
Jj.irftc. 


mgtteb  ttuce  moneths  anb  ten  Daves 
m3Jcrufaicm,  ano  hee  did  tftatiDtjirt) 
was  emu  in  the  fight  of  the  It  ©  a  ©. 

10  ana  t  «)i)cn  the  pcerc  ibas  cjrpfc 
reb,  Bins  J3ebuebabnc53ar  fent,  anls 
brought  Dun  to  HSabplon ,  tbitft  the 
t  gooblp  bcflcls  of  the  houfe  of  the 
HoajD,  anb  maoe  ||  zcbc&tah  Dts 
brother,  King  oucr  3iubah  anb  3Jetu 
latent* 

11  C*ZcbcRtahwasoueanotrbentic 
petesoIb,ibhcnhc  began  to  rcignc,anb 
rcfgncb  clcuen  peer  cs  in  3  erufaictu. 

12  anb  Ijce  bib  that  ibhieh  was  cuill 
in  the  fight  of  the  ?U»3©hts<!5ob,  and 
huntolcb  not  htmfrtte  before  3iercnuah 
the  prophet,  (peaking  from  the  mouth 
of  toe  !L  die  p. 

13  anb  he  alfo  rcbcllcb  agatntTmng 
jftebuehabncttat,  iDljo  habmabchtm 
froeare  bp  00b :  but  he  ftiffcncb  his 
uccrc,  anb  harbeneb  his  Heart  from 
turning  tonto  the  fl  st>  ik  ©  C5ob  of  3ft 
tael. 

14  C^orcouetailthechicfeofthc 
priefts,anothepcoplctcanfgrtu'ebberp 
mucli,  after  all  the  abominations  of  the 
heathen,  anb  pollntcbthe  rjoufc  of  the 
!L  j©  a  ©  which  Dec  hab  hailouxb  in 
Jcrufaiem. 

15  *anbthe  fL©fi©<5obofthett 
fathers  fent  to  them  t  op  his  mctTcn; 
ejers,  ruing  bpllbettmcs,  anbftnbing: 
betaufe  he  hab  eonipaulcn  on  hts  peo- 
ple,anb  on  htsbibclitngpiacc: 

16  zsut  thep  mocftcb  the  mctlengers 
of  <5ob,  anb  bcfpifcb  his  tborbes,  anb 
mtfufebhtsprophcts,  bntill  the  tbratt) 
of  the  !L€>iK©arofcagauu3htspcoplc, 
till  there  tbas  no  t remcbic. 

17  *  lEhcrefbrc  hec  brought  bpon 
them  the  King  of  the  Caibces,  lbho 


flett)  their  pong  men  Uilth  theftuorb.tn 
the  houfe  of  their  fanetuarie,  anb  hab 
no  companion  bpon  pong  man  or  mat 
ben, olbeman,  0:  htm  that  frcupco  for 
age :  he  gaue  them  all  mto  his  han  0. 

is  anb  all  the  beffcls  of  the  houfe  of 
<5ob  great  anb  fmall,  anb  the  treafurcs 
of  the  houfe  of  the  ?Lois©,  anb  the 
treafurcs  of  the  mug,  anb  of  his  pun? 
tes :  all  dicie  ijc  brought  to  2Sabplon. 

19  3nb  thep  burnt  the  houfe  of  d5ob, 
anb  braftcboibnc  the  ttiall  of  ^enifa? 
tern ,  anb  burnt  all  the  palaces  thereof 
tttith  fire,  anb  beftropeb  all  thegoobip 
bctTcls  thereof. 

zo  ^nb  t  them  that  hab  cfcapcb  from 
the  froorb,  cancb  he  aibap  to  rsabplon : 
ibherc  thep  iberc  fcruants  to  him  anb 
his  fonncs,  bntil  the  teignc  of  the  lung 
borne  of  #erfia: 

21  Xo  fulfill  rljeiboib  of  the  1L©is5D 
bpthcmouthof  *3Jcrcmtah,  bntillthc 
lanb  *  hab  cniopeb  her  Sabbaths :  to 
as  long  as  thee  lap  bcfoiate,  (hec  ftept 
Sabbath,  to  Mill  thrccfcorc  anb  tennc 
pceres. 

22  C  *ii5olb  in  the  firQ  peer c  of  Cp 
ms  amg  of  ^crfia(thatthe  \b020  of  the 
H©miDfpoRenbpthcmouthof*3ferc' 
nuah ,  might  bee  accompltthco )  the 
fL2>ms>  thrrebbp  the  Ipirtt  of  Cpzus 
lung  of  $erGa,  that  hecmabe  aprocl& 
mation  throughout  all  his  Kmgbomc, 
anb  put  it  alfo  in  uniting,  taping, 

23  XhusfaithCprusinttgof  0crfia, 
ail  the  tungbomes  of  the  earth  hath 
the  %  &  is  ©  00b  of  heauen  giucn  mec, 
anb  he  hath  chargcb  me  to  builb  him  an 
honfem  3erafalmt,ibhtch  "  mlmbah: 
teho  is  there  among  pou  of  all  his  peo- 
ple? the  %  <d  ik  ©  hts  c5od  be  urnl)  hun, 
anbicthtmgocbp. 


fEZRA. 


tHekthe 
remainder 
from  the 
j&orj. 


Tcr.Jjp, 
ii.8Hj.io 
*  Leuic.  26. 
34  and  3  j. 
and43. 


*  Ezra  1. 1, 

*kr.2j. 
1 3. and  29. 
10. 


Ifracls  rcturne ,  Chap.j.ij. from  Babylon, 


•  E  Z  R  A. 


fed  a.  voice 
topajfe. 


*Ifa.44.*8. 


\HebMft 
hunvf. 


\\Thatuy 

bctyedthtm. 


CHAP.    I. 

The  Proclamation  of  Cyrus  for  the  building 
of  the  Temple.  5,  The  people  prouide  for 
the  returne.  7  Cyrus  reftoreth  the  vcffels 
of  tire  Temple  toShefhbazzar. 

*&3  £>  m  in  the  firft 

)PCCtC   of  Cp^us 

Bmg  of  $ert\a, 

j  (that  the  lbojb  of 

the  mouth  of  3Jc= 
1  rcnual),  might  be 


^fUlfillCb)j>?L0ISE> 

""  flirrcb  Dp  the  fpi- 
rttofCvJUS  King 
of$erua,thathctmabeapjoclamatton 
throughout  ailhisbmgbome,  anb  put  it 
attorn  lbntutg,  Capitis. 

z  Xhus  fapth  Cvjms  bing  of  $cr; 
fia,  SCtjc  %  ©  is  ©  <5ob  ofheaucn  hath 
gmen  mee  all  the  btnsbomts  of  tlje 
carth,aua  he  hath*  chargcb  nic  to  bmlb 
himanhoufcat3Jerufalem,ibhich » in 
3lubal). 

$  ©1)0  is  there  among  pou  of  all  his 
people j.  his  GobbcUnth  htm,  anb  let 
htmgoe  bp  to  ^fcrufalcm ,  ibhtch  is  m 
gjubai) ,  anb  bmlb  the  houfc  of  the 
HfiDisjD  ©ob  of  3ifracl  ($c  is  the  <5ob) 
ibhuh  is  UfJcruTalem. 

4  3nb  ibhofocuer  rematneth  m  a? 
np  plate  where  lice  fotouructh,  let  the 
men  of  his  plate  t  hclpc  him  lbu  h  flitter, 
anb  tbtth  sofbt,  anbrbithgooos,  anb 
ttjttl)  beads,  beftbcs  the  free -null  offc 
rtngfo?  thchoufcof  d?ob  thatts  m3Je- 
rufalein. 

5  C  Xhcn  rofc  bp  the  chtcfc  of  the 
fathers  of  3Jubah  anoBctuamtn,  anb 
tlje  v&ieQs .  anb  the  JLcttitcs ,  tbtth  all 
them  tbhofefpirit  ©obhab  taifcb  to  goe 
bp ,  to  bmlb  the  houfc  of  the  %  e>  m  ts> 

rbhichtsfn^Jcrafalem. 

6  ^nb  an  thev  that  were  about  them, 

llftrcngthenebthcu-hanbs  lbith  beffels 
of  filner  ,ibithgoibc,  ttuth  goobs.anb 
ibithbcafts,  anb  ibithPienous  things, 
bcfibts  all  that  ibas  ibillmglp  offcreb. 


7  C  3lfo  Cpnts  the  butg  brought 
foozth  the  beUcis  ofthe  houfe  of  the 
%  0  k  3D/rui)irtj  jBcbttchabne35ar  hab 
brought  foorth  outof  3Jcrufaicm,  anb 
hab  put  them  m  the  houfe  of  his  gobs : 

8  CucnthofcbibCvwsbingof^et' 
fiabrtngfoorth,  bpthe  hanBof^itiwe* 
bath  the  tccafurcr ,  anb  numbrcb  them 
bnto  *  ^>hed)ba55ar  the  f^mceof  3Jtt= 
bal> 

9  3tnb  this  is  the  number  oftheni : 
thitUe  tbargcrs  of  golbc,a  thoufanb 
chargers  of  filucr,  tune  anb  nbentte 
bnmes: 

10  Xbttticbauttsof golbc  :fiiuccba= 
fins  of  a  fctono  fozt ,  fourc  hunbjeb  anb 
ten :  and  other  beffels a  thoufanb. 

1 1  311  the  beffels  of  goibe  ano  of  (fc 
uer,  we  re  fittc  tbottlano  anb  foure  hun- 
Ditu.  311  thefe  Dib  5>hefl)ba35ar  bjuig 
bp  lbtth  *em  oft  the  tapttuitie,  that 
iberc  brought  bp  from  26abplonbnto 
3lcrufalcm. 

CHAP.   II. 

1  The  number  that  returne,  of  the  people,  36 
of  thePriefb,  40  ofthe  Lcuites,  43  of  the 
Nethimms,  55  of  Solomons  feruanti,  62.  of 
the  Prieffs  which  could  not  fhewe  their  pedr- 
.  ^ree.  64  The  whole  number  of  them,\\ith 
their  fubftance.   68  Their  oblations. 

*&$  £>lb  "thefe  are  the  thtimcn 
m  oftheprouinee,  thattbent 
bp  out  ofthe  capmutte,  of 
^^r  thofc  ibhtch  habbeencta^ 
Aftftft  rtcb  albap,  ibhom/3cbtv 
thabnt3?at  tlje  Butg  of  ssabylon  hab 
tarieb  aibap  bnto  26abylon,anb  came 
agatnc  bnto  3Jcnifelcm  anb  3fubah, 
cucrv  one  bnto  h'-sntic; 

z  w\)it\)  tame  lbtth  Zcrubbabcl, 
^cfljua,  /5chctiuah,  ||S>araiah,&ce 
latah,^ojbecat,25ilfl)an,  ^©ifpar,  m- 
guai3ehum,2i5aanah :  Xhc  number 
ofthe  men  ofthe  people  of  JJfrael. 

?  Xhecl)tlb)en  ofparo(h,nuo  tljou 
fatib,anhunb2cb  feitcnttc  anbtvbo. 

4  Xhc  thtib:ctt  of  dhephatial;, 
thttchuntyebfcuctmcanbnbo. 

5   Xhc 


'  2.  Kings 

24.1;. 

2.chr.3«7. 


'See  Chap. 
5'+- 


\Heh.the 

rriwjporta- 


'Nchem. 
r.6,8cc. 


Wh 


o  returnee 


E 


zra. 


fi 


romcapcmitie, 


*  Nchcm. 

7.10. 


\\0r,  BttWKt, 
r.ebem.-j. 


\\Or9Ha- 

ripb,rtchent, 

7-24- 


r^bem.'J.lK. 


Afmctueth. 
Ncht.j.xi. 


teever.j. 


5  Xhc  chtlbzen  of  3trah,feucn  htm* 
bzebjcucnticanbfiuc. 

6  Xhc  chilbzcn  of *0ahafh-  fl^oab, 
ofthcdnibzcnof3icChuajnd3Joab,tibo 
thotUanb,  eight  hunbzcb  anb  ttbcluc. 

7  Xhechilbzenofeiam.afhoufanb, 
tibo  hunbzcb  fiftie  ano  foute. 

8  Xhc  chtlbzen  of  zattu ,  nmc  hutv 
bzebfourtte  anb  fiue. 

9  Xhc  chtlbzen  of zaccat,feucn  Dim* 
bzebanbthzecftoze. 

10  Xhc  chtlbzen  of ||  asani ,  fire  bun* 
b2eb,fourttcanbtibo. 

11  Xhc  chilbzcn  of  2Sebai ,  Grcbun* 

DZCD.tttJttUtCanD  tbZCe. 

ii  Xbe  chtlbzen  of  Sfegab  ,  a  thou* 
fcmb,ttbo  htuibzcb.tibennc  anb  ttbo. 

13  Xhc  chtlbzen  of  3botUBam ,  fire 
bunbzcb,firtte  anb  fire. 

14  Xhc  chilbzcn  of  Biguai ,  tlbo 
thoufanb  fiftie  anb  fire. 

15  Xhc  chilbzcn  of  3btn,foure  bun* 
DiCD,&ftic  auo  foucc. 

i6  Xhc  chilbzcn  of  3tcr  of  J^etuab, 
ninette  anb  eight. 

17  Xbe  chilbzcn  of  25c3ai,tb2cebuns 
bzcbttbcntpanbtbzcc. 

is  Xbeebtlbzcnof|l3Jozab,anbwv 
bzeb  anb  ttticluc. 

19  Xbe  chilbzcn  of  ^afljum ,  tlbo 
hunbzcb  tibentic  ano  tbzee. 

20  Xbe  chtlbzen  of  l|<i5ibbar,nmcflc 
anb  fiue. 

21  Xhc  cbilbzen  of  Bethlehem ,  an 
bunbzcbttbctuteanb  tbzee. 

22  Xhc  cbtlbzcn  of^I5ctop!jaIj , fiftie 
ami  fur. 

zj  Xbe  men  of  3matbort),  an  bun* 
bzcbttbcntic anb  eight. 

24  Xbe  rf)UD2cti of  ||  3l3mauctb,foz* 
tteanbtibo. 

25  Xbe  chilbzcn  of  Birtatb  -  artm, 
Cbcpbirab ,  ano  26cerotb ,  fcucn  bun* 
bzcb,attbfournc  ano  tbzee. 

26  Xbe chtlbzen  of  £Umab  ano  d5a- 
ba,firebunbzeb,tujcnttcanb  one. 

27  Xl)emmoffi0irl)!nas,anl)uiv 
bzcb,tttocnttc  anb  ttbo. 

28  Xbe  men  of  Bethel  anb  3U,  ttbo 
bunbzcb,ttbcnttc  ano  tbzee. 

29  Xbccbtlbzen  of iSebo ,  fiftie  ano 
tlbo. 

jo  Xbe  chilbzcn  of  £0agbi(b ,  an 
hunbzcb  fiftie  anb  fire. 

31  Xbe  djilbzen  of  the  otbet*eiam, 
a  thoufanb ,  tlbo  hunbzcb ,  fiftie  anb 
fonre. 

32  Xbe  chtlbzen  of  $?anm,tb2ccbun* 
bztbanb  ttbenttc. 


33  XbccbtibzcnofJLobH^abib.anb 
jDno  ,f cum  hunbzcb  ,ttbcntic  anb  fiue. 

34  Xbe  chilbzcn  of  Jericho ,  tbzee 
hunbzcb  fourtic  anb  fiue. 

35  Xbe  cljiiDicn  of  5>cnaah ,  ti)?ec 
thoufanb  anb  fire  hunbzcb  anb  tbtrne. 

36  C  Xbe  pwtts.  Xbe  cbilbzen  of 
*  JcbataD,of  tDcljoufc  of  3Icflnia,  nmc 
btmbzcb,fcttcnne  anb  tbzee. 

37  Xbccbtlbzen  of'JmmcMtbou* 
fanb,fiftic  anb  tlbo. 

38  Xbe  chilbzcn  of*0afbur,  a  thou; 
fanb,t\bobunbzeb,foutticanbfcuen. 

39  Xhe  chtlbzen  of*  J^anm,  a  thou* 
fanbanbfeuentcenc. 

40  CXbclUmtcs.Xbc  cbilbzen  of 
Jicflnta,  anb  mabnucl,  of  the  chtlbzen 
of||l^obauia,fcucnticanb  foure. 

41  C  Xbe  fingers.  Xbe  cbilbzen  of 
3tapb,  an  hunbzcb  ttbenftcanb  eight. 

42  C  Xhc  cbilbzen  of  the  poztcrs. 
Xhc  chilbzcn  of  dljailum ,  tDc  cbilbzen 
of 3itcr,  the  ri)ilb2cn  of Xalmon, rijc 
clnitaen  of  3CUftub,  tHe  rtiilbien  of  $a& 
ta,  tl^e  tJnlbzcn  of  5>rjobat,  mail ,  an 
ljunbjeb  tht'r  ne  anb  nine. 

43  CXfjc  ^lctf)mims.  X!)c  tfttlbjcn 
of  ztVja ,  the  tluibitn  of  i?afupl)a,rt)c 
tljilbjen  of  Xabbaotl), 

44  Xncchilbjenof Bcros,  trjctljil- 
b:cn  of5>ial)a,thctl)ilb2cn  of  jDabon, 

45  Xhc  clnlbzen  of  Hcbanal) ,  flic 
clnibzcn  of  J^agabalj ,  tljc  cl)Ub:cnbf 
^Kbub, 

46  xhc  clnlbzen  of  $agab ,  ttje  crjil^ 
bzen  of  ||  ^>l)almai ,  the  chilbicn  of 
i^anan. 

47  Xhc  chiltycn  of  (3ibbcl ,  the 
chtib2cn  of  caljar ,  the  chiltycn  of  3Kc 
atah, 

48  Xhc  chtlbzen  of  Be^in,  the  thtl- 
bjen  of  ii^clioba ,  tl;c  chilbzcu  of  <5&y 
5am, 

49  Xhc  chilbmi  of  ttJi'ia ,  trjctfjil- 
b:cn  of  ir)afcah,thc  chtlbzen  of  Kcfat, 

50  Xhccliilbjm  of  afnah ,  thcfliil 
bzen  of  C0chmum ,  ttje  cljilbzai  of  &v 
phuflnm, 

51  Xljc  chtlbzen  of  asaabne  ,  the 
chtlbzen  of  i^auupha,  thcchtlbzm  of 
l)arhur, 

52  Xljc  clnlbzen  of  ||2ga3luth ,  the 
chtlbzen  of  £0chiba  ,  tljc  fljilbzcn  of 
Mtftja, 

53  XhcchtlbzenofzSarUos,thcthil 
bzen  of  £>tfcra ,  tljc  fljilbzcn  of  Xha- 
mat), 

54  Xhcchiibzcn  ofiI5c5tah  ,thc  rtjtl- 
bzcnof!i?atipha. 

s<;  CXhc 


\\Or,HuriJ> 
ai  1/  it  in 

fome  copies. 


"l.Chro. 
2+7- 

■i.Chro. 
14-14. 

'  1  Chro.?. 

"i-Chto. 
»4-8. 


\\OrJmU, 
chap .3.  g. 

called  ,i/y  0 
Hade:i.J,, 
rehcTK.!  43. 


||  Or^ham- 


\\Or, 
tub,i 


AV- 


Thcpcoplcs  zeale.      Chap.ii). 


TheAfcr. 


\\Or.Pmda, 
tr.Nchcm. 


m  NtheTj. 
•loth-9. 
21,17. 
I.chro.9.1 
*  1. King.  9. 


||  Or.fcde- 


V.Sam.17 
*7- 


\Hch.thty 
werepolluted 
from  the 
pnejthood. 
Or,  goner- 


*Exod.a8. 
30. 


*i.C]iron. 
26.20. 


55  CXhechUbjcn  of  Solomons  fet* 
uants.  Xhe  ehiUuen  of  Sotat,  the  chtfc 
bzen  of  £>ophcreth,the  chiibzen  of  ||#e* 
mba, 

56  Xhe  ehilbzen  of  3faaiah,  the  d)fl? 
bzcn  of  Datkoti,  the  ciiilDitn  of  <i5ibbcl, 

57  XheehilbjmofShcphattah,the 
chilbzcn  of  $attil,thc  chilbzcn  of  ^othc- 
reth  of  zebaini,  the  chilbzcn  of  ||  3imi. 

5S  blithe*  4i3cthintm3,anbthcchil' 
bjen  of  Solomons  feruants,were  tt^ct 
hunbzeb  nmetic  anb  tibo. 

59  SIM)  tOCfe  were  they  fl^Cl)  lbCtit  bp 

from  Xel  -  niclahXct  -  $arfa,ehcrtib, 
3bban,and3jmmcr:  but  they  coulb  not 
(hcibc  their  fathers  houfc,  anD  their 
il  fecb,  ibhethcr  they  were  of  3Jfracl. 

60  Xheri^lbzcnofDciasaluhcchil- 
b?en  of  Xobiah ,  the  chiibzcn  of  /i2efeo- 
oa :  fire  hunbzcb  fiftte  anb  ttbo. 
6i  c^nbofthcchiibzeiioffhepzietts: 
the  crjilbzcn  of  $abaiah,  the  ehilbzcn  of 
H05,  thcchilbzenof  26at5iliai,(  Which 
tooUcatbifcofthebanghtcrsof*26ar^ 
Mliai  the  (Mcabite,  anb  tbas  caileb  a£ 
ter  their  name.) 

6i  Xhcfc  fought  their  rcgiftcr  among 
thofe  that  lberc  recboncb  by  gcncaio- 
gic,  bat  tljcv  Iber c  not  founb :  ther efoje 
tberc  they  tas  polluteb ,  put  from  the 
pnefthoob. 

6j  3lnb  the  HXirfiiatha  faib  bnto 
them,  that  they  thoulb  not  catcofthe 
mofthoiy  thmgs,  till  there  ftoob  bp  a 
pnefi  tbith  *  33rtm  $  Unth  Xhnmmim. 

64.  C  Xhe  Whole  Congregation  to* 
gcthcr,lbasfourttc  anb  nbo  thoufanb, 
thzee  hunbzcb  and  thzcefcoze : 

65  26cfibe  their  feniants  anb  their 
maibs,oflbhom  there  Vberefcuenthou- 
fanb ,  thzee  hunbzcb  thirtie  anb  fcuen : 
anb  there  were  among  them  tibo  hun* 
b.iebrmgingmcn.anbfingingvbonien. 

66  Xhctrhozfcs  were  fcuen  humweb, 
tljirtic  anb  fire :  their  mules,  tlbo  hun 
bzcbfourticanbfnic: 

67  Xhcic  camels,  fotn*c  hunbzeb, 
thirty  anb  Sue :  their  atres,firc  tljoufanb, 
fcuen  hunbjeb  anb  tibenttc. 

68  C3lnb  feme  of  the  et)itfc  of thefa* 
thcrs,  ibhenthcy  tame  to  the  houfc  of 
the  %  €>  is  ©  Which  is  at  JJcrufaicm, of- 
fercb  freely  foz  the  houfc  of  <5ob,  tofet 
it  bp  in  his  plate: 

69  Xheygauc  after  their  abtlitic,bn 
to  the  *  treafurc  of  the  il)02hc,  tiizecfcojc 
anb  one  thoufanb  bzammes  of  golbe, 
anb  fine  thoufanb  pounb  of  filuer ,  anb 
one  hunbzeb  pzicfts  garments. 


70  do  the  pzicfis  anb  the  fLeuitcs, 
anb  fomc  of  the  people,anb  the  fingers, 
anb  the  pozters,  anb  the  jftethmims, 
bibeit  in  their  cities,  anb  all  3Jfracl  m 
their  cities. 

CHAP.   III. 

1  The  Altar  is  fervp.  4  OfTenngslrecjuented. 
7  Workmen  prepared.  S  The  foundations  of 
the  Temple  are  laid  in  great  ioy  &  mourning. 

0  2>  When  the  feuenth 
moncth  was  come ,  anb 
the  ehilbjcn  ofgjfrarl  were 
inthceitics:thcpcoplega* 
thercb  themfclucs  togc- 
ther,  as  one  man  to  JJerufalem. 

i  Xhcnftoobbp||3kflniathefonne 
offo5abaft,  shtsbzcthzcnthcpjicfls, 
anb*  zerubbabcithcfonne  of*£>hcal* 
ttel,  anb  his  bjcthzen,  anb  builbeb  the 
3Utar  of  the  d5ob  of  3fracl,  to  offer 
burnt  off  rings  thcreon,asit  is*  tbntten 
m  the  law  of  $$)ofcs  the  man  of  <5ob. 

3  ^nbthcyfctthcaitarbponhisba* 
fes,  ( fo?  fear  c  was  bpon  them,  becaufc  of 
the  people  of  thofe  countrcys)  anb  they 
offercb  burnt  offerings  thereon  tonto 
the  %  ©  is  ©,  euen  burnt  offcnngs,mo^ 
ninganbeuening. 

4  XheyBcptaUbthcfeaftoftaber* 
naclcs,  *  as  it  is  tbzittcn,  anb  *  off  reb  the 
I  bayly  burnt  off  rings,  by  number  ,acco^ 
bmgto  the  anionic,  tastljc  bucttcof  v 
ucrybayrcqulrcb: 

5  ^tib  afteribarb  offered  the  eonti* 
nuall  burnt  offering,  both  of  thcneib 
mooncs ,  anb  of  all  the  fct  fcaas  of 
the  fL©iaie>,  that  mere  tonfecratcb, 
anb  of  enery  one  that  Willingly  off  reb, 
offercb  a  free  Uull  offering  biito  the 

H  ©IB©. 

6  i^rom  the  firftbay  of  the  fcucntl) 
moncth,  began  they  to  offer  burnt  offo 
rings  bnto  the  %  ©  is  © :  but  the  t  foun 
batton  of  the  temple  of  the  ILsdjbjd 
ttiasnotyetiaib. 

7  lEftcy  gaue  money  alfo  bnto  the 
mafons,  anb  to  the  || carpenters,  atib 
meate,  anb  biinlte,  anb  oyle,  bnto  them 
of  Zibon,anb  to  tlicm  of  Hy2c,to  bmig 
Ccbar  trees  from  Lebanon  to  thefea 
of  *  gjoppa :  accozbtng  to  the  grant  that 
they  hab  of  Cynis  Ittng  of  0crfia. 

8  Ci!2o«bmthefcconbyercofthetr 
comming  bnto  thehoufc  of  Gobat^ie; 
rufalem ,  intlje  feconb  monctl) ,  began 
zerubbabel  the  fonnc  of  S>hcaittci, 
anb3lcn)uathcfotmcof3103abali,anb 

<Slu    the 


\\Ory  Iofuj, 
Hagfe  1 . 1 . 

*  Match.  1. 
1  z.andluke 
^.27.  called 
Zorobabel. 
"Match.  I. 
1  2. and  hike 
l.zj.  called 
Sulathtel. 


*Num.  20. 

12. 

•Exod.23. 

16. 

\Hehr.thc 

mat  ter  of  the 


day  1, 

d.ij. 


this 


\  Kebrjbe 
Temple  of 
the  Lord 
w,u*j9tyit 

founded. 
1 1  Or,  rrorl^- 


•Aflsp.3- 


The  building  ofthe      Ezra.       Temple.,hindered. 


\\Or,Ho<U- 

UUi'"-i  ''-/' - 

\Htb.ai  one. 


♦i.Chro.tf. 

5 1. and tf. j. 


\Hebr.the 
founts  of  the 
rranjjteru- 
tton. 


the  remnant  of  tljtic  tyethjen ,  the 
ptfefts  anb the  ?Lcuitcs,  anto  all  thep 
that  id  etc  come  out  of  the  capttuitietoiv 
to  3Itrafaietn:  anb  appointed  the?U 
uttcs,ftom  tttieutte  pecrcs  olbeanb  top 
ibarb,  tofctfo;rttoaro  thelbojBcof  tip* 

!)OUfCOftl)ClL©lSJD. 

9  Xljcn  flooo  3Jen)tta,  with  })is  fons 
anb  ins  b?ctl)zen ,  i&abmtel  anb  his 
fonnes,thcfonncsof]l3Jubahttogcther, 
to  fct  fbjitoarb  the  ltoojltcmen  in  the 
houfe  of  <i5oo  :  thefonnes  of  ftenabab, 
ttnth  their  fonnes  ano  time  b?cth;tcn 
theHeuites. 

10  3lnDtt»i)cn  ffjcbtulDcrs!  laiuc  ti)c 
foundation  of  tt>c  Xctnplc  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©,  thep  fct  the  pmtts  m  their 
appatrtl  ltoith  trumpets,  anb  the  He- 
uitcsthc  Ibnnesof  aiaph ,  ttnth  Cpm* 
bales ,  to  p;sau"c  the  %  ®  is  jd,  after  the 
*o?t)inanceof2E>autbRmgof3lfracl. 

ii  3nb  thep  fung  together  bptottrfe, 
inpjaulng,  ano  gtutngthanUs  tonto  the 
fL©H©;  2i5ctaufel)cc  isgooti ,  foj  his 
metcp  cnbuteth  fo?  cucr  toltoatbs  3Jt 
rael.  3tnb  all  rtjc  people  ftjoutcb  tbttii 
a  great  fhoutc,  lbhcn  thep  p:aifeb  the 
%  &>  h  ©  ■.  becaufe  the  fonnoation  of  the 
houfc  of  the  %  ©  is  je>  ltoas  laibc. 

u  25ut  manp  of the  &acfts  anb  JU< 
uites,ano  chiefc  of  thcfathcrs,ttiho  were 
ancient  men ,  that  nab  fecne  the  firft 
houfe  j  lbhcn  the  founoation  of  this 
houfe  ltoas  latbcbcfojc  their  epes,  ttiept 
ltoith  a  loubc  tooice,  anb  man?  fljoutcb 
aloubefojiop: 

i  j  So  that  the  people  coulb  not  bit 
ceme  the  nopfcof  the  fhout  of  iop,fcom 
thenopfe  ofthe  tbccpmg  of  the  people 
fo;  the  people  fhouteb  with  a  loube 
ajout ,  anb  the  nopfc  rbas  hcarb  a? 
farre  off. 

CHAP.  IIII. 

The  aduerfanes,  being  not  accepted  in  the 
building  of  the  Temple  v/ith  thelewes,  en- 
deauour  to  hinder  it.  7  Their  Letter  to 
Artaxcrxes.  17  The  decree  of  Artaxerxes. 
13   The  building  is  hindrcd. 

£>u>  itohcn  the  abucrfa- 
ncs  of  3Jtibah  anb  26enia* 
mm,  hcarb  that  t  the  chit 
IAU  ^ K  D"n of tl1e  captiuitic  bml- 
'^hf^mm  beb  thcXempic  tonto  the 
SLsDJsjzxSoOof^fraei: 

2  Xhen  thep  came  to  Hcrnbbabcl, 
ano  to  the  chiefc  ofthe  fathcrs.ano  anb 
tonto  them,  %tt  tos  biulb  With  pou ,  fo; 
wee  feehe  pour  <sob,  as  pee  doe,  anb  lbc 


boefaecifuc  tonto  htm,  Once  the  bapes 
of  efat  ^aobonamgof  ;3u*ur,  Which 
fought  tos  top  hither. 

j  20iitZerubbabcianb3Jcfljua,anb 
tljc  reft  of  the  chiefc  of the  fathers  of  3ff 
tacl,Jaib  tonto  them,  JH>u  haucno- 
thuigtobocitoithtos,  tobuilban  Ijoufe 
tonto  our  <sob,  but  lbc  our  felucs  toge- 
thcritoill  builb tonto  the  %okis>  <5ob 
of  3lfrael,  as  lung  CywsthcBmg  of 
perfia  hatfj  commanbeb  tos. 

4  Xhenthcpeopleoftheianbrbcai 
Scncb  the  hanbesof  the  people  of  ju^ 
bah,  anb  troublcb  them  in  builbmg, 

5  31nb  h»teb  counfcllers  agamft 
them,  to  fruftrate  their  purpofe,  ail  the 
oapes  of  Cpms  hmg  of#ecfia,euen  tons 
ttllthcrcigneof  2>arms  miigofperfia, 

6  ^omthereigneoftahalucrus, 
in  the  beginning  of  his  reigne,  m^ote 
rtjep  tonto  himan  acmfation  agamft  the 
inhabitants  of  3Juoah  anb  3lcrufaicm, 

7  C  3nb  m  the  bapes  of  Slrtajcct* 
res  tttiott  1 1 2Sift)lam,  ^ith?ebath  ,%&■ 
beel,  anb  the  reft  of  their  t  companions, 
tonto  ^rtarerres  mng  of  perfia;  anb 
the  ltontmg  of  the  letter  was  ibntten  m 
the  5>pnan  tongue,  ano  mterpjctcb  m 
the  S>wan  tongue. 

8  &ehum  the  Chanccllour,  anb 
3>hunflirti  the  ||  Scribe,  uyote  a  letter 
agamft 'Jcriualcm ,  to  3ctarctrcs  the 
mng,mthtsfo2t: 

9  Xhctt,w.ote&chumtheChaneet 
lour,  anb  ShunQjai  the  Scribe,  anb 
the  reft  of  their  t  companions;  theSDt 
naites,thc  ^pharfathaitts,  the  Xar 
pclitcs,  rtic  apharfites,rhc  3rcheuites, 
the  23abylonians,the  Sufanchites,  the 
a>chatntcs,jnd  the  <£lamites, 

10  3nbthcrcftofthettationsitohom 
the  great  anbnobic^fiiapparbjotight 
ouer,am>  fetm  the  ones  of  Samaria, 
anbthcrcftthatareonthis  fibc  the  3K» 
ucr,tanbatfuchatimc. 

1 1  Clhis  's  thecoppofthe  Hettcr, 
that  thepfent  tonto  him,  euen  tonto  ^ 
tarerres  the  Hmg:  3Chp  feruants  on 
thisfibc  thclSiiicr.anbatfuthatime,  I 

u  26citlmoU)cntontothelnng,that 
the  3JcU)cs  ibhich  came  top  from  thee 
to  tos,  arc  come  tonto  3Icrulaicm,  buil- 
bing  the  rebellious  anb  the  bab  ritie, 
anb  hauc  ||  fct  top  the  ibaiics  thereof, 
anotiopneb  the  founbanons. 

1  j  25e  it  unoitoennoito  tonto  the  Bing, 
ri)attffhtscttpbcbtulbcb,aubthcibals 
let  top  agame,  thm  ltoill  tljcpnot  tpap 
tollc,  tribute,  anb  cuftome,  anbfotljou 

flmit 


\Hcb.Ah*. 
PiHerojb. 


\\Or,m  ■ 
peace. 

XHeb.ftxif 
tin. 


\Or,Seirt- 


\  Chaid.fi 
cirtKf. 


Cbal.Chl 
tnelh. 


\\Or.f.mP,«l 
tC'^fow- 
td  together. 


\  CImI.^imc. 


The  Kings  letter,        Chap.v.        and  the  enemies. 


\\0r, 

jtrengk. 

ar.-fdted 
vnth  the  full 
ofthcfaUce* 


\CatdmJL-. 

\Chald.in 
the  miJfi 
thereof. 


c%etns. 


me  a  decree 

\Chald.ttf. 
■dvpa 

pg*. 


\Ch*t.m*ks 
a  decree. 


\Ch4d.b* 

*rme  and 

pjwer 


(ijait  cnbaiumagc  the  ||  rcucnue  of  the 
tongs.  * 

14  iftotb  bccaufcXbe  t  hauc  mainte* 
name  from  theKmgs  palace,  anb  itibas 
notnicttc  fo:  bs  to  fee  tbebings  mflio- 
nour :  tljcccfo?c  hauc  lbc  ftnt ,  anb  cer* 
tificb  the  fang, 

1 5  %\w  fcareh  map  be  mate  m  the 
boobe  of  the  Bccojbs  of  thy  fathers :  fo 
(bait  tboufiubc  m  the  boobcoftbe&c; 
cojbs^nbfatoib,  tbattbtsCity  is  arc* 
belltouscity  ,anb  buttfull  bnto  fstngs 
anb  pjottinces,ano  that  they  baue  f  mo* 
ueb  febttion  t  tuttbm  the  fame  of  olbc 
time :  fo?  rbbicb  taufc  lbasfbis  ntic  be* 
ftroyeb. 

i6  m  eertifie  tlje  fang,  that  iftiHS  ri* 
fie  be  btulbeb  againe  $  the  lbaiiestbereof 
fet  bp :  by  this  hteancs ,  thou  malt  bane 
no  pomon  on  tins  fibc  tlje  &iucr. 

17  c  Then  fent  the  btng  an  anftucrc 
bnto  ffiebum  tbcCbawcllour ,  anb  to 
£>b«nfl)ai  the  fmbc ,  anb  to  the  reft  of 
tijeitt  companions,  tbatbibcll  tn&a= 
maria,anb  bnto  the  reft  bey onb  rbe&t* 
ucr,$eaee,anb  at  fuel)  a  time. 

18  1E;beletter,Tbbtcbye  lent  bnto  bs, 
hath  bene  plainly  r cab  befojc  me. 

19  3nb  t^j  commaunbeb,aub  fcareh 
bath  bene  mabe,  anb  it  is  founb,  that 
tbisctficof  olb  timebath  t  mabemfur* 
reetion  againftBings,  anb  trjat  rebel- 
lion $  febttion  baue  bencmabe  therein. 

ao  Xberebaue  bene  mighty  isutgs 
alto  ouefjernfalcm,  lbbtcb  baue  ru* 
leboucrail  countreys  beyonbtbe&iuer, 
anb  toile,  tribute,  anb  cuQome,tbas 
payb  bnto  them. 

ii  1 0me  ye  nolb  commanbement, 
to  caufe  tbefe  men  to  ccafcanb  that  this 
tltie  be  not  builbcb,  bntill  another  com 
manbement  (ball  be  giuen  from  me. 

22  ILalte  beeb  nolb  that  ye  fatie  not 
tobottbis:Ybby  fljoulbbamagc  grotb 
totbeburtoftbefangs* 

2s  C/15oibrbbentbccopyofBuig 
^rtarrrres  letter  tbasrcab  before  3Rc* 
hum  anb&btmlbat  the  fcribcanb  their 
companions,  they  lbcnt  bp  m  haOe  to 
5lcrufalem,bnto  the  3Jcibcs,anb  mabe 
them  to  ecafeby  t  fo^tce  anb  poibcr. 

24  Xbcn  tcafeb  the  lboojfcc  of  the 
houfe  of  the  <&ob ,  lbbieb  >s  at^erufa* 
lent.  5>o  it  ceafeb,bntotbefeeonoyccre 
oftberetgneof  a>arius  tongof  ^crfta. 

CHAP.    V. 

1    Zerubbabel  and  Sliealciel,  incited  by  Haggai 
and  Zacharie,fet  forward  the  buildingofthe 


Temple.  3  Tatnai  and  Shether  Boznai 
could  not  hinderrhelewes.  6  Their  letter 
to  Darius  againft  the  lewes. 

£*2f^s  tycn  the  ^ophets,*  $ag* 
m  gat  thc^:ophct,anb  ze» 
thariahthcfonne  of  3JD^ 
bo ,  pjopbcGcb  bnto  the 

_  3IClbCS  tljat  were  m  3Ju- 

bah  anb  gferufalcm ,  m  the  42amcof 
the  d5ob  of  3?fracl,euen  bnto  them. 

2  Xhcn  rofc  bp  zerubbabel  the 
fonne  of  £>beaittel ,  anb  3fcfl)ua  the 
fonneofSJosabab ,  anb  began  to  btitlb 
the  houle  of  d5ob  Vbhieh  is  at  gjerufa-' 
lent: anb ibuh  them  were  tbc02opbets 
ofd5ob  helping  them. 

3  C  ^tthe  fame  time  tame  to  them 
Xatnai ,  gottcrnour  on  this  ftbe  the  &v 
uer ,  anb  <§>betbat-2oo5ttai ,  anb  their 
companions,  anbfatb  thus  bnto  thcm: 
i©bo  hath  commaunbeb  pott  to  btnlb 
thishoufcanbtomabebpthisiball; 

4  Xhen  faib  ttec  bnto  them  after 
this  maner,nahatatethc  names  ofthe 
mcnUhatmabe  thisbutibingi 

5  26uttheeveofthctr(3obtbasbp« 
on  the  Cloers  ofthe  ^cibes,  fbattbep 
conlb  not  caure  tl)em  to  ccafc ,  till  the 
matter  came  to  Darius :  anb  then  they 
retumeb  anfraerc  by  letter  concerning 

thtS  matter. 

6  CXhetopyofthcletterthatlCat 
nat,  goucrnour  on  tbisftbetbeJRtuer, 
anb^>hcthar-2i503nat,  anb  hiscompa= 
nions  the  ^pharfachites,  tbfttcrj  wer, 
on  this  fibc  the  JRtuer,  fent  bnto  S>& 
riusthclttng: 

7  -£bey  fent  a  letter  bnto  htm, 
ttbherem  tbas  Tb?itten  tljus-.^Unto  3D& 
rtusthcbing,ailpcace. 

s  28eitbnorbenbntothebiing,that 
Tbc  tbent  tttto  the  pjoutnee  of  ^ubea,  to 
the  houfe  of  the  great  (Sob ,  ibbich  is 
butlbeb  ibith  t  great  Hones,  $  timber  is 
laicbintherbais,  anb  this  tt>o?Rcgocfb 
faft  on,  anb  pjofpereth  in  their  banbs. 

9  Xhenafbcbibethofeeibers,and 

faibbnto  them  thus,aaho  commanbcb 
you  to  builb  this  houfe,anb  to  mabe  bp 
thcfciballesf 

10  naeafbeb  their  names  alfo,totertt' 
fie  thee,  that  Tbe  might  ttmtc  th  c  names 
of  the  men  that  rbcre  thechiefcofthem. 

it  3lnb  thus  they  retumeb  bs  an* 
ftocre,  laying,  tec  are  the  feruants  of 
tbeOob  of  beattcnanb  carth,anb  btuio 
the  houfe  that  ibas  butlbeb  thefemany 
yeeresagoe.vbhich  a  great  Bing  of  31 
raelbuilbco/anbfctbp. 

tin  z        ii  25ut 


•Agge.i.t. 

.-.  .lIi.I.I. 


\ClxtlJ.thn 

bnilcLthu 

huildittjr. 


|  Challm 

themidll 

whereof. 


tChtU. 

jhnet  ofro- 
li*g. 


"  i. King. 
6.1. 


Tatnais  letter  to 


Ezra.         Darius,anlwered. 


"*  j  Kings 
14.1. ana 
25.8. 


*Ezrj.i.i 


•Eirai.i8 
andtf.5. 
|]  Or,  <6p«rrv 


jChttdc, 
ixkrs. 

\CUUt, 

nutdelede- 

Crenel. 

\\Or,Eeh*- 

r*KA,crtn/t 
Ctfcr. 


n  2Sut  after  that  our  fathers  hao 
Pitouo&eb  the  <5oD  of  hcauen  tontc 
tt)?atl) :  Dc  gaue  them  into  the  hanbe  of 
*  i2rtmclMtmc33at  ttjc  tans  of  aSaby; 
Ion,  the  fcaibean,  Xbtjo  Brfrroyco  this 
lioafc,  anb  carteb  the  people  away  into 
JSabylon. 

i}  ButinthcfirftyercoPCymsthc 
tang  of  23abylon,  the  fame  tang  Cyws 
mabe  a  octree  to  builb  this  houfe  of 

<E>00. 

14  anbthcbcfrcisalfoofgoiocanb 
filuer  of  the  houfe  of  (Sod,  tbijttfj  /15c? 
bnchaonc55ar  toofee  out  of  the  %tm> 
pie  that  was  m^Jcrufaiem,  anbtyought 
them  into  the  temple  of  25abylon,thofc 
DtD  Cyms  the  tang  tanc  out  of  the  tern* 
pie  of  zsabylon,  anb  they  were  Delate; 
rebbnto  one,  *Whofc  name  was  ;§>hcu> 
ba3?at,  Whomc  he  hab  mabe  ||gouer= 
nour: 

i<,  3fnb  faib Pnto  tarn,  3£aUc  tl)tfc 
PcfTcls,  got,  carte  them  into  the  temple 
that  is  m^erufalem,  anblctthchoiife 
of  <3ob  be  bmlbcb  in  I)is  place. 

16  3-nen  came  tlje  fame  £>hefl)ba5* 
$ar,  and  laib  tlje  founbation  of  ttjc  hoiife 
of  00b ,  Which  is  tn  3Jcrufalem.  3lnb 
fmce  that  time,  euen  tonttll  now,  hath  it 
bm  in  butlbtng,  ftyetittsnotfinifljco. 

17  iftott)  therefore ,  if  it  fcme  goob  to 
the  tang,  let  there  be  fear ch  mabe  in  the 
tangs  trcafur'c  Ijoufe  Which  i*  there  at 
asabylott,  whether  tt  be  fo  that  a  becrec 
was  mabe  of  Cynis  the  tang,  to  butib 
this  houfe  of  Gob  at  3Jerufalem :  anb 
let  the  tang  fcnohtspleafureto  Pscon= 
ccrntngthtsmattcr. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  Darius  findine  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  maketh 
a  new  decree  tor  the  aduancement  of  the 
building.  13  BythehelpeoftheenemieSjand 
the  directions  ot  the  prophets,  the  Temple  is 
finifhed.  16  The  fcjft  of  the  Dedication  is 
kept.  19  And  thePaffeouer. 

l^cn  2>anus  the  isung 
maoc  a  becrec,  anb  fcarch 
Was  mabe  tn  the  houfe  of 
the  t  rollcs ,  where  the 
trcafurcs  were  t  latbe 
pp  m  asabylon. 

x  3ttib  there  Was  founb  at  1 1  3f  clime* 
tha,  m  tljcpnlacc  tlwti  tn  thepjoiuncc 
of  tlje  upebes,  arollc,  anb  therein  ihas 
arecojbthttsnmttcn: 

3  3fn  tlje  nrfl  ycerc  of  Cynts  the 
tang.thc  fame  Cymsthctangmabcabes 
crccconccrmngthchoufcof(5obat3Je; 


mfaictn:  ?Lct  ttje  houfe  be  butibeb,  the 
place  Wheretheyoffcrcb  facrt&ces,anb 
let  the  founbanons  thereof  be  ftr ongly 
laib,  the  height  therof  thjccfeoje  cubtts, 
anb  the  bjeabth  thereof  th;tecfco;te  cu* 
bites: 

4  with  thjeerowes  of  great  ftones, 
anb  a  tow  of  new  timber :  anb  let  the 
erpences  bee  giuen  out  of  the  tangs 
houfe. 

5  2nDaifolctthegolbcn,anbGluer 
Petrels  of  the  houfe  of  45ob,  Which  fit* 
buchabnc53ar  tooae  foojth  out  of  the 
temple  whtch  «  at  31crufaicm ,  anb 
brought  Pnto  26abylon,be  refto^eb^nb 
ttyoughtagainePntothctcmple  Which 

is  at  3JcmfalCm,  eueryone  JO  (jlS  platC, 

anb  place  them  m  the  houfe  of  ti&oo. 

6  jftow  therefore  %atnai,gouer nour 
bcyonb  the  riuer,  £>hcthar -iSosnat, 
anb  tyour  companions  the  3lpharfa* 
cljitcs,  Which are  bcyonb  the  riuer,  beye 
farrc  from  thence: 

7  %a  the  wortte  of  this  houfe  of 
d5ob  alone ,  ictthegoucroourofthe 
3Jcwes,  anb  the  elbersof  the  3Jelbcs, 
butlb  tljts  houfe  of  d5ob  in  hispiace. 

8  ^Po^couer  t  5  mabe  a  octree, 
tbhat  vc  fljall  bo  e  to  the  €locrs  of  tljcfc 
3Jetbes,fo«t  the  builbing  of  this  houfe  of " 
d5ob:thatof  the  tangs  gooos,  euen  of 
the  tribute  bcvbnb  tljenucr,  fonhft'ith 
erpences  begtucntmtothtfemen,  tljat 
thevbenotthtnbercb. 

9  3nb  that  which  they  hmienccb  of, 
botljyongbttllocfts,  anbrammes,  anb 
lambes,  fo?  tlje  burnt  offerings  of  the 
©obof  heatten,tbhcat,falt,»jine,  anb 
oyle,  acco?btug  to  the  appoyment  of  the 
pnettsrbhtchareatSerufaiem,  lettf  be 
giuen  them,  bay  by  bay  Without  fane : 

10  Xljattljey  may  offer  faenficestof 
fraect  fattours  bnto  the  ©ob  of  heaucn, 
anb  pjay  fo^tljeltfcof  the  tang,  anb  of 
hisfonnes. 

1 1  3iifo  3Jhauc  maoc  a  becrec,  that 
Whofoeucr  fhall  alter  tljts  ibojb,  let 
timber  be  pttilcbboWn  from  Ijts  houfe, 
anb  being  fct  Pp,  let  him  bee  tljangcb 
thereon,  anb  let  his  houfe  bee  mabe  a 
bounghtiifojthis. 

ix  3lnb  tlje  (Sob  that  hathcanfeb  his 
name  tobWcll  there,  bcftroyail  tangs 
anb  people  that  than  put  to  their  hanb, 
to  alter  md  to  beftroy  rtjts  houfe  of  (Sob 
Which  isatJJcrufalem.  giS>arittshauc 
mabe  a  octree,  letttbe  bone  With  fpeco. 
13  CXhen^Catnatgoucrnour  on  tljts 
ftbc  tlje  riuer  ^hrthat  -  2503tiai,fj  their 

com 


f  Chaldtrgo. 


\ChAtd*, 

thnr/ieicr 


me  a  decree 
made. 


t  Chalde, 
'rude  to 
ccafe. 


t  Chaldeyof 


f  Chddcjct 

him  be  de- 
frayed* 


The  dedication.        Chap.vi).        The  kings  letter. 


\CUlVe 
crct. 


\ChM.:hc 

formes  of  the 
tranfborta- 


Chald.  ac- 

orJtnf  to 
the  renting, 
'Nuni.-J.c5. 
and  8.?. 


companions ,  atcozDing  to  tbat  Tblncl) 
2>artus  tt»c  bmg  tjaofimt,  lb  ttjep  mo 
fpceDih?. 

14.  3lnDtbcelDcrsoftbe3feibcsbuit 
DeD,  ano  tbep  pzofpcrcD,  tbzougb  tbe 
pzopbccytng  of  i^aggai  tbcj&opbct, 
ano  zctijartal)  the  fonne  of  3JDD0,  ano 
tljcv  builDcD ,  anDfimfbcD  it,  accojDmg 
to  tfyt  commanDcmcnt  of  tbe  <15od  of 
^Jfrael.anDaccozDtngtotbctcomman; 
uetnent  of  Cpzus  ami  3Dar  tus ,  anD  3tr? 
tajcerjecs  sing  of  0erGa. 

15  3nD  tbisbonfeifoasfimfbeD  on 
tbe  tbitD  bap  oftlje  mow?)  anar,  ibbid) 
ibasmtbeurtpere  of  tbeteigne  ofSDa^ 
riustbebtng. 

i6  C3mD tbe cbflDzcn  of 3lfracl,  tbe 
$nefrsatiDtf)c?Leuites,  anD  tbe  reft  of 
tttjc  tbtlDzcn  of  the  captmttic,  bcptfljc 
Dcbttatio  of  tins  l)oufc  of  <5oD,tbitl)  ior  > 

17  3nD  offcceD  at  tbe  DcDication  of 
tfjts  ^oufe  of  ©od ,  an  l)unb?eb  bul 
locbes,t)bo  bunD:eD  rammes,fonre 
InmbKb  lambes  ano  fo2  a  fitme  offe* 
ring  fbz  all  3Jfrael,  ttbcluebecgoatcs, 
aceozDingto  tlje  number  oftljc  tribes  of 
3JfracI. 

'  is  3nDtbcyfettbc02ieflsintbeitDi; 
uifions,  anotrjc?Lcuttesmt!)etr  tour? 
fcs>fojtt)c  fcrincc  of  (Sod  ,  tbijtcfj  is  at 
3Jcrufalem ,  t  *  as  it  is  ibzittcn  m  the 
boobeof^Pofes. 

19  2nD  tbe  dnlDzcn  of  tbe  captiuitic 
Kept  tbe  ^aOcouct,  bpon  tbe  four- 
tcentl)  day  of  tbe  firCmonetb : 

20  if  oz  tbe  ^jicftes  ano  me  ?Lcuitcs 
u3erepurificutogctl)cr,aUoftbem  were 

pure,  anD  feillcD  tbe  paffeoucr  foz an 
tbe  tbtlDzen  of  tlje  captiuitic,  anb  foz 
tbeir  bzetbzen  tbe  £zictts,anD  fo;  tbem- 
felues.  ,  ,  , 

ii  ^notbed)ilb2tnof3Jfrari,ibbui) 
lbecccomcagamc  outofcapnume,  anb 
all  fuel)  as  baD  feparatcD  tbcmfelncs 
bnto  tbem,  from  tbe  &u1)tncffc  of  tbe 
beatben  of  tbe  iauD,to  fecbe  tlje  ?L£>isje> 
©oDofJJfracl.OtDcatc, 

ii  3lnD  bept  tbe fealt of  bnlcauencD 
bzcaD  fcucn  Daves,  lbith  top :  fo?  tbe 
%  €>k©  baD  mate  tljcm  lovfull ,  anD 
turncDtbcbeart  of  tbe  bmg  of^ffyzia 
bnto  tbem ,  to  ttrcugtben  tbeir  banDes 
in  tbe  lbozbc  of  tljc  Ijoufc  of  d50D ,  tlje 
©oDof^frael. 

CHAP.    VII. 

i  Ezragoethvptolerufulem.  11  The  gracious 
commifsion  of  Artaxerxes  to  Ezra.  17  Ezra 
blefleth  God  tor  his  fauoux. 


£)U)  after  ttjcCe  tbings,  tn 
tbe  retgnc  of  attarenccs 
Hmgof^erfia,e5ratbc 
fou  of  Seraiab,  tbe  fonne 
of  3i5ariab ,  tbefonne  of 
^ilbtab, 
%  Xljc  fonne  ofSbalumubc  fonne 
of  zaoob,  tbe  fonne  of  3bttub, 

j  Xbc  fonne  of  3mat  iab,rbe  tonne 
of  3sanab,tbc  fonne  of  Q3eraiotb, 

4-  Xbefbnneofzeraiab,tbc fonne 
of  H5?t,  tbefonne  of  zBubbi, 

5  Xbefonne  of  3ibi(bua, tbe  fonne 
of  0binebas,  ttje  fonne  of  (ffieavu,  tbe 
fonne  of  3ar  on  tbe  tbtefc  0zictt : 

6  iCbts  €;ra  ment  bp  from  Babp 
ion,  anD  bee  was  a  rcaDy  Scribe  mtbc 
lattJ  of  Q9ofcs,  ibbicb  tbe  %  ©  e  ©  (Sod 
of  3Ifrael  bao  guicn:  anD  tbe  bmg  gran- 
tcD  bimall  bisrcqucCaccoiDmg  to  the 
banD  of  tbe  HoKiDbtSdPoD  bpon  bnn. 

7  ^nD  tberc  Ibent  bp  iome  of  tbe 
rinnwi  of^Jfraci,  anD  of  tbe  |t>?tcfrs, 
anb  tbc3Letutes,anDtbc  dingers,  anD 
tbe  0o#crs,  anD  tbei5etbuiuns,  bn- 
to 3Jtttrfalem,  m  tbe  feucntb  veerc  of 
^rrajcenccstbcBing. 

8  ^nD  be  came  to  3Jenualcm  in  tbe 
fiftbnionetb ,  Vbbirt)  was  uirtjc  fcuentb 
peercoftbemng. 

9  5fo?  bpon  tbe  firft  day  of  tbe  firfl  \ 
monetb.tbeganbetogobpfr625abp'Jw^'^ 
ion ,  anD  on  tbe  fittt  day  of  n)e  fiftb  mo-  \°Ur^g 
netb,camcbcto3lcrnfaiem,  accozDuig 
to  tljc  gooD  banD  ofbis  <5od  bpon  binu 

10  5Fo2€3rabaD  pieparcD  bis  bcart 
to  feebe  tbclUrtbof  tbe  %  ©  is  ©,  ano 
to  Doc 't,  anD  totcacbmJJfrael ,  Sta- 
tutcs  anD  'JuDgements. 

1 1  C/15otbtT)is  is  tbetoppoftlic  let 
tcr  tbat  t\)t  bmg  31rtarerres  gaue  bu 
to  €3ra  tbe  ^nett,  tbc&tnbe,  cutn  a 
Scribe  of  tbe  lbojbsof  tbccommanDc^ 
mtntsoftbclL£>is©,anDofbisSt^ 
tutcs  to  3Jfracl. 

iz  ^rtarcrrcsbingofbing5,||?anto 
€5ta  tbe  $2icU\  a  Scribe  of  tbe  JLarb 
oftbe(5oDofbcaucn,perfcctp«w,aiiD 
at  fuel)  a  time. 

13  3Jmabc  a  Decree,  tbat  all  tbcp  of 
tbcpcopleofIlfracI,anDofbis^2iefts, 
anD  ILcuites  ui  m?  Uealmc,  ibbitl)  arc 
muiDeDoftbciroibiicfrec-ttHll  togoc 
bp  to3lerufainn,goelbitbtbec. 

14.  jfowfmntD  as  tbou  art  fent  tof  l%Zf 
tbe  bing,  anD  of  l)is  *  fcucn  cotmfcllcrs, 
to  enqrarc  concerning  3luDab  anD  3?e- 
rulalcm ,  accozDing  to  tbe  Havbc  of  tbp 
d50D,rbbicb  >s  mtbinebauD; 

m  u  5        I<  ^Stio 


■J{. 


\OrJo  Fzra 

the  PrtcH  a 
verfic  Scribe 
</f  t'ne  L*v>? 
of  the  God  of 
heiwen, 
PcatCjC^.'. 


King. 

Eftb.I.M 


m 


ie  commiilion 


in. 


.zra. 


§ 


iuento.czra. 


E: 


•Chip.?. 


f  Chili: 
Q'cr  11. 


fattier  it  of 
tht  itcrt:. 


15  anb  to  tar?  ttjc  fituer  anb  golb, 
ttmicb  the  lung  ann  bis  tounfeiicrs 
bauc  freely  offered  unto  ttje  ©ob  of  3& 
raelAWioferjabitanon  is  m^erufalcnt 

16  "^tnDailtfjcCilacranusolti,  that 
tbott  tattft  fittb  in  all  tl)t  pjotrmre  of  ffia- 
byIon,ttntbtbefttcttnlloffcrtngofrbc 
people,  anboftbep:iefts,  offering  ttnl- 
Imgly  fo.2  tile  boufe  of  their  ©ob,U)bicb 
istnJJcmfalcm: 

17  %\m  tl)ou  maleft  buy  fpcebily 
Until  tilts  money ,  bullocltes,  rammes, 
lambes,ttntb  their  mcate  offerings, 
anD  their  Dnnhc  offcruicjs,  anb  offer 
tbcm  upon  the  altar  of  the  boufe  of 
vonr  Gob.rbbich  .singjentfaietn. 

13  anb lbbatfoetier  (ball fecnic goob 
to  tfice,  airb  to  thy  b:ctlnnt,to  boettntrj 
the  reft  of  tlieftlner  anb  golb  that  boc, 
after  the  ttnii  of  vonr  Gob. 

19  Xhe  bcffcis  aifo  that  are  ginen 
tlicc,  foztlic  fcriute  of  tlKftonfeof  tlrp 
Gob,tbofcbeuucrtboubcfo2e  the  Gob 
ofjcrufaicm. 

20  anb  uiDatfoencr  nioic  fball  be 
ncebfou  fo:  tbcboiu"eoftby  Gob,tt)bitb 
thon  (bait  bauc  occafton  to  beftottic  ■, 
bcftoibc  tt  out  of  the  Utngs  trcafurc 
hoiife. 

21  anbj,  cuen  3}  artarcrrrs  the 
lung  ,  boc  make  a  Decree  to  all  rfjc 
trcafurcrs  lbbicb.»cbcyonb  the  nuer, 
that  Uihatfociicr  C^ratbc  pnett,  the 
ftnbcof  the  lain  of  the  Gob  of  hcaurn, 
fliallrcQutrcofyoiutbcboncfpccbiry, 

22  <31nto  an  hnnbicb  talents  of  u> 
tier,  anb  to  an  bunbzcb  t  mcafutcsof 
U)htate,  anbto  art  rjunb?eb  bathes  of 
lbmcanb  to  an  bunbjcb  bathes  of  oyle 
anbfait,Uuthontp:cfcrtbingiiowmuch. 

2}  ttBbatfontcr  is  tommanbeb  by  the 
Gobofbcauctuctitbcbiligcntlybonc, 
fcntbe  houfcof  the  Gobofbeauen:foj 
ibhyfboutb  there  bettuatbagamfttbe 
r  calmc  of  the  lung  anb  his  fonnes  < 

2+  aito  ibe  certific  yon,  that  ton-- 
thing  any  of  fbep2lcfts,  anbULeuircs, 
Gngcrs,  po2tcrs,/!3etbuiuns,  02  mint 
ftcrsofthishoufrofGob,itinaiinotbc 
lattifull  to  nnpofc  tollc,  tribute,  02 nt- 
ftotnebponthein. 

25  anb  thon ,  tfsra ,  after  the  lblt 
borne  of  thy  Gob ,  that  is  m  thute  hanb, 
fct  magiftratcs  anb  ttibrjes,  lUbtcb  may 
mbge  all  the  people,  that  aicbeyonb  the 
rmer,  an  fuch  as  ttnotu  tht  lattice  of  thy 
god,  anb  teach  ycc  them  tbatftnottic 

them  ttOt. 

z6  anb  niljofotucr  null  not  Doe  the 


latb  of  thy  ©otwnDthclaU)  of  the  6mg, 
ictiubgcmentbcerccutcbfpecDtiyDpon 
bim,ttibctber  it  be  rmto  bcath,oi  to  tb& 
nifhment,02to  confutation  of  goobs,02 
totmpzifonmcnt. 

27  C^SleffeDbetrjcfLsimja  GoD 
of  oar  fathers ,  ltobtcb  hatfj  put  <"uch  a 
th.ng  as  tbis,<n  the  lungs  hca«,to  bcau^ 
tiftc  the  houfe  of  the  1L&&®  iDbtch'> 
m3ferufaltm: 

23  anb  hart)  cttenbeb  nterty  tonto 
mc,bcfo2Cthclnnganbbtscounfctlers, 
anb  bcfoie  all  the  Utngs  mighty  pnm 
tes ,  anb  3  *&*s  frrcngrbneb  as  the 
hanb  of  the  %  sr>  is  &  my  god  was  ur^ 
on  me,  anb  Jl  gatbercb  together  out  of 
3Jftacl,thicfcmen  to  goe  Dp  Ibitbme. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

i  The  companions  of  Ezra,  who  returned  from 
Babylon.  15  He  fendcth  to  Iddofor  mini- 
fters  for  die  Temple,  n  He  kecpeth  a  fid. 
14  He  committcth  die  rreafures  to  the  cufto- 
die  of  the  Pneffs.  31  From  Ahaua  they 
come  to  Ieruf.dem.  33  The  treafure  is 
weighed  in  die  Temple.  36  The  commii- 
lion is  deliuered. 

^cfearenotbtbetbtcfeof 
their  fathers^nb  tins  is  the 
geneaiogic  of  them  tl)at 
ttjcnt  up  Uoittj  mec  from 
zsabylon ,  in  theretgnc  of 
3lttar  etxes  inching. 

2  £>fthcfonncsof0hmehas,<j^r« 
fliom :  of  the  fonncs  of  3(thamar ,  SDa* 
niel:oftbcfonncsof©aiub,$attufb. 

3  ©f thefonnes of S>hethaniah ,  of 
tbcfontK6of£barofb,zcebariab,anb 
tt)tth  him  U)  ere  retboncb,by  genealogte 
ofthcmalcs,anhunb2cbanbfiftic. 

4  ^>f  the  fonncs  of  ^ahath^oab, 
ciihocnaithcfonnc  of  zerahiarj:anb 
Uittrj  hlm,nbo  htmb2eb  males. 

5  jDf  the  fonncs  of  £>berbantab,thc 
fonnc  of  3iaha5iel ,  anb  Vbiti)  him  th.2ee 
hunb2cb  males. 

6  £)f  the  fonncs  alfo  of  3ftmt,  €beb 
tlie  fonnc  of  Jonathan  >  anb  ibitb  him 
fiftic  males. 

7  ^nb  of  the  fonncs  of  Clam,  3fc 
tnaiab  the  fonne  of  athaliab,  anb  untl; 
him  fencn tie  males. 

s  ^nb  of  the  fonncs  of  &bephati 
ab,zebabiabtbcfotmcofi33icbacl>anb 
ibith  himfourcfcojcmalcs. 

9  j2>ftbefonncsof3Joab,£>babiab 
the  fonne  of^Fchtcl:  anb  U)ithhnnttt>o 
hunbjcb  anb  tighteene  males. 

10  anb 


XChM.10 

TQettnq  out. 


Afaftproclaimed,     Chap.viij.  The Lcuitcs charge 


Or,  the 


\\Or,Z.ic- 
atr,.vfomc 
TC*d. 


\pr  pitched. 


frith.  I  pm 

words  in 
their  month. 


*  See  Chap. 
M3- 


10  ^Dofthcfotmesof&hclomtth, 
thefonneof  Jouphiah  ,anDttmhhim 
an  huno:eD  anD  ttBeefttr/e  males. 

ii  2nDof t!)cfonnesof  aScbai,  ze- 
chartah  the  fcnne  of  25ebai ,  anD  Ibith 
^wntibcntv  anp  eight  males. 

ix  3tnD  of  the  Cannes  of 3ftgao,  3& 
hanan  ||  the  fotme  of  fcafcUatan ,  anD 
Hurt)  htm  an  humncD  anD  ten  males. 

ij  ano  of  tDc  laft  fonnes  of  3Dom> 
Ham.ibhofe  names  are  thefe :  tfliphelet, 
3fchtct,auD^hemaiah,anDttHth  them 
ttnccfeoic  males. 

14.  2SDffhefonnesatfoof2iSlguai,31= 
thai,  anDllzabbuo,  ano  lbiththemfe; 
itentie  males. 

15  C  3nD  3  gathcrcD  them  toge; 
ther  to  the  nuec ,  that  runneth  to  ^ha^ 
ua,  anD  there  UaboDcibce  intents  flyer 
Dayes:anD  3  btctbeD  the  people ,  anD 
thci&wtts,  anD  fb  una  therenoneofthe 
fonnes  of  ILeui. 

16  Xhcnfent^fojeiicser^^rfel, 
fo?5>hcmatal) ,  anDfo:cinathan,anD 
fo:3?anb,  anD  fo:<£lnathan  ,  anofo: 
Nathan ,  ano  fo:  zeehartah ,  anofo: 
flpefbullam,  chiefe  men ,  alfo  fo?  gja^ 
nb,  ano  fo:  etnathan ,  men  of  bnDcr- 
CtanDtng. 

17  3nD  3  ftntthenilbith  commas 
Dement  bnto  'JIddo  the  rhtcfc  at  the 
plate  €auphta,anD  3  iftoiDthemtbhat 
thcyfhoulD  Cay  bnto  3Jddo » and  to  his 
b:eth:en  tlic  iftethimms ,  at  the  plate 
Cafiphia,  that  they  ft)oulbb:ingbnto 
bs  mmittcrs  fo:  the  houfe  of  our  <3oD. 

is  3uDbythegooDhanDofonrc5oD 
bpon  bs ,  thev  b:ought  bs  a  man  of  bn> 
oerftanDing ,  of  the  Comics  of  99ahli 
thcfonneof?Lcui,  the  fonneofjfraci, 
ano  S>herebiah,  tbith  his  fonnes,  anD 
his  b?eth:cu,ctghteenc. 

19  3inD  $a(habtah  ,  anD  lbifh  him 
'iiefbaiahofthefonnesofSPcrart,  his 
b?cth.:cn,auD  their  Conues,nbentic. 

20  *  2tfb  of  the  jftcrhimms ,  ibhom 
2E>auio,  anD  thciDatueshaDappointeD 
fo?  the  feruicc  of  tlje  Hcuttcs,  nbo  hum 
D?£D  ano  Ubentte  /Scthtmms  :  all  of 
themtbece  ctpjefTcD  by  name. 

z\  CXheu3Jp:ociatmeDafa(ttherr, 
at  the  rtuer  ^haua  ,  that  ibe  might  af 
flietourfclucs  befozcour  <3oD,  tofecfic 
ofhimarightmavfo:  bs ,  anofo:  our 
Uttlc  oncs^no  fo:  all  our  fubftante. 

2.2  Sm  3  was  afhameD  to  teonirc 
ofthelnngabanDoffoulDtersanoho:ts 
men,  toheipebs  agatnft  the  encnue  in 
thcibay:  becaufctbcchao  fpoftenbnto 


the  feing,  faying,  Xhc  hanD  of  our  <5oD 
«  bpon  all  them  fo:  gooD  ,  that  recsel 
him,  but  his  potber  ano  bis  tb:ath  is  a 
gamttauthem  that  fo:fafcc  hrm. 

i J  &Q  ibe  faftcD ,  anD  befought  our 
(Sob  fo?  this ,  anD  hec  ibas  intrratcb 
ofbs. 

24-  C^Oicn  %  fcparateD  tibelueof 
thechtcfe  ofthep?tcfts,a>herebiah,^aj 
Cbabiah,  anD  ten  of  their  bjrtlucnitnth 
them, 

25  3inD  tbctghcD  bnto  them  the  fil 
iter  anD  the  goto,  anDtbebeflels,  euen 
the  offering  of  the  houfe  of  out  <5od, 
ibhtch  ti)t  lung  anD  his  tounfellours, 
auDhtsiojos,  ano  all  Jlfratl  there  p^ 
fent,haDoffereD: 

26  3  euen  ibeigheb  bnto  their 
hanD ,  fire  hunD/cD  ano  fifty  talents  of 
filuer,  anD  filucrbcCfelsanhuuD:cDta 
lents.anD  of  golD  an  hunD?cD  talents: 

17  ^ifotibcntpbaronsofgouxofa 
thoufanDD?ammes,  anDtrboheCfeisof 
t  fine  topper,t  p?etious  asgolb. 

z8  aiiDlJfafD  bnto  them ,  J3eeare 
holy  bnto  the  %  ©  a  © ,  the  befTels  arc 
holy  alfo ,  ano  the  fducr  anD  the  golD 
areafrcc-lbilloffring bnto  the  ILok© 
©od  of  your  fathers. 

29  naatrh  ye ,  ano  beepe  them ,  tnnll 
yec  tbcigh  them  bcfo:e  the  tljitfe  of  the 
quells,  anDthcUeuitcs,  atiDthiefc  of 
the  fatlicrs  of  ^irracl  at  3Jerufalcm, 
ut  the  chambers  of  the  houfe  of  the 
Hsde©. 

30  &otooKt  the  tfwetts  anD  the  He* 
rates  the  \bcight  of  the  filuer  anD  the 
golD,  anD  the  bedels,  to  bung  them  to 
3Jcrufaicm  ,  bnto  rt)c  houfe  of  our 

(50D. 

31  CE  Xlien  lbee  DcpartcD  from  tljcj 
riucr  of  3haua ,  on  the  trbclfth  ^y  of; 
thefirft  moncth,  to  goc  bnto  ^crufa-1 
lem ;  ano  the  hanD  of  our  (5od  rbas  bp- 
on  bs,  anD  hec  Deliucrcb  bs  from  the 
hanD  of  the  cncnuc,anD  of  fuel)  as  lay  in 
lbaitbythcibay. 

3  2  ^nb  ibe  tame  to  3Jcnifalem ,  ano 
aboDcthcrcth:ccDayes. 

33  C/i5o\b  on  the  fourth  Day  ftias 
the  filuer  anD  thegolD,  anD  the  bedels 
ibctgfieD  in  the  houfe  of  our  <5oD,by  the 
hanD  of  iTBcrcmoththcfonne  of  Slrtah 
the  j&icft ,  ano  Vbtth  h»n  was  eica?ar 
tlje  fonnc  of  0hmehas,  ano  lbith  them 
was  gioybab  the  tonne  of  'ycttnia, 
ano  Boaotah  thcfonncof26inmn,|Le' 
uites: 

34  25y  number ,  and  by  ibeight  of 
cucry 


XHAr.ytl- 

low  or  flt- 

f  HttrJe- 

hreable. 


Ezras  con 


fee 


sion 


zra. 


an< 


prayer. 


ucryoue-.anbail  tbcrbctgbtibasibn^ 
tenattbattunc. 

35  Air0  tbetbilbmtoftbofetbatbab 
bene  carieb  away  ttrtnd)  ibere  come  oat 
of  tbe  taptluttic,  ofiftrtD  burnt  offnngs 
bnto  toe  ©Ob  of  3Jfcael ,  tVbcinc  bul^ 
,  locHs  to:  a'.l  Sftacl ,  ninetic  anb  fire 
rammes ,  fraentic  anb  fewen  lambes, 
tibelue  nee  r:2?ies  foj  a  finnc  offering : 
ail  this  was  a  burnt  offering  into  tfje 
It©  13©. 

36  C  3inb tijev bebuctcb  rrje  Bings 
comtmfltons  bnto  tlje  Rings  neuter 
uams,  anb  to  fbegouctnours  on  tbis 
fibc  tlje  riuer,  anb  tt)cy  furtbereb  ttje 
people,  anb  tbcljoufc  of  <5ob. 

CHAP.    IX. 

i  Ezra  momnethior  the  affiuitic  of  the  people 
with  ftranrjers.  5  HeprayethviuoGodwith 


ife( 


conlelsion 


of  fin 


nes. 


Or,aJj!i?!f 


I  Or  yfui.'n 


Dm  tbben  tbcfc  things 
xv  lbcrc  bone ,  tfje  juices 
3  cantc  to  me ,  faying ,  Xbe 
^v/pco|)ltof3ftacl,  anb  ttjc 
$mm,  pnefts  anb  tl)c  DLeuttcs, 
bauc  not  fcparatcb  tljanfelucs  from 
the  people  of  tbc  lanbs,  doing  attojbmg 
to  their  abominations,  euen  of  tbc  Ca= 
naanttes,  the  J?ittites,  the  jDcri^ites, 
tbc  3Jcbufues,  the  Ammonites ,  the 
s$)oabites,  the  egyptiaus,  anb  the  a- 
montes. 

%  5Foj  they  bane  talien  of  their 
Daughters  foitljcmfelues,  anb  fo?  their 
fonncs  :fo  that  the  holy  fceb  banc  irang^ 
Icbtbcmfclucs  ttntb  tbe  people  of  thoie 
lanbs,  yea  tlje  Ijanb  of  tbc  pimtes  anb 
rulers  liatli  bin  cbicfc  m  tins  trefpaflc. 

3  anb  lbben  3  bcarb  this  tlnng,g} 
rent  my  garment  anb  my  mantle,  anb 
plurHt  off  tbc  haire  of  niybcab.anbof 
my  bearb ,  anb  fate  boibue  aftomeb. 

4  1Lbcn  ibere  affembleb  bnto  me 
cucry  one  that  trnnblcb  at  tbc  lbo.'bs 
of  tbc  Cob  of  Jifracl ,  bctaufe  of  tbc 
tranfgreffton  ofthofe  that  bao  bene  ca 
rtcB  aibay ,  anb  %  fate  aftomeb ,  bnttll 
toe  turning  faceffice. 

5  <L  anb  at  tbc  cuctur.g  facrtficc ,  3J 
arofebp  fcommyllbcaumcrtc,  anb  ha- 
ning  rent  my  garment  anb  mv  mantle, 
3Jfcllbpon  mybnecs,  anb  fpjcab  out 
my  banbs  Duto  tbc  %o  is  \n>  my  Gob, 

6  anb  faib, sD  mv  (5ob,  1,  am afba- 
mcb  ,anb  bluft)  to  lift  bp  my  face  to  tbee, 
mv  <3ob :  fo:  our  iniquities  are  mere  a 
fco  oucr  our  Ijcab, anb  our  ||  trefpaflc  is 


gcolbcnbp  bnto  the  beauens. 

7  ;Suntetbebayesofoutfatbets, 
haueibec  beene  ui  agecat  teefpaflebnto 
tins  bay,  $  fo?  ouctniauittcsbauerbe, 
our  mugs  anb  our  pnefts,  bm  beuueeeb 
into  tbc  banb  of  tbebtngsof  the  lanbs, 
to  tbe  fraojb ,  to  captuntie,  anb  to  a 
fpoiie,  anb  to  conniuon  of  fete,  as  it  is 
tins  bay. 

8  anb  nolb  fo?  a  t  luie  fpace  grate 
bath  bene  (betbeb  from  the  |L€>k©  our 
©ob,  to  leauc  bs  a  remnant  to  cfcape, 
anb  to  giue  bs  ||  a  ||  naile  tn  bis  rjoly 
plate,  that  our  <sob  may  lighten  ouc 
eycs,anogiuebsa  litlcrcuuungmour 
bonbage : 

9  ft oi  ibec  were  bonbmen ,  ^tt  our 
<Bob  batb  °ot  fotfaaen  bs  m  our  bon* 
bage,  bnt  Ijati)  ertenbeb  mertte  bnto  bs 
ra  tbeftgbt  of  tlje  tutigs  of  i&erna ,  to 
glue  bsa  reuiumg  to  fct  bp  tj)e  houft  of 
ouc  ©ob,  anb  t  to  rcpaire  tbc  bcColatt 
ons  thereof,  anb  to  gtuc  bs  a  iball  in 
3Jubal)  anb  in  3lcrufalcm. 

io  anbnoVb,€)our(E;oo,ibbatfbal 
toefayaftcctms;  fo.2U)e!)aucfo?fa&cn 
tfty  tommanbements, 

1 1  nalnrb  tbou  baft  tommanbtb  by 
ttfty  fctuants  tlje  pjopbets ,  faymg, 
*  Xbc  lanb  bnto  ibbirt)  ye  go  to  poffefle 
it,  is  anbiulcanclanb,  lbul)  tbe  filtbfc 
ncflc  of  tbe  people  of  tlje  lanbs,  lbttb. 
tbeic  abominations,n>l)tcb  baucftllcb  ft 
tfrom  one  enb  to  anotbec, \bctt;  ttjetc 
bneleanncffc. 

iz  i9oibe  tbcrcfo^c  gtne  not  your 
oangbters  bnto  tbeic  fonncs,  neither 
tabctocirbaugbtersbntoyourfbnnes, 
I  no:  feebe  tbeir  peace  o:  tljcir  Ibeattb  fo: 
cuer :  tbatye  may  bee  ftrong,  anb  eate 
tbegooboftbcianb.anblcaucitfozan 
|  mbentance  to  your  ebilbzcn  fo?  eucr. 

13  anb  after  all  tbat  is  tome  bpon 
;  bs,fo j  our  rail!  bcebs,anb  fo^  our  great 
trefpaflc,  feeing  tbat  tbou ,  our  ©ob, 
i  t  ijaft  punifl)cb  bs  lcfl*c,tbcn  our  miaui* 
tiesdeierue,  anbljaft  giucn  bs  fuchbclt 
ucrautcastbis: 

i+  5>bouib  ibee  agamc  bjeahc  tby 
!  commanbcments,aub  toync  maffuiitic 
lbitb  tbe  pcoplcoftbefcabommatious^ 
t  iboulbcft  tbou  not  be  angry  ibirt)  bs,  til 
|tboubabbcftconfumcbbs,fotbattberc 
fl)oulb  be  no  rcmnant,noj  eftapmg  < 

15  £>  %  ©  iR  ©  <5ob  of  3fracl,  tbou 
a^t  righteous,  fojlbcercmameyet  cfca 
peb,  asicistljisbay :  2Scbolb,ibearebc 
fozc  tbee  m  ouc  tr efpaffes :  fo?  lbcc  can 
not  ftanbbcfojc  tbee,  becaufc  of  tins. 

CHAP. 


|  Hehrjno- 
mtr.t- 


\\0r,api>7T:e 
\\Thatiita 
cmjlant  and 
furs  abode. 


XHcb.tofti 


\Heh.trjthe 
hard,  of thy 
fcrttaats. 

iz.dcut.7.5 

^Heb.frem 
mouth  (a 
msstth. 


\Hekbajt 

withheld  kc- 
nt at hour 
imquitiet. 


Order  taken  for  Chap.x.         ilrange  manages 


\fiebr.vicpt 
.fredt  wcc~ 


fHebr.lo 
brmgforth. 


\Htb.icne 
ttd. 


CHAP.    X. 

Shechaniah  encaurageth  Ezra  torerormethe 
llrange  manages.  6  Ezra  mourning,  aflem- 
bleth  the  people.  9  The  people  at  die  ex- 
hortation of  czra,repent  and  promife  amend- 
ment. 15  The  care  toperforme  it.  1S  The 
nanKbofthemwhohadmatiedrttaiigewmes. 

&§*  £>W  When  €5ta  haD  pwt- 
«  %  cd,  anD  When  he  haD  cotv 
1 1  fcflJtD ,  wee  pmg ,  anD  ca 
^  I  fting  himfcltc  Downe  be 
„  JJi  foje  the  l)oufe  of  <5oD , 
there  aflrinbleb  into  him  out  of  3fra 
el,  a  bery  Bceat  congregation  of  men, 
anD  women,  anD  chilDjctt:  foj  thepeo 
pletwcptbcryfoze. 

r  anD  £>hechaniah  the  fottne  of 
gjehiel,  oneofrtjefonncsof  €iam,  an 
IrocrcD  anD  fatDbnto  <£5ta,  nace  hauc 
trcfpaffcD  agamft  our  c&oD ,  anD  hauc 
tancn  ftrangc  Wiucs,  of  the  people  of 
theianDiyctnoWthcrcishopemJfra; 
el  contenting  thts  thing. 

3  #oW  tbercfoze  let  bs  raase  a  to 
uenant  With  out  (?oD,  t  to  put  away ail 
the  Wiucs  f  fuel)  as  are  borne  of  them, 
arco2Dmg  to  the  tounfcll  of  my  lo:D,auD 
ofthofc  that  tremble  at  the  tonunanDc- 
mentof  our  <5oD,  anb  lee itbe Done  at 
co2Dmgtothe?LaW. 
4.  atrifc,fo:tt)tsmartecbciongethbn= 

to  thee,  Wecalfo  wiilbettrttht&ce:  be  of 
gooD  courage,  anD  Doe  it. 

<,  1tbcn  arofc  <£3ra ,  anD  maDc  the 
crjiefe0:ieOs,the|Letntes,  auDail3Jf 
raelto  ftueare ,  that  they  fhoulD  doc  m 
tojDing  to  this  W02D :  anD  they  fruarc 

6  CXhenesrarofcbpfeombcfoje 
the  houfe  of  @oD ,  anD  Went  into  the 
chamber  of  "Johanan,  thefonne  of  & 
liafhib :  anD  when  ljcc  tame  thither ,  per 
Dtb  catcno  b:caD,  no:  Djmhe  water :  fo; 
hee  mourneD  becaufc  of  the  tranigrcut- 
on  ofthem  that  Dab  bene  cancD  away. 

7  3tnD  they  maDc  $;ociatnanon 
ttooughout  IJuDah  anD  3Jcrufalem, 
bnto  ail  the  cDUDien  of  the  taptuunc, 
that  they  fhoulD  gather  themfelues  to; 
gctlicr\)uto'5enifalcm. 

3  3{ttD  that  Whofocner  WoulD  not 
come  WttDm  rbJce  Daves ,  accortmtg  to 
thccounfellof  thepnnces,  atiDtbc  €1- 
Ders,  all  hts  fubQantc  fhoulD  be  t  foifcu 
tcD,  anD  huufelfe  fcparatcb  from  the 
congregation  of  tbofc  that  haD  becne  ca 

rtcbaway.  ,  ._  „„. 

9   C  £hen  an  tDc  men  of  Ihtbah 

anD  25cnianun ,  gatherco  themfelues 


together  bnto  Jcrirfaicm.Wittitntfjzee 
Daycs:  it  was  the  ninth  moneth,  on  the 
twennetfj  dav  of  the  moncth,  anD  all 
the  people  fate  in  tfjcftcccte  of  the  houfe 
of  (5oD,  trembling  becaufc  of  this  mat; 
tcr,atibfo2  f  the  great  tame. 

10  anDejrathciDjicftllooDbp.anD 
fatDbnto  them ,  jaec  hauc  tranfgrclleD, 
anD t hauc  tauctt  ftrangc  Wiucs,  to  en; 
crcafcthctrcfpaffc  of  Jfrael. 

1 1  iiSoW  tl)ercfo2c  matte  confdTton 
bttto  ttje  %  o  k  d  ©oD  ofyoucfarhers, 
anD  Doe  his  plcafure :  aiiDfeparate your 
fclues  from  the  people  of  thclanD ,  anD 
from  the  ftrangcWiues. 

n  Xhen  all  the  congregation  an- 
fmercD.anD  faiD  With  a  loubcboicc ,  Zs 
thouhaOfaiD,fomuftweDoc: 

i)  i6ut  the  people  are  many,  anD  it  ^ 
a  time  of  much  rainc,  anD  We  are  not  a; 
blc  to  QanD  Without;  neither  is  this 
awo:UcofoucDayo2two:fo2l|Weeace 
many  that  I;aue  tranfg«tTeD  in  this 
thing. 

i+  net  now  our  rulers  of  all  the 
congregation  ftano  ,  anD  let  all  them 
whtch  hauc  taKcn  Orange  wiucs  in  our 
cities,  come  at  appointcD  times,  $With 
themthcciDersof  cucryntie,  anD  the 
35uDgcsthercof  bntill  the  fierce  wjath 
of  our  (3od  |  fo:  this  matter ,  beturncD 
frombs. 

15  Chicly  Jonathan  the  fanneof 
^rahcl,auD3}aha3tahthefonneofH;t; 
buah ,  t  were  employcD  about  this  mat; 
tec  :anD^cfl)iiliam,anD  £>habbethat 
thc1tcuitc,helpeDthcm. 

16  3Jnb  the  thirteen  of  the  capmutic 
DiDfo  :anDi£5rathep,»cu>ith  ccrtame 
chicfc  of  the  fathers,  after  the  houfc  of 
their  fathers ,  anD  all  of  them  by  their 
|namcs,WercfcparatcD,anDfateDoWne 

i  in  the  6rfr  Day  of  the  tenth  moncth  to 
;  ejeaminc  the  matter. 

17  5lnD  thev  maDc  an  enDc,  With  all 
,  tlie  men  that  hab  fatten  ftrauge  Wiucs, 
by  the  firft  Day  of  the  firftmonctt). 

is  C  3Jnb  among  the  Cannes  of  the 
02teftcs,  tljcre  Were  foiuiD  that  1>id  t& 
ften  ftrangc  Wines :  namely ,  of  the  Cons 
of  Jjcfbua  the  ConncofJojaDaB,  anD 
his  b2eth2m,#aailah)anD  siie3cr,anD 
gjanb,anD©cDaUah. 

19  ^ttDthcy  gauc  their  hanDS,  that 
they  WoulD  put  away  their  Wiucs :  anD 
being  guiitte,  they  offered  a  ramme  of  the 
flotKeto2theirtrefpalTe. 

ao  anD  of  thefonncs  of  ^mnter, 
li?auam,anD  Zebabialj : 

11  ^nb 


f  HAr.  the 
(howrei. 


I  Hebr.  hunt 

ClufcdtQ 
dvtlL,OT  hjtH 
brought 
bjekf. 


\\Or,me 
hxMC  qreally 
ofjrndedu 
ihti  (hmff 


\\Or,lilltku 
mMttrbe 

difpjcctud. 


Heb.foci. 


33 


Who  put  away       Nehemiah.         Arrange  wiues. 


21  Sinbofthe  fonncs  of  t?anm,$)& 
afiah,  anb  <eiiiaj),  anD^ljcntata^ ,  anb 
3jchtei,anb  <Sl55tah. 

22  anb  ef  the  fonncs  of  $aflnit: 
<£liocnat,  £0aafiah,33fl)maet ,  iiJct^a^ 
necl^osababanbeiafah. 

23  SUfoof  tlje  ILcuitcs :  ^Jo^abab, 
anu  S>himet,  anb  i&clatah  ( the  fame  is 
Belitah)  i&ethahtah ,  3Jubab,  anbe* 
Ile5cr. 

24  £>fthefingcrsalfo,<£I(afl)ib  anb 
of  the  posters,  5>baUum,  anbftetcm, 
anbUri. 

25  $)ojeouer  of  3ffrael,of  the  tonnes 
of  paro(h,ftamlah ,  anb  3Icuah ,  anb 
Q)aichtah,  anD  Sj3iamin,  anb  eicajar, 
anb  s^alrtjijali,  anu  25enatoh. 

26  ^nDofq)cfonnesof€iam:SJ9at' 
tantah ,  zeebartah,  anb^Jebtei ,  ano 
3lbbi£nb  3Jeremotb,anb  eitab. 

27  3tno  of  the  tonnes  of  Zattu :  C* 
uocnai,<2ua(bib,  $)attantab,  anb3Je* 
remotb,anb  zabab,anb  aroa* 

28  j©f  the  fonncs  alfo  of zsebat:  31  e* 
bobanan,^anantab,zabbai,&:3tbiai. 

29  3nb  of  the  fonncs  of25ant :  £0c* 
flmllam ,  $Daiiucl) ,  anb  3toatab ,  3Ja* 
(bub.anb  5>hcai,anb  8amoth. 

30  3tnb  of  the  fonncs  of  ^abatb 
£)9oab :  3tbna ,  anb  Chclal ,  25enaiab,  1 


CBaafiah ,  £j9attamab,  2Sc3alcei,  anb 
26mnui,anb  £J9anafTcl). 

31  3tnb  of  the  fonncs  otl?arun:€lic< 
5er ,  3Q)ualj ,  :Sj9aichiab ,  S>bemaiab, 
3>bimcon, 

32  zscnianun,  fipailucb ,  anb  £>\)v 
mattan. 

33  jaDftbefonnesof^attntm :  ^at- 
tenaM^attatba.zabab.eitpbctct,^ 
temaM0anaffej,»nd  £>tjunct 

34  €>f  the  fonncs  of  25ant :  spaabai, 
3lmram,anb?llel, 

35  2Scnaiab,2Scbaiab,Cbciiub, 

36  ©aniab,^cremotb,«EUaftjtb, 

37  ^attaniab^attcnat.anb^aa* 
fau, 

38  ^nb25ant,anb25cnnu(,S)Dtnui, 

39  3inb  <&>helemtab ,  anb  /5athan, 
anbabaiab, 

40  ||fl0acbnabebai,:§>bafoai,  S>b& 
rat, 

41  parcel ,  anb  £>bclemiah,  $>\)v 
martab, 

42  ^haiitnn^manan^nd^ofcpl). 

43  £>f  the  fonncs  of  jftebo  ,3?ebicl, 
gpatttroiah ,  zabab,  zcbtna,3fabau, 
anb3Joct,25enatal). 

44  3UI  tbcfe  hab  ta&en  Orange 
ttjtnes :  anbfomc  of  them  hao  ariues,bp 
VbbomtbeybabcbiHwen. 


«fTHE  BOOKE   OF 

Nehemiah. 


chap.  1. 

Nehemiah  >  vnderftanding  by  Hanani ,  the 
mifery  of  Ierufalcui ,  mourneih ,  rafted)  and 
piaycch.    5    His  prayer. 

J?cibo?bsofii3e' 
liem(al)tl)eContit 

oftyathaliab.^nb 
ix  came  to  paCCctn 
the  monctb  €\yv 
flcn,mtl)cnbcn^ 
netbpeerc  ,as3I 
mas  tn  £>bufban 
the  palace ) 
2  1Cbat^anatn,oncofmvb;ctlnen 
camc>l)c  anb  ccrtame  men  of  Jlnbalj^nb 


3  afSeb  them  concerning  the  lltVots 
that  babtfcapcbAbbu1)mereicftof  the 
capmntie,anb  tonterntng^crufalem. 

3  anbtbeyfaibbntomc.Xbcwm'' 
nant  that  are  left  of  the  captuntic  there 
in  the  pjomncc,  are  m  great  affliction 
anb  rcp;orh :  the  mail  of  3Jeruialemal' 
&  •  is  bjofecn  boibne ,  anb  the  gates 
thcr cof arc  burnt  mttb  fire. 

4  C^nbitcamctopaffcVbhcn^ 
bcarbtbefc  mojbs.tbafJfateboUme 
anbtbept,  anbmoumcbccrumebapcs, 
anbfaftcb ,  anb  p?aycb  before  the  ©ob 
ofbeauen, 

5  3nb  fatb  ,  3  bcfccch  thee ,  *£> 
%  o  «©  ©ob  of  Dcauen,  the  great  anb 

terrible 


j  0r,M4i- 

ctrdinf  ra 
fame  ccjn*J. 


lX\D£.2y 


'Dan.y^. 


RS 


emiahs 


Pray 


cr: 


Ch 


ap.i 


Hi 


Hisrccjucit. 


'  Dfut.4. 

j.8tc 


'Dcut.  jc 


terrible  <5ob,  ttjat  fceepctD  couenant 
anb  mcceie  fo?  tDcm  that  louc  Dim ,  anb 
obfer  ue  Dis  commanbcmcnts : 

6  HettDmeearcnotb  be  attentate, 
anb  tljmc  epes  open,  that  tDou  mapcft 
DearetDc  paper  of  tDpfctuant,  tblitri) 
3Jp#pbefo2etDccnorb,  bapanbmgDt, 
fo?tl)c  cDtfbjcn  of  3JfraeltDpfcruants, 
ano  confcflc  tDe  finnes  of  tDe  cDtfbzcn  of 
3Jfracl,\bDteD  tbce  tyuxt  fmncbagamtt 
thee:  botD  5,  ano  mp  fathers  Doufe 
Daucfinneb. 

7  i©c  Dauc  bcatt  berp  wtuptlp  & 
gamfttDce,  anb  Dauc  not  fecpt  tDe  com- 
manbcmcnts,noz  tt)c  ftatutes,  no?  thci 
tnbgements,ibr)trt)  tDou  commanbcbft  i 
tDpferuant  drifts. 

8  ftcmcmber ,  3  bcfcccD  tljct,  tlje 
tbojb  tl)at  tDou  tommanbebft  tDp  fcr 
nam  i$)ofcs,  taping,  *  u  pee  tranfgreffe, 
5  rbill  fcatter  pou  atyoab  anions  rt)c 
nations: 

9  25ut  it  pe  turncbntomcanbfecepc 
mp  commanbcmcnts ,  ano  00c  tDcm: 
'though  there  rbere  of  pou  caft  out  bnto 
the  btccrmoft  pan  of  tDe  Dcaucn ,  pet 
tt>ill  3  gatDcr  tDcm  from  tDcncc,  ano 
tbtll  bjins  tDcm  bnto  tDe  place  tDat  3 
Dauc  cDofen,  to  fet  mp  0ame  tDere. 

10  &0V0  tDefe  are  tDp  ftruants,  anb 
tDppeopIe,  ibhomthou  Daft  rcbeemeb 
bp  tDp  great  potter,  anb  bp  tDp  ftcong 
Danb. 

11  ^DiLsDisiD^bcfcctDtDeclet 
notbtDmccacc  beattenmictothepjap* 
cr  of  tDp  feruant ,  anb  to  tDe  p?apcr  of 
trjp  fentants,  lbho  befire  to  fearc  tDp 
name :  ano  piofpct ,  3  p?ap  tDce,  tDp 
Ccruant  tDts  bap,  anb  grant  Dim  mctcte 
in  tDe  tight  of  tDis  man.  fo?  J  rbas  tDe 
tangs  cup  bearer. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  Artaxerxes  vnderftanding  the  caufe  of  Ne- 
hemiahsfaduelTe  ,  fendeth  him  with  letters 
and  commiflion  to  IcrufaIein.ijNehemuh,to 
the  eriefe  of  the  enemies ,  commeth  tolerufa- 
lem.  12.  Hee  vieweth  fecretly  the  ruincs  of 
thewalles.  17  He  inatcth  the  Iewes  to  build 
in  defpite  of  the  enemies. 


aM  iRb  it  tame  to  paffe,  in  tDe 
v^^monctD  iiJifan  ,  in  tDe 
*|  twentieth  pecrc  of  Zvtap 


&'£$£$  cttcs  ri)c  King ,  that  nnnc 
,  JsJkSs&i  was  bcfoic  htm  :  ano  % 
toottcbpthclbuic,  anb  gaucttonto  rife 
Bmg:  nott)  3  Dab  not  bene  beforetime 
fabtnDispjefcncc. 


i  naDcccfo^tDcRingfaibiJtuome, 
t©Dp  is  tt)p  countenance  fabbc  ,  feeing 
tDou  art  not  fitfte*  tDis  is  notDing  eife 
but  fon-oib  of  heart.  XDcn3J  ibac  be- 
rpfojeafratb, 

3  3ttb  faio  bnto  tDe  king  ,  %  ct  tDe 
tanglfue  fozeucc :  Ibhpfhouibnotmp 
countenance  be  Cab,  ibhcn  tDe  atp,  tDe 
place  of  inpfatDers  ^cpulcbicsapctD 
ibaltc,  anb  tDe  gates  thereof  arc  confa; 
mcbibttDnte* 

4  XDen  tDe  tang  fatb  into  mc,  if o? 
tbrjat bocft  thou  matte  rcqucft <&q3 
\  p;tapcD  to  tDe  Gob  of  Dcauen. 

5  3lno  3  faib  bnto  tDe  fting ,  3Jf  it 
plcafc  the  king ,  anb  tf thp  femant  Dauc 
!  founb  fauour  in  tDp  fight ,  tDat  tDou 

iboulbeftfenbmcbnto3Jubah bnto  the 
Cttp  of  mpfatDcrs  fcpu!rD?es ,  tDat  3 
map  builb  it. 

6  anb  tDe ftingfaibc  bnto  nice  (tDe 
t  £iuctne  alio  fitting  bp  Dun)  foi  Dotb 
long  Cnall  tDpionmep  bee;  ano  ibDen 
tbilt  tDou  returnc  t  £>o  it  plcafcb  tljc 
femg  to  fenb  mc,anb  3  fet  Dim  a  time. 

7  £Po2couer'JfaibcbntotDcmng, 
3Jfit  pleafc  tDe  mng,  let  letters  be  gmen 
mectotDc  gouernoms  beponb  tDcSi^ 
ucr,  tDattDepmaptonucpmc  oucr,  till 
3Jtomcinto'JubaD. 

8  ^nb  a  letter  bnto  3fapD  tDe  feec^ 
per  of  tDe  mngs  fojreft  ,  tDat  De  map 
guicme  tmiber  tomabebeamesfo^tDe 
gates  of  tDe  palace  ibDicD  appertained  to 
tljcDoufe,  anbfo?  tDeibailof  tljt  Citic, 
anbfo?  tDe  Doiu*c  tDat  3  ttjail  enter  in 
to :  3lnb  tDe  sing  granteb  me,aceo?bmg 
to  tDe  goob  Danb  of  mp  oobbpon  me. 

9  C1Hjm  3  tame  to  tDe  gouep 
nours  beponb  trjc  riuer,anb  gauc  tDcm 
tDe  tangs  letters:  (noib  tljc  tang  Dab 
fentcaptames  of  tDe  armp ,  anb  Dol- 
men ibifDmc.) 

10  ttjDcn  5>anbaiiat  tlje  ^ojonttc, 
ano  XobiaD  tlje  feruant ,  tDe  ammo> 
ntte,  Deacbofit,  it  gcieueb  tDemercccj 
btnglp,  tDat  tDere ibascomeaman ,  to 
feehe  tDelbclfare  of  tDe  cDilb^enofJiti 
rart. 

1 1  8>o  3  came  to  3Jmifaltm ,  anb 
tbas  tDere  tD^cebapes. 

u  C  2lnb 3  arofc in  tDe  nigDt ,  3, 
anbfome  fclb  men  rbitl)  nice ,  ncitljer 
tolbe  3  anp  man  lboat  <eob  Dab  put  m 
mp  Dcart  to  boe  at  3Jcrufalcm :  ncitDcr 
ibas  tDere  anp  bead  rbttlj  nice,  fane  tljc 
beaft  tDat  31  robe  bpon. 

13  3tnD3Hbcntoutbpnigr)t,bptlie 
gate  of  the  ballcp ,  euen  before  tDe  bja 
gon 

33  2 


f  Hehr. 
rrtfe. 


The  building  Nehemiah.  ofthewalles. 


•  trr<  j. 


hu  b*nd 


gon  ibell ,  anbtotheboung-pou.anD 
bicibcbthcb)allsof3Jcrufalcm,rbhteh 
mere  ttfoben  boibnc  ,  anb  the  gates 
thereof  lbcre  confumeb  ttnth  fire. 

14  Xrjeu  3J  lbentonto  thegateof 
the  founrainc ,  anD  to  the  lungs  poole : 
but  tbcicibas no  place fo;  tl)c bcafl  ttjat 
mas  bnber  me,to  paffc 

15  Xhcn  ibcnt  3J  bpinthc  night  bp 
the  bjooae ,  anb  biclbcb  the  lbau ,  anb 
tutneD  bacac,  anb  cntteD  bp  the  gate  of 
thcballep,anb  forcturncb. 

i6  3inD  the  rulers  Unerb  not ibhithcr 
3 Xbcnt,  ojVbhat'jDiD.nettherhaD'J 
aspcttolDcittothe'3fcibcs,noHothc 
$ncfts,no;!  to  the  nobles,noj  to  ttje  ru- 
lers, no*  to  tt>e  reft  tfjat  bib  tfje  lbozne, 

17  CXljenfaibJfbnrothcnt,  ptc 
teethe  Diaceffcthatlbearcin,hoib'3Je* 
ntfalcmlieth  ibafte,  anb  tfje  gates  ther; 
ofare  burnt  ttiith  fire:  come,  anb  let  us 
builbe bp  the  lb  ail  of  Jlcrufalcm ,  that 
Vbebenonwearcpjoch. 

18  Xljcn  3  tolb  them  of  thcljanb  of 
nip  (Sobjbljich  ibas  goob  bpon  me ;  as 
alio  the  Rings  lb02bes  that  be  l)ab  Epo= 
Hen  bnto  me.3nbthepfatD,1Let  bs  rife 
bp  anb  builbe.  £>o  thep  ftrcngtheneb 
their  hanDsfo;thisgoob  worke. 

19  25ut  ibhcu  <§>anbaiiat  the  $020- 
nite.anb  Xobiah  the  fetuant  ttje  2nb 
momtcanb  Gcfljetntljc^rabian  hcatD 
it,  t!>cp  laughcb  bs  to  ftojnc ,  anb  befpfc 
{ft  \)s  ,anb  faib,  tehat  is  this  thutg  that 
pcebocnbtllpcrcbcliagamfttheKing* 

20  XlmianQt)ercb3Jthcm,anDfaib 
bnto  them,  Xhc(3oDofhcaucn,hcibill 
pjofper  bs ,  therefore  ibec  his  feruauts 
U)tU  arifc  anb  builb:  25ut  ponhaueno 
po2non,no2tight,no;mcmo;iallm3te 
rufalein. 


C 

The  names 
ded  the  vva! 


HAP.   III. 

and  order  of  them  that  buil- 


tycn  €Uafl)ibthchtcp;icn\ 
rofc  bp  with  I)is  tycthJcn 
thc^ncfts,  anb  thep  built 
tlic  fljeepe  -  gatcthep  fane 
tinea  it,<?fctbp  the  doojcs 
of  it  cucubntothctoib2Cof£Peahthcp 
fanenftcb  it ,  bnto  the  toibzc  of  *  tyaxifc 
necl. 

1  3nb  t  ncit bnto  him  biulbcb  the 
men  of  Jericho :  anbnmtothcinbuil' 
dcd  ziaccnr  thefonne  ofjtnn. 

?  zBut  the  fiflj  gate  bib  the  fonncs 
of  ftafTcnaah  bmlD ,  lbho  alfo  latbc  the 
beamts  tljcrcof,  aubfet  bpthc  booses 


tfjcreof.tfje  locks  tljerof,anD  the  barrcs 
thereof, 

4  3nb  next  bnto  them  repaircb 
Q3enmoth  the  Con  of  ©riah,  thefonne 
of  1&05 :  anb  net*  bnto  them  repaircb 
HEJeCbuilam  the  fonnc  of  Berechiah  ,the 
fbnnc  of  s^cuje^abeel :  anb  ncjet  bn^ 
to  them  rcpaireb  zabott  tJjc  fomie  of 
asaana. 

5  3inbitertbntothcm,thc£cBOltes 
repaircb;  but  their  noblesputnot  their 
nccBcs  to  the  ibojftc  of  their  %  ©  a  ©. 

6  S0o?eouer  the  olbe  gate  repaircb 
Jehoiaba  the  fonnc  of  pafcah,  anb 
$)cfl)uliam  the  fonnc  of  loetbbaiah; 
they  laib  the  beames  thereof,  anb  fct  bp 
the  boodes  thcrcof,anb  the  lorHcs  there; 
of,  anb  the  barres  thereof, 

7  3lnu  ncrt  bnto  them  repaircb 
£]3clatiah  the  (Sibeointc ,  anb  3Jabon 
thC!Q3cronothitt,  the  men  of  ©ibeon, 
anb  of  $3i5pah,bnto  the  throne  of  tljc 
goucmonr  on  this  fibc  the  3Smcr. 

S  *i3ert  bnto  him  repaircb  5I35ICI 
the  foune  of  ^arhaiah ,  of  the  golb 
umths :  nort  bnto  htm  alfo  repaircb 
$anatnah>  thefonneof  oncot  the  ^po^ 
thecartes, anb  thep  ||  fo?tificb  ^ctufo 
lem  bnto  the  bjoablbail. 

9  3nbnert  bnto  them  repaircb  Bc« 
phaiah  the  fonnc  of  l^ur ,  tljc  ruler  of] 
the  haifc  part  of  3  crufalcm. 

10  3uibnertbntothcmrepaire&3Ic 
baiah  tljc  fonnc  of  ftarumaph ,  cuen  0 
uer  agamfl  \)\s  houfc :  anb  ncrt  bnto 
him  rcpaireb  l^attufh  tlje  fonnc  of  ^a- 
(habmah. 

1 1  ispalchiiah  the  fonnc  of  $atfm, 
anb  ^aOjnb  the  fon  of  0aljatl)  £0oab, 
repaircb  the f  other  piece,  $  the  toUw 
of  the  furnaces. 

u  3lnb  ncrt  bnto  ljuit  repaircb  £>hal< 
lum  the  fonne  of  $allocfl)  the  ntlcr  of 
the  haifc  part  of  ^cruCaicm,  hee,  anb 
Ijis  Daughters. 

13  3Crjc  bailey  -  gate  rcpaireb  $anun, 
anD  the  inhabitants  of  zanoah  -,  fhep 
built  it,  anb fet  bp  the  booses  tljcreol, 
thclocBcsthcrof,anbthcbarsthcrrof, 
anb  a  thoutanD  cubits  on  tljelball ,  bn- 
to the  DDung-  gate. 

1+  23ut  the  Doung  gate  rcpaireb 
spalchtah  the  fonne  of  ftcchab ,  the  ru^ 
ler  of  par  t  of  Beth  -  haccer  cm :  hee  built 
it,  anb  fct  bp  the  booies  thereof,  the 
lorttcs  thcrcof.atiD  tljc  barrcs  thereof. 

15  25ut  the  gate  of  the  fonntaincre> 
paireb  Sljalinm  the  fonne  of  Colho 
?clj ,  tljc  ruler  of  part  of  tljtopah :  hee 

bunt 


^Orjrftll. 
th  ralmi  vn- 
totbebrottd 
wall. 


t  Hdrfc 
ctmd  mtA- 
fwe. 


The  building Chap.iiij. ofrhewalles. 


'iohny-7 


*  s.King. 
io.io. 


\\Or,Zac- 
cai. 


'Icrc. 


'  2-Chron. 

27-;. 

\\Or,lhe 


built  tt,  anu  toucrcb  it ,  anbfetbp  the 
boo2csthcrcof,  the  loc&cs  thereof,  anb 
the  barrrs  thereof,  anbthetbaUof  the 
poole  of  *£>iloahbrfheBmgsgarbcn, 
anb  Unto  the  ftaires  that  goe  boibnc 
from  the  titic  of  S)auib. 

i6  after  him  repatreb  /3ehemiah 
the  fonne  of  3t3buU,rtic  ruler  of  the  haifc 
part  of  25crh-  3ur,  bnto  the  place  oucr 
agamft  the  fcpulciws  of  SDautb ,  anb  to 
the  poolethatlbasmabe/anb  bnto  the 
houfeofthcmightie. 

17  after  him  repatreb  the  Heuttes, 
IRchum  the  fonne  of  25am :  ncrtbnto 
hun  repaireb  ftafhabtah  the  ruler  of  the 
haifc  part  of  Bcilahuibtspark 

18  after  htm  repaircb  rhctrbzcthJcn, 
iBauai,  the  fonne  of  fccnabab  the  ruler 
of  the  haifc  part  of  Bciiah. 

19  anb  ncrt  to  him  repatreb  f>?$er 
thefonnc  ofjethua ,  the  ruler  of  i$iy 
pah,  another  ptete,  oucr  againft  the  go- 
ing bp  to  the  armonc,  at  the  turning  of 

the  wall. 

20  after  him  ffiatuch  the  fonne  of 
HZabbat,  carncfiip  repaircb  the  other 
piece ,  from  the  turning  of  rhcwjiibnro 
the  boojc  of  the  houfe  of  Cliafljib  the 
high  l&icft. 

ii  after  him  repasreb  33enmoth 
the  fonne  of  flrt'iah,  the  fonne  of  HS05, 
another  piece ,  from  the  boo2c  of  the 
houfe  of  titafntb ,  cucn  to  rhc  enb  of  the 
houfe  of  eiiaflnb. 

22  an&  after  him  repaireb  the 
02tefts,thcmcnofti)cpia:nc. 

ii  after  him  repatreb  25eniamin, 
anb  fraChub ,  ouer  againft  their  houfe : 
after  hmi  rcpaiceb  pariah  the  fonne 
of  ©aafciah,  the  fonne  of  anamah,  bp 
his  houfe. 

24.  after  hun  repaireb  2Bmnut  the 
fonne  of$?enabab,  another  piece  from 
the  houfe  of  asauah,  buto  the  turntng 
ot'tlicwaii.eucnbntothecozner. 

25  #alai  the  fonne  of  t^at,  ouer  a- 
gainft  the  turning  of  the  wail ,  anb  the 
toibcr  Ibhich  ipeth  out ,  from  the  lungs 
hie  houfe ,  that  ibas  bp  the  *  court  of  the 
p2ifon:  after  htm,  pcbaiah  the  fonne  of 
parofh. 

26  £0o2eoncr  the  jftetlnmmsblbclt 
m  *||£Dphcl,bnto  the  place  oucr  agauift 
theibater  gate,  toibarb  thceaft,  anb 
the  tolber  that  licth  out. 

27  after  them  the  Hc&oitcs  repai 
rcb  another  piece ,  oucr  agamft  the 
great  toibcr  that  uetb  out,  cuenbnto 
thcrbaUof£>phel. 


28  if rom  abouc  the  hotfegate  repai- 
rcb the  teziefts,  cucrp  one  ouer  agatnft 
hishouit 

29  after  them  repaireb  "abolt  the 
fonne  of  3Jmmcr  ,  oucr  agamft  his 
houfe :  after  htm  repaireb  alfo  :S>hcma- 
tah,  the  fon  of  ;§>hcchamah ,  the  beeper 
ofthceaftgatc. 

50  after  him  repatreb  tyanatuah  the 
fonne  of  Shclcnuah  ,  anb  li^anun  the 
firth  fonne  of  zaiaph,  another  piece: 
after  htm  repatreb  £0cfl)ttliam  ,  the 
fonne  of  iScrechtah  oucr  againft  his 
chamber. 

31  after  him  repaircb  flPalchiah,the 
golbfmiths  fount,  bntothcpiace  of  the 
/^ethtmms,anb  of  the  mcrthants,oucr 
agatnft  the  gate  Q9tphuab  ,  anb  to  the 
going  bpofthcll  comer. 

32  anbbctlbccncthcgoingbpofthc 
comer  bnto  the  Chccpc-gatc ,  repaireb 
thcgolb  Dntthcs  anb  the  merchants. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  V/hile  the  enemies  fcofFe,Nehemiahprayeth 
and  continuetli  the  works.  7  Vnderftan- 
dins, the  wrath  and  leasts  of  the  enemy,  hee 
fetretha  watch.  13  Hee  armeth  the  labou- 
rers,  19  and  giucth  military  precepts. 

,  <Ilt  it  tame  to  paffc ,  that 
sT  ibbcu  5>anbaiiat  hcarb, 
%  that  ibe  butlbeb  the  toail, 
he  ibas  rbjoth,  anb  toofte 
great  mbtgnation  ,  anb 
mocticDthc^Jcibcg. 

2  anb  he  fpaltc  befoiehisbiethjcn, 
anb  the  arm?  of  Samaria ,  anb  faib, 
nDliat  boc  thefe  feeble  3)cibes  t  tbtl  the? 
t  fomfic  them  femes:- ibtU  they  farcincc:* 
lbatfjc?  matte  an  enbtttaba^ibil  they 
rciuuc  the  (tones ,  out  of  the  heapes  of 
the  rubbtfb,ibbich  are  burnt* 

3  ^}o\bXobiah  the  ammonite  was 

br  htm,  anb  he  faib,  euenthatibhtcb 
thev  bniio,  if  a  fore  goe  bp  J)c  (hall  cuen 
b:eaftc  boibnc  their  ftoneibail. 

4.  ftcarc,if>ourc5ob,rb2ibearctbc; 
fpifeb  :  anb  turne  their  repzoch  bpon 
their  olbnchcab  ,  anb  giue  themfoja 
p2av,mthc  lanb  of  captuutSe. 

<,  anb  coiiet  not  their  intquttie,  anb 
let  not  their  finne  bee  blotted  out  from 
befoze  thee :  fo:  the?  hauep2onolieb  thee 
to  anger  before  the  btulbcrs. 

6  &o  built  ibe  the  ibail,  anb  all  the 
ibail  mas  loyncb  together  bnto  the 
haifc  ther  of :  fo?  the  people  hab  a  muibe 
touwfte. 

*je         7  Casut 


Or,cornfr 
chamber. 


tffch 
to theni 
[du.es. 


leam 


t  HthA- 
ftight. 


IThe  builders  Nchcmiah.         with  weapons. 


cendtd. 


ronrta  tt. 


\\Ortth<t 

cesyt  ms*ft 

reiametevr. 

\  Heb  from 
the  lover 
ftrtstfthe 
flKtj&c 


iojmt. 


7  C^Sut  it  came  to  paffe  that  itohcn 
jfeanbaiiatanb  Xobiah ,  anb  thcara* 
bians ,  anb  the  Ammonites ,  anb  the 
3tQibobites ,  hearb  that  ttjc  iballcs 
of  3Jcrufalem  t  tuerc  mabc  bp ,  anb 
that  the  breaches  began  to  becttoppeb , 
then  the?  tbcre  bcry  tbjoth, 

8  3nb  confpitcb  all  of  them  togt= 
thct,  to  come  and  to  fight  againft  37^ 
falcm,anbttohinbetit. 

9  ji2cucrtheies,ibcmabcourp:apcr 
bnto  out  <sob,  anb  fet  a  ttmtch  agatntt 
thcm.bap  anb  night,becaufc  of  them. 

io  3inb  3Jabaft  faib ,  Xhe  frrength 
of  the  beaters  of  butbens  is  beeapeb, 
anb  there  .s  much  rubbifb,  fo  that  lbe  arc 
not  able  to  builb  the  tball. 

1 1  3nb  our  abucrfancs  faib ,  Xhtp 
0)au  not  fcnotb ,  neither  fee ,  till  tbee 
tome  to  the  mibft  among  thtm,anb  Hap 
them,  anb  taufe  the  nwfte  to  ceafe. 

iz  2nb  it  tantc  to  paffe  that  ibhen 
the3Jerbcssbhiehbnjeltbvthem,tame, 
th  ey  faib  bnto  bs  ten  tunes,  ||  #rom  all 
plates,  ybhenee  v«  fhalltetutnc  into 

1)S,  thev  will  be  vpon  you. 

n  CXherefoje  fct3Jttnthclotbet 
places  behmb  the  tball,  and  onthehtgh 
er plates,  3  cucn  fet  the  people,  after 
tljeir  families,  tbtth  fhcitfioo;tbs>thett 
fpcares,  anb  tl)cir  bolbcs. 

14  ■%nn3  loofteb,  anb tofebp ,  anb 
faib  bnto  ttje  43oblcs,anb  to  tijc  rulers, 
anb  to  reft  of  the  people,  23ce  not  yea= 
fraib  of  them  :  Remember  the  Hojb 
lbhith  is  great  anb  terrible,  anb  fight 
fo:  pout  b:eth:en,vout  fonnes  anb  pour 
baughters ,  pout  tbiues  9  pout  houfes. 

15  3no  it  tame  to  paffe  ID!) en  our  cne^ 
mtcs  hearb  that  it  tbas  fenotben  bnto 
bs,anb  000  nab  bjougftt  their  tounfeii 
to  nought,that  lbe  rctumeb  all  of  bs  to 
tlje  tball,  cuctp  one  bnto  his  tboj&c. 

is  3lnb  it  tame  to  paffe  from  tDat 
rtmcfozth  ,that  the  haife  of  mp  feruants 
tbtought  in  tl)e  ttwfte,  anb  the  othet 
haife  of  them  hclb  both  the  fpeates,  the 
flntlbs  anb  tl)c  boibcs,  anb  the  habct- 
gcons,anb  the  rulers  were  behmb  all  tlje 
houfcofjubah. 

17  Xhcp  tbhich  builbeb  on  tfte  mail, 
anb  thep  that  bare  burbens,  tbtth  thofc 
that  labcb,  eucry  one  unth  one  of  his 
nanbs  tnjouglit  m  the  lVojftc,  anblbitfj 
the  other  band  hclb  a  \beapon. 

is  f  01  tDc  builbcrs ,  cuctp  one  fjab 
,u  his  ftuoib  giroco  t  bp  his  fibc,  anb  fo 
builbeb :  anb  he  that  founbeb  the  ttum* 
pet  w  as  bv  nice. 


19  CSinb  3  faib  bnto  the  Cobles, 
anb  to  tfte  rulers,  anb  to  the  reft  of  the 
people,  Xhetbozfce  is  great  ano  large, 
anb  wee  are  fcparateb  bpon  the  tball, 
one  farre  from  another : 

20  ^mtbhatplaccthetcfiwpehcarc 
the  founb  of  the  trumpet ,  refoa  pc  thfc 
thrt  bnro  bs:  our  ®ob  flial  fight  fo:  bs. 

ii  S>o  tbee  labourcbm  the  tbojuc: 
anb  haifc  of  them  hclb  the  fpearcs,from 
the  riGng  of  the  moming>til  the  Ctarrcs 
appcareb. 

2i  iLiaetbife  at  the  fame  time  faib  3 
bnto  the  people,  flet  cucrv  one,  lUith 
his  feruant,  lobge  ibithmjcrufalcm, 
thatmthenightthepmapbeaguarbto 
bs,anb  labour  ontheba^. 

13  5)0  neither  3,  no?  mptycthjen, 
no?  mp  feruants,  no:  the  men  of  the 
guarb  ibhtth  folioibcb  me,  none  of  bs 

put  Off  OUr  ClOthCS,  ||6m'ng  that  t\Xtq> 

one  put  them  off  to?  ibafhing. 
CHAP.   V. 

1  The  levves  complaine  of  their  debt,moreage, 
and  bondage.  6  Nehemiah  rebuketh  the  v- 
furers,  and  caufetli  them  to  make  a  couenant 
of  reftitution.  14  Hee  forbcareth  his  owne 
allowance,  and  kecpeth  ho(pitalitie. 

/Bb  there  tbas  a  great  trie 
of  the  people,  anb  of  their 
tbiues,  agatnft  thnr  l»e= 
thJcnthc^Jeibes. 
2  JFo:  there  lberc  that 
faib,  nae,  our  fonnes,  anb  our  baucj!^ 
ters  are  man? :  therefore  ibee  tabe  bp 
to?ne  for  them ,  that  ibe  map  cat,anb  uue. 
j  S>ome  aifo  there  ibere  that  faibe, 
i©e  haue  mo2gagcb  our  lanbes,  bme- 
parosanbhoufes,  that  ibe  might  buy 
comc,bccaufcof  thebearrh. 

4-  Xhcre  ibere  aifo  that  faib,  asec 
haueb02roibeb  moncp  foi  the  Rings  trfc 
bute,  and  that  vponour  lanbsanb  bines 
parbs. 

5  jaetnotbourflefh'sasthcflefhof 
out  tyethJcn,  our  chtlbzen  as  their  ch(l< 
bjen :  anb  loc,  tbee  bnng  into  bonoagc 
our  fonnes  anb  out  baughters,  to  bee 
feruants ,  anb  fomc  of  ont  baughtcts 
ate  brought  bnto  bonbagc  already ,  net? 

thCt  iS  it  m  OUt  pOlbCt  to  rcdeeme  them : 

fo:  othct  men  haue  out  lanbs  anb  bine 
patbs. 

6  C^nb3ibasbcrvangtp,tbhen 
31  hcatb  theitrae,anbthcfeibo:bs. 

7  Xhcn  t^j  confultco  ibtth  mp fclfe, 
anb  3tcbui$cb  the  /5obles,  anb  thctu-- 

lers, 


\\Or,nery 
ont  wenc 
vithhu 
we*fon  for 


t  Htb.mj 
t^etn  cenjiii- 


Vfune  reformed.       Chap.vj.        Sanballats  letters 


tobs  from  among  the  heathen  that 
about  bs. 

18  ii5otb  that  Xbljict)  ibas  pieparcb 

tor  me  baily ,  was  OHC  OJCe .  and  fijCC  ChOtCe 

fyrcpe.  alto  foulcs  iberc  pieparcb  fo: 
nice ,  anb  once  in  ten  capes,  ftoicof  all 
foits  of  mine :  vet  fo;  all  this  rcquireb 
not  3  $*  "?wo  of  ttje  gouernour ,  be? 
caufe  the  bonbage  mas  heauy  bpon  this 
people. 

19  *%hinftcbponmee,my<25ob,fo?  .Chap<3 
goob,  according  to  all  that  31  haue  bone 
foithtspcoplc, 

CHAP.  VI. 

i  Sanballatpractifeth  by  craft,  by  rumours,  by 
hired  prophecies ,  to  terrifie  Nehemiah.  15 
The  worke  is  fimfhed  to  the  terrourof  the 
enemies.  17  Secret  intelligence  pafleth  be- 
tweene  the  aiemies,and  the  nobles  of  Iudah. 

«f  £)tb  lit  came  to  paffe  Ibhen 
§  i  &anballat,  anb  Xobiah, 
I  aanD<25cfbernthe:arabian, 
^  I  anb  the  reft  of  our  m& 
iBil  mies  hcarb,  that  3  hab 
butlbcb  tlje  tbau,  anb  that  there  Ibas 
no  bieach  left  therein :  (though  at  that 
tunc  33  Dab  not  fee  bp  the  booses  bpon 
tl)e  gates,) 

z  %hat  5>anbauat,anb  (Pefbem 
fent  tmto  me,  faying,  Come,  let  bs  meet 
together  in  fome  one  of  ttje  btllages  m 
the  piatne  of  £mo :  26ut  tfjrp  thought 
tobocmemifcljiefe. 

1  ^nbJJfcntmeffengersbntotficm, 
faying ,  3  am  bomg  a  great  moitse ,  fo 
thatjj  can  not  come  boibmlbhy  fboulb 
thciboi&eeeafe,  ibhiUtt3l  lcauett,anb 
comebomnetoyou? 

4.  ^mheyfmt  bnto  me  foure  times, 
after  this  foit -,  anb  3  anftucr  cb  them  afc 
tct  the  fame  maner. 

<,  Xhenfcnt&anbauathisfernaut 
bnto  mt,m  U6emanner,the  fifth  time, 
tbiti)  an  open  letter  in  his  hanb : 

6  aeftereutrbasmnttcn^tisrci 
pozteb  among  theheathen,  anb  l!©au> 
mu  fayth  tt ,  that  thou  anb  the  Tlctbes 
thinHe  to  rebril:  foi  rutjtctj  caufc  thou 
butibcftthe  mall ,  that  thou  mayeft  be 
their  Bmg,  aceoibtng  to  theft  iboibs. 

7  3lnbthouhaftaifoappomtcb$i0' 
phctsto  picach  of  thee  atjjerufalcm, 
faying ,  There  .sanjungingjubah.  anb 
noibfbailitbercpoitcb  to  the  Ring,  at* 
touring  to  theft  tboibes.  Come  notb 
tyetefive ,  anb  let  bs  tahe  counfcll  to; 
gcther.  ^ 

%%t        8  Chen 


Lcuir  15 
4»- 


or  void. 


lets,  anb fatb bnto  them,  jaou  eract  b* 
fune,  eueryoneof  htsbiother.  2nb3i 
fet  a  great  afftmbly  agamft  them : 

8  3nb  3  faib  bnto  them,  tee,  after 
out  abiime ,  haue*  rebeemeb  our  b:e* 
thien  the  31etbes ,  tbhtch  tberefolb  bn* 
to  the  heathen ,  anb  ibtll  you  euen  fell 
youcbiethjcn*  0?  (ball  they  be  folb  btv 
to  bs^Xhcnbclb  they  their  peace,  anb 

fOUnb  nothing  to  anfwere. 

9  3tlfo  3  faib ,  3Jt  >s  not  goob  that 
yecboe :  ought  yee  not  to  tbaifec  in  the 
feare  of  our  <5ob  ,betaufe  of  the  rcp?och 
of  the  heathen  our  enemtes  < 

10  3  n&eibtft,  and  my  bjettwen ,  anb 
my  fecuants ,  might  eract  of  them  mo- 
ncy  anb  come :  3  P  W  ?ou  let  bs  leauc 
off  this  bfurtc. 

11  &ettoic,3Jpiayyou,tofhcm,cuen 
this  bay,  thettlanbs,  their  btneyatbs, 
thetr  olsue  -  yacbs,ano  their  houfes,  aU 
fo  the  hunbicth  part  of  the  money ,  anb 
ofthccomcthcibincanDtheoyie,  that 
ye  eract  of  them. 

n  Xhcnfaibthey,ffi)ceroillrefto?e 
them  anb  lbill  require  nothing  of  them ; 
fotbilimebocasthoufaveft.  Xhen3J 
calico  the  0nefts,  anb  toohe  an  oath  of 
them,  that  they  fhouio  bocacco?btngto 
thispjomtfe. 

u  ^ifo  3  fhoobc  my  lap ,  anb  faib, 
<S>od&oo  fhaftcoutcuerymanfroinhts 
ljoufe,ano  fromhis  labour.that  perfoj 
mcth not thispjomifc,  euen  thusbehe 
fljaKcnout,  atibtcmptico.  ^nballthe 
Congrcganonfaib,^mcn,  anbpjatfcb 
thelLsDiaiD.  anb  the  people  mo  acco^ 
bmgtottitspjomife- 

14  c^ojeouer,  ftomthetimcthat 
3  ttas  appomteb  to  be  thctr  goucmo? 
in  the  lanb  of  3lubah ,  from  the  tiben^ 
nemycerc  euen  bnto  thctiboanb  thic^ 
neth  ycre  of  3lr tarcrres  the  tang,  that  is, 
t\belueyeccs,5ianbmyb2cth2cn,haue 
not  eaten  the  bzcab  of  the  goucrnour : 

i<,  25utthcfo:mcr  goucrnours  that 
hadbencbcfozcmcibcrechargcablcbni 
to  the  people,  anb  nab  ta&cnofthcm 
b2cat),  aubibinc,  bcfibcfourticfheHels 
of  ftlucr,  yea  euen  thctr  fentants  bare 
rule  oucr  tlic  people :  but  fo  bibnofj, 
becaufe  of  the  feare  of  45ob. 

16  j3caaifo3icontiintcbuithelbojRc 
of  this  \bail ,  neither  bought  ibte  any 
lanb :  anb  all  my  fentants  iberc  gathe* 
rebthitherbntothcibozrte. 

17  ©o2Coucr,thcreVbcrcatmyta; 
ble,  an hunbieb  anb  fifnc  of  the 31  ernes 
anb  rulers, bcfibcs  thofc  thatcamebtu 


11^.^- 

Ihem,  ver.it 


Tobiahs  letters.       Nehemiah.        Who  returned 


ttphrdl't- 
t  m  pa  fling 
toTobiaii. 


\\  Or  pat- 
ten. 


s  Xbcn  31  fent  bnto  bun ,  fapmg, 
Xbcrcarcnofucb  tbtngsbonc  astbou 
fapeft,  but  tbou  fcigueft  tljem  out  of 
thine  oibne  heart. 

9  if  02  tbcp  allmaoc  bsafraib,  fap; 
ing,Xbcir  banbes  Cball  be  lbcabenco 
from -the  nwuc  that  it  bee  not  bone. 
Boib  therefore,  o  God,  ftrengtbenmp 
banns. 

io  3tftertbatb3J  came  bnto  the  boitfe 
of  S>bcmatab  tbefonne  of  Delatab,tbe 
fonneoffl0cbctabel,  ttiijo  was  tbutbp, 
ano  befaib,!Lct  bs  meet  together  in  ttjc 
boufcofooo ,  ibttbuitbcXcmplc,anb 
let  bs  (but  the  booses  of  the  XemplC; 
ftw  tbcpibill  come  to  Oar  tbec.peain  the 
night  ibtl  tbcp  tonic  to  dap  thee. 

ii  3lnb  3  fato ,  <a>bouib  web,  anian 
as3J,flcev  anbibho  is  tberc,tbat  being 
as  3  am,  lboulb  goc  into  tbe  Xcmple 
tofauebisbfe^  gilbtllnotgocm. 

n  ^no  loe ,  3  percctucD  that  <£>ob 
h,ab  not  fent  bim,  but  that  be  pjonouti; 
cebtbis  p2opncneagamftmec:fo?Xoj 
biab,ano  S>anbaliat  bao  biteb  bun. 

15  Xberefbicwas  bee  hireo ,  that  31 
Iboulbbeafraib ,  ano  bocfo,  aubGune, 
ano  that  tbcp  might bauc  matter  fojan 
euill  report  .that  tljrp  might  repjocb 
mee. 

14  !0Pp<l5ob,tbutSetboubponXos 
biab,anb£>anbaliat,acco2ftUtgtotbefc 
their  ib02bcs,anb  on  tbe  pjopbctciTc 
j!5oabtab,  anb the  rcllof  the  pjoptjets, 
that  lboulb  bauc  put  me  m  fcare. 

15  C£>o  tbe  iball  lbas  finifbeo ,  in 
tbe  tibentie  anb  fifth  bap  of  the  moneth 
eiul,tnfifticanbttbobapes. 

i6  3nbiteametopairetbatlbbenaiI 
out  enemies  bcatb  thereof ,  anb  all  tbe 
bcatben ,  tljat  v  ere  about  bs,  farb  thefe 
tilings,  tbcp  were  much  caftbolbne  in 
their  oibnc  epes  :  foj  tbcp  perteiucb 
tbat  this  lbozitc  tuas  Brought  of  out 
d5oo. 

17  C£©ojcoucr,uitbofcbapcstbe 
nobles  of  ^juoab  r  fent  manp  letters 
bntoXobiab ,  anb  the  letters  of  Xobiab 
came  bnto  them. 

18    5f02  there  were  tliatip  ttl  3JllbaI) 

froomc  bnto  bun :  becaufc  bee  Urns  tbe 
founc  in  lalb  of  £>bcchaiuab  tbefonne 
of  3Jrab ,  anb  btsfonnc^jobananbab 
taucntbcoaucjbtctof  i^cfl)uliam ,  tlje 
fonncofaSeTccbtab. 

19  3Uotbcprcpo2teobisgoobbcebs 
befojc  me ,  ano  bttctcbmpllibojbesto 
bun :  and  Xobiab  fent  letters  to  put 
me  m  fcare. 


CHAP.    VII. 

Nehemiah  commirteth  the  charge  of  Ierufa- 
lemtoHananiandHananiah.  5  Aregifter 
of  the  genealogie  of  them  which  came  at  the 
firft  out  of  Babylon,  9  ofthepeople.  39  of 
thePriefts.  43  oftheLeuiies.  46  of  the 
Nethinims.  57  of  Solomons  feruants.  63 
and  ofthePriefts  which  could  not  find  their 
pedegree.  66  The  whole  number  of  them, 
with  their  fubftance.  70  Their  oblations. 

4Dtb  it  tame  to  pafle  ruben 
tbcibalin)asbuiit,anb3 
baofctbp tbcDoojcs  ano 
tbe  posters ,  anb  tbe  On* 
gets  ,  anb  the  ILcuites 
ttiereappomteo, 

2  Xbatgjgauempbzotbctfyana* 
m,  anb  l^anamab  tljc  ruler  oftbepa^ 
lace ,  charge  oner  3ferufaicm  (fozbec 
ibosa  faubmiiman,  ano  fearcb  Coo  a- 
bouemanp.) 

5  3no  3  fatb  bnto  them ,  fLet  not 
the  gates  ofjcrufalcm  be  openeb ,  bn* 
nil  the  £>umie  bee  hot ;  anb  ibbfic  tbcp 
ftanb  bp,  Icttbemtbuttbcboozes,  anb 
barrc  them,  3nb  appoint  ibatcbesof 
the  utbabttants  of  ilcrafaiem ,  enerp 
onembisibatcb,  anb  cuerpone  to  bee 
oueragamftbisboufe. 

4  l5oib  the  titpwastiarge  anb  great, 
but  thcpeople  were  fcibthcreut,  anb  the 
boufesujcrenotbutlbeb. 

i  C  ^nb  mp  <Sob  put  into  mine 
heart ,  to  gather  together  the  nobles, 
anb  the  rulers,  ff  the  people,  that  the? 
might  be  rctboneb  bp  genealogie.  3uib 
^Jfounba  regiftcr  of  the  genealogie  of 
them  tbbicb  came  bp  at  the  firft ,  anb 
founbttijltten  therein  j 

6  *Xbefearetbecbilbzcnoftbep2o< 
umce,that  ttcnt  bp  out  of  the  taptuutie, 
of  thofc  that  hab  beene  carteb  aibap 
ibhom  /15cbuchabne55ar  the  Bing  of 
asabplon  hab  tarico  aibap,  anb  came 
againc  to  3Jcrulalem  anb  to  3)uoah, 
euerp  one  bnto  his  citie: 

7  i©boeame!bttbzcrubbabcl,3Je; 
ama,il5el)emiah,  ||  Sfcanab,  fUamiah, 
i!5ahamani,^02bccai,  ffiilftjan,  )3{9if- 
perctb,25igtiai,/!5abum,2Saanab.Xbe 
numbcr,i  fay  ,of  tljc  men  of  thepcoplc  of 

■Jfracl.was  this: 

8  Xhcthiib2cnof0arofl),nbothou' 
fanb,anhimb2tb,fcuentieano  tibo. 

9  Xhechilb2cnof^hcphattah,thJee 
hunb2Cb,fcuenneanb  tibo. 

10  Xhechilbmt  of^Jrafj ,  fire  hum 
bzcb.fifneanbtibo. 

nXhc 


\Hek. 

bngdm&Kf 


*  Ezra.  2.1 
la. 


\\Or,Ser&- 
tub. 


from  Babylon  Chap.vij.  tolcrufalem, 


\\Or,B<mi. 


\\Or,hra. 
\\Or,giii*r. 


\\Or,Az.ma 
talk. 

\pr,Km- 

atb-arim. 


*Stcvtr.\t. 


n  Xhe  chiuwn  of 0ahath  •  $)oab, 
of  the  chilbjcn  of  Jefbua  >  anb^Ioab, 
nuo  thoufanb ,  anb  eight  rmntyeb,  and 
ctghteenc. 

12  Xhc  chiKucn  of  Clam  ,  a  thou* 
fanb,tVbohunb2CD,fiftieanbfoure. 

15  Xhe  chilbjen  of  zattu,  eight  hmv 
bjebfourtieanbfiuc. 

14  Xhe  rtriuwen  of  zaccai ,  feuen 
hunbjcb  anb  tb2ccfco:c. 

15  Xhe  chiibjen  of||2Sinnui,fti;ei)un* 
D2eb,fouvtp  anb  eight. 

i6  Xhc  thtlbjcn  of  26ebai ,  fire  tynv 
D2eb,ttt>entieanb  eight. 

17  Xhechiib2cnof2l58ab,ttbofhou; 
fanb,tn2echiuiD2eb,ra)etttte  ano  tlbo. 

is  Xhe  thirteen  of  3lbonmam ,  fire 
hunbzeb,  fhzeeftoje  anD  feuen. 

19  3EhethilD!enof25lguai,ttDothoit5 
fano.rtneefcoze  anb  feuen. 

10  Xhc  thtiDien  of3lbm,  fire  hun- 
D2Cb,fiftic  anb  fine. 

2!  XhethUbjenof^tetof^cseUtal), 
ninctte  anb  eight. 

2i  Xhe  tl)Ub?en  of  fyafbum ,  thjee 
hunb?eb,ttbentteanb  eight. 

23  Xhe  thilbzcn  of 25c5ai;th?ee  hutv 
bjcbtiDentieanbfoutc. 

24Xnctimb2mof!|tyariph,anhun; 
DjcbanbrtDclue. 

25  Xhechilb2enof||(25ibeon,nmetic 
anbfiue. 

26  Xhemenof25ctblehem,anb4l5e; 
tophah ,  an  huntyeD  ,  fourcfco2C  anb 
eight. 

27  Xhenienof^natl)oth,anIjun^ 
bzcb.tttientie  anb  eight. 

2s  Xhc  men  of  ||  23ctha5maueth, 
fourtteammuo. 

29  Xhc  men  of  ||  fjiriathicanm, 
Cncphtrah  anb  2i6eeroth ,  feuen  him- 
Dictt  fourtic  anD  ttjiee. 

30  Xhe  men  of  Kamahanb  ©cba, 
fire  hunbzeb,  tfticnticanb  one. 

31  Xhc  men  of  fi©tchmafb,  an  ftuu* 
b?cb  anb  tibentp  anb  tlbo. 

31  Xhe  men  of  2Scthcl  anb  Zi,  an 
hunbzeb  .mientie  anb  tlnec. 

33  Xhemcnoffheothcri!5eb0,nftie 
anbtvbo. 

34  Xhe  thirteen  of  the  othct*€iam, 
arhoufanb,nDol)unb!Cb,fiftie»foure. 

35  XhechiiDicnof&anm.ttyeehim 
bzebanbtujentie. 

16  Xhe  chilbzen  of  Jericho ,  tbjee 
hunb?cb,fouttie  anb  fine. 

37  Xfie  thirteen  oHLob,$abib,  anb 
£)no,feuenhunb2eb,tibentieanbone. 

38  Xhe  thirteen  of  S>enaa ,  thjee 


thoufanb,ninc  hunbjeb,anb  thirty. 

39  CXhe&tlcflts.  Xhe  thirteen  of 
*3Jcbata,  offhehoufe  of  ^jeflnia,  nine 
hunbzeb,  feucntie  anb  ttoee. 

40  Xhechilbjcuofjlmme^athou; 
fanb,fifty  anb  tlbo. 

41  Xhe  thirteen  of  ^afbur ,  a  thou= 
fanb.tlDo  hunb2cb,fourticanb  feuen. 

42  Xhe  thirteen  of  «?artm ,  a  tljou 
fanb,andfcuentccne. 

43  CXftelLcuites.Xhecnirteenof 
3Jefl)iia,of  isabmiel,  and  of  the  thirteen 
of  ||^obcuan,fcucutie  anb  foure. 

44  CXhefmgers.  Xhechtrteenof 
3faph,an  huub?eb,foiirtieanb  eight. 

45  CXhe  powers.  XJic  thirteen  of 
£>hallum,  tijjc  thirteen  of  3ter ,  the  tlju- 
b2tn  of  Xalmon,thc  thirteen  ofStutuib, 
the  cimuieH  of  $atita,  the  thirteen  of 
^hobat,anbunb:eb,thirtie  anb  eight. 

46  CXhe  jflcthimms.Xbc tbiltyen 
of  ziha,  the  thirteen  of  §afljupha,  the 
thirteen  of  Xabaotb, 

47  Xhe  thirteen  of Ber os,  the  chil= 
b:en  of  S>ia,tbc  thirteen  of^abon, 

48  Xhc  chilbjcn  of  itcbana.thc  thil- 
bjen  of  $agaba,  the  chilbjcn  of&hafc 
mat, 

49  Xhc  thirteen  of  «?anan,  the chfr 
men  of  ©ibbel,  the  thirteen  of  (Sahac, 

50  Xhe  thirteen  of ftcaiah ,  the  tljil- 
b2cn  of  Se3in,thethiib2en  of  ii^efeoba, 

51  Xhethilbjen  of  C5a35am,thcchU' 
b:en  of  ll35a,the  eliilbjen  of  ^hafcal), 

52Xhechiib2enof26cfai,thcthilb2cn 
of  ^eunim ,  tlje  thiib2en  of  ii5epht 
niefim, 

53  Xhc  cljilbzcn  of 2BaftbuB, the chil; 
bdenofl^amiplja,  tlje  eljilbjen  of  ^ar- 
hue, 

54  Xhecl)ilb2enof28anitli  ,tljetlnl- 
bzen  of  iJPchiba ,  the  thilbzen  of  $arfba, 

^5  Xhctl)ilb2enof25arlJos,thctl)il^ 
b2en  of  ^)ifcra  ,tl)ecl)Ub2en  ofXamah, 

56  Xhc  tlnlbjen ofi!5e3»ai) ,  the chib 
bzenofi^atiplja. 

57  C  Xhc  chiUucn  of  Solomons 
fcruants:  Xheehilbzen  of  5>otai ,  the 
chilbmi  of  S>bpl)eretlj ,  the  chilb:en  of 
^eriba, 

58  Xhe  thilbden  of  ^laala,  the  rhtl- 
b?en  of£Dat&on,thcchilb2eu  of  <5tbbel, 

59  %\)t cl)ilD2en  of  ^hephatiah.the 
thilbden  of  ^atttl.thechiUnen  of  iDothe^ 
retl)  Zebaun,  the  rhilbzen  of  ||  Simon, 

60  blithe  iBetlit'mms,  anb  the  chit= 
b2enof^>olomon8fmiant0,wcicth:ec 
l)unb?eb  mnctic  anb  tlbo. 

6i  *^nbthcferberethcvn)l)itblbent 


"i.Chio. 


||  Or,ffcJ«- 

viahtBxxA 

2.4.  Ur,In- 
dah,  £<M. 

5-9 


Or-,Ami 


"Ezrl.  z. 
4i- 


Gifts  to  the  worke.   Nchemiah.     The  Law  is  read. 


Or, jade- 
grtt. 


\\Or,th 

uernow. 


\  Hebr.purt 


top  alfo  from  £cl-i$eiah,Xcl-J?are* 
[ha,  Cherub,  3bbon,anb  jimmer :  but 
rtjey  toulb  not  (hcibc  tljcir  fathers 
houfc,  no;!thett||fccbe,  Whether  they 

wereOf^JftaCl. 

5i  Xhecljiltycnof  SDciaial),  tl)ccl)il= 

bjcn  of  Xobtah,  the  cljilbzcn  of  jReHo= 
ba,ujcchuub2cbfourtic  ano  ttbo. 

6  j  C^nbof  tljepncfts:  fflecgtOBzen 
of  i?abaiah,  the  tfjfltyen  of  ltxo5,  ttje 
cniuucn  of  2Sar5illai,  ibhich  toouc  one 
of  the  baughtcrs  of  23at5i»ai  the  &\\v 
auttc  to  ibife,  anb  itoas  taiicb  after  their 
name 

64.  Xhcfc  fought  their  rcgifter,  a- 
mongtijofethatitoererccBoncb  by  gene 
alogic,  but  it  itoas  notfounb :  tljcrfoje 
iberc  thep,  as  polluteb ,  put  from  rtje 
p;icftljoob. 

65  anb  ||  tfjc  Xirfhatha  faib  bnto 
them,  that  rijcpfljoulD  not  eate  of  the 
moO  hoh?  thuigs,  till  there  ftoob  vp  a 
pnett  lbith  mxxnx  anb  Xljummim. 

66  C  Xhe  ltoljole  congregation  to- 
gether, was  fourtteanb  ttto  thoufano, 
th;ee  hunb;eb  anb  tl)?ccfxo;e : 

67  Befibe  their  man  feruants,  anb 
their  maib  feruants,  of  Ibhomc  there 

were  fcUCU  tljOUfatlb ,  tfttCC  hunbtfb, 

tlnrnc  anb  I'cueu :  anb  rlirv  !jab  tibo 
htmbzeb  fourtic  anb  fiue  tinging  men 
anb  ringing  ujomcu. 

68  Xhcir  hotfes ,  fcuen  hunbjeb, 
thirtic  anb  fire:  their  mules,  tu>o|)ut^ 
tocb  fourtic  anb  ftuc: 

69  Their  camels,  fourchunbjebthir'' 
tic  anb  Rue :  fire  thoufanb  ,fcucn  hun? 
b?cb  anb  tibcnticaffcs. 

70  C2nbtfomcofthccljiefcofthc 
fatlicrs,  gauc  bnto  the  ttioiuc:  Xhe 
lEirlhatha  gaueto  thetreafurcathou; 
fanb  b:ammcsof  golb,6fnc  bafons,fiuc 
humucb  anb  thirnc  pneus  garments. 

71  ^nb  ton*  of  rtje  tljicfe  of  the  fa« 
tl)crs  gaue  to  the  trcafurc  of  tljc  lboitic 
nbcntic  thoufanb  ojammes  of  golbc, 
anb  tibo  thoufanb  anb  ntoo  hunbzcb 
pounboffiluer. 

71  3lnb  that  tbhich  the  reft  of  the 
people  gauc,  was  titocntie  thoufanb 
biammes  of  golb,  anb  ttt>o  thoufanb 
pounboffilucr,anbth;!ccfcozeanbfeucn 
pnefts  garments. 

73  £>o  the  pnefts,  anb  the  JLcuitcs, 
anb  tlic  posters,  anb  the  fingers,  anb 
ibme  of  the  people,  anb  tljc  Ji5cthmuns, 
anbau3Bfracl,dweitin  their  tunes:  2nb 
when  tlic  fcucntl)  moncth  tame,  tljc 
cljilbzcn  of  3lfrael  Vbcrc  in  tljcir  cities 


CHAP.    VIII. 

1  The  religions  maner  of  reading  and  hearing 
the  Law.  9  They  comfort  the  people.  13  The 
foiwardnefleof  them  to  heare  and  be  inftru- 
fted.  1 6  They  keepe  the  feafl  of  Tabernacles. 

*fSftVl$£^>  all  tDc  people  gathe* 
SM&yfi&ttb  thcmfelues  together, 
*}i^\gg  as  one  man,  into  tljc  ftrect 
B*X<5  that  was  before  tlje  ibater 
^  £o»£s  gate,*  ano  thep  fpa&e  bnto 
<£3ra  thcftribc,to  bnng  tnc  booKc  of  the 
%aVo  of  s$ofcs,U)hiclj  the  ILonphab 
commanbcbtojfraci. 

x  2no  C3ra  tlje  p^icfl  biougljt  tljc 
ILalb  befo;c  tljc  Congregation,  botl)  of 
men  anb  lbomcn,  ano  all  t  tijatcouib 
rjeace  ibttl)  bnberttanbmg ,  bpon  tljc 
firQbapof  tljefcucntl)  monetlj. 

3  3lnb  l)ec  rcab  tljercm  befo?c  rtje 
ftrect  tl)at  was  before  tljc  lbatcr  gate, 
tfrom  rtjc  morning  bnnil  nubbav,  be= 
foze  tljc  mm  anb  the  inomen,  anb  tljofe 
tbatcoulb  bnbcrftanb:  3lnb  tljc  cares 
of  all  the  people  Vbere  anentmc  onto  tljc 
boofccofthciatt). 

4  ^nb  <£3ra  the  fenbe,  ftoob  bpon 
atpulpit  of  U)oob,U)htch  tljrp  hab  mabe 
foz  tlic  purpofe,  anb  befibe  Dun  ftoob 
fcT9atntl)tah,  anb  5>I)nna,  anb  3itiaiah, 
anb  JUnjalj  ,anb  l^ilHiah,  anb  Q9aafc« 
ial),  on  his  right  Ijanb :  anb  on  his  left 
hanb,£cDaiah,anb  ^tftjaei,  anb  S0au 
chiah,anb  J?aflntm,  anb  l?aft)babana, 
zechanah,  anb  ©cujuiiam. 

5  ^nb€3raopcncOthcboo!tcintijc 
t  fight  of  all  the  people  (fojhccrbasa* 
boucalthcpeoplc)anbVbljcnhcopcncb 
it,  all  thcpcoplc  ftoob  bp: 

6  3lnb<!E3rablcflcbthc1L0K©thc 
great  <5ob :  anb  ai  the  people  anfroereb, 
^men,  3fmen,  inith  lifting  bp  their 
hanbs  :  anb  tljev  botbeb  their  hcabs, 
anb  ttojlhippcb  the  H$Dis-D,lbith  tljcir 
face5tothcgrounb. 

7  ^lfo3icQ)uaanb25ani,anb5>hc^ 
rebiah,  3Jamin,  3lBmib ,  ^Ijabbctljai, 
fcobijah ,  ©aafciah,BeUta ,  ^anah, 
3Io3abab,  ^anan,pclaialj,anb  the  %e< 
mtcs,  cauftb  the  people  to  bnbcrftanb 
the  lavb :  anb  tljc  people  flood  in  tljcir 
place. 

s  5>othcpreabintheboo&e,utthc 
Hatb  of  Gob  biftmctlp,  anb  gauc  the 
fenfeanb  caufeb  them  to  bnbcrftanb  the 
reabmg. 

9  C  3nb  iBchcmiah ,  ibhtch  is  the 
IHLirftJatfta,  anb  €3ra  the  0n'eft  the 
5>ttibc,  anb  tljc  Hcuttes  tljat  taught 

the 


*E?_ra  J.I. 
and  7.6. 


\Hcb.ihtt 

Zindcrftoad 
in  hearing. 


\Heb.jr3V\ 

theLoht. 


\  H si. t  over 

of  wood. 


t  Hebr.  eye> 


\\Orythego. 
Hcrncwt 


Thevmakeboothes.  Chap.ix.  A  folcmne  fail. 


\\Ortthet 

they  mtght 
inflrnflin 
the  words  of 
the  Law, 
\Heb.bythe 
hand  of. 
*Lcutt.  25. 
■>.)  deut. 
16.13. 


\Heh.Aff 
ftrautt. 


ttjc  people,  faiD  Dnto  all  tt)e  people, 
30110  Dap  10  |)ol?  finto  tbc  Hois© 
pour  (2>oD,mourne  not,  nojlDccpc :  fo2 
all  rtje  people  mept ,  ftljcn  tbepbearD 
tbeiDO2D0oftbc?LaiD. 

10  xijen  bee  fapD  Dnto  them ,  d5ot 
poutlbap,cattbcfat,?D2mttftbefnjeet, 
auo  fenu  pomoits  pnto  tDcni,fd?  ttljom 
nothing  10  p2cparcb :  fo2tbt0Dap  10  bo- 
Ip  Dnto  our  %  a>  13  ©  :  neither  be  pe  Co- 
rp, ft>2  the  top  of  ttjc  %  o  is  ©  t0  your 
ftrcngrb. 

11  &otf)efLcuitc0ttilleDalifbcpco' 
pie,  faying,  teolDe  pour  peace,  foztbt 
cap  10  bolp,  neither  be  pc  grieucD. 

ir  3lnD  all  the  people  iDent  their 
lDapto  cate,  anDtoDUnbc,  anD  tofenD 
po2ttott0,  anD  to  masc  great  mtttb,  bv 
caufc  tljrrp  baD  DnDcrftooD  the  iDo2De0 
ttjat  rberebtdarcb  into  tljtm. 

13  C3mDontbcfcconDDaplDerega* 
tbctcbtogetbcrtbechicfcoftbefatbct© 
of  all  tbc  people,  t!)c  $2itfte0  anb  the 
ILentte©,  Dnto  €5tatbe  Scribe ,  cucn 

to  DnDcrttanD  the  Tbo2Sc0  of  the 
ILatb. 

14  3lnD  tljcv  founb  tbjtttcn  in  the 
%avo  tbbifb  the  |L®  is  ©  Dab  commas 
DeD  tbp£0ofe0,  fbattbecbilDjenof  Jl 
tael  ftioulb  Dtbeli  m  *  bootbe0 ,  in  tlje 
feaft  of  tbefcuentbmonctb: 

15  anDtbattbcpfboulbpubufhanD 
pjociaime  in  all  tl)«rtltie0,  anmn3te 
rufaiem, faping,  <3oefoo2tb  bnto  the 
mount,  aub  fetch  £)liueb?antl)e0,  anD 
£ine  b?antl)e0,  anb  <2$wt\i  D2ancbc0, 
anD  $ahne  D2ancbc0,  anDb:antljc0of 
tbitbe  trec0,  to  ma&e  bootbc0,  as  it  10 
tbnttcn. 

is  CS)Otfjc  people  tbcntfooJtr),anb 
biougbt  them ,  antt  mabe  tbcmfelue* 
bootl)C0 ,  euerp  one  Dpon  tbc  roofe  of 
IfiS  boufc,  aim  in  ttjeir  tourt0,  anb  in 
the  courts  of  tbehbufeof  <5ob,  ant  tn 
the  ftrccte  of  tlje  tbater  -  gate,anb  in  tlje 
ftrectcoftbegatc  oftfpbzatm. 

•  17  anDalltbetongccgationoftbem 
tbatrbere  come  agame  out  ofthecapti* 
uittcmaDc  bootl)C0,anbfatc  tanner  tt)c 
bootl)C0:fo2fince  the  bapc0of  3fcfljua 
tfie  fonnc  of  /5un ,  Dnto  that  Dap,  baD 
not  the  cbilbienof  3ifraelbonefo :  anb 
there  lDa0  Den1  great  glabneffe. 

18  aifonapbpDapftomtheftrftbap 
bnto  the  laftoap ,  be  teat  in  tbc  Doolie 
of  tbc  Hatb  of  (5oli :  anb  tbep  ncpt  tbe 
feaft  fenen  bapc0 ,  anb  on  tbc  eight  Dap 
was  ta  folcinnc  affemblp  accoibingPu- 
to  the  matter. 


CHAP.    IX. 

A  folernne  Fait,  and  repentance  of  the  peo- 
ple. 4  TheLeuitesmakeaieiigiousconfef- 
Ihn  of  Godsgoodnes,jnddieii  wickednes. 

£>lDintbc*trbcntieanD 
fourtb  bap  of  ttjts  mo- 
netb,  tbc  cljilbjcn  of  3fra^ 
el  nierc  aftcmblcD  ttntb  fa^ 

tting,$rbitbfat&clotbe0, 
anb  earth  Dpon  them. 

z  Znn tbe feebe of  3fraei  frparatcb 
tbcnifcluc0  from  all  fftrangcr© ,  anb 
ftoob  anb  confeffeb  tbctr  fumc0,anb  the 
miqume0  oftbetr  fatljer0. 

3  3{nb  tJ)ev  ftooD  Dp  in  tbeir  place, 
anb  rcab  in  tbe  booae  of  tbc  EaiD  of 
tbc  H©  is©  tbcir<5oD,  one  fourtb  part 
of  tbeDap,auD  another  fourtb  part  tbcp 
confcfteD  anD  \D02fl;ippeD  tbc  %  ©  is  © 
tbeir  (Pod. 

4  CXbcn  ftooDe  Dp,  bpon  tbe 
„ftaite0oftbc  flcmte©,  gjefbuaanD 
28am,  BaDnucl,  ^bebantab,  2Snnni, 
5>bcrcbiab,  Bam,  and  Cbenani,  anb 
crpcb  tbitb  a  louoc  Doice  Dnto  tbc 
?L©iR©tbcir<25ob. 

5  Xbcn  tbc  ?Lcuitc0,  SJcfbttaanD 
BaDmiel,  215am,  i^afbaDmab,  Sbcrc- 
Dtab,$oDuab,  S>bcbaniab,  ^nd^etba? 
biab ,  fapDc ,  5>tanD  Dp ,  ^nd  Dleffetbe 
1Lc»i3©  pout  <25od  fo;  cucr  anD  cucr, 
anD  bleffcD  Dec  tbp  glo2iou0  /I5ame, 
iDbicb  10  eraiteb  aboue  ailbleiTmganD 
pjatfe. 

6  Xbou,euentbouart3l€>i8©a^ 
lone,  *tboubaft  maDcbcauciubebea- 
ucnofbcaucn0,TDitbaiitbcirboftc)tbe 
cartl),  anD  all  tbing0tbat  are  therein, 
tbc  fea0,anb  all  tbat  is  tbcrtn,  anb  tbou 
pzeferueft  tljem  all,  anb  tlje  Ijoftc  offjea; 
ueniD02ft)tppetbtbec. 

7  XbouarttbcfL®iB©tbc<BoD, 
lDbo  Dibbeft  cboofe  *  ^bjam ,  anb 
bzougbtcft  bim  fo?tf)  out  of  33t  of  tlje 
Calbce0,  anb  gaueft  bim  tlje  name  of 
^bjabam: 

8  3lnD  founDeft  \)\s  bcart  *  faithfull 
bcfoietbec,  $  maDefta  "couenant  Ibttb 
bim,to  giuc  tbe  lanD  of  tlje  Canaanttcs, 
tbc^ittuc0,tbc3lmo2ite0,  anDtbe  $t 
ti55itc0,anDtbe5cbuatcs,anDtbc(l5ir 
gan)itc0,togmc  it,  iiay,tobisfccD,anD 
baft  pcrfojmeD  tljp  ibo?D0,  fetbouan 
ngbtcou0, 

9  *  anD  biDft  fee  tbe  affliction  of  our 
father©  in  egppt,  anD  bcarDrft  tljeir  crp 
bptbcreDS>ca, 

10  ^nD  fbctbcDft  Ogne0  *  anb  tDon- 

DCT0 


*Chip.8.t 


children. 


fold. 


'Gcn.i.i. 


"Gcn.n. 
}!.  and  xt 
C8E17.5. 


'Gen.  1  y.  6. 

"Gcn.i  2. 
17. and  1  5. 
18.&  17.?. 


'Exod.3.7. 
mj  14.10. 

•EKod.7.8, 
9 , 1 0 , 1 1 ,  & 
I4-.chapters 


Gods  benefits. 


N  ehemiah.     Mans  ingratitude. 


'Exod.14 


Exod.i;. 
o. 
•Exod.i;. 


Exod.20.1 
and  10.  so. 


t  Hob.U: 
of  trunk 


*Exod.  16. 
1;.&I7.6. 
num.  20.0. 


"Deut.  1.8 
t  Hctxhtth 
thoH  bttdil 
Itft  vp  rhtHt 
hand  to  giue 
them. 


*  Num.  14. 
4- 

f  Hcb.Agod 
of  pardons. 


'Exo. 


'Exod.i;. 
s2.num.14 
1 4. 1. cor. 
10.1. 


"  Num.11. 
'7- 

•Exod.it:. 
15  4;  17.6 
iouS.j.ii, 


bersbpon  pharaob,anb  on  all  his  fee- 
uants,anb  on  all  the  people  of  bis  lanb: 
fojthou  tmclbeftthat  they  Dealt  p20i«> 
uc  agamft  them:  fobiDtttbou  get  tbeea 
name,  as  it  is  this  Day. 

1 1  *  3nD  tbouDtbft  bitubc  the  feabe* 
fae  them ,  Co  that  the?  ibcnt  through 
thcniiDftof  tljcfea  ontheojielano.anD 
their  perfecutours  thou  th?ett>cG  into 
the  Deepes,  as  a  ftone  into  the  mightic 
*ibaters. 

n  $)02eoucr  thou  *  lebbeft  thetn  in 
the  bay  by  a  rtouby  pillar,  anb  in  the  I 
night,  by  a  pillar  of  fire ,  to  giue  them 
light  m  the  .bay  ibbcrm  they  fboulb  go. 

13  Xhou  *  tamed  boibnc  alfo  bpon 
mount  Sinai,  anb  fpaueft  ibith  tbcm 
from  heauen ,  anb  gaueft  them  right 
iubgemeuts,  anb  t  true  laibes.goob  ft& 
tutes  anb  commanbements : 

14  3lnb  mabeft  imoibeu  bntothem 
thy  holy  Sabbath,  anb  tommanbebft 
themp:etcpts,ftatutcs,  anblavbes,  by 
tbcbanb  of  93ofestby  fcruant: 

15  3lnb*  gaueft  thembicab  from  hea- 
uen fo?  their  hunger,  anb  bzoughtcft 
fouh  ibatcc  for  them  out  of  the  rocfec, 
to?  their  thirft  ,  anb  p:omifcbft  them 
that  they  fboulb  * goe in  to  pofTelTc  the 
lanb,  t  ibbtcb  thou  baoft  froome  to  giue 
them. 

16  26ut  they  anb  our  fathers  beau 
p2oubly,  anb  harbeneb  their  ncclts,  anb 
beartnieb  not  to  thy  totnmanbements : 

17  anbrcfufcD  to  obey,  neither  iberc 
miubful  of  the  lbouDcrs  that  thou  bibft 
among  tbem.but  harbeneb  their  nctlts, 
anb  m  their  rebellion  appointcb  *  a  tap* 
tame  to  returnc  to  their  bonbage :  but 
thou  art  t  a  god  reaby  to  parbon,  gratis 
ous anb  mcrcifuil,  floib  to  anger,  anb 
ofgreatlunbnes,ffo2foolicft  them  not. 

is  Pea* lbbcntbcy habmabcthema 
molten  taife,anbfaib,1i:t)is's  thy  (Sob, 
that  b:ought  thee bp  out  of  <£gypt,  anb 
hab  ttnottgbt  great  pjouocations : 

19  Pet  thou, in  thy  mamfolb  merries, 
f02fookeftthem  uotmtbc  ibilbcrocffe: 
the 'pillar  of  the  tloubt  beparteb  not 
from  them  bp  bay,  to  leabc  them  in  the 
Way,  neither  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night, 
to  (belli  them  light,  anb  the  lbay  ibbec* 
m  they  iboulb  goe. 

10  3Zhou  gancft  alfo  thy  *  goob  fpr 
rtt,  to  mltruct  them ,  anb  ibithheiocft 

notthy*sl3annafrotntbctrmoiith,anb 
gaueft  them  ibatcr  fo2  their  thirft. 

ii  Pea  fourtic  yccres  bibbeft  thou 
uifiamctbcmituhcibUbcrncffe;fothat 


they  latfecb  nothing  tbctc*clotbes  ibar- 
cb  not  olb ,anb  their  feet  frociicb  not. 

11  £0o2couer ,  thou  gaueft  them 
tungbomes  anb  nations,  ano  bibbftbi* 
uibc  them  into  comers:  fo  they  pofleffeb 
the  lanb  of  *  5>ibon,anD  the  lanb  of  the 
King  of  tyefbbon ,  anb  the  lanb  of  j©g 
tungofssafhan. 

13  3Cbctr  thilbjen  alfo  multiplitbft 
thou  as  the  ftarres  of  heauen ,  anb 
b20tigbteft  them  into  the  lanb ,  conccr- 
mug  ibbicb  thou  habft  p;omifeb  to 
thcirfarhers,  that  they  fboulbgoctnto 
poflcflC't. 

14  <§>otheehiiD2enibcntitt,anbpof' 
feffeb  the  lanb,  anb  thou  fubbuebft  be- 
fojethem  the  inhabitants  of  the  lanbe, 
the  Canaatutcs,  anb  gaueft  them  into 
their  hanbs,  ibitb  their  lungs,  anb  the 
people  of  the  lanb,  that  they  might boe 
ibitb  them,  t  as  they  iboulb. 

15  3nb  they  toobeftroug  cities,  anb 
afat  lanb,anb  pofteffeb  houfes  ful  of  all 
goobs,  II  ibelles  biggcb,  bmcyarbs,anb 
£)Uttcyarbs ,  anb  t  fruit  trees  in  abun* 
bantc :  So  they  bib  catanb  lbercfillcb, 
anb  became  fat,  anb  bcttgbteD  them- 
femes  m  thy  great  goobneffe. 

26  43cucrrijeletre,thcylbcrcb?fobe' 
bient,  anb  rcbcllcb  agamft  thee,anb  taft 
thi'laibbchittb  their  bac&cs,  anb  flcibe 
thy*p2ophets,ibhich  teftificb  agamft 
them  to  tttrnc  them  to  thee,  anb  they 
toought  great  p2ouocarions. 

17  "jEhcrcfo?c thou  bclutcrebft them 
into  thebanbe  of  their  enemies,  ibbo 
bCTcbtbent,  $  in  the  time  of  their  trou- 
ble, when  they  cricb  bnto  thee,  thou 
hearbeft  them  from  heauen:  anbactoj* 
bingto  thy  mamfolb  mcrtics,  thou  ga- 
ueft them  fauionrs,lbbo  faueb  them  out 
of  thchanb  of  their  enemies. 

18  2Sut  after  they  hab  reft,  t  they  bib 
null  agamc  bcfo2C  thee :  ther  efojc  leftcft 
thou  them  m  the  hanb  of  tbnr  enemies, 
fo  that  they  hab  the  Dominion  otter 
them:  yet lbhen they  rcturncD  anDcri; 
cD bnto  thee,  thou  hearbeft  them  from 
heauen,  anb  many  tunes  bibft  thou  be- 
liuct  tbcm,atco2btng  to  thy  mcrtics : 

19  3lnbtcftificbftagauifttbcm,  that 
tboumigbteft  bung  them  agamc  bnto 
thy  laibc :  yet  they  beau  p20ubly,  anD 
bcatftcneb  not  bnto  thy  rommaimbc- 
ments,but  finncb  agamft  tbyiuDgc^ 
ments,  (ibbicb  if  a  man  boc,he  fljal  line 
in  them )  t  anb  ibithb2clb  the  fbotiiocr, 
ano  harbeneb  their  netbe,  anb  iboulb 
nothearc. 
3?  #et 


•  Dcut.S.4 


"Num.Ji. 

2I.&C. 


t  Heb.atcor- 
ding  to  their 
mil. 

\Or,ciflrrnet 
\  Hob.  me 
of food*. 


iJCillg.to 


W'br.thej 

returnedto 

doeeutlL 


f  Hob.  they 
gAUC  A  with- 
Jratettf 

[boulder. 


Whofealcd 


Ch 


ap.x. 


thcC 


ouenanr. 


i  jo  #etntanyyercsbibbclrthoutfo2' 
bearcthmuanbteQifobfl'agatnlttbcm 
by  thy  Spirit  tin  thy  02ophcts :  yet 
ruoulD  they  not  sine  care :  therefore  ga= 
wtttljouthemmtotfichan&oftftepcO' 
pie  ofthc  lanbs. 

31  /iScucrthclclTe,  foi  thy  gtcat  met- 
ticsGi&c ,  thou  bibbctt  not  bttcrly  coip 
fume  them ,  1102  fojfabc  them  fo2  thou 
art  a  gracious  anb  mcrcifull  <25ob. 

32  0ova  therefore,  our  d5ob,the 
great,  the  *  mightte,  anb  tlje  terrible 
C5od  ,  ibho  Hccpcil  toucnant  anb  mer- 
tie:  let  not  all  the  t  trouble  fecme  little 
before  thee,  tthat  hathcome  bpottbs, 
on  our  j&utgs,oii  our  pmitcs,?  on  our 
02tetts  ,ano  on  our  $tophcts,f  on  our 
fathcrs,$onaifhypcopIc,unccthcttnic 
ofthc  Bings  of  3llTy2ta,bnto  this  bay. 

33  ^oibbeit4)ouantufttnailtl)atis 
b2ought  bpontos ,  fiw  thou  haft  bone 
nght,butmchaucboncVbicKcbly : 

3+  Neither  hauc  our  lungs  ,  onr 
02ittccs,  our  02tcfts,  no?  our  fathers 
ucpt  thy  %^vo,  no2hcarucucb  bnto  thy 
Conunanocincnts ,  anb  thy  XcftunO' 
tucs ,  ibl)crcU)ttl)  thou  bibtt  tcfti&e  a* 
gamftthem. 

35  jfo?  they  hauc  not  fetuebthecttt 
their  Kmgbomc,  anb  uirtjp  great  goofr 
neffe  that  thou  gaucft  them ,  anb  m  tlj  c 
large  anb  fat  lanb  which  thou  gaucfl 
before  them ,  neither  tumebthey  from 
their  rbu1icbU)02tics. 

36  26cholb,iueucfcruantsthisbay; 
anb  fo?  the  lanb  that  thou  gaucft  Unto 
our  fathcrs,to  cat  the  fruit  thcreof,anb 
thegoob  thereof,  bcholb,  tbccarcfcr- 
uantsinit. 

37  3tnb  it  yeclbcth  mud)  itttrcafc M\v 
to  thcumgs ,  iDhom  thou  haftfet  oucr 
v»s,bccaufc  of  our  fumes :  alfo  they  hauc 
bomuuon  oucr  our  bobics ,  anb  oucr 
our  cattcll ,  at  their  plcafurc  anb  Vbcc 
arc  in  great  biftcclTe. 

3s  3uibbccaufcofaii  this,  rbec  ma&c 
a  furc  coucn.im  ,  anb  imttc  it,  anb  our 
Winces,  Heuitcs,  and  pneftcs,  t  feale 

vnto  it. 

CHAP.    X. 

The  names  o(  them  that  fealed  the  couctunt. 
19  The  points  of  the  couenant. 

£)ib  thofc  t  that  fcalcb 
vvete,^chcmiah  lithe  %w 
(hatha  the  fonnc  of  $a* 
chaUah,anDZtbhuah, 

2   £>craiah,2i3artah, 
3Jcremiah, 


\Heb.fre- 

traSauer 

them. 

•  ,.Kmg. 

17.15.2. 

chr.j6.15. 


th, 


h*»4ofih 
Prophett. 


t  Hcb.wm. 

rinefe. 

\Htli.ihl 

hash  found 
VI. 


\Hekttc 
■J  the  feu- 
hn^,or  fen- 
led. 


\Heb.allb 
fe.iltn^t. 
\\Or,  thegl 
uemottr. 


3  0a(bur,3unartah,£Paichiah, 

4  ^attuQ),S>hcbaiitah^3aUuch, 

5  ftarim,$)crimoth,£>babiah, 

6  S)aiucl,d5inncthon,2Sarmh, 

7  iT9cfl)Ullam^btiah,i33iu'imin, 

8  £0aa*ia& ,  Nilgai ,  £>bcmaiah : 

theft  were  thC02iCttS. 

9  3utb  the  Hcuitcs :  both  3fcfl)im 
the  fonnc  of  3l5amah,25innut,  0f  ^jc 
fonucs  of  l?cnabab,Babnucl . 

10  3tnu  their  bzethjen,  5>hcbaniah, 
$obuah,  Belita,0claiah,  i)anau, 

1 1  iUicah.aachob^athabiah, 

ii  zactur,S>hcrcbtah, S>hcbamab, 

13  i?obuah,2Bani,2i5cnuiu, 

14  Xhc  thicfc  ofthc  people,  0arofh, 
^ahath  t'Boab^lam.zatthu,  26am, 

15  2i5uiint,^3gab,26ebai, 
i6  3tbouiiah,23iguai,3lbiii, 

17  ^tcr,^i3lutah,^53uc, 

18  i?obiah,i)afhum,26e5af, 

19  fcartph^uathoth.jlicbat, 

10  itoagpiafh^efliullani.ORir, 

11  iJaethrsabeel.zaboR/Jaobua, 

22  0elatiah,i)anan,3luaiah, 

23  ^ofljea.Danauiah.ftafljub, 

24  ^alioheflL^iicha^hobcii, 

z5  ftehum,  Dafhabnah  ,£!3aafeiah, 
i6  ^ub^hual^^anau^nan, 
Z7  £0ailurh,^arim,2Saanah. 

28  C  *  3uib  the  rett  of  the  pc'oplcthc 
02ic(ls,  the?teuites,  the  goners,  the 
fingers,  the  ji2et[)imms ,  anb  an  they 
that  hab  fcparateb  themfclucs  from 
thcpcoplc  of  tbeianbs,  buto  the  ?LaiD 
of  (5ob,  their  ibiucs,  their  fonues,  anb 
their  oaughtcrs ,  cucry  one  haumg 
bnoiblcbgc ,  aub  Ijaumg  bubcrftau. 
bing. 

29  Xhcy  claue  to  their  bzctbmi  their 
noblcs,anbcntrcbmtoacurfc,anouuo 
anoathtoU)aiUcm<5obs  ia\b,  ibhith 
Ibas  giucu  t  byQ9ofcs  the  feruant  of 
©ob ,  anb  toobfertic  anb  Doc  all  the 
commauDcmcnts  of  the  Ho  hjd  our 
ILoib,  anb  his  3Jubgciucnts,  anb  l;is 
ftatutes: 

30  2lnb  that  lbc  lbouib  not  guic ¥  our 
baughtcrs  bntothc  people  ofthc  lanb, 
no?  taftc  their  oaughtcis  fo?  our 
fonncs. 

3 1  *  3lnb  ii'thc  people  ofthc  lanb  bzmg 
\barc  02  anybittuals  on  the  Sabbath 
bay,  to  fell ,  that  me  moulb  not  buy  it  of 
them  on  the  Sabbath,  02  ontlicholy- 
bay ,  anb  that  tbec  moulb  leauc  the 
fcucuthyccrc,anb  the  fraction  of  eue 
ricbebt. 

32  Mo  U)c  mabc  02biuauces  foibs, 

to 


Ezr.1.43 


\Hehtythe 
h.w.hf. 


•Exo  la.lfi 
dcui.7.  J. 


'  ExoJ.io. 
1c.lcu1.23. 
;.Jcu:  c. 
1 :.  ncltein. 
'■•:J- 


'Dcut.15. 
Iciir.--  ^.4. 
I"  jYci.  enen 

h.<r,U. 


Firit  fruits  &c.         Nehemiah. 


Who  dwell 


■See  num. 

18.  &  19. 
chap.and 
Exod.2;. 

19.  andLe- 
uit.l9.23. 


"Exod.i ;. 

J.Lcuit.2J. 

17. num. 
15. 19. and 
18.12.  Sec. 


•Num.18. 


to  charge  out  fcUicspccccl^,  ibith  the 
thirb  part  of  a  (bead,  fojthe  feruicc  of 
theboufeofourcsoo, 

33  5F02  the  fbeib  tyeab ,  anb  fo?  the 
tontinuallmcatc-offcring,  anbfoz  the 
eontinuall  burnt  offering,  of  thc£>afr 
baths,  of  the  netb  moones,  foi  thefct- 
fcaftes,  anb  foi  the  holp  things,  anb  fo? 
theun-offertngs,toma&can  atonement 
foj^Jfrael,  anbfoiailtbcuwttcof  the 
houfc  of  out  <sob. 

34  anb  Ibc  eaft  the  lots  among  tt)c 
piicfts,  the  ILcuitcs,  anb  the  people,  w 
tljelboob  offering,  to  tying  it  into  the 
boufe  of  our  <5ob ,  after  the  boufesof 
our  fathers,  at  times  appomttb,  peere 
bp  pcerc,  to  bunie  bpon  the  altar  of  tfjc 
ILsdir©  our  e>ob,  as  it  isitytttcn  tn 
the'laib: 

j5  anbtotyingtbefirftfruitsofour 
gr  ounb ,  anb  tfje  fitft  fruites  of  all  fruu 
of  all  trees,  pcere  bp  peere,  bnto  the 
Ijoufc  of  tl)c  1L  €> «  s>. 

36  :Wo  the  firft  borne  of  our  fonncs, 
ano  of  onr  tattcll  (as  it  is  ityttten'in 
tfjc  laibc)  ano  toe  firftimgs  of  our 
bearbs,  anbofourflotRcs,  totytngto 
tbeboufeof  our  00b,  bnto  tbepnefts 
that  mtniftet  m  the  boufe  of  our  Gob : 

37  anb  dutifccmonlb  tying  the  fhrft 
fruits  of  our  bougl),  anb  our  offerings, 
anb  toe  fruit  of  ailmaner  of  trees,  of 
lbmc  anb  of  otic,  bnto  the  pnefts,  to  the 
chambers  of  the  houfc  of  our  <Sob,  anb 
the  tithes  of  out  grouno  bnto  thefts 
uites ,  that  the  fame  Hcuites  might 
hauethe  tithes,  in  ail  the  cities  of  our 
ullage. 

38  anb  the  piicft  thefonne  of  aaron, 
(hall  be  tbub  the  fLeuites ,  *lbben  the 
ILcuitcs  tattc  tithes,  anb  the  ILcuitcs 
dial  bung  bp  the  tithe  of  the  tithes  bnto 
the  houfc  of  out  <5ob ,  to  the  chambers 
into  the  trcafurcbonfe. 

39  ifoitbe tlnlbzen  of3Ifracl,anb 
thcchiib2cnof?Lcui,fl)aiibnngthcoffCi 
ring  of  the  come,  of  the  nc\b  lbmc ,  anb 
the  oplc,  bnto  the  chambers ,  Ibbctc  ^c 
the  bedels  of  the  fanctuanc,  ano  the 
pnefts  that  mimfrrr ,  anb  the  pojters, 
anbthc  fingcrs.anbibcibill  notfoifaite 
the  houfc  of  our  00b. 

CHAP.    XI. 

1  The  rulers,  voluntary  men  ,  and  the  tenth 
man  chofen  by  Lot,  dwell  at  Icrufalem.  5 
A  catalogue  of  their  names.  20  The  rcG- 
due  dwell  in  other  cities. 


mewxm  ifrb  the  rulers  of  tbcpco= 
*v«3f  Pic  Mbcltat3lctufalcm: 
the  reft  of  the  people  alfo 
taft  lots,  to  tying  one  of 
tcnnc,to  bibcll  m^Jcnmv 

lem,  the  bol?  title,  anb  nine  parts  to 

dwell  modier  cities. 

I  ^nbthepeoplcblcCTcbaHthemcn, 
that  lbtllmgip  offcrcb  thcmfcluts,  to 
bibeliat^erufalcm. 

3     C^OU)  tI)efC  arc  ttJC  CljlCfc  OfthC 

piouintctbat  bibelt  m  3Jerufalem :  but 
in  the  cities  of  "Jubah  bibelt  cuertcone 
in  his  potTclTton  m  their  cities,  to  wit, 
3Jfracl,fbe  pnefts,  anb  the  ILcuitcs, 
anb  the  /Sctbmims,  anb  the  tbtltyen  of 
£>olomonsfctuants. 

4  anoat^critfaiemblbeUcerraine 
of  the  cbiltycn  of  3liibah  ,ano  of  the  cbil* 
tycn  of  Bcniamm.  £>f  the  thiltycn  of 
3J«bah  :atbatab  the  fonne  of  Slfttab, 
thefonne  of  zctbariab,tbefonncofa? 
mariab,  the  fonne  of  3>bepbatiab,  the 
fonne  of  £0ahaialccl,  of  the  thtltyen  of 
l^erc?. 

5  anb  :S0aafciah  the  fonne  of  Z3a< 
ruch  the  fonne  of  Col  -J?03d) ,  thefonne 
of  ^ajaiah  the  fonne  of  aoaiab ,  the 
fonne  of  3foianb,  thefonne  of  Zccharv 
ah,thc  fonne  of  £>biloni. 

6  ail  the  fonncs  of  #etC5  that 
bibelt  at  gicmfalcm,  were  foure  hurt 
b:cb  tbicefcoje  anb  ctght  baiiant 
men. 

7  anb  thefc  are  the  fonncs  of  2Bcn 
lamin :  S>ailu  the  fonne  of  s^elhuliam, 
thefonne  of  3Joco,  the  fonne  of  0cba 
iah,thc  fonne  of  Bolaiah,  the  fonne  of 
^aalciah  ,  the  fonne  of  3Jtbicl ,  the 
fbnneoflicfaiah. 

8  ^nb  after  htm  d5abai,fi>aliai,iune 
huntycbtibenticanb  eight. 

9  anbljocltbe  fonne  of  Zittyi  was 
their  oucrfeer :  ano  3!ubab  the  fonne  of 
5>cnuah,  was  fecono  oucr  the  citp. 

10  £>fthc$nefts:3Jeoatah  the  fonne 
of3Jotarib,3!achin 

II  S»ecaiah  thefonne  of  fytUtiafubc 
fonne  of  £0clhullam ,  the  fonne  of  za 
bolt ,  the  fonne  of  *$)ctaioth ,  thefonne 
ofaintub,  was  the  ruler  of  the  houfc  of 
<3ob. 

ii  anb  their  tyethmt  that  bib  the 
lbojfte  of  the  boufe,  were  eight  buntycb 
tibcnticanb  tibo:anb  aoaiab  the  fonne 
ofjecobam,  thefonne  of  pclaliah,the 
fonne  of^m^l,  the  fonne  of  Zechanab, 
the  fonne  of  palhur,  thefonne  of^al- 
chiah, 

13  3Ino 


in 


Icrufal 


em,an< 


\\Orttbe 

jwnnt  cf 

de/im. 


fMr.V.\verc 
oner. 


\Hebr.«t 
thet4Mf, 


*SteCkx?. 

J.Stf. 

\\Or,tht 


j  0rt4/itre 
ardin&ncc. 


13  anbhtsptcthjen,  chicfeofthefa* 
thcrs ,  npo  hnnbieb  fourtp  anb  tino : 
anft  ^tnafpai  the  fonnc  of  parcel,  tlje 
fonncof  aitjafai,  the  fount  of££cfhiie* 
mofh.thc  Tonne  of  "jinnicr. 

14.  3inb  their  tycthzen  might?  men 
of  palouc ,  an  humijeb  tvbentp  anb 
etght-  ano  ttjctr  oucrfeer  w«  zabbicl, 
lltljcfonneofoneottOegceatmcn. 

15  3llfo  of  tt>c  ILcuites :  £>hcmatah 
rhefonnc  of  i?aflnib,  the  fonnc  of  3J5n* 
Ram,thc  fonnc  of  ^afhabiah,  the  fonne 
of28unni. 

!6  ^nb&habbcthai.anbgiosabab, 
ofttjcchtcfcofrljtiLciuts.th.idtljeoncr' 
ristjt  of  the  outtUarD  bufiueffe  of  the 

hOUfCOfOOb. 

17  3lnb  £19attantah  the  fonnc  of  8&1- 
cha,thefonncofzabbi,thcfonneof;& 
fapl),  was  the  pnneipall  to  beginnethe 
than&cfgitung  in  pzayer :  anb  28afebu< 
iuah  the  feeonb  among  his  tyethjen, 
anb  3bba  the  fonne  of  £>hammua,  the 
fonnc  of(5aial,the  fonnc  of  3Jebuthun. 

13  3111  the  Hetntcs  m  tlje  holy  City, 
were  tttio  hnnbzcb.fourcfcozc  anD  fourc. 

19  ^ozcouct,  the  pozters,  ^feftub, 
Salmon ,  anb  fhett  bzethzen  thatfeept 
t  the  gates,  were  an  hunbzcb  fcucnty  anb 
tibo. 

20  C  3nb  the  reftouc  of  3Ifrael ,  of 

thC  0Z(CftSand  ttlC  fLCUttCS ,  were  in  all 

the  cities  of  3mbah ,  cnery  one  in  hts  tn< 
hcritanec.  " 
ii  *  TSnt  the  iBcthtntms  btbclt  in 
£>phcl :  anb  ztha,  anb  ©fpa  mere  0- 
ucrthej^cthmiins. 

22  Xhc  oucrfeer  alfo  of  the  llcuttcs 
at  3lerufaiem ,  was  z&w  the  fonnc  of 
2Sani ,  the  fon  of  $afbabtah,  the  fonne 
cf^attamah,thcfonneof^icha:  £>f 
the  fonnes  of  3$faph,  the  fingers  were 
oner  the  bufineffe  of  the  houf  e  of  €>ob. 

23  5foz  it  was  the  Kings  tommanbc= 
mcntconccrningthem,tI)at||aeerta<nc 
poztion  fl)Oulb  be  fo?  the  fmgers,bue  fo? 
cucrybay. 

24  3lnb#etbahiahthe  fonncof  Q$t 
fl)C3abei,  of  the  tbuozenof  Zcrab  the 
fonncof  3Juoah,  was  at  the  lungs  banb 
m  all  matters  concerning  the  people. 

25  3fnb foz  the  Pillages ,  TPirb  their 
fielbs,  fome  of  the  cbtlbzeu  of  'Jubab 
mbelt  at  lainatb-arba ,  anb  in  tbcPifc 
lages  thereof,  anbatSDtbon,  anb  m  the 
PUiagcB  thereof,  anb  at3Jehab3ceI,anb 
in  the  Pillages  thereof: 

26  3nbat3}efbua,aubat£Polabab, 
anbataSctb-pbelet, 


Chap.xij.      thecities  ofludah, 


27  3tnb  at  9a5ec-S>huai ,  anb  at 
23eer-fhcba  anb  m  th  e  Pillages  thereof: 

2s  anb  at  ztgiag,  anb  at  #efeo= 
nah,  anb  in  the  Pillages  thereof: 

29  ^baten-Kimmon.anbatza-- 
rcah,anbat3Jarmuth, 

jo  zanoah,  2buiiam ,  anb  in  their 
Pillages,  at  Hadji'ty ,  anb  the  ficibcs 
thereof:  at^5chah,anbin  the  Pillages 
thereof.  Tints  tbcybiPclt  from  zsecc 
fheba,  Pnto  the  Pallcy  of  f?mnom. 

31  Xhc  cbiltycn  alfo  of  fficniamm, 
.  from  ©cba ,  dwelt  \\  at  S0icbmafb ,  anb 
3fua,anb  26cthel,anb  in  djeir  Pillages: 

31  AndatanatbotbJi3ob,3inantab> 

33  §a50j,Bamah<5ittaim, 

34  ^abib.zeboim./Scbaiiat, 

35  &ob ,  anb  £>no ,  the  Pallet  of 
eraftefmem 

3  6   Zlin  Of tljC  HCUitCS-  were  bftlifionS 

m  3Jubah^nd  in  Z3cniamin. 
CHAP.    XII. 

1  ThePnefts,  8  and  the  Leuites  which  came 
vpwiihZerubbabel.  10  The  fuccefsion  o! 
hiePriefts.  it  Cerramc chieie Leuites.  17 
The  folcmniiie  of  the  dedication  ol  the  walls. 
44  The  offices  ot  Priefts  and  Leuites  appoin- 
ted imhe  Tenple. 

SMP  thcfC  arethC^nCftS 

anb  the  fLcmts  that  \Pent 
bp  VPith  Zcrubbabcl  tlje 
fonne  of  ^Jjcaiticl,  anb 
3Jcflnia :  ^craial; ,  3t- 
t;emiah,<£;ra, 

2  ^mariah,!|^0alluch,^attnfh, 

3  ||S>hccaniah ,  1  Keljum,  ||  ^cri^ 
moth, 

4  3bbo,||<5mnctfto,3nrit'al), 

5  ||^iamin,||^abiah,2i5iigah, 

6  i&heniaiah^Sloiarib^cbaiah, 

7  Il^allu^moK^ilKiahScbaiah: 
thefe  were  the  tyuft  oftfjc  ^ncfts,anb  of 
thtfrb2tth?cninthebayesof3Jcfhua. 

8  ^ozcoiierthclLeiiitcs^cnma, 
26innm,Baomiel,S>herebiah.  3Iubah- 
and  ^attanlah  ,  Xbhith  was  oucr  the 
||thariKcfgiuing,heanbhisb:eth.'cn. 

9  3ifo25aKbuttiah,anb31niu  their 
bzeth«n,  were  oucr  agaiuft  themtntfjc 
tbatches. 

io  C^nb3Icn)uabcgatc3foiaKim, 
■JJoiaftim  alfo  begate  Cliaftjib ,  anb  <£- 
ltafl)ibbcgatc3loiaba, 

n  canb  3Joiaoa  begate  "Jonathan, 
anb  Jonathan  begate  3Iabbua, 

H  3lnb  in  tlje  bayes  of  jfloiaaim, 
tbcrc^neffs  the  chiefe  of  the  fathers: 

of 


Or,<fCe- 
ia. 

\Or,la 
Michmafh. 


Ems.t. 


\\Or,M'Ii- 
cu,vtr.l+. 

\Or£cb». 

\\Or,H*nm, 
ver.ly. 
\\Or,Mcr*. 
UtkfVir.i  5. 

.,  Or>^inne* 
thon^  tier, 
l«. 

\\CrtM,„- 
ijmm.zer. 

<7- 

||  Or,mfo*- 
dinht"jtr.\  J. 
II  Or,  S d«>, 
vcr.10. 
]j  Tliai  is, 
the  Pfalmti 
nfthmlef. 


walli 


is 


Nchemiah. 


dedicated. 


"i.Chro.y. 


|  J  Orjru- 

{nriti  or  af- 
[tmUies. 


of  £>ecatab ,  j©eratah :  of  Jeremiah, 
i^ananiah : 

13  £>f  esra ,  $)elbuliam  i  of  3nia< 
riah,3Jchohanan : 

14  j©fi$eUcu,3Jonathan:of£>he; 
bamab.liofcph: 

15  £>n?arim,  2ibna :  of  $)etaioth, 
feelttat: 

i6  Of  3JoDo,  zeehariah :  of <$mnc* 
thon.iBefhnliam: 

17  £>f^ijah,zichu:of£0itUamm, 
of£0oabiah,£iltai: 

18  £Pf  25iigah,  £>hammua :  of  £>he; 
maiah>3fchonathan: 

19  3inb  of  3Jotanb,  ^attenai:of 
3Jcbaiab,?il55t: 

zo  Of^ailai.nailaf  :of^niofe 

ir  jfDf  ^tttuah ,  ^afbabiah :  of  3Jc* 
baiab,  /Betbanael. 

ij.  CXhelLeuitestnthebayesof 
eiiafbib.gjoiaba,  ano3!ohanan,  anb 
■JaDDua,  wererctojDco  chiefe  of  the  fa? 
thets :  alto  the  0jicOs,  to  thereigncof 
©arms  the  tertian. 

23  1Chc  tonnes  of  ?Uut,  the  rtncfc  of 
the  fathers,  were  lujtttttx  in  the  booftc 
of  tbc*ChJomclcs,  men  bnttll  thebayes 
of  ^Johanan  tt)c  tonne  of  eiialbfb. 

24  3(nu  tlit  chtefc  of  the  Heuttes 
ftamabiah,  £>herebiah ,  anb  3Jcft)ua 
toe  tonne  of  laabnuel ,  lbith  time  bjc- 
tlucn  oiurr  agamfl  tljcin,  to  piaife  aud  to 
giuc  thanfccs,acco2bmgto  tbe  common; 
ocmcntof£>auibthcmanof©ob,ibarb 
oucragamftibarb. 

2$  ^attantal),  anb  ffiafebuhtah, 
jDbab-ah,  flJSMbuUam,  Xalmon,  %W- 
twb,  wercpojtctsfeccptngtlicujatb,  at 
the  H  t'meftiolbs  of  tije  gates. 

26  Xhcfclbcrcm  thebayes  of  gioia 
bun,  the  tonne  of  3ieflnia,  the  tonne  of 
JJo^abafc ,  anb  m  the  bayes  of  iiSehc- 
nuah  the  goncrnouc,  anb  of  Cjta  the 
02>.eft,the£>cnbc. 

2  7  C  3lnb  at  the  bcbtcatton  of  the 
iball  of  Jerufalcm,  they  fought  the 
Uetutes  out  of  all  then:  plates,  to  bung 
thcmto'Jccufaicnuoliccpcthcbebica; 
tionibith  giaouefTcboth  ibitb  thanbef 
gnungs  anb  lbith  fingitig,w.th  cymbals, 
pfaitcncs.anb  With  harpes. 

1%  3nb  the  tonnes  of  the  dingers 
gathcrcDtl)cmfclucGtogcthcr,bothout 
of  the  piamc  countrey  rounb  about  3Je= 
rufalnu ,  anb  from  tljebiliagcsof  Jftc; 
topbathi. 

29  Mo  from  the  hoafc  of  ©ilgai 
anb  out  of  the  ftclbs  of  Oeba ,  anb  21y 


maueth :  fo?  the  dingers  hab  btuioeb 
them  milages  rounb  abontgjerufaicm. 

30  ^nbthe&ncBs  anb  the  ILemtes 
purtfieb  theuueutes,  anb  purtfieb  the 
people,  ano  the  gates,  anb  the  wall. 

31  3thcn3Jb2onghtbpihepuncesof 
Jjubahbpon  the  wall,  anbappomteb 
tibo  great  companies  of  them  that  gauc 
thanbes,  whereof  one  went  on  the  right 
hanb  bpon  the  mail  tottmrb  the  bouug 
gate: 

32  3nb  after  them  tbent  J?ofbaiah, 
anb  halfe  of  the  punces  of  gjubab, 

33  3inb  Zyat\iA),€^va,mo^ttt)\xV 
lam, 

34  3lubah,anb2Seniamin,anb  ;£>!)£ 
maiah,ano35eremtah, 

35  ^nbcernineofthc^iicfts  tonnes 
Witt)  trumpets:  namely,  zeehariah  the 
tonne  of  Jonathan,  the  tonne  of  5>he; 
matah ,  the  tonne  of  #attaniah,  the 
tonne  of  $3ithatah ,  the  tonne  of  zap 
tur,  the  tonne  of  3faph : 

36  anbhisbiethjen^ftcmatah^nb 

3iratacl,fl}9ilalat,  ©tlalat,  £0aat,  /5c* 
tbanacl,anb3Jubah,$anant,  With  the 
muficallmftrnments  of  ©ambthc  man 
of©ob;  anb€5ta  the  &cnbe  before 
them. 

37  3nbatthefoutttaine-gate,lbhlth 
was  ouer  agauift  them,  they  ibentbp 
by  the  ftaircs  of  the  tttie  of  2>awb,at  the 
gomg  bp  of  the  Wall ,  aboue  thehonfe 
of  2>autb ,  cuentmto  the  water-gate, 
eaftwarb. 

38  anb  the  other  company  of  tljem 
that  gauc  thanbes  .Went  oner  agauift 
them,  anb  Rafter  them,  anb  thehaife 
of  the  people  bpon  the  ibau ,  from  be  -• 
yonbthetoibieofthefbinates,eucnbn? 
tothebzoabibail, 

39  %\xt)  from  aboue  the  gate  of  ffi* 
Phiatm,  anb  aboue  tl)c  olDr  gate,  ano  a- 
bouc  the  fid)  -  gate,  anb  the  totbic  of 
I?ananeel,anbthe  toibie  of  fi0cah,euen 
bnto  tlje  fliecpegate  •  anb  they  ftoob  lull 
intljcputongate. 

40  s>o  ftooo  the  tibo  companies  of 
them  that  gaue  thanbesm  thchoufe  of 
<0ob ,  anb  5 ,  anb  the  haife  of  the  ru? 
Icrsibithmc: 

41  ^nb  rl)c  0:tefts :  CltaWm,  Q9aa^ 
feiah,  ^uuauun ,  €0ichatah,  Clioenat, 
zathanah ,  and  i^anamah  lbith  trntu 
pets: 

41  3(ubQ9aafciah,anb;S>hcma<ah, 
anb  €lca3ar ,  anb  SI33! ,  anb  3Jel)orja> 
nan,anbs©aithuah,anbt£lain,anb<E? 
?cr.3lnothc^ingctstfaiigloiib, lbith 
'  3)c3ra^ 


f  Hei.  •fit 
theirvoicc 
tohhe.it  J. 


The  Law  read.  Chap.xii].      Abufes  reformed. 


pointed  bj 
the  /.TV. 
\Hcbr.for 
the  toy  of 
Iudah. 
\H*b.that 
(toed, 
i.Chron. 

chap. 

*  I. CI  iron. 

25.I,&C. 


\\7hakjet 

apart. 
z6. 


^Heb.  there 
»  m  read. 
*Num.  22. 

5.deut.i5-5 
f  Hit.  cares 


*Num.*2. 
5«ioll).24.9 


f  Hcb.  being 
fit  oner. 


3terahiah  tlicir  ouerfecr. 

43  3lfo  that  bay  the?  offereb  great 
faenfites,  anb  retoyeeb ,  fo*  ©od  hab 
mabe  them  rcioyccunfh  great  iop:  the 
mm  s  alfo  an  o  tile  rii  t  id  zc  1 1  rciopceb :  to 
that  the  lop  of  3ierufaicm  ibas  hearD 
euenafarreoff. 

44  C  ^no  at  thattimc  Vbcrcfomc 
appomteD  ouet  the  chambers  fo?  the 
mafures,fo:  the  offerings,  fozthcfirft 
fruits,  ano  fo2  trje  tithes,  to  gatDcr  into 
them  out  of  trje  ficlbs  of  the  titles  trje 
portions  of  the  ||  latt>  fo?  the  pnefts  anb 
fLcuttes:  tfo?  3Jubah  retoyceb  foz  the 
l&ztelfs,  9  foi  roc  jXcuitcs  t  that  lbaiteb 

45  3nbbofhthcfingctsanbthepo;i* 
tcrs  nept  the  tbarb  of  their  <£>ob,  ano 
trje  tbarD  of  the  purifieation^accojbtng 
to  trje  commanbement  of  2>auib,  and  of 
Solomon  pis  fonnc. 

46  5foitnthcbapesof2r>auib*anb 
3faph  of  olb,  there  were  rtjtcfe  of  the 
fingcrs,anb  fongs  of  pjaifc  anb  thannt 
gluing  lmtodSob. 

47  ■MxiD  all  3ffrael  in  the  Daves  of 
Zcrubbabel,anDinthcbavesof  j|5che* 
mtah,  gauethc  portions  of  thefingcts, 
anD  trje  porters,  euetpbaphisportton 
anb  the?  UfanctiQeD  holy  things  Dnto  the 
Hcuttes,  *  ana  the  fLcuites  fantttfieD 
themunto  thechtlbzcn  of  aaron. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Vpon  the  reading  of  the  Law,  feparationis 
made  from  the  mixed  multitude.  4  Nehemi» 
ah  at  his  retutne,  caufedi  the  chambers  to  bee 
deanfed.  10  He  reformedi  the  offices  in  the 
houfeof  God.  15  The  violation  of  the  Sab- 
bath, 25  &  the  manages  with  ftrangewiues. 

jftthatbaytthevrcabin 
trje*booRc  of  ©ofcsintije 
t  auDience  of  the  people, 
ano  therein  tbas  founb 
_tb?ttten,  that  thc3unmo* 
mte  ano  trje  flgtoabitc  fboulD  nottome 
into  the  Congregation  of  ©obfozeuer, 
z  *Bceaufethepmctnotthcchtlb?en 
of  3Jfraeirbithb?eaD,  anD  tbith  ujatct, 
but  hireo  Balaam  agamft  them,  that 
he  fboulb  curfc  them:  houibeit  out  d5ob 
turneb  the  cutfeiuto  a  blcOing. 

3  |5ott)  it  tameto  paffc  Vbhen the? 
hab  hearb  the  latb ,  that  they  fepa* 
rateb  from  3Jfrael  all  the  mtreb  mul- 
titube. 

4  C3lnb  befoze  this  eiiafljib  the 
pneftthautngthcouerrightofthctham^ 
btrof  the  houfeof  our  €>ob,Ujasailieb 

tmtoXobtah: 


5  3nb  hce  hab  pzepareb  foz  him  a 
great  chamber,  tbhece  afozenme  tt)n? 
latb  the  meat  offcings,thcfranBitucnfe 
anb  the  Ueffcls,  anb  the  tithes  of  the 
come,thenett>  lbincanb  the  oue,Vbhich 
ibas  tcommanbeb  to  be  giuen  to  the  He* 
uites,  anb  the  fingers,  anb  the  posters, 
anb  the  offerings  of  the  pnefts. 

6  But  in  ailthis  time  xuas  not3J  at 
3f  crulalem:  fo:  m  thettno  anb  thirtieth 
yectc  of  Sirtarerjecs  King  of  Babylon, 
came  3  bnto  the  Ring,  anb  tafter  rer* 
tame  ua?cs,||obtatneb3J  leaucofthe 
l&ng: 

7  3nb3Jcameto3ierufalcm,anb 
bnberftoob  of  the  cuil  that  <£ltafl)tb  bib 
fozXobiah,  in  preparing  him  a  cham- 
bet  in  the  courts  of  the  houfe  of  (Sob. 

s  3nb  it grieucb  me  f02c,  thcrefort 
3  caQ  footfh  all  thehoufliolD  Cuffe  of 
Xobiah  out  of  the  chamber : 

9  Xhen  3  commanbeb ,  anb  the? 
clcanfeb  the  chambers,  anb  thither 
brought  3  againe  the  bcffeis  of  the 
home  of  <i5oD,tbiththemeate  offering, 
anbthefranRincenfe. 

io  C  ^nb  3  petceiueb  that  the  pont- 
ons of  tlje  ULeuites  Dab  not  bcene  giuen 
them :  fo?  tije  fltuites  anb  the  fingers 
that  bib  thciLUOjBC,  ttereflebeuetpone 
tohisficlb. 

1 1  Xhtn  contenbeb  3  *bW)  the  tu< 
lets,  anb  faib,B9hvtsthehoufeof<l5ob 
fozfafecni  ^nb  'Jgathcrcb  themtogc* 
ther,anbfetthemintheirtpiacc. 

it  Xhen  brought  all  3mbah  the 
tithe  of  the  come,  anb  the  nein  Ibine, 
anb  the  oylcbnto  the  ||  treafurtcs. 

13  3lnD  3  mabc  treafurers  oucr  the 
treafunes,  Shdcmiah  the  pjiett,  anb 
zaboft  the  fcribe,  anb  of  fheHeuites, 
0cbaiah :  anb  t  ncrt  to  them  was  n>anan 
the  fonnc  of  zaccur,the  fonnc  of  Z&te 
tantah  s  fozthevibere  counteb  faithfull, 
anb  t  their  office  was  to  biftnbute  into 
their  toethzen. 

14  *Kememberme,iDmv<Sob,con' 
ccrning  thts,anbibipe  not  out  mptgoob 
Deebs,  that  3  hane  bonefoi  thehoufe 
of  mp  d5ob,  anbfozthellofficesthereof. 

15  C3nthofcDai>esfatt}c3hn3Ju= 
bah,  fometreabinglbinc  pzeffes  on  the 
5>abbath,anDb2mginginfheaues,anb 
iabingaffcs,asalfon)inc,  grapes,  anb 
figs,  anb  allmanerotburbens ,  ibhith 
the?  bought  into  'Jcrufaiem  on  the 
Sabbath  bap :  anb  3  teflifieb  agamfi 
them  in  tlje  bavtbhetem  tljcp  folbe  bi> 

ctuais.  ^ 

py        16  Xhere 


\Htbrshe 
command?, 
nent  of  the 
Lrttita. 


Ihb^tthe 
ad  of doits. 
Or,  lear- 
efllj  rtant' 
jhd.      ' 


f  Hcb.  far. 
ding. 


\\Or,flort- 
boufti. 


\Htbr.M 
their  hind. 


t  Heb.it  wu 
vpon  them. 

*  Vei-fc  1 2. 

frfeb.bmd- 
mjb. 

\\Or}obfer- 
tuttoni. 


34 


Abufeofthe  Nehemiah.  Sabbath,reformed. 


fHet.ie. 

fore  the  tv .ill. 


\\Or,vuilti- 
tndc. 


i6  3Cherc  tntocit  men  ofX^zcalfo 
therein,  which  teought&fh  anb  all  ma= 
net  of  ware,  anDfblDconthcSabbath 
mtothc  ehtltycnof  3fubah,anb  in^le- 
tufalem. 

17  Xhcn^  eontenbebujiththe /I5o= 
bles  of  ^uoaf) ,  anti  fapb  tmto  them, 
asrjat  cmll  thing  ts  this  tt)at  pe  boc,anb 
pjofane  the  Sabbath  bap  * 

is  s>ia  not  pour  fathers  thus ,  ana 
oib  not  our  Gobbling  all  this  emu  top* 
ontos  anbbpon  thtscitte*  pet  pc  bung 
mojettKath  l)pon3Jfracl,bppzofaning 
the  Sabbath. 

19  3lnb  it  came  to  paffe ,  that  ibhcn 
tnc  gates  of  3Jcrufalcm  beganne  to  be 
barKebefiwe  the  &abbath,3J  commas 
bed  tim  the  gates  Choulb  be  (nut ,  nno 
ehargcb  t!)attt?ep  fhoulbnot  be  openeb 
till  after  tfte  Sabbath  :anDfome  of  mp 
feruants  fet  3  at  the  gates ,  that  there 
(houlb  noourbcn  be  brought  in  on  the 
Sabbath  bap. 

20  So  the  merchants,  anb  fellers  of 
all  Rtnbe  of  ibatc,  lobgeb  tt)ithout3Je= 
rufalcmonteojttbicc. 

21  lChen5tcmfiebagam{tthcm,anD 
faibbntothcm,  aahplobgepcct  about 
the  mail*  35f  pe  boe  fe  agatne ,  3J  mm 
laphaubs  on  post>5From  that  time  fo?th 
came  thep  no  more  on  the  Sabbat!). 

22  ^nb^tommanBeDthelLeuites, 
that  the?  CBoultj  clcanfe  thcmfclucs, 
anD  tftat  thep  (houlb  tome  anb  feecpe 
the  gates,  to  fanenfte  the  Sabbath  bap : 
Kcmembermc,  j©mp<B>ob,  concerning 
this  alfo,  anb  fparcme,aecoz&ingto  the 
||  gtcatnefic  of  thp  mcrtie. 

23  C  3!nthofe  napes  aifo  fatbc  3 


gjemes  that  t  hab  maneb  mtues  of  3u> 
bob,of  ^mmon,and  of  fl9oab: 

24  2inb  their  ehlltymljpaisehairein 
the  fpeeth  of  aihbob ,  anb  t  toulb  not 
fpcattcmthe3jeiues  language,  but  at* 
coding  to  the  language  t  ofech  people. 

25  3lnD33tontenbcbrbtththcm,anb 
||  rarfeb  than,  anb  fmote  terteme  of 
them ,  anb  plucat  off  their  hair c ,  anb 
mabc  them  froeatc  bp  d5ob ,  faying ,  jace 
(hall  not  giue  pour  Daughters  fcnto 
their  fonncs,  nojta&e  their  Daughters 
Dnto  pour  fonnes,  02  fo*  pour  femes. 

26  did  not  Solomon  fctng  of  3Jfc 
racl  Onne  bp  thefc  things  *  pet  among 
manp  nations  was  there  no  mug  u&c 
him,  Ibho  ltoas  beloucb  of  his  ©ob,anb 
<5ob  mabc  him  mug  oucr  all  gifrael : 
*  ncnerthcle(rc,eiien  him  bib  outlanbilh 
ttjomen  taufetofmne. 

27  Shall  tbec  then  hearfcen  into 
von,  to  boc  ail  this  great  cum,  to  tranfc 
grcfle  againft  our  <E>ob, in marrping 
Orange  Unties* 

28  ^nb  one  of  the  fonnes  of 3Joiaba, 
the  fbnnc  of  eitathtb  the  high  0ncfl, 
was  fonne  inlaroto  Sanbailatthc  i^c 
ronite :  thcrfojc  3  #aftb  h*m  from  me. 

29  Bemember  them ,  <©  mp  (Sob, 
tbceaufe  thep  hauc  Defflcb  the  pfltfc 
hoob ,  anb  the  toucnant  of  the  $&He& 
hooD,anoofthe?Leuitcs. 

30  3Chus  tlcanfcb  3  them  from  all 
Grangers,  anb  appointed  the  lbatbs  of 
the  ^nrtts  anb  the  fLeuitcs,  euerp  one 
mhisbuunefle: 

31  ^nb  fo?  the  tboob- offering,  at 
times  r.ppomtcb,  anb  fo?  the  fitft  fruits. 
Bemcmber  me,  j©  mp  <£>ob,  fo?  goob. 


\  Hit.  bad 

made  to 

dwelt  With 

them. 

\Hei.thtj 

dtfeened 

net  tojpeaks. 

\Hct.ofpo 

pieandoeo- 

pJe. 

\\Or,rciulti 

them. 


'l.King.It 
I,&x. 


\Het.fcrthe 
defiling. 


^THE 


ThcK 


m2s,an 


Ch 


a 


£t 


Qj 


ueenes 


feaft 


s. 


THE  BOOKE   OF 


Efth 


ei% 


CHAR    I. 

Ahaluerus  makechroyall  feafts.  10  Vafthi, 
fait  for,  refufeth  to  come.  13  Ahafuerus, 
by  the  counfelt  of  Memucan  ,  makeih  the 
decree  of  mens  Ibueraiantie. 


found. 


||0r,w'«&r. 


\\Or,cfpcr. 

phjretarul 
marble,  end 
alalrjjler, 
andfiasecf 
Slew  colour. 
f  Hebr.vim 
aftbektne- 
Acme. 


it  came  to 
paffeuttheDapes 
of  Slhaftierus, 
(this  K  ^fjafuc* 
tus  tbhxch  reig* 
ne?»  ftom  3wbia, 
raen  Smtocthto* 
pia,oueranl)an* 
bzcb  ,  an&  feucn 
ano  t  Bjeatic  p?oumte& ) 

x  That  at  thofe  bapes ,  tt>Ucn  the 
IKtng  Sthawcrusfatconthethjoneof 
hsstotgooincxbhsth  ibasm  jfehwfhan 

3  3Jtt  the  t I)tta  pcerc  of  his  teignc, 
hcmaoeafi&ftbntoailhi0$;unecs,anB 
his  fecuants ,  the  polber  of  $erfia  ana 
$)rtna,  tfjeiBobltsano  stances  of  the 
p2oulnces  betngbefojehtm. 

4  ^henhelhetbebtherichcsofhis 
glonous  Sungsome,  anb the honour of 
his  rreeUcntmaiefhe ,manp  Daves,  euen 
anhnnoieb  anb  tourefwe  oapes. 

5  3^  Xbhen  theft  oapes  tbere  eje* 
pttcD,theltingmabe  afcaft  imtoallthe 
people  that  there  t  pjefentin  &hu(han 
the  palace ,  both  into  great  anb  (mail, 
Ceaenba?es,m  the  court  of  the  garben 
ofthcftutgspaiacc, 

6  where  were  tuDitcgreatc  ant>  I  Ibletb 
hangings ,  faftcnebttlth  cozbsof  fine  litt? 
nen\anb  purple, to  Bluer  rutgs,ant>  ptl* 
lers  of  marble :  the  bens  were  of  golb 
anb  Bluer,  npon  a  pauemcrtt  of ||teb, 
ano  blettjc ,  ano  tbhite,  ano  blacKe 
marble. 

7  ^notrjcpgauethemnnnBemDet 
fels  of  golD ,  ( the  toeffeis  being  btuers 
onefromanothet)anbtro?au»jlnein 


abunbance  ,aeco;tbing  to  the  t  ftate  of 
the  tang. 

8  ^nbrljcajm&uigwasaccojismgto 
the  la»),none&iDeompell  tfoithefung 
habappointco  to  all  the  officers  of  his 
houfe.rhat  tfjep  ftjoulb  noe  atcojbing  to 
entry  mans  pleafurc. 

9  :Mo<&atthithe;giJueencmabea 
feaft  fbj  the  ibomen,  ">thcropaiihoufe 
tthich  belonged  to  lung  3flh,awcrus. 

10  C£>nthefcucnthba?MBhenthe 
heart  of  the  Sung  ibas  inert?  ibith 
ttnne,  hceommanDeb!8J9ehunian,2!6t3^ 
tha,  $arbana,  25igtha,  anb^bagtlja, 
zcttjat,  anbCareas,  thefeucn||  chant 
bcrlcng  that  ferneb  in  the  picfhtce  of  %- 
hafuerus  the  long, 

11  ^ob?mgmaflhithc£lueenebc^ 
fozcthtfemg,  tbtth  theCroitoncropau. 
to  fhemthe  people,anb  the  Winces  her 
beautie :  fo?  the  was  t  fatre  to  loose  on. 

\%  25ut  the  fl&ueenc  Hafthi  reffe&b 
to  come  at  the  lungs  commanbement 
tbp  his  chamberlens :  therefore  ibas 
the  ming  nerp  HJiot!) ,  anb  his  anger 
burnco  m  him. 

13  CIChenthchingfaibetotheibife 
men,  mhieh  uneib  the  tunes  (fojfo  was 
the  Ulngs  maner  toibarbs  all  that 
lutein  iatt>,anbtubgemcnt : 

14.  ^nothenertbntohim,  wasCar? 
fhcna,£>hcthar,  3bmarha,  Xarftys, 
fiacres ,  ^aricna ,  and  ^emutan,  the 
feuen  "j&nnccsof  ^erfia ,  anb  ©cbia, 
ttrttfrhtalbthc  lunge  face ,  and  mhich 
Cste  the  firfl  m  the  Ringbome.) 

15  t  ©hat  (hall  ibee  boc  into  the 
^iuetnellaftht,  aceojcing  to  larb,  be- 
caufeftje  hath  not  perfomicb  the  cont 
manbementofthetung  ^hafuerus,  bp 
the  chamberlens; 

is  ^nu  #cmncan  anftuereb  befo;e 
the  Sing  anb  the  Ounces  •  ^aftljt  the 
£Uictnc  hath  not  bone  Vbious  to  the 
Rtngoncip,  butalfbto  all  the  Ounces, 
anb  to  all  the  people  that  are  m  all  the 
J Py  1 $01 


|  Hei>jtccor- 
dingtQtht 


\\Or.E«. 
nucha. 


\Hebr.goeH 
ofcairnic- 


wlojth  was 
hy  the  hand 
of  hi*  Eh. 
wchts. 


'Ezra. 7.14, 


fHelr.rrbjzt 

■9  doe? 


34  2 


Vafthi  put  away.         Efther.        The  kings  decree. 


be  good  with 

thektng. 

t  Heb.  from 

before  him. 

\  HeUhM 

ttpajfenot 

artay. 

\  Hebr.vnto 

hercompam- 


\  Heb.  XPM 
good  m  the 
eyes  of  the 


\Hebr.tb*t 
oneJJjottld 
fttbltfh  it 
according  to 
thefar.gttAgt 
of hu  people. 


p?otunces  of  the  King^bafuctus. 

17  jtfo?  this  dccd  of  tl)e  croecne  (ball 
tome  ab?oab  bnto  all  tbomen,  fo  that 
tbepfljalbefptfetbMburbanbsintbeit 
epes ,  tbben  it  fbail  bee  rcpo?tcb  ■,  %i)t 
Ring  3bafuerus  commanbeb  ©aftbi 
tbecmeeneto  be  b?ougbtmbefo?cbim, 
butfbeeamenot. 

is  LikewifcCballtljeJLabiesof^erfta 
anbS^ebia  fav  tins  bap  bnto  all  the 
bingspanees.ibbiebbauebearDoftbe 
beebof  tt)e£iaeene.  Xbusfha" therea- 

fe  too  much  contempt  anb  tt)?atb. 

19  t'jfitpieafetiKlmt&letttjerego 
a  rovaii  commanbement  t  from  bint, 
anblctitbeetb?ittcn  amongtbe  laibcs 
of  the  0crfians,  anb  the  <$>cncs,  t  that 
it  be  not  altcreb,  that  tlaftbi  tome  no 
mo?e  bcfo?e  Ring  ;3barucrus?,  anb  let 
the  Ring  giue  bet  ropallcftatetbntoa* 
notber  that  is  better  then  fbe. 

20  2nbibbm  the  Rings  Dccree,ttibicb 
befl)almaRc,U)albepublifbeDtb?ouo> 
ottt alibis  empire,  (fo?itisgteat:)  all 
the  ttJtucs  fball  giue  to  their  bufbanbs 
honour,  both  to  great  anb  fmail. 

21  3nbtbefepmgtpicafcbfbemng 
anbfhep?inces,  anb  tbc  Ring  bib  acco?* 
oingto  tbettio?b  of  ^emutan: 

22  ifoi  be  fent  letters  into  all  the 
King*  pzontntes ,  into  euerp  p?ontnce, 
aeco?bing  to  the  letting  thereof,  anb  to 
euerp  people  after  theft  language ,  that 
euerp  man  tboulb  beare  rule  m  his 
oTbnc  houfe,  anb  t  that «  aioulb  be  pub-- 
lifbeb  aeeo?bing  to  the  language  of  eue* 
rie  people. 

CHAP.    II. 

Out  of  thechoife  of  virgincs,  a  Queeneisto 
bechofen.  5  Mordecai  the  nurfing  father  of 
Efther.  8  Efther  is  preferred  by  Hegai  before 
the  reft.  12.  The  maner  of purification^  go- 
ing into  the  king.  15  Efther  beftpleafing  the 
king,  is  made  Queen e.  2.1  Mordecai  difcoue- 
ringatreafon,  is  recorded  in  the  Chronicles. 

ifter  thefe  things,  ibhen 
the  ib?atb  of  lung  3lba; 
fuerus  ibas  appeafeb  , 
hec  rememtoeb  Hafthi, 
anb  lbbat  (bee  hab  bone, 
anb  lbhat  ruasbctrccbagamftbcr. 

2  ILben  fatbe  the  lungs  feruants, 
thatmimftrcb bnto  him, net  tbercbee 
ralrepongbirgmsfougbtfo?  tbeRmg: 

3  3nb  let  the  King  appoint  officers 
in  an  the  p?outntes  of  his  Rmgbomc, 
that  the?  map  gather  together  an  the 


faircpong  birgmsbnto  £>bufban  the 
paiace.to  the  houfe  of  the  Jbomcntbnto 
the  cuftobie  of  ll^cgc  the  Kings  chain* 
beriainc.Rcepcrof  tiic  ibomcn,  anb  let 
their  things  fo?  purification  bee  giuen 

them: 

4  3tnb  let  the  maiben  ibbitb  plea* 
fctb  the  King,  bee  Auecne  m  fteab  of 
^aftbi.Stm)  the  thing  plcafeb  the  Ring, 
anbhebiofo. 

5  C  N°w  in  £>butban  the  palace, 
there  ibasa  ter  tame  3Jeib,ibhofe  name 
was  gpojbcca:,  the  fonne  of  3Jair ,  the 
fonnc  of  £>btmei ,  the  fbnnc  of  Bifb, 
azSentamtte, 

6  *3©hohabbcnecariebaibapfrom 
3Jerufalem,  With  the  captiuitie  rbbtcb 
hab  bene  cancb  albap  lbttb  Slceoniab 
King  of  3lubah,  ibbom  jiSeburbabnes* 
5ar  the  Btng  of  26abplon  bab  caneb 
avbap. 

7  3tnb  bee  t  biought  bp  tyabatTab 
(that  is  eftber)  hts  bncles  baughter, 
to?  (he  hab  neither  father  no?  mother, 
anb  the  maib  ibas  t  faire  anb  beautiful, 
ibbom£??o?bceat(lbbenbcr  father  anb 
mother  lbcrcbeab)  toobc  fo?bis  ottme 
Daughter. 

s  C  5>o  it  came  to  paOTe,  ibhen  the 
Kings  commanbement  anb  his  becree 
ibasbearb ,  anb  Ibhen  manpmaibens 
Iberegathereb  together  bnto  &bu(han 
the  paiacc,to  the  tuQobic  of  $egai,that 
€ftherrbas  brought  alfo  bnto  thebmgs 
bonfc,  to  tht  cuftobie  of  $egat ,  Keeper 
of  rl)c  lbomen. 

9  3Inb  the  maiben  plcafeb  him ,  anb 
flje  obtaineb  KirtbnelTc  of  him,  anb  hee 
fpeebUp  gaue  her  her  things  fo?punfi* 
cation ,  lbith  tfuch  things  as  btlongeb 
to  her,  anbfeuen  maibens,  Kbhicl)  lbcrc 
mcetto  be  giuen  her,  outof  the  Btngs 
houle,  anb  t  hec  prefer  rcb  her  anb  her 
mams,bnto  thebeft  ^  of  the  boufcof 
thettomen. 

10  either  hab  not  fheibeb  hec  peo* 
pie,  no?  her  binrcb :  fo?  S9o?becai  hab 
chargcbhcr,thatfl)efhoulbnotfl)crb  it. 

11  anb£}9o?becai!baiKcbeucrpDap 
befo?e  the  court  of  the  lbomcns  houfe, 
t  to  Knolb  holt)  either  bib,  anb  tbbat 
(bouib  become  of  her. 

12  C/!3orbJbbencucrptnaiosturnc 
tbas  come,  to  goe  m  to  Bing  ^hafue^ 
rus,  after  that  Ojcc  hab  bene  tibrtuc 
moneths,  accojbing  to  the  maner  of  the 
TbomcnCfo?  fotbete  the  bapes  of  their 
purifications  accomplilbeb,  to  wit,  ficr 
moneths  ibith  one  of  mp?rhc,  anb  ftre 

moneths 


I  Heb.VHto 
the  hand. 
\\OrJUpi, 

1/cr.i. 


*  }JCing.t4 
■  j.ici.141 
and  2.chto. 


t  atjKf 

rifled. 


\Heh.fairc 
effourme, 
and  Pood  of 
ccHntcnar.ee. 


tHeiJ,,; 

content. 


jHeMee 
cbangedhtr. 


t Met:  to 

Itncwlhe 

feae. 


Either  Queene.         Chap.iij.  Hamans  fuit.J 


\\Or&r.i- 

t  Hcr.br- 
:hirr.t 


t  Hit-' 


Or,Big- 

lb*nn.  chap. 
6.:. 

\H<k.thc 
tbrcpiM. 


moncths  Until  (IbcetoDours,  anD  ttnth 
other  things  fo?  rtjc  purifying  Of  thC 
tbomeu.) 

ij  Xhen  thus  came  euery  matDtn 
tmto  tlic  Umg ,  tbhatfocucr  flic  DcfireD, 
Vbasgiurnhtr ,  to  goe  Until  her  out  of 
the  houfc  of  tljc  rbomcu,tmto  the  kmgs 
hottfc. 

14  3httheeuentngflicU)ent,aiiDon 
theinoirotDc  fl)C  rcturncD  mto  the  fc 
cbtiD  Iioufe  of  the  tbomeu ,  to  the  tufto 
Die  of  £>haathga5  the  kings  chamber* 
len ,  Uihich  Sept  the  toucubtnes :  fljec 
camem  tmto  the  kmgnomo2c,  cttept 
the  kingoelighteD  tn  her ,  anD  that  fl)cc 
ttierc  calico  by  name. 

15  C/^oU)  ttihcn  the  turtle  of  efc 
her ,  the  Daughter  ofabihail,  thetmcle 
of  £0o?Decai  (Who  hao  taken  her  fo?  his 
Daughter)  urns  conic,  to  goc  lit  tmto  the 
king:  flic  rcqturcD  nothing,  but  tuhat 
tycgai  the  kings  chambcrlen  the  keeper 
of  theUiomcn,appomtcD :  3nD  either 
obtameDfauour  mthcught  of  aifthem 
thatlookcDtmonber. 

i6  &o  either  tbas  taken  tmto  king 
3f>ifuetus,mto  his  houfc  royall,m  the 
tenth  moneth(tbhich's  the  moncth  Xc= 
bcth)in  the  feuenth  veerc  of  his  reigne. 

17  3mD  the  king  lottcD  either  abouc 
autheihomen,  anD  flieobtamcD  grace 
anD  I  fauour  t  m  his  Gght,  11102c  then  all 
tlic  tiirgms ;  fo  that  hce  fet  the  ropail 
troumebpon  her  heaD,  anDniaDe  her 
qucencutflcaD  ofttaftht. 

18  XhcnthckuigniaDcagreatfeafl 
tmto  all  ins  pnncrs  anD  his  feruants, 
cuen  eithcrs  fcaft ,  anD  hec  maDc  a  t  re< 
leafeto  thcpioumccs,  ano  gaue  gifts, 
accoiDmg  to  the  (late  of  the  king. 

19  3fttt>  thhen  the  birgms  were  ga< 
thercD  together  the  fcconD  time ,  then 
Q)02Dccai  fate  in  the  kings  gate. 

io  either  haD  not  yet  flicibcD  her 
kinDicD,  tioi  her  people,  as  £]3o?Dccat 
hao  chargcD  her :  f  02  either  Did  the 
commaiiDenicnt  of  i^oiDccai,  like  as 
Mien  flic  mas  b:oughtbpttnth  h""' 

21  C3Jn  thofc  Daycs,  (iblnlc  ©o?- 
Dccai  fate  in  the  kings  gate)  turn  of  the 
kings  chamberlcns, '  Sigthan  anD  Xe 
refli ,  of  thofc  tbliicb  kept  t  the  0002c, 
mere  uuotb,  anD  fought  to  lav  hattD  on 
the  king  Stbafuerus: 

ir  2hiD  the  thing  tints  knotben  to 
£0o?Dceai ,  tbho  tolD  it  bnto  either  the 
Queene,  anD  either  ccrttficD  the  kmg 
thereof,  mfi0o2Dccais  name. 

2}  3itiDtt)hen  mqutunonibag  maDc 


of  the  matter  .tttbas  tbtmD  ont>therfo?e 
jtbeytberc  both  hangcD  on  a  trcc:anD 
jtttbasuntttcnmtbc  bookcoftheefno; 
nicies  bcto?c  the  kmg. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  Haman  aduancedby  the  king,  anddelpiied 
by  Mordecai,  feekcth  reuengevpon  all  the 
Iev.es.  7  Hce  cafteth  Lots.  8  Heeobtai- 
jjeth  by  calumniation,  a  Decree  o(  the  king, 
to  put  the  I  ewes  to  death. 

Jfter  tbcfc  thmgsDiD  king 
3bafuerus  p2omote  $a< 
man,  the  tonne  of  3meDa- 
tha  the  3lgaguc,  anD  aD- 
uanceD  him,  anD  fet  his 
fcatc  abouc  all  the  princes  that  were 
j  tint!)  htm. 

i  3ttD  all  the  kingsferuants ,  that 
iwercm the  kings gate,botbcD,anD  rents 
rnucD  teaman,  fo2  the  king  haD  to  com* 
manocD  concermng  him :  but  £0o?Decai 
bolbcD  not,no2  DiD  hmi  rcucreiue. 

j  Xbcn  tlic  kings  ftruants ,  lbbirb 
|werem  tlic  kings  gate,  faybbnto  G&op 
Dceai.ffliby  traiifgrtttctt  thou  the  kings 
commaiiDcment* 

I  4  /i3oU)itcametopau"c,ibbentbri> 
fpakc  Daily  bnto  bim,anb  be  bcarkencD 
not  tmto  them  •  that  they  tolD  $?aman, 
jto  fee  tbbctber  s$02Decai  his  matters 
tboulD  (tanD ,  fo?  he  hao  tolD  them  that 
ihewasa3Jctt)c. 

5  3uiDtbben  Hainan  tatb  that  £0o?; 
DccaiboU)cDnot,no?DiDhimreuercntc, 
then  mas  Hamau  full  of  U)?atb. 

6  3tnD  hce  thought  fco2nc  to  la? 
hanDs  on  £Po?Dccat  alone,  fo2  rtjcp  haD 
fliettieD  him  the  people  of  $)02Decat : 
tDhctcfo2c  teaman  tought  to  Dcftrop  all 
the  3Je\bcs,  that  were  thioughout  the 
rbljolc  kmgDomc  of  Slhauierus,  euen 
the  people  of  t10o?Dctai. 

7  €  3n  the  firlt  moncth  (that  is, 
the  moncth  i9iC»n)in  the  twelfth  veerc 
ofkmg^hafitcrus,  rhevcalt^ucthat 
is,  the  lot,  bcfo2C$?aman,  from  Dapto 
Dap,  anD  from  moncth  to  moncth ,  r° 
the  tfticlfthmoneth,  that  isttjc  moncth 

3iDar. 

8  C3md  naman  (aiDt  bnto  king 
3fl)arucrus :  Xhcre  is  a  ccrtamc  people 
fcattcrcDab2oaD,  atiDDifpcrfcD  among 
the  people ,  m  all  the  pjouinces  of  tliv 
kmgDomc,  anD  their  lattics  >•?  Diucrfc 
from  all  people,  neither  kccpcthcv  the 
kings  latbes  thcrefoic  it  > s  not  t  fo? the 
kings  p?ofit  to  fuffer  them. 


|  HtLmette 

cr,  equal 


Hi 


amans 


fuitmade       Either.      knowentoEflh 


cr. 


\  fleh.to  de 
jiro)  them. 


|  Or,  opprtf. 
jour. 


]Or,fecre- 

tones. 


9  3JfttpicafcrDcfcmg,tmtbciD2it; 
ten,ttbatttKvmaybebefrroveD:anb3J 
ttriu  t  pav  ten  fhoufanb  talents  of  filucr 
to  the  banbes  of  thofc  that  haue  the 
charge  of  the  bufmeffe,  to  tying  "into 
the  Kings  trcafttrtcs. 

to  anbtbelungtoouc  l)isringfrom 
hishanb,  ans  gauc  it  bnto  J?anianttjc 
fount-  of  .3nnncDathathe2lgagite,  the 
3eibcs!enemte. 

1 1  3lnb  the  umg  fatbe bnto  Hainan, 
Xhe  fmter  is  ginen  to  thcctljc  people  al 
fb ,  to  Doe  lDitlj  tljetn,  as  it  fccniEtt)  gooD 
totbee. 

iz  Xhcn  lbere  the  lungs  ||  feribes  tal 
icb  on  the  thirteenth  bay  of  the  firft 
moneth,  anb  there  masUnitten ,  auop 
bmg  to  all  that  banian  nab  comman- 
beb,  bnto  the  Rings  Utetttcnants,  anb 
to  the  gouerttours.tbat  w^oiicr  cucrv 
p2oiunte,anb  to  tlje  rulers  of  cucrv  peo? 
pic  of  eucrv  pjouuuc,  accozomgto  the 
netting  thereof,  anb  to  cncrvpcoplcaf 
tcr  their  language,  in  the  name  of  Ring 
31bauterus  was  tt  ibzuten ,  anb  fcaicb 
lbrtbthc  Ringsrtng. 

13  Slnbthe  letters  lbcrcfentbv  potts 
into  all  the  Kings  pjottinccs,  toocftrov, 
to  aill,aiio  to  taufc  to  periQ)  all  3Jelbcs, 
both  vong  anb  olbe,  litlc  tbtlbKn  anb 
ibometunoitcbav,^"  tpon  thethit' 
teenth  day  of  the  twelfth  moneth 
(tbhich is  the  moneth  3bar)nnbtotake 
tlje  fpoilcof  thcmfo2ap2av. 

14.  Xhe  toptc  of  the  Uniting  fo:  a 
comntanbement  to  bee  gmen  in  eucrv 
P201UUCC,  tbas  pubhfheb  bnto  all  peo- 
ple, that  the?  fbouib  bee  reabv  agauitt 
that  bay. 

15  Xbcpoftesibentout,bcuighatte; 
neb  bv  the  sings  tonunanbeincnt,  anb 
the  bctrce  was  guicn  111  £>hulhan  the 
palate:  anb  the Utug anb l?aman fate 
boibnc  to  bnnlic,  but  tlje  titic  £>hufhan 
Wasperplereo. 

CHAP.   1 1 II. 

The  peat  mourning  ot  Mordccai  and  the 
Iewcs.  4  Either  vndcrltanditig  it,  fendeth  to 
Mordccai,  who  Iheweth  the  uiufe.andadui- 
fethherto  vndertakethefuit.  10  Sheccxcu- 
imghciTelfcisthrcaincd  by  Mordccai.  15  She 
appointing  a  ("alt,  vndcrtakcth  the  fuit. 

S^Dcn  09o?bccai  perceiucb 

n  4  all  that  ibasbonc,i33o;bc 

g  cai  rent  his  clothes,  anb 

/.'/put  on  fachcloth  ibith  a- 

■irfc&fbes,  anb  went  out  into 


W&SB&i 


the  miblt  of  the  cmc,  anb  crtco  With  a 
loub  anb  a  bitter  trie: 

I  3tib  tame  cucu  before  the  Rings 
gate:  fo:  none  might  enter  into  the  Rings 
gate  tlothtb  ttHth  fachcloth. 

3  3inb  m  cucrv  p«!ouince,ibhtther{b; 
cuer  tlje  Rings  tonunaunbement,  anb 
his  becrec  came,  there  was  great  mour? 
nmg  among  tljc3JeWes,anb  falling, 
anbU)eeptng,anbibaiiing,anbtmanp 
lav  infacRcioth  anb  afhes. 

4  C&o  etthcrs  maibesanb  her 
t  cljamberlamcs  came ,  anb  tolb  it  her : 
then  was  the  £luecne  erccebmgivgrtc* 
ncb,anb  fhefent  ratment  to  clothe  #0^ 
occai,  anb  to  tafec  awav  tlje  fae&doth 
from  htm :  but  herccciueb  unot. 

5  Xhcn  cailcb  €fther  fo:  $atacb, 
one  of  the  Rings  chambcrlamcs,ta)hom 
he  hao  appomtcb  to  attenb  bpon  her, 
anb  gaue  hun  a  commaunbement  to 
^ojbccai,  to  imow  What  it  was,  ano 
rbhvttwas. 

6  5>o^atachtt)cntfo2thto£0o?bcj 
cai,  bnto  the  ttrcct  of  thcutie,  Which  was 
before  the  Rings  gate: 

7  3UW  J^ozbecat  tolbc  him  of  all 

1  that  hat)  happencb  bnto  him ,  anb  of 
Ithefummcofthc  moncv  fhatl^aman 
|hab  pzomifcb  to  pav  to  the  l&ngs 
;trcafuries  fo?  tlje  3cWes,to  bcGtoy 
jthem. 

8  3llfo  he  gaue  hun  the  coptc  of  the 
Wntmg  of  the  octree ,  that  u>as  giuen 
;at&lntfliatuo&ettrovthcm,tofhcWcit 
bnto  either,  anb  to  Declare  it  bnto  her, 
anb  to  charge  her  that  focfhonlbgocin 
bnto  tlje  Hmg,  to  maRe  wpplieation  bn- 
to him,anb  to  matte  rctmrft  before  him, 
foJhcr  people. 

9  3lnb  l^atach  came  anb  tolb  either 
theWo:bsof?$)o2bceai. 

10  C3igamc  either  fpahe  bnto  l?a* 
tach ,  anb  gauc  htm  commaunbcmetit 
bntofiOojbccai; 

I I  ail  tlje  BUtge  feruants ,  anb  the 
people  of  the  Rings  pjoumces  bo  Rnotb, 
that  Whofocuer,  ibhethcrmano2mo= 
man,  fljau  come  bnto  the  isunginto  the 
inner  court ,  ibho  is  not  cailcb,  dwe  is 
one  laivc  of  ins  to  put  him  to  beath,  er- 
ccptfuch  to  lbhom  the  Bmg  fljailholb 
out  the  golbcti  fccpttr,that  he  mav  hue : 
but  3  hattc  not  beene  taiieb  to  comem 
bnto  the  l*mg,tbcfethirticbavcs. 

u  anb  tljcvtolbc  to  iPcybctat  €fr- 
hcrs\bo2bs. 

13  Xhen  $©02betai  commanbebto 
anriuccc<£ftljcr -,  XljmRenot  Vbith  thv 

fclfe 


cloth  and 

aflxtwtrc 

laidz-nder 

mi%ny. 

\H<b.EH- 

TlHchil. 


llthdfi! 
btfirehrr 


Her  faft,and  fuit  Chap.  v. 


to  the  King. 


jiir.i: 


tHti.fi*™ 


f  Hit  faffed 


fclfc  ttjat  tljou  (ban  cfrapem  the  Rings 
houO;,mo?c  then  all  the  Jlcibes. 

14.  fo?  if  thou  altogether  bolbeft 
thy  peace  at  tins  time ,  then  (bail  there 
t  enlargement  anD  bcliuerancc  arifc  to 
the  'Jetties  from  another  place, but 
thou  anu  tliv  fathers  houfe  (bail  be  be- 
ftroycb:  ^nblbhoknoibcth,  Whether 
thou  art  come  to  thekingbomefo?  fuehl 
a  tune  as  this; 

15  C1-henCfthctbabethcmveturue; 

ii)30(JbeCai  this  anfwere : 

16  ©oe,  gather  together  all  ttje 
3Jeibes  that  arc  t  p?c(enttu  *hu(ban, 
anb  faft  ycc  fo:  me,  anb  neither  catc  no? 
D?utketb2ccbaycs,mgbto?bay:3jaifo! 
anb  my  maibens  unit  faft  iikcilnC: ,  anb , 
fottnll  31  goe  in  bnto  the  king,  lbbith  is  | 
not  acco?bmg  to  the  JUm ,  anb  if  3  pc- 
rifb.lJpcritb. 

17  £>o  33o?betat  tibent  hts  ibay, 
anb  bib  atco?btngto  all  that  either  hab 
tommanbeb  htm. 

CHAP.    V. 

Either  adueuturing  on  the  kings  fauour  ,ob- 
tcincth  the  grace  ot  die  golden  Icepter ,  and 
inuiteth  die  king  and  Haman  to  a  banquet. 
6  She  being  incouragedbv  the  king  in  her 
fuit,  inuiteth  them  to  another  banquet  the 
next  day-  9  Hainan  proud  o!  his  aduance- 
ment.rcpineth  at  the  contempt  of  Mordecai. 
14  BythecounfellofZercfr^hebuildetht'or 
him  a  pane  ofgallous. 

£)ib  it  tame  to  paflc  on  the 
thiro  bay,  that  either  put 
m  ^v -^,1  n  on  her  royall  appareii ,  anb 
1  Sjls^;  I  ftoob  m  tbeiuner  courtof 
W««ffiS4tl)c  lungs  houfe,  oucr  a* 
gamft  the  Umgs  houfe:  anb  the  isung 
fate  bpou  his  royall  thzonc  m  thcroy; 
all  houfe ,  oucr  agaiuft  tlje  gate  of  tlje 
houfe. 

z  3tnb  it ibas fo ,ibhcn  the  king fall) 
efthce  the  £Juccnc  ftanbing  in  the 
court,  that  (bee  obtameb  fauour  m  his 
fight:  anb  the  lunghcibcout  toeftbet 
thcgolben  fcepterthat  was  mbtsbanb: 
<§>o  either  bzcib  uccrc,  anb  toucijeb  the 
top  of  thefcepter. 

3  Xhcu  iayb  the  Bmg  bnto  her, 
lBhat  itoiittljou,  £>uccnc  either;  anb 
vbhat  is  thy  rcqucft;  it  (bail  bee  cucn 
guun  thee  to  the  haifc  of  the  kmgbomc. 

4  :&ib  either  anuuercb^f  it  fccine 
gooo  bnto  the  uung ,  let  the  Bmg  anb 
Daman  come  this  bay  unto  the  ban; 
quet  that  3  haue  p?cparcb  fo?  bun. 


5  Xhcn  the  Bing  fayb ,  Caufe  Da 
man  to  make  Dane,  thathemaybocas 
either  hath  faib:  jaJothckingaubDa^ 
man  came  to  the  banquet  that  ettljcr 
hab  pzeparcb. 

6  ii  3tub  the  king  faib  bnto  either 
at  the  banquet  of  untie ,  nabat  is  thy  pc^ 
tition,  anb  u  (ball  be  granteb  thee;  anb 
lbhansthy  rcqucft  t  cuen  to  the  halfc 
of  tlje  ktngbomc  it  (ball  be  pcrfomicb. 

7  lEhcnanuocrcbeftbcr,  anb  faib, 
i}3y  pctttion,anb  my  rcqucft  is 

8  3Jf  3  hauc  founb  fauour  at  the 
\  fight  of  tlje  kutg,anb  if  it  pleafe  the  king 
to  grant  my  petition,  anb  t  to  pcrfonnc 
myrequeft,  let  the  kuig,  anb  Daman, 
come  to  the  banquet  that  3  (ball  P*'e 
pare  fo?tbcm,aub3  UMbo  to  mo?olb, 
as  the  king  hath  faib. 

9  CXbcn  lbcnt  Daman  fbo?th  that 
bay,ioyfull,anbibithagiabbcart:  but 
;  ibhcn  ^aman  faib  i?3o2bccat  m  the 
; kings  gate,  that  htc  ftoob  not  bp ,  no? 
|  mooucb  fo?  him  hec  ibas  full  of  inbig^ 
nation  agamft  CBo?bccai. 

io  /Bcucrthcicffc  banian  refratneb 
hunfclfe  ,anb  ibhcn  he  came  home,  hee 
fcut  anb  t  caileb  fo?  \)\s  fticnbs.anb  ze* 
refbhisibtfc. 

n  anb^amantolbtbcm  of  the  glo- 
ry of  his  riches,  anb  the  multmibc  of 
hiscbilbzcn.aubailthc  things  lbhercin 
the  king  hab  p?omotcb  him  ,  anb  hott) 
he  hab  abuanccb  him  abouc  the  p?m-- 
ccs,aub  fcruants  of  the  king. 

iz  naman  faib  mo?eoucr ,  Pea  eft 
her  the  £iueeuc  bib  let  no  man  come  m 
lbitl)  the  king  bnto  the  banquet  that 
(be  hab  p2cpar  cb  ,  but  my  fclfc  anb  to 
mo?roib  am  3  inuttcb  bnto  her  alfo 
unth  the  king. 

13  Pet  all  this  auailcth  mc  nothing, 
fo  long  as  3  fee  i$)o?bccai  thc^lcibfit? 
ting  at  the  kings  gate. 

14  C  Xhcn  faibe  zerefb  his  lbifc, 
anb  all  his  frienbs  bnto  him ,  Hct  a 
t  gallons  be  mabc  of  fifty  cubits  hicanb 
tomo?roib  fpcakethou  bnto  the  king, 
that  iBo?bccat  may  be  hangcb  thereon: 
then  gocthou  m  merily  with  the  king 
bnto  the  banquet.  3inb  the  thing  plca< 
I  feb  Daman,  anb  bee  caufrbtbe  gnilous 
to  be  mabc. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  Ahafucrus  reading  in  die  Chronicles  of  the 
good  feruice done  by  Moidecai ,  takcth  care 
forhisreward.  4  Haman comming to fue 
that  Mordccai  might  bee  lunged ,  vnawares 

ilitieth 


tiki  re  Jo, 


Hi   cvfcd 
to  com:. 


\M 


(Moid 


ccai  the 


Either.  Iew,promoted. 


\Wrhr.tht 
kiwflnpt 


giucth  counlcll  thac  hce  might  doe  him  ho- 
nour, ii  complaynmgofhismisloftune.his 


riencts  toll  him 


ofhisfinalldefhnie. 


\\Or,Hit 

tha»t(hap. 

2.2!. 

t  Hehr.thre- , 


1  Heir. in 
whofe  ho- 
nour the 
King  eUhgh 
ttth. 


\Hebr.m 
whcftho- 
notrrt^e 

:tb. 

\H<h,Ut 
xUcmhnn^ 
therojAihp- 
pareb. 
^Hebvher- 
mththe 
kjngctotheth 
lumlclic. 


\Heh  cauft 
bimtoridc. 


t  Heb.fnffe} 

rt»t*nhttto 

fa. 


fl  that  ntgtit  +  coulD  not 
the  Bmg  flcepc,  anD  Dec 
commaunDcDto  bjmgthc 

bOOliC  Of  &CC02DS  of  the 

chiontrtcs,  anD  thep  Were 
rcao  bcfo;c  the  Ring. 

i  3inD  it  was  founD  Wiftten ,  that 
QBozbccaihaDtolDof  ||  aBigthana,  anD 
Xercfl),tWoofthc  Rings  cbamberleus, 
theRcepersofrhctDoo2e,Whofoughtto 
lap  hanD  on  tl)t  lung  3hafuerus. 

3  3nD  tl)c  Umg  (aiD,  nahat  honour 
anD  Dignitie  hath  bene  Done  to  Q9o;De- 
cai  foi  this?  Xhen  faiD  rtic  Rings  fer< 
uants  that  mlntftccD  bnto  him,  Xherc 
is  nothing  Done  fo;  him. 

4-  C3uD  the  Ring  faiD.nohoism  the 
courts  (now  l)aman  was  tome  into  trjc 
outWatD  court  of  the  Rings  houfe ,  to 
fpeaRcbnto  the  Ring,  to  hang  qDoftv 
cat  on  the  gauous  that  hce  baD  picpa* 
rcDfoibim.) 

5  2liiD  the  Sings  fcruantsCaiD  bnto 
htm,  ascboin,  banian  ftanDetb  m  the 
court.  3ud  the  Bmg  taiDc ,  %tt  him 
comem. 

6  £>o  banian  came  in,  atiDtbcRing 
faiD  bnto  bun,i©bat  (bail  be  Done  bnto 
the  man  t  whom  the  Rmg  Dcligbtctb  to 
bononr  <  ( now  Hainan  thought  m  his 
heart ,  Xo  Whom  wouid  theRmgDe 
light  to  Doc  honour ,  nio;c  then  to  mp 
ftiftO 

7  3nD  Iranian  anfmcrcD  the  Ring, 
foz  the  man  tinhorn  the  Ring  Dcligb 
tetb  to  honour, 

$  t  net  the  ropail  apparcll  bee 
brought ,  t  lbhich  rtic  Bmg  vf«h  to 
Wcare,  anD  thcho?fc  that  the  Bing  rt 
Dcth  bpon,anD  the  erowne  r opal  Which 
iS  fetbponhishcaD: 

9  3nD  let  this  apparcll  anD  hone 
bee  DcliucrcD  to  the  hanDof  one  of  the 
Rings  mod  noble  pnnccs ,  that  thep 
maparap  theinan  Witbau,  whom  the 
Ring  Dciightcth  to  honour,  anDtbnng 
him  on  hojfebaclic  through  rtic  flrccte 
of  the  titp ,  anD  pzoclauue  before  him, 
Xbuc  fl)al  it  be  Done  to  the  man  Whom 
the  Ring  Dclightcth  to  Iionour. 

io  Xhen  tlic  Rmg  fatDc  to  Ijaman, 
£!9aRcbafte,  mdtaUc  the  apparcll,  anD 
the  hojfe,as  thou  haft  faiD,anD  Doc  cuen 
fo  to  v)19o2Dccai  the  3Jcw ,  that  fittcth  at 
the  Btugs  gate :  i  let  nothing  failc  of 
all  that  thou  haft  fpolicn. 


ii  XbentooRe^amanrticappareU, 
anD  the  ho?fe,$  arapcD  £0o2Decal,anD 
brought  him  on  bo?f  bacRc  rtnougb  the 
ftcectc  of  rtic  tiiy ,  anD  proclaimeD  be* 
foic  him :  Xbus  fbail  it  bee  Done  bnto 
the  man  Whom  the  Bmg  Delightcthto 
honour. 

iz  C^nD^oiDccai  came  againcto 
the  Rings  gate :  but  tyamati  hafteD  to 
his  houfc,  mourning ,  anD  bailing  his 
hcaDtoucrcD. 

13  2nDl?amantolDZcrefbbisWife, 
anD  all  hts  frienDS ,  eucrp  thing  that 
haD  befallen  him.  Xhen  faiDe  his  Wife 
men,anD  Zcrefli  bis  Wifcbnto  bun,3Jf 
£0oiDccat  be  of  the  feeb  of  the  3cibcs, 
bcfoie  tbhom  thou  haft  begun  to  fall, 
thou  fhait  not  pmiailc  agamO  htm,  but 
flialtfurelp  fall  befoie  htm. 

14  3lnD  while  thep  were  pettaiRing 
Wirt)  him ,  came  the  Rings  chamber- 
lens ,  anD  hafteD  to  tying  $aman  bnto 
the  banquet  that  either  baD  pjcparcD. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  EflhermtertainingtheKinganciHaman,ma- 
keth  fuit  for  her  owne  lite  ,  and  her  peoples. 
5  She  accufech  Hainan.  7  The  King  in  his 
angervnderflandingof  the  gallous  ,  which 
Hainan  had  made  for  Mordecui ,  caufcth  him 
to  behanged  thereon. 

©  the  Bmg  anD  Hainan 
tame  t  to  banquet  With 
ettherthc&uccne. 
%  3lnD the  Ring faiDa- 
.-  gamebnto  either,  on  the 
fccouD  Dap  at  the  banquet  of  Wme, 
nahatts  thp  petition,  iQucenc  either, 
anD  it  fliaibe  grantcD  thec  *,  anD  what  is 
thp  requeft  t  anD  it  ftiall  bee  pecfonucD, 
cucn  to  the  haifc  of  rtic  RmgDomc. 

3  Xhen  efthcr the fihicencanfioc' 
rcD,anD  faiD  JfJ  hauc  founD  fauour 
m  thp  fight,  £>  Bmg,  anD  if  it  plcafc  th  e 
Bmg,  ictmp  life  bcgiuenmcatmppc- 
tmon  ,anD  mp  people  at  nip  requeft. 

4  iFoiwcarcfolD,  ^^atiDmppcO' 
plc,t  to  be  DcftropcD ,  to  be  flame,  anD  to 
pctift):  but  if  Wc  haD  bene  folD  fo;  bonD; 
men,  anD  boiiDWomcn,  3  hao  hclD  mp 
tongue,  although  the  cncmpcoulDnot 
countcruaiic  tljc  Rings  Dammagc. 

5  CXhen  the  Rmg  ahafucrucan* 
fnicrcD,*faiDDntoeftherthc^iueene: 


w®,\ 


\Hdr.tt 


\Hctr.th,:t 
they  /'.chM 
dtttrejani 
^ilyfrdcatfe 


f  h'tl.whofe 


n9hoishe^anDWhercishe,trt)atDurft  Vh 
picfumcin  his  heart  to  Do  fo  i  ymikm. 
6   3inDeftljerfaiD,tXhcaDuerfatp ~JHr<,r. th 
anD  cnemic ,  is  this  WicRcD  Hainan.  \Z 
Xhen  r 


Hainan  hanged.       Chap.vii).         Efthers  requeffc. 


trejaceoj: 


\  Hrb.wilb 


\Hch.u,;. 


\Hti.nni 

Inm. 


\Hcb.tie 

dfHUC. 


%\)t\\  l^aman  was  aftatb  ||  before  tbe 
l&tuganbtbcSiuccnc. 

7  C3mb  tbc  King  anftng  from  tbc 
banquet  ofwtnctn  bis  W2atb,wemmto 
t\)t  palace  garben :  anb  banian  ftoob 
bptomaKcrcqucftfiM  l)islife  to  ©fiber 
tbe  SQueene :  foi  be  faw  tbat  tber  c  was 
ciull  bctcrmmcb  agamft  l»m  bp  the 
iking. 

s  %\w\  tbc  lung  rcturncb  out  of 
tl)e  palace  garben,  tnto  tbc  plate  of  the 
banciuct  of  nunc ,  anb  banian  was  fal 
len  bpon  the  beb  Wbcrconfiftljct  was. 
ICbcn  faibtbcl&ing ,  ietllbccfojcctljc 
•aTluecue  alfo  t  before  me  m  tbe  boufc* 
3ls  tbc  W02b  went  outofvbcixmgs 
montb ,  tljcp  coucrcb  Damans  face. 

9  3iub  Dacbonab  one  of  tljc  cbam 
bcrlamcs,fatb  beftuctbe  King  iseljolb 
alfo  tbc  t  gailowcs ,  fiftte  cubttcs  Ijtgl), 
wbtcb  Damanljab  mabc  foi  £0o2bccai, 
WbobabfpDKcngoobfo2tljeKutg,ftan- 
bctbintbcboufeof  Daman.  %\)t\\ tyt 
King  faib,  Dang  ljs.ni  ttjercon. 

io  s>o  ti)vp  Ijangcb  Daman  on  tbc 
gallows  tbat  be  bab  p2cpar  cb  foj  f0ot= 
bccai.  Xbenwastljc  BmgsUvatfjpa? 
ttfieb. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

i  Moidccaiisaduanced.  5  Efthei  maketli  fime 
to  reucrfc  Haitians  letter;.  7  Ahafuerus 
granteih  to  the  Iewei  to  defend  themfelues 
15   Mordecaishonour,audthele\vesioy. 

i!5  tbat  bap  b:b  tbc  Bmg  31 
bafucnts  gittc  tbc  boufc  of 
Daman,  tbc^Jcwescncmp,  j 
bnto  <£ftbcr  tbc  jQuccne  ■, ! 
anb  ©02?)ctai  came  bcfo2c| 
rt)c  Bmg,  foi  ©fiber  ijabc  toib  wbat 
bewasijntobcr. 

z  3nb  tbc  lung  toolte  office  fttng  I 
Wbtcb  be  bab  taKcn  from  Daman,  anb 
gancitbnto  Q3o2bccat.  3lnb  ©fiber  fet 
iTBozbctat  once  tbc  boufc  of  Daman. 

3  C3inb  ©fiber fpaftc  pet agatnc be> 
fojc  tbc  lung,  anb  fell  bowne  at  \)is  feet, 
t  anb  bcfottgbt  Ijtm  Witb  tcarcs,  to  put 
atbap  tbc  uufcbicfc  of  foaman  the  3Jga; 
gitcanu  Dis  Dctucc,  tljat  1)C  DaD  bcutfeb 
agatnlt  tbegjewes. 

4  %\)m  ti)c  Ktttgbclbc  out  tbc  gob 
bcnfccptcrtoWarb  ©fiber.  S>o  ©fiber 
arotc,anoftooDbcfo2ctbcKtng, 

->  3fub fatb,3if ir plcafc tbc  lung.anb 
tf  3  banc  founb  fauour  in  Ins  figtot,aitt 
tbc  tbntg  fcemc  ttgbt  bcfo?c  tbc  lung, 
atwjbetplcaunginbis  epes,  let  it  be 
Wutten  to  reucrfc  t  tljc  letters  bcutfeb 


bp  Daman  tbc  Tonne  of  Dammcbatba 
tbc  3tgagtte,  ||  wind)  becW2otc  to  be* 
flroptbc  Jlctbes,  Wijidjarc  m  all  tljc 
Kings  P20umces. 

6  jr  02  boiD  can  3^  ensure  to  fee  tbc 
enill  that  mall  come  btuo  mp  people; 
02  bom  can  31  cnbnrc  to  fee  tbc  beflrut- 
nouofmpKinrcb; 

7  C1£bentbeKmg3lbafttcrusraib 
btuo  ©flbertbe  ^itcene,  anb  to  1^02- 
becaitbe3feWc,  Bcboib,3J  battcgutcn 
€ftbcr  tbc  bonfe of  Daman,  anb  bun 
tbepbauc  bangeb  bpon  tbegaiiomcs, 
becanfe  bee  lapbc  i)is  banb  bpon  tljc 
3leibes. 

8  ii92itcpeaifofo2fbe3lciucs,asit 
bUctb  pou,tn  tbc  Bmgs  name,anb  feale 
ttlbttbtbc  Btngs  ring :  fo2  rbcib2tttng 
ibbtchtB  lb2ttten  in  tbc  Bings  name, 
anbfcaicbVbttb  tbc  Btngs  ring,  *map 
no  man  rencrfe. 

9  Xljen  Vbcrc  tljc  lungs  feribes  cal- 
leb  at  tbat  time,  mtbe  tbirb  monetb, 
(tbatis)tbcmomb5>iuan)ontbctb2ce 
anbttbcnttctbbaptbcrcof ,  anb  it  rbas 
lb2itten  (acco2tJtng  to  all  tbat  ©ojbccai 
commautjcb)  btuo  tbc  3lcvbcs ,  anb  to 
tbc  Hicntcnants,  anb  tbc  bcputies  anb 
nilcrsoftbep;oiuuccs,\bbicbarcfrom 
ginbta  btuo  €t!jiopta ,  an  bnnbjcb, 
tibentic  anb  feuen  p20utnces,  btuo  enc> 
rp  pioumtc  acco2btng  to  tljc  lbnbng 
tijereof,  anbbnto  cucrp  people  after 
tfytit  language ,  anb  to  tljc  3)eibcs ,  ac> 
totting  to  tbetr  ibutmg^nbaccotting 
to  tbeir  language. 

10  3nbbcib20tcintbcbiug3fl)arue* 
nts  name,  anb  fcaicb  it  ibitb  tbc  Kings 
Ring ,  anb  fent  letters  bp  0oQcs ,  on 
b02fcbacKc ,  and  rtbers  on  mules,  ta- 
mels,  and  pongb2omcbancs : 

1 1  torjctcm  tbc  Buig  grantcb  tbe 
3Jc\bcs ,  vbbicb  lbcre  m  cucrp  titic,  to 
gatber  tbcmfclttcs  together ,  anb  to 
flanb  fo2  tbetr  ltfc,tobcftcop,tonap,anb 
to  taufc  to  pcnO)  all  tljc  power  of  tbc 
people  anb  p.'outncc  tljatibottlb  alfault 
tbem,  both  uttlc  ones,  anbWomcn,anb 
to  take  tbe  fpoilc  of  tbem  fo2  a  pjap : 

ii  ^lpon  one  bap,  m  all  tbe  pzottin- 
tcsofKing3lbafuerus,inameiyppon  tbc 
tbtrteentrj  bap  of  tbc  ttbclftlj  monctlj, 
ibbttb  is  tl;c  monetb  3Jbar. 

ij  Xbctopp  of tbcib2tting,fo2atom 
manbentent  to  bee  gtiten  in  cucrp  p20 
uuuemas  t  publiQiebbntoall  people, 
anbtbattbe  jeibcslboulDbe  redbie  a 
gamft  tbat  bap ,  to  auengc  tbcmfclucs 
otttljeircucmtcs. 

I4.    So 


Or,  »'<a 

r.   .if. 


t  Heb.  h 
tie  that  I 


"SceCha 
I.ip. 


muled. 


The  I 


ewes  loy. 


Efther.     Hamans  ten  Tonnes. 


\\0r,z-it!tt. 


tflWi  theft 
which  did 
thtbuft**(t 
tku  belon- 
ged totht 
Xing. 


14.  bothepoftsthat  roue  topon  mules 
and  camels  ibeut  out, bong  haftcneb, 
anb  p:efJcb  on  by  tl)c  UmgscommanbC' 
mem ,  anb  the  Decree  lbas  gmen  at 
^>Ijua>an  the  palate. 

15  €  anb  *33o2beeai  tbent  out  from 
tl)c  p?efcuce  of  tl)c  Uing,  tn  r  opail  appa- 
tell,  of  I!  Well)  ano  white,  anb  ibttrj  a 
great  croibnc  of  golb,  anb  Uuth  agar 
merit  of  fine  Umien,  anb  purplcanb  the 
otic  of  dhufhan  rctoyceb ,  anb  lbas 
glab: 

16  Xfjc  3Je\bes  fjab  light  anb  glafr 
neffe,  anb  toy  anb  honour. 

17  anb  in  rucry  pioumce,  anb  in  v 
uery  cit{>,tt)l)itl)crfoeucr  the  Ruigs  com 
manbement,  anb  his  betree  came,  tlje 
3Jctbeshab  ioy  anb  giabncs,afcaftanb 
a  goob  bap :  anb  many  of  the  people  of 
the  lanb  became  Jkibes  foi  the  feare  of 
the  3Jclbes  fell  bpon  them. 

CHAP.    IX. 

The  Icwes,(  the  rulers,  for  feare  of  Mordecai 
helping  them)  flay  their  enemies,  with  the 
ten  formes  ot  Hainan,  11  Ahafuctus  at  the 
requeft  of  Efther,  granteth  another  day  of 
daughter,  and  Haitians  fonnes  to  be  hanged, 
zo  The  two  daics  of  Punra  are  made  fefhuall 

£mj  m  the  ttbelfth  month 
( that  is  the  monctl)  3t= 
bar)  on  the  thirteenth  bay 
of  tlje  fame ,  lbhen  the 
Btngs  commaunbement 
anb  his  Decree  b:ctt)  ucerc  to  bee  put  m 
erctutton,inthebay  that  the  enemies  of 
rl)c3JeU)eshopeb  to  haue  polber  oucr 
them:  (though  it  lbas  turneb  to  the 
contrary  ,that  the  51  eibes  hab  rule  oucr 
them  that  hateb  them.) 

i  Xhe3cibcsgatl)ercbthcmfclues 
togetl)er  m  their  cities ,  throughout  all 
the  pjoumccs  of  the  lungahafucrus,to 
lay  hanb  on  fnth  as  fought  their  hurt, 
ano  no  man coulbibithltanb them:  foz 
the  feare  of  them  fell  upon  all  people. 

3  ^nb  all  the  rulers  of  the  pzoutn- 
tes,anbthe?Licutcnants,anbthcbepu 
ties ,  anb  t  officers  of  the  lung ,  hclpco 
thel^bcsibcratifcthcfcarcofi^ojbc'' 
caifcli  bpon  them. 

4  3fo?  *49o2bcrai  w«  great  in  the 
lungs  houfe,  ano  his  fame  ibent  out, 
throughout  all  the  prouinces :  for  this 
man  t^orbccai  lbarcb  greater  anb 
greater. 

5  Xhusthc  gjcilics  fmotc  all  their 
enemies  ibitlj  the  Orotic  of  the  fioorb, 


anbQaughtcr,anbbeftruetion,  anb  bib 
t  ibhat  they  iboulb  bnto  thofe  that  h& 
tebthem. 

6  anb  in  fehntban  the  palace  the 
3Jeibcs  flcib  anbbeftcoyeb  fiue  httnbjcb 
men: 

7  anb  ^arlhanbatha  ,  anb  £>al- 
phon,anoafpatha. 

8  anb  poratha ,  anb  abana,  anb 
artbatha, 

9  anb0arman)ta,anbanfai,anb 
anbai,  anb  ilaie^atha, 

10  Xhe  ten  fonnes  of  banian  the 
fonneof  i)ammebatha,  the  cnemic  of 
thCJcibes,  flcibthey,butonthcfpoilc 
laib  they  not  their  hanb. 

11  £>n  that  bay,thc  number  of  thofe 
that  iberc  flame  m  £>huQ)an  the  pa^ 
lace,  tiuas  brought  before  the  lung. 

ii  C  anb  the  ftmgfaibbnto  Cfrhct 
the  £iueenc .  Xhc  3Jcibcs  haue  flame 
anb  beflr  oicb  fiue  hunDreb  menm  *>hu 
than  the  palace,  9  the  ten  fonnes  of  ??a 
man  ;  tbhat  haue  they  bone  m  tlje  reft 
of  the  Kings  pronmces?  notb  Ibhat  i> 
thy  pcrtttomanb  it  flialbe  granteb  thee : 
oi  ibhat  is  thy  requeft  further '.  anb  it 
(hall  be  bone. 

i}  Xhcn  laib  efther,  3Jf  it  pieafc  the 
lung,  Uetit  bee  granteb  tothcjcibes 
ibhich"emS)hnihan,toboetomojotb 
aifo,  aceorbing  bnto  thtsbayesbecret, 
anb  t  let  Ramans  ten  fonnes  be  hangcb 
bpontlicgaiious. 

14  anbthcftnigcommanbebitfoto 
be  bone ,  anb  the  betree  lbas  giuenat 
&hulban,  anb  they  hangcb  Ramans 
ten  (bnnes. 

15  jfo:  the  3ctbes  that  were  in  5>hn= 
than,  gathcrcbthemfrtucs  together  on 
the  fourteenth  bay  alfo  Df  the  moncth 
abar,  anb  fleibc  three  hnnbrebmen  at 
£>hu(han :  but  on  thepray  they  laib  not 
their  hanb. 

16  26uttheother3Jcrbcsthatwerem 
the  lungs  proumccs,  gathereb  them> 
felucs  together,  *  ftoob  foz  their  Uues, 
anb  hab  reft  from  then*  cnennes,  anb 
fleib  of  their  foes  feucnty  anb  fiue  thou? 
fanb,  but  they  laib  not  their  hanbeson 
thepray. 

17  j3Du  the  thirtccntii  bay  of  the 
moncth  abar,  anb  on  the  fourteenth 
bay  iofthcfamr,rcfteb  they, anb  maoc 
itabavof  fcafftnganb  glabncs. 

13  25utrhe3Jcujesri)atweieatS)hUi 
than ,  aflembleb  together  on  the  thir- 
teenth <i<vtberof,anb  on  the  fourteenth 
thereof;  anb  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the 

fame, 


t  HekjK, 
dtnott  tlrtr 


\  Htb.z&nt. 


\Hthr  Itt 

ntrr.htlxg. 


\Htb.„„t. 


AnewFeaft 


CIi 


lap.x. 


LP 


is  ordeined. 


\Htb.CTH?,. 

f  Heb.  -when 
fheCamr. 


W,eu, 

Lor. 


VUr.fttf. 


fame,  tljcv  rcfteD,  anD  maDe  it  a  Dap  of 
feaftmganDgiaDneffe. 

19  Xheccfo2c  the  3fctt)cs  of  the  t»ii= 
lages  ,  that  DVbclt  in  the  unUjallcD 
tovbntis ,  maoe  the  foutctccnth  Dav  of 
thcmoneth3lDar,a  d^ofglaDucffcanD 
feafting.auD  a  gooD  Dav,anD  of  fcuDtng 
portions  one  to  another, 

zo  C  3nD  403o:occat  \b:otc  thcfc 
things ,  ano  fcnt  letters  unto  all  the 
^jcibcs ,  that  •  ere  u\  ail  the  pjoumccs  of 
thelnng  31hafuerus,  bochmglnfarrc, 

ii  Xo  ftablifl)  this  among  them  .that 
thev  fhoulD  keepe  the  fourteenth  Da?  of 
the  moneth  3Dar ,  anD  the  fifteenth  Dap 
ofthefamcvcerclv: 

it  as  the  Daves  inherent  thc3Jcttics 
rcftcDftom  their  en  enucs.fthemoncth 
Vbhicl)  iDas  turneD  Dnto  thcm.from  for- 
roll)  toiov,  anD  from  mounting  into  a 
gooD  Day:  that  thev  fhoulD  mane  them 
Dates  of  fcafttng  anD  tov.anD  of  fcnDing 
portions  one  to  another ,  anD  gifts  to 
thepoose. 

j  23  anD  the  jetties  fcnDcrtookc  to 
Doc,  as  thev  haD  begun,  anDas^ortJC- 
tai  haD  lDJtttcn  pnto  them : 

14.  Beeaufc  Hainan  the  fonne  of 
$ammcDatha  the  ^gagitc.thccncmic 
of  all  the  3JcU)cs,  DaD  DcuifcD  agamft 
the  Seines  to  Dcftrov  them ,  anD  haD 
caft  put  ( that  is ,  the  lot )  to  t  tonfumc 
thcm,anD  to  Dcftrov  them. 

25  25nt  t  luhftt  Either  tame  bcfo2e  the 
hing,hctommanDcDbvlcttets,tl)athis 
tbtcRCDDcuitc  lbhuhhe  DcuifcD  agamft 
the  gjetnes ,  fhoulD  rcturne  hpon  his 
ottmc  hcaD,  anD  that  lie  anD  his  fonncs, 
fhoulDbchangeDonthc  gallons. 

16  o)hcrcfo2cfheycallcDthcfcDavcs 

purim,  after  the  name  of  II  pur :  there; 
fo2C  fo2  all  the  VboiDS  of  this  letter ,  anD 
of  th  uxbhuh  thev  haD  fecne  tontcrnmg 
this  matter,  anD  vuhuhhao  come  Unto 

them, 

if  Xhe^JclhesortmncD.attDtooUc 
upon  them ,  anD  fcpott  thetr  fceD ,  anD 
bponall  futhasiovncDthemfclucsbn^ 
to  them ,  fo  as  it  fhouio  not  t  failc,  that 
thevihouiD  ucepe  thcfc  tibo  Daves,  at; 


co2Dmgtotljcitib!itmg,anDaccort)iug 
totiieir.ippontc^tiiuccuervvccrc: 

i3  3luD  thatthefe  Davesfti^uiabcrt- 
mnnbztD ,  ano  kept  throughout  cucrv 
generation ,  enerv  famiiv ,  cucrv  P20 
umcc ,  ano  cuerv  citte ,  anD  that  thefe 
Daves  of  purim  thoulD  not tfafle  from 
among  the  3JeU)ts,no2  thcmcnwiali 
of  them  tperifl)  from  their  feco. 

29  Xhcit  either  the  Qttccnc ,  the 
Daughter  ofSbihau ,  anD  il3o:Dccaithc 
3FcU),rb2otcU)ithMliauth02itie,toton- 
firmcthtsfcconD  letter  of  ptmm. 

30  anD  hec  fent  the  letters  Ditto  all 
the  gjcincs ,  to  the  hiuUucD  ,  tibnmc 
aiiDfntenp20umtesofthemngDoiiicof 
ahafucrus  >  with  U)02Dcs  of  peace  anD 
trueth : 

31  Xo  coufirmc  thcfc  Daves  of  Imu- 
ran, m  their  times  appointed,  acco2D:ng 
as  Q3o2Decaithc3Jctt>,  anD  either  the 
Uuccnc  haD  eniovncD  them ,  anD  as 
thev  haD  dcccccd  t  fo:  themfclucs  ano 
f02  theitfceD,thc  matters  ofrtjc  faftmgs 
anD  their  trv. 

32  anD  the  Decree  of  Clfhcr  confix 
mcD  thcfc  matters  of  purim ,  anD  it 
lbas  lfyittcn  m  the  bookc. 


\Hcbr.U 


\Heh-.all 

jhength. 


CHAP.    X. 


1   Ahafuerus  his  ^reatncfle. 
aduancement. 


Morde 


t  Hebrfer 
their  foiUcl 


®?,WBfi®  $c  WnS  Ahafuerus 
m^-l  lavDt  a  tribute  Dpon  the 
snEB  lanD ,  anD  Upon  the  Sides 
l§|Ng§  ofthefca. 
_  mmBaB  2.  3£ud  ail  the  actcs  of 
I  hispoU)cr,anDofhism!ght,aitD  tDcDc- 
tiaratiouofthcgrcatucffcofi33o2Decai, 
Vbhcrcunto  the  kutg  t  aDuanccD  him, 
arethevnotU)2ittcn  mthc  bookc  of  the 
Clttouuies  of  tlje  kings  of  upcDia  anD 
pcrfia* 

?  5F02  £0o2Dccai  the  3Jciu  was  nejrt 
bnto  Bmg  ahafuerus ,  ano  great  a^ 
mong  the3Jerbcs ,  anD  atccptcDof  the 
multittiDcof  his  b2Cth2cn ,  feckmg  the 
tbcaith  of  his  people ,  anD  fpcakmg 
peace  to  all  his  fccD. 


^THE 


f  Hetr.maJt 
him  ?r?jr. 


lobsvpnghtnefle.  lob. 


Satans  malice. 


•Chap.*.  3 


\Or,cjtlr!!. 


\\OrJmil.v.- 

drie. 

\  Web. fennel 

of  the  El? . 


*  T  -King. 
I  o,l  J. 

\H,k..x!l 
tlicdx/a* 


tjutrftne- 
\Hth.mihe 

>-.-..>;  of 
him. 


^THE  BOOKE  OF 

lob. 


CHAP.    I. 

The  holineile ,  riches ,  and  religious  care  of 
Iobforhis  children.  6  Satan  appearing  be- 
fore God,  by  calumniation  obtauieth  leaue 
to  tempt  lob.  15  Vnderrtanding  of  the 
lofTe  othis  goods  and  children,  ill  liis  mour- 
ning- hee  blefleth  God. 

$crcn>asaman 

mfbcianDorci?, 
inhofc  name  was 
3Job,  anb  that 
man  mas  *pcr* 
feet  anb  bpnght, 
anD  one  that  fca- 
reo  c5od  ,  anfi  cf 
chcincD  cmll. 
%  3lnD  there  Vbcrc  borne  Dnto  him 
fenen  fonncs,  auDtbzcc  Daughters. 

i  V)\s  [|  fnbttancc  alfo  n>as  fcuen 
thoufanb  fbccpc,anb  tb:ce  thoufanb  t*= 
mcis,  anD  fine  ftunDzeD  yofcc  of  oren, 
anDfiuchunDjcDfhccau'cs,  anb  aberp 
great  ||  houfbolD  fo  ti)at  tins  man  ibas 
the  grcatctt  of  all  the  t  men  of  the  Caff. 
+  3(nD  htsfonnes  lbcnt  anb  feaftcD 
tn  their  houfcs,cttcryonc  ins  bap,  anb 
fentanb  cailcDfin  their  tbjee  Oflccs ,  to 
catc  anb  to  Dunne  lbtth  them. 

5  35ttDtt  ibasfo,ibbctithcDapcsof 
their  fcalhng  mere  gone  about ,  that 
3Jobfcnt  anb  fanenfieb  them,  anb  rofc 
Up  early  m  tnc  morning,  anb offcrcb 
burnt  offerings  according  to  the  num* 
bcroftbcmali:  foi  3Jobfatb.  31 1  may 
bcthat  my  fonncs  naucfmncD,anb*euri 
feb  (3ob  m  their  hearts :  lOnis  bib  3Job  j 
i  continually. 

<s  C /Bom  there  \basabay ,  when 
the  fons  of  ©Ob  came  to  pzefentthem 
femes  befoze  the  %  o  i;  p,  anb  t  Satan 
came  alfo  t  among  them. 

7  31nb  the  %  o  k  r>  fatb  bnto  Sa 
tan ,  uahciuc  tommeft  thou  *  Hhcn 
Satan  anfujcrcD  tljc  JLo  w  &,  anD 


fayDe,  5From  going  to  anD  fro  m  the 
*  earth  >  anD  from  Jbauung  bp  anD 
Doibnctnit. 

8  JlnDthelLfiDK©  fayD  bntoS* 
tan,t  i?a(t  tpou  eonfiDcrcDmy  fcruant 
3Job ,  mat  there  is  none  line  him  m  the  | 
earth?  a  pcrfett  anD  an  bpnght  man, 
one  that  fcaretu  <5oD,  anD  cfcbcibcth 
cutll? 

9  1Ihcn  Satan  anfibercDplLoisjD, 
anb  fayD,  2>octh  3iob  feare  ood  foz 
nought; 

10  una  not  thou  maDc  an  hcDgc  a* 
bout  htm,  anD  about  his  houfe,  anDa 

I  bout  an  tljat  he  hatli  on  cucry  Gbe*  thou 
I  haft  bieflJeb  the  ibo?kc  ofJjts  hanbs,anb 
his  ||  fubftanec  is  mtreafeb  in  the  lauD- 

1 1  25ut  put  foonh  thmc  hanDnolb, 
anD  tour h  all  that  he  hath,  t  anD  he  \btll 
turfc  thee  to  thp  fate. 

ii  3lnD  the  %  o  \x  jd  faib  bnto  Sa- 
tan ,  25cholD,  all  that  hee  hath  is  m  thy 
t  power,  oncly  Ppon  hunfelfc  put  not 
foo2th  thmc  hanD.  So  Satan  incut 
forth  froin  tljc  pjefence  of  the  %  <£>  is  $>. 

ij  CJmDfhcrcibasabay,ibhcnhis 
fonncs  anD  hts  Daughters  \bcrc  catmg 
anD  DnnUmg  lbiuc  tn  their  elbeft  b-to; 
thcrshoufc: 

14-  3nb  there  came  amciTenger  btu 
to3lob,anbfatb,XhcorcnmcrcplolP' 
tng,  anb  rije  affcsfccbtugbcfjbcfhcm, 

15  3lnD  the  Sabcans  fell  ^pon  them, 
anb  toottc  them  away :  yea  they  hauc 
flaincthcfcnuuttslbtrhthccDgcofthc 
ftnozb,  anD  3}  oncly  am  cfcapcD  alone, 
to  tell  thee. 

is  CDhtlchctbasvctfpcalting,  tlicrc 
came  alfo  another,  anD  fatD ,  liXhcftrc 
of  <3oD  isfaiicu  fromhcaucn,anD  hath 
burnt  Dp  the  fheepe,  atiDthcfcrttants, 
anb  confttmcb  them,  anb  31  oneivam 
efcapcD  alone,  to  tell  thee. 

17  rohtlchcibasyctfpcaiuug.thcrc 
came  alfo  another,  attDfaiD ,  Xhc  Car 

Deans 


•i.Pct.j.3. 


;HA:h»!i 

hcufctthj 
le.irten? 


\[Or,c*:ti£. 


\Heh.  ifh 
car  ft  ihtt 
not  to  thy 


\Htb.hMl. 


|f  Or, ,t  treat 
fire. 


lobs  patienc 


.His      CI: 


•if( 


iap.i|.ii|.  wiretemptetnnim. 


hhi; 


IHclrr. 
■ujhtd. 


4>d-,a-c- 


WOrfxh. 


•EccM".5. 
1 4.  x  .cim. 
6.7. 


||0r,«/ri 
timed  folly 
to  Cod. 


*C!iap.  1. 
7- 


•Chap.  i. 
vcr.i.8c8. 


\  Heir. to 

[wallow  htm 
vf. 


Deans  maoc  out  ttfitt  banns,  anD  t  fell 
Upon  the  camels ,  anD  haue  caneD  tl)em 
aroap,  vea,anD  name  the  feeuants  ibith 
thetDgcof  thcfaJOzD,  anD3J  onelpam 
cfcapcD  alone,  to  tell  rijee. 

is  B9hilehetbaspetfprarring,  there 
came  alfo  another,*  faiD,  XhP  tonnes, 
anD  thp  Daughters ,  .bcre  canng  anD 
Dunning  ibme  in  their  elDeft  brothers 
houfe. 

19  anD  beholDc ,  tljerc  tame  a  great 
tbinDe  t  ftotn  the  VbilDcntcs,  anD  Quote 
tt)c  four  e  comers  oftV)c  houfe,anb  it  fell 
bpon  toe  pong  men,  anD  thep  arc  DtaD , 
anD  3  onelp  am  cfcapcD  alone  to  tell 
thee. 

zo  XDen  Job  arofc ,  anD  rent  Ins 

mantle,  anDfbaucDhisbcaD,  anD  fell 
Doibnc  bpon  the  grounD  anD  lbo^ 
(typpeD, 

zi  3nD  faiD,  *  jfrancD  came  31  out  of 
mp  mothers  ibombcanD  nancD  (hall 
j  tctucne  thither :  the  %  ©  is  ©  gaue, 
anD  the  |U>  is  © hath  taben  a.bap,blct 
(eD  be  the  /Rarnc  of  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

%z  Jnail  this  Job  finncD  not ,  no? 
||chargcD<soDtbou(blv» 

CHAP.    II. 

i  Satan  appearing  againe  before  God,  obtai- 
neth  further  leaue  to  tempt  lob.  7  Heimi- 
teih  him  with  fore  boiles.  <5  Iobreproueth 
his  wife.moouinghimtocurfeGod.  11  His 
three  friends  condole  with  him  in  filence. 

(Saute  there  ibas  a  Dap 
3  tbhtn  the  fbnnes  of  C5od 
came  to  picfeut  thenv 
felucs  befoje  the  JL©  is  ©, 
_  anD  &atan  came  alfo  a* 
mong  them  to  pjtcfent  himfclfe  before 

then©  is©. 

i  anD  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiD  lmto  £>a* 
tan,  from  ibhcncccomtncft  thou*  anD 

5>atan  anfracrcD  the  % ©  is© ,  anD 
faio,  5from  going  to  $  fro  mthc  earth, 
anD  from  lbaiamgbp  anD  Doibnc  m  it. 

j  *  anD  then  ©is©  faiD  bnto  £>a- 
tan,  $aft  thou  confiDtrcD  mp  fcruant 
Job ,  that  there  is  none  lifee  him  m  the 
earth  •>  a  perfect  anD  an  bpnght  man, 
one  that  fcacethdJoD ,  anD  cfchctbcth 
cuill  1  anD  (till  hce  holDcth  fad  his  tntc* 
gritie,  although  thou  mooucDftmcca^ 
game  him ,  t  to  Dcftcop  hint  XDttftout 

canft«  *        ^  ■« 

4.  anD5>atananfroereDthe1L©is©, 

anD  faiD  ,3>ainne  foz  flunncpca  all  that 

amanhath>tt)ii  hegiutfojhts  ufe. 


5  25ut  put  foouh  thmc  hauDnoib, 
anD  touch  his  bone anohtsfleCh,ano  he 
Hull  curfc  thee  to  tl)v  face. 

6  anD  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiD  bnto  £>a= 
tan,  2ScholD,hce^tnthinehanD,  ||but 
faue  his  life. 

7  CSo  ibent  £>atanfooah  from 
the  pjefence  of  the  %  ©  ts  ©,  anD  fmotc 
Job  ttnth  fo^c  biles,  from  the  folc  of  his 
tootc  bnto  Ins  crolbnc. 

8  anDhcetooUebunapotflicarDto 
fcrape  himfclfe  ibithall  •,  anD  hce  fate 
Doibnc  among  the  allies. 

9  C  1-hcn  faiDc  his  lbife  bnto  him , 
©ocft  thou  ttill  rctcmc  thine  mtcgrinc  i 
Curfc  ©ob,anD  Die. 

10  asuthclaiDbntohcr^hourpca-- 
deltas  one  of  the  fooliflj  Ibomcnfpea* 
fceth  i  tbhat*  (hall  ibee  rcceiucgoobat 
thehanDofd5oD ,  anD  (hall  rbeenotre^ 
ceiuc  cuill  t  Jn  all  this  did  not  Job 
fume  ibith  his  uppes. 

11  C/BottilbhenJobsthJeefrienDS 
hearb  of  all  this  null ,  that  ibas  come 
Upon  him ,  thev  tame  euerr  one  from 
his  oibnc  place :  €lipha5  the  £ema* 
nitc,anD25ilDaD  the  S>huhitc,anD  Zo* 
phar  the  /Baamatljitc ,  fo;  thev  hau 
maDe  an  appointment  together  to 
comctomournetbithhun,anDto  com» 
fotfhim. 

iz  anD  Ibhen  thep  lift  bp  their  eves 
afarrc  off,  anDnnclbhttnnot,  therlu^ 
tcDbp  their  botce ,  anD  ibept ,  anD  thev 
rent  cuerv  one  his  mantle,  anD  fpnncfc 
icd  butt  bpon  their  heaDes  totbarD 
lieauen. 

ij  do  thev  fate  Dotbncunthhnnbp^ 
on  the  grounD  feuen  Dapes ,  anD  fcucn 
nights ,  anD  none  fpafcc  a  ibojD  bnto 
hun  1  fo?  thev  favb  that  ^  gricfe  Ibas 
berv  great. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  lob  curfeth  the  day,  and  feruices  of  his  birth. 
13  The  eafeot  death.  2.0  Hecomplaineth 
ot  life,becaufe  of  his  anguifh. 

fltfiaSEsaffl  iFtcrthis,opcnco3IobhiS 
&WM  mouth  >  anD  curfcD  his 
,$  Dap. 

^S  x  anD  Job  t  fpabe, 
anbfaiD, 
j  *  JUt  the  bap  per  i(h ,  u»hcr  cm  31 
ibas  bo?ne,anb  thcnight  id  which  it  ibas 
faiD,  Xherc  is  a  man-chilDe  conccntcD. 
4.  fLct  that  Dap  bee  Darftcneffe,  let 
not  <5oD  regarD  it  from  abouc ,  neither 
let  the  light  fl)inc  bpon  it. 

Z5  5  net 


\Or,or.elj. 


f  Hehr.an- 

fevered. 

"Chap.  1  a 
i8,i9.tcrc, 

lO.tif. 


Iobsimpatiencie lob. is  reprehended. 


\\Or.chal- 
lenge  tt. 
''Or  Jet 
them  terrife 
tt.Mthtfe 
who  hauc 
j  bitter  day. 
||  Or  Jet  it 
notretoyce 
among  the 
days. 

\\Or,LcutA- 

tbatj. 


\Heb.the 

eyeluisof 
the  morning. 


\  Hei.-.vc.i- 

■d  in 
firengtb. 


\Hcb.  watt. 


*Chap.ip.3 

WMefire 
my  mat. 


\HehlfiA 

red, if  (arc-, 

offditcarjf 

{■por.nx. 


5  fLetbacfeencsanbthcfbabonjeof 
Death!  (tame  it,  let  aclottb  Dibcll  bpon 
it,  1 1  let  the  blacfenes  of  the  baptctrtficit. 

6  as  fo?  rtjat  mglit,  let  barfecneffe 
fea3C  bpon  tt,  ||  let  tt  not  be  topneb  bnto 
the  bapesof  thcpcctc,lctitnotcomeuv 
to  the  number  of  themoncths. 

7  ?Loe,lctfhatntghtbcfolitartc,lct 
no  topfull  botce  tome  therein. 

8  ?Lct  ttjem  tutfe  tt  that  tntfc  the 
oap,  who  ate  reabp  to  ratfe  bp  U  their 
mourning. 

9  Uct  tlje  ftarres  of  the  ttbiUoljt 
thereof  be  batfte,  let  it  loofee  fo?  light, 
but  hauc  none,nctthec  let  it  fee  tthc  batti* 
ntttgofthcDap: 

io  asecaufe  it  fljut  not  bp  the  booses 
of  mp  mothers  ibombc,  no?  |)tB  fojrolbc 
from  mtnc  cpes. 

ii  aahpDieDfnotftomtheibombei 
why  did  3  not  gtue  bp  the ghofttbhen  3 
tameoutoffrjebelltc* 

iz  nahp mo  the  fences  pmtentmec? 
02ibhpthcb2cafts,thatJJwouiDfucfte* 

ij  5ro:  noib  fljoulD  3  hauc  lien  Gill 
anb  beencQittet ,  3  IhoiUbhaueflept; 
then  hab  Jl  bene  at  reft, 

14  n&th  Bmgs  anb  counfcllers  of 
the  earth,  which  built  befolatc  places 
fo2themfelucs, 

15  £>nbith  02inccs  that  had  goibe, 
who  fiiieb  thetc  houfes  wttb  flitter : 

i6  ®i  as  an  hibben  bnttmelp  birth , 
3  hab  notbene ;  as  infants  which  ncucr 
falb  light. 

17  XhetctheWicfteb  ccafciromtrou- 
bling :  anb  there  the  Ubcartcbe  at  reft. 

is  There  thepnfoners  reft  together, 
thephcarc  not  the  boicc  of  the  oppjef 
four. 

19  Xhc  fmau  anb  great  arc  therc,anb 
the  fcruant  is  free  from  his  mailer. 

20  nahercfozc  is  light  giucn  to  htm 
that  ism  mtfcrp,attb  life  bnto  the  bitter 

infoitlCi 

2 1  iflhich t long foz  bcath,  but  tt  «>m- 
meth  not,  anb  tug  foz  it  mo2c  tljcn  fo2  hib 
treafurcs : 

22  lohtth  rciotcc  ercccbmglp,and  arc 
glab  When  they  tan  finbe  the  grattc j, 

13  why  is  light  -men  to  a  man,  lbhofc 
Wap  is  hib,  *  anb  Whom  Gob  hath  heb 
gebtn* 

24  5f02  mv  fighmg  commcth  t  befo2c 
3  eatc,  anb  mv  roarings  arc  poW2eb 
out  Ufee  the  waters. 

15  jf 02 1  the  thing  which  3  grcatlp 
fear  cb  is  come  bpon  tne,anb  that  Which 
3  ibas  afratb  of,  is  tome  bnto  mc. 


26  3  wasnotmfafetie,  neither  hab 
3  reft,  neither  was  3  quiet :  pet  trou* 
blecamc. 

CHAP.  II II. 

1  Eliphaz  reprooueth  lob  for  want  of  religion. 
7  Heteacheth  Gods  judgements  to  bee  not 
for  the  righteous,  but  for  the  wicked,  ii  His 
fearefull  vifion,  to  humble  the  excellencie  of 
Creatures  before  God. 

$en  ciiphasthc'ICemas 
rate  anfrocreb,anb  fatD, 

2  ffXbcaflayttoconv 
munc  With  thee,  Wilt 
thou  be  grtcucb  i  26ut 
tWho  can  WtthholDhtmfclfe  from  fpea* 
feing* 

j  2ScholDe ,  Xhou  haft  utftructeb 
manp,  anb  thou  haftftrcngtheneb  the 
wcafechanDs. 

4  %ty  wo?DS  haue  bpholben  him 
that  Was  falling,  anD  thou  haft  ftrcng; 
tljeneb  t  the  feeble  fences. 

$  28ut  now  ins  tome  bpon  thccanD 
thoutatnteft,  it  toutheth  thee,  anb  thou 
arttroubltb. 

6  isnotthisfhpfeare,thpeon6Denee; 
thebp2ightneflcof  thp  wapes  anb  thp 
hope? 

7  Hemcmber ,  3  pjap  th« ,  Whs 
euerpertfl)cb,  being  mnoccnt^o^itohcre 
Were  the  righteous  an  off  •: 

8  *€ucnas  3 hauc fctnethep that 
plolb  iniquttp ,  anb  foib  tbtcfecbnflc, 
r  cape  the  tame. 

9  25p  the  blaft  of  <5ob  thep  pcrivh , 
anb  bp  the  b2eath  of  his  *noftrtls  arc 
thepconfumeb. 

10  Xhc  roaring  ofthc&pon,  anb 
the  botce  ofthcfierce1Lpon,anbthf 
teeth  of  the  pong  ?lpons  are  bzofecn. 

11  Xheolb1Lponpenu")Cthfo2lacfec 
of  p2ap,  anb  the  (lout  Hponstt>hclpcs 
arcfcattcrcbab2oab. 

11  Lottie  a  thing  ibas  t  fccrctlp 
b20itghttome,  anb  mine  eare  retciueb 
a  utic  thereof. 

13  3Jtt  tlioughts  from  the  bifions  of 
the  ntght,  lbhcn  beepeflcepe  failcth  on 
men : 

14  .fear  c  t  came  bpon  ntcanb  trcm* 
blmg,  lbhich  mabc  t  all  mp  bones  to 
fhafec. 

15  Xhen  a  fptrit  paffeb  bcfo2C  mp 
face :  the  hairc  of  mv  flefh  ftoob bp. 

i6  3Jt  ftoob  full,  but3  coulb  notbtf 
ccrne  the  fo2tnc  thereof:  an  image  was 
befo.'e  nunc  cpes,  ||  there  wasfflence,  anb 
3lhcarbabopcc,iaving, 

17  ^>hali 


word. 


\Htb.nho 
can  rcfratne 
from  words? 


\  Hebr.  the 

halving 

kneel. 


"Prou.2i-8 
ofc  10.13. 


"That  is Jj 
bis  Anger yc* 
£>.3Q.  33. 


\Hcb.by 
ftea/th. 


f  Heb.  met 

met. 

t  Heb.  the 
multitude  cf 
mj  bones. 


|j  Or,  I  beard 

ajltiivoyce. 


liuersendsof  Chap.v.v].     godly  and  wicked. 


•Chap.  15. 
ij.a.pet. 

J-4- 

||  Orjtorin 
hu  Angelt, 
in  whom 
heput  light, 
•j.Cor.5.1 


t  Heb.  i">- 
tentnpieces. 


\\Or.looie. 

||  Orjndtg- 
nation. 


\Or,tnujHlty. 
\\  Or,  labour. 
\  Heb.  the 
formes  of  the 
burning 
coaleylift 
t/ptojhe. 
'Cha.9.10. 
pfal.72.l8. 
ran.ll.H. 
t  Heb.  and 
there  is  »0 
fearch. 
\Heb.till 
therebeno 
number, 
t  Heb.  out- 
places. 
•Pfa.n3.tf. 
J.frm.2.7. 
tJeh.4.15. 
pfal.  53.10. 
ifa.8.10. 
||  Or,  cannot 
performed- 
ny  thing. 
•l.Cor.j. 
>9- 


17  5>hail  mojtall  man  be  mo?e  tuft 
then  d50D  <  (hail  a  man  bee  mo?e  puce 
then  his  inafeet* 

18  25cholb,hce*putnotruttinhis 
fcruantS;  i|anbhis3Utgflshcccljatgcb 
UJItl)  follv  I 

19  $ott)e  much  lede  on  them  that 
bitoell  m  *  houfesof  clap,  ibhofc  fonnoa^ 
turn  is  in  the  buft,  Sbhtclj  aw  crufheb  be= 
fojc  the  moth. 

zo  %bv?  are  t  beftropeb  from  moj- 
nmg  to  eucning :  the?  penfb  fojeucr, 
Without  an?  regarbtng  it 

xi  2Doeth  not  their  crcclltneic  which 
is  m  them ,  gee  attmp  t  the?  Ute ,  euen 
Without  ttiifcbonic. 

CHAP.   V. 

1  Theharmeof  inconfidcration.  5  Thccnde 
of  the  wicked  is  mifery.  6  God  is  to  be  re- 
garded in  affliction.  17  The  happy  ende 
oi  Gods  corre&ion. 

3M  notb ,  if  there  be  an? 
that  ttnl  anfraece  thee,anb 
to  Xbhuh  of  the  S>amts 
Unit  thou  ||  turner 
x  jtotttfthbiHeththc 

fooiiO)  man ,  anb  ||  enup  aapeth  the  fill? 

one. 
5  3  haue  feene  the  fooli(h  taking 

toote :  but  fttfsbcw?  3  turfcb  hig  fiabi* 

tattoo* 

4  $is  chilbzcn  are  fatre  from  Cafo 
tic,  anb  the?  ate  trulhcbtnthe  gatc,net» 
ther  »s  there  anp  to  belmer  them. 

5  JBhofe  harueft  the  hungry  eatetlj 
hp.anb  tafecth  it  men  out  of  the  thorns, 
anb  the  robber  fioailolbtth  tip  their 
wbftancc. 

6  Although  ||  affliction  commcth 
not  fotth  of  the  buft,ncither  boeth  trou* 
Die  fpung  out  of  thegrounb : 

7  Ptt  man  is  bomt  tmto  ||  trouble, 
as  t  the  fparftes  flic  bpibarb. 

8  3  ttsouib  ferae  hntod5ob,anbl)n^ 
to  d5ob  ifboulb  3  commit  mp caufe : 

9  *  i©htth  both  great  things  t  $  »n* 
fcarchablc:  marueilous  thtngstttiith- 
outnumber. 

io  i©ho  giueth  raine bponthe earth, 
anb  fcnbcth  waters  bpon  the  t  ftelbS : 

ii  *  %q  fct  tip  on  high  thofe  that  be 
low ;  that  thofe  Which  moutne,  map  be 
eraltebtofafctie. 

ix  *$eeb!fappothtcththebcnieesof 
the  ccaftie,  fo  that  their  hanbs  ||  cannot 
perfojme  thar  enterpjife. 

13  *  i^e  tafteth  the  Wife  in  ttytxc  owne 


ccaftmefle :  anb  the  counfell  of  tljefro 
warbis  carieb  heablong. 

14  *Xhep  ||mcete  WifhbaraenclTc 
in  the  bap  time,  anb  grope  m  the  noone 
bapasmthentght. 

15  aSuttje  faucthtbcpoo?c  from  the 
fnwb,  from  their  mouth,  anb  from  the 
hanbofthemtghtte. 

16  *&o  the  pooje  hath  hope,anbini' 
quitic  ftoppeth  her  mouth. 

17  *2Seholb,happp>s  the  man  Whom 
d5ob  cojrcctcth :  therefore  befptfe  not 
thou  the  thafterang  of  the  3Jumghttc. 

18  *;tfojbemaaechfo;c,anbbtnbeth 
bp:  be  wonnb6th,anb  his  hanbs  maae 
Whole. 

19  *^eeQ}aUbelincrthccinarctrou' 
hies,  pea  in  feuen  there  (hail  no  cuill 
touch  thee. 

io  3fn  famine  he  thai!  rebeeme  thee 
from  bcath :  anb  in  warre  from  the 
tpotticrofthefawo. 

ii  Xhou  (halt  be  hibbe  ||  from  the 
ftoutgc  of  the  tongue :  neither  lhalt 
thou  be  afraib  of  beftruction ,  ibhm  it 
commcth. 

xx  3it  bcftruction  anb  famine  thou 
lhaltlangh:  neither  (haitthoubeafraib 
of  thebeafts  of  the  earth. 

XI  *  f  0?  thOU  fhaltbe  ttt  ICagUC  lMl) 

thettonesofthcficltKanb  the  bcaftsof 
the  ficlb  (hall  be  at  peace  ttotth  thee. 

24  3nb  thou  ujalt  Knott)  that  thp 
||  tabernacle  ftaii  bee  m  peace  anb  thou 
(halt  btute  th p  habitation,  anb  (halt  not 
IIGnnc. 

x<,  %\m  (halt  fenott)  alfo  thatthp 
feebe  (haibc  ||  great,  anb  thme  ofrlpjmg 
as  thegraflc  of  the  earth. 

x6  Xhottlhattcometothpgraucm 
afuliagejifecasaihocBeofcomcttom 
mcthm,tnhisfeafom 

xj  ?Loc  this ,  tbee  hane  fearcheb  it, 
fottis ,  hcatc  it,  anb  fenott)  thoutt  t  fo? 
thpgoob. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  lob  fheweth  tliat  his  complaints  ai  e  not  ca  u  fe- 
lefle.  8  Heewifheth  for  death,  wherein  he 
is  affured  of  comfort.  14  Hereproouethhis 
friends  or  vnkindneffe. 

Ut  3!ob  anlroereb ,  anb 
fapb, 

x  jDh  that  my  gncfe 

Ibercthioughip  tticighcb, 

._  anb  mp  caiamttietiavbtn 

tl;e  balances  together. 

3  5fo?nott)tttt)ouHsbcheamcrthen 

zu  the 


"Deur.28. 

|j  Or,rnryle 
into. 


Pfal.  107. 
43- 

•Pl'O.3.12. 

lames  1 .12. 
heb.l 2.5. 
apoe.3.  9. 

'Deut.j :. 
59.1.1am. 
2.6.  ifj.30. 
2«.hof.6.i. 
•Pfal.pi.j. 


I  Heb.  from 
the  hands. 
\\  Or, when 
the  tongue 
fconrgeth. 


'Hof.l.l8. 


9r,tha 

peace ti thy 
tabernacle, 
\\Or.erre. 

\\Ormttch, 


\Heb.afiex- 
deth. 


f  Heb.  fir 
thyfilfi. 


\  Heb.  lifted 
up. 


Iobcomplameth.  lob. 


M 


ansmiiene. 


fe 


||rimi< 

/  want  words 
rt  exprejfe 
myprtefe. 
•Pfjl.)8. 


\Hebr.at 
Zrafe. 


t  Hebr.  my 
cxpetlatiort. 


\He.hr*fm 


\  Hebr. to 
him  that 
meltttb. 


j  Hebr.  they 
are  cut  off. 
\  Hebr  an 
the  hem 
thereof. 
tHeir.ex- 
ttngmPied. 


\\Or,for 
now  ye  tire 
like  tothem. 

Hebr. ton. 

\Hcbr.Not 


the  fanb  of  the  tea,  ttjeccfo^c  nip  lbozbs 
arcllfroaiionjcbbp. 

4  *jf02thearroibcsofthc3amish; 
ticareibtthmmc,  the  popfbn  itohctcof 
bmifccth  top  mp  fpint :  the  tcrrozs  of 
<2>ob  boe  fctthcmrcwcsinarapagainft 
mcc. 

5  ^oeththeU>flbcau"cbzaptn)hcn 
he  hath  graffe*  02  lotbeto  the  ore  oner 
hisfbbber* 

e  Can thattbhicb  is  tonlauerp ,  bee 
eatmibithoutfait*02isfbercanptaftc 
tntheibhitcofancggc* 

7  X|e  things  that  nip  foule  refufeb 
to  touth,are  as  nip  fozroitofull  meat. 

8  £>that3Jmlghthauenipreqiicft 
ant)  that  god  idouid  graunt  meet  the 
thing  that  31  long  fo2f 

9  cum  that  tt  ibouin  pieafe  ©ob  to 
beftrop  mcc,  that  he  tboulb  let  loofe  his 
hanb,anbcutmeoff. 

io  Xhmu>ulb3i  pet  hauccomfiHt, 
pea  3  fboulD  harben  mp  feifc  tafop 
rotb ;  let  him  not  fpate,fo?3f  hauenot 
conccaicb  th  e  ttwos  of  the  hoip  jOne. 

n  i©hatismpftrength,thar3ja)ouib 
hope < anb  ibt>at  is  mine  cnuc,  that  3 
tboulbpzolongmpufe? 

\z  is  mp  ftrength  the  ftrength  of 
ttoncs  i  ox  is  mp  flcCb *  oftuaffc * 

13  isnotmpljelpeintncf anDisttife- 
Borne  tytucn  quite  from  me j. 

14  t  %o  film  that  is  afflutcb  ,  pitie 
ihouid  be  (hewed from  hisfaent).  25ut  he 
fozfaUetb  the  fcare  of  the  3lmightp. 

15  ^pb.2etlj?en  haucbelt  beccufullp 
as  a  b200Rc,&  as  the  dream c  ofbzooucs 
theppaflramap, 

i6  nahich  arc  biactuft)  bp  rcafon  of 
theptcandibheremthcfnovbishib: 

17  nahat  tunc  thep  ibare  ibarme, 
tthep  bamfli:nbhcnttishot,thep  arc 
t  tonfumcb  out  of  therr  place. 

18  Xhc  pathes  of  their  ibap  aretur* 
neb  afibe ,  thep  goc  to  nothing ,  anb 
penfh. 

19  Xhe  troupes  of  3CcmaiooKeb,thc 
companies  of  Shcbaibaitcb  foi  them. 

zo  Xhcp  lbcrc  confounbeb  becaufe 
thep hab hopeb  thep  camcthithcr ,  anb 
ibereafl)ameb. 

2 1  i| JF0.2  noib pe  arc  t nothing  pc  fee 
my  camngboibne,aiu>ateafratD. 

22  3Dtb  3  fap ,  zszing  bnto  mcc?  02 
giuc  a  rcitoarb  foi  me  of  pour  fubBance  < 

23  4D2  beltucr  me  from  the  enemies 
hanb,o:rcDccmcmcfrom  tljc  hanb  of 
themightp* 

24  Xeach  me ,  anb  3 tbfll  holb  mp 


tongue  :  ano  taufe  mce  to  bubcrCtanb 
ibheranlJhauecrreb. 

25  $crtb  forcible  arc  right  ibozbes  t 
but  itohat  bocth  pour  arguing  rcpzoue  < 

26  3Do  pc  imagine  to  repjoue  ttiozbs, 
anb  the  fpccchcs  of  one  that  is  Dcfpc 
ratc,tbhitb  arc  as  Ibtnbe  * 

27  ^ea,tpeotietitohelme  the  father* 
icfle ,  anb  pou  Digge  a  pit  fo2  pour  fhenb. 

28  iftoib  therefore  be  content,  lootte 
bpon  mcc ,  fo?  it  is  t  tuibent  bnto  you,  if 
3  lie. 

29  &cturne,3fpiappou,letitnotbc 
iniquitie  pea  rcturnc  agame :  mp  righ- 
teoufncflell'smtt. 

30  gjs  tljcrc  iniquitie  in  mp  tongue j. 
cannot  t  mp  taftc  btfeerne  pcrucrfc 
things; 

CHAP.   VII. 

1  Iobexcufethhisdefireofdearh.  n  Hecom- 
plaineth  ofhisowne  reftlefnefle,  17  and 
Gods  watchfulneffe. 

s  there  not  ||  an  appomtcb 
time  to  man  bpon earth? 
arc  not  Ijts  bapes  alfo  UHc 
the  bapes  of  an  hireling  < 
2  ^s  a  feniant  t  ear- 
ncftlpbcDreth  the  n)aboib ,  anb  as  an 
hireling  loobcth  fo?  4e  reward  of  his 
Uiozfec: 

3  ^>o  am  3  mabe  to  pofTcfre  mo^ 
ncths  of  bamticanb  tucartfome  nights 
areappointeotomc. 

4  n9hen3nicbottinc,3!fap,83hen 
Q)ail3  ante ,  anb  the  t mght  be  gone < 
anbjamfullof  toffingsto  anb  fro,bit 
to  the  baibnmg  of  the  bap. 

5  ^pflclhisdoathebibitbibomies 
anb  tioos  of  bull ,  mp  f  tnnnc  is  (gotten, 
anb  become  loathfome. 

6  *  (©p  bapes  are  fioiftct  then  a 
ltocancrs  Ojuttlc ,  anb  are  fpent  ibith' 
out  hope. 

7  €>  remember  that  mp  life  is 
lbinbc :  nunc  epe  tft)au  no  mozc  ||  fee 
goob. 

8  3Chc  epe  of  him  that  hath  fecne 
me,  (hall  fee  mec  no  more  •  thme  epes  are 
bponmcanb'JIIamnot. 

9  As  the  cloub  is  tonmincb  anb  ba^ 
tuflicth  aibap :  fo  he  that  goeth  boibne 
tomegrauc,  fljailtomcbpno  more. 

10  it)cc  (hail  rcturne  no  moze  to  his 
lioufc:  neither  fljau  hisplatebnolb  hun 
anpmo2e. 

11  Xhercfozc  3  ibill  not  tcframc 
mpmouth,3  ibilipcaBcinthcanguifl) 

of 


t  Hebr. ye 
com/c  to/all 
vport, 

\Heb.beforc 
yourface. 


HThitis, 
m  thu  mat- 
ter. 

\  Hsh.mj 
faUte, 


Or ,  a  war- 
fare. 


\Hebr.ga- 
ycth  after. 


\Hehr.the 
eneainf  be 


'lob  1(5.12 
pfal.jio.d. 

and  ioi. ii. 
andiot.ij. 
and  144.4. 
ifi.40. 6. 
iam.4.14. 
\Hebr.Jhstl 
not  retnrne. 
j  J  To  fee-thai 
u,ta  entcy. 
I  That  is,/ 
can  hut  no 
longer. 


Bildads  anfwere.      Chap.vnj.ix.       God  righteous. 


|  Hek  then 
my  hones. 


•Pfal.8.4. 
and  144-  J< 
hcb.1.6. 


*Dcu.ji.4 
i.chxo.19.7 
dan.  9. 14. 


\Hcb.inthc 
biinA  of  their 
tranfgrejjiort 
"Chap.  21. 


of  my  fptnt ,  3  ttUl  compiame  in  the 
bittern  cu*c  of  myfoule. 

it  3lm3Jafca,o?an)halc,thatthou 
fcttcttarbatth  oucr  me; 

ij  ashen  J  fay,  £0ybeb  thai  comfojt 
me,  my  court)  (hall  cafe  my  complaint : 

14.  Xhen  thou  fHatcit  met  ttnth 
D2eames,  anD  tcrrtneltmc  through  top 
(ions. 

15  S>othatmyfoule  choofcthfrrang' 
ling :  and  Death  rather  t  then  my  life. 

i6  3J  loath  it,  5  rboulD  not  Hue  al 
ltoay :  ictmealoncfojmybaycsare  toa* 
iiitte. 

17  *i©hat  is  man,  that  thou  fhoup 
Deft  macmifichim;  anD  that  thou(houP 
Deft  fet  thine  heart  topon  him  ; 

18  :3nDtrutthoumoulDeftbiutchim 
cuery  morning,  and  trie  him  cuery  mo* 
ment; 

19  $otb  long  tbilt  thou  not  Depart 
from  me;  nozlctme  alone  till  3  ft" ^ 
loitoDoitonemyfptttlc; 

to  3}l)aucfinneo,tbl)atQ)aU3lboe 
tonto  ttjee ,  if)  thou  pjcfcrucr  of  men  ; 
tbDphaft  thou  fet  me  as  a  marfe  agamQ 
thee,  fo  that  3  am  a  burben  to  myfcife  ; 

xi  3nDtt)hyDoe(t  thou  not  patDon 
my  tranfgrcmon,  anb  tafecatbay  mine 
iiuquitte;  fo?  nott)  (hall  3  flcepeinthc 
Duft,anD  thou  (halt  fecftc  me  in  the  mo?* 
ning,but3J(hailnotbc. 

CHAP.   vin. 

Bildad  fhewethGodsiuftice,  in  dealing  with 
men  according;  to  their  workes.  8  Healled- 
gethanticjuitieto  prouethe  certaine  deftru- 
dion  of  the  Hypocrite,  to  Hee  applieth 
Gods  iuft  dealing  to  lob. 

i^en  anftoercD  ffiflbab  the 
5>l)uhitc,anDfaiD, 

i   ^oltolongtblltthou 
fpcafccthcfc things;  anb 
„  how  long  (hail  the  VboiDcs 
of  thy  mouth  be  like  aftrongtbmb ; 

5  *2Doth  d50D  perucrtiuDgemcnt; 
o?  both  the  aimightic  peruert  mfhee ; 
4-  3Jf  thy  chilDjcn  hauc  finneb  & 
gaintthmi,anbhchauc  call  them  aibap 

t  fo?  thetr  tranfgrcfuon: 

5  *^ffyoutboulDcQfccttctmto<i5oD 
betimes,  anb  ma&c  thy  fupplicationto 
theSllmightic: 

6  3i  thou  wert  pure  anb  bpztght, 
furcly  nott)  he  itooulD  aibafec  fo?  thee, 
anb  mafee  the  habitation  of  thy  righte* 
oufnespzofperous. 

7  Xhough  thy  beginning  itoas 


fmail,  yctthy  latter  enb  (houib  greatly 
mereafe. 

8  *  if  o?  enquire,  3  p?ay  thec,  of  the 
fonncr  age,  anD  prepare  thy  fclfc  to  the 
fcarch  of  their  fathers, 

9  (JFo?*tt)Carebutof^e(lerbay,anb 
fenott)  t  nothing,  becauteourbayesbp- 
onearthareafljabott).) 

10  &hallnotthcyteachthce,  andtcll 
rtjee,  $  btter  vbojbs  out  of  their  heart; 

1 1  Can  the  rufh  grorbe  top  itotthout 
my?e;  can  the  flag  grotbcitoithoutitofc 
tcr; 

ii  *B9htleftit'syctinhisgreenneu*c, 
and  notmtboitone,  itlbithercth  before 
anyotherijcrbc. 

i  j  ^>o  are  the  paths  of  all  that  fojgct 
<£>ob,  anb  the  *  hypocrites  hope  (hail 
penfl): 

14.  iBhofchopc  fliaii  be  cutoff,  anto 
mhofe  truft  (hall  be  t  afpibers  tbeb. 

15  f?e  (hail  leanc  topon  his  houfc,  but 
it  (hail  not  ftaub :  he  (hal  holb  it  fa(t,but 
itfhallnotenbure. 

16  $c  u  greene  befo?e  the  funne ,  anD 
his  bianch  ihooteth  fonh  m  his  garben. 

17  $ts  roots  are  tbjappcD  about  the 
heape,  and  feeth  the  place  of  (tones. 

18  'Jfhebcfrroyhunfromhtsplate, 
thenitfhaibcmchun/aying.^j  haucnot 
fcencthct. 

19  26eholbe ,  this  is  the  toy  of  his 
tbay,  ana  out  of  rtje  earth  (hall  others 
grolto. 

io  25eholb,<I5obtbainotca(tatbay 
a  perfect  man,  neither  ttjfll  heet  helpc 
thecutllboers: 

21  Xilihefill  thy  mouth  wuh  iaugh= 
mg,  anb  thy  lips  with  t  reioyemg. 

ii  Xhey  that  hate  thcefljaubecloas 
then  with  fljame,  anb  the  Dwelling 
plate  of  the  ttnritcD  *  (hall  come  to 
nought. 

CHAP.    IX. 

i  lob  ackaowledgingGods  iuftice,fheweth  there 
is  no  contending  with  him.  n  Mans  inno- 
cencic  is  not  to  be  condemned  by  afflictions, 

(t>en  3lob  anfmercD ,  anD 
faib, 
1  3H*nott)ttisfoofa 

tructh:buthoitoe  ttjouib 

„  *  man  be  mfl  1 1  ttntl)  ©ob. 

j   3i  he  null  contenb  itoith  hun ,  he 

cannot  anfroere  him  one  of  a  thoufanb. 

4.  $c  is  Vbifc  m  heart,  anD  miglme 

in  ftrcngth:  Vbljo  hath  harDmcD  him- 

feife  agamQ  him,  anD  hath  piofpereD ; 

Z5  3        5  oalnch 


3.-, 


Dcut.. 


*  See  chap. 
7.6.gcn.47 
9.  I.chron. 
251. 1  J.pfil. 

39.14- 
\Htb.nit. 


•PfJ.  119. 
6.  icr.17.6. 


*Iob.1 1. to 
111(118,14. 

pdl.l  I  !  i'> 
prou.IO  *S 
\Hib.afti- 
dert  hpufe. 


\Hektake 

the  vngatUy 
by  thcljjnd. 

f  M>.p,cu- 
tinpfn-io]. 


\Heb.flaE 
not  be. 


•Pf»l.l4J. 

\\Or,befcre 
fj°d. 


God: 


power. 


an< 


lob. 


iuftice.  M 


i 


ans 


"Gcn.1.6. 

\Hcbr. 

b?igbt: 

"Amos  5. 8. 
ob.38.31, 
&c. 

\fitb.AJb, 
Ccf,l,mi 
Ctmab. 
''Sec  Chap. 
5-9- 


Mfai.45.9 
icrc.18.6. 
rom  9.20. 
j"  Heb.  ivbo 
cttn  tttrm 
him  Away  ? 
\Heb.hel- 

^tr:  of  pride  ^ 
•  rftrenfth. 


5  naftirft  remouetft  tftc  mountains, 
anb  tftep  ftnoib  not :  ibfticft  ouettur* 
netft  tl)cm  m  ftis  anger : 

6  naftitft  tftaBctft  tfte  eartft  ont  of 
ftcr  place,  %  tftc  pillars  tftcreof  tremble : 

7  aafttfft  commanbetft  tfte  Sunnc, 
anD  it  nfctft  not :  anro  feaictft  Dp  tftc 
ftarrcs. 

8  *  naftieft  alone  fpjeabetft  ont  tfte 
ftcauens,anbtreabetftbpontfte||ibaucs 
oftftc&ca. 

9  *  iefticft  maftetft  tareturus,  & 
rion  anb  $iciabes,  ana  tftc  eftatnbers  of 
tftc&outft. 

10  *  nafticft  boctft  great  tilings  part 
fuibuigout,  vcaanbilionbers  Uutftout 
number. 

1 1  fLocfteectoctftbpme,  anb  3  fee 
him  not:  fte  paffctft  onaifo,but3per* 
cciucftimnot. 

ii  *26c!)oH),rjcrabctI)  atbap,  t  ibfto 
tan  hmocr  ftim  t  Ibfto  lbill  fav  bnto 

l)!in,l©hatbOCfttllDU;' 

13  if©obtotiinotibttftbzaibftisan; 
get,  tftc  t  pjoub  ftclpers  boc  ftoupe  bn= 
bcrftmt. 

14.  tyavo  mucft  leffe  tljail  31  anfmcrc 

Dim,  and  tftOOfCOUt  mptbtybS  coieafon 

lbitftftitm 

15  Ddftom.  tftougft  3  iberc  rigfttc* 
ous,  yet  iboulb  31  not  anfraerc,  but  3 
U)oulbmaRtutpplttationtom^3)ubgc. 

i6  3Jf3Jftabeaileb,anbftcftaban: 
fracttb  me,  yetiboulb  3  not  bclceuc 
tftat  fte  ftabftcarfecncbbnto  mp  botte : 

17  jro?  fte  bzeaactft  me  lbitft  a  teni* 
pett,  anb  muttipuctft  mpibounbsibm> 
outtaufe. 

18  i^cttnll notfuffcr  mcto  taftcmy 
fyeatft,  but  fillctft  me  lbitft  bitterneffc. 

19  3ififpeakeofftrcngtr),loe,Ijceis 
ftrong :  anb  if  of  tubgement,  ibfto  fftail 
fctmcattmctopieade? 

20  3jf  j|  iufttfic  mpfcife,  mine  owne 
moutft  fl)all  tonbemnc  me :  if  1  fay ,  31 
am  perfect,  it  (ball alto  pjooucme  per* 
uerfc. 

H  Though  31  were  perfect,  vet  VbOUlb 

31  not  KnoVb  nip  foulc:  3  iboulb  befpifc 
mplife. 

n  This  is  one  tfting,  tftecefoje  3 
tatb  it  i  fte  befrropetft  tftc  perfect  anb  tfte 
ruit&cb. 

23  3Jf tfte  fcourge  flap  fubbcnip.ftce 
lbill  laugft  attfte  triallof  tftcmnoccnt. 

24  lEftecartftisgtuen  into  tftc  ftanb 
of  tftc  lbicncb:  fte  coucrctft  tfte  faces  of 
tftc  3Jut>gcs  tftcreof;  ifnot,lbftccc,  and 
\bfto  is  ftcc* 


x<,  49oibmpbapesarefroiftertften 
a  poftc :  tftc?  flee  atbap,  tftep  fee  no 
goob. 

i6  3Eftep  arc  paffeb  aibap  as  tftc 
1 1|  ftbtft  fftips :  as  tftc  eagle  that  ftafretft 
totftepzap. 

27  3f 3  fap ,  3  ibrll  forget  mp  com? 
plaint,  3  lbill  leauc  off  mp  ftcanmeffc, 
anb  comfojt  mpfcife. 

28  3  am  afraib  of  ailmp  fo?rolbes, 
3  hnoib  that  tfton  Ibat  not  ftolbc  me 
innocent. 

19  3lf3Jbcibicfeeb,tbfti)tl)cniabour 
3mbame< 

30  3Jf3Hbafftmpfelfcibitftfnoib 
tbatcr ,  anb  mane  nip  ftanbes  ncucr  fo 
tlcane: 

31  Pit  fftalt  tftou  plunge  mc  in  tftc 
bitcft, anb  mine oibnc clotftes (ftail  1 1 ab? 
fto?rcme. 

32  5Fo?fteisnotamanas3)am,that 
3  fboulbatifujereftim ,  and  jdc  fftoulb 
comctogetftcr  iniubgement. 

33  Jfrcttftcristftcretanvllbapcs-man 
bctibtrt  bs,  that  migftt  lap  ftis  ftanb  bp- 
onbsbotft. 

34  fLct  ftim  taftc  ftis  robbc  alba? 
from  mc,  $  let  not  ftis  fearc  terrific  me : 

3?  Then  iboulb  3  fpeafee,  anb  not 
fearc  ftim*  'but  ids  notfottntftmc. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  lob,  taking  Iibertie  of  complaint ,  expoftula- 
teth  with  God  about  his  affli&ions.  18  Hee 
complaincth  of  life,  and  craueth  alitdeeafe 
before  death. 

Hfoule  is  ||  tbearp  of  mp 
life  ,3  Vbill  leauc  mp  com« 
plaint  bpon  mp  fclfe;  3 
lbill  fpeafee  in  tftc  bitter* 
„ncffc  of  mp  foulc. 
i  3  Will  fap  bnto  <5ob,  2Doenot 
conbtinne  nice  ■,  fbtvot  mc  lbftcccfo?c 
tftou  contcnbeaibitft  me. 

3  Js  it  goob  bnto  tftec ,  tftat  tftou 
fl)Oiiibtft  opp;tfTe<  tftat  tftou QjoulbeQ 
bcfpiTc  t  tftc  ibojtBc  of  tftine  ftanbs;  anb 
fftine  bpon  tftc  counfeli  of  tftc  tDlcfecb  i 

4  ^aft  tftou  epes  of  flefft  <  oj  fecft 
tftou  as  man  fectfti 

5  Arefftpbapcsastftcbapesofmam 
are  tftppecresasmansbapes, 

6  Xftat  tftou  enquireft  after  mine 
niiauitie,anbfearcl)eftaftcrmpfmnci 

7  t  Xftou  nnoibett  tftat  3f  am  not 
lbicfecb,  anb  there  is  none  tftat  can  belt 
uer  out  of  tftmc  ftanb. 

8  ILftuieftanbstftaucmabemcanb 
fafftt< 


\Htirr.  Ships 
ofdefire. 
\\Or,p,,ps 
ofEbch- 


\\Or,uuie 
mi  to  beab- 
borrtd. 


f  Heb.  one 

tbatficM 

argue. 

\\Or,Vn>- 

pre. 


\Hcb.b,itl 

am  not  fa 
witbmy 


\\0rcuioff 
■abilsl  Inn. 


\Hib.the 

Ubonr  of 
thins  hand:. 


nthy 
know  It  doe. 

Heo.  tooi^c 
pomes  4&e&t 


r,g 


hteoufnclle.  Chap.x).  lob  reproued. 


'  Pfal.I?j>. 
4.andl4, 

t  UAheig- 
ed. 


ftThat ! 


yptyun. 


•Chap.J. 
II. 


*  See  Chap. 
3.9.W7. 
S. 


t  Hdr.  a 
mar.  ofltpt. 


fatDioncbmc togrtHcc  tounb about  pet 
tDoubocftocftropmc. 

9  Bemember,  3  bcfcccD  tDcc,  tDat 
tDou  Daft  mabc  mc  as  t!)e  clap,  anb  Vbtlt 
thou  b?tng  mc  into  bull  agamc * 

10  *^aQtDoitnotpoib2ebmcoutas 
milae,anb  crubbieb  me  line  cDeefe  < 

1 1  Xhouhaitcioathcomcttrithf&in 
anb  fled) ,  anb  Daft  t  fenccb  mc  lbitlj 
bones  anbfmeibes. 

iz  XDouDaftgrantebmeltfcanbfa 
uour,  anb  tDp  mutation  hath  p2cfetueb 
mpfpint. 

13  2lnb  theft  things  haft  thou  nib  in 
tl)inc  heart;  3  Knott)  tljat  this  ^ittitl) 
thee. 

1+  gif  3  fume ,  then  tDou  marbeft 
me  ,  anb  thou  Unit  not  acquitcmcfrom 
mmeuuquittc. 

15  31 3  be  ibirttcb  ,  \boc  bnto  me  • 
anb  if  3  be  righteous,) «  imil  3  not  lift 
op  mp  l)cab :  3  am  roll  of  tonfufion, 
thcrcfb2C  fee  thou  mine  affliction : 

i6  jFo?  tt  tncrcafctl):  thonhunteftme 
as  a  fierce  fUon:  anb  againefDou  fhctb; 
ell  tDp  felfe  matttcilous  bpon  mc 

17  Xhou  reuueft  thp  II  tbitneffts  a- 
gamftmc,  anb  incrcaftft  thine  inbigna- 
ttontoponmc  j  Changes  anb tbarre  arc 
agamftme. 

is  *i©hcrfb2C  then  haft  tDou  b2ougDt 
mcfb2fD  out  of  tlie  tttombc  i  £>h  that  3 
Dab  giuenbp  theghoft,  anb  no  eye  Dab 
feme  me! 

I?  3Jft)oirtbhauc  bene  as  though  3 
Dabnotbene,3l  CDoulbhauebenecarab 
from  theioombe  to  tDc  graue. 

10  *  3lre  not  mp  bapes  ftro  <  teafc 
tDen,  ^d  let  me  alone  tDat  3  may  tafte 
comfort  a  lttle, 

11  2ecfo2C3f  goc  whence  31  (ball  not 
rettirne,tue»  to  the  lanb  of barKnes  anb 
thctDabottiofbcath, 

\z  2  lanb  of  barKnes ,  as  barUnes  it 
felft,  andof  tDcfDaboibofoeath,  tbith 
out  any  ojocr ,  anb  where  tDe  tight '*as 
barftencs. 

CHAP.    XI. 

Zophar  reproueth  lob ,  for  mfhrying  him- 
feifc.  5  Gods  wifdome  is  vnfearchable.  13 
The  allured  blefsing  of  repentance. 

H^en  anfttjereb  zophar 
the  /I5aamatDitc,anb  faib, 
%  S>houlbnotthcmul= 
titube  of  ftiojbs  be  anfioe 
» rebi  anb  fljoulb  ta  man  ml 
oftai&ebtiuthficbi 


I  3  £>houlbthp||ucsmaKemcnholb 
Mmr  peace  <  anb  tbDeu  tDou  mocKcft, 
(Dan  no  man  mabc  thee  afljamebi 

4  j?02tDouDaftfaib,#pijotmnc<> 
ptirc,anb  3  am  cleane  m  tDine  epes. 

<,  23ut,  £>  tDat  00b  moiiibfpcauc, 
anb  open  Dis  lippesagamft  tDcc, 

6  3inb  tDat  DcrbouibfycibtDcc  tDc 
fecrets  of  ibiftbome,  tDat  diey  are  boubic 
to  tDat  rbDicD  is:  tmotb  tDcrcftnctDat 
Oob  eractetDof  tDcc  leffe  then  thine  uu* 

QUltltde/erueth. 

7  Canftthou  bp fcarcDingfinbe  out 
<5obf  eanft  tDou  finbe  out  tDe  3Unngl> 
tic  bnto  perfection* 

8  it  is  tasljigD  ashcauen,tbhatcanft 
thouboc;  beeper  then  Dell ,  ibDatcanft 
thonKnoib* 

9  XDc  meafure  tDerof  is  longer  tDtn 
the  earth,anbb2oabcr  then  the  fra. 

10  3fhe||entoff,anbfl)utbp,  02  ga- 
tDer  together ,  then  t  tbDo  can  Dmber 
him* 

n  5Po2,DcfenoibetDbaincmen:Dec 
ftethrbicKebncfft  alfo,  VbillDcnottDcn 
confiberit; 

it  if 02 1  bainc  man  iboulb  be  tbuc 
tDougD  man  be  borne  like  a  unlbc  affes 
coult. 

13  5Jf  tDou  prepare  tDine  Deart,  anb 
(rrctcDouttDmeDanbstoibarbDim: 

14. 3JfiniquiticbcintDintDanb,put 
it  farre  aibap ,  anb  let  not  Vbicaebnes 
btbell  in  tD  p  tabernacles. 

15  5f02  tDen  n>alt  tDou  lift  bptDr  race 
lbitDout  fpot,  pea  tDou  ftjalt  be  Ocbfafl, 
aubfDaltnotfeare: 

i6  JSecaufc  tDou  (halt  fo;gttthytnt 
fety,  ano  remember  «  as  tbaterstDat 
paifearoav: 

17  3lnb  thine  age  tfDalbe  clearer  then 
tDenooncbap  ;tDoutt)ait  (Dine  foojtD, 
tDou  fbait  be  as  tDe  morning. 

18  3nb  tDou  fljatt  be  fecurc  becaufe 
there  is  Dope ,  pea  thou  (halt  bigge  *■ 
bout  thee ,  and  thou  (halt  tafte  th?  reQm 
fafrtp. 

19  *^lfo  tDou  (halt  ipe  bottme,  anb 
none  (hall  matte  tljee  afraib ;  pea  manp 
ID  all  t  n  lab  c  f uitc  bnto  tl)cc . 

io  25uttDcepcsoftDetbicbebn)aii 
faiie ,  anb  t  thep  (hall  not  efcape ,  anb 
*  their  hope  thai!  be  as  t$t  \\  giuuig  bp  of 
thcgholt. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1    lob  mainteineth  himfelte  againilhis  friends 
tlutreprouehim.   7  Heacknowjedgeihthc 


\o,,4t* 


\Hebr.the 
heights  of 
hcauen. 


\^Or,mjltea 
change. 
\Hcbr.  who 
C.in  tnrr.e 


t  Hctr. 
empuc. 


£;eneralldo<flrineotGodsomniporeiKie, 


%t® 


anfe  abate 

ibtrwont- 

day. 


•Lcuit.  15 

f  HJr.  tx. 
(real  thy 
fact. 

\Hetfa.>" 
fcallpcnjh 
fitm'hfn. 
'Chap.3. 
14.  indi8. 

x+        «■ 

of  breath. 


35  2 


Gods  perfection.  lob.  lobs  confidence. 


heart* 
\Htb.lfall 
not  lovetr 
then  you. 
|  Heb.  fpith 
whomzxt 
not  fuch  as 
theft ? 


\Heb.ril 
ftefb  of  man. 

•Cha.34-3- 

\Heb.pi- 

late. 


\\Tbatii, 

with  God. 

Mia.zi.aa. 

'Apoc  3.7. 

t  Heb.  vpm 


"Clu.u.9- 
f  Heb.  the 
lip  of  the 
flithfnll. 


Or,  loofeth 
ihrgtrdleof 
hrjhonr. 


03)  3Jobanfocrcb,  anb 
fayb, 
2  i5oboubtbutyeaie 

tf)c  people,  anblbifebomc 
fbaiibieibitbyou. 

3  25ut  3  bauc  t  bnbcruanbing  as 
melt  as  yon,  1 3}  am  not  infectour  to 
you  :  yea ,  t  tbljo  bnotbetb  not  fuel) 
tbu»gsastbefe< 

4.  3f  am  as  one  mocbeb  of  bis  neigh- 
bour, who  calietbbpottd5ob>anbbean* 
ftucretb  bun :  tbe  iutt  bppgbt  man  is 
laugbcbtoftome. 

<,  $c  that  ts  rcaby  to  ttippc  vuttb  his 
f  cet,ts  as  a  lamp  bcfpifeb  in  tl)c  thought 
of  him  that  tsat cafe. 

6  Xbe  tabernacles  of  robbcrsp?o£ 
per,  anb  tbey  that  pzouofce  (Sob  are  fc« 
cure,  into  lbbofe  banb  (Sob  bjtlngetb 

abundantly. 

7  2Sutafctenott)tbebcafts,anotbey 
(ball  teach  tbee;  anb  tbefoulcs  of  the 
aire,  anb  ttjcp  fball  telltbee. 

8  j©itpeaftctotDceartb,anbttfl)all 
teach  thee ;  anb  the  fitbes  oftbe  tea  (ball 
Declare  bnto  thee. 

9  aabo  unoibrtli  not  m  all  theft, 
that  the  banb  of  tt)c  SLjdib©  bath 
ttuougbt  tins* 

10  5ln  lbbofe  banb  ■?  the  j|  foule  of 
cucry  lining  thing,  anb  the  tyeatb  of 
tallmanftmbe. 

n  *2>octbnottbeeatetriciuo;tbcs* 
anb  the  t  moutl)  taftc  bis  mcate  < 

12  i®itb  the  ancient  is  ibifcbomc,anb 
micngtbofDaycs,bnberttanDing. 

13  nattbUbimisibifcbomef  Qccugtb, 
be  bath  counfieU  anb  bnberttanbing. 

14  *2BebolD,beb,teafcctbDoronc,anD 
it  cannot  be  built  againc :  bee  *  (buttetl) 
t  bp  a  man,anb  there  can  be  no  opening. 

15  aBcboiojhee  untbboiDctbtbeiba* 
tcts ,  anb  they  &ne  bp :  alfo  bee  fcnbctlj 
tbcmout,anDtbcyoucrturnetbeeatfb. 

i6  i©itl)!)im'sftrcngtbfVbifcbome: 
tl)cbecciueb,anbtbebetciuer,arebis. 

1 7  ©clcabetb  counfcllersarbay  fpofc 
leb,  anbmaftetb  the  "jJnbgts  fooles. 

is  Dcioofcti)  the  bono  of  lungs,  anb 
girbctb  tbcit  lotncs  lbitb  a  gtrblc. 

19  5>cleaDctb0nncesarbayfpoileb, 
anboucrtbjoibctl)  tbe  migbtte. 

20  *  ti?e vemooueti)  aitoay  t tbe fpcctb 
of  tbe  truftic ,  anb  tafcetb  aibay  the  bn= 
Oerflantmigoffbc  ageb. 

21  $>c  pottijcfb  contempt  bponpnn- 
ecs,  anb  ||  ibeabenctb  tbe  ftccngtt)  of 
tbcmigbttc. 

2z  tycemfcoucretbbccpetbingsout 


'of  barUeneffc,  anb  bnngctb  out  to  light 
tt)cu>Doib  of  Death. 

23  5)cmcctafctl)  tbe  nations,  anb Dt^ 
ftroyetb  them:  Dec  tniargctb  ti)t  natt* 
ons,  anb  t  ftcaittnetb  them  asaine. 

24  $e  tabetl)  atbay  tbe  heart  of  tbe 
cbicfc  of  tbe  peopleoftfje  earth,  anb 
caufctb  them  to  ibanbcr  in  a  vbilbctncs 

where  there  is  HO  VD&p* 

x5  Itbc^gropemtbcDar&eajitbout 
Sigbt,anbbccmabetl)tt)emto  tflagget 
imea  b;unbenman. 

CHAP.   XIII. 

l  lob  rcprooueth  his  friends  of  partialitie.  14 
He  profefleth  his  confidence  in  God:  10  and 
ciureateth  to  knowe  his  ownc  finnes>  and 
Gods  purpofe  in  afflicting  him. 

"Jj©e,minecyel)atf)fe«neau 
tins,  mine  care  ftatftbearb 

•anbbnbetftoobit. 
2  j©batpee&notb,the 

lfamefioc3lbno»3alfo,3l 
am  not  tnferiouc  bnto  you. 

5  &uretp3iboulbfpcaaetof!)e3fr 
mtgbty,?3)bcfireto  rcafonibitb  <5ob. 

4  25utyearefo?getsoflics,  yccate 
all  ^byfictans  of  no  baiue. 

$  4Dtbat  you  lboulb  altogether  bolb 
your  peace,?  it  Ojoulb  be  your  ibifbomc, 

6  ^carc  noib  my  rcafbning,  anb 
Ijearbcn  to  tfjepleabtngsof  my  lips. 

7  i©tlyoufpeafecibtefteblyfo?(E>ob* 
anb  talHcbcceitfuliyfojbun* 

8  aatllyeacceptbispcrfon^lbtUyec 
conttnbfo?d5obi 

9  3lsitgoobti)at!)cefl)Oulbfeareft 
you  out?  02  as  one  man  mocactb.  ano« 
tbec,bocye£bmocftebinK 

10  ^ctt)iiifurriyrep;ooucyou,ifyee 
boe  feerttly  accept  pcrfons. 

11  3>bau  not  bis  crccllencie  mafte 
you  afraiD?  anb  Ijis  b?cab  fall  bpon  y  ow 

12  j3ourrememb,rances  are  use  bnto 
an)cs,your  bobicsto  bobiesof  clay. 

13  t«?olbyourpcace,letmeaionetbat 
3  may  fpeabe ,  anb  let  come  on  mc 
ibbatwiii. 

14  n9bcrcfo?eboe3ftaacmyflcfl)in 
mytcetl),anbputmyute  in  mine  banb; 

15  Xbougb  bee  flay  mcc,  yet  ibiligj 
trull  m  bim :  but  3  M\\  t  maintainc 
mine  ottmevbayesbefoje  bint. 

i6  ^eealfofriaiibemyfaluationtfo? 
an bypocrite fljall not  come befo?cbim. 

17  $care  biligently  my  fpcacl) ,  anb 
my  bcclaration  ibith  your  eares. 

18  2Scbolbnotb,  jlbaueo?bcrcbmv 
caufe,3  anoib  tbat  3  fbaii  be  mmficb. 

19  031)0 


\Heb.lea- 
deth  in. 


dtr. 


\Hei.lef;. 

lent  from  ntc 


\  Heb.  front, 
orargHe. 


►reuicie  Chap.xiiij.xv.  of  mans  life. 


»pa*j.7. 


Heft. 

\Hrb.raU. 


t  Hcb.pmrt 
ofJaycs .? 

■Pfal.101. 

ij.  Sc  144. 

4.  lob.  8. ). 


jHtb.who 
ivtllqtuc? 
•Pill. 51.;, 

Chap. 7. 1 


\Hcb.ceft. 


19  901)0  15  \)tt  that  1MI  plcaD  With 

me  i  fot  nolb  tf  3  holb  mp  tongue  >  3 
fhallgiuctopthcghoft. 

20  <£>nlp  Doc  not  tvbo  things  Pttto 
tnc :  then  Vbill  3  not  hibe  mp  fclfc  from 
thee. 

21  nasthbjauje  tbme  hanb  fat  from 
me: anb  let  not  thpbjcabmaBcmee  & 
fcaib. 

22  Xhen  call  thou ,  anb  3  \blll  an< 
fiber  c :  o?  let  me  fpcafee,  anbanftbcrc 
thou  mee. 

2}  ifjouj  manpareininciniquitiesanb 
finnes  *  mafte  mcc  tolmolbemptranf 
grcfuon,anbmpRnne. 

24  nahcrefojc  Dtoefl  thou  thp  fate, 
ano  holbcft  me  to;  thine  encinte; 

ij  naiit  thou  tycaKe  a  leafc  onucn  to 
anb  fro  <  anb  Unit  thou  purine  thebaic 
fhibble^ 

26  foi  thou  ttmteft bitter things  a 
gainftmee  anD*maRcftmeto  pofTcffe 
the  iniquities  of  in?  pouth. 

27  1£hou  putteft  mp  feete  alto  in 
the  ttotftcs ,  anb  t  loofeeft  nattotbl^  tin- 
to  allmppathes^houfettefta  pjinttop? 
on  thethcciesofmp  feete. 

28  anOhee,asarottmthingconfu* 
metf),  as  a  garment  that  is  moth-eaten. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

1  lob  intrca  teth  God  tor  fauoui  ,by  che  fhortnes 
of  life,  and  certainty  of  death.  7  Though 
life  once  loft  be  irrccouerable,  yethewaiteth 
for  his  change.  16  Byfinne  the  Cteature  is 
fubieift  to  corruption. 

31  iH  that  is  borne  of  a 
tt>oman,iStofftro  napes, 
ana  full  of  trouble. 

2  *$cecommethto;tth 
liKca  floU»cr,anbistut 
bourne:  he  fleetlj  alto,  as  a 

fyabDoU)  anb  tontmucth  not. 
j   ano  boett  thou  open  thine  eics 

Pponfuch  an  one,  anbbnngefrmeinto 

lubgmtntttiitljtheei 

4  t  j©i)o  *  tan  tying  a  tleane  thing 
outofannnclcanei  not  one. 

5  *^>eeinghiSbaiesareDetctmtneb, 
the  number  of  his  moncths  are  tbith 
thee,  thou  haft  appointeb  his  bounbs 
that  he  cannot  paffe. 

6  %mnt  from  him  that  hce  map 
t  reft,tinhc  fhall  at  compltfh,  asan  hrte= 

lmg,htsbap. 

7  5?o2thcreishoptbfa  tree,  ifitbc 
cut  bourne,  that  it  Mil  fpzoutagaine, 
anb  that  the  tenber  b?anch  thereof  ibill 
notceafc. 


8  though  the  roote  thereof  mare 
olbm  the  earth ,  anb  theftocfee  thereof 
biemthegrounb: 

9  Yet  thzough  the  fent  of  mater  it 
Hull  bub,  anbbnng  touhboughesu&e 
a  plant. 

io  2Sutmaitbpeth,anDtn)aftetha' 
ibap  i  pca,man  giucth  up  the  ghoft,  anb 
ftthcrcisheei 

11  as  the  maters  failc  from  the  tea, 
anb  the  floub  becapeth  anb  b.jpeth  bp : 

12  «So  man  lyeth  bourne,  anb  rueth 
not,  nil  the  heauensbc  nomoze,  ttjrp 
(hall  not  avbafec  no?  bee  raifeb  out  of 
their  flcepe. 

15  ^Dthatthou  tboulbefthibemeein 
the  graue,  that  thoumoulbcftttecpeme 
fecrct,  tmtill  thp  Vbjath  bee  paft,  that 
thou  tt>oulbcft  appoint  me  a  fet  time, 
anb  remember  me. 

14  3JfamanDic,fbailheltucagatfie? 
^11  the  bapes  of  mp  appointeb  time  ibill 
35  uwite,  till  mp  change  come. 

15  ILhoufhalt  tali,  anb  Urbilian^ 
fiber  thee :  thou  ibtlt  haue  a  beftre  to  the 
mozac  of  thine  hanbs. 

16  *fot  novbc  thou  numbzeft  mp 
fteppes,  bocftthou  not  match  ouctmp 
Rnncf 

17  ^ptranfgreulionisfcalcbbpma 
bagge,  anb  thou  foftcfl:  Ppmme  nte 
quitic. 

18  anb  furelp  the  mountainc  falling 
tcommeth  to  nought :  anb  the  rortte  is 
remoueb  outofhisplace. 

19  Xhe  roatcrstbearc  the  flones, 
thoutinafheltaibap  the  things  ibhich 
groibcout  of  the  bull  of  the  earth,  anb 
thou  beftropcfl  the  hope  of  man. 

20  1Ehou  pzeuailcft  fo?  cucr  agamft 
him,anbhee  pafTcth :  thou  djangctt  his 
coimtenanccanb  fettbefthint  attiap. 

21  ^is  tonnes  come  to  honour,anb 
heBnotbcthitnotanDtheparcbzought 
Iotbe,butheperceiueth'tnot  of  them. 

22  25ut  his  flefl)  Ppon  l)tm  flwll  haue 
patne,  anb  hts  toulc  ttithm  h«n  than 
mourue. 

CHAP.  XV. 

1  Eliphaz  reproueth  lob  of  impiety  in  iuifify- 
inghtmfdte.  17  He  prouerh  byTiadioon 
the  vncjuietnes  ot  wicked  men. 

$cn  anftbereb  tflipftaj 
1  thdCcmanitcauofaib, 

2  s>houlbaUiifcman 
bttcr  t  bamc  unoiulcbge, 
anb  fill  his  btllp  untlj 


\Hib.u 

venkfttidyor 
i-atsjf. 


thcCaftibmbc; 


1,  s>houib 


"Pfal.!3«.2 


t  Bcb.fi- 
dnh. 


t  Heb.  oner- 
fintsfl 


b.Kr.cW 


Caufeswhy 


lob.        lob  is  reprehended. 


\Hch.ihex 

||  Or.jpecck 

■\Hehu- 

chtth. 


•Rom.!:. 
34- 


•Chap.!4- 
4.1. lung.?. 
46.i.chton. 
<5.;d.pfal. 
14.}.  prou. 
Jo.o.i.iohn 
1.8. 
■Iob-j.18. 


'aund  of 
fear  a. 


r. 


3  £>houlb  hec  rcafon  rbith  bnpjofi- 
tablc  tafec  *  0?  ibith  fpeertjes  Xbhcrc; 
lDittilic  cauDocnogooti^ 

4  mUhoucattcftoffftare,anbre* 
ttrauictt  1 1  pjapcr  before  «5ob. 

5  jfonhpmotnljttottcreththineink 
quitic,  anb thou  chootcft  the  tongue  of 
the  crafhe. 

6  Xhtncotbne  mouth  conbemntth 
thee,  anbnot'J  :pcathtncolbneuppes 
trihficagamlUbce. 

7  art  thou  the  6rft  man  that  ibas 
borne  i  0;  Ibaft  thou  mate  before  rhc 

htllCSi 

8  *$aflthouhcarbthefcerttof  <Eote 
and  boeft  thou  rcftrattu*  vutfebome  to 
thpfclfe* 

9  ©!)atnuouifftrl)outi)cUiiicbnoii> 
not^whatbnbcrttanbcftthou,  tt>hich  is 
notinbs; 

10  naithbsatcboththegtaphcaoco, 
anb  berp  ageb  mcn,much  elbcr  then  thp 
father. 

11  arc  the  tonfoiations  of  (Sobfmaii 
tuith  thee  <  is  there  anp  fecret  thing 
lbitl)tftcc< 

ii  i©!)?  Doett)  thine  heart  rarie  thee 
avbap  *  anb  lbljat  boc  thine  epes  tbmac 
at, 

13  Chat  thou  tutnett  thp  fpirit  & 
gamft<sob,  anb  letteft  fuch  ibo?bs  goc 
out  of  thp  mouth; 

14.  *  sehat  >5  man,  that  he  fhoulb  be 
cleaner  anbhetbhichtsbome  of  aviso 
man,  that  l)c  tboulb  be  righteous  t 

15  *2Scholbc,  he  putteth  no  tcuft  in 
his  £>aints,  pea,  the  ijeauens  arc  not 
cleanc  in  his  fight. 

i6  ^ottmuichnuwabominablcanb 
ftlthicisman,  tbhichbnn&cth  imqutttc 
uneibater; 

17  3ibuitbcibthcc,hcaremc,anb 
thatibhichlJhaucfccnc.lJibtlbceiare, 

18  naDitnvbife men !)auctolbe from 
their  fathers,  anb  haucnothtbu : 

19  tmntolbljom  alone  the  earth  Ibas 
giucu,  ano  no  ftranget  pafleb  among 
them. 

10  %i)t  vuirscb  man  trauailcfh  Vbitlj 
paine  all  his  oapes,  anb  the  number  of 
peer  cs  is  hibben  to  the  oppjeffour. 

1 1  1 3  ujcabfull  founo  is  m  his  carts , 
in  pjofpcritic  the  bcttropcr  (hall  come 
bponhtm. 

2i  i)t  bclccucth  not  that  he  than  re* 
tumcout  of  barftencfle,  anbftcisitoao 
tcbfo?,oftl)cfroo2b. 

ii  i)t  lbanbcrethabtoab  foi  bzeab, 
faying  ©Dcrc  is  it?  hcfenoVbeth  that  the 


bap  of  barfeenes  is  reabp  at  hts  hanb. 

24  Xroublcanbanguifb  (ball  mane 
him  afratb.  they  (ban  pjeuailc  againtt 
him,  as  a  femg  reabp  to  the  battcll. 

25  if  o?  he  ftrcttheth  out  his  hanb  a* 
gauttt  <Sob,  anb  ftrcngthcnctl)  himfelfe 
againttthcaimightie. 

26  j^crunnethbponhim,euenonhis 
nccbe,  Upon  the  thicUe  boflcs  of  his 
bur&lcrs : 

27  2Secaufchccouercthhtsfaccibifh 
bisfatncfle,  anb  mafecth  tollops  of  fat 
onhisflanltes. 

23  3nb  he  bruelleth  in  bcfoiate  cities, 
and  m  houfes  ibhich  no  man  mhabitcth , 
rbhich  are  r cab?  to  become  heapes. 

19  $etyallnotbcnch,neuhcr(baii 
his  fubOancc  contmue ,  neither  fha!i? 
he  prolong  the  perfection  thereof  bpon 
the  earth. 

30  i^e  (hall  not  bepart  out  of  barfec* 
ncOc,  the  flame  (hall  bnc  bp  his  bmnt 
ches,  anb  bp  the  tycatt)  of  h»s  mouth 
lhaiihcgocatbap. 

31  ?Letnothimthatisbeceiueb,truft 
m  banitte :  (01  bamtie  fhaibe  hisrecom- 
pence. 

32  3Itfhall  be  ]| accomplifhcb  before 
his  time,  anb  his  btanch  thall  not  bee 
grecne. 

33  ^clhailbaRe  off  his  bnrtpe  grape 
asthetltncanbfbailcaftoff  h«sfloU);c 
asthe«©uuc. 

34  iFo?  the  congregation  of  hppo* 
critcs  frail  betefolatc,  anb  fire  (hail  con- 
fume  the  tabernacles  of  bnbene. 

35  Chep  conceiue  mu'chtefc,  *  anb 
bjmgfozth  llbanme,  anbthcir  beilpp^e- 
partthbeceit. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  lob  reproucth  his  friends  of  vnmercifulnefle. 
7  Hefheweth  thepitifulneffcof  hiscaff.  17 
He  maintaineth  hii  innocencie. 

$en  3fob  anunercb,  anb 
faib, 

2  3!hauchearbmanp 
fuel)  things :  Ii  *  1  inferable 
comforters  arc  pe  all. 

3  jSshalltbatneUJOitbshaueanenbc? 
ox  tbhat  cmbolbcneth  thee ,  that  thou 
anfrocrclh 

4  3  alfo  coulbfpeabe  as  pec  doe  if 
pour  foiilc  iberc  in  mp  foules  Ceab,  5 
coulb  heape  bp  tbo;bs  again  fl  pou ,  anb 
fhaBcmmcheabatpou. 

5  ButJUboulbftrengthenpouttuth 
mp  mouth,  anb  the  moumg  of  mp  lips 

Qioulb 


\\Or,t$Uff. 


*Efay50.4 

pfal.7.l5. 

\\Orttrtt^Hi~ 


\\Or,lrcH- 

blefome. 

'  Chap.t3. 

4- 

t  Heb.vords 

efwwd. 


Iobreckonethvp      Chap.xvij.  his  many  afltoions. 


f  Hcb.  what 

foetbfrom 

me? 


t  Hehr.  hath 
(hut  me  vp. 


f  Heir,  in 

the  htgh  pla 
cei. 

mjfcorners. 


\\Or,frtcnJ. 
T  HcB.yeeres 
cfrmmber. 


(bOUlD  aflraagC  your  gnefe. 

6  Xhough  3  fpca&c ,  mp  gticfc  is 
not  afltoageD :  anD  though  3  foibeare, 
tibhatamjjeafeb; 

7  zButnofl)  he  hath  mabe  mc  tbea- 
rp:  thou  haftmaDe  Defoiatc  ai  mp  com- 
panic. 

8  3tnD  thou  haft  filleo  mcc  ibith 

rb^UlCblCS ,  which  Ifi  a  ttJltnCffe  agamrt  me  : 

anbmp  leanncfle  rtfuigbptnmc ,  bea- 
reth  ttntneftc  to  nipfacc. 

9  $e  tcacctb  me  m  his  vomit) ,  rbho 
hatcthmc:  hcgnaflbcth  bponmetbtth 
his  teeth  mine  cncmp  (harpenctb  his 
cpcsbponme. 

10  XhephauegapcD  bponmetbtth 
their  mouth,  thcphaucfmittenmcbp* 
onthcchccltcrepjochtullp ,  thcphauc 
gathercb  thcmfclucs  together  agamft 
tnee. 

ir  ©oDthathDcliurrebmetothebn; 
goDIp,anD  turucD  me  ouer  into  the 
hanDsofthctbtcftcD. 

n  JJibasateafcbuthehathbjolicn 
mc  alunDer  the  hath  alio  taben  mc  bp 
mp  necftc,anb  fhaaen  mc  to  pieces,  ano 
fctmcbpfojhismarRC. 

i}  $hs  archers  compafTc  mc  ronno 
about,  he  cleaneth  mp  temes  afunDcr, 
anb  bocth  not  fpare  he  poitycth  out 
mpgailbponthegrounD. 

14  $cbtea&cthniclbith  breach  bpon 
bjcach,he  runneth  bpon  me  Itbea  giant. 

15  3  hauefotbeb  facbcloth  bpon  mp 
fBtn.anb  bcfileb  mp  home  in  theDuft. 

16  fi9p  face  is  foible  Kbith  keeping, 
anb  on  mine  cpe  libs  is  the  ujabovb  of 

Death; 

17  #ot  fo?  anp  (ntuftice  in  mine 
hanbs :  alfo  mp  praper  is  pure. 

is  £>  earth  coucr  not  thoumpblooD, 
anb  let  mp  crp  haue  no  place. 

19  3ltfo  nott) ,  bcholbmpibitncucis 
in  heauen,  anb  mp  rccojo  *  f  on  high. 

20  fl)9p  frienbs  t  fcome  me :  but  mine 
epe  poro?cth  out  teares  bnto  ©ob. 

%i  ©thatoncmightpieabfojaman 
Vbith  ©ob ,  as  a  man  pieadeth  fo?  his 
||  neighbour. 

■lx  oahen  t  a  tetb  pecrcs  are  come, 
then^lhaligocthcibapwhcncejKhail 

notreturne. 

CHAP.   XVII. 

lob  appea'eth  from  men  to  God.  6  Thevn- 
mercifull  dealing  of  men  with  the  airlifted, 
mayaftonifh,  but  not  difcouiage  the  righte- 
ous.   11  Hishopcisnotinli(e,butindeath. 


ja  1 1  breath  is  corrupt,  mp 
bapes  arc  ertmct  ,  the 

granesare  ready  fojme. 

2     Are  there  not  mOtfc 

_ .  crsttJith  mee  i  anb  bocth 
not  mine  epet  continue  in  their  p?ouo= 
cation  i 

j  !Lapbo!bncnoi[b,putmcinafuTt 
tie ibith  thee,  ibho  >s  he  that  xutli  ttnhc 
hanbs  unth  me  i 

4-  fm  thou  haft  hib  their  heart  from 
bnbcrftanbing  :  therefore  (halt  thou 
not  eralt  them. 

5  $cc  that  fpcabeth  flatterp  to  his 
frienbs,  cuen  the  t^es  of  his  chtlbren 
(hall  fane. 

6  $c  hath  mabe  me  alfo  a  bp  tborb 
of  thcpcopicanb  ||afo?etimc3J  was  as 
a  tablet, 

7  ^ineepc  alfo  is  bimmebpreafon 
of  forroib ,  anb  all  ||  mp  members  are  as 
athabott). 

8  Upright  men  0)311  be  aftonieb  at 
this ,  anb  the  innocent  (hall  ftirre  bp 
htmfelfc  agamft  the  hppocrite. 

9  Xhc  righteous  alfo  (hall  holb  on 
his  ibap.anb  he  that  hath  cleane  hanbs 
t  (haibc  ftronger  ,anb  ftconger. 

10  2i5ut  as  for  pou  all ,  Doc  pou  re- 
turne,  anb  come  noib,for  3  cannot  finb 
one  Vbife  man  among  pou. 

ii  £t=)p  bapes  are  pall ,  mp  purpofes 
arebjofeen  off ,  cuen  tthe  thoughts  of 
mp  heart: 

n  Xhep  change  the  night  into  bap : 
the  light  is  t  (bojt,becaufe  of  barbnes. 

ij  3f  3  waite ,  the  grauc  is  mine 
houfc:  3  haue  mabe  mp  beDDc  in  the 
Darftnefle. 

14  3  haue  tfaiD  to  corruption,  lEhou 
an  mp  father :  to  the  tbomie/rhou  an  mp 
mother,  anDmpCfter. 

\<,  3lnD  Vbhcre  is  norb  mp  hope*  as 
fo?mpbope,ibbo  fljail  fee  it* 

i6  lEhep  (hall  goe  Dotbnc  to  the 
barrcs  of  the  pit,tb|)en our  teft  together 
isuithebuft. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

1    Bildad  reproueth  lob  of  preemption  andim- 
patiencie.  5  The  calamities  of  the  wicked. 

«^«^^a  ^enanfmereD  25UDaDthc 
^>hnhitcanDfaiD, 

X     $0\b  long  will  it  bee, 

ere  pou  malic  an  niDc  of 
VbojDs^arHcanD  aftcr^ 
ibarDsibeunllfpeafte. 

j    !®herefo2C  are  tbee  countcb  as 
beafts,  and  reputcDbilcuipourCghtf 
±M 


rU  ia  IpC/tt. 


tHciU^r 


\\Or,btfcre 
hem. 


tlnHfhtt. 


Hchr.ftjrf 
addfjlrcgth. 


t  Hehrthe 
f  Heb.neete 


\Heb.crteJ, 
or  alUd. 


The  wicked  profper.      lob.  All  alike  in  death. 


\Hckfar. 

tened. 

t  Hth.  looks 

Vntomc. 


'Pfil.I7. 

io.  and  7  j 
1  2. icre.i 2, 
t.tub.i-i£- 


\Hch.are 

peace  from 
fare. 


I  Or,  n 
mirth. 


Chip.  23. 
'7- 


[  Or,  {.impt, 


\:hr  <ltt 

fab  <*mvj  > 
\Thdtiijibi 

tunipmitnt 
of  bit  iniani 


CHAP.   XXL 

lob  (heweth  that  euen  in  the  iudgement  of 
maiijhehathreafontobegiieued.  7  Some- 
times the  wicked  doefoprofper,  as  they  de- 
fpifc  God,  16  Sometime  their  defrruftion 
is  manifeit.  11  The  happy  and  vnhappy  are 
alike  in  death.  17  The  iudgement  ot  the 
wicked  is  in  another  world. 

s>  ttlt  gjob  anfroctco ,  ano 
SrfayO, 
J3£    z  ijeateoiugcntly  my 

sN  fw  M  fyufy  >anl)  let  ^IS  tie  ?ouc 

SsrW^g^a.  confolartons. 


3  &uf?crmctbat3JmayfpcaBC,ano 
after  that  3  banc  fpoUcn,  mocae-  on. 

4  3(0  fo:  mcc ,  is  my  complaint  to 
man;  ano  if  it  werefo ,  u>l)y  (bouio  not 
myfpiritbcttroublcO; 

5  * £0arac  mcc ,  ano  be  aftonifbeo, 
ano  lay  your  nano  bpon  you.  mouth. 

6  Cncn  iui)cn  5  remonber,  3J  am 
afraio,  ano  troubling  tafectl)  Ijoiocon 
my  flcflh,. 

7  *n9ljcrcfo?coocrl)cu)icRcoliue, 
bccomeolo,yca,atcniigbnctnpoU)cr; 

s  Xbor  fecoc  10  cftabltfbco  m  tbot 
fight  Uutl)  tljeni,ano  tljeir  o&Tpmig  be- 
fore tlmr  eyes. 

9  Xbot Ijoufcs  arc t  fafc  from fcarc, 
neither  >stncroo  of  <3oD  bpon  tljem. 

10  Xijcir  bull  gotoicth  ano  failctl) 
not ,  trior  com  calucrb ,  ano  caftctlj  not 
l)cr  caifc. 

1 1  Xbey  foio  fooali  tbOr  little  ones 
line  a  flot&c,  ano  thor  cbilo?cn  oancc. 

12  %l)ty take tl)c ttnrtwli ano barpc, 
ano  rooyce  attbefouno  oftbeojganc. 

ij  ITDcy  fpcuo  tl)or  oaies  |)m  Vbcaltli, 
ano  m  a  moment  goc  oolbnc  to  the 
gcauc. 

14  *  Xbcrcfojc  they  fay  tmto  ©00, 
2>epart  from  bstfoube  ocfircnot  the 
bnoiblcogc  of  thy  ibayes. 

15  ttwat  is  the  aitmgbrte,  that  lbcc 
(houlD  feme  him  <  ano  ibrjat  pzoftte 
fl)onlo  ibe  ljauctf  lbcpjay  Onto  him  * 

is  floe,  trmr  5000  a  not  in  their 
bono ,  tlje  connfcll  of  tt)c  lbiruco  10  farrc 
frommc. 

17  i)oib  oft  10  tt)t  |j  canoic  of  the 
lbtclteo  put  out;  anohow  oft  commeth 
tiior  oelrtuction  bpon  tbon  t  God  Oiftrt 
butcth  fouoibcs  m  Ins  anger. 

is  Xlicy  arc  as  (rubble  before  tlie 
mmoe ,  ano  as  djarTc  tljat  the  (tonne 
tcartethaibay. 

19  <300  laycth  bp  l)i0 1 1  imcnutic  fo: 


hi0  cbiiorcn :  he  rcibaroetl)  him,  ano  he 
(haillmotbit. 

20  i?i0eyc0  (hall  fee  hi0Deftruction, 
ano  be  (ball  onnftc  of  the  *b;tath  of  the 
3Umigbtic. 

21  5fo;  ibhat  plcafure  hath  be  in  hi0 
houfe  after  him,  when  the  number  of 
hi0  moncths  10  tut  offin  the  mtooeftt- 

22  <S>bail  any  tcatf)  <£>oo  tmottjlcoge 
fcong  He  luogob  tljofe  that  arehigh. 

23  «©ne  oieth  t  in  hi0  full  ttrcngtb, 
bong  ibbolly  at  cafe  ano  quiet. 

24  J?t0||b2eaa0arcfiiiiofmilfte,ano 
IJ10  bonc0are  moifteneo  lbtth  marroib. 

25  3nD  another  Oieth  in  the  bitter 
ncvTc  of  hi0  foulc,ano  neuer  catctlj  mttb 
plcafure. 

26  XbeyfballltcootbncaiiKcintbc 
bud,  ano  tl)cibO2me0  than  touer  them. 

27  25cljolo,3lRnoU)yourthongl)t0, 
ano  the  Ocuiec0  which  yet  ityongfuliy 
imagine  againft  me. 

28  ifojyc  fay ,  Habere isthehoufc of 
the  pjtnec  <  ano  ibherc  are  t  the  oujelling 
piacc0oftheVbicfecOi 

29  ^aue  ye  not  afneo  them  that  goc 
bytljcibayiranoooe  yenotfenomtljor 
toHcn0i 

jo  *  Xhat  the  lbicaco  10  rcferuco  to 
thcoay  of  oeftrnctionT  thev  ftau  bee 
brought  foozth  to  t  tlie  oay  of  ib?ath. 

ji  I©ho(haliocclarehi0maytohi0 
face;  ano  mho  (hall  repay  him  whatijc 
hath  oone < 

j2  pet  ihall  hec  be  brought  to  the 
tgraue.f  (hailt  roname  intljctombe. 

3  j  %i)c  tlouoc0  of  the  bailey  fbaibc 
fmeoc  bnto  h»m,  anOcucry  man  (hall 
ojaib  after  him,a0  there  arc  iratumera? 
ble  before  him. 

34  ^oib  then  comfort  ye  me  in  baine, 
fcong  in  your  anfraerrs  there  remain 
ncthtfalftjooo; 

CHAP.    XXII. 

Eliphaz  fhewedi  that  mans  goodnefle  profi- 
tcthnotGod.  5  Heeaccufedi  Iobpf  diuers 
Cnnes.  u  He  exhorteth  him  to  repentance, 
widipromifesof  mercy. 

^^^01  (fflipl;a3  the  %m& 
ff5$  mte  anftoercO,anofaiO, 
H^  2  <Ianamanbep?on* 
r^v  table  bnto  <5oO;  a©  Hhec 
tr^tbat  10  ibifc  may  be  profi- 
table bnto  himfclfe. 

3   i^>tt  any  plcafure  to  the  almighty, 

that  thou  art  nglncous  <  o^s  it  game  to 

him.that  tljou  maltclt  thy  ibaies  pofite; 

a  nam 


\Htb.i*bu 

vcTjpcrfc' 

tlion,9rin 

thcjhtngik 

ofbtsperfc- 

flion. 

\\Or,jmi'zr- 

pa/ts. 


\Htblhe 

tent  et  the 
tabernacles 
of  the  jwc- 

ksd. 


'Proltf.4. 


\Hcb.ihe 
day  of 
ictrAlbt. 


\Hcb. 

<rr(WCI. 
\Hrb.  VTAIth 
in  the  beape. 


f  Hcb.trtmj 
grrfm. 


\\0rtfh* 

mjyhe  pro- 

ft ahle,  doth 
bis  goodfttC' 
cejjc  depend 
thereon  ? 


Eliphaz  exhorccth     Chap.xxnj.    lob  to  repentance. 


\Htb.  (hip- 
ped the  cla- 
shes of  the 
ru'Jsed. 


t  rfei.lhe 
run  of  ar me 
\s-Uts.etm* 

n^rttCTAC- 

cepiedfor 
countenance. 


%Heb.the 
head  of  she 
fiarret. 
[J  Or, what. 


]Heb.  &  flood 
vocuposrred 
vpsm  their 
foundation. 
*  Chap.  2 1  - 
1 4- 

\\Or,soshcm 
"Chap.  11. 
16. 


'Pfal. 


°7 


||  Or,  eftate. 

[|  Or,  their 
excclJencie. 

[\Thatu, 
nth  God. 


Cliap.8.5 


\Or,cnthe 


4.  xetU hec  r  epzouc  thee  foi  feace  of 
thec  i  ilnll  tjc  enter  tbirh  thee  into  rnDg- 
menu 

5  3Jsnotthytt>icbcbncffcgtcafcanb 
tl)ine  iniquities  infinite  < 

6  fonhouhafttabenaplebgefrom 
thy  brother  foi  nought,  anb  tftnppen 
the  nabcb  of  their  dotting. 

7  ILhouhattnotgiuenrbatcrtothe 
\bearic  to  bnnbe,  anb  thou  Daft  tbtth- 
holben  tyeab  from  the  hungry. 

8  2Sutasfo2thetmighticman,hee 
hab  the  earth ,  anb  t  the  honourable 
manbtbcitmit. 

9  Xhott  haft  ftnt  ttubolbcs  aibay 
cmptie.anb  the  armes  of  the  fathetleffe 
i)aucbtncb:oucn. 

10  IChercfozcfuarcs  are  rounb  about 
thec,  anb  fubbcu  fear  e  tr  oubleth  thee, 

11  jDjbarbenes  that  thou  canft  not 
fee,  anb  abunbante  of  waters  toucr 
thee, 

iz  isnot<5obinthehetghtofheauew 
anb  beholb  the  t  height  of  the  ftarres 
hoib  high  they  arc. 

13  3nb  thou  fayeff,||$o.b  both  ©ob 
bnonx  can  he  lubge  though  the  bar  be 
tloubti 

14.  Xhicbe  eloubes  arc  a  touering  to 
himthathefcethnot,  anb  heeibaibcth 
m  the  circuit  of  hcauen. 

H  ^aft  thou  markeb  the  olbc  tbay 
tbhtch  ttncbcb  men  haue  troben  < 

16  nshieh  iberc  tut  botbne  out  of 
time,  t  rbhofe  founbatton  ibas  ouer* 
flotbenibithafioob. 

17  *  uahtth  faib  bnto  <5ob ,  SDcpatt 
frombs,  anb  \bhat  can  the  aimightic 
boc||foKhem; 

is  *J3et  he  filleb  their  houfcstbith 
goob  things :  but  the  counfetl  of  the 
ibicfteb  isfarrc  from  me. 

19  *%he  righteous  fee  it,  anb  are 
glab,  anb  the  tnnocent  laugh  them  to 
fcome 

20  xehereas  our  llfubftance  is  not 
cut  bourne,  but  the  ||  remnant  of  them 
thence  confumeth 

xi  2cquatntnorbthyfelfcttrith|frjtm, 
anb  be  at  peace :  thereby  goob  fhai  come 
bnto  thee. 

ii  &eceiue, "Jpzay thec,  the flattie 
from  Ins  mouth ,  anb  lay  bp  his  ttJbzbs 
in  thine  heart. 

13  *3fthourerametotheSlmigh' 
tie,  thou  fhait  be  built  bp,thou  fhalt  put 
aibay  iniqutne  farrc  from  thy  taber 
nacles. 

24  Xhenfbaitthouiaybpgoibellas 


bafhanb  the  gold  of  iDphir  as  the  ftones 

Of  tlKbZOOtJCS. 

15  Pea  the  3lnughtic  fljail  bee  thy 

1 1  befence,  anb  thou  fbait  haue  t  plenty  of 
filuer. 

16  5fo;  then  fljait  thou  haue  thp  be- 
light  m  the  ^imightie,  anb  u)ait  lift  bp 
thy  face  bnto  C5ob. 

17  Xhou fhalt  mabc thy p:arer bn- 
to him3nbhcfhaiihearethce,aub  thou 
fhalt  pay  thy  boibcs. 

18  Zhou  fhalt  aifo  bectcc  a  thing, 
anbu  fhai  be  eftabutheb  bnto  thec :  anb 
the  nghtfyall  thine  bpon  thy  ttmyes. 

19  nahen  men  arc  caft  botbne,  then 
thou  (halt  fay,  inhere  is  lifting  bp :  anb 
he  fball  fauc  the  t  humble  perfon. 

30  ||^c(haiibciiucrrhe3Jlanbofthe 
innocenttanb  tt  is  beliuereb  by  the  pure* 
neffe  of  thine  hanbs. 

CHAP.    XXIU. 

1  lob  longeth  to  appeare  before  God  ,  6  in 
confidence  of  his  merae.  8  God  who  is  inui- 
fible,  obferuethourwayes.  11  lobs  innocen- 
cie.    13  Gods  decree  is  immutable. 

V}tn  50b  anftoereb ,  anb 
faib, 

1  <£uen  to  bay  is  my  com* 
plaint  bitter:  mytftrobc  is 
heautcr  then  my  groning. 

3  ^that'jBncibcibherc  31  might 
finb  him '  that  Jf  might  come  euen  to  his 
fcatci 

4  3  Vboulb  ozber  my  caufe  befoje 
him,  anb  fill  my  mouth  tbith  argu- 
ments. 

5  3liboulbBnotothett)02bStt)hich 
hctboulb  anfrocrcmc ,  anbbnberftanb 
ibhat  he  tboulb  fay  bnto  me. 

6  jefflheplcabagainttmettuthhis 
great  poibcr  <  if5o,  but  hee  rboulbput 

ftrengthinmC. 

7  Xhere  the  righteous  might  bif- 
pute  lbith  him  fo  fhoulb  5  be  beliuereb 
foj  euec  from  my  3Jubgc. 

8  26eholb,'3Jgocfo2ibarb,  buthcis 
not  there,  anb  bacutbarb,  but3J  cannot 
pcrcciuchtm: 

9  ^Dnthelcfthandibherchccboerh 
ibojbcbut^cannotbeholbhmKhchi 
bethhimfcife  on  the  right  hand,  that  3 
cannot  fee  h.m. 

io  25ut  he  fenotbeth  Uhe  tbay  that 
"J  tabe :  when  he  hathtrtebme,  3  (hall 
tome  fouh  as  goib. 

ii  iByfoot  hath  hclbhtsfteps,  his 
may  haue  3  bept,  anb  not  bcclmeb. 
^aa  i        u  i!5ei 


\\Or,!old. 
f  Het. finer 
of  flrength. 


\m.hsm 

then  hath 

lort>ee)et. 

\\Orttheiti- 

r.ocent  fhall 

deltHcrthe 

Hand. 


\Hekr.mj 

hand. 


\Heb.tbe 
wot  that  u 
■asth  me. 


frS 


oppi 


rf< 


reision 


lob. 


of  the  wicked. 


bauehid-yOr 
laydvp. 
\\Or,mjnp- 
pointed por- 
tion. 

'  Pfal.  l « s  ■ 


*Dcnt.  19. 
14.  and  27. 

'7- 

I  Or  ,feed 
them. 


^Hebr  mm- 
gledcorr.e, 
r  dredge. 
fHeh-jhe 
wtckfdga- 
therthe  "jirt- 


u  iftcither  haue  3  gone  batfec  from 
thccotnmaunDcnicntofhislippcs.t^i 
haue  cftccincD  the  lbozDs  of  hismouth 
mozc  tilt  n  limp  ncceffarp  food. 

13  But  hec  is  in  one  mmde ,  anD  ttmo 
tantnrnc  Dun  i  anD  what*  ins  fouleDeu 
reth,cuen  that  he  Doeth. 

1+  jfoihepcrfonncththcthingthat 
is  appomteD  fo2  mcc :  anD  man?  fuel) 
tilings  arc  urn!)  nun. 

15  Xhcrcfojcam  3  trouble!)  at  his 
pjcfcncc:  tbhen  3  confibcr  J  am  afraiD 
of  linn. 

i6  foi  <5oD  manetl)  mp  heart  foft, 
anD  tUe  3lmightp  tr  oubleth  me : 

17  25ecaufe  3  mas  not  tut  off  befoze 
tlic  Darimes ,  ne.the.  hath  he  coueceD  the 
Darlincsfrommpface. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

1     V/ickednefle  goeth  often  vnpumfhed.     17 
There  is  a  fecret  Judgement  tor  the  wicked. 

S?p,  feeing  Ximcs  arc  not 
hiDDen  from  the  3Umigl); 
tic,  doc  thep ,  that  BnoVb 
himnot,fcchisDapcs; 
83§&vs>&?&  1  5>omc  rcmooucthe 
*  lanD-  mantes  -,  thep  biolcntlp  taUc  a- 

lPavflOtUS,aUD  I |feCD thereof. 

5  Xl)cv  Dnue  attiap  the  affc  of  the 
fathctleffc ,  tljep  take  the  iDiDoibes  ore 
fozapleoge. 

4  Xhep  turnc  tlic  neeDp  out  of  tlic 
Vbap:  the  poozc  of  the  earth  hiDctftcni* 
felues  together. 

5  25eI)olD ,  as  tbilDe  affes  in  tlic  Dc> 
fart,  goctnepfooith  to  their  ttiozfte,  xv 
fiiigbctmiesfoza  pzap :  the  ttnlDernes 

yeeldethf00Df02tl)Cm  ,  and  f02  their t\)\\ 

Dzen. 

6  Xhep  reape  cucrp  one  l)is  t  come 
intlie  ficlDc :  anD  t  thep  gather  the  bm 
tageofthcilutUeD. 

7  Xhep  caufc  tlic  naltcD  to  lobgc 
Without  clothing ,  that  thep  haue  no  co 
uermgintliecolD. 

8  Xhep  are  Wet  With  the  IhoWzcs 
of  tlic  mountames ,  anD  tmbjace  the 
rotUc  foz  Want  of  a  Inciter. 

9  Xhep  puirttc  the  fatlicrlcfrcfrom 
thebzcuVuiD  takcaplcDgc  ofthepoozc. 

10  Xhep  caufc  him  to  go  naiicD  With 
out  clothing :  ano  thep  tauc  awap  tlic 
flicafc  from  tlic  httngrp, 

11  which  maltc  oplc  Within  tlicir 
uiaiies.mJ  trcaD  thcirWiucpzcflcs^iiD 
fuffec  tnirft. 

1 1  t]3en  gr  oanc  from  out  of  the  citp, 


ano  the  foule  of  the  wounotD  eneth  out: 

pet  ©OD  lapCtl)  not  follP  to  them. 

13  Xhep  are  of  tljofc  that  rcbctl  a; 
gamft  the  light,  thep  unow  not  the 
wapes  thereof,  nozabiDcmthepathcs 
thereof. 

14.  Xhc  murDcrer  rifmg  With  the 
light, Bilieth  thepoozcatiDnccDp  ,  anD 
in  thenight  tsas  a  thicfe. 

is  Xhc  epe  alfo  of  tljc  aDultcrcr  wat^ 
teth  foz  the  twilight,  fapmg ,  iI5o  epe 
(hall  fee  me :  anD  tDifguifeth  his  face. 

i6  3Jn  the  Darltc  thep  Digge  thzougl) 
houfes  which  thtphaD  marbcD  fonhem- 
fclucsmthe  Dap  tunc :  thep  tmoW  not 
the  light. 

17  jfozthemozmngis  tothemcucn 
as  the  fbaDow  of  Dcatl) :  if  one  HttoW 
them.thepare  mthc  tcrrotirs  of  the  (ha 
Dotb  of  Death. 

is  l^ceis  fmift  as  the  maters ,  their 
pottion  is  cutftD  m  the  earth :  Ije  bcljol- 
Dcth  not  the  tbap  of  the  IlmcparDs. 

19  SDioiight  anD  heatc  t  confumc  tljc 
fnoU)  Waters :  fo  doeth  the  graue  ihofe 
which  hanefmncD. 

20  XheU)omben)ailfo2gcthim,thc 
ibozmcfliall  fccD  fiucctlp  on  him  ,  hee 
Q)aiibcno  tnojc  rcmembzcD  ,  anD  Ibip 
ncDncs  fhaibe  bioben  as  a  tree. 

21  i?)ccuillititrcatcth  the  barren,  that 
beared)  not :  auD  Doetl)  not  gooD  to  the 
ibiDotb. 

22  ^eDiatbcth  alfo  the  mightpUiith 
his  potticr :  he  rifcth  Dp,  II  anD  no  man  is 
furcoflifc. 

2}  Though  it  be  giuctt  hun  to  be  m  fafc> 
tp,  lbherconhc  rcfleth-  pet  his  eves  are 
bpon  their  lbapcs. 

24-  Xljcp  arc  cralteD  fo;  a  litlc  ibhilc, 
but  tare  goncauD  bjought  loU) ,  thep 
ar  cttaucn  out  of  the  lbap  as  ai  other,anD 
cutoffasthctopsofthecarcsofcomc. 

25  ^uDifitbcnotfonoUi,  lbholuill 
maltc  nice  a  liar,  anD  niaue  mp  fpcach 
nothing  Vbo:tljf 

CHAP.    XXV. 

Bildad  fhewetli  that  mau  cannot  be  iufti- 
fied  before  God. 

©ctianfmcreDicilDaDthc 
^DuhitcaiiDfaiD: 

1  DoinuuonaiiDfcarc 
.'.icibtthhim,  hecmaueth 
peace  m  his  higl)  places, 
j  51s  there  anp  num 
bcr  of  his  armies j.  anD  bpon  lbhom 
Doeth  not  his  light  anfe; 
4.  *fcott> 


t  H'irfet- 
teth  hit  face 
mfecret. 


t  Heir,  vio- 
lently take 


\\  Or  fie  em 
jieth  net  on 
ovvneA/t". 


t  Hehrjrre 

not. 

t  Heir,  ch- 

fedvp. 


God: 


pow 


er. 


Ch; 


i.H 


"Chap.4- 
17A0  & 
15.14.&C. 


'PfaUa.6. 


j  Or,  with 
the inhabt' 
tanti. 
Tro.lj.ll 


\Rct.vntiU 

theeitdof 
li^hl  with 


\  Net  pride 


4  *$ott»  tljen  cati  manbcctuthaeb 
lbttt)  (Sod  i  01  how  tan  he  be  cleanethat 
is  borne  of  aibomaiw 

5  2Sebolb  cucn  to  the  moont,  anb  it 
Qnneth  not,pca the  ttar  re s  arc  not  pnrc 
in  his  fight. 

6  tyovo  nnich  leffc  man ,  that  is  a 
ttjojmc :  anb  the  fonne  of  man  which  is  a 

"VDO}mti 

CHAP.  xxvr. 

1  lob  reprouint;  the  vncharitable  /pint of  Bil- 
dad,  5  acknowledgedi  the  power  of  God 
to  be  infinite  and  vnlearchable. 

II X  JJob  auftbercb  anb 
fapa, 

2  l?oibeba3thouhelpcb 
him  that  is  untho'utpoibm 
how  faudt  ti)ou  the  acme 
that  hath  no  fircugth* 

J    $0\b  Ijaft  tl)DU  COtmfclICbhim  that 

hath  no  lbifcbomc  i  anb  how  haft  ti)ou 
plentifully  bcciaccb  the  thtng,as  it  is  i 

4  Xo  tbhom  haft  thou  tortcrcb 
ibo^bs  i  anb  tbhofc  fpicit  tame  fcom 
thee? 

5  2t>eaDthingsarefomieDfcombn 
ber  the  lbatcrs,  I!  anb  the  inhabitants 
thereof. 

6  *  $ell  ^  nalteb  before  him,  anb  be- 
ftructton  hath  no  couermg. 

7  ^cftretchethoutthc/Bojrhoucr 
the  emptic  place,  and  hangeth  the  earth 
bpon  nothing. 

8  lm  binbefh  bp  rhelbatcrsin  his 
tljicUe  cIoudb  ,  anb the  cloubisnotccnt 
bnbcrthcm. 

9  J)ee  hol&cth  bacfte  the  face  of  his 
thjonc,  and  fpicabcth  his  cloub  bpon  it. 

10  i^cc  hath  compattco  tljc  ibattrs 
rmtl)  bounbs,  t  btmu  thebapanb  night 
comctoanenb. 

1 1  Xhe  pillars  of  fjeauen  tremble, 
anb  arc  aftomlhcb  at  hisrcpjoofe. 

12  i)cc bimbetl)  tfje  fca ibithhispo; 
ibcr,  anb  bp  his  bnbcrftanbmg  fje  fmi- 
tctb  through f  the  pjoub. 

1  j  Bp  his  fpirtt  he  hath  garmthcb  the 
heauens  ,  his  hanb  Dat^  fonneb  tlje 
crooKcbfcrpent. 

14  Hoc,tl)cfcarepartsofl)iSlbaics, 
bnt  hott)  little  a  portion  is  Dearo  of 
rjitwbut  tlic  thnnDcr  of  his  potter  ibho 
canbnbcrttanb; 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

lob  protefteth  his  fincerity.  8  The  Hypo- 
crite is  without  hope.  1 1  The  blefsings.which 
the  wicked  haue,  are  turned  into  curfes. 


ap.xxvj.xxvi].  Hypocrites  hope 


h 


«fei,  ©omter  ^jobtcontmucb  1 i™ •■■> 
-^htsparablcanbfapb, 

2     As  <5ob  lUietl),  who 

hath  tauen  aibap  mp 
mbgnient,  anb  tlje  %b 
mightp.ibhohathtbejc 


eb  mp  foule, 

3  blithe  ibhilempbjcafh>nnmee, 
anb  *  the  fpint  of  Gob  is  in  mp  noftnis, 

4  Q9p  lips  (hall  not  fpcaueibulicb- 
ncCTcno?  mp  tongue  btter  Deceit. 

5  ©ob  fojbio  that  3J  fyonlb  lufttfie 
pon:tiU3fbic,  ^ajiiinotrcmoiicmv 
mtegntiefromme. 

6  #p  rigDteonfneOe  3J  Dolb  fall , 
anb  Una  not  let  it  goe :  mp  Heart  tyall 
not  rcp;oacl)  me  tfo  longas^  Hue. 

7  %tt  mine  cneime  be  as  tlic  Tbte 
fecb,aub  he  that  nfetrj  bp  againtt  me,  as 
tljcbncightcous. 

s  *ifo2ibhatisthchopcofthehV' 
poctitctfiouglj  Ijchath  gamcb,  ibhen 
©00  tafteth  atbap  htsfouief 

9  *  mill  ©ob  hcarc  his  crp,  ibhen 
trouble  commethbpon  him? 

10  nauihcbciighthimfclfcinthc^ 
mtghtie  i  ibill  hec  alibapcs  call  bpon 

1 1  3  lbill  teach  pon  ]|bpthehanbof 
©ob :  that  ibhich  « ibith  the  3llmightic, 
Will  3  not  conceale. 

12  26cholb ,  au  pc  pour  fclucs  haue 
fccncit ,  mhp  then  arc  pec  thusaltoge* 
thcrbatnci 

13  Xhis  is  the  portion  of  a  tbicbeb 
manibrth  d5ob,anb  the  heritage  of  op? 
pjeflbure  which  thep  than  recciue  of  the 
3imighttc. 

14  3Jfhischilb?enbemultiplieb,  itis 
fo2thcfibo?b:anb  hisoffpmigftjallnot 
befanlnebtt)ithb?eab. 

15  *  Zhofe  that  rcmaine  of  h»n 
(hail  bee  fauneb  in  bcath :  anb  Ijislbi 
Doibcslhailnotibccpe. 

is  though  he  heapc  bp  Clucr  as  the 
bull,  anb  prepare  rapment  as  tlje 
clap: 

i7l9cmappjeparc't,buttheiuflfl)all 
puttton,  anb  the  innocent  fljailbiuibc 
the  Bluer. 

isi?c  builbcth  h«s  houfcas  a  moth, 
anb  as  a  booth  that  the  beeper  maucth. 

19  %\)t  rich  man  fljall  lie  bolbncbut 
hcfl)aimotbcgathcrcb:hcopcucthhis 

cpcs,anbhei^>not: 

20  *XcrrourstaUeholoonhimas 
tbatcrs,  a  tcmpcQ  Ccalcth  h»m  aibap  in 
the  night. 

21  Xljc  eaft  ibinbc  caricth  him  a= 

3iaa  3  lbap. 


t  Heh.  made 
tnyfoulc  bit. 
ter. 

"Thatis, 

ifie  breath 
which  Gcd 
gauchim. 


rr.j  daiei. 


♦Mat.itf. 
26, 


'Prou.l. 
aS.Ezech. 
8.i8.iohn. 
9.3 1. lam. 
4-J. 

\Ortbtingin 
thch/nni&e. 


■pfai.78. 


•Chap.tS. 


Godswifedome. 


lob. 


lobs  f( 


ormer 


\ffrtjnflre- 
iitgbewoitld 
flee. 


|  Or>a  mitx. 


Or,di,n. 


\\Or,gM. 


Or,  flint. 


t  H'b-  from 
'ctpinr. 


"Rom. ii. 
11,34. 

t  H,'i>.fme 
olijh.lilnot 

foru. 

"Pro.  V  14- 
and  8.1  I, 
1 9.  and 
1 6. 1 6. 


u>ap,anb  be  bepartctb:  anb  as  a  (tonne 
Ijurletb  Dim  out  of  Ins  place. 

22  fox  God  {\)au  caftbpon  bim ,  anb 
notfparc:  t  ijcc  lboulb  fame  flee  out  of 
t)ts  tjnnD. 

2}  ££cn  (ball  clap  tbeir  banbes  at 
bun,  anb  (bail  ijtffc  bun  out  of  bis  place. 

CHAP.  XXVIII. 

1   There  is  a  knowledge  of  naturall  tilings.   11 
But  vvifedome  is  an  excellent  gift  of  God. 

flLirclptbcre^llabeincfo;! 
tbcfiluer,anbapiacefo? 

gOlDC  where  tl)CP  fillC  it. 

2  gjroinstaftcnoutof 
«arl5zs&3D.  tijc  ||  cartlj,  anb  b.jafTc  is 
molten  om  of  tlje  (tone. 

j  i?ccfcttctb  an  cube  to  barBcncffe, 
ant)  fcarcljctb  out  all  pecfecnon  :  tlje 
(tones  of  bamcnclTc  anb  tlje  fljabolb  of 
oeatl). 

4-  XbcfloubbjcaUetb out  fromtbe 
ttthaoitant  cucn  tlje  waters  forgotten  of 
tbe  footc :  tbcp  arc  DncD  bp ,  tljcp  ate 
gone  aibap  from  men. 

5  315  fo:  tbe  cartl),outofitcommetl) 
bjcab :  anbbnbcr  it,  is  tumeb  bp  as  it 
Vbctenrc. 

6  Xbe  (tones  of  it  are  tbe  place  of 
S>aprjtrcs :  anb  it  Ijattj  ||  bull  ofgolbc. 

7  Thee  .s  a  patb  lbbtcb  no  foulc 
nnoibetl),  anb lbljtclj  tlje  bultnrs  epe 
Datljuotfcenc. 

8  %\)t  ipons  lbbclps  banc  not  tro- 
ben  it,noz  tlje  fierce  ipon  patTcb  bp  it. 

9  $ee  puttctl)  foonb  his  bano  bpon 
t!)c||rocRC;  Dceouerturnctljtljc  moun 
tamesbptberootcs. 

10  $cc  cuttetb  out  riuers  among  fl)c 
rocUcs.anbbtscpclcctbcucrppjccious 
tbmg. 

1 1  fee  bmDetb  tlie  floubst  from  outr- 
flo  lbittg ,  aub  tl)e  tiling  tljat  is  ijib.bnn^ 
gctbbcfoojtbtollgbt. 

ii  25ut  Vbberc  (ball  lbifcbomcbcc 
foiinb;anbib!)crcistI)c  place  of  bnber= 
Itanbmg; 

i}  iBanunoibctb  not  the  puce  tberc 
of;  ncittjcrisit  founb  mtlje  laiiboftrjc 
lining. 

14  *Xbcbcptbfaitb,1fti5tiotinmc: 
anbtbcfcafaitb.gjttsnotibitbmc. 

15  tgifcannot  be  gotten  fo:  goioc, 
ncitfjcr  (ball  filucr  be  lbcigbcb  tor  tl)c 
pjicctbcrcof. 

16  git  cannot  be  baiucb  lbitb  tbe 
goioc  of  Dpbir ,  nntlj  tlje  p:cnous  £>- 
ntr,o:ti)cS)apl)irc. 


17  Xbcgoiue  anb  tbe  cl)?v(tail can- 
not eciualltt :  anDtl)c  trcbange  of  it  fta" 
noc  be  tor  ||  icibcis  of  fine  golbc, 

18  0o mention (baibcmaoc of ||Co'- 
rau,  0?  of  ^carles :  fo?  tbe  puce  of  Vo\ic 
borne 's  abouc  Uubies. 

19  Xlje  Xopa^e  of  etbiopia  (ball 
notccuiailit ,  neither  (bailtt  be  baiueb 
ibttrjpurcgoioc. 

io  *  nabence  tljcit  commctb  ttnfc< 
borne*  anbibljerc  is  tl)cplaceof  bnber- 
(tanomg* 

21  <§>ccmg it  is  fjib from  tbccpesof 
all  iuung,anb  feept  clofc  from  tlje  foules 
oftljellapje. 

21  2>c(truction  anb  bcati)fa^>,  usee 
Ijauc  ijcarb  tbc  famctftercof  rout)  our 
cares. 

23  <5obbnbcr(tanbetr)tljett)aytrjetC' 
of,  anb  DcUnolbetl)  tfje  place  tljereof. 

24.  ifo?  f)ec  looaetl)  to  tfte  cubes  of 
tlje  cartrj,  and  fectl)  bnber  tlje  tt)l)ole 
Ijcauen : 

2$  %a  maKc  tfje  ttieignt  fo?  tlie 
ibmbes,anb  be  ructg^ert)  tlje  rbatcrs  b? 
mcafure. 

26  i©rjen  bee  mabe  a  becrce  foz  tbe 
ramc,  aub  a  xbap  fo?  tbe  ligbtmng  of 
tljctbunbcr: 

27  Xben  bib  be  fee  it ,  ||  anb  Declare 
it,bc  p?epar  eb  it,yca  anb  fear  cb  eb  it  out. 

28  "anbbnto  manbefaib,26cbolb, 
tbe  fearc  of  fbeHo?b,  tbat « lbifebome, 
anb  to  bepart  from  cum ,  isbnbcrftan^ 
bing. 


XXIX. 

1  of  his  former  prof- 


CHAP. 

lob  bemoaneth  himfelfe 
peritie  and  honour. 

5^iaDzcoucr3fob  tcontinncb 
$M  ft  ft*  patabicanb  faib, 
2  £>  tljat  3  votvt  as 
mmonerbspait,  asintbc 
bapes  Vbl;cn  <5on  piefcr= 
uebme. 
j  tttfKnbisilcanblefbincbbponmy 
bcab,  anb  when  bp  l)is  Ugbt3f  lbamcb 
through  barbeneffe: 

4  ^s  3  ibas  in  ttit  bapes  of  mv 
poutl),  ruben  tbe  fecret  of  <5ob  ibas  bp- 
on mp  tabernacle: 

5  i©bcntbc3nmigl)tictt)aspetibitb 
me,  when  nip  tbilbzcn  lberc  about  me : 

6  aaben  3  ibatticb  nip  ftcps  ibitb 
butter,  anb  tbe  rocHe  poibjeb  t  me  out 
nucrsofoplc: 

7  i©bcn  3  ibent  outto  tbe  gate, 
tb;ougb  tbe  ntic,  when  3lp;cparcbmp 
fcatciutbcftrcct. 

8    The 


\\Or,veJfe!t 
offnegold. 

mctb. 


■Vetf.12. 


\Or}be&ue/f. 


\\OrM 
tmmter  it. 

•Pfal.il!. 
io.prou.1. 

7-&P.TO. 


\Hekaddid 
to  take  vp. 


\Or,ljntj!. 


\Hci.  Tcita 


profpentie,and         Chap.xxx.  prefentmiferie. 


t  Heb.  the 
voice  of  the 
nobles  was 
hid. 


\  Heb.  the 
taw  teeth  or 
tbegrtnders 
\HeMcajt 


wenecL 

\Heb.new. 

\Heb.chan- 

geeL 


\Heb.cf 
fewer  dayet 
then  I. 


8  Xtje pong  men  fatb  me,  anb  hib 
themfelucs  :  anb  the  ageb  atofe,  and 
ftoobbp. 

9  Xhep2inccstcframcbtailung,anb 
laib  then  ijano  on  their  mouth. 

io  txhe  jftobies  bclb  t\)tit  peace, 
anbtheit  tongue  cleaucb  to  thetoofcof 
their  mouth. 

ii  nabenthe  care  hcarb  mee,  then  it 
blefleb  me,  anb  \bbcn  the  eye  faib  me ,  it 
gauettntneflctome: 

ii  aseeaufc  3  bciiuercb  the  pooje 
tbatcricb,  ano  tbefatberlcu"e,  anb  him 
that  baa>  none  to  helpe  him. 

ij  Xbe  bleffing  of  bun  tbattbasrea; 
Die  to  perilb,  tame  bpon  me :  ano3J  tau; 
fcbtbcibibomesheatttofmgfonoy. 

14  3  put  onrigbtcoufnefle,  anb  it 
clofbeb  me :  my  iubgement  Vbas  as  a 
robe  anb  abiabemc. 

15  3Jibascyestotbebltnb,  anb  feet 
was  31  to  the  lame. 

16  3  was  a  father  to  the  poojc:  anb 
the  taufc  tbhtth  3  unc\bc  not ,  3  fear? 
cbcb  out. 

17  3lnb  3  bzabe  the  t  iaibes  of  the 
ibicfeeb,anb  tpiucfet  tbefpoile  out  of  bis 
teeth. 

18  Xben  3  fatb,  3  fljali  m'c  in  my 
ncft,anb3  fijalimuitipiiemy  nayes  as 
tbefanb. 

19  $0y  rootc  was  t  fpjeab  out  by  the 
waters,  anb  the  bett>  lay  ail  night  topon 
my  branch. 

20  £0y  giojy  was  t  ftctt)  in  mee,  anb 
my  botb  teas  t  tcncibeb  in  my  hanb. 

21  Unto  me  men  gauc  care,  anb  Ibaif 
teb,  anb  feept  ftlcnte  at  my  tounfcll. 

22  after  my  Xbojbs  they  fpabc  not  a* 
gaine,  *  my  fpeach  bzoppcb bpon them, 

23  anbtbeyttJaitebfozmeasfoztbe 
tame,  anb  they  openeb  tfjett  mouth 
ibibc  as  fo i  the  latter  raine. 

24ifgiiaugnebontt)em,theybelee'! 
mn  it  not,  anb  the  light  of  my  counte 
nance  they  tad  not  boibne. 

2?  3f  chofe  out  their  ibay,  anb  fate 
thicfc,  anb  bibelt  as  a  bingin  the  army, 
as  one  that  comforted)  the  mourners. 

CHAP.    XXX. 

1  lobs  honour  is  turned  into  extreme  contempt. 
15  Hisprolperitie  into  calamine. 

3  (lit  novbc  they  t  that  are 
*  yongerthen^j ,  bane  mee 
u  in  centum,  ibbofe  fathers 
\  3  lboulb  haue  bifbatneb 
h.  to  haue  fet  ibitb  tlje  bogs 
of  my  flocUc. 


z  #ea  Whereto  might  the  ftrengtb 
of  their  hanbs  profit  me,  m  ibbom  olbc 
ageujaspcrifhebi 

3  5Fo?  ibant  anb  famine  they  were 
iifolitane :  flying  mto  the  lbilberneflc 
t  in  former  time  befoiate  ano  tbafte : 

4-  nabo  nit  bp  mailoibcs  by  the 
buujcs,  ano  jumper  rootes  tor  their 
mcate. 

5  HHjey lberebnuen foonbfrom  a 
mong  men,  (they  cneb  after  them,  as  af- 
ter a  tbiefe.) 

6  Xobrocll  in  the  tufts  of  thebaic 
leys,  intcauesofthc  earth,  anb  tn  the 
rocftes. 

7  ^mongthebuflKStheytoayeb: 
bnbet  the  nettles  they  Were  gathereb 
together. 

8  Xheywerechilb2enoffoolcs,yca 
tbinuen  of  t  bare  men :  they  iberc  bilcr 
then  the  earth. 

9  *  3nb  noib  am  3  their  fong,  yea 
3iamtneirby-tt)ojb. 

10  Xbey  abbojre  me,  they  flee  farrc 
from  me,  tanbfpare  not  to  (pit  in  my 
fate. 

1 1  ffictaufc  bee  hath  loofcb  my  to?b 
anb  afflirteb  me,  they  haue  alto  letioofe 
theb2iblcbcfo?eme. 

11  <33pon  my  right  hand  rife  the  youth, 
they  pufl)  anjay  my  feetc,  ano  they  raifc 
bp  agamfr  mee  the  ibayes  of  tljeir  be 
ftrucnon. 

13  Xbey  marre  my  path ,  they  fet 
fotfbarb  my  calamine ,  they  haue  no 
helper. 

14.  Xbey  came  vpon  me  asattiibcbjca^ 
femg  in  ot  waters  •  m  the  befolation  they 

rOllebthetUfClUeSvpon  me. 

15  Xcrrours  are  tumeb  bpon  mee : 
they  purfut  t  my  foulc  as  tlje  ibmb :  anb 
my  ibclfare  paflctb  arbay  as  a  clonbe. 

16  Suibnolbmyfouleispotbjebout 
bpon  me :  the  bayes  of  affliction  haue 
Itabcnholbbponme.     » 

17  ^9y  bones  are  pierccb  in  mee  in 
thenightfeafon:  anb  my  unclbes  taftc 
no  reft. 

18  26y  the  great  fo?ce  of  my  difeafe,  is 
my  garment  thangeb :  it  bmbctj)  mee 
about  as  the  collar  of  my  coat. 

19  l^e  hath  caft  mee  into  the  myjc, 
anb  3ambecomelibebuftanoafl)es. 

20  3i  eric bnto  thee,  anb  thou  oocft 
nothcarc  me :  3  ^x^  bp,  anb  thou  re 
garbeftmenot. 

21  Ihou art  t  become  crtiell  to  me : 
lbith  t  thy  ftrong  hanb  tljou  oppofeft 
thyfclfeagamftme. 

22  "Chou 


II  Or.  ink' 
Ai  the  mtrht. 
trirtyrfrer 
mvht,     ' 


\Heb,hol:t 


f  Heb.men 
of  no  name. 

♦Pfal.J5. 
I  5.2nd  6$. 
12. 

t  Heb.and 
withhold  x-it 
fj>u  tie  from 
■nyface. 


principal/erf 


\rifbt)trued 
tobecrue/l 
t  Hebr.th, 
firing  h  jf 
y&urd. 


lob  profefleth 


lob. 


his 


mtegntie. 


\\Or,mfc- 
dome. 


^Htb.hetfe 


"Rom.iJ. 
15.pfal.3j. 

\Hth.fa 
him  thslTvas 
kjrdcf  daj. 


'Pfal.IO!. 

6. 

\\Or,cP.ri- 
chu. 


*:.  Chron. 
1 6.9.10b 
_  MI. pro. 
5.11. and 
15.3. 

t  Heir,  lit 
hurt  weigh 
mttinbA- 
Unea  of 
IhiUcc, 


11  Xl)ou  liftcft  me  bp  totbcibmb : 
ffjou  caufeft  me  to  ribc  vpon  ic,  anb  mffol- 
ucftnipllfubftantc. 

23  Jro?  3}  Hnolb  that  tljou  milt  bung 
mctoDcattj,  attD  to  tljcljoufeappointcb 
foiauiiiKUG. 

24.  l^oibbcit  Ije  lbill  notficetd)  out 
tjis  tjanb  to  dje  t  grauc,tljouglj  tljep  ctp 
utljisbcftruction. 

15  *2>ibnot3}U)ecpctfo2fjimtf)at 
ibas  in  trouble  nbas  not  mpfoulcgcic* 

UCDfO2tflCp0O2C^ 

16  naljcit  3  looucb  fo?  goob ,  tjfjen 
cuill  came  bnto  nice :  anb  lbljcn  %  Wat-- 
teb  fo2itgl)t,ri)crccamcbarucncs. 

17  #p  boibcis  boplcb  anb  reflet) 
not:  tlje  bapes  of  affliction  pjteuenteb 
nice. 

18  3  went  mourning  ttntnout  fl)c 
Suumc :  3  ftoob  bp ,  and  3  cricb  m  dje 
Congregation. 

29  *3jamabjotrjcctob2agons>aivb 
acompaiuonto||oiblcs. 

30  £0p  fkinne  is  biacltc  bpon  nice, 
anb  mp  bones  arc  burnt  tint!)  Ijeat. 

31  £@pi)arpcalfo  is  tur neb  to  mour; 
nittg,  anb  mp  ojganc  into  tljcbopcc  of 
tfjcmtDatibccpc. 

CHAP.   XXXI. 

lob  maketh  a  folenine  pioteftation  of  his  intc- 
giitiein  feuerallducties. 

£|9abc  a  toucnant  Vbirtj 
nunc  eves  j  wfjp  djen 
fboulD  3  tljuiHC  bpon  a 
niapb* 
.  1  ifojttifjat  portion  of 
©ob  15  tljcu  from  abouc  *  anb  what  ni= 
Ijcritaucc  of  tlje  Slluugljtp  from  on 
Wfo< 

3  is  not  beftructton  to  the  lbtcftcb  t 
anbaftrangcpuniiiimeuttotljclbozucrs 
ofuuoumc; 

4  *£>octh  notrjc{ccmpU)apcs,anb 
count  all  nip  ftcps* 

5  3Jf  3  l)«uc  ibaiftcb  ibid)  batuttc, 
o?  if  mv  foot  Iiatf ) ijaftcD  to  Deceit ; 

6  tjutmebec  lbctghcb  m  an  cucn 
baliancc ,  tljat  Gob  map  Hnoib  nunc  m 
tegnfce. 

7  3Jf  mp  ftcp  Ijadj  tiirncb  out  of  d)c 
ibap ,  anb  nunc  l)eart  wailtcb  after 
mine  epes ,  anb  tf  any  blot  Ijatl)  cicancb 
tompljanbs: 

8  Thcnictmccfom,anblctanotl)er 
catcpea  let  nip  off  fpungbc  rootcb  out. 

9  gifmmcljeartljauebciicbcceiueb 
bp  a  woman ,  0;  if  J  tyiuc  lapbc  wait  at 


mp  neighbours  booje: 

10  %\fi\\  let  nip  ibifc  grinb  bnto  an= 
otrjcr,anbletotIjersboWboWncbpon 
Ijer. 

1 1  ifoitrjigisanljcinous  crtnic,  pea, 

it  is  an  iniqiUtie  to  bee  punifhed  by  tlje 

Suoges. 

11  f  0?  it  is  a  fire  that  confumetl)  to  be* 
Sruction,  anb  iboulbrootc  out  all  nunc 
encrcafc. 

13  3i  3  DiD  Dcfpife  tfjc  tatifc  of  mp 
man-  fcruant ,  0?  of  nip  mapb  fcruant, 
Wljcntrjepcontcnbeb  wttlj  me : 

14  i©l)attl)cnn)aii3Jbo,tt)licn(Sob 
nfetljbp^anb  Wljenijcebifitcdj ,  Wijat 
fl)aii3JanfrucreIjint< 

1$  SDtDnotfjcc  frjat mabemeemdjc 
ibombc,maucfjim;anblibU)notoncfa^ 
fl)ioiibsind)cwombc* 

i6  3Jf  3  fjauc  WidjoclDcdjcpooje 
from  their  acute,  02  Dane  taufeb  tt>c  eves 
oftljcWtbowtofatic: 

17  $)i  ijauc  eaten  mp  mo2fell  mp 
fclfe  alone,  anb  tlje  fatljerlefTe  ijatlj  not 
eaten  tnereof: 

18  (ifo?  from  mp  poutlj  Ijec  mas 
biougrjt.bp  lbitlj  me  as  with  a  fatljer, 
anb  3  Ijaucgtubcb  ||  fjer  from  mpmo- 
tljers  ibombc.) 

19  3Jf  3  lywit  fecue  anp  perin?  fo? 
tbant  of  cloatljing,  oiauppooicUutfj? 
outcoucrmg: 

20  gjf  rus  lopnes  Ijauc  not  blcffcb 
me,  anb  it  fjee  iberc  not  uiarmcb  lbitlj 
tlje  fleece  of  mpfneepe: 

11 3if  3  ijauc  lift  bp  mp  Ijanb  agaiuft 
tlje  fatljerlefTe,  ibljen  3  faib  mp  ijclpe 
in  tlje  gate: 

11  Then  let  mine  amie  fail  from  mp 
njoulbcr  -  blabc,  anb  nunc  arme  be  b;o* 
lien  from  tnc  ||  bone. 

13  fai  Destruction  from  <5ob  ibas  a 
tcrrour  to  nice :  anb  bp  reafon  of  Ijts 
IjigijucfTCJ  coulb  not  cnburc. 

14  3If  3  uatic  mabc  golbc  mp  Ijopc, 

OjliatlcfaibtOtljCfUlCgOlD,  Thou  anmp 

confibcncc: 

25  gjfj  reiopcebbecaufcmpibcaitl) 
ibas  great,  anb  bccaufcmmc  Ijanb  Ijab 
t  gotten  mud): 

26  gjf  3  bcliclb  ttDe  Smmtc  lblien 
it  fljincb,  02  tlje  iT9oonc  ibalumg  t  m 
bngl)tncfrc: 

27  3inb  mp  Ijcar t  natl)  bene  fccretlp 
cnticcb,  0?  t  mp  moutlj  ijatljluffcbnip 
ijanb: 

28  %fjis  alfo  tbcreaitiniciuitieto  be 

punifhed  by  the  ^llbgC  !  5f02  3  OjOlllb 

ijauc  benieb  tlje  cob  that  is  aboue. 
29  3(f 


notfapjion 
vl  iw  one 

wombs  ? 


That  is, 
the  veUoWt 


\\Or,the 
cbanrtclt 

bow. 


\Htkfound 

much. 
f  HrO,the 
tight. 

XHcb.lri^ht 


f  Heir,  my 
h.indhttth 
kjfcdmj 
mctttb. 


Elihu  reproucth       Chap.xxxij.       lob,  and  others. 


\Or,tothe 
tar. 

||  Or,  after 
l he  manner 
vfmen. 


\\Or,behold 
■iff gut  is 

that  the  Al- 
tiphttt  will 

anfweremee. 


t  Heb.weepe 
\  Heb.  the 
firength 
thereof. 
]Heb  cattfed 
thefonleof 
the  owners 
t  her  of t  o  ex- 
pire t  or 
breath  out. 
\\0r,m;. 
Jome  recedes 


t  Heb.  from 
anfwermv. 


\Heb.h:s 
foule. 


|  Heb.  ex- 
fcflidhb 
in  wordi. 


29  3Jf  3  reioycet)  at  ttjc  beftructton 
of  bun  tbat  batcb  me,  02  lift  topmyfelfe 
ibbeticuillfoiuiDbim: 

jo  ( jfrcitbcr  \)mt  3  furTcrcb  tmy 
moutl)  to  fume  by  ibifl)ing  a  curfc  to 
btsfoule.) 

3i  3Jftljc  men  of  my  tabernacle  {aib 
not,  ^btbatibcbabofbisflcfl)'ibcc 
cannot  be  fanfficb. 

ji  Xbcftrangcrbibnot  lobgeintbc 
ftrect:  but  3  opeucbmyboo2es||to  ti;c 
trauaiicr. 

33  3Jf3Jcoucrcbmytranfgrcft"ions, 
|as2lDam :  bybibmgmtnc  uucuutietn 
mybofomc: 

34  £>tb  3  fear c  a  great  mttltitubco: 
bib  the  contempt  of  families  terrific 
me :  tbat3JRcptuleucc,  and  went  not 
oiitoftlicboojei 

35  £>  tbat  one  iboulbbcarcnic!  1 1  be; 
rjolbt,  mybefireis,  thattrjc  ^imigline 
tboulbanftbcrcinc,  anb  tbat  miueab 
uerfery  l)ab  Mmttcn  a  boobc. 

36  Purely  3Jlboulb  take  it  bpon  my 
(boulbcr,  and  mnb  it  as  a  crolbnc  to  me. 

37  3  rboulb  bcciarc  bnto  bun  tbc 
number  of  my  ftcps ,  as  a  pnncelboulD 
3Jgocncctcuntobim. 

38  3Jf  my  lanb  cry  agamft  me,o 2  tfjat 
trjc  furrolbcs  Ubcibifc  tljcrcof  Uom= 
plainer 

.  39  3Jf 3  bauctcatcn  tljc frultstbcrt; 
of  ibitbout  money,  ojbauctcaufeb  tljc 
olbners  thereof  to  loofc  tljeit  life : 

4.0  %a  tbiftles  groib  in  ftcab  of 
rbbcat ,  anb  i|  cochlc  in  ftcab  of  barley. 
%i)t  ibozbs  of  Jobarc  enbeb. 

CHAP.    XXXII. 

1  Elihu  is  angry  widi  lob  and  his  three  friends. 
6  Becaufe  wiiedome  cometh  not  from  age,he 
excufah  the  boldnelle  of  his  youth,  n  He 
reproouech  tliem  for  notfatisrying  offob.  16 
Hiszealetofp^ake. 

£>  tbcfc  tl):cc  men  ecafeb 
t  to  anflbcrc3Iob,  becaufe 
be  was  rigljtcons  m  Ijis 
olbneeyes. 
%  Xben  ibas  tunblcb 
tl)c  ttnatl)  of  tfbbu,  tl)c  fonnc  of  25ara 
crjeltbc  25u3itc ,  of  tbc  Rintcb  of  Bam : 
agamft  3!ob  ibas  bis  voiatl)  Rintleb, 
becaufe  be  luftincotljmtfclfc  ratljcr  fljen 
<Pob. 

3  3Hfo  agaiuftbis tluce frienbs ibas 
bis  ttnatb  Rmblet)  :  becaufe  tbey  bab 
fount) no anfibercanb  y^Ijab  couocm 
neb  Hob. 

4  fioVo  c uiju Ijno  t  \tiaitcD  till  3Job 


\H,b.fcw 

ofJiyrs. 

\Htb.I 

Tob. 

8.515 

prou. 

.6. 

cccl.z 
Jan. 1. 

-.6. 
17.& 

'.21. 

t  Hcbjm- 

deriiandinJS 
\  Heb. words 


babfpoben  :  becaufe  tbey  were  r  elber  t  «,*.,«„ 
then  rje.  /«■*?«. 

5    I©bCU  Cllljllfaib  tbat  diere  was  UO 

anfibcre  m  rtjc  moutb  of  tbcfc  rtjict 
mcn,tbcnbistt)jatb  lbasRuiDUD. 

6  ^nbCUbutbcfbnneofaBaracbct 
tbe  Bu5ireanftbercbanb  fayb :  3  am 
tyong.anbyceare  bcryolD,  tbljerefojc 
3  ibas  afraib ,  anb  t  outtt  not  (berb  you 
mtnc  opinion. 

7  <5faiD,S>ayesfi)0ulbfpcaRc,anb 
muitituDcof  yeetes  fljouio  tcacbibtfc- 
borne. 

3  *  26ut  tbere  is  a  fpirit  in  man:  anb 
tbc  mfpiration  of  tbe  ^Inngbtte  giucrt) 
tbembnDerftanbing. 

9  ©rtat  men  arc  not  aiwaves  ibife : 
ncitber  boctf)cagcbbnbcr(lanb  iubge* 
ment. 

10  Xberfo2e3Jfayb,$carbcnto  me: 
3  alfb  lbtll  fticib  mine  opinion. 

ii23eboiD,'3ibaitcbfo2youribo:bs: 
3  gauccarc  to  your  t  reafons,  ibljilelt 
you  fearcbet)  out  t  vbbat  to  fay. 

ix  J3ca,3J  attenbebDnto  you :  anb 
bcljolbc ,  diere  was  none  of  you  tbat 
conuinceb  30b ,  or  tbat  anfibcrcb  bis 
lboibs: 

1 3  Heft  ye  fboulb  tay.nac  baue  founb 
out  lbifoom :  ©ob  tljiullctl)  bun  oottm, 
not  man. 

1+  i5oib  bcijatbiiot  ||  btrectcD  tys 
VooiQS  agamft  me :  ncitber  ibill  3  an* 
ftbercbimrbiri)  yomfpeccbes. 

15  %bfytt>crcamafcb,tbcyanfTbe; 
rcb  no  mo2c,  t  n)cy  left  offfpeabmg. 

16  i©beii3I bab U)aiteb,(fo2 tbey 
fpafeenot,  butftoob  ftill  andanftbercb 
nomoje.) 

17  1  fayd ,  3  ibill  anfibcre  alfo  my 
part.'J  alfo  ibillflicib  mine  opinion. 

18  foj^iamfulloftmattetJbetfpr 
nt  ibitbm  me  couftrametb  me. 

19  26cbolD, my  belly  isasibine,which 
tbatbnobcut,  itis  rcaDytoburftliRc 
neib  bottles. 

io3JibillfpcaUe,ttbat3Jniaybcrc' 
fr efbco :  3  tbill  open  my  lippcs,aub  an 
fibcre. 

it  fLrtmenot,  31  pjay you, accept 
any  mans  pcrfou :  ueitber  let  me  giuc 
flattering  titles  bnto  man. 

zz  ;fo2  3  luiolb  not  to  gme  flatte- 
nng  titles :  in  (a  doin?  iny  mabcr  IbotUD 
foonctabemcalbay. 

CHAP.     XXXIII. 

1    Elthuoffcrcthhinilelfeinltc.idofGod,  witb 
(incentie  and  meckencllc  to  reafon  with  lob 

_        8    Hc 
30 


red  ht. 

rejrds. 


rde- 


X  Heb. they 
remaned 
fpeeches 
from  them. 
fe/ues. 


Wel.wrd* 
\  Heb  the 
jpirtt  of  my 
beitf, 

\Htb.ismi 

opened. 

t  Heb.that  I 
may  breath 


Godschafhfcments;      lob. 


His 


mercie. 


(  Hcb.wmj 
pi/ate. 


*CIw.9.jj. 

and  15.  30. 

^  He1.'. ace  or- 

Mngtothj 

month. 

\H:b.cHt 

cut  vfthe 

clay. 

|  Htk  in 

mtnetxrcs. 


\Hch.hre 
anfitereth 


rettealeih  ,or 
vncoHtnth. 

\HcB.vperbe. 


J  Htb.from 

■ 
thifnurd. 


8  He  excufeth  God  from  giuing  man  an  ac- 
count of  his  wayes,byhisgreatnefTe.  14  God 
callechmantorepentancebyvifions>  19  by 
afflictions,  2.3  and  by  his  miuiftery.  31  Hce 
inciceth  lob  to  attention. 

Dercfojc ,  30b ,  3J  mag 
ti)tc ,  tjcarc  trip  Tpccrtjes , 
anb  beacben  to  all  my 

IbO?DC& 

2  25ebolb,notb3Ibauc 
openeb  my  mouth ,  my  tongue  patfi 
fpofeen  fin  my  mouth. 

3     £0?  tt)02bS  fhalbe  of  tl)C  bp2tgbt 

ncfTc  of  my  heart:  anb  mylippcsfbail 
bttcrlmoiblcbgc  clcarcly. 

4  Zbe  Spirit  of  00b  ftati)  mabc 
me,  anb the  b;eatb  of  the  $lmigbtte 
bath  giuen  me  life. 

5  3ftboucanft,anfa>ercmc,rctthy 
wordes  tn  02Dcr  befoze  mc,ftanb  bp. 

6  *  23t!)olb, 3  am  taccomtngtotby 
rbiO)  tn  csobs  ffcab :  31  alfo  am  t  fo^ 
meo  out  of  the  clay. 

7  25ebolb ,  nip  tetrour  (ball  not 
mafec  thee  af raib  .neither  (ball  my  banb 
bebeautebpotttbee. 

8  &uu Iy  thou  Ijafl  fpoben  t  tn  mine 
hearing,  anb 5 haue  bcarb  tbebotcc 

0Hhylb0;bS,  faying, 

9  3 am  elcanc  lbithout  tranfgrtul= 
on,  "Jam  innocent;  neither  is  there  nti* 
eminent  me. 

10  25cholb,  hce  finbeth  occaftons& 
gamft  mec ,  hec  cottntetb  nice  fo;  bis 
enemtc. 

1 1 1?  c  ptttteth  my  fcete  tn  the  ft  otues, 
he  marbctb  all  my  parties. 

11  25choib,inthi8thouartnotmft: 
31  ibill  anfiucrc  thee,  Xfiat  ©ob  is 
greater  then  man. 

1?  nabyboctrtbonfrritieagainftbinu 
fo:  t  rjc  gtttctb  not  account  of  any  of  his 
matters. 

1+  ifoz  Gobfpcabctb  onccyeattuiec, 

yet  man  pcrCCtttCth  ItllOt. 

15  3Jn  a  bzcame,  tn  a  bifton  of  the 
night,  ibhm  oeepe  fleepe  faiicth  bpon 
men,  in  flmnbnngs  Dpon  the  beo : 

i6  Xhen  hce  t  opencth  the  cares  of 
men,  attDfcaietb  their  inflruction, 

1 7  Xhat  hec  may  mirtibzam  matt  j 
from  ins  tpnrpofc,  anb  bibep2ibc  from, 
man. 

18  tycCUccpcth  bacbebis  foule  from 
the  ptt,  atto  rtis  life  t  front  pcrttbtng  by 

tljt  flU02D. 

19  l)ec  is  chafrcneb  alfo  ibith  panic 
Dpon  hisbcb,  anbthcmultttubcof  his 

bones  ibithffrongp-iiiK. 


io  *  &q  that  his  life  abbozretb  bzeab, 
anb  his  foule  tbainttemeate.  _ 

ii  Dis  flefh  is  tonfumcb  atbaytbat 
it  cannot  be  feme ;  anb  his  bones  that 
mere  not  fccne,fhcbe  out. 

22  Dtsfoulebzaibetb  neerebntothe 
gtaucanbbtsltfcto  thcbcftcoycrs. 

13  ^ftbctebeamcuengeribitbbim, 
an  interpreter ,  one  among  a  tboufanb , 
to  (beibbntomanbisbpzigbtncfre : 

24.  3tbcn  hce  is  gracious  bnto  him, 
anb  fayth,3>cliucr  bim  from  going 
bourne  to  the  pit ;  31  haue  founb  \  a  ran- 
fome. 

25  tyiSflcm  (bailbcfrefbcrttbcna 
cbiloes:befballreturnctotbcbayesof 
his  youth- 

26  $e  (ball  pzay  bnto  <5ob ,  anb  hec 
mill  be  fatiourable  bnto  him ,  anb  hec 
(bail  fee  his  face  ibith  toy :  foz  hec  ibill 
renber  bnto  manbtsrtgbteoufncfre. 

27  ||lf)cloofecthbponmen,indtfany 
fay,  gjbauefmneb,  anb  pcruertcb  that 
lbbtcb  mas  right,  anb  it  pzo&teb  mec 
not: 

28  ||$ee  mill  beliuer  hisfoulc  from 
going  into  the  ptt ,  anb  his  life  (hall  fee 
the  light. 

29  floe,  all  thefc  things  tto?tetfi 
C5ob  t  oftentimes  ibith  man, 

30  Xobztngbatbc  bis  foule  from  the 
pit,  to  be  enitgbteneb  ibith  the  light  of 
thcliutng. 

31  $3arbeibcu\j£)3Job,bearhenbm 
to  me,  bote  thy  pcaccanb'j  lbilfpeafic. 

32  <Jftbouhaftanytbtngtofay,am 
fmercnie:fpcabc,fo23lbcnre  to  mfhfie 
thee. 

33  3Jfnot,hcarbenbntomc:holbe 
thy  peace,  anb  3  (ball  teach  tbccibtfc 
botne. 

CHAP.  XXXIIII. 

1  Elihu  accufeth  lob  for  charging  God  with 
iniultice.  10  God  omnipotent  cannot  be 
vmufr.   31   Man muft humble hiinielfevnto 

God.    34  Elihu  reprooueth  lob. 

j£^$  5Llrthcrmo:c  Clihuanfme 
^W)rcD,anDfaib, 
Tri-|g    2   i)carc  my  tbojoes , 
Spjgft  O  yec  lbifc  men  ,  anb 
&&.bM  gutc  earc  bnto  me,  ye  that 

bane  RitotbieDgc. 
3   *  jf  02  the  care  trteth  ibo.'bs,  as  tijc 

t  month  taftcthmeate. 
4-   ILtt  bs  cbnfc  to  bs  iuogement  : 

\n\)B  imom  among  our  fclucs  lbhat  is 

goon. 

5   * 02 


•pfai.107. 

'7- 

t  Hch.mtiiic 

ofdejire. 


\\0r,» 
aic/nrme  at. 


:bi!dhofd. 


tS 


ioo\j  XfOH 

m4m,atjftrt 
ntdj&c. 

\\OrJxh*& 

dtluKred 
my  foule  &c. 
tndmjhfe, 

ffftktwki 

and  thriet* 


'Chap.  12. 

H. 

t  Hch.f*. 

Use. 


God: 


power, 


Ch 


ap.xxxm 


|  .xxxv. 


an 


dmft 


ice. 


f  Hebr-mine 
arrow. 


\Heir.men 
of  heart. 
"Exod.32. 
4  iob8.j. 
and  36.25. 
piil.03.15. 
roui.p-14. 
•?h\.6i. 
II.  pro.  24. 
I 2.ierc.2. 
32.10.ezc. 
3  5. 20.  mat. 
16.27.  rom. 
2. 6. 2. cor. 
j.io.  i.pct. 
1.1 7.  apoc. 

12.12. 

\Hebr.allof 

v. 

•Pf»l.  104. 

29. 

\Hthr.iyon 

him. 

•Ecckf.  1 2. 

6.  gene.  3. 


\HcbJbinic. 


'  Deut.io. 
I7.2.cliro. 
0.7.213.10. 
34.rotn.2. 

gal.i.tf. 
cphe.  6  0. 
co!of.;.2s. 
I. pet. 1. 17. 
\Heb.th,j 
jholl  rake  d 
wwr  the 
miohtj. 

"PtO  J. 21 

and  1 5.3. 

:uli  ;  1.4. 
2.chro. 16 
o.ierc.if. 
«7- 


tW<r£r.£0i 


5  ifoifjob  hath  faib , 3 amtightc 
ous: anb  (30D  hath  taitcn  attjap  mp 
uibgcmcnt. 

6  5>houlb  3  tft  againft  mp  rtgljt  ? 
tmp  Vbomtb  is  mcucablclblthout  tranfc 
greflion. 

7  oahatmanisiifte^ob, who  bjuuv 
cth  bp  ft  owing  lifec  water  * 

8  sshich  gocth  m  company  Vbitlj 
thelbozKcrs  ofmiquitie,  anb  Walfccth 
With  lbtcltcb  men. 

9  jfoz  ijee  hath  faib ,  Jt  pjofitcth  a 
man  nothing ,  that  he  (houlb  bclight 
himfclfcwithtfoo. 

10  Xhcrctozc  hearken  bnto  me ,  pe 
t  men  of  bnbcrftanbmg :  *  fartc  bee  it 

from  ©Ob,  that  he  fhould  doe  WiC&ebUCS, 

anbfromthtaimightp ,  that  hecfhouid 
commit  intqnitit. 

n  *jfo:thcWo2fecofaman(hallhc 
rennet  bnto  him ,  anb  tauft  cucrp  man 
to  finbe  accojDmg  to  his  wapes. 

11  j3cafuccly<0obWillnotbocWte 
Kemp,  ncitljcc  Ml  the  3Umtgl)fppei> 
ucrtiiibgctncnt. 

13  i@!jol)atl)giuettl)imatnargco' 
ucr  the  earth*  02  Who  hath  bifpofebtthe 

Wh0lCW02l0i 

14  *gifhcfct  his  heart  tbpon  man, 
ifhc  gather  bnto  Dtnifelfc  his  fpirtt  anb 
hifib?cath- 

15  *3fll  flcth  (hall  pcrim  together, 
anb  man  (hall  tunic  agamc  bnto  butt. 

16  gifnott)  thon  hail  bnberftanbing, 
heart this :  hearfcento  thebopteof  nip 
wo:bS.  ,    ^ 

57  ^hallnimhe  that  hatcth  tight, 
tgoiur rnei  anb  Unit  fhouconbemnehim 
that  is  molt  tuft* 

18  g|sttfitto(aptoaBing,Thouart 

UltCktb  i  and tO  02UtCCS,  Ye  are  bngOblp* 

19    *  How  much  lefle  to  him  that  8CCCp= 

tcth  not  thepcrfons  of  Winces,  nozrc* 
garbcth  the  rich  mozc  then  tljcpoojci 
foz  the?  ail  arc  the  W002&C  of  his 
lianos. 

20  511  a  moment  (hall  thev  mt,  anb 
the  people  lhalbc  tr  oublcb at  nubmght, 
anbpaflcawap :  anb  t  the  might?  (hall 
be  taucn  awav  Without  hanb. 

ii  "ifoihisn'csarepponthcibai'es 
ofman,anbhefccthallhis  goings. 

22  ThereiinonarUcncs,no?fl)aDoib 
ofbeath ,  tbherc  the  wozfccrsof  tniqnt* 
ticmapbibethcinfclucs. 

23  foi  Dec  Will  not  lap  bpon  man 
mozc  then  nght;  thathclhoulb  tenter  fa* 
to  uibgcmcnt  With  ©ob. 

24  $c  (hall  bjeaBcut  pieces  mighty 


men  t  without  number,  anb  ftt  others 
inthctrftcab. 

25  Xhcrcfo?e  hec  tmoweth  their 
W02ltes,anb  hcoucrturncth  them  mthe 
night,fo  that  they  arc  t  beftroyeb. 

26  i^c  ftnnctb  them  as  Wic&cbmen, 
t  in  the  open  fight  of  others: 

27  BccaufcthcpturncbbatUetfroni 
him ,  anb  Woulb  not  eontibcr  any  of  his 
wayes. 

28  5>o  that  thev  tauft  the  cry  of  the 
poozc  to  tome  bnto  hun,anb  he  tjeareth 
thccrvofthcafllictco. 

29  nahtnhcgincthctuietneffcibho 
then  tan  mane  trouble*  anb  lbhcn  \ytt 
hibcti)  his  face,  tbho  then  can  bchoibc 
him  j-  Whether  it  be  done  agamft  a  nati 
on,o:  againft  a  man  onelp : 

30  Xljat  the  hypocrite  raignc  not 
left  the  people  be  enfnareb. 

31  -S>urelp  it  is  mcctc  to  be  faibbuto 

©00 ,3  Ijaue  bO?ne  chaftfemeiu,  3  lblll 
not  OftCllb  any  more. 

31 1i:hattt)hich3l  fee  not,tcach  thou 
me;gif  gi  haucbouetntqumc ,  3  *bill 
bocnomozc. 

33  t  ^>houtt)  it  bee  accojbing  to  thr 
miobcdicttnlltceompcnft  it,  lbhether 
thourcfufc,  0?  whether  thou  cljufcano 
not  3J :  therefor  fpeafee  lbhat  thou 
mtoibclh 

34  ILet  men  tof  bnbcrftanbntg  tell 
nice,  anb  let  a  Vbife  man  hcarften  bnto 
mec. 

35  3Jobhathfpoftcntt)ithoutKiTOib; 
icbgc^nbhisaoibs  were  totthoutttnfc 
borne. 

36  ||  $ty  beftre  is  that  30b  map  bee 
tneb  bnto  the  cube ,  becaufc;  of  his  an 
ftocrcsfo2U)icbebmen. 

37  iFozhe  abbcti)  rebellion  bnto  his 
finnc ,  hec  clappeth  ^  iia»des  amongft 
bs,  anb  multiplictl)  his  ttiojbs  agamft 
e»ob. 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

1  Companion  is  not  to  be  made  with  God,  be- 
caufe  our  rood  or  euill  cannot  extend  vnto 
him.  9  Many  cry  in  their  affli&ions ,  but 
are  not  heard  tor  want  of  faith. 


Uihufpane  mo?coucr,anb 

faib, 
/&   2  Xhinlicft  thou  this 
,®i  to  bee  right ,  that  thou  lap 
lg€s  bed ,  $&?  nghtcoiuucffc  is 


tHeb.virh 
oulfeorch- 


jHeir. 

crujbej. 


\ffebr.m 

beplxe  of 
beholders. 
t  Hebr.from 
after  htm. 


\Helr. 
Should  it  be 
from  mi 
thee  .? 


m02Cthcn<5obs 

3  ifoz  thoufapbft.nshatabuautagc 
ibillit  bee  bnto  ti;ec,  and,  iBhatpzontc 

(hall 


\Helr.of 
heart. 


\\Or,Afjf«- 
thcr  t  let  lob 
be  tried. 


36  2 


The  caufcs  of 


lob.        Gods  punifhments. 


|  Or,  !>yit 
marethmt'j 
trtyjinnp. 

^Heb.Iml 

Teturneto 
thee  Jrordi 


•Pfal.  1(5.1. 
Rom. 1 1.35 
iob.ji.j. 


*Iob.»7.o 
prou. |. 28. 
ifa.1.1  y.icr. 
11. 11. 


\\ThAlU 
Qed. 

\\ThMa, 
lob. 


\HA.th,t 

there  are  jit 
words  for 
God. 


f  Htb.hctrt 


fliall  31  IjaUC ,  ||  ifl  bee  cleanfed  from  tliy 

finite  < 

4 1 3J  ail  anfinerc  tf)ce,anb  tl)y  eonv 
panionsibiththcc. 

<,  Hoone  muo  thcljcaucns  anb  fee, 
anbbeholb  the  cloubs  which  arc  higher 
then  thou. 

6  3jfthoufinneft ,  tbhatbocftthou 
againfthim;  02  it  thytranfgreffionsbe 
mumpiicb^hatboeftthoutontohim? 

7  *3lfthou be righteous,  rbhatgi- 
uctt  thou  him j.  02  ibhat  receiueth  fjee  of 
thine  hanb; 

8  ILhy  rbtrbebnefle  may  hurt  a  man 
as  thou  act,  anb  thy  r  tghteoufiicfre  may 
profit  thefonne  of  man. 

9  2iSyrcafonofthcmultitubcofop' 
p2cfnons  they  malic  the  oppreiicd  to  eric : 
they  crtc  out  by  ccafon  of  the  acme  of 
themtghtic. 

10  2Sut  none  faith,  )©hercii(5ob  my 
mascr,  ttmo  gutetl)  fongs  in  the  night  < 

11  naho  teacljctli  i)s  mo2e  then  the 
bcafts  of  the  cattlj,  anb  inaKcthbsuji 
fathcnthefoulesof  fteaucn. 

12,  Xhctc  they  trie,  (but  none  giucth 
anfiucce)  becaufc  of  the  pnbe  of  ctull 
men. 

13  *  Purely  ©ob  Ybilnot  hcarcbanis 
tic,  neither  tbil  the  SUtmghtie  tcgarb  it. 

14  Although  thou  fayeft  thoufhalt 
notfee  him.yctiubgcmcntis  before  htm, 
thcrcfo2etruftthouin  him. 

15  zSutnotbbccaufcit^notfo,  ||hcc 
fjatb  bifitcb  inDue  anger  ,vet  llljc  Uuoib^ 
eth  it  not  in  great  crtrcmitie : 

16  13l)crcfo2c  boetn  ^ob  open  l)ts 
mouth  mbamc :  l)c  multiplier!)  Utojos 
Witljoutfenotblebgc. 

chap,  xxxvr. 

1  Elihu  fheweth  how  God  is  iuft  in  his  waves. 
16  How  lobs  finnes  hinder  Gods  blefsingj. 
14  Gods  works  are  to  be  magnified. 

i^^SM  ^-lftu  alf°  pwceebcb ,  anb 

k\  rrl^\  "-  ^«ffer  mcc  a  little, 
W  P#Saul)  5  Will  fl)cUjc  trjee, 
2^^-u.yM  t  that  1  hauc  yet  to  fpcaftc 
on  <£obs  bchaife. 

j  3J  ttnll  fetch  my  ItnottJlcbgc  from 
afarrc,  anb  ibill  afcnbcrightcoufueffc 
tomyOSaltct. 

4  5fonruclpmvtbo2bgniaiinotbc 
faifc :  he  that  is  perfect  m  Unoil)lcbgc,is 
ibiththcc. 

5  25cftolb,  C50D  is  migWic,  anb  be- 
fpifetl)  not  any :  he  is  mighnc  in  ftrcugth 
and  fxbifcbomc. 


6  $cp;cfcrueto  not  tfhc  life  of  the 
tbicfteb :  butgiuctfjngrjtto  thcllpoozc. 

7  *  l?ce  tbitljbiarbctrj  not  fjis  eyes 
from  the  righteous:  but  tt>ith  fcingsare 
they  ontfjctfj2one,  yea  he  both  ettablitt) 
them  fo2  cuct,  anb  they  arc  craitcb. 

8  3nb  if  they  bee  bounb  m  fetters, 
and  be  holbcnm  co2bs  of  affliction : 

9  %\)tn  ijee  (helbert)  them  their 
iboi&e,  anb  tftcit;  tranfgreflions,  tfjat 
trjcvfjaueorcecbcb. 

10  tyt  opened)  alfotrjeit  eare  to  bifci? 
plinc,  anb  commanbetl)  that  ttjrj?  re* 
turnefromitiiquitie. 

11  3iftfjcvobepanbferuthim,*ti)cp 
(hall  ^cnb  their  bayes  in  pjofpcritie, 
anb  their  peer  es  in  picafures. 

ii  25ut  if  they  obey  not,  tthey  fl)ail 
penfl)  by  the  GtJ02b,  anb  t|)cy  (halibte 
tbithouttmoiblcbge. 

13  25ut  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heape 
bp  Vb2ath :  they  ccte  not  rbhtn  he  bin* 
bet!)  them. 

14.  t  Xhcybie  in  youth,  anb  their  life 
isamongthcllbnclcane. 

1$  §c  beliuercththc||poo:einhisaf' 
diction,  anbopcnctlj  tljctr  tares  m  op= 
P2cmon. 

i6  CuenfolDotilbhcrjaueremooucb 
thee  out  of  the  ftrait  mto  a  b2oao  place, 
ibhcrctiierc  is  no  flraitnefTc,  anb  tthat 
ibhich  fljoulb  be  fet  on  thy  table,  n^uid 
befulioffamcnc. 

17  Butthou  hafl  fulfilleb  the  iubge^ 
nient  of  the  ibicUeb  :  ||  mbgement  anb 

lUlhCCtallChOlbonthee. 

18    ZSCCaufC  there  is  Uj^atl) ,  beware  left 

he  tafec  thee  aujay  Hnth  \^  OcoUc :  then 
agrcatranfomc  cannot  tbcliuer  thee. 

19  !©tll  he  cftecme  thy  riches;  no  not 
golb,no2  all  the  forces  of  ftrcngth. 

io  2>efire  not  the  night,  Ibhtn peo- 
ple arc  cut  off  m  their  place. 

21  XaKchccb,  regarbnotiniquitic: 
fo2  t!)ts  haft  tljou  chofen  rather  then  af- 
flicnon. 

iz  26cl)olbc,  <5ob  eraiteth  by  l)ts 
potber :  umo  teach  cth  liHe  him  i 

u  naho  hath  inioyneb  him  hislbaw 
02  tbho  can  fay,  %hou  h^ft  fought 
uuciuitic; 

24  aScmembcr  that  thou  magnific 
hisU)02Kc,ibhichmenbeholb. 

25  <£ueryman  may  fee  it,  man  may 
bcholb  it  afarrc  off. 

26  ascholb,  Gob  is  great,  anb  Vbe 
Imoib  him  not,  neither  can  the  number 
of  hisyecres  be  fcarcheb  out. 

27  JFojhccmaueth  fmall  tlje  b2ops 

of 


•  Pftl.34. 


*  lob  11.13 


\Hcb.ihcy 
fball  pajft  j- 
vi a]  by  the 

[word. 


\Hrbrjhtir 
fottltdifth. 
\\Or,Sodi- 

mites. 

II  Or,*g!i. 
lied. 


\Hcb.the 
rcftoflhj 
table. 


\\Or,!udge. 

ment  andiu- 

fticithoHtd 

zphotdihcc. 

t  H'-b.turne 
theeajide. 


TI 


ie 


power 


Ch 


ap.xxxvi].xxxvnj. 


o 


FCT 


\tttb.ihc 
roots* 


\  Heh.  that 

which  gt-iib 


\Htb.he*rc 
in  hearing. 


\HebMgbt. 
|  Heb,  seuigs 
of  the  earth. 


*Pfal.  147 
K.&17. 
t  Heb..vJ 
to  the  {bow- 
er ofravte, 
ttndtotbe 
%<nversof 
nunc  ofhts 
firengtb. 


f  Heb.ont  of 
tbcchjmbi 

\Hcb  [title 
Tmg  wind: 


\Heb.tbe 
clvudofhis 
light. 


of  ibater :  thep  pottw  botbne  rautc  at 
cojbmgto  the  bapout  thereof: 

is  nahtch  the  tiouDsDoe  b?op ,  anb 
oiftM  upon  manabounbantlp. 

19  3llfo  tan  anp  bn&crftanb  the 
fpjcabings  of  trjc  cloubS ,  or  the  noife  of 
his  tabernacle; 

30  2SehoH>,hcfp?eaocthhisli8ht  Pp- 
ontt,  anbeoncteth  tthebottomeofthc 
fea. 

31  Jfo?  bp  them  iubgcth  he  the  peo- 
pie,  he  gtucth  ineatc  in  abtitibauce. 

31  uetth  tloubs  he  toucrcth  the  light, 
anb  tommaunbeth  it  notto  fhme ,  op  t'ie 
cloud  that  tommcth  bctibitt. 

33  %\yt  noife  thereof  thetbeth  con- 
temmg  it.tbc  tattcialfo  tontcrningtthc 
Ilapour. 

CHAP.  XXXVII. 

God  is  to  be  feared  becaufe  of  his  great  works. 
ij  Hiswifdomeis  vnfearchableinthem. 

%  this  aifo  mp  heart 
trcmblcth ,  anb  is  nioucb 
out  of  Ins  plate. 

i  t  locate  attentiuelp 

tlje  noife  of  his  boite ,  anb 

ihefounb  that  goeth  out  ofhismouth. 

3   $ee  bircttcth  it  bnber  the  ibhole 

heauen ,  anb  his  f  lightning  bnto  the 

tem>s  of  the  earth. 

4.  lifter  it  a  boy  tc  r  oarcfh:  he  trjun* 
bjeth  tbiththc  bottc  of  his  crtellcntie, 
anb  hec  ibill  not  flap  them  lbhcn  his 
boite  isheatb. 

5  d5ob  thunbcreth  maruclloutlp 
ibtfhhis  boite:  great  things  both  See, 
Which  tbe  cannot  compjehenb. 

6  foi*hefaithtothernolb,25ctljou 
on  the  earth  • f  hhetbife  to  the  fmall 
raine,  anb  to  the  great  raine  of  his 

ftrength. 

7  $e  feaiefh  bp  the  banb  of  cucry 
man ;  that  all  men  map  unoibc  his 
lbo&e. 

s  Xhen  the  bcaftcs  goc  into  benncs: 
anb  rematnc  in  their  places. 

9  t C*ut  oftlje  South  tommcth  the 
Vbhirlcvbinbc  :  anb  colb  out  of  tp£ 

tiiojtth.  ,        .  „     . , 

10  2Sp  the  bzeath  of  ©ob ,  f  toft  is  gi- 
ucn:anb  tlje  fycabth  of  the  ibaters  is 
fttaitucb.  ,  „ 

1 1  3tlfo  bp  lbatringhc  tbearieth  the 
thitnc  tloub :  hecftatteteth  t  his  bjight 
ClOUD.  ,_      _ 

ii  #nb  it  istumeb  rotmb  aboutbp 
his  tounfels:  that  thep  mapbocibhat^ 


foenct  hec  commaunoeth  them  bpon 
the  fate  of  the  lbojlb  m  the  earth. 

13  ^etaufethitto tomcibhctbcrfoj 
fto?rcttion,o2fo?hiSlanb,02fonncrtp. 

14.  hearten  bnto  this  ,  ©  3Job : 
ff anb  Hit! ,  anb  toiulber  the  lbonbjous 
tbojltcsoftisob. 

1$  SDoeftthouftnotbcibhcncSobbtfc 
pofebthem,  anbtaufeb  the  light  of  his 
tloub  to  thine; 

i6a>oeltthouJmovbtbcbaliatituigs 
ofthctloubs,  thevbonbzotts  nwUesof 
himibhithisperfcttmlnionjlcbgc; 

17  $oib  thp  garments  arc  ibarmc, 
lbhcn  hce  cuuereth  the  earth  bp  the 

S)OUth  wind? 

is  paft  thou  tbith  f)tm  fpjcab  out 
the  flue,  which  is  ftrong,  and  as  a  molten 
loolunggiaflc; 

19  XcachbstuhatTbeihaiirapbnto 

hilll ;  ior  tbC  tannOt  OjbCC  our  fpeach  bp 

reafonofbarftnes. 

io  Shall  it  bee  tolb  hint  that  3 
fpcaUc;ifamanfpcaBC;rurclphcthalue 
ftballoibctibp. 

11  ^nb  nolbc  men  fee  notthebnght 
light  lbhich  is  inthctloubS:butthe 
ibinu  paPfcth  anb  clcanfcth  them. 

ii  tjfatrclbcathcrcominethoutof 
the  ii5o?th  :Vbith  ©ob  «s  tcrnblc  ma= 
ieftie. 

13  1-outhingthe^lmightp,ibetan* 
notfinbhtmout:hc  is  ejceciicntiupotu: 
er,  anbiniubgement,  anbinpltntpof 
mthtc :  he  ibill  not  afflict. 

14  slpenboethercfojcfcarehiimhc 
rcfpcctcth  not  anp  that  are  mifc  ofheart. 

CHAP.    XXXVIII. 

1  Godchalcngethlobto  anfwer.  4  God  by 
his  mighty  workes ,  conuinceth  lob  ol  Igno- 
rance,   3 1    and  of  imbecilluy. 

93*^3^5 iocn  the  %®k®  anfibes 
Hf|  r  ct)  3Job  out  of  the  ibhtrie- 
H^iPinb^iirapb, 

S     1   XBhOisthlSrh-Hbatrr- 

fencth  tounfcll  bv  lbojbs 
iPrthouthnotblcDgc; 

3  oirb  bp  nolbc  thp  lomcs  liltc  a 
man  foz31  lbiiibcmaimb  of  thee ,  anb 
tanfibctcthoumc. 

4-  *  BDhcr  c  ibaft  thou  lbhcn  J  lapb 
the  founbations  of  the  earth  declare, 
rtf  thou  haft  bnbcraanbmg. 

5  i0ho  hath  lapb  the  mcafurcs 
thereof,  ifthouKuoibcft;  oAbhohath 
ftrctthtbthelincbponit? 

6  xohcrcpuon  arc  the '  founbatt? 

28bb  ons 


t  Htb^rod. 


\Heb.  gold 


f  Heb.  make 
mtltncTF. 

•Wat  1 04. 

S-  piou. 
^0.4. 

\bUbjfthm 

K«*»4  ™- 

ding 
\llrb.f0C- 

ken. 


Mans  weak 


enes. 


lob.       Godsfecretworkes. 


27  ^fanffietfjencfcrfateanbibaftc 
ground,  anb  to  caufe  thebub  of  the  tenber 
herbctofpnngfiwth. 

28  Daththeramcafathcr;o?rbho 
hath  begotten  thebjops  of  bclb  < 

29  £>ut  of  ibhofc  rbombc  tame  the 
pee* ano  the  boary  f toft  of beauen,  tubo 
batbgenbzebtt* 

50  3D)e  ibatets  are  bib  as  wh  a 
ttone>anb  the  face  of the  beepers  fro5en. 

31  Canft  tboa  btnb  the  ftbectc  mnU 
encesof||0leiaoes;  0;  loofe  the  banbs 
oftjDnons- 

32  Canft  t!iou  tying  foitl)  ||  2&awi? 
rotbinbisfcafon,  02  canft  thoutguibe 
^rcturusibitt)  bisfonnes; 

33  Bnolbeft  thou  the  ozbinances  of 
beauen  t  canft  t-hou  fct  the  bomimon 
thereof  tntbc  earth; 

3+  Canft  thou  lift  bptbyboite  to  the 
tlouocs.tbat  abanbante  of  rbatcrs  map 
toner  thee; 

35  Canft tbourcnb  lightnings,  that 
tbeymaygoe.anbfaybntotbee,  t^cre 

Ibearef 

3«  *H3bo  bath  pnt  lbiCebomcin  the 
mibarb  parts  srojibbo  hath  cjiuenbn? 
ber  ftanbmg  to  the  heart  i 

37  n9l)o  tan  number  the  cloubesin 
lbifebome  <  0?  t  mtjo  can  ftay  the  bot= 
ties  of  beauen, 

38  \\w\ytu  the  buft  t  grolbceb  mto 
barbnefle,  anb  the  dobs  tleauc  faftto* 
getbec; 

39  *i0tlt  thou  bunt  the  pjay  fo?  the 
lyon;o2  fill  tipet  appetite  oftbeyoung 
lyons, 

+0  nabentbeytourbintbeitbenttes, 
and  abioc  in  ttje  toucrt  to  lie  in  Vbaite* 

41  *j©rjo  pjouiDetb  foi  the  rauen 
bis  foobcfibben  fjis  young  ones  cry  btti 
to  <sob,tbey  ibanber  fo?  lathe  of  mcatc. 

CHAP.    XXXIX. 

1  Of  the  wild  goates  and  hinds.  5  Of  the 
wild  Aire,  j  The  Vnicorne.  ijThePeacock, 
ScoikeandOftrich.  19  Thehorfe.  1.6  The 

hauke.  27  The  Eagle. 

!??fcg®^/*o!bcll*  tljou  the  time 

lbbcn  tfjc  ibtlb  goates  of 

tberoebe  tying  fojtlwor 

^  canft  tnou  marltc  lbbcn 

thcDmbcsboctaluci 

2  Canft  thou  number  tbcmonctbs 
'hat  they  fulfill  i  0?  imoibcft  thou  the 
timcibbcn  tbey  tytngfojtb  ; 

3  Xbcy  bolbc  tbcmrclucs.fbcy bung 
ftytb  their  young  ones ,  they  taft  out 
tbetcfo?rolbcs. 
4-  Xheir 


*Pf J.I  04.9 


foedwfde 
creezpart.U 

XfM  the 

pn<tc  of  thy 


j  Het'.rrings. 


ons  thereof t  faftencb  <  o?  ibbo  laybtbe 
comer  ftonc  thereof < 

7  naben  the  morning  ftarres  fang 
together ,  anb  ail  the  fonues  of  d?ob 
(boutcbftyioy. 

8  *&>i  who  (but  bp  the  fca  tbttb 
boozes,  Vbbcttittyaaefoojtb  as  if  itbab 
iffueo  out  of  the  lbombe  < 

9  oabtn  %  mabethe  tioubthe  gar* 
ment  thereof  ,  anb  tbicKC  bactmefle 
aiibaoimgbanbfojit, 

10  SmbiityaBCbpfozitmybccrccb 
place ,  anb  fet  barr es  anb  bo  ozes, 

11  3im>  fasb,  hitherto  (halt  thou 
come ,  but  no  further :  anb  becre  than 
t  thy  pjoub  tbaues  be  ftay  eb. 

iz  Dafttboutommaunbcbtbemo;; 
ntngfinrc  thy  baies?audcanfcbthtbay- 
fpnng  to  fenom  his  plate, 

13  Xhat  it  might  ta&e  holb  of  the 
tenbesof  tljc  earth ,  that  the  lbicftcb 
might  be  fbaltcn  out  of  it J. 

14. 3tis  turncb  as  clay  to  the  feale, 
anb  they  ftanb  as  a  garment. 

15  3Jnb  from  the  VbicRcb  fheirligljt 
tsibirt)holbni,  anb  the  high  armeftjai- 
bebtoRen. 

16  l^aft  thou  entrcb  into  the  fpnngs 
of  the  Cea  <  m  haft  thou  Vbafttcb  m  the 
fearchofthebepth^ 

17  ^aucthegatcsofbeathbeneope: 
uco  btuo  thttf  02  haft  tljou  fcene  rt)c 
boozes  of  the  fbaboib  of  ocath  < 

is  Daft  thou  pctcctueb  the  tycabth  of 
the  car  tluDeclar  c  if  thou  tmoibcftit  all. 

19  tohcrc  is  the  ibay  «here  light 
bVbellctii  ;anb  as  fo:  barBtieffclbhere 
is  the  place  thereof; 

20  •3Cbatthouft)ouibcfttaueit!|to  the 
bouub  thereof,  anb  that  thou  fljoulocft 
feiiouj  the  pathes  to  the  houfc  thereof. 

21  Bnoibcft  thou  it ,  betaufc  thou 
Vbaftthtu  bonier  hccaufetlje  number 
ofthyoaitS's  great; 

22  Daft  thou  cntrcb  into  tlic  trca- 
Cures  of  the  fno\be;02  haft  thou  fcene 
the  trcafuces  of  the  hatle, 

23  bDhich  3  haue  rcfcnicb  againft 
the  time  of  trouble,  agamft  the  bay  of 
battailcanbibarre; 

24  25y  ibhat  ibay  is  the  light  par* 
tcb;whichfcattcrcththccaftibinbbpon 
thccartl). 

25  uahohath  biusbrbanjatcrtourfc 
fozthcotitifloUjingofibatcrssOitaibay 
foz  thelighmmg  of  tbunber, 

16  Xo  taufc  it  to  rame  on  thccartl), 
where  no  man  ts  :  on  the  Ibilberacffe 
Ibhcrcui  there  ts  no  man  < 


tHct.  is 

\\Or,tlitft- 

utnjlaire:. 

Hcb.Conali. 

\Htb.CcfU. 

\\Or,thc 

twclusfigmt. 

\Hch.gu<k 

them. 


\Heb.h- 
hoiivi, 

vChap.  ■: 
S.Ecdc.2. 
26. 


\Het/v,hi 
citxcditfe  to 
hedtmm\ 
||  O,  Trie. 
rkedujits 
turncdinto 

\  H<i.  11 
prtored. 
«Pf»J.  IO+. 
21. 

\Hcb.thc 
Itfc. 

Pfal  147 
pMzth.6. 

6. 


•Pf«l.  :y.; 


God: 


power  in 


Chap.xl. 


us  creatures. 


f  Heir,  fill 

places. 


\  Hdrcf 


\\Or,lhcfez 
ihmofihe 
Storttfand 
OShncb. 


terrour, 
\Or,bii[eel 


*rmwr. 


4  IChcir  pong  ones  ace  in  goon  V? 
Uing,tljcpgroibbp  i\jitli  come :  ftjepgo 
fb?dj,anbretnmcnot  bntortjem. 

5  m\)o  ftatt)  fent  out  toe  ttnlb  au"e 
frce<  ojlbholjadjloooftbdjebanDsof 
djettnlbaffe* 

6  nanofc  tjottfc  3  Jjauc  mabc  tfjt 
ttulbernclTc,  anb tflje barren  lanbc!)is 
Dwellings. 

7  i?c  ftomertj  tlje  multltubc  of  tbe 
tine,nml)ccrcgarbe$!)cdjetrpingtof 
djebnucr. 

i  %\\t  range  of  die  mountatnes  is 
t)is  patturc ,  anb  t)ee  fearrtjetl)  after 
cuerpgrceucdnng. 

9  nam  tlje  JUnttome  be  milling  to 
ftrnetnec^  ozabibcbptljpcnbbe* 

io  CanQ  djou  bmbedjc  Unicome 
mtdjljisbanbuidjcfurrotu?  ojUrilllje 
ftarrolbtoetoailepes  after  tljce* 

ii  m\t  djou  trull  Ijim  becauft  Ijis 
ftccngdj  is  greats  tbtlt  djou  leaue  ti)v 
labour  to  l)mu 

ii  naiit  djou  beleeue  Ijim  tljat  ljee 
tbtn  totng  Ijome  djp  fteb  <  anb  gather  it 
mtodjpbamc* 

u  GaueftthoutJjegooblvttingsbnto 
flje  peacotfts,  o?  liftings  anbftadjers 
Untott)cC>rtnci)< 

i+  naljtrt)  icaucttj  fjcr  egges  in  dje 
card), anb  tbarnietl)  them  in  buft, 

H  ^nD  fojgcttctl)  trjat  ttjc  footmay 
erufli  djem ,  o?  djat  dje  lbilbe  bead  map 
bjeaftctljem. 

is  £>lje(snarbencbagainttIjerpong 
ones,  as  djougl)  rticv  mere  not  6rrs: 
Ijcr  labour  is  tn  bamc  without  fcatc. 

17  asccaufe  (5ob  tjatt)  bepnueb  tjer 
ofUnftbome,  netfljer  Ijadj  Ijelinpartcb 
toiler  bnberttanbing. 

is  ©bat  nmc  (be  lifted)  bp  t)ec  felfe 
onbj'gl)  ,(1)6  fcomctfj  djcljotfc  anbljis 
rtber. 

i9?^afttbougiuentbcl)o;fe(rrengtb^ 
Ijaftdjou  tlodjeb  Dis  itccReUndj  tljun 
m* 

io  CantttljoumaRclnmafraibasa 
gra(l)oppt  r  <  dje  glo<tp  of  Ins  noftriia  is 
t  terrible. 

ii  p$epa\bctljlntneballep,anbrfc: 
foTHeflj  in  his  ftccngd) :  ljee  goedj  on  to 
merit  djtarmcb  men. 

ii  $emociictl)atftarr,anbtsnotafc 
frighteb:  neuijer  turnefl)  I)  t  bacfee  from 
djeftoom. 

ij  1B)e  qtiuier  ratletl)  againft  fjim, 
dje  glittering  fpeare  anb  tf)e  fliielb. 

24  ^cfroalloibcdjdjcgrounDtbid) 
fierceneflc  anb  rage :  nttfljcr  bclecuedj 


tjc djat  it  h  djefouub  oftlje trumpet. 

15  l!?ec  fait!)  among  the  trumpets, 
$a,  t)a:  anb  Ijc  fmellctl)  d)e  battaiica 
farrc  off,  dje  dumber  of  djecaptames, 
anbdjeujounng. 

16  DoctO  tbcljawRC  flic bptl)p  wife- 
borne,  and  ftrctrt)  Ijer  Unngs  totbarb  ttjc 
5>outlj? 

17  JDocd)  dje  eagle  mount  bp  tat 
djp  tommaunb  ?  anb  malic  her  neft  on 

higljf 

i%  j&ljcbtbcllcrtjanbabibedjontix 
rortte,bpon  tlje  craggc  of  tlje  rocKc,anb 
djcflrongpiatc. 

19  5Promtf)cncc  ffjc  fetfectT) ttjep^ap, 
andDercpesbefjolbafacteoff. 

30  $?er  pong  ones  alfofucRbpbloob: 
anb*  ibljcre  tlje  daine  are,tijere  is  t)c, 

CHAP.  XL. 

Iobhumb!ed)him(elfetoGod.  6  Godftir- 
rcchhimvptofliewhisrijhteoi.irncs,  power, 
andwifedome.    15    Oitne  Behemoth. 

^>«reouer  rnc  %  o  k  d  an? 
(toercbgjob.anbfaib, 

1  £>nail  Ijcc  that  con? 
tenbetljibitl)  tljc^imtgl)' 
tic,m(truct  him  >  jje  tljat  re- 
p;ouctD  <5ob,iet  ijtm  anfraere  it. 

3  C  %\)tn  'Job  anfrocreb  t1)c 
UrOiE^anbfaib, 

4-  ^djoMambile.umatnjalilJ 
anlracretljcef  fUbiliapmp^anb  bpon 
mpnioutlj. 

5  4Dncc  Ijauc  31  fpoRcn ,  but  3J  Ibrtl 
not  anfioer  c :  pea  tttnfc ,  but  5  ttnll  p^o? 
ccebnoftirtljer. 

6  CXljcnanuucrcbtfccHoHB 
bnto  3Job  out  ofrt)e  ibljttlerbinbc ,  anb 
fatD: 

7  *(Sirbbpfi)ployncsnotbURca 
man:3Jmill  bemaunboftfjee,  anbbc 
dace  tnou  bnto  me. 

s  *n9ilttl)oualfobifanuimpiubge? 
mentf  ibilt  tijou  tonbenme  mec ,  tljat 
djou  mapeft  be  ngijtcous  i 

9  Haft  tnou  an  armc  line  (Bob  i  o? 
canft  djou  djuubcr  ibidj  a  bopce  Iirc 
l)im< 

io  *  2DetBc  tbp  felfe  noro  with  fl9a? 
tc(lie,anb  crccllcnnc ,  anb  arap  djp  felfe 
tbldj  gloip,anb  bcatitie. 

ii  Caftabjtoabtijcrageofrtjpmjadr 
aubbd)olb  tucrp  one  djat  is  p<;oub,anb 
abaft  !)tnu 

u  ?Ioorc  on  cnerp  due  ttytt  is  pjoub, 
and  b;ingl)un  loib :  anb  trcab  bolbnc 
djeibicbebindjeir  place. 

26 bb  %        13  fctbc 


t  HA-rh 
•.hy  march. 


Mitt.  14, 
i8.1ukci7. 

37- 


■Chap.; 


'?a.  5c. 
:t.tom.3. 


*  PfJ.  104 


Behcmotli,and 


lob. 


Leuiathan. 


|  Or, the  E- 
lebhantyat 
fomc  ihmk^ 


\\Or,hef« 

lethvy. 


t  Hcb.be  of 
irejfctb. 
\')r,  villa 

»  hu  Jtebt  ■ 
r  bore  nit 
rofe  with  a 
glnne  f 


\\Thatii,a 

xrhaitor.x 
wbir/epoe/e. 

t  Heb.obuh 
thou  drew- 
left. 


13  $tbc  tbcm  m  the  Tmtt  together, 
anDbinDctbctrfaccstntccret. 

14  3Cbcn  iMl  31  alfo  coitfcrTc  t»nto 
thee,  that  thine  oumc  right  banb  tan 
lauctbee. 

15  C  Bcbolbc  noil)  ||  aSebcmorb 
tbbitb  J  ma&e  ttntb  tbec,  bee  eatctb 
gratlcasanore. 

i6  jioe  noil) ,  bis  ftrcngtb  is  ttt  bis 
loyucs,  auo  ins  fojtccismtbcnaucllof 
bis  belly. 

17  ||  ike  mouctl)  \)is  taile  line  a  Ce* 
bar :  the  fmcujcs  of  bis  (tones  ace  tt)?apt 
together. 

is  l?isboucsare  as  ftrong pieces  of 
biaffc:  l)ts  boncsare  lincbarrrs  ofiron 

19  $ce  is  the  cbicfc  of  the  tt>apcs  of 
dpoDtbctbatmabebim,  canma&c  bis 

ftbOjH  tO  apPJOatl)  vnto  him. 

20  Purely  the  mountatnes  tying 
bunfoojrbfoobe :  inbeteautbc  bcafts 
oftbcficlbpiap. 

21  fcclictbDnbcrtbcfbabptrccs,tn 
tlje  couect  of  the  tcett  e,anb  fennes. 

22  %\)t  fbabp  trees  couet  him  with 
their  fbabboVb  :  the  Ibtllorbcs  of  the 
tyooHc  compafle  htm  about 

23  25choiD,t he  Bnnfteth  bpariuec, 
and  haftctb  not :  he  ttuftctb  that  he  can 
tyaw  Dp  3Jojban  mtobismoutb. 

24  ||^etatttthittt)ithhtsepcs:his 
nofe  pcatcctb  through  fnarcs. 

CHAP.     XLI. 

OfGodsc,reat  power  in  the  Leuiathan. 

SInfttboutyatboutllfle* 
tuatban  Ibith  an  boofte;o? 
his  tongue  ttntb  a  cojbc 
t  which  thou  icttcftbottmc  ; 
2    Canft  thou  put  an 

hooiic  into  his  nofe;  o?bo;ehisiatt>e 

through  nntbatbojnc; 

3  naaibcmaucmanyrnppiieations 
bntorhee<U)tHhefpeaUefoft«ords  &tv 
to  thee; 

4  nam  he  ma&ca  coucnantttittb 
tbec;  unit  tboutaac  bint  fo?  aferuant 
fojeuee; 

5  nailttbouplapltoitb  him  as  ttntb 
a  btrbc;  ttnlt  ttjou  binbe  hu»  foj  tbp 
mapbens; 

6  s>hail  the  companions  mafic  a 
banquet  of  him;  fbaiitbcppart  bima= 
inong the  merchants; 

7  Canft  thou  fill  his  fitinne  ttntb 
barbcb  irons;  ojbtsbeab  ttntb  nu> 
fptarcs; 

s   jLaptbiuc  banb  upon  btm,  xt> 


member  the  batten :  Doe  no  mo?e. 

9  26rljoiD ,  the  hope  of  him  ts  in 
hatnc :  (hail  not  one  be  caft  DoVbne  euen 
at  the  fight  of bun ; 

10  jBonc  is  fo  fierce  that  bare  ftirre 
htm  Dp :  )DDo  then  is  able  to  ftantj  be? 
fojeme; 

n  *  i»ho  hath  pjcucnteb  me  that  31 
(l)oulb  repap  hini?whatroeuerisi)nDer  tt;e 
tbholeheauen,tsmtnc. 

12  3Jnrillnotconccalc  bisparts.no* 
his  power,  no?  his  comevp  pjopomon. 

13  naho  catt  btfeouer  the  face  of  his 
garmcnt;oz  tt>bo  can  come  tohi™,|| nutb 
bisboublcbublc; 

14  nabocanopenfbeboojesofbts 
fate ;  his  teeth arc  terrible  rounb  about. 

15  His  tCcaicsareimpn&e,fhutDpto5 
gether  aswithaclofefcale. 

i6  £>nei5foneere  to  another,  that 
no  ap?c  can  comebetvuecne  them. 

17  %hev  arc  iopneb  one  to  another, 
they  fticbc  together ,tbat  thep  cannot  be 
funbieb. 

18  25phtsncefingsaiightboth(hine, 
antj  his  epes  arc  nae  the  epe-ltbbes  of 
the  morning. 

19  £>ut  of  his  mouth  got  burning 
lampcs,and  (parties  offirelcapeout. 

20  qm  ofhts  noftrcls  goeth  fmofec, 
as  out  of  afeethmgpoto;  caibwn. 

21  ^tsbttathftmmethcoaics,  anba 
flame  goeth  out  of  Ins  mouth. 

22  ^nhisnecfteremainethlrrengrh, 
anb  t  fbjtroiue  tsturneb  into  top  before 
htm. 

23  t  T\)t  flabes  of  his  fled)  arc  I'op^ 
neb  together :  tljep  are  firmc  in  them- 
felues,thep  cannot  bemoucb. 

24  !f>is  heart  ts  as  finite  as  a  done, 
vea  as  harb  as  a  pecce  of  the  netbet 

mil-ftone. 

2$  iDhenheravfethhphimfelfcthe 
mightte  are  afrato :  bp  reafon  of  b?ea^ 
lungs  thet  punfic  themfclucs. 

26  Xhc  fluo  Jb  of  him  that  lapetb  at 
him  cannot  holb :  tbefpearc,  the  bart, 
no?  the  ||  habergeon. 

27  $ccftccmcrt)ironasftcatt),and 
bjaffeasrottcnlboob. 

28  %tyc  arrow  cannot  inahe  him 
flee :  fling  ftoncs  arc  turncblPtth  h»m 
mtoftubble. 

29  2Dartsarecountcbasftnbble:he 
laughcth  at  tlje  (baiting  of  a  fpcarc. 

30  1 5>uarpc  ftoncs  are  tonberbim: 
bcfpieabethfljarpepointcb  things  Dp* 
on  the  mire. 

31  i^c  maheth  the  beepe  to  topic  liftc 
a  pot: 


•Pfal.J4.t. 
&  50.12. 

l.COt.IO.2^ 


J  J  Or{mthin. 


\11eo.fhaig 
ptecei  of 
IhtsUs. 


t  Hcb.foTcTo 
raojeeth. 

1  Hthbt 

f*Uwgi. 


Or,ireft- 
fLtte, 


iHcb.feerpe 

piccet,  of  the 
for/herd. 


lobs  repentance,        Chap.xlij, 


an 


dfcii 


lciue. 


hattithem- 
frluei  witb- 
04tfeare. 


II  Or," 

thought  of 
thine  CAt  Pi 
kindred. 

•Chap.  ;8 


a  pot :  bee  maBetb  the  fca  uuc  a  pot  of 
opntment. 

ji  ^eemabctbapatbtofhtneaftet 
btm  one  iboulb  tfjinfec  the  beepe  to  bee 
boartc. 

33  Hpon  earth  there  is  not  Ins  lifcc : 
||  tubo  ts  mabc  tbttbout  fcare. 

34.  l^cbebolbetb  all  high  things:  be 
is  a  feing  oucr  all  the  cbilbzcn  of  p:ibc. 

CHAP.    XLII. 

i  lob  fubmitteth  himfeltc  vnto  God.  7  God 
preferring  lobs  caule,  nukctli  his  friends  (ub- 
niitdiernfelue.s&acceptedihim.  io  He  mag- 
nified! &  blcllcth  lob.  16  lobs  acre  &'  death. 


^»^sft^ 


^a  ften  3lob  anfrocrcb  the 
W$  %  ©  is  ©,  anb  taib, 


2    gj&notti  that  thou 
canft  doe  eucrp  thing ,  anb 
_  that  ||  no  tijought  can  bee 
VbttbbolbcnfTomtbee. 

3  *nabo  >  nc that iitoctl) eonnfcittottljs 
out  lmoil>leogc  <  therefore  bauc  3  ^^ 
reb  that  3  tonberftoot)  not,  things  too 
ttionbttfull  fo:  me,  ttmitb  3  fenclb  not. 
4-  l?care,3J  befcech  t!)cc,  anti 3(  tbiU 
fpcauc :  3  Unliocmanb  of  thee,  anb  be- 
ciarctboutontomc. 

5  3  bauc  bearb  of  tbee  bp  the  bca; 
ring  of  the  care :  but  nolb  nunc  cpcfcctb 
thee. 

6  i©hetcfo2c3Jabhon:cmyfc!fe,anD 
repent  tn  ouft  anb  afbes. 

7  C  3lnb  «  ttas  fo ,  that  after  the 
fL£>is©hab  fpoucn  thefc  ttwbstonto 
i  50b,  the  %  ©  is  ©  fatb  to  <£lipba5  the 
1  Ccmantte ,  £0p  tbzath  is  umblcb  a- 
!gainfttbce,  %  agamfttb?  ttbo  fricnDS: 
fo:vcbauenot  fpoften  of  nice  the  thing 
that  ts  right,  asmyferuant3Jobbath. 

8  Xhcrefo jc  tafte  Unto  you  notb  fc- 
ucnbulloctts,  anb  feucn  rammes,  anb 
goe  to  mp  feniant  3  ob,  anb  offer  top  fo: 
your  fclues  a  burnt  ofctmg.anb  nrp  fee 


uant  3Job  thai  p:ap  fo:  pou,fo:  tyim  Vbil 
31  accept:  left  3Jbealcriiith  pon  afte!  your 

folly,  in  that  p c  haue  not  fpoften  of  mec 
the  thing  which,  ts  rtgbt,  Itfec  my  fee- 
uant  job. 

9  So  €lipha5  the  Xemamtc,  anb 
28iibat>  the  £>bubite,  and  zophar  the 
jftaamatbttc  limit ,  anb  bib  acto:btiig 
asthc|L©KjE>commanbeb  them:  the 
H©  is  d  alfo  acccptcb  1 3Job. 

io  ^nbthcfL©isjDturncbthecapti' 
ume  of  3Job,  roben  he  pzapcb  fo:  his 
frtenbs :  alfo  the  %  ©  is  ©  t  gaue  3Job 
tibicc  as  much  as  he  hab  befo:c. 

ii  Xhen  came  tljcrebnto  him  all  his 
b:cth:cn,  anb  all  his  filters,  anb  all  thev 
that  hab  bin  of  his  acquaintance  bcfb:c, 
anb  bib  eat  b:cab  Ibtth  him  in  his  houfe: 
anb  they  bemoneb  htm,  anb  comfoztco 
bimoner  all  the  cuill  that  the  fL©is© 
hab  b:ought  bpon  hun :  cucry  man  alfo 
gaue  hun  a  piece  of  money,  anb  cucry 
one  an  earc  -  ring  of  golb. 

u  £>o  the  iLoismbleffeb  the  latter 
enbof  3Job,  mo:c  tbenbss  beginning : 
fo:  he  hab  fourteenc  thoufanb  fheepe, 
anb  fire  thoufanb  camels,  ant)  a  thou- 
fanb  youc  of  oren,  anb  a  thoufanb  CVjcc 
affes. 

13  $c  hab  alfo  reucnfonncs,anbfb:ee 
baughtcrs. 

i+  am)  he  calico  the  name  of  the  firft, 
gjcmima,  anb  the  name  of  the  feconb, 
Bt5ia,anbthenamcof  the  thtrb,  Be* 
ren-happuch. 

15  3no  tn  all  the  lanb  tbcte  no  too- 
men  founbfo  faircasthc  Daughters  of 
3lob:  anb  their  father  gaue  tbcm  inhe- 
ritance among  their  b,:crh:cn. 

i6  lifter  this  liucb  Job  an  hunbjeb 
anb  fourtic  pecres,  anb  farb  his  fonncs, 
anbhisfonnesfonncs,  euen  fourcgcne= 
ranons. 

17  5)0  3lob  bicb  bnng  olb,  ant)  full 
ofbapes. 


factffrptr- 
fm. 


\H,b.iht 
facdf  lcb. 


to  lob  Tnto 

tbi  double. 


Bbb 


fTHE 


Who  is  blelTed.         Pfalmes.     Chrifb  kingdome. 


•  Prou^. 
it- 

\Or.mcke4. 


IolKi.8. 
pfal.  119.1. 

icre.17.8. 


t  Heh-fiJe. 


'Pfal.34.1. 

fa.17.13. 


•Aas.4. 
*5- 

\\Ortlnmiil- 
iHottjlj  af~ 
fcmtUl 
\Hebr.m;- 
ditaie. 


,THE  BOOKE  OF 

Pfalmes. 


PSALME    I. 


Th 


e  vn- 


i    The  happinelTe  of  die  godly.    4 
happmelTe  of  die  vngodly. 

!Lcu"cD*istrjcman 
tUanballtrtnuot 
tu  the  counfcll  of 
trje||bngoblp,no? 
ftanbetl)  in  trje 
Ibap  of  Gnners, 
no?uttetl)uttl)e 
feat  of  tlje  fconu> 
fall. 

x  25ut  Ijis  beligrjt  is  m  tl)c  Hatb  of 
tt)c  %  ©  «  p,*anb  m  Ijis  JUVb  boet  j)  t)e 
memtate  bap  an&  ntgtjt. 

3  2Cnb  tje  fyaibc  hue  a  tree  piantco 
bp  the  riuers  of  ibater ,  that  tymgeth 
foojtl)  his  fruit  tn  his  feafon ,  his  leafc 
aifb  than  not  t  tbithcr ,  anb  tbhatfoeuer 
heboeth,uja.lp;torpcr. 

4     Xl)C  DllSOblp  ire  not  fo :  bUt  are 

♦lifec  the  thatfc ,  tbhich  the  tbtnbc  b;t 
uethavbap. 

5  Xherefojc  thehngoblp  fljall  not 
ftanbin  the  iubgement,  no?  turners  in 
the  Congregation  of  the  righteous. 

6  5fo?  the  2L£>  is  ©  tatottieth  the 
lUapof  the  righteous :  butthclbapof 
thebngoblpfyallperifh. 

P  S  A  L.    II. 

The  kingdome  of  Chnft.     10  Kings  are  ex- 
horted to  accept  ic. 

fcp*bothchcathen||ragc, 
anb  the  people  t  imagine 
abamcthmg* 
z  1EI)c  Bmgs  of  t!)c 
„  cacti)  fct  themrelues.anb 
the  rulers  tafec  counTcU  together  ,  a= 
gamft  the  Hsdk  w>  ,  anb  agamft  his 
3tnopntcb,fjying, 


3  JLct  l)£  bzcatte  tOar  banbes  afmc 
tier, anb caftaiuap  their  coitis from bs. 

4.  *^ec  that  Gtteth  in  the  heattens 
(baliaugh:  tljc  JLokp  ujallhaue  tljcm 
inbettGon. 

5  Xhcn  fhall  hec  fpeabe  bnto  them 
mhisib?ath,atib||berethcmmhisfo?e 
bifplcafurc. 

6  pa  hauc  3J  fct  t  mp  Bing  f  bpon 
mpholphillofSnon. 

7  *J  rbillbeclare  ||  tfjc  bctree :  tfjc 
1L  ©  is  je>hath&ub  bnto  nice,  Xhouart 
nip  fonne ,  this  bap  hauc  31  begotten 
tf)ee. 

8  *^fecofme,anb3in)augiucchee 

the  heathen  fo?  thine  inheritance ,  anb 
thebttcrmoft  parts  of  the  earth  fojthp 
poffeffton. 

9  *  Xhou  (halt  bjeaae  them  notify  a 
rob  of  iron,thou  (bait  balb  them  in  pie* 
cesiifte  a  potters  bclTell. 

io  2Sec  tbife  nolb  thercroje ,  if)  pee 
IStfngs:  beinGructcbpeSfubgcsofthe 
earth. 

u  S>crue  trje  JLokjd  Vbith  fcare, 
anb  reiopce  ttnth  trembling. 

\%  BitTc  trje  £>onne left  he be  angrp, 
anbpe  pcriuj  from  tlje  Vbap,  Vbfjcn  fns 
lb?atf)is  ftinbleb  but  a  little :  *  zsicffcb 
are  all  tljcp  tljat  put  tljcir  trutt  m  Ijim. 

P  S  A  L.    III. 

Thefccuncicof  Godi  proteclion. 

€*  31 0falmc  of  SDaiub  \bDen  Ije  fleb 

from  3tbfalomljis  fonne. 
^feWfCS^JS  o ,  Dolb  are  tljcp  m- 

m§&S crcaff  D  tnat  n'0UlJlc  mee  J- 
i^Piy  niaup  arctljcptl)fltrifebp 
fKiWiagamftme. 

*     ti]9anp  there  bee  which 


fap  of  mp  fouie,Thcre  is  no  l)elpc  to,:  Ijim 

lll(50D.  Sclalj. 

5  aBut 


* Prou.i. 
16. 


\\Or,lrmtlt. 


\Hebr.an 
omted. 
||  Htbr  Vf, 
Stan,  the  htll 
of  my  H oh- 

"Aas.ij. 

3}.hcb.i. 
?• 

\\Orfirj 
decree. 
'Pfal.7J. 
8. 

*  Apoc.2. 
27.  and  i>i. 


"Prou.  1 6. 
lo.ifa.  ;o. 
18.icte.17. 
7.romp.j  j 
and  10.11. 
rpcc.l.o'. 


"2  Sam. 13 
'S- 


Patience  in  trouble.     Pfalmes.  Dauid s  prayer 


\[Or,aboKt. 


•  Plal.4.;. 


"If,.  4  j. 

11. 

Hof.13.4. 


\\Crtoner- 
feer. 


\\Or,bte 
gractow  vn. 
re  me. 


•Pfil.jo. 
I4&S'- 
19- 


•PW.3.5 


3  26uttt)ou,€)3L©«©>anafl)ieH) 
|]fo?  me .  mpgiozp ,  anb  the  lifter  bp  of 
mineheao. 

4  3  ccpcb  Unto  the  %  o  is  ©  tbtttj 
mpbopce,  anb  he  hcarb  me  out  of  his 
t»oip  t)iu.  £>ciah 

5  *  3  lapb  me  bolbne  anb  flcpt ,  31 
atba&eojoithc  lL€>is©fufiatncbmc. 

6  *  31  ibM  not  be  afraib  often  thou* 

fanbSofpCOplC,thathaUC  fCt  themfelues 

agamft  mc  rcunb  about. 

7  3nfe,2L>3L©ia©,fauemce,4D 
mptSobifoj  thou  haftfmttten  all  mine 
enemies  vpon  the  cheefee  bone :  thou  haft 
bjo&enthetecth  ofthebngoblp. 

8  *  Valuation  belonged  bnto  the 
%  €>  is  © :  thp  blefling  is  bpon  thp  pco= 
ple.5>eiah. 

P  S  A  L.    IIIL 

1  Dauid  prayeth  for  audience,  i  He  reproueth 
and  exhorteth  his  enemies.  6  Mans  hap- 
pineffc  is  in  Gods  fauour. 

C  Xothcllchiefe^uficianoniftcgi* 
not!),  31  pfaimc  of  SDauib. 
ear  emc,tbhcn3J  call,® 
C5ob  of  mp  rlghteoufncffe: 
tftou  haft  iniargeb  mee 
Ibhcn  i  was  m  btftcetTc, 
_  ||  haue  mertp  bpon  me,anb 
hearemppjapet. 
z   £>pefonnesofmcn,  hotblong 

will  yee  turne  mp  glOjpitltO  ffiamc*  how 

lone  Tbill  pee  lone  banitie,  and  fecHc  after 
leafing;  £>eiah. 

3  26ut  Hnoro  that  the  2L®  is  ©hath 
fet  apart  him  trjat  is  goblp ,  fo*  him* 
fclfc:thc  Hois©  ttnllhearclbhen  3J 
call  bnto  hint. 

4  £>tanb  in  aibe ,  anb  finnc  not : 
commune  tbtth  pour  oibnc  heart bpon 
pourbcb,anbbefhU.  £>clah. 

5  ®ffcr*thcfacrinccsofrightcouf* 
neffe,  ano  put  pour  truft  tn  the  1Lc>is©. 

6  Xhcrcbemanpthatfap,n3hotbil 

n)CU)bSJnvgoOb;lioKJDltftt6oubp 
the  light  of  thp  countenance  bpon  bs. 

7  Xhou  haft  put  glaoncflc  in  mp 
heart,  mojc  tlieit  in  the  nine  that  their 
come  ano  their  nunc  mtreatcb. 

8  *  3f  mill  both  lap  nice  bolbne  in 
peace  anb  flecpc :  fo;  thou  ilois©  onlp 
ma&eftmeMbcllinfafcne. 

PSAL.    V. 

i  Dauid  prayeth,  and  profeiTcih  his  fludic  in 
pr.iver.  4  Gcd  fatiourctli  not  the  v.  icked. 
7  Dauid  profefsing  his  faith,  pravcth  vino 
God,  to  guide  him,  10  To  deflroy  his  ene- 
mies,  11  and  to  preferuc  the  godly. 


C  %o  the  chlefe  mufician  bpon  0t 
hiloth,  3$falmeof  2>aufb. 
gjue  eare  to  mp  Ibojbs,  © 
%  ©  is  ©,  tonfibcr  mp  me* 
bttarton. 

2  $caracn  bnto  the 
boice  of  mp  tric,mp  Btng, 
anb  mp  45ob :  fo?  bnto  trjee  tbill  31  pjap. 

3  *  fl^p  bopte  (halt  thou  heare  in 
the  morning,  ©  H©ia©  ■,  tn  the  mo?* 
ning  tbill  31  Direct  my  prayer  bnto  thee, 
anb  tbill  loofecvp. 

4  JFo?  thou  an  nota<R>b  that  hath 
pleafure  tn  tbirttebneffe :  neither  fhail 
mill  bibcll  tbtth  thee. 

5  XhefooUQjfhaUnotltanbtmthp 
fight:thouhateftaimo;t&ersofiniquttp 

6  Xhou  fhalt  beffrop  them  that 
fpeafte  leafing :  thelitis©  tbill  ab* 
hojrc  the  t  bloobie  anb  bctcttfull  man. 

7  2Sutasfo? me ,  3F  tbill come  into 
thp  houfc  m  the  mumtube  of  thp  mercp 
and  m  thp  fcarc  ibill  31  tbojfbip  totbarb 
t  thp  holp  temple. 

8  ?Lcab  mc  £)H©is©,  fnthprigh* 
teoufneffe,  becaufe  of tmine enemies; 
ma&e  thp  tbapftraight  before  mp  fate. 

9  jf  oj  there  is  no|jfatthfuinestin  their 
mouth,  their  intbarb  part  is  tberp  ibic- 
fecbnefTe :  *  their  th?oat  is  an  open  fepul* 
chze,thcp  flatter  ttith  their  tongue. 

io  |ja)Cirropthouthem,£)<!5ob,let 
them  fall  1 1  bp  their  oVbnctounfcts  :caft 
them  out  tn  the  multttubcof  thctt  tranf* 
greffions,fo;s  thep  haue  rebelleb  agamft 
thee. 

u  25ut  let  all  thofc  that  put  thefr 
ttuftinthec,rciopcc:lcttl)emeucrfhout 
fojiopibetaufcthou  t  oefenbefttljcm: 
let  them  aifo  that  louc  tljp  name,  be  iop* 
full  m  rt)ce. 

iz  j?o?thou,!L©iK©,n)iltbleu"cthc 
righteous:ibith  fauour  Vbiit  thouttom- 
paffchunaswuhafbielb. 

PSAL.   VI. 

i    Dauids  complaint  in  his  fickneife.  S  By  faith 
he  mumpheth  oner  liis  enemies. 

CXothe  chicfe  muficianon  fierjmoth 

llbpon&heminitb,  3lpfalmc 

of  SDauib. 

'iLowp.rebuhemenot 
in  thine  anger ,  neither 
chatten  me  inthpljotoif* 
pleafure. 
x  l)?auc  mercp  bpon 

mc ,OlLo ih © ,  foi  31  am  lDcabe : C> 

%  o  h  ©  !;caic  mee,  fo;  mp  bones  arc 

bcrcb. 

3    ffip 


'  PlaL  I  30 
6. 


fort  thtne 
tya. 


\H<b.  the 
munofblooiti 
and  deceit. 


\Heb.the 

temple  of  thy 

holtneffe. 

tHei  thof 

rehuh  ob- 

[true  me. 
Orfted- 

't-JtrtejTf. 

t  tiebsn  bu 

mouthj.m 
be  mouth  of 
ir.y  of  than. 

\Htb.mc- 

kedneffet. 

"Kom.j.ij 
Ortmake 

tbem  PHtlty. 

||  Or, from 

thetrcoHn. 

fits 

t  hieb  than 

utr,  or  pro- 
te8 eft them, 
t  Hfh. 
cromie  htm. 


\\Orfifm 
the  eight- 


Dauid! 


prayer. 


Pfa 


aimcs. 


ana  confidence 


fid. 


1 


'Pfjl.JO. 

IO.&88.H 
&115  17- 
&  118.17. 
Efiy.j8. 
18. 

\\OrfHerj 
night. 


•Mat.7*). 
805.4'- 
Luc.  1 5. 2  7. 


||  Or,iuJiiu 


\He'p  irrra 
tUluter.  r. 


'PU.it. 

19. 


j  spy  foule  ts  alfo  io;c  DcjceD  :  but 
tbou,  £D  %  ©  is  ©,hotb  long; 

4  3Returne,£>fL©!iSE\Dcliucrmy 
fouie:ohfauemec,fo;thymerctcsfalie. 

5  *  jfoj  in  Death  there  is  no  remem; 
tyanee  of  thee :  tn  the  grauc  tbho  (hall 
gracthcethanltes* 

6  31  am  iDeary  ttrith  my  grontng, 
II  all  the  night  malic  3J  my  beb  to  ftbtm : 
3  tbater  my  touch  tbith  m  y  tear  es. 

7  ^tne  ete  is  tonfumeb  becaufe  of 
griefe  ■,  it  tbajcctl)  olDc  betaufe  of  all 
nunc  enemies. 

8  *Departfromme,allyceiDO,irters 
oftniquitie  foj  fhe?L  ©  w  ©  hatb  hcarb 
the  Poicc  of  my  ttjcepmg. 

9  1Ehe?L©iK£>hathhearbmyun> 
plication  j  the  H  ©  is  js>  fljillrcceiuc  my 
pjayer. 

10  fLct  all  mine  enemies  be  afha* 
mcoanu  fojc  PcrcD :  let  them  tcturnc 
and  be  afhameb  fubbainly. 

PSAL.    VII. 

Dauidprayetli  againft,  the  malice  of  his  ene- 
mies ,  profefsinghisinnocency.  10  By  faith 
he  feefn  his  defence  and  the  deficu&ion  of 
his  enemies. 

C  £>higgaion  of SDauib  tbtjirf) he  fang 
into  the  ILsd  is  id  concerning  the 
tbozDs  of  €u(h  the  zsentamtte. 
!L  ©  is  jd  ,  my  <£>od,  in  thee 
boe  3  Put  m?  truft :  faue  me 
fcom  all  them  rtjat  pctfecute 
me,anDDeltuermc. 
i  ?Leatt  hee  tcarc  my 
foule  liac  a  lyon ,  rnitmg  it  in  pieces, 
tbfjile  there  is  t  noneto  Deliuer. 

3  £)?L©i3jD  my<£ob,  if3Jhauc 
bone  this  -,  if  tljere  be  iiucuutic  in  my 
hanDS: 

4  31 3  haue  retbarbeb  eutll  Pnto 
hunfhatibasatpeaceimthrne  :(yca3 
rjaucDeliuereD  him  ttjat  rbitljout  caufc 
ismincenemie.) 

5  fLcttt)c  enemie  per fecute  my  foule, 
anb  tane  i  r,  yea  let  Dim  tr eao  DoiDne  my 
life  topon  the  earth ,  ano  lay  mine  ho; 
nourintheDuft.  S>elah. 

6  3lrife,£>IL©  is  jp.in  thine anger, 
lift  bp  thy  felfe,  betaufe  of  the  rage  of 
mine  enemies  lanDanjaliefo;  me  to  the 
tubgementthaicliotiljaftcommanbeD. 

7  £>o  (hall  the  congregation  of  the 
people  tompafle  thee  about :  ioi  their 
lahes  therefore  returne  thou  on  high- 

8  XhelL©ia©fhaliubge  thepco- 
pie :  mbge  me,  £)  %  ©  is  ts>,  *  accoiomg 


to  my  rightcoufncCrc,  anb  accozbmg  to 
mine  integrate  thai  ts  mme. 

9  £>h  let  the  rbicBeonesof  the  ibtc 
acb  come  to  an  etiD.but  eftablith  the  iuQ: 
*fonhe  righteous  (Etobtrtcth  the  hearts 
anoremes. 

10  t  $$y  Defence  is  of  <soD ,  tbhich  fa- 
ueth  the  Dpughtm  heart. 

11  II  <£oD  lubgcth  the  righteous,  anb 
C5oD  isangrie  with  the  wicked  euery  bay. 

11  3Jfhcturncnot,hcn)illtt)hcthis 
frooiD ;  he  hath  bent  his  bolPc ,  anb 
maoeitreaby. 

13  m  hath  alfo  pzeparcDfo?  him  the 
inttruments  of  Death  i  heoiDameth  his 
arronjesagainftthcperfccutojs. 

14  *  26eholb ,  he  traucllcth  ibith  int 
quitie,anb  hath  conceiueb  mifchiefe,anD 
tyoughtfojthfaifhooD. 

\<,  t  $e  mabc  a  pit  anD  DiggeD  it,*  anD 
is  fallen  into  theDitch  which  ijemabe. 

i6  tyi&  mifctrtcfe  (hall  returne  Ppon 
his  otbnc  hcab,  anb  his  Piolent  beaimg 
(hall  come  ootbtie  bpon  his  oibne  pate. 

17  3  toill  P?aifc  the  H  ©  k  m  atw 
Ding  to  his  nghteoufiteffc :  anD  tbill 
Cng  praife  to  the  name  of  the  ?,©isjd 
motthigh. 

PSAL.     VIII. 

Godsglory  is  magnified  byhisworkes,  and 
by  his  lone  to  man. 

C  %o  the  chiefe  #uCcion  Ppon  <5it> 
nch,aj5faime  ofDauiD. 
^i||L©i3©  ourHojD,hotP 
%  excellent  >i  thy  name  mail 
the  earth  Who  haft  fet 
thyglo?yaboucthcheas 
uens. 
2  *£)ut  of  the  mouth 
of  babes  anD  fucUImgs  haft  thoutor- 
DameD  ftcength,  becaufe  of  thine  cne; 
mleS,thatthoumtghteftftillthe  enemie 
anDthcaucnger. 

3  nshen  3  confiDcr  thy  heaunis.the 
lV»oifteof  thy  fingers,  themooneanD 
tlje  ftarresibhich  thou  haft  ortaineD-, 

4  *i©hat^man,thatthouartmuib' 
full  of  him  i  anb  the  fonneof  man ,  that 
thoubifitefthinw 

5  5Fo?  thou  haft  mabc  him  a  little 
leitoer  tlicn  the^lngels  •  anbhaft  crolb- 
ncD  him  tbith  glozy  anb  honour. 

6  Hhoumabeft  himto  haue  bomi 
nion  ouer  theiPoihes  ofthyhanbs 
'thou  haft  put  all  things  PtiDer  his 
feete. 

7  taufhcepeanDoreii.ycaanDthe 
beaftsofthefielb. 

8  mhei 


"i-Sjfn  i  6. 
7.!«Chr.28 

9.pfdl.M9. 

!.ICf(m   i'i 

JO.ind  i  ; 

i o  inJ  jo 

I  :. 

th'iS.m, 
hmtk.hr  !t 
vpan  CuJ. 
\\0r.CHh 
«r,V*,„*, 


lob  I  J. 

yEfa.;0. 

4  Iitu.i. 
'5- 
tHei.foe 

^  fit, 

•Pfalo.l; 
md  io.:. 
prou.5.  n. 


Mac.it. 

'itf. 

1  t  Hrb.ftun 
\ied. 


Mob7. 17. 
pfal.144.}. 

Hti.i.6, 


'  1  Cor. 


\  Hcb.fci(. 
c[  them. 


Dauids  praife.  Pfalmes.  His  complaint. 


\  Heir. thou 

baft  made 
it  lodge- 
ment. 
t  Heir in 
rigblioiifnel 


\\Or.th, 
deUvcil-.onx 
if  the  enemy 
Are  corn,  to 
a  perp-tuaU 
end:  and 
their  r*rj>j 
haft  thou  de- 
stroyed, &c. 
•Pfil.95. 
11.  and  98. 


•Pfj!.;7. 
3.9. and  45. 
1  and  91.2, 
jHeb.an 
highplaee. 


•Ccny.j 

\\Or, al- 
lied. 


8  Xbc  tbulc  of  the  aire ,  ant>  the  fi(b 

Of  tl)e  fea,anH  whatfoeuer  pafletb  ttyOUgb 

the  paths  of  the  fcas. 

9  £>HoiB©out|Lo?tj,l)oUje]cccl'' 
lent  >s  thy  name  mall  the  earth! 

P  S  A  L.    IX. 

1  Dauid  prayfeih  God  for  executing  of 
judgement.  11  He  incitcth  others  to  prayfc 
him.  13  Hee  prayeth ,  that  hee  may  haue 
caufc  to  prayfe  him. 

C  Xotbecbiefenwfieiantoponiiputb5 
flabben.  30falmeofS>auib. 
ngtl  pjatfc  thee,  jj)  !U>ib©, 
ttntbmyrbbolcbeart:3l 
tbilKbeibcfooztbail  thy 
marucllous  tbojhes. 
x  3JibMbeegiabanb 
retoyce  in  tttee :  3  null  fing  pjayfc  to 
thy  name,©  trjou  moftl^igb. 

3  w\)tn  mine  enemies  arc  tutneb 
bathe,  tbcytyailfalianbpetifbattbv 
pjefence. 

4  jfoz  t  tbou  baft  maintaincb  my 
right ,  anb  my  caufc:  tbou  fated  in  the 
tbzonetubgmgt  right. 

5  Xhou  Haft  tebubcb  the  Ijcatrjcn, 
tbou  baft  befteoyeb  tlje  ttnebeb  ,  tbou 
baft  put  out  their  name  foz  eucr  anb 
ener. 

6  !l£>tboucnemic,beftrurttonsare 
tometoapcrpcttiallenb;anb  tboubaft 
beftroyeb  cittes,  their  mcmonailis  peri? 
(bebibitbtbem. 

7  25ut  the  ILokj?  (ball  enbure 
foz  eucr :  bebatb*p2eparebbts  tbzone 
foztubgement. 

8  3(nD  nee  (ball  iubge  the  tbozib  in 
r(gl)tcoufne(Tc  s  be  fljau  mlniftet  iubge 
ment  to  tbc  people  m  bprigbtneflc. 

9  *  Xbc  %  o  is  ©  alfo  ibil!  bee  t  a 
refuge  foz  tlje  oppzeffeb :  a  refuge,  m 
nmes  of  trouble. 

io  2inb  tl)ep  tbat  bnolb  thy  name 
ibill  put  tbeir  truft  in  tbee :  foz  tbou 
%  o  is  ©  Ijaft  not  fozfahen  tbcm  that 
feebe  tbee. 

II   5>mgpraifest0tbC!Lfl)13©,  which 

btbciletb  in  £>ion :  bcclate  among  rtje 
peoplebis  Doings. 

n  *n3benbcmaUetb  inqutfitionfoz 
blooD.beremembzetb  tbcm:  befozget 
tetbnot  the  trie  of  tbc  Hbumblc. 

ij  rjauemerciebponmesDJlcuw, 
tonfibtrmf  trouble  whicii  i  fuiK-r  of  tbcm 
tbat  bate  me,  thou  tbat  lifted  nice  bp 
from  the  gates  of  Death: 

i+  Xhat  3hnaymcibfoo:th  all  thy 
pzayfe  in  the  gates  of  the  Daughter  of 


£>ton :  3  tt»ai  rctoyte  in  thy  faiuation . 

15  *  %be  heathen  are  funbe  Dotbnc 
m  the  pit  tint  the?  mabe :  in  the  net 
which  they  bib,tstbeiroi(bnfoottaben. 

i6  XbefL2>ia©iSbnotbenbytbe 
tubgementwhrchhe  ejeetuteth:  tbctbte* 
beb  is  fnarebtn  tbcibozbeof  bts  olbne 
hanbs.  i)iggaion.  3>ciab. 

17  Xhe  ibitbeb  (ball  be  tumtb  into 
ben,and  all  the  nanons  that  fozget  <5ob. 

is  if o?  the  nccbic  (hail  not  aitbay  be 
fozgottcn:  thccirpertation  of  the  poojc 
(hall  not  penflifozeuer. 

19  2rtfe,  €>  ILoisj©,  let  not  man 
pzcuaiie :  let  the  heathen  bee  iubgeb  m 
thy  fight. 

20  0utthemtnfcare,^D|Ltir)isj3: 
that  the  nations  may  bnoib  tbemtelues 
to  be  but  men.  5>elab. 

P  S  A  L.    X. 

i  Dauid  complaineth  to  God  of  the  outrageof 
the  wicked,  n  He  prayeth  for  remcdie.  16 
He  profefleth  his  confidence. 

$y  ftanbeft  thou  afarre 
off,  jf>  H©kit>  i  why  bibeft 
tbou  thy  fclfe  in  times  of 
trouble? 
2  t  Xbc  ibtrbeb  m  his 
pjibc  bonh  perfecute  the  pooje :  *  let 
them  be  taben  m  the  Dcuttes  tljat  tljcy 
haucunagineb. 

}  Jfo?  the  ibicheb  boaftctb  of  bis 
t  hearts  befire,  HanbblefJcth  tlje  coue> 
tous,  whom  the  %  &  13  jd  abho;reth. 

4-  IChelbitbcbth^oughthcpnbcof 
bts  countenance  rbill  not  fcebe  after  God: 
||  d5ob  is  not  in  all  his  *  thoughts. 

5  ^isibayesareaiibayesgncuous, 
thy  iubgements  are  farrc  aboue  out  of 
bts  fight :  as  fo;  alibis  enemies,  fje  pufc 
fethattbem. 

6  fyt  bath  faib  in  bis  heart,  Slfhau 
not  be  moueb :  fo<t  i  (hall  t  neuer  be  m  ab- 
uerfitic. 

7  *  tyis  mouth  is  full  of  cur  fing,anb 
tocceit,anb  fraub:  bnocrljis  tongue^ 
mifcbicfeanbllbanitte. 

8  $e  Gttctb  m  tbc  lurbtng  places  of 
tbebiliagcsn'ti  the  fecret  plates  Doettj 
bemurbertbe  innocent:  biscyes  tare 
pmulyfctagainfttbcpooje. 

9  ^cltctljttnbaitetrccretlyasaiyon 
mbisDcnne.bciietbtuiiiaittotatcbtbc 
poo:c :  be  both  catch  rbc  pooje  tbljcn  Ijc 
b.zaibctl)  htm  into  bts  net. 

io  t£ccrouri)ctb,andinimbIetbbim- 
fclfc,  tbat  the  poo;c  may  fall  ||by  his 
fir  ong  ones. 
ii  free 


PfiI-7.i<S. 


t  Hei.il  lb, 
pride  of  lb, 
tricked  he 
dethperfe- 
cki,. 
"Pl'al.7.  1(5. 

j:;.!j    I  6. 

prou-5.1 X 
}Hei  foulei 
II  Or,  iheco- 
ne:oiu  ilef- 
felh  htmfelf, 
heabberreth 
the  Lord. 
\\0r,41lm 
thought!  ate 
there  u  no 
Cod. 

*Pfal  H  I- 
and  Sl-I. 
\H,ir.vnto 
generation 
and  Fenera- 
tion. 

*Rom  \  14 
tHeide- 
celit. 

II*.— 

amlie. 

t  Heihlde 
themfelHst. 

\Hei:mhe 

\fe.ret  placet. 

t  Hei  he, 

ire.tk/lh 

liimfelft. 

II  Or,  into 
l'"Pr-"l 


Gods  judgments       Pfal 


mes. 


onthewic 


ked. 


•P&1.94.7 


I  OrM>- 
Ued.  ' 


HClk. 


P(jl,2o.g. 
andi4J.lv 
and  146.10. 
iere.ld-Io. 
lam. 5.19. 

up,. 


\\0r, 


\  Hchrin 


,AbaV.:. 


( Or^it  bur- 


1 1  $cc  liatt)  faib  in  his  heart,  ©00 
hathfo23otten:*hchibcthhtsfacc,hcc 
Will  ncuer  fee  *. 

n  3rirc,!©lL0K3D,£>C5obuftbp 
thinehanb :  foigctnotthcll  humble. 

13  nahercfoie  bocth  the  lbtclseb  con= 
tcmnc  C5oD  *  he  Ijatt)  faib  in  his  heart, 
XhoulUlt  not  require  it. 

14  Xhouhattfccnc  .t.fo? tljou bcljol- 
beft  mifchiefe  anb  fpttc  to  requite  it  ibith 
thv  hanb :  the  pooic  t  committeth  ljini= 
fclfc  Unco  thec ,  thou  art  the  helper  of 
thcfathcrlcflc. 

15  26jeaite  thouthcarmc ofthe Vbic 
rco  ,  anti  the  cum  man :  fccUe  out  his 
U)itUCDncs,tiiitl)ounnDc  none. 

16  *5:i)c1L€)iSiD  is  Bins  foi  cucr 
anb cucr :  the  heathen  arc  pcrilhcb  out 
ofhtsianb. 

17  %  ©  k  jp,  thou  haft  hcarb  tt)C  DC- 
fire  of  the  humble  t  thou  ttnlt  Upzcparc 
their  heart ,  thou  Vbilt  caufc  thine  care 
to  heart, 

18  Xotubge  the  fathctlcfle  anb  the 
oppicffcb ,  that  the  man  ofthe  earth 
mapnomojelloppiefle. 

P  S  A  L.    XL 

1  Dauidincoura^eth  himfcllc  in  God  ,  a- 
gainft.  his  enemies.  4  Theprouidenceand 
luftice  ot  God. 

CXothcthicfc£0iificiatt.  a 

PfalmeOf2DaUlO. 

/BthclL^wiDputSImp 

truftihotbfappcctom? 

foule,3flcc  a?  abirD  to  your 

mountatnc? 
2  5fojloc,thctbltttcb 
bcttbe  ttjeie  both  ,  they  matte  reaby 
tljeir  ar  r  oil)  bpon  the  tiring :  that  the? 
ma^  pjtuily  (hootc  at  the  bpjight  m 
heart 

3  gifthefounoattonsbccDCfrropcD: 
What  tan  the  righteous  boe  < 

4  *  Xhc  fL.  o  k  ?d  >s  m  his  holy 
Xcmplc,  the  !L€UJi3E>£>Xh:oneism 
hcattcn:  hiscrcsbcholbc ,  his  eye  libs 
trtrfhcchilbzcnofmcn. 

5  Xhe  %  ©  s  d  trieth  the  rightc 
ous:but  tljcmxcKcD  anb  huii  that  loucth 
biolcntchts  foulc  hatcth. 

6  ^Hlpon  the  Mcltcb  hte  (hall  ramc 
marcs,  fire  anb  bnmftonc,  anb||  auhoz- 
nble  temped :  this  mall  be  the  pojltonof 
tljeir  tup. 

7  ifoj  the  righteous  %  o  is  ©  lo< 
ttcrh  rtghteoufnefle :  his  toimtcnantc 
boeth  bchoib  thebpjtght. 


P  S  A  L.    XII. 

DainddcihtLircoflnimanc  comfort ,  crauerh 
hclpcot'God.  3  Hee  comforteth  himfelfe 
with  Gods  Judgements  on  the  wicked ,  and 
confidence  in  Gods  tried  promifes. 

CXo  the  rhiefc  QMicsan  ||bpon 
3>hcmmith.  ajMainicof 
SDatub. 
miieipe  jLokp,  foMhc 
|  £  goblp man  r eafcrt)  foj  the 
\  W^R  l^thfittlfeticfromamong 
ttfiSsgl  tfthechtUucnofmcn. 
3e^&3|    i  xhey  rpeafcc  bant; 
ticcucry  onelbith  his  neighbour :  wirTh 
flattering  lips,  and  nnth f  a  boublc  heart 
bothcyfpcaitc. 

3  Xhc'^ispfltfUtutoffauflat; 
tenng  lips, md  the  tongue  tljat  fpcaheth 
tpjottb  things. 

4  »3ho  haucfatD,D3tth  our  tongue 
rbitlbepfcuaiicour  lipstue  ourottmc: 
U)hoisli,o2boucrbSf 

5  ifo?thcopp2cmonofthcpoo2e,fo2 
thefighuig  of  thcnccDy,  noU)  ibilllJ  a^ 
rife  (faith the  ?LeDK£0  31  milt fct him 

in  fafcttC  from  him  that  ||puffeth  at  IjiHt. 

6  Xhc\bo2bes  ofthe  H©K5E»arc 
pure  Vbo2bts :  *  as  niucr  tneb  in  a  fo?* 
nate  of  earth  purtficb  fcucu  times. 

7  Xhon  (halt  Rccpc  tlmn,  ( )© 
%  «SD  r  ©, )  tljou  than  p2cfcrue  t  tljem, 
from  this  generation  f02  cucr. 

8  XhcUnctieblbaiRcoucucryfibc, 
lbhen  the  t  btlcfl  men  arc  crattco. 

P  S  AL.    XIII. 

i  Dauidcomplaineth  of  delay  inhelpe.  3  He 
prayethtorpreuentingGrace.  5  Heeboa- 
fteth  ol  Diuine  mercie. 

€  %o  the  ||  chicfe  flMtcian.  a 

PfalmeOf2>aUlb. 

€>ib  long  ibilt  thou  fojgct 
nice  (4D%  ®  ie  ©)  fo?  cucr  < 
hoiu  long  lDtlt  thon  hfoc  U)p 
fatcfrommcr 
i  ^olblongfhaiigjtauc 
counfclitimv  foulc,  hauinc  fo2roTbm  tup 
heart  baplv^  hoiu  long  (hail  mine  cue- 
micbccraltcboucrmc; 

3  Confibcr  and  hcarcmc,©  %®\w 
my  (5ob :  lighten  nunc  cycs,lc{t  3J  tleep 

thefleepeOfbCath. 

4  Hcatl  mine  cntnue  fay ,  3  hauc 
pmiatleb  agamtl  him :  and  rtiofc  that 
trouble  mcc ,  reiopec ,  lbhcii  3J  am 
moueb. 

5  25ut3ihauctriiftcbinthpmcrn), 

my 


tbcnehlh. 


\Or./.^ 


fHtlr.m, 
heartjmd 


t  ficlr.g-tst 
■"£'■ 

}Hehr.erc 

Tsilh  vs. 


\\Or,muld 
enfn?.r;hbn, 
'a.Sam.2^. 
jr.pfil.i8. 
*9.Sc  119. 
ver.  140. 
prou.^o. y. 
I  HebJiimA. 
cwrj/cnecf 
thfm. 
\H<ir.thc 
villi! ofthe 
fames  cfw. 
arc-exalred. 


f" 


WhoisblefTed.  Pfalmes.  Dauidspraya 


•PGI.io.4 
and  53.1. 


"Rom.  ■.  10 


\Hei.fk 


\Hchhcy 

frjred  it 

fc&re. 


tffct.nbo 

willgiHe  ? 
O-c. 


TGI.  14. 

I.&C. 

t Hcb.fi- 

our;;*. 

'tTa.53. 

'5- 


Orj-rcn- 
I 

tbtrttk. 


mv  Heart  than  rciopcc  m  thy  faluatton. 
6    5 ttr.llfmgimto tljc?Lo  is r\bc; 
caufe  Ijcc  hath  Dealt  bountifully  mttlj 
nice. 

PSAL..  XIIII. 

1  Dauid  defcribeth  the  corruption  ofa  natural 
man.  4  He  conuinccth  the  wicked  by  the 
light  of  their  conlcieuce.  7  Hegloriethm 
the  faluation  ot  God. 

C  Xo  tljc  tbicfc  mwfuiatt ,  ArCiimc 

of2Dauib. 

^f?S^$c*foole  hathfayDmhts 


,,  IlCart,  There  1.  no  <50D  . 

{m  they  arc  tozrupt ,  they 
'  hauc  Done  abominable 
_  Ujozues ,  there  is  none 
that  DocthgooD. 

1  XhefLoisBlooitcDDoUmcfcom 
Dcaiten  Upon  tl)c  cljtlDjcn  of  men  *to 
fee  if  there  iberc  any  tljat  Did  fctiDcr 
OanD  .nafceHC(5oD. 

j  Xhcy  arc  all  gone  aQDc ,  they  arc 
ail  together  become  t  filthy :  there  ts 
none  tuatDoctl)gooD,no  not  one. 

4-  $auc  all  the  Uwltcrs  of  iniquity 
no  mioiblcDgc  t  U)ho  catc  bp  my  people 
as  tljEp  catc  b:caD ,  anD  call  not  bpon  tljc 

5  tXijere  mere  they  in  great  fear  z-, 
foi  God  ts  ut  thegencranon  ofthc  rtgh= 
teous. 

6  Pou  hauc  OianicD  tljc  counfcll  of 
tljc  poojc ;  becanfe  tljc  JLokd  is his 
refuge. 

7  W  that  tljc  faiuatton  of  3fracl 

vverccome0Ut0f5H0n1l)l)Cntl)cCoiSID 

b2ittgctlj  bathe  thecaptiumeof  hispco= 
plc,3Jacob  fljaii  rcioycc,  aad^ftacl 
fljaibcgiaD, 

PSAL.    XV. 

Dauid  defaibcth  a  citizen  ofSion. 

C3}&fabncof3>auiD. 

^%^^  ©bjd/uhjo  fhamabiDein 

i  p&\e^  thy  tabernacle  ;Mjo  than" 

rigDtcoufncffcanDfpcaUctljtljctrucrl) 
in  Ijis  Heart. 

j  r>ec  tiut  backbitcth  not  ibith  Ijis 
tongucnojDotljcuuitolHsncigDbour, 
U02,!tauctlj  Dp  a  repjoadj  agatuft  Ijis 
neighbour. 

4  3m  ibhofe  cics  a  bile  pcrfon  is 
tontcinucD  but  l)c  honourctlj  them 
that  fcarc  tljc  %  s>  is  © :  Ijc  that  fibca^ 


wDnicllm  thy  holy  hill; 

&$%§&    1  *J?cc  tljat  ibaibcth 

Ts&'i  fymfiOtip ,  anD  ttwltctlj 


rctljtohisowneijurt.anDtljangctljnot. 
5  *  i?e  that  puttctlj  not  out  Ijis  mo- 
ncy  to  bfury  ,1102  talicth  r  cibarD  againft 
tljc  innocent  :he  tljat  Doth  thefc  things, 
fljallncuerbcmoucD. 

PSAL.    XVI. 

1  Dauid  in  dilfruftofmerites,  and  hatred  ofl- 
dolatry,rlyerh  to  God  for  preferu.ition.  5  He 
(hew  eth  the  hope  of  his  calling,  of  the  refur- 
redfion,and  lite  euerlafting. 

<[l|£0ichtamof3>auiD. 

Kcfcruc  me ,  £>  god  :  fo2 
m  thee  Doc  3  put  my 
trutt. 

Z     Omyfoule.tljOUljaft 

fayD  bnto  tljc  Hoiaip, 
Xljouarttnyllo2D:*my 
gOODnCS  extended!  not  to  tijcc : 

3  But  to  the  faints ,  that  arc  in  tljc 
eartlj ,  anD  to  tljc  crrelitm ,  in  ibhom « 
all  my  Delight. 

4  Xhcicfojroiucs  fljaibe  multiple 
cD, that  ||  batten  after  anotljer  God :  their 
Djtnftc  offerings  of  blooD  u»tll  3  not 
offer,  no?  ta&e  bptljcirnanicsmtomy 
lippcs. 

5  *  Xfjc  Ho  is  d  is  tljc  portion  I  of 
mine  inljcritanccanD  of  my  cup  :tljou 
maintatncftmylot. 

6  Xljc  lines  arc  fallen  bnto  mcc  m 
plcafant places  yea,  Jljauc  agooDly 
Ijcntagc. 

7  3lDiUblcfTctl)e!L£>is©,ttil)o 
Datij  giucn  mc  counfcll:  my  rcincsaifo 
inftractmem  tljcuigljtfcafons. 

s  *  3J  Ijaucfct  tljc  lLo  is  ©  auuaies 
bcfbjc  mc :  bctaufc  Ijcc  is  at  my  rigfjt 
IjanD,  *J  Qjail  not  be  mottcD. 

9  Xfjcrefoje  my  heart  is  giao ,  anD 
my  glojy  teioyccth:my  flcQjaifo  Qjail 
t  reft  m  hope. 

io  »iro2thouH)iitnotlcaucmyfoulc 
in  hell .  neither  Unit  thou  fuffcr  thuic 
holy  one  to  fee  co2ruptton. 

1 1  Xhou  ibiit  (ljcibcmcthc  path  of 
life :  in  thy  p2cfcncc  is  fuincffc  of  toy ,  at 
thy  right  banD  there  are  picafurcs  f02 
cucrmo?c. 

PSAL.     XVII. 

i  Dauid  in  confidence  of  his  integrity,  craucth 
defence  of  God  againft  his  enemies,  io  He 
(neweth  their  pride,  craft  and  eagernes.  13 
Hee  praycth  againft  thcra  in  confidence  ot 
his  hope. 


'I^xod.  21, 

»4- 

Lcuit.25. 

;o\ 

Dcu.i;.ip 

Ezech.12. 

M.&18.8. 


oj  D.v.ad. 


"Pfal.jo. 

10. lob.  az. 


lifts  to  , 
rher. 


Lam.;. 
^.Dcut. 
3.9. 

t  Htk  ofmj 
par:. 


C^pjaycrofSDauiD. 


I^care 


"  Aflcs  j. 
■■>■ 


t  Htt.  iwtit 
confidently. 
•ACtj.jl. 
Jiidij.ij- 


Dauid 


er. 


Pfal 


mes. 


H 


fid, 


is  confidence. 


\Hfhwtth 

OHt  lip!  of 

deceit. 


fHebJ'cnct 
mr.ad. 


\\Or,.hat 

faHefl  them 
which  trnfl 
in  thcefrom 
theft  that 
rife 'j pa- 
^airtfi  thy 
right  hand. 
\Uebshat 
wafle  me. 
\Heb.mye. 
nemifs  a- 
v*ir.fi  the 
fault. 


\H 'eh. the 
Itkenesof 
him  (i,  of 
euery  one  of 
them) is  ma 

lionthat  dci 
rethxorutttn 
t  Heb.ft- 

ti»r. 
\Heb.pre- 

uer.th:sf,\cc. 
\Or,  by  thy 
fveord. 

|[  Or,  from 

men  by 

thme  hand. 

\\Or,their 

chil.iren 

arefull. 


€arc  the  t  tight ,  £> 
fL  ©  is  id,  attcnb  fcnto  my 
eric,  gtuc  care  Ditto  my 

§)  |$  piavtt,  rlur^cerh  tjtOtOttt 

,35<3|offamcblips. 
i   ?Lct  my  fcutcucc  come  forth  from 
thy  p?cfrucc :  let  thine  eyes  beholbethc 
thatgs  that  arc  ccntall. 

3  Xhou  haft  pjooucD  mute  heart, 
tltOtt  Ijaft  UlfttCb  me  mtbc  night,  tltott 
haft  trico  me,  and  malt  fmo  nothing :  gi 
am  purpofeb  that  mv  mouth  than  not 
trattfgreffe. 

4  Contenting  the  woiucs  of  men, 
bv>  the  llwb  of  tliv  nps-  5  Ij*»wc  Kept  me 
iiom  the  paths  of  the  beftroycr. 

5  i^olDDp  my  goings  m  thy  paths, 
chat  mvl footftcps  t  (Up  not. 

6  31  rjanc  caflcb bpon  thee,  fo?  thou 
Unit  rjearc  me,  £>  (Sob :  incline  thine 
carctontome,andfjcarenn>fpcaerj. 

7  dhcibc  thy  marucilous  lotting 
KntDtteffe,  &>  thou  ||that  fattcft  by  thy 
right  hanb,tf)nnibhtch  put  their  truft 

in  thce.fro  tlJOfC  that  tlfc  Dp  againft  them. 

8  Bccpe  me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye : 
htbc  nice  tmbct  the  ftjaoolDc  of  thy 
ttnngs, 

9  5F rom  tltc  tbUUcb  t  that  oppjefle 
ntc,  from  my  t  ocably  enemies,  who  com 
paffc  me  about. 

10  Xhcy  arc  intlofcb  in  theft  oXbtie 
fat :  llntl)  their  mouth  thep  fpeatte 

pjoubly. 

11  XhcyhauenoilJ  compafTcb  bsin 
ottr  fteps :  they  hatte  fct  their  eves  bow- 
ing boiunc  to  the  earth: 

ii  t  ilirc  as  a  lyott  tiuc  is  grecbic  of 
his  pzay ,  ant)  as  tt  mere  a  yong  l?on 
tiurRingmfetrct  places. 

13  2Cru"c,&>  fL0isiD,tbifappointhim, 
cafthtmboibttc:  bclutcr  myfoulefrom 
thcllncucb,  ||whichistl)vftno?t) : 

14.  ||  from  men  winch  are  thy  hanb, 
OIL  ©kid,  front  ntcnofthcilwlb, 
lbhich  hauetltcirpomon  fttthis  life,  ant> 
iDDofc  belly  thou  fillcft  With  thy  D«> 
treafure:  ilXiievarcfullof  c!)ilb:ctt,  anb 
icattc  tlje  reft  of  tDcirfubftance  to  tljctr 

babes.  ,       ,   r 

15  3isfontie,3JnHllbcholb  titrate 

uirtglttcottrneffc :  3  Oiall  bee  Gitimcn, 

il)ljcn3J  aiDaltc.lDitlj  tlji'ltHcncfTc. 

P  S  A  L.    XVIII. 

Dauid  praifcth  God  for  his  manilold  and 
marucilous  blcfsin^;. 
C  XO  t\)t  ClliCfc  mtlfiClOn,  a  pfalme  of 

S>antD,tl)e  feruant  of  tlje  %  0  ts  jd, 


IDIjo  fpaitt  unto  the  1L  o  ts  id  tlje 
ll)02Ds  of*  tins  fong,  mtljcuapthai 
tlje  %  ®  a  j?  bcltucrcD  ij'.tn  from  tl)e 
lianDofallfjiscncmiCS,anb  front  toe 
fjanbof  Saul:  ^nbljcfato, 

Kf  i©tli  loue  t\)et,Q  Hots©, 
mj'ftrcngti). 

z  3Cfjc1t£>KjDismp 
roeue ,  attD  ntv  fojtrcfTc, 
attD  nip  beltucrcr  :  m^ 
0od,  t  ntv  ftrcngtl)  in  tbltomc  3  iDtil 
cruft, nip bticKicr,  anD  tlje  Dome  of  mp 
falnatiott,  aid  my  Ingl)  totticr. 

3  Sibdl  call  bpon  U)e|L£>KiD,lDr)o 
is  lnojtDv  to  be  pwfet) :  fo  djall  31  be  fa^ 
itcD  front  mine  enemies. 

4  *  Xltc  fozroibcs  of  bcatl)  tompaf 
feo  mc,anD  tl)c  tloobsof  t  Dttgoblv  men 
mabemcafratD. 

5  XDc  ||  fo?r oiucs  of  Ijcll  compafTcb 
ntc  about :  tlje  fuaccs  of  oeatl)  p/cuett; 
ttn  me. 

6  3Ittinrbiftrcne3Jcailct)l)ponrfic 
1L  o  is  jd,  anb  crpeb  nttto  mv  Oob :  f)ee 
l)carbmpt)ovceoutof  Ijis  temple,  ano 
mverte  tame  bcfo;c  ijtm ,  eucn  into  fits 
cares. 

7  Xfjcn tUe earth fljooUcanbtrent- 
bleb;  the  founbationsaifo  of  tljcljilics 
moottcD  attD  ibcrefl;aitcn,  becaufc  hce 
inasilizotl). 

8  Xhere  lnent  Dp  a  fmoue  t  out  of 
fjisnoftrils,  anb  fire  out  of  Ijis  moutl) 
bcitourcb,coaIesil)ereltittbiebbptt. 

9  V)t  boibcb the  heauens  alfo,  anb 
came  bolbttc :  anb  barfecneffe  was  Dnbcr 
htsfect. 

10  3tubhcrobcbponaChernb,  anb 
bib  flic:  yeahebib  flic  DponthciDings  of 
theiliinb. 

iii)cntabebarKcncshtsfccrctplace: 
his  patttlion  rounb  about  him,  were 
barUc  ibatcrs,and  tljultc  cloubes  of  the 
fHics. 

n  ^t  the biightnes  that  was  befojehim 
histhichctlotibspaffcb,  Ijailcibues  anb 
coalcsoffirc. 

13  Xhc3L£>isjDaifo  thunbereb  tn 
the  heattens,  anb  the  higheft  gauc  his 
toopce ;  hailcftones  anb  toalcs  of  fire. 

14  *>ca,hcfcnt  outhisarroinc5,anb 
fcattcrcb  them  ,•  anb  he  (hot  out  Ught 
tungs ,  anb  biftomfitcb  them. 

15  XhctttlK  chattels  of  lbdtcrsibcrc 
fcciic,atibthcfotmbattousofthcii)02ib 
iberc  bifcoucrcb :  at  thy  rcbitltc ,  O 
?L©KiD,atthc  blaft  of  thcbjcatl)  of  thv 
noftrils. 

16  ftefentftontaboucherooue me, 
Ccc \jc 

37 


rockf. 


\H:b.1c- 
Otl. 

II  Or.cmrJj. 


\m.ijhu 


Dauidsrighteoufnes.  Pfalmcs.         Hisdeliucrancc. 


||  Or, $re*t 
watcrt. 


t/w. 


\Hccr.brforc 
htseyei. 


||  Ortwrejlh 


J  |  Or,  lompr 


bcD2cibmc  out  oflimaup  ibatcrs. 

17  tyz  bclutcrcb  inc  from  mp  ftrong 
cnenuc,  anb  fcom  them  ibhirt)  batcb 
me  :fo2tbcplbctc  tooftrongfozmc. 

is  Xbcppzcucntcbmcmtbcbap  of 
mp  calamine:  but  the  ?Lois£>  lbas  mp 
flap. 

19  $c  brought  mc  fojthalfomtoa 
large  place:  be bcuucrcbmc.bccaiifc  be 
bcligbtcbtnme. 

20  Xbc  Hois©  rcibarbcb  mc  at- 
cojbmgto  mp  rigbtcotifnc{rc,acco2bing 
to  the  clcanncffc  of  mp  Ijanbs  bath  bee 
rccompcufcbmc. 

ii  5*02  3J  bauc  fecpt  tl)c  ibapes  of  the 
%  o  is  £\ano  baiic  no  t  ttntftcblp  bepar  * 
tcb  fro  tump  Cob. 

2i  5f02  alll)isuiDgements  were  bcfo2C 
mc,  ana  5  bib  not  putaibap  Ijts  fta- 
tutcsfrommc. 

23  9  lbas  alfo  bp2tght  t  befo2c  mm : 
anb  3}  kept  mpfclfc  from  mine  imaiutp. 

24  Xbcrcfo2c  hath  the  TLoxx&Kt-- 
compctifcbmcatcoibmg  tomp  nghtc= 
oufucfTc,  atco2bmgto  the  clcanncffc1 
ofmp  hanbfitm  his  epe  fight. 

25  i&ith  the  mcrnfull thou lbiltfbclb! 
thp  fclfe  mcrnmll,lbithanbp2igbtman! 
thou  Unit  fbcib  thpfclfc  bpr.ght . 

26  toith  the  pure  thou  lbtlt  fbeibc 
top  fclfe  pure,  anb  ibith  the  froibarb 
thou  Unit  i  1  fbcib  thp  fclfe  froibarb. 

27  fQi  thou  ibiit  fane  the  afflirtcb 
people  :  but  Unit  b:ing  bolbnc  high  I 
looses. 

28  5*02  thou  Unit  light  mp  II  tanblc: ' 
the  It  ok  id  mp  cob  null  enlighten 
mpoarbcncfTc. 

29  5fo2  bptbcc3Ibaiie||ruutb2ougb ! 
a  troupe;  anbbpmpcob  bailed  lea- 
pcboncraibail. 

30  3lsfo2Cob,  his  Ibap  is  perfect:! 
'  dK  wort  of  the  ?1  o  u  ©  is  1 1  tries :  he 

',,9.^,°|fsa  buciuer  to  all  thofc  tbattruftm 
him. 

31  *  5*0,2  lbho>>  Cob  fane  the  ILokp? 
02  \bho  is  a  rotlicfauc  our  Cob  * 

31  ginscobthatcjirbcthmccnjith 
(trcugtb.aub  mafcetb  mp  map  perfect. 

33  tyce  maltctb  mpfcctclilichiubcs 
fectc ,  anbfetteth mebpon mpljigbpia 

CCS. 

34  Tietcacbcthnn'hanbsto  lbarre, 
fotbataboUiofftcclcistyouciibprninc 
amies. 

35  Xhouhaft alfo gmc. niethc flitclD 
of  thp  faluatiou  :  anbthpnghthanb 
hath  holbcn  mc  bp ,  anb  thp  ||  gentle 
neffe  hath  niabcmc  great. 


II* 


'Pfil.12.1? 

mOU 

II*.    - 
•Dcut.  ;: 

5i- 

l.Sam.  ».i 
pfi!.S«.8. 


fm.d 


||  Or  pith 
tlymtehe. 
nrffrthru 
tijft  mu'ilt- 
fludmr. 


36  Xbou  haft  cniargcbmp  fteppes 
bnber  me;  that  t  mp  fectcbtb  nor  Gtppe. 

37  3  banc  purfucb  nunc  enemies, 
anb  ouectaben  them  :  neither  bto  3 
ninicagatnctillthcpibcrcconfumcb. 

38  3  bauc  lbounbcb  them  that  tbcp 
iberc  not  able  to  r  tfc:  tljcp  arc  fallen  bm 
bcrmpfcctc. 

39  5Fo?  thon  haft  girbcb  mec  ibith 
ftccngth  bnto  tbcbattcll :  thou  t  j>aO 
fubbucb  bnber  mc,  thofc  that  r  ofc  bp  a? 
gainftmc. 

40  Xbou  haft  alfo  giucn  nice  the 
nccbes  of  mine  enemies :  that  3  might 
bcftropthcmthathatcmc. 

41  Xbep  eneb,  but  there  lbas  none 

tO  faitC  them :  men  bM0  tl)C  JL  0 13  JD,bllt 

bcanflbcrcbtbcmnot. 

41  Xbcnbtb  JbcatctbcmfnMiias 
the  buft  bcfoic  the  ibttibc :  3  bib  caft 
them  out,astbcbirtm  the  ftrcetcs. 

43  Xbou  haft  bcuucTCb  mc  from 
tiicftruiuigsofthc  people, »iJ  thou  haft 
mabe  tuce  the  hcab  of  the  heathen :  a 
people  whom  3  haue  not  bnoibcn,  ftjau 
fcrucmc. 

44  t^sfooncasthephcarcofmcc, 
thep  (bail  obep  mc :  t  the  ftrangcrs  (bail 
lifubmitthcnifclucsbntome. 

45  Xbc  ftrangcrs  than  face  aibap, 
anbbcafraiboutofthcirtlofcpiaces. 

46  Xbe?le>i5!?uuctb,anbblcfrcb 
^  mp  r  oebe :  anb  let  the  Cob  of  mp  fel* 
nation  be  craltcb. 

47  3t  is  cob  that  tauengcth  nice, 
atio  I!  fubbucth  the  people  bnocr  me. 

48  J?c  beliucrcth  mc  from  mine  c* 
ncnr.es  :  \hh  thou  liftcftmcc  bp  about 
thofc  that  rife  bp  agamft  mc  •  thou  haft 
bcliucrcbntcfrom  tbcttoiolcntman. 

49  *Xherfo2elbiii3j|gitictlianlics 
bnto  tbcc,f  £>  fLoi^Jamongthc  bca^ 
then :  anb  fingp2apfcs  bnto  thp  name. 

50  crcatbcliucranccgiuctbbctohis 
'Bing :  anb  fbclbctl)  mcrrpto  his^ln 
uomtcb,  to  Daitib ,  anb  to  btsfcebe  foj 
cucrmoje. 

P  S  A  L.    XIX. 

1    The  creatures  (TiewGoJsglorv.  7  The  word 
his  Grace,  n  Dauidpr.iycth  for  Grace. 

C  Xothcchicfc  tBitician ,  ^ 

0faimcofDaiub. 

?^^^*5?c  heaueus  bcciare  the 


8 

.r 


8fWS 


i 


■TS  "c  »caut»s  occiare  tnc 
p$  gl02pofcob:  anb  the  fir 
5^  mament  fbclbctl)  hisljan 

<r^bpib02Uc. 


^£NtW9       2 


\Hrt.\ 


to  Lm\ 


2>av  bnto  Day  t)ttc- 
rctl) 


the  hear  me 
of  the  eore. 
T  Hek  the 
formes  of  tki 
fha^ger. 
\\Or,yeetd 
j. lined,  obe- 
dience. 
Hcb.  lie. 

\Heb.gutetb 

AHtn^e- 

mentifor 

me, 

||  Or,  de- 

jtroyeth. 

\  Heb.man 
of  vielenre. 
*Rom.\  5.1? 
\\Orferifeft 


•Ccn.i.e. 


Gods  works. 


Pfal 


mcs. 


TrufhnGod. 


|  rctb  fpcacbanb  mgbt  bnto  ntgljt  fl)rtb 
ctbftnoiblcbgc. 

3  There  i.  no  fpcacb  noz  language, 
.  heid]  their  boyce  is  not  bcarb. 

4  ll'Zbciclincisgoncouttbzougn 
all  tbc  earth,  anb  their  tt)02bs  to  the  cnb 
of  the  ibo2ib :  3Jn  them  bath  be  fct  a  ta 
bcrnacle  f02tbc  5>imnc. 

5  nshtch  is  as  a  bzibcgromc  com- 
mmg  out  of  bis  chamber,  and  rcioyccfb 
as  a  ftroug  man  to  tunnc  a  race. 

6  ijts  gomg  foztb  is  from  tbc  cnb  of 
tlic  bcaucn ,  anb  his  cirautc  bnto  tbc 
cnbs  of  it:  anb  there  ts  nothing  btbbc 
from  the  heat  thereof. 

7  Xhc||jLatt)ofthc?L0K£nspcrv 
feet,  II  connecting  the  fouic :  the  tcftuno^ 
me  of  the  %  o  is  jd  tsfurc,matung  lbuc 
tbcfimplc. 

8  %\)c  Statutes  of  the  1L  ©  is  © 
trertght,rciorcmg  the  heart :  the  Conv 
manbement  of  the  % ©is©«  pure,  in* 
ligbtu'.ngtbccycs. 

9  Xhcfcarcofrt)c!L€)u©iseleane, 
cnburmg  foj  cucr :  tbcjubgemcnts  of 
the  %  ©  is  id  ate  ttmc/nd  righteous  afc 
together. 

io  tljjozctobccbcurcb  arc  they  then 
golb,*  yca,tl)cn  much  fine  golb :  ftocctcr 
alfo  then  bony,anb  t  the  bony  tombc. 

ii  £0o2couer  by  them  is  thy  fcrnant 
Vbarneb'.andiu  keeping  of  them  thesis 
great  rcuiarb. 

12  nabo  can  bnbcrftanb  his  ertonrs  i 
clcanfcthoumcfromfcrrctfaiks. 

15  Bccpe  back  thy  femaut  alfo  from 
pjcfumpniousfinncs-lctthcmnotbauc 
bommton  oucr  me :  then  mall  "5  bebp 
right,  anb  3  fbalbc  innocent  from  ||  the 
great  tranfgrcffion. 

14  lietthcibo2bsofmymouth,anb 
thcmcbitation  of  my  heart ,  bee  accept 
table  m  tfty  fight,  4D  !L©is?e>  tmy 
rtrcngtb.anbmyrcbccmcr. 


P  S  A  L.    XX. 

t   The  Church  blcfleth  die  Kinc;  iu  his  exploits. 
7    Her  confidence  in  Gods  fuccour. 

CXothcchicfc  SOufictan.  % 
#falme  of  SDauib. 
l?c!Lo  is  s>  heart  thee  m 

y  $Si^tbc  bay  of  trouble ,  the 
f:  fss  ^aine  of  the  Gob  of  Ja* 


\Orjmthe-Ht 

ihclc  ilicir 
yoycr  :s 
heard, 
Hebr.  frith 
ohi their 
zojee  he.trJ. 
*  Rom.  10. 
18. 

\\Or,their 
rut'etor  dt- 
ellio.i. 


l|Or,.tV- 
Itrmt'. 
\\\Ormta- 
Ting. 


triti.'h. 


•Pfll.IIO. 
73.  &I27 

and  io;. 
nrou.  8.19. 
fHch-jfo 

droopmrof 
j  cor/tbes, 


\\Oi^mneh. 


\Hckrjny 
rocks- 


f  Hebr.  fct 
thee  en  an 
hiph  place. 
\  Hebr. thy 
helpe. 
'A  Hebr  ,rnfh 
port  thee. 


fe^cobtbcfcnbtbcc. 


£>cnb  t  tbec  hclpc 
fcom  the  Sanctuary :  anbt  ftcengtben 
tbccoutof£>ton. 
3   Remember  ail  thy  offerings,  anb 


the  hraum 
of  his  helf 

t  Hebr.  by 
the  Qren^tb 

{the  (u!ha 


tacccptthyburiufacrificc.  S>ciah.       T/" 

4  ocaunt  thee  acco:bmg  to  thine  ,,.,., 
oibnc  heart,  anb  fulfill  all  thy  couufell.  j 

5  socibill  rcioytc  m  thy  faiuanou , 
anbtn  the  /Same  of  our  Gob  me  mill 
frt  bp  our  banners :  the  %  ©  is  ©  fulfill 
all  thy  pennons. 

6  ii^oiblmoib^.thatrlicIlOKiD 
faueth  his  3Utomtcb :  he  lbil  heare  bun 

t  from  his  holy  htaucn ,  t  vbitl;  the  fa?  t 
mug  ftrcugtb  of  hfs  right  hanb. 

7  5>omc emit m  charcts,anb  fomc in 
hozfes :  but  lbcc  mill  remember  the 
/frame  oftljc  JLohp our  Gob. 

s   Xbey  are  brought  boibnc  anb  '-» 
fallen :  butibc  arc  rtfcn  ,  anb ftanb bp-  T'&'ha" 
right. 

9  S»aucHoisp,lctthcBmghcacc; 
bsibhcntticcali. 

PSAL.    XXL 

1    A  thankeic^iuinc:  tor  victory.    7  Confidence! 
ot  further  fuccelle. 

C  %o  the  chicfe  fl9uftnan.  % 
£falnicof2>auib. 
$>*2¥&^&  Dc  Bing  fl)ail  toy  m  thy  i 
^m (frmgrh  ,  QlLovt &:\ 
¥^  anb  in  thy  faiuanou  hoib 
JS^  greatly fballhcrcioycc; 
^Sr^&    1  Xhou  haft  gmen  him 
his  hearts  ocfirc .  anb  haft  not  tt>m> 
holbcn the rcqucftofbts lips.  S)eiah. 

3  fa:  thoupicucntcft  hmi  lbith  tl;e 
blcffings  of  goobneffe :  thou  fcttcft  a 
Croibnc  of  pure  golb  on  b»5  hcab. 

4  Dt  afKcb  life  of  thee ,  and  thou  ga* 
ueft  t  him ,  eucn  length  of  bay  cs  to;  cucr 
anb  cucr. 

5  I?isgl02yis  great  in  thy  faluatton: 
honour  anb  s^aicftic  haft  thou  laybc 
bponhim. 

I  6  ifoithouhafttmabchimmoftblct 
feb  fo2  cucr :  thou  baft  t  mabc  him  crtee- 
binggiabibitb  thy  countenance. 

7  j?o:  the  liiug  tcuftctb  m  tbc 
!L  ©  is  e\  anb  rt)  jougb  the  mcrci'  of  the 
moftIrugb,bc  fljaunot  be  ntoucb. 

s  Xbtnc  !)anb  fljau  finbe  out  all 
tbinccncnucs,tby  right  hanb  fbal  finbe 
out  tbofc  that  bate  Mice. 

9  Xbou  flialt  make  them  as  a  fiery 
oucn  in  the  nmc  of  thine  auger :  the 
!L©ie©  (ball  froalloibtiicmbpinhis 
Ibzatb,  anb  the  fire  fballbcuourc  them. 

10  Xbcir  fruit  fbalt  thou  beftroy 
from  tbc •  earth,  anb  their  fecb  from  a* 
mougtl)C  chilb2tn  of  men. 

n  j*o:  tbey  mtcnbcb  etuU  agamft 
Ccc  r  fher: 


\Hchfct 
h-Mi  tobc 
Htffingu 

jif.r,r.£Ud- 

ded  htm 
vrithxy. 


A  proph 


ccie 


Pfal 


mes. 


ofChrill. 


\\Or,tl.  :i 
Italt    ■■ 
theme:  a 
butte. 

\Heb  fait!- 
der. 


[\Or,the 
hind  of  the 
mornino. 


t  Heb. the,  e 
iinofdence 


•Mat.!/. 
(  Heb,  open 


*Mjt.:7. 

*}• 

t  Hel.  hee 

r >  .'■  JliirTi- 

fcltconrbe 
Lord. 
\\Or,,fhe 
delight  m 
him. 

\Or,k_eflJl 
ne  tnjtfeti. 


f  lie  b.  nut 
a  helper. 


t  Heb.  ope- 
ned their 
moitthet  a- 


thee:  they  imagmcD  a  mtfcbicuousDc 

UlCC,  W  hich  tl)e>'  arc  not  ablC  to  performe. 

i  r  Xbcrcfac !  ifbait  thou  make  them 
nunc  their  t  barU, when  thou  limit  malic 
reabvtbme  anoAcbpoutbyftemgs,  & 
gauifttbcfaccoftbcin. 

1 3  i5e tljou  eraltcb ,1L  o  a  ©,in thine 
ottme  fttcngth :  fo  Unll  Ujcc  ting  ,  aub 
pzaifetbypolbcr. 

P  S  A  L.  XXII. 

i  D.iuidconipl.uneth  in  great  dilcouragement. 
y  Hee  prayeth  in  great  diftrefle.  2.3  Hee 
piailech  God. 

CXo  the  clr.cfe  £@u(ician  Dpon  ||  3ti)c; 

icttj  S>rjaliar.  ^Ipfaimc 

of  Datub. 

t'GoD,niy<3oD,*lbby 
haft  thou  tozfaucn  mcc  < 
whv  art  thou  fo  fact  from 

Helping  mC  ,  and  from  tljc 

ID02DS  of  my  roaring? 
2   sDmyGob^crtc 

in  the  Day  time,  but  thou  bcareft  not 
aub  in  the  night  fcafou,anb  tain  uot 
Went. 

3  25ut  thou  ai  t  holy ,  o  thou  tljat m 
habited  the  pwifes  of  35fracl! 

4-  <£)ur  fathers  truftcb  m  thee:  they 
miOcb,anb  thou  mbft  Dcuuer  them. 

5  Xbcy  cryeb  tonto  thee ,  aub  lbcr c 
DcliucreD:  they  trttfteDuitbecanD  mere 
notcoufounbeb. 

6  25ut  3Jjmaib02me)atttmottUm; 
accpzoaclj  of  men,  anu  bcfpifcb  of  the 
people. 

7  *  3111  they  that  fee  mciattgh  me  to 
fcome:thcytfl)ootc  out  the  lippe,  they 
fhaftc  the  bean,  f*vin-, 

8  *  t  $e  truftcb  on  the  %ovm>,  that 
he  lboulb  bcltucc  him :  let  him  bcliucr 
bim,i!fcctnghcbclightcbiuhim. 

9  25ut  thou  act  bee  thattooltc  nice 
out  of  the  lbombc  thou  ||  bibllmaitc 
me  hope,  when  1  was  upon  my  mothers 
bjcafts. 

10  ^Uias  call  upon  thee  from  the 
\Dombc:thou  utinyoobfcommymo 
tbcts  belly. 

11  25c  not  farrc  from  mc,  foj  trouble 

iinCCCC;f02  thereis  tltonCtObClpC. 

11  fljftany  bullcs  ijauc  compaffeb 
mciftcong  bulks  of  25aibanbaucbcfct 
mcrouub. 

13  Xhcy  t  gapcb  bpou  me  w  ith  their 
inoutlics ,  1  a  rauenmg  aub  a  roaring 
ILyon. 

1+  Jam  po\b:cb  out  nuc  water, 


anb  all  my  bones  arc  ||  out  of  ioynt :  my 
heart  is  Itbc  luarc,  it  is  mcltcb  in  the 
miDDcftofmyboIbcls. 

15  £0yftccngtbisO2iebrjpitBcapot= 
(bcacD :  aub  my  tongue  tlcauetb  to  my 
tames :  anb  thou  baft  brought  me  mto 
the  buft  of  Death. 

i6  ifo:  Doggcsbauc  conipaftcDme: 
the  affembly  of  the  tbicheb  bauctntlo- 
feb  me:  *tbcy  pterccD  my  Ijanbs anb  my 
fcetc. 

17  3J  may  tell  an  my  bones :  they 
loose  and  ftarebpon  me. 

18  Xbcy  part  my  garments  among 
tbcm,anD  caft  lots  bpon  my  befture. 

19  25ut  be  not  thou farre from  mcc, 
1D  %  ©  is  & ,  £>my  ftrcngth ,  baft  thee 
tobelpeme. 

20  3r»cliucr  my  foule  from  the  fmojD : 
t  my  barling  t  from  tl;e  poibct  of  the 
Doggc. 

21  3>auc  me  from  the  lyotts  mouth : 
foz  thou  baft  bcarD  mc  from  tljc  homes 
oftbcbntco2ttes. 

12  *  3  null  Declare  thy  name  bnto 
my  b2cth2en :  in  the  mibft  of  tljc  cougre? 
gation  rbiligjpjaifetbce. 

23  j9ectbatfcarctbcfLoiHjD,p2aifc 
htm  allyccthcfecbc  of  "Jacob  glo2ifie 
him ,  anDfcarc  himailycctbcfccbc  of 
Jfrael. 

24  iro2bebathnotDcfpifcD,no2ab' 
ho2rcb  tljc  affliction  of  the  afflictcb  nei- 
ther bath  be  bib  his  face  from  bmi,  but 
Vbljcn  he  crteb  unto  btm,bc  hcarb. 

25  <2&y  p2aifc  uSaibe  of  thee,  in  the 
great  congrcganomj  Will  pay  my 
tooibcs,  bcfo2c  them  that  fear  c  bun. 

26  Itbcmecrtc  (bail  catc  anb  be  fa 
nfncDitbcyfljalipzaifcthelL^KiDtbat 
fecac  bun  ;  your  heart  fbail  lute  fo? 
cucr. 

27  *2ll  the  cuds  of  the  ujo21D  (ball 
remember, anb  turnc  Ditto  the  IUhijd: 
aiiDailthckmrcDs  of  tbenanous  fljail 
ilioifl}ipbcfo2Ctlicc 

28  j?02  the  HutgDomc  >s  the  Uohid^: 
anD  Ijc  tljc  gouccuour  amongtbciuv 
nous. 

29  3flltljcy  tljat  be  fat  bpou  earth 
(ball  catc ano ih02tl)ip :  ail  they  that  goc 
Do\bnctotbcDtiftfliallbonibcfo2chim, 
anb  none  can  Hccpc  aluie  b'S  oihuc 
foule. 

30  31  fcebnjaiifcruebimittftjaibcac^ 
countcb  to  the  |Lo2b  fo?  a  generation. 

31  XheyfbailcomcanD  (ball  Declare 

his  ngbtcotifncs  bnto  a  people  that 
(halbcbo?tic,rtjatbcbatbDQttcthis. 

p  s  A  L. 


\\Or,(,,r.. 
dnd. 


"Mat.  27. 
3y.Mar.  r  *. 
14.Luc.13. 
33.I0h.1j. 
13.&37. 


\Hel.  my 
only  one. 
\  Hcb.  from 
tlxh.wd. 


"Luc.i;. 
^Iolin. 

19.24  Heb 
2,12. 


Pfal.s.8. 

&72.U. 

-niJS6.o. 


GodsgoodnelTe.        Pfalmes.  Feare  rewarded. 


•Efa.40.11 
Icrc.i3.5- 

Ezcch.  34. 
loh.io.  11. 

E.Pcr.2.25. 

\Hcl:r.* 
jiurti  often- 
dtrgr.ijfe, 
t  Heb.w,t- 
tericfjtiiet- 
r.rf. 

»PfJ.  3-tf. 
& 11E.6. 


ksff"- 


length  of 
tLfei. 


•Dcut.  10. 

14- 

lob.41.1. 
pfaJ.^o.I  z. 
I.Cor.10. 
16.&  28. 

Iob.;8.6. 
ptal.104. 5. 
Ui',6.6. 

•Pfal.iy.I 


•Er».,j. 
15. 16. 

cleuiit  of 


\\0r,  O 

G  od  of  J.l- 

cebM 


P  S  A  L.    XXIII. 

Dauids  confidence  in  Gods  grace. 

C^ipfaimcofDauib. 

C?c  ft  01s  ©is*  my  (hep- 
hcaro,3J  than  not  lbant. 
2  l?ema&etl)mcto uc 
bottmc  m  t  grccttc  pa- 
fhircs:  he  icaDctl)  nice  be; 
ftbcthctftiiubaters. 

3  I?c  relt02etl)  my  foulc :  he  leabefh 
me  m  tt)e  pathes  of  rigtjtcoufncs ,  fo2 
|)is  names  faac. 

4  mtl)ougl)3Jibalttcfhiough the 
bailcyoftl)en)abon)eofbcath,*3!iinil 
feare  no  eiUU:f02tl)ouanUMhme,  tUv 
rob  ana thy  ftaffc,  they  couiftut  mc. 

5  3Lboup2cpatcftatablebcfo2eme, 
mthe  p2cfence  of  mine  enemies  :  thou 
tanointefl  my  heab  tuitf)  oyle,my  tuppe 
runneth  ouer. 

6  Purely  goobnes  anb  metric  (hall 
follotoc  me  an  the  baies  of  my  life :  anb 
3  null  bVbell  in  tlje  houfe  of  the  %&&& 
ffo2cncr. 

P  S  A  L.     XXIII  I. 

I  Gods  Lordfhip  in  the  world.  3  The  citizens 
ot  his  fpintuall  kingdome.  7  An  exhorta- 
tion to  recewe  him. 

4[3ipfAuneof£>aiuu. 

*  decani)  is  the  Hois©%>, 
anb  tlje  mlncAc  thereof 
the  tt)o:lb ,  anb  tl)cy  that 
bYbelltncrem. 

z    *j?02  Ije  IWti)  fOMfc 

bcbitbpontlicfcas,  anb  cftabtifhcbit 
toponrhefloobs. 

3  *t©hofl)ailarccnbtntothehillof 
the  floffi©  i  anb  ibljo  (hall  ftanb  in  his 
holy  place; 

4  *t$e  that  hath  clcanchanbs,anb 
a  pure  heart  tbho  rjatl)  not  liftbp  rjis 
foulc  buto  Danmc,  no)  fuwne  beccit; 
fully. 

<;  ^ecfhaurcecuicthcblciringfcom 
the  Howes  anb  ngbtcoufneffe  from 
the  Gob  of  Ijisfaiuation. 

6  Xhis  >s  the  generation  of  them 
that  fecHe  him :  that  feelic  thy  fate ,  ||  4D 
3Jatob.5>elaI). 

7  ^LtftbpyourhcabsiDyee sates, 
anb  be  ycuftbpye  ctieriamng  boo2C5J 
anb  the  Bingofgl02y  (hall  come  in. 

s  i©ho  is  tfjts  tr.ng  of  gio^v  -  tlic 
floiHB  ttroug  *  mtghtte ,  the  %  o  is  £> 
mighty  mbattcll. 

9  Hiftbp  your  heabs,£>  ye  gates, 
euenlift  them  bp.yeeticriaihngboojcs 


anb  tl)e  Uing  of  gl02v  fljail  come  in. 

10  naho  is  this  Ring  of  gio2y;  tlje 
H©ir©  of  holies,  he  is  tlje  Rtng  of gl02y. 
S>eiah. 

PSAL.     XXV. 

i    D-iuids confide 


dsconhdence  in  prayer.    7  Hee  pray- 
eth    for  vemifsion  of  finnes,   16    and  foi 
in  affliction. 


lie 


lpe 


■I  A  Pfalme  of  3>aUlb. 

jftto  thec,  £>  !t©«© ,  boc 
Jjltft  bptny  foulc. 

z   Qm\><5on3*ttu!(t 
intncclctmc  not  bcaflja^ 
mcb:  let  not  mine  enemies 
triumpljouermc. 

3  *Pcalctnonctl)atlbaiteonflKC,bc 
an^amcb :  lcttl)nnbecan)aincblbl)icl) 
tranfgrefTcftitnout  taufc. 

4  *  ^Dljcvbc  mce  top  \DapcS ,  ^D 

H©K£>:tcac!)mctl)ypatf)es. 

5  1Lcabmcintl)vtruct!),  anbteaci) 
mc :  fo?  trjon »"  trjc  ©ob  of  mp  faluatt- 
ou,ontl)ccboc3nba:tcalltl)cbap. 

6  *aanncmbcr,£>?LoK3D,tthp 
tenber  merncs ,  anb  tljp  lomng  fe:nb^ 

llcffCS  :  f02 tI)Cp  hauebeene  etlCC  of  OlD. 

7  aaemembernottric  unties  of  my 
VOittl),no2  nip  tranfgr  cflious:acco2bing 
to  tfjp  merctc  remember  ttjou  mc ,  fo; 
tl)pgoobneffcfauc,D!Lo  ism. 

8  000b anb bp2igl)t is fnc  H©isp: 
tl)crcfo?c  Ibill  Dec  tcacl)  fmticrs  m  tl)e 
ibap. 

9  lErjemccnciMincgiubcuuiibgc; 
ment :  anb  tljcmccRcibillljc  tcacl)  tjis 

10   m  tl)C  patOCS  Of  thC  1L01R©  are 

mctcv  anb  trutlr.bnto  fuel)  as  nccpcljis 
coucnant,anb  rjis  tcmmotr.es. 

n  if  02  tl)p  names  fane,  0%  om  id, 
parbon  mine  tniqultic :  f02  it  i  s  great. 

u  i©l)at  mams l)ctl)at fearcthtfje 
%  ©  is  v>.  hint  niall  t)c  tcacl)  in  tl)e  itoay 
tlmthcfbailcoufc. 

13  ^isfouletfuallbtncliatcare:  anb 
l)isfcebcfl)ailinl)cntctl)ccartl). 

14  *1Elicfccrctofthc1L©HiMabitl) 
them  that  fcare  l)im :  ||  anb  l)c  lbill  fhcib 
tl)cml)tstoucnant. 

15  fipuic  eves  are  cucr  toibarbs  the 
|L©irb  :  fo2tjccu)ailtpiucttcmpfcctc 
out  of  the  net. 

i6  Xuructhccbiitome,  anb  Dane 
mercy  bponmc :  fo2'3ani  bcfoiateanb 
afflictcb. 

17  Xhc  troubles  of  my  heart  are  in 
largcb  :  f©  b2ing  thou  me  out  of  my  bi- 

ftreffes.  „    fc 

<Ccc  3         18  Hoorc 


8:31.2. 


'Efa.j8.l6 
Rom.io.ii 


•P:"a.:7.u 

&86.11. 

4:1141. 


•Pfal.io;. 
17  &.106. 
1.&107. 1. 
Icrc.;j.;. 
t  HriiA; 
I'orvclt. 


fodae  in 

nooaneffet 

•Pro.j.U 

MHetutMt  to 

mxkothirn 

fourth. 


Dauid 


sinte^ntie. 


:§' 


Pfal 


mes. 


H 


is  rcque 


\Heb. hatred 
ofvwUncc 


•Pi'al.7.10 


•Pfal.l.l 


fHel.cfrhe 

7~abrrnac/r 
of  thy  honor. 

\{Or}taks»ot 

J He  b, men 
ofblooi. 
t  Heh.filtd 
vuh. 


18  SLooftcbponmincafflicnon,  auo 
mp  pame,ano  ro?giue  all  mp  fames. 

19  ConfiOcr  mine  tnemtcs :  fo?  thep 
arc  manp,  ant)  tljcp  Date  me  unit)  t  ecu- 
cilhatrco. 

20  £>  nccpe  mp  foule  ano  ochucr  mc : 
let  me  not  bee  afbanico ,  fez  3  put  nip 
tcultmtOce. 

21  Het  mtegritic  ano  bpngOtncffc 
pjefcrttcmc:  foijjibattonthce. 

22  Beoccmcjfcacl^)  000,0m  of 
all  Ijts  troubles. 

P  S  A  L.    XXVI. 

Dauid  refortetli  vnto  God,  in  confidence  of 
htsintegritie. 

"•APfalmeOf^aUtD. 

!@S  33ogc  me,  £>  %  ©  is  jd,  fo? 

~  JDaucUjai&cDinmineuis 

ez&<  §^*  ascitic :  3  ijauc  truftco 

j5*    |Pk  alfO  111  tl)C  ?L©KJD:  therfore 

sSM3Jfl)aHnotflfl)e. 

2  *  ©rammc  mc ,  £)  JL  ©  is©,  ano 
pjoucmc  trpinprcmcsanOmpOeart. 

3  ifo?  tOp  louing  Kinoneflc  ^ before 
mme  eyes :  ano  3  Ijauc  ibalRco  m  tljp 
truert). 

4  *3I0aucnotfatclbit0batncpcrs: 
fons,  neither  null  3  goc  m  lbtth  Oifc; 
femblcrs. 

5  3  Ijatic  Oaten  rOe  congregation  of 
emll  Doers:  auo  ibtll  not  fit  ittirti  the 
lbicaco.  I 

6  3  rwnujafOmtncOanustntnnO'' 
cenctc :  to  ibtll  3J  compau"ct0inc3Htar, 
£)IL©is3d: 

7  XOat  3  "tap  publico  lbirt)  tOe 
bopec  of  tOatiRcfgiumg,  ano  tell  of  all 
tljp  lbonocrousiboj&cs. 

8  H©isiD,3J0auciouct>t0cOabtta; 
tion  of  tO  p  Ooufc ,  ano  tlje  place  t  vo\)ct  c  1 
tOmc  honour  DibcUctO. 

9  ||  C5at0cr  not  mp  ionic  lbirt)  Go* 
tiers,  no;  nip  life  VUitlj  t  blooOp  men. 

10  311  lbUofc Danos  is  mifcUicfc :anD , 
tOctr  ngOt  OatiD  is  t  full  of  bribes. 

11  ffiut  asfo2mcc,  3  lbiiiibalftcm 
mine  uttcgritic :  rcoccmc  mc ,  ano  bee : 
mcrcifull  Onto  me. 

12  i33p  foot  ftanoctOin  an  cucn  place: ' 
in  tOc  congregations  mm  3Jbleffe  the 

?L©lS3D. 

P  S  A  L.     XXVII. 

Dauid  fufhineth  his  faith,  by  the  power  of 
God,  4  By  his  loue  to  the  feruicc  of  God, 
9  By  prayer. 


3 


:ftJ 


VAPfalmeOfSDaUtD. 

$Z£&2£$%  $1  ?Lo_i3D  is  mp  UgOt, 


WM  anOmpfaluatton,ib0ome 

fl)ai3ftare;*t0e!L©isiD 

is  tOc  Strength  of  nip  life, 

.  of  tt)D6  fljau  3J  be  afcatD  ? 

2  naijcntliclbicRcD,  ei.cn  mine  cue; 
mies  auo  inp  foes  tcame  bpon  mc  to  cat 
bp  nip  flcfli.tOcp  ftumblco  ano  fell. 

3  'XhoughanhoftfOouiocneampc 
agatnft  me ,  mp  Oeart  ujail  not  fcare : 
though  ibarre(Ooulorifcagainftmc,tn 
rtjts  rum  3  be  tonfiDcnt* 

4  iDnc  thing  hattc  3JOcfircOofthc 
%  ©  is  id,  that  lbill  3  fccltc  after :  that 
5niapon)ciutthe0oufeoft0c2L©i5©, 
all  tOc  napes  of  mpufc,  to  bchoio  ||tOe 
bcaunc  of  tOc  %  ©  is  jd,  ano  to  inquire 
m  his  temple. 

5  Jfoi  m  the  time  of  trouble  Oefljail 
hioc  mc  m  Ois  pauuton :  m  the  fecret 
of  Ois  tabernacle  fljall  Oe  Otoe  mc,  Occ 
(ball  fct  mc  bp  bpon  a  rocUc. 

6  ^ttOnoibaiallmmcOcaobcliftco 
bp  abouc  mine  enemies  rouuo  about 
me:  therefore  mil  5  offer  mOistabcr* 
naclc  facnficcs  t  of  10  v,  3  ibtll  fmg,pea, 
3  Ibill  fmg  p?atfcs  bnto  tlje  %$>&&, 

7  $care,  £)  %  ©  is  ©,  ^  hen  3  trie 
ibitO  mp  boicc:  Oaucmercic  aifobpon 
nice,  anDanfmcreme. 

8    ||Whenrhoufaidit,S)CCllCpempfaCC, 

mp  Ijeart  fam  bnto  tljcc ,  Xljp  face, 
3L©isjD,mui3JfccHe. 

9  $noc  not  top  face  farrc  fro  mc,  put 
not  tl)p  fcruant  avbap  in  anger:  tOou 
OaR  bm  mp  Oclpc,  leauc  me  not,  neither 
fo,ifa&cmc,  £>d5oi)of  mpfaluanon. 

10  leOcnmpfatOcranbmpmotOcr 
foibuc  mctOen  tOc  %  ©  is  e>  t  mm  take 
mebp. 

*XcacO  mctOpttiap,  ^D  %  ©  is  r>, 


•Pfal.  1 18. 
6.mica.7.8. 


t  Hci.ap. 
proAcheda- 
'Alnilmc. 

;I>uij.ei. 


\\Or,the 
dtlnht. 


t Hit.  of 
Planting. 


Or,  my 
I  hr.trt/aij 

tmtttbte  Ui 

myfacejecks 
thjfdce^c. 


II 


ano leaoc mem  a  t  piamc  part),  becaufe 
of  mine  t  cnennes. 

12  SDcliucrmenotoucrbnto  rticiOrtl 
of  mine  enemies :  fo?  faift  ibitncffcsarc 
nfen  bp  agatnft  mc,  ano  fiid)  as  bicatO 
outcrueltie. 

I J   I  had  fainted ,  blllcfle  3  O'^O  bClCCUCD 

to  fee  the  goooneffe  of  tije  %  ©  is  jd  m 
tOcianooftOeliuing. 

14  *i©aitonthc?l©isjD:beofgooo 
courage,  ano  Ocfbaii  ftrcngtOcn  tOmc 
Oeart  :tbait,3J  fap,  on  rtjeji,  ©  is  jd. 

PSAL.    XXVIII. 

Dauid  praycthearncftlyagaiiifthis  enemies. 
6  He  blcfleth  God.  ^  Hec  prayedifor  the 
people. 

irAPfalme 


\Htb.mtf 
gat  her  me. 

Pfil  25.4. 
and  86. 1 1 
and  119, 

f  Heb.  a  way 
efpljtnncffe, 
fHekthofe 
which  ol>- 
fa-He  me. 


•P6.ji.jy. 

■fa.  J  5.9. 
hab.1.3. 


God 


s  power, Pfalmes.  andgoodnefle. 


7- 
\Hcbr,from 


§0r,towarjt 
the  Oracle 
if  thy  San- 
Uuary. 

*Pfal.  I2.3. 
icie  9*3. 


\\Orthss 

Vrength. 
^Hebr. 
flrtngth  of 
falHatuns. 


\Or,rule. 


\Hebr.yee 
pome*  of  the 
mighty. 


\Hehr.the 

hmotfrof 
hi*  name. 
\\QrjnhU 
glorimaSsn- 
EUtary. 

\\0r, great 
waters* 

\Hebr.tn 
pvrver, 

\RcbrJn 

Mateslie. 


f  APfalmeOfSDaatD. 

iI5to  thee  ttnU3J  cry,  jD 

%  o  is  rstnp  rocltc,be  not 

ftlerttto  mec :  *  Idt  if  tljou 

beulentttome,3J  become 

hfce  them  that  goe  botbnc 

intothcpit. 

x  $eare  the  boytc  of  my  fupplicati^ 

ons,  ibljen  3J  cry  bnto  thee:  lbheng 

lift  bp  my  tfanbes  ||  tonbarb  thy  holy 

j©,racte. 

j  2>MYbmenotatbayiLbiththctt)te 
licD,  atio  With  thciboj&crsofmtqtunc: 
*u»t)irt)  fpeaftc  peace  to  their  neighbors, 
but  mifcht  eft  *  in  their  hearts. 

4  <5mc  them  accoibmg  to  their 
bctbes,  ana  aewbing  to  the  ttNcftebncs 
of  their  enbeuours :  giue  them  after  the 
ttwfte  of  tfteit  Ijanbcs,  renber  to  tljcm 
their  befett. 

5  asecaufe  the?  regarb  not  the 
ttiozResofthefLsDiB©,  nonhc  opera- 
tion of  his  hanbs,  he  thai  beftroy  them, 
ana  not  butlb  them  bp. 

6  25leflebbetheH€)«jD,becanfehe 
hath  hcarcb  the  tooyce  of  my  fiipplica 
tions. 

7  Xhe^©3K©ism?(lrcngth,anb 
my  ft)iclb,my  heart  trufteb  in  htm,  anb 
31  am  hclpcb:  therefore  my  heart  great; 
ly  rcioyceth ,  anb  itoith  my  fong  Xbi\\3 
pjatfehim. 

8  Xhc!L©is©is||their{rrengtt), 
anb  t)ee  is  the  t  fautng  ftrcngth  of  his 
^notntcb. 

9  £>auc  thy  people,  anb  blcflc  thine 
inheritance,  ||fecbe  tt)cm  alfo ,  anb  lift 
thembpfojeucr. 

PSAL.   XXIX. 

1  Dauid  cxhorteth  Princes  to  giue  glory  to 
God,  3  byreafonofhispower,  n  andpro- 
teftion  ofliis  people. 

C"3t0falmcof2Dauib. 
3Jue  bnto  the  iLfiDisp 
( j©  t  y  e  mighty)  gtuc  bnto 
the  %  ©  is  jd  glory  anb 
ftrcngth. 
zd5iitebntothc?L©isjD 
tflje  glory  bite  into  his  /ftanie •,  ltoor* 
njtpthc  lL©is^  llinthebeautic  ofho? 

Uneffe. 

3  Xhe&oiceofthe1L©ia3E>>sl)pon 
the  rbatets :  the  ©ob  of  glory  tftun? 
t>itti),tbt%®&&  is  upon  ||  many  tba? 

ttrs. 

4  CI)eboiccofthefLflDa©istpotb< 

erfuihthe  boyceoftheH«i>K?D  fa  tftiu 
offiJ9aicftic 


5  Xhet>oyceofthe?L<Di8£»brca; 
tteth  the  Ccbars:  yea.tlje  %<s>  is  m  brea- 
ftcth  the  Ccbars  of  JUbanon. 

6  ^cma&cththematfotofWpWftca 
caife :  Lebanon ,  anb  *  Virion  itite  a 
yongBmeornc. 

7  Xheboycc  of  the  %  0  is  jd  t  biui^ 
beth  the  flames  of  fire. 

8  XheboyceofthefL©isjD  |(ha? 
keth  the  lMbernes :  thelitis  jDfljaf 
fictlj  the  ttnlbctncflc  of  Baaed). 

9  1Lhcboiccofthc!L£)HjDma&eth 
the  htnbes  to  caltie ,  anb  bifcoucrcth  the 
forrcfts:anb  inhisXemplcbocthllcuc; 
ry  oncfpeaUc  of  bis  glory. 

10  Xhc  %<£>  W5E>  fittctl)  bpon  the 
flo  ob :  yea  the  %  &  h  jd  fitteth  Bing  fo«j 
cucr. 

11  Xhe?L€)is©rbilIgiucflcength 

bntoh<spcoplc;fhcH©ia©lbilbleffe 
his  people  ibtth  peace. 

PSAL.    XXX. 

Dauid  prayfeth  God  for  bis  dcliuerance.  4 
He  exhorteth  others  to  praife  bim  by  example 
of  Gods  dealing  with  him. 

C^^faime^ndfongitthebebicas 
tion  of  the  houfc  of3>auib. 

i©il  ettol  thee,)©  ILflDis©, 
fo?  thou  haft  Ufteb  me  bp  -, 
anb  haft  not  mabe  my 
focstoreioyceoucrme. 
x  £)?Lfl[)is?Dmy(i50b, 
31  mebunto  tljee ,  anb  tljou  Ijaftljea* 
lebme. 

j  fl??L€>ajD,thouhaftb?oughtt)p 
my  fouie  from  the  graue:thou  haft  Kept 
meaiiue,rt)at3  fljoulbnotgocbolbne 
tothepit 

4  5>ingDntothe1L€)is©,(£)yce 
faints  of  his )  anb  giue  thanks  ||at  tftc 
remembrance  ofhisholinefTe. 

5  5F0?  this  anger  endurethbutamo 
ment ;  mhisfauour  islife:rbcepingmay 
cnbure  t  fo?  a  nigljt,  but  t  toy  comm«h  m 
tljc  morning. 

6  ^nbiiimytp2ofpcritie3}Caib,5 
njallncuerbcmooueb 

7  !L©isjE>,bythyfauourthouhaft 
t  mabe  my  mountame  to  ftanb  ftrong : 
Xhou  bibft  h»oc  thy  face ,  and  g  aas 
troubieb 

8  3lcriebtothte,€>fL©iaiE>:anb 
into  the  1L©iB£>  3  mabe  fupplication. 

9  l»hat  pjofit  is  there  tn  my  bio  ob, 
ibhcng  gocbotbne  to  thepit  <  *5>han 
the  bull  pjtaift  rtjee  <  (hall  it  beciare  thp 
ttucthi 

10  $eare,£>  %  «r>  w  ^,anb  rjauemer 

cie 


Dcut.  3. 

f  Hebr.  cur- 
tithout. 

Or,tobe:n 
faint. 


'.'r,enfry 
hit  of  tt  vt- 
terctli  0-c. 


\\Or,tetht 
mcmtiriaS, 

\Htb.  thae 

ubatanta- 

mentwbts 

anger. 

\Hlbr.in 

the  cutmng, 

f  Hebr.fin- 

Vi- 

t  Hebrfet- 
led  ftrength 
for  my  main- 
tame. 


P(>\.6.6. 

and88.  11. 
3nd  115. 
•7- 


A 


pray 


er 


of 


Pfal 


mes. 


thefaithfull. 


||  Hm  is, 

myrcwruc, 
or  my  joule. 


■pm.>2. 

5.Efa.4*. 
=  3- 


\Heb.tome 

fjrarocke 

offtrengtk. 


"Luc.ij. 

4(5. 


tie  bponme :  ILjD-is  pbetboumphcl; 
per. 

1 1  Xhou  haft  turaeb  fo?  mcc  mp 
mourning  into  Daunting:  thou  haft  put 
off  mpfae&cclotb,anDgirDeD  nice  With 
glaontffe: 

n  %q  the  cnu  that  ||  my  giozp  map 
rmgp?apfctotbce,anbnotbeulent :  j© 
fL£>is©mpC50D,  3libtll  giue  thanfees 
bnto  thee  to?  cucr. 

P  S  A  L.    XXXI. 

Dauid  (hewing  his  confidence  in  God,  cra- 
uethhis  helpe.  7  Hereioycethinhismercy. 
9  He  ptayeth  in  his  calamine.  19  Hepray- 
feth  God  tor  his  goodneffe. 

C  Xo  the  chtefc  ^uGeian,  3 
0{almcofS>auiD. 
*iBthcc,^DH©K©,uoc 
33  put  mp  trutt ,  let  menc* 
ucr  be  afbamcb  :  Deliutr 
me  in  thp  ttghtcouftiett"c. 
z  26o«je  Donmc  thine 
eatetomc,DeiuiermcfpccDilp:betbou 
tmpftcongrortte,  fozanhoufcofbe* 
fentetofaucmc. 

3  iroj  trjou  an  mp  rocfec  anb  mp  fo?- 
tr  effe :  tberfo  jc  fo?  thp  uamcs  fane  leab 
me,anbgutbeme. 

4  |£mu  me  out  of  the  net ,  that  thep 
haue  lapD  p?iuilp  fo?  me :  fo?thou  an  mp 
ftrengtb. 

5  *3fnto  thinchanD  3J  commit  mp 
fptrit :  thou  baft  rcbecmcb  mee,  £> 
S,  ©  k  ©  ©ob  of  trueth. 

6  3  baue  hatcD  them  that  rcgarb 
lying  banihes  :  but  3  truft  in  the 

?LiDi5©. 

7  3Jibillbcglab,anbrciopccfntbp 
merrie :  foj  thou  haft  toufibcrcb  mp 
trouble;  thou  baft  Knorbenmpfoulcm 
abuerfmes-. 

8  3mb  haft  not  (but  me  bp  into  the 
banD  of  the  cnemie :  thou  baft  fet  mp 
fectetnaiargcroome. 

9  ^auemerrpbponme,^D?L®iR©, 
foj^latn  tn  trouble;  mine  etc  is  tonfu* 
meDibitbgriefc,  yeamp  foulcanDmp 
bcllp. 

io  Jfoimpbfcts  fpcntnntbgnefc, 
anD  mp  peeres  ttutb  fighing  :  mp 
ftrengtb  failctb  >  bctaufcofininciniqut 
tie,anb  mp  bones  are  confumcb. 

1 1  3J  ibas  a  repjorb  amongallminc 
enemies ,  but  cfpcnallp  among  mp 
neighbours,  anb  a  fcare  to  mine  at* 
quamtanee :  thep  thatDiDfccmcibith* 
out,  fltb  from  me. 


ii  3  am  forgotten  as  a  beab  man 
out  of  minbe :  3  am  line*  a  bzoften 
beffell. 

13  jFo^bauehearDtheaaunberof 
manp,  ftarexuason  euerpftDe:  while 
thep  toobe  tounfell  together  agaiuft 
mcthepbeuifebto  tafeeaibapmpufe. 

14.  25ut3ltruftcbmthee,€)|L€>iB3e: 
3  £apb,Xhou  an  mp  <£od. 

15  #p rimes  are mtbp hanb : beliuer 
me  from  the  hanD  of  mine  enemies, 
anb  from  them  that  perfctute  me. 

16  agaric  thpface  to  (bine  bpon  thp 
fcr  uant :  faue  me  60?  thp  mercies  fa  be. 

17  fLet  mcc  not  be  afbamcb ,  £> 
ILsdis©,  foj^j  bauecailcDbponthec: 
letthc  rDicbebbea(hameb,and||ietthem 
beftlentmthegraue. 

ig  ILetthelpingUppcSbeputtofi* 
lcnce:tbbitb  fpeabetgricuous  things 
pjoublp  anb  tontemptuouftp  agamft 
tl;c  righteous. 

19  *&)l)ovo  great  is  thpgooDncfft, 
Which  thou  haft  lapb  bp  foj  them  that 
fcarethee:  which  thou  baft  thought  fo; 
them  that  truft  in  tfjee ,  btfojc  the 
fonncsofmen! 

20  Xhou  (halt  hibe  them  in  the  fe* 
cret  of  thp  pjefence,  from  thcpiuDcof 
man:  thou  fltait  fecepc  thcmfecretlp  m 
a  pauilton,from  the  ftnfe  of  tongues. 

xi  25lcu"ebbe  tbcfL©m©;toj  hee 
hath  (beibcDme  hismaruellousbinD* 
neu"e,ina||ftrongcitie. 

2i  jfozgifapbinrnphaftt^amtut 
off  from  bcfo?e  thine  eies:  ^cuerthe* 
icflc  thou  hearbeft  theboite  ofmpfup 
plications,tbhen3Icrpebbntothee.  •» 

13  £>  loue  theH©  «»,  all  pee  his 
Saints :  tor  the  !L  ©  is  ©  p?eferueth  the 
ratthfull.anbplcntifullprerbarbeththe 
p;oubbocr. 

24  *25cofgoob  courage,  anb  hce 
fljallftrcnghten  pourheart:ailpethat 
hopemthci-sDis©. 

P  S  A  L.    XXXII. 

1  BleflednefTe  confiftech  in  remifsion  of  finnes. 
3  Confefsion  of  finnes  giueth  cafe  to  the 
confeieuce.  8  Godspromifo  bring  ioy. 

APfaimeofDauib,#afchiL 
!UQcD  ishev.hofc*tranf* 
greffiouis  fo?giuen,whofe 
fume  is  co  ucr  CD. 

2  25icflrbisthcmanbn 
to  ll'liom  the  ILoisp 
imputcthnot  tmauitie:anb  mtbhofe 
fpinttiicrcisnoguile. 
3  H9hcn 


\Htb.avtf. 

jell  that  fe- 
rijierh. 


\\Or,Ut 
their,  be  ctti 
ejffvrthe 
eraue. 
\liebjiheri 

•E(i.«4. 
^.i.Cot. 
j.ji. 


||  Or{et>fed 
cuy. 


*PfJ.J7. 
'4- 


ofDau'J 
ftmttg  it- 
JfruZhtm. 
*Rom.47. 


Darnels  confefsion.     Pfalmes.       Godsprouidence. 


"Prou.-.S. 
13. 

l.loh.i.y. 


time  otftn- 
ding. 


Pfil.9.10. 


t  He':  1 '•tit 
coatfeiihee, 
mrneeje 
l>»all  be  vf- 
ett  thee. 
*P  10.16.3. 


PCJ.M9 
64. 

\\Or,mercj. 

Gen.  1.(5. 
&7. 


j  i©t)m  3lbcptftlcnte,  my  bones 
tbareb  olb  though  my  roaring  all  the 
Daylong. 

4  jfomyananigbtthyhanbtuas 
beauy  bpon  mc :  my  motfture  is  ttttneb 
into  the  brought  of  Cummer.  5>eiab. 

5  3 aclmoiblcbgcb niyfin  tonto thee, 
anbimncmiciuracbaucjnotbtb :  *3 
Caib,  31  tt)Ul  confeffe  nip  tranfgtefltons 
bnto  the  ft  ©is©  .anbtboufojgaueft 
the  miQuitic  of  my  fmnc.  £>ciah. 

6  jfoj  this  (ban  cuery  one  that  is 
gobly  p?ay  bnto  thee ,  t  m  a  time  ibhen 
thou  mayeft  bee  founb :  furcly  m  the 
floobs  of  great  ibaters ,  they  (ball  not 
come  titgb  bnto  him. 

7  *  Xftou  *«  my  bibing  plate ,  tbou 
fbaltpjcferac  mccfrom  trouble:  thou 
(bait  compafCe  meaboutlbithCongsof 
btituerance.  &elab. 

8  3rbiiiintttuetthcc,anbteaehtbcc 
m  thcttmy  tbhtcbthou  Cbaltgoc :  1 31 
Mil  guibc  thee  Mtb  mine  eve. 

9  *35epeenotastbebon"e,orastl)e 
mule  which  banc  no  bnberftanbing : 
ibbofc  mouth  mud  bcbclbm  mtlj  bit 
anb  bjible ,  lead  the?  tome  ncetc  bnto 

thee.     ' 

10  ^anvfojnrtbesfliaiibetotbcrbit; 

6eb:  but  he  that  truftcth  m  the  %®m®, 
mere?  (bail  compare  htm  about. 

1 1  25e  glab  m  the  %  ©  is  © ,  anb  xv 
loyceyce  righteous :  anb  (bout  fo?  toy 
all  ye  that  ate  bpjtght  tnhcart. 

PSAL.   XXXIII. 

1  God  is  to  be  prayfed  for  his  goodnefTe,  6 
forhlspower,  it  andforhispiouidence.  10 
Confidence  is  to  be  placed  in  God. 

€ioytemthefU>is©,jj> 
yee  righteous :  (or  pjayCe  is 
comely  fouhebpttght. 
2  j&aifcthc  ?,©ir© 
_  ttnthharp:  fing  bnto  htm 
ttnth  the  i&faitcne,  jnd  an  tnfrrument  of 
tenftrings. 

j  <6>mg  bnto  him  a  neib  Cong ;  play 
fftilfully  ttnth  a  loub  noife. 

4.  ifo?  thettwbof  the  ftom©  « 
right:  anb  all  hisibDjftcs  arc  done  in 
trueth. 

5  *  $ce  loueth  rtghtcoufncCfe  anb 
iubgement:tbc  earth  is  ful  of  the  |  |goob> 
ncffcofthefL©*©. 

6  *25y  the  Jbojb  of  the  ltM© 
tberc  the  heauens  maoe :  anb  an  the 
hoft  of  them ,  by  the  bjeath  of  hjs 
mouth. 


7  $?e  gathereth  the  lbaters  of  the 
featogethcr,asanheapc:  hclayeth  bp 
tlje  bepth  in  CtojcbouCes. 

s  ILetall  the  earth  fearc  the  %$>we>: 
let  all  the  inhabitants  of  tlje  ibozlb 
ftanbmaibeofhim. 

9  Jfo2hefpabc,anbittbasbone:hc 
commanbcb,anb  ttftoobfaft. 

10  *XhefL©iRE>tb,»ngetbtbecoun? 
fell  of  the  heathen  to  nought :  he  ma* 
teeth  the  bcuices  of  the  people,  of  none 
effect. 

n  "Xhc  eotmfailc  of  the  H©  is© 
ftanbeth  fo?  cucr ,  the  thoughts  of  h*s 
heart  t  to  all  generations. 

n  *  Bleffcb  is  the  nation ,  ibhofe 
d5ob  ^  tl)c  H©is© :  and  the  people, 
whom  Ije  Ijath  thofen  fo?  his  olbncinhe 
ritance. 

13  Xhe  %  ©  is  id  loofeeth  from  hea- 
ucmhcbcbolbctballtbefonnesofmen. 

1+  5fromthepiaceofh!shabitation, 
helooBeth  bpon  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  earth. 

15  l)efa(btonetb  their  hearts  alifec : 
he  tonftbeceth  all  their  Mwues. 

i6  iChcre  is  no  smgfaueb  by  the  mufc 
titubcofan  hoftc :  anughtic  mams  not 
beltuer  cb  by  much  ftrcngth- 

17  3n  ho?(e  is  a  bamc  thing  fo?  faft 
tic :  neither  fball  he  bcliuer  any  by  his 
great  ftrength. 

is  *25eholb,thccyeoftbe3L©iK© 
isbpon  them  that  fcarehim:bpon  them 
that  hope  in bismercy: 

19 1Co  bcliuer  their  foule  from  bcath, 
anb  to  n  cepe  tli  cm  aliue  m  famine. 

io  £)ur  foule  Ibaitcth  fo?  the  !U>ia©: 
he  is  our  hebpe,  anb  our  (btelb. 

21 5Fo?ourheart(hailretoycetnhim: 
becaufe  ibe  haue  trufteb  m  his  holy 
name. 

22  Hctthymerty(£>!LsDffi©)  be 
bpon  bs :  accojomg  as  ibe  hope  in  thee. 

PSAL.    XXXIIII. 

1  Dauid  pravfeth  God,  and  cxhorteth  other 
thereto  by  his  experience.  8  They  are  blefled 
that  truft  in  God.  n  He  exhorteth  to  the  fejre 
ofGod.  15  The  Pnuiledges  of  the  righteous. 

€  a  Pfa]meof33Dautb,ibhenhe  cbangeo 

his  bebautour  before  H^bimelech: 

ibho  bjouc  him  atbay  9  he  ocpartcb. 

"  notUbicfrethclLspisjpat 

all  times:  his  pjayfefraii 

continually  tee  m  my 

mouth. 

2  <$y  foule  (ball  made 

her  boaft  ui  the  %  s>  k  jd  :  the  humble 

(ball 


•Efa.ip.j. 

ketbfnt-  s 

Jhaie. 

*Prou.  IJ). 
zi. 

Ela.4fi.10. 
t  He  k  iooe~ 
titration  and 
oeneraium. 
•  Pfal.fi  5. 4 
&i44-'5. 


Icb.96.7. 
&?4'4- 

I.Pct.J.lJ. 


\Or,Atbi!b. 
l.Sam.21. 
11. 


Or,they 
paired  vnto 
him. 


To  fee  good  dayes.      Pfalmes.     Dauids  complaint, 


P«t.3- 10. 


*  100.36.7, 
pfal.53.18, 


\Hti.tothc 
broken  of 

heart, 

f  Hc&.con- 
trttt offftru 


\\OrJhaloc 
guilty. 


(ball  bear  c  thereof,  anD  be  giao. 

j  €>  magnifte  the  |L©ibje>  tbttf)  me, 
anD  let  bs  trait  Ins  name  together. 

4.  3}  fought  the  fL  <d  ft  © ,  anD  bee 
bearDmc  aut>  bciiucrcD  mee  from  all 
mpfeares. 

5  ||%bcploo&cDbntobim,anDlbere 
ligbtneD  :  anD  tljctr  fates  tt»crc  not 
afbameD. 

6  Xl)ts  poojc  man  trieo ,  anD  tine 
fL^>is3D  bearo  him ;  ano  faueo  bun  out 
of  alibis  troubles, 

7  Xbe  3ngel  of  the  |L  ©  m  jb  civ 
eampetb  rouno  about  rbcm  that  fearc 
bim,anD  beliucrctb  them. 

8  iS>  tatte  ano  feetbattbe  %® a© 
is gooo  :blcffcD  is  the  man  that  truttctb 
mbim. 

9  £>  fcare  toe  fL£>a©  pec  Ijis 
&aints:fo?  there  is  no  Ibant  to  tljem  tljat 
fearc  huu. 

10  3Erjc  vounglponsbociacfec,  anb 
fuffcr  hunger : but  tbep  that  fcelte  the 
ILoisj©,  fbail  not  ibant  an?  goob 
thing. 

1 1  Comepec  tbilbjen,  Dearbcit  bnto 
me :  3JUMI  teach  pou  rtjc  feare  of  the 

ILiDffi©. 

ix  *iel)at  man  is  bee  that  ocGrctb 
life  i  and  louctl)  many  oapes,  that  be  map 
fee  goob  < 

13  Bcepc  tl)v  tongue  from  euill ,  anb 
tbp  Uppes  from  fpcatwig  guile. 

14  SDcpart  from  cuill ,  anb  Doe 
goob :  feefce  peace  anb  purfueit. 

15  *Xbe  cicsof  tl)t  1L01B©  arebp* 

on  the  rigljtcous  -,  anb  bis  earcs  are  open 
bntotbcircrie. 

16  X!)cfaceoftfje|L©w©isagainft 
thrm  that  Doc  null  to  tut  off  the  W 
membjante  oftbemftom  the  cart!), 

17  Therie;hteoustrie,anbti)elL©«jD 
bcatctb  $  anDDeuueretbtbcmoutof  all 
their  troubles. 

is  Xljc?L©K©isnigl)tbntotljcm 
tijat  are  of  a  tyoben  heart :  anb  faucrb 
fuct)  as  be  t  of  a  contrite  fpirtt. 

19  £0anp  are  the  afflictions  of  the 
righteous:  but  tbe  ILsDispbcliueretb 
bun  out  of  them  all. 

20  ^cbccpetb  all  bis  bones:  not  one 
oftbcmisb;oben. 

21  Cum  fbau  (lap  the  U)icbcb:anb 
tbep  that  Date  the  righteous  |  fbaibc  be* 
folate. 

22  %\)t  JL®kjz>  rcDccmccb  the 
foulc  of  Ins  fcruants  :  anD  none  of 
tbcm  that  ttuft  in  bim,  ftjaibe  Defo* 
late. 


PSAL.    XXXV. 

D  uiul  prayeth  for  his  owne  fafety,  &  his  ene- 
mies confufion.  11  Hecomplainethoftheii 
wrongfull  dealing,  ir  Thereby  he  inciteth 
God  againft  them. 

f  APfalmeOfDaUtD. 

1LC&3D  my    caufe    (<© 

%  &  is »)  tbitb  tljem  that 
ttrlue  flntbmee :  fight  & 
gainft  them  that  fight  a* 
gamttme. 
2  1CabcfjolDoffl)teib 

anD  bucaler,  anb  ftanb  bp  fo?  mine 

bclpt. 

3  2>?aibotttaifotbefpcare,anDftop 
the  way  againft  them  tbatperfecuteme : 
fapbnto  mpfoulc/3J  am  tbp  faluation. 

4  *iLct  them  be  eonfounbeb  aiuj 
put  to  frjame  tljat  feebe  after  mv  foulc : 
lettbembeturnebbatbeanbb?ougl)tto 
tonfufion,  tljat  Deuifc  mp  tjurt 

5  *  Het  tljem  be  as  tljafft  bcfo?c  tfje 
lbmb :  anb  let  tlje  3lngel  of  tljdLsDjsj© 

tljafe  them. 

6  |Lettl)etribapbetbarbeanbQtp« 
pemanblettlje^ngelof  tlje  %<&&& 
pcrtetutcrtjem. 

7  5?o?ibitI)outtaufeUauerl)epf;iD 
fo?  me  tljtir  net  in  a  pit ,  ibijitl)  tottDout 
caufe  tbcp  ijatur  DtggeDfo?  mpfoule. 

s  %tt  Deftruction  come  bpon  htm 
tatbnaibarcs,  anD  let  his  net  that  nee 
hath  b»D,  tateh  hunfelfe :  mto  that  berp 
Deftructlonlethimfall. 

9  3nD  m v  foule  fbalbe  topfull  m  the 
JLois  id  :  it  fbalt  reiopce  in  bis  falua- 
tion. 

10  Sfllmpbonesfpailfap,  ?,€>»©, 
tbbois  iibc  bnto  thee  ibhiti)  oeliuercft 
the  poo^c  from  htm  that  is  too  ftrong 
fo?  hun,  pea  the  pooje  anb  the  necbp, 
fcombitnthatfponcth  hmw 

1 1  t  jfaife  tbttnefTcs  bib  nfc  bp  tthep 
lapb  to  mp  tbarge  things  that  3  bnerb 
not. 

12  Xhep  rerbarbeD  nice  euill  fo? 
gooD.tothctfpotlingofmpfoule. 

13  25utas  to?  me,  Ibhen  thep  ibcre 
ftctte,mp clothing  Ibas  facb  clothe 
llhumbleb  mp  foule  ibttb  fatting,  anb 
mp  piapcr  returneD  mto  mine  oibne 
bofome. 

14  ^^ehaucDmp  felfe  as  though 

he  had  bene  tmp  fttenD ,  or  bjOtber  :  3 

botbeb  boibne  tyami? ,  as  one  that 
mournctb  tor  his  mother. 

15  ffiut  in  nunc  t  abuerCne  rhep  re* 
topceb,  anD  gatljeteDthcmfelucs  togc- 
ther; 


•  pfai.40. 
15.j07o.3- 


*Iobu.i8. 
pfal.1.4. 
Efa.29.6. 
Ofci3-3. 

\HtBJark; 
rue  and 

jUpperMejf*. 


he  knaweth 
notef. 


\Hti.wit- 
ne/fti  rf 
wren?* 
\HJ>.thcj 

aikedmt 

t  Hrkdrpn- 
mmg. 

\\Or,afpa- 


ksd. 

t  .'/<•/■ .  «/J 

friend, as d 

h-otber  to 

mc. 

t HriJ:al- 

twg. 


an< 


oray 


\Hib.my 
oncly  one. 
'Pl1l.40.il 
and  I  1 1. 1. 

XHekftroig 


\Hekfa!??. 


er. 


Pfalmcs.         Gods  kindneflc. 


t  H:br.my 
rtghtceufncf 


tlyct :  yea,  the  abiects  gathcrcb  them 
femes  together  agamft  me,?  3  tmctt)  it 
not,  they  bib  tcace  me,  anbceafcbnot, 

i6  naith  hypocrifieall  mocfcers  in 
fratts :  they  gnatheb  Dpon  nice  tbtth 
their  teeth. 

17  ?Lo2b,hotbiongiiriitthoulooBC 
on?  refcue  my  foulc  ftomthcitbcQrut 
tions,  t  my  barling  from  the  lyons. 

is  *3J  nrillgiue  tijee  thanucs  in  the 
great  congregation:  3itbtllp2aifethcc 
among  t  much  people. 

19  fletnot  them  that  arc  mine  cne 
mics  t  ltyongfully,  reiovce  oner  me:  nei- 
ther let  them  Hrinfte  tbittj  the  eye ,  that 
hatemcitoithouta  caufe. 

20  jfo2  they  (pease  not  peace:  but 
they  ucutfc  becettfuu  matters  agamft 
tljcm  that  are  quiet  in  the  lanb. 

zi  j^ea  they  openeb  their  mouth 
ilribc  agamft  me,  and  tame,  3ha,  aha, 
our  eye  hath  feencr. 

iz  Thisthouhaltfecnc(£)|L©a©) 
Rccpe  not  Olcnce :  SDIL02D  be  not  farre 
from  me. 

23  £>tttrc  hp  thy felfc  anb  aroafcc  to 
my  iubgement ,  euen  bnto  my  caufe,  my 
<5obanbmy?Lo2b. 

24.  5JubgemoaD1Lc>Bpmy<3ob, 
acco?bingto  thy  rightcoufncfTc,  anblct 
them  not  reioycc  oucr  me. 

25  ILetthemnot  fay  m  their  hearts, 
1 3lh>  fo  lPoulb  ibe  hauc  it :  let  them  not 
fay,  tec  haueftoallotbeo  him  Pp. 

2  6  %n  them  be  afhameb  anb  b:ougl)t 
to  confufion  together,  that  reioyce  at 
mine  hurt:  let  them  bee  cloathcb  lbith 
(hamc  anD  btfbonour,  that  magntfic 
themfeiuesagainftme. 

27  Hct them  fooutcfo2ioy,  anb  bee 
glab  that  fauour  t  my  righteous  caufe : 
yea  let  them  fay  continually,  flct  the 
flouts  bee  magnifies ,  llrijich  hath 
plcafure  tit  the  pzofpetity  of  his  feruant 

zs  3nb  my  tongue  (hall  fpeaue  of 
tJjyrighteoufncffc,  and  of  tljy  piaife  all 
tlje  bay  long. 

P  S  A  L.    XXXVf. 

1  The  ^lieuousertate  of  the  wicked.  s.  The  ex - 
cellencieof  Gods  meicie.  10  Dauidpiayeth 
for  fauour  ro  Gods  children. 

<EXo  thcchicfc  mutician,  a  rfaimc  of 
S>auio,  the  feruant  of  the  %  c  is  id. 


*gsfl$€  tranfgreflion  of  the 
M$  lintKeb  faith  ttnthm  my 
)pm  heart,  that  there  n  uo  fcare 
ISv  of  Gob  befoze  his  eyes. 
-  jfojheflattcrechhun* 


fclfc  in  his  ottme  eyes,  tpnuu  hismi 
cmictcbcfounb  to  be  hatcfull. 

3     Xl)C  tt)02bS  Of  hlS  mOUtl)  are  ml; 

quitieano  Deceit:  he  hath  left  off  to  bee 
ttnfc,andtoDoegoob. 

4-  $ee  Dcuifert)  ||tnifcf)iefc  Ppon  his 
beb,  he  fetteth  himfetfc  in  a  may  thai  is 
notgoob  heabhojreth  not  euill. 

5  *%hymerne(£>?L0i33D>mthc 
heauens;  and  thy  faithmlncflc  reached, 
bntothectoubes. 

6  Xhy  nghtcoufnefle  is  like  t  the 
great  mountames;  thy  iubgements  are 
agreatbccpc;  £>TLsDis2D,thoup2Cfcr< 
nett  man  anb  bead. 

7  $oujtcrccllentistf)ylouingtunb 
neu*c,!BDc5ob!  therefore  the  ehilb;cn  of 
men  put  their  truttbnbcr  the  (babolbc 
ofthymmgs. 

8  Xhcy  (hail  be  f abunbantly  fattf 
ficb  Vbitlj 1  the  fatneffe  of  thy  houfc :  anb 
thou  (halt  mane  them  bzinKc  of  the  ri 
uerofthypieafures. 

9  if  02  ibith  thee  is  the  fountaineof 
life :  m  thy  light  fballtbc  fee  light. 

10  £>t  continue  thyloutngktnbncfrc 
bnto  them  that  anoib  thee;  anb  thy 
righteonfnefle  to  the  top2ight  in  heart 

11  Hct  not  the  foot  of  P2ibe  tome  a* 
gainftmc,  anb  let  not  thchanb  of  the 
UricUebtcmoucme. 

12  Xhccc  are  the  tbojfecrs  of  intend 
tic  fallen :  they  arc  caQbotbnc,  anb  thai 
not  be  able  to  rife. 

P  S  A  L.    XXXVIL 

Dauid  perfwadcth  to  patience  and  confidence 
in  God,  by  the  different  eftate  of  the  godly 
arid  the  wicked. 

••APfalmeOf  2D3Uib. 

3Rer  not  thy  fclfc  bceaufc 
of  cuiliboers,  neither  bee 
thou  cnuions  againfi  the 
tbojUcrsofiniquittc. 
2  5fo2  they  (hall  foonc 
be  cut  bourne  UUe  the  graffc  ,•  anb  rbt- 
thecasthcgcccnchctbe. 

3  Xruft  in  the  H©^D,anb  bo  goob 
fo  (halt  thou  btbcll  in  thclanb,  anbtpe 
rely  thou  (halt  be  feb. 

4-  ©clight  thy  fclfc  alfo  in  the 
!L  ©  is  £>  i  anb  he  fl)ail  giue  thee  the  be« 
fires  of  thine  heart. 

5  t*  Commit  tliy  tbay  touto  the 
1L  $>  k  © :  truQ  alfo  in  hmi.ano  he  fljail 
bjmgittopaffe. 

6  3lnb  he  Qiall  bzing  fojth  thy  righ 
teoufnes  as  the  light ,  anb  thy  uibge 

7  t^eft 


huiniquttie 
ro  hare. 


\  Or'jartiri: 


'Pill.  77.1  I 
anJloU.^. 


T  Hchr.  the 
mounrAines 


?f  God. 


f  Hrl.prt- 


t  Heh.  wate- 
red. 


\lH.draw 
our  at  lenjrh 


•Frou.J;. 
i7-5£=4-i 


mentasthenooncoay. 


f  Heir,  in 
rruerh  and 
Jral/enetfe. 


\HebroIte 
rhj  way  zpon 
rhe  Lord. 

•Prnu.KS  ; 

mat  6.15  . 
1  .Pet. 5. 7. 


The  profperitie  Pfalmcs.  ofthe  wicked. 


t  Hdr,  h 
lilenrtothe 
LOR-D. 


•  Mate. 


5  5- 


jtlh. 


•Pfil.J.4. 


fHei.tbe 
•Upright  of 

1VAJ. 


\Hch-,lhc 
BrtciuttfncJ 

i>j  Lvnbts. 


\Or.,H* 

blifiaL 


7  t£eftmthclL©KiD,anbU)ait 
pancntlp  fo;  l)tm:  fcrt  not  thp  fclfc  be^ 
caufc  of  hun  mho  pjofpereth  m  Ins 
map,  becaufe  oftljc  man  lPljo  bnngcth 
ilncHebbcuicestopafTe. 

8  Ceafc  from  anger ,  anb  fotfaUc 
ttuatb :  fret  not  thp  fclfc  in  anp  ttnfeto 
boceutli. 

9  i^cuilbocrsfhailbccutoffibut 
thofc  that  lbaite  topon  the  31  ©is©, 
thev  fl)ail  mljcnte  the  earth. 

io  jtfojpnaiifflcmhilc.anbthclbtc 
heo  (hall  not  bee :  pea ,  tfjou  (haitbili 
gcntip  confiDer  his  place ,  ano  it  fluii 

not  be. 

1 1  *  25nt thcmeclte  (hall mhmte  the 
eartDtanftftjail  bcitgljt  tDcmTciucs  m 
the abunbantc  of  peace. 

iz  XhcttiicKcb[|plottctbagamftthe 
tuft,  ano  gnafrjctl)  Ppon  Ijtmlptttjfjts 
tcetl). 

13  *  Che  ?l02b  (hail  lattgf)  at 
him :  fo?  J;c  feeth  that  his  Day  is  com 
mmg. 

i+  XhemicBebhaucb?amcnoutthe 
froo2b,  ano  haucbent  their  bom  to  caft 
boiDnc  thcpoo2c  anb  neebp ,  and  to  flap 
tfuchasbcofbpjightconucrfation. 

15  Xheir  (mo2D(hallcntccinto their 
ottmc  fjcart,  anb  their  bomcsfhallbc 
b?o&cn. 

i6  3  little  that  a  rtghteoits  man 
h.nh,  is  better  then  tljc  riches  of  manp 
mtcUcb. 

17  irojtbc  amies  of  thcmicacb  fliaii 
be  b20ftcn :  but  the  %  €>  is  id  bpholbcth 
thenghtcous. 

is  XhclLoisphnomcthtbcbapes 
of  riic  top2tgfjt :  anb  their  inheritance 
fhallbcfrueucr. 

19  Xhcp  (hall  not  be  afhameb  tu  tfje 
null  time :  anb  m  tt)c  bapes  of  famine 
thepfhaibcfattfficb. 

20  25ut  the  ftiicttcD  (ball  pcrifl) ,  anb 
the  enemies  of  the  %o  is  ©  (lull  be  as 
t  tf)e  fat  of  lambes :  thep  (ball  confume: 
mtoftiioncfhaiithcpcotifumcaibap. 

21  1LhcmicUcbbo2ronicth,anbpap 
ctb  not  agamc:  but  the  righteous  (hcu> 
cthJiicrtp,aiibguicth. 

22  .fo2fucl)asbeblcfrcboffiim,(hail 
infinite  rlie  earth :  anb  tljcp  tljat  be  tur- 
feb  of  Dun,  fhalbc  cut  off. 

23  •Ehcftepsof  a  goodmmi  arc H02 

Dercbbpthc3L0is©:anbhcbcligl)tctb 
inhismap. 

24  Xhoughhccfaii,hcfhaiinotbc 
bttcrlv  caft  boibtic:  fo2  the  %  o  is  ©  bps 
hoibcth  him  until  his  haub. 


25  31  hauc  bene  pong ,  anb  now  am 
:Olb,  pn  hauc  3  not  feme  therfghtr 
I  ous  fojfaHcn  >  no:  his  fcebc  begging 
!  b2cab. 

26  f?eistcucrmnnfiill,anblcnbnh: 
anbhisfccocisblclTcb. 

27  2>epartfromcuill,anbboegoob 
'  anb  bUicllfomiernwe. 

28  if 02  the  fL0ia©loueth  mbgc 
Imciit,  anb  fo2faheth  not  Ins  faints, 
thep  arc  prefer  ucb  fo?  nier :  but  the  fecb 
of  the  mtc&cb  (hall  be  cut  off. 

29  Xhc  righteous  Chan  inhcrtte  the 
lanb.anb  btticll  therein  fo2  eun. 

30  Xhe  mouth  ofthe  righteous  fpea- 
beth  lbifcbome  anb  his  tongue  talaeth 
ofiubgnnent. 

31  %ty  nam  of  his  (Sob  is  m  bis 
heart :  none  of  his  1 1  fteps  (hall  flibc. 

32  SLhc  rbicbeb  matchcth  the  ngh: 
teous,anb  fcc&ctl)  to  flap  him. 

33  Xhc  ?L  013  ©mill  not  leauc  him 
tnhtshanb  ,no?  conbemnc  hun  ibben 
betsiubgeb. 

34-  Hdaiton  the  %  0  is  ©,  anb  ftcepc 
his  map,  anb  he  (hall  craittbee  to  mbe- 
rit  the  lanb :  lbbm  the  Uitcfeeb  are  cut 
off,thoufhaltfccir. 

3$  3  hauc fecne  the  Uitchcbm  great 
pomer :  anbfp^cabing  htmfelfe  due  ||a 
grccne  bap  tree. 

36  #ct  he  pafTcb  amap ,  anb  loe  he 
mas  not :  pea ,  J>  fought  hun ,  but  hee 
coulbnotbefounb. 

37  ^arUc  the  pnfert  man ,  anb  be- 
holb  the  Dpnght :  fo;  the  cub  of  that  man 
is  peace. 

38  26m  the  tranfgreffours  (hall  be 
beftropeb  together :  the  cnb  of  the  lbic 
bcbn)aibctutoff. 

39  25ut  the  faluation  of  the  righte- 
ous '5  ofthe  3Lsdise>  :  he  is  their  ftrcngth 
in  the  time  of  trouble. 

40  ^nb  the  H©kit>  (hall  hclpc  them 
anb  b  eliuer  them :  he  (hall  bctiucr  them 
fromtheunc&eb^nbfaucthnnbccaufe 
theptruftmhim. 

P  S  A  L.   XXXVIII. 

Dauid  mooueth  God  to  take  companion  of 
his  pitiful]  cafe. 

C  31  i&foHiic  of  3>auib,  to  tying 
to  rnnemb?ancc. 
1  It  0  is  © ,  rcbuftc  me  not 
?  in  thp  ityath :  neither  cha- 
ftcn  me  m  thFhotbifplca^ 
I  fure. 

2   j*02  thine  arromes 
fticbc 


\Heh.ail 
the  tjjy. 


1 0r.i'>"S, 


\Orji  ^rttvt 
tree  ,that 
froveihm 
hu  owrtc 
fijk. 


Great  afflictions.        Pfalmes. 


M 


anisvanitic 


btaltb. 


Tvryeti 


|  He b.  ii  not 
■with  me. 

H  Or,  my 

mtihbaxrs. 


\\Orytheedc 

I  watt  for. 
(|  Or,  £*- 
jwerc. 


\  Heb.  for 
huttlttng. 


\Heb.bem^ 
litany  are 


\  Heb,  far 
my  heloe. 


Hicttc  fall  m  mc  ■>  anb  tbp  hanb  pjefTcth 
mcfojc. 

3  There  isno  fonnaneffe  in mp  fled), 
becaufc  of  thine  anger:  neither  is  there 
anp  treft  in  mp  bones,  bctaufc  of  mp 
tone. 

4.  iffoj  mine  inicutitiesarc  gone  oucr 
nunc  heats  :  asanhcaup  burben,  tfitv 
arctooheaiucfomtc. 

<>  <S^ibounb0ftin6c,anciatcco^ 
rupt :  bctaufc  of  nip  fooliftmeCTe. 

6  3J  am  t  troublcb,  3JainboibcD 
bolbne  gccatlp -,  3  soe  mourning  all 
the  bap  long. 

7  if oj  mp  lopnes  arc  filleb  tbtth  a 
loathfome  bueafe :  anb  there  is  no  tbanfr 
netfemmpflcfl). 

8  3  am  feeble  anb  Owe  bjofcen  i  3 
hane  roarebbp  rcafon  of  the  buquiet^ 
neffe  of  mp  heart. 

9  fLo?b,ailtnpbcricc «  before  thec : 
anb  mpgroning  isnothib  from  thee. 

io  £0p  heart  pantcth,  mpttrength 
fatleth  me :  as  foj  ttjc  light  of  mmc  cics, 
ftauVtsgoncfrommc. 

n  £0pioncrsattbmpfcicnbsQanba 
loofe  from  mp  t  foje :  anb  1 1  mp  btiifinen 
Qanbafarreoff. 

ix  Xhcpaifo  that  feefce  after  mplife, 
lap  fnarcsformeanbthep  that  fecftemp 
burt,fpeafce mifthieuous  things ,  anb 
imagine  beccits  all  the  bap  long. 

ij  2Snt3J,asabeafeman,hearbnot 
anb  i  was  asabumbeman  thatopenethj 
not  his  mouth. 

14  lEhus'Jtbasasamanthathca;! 
reth  not  anb  in  ibhofe  month  are  no  re* 
pjoofes. 

15  ;ffo:||inthee,  <D?L£>ia©,boe3f 
Dope :  thou  ibilt  H&eare,  <D1Lo?b  mp 
(Sob. 

16   5FOj3}faiD,^eare  me,lcaftotherwiTe 

thepujoulbteiopcc  otter  mc:  lbhenmp 
footflippeth,  thcpmagmfictbcmfclucs 
agauiftme. 

17  5Fojgjamrcabpttol)ait,anbmp 
fojrolb  is  contmuallpbcfo?c  me. 

18  f  ox  3  ibill  betiare  mine  iniquitie ; 
3  ibill  be  fenp  fo:  mp  fmnc. 

19  25ut  mine  enemies  t  a  re  uuelp ,  and 
thep  are  ttcong :  anb  thep  that  Date  mcc 
nwongfullp,  arc  multipiicb. 

io  Xhcp  alfo  that  renber  euill  foz 
goob,  arc  nunc  abuerfarics :  bctaufc 
3  follott)  the  thing  that  goob  is. 

ii  ^otfatee  mc  not,  iDIL  ©is  ??:£[> 
mp  <sob,be  not  farrcfrom  me. 

n  ^ascDaacttoDelpemcc,  £> 
Sfljompfattiation. 


P  S  A  L.    XXXIX. 

1  Dauidsc.ire  of  his  thoughts,  4  th<:confide- 
ration  of  the  breuity  and  vaiutie  o(  life,  7 
the  reuerence  ot  Gods  Judgements,  10  and 
prayer.are  his  bridles  ofimpatiencie. 

CXotheehicfc  £0uftctan,  euento*3Jr 

button,  ^iDfaimcofDauib. 
fg§3£$3ff  5>apb ,  3  ibili  taac  hcebe 
*K^  KS*»  to  mp  ibaics.tbatjl  tone 
not  lbtth  mp  tongue :  3 
UMl  ftccpe  1  mp  moutl) 
tothabnble,  ibhtlethe 
ibicHcb  is  before  me. 

i  3  tbas  oumbc  tbttb  filence ,  3 
hclb  mp  peace,  euen  from  goob,  anb  mp 
fo?roU)tbastlttrreb. 

j  fl0p  heart  ruas  not  tornm  mee, 
tbl)ilc  3  Ibte  mufmg  the  fire  burucb : 
then  fpatte  3  lb»tl)  mp  tongue. 

4-  !L€)iHE>,mabcmctolmolbmtne 
eno,anb  themcafurcof  mpbapcs,n)bat 
it  .s :  that  3  mapbnovb  ||  boibfcatic  3 
am. 

5  ©cfjolb  ,tl)ou  fiall  mabc  mp  bapes 
as  an  Danb  bzeabth ,  anb  mmc  age  is  as 
nothing  befoze  tl;ce :  bcnlpeuerpman 
t  at  his  belt  Hate  is  altogether  *  baume. 
S>eiah. 

6  -tmrelp  euerp  man  ibaiaeth  in 
t  abaiuc  Cheib :  fucelp  thep  arebtfquie^ 
tcb  m  bainc :  he  heapcth  bp  nche  s ,  anb 
ftnolbeth  not  ibho  fl)ail  gather  them. 

7  ^nbnoiblLojb,  tt)ljatlbait3I 
fo?^mp  hope  ism  thee. 

8  Deliuerme  from  all  mptranfgref 
(tons :  mane  mcc  not  the  repjoch  of  tljc 
foolifh. 

9  3  tt»^s  bumbe,  3  opcucb  not  mp 
mouth  bctaufc  tbott  bibbclt  n. 

io  RcmooucthpftroKcaibapfrom 
mcc :  'Jam  tonfumcb  bp  the  t  blolbe 
of  thine  hanb. 

1 1  nahen  thou  vbith  rebuHes  boeQ 
correct  man  fo;  ituquttie,  thou  mabeft 
t  his  bcautic  to  tonfume  albap  libc  a 
moth  :  furelp  cucrp  man  is  bamtte 
S)clah. 

u  ?}carcmppjapcr,  <©  |L©ibjp, 
anb  gmc  care  bnto  mp  cne,  holbnot 
thp  peace  at  mp  tearcs  :  *fo«!  3  am 
a  llraungcr  rbith  thee,  andafoiont^ 
ner,asallmp  fathers  were. 

i j  £>  fpar c  me,  that  3  map  rceouer 
ttrcngth :  bcfo?c 3  goe  hence,  anb  be  no 
itioje. 

P  S  A  L.    XL. 

i    ThebenefiteofconfidenceinGod.  6  Obe- 
D  d  d  dience 


*  i-  Chroti 

=  5  ' 


\Hcb.slri. 

die  t  ormon- 
fell  for  my 
mouth. 


f  Heb.  trou- 
bled. 


(J  Or,  whM 
lime  I  ban* 


\tieb.fett:J. 
•PfaUi.y. 


\Mebr, 
image. 


t Heb.  con- 


\Heb.  that 
which  it  to 
be  defired  in 
him,  to  melt 
xrcay. 


*  Lcuit.25- 

r.Cliron. 
29  ■:?• 
Pfal.liy.i9-j 
Heb.ii.i3- 
r.Pcc.i.U. 


Sacrifice  refufed.        Pfalmes. 


Offl 


atterers. 


■d. 


t  Hri.Apt 
ofnoife. 


cdnerder 
thrmvnta 
thct. 


•Piil.St. 
l6.Efa.l. 
W.U66. 
!Hof.«. 
tf.Heb.  10. 
5  .Mat.  I  2.7 
t  HthJ>£- 
gtd. 


\Helr.\ntkt 
mutflefmj 
hcTfclt. 


f  lMfor 


'Pfal.34. 

?  k;o.j. 


dicnce  is  the  belHacnhce.    11  Thelenceof 
Dauids  euils  inflameth  his  prayer. 

C  %o  the  thicfe£Piitinan,  Arfaimeof 
SDauio. 

t  naaitcbpartcntlpfo:  the 
3LOEP,anbt)cincuneb 
Dttto  mc ,  anb  hcarb  inp 
eric. 
2  $c  brought  me  bp 
alio  out  of  t  an  bomble  pit ,  out  of  the 
miricclap,anbfctmpfrctebponarotB, 
and  cftablifbcb  mp  goings. 

j  anbhcbarbputaneibfonginmp 
mouthy™  pjaifcbnto  our  <3ob:manp 
mall  fecit,  anbfearc,  anb  fyalltruftm 
tl)e?L©isjD. 

4  asicffeo  is  that  man that  mafectb 
the  Com  ©bis  trade :  anb  rcfpcctctl) 
not  ttjc  pjoub,  no?  fuel)  as  turnc  afibe  to 
lies. 

5  $3anp,  4DfL©m©  mp  <£ob ;  are 
tlrp  monberfull  roojftcs  which  thou 
ball  bone ,  anb  tbp  thoughts ,  which  are 
to  bsmatb :  ||tbcp  cannot  be  rccftoncb 
bp  in  ojbet  bnto  thee:  it  3J  lboulb  be 
date  anb  fpeafte  of  them ,  tljev  atcmoc 
tbencanbcnumb2C0. 

6  *£>acrificc anb  offering  tboubibtt 
not  befirc,  mine  cares  bad  tboutopc= 
neb :  burnt  offenng  anb  unnc-orTcring 
bafttbounotrcquireb. 

7  Xbcnfapb^.lLocSJcomcnn 
tbcboiumcof  the  boo&ctt'sVbntten  of 
mc: 

8  3Jocligbt  toboc  tbpitoiil,  ©mp 
©ob :  rca  tljp  Iarbe  15 1  muljm  my  l)car  t. 

9  "J  bauc  pzcacbeb  rigbteoufncfTc  in 
the  great  congrcganon:  loc,  3  bauc 
not  refratneb  mp  lippes ,  £D  %  ©  is  ©, 
thou  ftnolb  eft. 

io  3lbauenotbmtbpttgbtcoufncu*c 
ttnfbinmp  Heart,  'Jlianc  bcciarcbtbp 
faitljtulncfTc  anb  tbp  faiuation:  31  bauc 
not  eonccaieb  tbp  loiung  ftmbneflc,  anb 
thy  tnttfj ,  from  the  great  congrcga- 
turn. 

n  nartb  bolb  not  thou  tbp  tenber 
mercies  f com  mc ,  <D  %  o  as  © :  let  trjv 
lomng  ttmbnefle,  anbtbp  tract!)  conti^ 
nuallppzcferucmc. 

1 1  jf  o?  innumerable  einis  Dane  com- 
paflco  mc  about ,  nunc  uuouincs  bauc 
taken  holb  bpon  me ,  Co  that  3  am  not 
able  to  looftc  bp :  tb  cy  are  moc  then  the 
bancs  of  mine  l)cab,tl)crefo;c  mp  heart 
tfaiietbme. 

13  26c  plcafcb,  £>&£>«©,  to  bcluicr 
mc:  £>  !LoR©,maftc  bade  to  hclpc  mc. 

14.  *  fLct  tljcm  be  afbamcb  anb  coiv 


founbeb  together,  trjat  fecftc  after  mp 
foulc  to  bclttopit:lcttbcm  be  bnuen 
batftibarb,  anb  put  to  fl)amc,tbat  Vbifb 
me  emu. 

15  fLettljcmbebefolatcfojareibarb 
of  tljeir  Cbame ,  tljat  fapbnto  mc.aiba, 
abai 

i6  iLet  all  fbofe  that  feefte  thee ,  re- 
(opecanb  bee  glab  in  rt)ce:let  fuel)  as 
louc  ttr?  faiuatton^ap  tontmuailp,1Ll)e 
3LiDi3©bemagnificb. 

17  25ut  3J  am  poojeanbneebp ,  yet 
the  ILozb  touiBCtl)  bpon  me :  thou  art 
mp  belpeanb  mp  beliucrer ,  mafte  no 
tatrping,£)mpC5ob. 

PSAL.    XLI. 

1  Gods  care  ot'thepoore.  4  Dauid  complai- 
nethofhis enemies  trccherie.  10  He  flyeih 
to  God  tor  fuccouc. 

C  %o  tljt  tljitfe  ^uOaan.  ^|&fa!me 
ofSDauib. 

?Uffcb  is  !)c  tijat  tonObc 
tetj)  ||  the  poozc  ;  the 
%  ©  s  ©  tbUl  beluier  Ijim 
tm  time  of  trouble. 

z  3i:i)e|Lois©ibill 
picfcrae  htm ,  anb  accpe 
Ijimaiiuc,  anbbe  mall  be  blcffcb  bpon 
rtjccartij  anb||tl)ou  ibilt  notbcliucr 
Ijim  bnto  t!)e  mill  of  fjts  enemies. 

j  %\)t  %  ©  e  ©  mill  ftrcngt!)cn 
Inm  bpon  tljc  beb  of  languishing :  thou 
lbilt  t  mafte  all  his  beb  in  his  ficftnefle. 

4  3fap0,Hfi)isjDbcmeTnfullbn' 
to  mc,  heaic mp  foulcfoz^J  hauefinneb 
agamftthee. 

5  ^mc  enenucs  fpcaftecuillofmc : 
lbhen  fhaii  hee  bie,  anb  hts  name  po 
rtnjA 

6  ^nb  if  hee  come  to  fee  me,  hefpea- 
fttth  banitp:his  heart  gathered)  mi- 
ciuitietoitfelfe,  whenhegotthabjoab, 
hetcllcthir. 

7  ^Uthathatc  me,  lbhifpcrtogc 
thcr  agamftmc.  agamQmeboc  rtjcp  be- 
uifetmphurt. 

s  t^ncuuibifcafe,  fay  they,cicaucth 
fattbnto  him  ianb  now  thatljc  lpcth,hc 
(ball  rife  bp  no  mo:e. 

9  *  Pza  t  mmc  oibnc  familiar  frtcno 
mibhom^I  trufico,which  bioeatc  ofmp 
bjcab ,  !jat!)  t  uft  bp  his  hcele  agamft 
mc. 

10  26utthou,3D!Lfl>!s©,bcmcrri; 
full  bnto  met,  anbtaxfcmcbpfhat3J 
map  rcqintc  them. 

11 23pthis3llmott)thatthonfauon; 

reft 


||  Or,  the 
weakfy  or 

\Het>.mthe 

dzycjetitU. 


\\Or,JoerwT 
tboM  delixcr. 


\Hce.turne. 


f  Hcb.tuiil 
tame. 
t  He  b.  a 
tbtxgof  Et 
KM. 

'  Ioh.i?.i8 
\Heb.tht 

pence. 

\Hrb.ma*. 

mfieJ. 


Dauids  hop( 


Pfal 


mes. 


in  trouble. 


bi< 


J  Or,  a 
PfalmcW- 
MtnginftrH- 
Qun  of  the 
frmtet,  &c. 

rth. 


•Pfal.8o.f. 


I  HtPT.btiw 
tddotftu. 

\\Or,gmt 

thioiktt. 
\\Or,bufrc. 
fcnet  KJ*L 

tut:  tort. 


\\Or,lhe 
UltUhtll. 


\0r, killing. 


retime :  becaufe  mine  enemie  ooctb  not 
trwmpbouerme. 

ri  anoasfojme,tboubpbolbeftme 
inmineintegrme  anbfetteft  me  before 
tbyfacefojeuer. 

1}  25lClfcb  bee  tl)c  H€>S©  ©ou  of 
Ufrael,  fcom  euerlafttng,  anb  to  euer* 
laRing.  ame^anoamen. 

P  S  AL     XLII. 

i     Dauids  zeale  to  (erue  God  ill  the  Temple. 
5    Hcincourageth  his  foule  to  ttuftin  God. 

CXotbetbicfe^uaetan,l|ffl9aftbtl, 
fojttjc  fonnes  of  Bojab. 

£>  tbc  ^acttpanteth  after 
tbetbaterb2oofecs,fopan; 
tctlj  my  foule  after  tfjee, 
£><5ob. 
x  £$y  foule  tbirftetb 
fo?  C5bD,fo;  tin  ltutng  ©oo :  tbbcnlball 
3  come  anb  appeare  before  000  < 

3  *($>ytcaresbauebcncmymeatc 
bayanbmgbt  tbbtlc  tljey  continually 
fay  bnto  me,t©!)ere  is  tby  ©ob : 

4  istycn  3  remember  tbcfe  things, 
3  potbje  out  my  foule  in  mee ,  foj  3 
bab  gone  tbitb  tbe  multituoe ,  3  tbent 
ibttb  tijem  to  tbe  boufe  of  ©ob;  tbttb 
tbeboyccofioyanbpjaift,  tbitbamul- 
titubcthatfecpthoipba^. 

5  n9bvarttbouteattbotbne,j£)my 
foule,anbwhyarttlioubifciuietebtnme< 
l^ope  tljou  m  ©ob,fo?  3  fbail  vet  llpwtfc 
Ijtm  K  for  tlje  belpc  of  bis  tountcnante. 

6  4Dmy©ob,myfouleiscaftbotbnc 
ttntbin  me :  tbercfoje  ttull  3  remember 
thee  from  tfjc  lanb  of  3fo?bane,anbof 
tlje  ^trmonitcs,  fcom  the  ||  fjill  ^mar. 

7  Dcepe  callctl)  bnto  beepc  at  tbc 
noyfe  of  tby  ibatct-fpouts :  all  tby 
tbaues ,  anb  tt)P  btllotbes  arc  gone  0 
ucrme. 

8  y«  tbe  %  o  is  ©  Mil  commanb 
ms  loutng  binbnes  in  the  bay  time,  anb 
tn  tl)eni£fttl)isfongfhaibenjtrfj  me,  a«d 
my  ptay  er  bnto  tlje  ©00  of  my  lift. 

9  3  tbill  fay  bnto  ©ob ,  #y  r otfte, 
toby baft tbou  forgotten  me<  tbby  goe 
Tl  mourning,  becaufe  of  tbcoppjcETion 
of  tbc  enemy  < 

10  As  tbitb  a  ||  fioo^b  in  my  bones, 
mine  enemies!  tepwbmce:  tbbtlefbey 
fay  bayly  bnto  me,  when  is  thy  ©ob  ; 

1 1  D9l)y  art  tbou  raft  botbnc ,  £>  my 
foule  i  anb  tbby  art  tbou  bifqutctcb 
ibitbin  me J.  bope  tbou  in  d5ob ,  foi^ 
fljallyctp.jaifcljim,  who  istbebealtfjof 
my  countenance,anb  my  ©ob. 


P  S  A  L.    XLIII. 

Dauid  praying  to  be  reftored  to  the  Temple, 
promiferruoferue  God  loy  fully.  5  Heen- 
couragethhisfouletotruftinGod. 

^bgcmee,£>©ob,anb 

plcab  my  tauft  againftan 

libngobly  nation?  <©beb> 

uer  me  t  from  tlje  bercto 

..full  anb  bniuft  man. 

x  5fo?tl)ouantrjc(5obofmyftrengtD, 

tbby  boeft  trjou  caft  me  off;  tbby  goe  3 

mourning  becaufe  of  tbc  oppjclTion  of 

tbe  enemy* 

j  £>  fenb  out  tby  ligbt  9  tljy  tructb  1 
let  tbcm  leabemec,  let  tbembmigmec 
bnto  ttjv  boly  bill ,  anb  totbyXabcr^ 
nacles. 

4  Xbcn  mill  3  goe  bnto  tbc  aitar 
of  <5ob ,  bnto  <5ob  tmy  crcctbing  ioy : 
yea  bpontftefjarpe  ibill  3  p?aifttj)ee, 
£)(!5ob,my(I5ob. 

5  i©rjyartt!)outaftbolbnc,4Dmy 
foule  i  anb  ibljy  art  tljou  bifenucteb 
ibitljinmcjDopemcsob.fo^fljailyet 
pmiftbim,whoistljel)calti)onuy*coun< 
tenance,anbmy©oo. 

PSAL    XLIIII. 

The  Church ,  in  memory  of  former  fauours, 
7  compljine:h  of  their  prefent  euils.  17 
Profefsingherintegritie,  14  Sheteruently 
prayeth  for  fuccour. 

C  Xo  tlje  tljieft  filMirtan  foj  tbc 
fonnes  of  Bo;al)= 
<eehauc  iicarb  ibttt)our 
eares,£)©ob,  outfatljcrs 
fjauetoib  bs,  what  ibojftc 
thou  bibft  mtljeir  bayes, 
rd  uubcmr.es  of  o  id, 
z  How  tbou  bibft  bjiuc  out  tbc  ftea? 
tljcn  ttntb  tby  banb ,  f  plantcbft  tbcm  • 
how  tboubibftaffluttbc  people,  anb  caft 
tbcm  out. 

j  Jfojtbeygotnottbelanbinpoflcf 
fion  by  tbeir  olbne  ftno^b  ,  netrtjer  btb 
tbeir  olbnc  armc  fouc  tbcm :  but  tby 
ngbt  banb ,  anb  tbme  armc ,  anb  tbc 
ligbt  of  tby  countenance,  becaufe  tbou 
babfl  a  fauour  bnto  tbem. 

4  Xbou  art  my  Bing ,  <©  C5ob : 
commanb  beltueranccs  fo?  3acob. 

5  Xbwugb  tbee  tbill  ibec  pu(b 
borbnc  our  enemies  :  ftyougb  tby 
0mt  tbill  lbcetreabtbnn  bnber  tbat 
rifebpagainftbs. 

6  if 01 3  tbill  not  truftin  my  botb, 
neitber  (ball  my  froo^b  fauc  me. 

3Dbb  x  7  23ut 


\\Or%VT7m:r- 

ctfuU, 

t  Hebr.fwn 

<t  fXivt  cf  de~ 

cett^ondtm' 


t  Hebr  the 
gUdrKJfeof 
mjtoj. 


"Pfal.4i.6- 


Prayer  in  trouble.       Pfalmes.     Chrifts  kingdome. 


t  Heir  a, 

fheepeof 
nuMc. 


jHrl.vak- 
out  ruhn. 


'PGJ.7J.4 


"Itre.24.9. 


II  Or,  gang' 


'Rom.8.;6 


\Hcb.thclp 
ftrvi. 


7  2Sut  thou  baft  fauebbs  from  our 
enemies,  anb  haft  put  tl)em  to  fl;amc 
tbatbatebbs. 

8  JJnGobibcboaftaiitbcbaylong: 
ano  p?aife  thy  jftamcfo?  cucr.  ;§>eiab. 

9  2Sutthoubaftcaftoffanbputbs 
to  fljame ;  anb  goeft  not  fowl)  MJitI)  onr 
armies. 

io  XhoumaKeftbstoturnebacbc 
from  tfjecnemie:  anb they  tbljichbatc 
fs,  fpotle  fo  j  t  hemfciues . 

1 1  %tymx  baft  giucn  bs  line  t  fljeepc 
appointed  fo?mcate :  ano  Ijaft  fcattcreb 
bsamongtlje  heathen. 

n  Xbou  felleft  thy  people  t  fo? 
nought,  ano  bocft  not  increafc  thy  weakh 
by  their  p?tce. 

ij  *£boumaKettbsarep?ocbtoour 
neighbours,  a  ftomc  anb  a  bcrtfionto 
tficnt  that  are  rounb  about  bs. 

14  *Xf)oumabeftbsabp-«302ba* 
mong  the  heathen:  a  (basing  of  the 
ijcao  among  the  people. 

15  ^yconmfion  is  continually  bcfo?c 
me,  anbtljetbamcof  my  fate  hath  to 
utrebme. 

16  ifoztl)cboitcofI)imtt)atrep?oa= 
tbctb ,  anb  blafpbemetb :  by  rcafon  of 
the  cnemic  anb  auenger. 

17  2lll  this  is  tome  bpon  bS;  pet 
bauc  ibec  not  forgotten  tlicc,  neither 
Ijaucibe  beau  fainy  in  tljy  touenant. 

18  £)ur  heart  is  not  turncb  battic : 
ncittjcr  Ijaucour  ||ftcps  bcrtmeb  from 

tliylbay, 

19  1Ebougbtboubaft(b?eb?oRcnbs 
in  the  plate  of  b?agons,  anbtoncrebbs 
lbitlj  the  tbaboib  of  beatb. 

io  _jf  ibec  bauc  fo?gottentbeuame 
of  our  C50D,  o.i  ftrctcbcb  out  our  banbs 
toaftrangecsob: 

ii  <s>b«N  not  C5ob  fcarth  this  out; 
fo?  be  bnoibctb  t!)c  fctrcts  of  the  heart. 

11  * #ea  fc>2  tby  fabc  arc  ibec  ftilicb 
all  the  nap  long:  ibee  are  countcD  as 
(becpefoztbeflaugbter. 

2?  3nbabc ,  lbljy  fleepclt  thou ,  4D 
%oibj.  artfe,  tart  v>  not  off  fo?  cucr. 

14.  ©bcrefozebibetttbou thy  fate* 
and  fojgettcft  our  affliction,  anb  our  op* 
p:eflion* 

15  3Fo?outfoulctsboibebboibncto 
tbc  butt;  our  belly  tlcaucth  bnto  the 
cartl). 

16  strife  tfoiottrftclpcanbrcbceme 
bsfo?  tby  mercies  fabc. 

PSAL.    XLV. 

1   The  maieftie  and  grace  of  Chtiib  kingdome. 


10  Theduetieot  theChui'ch,  andthebene- 
fits  thereof. 

CXo  tbctljicfe  ^uCcian  bpon  £>ljo< 
fl)annim,  fo?  the  fonncs  of  Bozal), 
||  ©aftbil :  a  fong  of  loues. 

"  Pbcatttistnbitingagoob 
matter :  _J  fpeafec  of  the 
things  ttibttl)  _J  Dauc 
mabctoucbingtbe  fting: 
my  tongue  is  the  pennc  of 
areaoynwer, 

x  Xbou  art  fairer  then  the  chab?cn 
of  men :  grate  ispottweb  into  thy  lips 
tbctfo?e  ©ob  Datlj  blcffeb  thee  fo?  cuer. 

3  (Sirb  thy  nuo?b  bpon  thy  thigh,  d> 
nioft  migbtie :  ibitb  thy  glo?y  anb  tljp 
matcttie. 

4  3nb  in  thy  matcftte  t  ribe  p?ofpc 
roufly  ,bceaufe  of  truetl)  anb  mecbencs, 
andrigljtcoumcffc:  anb  thy  right  banb 
fljall  teach  tbec  terrible  tilings. 

5  Xbine  arrovbes  are  ftjarpe  m  the 
heart  of  the  mings  enemies ;  Xbtjcreby 
the  people  fall  bnber  thee. 

6  *  %\ft  tl)?one  ( )©  <E»ob)  is  fo?  cuer 
anb  cuer:  the  ftepter  of  th?  Uingbome 
isarightfteptcr. 

7  1Chouloucftrightcotuncfre,anb 
bateftibttbcbncffe:thecefo?c<l5ob,  thy 
<Sob,  hath anomtcb thee  Until  thcoylr 
of  giabncffcabouethy  fciloatcs. 

8  ^llthygarmcntsfmeiiofnmrhc 
anb  aloes,  and  caflia :  out  of  the  Sttumc 
palaces,  ibh^reby  the?  haue  mabe  thee 
giab. 

9  Bingsbaughtcrswereamongthp 
honourable  ibomcn :  bpon  thy  ngbt 
hanb  bib  ftanb  the  ^Inecnc  mgolbcof 
Cpbir. 

10  ^carbcn(«©baughtcr)anbcon' 
fiber,  anb  incline  thine  care  1  fo?getalfo 
thme  ottrne  people,  anb  thy  fathers 
houfe. 

11  5>o  fl)ail  the  Ring  greatly  befire 
thy  beautie :  fo?  he  is  thy  &o?d  ,  anb 
lbo?Qiip  thou  him. 

ir  2lnb  the  baughtcr  of  Xy?c  thai]  be 
there  ibith  a  gift,  eucn  theritl)  among 
tljcpcopic  Chan  mtrcatct  thy  fauour. 

ij  %l)t  lungs  baughtcr  «  all  glo?i- 
ousibitl)in;hcrtlotljtngisofU)?ought 
golb. 

14  5>hc  (hall  bee  brought  bnto  the 
fting  in  raiment  of  nccblc  ibo?ftc :  the 
birgms  her  companions  that  folloibc 
her,  (hall  be  biought  bnto  tbee. 

15  loithgiabncfrcanbretoynngajau 
tl)cy  be  b?ought :  tlicy  ftjall  enter  into 
tljcliuigs  palate. 

16  _fn 


Cr,cfn- 
JtrHtlun. 
t  HctrUy- 
leth  or  bw~ 
leth  vp. 


t  Heb-.frcf- 
pertfiotfy 
ride  then 


»Hcb.t.8 


\Hic.thy 


God 


ourreruge. 


fu 


Pfal 


mes. 


►ions 


beaut 


ic. 


||  Or,./ 


^Hdr.the 

heart  of  the 

(cas. 


^Heb.tehen 
the  mtrrmn? 
appear cth 


t  Heh.an 

high  place 
for it. 


j  Though  the  maters  thereof  roare, 


||  Or,./. 


i6  3Jn  fteab  of  tbp  fathers  (ball  bee 
tbp  cbiib?en,mbomthou  mapett  mafte 
pmuestnalltbeeartb. 

17  gj  mm  matte  tbp  name  to  bee  re* 
mcmb?cbin  all  generations:  tl)etefo?c 
(ball  tbc  people  piaifc  tbet  fo:  cueranb 
euer. 

P  S  A  L.    XLVI. 

1    The  confidence  which  the  Church  hath  in 
God.  8  An  exhortation  to  behold  it. 

CXo  tbc  cbtefc  #uGcian  ||fo?  the 
fonncs  of  l&ozah,  a  fong  bpon 
3Hamotb. 

1$)  2>  is  onr  refuge  anb 
ftcengtb :  a  bcrp  p?cfent 
bclpcm  trouble, 
i  Xberfo?cmiUnotmc 
fcare,  though  trjc  earth 
be  rcmoueb :  anb  though.  the  monn= 
tames  be  cattcb  into  tttje  mibtt  of  the 
fca. 

andbetroubleb,though  tbc  mountaints 
(babe  tbttt)  the  toeiung  tbctcof.&eiab. 
4.  There  is  anucctbcttreamesmbcr* 
of  (hall  maae  glab  the  cmc  of  Gob :  the 
l)olp  place  ofthcXabctnaclcs  of  tije 
moftfeigb. 

5  <5obistnrt)ctnibttofncr:fl)Cfl)al 

not  be  moueb;  d5ob  Q)ail  Delpc  her, 
t  and  that  rtgbtearlp. 

6  Xbe  heathen  rageb,  the  fting- 
bomes  mere  mooueb :  he  bttereb  fits 
bopce,  tbe  earth  mcltcD. 

7  1Lbe1L©m  ©of  bofts  (smith  bS; 
the  Gob  of  3Jaeob  is  tout  refuge.&rtab. 

8  Come,  bcbolb  tbettwucsof  tbc 
fLois©,  mbat  befbtatfons  bee  barb 
mabc  in  the  earth. 

9  $c  mafcetb  matrcs  to  tcafe  bnto 
the  cnb  of  the  eartb :  nee  b?eatietb  the 
bom,anbtuttetbtbe  fpearc  m  funber, 
bebutnetb  the  chariot  in  the  fire. 

10  ffie  ftfl,anb  ftnom  tbat  3  am  Gob: 
31  mm  bee  eraiteb  among  tbe  heathen, 
%  mm  be  eraueb  in  tbe  eartb. 

11  n:bcit©KjDofbotts.stbttbbS; 
tbe  Gob  of  3acob  is  our  rcfuge.5>clab. 

PSAL.    XLVII. 

The  Nations  are  exhorted  cheerefully  to  enter- 
tainethe  Kingdome  of  Chrift. 

CXo  tbe  cbiefe  mufician,  a  pfalmc  ||  fo? 
tbcfonnesofl&o?ab. 

CiappourbanbS(aiipcpco; 
pic : )  flboute  bnto  Gob  mttb 
tbc  bopec  of  triumph: 
%  5fo?tbe?LsDia^moft 


high  is  terrible;  be  is  agrcatl&tngouer 
alltbeeartb. 

j  itj>ec  tbailfuboue  tbe  people  bnber 
bs.anb  tbenations  bnber  our  feet. 

4  $e  (ball  cbufc  our  inheritance  fo? 
bs,  tbcercrticntieof  3Jatob  ibbombce 
lotteb.  £>elat). 

5  ©ob  is  gone  bp  mttb  a  fbout,  the 
%  ©  is  ©  ttiitb  tbe  fottnb  of  a  trumpet. 

6  5>ingp?aifestO(Sob,0ngp?aucs: 
fingp?atfesbntooutBlng,fingp?aifcs, 

7  5Po?  Goo  is  tbe  using  of  all  the 
cartb.ung  pe  p?atfes||mithbnberttau: 
btng. 

8  ©ob  reignetb  oner  tbc  heathen : 
Goo  fitteth  bpon  the  tb?onc  of  t}is  bo* 
Itncffc. 

9  !|  Xbe  p?mccs  of  tbe  people  arc 
gatbereo  togetbcr,euen  tbc  people  of  tbc 
d5oo  of  abjabam :  fo?tbe(biclbs  of  the 
earth  belong  pnto  Gob :  bee  ts  gteatlp 
eraitcb. 

PSAL.    XLVII  I. 

The  Ornaments  and  priuiledges  ot"  the  Church. 

C  afong,  and  |&raime  |[  fo?  tbefonnes 
offso?ab. 

ffieatistbefLoiHi^anb 
greatlp  to  bee  p?aueb  in 
the  titic  of  our  cob,  m 
tbemountame  of  bis  bo* 
Unefle. 
z  25cautifullfo?Ctua' 
tion,tbe  iop  of  tbc  lbbolc  eartb  is  mout 
S>ion,  on  the  Goes  of  tbcil5o?tb,tbe  et 
tie  of  the  great  l&tng. 

j  Gob  is  bnoiben  in  her  palaces  fo? 
a  refuge. 

4  jfo?loc,thcbingstbcrcaCremblcb: 
the?  paffeb  bp  together. 

5  Xhep  faibc  it,  and  fo  djep  maruefc 
leb,  theptberc  troublcb  and  baflrb  a* 
map. 

6  iFearc  toobc  holbe  bpon  them 
there,  andpainc,asof  a  moman  intra* 
uaile. 

7  Xhon  b?cafecQ  the  (btps  of  Xar? 
(hi(hmithanCaftmmb. 

8  Zs  me  bauc  hcarb,  fo  haue  mee 
feme  in  the  ntic  of  the  %.<£>  is  ©  of  liofls, 
in  the  crtie  of  our  <5ob ,  ©ob  mill  efta* 
bii(l)itfo?eucr.  5>ciah- 

9  i©cc  banc  thought  of  tbp  lotung 
bmbneffe,  £>  ©ob,m  tljc  mibbeft  of  tbv 
Xemplc. 

10  ^cco?btng  to  tbp  iBamc,  £)  Gob, 
fo  is  thp  p?atfe  bnto  the  enbes  of  the 
earth  •  thp  right  hanb  ts  full  of  righto 
oufnetTe. 

S>UD  3      II  %tt 


\\Or>  eucry 
one  that 
hath  vn- 
derfia?iding4 


Or,thevo- 
Itmtarie  of 
thepeopfe 
are  gathered 
vntof£f 

yU  of  the 
God  of  A- 
Sraham. 


\\Or,cf. 


3S 


v. 


ainetru 


ft. 


Pfalmes.  GodsMaiefti 


c. 


\H:b.fct 

ycttr  heart  to 
her  bni~ 

\\Or/.ufc 


\Or,,f. 


•Mjt.13. 
5  5.  phi. 
78.2. 


ntTAUonand 
veneration. 


fHet:  dt 
fahtinthetr 

month. 


1 1  ILct  mount  ;§>ion  rctoyce ,  let  the 
Daughters  of  3Jubab  be  glaD,  becaufe 
oftbywDgemetits. 

n  tt3ar»cabout£>tonyanDgectounD 
about  her :  tell  the  toW?cs  thereof. 

13  t^arncyce  Well  her  buiwarncs, 
1 1  confiber  her  palates ;  that  yce  may  tell 
it  to  the  generation  following. 

14  ifo?  this  (BOD"  our  <SoDfo?  euer, 
ant)  euer  •,  he  Will  be  our  gutoe  euen  tonto 
Death. 

P  S  A  L.    XLIX. 

1  An  earneft  perfwafion  to  build  the  faith  of 
Refurrc&ion ,  not  on  worldly  power,but  on 
God.  16  Worldly  profperiry  is  not  to  be  ad- 
mired, 

C  Xo  the  tbiefe  $)uuttan,a#falnte 
]|  fo?  the  fonnes  of  BOjtat). 
"  care  this,  all  y«  people, 
gtue  eare  all  yce  inhabit 
tatusoftbcWoUD: 
z  2BotbloW,anDbtgb, 
.  ritbattDpooje  together. 

3  i$y  mouth  (bail  fpeanc  of  wife* 
borne :  anb  the  mebitatton  of  my  heart 
fbaibe  of DtibcrftanDing. 

4  *3  Willintlincmine  carcto apa* 
table ;  3J  will  open  my  barftc  faying  bp 
outhcharpc. 

5  nahcrcfoK  fhoulb  3  feare  in  the 
bates  of  cuill,  when  tbemicuiitieof  my 
hecles  mall  tompaffc  me  about  < 

6  Xbey  that  trttftintbeir  Wealth, 
and  boaft  thcmftlues  in  tbemultitubc 
ofthcitrtthes: 

7  iBone  of  them  tan  by  any  meanes 
rebeemc  hisbjother ,  no?  giue  to  ©ob  a 
ran  fame  fo;  him: 

8  (jf  o?  the  rebemption  of  their 
fouie  is  precious,  anb  it  tcaftth  fo?  ener.) 

9  Xbat  he  fhoulb  (nil  hue  fo?  euer, 
andnotfee  abruption. 

10  3*0:  befeetb  that  wtfcmenDic,liRe* 
Wife  the  foole,anD  tbcbntttfb  pcrfon  pc* 
rifb  ,anb  leauc  their  wealth  to  others. 

1 1  Xheir  mwarb  thought  isthar  their 

hOUfcS  mall  continue  fo?  CUCT ,  and  tt)CtC 

Dwelling  plates  t  to  all  generations; 
they  tall  thai  lanos  after  their  owne 
names. 

11  jfteuerfbelcttc  man  being  m  ho? 
nourabibcthuot :  bc.Giiitctbcbcafics 
depend). 

13  1Cbis  their  Way  >  their  folliC;  yet 
their  pofteritie  tappjouc  tbetr  faymgs. 
§>clab. 

14  Jlifte  fbeepe  they  arc  layb  m  the 
graue,  bcath  fljail  fcebe  on  them;  anb 


the  fcpugbt  fhall  hauc  Dominion  ouer 
them  in  the  utommg,  anD  then;  ||  beauty 
(bail  tonftimellmtbcgraue,  from  their 
Dwelling. 

15  25ut  <E»ob  Will  reoeeme  my  fouie 
tfrom  the  power  of  the  !igrauc;fb?be 
fhallreteiue  me.  £>rlah. 

16  25 e  not  thou  afraiD  When  one  is 
maDenclj ,  When  the  glo?y  ofbisboufc 
is  (ncrcafeD. 

17  *5foj  When  beDterb.bc  (hall  tarry 
nothing  away:  bis  glojy  (hail  not  Dcfc 
tciib  after  him. 

i8  3ChoughtwhtlcsheliucD,heblefreD 
his  fouie :  anD  men  Will  p:atfe  tbee, 
wbentbouDoeft  well  to  thy  fclfe. 

19  ttyccihailgoc  to  the  generation 
ofbisfatbcrs,tbeyfball  ncuer  fee  light. 

ao  ^anthatismhonouranDbnDcp 
ftanoethnot,  is  lifte  the  beads  that  pe* 
rifh. 

PSAL.    L. 

1  The  MaieftieofGod  in  the  Church.  5  His 
order  to  gather  Saints.  7  The  pleafure  ot 
God  is  not  in  Ceremonies,  14  butinfinceri- 
tie  of  Obedience. 

C3$falimi|of3faph. 

$emightie  d5QD,  euen  the 
itojBjDhatbfpoBen,  anb 
caileb  the  earth  from  the 
rifingof  the  funnc,  into 
the  going Downt  thereof. 
z  4Dut  of  5>ton  the  perfection  of 
beautic,  €»oD  hath  fljineD. 

3  iDur<50Dfl)au  tome .atiDfbaii  not 
tteepe  ftiewc :  a  fire  (hall  Deuoure  before 
hint,  anb  it  fbaibe  bcry  tempeftuous 
rounb  about  htm. 

4  $e  (hall  tail  to  the  heauens  from 
abone,  anb  to  the  earth ,  that  bee  may 
tubge  his  people. 

5  ©athcrnty&aintstogctherbnto 
mccitbofc  that  haue  maDeatouenant 
Witbmc,byfaertnce. 

6  3lnb  the  heauens  (ban  Declare  his 
rtgljtcoufnes  foz  €>od  is  tubge  hmtfclfe. 
£>ciab. 

7  IJJcare,  ©  my  people,  anb  3  Will 
fpcaftc,  HD  3lfracl ,  anb  3!  Will  tethfic  a> 
gatuft  thee  ■,  3  am  <5oD,*uen  thy  (5ob. 

8  giwmnotrep;ouethecfo?thyfa5 
trifttcs,onhy  burnt  offerings,  to  haue 
bene  continually  befoje  me. 

9  3JwilltaBenobullocKeoutoftby 
houfe,nor  hecgoatcs  out  of  thy  folbs. 

io  5fo?  cuery  bead  of  the  fojreft  is 
mine,  and  the  tattell  bpon  afboufanb 
hillcs. 
n  3 


[Orffreneth 

\Or,the 
graue  bang 
an  h.ibit.ttt- 
on  to  exert 
tine  of  them. 
\Heb.fm 
the  band  of 
thegrme. 
\\Or,hcll, 


"lob. !  7. 
•9- 


\Hei.,nhU 
life. 

tHei.  the 
loulefiall 
gtt. 


\\Or,for 
Afoh. 


Paytr 


tnvvowes. 


Pfal 


mes. 


A 


contrite  heart. 


\HeU  vuli 

mt. 

•Exod  19 

5.dcUL!o. 

I4.ploi  ,i^. 

I. 

*Iob4i-2. 

I.cor.ia 

il.'t. 


*Rom.*. 
lis:. 


tHehr.iby 
portwn  was 
with  adul- 
terers. 
t  Hebr.'hm 
fenif. 


\Heir.lUl 

rfUfcfetbhis 

TPJJf. 


*  I.Sim,  i  j. 

and  11. |. 


ii  3  fenolD  all  tijc  foiiics  of  the 
monntautcs :  ant)  the  HMD  beads  of  the 
fielDa  ret  mine. 

ii  *  3/f  3  vottt  hungrp ,  %  iboulD 
not  tell  iljcc  ,*  foj  thetboao  >s  mint,anD 
the  fulnclTe  thereof. 

u  naui  3  eatc  the  defy  of  buiies ,  o? 
bzinitcthc  bloob  of  goats ; 

14  £>ffcr  bnto  ©ob  thanftcrgiuing, 
anb  pap  thpfcoibes  into  tfjc  molt  high. 

15  #nt)  call  bpon  mee  ut  the  bap  of 
trouble;  3  tbill  beuuec  thee,  anb  thou 
Halt  qlo:;ftc  inc. 

16  23«tbnto  the  Vbicftcb  <Sobfaitr)> 
ushat  Jjaft  rtjott  toboe ,  to  Declare  mp 
Statutes,  0?  that  thou  fhouibefttafcc 
nip  Coucnantinthpmouth; 

17  *  Seeing  thou  hatcft  inftructton, 
anb  rafteftmp  ttwbs  behinbethee. 

18  ©hen  ttjou  felbett  a  tbiefe,  then 
thou  confentcfift  ttrith  him ,  anb  thaft 
bene  partafeer  tbtth  abulterecs. 

19  t  xhou  giueft  tt»p  mouth  to  emu, 
anb  thp  tongue  ftamcfh  beceit. 

io  Xhoufitteft  and  fpcaftett  againft 
thpbiothcr  thouflanbercftthineotbnc 
mofhersfonnc. 

ai  1ChcrcthingshaftfhoubDnc,anb 
3lKcptfilcntc:  thou  thoiightcftthat'J 
ibas  altogether  fuch  a  one  as  thp  felfe : 
bm^jtutiltcpzoue  tljee,  anbfetthemm 
oibetbcfo;iethmecpcs. 

xt  flovo  confibcr  this,pc  that  fojget 
©ob,lcft3I  tcarc  you  m pieces ,  anb  there 
benonctobclluer. 

13  i©ho  fo  offcrcth  pjatfc,  glonfieth 
me:  anb  to  him  tfhatozbereth  Mon* 
uerfation  aright  ,tbiii3J  Ibelbthe  falua? 
tionof<3ob. 

P  S  A  L.     LL 

1  Dauid  prayeth  for  remifsion  offinnes,  where- 
of he  maketh  a  deepe  confefsion.  6  Hee 
prayeth  lor  fan&ification.  16  Goddeligh- 
teth  not  in  faaifice.but  iniinceritie.    18  Hce 

prayeth  for  the  Church. 

CXo  the  chicfc  ^ufician.  30Caimc 
of  S>auib,  nbhen  iftarhan  the  0io 
phct  came  bnto  him ,  after  hec  Ijao 
goncintoBatljlbcba. 

3lucmcrtictoponmcc,£) 
<3ob,acco;btngtofhpl05 
umg  Uinonctte :  attojbing 
bntotbenuilrttube  of  thp 
tenber  mercies  Wot  out 
mp  ttanfgreflions. 
z  ©afh  mee  thzoughlp  fcom  mine 
imquttte,anbcUnfemeftommpfimtc. 


3  5Fo<$  3  acfenorblcbgc  mp  tcanfc 
grcujtons:  anb  mp  fmne  is  euec  before 
nice. 

4  *3Cgamft  thee,  thee  onclpbaucj 
Gnneb ,  anb  bone  this  cuill  in  thp  fight : 
that  thou  nughteft  bee  iuftificb  lbhcn 
thou  fpeafcett,  and  be  cleare  roben  tljou 
iubgeft. 

5  asebolb ,  3  *&as  (bapen  in  uiiqiu; 
tie :  anb  in  finne  bib  mp  mother  t  con* 
ceiucme. 

6  2Sebolb,  thou  befireft  tructh  in 
the  urtbarb  parts :  anb  in  the  bibbm 
part  thou  fljalt  mafeemeto  fenoib  iinfc* 
borne. 

7  *  #urge  me  Vblth  hvffope ,  anb  3 
Oiaibecleanc-.ibaft)  me  ,anbj  fljailbc 
ibhtterthcnfnon). 

8  #abe  met  to  heart  io?  anb  giab; 
neue :  that  the  bones  which  thou  haft  bjo- 
ben.maprciopce. 

9  ^ibethpfaccfrommpfinnesanb 
blot  out  all  mine  iniquities. 

io  Create  in  nice  a  clcanc  heart ,  £> 
©ob ;  anb  rcnelb  ||  aright  fpirtt  ibithm 
met. 

1 1  Caft  mee  not  atbapfrom  t\r?  pit* 
tente  -,  anb  tafec  not  thp  hoip  Spirit 
from  me. 

ir  JJlcftozebntometheiopofthpfab 
uation :  anb  bpljolb  mee  with  thy  free 
Spirit. 

ij  Then  ttili  3  teach  tranfgreOours 
thpibapcs,  anb  Gnncrs  ujaibeconuer- 
tebbntothce. 

14  2>cliuer  nice  from  tbloobgmlti 
nefle,  ^>d5ob ,  thou  <e»od  of  mpwiua^ 
tion :  and  nip  tongue  (ball  Gng  alotbb  of 
tbprighteoufnefle. 

i$  2)  £o?b  open  thoumplips ,  anb 
mp  mouth  ujall  therb  foouh  thp  piaife. 

i<s  ifo?  thou  befireft  not  lacrifice : 
II  elfe  tboulb  3  giue  it  thou  bchghteft 
not  tn  burnt  offering. 

17  *  %\)t  facrificcs  of  <5ob  areab?o- 
hen  fplrit :  a  bzoften  anb  a  contrite 
heart,  j©  C5ob,  thou  Mnltnot  befpife. 

18  Doe  goob  tn  thp  goob  picafurc 
bnto  £>ion :  butlb  thou  the  walles  of 
^cruCalcm. 

19  Xhen  fbaitthou  be  plcafcb  lbtth 
the  faenfiecs  of  rightcoufucftc ,  lbuh 
burnt  offtring  anb  ibhole  burnt  offer- 
ing:  thciiOjail  thep  offer  bimocfecsbp- 
on  thme  altar. 

P  S  A  L.    LII. 

i    Dauid  condemning   the  fpighifulneffe  of 
|Docg,propheficth  nbdcftiuiSfon.   6  The 

tighrcous 

38  2 


'Rom. 


3-4- 


\Hdr. 

narnit  me. 


*  Leuit.14. 

6- nu.u.  I v 

■  8. 


Or,  a  eon- 
jtMilfant. 


\Hebr. 

btaodt. 


\\0,fhAll 

iheulAoiMc 
it. 

•Ifi.j7.t5 

and  66.?- 


The  cuill  tongue.       Pfalmes.  Gods  iuftice. 


i.Sam.u. 


cUceufnU 

finite. 

f  hih.  be.-Je 

thtederene. 


Or,fui- 
jltmet. 


•rfjl.14.1 
yCil  10.  4. 


"Horn.;. 
16. 


righteous  fhallrcioyce  at  it.  8  Dauidvpon 
his  confidence  in  Gods  mercy  ,  giueth 
thanks. 

C  %o  the  thiefe  (©ufictan ,  ^afrijil, 
a  riaime  of  SDautb :  *  xehen  SDoegthe 
€bomitccame  anb  tolb  £>aui,  anb 
fatbbntohtm,  S>auiDiscomc  to  the 
hjnifeof&hunelcch. 

l?p  boalicft  thou  thp  felfc  in 
nufchtcfe,  ©  nugbtie  man '. 
tbegoobnefleof  ©ob  indu- 
ct hcontinuallp. 
^  Xhp  tongue  beutfeth 
mifcbicfcs :  ubc  a  Cbarpe  rafo?,VbojR(ng 
beccittuup. 

3  Xhouloucfteuillmojcthcngoob 
and  tying  rather  then  to  fpeaae  nghte; 
oufneflc.  5>eiah. 

4-  Xhouloucftallbeuouclngtbo?bS, 
1 1  i)  thou  becettfull  tongue. 

5  <5ob  (ball  liKrtbife  t  oeftrop  thee 
fb?  ener ,  hec  (bail  tauc  tbecaibap  anb 
plurfcc  thee  out  of  thy  Mbellmg  plate, 
anbrootctbeeout  of  tbclanbof  the  lu 
utng.  S>clab. 

6  Xbc  righteous  alfo  (nail  fee,  anu 
ftare,ano  (ball  laugl)  at  bun. 

7  !Loe,tl)tsistl)cmantrutmaDenot 
©oDbistrtcngtb :  buttruftcb  inttjc  a* 
bunbancc  of  bis  riches ,  and  (teeugtbe; 
neb  fjunftifcmlnslitbttRebneu'e. 

8  2Snt  31  am  nuc  a  grecne  oliue  tree 
intbeboute  of  (5ob :  3J  trultin  the  tner- 
tp  of <5ob  fw  cuer  anb  cuer. 

9  3  Mil  P^pfe  thee  fo*  eucr ,  be* 
caufetbou  baft  bone  it :  anb  3?  ami  mait 
on tbp  name,  fo?  it  is  goob  before  fbp 
^auus. 

P  S  A  L.     LIU. 

Dauid  dcfcribeth  the  corruption  of  a  naturall 
man.  4  He  conuinccth  the  wicked  by  the 
light oftheirowneconfciei-.ee.  6  Hceglori- 
cth  in  the  laluation  of  God. 

C  Xofbe  thiefcmuncianbponfl0al)a 
lath,  CBafcba,  a  pfaime  of  2Dauib. 
5?c*foolc  bath  fapbe  tn 

l)lS   IJCart,    There  is    UO 

gob    Comipt  ate  tbep, 
anb  bauc  bone  abljomu 
nablc  tmemitie ;  *  there  is 
none  that  both  goob. 

x  C5ob  loobeD  bottmc  from  heauen 
bponthcebtlbKnofmcn,  tofcetf  there 
Vber  c  any  that  Dib  bnbcrttanb ,  that  bib 
fecUccSoo. 

3  tfucrp one oftbemts gone  barftc, 
the?  are  altogether  become  filtbp :  there 
is  none  that  Dothgoob.no  not  one. 


+  $aoe  the  tbojfeets  of  wiqmnc 
no  nnoiblebge*  who  eatcbpmppeoplc, 
astbepcatebjtcab ;  they  bane not  talleb 
bpon  d5ob. 

5  Xhcre  t  tbcre  tbep  in  great  feare, 
where  no  fear  eibas :  fo;Kl5obbatb  ftat* 
tercbthe  bones  of  htm  tfjatincampcth 
agamft  tbee,tbon  baft  put  them  to  (Ijame, 
betaufc  d5oo  hath  befptfeb  them. 

6  t  <8>  that  the  tarnation  of  3ifr  ael 
were  come  out  of  &ion  i  lbben  ©ob  b?in* 
geth  batfee  the  tapttuttic  of  hts  people, 
5laabob  (ban  reiopce ,  and  gifrael  (bail 
beglab. 

PSAL.    LIIII. 

1  Dauidcomptainingof  the  Ziphims,prayeth 
forfaluation.  4Vponhis  confidence  in  Gods 
hc!pe,hepromifetli  facrifice. 

C  Xo  the  thiefe  mufician  on  if5estnoti), 
#afehil,  a  Pfaime  of  ©auto.  *  aahnt 
the  ziphims  came  anb  fapbc  to 
£>aul :  boeth  not  2>auib  hSx  htm- 
fclfe  ibith  *s< 

^ueme,  ^><5ob,bpthp 
name,anb  tubge  me  op  thp 
ttrength. 

1  ^earcmpp?aper,^D 
Gob  ;  giuc  earc  to  the 
U»o?bs  of  mp  month. 

3  jfojttrangersarcnfenbpagainfr 
me,anb  opp?cffb2Sfeebe  after  mp  foulcj 
thep  hauc  not  fet  ©ob  before  them. 
£>ctah. 

4  25cholb,  C5ob  is  mine  helper :  the 
Hojb  is  ibith  them  that  bpholb  mp 
fouie. 

5  $e  fbail  reibarb  cuill  bnto  tmmc 
enemies :  eutthem  offin  thp  trueth. 

6  3Jflnll  freelp  fatnficebntothec; 
II  lbtil  pjatfc  thp  natnc  (£>  IL  ©  is  w> :) 
fo^isgoob. 

7  foi  hec  fjath  beliuerebmcoutof 
all  trouble:  anb  mine  cpe  hath  feene  his 
defirc  bpon  mine  enemies. 

PSAL.    LV. 

1  Dauidin  hisprayercomplainethofhis  feare- 
fullcafe.  j  He  prayeth  againft  his  enemies, 
ofwhofe  wickedneffe  and rrecherie he  com- 
plained). 1^  He  comfortcth  himfelfe  in 
Gods  prcferuation  of  him  and  confufion  of 
his  enemies. 

e.%o  the  thiefe  mufician  on  i5cginoth, 
£0afchtl.  APfalmeofSDautb. 
^uc  earc  to  mp  pjapcr,  j© 
<50b:  anbhibc  not  thp  felft 
frommpfupplitanon. 
z  ^ttcnb  bnto  me,  anb 
heare 


feared  A 
fcKTt. 


■f  Me!},  who 
vtigtHe  fd 
MAtienti&c. 


'  I.Sam. 13 
19. and 
16.1. 


\Heb.lhefe 
that  ebferite 
me. 


Dauids  complaint.      Pfalmes.  His  confid 


ence 


redmc. 


\Htb.jruv 
according  t 
mj  rank/. 
t  Heb.-wh, 
fjpcetned 

COHllfcS. 


\\Or,tht 
from:. 


\\Or,mil, 
wromi\lu 
ihtTcbtno 
(Jijtn'et  yet 
ttjejffSre 

tCjod. 
\HfbJve 
>*!hyrv]A 


bcarc  me :  3  mourne  m  my  complaint, 
ano  malic  a  none. 

3  25ecaufe  of  the  boyce  of  the  em- 
nuc ,  becaufc  of  tlje  oppzeflion  of  tljc 
UjicfteD :  to:  they  call  imqintie  bpon  mc, 
ano  m  ruiattj  they  bate  inc. 

4  £0y  heart  is  fo2c  pamco  lbitbm 
me :  ano  tljc  tctrours  of  ocatb  arc  fal; 
lenbponme. 

5  jfcatcfulncflc  ano  trembling  arc 
come  bpon  mc,ano  bozrour  bath  toucr- 
lbbclmeo  mc 

6  ano  3J(aiO,£>  that  3Jbaonjings 
ttftcaoouc,  tor  then  roouio  Jflecanmy 
ano  be  at  reft. 

7  Hoc,  ttun  loouio  3  ttjanoct  farrc 
off,  md  rcmamc  m  tljc  ibiiocmcu'c.&c; 
lab. 

8  3}  rbouio  batten  my  efcape  from 
the  UnnOtc  ftomie, -1  "J  tempeft . 

9  3!>cftroy  ,£>  Hojo,md  omioc  tljctr 
tongues :  fozj  baucfccncbiolcnce  ano 
ftnfcm  the  cine. 

io  £>ay  ano  night  toe?  goe  about  tt 
bpon  the  tballcs  thereof:  mifcbtcfc  alfo 
ano  fojroib  -» e  m  the  nuoft  of  it. 

1 1  iBicftcOnefreinnthemiDQtbcrof: 
Octette  ano  gtulc  ocpart  not  from  her 
ftcccts. 

u  3F02  it  was  not  an  enemtc  that  re; 
pjoacbcotnctbcn  31  couio  Dane  borne 
>t,  neither  was  it  bee  that  hatcome,  that 
DiO  magnifie  himfelte  agamft  mc,  then  3 
tboulO  banc  l)iO  my  fclfc  from  htm. 

13  But « was tbou,t  a  man,minc  equal, 
m?  guioe,  ano  mine  acquaintance. 

14  tj©cctooRc  facet  counfclltoge 
ther,  jnd  vbaibco  bnto  the  boufc  of  000 
mcompante. 

15  lietocath  fea3c  bpon  them,  ano 
let  them  goe  oolbnc  quicftc  into  II  hell : 
foiYbtcbcOncs  ^mtbcir  Olbelungs,  and 
among  them. 

i6  3lsfo2mc,3J\biHcaUbpon0oO: 
ano  the  ?Lo:0  fbail  fauc  mc. 

17  Corning  ano  morning,  ano  at 
noonc  null  31  pwy,  attO  me  alouo :  ano 
be  (bail  bcarc  my  boy  cc. 

18  $e  Ijatl)  ocliuereo  mv  foule  in 
peacefromtbebattclltbattt>asagainft 
mc  -.foz  there  there  many  tbitb  me. 

19  000  fbailbearc  ano  afflict  them, 
cucnbctrjatabioctbof  olD,3>eiab :  be 
caufcilfbcy  haue  no  changes ,  tbetrfo2c 
they  fcarc  not  <3oo. 

20  $c bath  put  fooztb  hishanoesa^ 
gamftfucbasbcat  peace  lintbbuu:  the 
hath  bjobenlji'scoucnant. 

21  The  words  of  his  mouth  ibereOnoo 


I  ther  then  butter,  but  ibarre  was  in  his 
heart:  btsuwosibcrefofter  tljcn  oyle, 
yet  a  ere  they  Ojatben  fiuo20s. 

22  *  Call  thy  I  burocn  bpon  the 
1L©KiD,anohefl)aiifuftaincthcc:hec 
(ball  ncucr  fuffer  tljc  righteous  to  bee 
moueo. 

23  25nt  thou,  <©0oo,  (halt  bzing 
them  oolbne  into  tljc  ptt  of  ocfrrurnon: 
t26ioooy  ano  Occeitfullmcntvbaii  not 
line  out  balfe  their  oayes,  but  31  ibui 
tcuft  m  thee. 

P  S  A  L.    LVI. 

1  Dauid  praying  to  God  in  confidence  of  his 
word,  complaineth  of  his  enemies.  9  Hee 
profeficth  his  confidence  in  Gods  word,  and 
promileth  ropraife  him. 

CXo  tlje  cljicfc  miifinan  bpon  3Jonatb 
eiem  ftccboHim,  i|  ^ichram  of  2D& 
mo  ,  lbhen  the  *  iDhtiilhncs  toobe 
hjmmpatb. 

€  mcreifull  bnto  nice ,  £> 
000,  fo2  man  iboulO  foal- 
loib  mc  bp :  he  figbnng  oau 
iy,opp2cflctljmc. 

2  t  spnc  enemies  ibouio  oaply  froai 
loib  mebp :  fo2they  beemanytljatfigljt 
againft  mc,  £>  thou  mod  high. 

3  naljatnmcj  am  afraioc,  31  ibiu 
tr tift  in  thee. 

4  3m0oo3hbillp2aifcbisibo2Oc, 
35n  000  3  haue  put  my  truft,  3J  lbill 
not  fcare  ibbat  flcih  can  ooc  bnto  me. 

5  Cucry  Oay  they  ifycft  my  uJojos  : 
all  their  thoughts  arc  agamft  nice  fo; 
cutil. 

6  Xhey  gather  thcmfcltics  togc 
ther ;  tljcy  hibc  tljnnfelnes.thcy  niarbc 
my  ftcps  ibhen  tljcy  ibaitfoz  my  foule. 

7  £>bail  they  efcape  by  iniquities  tn 
thine  anger  caft  ooibnc  the  people,  £> 

000. 

8  1-liontcileftmyVbanoenngs,put 
thou  my  tear  cc  into  tljy  bottle:  are  they 
notmtbybooUe* 

9  aaijrngi  me  bnto  thee,  then  Qjaii 
nunc  enemies  turnc  bacftc :  this  3 
HnoVb,  fo2  0oDisfonuc. 

io  3in0oOlbill3Jp;atrchisibo2D:in 
the  %  OKotbiligipzaffch'.niOiD. 

» i  3In  0oo  haue  31  put  my  truft :  3 
ttiui  not  bee  afraib  lbtjat  man  can  Doe 
onto  me. 

12  Xhybolbesaicbponme,£)0oD: 
3J  lbill  renocr  p^acfes  bnto  thec. 

13  iFo:  thou  haft  ocliucreomv  foule 
from  Dcatlj:Uult  not  tljou  deliucr  niy 

feet 


•PCI. ;7  2 

rri3t.6.ir. 
luk.  I  2  .  J  3 

r.  pet.  5.7. 


of  bhod!  A7li 

dtctit. 
\Hcbr.pird 
not  halfe 


(ten  pfalinc 
of  7).wui. 
"i.Sam.ji. 


t  Hebr.m'me 
obferuers. 


God  faucth  his.  Pfalmcs. 


Thewicked. 


\\\Or,dtpr6j 

j  not, 

j'i.Sam.14- 


^Orthere- 
fratcffeth 
\him  t!"tt 
.woitld  fva! 
fnvmevp. 


*Pfa[.7.l6. 

andf.ly. 

•Pfi!.lo8. 

I.&C. 

|  Orfrcf* 

•Pl'il.;  6. 
«.&  108.5 


feet  from  falling  t  that  II  map  walfee 
before  C50D  in  tt»c  light  ofttje  lining. 

P  S  A  L.    LVII. 

1  Dauidin  prayer  flying  vnro  God.complai- 
neth  of  his  dangerous  cafe.  7  He  incoura- 
gech  himfelfc  co  pi  ai  fe  God. 

CXo  the  chiefe  muGttan  \\7L\-  tafchifh, 
$)iehtam  of  Dauib,  *  rbtjen  Dee  fleb  i 
fcom  £>aulm  thecaue. 

<£  niernfull  bnto  mee,  fl> 
<5ob,be  merciful  bnto  me, 
fo?  my  foule  truftcth  in 
thee :  pea  tn  the  (habotb  of 
thy  itouigs  ttull  3J  inabe 

my  refuge,  DntflUhefe  calamities  bee  o- 

uerpaft. 

2  gj  tbill  eric  bnto  <5tto  mott  high : 
bnto  ©ob  tfjat  pcrfourmctl)  ^1  things  fo^ 
nice. 

3  $cc  (hall  fenb  from  heaueu,  anb 
fauemellnom  tlje  repjoch  ofhim,  that 
lipoma  ftballouj  me  bp  5>elah.  <E>ob 
(ball  fenb  fojth  his  mercy  anb  his 
tructh. 

4  *|)yfoulCisamonglyons,™d3l 

lie  eucn  among  them  that  arc  fet  on 
fire:  euenttje  Tonnes  ofmen.lbhofctecth 
are  fpeares  anb  arroibcs ,  anb  their 
tohgueatharpeftbojb. 

5  xSe  thou  eraltcb ,  ©  <£ob ,  aboue 
thcheauens:lctthyglo?y  beaboucail 
the  earth. 

6  *u:heyhauep2cparebatictfo;imy 
fteppcs.my  foule  is  boljbcb  bolbnc  :they 
haue  btggcb  a  pit  befoze  me ,  mto  the 
nubffUihctcoftrjcp  arc  fallen  themieiues. 

£>eiah. 

7  *^yheartis||nrcb,©<l5ob,my 
heart  is  ftrcb:3l  Vbill  fmg,  anb  gtue 
pjaife. 

8  3(tt>auc bp my  glo?y,att.iaBepfai: 
tcric  anb  harpe^  m> ltltc  ibillavbaKc 
early. 

9  3  ibill  piaifc  thec ,  j©  %m ,  * 
mongthc  people ,  31  tbtll  ungbnto  thee 
among  tl)c  nations. 

10  *5Fo?  thy  mercy  is  great  bnto  the 
heauens ,  anb  thy  tructh  bnto  the 
cloubs. 

n  23c  thou  ocaiteb ,  ©  ©ob ,  abouc 
the  heauens :  let  thv  Sto;p bc  abouc  all 
the  earth. 

P  S  A  L.    LVIII. 

Danid  rcprooucdi  wicked  ludges,  3  Dc(- 
enbeth the  nature  ot  the  wicked,  6  Deno- 
ted] them  to  Gods  iudgcmeius,  10  whereat 
the  righteous  dial!  rcioyce. 


f  H'kfrcm 
ihck/lh. 


\Or-}<lht 
hamcf  hc 
mrr/e  enn- 


€  Xothechiefemuuciani!  awafchith,  ^f^ 
-epichtam  of  Dauib.  phi™  i 

©cyeeinbeebrpeaBerigh*  zw- 
teouuicffe ,  £>  congregate 
owboe  re  mbge  bpjtghtly , 
©ye  founts  of  men* 
1   Pea ,  in  heart  you 
tt)o?ue  BjicBcbncffc  •  y  ou  Vbaigh  the  bio* 
leuce  of  yourhanbsmthc  earth, 
j  XheVbicBebarcettcangcbfromthe 
ibombe,  they  goe  affray  t  as  foone  as 
they  bcboHicfpcaHingltcs. 

4.  Xheir  poifon  is  t  uuc  the  poyfon  1 1  h^™ 
of  a  ferp  ent  Wf  arc  IiKc  the  bcafe  ||  an--  fe 
uer  that  ftoppeth  her  earc :  n  &*&,. 

5  i©hich  ttitU  not  hearken  to  the 
boyce  of  charmers,||  charming  ncucr  fo 
Ojifcly. 

6  25;eaftc  their  teeth ,  £>  (5ob ,  in 
their  mouth  :  b?eabe  out  the  great 
teeth  of  the  young  lyons,j£>  %  ©  is  w. 

7  Het  them  melt  avbay  ^  Ibatcrs, 
which  runnc  continually :  when  he  ben-- 
bed)  'us  bow  to  fhoote  hts  arroibcs,  let 
thembeaseutinpieees. 

8  ^safnailewhichmcltcth,letcuerv 
one  of  them  paffe  atoay :  like  the  bnttme 
Iy  birth  of  a  Vboman ,  that  they  may  not 
feethefunnc. 

9  25cfo;e  your  pots  tan  feele  the 
thomes ,  hefhall  taac  them  atbay  as 
ihith  a  rbhirlcvbmb,  t  both  Mumg ,  anb 
in  hisibzath. 

10  Xhc  righteous  (hall  retoyectbhen 
he  fecth  the  bengcancc:hc  Ojail  ttjafh 
hisfcctcinthcbloob  oftlicttucBcb. 

1 1  £>o  that  a  man  (hall  fay ,  Eerily 
thereistarelbaro  fo:  the  righteous  :be^ 
rily  hee  is  a  d5ob  that  tubgeth  in  the 
earth. 

PSAL.   LIX. 

1  Dauid  praveth  to  bedehuered  from  his  ene- 
mies. 6  Hee  compl.iineth  ot  their  auettv. 
8  Hee  truftcth  in  God.  11  He  prayetha- 
gainflthem.  16  HepraifediGod. 

C  Xo  ||  the  chufc  mufician  311-tafchuh, 
©ichtam  of  SDauib :  *  ibhni  S>aul 
fcnt.anbthcynjatchtthchoufc 
to  lull  him. 
'!*4  Cltucr  me  from  nunc  cue- 
*\V  mics,  ©my  C5ob:  toefenb 
SKSl  mcc  from  thcmtljatnfc  bp 
f^£|L-£|  againftmc. 

1  SDcltuer  mcc  from  the 
lbojUcrsofmiquitic,  anb  fauetm  from 
bloobicmcn. 

3  foi  loc ,  they  lye  in  lhaitc  fo?  my 
foule  the  mighty  ate  gathcrcbagamft 

mc 


t  Htt.  ul> 
vrah. 


f  Hib.fr*ilt 
if  the  C*f. 


\\Or,  r, 

the chufc 
Mu(tctant 
Jejh-oy  net , 
a    folacn 
pfalinc  of 
•Djktd. 
*  1. Sun.  1 9 
1 1. 
f  Htb.fei  me 


Thewickedsfuric.     Pfalmes.    Darnels  confidence. 


\Htir.tc 

mteteme. 


•Pfal.io. 

I  I.  and  ;; 

1    I      II.  d     -    4 

7- 


\Hebr.my 
bighfUce. 


f  Hebr.Kine 
abftruerl 


\Hlbr.to 
eate. 

\]Or,,fthey 
be  notfalif- 
jird,  then 
they  wit/fay 
allmght. 


||0r,^5»/- 
den  PfaJme. 
•  j.Sam.  8. 
?.l3.l.chr. 


me ,  not  for  my  tranfgtctTion,  not  for  niy 
0une,©!L3>i3£\ 

4  Xhey  rnnnc  anb  prepare  tftctn^ 
fclucs  tbittjout  my  fault :  amatte  t  to 
helpe  me,anbbchoIb. 

$  Xhouthcrefoje,iI)IU>iaiD<15ob 
ofOoftcs,  the  @od  of  3Jfraci,aibafte  to 
bifitc  ail  the  heathen :  be  not  merciful! 
to  anv  unchcb  tranfgteffours.S>eiah. 

6  1Chcy  retutne  at  cuening :  they 
mafec  anotfe  uue  a  bogge  .antigo  rounb 
aboutthetitie. 

7  2i6cl)olO,tI)cvbcleT)  outltoith  their 
mouth:  *  fawns  arem  their  lippes;fo? 
inho/av  thev,Dotth  heare  < 

8  iButthou,  ©  H^issslhalt  laugh 
at  them .  thou  fljalt  hauc  all  the  hca 
thenmbenfton. 

9  Becjufeot  his  ftrcngtb  ltoill  31  Wait 
topou  thee  :fo2(5ob ''« tmy  tocfente, 

io  3Chc  dtob  of  my  mcrtyfballp^ 
utntmcj  ©on  (hall  let  mecfeemy  defire 
bpont  mine  enemies. 

ii  £>iaythcmnot,leftmypeoplcfo^ 
get :  frattcr  them  bp  thy  potber  anb 
b2ingthnnboibnc,©!Lo?ooiirfhieib. 

iz  For  the  fmnc  of  their  mouth ,  and 
theitooztos  of  their  lips,  let  them  men  be 
tafeen  in  their  pnbe :  anb  to?  turfmg  anb 
lying  which  they  fpeafee. 

13  Confumc  them  m  lb;tath,  tonfume 
dvrm.thattheymay  notbe:  ano  letthcm 
fenott)  that  <eob  ruleth  m  3acob ,  touto 
the  cnbs  of  the  earth.  £>ciah. 

14.  3lnb  at  cuemng  let  them  returne, 
anb  let  them  mane  a  noifc  libc  a  ooggc, 
anb  goerounb  aboutthc  titie. 

i$  jutthemitoanbcrtopanbbo«tone 
tfozmcatc ,  II  anb  grubgeif  they  benot 

fanfficb.  c  ^     M 

16  2Mt3J  Mil  ting  ofthy  potter,  yea 

33  ltoill  ftng  alolbb  of  thy  mere?  in  the 
morning :  fin  thou  haft  bene  my  befence 
anbrefugc,tnthebay  of  my  trouble. 

17  tmtothec,©myfrrmgth,ibtl31 
fing :  foz  d50b  is  mv  befence ,  and  the  (0oo 

of  my  mere?. 

P  S  A  L.    LX. 

1  Dauid  complavning  to  God  of  former  iudge- 
ment,  4  now  vpon  better  hope  prayeth 
fordeliuerance.  6  Comforting  hirofelfe  in 
Gods  promifes ,  he  craueth  that  helpe  where- 
on he  trufleth. 

CXo  the  thicfe  ©uQrian  boonS>hu 
Cban-CDttth  II  ©ichtam  of  2>amo,  to 
teach-  *  i©hen  hee  fteoue  itoith  K 
ramiSahataim,  anb  itoith  ^ram 


Zobal),  *hen3Joab  rcturueb,anb 
fmotc  of  <£bom  in  the  bailey  of  fait, 
titoclncthoufanb. 

*<5oo,tbou  haft  cad  bs  off 
thou  had  t  fcattereb  tog, 
thou  haft  bencbsfplcafcb, 
£>tuntethyfclfetotosa< 
gaine. 
%\)o\\  haft  mabc  the  earth  to 
tremble;  thou  haftb2oKenit:heaicthc 
breaches  thercof.fout  fbafteth. 

j  Xhou  haft  flicitocb  thy  people 
haro  things  :  thou  haft  mace  tos  to 
bnnftc  the  itome  of  aftontfbmcnt. 

4.  Xhouhaftgiucnabanncrtothem 
thatfearctfice :  that  it  may  be  bifplay  cb 
becaufeofthetrueth.  £>eiah. 

5  *  Xhat  thy  bcloucb  map  be  beliue 
rcb  i  faucwiththy  right  hanb,anb  l;care 
mee. 

6  cob  hath  fpoftenin  hisholineffc, ! 
31  unl  r  eioy  te :  3Hbil  biuibc  5>hcthem,  j 
anbmete  outthetoallcvof5>utcoth. 

7  C5ileab  is  mine ,  ano  dpanaffeh  » 
mine .  Cphwtm  alfo  is  the  fttcngth  of 
mine  heab,  3Iubah  «  nw  ?La\togiuer. 

8  Ipoab  is  mp  Vbalh-pot ,  oucr  <&*\ 
bom  ibil  5  tail  out  my  fhooc:  ^ljiliftia,  I 
iltrtumph  thoubecaufc  of  me. 

9  tehoitoilbnugnieintotljctftrong 
title  i  ibho  ltoill  leab  me  into  Cbotn  t 

10  ©ut  not thou,i©  dSob^h.chhabft 
call  tos  off  i  anb  thou,  *  j©  <5ob,  tbljich 
bibftnotgoe  out  With  out  armies. 

1 1  <5iuc  tos  helpe  from  trouble:  w 
toaincisthethclpeofman. 

it  Xh^ough  C5ob  wee  njaiiooetoa' 
liamiv :  foj  \)t  it  is  that  (hall  tr  eao  boitonc 
ourennmes. 

PSAL.    LXI. 

1  Dauid  fleerh  to  God  vpon  his  former  experi- 
ence. 4  He voweth perpetual! feruicevnto 
him  becaufc  of  his  promifes. 

C^othcthitfc  £0uuciaitbpon#cgi'' 

nal).  a  Piaime  of  Daiub. 

caremvtrp^^ob.at' 

tenbtontomvp?aver. 

z   ifromtheenbofthe 

earth  tbiiH  try  tonto  thee, 

^  ltohen  nip  heart  is  ouet* 

itohclmcb :  leabc  me  to  the  roctse ,  'hat  is 

higher  then 3J.  „       c 

j  ifojthouhaftbciieanjelterfoinie, 

ano  a  ftrongtoitocr  from  the  enemy. 

4.  31  ltoill  abibe  m  thy  tabernacle 

fomicr:  3  Ml  II  ttuftm  tljccouertof 

thyitoings.  £>ciah  ^  ^ 


'  Pfal.^4- 
10. 

\Hefr.lm- 
ken. 


•Pi"i!.ioS. 
6.8tc. 


^Or/ritanph 
thou  ouer 
me.[fytui 
irome~]. 
\Beir.city 
cfjher.glb. 
"  Pdl.44. 
10  and  198 
12. 

f  Heir.fd- 


mj  refuge. 


Wait  on  God. 


Pfal 


mes. 


DauidsthirftJ 


f  Hebr.thou, 
fhultadde 
Jjyrsorhi 
day  ci  of  the 

Kwg. 

f  Heb. to  ge- 
neration and 
generalton, 


I)  Or,  cr.cli 

fHii.ufi 
lent. 


T  Hebr. 
btghp/ace 


tHdrJn 
thetr  wrv.tra 
farts. 


\\Or,*lHs. 
II  Or, 

(trengll). 
Mob  J4.I  I 
prou.14.1  1 

iere.  j i.19. 
czcU.7.  37. 
mat. 16.17. 
rom.1.6.  j. 
cot.  5. 10 
eph.6.8. 
colofTj.ij. 
r.pcr.i.  17. 
ap^c  2  1.1  a 


5  5fo,ubou,£D(SoD,  bad  heart)  my 
boibcs  :  tl)ou  baft  gtucn  me  the  heritage 
of  tbofe  that  fear  c  thy  name. 

6  t  %bou  lDilt  prolong  the  hinge 
life:  andbisyccrcstas  many  generate 
cms. 

7  ^cfballabiDcbcfojcosoDfoiicucc: 
£>  prepare  mercy  ana  trucfb  which  may 
pjefcruebun. 

8  5>o  null  31  fing  p:aife  bnto  thy 
name  fo?  cuec,  that  3  may  Datly  per- 
fonnciny  boibcs. 

P  S  A  L.    LXII. 

1  Dauidprofefsinghisconfidence  in  God ,  dif- 
courageth  his  enemies.  5  In  the  fame  confi- 
dence he  incourageththe  godly.  9  Notruft 
is  to  be  put  in  worldly  things,  n  Power  and 
mercie  belong  to  God. 

C£o  the  chtcfe  muucian,to  _fcDutbun, 

31  ftfalmc  of  2>auiD. 
£££*=__*»  I  ftucly  my  foulc  t  Xbattett) 

?$M  bp  on  (SoD :  from  bim  com 

|gi&  methniyfaluation. 

tf^y    z  iUconely^mytotUe 

«y^^^  anomyfalnationrheismy 

t  Defence,  _j|  (ball  not  be  greatly  moueD. 

?  $o»b  long  ibil  ye  imagine  niifcbicfc 

agamfta  man;  ye  mail  be  Game  all  of 

yOlt:  as  a  bOthing  UWll  ihallycbe.andas 

a  tottering  fence. 

4  Xhcy  oncly  tonfnlt  to  call  him 
Dottmcfcom  his  crccllency  ,tbcy  Delight 
in  lies:  they  blcflc  lbttb  their  month ,bnt 
tbeyeurfcUMbarbly.  5>eiab. 

5  £By foule ,  lbait  thou  onely bpon 
(SoD :  fo;  my  crpcetation  is  from  htm. 

6  ^conelyismyrochcanbmyfalua' 
tion;  he  is  my  Defence .  3  tyau  not  bee 
moucb. 

7  3»®oDismyfaluatioii,anOmy 
gloac :  the  rocfec  of  my  ftrcngtb ,  and 
my  refuge'^  in  <SoD. 

8  Unilt  m  him  at  all  times ;  ye  peo- 
ple, pott>2C  out  your  heart  before  him: 
COD  iv  a  refuge  fo?  bs.  5>eiah. 

9  Purely  men  of  loin  Degree  are  ba^ 
tutic,  and  men  of  high  Degree  arc  aitc: 
to  be  laiD  m  the  baliancc,  they  arc  \\ah 
together  lighter  then  batutie. 

io  Xrurtnot  m  oppzcfTtou ,  become 
not  bame  m  robbcric:  if  riches  incrcafe, 
fet  not  your  heart  vpon  them. 

1 1  (3oD  hath  fpoltcn  once ,  nbtcc  hauc 
3  hear  D  this,  that  ||  polbcr  beUgeth  bn 

to  COD. 

ii  3Ufobntotbcc,£>  Ho^D.beionncth 
niercic :  *  foz  thou  rciiDcrclt  to  cucry 
man  ac coding  to  his  lbojltc. 


P  S  A  L.    LXIII. 

i  Dauids  thirft  for  God.  4  His  manerof  blef- 
fing  God.  9  His  confidence  01  his  enemies 
deflru<fr.ion,aad  his  owne  fafetie. 

C30falme  of  3DauiD,  tbbenbecrbas 
in  the  ttuiDerncfle  of  _0uDab. 

(SoD ,  thou  a"  my  (Sod, 
earcly  lbtll  3  feehe  thee : 
my  foule  thirtieth  foj  thee, 
my  fled)  longeth  fo?  thee, 
in  aDjicanD  t  tbirftielanDe, 

tibbcre  no  ibater  is: 
z  iCofrctbypoiberanbfbyglojy, 

fo  3^3  banc  fecnthectn  the  Sanctuary. 

3  sceaufe  thy  loumghinDncs  is  bet- 
ter then  life :  my  lips  thai  pjaifc  thee. 

4  Xhusunii3blc{rcthce,ibhile3i 
liuc:  3  Will  lift  bp  my  banDes  m  thy 
iftamc. 

5  $®v  foulc  (hall  be  fatiulcD  as  with 
tmarroUianDratncfTe:  anD  my  mouth 
(ball  pjaife  thee  untb  loyfull  lips  : 

6  vs\)ei\3  remember  thee  bpon  my 
beb,  and  mcDitate  on  thee  ut  the  n%hc 
matches. 

7  26etaufethouhaftbcnemyht1pc; 
therefor  in  the  fljaboVb  of  thy  ibiugs 
Vbill'Jreioyce. 

8  ^y  toule  follotbcth  harD  after 
thee :  thy  right  hanD  bpholDeth  me. 

9  3Euttl)ofedutfechemyfbulctoDCJ 
ttroy  it,  (hall  goe  into  the  loibcr  parts 
of  tl)c  earth. 

io  t  Xhcy  (bail  fall  by  the  rroojD: 
they  (l  i  ail  b  e  a  portion  fo;  fores. 

ii  25utt!)clEungflial  reioyte  m  (SoD, 
cucry  one  that  frocareth  by  him  (hall 
glonc :  but  the  mouth  of  them  that 
fpeaftc  lies,  (ball  be  ftoppcD. 

P  S  A  L.    LXIIII. 

i  Dauid  prayed)  for  deliuerance,  complaining 
ofhis enemies.  7  Hepromileth  himfelte  to 
lee  fuch  an  euident  delhuclion  of  his  ene- 
mies, as  the  righteous  (TuIIreiovceat  it. 

C  %o  the  chiefe  muGcian,  a  |&falmc 
of  SDauiD. 

care  my  boice,  ©  (SoD.in 
my  p^aicr,  p;cfcrucmy  life 
from  feare  of  the  euemie. 
z  ^ibemc  from  the  fe 
trctcomifcl  of  the  ibichcD: 
from  the  mfurrcttion  of 
theibo^bcrsofinlquine : 
j  "nubo  ibhet  njeir  tongue  uhea 

flUO IX) ,  and  SCUD  their  bowes  to  (hootc  tljeif 

arrolbcs,  eucn  bittcribo^DS: 

4  3Cljat 


f  He&.wertrj 
f  Hcb.Tcnh- 
out  VfAitr. 


\HcbJAtnti 


1 

t  Hch.  they 
fhaUmskt 

him  ran  out 
like  water 
by  the  hands 
of the/word* 


TUl.II.J. 


Godschofen: 


Pfalmes.  Their  benefits 


\ti<b.toh\dt 
ftwa. 


\\Or,tveure 
confront  d  by 
tfulffhtch 
they  htzye 
throughly 
fcarched. 
\Hck  a 
fearchtfe.v- 
cbed. 

\Heb.thar 
WHnd  /hal- 
be. 


\Heb.isfi- 
ttnt. 


f  Hebyeoris 
ormAitertof 
iniquities. 


4  Xbat  t&ey  map  fyootc  in  ferret 
attbepcrfccttfobbcnlpboc  tbepfljoote 
atbmt,anb  f  ear  e  not. 

5  Xbep  tncourage  tfjentfelucs  in 
ait  cuilll  |  matter:  tljcp  tommunet  of  lap 
tng  marcs  pjiutlpjtljcv  &P  >  i®bo  djall 
fcctljcnti 

6  Xljep  feard)  out  iniquities,  ||  tbcp 
actompltfl)  t  a  mitgcnt  fcarcb :  botb  tbc 
inVbaro  thought  of  cucrp  one  of  tljem, 
anbfbebcart,isbcepe. 

7  But  @oD  (ball  (qoote  at  fbcm : 
with  an  arroibc,  fobcnipttbailtljcp  be 
rbounbeb. 

8  £>o  tbcp  (ban  mafee  tbeir  ottmc 
tongue  to  fall  upon  tfjetnfclucs:  all  tfjat 
fee  tl)cm,fljail  flee  atttap. 

9  3nb  all  men  (ball  feate,  ano  (ball 
bcrtate  tbc  Uiojftc  of  <Sob ;  fo?  tbcp 
(ball  tbifelv  confibcr  ofbis  Doing. 

io  Xberigbteousfbaibeglabintbc 
%  ©  k  ©,anb  fljall  trull  in  lum ;  ano  all 
tljcDpngl)tinl)cart(baugio?p. 

P  S  A  L.    LXV. 

i  Dauid  prayeth  God  for  his  grace.  4  The 
bleiTcdnefleofGods  chofen ,  by  reafon  ot  be- 
nefits. 

C  Xotbccbicfcniuuetan,  a^fclme 
andfongof2>aiuo. 
Batfc  t  ruaitetb  foz  tljec, 
<©  Gob, in  <a>ion :  anb  ton- 
totbcefljaii  tbc  borne  be 
pcrfomicD. 

^  €>  tbou  tbat  bca> 
reft  pjaper ,  tmto  tbec 
(ball  ail  fled)  come. 

3  t iniquities  p:euaile  agautd  me: 
as  fo?  our  tranfgrcmons,  tbou  (bait 
purge  tbcmaibap. 

4  3SlefTel)  is  the  man  whom  tbOU  ClJOO' 

fed  ano  caufed  to  appjoatb  vnco  thee, 
that  ijee  map  btticll  mtbp  Courts  :  lbc 
fl>aibe  fatifftcb  tbttb  tbe  goobnefleof 
tbpboufc,  <^noftbpbolp  temple. 

5  By  terrible  tbings  m  rtgbtcouD 

nefle,tbilttbouanfibcrcbs,  £>Gobof 
our  laiuation :  who  art  tbc  confibctttcof 
alltbcenbs  of  tbc  cartb,  anb  of  tljem 
that  are  afarreoifvpontbefca. 

6  wh.ch  bp  bis  dccttgtb  fcttctb  fad 

tbc  mountames  ;  being  girbcb  lbitb 
poiber. 

7  which  dillctb  tbcnoifcoftbefcas ; 

tbe  noife  of  tbeir  tbaucs,  anb  tbc  tu; 
mult  of  tbc  people. 

8  Xbepalfotbatbrbclltntbebtter; 

mod  parts  are  afcaib  at  tbptoftens: 


\\Or,<°H 

\\  Or,  after 
thotthadj} 
vuuLetttt 
defire  rainc. 


lOr.thou 
catt/f/i  raine 

to  defcend 
imo  thtfur- 
rawei  there- 
f 

f  Hel.  then 
difilurft.t. 
t  Htl>.  the 
yeereoflhy 
goodnejfe. 
\Ueb.M-e 
girded  with 

y. 


tboumafeed  if)t  outgoings  of  tbe  mo^ 
nmg,anb  euenmg  ||  to  retopec. 

9  Xbou  btfitcd  tljc  eartb  anb  1 1  tt>& 
teredit:tbou  grcatlp  inncbed  ttttntlj 
tbcriuerof  Gob  which  tsfullofttiater, 
tbou  prepared  tbemeomc,  ibbcnttjou 
baft  fopjouibcb  font. 

10  3Ebou  watered  tbc  ribgestberc; 
of  abimbantlp :  ||  tbou  (cttlcd  tbe  fur- 
roibes  tljcreof :  t  tbou  malted  tt  foft 
rottlj  dittoes ,  tbou  bledcd  tbc  fp«u- 
gmg  thereof. 

n  Xbou  trottmed  t  tbc  pcercttiitb 
tljp  goooueffc;anb  tljp  patljsb?opfat= 
nedc. 

it  Xljcv  bjop  vpon  tbe  padurcs  of 
tbc  milDcmeffc  anb  tbc  little  billes  t  xv 
loptconcuerpfibe. 

ij  1Cbe  padurcs  arc  tloatljcb  rbitb 
flocftes;  tbc  ballets  alfo  arc  toucreb  o< 
uer  ibitb  come ;  tbe?  (bout  fot  top ,  tljcp 
alfo  ting. 

PSAL.    LXVI. 

1  Dauid  exhorteth  to  praife  God,  5  To  ob- 
feruehis  great  workes,  8  ToblelTehimfor 
his  gracious  benefits.  12.  Hevowethlorhim- 
feltereligiousferuicetoGod.  16  He  decla- 
reth  Gods  (peciall  goodnefle  to  hirnfclfe. 

C  %o  tbccbtcfcmuficiati,afongor 
0falmc. 
7dxt  a  topfull  noife  bnto 
<5ob,taiipccianbs. 

z  ^tngfoJtbtbcbo* 
nottrofbtsnamennaBe 
bispjatfeglonouff. 
3  5>ap  trnto  ©ob, 
tyott)  terrible  art  thou  in  tbp  ibo?fecs< 
tb?ougb  tbc  greatuede  of  tbp  porocr 
(balltbmc enemies iifubmtttbcmfclues  ^'Jd'Hd 
bntotbee. 

4  3lli tbc  eartb  d)allibo,:n)iptbeei 
anb  djail  fiug  bnto  tbec ,  tljcp  d)ftll  Ctng 
to  tbp  name;  £>clal). 

5  Come  anb  fcctberoo;tUcsof(5o&: 
bets  terrible  in  hisjouig  toibarbtbc 
tbilb.tcnofmen. 

6  ^c  turttcb  flic  fea  into  my  lanb : 
tbcpibcnt  tljzougb  tbc  floob  onfoote, 
tljcrc  btb  Uic  rctopce  m  bun. 

7  $c  rnletb  bv  bis  poibcc  fo?  ettcr, 
bis  cpes  bebolbtbeiiattonsMetnottbc 
rebellious  craittbeiufclttcs.  5>clalj. 

8  sDblc(rcourC>ob,pccpcoplc,anb 
maKctbebottcofbispzatfctobehcarb, 

9  i©b<cb  tbolbctb  our  foulc  in  life, 
anb  mffctctb not  our  fecte  to  be moucb. 

10  Jfojtbou,€><5DD,hadp;ouebbs: 
tbou  bad  trtebbs.asriluer  tstrpeb. 

eet  '»  Xljou 


tHekdttke 
exrth» 


encc.Heb, 

lie. 


t  Heb.jut- 
tcth. 


Th 


ereioycin 


Pfal 


mes. 


oftheiuft. 


I  Htb.motft 


\Heb* 


ope- 


\f1cbr,m.u-~ 


f  Heh.mtb 


\\Ubr  .IcAiL. 


h  Xhoubzoughteft  bs  into  the net; 
thou  laycbtt  affliction  bpon  out  loynes. 

12  XUonljafttaufcOinentoriDco' 
utt  our  hcabs ,  roe  roent  tl)?ongtj  fire, 
aub  though  roatcr :  but  thou  bjougl> 
tcftbsouttntoat  rocaithy  place. 

13  3 row  goc  into  thy  ftoufc ,  lbith 
burnt  offerings:  3  roill  pap  thee  my 
boroes, 

14  lehtdimylipshauetbttcrcb.anD 
nip  mouth  hart)  fpofeen ,  rohen  3J  roas 
in  trouble. 

1$  3  mill  offer  tmto  tl)ce  burnt  Ia= 
cafices  of  t  fatlings ,  ttittl)  the  meenfe 
of  rammes  :  3  *btll  offer  bullocKes 
ibithgoatcs.  sclal). 

i6  Come  and  heare  all  ye  that  fcarc 
<5ob ,  auo  3J  rom  Declare  ivljat  he  hat!) 
bonefomiyfoule. 

17  3  crieb  bnto  him  roith  my  iiiouti): 
anb  he  Vbas  ertollco  lbtth  my  tongue. 

18  gjf  3  rcgarb  iniquitie  in  my  heart: 
the  $,020  mill  not  heare  me. 

19  25ut  bcrily  Gob  hath  hcarb  mce , 
nee  hath  attenbeb  to  the  boice  of  my 
player. 

20  asicffcb  bee  d5ob,  rohich  Ijart)  not 
turnco  albay  my  player,  nozhis  mertie 
fromme. 

PSAL.    LXVII. 

1  A  prayer  (or  the  inlargement  of  Gods  king- 
dome,  3  to  the  ioy  of  the  people,  6  and 
the  increaie  ol  Gods  blefs 


smes. 


C  %Q  iDc  cljicfe  ^ufictan  on  &t& 
notl).3J^faimcoifong. 

£>Dbc  mcrctfuU  bntobs, 
anb  bleffc  bs :  and  canfe 
his  face  to  fljme  t  bpon  bs. 
£>clah. 
z  Xhattljyroaymay 
bee  hnonjen  bpon  earth ,  thy  tailing 
health  among  all  nations. 

?  |Lct  the  people  pzaife  tljcc ,  £> 
ooO  (cf  alltiic  people  pMifc  rljrc. 

4  <©  let  the  nations  be  giaoanb  Gng 
fo;  toy :  foj  thou  (halt  uiogc  the  people 
rightcoufly :  anb  tgoucrnc the  nations 
bpon  eartl).  £>ciah. 

5  !Lctthcpcoplcpzaifctl)ce,£)(Bob, 
let  all  the  people  pzaife  thee. 

6  Then  fhail  the  cart!)  ycclb  l)cr  im 
Crcafe;  and  (500  ,  eucn  our  orotic  <5ob, 
mall  bleffc  bs. 

7  <2>ob  (frill  bleffc  bs  ano  all  tlje 
enbs  of  the  earth  Qjali  fcarc  him. 

PSAL.   LXVIII. 

i    A  prayer  at  the  rcmoouingol  die  Aikc.   4 


An  exhortation  to  praiie  God  for  his  mer- 
cies, 7  for  his  care  of  die  Church,  19  for 
his  great  vvorkes. 

C  %o  the  rtjtcfc  ^uCeian.  %  i&faimc 
oifongof2>auib. 
'  €t  *@»ob  arife ,  let  his  enc- 
mtesbc  fcattcrcb:  let  them 
aifo  tljat  hate  t)un,flcc  t  be* 
fozehim. 
i  3ls  fmonc  (s  bziuen 
aibay,(o  bnue  them  aibay  :as  roajecmel* 
tctljbefoze  the  fire ,  foietthcttJicKebpc^ 
rifh  at  the  pzefence  of  <2>ob. 

j  26ut  let  the  righteous  be  glab :  let 
tljem  reioyce  before  (Bob ,  yea  let  them 
terteebinglyreioyee. 

4  S>ing  bnto  ©ob ,  fing  pjatfes  to 
his /Same:  ertoll  him  that rtbeth bpon 
the  heauens ,  by  his  /i5amc  3J  a  9,  anb 
rcioycc  before  l)iin. 

5  %  father  of  the  fattjerlcfTc ,  anb  a 
tuDgeofthcUubowes,  is  (SobinljishOi 
ly  habitation. 

6  (Son  fcttcth  the  foutary  t  m  fami= 
lies:  IjccbnngttD  outthofclbhich  arc 
bounbibith  chatnes  ,butthercbcllious 
blbellinabiylanb. 

7  €>  (J5ob,tbhm  thou ibenteft fo?tI) 
befoze  thy  people ,  ibljen  thou  bibft 
march  through  the  mUberncs,  Sciah. 

8  Xhc  earth  fhooHe,thc  heauens  al^ 
fo  tfloppeb  at  tfje  pzefence  of  d5ob :  cuen 
^rnat  it  felfcwas  niooucdatthcpzcfente 
of  (5ob,thed5ob  of^frael. 

9  Xhou,©  <5ob,  bibfttfenbaplen^ 
tifull  rame ,  lbhcrcby  tljou  Dibfttcon; 
firme  tljme  inheritance ,  iDhcn  it  tbas 
lbcan>. 

10  Xf)y  Congregation  hath  bibtlt 
tl)erem :  thou,  £)  ©ob.haft  pjcparcb  of 
tljy  goobneffe  foz  the  poo:c. 

1 1  %\\i  jLozb  gaue  the  mo:b :  great 
teas  the  t  company  of  thofc  that  pub; 

llft)Cbit. 

iz  Bmgs  of  armies  to:b  flee  apace: 
anb  fi>  that  taricb  at  home,  biuibcb  tl;e 
fpoile. 

15  Xtjough  ye  hauc  lien  among  the 
pots, vet  ihaiivec  bee  as  tfjc  lbuigs  ofa 
bone,  coiicrcb  ibith  fiiucr,  anb  her  fca- 
tljcrsibithycUoUigolD. 

14  03hcn  tlje  almighty  fcattcrcb 
Bmgs  I!  in  it ,  it  mas  white  as  fnoib  in 
Salmon. 

15  Xhchii  of  (Soo  is  .is  the  hill  of  25a^ 
njan,  an  high  hill  ^  tl)c  hill  of  iSafhan. 

16  nahy  icapc  ye ,  yc  tngh  h»ues  *  this 
»s  tnc  l^il  which  <EfoD  Dcfirctl)  to  DlDcll  in, 
yea  the  1L  o  k  je>  rbill  bmel  m « fo:  cucr. 

i7Xhe 


\Hcbr.n- 
gladnejfr. 


*Kum.lo. 

\Hehr.from 
huf*te. 


\Htbr 
hottp. 


\H,hMks 

out. 

t Heir.  an. 

jirmcir. 


1  Hctr.tr. 

me. 

fHcirJid 

Hcc.dUftc. 


\\Or.f.r 
jhcVM 


God; 


power 


in 


Pfal 


mes. 


his  Church, 


||0/,cutn 
many  thou- 
funis, 

*Erh.4.8. 

\Hei.atbt 


||OyW. 


||0r,yethac 
ate  of  the 
foKntxwe 
oflfnct. 
||  Or, n>:th 
their  com- 
fmj. 


I  Or, the 
oeafloftbe 
reedt. 

\Or,befia- 
terab. 


17  %hc  thattots  of  ©ob  are  tibcntic 
thottfanb,  ||  euen  thottfanbsof  2ngcis : 
thcHozb ,s  among  them  as  itt5nttai,tn 
the  holy  place. 

18  "Ehou  haft  afccnbcb  on  high, 
thou  haft  lebbe  taptutitic  tapttuc ,  thou 
Daft  recciucb  giftcs  t  foz  mcttj  yea, for 
the  rebellious  alfo,  that  the  2,02b  d50D 

mtgljt  blbClIamonethem. 

19  2BleOct>  be  the  %w ,  tbljo  batly 

IOaDCtt)  bS  with  benefits,  euen  thCCSOb  Of 

ourfaluation.  £>ciah. 

20  ^cc  that  is  our  <5ob,  is  the  d5ob  of 
faluatton;  anb  bnto  <s*d©  the Ho?D 
belong  thcuTucs  frombcath. 

ii  But  Gob  than  tbouttb  the  heab 
of  his  enemies:  and the  hatry  ftaipcof 
fuel)  a  one  as  gocth  on  ftm  in  his  trcf- 
paflcs. 

11  %\yt  %mn  fatb ,  3  ibill  tying  a- 
game  from  usafhan,  3  lbill  tying  my 
people  agatne  from  the  bepthes  of  the 
fea: 

13  1Ehat  thyfootcmaybc||bippcbin 
ttjc  bloob  of  thine  enemies  ,  and  tl)c 
tongue  of  thy  bogges  m  the  fame. 

14  Xhcy  hattc  ferae  fljy  goings,  sD 
<5ob,  euen  the  goings  of  my  <£>ob,  my 
13ung,  in  tfie  3>ancntarie. 

15 1Chc  fingers  ibent  bcfo?c,tftepiav* 
ecs  on  tnftruments  followed  after;  a* 
mongftthem  were  the  bamofeis  playing 
with  timbrels. 

i6  zBlcCfeyce(i5ob,intheCongrcga; 
ttons ,  euen  theHojb ,  ||  from  tlje  foutt* 
tatneof^ffracl. 

17  Xhere  is  little  2f5cniamin  lbtth 
their  ruler,  the  pontes  of  3Jubah  land 
their  Counnll,  thepnntcsof  zcbulutt, 
and  tljcpnntcsof  jftaphtali. 

18  3tby<Sobhath  commattbebthy 
ftrcngtl) :  ftrcngthen,  £>  00b,  that 
which  thou  haft  ttuougbtftybs. 

29  zSccattfcofthy1Ecmpleat3Jeru; 
faicm ,  (hail  Kings  tying  pjefents  bnto 
thee. 

30  ftcbtiKC  the  ||  company  of  fpcarc^ 
men,  themuintubcof  thcbttllcs,  tbitf) 

tf)C  talUCS  Of  tOC people,  till  euery  one  ftlty 

mit  m'mfelfe  Mnth  pieces  of  filucr :  ||  feat* 
ter  thou  the  people  tlut  oclitcinibarre. 

31  juices  fhau  tome  out  of  €gypt, 
ethiopta  fljail  fooue  ftrctth  out  her 
hanbsbttto<5o5. 

31  <S>tngbnto  (5ob ,  ycetungbomes 
of  the  earth :  £>  fmg  p;aifcs  vnw  the 
2Lojb,  S>ciab: 

33  IColjun  that  riocthbponfhchea; 
ucnsof  heauens,  which  were  of  olbe:loc, 


heebocth  tfniD  out  htsboitc,  and  that  a 
migbne  boitc. 

34  3fcribe  ycc  Orengtl)  bnto  Gob: 
Dis  ercclienctc  is  otter  33fracl ,  attb  hts 
ttrctigth<stntbe||clottbcs. 

35  £>  <25ob,  thou  art  terrible  out  of 
tljy  lioly  plates  :tl)e  (5ob  of 'Jfracl  is  I)c 
tljat  gittctl)  ftrcngtl),  anb  poibcr  bnto 
his  people:  blefleb  be  ©ob. 

PSAL.    LXIX. 

1  D.iuidcompl.-iinethofhis  affliction.  13  Hee 
prayech  tor  deliuerance.  ii  Hee  deuoteth 
his  enemies  to  deftrucxion.  30  Hepraifed 
God  with  thankefgiuing. 

CXo  tftctljiefc  muntian  bpon§>ljo^ 
fbannim,  a  pfaime  of  2Dattib. 
5g  ^uc  mec ,  1D  (5ob,fo,t  the 
§  lbaters  arc  tome  m  bnto 
"  myfoule. 

2  3J  fittfec  in  t  Dcepc 
mirc,ibl)erethere  istto  ftan^ 
btng :  3  am  tome  tnto  tbeepe  tbaters, 
ibljcre  tljefloubs  otterflotb  me. 

3  3  tan  lbcary  of  mp  trying,  my 
tl)2oate  istyieb-.mtttceyesfatlewhrie  3 
ibaitefozmyGob. 

4  3Cfiey  tftat  ftatc  mec  tbitliout  a 
tattfe,  arentoe  tljctt  tftchatres  of  mute 
Ijeab:  tljcy  tftat  iboulb  beftroy  me,  be* 
ing  mine  enemies  ttyongfuiiy  >  arc 
nugl)tic:tljcn'5refto?cb  thatlbl)ici)3l 
tooltcnotaibay. 

5  €>d5ob,ttjoumtotbcftntyfooltfl)' 
neflej  anb  my  t  Onttes  arc  not  hibbc 
fromtocc. 

6  Hctnot  tljemtftatibaitc  ontftec, 
<©  Ho?b  (5©je>  of  ooftes,bcaft)amcb 
fo?  my  fabc:  let  nottljofe  that  fcesc  thec, 
be  tonfounbeb  fo?  my  fattc ,  £)d5ob  of 
3Ktacl. 

7  25ctattfcfo?tftyfafte3Jnauebomc 
tepjo  th :  tbante  itatt)  toucrcb  my  fate. 

8  3Jambccomcaftrangerbntomy 
b«tb2en,  attb  an  aliattt  bnto  my  mo 
tftcrscbtltycn. 

9  * jfo2tfte5eaicof thittcDoufc  ftath 
eaten  mec  bp  ■,  *  attb  tlie  tcp2otltes  of 
tftcmtDattcpiocljcbtljccarc  fallen  bp= 
onmc. 

10  j©hctt  31  tbept ,  attb  chained  my 
foulc  rbttl)  faftmg  ,tl;at  ibas  to  my  rc^ 
pzotl). 

1 1  3  mabe  fatUctlotl)  alfo  my  gar? 
mtnt :  a  31  became  a  p  joucrbc  to  tltcm. 

11  Xhey  tljat  Ot  tn  the  gate,  fpcaftc 
againftmccj  anb  1  was  the  foug  of  the 
tbmnfearbs. 

€ce  i  13  25tlt 


\Heb.gi, 


\Or,bl 


\Htb.tbe 
nrjre  of 
depth. 
t  Heb.dtftb 
of  rt.mrt. 


iHekguit. 

thujfe. 


*Iohn  j.17. 
"Rom.ij.j. 


\Bcb.d, 
imofjln 


Dauid: 


P 


rayer 


Pfalmes.      againft  the  wicked. 


h*fteto 
heart  me. 


\Heb.uU 
tmnt  \uth 


"Mat. 27. 
28.  mar  1 5. 
23.10(111  ip 

*9- 

*Kom.tl  9 


t  Heh.thdr 
pM.ice. 
|  Hebr.Ut 
there  not  b.c 
a  dweller . 


f  Hebr.thy 
wounded. 
\Or,f>i4>iiJ73 
fKsr.ljfim- 
tjHltte. 


13  25ut  asf02incc,mpp2apcr  «  bnto 
thec,  £D  JL©  e  id,  in  an  acceptable  time : 
j5D  <Sob,  inthcmuUttubcof  thpmercie 
Ijcace  me,m  rijc  tructh  of  thp  faiuation. 

14  2>cliucr  me  out  of  the  mire,  anb 
let  me  not  finite:  let  me  bee  bcuuereb 
from  them  that  hate  me,  anb  out  of  the 
beepctbaters. 

15  ?lct  not  the  mater  flooboucrflotb 
me,  neither  let  the  beepe  froallotb  mec 
bp,  anb  let  not  the  pit  flmt  her  mouth 
Dponmc. 

16  ©carcme,j©?U><iBiE>,fo2thplo= 
mng  tunbnefle  >s  cjoob :  turne  bnto  nice 
aeco2buigtothcmultttubcofthptcnbcr 
merries. 

17  31nb  hibe  not  thp  face  from  thp 
fcruant,fo2  3  ai»  »» trouble :  t  hcare  me 
fpcebtlp. 

is  2>2aih  nigh  bnto  mp foulc,  and tt- 
oceme  it :  bcliucr  me  becaufc  of  mine 
enemies. 

19  Xhou  haft  ftnomcu  mp  repjoch 
attbmpCbamc  anbmpbifhono::  mine 
abucrfancs  arc  all  before  thee. 

20  &cpzoch hath  bzofecn  mp  heart, 
anb  31  am  hill  of  heaumes:  anbj  loo= 

UCb  lor  Ionic  tfO  tafiC  pitlC,  bUt  there  was 

none ,  anb  fc>2  comforters,  but  31  founb 
none. 

11  Xhep  gauc  nice  alfo  gall  fojmp 
meat,  *  anb  m  mv  thirftthcpgaucmcc 
binegcrtobnnljc. 

11  *  llet  tfjerr  table  become  a  fnarc 

bCfO?C  tl)Cm  t  anb  that  which  fhould  haue 
bene  fOJ  then  U)ClfatC,  let  it  become  a  trap. 

13  iLct  their  eves  be  barUcncb  that 
thep  fee  not ;  anb  maac  thctr  loincs  eoiv 
tmuailptofhauc. 

24  0orb«  out  thine  inbignation  bp= 
on  them,  anb  let  thp  ibjathfull  anger 
taut  holb  of  them. 

i<)  Hct  their  t  habitation  be  bcfoiate, 
and  t  ict  none  bibcll  m  their  tents. 

16  jFo:  tljcv  perfemtc him  ibljo  thou 
haft  fmittcn,anb  thep  talbc  to  the  gricfe 
oftthofcibhomthouhaftibounbcb. 

17  3tbbc  ||  tniquitic  bnto  their  fttfc 
cuuric :  anb  let  them  not  come  into  thp 
rightcoufncflc. 

28  fLct  them  bee  blottcb  out  of  the 
booltc  of  the  lining,  anb  not  be  nmttcn 
ibith  the  righteous. 

29  25ut  31  am  poorc,  anb  fojolbfull : 
let  thp  faluanon  ( £>  Gob )  fct  me  bp  on 
high. 

30  3}  mill  p?aifc  the  name  of  Gob 
With  a  foug,  anb  Will  magmfie  him 
With  thanucfgiumg. 


t  Hebr.cree- 
peth. 


TfaUo. 

I4,&c. 

\H<hr.n 


31  Tins  alfo  fhaiipieafe  the  HfiDKjsj 
better  then  an  orcorbullocfcethat  hath ' 
homes  anb  hootcs. 

31  Xhc  II  humble  (ball  fee  this,  anb  1 11  o>v**. 
be  giab :  anb  pour  heart  (bail  hue  that  I 
feeacgoob. 

3J  ifo?  then  ©is©  bearcfh  the1 
poojcanbbcfpifcth nothisp2ifoncrs.  | 

34  fUt  the  beaucu  anb  earth  pjatfc 
him,thc  feas.anb  eucrp  thmg  that  tmo; 
ueth  therein. 

35  jfojesob  Will  faitc;S>ion,anb  Will 
bmlb  the  ritics  of  3jubah ,  that  thep 
inapbWcll  there,  anb  haue  it  inpoflct 
(ion. 

36  iChe  feebe  alfo  of  his  fcruants 
ftjall  inherit  it:  anb  thep  that  louebis 
name  ftjaublbcu  therein. 

P  S  A  L.    LXX. 

Dauid  follicitethGod  to  the  fpeedie  deftrudion 
of  the  wicked,aud  prefetuation  ot  the  godly. 

CXo  the  chicfc  mufirian,a  pfaime  of  Da* 
uib,  to  bung  to  rcmembiance. 

^S^  Akelufte,  *^D(!50b,t0btli^ 

ducr  mec,maac  haftctto 
hclpcmc,€)!i©w©. 
1  iLctthembcaDbameb 
anbtonfounbcbthatfeeHe 
after  inp  f  oule :  let  them  be  turncb  bacfc 
lbap,  anbputtocontuGon,  that  befire 
mpljurt. 

3  *  3Let  them  be  turncb  bathe  fo:  a 
rcibarb  of  tljcir  ftjamc,  that  fap,2iha, 
alja. 

4  detail  thofe that  feche  thee,  rc± 
iopec,  anb  be  giab  in  thec:  anb  let  fud; 
asiouc  tljp  faiuation,  fap  connnuailp, 
HetGobbemagnifieb. 

5  26ut3I  ampoojcanbnccbp,  mahe 
haftc  bnto  me,  £)  00b :  Xliou  art  nip 
Ijclpe  anb  mpbcliuercr,  $>%&%$> 
mahcnotarrping. 

P  S  A  L.  Lxxr. 

1  Dauid  in  confidence  of  faith  and  experience 
ot  Gods  tauour,  prayeth  both  for  himfelfe, 
anda^amftthe  enemies  of  his  (oule.  14  He 
proniifeth  conltancie.  17  Hee  prayeth  for 
perfeuerance.  ij  HepraifethGod,andpro- 
mifetli  todoeitcheerefully. 

=*?gS5;flrthec,£)?L£>is£sboc  . 
«@i  3  putmp  truft,  let  me  ne- 
ucrbcputtoconfiifion. 
1  3>eliucr  nice  in  thp 
£*sS5gfA4  rigfitcoufnefrc,  anb  caitfc 
me  to  eftape :  incline  thmc  care  bnto 
mc,anblaueme. 

3   tzsee 


*p&i.jj.4, 

and  71. 15. 


: 


Dauidshop 


c. 


Pfal 


mes. 


Gods  benefits. 


thou  to  mr 
forarocke 
of  habit  a- 


\H,hr. 
watch,  cr 
cbferue. 


t  Heh-.z-nto 
otd.x<re,atd 
■ujfhjsrei, 
\Hchr.th\nt 
armcm 


5  t  Bee  thou  my  ftrong  habitation, 
lbhercunto  3  may  continually  rcfozt: 
thou  Daft  giucn  commanbcnicnt  to  fauc 
mecfozthouartmy  tocltcanb  my  fo: 
treffc. 

4  3Deltucrmc,£>myC5ob,outofthc 
hanbof  thcibultcb ,  outof  tl)t  ijatiD  of 
the  bnnghtcous,aub  cruti  man. 

5  iroz  thou  an  my  Dope ,  £>?L02b 
©0©  :  thou  art  my  truft  from  my 
youth. 

6  26y  ttjec  hauc  31  bene  holben  bp 
from  tl)c  ibombe :  thou  act  Dee  that 
tooUemceoutof  my  mothers  boibcis, 
mypjatfefhiib-  continually  ofthec. 

7  3  am  as  a  Vbonbcr  buto  many, 
buttDou  iremy  ftrougrcfuge. 

8  ?Lct  my  tuoutl)  ber  fillcb  with  thy 
pzatft,ana  with  thy  honour  all  the  bay. 

9  Caftmenotoffmthctimcofolb 
age;fon"afte  me  not  ibhenmyOrength 
failcth. 

io  if  o?  mine  enemies  fpcabe  againft 
mcc:anb  they  that  t  layibattc  foz  my 
foulc,taue  counfell  together , 

1 1  «S>aymg,<3ob  hath  fozfafcen  him : 
perfeaite  anb  tahe  him,  foz  there  is  none 

tObCllUCthim. 

ii  £><scb,bcnotfarrefrommcc:j3D 
my  (Sob,  mabe  haftc  fo2  my  hclpc. 

13  Het  them  be  confoimbcb  and  con- 
fumcb  ,  that  arc  abucrfarics  to  my 
foulc :  let  them  bee  coucrcb  with  rcpzod) 
anbbtfbonout,thatfccRcmyhurt. 

14  26ut  3  tbii  hope  tontinually,anb 
Unll  yet  pjasfc  thee  moje  anb  moze. 

15  £|9y  mouth  fhau  fhctb  foozth  thy 
nghteoufnefl"c,jncithyfaluanonalIthe 
bay  :  foz  3  twoVo  not  the  numbers 

thereof. 

16  3Jtbillgoeinthefttcngthofthe 
?Lozb  <S  o  jp  :  3  Mil  mabe  mention  of 
thy  righteoufueflc,euen  of  tl)tneonely. 

17  £>d5ob,thou  haft  taught  me  from 
my  youth :  anb  hitherto  hauc  3(bccla^ 
rcbthyvbonbcrousiboibcs. 

18  jftoibalfo  tibhcn3J  am  olb  anb 
gray  hcabeb,  3D  <5ob ,  fcufafte  me  not : 
bnttll  3  hauc  fhctbcb  t  thy  ftrength  bn< 
to  this  generation,  and  thy  potber  to  cue- 
ryonethatistocome. 

19  Xhy  rtghtcoufnes  alfo,£>  (Sob.is 
bctyhtgh,ibho  haft  bone  great  thuigs: 
£)  00b  ,ibho  is  use bnto  thee < 

20  Thou  ibhirh  haft  ftjrtbcb  mee 
great,  anb  fo:e  troubles,  foaitquirtten 
mee  agame,  anb  (halt  bung  mee  bpa- 
gamefcom  the  beptbes  of  the  earth. 

21  Xhou  (halt  mcreafc  my  great* 


ncflc,anb  comfozt  me  on  eucry  Gbe. 

^3  Jbill  alfo  p2atfc  thee  t  ibtth  the 
pfaitenc,  euen  thy  ttucth ,  £>  my  <3oo : 
bnto  thee  ibill  3  fing  ruitt)  the  harpe, 
£Dthou^olyoncof3fracl. 

ii  ^y  lippes  fhau  greatly  reioycc 
lbben  31  fing  bnto  thee:  anb  my  foulc, 
tbhich  thou  haft  rebecmeb. 

24  *©ytongucairofhaiitalKcofthy 
righttoufucfrcail  the  bay  long:  foz  they 
are  confounbeb  ,  foz  they  arc  brought 
bnto  fljamcthatfccrtc  my  hurt, 

P  S  A  L.     LXXIL 

1  Dauid  praying  for  Solomon  ,  fhewcth  the 
goodnefie  and  glory  of  his,  in  type ,  aud  in 
tructh.ofChrifteskingdome.  18  Heeblef- 
leth  God. 

«[  a  rfaime  j|  foj  Solomon. 
fe^^ai  HuefhcBmgthy3Jubgc' 
^  ments ,  £>  @ob ,  anb  thy 
Sightcoufncffc  bnto  the 
Bmgsfoune. 
r  $ee  (ball  iubge  thy 
people  ibith  righteoufneffc ,  anb  djy 
poozclbithtubgcment. 

3  Xhcmountaincsfhaibnng  peace 
to  the  people,  anb  the  litlchils,  by  ngh-- 
ttoufneffe. 

4  J^ee  fliall  iubge  the  powe  of  the 
people ,  he  fhau  faue  the  chiUwcn  of  the 
nccbie ,  anb  fbail  bzeabe  in  pieces  the 
oppjeffour. 

5  Xhey  fl;all  frarc  thee  as  longas 
the^unnc  9  ^oonembure,  tljJough; 
out  all  generations. 

6  $cc  ftjau  come  boibne  lifee  rame 
bpon  the  moibcn  graffc :  as  Chotbzes 
that  rbatcr  the  earth. 

7  3Jn  his  bayes  (hall  the  righteous 
flourifh :  anb  abunbancc  of  peace  t  fo 
longas  tl)e  fi0ooneenburctt). 

8  ftefhailhaucbomimohalfofrom 
fcatofta,anbfromthcriuer,  bntortjc 
enbs  of  the  earth. 

9  Xhey  that  blbell  in  the  rbilbet* 
ncffcfhailboibcbefoic  hun :  anb  his c* 
ncmies  (hall  licfee  the  buft. 

10  icije  bmgs  of  Xarftnfb  anb  of 
the  3fflfS  fljall  bung  p2efents  :  the 
lungs  of  £>heba  anb  ^ebafljail  offer 
gifts. 

ii  j^ca ,  ail  lyings  fliall  fall  boibne 
bcfojehunrall  nations  fballferuc  hun. 

12  foi  hec  fljaii  bcliucr  the  necby 
ibhcn  he cneth :  the  poojcalfo , anb  him 
that  hath  no  helper. 

i}  i?c(halfparethepoo2eanbneeby, 
€ce  3  anb 


t  Htir.mh 
thcmJb-H- 

"""'■  'fffi1- 


\Or.of. 


1  Heir. M 
thereof  no 
mocne. 


Thedefcription  Pfalmes.  ofthe  wicked. 


f  bleb,  one 
Jfjdlgme. 


tHci.fi.JI 
be. 

1  Heb.fiaJ- 
be  at a  [onne 
to  continue 
hit  fathers 
nxmefor  e- 
iter. 


J  Or,  * 

Pfrltr.efor 

AfAfh. 

\\Or,,et. 

\Hcbclc.vtc 

ojhe/trt. 


•fob.  it. 7. 

pfal-37-'- 

Icrem.iz.i 


\Heb.f.,t. 

\Hcb.tnthe 
trouble  of  0- 
thermrn. 

\HA.jnt!i. 


\Heb.they 
fujfe  the 
thoHthttof 
thcheart. 


anb  (bail  fane  the  foulcs  of  the  neebp. 

1+  l?e  fljailrcDccmc  their  foulcfcom 
Ucceitant)  biolcwe  :anb  pjenous  (ball 
tlmrbloobbembis  fight. 

!5  3nb  be  (bail  liuc,anb  to  him  t  (bal* 
be  giuen  of  tlje  golb  of  S>bcba  pjapet 
alfo  (balbe  mabe  ftu  him  contmuaUp, 
and  bailp  (ball  tic  be  pzaifeb. 

i6  Xhcrc  (balbe  an  hanbfuU  of 
tojnc  in  the  earth  bpon  the  top  of  the 
mountames  ■■  tlje  fruit  thereof  (ball 
(babe  line  Hcbanon  anb  they  oftlje  cttic 
(bail  flounfl)  libc  graffc  of  the  earn). 

17  i)ts  name  t  fl)ali  enbure  foj  cner :  j 
t  bis  name  (balbe  cotittnucbasiongas 
the  funnc :  anb  men  (balbe  blcflcb  m 
him  all  nations  (ball  tall  bun  blcflcb. 

18  23lcflcbbetl)e!L©is©<3ob,njc 
Gob  of3Jfraci,  vuljo  onlp  both  voow- 
serous  things. 

19  3lno  blcffeb  be  bis  glonous name 
fo2  ctter  ,anb  let  the  lbbole  earn)  be  nlleb 
with  his  glojp.  3lmen,anD3hnen. 

20  Xbcp2apcrsof2>aiu&rbcfoniie 
of_Jcu"c,arccnbcD. 

PS  A  L.    LXXIH. 

1  The  Prophet  pieuailing  in  a  Temptation, 
r  fheweth  the  occafion  thereof,  the  profpe- 
ritie  of  the  wicked:  13  The  wound  giuen 
thereby,  diffidence.  15  The  victory  ouerit, 
knowledge  of  Gods  purpofe,  in  defboying  of 
the  wicked  and  (uftaininj  the  righteous. 

€  3£faimc||  bfMapl). 
SM^&^S?  1  £ucip  ©ob  is  goob  to  3Jf; 
racl,  euen  to  fuel)  as  ar c  t  of 
atlcanebeart. 

2  25utasfo2mec,mp 
fecte  iberc  almoll  gone: 
tin?  ftcps  l)ab  ibell-nf  gh  dipt. 

3  *  ifoj  _J  ibas  cnuions  at  the  foo= 

HO),  whmgjfelUC  U)C  pZOfpCHtp  0ftl)C 

lbicfteb. 

4  jfo:  there  arc  no  banbs  in  their 
bean) :  but  tljeit  ftrengtb  is  t  firmc. 

5     %\)W  are  not  t  in  trOUblC  as  other 

men :  neither  arc  tbcp  plagucb  t  ime 

other  niCU. 

6  Zbcrcfo2ep2ibceompaffcfi)tt)cm 
about  as  a  tbainc :  biolcnrc  couetctl) 
n)cm  as  a  garment. 

7  Xbctrnesftanboutlbitb  fames: 
t  the?  banc  mojc  then  heart  toulb  lbtft). 

8  1Cbcp  arc  tomipt,anb  fpealte  ttnr- 
heblp  concerning  opptfflion :  tljcp  fpcatte 
lofttlp. 

9  Xbcp  ret  their  mouth  againftn)c 
heauens  ,  anb  their  tongue  ibaiucn) 
tb2ougb  the  earn). 


10  Xhcrcfo2e  bis  people  rcturncbt; 
ther  :anb  lbaters  of  a  full  cup  are  ityung 
out  to  than. 

1 1  3lnD  tbcp  Cap ,  D?otb  both  ©ob 
tmott>;aiu>  is  there  fenoiblcbgc  in  the 
mott^igh* 

12  25crjolb,  tbcCe  ate  tl)c  bngoblp: 
lbbo  p:ofper  m  tl)e  lbojlb,  n)ev  mtr  cafe 
mrtcfjcs. 

13  SUmlp  3f  l)aue  tlcanfcb  mp  heart 
in  name,  anb  lbalbcbmp  hanbsinuv 
nocenne. 

14  5F0.!  all  tbe  bap  long  hauc3J  bene 
plagucb ,  anb  t  chattencb  eucrv  mo^ 
nmg. 

15  3JfJfap ,  3  ibtuTpcalictbus  :be^ 
boib,  3imouio  offenb  agamiuhc  genci 
ration  of  n)vchilb?cn. 

i6  nai)cn  3J  thought  to  bnotb  this, 
t  ft  was  too  painfull  foi  me, 

17  «Hntill  3J  ibent  into  the  ^anctu* 
aric  of  d5ob ;  then  snberftoob  3J  thtir 
cnb. 

is  5>urclj>  n)ou  biDdfetrbcm  in  flip-- 
pcrppiaces:  tbou  taflcDttthcmbolbnc 
into  bcltrnttion. 

19  ^oibare  the?  brought  mto  bcfola* 
tion  as  m  a  moment* the? arc  bttcth' 
tonfumcoibith  terrours. 

io  3sab:camerbbaioncarbaBcfb; 
ro,f)  ?Lo?b,  ibhenthou  aujascttthou 
(halt  bcfpife  their  image. 

11  XhusmpheartiDasigtceucb^nb 
3  tbas  Piicbeb  m  nip  r  ernes. 

it  £>o  foolifl)  ibas  3J ,  tanb  igno= 
rant:gjU)asas  abcafttbefo?c  thec. 

ti  i5euertbcleu*c  3  am  contmuallp 
ttith  tl)cc :  n)ou  l)aai)olben  mebpmp 
right  hanb. 

14.  Xhou  flialtgnibe  melbiththp 
counfcll ;  anb  aftcribarb  rccnuc  mc  to 
gl02p. 

25  nahom  haue  3  in  htauenbut  thee? 
anb  there  is  none  bpon  earn)  that  3 
beurcbcfibcstbce. 

16  ^p  flea)  anb  mvbeartfaflen): 
but  ©00 1  s  the  t  (tr  eugtb  of  mp  bcatt,anb 
mvpo?tionfo2cucr. 

27  5Fo2loc,  thep  that  are  farrc  from 
thec,  (hall  pcn(h  :rt)ou  haft  beftropcb 
all  thnn  that  goe  a  lbhojing  from  n)cc. 

28  But  it  is  goob  fo2  mc ,  to  b2aibe 
nccrc  to  <5ob :  3  haue  put  mp  truft  in 
thc!Lo2b  &  o  Estbat^  map  Declare  all 
n)plb02lics. 

P  S  A  L.  LXXIIII. 

1     The  Prophet  complainethol  the  defoIatioD 
of  the  Sanfluarie.   io  Hee  mouethGodto 

helpe, 


\Hcb.my 
cha'itfemen: 


f  HekitTcj: 
hbo-.tr  tn 
rmnc  ctes. 


\Heb.  I 

k*:rtv  not, 
f  Heb.mlh 
thee. 


\Hcb.ntks. 


ra 


yers 


>ftl 


or  tne 


Pfalmcs.        Church  affl  idled, 


||  Or,  A 

pialmc/tv 
dftphto 
gtut  ttijlnt' 
Sli  on. 


hajtefcnt 
tbvSttnclu- 
rte  into  the 
fire. 


\Htbr. 
breaks- 


"Csod.  14. 
ir. 

\Hihr 
h-eakc. 
||  Or,vrh*lu 


"Exo.  17.5 
num. 10. 11 
iofh.T.15. 
\H?ii.ruieri 
ofjlrcngrh. 


helpc  inconfideracionof  hispower.  18  Of 
his  reprochfull  enemies, of  his  children,  and 
of  hisCouenant. 

C II  ^a&ha  of  atfopi). 

0ob,n>hp  haft  thou  caftvs 

off  fo«r  euer  <  why  uoeth 
thme  anger  fmofecagaintt  I 
the  (b,  eepe  of  thp  pafture  < 
z  BemcmbcrfhpCotv 
grcgatjon  which  thou  haft  pnrchafcb  of 
oioe :  the  ||  ton  of  thine  inheritance 
which  tl)ou  haft  rebecmeb,  this  mount 
£>ion,  ibhcrein  tl)ou  haft  bibelt. 

j  jLtft  bp-thp  fecte  bnto  the  perpe*  j 
tuallbeCblations:  euen  all  that  the  encsj 
mie  Ijatt)  none  ibicReblp  m  the  danc- 
wane. 

4.  Xbine  cnemiestoarc  to  tne  nubft 
of  tbp  congregations :  the?  fet  Up  their 
enRgncsiorfigneB. 

5  3man mas  famous  aecoibing  as 
he  Dan  uftco  tip  aces  bpon  the  tlncttc 
trees 

6  28ot  notb  they  bjcafee  botbne  the 
taruet)  idOitRc  tfiercof  at  onte,tt»tlj  ares 
anb  hammers. 

7  t-jctjef  rjanctaftBretntotljv^atv 
ttuati>,thephaueDe6leD  by  cafhngdowne, 
the DttielUng  place  of  thpifJauie  to  the 
grounb. 

8  iq>epfatDinthctrhcarts,?Utbs 
t  brttrop  them  together :  the?  Dane 
burnt  bp  all  the  Synagogues  of  <Sob 
mtheianb. 

9  l©e  fee  not  our  Ggnes ,  there  is  no 
mo?e  any  pwphet,  neither  is  there  a? 
niong  bs  any  that  tmolbeth  hotbe 
Jong. 

10  £><25ob,hotb  long  Qjall  the  aouer* 
fane  repjoaeh  i  Qjail  the  encmie  blafc 
phetne  thy  /frame  to?  euer  t 

1 1  vsm  tbtth&Mttbettthou  thy  \)&nn, 
euen  thp  right  hanteplueac tt  out  of  thy 
bofome. 

11  JfozooDismvlcXingofolD,  Vbo^ 
Htng  faluationln  the  mibft  of  the  earth. 

13  *%houDibfttbiiubefhefcabyfhy 
ftreugth :  thoubzafteft  the  heabs  of  the 
ibmgonsinthetbaters. 

14-  ^houbjafccftfbehcaDSoffLeut 
athanui  pieces,  ano  gaueft  him  to  bee 
meat  to  the  people  inhabiting  the  tbtl- 
DetitclTe. 

15  *  Zhou  bicfttlemie  the  fountame 
anbthcflooD:  thoubjtebftbp  tmtghtic 
nucrs. 

16  Xheoap  is  thine,  the  night  aifo>s 
thme :  thou  haft  prepares  the  light  anb 
thefunne. 


17  3Ei)ou  haft  fet  all  the  bojbers  of 
the  earth  :Xhou  haft  tmaoc Summer 
anb  ©inter. 

18  ftcmember  this,  that  the  enctnic 
hath  repjoartjeb,  £>?L©Kja,  anb  rha: 
tt)t  foolift)  people  haue  blafphemeb  rt)P 
jframe. 

19  £>Deliuernotthcfoulcof  thytur; 
tie  boue  bnto  the  multttubc  of  the  wicked 
fozget  not  the  Congregation  of  thy 
poojefojener. 

ao  $aue  refpect  bnto  the  touenant : 
foj  the  baseplates  of  the  earth  are  full 
of  the  habitations  of  crueltte. 

ii  £)  let  not  theoppzefleb  returneas 
fhamcb :  let  the  pooie  anbnecbie  pjatfe 
thy  name. 

ii  ^nfe,  ^D<5ob,plcab  thine  otbne 
caufe:  remember  hoibthe  foolift)  man 
rep;oeheth  thee  Dairy. 

23  ifojgctnotthcboyccofthineenc; 
mles :  the  twnult  of  fhofe  that  nfc  bp 
agamft  thce.t  mcreafefh  connnuauy. 

PSAL     LXXV. 

1  TheProphetpraiferhGod.  1  Heepromifeth 
toiudgevpnghdy.  4  Herebukethrheproud 
byconliderarionof  Gods  prouidence.  9  He 
praifeth  Gud,  &  promilech  to  execute  iulhce. 

Ctl £0  the thlefe muCcian ^i  tafchith, 
%  pfalmc  or  fong  of  afaph. 

iBtothee,)D<J3oD,Doeibc 
guietlianbes.vnto  thee  Doe 
tt>e  gme  rtjanus :  foa  that 
thp  name  is  nere,  thp  tbon^ 
Dcrousuw&sbcctare. 
%  iinahen  3  fhall  reteiue  the  con 
gccganon,3ltt)iUiuDgebpjtghtlp. 

3  %X\t  earth  anb  all  the  inhabitants 
thereof  are  bUTotocb :  3J  bcarc  bp  the 
pillars  of  it.  &elarj. 

4  3Jfaibbntothefooles,ffi)eaienot 
foolift)lp:  anb  to  the  tt>irfccD,?Lift  notbp 
the  home. 

5  ?Lift  not  bp  pour  home  on  high : 
fpeahe  not  ibith  a  ftifte  nccbe. 

e  Jro?  pjomotion  commeth  neither 
from  the  <£aft,  no?  from  thenaeft,  no? 
from  the  tS>outh. 

7  26ut  <5ob  is  the  tubgc :  he  putteth 
botbne  onc.anb  fetteth  bp  another. 

8  fo i  in  the  hanb  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
rhere  is  a  cup ,  anb  tl)e  rbtne  is  reb :  it  is 
full  of  mtrturc ,  anb  he  pottuetb  out  of 
the  fame:but  the  biegges  thereof  all  the 
ibitaeD  of  the  earth  ft)a»  tt;ing  them 

0Ut,andD2tnftCthem. 

9  2Sut  3  torn  betlarc  foj  euer-  3J 

Hull 


|  Heb.  madi 
them. 


t  Htb.aficn- 
deth. 


\\Or,tothe 

chief e  mufi~ 

aan[tieflroy 

not^apfa/m 

otfongfor 

Jfapht 


\\Or,-»henT 
fhtlltahea 
fet  time. 


tHfUrfirt 


Vow,and  pay 


Pfal 


mes. 


God; 


power. 


|  J  Or,  far 

Af*fb. 


\Heb.tc 
Feare. 


lbtll  fmg  pjafcs  to  the  (Sob  of  Jacob. 

io  3iu  the  homes  of  the  Tbtcttcb  alfo 
tbtii  3  tut  off;  but  the  homes  of  the 
righteous  fl)au  be  craiteb. 

PSAL.    LXXVI. 

i  A  declaration  ot  Gods  maieftie  in  the  Church, 
n  An  exhortation  to  fcruehmi  reuerently. 

CXothcehiefcmufictanon/13cgmofh, 
a#faintcoifong||  oPlfaph. 

/3  3JubahtsdDObtmonj; 
m :  hts  uamc  *  great  tn 
3ifraci. 

i  3ftt  S>alcm  alfo  ts 
his  tabernacle,  anb  hts 
blbclltng  place  tn  5non. 

3  Xhercbtauchcthcarroniesoffhc 
boibc,  the  Ibtclb^nb  the  ftbojb,  anb  the 
batteli.  5>ciah. 

4  miouartmo2cglo2tousanbejC' 

ccllentthcnthcmoutitamcsofp2ap. 

5  Xfjc  ftout  hearteb  arc  fpoileb, 
the?  haue  Oept  thctr  aeepe :  anb  none  of 
the  men  of  might  haue  founb  their 
hanbs. 

6  3Jt  thv  rcbube,  j©  Oob  of  3J& 
cob ,  both  the  chariot  anb  Ijotfe  are  caft 
intoabcabQccpc. 

7  IChou.euenthouarttobefearcb; 
anb  lbho  map  ftanbtnthp  ftcjl)t  ruijcn 
once  thou  art  angry* 

8  Xhou  btbft  tanfe  iubgement  to  be 
hcarb  from  hcaucn :  the  earth  fcarcb 
anblbasfttll, 

9  nahen  eob  arofc  to  iubgemcnt.to 
fauc  all  the  mcebe  of  the  earth.  5>elah. 

io  Smrclp  the  rojath  of  man  (hall 
pzaifc  thee:  the  rcmatnber  of  tt>:ath 
(halt  thou  rcftrainc. 

n  $o*bc,aubpapbntofhc?L£>B3© 
pour  (Sob  let  all  that  be  rounb  about 
him  bzing  pzefents  t  bnto  him  that 
ought  to  be  fcarcb. 

ii  J?cc  (bail  tut  offthefpirttof  pjuv 
ces  :hcc  is  terrible  to  the  Kings  of  the 
earth. 

PSAL.   LXXVII. 

i  The  Pf.ilmirt  fheweth  what  fierce  cornbatc 
hec  had  with  diffidence.  10  The  victory 
which  he  had  by  consideration  ot'Gods  great 
and  gratious  workes. 

C  %o  the  thicfc  muftcian ,  to  3Jcbu* 

thun,a|Dfalmciof^faph. 

KSgS*g&9|  crpcb  bnto  (Sob  ttjtth  mp 

Sgi  boice:  eucn  unto  (Sob  tbtth 

C%  nrpboiccanbhcgauccarc 

bnto  me. 

x  3Fn  tlje  bap  of  mp 


troubled  fought  the  fLojb  ,  tmp 
foic  rannc  tn  the  ntght,  anb  ceafeb  not : 
mpfoulc  rcfufcbtobecomfotfcb. 

$  3  remembzeb  ©ob ,  anb  tbas 
troubleb  :3  compiatneb,  anbmpfptnt 
lbasouctibfjelmcb.  £>ciah. 

+  XhouholbeHmmccpcslbafelng: 
^amfotroublcbthatJcannotfpeaUe. 

5  3  haue  confibercb  the  bapes  of 
olb.thc  pceres  of  aunricnt  times. 

6  3  call  to  rememtyante  mp  fong 
tn  the  ntght: 3  commune  tbitrj  mine 
oUmc  heart,  anb  mp  fpirtt  mabc  bite 
gentfeareh. 

7  mm  the  Hojb  raft  off  fo?  v 
uer  *  anb  lbtll  hce  be  fauourablc  no 
mo2e* 

8  3s  his  mcrcp  cleane  gone  fo?  c- 
ucr  <both  his  pioniife  fatle  t  fo?  cucr? 
moje* 

9  $ath  (5ob  forgotten  to  be  gratis 
otts  i hath  he  in  anger  (hut  bp  his  ten? 
bcr  mercies  i  5>ciab. 

io  3lnb  3  fapb ,  Xhis  is  mp  infirmi- 

tiC:  but  I  will  remember  tr)C  peCreSOf  thC 

right  hanb  of  the  mofthtgh. 

1 1  3  Jbill  remember  thenbojfees  of 
the  %  0  ts »:  furelp  3  lbtll  remember 
tbpibonbersofolb.  " 

ii  3  lbtll  mebttate  alfo  of  ail  thp 
tuojfecanb  talbe  of  thp  botngs. 

i}  %\w  ibap,£>  (Sob ,  is  tn  the  3>an; 
ctuaric :  ttiho  is  fo  great  a  ©ob,  as  our 
©ob* 

14  £houartthe©obthatbocfttt>otv 
bcrs  thou  haft  bet larcb  thp  ftrcugth  & 
mong  the  people. 

15  Ithouhafttbtthtbinearmcrcbeej 
mcb  thp  people ,  the  fonncs  of  3lacob 
anbjlofeph.  3>clah. 

i6  Xhe  maters  (alb  tbec ,  £>  ©ob, 
the  ibaters  favb  thee :  thep  tberc  afraib 
thcbcprhsalfoiberctroubleb. 

17  fEhecIoubespouwbouttbater, 
tlje  flues  fent  out  a  founb ;  thine  ar* 
roibcsaifoibcntabzoab. 

18  Xhc  botcc  of  thp  tljunber  wastn 
the  hcaucn:  the  lightnings  Itghtneb  the 
\bo2lb,  the  earth  trcmblcb  anb  looottc. 

19  Xhpibapisin  the  fca,anb  thp  path 
in  the  great  ibaters :  anb  thP  foot-fteps 
arenotKnotticn. 

ao  *Xhou  lebbeft  thp  people  Itnc  a 
flocK,bpthchanbofii0ofcsanb^aron. 

PSAL.    LXXVIII. 

1  An  exhortation  both  to  learne  and  to  preach 
the  Law  of  God.  9  The  ftory  ot  Gods 
wrath  aaainft  the  incredulous  and  difobcdi- 


\Hti.mj 
hdnd. 


t  Hcl.lt:  ge- 
neration and 
generation. 


\Hel.tht 
eloudi  were 
petrreelforlk 
trith  faler. 


"Exod.  14. 
IS>. 


God 


s  wonders 


Pfalmes. 


in 


-gyp* 


\\Or.K 
Hlalmc  for 
t^ptfhfo 
gmcioftr"- 

Owi. 


'Pfal.495 

miidj.i;. 


•  Dcut.4. 

?.and6.7> 


I  Httr.  ik-v 

prrp.irrj  rut 
t bar  heart. 


\Hehr. 

tbrozpin? 
fccrlh. 


"Eiod.1/ 
11. 


•Eiod.  13. 
2  Land  14. 
14. 

•Eiod.  77. 
tf.nutn.io. 
10.  pfaL 
105.44. 1. 
cor.104. 


en:.   67   Thelfraelitesbeine  reie&ed,  God 
chofe  Iudah,Sion,and  Dauid. 

Ci;©aftftilof3lfapl). 

3Jue  eare,£>nrp  people^ 
mp  ILatbe :  incline  your 
cares  to  tbetbojbcsof  mp 
mouth. 
2  *  3  null  open  mp 
moun)  tii  a  parable :  5  uulbttet  barbc 
fapingsofolb: 

j  iebicbibcbauebearD^tmouien: 
anb  out  fathers  bauctolb  bs. 

4  naeunll  not  bibe  them  from  their 
cbilbjen ,  (beuiing  to  the  generation  to 
tome ,  the  pjaifcs  of  the  1L  ad  is  © :  ano 
bis  ttrcngtb.anbbisuionDCtfultboj&s 
tbatbe  bath  bone. 

5  jffojbeeftabbftcbaXefttmonpin 
facob ,  anb  appointee  a  %m  m  3i 
tael,  ibbich  be  commaunbcb  our  fa; 
tbers :  *  that  the?  Cboulb  mafee  tbem 
bnolbento  their  tbilbicn. 

s  Xrjat  tlje  generation  to  tome 
might  Knott)  them ,  eueu  the  ebilojen 
which  Cboulb  oe  borne :  who  Cboulb  anfe 
anbbeclatc  them  to  their  tbilbjen : 

7  Xbat  they  might  fet  their  hope  in 
(Bob  anb  not  forget  tfjerboj&s  of  <£>ob : 
but  heepe  bis  Commaitbemcnts, 

S  anb  might  not  bee  as  their  fa- 
tbers ,  a  ftubbome  anb  rebellious  gene- 
ration, a  generation  ttbat  fct  not  their 
heart  aright :  anb  uihofefpirit  ttiasnot 
ftcbfaaibithd5ob. 

9  Xbe  tbilbjen  of  Cpbiaim  being 
armcb ,  and  t  tarring  boibes ,  turueb 
batbeintbebayofbattcll. 

10  Xbey  bept  not  the  touenant  of 
<5ob:  anb  r  efufeb  to  ttjaibe  in  his  Hatti: 

11  anbfo;gatht£lbo?ftes:  anb  his 
ibonbers  that  he  hab  frjetbeb  them. 

ii  #arueilous  things  bib  he  in  the 
Ggbt  of  their  fathers:  in  thelanb  of  €- 
gypt,intbcfielD  of  Zoan. 

13  *$ccbiuibcbtbe5>ca,  anbtaufeo 
them  to  paffc  tbzongb:  anb  he  mabe  the 
Waters  to  Canb  as  an  beape. 

14  *jn  the  bap  time  alCobclebtbem 
tbitbatioub:anb  all  the  night  ttutba 
light  of  fire. 

15  *  $ee  tiaue  the  roebes  in  the  1M* 
bernes :  anb  gaue  them  bmibe  as  out  of 
the  great  oeptbes. 

i6  $ee  brought  ftreamesalfo  out  of 
thetotfee,anbtaufeb  maters  to  nmne 
bourne  libertuers. 

17  anbtbeprinnebpetmojcagainft 
him:  bp  pjouobing  the  moft  $igb  in  the 
unlbcrnes. 


is  3lnb  the?  tempteb  <@ob  in  their 
heart :  bp  af  bmg  meat  foz  their  lull. 

19  *  J^ea,  the?  fpabe  agamft  (Son 
tbep  faib,  Can  <5ob  tfurmfb  a  table  tn 
thetUUbernes; 

10  *26ebolb,befmotetbetortte)tbat 
tbettmtcrsguCbcb  out,  <$  tbeftrcames 
ouerfloibeb ;  tan  he  gtuc  b;eab  alfof  can 
he  pjonioc  flctb  fo?  his  people  t 

21  Xberefoje  the  %  ©  ia  ©  hearb 
th.s,  anb  mas  tb,iotrj ,  fo  a  fire  ibas  innfr 
leb  agamft  Ifatob:  anb  anger  alfo  tame 
bp  agamft  jfrael. 

22  26ecaufe  the?  belceutb  not  m 
(i>oD :  anD  trufteb not  in  his faluation : 

i}  IChough  hehab  tommanbeb  the 
cloubes  from  aboue :  anb  openeb  the 
boo?csofhcauen: 

24  *^nbhabraincbboibncfi0anna 
bpou  them  to  eate,  anb  hab  gtucn  them 
oftbetomeofheauen. 

25  *||^anbibeate3lngelsfooD:hee 
feut  n)em  meat  to  the  full. 

26  ^ctaufeban^afttbinototblolb 
in  n)e  heauen :  anb  bp  h»s  porbcr  hce 
brought  in  the  £>outh  ibinb. 

27  tyt  ratnebfleft)  alio  bpon  them  as 
buft :  ano  t  fcatbrrcb  foults  line  as  the 
fanDoftbefca. 

28  ^nb  hee  W  «  fall  in  the  mibft  of 
their  tampe,rounb  about  their  habita? 
ttons. 

29  £>a  thep  bib  eate,  $  mere  lbcll  fil- 
leb:  fo?  he  gaue  them  their  otbneoefire. 

30  Xbepttiere  not  eftrangeb  from 
their  lull :  but  tbbfle  their  meate  *was 
petintheirmouthes, 

31  ithetbjath  of  d5ob  tame  bpon 
thcm,anbflelbthefattcftof  them:  anb 
tfmotc  Dottwe  the  Htbofen  mm  of  3 f 
rati. 

32  jfoi  all  this  thevfinneoftill:  anb 
beleeucb  not  fo?  b«s  u>onb?ous  «J0?bs. 

33  XbetcfojetbcirbapesoiDbcton' 
fume  in  banitte ,  anb  their  pecres  in 
trouble. 

34  nabenhee  neuithem ,  then  thep 
fought  hun :  anb  n)cp  rcturncb,  anb  m- 
quitebcarlp  after  C5ob. 

35  3inb  thep  rememb?eb  that  <Son 
was  thetr  rotbe :  anb  the  high  ©ob.tbcit 
rebeemer. 

36  /freuertbeleffc  thev  bib  flatter 
him  untb their  mouth: anb  tljep  Ipeb 
bnto  him  Vbith  their  tongues. 

37  ifo?  their  heart  urns  not  right 
untbhum  neither  mercthep  Oebfaft  in 
his  touenant. 

38  25ut  hee  bemgfullof  tompaffion, 

fo;gaue 


•  |  "Num.  1 1 

4- 
fHcp.crdrr 

"Fxod.  17. 
6.  num.  10. 


id.  -.6. 


Molin  6 
Ji. 

\\Or,airrj 
one  <tt  J  tAt 
the  bm&  af 
the  mtghty. 
\Hebr.t, 
gn. 

\H.br.fitU 

tfmg. 


"Num.  11. 
3J. 


\Heb.nudt 
tobo-x. 
\\Or,jmg 
men. 


39 


Egypt  plagued.  Pfalmcs.  Dauid  chofen. 


'J  Orfelell 
Mgainjl  him 


\\Orfrnm 
tfjUtltan. 
t  Het.fet. 


•Eiod.7. 
ao. 


•E«oJ.8. 
24.8c  3. 6. 


*Exod.  10 


"Exod.9. 

t  Hit  Jut- 
ted. 

\\Or,rnmt 
hatleftaiies. 
\Heb.he 
fiiui  -jp. 
||  Or  light- 


\Heh.he 
wjigbedtt 
path. 
\\Or,iheir 
beaflt,  te  the 
murretnf, 
Exed,  9, ; . 
•Exod.ia. 


'Exod.14. 

27.8c  I  5. 

10. 

t  Heb.  eoHt- 

red. 


lofu  i}. 7 


fojgaue  rhcir  iniquity  ,  anD  DeftroycD 
themnot  yeamanyatimcturneDhchts 
anger  albay,  ant)  did  notfhrre  Dp  all 
IjisiDjatl). 

39  5foJl)ercmemDjcD  rtjat  they  were 
but  flefb  aunnD  that  palTetb  aibay,anD 
commctbuotagaiuc. 

40  i^ofti  oft  Did  they  ||p?ouoltc  him 
in  the  tbilDcroenc:anD  grtcue  htm  in 
ttjc  Defect  i 

41  j^ca  they  turncD  bacfee  anD  temp- 
teDC5oD:anDlinitteDtl)t  holy  one  of 
3frael. 

4.2  XhcytttncmbjeDnotbisbanD: 
nor  the  Dap  tbben  beeDcliucteD  them 
llfcomtbeencmte: 

4J  DorbbebaDtrbjougbtbisugnes 
tn£gypt:attD  bis  nionDcrshttbcficlD 
ofzoan: 

44  'anDbaDturwDthcitriucrstn* 
to  blooD :  anD  their  flouDs,  that  fbey 
toulDnotDnnne. 

45  *$?ccfcntDiucrs  fojts  of  flies  a= 
mongtbcm,tt>bicbDcuourcDtbcnt:anD 
frogges  lDbicl)  DeftroycD  them. 

46  *  $e  gauc  alfo  time  intrcafc  bnto 
ti)t  tatctptllec:anD  then  labour  Ditto 
tbclocuft. 

47  *l)>ctDeftroycDfbcttDinesibitb 
ijatlc :  anD  tljcir  ;S>ycomo;te  trees  lDtttj 
llfrott. 

48  t  i)t  gaue  Dp  their  tattelalfo  to 
the  bailc:anD  tbett  flo  tfees  to||  hot  tljun= 
Der  bolts. 

49  ^ccaftbpon  them  the  ftcrccncu"c 
of  bis  anger,  Unatf)  anD  tnDtgnation, 
anD  trouble  :by  fcnDmg  cutll  angclSa- 

mongthem. 

50  t^cmaDcaiDaytolnsangccbce 
fpareDnot  their  foulcfrotn  Deatfj :  but 
gauc  1 1  rbetc  Ufc  oucr  to  the  pcftilcnte. 

51  *3lnD  fmoteall  tfjcftrrt  bonte  in 
«gvpt :  tlie  clmfc  of  ihcir  ftrcngtf)  ut  tfte 
tabctnatlesoftyam: 

52  aSutmaDcbisottmepcoplctogoe 
fonljliUc  fljeepe :  anD  guiDcD  them  m 
tljeiDtlDerncffelibeaflotbc. 

5}  3MD  he  icd  rbcm  on  fafcly ,  fo  tfjat 
tlicv  fcarcD  not :  but  the  fca  *  t  oucr- 
lbhclincotbcir  enemies. 

54  anDbcbtQugbtthcmtothcbD^ 
DtrofI)isfanttuane:cucntotl)tstnoun- 
tame  which  Ins  right  banD  hao  pur* 
cbafeD. 

55  *  Dc  tad  out  the  heathen  alfo  be; 
fojc  them ,  anD  DluiDeD  them  an  inhere 
tancc  by  imeianD  maDe  the  tribes  of^if 
rati  to  DtDc  11  in  their  tents. 

56  Wt  they  temptcD  anD  p;ouobcd 


the  mod  high  ©oD :  anD  Hept  not  his 
teiTunomes: 

57  25ut  turncD  batbe,  anD  Dealt  Dn- 
faithfullv  line  their  fathers :  they  tbere 
turncD  auDc  line  aDcteitfuii  borbe. 

58  *jFo;  they  pjouofecDbimto  anger 
tbitb  their  high  plates :  anD  ntoueD  him 
to  icloufte  lDith  their  graucn  images. 

59  nahen  ©oDhearDthis ,  hce  tbas 
lD;oth,  anD  greatly  abbozrcD3)fracl: 

60  *  £>o  that  he  fotfoo&c  tbetaber- 

naclcof5>htloh:tihetentwhichheplatcD 
among  men, 

6i  anD  DcltucreD  his  ftrcngth  into 
tapttume :  anD  hts  glo;ty  into  the  ene* 
nueshanD. 

6%  $e  gauc  hiSpeoplc  oucraifototv 
to  the  fiDojD :  anD  was  iDjoth  untb  hts 
mheritantc. 

6j  %X\t  fire  tonfumeD  their  young 
men: anD  their  maiDenstticrc  nottgu 
uen  to  manage. 

64  Xhctr  pjicfts  fell  by  fhertbojD : 
ano  their  ttuDoibcs  maDe  no  lamciv 
tation. 

65  Xhen  the  IL02D  atbancD  as  one 
out  of  fleepe  rand  Hue  a  mighty  man 
that  fhoutcth  by  rcafon  of  Ibtne. 

66  2uid  he  fmotc  his  enemies  in  the 
huiDct  parts:  he  put  them  to  a  pcrpc^ 
tuailrcpjoch. 

67  fi0o?couer  he  refufcD  the  tabet* 
natleofUofcph :  anD  chofenotthetnbe 
of€ph?aim. 

68  zsutthofe  the  tribe  of^uDah: 
the  mount  Suon  ibhnh  he  loncD. 

69  ^nD  he  built  his  fanttuarie  Iibc 
high  paiacesriotetheearthlDhith  hchart) 
tcaabli^cDfouuer. 

70  *$cthofet>auiD  alfo  his  feruant, 
anD  toofte  him  from  the  fljcepcfoiDs: 

71  *  tiFromfolloibing  the  erbes  great 
With  young,  hec brought  him  to  fceD 
3Iacob  hts  people,  anD  3Jfracl  ijis in* 
hentance. 

71  ^ohcfeDthcmatwDingtothe 
intcgrittcofhishcart:anDguiDcDthcm 
bythcfmifulncffcofhishanDS. 

P  S  A  L.  LXXIX. 

1  The  Pfalmift  complaiiieth  of  the  dcfolation 
oflcrufalem.  8  Hee  prayeth  for  deliue- 
rance,    ij   Andpromifeththaiikcfulnefl'c. 

Ca^falmellofafaph. 
©od  ,  the  heathen  are  tome 
tnto  thine ,  inheritance ,  thy 
holy  temple  haue  tljey  DctV 
leD :  they  haue  layD  3Jcruta-- 
lemouhcapes. 


*Dcut.33. 

21. 


"  I  .King. 
4.10. 


t  Htb.  frai- 
l<d. 


\Htt>.foun- 

dcd. 

•  1.  Sam.  1 6 

1  i.a.Sam. 

7.8. 

'a.Sim.j 

l.l.Chron. 

II.  1. 

\Hcb.fram 

after. 


\\Or.fir 

Afah. 


The  troubles  of         Pfal 


mes. 


theChurch. 


"Pra.44"t 


■Pra.8jj.45 


"Icr.10.J5 


*Fi,i.<>4  0. 
\\Or,theim- 

empties  of 
them  that 
ver  re  before 


tHii.ve 


ffW.  thine 

amtc. 

\Hcbr.re 

[true  tec 
children  of 
dcAtb. 


\Hcb.toie- 
ntr.Uicn,{^ti 
Z?ncrMtcrt. 


r,  *er 
ts(f*fh. 


z  Xbc  bcab  bobies  of  ttip  feruants 
Dane  they  siucntobec  meatc  onto  the 
funics  of  rtjc  bcauen :  rtic  flefb  of  thy 
bairns  bnto  the  bcafts  of  the  earth. 

j  Xbcic  Wood  bauc  they  fbcb  Hftc 
maccr  totmb  about  3Jcrufalem :  anb 

there  was  HOIK  tO  bUTiC  them. 

4  'naearcbetomearepjoacbtoont 
neighbours:  a&o?nc  anb  Derifion  to 
them  that  ate  rounD  abont  bs. 

5  *  $oib  long,  %  o  is  ©,  luflt  thou 
be  anger,  fbz  encr?  fbatl  tby  icloufie 
burnt  line  fire? 

6  "  -0aXbic  out  tin'  tu:ath  topon  the 
heathen  that  batte  not  tmoiben  thee, 
anb  upon  the  Rfngbomcs  that  baue  not 
callebbpon  thy  name. 

7  fonbeybaucbetiourcb^iacob: 
anb  lasb  ttiafte  Ins  MbeHing  place. 

8  "Orcmanbcr  not  againCbs  l|  for- 
mer iniquities,  let  tby  tenber  mercies 
fpccbily  pzeucnt  bs :  foz  lPc  are  brought 
bcryioib. 

9  $elpe  us,  ®  <5ob  of  our  faluan 
on,  fo2tbcglo2yof  thy  #amc:  anbbc; 
itucr  us,  anb  purge  atbay  our  finnes  fo.2 
thy  Barnes  faue. 

10  naheTfo2cflioulD  the  heathen  fay, 
nabere  is  their  <5ob ;  lethnnbt  tmoiben 
among  the  heathen  m  our  fight  by  the 
t  reuengmg  of  the  bioob  of  thy  fernauts 
mbtcoisfbcb. 

1 1  flct  the  ftghmg  of  the  pnfoner 
tomcbefo:ethce,atto2bingtothcgreat' 
neffe  of  t  thy  pomcr:  t  pjcfeructbou 
thofcthat  art  appomtcb  tome. 

ix  2nb  renber  bnto  our  neighbours 
fruenfolb  into  their  bofome,  their  re- 
pioach  luhcrcibirh  they  banc  repjotrjeb 
thee.ilDfLozb. 

ij  5)o  tbc  thy  people  ann  fhecpe  of 
thypaftutc,  toill  gmc  thee  tbanfecs  fo? 
eucr:  wcmilllbcxb  fo2tb  tbypjaifctto 
all  generations. 

P  SAL.     LXXX. 

1  ThePfalmift  111  his  prayer  complaineth  of  the 
miferics  of  the  Church.  8  Gods  former  fa- 
uours  are  turned  into  judgements.  14  Hce 
prayeth  fordeliuerance. 

€  Xo  the  chicfc  &Hifician  bpon  3>hO' 
fbamum  emitl),  apfalmc||of 
3tfapb. 
3mccare,£>(bepbcarbof 
wcael,  thou  that  Icauctt 
3oftphliricaflot6e,thou 

that  blllCllCft  betwecnethC 

Chcrubtms,(hmcfb2th. 
z  26cfo2C<ffph2aimanb 


iSctuamtn,ano  t$>anaffcb,frirre  bp  thy 
ftrcngtb  s  anb  t  come  ^d  fauebs. 

3  Xnrnc  bs  agamc,  £>  0ob :  anb 
caufc  thy  face  to  u)tue,  anb  ibe  (hail  bee 
fatten. 

4r  €>!LoK©<5obofhotts,hoib 
long  tibiltthon  bee  angry  againft  the 
pjayer  of  thy  people* 

5  Xbou  fecbeft themibith  the  b2eab 
of  tearcs :  anb  guieft  them  tcares  to 
D2tnfce  m  great  meafure. 

6  Xbouma&eftbsaftrifcbntoour 
neighbours:  anb  our  enemies  laugh  a 
mongthemfelues. 

7  Xuroctosagatne.OCSobofbotts, 
anb  raufc  thy  fate  to  fbmc,  auo  ibe  lhall 
befauefc. 

s  Xhoahaftb2oughtabtncoutof 
egrpt:  thou  haft  call  out  the  heathen, 
anbpiantebit. 

9  Xbou  p2epar eutt  roome  bcfo?e  it : 
anb  btbft  caufe  it  to  tabc  becpe  root,  anb 
ttfiilcbthelanb. 

10  Xbc  bitlcs  mere  touercbibitb  the 
ibaboib  of  it,  anb  the  boughs  thereof 
Ibcre  littc  t  tijc  goobly  tcoars. 

11  £>befent  out  her  boughs  bnto  the 
S>ca :  anb  her  branches  bnto  the  rtuer. 

11  flahy  haft  thou  then  bzoltcn  bolbnc 
her  iKbgcs :  fo  that  all  they  lbhich  paffc 
bytt3clbay,bocplucrtchcr; 

ij  Xheboarcoutoftlicmoobbotl) 
ibaftcit:  anb  the  tbilbbeaft  of  tljc  fielo 
bothbtuonrcrt. 

14.  aRcturiictbcbefeeclKhec^C^ob 
of  hofts :  looftc  bolbnc  from  heaucn, 
anbbeholb,  anb  bifit  this  bmc : 

15  3nD  thcbuteyarT)  luh'.th  thy  right 
hanb  hatl)  pianteb :  anb  the  bza'ntf)  that 
thou  mabeft  ftrong  fo?  thy  fclfc. 
i6  3JtisburntttHthfirc,itiscutboibnt: 
they  penfl)  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  coun 
tenant?. 

17  flctthyh^nbbcbpontliemanof 
thy  right  hanb:  Upon  the  fonnc  of  man, 
whom  thou  mabeft  ftrong  fb.2  thy  fclfe. 

is  &o  mill  not  nice  got  barne  from 
thee :  quicticn  bs,anb  ibeibiU  tail  bpon 
thy/3ame. 

19  lLurncbsagainc,£)1L0KjD(c>ob 
of  holts,  tanrc  thy  fate  to  (bine,  anb  ibec 
trjalibefaueb. 

P  S  A  L.   Lxxxr. 

1  An  exhortation  to  a  folemnepraifingof  God. 
4  God  ch.illtngcththatduetie  by  reafonot 
his  benefits.  8  God  exhorting  to  obedience, 
complaineth  of  their  difobedience ,  which 
proueth  ihcirownehurt. 

CXo 

39  2 


t  He  f-. come 
for  fa/uMten 


\Heh.  mil 
thaH^mcke  f 


f  HtSrjIie 

Cedjriof 

god. 


Ifraels  obftinacic.        Pfalmes.  Iudges  arc  gods. 


C  %o  the  cfjtcfc  $)ufietan  bpon  <&\t> 

tltt).  APlalmcHof^CSpl). 

"  3Jng  alotbb  bnto  <£>ob 
our  Occngth:mai*e  atop* 
full  notfe  bnto  the  <Sob  of 
3Jacob. 
x  1Caftca0laime,anD 
bangljithct  tt)etimb?cll :  tljcpicatant 
harpeibitbfljcplaiterte. 

3  25lotD  top  tljc  trumpet  in  the  nelb 
©oonc :  m  the  time  appolntcb  on  our 
folemucfcaObap. 

4-  3Foj  this  ibas  a  $>tati\tt  foj  3Jfc 
rael :  and  ajLavo  of  the  (Sob  of  3Jacob. 

5  Xbis  he  ojbainco  m  3tofeph  for  a 
teOmiomc,ibbenheu)cntont|itlwough 
flje  lano  of  Cgvpt : «  here  35  ftcarb  a  lan^ 
gunge,th3[  5  pnDcrftoob  not. 

6  3Jremoucb  his  fljoulbcr  from  the 
burben :  his  hanbes  t  were  beliuercb 
ftomthepots. 

7  3Cf)ou  eallcbOtn  trouble ,  anb  31 
beliuctebtbce ,  3  anfroercbtlKcintljc 
fecret place  of  thunbcr:3J*p2oucbthcc 
at  tljc  ibatcrs  of  ||  i$cribalj.;&clah. 

8  l?carc,£>  mp  people,  anb  31  ibill 
teflific  bnto  thee :  £>  3)fracl,if  tljou  lbilt 
hearftenbtuome: 

9  Xhcrcfliaiiuo  Orange  d5ob  be  in 
thee :  neither  Ibalt  tbou  ibo?fljip  anp 
Orange  ©ob. 

10  3J  am  the  |U>  ir  ©  thp  c5ob,ibhieh 
bjoughttljccoutof  the  lanb  of  Cgppt: 
open thp  mouth  lbibc,anb  9  rtnllfillit. 

11 28utmppeoplciboulbnothcarBcn 
to  mp  boitc :  anb  3Jfcacl  lbonlb  none 
ofme. 

11  *  5>o3Jgauc  them  bp||  bnto  their 
oibne  hearts  luO:  anb  the?  lbalucb  m 
ut  their  otbneeounfcis. 

13  £>  that  mp  people  hab  hearlmcb 
bnto  me :  and  ^fracl  hab  ibalbcb  in  mv 
lbapcs! 

14-  3  O)oulb  foone  hauc  fubbucb 
their  enemies ,  anb  turneb  mphanba; 
gainB  their  abucrfancs. 

15  XhehatcrsoftbcHsDEiD  Ojoulb 
hauc  ||  fubmittcb  themfelues  bnto  hun : 
but  their  tunc  fljoulb  hauc  cnburcbfo; 
cuer. 

16  $ec  fboulb  haue  fttmt  them  aifo 
t  ibitlj  the  fincO  of  the  lbhcat :  anb  nmh 
home  out  of  tl;e  roeuc ,  thoulb  3J  hauc 
lattffiebthcc. 

PSAL.    LXXXII. 

The  Pfalmift  hauing  exhorted  die  Iudges, 
5  and  reproued  their  negligence,  8  prayeth 
Godtoiudge. 


\\Or,f,rA. 


\\Or,agMnfl, 


]Hebr.paj[ed 


"Exod.  17. 
6. 


"Aas.14. 
6. 

\\Or,tothc 
h.trdnes  of 
their  hearts j 
orinu\gtn.i~ 

1  hu. 


\\Oryeclded 
fwntiohc- 
dtence.  Hei>. 
tjed. 

t  Hebr.viith 
th v  fat  of 
•shear. 


CWalmellotafoph 
£>b  flanbeth  in  the  Con 
gregation  of  the  mightie : 
lire  iubgeth  among  the 
gobs. 
x  $olb  long  ibill  pee 
iuogebmuOlp:anb  accept  the'perfons 
oftljeibicacbf  S>ciah. 

3  t2>cfcnbthcpoojcanbfathcrlefle: 
boe  iuOicc  to  the  afflittcb  anb  nccbic. 

4-  *2Deltuertbepoo;ieanbnecbp:rib 
them  out  of  the  hanb  of  the  ibic&cb. 

5  Xhepmiottmot,  neither  Ibtl  the? 
bnnerOano  ■,  tbcp  ibaUte  on  in  barftnes: 
all  tljc  founbattons  of  tlje  earth  aretout 
ofcourfe. 

6  *  31  haue  feib,^e  «e  gobs:  anb  all 
ofpouare  chiuwen  ofthcmoO^lgh : 

7  25ut  pe  Ojaii  ble  lifec  men,  anb  fall 
ItUe  one  of  the  Unices. 

8  2trirc,£>d5ob,iubgc  tlje  earth:  fo? 
tljou  Omit  mhente  aunations. 

PSAL.    LX XXIII. 

1  A  complaint  to  God  of  die  enemies  con/pira- 
cies. 9  A  prayer  againft  them  that  op- 
preiTe  the  Church. 

C2fongor0faintc||of2aaph.  * 
€cpc  not  tljou  filcncc,  D 
(5ob:holb  not  tl)p  peace, 
anbbenotmil,£>cj5ob. 
x  $01  loc ,  thine  ene* 
„  micsma&c  a  tumult:  anb 
thep  that  hate  thee ,  hauc  lift  bp  the 
Ijeab. 

3  Xhep  hauc  taken  craftie  counfcll 
agamO  thp  people,  anb  confuitcb  a* 
gamflthphibbcnoncs. 

4.  Xhcphaucfatb,Come,anbletbs 
cut  tijem  off  from  being  a  nation :  that 
the  name  of  3Jftacl  mapbecnomojein 
remembrance. 

5  if 0? thep  Ijauc  conuiltcb  together 
lblth  one  t  confent:  thep  arc  confeberate 
againOtljcc. 

6  Xhe  tabernacles  of  *£bom,anb  the 
3tt)maelttes :  of  fl0oab,anb  the  $aga= 
rens. 

7  ©cbaianb3(mmon,anb^male6: 
tlic  i&hthOincs.tbulj  tlje  inhabitants  of 
%M. 

8  aflur  aifo  is  iopneb  ttiith  them : 
ttljep  hauc  Ijolpcn  thcchilb?cnof?Lot. 
S>ciah. 

9  *Doc  bnto  them  asvmo  tljc  fi0t« 
bianitcs :  as  to  *5>ifcra,  as  to  3Jabin,  at 
thcb?oobeofl£ufon: 

10  which  pctifljcb  at  Cn  bo? :  thep 
became 


II  Or.frr 
sAJtfh. 


*Dcut.  1. 

'7- 

t  Htb  judge. 


•Prou.24. 
II. 


f  Hebr,  me 
ned. 

*  I  oh  ii  jo. 

34- 


\\Or,frA- 

fafh. 


tHciM 


hauc  bene  em 
armetotbe 
children  of 
Lot. 

Mudg.7. 
>». 

•Iudg.4- 
15.  and  24. 


Thedefire 


Pfal 


mes. 


'  Iudg.7. 


\\0rJ. 


bcry-treet 
make  htm 

\HeSf.  cuue- 
•eth. 

l\Or,from 
eompame  to 
compame. 


became  as  bung  foj  tlje  earth. 

ii  *£0aBcthetr  nobles  Uftc£Vcb,anb 
UHc  Zeeb :  ycaall  their  pjinces  as  zc* 
ba|),  anb  as  zalmunna : 

u  saho  fapb,  flct  bstafteto  out 
fclncs,  thehoufes  of  ©obtn  pofTeflton. 

13  i>  mp  ©ob ,  mafte  them  ubc  a 
tbhecif :  as  the  ttubbiebcfiwthetbinb. 

14  asthefireburnefhaiboob:anb 
as  the  flame  rettcthfhemountameson 
fire: 

15  5>o  pctfccutc  them  Vbirti  thy  tenv 
peft:  anb  maac  them  afraib  tt>ith  thy 
ftomic. 

i6  jf tu  their  faccsmith (bame ttljat 
they  mayfeeBcfhy  namca)  fL©is©. 

17  ?Ut  them  be  confounbeb  anb 
tr  oublcb  f 0  j  eucr :  y  ca  let  them  be  put  to 
fbamcanbpcrtth: 

is  XhatmenmayBnotbcthatthou, 
lbhofc  name  alone  'sjetyfoWZV}: 
an  the  mott^tgh  oucr  all  the  earth. 

P  S  A  L.  LXXXIIII. 

1    The  Prophet  longing  for  the  communion  of 
the  Sanctuarie,  4  fheweth  how  blefled  they 
are  that  dwell  therein.   S   Heeprayethtobe 
"reftoiedvntoit. 

C  %o  the  chiefc  muficianbpott  <5ittith, 
a  j&falmejl  fo2  the  fonnes  of  H*o?ah. 
£>m  amiable  are  thy  to 
bernacles,  j©3LfiDiB£>of 
holies ' 

z  £t9y  foule  longcth, 
yea  eucn  famtcth  fo?  the 
courts  of  the  ft  0 11  jd  :  my  heart  anb 
my  flelb  cryeth  out  fo:  tlic  liutng  ©ob. 
3  Pta  ttjc  fpatroibc  hath  founb  an 
houfc,  anb  the  ftbailotb  a  ncft  fo?  her 
fclfc,ibhcrcfl)emayiayheryoung,euen 

thtneaitars,  £>lLsDiK3E>ofhoCcs,  my 
Binganbmy(i5ob. 

4.  2iSleffeb  are  they  that  bmcll  in  thy 
houfc :  they  ibilbc  Ihll  pjayfmg  thee. 
£>eiah. 

5  2Sleffeb'sthemanmhofeltrcngth 
isinthccun  ibhofc  hearts  thettmyes 
of  them: 

6  i©ho  pafTtng  through  theballey 
Hof2i5aca,mancttatt)Cll:tl)eramcalfo 
tfilieththcpooics. 

7  %t\ty  goc  ||  from  Irtength  to 
ftrength :  eue.v  one  of  them  tnzion  ap- 
peared) before  <5ob. 

8  &  %  <©  is  w  <5ob  of  holies, 
heare  my  pjayer :  giuc  care ,  <D  ©ob  of 
jjacob.  S>eiah. 

9  25cholb ,  )©  (Pob  our  fbielb :  anb 


of  the god  1 


y- 


\M.  I 

would  choc  ft 
rather  to  fir 
arthethr(< 
field. 


loose  bpon  the  face  of  thme  anolntcb. 

10  ifoiabay  m  thy  courts,  is  better 
then  a  thoufanb :  tjj  hab  rather  be  a 
booze  Sceper  m  the  houfe  of  my  <5ob, 
then  to  bibell  in  the  tents  of  ibtc&cfr 
neflc. 

11  jfo?  tlje  H©kid  <Po&  is  a  funne 
anb  flnelb :  the  1L  0  a  ■%>  xoai  gine  grace 
anb  glozp :  no  goob  fljing  mill  \)t  Mtf> 

l)olbfrom*tl)cmtt)atmalBebpnghtlv.  »»a»«. 
iz  ^DILsdisid  of  l)oftes:  blclfcbis  &3+? 

tlje  man  tliat  trufletl)  in  tbec. 
P  S  A  L.    LXXXV. 

1  ThePlalmill  out  of  the  experience  of  former 
mercies  prayeth  for  the  continuance  thereof. 
K  He  pronnfeth  to  waitethereon,out  of  con- 
fidence of  Gods  goodneffe. 

C  %o  t\)t  clnefc  mufician,  a  i&falmc 
llfoulicfonnes  ofBo^arj. 
F^ffrS^1^'  tljouljalt  bene 
M&m  II  fauourablc  bnto  tljp 
hMz&  WnD :  tijou  fjatt  bjougljt 
^p^ibacfee  tf)e  captiuit?  of 
■gasggsgsf  ^acob. 

z  *Xl)ou  fjalt  foigtum  tlje  micnte 
tic  of  tl)p  people ,  tljouljalt  coucreball 
tljeirunne.  5>clal). 

3  Xljou  Ijaft  tahen  amav  all  tl)? 
rb?atl;  :||trjou  hallturncb  thy  felfe  from 
tlje  ficccenelTc  of  rijine  anger. 

4.  Xurncbs,£)<c5obofourfaluati# 
on :  anb  caure  tljme  anger  to tbarbsbs 
toccafe. 

5  nailt  tl)ou  be  angrptbitfj  bsfoje* 
ucr ittiilt  tijou  bjamc  out  tijme  anger 
to  all  generations  < 

6  iBilt  tliou  not  reuiuc  bs  agame : 
tl)attl)v  people  mayrciopce  in  trjee; 

7  S»l)em  bs  tl)v  mer cv,£>  %£mis>; 
anb  graunt  bs  thv  faiuation. 

s  3  mill  rjcarc  lbl^at  <5ob  t\)t 
%®vn2>  tbill  fpeafte:  foz  Ijec  ttitllfpcaBc 
peace  bnto  rjis  people  ,  anb  to  l)is 
faints :  but  let  tljem notturnc agame 
to  folly. 

9  Surelv  nis  faiuation  is  nigl)  tl»tm 
tfjat  fearc  turn  ■,  tl)at  glo?y  may  bmcll  in 
ourianb. 

10  ^9ercv  anb  trutl)  arc  met  together: 

righteotifneflc  anb  peace  hauc  feiffeb 

each  other. 

11  Xruth  (hall  fpzing  out  of  tftc 
earth  :  anb  ngntcoufncfTe  fljall  loolic 
boibucfromrjcauen. 

iz  pea  tl)e?LfirMS3Dfl)allgiuetl)at 
mhicl)  is  goob:  anb  our  lanb  fljall  veelb 
Ijermcreafc. 

j^ff         13  ffiigfltc 


\\Oryf. 

\\Or.wd' 
p/cajiJ. 


'Prjl.3*.I. 


|i  Or,lhcu 
haft  turned 
thtveanger 
fromveAxiiig 
hot. 


Dauid1 


sprayer 


pray 


Pfal 


mcs. 


in  a 


ffliftio 


n. 


\\0r,  dpr.tr- 
cr,  beings 
Pfalmre/ 
DaKid. 


\\Or.ane 
whom  tUoH 
fattoitrefl. 


\\Ort*Jltl,e 


"loci  1.1 ;. 


*Dcur;. 


'Deut.c*. 

4.and  J  2. 

i?-ifa.?7- 
I  6.  and  44. 
6  .mar.  I  J. 
*9.cphfl  4 
6.1  cor  8. 
4 

•Pfal-lj. 
j.  and  )  1  9. 
S3- 

\  Or.gr ah c- 
itrrtblc. 


* Drur    ;4. 
<5.nutn.  14. 
18.  pfal. 
:oj.8.aiid 
» Jp<4.and 
i<5.8. 


13  Kightcoufncs  (ball  go  bcfo:c  him: 
anOtbaUfrtvs  in  the  may  of  hisftcps. 

PSAL.    LXXXVI. 

1  Dauid  ftrcngthencth  His  prayer  by  the  con- 
fcienceot his  Religion,  s  by  thegoodneffe 
and  power  of  God.  11  He  dell reth  the  con- 
tinuance of  tormei  grace.  14  C  implavmng 
of  the  proud,  he  craucth  fome  token  ol  Gods 
goodnefle. 

C!l3tp?aycrof3f>auiU. 

£>inoomnc  thine  care, 
O  fLoiscshcarcme: 
f02  31  ampoojc^nccDv- 
z  02eferttr  my  foulc, 
foj^-mi'ihoiv^thou 
my  Gob  ,  fauc  thy  fcr* 
uaut,  that  trurtcthin  thec. 

3  2Se  merciful  bnto  mc,£>  JL02K:  fo2 
31  crv  liuto  thec  |i  Daav. 

4.  ftctoy  cc  the  fouic  of  thy  (truant : 
foz  Imtothcc  (£)  JLo?b)boc  3J  lift  up 
my  fotiie. 

5  *fo:  thou!Lojt)  irtgootuinorca 
by  to  foigitte :  ant  plenteous  m  mcrne 
muo  all  them  that  call  upon  thee. 

6  Gate  care  D  V.  o  e  d,  bnto  my 
pzaycr :  anb  attcub  to  the  Dolce  of  my 
(upplitanotis. 

7  3>l  the  bay  of  mv  trouble  3f  mill 
tall  bpon  thee:  fo;  thou Unit  aufiucrc 
ntec. 

s  3mong  the  gobs  there  is  none  Iifec 
tontothcc(£)!L02b:)*ncithcr  arc  there 
any  lbo.'Ucs  lUtc  unto  thy  mo2kcs. 

9  3lli  nations  mhom  thou  rjaQ 
mabc ,  fhail  come  anb  ttwflnp  befoze 
thee ,  <£>  JL02D  :  auo  (hall  glo;ific  thy 
i3ame. 

10  .fo2tl)OHartgrcat,anDt)ocftWjon- 
bcrotts  things :  *  thou  art  Gob  alone. 

11  *  Xcach  mc  thy  may  ,©1Lo  13  id, 
3)  Uffll  lbaiuc  in  thy  truerh :  unite  my 
heart  to  fcarc  thy  /Same. 

11  3)  IDUI  piaifc  thee ,  £>  ILojD  my 
Gob  ,mith  all  my  heart :  ano  J  mil  glo- 
rific  thy  jftamc  fen  cucrmojc . 

13  :f  0;  great  is  thy  mcrcv  tomarb  mc: 
aim  thou  haftbcliucrcbinv  foulcfrom 
the  lomcft  hell. 

14  5©  Gob  ,  the  pzoiib  are  nfen  a- 
gamft  nice,  ano  the  affcmblicsoHbio 
lent  men  hauc  fought  after  my  foulc : 
anb  hauc  not  fet  thee  befo:c  them. 

15  *25tIttl)0U,©lL02t),a"ac50btUlI 

of  compaffion ,  anb  gracious :  long  fuf 
fcrtng ,  anb  plenteous  in  mercy  m\i 
tructl). 


j  i6  £>turnctmtontc,  anb  hauc  mcr- 
ne upon  me,  giuc  thy  (rtcngth  Dttto  thy 
I  fcruant :  anb  (auc  the  fonn'c  of  thine 
hattbmaib. 

17  £>hcm  mc  a  token  fo2  goob ,  that 
i  they  lnhich  hate  mc  may  fee  it ,  anb  bee 
jafhamcb:  becaufc  thou,  fLoiSEshaQ 
holpctimc,atibcomfo2tcbmc. 

PSAL.    LXXXVII. 

1  The  nature  and  glory  of  the  Church.  4  The 
increafe,  honour  and  comfort  ol  the  mem- 
bers thereof. 

C  3  0faimc «  fong  1 1  foj  the  fonncs 
ofBozah. 

•^Js  founbatton  is  in  the 
'holymountamcs. 

x   Xhc  %  ©  m  ©  lo- 
i  ueth  the  gates  of  Zion  : 
W&3&  mo:e  then  all  the  olDcl 
lings  ot  Jlacob. 

3  Glozious  tljmgs  arc  fpoUcn  of 
thec,  £>  €inc  of  Gob.  5>eiah. 

4  3  mill  mafte  mention  of  Kaljab , 
anb  ffiabylou,  to  them  tljatbnoU)  nice, 
bcholb  0hiiifha,aiib  Xy2c,mitl;  cthio 
pia :  this  man  mas  bojnc  there. 

<>  3nbofzionitfhaibcraib,'irhis 
anb  that  man  mas  borne  in  her :  anb 
the  higheft  himfclfc  (hall  cftablifl)  her. 

6  Xhc  1L  <d  « 1?  fliall  count  mhen 
j  he  m2itcth  up  the  people :  that  this  man 
masbo2iic there.  S>clah. 

7  2s  mcl  the  fingers  as  the  players 
!  on  mftrumnus  (lull  bee  chere :  ail  my 
;fp2mgsaremthec. 

PSAL.    LXXXVI1I. 

A praver  contayning a  grieuous  complaint. 

C  2  fong  or  ^falmcllfojthefotmcsof 
Bowh,  to  the  clnefcfiI)ufinanbpon 
s33ahaiath  JLcannotrj,  ||  fl)3afchil  of 
ftcmaiithcC5rahitc. 
&±$x&  %  o  is  id  Gob  of  my  fal- 
uanon,3!  hauc  enebbay 
and  night  befoje  thec. 

2  fLctmyp2aycrcomc 
befoje  thec :  incline  thine 
care  unto  my  cry. 

3  _f  02  my  foulc  ts  full  of  troubles : 
anb  my  life  twaiDctt)  nigh  Pnto  tljc 
grauc. 

+  Ji  am  couutcb  mith  them  that  go 
bomucinto  the  pit :  3  am  as  a  man  dut 
hithnofrrcngth. 

<,  .free  among  the  beab  ,  like  tljc 
flainc  that  lie  m  tlic  grauc,  mijotn  thou 

remeiii 


\Or,of. 

||  Or,  A 

Plalmc  "' 
Hemx*li>e 

jiruSIton. 


Dauids  complaint.     Pfalmes. 


God: 


pow 


er. 


hand. 


\\  Or,  ait  the 
day. 


\\Or,z 

pfalme/^r 
Ethan  the 
Evahiie-, 
togttte  in- 
fmdlCon. 

^  Heh.ro 

generation 
andgenc- 
ration. 


tememtycftno  mojc :  anb  they  ace  cut 
off  ||  fcom  thyhanb. 

6  %hou  baft  lain  mc  in  the  lotbcft 
pit:  tnbatKencffcinthcbcepes. 

7  Xhy  Vomii  iteth  hatb  bpon  mc : 
ant)  thou  haft  afflicteb  me  ruitl)  all  thy 
tbaucs.  £>elah. 

8  Xhou  haft  putaibay  mine  acquaint 
tanee  fatrefrom  mcc:  thou  haftmabe 
mc  an  abomination  bnto  them:  iam 
(hut  top,  anb  3J  cannot  come  fo?th. 

9  ©inc  eye  moutneth  by  rcafon  of 
affliction,  %  ©  m  j»,3!  haue  cailcb  toaily 
bpon  thee :  31  haue  ttrctchcb  out  my 
Ijanbstontothee. 

io  i©iit  thou  nictb  tbonbets  to  the 
aeab  i  fyal  the  beau  anfe  and  pjaifc  fhec  < 
£>eiah. 

ii  <§>hailthyloumgfeiiibncfrcbcbc; 
daccb  in  the  grauc  t  or  thy  faithfulncflc 
uibeftructioiu 

n  £>hall  thy  itoonbcts  be  fenoitocn 
inthetoattte;  anb  thy  righteoufneffem 
thclanbof  fo?gctfnlncffei 

i}  25ut  tonto  thee  haue  3  ccicb,  £> 
ft©  is  id,  anb  m  the  morning  (hail  my 
pjaycrpmicntthcc. 

14.  ^©mp,U)hycafteftthouoffmy 
fouler  why  htbcft  thou  thy  face  from  me; 

15  3f  am  afflictcb  anb  reaby  to  bie, 
fcom  my  youth Dp:  while  3  differ  thy 
tcrrours,3i  ambtCractcb. 

i6  Xhy  fierce  \bjathgocth  owe  me: 
thy  terrours  haue  nit  mc  oft. 

17  %hey  came  rounb  about  mec 
IIDailytofce  water:  they  compauebmec 
about  together. 

is  fLoucc  anb  fetenb  haft  thou  put 
farce  fcom  me:  and  mine  acquaintance 
intoDat&enefTe. 

PSAL.    LXXXIX. 

ThePfalmift  praifethGodfor  his  couenanr, 
5  Forhiswonderfull  power,  15  For  the  care 
or  hb  Church,  ijForhis (auourtothe king- 
dome  of  Dauid.  38  Then  complaining  of 
contrary  euents,  46  He  expoftulateth,pray 
eth,.indblefTcthGod. 

C  HflMchiiof  €thanthee5rahitc. 
"  naillungofthc  mercies  of 
tlie  1L©m©fo?  cucr:  ttrith 
my  mouth  tbill  %  malic 
imoitoen  thyfaitljfuuicfTc 
„t  to  all  generations. 
2   5foz  3  haue  faiD,  ^crne  fljallbec 
bullttop  fouuer :  thyfaithfulncftcthait 
tljou  ertabliCh  in  the  toecy  Deauens. 
5  3  haue  mabe  a  coucnantlbith  my 


*  2.  Sam.  7. 
1 1, Sic. 

nerationiwd 
generation. 


chofen :  3J  Daue  *  froome  tonto  3Dauib 
myfecuant. 

4-  Xhyfcebtbni3lftablifhfo;teuer: 
anb  butlb  Dp  thy  th?one  t  to  all  genera- 
tions.  5>elah. 

5  3tnb  thefjeauens  (hail  p:aife  thy 
tbonbers,  £)  %  ©  is  © :  thy  faithfulnes 
alfo  m  the  congregation  of  the  faints. 

6  5Fo?tt»ljom  the  Deaucn  can  become 
patcb  bnto  the  ?L©is©;  who  among 
the  fonncs  of  the  mighttc  can  be  litteneb 
tonto  the  ^©  is©* 

7  (Sob  is  greatly  to  be  feareb  in  the 
affcmbly  of  the  &atnts :  anb  to  bee  hab 
tot  rcucrencc  of  all  them  that  are  about 
him. 

8  £D5L«DisiD<5obofhofts,  ibho 
baftrongfl.©  is  ©liltc  tonto  thee*02to 
thy  faithfulncflc  tounb  aboutthec  i 

9  -HCljoumlcft  the  raging  of  tlje  fea: 
When  the  ibaues  thereof  attCJc,  thou 
ttillcflthcm. 

10  f:houhaftb20fecn  Hiaahabm  pic^ 
ces,  as  one  that  is  flame :  thou  haft  feat 
tereb  tljtnc  enemies  t  ru'th  thy  fttong 
arme. 

11  *mhchetwnsarethine,theearth 
alfo  b  thine :  as  fiw  the  iDojlb  anb  the 
fulnes  thereof,  thouhatt  founbeb  them. 

n  1Ll)c/!3o?th  anb  tlje  j&outb,thou 
haft  createb  them :  Xabo?  anb  Sermon 
fljail  reioyce  in  thy  iI5ame. 

ij  Xhouhafitamightyacmc:ftrong 
is  tijy  hanb,  and  high  istl)y  right  Ijanb 

14.  3lufticc  anb  iubgement  are  the 
||  habitation  of  thy  tljjone:  mcrnc  anb 
tcuerhfl)allgocbcfo?ethyfacc. 

15  26lcu"cb  is  the  people  tljat  hnotbc 
the  *  ioyfull  founb :  they  (hall  tbalbe  j3D 
ILsdibid  in  tlje  ligljt  of  thy  countenance. 

16  3Jn tljy  name  fhall  they  teioyce  all 
thebay :  anb  in  thy  rightcoufnes  (hall 
tbeybcocaltcb. 

17  ifo?  tljou  art  tljeglojy  of  their 
ftrengti):  anbin  thyfauour  our  home 
thallbeeralteb. 

18  5fo?tljcl||[,€>is©isoucbcfence: 
anb  the  holy  £>nc  of^lfcael  is  ouc  bmg. 

19  Xljcn  thou  fpaucft  m  bifion  to  tljy 
Ijoly  one ,  anb  faibft,3J  haue  laio  heipe 
bpon  one  that  is  mightic:  gihaue  ccat 
tcboncchofcnoutofthcpcople. 

20  *3  haue  founb  Dauib  my  fee; 
uant :  vbitlj  my  holy  otic  haue  3  mttrtn* 
tebhinu  ,       _  „ . 

21  nmth  lhhomc  my  hano  fliail  bee 
eftabliftieb:  mine  arme  alfo  (hailftccng; 
then  him. 

22  Xhe  enemie  (hall  not  tract  bpon 

ifff  z him: 


Or,ESft. 

t  Heb.  vtUh 

theartmtrf 

thyfhength. 

•Gen.i.l. 

pfal.J4.i. 

pral.50.lt 


iTrmewilb 
might, 

\\Or,t!U- 
bhjhmeH\ 


•Num.io.6' 


II  Or,  our 
jhtcldtiof 

theLOKP, 
and  our  king 
ucftheboij 
One  of 
Ifrael. 


l.Ssm.iC 


God; 


promi 


fc 


es 


Pfal 


mes. 


madetoDauid. 


t  Hrb.prc- 
font  mtjla- 

IHttl, 


\Heb.IwiU 
tot  trukf 
voydfroni 
htm. 
tHrb.nbr. 


f  hfcb.  tfl 
lit. 
"Rom. 7. 

16. Liu  1 . 
j3.lohn.t2 


b  mi :  no?  ttj  c  Cottnc  of  rutehcon  t  fTc  afflict 
\)\nu 

13  anb^ttHllbratebotbnebisfocs 
bcfo;c  l)is  face  :ano  plague  them  that 
hate  htm. 

14  25ut  my  faitbrulnenc  anb  my 
merer  (baibe  tbitl)  btmanb  in  my  name 
fl)aut)isbomcbecralteb. 

15  3Jibillfctbisbanbaifontfbcfea: 
anb  his  tight  banb  in  the  riucts. 

is  $e  (hail  trie  bnto  mee,  Xbou  art 
my  father  :my  <£>ob,anb  the  rocae  of  my 
faluation. 

17  3ilfo  3  tbill  mabc  him  my  firft 
borne :  higher  then  the  bings  of  the 

earth-       * 

18  $9y  mercy  ibill  3  ftccpcfbjm'm 
foj  cuermo;e:ano  mv  coucnant  (ball 
ftanbfa&ibttbbim. 

19  UisfccDaifoU)tU3Imaftetoindure 

fo;  euer :  anb  his  fbjonc  as  the  bayes  of 
heauen. 

30  3Jf  his  cbilb;cn  fotfafte  mv  latte, 
anb  tbaltte  not  tn  my  uibgcmcnts  ■, 

ji  gjftbcytbjcaftcmyftatutes.anb 
feerpc  notmy  commanbements: 

31  Xbcn  ttnll  3f  bifite  their  tranfc 
gceflion  nut  I)  the  rob,  anb  their  mtqui 
tteibitbftrtpcs. 

33  /freuertbelefte,  my  louing  fctnb 
neflribtlllJnotbtiertytafecfrombtm: 
no;  t  foffer  my  faithfulntffe  t  to  fatle. 

34.  £0ycouenantibtll3Jnotb;tcafte: 
no;  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of 
myltppes. 

3<  £mte hauc  3f  froome  by  mpfjoli-- 
neffe ;  t  that  3J  tt»M  not  lye  bnto  2>auib. 

36  *  5?ts  fcebt  (hall  enbure  fo;  ener , 
anb  his  tbwnc  as  the  funne  befoje 
me. 

37  3t  (h.  albe  cftabltfbcb  to;  euer  as 
tbe£0oonc:ano  asafaitbfull  ttitnefle 
in  heauen.  <§>clab. 

3s  2iSut  tljou  haft  taft  off  anb  abho;- 
rco :  thou  haft  bene  nyotb  ibttb  thine 
anomtcb. 

39  Xbou  haft  mabe  boyb  the  cone* 
nantoftbyferuant:tboubaftp;ofancb 
biscrotbne,bycaftutgittotbegrounb. 

40  Xboubaftb;obcnbolbneallbis 
htbgts :  thou  haft  bjought  bisttrong 
bolbs  tontine. 

41  3ll  that  patTc  by  the  tt>ay,  fpoilr 
bun: bee  is  a  rcp;oacft  to  his  neigh- 
bours. 

41  Xboubaftfctbptbertgbtbanb 
ofbisaouerfancs:  thou  haft  mabeall 
bis  enemies  to  reioyec. 

43  Xhou  haftaifo  turncb  thcebgc 


ofbisfawb :anb  baft  not  mabc  him  to 
ftanbinthcbattailc. 

44  Xhou  haft  mabc  his  t  gio;yto 
ccafe :  anb  caft  bistb;oncbonme  to  the 
grounb. 

4^  Xbe  bayes  oftnsyoutbbafttbou 
(bo;tncb :  thou  haftcouctcb  bim  with 
Ujamc.  S>elah. 

46  $oib  long,  2,£>»3>,Mit  thou 
btbe  thy  felfe ,  fo;  euer  i  thai!  thy  tt>;atb 
burnelibefire* 

47  &cmemberhotbu>>;ttnytiinc 
ts:lbbcwfo;ebafttboumabeailtnentn 
barney 

48  ©hat  man  b  he  that  ituetr) ,  anb 
0)811  not  fee  bcatb  <  Hall  he  beliuer  his 
fouic  from  the  banb  of  the  graue  t 
S>clab. 

49  Ho;b ,  tbbere  arc  thy  former  lo* 
uing  tunbne(fts,which  tbou*lroarcft  bn- 
to 2Dauib  in  thy  tructb* 

50  aacmember  (?Lo;b)  tbcrcpioacfi 
of  thy  feruants:  howjf  Docbearem  my 
bofome  thcrcproache  of  ail  the  nugbtp 
people. 

5r  naberettttb  tlnrie  enemies  haue 
repjoacbeb ,  j©|L©»id  :  tbbmuntb 
they  haue  rep;oacbcbtbefoote  fttppes 
of  thine  annointeb. 

5t  JSlcflcb  be  the  !Lji!>iB©fo;etier* 
mow.amcn,  anbamea. 

P  S  A  L.    XC. 

1  Mofes  (ctring  foortli  Gods  promdence,  3 
complaineth ,  of  humane  fragility,  7  diuine 
chaffifemenu,  10  andbreuily  oflit'e.  it  He 
prayech  for  the  knowledge  and  fenciblc expe- 
rience of  Gods  good  prouidence. 

G  H3p;aycrof99ofcst&emanof(Sob. 
"~{Dfli ,  thou  haft  bene  our 
bibelung  plate  t  mall  gc^ 
nerations. 
i  25efo;e  the  moun* 
_  tamestbercb;oughttb;th. 
0;  euer  thou  babft  fonneo  the  earth 
anb  the  ibo;lb:euen  from  euertaftmg 
to  cuenaftingthon  an  <sob. 

3  Xhouturncftmantobeftruetion: 
anb  fayeft ,  Seturne  ycc  ehilb;en  of 
men. 

4  *5Fo;  a  thoufanb  ycctes  in  thy 
fight  are  but  as  ycfterbay  ||  ibhcn  it  is 
paft :  anb  as  a  lbatrh  m  the  night 

5  Xhourarnrntbcmamayasttiith 
afloob,  theyarcasa  fleepe:m  rhemo^ 
ning  they  arc  mt  grade  winch  ||groEbctb 


*i.Sam.7. 
'J- 


cT,bcing  a 
pfalmc^f 

t  Heb.inge- 

nerdtioii  and 
gencraticn. 


bp 


6  3ntbemomingitflounfl)«b,anb 
groibeth 


•j.Prt.2,8. 

||  Or.wbcii 
tie  hiitb  paf- 
fedthem. 


\\Oruchw 
ttcd. 


Mans  life  fliort.  Pfalmes.      Godsprouidencc. 


\Uebr.twr- 
ne.iav.tj. 

||  Or,  *  A 

meditation. 
\  Heir.  .11 
for  the  d.l]el 
efoHrjeeret, 
in  them  nre 
fetuntte 
jecrct. 


\Heb.CM[e 

to  come. 


\Hcl:Mgt 


grolUeth  Up  :  in  toe  cuctung  it  is  nit 
bottmcanbumhereth. 

7  ifojtbe arc confuincb  by  thine an 
gcr :  anb  by  thy  ityath  arc  iuc  troubles. 

8  Xhouhaftfctourmtcimttesbcfcnc 
tijee:  our  fecret  finncs  m  the  light  of  thy 
countenance. 

9  foi  all  our  capes  arc  t  paflcb  a- 
tbay  in  thy  Vbjath :  ibe  fpcnb  our  yccrcs 
yasataicthatistoid. 

io  \%i)t  bay  cs  of  our  per  cs  ate  thicc^ 
fcojeyecresanb  ten,  anbtfbyrcafonof 
ftccngtl)tl)cvbcfourefco?cvccrcs,vctis 
their  ftr  cngth  labour  anb  fojrotb :  fo?  it 
tsfoonc cut  off ,anb  tbc  flic  aiuay . 

ii  nahoBnoujeth  the  potber  of  thine 
anger j.  eucn  accojbing  to  ttjv  fwtc,  (bis 
thyuwath. 

n  <S>otcaehUstonumbcrourbaicS: 
rhatlbce  may  t  apply  our  hearts  Unto 
Ibifebome. 

13  3Returnc(£>1L©i3jD)l)o«)longi 
anb  let  it  repent  thee  concerning  thy 
fcruants. 

14  £)  fatiffic  Us  early  ibith  rt)v  met* 
tic :  that  ttic  may  reioyec,  anb  be  glab  all 
our  oayes. 

15  #aae  us  glab  aeco2bmg  to  the 

bayCS  *  herein  thOU  Daft  affllCtCb  PS :  and 

the  yecrcs  whet  cm  tbc  hauc  fcene  euil. 

i6  ?Lct  thy  Uwbc  appcarc  Unto  thy 
fcruants :  anb  tUv  glozy  Unto  their  ehtl- 
bjen. 

17  ^nbicttl)cbeauticoftljc1L€>iBjD 
our  ©ob  be  Upon  us.anbcftablifh  thou 
thcuwac  of  our  hanbs  Upon  Us :  yea, 
the  ibo,2B  of  our  hanbs  cftabltfb  thou  it. 

PS  AL.     XCI. 

1  The  fbte  of  the  godly.    5    Their  fatety.  9 
Their  habitation,     n    Their  feruants.    14 

Their  friend, with  the  effects  ol  them  all. 

CthatMUcllethinthcfc; 
cretplaccof  the  mofthigh: 
fl)au  tabibc  bnber  the  fya- 
boiboftheSUmighttc. 
x  3  lbill  fay  of  the 
|L£>isje>,  i?e  is  my  refuge,  anbmyfo?; 
treffe:  my  C5ob,m  him  lbill  3  truft. 

3  Purely  he  (hall  bcluter  thee  from 
the  mare  of  the  fouler:  and  from  the  noi 
fomepcfttlcncc. 

4.  $ee  (hail  conec  thee  ttutohtsfca 
thers,  anb  unbec  his  ttmigs  (halt  thou 
truft :  fits  trueth  (hail  bee  thy  (hicib  anb 
buc&ler, 

5  %\ym  (halt  not  bee  afraib  foj  the 
terrourby  night :  norfo:  thcarroibihat 
fuethbybay: 


6  Norfo;  the  pcfhlcntc  that  nmiBcth 
mtwirBncs:  noifoz  thcbcftruetlon,  that 
lUaftethatnoonebay. 

7  31  thoufanb  (hall  fall  at  thy  ftbc, 
anb  ten  thoufanb  at  thy  nght  hanb :  but 
it  (hall  not  come  nigh  thee. 

8  £mclyttuth  thine  eyes  (halt  thou 
beholb :  rj  fee  the  rciuarb  of  tl)e  ibicBcb. 

9  26ccaufc  thou  haft  mabe  the 
%  at)  a  js,  which  is  my  refuge,  euen  the 
mofti>>tgh,thy  habitation : 

10  Xhcrc  (hall  no  euill  befall  thee: 
neither  (hall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy 
Mbellmg. 

11  "jfozhec  fljau  giue  his  Angels 
charge  oucrthec:  to  Bccpc  thee  in  all 
thyuwes. 

iz  Xhcy  fl)aii  bcarc  thee  bp  m  thai 
hanbs :  icftthoti  ball)  thy  footagamft  a 
ftouc. 

1$  Xhou  (halt  tr  cab  upon  the  !L  ton, 
anb  liabbec:  the  yongjlion  anb  the  b?a? 
gon  fliait  thou  trample  Unbcrfcctc. 

14  2i5ecaufehehathfcthtsloueUpon 
mc,tf)ercf02ciuui5bcliucrhim:3itbii 
fet  him  on  high ,  becaufe  hce  hath 
bnoVbcnmyiI5ame. 

11  i?c  fliaii  can  upon  me,anb  %  tbill 
anfmcrc  him :  3  Wl"  bee  ^fth  h»m  m 
trouble ,  3J  lUill  beliuec  him ,  anb  ho-- 
nourhim. 

i6  iBith  tlong  life  tDflUfatifBc Ijim: 
anb  fl)ctb  htm  my  faluation. 

PSAL.    XCI  I. 

i  The  Prophet  cxhorteth  to  prai/e  God,  4 
for  his  great workes,  6  for n!s  judgements 
on  the  wicked,  10  and  for  his  goodueffe 
tothegodl 


'Meet.  4.6. 
!ukc4- 10. 


[{Or^lfe 


:alnteorfongfo;tthe 
Sabbath  bay. 
Xtsagoobthmgtogtue 
tljanBs  unto  the  %®w®, 
anb  to  Cmg  praifes  unto  thy 
/5amc,€>moft$?igh: 
1  xon)cvbfoo?ththy 
louing  Bmoucfle  in  the  morning :  anb 
thy  faithfulncffc  t  euecy  night : 

5  Upon  an  inftrument  of  tenne 
ftnngs,  anb  Upon  the  pfaltertc:  Upon 
thdlharpc  lUith  afolcmnc  fouub. 

4  fo?thou,?LoHE>,haftmabcme 
glab  thjough  thy  iuozbc  :  3  ttnll  tri- 
umph tn  the  IU02UCS  of  thy  Ijanbs. 

5  ^D  %  ©  «  © ,  ho\u  great  are  thy 
iUo?Ues  i  and  thy  thoughts  are  ue'ry 
bccpc. 

6  %  b2Uttfl)  man  buoiUcth  not :  net* 
thcr  boeth  a  foolc  unberftaub  thiS- 

f  ff  3      7  nshen 


■j"  Hcb  length 
tfdajtt. 


f  Heir,  in 
thoughts. 


\\Or,vpon 

thefoietnne 

found  ■wtth 

ibeharpe, 

He6r.H$- 

g&iQn* 


Gods  power.  Pfalmes.        Gods  correction. 


•Hofr.i^ 


^Hebqrtene 


\  Heb.fr  om 
then. 


fjftfcff 

length  of 
d-tja. 


\Htl>.Goi 
of  rcutnQct. 

f  Heb.fhxr.e 
forth. 


7  vd\)m  the  ttncbcb  fpnng  as  the 
gtaffcano  Ujljen  ailtbeVbojbets  of  uu* 

cuiiticbocflouri(b:.ii  tljatttjcpfbatlbe 
bcflropcbfoicucr. 

8  €25Uttl)0U,1L€)lBJE>)actinoft 

bigbfojeuermoje. 

9  iFO(tloc,t!)tnecncmics,€>!L©is©, 
foi  lot,  t lime  enemies  (ball  pcritb :  all 
tbemojfecrsof  iniquitpftalbcfcatttcb. 

io  26utmp  borne  (bait  tbou  eraitlibe 
the  home  of  an  bmcome :  3  fl)*lbe  anoin= 
tebibitbfceflioplc. 

1 1  fl^me  epe  aifo  (ball  fee  my  defire  on 
mine  enemies :  and  mme  earcs  (ball 
beare  my  defire  of  tt)e  XbicbcD  tt)at  nfe  Dp 
agafnflmc. 

n  *  Xlje  righteous  thai  flourift)  Ime 
the  paime  tree :  Ijce  (ball  grotte  uuc  a 
eebarinlLcbanon. 

i}  Xbofctbatbcpiantcbintbeboufc 
of  the  ft  ©is©,  (ball  flounft)  in  tf)c 
courts  of  our  (Pot). 

i4  Xbcplbai  mil  tying  fo?fb  fruit  in 
olb  age :  tbcp  (baibc  fat,  9 t  flouri(bing : 

1?  Xo  (hett)  that  theft©  is  jD'sbp; 
right:  fjec  is  mp  roebe,  anb  there  is  no 
bnrigbteoumeuc  in  bun. 

P  S  A  L.    XCIII. 

The  Maiei  tie,  Power,  and  Holinelie  of 
Chrifts  Kingdomc. 

~  $c  Hokid  retgnettj,  Deis 
clotbebtbitb^aicttie,  the 
%  ©  is  ©  is  clotbeb  Untb 
ftrcngtb,  wherewith  bee  batlj 
gtrbcb  bunfelfe :  the  ibo?lb  alfo  is  Gas 
blilbeb,  tbat  it  cannot  be  moueb. 

1  Xbp  ttyonc  is  cftablitbeb  tof  olb: 
tbouan  fromcucrlaftmg. 

j  %\>t  floobs  baue  lifteb  bp,  j© 
!L©  a  ©,tbe  floobs  bauchftcbbptbeir 
boitc :  tbc  floobs  lift  bp  their  ibaues. 

4.  Xbcfl^is©  on  high is  mightier 
tbcntbcnoife.of  manpibatcrs,  yea  then 
tbcmigbticibaitcs  of  tf)e&ea. 

5  Xbp  tcflimonics  arc  beep  fare: 
boltticfle  becommetb  tbine  boufe,  j© 
IL©is©,tfo2cucr. 

P  S  A  L.    XCIIII. 

The  Prophet  calling  for  luftice,  complaineth 
of  tyrannic  and  impietie.  8  Hee  teacheth 
Godsprouidence.  irHefhewcththeblefled- 
neffeof  atflicfhon.  16  God  is  the  defender  of 
the  afrlifted. 

'  *!  %  0  is  id  1 00b ,  to  ibbomc 
ibengcante  bclongctb  '  J© 
'.  00b  to  lbbome  bengeante 
,  bclongetb,  t  lbe\b  tbp  felfc. 


I  fLtftbptbpfelfe,tbouuibgeoftbc 
earth :  renberareibarbtotbcpjoub. 

3  ?L  ©K©,boib  long  (ball  tbc  Ibtc- 
hcb^boU)  long  (ball  ttjc  uncbeb  trfc 
urnpb*  - 

+  How  long  faaitbcvbtter^Ddfpeabe 
barb  things  *  and  all  tbelbDjBers  of  im 
cmitie  boaft  tbemfelucs  < 

<,  %$vi  tycabc  in  pieces  tbp  people, 
£>2,<dkjs>:  anb  afflict  tbtne  heritage. 

6  %tft?  flap  tbe  ttiibolbe  anb  tljc 
ftrangct :  anb  nnirbcr  t\}c  fatbcrlcfle. 

7  *^ettbcpfap,1i:belL«DaBD(ball 
not  fee :  neither  (balltbc  ®ob  of  3lacob 
regarbit. 

8  fllnbcrftanb ,  vce  tyutifo  among 
tbe  people:  anbyefoolcs,  ibbcnibrllpe 
beibife* 

9  *  $c  tbat  plantcb  tbe  earc,  (ball  be 
not  beatc?  be  tbat  fo?mcb  tlje  epe,  (ball 
Ijcnotfce  < 

10  $c  tbat  cbattifctb  tbc  heathen, 
(ball  not  be  correct  *  Ijcc  tbat  teacljetb 

manbllOlblCbgC,fhallnothe  know? 

I I  *  Xbe  %  tf>  k  j»  imotbetb  the 
tbougbtsof  man :  that  tbcp  arebanitic. 

ii  asicflcb  is  tbc  man  rbljome  tbou 
cbaflcneft,  j©  fL€>a©:anb  teaebefl 
hint  out  of  tbp  Uaib: 

13  Xbat  tbou  mapefl  giuc  bim  red 
fcomtbebapes  of  abucrfinc:  bntilltbe 
pitbcbiggebfoztbe  ibicbeb. 

14  :fo2tbcfl©m©n)illnotcaftoff 
bispeoplc:  neitber  lbill  be  fojfabc  bis 
inheritance. 

15  25ut  iubgement  (ball  tttnrne  bit* 
to  rigbteoufnefCe :  anb  all  the  bpngbt 
in  heart  t  (ball  follolb  it. 

i6  naboMl  rife  bpfo;  nice  agaitul 
tbe  euill  boers  i  or  vbbo  ibillflanbbp 
fo;  mc  agamfl  the  lboibcrs  of  inicuiitic* 

17  tlnlefTc  ttjefLfiDiaj©  had  bene  nip 
bclpe :  mp  foulc  Ijab  ||almoft  blbelt  m 
(Hence. 

18  nahcn1lfaib,^pfootcflippeth: 
tbp  mcrcic,  £>  %  ©  «  ©,  belb  mc  bp. 

19  5lntbemiiltitiibc  of  mp  thoughts 
lbitbm  mc ,  tljp  comfojts  bcligbt  mp 
foulc. 

io  &>haltbctbJoncof  iniciuiticbauc 
fcUoibtbip  Vbitb  thec :  lfbtjittj  frametb 
mUcbicfebpalatbei 

x\  Xbcp  gather  tbemfelucs  together 
agamfl  the  foulc  of  tbengbtcous :  anb 
ronbcnme  tbc  innocent  bloob. 

2i  25utthclL©KiDisnip  befciicc: 
anb  mp  eob  is  tbc  roebe  of  mp  refuge. 

23  3lnD  bec  fliaii  bung  bpon  them 
their  oumcinicuufie,  anb  (ball  cut  tftem 

off 


i«,i  J.  pro, 


*Exo.4.:i 


•i.Cor.j. 

20. 


httfurit. 


||  Or,  quick!; 


jGodsgreatnciTc,        Pfalmes. 


and  maieftie. 


t  Hrt.fr,- 
ttent  his  face. 


^Hei.m 

nhofe. 

\\Or,the 

hetghel  of 

thektllei>are 

hit. 

\Htb.Tphoft 

thefea  is. 


•Hrf.3.7. 
and  4.7. 
"Nam.  14. 
21.&C. 
t  Heh.  con- 
tention. 
*Elod.  17. 
Land  7. 


t/M.  <f 

they  enter 
two  rr.i  rcfl. 


'  I.  Chron 


I  off  m  their  olbne  lbic&ebnefle:  yea  the 
!jl«dihe5  ourcBobCbaiiruttljcmoff. 

P  S  A  L.    XCV. 

An  exhortation  to  praife  God,  5  for  his 
greatnefle,  6  and  foi  his  goodnefle,  8  And 
not  to  tempt  him. 

Comt  ,ltt  bs  Gng  bnto  the 
?L©kjd:1«  bs  mauca 
topfull  notfe  to  the  rotae 
of  out  faiuattom 
i  fLetbstcomc  befo;c 

\)is  pjclmcc  lbitb  thanbfgiumg :  anb 

niafec  a  topfull  uoifc  bnto  him  lbitb 

pfaltnes. 
j   5fo2tbe3L©iSiMagrcatC5ob: 

ano  a  great  ferns  about  ail  d5obS. 

4  tgjn  bis  banbarc  tljcuccpepia; 
tes  of  the  eattlj :  ||  the  ftreugfb  of  the 
billesisbisaifo. 

5  t  %\yt  fta  is  bis,anb  be  mabe  it:anb 
biSbanbsfo;!mebtbcb2p  lanb. 

6  jaDtome.lttbsiboztbipanbbolbe 
boibnc:  let  bs  ttncelc  before  the  ?,©&© 
ourmaUcr. 

7  5Fo2fjeisout<5ob,anbn)earetl)e 
ptoplc  offjis  pafhir  e ,  anb  the  (beepe  of 
hisbano  :  to  bap  if  vet  ibiUbeate  bis 
boyce, 

8  *  $arben  not  your  heart ,  *  as  m 
tbttpjouocatton :  anb  asm  the  bay  of 
*tcmptation,tn  tbclbilberneu'c : 

9  naben  vout  fathers  temptcb  me : 
pjoueb  mcanbfaibe  my  bwfte. 

10  jf  ojtle  yeeres  long  lbas  3  sne- 

neb  tbttl)  th  is  gen  ctatton :  anb  favb ,  3 1 
isapeoplctfjatboc  crtc  to  their  heart: 
anbtbcybaucnottrnoibcnmyibayes. 
ii  Slnto  lbbom  3  flbarc  in  nip 
ttwafh :  t  that  they  (boulb  notentct  in; 
to  my  reft 

p  s  a  l.  xevr. 

i  An  exhortation  to  praife  God,  4  for  his 
erearnelTe,  8  For  his  kiugdome,  11  For 
hisgenevall  Judgement. 

~  *  -Sung  bnto  tlje  %,  ©  is  p 
a  ncib  fong  :fmg  bnto  the 
?L  ©is  ©all  the  earth. 

a    &ing   bnto    tlje 
H©is?D,blc(rebtsnamc: 
0)tib  fojtb  bis  Caluation 
from  bay  to  bay. 

5  Declare  bis  glozy  amongtbebea; 
then :  bis  ttonbers  among  all  people. 

4  5Fo?  the  %  ©IB©  ^  gtcat,  ano 
greatly  to  be  p:aifeb:bccistobcfcatcb 
abouealieobs. 

5  if  02  all  tlje  gobs  of  tlje  nations  are 


moles:  but  tlje  fL©ias>  mabe  tlje  bca 
uens. 

6  honour  anb  matefhe  are  before 
film:  ttrengtbant)  beauty  are  m  bis  fan- 
ctuary. 

7  <5iuc  bnto  the  ?L  ©  is  s?  (£>  pee 
Suircbs  of  tlje  people: )  giuc  bnto  tlje 
%  ©  k  jd  gto2y  anb  (lr cugtlj. 

s  Oiucbnto  tlje  %  ©  is  id  fbcgiozy 
tdue  vnto bis  name:  bang  an  offering 
anb  tome  into  Ijis  courts. 

9  £)ll»02fl)ip  tljc?LoiRE>,  lltn  tlje 
beauticofljolinefrc:feate  before  Ijim  all 
the  earth. 

10  *£>ayamongrljcbcafben,thattbc 
!L©w©reignetlj  :tbeibo?lbalfo  (baibc 
ettabiifbeb  that  it  (ball  not  be  moueb : 
be  (ball  tubge  the  people  rtgbteoufly. 

11  |Lct  thehcauens  reioyce,  anb  let 
the  earth  be  glab :  let  the  fca  roare ,  ano 
the  fulneu"c  thereof. 

ii  net  the  ficlb  beto  j>full,anb  all  tljat 
I?  therein :  then  Ojail  ailtljetreesof  the 
lboobreloycc 

ij  25cfo2etljc1i©K©,  foJbeccom-- 
meth ,  fo?  Ijce  commctlj  to  lubgc  tlje 
earth :  bee  (ball  iubge  tlje  Vbonbibitlj 
ngbteoufneu'e,  anb  tlje  peoplclbitij  Ijis 
truetlj. 

P  S  A  L.  XCVII. 

1  The  Maiertie  of  Gods  kingdome.  7  The 
Church  reioyceth  at  Gods  judgements  vpon 
Idolaters.  10  An  exhortation  to  godlineffe 
andgladnelTe. 

"  ^cHLsaDHjD  raigneth ,  let 
the  earth  rctovte :  let  the 
t  multitubc  of  3lflcs  bee 
glab  thereof. 
i  Cloubs  ano  barbc; 
neffc  are  rounb  about  him  :  'rigljteouf- 
ncflc  anb  tubgementare  tljc||  habitati- 
on of  his  tljionc. 

3  %  fire  goeth  befoie  him :  aub  bur- 
ueth  bp  his  enemies  rounb  about. 

4  l?is  lightnings  mligbtncb  the 
\bo2ib :  the  earth  faibcaub  trcmblcb. 

5  Xbcbillesmcltcbli&clbatcatfbe 
pzefente  of  tlje  %  ©  is  jd  :  at  tlje  pjefente 
ofthclLo2boftlicibljolc  cartlj. 

6  %{\t  heauens  bctiarc  his  riglne 
otifncfrt:anbailthcpeoplcfcelnsglo:v. 

7  *€onfounbeb  be  all  rtirp  that  fcruc 
graucn  images ,  that  boatt  tljcmfelues 
of  ibolcs :  tt>02fl)ip  him  all  yec  gobs. 

8  Snon  Ijcarb  >  anb  lbas  glab ,  anb 
the  baugbttrs  of  SJubah  teioyteb  :bt= 
caufcoftbpuibgcmcnts,©  H©k©. 

9  jfo2tljou,?L©  is  ©,aitf)igh  about 

ail 


\Kel.ofht, 
name. 

\\0r,tnthe 

giortsusfar,- 

flfMTJ. 

*PraI.9;. 
I.&57'- 


t  He  b. mam, 
or ,  grlat 
Jflet. 
•Pl'al.Sy. 

\\Or,e/!a. 
bltfimtnt. 


'  Fxod.30. 
4.Lciut.  16 
1  .Dcut.5. 
8.Hcb.i.'«. 


God: 


power, 


Pfal 


mcs. 


and  £00 


)dnefTe. 


•Pfal.  34- 
Ij.amos  5. 
1  f  .roui.1  z. 
9- 


\\Or,loll)e 
memorial!. 


"Ifa-Si. 

10. 

lei. 


'Va.$,6. 


f  Htirjtv- 


all  tlje  earth :  thou  art  cralttb  farrta^ 
bout  all  gobs. 

10  * mt  that  font  trjt ll  o  is £>,hatt 
tuil  Ijtt  pjtfe rutth  the  foults  of  Ins 
Saints:  hccbeltucrett)  them  out  oftljc 
hanoofthelbict»eb. 

11  ILightisfolbeu  fo:  tilt  righteous: 
anb  giabneflt  fo?  trjt  bpnght  in  heart. 

u  33ttoyct  m  tljc  %  ©  is ©,  ycrigt)- 
tcous :  ano  gate  thantts  jjattlje  rcmeim 
b;jatictofhtsholinfflc. 

PSAL.    XCVIII. 

i  ThePlalnnrtexhorteththelewes,  4  theG^'n- 
ciles,   7  and  all  the  creatures  to  praiie  God. 

C2i0faimc. 
Sing  bnto  the  %  o  is  jd  a 
^#erb  fong ,  fo?  hce  hath 
bont  marutilous  things : 
f)is  right  banb ,  ano  hts 
Doiv  acme  hatb  gotttn 
bimthtbictont. 

i  *1Ll)t|LiDi3iDl)atfjmat)tBnott)tn 
hisfaluatton:  his  rigbtcoufneu"f  hath 
6ce  ||  openly  fljtibcb  tn  trjt  fight  of  the 
btatben. 

-,  J^ce  rjatlj  remtmbjcb  bis  merctt 
anDbistrittthtoibarb  tbchoute  of  3Jk 
rati:  all  tbt  ctros  of  tht  earth  baue  fttnt 
tbcfaiuanon  of  our  ©ob. 

4.  fl0aHc  a  topfull  noift  bnto  the 
!L  ©  k  © ,  an  tlit  tartl) :  matte  a  ioidd 
noift  ,anb  rcioyccanb  fuigpzatfe. 

5  Sing  bnto  the !L©i3©Ibitrj  the 
barpe :  limb  the  barpe,  anb  tbcbotcc  of 
a  pfaltnc. 

6  noitb  truniptts  anb  fotinb  of  tor- 
net  :  mane  a  topfull  noift  before  the 
ILoiiEMbtlsuig. 

7  lLctthefearoarc,anbtlnfulncftt 
thereof :  tljt  lbo;lb,anb  thcp  mat  bVbcll 
therein. 

s  %  ct  the  floobs  flap  iheu  hanbes : 
let  the  htllcs  be ioyfuii  together 

9  23cfo2etheILor;iD,*fo2hctonp 
mcthto  uibgc  the  earth :  lbitbrigbte- 
oufiicffcfbau  bee  uibgctheibozlb,  anb 
the  people  Vbith  equine. 

PSAL.    XCIX. 

i  The  Piophet  fcttint;  foorth  the  Kin^dome 
ot  G  o  Din  Zion,  5  cxhortethall.bvthe 
example  of  lorcfatheis  ,  to  woifliip  God 
at  his  holvHill. 

R££.^9p  lie  JLokp  raigntth,  let 
%f$  -K$  the  people  tremble :  he  fit 

f$>&     Vm  tCtl)   betwee:  c  tl)t    CllttU'- 

yJm  buns ,  let  the  earth  f  bee 
^■^uiooueb. 


i  Xbe  ft  ©  is  ib  is  gttat  in  mon : 
anb  ht u  high  about  all  ptoplt. 

3  JLet  tfjem  pjaift  tby  Sttat  anbttr- 
nblt/!5ame :  lorit  brjolp. 

4  XheBingsftrtngth  alfo  louttb 
iubgtment.tbou  boeft  cttabltflj  equine: 
thou  ejeecuteft  tubgtment  anb  rights 
oufncsmgjacob. 

5  Cjtait  yet  tlit  %  ©  is  id  our  ©ob, 
anb  }bo?tyipatfite  footBoolt :  foi  |i  he  ts 

holy. 

6  £0ofts  anb  3aron  among  his 
$nefts,anb  Samuel  among  them  that 
tall  topon  bisiSamc :  tbty  taiicbbpon 
the  fL  ©  is  ©,anb  ht  antotrtb  tljem. 

7  l^tfpafet bnto themtn tljetloubit 
pillar :  they  Btpt  his  Xtftimomts ,  anb 
tt)t  ©zbinantt  that  ijc  gaue  trjtm. 

8  Xfjouanfratrtblithtnt,j£)!L©K© 
our  oob :  thoutbaftaGobthatfo^ga- 
ucftthem,  though  thou  tooRcftbcngt; 
ante  of  their  mucntions. 

9  <£ralt  the  %  ©  is  id  our  (Sob ,  anb 
lbojftip  athisholy  htii:  fo?tl)t?L©is^ 
our  ©ob  is  holy. 

PSAL.   C. 

i    An  exhortation  to  piaife  God  cheerefully,    3 
forhisgreatnefTe,   4  and  for  his  power. 

C^^falmtofilpjatft. 
•^$&&r  *&c  a  l°vmll  noift  bnto 
atljt?lo2b,tallvtianbs. 

%   Strut  tht?l©iRi> 

vbith  glabnts:tomt  before 

hisp;efeuce  ibitlj  fmgtng. 

5   1&nomvcthatthelL©a©,httis 

(5ob,'t  is  he  thatftatfj  tuabt  bs,  anb  ||  not 

\be  our  femes :  ibet  art  his  ptoplt ,  anb 

thtfbteptofhispafturt. 

4  €nttr  into  his  gattslbitfitljanBD 
giuing,3"d  mto  his  Courts  Vbtthpzaift: 
bee  thauhfiill  bnto  him,  and  blctfc  his 
iBamt. 

5  5?o2thtH©t<iiDisgoob,rjiSmtrtp 

is  cucriaftmg:  anbljis  truetl)  tnburttlj 
t  to  all  generations. 

PSAL.    CI. 

Dauid  niaketh  a  vow  and  profelsion  ofgodlines. 

C3pfalincof2r>auib. 
*^flfe@5  03>U  fmg  of  fi!3crcir  anb 
^£m  Sr§*  JJuogemcnt :  bnto  thee, 
SPl  W  o  %  o  k  r  ,lbil  H  fmg. 
u^j  ^f    -   31  lbill  behaue  tnj> 
«3.ira?&S»  fclft  lbifciv  m  a  ptrfttt 
lbay\iDibbtnibtlt  thou  tome  bnto  me; 
5  lbilltbaiftc  lbithm  mv  houfe  ibith  a 
perfect  heart. 
3   3Jibillfctnotiincuebfhingbefo2c 

mine 


hcly. 


[Or.tkmktf- 

\Hclr.eU 
thtatrtb. 


\\Or,adhia 


\Htlr.f 
generation, 
/end  gtnCTA- 
tisn. 


\  Hei.thinA 

cfKelul. 


A 


prayer 


Pfal 


mes. 


oftheafflidcd. 


itheWAj. 


notbeeftt- 
bCflaL 


mine  ev« :  3  ftatc  the  lbojftc  of  them  I 
thattutneaifaC'c  (halnotclcauctome.  | 

4  %  fcotbarb  Dtart  Ojail  Depart, 
from  me,  3libill  not  ftnorbe  a  ibicacb 
perfon.  | 

5  oahofo  pziutlp  flanocrcth  his 
neighbour.him  ttnll  31  tut  off:  him  that 
hath  an  high  loose,  an&  a  proub  heart, 
IbiIlnot3Jfuffcr. 

6  £@mecpcs  (hailbe  bpon  the  faitl> 
full  ofrtjc  lant) ,  tijat  thep  map  btbell 

\\or,f«fia  lanrtjme:  I)c tl)at ibaibctt) Hmapccfcct 
tbap,  hcthallfcrucme. 

7  f^cthatibotficth  Deceit,  fhailnot 
DttJCllibtthinrnphoufe:  he  thattclleth 
lies  t  (ball  not  tane  in  my  figfjt. 

s  3  ibill  carelpbettcop all  the  tbip 
beo  ofthc  lanb :  that  31  map  nit  off  all 
tbit&cb  bocrs  from  t|)c  citic  of  tfje 
ILcubjd. 

PSAL.   CII. 

i  The  Prophet  in  his  prayer  maketh  a  grieuous 
complaint,  it  He  taketh  comfort  intheeter- 
nitie  and  mercie  of  God.  lS  The  mercies  ot 
God  are  to  be  recorded.  13  Hefuftaincth  his 
weakenefTe  by  the  vnchangeablenes  of  God. 


\\Orfr. 


Or,(  at 
prmcrcade') 

intofmii^f. 


Or,fcH. 


*Eh.40.6. 
fam.i.io. 


C^prapcr  ||  of  the  afflictcbtbhen  he  is 
oucrvbhclmcb,  anb  polbrcfh  out 
his  complaint  bcfo;eti)c1L<aDBjE». 
£aremppraper,4D?Uim©: 
anb  let  mp  trie  tome  bnto 
tfjec. 

2  $ibe  not  thp  face  from 
me  in  the  bap  when  3  am  in 
trouble,  incline  thine  care  bnto  me :  m 
thebap  when  3  tall,  anftucrc  mee  fpec* 
btlp. 

$  iformpbapes  arc  tonfunteb  ||K6e 
fmouc :  anb  tup  bones  arc  burnt  as  an 
hearth. 

4.  fiJDp  heart  isfmittcn,  anb  ttrtn> 
rcbliftegcau"e:  fo  tljat  3»  forget  to  catc 
mpbreab. 

5  aspreafonoffheboiecofmpgro* 
ning,  mp  bones  clcauc  to  mpllf&innc. 

6  3  am  Ufec  a  pelican  of  the  fliilbets 
nes :  3  am  line  an  oiblc  of  the  btfert. 

7  3  ruatcfj,  anb  am  as  a  fparoVbc 
aionebponfhchoufctop. 

8  39tne  enemies  rcproeh  mc all  the 
bap:  and  tftept^atarcmabagainftme, 
aretoomeagatnftmc. 

9  5for3haueeatcna(bcsii&ebreab: 
anb  mingleb  mpbrinbc  tutthtbeepin:;. 

10  25ccaufc  of  thine  utbignation  anb 
thpibrat!) :  for  thou  haft  lifteb  mc  bp, 
anbtaftmcbotbnc 

11  *^pbapcsarciotcafl)abolb,that 


bctlmctt) :  f  3  am  ttnthcreb  UUe  grade. 

12  25ut  thou,  j©fL©i33D,  (halt  en* 
bucc  fb?  euec :  anb  thp  remembrance 
bnto  all  generations. 

15  Xhou(haitarifc,andhaucmcrctc 
bpon  Zion :  fo?  the  time  to  fauour  her, 
pea  the  fct  time  is  tome. 

14  5rorthpferuantstat$cpleafurein 
her  (tones :  anb  fauour  the  bull  thctof. 

15  £>o  the  heathen  (ball  fearc  the 
j|3amc  of  the  He>  ir  s> :  anb  all  the 
lungs  of  tfjt  cartrj  tbp  glorp. 

16  naben  the  fL^iajD  (ball  builbbp 
Zion :  he  (l)all  appcarc  in  bis  glorp. 

17  ^cibillregarb  the  prapcr  of  tlje 
bcltitute,  anb  not  befpifc  tbeir  prapcr. 

18  lEtns  (ball  be  Vbntteu  for  the  gc; 
ncration  to  tome :  anb  the  people  ibbicb 
fljau  be  trcateb,fbali  praifc  tlje  ?Lok©. 

19  iforbecbanjIooBcbbotbncfrom 
the  height  of  his  S>anetuaric :  from 
bcaucn  bib  the  #,©11  p  bcholbc  tlje 
earth: 

20  %o  heare  the  gronmg  of  the  pri* 
foner :  to  loofctthofc  that  are  appoint 
tcbtobcath: 

21  %o  bcelare  the  jBamc  of  the 
1L  ©  is  jd  in  Zion :  anb  bis  praifc  in  3ie* 
tufaicm: 

xx  ©hen  the  people  arc  gatberebto* 
gcthct :  anbthefetngboiucstofcruethe 

S»SD1S©. 

2}  ^etibeaftencbmpflccngthinthe 
ibap :  he  fhotfeneb  njpbapes. 

xAg.  3  faib,€>  mp  C5ob,tat$c  menota^ 
tbap  m  the  mibft  of mpbapes:  thp  peces 
arc  throughout  all  generations. 

z5  *tf)f  olb  haft  thou  laib  the  foun* 
bation  of  the  earth :  anb  the  heauens 
are  the  tborfce  of  thp  hanbs. 

x6  iChepChallperiCh,  but  thou  (halt 
tmburcpea  an  of  them  (hail  lbare  olb 
lifee  a  garment:  asabefture  (halt  thou 
change  them,  anbthcpfliaibcehangcb. 

17  25ut  thou  art  the  fame :  anb  thp 
peetcsfhailhaucnocnb. 

28 1Chcchtlb?enof  thpfcruantsfljai 
tontinue :  anb  their  fecb  (hall  be  citable 
(heb  before  thee. 

PSAL.    cur. 

1   An  exhortation  to  blcfTe  God  for  his  mercie, 
15  And  for  the  conftancie  thereof. 
irAPfalmeOfDaiUD. 

?Lcffe  the  %  €>  e  ©,  £>  mp 
foulc :  anb  all  that  is  rbithm 
me,biefrehisholpil5ame. 

2   2SleU"Ctl)C!LfiDlBJD,£> 

mp  foulc :  %  forget  not  all  his  benefits. 

3  «©ho 


Heb.tl,? 
childrtn  of 
dfjcb, 


Ulri.aflll- 
Bid. 


'Hcb.i.io 


tHii.Jlj*J 


God< 


s^reatmercie: 


Pfal 


mcs. 


H 


IS 


*Exod.;4. 

7.dcut.J4-tf 

nnm.i4.1S 

nehc.9.17. 

pf3J.86.iy. 

ier.33.lS. 

\Heb. great 

ofmercie. 


\Heh. accor- 
ding to  the 
height  eft  he 
heanen. 


tHrf.J 


"Dcut.7.p. 


\  Heo.migh- 
lymjlrcrt'th 


3  B3ljofo?giucth  all  thine  unciutties: 
ibho  Ijcaicfh  all  thy  bifeafes. 

4.  nahorebeemcth  thy  life  from  bc= 
ftrucfton :  U)l)o  crottmctlj  thcclPith  lo- 
tung  fembneffe  anti  tenber  merries. 

5  ©1)0  fattfiictb  tljv  mouth  ibith 
goob  things  :fo  that  thy  youth  is  renelp; 
cDltBethc  eagles. 

6  Xlje  IU>is©  etceutefh righteous 
ntfTc :  anb  tubgement  fo?  all  that  arc 
opp?cffcb. 

7  ^cmabetmolPcnhisibaycsbn; 
to  £0ofes : his actcsbnto  the  chtlb?en  of 
3Jfracl. 

8  *  5Ihe  %  &  is  ©  is  mcrcifull  ano 
gractous:  floib  to  anger,  anb  tpicntc- 
ousmmcrey. 

9  $cc  iPtll  not  aiibaycs  cljitjc :  net 
rheribillhcRccpc  his  anger  fo?cucr. 

10  $cc  hath  not  bcait  ibith  PS  after 
ourfiuncs:  no?rcrParbcbbs  aeco?bmg 
ro  our  iniquities. 

11  5fo?tasthchcaucniShighaboue 
the  earth :  fo  great  ishis  mercy  totbarb 
thcmthatfcarchim. 

ii  3ls  farrc  as  the  eaft  is  front  tljjc 
melt :  fo  farrc  hat!)  Dec  rcmooucb  our 
tranfgrctuonsfroin  PS. 

13  fLtRc  as  a  father  pittcth  his  thifc 
b?cn :  fo  tl)c  %  <©  is  ©  pittcth  them  that 
ftarcfjint. 

14  5Fo?hclmoVbetl)  our  frame :  I)cc 
rcmcmb?cth  that  lbc  arc  Dull. 

15  3s  fo?  man ,  his  oaves  are  as 
gran"c:asaflott)Ctoftl)cnclD,fol)eflou' 
rttheth. 

16  itothcttuubepafleth  oucrit,anb 
t  it  is  gone  ■,  anb  the  place  thereof  (hall 
tmolPitnomo?c. 

17  lout  tilt  mercy  of  the  %  ©  is  id  is 
from  cucrlaOmg  to  cucrlalhng  Ppon 
them  tljat  fcare  him:  anb  his  tigljtcouf- 
neflc  Pino  cbtlb?cnsehUb?cn : 

18  *  %o  fuel)  as  Kccpc  his  touenant : 
ano  to  tl)ofc  tljat  remember  his  com- 
manbcmcntstoboctljcm. 

19  %l)t  %  o  is  id  Daft)  p?cparcb  his 
th?oncm  the  heauens :  anb  l)is  King* 
bomeruicthoucrall. 

20  2SlcCTc  the  %  o  IB  ©ycc  l)»s  ISxv 
gels,  t  that  crcell  m  ftrengtluhat  bo  Ins 
tommanbements  :  hcarKcnuig  Pnto 
tljePoiccofhisibo?b. 

zi  zsicffcyc  tl)c  % ©is©ail  ycchis 
boftcs:  yeuuntfrcrsof  his  tljat boc  his 
plcafurc. 

%%  iSlcfle  the  Hois©  aiihtS\Po?KS 
m  all  places  of  his  bommion :  PlcfTcthc 
Hois©,  iDmyfoulc. 


pow 


er. 


P  S  A  L.     CI  I II. 

1  Ameditationvponthemightypouer,  7  and 
wouderfull  prouidence  ot  God.  31  Gods 
glory  is  eternal].  53  The  Prophet  voweth 
perpetually  ropiaifeGod. 

?Lcu"cthc?lOK©,iDmy 
foule,£)3l£>is©my  ©ob, 
tljouartPcrygrcatifljou 
art  clothcu  lbtth  honour 
..anbmatcOie. 
z  naijo  coucrctt  thy  feifc  ipulj  light, 
as  with  a  garment:  lbho  ftrctcheft  out 
the  heauens  line  a  curtame. 

j  naho  laycth  the  beames  of  ins 
chambers  in  the  lbatcrs ,  lbho  maitcth 
the  tloubcs  his  charet:  VPho  lbaibcth 
Ppon  the  ttimgs  of  the  lbinb. 

4  *n9homabcthhis3lngclsfpiritS: 
his  mintttcrs  a  flaming  fire. 

5  tieho  laib  the  founbations  of  the 
earth:  that  it  fljoulb  not  be  rcmouebfo? 
cner. 

6  'Ihou  coucrebfl  it  Ibith  the  bcepe 
as  with  a  garment:  thevpaters  floob  a^ 
boucthemountaincs. 

7  3t  thv  rcbuUc  they  fleb :  at  the 
Polcc  of  thv  thunber  thev  haftcb  aibap. 

8  |j Xhcv  go  bp  by th e mountames : 
they  goc  boibnc  bp  the  baileys  pnto  the 
place  lbhich  rljouhafl  founbeb  fo?  them. 

9  1Chou  hatt  fct  a  bounb  that  tljcp 
may  no  t  paflc  oucr :  tljat  they  turnc  not 
againcto  eoucrthceatth. 

10  t  ^e  fenbeth  the  fpiings  mto  the 
Pailcys:  which  trunne  among  rljc  Ijilles. 

11  1Thcy  giuc  bnnbe  to  cuery  bead 
of  thcficlb :  the  UMb  aflrst  quench  tljcir 

12  26y  them  (hall  the  foulcs  of  the 
hcaucn  hauc  their  habitation :  which 
t  ting  among  the  b:anehes. 

13  ^c  lbatcreth  the  hiiics  from  his 
chambers :  the  earth  is  fatifficb  ibith 
tljc  fruit  of  thyibOiiUcs. 

14  ^ccaufeththcgraflctogrotbfo? 
tljc  cattell ,  anb  hcrbc  fo?  the  fcruice  of 
man :  *  tljathcmay  pang  fo?tIj  foob  out 
of  tljc  earth: 

15  3nb  vpitic  thatmafteth  glab  tlje 
heart  of  man,anb  t  oilc  to  matte  his  face 
to  fliinc:  anb  tycabwhichftrcngthcncth 
mans  heart. 

i6  Shctrccsof  thcH©is©arefull 
of /appe:  tljcccbars  of  ^Lebanon  lbhtch 
Ijchathplantcb. 

17  nshcretljc  birbsmaUc  their  nefts: 
as  fo?  tljc  4>to?Uc,thcnrrc  trees  au  her 


•Hcb.1.7 


t  Htbr.be 
hath  foun- 
ded the 
earth  vpon 
htr  bafts 


\\Orttht 

mount4%net 
afcendy  the 
".•alleys  ds- 
fcend. 


I  Hebr.vrho 
fendeth. 

|  Heb.beak 


I  Heb.  gift* 
a  vmfi 


*  Ioflip.  t  5 


\Hebr,t3 
maks  "u 
facefhine 
with  oy!e~, 
or  mere  the* 
fy/e. 


Ijoufc. 


18  1ChC 


trafts  there- 
of dee  tr.tm- 
tlecnlhe 
forrtst* 


Godswifedome,        Pfalmes.  andprouidence. 


fHrl.for 
mid, 

•Pfal. 
'5- 


AS- 


\H€b.Jb<Jii 


18  Xhebic  tjillcsjrc  a  refuge  fr>2  the 
lbilbe  goatcsiand  the  roc&cs  fo:  tljc 
conies. 

19  *?e  appomteD  the  moone  fo?  fca- 
tons ,  the  funne  hnomcth  his  going 
Doibnc. 

20  XhOumaRc(tbatUncu"e,anb  it  is 
night :  mbcrcm  t  all  the  beads  of  tljc 
fojrcftboccrccpe  forth. 

21  ILhc  young  Ivons  roarc  after 
their  p?ay :  anb  fcctic  their  meatc  from 
con. 

ii  Xhc  funnc  arifeth ,  they  gather 
themuiucs  together  :  anb  lap  them 
boYbncm  their  behncs. 

23  £Jj)angocthfoitbbnto  DisilioiUc: 
anb  to  his  labour,  bntill  the  cucniug. 

24  i)ILffii)?,  lioib  manifolb  arc 
thy  ID02UCS  !  in  lbifebome  baft  thou 
mabc  them  all :  the  earth  is  rail  of  thy 
riches. 

25  So  is  this  great  aim  ibibc  £>ea, 
lbberctn  are  things  creeping  mnumc- 
rablc :  both  fmall  aim  great  beads. 

26  XlKrC  gOC  thC  fntppCS  ;  there  is 

that2Leuiathan,wliom  thou  haft  t  mabc 
to  play  therein. 

27  *Xberctt)atteallbpontbee:tbat 
thou  mayeft  gmc  them  tljetr  mcatc  in 
buefcafon. 

28  Xhat thoitgiuclt them, thcr ga- 
ther :  thou  opened  thine  batm,  they  arc 

fillebibitbgoob. 

29  Xhou  btbcftfby  face,  thep  arc 

troublcb,tboutaRcftaibay  their  bjcatb, 
they  bie :  aim  rcturnc  to  their  bud. 

30  Xhou  fcnbcll  fouh  tin'  fpint, 
the?  are  crcatcb :  anb  thou  rcnclbefr  the 

face  of  the  earth. 

31  1H)eglo2yofthc!Loi53©tfbaii 

cnbure  foz  cuer  :  the  3L  o  is  ©  (hall  re 
toyccinhlsmo2Rcs. 

32  tyce  lootictb  on  the  earth ,  anb  it 
trcmblcth  >bc  toucljctb  the  bUlcs ,  anb 
tbcyftiioKc. 

33  3  mill  fina  bnto  tl)e  %  ■£>  h  v  as 
long  as  3  liuc :  3  mill  fing  piaifc  to  my 
C5ob,U)hile  3  hauc  my  being. 

34  £9y  mebitanon  of  him  fljalbc 
fibcete :  3  mill  be  glab  in  tbe?L  €>  ik  e\ 

35  Jlct  the  tinners  be  confumeb  out 
of  the  earth  ,  anblcttbcibicRcbbccno 
mote : bleffc  thou  the  Hdhp,£5 my 
foule.  j&aiTcyeetheJLoisi?. 

P  S  A  L.  CV. 

I    An  exhortation  to  puile  God  ,  and  to  fecke 
outhiswoikes.   7  The  fiery  of  Gods  prou;- 


'  I.Chron. 
l6.S.Efiy. 
11.4. 


dence  ouer  Abraham,  16  Oucrlofeph,  13 
Ouer  Iacob  in  Egypt,  16  Ouer  Moles  de!i- 
ueiingtheHraelites,  37  Ouer  the  Ifraelites 
brought  out  of  Egypr,  fed  in  [he  wildemelTe, 
and  planted  in  Canaan. 

Oiuc  *  fbanucs  bnto  the 
!LoisjD,call  bpon  his  name: 
malic  luiomcu  bis  beebs  a 
moiigthc  people. 
2    -Sung  bnto  him ,  fing 
pfalmes  bnto  him :  tal&c  pec  of  all  his 
monbiousmoifecs. 

3  <3l02v  ycc  m  his  holy  name :  let 
the  heart  of  them  rcioyre,  tljatfecue  tljc 

4-  £>ecRc  the  3L<dhbs  aim  his 
ttrcngth :  feeKe  his  face  cucrmoie. 

5  Kemcmbcr  his  marticllous 
mo2Bcs,  that  bee  hath  bone:  hismon 
Dcrs,aub  the  uibgcmcnts  of  his  mouth , 

6  £>  ycc  feebe  of  atoaham  his  fer 
uant:yrccbilb2cuof3facobbiscbofcn. 

7  i?e>sthc  1L®kv>  otir<Sob:bi£ 
uibgcmcnts  are  m  all  the  earth. 

8  V)t  l;ath  rcmembjcb his coucnant 
fo2  eucr :  the  ibo2b  which  ije  commaubcb 
to  a  thoufaim  generations. 

9  *n3l)it!)  couenamhcmabemith^- 
toaham,  aim  his  oath  bnto  3Jfaac : 

10  3tnb  coufirmcb  the  tame  bnto  _ 
3facob  fo.2  a  lam  :  and  to  ^fracl  for  an  !"<*■«•'■  7 
ciicrialhngcoucnant:  I  IG& ,: 

11  *  having, 5:into  thee  mill  3Jginc  LI    s' 
the  laim  of  Canaan :  t  tljc  lot  of  pour  in  1 1  "• 
Ijcritance. 

11  naben  they  merest  a  fern  men  In 
number:  y  ca  bcry  frtb,ri  ftrangers  in  it. 

13  nubcntbeyibentfromonenation 
to  another :  from  one  aingbome  to  ano- 
ther people. 

1+  V)t  fuffreb  no  man  to  bocthem 
m2ong :  yea  he  rcp.2oucb  lungs  fo?  their 
faUcs: 

15  Saying,  1Eotici)notnuncanoiiiteb . 
aim  boe  my  ^ophcts  no  Ijarme. 

16  fl3o2coucr  hcetailebfo;  a  famine 
bpon  the  lanb:  ljcb2aKc  tljc  mhole  fraffc 
ofbuab. 

17  i)ee  fcut  a  man  befou  rlicni:  *wn 
3iofcph,who  mas  folb  fozafcruant. 

18  *  rehofc  fcetc  tlitv  hurt  ibith  fet- 
ters :  t  he  masiayb  m  iron. 

19  Until!  the  rune  that  his  lb02b 
came:  the  mom  of  tljc  ILoisjd  tneb 
him. 

20  *3CheHing  Tent  anbloofcbhim : 
ei.cn  the  ruler  of  tljc  people ,  atib  let  hfm 
goefree. 

21  *  i^ce  mabc  Ijim  lom  of  Ijis  Ijoufe : 

anb 


*Gcn  17. 
2.&22.16. 
and  26. 3. 
&  38. JJ. 
Sc ;  5.1  r. 
Luc.i.7,73 


corUe. 


•Ccn.;7. 

jS. 

"Gcn.ip 

:o, 

jHeb.l.,! 

fbuiec.tmc 

tutor  rat. 


Gen. 41. 
4 


*Gen.4i. 
40. 


Plagues  ofEgypt.      Pfalmes.  Confeffionoffinncs. 

\Hih.poT-     ^nhriilcrftf.-illhie'trithl>st*r<».  R^nttl  inu  '  and  flt«  rlmfrll  ^^llfll  t  nl.ltl-  tHrh,;\. 


\Hrh.f,f- 
fifio, 


•Gene.  4<?. 


Exod.  I. 


•Exod.% 

10. 

"  Exod.  7. 
o. 

ofhUfcntt. 
•Exod.  10. 


'  Exod.  7. 
20. 

'Exod.S.rJ. 

•  Fxod  R. 
17.  and  24. 

"Exod.o. 

t  Fftlr.  he 
vame  their 
rMne,  KaUe, 


•Exod.  10. 

4- 


"Exod.  12. 
•■9- 

•Exod.  12. 
:*■ 

■Exod.l :. 


•Exod.ij. 
Jr. 

'Exod  16. 


'Exr.,1  |-\ 

rS.num.io. 
11. 1. cor. 
re.,. 


anb  ruler  of  all  his  ffubltarac: 

2  %o  binbe  htspjmtcs  at  his  pica 
fare :  anb  lead)  his  £>enatours  ilufc-. 
Dome. 

1  j  *  3Jftael  Alfo  tame  into  «cjrvpt : 
anb  3Jatob  foiourncb  m  tl)c  lanb  of 
??am. 

24  3lnb  hec  ittcrcafcb  his  people 
greatly:  anb  mabt  them Itrongcr then 
their  enemies. 

25  *^c  turncb  time  heart  to  hate  his 
people :  to  beale  fubtiliv  with  his  fc£ 
uants. 

2  6  'V)cc  fent  fipofes  his  fcruant :  and 
^aron  whom  l)c  Dab  thofen. 

27  *  Xhcp  flicibcb  Ins  tfigttes  a 
mong  them:  anb  wonbers  m  the  lanb 
offtam. 

2S  "ficcfcntbarUncvTc,  anbmabcit 
barUc:atibthcprcbcllebnotagauilthts 
Wo2b. 

29  *  ftcc  turncb  their  waters  into 
bloob:  anb  flew  their  ful). 

30  *  Xhc  lanb  bjought  foonh  frogs 
m  abttnbaucc :  in  the  chambers  of  their 
lungs. 

ji  *  l>e  fpauc ,  anb  there  tame  bluets 
tons  of  flics :  and  hccui  all  their  coaQs. 

32  *t$ttgaiie  thcnihaticfoztainc: 
indflamingnrcin  their  lanb. 

33  ?>cc  fmotc  their  times  alfo ,  anb ; 
their  figgc  trees :  anb  b2ahc  the  trees  of, 
tljeir  coafles. 

3+  *  V)t  fpaiicanb  the  lottiQseamc : 
anb  catterpuiers  ,  anb  that  Without 
number, 

35  3ub  bib  eate  bp  all  the  herbes  in 
their  lanb :  anb  bcuourcb  the  fruttc  of 
rlicir  grouuo. 

36  -lice  fmotc  alfo  all  the  Rett  borne 
in  their  lanb  :  the  thicfe  of  all  their 
fttength. 

37  *  toee  biought  them  foozth  alfo 
With  filucr  anbgolbtanb  there  was  not 
oncfceblcpcrfouamongthtirtribcs. 

38  *<£gvpt  was  giab  when  thep  be- 
parteb :  foi  tljc  fcarc  of  them  fell  bpou 
them. 

39  *  $?c  fp^cab  a  tioub  fo:  a  tottering: 
anb  fire  to  gme  light  m  the  night. 

40  *The  people  afltcb,  anb  he  brought 
ntiailcs :  anb  fatilneD  them  with  the 
bjcabofheaucn. 

41  'lie  opencb  the  rotlic.anb  the  ma 
tcrs  gudicb  out :  they  ramie  m  tljc  biy 
plates  like  ariuec. 

42  ;f  02  he  rcmcnib:cb  his  (jolypzo- 
mifc :  and  3tb:ahamhis  fcniant. 

43  3nb  lie  brought  fojth  his people 


With  top :  and  ijis  thofen  With *  giab- 
tieffc : 

44  *3uibgatiethcmthcianbsofthc 
heathen :  anb  they  inhenteb  the  labour 
of  tljc  people : 

4<>  Hhat  the?  mtght  obferue  his 
ftatutcs,  anb  Uccpc  his  JLaWcs.  #;aifc 
pcthc^Lois©. 

P  S  A  L.    cvr. 

1  ThcPfalmiftexhorteduopraileGod.  4  He 
praveth  lor  pardon  off  mne ,  as  God  did  with 
die  fathers.  7  The  I lorieot  the  peoples  re- 
bellion, and  Gods  mercie.  47  Hee  conclu- 
ded! with  prayer,  andpraile. 

t£aifCpCthC!L5lT>:l3?D. 

€>*gutethatiitcst>nto 

thC?L0H5D,fO2hti5 

goob  :  foj  his  mcrric 

eiidurethfo^euer. 

2  *j©ho  tan  btter 
themightpattsofthe 


3Li©ie©<  who  tan  fhtWfoo?th  all  his 
pzaifct- 

3  asicffcb  ire  they  that  Uecpc  inbgc 
nicnt:andi)cthatbocthnghteourneu"e 
at  all  times. 

4  3Scmcinbermc,€)1L0i3iD,U)ith 

thcfailOUr  thanhou  beared  vnto  tl)p  ptO' 

pic:  fiDbtfttc  me  lbith  thpfaluation : 

5  Xhat  3J  map  fee  tljc  goob  of  thp 
thofen ,  that  J>  map  r cioyce  in  the  giab 
iieffc  of  thp  nation :  that3Jmapgi02p 
ibiththmcinheritante. 

6  *  tt)ec  haue  ftnncb  \bith  our  fa 
thers:  lbc  haue  tonumttcb  uuquitie,Vbe 
haue  bone  ibitbcblp. 

7  )©ur  fathers bnberfloob  not  tljp 
\bonbers  in  <£gppt ,  thep  rcmcmbieb 
not  the  multitubc  of  thv  merries :  *  but 
pjouoiicb  hun  at  tl;c  fea ,  euen  at  the 
3Kebfea. 

3  ^cuerthcleCTehcc  faticb  themfoj 
his  /Panics  falic :  thathec  might  ma&e 
Ijis  mighr\> poiber  to  be  Unoibni. 

9  l)erebul«bthe£cb  feaaifo,  anb  it 
ibasbncbbp :  fo  heeleb  them  through 
thebepthes,asth20iighthcibilbernes 

10  ^iiibhc  faueb  them  from  the  hanb 
of  him  triatliateb  them :  anb  rebcemeb 
them  from  the  hanb  of  thcencmie. 

1 1  *  3lub  the  ibatcrs  toucreb  their  e 
ncmies:  there  was  not  one  of  them  left. 

12  *lLhen  bclccncbthtp  hisibo,2bs : 
thep  fang  his  pjaife. 

13  * tXhepfooncfo2gatehisttio;Us : 
thep  lbaiteb  not  fo2  his  tounfcll : 

14  *  2Sut  tiultcb  ertccbinglp  in  the 
U)ilbctues:?temptcbGobinthebefcrt. 
15  *3Hib 


"lulTii;. 
■7-dcut.r; 
'o. 


•P6I.  107. 
I.II8.I. 

and  1 :6*.  i 


Iudg. 


'  I"dg-7- 
19. 


'Exod.  14 


■Exod.  14. 
27. and  1  y. 
S- 

"Exod.  14. 
}i.8iij.I. 

"Exod.  I  s. 
14.  &  17-2. 
\Hci.thn 
m.\de  h*Utt 
ihrjfer?Att. 
•Exod.  17. 
2. 1. cor. 10. 
f: 

\Htb.l»JUA 
aM). 


Ilraels  rebellion,  Pfalmes. 


an 


d  idols 


atne. 


Num.  I  I. 
'  Num.  1 6. 


'Numb.  \6 
ji.dcut. 
1 1.5. 

'Num   16. 
j  j.  and  ^6. 


Exo.  J-..4 


*Exod.  3  3. 


\lUlr.l 
l.mdcf dc- 
fir,    ■ 
Num.  14. 


\lkb.10 

kcthem 
fall. 

' Num.  25 
3- 


'Num.  25. 
7- 


*Num.  20. 


'Dcui-7-i 

"luJg.I.JI 


L 


15  *  3ttD  Dcsanc  them  their  rcqucft : 
but  rent  leanneffe  into  their  roulc. 

i6  *  Xhcy  cmucD  s®ofcs  alfo  in  tl)c 
campe :  and  ^taron  the  Saint  of  the 

llOKP. 

17  *  %\)t  earth  openeb  anbrvoailolb' 
eb  top  2>athan :  anb  coucrcb  the  tom^ 
pany  of  31biram. 

is  *3tnoa  fire  itoas  lunbleb  in  their 
company :  the  flame  burnt  bp  the  lbic= 
Hcb. 

19  *  Xhcy  maoe  a  caifc  m  $o?cb :  anb 
ibo?fl)ippeo  the  molten  image. 

20  Xhus  they  changcb  their  glo?y, 
into  tlje  fimilitubc  of  an  or e  that  catcth 
graffc. 

1 1  Xhey  fo?gatc  Gob  their  Satuour : 
ttmuhhabboucgrcatthingstuCgypt: 

21  nDonbcrous  llwlirstn  thcianbc 
of  I?am:  and  terrible  things  by thcrcb 
Sea. 

23  *  Xhercfo?che  faiothathcrboulb 
befiroy  them ,  hab  not  iWcs  his  cho 
fen  froob  befo?e  him  in  trie  b?cach:  to 
ttimc  aibay  his  ib?ath,  left  hec  (houlb 

beflrov [llcm- 

24  pea,  they  bcfpifcbt  the  plcafant 
lanb :  they  bcleeucb  not  Ins ibo?b : 

25  *  Z5ut  murnuircb  in  their  tents : 
and  hcarttcncb  not  bnto  the  boytcof  the 

16  Xhcrcfo?chcltftcbtophishanbc 
agamft  them:  to  oucrth?ott>  them  m  the 
VbilbcrncfTc: 

27  1 Xo  ouerth?oib  their  feeb  alfo 
among  the  nartons,anb  to  fcatter  them 
mtlKl<inbS. 

28  *  %\)ty  toyncb  fhemfcltics  alfo 
tmto  ffiaai  -  pco? :  anb  ate  tlje  famficts 
ofthebcab. 

29  Xhus  they  piouoUcb  him  to  anger 
ibtth  their  tnucntions:  anb  the  plague 
b?aftcmbponthcm. 

30  *Xhcn  ftoob  bp  phinchas,  anb 
crccutcb  inbgcmeut:  anb  fo  the  plague 
ibasftayeb. 

31  3tnbtfjat  Vbas  cottntcb  bnto  him 
fo:  rigl)tcottfncffc :  bnto  all  generate 
onsfo?cttcnno?e. 

32  *lH)eyaiigrebiiiniaifoattf)eiM' 
ters  of  ftnfe :  fo  that  it  Went  til  rbitl) 
<39ofcsfo?theirfattcs: 

33  26ecaufc  they  p20iiofecbhiS  fpirit : 
fo  that  Ijcc  fpauebnabuifebly  ibith  his 
lippes. 

34  *  Xhey  bib  not  beftroy  the  nati- 
ons ,  concerning  lbhom  tlje  ILokp 
commanbebthem: 

35  '25ut  Vberemingleb  among  tlje 


heathen,  anb  learncb  their  lboziics. 

36  3Jub  thep  fcrucb  their  tbolcs:; 
Ibhtch  lucre  a  utarc  bnto  them. 

37  Pc*  they  faenfieeb  their  fonncs,' 
anb  thetr  baughtcrs  bnto  bcuils, 

38  3(nb  fbcb  innocent  bioob,  mm  the 
bloob  of  their  fons anb  of  their  baurjh;! 
ters,lbhomc  they  faenfieeb  bnto  the 
tooles  of  Canaan :  anb  the  lanb  ibas 
poiiutcbUnthbloob. 

39  Xhus  mere  they  bcfilcb  ibith  their 
olbnc  Vbo?fts :  anb  lbcnt  a  lbljoMig 
lbith  their  olbnc  inucntions. 

40  Xhctcfo?cibastheU)?athofthc 
JLoisDftinblcbagamfr  his  people :  tm 
fomiichtljat  Ijc  abho?rcb  his  olbnc  irn 
hentancc. 

41  Slnbhcgaucthcm  into  thchanb 
of  the  heathen :  anb  they  that  hatcb 
thcm,mlcboucrthcm. 

41  Xhcit  enemies  alfo  opp?cfl*cb 
!  them:  anb  they  lbcre  bjoughtintofub- 
iccttou  bnber  their  hanb. 

43  *tlj?any  times  bibhebetiucr  them: 
but  they  pjouottcb  himibuh  their  coun? 
Tell ,  anb  lbcrc  ||  bJoaght  lord  fo;  tljcit 
uuqtutic. 

44  jftcuerthclcs  he regarbeb  their 
affliction :  ibhcn  hehcarb  their  trie. 

45  *  3lnb  Ijcc  remembjeb  fo?  them 
his  coucnant:  anb  repenteo  acco?bmg 
[  to  the  multitubc  of  his  mercies. 

46  tyc  mabc  them  aifo|to  be  pmcb, 
1  of  all  thofc  that  tancb  them  captmes. 

47  Sattcbs,  jPJL^iijDOtircob, 

'anbgathcrbsfromamongtheheathen 

to  giucthanUes  bnto  thy  holy  /2amc : 

and  to  triumph  in  thy  piaifc. 

48  2t5leffcb  bee  tilt  %  o  «id  Cob  of 
31fraclfrom  cucrlalhngto  cucriaflmg: 
anb  let  all  the  people  fay,  3mcn.  pzatfc 
yctljc  3LOHJD. 

P  S  A  L.     CVII. 

1  The  Pfdnnfl  cxhorteth  die  redeemed,  in  prai- 
fing  God/o  obferue  his  manifold  prouidence 
4  Ouei  trauailers,  loouer  captiues,  17  ouer 
fickemen,  13  ouer  Sea  men,  33  andindmers 
varieties  of  life. 

s^$4^  *  due  thelites  hnto  the 

*|Hidis©,  fo?  hce  is  goob: 

■,1fo?hismerciccndureihfo? 


Mudg.2. 

||  Or,  tmpo- 
Hcrtjheii    or, 


*Dc 


j<£%    1   ilctthercbeemcbof 
the  It  o  KPfav  fo .  lbhomchc  hath  re 
bccmcb  front  the  hanb  of  the  encmic: 

3  2lnb  gathcrcb  them  out  of  the 
lanbs ,  from  the  cafi  anb  from  the 

(5gg  H>cfl: 


•pr,. 

i;6. 


TC(?.I 

8.1.  & 


40 


Godsprefent  Plalmes.  helpe  in  trouble 


t  Htk.fn 
Ihcft*. 


Mob.JJ. 

10. 


nDeft  :  from  the  j3o:th  anb  t  from  the 
£>outh. 

4  Xhey  ibanb:eb  in  the  ibilberacs, 
m  afoutary  ibay :  they  fouub  no  cmc  to 
bttiellm. 

5  hungry  anb  tljicfttc :  tljcir  foule 
famtebm  tljcm. 

6  Xhcn  they  trycb  buto  tljc XLois© 
in  thctt  trouble :  and  ijc  bcltucrcb  tljcm 
out  of  tlicir  OiftccfTcs. 

7  31nb  hec  leb  tlKin  foul)  op  the 
right  ibay :  tfjat  they  might  goc  to  a  rfc 
tic  of  habitation. 

S     £>h  tljat  men  IbOtllb  ptflfc  tljc 

1L  o  is  p,  foz  his  goobneffe :  anD  fo:  his 
ibonbcrfull  ibo:ftcs  to  Ujc  ttjilozcn  of 
men. 

9  Jfo:hcfatifncth  the  longing  foule: 
anb  fillet!)  tlje  hungry  foule  lbitj)  goob 
neffe. 

io  ^urijasfitinbarftneu'canbtntbc 
(habolbc  of  bcath :  bcmgbounb  ra  affli- 
ction anb  y:on: 

ii  asccaufc  they  rebelleb  againftthc 
ibo:bS  of  Oob  :  anb  tontcmneb  the 
couufell  of  the  moll  Ingl) : 

ix  Xljcrcfo:c  Dec  b:ought  bolbnc 
tncicheartibithlabounthcyfclbolbne. 

anb  there  was  nOUCtOlKlpC. 

13  Xhcn  they  eryebbnto  the  SLokjd 
in  their  trouble: and  he  faucb  tljcm  out 
of  their  biftreffes. 

14.  Dec  b:ought  them  out  of  barUc- 
ncfTc ,  anb  the  fbaboibc  of  beat!) :  anb 
b:aftetheirbanbsmuinbcr. 

15  01)  that  men  iDoulb  p.zatTc  the 
ILobp  fo: his goobuclTc : anbfo: his 
ibonbcrfull  monies  to  the  chiltyen  of 
men. 

is  foi  hchath  bzoftcn  the  gates  of 
biaffc :  anb  cut  the  barrcs  of  y:on  m 
ftmbcr. 

17  jfooies,  bctaufc  of  their  tranf 
grcfuot^anb  becaufc  of  tljcir  intqumes, 
arcafflictcb. 

is  *Xheic  foule  abho:rcthall  man- 
ner of  mcatc :  anb  they  b:aibc  nccrc  bn 
to  the  gates  of  bcatl). 

19  Xhcn  tlicv  enc  buto  the  %  o  h  jb> 
in  thctr  trouble:  IjcfaucthtDcm out  of 
thcirbirtrctTcs. 

20  free  fent  IXs  ibo:b,  anb  Ijcaicb 
them :  anb  bcliucrcb  tljcm  from  their 
beftrucrtons 

II    01)  tljat  men  lbOlllb  p.Mlfc  tl)C 

%,  o  w  e>  foz  his  goobneffc :  anb  fo:  Ins 
ibonbcrfull  lbozftcs,  to  thcchilb:en  of 
men. 

21  3Cub  let  thcinfacnfue  thefaenfi 


1  tWf*.. 


t  Htb.  al 
their  wi/e- 
dome  itfwal- 
Ijnedvp. 


tes  of  tljanftcfgiuing  :  anb  bcclarc  his 
lbo:ftcslbtthtrcioyctng. 

13  Xbcy  that  goc  bolbnc  to  the  fca 
mfbtppes :  that  boc  bufinctTc  in  great 
Ibatcrs: 

24  Xhcfe  fee  the  lbo:ftcs  of  the 
%  &  is  £> :  anb  his  lbonbers  m  tfjc 
beepc. 

25  j?o:hccommanbctl),anbtratfeth  . 
theftomiy ibiubc :  ibhiclj  Uftcth bp  the  - 
ibaucs  thereof. 

26  Xhcy  mount  bp  to  thehcaucn : 
they  goc  bolbnc  agamc  to  the  bepthes: 
their  foule  is  mcltcb  bctaufc  of  trouble. 

27  Xljcy  rcclc  to  anb  fro ,  anb  flag; 
gcr  iiftc  a  bumHcn  man  anb  tare  at 
their  ibttscnb. 

23  XbcnthcycrybntothclLoKD 
in  their  trouble: anb hccbmigcth tljcm 
out  of  their  biftrcffcs. 

29  l)c  maftctl)  tljc  Atomic  a  caunc :  fo 
tljat  the  ibaucs  thereof  arc  mil. 

30  Xhcn  are  they  glab,  becaufc  tfjcp 
be  quiet :  fo  he  tymgctlj  tljcm  buto  their 
befircbhaucn. 

31  01)  tljat  me,,  lboulb  p:aifc  the 
ILobid  fo:  bis  goobncfTc;  anbfo:  his 
ibonbcrfull  lbo:ftcs  to  the  cljuo:en  of 
men : 

32  %tt  them  cralt  him  alfo  in  the 
congregation  of  the  people ,  anbpiaue 
IjtmtnthcafrnnblyofthcClbers. 

33  $cc  nirnctl)  nucrsinto  aibilbct; 
ue(Tc:anb  the  lbatcr  fpnugs  tntob:? 
grounb: 

3+  %  frattfuil  lanb  into  t  barren- 
uriTcifo:  the  Vbirttcbncffc  of  tljcm  tnat 
bibcll  therein. 

35  *  ^c  rurnctl)  tljc  lbilbcrnclTe  into 
a  flanbing  lbatcr :  aubb:v  gtounb  into 
ibatcr-fpnngs. 

36  3lub  rljcrc  he  maftctl)  the  hungry 
tobibell;  tljat  tljcy  mayp:cparc  a  tmc 
fo:  habitation, 

37  3lnbfoibc  tljc  ficlbs,  anb  plant 
binryarbSilbljich  may  ycclb  fruits  of 
mcrrafe. 

38  I?c  blefTctlj  tljcm  alfo  ,fo  tljat  tl)cy 
arc  multiplicb  greatly :  ano  fuff  rctlj  not 
their  tattcll  to  beer  cafe. 

39  3game ,  they  arc  nunidjcb  anb 
b:oughtioibcth:oun#opp:cmon,affli 
cnonanbfo:roib. 

40  *^cc  poib:cth  contempt  bpon 
pnnccs:  anb  taufctl)  tljcmto  ibanDcr  m 
the  II  lbilbcrncflc,  where  there  is  no  ibay. 

41  "I'ttfcttcthljc  tl)cpoo:conhigl) 
i  I  from  afflicnon :  anb  maftctl)  him  fanu 
licsiiftcatlocftc. 
42  *Xhc 


Htb.f.J:. 

rjfe. 


'  Hj.41. 

1 3. 


lob.  1  j. 

tl. 

I  Or,t/yi 
fhc: 
*  I.Sam.2. 
S.pfal.nj, 
7i8.vcr. 
\\Or,ff„r. 


Gods  great  mercic.      Pial 


mcs. 


Dauid: 


"Job  21. 

lO.Jild  J. 

I  6. 


•Pftl.tfo.7. 


41  *  Xhc  righteous  n>all  fee  tt,  anD 
tetoycc  ■,  aim  all  uuqume  Ml  ftop  t)cc 
mouth. 

4)  naho  fo  is  iMe ,  anD  mm  ob 
feme  thofc  things,  mm  they  (hail  x>\\- 
Dcrilatm  the  louing  lunDmeflc  of  the 

H©iS£>. 

PSAL.    CVIII. 

1  Dauid  incourageth  himfel/e  to  praiie  God. 
5  Hee  praycth  tor  Gods  alliitaiicc  ac- 
cording rohb  pronuie.  u  His  confidence 
inGodshclpe. 

__€  2fong  or  pu\\mc  of  £>antD. 

if.  <5od  ,  my  heart  is  RjccD : 
3}Vbillfmg?giucpjaifc, 
cucumtthmygtoiy. 

i  3tmaUcpfaltcryanD 

i)arpc:3lmyiei!cViHlia: 

matte  carty. 

j  3Jmrtlp2au*cthec,j|)?L©H©,a; 

mongthcpeoplc:aitD3JitoilGugp2aircs 

tonto  thee  among  the  nations. 

4  Jfa*  tf)v  mercy  is  great  abonc  the 
fteaums:  aim  thy  tructlj  readwth  two 
thc||elouDs. 

5  *  25c  thoueraitcD,£><3oD,  abonc 
the  heaucns :  anD  thy  gtozy  aboue  all 
the  earth: 

6  Xhat  tJ)p  bcloucb  map  bcc  bcluic- 
rcD :  fane  wuh  thy  right  hanD ,  anD  an< 
(mere  me. 

7  (5oD  Dart)  fpoftcn  in  his holincffe, 
3J  VbU  rciopcc,  3  mil  DiutDe  <5>hechem : 
anD  mete  out  the  bailey  ofSuteccth. 

s  ©ilcaD  is  nunc ,  £0anaffeb  is  nunc, 
<£pma(m  alfo  is  the  Itrength  of  nunc 
hcaD  :3luDah  imiyflaibgiuer. 

9  ^oabMiiyU)aihpot,ouer£Dom 
1M  5  call  out  my  fhooe :  oucr  ^hiltlha 
mill  3J  triumph. 

10  nstjo  VUtl  bang  mc  into  tlic  Orong 
attc  t  mho  luill  IcaDc  mc  into  CDom  i 

11  nautnotthou,  £)(5oD,mhoha(t 
call  bs  off*  anD  milt  not  thou,  jDC5od, 
goc  fooith  Vbith  our  holies? 

ii  0uic  1)3 hclpe  from  tcoublc:fo? 
baine^  the  hclpe  of  man. 

13  Zh:ough©oD  mcc  (hall  Docbait- 
antly :  foj  Ijeeit  is  thai  (hall  trcaD  DoiDnc 
our  enemies. 

PSAL.    CIX. 

1  Dauid  coniplavning  of  ln's  flanderous  ene- 
mies, vndcrthe  pcrlon  ot  Iudas  denoteth 
them.  16  HelTieweih  their  liiine.  n  Com- 
playning  of  his  owne  inifcry ,  hee  prayeth  for 
hclpc.    2.9   Hepioaiilethth^nktjlneile. 


praye 


rs. 


ic*uh  cf.ie 
cett. 
XHcbr.hm, 

ltiucs. 


C  1Co  trje  cfjiefe  ^ufician,  X 
ttfaimcofDaniO. 
£>lDnotthypcace,DC5oD 
ofmypjaifc. 

i.  fo:  the  mouth  of  the 
UrirUcD.anD  the  tmouth  of  t  n,tr. 
_  the  Dcceitfull  tarcopmeo 
agauut  mcc :  they  haue  fpoften  agautft 
memithaiymgtongue. 

3  Xhey  compaiTeD  mcc  about  alfo 
mith  mozDcs  of  hatrcD :  aim  fought  a- 
gaiuftmcmithoutaeaufe. 

4  $01  my  loue ,  they  arc  my  aDuer 
fanes :  but  'J  sme  my  fclfc  vn  :o  pzaycr. 

5  3nD  they  haue  rcmarDeo  me  eutll, 
foj  gooD :  anD  hatreD  fo;  my  loue. 

6  ^>et  thou  a  ujicbcd  man  oucr 
Dim :  auD  let  |5>atan  ItanD  at  Ijib  right 
l;anD. 

7  tenmhefljailbc  iubgcD ,  ictliim 


•{Or, 


erfrrj. 


be  tcouDemncD :  anD  let  Ijis  piayerbe-Jt^^ 
comefmne.  r'^T,'' 

8  "?ictijiBDayes  befelbundictan* I'talU. 
otljcr  tauerjusll  office.  i|ovw^. 

9  %a  Ins  trjiiD;en  bee  fatijetleffe : ' 
anDInsibifcaibiDoU). 

10  JLct  l)is  cfjUD«!m  bcctonnnuaily 
bagabonDS,?  begge:  let  tl)cmfccfec  their 
bread  alfo  out  of  tljeic  Dcfolatc  places. 

11  %tt  tftecytonioncr  tattl)  all  that 
hchath :  anD  ictthc  ttraugcrs  fpoilc  ijts 
labour. 

ii  ILet  there  be  none  to  crtcnD  mer 
cytJntorjimrneitljcc  let  there  be  any  to 
fauourhtsfathcrlcffechiuum. 

ij  ?Let  hispofteritie  be  nit  off:  and  m 
the  generation  fololbuig  let  their  name 
be  blottcD  out. 

14  ILct the tmcuttttc  ofljis  fatljcru  be 
rmicmfccD  Vbiththc  ILoeptanDlct 
not  the  Cnne  of  ^is  mother  be  blotteD 
out. 

15  ILct  them  be  befoze  tlje  %  &  is  © 
eontuiually :  that  he  may  cut  off  tljc  me- 
mory of  them  from  the  earth. 

16  25ctaufc  that  he  rementfMCD  not 
tofl)cU)mctcy,butpcrfccttteDthcpoo2C 
anD  uccDy  man:  that  Ije  migljt  men  flay 
thebjohen  m  heart. 

17  ^srjcloueDmrfing.fo  let  it  conic 
tottto  Imn :  as  hec  DclightcDiiotm  blcf 
fmg,fo  let  a  befarrc  from  him. 

18  2(s  hcciothcD  htmfelfetbttl)  cur 
finglifee  as  ibith  his  garment  :fo  let  it 
tome  tnto  t  his  boibcls  l*c  mater ,  anD 
USe  oyle  into  his  bones. 

19  ILct  tt  be  bnto  him  as  the  garment ; 
which  coucrcth  him  :  anD  fo:  a  girDle 
.vhcrewitii  hcis  girDcDcontuuiaily. 

C3gg  1  20  ILet 


tn  b:m. 


•ith- 


(0  2 


iChrifts  Pricithood.    Pfalmes.         True  wifedome. 


f  rich,  frcm 
the  itidgti 

ofhufonle. 


\M::t  it. 

44.11UM  2. 
;<5.hik.20. 
4*.aits  2. 
34.i.cor. 

15.25.lK-l>. 
1.1 


\\Or,mcre 

■    ■ 
wombe  cftht 
nor nii*  ,* 
th  h  ■  «A 
hautfi  c. 
•Hrb.5.tf. 
and  7.1  7. 


I    10  |Lct  tine  fte  tlje  rcttiarD  of  mine 

abucrfartcs  f rout  the  310H©:  anb  of 
them  that  fpeafee  mill  agamft  mv  foulc. 

11  i5utbothoufojmc,  £>Gor>thc 
JLojb.fojthv  ionics  fane:  bccaufctljv 
mcrcici  goobrbclsitcrthoumc. 

22  5ro?3lampoo2CJ"dnctDie:  anb 
nivhcartisUtounbcDlbithmmc. 

13  3him  gone  lilte  the  fhaboui.tbhcn 
ttbecuneth  rjamtoflfcbbpaubbolbnc 
asthclocuft. 

24.  fl3v  fences  arc  Ybcafecfhiough  fa- 
fling :  aim  mv  flefb  faticth  of  fatneffc. 

25  5  became  alfo  a  rcpzoch  unto 
tl)cm :  whenthcvloofecbtoponmc,  thev 
fhafecb  their  hcabs. 

26  l)clpcmc,  £>1L0H£>mv<3ob: 
O  fane  mc  accojomg  to  tl)v  mcrcic. 

27  Xhatthcvmavfenoib,  that  this 
is  tljv  Ijano :  that  thou,  3L  ©  1$  3? ,  haft 
Done  it. 

28  ILctthcm curfc,  but  blefTe  thou : 
ibhctt  thevanfe,  let  them  beafhameb, 
but  let  thv  fecuant  rciovcc. 

29  Uct  mine  abucrfartcs  beclotfjeti 
With  (name:  anb  let  them  couer  tl)cm 
fclucs  Until  their  olbnc  toufufion ,  as 
ilu'th  a  mantle. 

30  gjunllgrcatlvpiaifcthc  3L©u© 
lbith  mv  moutl) :  vca  3J  mill  p:aifc  Dim 
among  the  multitubc. 

31  fo:  lie  fhaiftano  at  the  right  hanb 
of  tl)c  poozc:  to  fane  him  tfroni  tDofc 
that  coubemnc  his  foulc. 

P  S  A  L.     CX. 

1   The  Kingdome,  4  The  Priefthood,  5  The 
concjucft,  7  And  the  palsionot  Chart. 

C3t0falmcof2>autb. 
?^2?p23t  loc  *Jl©i3pfaiobntomv 

mi  W$ ?l0ZD '  ^lt  t,,ou  at  mV 
right  hanb  ibtmrjimafec 
thine  enemies  thv  footc 

fiy?fe^-i3  ftoolc. 

%  %\)z  fLoi\v>  mall fenb  ttjc rob 
of  thvftrcngthout  ofziou:  rule  tljou 
m  tlje  nubft  of  thutc  enemies. 

3  %\)V  people  fhalbe  ttnllmg  in  the 
bav  of  tbv  poibcr,  m  tlic  beauties  of 
hoimcfTeii  from  the  ibombc  of  themes 
mug:  thou haftthe Dciu of  thp voutl). 

4  *  Xhc  |L  o  i;  ■&  hath  fiuomcanb 
Un'll  not  repent,  thou  art  apncftfo; 
cucr :  after  the  o;bcr  of  flSelchrsebcfe. 

5  Xhc  lLo.'Dat  tliy  right  hanb  (nail 
(Inlte  through  femgs  m  the  h^  of  his 
llvatl). 

6  r>  c  fhai  inbgc  among  the  heathen, 


he  thai  fil  the  places  vbtth  the  bcab  bobics: 
he  (bail  iboimb  thchcabsouer||manv 
cotmtrics. 

7  $?c  fhail  bjmftc  of  tlic  taoofee  in 
tljcVbav:  therefore  fljail  hce  lift  top  the 
bcab. 

P  S  A  L.    CXI. 

1  ThePfalmift  by  his  example  inciteih  others  to 
pr.nfe  God,  tor  his  glorious,  s  And  craciou 


workes.    10  The 

true  wiiedome. 


teare  ol  Goil  brccdeth 


t  -Kaifc  vce  the  %  ©  k  jb, 
3Jibillp:aifcthc  TL©is© 
tbftb  nn-itoholc  heart:  m 
the  affcmblv  of  the  top 
right,  anb  in  tlje  Congrc 
gatton. 

2  %l)t  U)0;feCS  Of  tlK  |LS>it®  ire 

great :  fought  out  of  all  them  that  ijaue 
plcafurcthcrcm. 

3  $is  lto02hc  is  honourable  anb  glo 
rious:  anb  Ij  is>  rigljtcoufueffc  cnburcrh 
fo:  cucr. 

4  i?ce  Ijatl;  mabc  his  ltoonbermli 
itoozfes  to  be  remembnb :  the  II  o  is  © 
is  gracious,  anb  full  of  companion. 

5  V)i  hath  guicn  t  mcatc  bnto  them 

that  fcarc  him :  he  itoill  cucr  be  mmbfuli 
of  Ijistoucuant. 

6  $?c  hath  (l)citocb  his  people  the 

poitocrofhisU)o?fecs:tl)athcmavgiuc 
them  tlic  heritage  of  the  heathen. 

7  %\)t  lbojfes  of  his  hanbs  are  be; 

rmcanbitibgmcnt:  all  ijistomnwnbc 
mentsarcfurc. 

8  3Chevtftanbfaflfomicr anb  cucr: 
and  arc  bone  m  tructh  anb  topjightnes. 

9  ^cfcntrcbcmptionbntol)ispeo 
pie,  hce  hath  commanbeb  his  touenant 

foz  cucr :  Ijolv  anb  rcucrcno  ts  Ijis 
/i5amc. 

10  *Xhefcareofthc!l€>i3©isthc 
begmnmg  of  ltoifcbomc,  ||  a  go  ob  tonber- 

flanbingljaueaii  thev^thatboe  hiscom- 

nundenientb.  hiSpzaifC  nibUCCtlj  fo^  CUCr. 

P  S  A  L.  CXII. 

1  Godlineflc  hath  the  promifes  of  this  life,  4 
Andot  the  lite  to  come.  10  The  profpeutic 
ol  the  ccxlly.fhalbe  an  eye-fpre  to  the  wicked 

ttfaifcvcthcHott©. 

23ieffcb  is  tlje  man  that 

fcarcth  the  JLsdk  jd, 

tljat  bclightcth  grcatlv 

m  his  Commaunbe 

_  jucnts. 

1  i?is  feeb  (ball  bee  mighfic  topon 

cartlj : 


I  ®r,  i,Trat' 


Hcb^rxj. 


t  Hth.trt 
ilahhlhci. 


'Iob.18.2B 

pro.l.7.& 

?.io. 

fcclcs.  1.16 

\\Or,tot>£ 

<KC<h. 

)  Hit.  <lai 

doc  them. 


tfU.HM- 
l.lMitb. 


!A 


rood  man. 


Pfal 


\Hch.wdg 
men:. 


"s.Cor. 
9-9- 


litiah. 


'D.in.2. 


•Mal.1.11. 


tethbimfelfe 

to  dwdl. 


'  I.Sam. 
*.8.pfal. 

107.41. 


\l!rb.  10 

iivcilin.vi 
hmfc. 


cacti) :  the  generation  of  the  hpnght 
(haibcblcflcD. 

3  nacaith  anD  riches  nuibe  m  his 
houfc :  anD  Ijis  righteoufuclTe  cnDurcth 
foicucr. 

4  ditto  the  Ppjight  there  arifeth 
light  m  the  Dartutcflc :  hec  >;  gracious, 
aim  full  of  compafTiomaiiD  righteous. 

5  3  gooti  man  fhciPcth  fauour anD 
IcuDctf):  Dc  ll)ill  cjuitje  Ijue  affaircsittttlj 
t  Difcrction. 

6  Purely  he  fliall  not  bcmottcDfo: 
cucc:the  righteous  (haibcincucrlafimg 
rcmcmb:aucc. 

7  l^c  (hall  not  be  afraiti  of  cuillti 
Dings :  his  heart  is  ficcD,  trtimng  m  the 
ILotac. 

8  ft:s  heart  is  clrablifhcD,  hec  (hall 
not  be  afraid,  Pnttll  he  fee  his  detire  tipon 
his  enemies. 

9  * iKhathDifpcrfcD ,  hchathgutcn 
to  the  poo2c:hisrightcoiirue{rccnDir 
rcth  foz  cucr  his  home  fljalbc  craltcb 
lpith  honour. 

10  Xhc  UncltcD  (hail  fee  it ,  anD  be 
grieucDhc  (h.ili  gtiafl)  nmh  his  teeth, 
anD  melt  atbap:  the  Defirc  of  the  ipickcd 
fhallpenlh. 

P  S  A  L.    CXIII. 

1    An  exhortation  to  praifc  God  tor  his  excel  - 
lencie,   6  tor  his  Mercy. 

^tBaifc  ycc  the  Uoisd. 
,X  pzaife,^)  ycefcrttauts  of  the 
jKu  %  o  e  jd  :  p:aifc  the  name  of 
igipsythe|l©KjE>. 
^^»^«=>  i  *2SicflcDbethcnamc 
of  the  %  o  «  p :  from  this  tunc  fozth 
auDfojcuermo.'e. 

3  *5rrom  thcriuugofthefunnePnto 
the  going  DoUmc  of  the  fame  :  the 
%  o  k  ©  £>uamc  is  to  be  pjaifcD. 

4  Xhc  % o E0  is  high  abouc  ail 
nations :  and  ijis  giojv  abouc  the  hca= 
uens. 

5  j©hoisiiitctmto  tljcIL obd  our 
<50D :  luho  t  DttKllcth  on  high : 

6  jdIjo  humblethhimfclfcto  bcholD 

die  things  that  are  lit  IjCaUCU,  3UD  III  tljC 

earth  i 

7  '^craifcthKpthcpoozcoutofthc 
Dud :  and  uftcth  tlje  nccDic  out  of  the 
Dunghill: 

8  Xhat he  mapfcthimHHti)  pnuccs: 

euen  U)ltl)  tI)C  pllttCCS  Of  1)IS  people. 

9  ftemaucththc barrempomantto 
neepe  houfc  to  be  a  loyfuii  mother  of 
cI)tlD:cn :  pjaifc  y  ce  the  %  o  k  je>. 


mes.  Godsprcfcnce. 


Ji.lofh.j. 


•  FxoJ. 
\~.6  Num. 
io.u. 


PSAL.    CXI  III. 

An  cxhorrarion  by  the  example  ofthedumbe 
creatures,  to  leaie  God  in  his  Church. 

JS*$tti3ffracitbentoatofiE 

,?A^gi'Pt,  tljcDoulecfJa-lij-s.' 
vVOcob  from    a  people  off 

J$$SW3  ftrangeianguage : 
£8$&&!4;t£   z  'JmDahiPas  his  fan- 
cciinrtc :  and^jfraet  Ins  Dominion. 

3  *3Cl)efearan)Cu  auDfleD:3fo2Dan 
lPas  Dmicn  bacltc. 

4  Xhc  mountaines  finppeD  like 
rammes  :  and  the  little  Ijilles  iflic 
lambes. 

5  nahat  a.ied  thee ,  D  thou  fea ,  that 
ithotifleDDcft  -thouJoiDan,  t!;atthou 
ruafi  Dnucu  barter  i 

6  J'ccmountames,  that  ycc  ftuppcD 
liltc  rammes :  and  yee  little  ijuics  lilie 
lambcs? 

7  Xremblc  thou  earth  at  the  p:e 
fence  ofthc  H02D  :at  thcp:cfcncc  of  the 
OoDofJjacob: 

8  'roiMhturucDtherocHe  into  a 
(lanDutg  mater :  tlje  flint  mtoafoim 
tame  of  Vbatcrs. 


PSAL.    CXV. 

Becauk  God  is  truly  glorious,  4  andIdol> 
are  vanity,  9  Heexhorteth  to  confidence  in 
God.  ii  Godistobebleffcdforhis  blelsings. 

£8  Otbntobs,  OIL  o  isp, 

®  not  Pino  bs ,  but  Pnto  thy 

,  '  name  gutcgloiy  :  foi  tl)v 

a^  1  mercy,  andfoi  thyrrutljcs 

M&L  faltc. 

"leherefoic  (houlD  the  Ijcathni 
fay :  E3hcrc  is  noib  their  (5oD  i 

3  *  lout  our  God  is  in  the  hcauens : 
he  hath  Done  lbhatfociur  hcplcafcD. 

4  *  Xheir iDoles  arc  fuuer anD  goiD: 
the  ttiojite  of  mens  hanos. 

5  Xheyhuu-mouthsdKitthcyfpcaRc 
not  cies  banc  tljcy,  but  they  fee  not. 

6  Xhcy  hauc  cares ,  but  they  hcarc 
not :  nofes  inuc  they ,  but  they  fmcll  not. 

7  Xhey haue  DanDs,  but  tl)cv  hanDic 
noefcetc  hau -thci',  but  they  lbailtc  not : 
neither  fpcaiic  tljcy  through  tljcir 
throat. 

8  Xhey  thatmaucthem  are hhe  Pn 
to  them :  fo  ts  eucry  ouetljattrufteth  in 
them. 

9  s©5lfrarl.truftthouinthe?Loiari: 
he  is  tlicir  helpc  anD  t!?cir  fhielD. 

10  sD  houfc  of  3aron,  triid  m  the 
JLok  £?:hc  >  s  their  helpc }  their  (hiciD. 

o  g  g  3 "  ^ee 


-Pu!  41. 
10  &  -g. 

10. 

■pfli  1-55 


Gods 


mcrcic. 


Pfaimes.       The  Saints  deatl 


cam. 


ii  ticthatfearcthe!Loi3Ptrnftin 
the  1L  o  is  p  :  he  is  their  heipe  anb  their 
fVjirlD. 

i  z  Zhe  Hokd  hath  bene  minDfuli 
ofbs ,  he  null  blcfTc  vs,iK\i»iil  blefTe  the 
houTe  of  Jfcael  : he  null  blcfTc  the  houfe 
of^aron. 

13  i)tt  null  blcfTc  them  that  fcarc  the 
21  o  13  p :  t  both  finail  anb  great. 

i+  Zhc  %  ©is©  fljau  mcrcafcyou 
ino2canbiiio2c:youanDyourcl)tlD2cn. 

15    J^OU  are  blcffcb  of  tl)C  H  £>  KP : 

Which  mane  hcaucn  anD  cart!). 

i6  Ulic  hcaucn.  cuciitljeDcaucnsarc 
the  %  o  13  p  fe> :  but  the  earth  hath  Ijce 
guien  to  the  chilb2cn  of  men. 

17  XhcDcaDp2aifcnotthclLoiBP: 
neither  any  that  go  Doibnc  into  filcntc. 

is  *23utU)cU)tll  blcfTc  the  %  ©kp, 
from  this  tunc  foo2th  anD  fojeucrmoje. 
^aifcthclloisp. 

PSAL.    CXVI. 

ouc  and  ductic 
Hecftudi- 


\Htir. 


\Bclr.m 
my  d.tjcs, 

*PfaI.i8. 

t  Rch. 
fowid  me. 


*Din.2.so. 


.Cot.  4. 


•Rom.  5.4, 


1. 


1  ThcPfalmift  piofefleth  bis 
lo  God ,  for  his  dehuerance. 
ethto  bethankfull. 

'*%%  ILOIK  tl)C  H  ©  K  P  :  bC' 

il|icaufe  hechath  hcarDmy 
Hg|?  potcc,  &  my  amplications. 
!^Q    z  25ccaitfchccharhin 

#asBo§§R!2  cltncb  his  care  Ditto  mcc : 

tl)crefo:c  mill  3J  tall  Upon  bimt  as  long 

as  3  line. 
3   *  £hc  fon-oiDcs  of  Death  eompaf 

fcD  nic,anb  the  patnes  of  hell  tgatc  holb 

bponuic :  3  founb  trouble  anb  foirott). 
4-  Xhcn  taiicb  3  upon  the  /2anic 

of  the  %  o  k  p  :  <D  %o  is  p,3J  befecrh 

thccDclittcrmvfoulc. 

5  Gracious  is  the  3L  ©  13  © ,  anb 
righteous :  yea  our  (5ob  is  mcrcifull. 

6  Xhc  H  ©  is  id  pjcfcructh  the 
Timplc :  3  was  brought  loU),  anb  hec 
hclpcbmc. 

7  ttcturnc  lmto  thy  reft ,  O  my 
fouic :  fo:  the  II  o  13  p  hath  Dealt  boun- 
tifully uuththec. 

s  .f  02  thou  haft  bclitiercb  my  foulc 
from  Dcath,mmc  eyes  from  tcarcs ,  and 
my  fecte  from  falling. 

9  3  Unuiiaihc  bcfo:c  the  %  ©  13  p : 
uithcianb  of  the  lining. 

10  *3lbctccttcD,thcrfo2chauc3Jfpo 
Hen :  3  nus  greatly  affltctcb. 

11  T3Jfaibm  myhaftc:  *3lll  mcuarc 
lycrs. 

ix  what  fhaii  3  renber  bnto  the 
%o  «  p:  foi  all  l)is  benefits  tolbarbs 
nice; 


13  3  ttUI  taUe  the  cup  of  faiuatton : 
anb  call  topon  thc/5amc  of  the  H©isp. 

14  3J  toll  pay  my  Poibcs  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  p:  nolb  mthc  pzefeuee  of  all  his 
people. 

15  Venous  in  pfig!)t  of  t!)c2.oisp: 
15  tDe  beat!)  ofljis  Saints. 

16  Oh?tm3P,trucly'2J.imr!)yfcr 
uant,3J  am  thy  fcruant  and  t!)c  fonnc  of 
tl)y  haubiuaybc :  thou  haft  loofeb  my 
bonbs. 

17  3  toll  offer  to  thec  the  famficc  of 
thanftcf-guung:  auDtoll  tall  bponthc 
i3amcofthc?L©isp. 

18  3  *MH  VW  nty  PoUies  bttto  tfjc 
!L  ©  13  p :  noU)  m  rt)c  pzcfcncc  of  all  his 
people: 

19  '5nthcCourtSofti)c?L0i3p$> 
houfe,  in  the  miat\ts  of  tljec,  C>  3Jcru; 
falnn.  pzaife  yc  t!jc  %  o  k  p. 

PSAL.    CXVII. 

An  exhortation  to  praifc  God  tor  his  mcrcie 
and  trueth. 

^§^5  *02atfc  the  Ho  13  p,aii  yc 
}  nations :  pjatfchimail  yc 
v  people. 
2  if 02  his  merciful  Uinb- 
^Es^csncfTeis  great  tottiarb  Vis: 

anb  tljC  trilCtl)  Of  the  ILO 13© enduieth 

fo?  cuer.  p.2aifeyctljc  %  033  p. 
PSAL.    CXVI II. 

1  An  exhortation  to  praifc  God  lor  his  niercie. 
5  The  Plalmitt.  by  bis  experience  fhewetb 
how  good  it  is  to  trull  in  God.  19  Vnder 
tile  t)pe  of  the  Pfalniift ,  the  comming  of 
Chrift  in  his  kingdome  is  cxprefled. 

*  <5iuc  rhanftcs  X>nto 
thc1Lomp,fo2hce^ 
goobibecanfchtsmcr^ 

ClCendurcthf02CUCr. 

1  fLctgjfraclnoui 
fay :  that  his  mercy  cn- 

durethf02CUCr. 

3  !lct  the  houfe  of  aaronnoib  fay : 
that  his  mercy  enduicth  fo2  cuer. 

4  Hct  them  noiP  that  fcarc  the 
Hoi3P,fay:  that  hts  mercy  enduicth 
fo2cucr. 

5  'JtaiicbbponthcJL(Di3ptmbt 
ftreffe :  the  1L  ff>  is  p  anfiurrrb  mc  ,and 
rctmc ma  large  place. 

6  *Xhc?Lei3pis  tonniyHbcgj 
ttiill  not  fcarc :  ©ljat  can  man  Doc  btt 
to  mcc  i 

7  H^hc  H  o  is  p  raucth  my  part 
Vbitl)  them  that  hclpc  mc:  tl;crfo2e  fliali 
31  fee 


Rom.  1  5. 


*PfjI.lo5. 
Land  107. 
1  &156. 1. 
i.chron.id. 
7- 


\Hchr-out 
of&fir'fc. 


»Hcb.i;.tf. 
pf»l.j«.* 


\Hcbr 


The  corner  ftone.       Pfalmes.       Whoareblefled. 


*  pfii.146. 
2. 


f  Heir,  cut 

them  of. 


^Htbrjut 
dswnc. 


"Esod.  1 5. 
2.Ua.  1 2.  2. 


"Mat, 11. 42 
mar.  I  2.10. 
Ink.  20. 17. 
nfis4.i1. 
pet.1.4. 
\Htb.ibu 
ufremihe 
L0R1). 


*Mat.»i,p. 


3  fccmydefirct)pon  them  that  hate  me. 

8  JJt^bctttt  to  trutt in  thesis©: 
then  to  put  confidence  in  man. 

9  ^t,s  better  to  tntf  in  rhefU>K3D: 
then  to  put  tonfibence  in  prices . 

10  3U  nations  compafleb  me  about: 
buttn  the  /frame  of  the  JL®t&ie>  ,  Ibtll 
3Jtbeftroythcm. 

11  Xhey  eompau'eb  nice  about,  yea 
thty  compadeD  mee  about :  but  m  tfje 
jframeofthe  %0j&w>,3  tbfllbcftcoy 
them. 

11  Xhey  eompattcb  mee  about  liBe 
Bees ,  ttjcp  are  quencheb  as  the  fitc  of 
foomestfoj  ui  the  jframe  of  the ■%£>%$> 
3Jibiltbcftroythcnx 

1  j  Xhou  haft  thmft  fwc  at  mee  that 
3  might  f  all :  but  the  %  ©  » je>  helpcb 
mee. 

14  *£hcfU>iB©  ismyftrengthanb 
Cong :  anb  is  become  my  faluation. 

15  Xheboteeofretoyeinganbfalua; 
ttonis  m  the  tabecnatles  of  thertghtc> 
ous :  the  3&tght  hanb  of  the  %  0  k  je> 
boethbauantly. 

i6  XhcJ&ighthanboffhe!L©ia© 
is  eraitcb  :  the  3&tght  hanb  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  boeth  valiantly. 

17  5  (hall  notbie,  butliue:  anb  be; 
dare  the  ibojBcs  of  the  |L©is©. 

18  Xhcfl£>K£>hathchaftcncbmc 
rojetbtithehathnotgtuen  meouerbn= 

tobeath. 

19  £>pcn  to  mee  the  gates  of  righte* 
onfncOe :  3  ibul  goe  into  them ,  and  3 
ttrillpjatfethefLiDK©: 

io  Xhis  gate  of  the  Hots©:  into 
tbfjtcl)  the  righteous  (hall  enter. 

ii  3  xuill  pjaife  thee ,  fi»  thou  haft 
hearo  nice :  anb  art  become  my  faiua- 
tion. 

iz  *Xhe  Hone  which  the  builbcrs  re- 
fufcb :  is  become  the  heab  ftone  of  the 
comer. 

13  tXhiSisttjelLflMsjs^boingtit 
is  marueilousra  our  eyes. 

24.  Xhis  is  the  bay  which  the  ll©ia© 
hath  mabe :  tbc  tbill  rcioytc.anb  be  glab 
Mitt.  ,      _ 

15  5>aue  notb ,  3 bcfccch  thee,  $© 
2,  <d  is  © :  j©  ?L  ©  k  e>  J  befeech  thee, 
fcnbnorbpjofpcritic. 

16  *28lcflcb  be  he  that  commcth  m 
the  /frame  of  the  ILcis© :  ibee  hauc 
blcflcb  you  out  of  the  houfc  of  the 

3Lfl>lB©. 

17  (Bob  is  thcIL  ©  is  3E»,  tbfnch  hath 
(hetbeb  bs  light,  bmb  the  facrfficc  Unth 
cojbs:euentontothchomsofthc3lltar. 


18  Xhou  an  my  <5ob ,  anb  3  iblll 
pjatfe  thee :  thou  an  my  <Sob ,  3  unll  cr* 
alt  thee. 

19  s©  gtue  thanlts  bnto  the  %®m>, 
fiwhc  >s  goob:fo?hisntercyendurech  foj 
euer. 

PSAL.    CXIX. 

This  Pfalmeconteineth  fundry  prayers,  praifes, 
and  professions  of  obedience. 

A  L  E  P  H. 

Hrtflcb  are  the  1 1  bnbe* 
nlebinthclbay:»jho 
ibaiBcinthe!Latt>of 
thefLflDis©. 

1  26lefleb  are  they 
thatBeepchtstcttiino; 
mcs:anb  that  fcefec  him 
lbtth  thcrbhoieheart. 

3  Xhey  auo  boe  no  iniquihe :  they 
tbaiBetn  hisibayes. 

4  Xhou  haft  tommaunbeb  vs  to 
Bccpcthy  precepts  Oiligcntiy. 

5  £>  that  m^  rbayes  ibete  nixttttn 
toBcepethyftatutes! 

6  Xhen  than  3  not  bee  afljamcb : 
\bhcn  3  haue  refpect  bnto  ail  thy  com* 
manbements. 

7  3  vbiii  pzaifc  thee  tbith  bpnght- 
ttcflc  of  heart :  ibhcn  3  ft)all  haue  lear? 
neb  t  thy  righteous  iubgements. 

8  3 rbiil  Beepc  thy  ftatutes:s©fo^ 
faBemenotbtterly. 

BETH. 

9  \  x  T$crcHnthaii  (hall  a  yong 
y  y  man  clcanfc  his  Ibay  <  by 
taBtng  hecbe  thereto  acco^ 
bing  to  thy  nwb. 

10  tstth  my  ibhole  heart  haue  3 
fought  thee:  j©  let  menot  Ibanbcr  from 
thy  Commanbcments. 

1 1  Xhy  ibo?bhauc5  httJbein  mine 
heart :  that  3  might  not  unne  agamft 
thee. 

u  25Ieflebart  thou,  £)  |L©ifij©: 
teach  me  thy  ftatutcs. 

13  naith  my  lips  haue  3  bcciarcb  au 
ttjc  iubgements  of  thy  moutt). 

14  3hauctctoyccbuithcibayofthy 
tcftimonies :  as  muAasfn  all  riches. 

15  31  tbtll  mcbttate  in  thy  precepts : 
anb  haue  refpect  bnto  thy  ibayes. 

i6  3  lbm  bciight  my  fcifc  in  thy  Oa= 
wtcs  -.3  ibilinotfo?gctthyibo?b. 

G  I  M  E  L. 

17  -pxcalebountifullyibiththyfer^ 
IJuant   that  3  may  lute ,  anb 
Bcepcthy  lbo?b. 

18  t£-pcn 


'rfincerc. 


\  Hehriudg- 
mentiofthy 
rtghteckf- 


Dauids  meditations.    Pfalmes.  Gods  promife. 


MfMet 


*Gen.479 
I.chro.jp. 
I5.pfal.j9. 
11.hcb.il. 
■3 


f  Htb.men 
of  my  conn- 
fell. 


•pa  3  5.4 

and  27.  1 1 
and  S6.  1 1 


I*  Heb.  drop 


"P-f'- 


18  t  £>pen  tbon  mine  eyes ,  that  3 
may  bcbolD  ttionDerous  things  out  of 
tbyfUtb. 

19  *3J  ama  ftrangctin  the  earth  :hiDc 
not  thy  commanDcments  ft  om  inc. 

to  *j£)y  fouU  tyea&ctb  fo:  ttjc  long; 
ing:  that  it  hath  unto  thy  tuDgements  at 
all  times. 

21  Xbou  baft  rebttReD  the  p:ouDtim 
are  turfeu :  ruftictj  Doe  crrc  from  thy 
Commantiements. 

22  &cmooue  from  me  tcp:ocb  ana 
contempt :  fo?3J  hauc  ucpt  thy  tcftimo* 
ntes. 

13  Ounces  aifo  did  fit  and  fpca&c  & 
gamftme :  but  thy  feruant  DtD  mcDitate 
intbyftatutes. 

24.  Xby  tcttimonies  alfo  arc  my  De- 
light :  and  tiny  counfellers. 

DALETH. 

&  foule  elcauctb  bnto  the 


15 


Jtyltnift :  quicken  thou  mee  acco^ 

Dingtotbytt)o:D. 
16  ^baueDeciareDinytbaycs^ttD 
trjou  bcatDcft  me :  * teach  mc  thy  £>ta? 
tutes. 

27  s^akemctobnDetftanDtbcujay 
of  thy  precepts :  fo  (ball  3  talke  of  thy 
lbonDcrous  U)o:kcs. 

28  iJ0yfouletmcitctb  fo:bcauines: 
ftcengtbcntboumcaccojDmgbnto  thy 

UWD. 

29  ftemouc  from  mee  the  ibay  of  Iy= 
mg:  anD  grant  mc  thy  flan)  gtacioufly. 

jo  3J  banc  cbofen  the  ibay  of  tructb: 
thy  tuDgements  hauc  3  laiD  before.™. 

31  3  baucttuckc  bntotbyXcfhmo* 
nics:  £>?L©i3©pittmcnotto(bamc. 

32  3  null  runnc  tlje  may  of  thy 
CommanDements :  iDljcn  thou  (halt 
enlarge  my  heart. 


HE. 


33 


Teach  mc,  j©  |L ©«£>,  the 
lbay  of  thy  Statutes  :  anD 
3  (hall  kcepc  it  mo  the  cnD. 
3+  GitiemebnDcrftan&tng,anD3J 
(ban  ucepe  thy  Haw :  yea  31  (hail  00= 
fcctit  tt  nnth  my  whole  heart. 

35  Caserne  to  gocm  the  path  of  thy 
commanDcments  :  fo?  therein  Doc  3 
Delight. 

36  incline  my  heart  bnto  thy  tcftt- 
monies :  anD  notto  couctoufncffc. 

37  *  Xurne  aibay  mine  eyes  from 
beholDmgDaiuticianJcur.cftenthoumc 
m  thy  way. 

38  ;S>rabli(btby  W02D  bnto  thy  fer- 


uant :  tbbo  is  deuoted  to  thy  feare. 

39  Xutnc  away  my  rep;oth  ttJijid) 
3Jfcare:  fo:tbytuDgcmentsaregooD. 

40  2SeholD,33hauc!ongeDaftcrthy 
p:ccepts:  quicken  me  m  tbyngbteouf; 
neffe. 

VAV. 

41  T  tft  thy  meretcscoine  alfo  bnto 

_L,mc,£D?Lifm©:  cuen  tbyfai; 

uatton,  accoiDtng  to  thy  wo:D. 

41  \\&a  fhau  31  haue  ibherettnth 
to  anfroerc  him  that  rcpjocbetl)  mc :  fo: 
3ftrufttntbyWo2D. 

43  3lnDtakenottbcWo:Doftruetb 
Utterly  out  of  my  mouth:  fo?  3  hauc 
hopcD  in  thy  tuDgements. 

44  <3>o  (hail  3  kcepc  thy  fUtb  ton; 
ttnually:  foicuerauDeucr. 

45  ^nD  gj  Ibtl  ttiaifec  t  at  libcrttc :  fo: 
gffccketbypjeccpts. 

46  3  wtll  fpeakc  of  thy  tcttimonies 
al(o  bcfo:c  Kings,  $  mil  not  be  aibameD. 

47  ^nD  3  torn  Delight  my  felfc  m 
thy  tommanDcments,  Which  3  bane 
loueD. 

48  #y  hanDS  alfo  Will  3  lift  bp  bn* 
to  thy  eomtnanDcmcnts,Wbieb  3  hauc 
loueD :  anD  3  anil  meDttatc  in  thy  fta* 
tutes. 

2AIN. 

49  "O  ^member  the  W02D  bnto  thy 
JtVctuant :  bpon  Which  thou 
haft  caufcDmc  to  hope. 

50  Xbts  is  my  comfort  in  my  afflicti 
on  :fo:  thy  W02D  hart)  qmckeneD  me. 

51  Xbc  p:ouD  hauc  haD  mee  greatly 
in  Dcntfon :  yet  hauc  3  wot  DeclmcD 
from  thy  Haw. 

51  JJrcmemb:cD  thy  tuDgements  of 
olD ,  4D  %  ©  is  tz>  x  anD  hauc  comfojteD 
myfclfe. 

53  D?o:rour  hath  taken  holDc  Upon 
me,  becaufcof  the  WttkcD  that  fouakc 
thy  Haw. 

54  Xbyttatntcsbaucbuimyfongs 
in  the  boitfc  of  my  pilgrimage. 

55  3  hauc  rcmcmb2CD  thy  name,  £> 
H©is©,  m  the  ntght,anD  hauc  Hept  tljy 
%dXo. 

56  Xhis  3  haD :  becaufc  3  ftcpt  thy 
precepts. 

CHETH. 

57  *Tp$ou  art  my  portion,   £> 
J_  %  1©  is  © ,  3  hauc  fatD ,  that 
3  iboulD  fteepe  thy  ujojds. 

58  ^uitrcateDtby tfauourtbith n>y 
lbhole  heart :  be  mcrcifull  Unto  meeac 
to2Dmgtothyujo2D. 

59  3  thought  on  myU»aycs:anD 

tnrncD 


||  Or,fifi*ll 

i  anfwere 
htm  ihat  re- 
proueth  mr 
in  a  thing. 


\Heb.M 
Urge. 


\Hcb.fc 


Dauids  delight  Pfalmes. 


in 


Godsl 


aw- 


1 1  OryCOmpa- 


*PfaI.ip. 
y.Prouli. 


\H,b.r>gh- 

tten/hejfe 


comfort  mc. 


tumcb  mpfeete  tonto  tfjp  ILetttmomes. 

60  3)mabetjaBe,anbbeiaptDnotto 
tacpctrip  commanbcmcnts. 

6i  Xlje  li  banbs  of  tljcujicRebfiauc 
robbeb  me :  but  3  tjaue  not  fo?gotteu 
ttjpiatoe. 

6i  at  mio  tugtjt  3  Mil  nfe  to  giuc 
tfjanRes  tmto  tl)ce  -.betaufc  of  tfjp  ngi> 
teousiu&gements. 

63  3J  am  a  companion  of  all  t!)em 
trjatfcarcttjce  :anbofttjemtfjatReepc 
tfjp  precepts. 

64  Xtjteattt),£)?LsD5K©>lsfullof 
tfjp  mere? :  tcacfj  me  tfjp  flatutes. 

TETH. 

65  *-f->^ou  nattbcalt  tbcll  ttntfj  tfjp 
feruaht ,  &>fj  %  ©  is  © ,  atto^ 
wngbntotfjplbo?b. 

66  Xeacfj  mc  goob  tuogement  anb 
Rnottrtcbgc :  fo?  3  fjaue  beletncb  tfjp 
eommanbtmtnts. 

67  2Scfo2e3JiMgafFlictcb,3Jilient 
aftrap  :butnoU)fjaue3J  Kept  tfjp  tt)02b. 

65  Xfjou  art  goob,  anb  bocft  goob; 
teacfjmetDpftarotcs, 

69  Xfjc  p?outs  fjaue  fo?geb  a  lie  a? 
gatnft  me :  but  3)  iDiimecpc  tljv  pzecepts 
UntljniplbDolefjeart. 

70  xijcir  neart  is  as  fat  as  grtafe  s 
but3Jbettgfjtintl)piain. 

71  31t  is  goob  fo:  me  tfjat  3  I)au* 
beneaffltcteb :  tfjat  3  mtgfjt  learnc  tfjp 
ffatutes. 

71  *Xfjeia»)  of  tfipmoutfj  is  better 
tmto  me :  tfjen  tfjoufanbs  of  golb  anb 
filuer. 

IOD. 

73  ^Tp^pfjanDSbauemabemeanb 
fafl)ionebtnc:  giuemetjnbet' 
ftanbtng ,  tfjat3J  map  Icarne 
tfjptommanbetncnts. 

74.  Xfjcp  tfjatfeare  ttjec  ttnll  bee 
glab  ftifjen  tfjep  fee  mec :  betaufc  3 
fjaue  fjopeb  in  tfjp  *bo?b. 

7"?  ^Rnoine,£)?Ltf>m©,tfjattljp 
iuDgements  aretng!)t  :anbthattfjouln 
faufsfulnefTe  fjaftaffiictebme. 

76  ^t,$p?aptfjce,tfjpmcrrifull 
fttnbnefle  be  ffb2  mp  comfo?t ;  aeto?bing 
to  tfjptt>02b  tonto  ttiv  i'cruant. 

77  fUtthptenDermerriescomcbn; 
to  mc ,  tfjat  3  map  liue :  fo?  tfjp  la\ue  is 
mpbcligfjt. 

78  %tt  tf)e  pjoub  bcafliamcb,  fo? 
tfjepbeait  peruerflp  ttntl)  me  ttiitfjout 
acaufe :  but  3}  mill  mebitate  in  tfjp  p?c^ 
ttpts. 

79  iLettfjofe  tfjat  feare  tfjee  tunic 


unto  mc:  anb  rtjoCe  tljat  fjaue  ttnotben 
thptemmomes. 

80  fLetnipfjcartbcfouMJintfjpfta; 
tutes  ,  tfjat  3  be  not  afljameb. 

CAPH. 

81  x  if  |3foulefamtetl)fo2tln>faltia 
|\xnon :  but  3  hope  m  tfjp  ib02b. 
%z  £9me  epes  faiic  to?  tljp 

rbo?b :  faping,  oaljcn  unit  tfjou  comfo?t 
me; 

83  jfo?3Jam  become  UUeabottlcm 
tf)e  miotic :  yet  Doc  3  not  fo?get  tfjp 
datutes. 

84  $?oro  manp  are  tlje  bapesof  tfjp 
fcruant ;  Vbfjentbilt  tfjott  crecutc  rnbge^ 
ment  on  tfjem  tfjat  per  fecute  mc  ■: 

85  1Chep?ouDtjaucDiggtDptttcsfo? 
mc :  rofjiefj  a  re  not  after  tfjp  lavu. 

86  ail  tt)p  tommaunbements  are 
t  fattfjfull :  tfjep  pcrfcrutc  me  ib?ongfufc 
lp;l)clpctl)oume. 

87  XDcprjaDaiinoftconramebmcc 
bpon  eartl) :  but  3  fo?fooRc  not  tl)p 
p?eccpts. 

88  SiuicRcn  mec  after  tfjp  louing 
Wnbnelle :  fo  Ojall  3  bcepetlje  tcftimo; 
nieoftljpmoutt). 


LAMED. 


tHel.fMh- 


%9 


F€>?  cuer ,  £>|L€>is  ©,tl)p  tbO?b 
i3fetleb,mi)eaucn. 
90       Xfjp  fauhfulncffc  is  t  bnto  all 
generations  :  tfjon  l)aQ  eOablifljebtfje 
eattl),anbtttablbctlj. 

91  Xf)cptontinuethiSbapatco2btng 
to  tljine  o?btnanccs :  to?  all  arettjpfcr* 
uants. 

9 1   SMcffC  tfjp  lalbC  had  bene  ntp  b^ 

ligfjts : 3  ft)OUlb  tljcn  fjaucpcnfljcb  in 
mincaffltttion. 

93  3  lbill  neuer  fo?get  tfjp  p?ecepts : 
fo2  ttJitfi  tfjem  tfjou  naft  QUitRtncb  me. 

94.  3lamtl)tne,fauemc:fo?3ll)auc 
fougl)ttf)pp?ccepts. 

95  Xfje  rbirbeb  Danelbaittbfo?  me 
tobcttropme :  but  3  ibilltonfibertDp 
tefhmonics. 

96  35  l)auc  feene  an  enb  of  all  per- 
fection:  but  tf)p  commanbement  ts  ip 
cccbmgb?oab. 

MEM. 

97  /"N^otbloue  3  tf)p  Uatb  1  itis 
II  mpniebitation  all  toe  bap. 

98  ^"^  XDon  tt)2Qugl)  flip  €om^ 
manbements  fjaftmaoeme  ttufertften 
mine  enemies :  fo?  t  tijep  are  euer  ttntfj 
met. 

99  3  haucmo?cbnberftanbmg  tnen 

all 


\Heh.loge- 

iteration  and 

generation. 

\Hob.ftan. 

Jab. 


\lhb., 


rxrith 


Gods  word  a  light.      Pfalmcs.  Dauidszealc. 


•pr3i.1p.9- 


Or,CAndlc, 


t  Hdr.ro  da 


•Mitth.  7. 
'3- 


|  Heir. (a* - 

ftsl  tocaaft. 


an  mp  teachers :  fe  thp  Xcfnmonirs 
arempmebitation. 

100  3Jbnberftanbmo?c  then  the  atv 
ttcnts :  becaufe  3  necpe  thp  pjecepts. 

101  3Jhauereframcbmpfcetefrom 
euerp  cuill  Mip :  that3J  mapncepc  ttjp 

MWD. 

ioi  5  hauc  not  beparteb  from  tt»r 
3iubgetitents:  fe  thou  haft  taught  me. 

103  *$oMnicct  are  thpMtfbs  bnto 
mpttafte  1  yej,fweetcr  then  honp  to  mp 
mouth. 

104  XIuoughthppKcepts3Jgctbns 
berftanbmg  :  therefore  3J  ijatc  cucrp 
falfeMip. 

NVN. 

105  *Tp%tbo;Disa|iiampcbntomp 

feetc :  anb  a  light  bnto  mp 
path. 

106  3  hauc  ftuomc ,  anb  31  Mil  per; 
feme  tt :  that  3  Mil  Itctpe  thp  nginc- 
ousiubgements. 

107  3  am  affltttet)  beiT  much : 
quitften  mee,  jDHojb,  accojbmgbnto 

thpMHb. 

ios  Accept ,  3  befcech  thee,  theftee* 
Mloffrmgs  of mp  months  %®&w 
anb  teach  me  thp  inbgements. 

109  £J3p  foulc  is  contmuallp  in  mp 
hanft :  petboe3l  notfegct  thp  !La«j. 

no  Xhc  Mcncb  haue  lapbc  a  fnatc 
femee :  pet  3  wrcD  not  from  thppjc; 
cepts. 

in  Xhp Xettimonics haue3f tafecn 
as  an  heritage  fe  eucr :  fethep  -re  the 
tciopcing  of  mp  heart. 

in  3  hauc  mchncb  mine  heart  tto 
pcrfeme  thp  Statutes ,  alMip ,  eucn 
bnto  the  cub. 

SAMECH. 

113  Tfeate  vame  thoughts  :  but  thp 

J>aujboe3noue. 
114.      Xhouartmphibmgplaee,anb 
mpft)iclD:3niopem  thp  Mwb. 

irt  *2Dcpartfrommc,pccuilbocts: 
fe  31  Mil  fteepc  the  Commanbcmcnts 
ofmpd>ob. 

116  ciphoib  mce  accortnng  bnto  thp 
Voofls ,  that  3)  map  hue :  anb  let  mee  not 
beafhamebofmphopc. 

117  lt)olbthoumebp,anb3in)allbc 
fafc :  anb  31  Mil  hauc  refpect  bnto  thp 
Statutes  continuailp. 

118  Xhou  haft  troben  boMie  all 
them  that  erre  from  thp  Statutes :  fe 
their  beceitisfallhoob. 

119  XhontputteftaMipailrheMc* 
&eb  of  the  earth  I'kcbjoffe :  thercfec3i 


loucthpXcftimonics. 

no  ££)p  flefh  trcmblcth  fe  feare  of 
thee :  anb  3  am  afraibc  of  thp  3Jubgt= 
ments. 

AIN. 

iii  y  $aue  bone  3Iubgemcnt  anb  in- 
I  (lice:  leaucmccnot  to  mineop* 
pjeffouts. 
in  25ee  furetie  fe  thp  feruant  fe 
goob  :lctnotthepjoubopp?cffcme. 

113  $)ineepesfailcfethpfaiuatton: 
anbfe  theMwb  ofthprtghteoufnefTe. 

114  2>eaie  Mth  tljp  feruant  acco?- 
bmg  bnto  thp  mercie :  anb  teach  me  thp 
Statutes. 

115  3lamthpferuant,giuemcbnber; 
ftanbmg :  that  3J  map  bnotb  ttjp  Xetti- 
monies. 

v.6  3ftistimefethcc,1L©m©,to 
M)?fec :  for  the?  h^ue  mabe  toopbe  thp 
JL&vo. 

117  *Xhecefec  3  touc  thp  Conv 
manbements :  abone  golb  ,  pea  abone 
fine  golb. 

118  Xberefec  3  eftccme  all  thy  pje* 
ccpts  concerning  all  things  to  be  right : 
md  3  bate  euerp  falfe  M*p. 


P  E. 


119 


T$p  Xeftimonics  are  Mm* 
berfull :  therefore  boeth  mp 
foiilenecpethem. 

130  Xhe  entrance  of  thp  M^besgi* 
ueth  light :  it  giucth  bnberftanbing  btv 
tothefimpie. 

131  3  opcncbmp  mouth ,  anb  pan* 
teb:  fe3J  longcbfe  thpCommanbe* 
ments. 

131  ?Loobc  thou  bponmee,  anb  be 
met  cifull  bnto  me :  t  as  thou  bfeft  to  bo 
bnto  thofe  that  louc  thp  Jftamc. 

133  ^betmpftepsinthpM);b:anb 
let  not  anp  miquinc  hauc  bomuuono* 
uctme. 

13+  Dcliucrme  from  theoppjeffton 
of  man :  fo  Mil  3i  beepe  thp  pjecepts. 

135  ^anc  thp  face  to  fnme  bpon  thp 
feruant:  anb  teach  me  thp  Statutes. 

136  BiucrsofibatersrunneboMie 
mine  epes :  becaufe  ti;ep  accpe  not  thp 
!LaM 

TSADDI. 

137  "O  ^ghteous  an  thou  ,  £> 
XViLois© :  anb  bpnght  "cthp 
uibgements. 

138  Xhp  tcftimontcs  that  thou  haft 
tonunaunbeb,arctrightcous:  anfiberp 
tfatthfuu. 

139  *  tyty  Kale  hath  *  confumcb  me : 

becaufe 


1  Prou  8 
ll.pfal,! 


\Htiru- 

cordmg  to 
the  cuUome 
tffxcurdj 
tb9fe,d~c. 


\Hebr.rifh- 
tcoufntjff. 

fu/ntfe. 
*Pfil.<9.S. 
ioh.2.  17. 
t  H'i.  (»! 


Dauids  gricfe;  Pfalmes. 


His  hope. 


\Hcb.tried 
or  refined. 


\Heb.found 
me. 


\\Or,thatI 


\0rt  nuvr* 


becaufc  mine  enemies  Ijauc  forgotten 
tljynwbs. 

140  Xliyttwbisbcrytpurc:  tljcre^ 
ioic  t  Up  Ccruatit  louett)  it 

141  3J am  fiitall  ano  bcfprfcb :  yet  doc 
not  3  fojgettl)^  p?ceepts. 

142  %l)yngbtcoufticfrcisancucria; 
(fang  rigbteoumefte :  anbtbyiarb  isfljc 
twett). 

14}  Xr  oublc  ant)  anguifl)  Dane  t  t& 
Men  t)olb  on  me :  yet  tl)v  commaunbc; 
mcmsaretnybcligrjts. 

144  %\)c  ngbtcoufnefle  of  tl)y  Ute 
ftuuonics  is  cuerlalhng :  gtucmctonbcp 
ftaiibuig,anb3J  fballliuc. 


KOPH. 


H5 


I€ncb  ttntn  my  tbljolc  oeart : 
ijcarc  me,  i>  ILc»isie»,  3  H)»H 
Hccpetftyftatutes. 

146  3Jcncbbntotl)ec,  fane  mc:||  anb 
3f  ujail  beepe  tl)y  tcftiinonics. 

147  31  pjeucntcb  the  battmtng  of  tbc 
mommg,  anb  erica :  3  Ijopcb  in  tby 
tboirtj. 

148  flj9inccyes  pjeucnttljc  night  mat- 
ches :  tijat  3J  might  mebitatc  in  tl;y 

tt)0?b. 

149  $carc  my.  boicc  accojbing  bnto 
tl)y  louing  fembneu'e :  £>  ?L  ©  is  ©  cmic? 
Benmcaccojbingto  tfty  wbgement. 

150  Xbcy  Djatt)  niglj  that  folloib  at 
tct  mifebiefc :  rbcy  ate  farre  from  tfiy 
3U\b. 

151  l£ftouartnecrc,jDfL©i5E>:anb 
all  thy  commanbements  arc  tructl). 

151  Concerning  thy tcftimonics,3J 
Dane  bnoibcn  of  olb :  that  thou  haft 
founbcbthcmfomier. 

RESH. 

153  /r^£>nfit)cr  nnnc  affliction,  anu 
l,Deluietme:fo?3JDoenotfo?* 
gett»jy3LaB>. 

154  ^icabmy  caufc,anbbciiuertnc : 
qutefecn  mc  acco2Dmg  to  thy  uwD. 

155  £>aiuatton>sfarrc  from  the  Ibic; 
bcd  :  fo:  tftcv  fecftc  not  thy  Cannes. 

156  ||  Great  a. ^  thy  tenDcr  mercies,)© 
%  ©  is© :  amcRcn  mc  acco:bing  to  thy 
uiDgcmcnts. 

157  £0any  ,rc  my  pcrfccuto:s ,  ant) 
mmc  enemies  :  y«  doc  31  not  Decline 
from  thy  tcftimonics. 

15s  3  be!)clDtnctranfgrcfTonrs,anD| 
tbasgneucD:  becaufc  they  beptnottby, 

159  Confiocr  Don?  3  low  thy  P^! 
ccpts:  ciiucRcntnc,0?LoffijD,atto^ 
Ding  to  thy  lotu'ng  innDiicOc. 


160  txbyttwb  is  true  from  the  beguv 
ning :  anD  cucry  one  of  ttjp  righteous 

tubgements  endureth  foi  cuer. 

SCHIN. 

i6i  T>Himces  bauc  pcrtceutcb  mee 
J;  Without  a  caufc :  but  my  heart 
ftanbeth  m  avbe  of  thy  lboib. 
i6r  3  rcioyce  at  thy  lboib:  as  one 
that  finDct  l)  great  fpoilc. 

i6 j  3  hate  anbabbo:re  lying:  but 
tby^LarbDoegjioue. 

164  £>cucnnmcs  abay  Doe3Jp?aifc 
thee :  becaufc  of  thy  righteous  lubgc^ 
ments. 

16$  <sccat  peaces  they  lbhichloue 
thy  Mb :  $t  nothing  (ball  offenb  them. 

166  jL©iR©,3Jbauchopcofo:tby 
faluation :  anb  bone  thy  tommanbe- 
ments. 

167  ^foute  hath  ftept  thy  tcfhmo^ 
nics :  anb  3J  touc  them  crccebmgly. 

165  Jhauencpttbypjeceptsanbtby 
tcftimonics :  fo:  all  my  rbay es  are  before 
thee. 

TAV. 

169  T  €t  my  ale  tome  neere  before 
^jbec,  £)?L€)is©:  giucmcc 
bnbcrfianbtng  attojbmg  to 
tfty  rbo?be. 

170  j.ctmyfuppIicat(ontomebcfo?c 
tl)ee:bcluiermcacto?bingtotl)yibo2b. 

171  £0y  lipsfl)ailbttcrp«!aifc:  \bftcn 
tl)ou  Dafl  tangDt  mc  tDy  5>tanitcs. 

171  i$y  tongue  fljail  fpcaUc  of  tf)v 
Vbo2D:fozali  rt)y  conunanbcmcuts  uc 
rigl)tcouftien"c. 

17?  iLcttlnncDanbljelpcmc:  fo?3J 
Ijaue  djofen  tljy  pjecepts. 

174  3  ijauc  longcbfonliy  faluation, 
j©  %  ©  is  © :  anb  tljy  %&\bc  is  my  be 
liglit. 

175  Hct  my  foulc  line ,  anb  it  fliall 
p^aifc  tljcc:  anb  let  tl)y  iubgmcnts  Ijclpc 
mc. 

176  1J  Dane  gone  aftray  libe  a  loft 
niccpc.Tecbc  tljy  fcruant :  fo?  3  boe  not 
fojgct  tl)y  tommanbnncnts. 

P  S  A  L.     CXX. 

1  Dauidprayeth  again  ft  Doeg,  3  reproucthhis 
tongue,  5  complainethof  hisneceflirycon- 
uer/ation  with  the  wicked. 

C^fong  of  Degrees. 
^^^ /B  my  biftr  cftc  31  cr  icb  bu 
^g|i  to  tnc  %  ©  a  jd  :  anD  ijcc 
IjearDme. 
2    2Deliucrtnyfoiilc,a) 


Bi  %  o  is  jd,  from  lying  up£ 


and  from  abctcitfuli  tongue. 


?  llDOlmt 


\Hcb.ih, 

beqwmny  of 
thy  word  is 


fti  a!1  haue  > 
ft  itmb  ling 
bhtks 


The  godlies  fafetie.      Pfalmes. 


Godfaueth. 


Or.TvliAt 
JW/ihc  dc- 
ccitfull 
congue^jW 
vmo  thee  T 
or  vfhat  (h.\U 
it  profit  thee? 
tHei.  ad- 
ded. 

\0r,  Itisas 
thefhitrpe 
grrowes  of 
themtghty 
man  with 

eoaleiefw 
r.iper. 

jj  Or,  a  man 
ef  peace. 


\\Or,p,Ml 
lift  vp rrnne 
eict  to  the 
hilt  ?  whci.ee 
(hottldmy 
helpe  come' 
•Pfal. 
'447- 


3  ||  nahat  (ball  be  gittcn  bnto  thee* 
02  tbhat  fbaibctDonc  unto  thee,  tljou 
falfc  tongue* 

4  ||  &hatpc  arroiDes  of  themigh; 
tic :  ibith  coalcs  of  lumptr. 

5  naoctsmcthat  3  foiourncin  fl0e- 
feci) :  that  31  DVbcll  in  tJ)e  tents  ofl^e- 
cat. 

6  £0y  foulc  Ijatrj  long  Dtbclt  tbith 
him  that  hatcth  peace. 

7  j  am  1 1  to.  peacc:but  lbl)en3J  fpcas, 
theyarefozibarrc. 

PSAL.    CXXI. 

i    The  great  fafety  of  the  godly,  V\  ho  put  their 
truft  in  Gods  protection. 

C  3  fong  of  Degrees. 
||t©illltftbp  mine  eyes  bit- 
to  the  IjUlcs:  from  lDhcncc 
commcthmyhclpc. 

X     *£P?  IjClpC  commeth 

front  the  ft©  is  3D :  lbhich 
maDc  hcaiicn  anD  cartl). 

j  $e  ibillnotrurTcrthyfootctobcc 
mottcD :  he  that  ttccpeth  tjjee  null  not 
number. 

4  26cIjolD,!jetI)atHcepetl)5fraei; 
fliall  neither  number  nozflccpe. 

5  %he  %o is 3D  is  thy  Keeper :  the 
%  ois  3D  is  thy  IbaDc,  upon  thy  right 
hanD. 

6  5Ehc  funnc  fball  not finite  thec  by 
bap ;  noz  the  moonc  by  night. 

7  1Clje^©ia;Dfl)aUpKfcntctocc 
from  Ml  cum  :  hec  fl)au  pzefcrue  thy 
foulc. 

8  Xhe  %  o  is  id  (hall  pzefcrue  thy 
going  out ,  anD  thy  tonmung  in  : 
from  tljts  time  foottl)  anD  cucn  foz 
cucnuoic. 

PSAL.   exxir. 

i    Dauid  profefleth  his  ioy  for  the  Church, 
6  and  prayeth  for  the  peace  thereof. 

C  3ifougofDcgrccsof£>auiD. 
3?*^*  aaasgiaD  lbhcntheyfayD 


lis 


^*|*  Unto  me :  ILet  bs  goc  into 
§J  flic  houfc  of tf)C  H  O  IS  3D. 
x    Our    feetc    niall 
tlanD  lbttbm  thy  gates, 
OJcnifnlciii. 

$  3lemfalcm  is  butiDcD  as  a  citic, 
that  is  compact  together: 

4  iDhithcr  the  rnbes  goc  bp, the 
tribes  of  then  o  is  3D,bnto  thetefmuo- 
meof^fraei :  to  gmcthanlics  bnto  the 
name  of  the  21  o  is  jd. 


5  5Po:  there  t  are  let  thjoncs  of  uing 
ment:the  thzoncs  of  the  houfc  of  Da- 

UlD. 

6  $:ay  fo?  the  peace  of  gjcruialcm : 
they  fyall  ptofper  that  louc  thee. 

7  0catc  be  rbttrjm  thy  ibailcs :  and 
ptofpcrittc  Urithin  tfjy  palates. 

8  ifonnybzethitcn  anD  companions 
fafecs:  3  iDill  noiD  fay  ,$cacc  be  ttrithm 
thee. 

9  ^Secaufe  of  the  houfe  of  the 
fLoK3D  our  C50D  :3  ibill  fecfecthp 
gooD. 

PSAL.    CXXIII. 

i    The  godly  profefTe  their  confidence  in  God, 
5   and  pray  to  be  deliuered  from  contempt. 

C%  fong  of  Degrees. 

/5to  thec  lift  3Jt)p  mine 
eyes  :£>  thou  that  Dlbcl- 
icflmthchcauens. 

%  26cljolDe,  as  the 
eyesoffcruants  looke  bn- 
tothchauD  of  their  ^a? 
Hers,  and  as  the  eyes  of  a  maiDcn,  Dnto 
the  rjanD  of  her  miftrcCTc :  fb  our  eyes 

waite  Dpotl  tl)C  %  O  IS  P  OUC  ©OD,  fcntlll 

tljathc  ijaue  mercy  bponbs. 

3  ^aucmcrcybponbs^lLoisiD, 
rjauc  mercy  bponbs:fo2  tbc  arc  crccc; 
Dmgly  fillcD  ibitlj  contempt. 

4  Our  foulc  is  crcccDtngly  fillcD 
tbitl)  the  fcommg  of  thofc  that  arc  at 
cafe :  and  umh  the  contempt  of  tlje 
p:otiD. 

PSAL.    CXXIIII. 

The  Church  blefiethGod,fora  miraculous  deli- 
uerance. 

C  ^  fong  of  Degrees  ofDauiD. 

$^*rd^  Jf   It  h3D   not    bene  the 

i&e^i  -crgpiy  uols3d  lbho  ibas  on  our 
S®  Odc  :  nolbc  may  3Jfrael 

■$$i4  fay : 

£*&i      Z    3JfltI)aDH0tbrnetI)C 

|Lois3D,U)hovbason  ourfiDc,lb!)en 
mcnrofcbpagatnftbs: 

3  Xhcn  they  haD  froaiioibeD  bs  bp 
nuicBc :  ibljnt  t^ctr  voiatl)  ibas  tttnDtcD 
agamflbs. 

4  Xhcn  the  VbatershaD oucrrbljcl- 
meD  bs  i  tlje  ftrcamc  IjaD  gone  oner  our 
foulc. 

5  Xl)m  the  pjouD waters JjaD  gone 
oucr  our  foulc. 

6  23lcfTcDb>thelLois3D:lDIioT)atl) 
not  gincnbs.isapMy  to  their  teeth. 

7  Our  foulc  is  cfcapeDasabirDout 

of 


t  Hcb.  Joe 
ft. 


Godsblefsmgs  Pfalmes.  on  the  godly. 


"PfiLiai. 


\Heh.  » 
leedneffe. 


\Hcbrh*th 
mjpitfieJ  to 
doe  Ktrb 
them. 


\\Orfag. 
I  0r,/W 


of  the  marc  ofthctoulcrs  ■,  tbefnarets 
b?o&Ctt,anbVbcarccfcapeb. 

8  *&)\\t  Uclpc  is  m  the  name  of  the 
lLs>K©:tbho  mabe  hcaucu  ano  earth. 

P  S  A  L.    CXXV. 

i  Thefafetyofiuchas  truftinGod.  4  A  prayer 
for  the  godly,  and  againft  the  wicked. 

Cj3fongofocgtees. 

$?cy  that  trull  in  the 
itsDis©,  (haibe  as  mount 
Zion,  which  cannot  here; 
mooueD ,  but  abibeth  fo? 
eucr. 

x  2ls  the  mountmucs  are  rounb  a? 
bout  3fcntfaicm ,  fo  the  %  ©  k  ©  is 
count)  about  his  people :  from  heme- 
foortheuenfojeuer. 

3  3f  o?  the  rob  of  t  the  tbtcaeb  (hall 
not  tell  Upon  the  lot  of  the  righteous: 
left  the  righteous  put  forth  their  hanbs 
bntoiniqutne. 

4  2Doc  goob,£>  |U>B9,lmto  tijofc 
that  be  goob :  anb  to  them  that  are  bp- 
right  m  their  hearts. 

<,  %s  fo?  web  as  turne  aftbe  tonto 
their  troofecD  iba?es,rhe!L  ©  k  js>  ujail 
leao  them  foorth  tbttb  the  tboibers  of 
inicmitlc ;  but  peace  fhaibebponjfraci. 

PSAL.     CXXVJ. 

t  The  Church  celebrating  her  incredible  re- 
turneoutotcaptiuitie,  4  prayethtor.and 
prophccierli  the  2,ood  fuccefie  thereof. 

C  31  fong  of  Degrees. 

V)t\\  the  %,  o  m.  ©  t  tumcD 
againcthttapnuiticof  zi- 
on :  Ibcc  lucre  UUc  them 
that  Became. 
iXbcnibasoutmoutb 
nllcD  ibith  laughter ,  anb  our  tongue 
tbith  Ongmg,  then  faib  they  among  the 
heathen :  %\m  %  o  k  ©  *  bath  Done 
great  things  fin  them. 

3  Xbe  Ho  m  ©  harh  oone  great 
thmgsfo?  bs:  wha  eofiuc  aregiao. 

4.  1Lumc  agai'ncour  captiuittc,  5© 
7L©k©  :  as  the  ftrcamesm  the  South. 

5  £bey  that  folb  fit  teares :  (ball 
rcapeuii|ioy. 

6  tyctbatgoetb  forth  anb  ibecpetb, 
bearing  1 1  p:ecions  feco ,  (bail  Doubtlcffe 
come  agatnerbitb  retoyemg :  brtngmg 
his  fl)canes  wkh  hi™. 

PSAL.    CXXVII. 

1  ThevettucofGodibleisiiig.   3   Goodchil- 
dren  are  histiifr. 


C3JfongofDcgcees||fb? 

Solomon. 

&f.  Jeept  the  fL©K©  buflb 

33  the  bouft ,  they  labour  in 

rWWbamcthattbinlbU:crccpt 
t£J  %^^a  thelLsDis©  fteepe  the  ci* 
jpgswggS  tic ,  the  ibatcbman  && 
licit)  but  in  name. 

i  3ftisbaincfozyoutorifcbpearly, 
to  fit  bp  late ,  to  catc  the  bicab  of  fo^ 
roxbes:  for  fo  bee  giucth  h<£  beloucb 
flecpe. 

3  fLocchilb^areanheritageofthc 
It  ©  is  © :  and  the  fruit  of  the  Ibombe  is 
HisreVbarb. 

4  2s  arroibes  are  m  the  banb  of  a 
mightie  man  :  fo  are  chtlBjen  of  the 

youth. 

5  $appieisthemanthatthathhis 

quiucr  full  of  them ,  they  (hall  not  be  a* 
fhamcbibutthepUfhailfpeaijeibiththe 
enemies  in  the  gate. 

PSAL.   CXXVIII. 

The  fundi  y  blefsings  which  follow  them  that 
fearcGod. 

C3fongofoegtees. 

!Lc(tcb  is  euety  one  tiiat 
fear  eth  the  H  ©  k  ©:  that 
tbalttcthinhisrbayes. 
1  5fo?  thou  (halt  eat  the 
labour  of  thine  banoes: 

happiC  fhait  thOU  bee ,  anb  it  (hall  be  tbell 

ibubtbce.    ^ 

3  Xhytbife  fhaibe  as  a  fruitful  51me 
by  the  Does  of  thine  boufc ,  thy  cbilbjcn 
UUc  £)Uuc  plants :  rounb  about  tby 
table. 

4  ffiebolbc  that  thus  (hall  the  man 
beblcfleb  that  fearcth  the  JLfi)s©. 

5  Xbc1Lom©(bailblcu*etbecout 
ofzion:  ano  thou  (halt  (ee  the  goob  of 
31  crufalcm ,  all  the  bayes  ofrtji?  itfe. 

I    6   jaca,tbou  (halt  fee  thy  cbtlbjens 
cbiHum:  and  peace  bpon  3ifrael. 

PSAL.    CXXIX. 

i  An  exhortation  to  praife  God  for  fauinglf- 
rael  in  theii  great  afflictions.  5  The  haters 
of  the  Church  are  cm  fed. 

C  31  fong  of  Degrees, 
~  :  I  any  a  time  bane  they  af 
flictcb  tne  frommy  youth : 
may^fraclnoiblay. 
z   flpany  a  time  baue 
« they  afflictco  me  from  my 
youth :  yet  they  haue  not  pjeuatlcb  a 
gainftmec. 
1  !^hh         3  Xhe 


Or,cfSo- 
lemon. 


t  H<br.  are 
bmlders  oftt 
mil. 


filled  his  qm- 

iicrvotfb 

them. 

\\Or,jhaU 

[iJ?due,  tu 

PfalA%.^. 

WjiUftroy. 


\Or,mtah. 


Dauids  humilitie,      Pfalmes.    and  care  for  religion. 


||  Or,  Tehich 
watch  who 
thtm'jr>un2 


\H'b  mlh 


1  Hei. . 

tUrfiJl. 


3  %$t  plotttcrs  ploitocb  Upon  my 
bacbe:  thcymaDclong  their  rurroibcs. 

4  %%t  fLc»K©  is  ngl)tcons :  l)ce 
bath  eutafunbet  the  tojbcs  of  the  vote 
ben. 

5  !Lct  them  all  be  eonfounDeb  anb 
ru n t cd  bacbe.  tljat  Date  -ion, 

6  fLet  them  bee  as  the  graflc  vpon 
the houfe tops:  lbbtcbtintbeteth  afojc 
itgrolberbbp: 

7  naberelbith  the  motber  frtlcrb 
not  bis  Ijanb  :  no?  bee  that  blnDcth 
{bcaucs,bisborome. 

8  /Bather  boe  they  ibfitrt)  goe  by, 
fa?,  Xljc  blcfftng  of  the  %  ©  8  ©  be  top* 
on  you:  ttjee  blefleyou  in  the /frame  of 

P  S  A  L.    CXXX. 

The  Pf ilmift  proicfleth  his  hope  in  prayer, 
5  and  his  patience  in  hope.  7  Hee  exhor- 
tcthlfraeltohope  in  God. 

C^fong  of  Degrees. 

U%  of  the  beptfts  baue 
3  cryeb  bnto  thee ,  £> 

z   %oibt ,  bcare  my 
boice:let  thine  cares  be  at 
ttntiucto  the  boire  of  nrp 
uppltcanons. 
3   'Jffyou,!L©i3JD,a)oulDcftmar&c 
miquuics  :£>  3Lo?D,  lbbo  thai  ftanD  * 

4  20Ut   there  is    fo?giUCnCflC  ttttl) 

thee:  that  thou  mayclt  be  fearcb. 

5  3Jibaitfo2tbeIL<0HJE>,myfouIc 

Doetl)  ibatte :  aubm  bis  VbojDe  Doc  3 
rjopc. 

6  Q3v  f0UlC  waiteth  fi)2  the  H02D , 

tno2ctbcn  they  that  lbatcb  foubc  mor- 
ning: ||  I  'ay.  more  then  tljC?  that  UiatCb 

fo2tt)cmo2mng. 

7  XLct3ifraclt)opcmtf)c1L€>is©, 

fo2  lbitb  the  %  <s>  ■&  ©  there  i\  mercy :  anb 
Unfbbuii  is  picntcousrcDcmption. 

s  3ud  bee  (ball  tcDccmc3Jfracl, 
from  all  bis  iniquities. 

P  S  A  L.    CXXXI. 

Dauidprotefsinghishumilitic,  3  cxhorteth 
Ilrael  to  hope  111  God. 

C  31  fong  of  Degrees  of  DautD. 
Xy^lt^OiaP,  my  heart  ts  not 
w*&^  1)«1llSI'tic ,  U02  mine  eyes 

-W^' lou1c :  Ilclt»cr  D°c  3 f  tt' 
crcifc  my  fclfc  m  great 

matters,  02  m  things  too 


t  high  f02  mcc. 
1   Purely  3  banc  behaucb  anD  qui 


ctcb  t  my  feife  as  a  chflb  that  is  ibcaneo 
of  his  mother :  my  foule  ts  eucn  as  a 
ibcancDtbilDe. 

3  jLct'JIfrael hope  m the  %$>&&, 
t  from  henceforth  anb  fo:  euer. 

P  S  A  L.  CXXXII. 

1  Dauidin  his  prayer  commendeth  vnto  God 
the  religious  care  he  had  for  the  Arke.  8  His 
prayer  at  the  remouing  of  the  Arkc,  11  with 
a  repetition  ofGods  promifes. 

C  3  £>oug  of  Degrees. 

£>is©  tcmemberZDauiD, 
and  aUbis  afflictions; 

z  ^oTbhttoarebnto 
thelLfiDfi^andboibcb 
bnto  the  mighttc  ©od  of 
3lacob. 

3  Purely  3  *brtl  not  tome  into  the 
tabernacle  of  my  houfe :  no:  goe  bp  mto 
my  beb. 

4  3  ibtll  not  giue  fleepc  to  mme 
eyes:  or  dumber  to  mtnejy  ebbs, 

5  Untill  3  fhtbe  out  a  place  fo:  the 
H©a  m  tanhabrtatton  to?  the  migl> 
tic  God  of  3Jacob. 

6  ?Loc,VbccbearDofttatepbjata: 
rbefounDttintbe  fielDsoftbelboob. 

7  naeibiiigoemtohtstabemacles: 
ibctbillibo2ft)ipatbisfootftoole. 

8  *  3rife,  a)  %  o  b  ©,  into  thy  red : 
thou,anD  the  ^rbc  ofthy  (trength. 

9  ?Let  thy  |S?ieftes  be  clotbcb  tuith 
rtgliteoufneiteianbletthy  famtslhout 
fojioy. 

io  ifo?  thy  ftruant  2>auibs  fahe : 
turne  not  arbay  the  fate  of  thtnc  Tin.- 
otnteb. 

1 1  Xhc  %  ©  h  ©  hath  fioome  in 
truethbntoDauib,  heetbill  not  turne 
fromit,  *of  the  fruit  of  UbyboDyUHU 
3  fctbpon  thy  throne. 

it  <jfthychilD2cuibtiibeepcmyco' 
ucnant  anbmy  tcmmontctbat'J  mall 
ttacl)  them ,  their  cbUDjenalfo  fl5ail  fit 
bpon  thy  th2oncfo2  eucrmo2e. 

13  5Fojthc!L©iR©hathchofcnzt; 
on :  he  hath  DefircD '« fo;  his  habitation. 

14  1Ehis  is  my  reft  fo2  eucc :  here 
ibrtl5iDrbell,fo2'5  haueDcfireDit. 

15  3  Wm"  llabunbantly blcffe her p;o- 
utfion  :  3J\bill  fatiRic  her  pooie  Ibitlj 
brcaD. 

i6  3  lbillalfo  clothe  her  pncftsiluth 
faiuation :  anb  her  Saints  fl)ailfl)ont 
aiouDfo2ioy. 

17  *1ThercibaiXm^fthcho2ncof 
SDauiD  to  buDDc :  3  haue  ojDatneD  a 
||lampefo2inmc  ^3iiointeD. 
18  t)is 


\Hcb.mj 


t  Hfbr.fr em 


! 


t  H*h.babi 


•:.Chton. 

<5--}t-iunu. 
IO.35. 


*  S.Sam. 7. 
1 1.1.  king. 
8,;  j.  j.chr. 
e5.j6.Iuke  1. 
0-3ifts  2,30. 
\Htb.thy 


I  Or,  fMrctj. 


'Luc.i.tf?, 


\\OrtyjxJ:c. 


Brotherly  vnitic. 


Pfal 


mes. 


Idol 


oiesarevanitic. 


f  Heh.eucn 
wgethtr. 


\Orinho- 
kntfic. 


is  Ms  enemies  lbill  3  clothe  lbith 
fliamc  :  but  bpon  himfelfc  (hall  t)is 
trottmeflourifl). 

PSAL-   CXXXIII. 

The  benefite  of  the  communion  of  Saints. 

<r  3  long  of  Degrees  of  Dauib. 

CholbhoU)  goob  ant)  hoib  | 
plcafant  it  is :  fo?  bzetlnen 
to  mbcll  t  together  m  b= 
nine. 
z  itisiibetftepjecions 
ovntment  upon  the  hcab ,  that  cannc 
Dottme  Upon  the  bearb ,  euen  Karons 
bearb:  rtjat  ibeiu  boibnc  to  tlje  fairts 
of  his  garments, 
j   ^stljebeibofMrmon.andasthe] 

dewe  that  befcenbeb  bpon  the  moun ■-[ 
tautes  of  Zton ,  foj  there  the  |L  ©  in  © 
tommanbeb  the  blefliug  :  euen  nfe  foi 
cuennoje. 

PSAL.    CXXXIIIL 

An  exhortation  to  bleiTeGod. 

C^fong  of  Degrees. 

i  etjolbc ,  blcffc  pec  the 

i  %  ©  is  ©,  all  vce  fcruants 

ofthcTL©is©:lbh"Dbp 

night  fianb  in  tijc  houfe 

oftljcfLois©. 

z  lUftbppouthanbs 

||  in  tljc  Sanctuary :  *  blcflcthe  !L©kid. 

j  %\)t  %  ©  is  ©  that  mabc  hcaucu 

anb  earth :  blcffe  thee  out  of  zion. 

PSAL.   CXXXV. 

An  exhortation  to  praife  God  for  his  mercy, 
5  forhispower,  8  forhis  judgements.  15 
The  vanitie  o(  Idolcs.  19  An  exhortati- 
on to  bleffe  God. 

£aifevefhe1L©is©, 
pjatfevetljeiBatneof 
tt)CfL©iE©:  pjayfc 
him,  ©pc  fcruants  of 
the7L©is©. 

i    pee  that  (tanb 
in  tlje  i^oufc  of  the 
1L©is©:  in  the  tourtsof  tl)cI)onfc  of 

our<Sob. 
j  0^fethe?L©is©,fo?fhclL©i!nD 

is  goob  ••  ting  pjaifcs  bnto  !)is  ii5amc, 

fo?  >t  ^  piearant. 

4  5Fo?  the  £,  ©  is  ©  hath  chofen 
^acob  bnto  himfelfc :  and  gjfrael  foj 
his  peculiar  ttcalurc. 

5  M  U  ImoVb  that  the  !L  ©  is  id  is 


great :  anb  that  out  ?L©e©  is  aboue 
all  gobs. 

6  u9hatfoeucrthe!L©i3©pleafeD) 
that  bib  he  in  heauen  ano  in  eartl) :  in  tlje 
5>eas,anb  aiibeepc  plates. 

7  *  i^cc  caufcth  tl)c bapours  to  at 
tenb  from  the  enbs  of  the  earth,  he  nta* 
ueth  lightnings  fo2  the  rame :  he  bjitv 
get!)  the  ibmbe  out  of  histreafuries. 

s  *  naho  fmotc  the  firft  borne  of  <fc 
gypt :  t  both  of  man  anb  bead. 

9  who  font  touens  anb  iboonbcrs 
into  the  mtbft  of  thee,  jDCgrpt :  bpon 
Pharaoh, anb bpon  all  hisferuants. 

10  *!Oho  fmotc  great  nations:  anb 
flcVbmighttc  kings: 

1 1  £nhon  lung  of  the  3unontes,anb 
!  4Dg  fttngof  25afhait :  anb  all  tljclung 
bomes  of  Canaan, 

ii  *3[nb  gaue their  lanb  foranijfl* 
I  tagc :  an  heritage  bnto  Jfrael  his  pco= 
pic. 

IJ    1H)pil5amC,£>!LC>lR©,endureth 

foi  cucr :  and  thp  memo2iail,4D  HL©is©, 
t  throughout  all  generations. 

14  ifo?  the  %  ©  is  id  u)iu  uiDgc  his 
people :  anD  he  ibtllrepent  hunfclfe  ton* 
tcrmnghtsferuants. 

15  *  HHjcibolcs  of  the  heathen  are 
Bluer  anb  golbc :  the  ibozac  of  mens 
hanbs. 

16  Xf)CP  haue  mOUthCS ,  bllt  the? 

fpcaue not:  eyes  lwue  they,  but  tljcpfcc 
not: 

17  Xhevliaiie  eares,  btitthcphcarc 
not :  neither  is  there  any  tycath  in  their 
mouthes. 

18  SLhtv  that  mafec  them  are  UUe 
bnto  them:  foiseuerp  one  that  truftctl) 
mthem. 

19  25leu*c  the  %  €>  is  id  ,  £>  houfc  of  I 
Ufrart-.mcfletljc  Hc>isjD,£)houfcof 
^aron.  J 

to  Blcffe  the  fLois©,  £>  houfc  of! 
fLcut :  pc  that  feare  the  %  ©  is  2>>  blefle 
the?L£)iB©. 

ii  25leu"eb  be  the  %  ©  is  ©  out  of  zi- 
on  i  Which  Wbcllcth  at  3lcrufalcm. 
^auepetheH©is©. 

PSAL.    CXXXVI. 

An  exhortation  to  giue  thankes  to  God  tor 
particular  mercies. 

*  <Siuc  thankes  bnto  the 
!L©i3©,foiheeisgoob:fo? 
htsmertp  endureth  foj  eucr. 

z  ©guicthauKcsbnto 
the  d5ob  of  gobs :  fo?  his 
merev  endureth  fojcucr. 

infill  z        3  €>gme 


'Icr.i0.i3 


*Exod.  11. 
19. 

f  Heb.  from 
man  vnto 
bcafl. 

*  Num.2  1. 
2. and  4.2  j, 


f  Heb.  to  ge- 
neration Jjid 
(renerarw*, 


*  Pfal.  1 1  5 
4,5.6i7>8, 


arTdio7.  i. 
and  118. 1 


Od 


s  mercie. 


Pfal 


mes. 


Ifrael 


raei ca 


ptiue. 


'Gcn.i.i 


"Gen.i.S 

icr.10.12. 


*Gcn.I.I4 

tHeb./or 

therultngi 


•Exod.  1 2. 
'■9- 

•Exod- 13. 
'7- 


"Exod.  14 

21.22. 


"Eiod.14. 

jS. 

]Hii.p,Ard 

<# 

'Exod.  15 

22. 


•Dcur.  :g 
7-pfal.  1  ;y. 

1  o,  &:  1 1 . 

"  Num.  2 1 . 

2;. 

'Num.11. 

??■ 

"Iofli.117 


3  0  giuc  thanues  to  tlje  fLozb  of 
lozbs:  foz  his  mercy  endureth  foz  cucr. 

4  Co  him  ibho  alone  both  great 
ibonocrs  :  foz  his  mercy  enduredi  foz 
cuer. 

5  *  Xohim that  by lbtfcbomcmabc 

tljClJCaUtnS  :fOZ  !jlS  mtCtp  endureth  foz 

cucr. 

6  *  Xo  tJint  tijat  Irretchcb  out  t!)c 
earth  about  the  maters  :foz  his  mercy 

endureth  fojCUCr. 

7  *XohimthatmaDcgrcatught5: 

fOlhl'S  tltCrCP  endureth  fc)Z  CUCT. 

8  Xhcfunncttorulcbybay:fozhiS 
mercy  endureth  foz  cucr. 

9  Xhc  moonc  anb  ftarrts  to  rule 
by  night :  fo;  his  mercy  endureth  foz 
cucr. 

10  *Xo  him  that  Guotc  egypt  in 
their  nrftbozuc :  foz  his  mercy  endureth 
rescuer. 

11  *  ;3nb  brought  out  3JfracI  from  a- 
mong  them:  foz  his  mercy  endureth  foz 
eucr. 

12  1191th  a  Grong  hanb  anb  ibith  a 
irretchcb  out  armc :  fiw  his  mercy  endu- 
reth foz  cuer. 

13  *Xohmt  lbhich  btiubcb  the  reb 
fea  into  parts :  foz  his  mercy  e.  idureth  foz 
cuer. 

14.  2lub  mabc  /Jjfracl  to  patTc 
through  the  mibltofit :  foz  his  mercy 

endureth  f0Z  CUer. 

15  *25nttoucrthzclbc0haraoh  anb 
hishofrc  in  the  reb  fca :  foz  his  mercy 

endureth  foj  CUCr. 

i6  *  Xohim  lbhich  leb  his  people 
thzough  the  ibilberaciTc:  foj iljis  mercy 

endureth  f02  CUer. 

17  Xo  him  lbhich  fmotc  great 
lungs:  foz  his  mercy  endureth  foz  cuer. 

18  *  3nb  flue  famous  lungs :  foz  his 
mercy  endureth  foz  cucr. 

19  *5>ihon  King  of  the  3mozitcs: 
foz  his  mercy  endureth  foz  cuer. 

io  *3tnb  £)g  the  lung  of  25afhan:foz 
his  mercy  endureth  foz  cuer. 

ii  *3nbgauc  mcitlanbfozanhcri; 
tagc :  foz  his  mercy  endureth  foz  cucr. 

2 1  Euen  an  heritage  buto  3f  fraclhis 
fcruaut:  foz  his  mercy  endureth  foi  cucr. 

13  Mho  remcinbzcb  bs  m  our  lolbc 
Mate :  foz  hismercy  endureth  foz  cucr. 

24  3lnb  hath  rebeemeb  bs  from  our 
enemies :  foz  his  mercy  en d  urcth  foz  cucr. 

25  B3hogiucthfoobc  toaiiflcfhjfoz 
hismercy  endmet!)  fo:  cucr. 

26  £>gmc  thanltes  bnto  the  0obof 
hcaueu :  foz  Ijis  mercy  endureth  foz  cucr. 


P  S  A  L.   CXXXVII. 

Theconftancieofthelewesincaptiuiry.  7  The 
Prophet  curfeth  Edom  and  Babel. 

jathcriuersofaSaby* 
ion ,  there  ibee  fate 
bolbncycaibelbcpt: 
lbhen  lbe  remembzeb 
Zion. 
2  j©ec  hangcb  our 

harpes  bpon  the  ibilloibcs,  m  the 

nubQ  thereof. 

3  iroz  there  they  that  tarriebbs  a- 
lbay  taptiue,  requtreb  of  bs  t afong, 
anb  they  thattibalrcb  bs,  required  or  vs 
mirth :  laying,  5nng  bsoneofthefongs 
ofzion. 

4  $oib  0>ail  lbe  fing  the  %®kk>£> 
i  fong:  in  at  Orange  lanb; 

5  3Jf  3  fozget  thee,  <£>  3Jcrufalcm : 
I  let  my  right  hanb  fozget  her  cunning. 

I  6  3Jf3Jbocnot  remember  thee,  let 
my  tongue  cleauc  to  the  roofc  of  my 
mouth ;  if  3  pzefcrre  not  3Jcrufalcm  a- 
bouctmychtcfcioy. 
I  7  3Rcmember,£)?loKD,thcehil' 
bzen  ol  <£Oom,in  the  bay  of  3Jcrufaicm  = 
iibhofayb,  trafcit,  tare  it:  euen  to  the 
founbatton  thereof. 

8  *  £>  Daughter  of  2Sabylon,tbho  art 
tobctnefrroyeb  :happy  (hail he  be  trhat 
rcibarbcth  tljcc,  as  tl)ou  haltfcrucb 
bs. 

9  *  fcappy  (hall  he  be  that  taltcth  anb 
batheth  thy  little  ones  agamtt  t  the 
fronts. 

P  S  A  L.  CXXXVIII. 

1  Dauid  praiferh  God  for  the  truth  of  his  word. 
4  Heprophecieth  thatthekingsottheearth 
fliallpraifeGod.  7  He  profefleth  his  con- 
fidence in  God. 

C  APfalmeOf2?atUb. 

^^^^  * mi  PWfc  t'Kc  ibuh  my 
%W  Kf  Whole  heart :  befoze  the 
J6&  ^isobs  ibili  3  fmg  pzaifc 
trafe  «GK  unto  thee. 
SfciriSSS  2  3  imi  ibozfbip  to> 
lbarbs  thy  holy  temple ,  anb  pzaifc  thy 
name,  foz  thy  louingftiubncfTcanbfoz 
thy  tructh :  foz  thou  haft  magnificb  thy 
ibozb  about  all  thy  name. 

3  3Ju  the  bay  ibhcn3!cricb,  thou  an^ 
uucrebftmc:and(irengthcnebfJmcwitii 
Irrcngthramyfoule. 

4  ^»  the  mugs  of  the  earth  than 
pzaifc  thee,  £)|LoiS3E>:  lbhcu  they 
hcarcthciiiozDs  of  thy  month. 

5  #cathcy  than fingm tljc ibayes of 
the 


tftti.tht 

nordj  of  a 

fortg. 

t  Hit.  Uji 

vsonheapes. 

vfaJlrxH?er. 


iHci.rh 
be.idofmj 
toy 

\Hcb.mJiS 
bare. 

*Obad. 
12,1;, 

\H>h.  va- 

\Htt.thtu 

recompen- 
fcth  wito 
iket  thy 
dtcii  whtch 
thou  diiii 
tovr. 

Mfa.l2.i6 
fHct.thc 


'Pfal.lip. 
4.S, 


Nothing  fecret  Pialmes.       totheeyesofGod. 


|  J  Or,  Tri/u. 
twweji. 


"Amos  p. 


lob  26.6. 
heb/Mj- 


tHtl.<Urkt- 

h  not . 
\Heb.tuu 

the  darker,  et 
fo  u  the  tight 


the  1L  <©£©:  fo;  great  is  the  glo.zp  of 
tl)C?L©w©. 

6  Xbougb  the  H«d  is  id  be  bigb,yct 
bath  be  refpect  tonto  the  lottily :  but  t|)c 
p?oub  he  Knotted)  afarre  off. 

7  Xbougb  3  luaifie  m  tf )c  ntibs  of 
trouble,  thou  lbiltreitiucmc,tbou  (bait 
ftretch  foo?tb  thine  banb  agamft  tlic 
ttnatbof  nunc  enemies:  anb  thy  tight 
battb  (ball  fauc  inc. 

S     XljefLffliffilDtbilpCrfltthatwhich 

concerned)  mc:  thy  mercte,  3D  ?L©  is  p, 
endurethfoj  cucr :  fo2fafecnottbcn)0?fts 
oftftmcorbncljanbs. 

PSAL.    CXXXIX. 

i  Dauid  praifeth  God  for  his  nil-feeing  proui- 
dence,  17  And  for  his  infinite  mercies.  19 
Hedefieth  the  wicked.  2.3  Hee  prayeth  for 
finceritie. 

CXo  the  cbicfe  ^uftttan,  3t0falmc 
of  IDauib. 
1<db©,  tljou  Ijatt  fear; 
cljeb  nice,  anbunoVbennif. 
2  Xbou  BitoVbcft  my 
boibnc  fitting ,  anb  mine 
bpnfmg :  tljou  bnberftan 
beft  my  thought  afarre  off . 

j  Xbou  || tompalTeft  my  part),  anb 
my  lying  bourne,  aub  art  atouatnteb 
wirhailmymaycs. 

4  jfo?  theic  is  not  a  tboibe  in  my 
tongue:  btuio,&H©K©,tt)outmou> 
cftttaltogctber. 

5  Xbou  haft  befctmebebinb,  anb 
befoje :  anb  laibtDincftanbitponme. 

e  <§Hirb  knoTblcbgc  &  too  Ybonbcr* 
full  fo?  me :  it  is  bigb>3J  cannot  attaine 
lmtolt. 

7  nsbitbet  fliail  31  goc  from  thy 
fpitit;  02tt)I)itl)er  fhaii  3J  flic  from  thy 
piefente  * 

3  *3Jf  3j  afcenb  top  mto  beauen, 
rt)ou  acttlicrc :  if  3J  niaue  tnybcb  in 

t)ell,bel)Olb,tl)OUait  there. 

9  if  3  taue  the  iblttgs  of  tlie  mo:- 
ning:  andbtbcll  in  tfjebttcrmoft  parts 
oftbc£>ea: 

10  <£um  there  (ball  thy  hanb  leabc 
mc:anbtbytigbtbanbfballbolbnie. 

11  *3if3Jfay,<§>urclytbebarucncs 
fbatlcouetmc:  eucn  the  night  (hall  bee 
light  about  me. 

12  Pea  the  barfteneffe  t  bibert)  not 
fromthec,  but  the  night  (hineth  as  the 
bavrtthcbaruncsanbtbcligbtatebotb 

alittC  to  thee. 

13  iroztboubaftpou'effebmyremes: 


thou  haft  coucr cb  mc  in  my  mothers 
ttjonibc. 

14  3  mill  piaife  thee,  foz  31  ant  fcare; 
fully  and  uionbcrfully  mabemaruet' 
lous  <re  thy  ib02lts :  anb  that  my  foule 
Unoibctbt  right  tticll. 

15  £0y Hfubftancc  urns nothib  from 
tbre,U)bcn  juias  mabc  in  fecret:  and 
cunoufly  ibjought  in  tbeioUicft  parts 
of  the  earth- 

i6  Xhutc  eyes  bib  fee  my  fubftancc 
yet  being  tonpecfect,  anb  in  thy  boouc 
t  all  my  members  iberc  Unttten ,  II  which 


tHrir. 

^rear/j. 

\\Or, 

[trengh  Or 
bad*. 


t  Htb.  .ill 


in  continuance  Uierc  faUiioncb:  tbhen  Jf*^ 
asycttheiewasnoncof  them.  ]%,',*? 

17  *  $otuc  precious  alfo  are  tby!^"' 
thoughts  buto  me,©  <3ob :  borb  great  Ifeoe. 
tstbcfummcoftbcm< 

18  if  3  ftiouib  count  them,  they  are 
moc  in  number  then  the  fanb :  ibbcn  3 
arbake,  3  am  mil  ibith  thee. 

19  Purely  thou  Unit  flay  the  ibitft  cb, 
©00b:  bepart  from  me  therefore,  yc 
bloobynten.. 

20  5fo2  they  fpcafeeagainft  thee  ttic* 
ttebly :  and  tljine  enemies  take  thy  name 
mbatne. 

21  a>oenot3ibatctbcm,<©?L«PEE>, 
that  hate  thec  <  anb  am  not  3J  gricucb 
inith  thofc  that  rife  »p  againft  thec ; 

22  3  hate  tljcm  ttntb  perfect  hatrcb: 
3J  count  them  mine  enemies 

2}  Search mc^dEfob, anb fenoirDe 
my  heart:  trie  nice,  anb  tmoibe  my 
thoughts: 

24  anb  fee  if  there  bee  any  t  tbuttcb 
Vbaymmc:  anb  leabe  mc  (nttjetbaye* 
ucrlafling. 

PSAL.   CXL. 

1  Dauid  prayeth  to  be  deliuered  from  Saul  and 
Dueg.  S  He  prayeth  againflthem.  n  Hee 
coniforteth  himielfe  by  confidence  in  God. 

C  Xo  the  cbiefc  fi0ufirian,  %  i&falme 
ofapauib. 
Cluicr  me,  fo  fL©K3©, 
from  the  euill  man :  p?c* 
fecue  mc  from  the  tbiolcnt 
man, 
2   nabicb  imagine  mif- 
chicfcs  mthetr  heart:  continually  are 
tljey  gathereb  together  for  iiiarrc. 

3  "Xhcybaucfharpncb  their  tongues 
UUe  a  fcrpent :  abbers  poifon  b  tonber 

their  lips.  5»ciah. 

4  Bccpcmc,i©!l©iBiD,fromthc 
hanbs  of  the  ibtrttcb,pKfcrue  me  from 
thetnolcntmammbobauepurpofebto 
oucrth2otb  my  goings. 

^>hh?         5  Xhc 


f  Heb.tr ay 
cfpasnf,  or 
gritfe. 


\Heh.man 
ofvto/ertCtJ. 


*Rom.;.T4 
pfaJ.58.5. 


41 


'rayers  againll 


Pfal 


mes. 


the  wic 


keel. 


:-w«nct  fo 
exMceti, 


f  hftt'.a  m.tn 

of  tortfHt:or, 

nemiBjbf.t- 

TH.1H  of v\o- 
ltn<e  be  efl,\- 
hhpttii'm  tht 
tarth:  In 
him  be  imn- 

udteMw 

turr throw. 


t  Heir  J,. 

r,dtJ 


\\OtJcilit 
rifhfttma 

fmtttmre 
kf*Alj ,  .vi J 
reftcmt, 

hi  nx  (|,fu 

fretstmtiti 

trtd^r  my 
hrMl,0-(. 


5  %\)t  piouDc  hanc  hib  a  mace  foj 
inc  ano  cojds  ,  they  hauc  fp:cab  a  net  bp 
the  lbay  Roc :  they  hauc  fet  grumes  fo? 
me.  5>clah. 

6  31  faiD  Ditto  tftc  %  ®  «  s>,  1-Hou 
an  my  ©ob :  hear  e  the  boy  te  of  my  fup» 
plications,  £>3Low©. 

7  &  <5©p  tficHojo,  thefttcngth 
of  my  taluatfon :  tfion  haft  coucrcb  mp 
hcabutthcDay  of  batten. 

8  <5tant  not,  £>  %  o  « js>,  thece- 
fices  of  tlw  ibitKeb:  further  nothisibit'- 
itcb  bcuice,  ||!eiUl)cy  exalt  thanfelucs. 
<£>ciah. 

9  as fo:  thehcab  of  thofc  that com* 
paff c  me  about:  let  the  mifchicfc  of  their 
oibnc  lips  coucr  them. 

io  %tt  burning  toaics  fall  bpon 
them,  let  them  be  taftinto  thefire :  into 
bccpcpits,  that  they  rifrnotbpagame. 

n  JLctnotantcuilIfpcaRcrbcccfia; 
blifbcb  in  the  eartl) :  euill  fhall  hunt  the 
biolcnt  man  to  oucrtluolb  him. 

12  3J  Unolb  that  tl)c  lLo « © will 
mamtamc  the  canfc  of  tfjc  afflictcb :  and 
the  right  of  the  pooic. 

13  Surely  the  righteous  fljau  gmc 
thanacs  bnto  thy  /|3amc:  the  bpjight 
tljail  DiUcll  in  tljv  picfcucc. 

P  S  A  L.    CXLL 

i    Dauid  prayech  thai  his  fuit  may  bee  accep- 
table,   j   his  conscience  fincere,   7   and  his 

life  late  from  Glares. 

€%ftfaimcof£>anib. 

©hjd,3I  trie  bnto 
thccinauchaftetinto 
mce :  giue  eare  bnto 
myboice,\uhcn3lcric 
bnto  thee. 

1  ?Lct  my  pjaycr 
bee  t  fct  fooith  before 
thec  as  mcenfe:  and  the  lifting  bp  of  my 
hanos a  tlje Cucmngfacrincc. 

3  5>ctaibatch(©IL£>iii?)befo2c 
my  mouth  :l;cepc  the  Doozcof  my  lips. 
4-  Jucliucnotniyhearttoanycuill 
thing,  to  p2actifc  iDicltcD  ilio:Ucstbirt) 
men  that  ID02UC  tmciumc:  auDlcttucc 
not  catc  of  their  oamtics. 

5  |i  iUt  the  righteous  finite  mce ,  it 
rtiaibo  a  tnnoneffe :  ano  let  him  rcp2oouc 

ttie , it  fhalbe  ail  crCCllCllt  OtlC ,  which  (hail 

not  b.'eahemy  hcab :  fo2  yet  myp2aycr 
alfoihaihcinthcircalaiiutics. 

6  tt)hcn  their  JJuDgcs  arc  oner 
th2onicn  in  ironic  places ,  they  (hall 
hcamiiyn>o2t)3,fo2thcyarcfujcct. 


7  4Dur  bones  are  fcattcrcb  at  rhej 
graucs  mouth  :  as  ibhcn  one  cuttcth; 
anb  clcauctl)  wood  fopon  the  earth. 

8  36ut  mine  v?ts  are  bnto  thee ,  O 
(So ©  the  3L02& :  in  thee  is  my  trufr, 
t  leauc  not  my  foulebeflitute. 

9  Beepe  mee  from  the  fnarc  which 
rfteyhauciaibcfinmc,  anbthegrmnes 
of  the  ibojBcrs  of  iniquitie. 

10  fLct  the  VbirttcD  fall  into  their 
ottmc  nets :  rbhilcfl  that  3J  ibithai  t  ef= 
cape. 

P  S  A  L.  CXLII. 

Dauidfheweth  that  in  his  trouble,  all  his  com- 
fort was  in  prayer  vn  to  God. 

C  il  ^afcljil  of  Dauib  a  p2aycr 
ibhcnhcibasiuthccauc. 
§S^  Cncb  bnto  the  Houp 
ibith  my  boicc :  wtth  my 
boiccbntothc  1i£>i3©bib 
3JmaHcmyfuppUcation. 
1   3  P0tt)2CD  out  my 
compiauu  bcfo2chuii:3J  n)c\Pcbbcfo2c 
hun  my  trouble. 

3  iE>hcn  my  fpint  \bas  oucribhel 
mcb  lbithm  mecthen  thou  tmcibcft  my 
path :  m  the  ibay  ibhcrem  %  ibaiUcb, 
hauc  they  p2iuily  laib  a  fnarc  fo2  me. 

4  1131  looBcDonmynghthano,anD 
bchclb, but  the.cv.asno  man  that  lbouib 
Unom  mc ,  refuge  t  failcb  me :  t  no  man 
carcbfo2myfoulc. 

5  3ltricbbntothcc,£>!lo«?D,3l 
faib,  Xhou  an  my  refuge,  andmppo2ti 
on  in  the  lanb  of  the  iiumg. 

6  attcnb  bnto  my  eric ,  fo2  3  <*m 
biought  bcry  lolb  ,  bcliucr  nice  from 
my  pcrfccutcrs :  fo:  they  arc  Orongcr 
thcn'3J. 

7  252ingniyfoulcoutofp2ifon,that 
3  may  p2aifc  thy  /3amc:  the  righteous 
fljail  compafTc  mc  about :  fo:  thoufhalt 
beale  bounnfully  ibith  me. 

P  S  A  L.    CXLIir. 

1  Dauidpravcthtorfauourin  Iud^nient.  3  Hl- 
complaineth  ot  hisgiietes.  5  Herttength- 
neth  liis  taitli  bv  meditation  and  prayer.  7 
Hee  praycth  for  grace,  9  fordeliuerancc, 
10  torlanctification,  11  tordelliuclionot 
his  enemies. 

Ca^faimcofDauiD. 

icarc  my  p2ayer  ,  <© 

]  Hoke?,  gmc  care  to 

my  fupplications :  m  thy 

faithfulncffc  aufmcrcme, 

ai-dinthyrightcoufucs. 

1    ano  cuter  not  into 

uibgc 


nolmifoitle 
hare. 


\Hchr.^c 


II  Or,  A 

I'laliticr/" 

D-'Hi  i  ^*- 

mngtnSb-H- 

c7w». 


\\OrtLook* 
*n  the  rt^ht 
h/w.l,  atid 

fee. 

\  Hck-.pc 
rtfitdpom 

\  Heh.no 
mjufoMfht 
Af'termj 
,.*/e. 


Mans  life 


Pfal 


mes. 


is  butvanitie. 


"Exod.  ,4. 
7. rem.  3.  Jo 


\Or.fir? 

am  hecomt 
like.&c. 


fHc&Md 

me  with 

thee. 


rocks- 

\tUh.  :■>:">* 
warrcj&c 
*  i.Sam.i* 

and^p.\er- 

frs. 

|]  Or-,  mjr 

merds. 


'!.■!>  7. ■■ 
p(il.8.j. 

Ub.iC 


tubgementttuth  tt?v  fetuant  :fc»  in*thp 
right  foail  no  man  lining  be  luftifiru. 

j  jfo:  the  enetntc  hat!)  perftcuteb 
inp  foulc,hc  hath  fmitten  mp  life  bottme 
to  the  grouuD :  hee  hath  tnaoe  nice  to  j 
bibell  ui  barKeneffe ,  as  thole  that  hauc ! 
bcnclongbcao. 

4  Xhcrefoze  is  my  fpirttouetlbljel;  j 
meb  Ibithm  me :  mp  heart  Ibithm  me  is 
Defoiate. 

5  3  remember  the  napes  of  olb ,  3 
mebitate  on  an  thp  Vootkts :  3  mufe  on  j 
thclbozUcofthphanbs. 

6  3  ftretth  fouh  mp  fianfis  bnto 
tibec  :tnp  foule  thirfteth  after  thee,  as  a 
thirfhcianb,  £>eiah. 

7  $earctncfpecbilp ,  <&%  o  «  ip,| 
mp  fptrit  failetl) ,  hibc  not  dip  fate  from 
mce :  ||  left  31  be  IiUc  bnto  themrhatgoe! 
bonmc  into  the  ptt. 

8  Canfc  mec  to  heare  tl)p  louing 
tnnbneffc  in  the  uiomtng,fonn  thee  boe ! 
3Jtrult,  raufc  mee  to  luioibc  thcibap 
Wherein  3  fboulb  ibaifte :  foj  3  lift  top 
mp  foule  bnto  thee. 

9  DcluiermecOiLoiH&Jrom 
mine  enemies :  1 3  flic  bnto  thee  to  hibc 
me. 

10  Heath  me  to  boe  thp  tt)iu,fo2  thou 
■mimxBou ,  thpfpititi^gooD:ieabcmCj 
into  the  lanb  of  bpzigljtnefTe. 

11  £luiclteume,<DfLois?r,  fozthp 
namesfakc:  foi  thp  rightcoufncffcfaKc 
bnng  mp  foule  out  of  trouble. 

11 3utu  of  thp  mercy  cut  off  nunc  ene- 
mies ,  anb  beftrop  all  them  that  afflict 
nip  foule :  fo?  3  am  thp  fcruant. 

P.SAL.    CXLIIII. 

1  Dauid  blcffeth  God  for  his  mercie  both  to 
him  and  to  man.  5  Hee  prayeth  that  God 
would  powerfully  deliuct  him  from  his  ene- 
mies. 9  He  promiicth  topraifeGod 
prayeth  tor  the  happy  (late 

«APfalmeof3)aUlO. 

ILefftbbrthelLaDujD  mp 
:M)  W  t  ftrengtl)  ibhfch  teacheth 
Trx^g  mp  hanbs  t  to  ibarrc,  and 
iM)  m,  mp  fingers  to  fight. 

i  *in&9pgoobnreanb 
mp  foztrrffc,  mp  high  toibcr  anb  mp 
beliucrcr,  mvflnelb,  anb  he  niibhoiuc 
3  truftabho  fubbitcth  mp  people  \n\- 
ocrme. 

3  *  %  <r>  h  cibhat  is  man,that  thou 
taUeftluiotblebgc  of  hinu  or  the  fonne 
of  man,  that  thou  maueft  account  of 
him; 


11  Hee 
jf  the  kingdome. 


4-  *  £©an  is  liftc  to  banitp :  his  bapes 
arc  as  a  Qjabott)  that  paffcth  atbap. 

5  25otb  tljp  heauens,  £>  %  $©  a  ©, 
anb  tome  bolbnc :  touch  the  moan- 
tames,  anb  thep  Oiau  fmoHe. 

6  *  Caft  fonh  lightning,  anb  fcattec 
tnem:  fhoote  out  thine  arrolbes,  anb 
beftrop  them. 

7  £*nb  thine  t  ftanb  from  abotte, 
tib  me,  anb  beitucr  me  out  of  great  iba< 
ters:  from  the  hanb  of  Orange  chiibmi, 

8  ©hofe  mouth  fpcafteth  banitit : 
anb  their  right  hanb  is  a  right  hanb  of 
faifhoob. 

9  3Jtt>iUfmganen>fong bntothee, 
&>  <0ob :  bpon  a  pfaltcric,  and  an  iufrru* 
mem  of  ten  firing*  lbill  3  fingpzaifes 
bnto  thee. 

10  itishe thatgiuetl)!i faitianonbnto 
lungs  :ibho  beliuercth  Dauib  his  fer- 
uant  from  the  hurtfuii  froozb. 

ii  Bib  me,  anbbelmer  me  from  the 
hanb  of  ttrange  chilb^en,  ibhofe  mouth 
fpcaarth  banttte:anb  tljcir  right  tjanb 
is  a  right  hanb  of  faifhoob. 

it  %\)&t  our  fonncs  may  be  as  plants 
groibcn  bp  m  their  youth  ;  due  our 
baughtcrs  may  be  as  comer  (tones,  tpo-- 
lifheb  after  the  fimtlitubt  of  a  palace : 

13  That  bur  garners  may  bee  fall, 
affoojbmg  t  ail  maner  of  (to:e ;  that  our 
fliecpe  map  brnig  fonh  thoufanbs ,  anb 
tcnnerhoufanbsm  ourftrectcs. 

1+  Xhatour  orenmnb-tnrongto 
labour,  that  diere  b;  no  bjcahmg  m,  noz 
going  out-  that  therebenotomplaming 
inourltrcetcs. 

15  **?apppi>that  people  tliat  ts  in 
fuch  a  cafe :  yea ,  happp  is  that  people, 
ibhofe  (Sob is  tljc  %  o  is  ©. 

PSAL.    CXLV. 

1  Danid  praiferh  God  for  his  fame,  8  For  his 
goodnes,  ii  For  his  kingdom?,  14  For  his 
prouidence,  iy  Forhisfaui!io;niercie. 

C  £>ambs  Pfaime  of  pjaifc. 
IPJJT  nam  ettoll  tliccmp  Gob,  © 
I  Sg  Umg :  anb  3  lbill  bltfTc  tljp 
H  l«*f  naiucfo;  cner  anb  eucr. 
%$k  i  Cucrpbaplbil^lblefrc 
thee :  anb  3  Wfll  P?aife  thp  j3amcfo.z 
eueranbeuer. 

3  csreat^tljeiLoE^anbgrcatlp 
to  be  pzaifeb :  tanb  his  greatnes  is  bn^ 
fearchablc. 

4  £>uc  generation  (t)ail  piatfe  thp 
lbotfis  to  another,  anb  fljal  Declare  tftp 
mighneactcs. 

5  3ilbillfpeaUeof  the  glouous  ho 
iiour 

41  ♦ 


•Pftl.j9.tf. 

lob  !•»   I 


'Pftl.lg. 


t  HeiJiAiJi 


HOr,'./.7»7 


\Htt.CM. 


f  Heifrm 


t  HchjibU 
iob;xrcbur~ 
dent,  or  /«- 
dtn  with 
flcfli. 

and  65.4. 


\;r,-r..uj 

f  hu  vrrat* 
effr  there 


Godsgoodnelle,        Pfalmes. 


and  tructh. 


f  Hth.xWmgt 

or  words , 

clarei:. 


(5,7.  num. 
14.18.pfal. 

and  10  j.  8. 
t  Heb.  great 


\Hebr* 

ofailaget. 


Orjooke 
nto  thee. 


Or,  mtra- 
fuflfirboun' 
ttfu/1. 


nourof  tbvmatelhc:  anb  oftbv*botv 
betoustmorftcs. 

6  3nb  men  (ball  fpeattc  of  the  might 
of  tbv  terrible  acts :  anb  3  tinl  t  Declare 
tbvgteatneiTe. 

7  Xbcv  (bail  abunbantlv  btter  the 
memo;?  of  tbv  great  goobneflc :  anb 
(bail  ting  of  trip  ngbtcoufnefTe. 

8  *  Xbe  ft  ©  is  ©  is  gracious  ano 
full  of  eompau"ion :  Clou)  to  anger,  anb 
t  of  great  me  rev. 

9  XbelL©i5©isgooDtoall:anb 
bis  tcnbcr  mereics  are  ouer  all  bis 
rtiozfecs. 

10  3tn  tbviborbes  (ball  prairctbcc, 
tiD  %  ©  is  © :  anb  tbv  faints  (bal  blclTc 

tbCC 

11  Xbev  (ball  fpeabe  of  the  glorv  of 
tbv  bingbome :  anb  talbe  of  tbv  povber. 

ii  Xo  maftc  bnoibcn  to  the  fonnes 
of  men  fjts  niigbtic  actcs :  anb  the  glori- 
ous s^aicme  of  bis  bingbome. 

ij  Xbv  feinguome  >s  t  an  eucrlamng 
fetngbomc :  anb  tbv  botranion  endureth 
throughout  all  generations. 

14  Xbe  1L  ©  is  ©  topbolDctb  all  that 
fall :  anb  ratfeth  bp  all  tbofc  that  bee 
boibcDDoibnc. 

15  Xbe  eves  ofali||ibaitcbpon  thee: 
ant)  thou  giucft  themtheirmcattnbuc 
feafon. 

i6  Xbou  opened  thine  banb :  anb 
fatifficfr  the  bcure  of  cucrv  lining  thing. 

17  Xbe  &  ©  is  ©  is  righteous  in  all 
his  waves :  anb  1 1  bolv  m  all  his  tborfts. 

is  Xbe  !L©ir©  is  nigh  bnto  all 
them  that  call  bpon  him :  to  all  that  call 
bpon  him  In  tructh. 

19  $ec  ttnll  fulfill  the  befire  of  them 
that  feare  him :  he  aifo  Tbtll  bcare  their 
trv,  antiibtllfauethem. 

20  Xbe  %  o  is  ©  prefcruetb  all  them 
that  loue  him :  but  all  the  UMbeD  mill 
bebeftrov. 

ii  ©v mouth  (ball  fpeafee  the  praife 
of  the  %  ©  is  © :  ano  let  all  flctl)  blcffc 
bisbolv  J3ame  for  cucr  anb  cuer. 

P  S  A  L.   CXLVI. 

1  The  Pfalmirt  voweth  perpetual!  praifcs  to 
God.  3  Hceexhortcthiiottotiufrinman. 
5  God  for  lus  power,iufhce,mercy  and  king- 
dome,  is  onely  worthy  to  be  truftcd. 

tJaaifcveethc1L©is©: 
p;avfc  the  ll©is©,  £> 
mp  fouie. 

i  nabticjuucttnii 
3Jpraifctbc?L©is©:31 
ibtii  fmg  piaifcs  bnto  nip 


©ob,  lbbilc  3J  baue  anv  being. 

3  *#ut  not  vonr  trull  inf&ruucs: 
notinthcfonneofman.tnibhomthereis 

nollhelpe. 

4  $tsbreatbgoctbfoortb,bcreturs 
ncth  to  bts  ta«h  J  in  that  becybap  his 
thoughts  penu). 

5     I?appV  is  he  tljat  hath  the  ©Ob  Of 

3Jaeob  for  his  belpe :  ibbofe  hope  >s  m 
the  %  ©is  ©his  ©ob: 

6  which  mabc  bcaucn  anb  eartb,tbc 
<§>ea,anD  an  that  therein  is :  ibbitb  bee* 
petbtruetbforcuer: 

7  which  erctutetb  iubgement  fo? 
the  opprefleb,  which  gmeth  foob  to  the 
bungrv :  trje  %  ©  is  ©  loofctb  the  pnfo- 
ners. 

8  Xbe  31  ©is©  openctb  the  eves 
of  the  bhnbe,  the  %  ©  m  ©  raifctb  them 
that  are  boibcb  bolbnc :  the  %  ©is© 
loueth  the  righteous. 

9  Xhe  ?L©is©  prefcruetb  the  ttraiv 
gers,he  relicucth  the  fathcrlelTc  anb  un* 
boib:  buttbenrnvoftbeuncbebbetur-' 
nethbpfibebolbne. 

10  *  Xhe  %  ©  is  ©  (hall  retgne  for  c- 
uer,euentrjv©oD,jD  zion,  bnto  all ge* 
nerations :  0raife  ve  the  %  ©  s  ©. 

P  S  A  L.    CXLVII. 

1  The  Prophet  exhorteth  to  praife  God ,  for  his 
care  of  the  Church:  4  his  power,  6  and 
his  mercy:  7  To  praife  him  for  his  proui- 
dence:  11  To  praife  him  for  his  blefsings 
vpon  the  kingdome :  1 5  for  his  power  oucr 
the  Meteors:  ]j  and  for  his  ordinances 
in  the  Church. 

3Ratfcvetbe?l©*B©:fo2 
it  is  go  ob  to  ling  praifcs  bn- 
to our  ©ob :  fozttisplca^ 
fant,and  pjaifc  is  comelv. 
i  XbcH©i8©boetb 
buflb  bp  3Jcrufalcm :  he  garbcrctb  to- 
gether the  out  -  cafts  of  3}fracl. 

3  i^ee  hcaicth  the  broben  in  heart: 
anb  bmbctb  bp  thnr  t  ibounbs. 

4-  ^cteiieth  the  number  of  the  Bars: 
he  cailcth  them  all  bv  their  names. 

5  ©teat  is  our  iLorb ,  anb  of  great 
poibcr :  t  bis  bnbcrftanumg  is  infinite. 

6  Xhe!L©is©liftctbbpthcmeebe. 
hec  taftcth  the  ibitbeb  bolbnc  to  the 
grount). 

7  S)ing  bnto  the  H©is©  lbith 
thanbefgiuutg :  fing  pravfc  bpon  the 
bar pc bnto  our  ©ob: 

8  nsho  coucreth  the  heaucn  tbitb 
cloubcs,  Vbho  preparetlj  ramefonhc 
cartl) 


•pfai.n8. 

\\Or,fUm. 

tien. 


•Exod.15. 
18. 


\Heigricfi. 


vnderjijr.- 
ding  there  is 
nunumier. 


God; 


spreat  power: 


great p 


Pfal 


mes. 


Hispraife. 


1 


pfjl.104. 
17.18. 


makfththy 

border  pe.icc 

\Heb!f*t 

oftvhente. 


\Heb.hU 

irds. 


Uintah, 


!!.:! 


earth :  who  ma&eth  gtaffe  to  grow* 
topontDemountaines. 

9  *^cgiuctt)tott)elJtaft  DtfifooDc : 

and  to  tlje  yong  tauens  WDtcD  me. 

10  ^cebelightcfhnottnthcftrength 
of  the  hojfe :  he  taKcth  not  plcafurc  m 
the  legs  of  a  matt. 

n  %\)t  %o  is  ©tahefh  plcafurc  in 
tfjem  that  fcarc  Dun :  in  thofc  that  hope 
mhismcrcic. 

1 1  pzaifc  tl)c  H©ise>,jbD  JJerufalcm: 
pzaifethy  C5ob,i©:rton. 

13  5roz  Dec  hath  ftrcngfbenct)  the 
barrcs  of  thy  gates:  hec  hath  blctTcb 
thy  chilbzcnWithm  thee. 

14  H)e  makcth  peace  in  thy  bozbers: 
ana  ftiietlj  thec  With  the  tfinclt  of  the 
Whcatc. 

15  i^c  fettbeth  fozth  Ins  commanbe- 
nunt  vPon  earth :  his  Wo?b  runneth 
Dciv  Tiuiftlp. 

16  i?c  gtucth mow  Ufcc Wooll : he feat 
tcrcththchoarcfrolrltricafhcs. 

17  J?c  cafteth  fozth  htsyce  nuc  mo?- 
fcis :  ll)l)o  tan  flanb  befoze  his  colb  < 

18  $c fenbeth  ottthis  Wozb.anb mel 
tctD  tlittn:  Dc  taufctf)  Dvs  Wtnb  to  blow, 
mdthe  waters  flow. 

19  ^cfbewcththtswozbbnto  3Ja- 
tob :  Dts  ftatutcs  anb  l)ts  tubgements  I 
bnto^Jfrael. 

io  i^c  Dath  not  bcaltfo  With  any  n& 
turn:  anb  as  foj  his  mbgcincnts ,  they 
hauc  not  Unowcn  them,  pzaifcyccthc 

P  S  A  L.     CXLVIII. 

1  The  Pfalmilt  exliortcth  the  celcftiall,  7  The 
teneftriall,  11  And  the  rational!  creatures 
to  praife  God. 

tftatfe  pec  the  %®\$.  jd. 
pzatfcycthcjXsDisiD  from 
the  fjeauens :  pzatfc  him  m 
the  heights. 
z  pzatfc  yce  htm  all  htS  Angels: 
pzaitc  vc  h«m  all  his  holts. 

3  pzaifcychimSunncanb  QBoonc: 
pzaifc  Dim  all  ye  Itatr  cs  of  light. 

4.  pzatfc  htm  vc  heauens  of  hca 
uens :  anb  vc  waters  that  be  abouc  the 
heauens. 

5  ?Lct  them  pzatfc  the  $ame  of  the 
ILsdisd:  fozDccommanbcb,  anb  tljcy 
Wcrecrcatcb. 

6  i)ec  hath  alfo  ftablifhcb  them  foz 
euer  anb  cucr  :hc  hath  mabc  a  Decree 
Which  (hall  not  paffe. 

7  pzaifethclloisjofcomthccartu: 


ye  bzagous  anb  ail  fieepes. 

8  irircanbhailcfnowanbbapour: 
ftozmic  Wmb  fulfilling  his  wozb. 

9  «©ountaincs anb  all  hillcs :  fruit; 
full  trecs.anb  all  ccbars. 

10  aseattes  anb  all  cattcll :  creeping 
things,  anb  tflpmgfouic. 

1 1  ismgs  of  the  earth  ,anb  all  people: 
pzhtces,  anb  all  Jubgcs  of  the  earth. 

11  25ofh  vomig  men  anb  maibcns: 
olbemcnanbchilbzcn. 

13  ?Lct  them  pzaifethc  iftamc  of  the 
%  &  is  e»,  foz  his  jftamc  alone  is  t  erccl- 
lent :  his  giozy "  abouc  the  earth  anb 
hcaucn. 

1+  i?ce  alfo  craitcth  the  home  of  his 
pcoplcthe  pzaifc  of  all  his  Saints-  eucn 
ofthcchiiozcnofjfraci.apeoplcncerc 
bntohim.  p.zaifeycthe?L£>KjD. 


PS  AL. 


CXLIX. 

topraileGodforhis 


\Htb.  birds 
ofvi»£. 


\Htb.m!- 
rid. 


The  Prophet  exhorted 
lone  to  the  Church,    5    and  for  that  power, 
which  hee  hath  giuen  to  che  Church  to  rule 
the  conferences  of  men. 

sp^i  t  aaaife  vec  tfje  %  ©  is© : 
Smg bnto  the  %  o  is  id  a 


T§?slf i  new  fong  :  and  jjis  pzavfe 
«Ss^im  tlJC  ^onjjccsation  of 
LMs^^i  Saints. 

i  ?Let  3Jfracl  rciovce  m  him  that 
mabe  htm :  ietthcchiib:cuof  Zionbee 
lovfull  tn  their  Bmg. 

3  Het  tl)cm  pjaitc  his  i!5ame  1 1  m  the 
bancc :  let  them  fmg  p.zaifcs  bnto  Dim 
With  the  timbzell  anb  harpe. 

4  if  oz  the  %  <£>  is  ?D  taiteth  plcafure 
m  his  people :  Dee  Will  bcauttfic  the 
mccHeWithfaluation. 

5  %tt  the  Saints  be  to vfull  in  glo-- 
rv :  let  tljem  fmg  aloubc  bpon  their 
bebbes. 

6     SLCtthChighpraifes  Of  d50b  be  t  m 

their  mouth :  anb  a  two  ebgcb  fujozbm 
jthctrhanb: 

7  %q  crcaitc  bengeante  bpon  the 
heathen :  and  puiufhtucnts  bpon  the 
people. 

s  %o  binbc  their  ittmgs  With 
chatties:  anb  their  Cobles  With  fetters 
of  yzon. 

9  *%o  erccutc  bpon  them  tlje  mbgc 
ment  wzittcn:  Xhis  honour  luue  all  Ijts 
Saints,  pzaifevctljc  JLoisp. 

PS  A  L.    CL. 

1    An  exhortation  to  praife  God,  3  withalikind 


\Htb.  Hi'- 
UtfttAh. 


||  Orjstth 
tbejiipe. 


\H<b.in 
their  threat  < 


'Deuc.7 


inlauments. 


pzatfc 


carcofGod.      Prouerbes.     Sinners  intifings. 


\OrXer,:,l 


(3RasfcyetrjcfLi©t3©. 

jD?atfc<5obtnntSi§>an; 

ttuanc :  j&atfe  i)un  in 

tne  finnament  of  l)ts 

polbcr. 
i   $jatfcbtmfo;r)ts 
mtgnttcactes :  i&atfc  fjtnt  atcojbtng  to 
rjts  crceUem  gr  catncffe. 

3   $?aifc  Ijttn  Unto  tljc  founb  of  tfjc 
II  Xrumprt  :  J&ayfc  Dim  ttntrj  tfje 


pfaitertc  ana  ^arpr. 

4  j&aifc  t)im  tbtt  rj  tljc  timtyell  anb 
||  oance :  pzatfe  htm  lbitb  ttringeb  in- 
urumcnts,anb  -Djganes. 

5  pzatfe  bun  bpon  tbc  loub  cynv 
bais :  p2aife  bun  bpon  the  fttglj  faun-- 
Dtng  cymbals. 

6  fLeteuerytfjingtbatbatbbzcatb, 
pjaifc  tbc  %  <sr>  s  jp.  |&?atfe  ?ce  the 


1THE    PROVERBES. 


\Hebr.ciHi- 
tiei. 

mtnt. 


\  Or. an  tie 
qmrrtr;beA(b. 

■r©bi8.ifl. 

plj!  in. 

IO  prou  9. 

lo. 

I  Or,  rA<- 

l>ri*xip.t}l 
tsrt. 

\  Hekr.tn 
cdAtnv, 


CHAP.    I. 

The  vfe  oi  the  Prouerbes.  7  An  exhorta- 
tion to  (care  God  and  beleetie  his  word.  10 
To  auoyd  the  intifings  of  finners.  10  Wif- 
dome  complaineth  of  her  contempt.  14 
She  ihrearneth  her  contemners. 

$  €  0iouerbes 
of  Solomon  the, 
fonne  of  SDautb, 
Bmgofjfracl,  | 
2  Xo  Knott* 
lbifebotne  ano  m- 
(rcuction,ro  per^ 

CClUetbClbOJbSOf1 

bnberftanbtng, 

3  %o  rccciuc  ti)c  inQructton  of ttrffc 
borne,  tuftttc,  anb  tubgement  ft 1 e  quitte, 

4  Xogtucfubttlticto  tbe  fimplc,  to 
tbe  yongman  Knoiblcbgc  anb  ||  btfercs 
tion. 

5  3tt)tfcmanttuibearc,anbtt)tlui; 
crcafe  learning :  anb  a  man  of  bnber- 
ftanbtng  (bail  attamc  bnto  ttnfc  conn* 
felS: 

6  %o  bnbcrflanb  a  pjoucrbe ,  anb 
||  tljc  interpretation  -,  tbe  lbozbes  of  tljc 
ttmc,anb  tbeir  barKe  fayings. 

7  C  *  3Ll)e  fearc  of  tbc  %  ad  «  ©  is 
!|tl)e  beginning  of  ftnoUilcbge-.hutfoolcs 
befpffe  uMebomc  anb  mftrurtton, 

s  tT3p  fonne ,  beare  the  inltructton 
oftbyfatbcr,anbfon'aUcnottbeiatt)of 
tbymotber. 

9  if  0;  tbey  (hail  be  t  an  ornament  of 
grace  bntotbybcao,anbebainesabout 
eljynecltc. 


10  €^yfbnne,tfunticrscntifctbce, 
confentrrjounot. 

11  3lftbeyfay,ComcttHtb  bs,lctbs 
lay  'bait  fo?  bloob ,  let  bs  inrKe  pjiuily 
fi»  tbe  innocent  Untrjout  tanfe: 

ii  jut  bs  froailoib  trjem  bp  aline, 
astbc  grauc,anbibljolc,  astrjofttfjat 
goebottmcuttotbepit: 

13  aaee  wall  finbe  all  p;etious  fun* 
Cancc,  ibec  (ball  fill  our  Ijoufes  lbttfj 
fpotlc: 

14  Call  in  tf)p  lot  among  bs ,  let  bs 
ailbauconcpurfe: 

15  £0y  fonne ,  ibalkc  nottbotttntbc 
lbay  mith  trjem  •,  reframc  tljy  footfrom 
tbettpatb: 

i6  *jfo:tbctrfctterunnctocutl,anb 
maKcbaltctofbcb  bloob. 

17  Surely  tnbatnc  tljc  ncttsfpjcab 
tmtbefigbtofanybirb. 

is  3nb  tt)cp  layttiait  fo?  tbeir  owne 
bloob ,  tljcy  lurtte  pjiutlyfo;  tljcirowne 
lutes. 

19  Soaretijcvbaicfiofeucrvonctbat 
tsgrccbicof  game:  which  taHctrj  amay 
tt>c  Itfe  of  tftc  oibncrs  tljcreof. 

io  Ctnatfcbomccrictljibttljout^e 
*  bttercrr)  tjcr  boitc  in  tl)e  ftcccts : 

ii  Shec  crictl)  m  tljc  tljtcfc  plate  of 
tontottrfctn  tnc  opnttngs  of  rnc  gates: 
in  tbe  tity  (be  btteretli  lier  Vbo^bs,ni>  ing, 

it  ^oiblong,yeftmpleones,«jillyc 
loue  fimpltntic  i  anb  tl)c  fcomcrs  bc^ 
ligDt  in  tljetr  fto,ming,anb  foolcsljatc 
bnoiblcbge? 

1  j  Xurne  you  at  my  repjoofe :  b£ 
rjolb,  5  ibtll  poU)?coutmyfptrttbnto 

. you, 


Ifa.jp.  7. 

10111.J.  1  j. 


%Htbrin 
ike  ejeief 
ntery  thing 
tliAthathtl 
mng. 


f  Hebrmjc 
liom.i  thai 
lifXctUcm 

tfedemc. 

l'rou.8. 1, 


Reward  of  foolcs.      Chap.ij.nj.  VVifedomes  fruits. 


•lfa.«5.M 
and66  4. 
icr.7.1;. 
czcih.S  18 


•lob.Jy. 
9.tfa.  1    IJ 
icr.l  I.I  I. 


Micih.3.4 


\\Or,rcfc 

eftkefvnptr 


tH.l.X.»rft 

thj  vptct. 

•Man;. 
44- 


"Tim.!.*, 
'•king.j.y. 


?ou,'3!  tollmaRCBriolbenmptiwDcs 
bntopou. 

14.  C"25«aufe  31  banc  cailtD  ,anD 
pee  rcfnfeD ,  3  baue  ftrettbcb  out  mp 
banD,aitD  no  tnanrcgacDcD : 

i5  26nt  pe  baue  fct  at  nought  all  mp 
counfell,«\bonlDnone  of  my  rrpjoofc: 

1 6  3(  alfo  lbiil  laugh  at  pour  calami 
tie ,  3  Xo\X  moclte  tPbcn  pout  fcarc  torn 
metb. 

17  *fl3bcn  pour  fcatc  tommctl)  as 
Deflation ,  ana  pouc  Dtftruttton  torn 
mcth  asatbbirlcibmDc  ,ibbcnDtftrelIc 
anD  angutfb  commcth  bpon  pou : 

iS  »?:bcn(ball  tber  tailbponmcc, 
bui^JtbUlnotaufiucretbcpfballfccRc! 
me  earlp.but  tb  cp  (ball  not  finDc  me : 

29  tfoi  that  tt)tp  batcD  Bnoiblcbgc,; 
anb  did  not  choofc  the  fcarc  of  the' 

30  XbeptboulDnoncofmpcounfel: 
tbcpDefpttcDallmprepioofc. 

31  iLheccfozt  (hail  thep  catc  of  the 
frwtc  of  their  ottmc  libap,  anD  be  fillet)  I 
lbith  their  onmcDcutccs. 

32  jfonhc'ttunungaipapofthcuin'' 
pie  fbail  Oap  theni^nb  the  pzolperirp  of 
foolcs  (nail  beftr op  them. 

3*  25uttbhofohearlmerhPntoincc,i 
(ball  Dwell  fafelp  ,  anD  fljall  be  (uuct 
from  fcarc  ofcuUl. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  V/ifedome  promifcth  godlinefle  to  her  chil- 
dren, io  and  fafety  from  cuill  company, 
to  and  direction  in  good  wayes. 

j*fonnc,ifthoui\nltrc 
rente  mpuwbs,  anD  btDc 
tup    totnntaunbcnicnts 

IDlthtfjCC; 

i  «S>o  that  thou  incline 
thtnc  care  bnto  tbife^ 
borne,  andapplp thine  heart  to  bnDcr- 
BanDwg: 

3  ^catfthoucrpcftaftcrRnoftJlcoge, 
andt  ufteft  Dp  thp  Popcc  fo?  bnDcrftan- 
tang: 

4  *3Jftbottfccbcftbcras;Giuer,anD 
feacthcQfoihcr,as/orhtutrearurcs: 

5  iaicn  (halt  thou  tonbcrftanb  the ; 
fcart  ofthefLoa©,  ant  fintj  the| 
bnoiblcDgccfOoD.  I 

6  *  f  02  the  %  e>  tK  r>  gineth  mk-  | 
bontc :  out  of  his  tnotith  commedi  Unoib 
lepge,  anD  bttDcrftanDing. 

7  fociapctbbpfounDXbifcDomcfoj 
the  righteous :  he  is  a  butUlcr  to  them 
thatipalttebpnghrlp. 


s  $e  ftecpeth  the  pathes  of  tubge- 
nicnt ,  ant  picfcrurtb  tl)c  map  of  his 
faints. 

9  Xhen  (halt  thou  DnberftanD 
ttghtcoitfticfTc ,  ano  iuogement,  anDe- 
quitp  \ea  cttcrpgoobpath. 

io  ftoaben  iDifcDomc  cntrcth  tnto 
thine  heart,  anbBitoiblebge  is  plcafant 
tottto  thp  foule . 

ii  Difrrction(haUp:cIeruethce,Pn 
berftattbing  (hall  feeepcthec : 

12  XoDelutrr  thee  from  the  lbap  of 
theetuilman,  from  the  man  that  fpea 
Beth  no  lbarD  things. 

i3  i»bo  leant  the  pathes  of  bpnght- 
neffe,  to  \balBcmtbcibapcsof  DarKc- 
neffc: 

14  iiobo  rctopce  to  boc  euill ,  and  De- 
light m  the  frolParDneffrofthclDlc- 

BCD. 

15  aahofc  mapes  are  crooBcb ,  anb 
thep  fro  lbarD  m  their  pathes. 

i6  %o  Dcltuer  thee  from  the  ftrange 
vhoman,  *euen  from  theffrattger,  which 
flatterctb  ttnth  her  ibozDS  : 

17  nabub  fo2fahtth  the  guiDcof  her 
pouth ,  anb  fojgcttetb  the  coucttant  of 
her  (5ob. 

rs  jFoz  her  hottfc  mtltneth  bnto 
Death  ,anbhcrpathcs  bntothc  DeaD : 

19  /3onc  that  got  bnto hcr,rcturnc 
agatnc ,  neither  rabe  thep  holDof  the 
pathes  of  life. 

20  33iat  thou  mapclt  ibalbc  in  the 
I  tbap  of  gooD  men,  anD  beepe  the  pathes 
of  the  righteous. 

21  *  #02  the  bpught  (bail  brttclltn 
tbclanD ,  anD  tbepcrfcet  Ojall  ronatne 
tntt. 

12  *  2But  the  ailcbeD  (hall  be  tut  off 
from  the  carth,anDthetranfgre(rours 
ibaibclirootcDDUtoftt. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  An  ocliortation  to  cbedieoce,  5  tofaitli,  7 
torr.ortificati  jii,  9  tod.'uotion,  11  to  pati- 
ence, ii  The  happy  game  of  wiledome.  19 
The  power,  n  and  the  benefits  olwifedome. 
17  An  exhortation  to  chautableneile,  50 
peaceablentlTc,  31  and  contemednefTe.  33 
The  curfed  ftate  of  the  wicked. 

^  fontte ,  fojget  not  nip 
laibc ;  *  but  let  thine  heart 
beepc  mp  tonnnaunbe- 
ments: 
2   fo;  length  of  Dapes, 
anD  t  long  lifr^ub  peat  c  (hall  thep  aoDc 
tothec 

3  Het 


'Prou.j  3. 
aiiH 7  5. 


•Pl"il.j7 


•lob.  18 
I7.pfai. 
104.55. 

\\Or,fl*clt! 
Vf. 


"Dtut.S.i 

&  ;o.l«. 


f  Hrf.tterts 


Wifdomes  praifc     Proucrbcs.  Dauids  care. 


9  dfjt.6.8. 

■  Pf»l.  111. 

10. 

||  Orgud 


■  t.Cliron. 

•Kom.  II. 
16 


t  Heh  m,- 
Arai.-. 

\  Htifl.TVA- 
trine  ,  sr 
majTrmn*. 

•  Hxod.i;. 

19.  and;.* 

jtf.deuc. 

16. 1  &c. 
mala.  3.  10 
Siclule 
I4-I5- 

•Dcui.  :8 
8. 

"lob  5. 17 
licbt.  1:.  s 
apo.«. ;  19, 


^He'or.the 
m.trt  rh.it 
tir.v.vclh  our 
znUerihin- 

MobiS. 
I5.3cc.pfaf. 
19.1a.  pro. 
f.vcrl'.ll. 
and  19  and 
16.16. 


[  Or,  prep* 
rei 


•Pfal.;7. 
14. and  91 


3  ILct  not  mctcy  ant  tructhfcufauc 
thee :  * bmb  the in  about  thy  ucefee  ,ID2UC 
them  bpon  tl)c  tabic  of  thine  heart. 

+  '  So  (bait  tliou  finD  fauour ,  ano 
!gooD  buDcrttaumng  m  the  fight  of 
<5oD,anDtuan. 

-;  4L  Xcnft  m  tl^c  ?L  c>  ta  ©  lDitft  all 
thtuc  heart  anb  leane  not  Unto  thine 
onmebnDcrftanbmg. 

6  *  Jn  all  th v  ibayes  acttnoibleDgc 
han.ano  be  (hall  Direct  thy  pathes. 

7  C*25f  not  lbifc  m  thine  oibnc 
eyes  :  fcarc  rhc  %  <*>  r>  © ,  anD  Depart 
front  euill. 

8  3?t  fbaibe  t  health  to  thy  nautii, 
aitD  t  marroib  to  thy  bones. 

9  *  honour  the  %  £>  k  ©  lbitb  thy 
fubftancc,anDibitbtbcfirft  feints  ofau 
rhmctncrcafc. 

10  *  5)o  (hall  thy  barncs  be  filleD 
lbtth plenty  anorhypzcflesfljailburft 
outibitbnclblbinc. 

n  C*^y  fonnc,  bcfpifc  not  the  eba 
ftcnin  g  of  tl)  e  ?L©  is  © :  ncitb  c  r  b  c  lb  ca; 
ry  of  his  correction. 

u  jfo:  lbhom  tljc  IL©  iso  loueth, 
he  co2rcetcthcucn  as  a  father  the  fonnc 

mwhomhCt)Cligt)tCtll. 

15  i~  tyappy  is  tljc  man  that  finbeth 
lbifcDomc ,  anb  t  the  man  that  gcttetb 
bnDerfranDing. 

1+  *  j?02  the  merchanbtfe  of  it  is  bet- 
ter then  themcrchanbifc  of  filucr ,  anb 
the  game  thereof  ,thcn  fine  golb. 

H  She  is  mo:c  precious  tljcn  Hit-- 
bies :  anb  all  the  things  thou  cauftbe- 
Grcarc  not  to  be  comparcb  bnto  her. 

16  JLeugth  of  bayes  is  m  her  right 
hanb  :anb  m  her  left  banb,  rtcbcsanD 
honour. 

17  lf»cr  ibayes  are  ibayes  of  piefant- 
nclTc :  anb  all  bee  pathes  are  peace. 

is  She  is  a  tree  of  life,  to  them  that 
lav  holb  upon  her:  and  happy  is  cucry 
one  that  ictamcth  her. 

19  Xhc  %  o  v.\  v>  by  unfebome  hath 
founbeo  the  cartl)  by  bnocrltaiiDrng 
hath  he  i  cftablifhcb  rhe  heaucus. 

io  23y  his  UnoiDlcbgc  the  bepthes 
arcb:oKcnbp  anb  thcclouDcsozoppc 
bourne  the  bcib. 

n  C  $*y  fonnc ,  let  not  them  Depart 
fiomtliiticrycs:KccpcfounDu»ifcDomc 
aubbifcretion. 

11  So  (hall  thev  bee  life  bnto  thv 
foule,anD  grace  to  thy  ncctic. 

i?  *  ICbcu  (ban  thou  lualfee  in  thy 

ibay  fafely,  *  thy  foot  fliall  not  (tumble. 

1+  DDljcn  rljou  lyclt  Dottmc ,  thou 


(halt  not  be  afraibe :  yea,  thou  (halt  lye 
boibne,  anb  thy  fleepe  fbaibefroect. 

25  Be  not  atcaib  of  fuDDen  fcarc,  nc(^ 
ther  of  tlje  Dcfoiatton  of  the  Uncueb, 
lbhcnittommctb. 

16  5fo2thclL©c©il)aibctl)ycon^ 
fibence ,  ano  (hall  feeepe  thy  footc  from 
being  taken. 

17  Cnrntbholbnotgoobtromtbem 
f  to  lnhom  it  is  Dttclbbcn  tt  is  m  the 
po  ibcr  of  thine  hanb  to  boe  it- 

is  Say  not  tmto  thy  neighbour, 
©ocanbtomeagamc,  anDtomojroib 
3  ttnll  giucinhen  thou  haft  it  by  thee. 

19  I IDcuifc  not  cuilagamft  thv  neigh- 
bour ,  feeing  hce  DlbcUcth  fecurcly  by 
thee. 

jo  {£  Stnuc  not  ibith  a  man  lhith- 
ont  caufe ,  if  hce  hauc  bone  thee  no 
harnie. 

31  C  *  ®nuie  tljou  not  t  the  oppzef- 
four,anb  choofe  none  of  his  luayes. 

31  jfo:  the  froinaro  is  abomination 
to  the  IL  ©  is  © :  *  but  ht£  ferret  is  Ujitt) 
the  righteous. 

33  C*XhccurfcoftheiL©w©i5tn 
tile  houfc  of  the  lutcucD :  but  he  blclTcth 
the  habitation  of  the  uift. 

34.  "Surelyhcfcomeththertomcts: 
but  he  giucth  grace  bnto  the  loibly. 

35  1Cheibtfcthallinhcritcgl02y,but 
fl)amctfl)albcthcpiomononoffooles. 

CHAP.     IIII. 

1  Solomon  ,toperfwade  obedience,  3  {hew- 
eth  what  inftruiftion  hee  had  ofhis  parents, 
5  to  fiudywifiiome,  14  and  to  fhuiuhe 
path  of  the  wicked,  zo  Hee  exhortethto 
taiih,    ij   and  fanflification. 

care,  yechill):cn,thctnj 
ftrucnon  of  a  father,  anD 
attcnb  to  tutoU)  touDer- 
ftanbmg. 
1  JFoi'JgiucyougooD 
Ooctnue :  tojfabc  you  not  my  laito. 

3  Jfo:  3)  ibas  my  fathers  fonnc, 
*  tenber  ano  oucly  beloued  m  the  ftght  of 
my  mother. 

4.  *  fee  taught  me  aifo  ,anb  faib  bnto 
mcHctthinehcartrctcmemyiboibes: 
kecpemy  commanocmcnts,anDliue. 

5  ©ctUiifcbomcgctbnbcrftanbing: 
fozget  u  not ,  neither  Decline  from  tljc 
UioiDcsofmymoutl). 

6  if 02falic  her  nocanb  (lie  fl)all  p:e^ 
fcrue  thee :  lone  her ;  attD  fl)C  (hall  ticepe 
thee. 

7  ©iCeDomc  is  the  p?mnpall  thing, 

there- 


t  Htbr.the 
0-wnert  ther- 
of- 


II  Or,fr*. 
tiife  no  ehtX 


•PraJ.;7  1. 
\H,br„ 
man  of  vio- 
lence.' 
*PfaU5. 
13- 
•MaJa-i.l. 


*Iam.4.<, 
t.pct.5.5. 


t  Heir.tx 
altetbthi 
fooUt. 


'  i.Chron 
19.1. 


i.Chcon 


289. 


Keepe  the  heart.         Chap.v.       Flee  whoredome. 


*Clwp  19 

|]  Or,pie e 
jhMcBm- 
paffe  thte 
jptfh  a 
crewnr  of 


■  i. 


*Chap.  i 
10,15. 

pEU.1.1 


fHti.mr 

dicme. 
\  Hebjtboue 
«&kecpng. 
\Heb.fro- 
■wxrdntffc 
of  month 
and  per Her'~ 
net  of  ftps. 


Ort  ail  thy 
wayesjhttie 
rierei 
rifht. 
Dcilt.JJ  1 


therefore  get  roifebome :  anD  roith  all  thy 
getting.get  tonberftanbing. 

3  craltlicc,  anb  (hec  (hailp2omotc 
thee :  fhee  Chan  b2(ng  thee  to  honour, 
rohen  thou  boeftimb2acc  her. 

9  * S>hc  (hall  giuc  to  thine  heab  ait 
02tiamcnt  of  grace, 'larrolbnc  of  gl02y 
fhallfhcbeiuicrrothcc. 

10  locate ,  jD  my  fonnc ,  anb  recciue 
ntv  faymgs :  anb  the  yccres  of  thy  Itfc 
fhalbc  many. 

1 1  3  haue  taught  thec  in  the  may  of 
tbifcbomc :  3  *)aue  icab  thee  m  right 
pathes. 

ii  ashen  thou  gocft ,  trip  ttcps  (hall 
not  be  ftrattneo ,  *  anb  rohen  thou  can* 
nett,thou  (halt  not  (tumble. 

13  iCaHc fait  holb  of  inftraction  ,  let 
her  notgoc  feccpe  her  ,fc>2  (he  is  thy  life. 

14.  Center  not  into  thepath  of  the 
rotcHco,anbgoc  not  inthcroay  of  eiuil 
men. 

15  Sutoibit,  paffenot  by  it,  turnc 
fromit.anbpatfcaroay. 

i6  .f  02  they  flcepc  not  ercept  they 
haue  bone  nufchtcfe :  anb  their  deepe  is 
tafecn  aroay  unicflc  they  taufc  foiuc  to 
fall. 

17  jfo2thcycatcthcb2cabofroitKcb 
neffe,  anb  bztnfec  the  roinc  of  biolcncc. 

18  26utthcpathoftheiu(i>sasthe 
fl)imng  light  that  (hmcth  tnojc  anb 
mo:c  bnto  the  perfect  bay. 

19  %\)t  roav  of  the  roicUeb  is  as 
barfencs:  they  bnoVD  notatrohatthcy 
Ihnublc. 

10  C^pfonnc,attcnbtomyn)02bs, 
meltnc  thine  earc  bnto  my  faymgs. 

ii  Het  them  not  bepart  from  thine 
eyes:  Itecpethem  m  the  nublt  of  tlnne 
heart. 

22  Jro:  they  arc  life  unto  thofe  that 
finb  them,  anb  t  health  to  all  their  fled). 

23  IT  Beepc  thy  heart  t  roith  all  bili 
gence :  1*02  out  of  it  are  the  iffucs  of  life. 

24  $ttt  aroay  from  thee  t  a  frmuarb 
month  ,anb  pcrucrfe  lips  put  far  re  from 
thee. 

25  %  ct  thmc  eyes  lo  otic  right  on,anb 
let  rhnte  eye  libs  lookc  ftraight  befoze 
thee. 

26  0onbcrthepathofthyfeet,||anb 
let  all  thy  roayes  be  cltablifhcb. 

27  *%urnc  not  to  the  right  hanbe 
no.z  to  thclcft :  rcmouc  thy  foot  fro  cutl. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Solomon  cxhorterh  to  the  fttldie  ol  wifedome. 
3  He  fheweth  the  mifchiefe  ot' whoredome 


and  not.  15  Heexhorteth  to  contentedncs, 
liberalise,  and chailitie.  11  The  wicked  aie 
ouertaken.Mthtlieirownefinncs. 

$£;&  fount,  attcub  bnto  my 

I  roifebome,  and  bome  thine 

I  earc  to  my  Dnbcrftanbing. 

§    2   Xhat  tliou  mayett 

regarbbifcrctiou,  anb  thu 

thy  lips  may  Ucepc  Hnoroicbgc. 

3  €  *  foi  the  lips  of  a  (trangc  woman 
bjop  as  an  hony  combe,  anb  her  t  mouth 
isfmoorhcrthcnoyie. 

4  26ut  her  eno  is  bitter  as  rbojine- 
Vboob,  fharpc  as  a  tibo  cbgcb  froo2b. 

5  *  fyct  fecte  goe  bottme  to  bcarh : 
her  ftcpstahcholbon  hell. 

6  jLttt  thou  (Vjoulbclt  ponber  the 
path  of  life,  her  roayes  arc  moucablc, 

that  tl)OU  tanft  not  UUOlb  them. 

7  l?care  me  nolb  therefore ,  <D  ycc 
chilb;en:  j  bepart  not  from  the  lbo2bs 
of  my  mouth- 

s  Hcmoucthyroayfarrcfromhcr, 
anb  come  not  mc  the  boo2c  of  her  houfe: 

9  ILettthougiuethtnchonoiirbttto 
others ,anb  thy  ycercs  bnto  the  ci  ucll : 

10  iLcttftrangersbcfillcbttHthtthy 
metilrt) ,  anb  thy  labo;sbe  m  the  houfe 
of  aftranger, 

11  5Jnb  thou  mournc  at  tlic  ia(t,ibheu 
tljy  flefh  anb  thy  boby  arc  confumcb, 

12  3lnb  fay,  l^o\b  hauc  J  hatcb  m 
ftructton  ,  anD  my  heart  befpifcb  re 

P200fc  i 

13  3(nb  haue  not  obe^'eb  the  bovce  of 
my  teachers,  no2  mclutco  nunc  earc  to 
thcmthatinQructebmei 

14.  giibas  aimolt  m  all  cuill,  in  the 
mibftof  the  congregation  saffcmbiy. 

15  CC  S?2inHc  iliaters  out  of  thine 
olbne  nOcrnc ,  anb  cunning  Vbaters 
outofthmcoibncibell. 

is  ?Lct thy  fountames  bec  btfpcrfeb 
ab2oab ,  and  ruiers  of  Vbatcrs  m  the 
(trccts. 

17  tLetthem  be  onely  thine  olbne, 
anb  not  ftcaugers  tbith  thee. 

18  ?Lctthyfountatuebcbicffcb:anb 
ceioycc  Vbith  the  lbifc  of  thy  youth. 

19    Let  her  bee  as  tl)C  lOUltig  l^UlbC  tlltD 

pleafant  Hoc,  let  her  b2ca(ls  tfatiffle 
thee  at  ail  tunes,  anb  be  thou  t  rautttjt 
aUbaycsVbithhcrlouc. 

20  ^nbTvhy  rout  thou,  my  fonnc, 
berauithtroithaftcange  rootnan,  anb 
itnbwce  the  bofomc  of  a  (trangcr  i 

21  *  jfo2thcroayesof  man  ^ebefozc 
the  eyes  of  the  %.  €>  s  ©,  anb  he  ponbe; 
rcthalihisgomgs. 

Hit  21  Cfrfs 


'Chap  -s. 
1  6  and  6. 


'Chap  7. 
*7- 


XHebr.th] 
ffrength. 


f  Heh.vfMer 

thee. 

t  Heb  err: 

thonaln-.ryej 

tn  her  hne. 


and  :4.  n, 
thap.  15. j. 
icr.itf.i  7. 
Jiid  ;2.iy. 


Offuretifhip.  Prouerbes. 


Adul 


tcrie. 


THfi/""'. 


\\Or,p>fl,Alt 
thoH  pre 
Hdtlewttk 
thifrtend. 


•Chi.ij.* 

and  :o.4. 
and  J4ij. 


pnhfmh. 


Ihiek'fh, 
fmU. 


22  C  $is omnc  iniquities (hail tatte 
tljc  wicKct)  ijunfclfc,  anb  He  (hall  be  Ijol- 
ben  Mth  t!)c  coarbs  of  Ins f  fumes. 

i?  $c  fl)au  Die  without  inftructton, 
anb  m  the  greatneffe  of  t)is  four  he  fljai 
gocaftrap. 

CHAP.    V  I. 

i  Agaiuft  furetifhip,  6  Idlenefle,  n  And  mif- 
chicuoiifncfle.  >6  Scuenthm<;s  hatctull  to 
God.  10  The  blelsings  ot  obedience.  1.5 
Theinilchiel'esot  whoirdomc. 


z  Xhouartfnarcb 
luiththcrcojbsofthF 
mouth,  thou  art  taftcn 
lDirn  the  nmbes  of  thp  mouth. 

j  2Doc  thisnom,  mpfonnc,  anUDc- 
liucr  thy  felfc,  ti)hcn  thou  an  tome  uito 
the  hanb  of  tfti?  fcicnb :  gochumble  tlrp 
felfc,  anb  1  mane  fure  top  f  nenb. 

4-  <©iuc  not  fleepe  to  thine  c?cs,  no? 
(lumber  to  thine  cychbs. 

5  2>cltuct  thp  felfc  as  a  &oe  from 
the  hanb  of  the  hunrer,anc  as  a  blrb  from 
the hanb  ofthcfoiblcr. 

6  {[©octothcant.thoufluggarb, 
confiocc  her  wapes,  anu  be  vbifc. 

7  nshichhaumgno  guibc,oucrfccr, 
02  ruler, 

8  £2oiubcth  her  meat  m  the  £>um 
mcr,  and  gathered)  her  foob  in  thchar; 
ncft. 

9  *  J?ow  long  Unit  thou  fleepe ,  £) 
fluggaro^  tthcnnnlt  thouarife  out  of 
thv  fleepe; 

io  ptt  a  little  flecpea  itttlc  (lumber, 
a  Itttlt  folbmg  of  the  hanbs  to  fleepe. 

1 1  5)0  (hail  thp  poutrnc  tome  as 
one  that  trauaiicth ,  anb  thp  Vbantas 
anarmebman. 

ii  C  3  uaughnc  perfon ,  a  UntUcb 
man  luaiftcth  rbith  afroibarb  mouth. 

u  Dc  ttuniicth  ttiith  his  cpcs,he  (pea- 
licth  mith  hisftctt ,  hec  trachtth  Hnth 
his  fingers. 

14  f  roiuarbntflc  \sin  his  heart,  he 
bcuifcth  mifthiefc  continually,  Ijc  t  fom- 
cthbifro:b. 

15 1Ehcrcfo2c  (hall  his  calamine  conic 
fuD&cnlv  fubbcuiy  (hall  hce  be  b;ohcn 
Without  rcmcbic. 

i6  C  Xhcfc  fire  things  bocth  the 
!L  o  is  id  hate  ■,  yea  fcucn  arc  an  abomi 
nation  tbnto  him: 


17  t  3  pjouDt  loofte,  a  lying  tongue, 
anb  hanbs  that  (heb  mnoccnt  bloob : 

18  3ln  heart  that  bcuifcth  ttncbcb 
imaginations ,  *  feet  that  be  tout  in  tun? 
ning  to  mifchiefe : 

19  afaife Vbitneffc th^fpeabcth lies, 
anb  him  that  fbuxth  bifcoib  among  bit- 
ttwen. 

10  C^fonncHcepcthv  fathers 
romnianbnncnt ,  anb  fozfafec  not  the 
law  of  thy  mother. 

21  ffitnbc  them  connnuaily  hpon 
thine  heart,  and  tic  them  about  thy 
nctUc. 

22  ©hen  thou  gocft,  it  (hall  leabc 
thee  i  when  thou  flecpett ,  it  (hail  itecpe 
thec  anb  When  thou  awancft,it  (hall 
talhc  With  thec. 

23  *  foi  the  Commanbement  "  a 
iilampe ,  anb  the  Hawc  is  light :  anb 
rep2oofcs  of  infrructton  arc  the  way  of 
life: 

24  "Xo  fceepe  thec  from  the  euili 
Woman  ,  from  the  flatteric  ||  of  the 
tongue  of  a  Orange  lUoman. 

25  "Hiift  not  after  her  bcautie  M 
thine  heart  •  neither  let  \)tv  taftc  thee 
ttMthhcr  crelibs. 

26  .f02bpmcancsofaVbhojl(htb05 

mail,  1  man  is  brought  tO  3  piCCCOftycab: 

anb  the  t  abuUcrcffc  VoiU  hunt  fo?  the 
pjcnouslifc. 

27  Can  a  man  tafee  fire  in  his  bo- 
fomc,  anb  his  clothes  not  be  burnt  < 

28  Can  one  goc  topon  hotc  coaies, 
anb  his  ftcte  not  be  burnt  < 

29  5>o  he  that  gocthm  to  his  neigh 
bours  ttnfc.  Vbhofocuer  touchctlj  her, 
(hail  not  be  innocent. 

jo  £{3cn&ocnotbcfpifcathicfc,  if  he 
ftcaic  to  Cattffie  his  fbulc ,  tthen  hec  is 
hungry : 

31  But  if  he  be  fouub,hc  (hail  reftojc 
feucnfolb ,  he  (hall  giuc  all  tl)t  fubftancc 
ofhishonfe. 

32  Bur  uiho  fo  committcth  abultcry 
Vbith  a  lboman,  latfecth  f  bnberftan' 
bmg:  hec  thatboethtt,  bcftropcthhis 
oUmcfoulc. 

33  31  tbounb  anb  bifliononr  (hall  he 
get,  anb  his  repwh  (hail  notbcrbipeb 
aibap. 

34.  ;f02icaiouficuthetagcofaman: 
therefor  he  Ujillnotrparcmthebav  of 
hengeancc. 

3<  tltie  rbiil  not  r cgarb  an?  ranfome ; 
neither  lVull  hec  reft  content,  though 
thou  gtucO  manv  giftes. 

CHAP. 


\H,lr. 

bamjhtia 
eyes. 

*  Rom.  J, 


"Cliap.l.8. 


•Pfal.  19  9- 
&:  1 1 9.10  j. 

||  >rtc4*Ms. 


*Cha.l.i«. 
and  j. 3. 
and  7.  e. 
\\Or,tf:ht 

A«s< 

tongHf. 
*Mit  5.38 


man  fir  .1 
nwts  wtft. 


\Hebktart. 


\H,br.he 

(tftibe  f*£t 
efj*jr*M 
fomt; 


Thedefcription     Chap.vij.viij. 


ofa  harlot. 


•Deuc«8. 
&H.18. 

clup.J.3. 


•Chip.  5  j 


t  Hth.tht 

fsnntl. 


\Htkmthi 
tuening  tf 
tht  day. 


"Chap.?.)  3 


\Hcb.p„e 
ftrenqjhtntd 
htr  face  and 

fir* 

f  H:b.  peace 
~-crwgi  are 
vpo/tmc. 


CHAP.    VIF. 

Solomon  perfwadethto  afmcere  and  kind  fa- 
miliaritie  with  wifedome.  6  In  an  example  of 
his  owne  experience,  he  fhewcth  10  the  cun- 
ning ot  an  whore,  11  Andthedcfperatefim- 
pliciticot  a  yong  wanton.  14  Heedehorteth 
from  fuch  wickedntfle. 

13  fonnc,  beepe  my  tb02bs, 
anb  lay  Pp  my  tommaun* 
bementsttnththee* 

2  *U*ccpe  my  commas 
bcments,anb  hue:  anD  my 
latt)  as  the  apple  of  tl)tnc  eye. 

3  2Sinb  them  Ppon  thy  fingcrs,tt)ntc 
them  topon  tt)e  table  of  tljine  heart. 

4.  5>ay  tmto  natfebome ,  %hou  art 
my  fitter ,  anb  tall  Unbcrftanbuig  thy 
binfelboman, 

5  *  Xhat  they  imybecpc  thee  from 
the  Orange  tboman,  from  the  ttrangcr 
which  flattcrcth  ttnth  her  ttwbs. 

6  C  Ifoj  at  the  iPlubolbc  of  nip 
houfc  3  loobcb  ttuough  my  tatement, 

7  2nb  bchelbe  among  the  timplr 
ones,  3  bifecrnco  among  t  the  youths, 
ayongmantootb  of  brtberflanbmg, 

8  patting  th:ough  the  itccete  ncete 
her  tomcr,  anbhevbent  the  Vbay  to  her 
houfc, 

9  gin  the  tttnnght  tin  the  euenmg, 
tn  the  biaebe  anb  barbe  night : 

10  :3nbbeholb,thcrcmcthimatt)o= 
man,  with  the  attttc  of  an  harlot,  anb 
fubtill  of  heart. 

1 1  (*  Shcts  loub  anb  ftubburne,her 
tcetabibcnotin  her  houfc: 

11  /9oiblsfl)ccttnfhout,nottnnthc 
ftrcctes,  anb  licthinttiaitcateucryco^ 
net.) 

13  &ofl)tcaughthim>anbbiffcbhim, 
anbtttnthan  unpnbnu  fate,  faibbnto 
him, 

14.  gj  hauet  peace  offerings  ttnth  me: 
tljisbay  hauc  gj  patb  my  bottics. 

15  Xherefoze  tame  j>  fojth  to  mectc 
thee,  btttgcntly  to  fcefec  thy  fate,  anb  gi 
hancfonnbthec. 

i6  gj  haue  beebt  my  beb  ttnth  toue- 
rings  of  tapeftnctbith  carueb  ttiojbes, 
with  fine  Unncn  of  Cgypt. 

17  gjhaucpcrfumcb  my  bcbttHth 
myjthc,  aloes,  anb  tynamom. 

18  Come,  let  bs  tabc  our  fill  of  loue 
tontttt  the  morning,  let  bs  folate  onr 
[flues  ttnth  loues. 

19  5Fo?thcgoob-manisnotathome, 
heisgoncalongionrncy. 

20  $c  hath  taben  a  bag  of  money 


trbtth  htm,  and  tbin  come  home  at  ||  the 
bay  appointed. 

ii  raith  much  faire  fpeech  (he  caufeb 
htm  to  yccib,  ttnth  the  flattering  of  her 
lips  (hcfoiteb  him. 

22  ^cgoethaftet  hertftratghttbay, 
as  an  ore  goeth  to  the  (laugh  ter ,  0,2  as  a 
foolcto  thecoicettionoftheftoebs, 

23  Xil  a  bart  (tribe  through  Ins  liner, 
as  a  birb  hafteth  to  the  fnarc ,  anb 
Bitoibeth  not  that  it  >s  fo?  his  life. 

24  <[  ^earben  bnto  me  note  there* 
foje,  3D  ye  chiibicn ,  anb  attcnb  to  the 
iP02bsofmynioufh. 

2$  fLtt  not  thmc  heart  beclinc  to  her 
ttwyes,  goc  not  aftray  m  her  paths. 

26  fo;  (hec  hath  tad  bottme  many 
lPounbcb :  yea  many  ftrongmen  hane 
bene  (lame  by  her. 

27  *$crhotifeisthett)aytohcu\gos 
mg  bottjne  to  the  chambers  of  beath. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  The  fame,  6  andeuidencicofwifedome.  10 
The  excellence,  11  the  nature,  15  the 
power,  18  the  riches,  11  and  the  eternkie  of 
wifedome.  52.  Wifedome  is  to  be  defired  for 
the  blefledne/Tc  it  bringcth. 

£>eth  *  not  iBifebome  ttizi 
9  tmberftanbmg  put  foo;rth 
hctPotce* 
2  £>h«  ftanbeth  in  the 

top  of  high  places,  by  the  tbay  m  the 

places  of  the  pathes. 

3  S>he  eryeth  attfjc  gates,  at  the  etv 
trie  of  the  title,  at  the  commingm  at  the 
boojes. 

4  flUnto  you ,  j©  men ,  gj  tall ,  anb 
my  boite  >s  to  the  fonncs  of  man. 

5  4D  yccfimplcbnbcrftanb  uufc- 
borne:  anb  ycc  fooles,  be  yeeofanbn- 
bcrflanbmgheart. 

6  i^carc ,  ftngj  ttnll  fpeanc  of ertei- 
lent  things :  anb  the  opening  of  my 
itppcs  fhaibc  nght  thmgs. 

7  ifo?  my  mouth  (hall  fpcane  truth, 
anb  nncRcbnclTc  istanabominanon  to 
my  itppcs. 

8  blithe  ttio?bs  of  my  month  ^m 
righteoufttcs,  there  is  nothing  tfroibarb 
ojpeeuerfcinthem. 

9  1Ehey  are  all  plainc  to  him  that 
bnbcraanbcth:anbnght  tothemtljat 
ruibbnottilcbgc. 

10  aaetet'ue  my  inftruction ,  anb  not 
filucr  :  anb  Hnoiblcbgc  rather  then 
thotfcgolb. 

n  *JFo?  ttJifcbome  is  better  thenru= 
Ju  2 bics: 


hand. 

|| Or,  tht 

NtwtWJnt. 


\Htt.fui- 


dtnlj. 


'Chip.2. 

iS.&S.j. 


Chi.  1. 10 


t  Hit.  :ht 

of  myites. 

f  Htk  wrta 
thtd. 


•lob  »8.i{ 
pfj.  1 9. 1 1 . 
chjp.3-t  5. 
&i6.:6. 


IChrift 


s  etcrnitie. 


rouer 


bes.     \  Vifedomes  feaft, 


\Or,frbti! 


■Prou.3. 
16. 

•Prou.J. 
14. 


WOr.rtntk;. 


\\Or,tptn 
placet. 
\Or.lhc 

chtcfeptrt. 
\\?r,i  circle. 


'Gen  1. 10 
iob.38.10. 

pfiLl^o. 


bits :  anb  all  the  rtjinss  that  map  be  be< 
f a-  ca  ,  arc  not  to  b  c  cempar  cb  to  it. 

12  31  tbifebomc  btbell  ttitb  II  put* 
bentt,  anb  finb  out  ftnolbiebgc  of  ttnttp 
mucntions. 

13  ICbe  feare  of  the  %®$ne> » to 
bate  euilu  pnbt  ano  art  ogancie,anb  tfje 
eutuibap,  anbtbefcottmrbmoutbboe 
3  bate. 

14  Cotmfellismuic,anbrounb«)u"c5 
bonit :  3Jam  bnbttftanbmg,  3  haue 
ttreugtb. 

15  aspmcbuigsixigne,  anbp2inr.es 
bcrrceurthee. 

i6  Bprne^itntestule^nbiiSoWcs, 
euen  all  the  3lubges  of  the  earth. 

17  II  lone  tbem  that  lotic  me,  anb 
tbofe  that  fcefee  me  carlp.Ojau  finb  me. 

is  4  ©itbes  anb  honour  are  ibitb  me, 
veabutable  ndjesanb  righteoufnef  fe. 

19  *fl0pfcutte  is  better  trjen  golb,vea 
tbenfine  golb,  anb  my  rcucnuc  then 
ebotfe  Bluer. 

20  gjiiicabcintherbapofrigbteonk 
neffe,  m  tbcmibftoftbcpafbesofiubg 
ment, 

21  Xhat3fmavtanfernofcthatlouc 
mc,to  tnbmte  fubfiancc :  anb  3J  ttnll  fill 
their  trcafurcs. 

22  XbefL©i3©poflefrebmtintl)c 
beginning  of  bis  tt>ay ,  before  bis  tb02bs 
ofolb. 

1}  3  ttms  fct  bp  from  cuerlafting, 
from  the  beginning,  02  euer  the  earth 
tt>as. 

24.  l©rjCn  there  were  nObeptbCS,  3 

tbas  brought  fotfb :  ibrjen  there  were  no 
fountames  abounbmg  \bitii  ibater. 

25  fficfoicrticmountamesibercftt- 
icb :  before  the  btucs ,  ibas  J,  bought 
foortb : 

z6  rebileasvctbebabnotmabetbe 
tart!),  no;tbc  ilficios ,  no?  tbc||  bigbcfi 
part  of  ti)c  bull  of  the  lboilb. 

27  nabcnbecpjcparcbtbcbcancns, 
3Jlbas  there  :tt)ben  be  fetijatompafTc 
bpon  the  face  oftDc  beptrj. 

28  naben  l)c  cQabliQjcb  the  rloubes 
abouc :  when  be  ttrcngthncb  the  fonn= 
tames  of  tbcbccpc. 

29  *  ©ben  be  gaue  to  tbc  fcabifibe; 
crcc,  that  tbcttiatcrsfbonlbnotpaiTc 
bifi  tonunanbement :  ibbcn  be  appouv 
tcb  the  founbattonsoftbc  earth : 

30  IDbcn  "J  ibas  bp  bim ,  as  one 
brought  bp  with  him  ;anb  3*  ibas  ban? 
his  bdigbt ,  rciopcing  airuapes  before 
bim: 

31  Bciopringinthcbabttablcpartof 


Dis  earth ,  anb  my  beltgbts  were  ibitf) 
tbefonncsofmen. 

32  #oibe  therefore  rjtarben  bnto 
me,  £>pce  cbrtbjen  :fo?blefTcb*  are  they 
thatbeepemvibapes. 

33  $eare  tntttuction ,  anb  bee  Me, 
anbrefufeitnot. 

34  BieiTeb  is  tbc  man  that  hearefb 
me:  ttatebmgbaiivatnrp  gates,  iban 
ting  at  the  potttsofmy  booses. 

35  JF02  ttibofo  fmbctb  met, finbeth 
life,  anb  ll)al!  t  obtatne  fauout  of  the 

JL©135J, 

36  26ittbes  that  finnctb  agamic  me, 
ttjjongctb  bis  oame  foule ■,  all  ttjey  that 
bate  me,  loue  beatl). 

CHAP.    IX. 

1    Thedifciplnic,  4  anddothincofwifedome. 
13  Thecuftomc,  \&    and  error  offolly. 

3lfebome  bath  builbcb  bet 
boufe:  the  bath  beibcn  out 
hcrfrucn  pillars. 

2  &b*  bath  ftfllebt  her 
beaftcSi  me  hath  nungicb 

her  ttime :  U)C  hath  alfo  fiimiajeb  her 

table. 

3  £>bcbatbfcntf02tbbtttnaibcns; 
(he  crpcth  bpon  the  ijistjcftpiaccs  of  the 
nne. 

4  i©hoCoisfunple,lethimturncin 
hither :  as  fo:  htm  that  ibantctb  bnber= 
ttanbmg,flicfapthtohun : 

5  Come,cate  ofmvbjcab,anbb:inbe 
of  the  Ibme,  vh.ch  3  banc  mingleb. 

6  5Fo2fabethcrooli(l),anbliueanb 
goeln  theibap  of  bnbcrftanbmg. 

7  ^e  that  rcpzoueth  a  fcojner,  gct^ 
tcti)  to  bimfelfe  thame :  anb  he  that  re- 
bubcth  atbicfeeb  man,  gf  tteth  hunfelfca 
blot. 

s  *&epiouenotafcomcr,lcflbec 
haterhettrtbubeaibifcman,  anb  bee 
Hull  lour  tbec. 

9  d5uie'nftrua[ontoaibifeman,anb 
hett)iUbepctlbifer:teacha  intl  man, 
anb  he  lbill  mcr  cafe  in  learning. 

10  *Xbcfcareoftbc}L©H©istbc 
beginning  of  tbifebome:  anb  the  Knott); 
Icbge  of  the  holv  >s  bnberftanbmg. 

11  *jt02bvmctbvbaves(baUbcmitl; 
tiplicb :  anb  the  yccrcs  of  ri)p  life  (balbc 
mtccareb. 

12  3f  thou  be  ttnfe ,  thou  fljait  be 
lbife  foz  thp  felfc :  but » thou  fcomeft, 
thou  alone  (baitbcarc  it. 

13  C*S  fooiilb  iboman  b  eiamo^ 
rous :  njeisfimplc^bnottietljnothmg. 
14  iF02 


Tfil.  tT?. 
I,  2.  and 
H8.1J11C. 


lurch. 


t  Hit.  her 
Kihng. 


"Mat.7. 

16. 


*  lob.  18. 

18. 

pfal.  1 1 1 . 

10. chap. 

1.7. 

•Chip. 

10.7. 


•Chap. 7. 
II. 


Theiuft  blcfTcd.  Chap.x.      The  good  tongue. 


||  Heir. 

offecrectes. 


•Gup.  I  5. 
10. 


•Pfil.57. 

||  Or,  t  he 
vnckedfer 
their  mc- 

*  Chip.  1 2. 
24- 


«  Verfcu, 

•Pfal.112. 
6. 


\Hehr.* 

fwleofhf,. 

\\Or,fhalte 

beaten. 

"Pfal.23.4. 

"Ch3.tf.13. 


\\Or,fiaJl.e 
Beaten. 
"  Chap.  13. 
'4- 

*I.Pcr.4.8. 
1, cor. 13. 4. 


14  jtfoifbcuttethattbebootfofhcr 
houfc  on  a  Ccatr ,  in  the  high  plates  of 
thcCttte: 

15  Xo  call  paffengcrstbho  go  right 
onthettibapcs: 

i6  nahoto  Simple,  let  him  turne in 
hither :  ano  as  fo?  htm  that  ruantcth 
bnber  ftanDing,fbc  faith  to  htm  , 

I  j  Swollen  ibaters  aw  frocct ,  ano 
bjcab  t  otmtnfetrcttsplfafattt. 

18  26ut  hee  fenottjett)  not  that  the 

DtaD  arc  tljCrC   and  that  hCC  gUCftS  ar «  tn 

the  ocptljs  of  hell. 

CHAP.    X. 

From  this  Chapter  to  the  hue  and  twentieth,are 
fundry  obferuations  ot  morall  verities ,  and 
their  conti  ary  vices. 

*f>e0iottcrbcsof£>olo* 
mon:*^tt)tfcfonncma^ 
Rett)  a  giao  father :  but  a 
foolifb  fonnc  is  the  hea^ 
umefrcofhts  mother. 
2  'Xrrafuresofibu* 

BcbnetTepjofit  nothing:  butrtghtcouC 

ncsbcltttcrcthfroinbeatb. 
$   *  Xhe  %  o  is  ©  ibill  not  fuffcr  the 

fouleof  the  righteous  to  fanuft) :  but  he 

cafteth  arbay  II  the  uibftance  of  the 

rbttHcb. 

4  *  l?cc  becomnteth  pooje  that  bca< 
leth  *>*  a  aat&e  hanb :  but  the hanb  of 
the  biligcnt,mabcth  nth. 

5  ^ee  that  gathereth  tn  S>ummer, 
ts  a  ibrtc  fbnnc  :  but  ijcc  that  flecpeth 
m  harocft ,  is  a  fonnc  that  cattfrth 
(hame. 

6  25StGingsarebpontheheaiiofthc 
iuft :  but*totolcmccoucrcth  the  mouth 
ofthetbieBeb. 

7  *Zhemnno;ieofthciuftisblcu"c&: 
butthcnameoffhcttncBebfballrot. 

s  Xhettnfctn  heart  nnlrerciuecom- 
ntauttbements :  but  a  t  plating  foolc 
IKbaufaii. 

9  *l?ethatrbaiBcthbp2ightlp,rbal= 
Bcthfurerp :  but  he  tbatpecaerteth  hi* 
tt>apes,tbaibe  Bnottien. 

10  *  $ee  that  ttnnbtth  tbitr)  the  eye, 
taufeth  fo?ro!b  :  but  a  piatittg  foole 
||  (hail  fall. 

I I  *  Xhe  month  of  a  righteous  man 
is  a  Ibell  of  life :  but  biolcmc  concrctl) 
the  mouth  of  tbetbicBeo. 

11  *  lj>atrcD  fttrrcth  bp  ftnfcs :  but 
lout  toner  eth  all  finnes. 

1?  3jn  the  lips  of  htm  that  hath  btv 
bcrftanbmg,  lbtftoomctsfbunb  :buta 


roDis  fo?  the  baeBeof  htm  that  ts  bopb 
oftbnbcrftanbtng. 

14  aaifemenlapbpBtiotblrtsgetbut 

themouthofthefooltu>snccrcbfutu; 
ttton. 

15  *  Xhc  rich  mans  lbcalth  is  his 
ftrongcthe :  thebeftructionofthepooze 
is  their  pouertie. 

16  3Chc  labour  of  the  righteous  «n- 
deth  to  life:  tljcfruitc  of  the  lbicucD  to 
Onne. 

17  lNiwntheH>apoflifethatBccpeth 
inttructton :  but  hee  that  tcrafetb  w 
Pioofcllcrreth. 

is  $ce  that  htbeth  hatreb  with  j^tng 
Uppcs.aiib  he  thatbttcrcth  a  (lanDcr,is 
a  foole. 

19  3Jn  the  muMtitbe  of  tboj&s  there 
lbantcth  not  (innc  :bttt  he  that  rcfrai- 
ncthhislippcs,isnnfe. 

20  Xhc  tongue  ofthc  iuft  ts  as  thoife 
filucr :  the  heart  of  thettiicBeDis  tittle 
lbonh. 

21  Xhc  lippes  of  the  righteous  fceb 
man?  rbutfoolcsotc  fojibanttofimrc' 
borne. 

22  Xheblcflingofthc|LaDtB©,it 
maBcth  rirh.ano  hee  abbctj)  no  fozroib 
lbtthtt. 

23  *3lt  is  as  a  fpozt  to  afooietoboc 
mtfchicre:  btttaman  of  bnberftanbuig 
hathtbtfebomc. 

24  Xhefeate  of  thcttncBcb ,  it  (hall 
come  bpon  htm :  bnt  the  befire  of  the 
righteous  fhaibe  grantcb. 

25  as  the  tbhitictbinbe  paOcfh ,  fo 
sthe  ibttRcb  no  moie :  but  the  righte- 
ous is  an  cucr  lotting  foim&at  10  u. 

26  asbincgertothcteeth ,  anb  as 
fmofte  to  the  eyes,  fo  is  the  fluggarb  to 
them  that  fenb  him. 

27  *Xhefeareofthe!L©i5©tpio, 

longeth  bayes  •  but  the  yeeres  of  the 
ttricBeb  (l)albe  (hojtcncb. 

28  *  Xhc  hope  of  the  righteous  rtiaii 
becgiabnefle  :but  the  expectation  of  the 
tbuBcbfliailpcnfl). 

29  Xhe  ibai>  of  the  !L  €> »  s>  is 
ftrength  to  the  bpjight:  but  beflruttt- 
on  (bail  bee  to  the  tboJBers  of mtcraitie. 

jo  *  Xhe  righteous  (hall  neuer  bee 
remooucb :  but  the  IbicBcb(hall  not  in- 
habite  the  earth. 

31  Xhc  mouth  of  the  iuft  bzingcth 
foo?th  ibifcbome  :  but  the  froibarb 
tongue  (baibccttt  out. 

32  Xhe  lips  of  the  righteous  Bttoib 
Tbhat  is  acceptable :  but  the  mouth  of 
the  Ibttaeb  fpeakcih  t  frolbarDnclIc. 

Iii   i  CHAP. 


tHeh 

heart. 


•Chap.  18. 
n. 


\\Or.c* 
loerrc. 


lifer,' 


\Hehr.of 
heart. 


'Chap.  14, 


"Chap. 9. 
■  I. 

\Hebr.ad- 
Jeth. 

"lob?.  13. 
and  t 1. 20. 
pfal.l  1  2. 
10. 


"PCal.nf. 

I.and37. 

22. 


tHebrfo- 
owrdiwffel. 


[Ol  tale-bearers.        Prouerbes,       A  good  woman. 


Leuu.19. 

;6.dcur. 
25.15.cha. 

6-i  1. and 
10.10,13. 
\Heb.bat- 
Ltrjces  ef  dt- 
cta. 

\Heb.aper- 
fcltftene. 

Chap.  1 6. 

8.  and  1  5. 
} j. and 

8.11. 

Cha.lj.6. 

'Cha-.o.i 
czck.  7.19. 

,i|.;i.  I  .  iS. 
•Chj,j,jJ. 


•Chap.  11 
18. 


'lob  8. 


\Hcb.dcftt- 
lute  of  heart. 


t  Hit. hie 
thai  walketh 
being  a 
talebearer 
•  I.King. 
■  I.I. 


\Hek.!h.dbe 
fare  I  rob  en. 
t  He':  thoje 
thai  {reiki 
hand). 


CHAP.    XI. 

*  t  faifebailante «  abomi? 
nation  to  tlic  !Lo  ee>  :  but 
t  a  mft  ibeigbt  is  bis  be< 
light. 

2  "whenpnbetommctb, 
then  tommetbfl)amc:butrbttb  the  Urtfr 
h>  istbtfebome. 

3  *  Xljc  integrate  of  the  bpzigbt 
(ball  guibe  them :  buttbcperucrfcncfrc 
of  tranfgrclToitrs(ballbeltrop  them. 

4-  *  ftttbes  pjofitc  not  tn  the  bap  of 
ttuatb :  but  ngbtcoumefTc  bcliucretb 
frombcatb. 

5  %l)t  rigbteoufnetTe  of  the  perfett 
fliail  tbirctt  bis  lbap:  but  tljclbicfieb 
(bail  fall  by  bis  oibnc  VbidtcDttetTe. 

6  *  Xoc  rigbteoutncffc  of  tijc  bp< 
right  (ball  bcliucr  them :  but  tranfgrcf- 
fours  (ball  bt  taken  in  their  owne  naugb; 
nnefTc. 

7  iBbenanHtbebmanbicrh.bisep 
pcttation  (bail  perifl) :  anb  the  hope of 
bntultmeupcrifbetb. 

8  *  Xljc  righteous  is  bcltucreb  out 
of  trouble,  anb  tbcuHthcb  tommctb.  m 
bisftcab. 

9  *  ^nbppotritc  .bit!)  his mouth be* 
ftropctb  his  nctgbboue :  but  through 
BnottMcbgcfbailtbeiuftbebeliuercb. 

10  n9bciiitgottl)ibciitt)irl)tl)cngh' 
teous,  the  titter  eioytctb :  anb  tbben  tfie 
lbitBebpcnfl),  therein  (bouttng. 

11  B  p  the  blcffing  of  the  bpngftt  the 
titiciseicaitcb  butttisoucrttnolben  bp 
the  mouth  of  the  lint  ke  d. 

11  ii>etbatistboibof«Mcbomc,be' 
(pifctb  bis  neighbour :  but  a  man  of  bit 
bcrftanbmg  bolbctb  btspcate. 

13  1  %  tale  bearer  rcttcaietl)  ferrets: 
but  bee  tbat  is  of  a  fattbfullfpirit ,  ton- 
ecaietb  the  matter. 

14  *t©bcrcnotounfcll>s,tbepcople 
fall :  but  in  tbc  multitube  of  tounfcllcrs 

thereisJafetlC. 

H  Dee  tbat  is  furetie  foz  a  Granger, 
tlbail  Dnartfont:  anb  bee  tljat  batctb 
tfurcti(bip,tsfure. 

i6  %  gractous  iboman  retained) 
honour  :  anb  ttrong  men  tetanic  rfc 
ebes. 

17  "Che  merctfull  man  boetb  goob 
to  bis  oibnc  foule :  but  be  that  is  truell, 
troublrth  bis  olbnc  fleth. 

is  3Clic  lbtthcb  ttiojhctba  betcitfuli 
U)o:Hc :  but  to  btm  tl)at  foibcth  rights 
oufnciTc,  ihallbca  furevcibarb. 

19  3ls  ngbtcoufnefle  tended,  to  life: 


0>  be  that  purfuetb  cuill,  purfueth  « to  bis 
olbnc  Death. 

20  Xbcy  that  are  ofafrotbarb  heart 
are  abomination  to  the  %  on  g> :  but 
futb  as  arc  bpzigbt  in  their  ifoap,  are  bis 
Delight. 

21  Though  banb  ioyne  m  banb,  the 
lbtcUtD  (ball  not  be  bnpum(beb  :  but 
the  feebe  of  the  righteous  (ball  be  belt- 
uereb. 

22  As  a  ietbell  of  golbe  in  a  fanncs 
(hotbt ;  io  is  a  faire  iboman  ibbttb  t  is 
Untboutbifcrenon. 

2  j  Xbcbefire  of  the  righteous  is  one- 
lp  goob :  but  the  expectation  of  the  Tbic* 
neb  bttnath. 

24  Xbcretstbatfcattcrctb.anbpct 
mtrcafetb;  anb  the r- m  that  ruuhbolbctb 
mo2c  then  ismeete,  but  it  tendeth  to  po- 
uerne. 

25  *fXbcliberall  foule  (balbemabc 
fat :  anb  be  that  ibater  etb ,  (ball  be  tba- 
tereb  alfo  bimfclfe. 

26  ^cetbat  rbttbbolbctb  tome,  the 
people  (ball  tucfe  htm :  but  blelTmg  frail 
^  bpontbcbcabofbimtbatfellctb  it. 

27  *^etbatbiligcntlpfecfecthgoob, 
pjocurcrb  fauonr :  but  bee  that  feeuetb 
mOthicfe,  tt  (ball  tome  bnto  bun. 

2s  ^cthattruQethmbisrttbes^ail 
fall :  but  the  *  rtgbteous  (ball  flounQ) 
asab:antb. 

•29  i^e  tbat  troubletl)  bis  otbneboufc, 
(ball  inbcnte the  lbmbe:  anb  the  foole 
(tun  be  fcruant  to  the  tbu"e  of  hear  t. 

30  Xbefruitoftbctigbteousisatrcc 
of  life :  anb  bee  that  t  Ujmnethfoulcs,>s 
tbife. 

31  *25ebolb,tbcngbtcous(balberc^ 
tompenfeb  m  the  carB) :  much  mo?e  the 
lbitftcb  ano  the  (inner. 

HAP.  XII. 
v^ofo  louetb  mOntcnon, 
louetb  bnoiblebge :  but  he 
tbat  hatcib  rtpioofc,  is 
bmnCb. 
2  H  goob  man  obtai 
ncthfauouroftbe  |Lc»is©:butaman 
of  lbicbcb  Dcuiccs  ibill  he  tonocmne. 

3  21  man  (ball  not  bee  eftabluTjeb  bp 
UiitfeebneCTe :  but  the  *  rootc  of  the  ncjfr 
teous  (ball  not  be  mooueb. 

4  *  %  bcrtuous  iboman  is  a  crottme 
to  her  hufbanb  :but(bcthatmabetba' 
(bameb,  ■?  as  tottennefle  tn  bis  bones 

5  3Cbe  thoughts  of  the  righteous 
"-  right :  but  the  tounfels of  tbcrbicfecb 

at:bCtett. 

6    *%l]C 


\UebM- 

farteth 

from. 


'l.Cor.o  o 
\Hcb.tht 

faule  of  blef- 
fml- 


•PfaI.7.I7. 

and  9. 16. 

andio.i. 
and  5  7.7. 


•Pfal.I.j. 
and  92.13 

icre.17.8. 


\Heb.  t*. 
keth. 

•l  Pet. 4. 
18. 


'Chap.  10. 

'  I. Cor. 
11.7. 


OfhTmd 


yingnppes. 


Ch; 


p.Xllj. 


Theflussard. 


ggai 


'Chip.  I. 
11.8c  iS. 


•Pfal.j7.37 

prou.i  1.2 


fi  ieb.  per. 
turfe  of 
heart. 


l|  Or,  Lowell 

"Clup.18. 
>9- 


|| Or,  the 
fortreffe. 


1  Hot.  the 
fnjre  of  the 
vntktdiitn 
the  trinf. 
griffon  of 
limel. 

"Cha.18.7. 
"Cha.l  j.j 


'Chip.  3. 7 


\Heh.inthjt 


"Chi.  1 4.5. 


•PGI.fM 
&$S>.«. 


'Chip.!). 

16.M5.J 


•Clu.io.^. 

\Ortdeceir- 
tnll. 


6  *Xt)eU)0?DSOf  tl)CU)tC&CO«etoj 

UcmibaitefojblooD :  buttljcmourtj  ofi 
tbet>p:(gbt  (ball  Dchuer  them. 

7  *  Xlje  lbickcD  ace  oucrtb<!oVbcn, 
anD  are  not :  but  tljc  Ijoufc  of  the  ngljtc 
ousaiaiin-.iuD. 

8  ;Sman(bailbecommenDcDacco,! 
Ding  to  bis  mifcDome :  but  bee  tljat  ts 
t  ofaperuecfe  Ijeatt,(l)aii  be  DetpiCco. 

9  tyee  tljat  ts  DcfpifcD  ana  hath  a  fee; 
uant,  "better  then  be  tbatbonourctb 
Ijimfelfcano  lackctlj  bjcaD. 

10  3t  righteous  man  rcgarDetb  the 
life  of  bis  bead:  but  the  ||  tcnDcr  mercies 
oftrjeiDtcfteDareccwcll. 

11  *$>eetbattillctbbisianD,(baiibce 
fa  tifficD  tbitb  bzeaD :  but  be  tljat  fo  UoiD- 
etbtoaineptrfons,  isfcoiDof  DnDerHan: 
Ding. 

ir  -3i:tjeHjicKCDt)cfirctf)||tt)cnctofC' 
nill  men ;  but  the  rootc  of  the  righteous 

pCClDCtl)  fruit. 

13  t*  %ty  ibickcD  is  fnarcD  bp  the 
ttanfgccfBonof  hisiippes  :  but  tljc  iuQ 
(ball  come  out  of  trouble. 

14  *  %  man  (ball  bee  farttttcD  itoitb 
gooDbptljefcuitof  h.smoutb,  anbujc 
rccompence  of  a  mans  banbs  (ball  bee 
rcntycutmtoljim. 

1$  *Xbemapofafoolcisrigbttnbis 
otbne  ms :  but  be  that  bcarkenetb  ton- 
tocotmfell,istt)ifc. 

i6  a  foolcs  lbjatlj  is  t  pjcfcntlp 
knorben :  butapjuDcntman  couerenj 

(bamc. 
17  *$crtjatfpcabctbttuetb,(bcrb 

en)  fooitl)  nghtcoufnefTe :  but  a  falfe 
ttitncutDcteit. 

is  *  Xnere  is  that  fpcaketb  libe  tljc 
pearcmgsofafroozD:  but  the  tongue  of 

tbctuife>s  health. 

19  XDc  Itppc  of  truetb  (ball  bee  ctta= 
bUfneo  foz  cucr :  but  a  lying  tongue  b 
but  foz  a  moment. 

10  Deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  them  tljat 
imagine  cuill :  but  to  tbecounfellours 
of  peace,  isiop. 

11  Xljcrc  (bail  no  cuill  Happen  to 
tbeiutt :  but  the  tbicBcu  (ball  bee  fillcb 
Ibirtjmifcbiefe. 

11  Hying  lippcSirc  abomination  to 
tl)c  5r€)K© :  but  tljcv  tljat  Dcale  truelp, 

lehisDeligljt.  , .     M 

u  *  SCpiuDcntman  concealer!)  knotty 
leDgc :  but  the  heart  of  fooles  pzotlau 
methfoohthneffc. 

24  *  %\)t  hanD  of  the  Diligent  (ball 
beacc  rule :  but  tljc  ||  aoutbrull  (ball  bee 
touDcr  tribute. 


15  *  ^eaumcCTc  in  tlje  heart  of  man 
uiaketh  it  (loopc  :  but  a  goob  iuozd 
makctbitgiab. 

16  Xtje  righteous 'snio?e  1 1  ertellent 
then  his  neighbour :  but  tljc  map  of  tlje 
tbtckcDfcDucetbtbcm. 

17  Xbc  Oouthfull  nun  roftcth  not 
that  tbrjicf)  be  tookc  in  hunting:  but  the 
fubfranccof  a  Diligent  man  *  pzeetous. 

i%  3Jn  the  urn?  of  ngljtcoufneffe  is 
life,  anD  mrtje  path  Vbay  thereof  there  is 
noDcatlj. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

naife  fonitc  heareth  his  fa* 
tljers  mftruction  :  but  a 
fcomer  Ijearctl)  not  re* 
buke. 
1   *  %  man  (ball  eatc 

gooD  bj>  tlje  fruit  of  his  moutlj :  but  tlje 

foulc  of  tljc  tranfgreffburs ,  (hail  eate 

Diolcnce. 
3   $c  that  kcepetb  bis  mouth,  bee* 

petlj  his  life :  but  f)ee  that  opcncthUJiDe 

IJISUPS ,  ftiall  haue  DeUTUCtlOlt. 

4.  XljcfouleofthcauggarDDeureth, 
anD  hath  nothing :  but  the  foulc  of  tljc 
Diligent  (ball  be  mabefat. 

5  %  righteous  man  batctb  hnng: 
but  a  tbicfecD  man  is  loatljfomc,  anD 
commcthtofljame. 

6  *  ftigljtcoufncfle  beepctlj  him  that 
is  topjigljt  tn  tljeibap :  butrbicbebneffe 
oucrthzotbctl)  t  the  uuncr. 

7  Xberc  is  that  mafteth  himfclfc 
rieb,yet  hath  nothing :  there  is  that  tmv 
beth  hmifelfc  pooje ,  pet  hath  great 
riches. 

8  %\)t  ranfome  of  a  mans  life  are 
his  ricljcs :  but  rtje  poo;e  hcarctlj  not 
rcbube. 

9  Xheiightofrtjcrightcousrcio^ 
ccth:*buttlje||iampcoftljerbichcDfl)all 
be  put  out. 

10  CmclpbypjiDeeommctf)  conten- 
tion :  butuntlj  rtjclbellaDuffcD  is  rbifc* 
Dome. 

1 1  *  iBcaitb  gotten  bp  Danitic  fliali  be 
DimimfbeD  :  buthenjatgatljcrctlj  f  bp 
labour  .(ballincreafe. 

ix  ^ope  DcferrcD  maketh  tljc  heart 
Rcbe :  but  when  tljc  Defire  comuicth, « >s  a 
tree  of  life. 

13  i©l)ofo  Dcfpifttlj  tljc  ibojD ,  njau 
bcDe(lropeD:but  he  that  fearcth  the 
tommauiiDcmeut,  1 1  (ball be  relbarDcD. 

14  *  Cl)CiaiDe  of  thettife  is  a  foun? 
tame  ofkfc ,  to  Depart  from  the  fnarcs 
ofbcatb. 

15  <t500D 


•Chap.  1  j. 
>3- 


\\Or,aiu'.- 
cUnt. 


'Chap,  12. 
14. 


•Chap.  II 

J.jA 

\HeLfmte. 


•Iob.18.tf 
&J1.17. 

\Or,cmMt 


•Chap.  10. 
i.&ao.n. 

}  Heb.  with 
the  hand. 


\\Cr,th*Sk 
inprjee. 
'  Cliap.  14. 

n- 


Anillmeflenger. 


rouerbcs. 


Ralh 


anp:er. 


•Chap.  II 
13.6:15.1. 

A,th. 


\H<lJbMt 

broken* 


•lob.  37. 
"  Chip.  1 1 


'Chap.  23. 


&  34.10. 


•  lob.  ii  4 


"Exod.40. 

16.0*13- ' 
eh.ip  6.  10. 
&  12.17. 

•Clup.S.y 


15  C&oob  bnbcrftatiotng  gutcth  fa- 
uottr  :but  the  ibav  of  tranfgrefroursis 
harb. 

i6  *eucry  pjubentmanbcalcth  lbith 
ttnoiblcbgc :  but  afoole  t  layethopen 
tits  follp. 

17  ^McbcDmeffrngeefailcthmto 
mifchtcfe :  but  a  fatttsfull  ambaflabonr 
is  health. 

18  0ouerty  anb  (hamc  fhaii  betoiiim 
tl;at  tcfufcth  inflcuctton :  but  he  that  rc= 
garnet!)  repjoofc,  (hall  be  honoureb. 

19  Xhcbcureaccompuvhebtsflbcct 
to  the  foulc  :but  it  ts  abomination  to 
foolcs  to  Depart  front  eutll. 

10  $e  that  lbalhcth  lbith  lbifc  mm, 
(hail  be  ttufe:  but  a  companion  of  fooles 
tlhailbcbclrroyrb. 

1 1  euill  purfucth  tinners :  but  to  the 
righteous,  goob  u>ui  be  rcpayb. 

11  3  goob  man  icaucth  an  inhere 
tancc  to  histhilb2cttsthtlb2cu:anbthc 
'tbcaith  of  the  fmner  tslaybbpfozthc 
inrt. 

1}  *Q3uthfoob's  in  the  tillage  of  the 
pooje :  but  there  tsthattsbcftroycbfo? 
ibantofiubgcmcnt. 

24  *$c  that  fpareth  his  rob,  hated) 
his  fonnc :  but  he  that  lotted)  him ,  clja- 
Owed)  him  bettmes. 

25  *  Xhc  rtghtcous  catcth  to  the  fa^ 
tiffvtng  of  his  foulc :  but  the  belly  of  the 
ibicttcbthallibant. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

tlcry  ibtfe  iboman  butl 
bcth  her  houfe  •,  but  tl)c 
y  foolifh  plucked)  itooibtic 
,i«$ibitl)licrhattbs. 
agcsigCg  1  *i?cthatiMU$cthtn 
htsbpjightncfTc ,  fcarcti)  thcIL  ©  m  jd  : 
but  he  that  is  peruerfc  m  his  tbayes, 
bcfptfcthhmi. 

3  35"  the  mouth  of  the  foolill)  is  a 
rob  of  pnbe :  but  diclippcsofthclbtfc 
fhallp2cfcructi)cm. 

4  inhere  no  j©rtn  arc  the  crib  is 
tleanc  :  but  much  utcrcafc  is  by  the 
(trcucrthofthe^rc. 

5  *  afaithfuiniumcfleuminottpc: 
but  a  falfc  lbttticfTr  lbtll  bttcr  h'es. 

6  31  fco2tttr  feeUcth  lbifcoomcanb 
findcdi  it  not:but'lmobJlcbgcts  cafic 
Unto  him  that  bnbernanocth. 

7  Got  from  thcpicfemcofafooltfi) 
man,  lbhcn  thou  prrtciucfl  not'" him 
thclippcsofUnowicbgc. 

8  Xhc  ibtfcbomc  of  the  pntocnt  is 


to  bnbcrlianb  his  ibay :  but  the  folly 
of  foolcs  i;becctt. 

9  Joolcs  mafte  a  motto  at  *  fmnc : 
but  among  the  righteous  there  is  fa^ 
uour. 

10  Xhc  heart  unolbcth  his  toibnc 
bittcrncfTc  anb  a  ftranger  both  "Ot  m* 
tctmebbleibithhisioy. 

11  Xhc  houfc  of  the  ttnttob  (hall  bee 
oucrdnoiben :  but  tfjt  tabernacle  of  the 
tjpjtghtfliailflourifl). 

11  'Xljcrc  is  a  ibay  ibrjichfeemcth 
right  bnto  a  man :  but  the  cnb  thereof 
are  the  tbayes  of  bead). 

13  €ucn  tn  laughter  the  hear t  is  for- 
roibfull ;  anb  the  enb  of  that  mirth ,s 
hcauuicfTc. 

14  Xhc  bacftdibct  in  heart  than  be 
*  fillcb  ibtth  his  otbnc  lbaycs :  anb  a 
goob  man  Hull  be  fatisfied  from  htmfclfc. 

15  Xhcfimplcbciccuetheueryibojb: 
but  d)c  pntocnt  man  looked)  tticil  to 
his  going. 

i6  7L  rbtfc  man  fcareth ,  anb  bepar- 
tcth  from  euill :  but  the  foole  ragcth, 
anbistonfibent. 

17  ^ccdjat is foone  angry ,  ocaltth 
fooltfhly :  anoamanoftbtctobbcutccs 
ishatco. 

18  Xhc fitnple  tnhcrttc folly :  but  tijc 
pntbent  arc  crolbncb  tbtth  knoiblcbgc. 

19  Xhe  cutlIbolbebcfo2c  the  goob: 
anbthcibiekeD  at  the  gates  of  the  ugh- 
tcous. 

10  "Xhc  pooje  ishatco  cucnof his 
olbnc  neighbour :  but  t  the  rich  hnh  ma* 
ny  frienbs. 

11  i?e  tf)at  befptfeth  his  neighbour, 
fttmcth :  *  but  he  that  hath  mercy  on  the 
poo:e,happyishe. 

11  apocthcynotcrrethatbcuifccuiU 
but  mercy  ano  tcucth  ft"11  be  to  them 
thatoeuifegooD. 

13  3n  all  labour  thereispjofittbut 
the  tame  of  the  lippes  tendeth  oncly  to 
penury. 

24  Xhccroluneof  tliclbifcistheit 
nches:bur  the  fooliihncffe  of  foolcs^ 
folly. 

25  *^  true  ibttncCTc  beliuercth 
foulcs:but  a  DeccitruUwnneflefpcafecth 
lyes. 

16  gjn  the  fcare  of  the  H^isjd 
is  ftrong  confibencc :  ano  his  chtlbjen 
djall  hauc  a  place  of  refuge. 

17  *Xhcfcare  of  the  Hois©,  «a 
fountaincofltfe,  to  bepart  from  the 
fnarcsofbeath. 

18  3ln  the  multituOc  of  people  is  the 
! nings 


•Chip.  10. 
>3- 


\Hch.the 
Siltentfjfe 
ofhtsfoHte. 


'Ckip.ift 
'5- 


•  Chap. 1. 
J1- 


'Chap. 

7- 

j  Htb.  many 
ari  [he  /a. 
utrs  of  the 
rtc  j. 

*Pfsl.U2. 


»tr.j. 


"Chap.lJ. 
14. 


Thewickedsfacrifice.Chap.xv.        The  fooles  ioy. 


tfjfmt. 


Chip.  I  7- 
;.nuit,:j. 

4°- 


\Hdr 


'Chap.  25. 


\HttrM- 

cheth,cr 
MbUth. 
•Vafe  18. 
and  chap. 
il.*;. 
and  i  3.  16. 
'lob  34.11, 
prou. 5.21. 
icrt  16. 17. 
and  J  J.  19. 
hebr.^.ra. 

h tiling  of 
ihctongv. 

•Chap. 10. 

I. 


'Chap.n. 
ay.amos  3. 
JJ.ila.  I. 
1 1,  and  66. 
J.icrc.fi.io. 
and  7.  21. 


\\0r,ui9nt- 

Tl0Ht&C. 


lobl«.tf. 


Rings  honour :  but  tntbcibantofpeo 
pic  istbeDeftructton  of  the  puuee. 

29  tytt  that  ts  QoU)  to  iD2atb,i>of 
great  btiDcrlranDmg :  but  lice  that  is 
l  bafly  of  fpirit,  craltetb  folly. 

jo  %  fbuno  heart ,  s  the  life  of  the 
flefh  *  but  enuic ,  the  rottenncfl*  of  the 
bones. 

ji  *$ec that  oppjefTctb the poozcrc* 
pjocheth  his  falter :  but  hee  that  bo* 
noureth  bim,batb  meet?  on  the  pooje. 

31  £hetouBCDistwucnaroayuthtS 
tbtc&eDttes  :  but  the  righteous  hath 
hope  in  his  Death. 

j3  t@ifcDomc  reftrth  tn  the  heart  of 
him  that  hath  DnDerftattDtng :  but  that 
wh.ch  is  m  the  mtolt  of  fooles,  is  matt 
imotben. 

J4 ftigbtcoufnes  craltetb  a  nation: 
but  unnc  is  a  repjoeb  t  to  any  people. 

i<,  Xbe  Bings  fauour  is  tolbarD  a 
tbife  feruant :  but  bisxbjatb.is  agakft 
bimtbatcaufethfl)ame. 

CHAP.    XV. 

sm$  *  £>oft  anuuerc  rurnetb  a* 
s  Ibay  ttijatb :  but  grteuous 
ttWDSftirrebp  anger. 

2  Xhe  tongue  of  the 
tbife,bfeth  UnoiblcDgea* 
tight:  butthc  mouth  of  fooles, tpo»> 
rctbout*foolifbnes. 

j  *Xhe  eyes  offbeats©  are  meue* 
ry  plate,  bcbolDutg  the  cutll  %  the  goob. 

4  t&ibbolefometongueisatcceof 
life :  but  peruerfneffc  therein  is  a  breach 
in  the  fpirit. 

5  *afoolcDcfpifctbbisfatbctsuv 
ttcuthon :  but  hee  that  rcgatDetb  re- 
p?oofe,ispjubtnt. 

6  3Jn  the  boufe  of  the  righteous  is 
much  treafure :  butm  theteuenuesof 
tbclbtcacbis  trouble. 

7  1Lbe  lippes  of  the  ttnfc  bifperfc 
bnottrtcDge:  butthehcart  of  thcfoolilb, 

doethnotfo. 

8  *  Xhe  (artifice  of  the  idicbcd  is  an 
abomination  to  tbeHfiDKB :  but  the 
pjaycr  of  tbebp«ngbt  is  his  Delight. 

9  XbciDayoftbettiuBcDijanabo* 
mmationbntotbe?l€>iKF>:butbelo* 
ueth  bun  that  folloVbetlj  after  tights 
oufnes. 

10  ||  Connection  is  grteuous  bnto  him 
that  forfa&ctb  the  .Day :  ud  bctbat  ha* 
tethrcp:oofe,ft)ailDic. 

11  »0cllanDDeftntctionirebtfo;cthc 
ILsdkjd  :  hotb  much  motf  thni ,  the 
hearts  of  the  tbtlDjen  of  men  t 


n  aCtomerloutthnotonethatre; 
p2oucth  hmi :  neither  null  he  goe  Dnto 
tbelDife. 

I  j  *%  merry  heart  mafectb  a  cheer  t- 
full  tountenante :  but  by  fojroiD  of  the 
heart,  the  fpint  is  tooUen. 

14  %\)t  heart  of  him  that  hath  bn* 
DeruanDtng,  fccbetli  BnoiDleDgc :  but 
the  mouth  of  fooles  feebctb  oufooltuy 
neflc. 

15  %\\  the  Dayes  of  the  afflittcD  are 
euill :  but  he  that  is  of  a  merry  heart, 
hathaeontinuaiifealJ. 

16  *2SctterisitttleiDiththefeareof 
the  %  ©  m  ©,  then  great  treafure ,  anb 
trouble  tbcrciDitb. 

17  *  better  is  a  Dinner  of  bcrbes 
\Dhereloueis,thcnaaalleD  orc,anDba* 
treD  thereuntil. 

18  *  %  ttyatbfull  man  flirretb  bp 
Drife :  buthe  that  is  ttoiD  to  anger,  ap* 
pcafetbttrtfe. 

19  Xheaayoftheaouthfulimanis 
as  an  beoge  of  thomes :  but  the  iDay  of 
the  righteous  is  maDe  t  piaine. 

20  *attn&fonncma&etbagtaDfa* 
thee :  but  a  foolifb  man  Defpifcth  t)ts 
mother. 

II  *5FoIly  is  toy  to  him  that  is  t  Dettt* 
rut  c  of  ttufcDome :  but  a  man  of  bnDer* 
ttanDingttialRefbbprigbtly. 

22  *i©itboutcounfcii,  purpofesarc 
DifappomteD :  but  in  the  muintuDe  of 
counfellourstbey  are  eflablifheb. 

2j  SSmanhathfoyby  the  anfracce  of 
his  mouth :  attD  a  VbotD  fpoken  t  tnDue 
feafon,holbgooDtsit; 

24  *%hetbay  oflifeisabouetorhe 
tbife,  that  he  may  Depart  from  hell  be* 
neati). 

2$  *XhelE,4Dis©IbillDelrcoy  the 
houfc  of  the  p;ouD :  but  he  ttnll  eftablifl) 
the  boJDer  of  the  tbiDolu. 

26    "IthC tlJOUghtS OftbCttHCBCD  are 

an  abomination  to  the  H  o hp  :  but 
the  wordes  of  the  pure ,  are  t  picafant 

1D0?DS. 

27  ^ectbatiSgrccDyof  gaine,trou^ 
bleth  his  orbne  hottfe :  but  he  that  ha* 
tctb  gifts,  (bail  uuc. 

28  Xhe  heart  of  the  righteous  mt^ 
Dieth  to  anuuerc:  but  the  mouth  of  the 
lbicKcD  ,pott»ctb  out  euil  things. 

29  *  itbe  %  ©  is  ©  is  farre  from  the 
tbicbeD  :but  hee  beatetb  the  player  of 
the  righteous. 

jo  SChe  light  of  the  ms  rciovceth 
tiiebeart:andagoooreponmaRCththc 

bones  fat.  ^ 
?i  1^he 


'Chap.  17, 

3  2. 


«Pfa!.  37. 
I6\l.tim.6\ 
6.  prou.  16. 
8. 

"Chap.  17. 


'Chap.  2 s. 
21.  and  ao. 


\Nihr.u 
Ttifedvy  1: 
aciwfej. 
"Chap.  10. 

I. 

*  Chap.  10, 

13- 

t  Hthr.voji 
ofhtart. 

•Sec  Chap. 
u.vcr.w. 


t  Htbr.in 

bldftttpSH, 
•Phil.3,20. 

col. ;.i. 


"  Chap,  1 1, 
7.  and*.} 
1 1. 


"Chap.*. 
18, 

t  Hek.Tordj 

ofplejfznt- 

mfi. 


•Pfal.34. 
id.and  145. 


frViuft 


weight. 


rouerbcs. 


si 


ow  to  anger. 


a 


j  j  Orferre- 

tlum. 

\\Or,tiiy- 

eth. 

\Heb.foff- 

feth  an  heart 

•Cha.18.12 


•Vtrf.o. 
and  chap. 
10.2  1.  and 

20.14.  ier. 

10.23. 

\\OrJijpt- 

fim. 

•Cha.21.2 


•PfiLj7.j. 

and  5  J.  i>- 
mac. 6.15- 
lukc  12.22. 
i.pet.f.4- 

\Heb.rotlc. 
*Iob  11.50. 

•Chap.6.7. 
and  3.1?. 


\Hcb.hclde 
innocent. 


■Pfal.37. 
l6\chap. 
I  j.  16. 

■Vcrf.l. 

\Hcb.dmi- 

natun. 


*L«liC.  10. 

3  6. chap. 
11. 1. 

\Hel..<X 
ikejloit'l. 


"Chap.  10. 
II. 

•Cha.8.11 


31  Xhc  care  thathcarcth  the  rcproofe 
of  nfcabtbeth  among  the  ttnfc. 

32  f?cthatrefiu"cth  llinttrucnon,  be* 
fptfeth  his  omnc  foulc:  but  he  that  ||hca* 
rcth  rcproofe,  trjettcthtonberftanbutg. 

33  %l)cfcatcoftljc?L.t©mj©istl)cin' 
ftructionoftbifebomc;  anb*  before  ho* 
none  is  hunulttie. 

CHAP.   XVI. 

$e*  ||  preparation  s  of  the 
heart  in  man, anb  the  an* 
wiercofthetongue.isftom 

the  ft  ©is©. 
2  *3lutheM)apesofa 

man  are  clcaneinhisotbnc  epcs:bnt  the 
%  hd  is  jb  ttjeigheth  the  fpirtts. 

3  * t Commit  thv  lbor&es  into  the 
%  ®  is  ©,anbfhp  thoughts  thalbc  cfta* 

4.  3Ehe  %  ©  is  ©  hath  niaoc  an 
things  for  himrdfc:*yca,cum$ett.nc* 
ttebforthebapofcuill. 

5  *<£uerponethatisproubinheart, 
is  an  abomination  to  the  fL  ©  is  © : 
though  hano  ioync  m  hanb.hcthall  not 
betpnpumthcD. 

6  26y  mctcp  anb  tr ueth  imquitte  is 
pnrgcb:  anb  bp  the  fearc  of  the  %  ©is©, 
men  bepart  from  euill. 

7  nahen  a  mans  wapes  plcafc  the 
%  ©  is  ©,  he  maacth  cucn  his  enemies 
tobcatpcaccibithhim. 

s  *  2Settct  is  a  little  ttrith  righteouf* 
nelTe,  then  great  reuencibes  Without 
right. 

9  *3manshcartbeuirethhistbap: 
butthe?L©iS©  bttcctcthhisfrcps. 

10  t^oiuinc  fentcnee  is  mth  dtps  of 
the  Ring:  his  mouth  tranfgrcflcth  not 
inutbgcmcnt. 

n  *3tiuit  ibeight  anb  bailantc  arc 
the  %  ©  is  ©  s> :  t  all  the  Weights  of  the 
baggc  arc  Ins  I.102UC. 

ii  it  is  an  abomination  to  Kings  to 
tonunit  nncfecbnciTc :  for  the  throne  is  c* 
(rabltflieb  by  rightcoufnctTe. 

1 3  Btghtcous  lips  are  the  bclight  of 
lungs :  anb  they  loue  him  that  fpeaheth 
right. 

14  Xhc  Wrath  of  a  King  is  asmcfTen* 
gets  of  bcath :  but  a  Wife  man  Will  pa* 
cmcit. 

15  3ln  the  light  of  the  lungs  couttte* 
nance  ts  life ,  anb  *  his  fauour  a  as  a 
cloube  of  tlje  latter  rame. 

16  *  I?oW  much  better  is  it  to  get  Wife* 
bomcthen  golb  t  anb  to  get  tonbcrlran* 
btng,  rather  to  be  chofen  then  filuer  i 


17  XhehtghtoapofthePpnghtisto 
bepart  from  euill :  hee  that  feecpeth  his 
way,  preteructh  hisfonlc. 

18  *  $tibe  goeth  before  beftruetton: 
anbanhauttefpirtt  before  a  fall. 

19  ascttet "  is  to  be  of  an  humble  fpt* 
rit  tbith  the  lowly,  then  to  biuibe  tlje 
fpoilc  with  the  proub. 

20  iifjethathanbleth  a  matter  wife* 
ly,lhail  finbe  goob:  anb  Who  fo^tru* 
(rcth  m  the  ft  ©is©,  happy  is  hee. 

21  %\yt  Wife  in  heart  (hall  becallcb 
prubent  anb  the  frocctnctTcof  thelips 
tntrcafcth  learning. 

22  *Slnbct(tanbitig  is  atbcll-fp2ing 
of  ufebnto  him  thathath  it : bnt  the  up 
ttruttionoffoolcs  is  folly. 

23  Xhc  heart  of  the  Wirctteachcfh 
his  month  >  anb  abbeth  learning  to  his 
lippes. 

24  #icafant  wor&s  are  as  anhony* 
combe,  froectc  to  the  foulc ,  anb  health 
to  the  bones. 

25  *  Xhere  is  a  ibap  that  fecmeth 
right  bnto  a  man.  but  the  enb  thereof 
are  thcibapcs  of  bcath. 

26  tftecthatlaboureth,iabourcth 
forhimfclfc;  for  his  mouth  tcraucth  it 
of  him. 

27  t^n  bngobly  man  biggeth  bp  v 
itiii :  anb  in  hislips  there  is  as  aburmng 
lire. 

28  *  %  fcotbatb  man  t  foiheth  ttrifc  •. 
%  a  lDhifpcr  cr  feparateth  chicfe  fnenbs. 

29  ^biolentmanenticcthhisncigl> 
bour,  anb  icabeth  him  into  the  map  that 
is  not  goob. 

30  ^eflmttcthhtecycstobcutfeftO' 
ttiarb  things:  moouinghisitpshtbrln* 
getheiuutopafle. 

31  Xhr  hoarp  htab  is  a  croibne  of 
glorp,  if  it  befounb  in  thclbapof  righ 
tcoufnclTe. 

32  l^c  that  is  notb  to  anger,  is  better 

then  the  mightv :  anb  he  that  rulcth  his 
fpirtt,  then  he  that  taiteth  a  ettte, 

33  %\yt  lot  is  call  into  the  lap :  but 
the  lbholc  btfpofing  thereof  is  of  the 

31  SDK©. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

cttct  *  is  a  brie  nwrfell, 
anbquittneu*cthereU)tth  • 
thcnanhotifcfullof||fas 
cnficeswithftrife. 

2  ^ibircferuantfhail 
haucnilcouerafonthat 
cauftth  fbamc:  anb  (hall  haue  part  of 
tlje  inheritance  among  the  brethren 

3  *1i:he 


•Cha.H.i. 

and  1S.1;. 


Or,hethal 
I'nderftan- 
dttha  mat- 
ter. 

'Plll.l.Il. 

mdj4.c. 
and  135. x. 
ila.30.18. 
icrc.17.7. 
f  Chap.  1  j. 
<4- 

t  Heb.ma- 
k.'lb  wife. 


"Chip. I  4. 


\Heh.the 
foulc of 'htm 
that  tabcu- 
reth. 

IHeh.lcTT 
eth  vato 
htm. 

\Hebjtman 
of  Belial. 
•Chap.o-. 
14,10. 
and  15.  l3. 
and  26.11. 
and  19.11. 
\Hcb.fen- 
dcthfoorth. 


'Chip.lj. 


[|  Or,got 
cheer*. 


Tohidefinnes.  Chap.xvii).      Of  tale-bearers 


'Phi.  16.1. 

da.  17.11. 

itrc  17.10 
mil:.;. 3. 


•Chip.  14. 

'3- 

fHrt.i.U 

V0HK  tMm 

'  Pfa!  I  17. 
4. and  1 18. 
J- 

\H1t.al1p 
(Srxcclli  r.cj. 
\H<h  a  lip 
Cf  l)Wg. 

•Chap.  1 8 
16. 

\H:ir.a 
Jtont  cf 

srm- 

"Chap.  10 
11. 

\\Or.frocH- 

rr:h. 

||  Or  j  n- 

proefcawctb 

mure  a  jetfc 

man,  tbci  to 

ihtej it  fotile 

an  hundred 

Tonet. 


•Rom.  1 1. 
>7- 
i.ihcfT  j. 

'5- 
i.prc.3.0. 

"Exod.:j.7 
ifi.  J.iJ. 

chap. 14. 14 


'Chap.  18. 

'Chap.  5.1. 
and  11.15. 

\Hcb.b,ort. 


\KthAt 
frtrword  cf 
heart. 

"Chi.  10. 1, 


"Chap. !  5. 
1 ;.  and  1:. 
"5- 

\\Cr  tea 


3  *Xhc&nmgpotisfo2(iluer,anDthe] 
lurnatefojgolD :  but  the  JL©  is  ©truth ! 
the  hearts. 

4.  anucaeDDoergmctbtjeeDtofaiTe 
lips :  and  a  lu«  gmctlji  care  to  a  naught  ir 
tongue. 

5  *nahofomoc&ctbthcpooje,rcp2oa^ 
ti)ctfj  his  mabcr :  and  he  that  is  giao  at  [ 
caianutics,fl)ailttotbetbnpumuieD. 

6  * ChUDjens chtlDjen a' c the  croitonc 
of  olDtnen :  anD  the  glo?p  of  thtlDjcni 
a  re  their  fathers. 

7  t<£jccellentfpeechbecommefhnot 
a  foolc :  much  lefXc  Doe  t  lying  uppes  a 
pztnee. 

8  *  71  gift  is  as  a  t  pjecious  Hone  tn 
the  eyes  of  him  that  hath  it :  Ujbtthcrto- 
eucr  it  turned) ,  it  p2ofp  tr  eth. 

9  *lr?cthatcouctetbatranfgreu"ion, 
llfecftcth  loue ;  but  he  that  repeated;  a 
matter, fcparateth  \  iv  frtcnbs. 

10  ||  71  rcpzoofc  cntrcth  mote  Into  a 
ttnfe  man,  then  an  hutiDicD  Stipes in- 
to a  foole. 

11  an  null  man  fcefecth  oncly  rebel- 
lion thereftucacrucU  meffengcrfljail 
bcfentagainfthim. 

12  lletabearerobbeDof  hertbhelps 
meet  a  man ,  rather  then  a  foolc  m  his 
folly. 

15  tohofo  *re«jarDcthcutllfojgooD, 
cutll  (ball  not  Depart  from  his  houfc. 

1+  iZhcbegummgofftnfciS'siDhen 
one  lettcth  out  lDatcr:  rbcrnwc  lcauc  off 
contention,  beftne  it  be  meDlcDlDitb. 

15  * $e tljat  mftifiet!)  the idubcd,  anD 
hcthatconDcmneththc  tuft:  eucntbey 
botl)  jre  abomination  to  d)c?L  ©  15  ©. 

i6  t©hcrfo:c  is  uWaptfce m the hanD 
of  a  foolc  to  get  U)ifcDome,Ccetng  he  hath 
no  heart  to  u? 

17  *  %  frieuD  loucth  at  all  times,  anD 
a  brother  is  borne  fo2  aDucrfitte. 

18  *  ^  man  tootD  of  t  bttDerOtanDlng 
ttriltetbbanDS,  and  becommeth  fucctie 
in  the  pjefencc  of  bis  frienD. 

19  Jr?e  loucth  tranfgrefTion,  that  lo- 
ucth ttrife:  and  hcthat  ejcaitcth  his  gate, 
fcehethDcilruction. 

io  t$c  that  hath  a  froibarD  heart, 
finDcth  no  gooD,anDhc  thathath  aper- 
uctfe  tongue,  falleth  into  mtfchicfc. 

21  *  $e  that  begetteth  afoole,  doth  lt 
to  bis  fo2roUi :  ano  the  father  of  a  foolc 
hathnoioy. 

22  *amerrieheartDothgooD||ii)<ea 
mcDicine :  buta  bjoKcn  fpirtt  Djtcth  tfje 
bones. 

23  %  rbirttcb  man  taftetb  a  gift  out 


of  tbebofome,  to  peruert  ttjelbayesof 
uiDgemcnt. 

24  *  naifcDoine  >s  befoze  hint  rtjat 
hath  bnDcrttanDtng:  but  trjc  eves  of  a 
fooleadnthcenDsof  thecartl). 

2<>  '71  foolifl)  (bnnc  >s  agrtefc  to  bis 
father,*  bittcrncs  to  her  tljat  bare  htm. 

26  3llfotopunifl)theiuft'snotgooD, 
r  1 0  ftnlt  e  pnntcs  f 0  2  equitie. 

27  "fcc  that  hath  ttnotblcDgc,  fpa- 
rcth  his  iboiDs :  anD  a  man  of  btiDer- 
iTanDtng  is  of  1 1  an  crcellent  fpirtt. 

1%  *  cucn  a  foolc,  ibhcn  he  bolDeti) 
his  peace,  tscounteD  llnfe:  and  be  tfjat 
(l)uttcth  his  itps,  is  cikcaied  a  man  of  bns 
DcrftauDing. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 
fegseuse  J?2ourjb  Dcfttc  a  man  l)a> 
umg  1 1  fcparatcD  htmfclfe, 
^fceUcth  and  tntermcDlcth 
i^iDtthaiiiDtfcDomc. 
'k&hJsi    2   ^  foolc  hath  no  De? 
ItSht  in  tonDcrfranDing,  but  that  his 
heart  may  Dtftoticr  it  fclfc. 

3  nahcnthciDitBCDcommcth,  tfjen 
comntcth  alfo  contnnot,  anDVbtrh  tg- 
nomtnicrepjoch. 

4-  *  %\)c  VbojDS  of  a  mans;  moutt), 
'rcasDccpcrbaters.andthcrbcll-fpztng 
oflDtfcDomea^afloUJtngb;oobe. 

5  *3)tisnotgooDto accept  thepcr- 
fon  of  the  Uiicbcd,  to  ouerrtwoibc  rtjc 
righteous  tn  tuogement. 

6  31  fooles  lips  enter  into  contents 
on,  anD  his  mouth  talletb fo2  ftrofeesr. 

7  '^foolcsmouth'shisDeftruction, 
anD  his  lips  arc  the  fnare  of  his  foule. 

8  *3Cheibo2DSofa||taicbcareraie 
HasibounDS,  anD  they  goe  Doibnetnto 
thctittnermoftpartsof  tljc  belly. 

9  $cc  alfo  that  is  flouthful  in  his 
rbo2he,  ts  brother  to  him  tljat  is  a  great 
Tbaftcr. 

10  *  Xhc  name  of  tl)c  %  ©is  ©  is  a 
a  ftrong  tolber :  the  rtgtjtcous  runneth 
into  it,  anD  ttsfafe. 

11  'Xlje  rich  mans  tbeaith  is  \)is 
Qrong  ntte :  anD  as  an  higt)  Vball  tn  his 
olbnc  conceit. 

12  *2tSefo2eDcfttuetionthc  heart  of 
man  ishattghtte,  anD  before  honour  <s 
humilitic. 

13  l?c  trjat  t  anfroer eth  a  matter  be- 
fo2e  hchcareth  »>  it  is  follp  anD  fljamc 
bntohim. 

14.  Xhe  fpirit  of  a  man  ffifll  fnttatne 
his  infirmtrte :  but  a  U»outtDeD  fptrtt 
Tbho  tan  bearer 
KXhe 


'Ecclcs.i 

14  andS  1 


*Chap.io. 
1  &  iy.20, 
*nd  iff.  i). 


lira. 


1  19. 


\\Or:acoelc 
lob  1  J.  5. 


;  Or,  kc that 

/rparaieth 
himfelfejt  t- 
kctb  accor~ 
Amg  to  liis 
tie/ire,  and 
inxcrmed- 
Itth  tn  euery 
bufinrfie. 


*Cha  20.5. 


'Chap.  1 4. 

lcutt.19  15 
dcut.i  1.7. 
and  16.  10. 

*Chap.  10. 
14.  and  12. 
15.&M  5. 

*Chap-i3. 
1 JJ.  and  16. 

22. 

\\Or,-*faf- 
fertr. 
\Or,  iikt  at 
vh<n  men 
*re  nenndtd 
fhicS ■  .cham- 
bert. 

•Pill.  18  1. 
and  27. 1. & 

M4  * 

\H*b.u[tt 

alofie. 

"  Chap.  1 0 

M- 

*Chsp.  1 1. 
1  &  16.18. 
ami  If. 3J. 

\clebr.rc- 
1  ur met  h  a 

jverj. 


Afalfewitncfle.        Prouerbes.     Thekings  wrath. 


*  Chap.  1 7 


•Chap.  I  3. 
4.  and  1  3 
1. 


•Chap.  19 
'■♦■ 


'Iini.1. 


•Chap.  17 
'7 


•Chap.23.o 


'Chap.  14. 
10. 


•Eiod. :; 
l.dcut.  19 
l6.prou.6 
9.  and  2 1. 
28. 
\H<b.hiU 

:HMCCKt. 

fHtbji  m.tn 

•ft'!"- 

•Chap.  14 
ao. 


he  AT., 


15  %X>t  heart  of  the  pmbent  gctteth 
ftnolblcbge  ;anb  the  earc  of  the  tDife 
fccBetblmottHebgc. 

16  *3tmans  gift  maisetb  roomc  to? 
bun ,  $  bnngctb  Dim  befoje  great  men. 

17  $c  that isfirft  tnhis  ottmc  tauft, 
fcenieth  tuft;  but  Ins  ncigobourtommetl) 
anb  (earthed)  bun. 

is  Xbe  lot  eaufefb  contentions  to 
ceafe,anb  parted)  betibeenc  the  mighty. 

19  71  toother  offenbeb  is  i«rdci-  to  be 
wonnetljcn  a  ftrong  arte:  anb  then  ton- 
tcnttonsacciibctDebarrcsofatalrlc. 

io  *  31  mans  belly  (ball  be  fatifficb 
ttutb  the  fruttc  of  bis  mouth  >  ^d  ruittj 
the  tncreafe  of  bis  uppes  (ball  he  be 
ftlleb. 

ii  2?eath  anb  Itfejrc  m  the  politer  of 
the  tongue  'anb  they  tbatloue  tt  (ball 
eate  the  fruite  thereof. 

xx  *  who  fo  finbeth  a  lutfe ,  finbeth  a 
goob  thtng,anb  obtained;  fauour  of  the 
|L©is©. 

xi  Xbcpooje  tofctb  intteaties,  but 
the  nth  anfujereth  *  roughly. 

24.  71  man  that  hath  fnenbs  mult 
fbcibc  huntcife  fricnbly:*anb  there  ts 
a  frienbthat  fttcKCtb  clofer  then  a  bo- 
ther. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

*  €ttcr  is  the  pooje  that 
VbaiKCthmhis  integrity, 
thenhcthatispenicrfc  in 
hislippes,anbisafoole. 
i  3Ufo,  that  the  foule 
be  Xbitijout  tmoiblebge ,  it  is  not  goob 
anb  bee  that  halted)  1Mb  his  fectc,  fin 
net!). 

3  Xbe  foolilhnelTe  of  man  peruer 
tetbbtsibayianb  his  heart  fretteth  a 
gamfl  the  Hois©. 

4  *B9caitb  maRCth  many  fnenbs : 
but  the  poojc  is  feparatcb  from  his 
neighbour. 

5  *3faife.bitnclTefbaiinotbc  tbn^ 
pumfl)Cb:anbbc  rhatfpeaKetb  lycs.lbal 
notefcape. 

6  ^anyitoiilcntrcate  the  fauour  of 
the  #nntc :  anb  ettery  man  is  a  fnenb  to 
t  him  that  giueth  gifts. 

7  *3ttitbeb2ctbmioftbcpoo:cboe 
hate  htm :  bouic  much  mojc  boc  his 
frienbs  goe  farre  from  him  •  bee  purfu 
erb  them  with  ttioios,  v«  they  arc  ttjan-- 
nngtobim. 

s  fyctbatgettetbtiMebomelouctb 
his  oiutie foulc :  he  that  fcccpctb  bnber^ 
ftanbmg  (ball  tmb  goob. 


9  *  31  faife  VbttnclTc  fhailnot  be  ton- 
punimeb,  anb  bee  that  fpeafcctb  lyes, 
fyailperiu). 

10  Delight  is  not  fecmely  fo;  afoolt : 
much  lelTc  *fo?  afcruant  to  bane  rule  o- 
uerpnnces. 

11  *Xbe  ||  btftretion  of  a  manbefet- 
red)  bis  anger :  anb  it  is  his  glo?y  to 
paffcouer  atranfgreflion. 

u  *  Xbe  Rings  ibiatb  >s  astheroau 
ring  ofaiyon:  but  bis  fauour  >s  as  beine 
Upon  the  grafle. 

13  *3tfoolift)fonne is  d)ecaiamityof 
his  father  anb  the  contentions  of  a 
tbifrare*  a  continuail  popping. 

14  $oufe  anb  riches .  arc  the  inheri- 
tance of  fathers ;  anb  *  a  pmbent  ibtfc  is 
from  the  ?Isdir©. 

15  &loud)fulnctTe  taftctb  into  a  beep 
fleepe :  anb  an  ible  foule  (ball  *  fuffcr 
hunger. 

i6  *  $e  that  Beeped)  the  commanbe* 
ment,  ftecpctb  bis  otbnc  foule:  but  bee 
thatbefpifcth  bis*baycs,(bailbic. 

17  *$ee  that  bath  pity  Upon  the 
pooie ,  lenbctb  bnto  the  1L  sd  ih  © ,-  anb 
lltbatibbtcbbebatbgtucn,  mill  be  pay 
htm  againe. 

18  "Chaftcnthy  fonnc  lbbilc  there 
is  hope ;  anb  let  not  thy  foulefparc||fo? 
hts  crying. 

19  %  man  of  great  lbjatb  (bail  fuffcr 
ptuulbment:  fonftboubcltuer  him,  yet 
tboumufttdoeitagamc. 

zo  locate counfell, anb  recciucmftrU' 
rtion ,  that  thou  mayeft  bcibtfe  in  thy 
latter  cub. 

ii  *Therearemanybeuicesinamans 
heart :  neuertheielTc  thecounfellof  the 
I  %  jd  is  ©,tbat  (ball  ftanb. 

ix  Xbe  beBrc  of  a  man  is  hiSBlnb- 
\  neffe :  anb  a  poojf  man  is  better  then  a 
lyar. 

13  Xhefearcoftbe1Lfi>is©tendeth 
to  life ,  anbhethathathitfbaiiabibcfatif' 
fieb :  be  (ball  not  be  toifiteb  rbitb  euill. 

24  *^  flouthfnll  man  bibetb  his 
hanb  in  his  bofomcanbUnlnotfo  much 
as  bJing  tt  to  btsmoutb  againe. 

25  *  finite  a  fconier,  anbtbefunpie 
tniillbc\bare;anb  repdoouc  one  that 
bathbnberftanbing ,  andhcibillbnber* 
ftanb  bnoiblcbge. 

26  i^ctbat  ibaftcth  his  father ,  and 
chafcth  aibay  bis  mother,  uafonne 
that  taufctb  fbame,  anb  biinactt)  re- 
P^och. 

17  Ccafe,myfonne,tobearetbcuv 

ftructton,  that  caufeA  to  erre  from  the 

lboibs 


•Ecclc.  .0. 
6  ptou.  30. 
21. 

"Chap.  14. 
29. 

\\Or,fru- 
denct. 
•Cbap.16. 
I  ;.  and  20 
2.8(28   15. 
•Chap.  10. 

I.&IJ.lO. 

and  17  J  1. 
6:^5.  and 
chap.  2I-9- 
'Chap.  57. 

M 

'Chap.  1 3. 
22. 

"Chap.  10. 
4  and  ao. 

'3- 
'Luc.u. 

aS. 


•Mat.  10. 
4 : .  a  j  1 J  25. 
40. 2.  cor. 
9.6  and  7. 
||  Or,  h„ 
deed, 

'Chap    1  3. 
24  3c  13- 
■  3- 

jjO  ,tohu 
deflru-tlwn  : 
cr,  toewfe 
hm.tad:*. 


Mob.13.1j 
pi ai  -  j  3  - 10, 

11.prou.16 
1. an  J  9.  1I3. 
46.10. 


"Chap. 15. 
19. &  16.13. 
and  1 5. 

*Ch.ip.H. 
11. 

t\>  CHKMfif. 


N 


oneiscleanc. 


Ch 


ap.xx.xxi 


Falfc  ballance. 


t  Httr.  A 
•.tmjfe  of 
Sriml. 


"Ch.ip  19 
1  '  andio. 


■Chap-  so 
J  Ortrpinter. 

'Chap.  18. 


\[0rM 


*  PH.  in. 


io  b  14.; 
I. king. ii. 
46.  2.chro- 
6.]6.rcclcs. 
7.18. 1. ioh 
1.8. 

'  Dcut.25 
1  5  chap. 1  1 
.and.  1 6.1 
\Hebr.t 
j'tar.;  ,jnj  j 
ftone. 
\Hthrm 
epbah,  and 
tut  epbah. 
•Exod.4. 
II.pfal-94. 
9- 

•Chap.  19. 
I  J.  lnJ  I.- 


"Chip.  »; 

»?■ 

•Chj.9.17 

t  Hok.irouJ 
eflpn^,  or 
falfioed. 


ttwbsoftmolbleogc. 

18  t3ln  bngobty  tbtmrtTc  fcometh 
ittbgcmenr.anb  the  mouth  of  the  line 
ft  en  n  r  u  our  c  th ;  u-.qiutte. 

29  ^jubgements  arc  pjepareb  fo? 
fawners,  anb  ftnpes  fiw  the  barHeof 
fooies. 

CHAP.   XX. 

3lne  is  a  mocKec ,  ftrong 
bzintie  is  raging  :  anb 
lbhofoeucr  is  beceiueb 
thereby  ,tsnottt>lfc. 
z  'Xhcfeareofamng, 
the  roaring  of  a  ILton:  who  [op2o* 
uoHcth  him  to  anger ,  finncth  agai»ft  his 
olbncfoulc. 

3  it  is  an  honour  foj  a  man  to  ccafc 
from  flrife:  but  cuery  foole  ibill  be  mea- 
ling. 

4-  *  Che  ttuggarb  tuill  not  ploib  by 
reafon  of  the  ||  colb  therefore  (ball  he 
brggc  in  harucu\anb  haue  nothing. 

5  *  Counfcll  m  the  heart  of  man  is 
like  occpe  lbatcr :  but  a  man  ofbnbcr- 
fianbtng  ibill  bjauj  it  out. 

6  i!j9o(t  men  lbtll  pzociatme  euery 
one  his  oibne  ||  goobnes :  but  a  faithfull 
manibhocanfmbc* 

7  Xhc  mQ  man  ibalUeth  in  hts  inte^ 
gntic :  *  hts  clnibJen  are  bleUcb  after 
htm. 

8  %  fcing  that  fittcth  in  the  rh:onc 
ofiubgement ,  fcattcreth  albayalleuill 
tbtfh  his  eyes. 

9  *  naho  can  (ay ,  3  haue  mabc  my 
heart  cleaned  am  pure  from  my  fmne? 
•  10  '  t  JDuiers  Tbetgbts  ,  and  biuers 
tmeafures,  both  of  them  arc  alike  abo- 
mination to  the  ft  ©  is  ©. 

1 1  <£uen  a  chilbe  is  tmolben  by  his 
botngs ,  Vbhethet  his  lboj&c  be  pure, 
anb  ibbether  it  be  right. 

12  *  Xhe  hearing  earc ,  anb  the  fee- 
mg  eye ,  the  %  ©  is  ©  hath  mabe  eucn 
both  of  them. 

15  *  ?Loue  not  fleepe ,  led  thou  tome 
to  pouertie :  open  thme  eyes,  and  thou 
(halt  be  fatitfieb  Unth  bjcab. 

14.  it  is  nought, 't  is  nought  (fatththc 
buyer : )  but  lbhen  he  is  gone  his  ibay , 

thenhcboafltth. 

15  iDjereisgolb.anbamultttubcof 

JSubtes :  but  the  lips  of  tmolblcbgc  axe 
ap:cciousteibell. 

16  "Case  hts  garment  that  is  fucrty 
foraftrangcrranb  tane  aplebgeofhim 
foiaftrangeilioman. 

17  *  1 262eab  of  beteit  is  fweet  to  a 


man :  but  aftcribarbs  h»s  mouth  (hall 
bcnllebibithgrauell. 

18  'CucrypurpofciscGabltflicbby 
tounfell :  anb  tbith  goob  abuttc  make 
Ibarrc. 

19  *^c  that  gocth  about  ^  a  tale  befr 
rcr,rcucileth  ferrets  therefore  nubble 
not  roithhnn  that  llflattcccth  ibttb  hts 
lippcs. 

20  *  t©ho  fo  curfrth  his  father  0?  hts 
mother,  his  ||  lampcfbailbcput  out  in 
obfturebarKenetTc. 

21  3ln  inheritance  may  be  gotten  ha* 
ftfly  at  the  beginning  :  but  the  cube 
thereof  (ball  not  be  blcOTcb. 

22  *  5>ay  not  thou  ,  Ji  lbtll  rccom- 
pence  euil:  but  ibait  on  the  %  ©  is  ?D,anb 
he  (hall  faue  thee. 

2 j  *2Diuers  lbatghts  are  an  abonte 
nanon  bnto  the  %  ©  is  © :  anb  a  t  falfc 
ballantcistiotgoob. 

24.  *fl^ans  goings  are  of  thelLfiDis©; 
hoib  tan  a  man  then  bnbctftanb  hts 
oibncibay? 

25  it  is  afnarctothemanwtio  ocuou- 
rcth  that  lbhieh  is  holy  :  anb  after 
boibcs.to  malic  inquirlc. 

26  *  3  rbtfe  lung  fcattercth  the  tbic* 
fccb,  <t  bnngeth  the  ibheele  oucr  tliem 

27  Xhe  fpirit  of  man  is  the  ||  canblc  of 
the  %  ©  is  © ,  fearchmg  all  the  mrbarb 
parts  of  the  belly. 

28  *  95crcy  anb  trueth  pjeferuc  the 
lung :  anb  his  throne  is  bpholbcn  by 
mercy. 

29  *  £hc  glojy  of  youg  men  is  tljcir 
uTcngth:anbthebcautie  of  olb  men  is 
the  gray  hcab. 

30  Xheblerbnesofarbounbt  clean; 
fetl)  atbay  euill :  fo  boc  (tripes  the  in* 
Xbatb  parts  of  the  belly. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

^^"^SP  I)  €  lungs  heart  is  in  the 

nana  of  the  |L©is©,  as 

the  nucrs  of  lbatcr :  hee 

vlsS  turnert)  it  Vbhtthcrfoeucr 

t^hcibm. 

2  *<£tury  ibay  of  a  man  is  right  in 
hts  olbne  eyes:  but  the  %  ©  is  jd  ponbe^ 
rethtlie  hearts. 

3  *Coboeuimccanbiubgcment,ts 
11102c  acceptable  to  the  %  ©is©,  then 
facriftce. 

4  *  1 3ln  high  loobc ,  anb  a  pzoub 
heart,  and  ||thcploibingofthcU)itBcb, 
isfinnc. 

5  Xhc  thoughts  of  the  biligcnt  tend 
oncly  to  plcntcoufncs :  but  of  euery  one 

BUU  that 


'Chip.  1 5. 

12. 


"Chap.  II 

'J- 

\Orfnlifetb. 

'Exod.ii. 
17.JCUK  io. 
o.mact.15. 
4- 
Or,  ctmdU. 


•Dtui  j». 
j5.cha.17. 
1 3 .  and  14. 
io.rom.1 1. 
17.  i.thcfT. 
j.lj.I.ptl. 
J.9- 

'Vcrfc  10 
\Holr.b*l- 
lancel  ofdf 
ceit. 

•PfaL  J7- 
2  j.cha.  16. 
9-iac.io. 
>3- 

•VcrfcS. 
pdl.  1 01.  j. 

j  I  Or,  lamft. 


'PftLioi. 

ichap.  29. 
14. 

Chap.  1 6. 
J'- 


tHdrJt* 

purging  me- 
dicine j 


Cha 


'i.Sam.i;. 

it  An  1. 1  1. 
hole.  6. 6. 
mich.tf.7. 
cliap.  1  ;.8» 
'Chap. 6. 

17. 

\Htbr.h**- 
tmes  ofejet. 
I  Or,  the 
Kehtfifthe 


Kcepethe  mouth.     Prouerbes.  A  good  name. 


"Chip.  10, 
J. and  l 5 
II. 


T  Heh.fr* 
them,  or , 

dwelt  wub 
hem. 


'Chap.  1 5. 
19. and  13. 
3. and  27. 

\Heb.  areo- 
max  of  con- 
tention!. 
\  Heb.  ax 
houfe  of fo- 
eietie. 
Mam. 45. 
f  Heb.  u  not 
fruo/tred. 
•Chap.  I  J. 
2S- 


'Mir.18. 


*Cha.i7.8. 


i|  Or,Jfort. 


"Chip.  11. 
18. 


Vtrfc*. 
\H<h.mth, 
hndoflhe 
defen. 


"Ecdcl.9. 


•Chip. 
II.  and 
■8.11. 


\Htiuiht 

wrath  of 
"Chi. I  j. 4 


L 


ttjat  is  bamconely  to  ibanc. 

6  *  begetting  of  treafucesby  a  ly- 
ing tongue ,  1  s  a  toamtic  to  deb  to  anb  fro 
of  them  that  fec&cbcatb. 

7  Xbe  robbery  of  the  tbicbcu  (ball 
t  beftroy  them;  becaufe  tl)q?  refufe  to 
bociubgcmcnt. 

s  Xbelbayofmanisfrottiarbanb 
ftrange :  but  as  foufjc  pure  bisflwae 
is  right. 

9  *  3ft  is  better  to  bibcll  in  a  comer 
of  ftje  tjoufc  top;  then  ltoitl)  a  t  bjani* 
img  luoiii.in  in  tatbibeljoufc. 

10  *30)eroulcoftbemicBebbcftrctb 
euill :  rjis  neighbour  tfinuetf)  no  fauour 
in  bis  eyes. 

11  *i©bentbefcomcrispuni(bcb,tbc 
runpleismabc  tbife:  anb  ibljen  the  wife 
tslnftcuctcb.bcrcceinetbBnoiblcbge. 

u  "%\)t  righteous  man  Ibifcly  confc 
berctb  the  houfe  of  the  ibic&cb:  but  God 
onerrtwottictbtbe  tbicfetfifo^  their  tbic= 
ftebnefifc. 

ij  *whofofloppetrj!)ts  cares  at  tlje 
cry  of  the  poo:e,  bccalfo  (ball  cry  bim= 
fclfc,butfhaiinotbcbcarb. 

14  *  31  gift  in  feecct  paetfictb  anger : 
anb  a  rctbarb  in  tlje  bofomc,  ftrong 
mzatlj. 

15  ^  is  top  to  the  intt  to  boc  mbge- 
ment:butbe(tructton  fliaibetofbe  Hbor- 
Iters  of  mtQuitie. 

i6  Xfje  man  tljat  lijanbjctbotitof 
the  tbay  of  bnbcrftanbtng ,  fl)all  re* 
matne  in  toe  congregation  of  the  bcab. 

17  ^ctbatiouetb ||picafurc,ftuiibea 
pooje  man :  fjee  tbatlouctb  Urine anb 
oyle,  (bail  not  be  rich. 

is  *1CljelbicBebf>wibcaranromcfoj 
toe  righteous  ■,  anb  tfje  tcanfgrclTour 
foztbetopngbt. 

19  *Jlt  is  better  to  btticli  t  in  trjc  ttrtfc 
bcrnelte ,  then  lDirt)  a  contentious  anb 
an  angry  woman. 

io  Xrjcrc  is  trcafure  to  be  beCreb, 
anb  oyle  in  tfje  oiDcUmg  of tlje  ttrifc:but 
a  fooltflj  man  fpcnbctb  it  bp. 

ii  Dec  that  follovbetlj  after  tighten 
oufnclTc  anb  mercp,nnbetb  life,  ngUtc- 
oufticlTe  anb  honour. 

11  *  31  ttiifc  man  fcaletb  the  eitic  of 
tfje  migbtic ,  anb  caftetb  botbnc  the 
ftrengtb  of  the  confibencc  thereof. 

13  *  HDfjofo  Bcepetlj  Ins  mouth  anb 
his  tongue.Beepctfj  Ijis  foulc  from  trou: 
blcs. 

14  pwvb  and  baugbne  fcomer ,  is 
rjis  name,  who  Dcaicth  t  mp:oub  ro:atb. 

15  •  Xljc  beftrc  of  tlje  aourbfull  Bil* 


led)  bumfoj  rjis  rjanbs  refufe  to  labour. 

16  $?ee  couetetl)  grcebfly  all  tbebay 
long :  but  the  *  rigfjttous  giuctb  anb 
fparctbnot. 

17  *  1Dbe  facrtfice  of  the  tbiefecb  is 
abomination :  rjotb  mucfj  mo?c,  when  be 
bjingetb  it  *  Vbitb  a  ibtcfeeb  minoe '. 

xl  * t  %  falfe  mttnclTc  (ball  pcrifl; : 
buttle  man  that  bearctb,rpeaBctb  con* 
ttantly. 

19  2  ttnefeeb  man  harbenetp  his 
face:  but  as  fo?  toe  Dpngot,be  ||0(rcctctb 
l)is  lbay. 

50  *  Itjere  i&  no  tbifebome,  no?  bn= 
berftanbing ,  no?  counfcll  againft  trje 

ft  ©IE©. 

31  *Xl)tOo;feispjeparebagainlitOc 
bay  of  battel! :  but  *  II  fafetie  is  of  tipc 

HAP.  XXII. 

*  Good  name  is  rather  to 
be  cljofen  toen  great  rt 
cl)es,  ^d  ||  loutng  fauour 
raffjertocn  filucr?  golbc. 
1  "Xrje  rich  anb  poojc 

meet  together :  the  %  ©  is  je>  is  themas 

Bcr  of  them  all. 

3  *3l  puibent  man  fojerectb  the  euill, 
anb  bibctb  himfclfc:but  the  Omple  paffe 
on,anbarepum(l)eb. 

4  '  j|25yhumtlitic  jndtliefcarc  of  the 
fLoisjD,  arencbes,  anbhonour,  anb 
life. 

5  injomesaiidfiiaresareintbetbay 
ofthcfcotbarbthethatboefhBeepehis 
foulc,  fbalbc  farr e  from  them. 

6  ||  xramc  bp  a  chilbe  t  m  the  Uiay 
he  fljoulb  goc :  anb  tbhen  he  is  olbc,  bee 
ttnllnotbcpartfromtt. 

7  Xbe  rich  ntlctb  oucr  the  poo?c, 
anb  the  bojrofoct  is  feruant  t  to  the 
lenber. 

3  *  l^ee  that  fotbeth  iniauitie ,  fljall 
r cape banitie :  || anb  the  robbc  ofhis  atp 
gera)aufatle. 

9-  *  t  $ee  that  hath  a  bountifull  eye, 
(ball  bee  blelTeb  :  fo?  h«  ffiueth  of  his 
b:cabto  thepooic. 

10  *  CaQ  out  the  fcomcr,  anb  conten- 
tion (bail  goc  out;  yea  frrtfc,  anb  re* 
pzocbfbailceafc. 

11  M  that  louetbpurenelTc  of  heart, 
IKorthc  grace  ofbislipstbe  Bing  fti.-ii  be 
bisfrienb. 

ii  Xhc  eyes  of  the  %  «ms  jd  p?cferuc 
Bnolblcbge,  anb  be  oucrtb?ott)Ctb  tlje 
1 1  Uio;bs  of  the  tranfgrcflbur. 

13  *3Chcflothfullinanfayth,Th':r':is 
aiyon 


'Pfal.in.p. 

'Cha.15.8. 

ifa66.,.icr. 

6.ao.pfal. 

50  S>.anios 

J.U. 

tHtb.tn 

•mckedncfie. 

•Chap. 19. 

5,9- 

j  Heb  a  wit- 
nejfe  of  lies 
\\Or,conf, 
acreth. 
•Icr.J).!3. 


•PfaJ.JJ. 
'7- 

•Pl'al.j.J. 
||  Or,viO(h 

7- 


'Etdci.y.i 

\\Or,fanotir 
u  better 
thcHt&c. 
"Chap.  19. 
'J- 


*Chap.J7. 
12. 


•Pill.  Ml. 
•  !• 

\\Ortthere. 
wjraafbi*- 
mUute,  £-c. 


\\Or,ctte- 
ctit<*. 

\Heb.whu 
way. 

fHeb.  to  the 

manthdt 
lendeth. 
"lob  4.8. 
hol'.io.i}. 
j  Or,  ni 
with  therod 
cfhu  anger 
helhtlle 
confiimed. 
"a.Cor.9.5 
t  Heb. good 
of  eye. 
•Plal.lbi.6 


\\Or,Aiut 
h.tlh  or*ce 
tn  hit  lift. 


\\Orfhe 
tat  ten. 
Chap.  16. 


Of 


oppi 


:fsi 


reision. 


C'ha 


p.XXll|. 


Buyth 


etrueth. 


■Chap.  i. 
\6.  and  2 J. 
27.ands.:. 
aiut75. 

•Chap.  13. 
24.  and  19. 
18. and  2  j. 
1  j.  and  19. 
M.I7- 


Mlj. 


itbf 


||Or,truli 
thoHAlfe. 


\\Orttothofc 
thai  fetid 
ibee. 
'lich.T.lt 

•Chap.  13 
11.106.31. 
21. 


*Chap.<>  1 
and  11.  ij, 


*Chap.  1 ;. 
lo.dcut.  19 
14.&27.7. 

\\Or,bouM. 

\Htt.  cb- 
[cnremai. 


a  iron  without ,  $  than  be  flame  m  the 
flrcctcs. 

14  *Xhc  moutl)  of  ltrangcU)omcn 
isaaccpcpit:hc  that  15  abhorrcbof  the 
%  o  k  id  (hailfall  thcr  cm, 

15  jfooliflmcrteisboimom  the  heart 
of  a  chiia :  but  *  the  roD  of  correction  thai 
anucttfawc  from  him. 

16  ftcc  that  opprcflcth  tl)c  poorc  to 
incrcafchis  riches,  and  tjc tljin gutttl) to 
rt)c  ricl),fl)ailfnrc!v  com,  toibant. 

17  2S0HJ  aolbnc  thtuc  care ,  ana 
hcarc  tDc  lboras  of  the  unfc ,  ana  apply 
thine  heart  auto  my  hno.aicagc. 

is  jforit  '5  aplcafantthmg,  if  tfiou 
hccpefljem  t  U)itl)m  fljccthcy  (hall 
laithaiibcfittcam  thyiippcs. 

19  Xljat  thy  truft  map  bee  m  the 
Hsdikjd,  5  hauc  maac  bnouxnto  thec 
this  aay,!|cucn  to  thee. 

20  ^aucnot^j  written  to  thee  cjcccl* 
lent  things  m  cotmfailcs  ana  bnoia; 
leagc: 

2.1  XhatlJ  might  mabc  thee  ftnotbe 
the  certainty  of  the ibo:as  of truth  that 
thou  mightelt  anfrocrc  the  woras  of 
tructl)  ||  to  them  that  fena  auto  thec? 

22  Hob  not  the  poore  becaufc  he  i 
poore ,  *  neither  opprcflc  thcafflicteain 
the  gate. 

23  *5for the  s,  o  k  d lam picaa their 
caufe,  ana  fpoilc  tljc  foulc  offhofc  that 
fpoticathcm. 

24  «30auc  no  fnena  (hip  With  an  an 
grtc  man  :  ana  tbitl)  a  furious  man 
tljott  (halt  not  goe; 

2$  iLcfttljouicarncljiswaycs,  ana 
gctafnarctothyfoulc. 

26  *2i5e  not  thou  one  of  them  tljat 
(tribe  hanas ,  or  ofthctu  that  arc  furc= 
ties  for  acbts. 

27  3Jf  thou  haft  nothing  to  pay,Why 
(l)ouia  he  tabc  away  thy  bca  from  an- 
acr  thee* 

28  "ftcmouc  not  tljc  ancient  ||  lana 
marhc,  which  thy  fathers  hauc  fet. 

29  *>ccftfljouaman  oiligcntinhis 
buuncfl"ed)ecfhall  (tana  before  lungs, 
Ijc  fhall  not  flaua  before  t  meancmen. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

l^fc^Sfycn  thou  fittcft  to  catc 
^Xr^fe  With  a  ruler,  confiocr  Dili; 
M.nl't^  gcntlp  what  is  before  thee. 
■•MM    i   3na  put  a  Uiufc  to 
v  %Mt\)V  throatc,  tf  tljou  be  a 
man  giucu  to  appetite.  I 

j   25e  not  acfirous  of  tjisaamties : 


for  they  ■ireacccttfullmeatc. 

4.  labour  not  to  bee  rich  :ccafc 
from  thine  owiicwifcaomc. 

5  tiEilt  tljou  fct  tljme  epes  topon 
that  Which  is  notf  for  riches  certainly 
mabcthcmfclucs  Wings,  they  fly  away 
as  an  eagle  toibara  Ijeaucn. 

6  catc  tljou  not  the  breaa  of  hin 
that  hath  an  ctullCK,  neither  acurcthou 
hisaamtymcatcs. 

7  Jr  or  as  he  thmbcth  m  his  heart, 
foishc :€atc,  ana  annhc,  forth"  he  to 
thee,  but  his  hearts  not  With  thec. 

3  Xhc  morfcll  which  tljou  halt  eaten, 
(halt  thou  aomitc  ap ,  ana  loofc  thy 
fwecteworas. 

9  5>pcauc  not  m  the  cares  of  a 
foole  s  forhccwiiiacfpifethc  wifcaomc 
ofthy  .boras. 

10  *33cmoue  not  tl)c  ola  ||  lana 
mar  be  j  ana  enter  not  into  tljcflciasof 
tljcfathcclclTc. 

11  *5for  their  rcaccmer  is  migljty- 
he  fhaiiplcaa  their  caufe  Vbttlj  thee. 

12  3ippiy  tljinc  heart  bnto  in; 
ftructton,  ana  tljmc  cares  to  the  iaoras 
ofbnoiaicagc. 

1$  *t©itljhoia  not  correction  front  tljc 
chtia :  for  if  thou  bcatcft  him  lbitlj  tljc 
roa,ljefl)alliiotate. 

14  Xljou  fljait  bcate  Ijim  lbitl)  the 
roa ,  ana  fljait  aclutcr  Ijis  foulc  from 
Ijell. 

15  fil9y  fonne ,  if  thine  heart  be  iMc, 
my  heart  lhallretoycc,  ||  euen  mine. 

16  jacamyrcmcsfl)aiircioycc,ibhcn 
tljy  lippes  fpeabe  rtgljt  things. 

17  *?Lct  not  thine  heart  cutty  tin- 
ners, but  be  thou  in  the  fcarc  of  tljc 
%  0  K  £>  an  the  aay  long. 

is  * Jforfurely thercisan || eua ,  ana 
thmc  crpcctation  fljau  no t  be  cut  off. 

19  $catcfhou,myfonnc,auabciMc, 
ana  gmae  tljinc  Ijcartm  the  ibay. 

20  *  23c  not  amongfl  lamc-bibbers ; 
amongfl  riotous  eatcrst  of  flcfli. 

21  iror  the  arunbara  ana  the  glut: 
ton  (hall  come  to  poucrty ;  anaaroufp 
nc(Tc  fl)all  cloatlj  a  man  iaith  ragges. 

22  *$earhcn  bnto  thy  father  that 
begatcthccanaacfpifenotthymother 
ibhcnfhc  is  ola. 

2j  Buy  the  tructlj,  ana  fell  it  not  i  al- 
io lbifcaomc  ana  inflruction  anaanacr 
flauamg. 

24  *  Xhe  father  of  the  nghtcons 
fl)au  greatly  rcioy  cc :  ana  he  that  beget 
tcth  a  lbifc  chiij.fljaii  hauc  loy  of  him. 

25  Xljy  father  ana  tljy  mother  (hall 

I&bb  2  be 


10. 
\Heb.mlt 

theft  cwfe 
thine  eyet  to 

fly  spon  ? 


'Chap.  li. 
:8.dcut.  19 
14.  and  i  7. 
'7- 

\\Or,  bound. 
"Chap.  22. 


»Chap.  i ; 
24.  and  19, 
18.  and 2 2, 
»5- 


!|(?r,  men  I 
wilrciovec. 


"Chap.  14, 
rand  5.51. 
pfal.  17. 1 
and7?.;. 
'Chap.  24. 

\\Or, rnr.tr  I 


Rom.  1 5. 
i.cph.j. 
S. 

\Hrb.of 

thar fcpi. 

Chap.  i,3. 


Chap.  10 
,&  1  5.20. 


Againltenuic.  Prouerbes.       Theiuftfallcth. 


*Chjp.I2 

■  4- 

•  Gup  7. 
1 1. 

!  0r%  ASA 
.obber. 
•Il'ay.5.11 


]Or,acoclj 
trice. 


\Htlintht 
h'.irtofshe 


\H<b.  I 
kffrwitnot. 


•  Chip. 
13.17.  an. 
14.19.  pfal 
37-i.StC- 

and??.;. 
*Pfal.lo.7. 


fircngth, 

r  Hcb. 

tlrtnqthe- 
neih  might. 
•Chap. -.c 
18. and  11. 
14.  audi; 


',Hd:   r.u- 


beglaD,  anD  (hcthatbarcthecfhall  tc- 
toycc. 

z6  £$y  fonnt ,  giuc  mc  thine  heart, 
anD  let  thine  cycsobrcrucmyTbaycs. 

27  *  ifo?  an  ibhojc  is  abeepe  bitth; 
anD  a  ftrangc  Kbonian  15  a  narrow  pit. 

18  *5>hcaifoiyeth  m ruatt||asfora 
piap,  ann  tner  cafcrl)  the  tranfgeeffours 
among  men. 

29   *  031)0  Iiath  tt)OC;tt)l)0  hath  f02s 

roib<ll)!)ohith  contentions  ?Uiho  huh 
babbling;  ltoho  hath  ibounDS  Without 
canfc  ;U)ho  huh  rtbnelTc  of  cpes  < 

30  Xhcy  that  tarry  long  at  the  ibtne, 
they  that  goctofccKcnnrtlbmc. 

31  ILoohc  not  thou  Upon  the  lDinc 
when  it  is  r  cD.lbhcn  it  giucth  Ins  colour 
in  the  tup,  when  it  moucth  it  felfe  aright. 

31  3tthclalrit  bitcthliKc  a  ferpent, 
anb  fhngcth  littc||anabbcr. 

33  3Chmc  eyes  (hall  bcholb  Orange 
lbonicn^nbthinchcartfbailbtterper 
ucrfc  things. 

3+  Pea  thou  (halt  be  ashc  thatly; 
cthDOibnctmthemiDftofthcfca,  o?as 
he  that  lyetfi  upon  the  top  of  a  matt. 

3$  Xhcy  hauctlnhcnmc,  fhaicthou 
fay,  andjubasnotficfte :  tlitv  Ijaucbta- 
ten  mc,  and  1 3)  feu  it  not :  When  (hall  3 
avbanc  i  3J  ibill  fccttcit  vet  agatne. 

CHAP.   XXIIII. 

€  not  thou  *  emuous  <\- 
M  gainfl  cum  men ,  neither 
>g>  before  to  be  with  them. 
2  *  Jf 02  rtjeit  Ijcart  flu 
raagsgRH  bicth  Dcftruction  ,  anb 
their  iippes  tame  of  inifchtefc. 

3  Xhzough  ibifcbomc  is  an  houfc 
buiibcb;anb  bp  bnbcrftanbmg  it  is  cfta^ 
blifhcb. 

4  3nb  by  Imovblebgc  (hall  the 
chambers  bee  ftlicb  With  all  pzenous 
ahbplcafant  riches. 

5  3t  wife  man  t  is  ffrong ,  yea  a  man 
of  Unoibicbgc  tencrcafeth  ftrength. 

6  *  foi  by  mfe  counfcll  thou  (halt 
malic  thy  lbarrc :  anbm  multitubc  of 
counfcilcrs  there  ^fafetie. 

7  nMcDomc  "too  high  foi  afoole: 
he  openeth  not  Ins  mouth  mttic  gate. 

8  tyt  thatDcuifeth  to  boe  euill,  fl;all 
be  callcb  a  mifchicuous  perfon. 

9  Xhc  thought  of  foouflmcfTc  is 
fume :  anD  the  fcomcr  is  an  abominate- 
onto  men. 

10  ii  thou  faint  in  th c bap  of  abucr fi- 
ne .thvlrrcngtlj  1st  fmail: 


n  *3ifthoufo2bcarc  toDcliucrthem 
that  arc  Djatocutmto  Death,  anb  rhofe 
thatarcrcabytobe  flaiuc : 

11  gjf  thoufayeft,  2ocholb,iueUnenj 
it  not:  both  not  he  that  ponbereth  the 
heart,  tonftber  u?anbhc  that  hecpeth 
thvfoulc,both"othCBnoU)i[?anbfhail 
not  net  renber  tocucryman*acco2bing 

tOhtS«302fiCSi 

13  HPyfonnc,  catc  thou  honic,  be; 
caufcit  is  goob,  anb  the  honie  combe, 
which  isftbcctcttothytafte. 

14  £>o  fhaii  the  mtoVblcbgc  of  lntfe^ 
Domcbebntothyfoulc:tt)hcnthouhaft 
founbir,*  then  there  (hail  be  a  reibarb, 
anb  thy  expectation  (hall  not  betttt  off. 

15  ?Lap  not  matte,  (j©ttncBcD  man) 
agatnft  the  bibcllmg  of  the  righteous : 
fpoilc  not  hts  rcftmg  place. 

i6  *jfo?  a  uift  man  fallcth  feuen 
nmes,anb  rifcth  tp  aeaine  :but  thcibie; 
Utb  tball  fall  into  mifchtefc. 

17  *  3Rciopcc  not  ttrtjen  thine  encmie 
fallcth :  anb  let  not  thme  ijcart  be  slab 
mhcnhcmunblcth: 

18  ?Lcft  tljc  floKB  fee  it,  anb  titbif- 
pleafc  him,  anb  hce  turne  aibap  his 
U)2ath  from  hun. 

19  *  ||  if  ret  not  thy  felfe  becanfc  ofc- 
mil  men  neither  be  thou  cnutous  at  the 
ibieUcb. 

10  *  if  02  there  fhau  be  no  r  ctbarb  to 
the  cuillmamthc  ||  canblc  of  the  ttncttcb 
fljallbeputout. 

ii  ^fonncfearethouthcHsiMK^, 
anb  the  Hmg:anb  meblc  not  ttrithtthem 
that  are  giuentothange. 

ii  ifouhetr  calamity  fljall  rife  rut^ 
benly,  anb  Vbljo  nnolbeth  the  nunc  of 
themboth; 

23  Xhcfc  things  alfo  belong  to  the 
lbifc :  *3Jt  is  not  goob  to  haucrefpett  of 
pcrfonsinittbgement 

24  *$e  that  faythbnto the Vbicfteb, 
Xhou art rtg!)tcous,  hint  (hall  thepeo 
pie  curft  ;  nations  (hall  abljojre 
htm : 

2$  2Sut  to  them  that  rebuae  him 
(hall  be  Delight,  anb  f  a  goob  bleffmg 
fhau  come  bpon  them. 

26  Euery  man  fljall  Ulffc  his  UppcS  that 

tgiuctharightanfnicre. 

27  02eparethyibo2itcH)tthout,anb 
mafte  it  fit  102  thyfclfcin  thcficlb^anD 
aftcrruarbsbmlb  thmchoufe. 

28  2Sc  not  a  ibttncffc  againft  thy 
ncigl)bour  ibithout  taufc :  aubbrcnue 
uotiDiththyiippes. 

29  *£>ay  not,3  ibill  boe  fo  to  him  as 
he 


•  pfai.81,) 


Mob.j4. 

1  l.pfal.6J. 

I1.1cr.31. 

l>»-rom.l. 

6.  apoc.  11. 

I  2. 

•Plal.19.1 

P.Si  119. 

lol. 

f  Htb.vsen 

'Chap.  13. 
18. 


•Pfal.34. 
18.  and  tf. 
14.  iob.  5. 
•9- 

•Pfal.3c. 
1  j.chap.17 
5. iob. 31. 
'9- 
\Hck.„h 

emlltn  hit 
eyet. 

•Plal.37.1. 
chap. 13. 

'7- 

\\Or,k?rpr 
not  compjurj 
fnlhlbetrtC' 

tot 

'Chap.lj. 
9iob.ll.17 

\\OrJ4mp, 
I  HchjhiBh. 
tm. 


Ip. 


•Lcuit. 
1  j.chap.18. 
3-indi8. 
n.dcuc.f. 
1 7.  and  16. 
io.ioh.y. 
14. 

•Chap.  17. 
15.1^.5.13. 
\Hrt.  a 
Htf,utf 
tent. 


XHtb.tbu 

tVtfircrcth 
Tiabt  words. 


'Ch 


np.20. 


Of  flouthfulnefTe.     Chap.xxv.         Afhrewdwifc 


\Heir.fet 
my  hear;. 


■Clnp.6. 


\H-tr.i 

man  of 
fluid. 


\H.-h.  there 
is  no  fejrch- 


*  Chap.  10 
S. 


\Hcbr.ftt 

not  cut  thy 
ghtj. 

'  LuVc  14. 
10. 


Macth.  5. 
:j  andl8. 

5- 
\\Or,dtfco- 
tttrnct  the 
ferret  of  an- 
other, 

^He^fpoh^n 
vpon  hu 
heclet. 


j  i)c  l)atl)  Done  to  mcc :  Ji(  IMI  renber  to 
■  the  man  accojbmg  to  Ins  YbojUc. 

30  3J  mm  by  the  ftcib  of  the  flonth 
full,  ant  by  the  liiucyarb  of  the  man 
boybofbnbcrftanbtug: 

si  3nb loe,tt ibasail grotticn oner 
lbith  thomes,  and  nettles  habcoucrcb 
'tlie  face  thcreof,anbthc  (tone  VDallttjcr; 
ofibasbJOKcnbolbne: 

31  SEhcn  3Ifatt>,  md  t  confiDcrcu  it 
lbcll ,  3  looticb  bpon « ,  and  rccciucb  m 
fttuetion. 

33  *  net  a  little  accpe ,  a  little  flum 
bee ,  a  little  folbmg  of  the  Jjanbcs  to 
accpe: 

34  5>o  ujalltop  ponertie  come,^ 
[one  thattraucilctlj,  anb  tljy  lbant,  as 
itanaemcbman. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  Obferuations  about  King;,  8  and  about 
auoyding  caufes  of  quarrels,  and  fundrv 
cau(es  thereof. 

$efc  arcalfo0^ottcrbcs  of 
S>olomon,Tbhich  the  men 
of  I?c$cBialj  Ring  of  3Jn 
sg^bahtoptebout. 
Psfe  i  itisthcglojyofGob 
to  conccale  a  thing :  but  the  honour  of 
Bmgs  iitofcarch  out  a  matter. 

3  Xhcljcaucu  fojh«gl)t,  anb  tljc 
earth  foi  bepth,  anb  tljc  Ijeatt  offings 
istbnfcacchable. 

4  Xauc  aibay  the  bioffc  from  tljc 
filucr ,  anb  there  fijaii  tome  foojtlj  a  bef 
fell  fo2  the  finer. 

5  *  SlaBcaibay  the  tbtcBcb  from  be; 
fo:c  the  utug,anb  l)is  thjonc  fliaibc  efte 
blifhcbmnghtcoufnes. 

6  t^utnot foUljtIn>fclfcintljep2C* 
fence  of  the  Umg,  anb  Ctaub  not  in  the 
place  of  grcatincn. 

7  *  iroj  better  it  is  that  it  be  faibtonto 
thec,  Come  bp  hither ;  then  thattljou 
fhonlbcft  be  put  loibet  in  the  p:efcnce  of 
tljc  v>nncclbhom  thmc  cieshaucfcctic. 

8  ©oc  not  fouh  hafhly, to  flriue ,  left 
thou  know  not  tbhat  to  boc  in  tljc  cube 
thereof,  lbhcn  thy  neighbour  ijatlj  put 
tljcctofhamc. 

9  *S>cbatc  th v  taufc  \bitlj  n)y  nctgh- 
bourhimreife;anb!|bifcoucr  not  a  fecret 
to  another: 

10  ?Lc!thcthathcarctlnt,putthceto 
fhamc ,  anb  thmcmfamic  runic  not* 
tbay. 

1 1  %  ttwb  t  fitly  fpoiicn  isufce  apples 
of  golb  m  pictures  of  filucr. 


11  3ls  an  care  ring  of  golb ,  anb  an 
ornament  of  fine  golb,  fo  is  attJife  rcp;o- 
tier  bpon  an  obcbicnt  care. 

13  3lsrt)ccolboffno\biiuhctimcof 
harucft,  fo  is  a  faithftill  mcfTcngcr  to 
them  that  fenb  him :  foMjccrcfccfbctlj 
thcfouicofhismalters. 

1+  naho  fo  boaftcth  himfclfc  t  of  a 
falfegtft,ts  like  cloubcsaub  nmibcibitlj; 
outrame. 

15  *  2Sy  long  fo.'bcaring  is  a  ytancc 
perfroabeb,  anb  afofttongtic-b:calttth 
the  bone. 

16  i)aft  thou  founb  Uony  t  eate  fo 
much  as  isfufficicnt  fo:  thec :  left  tljou 
be  fillcb  thcr  cibith.anb  bomit  it. 

17  ||J0ithbM\u  thy  footc  from  tlip 
neighbours  houfc :  left  Ijc  be  t  mcary  of 
tijcc,anbf>  hate  thec. 

18  3JmantIjat  bcarctlj  falfc  lbitnes 
agamft  *  his  neighbour ,  is  amauic,anb 
a  fmozb  ,anb  a  fljarpc  arrolb. 

19  Confluence  in  an  bnfaithftill  man 

intime  of  trouble,  fsHkeatyoKen  tooth, 

anbafootoutofioynt. 

10  As  hec  that  taftctl)  a\bay  a  gar- 
ment m  eolb  Ibcafhcr,  and  as  btnegcr  bp= 
on  nitre,  fo  is  Ijc  tljat  fingcth  fongs  to  an 
Jjcauy  heart. 

21  *3f  thine  cnemic  be  hungry,  giuc 
htmbjcab  to  eate:  anb  ifljccbcthtrthe, 
giuc  him  rbater  to  bnitne. 

22  ifoi  thou  fliait  hcapc  coaics  of 
fire  bpon  Ins  hcab,  anb  tljc  %®kt> 
foailrcmarbthcc. 

t3  I  Xfjc  i!5o2th  Ibmbc  bJiuctlj  & 
tbapratnc:  fobocth  an  angric  counte- 
nance a  bacHbiting  tongue. 

24  *  3Jt  is  better  to  bibcll  in  a  comer 
of  njc  Ijoufc  top ,  tljcnnnth  a  bMibling 
iboman,  anb  in  a  nnbe  honfe. 

25  As  colb  ibatcrs  to  a  thirfhc  foule : 
fo  is  goob  ncibcs  from  a  farre  coun 
trey. 

26  5f  righteous  man  faiungboibnc 
before  rheU)icUcb,is  a5  atroublcbfoun- 
tame,aub  a  corrupt  fpnng. 

27  3t,snbtsoobtocatmiichljony: 
fo  for  men  to  fcaccljtfjcir  oVbucglozp, « 

notgloiy. 

28  *  l?ce  that  haih  no  rule  oner  his 
ottmefpirit,  ts  iikeariticthatisbioUcu 
bolbne,andtbitljoutiballts. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1 1  Obferuations  about  (coles,  13  about  flug- 
EMrds,  17  and  about  contentious  bufic- 
bodics. 

BBS  3  US 


*  Chap.  1 3 
'7- 


fHeir.ina 
pfi  off  ejf. 
hood. 

*  Cliap.  1  ; 

t.  gene.  >  1 
4. and x6 

14. 1. fain. 

lj  24. 


\\Or.letth} 

foore  htfel- 

dsmexnthj 

neighbour! 

houfe. 

\Htbr.fnH 

of:hre. 

"Pfal.  no. 

4.  chap. 12 


*  Exod.13 
4.10m.  12. 
20. 


\\Or,Tl 
Northwir.de 
brwaeth 
foorth  rxine, 
f'j  doer  h  a 
('tickffittttp 
tongue t  an 
angry  coun- 
tt nance. 
"Chap.  J  1. 
p. mil  ip. 

n- 


'Chap,  16, 


Buiie-bodies. 


rouerbes. 


b< 


Offclfc-louZ 


'Chip.  Io. 

ij.plil. 

3*?. 


\Heb.hi 
otvneejei . 


\\Or,vio- 

/etee. 

\  Heb.  .ere 

hfttivf. 

\\Or,tu!:e 
thjt  pttiteth 

rfprcucus 
flo-iein.tn 
hcjfc  of 
/lens. 


tftl.t  ;n.- 
nc:l:.ul,.::.l 

keelnretb 
thcfoole,be 
biretbatji 
trjnfgreffort. 

i.Pct.i. 

1. 
XHeb.ttera- 
tellj  htsfcUj, 
'Cliap.  :2. 
'J- 


"Chap.lp. 
14. 

\Orheil 
weir j. 


\\Or,hm- 

pM./lllKCl 

irtjurkef. 


\Heb.with- 

ttit  noed. 

"  Clup.  1  J. 
10. 

\\Or.irhi- 
frrrrr. 

ifiti.i, 

fitert. 

•Chip. I  5. 
18.  S.-  »?.«». 
»Cha.i8.8 


^  v^  as  raiue  ul  {HMfUeft :  fo  ho 
St  nour  ts  not  fccmcly  fo?  a 
foolc. 
z  3lsthcbirbbyibati 
tying, as  the  ftoalloilifrpflvms:  fothc 
cttrfccatifclcffcfhall  not  come. 

I  *  3  lbhip  fo:  the  ho:fc,  a  b:tblc  fo: 
the  affc  s  anb  a  rob  fo:  the  foolesbachc. 

4  3lnftocrc  notafooIcacco:bmg  to 
hisfoliy.icftthou  aifobc  iiiiebuto  him. 

5  3nftucr  c  a  foolc  acco:btng  to  his 
folly,  lefthec  be  lbtfcttt  tins  olbnc  ton- 
ttit. 

6  5?e  that  fcnbctl)  a meflageby  the 
hanb  of  afoolc,cttttcth  off  the  fcctc.and 
bmtuethllbammage. 

7  Xhc  legges  of  the  lame  tare  not 
equal! :  fo  is  a  parable  in  the  moutlj  of 
fooles. 

s  || 3s  hec that  bittbcth  a  (tone  in  a 
fling  fo  is  hec  thatgiucth  honour  to  a 
foolc. 

9  Asafhomcgoefhbpmtothchattb 
of  a  bnutUarb  fo  is  a  parable  in  the 
mouth  of  fooles. 

10  ||  Xl)c  great  God  that  fo:mcb  all 
tilings,  both  rcibarbeth  the  foolc,  aub 
rcmarbcth  tranfgreflours. 

II  *3lsaboggc  rctttrncthtohtsbo 
mite :  fo  a  foolc  t  retuructl)  to  l)is  folly. 

11  5>ccft  thou  a  man  lbifc  m  Ins 
olimc  conceit;  there  is  mo:c  hope  of a 
foolc  tlicn  of  l)im. 

1}   *  XI)C  notljfllllmanfavtl),  There is 

alioniuthClbay,altoit  is  tnthefrrccts. 

1+  As  the  boo:c  turncth  bpon  l)is 
lunges  :  fodoedi  thcflothfull  bpon  his 
bebbc. 

15  *%Ut  flotl)full  hibcth  his hanb  in 
hisbofomc  ,||ttgricucfh  htmto  buugit 
agamc  to  his  mouth. 

i6  die  fluggarb  is  ibifcr  m  his  ottmc 
conceit,  then  fcucn  men  that  can  renber 
areafou. 

17  fcc  that  paffctl)  by ,  and  ||  mcblcth 

lbltll  ftrifc  belonging  not  tO  hull ,  is  like 

one  that  taucffi  abogby  the  cares. 

is  3ls  a  mab  matubho  caftcth  t  fire- 
b:anbs,arroibcs,anbbcarh : 

19  £>o  is  the  man  chat  bcccutcth  his 
ucigbbour,»fayrh,3imnot'3lmfpo:t; 

zo  tn3f)crcnorboobts,tl)cretl)cfirc 
gocth  out :  fo  *  inhere  there  is  no  |[  talc 
bearer, theflnfctccafcth. 

ii  *  As  toaits  ire  to  burning  coairs, 
anb  lboob  to  fire,  fo  is  a  contentious! 
man  to  hinblc  ftrifc. 

ii  *Xhcibo:bsofa  talc- bearer a« 


as  ttiouubes ,  anb  they  goe  boibnc  into 
the  t  inner  moll  parts  of  the  belly. 

2j25urnmglips,anba«)icljcbhcart, 
are  like  apotfbearo  coucrcb  ibith  filucr 
b:offr. 

24  $?cc  that  hateth,  II  bifTcmblcth 
rbith  hislips,anb  laycthbp  beccitibith' 
ui  him. 

15  nahen  hetfpeafteth  faire.belceuc 
him  not:  fo: there  are  ftucti  abominate 
onsm  his  heart. 

26||v/hoiehatrcbiscoucrcbbybctctt, 
his  lbicncbncffc  fbail  be  Ojerbcb  before 
thcujholccongrcgation. 

27  *  loljofo  biggcth  a  pit,  fljailfall 
therein :  anb  he  that  rolleth  a  done,  tt 
Ujillrcturncljponhim. 

28  %  lyingtonguc  hatcth rtjofc that 
arc  afflictcb  by  it,aub  a  flattering  moutlj 
\bo:Ucth  ruinc. 

CHAP.   XXVIL 

1    Oblcruationsof  fclte-louc:    5    ohrueloue: 
ii    olcJreroauoidotlences :   13   andolrhc 


liou 


(hole 


c  cue. 


£>afTnotthyuifcoftto 
W  mo:ro\b:  fod  thouftnouj 
^  eft  not  Vbljat  a  bay  may 
b.:ingfoo.:rh. 
7s^s^^  1  fLet  another  man 
p:aifc  thecanb  not  rl)mc  olbnc  mouth 
a  Qrangcr  ,anb  not  thine  olbnc  lips- 

3  %  ftonc  is  t  hcauic ,  anb  the  fanb 
ii)Cigljtic :  but  a  fooles  ib;afh  is  l;ca- 
titer  then  them  both. 

4  t  n&ath  is  cnicll,  anb  anger  is  out> 
ragious :  but  luho  is  able  to  ftanb  be- 
fo«!c!|cnuic; 

5  £)pen  rebuke  is  better  thcnfccrct 
lone. 

6  *  f  aithfull  ar<;  the  xbottubcs  of  a 
fricnb :  but  the  Htffcs  of  an  enemy  arc 
llbcccitfuii. 

7  *  3Che  full  foulc  t  loatheth  an  ho- 
me combe :  but  to  the  hungry  foulc  e-- 
ucry  bitter  tl)tng  is  fincctc. 

S  2sabirbthatn>am>:cthfromhcr 
ncft :  fo  is  a  matt  due  lbaubieth  from 
his  plate. 

9  jsDytttment  anb  perfume  rcioytc 
the  Ijcart :  foboetljthc  fmcctneffc  of  a 
mans  fricnb  t  by  hcartic  counfell. 

10  ithinc  olbnc  fricnb  anb  thy  fa 
thcrs  fricnb  fo.:faUeuot;  neither  gocm 
tofhy  brothers  houfcin  the  bay  of  thy 
calamine :  fo?  *  better  is  a  neighbour 
tljat  isnccrc,thcnab.:otherfarrc  off. 

1 1  *s$yfotme,bcibifc,anbmaltcmy 

heart 


\HtbzhAm. 
km. 


\\Or,u 
knotret 


\H,l-.ru- 
krlh  hu 

voicelri- 

ClOHl, 

\\Or, hatred 
w  cotter  ed 
tnfecret. 

'Ecdcs.  10. 

J.plil.17. 

16.KS.I5. 


"Iatn.^.ij, 

\Hei.U 
morrow  djy. 


t  Het:  heu- 
Htneffe. 

\Heb.rerAlh 

iicritelHt 

.tttjjngerjr. 

OHerflowin^. 

\\Or/cbxJu. 


•Pill 


141.5 


lOr,  ejnte/f, 
or  fret]*  nt. 
Mob  6.7. 
\Het.tre.u 
detb  zoder 
foole. 


f  Het:  from 
the  cotinfell 
oflbefomie. 


'  Clup.  1  7. 

17.  ind  18. 

"Cliiio  1. 
inj  15.14. 


Know  thy  flocke.    Chap.xxvii).       A  wicked  ruler. 


Chjp.iJ-3 


•Chap. 20. 
6. 


•Chap.  19- 


•Ecdct.iS 
\H'br.not. 

"Chip.17.3 


t  Hdr.fel 
hi  heart. 

fhrength. 
\Htbr-tn 
ffcjirraltorl 

rjriort. 


\Hthr.lfr 


•Lcuit.t*. 
%6. 


Ijeart  glaD ,  tbat  3  may  anfroetc  bim 
tbatrep?ocbctbmc. 

ii  *3p?uDentman  fo?efectbtbeeuil, 
and  t)ioett)  ijimfelfe :  but  rtjcftmplepaiTc 
on,andatepumfl)co. 

ij  'Xauebisgarmenttbatisfurcty 
fo  x  a  ft  t  anger ,  at  id  tabe  a  p  icDgc  of  bun 
fo?a(trangeVboman. 

14  $etbatblciTctbbtsfrienDlbitba 
louDbotte,ttfingearclyintbemo?nmg, 
1 t  (bail  be  co tin t cd  a  cur  fe  to  h  tin . 

15  *%.  continuail  Dropping  in  a  tier? 
ratine  Day,  ano  a  contentious  ttoman, 
areali&e. 

k  x©bofocucrbtDcfbbcr,btDcrbtbc 
ttnnD,  anD  tbe  ointment  of  bis  wgljt 
rjantj  winch  oelb?ayefb  it  (elk. 

17  'Jronfbarpenetbiron:  fo  a  man 
(barpenctb  tljc  countenance  of  ljis 
frtcnD. 

18  nabofo  Bccpctb  tbe  figttee,  (ball 
eate  tbe  fruit  tberof :  fo  be  tbat  ttjattctt) 
on  bis  mailer,  (ball  be  bonourcD. 

19  3s  m  lbater  face  anfwereth  to  face : 
lb  tbe  bcart  of  man  to  man. 

20  *  j^cll  ano  oetttuetion  are  t  neuer 
full :  fo  tj)t  eves  of  man  are  neuer  fatlfc 
ficD. 

11  *  As  tbe  fining  pot  fo?  filucr,  ano 
tbe  furnace  fo?  golD :  fo  is  aman  to  bis 
p?aife. 

11  ICbougb  tbou  fboulDeft  b?ay  a 
foole  in  a  mooter  among  lbbeatc  lbttb 
a  peftcll,  yet  mill  not  bis  fooliujticffc  De^ 
part  front  bim. 

23  25c  tbou  Diligent  to  Bnolbe  tbe 
ftatcoftbvflocBS,indtiooBeiDclltotby 
bcrDs. 

14  jFo?  t  riebes  are  not  fo?  cucr :  anD 
Dotbtbc  croibne  endure  t  to  cuerpgene: 
ration? 

25  Xbebayappcatctb,anDtbeten 
Der  graffe  fbctbctb  itfclfcanD  bcrbes  of 
tbe  mottntames  arc  gatber  eD. 

i6  Xbeiambcs  are  fo?  tby  clotting, 
anD  tbe  goates  arc  tbe  p?ice  of  tby  ficlD. 

17  3utDtbou  njaithaue goats miiuc 
tnougb  foz  tby  fooD,  fo?  tbe  fooD  of  tby 
boufbolD,  anDtoi  tlje  t  maintenance  fo? 
tbymaiDcns. 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

Generall  obferu.itions  of  impietic  and  reli- 
gious integrities 

^  lr>e  *  ibtcHcD  flee  ruijcn  no 

m.  man  pttrfttetb  :  but  tbe 

^ff§  ngbtcous  arc  bolDc  as  a 


I  on  of  alanD,manyaretbcp?tnccs  tbere-l 
I  of : !  I  but  by  a  man  of  btiDccttanDiug  and ;  y  or, 


"*>,<>/*>>  f 


m 


1 


ofvnder- 
flanding  and 
"mfedomc 
Jhallthey 
hkprife  be 
prolonged. 
\  Hey.  with- 
outfaode. 


jfo?  tbe  traufgrcffi 


finoiblcDgc  the  ihte  thereot  (bail  bee  p?o 
longcD. 

j  %  poo?c  man  tbat  opp?c(Tctb  tbe 
poo?c,  isiifec  a  froeeping  ramc  tibbicb 
lcauctbnofooD. 

4  Xbeytbatfo?faBetbciati),p?atfe 
tbciblcBcD  :butfucbasBeepctbc|Larb, 
contetiDlbltbtbem. 

5  euill  men  bnDcrftatiD  not  iuDge* 
ment:  but tljcp ttjat fecfee tijc  1L  ©  is®, 
bnocr llano  all  tljtngs. 

6  *26cttcristbcpoo?ctbatibaiBetb 
in  bis  bp?igbtncCfc,  tben  betbatispcr; 
uerfeinbisU3avcs,tbougbbcbertcb. 

7  *i©bofoBeepctbtbeiaUi,isaU)ife 
fonnc :  but  be  tljat  t  is  a  companion  of 
riotous  men,  (bamctb  bis  fatljcr. 

8  *  $e  tbat  by  tofune  anD  t  bmuft 
gainemcrcafctb  bis  fubflancc,  be  (ball 
gatber  it  fo?  bun  tbat  tinlptty  tbe  poo?e. 

9  $c  tbat  rurnctlj  arbay  bis  tare 
from  bearing  fbeiaui,  euenbisp?ayer 
fhaibe  abominanoti. 

10  *  i©bo  fo  caufetb  tbe  rigbteotts  to 
gocafteayman  cutll  ibay,  be  fljall  fall 
bimfelfc into btsolbne pit:  but  tbe  top- 
rrgbt  (ball  bauc  gooD  tljmgs  in  poffct 
fion. 

11  Cbericb  man  is  tuife  tin  btsolbne 
conceit  t  but  tbcpoo?e  tbat  batljbnDet; 
ttanDingfcarcbetb  bmi  out. 

11  *B9bcn  ngbtcous  men  Do  rcioyee, 
there  isgreatglo?y:butibbentbcrbicBeD 
rife,  amanisllbiDDcn. 

1  j  *  $?e  tbat  couerctb  Ijts  rinnes,fball  j  fir. 
notp?ofper:  butlbbofo  confelTctbanDl  \p^\y- 
fo?fafeetb  them,  fbailbaue  mcrric. 

14  ^appyistbcmantbatfcarctlial 
tbay  :*  but  be  tbat  barDcnetb  bis  beact, 
(ball  fall  into  mifcbtefc. 

15  As  a  roaring  lyon  attD  a  ranging 
beare :  fo  is  a  rbicbcD  ruler  ouer  tbe 
poo?cpcoplc. 

16  %\yt  p?tncc  tbat  lbantetb  bnDer 
flanomg,  isalfoagrcat  oppzcffoitr:  but 
bctbat  batetb  coiictouCtuflt,  (ballp?o- 
longhi^Daycs. 

17  *  31  matt  tbat  Dotb  btolencc  to  tbe 
blooD  of  any  perfott ,  (ball  flte  to  tlje  pit, 
let  no  man  (lay  bim. 

18  *  nabofo  ibaiucfb  bpngbtiy ,  (ball 
bcfatteD :  but  lie  tbat  is  pmtcrfe  in  his 
ibaycs.fbalifaiiatonce. 

19  *$ctbat  nuctbbisiatiD.niaibatic 
picnnc  of  b?cao :  but  be  tbatfoiioibctb 
after  baincperfons,  Ojallljaue  poucrty 
cnouglj. 


•a.a.19.1 


"cha.19.3- 

\Or,frtdtlh 
e/iitlont. 

"Chap.  13. 
22.  cedes.  2 
16. 

\Hcbr.tj 
mcrcufr. 


■Chap.ltf. 
>7- 


f  Hik.ii 
cyet. 


'lohnino 

ecclcs.  10.6 

and  vcr.  a8. 

!||Or,/.«J*f 


and  lo 


Rom.  I 


"Gen.  0-6 

exod.ai.i^ 

•  Chap. 10. 
'Chip.lJ. 


20 


afattlj 


An  cuill  eye. 


Prouerbes.     Correct  children. 


•Chap.!?.! 
and  I}. 

||  Or  ojrtfit- 
nifhrd. 
•Chap.  1 8. 
<  &24.2;. 
Or  hr  that 
hath  an  emit 
ejethajhlh 
tobcrich, 
trr.io. 
•Cha.l7.<S. 


drjlroyin" 

•  Chap.  I 
10. 


20  z  faitljfull  man  (hall  abonnb 
tenth  buffings:  *  but  lice  that  maftetl) 
halte  to  be  net),  fball  not  bt  !| innocent. 

21  "Co  haue  refpett  of  pcrfons,  u 
not  goob :  fo2,  fo2  a  piece  of  tyeab  that 
man  Will  tranfsrefle. 

22  \\V)t  ttjat  haftcth  tobccriclj,  hath 
an  cum  eye,  anb  confibetcth  not  that 
poucrty  fljau  tome  bpon  him. 

23  *  j?c  tljat  tebulteth  a  man,  after; 
warbsfljau  finb  mozc  faitottr,  then  be 
that  flatteretl)  with  the  tongue. 

24.  nahoforobbeti)  bis  father  02  bis 
mother ,  anb  fait!) ,  it  is  no  tranfgrcf 
•"fton^hcfaincithetompaniouof  face- 
ftroycr. 

25  *  i^c  that  ts  of  a  p:oub  heart,  thr^ 
rcth  top  ftnfe :  but  he  that  putteth  his 
truft  m  the  %  o  k  e>,  fbaibe  mabc  fat. 

26  i)ce  that  truftctl)  in  bis  ownc 
heart,  is  afoolc:  but  Who  fo  waiiscth 
Wifely  hefballbcbeltucreb. 

27  "toctbatgmctb  unto  thepooje, 
(bail  not  lac&c:  but  he  that  Ijt'bctljljis 
eyes,  fhau  haue  many  a  turfc. 

28  *ttJhenthcttncr«D  rife,  men hibc 
thcmfclucs:  but  lbhentheppcnfl),  the 
righteous  tncrcafe. 


'Dent   15. 
E.cha.aa.p. 

*Chap.  29. 
a. and  vtr. 
1 1  of  this 
chapter. 


of  reproof. 


•Chap.  11. 
10  arwli*. 

i8.ccdcs.   arc 

10.5. 

M 

"Chap.  10. 
1  and  1  5. 
so.  and  37. 
1 1. 

•Luk-.ij. 
U-chap.  5. 
o.ai'f!  28.7. 
\Hcb.* 
man  of  oil- 
Uttcr.i. 


Mob  19. 
16. 


\\Or.f„M 

lUntnfire. 


CHAP.    XXIX. 

Obferuations  of  publike  gouerncmenc,  15 
Andofpiiuate.  1:.  Of  anger, pride,theeuery, 
cowardize,  and  corruption. 

t  €  that  being  often  rcp2o- 

ucb,  barbrncttjbtsnec&c, 

fbalfubbcniybcbcftroicb, 

anb  that  Without  remeby. 

2  *n9hcn  the  righteous 

tnautbo2itie,  rhc  people  rcioytc : 

but  when  the  Wtctteb  bcarctlj  rule,  the 

people  mourne. 

j  *  rohofo  loueth  Wtfcbome,  reioy 
cctb  his  father  : "  but  hrc  that  beeped) 
company  Wttlj  harlots,  fpenbeth  his 
ftibltance. 

4  Xhc  King  by  lubgement  ftabli- 
flieththclanb:  but  f  Ik  tljat  rctetucrh 
gifts,  ouertlKoibctb  it. 

5  3  man  that  flattcrcth  his  ncigfj- 
bour ,  fp:eabeth  a  net  fo2  his  feet. 

6  3Jn  the  tranfgreffion  of  an  ctnll 
man  there  is  a  fnart:  butthc  righteous 
both  fmg  anb  rcioyce. 

7  *  Che  righteous  confibcrcth  the 
taufc  of  the  poo2c :  but  the  Wtcbcb  rrgar 
brtlinottotmoujit. 

S  S>co2nefull  men  |b2tng  antic  into  a 
fnarc:  but  Uufc  men  turnc  away  llvath. 


9  if  a  Wife  man  contenbeih  tbtth 
a  foolifl)  man ,  whether  bee  rage  02 
iaugh>theie|snorc(t. 

10  t  Xhe  bloobthirfhe  hate  the  top* 
right:  bnttbetultfeeBehisfoule. 

11  ^foolebttcrcthalllnsnunb:  but 
a  wife  man  Kcepetl)  it  m  till  afters 
warbs. 

12  3f  a  ruler  hearken  to  lies,  all  fits 
fcruantsarcWttHcb. 

ij*1Zhepoo2canbrt)e||Deteitfulman 
meet  together :  the  %  ®  k  ©  Ughtnetb 
botlj  their  eyes. 

14.  *  Xhc  Bmg tljat  faitljfully  tubg* 
cththepoo2c,htsrtj2oncfballbce(rabli- 
ujebfo2eucr. 

15  *  1Che  r ob  anb  repjoofc  gtuc  tbtfc; 
borne:  buta*cbtlbleft  to  himfeife tying* 
cth  hismotljcr  to  fbame. 

i6  tebcntbcWic&eb  are  mumplicb, 
tranfgretTion  incr  cafctlj :  *  but  the  riglj; 
tcous  (bail  fee  their  fall. 

17  *  Co2rcrt  thy  fonne,  anb  l)ce  (hall 
guic  thee  reft:  yea  he  (ball  giue  btltgljt 
bntothyfoule. 

is  i©ljcrcthcrcisnobifiou,tI)epcoplc 
llpcrtfb :  but  he  tljat  fteepctlj  tl3cJLatD, 
happy  is  he. 

19  3fcruantrbillnotbcco2rcctebby 
ib02bs :  fo:  though  ijcc  bnberflanb,  Ijce 
rbillnotanfrocrt. 

20  §>ccftthouamanthatishalryl!in 
htsU)02bsichere,smo2e  Ijope  of  a  foole 
then  of  htm. 

21  $c  that  ficlteatcly  b2ingcth  bp  his 
fcruantfromacijtlb.fliali  haue  him  be- 
come  ins  fonne  at  the  length. 

22  *3Jn  angry  man  flurcthbpRrifc, 
anb  afurtous  man  abounbeth  in  tranf 
grctuon. 

2}  "7i  mans  p2tbc  fliail  bitngrjim 
loibc :  but  honour  fhail  bpljolbc  the 
humble  mfptnt. 

24.  iiDho  fo  ts  partner  lnttlj  a  thtefc, 
hateth  his  o\nnc  foule :  hec  Ijearctlj 
curling,  anb  bclbwyeth « not. 

25  3Z\)c  fcare  of  man  bjmgeth  a 
fnare:  but  ibho  fo  puttcrtj  Ijis  truOtn 
tlje  !L©  b  ©,t  fliail  be  fafe. 

26  * flSanyfccfec the t rulers  fauour, 
but  tucry  mans  uibgemeut  commai. 
from  the  1L  on  id. 

27  3lnbiuuftman  >s  an  abomination 
totDciult:  anbhethatts  bp2igl)tmthe 
Ibay,  is  abomination  to  the  iDtcttcb. 

CHAP.    XXX. 

1    Agurs  confefsion  of  his  fauli.  7  The  two 
points  of  his  prayer.   10  The  m caned  are 


I  Htb.  mtn 
*f  blood. 


"Cha.i:.;. 
\\Orttbev- 
jttrer. 

Chap.  30. 


*Sccvcr.!7 
*ch:ip.  10. 
Land  1  ;.ii 
aod  1  j. 

"Pfal.,7. 
^6. and  58 
II  and  91.8 
"Chap.  1  j 
24. and  i*. 
1  j.  and  35 

■3r*4 


\Or.umaie 
wksdr. 


\0r  vthu 


"Chap.ij. 

18.&26.H 


•Chap  1  5 
;  .-.and  18. 
i-i  tob  33. 

ll.mai.13. 


\Hrb.fh«lbe 
jit  on  hifb. 

'Cha.19.tf 

t  Htbr.  the 
face  of  a 
ruler. 


God 


swon 


pure. 


Ch; 


ap.xxx. 


f«*.i«w. 

•Iohn.;. 
13.iob.j8. 
4-plal.  1  :■',. 
j.ifa.  40. 

II. 


•PfJ.11.7. 
ndl8.  31. 
8c  10.  8.8; 
1 19. 1 40 
t  He  b.  tmi- 
fed. 

"Dcut.4.». 
and  11.31. 
apoc.zi.19 
\Hrb  with- 
hold lot 
frommr. 

•Mat.6.  II. 
t  Heb.  ofntj 
ttHowance. 

"Dcut.  j:. 

\Heb.belje 
thee. 

\Heb  hart 
not  with  thjf 
tongue. 


•Chap.6\ 
>7- 


>Pfil.j2. 

J. and  ,7.5 
iob.  29.17. 


not  to  bee  wronged. 
Foure 


Fourc  wicked  ge- 
infatiablc. 


11 
nerations.  15  foure  things  iniatuoic.  17 
Parents  are  not  to  bee  defpifed.  18  Foure 
things  hard  to  be  knowen,  11  Foure  thing: 
vntollevable.  14  Foure  things  exceeding 
wife,  zj  Foure  things  (lately.  31  Wrath 
is  to  bee  preuented. 

$e  mojbsof  3lguttl)e 
fonncof  3JaUelj,eucnt6e 
p?opIjecv:Xljcman  fpattc 
Pnto  3Itf)id ,  eucn  tonto 
3Wncianbflcal. 
2   Smrelv  3 am  ni02C 

bnttiujfljcnanyman,  anD  hauenottljc 

bnbcrfianbing  of  a  man. 
5  5  neither  lcarncb  wtfcbome,  no? 

t  Ijauc  tlje  ftnotblcDge  of  tlieljolp. 

4  *i©borjatl)aftcnbebbpintol)e& 
ucn,  oibcfcenDebfttnjorjatl)  gatljcreb 
tlje  ibinb  in  Ins  nGSiUnJorjatobonno 
tlje  tbatcrs  in  a  garment  i  unjo  IjatlJ 
eitabliujcb  all  tlje  cnbs  of  ttJc  cartlj* 
tbljat  is  Ijts  name ,  anb  ttnjat  is  ijts 
fomus  name,  if  tljou  tanft  tell 

5  *€nervU>o?bof  <5obtispure:rje 
is  a  flnclD  tonto  tljctn  tljat  put  ttjttr 
trnttmmm. 

6  *3Dbctr)ounotbntoljisU)o?bs, 
lettrjcrep20uetljcc,anbt!)oubcfounba 
Ipar 

7  Xlbotljmgsrjauc3Jrequirebof 
tljcc  tocn^methemnotbcfojc^Jbie. 

8  ©emouc  far  re  frommce  bamtv, 
anb  Ives  giucmencttticrpoucrtv,  no? 
ririjcs/tccbe  me  Untlj  foob  t  conuenicnt 
fame. 

9  *  %ttt  31  be  full ,  ano  t  benv  thee, 
anb  fap ,  nstjo  >4hc  %  ®  is  ©?  o?  left  31 
bcpoo?e,ano  Qeaic,  anb  taBCtljc  name 
ofmpoob 

10  r^tcufc  not  a  fcruant  bnto  ots 
matter;  left  lie  cutfcfrjcc,  anb  tljou  be 
founb  guiltv 

11  There  i.  a  generation  that  rurfeth 
their fattier ,  anb  both  not  bletTc  their 
mother 

ii  Thereisa  generation thatare  pure 
tn  their  olbne  epes,anb  vet  ts  no  t  lbau> 
eb  from  their  filtljmctTc. 

ij  *  There  is  a  generation,  £>  home 
loftv are their eves  anb their eve- libs 
arcltftcbbp. 

14.  *  There  is  a  generation ,  lbhofc 
teetbareasfrdo?bs,anbtl)ciriaUi-tcetlj 
as  tmiues  ,  to  bcuoure  the  pocc  from 
off  the  ear  tfj,anb  the  ncebv  from  among 
men. 

15  Xhehojfc-leachhathtVbobaugh 


Thi 


ln^svn 


fatiabl 


c. 


|tcrs,crying,  ©lucgiuc.  Xhcrcacethjcc 
things  thatarcneucrfattuieb,  yea  foure 
tljmgsfapnot,  tit  is  enough: 

i6  Xhc  graue ;  anb  the  barren 
Uwnbc ;  tlje  earth  that  is  no  t  filieb  VbttD 
ibatcr  i  anb  tlje  fire  Jut  fattt)  not ,  it  ise* 
nough. 

17  Xhe  eve  that  mocBcth  at  his  f& 
thee ,  anobefoifeth  to  obev  his  mother , 
tDe  rauens  ofllthe  baiiev  (ball  picBctt 
out  ,  anb  tlje  voung  eagles  flmti 
eateit. 

18  Xherc  be  thjee  things  which  arc 
too  monbcrfaiifozme,vcafouce,U)hirh 
3Jfenottinot: 

19  Xhettjavofantfagieinrtjeavje; 
tlje  ujav  of  aferpent  bponarot6e;tl)e 
the  map  of  a  ttnp  in  tlje  t  mibft  of  tlje 
tea;  anb  ttjc  map  of  a  man  rbu^  a  maib. 

io  ^>url)istl)eibavofanabuiterou5 
iboman :  mc  catetl) ,  anb  Ibipetl)  ijcr 

moutl),anofauU,  3!l)aaeboneno«)^ 
Uebnefle. 

ii  iro?  rlj?ee  tfjmge  tlje  cart!)  ts  Mfc 
auteteb  ,  anb  fo?  foure  which  it  cannot 
beare: 

ii  *JFo:  a  feruant  rbljenljereignetrj, 
anb  a  foolc  ibljen  l)te  is  nllcb  until 
nteate: 

13  jfo?  an  obious  woman  u»l)cnfljee 
is  marneb ,  anb  an  Ijanbrnapb  ttjat  is 
IjcirctorjcrmiftrelTc. 

14  Xljcre  be  fourctjjings  roljicl)  arc 
little  bpon  tlje  cartfj ;  but  thep  aret^ 
eecbingttnfc: 

15    *  %\)t    rlltltS  are  a  pCOpfc  UOt 

ffrong ,  vet  tljev  prepare  ttjnr  meatcm 
tlje  fummcr. 

16  XljctomeSaiebutafccblcfolBC, 
VCtmabetfjcvtl)eirl;oufesintfjcrotBs 

17  XljelotulteshauenoBing.vet 
goe  tljev  fo?th  all  of  tljem  t  bvbanbs. 

18  Xrjefp!bcrtakctnl)olbU)Ul)l)er 
Ijanbs,  anb  is  in  Kings  palates. 

26  Xl)erebctl)?cctfjingsn)l)itl)goc 
U)cll,  vea foure  arc  comclv  in  going : 

jo  71  Ivon  which  is  ftrongeft  among 
bcafles,anb  turnetl)  not  amav  fo?  anv: 

ji  ||  %  grav-ftounb  an  Dcc-goate ai-- 
fo  ;anbaUmg ,  againft  Ujljom  tljcrets 
norifmgbp. 

31  *3lftt)oul)aQ  bone  fooliO)iv  m 
lifting  bp  trjv  fclfe ,  0?  if  tliou  Ijaft 
tl)ougl)tcuill,  lay  tfjinelianb  bpoutljv 
moutl). 

33  5>urclv  the  cljiirnmg  of  nulftc 
bzingetl)  foith  butter  -,  anb  tfjc  ttijingiug 
ofthc  nofe  bnngetl)  foztl)  bloob :  fo  tlje 
fomng  of  Unatl)  bnngetlj  fouh  flrife. 

CHAP. 


t  Ha. 

wealth. 


|| Or,  ,he 

brooke. 


\Heb.heiirt. 


*  Chap. 1$). 
to. 


j  Heb.  wife 
made  wife. 

»Chap.<5.7 


\Heb.  ga- 
thered toge- 
ther. 


\\Or,horf. 
Heb.  girtti 
thelojne:. 

•■Iob.li.  j. 

and  j  9.  37. 
&c.and4o 


Thedefcnptionof    Prouerbes.        agood woman. 


t  Hebr. al- 
ter. 

\Hebr.of 
aUthefonncs 
ofaffUOion. 

'PfaLio* 

■f  Hehr.  Mi- 
ter offoule. 


\He'r.thc 
fonrf  of  tie- 
PrttUton. 

*  Lcuic.  19. 
ij.deiu.  1. 
1 5. 

*Chap.  it. 
4- 


proper- 


CHAP.     XXXI. 

Lemuels  lefTonof  chaftitie  and  temperance. 
6  The  afflicted  are  to  be  comforted  and 
defended.  10  The  praife  and 
ties  of  agoodwite. 

r^m*$m  $c  Mjo^Dc  s  of  Bing  %t- 
^^  j^Cmucl,  the  p2ophcric  that 
Wfflf  his  mother  taught him. 
Sp3|    x  09hat,mi> Tonne! 
»S  ifw  anD  *MJat>  the  tonne  of 
£3>^  myibombc  \  anbibhat, 
thefonncofmpbotbes! 

3  ti&iue  not  tljp  ftrcngth  bnto  tbo- 
men,  mn  thp  tbapes  to  thatibhichbe^ 
ftropcthlungs. 

4.  3Jtisnotf02BmgS,<£)ILcmucUt 
is  not T02  butgs  to  DnnHc  ibtnc,  no2  fo? 
|&nntc5,ftrong  Dnnfee : 

5  fLcft  thep  DnnHc ,  anb  fbjgct  the 
fLain,  anb  t  pcructt  the  mtigcmcnt  t  of 
anyofthcaffltctcb. 

6  *<5iuc  ttcongojinae  bnto  him  that 
isrcabytopcnCh,  ano  tttme  bnto  rtjofe 
that  bet  of  heautc  hearts. 

7  ?Lethimb2inBc,anbfo2gethtspo' 
ncrtic ,  anb  remember  his  nnferp  no 
mo2c. 

s  £)pm  d)y  mouth  ft»  the  bumbe  in 
the  caufc  of  an  fuel)  as  ate  t  appoititeb 
to  bcfrruction. 

9  £>pcn  thy  mouth ,  iubge  righte- 
ouflp , * anb plcab  the  caufc  of  ttjc pooze 
anb  neebp. 

10  *r*n9hocanfinbcaberruousibo* 
man;  fo:  Uer  pnee  i^fattc  aboucJSubles. 

1 1  %\)c  heart  of  her  Ijuf  banb  boeth 
fafclptruftmhcr,  fo  that  he  (hall  hauc 
nontcboffpofle. 

12  §>iic null boc him goob,  anonot 
null,  all  the  bapes  of  her  life. 

ij  fehcfecttethtbooli  anb  flare,  anb 
\b02Heth  ibillmglp  tbith  her  hanbs. 

14.  Shcis  lifec  the  merchants fbtps, 
(he  b2ingcthhcr  foobfrom  afarre. 

15  5>hce  rifcth  alfo  ibhtlc  it  ts  pet 
night,  anb  giucth  mcatc  to  her  houfc; 


holb,  anb  a  portion  to  her  mapbens. 

16  5>hcconriocrcthanclb,anbtbu^ 
ethtt :  rbith  the  fruit  of  her  hanbes  fbe 
piantcthalilitieparb. 

17  5>hc  girbeth  her  lopnes  tbith 
ftrengtb,anb  arengtheneth  her  armes. 

18  t  <g>he  pcrtctucth  that  her  mer 
chanbifc  is  goob;  her  canblc  goeth  not 
out  by  night. 

19  £>hc  lapcth  her  hanbes  to  the 
fpmbic ,  anb  her  hanbes  holb  the  bt 
ttaffc. 

to  t&heftrctcbcthoutherhanoto 
thepooze ,  pea  (he  reachcth  foo2thhcr 
hanbes  to  the  neebp. 

ir  5>hc  is  not  afraio  ofthefnotbfo? 
hcrhoufholb:  fo?  all  her  houfholb  are 
cloathcbibithllfcarlet. 

2i  <§>hc  mafteth  hcrfclfc  couerings 
of  tapeftric ;  her  cloathtng  is  fti&e  anb 
purple. 

23  ^er  hufbanb  ts  hnoibcn  in  the 
gates,  lbhen  he  fittcth  among  the  fi- 
bers of  the  lanb. 

24.  5>hc  maUeth  fine  imnen,  anb  fel- 
leth  it,  anb  beliucrcth  girblesbnto  the 
merchant. 

25  Strength  anb  honour  are  her 
cloathing;  anb  fbc  (ball  rctopcctn  time 
to  come. 

26  S>he  openeth  her  mouth  tbith 
lbifcbome  anb  in  her  tongue  is  the  laid 
ofBinbneffc. 

27  s>he  loobeth  ibell  to  the  tbapes 
of  her  houtholbe ,  anb  catetf)  not  the 
b2cabofibieiieffc. 

28  $crehtib2enarifebp,anb  call  her 
bicffeb-  her  hufbanb  alfo,  anbhcp2at< 
fethher. 

29  £0anp  baughtcrs  ||  hauc  bone 
bcrtuoufly,but  thou  ercellcfl  them  all. 

jo  jfauourisbcteitfuIl,anbbeautic 
is  baute :  but  a  tboman  that  feareth  tlje 
JL  ©  is  ip,  (he  fhaibc pzatfeb. 

31  (Kueherofthefruitofherhanbs, 
anb  let  her  ottme  tt02ftes  pjaifc  her  in 
thegates. 


fTHE 


\Hthrta- 
k>'h. 


\Hrlr.{b, 
Uflrtb. 


\Hdrfh, 
ftrt.ulcth. 


\\Or,JcM, 


\\OrJ,we 

folten  ri. 


Thevamtieof  Chap.j.ij.  worldly  things.' 


^ECCLESIASTES, 

or  the  Preacher. 


•Ch.  11.9  I 
pl'al.  T44-4 
fhl.16.6. 
and62.9- 


•ChiMs. 

and  5  9. 


•Pfal.io-4.5 
&:  1:9.90. 


tab. 


•Pfal.  IC4. 
9, to.   iob 
jS.io. 

\Hcb.TC- 

tnrnt  to  got. 


Cha.3.15 


CHAP.     I. 

The  Preacher  fheweihihat  all  humane  cour- 
(es  are  vaine :  4  Becaufe  the  creatures  are 
relllefle  in  their  courfes  ,  9  They  bring 
fborth  nothing  newe,  and  all  olde  things  are 
forgotten,  12.  And  becaufe  he  hath  found 
it  Join  the  fhidies  of  wifedome. 

f^5l§Clb02bCSOffhe 

;  teacher,  the  fon 
of  JDauib ,  isung 
m  3erufalem. 

z  *«Oamtieof 
banmes,  faith  the 
j&cacher,  bamtte 
of  canities ,  all  is 
bamrtc. 

j  *  -©hat  piofitc  hath  a  man  of  all 
his  labour  luhich  hectaKcth  bnberthe 

4  o.k  generation  pafTefh  aibay, 
anDanothei  generation  commcth :  'but 
ttjc  earth  abibctl)  fin  eutr. 

5  Zhc  Auntie  alfo  arifctl) ,  anb  tf)c 
Auntie  gocth  bourne,  anbthaftcthto 
the  plate  tt>licrc  l)c  arofe. 

6  %\\i  lbmbc  goctl)  torbarb  the 
£outh,  anb  turncth  about  bntothe 
4!3o2tI) ;  it  lbhirlcth  about  connnually, 
anb  thcibmbc  rctunicth  agamc  atto^ 
bingtohis  circuits. 

7  *SU  tlic  niters rttnncinto  the fca, 
vet  the  &ca  is  not  full :  onto  rtjc  place 
from  lbhcncc  the  nucrs  come,  thither 
they  treturnc  again  c. 

8  ail  things  are  full  of  laboucman 
cannot  bttcr « :  tlic  eye  is  not  fatiffieb 
ttntlj  feemg  ,  no?  the  earc  ftllcb  ibtth 
Rearing. 

9  *Xhe  thing  that  hath  becne,  it  is 
that  U)l)icl)  (hall  be :  anb  that  Ybhich  is 
bone  >is  that  lbhuh  (nail  be  bone  ■,  anb 
the.e  is  nonc\o  thmgbnbcrthcfunnc. 

10  "Js  tlurc  any  thing,  lbhercof  it 
may  befayb,  5)cc,tl)isisnetti;  it  hath 


Crroaf- 
jLlibm, 


becne  alreaby  of  olbc  timcibhlch  tbas 
befojens. 

1 1  There  is  no  remembjance  of  fomicr 
things;  neither  fljaii  there  bee  any  re 
mctntyancc  of  things  that  arc  to  tonic, 
ruitl)  thofc  that  fljaii  come  after. 

n  C3tl)cp2cacrjcrrbasftmgoucr 
3jrracltn3Jcrufaicm. 

13  Sinb^Jgaucmyhcarttofccfccanb 
fcarchout  byrbtfcbomcconecrniiig  all 
things  that  arc  bone  bnber  Ijeaucn: 
this  fojctraucllhath  <5on  giucnto  the 
fonnes  of  man ,  ||  to  be  crerrtfeb  trjero 
ltoith. 

14  3J  ftattc  fecne  all  trjc  tt)02&cs  that 
arcboncbnbcrthf£>unnc,anbbcholb, 
all  is  bantttc,  anb  bcration  of  fpirrt. 

15  *1Ehattt>htehiscroo&eb,  cannot  *a,,.7.i3 
bemabe  (rraigfjt:anb  t  that  tbfjict)  ts  tw^*- 
wanting  cannot  be  numbjeb. 

16  *J  communeb  ibtth  nunc  ottmc 
heart,  faying,lLoc,3I  am  come  to  great 
elrate.anb  haucgottrn*mo2ci\)ifebomc  \'iXi 
then  all  they  that  haue  beenc  befo2e  me  7°, 
m^erufalein:  yea  my  heart +ht»bgrcat 
crpcticnce  of  lbifcbomc  9  Knoiblcbge. 

17  *3nb  3J  eauc  my  heart  to  nnotb 
lbifcbomc,  anb  to  ftnolbmabnctTe  anb 
folly:  3  pcrcetueb  that  this  alfo  is  bet- 
anonoffpirtt. 

is  5F02  in  much  ttnfcbome  is  much 
griefe :  anb  hec  that  incrcafcth  Hnotb- 
lebge,  incrcafcth  fojroVb. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  The  vanitic  of  humane  courfes  in  theworkes 
ofpleafure.  iz.  Though  the  wife  be  better 
thendicfoole,  yet bothhaueonceuent.  18 
Thevauiueofhumane  labour,  inleaumg  it 
they  know  not  to  whom.  14  Nothing  better 
then  ioy  in  our  labour , but  that  is  Gods  gift. 

£>aiD  in  mine  heart,  G5oc 
tono\b,'3JVbilp200uethce 
lbithmirth,thcrfo2ecntoy 
pleafurc:anbbcholb,thts 
alfo  is  bamtic. 
x  $  fail) 


jnd  io. 


fctncTRH:'i. 

'Cha.3 

anJ  7. 


Thevamtieofall     Ecclcfiaftes.        worldly  things. 


"Chap  i 
17 

fhfebr  to 

with  vine. 


t  Hrh.fhe 

iberof 
the  d*iei  of 
their  life. 


\Hebfonnt; 
of  mj  houfe. 


*  j.  King. 9 
28.  and  10. 


f  tiebr.  mi: 
ficdlinftrH- 
meat  >and 
iftftntmtnti, 


Gup.  t. 


"Chap.i. 

17.au.J7 

\\Ortin  thole 
tt/infi  which 

hune  bene 

alre.uit  ./■>;.• 

\Htbr.Th*t 

thtr?  11  dn 

r  ice.irnrlr 

in  Wtfcdom* 
ma't  -■-.'.  in 

*Prou    17. 

14  diip.8. 

r. 
\Mr.h*f. 

penrth  to 
mrtcuento 


x  3  ftitDe  of  laughter ,  Jt  femau : 
aiiDofnurth.nahatDoethtu 

3  *  3  fought  ut  mine  heart  t  to  gtue 
my  fclte  bnto  Voiwt ,  ( yet  acquainting 
nunc  heart  tbitlj  ibifcDomc)  anD  to  lap 
rjolD  on  follp,  till  31  might  fee  tbhatwa* 
thatgooDfojthcfonticsofmcn.ibbich 
they  fljoulo  doc  tmbct  the  hcauentall 
the  Dayes  of  their  life. 

4  3ImaDemc  great  ib02&cs,3J  buil 
DeD  met  houfes ,  3  piantcD  mec  33me 
yaros. 

5  3  maDc  mec  garocus  ?  oicharDs, 
anD  3  piauteD  trees  m  them  of  all  kiude 
oi  fruits. 

6  JniaDcmcepoolcsoftbatct,  to 
ibatcr  tlicreiDith  theibooD  that  tying- 
cthfoonh  trees: 

7  3  got  me  feruants  anD  mayDens, 
anD  haD  t  feruants  borne  in  my  houfe 
aifo3  haD  sreat  pofTemons  of  great 
anDfmaiicattcll,aboucallthatibercin 
3Icrufaicmbcfo2cmc. 

8  *  3  gatljereD  mec  alfb  Gluer  anD 
golD,  anD  the  peculiar  trcafure  ofmngs 
anDoftlicpzoumccs:  31  gate  nice  men 
fingers  ano  iDomenfmgcrs,anDtheDC' 
lights  of  the  fonntsofmen.tasmufical 
fttftninients.anD  that  of  all  fojts. 

9  do  3  was  great,  anD  increateD 
mo:c  then  all  that  lbcre  before  mecm 
3ferufaicmi  alfo  my  tDifeDomc  remain 
neDttiitrjme. 

10  3tiD  ibhatfocuct  nunc  eves  Defi^ 
reD,  3  Hept  not  from  them  3  with- 
helD  not  mv  heart  from  any  iov :  fo? 
my  heart  rcio  vtcD  in  all  mv  labour  s  anD 
this  tt>asmypo2tionofail  my  labour. 

11  Xhcn3JlooUeDonailthcTbozHcs 
thatmv  hauDs  haD  bought,  anD  on 
the  labour  that  3  haD  labourcD  to  Doc : 
ano  bcholD,  all  a  as  *  batutic ,  anD  beta; 
tion  of  fpint ,  anD  there  w  as  no  profit  btv 
Derthedunne. 

11  C  "3UD  3  turncD  mv  fclfc  to  be 
holD  ibifeDotue, '  anD  inaDncfTc  anD  fol- 
ly:  foi  what  can  the  man  doe ,  that  com 
mcth  after  the  mug;  fleuen  that  Which 
hath  bene  alreaby  Done. 

15  Xhcn  3i  fa\b  f  that  WifcDomc  cr 

cciicth  folly ,  asfarrc as  light  erccllcth 
DarUcucffe. 

14  *  Xhc  Wife  mans  eyes  are  mhis 
lieao  ,but  the  fo  ole  waitteth  m  Dacltnes : 
anD  3J  my  fclfc  perceiuto  alfo  that  one 
cucnt  happeneth  to  them  all. 

15  Xheu  faiD  3  m  my  heart ,  3lsit 
bappeneth  to  the  fooie.fo  it  tbappctteth 
euen  to  me  auo  lbhy  mas  3  then  1110.2c 


Wife?  then  3  faiD  m  my  heart,  Xhat 
this  alfo  k  banitie. 

16  if  0:  there  is  no  remembjance  of  the 
Wifc,mo2C  then  of  the  foole  fo;  eucr ,  fec- 
tngthat  Which  now  is ,  tn  the  Dayes  to 
tome  mall  be  forgotten  •,  anb  how  Dicth 
thcrbifc  man  i  asthcfoolc. 

17  Xhcrcfo.2c  3  IjatcDlifc ,  becaufc 
the  ibo2Be  that  is  lmottght  bnDcr  the 
5>utmc  is  grieuous  bnto  mcc:fo2all  is 
banitie,anD  Deration  of  fpirit. 

18  C  Pta  3  hatcD  all  my  labour 
which  3  hao  ttaiten  imDcr  the  £>unnc : 
becaufc  3  fboulD  leauc  it  bnto  the  man 
that  fhaibc  after  mec. 

19  *3lnDil)ho  mtowcth  Whether  he 
fl)aubca\Du"ciiian  02  a  fooler  yet  Cl)au 
he  hauc  rule  oucr  all  my  labour ,iDhcr e* 
ut  3  hauc  labourcD,  anD  therein  3 
haue  (l)ClbcD  my  fclfc  Ibifc  DnDcr  tljc 
dumic.  XhtS'salfotoanitie. 

ao  n:hcrcfo;c3lrbentabouttotaurc 
my  heart  to  Defpaire  of  all  tljc  labour 
rbhich  3  toolic  bnDcr  the  <Smnne. 

xi  ifozthttc  is amatttbhofe labour 
An  VbrfeDomcanD  inanotbleDge,  anD 
in  eenritie :  yet  to  a  man  that  hath  not 
labourcD  therein,  (hall  hec  t  leaue  it  for 
hispo.2tton ;  Xhisalfo  is  hanitie,anDa 
great  cuill. 

2x  *  jfoz  lbhat  hath  man  of  all  his 
labour,  anD  ofthc  bcratton  offjis  heart 
Wherein  hec  hath  labourcD  bnDcr  the 
£>mme  < 

is  ifo.2  all  his  bayes  are  *fb?roU)es, 
anD  his  trautile ,  gricfe  yea  his  heart 
tattcthnotrcatnthenight.lEhistsalfo 
batutic. 

14  c  *  There  is  nothing  better  foz  a 
man,tiun  that  he  fljoulD  cat  anDDjtnhe, 
anD  that  he  ||Q)onlD  mane  his  fouiccn- 
1  ioy  gooD  tn  his  labour.  Xhis  alfo  3 
:  favb.tliat  it  was  from  the  hanD  of  ©oD. 

^  JFo:)bho  tan  catc?  02  lDho  elfe 
!  can  halren  hereunto  mozc  tl)cn5  < 

16  JF02  God  guieth  to  a  man  that  is 
gooD  t  m  ijts  fight ,  tbtfcDome ,  anD 
bnotblebgc ,  anD  ioy:  but  to  the  linnet 
hce  guieth  traucilc ,  to  gather  anD  to 
heapc  bp  that  *  hemay  gmc  to  him  tljat 
is  gooD  bcfo2e  ©oD:  Xljis  alfo  >s  bauttie 
anD  bcratton  offptnt. 

CHAP.   III. 

1  flv  the  iieceffary change  ot  times,  vjnitie  is 
advleJ  to  humane  trauaile.  11  Thcreisan 
excellence  in  Gods  workes:  i^  But  as  for 
man, God  (hall  iudi;e  his  workestherc,  and 
here  he  ftialbelikca  bcalh 

Xo 


fHctr.l* 

homed. 


"  PfaI-49. 
M.&C. 


f  Heir  gtue. 


*Chap.  1.3. 
and  3.9. 


'lob  14. 


'Cha-Vii, 
11.  and  5. 
i7.aod3. 
M- 

||  Orjdeliiht 
hufenfes. 


t  Hehr  be- 
for  e  htm. 


fob! 


A  time  for  all.  Chap.iij.ui|.         Man  and  bead. 


be&c. 


1  Hcbjoti! 
fine  from. 

\\Or,fcci£ 


"Chip.i  3 


Cfii.l  9- 

t  Hek.thm 
which  It  drt 


■Vcrf.i. 

j|  Or,  that 
thrj  nn^ht 
clejrc  God, 
*ndfcr,c-c. 


e^^pss/  O  tiierv  thing  there  is  a  fea 
^wfon,  anb  a  time  to  eucry 


pucpofc  Pnbct  the  heaucu. ' 
:gvj  z  a  tunc  t  to  be  borne,  i 
<^^^S§  anb  a  nine  to  bte:  a  time  to, 
plant,  ano  a  nine  to  plucu  Pp  that  which 
ts  pianteb. 

j  31  tune  to  Rill,  auu  a  tunc  to  htalc : 
a  tunc  to  tycanc  bountc ,  anb  a  tune  to 
but'lb  Pp. 

4  71  time  to  iPccpc ,  ana  a  tunc  to 
laugh :  a  time  to  mourne,  ano  a  tin  ic  to 
Dante. 

5  2lnmc  to eattaibay Cones,  anU  a 
time  to  gather  Rones  together :  a  time 
totmb?ace,anbattmc  *  to  rcfrauieftom 
unbracing. 

6  3t  tunetojlgct,  anbattmctolofe: 
a  time  to  ttcepcano  a  tunc  to  caft  antay. 

7  3timctotent,attDatimctofott): 
a  nmc  to  Hcepc  fiicncc,  ano  a  tune  to 
fpcabc. 

8  Sttunctoloue.anDatuuetohate: 
attmeofiPatrcanbattmcofpcaee. 

9  *  nahat  pjofitc  hath  her  that  Vboj- 
beth.inthat  iPhcrcm  he  laboured); 

io  5  hauc  tcene  the  tranailc  iPhtcf) 
<Eob  hath  giucn  to  the  fonnes  of  men,to 
bccrtrcifcbmit. 

1 1  ??e  hath  mabe  encry  thtngbcautt 
full  in  his  time :  alfo  hee  hath  fct  the 
tbOJlb  m  their  heart  fo  that  no  man  tan 
finbe  out  thettwftc  that  <5ob  maberh 
from  the  beginning  to  the  cud. 

it  3  Knott)  that  there  is  no  goob  in 
them,but  foz  *  man  to  reioy  te,  ano  to  Doe 
goon  m  his  life. 

13  anD  alio  that  eucry  man  fljottlb 
catc  anb  tmn&c ,  anb  cntoy  the  goon  of 
all hts  labour :  it  is  the  gift  of  ©od. 

•4  3  bnott)  that  ibhatfoeucr  <son 
bocth ,  it  (halbc  fo?  cucr :  nothing  can  be 
put  to  it,  nozany  thing  tafeenfeomit: 
anb  <5ot>  Doth  it,  that  mcnfhottlDfeare 
befoje  him. 

15  *ihattt)hichhathbeene,isnott): 
anb  that  Ibhicl)  is  to  be,  hath  alrcabie 
bcencanb  GoDtcqtttreth  UhatiDhicl) 
tspafr. 

i6  C  3nD  nuucourc ,  3  Cube  PttDer 
the  €>unnc  tlje  place  of  iubgement ,  that 
ttne&cDncfTc  was  there.  anDthc  place  of 
rightcoufncfTcthat  mtquitie  was  there. 

17  3Jfatb  mmme  heart,  Gob  (hall 
mbge  the  righteous  anb  the  U)icHcD:fo2 
the,  c  is  *  a  tunc  there ,  fo?  eucry  purpofc 
anbfozeueryiPoj&e. 

18  gjfaiPm  my  heart  contenting  the 
eftateof  the  fonnes  of  men,  |  that  Gob 


might  manifcfl  them ,  aub  that  they 
might  fee  that  tljcy  themfclues  are 
beafrs. 

19  *  Jfoz  that  U)hich  befaiieth  the 
fonnes  of  men,  befaiieth  beaftes.cucn 
one  thing  befaiieth  them :  as  the  one  bi- 
cth,  fo  bicth  the  other :  yea  they  Ijauc  an 
one  b2cath,fo  thataman  hath  no  yic\)c- 
nuuence  abouc  a  bead ;  foz  all  is  Panme. 

zo  3lii  goe  Pitto  one  place,  all  arc  of 
the  ouft,  anb  an  tume  to  bull  agautc. 

ii  BDho  Unotticth  the  fpint  t  of  matt 
that'  goeth  Pptttarb;  anb  the  fpirrt  of 
the  bead  that  goeth  borpncibarb  to  the 
earth; 

i  *nahcrcfo?e3Jperteiue  that  there 
is  nothing  better ,  then  that  a  man 
thoulbrcioyccmhtsottjuctttoifecs :  fo: 
thatis  hts  portion :  fojiDhofhaiibung 
htm  to  fee  tt»hat  (halbc  after  hint  i 

CHAP.    IIII. 

Vanitie  is  encreafeiA1  vnto  men  by  opprefsion, 
4  Byeuuie,  s.  ByidleneiTe,  7  Bycouetouf- 
nelTc,  9  By  (oluaiinefle,  13  By v\ ilkilncilo. 

jaD  *  3  retumeb,anb  tonfi 
tcrep  all  the  oppjeffiotts 
that  are  bone  Pnber  the 
ftuutCi  $  beholPthctcares 
w&S.  of  fuel)  as  Iberc  oppjcfftD, 
anb  they  i«d  no  comforter  :am>  on  the 

tQbC  Of  their  Opp;enblirS  there  was  pott* 

er,  but  they  had  no  comfojter. 

i  *  nahcrefojc  3  pjaifeD  the  beab 
iPhitharcaireaby  beab ,  mojethen  the 
liuutgibhtchareyetaliue. 

3  *#ea  better  is  he  then  both  they, 
winch  hath  not  yet  been,  ttiho  hath  not 
fcene  the  eutll  ttw&e  that  is  bone  bnber 
the^>iutne. 

4  C  ^gatne  3  tonfibereb  ail  tra# 
uatic,  aub  t  cuery  rigltt  iPozbe,  that  t  foj 
this  a  man  is  enuicb  of  hts  neighbour : 
this  is  alfo  Panitie,  ahb  Pcranon  of 
fpirtt. 

5  'XhefoolefolbcthhishanbSto- 
gethcr ,  anb  catcth  his  otttne  fleft). 

6  *  25cttcr  is  an  hanbfull  *  >th  ciuict- 
neffcthen both  the  hanbs  full  with  tra-- 
ucll  anb  Peratton  of  fpint. 

7  CXhenD  rcturncD,  anb  3  fatt) 
panittc  tonber  the  Smnne. 

8  l-hereisottcaione.anb  there  is  not 
afecoub ;  yea,  he  hath  neither  thilbt  no; 
biothcr :  yet  is  there  no  ntb  of  all  his  Uv 
bour ,  neither  is  his  eye  fafuTteb  ftnth 
nchCS,nCtthCr  faythhee,  jfoziDhomboc 
3  labour ,  anb  bereaue  my  foule  of 
|LU  goob; 

43 


'  Pfal. 
i.l6. 


49 


t!M.efrh< 
ton  of>mn. 

ccudiny 


'CliJ. 
ind  5 . 


Cli 


'P-5- 


*Iob  3.17. 
&C. 


Mob;.!!, 


t  Hek  *U 

the  rightnes 
<tfxv«rke 
\Hcb.thu 
the  anus  of 
j  mun  from 
hunetgh- 
hottr, 
'Prou.6.10 

*  Prou..  1  %. 
1  6.  and  16. 
18. 


Mansfocietie.         Ecclefiaftes. 


H 


ow  riches 


t  Hfh  who 
l^najrelh  not 
lobtjAmo- 
r.tPlti. 


*  I. Sam. I  s 
13.  [ifjl.  50 
K.prou.  I  5. 
8.&U.27. 


Ij  Ortn-gt  J. 

"MaC.S.7. 

prou.  lO.iy 


'Dcu:  I] 
1  1 
'P(tl(6. 

ij'M 


goob?  this  ><aifo  bamtic ,  yea  it  i*a  fojc 
traucll. 

9  CITibo  ^c  better  then  one  be- 
caufc  tbty  bauc  a  goob  reibarb  fo.2  their 
labour. 

io  5ro :  if  ti)cv  faiutljc  one  ttJfll  lift  top 
l)is  felloib  but  Vboc  to  bun  that  is  alone, 
robot  be  fallen) :  fo:  Ijc  hath  not  another 
tobelpcbimbp. 

n  agamciftlbo  lye  together,  tljen 
they  baue  Ijcate  ■,  but  boroccan  one  be 
roarme  alone? 

ii  3nb  if  one  p?otaile  agauift  Dim, 
troofbaii  ronbOanb  bun  anb  a  tbjec- 
folD  coarbts  not  quictUy  bjo&en. 

ij  C  Better  is  apoozc  anb  a  roife 
cbtib.tbmanolbanbfoolifbHingtrobo 
VbiH  no  mojtc  be  abmonitbeb, 

14.  jfoi  outofpnfonncc  commetb 
toraicnic.robcreasaifobetbatisboime 
tnl)iebingDonic,becomn-.etiipoo?e. 

15  31  confibcreb  ail  the  liumgrobicb 
roalhc  bnber  tlic  funne,roub  the  fetonb 
rbtlb  that  fljail  ftanb  bp  m  bis  fteab. 

16  There  is  no  cnu  of  all  tlic  people,  c- 
uenof  all  tbatbaue  beenc  beftwetbem: 
tbeyaifo  that  tome  after,  fbailnotrc= 
loyeeinbuu :  finely  this  aifo'sbanifte, 
anbberanonorTptnt, 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Vanities  in  Diuine  feruice,  8  in  murmu- 
ring a^ainft  opprefsion,  9  and  in  Riches. 
18    loy  in  riches  is  the  cjtt  of  God. 

Cepc  thy  footeroben  thou 
gocfttotbeboufeofoob, 
anb  be  mo;c  reaby  to 
bcare,*  tttcn  to  guie  the  fa= 
enfice  of  fooles  :  fo;  they 
tonfiber  not  that  tftcv  boc  mill. 

2  Bcnotrafbroitbtbymoutb.anb 
let  not  thine  beartbebafty  to  bttcr  any 
||  thing  before  d>ob  :  ftn  <£>ob  is  inbca- 
uen,  anb  thou  bpon  earth  :  therefore 
let  tin'  M)o:DB*  befell). 

3  jfo2  a  Ojcame  connucth  tbiougb 
tliemultttuDcof  tntfinefTe,  anuafoolcs 
boyecis  knowen  by  multttiioc  ofilwbs. 1 

4.  *B9bentbouboroertaborobntoj 
(5oo ,  befcrre  not  to  pay  it  :fo2  be  hath  > 
no  pleafurc  in  fooles ;  *  pay  that  lbbicb' 
thouhattboibeb. 

5  Better  is  it  that  thou  fbouibeft  not 
boibe ,  tbcntbatthoufhouiocfrboroc 
anb not pay. 

6  buffer  not  thy  mouth  to  caufc 
thy  flefb  to  fume ,  neither  fay  thou  be 
fo:c  the  3ugei ,  that  it  was  an  crrotu: 
lbherefo;efi)oulD  <I5ob  bcangrieattby 


boyte,  anbbcHtoy  the  roo?«c  ofthmc 
banbs* 

7  foi  in  n)e  multitubc  of  bjeames 
anb  many  lboibs,  there  are  alfobiuers 
banttics :  but  fcarc  thou  (5ob, 

8  C3f  thou  fecit  the  opp2cffionof 
the  poojc ,  anb  bioleut  perucrting  of 
lubgcnicut ,  anb  iumce  m  a  pioumcc, 

jmaruellnottat  the  matter  :fx>2  he  that 
I  is  higher  then  the  bi'gbeft,  regarbeth, 

anb  there  be  l)igl)Ct  tt)ttl  tl)Cy . 

9  C  s©o?eouer  the  profit  of  the 
earth  is  fo2  all :  the  fting  Weife  >s  fer 
uebbytbefirtb. 

10  ^eerhatloucth  filucrfball  not  be 
fatifficb  roitb  frtuer  -.  1102  he  that  louctb 
abunbancc,ibithincrcafc:thiS'sauloba' 
nine. 

11  nabot  goobstnrreafe,  they  arein- 
crcafeb  that  eate  them :  anb  robat  goob 
is  there  to  the  oroners  thereof , failing  the 
beholbingohhemibith  their  eyes  < 

xi  %\yt  flccpe  of  a  labouring  man  is 
fiucctc,  ibbctber  he  eate  little  02  much : 
but  the  abunbantt  of  the  nth  ibUlnot 
futTerhimtofleepe. 

u  Xberets  a  fo?e enill which 31  ijaue 
feme  bnber  the  5>nn,namdy  riches  feept 
foi  the  olbncrs  therof  to  tljcir  hurt. 

1+  26ut  tljofc  riches  perifh  by  euQI 
traucli  i  anb  he  begetteth  a  fonnc ,  anb 
there  is  nothing  m  his  hanb. 

15  *  3ls  he  came  ftutb  of  his  mothers 
lbombc,  naliebfbailbc  rctunicto  got 
as  he  tame,  anb  (hail  tauc  nothing  of 
i  his  labour ,  mhicb  he  may  carry  atbay 
j  in  his  hanb. 

i6  3hibthisalfoisafo2e  euill.thatm 
all  points  as  he  came,  fofljaiihccgoc : 
*anb  ibhat  pjofit  haihjjc  that  hath  to 
bourcbfrntbclbinbe; 

17  villus  bayes  alfohec  cateth  in 
barheneffe ,anb  he  hath  much  feroibe, 
anb  Unath  lbith  his  ftcRneffe. 

is  C*a3ehoib  that  ibhtch  3fhaue 
feenc:t3Jt  is  goon  anb  comely  for  one 
to  eate  anb  to  Dnnkc ,  anb  to  cnioy  the 
goob  of  all  his  labour  that  he  tabeth 
bnDer  the  funne ,  t  all  the  bayes  of  his 
life,  Which  ©ob  guictb  \)\m :  fo2  it  is  his 
po2tion. 

19  ffiucry  man  alfo  to  lbhom  <Sob 
hath  giucn  riches  aubibealth,anb  hath 
rjiuen  him  poibct  to  rate  thereof,  anb 
to  tahe  his  pojtio n  ,anb  to  r eioy ce  in  bis 
labour  this  is  the  gift  of  C50D. 

20  f  02  he  fhail  not  much  remember 
the  bayes  of  Ins  life ;  beeaufe  (Bouan- 
finer  ctb  hun  m  the  loy  of  his  heart. 

c  h  a  v. 


\  Hrc.lt  the 

m'lcrzur 


•lob.i.  31 

I.clm.6.7. 


Chap. 1. 


"Chap.-. 
24  jnd j. 
1  z. 
tffr&thuc 

IS   A   f  r-.\l 

rvkich  it 
comtiyt  d~c. 

\  Hek  the 
r.nmbtr  of 

rheJ-yei. 


\\Ot,rhousk 

!iepiiic«« 

n*trcbtjet  ht 


arem'iferabie.  Chap.v|.vij.  A  fooles  laughter. 


ftfriyW, 


\Hci.  then 

the  u-jl^tn? 
trfthefonU. 


t  Httjht 

'./titer  of 
tbt  J.iyet  of 
the  life  of 
his  wutie. 
•PlaJ.144- 


CHAP.   VI. 

1  Thevanitie  of  riches  without  vfe.  3  Of  chil- 
dren, 6  and  old  age  without  riches.  9  The 
vaniiie  of  fight  and  wandring  defires.  11 
The  condufion  of  vanities. 

:$erefsaneuunbhlch3 

hauefeen  bnber  the  Sun, 

IHi  an0  rt  is  f0,nmon  among 

rJs&  t3lmantorbhomC5ob 
hath  giucn  tidies,  tbealth  anb  honour, 
fo  tl)at  he  lbantefh  nothing  fo?  his  fottle 
of  all  that he  befireth,  yet  (Sobgiueth 
nun  not  poibcr  to  eate  thereof ,  but  a 
ftrangcr  eatctl)  it :  XhtS  is  banitlc,  anb 
ttisanciuuutfeafc. 

3  C3Jfamaubcgctanhunb:cbch. 
dren,  anb  Uuc  manyyeeres,  fo  that  the 
bayesof  i)ts  vecrcs  bee  many:  anb  his 
foulc  be  not  filleb  With  goob,  anbalfo 
that  he  hauctto  burtau,  3  &?> chat  an 
bnnmcly  birth  is  better  then  he. 

4  ifo:  he  commcth  tn  Jbtth  baniflc, 
anb  beparteth  tn  barRcncflc ,  anb  hfs 
name  mall  be  coucccbibitbbarlicneu*c. 

5  *©o:coucr  hec  hath  not  fccncthc 

&UUlte,  UOjUltOlbCn  any  diin^fljlS  hath 

moze  reft  then  the  other. 

6  C  Pea  though  l)e  Uuc  a  thoufanb 
yccres  nbicetolb,  vet  hath  he  fecneno 
goob:  S>oenotailgoctoonepiacc? 

7  3M  the  labour  of  man  is  foz  hfs 
mouth,  anb  yet  the  t  appetite  is  not 
filleb. 

8  $oi VbDathuh tl)c lbifc ntojc then 

thC  fOOlC  *  lbljat  hath  tl)C  POOJC  ,  that 

Imoibcth  to  lbalUc  befoje  the  liuing* 

9  C25etter  is  tt»c  fight  of  toe  epes, 
tthenthcVbanbcringofthcbcftre :  thts 
is  alfo  banttieanb  bcranon  of  fpictt. 

io  Zhat  which  hath  bene,  is  nantcb 
alrcaby.anbittSRnoibcnthatttisman: 
neither  may  he  content)  With  bun  that 
is  mightier  then  he. 

1 1  C  Seeing  there  be  man?  things 
tl)at  inctcafc  battitte,  What  is  man  the 
better? 

ix  jfo:  Vblio  knowefh  What  is  goob 
foz  man  in  this  nfc,  t  all  the  bayes  of  his 
bame  life,  Which  he  fpeubeth  as  *  a  fba 
bow  t  fo:  lbbo  can  tell  a  man  what  (bal 
be  after  him  bnber  the  funnc  i 

CHAP.    VII. 

Remedies  againft  vanitie.are  a  good  name, 
i  Monification,  7  Patience,  11  Wiledomc. 
2.3  Theditricukieoi'wifedome. 


•Ptuu.i 

and  1 


5-3° 


bay  of  ones  birth. 
2.  C3ft'sbettertogoeto 
the  honfc  of  mourning,  then  to  goe  to 
tbchoufeof  fcafting:  fo:  that  is  the  enb 
of  all  men,  anb  the  lining  rum  lap  it  to 
his  heart. 

j  l!&o,:coW  ^better  then  laughter: 
fo:  by  the  fabneffe  of  the  countenance 
the  heart  is  mabe  better. 

4  %\\t  heart  of  the  Wife  is  fit  the 
houfc  of  mourning :  but  the  heart  of 
foolcs  is  in  the  houfe  of  mirth. 

5  *'3JtisbettcctohearethcrebuUeof 
the  lbifc,  then  fo?  a  man  to  hcare  tlje 
fong  of  foolcs. 

6  jFo;  as  the  t  tcacltling  of  thojttcs 
bnber  a  pot,  fo  is  the  laughter  of  the 
foolc:  this  alfo 's  banitfe. 

7  C  Purely  opp?effion  mafceth  a 
lbifc  man  mab:  *anba  gift  ocftroyctb 
the  heart. 

s  2Settec  is  the  enbe  of  a  thing  then 
the  beginning  thereof:  and  the  patient 
in  fpirtt  is  better  then  the  pjtoube  in 
fpirtt. 

9  *  25c  not  haftic  tn  thy  fpirit  to  bee 
angry :  fo:  anger  reftcthm  the  bofome 
of  foolcs. 

to  £>ay  not  thou ,  nahat  is  the  caufe 
that  the  tomtcr  bay  cs  Jber  c  better  then 
tbefeffo:  rtjou  bocft  not  cttmure  t  rbtfcly 
concerning  this. 

11  CJ0ifcbomcl|isgoobtbithanin?| 
hcritancc :  anb  by  it  there  is  p:oftte  to 
them  that fecthefutme. 

ii  ifo?  lbtfebomeis  atbefence,  and] 
money 's  abefencc :  but  the  ercellenneof 
unoVblcbge  is ,  that  lbifebomc  guteth 
life  to  them  that  hauc  ft. 

1  j  *  Conftbcr  tfjc  wo&e  of  C5ob :  foz 
tbho  can  maltc  that  ftcafght,  ibhichhcc 
hathmabccrooHeb? 

14  3ln  the  bay  of  pzofpecittc  be  f oy- 
fullbttttntljcbayofabucrfiticconftber: 
©ob  alfo  hath  t  fct  the  one  oner  againft 
the  other,  to  the  cub  that  matt  fboulb 
fmb  nothing  after  htm. 

1$  5111  things  haue  3  feene  in  the 
bayes  of  my  batutic :  there  is  a  tuft  mart 
that  pccifljethinhistightcoulues,  anb 
tljcrets  atticKebman  that  p:olougeth 
hiiiifefnhisvbtcltcbnes. 

i6  25c  not  righteous  oner  much,  net 
thcr  matte  thy  fcifc  oucr  lbifc :  lbhp 
n)oulbcft  thou  tbeftroy  thy  ftlfc  < 

17  2Scnotoumnnchibiclteb)uetther 
1LIU  be 

43  2 


il' 


Tro.IMS 
&'S-3'-3J 


Hcb.founA 


•Dcut  \i. 
'9- 


*Pro.  14.17 
and  16.  :i. 


\H,h.CHt 

cfjrtjtjcme. 

||  Or  at geed 
ai&niiweri- 

btilKTtco. 
\Hcir,ft» 

tb-WC, 


'Chap.  1. 
'J- 


f  Hci  rrfjjt 


t Hd.ie 
defoUtei 


None  is  mil:.  Ecclefiafires.    The  kings  power. 


|  He&.  not  in 

thyilmt  f 


'  Prou.l  i 
! i.nnd  24. 

'  Prou  109 


.in  8  46. 
j  1  ioh.  1  M. 

not  ihtnr 
he  urt. 


Mltk.lmi 
mm?  htjrt 
comp.ijf.J. 


Prou  ; 
4- 


j  He  thai, 

Cod. 

||>,wcigh- 
ingiw  thittf 

itflCTMielbtr 

tstuije  out 
tberea/on. 


Ctn.l,:?. 


'  Prou,  17. 
'■■*. 

< 


bettjoufoolifli :  lbhy  (houlbcftthoubie 
tbefo2c  thy  tune? 

13  31t  ^  goob  that  thou  (houlbcft 
tahc  holbc  of  this ,  yeaalfo  from  tl)is 
Uutl)D:a\rj  not  rhmc  hanb :  ftuhec  that 
fcarcth<3oo,fl)all  come  fooithofthcm 
all. 

19  *  naifcbomc  ftrcngthcucth  the 
Ibife,  11102c  then  ten  mightic  men  ibhitb 
arcmthcctnc. 

20  '5^02  there  isnotatuftmanbpoti 
carth,that  cocth  goob  ,anb  frnncth  not. 

21  3ilfo  t  tahc  no  beebe  bnto  all 
ibo2bs  that  arc  fpoUcn  left  thou  heart 
thvfcmantcurfcthcc. 

22  ^02  often  times  alto  thine  olbne 
heart  tmoibctb,  that  thon  thy  fclfc  linc^ 
Tbifc  haft  turfeb  others. 

2}  C  311  this  banc  3  P200ucD  by 
Unfcbomc :  3  rati),  3  ibiii  be  lbifc ,  but 
it  was  farrefrommc. 

2+  Xhatlblnchisfarrcoff,  auoet 
ccebmgbccpcibbocan  finbett  out; 

25  tjapplycbmmcbcarttolmoib, 
anb  to  fcarch,anb  to  fecite  out  lbifbomc, 
auothc  rcafonot  tiiu.t;s,auOto  Unoib  the 
ibtcnebncs  of  folly ,  cucttoffooUnmciTc 
and  mabucflc. 

26  *3lnb  3  finbe  11102c  bitter  then 
bcath ,  the  Woman  ibhofc  heart  is 
marcs  *  nets,  "kI  her  haubes -^  banbs : 
t  lbho  fo  plcafcth  <5ob  ,fliali  efcape  from 
her, but  the  fmncrfballbc  taken  by  bcr. 

27  iSchoib.thishauc 3 fouub  faith 
the  p2cacher )  ||  counting  one  by  one  to 
fmoc  out  the  account: 

2s  nshich  yet  my  foulc  fccUcth,  but 
3  finbe  not :  one  man  among  a  thou 
fano  Ijaue  3  founb  ■  but  a  iboman  a- 
mong  all  thofc  hauc  3  not  fouub. 

29  ?Loc ,  this  oncly  hauc  31  founb, 
•  that  Gob  hat!)  mabc  man  bp2igbt:but 
tl;cy  hauc  fought  out  many  munitions. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  Kings  are  steady  to  bee relpedled.  6  The 
Diuinc  prouidence  is  to  be  obferued.  n  Ir 
is  better  with  the  uodlv  in  aduerfitie ,  then 
Vi  uh  the  wicked  in  pro/perity.  \6  Theworkc 
ot  God  is  vnlcarchable. 

^l4'^>'^o  is  as  the  teifc  man* 
-r  \   V .  /,  anb  lbho  tmoibctb  the  tn 
^  V/Y/-  trrp2etanon  of  a  thing/ 
f/Vvvyb"  a  mans  Unfcbomc  ma 
Ui  v-~/£U  hcth  his  fact  to  fbmc ,  anb 
t  the  bolbncs  of  his  face  fbalbc  cbangeb. 
2    3  coimicii  thee ,  to  keepe  the  lungs 
commanbement ,  anbtbatinrcgarbof 
the  oath  of  Cob. 


3  26cc  not  haftic  to  got  out  of  his 
fight :  ftanb  notman  cuill  thing ,  foi  Ijc 
boethtbbatfocucrplcafetbbmi. 

+  uahcrctherboibofamng  is,  there 
is  potter:  anb  lbho  may  fay  bnto  hun, 
nDbatbocfttbou; 

5  nabofo  Rccpeth  the  commanbe 
mem . '  fhaii  fcelcuo  cuill  thing:  anb  a 
Unfc  mans  heart  bifcernctl)  both  tunc 
anbiubgcmcnt. 

6  CBecaufc  to  cttcry  pnrpofc  there 
is  tune ,  anb  uibgcmciit  therefore  the 
nuferyofman  is  great  bponhmi. 

7  foi  Dec tmoibctb  not  that  Ybhith 
(hall  be :  fo2  tbl;o  can  tell  hun,  ||  lbbcn  it 
tyallbe; 

3  There  is  no  man  that  hath  poibcr 
*  oucr  the  fpirit  to  retamc  the  fpint .  \m 
thcr  hachhcpotbcrin  the  bay  of  beat!): 
anb  there  isno  llbifchargc  m  that  ibarrc, 
neither  fhail  ibtcfecbnefSc  belmet  tbofc 
that  arc  giucn  ton. 

9  3111  this  hauc '31  fecne,  anb  applieb 
my  heart  bnto  cuery  ibo2be  that  is 
bone  bnber  the  £>unne :  there  is  a  time 
lbhcrcin  one  man  rulcth  oucr  another 
to  his  olbne  hurt. 

io  3nofo3lfaibthcibicBcobuncb) 
lbho  l>ib  come,  anb  gone  from  the  place 
of  the  ^oly ,  anb  they  ibere  fo2gottcn 
m  the  nty  Abhtrc  ti)t\>  hab  Co  bone :  this 
is  alto  banmc. 

ii  25ccaufc  fentence  againft  an  cuill 
ib02Rc  is  not  COTtitco  fpccbtlvi  there 
fo2c  the  heart  of  the  fonncs  of  men  is 
fully  fct  m  client  to  boc  eutll. 

12  CXhough  a  turner  boceiulian 
hunb2cb  times ,  anb  his  dayes  be  p2olon- 
gcb  yet  fur  cly  3  fenoib  that  *  it  (hall  be 
ibcll  ibitljthcm  that  fear c  d5ob,  tbhtth 
fMrcbeto2Chtm. 

u  Butttnjailnotbcibclllbtththe 
lbitueb ,  neither  fljail  Dec  pjolong  his 
bayes  winch  are  as  a  fljabolb  •  bctaufe 
hefcareth  not  befoje  (S5ob. 

14  Xhcrcisabaniticibhithisbonc 
bpon  the  earth ,  thatthttc  be  iuft  men 
bnto  ibhom  it  *  happeneth  atcoibmg  to 
;theVbo2kcof  the  ttncRcb:  agame,  there 
be  Vbicftcb  men ,  to  ibhom  it  happeneth 
|acco2bmg  to  the  lb02bc  of  the  nghte 

,  ous :  3  tob,  that  tins  alfo  is  banmc. 

15  *  £hcn  3  eommcubeb  mirth ,  be^ 
caufca  man  hatl)  no  better  thing  bnber 
the  Suinnc ,  then  to  eatc  anb  to  Djmftc, 
anb  to  be  meme :  fo2  that  (hall  abibc 
ibith  him  of  his  labour,  the  bayes  of 
his  life ,  lbhich  ©obgiucth  !)im  bnber 
the  5>unuc. 

16  Cnahcn 


\HA-  p,M 


||  Or,),, 

Ihttlbi  ■ 


Mob 


4  S 


||0r,«/r«j 

of  weapons. 


•  Pfal. ;  7. 

10,11,18, 

19. 


•PlV7j.11. 


-Clu.j.ii. 


All  are  alike.  Chap.ix.x.  Wifdome  defpifed. 


t  Hctr.  ; 

e.we.crfrl 
lo  mjhcAi:. 


•Mala.  ;. 
J4.plal.73. 

j.Scii.ij. 


i6  CrabenJ  apph'eD  mme  fjcart  to 

Unolb  lbifcbomc ,  ant»  to  fee  the  bufmes 
that  is  Done  Upon  the  earth :  ( fo;  alfo 

there  is  that  tlCltljCT  bay  HO?  ntgijt  fretl) 

fleepcibttbhiscyes.) 

17  %ben  3  bcbelbe  all  the  Wo;rc  of 
CEob ,  that  a  man  cannot  flnbe  out  the 
U>o;bc  that  is  bone  bnber  the  Smnne: 
becaufethougb  amanlabourto  feeacu 
out ,  yea  further  ttjougb  a  wife  man 
thinne  to  Unolb  it,  pet  fpaH  bee  not  be 
abletoftnficir. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Like  things  happen  to  t^ood  and  bad.  4 
There  is  a  nece/firie  of  death  vnto  men. 
7  Comfort  is  all  their  portion  in  this  life. 
11  Gods  prouidence  mlcthouer  all.  13  Wif- 
dome is  better  then  fhength. 

^alltbist^confibereb 
in  my  heart,  euen  to  be- 
dare  all  tins ,  that  trjc 
righteous ,  anD  tlje  wife, 
„.aubtl)cttibojkc£,aieintlje 
banbof  Cob:  no  man  hnolbctb  either 
toue,o;  natreo.hy  all tbat>'  before them. 

1     *  ^lll  tfjinCtS  come  allliC  tO  all :  chei  e 

>s  one  cucnt  to  the  righteous  anb  to  the 
Ibicbcb  ,  to  the  soot  ana  to  tbccleane, 
ano  to  tbcbncleanc  to  bimtbat  facrtfi 
tctl),anb  to  Dun  tbatfactincctbnot:as 
is  tl)c  goob  fo « the  (inner,  -md  bee  that 
fruearetb.as  be  that  fcarerb  an  oath. 

$  Xbis  «  an  cuill  among  ail  things 
tljat  are  Cone  bnber  the  Smmte ,  that 
there  is  one  euent  bnto  all :  yea  alfo  the 
heart  of  tbefonncs  of  men  ■<  full  ofeuill, 
anb  mamielTc  is  in  tbeir  heart  While 
trjey  Hue,  anfi  after  that  they  &oc  to  the 
neat). 

4  C5fo;tobuntbatiBioynebtoall 
tljelmutg ,  there  is  Dope :  fo;  a  lining 
Doggeis  better  then  abeab  S.ion. 

<,  5ro;  the  liumg  Know  that  they 
(ball  Die :  but  the  beab  hnoW  not  any 
tbius,  neither  haue  tbey  anymore  a  re* 
warb ,  fo;  tbc  memoneof  tl)em  is  fo^ 
gotten. 

6  Mo  their lone , anb  tl)etr batceb, 
anb  their  enuy  is  now  penmeb  neither 
haue  tljev  any  tno;e  a  portion  fo;  euer 
in  any  tljuuj  ttjat  is  bone  bnber  the 
£>uune. 

7  C  ®oe  thy  >bay ,  eate  fby  b;eab 
With  ioy ,  anb  bnnhe  thy  Wine  Unto  a 
merry  heart;  fo;  <0ob  nolb  acceptetl) 
tl)ytbo;aes. 

%  %et  thy  garments  bee  alibaycs 


White ;  anb  let  thy  beab  lacHeuooynt 
raent 

9  t  %mc  ioyfully  With  the  wife, 
Whom  tljou  loucff ,  all  tlje  bayes  of  tlje 
life  of  thy  banmcwbicbbe  batbgiucn 
t\)tc  bnber  tbeSnmne,  all  the  bayes  of 
thy  bamtie:  *fo;  that  >s  tbyponionin 
tins  life,  anb  intby  labour  ibljictj  thou 
tancd  bnber  the  Suumc. 

10  nahatfocucr  thy  bant  fmbetb  to 
boc,boc  it  ibitfj  thy  migl)t :  fo;  there , ,  no 
wo;ke,  no;  beuice ,  no;  mio  wiebge,  1102 
w.fcbomc  m  rbcgrauc ,  uifiitljer  thou 
goeft. 

n  c  3  returueb.anbnilb  bnber  the 
Minnie,  Xfjat  the  race  is  not  to  tlje 
froift,  no;  the  battell  to  tljcffroug,  uel- 
tljet  yet  b;cabto  the  lbu'cno^et  rirljes 
to  men  of  bnberlranbtng ,  no;  yctfa> 
uour  to  men  of  fail  but  tunc  anb  chance 
happcncthtothcmail, 

n  *  Jto  man  alfo  Biioibeth  not  his 
nine,  as  thcfiuys  tI)ataretaHcninan 
cuil  nct,aub  as  the  birbs  that  jre  caugljt 
m  the  fnare;  fo  arc  the  fonnes  of  men 
fnarcb  m  an  cuill  time ,  ibljen  it  failcth 
fubbcnlybponthcm. 

1}  C  Xhis  lbifcbome  haue  3  fecuc 
alfo  bnber  the  £>unuc ,  anb  it  f«med 
great  bnto  me: 

14.  There  wjs  &  uttlc  nticaub  fctt)  men 
lbitljiu  it ,  anb  there  came  a  great  sung 
agatnftit,  anb  befi'egcb  it,  ?  built  great 
bulibarhsagainflit: 

15  .tfJoib  there  ibas  founb  m  it  a 
poo;e  ibife  man ,  anb  Dec  by  bis  lbtfe 
boincbeliucreb  thccitic,  yet  no  man  re; 
mcmb;eb  that  fame  poo;e  man. 

16  *3Chcnfaib3,n9ifebomcisbetter 
thenncength :  ncucrtbelefre,tbcpoo;e 
mans  ibifebome  is  fccfpifeb ,  anb  I;is 
ibo2bcarenothearb. 

17  XbclbojDSofibife  mm  uehcarb 
m  quiet,  mo;e  then  tlje  cry  of  bun  that 
rulcth  among  fooles. 

18  natfebome  is  better  then  Weapons 
of  ibarrc :  but  one  fituier  beftroyetlj 
mucbgoob. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Ot>ferir?.tions  of  Wifedome  and  folly.  16 
OfRiot,  18  SlouthfulnelTe,  ij  andMo-. 
ney.  :o  Mens  thoughts  of  Kings  ought 
to  bee  reuerend. 

tcab  flies  caufc  the  oynr 
ment  of  the  3lporhecaric 
to  fenb  fbonh  a  fririfeing 
fauour  :  fc  ooeth  a  little 
folly  him  that  ism  repu> 
1LU  3     tation 


i  Heir  fir. 


•Chap  ,. 

1  lands. 
18. 


Prouty. 


•  Ptou. 1 1 
::  cliap.7 
'9. 


\Hch:fu: 

ofdtt/h. 


Folly  efteemed.        Ecclefiaftes.     GodiudgerJiaik 


btfsre. 
\Hcb. 
tn  great 
heifbtt. 
"Prou     30. 
12. 

*Pfal.7.rtf. 

prou.ie).:  7 


m.tjirr  tj  :hc 
tOHfKe. 

*Prou.   !0. 
31.  and  |2 

1 1- 

^Hcbgracc 

\H<bMt 

month, 

*  Prou  1 5. 

x. 

t  H'b.  mul- 

tip/tetb 

word/, 

"Chap.3, 

7  1  and  6. 


[fa 


'  Pi'il.  1 04 

'  Httt  ma 
KellttUi 

:bilift. 

*£«od.:i 
■2'. 


tattonfo:ttnfcDome  and  Iionour. 

1  2  ttnfc  mans  heart  is  at  his  rtglK 
lunJ :  but  afoolcs  Heart  at  his  left. 

3  Pea  aifo  luljcn  lice  that  is  a  foolc 
rbaitieth  by  the  ibay  ,  t  his  unfcDomc 
fmlethhim ,  anD  rjee  faith  to  cucry  one 
that  he  is  a  foolc. 

4.  ^f  the  (pint  of  the  ruler  nfciip 
againffthec ,  leaue  not  ttjp  place ,  foj 
ycclDiug  pacifieth  crrcat  offences. 

5  Xrjcre  is  an  etull  which  5  hauc 
feme  bnDcrthejSmnne,  as  an  crrour, 
svhichpiocccDctrj  t  from  the  ruler. 

e  f oily ts fct t m great Digutrtc;auD 
the  rich  fit  m  lolbc  place. 

7  ^  Ijaue  feme  fcruants  *  bpon 
rjoifcs,  anD  pnnces  Ujauung  as  fer 
uants  bpon  the  earth. 

8  *  $?e  ttiat  Digger!)  a  pit ,  Ojall  fall 
into  u  anD  lbho  fo  tyeaacth  an  fjeDge, 
afcrpcntfhallbitchim. 

9  nafjoforemoucth  (tones,  (hall  be 
hurt  thcrcVbtth :  and  j)ec  thatclcaucth 
u)ooD,(halbecnDaugcrtD  thereby. 

10  3*f  the  y;on  be  blunt ,  anD  he  Doe 
not  rohct  the  eDge ,  then  muft  he put  to 
mojc  frrmgth :  but  ibifeDome  is  p:onta> 
bleto  Direct. 

11  Surely  the  ferpnitlbill  bite  lbiih 
out  mrhauntmeut,anD  t  a  babbler  is  no 
better. 

12.  *Xhe  Uwds  of  a  tbife  mans 
montrj  irctgrattous :  but  the  lips  of  a 
foolc  ttnll  froallolbbphimfclfc. 

13  Xhe  beginning  of  the  ttwDs  of 
his  mouth  is  foolifhneffc:auD  the  enD 
of  t  his  talfec  ismifchtcuousmaDncffc. 

1+  ^foolcalfottsfullofnwDs.a 
man  cannot  tell  *  U)hat  (hail  be  anD 
What  (hall  bee  after  him  lbho  can  tell 
\)inii 

15  Xhclabottr  of  the  fboliih  Weary- 
cth  curry  one  of  them  ;  becaufe  hce 
Knottier!)  nothoilitogoctothenne. 

16  C'odoc  to  thee,  iDianD,  When 
thy  lung  is  a  chilD ,  anD  thy  pjinccs  eate 
inthemommg. 

17  BleffcD  ."i  ;thou ,  £>  lanD ,  tbhen 
thy  lung  >.  the  Tonne  ofnoblcs.anDthy 
puttees  catc  tn  Due  rcafon,  fo;  ttrcngth, 
anD  not  fo:  DnutHcuncffc. 

18  Hffiy  much  flotithfulucffc  the 
btulDiug  Dccavcth  anD  th.'ottgh  tDlc 
ueffc  of  the  hauDs  thchoufc  Dioppcth 
through. 

19  IE  3  fcaft  is  maDc  fo:  laughter, 
*  anD  Untie  maheth  t  merry :  but  money 
anftucrcrh  all  things. 

20  H'Curfcnot  the  lung,  no  not  m 


thy  !l  thought ,  anD  curCe  not  the  rich  m 
thy  beb  chamber :  fo2a  btrDofthcairc 
Qjall  caccy  thetooyce,  anD  that  Winch 
hath  wmgs  Q)all  tell  the  matter. 

CHAP.     XI. 

I  1  Dire&iotis  for  chariuc  7  Death  in  life,  jand 
the  day  of  judgement  in  the  dayes  ofyouth 
.ire  to  be  thought  on. 

^ft  thy  bjeaD  t  bpon  the 
maters  :  fo:  thou  (halt 
fitiDit  after* many  Dayes. 
i  (Sine  a  pouion  to 
jsr»3»s«  feucu  ano  alfo  to  eight .  f 02 
thoiiKuoWcQ  noc  Whatcuill  (hall  be 
tpon  the  earth. 

3  3ftbectouDsbcfullofratnc,thcy 
empue  thcmfelucs  bpon  the  earth  :anD 
if  the  tree  fall  towarb  the  South,  02  to- 
ibarD  the  il5o2th4n  the  place  inhere  the 
tree  fallcth,  there  it  (hail  be. 

4  ^c that  obferueth  the tbtnD,  (hail 
notfotbtanD  hec  that  regarDett)  the 
tlouDs.fhallnotreape. 

5  3sthoutmoibcftnofcrbhat<sfhe 
tbay  of  the  fptnt.noi  hotb  the  bones  doe 
?rowe  m  the  lPombe  of  l;cr  that  is  ihtth 
rtjrto  :  encn  fo  tijou  bnolbeft  not  the 
tbozbes  of  <J5oU  lbho  mafceth  all. 

6  3Jn  the  mowing  forbe  thy  feeDe, 
anD  m  the  racnrngftitbhcjlDnotthme 
hanD :  fo?  thoa  bnotbeft  not  rbhethet 
tfhall  p.'ofpcr,  either  thiso!  that,  o; 
tbhEtljer  they  both  rhaii  be  alfte  gooh. 

7  C  Xtuly  the  Itcjht  >s  facet,  anD  a 
pleafant  thing  is  ttfo?  the  eyes  tob^ 
hotDthefunne. 

8  26nt  if  a  man  line  many  yccres, 
and  rnoyce  in  them  all ;  yet  let  him  rc^ 
member  the  Dayes  of  Darkeneffe ,  fo; 
they  (hail  be  many.  2u  thatcommcth 
'sbanitie. 

9  C&cioyte,£>youngman,tnthy 
youth,  anD  let  ttjy  heart  chccrc  thee  m 
the  Dayes  of  thy  youth ,  anD  Vbalfee  in 
the  ibayes  of  thme  heart ,  anD  m  the 
fight  of  thme  eyes :  but  hnotb  thou,that 
fo:  all  thefe  thmgs,  <5oD  lDiU  bung  tljce 
tntoiuDgnncnt. 

10  Xhercfoicrcmoucllfo'roihfrom 
tljy  heart,  anD  put  aibay  null  from  thy 
fleih  ,fb2chilD  hooD^youtlj  •'^Jwnitie. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  The  Creator  is  to  be  rerr.einbred  in  due 
time.  3  The  Preaxherscareto  ediric.  13 
The  frare  ol  God  is  the  chicle  Antidote 
of  vamtie. 

*  fitcmembet 


\\Or,  can- 
fctmce. 


t  Htb  xyut 
the  f Mi  of 
the  vt&ert* 
"Dcut,  |j. 
jo.Mit.  10 
^1  pcOu.ip 
■7- 


lHtb.faU 


R< 


cpentbctimc. 


p 


Ch 


ap.j. 


TheendofalL 


*Proti  zi.6 


|  Or,  the 
qrindert 
fxde.be- 

CAu'e'-hej 
•rrinJtuk. 


*  <£member  notb  thy  Ccc 
atouc  m  the  oaves  of  thy 
youth,tt)hilc  the  euil  baies 
come  not ,  noz  the  ycercs 
bjaibe  nigh,lbhcn  thou 

Cbait  fap,  3  haue  no  plcafute  m  them : 
i  nahiie  the  Auntie,  02  the  light,  02 

themoone,  02  tljcftatccs  benotoarae; 

neb ,  no?  the  cloubes  rcturne  after  the 

tame : 

3  3Jn  tj>c  &ap  tbhen  the  Beepers  of 
thehoufe  mail  tremble,  anb the  ttrong 
men  ttjail  borbethcmfciues,  anb  the 
llgtinbers  ccaft,  bceaufc  they  arc  feibc, 
anb  fhofe  that  looae  out  of  the  nmv! 
botbesbebaracneb: 

4  3nbthcboo2CSfhalbeftMtutthe| 
tttcets,  lbhen  the  fonnb  oftijc  gtmbing 
tsloVb,  anbhcfball  rife  bp  at  thcboicc! 
\  of  the  btrb,anb  all  rtjc  baughtevs  of mu? 
ftcftc  fbau  be  brought  lorb. 

5  3lfo  whd.tljtp  fyaibcafraiboftljat 
rbljtclj  is  Ijigl),  anb  feares  fVuii  bee  m  tlje 
Ibay,  anb  the  3lmonb  tree  than  flou^ 
nfb,  aubtljegraftjoppcrfliallbcabur' 
ben,  anb  befire  (hall  faile:  bceaufc  man 
goctl)  to  his  long  home,  anb  themour*! 
ners  go  c  about  tl)c  ftrccts : 

6  <D;  cuer  the  filuet  cojbe  be  loofeb,  j 
02  the  goibcn  bottile  be  bzofecn,  02  the ' 
pitcher  be  bzoaen  at  the  fonntatne,  02 


thelbhecle  b20Rcnatthertltccnc 

7  £t)en  (hall  tt)e  butt  rctnrne  to 
the  earth  as  it  ibas:  anb  the  fptrtt  (hall 
returnc  tonto  ©ob  tbho  gane  it. 

8  C  Dannie  of  banmes  (faith  the 
P2eacl)et)allisbanitic. 

9  3nb  ||  iiKucouet  becaufc  the  p2ca= 
chcr  tbas  tbifche  fhll  taught  the  people 
Uttorblebge,  yeahe  gauc  goob  hccb,anb 
fougrjt  out,  and'fet  mo2bcrmanyp20- 
uerbes. 

10  Xhe  p2cather  fought  to  finbe  out 
tattcptable  U)02bs,anb  that  rbhuh  mas 

VatltttW  was  bp2tgj)t  ,  euen  rbojbes  of 

trueth. 

11  Xhc  Vb02bcs  of  the  ibife  areas 
goabs.anbasnailcsfaflcncbbvthenia' 
Qers  of  affcmblles, winch  are  giuen  from 
one  (hephcarb. 

ii  3nb  further  ,l)ythefc,myfonne,be 
abmomChcb :  of  maamg  many  booties 
there  is  no  cnb,anb  much  I  ftubic  k  a  ibca- 
nnetlcoftheflefl). 

13  CH?Ut  bs  hcarc  the  conclufion 
of  the  Ibholcmattcr :  jFeatcdSob,  anb 
acepc  his  commanbements,  fo^tljiS's 
thclbholeduetieofman, 

14  J02  d5ob  *  thai  b2mg  eucry  lbo2Re 
into  Uibgemcut,  ttnth  euct  fecret  thing, 

IbhethCr  it  bee  gOOb  ,  02  tbhCtljCr  it  bee 
fUlll. 


omon. 


CHAP.     I. 

1  The  Churches  louevntoChrift.  5  Slice  con- 
federal her  defornntie,  7  And  prayethto  bee 
dueled  to  his  flocke.  8  (Thrift  dire <5teth her 
to  the  fhepheards  tents,  j  Andfhewinghis 
louetoher,  11  Giueth  her  gracious  pro- 
mifes.  11  The  Church  and  Chrift  con- 
gratulate one  another. 

$efongoffongs, 
Which  's  5>olo> 
mous. 

i  %tt  him 
Kiffie  mee  lbitl) 
the  luffcs  of  his 

mouth  :*fo2tthv 
ILoue  is  better 
thcnibinc. 


3  2&etaufeofthcfauoucofthygoob 
ointments,  trjp  name  is  as  ointment 
poibjeb  fo2fh,  thercfojc  boc  the  bitgms 
louethee. 

4  *SD2arbmc,  tbctbillrunne  after 
thee :  the  Ring  hath  b20ught  me  mto  hts 
chambers:  ibe  nnllbegiananbretopcc 
mthce,lbeU)il  remember  thVloucmo2C 
thenlbine :  ||  the  bp2ight  louc  thee. 

5  3  am  biacac ,  but  comely,  ( £>  yt 
baughtersof  3icnu"alcm)  as  the  tents 
ofl&ebar,  as  the  turtames  of  Solo- 
mon. 

6  lLooUc  not  bpon  me  becaufc  31  am 

biacfee,  becaufc  the  5>unne  hath  looacb 
bpon  me :  mp  mothers  chiUvcn  iberc 
angrp  ftitljmc,  tljcpmaoc  me  the  feec- 
per  ofthebincparbs,  but  mine  oibnc 

bmc^ 


'Cen.j.ip 


*  Chap,!. 2. 
ji  Or,  the 

Wore  wife 
the  Prea- 
cher was, 
&c. 

■  i.Kjng  4. 
J*- 

fHchnvrJi 

of  delight. 


\\Or,rea 
dutg. 

\\Or>:hrad 

of  the  mat- 
ter',  cucn-jfl 
that  hath 
bene  he.ird, 
is. 

•Rom.l.i« 
and  14.10. 
:.  cor.  j.  :o. 


I0I1.  <S. 


M- 


Or,thrj 
lour  thee 
vfrifhllj. 


[Chrift,  and  Solomons  fong.         his  Church. 


j]  Or. At  one 
ti'M  (i  I  ,jj- 
ltd. 


\\OrtC;prtj. 

\Or \my  com 
pjtmon. 


Chap. 4. 1 
and  5.12. 


net. 


t  tfrfc  Id*. 

Sighted  and 
(,\te<iorrvei 

tHtifttttt 
\Htb.bmfi 

efwir.c. 

ffftt  li-.-iu 
with  ■*:'- 
flu. 
•Chap. 8.;. 


bincyarb  hauc  3  not  Kept. 

7  Xcllme,(£>thoutt)hommyfoulc 
loucth)  tbljcre  thou  fecbeft,  tbhere  thou 
tnafccft  thv  flockc  to  tell  at  noonc :  fo? 
iDljpt^oMlti'5  bcllasonc  that  turneth 
afibe  by  the  flocacs  of  thy  companions  < 

8  CJftl)Ou!mon)not(5Dtljoufai' 
rcllamongrbomen)goctbylbayfo?th 
by  trjc  footfteps  of  the  florttc,  anb  fcebe 
thytoDbesbcubethethephearbstents- 

9  3njauccompareothcc,£>myloue, 
to  a  company  of  Ijojfcs  in  Pharaohs 
chariots. 

10  %]m  creches  arc  comely  lbith 
cotteSoficweis,  tDyincUciDit!)  cbames 

of  golde. 

ii  i0cc  lbffl  masc  thec  bo?bcrs  of 
golbc,  ttnth  ftubbes  of  ftbtcr. 

iz  Cnohilethctungftttcthat  hista* 
blc,  my  fptftcnarb  fenbeth  foo?th  the 
fmcll  thereof. 

ij  3(bimblc  of  my?rhc  is  my  ibclbe- 
louebbnto  me  hcfhaiiiicall  night  be- 
tlbirtmyb?cafts. 

14  tt)y  bcloucb  is  bnto  me ,  as  aclu^ 
fler  of  I  Camphircmthc  bincyarbs  of 
engcbi. 

1$  26cbolb,  thou  artfatrcllmylouc: 
bcholb ,  thou  an  fatrc ,  thou  haft  boucs 
eyes. 

16  *  zScoolD ,  thou  art  faire,  my  be; 
loucb  i  yea  pleafant :  alfo  one  bebbc  is 
grcenr. 

17  Xhc  beames  of  our  houfe  are  Ct-- 
bar,  and  our  lltaftcrsof  firrc. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  The  niutuj]l  loue  of  Chrift  and  his  Church. 
8  The  hope,  io  and  calling  of  the  Church. 
14  Chrifts  care  of  the  Church.  \6  Thepro- 
fefsion  ol  die  Church,  her  faith  and  hope. 

Am  the  rofc  of  Aharon, 
and  the  lillic  of  the  baileys. 
z  3s  the  Itlltc  among 
thomes,  fo  is  my  loue  a 
mongthebanghtcrs. 
3  as  the  apple  tree  among  the  trees 
of  the  lboob,  fo  is  my  beloueb  among 
the  fonnes.  t  3  fate  bourne  bnber  hts 
(haboib  lbtth  great  bciigljt,  anb  his 
fruit  was  fmectc  to  my  ttafte. 

+  li?cc  brought  me  to  the  t  banlscfc 
nng  houfe,  anb  his  banner  oner  mec, 
was  loue. 

5  5>tay  me  ttith  flagons,  tcomfon 
mc  lbtth  apples,  fo:  31  am  firfce  of  loue. 

6  *  tyis  left  hanb  is  imber  my  heab, 
auo  bis right  banbboctbimluaccmr. 


7  t*j  charge  you,  O  ye  Daughters 
of  3erufalcm,by  thc3Roes,  anb  by  the 
binbes  of  the  ficlb ,  that  ye  fhrr  e  not  bp, 
no?  aibafec  my  loue,  till  he  pleafe. 

8  C  Xbe  boice  of  my  beloueb '.  bfc 
Ijolb!  hec  commeth  leaping  bpon  the 
mountainesjmppingbpontbehiis. 

9  *  fll9y  bcloucb  is  lifec  a  Hoe ,  0:  a 
yong$art:beholb,  he  ftanbethbebinb 
our  iball,  he  loofeetb  foo?tb  at  the  torn 
boibc ,  t  (hclbtng  bimfclfc  through  the 
lattcfTc. 

10  i©y  beloueb  fpahc ,  anb  faib  bnto 
me ,  3Mcbp,my  %out,  my  faire  one, 
anb  come  aibay. 

1 1  fo;  loc,  the  ibinter  is  patt,  the 
raiurtsoucr,andgone. 

nXbefloibersappeareontheeartb, 
the  tune  of  the  fingingof  bads  is  come, 
anb  the  boice  of  the  turtle  is  bcarb  in 
ourianb. 

13  Che  fig  tree  puttctb  foo?rb  her 
greencfigs,  anb  the  bines  with  the  ten- 
ber  grape  giueagoodfmell.  3rtfc,  my 
loue,  my  faire  one,  anb  come  aibay. 

1+  C£>myboue!  that  avtm  the  clefts 
of  the  rotBC ,  in  the  fecret  places  of  the 
ftaires:  let  me  fee  thy  countenance,  let 
mehcarethyboice,fo,tfttjcctisthyboice, 
anb  thy  countenance  is  comely. 

15  Xahcbsthcforcs.theuticfojces, 
that  fpoilc  the  bmes :  fo?  our  bines  haue 
tenber  grapes. 

i6  C*S0y  beloueb  iimme,anbgi  am 
bis:befcebetbamongtbeIillfes.  " 

17  *  tlntili  the  bay  b;cattc,  anb  the 
fhaboibcsflec  aibay:  turnc  my  beloueb 
aubbctl)ou*lihcaHoc,o?ayong^art,| 
bpontlje  mountainesl!  of  ascthcr. 

CHAP.    III. 

1   The  Church  her  fight  and  viftone  in  temp- 
ration.  6  The  Church  glorieth  in  Chrift. 

&&***»  p  night  on  my  beb  3J 
fought  him  ibhomc  my 
fottle  loucth.  3  fought 
him,biu  3  fomtb  him  not. 
i  gjibillrifenoib,  anb 
goc  about  the  cute  m  the  Arrets,  anb  in 
the  b?oab  ibayes  3  lbill  fceuc  him 
ibhom  my  fbnlcioueth :  3  foughthim, 
bnt^founbhimnot. 

3  XIjc  ibatchmen  that  goe  about 
the  cittc,  foimb  me :  w  whom  1  (aid,  £>aib 
ychmiibhommyfoulcloueth; 

4-  3t  tbas  but  a  utic  that  3  pafftb 
from  them,  but  3  founb  himibljomc 
myfouic  loucth:  3  hclbc  h:m,  anb 
Uioulb  not  let  htm  Goe,  bntill  3  hab 

b?ought 


T  Hct.JU 

mtcJOH. 
•Chlp.3.j 

and  H  4 


Vcrfc  17 


t  Hri.Jla 

rtjhng. 


'  aip.15.3. 
And  7. 10. 

Chap.  4.6 

*  Chap.8. 

'4- 

||  Or,  rfduu- 


Theb 


eautie 


brought  him  into  my  mothers  houfe, 
anb  into  the  chamber  of  Ijcr  tljat  coti^ 
ceiuebmr-. 

5  *  3J  charge  you ,  £>  ye  Daughters 
of  Jmrfalem ,  bv>  ttic  &ocs  anb  by  the 
Djinbes  of  the  fielt»,tljat  ye  fhrrc  not  top, 
no:  aibato  my  louctill  he  plcafc. 

6  C*i©ho isthisthattommcthont 
of  thetbilberuesitto  pillars  of  fmoto, 
pcrfutneb  lbith  myjrhc  anb  frautan; 
cenfe ,  lbith  ail  poitob'crs  of  the  met; 
chant* 

7  iBebolbhis  beb  ,  ibhich  >*  £>olo; 
mons:thJeefto2e  baltantmcn  arc  about 
it.of  the  baliant  of  Jftael : 

s  Xhey  all  holb  fuwbs ,  being  er 
pert  tn  lbarrc :  Cucry  man  hath  his 
uWotopou  his  thigh  >  bctaufcoffcarc 
m  the  night. 

9   Bing  Solomon  mabe  himfrtfc 

acharetoftbeitooob  oflLcbanon. 

io  ir>e  mabe  the  pillars  thereof  of  fil- 
uer,  the  bottome  thereof  of  golb,  the  to- 
uermgofit,  ofpucple  the  mibft  there 
of  bemgpaueo  with loue,  foj  thebaugh- 
tersoflJerufalem. 

1 1  <2>oe  foortb,  £>yce  baughters  of 
Zion,anb  beholb  tang  Solomon  lbith 
the  Crolbnc  itohcreibith  his  mother 
trovbneb  him  in  the  bay  of  his  cfpou 
fais ,  anb  m  the  bay  oftbcgiabncfle  of 
his  heart. 

CHAP.   IIII. 

Chrill  fettetli  forth  the  graces  of  the  Church. 
S  He  fheweth  his  loue  to  her.  1 6  The  Church 
prayeth  to  be  made  lit  for  his  ptcfence. 

*  <£holb,thou  art  feire,  my 
loue,  beholb  thou  an  fatre , 
thou  hart  aoues  eyes  lbtth 
m  thy  lottos:  thy  hairc^ 
asa*flottoofgoats,||that 
appeare  rrom  mount  Giltab. 
z  Xhy  teeth  are  Uto  a  flocto  office 

that  are  euen  fbome ,  lbbirh  tame  top 
from  the  itoaflung :  Whereof  cuery  one 
beare  tttotones ,  anb  none  is  barren  a; 
mongthcjn. 

j  Xhy  bps  are  uto  a  thiccb  of  fcar^ 
let ,  anb  thy  fpeatb  is  tomcly :  thy  tern; 
pics  arc  uto  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate 
Within  thy  lottos. 

4  Xhynectoi4itothctoibcrof£>a; 
utb  bmlbeb  foj  an  acmojte ,  Whereon 
there  hang  a  thoufano  bucklers ,  all 
tttolbsofimghticmen. 
•chJF  7  j  5  *  Xhy  two  brcatts ,  are  mc  nbo 
yong  ftoes ,  that  arc  twtones,  winch 
feeb  among  the  lilhcs. 


Chap.inj.v.         of  the  Church. 


■Chap  i  7 
and  8-4- 


•ChapS  5 


\Or,*ktd. 


v  Chip.  i. 

i  s-and  5. 


•  Chap.6 
5,6. 

\\Or,lh*t 


6  "  SUnnil  the  bay  t  bjeato ,  anb  the 
fbabowes  flee  away,3JWUlgetmeeto 
thcmountaincsof  myjrhe ,  anb  to  the 
hilloffranUmccnfc. 

7  'IChoua'ailfaitc.mylouciricrc 

i^uofpotinthce. 

8  CCome  With  mc  from  ILcbanon 
(my  fpoufc, )  rbitl)  mc  from  lUbanon : 
lootte  from  the  top  of  3mana,  from  the 
top  of  &bemr  *  anb  l)ctmon,froiu  trjc 
?UonsDcnncs,from  tbcmouiitamcs  of 
tbefLcoparbs. 

9  Xbou  hall  ||  rauifbeb  my  heart, 
my  filter,  my  fpoufc,  thou  halt  rauilbeb 
my  heart ,  With  one  of  tljmc  cycs,Witb 
oncchamcofthynccto. 

io  $oW  faire  is  thy  loue,  my  filter,  I 
*  my  fpoufc  •'  how  much  better  is  thy 
loue  then Wine '  anb  the  fmcll  of  tbtne 
oyntments  then  all  fpiccs ' 

ii  Xhy  hps,£>mv  fpoufc  b;op  as  the 
Ijony  combe :  bony  anb  milUc  r^buDcr 
thy  tongue ,  anb  the  fmcll  of  thy  gar; 
mcntS'sUtothefmelloffLcbanon. 

ii  3  garben  t  mclofcb  is  my  fitter, 
my  fpoufe :  a  tpnng  (hut  top,a  fountamc  I 
fealeb. 

13  Xhy  plants  are  an  ojcharb  of 
pomegranates,  With  plcafant  fruits,1 
||Campblrc,Witb  S>pihcnacb, 

14  £>piBenarb  anb  Saffron,  Cauv 
mus  anb  Cynamom ,  With  all  trees  of 
5?cantantenfe,fl0irrheanb^loes,tbith 
allthechicfefpices. 

1$  a  fountamc  ofgarbens,  a  well  of 
liutng  waters,  anb  ttrcames  from  %v 
banon. 

16  C3Wato,jD#<vtbWtnbc,anb 
comcthou  &outb,bloWtoponmy  gar; 
ben,  that  the  fpiccs  thereof  may  floito 
out :  let  my  beioucb  come  into  his  gar; 
bcn,aub  cate  his  plcafant  fruits. 

CHAP.    V. 

Chrirt  awakeththe  Church  with  his  calling. 
i  The  Church  hauiug  a  tafte  of  Chrirtcs 
loue ,  is  ficke  of  loue.  9  A  defcription  ot 
Chrilt  by  his  graces. 

%n\  tome  into  my  gar; 
ben,  my  filter,  my  fpoufe, 
31  haue  gathcrcb  my 
iDyzrhc  TUith  my  fpue, 
_  3J  haue  catm  my  home 
rombe'ltoith  my  hony  ,  31  haue  bzunUc 
my  ibmc  lbith  my  nulto  :  eatc ,  a> 
fncnbs,bnnto  ,||yca  b;tnhcabunbant; 
Iy,^>bctoucb! 
x  €.3  fleepe ,  but  my  heart  tt>& 

Ucth: 


■Chip.i 

'7 

\Hitr 

brtslhi. 


•Ephcf.j 
»7 


Den- 3.9 


4ir<)  my 
heart 


*  Chap, l.J. 


t  He  h   U 


\\1r>Cjp*t. 


J|  Or,andU 
YtilhioMt*. 


Ill 


watchmen. 


Sol 


oiomons  ion 


fc 


Theb 


cautie 


of 


\Or,  (at 

fvmertad) 

tame. 

fir.?,  orrnn 
nf.i?  about . 

\Htb.r>k,:t 


d*rdbe*Ttrr 

\\Or,airlrl 

♦  Chip  I. 
IJ.&41. 

\Hib.ftling 
infulntfc, 
•h*tu.  fitly 
oLeed,  und 
fetAtc.fre- 
tiaiufiatc  in 
thrfaUt  of d 

Or,  tnvr-i 
tfpcrftm.  i. 


f  Htb.hu 
fuhte. 


ttetl):>ti  the  boyce  of  nip  beloucb  tljat 

UllOCttCtD ,  raying,  j£)pctl  tO  niC,  my  Qfttt, 

my  loue.my  boucmy  btibefilcb :  fo:  nip 
Deao  IS  fillCO  lbltDbClbC,  and  my  lOCKCS 

iDttl)  tin  bzops  of  tDc  nigljt. 

3  3  banc  put  off  nip  coate,houj  loan 
3  put  it  on?3J  Dane  lbalDe&myfcete. 
DoibtDaugjoefilcrbcm; 

4  t19v  beloueo  put  m  fjis  Daub  by 
tlic  Dole  ofdiedorcanDmyboUKls  lucre 
moueo  jfoiDun. 

$  3  rofe  top  to  open  to  my  beloucb, 
anb  my  Danos  tyoppeb  with  myirDc, 
atiD  my  fingers  v.  uh  tfroeetc  (hulling 
my2rDe,bpontDc  baubles  of  tin  loc&c. 

6  3  openeb  to  my  bcloueo ,  but  my 
bcloueb  rjao  lbirb  bzaujen  l)imfclfe,  and 
mas  gone :  my  fonle  faiico  turjen  fjec 
fpafec  :3fougl)tl)im,but  3fcoulbnot 
fino  Dun :  3  taileo  Dun,  butfngauc  me 
noanfmcre. 

7  XDeVbatcDmentDatibent  about 
tDeotic,rounbnic,tDcyfmotcme,  tiiey 
tbounbebme  ttjcfeccpccsof  trjcinaiies 
tootie  aibay  my  banc  from  me. 

8  3  crjargc  you ,  £>  baugDtcrs  of 
3Jc  cufalem ,  if  ye  finD  tup  beloucD,  t  tljat 
ycc  tell  l)tm,trjat  3 im  ftcke  of  loue. 

9  C  i©Dat  is  tf  )y  beloucb  mow  tfjen 
another  beloucb,  <3D  tfjott  fatrcft  among 
njomcn?ibbatis  tDy  bcloueb  montDcn 

another  bClOUCb  ,  tpt  tl)0U  OOCft  fo 

cbargebs? 

io  $)y  beloucb  is  tbbitc  anbrubby, 
ttrjetfticfeuamongtcmutlioufaiiD. 

nfcis  fjeab  is  as  the  molt  fine  golb,  Dis 
lotns  are  ||  bulby,  and  blartte  as  aBauen. 

n  *$iseyesareasthecvesofDouesby 
tf)eriucrsofrbater,)ban)ci)tt)ttf)niilfe, 
anb  t  fitly  let. 

n  $ts  crjeebes  are  as  a  beb  offpiccs, 
asiiuoccteflotberstrjisnppcsi^ciuiics, 
biopptngfunetcfmellfngmynln. 

14  $isDanbs  arc  as  golD  rings  fct 
iDuDtDe25rail:tyisbrtlyis3sbngDtiuo' 
rie.oucrlayb  « ith  5>apDires. 

15  fyts  legges  ai  e  as  piuars  of  marble, 
fct  topou  fbcuets  of  fine  golb:  bis  eonntc- 
nantc  is  as  ^Lebanon,  excellent  as  tlic 
Cebars. 

i<j  t^ismotuDiSmoftfrbeete,ycaDc 
is  altogctlur  louely.  %\y\s  is  my  belo- 
ucb ,ano  tbis  is  my  fricnb,  £>  battgljters 
of  Jerufalcm. 

CHAP.    VI. 

i  The  Church  profViTcth  her  faith  in  Chrilt. 
4  Chrift  Ihcwcth  the  graces  of  the  Church. 
io   and  his  loue  towards  her. 


feitDcr  is  tljy  beloucb  gone? 
4DtDou  fairclt  among  ibo* 
men ,  ibbuber  is  thy  bclo 
B  neb  turneb  afioc  ?tbat  lbe 
^  may  fceaeDim  tbitl)  tljce. 
i   s39y  beloucb  is  gone  boibnc  into 
Dtsgaiocn,totljcbebsoffpiccs,tofcebe 
m  tDc  gatbcns,anb  to  gatfjer  liiues. 

j  *5  am  my  bcloucbs,? my  beloucb 
is  mine  :DefecbctDamongtDelillies. 

4  c  XDou  art  bcautiftill ,  £>  my 
louc,as1Cir5aD,  comely  as  3Icnualcm, 
terrible  as  anarmie  ibitD  banners. 

5  Xirrne  attay  tDine  eyes  from  me, 
fb:tDcyDauc||oucrcomcme:t!jyDatre 
is*  a  floctw  of  goates,  tljat  appcarc  from 
d5ilcab. 

6  XDyteetD^asaflocReofnuepe 
rbDieDgocDpfrouttDeVbafl)mg,ujDer= 
of  cucry  one  bcarctlj  ttblnncs,anb  tijere 
is  not  one  barren  among  tDem. 

7  3s  a  piece  of  a  pomegrauat  arc 
tDy  temples  itoitrjin  tljy  lotbcs. 

8  ICDerc  are  tDzceftou  Situencs, 
anb  fonrefcoic  coneubtnes,  anb  iirgins 
iDitljout  number. 

9  £0y  Doue,myhnbcfilcb  is  but  one. 
(De  is  ttje  only  one  of  Der  motDcr ,  (De  is 
tDe  djoicc  one  of  Der  tDat  bare  Der  •• 
XDcDangJitersfaibcDer,  anDblcflcb 
Der,yea  tfjc  -SQuccncs  aiiB  tDc  conmbms, 
anotDeypMyfrbDer. 

io  CffiDo  ts  (Dc  tljat  looftctD  fo;tD 
as  tDe  momuig,  faire  as  tDe  moone, 
elearcastDefunne,  and  terrible  as  anar- 
mie itoitD  banners* 

ii  3  Vbent ooUinc  into  tDcgarben  of 
iuitsto(cetDefruitsoftDebaucy,andto 
fccrbDctDcrtDebmcflounnjeb,  and  tDc 
p  omegcanats  bubbeb. 

n  t£>;eucr3JU)asavbarc,myfoule 
llmabc  me  lifte  tijc  rijariots  of  2(mmb 
nabib. 

13  3acturne,rctumc,€)S)Duiamite; 
retnrnc,returnc,tDat  tbc  may  looHc  bp 
ontDcc:U)DatujillyecfceintDc^Duia 
mite? as  itlbere  tDe  company  ||of  tlbo 
armies. 

CHAP.  VII. 

I  A  further  defcription  of  the  Church  her 
graces,  io  The  Church  profefleth her  taith 
anddeliie. 

<S>voc  bcautifuli  are  tDy 
fcetc  ttntD  (Dooes,  £>  pilru 
ccsbaugDter1  tDeioynts 
oftDytDiglisarc  Ufte  te- 
ibeis ,  tDe  ibojfte  of  tDe 

Daubs  ofacunnmgB)02bman. 

i  XDy 


"Clnp.2. 
16  and  7. 

19. 


\\Orttht) 

vttvf. 
*Chap. 4. 
1, and  2. 


\hc\w  nc:. 
\\OrSetm* 
on  the chu- 
riotofmj 

f/c. 

\\  Or  of  Ma 


the  Church. 


Chap.viij.         Spirituall  Jouc. 


f  Htb.  mix. 
lure. 


•Chap.  4-5 


\fprfrimfen 

XHebMnnd 


\Hrbr; 
fireightiy. 
\\Or,oftht 
ancient* 
•Chap.  2. 
l6.and6.  : 


|  He b,  opo 


14. 


\Hebr.thty 

fhould  not 
defttftme. 


x  ■JLhynauell  ^  like  a rounb  goblet, 
which  ttmnteti)  not  t  iitowt :  thy  belly is 
like  an  ijeape  of  rdtjeate,  fet  about  lbith 

IfflfeS. 

3  *  ILby  ttbo  bjeafls  ire  lifee  ttt>o 
yong  Boes  that  ate  tibinnes. 

4.  3Ebp  nceite  is  as  a  tonne  of  yuo> 
ry:  thine  eyes  like  the  fifb  poolesm  $cft> 
ton,  bp  the  sate  of  aSatbiabbim :  thy 
nofc'sastbctoibJeofILebanon,tbhich 
loolteth  tolbarb  3>amafcus, 

5  Xbmeheab  bpon  thee  isuftcll  Car; 
mel,  anb  the  Ijatrc  of  thine  heab  liae 
purplc,tbelnngistbelbmtbegaiieries. 

6  $otbfairc,anbborbpleafantart 
thou,i£>  fLoucfozbeiights  i 

7  ICbistbyftattireisu&etoapainie 
tree,anbtby  bzeaflsto  clutters  ot  grapes. 

8  3fatb,3Jttnilgoebptothepa'lme 
tree,  5  *b»U  taae  bolb  of  the  bougies 
thereof:  notb  alfo  thy  toeafts  (bail  be  as 
flutters  of  the  bme,anb  the  fmell  of  thy 
nofe,lifee  apples. 

9  anb  the  roofe  of  thy  mouth  lihe 
the  belt tbine,fojmybeloueb,tbatgoetb 
downe  tfajcetely,  taufmg  tl)e  lippes||of 
thofefhat  atcaaeepe,to  fpeafee. 

io  C  *3  am  mv  belouebs,  anb  his 
befitcistoibatbsme. 

1 1  Come,  my  beloueb ,  let  bs  goe 
forth  into  the  fielb:  letbsiooge  inttje 
btllagcs. 

\i  SLetbsgetbpeatelytotbebine' 
yarbs,letbsreciftbebmeflourifb,whe- 

Aer  the  tenbet  grape  t  appear  c,  and  the 
pomegranates  bub  forth:  there  ibillJJ 
giue  thee  my  loucs. 

13  Xbc  *  manbza&es  giue  a  fmell, 
anb  at  our  gates  are  all  maner  of  plea* 
fant  fruits,  neib  anb  olbe,  which  3f  ijaue 
laib  bp  fo?  thee,  £)  my  beloueb. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

:  The  loue  of  the  Church  to  Chrift.  6  The 
vehemencle  of  lone.  8  The  calling  of  the 
Gentiles.  14  The  Church  prayeth  for 
Chriftes  comming. 

Xhatthouwert  asmy  brt>< 
th  ct  that  fucfteb  the  brtfts 
of  my  mother ,  when  gj 
(houlb  finb  thee  ltottbout, 
3Hboulbbtffethee,yett5 
(bouibnotbcbefptfeb. 


i  5ft>oulbieabcthce,andbnngthee 
into  my  mothers  boufe,  who  rbouib  m 
ftrtict  me :  3  iboulb  caure  thee  to  bnnae 
of  *  fptteb  ibine,of  the  mice  of  my  pomc= 
granate. 

3  "i^isiefthanb  fhould  he  bnber my 
heab,  anb  his  right  hanb  (houlb  em= 
bzaceme. 

4  *  3  charge  you,  £>  baugbters  of 
3)erufaiem  ,ttbatyefttttenotbp,  no? 
aibaac  my  louebntuihe  pleafe. 

5  (*  nabo  is  this  that  commeth  bp 
from  the  rbilbcrneffcleamngbpon  her 
beloueb  0  3  rarfeb  thee  bp  bnber  the 
apple  tree:  there  thy  mother  tyougbt 
tljee  forth,  there  fbe  brought  thee  forth, 
that  bare  thee. 

6  C£>etmeeasafealebponthme 
heart,  as  a  fcale  bpon  thine  arme :  fo? 
loue  1  s  ftrong  as  bcath,icaiouGe  is  t  cruel 
as  the  grauc :  the  coaics  thereof  are 
toaies  of  fite,which  hath  a  moft  bebement 
flame. 

7  $)any  ibaters  cannot  quench 
lone,  neither  can  tftefloobs  tyottmeit: 
if  a  man  tbouio  giue  all  the  fubftance 
of  his  houfe  fo?  loue.it  Iboulb  btterly  be 
contemneb. 

8  CW  haue  a  title  fitter ,  anb  fhee 
hath  no  bjcafts :  lbhat  fball  ibe  boe  foj 
outDfler,  in  the  bay  ibbenfbe  than  bee 
fpottenfo?; 

9  3ffl)ebeaibau,ibeibillbuflbbp 
on  her  a  palate  of  filuer :  anb  if  the  bee 
aboze,  iberbUlmclofc  her  ibitb  boarbs 
of  Cebar. 

io  3Jamaibail,anbmyb2eaftsii6e 
totbers :  then  rbas  3J  in  his  eyes  as  one 
thatfounbtfauour. 

n  S)olomonhababineyarbat25aal# 
bamon,  bee  let  out  the  bineyarbbnto 
beepers :  euery  one  foj  the  fruit  tliereof 
tbas  to  bung  a  thoufanb  pieces  of  Gluev. 

ii  il0ybineyarbibhich  is  mine,  is  be- 
fore me:  tljou(fl)  Solomon)  mufthaue 
a  thoufanb,  anb  fbofe  that  feeepe  the 
fruit  thereof,  ttbo  hunbjeb. 

u  Xhouthatbtbelleamthegarbens, 
the  tompanions  hearaen  to  thy  boite: 
taufemctoheateit. 

14  €^aftehaQe,mybeioueb,anb 
bethouliUetoaJcloc,o2  to  ayong^art 
bpon  themountames  of  fpices. 


f  THE 


*Prou.9.2. 


"Chap.  1.6 


•Chap.;. 5. 
and  2.7. 
\  Htb. why 
jhaxldjee 
jiirre  vbjrr 
fvhy^c? 

"  Chap.  3.6 


\Hcb,h*rd. 


t  Heb. peace 


\Hcb.jU 
.XWAy. 


Mans  rebellion.  Chap.j.       Sacrifice  reiected, 


'Deu.ji.i. 


Mere.8.7. 


\Htb.of 


nated,  orfe- 
farated, 

crrafr  re- 
volt. 


,THE  BOOKE  OF  THE 

Prophet  Ifaiah. 


CHAP.    I. 

Ifaiahcomplaiilcthofludah  for  her  rebellion. 
5  Helarnentcthhermdgements.  ioHevp- 
braideth  their  whole  feruice.  16  He  exhor- 
ted] to  repentance.with  promilcs  and  threat- 
nines.  11  Bewailing  their  wickedncfle,  hec 
denounceth  Gods  ludgements.  15  Hee 
promiledi  gtace,  2.8  and  threatneth  de> 
(hu&ion  to  the  wicked. 

$€Uifiottof3l 
fatal)  the  fonne  of 
3(mo5,ibhich  hee 
fatbc  concerning 
3iuDah  anb  3je= 
rufaiem,  m  tl)c 
bapes  of  U^iah, 
giorham,  3iha5, 
&$c3Cftiah  tongs 
ofjubah. 

2  $earc,  £>  *  heauens,  anb  giue 
tare ,  $>  cartl) :  fo?  the  1L  ©  is  ©  hath 
fpoben  3!  haue  nourifbeb anb tyonght 
top  chflbjtn,  anb  thep  haue  tebelleb  a> 

gamftme. 

3  Xhc'orelmotbethhisotbner, 

anbthe  affehtsmafiers  crtbbe:  bm^f? 
raelboethnotfenoib ,  mppcople  boeth 
notconfiber. 

4  2b  ftmtefull  nation,  a  people  1 1& 
Den  tbith  immune,  afceDe  of  emu  Doers, 
thiltyen  tfjat  are  cozcupters :  thep  haue 
fotfaben  tt)c  %  <s>  s  © ,  the?  Dane  pjo< 
uobeo  the  Jaolppneof  Jftaelbnto  an? 
gee,  the?  are  t  gdneatbap  bacbtbarD. 

5  CiBhpuioulDpcebcuTichettanp 
mo?e;  peetbilltreuoltmoieanbmojt: 
therbhoieheaDis  uctie,  anb  the  ibholc 
heart  fatnt. 

6  from  the  fole  of  the  foote ,  euen 
bnto  the  heab,  there  is  no  founbncfTein 
it  -,  but  tbounbs,  anb  bnafes,  anb  putri- 
fpingfbjses:  thephauenotbeettecloteb, 


neither  bounb  bp ,  neither  molli&eb 
ibithllopntment. 

7  )&ourconntrep  is  *befoiate,pour 
cities  are  burnt  ibtth  fire :  pour  lanb, 
(rrangcrs  beuourc  it  tn  pour  p;cfcncc, 
anb  it  is  uefoiate  t  as  ouerthjotben  bp 
Qrangers. 

8  3nb  the  baughter  of  Zion  is  left 
asacottagctnabincparb,  asaioogein 
a  gar  ben  of  cucumbers,  as  a  befiegcb 
cine. 

9  Cjrceptthe1L©K©ofhottcshab 
*leftbntobsabcrpfmail  remnant,  Ibe 
a)oulbhauebecneas*5>Dbom,  and  me 
fboulb  haue  bene  U&e  bnto  <0ontO2tah. 

10  c^earcthelbo?bofthelL©i!{©, 
pe  rulers  of  S>oDom,  giue  earebnto  the 
ILaib  of  our  ©£>©,  pcepeoplcof  (So- 
mojrah. 

11  Xorbhatpurpofeisthemultitube 
of  pour  *  facrifiees  bnto  me,  fapth  the 
%  ©  b  ©  1 3  am  full  of  the  burnt  otfo 
rings  oframmes,  anb  the  fat  of  febbc 
bcafts,  anb  31  belightnot  mthe  bloob 
of  bullocfces ,  0?  of  lambes ,  o?  of  t  tote 
goatcs. 

11  nahen  pe  come  tot  appear  e  befoje 
mce ,  rbho  hath  recurtreb  this  at  pour 
hanb  ,to  treab  mp  courts  i 

13  25nng  no  moje  baine  obianons, 
incenfe  is  an  abomination  bnto  me :  the 
netbS9ooncs,  anb  Sabbaths,  the  cab 
lingofaffembUcs31tannotaTbapU)ithi 
it  is  ilimciuitic ,  euen  the  folemne  mee- 
ting. 

14  $JDttrnetb£Etoones,anbpourap< 
pointeb  feaOsmp  foulc  hatctb  :  thep 
are  a  trouble  bnto  me,  5  am  Kbearp  to 
bearethem. 

15  Snbtbhenpe  fpjeabfoozth  pour 
*hanDcs,  3itblll  htbc  mine  epes  from 
pouj  pea,  tbhenpee  traa&e  manp  pjap? 
ers'3l  ibtli  not  heate :  pour  hanbs  are 
full  of  *t  bloob. 

ii0mm      igCnaatb 


\\Or,,,U. 

"Chip.?.;. 
dcuc.iS. 

omrthroif  of 


*Lim.  j.ii 

rom.p.  19. 
'Gcn.»«J. 


'Prou.  ij.3 
andl  1.7. 
chip.  66.  J. 
icre.6.10. 
amos  J.2|. 

t  Hcb-greM 
btegoMi, 


\Or,gr,ef<>. 


'Prou.I. 

j8.ierc.14 

u.mic.  j.4. 

\Hrb.mtt- 

lip/j  prjytr 

•Chj.59.! 

\Hri.bl«:i' 


M< 


rcyp 


romi 


lfcd.         Ifaiah.      TheGentiles  called. 


•i.pct.3. 
■I. 

\0rrigkta 


'Ier.j.tS 

Zac.7.10. 


\Hel.accor- 
tu'ijrtopurc- 


\\Or.thtj 
thai  relume 
cjljer. 
•Iub.31.^. 
plil  i.t.SL 
S-».«t73- 

J7.&9I. 

10.  &  104 

35- 

t  Het.br  e.i- 


„_•',, 


i6  CnaafljpccmaKepouclcancput 
aibapthccuill  of  pour  Doings  from  be* 
fo;e  mine  eyes,  "ccafc  to  doc  cufll, 

17  iLwrnctoboeibcil.fecBciubgc; 
mcnt.llrtucutthcoppiteffcb,  lubgethc 
fathcrle(Te,plcab  fo?  the  ibiboti). 

is  Come  nolb  aiiD  lettos  rcafonto- 
gethcr,  faith  the  fL£>Bie>:  though 
pour  fmncsbc  asfcarict,  thep  fljall  be 
as  Vbhitc  as  fnotb,  though  thepbereb 
liUcmmfin.thepfljallbcasttJooll. 

19  3Jf  pec  be  mining  anD  obcDient, 
pec  fljallcatcthc  gooD  of  the  lanD. 

20  25utif  pec  refute  anb  rcbell ,  pec 
fljalbe  Deuour  CD  ibith  the  fn>02b:fo2  the 
mouth  of  the  IL£>i5£>  Ijaftifpofcett't. 

21  C  $oiDc  ts  rt)c  fatt!)full  cmcbc= 
come  an  harlot  t  it  ibas  full  of  mDgc^ 
ment ,  righteoufnefle  lobgeDinitjbut 
noibmurthercrs. 

22  Xhpulucc  is:  become  bjoffc,  thp 
ttnncmtrtttuthtbatcr. 

2}  %\w  pances  are  rebellious  anD 
companions  of  thecucs :  euerp  one  lo- 
uetrj  gifts  ,  anb  follotbeto  after  re- 
ibarbs :  thep  *  mbge  not  the  fathcricfle, 
neither  both  the  raufc  ofthcibiDolbc 
come  bnto  them. 

24  Xhcrefbie  ,  faith  the  JL02D, 
the  %  0  ir  jd  of  hottcs,  the  might?  one 
of 3!fracl  3h ,  3  lbtll  cafe  mcofmute 
aDucrfarics,anb  aucngc  mc  of  nunc  enci 
mtcs. 

25  C3mb  3  Ibill  tumc  mp  hanb 
bponthecanbtpurelp  purge  atbapfhp 
bjoffc.anb  take  atbap  all  thp  tmne. 

z6  3nb  3  fbill  rcftoic  thp  uibgcs  as 
at  the  firff,  anb  thp  tounfcllers  as  at  the 
beginning :  aftcrtbarb  thou  fl>alt  be  cafc 
let)  the  citie  of  righteoufnefle ,  the  faitl> 
fullcittc. 

27  Zion  (hall  be  rebecmcb  ibith 
lubgcmcnt ,  anb  |]  her  conucrts  ibith 
ttghttoufneffc. 

28  C3nDthe*tDe&cuetionofthc 
tranfgreffours  anb  of  the  tinners  ftuii 

together :  anb  thep  that  fo^asc  the 
%  0  is  p  (hall  be  coufumcD. 

29  foi  thcpfliailbc  afljameD  of  the 
olics  ibhich  v^  hauc  befireb,  anD  pec 
(haibc  confounbcD  fc»2  the  garDens  that 
pec  hauc  chofen. 

30  fat  pec  fljall  be  as  an  06c  lbhofc 
leafefabeth,  anb  asagarDcn  that  luth 
no  lbatcr. 

31  2nD  the  flrong  fljall  bcastolbc, 
ilanbthcmaftcr  of  it  as  a  fparbc ,  anb 
thep  (hail  both  burnc  together ,  anb 
none  fljall  quench  <h«n. 


CHAP.    II. 

Ifaiah  prophecieth  the  comming  of  Chrifts 
kingdome.  6  Wickedneffe  is  the  caufe 
of  Gods  torfaking.  10  Hee  exhortcth  to 
feare  ,  becaufe  ot  the  powerful!  effects  of 
GodsMaicftie. 

$?e  tbojb  that  3Jfaiah,  the 
fonne  of  3mo5,  favbc 
concerning  3Jubah  anb 
3icru(aicnt 
2  3inb  it  fljall  come  to 
paffc  m  the  *  laft  bapes,  that  the  moutv 
tainc  of  tljc  %  0  ir  jd  %  houfc  (hall  be 
||  eflabltfljeb  m  the  top  of  the  monn^ 
tames ,  anD  fljall  be  craitcb  abouc  the 
hilles  anb  all  nations  (hall  flolD  ton* 
to  it 

3  3nDmanp  people  fljall  goc?fap  \ 
Come  pee  anD  let  bs  go  bp  to  the  moun< 
taine  of  the  %0\s.js> ,  to  the  honfeof 
the^obofjacob,  anb  he  rbill  teach  bs 
ofhisibapes,  anbibctbillibailtcinhis 
pathcs:fo;  out  of  Zion  fljall  gocfoitth 
thciaibc,anbthcrbo2bofthc  ft  ok© 
from^crufaicm. 

4  3lnD  hce  fljall  mbgc  among  the 
nations,anb  fljall  rebnuemanp  people 
anb  thep  fljall  beatc  their  fmo2bs  into 
ploib  fljares,  anb  their  fpearcs  into 
llpzunmg  hoones :  nation  fljall  not  lift 
bp  froojb  againft  nation,  neither  fljall 
tljcp  learnc  tbar  r  e  anp  mo2e. 

5  ©  honfc of^acob,  comepec,  anD 
let  bs  ttialftc  tn  the  light  of  the  JL©iss». 

6  CXhccefoic  thou  ha&  fojfafecn 
thp  people  the  houfc  of  3Jacob ;  becaufc 
thep  be  rcplenifljcb  ||  from  the  eaft,  anb 
arefoothfapcrsliKcthciDhiUflines,anD 
thep Uplcafc  thcnu"clues  in  the  chilD;en 
offtrangers. 

7  Xhcir  lanD  alfo  is  full  of  flluet 
anDgoID,neither  is  there  anp  cnD  of  their 
trcafures:  their  lanb  isaifo  fullofho^ 
fes !  neither  is  there  anp  cnD  of  their  cha* 
rets. 

8  Hheir  lanD  alfo  is  full  of  ibolcs ; 
thep  ibonljip  the  XbojKeof  their  olbnc 
hanbs,  that  tbljul;  their  olbnc  fingers 
haucmabc. 

6  ^nb  the  meanc  man  boibcth 
Dottmc,  anD  the  great  man  humblcth 
himfclfc  tl)crcfo2cfo2giucthcmnot. 

io  Center  into  the  rotue,  anbljibc 
thec  in  flic  Dtifl,  foj  fcarc  of  the  !L©is£>, 
anD  foj  the  glo2p  of  his  ^aicflic. 

1 1  Xhc  * lofticiooftcsof manfljaibc 
humblcb  ,anb  the  haunncs  of  men  fljai- 
bcbolbcbboibnc:  anb  the  %0K&  a- 
lone 


'Mic.4.1. 
&c 

\\Or,freptt- 
redm 


\OrJjthet. 


\\Or  ,mffr 

thea  the 

T.4. 

WOr^wd 
»uh  the 
ebiltlrcn.e*-c 


Oil 


FS- 


Pride  th  reamed.  Cha 


p.uj. 


Of  oppreflion. 


Hurts  vfde* 
[fir*. 


II  Or, the 

<doifiJh*U 
vtterlyfajfe 

Hot  10.3. 
loleij.  30. 
reuel.tf.id. 

and  9.^. 

\Heb-.tbe 

dmil. 

fHthrjhe 

tdebofhu 

I  Orjvhtch 

thejmade 
ferbtm. 


\HetrxA 

mtnemmtni 
in  remote- 


tone  (haibc  cjcaiteb  m  that  bap. 

iz  jfo?  tt)c  bay  of  the  %®  a  ©  of 
hoftcs  ftiaii  bee  upon  euerp  oue  that  is 
p?oub  anblofnc ,  anb  bpon  euerp  otic 
thatis  Uftcbbp ,  anbhelhaibcbJoughr 
loll) 

13  anbbponailthcCebarsoflLcs 
banon ,  that  arehtgh  anb  Itftcb  bp.anb 
bpon  an  the  oacs  of  asafban, 

14.  anb  bpon  all  t\)c  Dig!)  moim- 
tames,  anb  bpon  ail  rhchiilcs  that  are 
liftcbbp, 

15  2Mb  bpon  euerp  high  tolber,  anb 
bpon  euerp  fentcb  ibau, 

i6  anb  bpon  ail  the  fbips  of  Xac- 
(htfl),  anb  bpon  all  tpieafant  pictures. 

17  anb  the  loftincfle  of  man  (ball  be 
botbeb  boibnc ,  anb  ttje  hauttnefle  of 
men  Ibaibe  mabe  lotb :  anb  the  ILsdib© 
alone  fljaibe  cjcaiteb  m  that  oap. 

is  »nb  ||  the  tboles  Dec  thailbttcrlp 
aboltfl). 

19  anbthcpfyallgocintothe'hcrtes 
of  ttje  roctts,  anb  into  tbccaucsof  the 
t  earth  fo?  ftare  of  the  %  £>  b  ©,  anb  fo? 
tbeglo?pofhts$)aicftie  s  rbbeubeeart 
firth  to  (baac  tcr  nblp  tt)e  carrt). 

10  3Jnthatbapamanfl)aiicaftthts 
(boles  of  filuer,  anb  htsibolcsofgolbe 
IJibbich  thep  mabCdchone  fo?  himfelfc 
to  ibo:Qiip ,  to  the  monies  anb  to  the 
battes 

x\  Xo  go  into  thetlcrts  of  the  rotas, 
anb  into  tbetopsoftbctaggcbrocRcs, 
fo?feace  of  the  %  €> «  ©,anb  fo?  the  glo= 
rtcofhts£0aicftte,  tbhcnljccanfetftto 
ujaftctetrtblp  the  earth. 

ix  Ceafepcfrommanrbhofcb?eath 
isin  insnoftrcls  :fo:  lbbcrrm  is  Dec  to 
bcaccountebof* 

CHAP.   III. 

1  The  great  confufion  which  commethby 
finne.  9  The  impudencie  of  the  people. 
12.    The  oppi  eifion  jnd  couetoufnciTe  of  die 

rulers. 

for  the  pride  of  the  women. 

©?bebolb,tbe!lo?b,the 
ILsdis©  of  hoftcs  boctb 
tafcc  aibap  from  ^erufa- 
lcm,ano  from  38»baf),  the 
(lap  anb  the  flaffe ,  the 

tbboie  (tap  of  b?eab,  anb  the  lbbole  ftap 

oflbater, 
i  30je  might?  man,  anb  the  man  of 

rbarre;  the  Jubge  anb  the  #?opbet, 

anb  the  p?ubent,  anb  the  ancient, 
j  1Ehetaptaincofnftte,anbtbctho< 


16  The  Judgements  which  (hall  be 


oflptech. 

"Ecdes.io 
16. 


\Hebr.Uft 

\HtbrMr. 
derzp.t 


nontableman,  anbtbccomriciier,  anb 
the  tunning  artificer,  anb  the  |l  eloquent 
ojatour. 

4  anb  3  fttll  giuc*  cbilb?cnto  bee 
their  Ounces,  anb  babes  n?aii  rule  ouer 
them. 

5  anb  the  people  (bail  be  opp?efleb, 
euerp  one  by  another ,  anb  euerp  one  bp 
his  neighbour:  the  cbflbetbaiibebauc 
himfelfc  p?oublp  agamft  the  anncnt, 
anb  the  baft  agamft  the  honourable. 

6  ©hen  a  man  Ibau  tabc  hoio  of 
his  toother  of  the  houfeof  his  father, 
uymg ,  Xbou  haft  clothing,  be  thou  our 
ruler,  anb  let  this  nunc  bee  bnber  tbp 
hanb: 

7  Unthatbaptftjaiiheunearcfa^ 
tng,  3J  lbill  not  be  an  t  healer :  fo?  in  mj> 
home  >s  neither  b?cao  no?  clothing: 
mafte  me  not  a  ruler  of  the  people. 

8  ifo?  3(crulalcm  tsrumcb  ,t3Ju 
bahtsfailen  :becaufc  their  tongue  anb 
their  boings »«  agamft  the  %  €>is  j?, 
to  p?ouoftc  the  v?is  of  his  glo?ie. 

9  €Xhe(hcU)oftheircountcnancc 
boeth  ibitneffe  agamft  them ,  anb  thev 
beclare  their  0imc  as  *  5>obom ,  thep 
hibc  it  not :  Iboc  bnto  their  foulcfo? 
the?  hauc  rctbarbeb  euili  bnto  them^ 
Crtucs. 

10  «S>ap  pec  to  the  righteous ,  that  it 
(hall  be  ibcll  with  him :  fo?  they  thall  eatc 
the  fruit  of  their  boings. 

11  i©oe  bnto  the  ibicneb,  icflialibetll 
withhim  =  fo?  the  rclbarb  of  his  hanbes 
ftjaibctgiuenhim. 

ix  cas  fo?  mp  people,  thilb?cnare 
their  opp?eflours,  anb  Tbomcn  ruleo^ 
nerthem :  jDmp  people,  ||thtj>lbhtcl)|ii^'*7 
leab  thee,  eaufc  thee  to  erre,anb  t  beftrop  tll\T.U 


*Gcn.n. 
1  ;.and  18. 

11.  and  1?. 


\Hitr.Jme 


the  lbap  of  rhp  paths. 

ij  1the  2,  ©  a  ©  ftanbeth  t>P  to 
plcab,anbftanbeth  to  lubgc  the  people. 

14.  %\)i  %  ©  k  ©  Ibill  enter  into 
iubgement  tblth  the  ancients  ofhts  pco- 
plcanb  thei&?mccs  thereof:  fo?pchaue 
II  eaten  bp  the  Utncparb;  the  fpoile  of 
ti)cpoo?c  is  m  pour  homes. 

15  lehatmeancpcethat  ftt  beat  nip 
people  to  pieces,  anb  grinbe  the  faces  of 
the  poo?c ,  faith  the  |Lo?o  <5  o©  of 
hofts* 

i6  C33o?couertt)e1l0H©(aith: 
23ccaiu*e  the  baughtcrs  of  ziou  arc 
haune,  anbibaibcibith  ftrctclieb  fo?th 
necfes,anb  t  rbanton  epes,tbaltmig  anb 
||  minting  as  thep  goc ,  anb  making  a 
tmftclmg  ibith  then  feet : 

17  -3Ehctfto?c  the  ?Lo?b  VbiU  finite 
ftnm  i         ibith 


\Hcbrfwal- 
iatrvp. 


\Oribtfm:. 


\HthrJr- 

letting   with 
tl'eirfif. 


Women  s  pride. 


Ifaiah. 


God 


s  vineyar 


i 


\10r.„cr- 

\\0r.fwect- 
baitct, 

\\Ory  fwt 
ole<a  orna- 
ments. 

\H?b.hottfes 
of  the  font*. 


fHeb.mt^ht 


\\Orsm?U 
ti:htbr. 

cUdnfeJ. 


\HelUtth 
"itt  he  ai- 
led vasn  i . . 
\\Or,t.il-j 

tUoHATXAJ. 

tj  and  %l°r}- 
t  Hcb.for 
theffc.tptn* 

of  IJraet, 


\Or,ltlift. 


With  a  fcab  the  ccottme  of  the  hcao  of 
the  baughtcrs  of  zion,anb  the2,£>BjD 
Will  tuttJcoucctfjeic  fectct  parts. 

is  3Jn  that  Dap  the  H020  Hull  tafcc 
away  the  tyauery  of  their  tuufelmg  up 

namttltS  -'bout  their  feete  ,  anb   their 

II  taulcs ,  anb  their  rounb  tpjes  libc  the 
s$oonc. 

19  %\)t  || chatties , anb  the  bracelets, 
anb  the  1 1  mufflers, 

10  Xhcbonncts,anb  the  ornaments 
of  thclcggcs,  anbthchcabbaiiDs.  anb 
the  t  tablets,  anb  the  carcrttigs, 

ii  Xhc  rings,  anb  nofe-ieWels, 

22  %X\z  changeable  futes  of  appa 
rcll.anb  the  mantles,  anb  the  Wimples, 
anb  the  cttfpmgpinncs, 

25  %\)c  giaffcs,  anb  the  fine  lumen, 
anb  thcboobs,anDthcbailcs. 

14  anb  it  (hall  come  to  pafle,  that  m 
ftcaoe  of  fmcctc  fmell,  there  (ball  bee 
ttitiRe ,  anb  in  ftcab  of  a  gtrble ,  a  rent 
anbm  fttab  ofWcllfcthaicc,baibnc(re 
anu  in  ftcab  of  a  ftomacber ,  a  girbmg 
of  facbccloth ;  and  burning ,  in  ftcab  of 
beautie. 

25  Xhy  men  (ball  fall  by  the  ftnow, 
ano  thy  t  mightic  in  the  warre. 

26  ano  her  gates  (hall lament  ano 
mouruc  i  anb  (he  being  ||befolatc,  (hall 
utbpontbegcounD. 

CHAP.    HIT. 

In  the  cxtremiiie  of  cuils,  Chrises  kingdome 
fhall  be  a  Samfhiarie, 

^/\f^  ^Din  tl)iU  M?  fcucn  No* 
'f||&\gtj  men  fl'aU  ta{JC  bQVi  °f  one 
^^\^,  man,  faying,  m  Will  catc 
our  oWnc bjcao ,  *  Wcarc 
S  our  oWnc  apparcll :  oncly 
t  let  *>s  be  calico  by  thy  name,  j|  to  tafte  a* 
wayourrepioch. 

1   3Jn  that  Day  (hall  the  25;aueh  of 
the  IL®  is  id  be  t  bcautifull  ano  glon 
ous,  ano  the  fruit  of  the  earth  fhalbe  cr 
cellcnt  anb  comely  t  fo?  tljem  that  arc 
cfcapctj  of  Ufracl. 

j  ant)  it  (hall  come  to  pafle,  that  hee 
thatislcftmzion, anb  hce  that  remain 
ticthin3Jcrufalmi,Q)aiibccaiico^oly, 
euen  cucry  one  that  is  wnttcn  ||  among 
the  lining  ingjcrufaicm, 

+  naben  the  %w  (ban  hauc  wa 
(hebawap  the  filth  of  the  baughtcrs  of 
zion,  anb  (hall  hauc  purgrt)  the  bloob 
of  Jerufaiem  from  the  uubbeft  thereof, 
bv  the  fpirit  of  mbgement,  anb  by  the 
(pint  of  burning. 


5  3ud  tlje  XL  0  is  e>  null  create  Dp 
on  cutty  blbcllmg  plate  of  mount  zi- 
on ,  anb  bpon  her  aftemblics  a  *  cloube, 
anb  fmobe  by  bay,  anb  the  (hmmg  of  a 
flaming  fire  by  night  ;fo?  1 1  bpon  all  the 
gloip  ihaiibet  abefence. 

6  anb  there  (baibe  a  tabernacle  fo: 
a  (haboW  in  the  bay  tune  from  the  heat, 
anb  fo:  a  place  of  refuge,  anb  to;  a  co 
uert  from  ftomie  anb  from  ram  t. 

CHAP.    V. 

i  Vnderthe  ParablcofaVineyard  .Godexcu- 
feth  his  fcucie  Judgement.  8  His  judge- 
ments vpou  couetoufncfTe ,  11  Vponlafci- 
uioufnefle,  ij  Vpon  impictie,  10  and 
vpon  iniiiltice.  16  Tlie  executioners  ol 
God>  Judgements. 

jMF  €>lb  Ibfll  J  ling  to  my 
tavX-^  ?  ^belbclouco ,  a  fongofmy 
^^xl  ibclouebtourtjinghisbm^ 
"^^lyarb  :  my  ibellbeloueb 
&&&tu  hath  a  *  buieyarb  m  a  t  be* 
vg  fruufull  hill. 

2  anb  Ijce  1 1  feneeb  it ,  anb  gather  cb 
out  the  Qoncs  thereof,  anb  piantcb  it 
lbith  tl)c  choitcft  bine, anb  built  a  toVbjtc 
m  the  nubbeft  of  it,  anb  aifot  mabe  a 
rbinepzeflc  therein:  anb  he  looheb  that 
it  flionib  biing  fooith  grapes,  anb  it 
brought  fooith  Wilbe  grapes. 

j  anb  no*b,  £)  inhabitants  of  31c 
rufalem,  anb  men  of  9ubah,  Jfubge, 
31  pjayyou,  betlbirt  me  anb  nip  (Bine* 
yarb. 

4  tt?hat  toulb  hauc  bcette  bone 
mo;c  to  my  llmcyarb,  that 3  haucnot 
bone  in  it?  rbherefoJe  ibhcn  3  loobcb 
that  it  (houib  bnng  foo?th  grapes, 
brought  it  fooithibilbcgrapcsi 

<  anbnolb  goe  to ;  J>  Vbill  tell  you 
what  3  Will  boe  to  my  tumcyaro ,  gj 
Will  tabe  away  tljchebge  thereof,  anb 
it  thall  be  eaten  bp  ■,  and  bicabe  bowne 
the  wall  thereof,  anb  it  (hall  be  ttro- 
benboWne. 

6  anb  3  Will  lay  it  Waftc ,  it  (hall 
not  be  pnntcb,  no*  biggeb,  but  there 
ftjaii  come  bp  bjiars  anb  thontcs :  3 
wuiaiCo  commanb  the  tloubes,that 
they  raine  no  rainebpon  it. 

7  iFo:  the  Slmcyarb  of  the  3L©is© 
of  holies  is  thehoufcof  3Jfracl,anbthc 
men  of  3Jubal)  t  htspleafant  plant : anb 
he  looheb  foz  mbgement ,  but  bcholbc 
r  oppjeffion ;  fozrigljtcoiifneflc,  but  be 
Iiolo  a  trie. 

s  It  moc  bnto  tljem  that  ioyne 
*  boufe 


it. 

\\Ory*eow, 
\  Heb.ACt 


'Uic.l.li. 
mat.  ii, jj. 
mirk,  i  2.1. 
lukc  30.9. 
\tieb.th: 
borne  of  the 
fonneof oyl.\ 
\\0rfn*le 
a  wall  a- 
bout  it. 
|  Heb.  hce- 


f  Het.forj 
tre*dwg. 


\Web.fUnt 
of  his  pie  a- 
furu 

\Heb.*fc*b. 


CouetoufneiTe  and     Chap.vj.     not  are  threatened. 


*boufe  to  boufctbat  lap  ficio  to  nelb,Ml 
there  b-  no  placctbat  tbcp  map  be  piaccb 
alone  m  the  mibtt  of  tbc  cant). 

9  llJInmineeaKSfaidtbefLoia© 
of  bottcs,t£)f  a  mtrtb  manp  boufes 
(bail  be  ocfoiate ,  cuen  great  anb  faite 
ttntbout  inhabitant. 

io  jaea  ten  acres  of  toincpato  (bail 
pceloone2Satb,anotbcreeo  of  an  J?o* 
mer  (ball  peeio  an  epbab. 

ii  C  naoe  onto  tljem  ttjat  rife  Op 
carelpmtbemomtng,tiuttbepmapfol« 
loiofttong*OntiB,  tljat  continue  Dimil 
mgbt,  t>n  xuine  ||  enflamc  tbem. 

ii  3ln0  tbebarpe  anotbeotolc,  n)e 
tatact  ano  pipe,  ano  tbinc  are  in  tfjctr 
feafts :  but  tbcp  rcgato  not  tbettwbe 
of  tbc  HfiDK©,  nntbcrconfioertbeo* 
perationofbtsbanos. 

13  CXbcrefiwe  mp  people  arc  gone 
into  captiuitte ,  Oceautc  thev  haue  no 
unorblcoge :  ano  t  tbeir  bonourabie 
men  arefanufbeo,  auo  tbeir  multituoe 
oncoopMtbtblcfl. 

14  Xbercfiwe  bell  barb  eniargco  bee 
felfc,  anb  openeb  bet  nioutb  Vbitbout 
meafnre:  anb  tbeir  glozp,  anb  tbeir 
multimoc,  anbtbeic  pompe,  ano  bee 
tbat  rciopectb,  (baliocfceno  into  it. 

15  3inD  *  n)e  nicane  man  (ball  bee 
foougbtooione,  anb  tl)e  migbtieman 
(bail  be  bumblcD,  ano  tbc  eves  of  tbc 
lofttcfballbcbumblcb. 

i6  2ButtbeiL©is©ofbo(tsfl)albe 
cralteb  in  uibgcmcnt,  ano  1 1  ©00  tbat  is 
bolp,  (ball  bee  fanenfieo  m  ngbteoufc 
ncflc. 

17  Xbcntballtbciambesfcco  after 
tbeir  maner,ano  tbc  loattc  places  of  tbe 
fat  ones  (bail  fttangers  eate. 

18  naoc  onto  tbem  tbat  ozatb  imam 
tic  tbitb  cotf>s  of  oanitie,  anofinnc,  as 
ittbeteibltbacartropc: 

19  Xbatfap,  %tt  bim  malic  fpeeoe, 
and  batten  bis  tbojae,  tbat  tt)c  map  fee 
it :  ano  let  tbc  counfcll  of  tbe  bolp  one  of 
gifcacl  Djato  mgb  ano  come,  tbat  rocc 
maplmolb'c. 

zo  cnaocbntotbcmttbatcailcufli 
gooo,  ano  gooo  euill,that  put  oarttencs 
foiiugbtano  ligbtfoz  oarfecneffe,  tbat 
put  bitter  fo:  fcucctc ,  ano  ftoeete  foz 
bitter.  , 

II  VBOt  vnto  tbem  that  are*  tblfc  in  tllCir 

oione  epes ,  ano  pmbent  t  m  tbeit  otbnc 
fisbt. 

22   I0OC  vnto  them  that  are  nltgUtlC  tO 

oiintte  ttnne,  ano  men  of  flrengtb  to 
mingle  ftrongonnbe- 


'Mich.:.  2. 


||  Or,  [his  is 
utmwe  cures 
(ikhtbe 
LOKD, 

\HcUfmt, 


*Prou.2?. 

'9,  i°- 

UOr^fHrfitf 
them. 


^Het. their 
elm  jure 
men  offa~ 
mine. 


*  16.2.9. 
11.17. 


\\Or,thehc- 
liqa.Heb. 
The  Cud  the 
hot}. 


\Heb.that 

fay  cencer- 
mn^eutll,  It 
isgoody  Q-c. 


*Prou.:,7. 
rom.i  2.  16 
\  HeUe- 
fore  their 
fuce. 


23  iBbicb'uiftinctbettncfcebfozrc: 
ioaco,ano  taut  aibap  tbe  ngbteoumes 
of  tbcrtgbtcotisfrombim. 

24  Xbcrfozeas  tbe  t  fire  oeuourcuj 
tbc  ftubblc,and  tljc  flame  confumctt;  tbe 
cbaffcfo  tbctr  root  (ball  berottcnues, 
ano  tbeir  bloflbmc  (ball  goe  Op  as  butt : 
becaufc  tbcf  bauc  cattaioaptbc3Un>c 
of  tbc  ?L©«©ofboQs,anoocfptlco 
t\)t  Vooibt  of  tbe  $olp  iDne  of  Ufcacl. 

25  Xbecefojc  is  tbe  anger  of  tbe 
Ham©  HmOlcO  agatnft  bis  people, 
ano  be  batb  ttrctcljcofooub  bisbanoe 
agamtt  tbem,  ano  barb  fmtttentbcm: 
ano  tbe  btUcs  Dib  tremble,  anb  tbctr 
carbcifcs  voerc  ||  towtn  tbe  mioft  of  rtjc 
ftrects :  *fo?  all  trjis,  Ijis  anger  isnot 
turneo  atbap,  but  bis  bano  (s  ftr  etcbeb 
out  (MX 

26  C^no  be  ttnll  itftbp  an  etifignc 
to  tbenationsfromfarre.anotbilbuTc 
Onto  tbem  from  tbc  eno  of  tbc  eartb : 
ano  brtjolb,  tbc?  (ball  come  ttJitbfpccO 
fraiftlp. 

17  /i5onc(baibclbearv,no2ftumblc 
amongtt  tbem:  none  (ball  aumbernoj 
dcepc,  neither  (ball  ti)e  girbie  of  their 
lo  vnes  be  loofco  .no*  tbc  latrhct  of  tberr 
(boocsbebzoBcn. 

28  i©bo(carro«)CS  are  ttjarpc,  ano 
all  their  bolbes  bcu t,tbctr  bo;fcs  bcofe 
(ball  bee  couutcO  uttc  flint,  anb  their 
lObetles  Ubc  a  tbbitletbmo. 

29  Xbeir  roanng  fhaibe  ubc  a  \yo% 
titty  (ball  roarc  lifee  pong  Uons :  pea 
rbepfbairoareanoiapbolb  oftbepw, 
anb  (ball  carte  «  atbapfafe,  anb  none 
(baiioeiiuerit. 

30  ^nOintbatDaptbei'lbaUtoare 
agamtt  tbem.libc  tbetoanngoftbe 
fea :  anb  tf  onC  ioobc  bnto  tbc  lano ,  bc^ 
bolODarHeneffcand  ||fo«ott),  llano  tbc 
Itgbt  is  oarncneo  in  tbc  beauens  tberof. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  Ifaiah  in  a  vifion  ot  the  Lord  in  his  glory, 
5  being  terrified,  is  confirmed  for  hisMef- 
fage.  9  He  fheweth  the  obftiiiacie  of  the 
people,  vnto  their  defolation.  l)  A  remnant 
fhall  bee  faued. 

'^XSit  /!5  tbc  pecre  tbat  Bmg 

f**^»  Cl55iaboieo,'5  "(aioaifo 

tbe  fLojo  fitting  upon  a 


sS§  tbzone ,  bigb  ano  lifteO 
£M  op,  ano  bts  II  trautcbilco 
tbc  Xcmpic. 

2  ^bouc  it  ttooo  tbe  £>ecapbuus : 

cacb  one  had  fire  ttnngs,TOttb  flOamc  be 

if®  m  m  3      coucreo 


'Pron.17. 

■5- 


tHeh.tbe 
timftteof 
fire. 


||0r^> 

doweg. 
*Cha  9.  u 

i( .  n.irid 
10.  e\. 


\\Or,Ji. 

\\Or,when 
ttuh^httt 
fait  e  darks 
intbedt- 
fhuShons 
hereof. 


Mohn  ii. 
1 9,4°  .4*  ■ 

\\Or,tU 
kyrtt  there* 


44 


Vncleanelips. 


Ifaiah.   Chrid  promifed,and 


t  Heb  thit 

cried  to  thit 


t  Heb.  hu 
glory  is  the 
fulneffe  of 

the  whole 

earth. 

t  Heb.  thre. 
fholdt. 

|  Heb.  cut 


^  Heb  and  m 
hu  hand  a. 
litic  coale. 


t  Hebxau- 
fcd  it  to 
touch. 


"Gcn.i. 

t  Heb.  be- 
ho/dm.: 

"Matih.i  j. 
I4.mar.4- 

I2.1UC.8. 
loh.  1  1. 

40.3a.  28. 

26.roi».i  1. 

I  Or,  with- 
out ceafwf, 
&c  ■  Heb. 
heareyee  in 
hearing,^  c. 


f  Heb.  defo- 
latewithde- 
foLuion. 


\  \  Or, when  it 
is  returned 
•n  1 '  .1  ■■  bin 
broufed. 
\\Or,/!,ckf, 
orjlemmc. 


!  coucreb  his  face,  anb  with  titoauie  hee 
coucreb  his  feetc,  auto  lbithtibamchee 

blbfllC. 

3  3inb  t  one  crycb  bnto  another, 
anb  fayb  *  i?oly,  holy  ,  holy,  '5  the 
Iokd  ofhoftcs,  t  the  lbhole  earth  ^ 
full  of  tits  gtoiv. 

4  3tnto  the  pofts  of  the  t  t)oo:c  mo^ 
ucbatthcboyccofhunrhat  crycb,  anb 
the  honfr  lbas  fillcD  ibtth  fmokc. 

5  irXhcnfayblf  tt)ocismc.fo:3J 
am  t  bnbonc,  becaufc  gj  am  a  man  of  ton 
cicancltppcs,  ano  J  bitocllintbcintbrt 
of  a  people  of  tonelcanclippes:fo2  mine 
eyeshauc  fccncthc lung ,  the  JIsdep 
ofhoflrs. 

6  Xhcnflelb  one  of  the  Scraphims 
bnto  mcc ,  thautng  a  Hue  cole  tn  his 
hanb ,  which  hec  hab  taken  rmth  the 
tongs  from  off  the  altar. 

7  ^nDtrjclaiDc  it  upon  mv mourn, 
anbfayb ,  Hoc,  tins  hath  tourhcD  thy 
Uppcs  ,  ano  thine  imqumc  is  tattcn  a 
itoay  ,aub  tliv  finne  purgeb. 

8  3Ufo  j  bcacb  tlic  boyec  of  tlic 
ILozb, faying  nahom  (ball  j>  fenb,anb 
ltolio  ltoill  goc  for  bs?  Xbcn  Jfaioe 
t$?ccrcam'3j,fcnbmc. 

9  C  3no  be  fayb ,  (Soc  ant)  tell  tins 
people  * tycarc pee  II mbecbebut  buber 
ftanb  not :  anD  fee  yccmbcco,  but  per 
cciuc  not. 

10  tBakc  the  heart  oftbts  people  fat, 
ano  make  time  cares  hcauy ,  anb  (but 
their  c^es  tielltbcy  fee  Until  tbeir  eves, 
anD  bearc  llntl)  tlmr  cares,anb  bnber 
ftanb  ltottli  their  tjcart,  ano  conucrtaub 
bcbcaicb. 

11  Xhcn  fayb  J  iLoib ,  boito  long- 
Smbnccanfiocrcb,  tlntiiitbc  cinesbc 
lbaftcb  ltottbout  inhabitant,  anbrhc 
houfes  Without  man ,  anb  tbciaubbc 
tottcrlyt&cfolate, 

u  3!nb  tlic  %  o  is  id  Dane  remoucb 
men  farre  aibay,,  anb  there  he  a  great 
fo2faktngmtl)cmibitoftI)clanb. 

13  C^Sutretm  it fti-iibeatcnti),Hanb 
it  (ball  rcturnc ,  anb  (ball  be  eaten :  as  a 
Xcylc  trcc,anbasan£>kc  itol)ofc!|fub 
(lance  >  in  tlicm ,  when  they  caft  their 

leaues;  fo  tl)C  Holy  fCCbC  (hail  be  tljC  fub= 

fiance  thereof. 

CHAP.    VI  I. 

1    Ahaz,beit)g  troubled  with  feare  ofRezin  and 

Pekahjis  comforted  by  Ifaiah.  10  Ahaz  ha- 

uin"  liberty  to  choofe  a  flgnf,  andrctufiii^it, 

hath  for  a  licnc ,  Clirift  promilcd.  17  His 

••■innit  is  prophecied  10  come  by  Aflyria. 


f^PA*?^  i^b  it  came  topaffc  mtt)e 
%^  A\^  Dl^cs  of  *  %lW  ttic  fonne 


§•  of  Jotliam,  tlic  fonne  of 
'(WySa^  U33tal)  kuig  of  Jubal), 
r  ^J^cssi  that  Kc3in  tnc  king  of  S>v- 
na,anbpckal),  tlic  fonne  of  »cmaiial) 
king  of  Jifracl ,  ltocnt  bp  toitoarbs  "Jc 
rufaicm  to  ltoarrc  agaiuftu ,  buttoulb 
notpmtaticagatnltit. 

2  ^nb  it  ltoas  tolb  tlic  lioufe  of  2>a- 
uib,  faping  5>>>2ia is  t  confcbcratc  lbitfj 
«pmaim:anb  his  heart  lbas  moucb, 
anbtlie  heart  of  his  people  as  the  trees 
of  the  lboob  are  mooucb  lbitl)  ttje 
ltomb. 

3  Then  fapb  the  %  ©  in  ©  bnto 
Jfaiah  <5oc fouh  noito  to  mcctcaiw, 
tliou,?t^)i)car-iaQ)ubthvfonnc,atthe 
cub  of  tlic  *  commit  of  thebppcrpoole 
I m  the  high  ibav  of  thcfuilers  ficlb 


"  Mcings, 
ifi.,. 


f  mri- 

jtelh  on  E- 
pbrAtm. 


f  Thai  itjthe 
remnant  fijl 
rrtitrne. 
\\Or>  caufc 


4  3lnb  fay  bnto  hmi ,  Xakc  heebe  \  "J- 


anb  be  quiet: feare  not,t  nnthcr  be 
faint  hcartcb  fouhctibo  taiiesofthefe 
fmokmg  firebjanbs,  fo;  riie  fierce  anger 
of£lc3inmith  &yxn,  anb  of  the  fonne 
ofjRemakah. 

5  23eeaufe5>vna,€ph2aim,  anb  the 
fonne  of  ftcmaiiah  haue  taken  etull 
connfciiagamathecfaviiig ; 

6  fLct  bs  goc  bp  agamft  ^ubah 
anb!  bcrett,  anb  let  bs  make  ab;cach 
therein  fo2bs,anbfct  a  tang  in  tljc  mibft 
of  it,  cuen  the  fonne  of  Xabeal. 

7  Xhus  faith  the  %m  o  o  id  , 
3t  fliaunot  ftanb,  nnthcr  (hail  it  come 
topalTc. 

8  foi  the  heat)  of  £>yjia  is  ©amat 
rasanb  the  hcab  of  Damafcus  is  ISnui 
anb  lbithm  th2ccfco:c  anb  fiuc  yccrcs 
fliaii  Cphjaun  be  broken,  t  that  it  be  not 
a  people. 

9  ^nb  the  hcab  of  ephiaim  is  s»a 
maria,  anb  the  hcab  of  Samaria  is3Se= 
maiiahs  fonne  :||tfvecibillnotbclceuc, 
furelp  vec  fliaii  not  be  caablittieD. 

10  CtfiPojcoucrthc&oisjDfpakc 
agamr  bnto  ^lja3  faying . 

n  ^fkcthecafigneofthe  ILoisiD 
thy  Gob ;  1 1  afkc  it  cither  in  the  bepth ,  02 
mthchnght  about. 

u  2Sut  3lha5  fayb,  31  ibill  not  afkc, 
neither  ltoill^  tnnpt  the  %  o is  id. 

13  3nb  he  fayb  ticarc  yee  nolb .  £> 
houfc  of  Dauibj  1.  itafmau  tbmg  fo: 
voutoitocancmen,  butlbill  ycc ibcarie 
mycPobaifo; 

14  Xherefoze  the  lLojb  hunfelfe  fliai 
gnicyouafignc:  *25eholb,  aSilirgmc 
(hall  concciue  anb  bearc  a  Sonne , anb 
I ;  (ban 


18.17. 

\Heb.htnat 
thfhtaribe 
lender. 


\  Or,  waken. 


\Heb.frx 
1  oeop/e. 


I J  Or,  doe  yee 
not  betetue : 
it  is  becAufe 
yee  are  ntt 
liable. 
f  Heb.  and 
the  Lord  ad. 
ded  tofpeai^. 
\\Or,m»ke 
thy  petit  ton 


Matn.r. 


ca 


lied  I 


mmanue 


E       Ch: 


||  Ori:bou> 

6  Virgin, 
fialt  all. 


!  Or, com- 
tree  j. 

•».King. 
i?.3J. 


1  Heh.in 
themidslof 
the  I  And, 


1 1 1  fljall  can  his  name  Emmanuel. 

15  asuttec ano hony  fljall he eat,tl)at 
hec  may  tmotb  to  rtfufe  the  mill ,  auD 
thoofethcgooD. 

i6  fozbefozetftecfKlDefljaUHnoib 
torefiifc  the  ciull  anD  thoofethcgooD, 
the  lanD  tfjat  tftou  abhozr  eft,  fljaibc  fo^ 
fahcn  of  botl)  her  fetngs. 

17  C^Ehc  ?L  01s©  fljall  bzmgbpou 
tl)cc  ano  upon  thy  peoplcano  bpon  thy 
fathers  l)oufc ,  Daycs  that  hauc  not 
tome ,  from  the  Day  that  ephzatm  DC 
partco  from  3>uDat);  men  thc-Bmgof 
afffrta. 

13  3lnD  it  fljall  tome  to  paffc  in  that 
Day,  thattl)e1t€>iaB  fljaiihiffcfozthc 
flie,  that  k  m  the  bttcrmoft  part  of  the 
tiuers  of  €gypt,  anD  fo?  the  zsce  that  is 
intheianDof3ffyzta. 

19  3mo  they  (hail  comcanD  fljall  reft 
ailofrhcmmtheDcfolatc  baileys,  ano 
in  the  holes  of  the  rot&cs,  ano  topon  all 
thoznes,anD  bponail  |  bufljes. 

20  3Jn  the  fame  Day  fljall  the  !LozD 
flianc  ibith  a  *tafoi  that  ts  hir  tti,namci 
ly  by  them  bcyonrj  the rtuer  ,bp  the  Sing 
of  Slffyzia,  the  hcati,  ano  the  haire  of  the 
feet :  anD  it  fljai  alfo  tonfume  the  bcarD. 

ii  ^nD  it  fljall  tome  to  paffc  m  that 
Day,that  a  man  fljal  nourill)  a  y  ong  toU) 
anDttbofljccpc. 

11  3lnD  it  fljall  tome  to  paffc,  foz  the 
abimDantc  of  milttc  that  they  fljall  giue, 
he  fljal  catc  butter :  foz  butter  anD  hony 
fljall  eucry  one  catc ,that  is  left  tut  the 
lanD. 

ij  3taD  it  fljall  tome  to  paffc  in  that 
Day,thatcucry  place  fljaibc,  Where  there 
Vbcrc  a  thoufattD  tHincs  at  athoufanD 
filucrlings,it  fljall  euen  be  foz  friers  anD 
thoznes. 

14  naith  arrott)ts anD  lDtthboiDcs 
(hall  men  tome  thither  bccaufcallthc 
lanD  fljall  become  bnars  ano  thomes. 

15  3inD  on  all  Utiles  that  fljaibc  Dig 
gcD  Vbtth  the  mattocfec ,  there  fljall  not 
tome  thither  the  fcarc  of  bztars  anD 
thoznes :  but  it  fljall  bee  foz  the  fcnDing 
foozth  of  orcn  ,  anD  fozthetrcaDingof 
leffcrtattcll. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

1  InMaher-iTulal-hafh-baz,  hec  prophecieth 
thatSyriaandllraelfhalbelubdued  by  Alfy- 
na.  5  Iudah  likevvife  tor  their  infideline. 
9  Gods  judgements  fhalbe  vnrefiftable.  11 
Comfort fhalbe  to  them  that  t'eare God.  19 
Great  afflictions  to  idolaters. 


Againfl:  infideline. 


£>zeottcr  the  %  ©  is  ©  faiD 
bnto  mce ,  Xaite  thee  a 
great  roule,  anD  iDntcm 
it  lbith  a  mans  ptnnc 
concerning  t  iJjaahcr-fljfc 
ba?. 

2  3nD  ^  toohc  bnto  mce  faithfuli 
ibttncffcs  to  rccozD  ,  flJrtahthcpzicft, 
ano  zcthartahthe  fonnc  of3Jcbere; 
chtah. 

3  2nD  %  t  ujent  bnto  the  0zophe- 
teffcauD  fljee  conceiueD  ano  bare  a 
fonnc,  then  faiD  the  ILokjd  to  met, 
Call  his  name  Q)ahct-fljaial-haflj  bav 

4  ifoz  befoze  the  thUDc  fljall  haue 
UnoiblcDgc  to  try,  £0p  father  anD  my 
mother ,  the  ||  nrhes  of  ©amafcus ,  anD 
the  fpoiic  of  Samaria  fljaibc  taHena^ 
lbay  befoze  tfjchtng  of  ^ffyzta. 

5  C  Xhen©  is  ©fpa&c  alfo  bnto 
meagamcCaymg, 

6  foi  fo  much  as  this  people  teft> 
fcth  the  waters  of  5>htloah  that  goe 
foftly,anDreioytcm3Re5in,anD3Rcmai 
liahsfonne: 

7  ii5omthercfo2cbcholD,the!LozD 
bzmgeth  Dp  bpon  them  the  waters  of 
the  riucr  ftrong  anD  many ,  euen  ttjc 
lung  of  3ffyzia ,  anD  all  ins  giozy :  anD 
he  fljall  tome  Dp  otter  all  his  channels, 
anD  goe  otter  all  his  banftes. 

s  3lnD  hec  fljall  paffc  thzough  3fu? 
Dah,  hcfliali  oucrfloU)anbgocoucr,he 
fljall  reach  euen  to  thenccHc  anD  ttfje 
flrctchtng  out  of  hts  Vbtngs  fljall  fill  the 
bzeaDthofthylatiD,^  Emmanuel. 

9  C3ffonatcyoutfclucs,£)ycpcO' 
pic,  II  anD  yec  fljaibc  bzoftcn  m  pieces 
ano  giue  care  all  ye  of  farr  c  countrcys : 
giro  your  fclucs,  anDycfljaibebzoKcn 
tn  pieces ;  giro  your  ftlues,anD  pe  fljalbe 
bzoucn  m  pieces. 

10  Xauc  tounfeii  together ,  anD  it 
fljall  come  to  nought :  fpcaite  the  rbozD, 
anD  tt  fljall  not  ItanD  ;  fo;  <£od  is 
rbithbs. 

11  CiFoztljc  HfiDis©  fpafte  thus 
to  metibithaftronghanD,  anDinftru= 
ctcD  me  that  3  fljouiD  not  tbalbe  tn  the 
Vbay  of  this  people  jayttig, 

ii  5>ayycnot,3lconfcDcracictoail 
tl)cm,to  VDhom  thtspcople  fljallfay,^ 
tonfcDcranc ,  neither  fcarc  yce  thetr 
fcare,nozbeafraiD. 

13  £>ancttfiethe?L<DiB?D  ofhoflcs 
himfclfc,  anD  let  him  bee  your  fear c,atiD 
letijimbeyourDzeaD. 

14  2nD  he  fljaibc  foz  a  fanrtuary .  but 
foz*afloncofflumblinganDfozaroclic 

of 


t  Hikr.ln 
maktngjpctd 
Jo  the  jpoUe, 
he  hAUrnelh 
the  DMT.Or, 
make  [peed, 
&t. 


t  Hetr.  ap- 
preched  vn- 


||0>-,Hethjl 
is  before  the 
King  ofjif 
(/rufitlt 
take  array 
thericka 
&c. 


t  Heir.  The 
frheffe  of 
i he  ereadth 
ofthylxnd 
(h All  be  the 
j} retching 
out  of  his 
mnps. 
\\Or,fel. 


fHerr.h 
jlrcneth  of 
hand. 


Ifj.iS.l6. 
ukc2.;4. 
om.g  ; ;. 


44  2 


SeekeGodonely.        Ifaiah.      Chnlleskingdome. 


Mattli.^i. 
>M.  !uke 
10.1S. 


'Hrbr.*. 
'3- 


'Heb.i.ij. 

t  Hrk.no 

mormn£. 


\  Or, p<nn- 

Mat.  4. 1 5. 

phc.j  14. 


pr/oka 


of  offence  to  both  the  boufes  of  gjftael, 
fo:  a  ginnc ,  ano  fo?  a  fnarc  to  the  liiha 
bitantsofjcrufaicm. 

15  2ltib  man?  among  them  (halt 
*  (tumble  anb  fall,  ano  be  b;oKcn,  anb  be 
fnarcD,atiobctaucn. 

16  26uioe  Dp  the  Xefhmonic ,  Ccale 
the  ILati)  among  my  bifctples. 

17  3nb3Ilbilbjaitbponthc?U>i3ii? 
that  bioetb  his  face  from  the  boufcof 
3Jacob,  anb  31  ttnll  loottc  fo?  him. 

13  *  25ebolb ,  3 ,  anb  the  chilDzen 
tbhomrhc  1Le>is©  hatbgiucnme,arc 
fo?  ugnes,anb  fo2ibonocrs  in^jfrael 
fcom  the  ILohjd  of  boQcs,  lbbtcb 
DIbcllctb  tn  mount  Zion. 

19  C  3inb  ibhcn  they  fh,ailfap  bnto 
you .  3>ecfcc  bnto  them  that  haue  fanti= 
liar  fpirtts,  ano  bnto  lbtwos  that 
peepe  anb  that  mutter :  Qjoulb  not  a 
pcoplcfcebcbntotbcit  <5on<  fo?  the  U 
mng,totbcbeao? 

zo  *%o  the  ILatb  anb  to  the  Xcfh 
monic :  if  they  fpcabe  notaccozbuig  to 
thisttwb,  >u>bccaufe  there  tst  no  light 
in  them. 

xi  3tnb  they  (hall  paffc  tbzongb  it , 
barDly  beftcab  anb  hnngrp :  anD  it  Qjau 
come  to  paflc ,  that  ibhcu  they  (ball  be 
hungry,ther  Qjailfcet  themfclucs,  anb 
turfe  their  Butg,  anb  their  ©ob ,  anb 
looac  bpibarb. 

xx  :3uio  they  u>ill  loose  bnto  the 
earth:  anb  btholb  trouble  anb  oar&t- 
neffe,  Oimncflc  of  anguifb ,  anb  tbep 
ftjallbe  onucntooarltcneuc. 

CHAP.   IX. 

1  What  toy  fhall  be  in  the  midlt  of  afflictions, 
bv  the  Kingdome  and  birth  of  Chrifr.  8 
The  judgements  vpon  Iftael  for  their  ptide, 
i ;  For  their  hypocrifie,  iS  And  tor 
their  impenitencie. 

S^»  €ucrrhcleflcthc  bimneffc 

!$  §  fhallnotbcfucbas  lbasm 

»  her  Deration  lbhenat  the 

rll^v  firflnc  llStW  afructcbthe 
$Wf<Wtti£  lanbof  Zebulun,  anb  the 
ianb  of  /3aphtau  ,  ano  aftcrlbarb  0<0 
ni02c  gricuoufiy  afflict  h«  by  the  Uiay 
of  the  £>ca,  bcyono  Jojoanm  Gallic 
of  the  nations. 

i  Ulic'pcoplethatlbaiUeomoarfc 
nclTc  ,hauefccnea  great  light :  they  that 
oibci  in  the  ianb  of  the  fljaooib  of  Dead), 
bpon  them  hatii  the  ligbt  fljuuD. 

3  Zhou  haftmttitipiico  tlje  nation, 
»nd  i  not  tntrcafeb  thcioy:  tbcyioybc 
fo?ctbcr,acco;Dmgtotbctoyuiharucu\ 


and  as  men  rtioyce  ibhcn  they  btmbe 
thcfpoilc. 

4.   ||jfo2thoubairb20Bcntbcyobcof 
bisburocn,  ano  the  fraffcof  his  fboul 
Dcr,  the  roo  of  his  oppzeffour ,  as  in  the 
oayof'sDioian. 

5  ll^oieucrybattclloftljtlbarnour 
is  lbitl)  confufco  noife,  anb  garments 
toilet*  m  bioob,  libut  this  fljau  bcibith 
burning  and  t  fcibcll  of  fire. 

6  ;#o2bntobsathilbt5b02ne,bnto 
bsa*S>onncisgmcn,  anbthegouern? 
ment  fbalbc  bpon  his  fbouiotr :  ano  his 
name  fbalbc  callcb,  naonbcrfuil,  Conn 
feller,  Xhcmiglmcoob,  Xbceucrla 
fhng  iFathcrXbcpnncc  of  peace. 

7  £>fthcuurcafc  ofhis  goucrnment 
ano  peace  'there  fhaii  be  no  cno,  bpon  the 
thione  of  SDauiO  $  bpon  hts  tungoomc, 
to  oioet  tt,  ano  to  IrablttT)  it  Ybtth  tubgc^ 
ment  anb  lbith  tuuncc ,  from  henccfojrh 
:cticnfo2cuer:thc*3eaieofthc  JLsdbjd 
of  hoftesibill  pcrfo2mcthis. 

8  CXlic  2.02D  fent  a  tbozo  into  3Ja; 
cob.anoit  hath  lightco  bpon  3jfcacl. 

9  ^nb  all  the  people  fhaiRnoib.euen 
<Eph?aimano  the  inhabitant  of  £>ama; 
na ,  that  fay  m  the  pnoc  ano  ftoutnefle 
of  heart, 

io  1Chcb2lcKes  are  fallen  Ootbne,but 
Ibc  tbill  built)  lbith  hclbcnQoncs:  the 
£>ycomo2cs  arc  cut  ooibne,  but  lbc  null 
change  them  mtoCcoars. 

1 1  therefore  the  %  ©  k  jd  Ojail  fet 
bp  the  aoucriarics  of  Kc^in  agamO 
him,  ano  t  toync  his  enemies  together. 

ix  Xhc§)y?tansbcfo2e,anOthe0l)i; 
iiflincsbchtnoc,  ano  they  (ball  oeuourc 
5fracl  t  lbtth  open  month :  *tb2  all  this 
hts  anger  is  not  turncoaibay,  but  Jjts 
hatiD'sfrretcheDoutfhll. 

ij  €  foi  the  people  turncth  not  bn= 
to  him  that  fmttcth  them ,  ncitbcrooe 
j  they  feebe the HfiPiH©  ofbottes. 

i4-  Xhercfo2C  the  %  o  is  jd  ibtll  tut 
off  from  3Jfrari  heab  aiiotatlt,  b?ancl; 
janorufbtnoncoay. 

15  Xhc  ancient  ano  honourable,  hec 
is  the  ncao :  ano  tlje  p2ophct  that  tca= 
|cl)ctbltes,  be  is  the  taiie. 

i6  5fo?  the  U  leaocrs  of  this  people 
,  caufc  them  to  crrc ,  ano  they  ||  that  arc 
icooc  of  them,  arc  t  oeftroyco. 

17  Xhcrfo2C  the  ILoib  (ball  haue  no 
toy  in  their  yong  men  ,nctthcr  ftjal  haue 
mercy  on  their  farherleffcf  ibtboibes : 
fo?  cucry  one  is  an  hypocrttc.ano  an  cull 
Oocr ,  ano  cucry  mouth  fpcabcthll fol- 
ly :  fo?  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turnco 
aibay. 


than  bnkeft. 

*IurIg7.ia 
cha.  10.26. 
\\Or,v>hen 
the  whole 
bat  relief  the 
warrtour 

|J  Or^mdit 

\\iebmeaie, 

*  loh.j.  16. 


'Luke  1. 


" :. Kings 
19.31. 

chap.  37.32 


Heb.mi?i' 
'It. 


f  Hcb.  with 
whole 
mouth. 
'Chap.5 
15.  &  JO-J. 


\\  Or,  they 
that  call 
themilef- 
fed. 

\\Or,they 
that  are  cal- 
led blefedcf 
them. 

t  Heb.  fal- 
lowed'vp. 
\\Or,ViLerrf. 


Wicked  law-makers.  Chap.x.  Affhurs  pride. 


f  Heb.meat. 


\Heh.CHt. 


Or, to  the 
writers  that 
write  gne- 

Houfnfjfe. 


*Cha  5.  35 
and  £.12. 


Or }  we  to 

the  zsf Syri- 
an. 

\Hch.Af- 

fhurt 
Or^houih, 


\Heb.toLy 
them  .area- 


albay,butbisbanbisttretcbcboutftilI 
18  C  foi  ibicbetmcs  bumetb  as  the 
ficc :  it  Ojall  Dcuoure  ttjc  butts  anb 
tbouies.anb  uialifroiblemtbctbicfects 
of  tbefojrett,  ano  they  (ball  mount  bp 
like  ti)c  Ufttns  up  of  ftiiofet. 

19  Xtyougbtbeibjatbof  tbe?,©ia© 
of  bofts  is  tUe  lano  oar&cneo,  ano  tfK 
people  (ball  be  as  the  t  fucll  of  tijc  fire : 
no  man  fliail  fpare  bis  fcotber. 

20  Smbbcfliail  t  match  on  the  right 
banb,anb  be  hungry,  ano  lie  fli'all  cate 
ontlielcftHanb,  anti  they  fliail  not  bee 
fatiffieb :  they  fljall  cate  cucty  mantbc 
flefliofbtsoibncatmc. 

21  £Danafl"cb,€pbjaim :  anb  epb;a; 
tm,  iDanaflcb :  and  tDrp  together  ihaibe 
agalnfl  3ubab :  foj  all  tins  Ins  angct 
tsnottucneb  aibay,butb»8  Ijanb  is  fleet* 
cbcboutthil. 

CHAP.     X. 

1  The  woe ot  tyrant?.  5  Ally ria,  the  rodde 
of  hypocrites,  for  his  pi  Lie  (hall  be  broken. 
10  A  remnant  of  Ifrae!  fhall  be  faued.  14 
Ifrael  h  comforted  with  pronnfc  of  dcliue- 
rance  trom  Affvria. 

£>c  bntotbcm  that  octree 
JJ7&  bnrtgbtcous  bctrces,  anb 
SM\ftp!|tbat  ttwtc  gneuoumefle 
^§  which  they  Ijaue  pjcfcribcb: 
2  %q  tunic  aftbe  the 
nccoy  from  tubgement,  anb  to  taHca* 
may  tlie  right  from  the  poo:c  of  my  peo- 
ple, tbattbtoooibcs  maybe  their  pjay, 
anb  tliat  they  may  robbe  the  fafbcrlcs. 

3  &no  tbbat tbilycbocintbcbay of 
bifitatioa,  anb  in  t!)c  befoiation  which 
(ball  tome  from  farre*  to  lbbomlbilyc 
flecfojfielpci  anb  ibhercibillyceleaue 
yourguny* 

4  ©ithout  nice  they  (ball  botbc 
bolbne  bnber  tlie  pufoncrs,  anb  they 
fliail  fallbnbcr  the flame :  *  foi  all  this 
l)is  anger  is  not  turncoaibay,  but  Ijis 
banbi  flrettbco  out  fttU. 

5  CllC^flyn'an,  the  robof  mine 
anger,  ]|anb  the  Qaffcin  their  banb  is 
mtnctnbignatton. 

6  3  umi  fenb  Dim  agatnrt  an  f)ypo= 
enntau  nation,  anb  agamtttbc  people 
of  my  tbjfttb  ibill  3  guif  Wm  a  tfjargc 
to  tatte  the  fpoilc,  anb  to  tatjc  tbc  pjaye, 
anb  t  to  tr  cab  them  oolbne  UKc  the  mire 
oftbeftrects. 

7  ftoibbcttbemeanctb  not  fo.net 
tber  both  bis  heart  tbmltcfo,  but  it  ism 
bis  heart  to  Dcflroy,anb  cut  off  nations 
uotafcU). 


3  *foi  liefaftl),  Are  not  my  puttees 
altogether  tongs; 

9  is  not  Caino ,  as  CarcbcmtOV  is 
not  $amatb,  as3irpao?  is  not&anuv 
ria,as£>amafcus? 

io  3ts  my  banb  bath  founo  tbc  fling  I 
bomes  of  the  ibolcs,  ano  lDtjofc  graucn  | 
images  bib  crtcll  ttiem  of  jtrufalcmi 
anb  of  Samaria: 

n  £>baii3not,as3lbaucDoncbtv 
to  Samaria  ano  bee  ibolcs,  fo  ooc  to 
^crufaiem  anb  bcr  ibolcs  t 

12  sebcrcfojc  it  fliail  come  to  paflc, 
th.itU)bcntbc|Lo2bl)atbperfonncobts 
ibbolc  ib02Uc*bpon  mount  zton,  ano 
on  3Jcrulaltm,'3J  ibill  t  puniflj  tlje  fruit 
t  of  tbc  flont  beart  of  the  bmg  of  ^ft> 
na,anbtbegiojy  of  bis  high  looses. 

13  5ro2bct  faitb,  2i5y  the  llrcngtb  of 
my  ftanD  3  banc  bone  it ,  anb  by  my 
ttnfcoomc,  foi  3J  am  pzubent:  anb  3 
banc  rcmooueo  tbc  bounbs  of  the  peo- 
ple, anb  bauc  robbcb  their  trcafurcs, 
anb  3  bauc  put  boibnc  tbc  inhabitants 
UltBeabaliantman. 

14  ^nb  my  Iwnb  bath  fouubasa 
ncft  the  rltbes  of  the  people:  anb  as 
oncgatbcretbeggcstbatatc  left,  banc 
3  gatbercb  ail  the  earth  1  ano  there 
ibas  none  that  moucb  the  ibing,020pcj 
neb  the  mouth,  0:  peepco. 

15  ^balltbcareboaftttlelfeagatnfl 

him  that  bcibctbtbctcvbtth- or  fbaltbc 
fatbe  magnifie  it  fclfc  agamQbim  that 
fljauctliitf  Has  if  the  rob  (boulbfljabc 
it  feife  agamft  tbcm  that  lift  it  top,  or  as  if 

tbC  flaffC  fljOUlb  lift  Dp  1 1  it  fclfe,  as  if  it  were 
no  11)000. 

16  Xbetcfojc  thall  the  ILojb,  the 
Ho2b  of  bofls,  fenb  among  his  fat  ones 
lcanncflc,anb  bnber  his  glozy  bee  (hail 
limbic  a  burning ,  Ubc  the  burning  of 
a  Arc. 

17  3(nb  tbc  light  of  giftacl  fliail  bee 
fo2  a  fire,  ano  Ins  $?oly  £>ne  fo?  a  flame : 
anb  it  fliail  burne  anb  beuouce  Ijis 
thomesanb  bis  briers  in  one  bay : 

18  ^ttbfl)aiiconfumctheglo2yofbts 
fo2rcfl,anb  of  Ijts  fruttfull  fielbtbotb 
foule  anb  boby :  ano  they  fljall  bee  as 
Vbbcn  a  flanberb  bearer  famtcth. 

19  3lnotbc  reft  oftbc  trees  of  bis  foz; 
rcfl  (ball  be  t  fcib  ,tbat  a  cljilb  may  ibntc 
tbent. 

20  C^nb  it  flial  come  to  paflc  in  that 
bay,  that  tl;c  remnant  of  "jfracl ,  ano 
furhasarc  cfcapcb  of  the  honfc  of  3¥a 
tob,fliallno  mozeagameflav upon  bun 
tliat  fmote  them :  but  fljall  flay  bpon 

the 


■  I.Kings 
18.24,;;. 
Jnd  ly.  1  d 


•  i.  King, 

•9- )'• 

t  Hi I:.  vfi'e 

vpm. 

t  tieb.eftbi 

the  hcxrr. 


\\Or,Uks 

truwj  people 


\\Or.Mif; 
rodflnuld 
P'jkf  them 
that  Uft  it 
vp. 
\\0,,<h« 

tv  bich  u  not 
vooj. 


t  Hft.  from 

ths  foule  and 
exert  to  the 

fl'jt- 

\Heb.m 


A  remnant  faued.         Ifaiah.      ChriftsKingdome 


X  HtbJx  or 
*mon?ftt 


'Chap.  18, 


|!  Or,  in:  bee 
Shall  Itfevf 
bu  ffaffe  for 
bee. 

Exod.  14. 


Mudg.7.15 


\Hee-r.pull 
remoiie. 


\Hei.cHe 
[hrtllmib 
hyjotec. 


the  %  ©  £  £>,tbc  $oip  4Dnc  of  3lftacl  m 
trtietb. 
21  1Ehcremnant(baHrcturnc,euen 

tbc  remnant  of  3lacob,  unto  ttjc  migb* 

ttCCSOb. 

ii  *  $01  though  thp  people  3Jfracl 
be  as  the  fanb  of  the  fea,  vet  a  r enmant 
tof  them  fbaUcemrne:  tbceonfnmpte 
on  bccrccb  (ball  ouerflolb  ||  Untb  rt5t)tc^ 
oufneffe. 

23  *jfojthe3Lo2b€>(D©ofbodcs 
djail  maltea  ronfumptton,  cuenbe- 
termmeb  in  tbc  rnibbctt  of  all  the 
lanb. 

24  CXbcrfoje  thus  faith  the  lLojb 
<E>©&  of  hoftcs,  j©  mp  people  that 
Dtbclleftinzton,  be  not  afcaibc  of  the 
aflpnan:  be  fljall  finite  thee  tbitb  a 
rob,  ||  anb  (ball  lift  bp  his  ftaffe  agamft 
thee,  after  fbemaner  of  *<£gppt. 

25  iro:  pet  a  bcrp  ittlc  tbbtlcanb  tfjc 
inbignatton  (ball  tcafe,  anb  mine  anger 
in  their  bettrnctton. 

26  3inb the  !L  0  is  ©  of  hoftcs fljaii 
fttrrcbpa  fcourgcfo2him,aeco2bing  to 
the  daughter  of  *J©ibtan  at  the  roebe 
£)2cb:anb-isbtsroDw.isbpont|)c^)ca, 
fo  (bail  be  lift  it  bp  after  tljc  manner  of 
cgppt. 

27  3nb  it  fljall  tome  to  paflc  in  that 
Dap,ih.ubtsbiirbcntd)aibetabcnarbap 
from  off  tljp  (l)oulbcr,  anb  bis  volte 
from  off  thp  netbc,  anb  the  pobc  fljalbc 
bedropeb  becaitfe  of  tbc  anotnnng. 

28  ^eiseomcto^iatb,  bcctspafTcb 
to  pigeon :  at99tcbmad)  be  Ijattj  laib 
bp  bis  cartages. 

29  %bcp  are  gone  oner  the  paffagc : 
tbcpbauctabenbpthctrlobgtngatec; 
ba,  Kamal)  is  afraib,  (Scbcab  of  £>aul 
isflco. 

30  t fLift  bp  tbpboue,  j©bangbtcr 
of  oaliun :  caufc  it  to  bee  bcarb  bnto 
?Laifl) ,  <D  poo?e  3natljotb. 

31  i$)abmciiah  tsremoouct),  tbc  to* 
habitants  of  ocbnn  gather  tbcmfclucs 
to  flee. 

32  ^syctdjail  hccremaine  at  /Bob 
that  bap:  be  djaiidjaite  hishanb  againft 
thcmotmtoftbcbaugbtcrofZion.tbc 
hillofllcrnfalcm. 

33  BeboiMbcfLojb.tbcfL^is© 
of  bodes  (l)all  lop  tljc  bough  ttntbtcr; 
r  onr :  anb  tljc  high  ones  of  daturc  fljai 
be  bcibcn  bomnc ,  anb  the  haughtte 
dialbchumblcb. 

3+  3tncbcfl)ailmtboUmctbctbic= 
bets  of  the  foircds  Uutlj  P2on,  anb  %t- 
banon  fljall  fall  ||  bp  a  mtgbfic  one. 


CHAP.     XI 

1  The  peaceable  kiugdome  of  the  Branch  out 
of  the  root  ot  Iefle.  10  The  victorious  rcftau 
ration  of  Ifrael,and  vocation  of  the  Gentiles. 

/15b  there  fljail  tome  fotfb 
a  rob  out  of  tbeftemme  of 
*3c(Tc,  anb  a  b?anthO)ai 
groiboutofbisrootes. 
2  3(nbthc£>ptritoftbc 
ILois©  fljaiireft  bponbim,tbefpirit 
of  mifebome  anb  bnberdanbing,  the 
fpint  of  counfell  anb  might,  the  fpint  of 
bnoiblcbgc,  anb  of  the  fcare  of  the 
|L©ibjd: 

3  3lnb  (bai  mabc  him  oft  quicbe  bn> 
bcrdanbmg  mthefcareof  the  ILsdis©, 
anbhcfbail  notiubge  after  the  Dghtof 
bis  epes,  neither  repjoue  after  the  hefc 
ring  of  his  cares. 

+  26utU)ithrightcoufncu"ed)allhe 
mbge  tljc  pooje,  anb  ||  repjooue xuitlj 
ccuiiticfo:  themecftcof  the  earth  •  anb 
he  d)all* finite  the  earth ibtth  the  robbe 
of  his  mouth,  anb  ttntb  the  tycatb  of 
hishps  (hall  he  dap  the  ttntbeb. 

5  2nbngbtcoufitcffc(baibctbegir; 
bic  of  his  lotnes,  anb  fattbfulncffc  the 
girble  of  his  rentes. 

6  *XbeU)olfeaifod)alimbellibith 
the  lambe,  anb  the  leoparb  (hall  lie 
Dovbnc  tbith  tljc  bib :  anb  the  calfe  anb 
the  pong  lion,  anb  the  fatlmg  together, 
anb  a  btle  rhilb  (hail  leab  them. 

7  ^nb  the  totb  anb  tljc  bearc  (hall 
fecb,  their  pong  ones  (hall  lie  botbnc 
together:  anb  tljc  Iponftjallcatedraib 
Ubethcore. 

8  3ltib  the  fucbing  thilbc  (hall  plap 
ontheholcoftheafpe,  anbthcibeancb 
chilbc  fljall  put  his  hanb  on  the  ||  cotba- 
trice  benne. 

9  Xhcpfljailtiotljurtnojbefrroptn 

all  mp  holp  motmtainc :  foz  the  earth 
diall  bee  full  of  the  Unolblcbgc  of  tljc 
H^©,as  tbcibatcrscoucc  tbc  fea. 

10  CC  3lnD  to  that  bap  there  djail  bee 
arootcof  JJcdc,  Vbhich  djail  (lanb  fo: 
anenfigne  of  tljc  people;  to  itfijauthc 
*<B>entilts  fcebc ,  anb  bts  reft  djallbcc 
tgionous. 

1 1  31nb  it  dial!  tome  to  padc  to  that 
bap,thattbc  IL020  diaiifcthisljanbc  a- 
game  the  feconb  tunc,  to  rccoucr  the 
remnant  ofbts  people  Vbhith  dndbc  left, 
from  ^Idpnajaiibfromeg^'pt,  9  from 
0ath2os,anb  from  Cud),  anb  from  €* 
lam,  anb  from  5>huiar,  anb  from  ^a- 
matlwttb  from  rhepianbsof  tljc  5>ca. 

12  3iut) 


Aftsi;. 

'J- 


\Heb.fem 
oifmell. 


||  Or,  ogw. 

*  '<  }.r.  j,.  0. 
l.lhcf.2.3, 


"  Chip. te 


Or.Ai- 
dert. 


•Rom. 1 5. 
12. 

\Hcb-gfory. 


A  thankefgiuing.    Chap.,xij.xiij.  Againft  Babyl 


on. 


\!{ei>.mn?f 


f  Heh.  the 
children  of 
tktEafl 
\Hcb.Edom 
ajtdMoab 
[hall  be  the 
laying  on  of 
thetrh.tnd 
^Heb.the 
children  of 
Ammo* 
their  obedi- 
dtencc. 

t  Hth.  in 
Jboort. 


•E*od.  14. 
19. 


*  Exod.  15. 
i.pfal.i  18. 
14- 


*  i.Chron. 
i(5.8.p(al. 
105.  I. 

1 1  Or,  pra- 
cUimc  his 
name* 


\Heb.l 

Htrtfc. 


iz  2nDbc(bail  (Jett>panenugncfo2 
t\)t  nanons,ani)(bailatTcniblc  the  out 
carts  of  3frael,anb  gather  together  the 
bifpcrfcb  of  3Kuuah  ,  from  the  fourc 
tco:ncts  of  tlie  cacti). 

1  j  %\)t  eniiic  alfo  of  <£pb2atm  dial  nc 
part,  anb  tlje  abucrfartcs  of  3Iubab 
(baibccutoff:€pb2aun  (bail  not  nunc 
3Jubab.  anb  3JtiDal)  (bail  not  bcte€- 
pbjatm. 

•4.  26ut  thep  fliallflpbpon  the  fboul; 
Decs  of  tf)c  jkiilifttnes  totbarb  the 
naeft ,  the?  (bail  fpotic  t  tucm  of  the 
caft  together :  t  thep  (bail  lap  their 
banb  bpon€bomant>fi0oab,taub  the 
cbtlb2cnof3(mtiioii(baiiobcprbcm. 

15  ^nbtbcliompfballtorterlpbC; 
drop  the  tongue  of  tl)c  egppnan  fca, 
anbujitbbtsnugbtp  lhmb  fl)ali  l)cc 
lhaltebtsbanbouctrbcriucr,anbfbaIl 
finite  it  m  the  fcucu  (rrcames,anbma&c 

mcng0C0UCttD2r-fl)0D. 

i6  anb  there  fhaibc  an  nigh  lfcap  fc>2 
tbcremnantofhispcoplcAtobicbfbaibc 
left  from  aflyna;  itftc  asitibasto^If 
raclmtDc  bap  that  fjee  came  bp  out  of 
thelanooPCgppt. 

CHAP.    XII. 

Aioyfull  ihankf^iuing  of  the  faithtuli  for  the 
mercies  ot  God. 

4>5omtbat  bap  thou  (halt 
fap,  £>fL©«©',  35ihfll 
pjatfc  thee :  though  tbou 
tt»afr  angrtc  ibitb  mce, 
t  thine  anger  is  turncb  a 
ibap.anb  tl)outomfo2tebftme. 

z  iscboib,  (5oo  is  mp  faiuatton :  3J 
tbdl  truft,  ant)  not  be  afraib  foz  tfjc 
|L©is©  g}€^£)?U^  is  mp'frcengrb 
ano  myfong,  healfo  is  become  mpfai 
uation. 

j  1El)Ctcfo2c  ttutb  top  (ball  pee  b;aib 
UiatcroutofrrjcVbelsonaiuation. 

4  3nb  in  that  bap  (hail  pee  fap , 
'l&aifcthc  1Lsd.se>,  ||  tall  topon  hts 
name ,  Declare  his  bomgs  among  the 
people,  maftc  mention  that  his  name  is 
craitcu. 

5  £>iug  bnto  the  %  €>  is  id  ■,  fo?  hee 
hath  bone  excellent  things  :  this  is 
fenolbcn  mall  the  earth. 

6  Crpout  anb  fb  out  thou  tmbabi 
tantofzion  :fo2 great i  thcholpone of 
^jfraeiintbcmibftofthce. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

God  inuftcrcch  the    armies  of  his  wrath. 


6    He  threatneth  to  deltroy  Babylon  by  the 
Medes.     19     ThedtlolationofBabvlon. 

V)c  butben  of  25abplon, 

rf«r  Miicbjfaiarjrbcfoiineof 
■|H  amo3biDfee. 

z  fUft  pee  bp  a  banner 
,  bpon  the  htgh  mouir 
tame ,  ctaitthe  boice  unto  them ,  (babe 
the  batib ,  that  thep  map  goe  into  the 
gates  of  the  nobles. 

j  3?  bane  conunanbeb  mp  fanenfieb 
ones  :  3  bane  alfo  caiieb  mp  nughtic 
ones  fo;  mine  anger ,  euen  them  that  re- 
topee  in  mpbigbneffe. 

4  Xhe  noifc  of  a  mulrtnibe  in  the 
mountames,  t  ime  as  of  a  great  people : 
a  tumultuous  noifc  of  the  btngbomes 
of  nanons  gatheteb  together  :  the 
%  ©  k  ©  of  holies  muttctctb  the  boffe 
of  the  batten. 

5  Xhepcomefromafarrccountrep 
from  the  enb  of  hcaucn  ,  euen  the 
%  ®  is  ©  anb  theibcapons  of  his  m- 
bignation,  tobeftropthe  Whole  lanb. 

6  C  Corbie  pee ;  fo:  the  bap  of  the 
!L  ©»©  is  at  hanb  i  it  (hall  come  as  a 
Deftruttion  from  the  3lmightp. 

7  Xhcrefoje  aiail  all  hanbs  ||  bee 
faint,anbeucrpmanshearta)ailmclt. 

s  3nb  thep  (halbe  afraib :  pangs 
aub  fojrottics  (hall  taue  bolb  of  them, 
t\)tv  Ojaibe  m  painc  as  a  rboman  that 
trauellcth :  thep  (halbe  tama5eb  t  one 
at  another , their  facts  fhaibe  as  t  flames. 

9  26choH),theoapofthc?L©K© 
commcth,  cnicllbothinithihzath  anb 
fierce  anger,  to  lap  the  lanb  Dcfoiate 
anb  he  (ball  beftrop  the  fmners  thereof 
out  of  it. 

10  jfoj  the  (larres  of  heauen ,  anb 
the  confteliations  thereof  (ball  not  gtttc 
their  light :  the  funne  djalbe  *  barheneb 
mbi5  going  fojth ,  anb  the  moonc  (ball 
not  caufc  her  light  to  fljinc. 

11  3tnD3Jtbtllpuni(b  therbozlbfo: 
their  null ,  anb  tbetbicfeeb  foi  ttjctr  tnt? 
quitie;anb3J  iDrtlcaufethearroganeic 
ofthepzoubto  teafe,  anb  ibill  lap  lolb 
the  hautmeffe  of  the  terrible. 

ii  3J  ibill  mabc  a  man  moje  pzeti 
ous  then  fine  golb  1  euen  a  man  then  the 
golben  ttjcDge  of  €>phtr, 

13  Xbcrefojc^nMirbaftctbcbca 
uens,  anb  the  earth  fljail  remouc  out  of 
her  place  m  the  tt)2atb  of  the  %€>&%■ 
of  hoftes  ,  anb  m  the  bap  of  his  fierce 
anger. 

14  3lnD  it  IbaibcastbccbafcblAoe, 
anbasafljccpcthatnonian  tanethbp: 

thep 


t  Hct.  the 


'Or,  fill 
downe. 


\  He&.won- 

■Ur. 

I"  He b.  ektrj 

mutt  at  hit 

neighbour. 

t  hfeb/aeei 

eftheftamci. 


*Ezctc.  : 
7.iod.i.;i 
and  ;.i  5. 
match. 34. 
ip.inar.l  J. 
14.Iuc.j1. 
'5- 


AgainftBabylon.  Ifaiah.  The  tyrants  fall. 


Tfal.137. 

9- 


\Hcbr,/ts 

the  oner- 
throwing. 

"Gene.  19. 
1  5-icrc.  50. 
40. 


XH'teiim. 


chtm. 

\\Or,Ojhi- 
chet, 

t  Heir. 

daughters 

ofthtawle. 

\\Ory.iUcet. 


\Hebr.th 

htdtaksn 

thrmt.rp- 


they  fl»au  eucry  man  turnc  to  bis  ollmc 
pcople,anb  flee  eucry  one  into  bis  olbne 
lanb. 

15  <£ticry  otic  that  ts  foutib  djall  be 
tl).2uft  though, :  anb  eucry  one  that  is 
iopncDvmo  them,  fl^au  fall  by  tl)CUO0?D. 

i6  Xbctr cljUDjen  alfo  d)albc*bafbeb 
to  pietcs  befoje  their  eyes,  tbcithoufcs 
d)albefpoilcb,fjtbeiribtucsrau;(bcb. 

17  25cbolbe ,  3  ttnll  (hrre  bp  the 
$&tbts  agamd  tbcm ,  lbhiclj  diailnot 
rcgarbfiluer,anb  asfo2golb,tbcy  (ball 
not  bcltgbttn  it. 

18  Their  boibcs  alfo  fyau  bad)  tbc 
y  ongmen  to  pieces,  anb  tbey  fljail  bane 
no  pitie  on  tlje  fruit  of  the  ibombc;  their 
eye  fljail  not  fpare  efjilbjen. 

19  OM)25abylontbcgl02yoflung^ 
bonus ,  the  beautie  of  the  Chalbccs  tp 
tciicncte,  djaiibc  tasibbctKSobouer^ 
tbjeib  *  S>obom  anb  ©omojrab. 

zo  gjt (bail neucr beinhabucb,nei; 
tbet  (fall  it  be  blbelt  in  from  genera 
tfon  to  generation :  neither  (ball  tbc  T& 
rabian  pitch  tent  there,  neither  fbai  tbc 
(bepbearbs  ma&c  tfjetc  folb  there. 

21  25ut  t  uhidc  bwdes  of  the  befert 
diaitlvc  there,  anb  rlicirljoufcs  (l)aibe 
full  of  t  Dolefuil  creatures,  anb  ||  oibles 
flmu  bibcll  there ,  anb  £>aty2cs  (ball 
bauucctliere. 

ix  3inb  the  lbilbc  t  beades  of  the  gj* 
lanbs  fijal  try  in  their  llbefolatc  boufes, 
anooiagonsin  their  plcafaut  palates : 
anb  bcr  tunc  is  ncere  to  come ,  anb  ber 
bayes  (ball  not  be  pjolongcb. 

CHAP.    XI III. 

1  God>  mercifull  reftauration  of  Ifrael.  4 
Their  triumphant  infultation  oner  Babel. 
14  Godspurpofeagamfl  Afiyiia.  ij>  Pa- 
leftina  is  thr  earned. 

Jgf*£Sf  £>2 the  %  0  \a  s>  ibil Dane 
l#isvl  mcrcicon^Jacob,  anbibil 
%z  yet  cboofcjfracl,  anbfet 
^^  tbcm  m  tbeir  olbne  lanb : 
?ja>&  anb  tbc  ftrangtrs  fliaibc 
loyiicbimtbtbcm,  anbtljcy  (baiclcauc 
totbeboufcofjacob. 

x  3lnb  the  people  (ball  taftc  them, 
ano  b:mg  tbcm  to  their  place  :anb  tbc 
bonfe  of  Jfrael  (ball  pofTeffc  them  m 
the  lanb  of  tbc  %  oisp,  foj  feruants 
anb  banbniatbes :  anb  tbey  (ball  talic 
tbcm  taptiucs ,  t  ibhofc  captiues  tbey 
were,  anb  they  djail  rule  oner  their  op 
pieffours. 
}   2ino  it  (ball  come  to  paffc  m  the 


bay  that  tbc  %  ©  is  jd  fljai  guic  tbec  r  eft 
from  thy  fo2roib,anb  from  tby  fcare, 
anb  from  the  barb  bonbagc  lbberem 
tbou  load  mabe  to  fenic, 

4  C  Xhat  tbou  (bait  tabc  topthis 
||p20ticrbc  agamd  the  King  of23abylon, 
anb  fay;  (>?olb  bath  the  opp:cffourcea^ 
feb;  tbellgolbcncitieceafebi 

5  Xbc  ILfiP  is  m  barb  bzoben  tbc 
(raffe  of  tbc  ibicbcb  ,  and  tbc  fceptcr  of 
tbc  rulers. 

6  ^cibbofmote  tbc  people  unbjatb 
ibitb  taconttnuaillrcoliC;  bee  that  ru= 
leb  tbc  nations  in  anger  ,lsperfccuteb 
and  none  bmbererb. 

7  Xbc  tbbolc  eartb  is  at  red  and  ts 
qmct :  tbey  bjeabe  fooath  into  fingmg. 

8  Pea tbefirretrecsreioyceattbce, 
andtbcccbarsofjlcbanon/ayina^mce 
tbou  art  laybboibnc ,  no  feller  is  tome 
ppagainQbs. 

9  picllfrombencarbismooncbfoj 
tbec  to  meet  thee  at  tby  tommmg :  it  (hr* 
rctl)  bp  the  beab  fo;  rticc,  eucn  all  tljc 
t  cbicfc  ones  of  tljc  carrb ;  it  batb  raifcb 
bpfrom  there  tlj^oncs,  all  ttic  Kings  of 
tljc  nations. 

10  3Uitbey fbalirpcabc anbfay bnto 
thee .  ^rt  tbou  alfo  become  ttjcabe  as 
voi  <  art  tbou  become  libc  bnto  bs* 

11  XbvpompciS  brought  botbnc  to 
:  the  gcaitc ,  and  the  noyfe  of  tl)y  btolcs : 
:  tbc  ttiomic  is  fpjeab  bnber  tbecanb  the 
ibo.mtcs  coucr  tbec. 

ii  (^o\b  art  tbou  fallen  from  bcaitcn, 
||^D?Limfcr,fonncofthe  morning  f  How 
art  thou  nit  bonmc  to  the  groimb, 
tbhicb  bibOibeabcu  tl)c  nations  < 

15  f  02  thou  had  faio  m  thine  heart . 
31  lbll  aftcitb  into  hcaticn ,  j  ibil  crait 
my  tb:one  abouc the  flarrcs  of <5ob :  $ 
ibil  fit  alfo  bpon  the  mount  of  the  con* 
grcgarton.m  tbc  fibes  of  the  jRoith. 

14  3  ibil  afccitD  abouc  tbc  heights 
of  the  cloubes,  3  ibilbcc  like  tlje  mod 

15  J3et  thoudiaitbc  bjoughtboibnc 
to  hci,to  the  fines  of  the  pit. 

16  Xljey  that  fee  thee  dial  nar r oibly 
loobc  bpon  tbec,  and  confibcr  tbec,  fay- 
ing •.  is  this  the  man  that  mabe  the  earth 
to  trcmblcthat  bib  fliaUc  bingbomcs  < 

17  Xbat  mabc  the  ibojlb  as  a  iuu 
berueffe,  anb  bedroyeb  the  cttics  there 
of  ||  that  openeb  not  tljc  boufc  of  hisp^ 
foncrs^ 

18  ^ll  the  lungs  of  the  nations,  eucn 
all  of  them  be  m  gloiy ,  cncri>  one  m  his 
olbne  houfe. 

19  25ut 


\\Ot,T*x»- 

•i*gfrmh. 

||0r,MVI- 

thtfi  of 

g«u. 


\H,br.A 

flrokf  mth- 
ph:  remoo- 


\\Or,lht 
pmu. 

t  Hthr.Ux 
dm ,  or 
grattgt&ii 


Or.Odjy. 
fi.trre. 


\\Or.DU 
njl  let  hit 
frifmrt 

l:ot  el  jrnc- 
w*rd. 


Again  ft  Aflyria,         Chap.  xv. 


TobiS. 

19.  pUl  2  1. 

1  1. and  57. 

:8.aud  109 

1  ;• 

•  Exo  20.5. 

mat.2j.js- 


"2.Chron. 
20.6.10D9. 
I'.proll. 
21.30.  dan. 
4.32. 


\\Or,.Wo 


\\Or,!:cP,li 
not  be  alone. 
|]  Or  ajfem- 

Ilia. 


19  26uttJ)ouartca8  outofthygranc, 
littc  an  abominable  bzancb:  and  as  the 
raiment  of  thofe  that  arc  name ,  tbzuft 
thzoughnnrtufnjozb.thatgoeboibne 
to  the  ftones  of  tlje  pit,  as  a  carfeeis  tr  0 
bcnbnberfcctc 

io  Xbou  (halt  not  be  loyncb  awl) 
them  m  buriail,  becanfe  thou  haft  be 
ftcoycbtby  lanb,  and  flame  tbv  people : 
*thc  fecbeof  cuill  bocrs  (hall  ncucrbc 
tcnoiomcb. 

2 1  prepare  daughter  foi  l)is  thiibzcn 
*  foz  the  tmnuittc  of  their  fathers,  that 
they  bocnot  rife  noz  polTelTc  tlic  lanb, 
no?  fill  the  face  ofthcibozib  ujith  cities. 

22  Jf02 1J  \bill  rife bp  agamft  them, 
faytl)  the  Coke?  of  noftcs,  anb  nit 
off  from  Babylon  the  name,  anb  rem- 
nant, anb  fonnc  anb  ncphOb,  faytl)  the 

ij  3  ttnll  alfo  mane  it  a  poffcflion 
foz  tnciSittcrncanbpooles  of  ibater: 
anb  31  Unit  ftueepc  tt  Hurt)  the  befome 
of  bcfttnction ,  faytl)  the  ILoisp  of 
hoftcs. 

24  CXhc?L©K©ofhofteshath 
fwcmic ,  faying-.  Purely  as  %  hauc 
thought ,  fo  fljail  it  tome  to  pane  ■,  anb 
as  3  hauc  pnrpofeb,  fo  (hall  u  ftanb : 

2$  Xhat  3  ibtll  bzcauc  the  3KTyzian 
in  my  lanb,  anb  bpon  my  mountames 
trtab  l)im  bnber  footc :  then  (hall  l)is 
yo&cbepartfromoffthcm,anbhtsbut= 
ben  bepart  from  off  their  fljoulbcrs. 

%6  XhiS  is  thepurpofc,  that  is  put; 
pofeb  bpon  rt)c  iuholc  cartl) :  anb  this 
is  tl)  c  hanb  that  is  Ircctchcb  out  bpon  all 
the  nations. 

27  5Fozthc  %  o  «  id  of  Dottcs  hart) 
"pttrpofcb,  anb  ibt)o  (bail  bifanull  it? 
anb  hts  hanb  «  (tretchebout,  anbibho 
fbailturneitbacBC:- 

28  311  the  yccre  thatRtttg3fl)a?  &fe 
cb,U>asrt)tsburbcn. 

29  €  ft etoyce  no t  thou  ibholc  0aie=  I 
fhna,  bccaufcrt)erobofl)im  thatfmote 
thee  is  bzoken :  foz  out  of  the  fcrpents 
roote  fliau  come  fooztb  a  ||  cockatrice, 
anb  ijisfcuite  rhaii  be  a  ficrtc  flying  fet- 
pent. 

30  QCub  the  firft  boznc  of  the  poozc 
fballfecb.anb  thenceby  n)aliliebo\bnc 
tn  fafene :  anb 3  lbill  Kill  tl)y  root  ibttb 
famine,  anb  he  mall  nay  thy  remnant. 

31  ^ott»ie,<D  gate,  trie,  £>  otic,  thou 
ibholc  0aicmna  art  buTolucD,  foz  there 
thai  tome  from  the  iftoztb  a  miotic,  anb 
llnone  (hall  bee  alone  m  his  ||appomtcb 
nines. 


•Pfal.S7.i. 
5.  and  io:, 
<7- 

\\Or,betake 
themfel»ei„ 
vnto  it. 


•ICr.48.37, 

*,8.ezck.7. 
18. 


\Heb.d-f- 

c  ending  ml  a 
Weeping  : 
or j  camming 
dcnvnewith 
weeping. 


3  2  ©hat  fl)au  one  then  anfinerc  the 
meffengers  of  the  nation  i  *  that  the 
%  ©  is  5D  hart)  founbeb  zton ,  anb the 
poozc  of  Dispeople  (hail  ||tcnftmit. 

C  H  A  P.    XV. 

The  lamentable  ibtc  of  Moab. 

s^ra^,^  l?c  buruen  of  i^oab :  be; 
.  canfc  m  the  night  3r  of 
K  <35oab  is  laibe  rbaftc 
bzought  to  filcncc  -, 


P 
„  &fiS  ||  bzought  to  filcncc  -,  be-  \Y*p-£ 

i*fjg£g^|  canfc  in  the  night  Bir  of 

i©oab  is  laibc  ibaftc ,  and  bzought  to 

filcncc : 

2  fyce  isgonc  bp  to  2Saijth,  anb  to 
iDibon,  the  high  piaccs,to  )Dcepc :  U0o^ 
ab  (hall  holble  oucr  ii5cbo ,  anb  oucr 
iiScbcba,  *  on  all  their  heabs  (haibe  balb- 
neffe,  and  cuery  bcarb  cut  off. 

3  3m  their  frrcetes  they  fljail  girbe 
themuiucs  ibith  lacbecloth  :  on  the 
toppes  of  there  houfes,  anb  in  their 
ftrcetcs  cuery  one  fhall  horblc  >  tibce* 
pmg  abunbantly. 

4  3inb ^eil)bonfl)ail cry, anb €le^ 
alch :  their  boiccfhaibe  hearbeuentmto 
3Jaha3 :  thcrefozcrt)e  armcbfoulbiers 
of  i39oab  fbail  trie  out ,  his  life  (hall  be 
grtcuousbntohim. 

1  tW  heart  (hall  try  out  foz  SBoab 
II  his  fugmucs  rhaiirice  unto  zoar,  an 
*  heifer  of  fhzec  yecres  olbe:foz  by  tlje 
mounting  bp  of  fLuhith  rbirt)  lbee- 
pmg  (hall  they  goc  it  bp :  foz  m  the  lbay 
of  ^ozonaim,  they  (hall  ratfebp  a  trie 
oftbefrructton. 

6  foi  the  lbatcrs  of /Bimrtm  Q)ail 
be  t  befoiatc:fozthehay  tsttnthercb  a^ 
map,  rt)c  grade  faucth ,  there  is  no 
gceenc  thing. 

7  Xhercfoze  the  abunbantc  rt)cy 
hauc  gotten ,  anb  thattbhtth  they  hauc 
laibebp  ,  (hail  they  cary  arbay  to  the 
llbzooacoftheibilloibcs. 

3  $0}  the  try  is  gone  rounb  about 
the  bozbers  of  s^oab  :  the  hoiblmg 
rt)ereof  bnto  Cglaim,  anb  the  hoiblmg 
thereof  bntoBecr-clim. 

9  jFoz  the  lbatcrs  of  2Dimon  (haibe 
full  of  bloob  :  foz  3  lbill  bzing  t  nioze 
bpon  3Dm ion ,  lyons  bpon  htm  that  ef- 
capctl)  of  t©oab,anbbponthe  remnant 
of  tlje  lanb. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1    Moab  is  exhorted  to  yeeld  obedience  to| 
Clirirtskin^dome.  6  Moab  is  tlueatncdfor 
her  pride.   9   The  Prophet  bewjilcth  her. 
11    Tile  iudgementof  Nloab. 

/|5nn  5>enb 


\\Or,tothe 
borders 
hereof  euer. 
to  Zoar  as 
ast  heifer. 
*Ierc.48. 

iHee.brea- 

tH.-b.  Jefi- 
iltuns. 


II  Or.v.tlliy 
of  the  Ara- 
bians, 


tHeb.aJM- 


AgainftMoab,  Ifaiah.  andDamafcus 


\\Or,Pctn 
Hehr.  a 
recks* 


Or,  am  ft 


\Hcb.wrm 

\Rebr.tht 

trcadcrs 

dtmne. 


\0r. 


pr<fj. 


•Din.  7 

H,!7-mic. 

4.7.lukei. 

;!• 

•icre.48. 

■  9- 


•Icrc.48. 
20. 


\OrmHlter. 


\\Or.flncksd 

Vf. 


||  Or,lhc 
aUrmeu 
fallen  vpon, 
&e. 
•.'C-C.4S. 


€nu  pe  the  lambc  to  the 

?  ruler  of  the  lanb  from 

!!£>eiatofhetbilbcrne(rc 

Unto  the  mount  of  tfjc 

Daughter  of  ziort. 

-1  jfoutlbaibctbatasaroanbering 

birbi|taftout  of the  ncft:  fotbcbaugb: 

tcrs  of  upoab  (baibe  at  the  fozbes  of 

anion. 

j  t£aaccoimfeli,eretutc3wbge 
mcnt,mafte  tbp  (baboib  as  the  night  in 
tbemtobeft  of  rtjc  nooncbap,  btbe  trje 
outtaacs,bem;uipnotbtmtbattbanbe; 
retlj. 

4.  lUtmtncouteaftsbuKnbttbtbce, 
i$oab ,  be  thou  a  touert  to  them  from 
the  faecoftbefpoilcr:  fojtbetcrtomo* 
ncrisatanenb,tbefpoilcccca{crb,ttbc 
oppttfTours  ate  tonfumcD  out  of  the 
lanb. 

5  3tnb  in  mcrcp  (ball  the  tbjonc  be 
||  cftabltfljcb,  anb  bee  (bai  *  Ct  bpon  it  in 
truetb,intbctabcrnaclcof2>autb,iubg; 
ing  anb  fceHmg  mbgcment,anb  batting 
rigbtcoufncflc. 

6  Ct©cbaucbearboftbe*p?ibcof 
£@oab  Hjcc  is  bcrp  pjotib)  awn  of  bis 
bautiucs,anb  bispjibcanb  ljis  rbzatlj: 
bmijisuesfljailnotbefo. 

7  Xbctcfoje  (ball  ^oab  *botblc 
foj  <©oab,cucrp  oncthai  boiblc:  fox  the 
fouttbattons  of  lur-barcfctb  (ball  pee 
1 1  mourne,uirelp  ttjev  are  ftrtcftcn. 

s  foi  the  fielbes  of  $e(bbon  Ian* 
gm(n  ,and  the  bine  of  Stomal) ,  the  lojbs 
of  the  heathen  bauc  tooacn  bourne  the 
pnncipail  plants  thereof ,  trie?  are 
tomeeuenbnto  Itoer,  the?  ibantycb 
through  the  lbilbcrncttc,  her  branches 
are||ftretcbtb  out,  tljep  ace  gone  oner 
tbefea. 

9  CXbcrcfo2c3toilbctoaiIc\bitb 
tbe\becpingof3Ja3cr,tbc33ineofS>ifc 
mal)  3Ubil  ibatcr  tljceffiitli  mp  teares, 
£>  tyefljbon.auo  Sleaieb :  fo:  ||rt)e  (lm\ 
ting  foz  tbp  Summer  frutts,attb  fo?  tbp 
baruefl,is  fallen. 

10  3lub  *  giabneflc  is  taften  aibap, 
anb  iov  out  of  tDc  plcntifuiiaelb,  anb  in 
tfjc  23  incparbs  there  (baibe  no  fingmg, 
neither  fljal  there  be  (botmng :  the  trea^ 
bers  fljail  trcao  out  no  nunc  m  their 

p^ru'cs.'Jnaucmabctljcirvmtage  flou- 
ting to  tcafc. 

1 1  nDbcrefo2cmpbolbcls(bairounb 
Itfce  an  barpc  fo:  t]9oab,  anb  mute  tn> 
lbarb  parts  fo2  Bir-harefl). 

11  C3nb  it  flial  come  to  paflTctobcu 
it  (s  feenc  tnat  i39oab  is  lbcarp  on  tftc 


high  plate ,  that  Dec  (ball  tome  to  bis 
Sancntacpto  p;ap :  but  Ijcc  (bail  not 
pzeuaiie. 

i}  Xl)iSistfjcrbo?btljattfjc3Lc»KjH> 
batfj  fpoKcn  concerning  spoab  Gnce 
tfjattime. 

14. 26utnoU)tl)c!LsD)s©rjatl)fpO'' 
aen,(a?mg.i©it|)tntl)?ceveeres,astljc 
^ceresof  anljirclmg ,  anb  thcgloipof 
fl|9oab  fl)aibccontcmncb,tbitl)aU  trjat 
great  multitubC;  anb  tfjc  remnant  (hill 
be  berpfmaH  anb  ||  feeble. 

CHAP.   XVII. 

1  Syria  and  Ifrael  are  tlireatned.  6  A  rem- 
nant dial!  foifake  idolatrie.  9  The  reft  fhal- 
beplagued  for  their  impietie.  12.  The  woe 
of  Iiraels  enemies. 

^eburbenof  2>amaf= 
cus:25erjolb,2>amafcus 
is  taacn  arbap  from  be- 
i"?acitie,anbitfl)aibea 
ruinous  Ijcape. 
%*3S^^a  i  Xue  cities  of  3trocr 
arc  fojfaacn :  tijev  (ball  bee  foz  flocHcs, 
lbljiclj  Qjau  ivc  bolbne ,  anb  none  iTjaU 
maBCthemafraib. 

5  XljcfoitreffcalfofbaUccafcfrom 
€pfjjaim,anb  trje  bmgbomc  from  2>a^ 
mafcus,  anb  tnc  remnant  of  S>i>na: 
ttjcv  (ball  bee  as  tljc  glouc  of  tlje  cljil- 
b?cn  of  3Jfrael,  faitt)  tftc  Hsdisjo  of 
Ijortcs. 

a.  ^nb  m  trjat  bap  it  (nail  come  to 
pauc,  that  tljc  glo^p  of  3?atob  fftailbec 
mabc  trjiunc ,  anb  tljc  fatncfTc  of  \)is 
flen^njalirbareicane. 

$  ^nb  tt  (bail  be  as  lbljcn  tljc  ftar- 
uefl-man  gatljeretljtljc  come,  anb  tea* 
pcth  tljc  cares  ibttfj  fjis  armc ,  anb  it 
fnalbc  as  lie  tljat  gatfterctl)  eares  in  tljc 
bailcpof&cpDaim. 

6  ( C  Pet  gleaning  -  grapes  fijail  be 
left  in  it ,  as  tbc  (baaing  of  an  ^)ime 
tree ,  tibo  o«f  tftiee  berries  in  tljetoppc 
of  tlje  bppctmofr  bottgl) :  foure  oj  fiuc 
in  tlje  ont  -  mod  fruitfull  b^ancfjes 
thereof ,  faith  the  %  ®  n  w>  ©ob  of 
ifrael. 

.  7  ^t  that  bap  (hall  a  man  looltcto 
his  falter,  anb  his  eves  (hall  bauc  re 
fpect  to  the  l?o!p  one  of  3ifracl. 

8  ^nb  hec  Qjallnot  loofteto  tljeal- 
tars ,  the  tbo:He  of  his  hanbes ,  net 
ther  (hall  refpect  that  lbhuh  h»s  fin* 
gees  hauc  mabc,  either  the  groues  o; 
the||imagcs.) 

9  C3n  that  bap  (ball  bis  fitong 

cities 


1 1  Or,  rat 
man]. 


I  OrjSvmie- 
n-.a»a. 


AgainftEthiopia,  Chap.xviij.xix.  and  Egypt. 


O:,rcmo- 
uedvithe 
ds.y  of  inhe- 
ritance,and 
ihcrc  Irialbe 
deadljfor- 
rem. 

|  Or,  noife. 

[  Or, many. 


\\Orjhjilc 

down;. 


Or,  out- 
fjircad  .t:d 
po/ifijtd. 
\\Or,a»ati- 
01:  th.it  me- 

letboHTtana 
rreadeth 
downe.  tieb. 
anat ton  of 
line  Une,  >w.d 
treading  vn 
derfoote. 

lurid  theri- 
t'.ers  defptfe 

|  j  Or,  regard 
my  fa  dwel- 
ling. 

11°'.°/' 

ratTTp. 


cities  be  as  a  foifahen  bough ,  anb  an 
bppcnnoftbjanch,  ibhich  they  left,  be- 
caufc  of  the  chtlbicn  of  jftaefcanb  there 
fhalbe  bcfolation. 

io  2i6etaufr  thou  haft  fozgotteu  the 
©obofthyfaiuatton.anbhaftnotbcenc 
minbfull  of  the  rocuc  of  thyftrrngth  : 
thecefoic  (halt  thou  plant  pleafant 
plants,  anb  Ojalt  fet  it  Hnth  Orange 
nips. 

ii  3Jn  the  bay  (halt  thou  matte  thy 
plant  to  groiP  ,anb  in  the  morning  (halt 
thou  matte  thy  feebe  to  flounfh  :  but  the 
hatneft  dull  be  a  ||  heape  in  the  bap  of 
gnefe,anb  of  befperate  foztolb. 

u  €  u@oc  to  the'll  multittibe  ofma* 
ny  people,  which  matseanoife,  lute  the 
uotfe  of  tt;c  fcas  anb  to  the  cufljing  of 
nations,  that  matte  a  rufbutg,  liaethc 
tuning  of  ij  mighty  waters. 

ij  Xhc  nations  (ball  tufb  littc  the 
ru filing  of  many  waters :  but  God  (hall 
rebuke  them ,  anb  they  (hall  dee  farrc 
off,  anb  fhalbe  chafeb  as  thechatfc  of 
themountaincs  bcfo2C  the  ttnnb ,  anb 
liBcallrollingtbmgbcfoie  the  wbirlo 
lhinb. 

14  anb  beholb  at  cucnutg tibc  trou* 
ble,indbcfo2Cthemo?ninghe'snot:this 
isthepo:tioitofthcmthatfpoilcto6,aub 
the  lot  of  them  tljat  robbebs. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

1  God  in  care  of  his  people  will  deftroytheE- 
thiopians.  7  An  accede  thereby  fhall  grow 
vnto  the  Church. 

4De  to  the  lanb  fbabolb* 
mg with lbmgs, Which  is 
bcyonb  the  nuers  of  & 
Ethiopia: 
^M   2,  Chat  fenbeth  am* 
baffabonrs  by  thefea,eucn  in  befTcls  of 
bulrufl)esDponthcibatcrs,<aying:(!5oc 
ycefmiftmcffengcrs  to  a  nation  1 1  feat* 
teres  anb  peeleb ,  to  a  people  tcrahle 
from  their  beginning  hitherto,  ||  a  nate 
on  mcteb  out  anb  troben  aownc ; 
II  wbofc  lanb  the  nucrshauc  fpoiicb. 

3  ail  yee  inhabitants  of  the  Worth, 
anb  bibcHcrs  on  the  earthXec  yec,Wben 
heeliftcth  Dp  an  enfigne  on  tbemoun* 
tames  ■  anb  When  he  blowetb  a  mini* 
pet,  heart  yet. 

4.  jfoifo  the  ILoko  fayb  bnto 
mt-3  if  ill  take  my  reft  anb  3  WUlllcon* 
fiber  m  my  swelling  place  iibeaclearc 
heatejlbpon  heroes,  and  Uhea  cloubof 
Dew  m  the  beatc  of  barucft. 


5  Jfoz  afoje  the  barucft  when  the 
bub  is  perfect,  anb  the  foWje  grape  is 
ripening  in  tljc  floWit  ,hec  (ball  both 
cut  off  the  fpugges  tbith  pruning 
boobes,  anb  tahe  away  and  cutbownc 
tl;e  branches. 

6  Xbcy  fhalbe  left  together  bnto 
the  foules  of  the  mountautcs  ,  anb  to 
the  bcafts  of  the  earth :  anb  tljc  foules 
(halt  fummer  bpon  them  ,  anb  all 
tbcbcaftcsofthccartb  (ball  winter  bp* 
on  them. 

7  CUn  that  timcfball tbepjefent 
be  brought  bnto  the  %  o  w  j?  of  hoftcs, 
of  a  people  ||  fcattereb  anb  peeleb,  anb 
from  a  people  terrible  from  their  begin* 
ning hitherto ;  a  nation  mcteb  out  anb 
troben bnberfoote ,  Wboft  lanb  then 
uers  hauc  fpoiicb,  to  the  place  of  the 
name  of  the  ft  ©is©  of  boftts,  the 
mount  —ton. 

CHAP.     XIX. 

i  The  confufionol  Egypt.  11  Thefulifhneflc 
or  their  Piincei.  18  The  calling  of  Egypt 
to  the  Church.  15  Thecouenantof  Egypt, 
Allyrfa  and  Ifrael. 

tee  burben  of<£gypt:2Sc 
bolb,tbc  jloHJDribeth 
bponafmift  cloubc,anb 
fballcomcinto€gypt,anb 
tbcibolesof  (Egypt  fbaibc 
moucb  at  his  pjcfcncc ,  anb  thchcart  of 
(Cgyptfljallmcltinthemibftofit. 

%  anbJJWtlltfettbeegypttansa* 
gamft  the  Egyptians :  anb  they  (hall 
fight  eucry  one  agamft  bis  b2otbcr,anb 
cucry  one  agamft  his  neighbour  ■  cute 
agamft  eitic ,  and  tungbomc  agamft 
hutgbome. 

j  anb  tljcfpintofegypttniall  fane 
mtl)cmibftthcreof,anb3(rbiiitbeftroy 
the  counfcll  thereof:anb  they  (hall  feebe 
to  thcibolcs,  anb  to  the  charmers,  anb 
to  them  that  haue  familiar  fpirits,  anb 
totheibi^arbs. 

4  anb  the  Egyptians  tbill  31 1 1  giuc 
ouer  into  the  hanb  of  a  crueil  Jlojb  ■> 
anb  a  fierce  Ring  fljalt  rule  ouer  them, 
faith  the  fLoJbc ,  the  %  o  is  p  of 
hoftes.  . 

5  anb  tfie  Uiatcrs  fliall  fane  from 
thcfca,anb  the  ruicr  fljaibe  U)aftcb,anb 
bjiebbp. 

6  anb  they  fhall  tunic  the  riucrs 
farrealbay,  anbthcbjooHes  of  bcfrnce 
(ball  be  cmpticb  anb  bzicb  bp :  the  r  cebs 
anb  flagges  fhall  ttrithcr . 
j!3nn  z 7  Xhe 


]  Or,  out. 
rpr?jti  And 
ftlificJ.&c. 


\  HcB.min- 
ff'- 


t  Hch.falt 
be  emptitd. 
t  Hd.  [vol- 
lamp. 


I  Or,  flat 
vp. 


Earthly  helpes.  Ifaiah. 


Ifaiah  naked. 


fhaflnot  be. 


\\Orttvhite 
work's. 


\  Heb.  fonts- 
datum. 
\Heb.ofl,. 
mug  thirty. 


Or^gouer- 
nottrs.hcb. 


\Htb.a,}i. 
fit  ofprr- 
".erfitici. 


\H,i.ihc 
liffc. 

\\Or,cfHr- 
res:  or  oftht 
Stinne. 


7  Xhc  paper  rccbsbythetyooRcs, 
by  the  mouth  ofthebiooRcs,  anb  cucry 
tiling  foWcn  by  the  t«oolts  (hal  UJitljcx, 
bcbmicn  alba?,  t  anD  be  no  more. 

8  Xhc  ftfbcrs  aifo  (hall  moumc, 
anb  all  they  ttjat  caft  angle  tnto  tlje 
bzooRcs  (hall  lament,  anb  they  that 
fpjcab  nets  bpon  the  waters  (hall  lan* 
quill). 

9  fl0o:couertheythatWojBcinfine 
flarc,anb  they  that  wcauc  ||net-wo?RS 
fhaiibeconfounbeb. 

io  ^nb  they  (hall  be  bzoRcn  in  the 
t  purpofes  thcreof,ail  that  mafce  auces 
anbponbstfojnfh. 

n  C  Purely  the  pmucs  of  zoan 
arefoolcs,thetounfelloftheWifecoun< 
fellers  of  Pharaoh  is  become  bmtifh : 
li?oft  fay  ye  bnto  Pharaoh,  3 anl  tijc 
fonne  of  the  wife,  the  fonne  of  ancient 
Rings j. 

ii  oahcrc  are  they  i  ©here  are  thy 
Wife  men  i  anb  let  them  tell  thee  now, 
anb  let  th  cm  Rno  w /What  the  %  ©  is  p 
of  fjofls  hath  purpofcb  bpon  Egypt. 

13  Xhc  piinces  of  zoan  arc  become 
foolcs,  the  p2inccs  of /Bop!)  arc  bccel^ 
ueb,  tijev  l)auc  aifo  fcDuccD  <Scjrppt,  euen 
II  they  that  are  the  Cap  of  the  tribes 
thereof. 

14  Xhe  ?L©isp  hath  minglcb 
tapcruerlefpirit  in  the  mibft  thereof: 
anb  they  hauc  tanfeb  Egypt  to  crre  in 
eucrywojRc  thereof,  as  a  omnRcn  man 
ftaggcrcthinhisbomit. 

15  Neither  (hail  there  be  any  wojRe 
fo?  Egypt,  which  the  heab  0?  taiie, 
bjanchomtfhmayboc. 

16  3Jn  that  bay  (hallEgypt  beeliRc 
bnto  women :  anb  it  (hall  be  afraib  anb 
feare ,  bctaufc  of  the  fhaRtng  of  the 
hanb  of  the  %  ©  is  p  of  hofts,Whtch  !jc 
(haRethoiterit. 

17  2lnb  the  lanb  of  Jtibahfhaiibec 
aterrour  bnto  Egypt ,  cuery  one  that 
maRcth  mention  thereof,  (hal  be  afraib 
iiihimfeifcbccaiifcofthctoiinfcllofthe 
%o  a  p  of  hofts,  which  hchath  bctcr* 
mutebagamftit. 

18  C  lln  that  bay  (hail  fine  cities  in 
thcianb  of  EgyptfpeaRcthet  language 
of  Canaan,  anb  froearc  to  the  %  ©  is  p 
of  hoftes :  one  fljaibe  callcb  the  citic  ||  of 
bcftruction. 

19  3\\  that  bay  (hall  there  bean  3ii 
tar  to  the  H  o  is  ©  in  tlje  mibft  of  the 
lanb  of  Cg>'pt,anb  a  pillar  at  the  bozber 
thereof  to  the  ?L©  is  e>. 

20  3tnb it  (hall be  fo;  a fignc,  anb  fo; 


atbitneffe  bnto  the  |L©  ispof  hoftsin 
the  lanb  of  Egypt :  foz  they  (hall  trie 
bnto  the  fL©  is  p,becaufe  of  the  opp<tef= 
fours,  anb  hcfhal  fenb  them  a  S>auiour 
anb  a  great  £>ne,  anb  he  (hail  beliuer 
tljcm. 

ii  3nbthc!L©isp(haibcRnoWen 
toEgypt,anbthcEgyptians(halRnow 
the  %  ©  is  p  in  that  bay,  anb  (hal  bo  f& 
crifitc  anb  oblation,  yea  they  (hall  bovb 
a  boWc  bnto  tlje  fL©isp,  anb  per- 
fonne  it. 

11  3(nb  the  ?L©iap  (hall  finite  C« 
gypt,  he  (hall  finite  anb  hcale  it.anb  they 
(hall  rerurnc  euen  to  the  %  ©  is  p,  anb 
he  (haibe mtrcateb  of  them,  anb  (hall 
hcalcthcm. 

23  C  Hn  that  bay  (hall  there  be  a  hie 
ibay  out  of  cgypt  to  SuTyjia,  anb  the 
^ffyjian  fljail  come  into  €gypt,anb  the 
Egyptian  into  ^ffyna,  anb  tlje  <£gypti= 
ans  ujau  feme  rbith  the  SKTraans. 

14  3n  that  bay  (hall  gjftacl  bee  the 
tljirb  With  egypt,  anb  With  Zffvm, 
euen  a  blcffing  in  the  mibft  of  the  lanb : 

i<>  n9homthc?l©ispofhofts(hai 
bleffc,(aying,25icffcbbeCcjni'ptmypeo= 
pic,  anb  3t(Tyna  the  wo?r  of  my  hanbs, 
anb  3fftacl  mine  inheritance. 

CHAP.   XX. 

A  type  prefiguring  the  fhamefull  captiuitie  of 
Egvptand  Ethiopia. 

0  the  yecrc  that  ILar- 
tan  came  bnto  ^fhbob 
(When  Jargon  the  Ring 
of  ^Iflyzia  firm  Ijim)  anb 
fought  againft  athbob 
anb  tooRcit: 

i  ^tthcfametiincfpaUctljclLott© 
tbyjfaiah  the  Tonne  of  ^11105,  faytng, 
€>o  anb  loofc  the  fachdoth  from  off  thy 
loyncs,anb  put  off  thy  fhooc  from  thy 
foot :  anb  he  bib  fo,  wanting  naReb  anb 
barefoot. 

3  3(nbthc?L€>ispraib,?liReasmy 
fcruant  gjfaialj  hath  walRcb  naReb 
anb  bare  footc  thjee  yccres  tor  a  fignc 
anbWonbcr  bpontfgypt  anb  bpone< 
thiopia: 

4  £>o  (hall  thcRing  of ^(Tynaleab 
away  the  t  ccjyptians  pnfoncrs,  anb 
the  Ethiopians  capttucs,  yong  anb  olb, 
naReb  anb  bare  footc,  euen  With  their 
buttocRs  bncoucreb ,  to  the  tfbamc  of 
Cgypt. 

5  3tnb  they  Qjau  be  afraib  anb  alba* 
mcb  of  Ethiopia  their  expectation,  anb 
of  Cgypt  their  gio.jy. 

6  ^nb 


\Htklythe 
tab. 


tffei.lk- 

cjptmiltr 
°fEVF'- 

ItsJicfi. 


onsfall.         Chap.xxj.xxij.     Againft  Arabia. 


\\  Orjoitn- 


\Hcb.htri. 


||Or,«y 
minde  rvan- 
Jrcd. 


||  Or  trjci 
axaljon. 
*  Atactic. 

2.1. 

\\Or,tuery 

night. 


*Ier.ji.8. 
reu.14.8. 
2nd  18.  2. 


\Hch.fon 


6  3tttD  the  inhabitant  of  this  ||  pie 
(hailfap  tuthatbap ,  26eholb,fuch  isour 
expectation  neither  tbc  flee  foi  helpc 
tobeDeuticccDfromtljemngof;3trpna: 
anb  hotb  (hall  rbeercapc;- 

C  H  A  P.   XXI. 

1  The  Prophet,  bewaylingthecaptiuity  of  his 
people,  feeth  in  avifion,  the  fall  of  Babylon 
by  the  Medes  and  Perfians.  11  Edom, 
fcoming  the  Prophet ,  is  moiled  to  repen- 
The  fet  time  of  Arabias  calamity. 

^ebttrDen  of  the  Dcfcrt  of 
thefca.  ^s  ibDirlcttjuiDiS 
in  rile  South  paffe  tbo 
rough  i  (b  it  commed) 
from  the  ocfett ,  from  a 
terrible  lano. 

x  ^tgrtcuousDifiotttsDcdarcDDn* 
to  nic ;  Xhe  treacherous  Dealer  Dcaicth 
treadjerouflp,  atm  the  fpoilcr  fpotlcth : 
<5oc ,  top  t©  Clam :  befiege ,  £>  i^cDia : 
ailthcfighmg  trjereof  hauc  3Jmabcto 
ceafc. 

j  Xhercfojc  arc  mp  lopnes  filleu 
ibttljpainc,  pangs  hauc  taftcnholbbp* 
onme,  as  the  pangsofaibomandjat 
trauellcth:3libasbottJCbboibncatthc 
Rearing  ofic^f  rbas  btfinapcD  at  tlje  fee* 
ingofic. 

4  ||  ^pljeartpanteb ,  fearcfulneffc 
aff  rightcb  me :  djc  night  of  mp  pltafurc 
hath  he  t  turncb  into  fcare  tmto  me. 

5  0jcpare  the  table ,  ibatcfj  in  the 
tbatch-toVbcr,  catcDnnttc :  arifc  pec 
pnnces,and  anoint  dje  fl)iclD. 

6  fox  tints  hath  tije  IL02D  fapD  in- 
to me  5  <soe,fcta  ibatchman,let  him  be* 
dareiDhathcfeedj. 

7  3nD  he  fam  a  djarct  with  a  couple 
of  hozfemctt ,  a  charet  of  affes,  and  a 
ehacct  of  camels .  anb  hce  hear&cncb 
btUgcndp  lbitl)  mud)  neebe. 

S  3lnD  ||  he  crpcb  -,  %  iron:  my  ILojD, 
3)  OanD  continually  topon  thc*ibatdi- 
totberinthcDap  time,  anbjianifct  in 
mp  tt>atb  l|  tt>hole  nights. 

9  3inD  bcholb ,  Deere  tommcth  a 
djarct  of  men  with  a  couple  of  hojfcmcn: 
anb  l)e  anfmcreb  anb  fapD,*26abpIon 
isfailen,  is  fallen ,  anb  all  thegraucn 
images  of  her  ©obs  he  hathbjottcii  ton* 
todjcgrounD. 

10  j|)mptlj2cfl)tiiganD  tljc  t  come  of 
mpfloo2C :  that  tbljtchUhauchearbof 
the  %<$>  is©  of  hoftcs  trje  <E»ob  of  3Jf* 
racl.ljauc  3J  bedareb  bnto  pou. 

11  c  Xljc  burDett  of  2Dumah.  $cc 


callctljto  me  out  of  £>cic:i©atchman, 
lbhat  of  tljc  night:-  naatchman,  lbhat 
of  the  night* 

n  Xhe  ibatdjman  fapb  ■,  Xhe  mo?* 
ntng  commcdj,anD  alfo  the  night :  if  pec 
lbill  enciuirc ,  cnciuirc  pee  :  returnc, 
come. 

13  C  Xhe  burDcn  bpon  Arabia.  3Jn 
thefojeftm  Arabia  (ball pee  loogc,  £> 
pectrauelling  companies  ofDebatum. 

14  Xhe  inhabitants  ofdjclanbof 
Xcma||b:ought  mater  to  htmdjatlbas 
thirflp,  thep  p2cuciitcbibith  their  tyeao 
him  that  flcb. 

15  5fo?  djep  flcb  from  djc  froojbs, 
||fromdjeD?arbcnfrao;b,  anb  from  roe 
bentborb ,  anb  from  tljc  gricuoufnefle 
ofibarrc. 

16  ifo?  djus  hath  djc  fLojb  fapbton* 
to  mc:n9idjm  a  pectc,acco?buigtodje 
peer  es  of  an  fiir  cling,  anb  alldje  glo;p 
ofBcbarfhailfailc. 

17  3inb  dje  r  cfibuc  of  tljc  number  of 
tatdjers,  tljc  mtgljtp  men  of  djcetM- 
b?en  of  Bcbar  (naibc  bummajcb :  fo? 
tlje?liDKjs»(5oDof3lfracll)ad)  fyo> 
Hen  it. 

CHAP.   XXII. 

1  The  Prophet  Iamenteth  theinuafionoflury 
by  the  Perfians.  8  He  reproueth  their  hu- 
mane wifedome  and  worldly  ioy.  15  Hee 
prophefieth  Shebnaes  depriuation,  10  and 
Eliakim  prefiguring  thekingdomeofChrift, 
his  fubflitution. 

^eburbenof  tDCbailep  of 
bifiou.  naljat  apictl)  djee 
no!b,d)attUouartibr)ol 
ip  gone  Dp  to  tpc  tjoufe 
toppes; 
z  %\)o\x  djat  art  full  of  ftirrts ,  a 
tumultuous  title ,  a  iopous  ritie  :d)p 
aamc  men  arc  not  flame  ruitt)  djc 
troo?D,no2  bcab  m  battell. 

3  3lll  trjp  rulers  are  fleb  togedjer, 
djep  ace  bounb  t  bp  tDe  ardjcrs:all  tlja t 
arc  founb  in  tfiee  arc  bounb  together, 
which  ftaue  flcb  fromfarre. 

4  Xljcrcfo«fapb3li*iLooSeaibap 
from  me,  tgj  nitll  ibeepc  bittcelp,  la* 
bouc  not  to  comfotf  me,  becanfe  of  tljc 
footling  of  djc  Daughter  ofmppcoplc. 

5  iFo:  it  is  a  bap  of  trouble ,  anb  of 
trcabutgbotime,  anb  of  pcrplerntcbp 
dje  3LOJD  d5£)2D  of  Ijoltes  tntljcuai* 
lep  of  ljtfion  ,  bjcaKing  bottmc  the 
iballes,  ano  ofcrpmgtodje  mouti^ 
tames. 

iI5nn  3  6  ^nb 


Or,fir 
'feare.Hcb. 
from  the 
face. 


\Heb.bowi. 


tHckoftbc 


Ier.4.19- 
and9-i- 

\Hcb.Iwilt 
he  bitter  in 
weeping* 


f  Heb,  mtde 
naked, 

\Heb.the 
choice  of  the 
valleys. 
\\Or,to- 
wxrds. 


FcaiTringforfafting.       Ifaiah.       ThekeyofDauid. 


"Chap.  5e>. 

H.Wlfd.  2. 

6.I.COM  y. 
3»- 


\\0r,0ha 


\\Orythe 
Lor  J  who 
eonrredtbee 
with  an  ex- 
celentcoue- 
rm^and  clo- 
thed the: 
gorjreoMfly, 
v.xZ.jhall 
fnrely,tf-c. 

\Htb.tht 

captmitteof 
a  m.\n. 
t  He!>.  large 
offtaccs. 


6  atnb  Clam  bare  the  emmer  lbttb 
cbarctsof  men  and  h02fcmcn,anbl&ic 
tbncouercbthefbielb. 

7  3nb  it  fl)ail  come  to  paffc  rijat 
trj^tcijottctt  bailers  (ball  be  full  of  rrja* 
rets,  anb  rrjerjozfemen  (balifct  them* 
fcluesinarar  ;attbegatc. 

s  C3nb  be  bifcouercb the  toucring 
of  3Jubalj,  anb  tfjou  t>mrtt  looftc  m 
that  baj>  to  the  armour  of  the  houfc  of 
tljefbzrcft. 

9  jachauefcencaifo  tbcb2cacbesof 
the  eittcof  S>autb,tbattbcr  aremanr : 
anb  re  gatbereb  together  tlje  lbatcrs  of 
thclolbcrpoolr. 

10  anb  re  bauenumbjebtbeboufes 
of3fcrufalcm,anbtbcbotires'bauerec 
tyolten  boibneto  fojnfic  the  ibail. 

11  l^emabcalfoa  bitch  betibeenctbc 
ttbo  ibailcs,  fojtfje  water  of  the  oibe 
poole : but  re  banc  not  loobcb  bnto  tiic 
maber  thereof,  neither  bab  refpectbh* 
to  !)tm  that  fafljioncb  tt  long  agoe. 

11  3lnb  m  that  bar  bib  the  JLozb 
<5  ©  jd  of  holies  rail  to  lbecpmg  anb  to 
mourning,  anb  to  baibncfle,  anb  to  gir- 
btngibttbfacBccIotb. 

13  3nb bcl)olb  tor anb  giabncftcflar 
tug  oren  anb  billing  fbeep,  eating  flcfl), 
anb  bjinbing  vbine;  *  let  bs  catc  anb 
bnnBcfaz  to  mo?roib  lbc  (ball  bic. 

14  3nb  it  ibas  rcucaicb  m  mine 
cares  or  the  fL«r>Ki?  of  boftes;  furclr 
tfjts  intriuittc  (bailnotbcpttrgcb  from 
rou ,  tillrec  Die,  fartl)  tlje  H02D  e>  o  jd 
ofrjoftes. 

15  <E  Xbus  fartl)  tI)cH02b(!5o© 
ofrjoftes,  <5oe,  get  tbee  bnto  this  tmv 
furer,cuenbnto^>l)cbna,ibljicIj>soucr 

tfjCl)OUfC,andf.iy; 

i6  nabatbaft  thou  here;  anbibbom 
Daft  thou  here,  that  thou  haft  be'ibeb 
thee  out  a  fcpulcl)2C  here ,  ||  as  bee  that 
belbetb  Dim  outafcpulcDie  on  high,  and 
tDat  grauctb  an  babttanon  foi  btmfclfe 
marotHci 

17  zBcDolb,  !|  tDe  %  o  k  e>  ibill  carr 
tDcc  aibar  ibitb  a  t  nugbne  captuutic, 
anb  ibill  furclr  coucr  tluc. 

is  lie  ibill  furclr  bioleutiv  ntrttc  anb 
totfetbec,  like  a  ball  into  at  large  conn- 
trcr:  there  (halt  tboubtc.aubthcrctbc 
charctsof  thr  glojrfhaii  1*  the  (bameof 
thr^o2bshoufc. 

19  3ltiu  3J  ttull  D2ittc  thec  from  thr 
ftation,  anb  from  thr  ftate  (ball  he  pull 
tbec  bourne. 

20  c  3ltib  it  (hall  conic  to  paffc  m 
that  bar ,  that  3  null  can  mr  ftruant 


"lob  1 1. 14. 
rcuc.3.7. 


]\9r,tnfirH- 
mtn:i  of 
violet. 


Cltabim  the  foime  of  ^tibial) 

21  anb  3  ibtll  clothe  Dun  ibitb  thr 
robe,  anb  ftrcngtDen  him  Kbith  thr  g»r- 
blcanb^ibil  commit  thr  goticrnmcnt 
mto  bis  hanb,  anb  Dc  (baibc  a  father  to 
the  inhabitants  of  JJcrufalcm ,  anb  to 
thehoureofjubah. 

22  ana  the  iter  of  tiic  houfc  of£>a= 
utb  ibill  31  larbpon  his  (houlbcr:  fohc 
(bail  *  open  anb  none  (hall  (but,  anb  he 
[hall  (but  anb  none  (hall  open. 

23  3ln&  3J  ibill  fatten  him  as  a  nailc 
m  autre  place,  anb  hcfljaibcfoz  a  glon- 
ous  tl)20ttcto  his  fathers  houfc. 

24  ^nb  tijcrfljall  Dang  bpon  Dim 
all  the  glo^r  of  his  fartjers houfc,  the 
offTpmtg  anb  the  tftuc,  all  bcffcls  of 
final!  (inanttnc :  from  the  bcffcls  of 
cups;cucn  to  all  the  1 1  bcffcls  of  flagons. 

25  gin  that  bar ,  fartl)  the  %  <©  h  t® 
ofhoftcs,fl)aiithcnatiethattsfaftencb 
m  the  fure  place ,  be  rcmooueb ,  anb  be 
cut  boibnc  anb  fall:  anb  tbc  burbctt  tDat 
was  bpon  tt  (bail  bec  cut  off :  foz  the 
!L©i3Pbati)fporienit. 

C  HA  P.    XXIII. 

1    Thcrmferableoucrrhrowof  Tvre.  17  Their 
vnhappie  recurne. 

f^^^TS?c  burbctt  of  3Tr2C.ftoUilc 
»  rcc  ft)ips  of  Xarflttn) ,  fo: 
^»it  ts  laibe  maftc,  fo  that 

mM!^  trtngttt:  from  the  lanb  of 
Chimin  it  ts  rcucaicb  to  them. 

2  23c  tihu ,  ycc  inhabitants  of  the  t«* 
rlc ,  tl)ou  lbhom  the  merchants  of  n  ' 
bon,thatpaffcoucr  tljcfca,  Ijattc  rcplc 
ttttheb. 

3  3lttb  br  great  lbatcrs  the  feebe  of 
S>tho2,r!)chanicftofthcrutcr  1  herrc- 
itcncvb,  anb  flje  is  a  mart  of  nations. 

4  26c  thou  a(bamcb,£):rtboti  foz 
thcfcahathfpoHcit,  cucntljcftrength  of 
the  fca,fartng;  ,5trattclltiot,tto2b2tttg 
foo2tl)  cbtityen.  neither  bocSJuottrin) 
bp  rong  men,  nor  bnttg  bp  btrgtnes. 

5  3(s  at  ttjc  rcpo2t  concerning  £■ 
grpt,fo  (ltaithcr  be  fojclrpatttcbatthc 
rcpo2tofXr2c. 

6  0aftcrcoucrtoXarn)tfl),holble 
re  inhabitants  of  the  rlc. 

7  ^  thtsrour  torotis  cine,  lbhofc 
annqmnc  ts  of  ancient  bares  <  her 
o)bnc  feetc  n^ail  carr  her  t  afarrc  off  to 
fotottrnc. 

8  loho  hath  taltcti  this  cottnfcii  a^ 
gamft  Xr?c  the  croibtung  cne,  ibhofe 
merchants 


\Hcb.frcm 
tfjrre  ojf. 


AgainftTyre.         Cliap.xxni).      Curfeforfinnes. 


\H<b.l 
Uttr. 


\tol 


\H't.gi> 


II  Or, comer- 
mngamer- 

■hant  m.tn. 
HekCwa- 

n. 

\0r, 

'rengths. 


t  Heb.it  foal 
vnto  Tyre 
thefongof 

^harlot. 


\UcbMic, 


\Keb.pr- 
nerteththe 
face  thereof. 


merchants  ace  pontes,  Vbljofc  ttaffi 
ciuecsacctDeljonoutablcoftDecactlj* 

9  XDcfL€>KS>ofDoftesl)atDpuc; 
pofeb  it,  t  to  (lame  tlje  pzibe  of  all  gio?p, 
and  to  bzing  into  contempt  all  tDe  Dono* 
cable  of  tDe  cactlj. 

10  0a(Te  tljzougl)  tDy  lanb  as  a  tiucc 
fl>  baugljtcc  of  Xacfljift) :  there  is  no 
mozctftcetigtD. 

ii  $eftcctcDeboutl)isDaim ouecrtjc 
fca,  Dec  fljooftc  tlje  Ringbomes :  tijc 
%  ©  m  iDljatlj  giucn  a  eommanbcmcnt 
llagainft  tlje  meccDant  one,  tobefttoy 
tDe||ttcongDolbcstl)eteof. 

ii  2(nbDcfam,  XDou  (Daitnomoze 
tcioice,  €>  t^ou  oppzcfTco  l)icgm,uaugl)' 
tec  of  ZiDon:  acifc,paflcouccto  CDifc 
tim,  tftccc  alio  0>ait  tDouljauc  no  ceft. 

13  26cDolo,tDcianbof  tfjcCalbeans, 
tfjis  people  mas  not  tin  tlje  3lftY2tan 
founbeb  it  foz  til  em  tljat  DiDcl  in  tlje  VoO> 
beencue:  tDeyfctPptDc  toibecstDete; 
of,  tDey  raifcb  top  tlje  palates  tDeceof, 
and  jjcb?ougl)tttto  cuinc 

14  $omle  ye  ujips  of  Xacftnfl) :  foz 
youc  ttccngtl)  ts  lam  ibafte. 

15  ^nbitlDalicometopaflcintDat 
bay,tDatXyzefl)ailbcfo?gottcnfcuen* 
tie yccces accozbing  to  tDebayes  of  one 
Hing:  aftec  tlje  cnb  of  fencntie  yceres 
t  fljail  Xyzc  fing  as  an  Ijaclot. 

16  XaltcanDacpe,gocabouttDecity 
cDou  Ijaclot,  that  Daft  btcne  forgotten, 
matte  froectmcloby,  fing  many  fongs, 
tljat  tDoumaycft  be  ccmcmbzcb. 

17  C3Dib  it  ujau  conic  to  pafle  aftec 
tfte  enbe  of  fencntie  yccces,  tfjat  tlje 
IL^iinDiMlbifitcXyze,  anbftjee  (nail 
tucnetoDecrjicc,  aim  fljau  committal 
nication  ttiitl)  all  tUcKtngbomcs  of  tftc 
roozlbDpon  the  face  of  tlje  cacti). 

is  3mul)cnneccl)atmi5e  atm  DctDire 
0)allbel)olme(retotl)c?lfiDKJD:tta)aU 
not  be  trcafutcb  noz  lam  Dp:  foz  Dec 
mcccljatmrscflialbcfoztDcnitDatMMl 
befoze  tDe  JL  ©  m  ©,  to  catc  fumcicntly , 
anbfoztbutable  clothing. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

1  The  dolefull  Judgements  of  God  vpon  the 
land.  13  A  remnant  (hall  joyfully  praifehim. 
16  God  in  his  judgements  fhall  aduance 
his  Kin°;dome. 

i€Dolb,tDelLfli>K)Dma* 
1  ftctlj  tDe  cactD  emptie,  anb 
;  mauetl)  it  tbaftcanb  t  tuc^ 
1  nctDitbpu'bebottme,  anb 
tfcattccctj)  aozoao  tDe  nv= 
habitants  theceof. 


z  ^nbitmalibeastbiththcpcoplc, 
fo  lPitl)  tDe  1 1  *pzicft,as  tbitlj  tDe  fetuant, 
fomitDDismaftcc,asmitDtljemam,fo 
lbitD  Dec  miftceffc,  as  ibitD  tDe  buyer, 
fo  ttntl)  tDe  fellcc,  as  VbitD  tDe  lenbec,  fo 
VbitDtDebozoVbec,  asmttD  tDctafterof 
bfutic,  fo  IbitD  tDe  giucc  oftofucicto 
Dim. 

3  XDc  lanb  (hail  be  Dttctly  emptier), 
aim  Dttccly  (potleb:foz  tDe?L£>iBP 
DatDfpoUcntDtstbom. 

4  Xhe  cacti)  moucnetlj  and  fauet!) 
amay,  tDe  mozlb  languifhctlj  anb  fa« 
bctlj  arbay,  the  t  DaugDtic  people  of  the 
cacti)  boc  languid). 

5  Xhe  cactD  alio  is  bcnlebbnbcrtljc 
inDabttants  tDcccof :  becaufc  tDcy  Ijaue 
ttanfgtcflcb  tDe  lames,  cDangeb  tlje  oz* 
binancc,  bzoacn  the  cucciaftmg  coues 
nant. 

6  XDercfozc  DatD  tlje  cucfc  beuou- 
cebtDccactlj,  anb  tDcy  tljatrnDclltljctf 
in  ace  befolatc :  tljctcfoze  tDe  inDabi- 
tants  of  the  cacti)  ate  burncb,  anb  fell) 
men  left. 

7  Xljc  nem  Ibinc  moucnetlj ,  tlje 
bine  iangui(l)Ctlj,ail  tlje  mccric  Ijcactcb 
bocfigl). 

s  XDe  mirtD  *  of  tablets  ceafctlj, 
tDcnoifc  of  tDcmtDatccioyce,  cnbctD, 
the  tor  of  tlje  Dacpc  ccafctD. 

9  %\yvp ujall  notbzinfee  Ibinc  \DitD 
afong,ftcongb?inBc(Dail  bee  bittcc  to 
tljemtDatbzmbeit. 

10  XDe  city  of  confiiGon  is  bm&cn 
bomne :  cuecvljoufc  is  fl)Utbp,tljat  no 
man  mav  come  in. 

11  XDecc  is  aecping  fo:  tbincintDe 
ftccets,allioj>isbacfecncb,tIjcmictljof 
tDe  lanb  is  gone. 

u  JntDccttieisieftbcfolation,  anb 
tDe  gate  is  fmittcn  tbitlj  tjcftcuttion. 

13  CnaDmtDusttfljalbetutbcmibft 
of  tlje  lanb  among  tDcpeople :  there  fhaii 
beastDefJbaHmgofanoliuctcec,  and  as 
tlje  gleaning  gcapcsrbDetttljc  Mintage 
is  bone. 

14  XDeymailiftbptDcirtooice,tljey 
fl)aifing,foztDemaieftV  of  tDe!L€)is52>, 
tljcy  ujail  tcieaioub  fcomtlje  fea. 

15  i©De«foze,  glojtfic  ye  tlje  %®\m> 
in  tDe  Hficcs,  eucn  tlje  0m\t  of  tlje 
%  ©  iss>  ®ob  of  3Jftaci  in  tDevlesof 
tDc5>ea. 

16  GiFcomtljetpttermoftpactof  tlje 
eactlj  Ijnue  Vbc  Deacb  fongs,  eucn  giojy 
totDecigljteonstbutSlam.t^yieatu 
neflc,  my  leanneffe,  moc  bnto  me :  tlje 
tceacljecous  bealccs  Ijane  Dealt  trea- 

cliecoud)', 


\Or,Prime. 

■Hofc.4.9. 


height  of  the 
peop/e. 


•Ier.7.37- 

3ndl6.9.& 
1  j.io.czra 
:£.i]..hor. 
2.11. 


\\Or,vitlltjci 


\Hel>.wing. 

\H'l>.lnuf 

nejfe  ttnne 
ormjfecret 
tome. 


Fearc,pit,and  fnare. 


Ifaiah.        Death  fwallowed 


"iere.48. 

44. 


f  Hcbr.vi- 

fltC  VfOlt. 


\  Hlhr.  ixith 
ibe  gM  be- 
ing ofprt' 
(oners. 
'\VrtdtM- 
%fon. 

)|  Or, found 
■wantins. 

'Chap.  1  \. 
IO.crc.51. 
7.iocl2.;r- 
andj.r  c. 
\Or  .there 

jbaltreglory 
before  bts 

ancients. 


cberouflv  ,yea  tt)ctrcachcrou0  Dealers 
baue  Dealt  toecy  tccacbccoufly. 

17  ^care^nDtljcpit.f  tnefnart^rc 
Upon  thee,  O  inhabitant  of  the  earth. 

is  3(nDit  (ball  come  to  paffe,  thuijc 
tt)ho  flceth  from  the  noifc  of  the  fcarc, 
(ball  fall  into  the  *  pit ;  anDbc  that  com 
mcth  Up  out  of  the  nuDft  of  the  pit,  fljai 
be  taiietun  tbc  fnare:  foz  tbc  UnnDoibcs 
from  on  high  arc  open,anD  the  fonnoa 
ttons  of  the  earth  Doc  (bane. 

19  Xbc  eartb  is  btterly  bzoUcit 
Dotbnc,  the  earth  is  tlcanc  DtflblucD, 
ttjc  cartl)  ismoneD  ercccDmgiy. 

10  Xhc  earth  (ballreele  toanDfro, 
liftc  a  DmnnarD ,  anD  (ball  be  rcmooiieD 
liftc  a  cottage ,  anD  the  traufgreffion 
thereof  (ball  be  bcame  bpon  it,  anD  it 
(ball  fall ,  anD  not  rtfc  agamc. 

11  3nD  it  fljail  come  to  pattern  tbat 
Day,tbat  theft©  isp  (ban  tpimtfb  the 
boftc  of  thebigh  ones  that  a,e  onbigb, 
anD  the  Rings  of  the  cacti)  bpon  tljc 
cartl). 

n  3lnD  tbey  (balbc  gatbereb  toge^ 
tber  taS  pjifoncrs  arc  gatbctcD  m  the 
1 1  pit,  anD  (ball  be  (butbptntbepjtfon, 
anD  after  many  Daycs  (ball  tbey  bee 
UbifitcD. 

u  Xbcntbc*q3ooucfballbccon* 
fonnDcD  ,  anD  the  Suinuc  afbameD, 
lbhcn  the  1L  0  k  &  of hofts  (ball  rcignc 
in  mount  Zfon  atiDiu^Jeruralem,  anD 
1 1  befoze  I)i6  ancients  glojioufly. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  The  Trophet  praifeth  God  ,  for  his  iudc,e- 
ments,  6  for  his  fauingbencfits,  <?  and 
for  his  victorious  filuation. 

%  o  is  © ,  tbou  art  my 
ooD.^ibiiieraitthccll 
mm  pzaifc  thy  jftamc  foi 
„  thon  haft  Done  lbonDcr- 
.J&&  full  things ;  tin  connfcls  of 
olD  ik •faitbfulncfTc  and  trnctb. 

1  foi  thon  haft  maoc  of  a  nfic,  an 
hcapc ,  of  a  DcfcnccD  city,  a  nunc :  a  pa- 
late of  ftrangcrs,  to  be  no  cmc ,  it  (ball 
ncucr  be  built. 

i  Xbcrcfojc  (ball  the  ftrong  people 
glo-'inc  thee,  the  city  of  the  terrible  nati- 
ons (ban  fcarc  thec. 

4-  .f  0:  thou  haft  bene  a  ftrcngtb  to 
thcpoo:c,aftrcugthtothcnccDymhis 
Diftrcflcarcfiigcfromthcftomicaflia 
Doiv  from  the  heat ,  lbhcn  the  blaft  of 
the  terrible  ones  is  as  a  ftonnc  wmi\  the 
man. 


5  Xhou  (bait  b2iug  Doibnc  tbc  noife 
offtrangcrs,  as  the  beat  m  a  D2y  plate; 
ci.cn  the  heat  ttntb  the  (IjaDoU)  of  a 
rtouD :  the  bianch  of  the  terrible  ones 
IbaibctoougbtloU). 

6  <[  3tuD  m  this  mountainc  (ball 
therein©  of  hoftcsmaKe  bntoau 
people  a  feaft  of  fat  things ,  a  fcaft  of 
lbmcs  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of 
marrolb,  of  lbmcs  on  tljc  lees  Vbdi 
rcfiucD. 

7  3lnD  he  U)U  meftr 0  y  in  this  mouu  > 
tame  the  face  of  thecoucrmg  tcaftoucr 
aiipcople.anDtbcbaiiethatisfp.zcaDO' 
ucr  all  nations. 

8  li>c  lbiirfmailoibbpDeatb  in  bit- 
tonc,anDthe?lo2D00jDmii*ftiipea- 
may  tear  cs  from  ofFaifaccs,anD  tbc  re- 
buke of  his  people  (bail  be  tahc  avbay 
from  offau  the  cactlj :  fo;  tbc  %  ©  is  © 
hatbfpottcttit. 

9  C  3lnD  it  (balbc  faiD  in  tbat  Day, 
Hoc,  this  is  our  <soD,  ibebaucibaitcD 
fo^bmi  ,anDbclbillfaucbs:  this  is  tbc 
?L©is©,  ibe  baue  ibaiteDfo2  bun ,  toe 
ma  be  glaD  ,anD  r  cioy  cc  m  Ins  faiuation. 

10  jro:  in  tl)is  mountainc  (ball  the 
banD  of  tbc  %  o  is  ©  reft ,  anD  £J3oab 
(baibc  1 1  troDcn  Doibnc  bnDcr  bim,cuen 
as  ftraib  is  ||  troDeu  Doibnc  fo?  tljc 
Doungbtll. 

1 1  3tnD  bee  fliaii  fpzeaD  foojth  \)i& 
banDs  m  the  miDft  of  them ,  as  bee  tbat 
fmimmctb  fpjcaDcthfoojtb  bis  hands  to 
fajimme :  anD  bee  (bail  bung  Doibnc 
their  p?iDc  togctber  lbitb  tihefpoilcs  of 
their  banos. 

u  3lnD  tbc  foztrcEfc  oft!)c  blgb  fotf 
of  thy  ibaiics  (ball  hec  bung  Doibnc, 
lay  loib,  and  bung  to  tljcgroumvuen  to 
tljcDuft. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  A  fonr;  inciting  to  confidence  in  God,  5  for 
his  Judgements,  n  and  foi  hisfauourtohis 
people,    -o  An  exhortation  to  wait  on  God. 

fi  tbat  Day  (ball  this 
fong  bee  fung  m  the  lauD 
of  giuoah  ;  H3ec  banc  a 
ftrong  titicfaiuation  lbill 
God  appoint  tot  ibaiics 
anD  buiibarKcs. 

r  Open  ye  the  gates,  tbat  tbc  righ- 
teous nation  lbbicb  Uccpetlj  tbc  ttructlj 
may  enter  m. 

3  Xhou  lbilt  Uccpc  him  m  t  perfect 
peace,  w  hok  1 1  inuiDe  is  ftayeD  on  thee  ■,  bc> 
caufchctruftctbuubcc. 

4  Xruft 


]  low  vp. 
J  f  Hebr,  co- 
utred. 


*i.Cor.ij. 

5S- 
*Rcud.7. 
17.2nd  31. 
4. 


\\Or,threJh- 

||  Or,threpi- 
edtn  Af,td- 


t  Htlr. 

tru'th, 

pcAccfencr. 
|  Orjhoufcbt, 
erim.tcinj- 
non. 


Prayenn  trouble.      Chap.xxvij.    Therefurre&ion. 


\Hcb.tht 


rhypeop/e. 


\\Or,ferV7. 


\Htb.[t;rct 
jpeecb. 


4  XruftycintbelLfiDisiDfoieuer: 
fojintbefUDis©  Jje^flxua^iiteuet' 
lafttngttrengtb.  " 

5  C  f  02  b«  bjingetb  bonmc  tbcm 
tbat  brbell  on  bigb ,  tbc  lof  tic  cine  be  lay; 
ctb  it  loWi  Ijc  layctb  tt  lolb ,  cucn  to  tbc 
greunb ,  be  bnngctb  it  ettcn  to  tbc  bu&. 

6  mbc  footc  (bail  trcabc  it  boibne, 
euentbefeeteof  tbepooje,  and  tbeftcps 
oftbcnecoic. 

7  Xbe  lbay  of  tlje  tuft  >-.  bpngbt' 
neflc :  tbou  moft  topngbt ,  bocftlbcigb 
tbcpatboftbciuft. 

8  Pea  in  tlje  tbay  of  tby  3!ubgc; 
ments,£)  %  ©ra  EsbaueiDctbaitcbfo? 
tbec  i  tbc  befirc  of  our  fouic  is  to  tby 
/15ame,anb  to  tbe  remembrance  of  tbee. 

9  ffiitbmvfoulebaue3Jbcfireotbee 
in  tbenigot ,  pea  rbitb  nip  fpitit  Vbitbin 
me  tbill  3J  fecfee  tbec  early:  foz  tbben 
tby  lubgements  are  in  tbe  eartb ,  tbc 
inhabitants  of  tlje  tbozlb  tbill  leame 
rtgbteoufticflc. 

io  fict  fauour  be  fbeibcb  totbetbie; 
feet),  yetibrtl  bee  not  leame  rigbteoufc 
neffe:  in  tbe  lanb  of  bpngbtnefle  rbill  be 
bcale  bniuftly ,  anb  tbill  not  bcbolb  tbe 
maicftieoftbclLfimjB. 

n  ?L©is©,  whentbybanbisiiftcb 
&p,tbcytbillnot  fee:  but  tljey  fljau  fee, 
anb  be  aftjameb  foz  their  cnuic  ||  at  tbc 
people ,  yea  tbe  fire  of  tbine  enemies 
(bailbcuourctbem. 

ii  C1t€>iE©,  tbou  ttnlt  ozbaine 
peace  foz  bs :  foz  tbou  alfo  baft  ibzougbt 
all  our  tboj&cs  Hints. 

i j  ^)?L€)HDour(5ob,otlierio?bes 
befibes  tbec  baue  bab  bonunion  ouer 
bs :  but  by  tbee  only  tbill  tbe  mabc  men? 
tionoftbyiframe. 

14  Xljcy  at e  beab  .tljey  (ball  not  line, 
tbey  are  beceafeb ,  tbey  (ball  not  rife: 
tberefoze  baft  tbou  toifitcb  anb  beftroy^ 
eb  tbem,  anb  mabe  all  tbeir  memozy  to 
perifl). 

15  1Lbou  baft  incrcafeb  tbe  nation, 
jD  JL  ©  is  w<,  tbou  baft  incrcafeb  tlje  na* 
tion ,  tbou  art  glozi&cb  tboubabft  re- 
mooucb "  farre  v.uo  ailtbeenbsoftbe 

eartb. 

16  %®  is  t>,  in  trouble  bane  tbey  W 
ftteb  tbee  :  tbey  potbzcb  out  a  t  pzaycr 
when  tbyebaftcning  was  bpontbem. 

17  flihc  as  a  tboman  tbitb  clitlbc 
that  bzatbctb  neere  tbe  tunc  of  berbcli 
ueric ,  is  inpame  »>d  cryctl)  out  mbcr 
pangs ;  fobaue  tbee  beenc  in  tby  figbt. 

j©  fL€>IH©. 

is  naee  baue  beeue  tbitb  cbilbc.ibce 


bauebecnempainc,  tbe  baue  asittucrc 
bjougbt  fooztb  ttunbe ,  tbec  baue  not 
tbzougbt  any  bcliucrauce  in  tbe  cartl), 
nettber  baue  rtjc  inbabitants  of  tlje 
tbozlb  fallen. 

19  Xby  bcab  men  (ball  hue ,  together 
with  my  beab  boby  (ball  tbey  anfe :  a? 
tbabc  anb  Ong  yee  tbat  btbell  in  buft: 
foz  tby  betbe  is  as  tbe  betbe  of  berbes, 
anb  tbc  cartlj  (ball  taft  out  tbe  beab. 

10C  Conic,  my  people ,  enter  tbou 
into  tt)y  cbambers,  anb  ft)ut  tby  boozes 
about  tbec,  bibc  tby  felfeastt  tbece  foz 
a  little  moment ,  tontill  tlje  inbignation 
be  oucrpaft. 

11  5fozbcbolb,tbe!L©iRiD*com; 
mctb  out  of  bis  plate  to  punifl)  tlje  in^ 
Ijabitants  of  tbc  eartb  foz  ttjetr  iniqui? 
tic :  tbe  eartb  alfo  (bail  bifttofe  bcr 
t  bloob ,  anb  ftjall  no  mozc  coucr  bcr 
Qame. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

1  The  care  of  God  ouer  his  vineyard.  7  His' 
chafiifements  differ  from  judgements.  12.  The 
Church  of  Iewes  and  Gentiles. 

0  tbat  bay  tlje  %<$> k© 
lbitb  bis  102c  anb  great 
anb  ftrong  fmozbc  (ball 
punifl)  JLeuiatban  tt\z 
t  piercing  ftrpent ,  euen 
ILcuiatban  tljat  croofteb  ferpent,  anb 
bee  (ball  flay  tbc  tyagon  tbat  is  m  tlje 
^>ca. 

2  3Jn  tbat  bay,  ting  yee  bntobfC;  31 
bincyarbofrcblbinc. 

3  31  tbc  3L©i3iD  bocbecpeit;  3 
tbill  lbatcr  it  tucry  moment :  left  any 
burtit^VbillBcepcitnigbtanbbay. 

4  if  uric  is  not  in  nice  :U)boU>oulb 
fcttbebnars  and  tbomes  agaiiiftmctn 
battciu  5Hboulb  ||goc  tbzougb  tbcm, 
*3  ibouib  burnc  tbcm  togctber. 

5  <Di  let  bim  tauc  bolbe  of  my 
ftrcngtb,  that  be  may  mabc  peace  rbitb 
mc,and  be  (ball  mabe  peace  tbitb  me. 

6  ^ccfljall caufe tbemtbat  comcof 
Uatob  to  tabe  rootc :  Jlfrael  fljau  blof- 
fomc  anb  bubbe,  anb  fill  tbc  face  of  tbe 

nwlbVbitbfruitc. 

7  C^athbtefmittcnbim, tas bee 
(mote  tbofc  tbat  fmotc  bun  <  or  is  Dec 
flainc  accojbing  to  tbc  flaugbtcc  of 
tbemtbat  are  (lame  by  bun  *. 

8  Jn  mcafure  ||  lbbcn  it  fliootctb 
foonb ,  tbou  ibilt  bebate  tbitb  it :  II  bee 
ftayctb  bis  rougb  ibmbe  ui  tlje  bay  of 
tbccaftibmbc. 

9  J5y 


■Mic 


\Heb.b!aedj 


Itks*  b&rre. 


Or,  nurch 


f  H'  b.ACCor- 
dtnftotke 
flnk{  tf 

ihsfe. 

||  Or,  *litK 
iheufindrll 

itfuorth. 
Xflr,wh.-n  he 

remotstthit. 


Jacob  purged. 


Ilaiah.   The  peoples  fecuntie. 


j  Or j  Sunn; 
images. 


\Heb.brc- 


7  hfel/r.mth 

(fete. 


9  216  v  this  therefore  (ball  the  tniqur 
tit  of  Jacob  be  purgcb ,  aim  this  uall 
the  fruit,  to  tabc  aibav  bisfinnc :  lbben 
be  mahctb  all  the  (tones  of  the  aitatas 
cbaiae  {tones,  that  arc  beaten  m  fun- 
ber,  tbegroucs  anb  ||  images  (ball  not 
ftaubbp. 

io  J3cttbebcfenccbcitie  (ballbe&efo 
late,  and  the  habitation  fortahen,  auD 
left  libc  a  lbilberncu"c :  there  (ball  tlje 
caifc fccDc, anb there  (ball  be  lie botbnc, 
anb  tonfumetbc  bzawbestbercof. 

ii  D3bcn  tbe  bougbes  tbcreofarc 
ttntbereb,  tbcvibailbcbjORenoff:  the 
Women  tome  and  fct  tbcm  on  fire:  fo; 
it  ts  a  people  of  no  bnbcrltanbtng : 
therefore  bee  that  mane  tbcm  lbill 
not  bane  mercic  on  tbcm,  anb  tjee  tbat 
fomicb  tljem,  ibtil  (bcibc  tbcm  no  fa- 
uour. 

n  C3no  it  (ball  tome  to  pafTe  in 
tbat  bap,  tbattbc  Hois©  (ball  bcatc 
off  from  tbe  cbancll  of  tbe  riuct  bnto 
tbe  Itrcamc  of  cgypt,  ano  vc  (ball  bec 
gatbereb  one  bv  one,®  vc  cbtlbjcu  of 
3(fracl. 

n  3Jub  it  fl)all  come  to  pafJc  in  tbat 
Dap ,  tbat  tbe  great  trumpet  (bail  bec 
bloibcn ,  ano  tljcv  (ball  come  ibbitb 
lbcrc  rcabv  to  penfb  in  tbe  lanb  of  %l 
fp:ui,  ana  tbe  outcatts  m  tbe  lanb  of  €< 
gvpt,anb  Qjall  lbojflnp  the  1L  ©  is  ©  in 
tbe  bob>  mount  at  Jcrufalem. 

CHAP.     XXVIII. 

i  The  Prophet  thieatneth  Ephraim  for  their 
pride  and  dmnkennefTe.  5  Thercfiduefhall 
be  aduanced  in  the  Kingdom  of  Clm/i.  7  He 
rebuketh  their  en  our.  9  Theii  vntowardnes 
to  le.irne,  14  And  their  fecuritie.  16  Chrift 
the  fure  foundation  is  proinifed.  18  Their  fe- 
curity  fhalbe  tried.  t?  They  are  incited  to  the 
confederation  of  Gods  difcreet  prouidence. 

©ctotbccrotbncofpnbc, 
to  tbcbnmUarbs  of  <£pb:a; 
nn,  lbbofeglo.'iousbcautv 
is  a  fciDmg  floilne,  ibbitb 
'  a  are  on  tbe  beau  of  the  fat 
bailees  of  tbcm  tljat  arc  t  oucrcomc 
\l)itbiDiue. 

i   rscbolb,  tbe  Horn  hath  ainigbttc 
anb  (icons  one,  winch  as  a  temped  of 
baiiea.u!aDtltroring(tomic,asafloob 
of  migbnc  lbatrrs  oucrfloibing ,  (bail 
call  botbne  to  tbe  earth  With  the  banb. 
3    Xhc  croibnc  of  pnbe ,  the  bzuii 
barbs  of  tfpb.jaim  (ball  be  trobcntbti 
bcrfcetc. 


4  3nb  the  glonous  beaunc  ibbitb 
.sontbebeaboftbcfatbailcv,  (baiibee 
a  facing  floltoic,  and  as  the  bathe  fruitc 
befoje  the  ftimmct :  tbbtcb  when  he  that 
loobetb  toponit,  fecth  it,  ibhilc  it  isvct 
utbisbanD.hcteatetbltbp. 

5  €C3Jn  that  bap  (bail  the  %  ©  is  © 
of  holts  be  fo:  a  troibnc  of  glow  >  ant) 
fo:  a  biaocmc  of  bcautie  bnto  the  rcfibuc 
ofljispcoplc: 

6  3lnD  foz  a  fpirit  of  tubgement  to 
him  that  littctb  tniubgemcnt,  anb  fo? 
(trcngtb  to  them  that  turnc  the  battcll 
to  tijc  gate. 

7  C  2Sut  tbcv  alfo  bauc  erccb 
through  lbtnc ,  anb  through  (trong 
biinftc  arc  out  of  the  lbav:  tbepneft 
ano  the  pjopbet  hauc  crrco  through 
(trong  Dnnftctbev  arc  froallotbebbp  of 
ibinc :  they  arc  out  of  the  lbav  through 
(trong  bnnbe,  tbevcrtem  bifion,  tbcv 
(tumble  m  iuDgcmcnt. 

8  Jfo?  ail  tables  arc  full  of  bomite 
and  filtbincfle,fo  that  there  isno  plate 

deane. 

9  C  ©home  (ban  he  teach  bnoifr 
lebge  <  anb  whom  (ball  he  mabe  to  ton* 
Detftan&tbottruienbcmtbatarelbca' 
neb  from  tlje  milftc,  and  tyamen  from 
the  tyealts. 

10  foi  p?cccpt||niuftbebponp?etept, 
precept  bpon  precept ,  line  bpon  line, 
line  bpon  line,  here  a  btle,  and  there  a 
Utle. 

1 1  jFoz  tbith  t*  Hammering  lips  anb 
another  tongue  Hlbillbe  fpcabctotbis 
people. 

11  %o  Jbhomhcfaib,Xhisis  thcrclt 
wherwithpc  map  taufc  the  ibcatp  to  rclt, 
anb  this  n  the  rcfcc(t)ing,vct  thcplboulb 
not  bearc. 

ib  a5uttbenio?bofthe?L€>is3DU)as 
1  bnto  them,  pjetept  bpon  p:cccpt,  p?e« 
tcpt  bpon  precept,  line  bpon  line,  line 
j  bpon  line,  here  a  utlc  and  there  a  litle: 
tbatthcpmightgoeanbfallbarbibarb, 
anbbeb?oHeu,anbfnareb,anbtabcn. 

14  Cnabcrcfojehearcthcibojbcof 
the  H©is©,  pec  fcomcfuU  men ,  that 
rule  this  people  tbbtcb  is  m  Jcrufolcm. 

15  26ecaufc  vc  hauc  faib ,  mc  hauc 
inabe  a  coucnaut  Ibitb  bcath,  anb  lbitb 
hell  arc  lbc  at  agreement,  lbhen  the  o= 
utrflotbingfcourgclbaiipafrethojotb, 
itlliallnottome  bntobs:  fozibcehauc 
maoc  lies  our  refuge,  anb  bnber  falfe- 
boob  banc  uic  bib  our  fclues : 

i6  C  Xbcrcfoje  thus  faith  tbe  ILozb 
(5©©,  23eIjolbc,  31  lav  in  zion  fo2  a 

foun 


\  Hrh.fu.ll. 
lownh. 


\Heb.the 
bearing. 


\\Oryha:b 
bene. 


\  Heb.fi  am- 
mermts  of 

hfft. 

*  I. Cor.  14. 

21. 

\\Or,hth*th 


The  corner  ftone.  Chap.xxix.      Againftlerufal 


em. 


•Pfcl.  1 1 3. 
22.  match. 
11.4j.acl: 
4. 11. 1.  pec 

2.6,7,8. 

and  to.  1 1 


treadtrg 
downetoit 


\\Ortvhe* 
hejhaHmak* 
you  to  vn- 
dtrfiand 
doUrinc. 


*  2.  Sain.  5. 
20. 1.  chro 

I4-M- 

Mofti.io. 
1  a.  j. lam. 
y.15.  i.clir, 
14.16. 


Or,  the 

•heat  inthe 
principal 
place  and 
parley  inthe 
appointed 
place. 
lOrJpett. 
\Hcb. bor- 
der. 

[Or,  and  he 
btndeth  it  in 
fnchfort  as 
GU  doth 
teach  him. 


founbation ,  *attone ,  a  rrpcu  ftone ,  a 
pjettous  tower  ftone ,  a  fare  founbatu 
on :  Dec  that  bclccucth ,  fbail  not  maae 
hatte. 

17  3iuDgcment  atfo  ibili  gj  lap  to 
thelme,anb  rtghteoufneffe  to  the  plum; 
met :  anb  the  hailc  than  fujccpc  aibap 
the  refuge  of  rpes,  anb  the  waters  (hail 
ouerfloib  the  htbmg  plate. 

18  C:3nbpourcoucnantlbitbbcatb 
fbaibcbifanullcb ,  ant)  pour  agreement 
lbith  Dell  ft)ail  not  ftanb ;  ibbcn  trjco- 
uerfloiblng  fcourgc  (ball  paft"e  tl)o- 
rougj),  then  pec  (baibcttrobcnboibnc 
bj»tt. 

19  ifrom  the  time  that  it  goctb 
fo,ith,ttft)allta&epou  :  fo;  morning  bp 
mommg  (ball  it  paflc  ouer ,  bp  bap  anb 
bp  night,  anb  it  fbalbe  a  Deration,  onelp 
||  tobnberftanb  tljc  report. 

to  3fo:thcbcbisfl)oncr,  then  that 
a  man  tan  ftcetch  bunfelfe  on  it :  anb  the 
coucring  narroibec ,  then  that  be  tan 
ityapbmtfclfcinit. 

xi  5Fonbc  lL©ia©  ftjaii  rife bp as 
in  mount  *  i&crasun,  be  fbalbc  tt>?orb  as 
in  the  ballep  of  *  dftbeon ,  that  tie  map 
bocbfsibojtte ,  bisftrangcibojRcanb 
bring  to  paffehisaet,btsftrangeact. 

22  iI5otb  therefore  be  pec  not  mot* 
feces ,  left  pour  banbs  bemabeftrong : 
foj  3  hauc  b  eatb  from  tfte  fLozb  <s  ©  jp 
of  boftcsaconfumption  cuen  betcrmi^ 
neb  bpon  the  ibbolc  earth. 

ij  C  d5iue  pec  care ,  anb  bcare  mp 
boptcbearBcn  anb  fjearc  mp  fpcaeb. 

24.  SDotb  the  plolbman  ploib  all 
bap  to  fouwboth  He  open  anb  bteafec 
tbetlobsofbtsgrounb* 

25  i©rjcn  bee  hath  mabc  plainc  the 
fate  thereof,  both  he  not  taftatyoabthe 
fitrbes,anb  fcatter  the  cummin,  anb  taft 
in  the  ||  pnneipail  ibbeatc,  anb  the  ap- 
pomtcb  barlp  anb  the  ||  rpe  m  their 
t  place; 

26  ||  jf 01  his  <£obbotb  tuttrutt  htm 
to  bifctetton.  and  uoth  teach  htm. 

27  5F02  the  fitches  arc  not  tbjcfljcb 
rwtbatbjcflnngmftrumcnt,  neither  is 
a  cart  tbbcclc  turnco  about  bpon  the 
cummin:  but  the  fittljesare  beaten  out 
lbith  a  ftaffe ,  anb  the  cummin  tbtth  a 
tobbe. 

18  25zeab  come  is  bmtfeb ,  be caufe  he 
ibill  not  eucr  be  ttocfbing  it ,  no*  tweaKe 
It  lbith  the  ibbeclc  of  bis  cart,  noj  bmife 
itlbithhtshojfemen. 

29  Xbis  alfo  commcth  foirtj  from 
the  %0mw>  ofhoftes.wh.chisibonbcr'' 


full  m  tounfell ,  and  crtcllent  in  ibo* 
femg. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

i  Gods  heauy  iudgement  vpon  Ierufaleni. 
7  The  vnfauableneffe  of  her  enemies. 
9  The  fencelefneflc,  13  and  deepe  hypo- 
crifie  of  the  Iewcs.  iS  A  promifeotYan- 
iftifkation  to  thegodly. 

4Dc  to  Strict,  to  3riel||tbc 
Cftie  where  £>autb  bibcit : 
abbepccpecretopccrc.let 
thcmtRUifacrifices. 
2  ^et  3J  ibillbiftrefTt 
3lncl,  anotherefhalbeheauinclTc  anu 
fo^roU) ;  anb  it  (bail  be  bnto  nice  as  3 
riel. 

3  2ub  31  U)Ul  campc  agatnft  thee 
rounb  about,  anbibiiuapfirgcagainft 
thee  lbith  a  mount,  anb  %  umi  raife 
fo?tsagamftthee. 

4-  3nb  thou  (l)alt  bee  b:ougl)t 
Doibnc ,  and  (bait  fpealic  out  of  the 
grounb,aiiD  thp  fpcach  fljall  be  lolb  out 
of  the  buft,  ano  thp  bopceajaibeas  of 
one  that  hath  a  familiar  fpirttout  of  the 
grounb,  anb  thp  fpcach  fl)aii  tu>ljifpcr 
out  of  the  buft. 

5  Q9o?couer  the  multitubc  of  thp 
ftrangers  njaibc  Iirc  fmau  buft,anb  the 
multitubc  of  the  terrible  ones  ftjalbc  as 
chaffe,that  paflcth  avbap  pea  tt  fl^aibc 
ataninftantfubbenip. 

6  3Chou  (halt  bee  bifitcb  of  the 
ILflDis©  ofhoftcs  lbith  thunber,  anb 

ibtthearthciuaHe,  ano  great  noifc,ibith 
fto?me  anb  tcmpcft,anb  the  flame  of  be; 
uounngfirc. 

7  C  ^nb  the  muinttibc  of  all  tfjc 
nationstbat  fight  agamft  ^nei ,  cum 
ail  that  fight  agamft  her  anb  her  mum 
tion>  anb  that  biftreflc  her ,  fbaibcasa 
b^amcofanightbifion. 

8  3lt  ftjau  cuen  be  asibhcnahun- 
grp  man  b^camcth,  anb  beholb  heca^ 
tethbuthe  aibalicth,  aubhisfoulci£ 
cmptte:oMStt)hcnari)irftieiiianrj2ca 
mcth ,  ano  beholb  hcomibcth;buthec 
aibahcth  ,anb  beholb  he  is  famt,  ano  his 
foulc  hath  appetite :  fo  fbail  the  mtilti 
tube  of  all  the  nations  bee,  that  figljta^ 
gamftmomuzion. 

9  <[£>tappourfeiucsanbibonber, 
1 1  crp  pee  out  ,ant>  ccp :  thep  arc  bniuhcn, 
butnotlbithlbmcthcpftaggcr.butnot 
lbith  ftrongbnnbe. 

10  ifoj  the  jtflDisB  hath  poitycb  out 
bponpouthefpintof  oerpc  fltepe,  anb 
hatlj  clofeb  pour  cpes :  tljc  pjopnets 

anb 


||Or,»A 

Ariel \\\lt 
is  the  /yen  if 
god:  Or, 
oft he  cit  tt 
\Hcbctttcff 
t ht  head). 


\  Heb,  feept 
Olchirpe. 


\\Ort-t*ke 

ycurjle.t(Hre 
and  riot. 


4:.  L 


iH 


ypocntes7an< 


Ifaiah.       rebellious  children.! 


tHd  hctdi 


||  0.   Iff,, 


"Mattli.  15 
S.wa-J.6. 


\Hcb.  I  Ml 
<tddc. 


'Iec.^9.7- 
obad.vcr-8 
I.  cor.  l.i  9 


*Ecclus.*3 
'5- 


'lfj.45.19. 


\H,b.Jh*ll 


anb  pout  t  rulers,  the  £>ccrshath  rjee 
cottcrcb. 

1 1  2lnb  the  tofiott  of  all  is  become  totv 
to  you,  as  the  rbo:ucs  of  a  |j  booftc  that 
is  fcaicb,rbhuhmcnbcliucrto  one  that 
isicarneb,  faying,  ftcabc  tbts,  3Jp?av 
thee :  anb  hec  faith,  3J  cannot,  fo?  it « 
fcaicb. 

ii  3uibthcbooBcisbcliuercbtohim 
that  is  not  itamcb,  faring,  Bcabe  this, 
3  p?ay  tfjec :  anb  he  faith,  3  am  not 
leatneb. 

15  Ci©hercfo?cthc!Lo?bfaib,*jro? 
annuel)  as  this  people  bzavb  necre  mcc 
ihith  their  mouth,  anb  lbitfh  their  lips 
oochonourmcbuthaucremouebthctr 
hcartfarrefrommc,  anb  theitfeareto 
ruarbs  mee  is  taught  by  the  p?cccpt  of 
men: 

14  Zhetcfo?c  bchoib,  1 5)  xtrni  p?o 
tccbtoboamaructlousttwttcamongfr 
this  people,  euen  a  macucilous  U)o?ltc 
anb  a  rbonber  :  *  fo?  the  ibtfcbomc  of 
their  ttnfc  men  fhall  perifh ,  anb  the  bn; 
bcrftanbittg  of  their  p?ubent  men  fhall 
bchib. 

15  naoebntothcmtfjatfccBcbccpeto 
hibc  tl)cir  counfcll  from  tlic  %  o  is  id, 
anb  there  ttwucs  arcm  the  barbe,  anb 
they  Cay ,  *naho  feeth  Ds  <  anb  ibho 
anoujethhs? 

16  Purely  your  turning  of  things 
bpfibc  bolbne  (hail  be  cftcetneb  as  the 
pottcrstiay:fo?fhallthc*tt)o?Kefayof 
him  that  mabc  it ,  l?c  mabc  me  not  <  02 
fhall  the  thing  framcb,  fay  of  him  that 
ftameb  it,H?chab  no  tonbcrftanbing  < 

17  isitnotyetaberylitlcU)hilc,anb 
Lebanon  (hall  be  turncb  into  a  fruitful 
fielb,  anb  the  frtilrfull  fielb  (hall  be  cftcc^ 
mcbasafo?rcfh 

18  C  3nb  in  that  bay  (hall  the  bcafc 
hcarcthcttto2bs  of  theboofee,  anb  the 
eyes  of  the  bltnb  fhall  fee  out  of  obfeu 
rltie,  anb  out  of  bathenclTe. 

19  Xhe  mccKc  alfo  t  (hall  incteafc 
their  ioy  m  the  ILfiDrnp,  anb  the  poo2C& 
mongnim(hailrcioiccinthcholy£)nc 
of  3  fr  acl. 

20  5F0?  the  terrible  one  is  b2ought  to 
nought,  anb  the  fcomcr  is  confumcb, 
anb  all  that  watch  fo:  imcuutic  arc  tut 
off: 

2  1  Zhat  maltc  a  man  an  offenbout 
fo:  a  lhojb,  anb  lay  a  fnare  fo?  him  rliat 
repjoutth  m  the  gate,  anb  turnc  afibe 
the  tuft  fo2  a  thmg  of  nought. 

22  Xherefo?c  thus  faith  the  Hs>k© 
ibho  rtbecmeb  3lb;aham ,  concerning 


tl;e  houfe  of  3idtob :  3'acob  (hail  not 
nombcafhamcb,  neither  fhall  his  face 
norb  mare  pale. 

zi  2Sutmhcnheefccthhisehilb2ctt 
the  U)02Ue  of  nunc  hanbs  m  the  mibft  of 
htm,  they  fhallfancftfie  my  #ame,  anb 
fanctific  the  $oly  £Dne  of  3Jacob ,  anb 
fhau  fear  c  the  00b  of  Uftacl. 

24.  Zhey  alfo  that  trrcb  in  fpirtt 
'.  t  fhall  come  to  bnberftanbing,  anb  they 
'  that  murmur cb ,  (hall  leamc  bocmne. 

CHAP.    XXX. 

The  Prophet  threauicth  the  people,  for  their 
confidence  in  Egypt ,  8  and  contempt  of 
Gods  word.  18  Gods  mercies  towards  his 
Church.  17  Gods  wrath,  and  the  peoples 
ioy  mthedeftruction  of  Allvria. 

j3De  to  the  rebellious  chtl- 
b2en,fayth  the  %®  is  3?, 
that  tabc  counfcll ,  but  no  t 
of  mcc  i  anb  that  coticr 
ltoith  a  touerutg,  but  not 
of  my  Spirit,  that  they 
may  abbe (innc  to  finite: 

2  Zhat  ltoalhc  to  goc  bolbne  into 
egypt,  ( anb  hauc  not  afaeb  at  my 
mouth)  to  ftrcngthnt  thctnfclucs  m  the 
(Ircngth  of  pharaoh,  anb  to  truft  tn  the 
thaboibofcgypt. 

3  Zhcrcfwe  fhall  the  ftrcngth  of 
pharaoh  bey  our  Cbamc,  anb  thctruft 
inthcfhabolbof£gypt,  your  confufion. 

4-  5^02  his  p2inccs  ibere  at  Zoatt, 
anb  his  amba(fab02S  came  to  $?anes. 

5  Xhcylbcrc  all  afhamcb  of  a  peo- 
ple that  toulb  not  p20fit  them,  no?  be  an 
hclpc  no?  p?ofttc,  but  a  fhatne  anb  alfo  a 
!rcp2orh. 

6  Xhcburbcnofthc  bcaflcsof  the 
!  3>outh :  tnto  the  lanbe  of  trouble  anb 
jangutfli,  front  ibhencc  come  thcyong 
anbolb  ivon,thcblpcr,  anbficne  flying 
ferpent,  they  lhill  cane  their  riches  bp^ 
!  on  the  fhoulbcrs  of  yong  affes ,  anb 
!  thctr  treafttrcs  bpon  the  bunches  of  ca 
mcls ,  to  a  people  that  (hall  not  p?ofttc 

them. 

7  JT02  rtKCgrypttans  fhall  hclpc  ut 
■  batnc,  anb  to  no  purpofc :  Xhcrcftnc 
!  haue  J  cricb  ||  conccmuig  this :  Hhcit 
;ftrengthistofttfhll. 

8  C /i5o\D goc,lb?itc itbcfo?cthem 
tn  a  tabic,  aubnotc  it  tn  a  boolte,  that  it 
may  bee  fo?  t  the  time  to  come  fo?cucr 
anbeuer: 

9  Xhatthis  is  a  rebellious  people, 
lying  chilb2cn ,  diflDzeu  thai  Hull  not 
hcarc  tyULAVo  of  tljc  Hon  ©; 

10  nDhicl) 


t  Htlr.Shill 
know  \w- 
dfjljndirt? 


}Ortt}  her. 


f  Heir,  the 
fdtterdn. 


Prophcfic  nor.  Chap.xxx.       Dcuouring  fire. 


|  Orfiivd. 


fHeh.  the 
bottcli  of 
fetter:. 


Or- it  tree 
bereft  of 
braxebe/j  or 
boHghest  or 


PfaU.ix. 

and  j  4.  g. 
prou.  1 6. 
20.icre.T7. 
7- 


\\Or,offref 
Jion. 


\Htlr.thc 
graur.i  ima- 
getofthjfil- 
uir. 


10  oaintlj fap to  tbc fcets ,  £>ccnot 
anD  to  tl)e  p2opbcts ,  i&opljeetc  not  \>n- 
to  bs  tigljt  tifings  :  fpcaKc  unto  bs 
fmootbtbmgs,p2opbcctcbecctts. 

1 1  <5ct  yt  out  of tlje  lbap :  turnc  afiue 
out  of  ti)t  part) :  caufe  ti)t  $olp  one  of 
3Jfrael  to  ceafefrom  befiwbs. 

12  lEhcrcfcue,  tints  faun  tf)e  $olp 
one  of  3Jftael :  25ccaufc  ye  befptfc  tins 
ibojb ,  ano  trutt  in  1 1  oppjeffion  anD  per? 
uerrneffe,auD(taprtjereon : 

1  j  Xberefiwrtjis  tniquttieujalbeto 
pou  as  a  bieatl)  rcabp  to  fall ,  froellmg 
out  in  a  btgb  ibail,ibbofe  bjcaKtitg 
tonunetl)  fubbcnlp  atanmltattt. 

14.  :anbbe(ballb2caBettastbeb2ea; 
auigof  tbe  potters  tbeffell,fbatisb20' 
feentn  pieces,  be  (ball  notfpate  i  fo  tbat 
ttjetc  fball  not  be  founb  tn  rtje  buttling 
of  it ,  a  fbcarb  to  taae  fire  front  tfje 
Ijcartlj ,  0?  to  taftc  ibatcr  wnhai]  out  of 
tljeptt. 

15  5fo?  tfjus  faitl)  tile  ?Lo2b  «3©ip, 
tbc  $olpone  of  3Jfrael,3ln  returning 
auureftfljallpe  be  faueb,  mcwietneffc 
anb  in  confibcnccu^lbepoutfttengtb, 
anbpciboulbnot: 

w  Butpcfatb;  Mo,  fo?  tbe  null  flee 
bpon  botfes .  tbcrefoze  (ball  pc  flec.^no 
tbc  ttttl  ttbe  bpon tbe  ftaift  >  tljcrcfojc 
fball  tbcptbatpittfocpou,beftBtft. 

17  £>ne  ttjoulanD  fliaii  flee  at  tt)e  re* 
bu&cofonc:at  tbetebu&eof  Sue,  (nail 
pe  flee ,  till  pe  be  left  as  a  ||  beacon  bpon 
tbctopof  a  mountain* ,  anb  as  an  en* 
fignconabill. 

18  C^nbtljerefoictbtlrtJelL^wjD 
tbaitfbatbemapbcgraciousbntopou, 
anb  rtjeccfojc  tbil  Ijc  be  cjcalteb  tbat  be 
map  tjaue  mercp  bpon  pou  :  fo:  rtje 
fL©  is  w>  is  a  <£ob  of  3Jubgntent.*25lcfc 
feb  are  alltbep  tbat  tbait  fo?  ftint. 

19  $ot  ti)t  people  fball  btbel  in  zton 
at  3JmUaiem :  rtjott  (bait  tbeepe  no 
moic :  be  c  ibill  be  berp  gracious  bnto 
tbee ,  at  ti)t  botccof  tbp  crp  ttrtjenbe 
(ball  beare  it,  be  ibill  ahfroere  tbce. 

10  ^nb  though rt)e ?Lo2bgiueponfbc 
bjcab  of  abucrutic,anb  fljc  Ibatcr  of  ||  a£ 
flictton,petfbailnottbpteartjcrsbere< 
mooueb  into  a  comer  anp  tnoze :  but 
tbtnc  epes  (ball  fee  tbp  teacljcrs. 

21  3lnD  tbtnc  cares  (bail  bcart  a 
tbojbbebinbertjee ,  faying;1i:bte'stbe 
ibap,  ibaiae  re  in  it,  tbbenpentrneto 
tbc  ngbt  banb,  anb  ibben  pe  turnc  to 
tljcicft. 

22  pt  fl)all  uefile  alfo  tbe  couertng 
oft  rtjp  grauen  images  of  filuer,anb  tlje 


m-.Hebr. 
haiitned. 


\Hcbr.hf- 

CcdvO. 


02nament  of  tbp  moulten  images  of 
golb :  tboufbait  tcaft  tbematbar  as  a  t  h^/m. 
menftruous  clotlj,  tljou  Qjalt  top  bnto  \"r- 
it,(I5cttbccbence. 

23  Xbcn  fl)au  be  glue  tbc  rainc  of  j 
tbpfecbtbattboufljaltfomtbcgrounb 
lbitbali ;  aubbieabof  tbcmcreafeoftbc 
cartb,  anbttnjaibc  fat  anb  plenteous: 
in  tbat  nay  fl;au  tljp  cattell  fecbm  large 
padures. 

24  XbcorcnitBenjife  anb  tbc  pong 
affes  tbat  care  tlje  grounb ,  (ball  catc 
II  clcanc  p20ucnbcr  lbbicb  batb  bene 
ibinnoibcb  Uiitb  ti)t  fboucll  anb  until 
tbefanne. 

25  ^nb  tbere  (ball  be  bpon  cttcrp 
btgb  mountamcanb  bpouetterptijigb 
btU,riuers  andfttcames  of  ttiaters,  m 
tbc  bap  of  tbegreat  flaugljtcc  ibljcn  tlje 
tolbctsfali. 

26  ^o.2couertbcltgbtoftbcfi|9oone 
fljalbc  as  tbcltgbtof  tbe  Suttne,  anb 
tbc  ligbt  of  tlje  ^>unne  fljali  befcuctv 
folb,astbe  ligljt  of  fetten  bapcs.mtbc 
bap  tbat  tbc  %  ©11©  btnbetb  bp  tbc 
bzcacb  of  Dispeople,  anb  beaietlj  rtje 
ftrofeeoftbcttibounb. 

27  C  20eljolbc ,  tbc  il5amc  of  tbe 
%  ©  ts  ?d  contmefb  from  far  returning 
tbttt)  bis  anger  ,|| anb  tlje bucben  there- 
of is  t  bcaup :  bis  lips  arc  full  of  inbtg; 
nation, anb  bts  tongue  as  a  beuott* 
ring  fire. 

28  3nb  b'S  fccatb  as  an  ouctflon> 
mgftreamc,  (ball  reacb  to  tbemibftof 
tbe  necne ,  to  ftft  tbc  nations  Jbttb  ti)c 
ficuc  of  banitie:  anb  there  diaibeabnblc 
intbeiarbesof  tijc  people  caufingthem 
tocrre. 

29  J^ee  (ball  baue  a  fong  as  in  tbc 
trtgbt,  when  a  bolp  folemnitie  is  nept, 
anb  giabttcfTc  of  beart,as  ibben  one  go= 
crt)  lbitl)  a  pipe  to  come  into  tbc  mouit* 
tatnc  of  tbc  %  ©  is© ,  to  tlje  t  migljtp 
oncof^Jfrael. 

30  3nbtbc!L£>tB3D(baUcaufctbis 
glozious  botce  to  bebcarb ,  anb  (ball 
(bctb  tbe  ligbting  botbne  of  bis  armc, 
ibitb  tbcinbtgnatton  of  bis  anger ,  anb 
tbtrtj  t^e  flame  of  abeuottnng  fire,  with 
fcattcrtng  anb  tempeft  anb  batleOones. 

31  ifoi  tb20ttglj  tbe  bopec  of  tbc 
Hots©  fl)ail  tbc  3Jflp2ian  be  beaten 
bolbnc,whichfntotcibitb  a  rob. 

32  3inb  t  tn  enerp  place  ibberc  tbc  7d~;$l 
grounbeb  ftaffe  fljall  paffe ,  ibbidj  tbc 
%  <$>  tsB  fball  t  lap  bpon  bun  ,(t  (ball  be 
ibttlj  tab;ets  anb  barpes :  anb  in  bat- 
tels of  (bafetngrbiiilje  figbtllibttb  it. 

jSDoo  33  ifo: 


j  Or, and  the 
'riettoujhct 
tfjUme. 
t  Htbr.  ;•,,.- 


XHth.rctks, 

\Htbr.lhc 
ghrjofhu 


tH;lr.t 


icd. 

\Hibr  tr.uft 

ttrniiyon 

him. 

\\Or.<t?/ti>itt 

thtn. 


Vaine  trull:  in  man. 


Ifaiah. 


Good  rulers. 


yajlcrdaj. 


mo  out* 


\  Or,  multi- 
tude. 


Cha.2.20 
|  Heb.  the 
idoleiofhis 
colde. 

\Or,f* 

feort  of  the 
(y»ord. 
\\Or,:ribtt- 
tdti-.htbr. 
for  melting , 

01  tribute* 


j j  5fozXopl)et  is  ozbaincb  tof  olbe; 
vea,  foi  the  King  it is  pjepareb ,  he  Ijatt) 
mabettbcepe  and  large :thc pile thereof 
is  fire  aubmuchWoob.tl^cathofthc 
ILfiPB©,  itbc  a  ftreamc  of  bzimftone, 

bOCthlUUblClt. 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

The  Prophet  fheweth  the  airfed  fo!ty,in  tru- 
fting co  Egypt,  and  forfakingof God.  6  He 
exhortetli  to  conueifion.  8  Hee  (heweth 
the  fall  of  Affyria. 

$>t  to  them  that  go  Down 
to  egvptfo?  helpe,  ann 
ftav  on  hojfcs,  anb  mtft 
m  charets,  betaufe  thev 
are  manv ;  anb  in  rjojfe^ 
men,  betaufe  thev  arc  berv  ftrong :  but 
trjcvloofeenotbntotfje^olponeof^f- 
rael.netther  fecfec  the  %  ©  is  ®. 

i  #ethcalfo  is  Wife,  anbWilltytng 
euiU,ano  ttitl  not  t  call  batfec  Ins  n>ojDs: 
but  tbill  arifc  againft  the  boufc  of  tf)c 
emu  Doers,  anb  againft  tlje  hclpc  of 
them  that  nwtte  iniriuitie. 

j  jfiow  the  egvptians  are  men  ant) 
not  (Sob,  anb  their  l)02(cs flefb  anb not 
fpirit :  when the  %  0  ft  jd  (bail  ftrettb 
out  his  fjanb ,  bo  th  he  that  helper!)  (ball 
fall ,  anb  hee  that  is  bolpcn  (ban  fall 
Doume ,  anb  thev  an  (ball  failc  togc 
ther. 

4  5F0?  tljus  Rath  the  %  &  ft  ©  fpo< 
benbittomc,  lURcasthc Ivon anb the 
vong  Ivon  roaring  on  his;  p;av ,  when 
a  multitubc  of  fbephcarbs  is  taileb 
foojth  againfthim.he  Wirtnotbcafraib 
of  their  Doitc,  noz  abafc  bunfelfc  fo?  the 
l!novfeofthem:fo(baiithc!Le>K32>of 
boftcs  tome  bownc  to  fight  foz  mount 
Zion ,  anb  fo?  the  hill  thereof. 

5  3s  birbs  n>ing,fo  wil  the  |U>k© 
of  hoftes  bcfcnb^crufalem,  befenbing 
alfo  beeWillbchucr>t,  and  patTing  oner, 
hcwiilp2c(crueit. 

6  f[  Xutuc  pee  bnto  him  from 
whom  the  cbilbjcn  of  Jfracl  bauc  beep- 
IV  ceuoiteb. 

7  5f 02  m  that  bap  eucrv man  (ball 
*  cart  WOofy  his  ibo  les  of  bluer ,  anb  t  his 
ibolcs  of  goib,  which  vour  ownc  hanbs 
hauc  mabc  onto  you  fo2  afinne. 

8  C  Xhcn  (bail  the  affljwm  fell 
With  the  (iuo:b ,  not  of  a  mighticman 
anb  tljc  fiuo2b,tiot  of  a  meane  man,(bai 
btuourehim:  but  hee  (ball  flee  llfrom 
the  fruo2b ,  anb  Ijis  voting  men  (ball  be 
,  Diftomfitcb. 


9  3inD  Ijcc  (ball  paffc  ouer  to  ||his 
ftrong  holbe  fo?  fcarc ,  anb  his  pnntcs 
ftjall  be  afratb  of  the  cnfignc,favth  the 
H©ft2sWbofcfirc  is  inzion,anDhiS 
fomacem^jerufalem. 

CHAP.    XXXII. 


\\Or,hu 

jircvgth: 

bet.  rocke 

IhMlpafc 

oiv.ijfcr 

fe're. 


The  blefsin^s  ofChriftcskingdome. 


9  De- 

Reftauration  is 


\  Hct.hu- 


\Htt,h*fit. 


Or,  elf 
gcuttf. 


folacion  is  forefhowen, 
promifed  rofucceede, 

1  Chow,  a  lung  (bai  rcigne 
'  m  righteoufnes,  anbpnn^ 
g  ces  (l;airule  m  inbgement. 
z  3nb  a  man  (ball  be 
_,-ssaBEs»«»!  as  an  hibing  plate  from 
thcibmbe,  anbatoucrt  from  the  tent; 
peft :  as  riucrs  of  water  in  a  b2ic  plate, 
as  the  fbaboU)  of  a  t  great  rottte  in  a 
tbeariclanb. 

3  3nb  the  evee  of  them  that  fccftjail 
not  be  buuiuc  -.  anb  the  eares  of  tljem 
tljat  hearc,  (ball  hearfcen. 

4  Xhc  heart  alfo  of  the  t  raft)  n)all 
bnber  ftanb  KnolVlcbge,  anb  the  tongue 
of  the  ftammercrs  fl;ail  bee  rcacicto 
fpcafecllplainelv. 

5  Xhe  biieperfon  (ballbc  no  mojc 
taileb  liberail ,  no?  the  thurlc  fevb  to  be 
bountifuii. 

6  i:02thcbilcpetfontt)ilfpeaftebil' 
lenicanbhis  heart  Will  ttiojnc  uuqii^ 
tie ,  to  pzamfc  hvpotnfic ,  anb  to  btter 
errour  againft  the  %  ou  3d  ,  to  maHe 
emptictbcfoulcofthehungrv,  anbhee 
tbill  taufc  thctyinhc  oftljctljtrfheto 
fail?> 

7  XDt  inrtruments  alfo  of  the  thur  le 
are  cuill  i  he  beuifeth  witfecb  beuitcs ,  to 
beftrov  the  poo2c  with  iving  wojbcs; , 
euen  ||  Wljen  the  ncebic  fpeafecth  nght. 

8  2i5ut  the  liberail  beuifeth  liberail 
tliuigs,  anb  bv  liberail  tijtngs  (ban  hec 
Hftanb. 

9  C  5Rife  i>p  ve  Bwmen  that  arc  at 
cafe:  heart  mv  boitcve  tarcldfc  baugl> 
tcrs,  gtuc  care  Pnto  mvfpccth. 

10  fijjanv f  bapes  anb  vecres  fljail  ve !  t  »< 
be  trottfalcb ,  vec  tarcleflc  women :  foz 
the  bmtagc  Qjail  fetlc,  tljc  gathering 
fljail  not  tome. 

1 1  Xrcmble  vec  iDomen  that  are  at 
cafc:bctronbleb,vetarclc(reoncs,ftnp 
veanD  mabc  vebarc,  anb  girb  fackedoth 
Upon  vour  lovues. 

ii  ILbty  fl)all  lament  fo:thc  tears, 
fo2 1  thcplcafautficlbes ,  foitljc  fcuirfull 
Vtnc. 

i  j  Upon  the  latin  of  mv  people  (ball 

tome 


•ijcrt, 


fields  ofde*- 
fee. 


Thefpoilcrfpoilcd.  Chaaxxxii).     Hypocrites  fcarc, 


||  0r,6«r- 

nmg  vpon* 


\\Ortc!ifit 
tad  watch- 
tffvcrtt 


*Chap.2p. 
<7- 


I  Or,  and  the 
eititlhMtie 
vttrrtj  aba- 

fij. 


come  top  tljomcs,  and  bztars,  Upcabpon 
all  tlje  Ijoufcs  of  lop  in  tljc  iopous  citic . 

14  asccaufe  tl)e  palaces  fljail  befoz- 
fatten,  tlje  multttiiDt  of  tlrjc  ctticfljail  be 
left,  tijejfozts  anb  toibzes  fljail  be  foz 
bennes  foz  euer ,  a  iop  of  Jbtlbafles,  a 
patturcofflocBes ; 

15  Untill  tljc  fpirrt  be  poibzcb  bpon 
bsfromonl)tgl),anbtljeJbtlbcrncfrcbe 
afcuitfulificio,  anb  tlje  frmrfulifielb  be 
eountebfozafozrefr. 

16  Xijm  *  inbgement  fljail  btbell  in 
ttjerbilbemefle,  anbrtgljteoufnefle  xt- 
maincmtljcfcuitfuU  fielb. 

17  ^tntttljc  tbozftc  ofrigljtcoufnefle 
fl)albc  peace,  anbtfje  effect  of  rigtjtcoufc 
ncfle,quictncu'c  atib  aflur  ancc  foz  eucr. 

18  3nb  mj>  people  fljail  blbeil  ma 
pcaccablcljabnation,anbinfurcbtbel' 
Ungs,anb  mauicttcflmg  places : 

19  naljcn  ft  fljail  Datle ,  comming 
boibnc  on  tljc  fojrcft;  ||anb  tljc  cittc  fljail 
bcloibtnalolbpiaee. 

20  2Sieu"cbjrepcctl)atfo*bbc0bcall 
ibaters,  tljat  fenb  fozttj  thither  tljcfecte 
oftljcorcanbttjcatrc. 

CHAP.    XXXIII. 

1    Gods  judgements  againft  the  enemies  of  the 
Church.   13   Thepriuiledgesofche  godly. 

€>eto  tljec  tljat  fpotleft, 

anb  tljou  waft  not  fpoilcb 

anbbcaieft  ttcacljerouflj', 

anb  ttjcy  bcalt  not  ttcartjc: 

^rouflv  lbitlj  tljec:  lbljcn 

tljou  ftjait  ceaft  to  fpoile,  tljou  Hjait  bee 

rpotlcb ;  and  uiljen  tf)ou(balt  mafeean 

cnb  to  ocaic  treacljcrouflp ,  ttjcy  fljail 

beaietrcacljccouflvibitlitljee. 

2  £>?L©JB£>,bcgcariousbntobs, 
lbc  tjaue  Ibaitcb  foztljee:  betljoutljcir 
armc  euer  j>  mozning,our  faluation  aifo 
in  tlje  time  of  trouble 

j  3lttUc noifc of  tljetumulttljcpco* 
pleflebrat  tlje  Uftingbpoftljvfelfc  tlje 
nations  lbetefcattereb. 
-  4  3lnb  pour  fpoile  fljail  be  gatljerebj 
like  tlje  gatljccmg  of  tljceaterpillec  :asi 
tlje  tunutng  to  anb  fro  of  fUcufts  fljail 
lie  tunnc  bpon  tljem. 

5  lEtjc  %  0  k  ©  is  craiteb : foz  Dec 
bJbelletn  on  IjigU ,  Ijeljatlj  filleb  zion 
lbitlj  iuDgement  anbrigljtcoumcfle. 

6  3nb  lbifebomc  anb  nnoiblcbgc 
(Hall  be  tlje  ftabilitte  of  tljy  times,  and 

\HAf<d»..  ftrengtlj  oft  faluation :  tlje  fcarc  of  tlje 

3L©ia©istjtetrcafuce. 
war *.$<*.    7   26erjolb,tljcir||baiiantonesQjail 


cr  j>  ibitljoutrtlje  ambaftabours  of  peace 
fljailibcepe  bitten?. 

8  3Dje  ijigfj  mapes  lye  tbaft  e  1  tlje 
ibap  faring  man  ceafetij :  Ije  Ijatij  bzo* 
ftenttjc  concnant,  Ijeljattjbefpilcb  tlje 
cities,tjc  tegatbetlj  no  man. 

9  Xlje  eartlj  moutnctlj  and  Ian* 
gmfljetlj :  ^Lebanon  ie  afljameb  and 
Hljciben  bourne  :£>ljaron  is  liae  ami* 
Dcrncs,anb  2Saftjan  anb  Carmcl  fljaae 

Off  their  fruits. 

10  i5olbibill5lrife,faitIjtlje?L©is©: 
nolb  ibilllJ  be  ejcaltcb,  nolb  ibW3  lift 
bpmpfclfe. 

11  J^cc  fljail  coneciucctjaffc,  pec  fljail 
bzing  foztljttubble  :pour  bzeatlj  as  fire 
fljaiibeuourcyou. 

12  3lnb  tljc  people  fljalbc  as  tlje  bur? 
ningsof  iyme :  astbomescutbpfijall 
rtjeybeburntintljefire* 

13  C  J^eare  pee  tljat  are  farre  off, 
tbljat  3}  ijaue  bone ;  anb  pec  tljat  are 
ncerc,acrmoiblcbge  mp  migljt. 

14  UHjc  Gnncrs  in  zion  areafraib, 
fcarcfulncfle  Ijatlj  furpnfeb  tlje  Ijrpo 
critcs :  tbljo  among  \>s  ftjall  blbeil  lbitlj 
tlje  bcuouring  fire  <  lbljo  amongft  bs 
fljail  blbeil  lbitlj  eucrlafttng  burnings? 

15  ^c  tljat  *  tbalHctl)  t  rigljteoiiQp, 
anb  fpeaHetlj  tbpngl)tip,ljcc  tijatbcfpi- 
fctl)  tlje  game  of]  opp?eu"ions,tljat  Oja^ 
netlj  fjis  Ijanbs  from  Ijolbing  of  bribes, 
tljat  ftoppctlj  Dis  cares  from  Ijcaring  of 
tbloob.anbujuttctljljis  eves  from  fee* 
ingcuiU: 

16  ^cfljalimbcllontljigl):l)ispiace 
ofbcfencefhaibetljcmunittonsofrocBS, 
b?eaba)aibegiucnl)im>ljisJbatersfhaii 

be  fur  e. 

17  Xljine  cpes  ftjail  fee  tlje  lung  in 
Ijis  bcautv :  tljev  tljail  bcljolb  t  tlje  lanb 
tljat  is  bcrpfarrc  off. 

18  Xtjme  fjcart  fljail  mcbitate  tcr* 
rout ;  ffirtjere  is  tlje  *  fenbe  itbljcrc  ii  tlje 
trecciucr  ;U)l)cre  «s  Ijc  tljat  countcb  tfjc 
totbjes? 

19  lOjou  fljait  not  fee  a  fierce  people, 
a  people  of  a  beeper  fpccclj  tfjen  tljou 
canfl  pcrcciuc;  of  a||(tammeringtongue, 
tljat  tljou  tanftnot  bnberftanb. 

20  jLooHcbponZion.tljccitvofour 
folcmnfttcs :  tljinc  eves  njailfecJJent* 
falcm  a  ciuict  Ijabttation,  a  tabernacle 
tljat  fljail  not  be  taKen  boibnc ,  not  one 
of  tljeflafecstljcccof  fljail  eucr  be  remo 
ueb ,  neitljer  fljail  an?  of  tlje  coarbes 
tljcrcofbcbzoben. 

21  25nt  tftere  tlje  glozious  %  ad  k  p 
will  be  bnto  bs  a  place  of  ttyoabrmers 

|)00    i and 


\{0r,  mthc 


'Pfal.ly.j. 

and  14.3. 
\Hlb.    >r> 

\H>k  y- 

riohtntUcs. 

l\kl 

ceirr. 

jH'kkhcA 
\Hek 
beigbti,or 
hie  f!,tcef. 


t Hd -.the 
land  of  farre 
dsftancer. 

•i.Cor.r. 

:o. 

\Heb. 

weithcr. 


Or,  ridicti- 
lorn. 


\Heb.hoaJ 

fff^acetsr 


_ 


Againft  Idumea.  Ifaiah.  Gods  word  fure. 


fHe&rJla 
rule-maker. 

Or,  they 
htwefor- 
fa^ett  thy 
t#cl?/i»f>. 


t  Hebr.  the 
fttints  there 


icl.6. 


'Reucl.tf. 


\\0>,    Rl.    •:- 

cerou. 


fa* 

Chap.  6) 


andftrcames  -.wherein  fhaiigocno  gal- 
lev  tbitli  oarcs ,  neither  (ball  gallant 
(bippaffctbetebp. 

zi  foi  the  %  ©  »©  is  one  3Jnbgc, 
the  fL©Js©  is  one  t  Haibgitter,  the 
ll  ©  is  ©  is  out  l&ingjbc  ibil  fane  bs. 

zj  ||XhptaeButigsarc  loofeb :  thep 
coulb  not  well  decngtben  their  mad, 
tbey  coulb  not  fpjcab  the  failc:tbents 
tbepzape  of  a  great  fpdtle  buubeb,  the 
lame  taBe  the  pjapc. 

14.  ^nutlic  inhabitant  (hall  not  fap 
3  am  ficBc  :thc  people  tbatblbel  there? 
in  fbalbe  fojguten  their  tmnutne. 

CHAP.    XXXI1IL 

i  The  iudgements  wherewith  God  reuengeth 
hisChurcli.  rr  The  dcfolation  of  her  ene- 
mies.   16  Thecerraintieoftheprophecie. 

£)mc  mere  pe  nations  to 
bcarc,anb  bearften  pepeo? 
pie :  let  the  earth  bcare, 
anb  t  ail  that  is  therein, 
tbeibojlb,  anbail  tbuigs 

that  come  fo?tb  of  tt. 
z  5foul)etnbignationoftl)c?L©a© 

isbpon  all  nations,  ano  hisfuriebpon 

all their  armies: bee  bath  bttcrip be? 

dropcb  tbem,bc  bath  bcuuereb  tljem  to 

the  daughter. 

3  Xheir  flattie  aifo  djalbe  tad  out, 
anb  tljetr  (finite  (bail  tome  bp  out  of 
their  caraetfes,  anb  the  mountaincs 
fljaibcmcltcbttmb  their  bloob. 

4  3lnb  all  tbe  bode  ofbeattenfliaibc 
btffolueb,anb  the  bcauens  fljaibc  *rou? 
leb  together  as  a  frrolc :  anb  all  there 
bode  fliali  fall  oolbttc  as  the  Icafc  fal- 
letl)  off  from  the  Clitic,  anb  as  a'falung 
figgefrom  tlje  figgc  tree. 

5  foi  mp  fujo«Jb  (ball  bee  batfteb  in 
bcaucn:bcbolbc,  it  (ball  comeboibnc 
bpotfjbnmca,  anb  bpon  the  people  of 
mpcttrfctoittbgcmtnt. 

6  Xbc  ftuojb  of  the  %  ©  k  b  is  61? 
lebttntb  bloob,  it  tsmabefatttntb  fat? 
neffc,  and  1Mb  tbe  bloob  of  lambcs anb 
goatcs,  lDiri)  tbe  fat  of  tbe  Btbncps  of 
rammes:  fo?  the  Hoik  id  hath  a  fa? 
crificcm  26o3rab,anba  great  Qaugljter 
mtbcianbofgibumca, 

7  3lnb  the  ||  Clmcozties  fl)all  tome 
ooibne  Unrb  tbem,  anb  the  bullocftcs 
lbttb  the  bullcs,  anb  tljeir  lanb  (ball  be 
II  foaftcb  with  bloob  ,  anb  tbeir  bud 
mabe  fat  With  fattieflr. 

8  foiitistbcbavoftbc^L^jsiP^ 
•  bengcante,  and  the  pecre  of  rceom? 


pencesfoittbetontrouerftc  of  Zion. 

9  ^nb  tbe  ftteames  thereof  fbalbe 
tumeb  into  pitch,  anb  the  bud  thereof 
into  bjimdone ,  anb  the  lanb  thereof 
(hail  become  burning  pitch. 

io  gjtfhamotbeguenthebnightno? 
bap,*tbefmoBetbeteof(bailgocbpfo? 
cuer :  from  generation  to  generation  it 
fljall  Ipc  Wade,  none  fhal  paffe  though 
itfojeueranbeuer. 

ii  C*XheJtomto?antanbtbcbit? 
terne  djail  poueffe  it,  the  oiblc  alfo  anb 
the  mien  (ball  b\beU  in  it,  anb  he  fliail 
ftretch  out  bpontt  tbclmc  of  coiifuOott, 
anb  theftones  of  emptineffe. 

ir  Xhep  fhail  tall  the  nobles  there? 
ofto  tbe  Btngbome,  but  none  (ball  bee 
there,  anb  all  her  ^nntcsfbau  bee  no- 
thing. 

ij  anb  thomes (ball  tome bpinher 
paiaccs,nettlcsatibbwmblesintbefo?? 
treffes  thereof:  anb  it  fbalbe  an  babita? 
tion  of  bjagons.md  a  tourtfo?  ||  olbles. 

14.  Xhclbilbet  beads  of  the  befert 
(ban  alfo  meete  Vbtth  the  t  jbilbe  beads 
of  the  gjianb  anb  the  fatp?c  (ball  trp  to 
his feloib,the I! fbJichobJlc alfo  (hail  red 
there,  9  finbe  father  felfcaplaceofrcd. 

15  Xher  e  djail  the  great  oible  matte 
her  ncd,anbiapanb  hatch,  anb  gather 
bnber  bcrfltfboU) :  there  (ball  the  bul? 
turesalfo  begathercb,  euerp  onerbitf) 
herniate. 

i6  C&ceaeycotttoftbcbooBeoftbe 
Ho?b,anb  reabe:  no  one  oftfjefefhall 
faile,nonefhail  ibant  her  mate:  fo?  mp 
mouth,  it  hath  tonwiaunbeb;anbhis 
fpirit,ithath  gathetebthem. 

17  ^nbhehath  tad  the  lot  fo:  them, 
anb  his  hanb  hath  bmibeb  it  bnto  them 
bp  line :  thep  u)ail  poffeffe  it  to?  cuer, 
from  generation  to  generation  djall 
tbevbibell  therein. 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

1  The  ioyfull  flourifhing  of  Chriftes  King- 
dome.  3  The  weakeareincouragedbvthe 
vermes  and  priu  Jedges  of  die  Gofpel. 

.  $c  ibilbcrncffe  anb  the  fo? 
^?  litanc  place  fljall  be  glab 
^B  fo?  them :  anb  the  befert 
^  fbad reiopcc anb  bloffomc 
^astherote. 
x  3t  (hall  bloffomc  abunbantlp, 
anbretopce  euen  lbith  iopanbfmgmg: 
theglojp  ofHebatton  (baibcgiucubn? 
to  tt,tljc  crcclicncie  of  Carmeianbdba* 
ron  :  thep  fljall  fee  tlje  glo?p  of  the 

|L£>K©, 


»,l8.and 
>9<i- 


•Zcph.J. 
14-rcud. 
18.1. 
\\Ortpellt 


chel.    Hebr. 

cUughltrt 

oflnecmlc. 

\MZifm. 

\Hcb.Itjm. 

monSltr. 


Iudahinuaded.      Chapjcxxvj. 


Rabfliakeli 


•Htbr.ii. 

i  J. 

\ti&S>4it. 
*M«ih.». 
17., in  J  1 1. 
5. and  II. 

11. am)  to. 
so.  and:  1. 
i+.ioh  j> 

6.1 

'  Ms'.th.  1  1 

;.mir  7. 

'Matih.i  1 

5  and  i  5. 
lo. and 2  1. 
14. toll  j.S, 

and  8  7  and 
14.S. 

•Matth.  0. 
13.  and  !  2. 
XI. and  1  5. 
50. 
•Ioh.7.;8. 

19- 

||  Or,  acctfrr 

forreedtt 


pinlbttvuh 
hem. 


"Chap.  ji. 


*  i.Kings 
18.13. 
l.chion. 
3J.I. 


?L  ©  »  e»  ,  atiD  the  rccellc nne  of  our 
C50b. 

3  C  *  Strengthen  pec  the  tbeaitc 
banbcanb  tonfirme  the  feeble  twees. 

4  5§>ay tothemthatarcoftafcarc* 
fail  heart;  Be  ftcong,fcarcnot:beholb, 
your  ©ob  lbill  tome  Mthbengcancc,  * 
nen  ©ob  with  a  rccompcncc,he  null  conic 
anbfautyou. 

<,  Xhcn  the  *eyes of theblinb  than 
beopeneb,  anb* the  cares  of  the  beafc 
fhaibetonftoppeb. 

6  %hen  than  tl)c  *  lame  manleape 
as  an  $art ,  anb  the  *  tongue  of  the 
butnbefing:fo;  in  the  ttnlberncffe  (ball 
*  lbatecsbjcahc  ont,anb  fttcamcstntbc 
befcrt. 

7  3lnbtbc  parebeb  grounbfbailbc 
tome  a  poole ,  anb  tl)c  tliirftie  lanb 
fpnngs  of  ibater :  in  the  habitation  of 
b?agong,rbncrecachla^,(ba!be||gtaffc 
ibttbreebsanbrutbcs. 

8  3lnban ntgnnja?n«ibc tbcrcanb 
aibay ,  anb  itfhau  becallcb  tt)etbap  of 
bolineffe ,  the  tonclcane  (ball  notpaffc 
otierit.^ut  it  ttiall  be  fo?  tliofe  :tijc  majv 
fartngmtn,  though  fooles,  (ball  not 

CtrC  therein. 

9  0o  lyon  fbaibe  there .  no;  any  ra* 
uenotts  beaft  (hall  gocup  thereon ,  it 
fballnot  befonnbttierc  rbuttbercbee* 
mcofhaflibalke  there. 

10  3nb  tl}c  *  ranfomeb  of  the 
%  <5t>»©  (ball  ccturncanbtoineto  Zfc 
ontwtb&ngs,  anb  ettcr  lading  ioybp< 
on  their  beabsrtbey  fliall  obtaine  iop 
anb  gtabneffe ,  anb  wrotb  anb  figbmg 
(ball  flee  aibay. 

CHAP.   XXXVI. 

1  Sennacherib  inuadetli  Iudah.  4  Rabfha- 
keh  fent  by  Scnnacherib,by  t>!afphemous  per- 
fwafions  (ollicireth  the  people  to  reuolt.  u 
His  words  are  told  to  Hezekiah. 

siDibc  *  it  tame  to  paffe  tit 
the  fourteenth  ycere  of 
Umg  ^eiefciah,'™  5>en* 
nacbertb  tting  of^ffyna 
tame  top  agamttautbebe* 
fen  teb  ntics  of^ubah,anb  toofec  them. 
x  anbtbctangof:?lffy:iafcnt3&ab 
fbaheb,  from  JLacbifb  to  gierufalcm, 
bnto  hmg  fce^eluab,  lbitb  a  great  at> 
nuc:  anbbeftoob  by  theconbuitof  the 
tipper  pooic  in  the  high  K&V  of  &* 
fuUersfielo. 

3  Xben  tame  fotfb  bnto  him  € 
liaium  i!?iltuabs  fonne,  rbbicb  was 


oner  the  boufc.anb  SbebuatbclJfcr.be, 
anb  3oah  3faphgfonne  the  Becozber. 
4-  €  3nb  BabfhaUeh  fayb  bnto 
tbem.&ayyccnoujtot^clnalfcXbus 
faith  the  great  tnng,tbe  feing  of  3ffyjia ; 
nabat  eonftbentc  is  this  U)bcrcm  thou 
truftefti 

5     3  fa? ,  (fayeft  thOU)  (bUt  they  are 

but  t  baine  rbo?bs)  ||  i  haue  counlcli  anb 
ftrength  foz  ibarre :  &m  on  lbbom 
bocfl  thou  trull ,  that  thou  rebelled 
gamflmc? 

6  3Loe,tboutrufteftinrt)e*flaffeofK° 
this  b:oUeureebc,ou  (Egypt  Ahhereon 
tf  a  man  leane,  tt  lbill  goe  into  his  hanb 
anb  pierce  it :  fo  is  Pharaoh  hmg  of  €* 
gyptto  all  that  trull  m  him. 

7  Butiftljoufay tomc;B9e truflin 
the|L©is©  onr<5ob  :isitnothe,lbhofc 
high  placcsanb  rbhofe  altars  ^wniah 
hath  taken  atbay ,  anb  fayb  to  3Juoah 
anb  to  IJerufaicm  i  ^ee  fljail  tbojfhip 
before  thisaltarf 

8  ^5orbthcrcfo?egmc||plcbges,3J 
p:ay  thee ,  to  my  matter  the  mng  of 
3ltT?ua ,  anb  J  ihill  gtue  thee  tttio  thou= 
fanbljojfes,  if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part 
tofet  rtbtrsbponthem. 

9  $o*btben  ibtitthouturnc  atbay 
thefateofonecaptatncofthcleaftofmy 
matters  femants :  anb  put  thy  trillion 
cgypt  fo?  charets  anb  fo?  hojfetnen  i 

10  ^nb  am  3J  nolb  come  bp  ibith- 
out  the  %  ©  w  ©  againft  this  lanb  to  be^ 
ftroy  itifyt%  ©  e  ©faybbnto  me  00c 
bp  againft  this  lanb  anb  beftroy  it 

11  C  Xhcn  fayb  €iiahmi  anb  ^heb^ 
na  $  3Joah  bntoBabfhaftel);  ^>pcane, 
gj  pjaythec,  bnto  thy  feruants  m  the 
£>y«jian  language  -,  fo?  ihe  bnbcrftanb 
it :  anb  fpeafte  not  to  bs  m  the  gjctbes 
languagcm  the  cares  of  the  people  that 
areontherbail. 

ii  CButftabfhaBchfayb  ;^ath  my 
matter  fent  me  to  thy  matter  anb  to 
fhec,to  fpeahc  thefcihozbSf^athhcnot 
fennnetothcmcnthatfitbponthelbail, 
that  they  may  eatc  their  ottmebongue, 
anb  bztnfec  their  ottmc  piffcibtth  you  t 

13 1Chcn3Rabfhafecl)lloob)anbcrycb 
rbith  a  loub  bouc  in  the  3,cibes  lan^ 
gnage,anbfayb  ■,  ^>eareyctheibo?bsof 
the  great  Uing^hc  mng  of  ^(Tyna. 

14.  Xhns  faith  the  htng  ■,  %tt  not 
l^Rclnah  bccciuc  you,fo?  he  than  not  be 
abletobcliner  you. 

15  Neither  let  ^e^eUiah  mafec  you 

trull  in  the  fL©isje> ,  faying    %\)t 

ILsDibid  Ibilffurelybeliuerbs:  tljistt 

>©oo  3  tie 


\\OrJeereta- 


word  of  lirti . 
||  Or.  Im 

COHttfell  j 
firrngth  arc 
corth-\rar 
Ezc.ip. 
6J- 


Or.hofte- 


Thcblafphemie  Ifaiah.  ofRabfliakch. 


\OrJeekf 
mj/fuMow 
by  a  pre  fent, 
Hcb.  make 
vubrnea 


'j.King. 


tic  (bail  not  bcbeliucvcb  mto  flic  DajiD 
oftbcBingoraflpna. 

i6  $car6cnnottoii?C3eInab:fo2tbus 
faptb  rtjc  isuns  of  3ffp2ia,  ||  fi0abc  an  & 
gtecmeuttbub  nice  bp  a  pjefent,  anb 
conic  out  to  mcc :  anb  catc  pec  euetp  one 
of  bis  btnc ,  anb  euetp  one  of  bis  ftggc  > 
tree,  anb  bnnUe  peccuccp  one  tbe  iba 
tecs  of  bis  oibnc  ciftcroe : 

17  HtmiJcomeanbta&epouaVbap 
to  a  lanb  like  pone  0  ttmc  lano ,  a  lanb  of 
tome  anb  tbine ,  a  lanbof  tyeab  anb 
btncpatbs: 

18  Beware  left  $e$c&tab  pecfiuabc 
pou,faping  Xt)c?Lja!>KPibillociuicr 
bs.  i?atb  anp  of  tbe  gobs  of  tbc  nan* 
onsoclutercb  ins  lanb  out  oftljc  banb 
oftfjcBntgofaaVna; 

19  mfyttt  are  tbc  gobs  of  $amatb  > 
anb  arpbab  i  lbbere  are  tbc  gobs  of 
£>cpbaruatm  <  anb  bauc  tljep  beliuercb 
fi>amaria  out  0  f  m  v  banb  t 

20  xebo  are  they  aiiiongft  all  tbc 
gobs  of  tbcfc  lanbcs ,  tbat  bauc  bcliuc= 
rcb  tbcit  lanb  out  ofmpbanb ,  tbattbe 
%  o  b  s>  fboulb  bcliuer  3Jcrufaicm  out 
ofmpbanb; 

21  2Suttbcpbclbtbeirpcacc,anban'- 
fajcccbbtmnot  aibojb :  fo?  tbclBUngs 
commanbcmentibas,faptng ;  Slnfroccc 
bimnot. 

22  c  Xbcn  tame  €liafeim  tbc  fonnc 
of  MUtab,  tljat  was  ouct  tbc  boufbolb, 
anb  Smebna  tbc&xribc,anb3Joab  tbc 
fonnc of  Sfapb  tbe&ewber,  to^c^c- 
mabibitb  th^r  clothes  rent,  anb  tolbc 
buntljclb02bcsof1Sabfl)abcb. 

CHAP.   XXXVI  r. 

1  Hezekiahniourning/endeth  to  Ifaiah  to  pray 
for  them.  6  Ilaiah  comtortcth  diem.  8 
Sennacherib  going  to  encounter  Tirhakah, 
fendeth  a  blafphemous  letter  to  Hczckiah. 
14  Hczekiahs  prayer.  11  Ifaiah  his  pro- 
phccie  of  the  pride,  and  defti n6tion  ot  Sen- 
nacherib, and  the  good  of  Zion.  36  An 
Angel  flaycth  the  Affyri.ms.  37  Sennache- 
1  lb  is  llaiuc  at  Nineueh  by  his  owne  fonnes. 


$/fr«k&r&  anb  coucrcb  Ijmifclfc  lbitb 
aj^A^S^IabfatUctlotl).  anb  Went  into 
tbc  boufc  of  tbe  iLoiiic. 

2  3lnb  bee  fent  eiiaium,  lbbo  was 
oner  tbc  boufbolb,  anb  £>bcbna  tbc 
S>cribc,anbthceibctsoftbcpnc(tcs 
touctcb  lbitb  fatftcclorb,  bnto  JJfaiab 


tbc  t&opljct  tljc  fonnc  of  3mo5. 

j  anb  tbepfapb  bnto  bun ;  %l)us 
foptb  $c5CBiab ,  Xbis  bap  is  a  bap  of 
trouble,  anb  ofcebuficanb  of  ||  blafpbe^ 
nue:  fo?  tbe  dnibjcn  ate  come  to  tbe 
birtb ,  anb  dierc  is  not  ttrengrt)  to  bzuig 
tbojtb. 

4  3Jtmap  be  tbc  %.  0 13  ©  tbp  00b 
Unll  bcate  tlje  uwbs  of  ftabtyaucb , 
ibbom  tbc  King  ofStffpna  btsmaftet 
batb  fent  to  tepjori)  tbc  Uumg  ©ob, 
anb  lbiil  tcpioouc  tbc  lbozbs  tbbub  tbe 
?t02b  tbp  (Sob  batb  bcarb:  tt>bercfo2e 
lift  bp  thy  pjapct  foube  remnant  tliat 
is  t  left. 

5  5>otbcfcruantsofBmg^c5cfti= 
abcamcto3Jfatab. 

6  c  3Uib  3Jfatab  fapb  bnto  tbem 
Xbus  (ball  pec  fap  bnto  pour  matter, 
Xbus  faptb  tbe  JLswa©,  isenotafraib 
of  tbc  ibo2bcs  tbat  tbou  ball  bcarb, 
lbbcrclbiti)  tbe  feruants  of  tbe  Ring  of 
3iffpaa  baue  biafpbemeb  me. 

7  zsebolb ,  3  ibtll  |l  fenb  a  blaO  bp? 
onbim,anb  beefljaii  bcarc  a  tumour, 
anbtcturnetobis  oibnclanb,  anb  31 
ibill  caufe  bun  to  fall  bp  tbe  fioo2b  in  bis 
ovbneianb. 

8  C  £>o  Babflja&eb  returncb  anb 
founb  tbe  aing  of  aCTpna  ibatrmg  ^ 
gamflllUbnal) :  fo2bee  bab  bcarb  tljat 
bcibas  bepartcb  from  Hatbttb- 

9  ^nbbebcarb  fap  concerning  Uto 
babab  Ring  of  ctbiopta,  $cc  is  come 
foo2tb  to  mafee  ibarre  lbitb  tbec :  anb 
Vbbcnbcbcarbit.befentmcfleugcrsto 
^e5cUiali,faptng; 

10  Xbusn)aiipcfpeabcto^C5cluab 
mmg  of3Juoab,fapmg,  Hctnottl)p 
d5ob  m  lbbom  tboutruflcflbctcuictljcc, 
faping,  gjcrufaicm  fljall  not  bee  giucn 
into  tljc  banb  of  tbc  Utng  of  aopua. 

11  25cbolb,tboubaftbcarbU)battljc 
ftmgs  of  3JfTp2ia  bauc  bone  to  all  lanos 
bp  bclrroping  tl)cm  btterlp ,  anb  fl^alt 
tboubcbcluicrcb^ 

12  ^auc  tljc  gobs  of  tbc  nations  be* 
liuerco  tbem  ibbicb  mp  fatbers  bauc 
bcttropeb,  as  ©osatt,  anb^aran,  anb 
8c5cpb,anb  tlic  cbilbmi  ofcoen  lbljtcb 
weretn5Ceiaflat< 

i}  nabcrc  is  tbc  Uing  of  ^amafl),  anb 
tbc  Hmg  of  3lrpbab,  anb  tbc  bing  of  tbc 
cine  of  S> cpbaruaun,  ?)cna  anb  3Juab  < 

1+  C  3lub  fcevtnab  rcceiutb  tbc  let 
tcr  from  tbc  banb  of  tbc  meflengecs, 
anb  r cab  itanb  Bc^clnab  lbcnt  bp  bnto 
i  tbc  boufc  of  tbc  1L  ©  is  je>  ,  anbfpzcab  it 

|bCf02CtbC?liDK©. 

1      \<>  5(ub 


\\Or,protio. 

C*tiQn, 


\  HtofoHfui. 


\\Or,pHtA 
jfi.ru  mi  j 


Hczekiahs  prayer.  Chap.xxxvij.  Sennacherib  flaine. 


\Htb  U*ds 
f  Heh.giutn 


\Heb.bythe 
hand  of  thy 
feruants. 
\Heb.the 
taSttejfe  of 
the  cedars 
thereof  \  and 
the  choi/e  of 
the  frre 
trees  theff. 
\Or,thefor- 

efl  and  his 
fruitful! 
field. 
|f  Or,  fenced 

nd  eh  fed. 
„Or,H*ft 
thou  not 
ke.irdhow 
I  haue  made 
itlonvagoe, 
andformed 
it  of  ancient 
times? 
Snonld  I 
now  brine  it 

e  I  aide 
waf}e,and 
defencedu- 
//Vrtobc 
rmnoui 
heapes  f 


15  3im>  ^eseRiah  pzaycb  unto  tlje 
Horn©,  faying, 

16  <£>  3L&13©  of  nodes ,  <eod  of 
35frael,  thatblbelicd  between*  tlje  Che; 
rubuns,  thou  art  the  <5ob,e»en  thoua- 
lone,  of  ail  the  Ringbomes  of  the  earth, 
thou  had  maoehcaucn  anb  earth. 

17  incline thine  tare ,  fD  %$>%. a>, 
anb  heatc,£>pehthuiccyes,£>  n©is©, 
anb  fee,  anb  heare  all  tljt  ttwbes  of 
Sennacherib,  which  jjath  Tent  to  re* 
p?ochthcltuing(i5ob. 

is  €>f  a  tmttj,  &€>??©,  tlje  Rings 
of  3dVna  haite  laib  matte  all  tlje  t  nate 
onsaribthctrcountreys, 

19  ^nt>  Ijaiie  t  cad  their  gobsfnto  the 
fire :  fo;  they  were  no  gobs,but  the  tbo?R 
of  mens  hanbs,iboob  anb  done :  thcr* 
foje  they  haucbedroyco  them. 

20  iRorbthcrcfoJC,jD!L©iftj3  our 
C5ob,fauc  bs  from  htshanb,that  all  tijc 
mngbomes  of  the  eartfj  ma?  Rnotbe, 
that  thou  art  tlje  Hsdisjd,  euen  thou 
onely. 

ii  CChen  3lfaiah  tt)c  fonne  of  7b 
moment  btrio$C5CRtah,faying,  Xhus 
faith  the  fU>e©  C5oo  of  UfraeWher* 
as  thou  hadpMycbtomeagaindScn'- 
uacfjenbRmg  of  3KTy?ia : 

n  %t)\s  is  tlje  ibojbe  ibhich  tlje 
?l  so  b  ©hath  fpoRen  tonctrnmg  Dim : 
%\)t  birgin.tjjebaughtcr  of  Ztonjjarrj 
oefptfeo  thee,  and  laugljebthceto  Rome, 
the  baughtcr  of Jjcrufaiem  hath  flja* 
fecuherUeabatthee. 

23  nahom  had  thou  repzocheb  anb 
blafphemcb?  anb  againd  ibhome  haft 
thou  eraltcb  thy  boicc,  anb  hftebbp 
thine  eyes  on  high  f  «>en  againd  the  feo* 
ly£>ncof3Jfracl. 

24  tasp  thy  feruants  hail  thou  re* 
p?ochebthcS.ojb,anbhadlatb,23ythe 
multitubeof  mptharetsam  31  comebp 
to  the  height  of  themouutaincs,  to  the 
Gbcsof  Hcbanon,anb3i  Unlcutbotimc 
tthe  tail  tebars  thereof,  and  the  thoife 
firre  trees  thereof:  anb  3  lbill  enter  in- 
to the  hcightof  his  bo?ber,andthe||fo^ 
reft  of  htsCarmel. 

25  3JhauebiggebanbbnmRetbatcr, 
anb  tbith  the  fole  of  my  fecte  haue  3J 
rum  bp  all  the  riuers  of  the  |l  befiegeb 
places. 

26  ||  $?ad  thou  not  heatb  long  agoc, 
how  31  haue  bone  it,and  of  ancient  times, 
that  3J  haue  fomieb  it  t  notti  haue  3J 
bzongTjt  it  topafle,  that  thou  0)Oulbcft 
be  to  lay  tbadebtfenceb  cities  into  rut- 
nousheapes. 


27  Xhercfozc  their  inhabitants  we 
tof  fmaii  poibcr ,  the?  incre  btfiuayeo 
anb  confoiuibeb:  they  mete  as  the  grade 
of  the  ficlb,  anb  is  the  grecne  rjcrbe,  a 
the  graflc  on  the  hoiifc  tops,ano  a  come 
biaftcb  befo^  it  be  gtoiucn  bp. 

28  25ut3JftnoU)thpilabobe,anbthp 
going  out,anb  thv  coinmingin,anb  ttj^ 
ragcagatnftnic. 

29  25ecaufcthpragcagamftmc,anb 
th?  tmniUt  is  come  bp  into  mine  cares : 
therefore  iDtii  3J  put  mphooiie  m  ttiy 
nofe,  anb  my  bjtble  in  rt)y  lips,  anb  3 
lbill  tmw  thee  bacac  by  tlje  ibay  by 
tbhtchthoucameft. 

jo  anbthtsfliaiibeafignebntotfiec, 
juc  d)aii  catethisyeercfuth  as  groibeth 
of  it  felfe :  anb  ti)t  feconb  yccre  that 
which  fpnngcth  of  the  fame :  anb  in  the 
thtrb  ycere  fotb  ye  anb  reape,  anb  plant 
bmcyarbs,  anb  cate  tlje  fruit  thereof. 

31  3lnb  the  t  remnant  that  is  efcapeb 
ofthehoufcof  3Iubah,(halagaine  tafec 
rootc  botbnrtbarb  -  anb  beare  frutte 
bpibarb. 

32  Jfoi  out  of  3Jerufelem  than  goe 
fojth  a  remnant,  anb  t  they  that  efcape 
out  of  mount  Zion :  the  *  5eaie  of  the 
%  €>  k  ©  of  hoftcs  than  boe  this. 

33  Xherehw  thus  faith  the  %<s>xm 
concerning  the  Ring  of  au*yna,$e  than 
not  come  into  this  eitie,  no?  (hoot  an  ar- 
rotb  there ,  no^  come  before  it  rwtl) 
Qjietbs,  no?  cafl  a  banuc  againd  it. 

34  25ythelbaytl)athecame,  bythe 
fame  (hail  he  retume,  anb  djail  not 
comeinto  thisatie.faith  thc?L  &  is  ©, 

35  3T02  3  lbill  *befcnb  this  nticto 
Cauc  it,  fo?  mine  oibne  faRe,  anb  fo?  my 
feruantDauibsfafec. 

36  XhOTthc*:HngelofthefUD!R3E> 
tbentfoith,  anb  fmote  in  the  tampe  of 
thc^ffyitansaljunbzcbanbfourefcoje 
ano  fiue  thoufanb :  anb  Vbhen  tljey  a- 
rofe  earcly  in  the  mouiing,  bchoib,  tljcy 
ibereaiibeabco^pfes. 

37  C  £>o  Sennacherib  Ring  of  2U* 
fy:iabeparteb,  anb  rbent^nb  retumcb, 
anbblbcltat/I5ineueh. 

33  3lnb  it  came  to  pade  asljeettias 
iboidjipping  in  the  houfc  of  /[5ifrocrj 
his  gob,  that  3ib;wmclech  anb  Shares 
5er  his  fons  Quote  hfm  ftith  tlje  frooib, 
anb  they  efcapeb  into  the  lanb  of  f^r- 
menia:  anb  €fartjabbon  Ijis  fonne  retg= 
nebinljisdeab. 

CHAP.    XXXVIII. 

1     Hczekiah  hauing  receiued  a  melTage  of 

death, 


j  OrJuttHg, 


\Hcb-<hc 
cfcaping  if 
thchnifeef 

IhJaIi  ihjt 
rem.naetlt. 


f  lUb.  A, 
e/ufing. 
•l.Kmgs 
19.1  i.eha. 
96. 


'  j.Kiogs 
10.6. 


'l.Kinj 
'9  35- 


t  H<b.A,i. 


Hczckiah  ficke,  Ifaiah.      His  thankelgming. 


"i.Ktn.  si. 

2.chron. 


t  Helr.giae 
charge cot- 
cerntnf  thy 
kon[e. 


\HchrMtth 
great  r/ec- 


1Hctr.it:- 
greetty.  or 
icub  the 
Same. 


death ,  by  prayer  hath  Ins  hte  lengthened.  8 
The Sunnc  goeth  tenne  degrees  backward, 
for  a  tigne  of  that  promife.  o,  His  fong 
ot  Thankefgiiung. 

*&  thofe  Dates  vonsfyw 
Utah  Ocftc  bnto  Death:  anb 
3ifaiah  the  ^opljet  tlje 
fonne  ofSlmo?  came  bnto 
Dim  ,  anD  faiD  bnto  htm; 

Xhus  faith  the  IL  ©kjd  ,  t  g>ct  thine 

houfcm  o?Dec :  foi  thou  fljalt  Die ,  anD 

uotliuc. 
2    1Ehcn  l^etnah  tumcD  his  fate 

toibarDthe  iball,  anopjtapeD  bnto  the 

j  2tiD  faiD ,  Remember  noib ,  £> 
!Lfioas»,  3  befcech  ttjee,  hott>  3  haue 
maiaeDbetoze  thee  in  trueth,  anDlbith 
a  perfect  heart ,  anD  haue  Done  that 
Which  t0  gooD  in  thp  Gght:anD  ^eje- 
Hiahibepttfojc. 

4.  C  Xhcn  tame  the  lbo?D  of  tfjc 
%  o  is  ©  to  31  fatah,(aping, 

5  <25oc  anD  fap  to  i^cfttah,  Xhus 
fattll  the  H  ©  «  jd,  the  <5oD  of  ©atuD 
thp  father ;  3  haue  hcatD  rhp  p2apcr,3J 
haue  fecne  thptcates:  beholD ,  3f  null 
aDDcbnto  thpoapesfiftcenepcercs. 

6  3mD  3  Will  Dcltuer  thee  anD  this 
titie,  out  ofthc  hanD  of  the  lung  of  3lu> 
tia :  anD  3  Unit  DcfcnD  tins  titie. 

7  :StiD  this  felloe  a ftgne bnto  thee 
from  the  Hois©, that  the  Hois© 
null  doc  this  thine  that  he  hart)  fpoaen. 

8  25cholD,  3  null  bnngagame  the 
fhaDotti  ofthc  Degrees  Which  is  gone 
DoWtic  in  the  1 £>unnc-Diail  of  TLlw  ten 
Degrees  bacttwarD:  fo  the  £>unnctc« 
turucDtcn  Degrees ,  bp  Which  Degrees 
itwasgoncDoWne. 

9  CXheWjitingof^escKiahlnng 
of  JuDah,  When  he  haD  bene  ftcUc,  anD 
wasrctouereD  ofhtsficftncfli: 

io  'JfaiDetnthc  tutting  off  of  mp 
Daves  ■  3  (hail  goc  to  the  gates  of  the 
gratie :  3  am  DcpnucD  ofthc  rcfiDuc  of 
mppecrcs. 

n  "3faiD,3Jfl)ainotfccthclL£>i3©, 
euen  the  !L  oh©  in  the  lanD  of  the  ll- 
tung :  3  thai  bcholD  man  no  mojc  With 
the  inhabitants  ofthc  WojlD. 

u  fj3inc  age  is  DcpartcD  ,  anD  is  re? 
moucDfrom  me  a3  a  flicphcarDs  tent: 
3  haue  nit  off  like  awcaucrmp  life:  he 
mm  tut  nice  off  '(With  pining  ficfincffe: 
from  oar  cucn  to  night  milt  thoumake 
an  enb  of  me. 

i}  3*rctUoncD  till  morning,  tii.it  as  a 
Upon  fo  Mil  hccb;cauc  all  mp  bones: 


frombap  euen  to  night  Unit  thou  mane 
anniDofmc. 

14.  mttc  a  crane  0?  a  froallow ,  fo  DtD 
3  chatter ;  3  WB  mourne  as  aDoue: 
mine  epes  faile  With  looking  DpwatD: 
€>  H£>ke>,  3lamoppjcffcD,  ||  bnDcr« 
taaefojme. 

15  JBhatfhaii3J  tap*  hee  hath  both 
fpohcu  bnto  mee,  anD  htmfelfe  hath 
Done  >t  -3  than  gocfoftlp.aiimppceres 
in  the  bitterncflc  of  mpfoulc, 

is  £>  ?Lo?d  ,  bp  thefc  things  men 
hue:  anD  in  all  thefc  things  is  the  life  of 
mp  fpint ,  fo  Unit  thou  r ecoutr  me,anD 
maBcmctoliuc. 

17  aSeholD,  ||  fb?  peace  3  haD  great 
bittcracfTcbut  t  thou  haft  m  louc  to  mp 
fouleddiuered  itfroiiithe  pit  of  tojrup* 
tion  :fo?rt)ouhaft  taftail  mp  ftimcsbe= 
hmDethpbatUe. 

18  ifojthe  grauc  cannot  pjaifethce, 
Death  tannot  celebrate  thee:  the?  that 
gocDoWnctnto  the  pit  cannot  hopefo? 
tljp  trueth. 

19  Xhe  liumg ,  the  lining ,  hee  (hall 
piaifc  thec,as  3  doe  thisDap :  the  father 
tothethtlDjenthaii  matte  ftnowen  thp 
trueth. 

XO  XhC  %&■&&  was  ready  t0  CaUC 

me  :thcrefo?ett)e  nnllungmpfongsto 
thcftringcDinftrumcnts,  all  thcoapes 
of  our  lirc,tnrt)choufeofthc?L©iB£>. 

11  5?0231faiah  haD  faiD ,  ILct  them 
taKcaiuinpe  of  ftgges ,  anD  lap  itfoza 
piaiftcr  bpon  the  boilc,  anD  hc(haiire= 
coucr. 

iz  J?e5rttiah  alfo  haD  faiD,©hat  is  the 
fignc ,  that  3  (hall  goebp  to  the  houfe 
ofrt)e!t©is5?r 

CHAP.    XXXIX. 

1  Merodacli  Baladan  fending  tovifitHezekiah 
becaufe  of  the  wonder  ,  hath  notice  of  his 
tre.ifures.  3  Ifaiah  vnderltanding  thereof, 
toretclleththeBabyloni.nl  captiuirie. 

*%  that  tunc  tBcrooach 
25aiaDanthcfonnc  ofisa^ 
laDan  King  of  JSabplon, 
«P^Sfcnt  letters  anD  a  p^cfent 
^£^3^  to  ^C3clual) :  fo?  hec  haD 
hears  that  he  hao  bnic  ficHc ,  anD  mas 
rccoucrcD. 

1  3(nD  i?c3cUiah  ibas  giaD  of  them, 
atiDfhemcD  rtjem rtic houfe  of  hts  ||pje^ 
clous  things,  thcfiiucr,auDri)c  golDe, 
anD  the  fpiccs ,  anD  the  pzenous  opnt; 
ment,  anD  all  thchoufcofhis  ||  armour, 
anD  all  that  mas  fouiiD  in  his  treafurcs: 

there  1 


\\Or,eafi 
me. 


\Or,onmy 

pC-iCC  C301C 

great  tit- 
rcniejfe. 
f  Hetr.  thou 
hull  letted 
me  ft  i.m  the 
fit. 


'  i.Kin.  Jo. 
is.&c. 


\\Or,S^arj. 


\\Cr,iewtis. 
het:  veffcU 
or  trUru- 
merttt 


OflohnBaptiil.        Chap.xl.        AlIflcfhiTgraflc. 


\Htb,tothc 
heart, 

\\Or,appoirt- 
ledttmc. 


•Mat.3-?. 
mark.  1.3. 
Iukej-4. 


Or,  a 
jh-aighr 
oUce. 

\\9r, a  plaint 
flxce. 


t\)ttt  tbasnotymgtnhtshoufe,  no?  m 
ail  hisbommton.tyatitociuahtheujeb 
tycmnot. 

3  CXhcntamc3Jratahthc02ophct 
bnto  l&tng  i&cseftiah,  ano  Caybe  bnto 
htm,  oahat  fayb  tycfe  men*  ant)  from 
rbbeiwcamctyey  bnto  tl)ct<2Wbtyci 
5emah  faib,Xhcy  arc  tonic  from  a  farre 
countrey  bnto  mc,  euen  from  Babylon. 

4  Xhen  fatb  hec,  !©hat  haue  they 
fccncintmncnoufcf  3nbl?C5eBiahan: 
fiticieb ,  3UI  that  is  m  nunc  houfe  haue 
they  fecne :  there  is  notytng  among 
my  treafurcs,  that  3  haue  notlbeibeb 
them. 

5  Xhen faybc  3ifaiah to  tyesctnah, 
$eare  ttjc  ibojb  of  tye  %  ©  is  ©  of 
holies. 

6  aStyolb ,  tyebayeseome,  thatau 
that  is  m  thine  houfe ,  ano  tyat  ibhich 
thy  fathers  haue  lalbc  top  in  ftojc,  bnnil 
tins  Day,  tbaibc  cartel)  to  Babylon :  no- 
tying  fbalbelcft,  faitytye  fL©iss>. 

7  attbofthyfonnesthatfbaiiiffuc 
fromtyccibhity  tyou  tbaitbcgct,tbail 
thcytattcatbayj  ano  they  lhall  bce€u* 
nutyes  in  tyc  palace  of  tyc  mng  of  25a= 
bylon. 

8  Xben  Caybe  $c5cftial)  to  3Jfatab , 
©00D  is  tbettwb  of  tyciL  ©  K^torjicfj 
tljou  bait  fpoben :  rjee  fayb  mojeouet, 
jfcntyerclbaibcpeaccanb  trnctyinmy 
uayes. 

CHAP.  XL. 

1  The  promulgation  of  the  Gofpel.  3  The 
preaching  of  lohn  Baptift.  9  The  preach- 
ing of  the  Apoftles.  u  The  Prophet  by 
the  omnipotencie  of  God  >  18  and  his  in- 
compaiablenes,  2. 6  comforteth  the  people. 

gDntfotf  y  c,  comfort  y  c  my 
people,  faytl)  yonr  <3ob. 
z  £>pcaftcyctcomfo£ 
tably  to  3lcrufalcm,  anb 
cry  bnto  her ,  tyat  bet 
II  inarrcfiarc  is  accompli' 
ftcb.thatbccmiquitictsparooneb :  fo? 
tyce  bath  rccenicb  of  tyc  %  ©  is  ©  p 
Iianbboublc  fojailbcrfinnes. 

3  C  *  Xbc  boyce  of  bun  tyat  eryety 
intbcibllberneffc,£jcparcycetyett)ay 
of  tyc  %  ©  is  ?D,mafec  ttraigljt  m  tyc  be* 
fcrt  a  high  Xbay  fo?  our  d5ob. 

4  eucry  bailey  fliaibe  eralteb,  ano 
cucry  mountame  anb  rjillfljalbemabc 
lolb :  ano  the  croobeb  (hall  be  tnaoe 
1 1  ttraight^nb  the  rough  places  1 1  plainc. 
I  5  anbtbegio?yoftyc?L©is©fbau 


bcreueaieb,anbaliflen)  (hall  fee  it  toge- 
ther :  fo?  tye  mouty  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
hatyfpoKctu. 

6  %\)t  boyce  fayb  i  Cry.  2nb  hec 
fayb  aahat  (bail  31  cry  *  *  aiiflcm  is 
graffcanb  all  the  goooitncffctycrcof  >s 
astheflouwoftycficib. 

7  Xhegraffettnthcrcty.tye  florae 
fabcty;  becaufc  tyc  fpirtt  of  tyc  %  ©  h  © 
bioittcty  bpon  it :  fuccly  the  people  is 
graffc. 

8  Xbc  graffc  Vbityercty,  the  floitoe 
faocty :  but  the  *ibo.:b  of  our  C5ob  {ball 
ftanbfonucr. 

9  C|4>  zion,tyat bjingeftgoob  ty; 
bmgs ,  get  thcebp  into  tye  high  mouit^ 
tainc :  ||  £>  3f  mitotan ,  tyat  bnngeft 
goob  tiblngs,  lift  bp  tyy  boyce  liiity 
ftccngth,Uftit»p,  benotafratb  :fay  bn< 
to  tyc  nncs  of  3tobah  ■,  25eIjolb  your 
<5ob. 

10  25ebolb,tyc  Ho;b  d5©jp  mill  come 
.ibithftrong  hand ,  anb  his  arme  tyall 
rule  Iqi  him  :  beholb ,  *  his  relbarb  « 
tt)ityhim,atib||his«jo^ebcfo«him. 

11  $e  tyall  *feebc  his  flocftc  Ulie  a 
nicphearb :  hcfljail  gather  tye  lambcs 
ttity  his  arme,  anb  carte  them  m  his  bo= 
fomc,  and  tyail  gently  leab  tyofc||tyat 
arcttnthyoong. 

ii  Ciehohaty  meafureb  tyc  iba 
tecs  in  the  hollovb  of  hishanb  i  anb  me 
teb  out  heattcn  Vbity  tye  (panne ,  anb 
eomptthenocb  the  buft  of  tye  cartytn 
tamcafure,  anb  tbctghcb  tyc  moutt# 
tames  in  ftales,  auo  tychillcstnaba 
lantc^ 

13  *  naho  haty  bircctcb  tyc  fpirtt  of 
tyc  !L©  k  w,  ot,  bctngt  histounftlicr, 
hath  taught  him; 

14  i©ity  rbhom  toofee  he  tounfcll, 
anb  who  t  mftructcb  htm ,  anb  tanglit 
I  him  in  tye  path  of  lubgcment  i  anb 
taught  hun  fenovblebge,  anb  flicujcb  to 
huu  the  way  oft  bnberftanbmg; 

15  25eholb,  tye  nations  are  as  a  bjop 
of  a  buc&ct.ano  arc  cottnteb  as  the  fmaii 
Duttoftye  balance: bcljolb, hce  tabety 
bp  the  yles  as  a  bcry  litle  tying. 

16  3lnb  Hcbanon  is  not  fufftctent  to 
burnc,  no?  thebeatts  thereof  fuffittcnt 
foiaburntofrrmg. 

17  £llnationsbefojehimareas*no 

tying ,  anb  they  arc  countco  to  him  leffc 
then  nothing,  anb  bantttc. 

18  C  Xo  VUhont  then  tbill  ye  *  Itften  *  a«s  ■  7 
<5om  ox  ibhat  iiucncffc  ibtll  ye  compare  ' 
bntohtm* 

19  Xhettto^nemanmeltctyagrauen 

image 


Iob.i-M. 
pfal.  1 1 1. 
and  103.1  5 
bm.  l.io.i. 
pet. 1.24. 


Iohn  1  2. 
4.1-pcc.i. 

\\0r,0  than 
rhjtte/UJf 
^ood  tldingi 

I  Or,  0  tlmu 

but  telle!} 
rcaiitubnat 
ta  lerufitlem. 
|J  Or,dg*inj} 
tketlronq. 
Chap.62. 

Or,  recom- 
mence for  hit 
worke. 

£z.e.}.*. 
2;.ioh.  10. 
11. 

||  Or,  that 
giuefrcke. 


\Hcb.  4 
Tierce. 

•wird.j>. 

1  j.rom.i  1. 
3  4. 1.  cor.  2. 

\Heb.m.m 
of  hit  conn- 

fiii. 

\Het.m.iU 
him  vndtr- 
jiAii. 
t  Hti.  ot- 

derftjn- 
dwgi. 


•Dan^f. 


Gods  power,  and         Ifaiah .        prouidencc  for  his. 


fH/J.Ii 

poore  ofok- 
Ulicn. 


\\Or,him 
thatfmtlh, 
dr. 
*Pk,i04.: 


•Iobu.ii 
pfa.  10740, 


Tfa.i47.j 


\Hfh.ehAttgt 


image,  anb  the  golbfimth  fpieabeth  it 
oner  tbtth  golbe ,  anb  caftctlj  filuet 
chames. 

ao  $e  that  t  is  foimpoucrtfhcb  that 
he  hath  no  oblation,  thoofeth  a  tree  that 
tbtil  not  tot  i  lie  fec&eth  bnto  him  a  eun= 
nine  tboztieman ,  to  pjepatc  a  stauen 
image  that  (hall  not  be  mooueu. 

21  tyauepce  not  tmofben  <  haue  pec 
nothearb<hathit  not  beenc  tolbc  you 
from  the  begummg?  haue  pec  not  bn* 
berftoob  from  the  founbations  of  the 

earth* 

22  ||Uishethatrittethbponthetittlc 
ofrhecatth.anbthemhabttants  there- 
of  arc  asgrathoppers .  that'Grctthcth 
out  the  heauens  as  a  rurtame,  anb 
fp?eabetrj  themoutasatentto  bibel  in: 

23  1Ehatb2ingeththe*p?tncestono< 
thing  i  hce  mafeeth  the  3Jubges  of  tl)c 
earth  as  banific. 

24  jtJcatheplhainotbcpianteb,pea 
thep  Ojall  not  bcfoibcn,  pea  their  Gotfec 
(hail  not  tafec  roote  in  trjc  earth :  anb  he 
(haiiaifobloibbponthcm,  (jthcpfhall 
tttthct,  anb  the  ibhir  Ictttnbc  (hail  tafee 
them  aroap  as  (nibble. 

25  %o  ibhom  then  tbfll  pe  liftcn  me, 
0?  thai  3  be  eqnall,fatth  the  $olp  <©nc< 

26  ?aft  bp  pour  eyes  on  high,  anb 
bchoib  mho  hath  ttcateb  thefe  things, 
|  that  bnngeth  ont  that  holt  bp  number : 
he  taileth  them  all  bp  names,  bpthe 
grcatneffeof  his  might,  foj  that  hce  ■* 
llrong  in  potber ,  not  one  failed). 

27  nahp  fapeft  thou,  £>3!acob,  anb 
fpeafcett  a)  3ifracl,$)p  tbap  is  hibf  torn 
the  3L  ©  is  ©,  anb  mp  inbgement  is  pat- 
feb  ouer  fr  om  mp  <Bob  < 

1%  C  $?aft  thou  not  bnotbetu  haft 
thou  not  heatb  ,  that  the  eneriamng 
<E»ob,the  ?La>isjB>,the€reatour  of  the 
enbs  of  the  earth,  famteth  not,  neither 
istbcartci  "thcrcisnofearthingof  his 
bnberftanbing. 

29  $?c  giucth  potbet  to  the  famt,anb 
to  them  that  ham  no  might,  he  lncrca= 
feth  Strength. 

30  euen  the  pouths  (hall  taint,  anb 
be  ibcarp.anb  tljt  pong  men  (hall  btter ■ 
ipfall. 

31  But  thep  that  ibaite  topon  the 
|L  ©  is  © ,  (hall  t  rcncVb  tiicr  ftrcngth : 
thep  (hall  mount  bp  ttuth  rbings  as  tfa* 
glts,thep(l)airunncanbnot  bcibcarp, 
and  thep  (haiUbaifccanb  not  faint. 

CHAP.   XLI. 

1    God  cxpoftulateth  with  his  people,  about  his 


rr.ercics  to  the  Church,    10  about  his  promi. 
and  about  thevanitv  ofldoles. 

CcpeClcnce  before  me,  £> 
pianbs,  anb  let  the  people 
renctb  their  ftrcngth  :  let 
them  tome  neere,  then  let 
them  fpeabe  :let  bs  tome 
neere  together  to  iubgement. 

2  xeho  raifcb  bp  t  the  righteous 
man  from  the  iSaft ,  talleb  him  to  his 
footc,gaue  the  nations  before  him,  anb 
mabehim  rule  ouer  Bings  <  hce  gaue 
themasthebuftto  hts{roo?b,andasb?ts 
uenftubletohisbotti. 

3  $c  purfueb  thcm.and  pafleb  t  fafe* 

lp;  cuen  bp  thC  )Dap  ,  that  tjec  hab  not 

gone  ttith  his  fecte. 

4  n)ho  hat!)  lbjougiit  anb  bone  it, 
tailing  the  gencranons  from  the  bcgttt= 
nmg^ihe  fUMg>  the  *  firft,anb  tttith 
thelaftTjamht. 

5  Xhe  pies  iatbitanbfeateb,  the 
enbs  of  the  cart!)  ibere  afraib,  bjtcrb 
neere,  anb  tame. 

6  Xhephelpebcucrp  onchtsneigh* 
bout,  anbeuetyonefapbto  his  brother, 
t25eofgoobtourage. 

7  £>othetarpcntcrcttcouragcbthe 
II  golbutttth,  and  hethat  fmoothcth  with 
the  hammer  II  htm  that  fmote  the  an* 
utll ,  ||  faping  tyt  is  rcabp  to?  the  fobc* 
ring :  anb  he  faftencb  it  tbith  naples 
thattt(houlbnot  bemoueb. 

s  26utthon3fracl,  art  mpfcruant, 
giacobibhom  3rhaue*chofctt,thefccbe 
of  3bzaham  mp  *  fnenb. 

9  Thou  tbhom  3  \)^e  tafeenfrom 
the  enbs  of  the  earth ,  anb  talleb  thee 
from  the  thiefc  men  thereof,  anbfapb 
bnto  thee ,  1Chou  art  mp  feruant ,  3 
hane  rhofen  thee ,  anb  not  taft  thee  a 
ihap. 

10  Create  thounot,  fo?  31  am  uuth 
thee :  be  not  bifmateb,  fo^  "J  am  thp 
d5ob:gj  lbftl  fttcngthen  thecpea  "5  ibill 
hrtpethee,pea3  Tbillbpholb  theeibixh 
the  right  hanbofmprightcoufnem. 

ii  ffieholb,  ail  thep  rtiatujerc  intent 
fcbagainftthee,  (haibe*a(hamcbanb 
tonfounbeb :  thep  than  be  as  nothing, 
anb t thep  that  ttrtuctbith  thee, (hail 
pcrifl). 

ii  HH)ou  fl)alt  fcefte  them ,  anb  (halt 
not  finb  them,  eum  t  them  that  tontcn* 
beb  ibith  thce:tthep  rl)atU)arrc  agauift 
thee  (haibc  as  nothing ,  anb  as  a  thing 
ofnousht. 

13  f  0}  3  the  %  a>  ir  id  thp  <Bob  mill 
holb  thp  right  hanb,  faping  bnto  thee, 
ifeate 


t£enfrtcj[e. 


•Chap.  4j. 
10.  and  44. 
6.  and  48. 
Ji.reu-l. 
17.  andjJ. 
'3- 


flrmg. 

||  Orfmn- 

dtr. 

||  Or.thrfmt- 

ttitg. 

WOrfang 

eftbe/idn; 

u  ugocd. 

*Deut-7.$. 
and  10.  1  e. 
and  14.  3. 
pfal.135-4- 

and  44  1. 
*  a.Chron. 
:0.7.1am. 
1.13. 


•Eiod.  15 

11  J  up. 
tfo.13. 

Zrch.11.;. 
mnttftby 

\Htb.tht 

mm  of  thy 
contention, 
t  Hek  the 
men  of  thy 
rexrre. 


What  idoles  arc.       Chap.lxij.         Chrifh  Office. 


\\Or,f,» 


\H,br. 

months  s. 


"Chap.35- 

7.and44.i. 

'Pkl.107. 
35- 


\Hcb.  caufe 

to  come 
netrc . 


tHri.fil 

oar  heart 

vponthem. 


\\Or,rvorfc 
then  nothing 
\\Ortworfe 

then  of  a 
viper. 


jf  cart  not,  3  Unit  hclpc  thee. 

14  jfcarc  not,  thou  JbonnCJatob, 
and  ye  ||  mm  of 'Jfraci :  3  Mil  helpc 
thee ,  fau  h  the  ft  ®  is  id  ,  anb  thy  Ite 
bccmer,  the  «?oly  jDnc  of  3ifract» 

15  ascljolb,  3  null mafcc thee  anclb 
fbatpe  tbjcflnng  inftrumcnt  hauing 
t  tcett) :  thou  fljalt  tbulh  the  mouti* 
tames,  anb  bcatcthemfmail,  anb  (halt 
maBethchillcsascbarTc. 

16  Xhou  Ojalt  faune  tljcm ,  anb  the 
ibmbc  fljail  cane  them  aibay,  anb  the 
ibhirlcttnnbc  (hall  frattcr  them:  anb 
tljoufbaitreioyectntbc  |L^«?d,  and 
(halt  gloip  m  tbe  $oiy  £>nc  of  3Jfeacl. 

17  when  the  poojeanb  neebic  fecUc 
lbatcr  anb  there  is  none,and  their  tongue 
failcthfo2thirft,3Hhe!Lo2bibillbcarc 
them,  ithc<5obof  3Jfracl  ibill  notfod; 
fauctjjem. 

18  3J1MI  open  *riucrs  in  hie  places, 
anb  foimtatncs  in  tlje  mibft  of  the  bal 
leys:  3  null  mafce  the  *  ttHlbcrneiTca 
poole  of  mater, anb  the  ojyianbfpnngs 
of  lbatcr. 

19  3}  ibill  plant  in  the  ibubcrnes  the 
Ccbar,  tbc&btttab  tree,  anb  the  <S&vp 
tie,  anb  the  iDylc  tree :  3  ftttll  fct  m  the 
befcttthe  jFirrctrcc,  and  the  0me  anb 
the  26ore  tree  together: 

zo  %hatthcymayfce,anblmolbe, 
anb  confioccanb  bnbcrttanb  together, 
that  rhc  hanb  of  the  %®&®  hath  bone 
this,  anb  the  $oly  4Dnc  of  ^fcaclbath 
crcatcb  it. 

ii  t  |&obuce  your  taufc ,  faith  the 
HsD\siP,bnngfoo?th  yourttrong  rea- 
fons,  fatth  the  l&tng  of  3iatob. 

22  fLetthenibnngtiiemfoojth,  anb 
fbevb  bs  ibhat  mail  happen :  let  them 
fhctb  the  fonner  things  what  the?  bee, 
that  tbe  may  tconfibcr  thcm,anb  tmoib 
the  latter  enb  of  them,  0?  betiarc  bs 
things  fo:  to  come. 

23  §>hcibc  the  things  that  arc  to 
comebctcaftet ,  that  Vbec  may  ftnotbc 
that  ye  arc  gobs :  yea  boc  goob  0?  boc 
emu,  that  ibe  may  bcbifmaycb,anbbcs 
holb  >t  together. 

24  26choib,ycare|i  of  nothing,  anb 
your  tbojfte  ||  of  nought :  an  abominati- 
on is  he  that  tlJOOfett)  POU. 

25  3  hauc  raifeb  bp  one  from  the 
/i5o;th,  ano  he  mall  come:  from  the  ri* 
Ongof  the  inline  mallhctallbpon  my 
name,  anb  he  (hall  come  v  pon  pztnees  as 
bpon  mo?tcr ,  anb  as  the  potter  trca* 
bcthclay. 

26  ©ho  hathbeclareb  from  the  be< 


ginning,  that  tbe  may  ftnotb  <  anb  be* 
fo:e  tunc,  that  Ibe  may  fay,  He  is  righte- 
ous <  yea  there  is  none  that  tljetbetb, 
yea  there  is  none  that  beclaceth,  yea 
there  is  none  that  hcaccth  your  ibojos. 
27  ILhefirftihaiifaytoZion^eholo, 
bcbolb  rhem,  anb  3  ibill  giue  to  3Jcrtt- 
falem  one  that  bnngctb  goobtibings. 

28   5F02  3  bChClbe,  ailb  there  was  00 

man,  cum  amongtt  them,  anb  there 
was  no  counfenccthat  tt)hen  3  af  keb  of 
tfjem,  coulb  t  anfmer  e  a  in  o  20 . 

29  Behoib,  they  are  ail  bamtic,  their 
ibo2fts  are  nothing :  their  moultcn  ima« 
gesarenjmbeanbtonfuuon. 

CHAP.   XLII. 

1  The  Office  ot  Chrift,  graced  withmeekenes 
and  conftancie.  5  Godspromifevntohim.  10 
An  exhortation  to  praife  God  for  his  Go/pel. 
17  Heicprouechthe  people  of  mcredulitie. 

€holb  *  my  feruant  tbhomc 
3  bpholb.mmc  etcct  in  whom 
my  foulc  *  bctigbteth :  3 
hauc  put  my  Spirit  bpon 

him,  he  (hall  bung  fo?th  iubgement  to 

the  ©mtiies. 
2   $cc  fljail  not  trie ,  no?  lift  bp, 

no?  taufc  his  boyce  to  bec  heatb  mthe 

ftrcctc. 
?  %  bmifeb  rccb  than  I)c  not  b?cabc, 

anb  the  ||  fmofting  flajee  than  hec  not 

tqumclj:  hcfhallbmigfonhinbgmcnt 

butotructh. 

4  ^eOjallnotfailenojbettiifcouras 
gcb ,  till  he  hauc  fct  iubgement  in  tlje 
earth :  anb  tlje  ylcs  (hall  tbaitc  fo?  tys 
laibe. 

5  € Xhus  faith  <Kob tfjc  % «r>B ©, 
hctbatcreatcb  the  Ijcauens,  anbltrct^ 
cljcb  them  out,  he  that  fmcab  footff)  tlje 
earth  anb  that  Tbhith  commeth  out  of 
it,hc  that  giuctbb?eathbntotl)c  people 
bponu.anbrpirit  to  them  that  ibaibc 
therein : 

6  35tf)c3L©K©himecailebtl)eein 
rightcoufnes,anbibilholbthinchanb, 
anblibillftcepethcc,  anbgiuc  thee  foja 
toucnant  of  the  people,  fo?  *  a  light  of 
the<Rntilcs: 

7  ICoopm the blinb eyes, to* bung 
out  tlje  pufoncrs  from  the  pufon,  and 
thcmtljat  fitin  *  barKeneflc  out  of  the 
pnfonhoufc. 

8     3  am  thC  H«D1BJD;  that  is  Illy 

name,  anb  my  *  glo?yibill  5  not  gtue 
toanothcr,netthermyp?aifetograucn 
images. 

9  28eholb, 


(  Hd.Tf 

tfirne. 


•Mat.  I  J. 
1 8. 

'Mat.3.17. 
and  17.5. 
fph,i,6. 


b*rmnf, 
\Httr. 

tjitench  it. 

t  Hct.irs. 


'Chap.  49. 
5.  luk.j.ji 
afts.13.47. 
•Chap.«i. 
I. 

•Luk.4.18 

hcb.2.14, 
1  ^.tha.jj.2. 

•Chjp.48. 


The  Lords  filence.       Ifaiah.  Gods  loue  to  his. 


t  Ffdr.the 

frlneffe 
thereof. 


Or,  behme 
htmfelfe 


f  Mr  fal- 
low or  [up 
vp. 


f  Hebr.mto 
fbrAighmts. 

•Pfal.97.7. 

chap.  1.29. 
and  44.  1 I, 
and  4  5.  16. 


'Rom.  ;.  1. 


|0r,him. 

J  Or,  in  fna- 
■w^jllthe 

yong  mm  of 

them. 

\Htbr.m 


9  ischolb ,  the  fojmcc  things  arc 
cometopaffe.anDnclbthtttgsDoejDc; 
tlacc :  before  tljcv  fp^ns  foul)  3  tell  vou 
of  them. 

io  5§>ing  tjnto  trjc  3L<£>ta)*>anettie 
fong ,  an  j  0is  p:aife  from  the  cud  of  the 
cattt) :  pee  that  goe  Doibnc  to  the  fca, 
anD  t  autljat  is  therm  j  tfjc^lcs,  ano  the 
inhabitants  thereof. 

1 1  %tt  the  HjtlDcntcs  anD  the  cities 
thereof  lift  bp  their  vovce,  tlje  biliagcs 
that  Scbar  Doeth  inhabitc  :lct  the  in< 
habitants  of  the  roctic  ting ,  let  them 
(houtefromthetopoftbcmountaines. 

u  ftct  them  gitie  glo?p  bnto  the 
%  &  is  e>  ,  ano  bedate  his  p:aifc  in  the 
■Jlanbs. 

13  Xhe!L<r>is©fl)ailgocfoo«has 
a  might?  mamhe  (hall  ftitre  bp  teaiou- 
fie  liae  a  ntan  of  ibarre :  he  (hall  crp,pea 
roare ;  hce  fljail  Hpzcuaile  agamft  ins 
enemies. 

14  5  haue  long  time  holben  mp 
peace ,  3  l)auc  bcnc  foil  and  rcfraineD 
mp  felfc :  now  ttnl  3  ctp  line  a  trauatling 
ttioman ,  3HbillDcftropauDtDcuourc 
at  once. 

15  3  ibtll  mane  Vbaftc  mountaines 
anD  DUles,  anDDjpbp  ailthetr  hcrbes, 
anD  JJ  \bill  matte  the  ruiers  3JlanDS, 
anD  3  ttnll  Dip  bp  the  poolcs. 

16  3md1I  null  bung  tlje  blinbc  bpa 
ttiap  that  the?  hncib  not ,  3J  ttnll  icab 
them  m  parties  that  the?  haue  not 
ftnovben :  31  ttnl  mane  bar  Rcneffc  light 
before  them  ,  anD  croottcD  things 
tftraigbt.  Ithefethings  ttnll  Jboebtu 
to  thcm,atiD  not  fojfafte  them. 

17  Clthevfoallbe'turncDbacfec, 
thev  foaibe  greatlp  afhameb,  that  ttuft 
ut  graucn images,  thatfap  to  the  moul- 
ten  images  •,  Pt  are  our  goDs. 

18  $earcpcDcafe,anDlooBepeblinDc 
that  pe  map  fee. 

19  n@ho  '5 blinbe, but mp  fcruant < 0? 
Deafcasmpmefrengerthat^jfentiibho 
isblinbeas  he  that's perfit ,  anD  bluiDe 
as  the  %  o  «  ©  §d  feruant* 

xo  Seeing  man?  things ,  *  but  thou 
obferueft  not :  opening  the  cares,  but 
he  hear  cth  not. 

ii  n:he ILoir© is lbell pleafcD fo: 
hlsrtgljtcoufnes  fafec.hc  ttnllmagnific 
the?Utti,anbmaac||it  honourable. 

xx  25ut  this  is  a  people  robbcDanD 
fpoilcD,!|thep  arc  all  of  them  fnarcDm 
l)oles,anD  the?  arc  hiD  in  pufon  houfes: 
thcparcfo:ap2apc,?noneDcliuereth; 
tfo?a  fpoilc,  ano  none  faith,  ftefto;e. 


xj  naho  among  von  ttnll  gtuc  care 
to  this*  who  null  hearuen  ,  anD  hcarc 
tfo:  the  time  to  come  < 

x+  ©ho  gaue  3faeob  fo?  a  fpoiie, 
anD^fwelto  the  robbers  ?S>iD  not  the 
%  0  m  ©,  hce,  agamft  Vbhom  tbee  haue 
finncDf  fo;  thep  iboulD  not  ttiame  m 
his  lbapes ,  neither  iber  e  thev  obcDtent 
bnto  his  HattJ. 

x5  Xhcrcfojc  he  hath  poibjcb  bpon 
hun  the  furic  of  his  anger ,  anD  the 
ttrcngthofbattcll:anD  it  hath  fet  him 
on  fire  r ounD  about,  vttljee  hncib  not : 
anb  it  burncb  him,  vet  hce  lapcD  it  not  to 
heart. 

CHAP.  XLIII. 

The  Lord  conifonech  the  Church  with  his 
promiies.  8  Hee  appealeth  to  the  people 
torwitneiTcot  his  Oranipotencie.  14  Hee 
foretelleth  them  the  delhuifiion  of  Baby- 
lon, 18  andhis  wondertull  dehueranceot 
his  people,  n  He  repiooueth  the  people 
asinexcufable. 

Ut  nott)  thus  faveth  the 
3H  |«^JL0H©  that trcatcD  thee, 
3s<3£  ©  "Jacob ,  ano  hee  that 
fomteD  thee,  €>3Jftael, 
5fearcnot:foi3lhaucres 
DccmcDthee,  3  haue  talleD  theebpthp 
namcthou  art  mine. 

x  J»hen  thou  patted  tljiough  tlje 
ibaters,!}  w.i  be  vbith  thee,  anb  tlizough 
the  riuers,thcv  ftjal  not  ouerflovb  thee 
ibhen  rl)ou  ibameft  thiough  the  fire, 
thou  thait  not  be  burnt  ,•  neuDcr  than 
the  flame  binble  bpon  thee. 

5  ifoj  3  am  the  %  €>  k  ©  thv  C50D, 
tbcfyolyone  of  3Jfcacl,thp  ^>auiour : 
3fgauc(£gvpt  fonhpranfome,€thiO' 

piaanDS»cbafonhct' 

4  5>mce  thou  matt  precious  in  mj? 
fight,thouhaftbmehonourable,anD3l 
haucloucD  tljce :  thercfoje  ttnll  3  gme 
men  fo?  thee,  anb  people  fo?  thv  Ii  lift- 

5  *5Fcarenot,fo?3amttiiththcc:3J 
ttnll  tying  thy  fecb  from  the€aft ,  anb 
gather  thee  from  the  ©eft. 

6  '3Jtt)ilfavtotheii5o?th,<5iucbp, 
anb  to  the  3>outh ,  Beepe  not  bachc : 
bung  my  tonnes  from  farre,  anb  nip 
Daughters  from  the  cnDs  of  the  earth  s 

7  EuencuerponethatiscallcDbpmp 
iBanic:  foj'J  haue crcatcD him  fo:  mp 
glojp ,  3  haue  fonncD  him ,  pea  31  haue 
maDchim. 

8  C25?ingfoo?th  the  blinbc  people, 
that  haue  epes ;  anb  the  Deafe  tl;at  haue 
earcs. 

9  HVet 


the  after 
time. 


\\Or,ftrfm. 

"Clnp.44. 
r  if  re  50. 

1  0  -v.!  -p 

»7- 


Godsloucto  Chap.xlni].     his  chofcn  people. 


'Chap.  41. 


Cha  4  1.4. 
11^44.8, 
\\Qr,notbmg 
farmed  of 
Cod. 
*  Chap  45 

i.ofc. »?. 
4- 


ff/r  b.  none 
it  Back^. 
"lobe.. 1-- 
chap.  14.17 

^Hcb.twres 


•Exod.  14 
•Iofh.j. 


•  2.Cor.6 
17.reuel, 
2i.j. 


\\Or,  cftri- 
ches.Hcbr. 
daughters  of 
the  ojrte. 

•Luke  1 
74.75- 


9  %tt  ail  the  nattons  be  gathcreb 
together ,  anb  let  tlje  people  be  attcm 
bleb :  *ibho  among  them  ean  Declare 
rt)i£S ,  anb  (hcib  bs  fanner  things*  let 
them  bjing  foouh  their  tbitnefles ,  ttjat 
they  may  be  tuftificb :  ojlct  themheare, 
anbfay.'ustrueth. 

to  jtJcc  are  my  ibitnctTes ,  faith  the 
!L€)iE© ,  anb  nip  feruant  ibhotn  3 
j)aue  cholien :  that  ye  may  miott)  anb  be^ 
leeue  me,  anb  bnberttanb  that  3 im  he : 

*  before  me  there  ibas  ||  no  <5ob  fonneb, 
neither  (hall  tlicrcbe  after  me. 

11  3J,cuen5*.initl)c!Lfi>K©)anbbC' 
Otic  inc there  is  no  £>autour. 

ii  gihaucbcciarcb  ,  ana  haue  faueb, 
anb  3  haucthcibcb ,  when  there  tbas 
no  ttrange  God  among  you :  therefore 
pee  are  mv  VbirnetTeS;  faith  the  %  sd  k  js>, 
tl)at'3am<E;ob. 

13  ^eabcfo?etl)cb<i^w.is3Jam  Ijee; 
anb  tl)ere  is  none  that  tan  bcUuer  out  of 
myhanb:3tttUu)02Bc,anDlbhGlhall 

t*  let  iti 

14  c1H)ustayththe?L©iB©your 
IRebeemer  ,the  i^olv  one  of  ^frael ;  foi 
your  fane  3  haue  fent  to  Babylon,  anb 
haue  brought  bourne  all  ti)cir  t  nobles, 
anb the  Calbeans ,  ibhofc  me  tstnthe 
fhippcs. 

15  <jamthc?L©ia©,youc$olyone) 
the  Crcatour  of3Jftacl,your  mmg. 

16  Xhus  fayththe  1L ©is©,  lbhtch 

*  ma&eth  a  rbay  in  tl)c  fca ,  anb  *  a  part) 
in  themightte  waters: 

17  nahnWiigethfoorththccharet 
anb  hojfe ,  the  armic  anb  the  poiber : 
they  (hall  lie  botbne  togcthcr,thcy  (hall 
not  rife :  they  are  erttntt.thcy  are  cmeiv 
ehebastouie. 

is  €  Kemcmber  ycc  not  the  former 
things,  neither  tonftber  the  things  of 
olbc. 

19  ffieholb,3ItbiUboea*nctt)thing: 
nolbtt  (hall  rpmtgfoorth,  (hall  yecnot 
Unotb  it  i  3  tbill  euen  mafce  a  may  in 
the  ttnlbcrncfle,  and  tiuers  in  the  be- 

fert. 

zo  ii^bcaft  of  the  ficlb  (hail  honor 
mee,  thebragonsanb  the  II  otblcs,  be* 
caufejjl  giwe  maters  in  the  lbilbernctTe, 
and  nuers  in  the  befert,  to  giue  brinfec 
to  my  people,  my  chofcn. 

n  *Xt)iS  people  haue  3(  forniebfor 
myfelfe,  tijep  a^all  (hclbe  faorth  my 

praife. 

12  c  ffiut  thou  haft  not  cailcbbpon 

me,  €>  3*acob,  butthou  haft  beene  Vbefc 
ncofme^jfrael. 


Z3  Xhou  haft  not  brought  mee  the 
II  finall  tattell  of  thy  burnt  off  rings,  net? 
thee  haft  thou  hotumrebmee  With  thy 
faenficcs.  3  haue  not  caufeb  thee  to 
ferue  ttnth  an  ofFring,  no?  ttieaneo  thee 
Unth  incenfe. 

24  Xhou  haft  bought  mee  no  ftbecte 
tanc  roith  money ,  neither  haft  thou  t fil* 
leb  mee  Witt)  the  fat  of  thy  faenficcs:  but 
thou  haft  mabc  mee  to  ferue  Wirt)  thy 
fins ,  thou  haft  wearieb  mee  With  thine 
iniquities. 

!<,     3J,  euen  3f.imheC  that*  blOttCth 

out  thy  tranfgrcftions  foj  mine  olbnc 
faHe,anDUnUnotrcmembcr  thy  fumes. 

26  ^ut  nice  m  remembrance :  let  bs 
pleab  together :  Declare  thou,  that  thou 
mayeftbeciuftifieb. 

27  Xhyfirft  father  hath  tinneb,anb 
thy  t  teachers  haue  tranfgrctreb  agamft 
mee. 

28  therefore  3I  haue  pjofaneb  rtjc 
llpnnccs  of  the  S)anctuarte ,  anb  haue 
giuen  llacobto  tlje  curie,  anb  3Jfrae!to 
repjoches. 

CHAP.    XLIIII. 

1  God  comforteththeChurchwirh  his  promi- 
les.  7  The  vanity  of  Idols,  9  and  folly  oi 
Idolmakers.  2.1  HeexhortethtoprayfeGod 
for  his  redemption  and  omnipotency. 

<£tnoVbheare,*^>2atob 
my  feruant,  anbjfrael 

Vbhom  3  haue  chofcn. 

2  Shus  faycth  the 
%  ©  k  ©  that  mabc  thee, 
anb  fomtebthccfromrtjettombc,which 

lbil  helpe  thee:  5Fcarcnot,«©3latob,my 
feruant ,  anb  thou  3Jefurun ,  ibhom  3 
haue  chofcn. 

3  JFod  3  \Ml  *  potbjc  mater  hpon 
him  that  ts  tliirftie,  anb  floobs  bpon 
thcb?ygrounb:3llbtllpolb2emyfpirit 
bpon  thy  ftebe,  anbmy  bleftingbpon 
thine  ornpnng: 

4.  ^nbthcyfliailfpnngbp  as  among 
the  gcaffc ,  as  ibilloibcs  by  tlje  Ibater 
courfes. 

<i  £>ne  (hall  fay ,3  am  the  ?L©ihid5): 
anb  another  fljall  call  hmifclfe  by  the 
name  of  3>acob :  anb  another  (hall  fub- 
fcribe  w  uh  Ins  hanb  bnto  tlje  %  sd  k  id, 
ano  furnamc  himfclfc  by  rtjc  name  of 
3Jft-acl. 

6   Xhus  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©  the  lung 
of  Jfcael  anb  his  rebecmer  the  !L«dk© 
ofhoftcs,*H  am  the  ftrtt,anb'3i  am  the 
laft,  anb  befibes  me  there  is  no  ©ob. 
^pp        7   ^fnb 


\Heb".  Lwtbi 
or  h^ds. 


\Heb,  mnAc 
me  drunks  : 
or^bimdAnt 
Ijmoificncd. 


•Ezck.36. 
2  2,&c. 


f  Hek.  inter- 
preter/. 


||  Or.hc'y 
princes. 


•CI12.418 

and4J.i. 

icre.jo.io, 

anJ46J7- 


•Ch 
ioel; 
ioh.7.18. 
ads  z. 18 


J-7- 


'Chj.41.4 
3nd48.i  2. 
rcucl.r.3, 
1  7  and 
22. IJ. 


46 


Vanitieofldoles,  Ifaiah. 


an 


dldol 


aters. 


*Chap.  45. 

S.deut.4. 

j5.59.and 

11,39.1. 

fam.s.z, 

\Heb.rockf- 

\  Heb.  de- 

fireabtc* 

'ftal.115. 

4-&C. 


'Pfal.49.7- 
chap.i.  29. 
1111142. 17. 
and  4  5.  16. 

*Tcr.  10.3. 
wifd.  13.I  j 
\\Or,wtth 
anaxi. 


\\Or,tAke:h 
courage. 


7  3lnD  luljo  ,  as  3 ,  Ojallcail ,  anD 
(hallDcciaren,anD  return  orbct  forme,! 
Once  3  appolutcD  tlje  ancient  people; 
anD  the  things  that arc  eomming,  anD 
fhail  come « let  them  fljctb  tonto  them. 

8  jfrcarc  pee  not ,  neither  be  afcaiD :  | 
haue  not  3  tolD  tijee  from  tfjat  time, 
anD  haue  DcclarcD  it  ?  pee  are  eucn  my 
ibitncflcs.  gjs  there  a  <3ot>  bcfiDcs  me  t 

V'Ca  *  there  is  no  t  ©OD  ,  3  ^OXO  HOt 

any. 

9  C  Cljep  that  maftc  a  grauen 
image  arc  all  of  them  bamtie,anD  tijetc 
t  Delectable  things  (hall  not  profit ,  anD 
tljcp  are  their  olDncttntncffcs ,  *  thep  fee 
not ,  nor  BnoiD  •>  that  tljcp  map  be  aflja= 
tncD. 

io  jefio  l>itfj  fo?meD  a  <3oD,or  moul 
ten  a  granen  image  tfjat  is  profitable  for 
nothing* 

ii  25cfjolD,  all  IjisfellottiesQjaU  be 
*a(hamcD  :anDtl)cn)or&emcn,thcpare 
of  men:  let  them  all  be  gather cD  toge^ 
thcr,lctthcm  (lanD  vp;y«  tfjep  (hai  fcace, 
and  thepGiaibcaihameD  together. 

n  *Xfje  Diutt)  |]  ibith  tlje  tonges 
both  iborBeth  inthceoalcs,anDfa(hto^ 
ncthitttnth  hammers,  anDtborBeth  u 
ibttrjtrjcftrengtrj  of  his  amies:  pea  Ije 
is  !jungrle,anD  his  (rtengrh  failcth ;  t)cc 
Dnnftetl)  no  water  ,anD  tsfalnt. 

15  Xhc  carpenter  (trcttheth  out  his 
rule :  he  maBeth  it  outUntlj  the  line  :lje 
fittcthit  with  planes,  anD  hcmarBcth 
uout»)iri)tfjecompaOrc,anDmaUetrju 
after  tlje  figure  of  a  man,  accojDlng  to 
tfje  beautie  of  a  man  ■,  that  it  map  w 
mamemtrjerjoufc. 

14  $e  Ijctbcth  him  DoiDnc  ceDars, 
anDtauctl)  the  <£rpzcfreanDfhc£>Bc, 
which  hc]|(ircngtfincth  for  himfcife  a? 
mong  the  trees  of  the  forrcfh  he  plain 
tcthanSJttJc,  anD  the  rainc  Doth  nou= 
nft)W. 

15  Xhen  (hall  it  bee  for  a  man  to 
burne :  for  hec  iirni  taBc  thereof  anD 
ujarmc  himfcife  w&  he  BmDleth  it  anD 
baBetlj  brcaD;  pea  fie  maBeth  a  <5oD, 
anD  uwfhippcth  it :  lie  maltctl)  it  a  gra* 
ucn  imagc,anD  fallctli  Do  lune  thereto. 

16  t)c  burnetfj  part  thereof  ui  ti)t 
fire :  nnttj  part  thereof  he  eatethflcfl) : 
hcroftcthroft,  anD  is  tatifficD:  pea  hte 
\Datmetfjii'mfe!fe,anDfattl);ai)a,5am 
iDacme,3l  naucfeenctlic  fire. 

17  2tnD  tlje  refiDuc  thereof  rjc  m& 
ftcth  a  (5oD,  cucn  his  grauen  miagc :  hec 
fallctli  Dottmetontoit,anDttiorfl)ippctl) 
it,  anD  prapcth  bnto  u,  anD  fait!) ; 


2>cuuct  me,for  thou  a  rt  nip  (SoD. 

is  Xhcp  Dane  not  Bnoibcn,  nor  Dtv 
DcrttooD :  foi  he  hath  t  (hut  tfjeit  t^ts, 
tDat  tfjcp  cannot  fee ;  and  trjeir  Ijcarts, 
tljattlicp  cannot  imDerBanD. 

19  ^nD  none  t  ronfiDcrctl)  in  !)is 
licart,  ncitUer  is  there  mioiblcDge  nor 
DnDerftanDing  to  fap ;  gj  fjaue  burnt 
part  of  it  in  the  fire,  pcaau"o'3Sliaucba< 
bcd  brcaD  bpon  tfje  coaics  thereof:  3 
haucroffcD  flefb  anD  eaten  it ;  atiDfliail 
3  maBc  tlje  refiDuc  tDercof  an  abomt* 
nanoiuniall^failDottnctottlieaocBe 
of  a  tree  i 

20  i^e  fceDetf)  of  allies :  a  DeeciucD 
liearttjat!)  turncD  fjim  afiDe ,  tfjat  Ijc 
cannot  Dcliuer  hisfoule,  nor  fap ;  is  there 
notaliem  mprigfjt  fjanDv 

21  C  Kcnicmbec  tljefe  (<D  3Jacob 
anD  3Jfracl)for  tljouaitmpferuant:  3 
Iiaue  formcDtfjce:tljou  annipferuant, 
£»3Jfracl ,  tijou  fljaw  not  be  forgotten 
ofme. 

22  3  ijaue  blotteb  out ,  as  a  tfjtcfte 
clouDc,  tfjp  tranfgreffions,  anD  as  a 
a  ciouD,  top  finncs:  returnc  into  mc,for 
3IliaucrcDcemcDttjce. 

23  £>ing,  <S>  pee  ijeaimis ;  for  tfje 
%  ©  is  ©  hati)  Done  u  •.  Oiout  nt  lotber 
parts  of  tlie  cartfj :  breaBe  fortfj  into 
fmgrng  pecmountames,  joDforrcOanD 
eucrp  rrect!)ercin:fortI)e|La>i33E>rjatr) 
rebcemcD  3Jacob,anDglorifieD  fjimfclfc 
mSfracl. 

24  Xfjus faitlitlje fLsDis©  tfiprc^ 
Dtcmcr ,  anDDctfjatformcDtliccfrom 
tlie  ibombc ,-  3  am  the  2, mm©  tbat 
maBttf)  all  things,  rtiat  Qrctcfjctfj  fortfj 
tlje  hcauens  alone,  that  fprcaDcth  a= 
broao  die  eartij  bp  mpfclfe : 

25  Xljat  ftuflrateth  the  toftens  of 
the  ipets,  anD  maBcth  Diuiners  maD, 
thatturnctlj  uiifcmcn  bacBttiarD ,  anD 
mafteth  their  BnoibleDge  foolifl) : 

x6  XhatconfirmethtljetboiDofhis 
(truant,  anD  ptrformetljthecounfeliof 
his  mcCTcngcrs ,  that  faith  to  ^enua- 
ltm,1Chou  fljalt  be  mhabitcD ; anD  to 
thcnnesofJuDah,  Ptt  fhaiibc  built, 
anD  3  Hull  rau"c  bp  tlje  t  DecapcD  places 
thereof. 

27  Xhat  faith  to  the  Detpe  2Se  Drp, 
anD^lHniiDrtc  bpthp  nucrs. 

28  Xhat  fauh  of  Cyrus,  Hee  is  mp 
(hephcarD,  anD  than  performc  all  mp 
pleafurc ,  cunt  fapmg  to  3Jcnifaicm, 
*  Xhou  (halt  be  built,  anD  to  the  %mv 
pic,  1Chp  fouubation  fliaibc  laiD. 

CHAP. 


t  Wr*.  dim- 
bed. 

\Htb.fa- 
terbtobtJ 
heart t 


t  Hd.  that 
irhich  Cct/jcs 
of  a  tree. 


fHeb. 
w.ijlet, 


*z.  Chroa 
56.  ii. err. 
1.  i.ctup. 
45.13. 


Cyrus  called.  Chap.xlv.       God  onely  Lord. 


Or,J!rcn£- 
ihcncd. 


'Dcu.4.;j. 
}9-  and ;2. 
)9-chap. 
44-8. 


*Icr.i8.«. 

rom.9.10. 


CHAP.  XLV. 

1  God  calleth  Cyrus  for  his  Churches  fake.  5 
By  his  omnipotence  he  challenged,!  obedi- 
ence. 10  Hee  conuinceth  die  idoles  ofva- 
nitie,byhis  fauingpower. 

33B£S|  $US  faith  t!)£  %  ©  IK  ID  tO 

biS3motntcb ,  to  Cyms 
itobofe  right  banbc  3 
...  Ubauc  boibcn,  to  fubbuc 
sJII  nations  bcfojc  him:  anb 
31  ibili  loofc  the  lotncs  of  lungs  to  open 
before  bun  the  titoo  leaucto gates,  anD 
tlje  gates  (ball  not  be  (but. 

x  3  tbill  goe  before  tbee,anb  mafic 
tlje  eroofieb  places  (traigbt,3J  m\  bieafc 
in  pieces  the  gates  of  bzaffc,  anb  tnt  in 
limber  tlje  barces  of  yjon. 

3  2nb  3  Vbill  giuc  fbee  tnt  creatures 
of  barfeeneffe,  $  bibben  rttbes  of  ferret 
plates,  that  thou  may  eft  bnotb ,  that  3 
tfte  fLfl03S3D  ttJliich  tan  thee  by  thy 
name,  3^  the  (Sob  of  3ifraci. 

4-  jfozStetobmyferuamsfafee^nb 

Ufrael  mine  elect ,  3  !tfuc  cuen  callcb 
.Dec  by  thy  uamc :  %  bauc  furnamcb 
tbce,tbGugbtboubaftnotftnoyjcnmc. 

5  C3i*amri)c13U»D,anD  there  is  none 
eis,therc  is  no  ©ob  bcfibes  me :  3  gttbeb 
fbce,tbougbtboubaftnotftnorbcnmc: 

6  Xbat  tlicv  may  fenoitoc  from  the 
rifmgof  the  £>un,  anbfrom  the  naeft, 
that  there  is  none  bcfibes  me,  3 am  the 
%  © is  ©,  anb  there  is  none  elfe. 

7  31  fomtc  the  light ,  anb  create 
batfeenctTe :  3  mafic  peace,  anb  create 
cuM :  5  the  £©i3©  bo  all  thefe  things. 

8  s>jopboibne,ycbeancns,froma; 
boue,  anb  let  tlje  f  fetes  pottos  bolbne 
rigbteoufneffc :  let  the  earth  open,  anb 
let  than  bmig  foztb  faiuanon,  anb  let 
rigbteoufnefle  fpzmg  top  together:  3 
the  %  ©  is  ©  l)aue  crcattb  it. 

9  t©oc  tonto  btm  that  ftriuctb  Xbatlj 
fjis  mafeer :  fLet  tlje  potftjeatb  ftriue 
ttritlj  fbcpotfbearbsoftbc  earth:*  thai 
the  clay  fay  to  nun  that  fafbionet!)  it, 
aabat  maBctl  thou  <  oztby  nwfie,  be 
batbnobantos? 

io  a9oc  tonto  him  that  faith  tonto  his 
fatlicr,  safjac  begctttft riioui'  02  to  tlje 
itooman,i©batbafttboub20iigbtfo2tb< 

1 1  %\w  faith  tDc  %  ©  is  ©  tlje  l)oly 
£me  of  3fftacl,  anb  his  mafeer ,  3ffee 
me  of  things  to  tome  concerning  my 
fonnes,  anb  concerning  the  itoojfee  of 
my  banbs  commanb  yc  me. 

12  3  hauematoe the  earth,  anb  crea- 
ted man  toponit :  3  > euen "*?  hanbes 


haueftrctebebout  theljcauens,  anb  all 
their  hoftchaue  31  tommanocb. 

15  3  haue  raifcb  him  top  in  rights 
oufnefle,  anb  3  ltosll  ||  bircct  an  his 
itoayes :  he  (hall  *  bmlb  my  etne,  anb  fjee 
fl)ail  let  goe  mycapftucs,  not  fo2  pzite 
noireibacb,  faith  the  3L©is©  of  bofts. 

14  Xhus  faith  the  %  ©  is  © ,  %\)t 
labour  of  €gypt ,  anb  merthanbuc  of 
<£thiopta,anb  of  the  £>abeans,mcnof 
ftature  (hall  come  oner  tonto  thee,  anb 
they  (hall  be  tbme,  they  fl)ailcomc  after 
tljccm  chaints  tlic^  fhall  come  oner: 
anb  they  thai  fallbottmc  tonto  tbee,tbc? 
(hai  mafee  fupplication  tonto  thee/ay  mg, 
Purely  <sob  is  mthee ,  anb  there  is  none 
elfe,  there  is  no  gob. 

1$  tlerdy  thou  art  a  ©ob  that  htbcQ 
thy  felfc,  £>  ©ob  of  3Jfrael  the  ^>aui^ 
our. 

i6  Xbey  (hall  be  aajameb.anb  alfo 
confounbeb  ail  of  them :  they  fijall  goe 
to  tonfufjon  together  that  are*  mafecrs 
ofiboles. 

17  But  3fracl  (ball  bee  faucb  in  the 
%<$>  is  ©  ltoith  an  cucrlallinglaluation: 
ye  (hall  not  be  afbamcb  no?  confounbeb 
itoojuntoitboutcnto. 

18  5F02  thus  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©  that 
ereatcDtbeheaucns,  ©otobimfeifetbat 
fo^rncb  the  earth  anb  mabe  it,  becbatb 
cfiabltthcb  it,  he  treateb  it  not  m  toatne, 
he  fomicb  it  to  bcinljabiteb,  3  am  the 
5L  ©  is©, anb  there  is  nonecife. 

19  3lbaucnotfpofecnin*fcttet,ma 
barfee  place  of  the  earth '  3  faib  not  ton; 
to  the  fecto  of  3facob,  5>ecfee  ^t  mee  in 
toainc :  3  the  fL©is©  fpeafec  righte- 
oufnefle ,  3  Declare  things  that  are 
right. 

io  c  SKTcmblc  your  felucs  anb 
come:  bjattntccmogetberye  that  are 
cfcapeb  of  the  nations:  they  haue  no 
fenoitolebge  that  fct  top  the  moob  of 
their  grauen  image,  anb  pzay  tonto  a 
gob  that  cannot  faue. 

21  Xcii  yc  anb  hmig  them  neerc,  yea 
let  them  tafeecounfefl  together,  itoho 
hath  betlarcb  this  from  ancient  time? 
who  hath  tolb  it  from  that  nme?  J^auc 
nofj  the  1L©is©;anb  there  i>no  (Bob 
clfcbeftbeme,  a  mft  ©ob  anb  a  ^>aui- 
our,  there  is  none  befibc  me. 

21  ?Loofectontomcc,atibbeyefaueb 
all  the  enbes  of  the  earth  :  fo:  3  am 
<3ob  ,anb  there  is  none  elfe. 

23  3  h^uc  fiuomc  by  my  felfe :  the 
ltoozb  is  gone  out  of  iny  mouth  »ingh; 
teoufnes,anb  n;all  not  rcnirne,that  ton- 
$pp  2 to 


jtrught. 
'  Chron.  j6 
2,-ezra  1.1 
cha.  ^4, 23 


*  Chjp.44. 
11. 


"Deut.  30. 
11. 


4fi2 


Godbearcthhis.  Ifaiah.  Babylons  pride. 


"Rom.  14. 
1 1. phi)  J  ■ 

II  Or  ,f*rtl) 

he  [bull  ft) 

tf  me.  In  the 

LcrduaS 

righteoiifnti 

anJJlrenplh. 

Helr-r$- 

tfettfnejpt. 


t  Hrhr.tbeir 
fehle. 


"Chap.  40. 
18,25. 


•Pfal.jj., 

1 1,  pro.  1  p. 
1 1  .and  1 1 . 

»7- 


to  me  cucrp'Snce  (ball  boitoc,  racrp 
tongue  fbautiuearc. 

24.  ||  Surety ,  fyail  one  far,  3n  tl)e 
jLsdkjd  i«ne  3  rigbtcoufneae  anb 
(tccngtb  :raento  f)tm  (ball  men  tome, 
ant)  all  tbat  are  mcenfeo  againft  bini, 
(baibcalbamcb. 

15  3mtbe3L€>K©(baliailtbcfecb 
of  3fracl  be  luOtfiei),anD  (ball  glo?p, 

CHAP.    XLVI. 

The  idoies  of  Babylon  could  not  faue  them- 
felues.  3  God  faueth  his  people  to  the  end. 
5  Idoies  arc  not  comparable  to  God  for 
power,    11  orprefentfaluation. 

m  boibctb  botbnc,  $cbo 
ftoupctb,  tbctr  ibolcs  were 
bpon  tbe  beatts,  anD  bpon 
tbe  tattcll :  pour  carriages 
werebcautc  loaben,  tbcp  -<re 

a  burben  to  tbeibearte  beaft. 
2  •£bcplroupc)tbcpbott)bott)ncto- 

getber ,  tbe?  coulbnotbclmcr  tbe  bur? 

ben,  but  t  tbemfelucs  arc  gone  into  tap- 

ttumc. 
j   C^ear&cnbntome ,  sDboufcof 

gjacob,  anb  ai  tbe  remnant  of  tbc  boufr 

ofjfracl,  ttibitbarcbomcbvme,  from 

tbe  bcllp,  Vbbub  are  caneb  from  tbc 

ibombe. 

4  3lnbcuentovoiiiolbage3fambc, 
anbeuen  to  boarc  baircs  lbiu  3  carp 
you:  gj  bane  mabe ,  anb3  ttniibcarc, 
citen  3  ibil  carp  anb  ttnt  bcliucr  you. 

5  C5Co>bbomibilvcliltcnmc,anb 
maKemeequall.anb'comparcmc.tbat 
UicmapbeUftc; 

6  %\yt p lauifli golb out oftbebagge, 
anb  ibcigb  filucr  m  tljjc  balance,  md  btrc 
a  golbfinttb,anb  bec  maltetb  it  a  gob : 
tbcp  fall  bovbnc,  pea  tbcp  ibojfljip. 

7  Xbepbearebim  bpon  tbc  (bout 
bcr,  tbep  carp  bun  anb  fet  blm  in  bis 
place,  anb  bee  ftanbctb .  from  bis  place 
fbaii  be  not  r  cmoouc :  pea  one  (ball  crp 
bntobim,  pet  can  be  notanftuerc,  no; 
taue  bun  out  of  bis  trouble. 

8  JJcmcmber  tbis  ,  anb  (beib  pour 
fclucs  men :  bung  it  agamc  to  nunbe,£> 
pctranfgreffours. 

9  Ecmcmbcr  tbc  founer  tbings  of 
olb,foz3Jamc5ob,anbtheicisnoncclfe, 

I  am  <S50b,ailb  there  is  tlOUC  ItUCHtC, 

10  ^Declaring  tbc  enb  from  tbe  be; 
ginning ,  anb  from  ancient  nines  tbc 
tbings  tbat  are  not  y«  Done ,  taping, 
**©p  rounfcii  (bail  (ranb.aub  3  ibil  boc 
ailmpplcafurc: 

n  Calling  a  raucnous  birb  from  tbe 


eatt,  t  tbc  man  tbat  ejeecutctb  mp  coun 
fell  from  a  farrc  countrcp ,  pea  3  baue 
fpo&cn  it,  3  vbiii  aifo  bung  it  to  palTc,3J 
bauepurpofeb  it  ,3  lbiliaifo  boctt. 

11  C^earfecn  bnto  mc,pe  (lout  bear; 
tcb.tbat  ^e  farrc  from  rtgbtcoufncffc. 

u  3lbnngnccrcmprigbteoufnelTe: 
rt(l)ailnotbcc  farrc  off,  anb  mpfalua^ 
oon  (ball not tane  anb 3  *bil  placefafc 
uation  in  zton  fo?  3ix  ael  >np  glojie. 

CHAP.    XLVII. 

1  Gods  iudgement  vpon  Babylon  and  Cal- 
dxa,  6  for  their  vnmercifulncfTe,  7  pride, 
10  andouerboldnes,  n   fhalbevnrcfiftable. 

£>mebottmeanbfitmtbe 
bull :  j©  birgm  baugbtcr 
of  26abplon ,  (it  on  tbc 
grounb :  there  is  no  rbjonc, 
<D  oaugbter  of  tbe  Cal- 

beans :  to?  tbou  (bait  no  mo?c  be  callcb 

tcnbcranbbclicate. 

2  Xattc  tbc  millfones  anb  grinbe 
mcaie,bntouer  tbp  loefces:  mane  bare 
tbe  leggc:  bncouer  tbc  ttjtgtj,  patle  ouer 
tbc  riucrs. 

3  Xbpna&ebnesfyaibcbncoucrcb, 
peatbpfbamefbalbe  feenc:3Jibtlltaftc 
bcngcante,anb  3  tbill  not  meet  thee  as  a 
man. 

4  3ts  fo?  our  rebecmer ,  tbe  2.©ihjp 
ofboftes  is  blsiframe,  tljc  Jf>olpone  of 
3Jfrael. 

5  £>it  tbou  Ricnt,  anb  get  tbee  into 
barHnes ,  £>  baugbtcr  of  tljc  Caibc; 
ans:  ioi  tbou  (bait  no  mo?e  be  callcb  t\)c 
Habicofhingbomcs. 

6  ftjibas  «5«iotb  Vbiti)  mp  people : 
3  bane  pollutcbmtncinbcntance ,  anb 
giucn  tbcm  mto  tbine  banb :  tbou  bibft 
fbcwtbcmnomcrcp;  bpon  tbcancicut 
baft  tbou  berp  bcatulp  lapeb  tljc  pofte. 

7  C  3nb  tbou  fapbft, 31  (ball  bee *a 
liable  fbj  mer :  fo  tljat  tl)ou  bibft  no  t  lap 
tbcfc  tbings  to  tbpbeart ,  neubcr  bibu 
remenber  tbc  later  enb  of  it. 

s  Xbercfoje  bcarenotb  tbis,  tbou 
tbat  art  giuen  to  pleafurcs ,  tbat  blbct 
left  carclcflp,  tbat  fapeft  in  tbtnebcart, 
3Jan. ,  anb  none  clfc  bcfibes  mcc,  3 
(baiinotfit  as  a\mootb,ncirbcr(baii3J 
ftnoib  tbclofTc  ofcbilbicn. 

9  25ut  tbcfc tibo*  tbings fljall  come 
to  rtjee  in  a  moment  tit  one  bap ;  tbe 
!o(Te  of  cbtlbjcn,  anb  Uuboibboob;  ti)cv 
(ball  come  bpon  tbec  m  tbetr  perfecti* 
on ,  foj  tljc  multitubc  of  tbp  fojecries, 
and  foi  tbe  great  abunbancc  of  tbtnc  uv= 
cbantmetus. 

loCJfO? 


\Helrjh, 

Tkoi  of  my 


*Rcuc.i8. 
7- 


*Chap.  51. 
1?. 


Vaine  (ciences.        Chap.xlviij.  Godtnetnhis. 


\\Or,Mtfed 

theetoturne 


\Ueb.the 

vtcrmng 

thereof. 

\Hd.ex- 

piatc. 


\Heh.  view- 
ers of  the 
heattcits. 
\Heb.that 
gitte  l^now 
ledgeton 
cerr.tr.g  the 
mantihi, 

\Htk  their 

foulest 


io  C  5Po;  thou  haft  truttca  tntlrp 
tbtcHcDnede:  thou  haftfatb.jfcone  feettj 
me.  1Ehy  tbiuDonic  ana  thy  fenou>- 
lease,  tt  hath  II  pcructtea  thce,ana  rhou 
Daft  faia  in  thine  heart ,  3  am>  ana  none 
clfcbefi&esme. 

i  i  CXhercfo:e  fljall  cufll  come  top 
on  tbee,  thou  Qjait  not  nnoito  t  from 
whence  it  rtfeth :  ana  mifchtefc  Chan  fall 
topouthce,thou  (bait  not  be  able  tot  put 
tt  off:  ana  aefolation  ftjaii  tome  top- 
on  thee  fuaaeniy ,  which  thou  fljaltnot 
fenotb 

iz  £>tana  nolb  ltoifh  thine  tntDant- 
ments ,  ana  tbith  themultituac  of  tby 
fo:tertes ,  tbhcretn  thou  Daft  labourca 
from  thy  youth  tf  fo  be  thou  (bait  be  a- 
ble  to  profits ,  tf  fo  bctljou  mayeft  p:e 
uaile. 

13  Xhou  act  tbeariea  in  the  multi 
tuac  oft^V  tounfels :  let  nott)  the  taftro 
logers,  the  ftarre  gamers,  the  t  monctD- 
ly  p:ognofticato:s  ftana  Dp ,  and  faue 
thee  fromthefe  things  that  fljall  tome 
topon  thee. 

14.  isehoia ,  they  mail  be  as  ftubble : 
the  fire  (ball  burne  them ,  thev  mall  not 
acliuet  t  themfclucs  from  the  potber  of 
the  flame :  there  fhaii  not  bee  a  toale  to 
ibarme  at,  nor  fireto  fit  before  it. 

n  lEhusmai  they  be  bnto  thee  ltoitb 
Bjfjom  thou  haft  labourca ,  euea  thy 
merchants  from  thy  youth ,  they  mall 
raanaer  cuery  one  to  fjts  quarter:  none 
fljall  fane  thee. 

CHAP.    XLVIII. 

God ,  to  conuince  the  people  of  their  fore- 
kiiowenobftinaae ,  reuealed  his  prophecies. 
9  He  fauerh  diem  tor  his  ovvne  fake.  11  He 
exborteth  them  to  obedience ,  becaufe  of  his 
power  and  prouidence.  16  Heelamenteth 
their  backewardnefTe.  10  Hee  powerfully 
dehueredi  his  oucof  Babylon. 

€arcyeetl)is,£)!)oufeof 
Jacob,  itotjuharc  calico 
by  the  name  orJfraeUnb 
are  come  foo:th  out  of  tl)c 
„  ibaters  of  Juaab  ■,  lbbtcb 
fmcare  by  the  jBamc  of  the  ?L©ra©, 
anamauc  mention  of  trje  ©oa  of  3?fra= 
el,  but  not  tn  trueth  no:  in  rigtjtcoufncs. 
z  JFo:  they  can  themfclucs  of the  ho* 
lr  city,  ana  ftay  themfclucs  topon  tlje 
(5oo  of  3Jfracl ,  the  %  €>  is  ©  of  hoftes 
i>i)iSi!5amc. 

j  gjrjaueacciarcatr)cfo:mcttl)tngs 
from  tlje  beginning :  ana  they  rbent 


foo:th  out  of  my  mouth,  ana  3  mclbca 
them,  3  ata  them fuaaeniy ,  ano  the? 
tametopafle. 

4  25etaufe  3  &nctto  that  thou  art 
tobftmate,  ana thy  netUc  is  an  y:onG 
ncib,  ana  thy  b:oito  b:afte : 

5  3  Dane  cucn  from  tlje  beginning 
aectarea  it  to  tljcc  befo:citcamc  to  paflc 
3  fljcibea  it  tljce :  left  tljou  ajouiacQ 
fap,^9ine  iboic  Datij  aone  tljem,ana  mp 
gtauen  image,  ana  mp  molten  image 
rjatrj  tommanaebtljcm. 

6  Xl)ouljaftl)cara,feealltl)is,anD 
mill  not  $>cc  Declare  u  ?  3  Ijauc  fljcibea 
tljee  ncib  tilings  from  tfjts  nme ,  cuen 
Ijiaaen  tljingsana  tljou  aiaft  not  enoib 
tljem. 

7  Xljey  arc  createa  nolb,  ana  not 
from  tlje  beginning,  enen  befo:e  tlje  bay 
ttifjcn  tnou  Ijearacfttljem  not ;  lefttljou 
ajoulocftfay,aBcfjoia,3}  Sneib  tfjem. 

8  J3ca  tf)ou  bearccft  not ,  yea  tfjou 
knerbeft  not,  yea  from  that  time  ttjat 
tljme  care  tbas  not  openea:  fo:  3  kwtb 
trjat  tljou  ibouiacft  acale  bery  treacrjc^ 
r  oufty ,  ana  itoaft  tallca  a  tranfgrcftour 
from  tlje  ibombc. 

9  C  foi  my  names  fane  mill \%  \>t 
fecremincangcr,anafo:myp:auetbill 
3  r cframe  fo:  tljee ,  tljat  3  cut  tljee  not 
off. 

10  25rtjoia,3  Ijaue  refinca tfjee ,  but 
not  II  Buitlj  filuer ,  3  ijauetljofen  tljee  m 
tUcfomace  of  affliction. 

11  ifo:  mine  oibnc  &fte,euen  fo:  mine 
oibne  faaeibill^l  aoe  ic  fo:ljoib  lljoulD 
my  Name  bee  pollutea?  ana  3  Mil  not 
glue  my  *glo:ybntoanotIjer. 

ii  C  ^carftcn  tonto  me ,  €>  Jacob, 
ana  Jfrael  my  tailea ;  3 am  W  >  3 im 
ttje'firft^alfoamtljelaft. 

13  ffl9inerjanaaifo6arl)!aiarl)cfoun' 
aation  of  tlje  cartl),ana  ||  my  ngljt  Jjano 
Ijatljfpanncatrjcljeauens:  when  J  call 
bnto  tljcnuDcy  ftana  bp  togctljer. 

14.  aiiyee  aflemblc  your  feluesanb 
Ijearc  ribhitlj  among  tljemljatljaecia= 
rea  tljefc  things  i  tlje  %  <£>  is ts>  hath  lo- 
uea  him :  heeibtll  aoe  his  plcafure  on 
^Babylon ,  ana  htsarme  fhaii  be  on  tlje 
Caiaeans. 

15  3i,euen2hauefpoRcn,vca3l|)aue 
tailea  htm :  3  Ijaue  b:ought  hint ,  ana 
hefljaiima&e  hiSJbayp:ofpcrous. 

i6  CComcycnccrebntome^heare 
yethiS,3lhauenotrpoltcninfecrrtfrom 
the  beginning,  from  the  tunc  that  it 
ibas ,  there  am  3  ■,  ana  noito  the  |Lo:a 
<5  ©  tz>  ana  his  Ibpirlt  rjat!)  fent  me. 

^5pPJ__I7jO)US 


t  Hit. hard. 


\\°r,firfl- 


"Ch—4:,8 


*Cha.  41  4- 

.inJ  44-*  ■ 
[fuel.  1. 1 7. 
and  22.83* 
\\Or,ihc 

fal-mecfmy 
right  bona 
harhjjread 


Goc  from  Babylon.       Ifaiah.        Chrilt  appointed. 


•Exod. 
4J,«. 

•Exod. 
6.  num. 
ii. 


19. 


■Oh. 


F-  57 


Or,  myre~ 
tvard. 


17  Xbusfaub  the  3L«diss>  tbp  w 
bcemer,  ti}c  bolp  one  of '3Hrael;3J  am 
the  iLotsiDtbp  ©od  lbbieb  teacbeth 
tbec  to  profit,  Vbbtcb  icatjctl)  ttjee  bp  the 
ibap  that  thou  fboulbcft  goc. 

18  $>  that  thou  baboeft  btartencb 
to  mp  eommanbcmcntstbcn  bab  tbp 
peace  becne  as  a  tiucr ,  anb  tf)p  rights 
oufnefle  as  the  ibaues  of  the  fea, 

19  %bp  fccbcalfo  bab  becne  as  the 
fanb,  anb  the  offpnng  of  tbp  botbcls 
Itftc  the  graucll  thereof :  bis  name 
fijoulb  not  hauc  becne  cutoff,  nojbc- 
Gropcbftonibcfojcme. 

20  C@oc  pee  fojtbofzBabpIon:  flee 
pec  fcom  the  Calbcans,  ttntbabopec 
offingtng,occiarcpce,  tcllthis,  bttcrit 
cucn  to  the  cno  of  the  cacti) :  fap  pec , 
Xbc %  ©  jb  p  bath *  rebccmcD  bts  fees 
uant^acob. 

ii  ^nb  ttjcv  tt)trftcb not  when  !)cleb 
then;  through  the  befcrts  ;be  *  caufeb 
tbcibaterstofloibotttoftbc  rotbefoj 
them :  be  ciattctbcrocRealfo,  ano  the 
tbatcrsgufbebout. 

11  *  There  is   110    ptaCC  ,  faith  tl)C 

H  0  n  jd ,  bnto  the  rbicbcb. 
CHAP.    XLIX. 

1  Clirift  being  fent  to  the Iewes,  complaineth 
ofthem.  5  He  is  fent  to  the  Gentiles,  with 
gracious promiles.  13  Godsloueisperpctu- 
all  to  his  Church.  18  The  ample  refrauran- 
on  of  the  Church.  14  The  powerfullldeli- 
uerance  out  ofcaptiuity. 

HWS  35ft"1 >  £>  Vies ,  bnto  me, 

;*$fc&?jj  anb  heathen  vec  people 

rli?S$  from  farce.  Xbc  ?L  ©  a  © 

^j^batb  callcb  nice  from  the 


i-£>i 


?(*ww4  &  lbombc ,  from  the  bolbcls 
of  mp  mother  bath  l)e  mabc  mention  of 
mpname. 

1  2Inb  be  Ijatf)  mabc  m p  mouth  bite 
a  fbarpe  fwo2D,  in  the fba&oib  of  bis 
banobath  hcljiome,  anb  mabc  nice  a 
polifl)cb  (baft  ;tn  his  qutucr  bath  bee 
btbmc, 

3  2Mb  faro  bnto  me  •, Xljou  art  my 
feruant,  £>3Jfcacl,  tntbhom^ibilibc 
glonftcb. 

4  1Ebcn  3J  fatD ;  ^  hauc  laboureb 
in  batne,  3J  hattefpent  mvftrcngtbfoi 
nought,  anb  in  batne ,  yet  furclp  mp 
iubgflnmtisibitbtbe2L©iK©,anb||mp 
mojltciUitbmpcBoD. 

5  C  3Cnb  ttorb ,  faith  the  %  ©  it  e> 
tbatfozmcb  mc  from  the  lbombc  to  be 
btsfcniant,  to  b2tng3Jaeob  agatnc  to 


him-,  though  3Jfrael  be  ||  not  gathcreo, 
ytt  (ball  3J  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the 
%,  ©  m  © ,  anb  my  d5ob  (ban  bee  mv 
ftccngtb. 

6  3mo  he  raits,  1 1ft  is  a  light  thing 
that  thou  (bouUKft  be  mp  feruant  to 
ratfebp  the  tribes  of  3Iacob,  anb  tore- 
ttoie  the  ||  p;efcrucb  of  3Jfrael:3J  ibtl! 
aifo  giuc  tljee  foi  a  *  light  to  the  <5cn^ 
tiles,  that  tljou  mapeft  be  mpfaluan-- 
on,  bnto  the  cnb  of  the  earth. 

7  Xhus  faith  the  %  ©  is  j>  the  re- 
becmer  of3lfcacl,and  bisbolpone,  ||to 
Ijim  Jbhom  man  Dtfptfctb  ,  to  htm 
ibhom  the  nation  abhojreth  ,  to  afer> 
nam  of  rulers -leungs  (Ijal!  fee  anb  a; 
ttfcpnncesalfo  (haiubozfljip ,  becaufc 
oftbclL0iH©,tbatis  fatthfuii^nd  the 
holponeof^Jfrael,  anbljefhau  cboofc 
thee. 

8  3Ehusfaiththc?L©iR©,,,5nan 
acceptable  time  hauc 'J  hcarothce,  anb 
m  a  bap  of  (aittanon  hatte  31  helpcb 
thee :  attbj  ujtll  pjefcrtte  tljcc,  anb  gtue 
thee  fo?  a  cottcnant  of  the  pcoplc,||to  cfta^ 
bltnuhc  earth,  to  taufe  to  tnhcrttethc 
befoiatc  heritages: 

9  Xbattboumapcftfap'totbcpn* 
foncrs,  (5oe  fojtb  •  to  them  that  are  m 
barbeneffe,  &hcibe  pourfciucs:thep 
Ojafl  fceocinthcujapes,  anb  tbctr  pa- 
flures  iinibe  m  all  high  places. 

ro  3Ebcp(baUnot*hungerno2thirtt, 
neither  (bail  the  beatcno*  funnefmitc 
them  :fo;  he  tljathath  mercponthem 
a)anicabthcm,  eucnbp  the  fpnngsof 
ibatcr  (hall  he  gutbc  them. 

it  %W3  3J  ttiill  mabc  all  tup  moun- 
taines  a  tbap,  anb  mp  high  Vbapcs  fl;ail 
bccraiteb. 

ii  fficbolb ,  thefc  (hall  come  from 
far :  anb  loc ,  thefc  front  the  /Rojtb  anb 
from  tlje  tecft ,  anb  thefc  from  the  lattb 
ofS>intm. 

13  C^ing,£>beauett,anbbciopfuU, 
©  earth ,  anb  btcabc  fonh  into  fingtng, 
^)mountaincs:fo?(I5obhath  comfo,r= 
tcb  his  people,  anb  ibtll  hauc  mercp  bp< 
onbtsaffltetcb. 

14  2Sut  zionfatb ,  XhelLois© 
hath  fo;faben  mc ,  anb  mp  JLojb  Ijath 
forgotten  me. 

15  Can  a  iboman  forget  her  fucUmg 
thtlb,  tthatfbc  fljottlb  not  hauc  com- 
paffionontbcfomteofbcnbombc^pea 
thcpmapfo?gct ,  pet  ttuu  31  not  forget 
tl;cc. 

i6  28cbolb,3Jbaucgraucntbecbpon 
the  paintcs  of  ™>  hattbs :  thplbailes  arc 

continue 


||Or.fW 
Ij rati may 
be  gathered 
lohtmtai:d  I 
may  rfc 

[Or.arttkou 
lighter,  then 
that  thou 
/hoteUejl 
<5-c. 

\\Ordefib- 
ttont. 

'Chap.  41. 
6, 


J!  Or,  tohir 
that  is  Jefpi 
fcdirjfoulc 


'  i. Cor. 6 


\\Or,raife 
Vf. 


7- 


'Rcu.7.15. 


\Hch.from 
hdumg  torn- 
pafjion. 


Gentiles  called. 


•Chap.tfo. 


Chap.l. 


Lewes 


forfak 


en. 


\Ucbr.ba- 
fame. 

\Heb.  nou- 

rifhers. 

t  Hcb.Pnn- 

cefcf. 


\Hehrthe 
captudtte  of 
thewjl. 

'{HeS.capti- 


lo.anJ  \6. 
6 

\\Orttuw 
TCtr.e, 


continually  before  mcc. 

17  Xtjp  ctyimcn  ttjai  make  !)atte,rt)p 
beftrovers ,  anb  tt)cp  tnat  maoe  ttjee 
malic,  (nail  got  fojtii  ofttjec. 

18  C*fLifttop  tome  cpes  rouno  & 
bout.anb  bcDolO:  all  thefe  gather  tljcin- 
felues  together  and  conte  to  ttjee:  as  31 
liucfaitl)  tt)'c  Ho  13  D,tt)ou  (bait  furely 
clotrje  tljcc  tbitl)  tljcm  au,a0  tbitl)  an  op 
namcnt,anb  binb  tljcm  on  thee  as  a  bjtbc 
oocrt). 

19  5fo*  tl)p  tbaflc  ano  rljp  ocfoiate 
piaccs,  anb  tljclatio  of  thy  ocftcuctton 
(ball  cueu  noito  be  too  narrotb  byrca- 
fon  of  tl)c  inhabitants,  ano  rtjcy  trjat 
ftoaiiotbco  tljcc  top  ,  fljau  bec  facte 
atbap. 

20  Xi)e  tfrlbjen  tbljirt)  toou  (uait 
l)aue,  after  tljou  Ijafl  loft  toe  otl)cr,ftjail 
fayagamc  tn  tl)tne  cares,  %\yt  place  is 
too  ftraigot  foz  me:  gutc  place  to  mtc 
tljatJJmayDibcU, 

n  Zljen  fljalttljoufapintljineljcart, 
D9l)o  Ijatl)  begotten  mctljcfc,  feeing  3 
Daueloll  my  cfnttuen  ano  ambefolatc, 
a  capttuc  anb  rcmouing  to  anb  fro  *  anb 
tbDoljatobjougljt  up  thefc;  ffieDoibe, 
3Jtbas  left  alone,  tljefc  wbetc  hadrtjey 

beene? 

22  Xfjusfattl)tl)tlLo?b(l5!©©,2S^ 
bolb,  3  tbill  lift  bp  nunc  Ijanb  to  tlje 
©ennics,  anb  fet  top  my  ftanbeto  to  tlje 
people :  anb  tl)cy  (Ijail  bung  tl)y  fonncs 
in  cheir  t  armes :  ano  tt)y  oaugljters  ujal 
be  carteb  topon  their  ftjoulbcrs. 

25  31no  lungs  fljail  be  tl)y  t  nurOng 
fatljers,  anb  tijetr  t  queencs  tl)y  nut* 
tmginotoers:  tfjcp  n>ail  botb  Dottme  to 
tljce  tbitl)  tljctt  fatetoibarb  trjc  cattl), 
anb  *  itchc  top  tl)c  oufi  of  tljy  fcete,  anb 
tbou  fyalttmolb  tljafj  am  tlje|L©uj©: 
fo2  ttjcv  fljall  not  be  aftjamcb  tljat  rbaite 
fo?  me. 

24  C  5>ljail  tl)c  pjay  be  taften  from 
tfjcm(g6tie,02tt!)c  iaitofull  capttuc  be- 
liuereo? 

25  2ButtOusfaitfttDe!LfiDUJji?,cuen 
tlje  t  tap  tiucs  of  tbe  mtgl)tic  (ball  be  ta* 
fecnaioay,  anb  tt)e  p*ay  of  tbe  terrible 
(nail  be  oeliucreb :  fo2  3  tbill  contenb 
tbitlj  him  tljat  contcnoctlj  ttntb  tljcc.anb 
3HbiiiCauctbytbtlD2cn. 

26  3ino  3  null  feebe  tljcm  tbat  op 
pzeCTe  tbec,  Vbitl)  t!)eir  onmc  fled),  anb 
thep  0)all  be  Djunfecn  tbitl)  tiictr  otbnc 
"Wood,  as  ibitrj  lifmeet  ibinc :  anb  all 
fled)  Qjall  imoil)  trjat  31  tnc  !L  ©  is  je>  am 

trjp  5>autouc  anb  t\y$  aaebecmer,  tlje 
mtgrjne£>ncof3J3cob. 


CHAP.    L. 

ChriA  (heweth,  that  the  dereliction  of  the 
Fewcs  is  not  be  imputed  vntohim,by  his  abili- 
tictofaue,  5  by  his  obedience  in  thatworke, 
7  and  by  his  confidence  in  that  afsiftance. 
10  An  exhortation  to  truft  in  God,  and 
not  in  our  felues. 

^USf  fatt!)  ttjC  1Ls5D3H©, 

fiacre  is  fl;c  bill  of  pour 
mothers  bsuojecment , 
ttiliom  3  Dauc  put  aiba^i 
02  ibljicli  of  mv  crcbitours 
is  u  to  tbljomj  l)aucfolbpoui25c!)olb3 
fo2  your  iniquities  fjauc  von  folbe  pour 
felues,  anb  foz  vour  tranfgrcflions  is 
yourmofhcrputaibap. 

2  nai)crcfo2e  ibfjen^l  tame  was  there 
no  man  <  rbljcn  3  cailcb,was  tljercnone 
to  anfiucte  i  *  3%  nip  ijanb  fl)02teneb  at 
ail,tl)at  it  cannot  rebecine*  02  Ijauc  3 
nopoibcr  to  beluter j.  2Scl)oloc,  at  mp 
rcbuftc  3  *  one  top  rlie  fea :  3  watte  rtje 
*  riuers  a  tbilberncs  J  rljeir  &fl)  fhntieti) , 
becaufc  there  is  no  tbater,  anb  bietl)  fo? 
trjirft. 

j  3  clotlje  tfte  Dcauens  Vbitl)  biatKc^ 
nctTe,  ano  3  make  facfeclotl)  tljeir  touc^ 
ring. 

4  1Tl)c?Lo20<E©©5)atl)giueutne 
tne  tongue  of  tlje  learneo,tl)atifljoulb 
tuioibDoVD  tofpealie  arb020e  infeafon 
to  l)im  tfjatis  'ltocarie :  l)ee  itoafeenetD 
morning  bp  morning,  f)ce  rbafeenetfj 
nunc  care  to  l)earc  as  tlje  learncb. 

5  iCXl)elio2b(5sD©natl)openeb 
mine  care,  anb  3  was  not  *  rebellious, 
ncitlicr  turneb  attiapbatfee. 

6  *  3  gaue  mp  bac&e  to  tlje  fmiters, 
ano  my  tlicefes  to  tl)em  tljat  plucHco  off 
tlje  naire :  31  Ijibbc  not  mp  face  from 
Uoameanbfpitttng. 

7  Cf02tnclLo20(5©©itoil|itipc 
me,t5icrfo2cfl)ail3fnotbcconfounbcb: 
tl)ercfo2Cl)auc3l  ietmv  face  lifee  a  flint, 
anb  3  ftnorb  tljat  3  fljaii  not  bec  aty* 
mcb. 

8  *^Csneeretl)atiufrifietI)me,tt)I)o 
tbill  contcuo  ami)  me*  let  tos  ftanb  to* 
gctl)cr :  ltoDo  is  t  mine  abuerfarie*  let 
i)uncomenccrctome. 

9  26cfjolb,tl)c|Lo2b(I5©©Ibill)clpe 
mc,ltoho  is  Ijc  that  (ball  conocmnc  mee J. 
fLoctbcv  all  fbaiiitoarcoioeasagaC' 
ment :  tliemotn  mail  eatctUemtop. 

10  cnaijo  isamongpouthatfeaeetJ) 
tnetLfiPKiD,  tliatobcyctothe  toopceof 
rjisfcruant,  tljatitoaiftctft"  inbarfeenefle 
anb  Ijatl)  no  ligl)t  <  let  ljun  trud  in  tilt 

iI5amc 


*Nun).  1 1. 

i^.chsp. 

5S" 

*Exod.l4. 

21. 
"Iodl.J.ltf 


•Matthil. 

18. 


"Iohi)i4- 

ji.hcb.io. 

j.&c.phil. 

j. 8. 

"Matth.ltf. 

67.  and  17. 

16. 


•Rom  ?. 

\  Rib.  the 

maftcr  of  Try 


Nottofeareman.  Ifaiah.   Godsrightcoufncfle. 


lohnp.jj. 


•Pfil.  101. 

I7.malth. 

M.3S- 


'Pral.37. 
II. 

Mitth.  11 
57- 


iftanic  of  the  &  ©  is  © ,  anb  ftay  bpon 

1 1  ffieholb,  an  ye  that  amble  a  fire, 
that  compaffe  your  feiues  about  Ulltl) 
fparfts :  ttmiac  (n  the  light  of  pout  fire, 
anb  inthcfpatRcsthatyehaue  Btnbleb. 
*1Ehisft)aiiyc  hauc  ef  minebanb,  pee 
fhall  lie  bourne  in  ioitavo. 

CHAP.    LI. 

1  An  exhortation  after  the  paterne  of  Abra- 
ham ,  to  truft  in  Chrift ,  3  by  reafon  of  his 
comfortable  promifes,  4  of  his  righteous  fal- 
uation  ,  7  and  mans  mortalitie.  9  Chrift 
byhisfan(ftined.ume,defendethhisfiomthe 
feare  of  man.  17  Hebewaileth  the  afflictions 
oflerufalem,  2.1  andpromifethdeliuerance. 

ear&cntomcyefhat 
follott)  after  nghtc* 
oufncffcycthatfcese 
the  %  ©  is  © :  loose 
tonto  ti)c  rotae  whence 
yccarchclbcn,  anbto 
the  hole  of  the  pttte 
whence  pc  are  oiggeD. 

2  flooKc  tome  Sibjaham  your  fa= 
trjer,  anb  tonto  £>arah  that  bare  vou: 
fo;3icauebhMiaionc,mibblcflebhini, 
anbtncreafebhim. 

3  5foj  tlic  1L©is©  (hall  comfort 
Zion :  be  unl  comfort  all  her  ttiafte  pla- 
ccs,anbbttt)tlmaueber\totlbcrncsIiRc 
€ben ,  anbftcr  befcrtliHc  tl)e  garocn  of 
tbe!L©iK©:ioy  anb  giabncffcfhaibc 
founb  therein,  tbanKcfguwig,  anb the 
tooucofmeloby. 

4  4C  heathen  tonto  me ,  my  people, 
anb  giuc  care  tonto  me ,  tD  my  nation: 
fojaiUttj  (bail  pjoceebfrommec,  anb 
3  ami  mahe  my  mbgement  to  reft  foj  a 
light  of  the  people. 

5  sJ0yrtgbtcoufnes>sneerc:myfai^ 
nation  is  gone  foouU ,  anb  mine  armes 
fhall  inbgc  the  people :  the  3Hcs  (ball 
ltoaittopon  me,  anb  on  nunc  arnic  (ball 
tbcyrtuft. 

6  ?liftbpyourcyestotbebeauens, 
anb  loose  topon  the  cartl)  beneath :  to? 
the  bcauens  (ball  toantfb  aitoay  liac 
fmo&e,  anb  tl)c  earth  (bailttiare  olb  line 
a  garment,  anb  they  that  bibel  therein 
fhailbic  m  UUe  nrnncr :  but  my  feuta* 
tionfhalbcfo?  euer,anb  my  ngbtcoufc 
ties  (ball  not  be  abolifbeb. 

7  <[!>>carRcn  tonto  me  yctbatBnon) 
rigbtcotifncfle ,  the  people  *  in  itobofc 
heart  is  my  %M) :  *5?carc  ye  not  the  r  i- 
pjocb  of  men,  neither  be  yce  afcaib  of 
tbttrreuilmgs. 


1  8  if 0?  the  motb  fl)ail  cate  tljcm  top 
liKeagarHicnt,anbtbcnio;tmc(baicate 
\  tbeni  line  Vbooil :  butmy  rigbteoufnes 
1  (balbe  fo?  eucr  ,  anb  my  faiuation  from 
I  generation  to  generation. 

9  C^VbaKcarbane.putonftrcngtli, 
4D  armc  of  the  %  ©  is  © ,  avbaftc  as  in 
tbcanctcntbayes,mtbcgcnerationsof 
olb.  Art  thou  not  it  that  hart)  tut  fta- 
}jab,and  rbounbcb  tftc  *  bjagon  < 

10  Arttbounotitvbbicbbatb'bncb 
the  fca ,  the  maters  of  the  great  beepe, 
rfjat  bath  mabe  the  beptbes  of  the  fea  a 
may  fo?  the  ranfometo  to  paffc  ouer  ? 

1 1  %htttfmt  the  rebcemeb  of  the 
%  a>  is  ©  fljair  rcmrne,aub  tome  ibitn 
tinging  tonto  Zion,anbeueriamngtoy 
fhaibe  bpon  tlieir*  hcab :  tliey  fljall  ob- 
tame  glabncffc  anb  toy,  andfojroibanb 
mourning  mall  flee  attiay. 

II   3J,euen3Jam  rjCCtftat  C0mf02tCtl) 

you,  ibljo  art  tl)outl)attl)ou  (IjouiDcfi 
be  afraib  *  of  a  man  that  fljaii  bic ,  anb  of 
tlje  fonnc  of  man  winch  flmil  bee  mabe 
as'graffc^ 

13  ^nb  fojgcttcft  roc  %  &  is  ©  thy 
maaer  that  hart)  ftretchcb  foonh  the 
heauens,  anb  layebthefounbattonsof 
the  cartl)  <  anb  haft  fearcb  continually 
cucry  bay,  becaufc  of  the  fucic  of  the  op- 
p^effour,  as  if  hce  ||  lbcrercaby  to  bc^ 
ftroy;anb  Tbljere  >s  tljc  tunc  of  tl)c  op- 
pjcflour; 

14  3Chc  taptiue  erile  haftencth  that 
he  may  be  loofeb,  anb  that  hce  flboulb 
not  Die  in  the  pit,  no*  that  his  bjcab 
fhoulbtaile. 

15  ffiut  3J am  the  %  ©  is  ©  thy  d5ob, 
that  *btmbcb  the  fca.ibhofe  rbaucs  toa= 
reb :  the  %  ©  a  ©  of  hofts  «  his  iftatne. 

i6  znn  3  hauc  put  my  Mwbcs* in 
thy  mouth .  anb  fiauc  touereb  thec  in 
the  fhaboa  of  minchanb,  that  3  may 
piantthcheauens,  anb  lay  the  founba: 
nous  of  the  earth,  anb  fay  tonto  zion, 
Xhou  art  my  people. 

17  C  *  auiaac,  atbaue,  ftanb  bp,£) 
3Jcrufalcm ,  itohici)  haft  bjunae  at  the 
hanb  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  the  cup  of  his  fw 
nc  i  tljou  haft  bwnttcn  the  bjegges  of 
the  cup  of  trembling,  and  njmng  them 
out. 

is  There  is  none  to  guibc  her  among 
all  the  fonncs  whom  ftjee  hath  brought 
foo^fl) :  nctthcr  » there  any  that  taseth 
her  by  the  hanb ,  of  all  rt)tfonncs"that 
the  hath  bought  bp. 

19  *  Xhcfc  tibo  things  t  are  come 
bntothec.Vbbo  ft)all  befone  fo?  thec; 

befo-' 


•pw.74. 

*  £xod.(^ 


"Chap,  j  5 
10. 

"Chap.  )5 


"PfJ.nS. 
6. 

*  Chap.  40 
6  I.pct.  1. 


\\Or,midt 

himfclfj 

rcldj. 


"Icrc.31. 

35- 

"  Chap.  40 


"Chap.  51. 


'Cha.47.9. 
\Hthr.kif- 


The  deliucrance       Chap.lij.lii  j.        of  the  Church. 


'Chap.  51 
•7- 


*Ccn.4i5.6. 


"Ezck.;6. 

10,2  j.rom. 
2.24. 


•Nahum. 
i.i5.rom. 
■  0.1  5. 


befolanonanb  tDedcuctton,  aaotfttfa  , 
mtneanbthefnwbibpibhom  than  3\ 
comfojtthee; 

20  injspfontteshauefauttcb.thepuel 
at  theheatief  autheftceetesas  aSbilbe ; 
bull  ma  net;  thep  ace  fultoftheftraeof 
the  3L©«©,thctcbulicofthp<i5ob. 

zi  CXher  foje  hearc  novb  this  thou 
aQucteb  anb  bmnlten ,  but  uot  lbith 
nunc. 

xx  ithusfauhtltf  &ojto,rtjefU>K© 
anbthpOtob  that  picabcth  the  taufie  of 
his  people,  ascljoiu,  3  l)auc  taacn  out 
of  njmc  hanb  the  tup  of  trembling,  eucn 
tljc  lyegges  of  the  tup  of  nip  ftmc :  thou 
(halt  no  moje  b#n&e  tt  agauie 

x}  25ut3l  unli  put  it  mto  the  hanb 
of  them  tljat  afflict  ttjec :  itohich  hane 
faibtothpfoule,  uBotb  bourne  that  ttiee 
map  goe  ouet:  anb  thou  haft  laiocthp 
bobpas  the  gcounb ,  anb  astheliccete 
to  them  that  ibcnt  ouet. 

CHAP.    LI  I. 

1  Chrift  perfwadeth  die  Church  to  belceue  Kb 
free  Redemption ,  7  Toreceiue  theMini- 
ftersdiereof,  9  Toioyin  the  power  there- 
of, n  And  to  free  themfelnes  from  bondage. 
Chriits  kingdome  fhalbe  exalted. 

naabe,  *  auiakc,put  on  thp 
ttteugth,  £)  zion,puton 
thp  bcantifull  garments, 
s©  3Jcrofaiem  the  holpci* 
tie :  foz  hentcfooith  there 
jail  uomdze  tome  into  thee  the  tonne* 
cmntifeb,  anb  the  tontieane. 

x  dbabc  thp  fclfc  from  the  Htt6 :  a* 
rife,  and  fit  bolbne,  £)  33ceufaiem :  loofc 
tbpfelfe  fcom  thetoanbes  of  thpneclic, 
jD  eaptiucbaugbtcr  of  zton. 

3  5fonbusfapththeIL©iS©,  J*ee 
hane  foioc  pour  femes  nw  nought:  anb 
pefhaltbetebeemebUiithoutmoncp. 

4.  fm  tints  faiti)  the  %mn<5®  jd, 
$&¥  people  ttoent  boilmc  afoicnmt  into 
"egppttofoiourncthcrcanbthc^u'p; 
nan  oppjciTcb  them  ltoit  bout  taufe.  > 

5  jQoib  therefo:c ,  Vbhat  Dane  3 
hcrc,faptbtbe?l  o  is  jd,  thatmp  pco* 
pie  is  ta&en  attiap  fo  j  nought  <  thep  that 
rule  ouet  them,  malic  them  tohoUrtc, 
fapth  the  %  o  is  ©,  anb  nip  /frame  con- 
tinuallv  cucrp  bap  is"  biafphcincb. 

6  1Chcterb:c  mv  people  (hall tmott) 
nip  /frame :  tnetcfoze  thev  fhaii  know  m 
thatbap^batgjamhethatbothfpca&e. 
26eholb,itls% 

7  C  *  $oib  bcauttfull  topon  the 
moimtautcs  are  tlje  feete  of  him  that 


bMngeth  goob  tibings,tbat  pubitfbcth 
peace,  that  btiugeth  goob  nbmgs  of 
goob,  that  publilbctb  Tarnation ,  that 
fapth  tonto  Zion,  %hp  <3ob  reigncth  < 

s  XhP  lbatthmcn  than  lift  top  the 
tootce,  lbith  the  tooicetogether  than  thep 
Ong :  fo:  thep  than  fee  v?t  to  epe  ltohen 
the  %  ©  is  2?  fl)ali  bung  agame  zion. 

9  C^cabefoo«hmtoiop,fingto- 
getber,pcettiaac  places  of  ilcrufaicm : 
m  the  iL©K©  hatlj  tomfoiteo  his 
pcopic,hehathteDecmcb3Jcrulaieni. 

io  3Che  itoiR©  hath  mabc  bare  his 
holp  acme  m  the  epes  of  all  the  nations, 
anb  *  ail  the  cnoes  of  the  earth  than  fee 
thefaluanon  of  our  «sob. 

ii  C3>cpartpc,bepartpe,gocpeouJ 
from  theme,  *  touth  no  toncleanc  thing ; 
goepe  outofthemibbeBofhec;  be  pee 
cleanc ,  that  bcarc  the  toeffcls  of  the 

it  ^pcnjailnotgoontttiithhafte, 
no?  goe  bp  flight :  fo?  the  %  ©  a  ©  ttnll 
goe  before  pou:  anb  the  ©ob  of3Jfeael 
will  t  be  pour  rereibarb. 

u  C26cho!b,mpfcruantfl)al||beaie 
pmbcntlp,  hefi)aitbeeraiteb  anbcttol- 

leb,  anb  be  beep  high* 

14  3s  manp  ibere  aftonicb  at  thee 
(his*bifage  ibasfomarreb  mo^cthen 
anp  man ,  anb  his  fo?mc  mo;c  then  the 
fonnesofmen:) 

15  S>o  (hallhcc  fp2incMe  manp  nati* 
ons,  ti)e&mgsfl)all(hutthetrmouthes 
at  him :  fo;  that  *  itohich  hab  not  becne 
tolb  thcm,tl)au  tljcp  fce,anD  that  ibhfch 
tljep  hab  not  hcarb,  (hail  thep  tonuber. 

CHAP.    LIII. 

1  The  Prophet  complaining  of  lncredulitie.ex- 
cufeth  the  fcandall  of  the  crofle,  4  by  the 
benefice  of  his  palsion,  10  and  die  good 
fuccefTe  thereof. 

&o*hathbelccucb  out  ||  re* 
po2t<  anbtoibhomtsthe 
armeofthc  ?l£)K©re* 
ucaleb^ 
x  5?o?hemailgrolbtop 
before  him  as  a  tcnbcrpiant,  anbasa 
coot  out  of  a  djic  grounb:hcc  hath  no 
fomienoz  comclincfTc :  anb  tbhen  ibee 
(haiifechm^thereisnobeaunethatuie 
(houlbbefirelnm. 

3  *$eisbefpifcbanbrciettcbofmen, 
a  man  of  fon-oibs,  anb  atquatnteb  ibith 
gricfe :  anb  u  ibe  htb  as  it  Vberc  our  faces 
from  him  hee  ibasbcfpifeb ,  anb  ibee 
cftecmeohimnot. 
+  C  5>urelp  *  he  Datfj  borne  our 

grtefes, 


•PW.9J.3. 
lulcj.6. 


•  2.Cor«. 
17.  rci;el. 
18.4. 


iheryoulf. 
\\Or,{nftcr 


't.ha.51.3. 


'Rom.i  j. 
21. 


•Iofi.I2.j8. 
rom.  10.16. 
\\Or,io- 
Orini-.Hcb. 


|Chnits  pafsion.  Ifaiah.       Gods  great mercie. 


the  ctjtiDicn  of  rtjc  niartcb  tutfc,Catrt)  tljc 

i  <fnlargethcplaceofthptent,and 
let  tljent  Bretd)  foitt»  the  eurtaines  of 
thine  habitanons :  fpar  c  not ,  lengthen 
thp  co2bs,anb  ttrcngthen  thp  ftahes. 

3  fax  thou  (halt  bzcafee  fojrh  on  the 
rtgljt  hanb,anb  on  the  left ,  anb  thp  feet) 
(bail  mhcrtte  the  ©entiles,  and  mafec 
rtjc  bcfoiatc  cities  to  be  inhabited. 

4  jf  care  not  :fo2  thou  Ojait  not  be 
a(hamcb:ncu1)cr  bedjou  confounbed, 
fo?  thou  (halt  not  be  put  tolhamc.fo: 
thou  (halt  fojget  the  (hamc  of  d)p 
poud),  anb  (haitnot  remember  tfhc  re- 
P2oad)  oftl)v  rbiboibhoob  anp  mo:c. 

5  ifo;  thp  mafect  is  thine  hufoanb, 
(tI)c*!L©iK2D  of  holies  is  Ijts  name,) 
anb  tiiv  rebecmetthe  holponcof  3tfta- 
el,  the  ©odofdjeibhoic  earth  (hall  he 
bctaileb. 

6  fo2thclL©K©hathcaiiebthee 
as  a  ibomau  f02lafe.cn ,  anb  gricucd  m 
fptnt,  anb  avbtfe  ofpouth ,  ttihcn  thou 
il>aftrcfufcd,fatth  d)p  God. 

7  3?02afmautnomcnthaue3Jfor 
fafecn  thec,  but  lbith  great  mercies  mil 
5  gather  thec. 

8  ^n  a  ntle  uwad)  31  l)ib  mp  fate 
fromthcc,fo2amomcnt;butlbithcucp 
lafhng  lundnelTe  UMl  3  hauc  incrcie  on 
tlKcfaitl)  the  %  o  a  c>  tlip  rcbecnif  r. 

9  iFo2t!jtSisastijcUiatcrsof*/i5oaJ) 
bntomc:fo2«3I  hauc  fuwnc  that  the 
tbatcrs  of  itfoal)  Ihoulb  no  mo2C  got 
oner  the  cacti) ;  fo  fjauc  3  mwnctfjat 
Hiboulb  not  be  ibjodjibith  d)cc,  no? 
tcbnfectljcc. 

io  :f  02  themountaincs  (hall  depart, 
anb  tl)c  l)illcs  be  r  einoueb,  but  nip  bind 
ncflc  Ojall  not  bepart  frotn  thccnctthct: 
tball  the  coucnant  of  inp  peace  be  rcmo- 
ucb ,  faith  the  %  ©  x  jd ,  that  hath  met* 
ciconthcc. 

"  Cfl>h  thou  afflicteb,  toffeb  \toith 
temped:  and  not  comfo2tcb  ,  bcholb, 
U  ibill  lap  thp  Itoncs  ibid)  *  fairc  co- 
lours, anb  lap  tljp  foundations  Urtth 
5>aphircs. 

ii  3hrt>3lttriU  mafecthp  lbindotbcs 
of  Agates ,  anb  thp  gates  of  Carbun* 
tics,  anb  all  thp  bozbers  of  plcafant 
(tones. 

13  ^nballthpehtlb2enfl)aibc*taught 
of  the  3L©»£>,  anb  great  ftnlbe  the 
peace  of  thp  chtlbjcn. 

*4  3In  rightcoufnctTc  (halt  tl)onbe 
cftabiimcb:  thou  lhalt  be  far  re  from  op- 
p<JcfTio«,fo;  tljou  (halt  not  fcare ;  $  from 
. tcrrour, 


\\Or.tomff.' 
ted. 

*Rom.4  15 
l.cor.15  3. 
•  1  fa  -•- 

'4- 
\Htb.trltifc. 


h'Mh  maie 

the  truefui- 

ueofviall 

tomeeteon 

him. 

*Ma:th.-« 

63.  and  27. 

li.nur.  14 

61.  and  1  J. 

6. 

■  Attcs  8. 

PI  Or,  herein 
tultenimxj 
tj  difrrtjfr 
tidindge- 
merit :  t'Ht 
&C. 

\  He'c.  wji 
thefiroks 
■upon  him. 
t«<-«. 
deathet. 
'i.Pce.J. 
n.i.ioii. 
J-5- 

\  Or,  vhen 
nuilrean 


a8.luc.at. 

57- 
•Luc.13.8. 


Gil. 4  27 


gnefes,  anb  cancb  our  fo2roibcs  :pct 
ibebsb  cftecme  htmllnftcnjmtttcnof 
Oob,anbaffitctcb. 

5  2Sut  he  ibas  I!  *  ibounbcb  fo:  out 
tranfgrefTtons,  he  )basb2uu"cbfo2our 
unqu:ttes:ti)t  chamfement  of  our  peace 
wjspponhnn,anb\DUhh!5,'tftnpesttic 
arc  hcaieb. 

6  3iii  ibe  lifee  H)ecpc  hauc  gone 
a[trap:ibe  hauc  turned  cuerp  one  to  h«s 
oibnc  ibap,ano  the  %  ©  «  ©  fjatljUapb 
onhimthcmtautticof  bsail. 

7  i?e  ibas  opp2ciTcb ,  anb  he  tt>as 
affltctcb , pet  *  he  openeb  not  his  mouth : 
he!Sb:oughtasa*iambetothcflaugt)' 
tcranb  as  a  niccpcbcfo2Cl)crfl)carcrs 
ts  bummefo  he  opened)  not  hismouth. 

8  i!  19c ibastafeen  from  p2tfon,  anb 
from  uibgcmcnt:  anb  mho  (bailbceiate 
his  generation;  fo:  he  «jas  cut  off  out 
of  the  laud  of  the  liuing ,  fo2  the  tranf- 
grcmon  of  mp  people  tiuas  he  thricfecn. 

9  3!nd  he  mabchts  graucUitththt 
lbicfeed  and  lbith  the  rid)  m  hts  t  death , 
becaufc  h  e  hab  done  no  PioIcncc,ucithcr 
svasanp^decett  m  his  mouth. 

10  *LJ3etitpieafcdthc?L©i3Dto 
biutfc  htm,  he  hath  put  him  to  gricfc: 

IIU)henri)oufl)aitmaftch«sfoulcanof- 
frmgfozfinnc,  hcfljallfceiiisfccde,  Dec 
(hall  p2olong  ins  dates,  and  the  plcafurc 
of  the  jLoiHjE*  (hail  p2ofpcr  in  his 
hand. 

11  $c  niau  fee  ofthctraucllofhis 
foule,  and  ttjaibc  fatilRcb :  bp  his  bnoib- 
lebgc  (hall  mp  righteous  fcruantutfhnc 
manp :  fo?  Ijcc  fl)ail  bcarctheicmiriut= 
ties. 

\z  Xhcrcfo2e  lbfll  31  bmxht  him  a 
pomon  n«th  the  great ,  anb  he  (hall  bi- 
uibcthcfpotlc  Uiul)  theftroncj :  becaufc 
hec  hath  poili2eo  out  hts  foulc  bnto 
death : and  he  Idas* numb2cbnuth d)c 
tranfgrcu*burs,anb  he  bare  the  ftnnt  of 
manp,  anb  *mabc  intcrccfltou fo:  the 
tranfgreffours. 

CHAP.    LI  II I. 

The  Prophet  for  the  comfort  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, prophefieth  the  amplitude  of  their 
Church.  4  Their fafety,  6  their certaine 
deliuerance  out  of  affliction,  n  thcirfaire 
edification,  15  and  their furepreferuation. 

"ling*!©  barren  thou  that 

didff  not  bcarc  ■,  bjeafee 

fo2thmto  fmgmg,ano  eric 

aloud  thou  that  Dibit  not 

&--&,  traucll  ibid)  chilb  :  fo: 

tljc  djiib2cn  of  the  befolatc  then 


■Luc.  1 


*Gcn.j.u. 


*  1  .Chroo. 
29.J. 


Ioh.tf.  4  J 


Grace  offered  freely.Chap.lv.lv).     Gods  word  fure. 


■  loh.7-37 


\Hcb. weigh 


54- 


^Bebrthe 

ejMtie, 

\Hebhevu 
mulnplnrto 
pardon. 


terrour,fo2tt  (hailnot  come  mere  thee. 

15  25el)oiD,  ttjcv  Qiau  furcly  gather 
together,^  not  by  me:  ibhofocucrfhal 
gather  together  agamft  thee,  (hall  fall 
fwthyfauc. 

16  2Seho!D,^hauetrcatcothc&ntth 
thatbloinrththrcoairsin  thcBre,  anb 
thattymgeth  roouh  antnltrumcntfiw 
htstbojbe,  aubj  hauecrcatebthcttta; 
ttertobcCtoy.  " 

17  C  0o  weapon  that  is  fojmen 
agatnft  thee,  fhall  pzofper ,  anb  cucry 
tongue  that  (hall  rife  agamft  thee  tn 
lubgrmcnt,  thou  (halt  conbetnnc.Xlns 
is  the  heritage  of  the  fcruants  of  the 
fLois  39,  attb  their  ngljteoufneffc  15  of 
me,  faith  the  !L ©is©. 

CHAP.    LV. 

1  The  Prophet,  with  the  promifcs  of  Chrilt, 
calleth  to  iauh,  6  and  to  repentance.  8  The 
happy  fucceiTeot  their,  that  belceuc. 

r  *£>>  cucry  one  that  thir- 
f  ftcth ,  conic  pe  to  the  lba- 
tcrs,  anb  he  that  hath  no 
money :  come  ye,  buy  anb 
rate,  pea  come,  buy  Untie 
anb  milk  without  money ,  anb  tbm> 
outpnte. 

i  lehtrefweDocyectfpetib  money 
foj  that  Which  is  not  bzeab  i  anb  your 
labour  fin  that  Which  fatifficth  not; 
hearken  biligentlv  Pnto  me,anb  catc  ye 
that  Which  is  goob,  anb  let  your  foule 
belight  ttfdfc  tn  fatneffe. 

3  gjneime  your  care ,  anb  come  ton- 
tome:  hcarc,  anb  your  fottlcfhailliuc, 
anb  3  Hull  mane  an  cucriafttng  couc 
nant  With  you,  e^n  tljCfurc  mercies  of 
2^auio. 

4  23eholb,  3  hauc  giucn  htm  foz  a 
WttnciTc  to  the  people ,  a  leabct  anb 
commanber  to  the  people. 

5  Behoib ,  thou  fhalt  tail  a  nation 
that  thou  Btio  Weft  not,  attb  nations  that 
Imewnotthee,  fliail  runtte  Ditto  thee, 
becaufe  of  the  1L  o  is  ©  thy  <5ob,  anb 
foz  the  I?oly  One  of  3Jfrael,  foz  tjeljat!) 
cfionfteb  thee. 

6  C  ^ecBcvc  the  H  o  is  p,  While 
hemaybefouno,cailycbponhimWhile 
heisnctre. 

7  ?Lct  the  wtc&eb  fozfaKe  htsway, 
5  the  t  unrighteous  ntan  his  thoughts : 
anb  let  htm  rentrne  unto  the  1L  o  is  je>, 
attb  he  mm  hauc  titer  etc  upon  htm ,  anb 
to  our  C5ob;  fo;  hee  Will  tabimbantly 
parbon. 

8  C  f  02  my  thoughts  are  not  your 


thoughts,  neurjet  are  your  wayes  my 
tt)ayes,faith  the  JL  0  ik  ©. 

9  5f  02  3 i  the  heauens ar c  higher  then 
the  earth.fo  are  my  wayes  higher  then 
your  wayes,  aub  my  thoughts  then 
yourthouhts. 

io  f  02  as  the  taittc  tommcth  boWtt, 
anb  the  mow  from  heauen,  anb  retur- 
neth  not  thtthcr ,  but  Watcreth  the 
earth,  anb  mabcth  it  b2tngfoo2thanb 
bub ,  that  u  may  gtue  feeb  to  the  foWcr , 
anb  b2cao  to  the  cater: 

ii  £>o  (hall  my  Wozb  bee  that  gocth 
foztljout  of  my  mouth:  it  (hall  not  re 
tunic  btttomebotb,  but  ttfhaliaccom- 
pitfl)  that  tbhicl)  3  picafc,  anb  it  (hail 
p?ofpcr  in  the  thtttg ^hereto  31  fent  it. 

ix  5To2ycfl)allgocoutttnthioy,ant3 
bee  leo  fooirti  With  peace:  the  moutt 
tames  attb  the  hiiies  (hall  *  bzcaBe  fozth 
befoze  you  mto  fmgtng,anb  al  the  trees 
of  the  ficlb  (hall  clap  their  hanbs. 

13  3}nQcab  ofthcth02neQ)alicomc 
top  the  ;f  irr  c  tree ,  anb  in  ftcab  of  the  bzi- 
cr  (hall  come  top  the  fi^yztlctrcc,  anbtt 
(hail  be  to  the  %  ©  is  ©  foz  a  name,  fo; 
an  menacing  ftgnc  that  Qjau  not  bee 
cutoff. 

CHAP.    LVI. 

The  Piophet  exhorteth  to  fanclification. 
3  He  promifeih  it  fhall  be  generall  without 
refpea  oi  perfons.  j  He  inueyeth  agamft 
bhnde  watchmen. 

?*»&<**&  lf)us  faith  the  ?L(D1S©, 

?  Beepc  yee  lltubgcracnt, 

anb  boc  tuftitc :  foz  my 

(S¥  faiuanon  i^nccrcto  come, 

fs«@£5t  anb  my  rightcoufneffe 
to  bee  rcueaieb. 

z  26icu"ebisthcman  thatbocththts, 
anb  the  fonnc  of  man  that  laycth  holbc 
on  it:  that  Ucepcth  the  Sabbath  from 
pollunngit,anbBccpcthh'Shanbfrom 
boutganycutll. 

3  C  Neither  let  the  fonnc  of  the 
ftrangcr,  that  hath  toyttcb  htmfclfcto 
the  jLois© ,  fpcaite,  faymg  ,  Xhe 
Hens©  Ijath  btterly  feparatcb  mcc 
from  his  people :  neuhcr  let  the  Cu 
nuchfay,26cholb,  3J  ^nia02tctrcc. 

4-  5F02  thus  faith  the  %  o  is  v  bnto 
the  €unuchcs  that  Hecp  my  Sabbaths, 
anbehoofethe  things  that  picafc  mcc, 
anb  taac  holb  of  my  coucnant : 

5  €ucn  Pnto  them  lbtll  3  gmc  in 
mute  houfc ,  anb  ipttlnn  my  Uiallcs,  a 
place  anb  a  name  better  then  of  fonncs 
anbof  oaug!)tcrs:3J  ttnl  gtue  them  atie- 

ucr 


"Cha.35.1 


\\0r}  e^mty. 


Blindc  watchmen.       Ifaiah.  Gods  dwelling. 


Chap.i. 


'Macth.il. 

I  j. mar.  1 1 . 
J7-lukc  19. 
-0. 

"\Hebr.tO  his 
gathered* 


V»i 


n  then 


(kept. 

f  Hebfhrong 

of  appetite. 
\Heb.  Know 
nit  to  be  ft' 
tufted. 


f  Hebr .  men 

ofkl'tbtlfe 
r  tod/ineffe. 

Ail.is.1. 

mich.7*. 

\\Or,frem 

th*t  which  is 

null. 

\\Or.goem 

peace. 

\\0r  .before 
him. 


\\Orjmong 
the  eke  I. 


ucrlafhng  namctDat  fljai  not  be  tut  off. 

6  3lifo  tDe  fonnes  of  tl)c  ttrangcr 
tDat  toync  tfjcnifelucs  to  tDe  ?L£>  iass 
to  feme  Dim ,  anb  to  loue  tDt  Jftamcof 
tl)c  1L  ©  is  jd  ,  to  be  Dis  fcraants,  cucry 
otic  tDat  BcepetU  tDe  £>abbat!)  from 
polluting  it  >  anbtaucti)  Dolb  of  my  Co- 
uenant : 

7  «ucn  tbein  lbill  3  *  tying  to  my 
Dolvmountatnc,  anb  mafec  tDem  top 
fullmmyDoufe  of  pzayct :  tDcirburnt 
offerings  anb  tljetr  facriftccs  rhaii  beat; 
ceptcb  topon  mine  3lltar :  foj  nunc  noufe 
fbaibc  calleb  *an  Ijoufc  of  pjaycr  fo?  all 
people. 

8  %l)t  ?Lo:b  <5  o  ©  rbbicD  gafDc* 
rctl)  toe  outcafts  of  3lfracl,  fattrj ,  jact 
lbtil  3  gatljer  others  to  Dim  ,  t  bcfibes 
tDofctbataregatDerebbntobim. 

9  C  311  ye  beafts  of  tbc  ficlb ,  tome 
to  beuoure,  yea  all  yc  beafts  tn  tl)e  fozett. 

io  irHSiDatcfjmcn are  blmbc : tljcy  arc 
all  ignozant,  tfjey  are  all  bumbebogs, 
fDcy  cannot  barbe  •,  ||  deeping  ,  lying 
bolbncloutng  to  dumber. 

n  Peatbey  are  tgrecbybogges  which 
tcan  ncucr  rjauc  ynouglj ,  anb  tDcy  are 
fljeplicarbs  that  cannot  bnbcrftanb: 
tbey  all  loone  to  tDctt  ottmc  n)ay,cucry 
one  fo2  Dis  gamefrom  bis  Quarter. 

ii  Comcpc'aythev^uitlfctcftibme, 
anb  U>c  lbill  nil  our  fclttcs  Ibltfj  ftrong 
bnnbe.ano  tomojrolb  dial  be  as  ti)ts 
bap,  and  rnuclj  moje  abunbant. 

CHAP.    LVII. 

The  blelled  death  o!  the  righteous.     3    God 
reproueth  the  Icwes  tor  their  w  honfh  idola 
try.     15    Heegiueth  Euangelicall  promifes 
to  the  penitent. 

g  fy  €  ngbtcous  pcrifbetD, 
f  anb  no  tnan  laycti)  it  to 
^Dcarti  anb  t »  mcretfull 
men  ate  taken  aibay  none 
conftbcrutgtDattbcnglji 
tcous  tstabcnaibay  jlfcotu  tlje  cuill  to 

COD1C. 

2  J)cc  fliaii  ||  enter  into  peate :  tfjey 
a?all  reft  intDett  bebs ,  cacl)  one  Voav 
bingll'iifjisbpngbtncffc. 

3  C  25ut  Dzalb  necrc  rjitoct ,  yec 
fonnes  of  tliefoiccrcfTe,  tljc  fceb  of  tl)c 
abultcrcr  ,anb  tbc  ibDojc. 

4  3gainftibboniOoeyefpoityt>ur 
fclues*  agauiftibDom  mauc  yc  attnbe 
moutb.and  ttwrb  out  the  tongue  *  are  yc 
notcbuozen  of  teanfgreffton,  afecbeof 
faifcDootw 

5  inflaming  your  felucs  ||  ibitD 


tboles  *bnbcr  cucry  greencrtrce ,  flays 
ingtrjt  cbilDzcn  m  tbc  baileys  bnber  ttje 
cliftesoftDcrotftcs; 

6  among  tljcfmootl)  ftoncs  of  tlje 
flreamc  is  ttn>  pomon  ,  tDcy ,  tljey  are 
tDy  lot :  euen  to  them  Daft  tbou  poib= 
rcb  a  bnnttc  offering ,  tDou  Daft  offcreb 
a  mcate  offering,  dljouib  3  rcceiue 
tomfojtmtDefc; 

7  3ilpon  a  loftic  anb  IjigD  moun- 
tatneDafttDoufcttDybeb:cuentDttljer 
rbcnttft  tljou  bp  to  offer  fatnfice. 

8  iSeDmbe  tlje  booies  alfo  anb  tDe 
pofts  Daft  tDou  fet  bp  tDy  reincm^ 
b^ancc:  fo?  tDou  Daft  bucoucrcb  tDy  fclfe 
to  an  other  tDcti  mee ,  anb  art  gone  bp : 
tDouDaftenlargco  rDybcb,  anb||mabe 
a  couenant  lbttD  tDem  :  tDou  louebft 
tDctr  beb  \  lbDere  tDoufatbcfttt. 

9  3lnb  ||  tDou  lbentcft  to  tDe  King 
VbitDoyntment,  anb  btbft  tncrcafe  tDy 
perfumes,  anb  Dibft  fenb  tDy  mcffetu 
gcrs  farr  e  off,  anb  bibft  bebafc  tDy  felfe 
euen  bnto  Dell 

io  XDo'u  att  Vbearicb  in  tDe  greats 
neffe  of  tDy  ibay  ,  vet  faybft  tDou  not, 
XDetctsno Dope: tDou  Daft  founb  tDe 
II  itfe  of  tDtne  Danb  >  tljcrcfo?c  tDou  ttiaft 
notgrtetteb. 

1 1  3inb  of  ibDom  Daft  tDou  bene  a* 
fratbojfeareb,  tDattDouDaftlyeb,anb 
Daftnotrcmcmbzcbmcnoj  laytb  it  to 
tljy  Dearth  Dauc  not  3  Drib  my  peace 
tuen  of  olb,anb  tDou  fearcft  me  not  i 

\i  3  lbtll  bcclarc  tDy  rtgDtcoufnes  ■ 
anb  tDy  Uwucs ,  fo,t  tDey  fliall  not  pjo* 
fittljte. 

ij  C  nsDen  tDou  crttft ,  let  tDy  torn* 
pantcsoeltucr  tDcc:  bnttDcibtnbefDail 
tacy  tDem  all  aibay ;  ^latutic  lliall  tabe 
them:  but  Dee  tDat  pttttctD  Dts  truft  in 
me,  Q)ail  pofleffe  tlje  lanb,  anb  fljail  m 
Dcrtt  my  Doly  mountame, 

14  tubman  fay,  *Caftyccbp,taft 
ycebp^pzeparc  tDe  ibay,  tabe  bp  tDe 
ftumblingblocUcout  of  tijc  Ibay  of  my 
people. 

15  3Fo*  tDus  fattD  tDe  l^igD  anb  lof- 
tic s£)nc  tDat  ttiDabttetDcternmclbDofe 
ii5ame  is  i)olv ;  "J  bibcll  tntDc  Dtgl)  anb 
Doly  place  .•  lbitD  Dim  alfo  tDat  is  of  a 
conttttc  anb  bumble  fptrtt ,  to  rcuute 
tDclptrttof  tDcDumblc ,  anb  toreutne 
tDe  Dcart  of  tDe  contrite  ones. 

16  j^oj'jnbillnot  contcnb  fo;  cucr, 
ncitDcnbtll  3  be  anbayes  lb^otD :  fo? 
tl)efpint  fbottib  fatic  before  me,  anb  tlje 
foulcs  *  hich  3  Dauc  mabe. 

17  Jfo?  tlje  tntqumc  of  DiS  touctouf 

neffe 


4- 


\\Or,heired 
if  for  thy 
felfe  larger 

thtnthctrr, 

\\Ortthcu 

promdedn 

roome. 

\\  Or,thourc- 

tyetiedfithe 

Km, 


J  Or,  lining. 


'Chap.  40. 

Mnd6c 


The  true  fad,         Chap.lvii|.lix.    and  true  Sabbath. 


neflc  Ibasj  lbzotb ,  ano  fmote  bun :  3 
ljib  mc ,  anb  ibasttwotb,  anbbccrbcnt 
on  t  fcoibarblp  m  the  ttwp  of  blsbesrt. 

18  Jb3ucfccncbtsU)3pcs,anbibill 
bcale  fjttn :  %  tbtll  leabc  bim  aifo ,  anb 
reftozc  comforts  bnto  t)im ,  ano  to  Ijts 
mourners. 

19  3f  create  the  fcuitc  of  tljclippes; 
peacc,peaectobuntb3tisfarreorf,anb 
to  bint  that  is  necr  e,fapth  the  %  ©  is  js>, 
anb  31  Mil  bcale  btm. 

20  26utthcu3itbeDucitfecfhettou^ 
bleb  fea,Vbhcn  tt  csnnotrcttAbbofcMv 
ters  caft  Dp  nunc  ano  Dirt. 

n  *The,c  is  no  peace,  faptbmpcSob, 
totbeMcueb. 

CHAP.    LVIII. 

The  Prophet  being  fent  to  reproouehypocri- 
fie,  5  cxprefleth  a  counterfeit  tall,  and  a 
true.  S  Hedeclarefhwhatpromifesaredue 
vnto  £,odlinclTe ,  13  and  to  the  keeping  ot 
the  Sabbath. 

£ietalouDc,fparcnot,uft 
$P*j  bp  thp  Doiee  Use  a  trunt 
i$$&X>tt,  anb  fbcibcmp  people 
tijar  tranfgrcmon,fjtbc 
.  houfc  of  Jacob  then  fins. 
r  Pet  tbsrp  fecac  mccbailp ,  anb  be; 
light  to  UnoUMnpMipcs  ,  as  a  nation 
that  bib  righteoumcuc,  anb  fozfooac 
not  the  ozbmancc  of  their  <3ob :  tbcp 
af  he  of  mc  the  ozbmances  of  iumcc:tb  cp 
taac  bclight  in  appzoebmg  to  c5oo. 
)   C  EDherefozc  baucMefaftcb,fjy 

they,  anb  t!)OU  fecfttlOt?  wherefore  baUC 

ujcc  afflictcb  our  route ,  %  thou  taficft  no 
tmoMebge*  25cholb,mtbcbapofpour 
faft  pou  finb  plcafurc,  anb  eract  all  pour 
||  labours. 

4.  i6cbolb,pec fart fozftnfc anb nt 
bate .  anb  to  finite  unto  the  fift  of  ttnc- 
Bcbncflc ,  lipcc  (bail  notfaft  as  yee  doe 
tbtsbap,tomaKcpourboicctobcbe3rb 

on  high. 

5  3Jsit  *  facbafaft  thn^hauccho- 
few  a*||oap  foz  a  man  to  afflict  his  foule? 
isictoboibbo^bnhishcabasabulrufl), 
anb  to  fpzeab  facacclotb  anb  afhesbn- 
bcr  htm;  lbilt  thou  call  this  a  faft,  anb 
anacceptablcbay  to  the  ?L©hid; 

6  js  not  this  the  faft  tbatj  haue 
chofen  i  toloofc  tljc  banbesof  lbuHeb: 
neffcto  bnooc  t  the  hcauir  burbcns,anb 
to  let  the  t  oppzeffeb  goe free,  anb  that 
pcbzealiceuerppoRe* 

7  Js  it  not,  to "beaie  thp bzcab to 
the  bungcp,  anb  tbat  thou  bimg  ttjc 


f  Heir,  tier 
mngatv-ty. 


•Chap.48. 
II. 


\Heb.mth 
the  throat. 


\\Or,thi>:ct 
'herrrpith 
ye  grime 
•then.  Heb. 
frtefet. 
\\Or,,ef*ft 

nitMthu 
auy. 

*Zcch.7.s. 
'Lcuit.iS. 

t  Or,  to  at '- 
JtiH  hti  Joule 
ioiad^yl 


\  Heb.  the 

bundle!  of 
theyok^e. 
X  Heb.  bro- 
ke-. 

*Eze.|8.8. 


poozc  that  arc  Hcaftout,  tothphoufc; 
MjcntboufecfttbcnaKeb,tbattbouto^ 
uer  him,anb  that  thou  hibe  not  thp  fclfe 
from  thine  oMicflcflK 

8  c  Xhcn  (bail  thp  light  bzcalte 
foo;tt)  as  the  mo?mng,anb  tome  health 
Chan  fpzmg  fooztb  fpccbilp :  anb  thp 
nghtcoufneOc  (hall  goe  before  tbec,  the 
glozp  of  the  %  ©  is  ©  t  (hall  be  thp  rere= 
ibarb. 

9  Xhen  (bait  thou  can ,  anb  the 
%  ©  k  ©  (bail  anfrocre ;  thou  (bait  crp, 
anb  he  fljalfap,  J?crcgj  am :  if  thoutaftc 
aibap  from  the  nnbftof  thee  the  pose, 
theputtmgfo2thofthcfingcr,anofpea^ 
Ringbanittc: 

10  2nbiftboubzaibDUttbpfouleto 
the  bungrp ,  anb  fanffic  the  afflictcb 
foulerthcn  (bail  thp  light  rife mobfeu^ 
ntic.anb  tljp  baracnefTc  be  as  the  noone 
bap. 

1 1.  Znh  tljc  %  0  is  id  (Ijai  guibc  thee 
tontmu3llp,  anb  fatif&c  thp  foulc  in 
tb2ougl)t,anbmaBc  fat  thp  bones :  anb 
thou  (halt  bcliUc a  tbatcrcb  garben ,anb 
Iikc  a  fpjing  of  ibatcr,  ibhofc  lbatcrs 
tfaticnot. 

It   3M)  they  that  fhall  be  Oft\)tt ,  *  (1)311 

bniioc  the  olbc  rbaftc  puices :  thou  (halt 
raife  bp  the  founbationscf  tnanp  gene 
cations ;  anb  thou  (bait  be  caiicb,  the 
repairer  of  the  bzcach ,  tljc  reftozcr  of 
patljstobmciiin. 

13  ttjftbouturncattniptbpfoote 
from  the  5>3bbatl),  trombomg  thp  plca- 
furc on ^mp  $?olp  bap ,  anb  call  tljc  Sab- 
bath a  bclight,  the  holp  of  the  %  ©  is  jd, 
b onourable,  3nb  (halt  honour  bun,  not 
bomg  tl)inc  oibnc  ibapes ,  noz  fmbmg 
thme  olbne  plcafurc,  no?  fpcabing  ihme 

owneUlOZbCS: 

14-  Xbcnn)aittbonbeligljttbpfelfc 
m  the  %  o  hp,  anb  3J  mill  caufethec 
to  *nbe  bpon  the  btsb  plsccs  of  tlje 
C3rtb,3nbfccbctbectt)itl)  tljc  bentage 
of  Jacob  thp  father;  fo2  the  mouth  of 
tljc  %  &  k  jd  hath  fpoacn  ir. 

CHAP.    LIX. 

I  The  damnable  nature  olfinne.  3  Thefinnes 
of  the  Iewcs.  9  Calamitie  is  for  finne.  16 
Saluation  i^  onely  of  God.  10  .The  coue- 
nnntol  the  Redeemer. 

€bOlbC,tbC?L©K1E>fe> 

r^hanb  is  not  *  (boztencb, 
^S  that  it  cannot  faucmcitber 

his  eare  bcauic,tbat  it  tan 

notbeare. 

^aqq         z   23ut 


\\Or,affU. 
Lled.  ' 


\HebJ.aH 
gutherthec 


t  Heir, 
droughts. 

\  Heb.  lye, 

ordceetue 

"Gi2.<5l.«. 


! 


Dcur.  32. 


'Num.,  1. 
,3. chap. 


Thelewesfinnes.         Ifaiah.  1  heiuftisapray. 


|j  Ort  ban* 
madehim 

hide. 

"Chap.  I. 
'5- 


"IoS.  15. 
3J-P&I.7. 
'5- 

\\Or,<tJJerl. 
\Or,  lh.1t 
rchich  it 
fpritiltletl'i'i 
asiftbere 
brakeoni  ■' 
viper. 

Mob.8.14, 
'I- 


'Prou.  1 .1 ; 
rem.  5.15. 

\Heb.bre»- 


%  25ut  your  iniquities  haucfepara^ 
tcDbettbccncyou  anD  your  <5oD,  anD 
yourfinncs||hauchiDhistatefromyou, 
that  he  unti  not  hear  e. 

3  if 02  *  your  hanos  arc  DcfficD  ttiirh 
blooD,  anD  pour  fingers  unth  imquitic, 
pone  lippcs  haue  fpoHcii  lies ,  your 
tongue  hath  muttercD  pcrucrfncffc. 

4  0ont  caileth  fo:  luftttc ,  no?  any 
pleaDcth  fo:  tructh :  they  truft  in  bamtv 
ant)  fpcaitc  lies  *they  coneeiuc  mifchiefc, 
ano  b:mgfo:th  imquitic. 

5  Xhcyhatchl|coeKatrieeegges,anD 
Uicaue  tlje  fpiDers  tt)cb:hctbatcatcth 
ofthctrcggesDteth,anD!!thanbhicl)is 
crufticDbicaKcth  outtntoabiper. 

6  *XhcirU)Cbbesftiall  not  become 
garments  ,  neither  (ball  they  touer 
tbcnuclucs  Xbitlj  their  UwKes :  their 
u>o:kcs  arc  U)02Bcs  of  mtquttie,  anD  the 
act  of  biolcncc  is  m  their  hanDS. 

7  *  Xbcir  fcetc  mnne  to  cuill ,  anD 
tbcymaucbaftcto  fbeDinnocentblooD: 
their  thoughts  are  thoughts  ofintqmty, 
lbafting  jfDcftruttion  are  tn  their  parbs. 

8  Xhcibayofpcacc  they  fenoib  not, 
anD  there  !s  no  ||  utDgement  m  tlictrgo 
nigs :  tbey  Dane  maDe  them  trooHcD 
parlies,  fthofocucrgocthtijcrcin,fl)an 
not  fenottJ  peace. 

9  C  Xbcrcfojc  is  luDgcmnu  farrc 
from  bs,  neither  Dotbiufttccottcrtaric 
bs :  iDc  uiaitc  fo:  light ,  but  bcbolD  ob- 
fnirmcfozbzjgfjtnclTe,  butiberbaiRem 
Dartmcffc. 

10  mt  grope  to:  the  tuail  iiUc  the 
blmD  ,  anDlbc  grope  asiflbchaDno 
cies:U)eftumblcatnooneDayasintbc 
night,  we  are  m  Dcfoiatc  places  as  DeaD 
men. 

11  i©c  roatc  ail  ufcc  bearcs ,  anD 
moumc  fo:c  Itttc  Doucs :  lbe  loolte  fo: 
uiDgcment,  but  there isnonc ,  fojfaiua^ 
tton,  bunt  tsfarrc  off  from  bs. 

u  f  0 i  our  tranfgreffions  arc  multfc 
pucDbefo:ctbcc,  anD  our  funics  teftific 
agamft  bs  :  fo:our  tranfgreffions  are 
Uitbbs,  atiD  as  fo:  our  iniquities  ,  lbe 
luiolbthcm: 

ij  gin  tranfgreffing  anD  lying  a- 
gauitfthc  JLokp  ,  anD  Departing  a- 
lbay  from  ourGoDfpcaUmg  oppicfli 
otiauDrcuolt,  tontciumganDbttcrmg 
from  the  heart  Uwds  of  faifliooD. 

14.  3lnD  luDgcmcnt  is  turncD  aurny 
bacinbarD ,  atiDttifticc  ftauDctbafarrc 
off :  fo:  truth  is  fallen  m  the  ftrcetc,  anD 
cquuic  cannot  enter. 

15  J'eatrutb  fatlcrh ,  anD  IjctfjatDiv 


partetb  from  cuiu  |  matter!)  Inmfelfca 
p:ay :  anD  the  %  o  is  s>  {alb  u ,  anD  t  it 
DifpieafeDhim,  that  there  was  noiuDgc^ 
inmt. 

i6  C  3tnD  rjec  fall)  rhat  there  was  no 
matt,  ano  ibonDercD  that  there  was  no! 
uttereeffour.  *  Xbcrcfoic  bis  atmc 
b.iought  faluanon  unto  fjnn  ,  anD  his 
rightebnfncflc,tt  fuftamcb  him. 

17  jfo:bcputon*nghteoufnclTeas 
a  b;eflplate,anD  an  helmet  of  faiuation ' 
bpon  his  beaD :  anD  he  put  onrfjegar* 
ments of  btngeante  tor  nothing,  anD 
mas  ciao  untfo  5ealc  as  a  cioaftc. 

18  3lrro:Ding  to  *  their  tdccdcs  mop 
DmglyljcVbtllrcpay,ftmetorjisaDuer« 
fanes,  recompcncc  to  rjis enemies,  to, 
tljcylanDSfteUnll  repay  recompence.  | 

19  5>o  ftjail  trjcyfcaretlicnameof 
tlie  %  ©  k  t>  from  tile  i©cu\  anDfjis 
glo:y  from  rlicntmg  of  tlje  funnciUifjeu 
thcenenue  fliaii  come  in  *  lifeea  flooD, 
fi)cfpiritofriic2,£>K2?fljaUi|liftbpa! 
(lanDarD  agamft  I)im. 

io  c^nDtlie'rcDennerflialltomc 
to  zion  ,  anD  Ditto  tlmn  trjat  tutne 
fromtranfgreftionm^acob,  fairt)  tlje 

JL©13©. 

2i  3s  fo2  me ,  tfjis  is  my  toucnant 
U)itr)t!)cm,fait!)tl)e1t©iS3E>-.  09yfpi^ 
nt  that  is  bpon  thee ,  anD  my  Vbo:Ds 
ttirjicr)  3  l)auc  put  in  thy  mouth ,  (hall 
not  Depart  out  of  rliy  mouth,  no:  out  of 
the  mouth  of  rticfeeDt,  no:  out  of  the 
mouth  of  ttjy  feeDes  fceD ,  fatth  the 
!L©ia© ,  from  hcnccfoifh ,  anD  fo: 
eucr. 

CHAR    LX. 

i  The  glory  of  the  Church ,  in  the  abundant 
accefle  of  the  Gentiles,  15  and  the  great  blef- 
1I115S  after  a  fhort  affliction. 

g&V&fr  3R»fe.  I!  tl»nc ,  fo:  thy  light 
|«^Vfe|  is  come,  anD  the  gio:y  of 
5§|I|JS5  tiic  ?l€)K3Disru"cnDpon 

Mm^zg  x  ifo:behoID,thcDarrt; 
ncfteniaiicouer  the eartl), anD groffc 
Darlmcffcthe  people:  but  thefLois© 
ftiau  anfebpon  thcc,anD  hisgio:y  fball 
be  fecne  bpon  thee. 

3  3lnD  the  *  ©entiles  dial!  tome  to 
thy  light ,  anD  lungs  to  the  bugrjtttcffc 
ofthynung. 

4-  *?Liftbp  thmc  eyes  rounD about, 
anD  fee  rail  they  gather  tlicmfclucs  to- 
gcther,  they  come  to  thee:  thy  fonncs 
fliall  come  from  farrc ,  atiDthyDaugh* 
tcrs  ftjaibcnourttDat  thvfjDc. 
<,  Xncn 


||0r,„«. 
coanndmjj 
J  He!>.  it  tvij 
cuUlinhit 
tja. 


*  Chap.  6] 

y 

•EphcW. 
1 7. 1  .thel". 
5.8. 


'Chap.  5j, 
7- 

\Heb.re. 
ewnpenftl. 


IS. 

II  Or,  fHl 
hinjtjfUffht. 
*Kom.i  j. 
16. 


\\0r,  tter.. 
lightened 
for  thy  light 
C3tnmilht 


"Reu.  11. 

1* 


«  C!up.4j. 
18. 


lemcrcaie 


ic 


Ch; 


||  Or,natfe 
cf  the  Sea 
pudbe  tur- 
nediowxrd 
thee. 
\Or,Tvea/th 


*Chap.6i. 
6, 


*Gel<\:6 


-5- 

|j  Or.tveo/tb 


.1: 


ap.ix 


of  the  Church. 


•Rcuc.j.s. 


5  Xhcn  thou  (bait  fee,  anD  flott)  to* 
gcthcr,  anD  thine  heart  (hail  feare  anD 
bcmlargcD,  becaufe  the  llabunDancc  of 
the  S>ea  (haibc  conuerteD  bnto  tt)ce,tt)c 
Hfojces  of  the  ©entiles  Qjau  tome  Dnto 
tjjee. 

6  Xhe  multituDc  of  camels  (tjali 
coucrthcc,theD2omcDaricsof  £0iDian 
anocphah:  all  theyfcom£>hcba  (ball 
tonic:  thcyfbai  bung*  goloariDincctifc, 
anD  they  fljau  (bcib  fojth  the  pzaifcs  of 

tl)CfL©K©. 

7  au  the  flodtcs  of  Bcoar  Gballbc 
gachereD  together  bnto  thec,  the  tains 
of  i[5ebaiotl)  (hail  mtmtter  Ditto  thec : 
they  (ball  tome  Dp  tbitb  atteptantcon 
nunc  altar,  anD  3  tbil  glonfic  the  boufc 
ofmygiotp. 

8  i®bo^etbefctbatflieasatlouDe, 
anD  astbeDouesto  tbettrbinDoibes; 

9  Purely  tbcylcs  Cballibait  fr>2  ntc, 
anD  the  mips  of  £at(bitt)  fictt,*to  bung 
thy  fonncs  from  farre,  their  Bluer  anD 
their  golD  tbitb  tbtm,  Duto  the  Batne 
of  tl)c  %  o  is  ©  thy  <5oD,anD  to  the  J^o- 
lp©neof  3Jftatl,  becaufe  be  bath  glo- 
rifteDtbce. 

io  3inD  the  founts  of  (trattgers  (ball 
built)  Dp  thy  tballcs,anDtbcttmttgs 
(bal  muuftcr  bnto  thec:  foz  m  my  tbjatb 
3  fmotc  thec,  but  in  nip  fauour  baue  3 
baDmetcteontbcc. 

ii  Xbcrefb2ctbv  gates*  (bal be  open 
toittuuially ,  they  (ball  not  bee  (but  Dap 
no?  titgbt,tbat  men  may  b:mg  Dnto  thee 
the  I!  fojtcs  of  tl)c  ©entiles,  anD  tljat 
ttjetc  Rings  map  bcb20ugbt. 

1 1  if  02  the  nation  anD  uingDomc  that 
iDtll  not  feme  thee,  (ball  pen(b,  yea 
t^ofcnanoiisfliallbcDttcclyiDaftcD. 

U  Xbe  glojy  of  ^Lebanon  thai  come 
bnto  tbec,  the  fir  re  tree,  the  0lnc  tree, 
anD  t!)c  25orc  together,  to  beauttfic  tl)c 
place  of  my  Sanctuaric,  anD  3  tbiil 
matte  the  place  of  my  fecte  glonous. 

14  Xbefonucs  alfoof  tijetntrjataf; 
flicteD  tlicc,  mall  come  bcnDing  Dnto 
tbec:anDalltbeytbatDcrpifeDtbeclbal 
*bo\Dtl)cmfcluesDoDjncattDcfolcsof 
thy  feet,  anD  they  (ballcail  thee  tbetitte 
of  the  %  ©  is  p ,  the  Zion  of  the  tyoly 
One  of  IJftacl. 

H  lBhcrcas  thou  hall  bene  fafaaen 
anD  hateD,fo  that  no  man  tbcnttbo.zotb 
thce,gj  tbill  matte  thec  an  eternail  ccccl 
lencic,  a  toy  of  many  generations. 

16  %\)m  (halt  airo  weftc  the  millte 
of  the  d5cnnies,anD  (halt  rutuc  the  bjeft 
of  Kings,  anD  thou  (halt  tmoiD  that  3 


the  HI  c>  hp  am  tbv  Mainour  anD  thy 
&cOcemcr ,  the  mtgljtie  £>nc  of  Jacob. 

17  5Fo2b2a(fc3iDillbnnggolD,anD 
fo2  yjon  3  DjiII  bnng  uluer,  anD  fo2 
IbooD  bzatTc,  anD  foj  ftoncs  yzon:  3 
tbitiaKb  mauc  thy  officers  peace,  anD 
thine  ejeattours  ngbtcoufnefle. 

18  Violence  (ball  no  mote  behcarD 
In  thy  lanD ,  tbafhug  1102  DcQruttton 
ttntbintbybozDers,  but  thou  (halt  tall 
thy  tbaiies  faiuanon,anD  thy  gates 
pjaifr. 

19  *Xhc  £>mtnc  (hall  be  no  ntoK 
thy  light  by  Day,  neither  fo?  b2ightne{Te 
(hall  the  moonc  giue  light  Dnto  tljee: 
but  the  31©isp  (hail  be  Dnto  thec  an 
eucrla(hnglight,?tl)y  (5oD  thy  glo;y. 

20  Xhy  ^>uune  (hail  no  mo?e  goe 
Doibnc,  neither  (hall  tljy  moonc  tbtri> 
D2aU)itfclfc:fo2ttKl^©i3©  (hail  bee 
tl)inccucrla(hnglight,anDthcDayesof 
thy  mourning  (hail  be  enDcD. 

z\  3ChypeoplcaifofliJiif>;  all  righte- 
ous :  they  ujai  inherit  the  lanD  fo:  euer , 
the  b2anth  of  my  piantmg.thc  idojec  of 
my  hatibs,  that  3  may  be  glo2ifitD. 

zz  3  litlc  one  fljall  bctomc  a  thoits 
fanD,anD  afinail  one  a Scong nation: 
3  rtjc  Hoe©  iDiU  haQm  tt  in  hi3  time. 

CHAP.    LXI. 

1   The  Otficc  of  Chri/t.  4  The  forwardnefle, 
7    and  blefsinasofthetaithtuH. 

i?e*  Spirit  of  the  ?Lo«jD 
C5  o  p  is  bpon  inc,bctatuc 
tlje  %  0  m  p  hath  anoin- 
tcD  me,  to  p2each  gooo  tt 
DingsDntothcmccttc,  hec 
hath  fent  me  to  binDc  Dp  the  bzofien 
heartco,  to  pzotlatme  Ubertic  to  the  cap= 
nucs,  anD  the  opening  of  the  p:ifonto 
them  that  ate  bounD: 

z  lLopzociaimc  the  acceptable ycrc 
of  the  %  ©  a  p,  anD  the  Day  of  Dchge; 
ante  of  our  <3oD ,  to  comfozt  an  that 
monrnc: 

3  %o  appoint  Dnto  them  that  mournc 
mZion,  togiue  Dnto  them  bcaunefo? 
afljes ,  the  oyle  of  toy  fo2  monrning,the 
garmentof  piaifc  fo2  the  fpint  of  hca^ 
uincffc,  that  they  might  be  calico  trees 
ofnghtcoufneffe,  the  planting  of  the 
1L  o  is  p,  that  he  might  be  gior.ficb. 

4  C3nD  they  (hall*  biulD  the  olDc 
VbaQes,  they  (hall  raifc  Dp  the  fo:mcr 
Defoianons,  anD  they  (hall  rcpatrcthc 
ibaftc  tmes,  tlje  Dcfoiations  of  many 
generations. 

5  2(iiD  ftrangers  (hail  (tanD  anD 

£)dc\2  fccD 


*Rcuc2I. 

'2  &2J.J. 


'  I.uk.  4. 18 


"Chap.;8. 


Thcd 


uene 


Ifaiah. 


ofWatchmen. 


•th  as  a 
priefl. 


*  Chip.  Co. 
6. 


fecDyourflocrics,  anDtbcfonncsoftbc 
alient  fbaibe  your  plowmen,  anDyour 
time  Dzeffcrs. 

6  73m ye  fbaibe  namcD  rbe#nc fts 
oftbcHoisp:  men  (ball  call  you  the 
tniniftcrs  of  our  ©oD :  *  ye  (ball  cat  the 
rid)esoftbc<5ciuiles,anDintben:glo?y 
(ball  you  boaft  your  fclues. 

7    C  fO}  VOUC  (l)ame  you  fhall  haue 

Double .  anD  fo:  confufion  they  (bail 
ettovee  in  their  portion :  rtjctcfojctn 
their  lanD  they  fl)al  pofTcfTc  the  Double : 
cueriafttngioyfbaibePnto  them- 

8  ^02  3  the  %  ©  a  ©  louc  3JuDgo 
ment,  3J  hate  robbery  foi  burnt  ofc* 
nng,  anD  3  Will  Direct  their  Wort«  in 
tructb,anD3JWilima&caucucrla(ring 
CoucnantWttbtbcm. 

9  3(nD  tbeir  fccD  (baibc  mtotben  a- 
mongtbc  ocntilcs,  anD  tbeir  offfprtng 
among  tfjc  people :  311  that  fee  them, 
(bail  actmowlcDgc  them,  that  they  arc 
the  feeD  which  the  %  ©  k  ©  bath  bleflcD. ' 

io  3J  will  greatly  tctoyce  m  the: 
%  <s>  is  £>,my  foulc  (balbc  ioyfull  in  my  | 
<5oD :  fo;  be  bath  clotbcD  me  tbitb  the 
garments  offaluanon,bcbatbtouercD 
me  With  the  robe  of  ngbtcoufnes,  asa 
bnDegromc  t  Declictb  bimfclfc  With  tsp 
naments,  anD  as  a  tyioe  aDometb  hers 
felfc  With  her  icWcis. 

1 1  foi  as  the  earth  bztugeth  foozrt) 
her  bub,  ano  as  rbe  garDen  caufcth  the  I 
things  that  arc  foWcn  in  it ,  tofprtng1 
foojtb :  fo  tlic  JLoib  (BO©  ttnll  caufc 
rigbteoufnesaiiD  p;aifc  to  fpnng  forth 
befort  all  the  nations. 

CHAP.    LXII. 

i  The  fenient  defire  of  the  Prophet ,  to  con- 
firme  the  Church  in  Godspromifes.  5  The 
office  of  the  Minifters,  (  vnto  which  they  are 
incited  )  in  preaching  the  Gofpe!,  10  and 
preparing  the  people  thereto. 

**£^i$  <Djrionsfafte,iM3fnot 
&f®\  bolD  my pcace,anD  fo? 3v 
Jg  rufaicmsfaftc  3  will  not 
3  reft ,  Dntill  the  rigbtcoufc 
ncfTc  thereof  goc  forth  as 
b.ngbmeffc ,  anD  the  faiuation  thereof 
asaiampcthuburncth; 

z  3nD  the  Pennies  (ball  fee  rby 
r  tgbtcoufncs,anD  all  Buigs  thy  glojy : 
ano  thou  (bait  be  calico  by  anew  name,  j 
which  tljc  mouth  of  the  H  ©  kjd  fbau 
name. 

3  Hbou  (bait  alfo  be  a  crownc  of 
glojy  in  tljc  hanD  of  x\yt%  o  is  ©,  anD  a 


royail  DiaDcmc  in  tbcbanDoftby  (!5oD. 

4  1Cbou  fhait  no  mort  bee  tcrmcD, 
*  jfortatten;  neither  n^all  thy  lanD  any 
mo:e  be  tenneD  ,  Dcfolate :  but  thou 
(bait  be  calleD  ||  $cpb5i  bah » anD  thy 
lanD,  !!25culab :  foube  H  €>  isjDDcligb' 
tetb  in  tbcc,anD  thy  lanD  fbaibc  mancD. 

5  Cifo:  as  a  yongmanmarrictba 
birginc ,  fo  (ball  thy  Tonnes  marry  thee: 
anD  t as  tljc  bjiDegrome  rcioyeetb  ouer 
tbcbuDe,  fo  (ball  tbyooDrcioyceoucr 
thee. 

6  3  haue  ret  watchmen  bpon  thy 
wanes,  iDJJcrufaicm,  Which  (baling 
uer  bolD  tbeir  peace  Day  no:  night :  ||  ye 
that  maHc  mention  of  tljc  %om&, 
Becpenotfilcnce: 

7  31nD  giuc  him  no  t  reft  till  he  cfta< 
blifb ,  anD  nil  bee  maftc  3Jcrufalcm  a 
pjaifcmtbc  earth. 

8  XbcJUH^batbfmomcbybis 
KigbtbanD,  anD  by  the  armc  of  his 
ftrcugtb,  t  Purely  ,3  will  no  mort  giue 
thy  come  to  be  mcatfoz  thine  enemies, 
atiDtbefonnesoftbc  ftcanger  fbailnot 
Dnnfte  thy  Wmejoz  the  Which  thou  baft 
labourcD : 

9  25ut  they  that  haue  gatbercD  it 
(ball  cat  it ,  anD  pzaife  the  1L  ©  is  ©,anD 
they  that  haue  bzougbt  it  together,  thai 
Djinfte  it  m  the  Courts  of  my  ftoltncffc. 

io  C  *  <3oc  through ,  goc  through 
the  gates :  picpare  you  the  way  of  the 
people :  caft  pp,  caff  Dp  the  highway, 
gather  out  tbcfroncs.uftup  a  ffanDarfc 
fo?  the  people. 

1 1  ascboiD ,  the  %  o  is  jd  bath  p?o 
claimcD  bnto  the  cud  of  the  W02ID,*  fay 
ye  to  the  Daughter  of  Zion ,  J6e()olD, 
thy  faiuation  tommctl)  bcholD,bis*rc^ 
warD  h  iPitlj  l;tm ,  anD  his  ||  WojUc  bc= 
fort  hint. 

u  ^no  they  fljail call them.Xljcbo^ 
ly  people :  the  tcDccmcD  of  tbeHo  b  ©: 
aiiDtbou  fliaitbecallcD,  Sought  out,a 
citicnotfortaiten. 

CHAP.   LXIII. 

1  Cliriftfhcwediwhohcii,  i  what  his  victo- 
ry ouer  his  enemies,  7  and  what  his  mcrcv 
toward  his  Church,  io  In  hisiuft  wrath 
hee  rcmembreth  his  tree  Mercy.  15  The 
Church  in  theirprayer,  17  and  complaint, 
profefle  their  Faith. 

$0  is  this  that  commcth 
from  CDotn,  With  DicD  gar- 
ments from  2i5o5rah  <  this 
that  is  tgionous  in  his  ap- 
parcll, 


•Ore.  1. 10. 
1.  pec.:.  10. 

flrhicis,«y 
drtioht  is 
inilr. 
||  That  is, 

marrteJ, 


Hehr.with 
[heioyof  the 
brtdteromt. 


Or,yethal 
aritheLerM 

cerr. 

f  Hehfi. 

fence. 


\Heh.ifhe 
vine  crc 


*  Chip  .40. 
3.&57.14. 


"Zcch.p.p. 
match.:  i. 
j.iohn  li. 
IS. 

*  Chap.  40. 
10. 

\\  Or, recom- 
mence. 


\Heh. 
decks-l 


Gods  mercies.         Chap.lxinj.       God  our  Father. 


'Rcu.i?. 
«3- 


•Chap.  34 
8. 


•Chap.  59, 
itf. 


•Dcut-7. 
7.8- 


*Exod.  i  t. 

11.pf1l.78. 
57.  ami 
9J-9- 


*Eiod.i4 

\\Or,fhcf- 
hejrdt^u 
Pf4l.7J.il 


*E«od.  14 
2  7.iofh. 
1516. 


parel,traucllingmthegreatncflcofhts 
ftrength  <  3  thattpcanc  in  rightcoufc 
ncfle,  noistjttc  to  Caiie. 

i  nahercfoze  *  an  thou  rco  in  thine 
apparell,anb  tlir  garments  Uttchim 
that  trcaocth  in  the  tbinefat  < 

j  31  haue  troocn  the  nnncpzeflc  a* 
lone ,  ano  of  tfjc  people  there  was  none 
u)ithme:foz3JuMlltrcaotheminminc 
anger,  ano  trample  them  in  mpraric, 
ano  their  blooo  fliait  be  fpztnfelco  bpon 
mpgatments,  ano3JibiUftainc  allmp 
raiment 

4-  ft>i  the  *  oap  of  bengeance  is  in 
mine  heart,  anD  thepcereof  mprcoce; 
men  is  come. 

5  ^no^J  loofeco,  ano  there  wasnone 
to  hclpe  ,•  ano  31  rbonoereo  that  there 
was  none  to  nphoio  :  therefore  mine 
ottne  *  arme  bzought  faluation  bnto 
me.ano  mp  ftirtcitbpheiome. 

6  3lno3JibtUtrcaDDotbnetl)epeo' 
plein  mincanger ,  |  matte  them  ozunltc 
in  mp  forte ,  ano  3  tbill  bzing  botbnc 
their  ftrength  to  the  earth. 

7  C  3  tbill  mention  the  loning 
ttiuoncttcs  of  the  %  $>  is  © .  and  the 
pzatfes  of  the  %  a>  is  ts>,  accozotng  to 
all  that  the  %  ©  is  ©  hatl)  beftotbeo 
on  bs  ano  the  great  gooones  totbaros 
the  houfc  of  3lfrncl ,  tbhich  he  hath  be* 
ttotbeO  on  them ,  accozotng  to  his  mer 
cits,  ano  accozomgto  thcmulmuoc  of 
hisioutngHinDncfTes. 

8  ifoz  hee  laio,  Smtclp  thep  are  mp 
people,  ehtlozen  that  tbillnotlic:  fohce 
tbas  their  fauiour. 

9  ;jn  all  their  affliction  he  tbas  afc 
flictco,anothe  2ngelof  his  pztfencefa- 
ueothem :  *in  his  loucanOm  hispitie 
hee  reoeemeo  them ,  ano  he  bare  them, 
ano  catieo  them  all  the  oaves  of  oioe. 

io  C2Sutthcp,'rcbelUU,anObereo 
t)is  holp  tptrtt:  therefore  hee  tbas  tur 
nco  to  be  their  encmie,  and  he  fought  a= 
gatnftthem. 

11  IChenhctcmembzeothcoapesof 
oio^ofesmdhispcople/ayingjieherc 
is  hee  that*  bzought  them  bp  out  of  the 
3>ca,tbith  the  ||  (hephcaro  of  hisflo&e  < 
tbhere  >s  hee  that  put  his  holp  Spirit 
tbithinhfm? 

ii  %\)at  leo  them  bp  the  right  hano 
of  GBofestbithhis  gioziousarmc,  *0i- 
uiotng  the  tbatcr  befoze  them ,  to  matte 
himfelfe  an  euer  lafttng  name  < 

13  Xhat  leo  them  thzoughthcoccpe 
as  an  hozfe  in  the  tbiioe  weftc ,  that  thep 
(bouionot  Humble  i 


14  asabeaftgoethDoibucintotbe 
baliep.thc  Spirit  of  the  5L©is©cau> 
feo  htm  to  reft :  fo  Oiooeft  thou  icaoe  thp 
people,  to  matte  thp  fclfe  a  gioztous 
/15ame. 

«  C  *  Hooae  ootbnefromheauen, 
ano  bchoio  from  the  habitation  of  thp 
houncflc,  anOofthpgiozp:tbhcreisthp 
5caicanOthpftrcngth,||thefoimoingof 
thp  boibels ,  ano  of  thp  mercies  to* 
tbarosme*  are  thep  rcftratnen? 

i6  SDoubtlcfle  thou  art  our  father, 
though  3lbzaham  be  ignozant  of  bs, 
anojjfrael  acttnotblcogebs  not*,  thou, 
j©  fL€)is©  art  our  iFathcr ,  ||our&e* 
occmer,  thp  jf5amc  is  from  euerlamng. 

17  C£>!L£>isjD,tbhp  haft  thou 
maoe  bstoetrc  from  thp  tbapes;  and 
harbeneo  our  heart  from  thp  fearer 
Beturne  foz  thp  feruants  fattc ,  the 
tribesof  thineinhcritance. 

is  Xhe  people  of  thp  holincu*c  haue 
poffcflcD  it  but  a  lutle  Vbhlle :  our  ate 
uerdrieshaue  trooen  oolbnc  thp  &an^ 
ctuaric. 

19  nace  are  Jiine ,  thou  neuer  bareft 
rule  ouer  them,  Uhcp  Vbcre  not  calico 
bpthp/Ranic. 

CHAP.    LXIIII. 

The  Church  prayeth  for  the  illuftrauon  of 
Gods  power.  5  Celebrating  Gods  mercy, 
itmakethconlcfsion  of  their  naturallcorrup. 
tions.  9  It  complainethof.  their  affliction. 

1^  that  thou  ibouioeft 
rcnttheheauens,that 
thou  looulDcft  tome 
Oolbn,  that  the  moun> 
taines  might  flotbe 
oolbneatthppzefettee, 
z  ^gwhen  Tthemel- 
ting  fire  bumeth ,  the  fire  caufeth  the 
ibatcrs  to  bople :  to  matte  thp  jRamc 
unotbento  thmc  aouerfaries,  that  the 
nationsmap  tremble  at  thp  pzefence. 

j  !©h*n  thou  OiOOcft  terrible  things 
which  ibee  looBebnotfoz,  thou  cameft 
ootbne,  the  mountatnes  ftoibco  ooibne 
atthpp^fente. 

4.  Jro?  fince  the  beginning  of  the 
niozlb  *  men  haue  not  hearo,  noz  percei* 
ueo  bptlje  eate ,  neither  hath  the  m 
llfcene ,  s>  <3oo,  befioes  tljce ,  what  hee 
hathpjepareorloz  htm  that  loaitetlj  foz 
him. 

5  Xhoumtettfthintthatreiopteth, 
ano  ttjozketh  rtghteoufnclTe,  thofe  chat 
remember  thee  m  thp  ibapcsibchoio, 
thou  artrbzoth,  foz  u>c  haue  CuneD :  in 
&(tq  3        thofe 

47 


'Dtut.  26. 


\\Or,ihe 
multitude. 


\\Or,ourr? 
deemert 
from  eucr- 
UJlmg  u  thy 
name. 


\Hct.thy 
namervM 
not  ailed 
voonthem. 


t  Htb.  the 
(ire  of  met- 


•t.Cor.a. 

9.pfil  3 

:0. 

||  Or.fceneA 

god  btfdes 

thee  which 

doelh  {ofor 

htm,C$~e. 


Mansrighteoufnefle.    Ifaiah.  Ioy  of  the  Elcft 


Plil  ;c 
5.6 


t  Hcl.mcl- 

•a. 


'  Pfal.7J. 


•Rorn.io- 
"Rom. 9. 

24.25, 2d 

cph.  2.11. 


t  Hrf'  1/pon 
bntks* 

\\Orp,rlrl 


tt)ofc  is  continuance ,  anb  itoe  (ball  be 
fan  cd. 

6  iStu  tt)t  arc  ai  as  an  toncleanc  tbmg, 
anb  all  our  nglucoumcffcs  arc  as  fil- 
tt)v  ragges ,  anu  ltoc  all  doc  "  fabc  as  a 
Icafc ,  anb  our  iniquities  littc  tbcibmb 
bauctab.cn  tos  aitoay. 

7  3nb  there  ts  none  that  callctb 
topon  tl)p  name,  that  fhrretb  top  him 
fclfcto  tabc  holt)  of  thee:  fo?  thou  haft 
bib  thy  face  from  tos ,  ant)  haft  t  confix 
mcb  tos  becaufc  of  our  uuciuitics. 

8  23utnoU),€)fL©KP,  thouut 

our  father :  ltoc  arc  the  clap ,  ant>  thou 
our  potter,  anbibc  aUaictbcuwbcof 
thine  hantJ. 

9  C26c  not  *  ltozoth  tocry  fo?c ,  £> 
%  o  in  j? ,  neither  remember  imquitic 
foj  cucr :  bcbolb,fce  rue  bcCccrt)  thee,  ltoc 
are  ail  thy  people. 

10  Xby  holy  cities  arcattortDcrncflc, 
zion  is  a  itoUDcrncffc ,  'Jctufalem  a 
bcfolanon. 

11  £>ur  holy  anb  our  bcautifull 
houfc,  itoherc  out  fathers piaifcb thee, 
is  burnt  top  Unthfire ,  ant)  all  our  plca= 
fant  tilings  arc  layebitoaftr : 

11  natit  thou  tcfrainc  thy  Ceifc  foj 
thefc  tilings,  £>  3L©ih?e>  <itotlt  thou 
boibtby  peace,  anb  afflict  tos  tocry  fojc  t 

CHAP.    LXV. 

1  Thecallmg  ot the.  Gentiles,  i  Thelcwes, 
for  tlieir  incredulity, idolatry'  and  hypocriile, 
are  iciccled.  S  A  remnant  fhalbe  faned. 
11  Iud^ements  on  the  wicked  ,  and  blef- 
fings  on  the  sodly.  17  The  blclled  ftate 
of  the  new  leruf.ilem. 

SPJ^€5$*3un  fOlight  ol   them   that 

iwaatbet)  nr 
L<2ft  fount)  of 


&Xv?afftco  not  for  me :  3J  *  am 
L&k  founb  of  them  that  fought 

§|  >gs&mc  not :  3J  faib, 26cl)oib 

£\*7&<&§mc,bcbolbmc,  tontoana 
tton  tiwttbas  not  caiicb  by  my  name. 

i  3  hauc  fp2cab  out  my  hanbs  all 
the  bay  tonto  a  rebellious  people,  ibhich 
itoaiHtth  maibap  that  *a>notgoot),  af- 
ter their  oibnc  thoughts: 

i  31  people  that  p2ouolictb  nice  to 
anger  continual!?  to  my  face,  that  fa 
criftccth  m  garbens ,  anb  burneth  m 
cenfe  ■  topon  altars  ofbncfte : 

+  ttJhi'ch  rcmamc  among  the 
grants ,  anblobgem  the  monuments, 
ltoljith cue  ftbines  flefb,  anb!|b:otbof 
abominable  things  is  in  their  tocfTcls : 

5  nabich  fay  3>tanb  by  thy  feifc, 
conic  not  nccrc  to  me,  fcu  ji  am  holier 
tllCtl  rllOU  :  tl)Cfc  are  a  fniolic  in  my 


„  nofc,a  fir  c  tl)at  burneth  all  the  Da? . 

6  26cholb ,  it  is  ltontten  befo2c  mc : 
3J  null  not  &ccpcfilcncc,butnnllrccom 

!  pence,  cucn  rccompcncc  into  their  bo; 
fomc, 

7  Pour  iniquities ,  anb  the  tniqui 
tics  ofyourfatberstogctbcr,(faitb  the 
%  o  is  jzOiblwb  hauc  burnt  mcenfe  top 
on  the  mountames,  $biafpbemcbmec 
topou  the  hils :  tbcrfoje  ltoili  j  mcafure 
their  frmncr  uwbemto  their  bofomc. 

8  C  3Lhus  faith  the  %  &  «  © ,  3s 
the  new  ltoiuc  is  founb  m  the  duller, 
anDoucfatth,Dcftroy  itnot,  fojablef 
fmg  >^  m  it  :fo  itoil  5J  bo  c  fo:  my  femants 
faUcs,  that  3  may  not  beftroy  them  all. 

9  3tnb  3  ltoili  b:mg  fo2tb  a  feebe  out 
of  Jacob ,  anb  out  of  Jubalj  an  mherr 
tout  of  my  mountains :  anb  mine  elect 
(hail  inherit  it ,  anb  my  fcruants  (hall 
mbcll  there. 

io  3mb  Aharon  fbau  be  a  folb  of 
flocbes,  anbtbc  toailcyofScbojaplacc 
fo:  tlichcrbs  to  licboltonein,fo?my  peo- 
ple that  hauc  fought  mc. 

ii  C  25ut  ycc  are  they  that  fojfabe 
rtje  H^isjD,  that  fojgmny  holy  mouu' 
tame  ,  that  prepare  a  table  to?  that 
|troopt)anbthatfurnifbthcb?maeo& 
frmg  tonto  that  llnumber. 

ii  Xbcrcfojcltoill^numbcryouto 
thcfmo2b,  anb  ycc  (ball  ailbolto  boltonc 
to  the  daughter  :*  becaufc  ibbenlJ  cai- 
icb, ycc  bib  not  anfrucrc  ltohen  3J  (pane, 
ycc  bib  not  hear e ,  *  but  bib  ctullbcfoje 
nunc  eyes,  anb  bib  cboofc  that  itobercut 
Jbclightcbnot: 

ij  Xhcrcfo2c  thus  faith  the  2Lo2b 
<5  &  w.  26el)olb,my  fcruants  (hall  catc, 
but  ye  fljail  be  hungry :  bcholb,  my  fer< 
uants  fliail  b:mae,  but  yce  (hall  bcthir 
ftic:  bcholb,  my  fcruants  (hall  rcioycc, 
biityccthailbcafliamcb. 

i+  iScholb,  my  fcruants  (hall  fmg 
fo:iov  oflicart,  butyecfl)aileryfo;foj= 
roito  of  hrart,anb  fljall  hoitolc  fo^t  bcra 
nonoffpint. 

15  3lnb  ycc  fljall  icauc  your  name 
fo: acurfc tonto  my  chofemfoj  the 2.02b 
0©p  (ban  Bay  thec,  anb  call  bis  fee 
uants  by  another  name: 

i6  Xhat  he  itoho  blcffctl)  himfclfcm 
the  earth  ,  fljall  bleffc  himfelfe  in  the 
Goboftructh;  anbhc  thatfiucarcthm 
the  earth,  fbail  fmcareby  thctPobof 
triicrh ;  becaufc  the  ftmncr  troubles  arc 
fo2gotrcu  ,atio  becaufc  they  are  htb  from 
nunc  tvec. 

1 7  C f  o;  bcholb  ,3  create  *  neito  hca 
uens 


I  Or.  GuJ. 


"Prou.l. 

Jj.ier7. 

'}■ 

*  Chap.  66. 

4- 


t  Htkhti 


'Chap.  66 
12. 2. pet 

J.IJ.ICU 
21.  j     ' 


Ncwlerufalem.       Chap.lxvj. 


Herd 


glory. 


f  Hcb.come 

vptmtbe 

htcrt. 


•RcU.Jl.4. 


\H'l>.fi«3 
mah^e  them 
continue 
font  fit  Pull 


Pfai.  5  J.  5 


•I6i.11. 

«,7- 


"i.Kings  8, 

ij.i.cot.6 

l8.aflcs7. 

49.2nd 

17.J4. 


ucns,anb  anew  earth:?  thefonner  (hal 
notberememb2Cb,no2tcoinemtominb. 

18  25utbec  pou  gtabanb  rciopce  foz 
euet  in  that  ttjijub  3J  create :  fo?  befjolbe, 
35  create 3Jcrufalem  a  retopemg,  anb 
her  people  a  lop. 

19  anD^iDiircioptcm^ertifalcm, 
anb  iop  in  mp  people ,  anb  toe  *  tootcc  of 
tbeepingfhallbcnomo2c  hcarbin  her, 
nonhcboice  of  crying. 

zo  Xhctelhalbe  no  moze  thence  an 
infant  of  bapes,no?an  olbeman,  that 
hatl)not  fillebhtsbapes:fo2  thechtlbc 
(hall  Die  an  huntyethpceresolbc:  bnt 
the  finner  being  an  huntyefhpercs  olb, 
(halbeaccurfeb. 

21  3tnb  thep  (hall builbc  houfes,anb 
mhabite  diem,  anb  thep  fljall  plant  tome- 
pares,  anb  rate  the  fruit  of  tl)em. 

22  Xhcpfliainotbiulb.anbanother 
inhabit:  thep  (hall  not  plant,  anb  ano- 
thcteanfojasthebaicsofattce.arethe 
bapes  of  my  pcoplc,anb  mine  elect  t  (hal 
long  cmop  the  llwhe  of  tlieir  hanbS. 

23  Xhep  (hall  not  labour  in  toame, 
noz  bang  foztl)  fo:  trouble :  foitljcv  -irc 
the  fcebe  oftljc  bleflcb  of  the  %  ©  s  & , 
anb  their  offfp2ingtt>iththem. 

i4^nbitfl)alcomctopairc,tliat*bej 
fozc  tfjcp  call ,  3  tinll  anfroctt,  %  ibhUcs 
thep  arcpctfpcafemg,3J  ibtUheare. 

25  %\)t  *  tbolfe  anb  thclambe  (hall 
fcebe  togctlier ,  anb  the  Ipon  fljall  rate 
(tram  line  tnc  bulloclie :  anb  buft  fliaibc 
the  ferpents  meat.  Xhep  (hall  not  hurt 
noz  beflrop  mail  mp  holp  mountamc, 
fapthrheSLcm^. 

CHAP.    LXVI. 

1  The  glorious  God  will  be  ferued  in  humble 
iinceruie.  s.  He  comforteth  the  humble  with 
ihemarueilousgencration,  10  and  with  the 
i-iacious  benefits  of  the  Church.  15  Godsl'e- 
uere  judgements  againfl  the  wicked.  19  The 
Gentiles  (hall  haue  an  holy  Church,  14  and 
fee  the  damnation  of  the  wicked. 

g>i»g»ag).g»  li)»g  faptll  tl)C  fLfi>lfU3> 

g$?  *j:iKl)caumtsmptrj2onc, 
s&&  am)  the  earth  15  mp  footer 
floolc:l\>hcrcisfhchoufe 
that  pec  builbetonto  nice? 
anbibhcmsthepiaceofmprcti? 

1  jFoz  ail  thofc  tilings  hath  mine 
hanbmabe ,  anb  allthofe  things  haue 
becne,  faith  tlje  H«d«b> :  but  to  this 

mantt)ll3)lOOfee,euentOl)imtliatisp002C 

anb  of  a  contrite  fpirit,anb  ttctnblcth  at 
mpttojb.  ,  „ 

j  i?c  ttjat  Uilletlj  an  ojrc  is  as  .tlje  flue 


a  man :  he  thatfaenficeth  a  ||  lambe,  as  if 
fje  nit  offa  bogs  nccue :  be  tliat  offecetb 
anobiation,as  if  he  offered  (routes  bloob : 
betbattburnetbincenfe,  as  if  bebleffeb 
an  ibole:  pea,  thep  baue  ebofen  their 
otbne  mapes,anb  their  foule  bcligbtetb 
m  their  abominations. 

4  3talfowillcbufetbnt||belufions, 
anb  lbill  tying  their  fcates  bpontbem; 
*  becaufc  ibben  3  talleb ,  none  biban* 
froere,tbrjcn'J  fpaae  thep  bib  not  hcare: 
but*tbepbtbeuiiibcfo2cmtneepes,anb 
cbofe  trjat  tn  Ibhirh  3  bclighteb  not. 

5 '  Create  the  Ib02b  of  the  H  ©  k  ©, 
pe  thattrcmblc  atbistt)020 :  i^our  bjes 
tbjen  tbatbatcbpou ,  that  caflpou  out 
fo?  mp  iftames  lafte ,  fapb ,  *  %tt  n)e 
%®\m  be  gl02ifieb:but  he  ftjal  appeare 
to  poutiop,anbthepfliaibeafl)amcb. 

6  1&  botcc  of  nopfc  from  the  cup ,  a 
boicc  from  the  Xemplc,  aboicc  ofthc 
!L€>is©,  thatrcnb2cth  recompenfe  to 
his  enemies. 

7  25efo2cfl)Ctrauailcb,fl)c brought 
foo2th:befo2cherpainecame,fl)ecttias 
bcliuetcb  of  a  man  chilbe. 

8  naho  hath  hearo  fuch  a  thing? 
rbho  hath  fecne  fuch  things?  ftjaiitrje 
earn)  ^  mabc  to  bnng  fo?th  m  one  bap, 
or  (hall  a  nation  be  borne  at  once?  fojas 
(bone  as  Ziontraueilcb,  fl)eeb20ugljt 
foo2thherchtlb«2cn. 

9  ^hall3l||b2ingtothebirth,fnot 
caufetobmigfonh,  faith  the?/.  o»© 
fljaiij  caufc  to  bjutg  foo?tt) ,  anb  flmt 

the  wombe,  fapth  tljP  ©Ob  i 

10  Kciopccpeu)ith3ierufaiem,anb 
be  glablbithhcf  >  all  pec  thatlouc  her: 
reiopcc  fo?  iop  lbtth  X>zt ,  all  ^ce  that 
mourncfo2het: 

11  XhatpemapfncBeanbbcfanfiieb 
lbith  the  bzcafls  of  her  confolations : 
that  ^c  map  nulfee  out,  anb  be  bclighteb 
lbith  fhcllabunbanccofherglozp. 

11  JF02  thus  fapth  the  5L©k©,25c- 
fjoir»,3J  tbiUertcnb  peace  to  her  liuea  ri> 
uer,anb  the  gloipof  the  ©entiles  Ufte  a 
floibmg  flrcamc :  thcu  (hall  pe  fucfte,  pc 
fliaibc  *bome  bpon  her  (ibes^nb  be  batv 
bleb  topon  her  fenees. 

u  ^sonc\bhomhismoti)crcomfo2' 
tcth ,fo  ibil^l  comfo2t  pou :  anb  pc  than 
be  comfo2tco  m^lerufalcm. 

14  3lnb  when  pccfcc  this,  pour  heart 
(hall  rciopce,  anb  pour  bones  (hall  flou- 
nfl)liftc  anhcrbc:  anb  thchanbof  the 
!L©isi?(hallbCBnoUJcntott)arbshis 
femants,anbinsinbignationtoibarbs 
his  enemies. 

15  f  02 

472 


ttOr.^Jdc. 


f  Feb  nu- 

ke:h  jme- 
mcruillof. 


'Pro.  1.24.. 
ictc.7.13. 

'Chap.tfj. 


Chj.j.19, 


\Orftlct. 


,  bright. 


*llai.)0.:z. 


Thereltonngof        Icremiah.  the  Church. 


II  0rt  one  af- 
ter anaihtr 


15  iwbchoUUhclLoispttnlcomc 
With  fire ,  anb  With  his  charets  libra 
lbhir  leiumbcto  r  enber  his  anger  lDitij 
fnetc,  anb  his  rcbuue  umb  flames  of 
fire. 

i6  jfozbyfireanbr^hisfttJO^Uull 
the  %  0  is  ©  plcab  vuirt)  all  fled) :  auD 
the  flame  of  tiyz  %  o  is  s>  fljalbe  many. 

17  Xbcy  tfjat  Canctific  tbcmfciues, 
anb  purific  tbcmfciues  in  the  garbens, 
I]  belnnbc  one  tree  m  t|)c  nuDft,  catmg 
names  flcfl) ,  anb  ti)t  abomination,  anb 
themoufe ,  (bailbcconumtcb  together, 
fait!)tI)c1L€)isjD. 

is  JF02  3J  know  their  UwKsanb  their 
thoughts:  it  (ball  tome  tfjat  3  miUga^ 
tiytx  all  nations  anb  tongues ,  anb  they 
Cljail  tome  anb  fee  my  glonc. 

i9  3ub  31  luill  let  a  tigne  among 
tlicni,  anb  jujill  fenb  thofe  that  efcapc 
oftbcmDnto  tbc  nations,  to  Xarlbitb, 
jtHU  anb  Hub ,  that  bjamthc  botb ,  to 
l-ubalanb^auan ,  to  tbc3Jlcsafarre 
off,  that  haue not hcarbmy fame  nci= 
thct  haue  fecnemy  gloiy.anb  they  Cljall 
Dcrlarcmy  glojy  among  the  ©cnnics. 

20  anbthcy  (ball  tymgallyourtyC' 


th^n  fo:  an  offering  unto  the  Ho  is  ©, 
out  of  all  nanons ,  Ppon  botfcsaubui 
charets ,  anb  m  ||  litters  ,  ano  Upon 
mules, aubbponuuift  beads  to  mv  ho- 
ne moimtauie  3Jf  nifaiem  >  faith  the 
JLohp,  as  the  chittucn  of  Jfracl 
bung  an  offering  in  atleanc  bcffell.mto 
thchoufcofthclLoisp. 

2 1  3nb  JJ  rbill  alfo  taac  of  them  fo? 
*  l&icftcs  and  fo:  Hcuitcs  ,  faith  the 

22  fo:  as  *  the  ncm  htauens ,  anb 
thenett)  earth  VbhichU  Unl  maae,  (ball 
rcmamc  befoje  me,  (aith  the  V.  ©  is  ©, 
fo  (ball  pour  feeb  anb  your  name  re* 
matne. 

23  anb  it  (ball  come  to  paffc,  that 
tfrom  one  ncU)  ^oonc  to  an  other, 
anb  from  one  Sabbath  to  an  other, 
(ball  ail  flc(b  come  to  Uiozflup  bcfo?c 
nic,fatthtbe?L©i3E>. 

24  anb  thev  than  goc  fooittj ,  anb 
loose  upon  tljc"  cacfecifcs  of  the  men 
that  haue  tranfgreffeb  agamQ  me :  fo: 
their  *nwnic  (ball  not  bicncithcr  (ball 
their  fire  be  quencheb,  anb  they  (ball  be  « 
anabhojnngbnto  allflctb. 


Or  Co jt he 


*Eiod.  19, 
tf.chap.  6\ , 
6. 1.  pet.  j. 
9-rcucl.j.eJ 
*  Chap.  65 
17i.Pcr.3- 
1  ;.rcucl. 


nnv  Aiojne 
tohn  new 
Afuone}and 

from  Sai- 
bAihtobit 
S.tib*lh. 


'Marie:?. 


,THE  BOOKE  OF  THE 

Prophet  Jeremiah, 


CHAP.    I. 

Tii.  time,  3  and  the  calling  ofleremuh: 
u  Hi?  prophetical!  vifions  ot  an  Almond 
rod,and  a  leeching  pot :  15  Huheauymel- 
fagc  againft  Iudah.  17  God  incourageth 
him  with  hispiomileotalfilhnce. 

ficwojbcsofjc 
rcmiah  the  foimc 
of  l?illuah,  of  tljc 

P'ICflS  that  were 

in  anathoth  m 

the  lanb  of  25cm 

lanim: 
2    %q  inborn 

the  ibojb  of  the 
JL  o  ib  &>  came  m  the  bayes  of  3Jofiah 
the  founc  of  3inou  lung ofjubab,  m 


tljc  thirtcentb  ycerc  of  his  rcigne. 

3  3Jt  came  alfo  m  the  bayes  of  Jfc 
boialum  the  fonnc  of  Jofiah  King  of 
■Jubab  ,  unto  the  cube  of  tbcclcucnth 
ycerc of  zebeftiab  the  fonnc  of  3Jofiah 
lung  of  Jubah  ,  unto  the  carrying  a 
luay  of  3Jcrufaicm  captiuc  m  tljc  fift 
mouctli. 

4  Xhcnthc  ibo:b  oftljc  Hoisp 
came  unto  mctaymg, 

5  26cfo:c  jK  *  fonncb  thec  m  the  bcl 
lie,  Ji  Rticib  thec;  anb  befoze  thou  ca 
mc(lfonhoutofthcil)ombe,3i'fancti 
ficb thee  in d  5 to:bcmcb theca  02ophct 
Unto  the  nations. 

6  Xhcnfaio3,ah*Iio2bC5iPi?, 
bchoio  ,  5  cannot  fpcalic ,  fo:  31  una 
tljilbc. 

7  CiSut 


•n.,.49. 
1, j. 

"Gil  5.1, 


'IJlO.;.^. 


A  Teething  pot.  Chap.ij.     Mans  vnkindnefle. 


•Eze.j.p. 

*Exo.;.i2 

dcuc.ji.fi, 

8.io(h,i.s, 

hcb.ij.fi. 

•Ifai.fi.?. 


•Cha.j.;4. 


■Cha.iS.7. 

2.COMO, 

4.5- 


\Htb.from 
the face of 
the  North. 
"Chap.  4.6 
\Hcb.[hall 
it op cited. 

*Cha.5.lj. 
and  6.H. 
and  io.li. 


\\0r,brettis 

tofiecet. 


"CI1a.fi.27. 

and  1  5.  jo. 
fai.50.7. 


7  CButtljelLfiDisiDfapbbMo 
mc ,  5>ap  not ,  3  am  a  cOilbc :  to?  tOou 
fbait  goe  to  all  tOat  3  fljail  fenbtoee, 
anbtol)atfocuer3Jcommanbt!)cc,toou 
fOaitfpcatte. 

8  *  25c  not  aftatD  of  toctt  facts :  foj 
*  3  am  itoitJj  thec  to  bcltucr  tOcc ,  faptl) 
t|)C  ?L  o  is  ©♦ 

9  £Dcntl)C?LiDlR©putf002tl)l)lS 

Oanb,  ant)  *  toucocb  mp  moutO,  ant)  tljc 
%  e> «  id  faio  bnto  mc,  25cl)olb;3J  Ijauc 
put  mp  toojbs  tn  tOp  moutlj. 

10  &cc,3^auetrjtsbapletii)ccoucr 
toe  nations,  ant)  oucrtOctungbomcs, 
to*rootcout,  ant)  to  pull  botonc,  anb 
tobeftrop,  ano  to  ttyoto  botou,to  butlb 
ant)  to  plant. 

n  C^ozcoucr ,  toe  too?b  of  toe 
%  >o  k  id  tantc  bnto  mc,  faptng  3Jcre' 
miat),  tooat  fecit  tljou *  ano  3  faiD,  3J 
feca  robbc  of  an  aimonb  tree. 

ii  Xt)cnfait)tDc!L«DiSiDbntomc, 
3D)ou  Oafttocll  fecne:  to?  3  toill  Ijaftcn 
mptoojbtopcrfomictt. 

13  3nb  toe  toojbc  of  ti)e  %  ©  is  id 
tame  bnto  mee  tljc  fcconb  time ,  faying 
reoat  feen  trjou*  3lub  31  fam.  3  fee  a 
fcctljmg  pot ,  anb  tl)e  face  ttjereof  was 
ttotoatbstociRojto. 

14  ICOcntOeJLsDisiDfaibbntome; 
sDut  of  toe  *il3o?tO  an  cum  t  foal  toca&c 
foo?t!j  bpon  all  tlje  inDabitants  of  ttje 
lanti. 

15  ;ffo;!loe,  31  toill  *caUalltocfami* 
lies  of  tlic  feingboms  of  toe /I5o?tD,faitD 
the  H€>isiD,anbtocpfl)ailcome,  anb 
tOcpfl)allfctcuerponcotstl)2oncattl)e 
cntrmg  of  tl)e  gates  of  3Jcr ufalem,  anb 
againltalltoc  iballcs  tfjercof  rounb  a* 
bout,*  againft  ail  toe  titles  of  3Jubao. 

16  3lnb3Itotllbttcrmpiubgcmcnts 
agatntttOcmtoucOingail  tOeir  toitfecb* 
neflc ,  torjo  IjaucfofaKcnme ,  anbljaue 
burnt  tnccnfc  bnto  otOcr  gobs,  anb 
toojflnppcb  toe  tootfesof  ttjctr  otonc 
IjanbS- 

17  CXljou  tIjcrcfo:c  gitb  bp  top 
Iopnes,anb  anfc  ant)  fpcafcc  bnto  tijem 
ailtljatj  commaunb  tljee:  be  not  bit 
mapcb  at  toeir  fates,  lc03J  llconfounb 
tl)cebefo?ctl)cm. 

18  5fo:  bcOolb,  3  oauc  mabc  tfjec 
tots  bap  *  abcfcnccbntic,  anb  an  won 
pillar,  anb  btafen  toallcs  againft  tUc 
ibrjole  lanb ,  againft  trje  Kings  of  3w 
bao,agautfttOcp;incestOcrcof,  againft 
fl)c#ucQsrocccof,anbagamfttOepeo* 

pie  of  tOc  lanb. 

19  3lnDtocvfl)all6gDtagainfttl)ec, 


but  tOcp  (ball  not  pmtauc  againft  tocc : 
fo?3J  am  ibttotDcciaptDtljc  JlOlSID, 
tobeliuertljec. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  God  hauing  iTiewed  his  former  kindnefTe, 
expoftulateth  with  the  Iewes ,  their  caufe- 
lelTe  reuolt,  9  beyond  any  example.  14 
They  are  the  caufes  of  their  owne  calami- 
ties. 10  Thefinnesof  Iudah.  31  Her  con- 
fidence is  reiecled. 

$4£d)*coutt,  toe  toojtbof  toe 
jfi  f  1L  ©  is  id  tame  to  mc ,  fap* 
ling-, 

J  x  <Boc,  anb  trie  in  toe 
&b£^&  earcs  of  3Jerufaicm ,  fap* 
mg .  %\)m  (apt!)  rt)c  fL©!B»,  3  re* 
member  ||tocc,  toe  Rinbncflc  of  tOp 

*  poutO ,  tl)c  louc  of  tfjinc  cfpoufais, 
lbljcntOouibentcft  after  memtoe  toil* 
berneffcina  lanbtoat  toasnotfotocn. 

$  3lfracl  was  ooimeffc  bnto  tl)e 
%  €>  n  ©,  and  trje  firft  fruitcs  of  |)is  tn* 
trcafc :  all  fl)at  bcuoure  t)im ,  fl^au  of* 
fenb  cutlKoallcomcbpontocm,  faptlj 

tl)ClLC>EID. 

4  ^eare  pc  toe  too?b  of  toe  |L©is©, 
sDOoufc  of  3Jatob,anball  tfic  families 
oftljcOoufeofgifracl. 

5  C30)usfaptotocH©KiD,B9oat 
iniauitic  ijauc  pour  fatoets  founb  m 
me,  tljattoeparc  gone  farrc  from  mcc, 

anboauctoalftebafterbanitic,  anb  are 
become  bainc; 

6  iBettoer  fapb  tfjcp ,  naOerc  is  tlje 
%  ©  is  id  toat  *biougl)t  bs  bp  out  of 
tftclanbof  Cgppt^  tOatlebbstljjougl) 
tOc  toilbcrnclTe,  trjjougl)  a  lanb  of  be* 
fcrts  anb  of  putcs,  tO?ougl)  a  lanb  of 
bzougot,  anb  of  tOc  fljaboto  of  Deatrj, 
tIjzougO  a  lanb  toat  no  man  paiTcb  tl)o* 
roto,  anb  toOcre  no  man  btoclt. 

7  ^nb  3  bjougljt  pou  into  a  plen* 
tifulltountrcp,to  eatctoc  fruit  tocrcof, 
anDtljcgoobnctTctOctcof ,  buttooenpe 
entrebpee  *  bcfilebmp  lanb,  anbmabc 
minebcritage  an  abomination . 

8  iE0c^ueQsfaibnot,n90crcist0e 
%  ©  is  &i  anb  tocp  toat  Oanblc  tOc 

*  ?Lato  ftneto  mc  not :  toe  paftours  alfo 
tranfgrcfrcbagamOmcc,  anb  tOc^Dio* 
p0ctsp20pl)cncbbp25aai,anbtoalftcb 
after  things  that  boenotpjofit. 

9  C  J©l)crefo?c ,  3  toill  ^ct  plcabc 
toito  pou,faptl)  tOc  %  ©  is  id,  anb  toitl) 
pour  cOUbicnscDtHwctttotll'31  plcabc. 

io  5Fo;paflc  (1  oucr  toe  pics  of  COit 
ttm,anb  fcc;  anbfcnbbnto  Bebaranb 

cotifiber  I 


||  Or,  forth] 

»Ezc.l6.8. 
cha.  11.14. 


*Ifai.fij.s> 
11,13.01%. 
13.4. 


♦Pral.78. 

IO6.38. 


Rom. 2. JO 


Thebackflidingof     Icremiah.  Gods  people. 


Cha.lS.Jo 


'Oaf.  '7 
15.&18.14 

pfal.36? 


\Heb.  be- 

comeafpoiit 

\Heb.  gutte 
out  their 


||  Orfiti: 

mtbj  crown, 

dent.  3 ;.  1 » 
Jfn.  8.3. 


"Ifai.  3. 
9of.s.j. 


\\OrJirH,. 
Ifai.  57. 

J.7- 

'ler.j.tf. 

'Match.*!, 

2  ;  ,nur.  IS, 
.luc.ao.  9. 
£xod.  15 

17.pfal.44 

a.andSo.p 

Ifai.5.2. 

'lob.?.  30 


||  Or.Ofwift 

dromed.xrte. 

Orflwild 

ftdc 


eonfiber  Dtligentlp ,  anb  fee  tf  ttjerc  be , 
futljatbmg. 

n  i^atij  a  nation  cbangeb  tbeir 
©oDs.iDljttDare^ctno  (Sous  <  but  mp 
people  Ijaue  ebangcb  their  gloip,  fo? 

that  which  DOtlJ  HOt  p?0fit. 

12  ffieattonifbcD,£>pcebeaucttS,at 
this,anb  be  bojnblp  afralb ,  be  pee  bcrp 
Defoiatcfattb  tbefL,  ©  a  £>. 

13  ifo?  mp  people  baue  tomrnitteb 
ttbo  tmls:*tbcpbauefon'aBcnmc,  tlje 
fountamcofuuingibaters,  and  brtbeb 
them  out  ctfterncs ,  bjonen  nfternes 
t6attam)oibnorbatec. 

14  C  3s  3Jfracl  a  feruant*  is  be  a 
homc-bomeflaue>U)bplsbctfpoileb* 

15  %fyc  young  Iponsroateb  bpon 
him  andtpcuc&.anDfbepmaDcbisianD 
lbaftc.his  titles  arc  burnt  ttittjontin* 
habitant. 

i6  3tu"o  the  djfUKen  of  jBopb  anb 
Xabapancshaue  |]  bzoben  tljccrotbne 
offhpbcab. 

17  $aft  tbou  not  procures  this  bnto 
tbpfclfe,  mtyattboubaftfojfaucntbc 
1L  ©  is  &  ttjp  <0o&,tbb,en  be  leb  ttjee  bp 
thcibap< 

18  3nb  noib  tbbat  rjatt  fhoutobce 
inthcibapof€gppt,  to  b?inRctf)ctt>a> 
tecs  of  Svujo?  *  m  Vbfjat  baft  tbou  to 
bocintbcibap  of  ^ffpna,  to  bnnbetbc 
ibarersoffljcriuer< 

19  Xbine  oibnc  *  tbitUebneffe  (bail 
correct  trjee,  anb  tljpbacbntbtngs  (ball 
repjouc  tljce :  Bnoibtbctcfoze  anb  fee, 
ttjat  it  is  an  emll  thing  anb  bitter  tbat 
tbou  Daft  fo?faben  the  |L©K22>  njp 
©ob ,  anb  that  nip  fcare  is  notintfjee, 
faith  trje1Lo?b  ©£>£>  oftyoftes. 

io  CiJFozofolDtimegibaucbjoRen 
tbp  pobc,and  butft  tbp  banbs,anb  tbou 
faiDft  ,3  ttiill  not  ||  ttanfgrcffc :  tbhen 
bponmerpbtglThill,  anbbnberencrp 
grecne  tree*  tbou  lbam»ett,plapmg  the 
harlot. 

ii  jW3frjab*plantcbtftecanoblc 
*bine,  ibbolpartgljtfccbe  :$otb  then 
art  trjou  turntb  into  the  Degenerate 
plant  ofaftrange  binebnto  me  i 

ix  jfoj  though  tfjou  *  Ibad)  thee 
ujltb  nitre,  anb  tatte  tbee  mud)  fope ,  y« 
thine  imqume  is  marftcD  before  me, 
forth  the  JlozD  <£>©©. 

23  $olb  tanft  trjou  fap,  3  am  not 
polluteb ,  3  baue  not  gone  after  Kaa? 
linn  fee  tbp  lbap  mtrjcballcp  ,  hnoib 
ibfjattrjou  baft  bone :  ||  thou  an  afruift 
bzomcbartctraucrftngbcribapcs. 

%4r  lianjiiDaftctpfcbtotbciMbcr* 


neffe,  that  fnuffetbbp  the  ttwib  atther 
pleafurc,mbcrotcauotttt>hocan||turne 
her  att»ap*ailfbep  that  feefte  bcr  rbiil 
nottbeanctbcnifciues,  inftcrmonetb 
thepujallrmbher* 

15  nattbrjolD  ftp  foote  from  being 
bnftjob,  anb  tbp  tftfote  from  ttjirft :  but 
tbou  faiDtt,||  Xbereisno  bope.  j©o,fo? 
■5  fjaucloucbftrangers,anb  after  trjem 
ibill3Jgoe, 

%6  astfjetfjicfcisaa)ameb,ibl)cn 
be  is  founb :  fo  is  tfjcfjoufe  of  3lfrael 
aftjamcb,  trjep,tfjeirb(ngs,tfjeirpnn? 
ces,anb  ttjeir  p?iefts,$  trjetr  p?opbets, 

17  ^apmgtoaftotbeiXbouartmp 
fatber ,  anb  to  a  ftone  -,  xhou  baft 
Hbjougbt  me  fo^tbtfo^tbepoauetur' 
nebttrjtirbarbebnto  me,anbnottbeir 
fate:butin  tbetime  of  tbctr* trouble, 
ttjep  mmfap  s  3lru"e anb  fane  bs. 

x%  25ut  ibbere  are  tijp  <5oas  tbat 
tbou  baft  mabe  tbee  <  let  tbem  arrfeif 
trjep  *  tan  fane  tbee  ut  trje  time  of  tbp 
ttrouble:fo;*accordin§totbenumbcrof 
tbp  cities,  are  tbp  d5obs,flD  3ubai), 

29  i©bcrefo?e  IbtU  pec  plcab  ilutf) 
mc^peeail  bane  tranfgretteb  againft 
me,faitbtbe1L©K^ 

30  3nbamebaue3l*fmittenponT 
tbilDjen,  tbepretetucb  no  cojrcttion: 
pour  otbne  froo^b  barb  'bcuourebpour 
p?opbets,Ubcabcftroptnglpon. 

31  C  €>  generation,  fee  pee  ttjelbo^b 
of  tbe  ILiDiB©  :*ba"c3lbceneaibil^ 
benuffe  bnto  gjfracwa  lanbof  barfee* 
neffcfibbercfo?efapmppeople;ta9eare 
1Lo?bs ,  tbe  null  tome  no  mo?e  bnto 
tbeci 

32  Can  a  matbe  fo?get  fjer  ornaments, 
orabnbeberattircipetmppeoplebauc 
forgotten  me  bapes  ibitbout  number. 

33  *©b?  trimmeft  tbou  tbplbap  to 
feebe  lone  4  tbcrcfo2t  baft  trjou  alfo 
taugljt  tl)cibitbcb  onestbplbapes. 

34  ^ifoin  tl)p  fbirts  is  founb  rtjc 
bloobof  tbe  foules  of  tbe  poozc  mno 
tents  :3J  bauc  not  fonnb  it  bptfctrct 
fearcb  >  but  bpon  all  rtjefe. 

35  J9cttboufapcft;2i5etaufcgiamin? 
notent ,  furelp  b&  anger  fball  rurnc 
frommc:bcbolb ,  3  will  plcab  «ntb 
tl)ee, becaufc tbou tapeft,  gj  banc  not 
fmncb. 

36  nabp gabbeft tbou  about fomucb 
to  ebange  tbp  lbap<  tbou  alfotbalt  bee 
afbamcbofcgppt,  as  tbouVbaft  alba* 
mebof^ffpna. 

37  Pta  fljou  fbait  goc  fozfbfrom 
Dun ,  anb  trjine  bancs  bpon  tljme 
bcab : 


tHcb.th. 
drfreofb 
heart. 
\\Or,rcttrrfe 


\\Or.iilbe 
cafe  ite- 
rate? 


Orjttgot- 
teame. 
tHei.  tbe 
binder  part 
part  of  tbe 
necke. 
'Hal.  IS. 
16. 
«lfai.  4  5. 

30. 

]Heb.tuilt. 
'Chap.u 
>3. 


*lfail.?. 

»3.cha.j.3 

•Match-jj. 

2J.8CC. 


*Chap.Z5 

\Hib.we 

hanedomi' 


tffeUtg- 


God  callctri 


Ch; 


lEUt 


to  repentance. 


trig. 

*Dcu.:4.4 


'Dcut.28. 
24.chap.9- 

12. 

•Cha.5.15 


'On.i.io 


\Or,fame. 


Dcab:  foztDe  Hois©  DatD  reiecteb 

tiivconftDcnccs.ant.t'ooafljaitnotpjo 
fpecintDem. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  Gods  great  mercy  in  ludahsvile  whoredomc. 
6  Iudah  is  worfc  thenlfrael.  12,  The  pro- 
mifesof  the  Gofpel,to  the  penitent.  2.0  \l- 
rael  reprooued  and  called  by  God,  maketh  a 
folemne  confeision  of  their  finnes. 

$cptfap,3jfaman  puta* 
ibap  l)ts  ibife,  anb  (l)CBoe 
W§>  fromDim.anb  become  an? 
"*otDcrmans,*a)al!Deere> 
nunc  bnto  Ijer  agame  i 
(bail  not  tDat  lanb  be  greatly  pollutcD  < 
but  t|)ou  Daft  plapcb  ttjc  Darlot  lbitD 
man?  louers ,  pet  rcturnc  againe  to  me, 

taitl)tt)Cfl€)lE©. 

x  ?Lift bp  tljine  epes  into  tDe gtfgf) 
piaccs,anbfccibDcrctDouDaftnotbenc 
lien  lbitD :  m  tJje  ibapes  Daft  tljou  fate 
foztDcm.as  rtjc  Arabian  m  tDe  iMbcr* 
neffe,  anb  tDou  Daft  pollutcotDc  lanb 
lbttl)  tDpibDo?cbomcs,  anb  Ibitfj  tDp 
lbitRcbncs. 

3  1CDcrefo?etDe*fbolb;iesDauebin 
ibitDDoIben,anbtDcre  DatD  bene  no  lat* 
ter  tame,  anbtDouDabbcfta*ibDojcs 
tbjeDeab.tDau  tefufebfttobcafbameb. 

4  nauttDou  not  from  tt)is  tunc  rep 
bnto  me,  £^p  fatDer,  tDou  art  tljeguibc 
ofmppoutD* 

5     ©III  \)C  rcfCfUe  his  anger  foj  OXtti 

tbUI)efeeepctto  tDecnb*  25cDolb,tDou 
Daft  fpo&en  anb  bone  cuilltDmgsas 
tDoutoulbcft. 

6  C.XDe  ?L<dis©  fatb  alfo  bnto 
me,(n  t^e  bates  of  JofiaD  tije  Btng,l?aft 
tDou  fcene  tljat  lbDicD  bacbtlioing  llfc 
raclhatljbonei  fbeis'goncbpbponc* 
ucrpDigD  mountains,  anb  bnber  cucrp 
grccnctrcc,  ann  ttjece  Jjatt)  platen  ti)e 
Darlot. 

7  2nb 3 faib aftcrfbeDabbonc  all 
tbefc  tDmgs,  Xurne  tDou  bnto  mt :  but 
a>eeretucncbnot,anb  DertrcacDctous 
Qfter3Juoabfaib>t. 

3  3lnb  3  faib,  tbben  foi  all  tDe  cau= 
fes  IbDerebp  bac&fltbmg  gjfracl  com= 
mtttebabultetie,  3J  Dab  put  Dctaibap 
anbgiuenbcc  a  bill  of  biuojec :  pet  Dec 
treacDcrous  fiftec  3Iuoal)  fcateb  not, 
but  tbent  anb  plapcb  tljc  Darlot  alfo. 

9  3nb  it  tame  to  paffc  tt)ozo\U  tl)c 
HUgbtmsof  Deribbo;cbome,tDat  dice 
oefiicbtbeianb.anb  committeb  abutte- 
rs tbitb  ftoncs  anb  ibitb  ftocltes. 

10  anbpctfojailtDtsDttttcadK5 


\Hehr.m 
fallhood. 


rous  rater  3JubaD  DatD  not  turneb  bn 
tomcetbitD  Dcr  rbDoleDcart,buttf~at= 
nebip,fattt)tl)clL€)K©. 

11  ^nbtDelLsDis©  faib  bnto  mee, 
XDe  bacBcmbtng  3Jfcacl  DatD  iuffr 
fieb  Dcr  felfe  mo?e  ttjen  treacherous 
gjubaD. 

u  C  <5a  anb  pjociaime  tDefc  uwbs 
toibarb  tDe  JBo#D,  anb  tap,  Bcrurne 
tDou  bacfecllibmggjrraei,  fapctl)  ttje 
%  ©  is  ©,  and  3  ibiii  not  cattfc  mmcans 
ger  to  fall  bpon  pou :  fi»  3* am  *  mttn> 
rtulfattDtDe  %®&®,  and  3J  ibill  not 
nccpe  anger  fo^cuer. 

13  iDnlpacRnolblcbgctDineiniQuitp 
tijat  tDou  Daft  ttatugrctlcb  agatnftrDe 
ILsdisjd  rtjv  <5ob,anb  Daft  fcattcreb  tDp 
ibapes  to  tDe  ftrangcrs  bnber  cuerp 
grcene  tree,  anb  ye  Dauc  not  obe^eb  nip 
boicc,fatrDtDeH€>i3£>. 

1+  Xurne,iObacBCilibingcDtlbjen, 
faitD  tDe  %  ©  k  ©,foz  3  am  marieb  bn^ 
to  pou :  anb  3  Brtll  taftc  pow  °nc  of  a  cfc= 
tp,anb  tftio  of  a  familp,anb  3  *ft  U?ing 
poutozion. 

15  3Cnb3f  Ibill  giucpou*0aftours 
accojbing  to  mine  Deart,  VbDitD  fbail 
fecbepou  ttiitD  unoiblcbge  anbbnbers 
ftanbmg. 

16  2nb  it  Cball  come  to  paiTe  ibDen 
pee  bee  multiplicb  anb  incrcafeb  mtljc 
lanb.m  tDofe  bapes,  faitl)  tDe  %  ©  is  ©, 
tDcp  fDal  fap  no  mo^e  ■,  iCDe^trbe  of  tDe 
Coucnant  of  tDe  %  sd  is  © :  ncitiier  ftjal 
tt  t  come  to  minbe,  ncitDcr  fljall  tDcp  re^ 
member  it,nettDec  Ojall  tDep  btfit  it,  nei- 
tDerfDall||th  tbcboneanpmoze. 

17  3(ttDattimctDcpfDallcall3}eru^ 
falem  tDeXDwnc  of  tDe  %  sd  is  © ,  anb 
aH  ttjc  nations  (DaibcgatDercb  bnto  it, 
to  tDe  4i5ame  of  tDe  %  0  k  ©,  to  3Jcru- 
falem:  ncitDcr  (Dan  tDep  ibaiUeanp 
mo^e  after  tDe  ||  imagination  of  tDcir 
cuillDcart. 

18  3x\  tDofc  bapes  tDe  Doufc  of  3u- 
baD  (ball  lbainc  ||  lbitD  tDcDoufeoflJf 
rael,  anb  tDep  (ball  tome  togetDec  out 
of  tDe  lanb  of  tljc  jftojtD  to  tDe  lanb  tljat 
g}Daue||giucnfo?an  inDcrttance  bnto 
pourfatDers. 

19  25uf5faib,^oibft)au3JputtDee 
among  tDe  cbtlbzen  ,  anb  giuc  tDcc  a 
tpieafantianb^gooblptDcritagcofrlie 
Doftcs  of  nations  <  anb  3  faib  XDou 
fl)altcalime  ^pfatDer,  anb  ftjait  not 
turneaibaptfcomme. 

io  C^nrclpasalbifctrcacDcrouflp 
bepartetDftomDcrtDufbanb:  fo  Dauc 
pou  bcait  tccacDerouOp  lbitD  mce,  1© 

Doufe 


*Pfj]8(5. 

1  -  tin!  103 
8,9- 


•Cha.JJ.4. 


\Hcb.cmu 

vp  on  the 
heart. 
\\Or,u6e 
mAgnficd. 


WOr.flni- 
bumn.-jje. 

\\Or,tl. 


\\Or%CAIlfcd 
jottr  father/ 
tipjftfe. 


\  Hehtand 
of  djfire. 


f  Heh.frem 
after  me. 

\Het.frieni 


True  repentance.      Ieremiah.  Againft  Iudah. 


•Ofc.  14-2. 


loci  2.  12. 


'J.Cot.lO 
•7- 


boufe  of  Jffrael.fatth  the  JL  ®  is  ©. 

21  aboicctbasheatbbponthehigh 
places ,  ibecping  and  fuppiicattons  of 
the  chtlbjen  of  flftael :  to:  the?  hauc 
peruoteb  their  ibay,  «>d  they  hauc  fo;- 
gotten  the  %  €>  a  ?e>  their  ©on. 

22  'ftcmrncycbacftflibtngehilbzcn, 
and  3  iijii  hcale  pour  baeBfliDings :  ffic^ 
hoicc  ,  ibec  conic  bnto  thee ,  fo?  thou  an 

n)C3L€>lBPOUt<50D. 

23  Xruely  in  bainc  is  faiuation  hoped 

lor  ftoni  the  frlllCS,  and  from  thCnUUfr 

tube  of  mountatnes  :  trucly  in  the 
JL  ©  is  £>  out  ©oo  is  the  faiuauon  of 
3JfraeI. 

14  jffojtyamc  hath  beuourcb  the  l& 
bout  of  out  fathers  from  our  youth; 
their  floc&es  anb  their  hcarbs ,  their 
fonnes  anD  their  Daughters. 

25  nae  lie  Doibne  m  our  fbame ,  anD 
our  confufion  coucrcth  bs :  fo?  ibe  hauc 
fittneb  againft  the  fL©is©our©ob, 
rbee  anb  our  fathers  from  our  youth 
euen  bnto  this  bay , anb  hauc  not  obeub 
the  boicc  of  the  %  ©  is  5>  our  ©ob. 

CHAP.  IlII. 

1  Godcallethlfraelbyhispromife.  5  Hcex- 
horteth  Iudah  to  repentance  by  fearefull 
judgements.  10  A  grieuous  lamentation 
for  the  mileriesofludah. 

iFfhou  ttnlt  rctutnc,4D 
3Jfraci,faith  the  %®  is  ©, 
^returne  bnto  nice :  anb  if 
tljoiiibiU  put  avbay  thine 
abominations  out  of  my 
ugbt,tbcn  (halt  thou  not  rcmoue. 

2  3mb  thou  ftjait  frocarc ,  Xhe 
%  ©  is  tz>  uueth,  in  Xructh,  in  3mbgc 
mcnt,anb  in  Kigbtcoufncs,anb  the  m- 
tionsfliaiiblcffethemfclucsinhim,anb 
in  him  (hall  they  *glo»c. 

3  C  foi  tbusfaith  the  1L©  is  ©  to 
the  men  of  "Jubah  anb  ^crufaicm, 
25?cahc  bp  your  fauoib  grounb ,  anb 
foib  not  among  thomes. 

4  Circumctfe  your  fclttcs  to  the 
?L©isjE\aiiD  taltr  aibay  the  foKfrunncs 
of  your  heart,  ye  men  of  3luDAh,tmbttfc 
habitants  of  3Jcrufaiem ,  left  myfuric 
comcfojth  UftcfircanD  butnetbatnonc 
tan  quench  ^becaufe  of  the  enill  of  your 
oolngs. 

5  SDcciarcycin^Hibah.anbpiiblifJb 
in'Jcriifaicm,  anb  fay,  Bloibyee  the 
Xrumpct  m  the  latin :  try,gathcr  togc^ 
tbcr,anDfay,3flcmblcyourfeltics,anb 
let  bs  goc  into  the  befeneeb  cuies. 

6  g>a  bp  the  ftanDarbs  toibarb 


zion:  I!  retype,  ftay  not ,  fo;  3  ibtl  bnng 
curt  fromthe*4i5o;tth,  anbagreattDt? 
ftruetion. 

7  Xhe  fLion  is  come  bp  from  his 
thtcBct ,  anb  the  beftroyer  of  the  ©en- 
tiles is  on  hts  ibay ;  hee  is  gone  footfh 
from  his  place  to  mane  thy  lanb  befo- 
late,  and  thy  cities  (hallbciaycbibaftc, 
ibithout  an  inhabitant. 

8  if o? this *girb y ou lbith facecloth, 
lament  anb  hotblc :  fo?  the  fierce  anger 
of  the  %  e>  is  je>  is  not  turncb  bacfec 
fcombs. 

9  3lnb  it  (hall  tome  to  palTe  at  that 
Day,faith  the  %  sd  is  ©,that  the  heart  of 
thci&ing  ftjail  pcrifh,  anD  the  heart  of 
the  Ounces :  anD  the  ftnefts  (halbe  & 
ftonilhco^thcpjophctsfbaiUbonbet. 

io  Xhcn  (aib  5  >  3fl)  %oio  ©  ©  ©, 
furcly  thou  haft  greatly  bccciucb  this 
pcople,anb  3Jcrufalem,faytng,  ?>c  (ball 
tjaue  peace ,  tbhereas  the  fuwb  tm 
chcth  bnto  the  foule. 

ii  au  that  time  fliaii  it  bee  faib  to 
twspeoplc,  anb  to^lcrufalcm  .  3b?y 
ibtnbc  of  the  high  places  in  the  tbilbet* 
nes  toibarb  the  baughtcr  of  my  people, 
not  to  fanne,no?  to  cleanfe, 

12  Euen||afull tbinbcftomthofe pla- 
ces ftjail  come  bnto  mec :  notb  alfo  Vbill 
3Jtgiuefentcncc  againft  them. 

n  sBcholb ,  Dec  ftjail  come  bp  as 
rtoubes,  anb  his  charcts  flail  bee  as  a 
Ybhtrlctbinbe :  his  hortes  are  fmifter 
then  eagles :  iboe  bnto  bs,  fo?  tbee  are 
fpoileb. 

i+  £>3Icrufalem,*«)aft)thinchcart 
from  ttncBcbnefle ,  that  thou  mayeft 
bee  faueb :  ftotb  long  (hall  thy  bame 
thoughtslobgetbtthinthce^ 

15  5fo?aboiccbcciarcth*f*com2r>an, 
anb  pnblifljeth  affliction  from  mouitt 
€ph?ann. 

i6  iBafteycntentiontothenations, 
bcholb,publift)  againft  'Jcrufalcm,  that 
lbatchers  come  from  afarrccountrey, 
anb  glue  out  their  boicc  againft  the  ci- 
tiesof^Jnbah. 

17  3ts  beepers  of  a  fielbe  are  they  & 
gamft  her  rounb  about .  becaufe  fhee 
harl)  bene  rebellious  againft  mec,  fauh 
thelLiDiR©. 

18  *Xhy  tbay  anb  thy  boingshaue 
pzocureb  theft  things  bnto  thee ,  this  is 
thi>  Hncftcbnes  becaufe  it  is  bitter ,  be- 
cauCc  it  readicth  bnto  thmc  heart. 

19  TOy*boTbels,myboibcis,3Jam 
pamcb  at  my  bcry  heart,  t  my  heart 
manert)  a  noifemmec,  33  tannothoib 

my 


Or, 

jirer.qlhen. 
"Chap.  f. 
•h  I4,i;. 
chap.  6. 16. 
t  Htir.trt* 


'Chap.fi. 
16. 


\\Or,afVUr 

mndethtn 

thofe. 

\Htkr.vt- 

trr  tudgc* 

maar* 


'Ifa.l.115. 


'Chap.8. 
16. 


*Pial.io7. 
17.  ifj.50. 


•IIJ-2J.4. 
cliap.0.1. 
f  Hckr.lht 

hrirt. 


iWifetodoeeuill.       Chap.v.  Gods  plagues. 


'Cha.;.iS 


!»<■*.. 


mv  peace,  becaufe  thou  haft  heart) ,  s©  i 
mv  foule ,  ttje  founb  of  the  Xrumpct, 
the  aiarme  of  ibarre. 

zo  Dcftructton  topon  beftrucfion  is 
crieb,  fo ?  the  Whole  lano  is fpotleo :  fub< 
benlv  ate  mv  tents  fpotleo ,  and  mv  tut- 
tames  ma  moment. 

it  $om  long  (haijl  fee  the  ftanoarb 
andhearethefounoofthcXtumpet; 

22  5fo?  mv  people  is  fooltfh  ,  tljrp 
hanc  not  Rnoitocn  me ,  thev  ate  fottifb 
chilb?en,anb  they  haue  none  tonnes 
ftanmng :  thev  ate  ttnfe  to  ooe  cuill,  but 
toDoegooDthevhauenoRuotblcDgc. 

13  3 behclb theearth,anDloe,itwas 
Without  fo2me  anb  tootb:  anothc  hca« 
ucns,anbthcv  had  no  light. 

24.  gj  behclb  the  mountatnes,  anb 
loe  thev  trembleb,  ano  all  the  hilles 
mooueb  lightly. 

25  3  behelbe ,  ano  loe ,  there  was  no 
man ,  anb  all  thebtrDesofthc  heauens 
ltoercfleo. 

26  3  bchelD ,  ano  loe ,  the  fctutfnll 
place  was  aunioerncfjc ,  ano  all  the  ci- 
ties thereohtoetcbioRenooitoncatthc 
pzetence  of  the  ILoa© ,  and  by hts 
fierce  anger. 

27  if oz  thushath  the ?L©  ib ©  faib 
Xhe  whole  lano  (hall  be  ocfolate  j'yet 
Will  3  not  maRe  a  full  cnbe. 

2s  5*02  this  (hail  the  earth  moume, 
ano  the  heanens  aboue  be  biacRc :  be- 
caufe  3  haue  fpoRen  it ,  3  haue  purpo- 
feo  it,  anb  Will  not  repent,  netthertbill 
gjturncbacRefromit. 

29  Xhe  whole  cine  (hall  flee,  fo?  the 
uoife  of  the  ho?femen  ano  bowmen, 
thev  (hall  goe  into  thicRets ,  ana  ciunbc 
top  topon  the  rocRes:euery  city  (ball  be 
fo2feRen,anbnotamanbWclltbcretn. 

50  3nb  When  tbou  art  fpotleb,  What 
wtlt  thou  Doc?  though  thou  clothed 
tbpfeife  With  crimfin,tbougb  thou  Dee* 
Heft  thee  ltotth  02iiaments  of  goioc, 
though  thou  rented  tftytfecc  Until  pain* 
ting .  mtoatnc  fl^alt  thou  maRe  tbv  fclfc 
faircthr  louersVbtll  befpift  thee,  they 
Will  reeRe  thy  life. 

31  5*02  3  haue  bearo  a  tooice  as  of  a 
Woman  in  trauel,  and  the  anguifli  as  of 
her  that  biingetbfooitbber  firftehilDc, 
the  too  ice  of  the  Daughter  of  Zion ,  that 
betbatlcthher  felfc,  that  fp?eaDetb  her 
hanos ,  faying  i  D9oe  is  me  noW,fo?  my 
foule  is  vueaneo  becaufe  of  muroer  crs. 

CHAP.   V. 

1    The  Judgements  of  God  vpon  the  Iewes,  for 


their  pcrueifcneflc,  7  for  their  adultcric, 
10  for  their  impietie,  19  for  tlieir  contempt 
of  God,  15  and  for  their  great  con  upiion 
in  the  Ciuill  ftare,    30   and  Ecclefiafticall. 

"^^^&  SBnnc  pec  to  ano  fro  tho- 
M  row  the  ftreetes  of  3icru; 
faiem ,  anD  fee  now  ano 
Rnoitoe,  ano  fceRc  in  the 
b?oao  places  thereof,  ifvc 
ean&nDeaman,iftberebeanytbat  ere* 
cutcth  itibgement ,  that  fccRcth  the 
tmcth,  ano  3  Wtllparbon  it. 

2  3lnD  though  thev  fay  ,Xbc?L©iR© 
Uuctb,furely  they  fwearefalfcly. 

3  ^)  fL  ©  is  ©,  are  not  thine  eves  top* 
on  thettucth  rtbou  haft  'ftncRen  them, 
but  thev  haue  not  grieueD;  thou  haft 
confumeb  them,  but  they  haue  rcfufeb 
to  teceiue  co?remon :  thev  haue  maoe 
their  faces  barber  then  a  rotfec ,  thev 
haue  refufeb  to  rcturnc. 

4  Xberefo?C5  falb ,  Smrdy  thefe 
are  poo?e,  thev  arc  fooltflj  :  fo?  tbey 
RnoW  not  the  way  of  the  %  ©  a  © ,  nor 
the  tuogement  of  their  d5ob. 

5  'jwtlgetmctontotbegreatmen, 
anb  ibill  fpeaRe  tonto  them,  fo?  thev 
haue  RnoWen  the  wapoftbclL.  ©  in  ©, 
and  the  tuogement  of  their  <£»ob :  but 
thefe  haue  altogether  b?oRcn  the  yoRe, 
andburftthebonbes. 

6  naberfo?eaiyonoutoftbcfo?rett 
than  (lav  them,  and  a  Wolfe  of  the  ||  cue* 
nings  (hall  fpoile  them,  a  icoparb(hall 
watch  ouer  their  cities :  eucrv  one  that 
gocth  out  thence  (haibe  tome  in  pieces, 
becaufe  their  tranfgrcflions  are  many, 
land  their bacReflibmgst arc increafeb. 

7  C  $ow  (hall  3  parbon  thee  fo? 
this  <  thv  chilb2en  haue  fb2faften  mee, 
!anb  fmo2nc  bp  them  that  are  no  gobs 
Wbcn^Jbab  feb  them  to  the  full,  thev 
then  committeb  abulterie,  anb  atTem; 
iblebthemlelues  bv  troupes  in  thchar 
lotshoufcs. 

3  *  Xhev  Itocre  as  feb  hoafes  in  the 
I morning:  eucrv  one  netghcb  after  his 
neighbours  ltoife: 

9  £>hall1f  not  toifit  fo?  thefe  things, 
favth  the  H©a©,  anb  (hall  not  mv 
foule  bee  aucngcb  on  fuch  a  nation  as 
this* 

io  C  ©oe  vee  top  topon  her  Ttoalles, 
anb  beftrov ,  but  maRe  not  a  full  tnut : 
taRcaitoav  her  bafflements,  fo?  thev  ^ 
notthe|L©is©^. 

1 1  5ro?  the  houfc  of  ^fracl ,  anothc 

houfe  of  'Jnoah  haue  Dealt  tocrv  trea 

cherouflv  agamft  mcfaith  the  ?L©k© 

3Rrr  12  fo? 


•rf«i.9.i3. 

chap. 2. ;o 


\\Or,ic[rm. 


Ezcl<.22. 
I  I. 


Gods  word,  fire.         Ieremiah.         Falfe  prophets. 


•Ifal.  i8. 
IT- 


Cha  1.9. 


•Dcut  28. 
40.cn:] 
I  S- 

22. 


.  and  6 . 


'Leu  26. 
l6\dcuc. 
28.J-.33. 


Ou.4.27, 


\6.  jo 


•  ICai.  6  9. 
match.  1  ). 
I4.atcs  2^. 
icS.rom.i 1 
S.ioh  .  1. 
40 
\Hcb.htart 


Mob.  38. 
10,1  1.  pfal. 
104.9. 


"Dcut  11. 


11  Xt)cv  tjaucbclpet)  the  !Lois5?,| 
anb  faiD ,  1  ns  not  he ,  *  neither  ujau  cutll 
comcbponbs,ncithcr(l)altt)cfccfu)02b| 
1102  famine. 

ij  3tnb  the  pjophcts  (hall  become : 
lbinb,  anD  the  lbojb  is  not  in  them :  thus 
(ball  it  be  bone  bnto  tbem. 

14  naherfojethus  faith  the  fLoispj 
Gob  of  Ixodes ,  Becaufc  pec  fpeabe  this 
Uwb,  bcholb,  "JlbillmaRcmynwbSj 
m  thy  mouth ,  'fire ,  anb  this  people 
ujood,  anb  it  (ball beuoutc  them, 

15  floe ,  3  Uiill  buns  a*  nation  bp- 
on  voufromfarrc ,  tDboufcof^fraclJ 
faith  the  %  <£>  k  c:tt  is  a  mighty  nation, 
it  is  an  ancient  nation,  a  nation  ibbofe 
language  thou  imovbeft  not.ncithcr  biv 
bcrfranbeft  lbhat  they  fay. 

16  Cheir  auuicr  is  as  anopenfcpul- 
cine,  they  ir e  all  mighty  men. 

17  ^nb  they  (bail  catcbp  thine  *bar 
ucft  anbthy  bzeab,  winch  thyfonnesaub 
thy  baughtcrs  (boulb  rate :  they  fliall 
eatcbp  thy  flocbes  ano  thine  hearbs : 
they  (ban  eatc  bp  thy  bines  anbthy  fig 
trees :  they  fliall  impouenfb  thy  fenccb 
cities  lbhcrem  thou  truftebft ,  lbitb  the 
fruozb. 

13  il5cuer thcleffe  in  tbofe  baies.faitb 
the  %  €>  is  © ,  3  *  ibiu  not  mafee  a  full 
cnbttutbyoti. 

19  C3nbit(ballcometopaflcibbcn 
yee  (hall  fay  ■,  *  nabercfrne  both  the 
I  %  0  a  j?  our  Gob  all  thefe  things  bnto 
'bs;thenfl)altthouanfuicrethem?Libe 
I  as  ye  hauc  fojfaben  mc,s  ferueb  ftrangc 
J  Gobs  m  your  lanb .  fofbail  yee  feruc 
'(trangersinaianbtlut  i<  not  yours. 

20  Declare  this  m  tbehoufcof  3Ja 
cob,  anb  publiflj  ittn^Jubarj  faying ; 

21  ixarc  nollt  this,  £D'  foolilbpeo 
plc.anbibitbouttbnbcrfranbingabbtcb 
haue  eyes  ano  fee  not.ibbicb  haue  cares 
anbhearcnot. 

22  jfcarc  yee  not  nice ,  faith  the 
!L  *o  k  5?  i  ibill  yee  not  tremble  At  my 
pzefente,  .bbicb  hauc  placet)  the  fanbfoj 
the*bounbofthcfea,byapcrpctuallbc^ 
ctrc  that  it  cannot  pafTc  it ,  anb  though 
the  ibaues  thereof  toffctbcmfclucs,  yet 
can  they  not  pjcuailc ,  though  ttjey 
roarcyct  can  they  not  paffcoucrit? 

23  25ut  this  people  hath  a  rcuoltuig 
anb  a  rebellious  heart  :thcy  are  rcuol> 
teb  anb  gone. 

2+  Neither  fay  they  m  their  heart; 
ILct  bs  noib  fcarethc  %<s> 13  s>  our 
Gob,  thatgiueth  raiuc,  both  the*  fo^ 
met  anb  the  later  m  bis  feafon  there- 


fcructhbnto  bs  rbeappoutteblbccHcs 
ofthcharueft. 

25  C  Pour  miQUities  haue  tumcb 
albay  thefe  thmgs,  %  your  fnuics  hauc 
ibithholbengoob  things  from  you. 

26  Jro?  among  my  people  arefounb 
unc&eb  men  :  ||  they  lay  ibattc  as  hee 
that  tcttetb  fnares ,  they  fct  a  trap ,  they 
catch  men. 

27  3ls  a  il  cage  is  full  of  birbs ,  fo  arc 
their  honfes  full  of  becctt:tbcrcfo2C  they 
are  become  gceat,anb  Vbarcn  rich. 

28  3Cbcy  are  iMjcen*rat,tbcy  thine: 
yea  they  oucrpafle  the  bcebes  of  the 
ibubeD:thcy  mbgc  not*  the  caufc,  the 
caufe  of  the  fatbcrleffcy  ct  they  pzofpet : 
anb  tlje  right  of  fhenecbyboe  they  not 
mbgc. 

29  5>hail33  notbifitfo2thcfcthmgs, 
faith  the  %  o  is  © *  (ball  not  my  foule  be 
auengcb  on  fuel)  a  nation  as  this  < 

jo  ic  II 31  lbonberfull  anb  horrible 
thing  is  commtttcb  (n  the  lanb. 

31  3Lhcp2ophetspjophcnc*falfrty, 
anb  the  pziefts  II  beare  rule  by  there 
meancs  anb  mv  people  loue  to  ha  ue  it  fo : 
anb  lbhat  ibtll  yee  boe  in  the  cub  thcrofr 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  The  enemies ,  lent  againft  Iudah ,  4  encou- 
rage theuilelues.  6  God  letleth  them  on 
worke,  becaule  ot their  finnes.  <a  The  pro- 
phet lameuteth  the  judgements  of  God 
becaule  of  their  finnes.  18  He  proclaimed^ 
Gods  wrath.  2.6  He  calleth  the  people  to 
mourne  for  the  iudcement  on  their  fmnes. 

Pee  rrjilbjcn  of  ascmamin, 
gather  your  fclucs  to  flee 
I  out  of  the  nubbeft  of  5c 
rufaicm ,  anb  bloib  the 
trumpet  in  CcHoa  :anb 
ret  bp  afigne  of  fire  ut  aBctb-batccrcm : 
foj  emu  appcarcth  out  of  the  Jftojtb , 
anb  great  beftruction. 

2  3  haue  lihcneb  the  baughtcr  of 
Ziontoaji  comely  anb  Delicate  woman. 
i  XhcfbephcarbsibiththctrflotUs 
(hall  come  bnto  her :  they  fliall  pitch 
their  tents agamfi  her  rounbabout:tljey 
fljau  feebe,  cucry  oncm  his  place. 

4-  02cparc  yee  ibarrc  agamft  her : 
arife ,  anb  let  bs  goebp  atnoonc :  iboc 
bntobs/onhebaygocthaibay.fertie 
fbaboibes  of  the  cueiung  areftrctchcD 
out. 

5  ^nfc,anbIetbsgocbynlght,anb 
ictbsbcfrcoy  her  palaces. 

6  «r  foi  thus  hath  the  %  o  is  v>  of 
hoftcs  faib  l^eUi  yee  bolbnc  trees  anb 

Head 


Unit; 


they 
<fm 


\  Or^eupe. 


"Dcut.  3  2 

■5- 

"Ifai.  1.2  3 

12l  7.10. 


1 1  Or,  j/7, 
nifhmat  dni 
filhinejfe. 
•  Chap.  14 
18.  and  22 
25.26.cz. 
11.5. 

1 1  Or/4.' 
intothttr 
hxndi. 


\\Orydwel 
Una  At  home. 


The  old  way. 


our  die  en- 
fine  of  {hot. 

•III.  5  7*° 


f  Heb.lee 
loojed  or  dtf- 
totnuJ. 


'Chap  7  iC 


'Ifa5S.1l 
chap.8.  lo. 


•Chap. 8. 
i  i.ezek. 
12. 10. 

\Heb.brmf, 
or  breach. 

'Chap.;  .3. 
andS.12. 


•Ifa.8.2o. 

mil  4  4. 

•Mat.ll. 


i|  caft  a  mount  agamft  3lccufaiem :  tljis 
isttecitictobcbifiteb,  fteistbtjolly  op- 
p?cfiTionintten.ibttof  tjer. 

7  '3sa  fottntatne  caftctlj  out  tjet 
ttiatcrs,  fo  fl)C  caftctl)  out  Drt  nncteb- 
neffe:  biolcnce  anb  fpoile  ts  tearb  in 
Uer,  befozc  mc  continually  <sgricfc  anu 

VbOUtlDS. 

8  jectljouinftrutteb^gjcruralcm, 
lefimp  foulct  Depart  from  ttjee:  left  31 
make  tljec  btfoiatc,  a  lanbe  not  mlja 
biteb. 

9  C£l)us  faith  tte  ILsdk©  of  hofts, 
Xljcy  (hall  tlj?oughly  glcanc  trjc  rem 
nantof  3lfttKl  as  a  tome :  turne  baebe 
thine  hanb  as  a  grape  gatherer  into  tljc 
baftets. 

10  %o  tbhome  (hail  31  rpcafec  anb 
giuc  warning,  that  ttjrp  map  hcarc  < 
ascljolb ,  tljetr  *  earc  is&neitcumcifcb, 
anb  t\)tv  cannot  hearten :  bcholbc,  the 
lbo?b  of  tt)c  %  ©  is  ©  ts  bnto  them  a  re- 
p?oeh :  they  hauc  no  beiight  in  it. 

1 1  1Ll)erefctfcJJ  am  full  of  tljc  furie 
of  the  fl£>ii>©  :  3  am  roeary  ibitf)  hot 
bmgm :  33  Hull  polb?c  it  out  bpon  tl)e 
chilbzen  abioab,  anb  bpon  rt)e  atTcmbly 
of  pong  men  together :  fo?  eucn  the  Ijuf 
banb  tbitlj  tlje  tbtfc  ttjail  be  eaten,  tlje 
ageb  tbitlj  him  that  is  full  of  bayes. 

11  Znn  their  houfes  (hall  be  turneb 
Unto  otljcrs,  with  their  fielbs  anb  ibtucs 
together:  foi  33lbilttccrch  out  my  hanb 
bpontljcinljabitantsoftljcianb^aitl) 

tl)C|Lffl)lR©. 

13  5Fo?  from  the  Icaft  of  them  eucn 
bnto  tlje  grcatctt  of  them ,  cuery  one  is 
giucn  to  *touetoufncfrc,  anb  from  tte 
p?opljcteucn  tontotIjcp?icft,  cuery  one 
bcalcthfalfly. 

14  Xtev  ft'Wc  *  Deaieb  alfo  t!)c  t  fjurt 
of  tte  Daughter  of  my  people  fleightly, 
faying ,  peace ,  peace,  Vbljcn  there  is  no 
peace. 

15  nacre  tljcy  *a(hamcD  when  they 
Ijab  commtttcb  abomination  t  nay  they 
tbere  not  at  alia(hamcb,ncithercouib 
they  blufh :  therefcte  they  (hall  fall  & 
mong  theni  that  fall :  at  tlje  tune  tljat 
3Jbiutthcin>theyfhailbcc  caftbolbne, 

faith  the  ^©k©. 

16  Xhus  faith  tteH<3Disip,£>tanb 
ye  in  ttjc  rbayes  anb  fcc,anb  af  be  fo?  tte 
*  olb  paths,ibhere  is  tfjc  goob  u>ay,anb 
Vbaibc  therein,  anb  ye  (ball  anbe*  reft 
fo?  your  foules:  but  they  faib,  naetbrtl 

nOt  Ibalftt  therein. 

17  Silfo  33  fct  matcDiiien  oner  you, 
faying^carucn  to  tlje  founb  of  tlje  trunv 


Chap.v).     Rebellious  lewes. 


pet :  bm  ttey  fatb,  nae  U)il  not  Ijearttcn. 

is  <[  Xtercfoie  Ijearc  ye  nations, 
anb  bnoU),  j©  Congregation  ibljat  is  a- 
mongtljcm. 

19  J?carc,  iD  earth ,  bchoib ,  3  imi 
b?tttg  euill  upon  this  people,  eucn  the 
fruit  of  their  thoughts  ,  becaufc  ttey 
Ijaue  not  teactencb  bnto  my  lbozbcs, 
no?  to  my  laib,  but  rciectcb  it. 
20  *  %o  lbljat  purpofc  cometlj  tljcrc  to 
meincenfefrom  5>Dcbaf  anb  the  fwect 
cane  from  a  farrc  countrcy  <  your  burnt 
offerings  ire  not  acceptable^  your  fa^ 
enftces  facet  bnto  me. 

2i  Xtjcrcfozctljusfaitl)  tljeHtDaiD, 
ffieljolb,  3jibtll  lay  ffumblmg  blotUcs 
befojerbis  people,  anbttefatljers  anb 
tlje  fonstogctterfljall  fall  bponttem: 
tlje  nciglibo?  anb  Disfricnb  (hall  perifh. 

2i  Xijusfaitlj  tlje^©K©,2i5rt)olb, 
a  people  tommetl)  from  tljc*/I5o«fj 
countrey,  anb  a  great  nation  ujail  bee 
ratfeb  from  tlje  fibes  of  tfjc  earth. 

2}  Xteytbaillayrjolbonbotbeanb 
fpcarc :  ttey »« cruell,anb  hatte  no  mcr^ 
ne:  tfjeir  boicc  roarctlj  liftc  tlje  ^>ca,anb 
tljey  tibe  bpon  Ijoifes.fct  in  aray  as  men 
fo?  rbarrc  agamft  tfjec,  £>baugljtcrof 
zion. 

24  naefjauctearbtljcfamctrjereof, 
our  Ijanbs  lbarc  feeble,  anguift)  Ijatlj 
tatenfjolbof  bs,a"dpaincasof  a  tbo- 
manintrauatlc. 

25  ©oc  not  fojtl)  into  tte  ficlb,  no? 
ttiaiteby  tljcvbay :  fo?  tl)cfao?bof  tte 
cnemic  an  j  fcare  is  on  eucry  ute. 

26  CC  £>baugfjtcr  of  my  people,  girb 
theenjith'facHclotlj,  anbimiloibe  thy 
fclfc  in  altes :  malic  thee  mourning,  as 
fo?  an  oncly  Tonne,  moft  bitter  lamentas 
tion:foitljcfpoilcrft)allfubbenlycome 
bpontos. 

27  gj  Ijaue  fet  tljce  fo?  a  totb?e ,  and 
a*fo?trcu"c  among  my  people:  tljat  tljou 
may  eft  miolb  anb  trie  tljeir  Ibay. 

28  Xfjcyarcailgrieuousrcuolters, 
IbaiBing  ibitl)  ftanbers :  they  are  *  b?afle 
anb  y?on,  tljey  are  all  co?ruptcrs. 

19  XljebelloiPes  arc  burnt,  tlje  lcab 
isconfumcb  of  tte  fire:  tljcfounbccmet 
tcttj  in  bame :  fo?  tte  lbicscb  arc  not 
pluctebavbay. 

30  *  ||  ftcp2obatc  filucr  Ojall  men  call 
them,  becaufe  tte  H eu,phatn  rcie- 
ctcb ttem. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1   Iercmiah  is  fent  to  call  for  true  repentance,  to 

prcuent  the  lewes  captiuitie.  8  He  reie&eth 

Rrri  their 


•Ifai.ii. 

and  66.3. 
amo,  5.11. 
mic.6.6, 


*Chap.  1 . 1  y 
and  5.1  5. 

and  10.  2  2. 


•Chap.  4.8. 
and  zj.36. 


"Chap.t. 
iS.andi; 


'  Eztlc,  j  j 


•Ifa.1.22. 

\\Or,refrf, 
fUuer. 


v. 


ainetru 


It. 


Icremiah.    Obey  Gods  voice 


•Ch.ip  --6 
i  j.  and  18- 


f  Heir. 

trherenport 
mt  A'.tmf  u 
ctlltd. 

•Ifai  ,o  7. 

I  "Math.it. 

I  1  j  .mar.  11. 
7-Iukc  I?. 
46. 


'l.Sam.4. 
11.pfal.7S. 
60. chap. 
166. 


Pro.  1.1.1 
fa  tfj.U. 

uid  66.4. 


their  vame  confidence,  12.  by  the  example 
otShiloh.  17  He  threatneth  them  for  their 
idol-itne.  ti  Hee  reieifrelh  the  faenfices  of 
the  difobedient.  19  He  exhortcth  to  mourne 
tor  their  abominations  in  Tophet,  31  and 
Lie  iud£;emeiits  for  the  lame. 

$£lbo;!D  that  came  to 
3!crcmiah  from  ttjc 
JL©  bid  .faring, 

z  .StanDintibegatc 
ofrt)e?LfiDKiE>§)l)onfc, 
anD  pjociatmc    there 
thisibojD,  anD  tap ,  ftcare  tbeibozDof 
tbe?L©B£>,  all  j>cof3fuDal),  that  en* 
tct  m  at  thefc  gates  to  lbojflw  the 

?L©B1>. 

3  Xhus  faul)  the  ?U>  b  ©  of  holies 
the  <!5oD  of  Jlfcael ;  *  3imcnD  vont 
waves ,  ant  rour  Doings,  anD  3  Unll 
raulc  you  to  Dibctlui  this  place. 

4  ILruftrc  not  tn  lying  iboiDSjar* 
ing,  Xhc  Xctnplc  ofthcXLoBSNthe 
Xcinplc  oftJ)c  %  ©  b  s?,thc  temple  of 
tJ)cH©B©-»rctrjefe. 

5  jfoz  if  re  thzougblr  amenb  pour 
lbaies  anD  rout  Doingsaf  rou  through- 
U>  crecutc  uiDgctnent  bctibccne  a  man 
anDhisncighbour: 

6  iipcopp2Cf[cnotthcfttanget,thc 
fathcrlcflc  anD  the  Vbiboib ,  anD  fticD 
notumoccntbloobmthisplacc.netthct 
ibaiuc  after  other  goDs  to  pour  hurt: 

7  Xhen  rutll  3  taufc  rou  to  Dibcll 
in  this  plate,  in  tt>c  lanD  that  3  gaue  to 
rout  ftithcrs,foj  cuer  anD  cucr. 

s  C^eholD,retruft  in  tying  ibojbs, 
t  liar  cannot  profit. 

9  nail!  pe  (teale,  murther,  anD  com- 
mit aDulteric ,  anD  frocarc  falflr,  anD 
butnc  iucenfc  bnto  25aai,anD  ibalftcaf 
ter  other  goDS,  tbhom  re  Unoib  not ; 

io  3inD  tome  anD  ftanD  before  me  in 
tins  l)oufc ,  t  tbrwl)  is  tallcD  br  mr 
/^amcanD  far,nae  arc  DcliucreD,  to  Do 
all  thefe  abominations  < 

1 1  3Js* thishoufctbhtch tstalleD br 
mr  /frame  ,betomc  a  *  Dennc  of  robbers 
m  pour  eies  <  2i6cholD,cucn  3  hauc  fecn 
it,faiththc?L£>B©. 

u  2Sut  goercc  noro  bnto  mr  plate 
lbhich  \l>as  m  S>hiloh ,  Where  3  fct  mr 
ji3atmattl)cfiru\anD  fee  'xbhat^Dib 
to  it,  ft>2  the  U)icbcDnelTc  of  mr  people 
3Jftact. 

13  SliiDnoibbceaurcpchautDoncall 
thefc  lbojttcs.fatth  the  |L€>b  jp,anD3f 
fpahc  bnto  pou ,  nfmg  bp  carctr,  anD 
Ipeabing ,  but  ye  hcarb  not ,  anD  3  *  tai- 
Icd  pou,but  re  anfmercD  not : 


i 


14.  Xhcrefojc  tbtll  3  Doe  bnto  tins 
houfc,  which  is  callcD  br  mr  iBame, 
Wherein  rec  trtrit,  anD  bnto  the  plate 
which  3  gaue  to  rou ,  anD  to  rour  fa* 
thcrs,as  3) hauc  Done  to  *  ^>l)iloi). 

15  2L\\i \3  ibill  eaQ  rou  out  of  mr 
figi)t ,  as  Jhauc  caft  out  ail  rout  bze* 
J  tfj?cn,euentrjctt)DolefeeD  oftfphfatm. 

i6  Xhcrcfojc'pjar  not  thou  fa;  this 
pcopic,ncuhcr  lift  bp  errnojpjarer  fo? 
them,  neither  mattetntcrteflion  to  me, 
foj^ibillnotrjcarcttjcc. 

17  C£>cclt  thou  not  what  thev  Doe 
m  the  cities  of  3fuDalj,anD  m  tlje  ftrccts 
ofjferolaiem; 

is  *  XhcchilDjen  gather  wood,  anD 
tfje  fathers  IrniDie  the  fire,  ?  tlic  Women 
ftncaD  their  Dough  to  mane  cakesto  the 
llliuceneof  heaucn,  anDtopoWje  out 
Dunne  otfenngsbnto  other  goDs,  ttjat 
thcr  mar  p«Jouofec  me  to  anger. 

19  2Doc  thcr  pjouottc  nice  to  anger, 

fattl)  tt)C iL  €> B  JDi  DOC  thCT not prouoke 

thcmfclues  to  the  conmlton  of  their 
olbne  faces; 

20  Xhercfo?c  thus  faith  the  !LojD 
d5ojD,26cholD,mine  anger  anD  mr  fu# 
nc  malbeporbjcD  out  bpon  this  place, 
bpon  man  5  bpon  bcaft,  ano  bpon  the 
trees  of  the  ftelD ,  anD  bpon  the  fruit  of 
the  grounD,anD  it  fyall  burne,anD  fljau 
notbequcncl)cD. 

u  CXhusfatththe?l€)K©ofholls 
thed5oD  of  ^Ifrael^j&ut rout  burnt  o& 
fnngs  bnto  rout  faenfices,  tj  cateflcth. 

ii  foi  3  fpaHc  not  bnto  rour  fa* 
thers  ,1102  cominanDcD  them  in  the  bar 
that  3  bjought  them  out  of  the  lanb  of 
€grpt,t  concerning  burnt  offerings  0: 
faenfices. 

13  26ut  this  thing  tommaunbcD  3 
them,  faring,  £)ber  mr  boice,  *  anD  3 
lbii  be  rout  (Bob,  anD  re  fljaibcmr  peo- 
ple :  anD  iDalne  re  in  all  the  JEbapes  that 
3  hauc  commanDcD  rou,tljat  it  mar  be 
tbcll  bnto  rou. 

14. 28ttt  thcrhearbcneD  not, no? uv 
tlincD  their  care ,  but  nmlHcD  in  the 
tounfels  «nd  in  the  ||  imagination  of 
their  cuill  heart,  anDtibent  bacftlbarD, 
auDiiotfonbarb. 

15  5>intc  the  Dar  that  rour  fathers 
tame  fo  jth  out  of  the  lanD  of  Cgrpt  bn^ 
to  this  Dar  3  hauc  cuen  *  fent  bnto  rou 
allmrfcruantsthc  ^ophcts,Dailr  rv 
fing  bp  earlr  ,anb  lenDtng  them. 

16  |9ct  thcr  hearftneD  not  bntomcnoj 

intlmeD  their  tare,  but  *  harDcncD  thnr 

neclt,  thcr  did  ibojfc  then  their  fathers. 

17  1Ehcrc; 


*  1. Sam. 4. 
li.pfal.78. 
60.2nd  132. 
e5.chap.  26. 
6. 

*  Qup.it. 

14  and  14. 
1  i.exod. 
32.10. 


*Chap.*4. 
'9- 


\\Orjrjme, 

fotpcfhcA- 
uen. 


"Ifa.i.il. 

chzp  6.20. 
an.os5.21. 


f  Hebr.  CC/)- 
cermng  the 
matter  of. 

*Deut.6.J. 
*Exod.  19. 
5.  l;uit,  26. 
12. 


\\OrJhtL 

i'HTTmtlJe, 
J  H:brj»(7t, 


■  i.Chron. 
jtf.iy. 


'Chap.  16. 


Stubborne people.    Chap.viij.    Couetoufnesin  all. 


\\Or,injlrn- 

lliOiir 


*  J.Kings 

23.10.chap. 

10.5. 


t  Bet.  came 
it  vp on  my 
heart. 
*Cha.|o.6. 


"Chap.  34. 
ac.and.  16. 
4.pf»1.7?.5 


"Ifa.J4.7. 
cliap.16.9. 

and  :5.1c' 
and.33.1I. 
«e.  16. 13 
ofe.2.11. 


27  Xhercfcwethou  (bait  fpeaHe  all 
theft  ttwbesbnto  them ,  but  thep  tbtll 
notbearltcnto  thee :  thou  (bait alto  call 
unto  them ,  but  thep  null  not  anflberc 
thee. 

2$  26ut  thou  (bait  lav  bttto  them; 
ICbts  is  a  nation ,  that  obepeth  not  the 
bopce  of  the  %  fl>  1a  ©  tljcir  <5oo,no?  re> 
tetuctb  ||  to;  tcctton :  trtteth  is  pmfbcb, 
anb  is  tut  off  from  tljctr  mouth. 

29  C Cutoff tbinchaite,oierufaiem. 
anb  raft  it  atbap,ano  tatte  bp  a  laments 
tion  on  high  plates ,  foj  the  %  ©  is  3D 
hath  r  etecteb ,  anb  fojtaKen  ttjc  genera- 
tion of  Ins  lujath. 

30  ifonhethtibjcttDflntbahhane 
bone  euill  in  mp  Ggbt,fatth  the  %®wz> : 
thep  haue  fct  their  abommanons  tn  the 
botifc  ibhich  is  cailcb  bp  mp  $ame ,  to 
pollute  tt. 

31  3lnb  thep  haue  buiUtiic'ijicl)  Pia* 
tcsofltopbet  ujbicbis  m  toe  Dalle?  of 
tlje  fonnc  of  $mnom ,  to  butne  tbetr 
fonnes  anb  time  baugbtetsin  the  fire, 
rbbtth'5  tonunanbtb  them  not,  ncittjet 
t  came  ttmtomp  heart. 

31  cxbercfojebeholb.tbebapes 
*  tome,faith  thc?L  ©  is  © ,  that  it  (bail 
nomwcberailebXophet,  nouhe  bai; 
lev  of  tt)e  tonne  of  $lnnom ,  but  the  bal^ 
lep  of  daughter  :fo?  thep  (hall  burp  in 
lEophct,  till  there  be  no  plate. 

33  anbthc  narfteifesof  tb*speople 
(ball  be  meate  foj  the  foibles  of  tljc  hea; 
uen,anb  f  0:  the  beads  of  the  earth  ,anb 
none  (bailfrap  themarbap. 

34.  ILben  ibtll  3  taufe  to  teafe  from 
the  *  titles  of  IJuoah ,  anb  from  the 
ftteets  of  3eruralem,tbebotce  ofmtrtb 
anotbeboiceofgiabnefTc,  theboiecof 
thebubegroome,  anb  the  botre  of  tlje 
b?ibe :  foj  the  lanb  (hall  be  befoiate. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

The  calamity  of  the  Iewes,  both  dead  and  a- 
liue.  4  Hee  vpbraideththeirfooliftl,  and 
fhameleffe  impenicencie.  13  Heefbeweth 
their  grieuous  iudgment,  18  and  bewai- 
lech  their  defperate  eftate. 

%  that  time ,  fapcth  the 
|L©m©,  thep  (ball  bung 
outthe  bones  of  the  Sings 
of3Jubah,anbthcbonesof 
bis  pjinces ,  anb  the  bones 
ofthe^teds,  anbthe  bones  of  $e$;o« 
phcts,anb  the  bones  of  the  inhabitants 
oflietufalcmoutoftbcirgraues. 

x  anbtbeptbalifpzeabtbembcfoje 
theS»unne,anb  rhe£Poone,  anb  all  the 


boftc  ofheanen  Ibhom  thep  haue  loueb 
ano  ttihom  thep  Ijaue  fctueb ,  anb  after 
ibhom  tbepbaue  ibaifeeb,  anbibhom 
thep  haue  fought,anb  ibljom  tbepbaue 
ibojlbtppco :  thep  (hall  not  be  gathereb, 
nojbeburieb,  the?  (hall  be  fo;t  boung, 
bpon  the  face  of  tl)e  earth, 

3  3lnb  beath  man  bee  thofen  rather 
then  itfe,  bp  all  the  rcfibue  of  them  that 
rematneof  thtscuiil  familp,  ibhiebre; 
mame  in  an  the  places  Uiljitljcrli  bane 
bjiuen  them,faith  the  fLssDis©  ofhofts. 

4  iC^ojeouer  thou  (halt  faptonto 
them,  Xhns  faith  the  %  ©  a  ©,  S>han 
thep  fall,  anbnotanfci  (hall  heetume 
ausap,anbnotreturne; 

5  i©hPthen»s  this  people  of  Jetnfiau 
lem  fttbben  bacftcbp  a  perpetual  bacfte* 
Oibuig  *  thep  holb  fift  beteit,thcp  r  efufc 
toteturne. 

6  31  hearftcneb  anbhearb ,  butthep 
fpabc  not  aright:  no  man  repentcb  htm 
ofhts  rbitbebnefle ,  (aping ,  ©hat  haue 
3J  bone*  euerp  oneturneb  to  h<s  conrfe, 
as  the ho?fe  ruthcth  into  the  battel! . 

7  |9ea  the  *  S>to?lte  in  the  heauen 
tmoihcth  her  appotnteb  tunes,  anb  the 
turtle,  anb  the  crane ,  anb  the  ftballorb 
obferue  the  tune  of  their  tommtngj  but 
mp  people  tmotb  not  the  iubgementof 
thelitis©. 

8  ^orb  boe  pe  fap,  m  are  rbifc ,  anb 
the  fLarb  of  the  %  ©«j©  is  unth  i>si 
%Qt->\  I  tettamip,  in  baine  mabe  he  it,the 
pen  of  thefcribes  is  in  baine. 

9  3Lhe  *  ||  ibife  men  are  afhameb, 
thep  are  bifmapeo  ano  taben,  ioe,tljep 
haue  rciecteo  the  u)o?b  of  the  %  ©  a  ©, 
anb  t  ibhat  rbifebome  u  tn  them  i 

10  Xherfojc  ibill  3  gme  their  tbiues 
bnto  othcrs,&  their  Relbs  to  them  that 
(hall  inheritethem :  fo;  euerp  one  from 
theleaftcuentjntothegreateftis  gtnen 
tocouetoufnes.from  thc^ophct  euen 
bnto  the  p?ieft,*cuetp  one  beaicthfaiftp. 

ii  jpo?  thep  haue  *healcb  the  hurt  of 
the  baughtcr  of  mp  people  atghtlp ,  fep? 
ing,*pcace,peace,ibhen  here  is  no  peace. 

12  ©erethep'athameb  ibhen  thep 
hab  tomntitteb  abomination  t  nap,thep 
rbtre  not  at  auaftjameb,  neither  coulb 
thep  bluft):  therefor  (hall  thep  fall  a 
mong  them  tfjat  fal,  tn  the  nme  of  their 
toifitattonthep(haUbeiaftbolbM,faith 
theH©iB©. 

13  C II 3  MH fucrtv  confume  them, 

(attl)  tl)C  %$>  IS  ©;there  fhalbe  110  grapCS 

*  on  the  Dine,  no?  figges  on  the  *  figtrce, 

anb  the  leafc  (hall fabe,anb  the  thin»s  thai 

mrr  3        Shane 


Mfai.1.3. 


WOrfheplj, 
penAc of  the 
fcri&et  nror- 
ketbforfj/j- 
hood. 

*Cha  6.i  5 
U  Or,  hatte 
ihty  beene 
afjamed, 
&c. 

t  Heb.  the 
wifedome  cf 
what  thing. 


"Ifti.5tf  ■  I 

chap. 6.1  3. 
Cha.6.14. 

■Eic.ij. 

ro. 

•Chap.}.;. 
ol\d6.1 5. 


\\Or,mS± 
therlng  I 
VftUcon- 
fume, 

•Ifai.J.l. 

3cc 

'M3cth.11. 

W.luku 
1  ■  6  Stc. 


The  Prophets  forow  Ieremiah.         for  the  people. 


•Cha.sMj. 
dan.  23.1 5. 
\Oryoyfon. 

•Chap.  14. 
i<5. 


"011.4.15. 


XHlkr.thr 


'Pfal-jS. 


\Heb.vpon. 

t Heb.be- 
caafeofth? 
countrej  of 
them  that 
or.- Jarre  ojf. 


"Chap.  46. 
II. 


\Heb.gone 
vf. 


mttqmen:] 
head  &c 
"Ha.31.4. 

diap.-j.ij,>. 


1J  haue  gtuen  tbcm,  Ojall  paffc  aibap 
tromtbem. 

14  nal)puoc  JD«  Bt  tttU<  affembic 
pour  felttes,anb  let  tos  enter  into  tljeuc* 
fenccft  cities ,  ant)  let  tos  be  Glcnt  there : 
foj  tt)e  fL  ©  is  ©  our  ©oft  bath  put  tos 
to  ftlcncc.anft  gtucn  bs*ibatcrs  of  II  gall 
tob;inft,betau(cU)cl)auefmncbagama 

tbC?L©K©. 

1$  nacMoofccbfozpcaccbutnogoob 
came:  and  foz  a  tunc  of  bealtb,anb  beljolb 
trouble. 

1 6  3Ebc  fnomttg  of  bis  bojfcs  itoas 
beatb  from*SDan:the  itobolc  lanb  trcm* 
bleb  at  the  founb  oftljc  neighing  of  bis 
ftrong  oncs,fo?  tljevare  comcano  Ijaue 
beuourcb  tlje  lanb ,  anb  t  all  that  is  in  it, 
tt»c  titie,anb  tbofc  tliat  Dwell  therein. 
.  17  5fojbcDolb,3Ubilfenbferpents, 
tocKatttresamongpou ,  itobitb  will  not  I 
be  *cbarmcb ,  anb  thep  ftjail  btfe  pou;  i 
faith  theft©  is©. 

is  ftwi^ngitboulbtomfortmyfelfe 
agamfi:  fo;troito,mp  heart  is  faint  t  m  me. ' 

19  aSeholfttbctootceoftbccricoftbei 
Daughter  of  mp  people  tbctaufc  of  them 
that  Dtbcl  in  afarre  counttcp :  is  not  the 
fC  ©  ib  ©  in  zton j.  is  not  her  sing  tn 
ben  rbh p  haue  the?  pjououeft  me  to  an; 
ger  with  their  graucn  imagcs,and  ujttl) 
Orange  bantties.* 

zo  XhehatueO  is  pall  >  the  funimcr 
is  enbeb,aub  ibe  arc  not  (aueft. 

z  1  if  0?  the  hurt  of  the  Daughter  of 
mp  people  am'J  hurt,  31  amblacftc:  a< 
ftontfbmcnt  batbtaRcnbolDonmc. 

XX    Is  there  HO  *balmC  Itl  (SllCab  i  is 

there  no  pbpfictan  there*  rbbp  then  IS 
not  the  health  of  the  baughtcr  of  mp 
people  trccouercbi 

CHAP.    IX. 

Iereniiah  lamcnteththe  Iewes  for  their  mani- 
fold linnes,  9  and  for  their  judgement.  11 
Difobedienceis  the  caufe  of  their  bitter  cala- 
niitic.  17  He  exhorted)  to  moume  for  their 
dcftrjclion,  25  and  to  truft ,  not  in  them- 
felnes.butin  God.  15  He  thteatneth both 
Iewes  and  Gentiles. 

V)  t  *  that  mp  Draft  lbcrc 
waters,  anD  mine  epes  a 
fountamc  of  tearcs,  that 
3J  might  ibeepe  Dap  anb 
night  fo?  the  Qame  of  the 
Daughter  ofmp  people. 

i  £>b  that  31  haft  tn  the  lbiifterncttc 
aloDgingpiate  of  ruapfanngmctt,  tljat 
3  might  icauc  mp  pcoplcanft  goc  from 
tljcm :  foj  thep  be  all  aftultcrcrs ,  an  af 


fcmblp  of  treacherous  men. 

j  3lnft  thep  benft  their  tongue  i& 
their  bom  for  lies :  but  thep  arc  not  bate 
antfoz  thetructh  topon  the  earth:  fo? 
thep  pjotecft  from  eml  to  cuill,anft  thep 
tmolto  notmc,faitb  the  %  ©  is  ©, 

4.  *1CaRcpcchcefteeuccp oncof  his 
1 1  neighbour ,  anft  ttufl  pec  not  tn  anp 
bjothcr:  fojeucrp  brother  ttiillbtterlp 
fttppiant,  anft  euerp  neighbour  Ibill 
lbai&ctbitbflattftccs. 

5  3nb  thep  Ibill  ||  ftctciuc  eucrp  one 
his  neighbour,  anft  ltotll  not  fpeaae  the 
tructh,  thep  bauc  taught  then;  tongue 
to  fpeauc  lies ,  and  incarp  thcmfclucs  to 
commit  miQuitp. 

6  Xhine  habitation  is  in  the  mibbeQ 
of  beccit,  though  Deceit  tbcp  refufe  to 
ftnoU)  mcfapth  the  ?l  ©  is  ©. 

7  Xberfoiie  thus  faith  the  ?L©i3© 
of  hottes;  26eholft ,  3JitoUlmclt  them, 
anft  tnc  them :  fojbotbfbailSJ  Doc  fo? 
the  Daughter  of  mp  people  t 

8  Xhcir  *  tongue  is  as  an  arrotbc 
fbotout,  itfpcaacth  *ftetcit :  one  fpea? 
ncth  'peateablp  to  his  nctghbour  ibitb 
his  mouth ,  butt  m  heart  he  lapcth  II  his 
tbattc. 

9  C*  5>hall  3  not  Suit  them  foz 
thefe  things ,  faith  the  %  <s>  is  ©  i  fbau 
notmpfouicbcaucngcft  onfuthanati* 
on  as  this  t 

i  o  foi  the  mountaines  Ibill  3}  taae 
pp  a  ibecptng  anft  rbapimg ,  anft  fb?  the 
1 1  habitations  of  the  ttMfternefle  a  la^ 
mentation,  betaufe  thep  arc  ||  burnt  bp, 
Co  that  none  tan  paffc  tb;ougb  them, 
neither  can  menheare  thebopte  of  the 
tattcll ,  t  both  the  foulc  of  the  heautns, 
anft  the  bcaftare  fleft,thcp  arc  gone. 

11  3toft3i  mm  mane  gjcrnfaicm 
hcapes,andTaftcnnc  of  ft;agons,anft  % 
nnl  mabc  the  cities  of  3Juftab  t  ftcfolate, 
lbitljout  an  inhabitant. 

n  €C  M)o  is  the  Vbife  man  that  map 
bnberttanbthts,  anftwhoishetorbhom 
the  mouth  of  the  Horn©  hath  fpohen, 
that  bec  map  Declare  it;  fb;  lfthat  the 
lanD  pertfljeth,  and  is  burnt  top  iibca 
tttilDcrneircthatnonepafleththJOugl^ 

i}  ^nb  the  H©k©  faith  28cfaufr 
thep  haue fonaltcn  mp  iau>,u)btrb  3  fct 
before  them ,  anb  bauc  not  obepeb  mp 
tooptcneitber  ibailtcD  therein ; 

14  25nt  bauc  itoaihcb  after  the  llimagt 
nation  of  their  ottmr  heart,  9  after  25a? 
altm,ibbicb  their  fatberstaugbtthem : 

1$  1H)rrefoje  thus  faith  the?,  ©is© 
ofhoQs,thcC5oDof3(fraci;25cholD,3l 
-, umi 


*Chap.»2. 
6.mich.7. 
K.6. 

\\Or,fr,cnd, 


\\Ortmocks- 


'Pfal.uo.^ 

'Plal.u.j. 

andjSj. 

Tfa.u.3. 

andaS.;.. 

\Hcb.ir,tht 

mcUrJttf 
him. 

\\Or,TBAile 
far  him. 
•Chap^.j, 


\Prfaftures 
\\OrJcJcL11c 


\Heh.fram 
thefoute  t* 
Mento  &c* 

'Chap.n. 

IO.J2. 

\Hcb.irfi- 

fatien. 


Orjul. 
CHrrjr.(Jfr. 


True  glory. 


Ch; 


ap.x. 


and  2,.  *j. 
33- 


•l.Cor.i. 

jit  2. cor. 
10.17. 


vpon. 

f  Hebr.eut 
0$ into  cor- 
ners >or  ha- 
tungthe  cor- 
ner! of 'their 
hairc  polled 
"Chap,  a  5 

*  Rom. 2. 


Will  fecb  them ,  euen  this  people  *  With 
womiewoob,  anb  gmc  them  water  of 
gall  to  finite. 

16  3}  will*  fcattct  them  aifo  among 
the  ijcatljett ,  Whome  neither  the?  no? 
their  fathers  hauc  tmoWcn :  anb  30  Wil 
fenb  a  froojb  after  them,  til  31  haue  ton? 
fumebthem. 

17  cinnisraiththcfUi>»3£5ofhofts, 
Confibec  pec,  anb  tall  fo?  the  mourning 
women,  thattbevmaycomc,  anb  fenb 
foj  tunning  women,  that  tljrp  map 
tome. 

18  3nb  let  them  maKehatte,anbtaKe 
top  a  wailing  fo?  tos ,  that  our  eyes  map 
run  bo  wn  with  teates,  ant>  our  cpclibs 
guth  out  with  waters. 

19  ifoi  a  toopte  of waging  ishcarb 
outofzton,$owareWefpoiieb<  luce 
arc  greatly  confounbeb,  becaufe  wee 
hauc  foifaucn  the  lanb,  betaufe  our 
Dwellings  hauc  tall  tos  out. 

io  jmheatethcwoitbof  the  JL©ra£>, 
A)  n  women,?  let  pour  carcretciuc  the 
W02D  of  Ijis  mouth,  anb  teach  pour 
Daughters  mailing,  anoeuer?  oncher 
n  cigbbour  lamentation. 

11  5fo?  bcath  is  tome  top  into  our 
Wtiibowcs,  and  is  entteb  into  our  paia 
ccs,to  cut  offtl)ccl)ilt»?cn  from  Vbittjout 
and  the  pong  menftomthefrreetes. 

22  apcanclEbus  faith  m%®&®, 
eucn  the  catftcifes  of  men  (ball  fail  as 
mmg  bpon  the  open  ficlto,  anb  as  the 
Dantjfuli  after  the  harueft  man, anb 
none  (bail  gather  them. 

23  cr  3El)us  fait!)  tt>c  ft  o  k  ?©,  fLtt 
not  the  *Wifc  man  glojp  in  his  Wilbom, 
neither  let  tbcmightp  mangloipmbis 
might,letnotthe  rich  manglojpin  his 

-  zlmtWWi  that  gtotfeth ,  guwp 
in  this ,  that  hce  tonDcrOanbeth  anb 
RnoWcthmc,  tbatU  ™  theJL©«© 
winch  crcrcifcloumg  tnnbncflc,tubge; 
ment  anb  rightcoufneftcm  the  earth : 
fozinthefe  things  31  bclight,  faith  the 

15  c^hoIb,tbcbapcseomc,foith 

theV©is^,that1Jmiltpumfbau 

them  Which  arc  tirtumcifcb ,  With  the 

toncireumctfeb,  _„.m 

26  €gvpt,anb5lubah,aub€bom, 

anbthc  cbiuwcn  of  amnion ,  antJW 
ab,anbaUthatatetmthc;btmortto^ 
ncrs.tbatbWcllinthc  Wilberneffe :  fo? 
ailthcfc  nations  aretoncirmmcifcD,anb 
all  the  houfc  of  3Jfracl  are  *  tonctrrumci* 
fcbintheheatt. 


£ 


Ofidolatry. 


chap.  x. 

The  vnecjuall  companion  of  God  and  idoles. 
17  The  Prophet  exhorteth  to  flie  from  the 
calamine  to  come.  19  Heelamentedidie 
fpoyleoftheTabemaclebyfoolifhpaftours. 
13  He  makethau  humble  fupplication, 

care  pe  the  wojb  Which 
tlje  ?L  €>is  ©fpcaftetlj  ton- 
to  pou,€>  houfe  of  3lfrael. 
z  Xhus  fapeth  the 
_  %  sd  is  55,  flearne  not  the 
wapofthe  hcathcn,anbbenotDifmap* 
ebatthc  figncs  of  hcauen ,  fo?  the  hea 
then  arc  btfmapeb  at  them. 

3  foi  the  t  tuftomes  of  the  people 
are  baine  j  fo?  one  cutteth  a  tree  out  of 
thefojtctt  (the  WozRcoffhchanbes  of 
tlje  wo*Bcman)With  the  are. 

4  SEhep  becfte  it  With  ffltter  anb 
With  golbe ,  the?  fatten  it  With  napies, 
anb  with  hammers  that  it  mooue  not. 

5  Xhcpart-topnghtasthepalmetrce, 
*  but  fpeane  not:  thepmutt  neebes  bee 
*bo?nc,becaufcthev  cannot  goe  :benot 
afratbofthcm,fo?*thcpcannotboceutl, 
neither  aifo  u  « in  them  to  boe  goob. 

6  5fo?afmuth  as  there  is  none  *  lifee 
bnto  thee  ,jb  %  ©  js  ■& ,  thou  art  great, 
anb  thP  0NOXI  's  great  in  might. 

7  *aahoWouib not fearc thee,  £) 
Bing  of  nations;  fo?  ||  to  thee  bocfh  it 
appcrtamc :  fojafmueh  as  among  all 
the  wife  men  of  the  nations,  anb  man 
their  Bingbomes,  there  is  none  itfee  bnto 
thee. 

8  2Butthevaretaitogcther*bnitifl) 
anb  foolifh :  the  ttocue  is  a  Doctrine  of 
toanities. 

9  SHluet  fp?eab  into  piatcsis  bought 
from  Xarn)ifl),anbgolb  from  ©pha5, 
the  wojac  of  the  Wo?ftcman,  anb  of  the 
Ijanbs  of  the  founber :  blue  anb  purple 
isthetr  clothing:  thevareallthc Wo?be 
of  cunning  men. 

10  2Sutthc?Loi3©isthettrue(l5ob, 
he 's  tfjc  Iiuing  <Eob,anb  an  teueriatting 
Bing:athtsw?aththcearthfl)altrcms 
bie,  anb  the  nations  than  not  be  able  to 
abiDcbiSinbignation. 

n  mhusihaivefapbntothem.lLhc 
C5obs  that  hauc  not  mabe  the  heauens, 
f  the  earth , euen  the?  (hall  pentb  from 
thcearth,ffrombnbcrthefchcauens. 

12  $cc*  hath  mabe  the  earth  by  bis 
poWer,hc  hath  cttablifljcb  the  wo;lb  by 
his  Wifcbomc ,  anb  hath  Qrctchcbout 
the  hcauensbp  his  bifcrcrton. 

1 3  i©hen  ije  bttcteth  his  boicc,  there  .s 

allmul 


\Hcb  flo, 
tutesorordi- 

tiAnctixrg 
vtmtj. 


•Pfa.115. 

ira.46.1, 

h 
Ifa.41.28. 

Pfal.8l5. 
8,10. 


Rmc.15. 

4- 

\\Or,itU- 
teth  ttjte. 


\Heb  wont, 
or  at  once. 
*Ifa.4i. 19 
abac.:.  1 8. 

ZCC.IO.I, 


iHob.GoJ 

iftrtuth. 
f  Hob.  Ktng 
if  eternity. 


•Gen.i.6. 
d13p.51.15 


Brutifli  paftours.      Ieremiah.  ObeythcCoucnant. 


aOr/ufr. 


\\Or.fir 


\\Oryij  mire 

brultjhjhetl 

"Chap.}!. 
17,18. 


"Chjp.ji. 


Utilrejfe. 


'  Chap  j . 
15.  and  5. 
1 5  .and  6. 

71. 

•Chap.?. 

11. 

•Pro.KS.!. 

aud  20.44. 

•Pfal.tf.l. 
and  ;8.i. 
cha.^O.  II. 
\Hetrett- 
njwl/h  me. 

"PfaJ.7?.(S. 


muintnbc  ofruaters  m  ttK  hcauens, 
atiDhcc  caufcth  thcbapourSto  afccnD 
from  tt)c  cuds  of  tlje  cart!) :  hecmaKcth 
lightnings  liwith  rame,  atibbjingeth 
fojth  the  UrtnU  out  of  his  trcafures. 

14  <£ucrp  man  is  ||  *b?utifl)  m  his 
Httowlebge,  euerp  founoer  is  confoutt 
bcb  bp  the  graucn  image :  fo?  his  raonl* 
ten  image « faifehoob,  anb  there  is  no 
tweathmthem. 

15  Xhcparebanitp,andthcwo<tBcof 
crrour s :  m  the  time  of  thctc  bifitatiou 
thcpfballpcrifb. 

16  *f:hc  portion  of  3Jatob  is  not  use 
thctmfoz  he  is  the  fourmcr  ofall  things, 
anb JJfracl  a  the  rob  of  his  tnhentance: 
thcCa©«£>ofhoftcs  i>.\)\s&tunt. 

1 7  €  d&atbcr  bp  thp  wares  out  of 
thclanb)£>tmhabitantcrfthefo?ttcu''e. 

18  ifozthtis  faith  the  !L<£>  is  Esffic; 
holb ,  3  will  fling  out  the  inhabitants 
of  the  lanb  at  this  once,  anb  Unll  bi 
ftrefle  tbem,tbat  the?  map  finb  k  io. 

1 9  Cnaoe  is  nice  io;  my  hurt ,  mp 
Vbounb  is  grieuous :  but  3  &V°>  %tw 
Ip  this  's  a  gnefcanb  3  muft  btarc  it. 

io  £)3y  Xabernacle  is  fpoplcb ,  anb 
all  mp  cojbes  arc  bjobcn :  mp  chtlbjten 
aregoncfoo;stbofme,anbthcparenot: 
[Here  is  none  to  ttcctch  fooitb  my  tent 
any  moje.anb  to  fct  bp  mp  tut  tames. 

x  1  jfo;  the  paftoavs  arc  become  tau 
t»Q),  anb  Ijauc  not  fought  the  ?L  «r>  is  © : 
therefor  the?  (ball  not  pjofper ,  anb  all 
their  flocftcs  (hall  be  fcatttr eo. 

xx  ascholb ,  the  noifc  of  the  bmit  is 
come,  anb  a  great  commotion  out  of 
the  *  /ftozth  countrep,to  matte  the  cities 
of  3Jubah  bcfolate ,  and  a*  benne  of  b?& 
gons. 

x?  CiD?L>®iB©,3lBnoU)thatthc 
*  way  of  man  is  not  m  bimfelfc :  it  is  not 
in  man  that  waibctb  ,to  bir  cct  hts  Qcps. 

X4  s©?L€)i5jE>,*co?retlmee,but 
With  iuogement,  not  in  thine  anger, 
left  thou  t  bung  me  to  nothing. 

v>  *0ow;c  out  thp  rurp  bpon  the 
heathen  that  nn 0  w  thec  not ,  ant) bpon 
the  families  that  tall  not  on  thviUamc: 
fo:  they  hauc  eaten  bp  3lacob,  anb bt- 
uottrcb  him ,  aub  confumebhun ,  anb 
hauemabe  his  habitation  bcfolate. 

CHAP.    XI. 

Ieremiah  proclaimed!  Gods  Coucnant :  8 
Rebuketli  the  kwes  difobcying  thereof: 
n  Propheficth  euils  to  come  vpon  than, 
1 8  and  vpon  the  men  ot  Anadioth,for  «m- 
Ipinng  to  kill  Ieremiah. 


fc^H®  $c  ibojb  that  tame  to  31*' 
^  rcmiah  from  the  %®mw, 
I  faying, 

z  $carcpecthewojbsj 
_  of  this  Coucnant ,  anb1 
[peaaebntothemenof  3Jubah,  anb  to 
the  inhabitants  of  "Jerufaiem. 

5  anb  Cap  thou  bnto  tbtm,  Xhus 
faith  the  Hadis©  d5ob  of  jfrael,  * Cut* 
I  fcD  bee  the  man  that  obcyeth  not  the 
wozbs  of  this  Coucnant, 

4  nahich  3  commaunbeb  pour  fa« 
thers  tn  the  bap  that  35  brought  them 
foo;th  out  of  the  lanb  of  Cgppt ,  from 
thepzonfurnate,  taping,  *sC»bep  mp 
bopce ,  anb  boe  them ,  actojbmg  to  all 
which  31  tommanbpou :  fotbailpcebe 
mp  peoplcanb  3  tbill  be  pour  (5oo. 

5  Xhat  3  map  perfo;tme  the  *  othe 
which  3  hauc  f  wo?ne  bnto  pout  fa- 
thers,to  giuc  them  a  lanb  flowing  With 
iniiltcanohome,  as  >c  .->  tins  Day  :ti)eh 
anfwertb%anbfaib,  t^>obeett,  £> 

6  iChcn  the  !Li©m  w>  flub  bnto  me, 
pzotiamic  all  thefc  Wozbcs  in  the  cities 
of  Jubah,  anb  mthe  flrects  of  3Jer  ufas 
lem,  faping,^earepethcW02bs  of  this 
Couenant,anb  doc  them. 

7  foi  3  eatnefllp  pjotefltb  bnto 
pourfathcrs,in  thebapth.n  3  bzougbt 
them  bp  out  of  the  lanb  of  <£gppt,  euen 
bnto  this  bay ,  rifmg  carelp  anb  p;ote* 
ftmg,faping,iDbcpmp  botce. 

8  *>ct they obeyeb not,  no«iinclincb 
their  eare :  but  waincD  euerp  one  mthe 
Dunagination  of  their  cuillheart :  there 
Ifoze  3  Will  bzingbpon  them  all  the 
wojds  of  this  Coucnant,Which  3  com- 
maunbeb them  tO  bOC ;  bllt  tlJCy  bib  them 
not. 

9  ^nb the  ILoKirfaib bnto nie,3i 
confpiraneis  fonnb  among  the  men  of 
juDah,  anb  among  the  inhabitants  of 
3Ictufalem. 

10  Xhepareturnebbatbetothcini* 
numes  of  their  forefathers,  Which  re- 
fufeb  to  hcare  mp  Worbes  :  anb  they 
went  after  other  gobsto  feruc  them: 
the  houfc  of  3lfrael,  anb  the  houfe  of 
JuDah  hauc  bjofeen  mp  Couniant, 
Uiljtd)  3  maoc  with  their  fathers. 

n  CXhctcfoite  thus  fapctlj  the 
ILaDSB,  26cholb,  3  wai  bnng  etuli 
bpon  tt)em  Whtcl)  they  fhailnot  bcable 
t  to  efcapc i  anb  "though  thep  fljaii  eric 
bnto  mce,  3  Will  not  hearaen  bnto 
them. 

1  x  Xhcn  than  the  cities  of  3mbah, 
anb 


■  Deut.,7. 

»«.gaJ-3 
10. 


3,u. 


"Deut.7. 
11. 


\Hebr-A- 
men. 


\\OrJhk- 
tnrmefe. 


tHeh-.tl 
goe  fwthef. 
'Prom. 
l8.ifj.I. 
1 5. tha.  14. 
u.eze.8. 
iB.iriith.  3. 


\Jieb.emll. 

\HcbJjam: 


Chaj.id. 
and  141 1- 


\Hcb  emit. 

Ifai.  1.1 1. 
See. 

xstorm  he- 
loHed\>.my 
houfe? 

Orywhc'i 
thytulUi. 


Iudahs  idolatrie.         Chap.xij.  The  wicked  profper. 


\M.  the 

flalheivit') 
his  held. 


*  t  Szm.  16. 
7.i.chron. 
28.9  pfjl. 
7.  io.and 
io.u.  clia. 
17.  icand 
20.12. rcue. 
2.2;. 


anD  uinabttants  of  3ferufaicm  goc,anD 
me  unto  tljr  gobsbnto  ibhomthcyof 
fcrmccnfe  but  they  flpail  not  fauc  them 
at  all  m  the  time  of  their  t  trouble. 

13  ifo;  ^cording  to  the  number  of  thy 
*  cities  mere  thy  gobs,  £>3JuDah,  anD 
accordnij;  to  the  number  of  the  ftrcctcs  of 
3Jeru(aiem  hauc  ye  fct  bp  altars  to  that 
t  djamcfull  thtng,  euen  altars  to  butne 
uucnfcbntoasaai. 

1+  Xhercfo2C*p2ay  not  thou  foj  this 
peo  pie  .neither  lift  bp  a  cry  02  pjaper  fcn 
them :  fo2  3  ibill  not  hcarc  them  in  the 
nine  that  they  enc  bnto  nice  foz  their 
t  trouble. 

15  *  t  s@hat  D^tl)  my  bcloucb  to  boc 
mmmchoufc,  iccin-ft)cchathib2ought 
ictbDncflc  until  many  *  anb  the  holy 
flefu  ispattcD  from  thee:  Hibhcnthou 
bocdcuill,  then  thou  retoyecd. 

i6  Xhc  ILoisjd  calicb  thy  name, 
3  grecne  oltuc  tree,  faire  anb  of  goobiy 
friutc :  ttml)  the  uoifc  of  a  great  tumult 
hcehath  ftmbicb  fire  bponit ,  anb  the 
bianthcs  of  it  arc  bzofecn. 

17  iftn  the !L©i3p  ofhoftcsthat 
plantcbthcc,  bathpjononnteb  cum  & 
gauifttbcc,  ftntbc  cntllof  the  houfc  of 
gjfraci,  anb  of  the  houfe  of  JJuoab, 
ibhich  they  hauc  bone  agauift  them 
fclucs  to  pzouo&c  meeto  anger  m  offe- 
ring mcenfe  bnto  25aai. 

18  C  3iuD  the  TLoisjd  bath  giucn 
nice  fenoVblebge  of  it,  anb  3}  mioibc  it, 
then  thou  flnibcDd  me  their  bomgs. 

19  23ut3l  was  liUcaiambcoran  ore 
« is  brought  to  the  (laughter,  anb  3 

Hnclb  not  that  they  hab  betufeb  beulccs 
agamltmc,  frying  JUtbs  beflroy  t  the 
tree  until  the  fruit  thereof,  anb  let  bs 
cut  him  off  from  the  lanb  of  the  lining, 
that  his  name  map  be  no  nwercmem 

20  25ut,sD!LoK£>  of  nodes,  that 
uibgert  rightcoudy  ,  that  *  tryed  the 
rcmcs,anb  the  heart  ictnicfcctbybcm 
Stance  on  them ,  ft>2  bnto  thee  bauc3J 
rcucalcbmycaufc. 

ii  Xbcr  cfcne  thus  faith  the  !Lois© 
of  the  men  of  3nathoth,thatfccUc  thy 
life,  faying  ;  iDzophccic  not  in  the  /iiamc 
of  the  Hois©,  that  thou  wc  not  by 
ourhanb: 

i%  Xhercfo.'cthusfaiththclLoisip 
ofhofts ,  25cboID/31  ttnl  t  puntd)  tbcm: 
the  young  men  mail  Die  by  the  froo2b, 
thetr  fonnes  anb  their  Daughters  fball 
Die  by  famine. 

13  3mD  there  fljan  be  no  remnant  of 


^  'it  ©  is  id  ,  when  II  pieaoc 
ttntb  thee:  ||yct  let  nice 


them ,  fo2  J  null  bJing  cum  bpon  the 

incnof^nathoth,cucnthcycrcofti)cir 
bifitanon. 

CHAP.     XII. 

1  lercmiah  complaining  of  the  wickedsprofpe- 
ritie ,  by  faith  feeth  their  mine,  s  Godad- 
mor.ifhcth  him  of  hi>  brethrens  treacherie 
againfthmi,  7  and  lamented)  his  heritage. 

14    Heepromi(eth  to  thepenitcnt,  rcturne 
from  captiuitie. 

jgs^^-^^jfttcoiw  art  thon 

la 

i_^W|taifte  Jtottl)  thee  of  thy 
s?  mbgements :  *  osherefojc 
bocth  thelbay  of  tbcttnrttcb  pjofper; 
wherefore  arc  all  trjcp  bappte  tfjat  Dcaie 
bcrytreachcroufly; 

2  Xbou  haft  piantcD  tbcm,yca  they 
haue  tafecn  root :  t  they  grow ,  yea  they 
b2ingfoo2tl)fruit,thoujrtnecremthen 
mouth  ,anbfarrc  from  their  reines. 

3  26ut  thou,  <D?Lc»  is©,  "Knotted 
me ;  thou  haft  f cene  me ,  anb  tneb  nnne 
heatt  t  toibarbs  thee :  pull  them  out 
line  fliccp  fo2  the  (laughter,  anb  prepare 
them  fo2  the  bay  of  daughter. 

4.  $ottt  long  flian  the  lanb  mournc, 
anD  the  hcrbes  of  euery  ficlb  tttltbcr, 
*  fo2  the  rbicnebnefle  of  them  that  dukU 
therein j.  thebcaftsarcconfnmcb ,  anb 
the  birDs.bccaufc  they  faib  ■,  $?eujaunot 
fceourlaftenb. 

5  CE  3lf  thou  haft  runnc  ttntb  the 
footmen ,  anD  they  hauc  Xbearieb  thee, 
then  hotbeanft  thou  tontcub  ttnth  ho* 
fes  ?anb  if  m  the  lanb  of  peace,  wherein 

thOU  trUftCDft,they  wearied  tliec,tt)t«  hOtt) 

ttnit  thou  boc  in  the  Quelling  of  3o«2-' 
ban* 

6  jfoj  euen  *  thy  b2Cth2cn  anb  the 
houfcofthy  father  ,eucn  they  haucDcait 
trcachcrotilly  with  thte,yca  Hthcy  haue 
talleD  a  multimbc  after  thee  beleeue 
;thcm  not,  though  they  fpeaUc  t  faire 
\b02bs bnto  thee. 

7  C3  hauc  fo2fahcu  nunc  houfc : 
gi  hauc  left  nunc  heritage:  '31  hauc  & 
ucn  t  the  bcarely  bcloucb  of  my  foulc 
into  the  hano  of  her  enemies. 

s  ©uie  heritage  is  bmo  me  as  a 
ly  on  in  the  fo2rcft :  it  ||  trycth  out  agauift 
me,thcrcfo2Chauc3Ihatcbit. 

9   ^3mc  hcrnagc  is  bnto  nice  as  a 

HfpecblcDbirb,  thcbicbcs  ronnb  about 

are agamft her  comcyce, alTeniblc  all 

the  beads  of  the  uciD,  Iconic  to  Dcuourc. 

10  i^any 


rettjenthc 
cafe  with 

tbu. 

'Job  11.7. 
pfll.37.1. 
and  7?.^ 
hab, i.j. 


\HtbM.tj 


•PW.17.J. 


\Hth.m:h 
thee. 


"Chap.J.i)- 


cryed  after 
thee  fttUy. 
\Heb.  good 
ihmtri. 


f  Htb.  the 
lone. 


\\Or,yfUth 

out  hu  voice. 

\\Or,  tJkn. 

ted. 

\\Or,cajtfe 

rhemio 

li'ne. 


48 


Thel 


innen£ircue 


di< 


Jeremiah,       and  wine  bottles. 


f  Hcb.ftr- 
1  ten  of  de fire. 


•Ltuit.  56 
16.dcm.16 
j8.mic.6. 
i5.agg.i.i5. 


"Dcut.  30, 
j.  chap.  3  J. 
57- 


•IfaLtfo. 
12. 


io  $)anp  paftojs  Ijauc  ocftroycb 
my  umcyarb  tbey  Dane  trobcu  my  poz- 
tion  unber  footc  :thcy  hauc  maoc  my 
t  picafant  po.uion  a  bcfoiatc  lDUDcr- 
ncflc. 

ii  Zhcy  haue  mabc  ttoefoiatc ,  and 
being  bcfoiatc  it  mourncth  unto  mc 
the  Whole  lanb  is  mabc  ocfoiate ,  be- 
canfeno  man  taycth  'tto  heart. 

n  %\\t  fpoiltts  arc  come  upon  all 
high  places  tlnough  thclbtlbctnelTc: 
fouhcfnwb  of  the  JLoia  d  than  be- 
tiourc  from  thconetnoof  thelanoeucn 
to  the  other  cud  of  the  lantnno  flelh  (hall 
hauc  peace. 

13  Xhcy  haue*  fowen  lUhcate,  but 
(hail  rcapc  thoznes  :  they  Ijaue  put 
thcmfclucs  to  patnebut  (hail  not  pzofit: 
anotljcy  than  be  afljamco  of  your  re- 
uenucs,  becaufc  of  tljc  fierce  anger  of 
the  fl  SDK©. 

14  CXhus  faith  the  jLoktd  a- 
gatnftaiimmc  emu  neighbours ,  that 
touch  the  inheritance ,  Vbh'.ch  3  hauc 
caufeb  mv  people  gifracl  to  inherit ;  26c^ 
hole,  giUrtirplutUc  them  out  of  their 
lanD,anoplueheoutthehoufeof3iubah 
from  among  them. 

15  3tnb  it  than  come  to  pafjfc  after 
that  3J  hauc  plucUcD  them  out,  3JwtIl 
rctur  uc,  anb  Dane  companion  on  them, 
ano  mill  bang  agaiuecucrymanto  Ins 
heritage  ,anb  cucry  man  to  his  lano. 

16  3lnbitfhailconicro  pafjfc,  if  they 
ibill  Diligently  learne  theiuaycsof  my 
people  to  fiocarc  by  my  namc(X!)c 
%  o  is  ©  liucth »as  they  taught  my  peo- 
ple to  fiocarc  by  23aai : )  then  (hall  they 
be  built  m  themibocft  of  my  people. 

17  25utif  they  mill  not  *  obey,  3  rbfll 
bttccly  plucftcUp ,  anb  beftroy  thatnfp 
tion.faitljthclLois©. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  In  the  Type  of  a  linnen  giidlc,  hidden  at  Eu- 
phrates ,  God  prefigured]  the  definition  of 
Dispeople.  12.  Vndci  the  parable  of  the  bot- 
tle:, rilled  with  winc,hc  foretclleth  their  drun- 
kenneflemmiferie.  15  Heexhortethtopre- 
uent  their  future  judgements.  12,  Hefhew- 
eth  their  abominations  a  re  the  caufe  thereof. 

mis  fa:th  the  iLois© 
unto  me  oocanbgctthcc 
a  linen  girbic ,  anb  put  it 
upon  thy  loynes,  anb  put 
it  not  in  Water. 
i   5>o  3  got  a  girbie ,  acco.'btugto 

die  iuo:b  of  the  jl  oui?,  anb  put  it  on 

my  ionics. 


3  3nD  the  tbojb  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
came  Unto  me  thefceonb  time ,  laying; 

4  Xanc  the  gitblc  that  thou  haft 
got,  which  «  Upon  thy  lotncs,anb  anfc, 
goc  to£uph?atcs,anbhtoeitthercma 
holcofthcroclic. 

5  £>o  3  lUent  ano  hto  (t  by  &u 
plnatcs,  as  the  %  ®  is  ©  commannbeo 
nice. 

6  3(tib  it  came  to  paffc  after  many 
bates,  that  the  JLois©  faibcUtttome, 
5tnfc,  goc  to  cupinates,  anbtabcthe 
girblcfrom  thcncc,whtch3  tommatm* 
ocb  tljec  to  h»bc  there. 

7  Xhcn3J  went  to  Cuplnatcsanb 
biggcb ,  anb  tooBc  the  girbic  from  the 
place  inhere  3  hab  htbit ,  anbbcholb, 
the  girbic  was  mar  r  cb ,  it  rbas  pzofita- 
blcfoz  nothing. 

8  Xhcn  the  worn  of  the  JLok© 
came  Unto  mcfaymg-. 

9  Xhtts  faith  the  %  ©  is  jd  •.  3(ftcr 
this  mancr  Will^jniarrcthcpubeof 
3Jubah ,  anb  the  great  pnbe  of  Jerufa^ 
inn. 

io  Xhis  enill  people  Which  tcfufe  to 
heart  my  wojbs ,  which  waltte  in  the 
||  imagination  of  their  heart,  anb  rbalttc 
after  other  Gobs  to  feme  them  anb  to 
tt>Dilhip  them,  fljall  men  be  as  this  gir- 
blc,  lUhich  is  goob  fo?  nothing. 

ii  foi  as  the  girbic  clcaucth  to  the 
lomcs  of  a  man :  fo  hauc  3  caufeb  to 
clcauc  unto  mc  thciuhoiehoufcofjf 
raci,  anb  the  whole  houfc  ofjuoah, 
faitlj  tljc  %  o  is  jd  ;  thatthcy  might  bee 
Unto  mc  fbj  a  people ,  ano  fc»  a  name, 
anb  fo:  a  p*aifc,anb  fo,t  a  gio?y :  but  they 
iboulbnothcare. 

it  CXhcrcfozc  tl)ou  (halt  fpcanc 
Unto  them  this  \U02b;Xhus  faith  the 
ILsdibid  <5ob  of  3Jfrael  ,€ucncbotle 
fljaibcfihcb  vuith  Uiinc:anb  thcyfliail 
fay  Unto  thee ;  2?oe  lUc  not  certainly 
UnoU),  that  cucry  botlc  fljall  be  fillcb 
Unth  lUinci 

13  Xhcn  fljait  thou  fay  Unto  them; 
Xhusfatth  the  lLois©;2Bcholb,  3 
ibill  fin  all  the  inhabitants  of  this  lano, 
cuen  the  lungs  that  fit  UponS>aiubs 
tlnonc ,  anb  the  pn'cfts  anb  the  p:o- 
phcts,  anb  all  th  c  inhabitants  of  Jcru- 
faicmiUitljOHmltcimclTc. 

14  3lnb  3  null  bad)  them  t  one  a< 
gamft  another ,  cuen  the  fathers  anb 
thefonncs  together , faith  the  %  ©  is  © : 
Jmilnotpiticnojfparcnojhaucmcr- 
nedbutbeftroythem. 

15  Ci?carcyc anb giuc care,  bcenot 
pzoub: 


\\OrJ!ui- 

bHnvttffc, 


crother. 


t  tit h.  from 
dtftrojiag 

them. 


Cuftome  in  euill.     Chap.xuij.         Prayer  rcieclcd. 


1  [fj.S.ts. 


'Lamcn.T. 

1. 16, and  a. 


\\Or,  hcad- 
tirtt 


t  Hetr.vifit 

if  en. 


and  j 6. 10. 


\\OrJ;jJlke 

violently  ta- 
Itenamtjr. 


\Mek 


\  Hrb.tftcr 
trkcnjcl? 


p;oub :  fo;  the  iL  o  m  ©  hath  fpoucn. 

16  <5iuc  glo:y  to  the  Howpyour 
(5od  bcfo:c  he  caufe  *  bartmeffc,  anb  be 
fo;c  your  feet  (tumble  topon  the  oarbe 
mountaincs,  auto  While  ycc  loofcc  fo: 
light,  he  turnc  it  mto  tl)c  fhabowc  of 
Death,  anb  mane  it  groffc  barftcneffc. 

17  25ut  if  ye  VbtU  not  hearc  it,  my 
foulc  (ball  Wccpe  in  fecret  places  fo;  vour 
p;itoc,  anb  'mine  eye  (ball  Wccpe  fo;c, 
anb  tun  Dottmc  With  teates,bctaufc  the 
Hoia©£>flocRc  iscanebaway  capmic. 

is  S>ay  tonto  the  bins,  anb  to  the 
cuicenc,  tyumble  vour  fcluesXttboWnc, 
fo:  your  ||  pnncipaimcs  (ball  tome 
DoWnceuuitbcctoWncof  yourglo;y. 

19  Xbenttcsof  the  S>outb  (bail  bee 
(hut  top,  anb  none  (ball  open  them,  gju- 
bah  (hail  be  tancb  aibay  taptiueaiiof 
it,  tt  (hall  bee  Wholly  caneb  away  tap 
tiue. 

zo  jLift  top  your  eyes,  anb  bcholbe 
them  that comefromtocjftortb.Wbrre 
is;  the  flotftc  that  was  giucn  thee,  thy 
beautifullfloctsci 

ii  nabatWUtthoufaywbenbefball 
tpuiulbthec(fo;  thou  baft  taught  them 
ro  be  taptaiucs  and  as  tbtcfe  ouct  thee) 
(ball  not  fo:roWes  taut  tbee  as  a  wo- 
manmtrauaiicf 

11  C^ub  if  thou  fay  m  thine  heart, 
*t©bercfo;c  tome  thefc  things  topon  mci ' 
fo?  the  grcamcfTc  of  thine  uuquitic  are  I 
thy  ftttrts  bifcoucrtb.  and  thy  tjcclcs; 
llmabcbate. 

13  Can  the  (Cthtoptan  thange  his 
ftunne;  02  tbcleoparb  Insfpots*  then 
mavpeaifo  boegoob,  that  arc  tacaifto- 
mcDtoboecuiil. 

2+  1Lbercfo;e  Will  3  fcattct  them 
astbcttubblc  thatpaffcth  away  by  the 
tbtnbc  of  the  ltoilberncftc. 

15  Xbis  is  tby  lot,  the  portion  of  thy 
meafurcs  from  me,  fattbtbclL  ok©, 
betauft  thou  haft  fo;gottcn  mce,  anb 
ttuftebtnfailboob. 

16  Xbctefo;c  Vbtll  3  bifcouer  tby 
Hurts  topon  thy  fate,  that  thy  (bame 
mayappcarc. 

17  3  haue  fcene  thme  abuitenes, 
anb  thy  nctgbings.tbc  leitobnefTe  of  thy 
Wbo:toome,  and  thmc  abominations  on 
thctnisntthefielbs:  woe  tonto  tbee  JD 
3Jerufalcm,  Unit  thou  not  bee  mabc 
tleane  <  t  when  niaii  '«.  once  be  > 

CHAP.   XIIII. 

1    The  ^rieuous  famine  7  caufeth  Ieremiahto 
pray.  \o  The  Lord  will  not  be  intreatedt'or 


the  people.  13  Lying  prophets  are  no  exculc 
lor  them.  17  Ieremiahismooued  rocom- 
phine  for  them. 

'houojD  of  the  Ho kd 


j,  that  came  to  Jeremiah 
«?nM  concerning  the  tbcarth. ' 
1    3*ubah  mourncth, 
anb  the  gates  thereof  lan 
guifl) ,  they  arc  biattte  tonto  the  grounb, 
anb  the  enc  of  Ucnifaicm  is  gone  top. 

3  3tnb  their  nobles  haue  fent their 
title  ones  to  the  waters,  they  tame  to 
the  pits  and  founb  no  Water ,  they  rctur 
neb  itoith  the  tocflcls  emptte :  thev mere 
a(hamcbatib  confounbeb,  anbeoucreb 
their  heabs. 

Ar  Bccaufc  the  grounb  is  chapt,  fo; 
there  was  no  ramc  m  the  earth,  the 
pioitomen  wercafbameb,  they  coucrcb 
their  heabs. 

5  Pea  the  hinbe  alfo  calutb  tn  the 
fielb,anbfo:fool»cu,  becaufc  there  ltoas 
no  gratfe. 

6  3tnb  tljc  itoilDe  aftcs  bit)  ftanb  in 
the  htcpiaccs,thcv  fnuffeb  top  the  Wmbe 
lihcmagons:  their  eyes  bib  fade  becaufe 
there  was  no  grafTc. 

7  C  O  %  o  ie  c\  though  out  mi 
qumrs  tcftifir  againft  tos,  boc  thou  »  fo: 
thy  Janice faKc :  fo:  our  barb  -  fltbtngs 
arc  many,  we  haue  (timet)  agamft  thee. 

s  €)  the  hope  of  Jfracl,  the  £>aiu 
our  thereof  tn  nine  of  trouble,  why 
(houlbcft  thou  be  as  a  ftranger  m  the 
lanb ,  anb  as  a  wayfaring  man,  that  mr^ 
neth  afioc  to  taric  to;  a  night  < 

9  lOhyfljouiDcftthou  bee  asaman 
aftonieo,  asamighticman  that  cannot 
fane;  yet  thou,  Q  !LoiK©,ar[mthc 
mibftof  bs,  anb  we  are  caiicb  tby  thy 
/^amcleauetosnot. 

10  cXhus  faith  the  Ho  13  id  tonto 
this  people,  Xhus  haue  they  loueb  to 
Wanbcr.tliQ'  haue  not  refcatneb  their 
fccte,therrfo;c  the  ILoh©  bocth  not 
atcept  them,  hec  will  now  remember 
their  immune,  anb  bifitc  their  ftnncs. 

11  XhcnfatbthcHoisBtontomec, 
*  p;ay  not  fo:  this  people ,  fo;  their 
goob. 

11  *  noheu  they  fad 31  Will  nothcatc 
their  trtt,  anb  whtn  tl)cy  offet  burnt  of 
fcrmganb  an  oblation  3  Wil  not  accept 
them :  but  3  Will  tonfumc  them  by  the 
froo:b,  anb  by  the  famine,  ano  by  the  pc^ 
ftilcnce. 

13  C^hcnfaib'3i5aiHo2bCoii?, 
bchoib,thc  p;ophets  fay  tonto  them  Pe 
ftjailnotfcc  tljcfiuoJb,  neither  (hall ye 

haue 


f  Hit.  ib 
rveriisof  ihe 
Jejrtbl  tn 

rjlramtt. 


\Httrihj 

ted  Zfon  iv. 


'Cha.7.n5. 
ind  1 1.  14. 
'x>.d  ;  2.10 
"PrOU.1.28 
ifl.J.lj. 
cha.  11.  11. 
czek.it.  1 8. 
.nic.j.4. 


Falfc  prophets.  Ieremiah.        Prayers  reietted. 


\  Hebr  yeace 

cjtriitth. 


21.  and  i~}. 
i  5  .  ami  29. 
8,?. 


"  Lam.  i. 

16.  .111J  2. 
iS.  chap. 
'3-'7 


mtrchandt;e 

/.in J,  and 
mm  ati^now- 
ttdtt*tnotl 
C»*}.  5. 

•Chap.  8. 
M 


tf.dan.y.S, 


haue  fammebufj  ibtll  guic  von  t  affu 
rcD  peace  in  this  place. 

14-  ILhcnthcILospfaiblmtomc, 
Xhc  p2ophets  piophecic  lies  m  my 
J3amc,*'jfcnt  them  not, neither  haue 
3?  commanDcDthcin  ,uetthccfpabcPti 
to  them:  tticv  piophene  unto  vou  afaifc 
Dilton  anD  animation  ,  anD  a  thing  of 
nottght,anD  the  Deceit  of  their  heart. 

15  Hfterefojc  thus  faith  the  lLo  bi? 
tontermngthcp2ophctsthatp2ophcc:c 
m  my /Same,  antral  fent them  not, vet 
they  fay ,  jS>Bjo?d  ant)  famine  fhatinot 
be  m  this  lanD,  J5y  fioojbanD  famine 
ihaii  thofc  pjophcts  be  toufumcD. 

i6  3no  the  people  to  mhom  thev  p:o- 
phene,  fhaiibecaftout  in  the  ftrectsof 
Ijerufaiem,  bctaufc  of  the 'famine  anD 
the  fiuo2D ,  ano  they  (hall  haue  none  to 
bunethcm,them,thcirlbmcs,uo2  their 
fonnes,  1102  their  Daughters :  fo:3  lbill 
polD.'C  their  nitcltcDncflc  bpon  them. 

17  CXherefoje  thou  fhalt  fay  this 
1D02D  buto  them,*  ILct  mine  cies runnc 
DottmcnnthtcarcsntghtanDDay.atiD 
let  them  not  tcafc ,  ftu  the  bir gm  Daugh  ■■ 
ter  of  my  people  is  b:oHcn  With  a  great 
b;each,nnth  abcry  grieuous  bloil). 

is  Jf  3  goc  fo«h  into  the  ficiD.thcu 
btholD  the  name  ibith  the  fmo:b,  ant  tf 
3J  enter  into  the  nnc.thenbeholD  them 
thatarcficHcilHthfammc.yca both  the 
p2ophctanDthcp:ie(t  !goe  about  into  a 
lanD  that  they  luiotti  not. 

19  Vrattthouotterlv  reiettcD^uDah? 
hadnhy  fouicioatheD  rum  niihy  haft 
thou  fmtttenbs,  anD  there  is  no  healing 
foz  bs  i  *  ihc  looheD  fo2  peace ,  auD  tht  re 
■Mio  gooD ,  anb  fcu  the  tunc  ofhcalmg, 
anbbeholb  trouble. 

10  iec  acknoihlcDgc , £)  jLobd, 
ourUuclieDnes,  and  theuitqutttc  ofour 
fathers :  fo:  *  nice  haue  fmncD  agamft 
thee. 

a  1  Do  not  abhoirc  ■•  ,fo:  thr/5ames 
faUcDocuotbifgraccihclZhioucofthr 
gl02tc:  remember ,  bieahcuotthyCo 
ucnautibtthbs. 

az  3rc  there  any  among  the  bant 
ties  of  the  Gentiles  that  can  caufc 
ramcr  02  can  the  heauens  g;uc  flioib:es, 
A.tnotthouhe,  <D  Ho  i?p  our  god? 
thcrcfo.'cUiennll  mane  bpon  thce:fo2 
thou  had  maDe  all  there  things. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1    The  v!tfrrcicc1ion,.-iiid  manifold  judgements 
olthclcwcs.    10   Icrcnnahcomplayriinecf 


their  fpight,  receiueth  a  promile for  liimielfe, 
11  and  a  chreatningfor  them.  15  H;prai- 
eth,    19  and  receiuerh  a  gracious  promile. 

faaae^ge  $cn  faiD  the  %  o  is  ©  »n; 
tomc,*i:hoHcjh*539ofcs 
anb  Samuel  ftooD  before 
me,  yet  my  mmbe  could  not 
_  be  t  oiuaro  this  people.caft 
out  of  mv  fight ,  ano  let  them  goe 
foojth. 

i  3nD  it  fhau  tome  to  paffc  tf  they 
fa? pnto  thee,  nahtthcr  fhau ibec  goe 
foonii?  then  thoufbait  tell  them,  Xhus 
faittuhc|LoL:iP,*5)uchas.ircfo2Death 
toDeath,  ann  fuel)  as  arc  ftnthcfuwD, 
tothcfroo2D ;  ano  fuel)  as  arefoltfjefo 
mmctothefamme,  anDfurl)  as  arefoz 
the  captumie,  to  the captuutte. 

1  ^InD'J  Jbill* appoint oucr  them 
foure  t  mnbes,  faith  the  1L  okjd,  the 
fmo2Dtoflav,auDthcDogstotcarc,auD 
the  foules  of  the  hcaucn ,  anb  the  bcafts 
of  the  earth  to  Deuoure  auDDcftroy. 

4.  3lnDt3amicaufethemtobc*re= 
moucD  into  ail  HsugDomcs  ofthe  earth, 
bctaufc  oPQDanaffeh  thefonne  of^e^c- 
Utah  King  of  3Iubah,  fo?  that  a>i)tclj  hec 
DtDmgicrufaicm. 

5  foi  mho  (hall  haue  pitie  Upon 
thee,  £>  gjerufalem  i  02  ibho  fhau  be- 
moanc  thee?  02  lbho  fhau  goc  afiDe  to 
taf&choibthouDoeff; 

6  Xhou  haftfo2fafecn  me,  faith  the 
Ho  13© ,  thou  art  gone  barMDarD : 
trjecefoie  Unil  J  ftrctch  out  mp  hanoa^ 
gamft  thecaub  DeOrop  thee,  3  am 
rbcanciDith  repenting. 

7  ^ud  5  null  fannc  them  lbith  a 
fanne  in  the  gates  of  the  lanD :  J,  ibtll 
bereauc  then.  of||chilD2cn,  3}  uui  Deftroy 
my  people ,  fith  they  cctumc  not  from 
their  uiaies. 

3  Xhctr  UuDoibes  are  mcrcafeD  to 
meaboue  the  fanb  ofthe  fcas:3I  haue 
b2ought  bpon  them  ||  agamft  the  mo- 
ther ofthe  yongmcn,a  fpoiler  at  noone 
bay :  Jl  haue  caufeD  him  to  fall  bpon  it 
fuDDenlv,anDtcrro2sl)pouthetitie. 

9  *S>he  that  hath  bo2nefeuen,  laip 
giuflicth:  flichath  giuenbp  thcgljoft: 
her  funnc  is  gone  boibn  lbhile  it  was  yet 
,Day :  fhee  hath  bene  alhameD  anD  ton- 
!  fouiiDeb  ,anb  the  refibue  of  them  ibill  3J 
beluier  to  the  fmo2D  befoie  their  ene= 
mics.fauhthcJLoK©. 

10  |r*tt3oets  mcc,mymother,that 
that  thou  haft  bo2iic  me  a  man  of  ftnfr, 
lanbanian  of  contention  to  thclbhole 
earth:  Jl  haue  neitlKr  lent  on  vfuric, 

L 1102 


*  Exod.32, 

'4- 

"  1 -Sam. 7. 

9- 


'  Ctap.4;. 
11  21ch.11. 


"Lcuit.  16. 

16. 

t  Httr.f*. 


\Hft-r.Iv,l 

for  jmM~ 
»W. 

*  Dcuc.  iS. 

9. 

"2.Kin.Ji, 

11. 

f  H,lr. :. 
ai^ecfrhr 
thjptace. 


[o:ncr  a 
dcjrc* 


WOr.^imn 
the  matter 

ci'ieytjimg 

man  jhoi/wft, 
0-c.     Or.a- 
winfl  the 
mo  tbtr  and 
tkc  yong 
mtr. 
'Amos  8.9. 


Morn.T. 
Bic.cha.jo. 


Godfauethhis.  Chap.xvj.       Thelewesruine. 


||0r,  fw,U 
cntrtM  'he 
enenutfor 
thee. 


'Cha.17- 


•Dcui.  31 


•Ek.j.j. 

TCUrl.  IO.9. 

\Hrb.  thy 
ledvpon  me. 


"Chap.  ;o. 

J5- 

\rlcb.  he  not 
ftrre  ? 


'Chap. 10. 


no?  men  bane  lent  to  me  on  tofurtc ,  y« 
cucry  one  of  them  Doctl)  tnrfc  tnc. 

11  Xbc!LmiiDfaiD,<Llcrclyit(ball 
be  mcll  ibitb  thy  remnant ,  tocrcly  ||  3 
ltoill  caufc  the  ciicrmc  to  mtr  cat  thec  well 
in  the  time  of  cuili,  anb  in  the  nine  of  af 
flittton. 

12  &\)M  y2on  bzeabe  the  ji3o?th?cn 
y?on,anbtbcftcelc; 

15  Xhy  jubilance  anb  thy  trcafnrcs 
Itoill^giuctotbc'rpoilcrbirboutpztcc, 
anb  cnacfo?  all  thy  unncs.cucn  in  an  tijp 
b02bcrs. 

14.  3Mb  3  lbtll  mane  thee  to  pafTe 
ttntb  thuic  olenites ,  into  a  lanb  which 
tbountioibcftnot:fo2a*fircisBinDIcb 
an  mine  anger,  which  (ballbtiructopon 
pott. 

1  •;  4T£)lL©Kr*,tl)onhno\be{r,re^ 
member  me,  anb  btfit  me ,  anb  rencnge 
me  of  my  pcrfccuto2s,  tabemecnota 
Ybay  tn  thy  long  fuffcrmg:  bnolto  that 
fo?tby  fattc  3  bauc  fnffcreb  rebnbe. 

i6  XbyvbozbesibercfounD,  anbH 
bib*  eatetrjem,  anb thy  itoo?b  ibas  ton 
to  mcc ,  the  toy  anb  rcioycmg  of  nunc 
heart:  fo?  tjam  tallcb  bytby  jJ5amc, 
^D  ft  o  is  id  <5ob  of  boftes. 

17  3  fate  not  m  the  affcmbly  of  tl)c 
mocftcrs,  1102  rcioyceb :  3  fate  alone  be 
caufc  of  thy  hanb :  fo2  ttjou  baft  fillcb  inc 
rbitbmbignanon. 

18  naby  is  my  *patnc  perpetually  anb 
my  tbounb  mcnrablc  which  rcfufctb  to 
be beaicbntoilt  thou  be  altogether  tonto 
me  as  aiyar,  and  as  waters  that  t  fade  t 

19  C1thcrfo2e  tints  faith  thelitis©; 
gifthourctumctbcnitoill'JbnngtDec 
againe,  and  thou  (halt  ttanb  befoic  me : 
anb  if  thou  tafcc  foitt)  the  p;cnous  from 
the  bile,  thou  (bait  be  as  my  mouth :  let 
them  returnc  tonto  thec  ,bttt  retur  ne  not 
thou  tonto  them. 

20  3tnb  3  mill  mafte  thec  tonto  this 
people  a  feneeb  bzafcnMtoaii,  anb  they 
(hall  fight  againft  thec ,  but  they  (bail 
not  *  pjcuailc  againft  thee :  foz  3 im 
tbitb  thec  to  faue  thec ,  anb  to  bcliucr 
tbee,faytbtbc?L<r>is©. 

21  anb  3  Hull  tciiuer  thec  out  of 
the  hanb  of  tbcibtcbco,  anngjitoiil  rc^ 
becme  thec  out  of  the  hanb  of  the  tet 
riblc. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  The  Prophet,  vnder  the  types  of  abftaining 
from  marriaecfromhoufes  or  mourning  and 
feafting ,  torefhe^eth  the  vtter  ruine  ot  the 
Iewes ,    10  becaufc  they  were  worfc  then 


'Cha.l  5.: 
*  Chap.: 


'Chip  7  .33 
and  34.10. 
pfjl.jp.j. 


their  fathers.  14  Their  retume  from  capti- 
uine,  I  hall  beitranger  then  their  deliucrancc 
outof  Egypt.  16  God  will  doubly  recom- 
penle  their  idolatrie. 

,(?cvbo2bofthc  Horn© 
came  alfo  tonto  mcfaymg, 
1  £bou  (halt  not  tafcc 
^  thec  a  ltoifc,  neither  (bait 
Sslthou  banc  tonnes  no? 
baughtcrs  111  this  place. 

?  f  02 thus  fay th the  It©  is©  con 
ccrunig  the  founts  anb  concerning  the 
Daughters  that  arebomcmtbis  place, 
ano  concerning  their  mothers  that 
bar  c  them , anb  concerning  their  fatb  crs 
that  begate  them  in  this  lano : 

+  Xhcyfbaibicofgrtcuous'bcatbs, 
they  (ball  not  bee  *  lamentcD,  neither 
(hail  they  be  buncb :  but  they  (hall  be  as 
Doungtopon  the  face  of  the  earth ,  ano 
they  (haibcconfumcb  by  rile  fiuo2b, anb 
by  famine,  anbthnr*  carlicifcsfbailbc 
meatc  foz  the  fouics  of bcaucn ,  anbfo2 
the  beads  of  the  earth. 

5  Jro;thusfayththc1LowiD,  <Sn 
tcr  not  into  the  houfc  of  ||  mourning, 
neither  goc  to  lament  no2  bemoanc 
them :  foz  3  hauc  tafcen  atbay  my  peace 
from  tl)is  people ,  faytb  the  V-  o  «  ©, 
euen  louing  Uinbncffcanbtncr  cics. 

6  zSotb  the  great  anb  the  fmail  (hall 
bic  in  this  lanb :  they  (ball  not  be  buncb, 
neither  (hall  men  lament  foz  them,  no? 
cut  thcmfelues ,  no?  matte  tbcmfelues 
baiDcfo?tbcm. 

7  ^either  (hall  men  *||tearc ihem- 
feiues  foz  them  in  mourning  to  comfo2t 
them  foz  the  oeao ,  neither  (hall  men 
giuc  them  the  etippe  of  confolation  to 
D2inbcfo2  their  father ,  02  fo2  their  mo? 
ther. 

8  Xhou  (halt  not  alfo  goc  into  the 
houfc  of  fcafhng,  to  utttmbthemto  cat 
anbtoD2inbc. 

9  Jfoz  thus  fayth  the  %  o  in  p  of 
hoftcs,thcC5obof31frael  25cholb,*3 
ltoili  caufc  to  ccafe  out  of  this  place  m 
your  eyes,  anb  in  your  bayes,  the  tooice ;  i°-  ««k 
of  mirth,  anb  the  tooice  of  giabneffc,  the  : 
tootce  of  thcb?iDcgroomc,anb  thctoouc 
ofthtbzibe. 

10  <ranDit(halcometopafTc*\tohcn 
thou  (halt  (heme  tins  people  all  tbcfe  " 
Vbozbcs ,  anD  they  fliail  fay  tonto  thec; 
20bercfo?e  hath  the  %  o  «  td  pzonoun^ 
ceo  all  this  great  cutll  agatnft  tos^  02 
itohat  is  our  imqumc  1 02  itohatis  our 
fmncthatmc  banc  comnutteb  agatnft 
the?L€)ispour(5oD< 

a>ff       11  Xljcn 


•  Lcuit.ip. 

i8.dcur. 

14.1. 

\\Or,h-r«kt 
brexdfor 
lhcm,*t  E- 


■irai.24.7, 
i.  chap. 7. 
4.  and  15, 


Cha.5.19 


Fi(hers,and  hunters.  Ieremiah.    The  heart  wicked. 


•Ch.r7 
26. 

||  <7r ,/?„£- 

bttmnrffc. 


37. and  18. 
64,«j. 


•Chap. 
7.8- 


"lob.  3  4. 11 
prou.  5.  II. 
chap.  }X. 
'9- 


•Clup.J 
1 1. 


11  %\)t\\  fl)ait  thou  fay  buto  tbcm 
2Sccaufc  your  farmers  bauc  fotfaben 
mcfaitb  the  %  ©  is  © ,  ant)  bauc  it»ai= 
tub  after  other  Gobs  ,  anD  bauc  fcrucb : 
tbcm ,  anb  bauc lb02fbtppcD  them,  ant) 
bauefojfaBcumce,  ant)  Ijauc  not  Sept 
niyiarb: 

u  3lnD  ycc  bane  bone*  mojfc  then 
your  fatbcrs,(fo2bcbolbycclbaiRc  cue; 
ric  one  after  the  I  i  imagination  of  bis  v 
mil  heart,  that  they  may  not  heathen 
bntomc.) 

13  *1Ehcrcfo2ett)iiigicaayououtof 
this  lanb  into  aianbtbatyccBnomc 
not,  ncuhcr  pec,  no:  your  fathers,  ant) 
there  (ball  ycc  fcruc  other  Gobs  Day 
ant)  night,  Where  3  mill  not  (beme  you 
fauour. 

1+  C£bcrcfo2cbcboiD,tbc*Dayes 
tomcfaith  the  %  ©  is  Estbat  it  (ball  no 
mo:c  be  faiD :  Xhc  %  ©  is  r>  liueth  that 
biought  bp  the  chiltycn  of  Jftacl  out  of 
thrianbofcgypt 

15  i5itt,1-be?L©i3iDUuctb,tbat 
bought  bp  tl)c  chtlbzcn  of  31  fcacl  from 
thclant)ofthc^ouh,ant)fromailthc 
lanDs  mbttber  Dec  hat)  Dnucn  tbcm : 
aim  3  mill  b:mg  them  agamc  into 
their  lano,  that  Jgaucbnto  their  fa 
thtrs. 

1 6  C^cholt),  3  mill  fenufo:  many 
fitbcrs.factb  the  1L  ©  is  n\anD  they  (bai 
fid)  them,  ant)  after  mill  3  fciiD  foj  ma< 
iuchuntcr5,  ant)  they  (ball  hunt  them 
from  cuery  mountamc ,  anb  from  t- 
ucry  hill,  anb  out  of  the  holes  of  the 
roches. 

17  iro2mme*cycs-!ret)ponailthrtr 
maies:tbcy  arc  not  hibfrom  my  face, 
neither  is  their  intquittebtD  from  mine 
cics. 

is  3uiDfirft3J  mill  recompenfe  their 
imquitic,  anb  their  finne  boublc,becaufc 
they  bauc  befilcb  my  lanb,  they  bauc  fil- 
leb  nunc  inheritance  mtth  rt)c  carlteifcs 
of  their  bctcftablc  anb  abominable 
things. 

19  £)!L©isiD,myIrrtngthanbmy 
fonrctTcant)  my  refuge  m  the  bay  of  at 
diction  the  Gentiles  (ban  come  bnto 
thec  from  the  enbs  of  the  earth  ,  anb 
(ball  fay  Purely  our  fathers  baucm 
hcrttcb  lyes,  baniticanb  tiling  mhecein 

there  is  tlOp20fit. 

20  snail  a  man  malic  GoDStonto 
htmfelfcanb  *  they  are  no  Gobs  t 

11  Hhcrefo:c  bcholb  ,  3  mill  this 
once  caufc  them  to  linom :  3  mill  caufc 
them  to  tmomc  mine  banb  anb  my 


might ,  anb  they  (ball  fcnom  that  my 
name 's  tbc?L©i3jP. 

CHAP.     XVII. 

1  The  captiuitie  of  Iudah  for  her  finne.  5 
Trult  in  man  is  curfed,  7  inGodisbkfled. 
9  The  dcceitiull  heart  cannot  dcceiucGod. 
ii  ThelaluationotGod.  15  The  Prophei 
complameth  ot  the  mockers  ot  his  prophecie. 
1  cj  He  is  fent  to  renew  the  couenantin  hal- 
lowing the  Sabbath. 

%*^*g^8>  $c  finne  of  Ifubalj  ■mjit 

^  ten  Untb  a  *  pen  of  yron, 

and  untb  the  t  point  of  a 

Diamond  j  >usgraucn  bp 

^^^S  on  tljc  table  of  their  heart 
anb  bpon  the  homes  of  your  altars: 

1  i©bilcft  tbett  cbilbjcn  remnnber 
their  altars  anD  their  *groucs  by  the 
grecne  trees  Upon  the  high  hillcs. 

3  £D  my  mountamc,  intbcficib*3l 
mill gme  thy  fubftantc,  and  an  thy  trca- 
furcs  to  tljc  fpoilc,  and  thy  bigb  pia^ 
ces  fo?  finne,  throughout  all  thy  bo^ 
bcrs. 

4-  3lnb  thou ,  t  cuen  thy  fclfe  fbait 
bifcontmuc  from  thine  heritage  that 
3  gaue  thec ,  anb  3  mill  caufc  thee  to 
fcruc  thine  enemies  m  the  lanb  ibbieb 
thou  Bnolbcft  not  :fo2yec  bauc  tunbleb 
afire  itinunc  anger,  winch  fbailburnc 
fojeucr. 

5  C  Xbus  faith  the  H©kjd.  Cur; 
feb  be  the  man  that  truftctb  m  man,  anb 
maactb  fled)  his  armc ,  anb  mbofc 
heart  bepartcth  from  the  JL  ©  is  ©. 

6  5Po2  bee  wall  be  Ubc  the  bcatb  m 
thebefert,  anb  (bailnotfeembcngoob 
commcth,butfbailinhabitcthcparchcb 
places  in  the  milbcrncffc ,  ma  fait  lanb 
anbnotmhabiteb. 

7  *  25leffcb  >s  tlK  man  that  truftctb 
mtbc  H©isjd  ,  anb  ibbofe  hope  tljc 

?L©1S1DIS. 

8  ;tf02bc(balibc*asatrccpiantcb 
by  the  maters ,  anb  that  Tprcabctbout 
her  r  ootcs  by  the  rtucr  ,anb  (ball  not  fee 
mhen  bcatc  tommcrb ,  but  her  leafe 
(ball  be  grecne,  anb  (ball  not  be  carcfull 
intbcyccrc  of!  i  brought,  neither  (ball 
ccafc  from  ycclbmg  fruit. 

9  C£bc  heart  is  bcccitfull  aboue 
aiitl)tngs,anbbcfpcratclymitHcb,mho 
canbnotbit; 

io  3  the  %  ©  is  jp  *  fear  th  the  heart, 
i  try  the  remes,  cuen  to  gmc  eucry  man 
accoibmg  to  his  mates,  and  acco2bmg  to 
the  fruit  of  bis  Doings. 

II   As 


Mob.io. 

«4- 

t  Hcb  mule 


Vudg.2.7. 
Ifai.l.to. 


'Ch 


p.  1 5 


\Hfb.,nthy 
f'lfc 


'Pill.  ».!«. 
and  J4.  10. 
and  iif.  i. 
prou.  \6. 
so.ifa.30. 
18. 
"Pfll.1.3. 


Or,  1 

Jlratnt, 


*2  Sjm.lt;. 
7.pfal.7-lo. 
(.hap.l  1. 10 
and  10.  IX. 


Theobferuation       Chap.xvnj.   of  the  Sabbath  day 


\\Or,gathe- 
relh  foltng 

hath  not 

troM?hr 

fttrlh. 


•PfJ.73. 
25  ifa.1.28 


•Chap.  1.3 


•Id-j.ip. 


\Heb. after 

thee. 

'Chjp.l. 


'Pla1.;5.4 
and  ao.  1 5. 


XHekb'rak 
them  With  a 
Je/uble 
breach. 
*Gl3.l  1. 10 


'Niche. 


*E»o  10.8. 
and  25.  11. 
and  5 1 .  11. 

CXC.20.  12. 


11  A>thcparmchlirttteth  on  e^es.anb 
hatthcth  them  not:  io  hcthatgcttethn 
thcsatibnotbpnght,  (hall  icaticthem 
tn  the  mtbft  of  htsbapcs,atib  at  his  cnb 
(hailbcafooic. 

ix  C  3  glorious  high  tluonc  from 
the  beginning,  ^tljc  place  of  our  dan 
ctuanr. 

13  £>|LfiP«p,tt)c  hopeof  Jifraei, 

*  all  that  foifakcthec  Qjailbcaihamcb, 
anb  thep  that  Depart  from  me  (hail  bee 
tbnttcn  tnthcearth,  becaufc  thep  Dane 
fo2fakcn  the  %  o  is  jd  the  *fouutatnc  of 
luting  rbatcrs. 

14  $caiemc,£>1L©is£\anD3i(l)aii 
be  rjcaieb :  faue  me,  anb  3  fl)aibc  faucb: 
fojtfjouanmvpiatfc. 

15  C  25eholD ,  tnev  far  bnto  mce, 

*  cohere  is  the  ttwb  of  the  %  ©  is  jd  i  let 
ittomenouj. 

i6  3s  fo2  me,  3J  hattc  not  haftcncD 
from  being  a  paftour  to  tfoiiotttthcc, 

*  neither  ijanejl  DcfircD  thcUiofuilDap, 
thou  knoVb  eft :  tl)at  lbhich  came  out  of 
mp  lips,  tbas  right  bcfoic  thee. 

17  26c  notatcrrour  bnto  me,  thou 
n  nip  hope  in  the  bap  of  cuill. 

18  *  JLct  them  bee  toufounbeo  that 
pctfccutcme,  but  let  not  me  be  confoun 
bcD :  let  them  be  btfmapcb,  but  let  not 
me  bcbifmapcb :  bung  bpon  them  the 
bap  of  etitll,anD  t'Dcftropthcm  lbtth 
Double  Detraction. 

19  <r  Xhus  fapb  the  %  ©  is  ©  bnto 
me,  Go  atiD  lianD  m  the  gate  of  the  chil 
Dicn  of  the  people,  lbhercbp  the  kings 
of  3JitDah  tome  tn,  anb  bp  the  lbhtch 
thep  goc  out,  atib  mall  the  gates  of  31c; 
rufalcm. 

20  sinDfap  bnto  them,  I)carcpethc 
ID02D  of  tlic  ?L  ©  is  jd  ,  vc  ftmgs  of  3iu- 
bah,  attb  all  ^lubah .  anb  all  the  inhabit 
tants  of  3Jerafalem ,  that  enter  in  bp 
thefc  gates. 

ii  Xhus  faith  thcILo  is  i?,*i:akc 
heeb  to  pour  fclucs,  anb  bcarc  110  bur 
benonthe  dabbath  bap,  no2  bmig'ttn 
bpthc  gates  of  gicrufalcm. 

12  father  cane  fo2th  aburbcnout 
of  pour  houfes  on  the  dabbath  bap, 
neither  bocpcanpmotkc,  but  hailoibc 
pc  the  dabbath  bap,  as  3  *  comman 
ocb  pour  fathers. 

23  25utthcpobcpcbuot,nctthcrmcU 
neb  their  earc,  butmabc  their  netke 
fhffc, that  thep  might  not  hcarcnoirc; 
cctuemftcuctiott. 

24  anb  ttfhail  come  to  pafTc,  if  pec 
btligcntlp  hearken  bnto  me ,  faith  the 


iLoisiD,  to  b2ing  in  no  burben  thjoitgl) 
the  gates  of  this  erne  on  the  dabbath 
bay,  but  hallow  the  dabbath  bap,  to 
bocnoib02kctl)crcm: 

25  *3Chen  mail  there  enter  into  the 
gates  of  this  cmc  kings  anb  p;mces  fit* 
tmg  bpon  the  ttyonc  of  SDauib,  nbing 
m  char cts  anb  on  ho2fcs,  thep  anb  their 
P2inces,  the  men  of  3Jubah  anb  the  in= 
habitantsof3Jcrufaicm:anbtljtsnrie 
(haiircmatncfomtcr. 
•  26  3tnb  thep  (hall  come  from  the  ct* 
tics  of  3Jubah,  anb  from  the  places  a* 
bout  Jcrufaicm,  anb  from  the  lanbc  of 
Bcntamtti ,  anb  from  the  plamc  anb 
from  the  mouutames ,  anb  from  the 
douth,  bringing  burnt  offerings,  anb 
facriftccs.anbmcatc  offerings,  anb  in- 
cenfe ,  anb  bnngmg  faenfiecs  of  pjaife 
bnto  the  houfc  of  the  %  o  is  je>. 

27  26utif  pou  lbill  not  hearken  bn* 
to  me  to  hallolb  the  dabbath  bap,  anb 
nottobcarcaburbcn,ntcncntrmgiuat 
the  gates  of  "Jcrufalcm  on  the  dab- 
bath  bap :  then  lbill  3  kinblc  a  fire  in 
the  gates  thereof,  anb  it  (hall  beuoure 
the  palaces  of  ^erufalcm,  anb  it  (hall 
notbermencheb. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

1  Vndei  the  type  of  a  potter  is  (hewed  Gods 
ablolutc  power  in  difpofing  of  Nations.  11 
lodgements  threatned  to  Iudah  for  her 
ftrangereuolt.  18  Ieremiah  pr.iycili  againft 
his  confpiratours. 

^^^mv>t  ib02b  ibhich  came  to 
§pw  Jeremiah  from  pJLoisp 
*S§;  faving, 

^«  2  3ru"eanbgoDoibneto 
iRPiisrs^fe  the  potters  Ijoufe ,  %  there 
J)  lbill caufc  thee  to  hearemp  ib02bs. 

3  %\ytn  3  Vbcnt  ooVbuc  to  the  pot 
tcts  houfc,  anb  bcholb,hcc  Drought  a 
ib02kconthc!IU)hcclcs. 

4  3nDtl)cbcffcll||thathcmaDcof 
clap,ibas  marreD  in  the  hanb  of  thepot- 
tcrfohctmabcitagaincanothccbeircll 
as  fecntcb  goob  to  the  potter  to  make  it. 

5  1Ehen  the  lb02b  of  the  JLoisjd 
tame  to  me,  fapmg, 

6  £)  houfc  of  Tifracl ,  *  cannot  3 
boc  nnth  pou  as  this  potter ,  faith  the 
jlfflKDi  bcholb,  as  the  clap  is  tn  the 
potters  hanb,fo  arc  pc  tn  mine  hanb,  «© 
houfc  of  3Jfracl. 

7  At  what  infrant  3  H>all  fpeake  ton 
tenting  a  nation ,  anb  fomenting  a 
kmgbomc,  to  "plttckc  l>p  ano  to  pull 
Dott»ne,anDtoDeltropit. 

dffi  s  3If 


'Cha.  J2.E 


\\Or,framts 

or  fences. 

\\Or,that 

he  made, 

W4J  rrurreJ 

at  clay  in  the 

hand  of  the 

pottrr. 

t  Hebr.  re- 

titmedand 

made. 

•lla.450. 

rnni.9. 10. 

tvifd.IJ.7. 


Ch: 


Euill  for  good.  Ieremiah.    The  potters  veiTell. 


'Iona.; 


-2.K1n.17. 
i ;.  chap.  7 
?.and  155 
and  35.15 

*  Chap. :. 


h  Chip.  2. 
10. 


pr.myfieU 
far  a  roc  kf, 
or  {ox  the 

banon  f^yhali 
the  running 
wareri  be 
forftk^nfer 
the  (I range 
cold  waters1 
•Cha.2.1  V 
'Chap.  17. 

•Chap.<5. 
16. 

•Chap  19. 
8. and  49. 
I  ^.anc^o. 
M 


'Mai. 


\\OrJ.r 
tonsne. 


8  3K  that  nation  agatnaibhom  3 
oaue  p:onountcb ,  turne  from  their 
rut!!, "  3  mill  repent  of  the  cmll  tijat  3 
thought  to  Doc  unto  rtjem. 

9  anbu  what  tn(rant3J  mail  fpcalie 
conccnung  a  nation,  ant)  contenting  a 
mngoomc  to  builb  anb  to  plant  k  , 

10  3)f  it  Doecuill  mmyfigOt,  that  it 
obey  not  mybolec,  then  3  null  repent 
of  the  goob ,  lDtJctcnnrfJ  3  fatbe  3 
ttioulbbcttcfitctocm. 

1 1  C  /i2oU)  tnerefoze  goe  to ,  fpca&c 
tothemenof  3Jubah ,  anbto  tfjc  infta-- 
bitants  of  Jcrufalcm ,  faying,  Xhus 
fait!)  the  %  0  «  ©  •  23c0olb ,  3  frame 
cntll  agamltyou,  anb  beuifc  aDcuttea? 
gatnfl pott :  *  rctttrnc ye  nolb  cucry  one 
from  Ois  cmll  may ,  auo  matte  your 
Vbaics  anb  yottr  bomgs  goob. 

11  3ttiDrt)eyfaiD,*Xhcrcisnooopc, 
but  lbcc  UnlltbaiUc  after  our  oibnc  be- 
titccs,  anb  lbcc  llnll  cucry  one  boc  toe 
imagination  of  Ins  etui  I)cart. 

1?  Xhereftuc  thus  faith rt)e!Loi3©, 
*3mcycnoU)  among  the  hcathen.tbho 
hath  l)carb  fuel)  tDmgs  <  thcUirgitt  of 
jfraclhathooucabcryho.'nblcthmg 

1+  HDtll  a  man  leauc  J  tDe  *  fnow  of 
^Lebanon  winch  eomm«!i  from  the  rocUc 
of  the  fielbc^o:  fljaurhc  coibcfloromg 
maters  that  come  from  another  place, 
bcfo:fabeiH 

15  Becaufc  my  people  hath  *  foigot- 
tenmcc,  tl)cyl)auc  burnt  inccnfc  to  ba; 
nine ,  anb  tocy  Oauc  caufeb  tDcm  to 
(tumble  tn  tOctr  ibaics  from  tf)e  *  anncnt 
paths,  to  ibalrtcm  paths,  b  arbaynot 
caftbp, 

i6  %o  ntaftc  their  lanb  *  bcfolatc  and 
apcrperualU)imng:cucryonctt)atpaf 
fetl)  thereby  fhall  bee  aflonifljcb  ,  anb 
ttiaggchisheao. 

17  3  Hull  frattcr  them  as  Hurt)  an 
Cafrnnnbcbcftuc  thccncmtc :  31DHI 
fljclb  them  the  batfec ,  ano  not  rijc  fate, 
in  the  bay  of  their  calamine. 

18  CXhenfaibthcy,  Come,  anb  let 
bsbcutfc  bcutces  agautfl  Jeremiah: 
•  fo:  the  ILaib  fbail  not  prnf!)  from  the 
pzicft,  no2  counfell  fronuhcttufc,  no: 
ri)cVbozbfrom  the  piophet:  Come  anb 
let  tos  finite  him,  lbuh  the  tongue,  ano 
let  bs  not  giuc  heebe  to  any  of  Ois 
moibes. 

19  eiucheeb  to  mc,£>  1L  0  «  s\anb 
ocarttcutotOc  boice  of  them  thatcgn 
tenbwithmc. 

20  ^hail  cmll  bee  recomprufeb  fo: 
goob;  fo:  tf)eyhaucbiggcbapitfo:my 


foulc :  remember  ttjat  3  0°°b  befoje 
ttjee  to  fpcatte  goob  fo?  them,  and  to 
tunic  amay  toy  ttuath  from  them. 
21  Xhcrcfozc  bcliucr  bp  rtjnr  ttjil- 
:nt  to  tljc  fammc ,  anb  t*poib:e  out  tru, 


ptrivr 
themou:. 
"Pul.109. 
10. 


t  Hiir.fir 
dcMh. 


mm  I 

thncbioodbyrt)efo2ccofrt)cfroo2b,anb 
let  rtjcir  ibiucs  be  bcrcaucb  of  rt)cir  toll- 
men anb  be  miboibcs,  anb  let  their  men 
be  put  to  beath ,  let  toetr  yong  men  be 
name  by  tOc  ftoo:b  in  battel!. 

21  llet  a  trie  bee  Ocarb  from  tfteit 
houfes,  tbOcntOouChaltbnnga  troupe 
fubbcnly  bpon  toon ,  fm  they  hauc  big- 
gcb  a  pit  to  tafcc  me ,  anb  Ijib  fnar  cs  fo: 
my  feet. 

23  jset  3L©ire>  thou  ttnoibcft  all 
their  tounfcll  agamft  me  t  to  Qay  mee : 
fo?giuenot  rt)cir  imqume ,  neither  blot 
out  their  finite  from  thy  fight ,  but  let 
them  bee  oucrtlKolbcn  befoje  toce, 
beale  thus  rrnrt)  them  in  the  nmc  of  t  jjmc 
anger. 

CHAP.     XIX. 

1  Vnder  the  tvpe  of  breaking  a  potters  vcfTell, 
is  torefhewed  the  defolation  of  the  lewes 
tor  their  finnes. 

ins  fait!)  toe  H©is  &, 
Goc  anb  get  a  potters 
earthen  bottcll,  anb  ta&c 
ofthcanncntsofthcpco- 
_  pic,  anb  of  the  annents 
of  tljc  p:ieltcs. 

2  3ino  goc  foitl)  bnto  toe  bailey  of 
the  fonncof  J^innom,  mhirt)  ^  by  rt)c 
entneof  the  t  tailgate,  anb  p20tiaime  w^.d, 
tOetc  the  lbojbs  tOat^l  fhaiitcll  thee:  ■*■**"• 

3  Znn  fay,  ^car  e  y  c  the  lbo2b  of  the 
JL  ©  ib  ©,  ©  uings  of  JJubah,anb  tnhte 
bitants  of  3Jcrufaicm  ■,  Xhus  faith  the 
ILohd  of  holies, toccsoo  of  3Jfraci-, 
25cl)olb ,  3  lbtu  bnng  cum  bpon  this 
plate,  the  ibhid)  ibhofocucr  Ijcatcth, 
hiscarcsfoail'nnglc. 

4  Becaufc  they  hauc  fojfaften  nice, 
anb  hauc  eftrangeb  thts  piatcanb  hauc 
burnt  mtenfc  m  it  bnto  other  gobs, 
Vbhom  neither  rt)cy,  no;  tOcir  fathers 
hauc  ftnottictuio:  the  kings  of  3Jubal), 
anb  Oauc  filleb  this  plate  lbitlj  the 
bloob  of  innocents. 

5  Xhcy  Oauc  built  alfo  the  higf)  pla- 
tes of  zSaal,  to  burnc  their  fonncs  ttnrt) 
fire  fb:  bunit  orTcnngs  bnto  ffiaal, 
niihich  %  tommanbeb  not,  no^fpane  -civ.P.7. 
't.ncithcr  tame  mntomyminDc.  v, 

e  Xhercfo2cbcholb,tOcbaiestome, 
faitO  tOc  %  0  k  id  ,  that  this  place  fhall 
no  mo:c  bec  calico  Xophct ,  no:  the 
bailey 


*  1  .Sam.  ). 
1 1.  2.  king. 
21.12. 


I  udahth  reamed.        Chap.xx..  Fafhursname. 


*Ch3.i6.4. 
and  7.;;. 

•Chap.  1 8. 
1 6.  and  49. 
1 3 .  and 
JO.13. 


'Lcuit.  16. 
29.dcu.18. 
5  3. lam. 4. 
10. 


^Heb.  fc 

heated. 

•Cha.7.;j. 


•Chap. 32, 


bailep  of  the  fonne  of  J^innom,  but  the 
ballcp  of  daughter. 

7  2no  3  Will  matte  boiD  the  cotui- 
fell  of  Juoah  ano  Jcrufaiem  m  this 
place ,  ano  31  nun  taufc  them  to  fall  bp 
thefmojD  befojethctt  enemies,  anDbp 
the  hanos  of  them  that  fees  their  Hues: 
ano  their  *  tartmfes  will  3  Suk  to  be 
mcatfoj  thifoulcs  of  the  heaucn,  ano 
fo;  the  bcafts  of  tlie  earth. 

8  ano  3  Will  matte  this  tittc  *  Ocf o> 
late  ano  an  hitting :  euctp  one  that  pat 
fcth  thercbpfhalbcaftontthco  anohuTc, 
bctaufe  of  all  the  plagues  thereof. 

9  ^no  3  null  taufethem  to  catcthc  I 
*  flefb  of  their  fonnes  ano  the  fltfh  of! 
their  Daughters,  ano  thep  thai  catena ' 
tp  one  the  flefh  of  his  f nenO  in  the  ficgc  j 
ano  ftraitncffe,  Wherewith  their  enr-! 
mics,  ano  thep  that  fceuc  their  liucs.i 
(haiittraitcnthem. 

10  Xhtn  (halt  thou  bjcafccp  bottle  in! 
the  fight  of  the  men  that  goc  with  thee, 

11  3lnD  Chalt  fapbnto  them  Xhus 
fait!)  the  %  ©  a  £>  of  holies,  €ucn  fo 
Will  3  bieattc  this  people  ano  this  erne 
as  one  bicaucth  a  potters  toctteil  that; 
tcannot  becmaoe  whole  agamc ,  ano  \ 
thep  Chan  *burp  them  m  Xophet,  nil 
there  be  no  place  elfe  to  burp. 

11  Xrjus  miirj  00c  bnto  this  place,  1 
fapththe  ?1©ik©,  ano  to  the  inhabit 
tants  thereof,  ano  euen  matte  their  cttic , 
asXophct. 

13  2nD  the  houfes  of  3lcrufalcm,anD! 
the  houfes  of  the  lungs  of IJuoah  fl)ali  \ 
bceoefilco  as  the  place  of  xophet,  be-| 
caufe  of  all  the  houfes  Dpon  Whofcj 
*roofcs  they  haue  burnt  mcenfe  bnto  | 
all  tljehofte  of  heaucn ,  s  hauepoWzeo 
outonnfee  offrmgsbnto  other  goos. 

14.  Xhen  came  Jeremiah  from  Xo- 
phet,  lDhither  the  ILfiDuj?  hao  fent  hmi 
top2ophenc,anohee  ftooo  mthc  court 
of  the  %  ©  is  3D  £>  houfc ,  ano  faio  to  all 
the  people, 

15  Xhus  faith  theft  ©is©  of  hoftes 
the  ©00  of  3)fracl,25eholo,3l  Wilbmtg 
topon  this  citp,ano  bponall  her  toumes 
all  the  euill  that  3  haue  pjonouneco  a> 
gainft  it ,  becaufc  thev  haue  harOcncO 
their  netttcs,that  thep  might  not  hcare 
mpwojoes. 

CHAP.  XX. 

1  Pafhur  fruiting  Icremiah ,  receiueth  J  newe 
name,  and  a  fearefull  doome.  7  Icremiah 
complaineth  of  contempt,  10  of  treachery, 
14    and  of  his  birth. 


£>W  pafrmr  the  fonne  of 
*  dimmer  the  ^ncft,  who 
was  alfo  chiefc  goucmojin 
thehoufeof  tljc  JL©is©, 
hearo  that  Jeremiah  p;o= 
phcticothefe  things. 

z  Xhen  #a(l)iirfmotc3Jcrcmtah 
the  0jophet,anO  put  him  in  the  fortes 
that  were  mthc  high  gate  ofBcntamm, 
Which  was  bpthehoufeofthe!l£>fi3D. 

3  3tnD  it  came  to  paffe  on  the  mop 
rorb ,  that  0afl)ur  brought  foojrh^lC' 
remiah  out  of  the  fotftes.  Xhcn  (apo 
Jeremiah  bnto  him,  Xhc  ft  ©a© 
hath  not  calico  thy  name  pafhur ,  but 
||Q3ago2  milTabib. 

4  foi  thus  fapth  the  %  ©  e  m, 
BeholD^  Will  maRcthcea  tcrrourto 
thy  felfcano  to  all  thy  frienos,ano  trjcp 
fhall  fall  bp  the  frooiO  of  their  enemies, 
ano  thine  epes  (hall  bchoio  it,  ano  3 
Will  gute  all  Juoah  into  the  hano  oftijc 
King  of  Babplon ,  ano  hec  (hall  carp 
them  captme  into  Babplon,  ano  (hail 
fiap  them  With  the  fmotf). 

5  s©o;eoucr,*3rbillOcliuerallthe 
ftrength  of  this  ntp^no  all  the  labours 
thereof,  ano  all  the  pjenous  things 
thereof ,  anb  all  the  trcafures  of  the 
Kings  of  JuDahWtii  Jgiucutto  the 
hano  of  their  enemies  which  (halfpoile 
them,  anotaitc  them  ano  carp  them  to 
agabplon. 

6  ano  thou  0afl)ur ,  ano  all  that 
DWcll  in  thine  houfc,  fljail  goc  into  rap-- 
nuitie ,  ano  thou  (halt  come  to  25abp« 
lon,ano  thercthou  (haitoie,  anoOiait 
be  bunco  thercthou  ano  all  thp  frienos 
to  whom  thou  haft  p«!ophccteO  lies. 

7  C  sD  %  ©  a  © ,  thou  haft  occei- 
uco  me,  ano  3  was  D  Oeceiuco,  thou  art 
ftrongcr  then  3J,ano  haft  pzcuatlco :  31 
am  in  oerifion  oailp ,  cucrp  one  mop 
Bcthmc. 

8  jf o?  fintc  3  fpaac  3  crpco  out,  3 
crtco  biolcncc  ano  fpopic  bccaulc  the 
wo;o  of  the  TL©is©  was  maoc  arc- 
pjoth  bnto  me,  ano  a  Denfion  oailp^ 

9.  Xhcn  3  faio ,  3  wui  not  ntabe 
mention  ofhun,  no?  fpease  anp  mo?c  in 
his  name.  But  his  Wojo  was  in  mine 
heart,  as  a  *  bur nmg  fir e  (hut  bp  in  mp 
bones ,  ano  3  was  wearp  With  fo?bca* 
nng,ano*3Itowlbnot  ftav. 

io  C  Sfoi  3  tJ^aro  the  Defaming  of 
manp ,  fcarc  on  cuerpfioe.  5Kepo?t,'Jv 
thev,  ano  Wee  Will repomt:  tallmpta^ 
miliars  watchcofozmp  halting,  faying , 
^eraoucnturc  he  U)iil  be  enticeO:  ano 
§>ff  i  We 


'l.Cbti 

24.14. 


That.:, 

feure  round. 


**.  Kings 
10,1 7-. 


Or, enticed. 


*Iob3i.i8, 


f  Reb.  cum 

man  of  my 
peact. 


T 


m 


paticn 


cie. 


Ieremiah.  Life^and  death. 


•Chap.  17. 
18  and  1  5. 
10 


Chap 


'  Chap.  1 1. 
20   and  17. 


*Iob.:.;. 
chap.  15.10 


•Ccii.ip. 


lob.],  ic 


tbe  (ball  pjcuaiic  agamft  turn ,  anb  iDe 
tlja.ll  take  our  rcucugcoiihmi. 

11  2i3uttl)elLfir)isi©i5U)irt)mcasa 
migbtp  terrible  ont  :*  tbcrefojc  tupped 
fecutoursfball  (tumble ,  anb  tbep  (ball 
not  pjcuatle ,  tbep  (ball  be  gccatlp  afba; 
meo,  fo?  tbep  (bait  not  pjofper,  th«r*e* 
ucrlaflmg  tonfufion  fballncucrbcn> 
gotten. 

12  2Sut£)1L©i3©  ofboQcs,tbat 
•trpcfltbcrtgbtcous^ndfeefttbcretnes 
anb  the  heart,  let  me  fee  tbptocngcaticc 
ontbem  tfozlmtotbee  baue^Jopcncb 
mpcaufe. 

13  &mgPntotbclL©i3iP,p;aifcpcc 
tlie  It  ©  is  jd  :fo;  Dec  bath bclmereb  tbe 
foulcoftbcpoo:cfronithcb.mbofnt;ll 
boers. 

14  CCurfcbbetbcbapihberetng} 
iDas  borne :  let  not  toe  Da?  therein  mp 
mother  bar c  nice,  be  blcffeb. 

15  *  Curfcb  be  tbemau  ibbo  brought 
tibmgs  to  mp  father ,  facing .  31  man 
cbtio  ts  borne  bntotbee ,  malting  bun 
berpgiab. 

i6  3lnb  let  that  man  be  as  the  cincs 
ilihtth  the  ILoifi©  *  oucrtbjcili  anb  re; 
peutcbtiot:anblctbunbcarctbecrpin 
the  morning  ,  anb  the  fhounng  at 
noonctibc, 

17  JSecaufeheflclPmcnotfromthc 
lbombcro?  that  mp  mother  might  baue 
beenemp  grauc,  anb  becujombctobc 
aiujaics  great  wichmc. 

18  'iBhercfoic  came  3J  forth  out  of 
fthevbombe  to  fee  labour  anb  unroll), 
that  mp  bates  fboulD  be  confumcb  Untb 
jtbamc* 

CHAP.  XXI. 

Zcdekiahfendeth  to  Ieremiah  to  inquire  the 
client  ot  Nebuchadrezzars  warre.  5  Iere- 
miah foretelleth  a  hard  fierce  and  milerablc 
captinitie.  8  He  counfelleth  the  people  to 
Caldeans,    11    and  vpbraidetli 


fall  to  the 

the  kings  houfc. 


ix  iuo?b  which  came  ton; 
K  to  'Jlcremiah  from  the 
)%m  1L  o  is  c\  lb'ocn  lung  ze- 
^bcltiab  fent  bnto  him 
pafburtbcfouncofgSel 
cniab  ,  anb  zephantah  the  fonuc  of 
iBaafeiah  the  pjicttfaptng . 

2   Cncuurc ,  3  mv  thee ,  of  the 
iOBD  fc>2  bs (fo2  Jlcbuchao  mvir 
King  of  zBabpIon  malteth  inane  a 
gamfl  D5)  if  fo  uc  that  the  it  o  is  c>  Hull 
beale  lluth  us  ,  acto.'bmg  to  all  his 


Eioi.  6.6 


iDonbjousiboitkcs.tbatbemapgoebp 
fromns. 

j  C  Xbcn  faibe  3Jercmtab  bnto 
tbcmXbus  (bail  pec  lap  to  zebetuab, 

4.  Xhus  faith  the  %  €>  13  ©  <5ob 
of  gjfracl ,  aScbolb ,  3  MUturne  bacftc 
the  lDeapons  of  lbarrc  that  ".in  pour 
bmtosabberciuttb  pec  fight  againfttbc 
btngofSabplon,  anb  agamft  thecal 
beans,  lDljich  beftege  pou  Without  the 
vbailcs.anb'J  llnliaflcmblc  them  into 
the  mtbbeft  of  this  cine. 

5  3lnt)  3  mp  felfc  lDill  fight  againft 
pouilntb  an  *  out  ftrcubcbbanb ,  auD 
ttutb  a  ftrong  acme,  cucn  in  anger,  anb 
in  furtcanb  in  great  lDjatb. 

6  3nb  3  lDrtl  finite  the  inhabitants 
of  this  ctttc  both  man  anb  bead:  tbep 
(bail  bie  of  a  great  pefttlenee. 

7  5lnbaftctiDarb,faitbtbc!Lc>K?D, 
3  Ui'.ll  bciiucr  zebemab  fttng  of  3u 
bah,  anbbisfcruants,  anb  the  people, 
anofucbas  •>«  left  in  tins  ntte  from  the 
pcmlciicc,tromtbcfroo2b,anbfromtbc 
famine,  into  the  hanb  of  Bcbucbab- 
rc5?ar  bing  of  26abplon ,  anb  into  the 
barib  of  their  enemies,  anb  iuto  the 
hanb  of  tbofe  that  fccUe  their  nfc ,  anb 
anb  he  (ball  finite  them  With  tlje  ebgc 
oftbeftmnb:  bee  (ball  not  fpare  them, 
neither  bauc  pule,  no:  baue  mctcp. 

8  #[  3lnb  tonto  this  people  thou 
(bait  fap  Xhus  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©  -.t&v 
tiolD ,  gi  tetbefoje  pou  the  lbapof  life, 
anbtbeinapofbcatb. 

9  5>c  that  *  abibeth  in  this  citic,(bail 
Die  bp  the  froojb.anb  bp  tbcfamtnc,  anb 
bp  the  pemlence :  but  be  that  gocth  out, 
anb  faiictb  to  the  €albeans,that  beftege 
pott,  befljailliue,  anb  bifiufc  (hall  be 
onto  bim*fo?apwv. 

to  iPoi  3  baue  fct  uip  face  agatnfl 
this  ntie  foi  cuill  anb  not  fo?  goob,fatth 
the  H© a©-, it  (ball  beguten  tnto  the 
hanb  of  the  bing  of  JSabplou ,  anb  Ijc 
ftjaiiburnettilittbfire. 

n  €l  5ltib  touching  theboufc  of  the 
lung  of  JuDah,  fay ,  i?earc  peetheibojb 
ofthcHoH©. 

ix  £>h  boufc  of  SDauib ,  tljus  faith 
the  %  ©  is  r>,  *  t  crecutc  ittbgement  m  •  chaP 
the  morning,  anbbeliiierbim  that  is 
fpotlcb,  out  of  tlie  hanb  of  thcoppjef 
four,  leltmpfnric  goe  out  like  fire ,  anb 
burnc,  that  none  can  quench « ,  bctaufe 
of  the  cuill  of  vour  boiugs. 

i?  2Scbolb,3Tim agatnfl tbee,£) tin- 

habitant  of  the  Dailep,  jndrothe  of  the 
platnc,  faith  the  ?Loi3P,tt)b:ch  Tap, 

031)0 


•Chap.  38. 


•Chap.  39 
iS.and^j. 


\H<bi»Ajf 


tolvjp 


The  Kings  duetie,  Chap. 


XXI]. 


an< 


profpentic 


\fltb.vifil 

/pet. 

'Pro.i.ji. 


■Clup.jl. 

11. 


•Chap.  17. 

\Hibr.for 
D>\uid  vpo* 
bu  ihmnc. 


*  Dcut.  19. 
24  1. kings 
9.8. 


O3ho  dial!  come  bottmc  agatnfttos?  02 
Who  (ball  enter  into  our  babitanons  i 
14  26ut  '3  Will  t  pumft)  you  atto^ 
btngtothe*rrutt  of  yourbotngs,  faith 
the  ?L  ©  a  © :  anb  3  tt>Ul  amble  a  fire  m 
thcfozrefithcrcof,  ano  ttfball&cuoute 
all  tlnngs  touno  about  it. 

CHAP.     XXII. 

Hce  cxhorccth  to  repentance,  with  promifes 
and  threats.  10  The  Judgement  of  Shallum, 
13  Of  lehoiakim,  10  and  ot  Coniah. 

ifKM€K^3g  fcus  fatth  the  IL  ©  ii  ©, 

"^Sl  E3)P©oeboWnetothehoufe 

8  ^BP  of  tl)e  femg  of  3iubah, 

|fegg  ano  fpcaac  ttjcre  this 

!kSJ  Pfrl$  UW3' 

^tsc^^  1  3nbfay,$catcthc 
wozb  of  the  ?L  ©  is  © ,  £>  lung  of  3u* 
Dat>,  that  fittcfttopontbc  thzoncof  2>& 
ulb,  thou ,  ano  thy  ftntants ,  anb  thy 
people  that  enter  in  by  tbcfc  gates. 

1  Xhusfaiththe?Lc>iB©,*crctutc 
ye  uibgcment  auto  nghteoufneffe,  anb 
bcliucr  the  fpoilct  out  of  the  banb  of  the 
oppzeffout:  anbbocnoWzong,  boeno 
toiolcncc  to  the  ftcangcr,  the  fatherlcfle, 
noztbcWiboW,  neither  fl)Cb  innocent 
bloobm  this  plate. 

+  5roz  if  ye  boc  this  thing  inoeeot, 
*  then  (hall  there  enter  in  by  the  gates 
of  this  houfc,  Bmgs  fitting  t  bpon  the 
tbzoneofSDauio,  nbtngmtharctsahb 
on  hozfes,be>atibbisferuants,  anb  his 
people. 

5  2i3ut  if  yec  will  not  hcarc  thefe 
wozbs,3Jfitjeatc  by  my  fclfe,  faith  the 
fL£>is©,  that  this  houfc  fhall  betome 
abefoiatton. 

6  ifonhusfaiththc  H€)K©  touto 
the  lungs  houfc  of  ^ubab ,  Xbou  a« 
©tleab  tonto  me,  and  the  hcab  of  Heba* 
non :  vet  fuccly  3 will maSc thee  a  WtU 
betnefle,  and  cities  which  arc  not  inba* 
biteb. 

7  2nb  3  Will  prepare  beftroycts 
agalnlt  thee,  cutty  one  With  btswea; 
pons,  anb  the?  (ball  tut  toowne  toy 
thoife  cebars  ,  anb  cad  them  into  the 

fice-  „ 

8  3inb  many  nations  (ball  pafTc  by 

thisnne,  anb  they  (hall  Cay  cucrpman 
to  his  neighbour,  *  iBherefoze  bath  the 
ILsdkjd  bone  thus  tonto  this  great 
ntie  i  ,        M 

9  %\ytn  they  (hail  anrrocre ,  t&v 
caufe  they  battcfozCa&en  the  touenant 
of  the  %$>&'$>  rt)oc  ©ob,  anb  Voop 


fhippeb  other  gobs,  anbfcrueb  them. 

10  C«©cepeycnotfoztbet>cab,net' 
tber  bemoanc  him,  but  weepe  foze  foz 
him  that  gocth  away :  foz  he  mall  rc- 
turncno  moze,  nozfecbtsnattuetoun 
trey. 

1 1  jfoz  thus  Caul)  the  %  ©  is  ©  tou- 
thing  £>hallum,  the  fonne  of  gjofiab 
femg  of  3ubah  Which  reigncb  m  ftcab 
of  3o0ah  hts  father,  which  went  fozth 
out  of  this  place,  tyt  fbail  nottcturne 
thttljcr  any  moze. 

ii  2SuthefbailDiem  ti)e  plate Wbfc; 
thcr  they  haue  leb  htm  captiuc,anD  tbai 
lee  this  lanb  no  moze. 

ij  C  naoc  tmto  *  him  that  builbctb 
hlsljotife  by  tonnghteoufncCfe,  anb  his 
chambers  by  Wzong :  that  tofctb  his 
neighbours  fenttee  Without  wages , 
anb  giueth  him  not  foz  his  rbozRc : 

H  Xhat  faith,  3  will  builb  ince  a 
Wtbe  houfe  anb  t  large  chambers,  anb 
mttcth  hun  out||WinboWes,  anb  it  is 
ueleb  ttnth  tebar ,  anb  patnteb  with  bet- 
milton. 

15  5>halt  thou  retgnc  betaufc  thou 
tlofcft  thy  felfc  in  cebar  <  mb  not  thy  fa* 
ther  eate  anbbzinhe,  anb  boe  tubgment 
anb  utftitc,3nd  then  it  was  wcl  ttntl)  hum 

i6  ^eiubgeb  the  caufe  of  the  pooze 
anbneeby,  then  u  was  well  ^ith  him-,  was 

not  this  to  bno  W  mcfaith  the  %wm  < 

\rj  25ttt  thine  tyts  anb  thine  heart 
are  not  but  foz  thy  touetoufnelTe,  ano  foz 
tofhebtnnotent  bloob,  anb  tbzoppzet 
Oon,anbfozllntolencetoboe  it. 

18  1thtrcfozetl)usfaifl)thelL€)i5© 
concerning  gichoiaaim  the  fonne  of 
3Jofiah  King  of  3!ubah,  Xrjey  ttjall  not 
lamcntfozhim,  (aying,  ^hmybzothcr, 
oz  ah  Bftcr :  they  foall  not  lament  foz 
him,  faying,  Sih&ozb,  ozahhisglozy. 

i9  ^edjall  be  bunco  With  the  bunan 
of  an  aCTcbzawcn  anb  call  foztl)  beyonb 
the  gates  of  Jcrufaiem. 

20  C(5ocbpto1Lcbanon,  anberic, 
anb  lift  top  thv  Dolce  in  25afJban,anb  trie 
ftomthepaflagcs:fozailthyloucrsare 
beftroyeb. 

ii  jKpafeetonto  thee  m thy  tpzofpc* 
rttie,  Gut  thou  fatbeu\'3J  Vbtll  not  hcarc : 
this  hath  bm  thymaner  from  thy  youth, 
tl;at  thou  obcyebft  not  my  none. 

2i  Xhe  wmbe  (hall  eate  top  all  thy 
pafiozs ,  anb  thy  louers  foall  goc  two 
tapttuitie ,  furciythen  fljalt  thou  be  a 
fhameb  anb  tonfounbeo  foz  all  thy  Wtc- 
UebnefTc. 

23  t£)inhabttant  of  Lebanon,  that 

maftefl 


'Lc.iit.  19. 
1  ;.dcut.  14 
I4.'5 
habac.l.p. 


\Htbr. 
aired. 

\\Or,my 

fcindoTf:i. 


|jOr,MfjW- 


verities. 


■  ttreffe 


Falfcpaf  lours  Icremiah.  arethreatned.l 


(  Heir,  lift 
vp  their 
minde. 


'Ezcch.j-j 


•Chap.;, 
ij.czrcn. 


matteft  thy  neftm  theCebars ,  holb 
gracious  fhait  thou  bee  tbhtn  pangs 
come  bpon  thee ,  the  pame  as  ofatbo* 
mamntrauell? 

14.  3is  3  itue,  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©, 
though  Comal)  the  fonne  of  3tehota* 
Utm  tungofljubah  were  thcusncttoP' 
onmynghthanD  ,yctlboulD'3plucftc 
thee  thence 

15  3tnt>  3  lhill  giue  thee  into  the 
hanD  of  than  that  fcebc  thy  life ,  anD  in* 
to  the  nana  of  them  mhofe  face  thoufea? 
reft,  cuen  into  thehantj  of  /i3ebuchaD 
renaming  of  Babylon ,  anD  into  the 
hanbofthcCalbcans. 

16  Znn  3  mm  cart  thee  out,  anD  thy 
mother  that  bare  thee ,  into  another 
countrey  ibljerc ye  Ibcrc  not  borne,  anb 
there  fhall  ye  Die. 

17  26ut  to  the  lanD  luhercimto  they 
t  Dcfire  to  retutnc>thithet  fhall  they  not 
returnc. 

13  is  this  man  Coniah  a  DefpifeD 
bzoUcniDolc;  is  hee  a  bcffcll  wherein  is 
no  plcafurc  <  Wherefore  arc  they  tart 
out,  he  anb  his  feeb,  auDateraftuuoa 
lanb  winch  they  ftnow  not  i 

19  <©  earth,  earth,  earth,  hcarc  the 
Wo:bofthc1L©isjD: 

jo  u:hus  faith  the  %  ©  is  © ,  nante 
ye  this  man  thilDlcffc ,  a  man  that  fljali 
notpzofper  m  his  bayes  :fonio  man  of 
ins  feeb  (hall  pjofpec ,  fitting  bpon  the 
thioncof  Dauib ,  anb  ruling  an?  moze 
mJuDah. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

1  Hee  prophecieth  a  refhuration  of  [he  fcatte- 
red  fiocke.  5  Chrift  fhall  rule  and  faue 
[hem.  9  Againlf  falfe  prophets,  33  and 
mockers  ot  die  true  prophets. 

^£-f8*4Dc  bee  bnto  the  partes 

J  K  that  Dertroy  anb  fcatter 

,  m®  the  theepe  of  my  pafturc, 

^&fcWfeS  1  Xhcrcfozc  thus  faith 
the  %  ©  is p  (5ob  of  Jfraei  agauift  the 
partojs  that  feeb  my  people ;  Pet  hauc 
fcattcrcb  my  floclic  anb  Dmien  them  a 
way,  anb  hauc  not  utfitcb  them  i  be- 
holb  31  Will  bifitc  bpon  you  thccuillof 
your  bomgs.fatth  the  %  ©  u  r\ 

3  3iub  3  wil  gather  the  remnant  of 

my  Aortic,  out  of  ah  countreis  Whither 

iTI  hauc  bmien  them  ,  anb  Will  b:,ng 

them  agameto  their  fotbes  ,  anb  they 

fhalbcfruitfull  anb  uureafc. 

4  anb  J  will  fct  bp  *  fhrphcarbs 


oucr  tljcm  Which  fhall  feeb  them,  anb 
theyfhaifcarcnomozcnozbcbifmaieb, 
neither  fljali  they  bee  lacfemg,  fauh  the 

H©BB. 

5  C^Seholb/  the  bales  tome,  faith 
the  1L  ©  is  ©,that  II  wtl  raifc  bnto  Da- 
uiD  a  righteous  b:atuh ,  anb  a  "Sung 
fhall  rcignc  anb  p:ofpcr,  anb  fljali  ere? 
cute  rabgement  anb  uiQicc  in  the  earth. 

6  *  3fn  his  bayes  3Jubah  (haibc  fa 
neb,  anb  3Jfrael  mall  biPcii  rafely,anb 
this  is  his  jlSamc  Whereby  hec  fhall  be 
talleb,t1i:hc!L©iH©  ®wK'R'i(5fy 
c<£©dB&$2cE&. 

7  Xhcrefoze  bcholb ,  *  the  bayes 
comcfaiththcH©  is  id,  that  they  fhall 
nomo2cfay,Xhc&©H©liucth,Whtch 
brought  bpthc  rhUDzcn  of  3ifrael  out 
ofthcianbofcgypt: 

8  2Sut,  XhelL©  is  ©liucth, Winch 
bzought  bp  ,anb  ttjfjict)  leb  the  feeb  of 
thchoufcof  Jfrael  out  of  thejftozth 
counircy,  anb  from  all  tountrcis  Whi- 
ther 3  hab  bziucn  them ,  anb  they  fhall 
D  Well  m  their  o  WnelanD. 

9  C  £0me  heart  Within  me  is  bjo-- 
Sen  becaufc  of  the  pzophets ,  all  my 
bones  fhafec :  3  am  Ubc  a  bnmben  man 
(anb  lihe  a  man  ltohom  rbuic  hath  oucr< 
come )  becaufc  of  the  %  ©  is  © ,  anb  bc> 
caufcoftherbo2bsofhis^olmeffe. 

io  5f02  the  lanb  is  full  of  abnltcrcrs, 
foibecaufcofllfujcanngthcianbmour'' 
neth :  the  pleafant  plates  of  the  ttnlbcr; 
ncs  arc  bjicb  Pp  ,anb  thetr  ||courfe  is  cuil, 
anb  their  fozee  is  not  right. 

1 1  fax  both  pzophct  anb  pzlcft  arc 
pzophanc ,  yea  m  my  houfc  hauc  3 
founo  their  \bicHebneffc  ,  faith  tljt 

H©K1D. 

u  nahcrcfojethcirroayfhaibe  bnto 
them  as  flippcry  waves  m  the  barfeencs: 
they  fliaibc  bnucn  on  anb  fall  therein : 
foz'JiDtll  b2iitgeiull  bpon  them ,  euen 
the  yecte  of  their  Pifitation,  fattlj  the 

H©13  5X 

i3  3lnD  3  hauc  fecne  ||  folly  in  the 
prophets  of  Samaria  ;  they  pzoplic 
cicb  m  25aal,  anb  caufeb  my  people  3lfc 
racltocrrc. 

i+  3  haucfcmealfoiuthcpjophcts 
of  jcrufaicm  1 1  an  hozrtblc  thing :  they 
commit  abultcry  ,  anb  lbalhc  in  lies :  j 
they  ftrcngthen  alfo  the  hanbs  of  cuillj 
bocrs  ,  that  none  bocth  rcturne  from 
his  UncUcbncffc :  they  arc  all  of  them 
butomcas*  S>obom  ,  anb  the  inhabit 
tants  thereof  as  oomozrai). 

15  Xhcrcfojc  thus  faith  the  ?L©isir 

of 


Chap.  53, 
14,1  $■  ifi. 
4  z.and  40. 
1 1.  djn. 9 
34. John  1 

•Dcut.  3 

28. 


\Heir.le- 

bott4h:fid- 

kenH. 

•  Jtrr.  16. 


\\Or,acr- 

||  Or,M». 
lence. 


WOr^nxb- 
(urdilnna. 
Heir,  j'n- 

flHOMrf. 


\Orpht- 


"Ifr.l.J). 


iFalfe  prophets. 


Chj.S.  14 
and  J. 15- 

||  Or,hpo- 


•Cha 

6.1 

4 

and  8 

1 1 

c  ze.  1 

7.  1 

0 

zcch. 

10 

2 

[fir.M 

t&ritti 

J? 

I  Or,ficrct. 


Cll 


ip.30 


;Ctap.  30 


*Chap.  14 
14.  and  l~] 
5- 


*Pfal.M9- 

7.&0  amos 

9-i,3- 


Mutlg.3.7 
and  8.3  3. 


1 1  Hti.wtih 
[whom  a. 


of  holts  concerning  the  tf)?ophcts  26c* 
holb ,  "5  Ml  fccbe  them  Mth  *  lbojnu 
lboob,  anb  mane  them  b?inBe  the  *ba 
tec  of  gall :  ft?  from  the  J)?ophcts  of 
■Jcrufalcmis  ||p?ofancncttc  goncft?th 
into  all  the  lanb. 

16  Xhusfaiththe  % © is -o  ofhofts, 
i?caracn  not  tonto  the  ibo?bcs  of  the 
pzopljtts  tijat  p2ophccic  bnto  you ,  tljcv 
maite  you  bamc :  they  fpcaKc  abtfion  of 
their  ottmc  heart, ->nd  not  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  ?L©  is©. 

17  Xhey  *  fay  fhll  bnto  them  that 
bcfpifc  tnc ;  Xhc  ft,  ©  is  ©  hath  faybc, 
j^ee  (hall  hauc  peace;  anb  they  fay  bnto 
cucry  one  thatibaifeerrj  after  the||ima^ 
gmation  of  l)is  oibnc  heart ,  0o  cuill 
(hall  come  bpon  you. 

18  jFo?ibhohath  (ftobtnthcllcouiv 
fell  of  the  iLobp,  anb  hath  pcrcciueb, 
anb  hearb  his  111020  <  U)ljo  hath  mat* 
&ebhistbo?D,anbhcatbit? 

19  26cIj0lD ,  a  *  ttlljirlCUHttDC  of  tl)C 

fL©is?D  13  gone  foo?thm  func ,  cucn 
a  gticttous  lbhirlclbmbc ,  tt  (hall  fall 
gricuouflybponthehcabofthcttiicRcb. 

20  Xhc*  anger  of  the  ft  ©is  id  (hall 
not  rcturnc,  bntill  lice  hauc  crccntcb, 
ano  til  he  liauc  pcrft?mcb  the  thoughts 
of  his  heart :  in  the  latter  bayes  ye  (hail 
confibcr  it  perfectly. 

21  "3  hauc  not  lent  thefe  p?ophcts, 
yet  they  ramie :  3  hauc  not  fpoRcn  to 
thcm,ycttheyp:ophcneb. 

21  Butifthcyhabftoobuimycomt; 
fell,  anb  hab  caufeb  my  people  to  hearc 
my  lbo2bes,  then  they  (houlb  hauc  tur- 
neb  them  from  their  cutlVbay.anbfrom 
the  cum"  of  their  Doings. 

23  Am  3  a  god  at  nana ,  fayth  the 
fl©isiD,  anbnotaoobafarrcoffi 

24  Can  any  *  hibc  htmfclfc  m  fecret 
places  thatU  (hall  not  fee  him, faith  the 
3L©isid^  uocnot  3  fill  hcaucnanb 
earth  fayth  the  ft  ©is©* 

25  3  hauc  hearb  what  the  p:ophets 
faib ,  that  p:ophcnclycs  m  my  iI5ame, 
faymgj  Jhaucbjcamcb ,  3  hauebjea* 
meb. 

26  feoib  long  (hall  this  bee  in  the 
heart  ofthcp2ophets  that  pzophecic 
lics^ycatheyarepjophetsofthcDcccitof 
their  oibnc  heart 

27  iDhich  thtnlic  to  caufc  my  people 
to*fo:gct  my  jftamc  by  their  bjcamcs 
ibhich  they  teli  cucry  man  to  his  neigh- 
bour,  as  their  fathers  haue  fo?gottcn 
my/framc,fo225aal. 

2s  ■3thcp2ophcttthati>ad1abicamc, 


Chap.xxiij.        Godsword,rire. 


2o.  Cha.14. 

M-'S- 


||  Or.thai 
f month  tkar 
tongues. 


let  him  tell  ab?camc  i  anb  hec  that  luth 
my  tt)o?D,lct  him  fpcauc  my  ibojD  faith- 
fully :  ibhat  is  the  chaffctothc  tbheat, 
fayth  the  ft  ©is©* 

29  is  notmytt)o?bliRcasafu:c,fatth 
the  JL  ©kid;  anb  Iirc  a  hammer  that 
b.'cattcththcrotRcin  pieces^ 

30  Xhcrcfo^bchoiv^^asauitt  'Dcums 
tlie  prophets,  fayth  the  %  o  is  id,  that  ' 
ftcale  my  Vbo?bc  cucry  one  from  his 
neighbour. 

31  25eboK>c ,  3 am  agamft  the  p?o- 
phcts,faith  the  1L  0  is  ©,  that  ||  bfe  their 
tongucs,anb  fay ;  It?c  fayth. 

32  25cholD,3Jamagainftthcmthat 
p2ophcnc  falfe  tweames ,  fayeth  the 
ft  ©  is  id,  anb  boc  tell  them ,  anb  caufc 
my  people  to  crrc  by  their  lyes  anb  by 
their  lightncffc ,  yet  3  ftnt  them  not, 
no2  eommanbcb  them :  therefore  they 
(hall  not  p2ofitc  this  people  at  all,  fayth 
the1L©i3P. 

33  C3nb  tbhen  this  people ,  02  the 
p2ophct,o2ap2icftn)all  afue  thee,  fay- 
ing; i©hati  thcburbcnofthelLGDis©: 
thou  (halt  then  fay  bnto  them;  ©hat 
burbctu  3J  mill  cucn  fo?faftc  you,  faith 
;the?L©i53D. 

34.  3lnb  as  ft?  the  p?ophct,  anb  the 
P2icft,  anb  the  people  that  thai  fay,Xfje 
burben  of  the  %o  is  id,  "JibiU  cucn 
tpmiifl)  that  man  anb  his  houfe. 

35  1Ehus  fhailyecfaycueryoneto 
his  neighbour , anb  cucry  one  to  his  bro- 
ther ,  i©hat  hath  the  %  0  is  9  anfrae- 
rcb;  anb  ibhat  hath  tlje  %  o  is  ©  tpo* 
acn? 

36  ^nb  the  burben  of  the  IL©  is© 
fhail  yec  mention  no  mo2e :  ft?  cucry 
manstbo2b  (hall  be  his  burben :  fo?yce 
hauc  pcrucrtebthe  ibo?bsoftheliuuig 
00b,  of  the  V*  £>  is  ©  of  IjoQes  our 

C50b. 

37  Xhus  (halt  thou  fay  to  the  p?o* 
phct ,  nahat  hath  the  %  ©  is  jd  anftoo 
r  cb  thec  t  anb  rbljat  hath  the  %  ©  is  © 
fpoRcn* 

3s  But  fith  ye  fay,Xhc  burben  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  •■  thcrefo?c  thus  fayeth  the 
%  ©  is  © ,  25ccaufc  you  fay  this  ibo;b, 
Xhc  burben  of  the  ft,  ©is©,  anb  3 
haucfcntbntoyou,faying,J9ca)ailnot 
fay,  Xhc  burben  of  the  %  ©  is  © : 

39  Xhcrrfo2c  bcholbc ,  3 ,  cucn  3 
ibillbttcriyfo?gctyou,  anb JJUiill  ft?-- 
fafecyou,anb  the  one  thafj  gaucyou 
anb  your  fathers,  and  cart  you  out  of  my 
p?cfcncc. 

40  2nb  3  tbill  b?ing*an  cuerlathng 

rcjuoch 


\M.ufu 


'Chip.  «0. 
II. 


Bafketsoffigs.  Ieremiah.    A  diligent  prophet. 


*  2.  Kings. 
34.2.chron 


\Hri.for 
badnejjo. 


f  Hce.caplt 


'Dfut.  50. 
tfo.chap.  ;i 
39.ezech* 
1  t.  1 9. and 
jtf.2S.j7. 
'Chip.  jo. 
22.  and  3 1, 
}?.  and  jj. 
?8. 

•  Chap.  19. 
'7- 


t  IM.fo, 

rtmfiHtnt  or 
vexation. 
'Doit. 18. 

)7-chap. 

154. 


rcpjoc!)  bpon  you  >  anb  a  pcrpctuail) 
fhamcibhtth  fljall  not  be  fo?gotteu. 

CHAP.    XXI 1 1 1. 

Vnder  the  Type  of  good  and  bad  figs,  4  he 
forefheweth  the  reltauration  ot  them  that 
were  in  captiuitie,  8  andthedefolationof 
Zedekiah.ind  the  reft. 

V)c  %ont>  fhctbcbmcc, 
anb  bctjolD ,  two  bafHcts 
of  figges  tberc  fct  bcfo;c 
the  temple  of  the  ILoiajp, 
after  that  ^cbuchab-rcy 
$ar  *  mug  of  asabylon  Dab  taneb  albay 
captiuc  gjecomah  the  fonnc  ofJJeljota- 
lum  king  of  gjub'al) ,  anb  the  p?uucs  of 
3Jubah,>b.ththccarpcntcrsanbfmtths 
from  gicrufalcm  >  anb  hab  b?ought 
them  to  Babylon. 

2  £>ncbaffccthadbcrygoobfiggcs, 
euen  urc  the  figges  that  arc  ftrft  ripe: 
anb  the  other  baf  act  had  bcry  naughty 
figges,  lWbict)  tonlb  not  be  eaten,  tthcy 
lDcrcfobab. 

3  IChenfatb  the  %  o  is  ©bnto  me, 
n^hat  feeft  thon  gjcrcnnalK  anb  31  fatb 
jFtgges:  the  goob  figges  ,bcrv  goob  anb 
the  euiil,  berycuiii,  that  cannot  be  ea- 
tcn,thcyarefoctull. 

4  C  3tgamc  ,  the  «wb  of  the 
%  ©  H  ©  came  bnto  mc,fay  mg ; 

$  Xhus  faith  the  Hog©,  tliel 
Oob  of  gjfracl,  Jlibc  rhefc  goob  figges, 
fo  null  5  acftnotblcbge  them  that  arc 
carieb  aiDap  t  tapnucof  juoah,  ruhom 
gjoauc  fent  out  of  this  place  into  the 
lanb  of  the  Caibcans  fo?  their  goob. 

6  5Fo?  gi  Jbill  fct  mine  eves  bpon 
them  fo;  goob ,  anb  gj  Vbillbnng  them 
agamcto  this  lanb ,  anb  3  willbuilb 
them,  anb  not  pull  chemDoiDnc,  anbgj 
Vbtll  plant  them ,  anb  not  plucbc  them 
bp. 

7  anbgjunllgtucrhcm*an  heart 
tolmo.b  me,  that g} am  the  TLois©, 
anb  thev  fhail  be  *  my  people ,  anb  gj 
lbili  be  their  C5ob:fo?  thev  fliau  returne 
bnto  mc  \bith  their  ibholc  heart. 

8  C 3Jub  as  the  euill* figges  ibhtch 
cannot  be catcn.thcparcfo  cuill;(S)ucc' 
ly  thus  faith  the  %  015©)  fo  lbill  3 
guic  zcbcKtahthelungof'jubah,  anb 
hispzmccs,  anb  thercfibueof  gicrufa- 
lem ,  that  rcmamc  in  this  lanb ,  anb 
them  that  Mbellm  the  lanb  of  egypt. 

9  ^nb gjibiiiocliucr  them  t  to  *  be 
r  emoucb  into  all  the  lunguomcs  of  the 
earth  fo;  <'>..  >r  hurt,to  be  a  rcpzoch  anb  a 


p?ouer  be ,  a  taunt  anb  a  cur  fe  m  all  p  I  a 
ccs  lbhithct  gi  ttjaii  bnue  them. 

10  2nb  3  lbillfenb  the  froo2b,rhcfa; 
mine,  anb  the  pefhlente  among  them, 
ttll  they  be  eonfumeb  from  off  the  lanb, 
thatgjgauc  bnto  them,  anb  to  their  fa? 
thcts. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  Ieremiah  reproumg  the  lewes  dilobedience 
to  the  Prophets,  8  foretelleth  the  /euenty 
yeeres  captiuitie,  11  and  alter  dial,  the  de- 
ftruttion  of  Babylon.  15  Vnder  the  Type 
ofa  cup  ofwine  he  forefheweth  the  deflruc'li- 
0:1  ot  all  nations.  34  The  howling  ol 
theShepheards. 

S^2?^|&  ^e  ibo?b  that  tame  to  gie * 
^pfl?  renuah  concemmgallthe 
people  of  gjubah  ,  m  the 
fourth  ycere  of  gjefwa; 
_  nun  the  fonnc  of  gjofiah 
Hmg  of  giubah,  that  was  fl)c6uTy cere 
of  iJ5ebuchab-rc5?ar  hmg  of  asabylon : 
2  Xhc  Vbtjich  gjcrcmiah  the  p?o; 
phctfpasc  bnto  all  the  people  of  giu^ 
oah,anbto  all  the  inhabitants  ofgicru- 
falem,  faying. 

3  f  rom  the  thirteenth  V e re  of  gjofiah 
the  fonnc  of  ^mon  lung  of  gjubah,eucn 
bnto  this  bap  (that  is  the  th?cc  anb 
tibentith  veer  e)  the  lbo?b  of  the  fU>is© 
hath  tome bnto mcanb gj hauefpofien 
bnto  vou,nfmg  early  anb  fpcalung,but 
yeehaucnothcaracncb. 

4.  ^nb  the  %  5©  ik  id  Ijatli  fent  bnto 
vou  all  his  fcruants  the  prophets ,  *  xt- 
ling  early  anb  fenbing  them,butyce  fjauc 
not  hcarKeneb ,  no?  mclmcb  your  care 
tohearc. 

5  Xhey  fayb ,  *  Xurnc  yee  agamc 
noib  cucry  one  from  his  euill  ibay,  anb 
from  the  cuil  of  your  bomgs,  anb  blbell 
mthclanb  thatttje  ?U>ia£>rjathgmen 
bnto  you ,  anb  to  your  fathers  fo?  cuer 
anbeuer. 

6  anb  goe  not  after  other  <SobS  to 
feructhem,  anb  to  lbo?ft)ip  them,  anb 
p?ouobe  mee  not  to  anger  ibith  the 
lboifecsof  your  hanbs,  anbgiibillboc 
you  no  hurt. 

7  wet  yee  haucnotljcarBencb  bnto 
mc,  faith  the  1L©«©,  that  yee  mtght 
p?ouoUc  mc  to  anger  Vbiththclbo?Res 
of  your  hanbs,  to  your  otbne  hurt 

8  C  Xhcrcfo?e  thus  Caith  the 
%  «r>  k  id  of  nodes  i  JSecaufc  yee  hauc 
nothcarbmyibo?bs: 

9  2Scholb ,  U ibiil fenb  anbtaae  all 
the  families  of  the/i5o?th  ,  faith  the 


"Chap.  19 
19. 


*  l.Kingi. 
17.i3.cha. 
18.  1  i.uid 
?y.ty.io- 
nas  3.8. 


A  cupoffurie  Chap.xxv.  for  all  nations. 


cattfetope- 
rifb  from 
hem. 

*Ch3.7.^4- 

idi6.o. 
and  25.10. 
C7.ck.:6.i  3 
ofc  2 . 1 1 . 


*  2.  Chron. 
56.22.clzr. 
1, 1. chap. 
29.10  dan. 
9.2. 

\Htb.  vifte 
Vpon, 


Cha.27.7. 


"IJa.51.  17 

pfal.75.8. 

iob.21.20. 


!LfiP«3D,anD  /Bcbucljab  rc%yir  tljc  Ring 
of  asabplon  mpfcruant,  ana  VDiu  bung 
them  agamft  tljts  lanb,  anb  agamft  the 
inhabitants  thereof,  anb  agamft  all 
tljcfe  nations  rounb  about,  anb  Jbill  bfc 
terlpbettrovtljcm,  anb  inaftc  them  an 
aftomfljment,  anb  attljiffing,  anb  per* 
pctuallbcfolattons. 

10  jfJojcouer ,  t  3  iDui  tafec  from 
them  the  *  boyce  of  nnutlj,anb  the  bout 
ofgiabncs,tljcboiccoftljcb2ibcgromc, 
anb  tljc  boitc  of  thcbnbc,  the  founb  of 
tlje  nulftoncs,  ?  tf)t  light  of  tl)c  tanblc. 

1 1  3nb  this  nmoic  lanb  (hail  be  a  be* 
folation,  and  an  aftomfljmcnt,anb  thefe 
nations  lljai  feme  tljc  Ring  of  fflSabplon 
fcucnticyccrcs. 

12  C3nb  it  ftjall  come  to  paflc*ibhen 
feucntie  yccrcsarc  actompiiftjeb.that 
3  Mil  t  pumfl)  the  Ring  of  25abplon 
anb  that  nation,  faitl)  the  iLois©,foz 
their  tmquitic,  anb  the  lanb  of  thecal 
bcans.anbttnll  matte  it  pcrpctuailbcfo* 
lattons. 

13  3inb  3  ttnll  bung  bpon  that  lanb 
an  my  lbozbs  lbljtth  3  Ijauc  pronoun* 
reb  agamft  it,  euen  all  that  ts  rbnttcn 
in  tins  booRc ,  lbljich  Jeremiah  hath 
pupljcctcb  agamft  all  the  nations. 

14.  5roj  many  nations  anb  great 
lungs  ftjall  *  feme  tljcmfclues  of  them 
alfo :  anb  3  lbill  rccompcnfcthemac* 
cobbing  to  thcitbccbs,  anb  acco?buigto 
tljc  ltoozRcs  of  tljeir  oibnc  l)anbs. 

15  Cifoztlnisfattl)tnc?Loi5©(l5ob 
of31ftaclbntomc,XaRctlJctt>mc*cup 
of  tljis  fune  at  my  hanb,  anb  taufeail 
the  nations,  to  lbhom  3  fenbthec,  to 
bnnaeit. 

i6  3lnb  they  ftjall  bmiRc,  anb  be  mo  - 
ucb.anb  be  mab,  betaufc  of  tljc  frooibc 
that  5  OJillfcnb  among  ftjem. 

17  Xhcn  tooRc  3  tljc  cuppc  at  tlje 
!LDi3©&l)anb,anbmabcalitljcnati; 
ous  to  bnnbebnto  ibljom  tljc  %  ®  is  jd 
ijabfcntmc: 

is  To  wit  3Jcrufalcm ,  anb  tlje  cities 
of  Jubalj ,  anb  tljc  Rings  thereof ,  and 
the  pnnecs  thereof,  to  maftc  them  abe* 
folation,  an  aftonifljment,  an rjifting, 
anbaatrfc(as'tis  tins  bap :) 

19  Pharaoh  Ring  of  cgypt,  anb  his 
fcruants,  anb  Ijts  pnnccs, anb  alt  Ijis 
people : 

20  3nb  ailthemmglcb  people  ,f  all 
the  Rings  of  the  lanb  of  CJ5 :  anb  all  trjc 
Rings  of  the  lanb  of  tljc  pljilifttnes,anb 
3tfljRcion,  anb  3toah ,  anb  CRron,  anb 
the  remnant  of  2iftjbob: 


21  *€bom,anb*s$oab,anbthctljil- 
bjen  of  *  amnion: 

22  3nb  all  the  Rings  of  *Xynts,anb 
ail  tljc  Rings  of  Zibon,  anb  tljc  Rings 
of  tljc  i|  vies  ibljttij  are  bevonb  tljc  *  fca : 

!    23*3>cban,anbH:ctna,anbZ5u5,anb 
all  t  trjat  arc  m  the  btntoft  comers : 

1+  3tnb  all  the  Rings  of  arabia.anb 
all  tljc  Rings  of  the  *  minglcb  people 
tljatbibcllinthebcfcrt: 

2<!  3tnb  all  tljc  Rings  of  Zimrt,  anb 
all  the  Rings  of  *« lam,  anb  all  tlje 
Rings  of  the  s$cbes: 
1  26  3uibail  tljc  Rings  of  the  jftozffi, 
farrc  anb  nccrc,  one  lbith  another,  anb 
all  theRingbomcs  of  ttjc  tbono,  Tbijicl) 
■  are  bpon  tljc  face  of  the  earth,  anb  the 
Ring  of  5>hcfljach  ftjall  b.nnRe  after 
them. 

27  Xhercfo:c  tljou  fljait  fay  bnto 
them,  Itljusfaith  tljc  %®&m  of  hofts, 
1  the  <sob  of  3ifrael,  S>«nRc  ye  anb  bee 
j  bmnRcn,  anbfpucanb  fall,  anb  nfeno 
mojc,  betaufc  of  tljc  ftoojb  rbhtch  3  vo\\ 
fenbamongyou. 

28  3nb  it  fljail  bee,  if  they  rcfufe  to 
taRc  the  cup  at  tljtnc  hanb  to  bjtnRe, 
then  ftjait  tljou  fay  bnto  them,  Xhns 
faith  the  %  o  k  jd  of  hofts ,  J^ce  ftjall 
certainclvbnnRc. 

Z9  5Fo2loe,3Jbcgintobwgeutllon 
the  *  citic,  t  iDljiclj  ts  taiicb  by  mp  name, 
anb  fljoulb  ycc  be  bttcrlp Pnpunifljcb  1 
ve  ftjall  not  be  impunifljcb :  fo?  3  ^<H 
caifoz  a  ftuozb  bpon  all  tljc  inhabitants 
of  the  catth,faith  the  ?Loiso  of  hofts. 

50  Xljcrcfojcpjophccic  tljou  agamft 
them  all  tljefc  rbo^bes,  anb  fap  tnto 
tljcm,1Lljc  1L  ©  i5©fljall*roarcfrom 
an  high ,  anb  bttcr  his  boitc  from  his 
I  holp  ljabttation,hc  ftjall  mighttlv  roare 
bpon  his  habitation ,  hec  ftjall  guie  a 
1  fljout,  as  thepthat  trcabc  the  grapes, 
agatnttailthcinljabitantsof  the  earth. 

31  %  noifc  ftjall  come  eucn  to  the  cnbs 
oftljecarth;fo2the1L©K©riaiiiacon5 
trouerftc  un'ttj  the  nations:  hec  Will 
plcabeBJithail  flefti,  hcibill  giucthcm 
that  are  vbitRcb  to  tljc  fraozb,  faitlj  tlje 

32  Xhusfatrt)thc?L©iKE>ofhofts, 
2iScholb,  euill  ftjall  gocfozth  from  nati- 
on to  nation,  anb  a  great  rbhtrlcttunbc 
ftjall  be  raifeb  bp  from  the  toafts  of  the 
earth- 

33  anbthcaaineofthclLoKiDfljail 
be  at  that  bay  from  one  cnb  of  the  earth 
eucn  bnto  the  °ther  enbe  of  the  earth  '• 
thcvfljaunotbe'iamcntcb,  neither  ga^ 

thcrcb 


'Chap. 49. 
7,&c. 

*  Chap.  48. 

*  Chap.  4 p. 
"Chap.  47. 

||  Or  region 
by  the  St* 
ftdc. 
"  Chap.  49. 

*?• 

'Chap.  49. 

28. 

t  Hcb.au  off 

into  corner i  t 

or  h.vun? 

the  corntrt 

of  the  haire 

polledjchap. 

9-2$. 

'  Ch3p.^9. 

?'■ 

'  Chappy. 

34- 


•  1. Pet.  4. 

17' 

\Hth.v?m 
Tvhich  my 
N.im;  ts 
\llcd. 


•Iod  3. 1  i 
amos  1.2. 


'Cha.  1 64 


•Chap.  4-8 
md6.i6. 

t  Heir  your 
Jay  t>  far 
flattest  er. 
\Hch-.a 
vejfell  of  de- 
fire. 

\Hcb.fL$ht 
fhallpertjh 
from  the 
fbephards, 

<d  cfcattnf 
frvm&c. 


Shepherds  howling.  Ieremiah.  TheProphettaken. 


f  Heir,  a 

dcfolntton. 


•  AcU.io. 
»7- 

•Chjp.  18, 


tbereb  no2buncb,  tbey  (bail  be  Doting 
bpontbegrounb. 
34-  C  *  fcoibic  ycc  (bepbearbs  anb 

Ctp,anD  IballOlbyOtirfClUCS  mtheafhes 

ycp2mcipailoftl)cflochc:fo2ttbcbaycs 
of your  daughter  ,anb  ofyourbtfpcrfi 
ons  arc  accomplifbcb ,  ant)  pec  fljail  fall 
lirtctapicafantbcffcll. 

it  3nb  ttrjc  (bepbearbs  (ball  hauc 
no  way  to  flee,  no;  rtjc  pnnnpali  of  ri)e 
flocnctocfcapc. 

16  3t  boyce  of  the  cry  of  tl)c  (bep 
bearbs,  anb  an  bowling  of  tljcpjinti 

pall  Of  tt)C  flOCRC  Hull  be  heard  :  fo;  tljC 

|L©EB  Dart)  fpotlcb  rtjctr  pafrurc. 

37  3no  rt)c  peaceable  habitations 
arc  cut  boibne  becaufc  of  rtjc  fierce  an 
gcr  of  the  5,  ok  id. 

3S  l?e  hart)  fozfaacn  his  coucrt,  as 
the  Upon :  fo?  their  lanb  is  t  bcfoiatc, 
becaufc  of  tbcfierccneffc  of  the  opp?cf 
four ,  anb  becaufc  of  ijis  fierce  auger. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

Iercmijh  bypronufesandthreatnings,  exhor- 
tctlno  repentance.  8  Hee  is  therefore  ap- 
prehended, io  and  arraigned :  n  His  a- 
pologie:  16  He  isquitiniiidgenient,by  the 
example  o(  Micah,  io  andot  Vnjnh,  14 
and  hv  the  care  of  Ahikam. 

0  the  beginning  of  the' 
mgnc  of Jichoiamm  the 
fonncoffofiah  mug  of  I 
^iubah  came  this  wo2b 
from  the  ILokp,  faying 
1   ILhusfaitb  the  %  o  «  jd,  5>tano 
tntheCourtofthe  iLois©&  bonfc, 
anb  fpeatte  bnto  all  the  nr.es  of  3Ju 
bal) ,  Which  conic  to  W02(bip  m  the 
%  ©  is  id  s>  houfc ,  all  the  W02bcs  that  i 
3  comnianb  thee  to  fpcauc  bnto  them : 
*bmnm(bttotaWo2b. 

3  3i  fo  bee  thev  Will  bcarHen ,  anb 
turnc  cucry  man  from  his  cum  way, 
that  3  may'repent  mc  of  the  cuil  which 
3Jpurpofc  to  bot  bnto  them,  becaufc  of 
the  cuil  of  their  bomgs. 

4  2lnb  thou  (halt  far  bnto  them, 
Xhus  faith  the  Hoibjd;  3)f  yet  null 
not  heathen  to  nice  to  WaiUc  m  my 
fLaw,Wbicl)3J  haucfet  bcfoic  you, 

5  Xoheaibcntothe)\J02Des  of  my 
fcruantsthc  y>2ophcts,  Whom  3  fent 
bnto  you .  both  rifmgbp  early  anb  fen* 
bmg  them/but  ye  hauc  not  hcarancb:) 

6  ZbenWil  ^imaftcthis  houfc  line 
•  £>hiiob,  anb  wu  mahc  this  city  a  curfc 
to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

7  £>o  the  p?icfts  anb  the  p?opbcts, 


anb  all  the  people  bcarb  "Jeremiah 
fpcatung  tbcfe  wo?bes  in  rtjc  houfc  of 
irtjcILois©. 

8  €  /Row  it  came  to  paffc  When 
'Jeremiah  bab  mabe  an  cnbe  of  fpca- 
bmg  all  tljat  the  Hois©  bab  torn- 
manbeb  hmi  to  fpeatte  bnto  all  the  pco= 
pic,  that  the  p?tcfts  anb  the  p?ophcts, 
'anb ail  the  people  tooae  bun  , faying 
Xbonfbaltfurclybic. 

9  nahy  baft  thou  p?opbceteb  in  the 
!  /Rame  of  the  %  ©  m  © ,  faying ,  Xlns 
houfc  (balbc  liKe  £>bilob  >  anb  this  city 

;  fbaibc  bcfoiatc  With  out  an  inhabitant  t 
anb  all  the  people  Were  gatbereb  a- 
gamft  ^Jcrcmiaf)  in  tlje  Ijoufc  of  tlje 

]  HO  KID. 

io  c  ttDhen  the  Winces  of  3Iubab 
hcarb  thefe  things,  then  tbey  came  bp 
from  the  lungs  houfc  bnto  rtje  houfc  of 
the S.o«P,  anb  fate  bottme  ||  in  tlje 
entne  of  tl)e  ncuJ  gate  of  t!je  1L€>is  jd^> 

houie, 

1 1  Xhcn  fpakc  tiie  pjicfts  anb  rtjc 
p2ophcts  bnto  the02itues ,  anb  to  all 
the  people,  faying  ;tlChis  man  isU»02- 
thy  to  bte  ,fo2  he  Iiatli  p2ophccicb  agamft 
thiscttic ,  asyccljaucljearDujitbyour 
cares. 

u  C  Hhen  fpane  llcrcmiab  tinto 
all  thcp2intcs  ,  anb  to  all  the  people, 
I  faying ,  Xhc  1L  o  n  id  fent  me  to  p20= 
phene  agamft  tins  houfc ,  anb  agamft 
this  ntic  ,au  thelites  that ycc hauc 
jljcarb. 

13  Xhcrcfojc  no)bc  *  amenb  your 
ttiayes,  anb  your  bomgs,  anb  obey  the 
bouc  of  thcll  o  «  pyoiir  <5ob,anb  the 
ILoisid  ibili  'repent  bun  of  tbccuill 
that  he  hath  p2onouuccb  agamft  you. 

14.  Sisfojmcc,  bebolb,JJaminyont 
banb :  boc  lbttb  mec  tasfecmcthgoob 
anb  meet  bnto  you. 

15  23ut  hnoib  yt  fo?  ccrtainc ,  Chat 
if  yc  put  nice  to  btatb ,  ye  (ball  ftirely 
b2mgmnoccntbloobbpon  your  fclucs, 
anb bpon  this  n tic,  anb  bpou  the  mha; 
bitants  thereof :  fo2  of  a  trttcth  the 
ILoikjd  bath  fent  mec  bnto  you  ,  to 
fpcaac  alitbtfc  uwbsmyour  cares. 

16  4l  Xhcn  faib  the  V>?mtts,  anb  all 
the  people,  bnto  the  p2tcfts,  anb  totl)c 
P2ophcts.  Hhisman  istiotibo2tbyto 
bit :  fo2  Dec  hath  fpohen  to  bs  m  tljc 
/i5amt  of  the  H  o  is  jd  our  Gob. 

17  HI) en  rofc  bp  ccrtamcof  the  €1 
bcrs  of  the  lanb ,  anb  fpahc  to  alltlje 
affcmbly  of  the  people,  faymg 

13  *t]9icah  the  t!3o2aQ)itc  piopljencb 

m 


\\Or,dt\lu 
doerc. 


\Htlr.the 
iHttgtment 
of  death  u 
far  ihisntjn. 


•Chip.7.3. 
•Vcrfc  1  p. 


t  Htbr.  4i 
it  u  Jood 
andrfbtul 
jour  cyi. 


'  Mic.l.l. 
and  J  II. 


Vri)ahflaine.  Chap.xxvij.  Babels  yoke. 


m  the  baycs  of  $e5cfeiah  Ring  of  3&- 
bah,anb  fpabc  to  all  the  people  of  3)u- 
bah,faymg ;  1£hus  faith  the  Hokp  of 
hoftes,  Zion  (hall  bcploibcb  like  a ficlb, 
anb  3!crufalcm  (hall  become  heapes, 
anbthcmountauieoffhchoufe,  the  hie 
piacesofafojrcft. 

19  Did  ^cscRiah  Btng  of  Hubah 
ants  all  3Jubah  put  ijim  at  all  to  Death  * 
bibhecnot  fcarcthe  fL&ia©,  anb  be? 
fought  Uhe1L<j>isj2sanb  fheflsDisjD 
rcpentebhimof  theeuill  ibbiehhe  hab 
pjonounccbagainttthcmir  thus  might 
ibee  procure  great  eurtl  againtt  our 
fouler 

io  3(nb  there  Jbas  aifo  a  man  that 
pjopbccieb  in  the  J9anu  of  the  %  <j>  is  ©, 
SUnjah  the  fonnc  of  3>hcmaiah  of  Bt 
rtath-iearim,  Ibhopjophccicb  againtt 
this  citte  anb  agamil  this  lanb ,  mop 
bmg  to  all  the  lbojbs  of  gjtremiah. 

21  2tnb  tt>hcn  3tehotaRim  the  Ring 
tbith  all  hts  mtghttc  men ,  anb  all  the 
pnnecs  hcarb  his  ibojbcs,  the  Ring 
fought  to  puthimtobcath;  but  tbhen 
®lrnai)  ijeacb  it,  lie  rbas  afcaib  anb  fleb, 
anb  ibent  into  Cgypt. 

22  ^ub  3JehoiaRun  the  lung  fent 
men  into  €gypt ,  namely  £inathan  the 
fonnc  of  3thbo;j,  anb  cmeine  men  tbttti 
him,into€gypt. 

25  ^ud  ttjevfttfo02tij  SHrtja!)outof 
egypt,  anb  bzoughthim  bnto  35ehota; 
RimrhcRing,  lfohoflefflchimtbtfh  tl)t 
fioojb ,  anb  call  his  beab  boby  into  the 
geauesof  the  t  common  people. 

24  /13enertDclcu"e,tije!)anDcf20te 
Ram,  toe  fonne  of  £>haphan,lbasH)irh 
Jeremiah,  that  they  tooulb  not  giu£ 
mm  into  the  hanb  oft|)c  people ,  to  put 
(junto  beat!?. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

1  Vnder  the  type  of  bonds  and  yokes,  hce  pro- 
phecieth  the  fubdumgof  the  neighbour  kings 
vnto  Nebuchad-nezzar.  8  Hee  exhorteth 
them  to  yeeld ,  and  not  to  beleeue  the  falfe 
prophets,  ii  The  like  hec  doeth  to  Zede- 
kiah.  19  He  foretelleth  the  remnant  of  the 
veflels  (hall  be  caried  to  Babylon ,  and  dicrc 
continuevntilltheday  of  vifitation. 

0  tlje  beginning  of  tl)e 
rcigncofltehoiaRimthe 
fonncofHoGaimmgof 
gjubah,  came  this ttwbe 
_  bnto  jerenuah  front  the 

3L©  kb,  laying, 
i  %husfaytbthc!t£>K3>tome, 


£$3a&e  thee  bones  anb  yoRcs,  anb  put 
them  bpon  thy  necae. 

$  Znn  fenb  them  to  the  Ring  of  e? 
bom,  anb  to  the  Ring  of  £0oab,  anb  to 
the  Ring  of  the  Ammonites,  anb  to  the 
Ringof  Xyms.anb  to  tlje  King  of  zt- 
bon,  by  tne  hanb  of  toe  meffengers 
ibhteh  come  to*Jetufa!cm  bntozebe* 
RtahRmgofJubah. 

4-  3lnb  tommanb  thctn  to  fay  bnto 
their  matters,  Xbus  fattij  the  %  ©  is  e> 
of  bolls  tljccEfob  of  3Jfrael,X^usQ)au 
ye  fay !  |  bnto  your  matters : 

5  3  baue  mabe  tlje  earttj,  tlje  man 
anb  toebeatttbat«et)pontOc  grounb, 
by  my  great  poiber  ,anb  by  my  outftret- 
c!)eb  arme,  anb  *  hauc  giuen  tt  bnto 
lbbomitfcemeb  meet  bnto  me. 

6  3nb  nott)  Ijaue  3  giuen  all  tl)cfe 
lanbes  intotljcijanbof  ^eburDabne^ 
5ar  tpe  atng  of  Babylon  *  m^  feruant, 
anb  tlje  bcafts  of  tlje  &elb  fjanc  31  giuen 
tjimalfotofcrueoim. 

7  ^nb  all  nations  fball  feme  !)im 
attboiSfonnc,anb!)islbnncsfcnne,bn; 
rtlltljcbery  time  of!)ls  lanb  come:  anb 
rocn  many  nations  anb  great  Rings 
fball  ferae  toemfelucsof  i)im. 

3  3Snb  it  fl»all  come  to  paffe ,  tijat 
toe  nation  anb  Kingbome  suyicfj  ibiu 
not  ferue  tlje  fame  ^cbncnab-ne55ar 
toeftingof  ©abylon,  anb  tDat  tbtu  not 
put  their  nctae  bnber  the  yoRc  of  toe 
Ring  of  26abylon,  that  nation  Vbffl  3J 
pttnitt) ,  fayth  the  1L©jsb,  ibith  the 
ftno^b ,  anb  With  the  famine ,  anb  rbtth  ] 
the  peflilence,  bnmi  31  haue  conftuneb 
thembyhishanb. 

9  %he«fQ?eheatftcnnotyetoyotn; 
pjophets ,  no?  to  yourbiuiners,  no*  to  j 
yoat  t  Dreamers ,  no?  to  your  tnehan? 
ters,noitoyowrfo?cercrs,ibhichfpeaR 
bnto  you,faying  i  Pt  fljall  not  ferne  the 
Ring  of  Babylon: 

io  irouhepp^ophecieaiicbntcyou, 
torcmooue  you  farre  from  yourSanb, 
anb  that  3  moulb  bziue  you  out,  anb  ye 
fhoulbperul). 

1 1  28ut  the  nations  that  tying  their 
necRc  bnber  the  yoRe  of  the  Ring  of  25a; 
bylon ,  anb  ferue  him ,  tJjofe  ibtll  3  itt 
rcmaine  ftill  m  th«r  orbne  lanb ,  myth 
the  JL  «r>  h  © ,  anb  they  fljall  til!  it,  anb 
bibcll  therein. 

it  C3J  fpaRc  aifo  to  zebe&tah  Ring 
of3Iubahacto?bingtcallthcfcibojbes,. 
faying,  25nng  your  necRes  bnber  the; 
yoRe  of  the  Ring  of  26abylon,  anb  ferue 
Ijim  anb  his  people,anb  Rue. 

1Ctt         i?  rohyi 


\\Or,eo>icer- 
t:ihjr  their 
waiters,  fay- 


'Dan.4. 


!'Cha.25  9. 
ini  43-IO- 


t  Mr. 


49 


Lying  prophets.         Ieremiah. 


H 


anania 


h. 


vvrfhingittobetiue,  fheweth  that  theeucnt 
will  declare  who  are  true  Prophets.  10  Ha- 
naniah  breaketh  Ieremiahs  yoke,  it  Iere- 
miah teller!)  of  an  yron yoke,  15  andfore- 
telleth  Hananiahs  death 


'[$&&>&  briuah  tons  of  3mbah ,  (n 
■e^^gC^thcfoutthpccre,  andfnttjc 
fiftmoneth,  that  Manama!)  t\)c  fonncof 
5(5itr  rtjepjopftrt.ttiljttl)  was  of  ©ibton, 
fpaRe  into  nice  in  the  houfc  of  the 
2L£>isjd,  m  tljc  p?cfcncc  of  thepnefts 
anb  ofail  the  people,  raping, 

a  %bus  rpeaReththc  Hois©  of 
fioftes ,  the  <5ob  of  3fracl ,  Taping  -,  3 
mat  tooRcn  the  po&eorthcRing  of 
ffiabplon. 

5  leithin  ttiDo  full  pecres  lbtll  3 
bmtgagainc  into  this  plate  all  the  befc 
fclsoftbc  1L®k&$>  Doufc,  rhat/]3e; 
bucbabncBat  Rmg  of  Babplon  tookc 
aibay  from  this  plate,  anb  caricb  them 
to  asabplon. « 

4  3int>  3J  sum  tying  againc  to  this 
plate  gjctomah  the  tonne  of  Ucno:a^ 
feim  Ring  of  futon) ,  nmh  all  the  t  tap 
ttucsoflJti&ah ,  that  lbcntmroasabp^ 
ton,  faith  the  %fDm®,fo}  3  ibilltyeaac 
tbcpoReofthcRmg  ofBabpion. 

rJ.  S%l),cn  tl)e  P2°Pt)«  Uercmtalj 
(aib  bnto  the  prophet  Manama!)  in  the 
pfrnccofthc  pjtctts,  anbinthep/c; 
fenfcofalitlje  people,  tbatlloobm  the 

l)0lUC0ftl)C|L©lS©, 

^L5uin#cp?ophct3to™itahratt) , 
amen :  the  %  ©  is  m  &oefo,thc  lL®m® 
pcrfomtc  tfjc  jbojbs  tuftirij  tlioti  bad 
pwpocricD,  to  bring  agafnetbcbeiTcls 
ot  the  %  ©  «  ©  a»  bonfe ,  anb  an  that  is 
tancb  aibap  capttne  fromasabpion  in- 
to this  plate. 

tins  Bjwa  mat  3J  fpeabe  m  fljmc  cares, 
anb  m  tl)e  cares  of  all  the  people. 

8  Hhe  prophets  that  haue  becne 
before  mec,  anb  before  tbec  of  olb,  m& 
Pbccicb  both  agamltmanp  countries, 
anb  agatnft  great  Rtngboms,of  Ibarrc 
anbofcuill,anbofpclhicncc. 

9  %\)t  pjopbet  lbljtth  pjophcttcth 
of  peace,  iphentbc  lboto  of  the  pjopbet 
fbau  tome  to pau"e,  then  (ban tbcpio- 
Pbft  be  Rnottcn,  tbatthc  Hoiwhath 
truelp  rent  htm.  , 

,  ll  <^tn  fcttuwrtan  the  p?opfiet 
toonc  thc'pofte  from  off  the  prophet 
3crcmtahsnctftc,anbb?aRcit. 

11  3lnb 


*Chap.  14. 
14.  and  13. 
21. and  29 
8. 

he%  or  lying- 


[.Kings 


• :  Kings 

--5. 1  |.  j. 

ch:on.:6. 

18. 

'  :.CIiron. 

;<■'■::.  chi 

i?.io. 


13  nabp  ibtll  pec  bie ,  thou  anb  thp 
pcoplc,bp  the  fiooto,bp  the  famtneanb 
bpthcpcttilcnccastljc  ILsdisjd  hath 
fooRen  againfttbc  nation  tbatlblll  not 
(cute  the  Ring  of  2Sabplon  < 

14  IThcrcfojcbcarRcnnotbntotljc 
ttoojbs  of  tljc  prophets,  that  fpeabe  bn^ 
to  pou,  raping  ^cctljalt  not  feme  the 
Rtng  of  2i5abplon:fo?  tljcpp?opljcttc*a 
lie  bnto  pou. 

15  3Foj  3  Ijauc  not  fent  them ,  raitlj 
tljelL  o  is  © ,  pet  tljcp  pjophenc  t  a  Ipc 
in  nip  name,  that  3  nught  bnuc  pou 
out,  ?  that  pec  might  penfb,pc,anb  tljc 
pjopljctsthatpjophcnc  bntopou. 

i6  3Uto3JrpaRctothcp2ictts,anbto 
all  this  people,  raping;  Xljus faith  tljc 
%  ©  is  ?D,  $?earRcn  not  to  thciboibsbr 
pour  p2ophets  ,  that  pjophcrte  bnto 
pou,fapmg  •,  25eholb,  thcbcirclsof  tljc 
%  OH  jd»>  noufc  (baunoU)fl)o?tip  be 
brought  againc  from  J8abptonifb?thei> 
pjophetiealtebntopou. 

17  ??carRcn  not  bnto  tljcnt:  fcrue 
thcRingof25abplon,  anbliue  :tbhcrc- 
to?c  fijoulb  thtstttic  be  laib  Ibaftc  i 

18  26utifrhcpbep;ophtts,anbifthc 
iboto  of  the  %  o  it  ©  bctbith  them,  let 
thnn  noiPe  maRe  UitertcrTion  to  the 
IL€)k  id  of  holies,  tljat  djc  bcfftls 
ibhith  are  left  in  the  Ijoufc  of  the 
IL^isp,  anbinthehoufcoftheRingof 
3!u5ah,  anbat^erufalem ,  goc  not  to 
28abplon. 

19  Cjfojrtjusraithtbe&fnKBof 
holies  tontcnung  the  pillars ,  anb  ton; 
temmg  tlje  fea ,  anb  tontcrning  the  ba 
fts,  anb  tontcrning  thercfibut  of  tljc 
bcffels  that  r cmainc  in  this  cttic, 

20  aahithi5cbutbabuc3?arRuigof 
JSabplontoobcnot,  ibhcn  Ijccaneb  a- 
ibap  *  taptiut  ^etotuah  the  tonne  of 
jIchoiaRim  Ring  of  giubah ,  from  gjc; 
ruCilcm  to  25abplon,anb  all  tljc  nobles 
ofjubahanbgjcrufaiem: 

21  *»ca  thus  faith  the  3L©bjb  of 
holies  the  Gob  of  3Jfraei ,  contcming 
thcbeiTclsthatrcmauicin  tbcboufc  of 
the  %  013  id,  anb  in  the  houfe  of  the 
King  of  3uDdhauD  of  jcrufalent : 

12.  Chcv  fljan  be  *  cancb  to  2Sabp 
ion ,  ano  there  (ball  thep  be  bimil  the 
bap  that  3  *  b.ftt  them ,  raith  the 
ILow  :  tbcnnnii  3  bmigtlicmto 
anb  reftojc  tljem  to  this  plate.  ' 

CHAP.    XXVIU. 

Hananiahprophecieth  falfelyihereturae  of 

the  vcflels  and  of  leconiah.  5   Ieremiah 


t  Heb.  nvo 
ye  era  of 
.'yet. 


Heh 


a*?*?. 


_J 


Yokes  of  iron.  Chap.xxix*         Falfc  prophets. 


'DcUM 

j.chap.: 

H0lt. 


ii  3nD  laanamah  fpaKc  in  the  pjc- 
fence  of  alt  the  people,  faying  :  Xfjns 
faith  tl)c  2L©i£cy£  ucn  fo  Unll  31  bjcalte 
the  yoae  of  iEJcbuchaDne^ct  tang  of 
ffiabplon  from  the  ncctsc  of  all  nan- 
onsttiithinthefpacc  oftlDo  fullpcctcs: 
anb  the  #jophet  Jeremiah  Utcnt  tjts 
tbay. 

it  CXhenthe  tbojo of thc&©m© 
came  tmto  Jeremiah  thcj&ophet  (af- 
ter that  ^anamah  the  pzophct  hab  So- 
ften the  yoke  from  off  the  necfee  of  ttjc 
i&ophet  Jeremiah)  faying, 

13  <5oc ,  ano  tell  Manama!) ,  faying, 
Xhus  faith  the  fLois© ,  Xhou  Daft 
bjotten  the  pokes  of  rboob,  but  thou 
(halt  matte  fiw  them  y o&cs  of  won. 

14.  ;fo?  thus  faith  the  3L  ok©  of 
holts,  the  ©on  of  3Jfrael,  3  haue  put 
a  youc  of  yjon  topon  the  nccfe  of  all  thtfe 
nations,  that  they  map  feme  ifrcbu* 
chat)  -  nc$$at  King  of  25abylon,anb  ttjrp 
(hall  fcrue  htm,  anD^S  Dane  ginenhun 
the  hearts  of  the  fielDaifo. 

15  CXhcnfatD  the  prophet  3Jerc; 
mial)  unto  tyananiaf)  ttjc  pjophet, 
tyeatc  noihe  Manama!): thefL© is © 
hath  notfentrhee,butthoumatteft  this 
peopletottufhnalye. 

i6  XhercftHCthus  faith  the  !L©i3©, 
25tl)olbc,  5  ttjill  raft  thee  from  off  the 
fate  of  the  earth:  thtsyecre  thoufhalt 
me ,  became  thou  haft  tang5)t*trcbellt^ 
on  agamft  the  %  ©  m  ©. 

17  «§>o  fcananial)  the  piophet  bleb 
the  fame  yeere,tn  the  fcumthmoncth. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

1  Ieremiah  fendeth  a  letter  to  the  captiues  in 
Babylon,  to  be  quiet  there,  8  and  not  to  be- 
leeue  the  dreames  of  their  prophets,  10  and 
that  they  fhall  returne  with  grace,  after  fe- 
uemie  yeeres.  1 5  He  foretelleth  the  deftrufti- 
on  of  the  reft  for  their  difobedience.  ioHc 
fheweth  the  fearefull  end  of  Ahab  and  Zcdc- 
kiah,  two  lying  prophets.  14  Shemaiah  wri- 
tech  a  letter  a^ainft  leiemiah.  30  lercmiah 
readeth  his  doome. 

£>tti  thefe  are  the  VbortiS  of 
'<$  t  toe  letter,  that^Jcremiah 
'  £  the  pzophct  few  from  3Je- 
I  rufalem  Dnto  the  rtftDuc 
_i£&S£A£  of  the  clDcrs  tbhich  tbcte 
earstD  away  captiues  ,anb  to  the  pjicfts, 
anb  to  the  pzophets,  anD  to  all  the  peo- 
ple whom  iftebuchab-ne^athaD  carfc 
eo  alba?  taptiue  ftotn  Jkrufaiem  to 
asabylon, 


i  (Sifter  that'^econtah  the  tang,  anb 
the  quecne,  anDthejcunuchcs,thc  pan* 
tes  of  3Jubah  ano  3Jctufaiem,  ano  the 
carpenters  ano  the  fmithcs  Were  be* 
partebfcom3JerufaIcm) 

3  23?  the  hanb  of  ©lafah  the  fonnc 
of  5>haphan,  anooemariahthcfonnc 
of  I?iltaah,  Whome  zebetaah  tang  of 
Jjuoah  fent  bnto  zsabylon  to  i!5ebu^ 
chao  -  ne^5ar  tang  of  28abylon,  faying, 
+  Xhusfatththe?L©is©ofhotts 
the  (Sob  of  3Jfraelbnto  all  that  are  ca* 
rieb  away  taptiucs,  ibhom  3  haue  cau^ 
feo  to  becarteo  aftiapfrom  3Jemfalein 
bnto25abplon: 

5  BiMiDpchoufesanbolbeUinthem, 
anb  plant  garbens,  anb  cate  the  fruit  of 
them. 

6  XaRepctbiues.anDbegetfonncs 
anb  baughtcrs,ano  tafte  rbtues  foz  pout 
fonnes,  ano  giue  your  Daughters  to 
hufbanos,  tljat  they  may  bearc  fonnes 
anb  Daughters,  thatyemaybecincrea* 
feD  there,  ano  not  DimmttheD. 

7  3lnb  feese  the  peace  of  the  rttic, 
lhhitljcr^  haue  caufcDyoutobetaricb 
alijay  capnucs,  fj  pjay  bnto  the  ILsdis© 
fo?it:  fo«t  In  the  peace  thereof  fhall  yee 
hanc  peace. 

8  C  jfonhus  faith  the  3L  ©K  ©of 
hofts,the  <50D  of  3fracl,  ?.et  not  your 
prophets  anb  your  biumers,  that  bee  m 
thcmibftof  you,  "beceiueyon,  neither 
hearten  to  your  blames  tbhith  P« 
caufctobcDzeameb. 

9  fo;  they  pjophetie  tfaicy  tnto 
youinmyname:3hauenotfentthem, 
faith  the  ?l€ii5©. 

io  Cf  o^husfatththelt^E^rXhat 
after  *ftuentie  yeeres  be  accomplifhcb 
at2Babpion,5  B>ill  Mite  you,  anbper* 
fo?me  mygoob  ibo?D  toifcatDs  yon,  in 
tanfing  yon  to  returne  to  this  plate. 

n  fan  3  fenoibe  the  thoughts  that 
3J  tljinRe  toibarbs  you  ,  tattt)  the 
%  ©  k  ©,  thoughts  of  peace ,  anb  not 
of  cuill,  to  giue  you  an  terpecttD  enD. 

ii  Xhen  fliall  ye  "call  bpon  me,  anb 
ye  fhall  goe  anb  pjay  bnto  nice,  anb  3 
ttnllhcartcn  bnto  you. 

ij  3nb  ye  fljail  ferte  me,  anb  finbe 
me.ttjhenyefhallfeatchfo?  mettnthail 
your  heart. 

14  Znn  3  tbill  be  founb  of  you^aith 
thcH©isjD,  anD^I  ibill  tunic  aibay 
yourcaptiuincanb  3  *bfll  gather  yon 
from  all  the  nations,  anD  from  all  the 
places  Mjtther  3  haue  Dmien  you, 
faith  the  &©»©,  anb  3  Sbill  b?mg  you 
Xttr         agamc 

49: 


•J. King. 

||  Or,  cham- 

ttrlemil. 


vCtiap.  14. 
I4.andi3. 
ar.3ndl7. 
'S- 

f  Hcb.il!  c 

lie. 


*  a.Chron. 
56.21. cira 
j.:.diap. 
l<$.  I  2. and 
a  7.21.  dan. 
9.2. 


\Htkr.ni, 

rt.-r. 
•Dan.". 


Aft 


terca 


ptiuitie, 


leremian. 


ah 


deli 


lucrence. 


"Chap. 14. 

8,10. 

■  Chip. 24. 

3. 


f  Hw./lr 


•Chap.  15. 
4.and;i.;. 


\Or,artx- 
mtr. 


agame  into  the  place  ibhcncejl  caufeb 
you  to  be  cartcb  atbay  tapmic. 

15  c  25ccaufc  pec  haue  fatb ,  Xhc 
%  0  is  c>  hath  raifeb  Us  bp  pzophcts  m 
Babylon: 

16  Know  that  thus  faith  tlic  JLobtd, 
of  the  sing  that  fitters  bponthcthzone 
of  S>amo ,  anb  of  all  the  people  that 
bibellcth  tn  this  nttc,  anb  of  pour  bnv 
thjcnthatarcnotgoncfootfhttnthyou 
into  taptitutte. 

17  %hUS  faith  theft©  13  JSOfrjOttS, 

2Bch0.be ,  3J  U)tii  fenb  bpon  them  the 
*  froo:b,  the  famine ,  anb  the  pcftilence, 
anb  ibill  matte  them  itac  'bile  figges, 
tljat  cannot  be  catcn,thcy  arefo  emll. 

18  anbj  lbtll  petfetute  themibith 
the  ftuo:b,  uuth  the  famine,  anbibith 
the  pcftilence,  anbvbillbcliuer  them  to 
be  tnnooucb  to  all  the  ntngbomes  of 
the  earth,*  to  be  a  enrfc  anb  anaftoniflr- 
ment,  anb  anhuTmg,  ano  arep2oeh  fc 
mongaiithcnanons, ibhith  cr35hauc 
bnuenthem. 

19  23ecanfe  they  haue  not  hearacneb 
to  my  ibo?bs,  faith  the  %  0  is  w>,  ibhtch 
""5  fent  bnto  them  by  myferuantsthe 
0:ophcts,  rifingbp  early,  anb  fcnbing 
them, but  yetboulbnor  hcare, faith  the 

io  C  l?carc  pec  therefore  the  rbo:b 
of  the  %  0  is  £>  ,  all  ye  of  the  taptmmc, 
ibhom^haue  fent  from  Jecufalem  to 
Babylon. 

21  Xhns  faith  thelL  0  is  ©  of  hods 
the  <?ob  of  gifcaei,  of  2habthcfonnc 
of  f&olatal),  anb  of  Zcbcaiah  the  fonnc 
of  CQaafctah ,  ibhtch  pjopbectc  a  lye  bn* 
to  yonm  my  iSamcBcholb/J  ibill  be* 
liucr  them  into  thchanb  of  i3cbuchab< 
rwar  lung  of  Babylon,  anb  hecfhali 
flay  them  before  your  eyes. 

n  3lnb  of  them  fhau  bee  ratten  bp  a 
curfc  by  all  the  taptiuitic  of  3Htbah 
lbljichare  in  Babylon,  faying,  %\)t 
%  0  «  jo  mane  thccltac  zcbcUiah,anb 
liBe2hab,ttihomthcUtug  of  Babylon 
roftcbm  the  fire. 

u  Bccaufc  they  haue  tommittcb 
billanie  m^Jftacl,  anb  haue  tommittcb 
abultcnc  lbith  their  neighbors  lbiucs, 
anb  haue  fpoacn  lying  ibojbcs  tn  my 
jBamcibhtth  3  haue  not  commanbeb 
them,  cucn^  imolb,  anb  amaibitncffc, 
faith  the  %0  is  p. 

14  C  Xhus  fbait  thou  alfo  fpeabc 
to  5>bcmaiab  the  |l  jBehciamitcfavtng 

zl  Xhus  fpeatteth  the  lLoisb  of 
hoflcsthcGob  of  3ifracl,  faying,  25c- 


caufc  thou  haft  fent  letters  in  thy  name 
bnto  all  the  people  that  are  at  3Jertp 
Calcm,anb  to  Zcphamah  the  fonnc  of 
spaafciah  the  pneft,  anb  to  ail  the 
paefts,  faying, 

26  %\)t  %  0  «  id  hath  mabe  thee 
0zicft  m  the  ftcab  of  Jehotaba  the 
i&tcft,  that  ye  ftjoulb  be  Officers  m  the 
houfc  of  the  %  ©is®,  foz  cucry  man 
that  is  *  mabbe,  anb  ma&eth  htmfclfc  a 
l&ophet,  that  thou  fboulbcft  puthmi 
in  pnfon.anb  m  the  ftocitcs : 

27  iBoib  therefore  lbhy  haft  thou 
notrcpzoutb  Jeremiah  of  Sltiathoth, 
Vbljtrt)  maacth  Ijimfcifc  a  pjophet  to 
you; 

28  foi  therefojehe  fent  bnto  bs  in 
Sabylon,faymg,5nhiScaptiumeisiong, 
builb  ye  houfes  anb  bibcll  in  them,  anb 
plant  garbens ,  anb  catc  the  fruit  of 
them. 

29  3nb  zephaniah  ti)t  $nttt  reab 
this  letter  tn  the  eares  of  Jeremiah  the 
l&ophct. 

30  c  Xhen  tame  m  lbojb  of  the 
%  0  is  ©  bnto  3Icremiah,faymg  ■, 

ji  £>cnb  to  all  them  of  the  captunrte, 
faying,  Xhus faith  the  ?L£)isE»,tom 
cemmg  5>hemaiah  tlic  iI2ehclamite, 
23ccaufethat5)htmaiah  hath  pjophe* 
neb  bnto  you ,  anb  3  fent  him  not,  anb 
he  taufebyou  to  truft  m  alyc. 

32  irhcrcfo^c  thus  faith  the?L©ia©, 
iSehoib,35ibill  pumfh5>hemaiahrhe 
/i5ehclamitc  anb  his  feeb :  he  fhallnot 
haue  a  man  to  bibcll  among  thispeo* 
pic ,  neither  (bail  hee  beholb  thegoob 
thatjibillboefoimy  people,  faith  the 
?L  ©  is  id,  *  becanfe  he  hath  taught  t  tci 
bellion  agamft  the  %  0  is  j©. 

CHAP.    XXX. 

1  God  fheweth  Itremiah  the  returne  of  the 
Iewes.  4  After  their  trouble,  thev  fhall 
hauedeliuerance.  10  Hecomfortcthbcob. 
18  Their  returne  fhalbegracious.  10  V/rath 
fhalllall  on  the  wicked. 

*)elb02bthattameto3Jc'| 
remtah  from  the  %0K&, 
faying, 

2  Xhus  fpeaneth  ti)c 
ILoiso  C5ob  of  31fraci, 
faying;  i©:itc  thee  all  the  Vbojbcsthat 
3  haue  fpoBcn  bnto  thee,  in  a  boobe. 

3  J^ozloc  ,tl;e  bayes  tome, faith  Ac 
!L€»isjd,  that  3J  U)ilib2ingagainethe 
wptiuitie  of  my  people  jfrael  anb  3lu- 
bah,faith  the  %  0  is  p,anb  3  ibil  caufe 

them 


*  J.King-?. 
1 1.  acts.  1 6, 
14. 


"Chap.:  3 
16. 

\H,':rri- 
hall. 


Deliuerance  after     Chap.xxx.      trouble,promifecl. 


is  f ear /,  and 
not  peace. 
\Heb.a  male 


*IocI  l.ll. 
.mos  5.18. 


them  to  tctitrnc  to  tt)c  lanb  ,  that  3 
gauc  to  their  fathers ,  anb  thep  (hail 
polTcfTe  it. 

4.  C3nb  there  ^c  thcuwbs  that 
tl)c  %  o  is  ©  fpaftc  concerning  Jfracl, 
anb  concerning 'Jubah. 

5  5fo2  thus  fapth  the  ?l£us©,i©cc 
11  o. thf re  hauc DcacD a  boicc  of  trembling,  li  of 

tcatc,  anD  not  of  peace. 

6  31fUevcc  noil)  ant)  fee  ll)l)etljcti"a 
manDocthtrauailciimluhilDiiDhcrc 
foK  Doc  3J  fee  etierp  matt  With  D15 
hanDes  on  his  lovnes,  as  alboman  in 
trauatlc ,  anb  all  faces  arc  turncD  into 
palnteffc; 

7  *3lias,fo2  that  Dap  >s  great,  to 
that  none  is  lihc  it :  it  fe  enen  the  time 

«Ph.i.i  5- 1 0f  Jacobs  trouble,  but  he  (hall  be  faueb 
out  of  it. 

8  5roz  it  (hall  come  to  paffc  in  that 
Dap  ,faitli  the  %  o  is  ©  of  hoftcs,  that  35 
il)illb2cartc  Dispose  from  off  thpnecfcc, 
anD  ilnllbuclt  thy  bonbes ,  anb  ttran 
gers  lhailnomoje  fcructhcmfclncs  of 

him. 

9  ffiutthcpfhallfcruc theH  01s© 
their  <5ob,anD  *  £>aiuD  tlicir  Bing 
lUhom^l  Will  ratfebp  unto  them. 

io  CXhcrcfo2e  *  feare  thou  not,  £> 
my  fcruant  3jacob,  faith  the  %  o  is  ©, 
neither  be  btfinarcb,  "OUfracr  f02  loe, 
3  mill  fane  thee  from  afarrc ,  anb  trip 
feebe  from  thcianb  of  their  captutittc, 
anb  Jacob  (hail r cturnc, anb  (hall  be m 
reft,  anD  be  quiet,  anb  none  (hall  maac 
him  afraib. 

11  f  02  3  am  Uiith  thee ,  fapcth  the 
%  o  is  id,  to  fauc  thec :  though  31  mane 
a  fall  enb  of  all  nations  Whither  3  hauc 
fcattcrcD  thee,  pet  Will 3  not  maltc  a 
full  cube  of  thee :  but  3  ft  til  wrcct  thee 
*mmcafure,  anb  ibill  not  IcauetDcc  al- 
together impunifhcb.  „_ 

ii  ;fojthusraiththc?L©i3©,Xhp 
b2iufc  is  incurable ,  and  thp  WoutiD  « 
grieuous. 

15  XhcreiSnonctoplcaDcthp  caufc, 
t  that  thou  mapeft  bccbonnDbp :  thou 
haft  no  healing  mcDicuics. 

14.  3lii  top  louers  hauc  fo2gottcn 
thee:  the?  feclte  thee  not ,  foz  3  hauc 
wounDcb  thee  With  tlic  wouno  of  an  c- 
nemp ,  With  the  chamfement  of  a  ctucil 
onc,fo2thcmultitubcoftl)incuuciuitte: 
becaufe  top  unites  tucrctncrcafcb. 

15  aahp  *  crpeft  thou  fo:  thine  afflic 
tton  <  thp  fo2tom  is  incurable ,  fo?  tlic 
multitubeofthmtimauitlc:  bccauie  thp 

iftnncs  were  mcreafeb  ,  3  hauc  bone 


"Ezek.,4 

13.2nd  37. 
24  hofc. 

>■■$■ 
•lfa.41.r3. 

and4;.5- 
and  44.  r. 
<ha.  46.18. 


P61.U.I. 

chip. 10.24. 
and  46.18. 


tHli.fir 

binding  2T, 

"F'JF'Z- 


'Chip.  :■ 
18. 


I  rhefe  things  Unto  thee. 

16  Xhcrcfojc  an  thep  that  bcuourc 
jthec*Q)aibcbcuourcb,anballthmtab 

I  ucrfarics  etierp  one  of  them  (hail  goc 
m  to  captiuittc :  anb  thep  that  fpoilc  tljec 
I  (hall  be  afpoile  anb  all  thatp2apl>pon 
1  thee,  mill  3)  gutc  fo2  a  p2ap. 

17  foi  3  Will  rcfto2c  health  hnto 
;thec,  anb  3  IDUI  hcaic  thec  ofthP 
Wouttbs,  fapth  the  %  01s©,  becaufe 
I  thep  caiieb  thec  an  outcaft,  faym?: 
Xhts  is  zion  Whom  no  man  fccBcth 
after. 

1 3  <C  Xhus  faith  the  %  o  is  ©,  H5t- 
{ I)o  10, 3?  Vbill  b2ing  agatnc  tlje  captiuttie 
!  of  Jacobs  tents,  attb  haue  mcrneon 
his  bWclling  places :  anb  the  cmc  a^all 
be  builbcb  upon  her  0  Wnc  !l  hcape ,  anb 
the  palace  (hall  rcmaine after  the  man 
tier  thereof. 

19  3nb  out  of  them  (hall  pioeccDc 
thantttfgiumg,  anb  the  tootcc  of  them 
that  malic  incr rp ,  anb  3?  XUill  multiplp 
tJ)cm,anb  thep  (hall  not  be  fern :  3  ltolll 
alfoglo2tfie  them,  anb  thcpfl;ailnotbc 
fmau. 

20  Xljcir  chtlbicnaifo  fliali  be  as  & 
f02Cttmc,  anb  their  congregation  (halbc 
efrabli(l)cb  befo2e  mcatiD  3  UitU  punifh 
:  all  cljat  opp2rfTc  trjem. 

21  2ltio  their  nobles  (hall  be  of  them^ 
[femes,  anb  their  goucmouc  Qjall  pjo 
cecbc  from  the  mlbbeQ  of  them ,  anD  3F 
IDUI  caufe  h'nt  to  b^aiDneerc,  anbhee 
!  (hall  appjoch  bnto  me :  fo?  rbho  is  this 
I  that  cttgagcDhts  heart  to  appwh  bnto 
:  me, fapth  the  ?L£)K©  t- 

22  3(nD  pee  Qjail  be  *mp  people, anb 
j3JttHllbc  pour  Gob. 

23  2Seholb,thc*U)hirlcn)niDcofthe 
i  %  ©  is  ©  goctl)  foonh  Vbitli  fartc ,  a 
I  tcontmutng  ihhirlcHjinDe.itfhailll  fall 
iDitl;  pamc  Upon  the  hcao  of  the  xdic^ 
Hcd. 

24  Xhe  fierce  anger  of  the  |L©k© 
j  (hall  not  rcturne,  hntillhcc  hauc  Done 
1  it,  anbbntillhc  \ysat  pcrfojmeD  the  in- 
tents of  his  heart :  m  the  latter  Dapcs 
yc  (1)311  confiDcr  it. 

CHAP.  XXXI. 

1  ThercPtaurationoflfrael.  io  Thepublica- 
tion  thereof.  15  Rahc!  mourning  ib  comfor- 
ted. 18  Ephraim  repenting  is  brought 
home  againe.  it  Chrill  is  promifed.  2.7 
His  care  ouer  the  Church.  31  Hisnesvco- 
uenant.  35  The  (lability,  38  and  ampli- 
tude of  the  Church. 


•Eiod.  23. 
21.  iiit 
4r.11 


H^./.rr/f 
kJl. 


Xtt  3 


ait 


*  Cha.14.7.. 
and'.ji. 
and  32.  58. 
'  Chap.  2j. 
19,20. 

\Heb.cHt- 

tinv. 

\Or,rem.iir.e. 


Eucrlailmglouc.       Ieremia 


h.        Chriftpromifed. 


prom  i 


\  Hcb.from 
af.vrt. 

\\OrJ>*ue 
I  extended 
Sorting  i-jnd- 
neffe  into 
tlxe. 


*Exoii  if- 

=  4- 
\\Orttlm- 

Or  els. 

phxac  than. 


II"', /••<- 


Exoi!,4- 


$&$&&&  5C  tDc  fame  tunc,  fatth  the 
femS@&  JL0isc>,um3J  be  the  <3ob 


^'"/.w*  jt-otsEsimi  JJ octocooo 
^>\^i  ofailthcfamtUcsoflJfra; 


Ml  cl,nhcyfljalbc  my  people. 
&**«=*  2  Xhus  fattl)  tile 
|L  ©  is  m ;  Xhc  people  Ybhich  iberc  left 
oftlje  ftoojo  fottnb  grate  mthennlber; 
neffe,  ciicn  gjfracl,  Ibhcn  3  lbent  to 
caufc  titmto  reft 

3  Xhc  %  o  is  p  hath appearcb  t  of 
olo  buto  met,  laying  pca^J  Dattc  loucb 
ttiee  lbtth  an  cucriafttng  lotic :  there; 
fojclliDttti  loumg  BiubncfTc  tiaue  3 
bjaibcu  ttiee. 

4  3lgainc  3  Ibtllbuilb  ttiee,  anti 
ttiouftiaitbc  built,  £>  toirgmc  of  3!f 
racl,  ttiou  fljait  agatnc  be  aoozneo  ttntti 
ttivM  tablets,  anb  fljaitgoc  fo2thtnttic 
bautues  of  them  that  make  merry. 

5  Xhou  fljait  vet  plant  bmes  bpon 
ttic  mountatnes  of  Samaria,  thepian> 
tcts  fl>ail  plant ,  ano  Hjail  t  eatc  them  as 
common  things. 

6  jf  02  there  fljali  be  a  bap,  that  ttic 
watchmen  bpon  ttic  mount  ephjaun 
fljali  ftp  Strife  yccanb  let  bsgoebp  to 
zton  tonto  ttic  1L  <£>  is  id  our  ©ob. 

7  j?02  thus  faitti  the  ILoisjd,  Sing 
tbtth  glabncffc  fo2  JTacob ,  anb  fljout  & 
moug  ttitctiiefc  oftljc  nations  :publtflj 
ycc,p2atfc  pec,  anb  fay ;  £>  %  ©  is  $>  faue 
ttiy  people  ttic  remnant  of  Jfrari. 

8  2Sctiolb,  3?ibillb2tngtticmfrom 
t})c/I5o;tti  countrcv ,  anb  gather  them 
from  the  coafts  ofttic  cartti,  andibith 
them  tl)c  blinb  anb  ttic  lame,  the Ibo- 
man  ibttti  chtlb,  anb  her  that  traucllcth 
mirt)  ctiilb  togctticr ,  a  great  company 
fljailrcturnc  thither. 

9  Xhcy  than  tome  lbithltoecping, 
anb  Mth  II  fupplitations  lbtil  3  leabe 
them  :  3  lbtil  taufc  them  totbalacby 
the  r titers  of  lbatcrs ,  utaftratghnbay 
ibhercm  they  fljailnot  ftumblc:fo2  3 
amafathcrto  3lfvacl,  anb£ph2atmts 
niy'ftrttbomc. 

io  C"3?carcthc)b02bofthc?L©is3D, 
£>  pec  nations,  anbbcclarcitmthctlcs 
afarrc  off,  anb  fay  tyce  that  fcattcreb 
IJfracl  null  gather  him,  anbttccpe  him 
as  a  flicphcarb  aoih  tiisflotbc 

ii  f  02  the  fLfflia©  hath  rebecmeb 
'Jacob,  anb  ranfomcb  him  from  the 
tiaub  of  Dun  ttiat  ibas  ftrongcr  then 
hcc. 

ii  Xhcrcfo2c  they  (hall  come  anb 
Ting  m  the  height  of  rtou ,  anb  fljali 
floU)  together  to  the  goobneffc  of  the 
%  o  u  d,  foz  ibhcatcanb  fo:  ibme,anb 


faoylc ,  anb  fo2  the  young  of  the  floctte 
anb  of  the  herb  :  anb  their  foulcfliaii  be 
asa*i\iatcrcbgarben ,  anb  thev  ftjaii 
not  Ib2roWj  any  11102c  at  all. 

i  j  Xhcn  fljali  the  birgmc  retoyce  in 
the  bauntc,  both  yoongmen  anb  olb  to- 
gether :  fo2  3  H>iU  tunic  their  mottr 
mug  into  toy,  anb  lbtil  comfort  them, 
anbmaKc  them  retoyce  from  their fD2 
ro». 

14  3tnb  3  linn  fatiatc  the  fouie  of 
thcp2teftsU)ith  fatneffcanb  my  people 
Qjaii  be  fattfficb  Unth  goooneffe,  faith 


the  1L  o  «  id. 

15  CXtius  fa;tti  ttic  % 01s £>■■* % 
boyce  u>asticarbni3Ramah,  lamcnta* 
rionandbtttcrU)ccping:lAahelibccpiug 
fo2hcrchilb2cn,  refufeb  to  bccomfo2 
tcb  fo2  her  chUbjen ,  becanfc  tljcy  wen 
not. 

i6  Xhus  faith  the  HoHB.Hefraiuc 
thy  bouc  from  \bcrping,anb  thmc  eyes 
from  trarcs :  fo2  tljy  ibozhc  fljali  be  rc^ 
iliarbcb ,  fairt)  the  JL  0  is  1?,  anb  tticy 
fljau come  again e  from  ttic  lanb  ofttic 
enemie. 

17  3lnb  tticrc  is  hope  m  thine  cnb, 
faith  the  1L  0  is  ©,that  thy  crjtlDjm  (hall 
come  agame  to  their  oVbnc  b02bcr. 

is  C3I  hauc  furcly  hcarb€ph2atm 
bmioamng  hunfclfc  thus ,  Xhou  haft 
chaftifebmc,  anb^ibaschaflifcb,  as  a 
bullotRcbnaccuftomeb  to  the  yoke:  turtle 
thou  mcanbjfljau  be  turticb;  thou -ut 
thcIl0isiDmy(i5ob. 

19  Surely* after  ttiat 3  ibas tur- 
ncb,3J  repentcb ,  anb  after  that  31  ibas 
mftructcb ,  3  fniotc  bpon  my  thigh :  3 
Uiasafljamcb,ycaeucnconfottnbcb,  be; 
caufc  3  bib  bcarc  the  rcp20th  of  my 
youth. 

io  is  Cph2atm  my  bcarc  fonnc ;  is  Ijc 
aplcafantthilbifo2  fttttc3J  fpalteagauift 
him,  3  boc  carucftly  remember  him 
ftill:thcrcfo2cmvboibclstarctrottblcb 
foi  him:  3  lbill  finely  hauc  mercy  bpon 
htm,fatththc!L©iK©. 

21  Sctthcc  bp  ttiay-marljcs  malic 
thcchigl)hcaps:fctthmchearttoibaro 
tljchtgh  tbay,euen  the  ibay  which  thou 
lUcntcft :  turnc  agame ,  £)  btrgme  of 
'Jfracl ,  turnc  agame  to  tljcfe  thy  ci 
nts. 

it  Cf>o\b  long  Unit  thou  go  about, 
€)  thou  bacltfltbtng  bauglitcr  t  fo:  the 
fLoiip  hath  crcatcb  a  ttcib  thing  m 
the  earth  *•  31  iboman  fljali  tompaffc 
a  man. 

2}  Xhus  faith  tljc  ILoissd  of  hofts 
the 


•Id 


•  Mjcth.i. 


'Dcut. 


t  «.-*./«  «i 


A  new  Couenant,    Chap.xxxii 


Ezc.18.1. 


'Hcb.8.8. 


Ibaufcan- 
ttnttrda  haf- 
bundvmo 
them  ? 


"Chap.2  4. 
7. and  ji. 

20. 


Il».S4  17 

10(1.6.45. 
"Chap,  j  \. 
8mic.7  18 
ads  10.43. 


thc<Sobof;p:acl,asyetthcy(hailbfc 
thisfpccchtn  tDc  lanb  of  3hibah,anb  m 
thecuncs  thereof,  tbhcu  3  fljait  b?mg 
agamc  their  taptiuitic,  Itfjc  H©is© 
blcffc  thee,  £>  habitation  of  tuQicc,  anb 
tnountameof  Ijoltncffe. 

14  3(nb  there  (hall  Mbcll  in  gjubalj 
it  fclfc,  anb  man  the  ones  thereof  togc 
tber ,  hufbanbmen,  anb  they  chat  goc 
fo?thttnthflocRS. 

25  jfoz  3  Dane  fattatcb  the  weanc 
fonlc,  anb  J  tjaue  rcplcmOjct)  cucrp  fo 
roibfnllfontc. 

26  SJponthiS'Jaiba&cbanbbehelo, 
anb  my  aeepc  lbas  frocetc  bnto  me. 

27  <rzSeholb,thcbaycstome,  faith 
the  %  ©  ib  ©,that  5  mm  foib  the  ftotifc 
of  Ijfracl ,  anb  the  rjonfe  of  Jlubali 
lbith  the  f ccb  of  man ,  anb  ibtth  the  feeb 
ofbeaft. 

28  anb  it  Cljau  come  to  paffe,  that 
lifceas  3  Dane  lbatthcb  oner  them,  to 
plut&e  bpanbto  bzcaRcboibnc,  anb  to 
tfnoib  bolbnc,  anb  to  befrroy ,  aub  to 
afflict:  fo  lbtllj  ibatth  oucr  them,  to 
biutb  anb  to  plant,  faith  the  tl  ©  a  ©. 

29  "Jntbofebaycsthcyfbatlfayno 
mo:c,  Xhc  fathers  haue  eaten  afouw 
grape,  anb  the  chilb?cns  teeth  arcfet  on 
ebge. 

30  25ut  entry  one  (hall  bic  fo;  rjis 
olbncimqintic,  cueryman  that  eatcth 
thcCoujzc  grape,  his  teeth  Cljau  be  fct  on 
ebge. 

31  €  Bcholb,  the*  bayes  tome,  faith 
the  %  ©  is  ©,that  3 ibill  malic  a  ncibc 
couenant  Unto  fhchoufe  of  3Jfracl,anb 
lbith  the  houfc  of  Jubah. 

52  il5ot  actojbtng  to  the  couenant 
that  3  mabe  lbith  their  fathers  m  the 
bay  that  3  to  obe  them  by  thchanb,  to 
b?mg  them  outofthclanb  of  £gypt, 
Uirjict)  my  couenant  they  bjafte,  ||at> 
though  3  tbasanhuf  banbbnto  them, 
faith  the  !L©  is©. 

3?  25ut  this  fhaii  he  the  couenant,  that 
3ibillmaftcibiththchoufcof3)fraci, 
after  thofc  bayes,  faith  the  %  ©  ib©,3J 
IbUIputmy  latti  m  their  mibarb  parts, 
anb  lb?itc  it  in  their  hearts,*  anb  ibil  be 
their  C5ob ,  anb  they  fhail  be  my  people. 

34  anb  they  fliallteath  no  mo?c  cue 
ryman  his  neighbour,  anb  cueryman 
his  toother ,faymg,Bno.b  theH©i3©: 
foz*they  (hail  all  Rnoibmcc,  from  the 
leaft  of  them  bnto  tlic  grcatcft  of  them, 
faith  the  %  0 13  © ;  *  fo?  3  tbiil  fo?gtue 
their  immune ,  anb  3  tbill  remember 
their  finnc  no  moze. 


ancleuerlafhn£. 


35  C  Xhus faith  the  !l ©a©  "ibljirh 
giuettj  the  <S>tmnc  fo;  a  light  by  bay  M 
the  ozbinanccs  of  the  moonc  anb  of  the 
Itarres  fo?  a  light  by  night ,  Vbljich  biui 
beth  *  the  fca  lbhcnthcibaucs  thereof 
roarc,thclL©ia©ofhofts>shisnamc. 

36  *  3lf  thofe  o?bmanccs  bepart  from 
befoze  me,  faith  the  1L  ©  13  id,  then  the 
fcebof  "Jfraciaifo  (hall  ccafc  from  bc> 
mg  a  nation  bcfo?e  me  fo?  cucr. 

37  ^hus  faith  the  ?L©isE>,5f*hea- 
ucn  aboue  can  bee  mcafuteb,  anb  toe 
founbanons  of  the  earth  fearcfjeb  out 
beneath,  JJ  ibiliaifocaft  off  all  the  feeb 
of  Jfcacl  fo?  all  that  they  hauc  bone, 
faith  the  %  0  is  ©. 

3s  C23eholb,thcbaycstome,  faith 
the  %  ©is©,  that  the  cine  (hail  be  built 
to  the  1L  0  is  ©  from  tljctoibct  of  J?a- 
nanccl  bnto  the  gate  of  the  co?ncr. 

39  anb  the  mcafurmg  line  fbail  yet 
|goefo?th  oucragamft  it,  bpon  the  ijilt 
©areb,  anb  (hall  compaffe  about  to 
©oath. 

40  ^nb  the  lbholc  bailey  of  the  beab 
bobics,  anb  of  the  afbes,  anb  all  the 
ftclbs  bnto  the  b?ooRc  of  Bibzon,  bnto 
thcco?ncr  oftlje  ho?fegatc  toibarbs 
the  cad,  fhaibc  holy  bnto  the  !t  0  is  ©, 
u  (hall  not  be  plutfecb  bp,  no?  th?oibcn 
bottmeanymo?cfo?  euer. 

CHAP.    XXXII. 

1  Ieremuh  being  lmptifoned  by  Zedekiah  for 
hisprophecie,  6  buyeth  Haoameels  field.  13 
Baruch  mult  preferue  the  euidences.ai  tokens 
ot  the  peoples  retutne.  \6  Ieremiah  in  his 
prayer  complaineth  to  God.  16  God  confir- 
ie  captiuitie  tor  their  iinnes,  36  and 
racious  returne. 

^cibo?bcthattanieto 
Jeremiah  from  the 
H©is©  m  the  tenth 
yccreofzcbCBiahning 
of  3Jubah,  tbSjicrj  was 
tS^fe^  the  eighteenth  ycete  of 
Ji2cbuehab-rc53ar. 

z  fm  then  the  lung  of  Babylons 
armie  befiegeb  lemfalem :  anb  'Jcre- 
nuah  the  p?ophet  lbas  fliut  bp  m  the 
court  of  rt)c  p?ifon U)l)ict)  ■< «  m  ttjc  Ring 
of^ubahshoufc. 

3  JFo?  zcbcRiah  Ring  of  3Jubah  hab 
fl)ut  him  bp,  faying ,  D9hcrcfo2c  bocft 
thou  p?ophcnc  anb  fay,  Xhus  faith  the 
?L©is©,  *  Bcholb,  3JUnligiucthisci 
tie  into  the  hanb  of  the  lung  of  iSaby 
lon.aubhccfljalltaueiti 

4  anb 


'  Gen.  1. \6 


"Iii.jl.15 

"  ICa-54  9- 
cliap.jj.20 


"Chap.  33 

!2. 


•Chi.  34.3 


Ieremiahs  purchafe.    Ieremiah. 


H 


is 


praye 


r. 


Chap.  5  4. 


"Leuit.  25 
7.4. ruth..}. 
4- 


\\Qx,ftnc» 

"  ^7/  Mid 
ten  pieces 
tf finer. 

t  Htb.  Ttrole 
tnthe  ttiokc. 


Ar  3nbrcbcKiahBtngof3mbah,fhai 
not  eftapc  out  of  the  hanb  of  the  Caibe^ 
ans  ,but  (hall  *  furely  bcbeliuercbinto 
the  hanb  of  toe  lung  of  asabylon,  attt> 
fljaifpcaucibith  him  month  to  mouth, 
anb  his  eyes  (gall  beholb  hts  eves. 

5  2tnD  l)c  (hall  leab  zebefeiah  to 
Babylon,anbtlKrc{hallhcbebnwi31 
btfit  him,  faith  the  !L©  ib  p :  though  ye 
fight  lbtth  the  Caibcans,  pec  (hall  not 
pjorper. 

6  C^ubgjcreniiahfaiblCherbo^ 
of  the  %  ©  33  ©  tame  bnto  me,  faymg  -, 

7  2i5eholb,  l^anamcel  the  fonnc  of 
£>hallum  thine  bnclc,  (hall  tome  bnto 
thee,faying;  26uy  thee  my  ficibthatts 
m^uathoth  :fo?  the*  right  of  reacting 
turn  is  thine  to  buy  ir. 

8  £>o$anamcclnuucbnclcs{bnnc 
tamctomcinthetourtofthep2ifon,aC' 
eojbing  to  the  tbojb  of  the  ?L©irp, 
anb  faib  bnto  me .  25uy  my  fielb  ,3F  pjay 
thce,that  is  m3nafhoth,lbhtch  a  in  the 
counttcyof  zBeniamin:  fo?  the  right  of 
inheritance  is  thinc,anb  the  rcbeniption 
is  thine ,  buy  it  fo?  thy  felfc.  Xfjcn  3 
Uncib  that  this  was  the  ibojb  of  the 
3L©-irp. 

9  2(nb  gj  bought  the  fielb  of  ^ana^ 
mccl  my  Dncies  fonn  e ,  that  ^as  in  3na- 
thoth  ,anb  \beigl)cb  him  the  monej>,eucn 
||  fcuenteene  (hearts  offtluer. 

10  ^nb^F  tfubfcnbeb  the  cutOencc, 
anb  fcaleb  it ,  anb  toofoclbitneflcs  ,anb 
lbcighcb  him  the  money  m  the  bai* 
lances. 

1 1  S)o  3  cookc  t\)t  euibcncc  of  the 
purchafe ,  both  that  mhich  lnas  feaieb 
according  to  the  laib  anb  ciiftomc ,  anb 
that  Much  ltoas  open. 

n  3nb  31  sauc  the  cuibcute  of  the 
purchafe  bnto  ©aruch  the  fonnc  of 
/fteriah,  the  fonnc  of£J3aafciah,  inthe 
fight  of  ^attained  mine  bntles  fonnc, 
anb  m  the  pjcfeucc  of  the  njituelTes.that 
fubfenbeb  the  booae  of  tl)e  purchafe, 
befoze  all  the  Jelbes  that  fate  in  the 
court  of  the  pjifon. 

13  C3ltib3Jchargcbi5aruchbefo;c 
them,faying, 

14  Xhus  faith  the  ILowPofhofts 
the  Gob  of  Tifrael,  "Eanc  thefc  euu 
bentes ,  this  euibcncc  of  the  purchafe, 
botinbhichts  fcaleb,  anb  this  cuibcnce 
Tlthtch  is  open ,  anb  put  them  in  an 
earthen  bcflcll,  that  they  may  continue 
manvbatcs. 

is  f  02  tints  faith  the  ?Lo  u  p  of 
holies  the  Gob  of  Jfvnei  i?oufcs  anb 


fielbs,anb  33mcyarbs(halbe  poffeffeb 
agamcmthisianb. 

i6  C  &0V0  lbhctt  3  hab  beliuereb 
theeuibente  of  the  purchafe  bnto  25a* 
ruch  the  fonue  of  i!3crtah,3J  pjayeb  bn* 
tothc?L©HP,faytng, 

17  3(h  ?Lo?b  g©p,  beholbe,  thou 
haft  mabc  the  heaucn  anb  the  earth  by 
thy  great  poibcr  $  fttctchcb  out  arme, 
and  there  is  nothing  1 1  too  harb  fo?  th  ce. 

18  Xhou  (herbeft  *  loutng  fembneflc 
bnto  thoufanbs,  anbrecompemeftthe 
iniquitic  of  the  fathers  into  the  bofome 
of  their  chtlb2cn  after  them:  the  great, 
the  mighfic Gob,  the  %  ©  as  p  of hofts 
ishisi!5ame, 

19  Great  m  counfcll ,  anb  mightic  in 
t  rbo2l$e,(fo2  thine  *  eyes  arc  open  bpon 
ailthcibaycs  of  the  fonnes  of  men,  to 
giue  ettcry  one  aceojbtng  to  his  ibayes, 
anb  accozbing  to  the  fruit  of  his  boings) 

20  nahieh  haft  fct  fignes  anb  ibon- 
bers  in  the  lanb  of  €gypt ,  euen  bnto 
this  bay,  anb  in  gjfracl  ,  anb  amongft 
other  men,  anb  haft  mabc  thee  a  jftame, 
as  at  this  bay, 

21  3nbhaftb20ughtfootfhthypeo= 
pie  llfracl  *  out  of  the  lanb  of  €gypt, 
ujtth  fignes  anb  iDtth  ibonbcts ,  anb 
lbith  a  ftrong  Ijanb ,  anb  lbith  a  fleet* 
cheb  out  arme,  anb  lbtth  great  tcrronr, 

22  3(nb  haft  giuen  them  this  lanb 
luhtch  thou  bibft  frocare  to  their  fa* 
thersto  gutcthem  a  lanb  floibiugibith 
milBc  anb  honie. 

23  ^nbthcycameinanbpoftcnebit, 
but  they  obciebnot  thy  boitc ,  neither 
iballteb  in  thy1taib,thcy  haucboneno; 
thing  of  all  tljat  thou  commauubebft 
themto  boe :  therefo2cthou  haft  caufeb 
all  tilts  cuill  to  tome  bpon  them. 

24-  25cholbcthc!|mounts,thcyarc 
come  bnto  the  citie  to  tabc  it,  anb  the  ci^ 
tic  is  giuen  into  the  hanb  of  thcCaibe* 
ansthatficjhtagainfttt,  becaufc  of  the 
ftuo2b,  anb  of  the  famine,  anb  of  the  pe* 
ftilcncc,  anb  ibljat  thou  haft  fpoltcn  is 
tometopane,anbbeholb,thoufceftit. 

i<,  3(nb  thou  haft  fatb  bnto  mte,  £> 
"2.02b  G©p,  buy  thec  the  ficlb  foj  mo- 
ney, anb  take  uJitncCTcs :  fo?  the  cute  is 
giucnuito  thchanbofthcCaibcans. 

26  c  Xhcit  came  the  ibojb  of  the 
%  oik  p  bnto  1Icrcmiah,faymg, 

27  ?5cholb, '3  ,m  tlielL©Kp,the 
*  Gob  of  all  flefl) :  3ls  there  any  thing 
too  harb  fonnc* 

28  Xherfo2ethusfaiththc|L©KP, 
©choib ,  3Jumi  giue  this nttc into  the 
hanb 


Or,hid 
pom  thee. 
*  Exoti  34. 
7.dcut,j.y. 


\Heb. doing. 
*  lob  34. 
:i.pro.;. 
z  1. chap. 
16.17. 


"Exod.6.tf. 
J.fam.y.a). 
i.ehto.  17, 
11. 


I  Or,en£mss 

ifjhot. 


•Num.  I  ti- 
ll. 


Lfracls  idolatric.       Chap.xxxnj.  Gods  mercy. 


Ctup.  19 


]Htk  fir 
my  *»?ct. 


t  Hci.tccir. 
*Cha.  l.if. 


Cha 


Cha. 7.*?. 
and  19.6. 

•  Lcuit  10 


'Pcu.jo 


Tin  -.4.7. 
and  30.  3;. 
and  ;  I.  ; }. 
"Ezck.  II. 


hanb  of  the  CalDtans ,  anD  into  the 
hanD  of  /3cbuehar>re33ar  tungof  15a 
bplon,anDhc(halltaRcit. 

19  3MD  tlic  CaiDcans  that  fight  a 
gainflttjis  cttic,  (hall  tome  ano  fttftrc 
on  tilts  cmc,  ano  burnt  it  itoith  tl)c  hou 
fes*  topon  itohofc  roofes  tt)cp  hauc  offc- 
rcDmccnfc  tonto  Saal ,  ano  pomzcb  out 
Dnnbc  offerings  tonto  other  <5oos  to 
pzouoRcmc  to  anger. 

30  5fo2  the  chUDzcn  of 31fracl,anb  the 
chUDzcn  of  3Juoah,  hauc  onclp  Done  c 
mil  befoze  me  from  their  pouth :  foz  the 
chttbzcn  of  3)fracl  hauc  onclp  pzouoRcb 
met  to  anger  until  the  ibozRc  of  their 
hanbs,fapth  the  It  o  is  p. 

3t  ;foz  this  ntic  hath  becne  tonic,  as 
ta  pzouocatton  of  mine  anger ,  anDof 
tupfurtc,  from  the  Dap  that  thep  built 
it,cucn  tonto  tins  Dap  that  3  fhoulb  re 
mooucit  from  befozemp  face : 

31  26ctaufc  of  all  the  cuili  of  the  chil 
Djcn  of  ifjfracl ,  ant)  of  the  chilDmi  of 
gjuoah,  mhich  thep  hauc  Done  to  pzo^ 
uouc  nice  to  anger ,  trjcp ,  their  Rings, 
their  pzmccs,  their  pzicttcs ,  anD  their 
0;ophcts,anDthemenof  3JuDah,  ano 
ttjc  inhabitants  of  3Icrufaicm. 

33  31nD  thep  hauc  turncD  tonto  nice 
thct*bacRC,anDnotthcfacc,though3J 
taught  them  riftng  top  catlp,  anb  teach- 
ing them, pet  thep  hauc  not  hcarftcticD 
torecetucinftruction, 

34.  26ut  thep  *  fct  their  abominate 
onsmthchoufc  (ltohichis  caiicDbpmp 
i!3amc)  to  Defile  it. 

35  mm)  thep  built  the  high  places  of 
asaal ,  mhich  are  in  the  toaiicp  of  the 
fonnc  of  ifnnnonuo'caufc  their  fonncs 
anb  their  Daughters  to  pafTc  th2ough 
the  fire  tonto' £0olcch  ,Vbhich  3  commaiv 
DcD  them  not ,  neither  came  it  into  mp 
mmDc ,  that  thep  (lioulD  Doc  tins  abo 
muiation,  to  caufc  Ijuuah  to  funic. 

36  C3tiDno\tothercfo2C,thus  fapth 
the  Ho  isp  the  god  of  3Ifracl  concern 
ning  thiscttie,  mhcreofpcfap,3Itfhall 
bcDcliucrcD  into  the  hanD  ofthcnmgof 
25abplon ,  bpthcfruozD,  anb  bp  the  fa 
mmc  ,anbbp  the  pcttllcncc: 

37  25cholD,3J  ltoil*  gather  them  out 
of  all  counttcps.tbhithct  3  hauc  D2i^ 
ucnthem  m  mint  auger ,  auDin  nip  ui- 
rie,  anD  in  great  ltozath,  anD  3  mm 
bang  them  agamc  tonto  this  place  ;auD 
3  mill  taufe  them  to  Ditocli  fafclp. 

3S  3utD  thep  fhaibc'mp  people,  anD 
•3  mill  be  their  <SoD. 
39  mtiD  3  mill  *  gute  them  one  heart, 


aa/e. 


\  Hr.fr. 

ifler  Ibr 


fiaklluit. 


anD  one Ttoap ,  that  thep  map  fear c mee, 
t  foz  cucr,  foz  the  gooo  of  them ,  anb  of  t  m 
their  chilDzcn after  them. 

40  ^nD^nJillmancancuerlamng 
touenant  ltoith  them ,  that  3  nnll  not 
tnruc  amap  1  from  them,  to  Doc  them 
goob ,  but  3  n>UI  P«t  mp  fcarc  in  their 
hearts,  that  thep  than  not  Depart  from 
nice. 

41  Pea,  3  itotll  reiopcc  oner  them  to 
boc  thtmgooD,  anb  31  mill  plant  them 
m  this  lanb  t  afTurcDlp,  muh  mp  mholc 
hcart,anDmithnipmhoicfoulc. 

41  f-oi  thus  fapth  the  1L  o  15  m, 
Hihcas3J  hauebzought  all  this  great 
cum  toponthts  people,  foitoill  3  bzmg 
topon  them  all  the  goob  that  3  hauc 
pzonufcDthem. 

43  3hib  ficlDs  flialbe  bought  in  this 
lanDitohcrcofpc  fap,  hisDcfoiatcmith 
out  man  02  bcatt,  it  is  giucn  mto  the 
hanDofthcCalbeaiis. 

44.  ^cnfljaiibupfieiDSfozinoucp, 
anD  fubfenbe  ctuDcnccs,  anD  feale  them, 
anDtaKtmitncffcs  mthcianD  of 23en; 
lamin,  anD  in  the  places  about  Jcrufa 
lem ,  anb  in  the  cities  oPJubah ,  anD  in 
the  ntics  of  the  tnounrames,  anb  in  the 
cities  of  the  toallcp ,  anD  m  the  cities  of 
the  &>outh :  foz  3  Will  caufc  their  cap^ 
tiuitic  to  returnc.faith  the  %  o is  ©. 

C  H  A  P.   XXXIII 

God  promifeth  to  thecaptiuitie,  a  gracious 
tctunie,  9  aioyfullfhte,  12.  aletkdgo- 
uernment,  15  Chrift,  the  branch  of  righte- 
ouihefle,  17  a  continuance  of  kingdomc 
and  Priefthood  ,  10  and  a  ftabilitic  of  a 
blefled  feede. 

r  Ozcouer ,  the  mozD  of  the 
flLoHP  tame  tonto  3ie- 
trcmiah  the  fccotiD  tunc 
SOtomle  hecmas  pet  *  flint  .chJp.3«. 
"  top  in  the  court  of  the  pzt^ 
foil)  fapmg, 

z   XhiisfaiththelLoispthc'm^  'in..37.»tf. 
Ucr  thereof,  the  %  o  ujd  that  fozmcD  it, 
to  cOablifl)it,thc?L  0  is© 1S  his/5amc. 

3  Call  tonto  tucanb  3  mill  anfracre 
thee,  anb  niemthec  great  anD  j|  rmghne  ||< 
tilings,  mhicl)  thou  Knomclt  not. 

4  foz  thus  fapth  the  %  o  a  r>  the 
(5ob  of  5lfracl  concerning  the  houfes 
of  this  cmc ,  anD  tonccrntng  the  hou 
fes  of  the  Rings  of  JuDah ,  mhuh  arc 
thzomen  Domne  bp  the  mounts,  anb  bp 
thefmozD.  ,  .  ^  , 

5  Xhcp  come  to  fight  muh  the  Cai- 

Dcans. 


f( 


mnesrorgiuen. 


lercmiah. 


God 


s  coucnant. 


'Chip 

H-m*u 

18. 


•Oap. 
19. 


beans,but  <t »  to  fill  tbeni  luul)  tftcocaD 
booics  of  men ,  lbhomc  3  haue  flame  m 
mine  anger, anb  in  mp  fun' ,  anb  fo:  all 
UjrjoCc  ibiclicbncffc  3  Dane  hib  mp  face 
from  this  cmc. 

6  JScljoiD ,  3  ibill  bung  tt  health 
anb cure,  anb  3  Unll  cure  them,  anb 
Unl  reuealc  Unto  them  the  abunbante  of 

peaccanbtructh. 

7  3lnb3Jtbillcaufcthccaptiuifieof 
3Jubah, anb the  capnuincof  Dfracito 
retume,  anb  ibillbuUbtrjemasat  the 
Reft. 

8  ^nb  5  ibill  clenfc  them  front  all 
their  immune,  fthcrcbpthcphauc  &n? 
neb  agatnfr  nice :  anbjJlbiU*  pacbon 
all  their  intqutncs  ibhctebp  rhephauc 
fmncb ,  anb  lbhcrcbp  the?  hane  tranf- 
grclTcbagainfimr. 

9  canbitfliallbctomcanamcof 
top ,  a  piaifc  anb  an  honour  before  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth ,  ifchich  fhall 
hcarc  all  the  goob  that  3  °oc  bnto 
them :  anb  thep  fhau  fcare  anb  trnnblc 
fozallthegoobncfre.anbfoiailthepjof' 
pentic  that  3  Procure  bnto  it. 

10  Xhus  faith  rhclL©isiD  3game 
there  fhall be  hcarb  in  this  piacc(ujhicl) 
pee  tap  Ouibebcfolatc  without  man  anb 
Without  beafl,  eucn  m  the  cities  of  3Ju- 
bah,  anb  tnthc  flrcetcs  of  'Jcrufalcm 
that  are  bcfoiatc  Without  man  anb 
Without  tnhabuant,*  without  bead.) 

11  Xhe  *  bopceof  lopanb  thebopee 
of  glabneffc ,  the  bopce  of  the  bubfc 
groomc ,  anb  the  bopce  of  the  b2ibc,  tiic 
bopce  of  them  that  (haufav  jdjaifcthe 
JLois©  ofhoftes,  foz  the  ?Lois©is 
goob,  fo:  his  tncrcv-^i"^'thfo2cuer,.ind 
of  them  that  (hall"  bung  thcfacttftcc  of 
piaifcmto  thchoufc  of  the  II  ©  11  jp  fo: 
■J  Wtlleaufcto  rcturucthetapttumc  of 
the  lanb  ,  as  at  the  firfl ,  faith  the 

12  Xhusfaith the ILo«© ofhoftes, 
2gainc  in  this  place  lbhich  is  bcfolate 
rbithout  man  anb  Without  bcaft ,  anb 
mall  the  cities  thereof  foaibe  a  habitati- 
on offhephcarbs  caufmgthar  flocucs 
to  licbownc. 

n  gin  the  rules  of  the  mountames, 
m  the  cities  of  the  bale,  anb  in  the  cities 
of  the  &outh,  anb  m  the  lanb  of  aBcnifc 
mm ,  anb  in  the  places  about  3letuf& 
lem ,  anb  m  the  cities  of  Jubah ,  fhall 
the  florttes  paffc  agamc  tonbeu  the 
hanbsof  him  thattcllcth  th™'>faith  the 
1L  ©  w  IP. 

14  JSeholb ,  the baves  come, faith 


the  %  o  is  cthat  3  Will  pcrfozme  that 
goob  thing  which  3  hauepzomiEeb  bu- 
to  the  houfc  of  Jfrael,  anb  to  the  houfc 
ofjubah, 

15  C  3m  thofc  bapes,  anb  at  that 
time  Wiu^taufc  the 'bzaiuh  of  rights 
oufueffc  to  grow  bp  bnto  SDauib ,  anb 
he  fhau  crccutc  iubgcmentanb  nghtc 
oufueffc  m  the  lanb. 

i6  gjn  thofc  \myts  fhau  3Jubah  be 
faueb,anb3Jcrufalnn(haUbrbellfaftlp, 

ailb  thlS  is  the  name  WhCtCWtth  fl)C  fhall 

be  caiicb,t  1Tf)c  %  o  «  %>  our  nghtcout 
nctTe. 

17  Cjto  thus  faith  the  DL  ©m  id  ; 
ts>awb  fhall muer  'want  a  man  to  fit 
bpon  the  throne  of  the  houfe  of  3if 
racl. 

is  .^either  fhau  the  pjtcfts  the  %t- 
uites  ibant  a  man  beftwe  me  to  offer 
burnt  offnngs,anD  to  amble  meatc  of- 
frings ,  anb  to  boe  faennce  conning 
allp. 

19  C3nbthcWo2bofrhcIL©EJD 
came  bnto  3lcrcmiah,fapmg, 

20  Xhus  faith  the  CfiPB© ;  *  3f 
pou  can  bzeaaemp  coucnant  of  the  bap, 
anb  mp  coucnant  of  the  night ,  anb  that 
there  fhoulb  not  be  bap ,  anb  night  m 
their  fcafon : 

ii  Then  map  aifo  mp  coucnant  bee 
b:oUcn  ibith  2Dauib  mp  frtuant.that  he 
fhoulb  not  haue  a  fonne  to  reigne  bpon 
his  thzonc ;  anb  Ibtct) tt)c  JLeuttesthc 
p2icftsmpmmtftcrs. 

ii  3ts*thehoflcofheauen  tannot 
be  numb2cb ,  neithct  the  fano  of  thefea 
meafureb  :fo  Will  ^multtplpthefcebc 
of  ©ambmpferuant,  anothelteuitcs 
that  nunifltr  bnto  me. 

23  £0o2coucr  ,  the  wozb  of  the 
2,  ©  is  ©  tame  to  3Jetcmiah,faping ; 

24  Confibcrctt  thou  not  What  thts 
oeoplc  haue  fpoaen ,  fapmg ;  Xhc  two 
families,  lbhich  the  JL  ©  h  id  hath  tho 
fen, he  hath  eucn  caff  them  offrthusthep 
haue  btfpifeb  mp  people ,  that  thep 
(l)onlbbeno  mo2c  a  nation  befoje  tlmn. 

15  Xhus  faith  the  JL«DKE>i3!fmp 
toucnant  be  not  ibid)  bap  anb  mght.and 
if  3  haue  not  appotntcb  the  ojbutances 
ofheaueu  anb  earth: 

z6  Xhenibiir5ltaftarbapthefcebc 
of"5acob  anb  Dauib  nip  fetuant,i'o  that 
31  ibill  not  take  anp  of  his  fecbe  to  be 
rulers  oucr  the  fcebe  of  ab2aham, 
"Jfaac  anb  35acob  :  foj  3  ibill  caufc 
their  capriumc  to  tctutne ,  anb  haue 
met  cic  on  them. 

CHAP. 


'CKlp  J; 
^.ifai.  1 1,1 

inJ-J.J. 


t  Hci.  M* 

ua  xpd^emt, 

I  Hel.  thtrr 

ihaUnotbe 
c*t  ejffrem 
DahkI. 
*  :.Sam7. 
1 6. 1. kings. 


'Chap. 
9- 


-nap.  31 


Captiuiticis  Chap.xxxiiij. 


threatened. 


■i.King* 
15.1,  &i 
chap  .51. 

\Hcb.,hc 

dominion  t>J 


■Chap. ;  i< 


mouth  fh.i.i 


"Exo.n.z 


CHAP.   XXXIIII. 

leremiah  propheeieth  the  captiuitie  of  Ze- 
dckiah  ,and  the  Cicic.  S  The  Princes  and 
the  p-ople  haumj  dilmilled  their  bondfer- 
uants, contrary  to  the  Couenant  of  God ,  re- 
aflunicthcm.  11  Ieremiah  for  their  dilobcdi- 
encc  ,  giucth  them  and  Zedckiah,  into  the 
hands  of  their  enemies. 

fyc  ID02D  U)l)tri)  catrtc  tmto 
Jeremiah  fro  the  |L©kid 
( 'When  jftebucbao-ncy 
vir  lung  of  2Sabplon  anb 
ail  Ijis  armtc,  ano  all  the 
Ktngbomes  of  the  earth  of  fjts  tootm 
mon,  ano  all  the  people  fought  agamft 
3Jcrufaicm  ano  agamft  all  the  cities , 
thereof)  faping, 

i  %DusfaitDtbe2U>iS£>,tbe(5ooj 
of  3Jfraci,  oo,ano  fpcahc  to  zcocKtaD 
King  of  "^iiDal),  ano  tell  rjmt,  3Ci)us I 
faitl)  tlje  %  o  is  c,2iScl)olD,3Jtbiu  gmc 
tilts  titie  into  tfjc  Dano  of  the  Kmg  of 
26abplon,ano  he  lhalburnc  ttibith  fire. 
3  3Dto  thou  fljait  not  efcape  out  of 
htshano.but  fhaltuirclp  be*  taKcn,anb 
ocliucrcb  into  his  hanb,  anb  thine  epes 
Chall  bcholb  the  eyes  of  tl)c  King  of  23a= 
bplon ,  ano  t  i)e  (hall  fpcahe  ttiitl)  tijee 
mouth  to  nioutlj.anb  thou  fljaltgoc  to 
26abplon. 

4.  |Jetl)carct|)e  lliozo  of tfjclL®8JD, 
O  zcbcKtaD  Utng  of  'JubaD :  XDns 
faitfj  the  1L  o  is  p  of  tfjee ,  Xhon  (halt 
notDiebptDcfruo2b: 

5  But  thou  djalt  ote  m  peatc,  anb 
ttritf)  the  burnings  of  tDp  fatDers  tlje 
fo2inct  Kings  IbDicD  lucre  bcfbjc  tl)cc, 
fo  ftjail  tDcp  burnc  odours  foj  thee,  ano 
tl)ev llnll lament  thee, living ^i)Ho2b 
foi^j  Dane  pionountcDtljc  10020,  fait!) 
trjelLff'iKH?. 

6  XDett  "Jeremiah  the  £2ophct 
fpaKe  all  thefc  luo.'Os  bnto  zcocKiah 
King  of  "J  uoah  m  Ucrufalcm  ■, 

7  when  the  King  of  25abplons  at 
mie  fought  agamft  JcruCaicm,  ano  a 
gatnftallthc  cities  of  JuOaDtDat  lucre 
left,  agamft  Eatlnfl),  anb  agamft  3he- 
Kah :  fo:  theft  ocfctueo  tutcs  rcmatucD 
of  the  cities  of  Juoah. 

8  C  Xhts  is  the  ibo2b  that  tame  brv- 
to  3Jcvcintah  front  the  ILohip,  after 
that  the  King  zcocKiaD  bat)  mane  a  to 
ucnant  lint!)  all  the  people  lbhich  were 
atUcrufalcut  to  p2ociauuc  *  Ubcrtpbn- 
totrjem, 

9  Xhat  cuerp  man  fbonio  let  ms 
man  feruant,  ano  cucrp  man  bismaioe 


feruant,  being  an  l?cb2cibc,  02  an  i)v 
b2eibefle,  goc  free,  that  none  fhoulb 
feruc  buufclfc  of  them,  to  wit ,  of  a  jjcib 
htsb2othcr. 

10  jftoib  ibDen  all  the  p2inccs  anb  an 
the  people  Which  hab  cntreb  into  tlie 
couenant,  DearDtDat  cucrp  one  fhoulb 
let  his  man  feruant,  ano  cucrp  one  his 
ntaio  feruant  goc  frcctDat  none  fhoulb 
feme  themfeiucs  of  them  anp  iuojc, 
then  tDcp  obepeb  anb  let  them  goc. 

11  z6iitaftcribarostDcpturncb,ano 
caufeb  the  fcrttants  ano  the  hanomatos 
Ibhom  thev  hab  let  gocfrcc,  to  returne, 
ano  b20tight  them  into  fubicction  fo? 
fcruants  anb  to:  hanbmatos. 

12.  tc  Xhcrcfo2c  the  vbojocofthe 
ILoiap  came  to  Jeremiah,  from  the 
JUdisid,  Taping, 

13  Xhnsratfhthe3LoisjDtbc<!5oo 
of  3Ifracl,  3  maoc  a  couenant  ibith 
pour  fathers  m  the  oap  that  3  b:ougl)t 
thcnifo?thoutofthclanoof«Egvpt,out 
of  tlje  houfc  of  bonoiucn,  faptug, 

14  Zt  the  cub  of *  fcucn  pecrcs,  let 
\k  go  cucrp  man  his  b2otfjcr  an  ir)cb2cib 
lOhich  i|  hath  bene  Tolb  buto  tljcc :  anb 
ibljcn  he  hathrcrucb  thee  fire  pecres, 
thou  (halt  let  Dim  goc  free  from  ttjee, 
but  pour  fathers  hcarKcnco  not  Onto 
me, neither  mcimeb  their  care. 

15  3tnb  ve  Were  t  nolo  tumcD ,  anb 
Dab  bone  right  in  mv  figDt,  tn  p20tlat< 
nung  libcrtic  cucrp  man  to  Dis  nttgf> 
bour,  anb  pe  Dab  mabc  a  couenant  bt; 
fo2C  me  in  tlje  Ijoufe,  t  lOljich  is  calico  bp 
mp/I5amc. 

16  26utpectumcbanbpollutcbmp 
ii5amc,  ano  cauTco  crterp  man  his  fct- 
uant,  ano  nttrp  man  Dis  Danbmaibc, 
VbDomcpcc  l>ib  fct  at  itbrrttc  at  tDcir 
piearure,  to  returne :  ano  b2onght  tDcm 
mtorubicttion.to  bee  bntopoufo2fcr^ 
uants  ano  fo2  hanbmaios. 

17  XDerfo2c  thus  faith  the  ILosB, 
jJchauc  not  hcarKcnco  Onto  mc,mp2o 
claiming  libcrtic  cucrp  one  to  his  b2o 
thet ,  ano  cucrp  man  to  his  neighbour : 
btholb ,  "3  p2ociai'mc  a  ubcrtie  fozpou, 
faith  tlje  JLoiip,  to  the  froo2b,  to  the 
pefhlcnce,anbtothefammc,ano3hOil 
maKc  pou  t  to  be  *  r  cmoueb  into  all  tlje 
lungoomcs  of  the  earth. 

13  Suiolhlul  guic  the  men  that  haue 
tranrgrcffcD  mp  couenant,  lbhich  haue 
notpcrfonneb  thcibo2bcs  of  the  tone 
nantibhith  thep  hao  nwoc  bcfo2c  nice, 
when  thep  cut  the  taifc  m  nuame,  anb 
paffco  bcttbccttc  the  parts  thereof, 

19  Hhc 


•Eio.n.t 
dcuc.i  5. 1 1 

\\Or.l-Alh 

fold  him. 
ftlfr. 


\HthotU) 


\Hcb.whcr- 
n*tma  u  c<U- 


\Ht!>for* 
rcm<3t<m$. 

"  Dcut.  iS. 
64  thap.zy 
18. 


The  obedience  of       Ieremiah.         theRechabites. 


Chap 
I.  2nd 


\Mrlr.thre- 

fbold  or  vef- 

fit 


19  Xhc  p:mct5  of  3iubah  anb  the 
primes  of  3Jcrofalem,  the  cunuches, 
anti  the  pnefts,  ant)  all  tlic  people  of  the 
lanb  Which  paffeb  betwecne  the  parts 
ofthccaifc, 

20  31  will  cuen  sine  them  into  the 
hantic  of  their  enemies ,  anb  into  the 
Dana  of  them  that  fecftc  their  life,  ano 
their  *  DcaD  bobics  (hall  bee  fo:  mcatc 
unto  the  fouies  of  thcljcauen,  ano  to 
the  bcafts  of  the  earth. 

21  Unn  zcbcftiahftingof3HiDah, 
anb  his  #:inccs  Will  3J  gtuc  into  the 
hano  of  their  enemies ,  anb  into  the 
hano  of  them  that  fecftc  their  life,  anb 
into  the  hanb  of  the  ftmg  of  ffiabylons 
acmie,Which  arc  gone  bp  from  you. 

2i  zScDolb.'jWiUcommanD,  faith 
the  %  0  53  £>,  anb  caufc  them  to  r  crumc 
to  this  cine , anb  tDcy  (hall  fight  agamft 
tt,anbtaftett,anbburncttWitDfirr,anb 
%  rbill  maftc  the  cities  of  gjuoalj  a  hv 
folanon  Without  an  inhabitant. 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

1  Bytheobedienccof  the  Rechabites,  it  le- 
rcmiah  condemneth  the  difobedienccofdie 
Icwcs.  18  God  blefletlithe  Rcchabitesfor 
their  obedience. 

gyK^jg^  H)€  wo:b  which  came 
bnto  'Jeremiah  from 
the  %  o  is  jd  ,  in  the 
bates  of  JJchoiaftim  the 
fonne  of  Jofiah  Bmg 
of  Jnoah ,  faying, 
2  eocbntothchottfeofthcftctha^ 
bites ,  anb  fpcaftc  Imto  thcm.anb  bang 
them  into  the  houfc  of  the  1L  0 13  £> ,  in- 
to one  of  the  chambers,  anbgiuc  them 
Wmc  to  bnnfte. 

5  Xhcti  3  tooftc  gjaaytniaD  the 
fonne  of  Jeremiah  the  fonne  of  $?ab& 
Mu(al)  anb  his  toctDtcn ,  anb  an  his 
fonncs.anb  thcWholc  houfc  ofthcJac- 
chabitcs. 

4  3inD  3J  b20iight  them  into  the 
houfc  of  the  %  o  is  id,  into  the  chamber 
of  the  Tonnes  of  l?anan ,  the  fonne  of 
Jgbaliahamanofoob ,  Which  was  by 
the  chamber  of  the  juices,  lhhtch  was 
abouc  the  chamber  of  ©aafeiah ,  the 
fonne  of  £>hallum,  the  keeper  of  t  the 

DOOJC. 

.  5  2fnb3}frtbcfo:cthcfonnc50f  the 
houfc  of  the  ftcchabitcs,  pottcs,fnll  of 
Wincanb  cups,  anb  3  faib  bnto  them, 
SDiinftcycWtnc. 

6  ffiut  they  faib,  mt  Wtllbjtnftcno 


Wmc :  foz  3ionabab  the  fonne  of  ftc 
chab  our  father ,  commanbcb  bs ,  fay= 
mg  Pc  fl)au D2tnftc  no  Wine ,  neuherye, 
no:  yourfonncs  fomicr. 

7  ^cither  (hall  ye  builbrjoufe,no2 
foW  fecb,  no?  plant  3UincYarb,noz  hauc 
any;  but  all  your  bayes  yc  fljau  twcii 
intents ,  that  ye  may  lute  many  bayes 
in  the  lanb  ibhcr  c  y  c  be  ftrangcrs. 

8  XIjus  hauc  \Mc  obeyeb  the  botce 
of  3f  onabab  the  fonne  of  fiechab  our 
father,  in  all  that  hchathchargcDtos, 
toD2uiftcnoWincailourbaycs,wc,our 
Wines,  our  fonncs,no2  our  baughtrrs: 

9  i]5o2  to  built)  houfes  fo:  bs  to  bibel 
m,ncitl)cr  hauc  We  Clineyarb,no;  ficlb, 
nojfccb. 

10  lout  Wee  hauc  bWclt  m  tents, 
anb  Dane  obcycb,anbboncacco2bing  to 
all  that  3Jonabab  out  father  command 
bebbs. 

n  2Sutittamctopaffewhcnj3cbu= 
thabre53at  fting  of  25abylon  tame  bp 
into  thcianb,thatibc  faib,  Comcanb 
Ictbs  gocto  "jerufaiem  fojfcarc  of  the 
armie  ofthcCaibcans,  anbfo?  fcarcof 
thcarmtcofthc£>y2ians:  foWc  bWcil 
at  3Jerufalem. 

12  c  Xhcn  came  the  Wojb  of  the 
1L©k  ©  bnto  IJcrcmiah  .faying, 

i}  XhusfaithrhcIL<9isE>ofhofrs, 
the  Gob  of  3Ifracl,  <£>oc  anb  tel  the  men 
of  3JubaD,  anb  inhabitants  of  Jcrufa; 
lem ,  ©ill  ycc  not  rccciuc  inftrucnon  to 
hcarbcntomylbo2bs,fattiitl)cHoi35x 

14  %\n  ib02bcs  of  ^lonabab  the 
fonne  of  JSecljab ,  tDat  Dec  commanbcb 
his  fbnncs,  not  to  b2inhc  ibmc.  arc  pcr^ 
fojmcb;  fo;  bnto  tliisbay  tljcy  b;mltc 
none,  but  obey  their  fathers  tommaiv 
Dement :  notibithftanbmg  3  hauc  fpo- 
Ucn  bnto  you,  nfing  early,  anb  fpea= 
Umg,but  ye  hearftcneb  not  bnto  mc. 

15  3  Datte  fcut  alfo  bnto  you  all  my 
fcruants  the  ^opDcts,  nfing  bp  early 
anb  fenbing  them,  faying,  *  SKcutrncyc 
no\b  cucty  man  from  Dis  cuil  ibay,anb 
amcubyour  bomgs,  anb  goc  not  after 
otDcrgobsto  feme  them,  anb  ye  (hall 
blbcil  m  the  lanb ,  lbhich  3J  hauc  giucn 
to  you ,  anb  to  your  fathers :  but  yu 
Dane  not  cnclmcD  your  car  c,no;  hcark= 
neb  bnto  mc. 

\6  25ccaurcthcfonnesof3Ionabab, 
the  fonne  of  53cchab,haue  pcrfojmcb 
the  commaunbemcut  of  their  father, 
which  De  commaunbcD  them,  but  this 
people  hath  not  hearftcneb  bnto  mc  ; 

17  Xhcrcfojc  thus  faith  thcJLois© 

<5ob 


Chap. 
1 1.  and 


Baruchwriteth,and  Chaaxxxvj.       read eth  a  roule. 


\M.tbere 

m.mbe  cue 
>ffrcm,o-c. 


"Cha.ij.3 


C5oD  of  holies,  the  <sob  of  3Jftacl ,  ffie* 
holb ,  3  ttiill  bans  bpon  giubah ,  ana 
bpon  ail  tftc  inhabitants  ot  gjerufaicm, 
all  the  euill  that  J,  hauc  pzonountcba- 
gainft  them:  becaufc  31  haue  fpofcen  ton* 
to  them,  but  they  haucnotbearb,  anb 
3  hauctailcb  bnto  thcm.but  they  banc 
ttotanfujctcb. 

is  C  3nb  3Jetcmiab  fayb  bnto  the 
houfc  of  the  3&ccbabttcs,  Xbus  fayth 
the  ILok©  of  bolts  tljc  00b  of  -Jfracl, 
fficcaufc  ye  l)auc  obeycb  the  commas 1 
bemciit  of  3!onabab  your  father ,  anb 
feept  all  bis  p2eccpts,anb  bone  actojbmg 
bnto  all  thatbehatb  tommanbebyou: 

19  Xberefwe  thus  fayth  the  ?L«dk© 
of  hones ,  the  ®ob  of  Jfracl ,  ^ona;  | 
bab  the  fon  of  Bccbab  (ball  nott  want 
a  man  to  ftaub  befoje  me  fo  j  cuer. 

CHAP.    XXXVI. 

i  lercmiah  caufeth  Baruch  to  writermprophe- 
cie,  5  andpublikely  roreadeic  11  TnePrin- 
cc  haumg  intelligence  thereof  by  Michaiah, 
(end  Ichudi  to  fetch  the  roule  and  rcadcit. 
19  They  will  Baruch  to  hide  himfelfe  and 
lercmiah.  2.0  The  king  Iehoiakirn  being 
certified  thereof,  heareth  part  of  it ,  and  bur- 
nerh  the  roule.  2.7  Ieremiah  denounctth  his 
judgement.  31  Baruch  writeth  a  newecopie. 

i^bittametopaflemtne 
fourth  yecte  of  3Jcl)ota- 
mm  the  fonnc  of  JoRah 
mng  of  3ubab,  that  this 
_  iboib  came  bnto  3Jcrenu= 
ah  fromtbc!L£>K;E>,faying; 

z  Xaftetbccarouleofabookcanb 
Ybntethctcmallt!ictt>02bsthat3J  Dane 
fpotten  bnto  thee  agatnft  gjftael,  anba* 
gamft3Jnbab,$figatnft  all  tbenations, 
fcom  tbebay  3  fpabebnto  thee , fro  the 
baves  of*  gjoftah ,  caen  bnto  tbtsbay. 

3  3t  may  be  tliat  the  houfc  of  3\v 
bah  lbtli  hcarc  all  the  cuil  ibbjcb  3  pur- 
pofc toboebiuo  them;  that  they  map 
returne  cucry  man  fromhts  euffllbay, 
thatgi  ma?  foajiuc  their  imemitte,  anb 
their  finnc. 

4  Xben  Jeremiah  tallcb  asarueb 
the  fonnc  of  jftcru^anbBaruch  ttwtc 

from  the  mouth  of  3«cmtah  all  the 
Tbozbs  ofthcH^i35D,ibhith  he  haofpo 
kenbntobtm,  bponaroulc  of  aboobc. 

5  3mb31ctermab  tommanbcb^Sa- 
ruth ,  favmg  3  ""  fl)«t  bp,  3  tann°t 
goc  into  the  houfe  of  the  %  o  is  p. 

6  Xi)erefo2c  goc  thou  anb  reabe  in 
thcroulcibhiththouhallibattcnfrom 
m  mouth,  the  ttwbesoftbc  Hois*? 


f  Hct>  their 
fitpplicatton 

fi*i  fa. 


•Cha 


in  tljc  tares  of  the  people  m  the 
2L<©h©£>  houfc  bpontbefafhngbay: 
anb  alfo  thou  (halt  rcabc  them  m  the 
cares  of  ail  Jubah ,  that  come  out  ofi 
their  ntics. 

7  3t  map  bee  t  tbey  null  pzefnit 
their  fupplication  before  the  3L©is©, 
anb  Vbill  rcturnc  cucry  one  from  bis 
eiuinbay ;  fo:  great  is  the  an  get  anb  the 
furtc  that  the  Hois©  bath  pronoun* 
tcbagamfttlas  people. 

8  :3nbSarucb  the  fonne  of  JSenab 
bib  atco:bmgto  all  tbat'Jicteimah  the 
l&opbet  commanbeb  him ,  reabing  in ; 
the  booke  tbcibojbcs  of  the  ?Loussi 
mtbe  ILfiDispfe)  houfc. 

9  3inb  it  came  to  paffe  at  the  fifth 
ycere  of  3fchoiaium  the  fonne  of  Jo 
fiah  bing  of  3mbah ,  in  the  nuith  mo 
nctl),  that  thep  pzociamicb  afafl  befoze 
;  tl)e  H0H©  to  all  the  people  m  Jcrufa- 
lem,«  to  all  the  people  that  came  from 
the  tmes  of  3Juoah  bnto  3lcrufalcm, 

io  Xhenrcab  iSaruthm  theboo&c, 
the  rbo2bcs  of  ^tremiah  m  the  houfc 
of  the  1LoK©,mthcthambcrof  (3c 
mattah  the  fonnc  of  £>hapban  the 
fmbc.mthehigher  court  at  tljc  ||  *  entrp  i 
of  the  ncibc  gate  of  the  It  €>  is  ©  $>  i 
houfc,  in  the  tares  of  all  the  people. 

ii  C  BDhen  fl^ithaiah  the  fonne  of 
(Bcmariah  the  fonnc  of  £>haphan  hab 
hearboutofthcboofee,allthcibo.:bsof 
the  !L©  is  ©■. 

n  Xhen  hee  ibent  botbnc  into  the 
kings  houfc  into  the  fenbes  chamber, 
anb  loe,  all  the  p2inces  fate  there,  euen 
(Elilhama  the  fenbe ,  anb  S>ciaiah  the 
fonnc  of  &hcmatah ,  anb  €  luathan  the 
fonnc  of  :3chb02 ,  anb  Gcmanah  the 
fonnc  of  Shaphan,  anb  zcbcbiah  the 
fonnc  of  5?anantah,  anb  all  the  p2inces. 

U  Xhen  fi^idjaial)  bcclarcb  bnto 
thnnall  thctbo2bs  that  hee  hab  heaco 
libhcn  25aruch  rcab  the  boofee  m  the 
cares  of  tljc  people. 

14  Xhercfo2eall  the  ponces  fcnt  3fc- 
hubithefonncof/5cthauiah,  the  fonne 
of  5>helcmtah,the  fonne  of  Cufb!,bnto 
2Sarucb,  faying  Xaue  m  thme  hanb 
the  roule  ibhercm  thou  haft  rcab  m  the 
cares  of  tfie  people,  anb  come.  £>o  Sa; 
ruth  the  fonne  of  jRcnah  toob  the  roule 
in  his  hanb,  anb  came  bnto  them. 

15  3lnb  they  faybe  bnto  him ,  S>tt 
bolbnc  uoib  anb  rcab  it  m  our  cares. 
S>o  2Saruchreabitm  their  cares- 

16  ^oibittame  to  paffetbhen  they 
liabhearball  the  nwos,  they  iberea 

^iluu  fraiD 


The  roule  burnt.        Jeremiah.      Another  written. 


fraib  both  one  anb  other,  anb  fayb  bnto 
23aruch>  nDeeibill  furclp  tell  the  l&mg 
of  all  theft  ibojbs. 

17  3nb  they  afftcb  Barach,  farms, 
Hcllbsnoib ,  ftoib  bibbcft  tl)ou  lbjttc 
ailthcfclbojbsath'.s  mouth  i 

is  Xhcn  asaruch  anfwereb  them, 
l^cc  pjonounccb  all  thefc  ibojbs  bnto 
me  ttnth  his  month,  anb3J  lb;ote  them 
ttnth  matin  the  13oorc. 

19  Xhcn  faib  the  pmues  bnto  23a= 
ruch.Gohibcrhcc^ouanb'JIctcnuah, 
anb  let  no  man  rnioib  lbherc ycc  bee. 

20  C3nbtheylbcntuitotheBmg 
mto  the  Court,  bnt  they  laycb  top  the 
ronlr  m  tDt  chamber  of  Ciifbama  trie 
<S>mbc,  anbtolb  all  tl)c  ibojbs  m  the 
cares  of  the  lung. 

21  3>othc  mngfent  "Jchubi  to  fct 
the  roule ,  anb  hec  tooftc  it  out  of  eit- 
fl)amathcfcribcsd)ambcr,anb3Jchii* 
bt  r  can  it  in  the  cares  of  the  Rmg,  anb  in 
the  cares  of  all  the  pontes  ttihirh  ftoob 
bcfibc  the  Ring. 

22  /5oU> the  hing  latttn riicrbfntcr 
honfem  the  ninth  moncth,?  there  Ibas 
afire  on  the  hearth  burning  before  him. 

2 j  3nDit  tamctopafTc  that  tbhen' 
'Jchtibi  habrcabthiccoz  fourc  icaucs, 
he  rut  it  tbith  th c  pcnftnifc,  anb  cad  rt  tru ; 
to  the  fire  that  w..s  on  the  hearth, bntuT 
all  the  roule  lbas  coufumcb  m  the  fire 
that  wu  on  the  hearth. 

24.  t1ctthcviPcrcnotafrait),nozrent 
their  garments,  neither  the  Utng,nojai 
nyof  hisfcruants  that  hcarD  all  thefc 
lbojbs. 

25  iSeucrthclcflc  €lnathaii,anb2>e' 
laiahf  <3cmariahhab  niabc  intcreevn> 
on  to  the  lung  that  he  rbotilb  not  burnc 
the  r  ouicbut  he  iboulb  not  hearc  them. 

26  2Snt  the  Ring  tommaunbcb  "Jc 
rahmrci  the  fonne  H  of  tyamtnclech,  anb 
£>craiah  the  fonne  of  :tortci,<?3>hclc: 
miah  thefonnc  of  3bbiei ,  to  taitc  asa 
rurhtheftnbe,  anb^crcntiah  thc02o- 
phct :  butthe  |L  ©  h  1?  hib  them. 

27  C  Xhcn  the  lb02b  of  the  3Lob© 
tame  to  Jeremiah  (after  that  the  Ring 
hab  burnt  the  roule  anb  the  ttojbs 
tbhich  zSaruch  ibjote  at  the  mouth  of 
3Jcrcmtah)faying: 

23  Xa&cthccagame another  roule, 
anb  ibiitc  in  it  all  the  fonncubotos  that 
mere  m  the  firft  roule ,  lbhirh  3choia 
Rtm  the  Ring  of  Jubah  hath  burnt. 

29  3nb  thou  (halt  fay  to  Jlchoia 
aim  King  of  ?!ubah ,  Xhus  (ayth  the 
JLohjp,  XijouhaO  burnt  thtsroulc, 


faying  nahyhaCtrhou  ttmttcn  therein, 
faying,  Xhe  Sung  of  25abylon  (hall  ccr- 
tamely  tome  anbbefrroy  this  lanb,  anb 
(hall  caufe  to  teafc  from  thence  man 
anbbcaft; 

30  Xhcrcfoje  thus  faith  the  %  ©  is  r> 
ofjehotaitim  Ring  ofjubahi  I?c  fl)alt 
hauc  none  to  fit  bponthcthioncof  2>a* 
uib,anb  hisbcab  boby  (hall be*  tail  out 
in  the  bay  to  the  heate,  anb  in  the  night 
tothefrofr. 

31  3lnb  3  tbilltpunifh  him  anb  his 
fcebt,  anbhisfcruants  fo2  their  uuam- 
tit,  anb  *§  ibillbnng  upon  them,  anb 
bpon  the  inhabitants  of  licrufaicm, 
anb  bpon  the  men  of  3ubah  all  the  cum 
that3Jhmi>p2onounte&agatn(itbcm: 
but  tfiey  hearftcnebnot. 

31  <C  Xhcn  toolte  gjcrcmiah  ano; 
ther roule,  anb  gauc it  to  25aruththe 
(tribe  the  fonne  of  ji3cnah ,  ibho  ibzotc 
therein  from  the  month  of  jJJercmiah, 
ailthcuwbs  of  the  booae  lbhichSc 
hotaBim  Ring  of  3Jubah  IjaD  burnt  in 
the  fire,  anb  there  mere  abbcb  beGbcs 
bnto  them,  many  t  urc  lbojbs. 

CHAP.     XXXVII. 

1  The  Egyptians  hauing  railed  the  ilege  of  the 
Caldcans,  king Zedekuh  feu deth  tolcicnu- 
ah  to  pray  forfhepeople.  6  Iercmiahpro- 
pheficth  the  Caldcans  ccrtaine  returne  and 
victory.  11  He  is  taken  tor  a  tngitiue,  bea- 
ten and  put  in  pri/on.  16  HeafuirethZede- 
kiah  of  the  captiuitie.  iS  Intreatingtor  his 
libertv,he  obtain  eth  fome  fauour. 

fin  bing  *  Zebcfttah  the 

**j  fonne  of  Jioftahreignebm 

t<3  fieab  of  Comal)  thefon  of 

7JS£  35ehoiaR(m ,  lbljo  /Bcba^ 

^3^  thab  -rc353t  Umg  of  25a- 

bylon  mabe  feingm  the  lanb  of  3ubah. 

2  23utneithcrhe,noihisfcruants, 
;no2tl)c  people  of  the  lanb,  bib  hearscn 
I  bnto  tl)tib02bs  of  the  ?L©isid  ,  lbhich 
he  fpabe  t  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah. 

3  ^nb  Zcbeltiah  the  Sing  fent  3e^ 
hutaithc  fotmeof£>hclcmiah,anb  zc* 
phanwhthe  fonof  S}9aafciah  the  p2tc(t 
to  thcp2ophet3Jcttmiah,faymg,  v>W 
nolb  bnto  the  %ovu?  our  <5ob  fo;  bs. 

4-  iftoibc  Jeremiah  tame  m  anb 
lbcnt  out  among  the  people :  foi  they 
I  l>ib  not  put  him  into  pnfon. 

s  Xhen  pharaohs  arnucibas  tome 
fo2tl)outof  egi'pttanbVbhcti  the  Cal 
;  beans  that  beftegcb  3Jcrufalem,  hearb 
nbings  of  them,  they  bepartcb  from 
3Jcrufaicm, 

6  CChen 


"Chap.  2  2, 
>9- 


t  Hck  vi/U 

VDOH, 


\  Hct.  , 
■hy. 


'Chap. II. 
24.1.  kings 
24.17.md 
1  chron, \6 


\M.hj 

tfjcbanJof 
the  pro- 
fhet. 


Ieremiah  taken,      Chap.xxxviij.     and  imprifoned, 


6  C  Xbcn  came  the  \D02D  of  the 
iL  ©  k  ©  Ditto  tljc  £2opbct  Jeremiah, 
(aping, 

7  XbUSfatfbtbClL01a1D,tbC(!5OD 

of  Jfracl,  Xhus  (ball  pc  fay  to  the  king 
of  JuDab,  that  fcnt  you  Ditto  nic  to  cu 
quire  of  me,  iScbolD,  ^baraobsartnie 
lUljicl)  is  come  fo:tl)  to  belpcyou,  fljall 
rcturne  to  Cgypt  into  their  oibnc  lattD. 

3  3MD  the  CaiDeans  (bail  come  a^ 
game,  ano  fight  agamlt  this  cine  ant) 
take  it,  ana  bumc  it  tmtb  fire. 

9  Xhus  faith  the  %  €>  k  ©,  Decctuc 
tHei/«r/«  not  pou ctfclucs,  faying,  XbeCaibc 
ansujail  fitrclp  Depart  from  bs:  fo? 
they  (bail  not  Depart. 

io  JFoj  tbottgn  pec  baD  fmittcn  tlje 
ibbolc  atmic  of  the  CaiDeans  that 
fight  agamlt  you,  anD  there  rcmamcD 
tW'*.'W  but  tiDotmDcD  men  among  them,  yet 
(boulD  they  rife  Dp  eucry  man  m  fjts 
tent,  anD  burnc  ttjis  etttclbttb  fire. 

1 1  C  3taD  it  came  to  paCTc  that  iDljcn 
the  armic  of  the  CaiDeans  \bas  t  d?o- 
Ken  Dp  from  Jmifaicm  fo?  fcarc  of 
pjaraobsarmic, 

ii  Xbcn  Jeremiah  VDcnt  fo2fb  out 
of  Jerufaicm  to  goc  mto  the  lanDc  of 
*Scntemm,!i  to  fcparatcbmifclfc  thence 
in  tbcmiDs  of  the  people. 

13  3mD*uocttDerbasintocgatcof 
Semamin ,  a  captatnc  of  the  ibarDe  was 
there,  tubore  name  was  jttjab,thefon 
of  &l)eicmfa!),tt)e&mnc  of  ijananialj, 
f  betookc  Jeremiah  the  02opbct,fay- 
ing,XDou  fallefl  aujap  to  tlje  CaiDeans 

i+  Xljcn  faiD  Jeremiah,  Jt « t  falfe, 
J  fall  not  a\Day  to  the  CaiDeans:  but 
bcbcarhencD  not  to  him:  To  Jrijab 
tooke  Jeremiah,  anD  bought  bun  to 
tbcp?mtes. 

\<,  n9l)ecfo2C fbepjinccstbcrc  Vb?otb 
ttntb  Jeremiah ,  anD  fmotc  him,  anD 
put  him  m  pnfon ,in  the  houfe  of  Jona- 
than the  fenbe,  fo?tbey  hao  maDc  that 
thepnfon. 

i6  C  rahen  Jeremiah  mas  cntrcD 
mto  thcDungeon,anDinto  tbcHcabbins, 
anD  Jeremiah  IjaDrcmamcD  there  ma 
ny  Daves: 

17  Xhen  zeDekiab  the  king  fent  anD 
tooke  him  out,  anD  the  kingafkcDbim 
fecrctly  in  his  boufc,  anD  faiD,  Js  there 
any  vdojd  from  tfjc  %  o  k  3D  i  anD  Jere- 
miah faiD,  Xherc  ts :  fo2,fato  he,  thou 
(bait  bcDeliucrcD  mto  the  banDof  the 
king  of  Babylon. 

is  Q9o2coucr  Jeremiah  fayD  tmto 
King  zcDrtuah,r0hathauc  J  offcnDcD 


t  Htb.rn.ii- 
toafcemi. 


away  from 
thence  in  tic 
uridfl  of  the 


peoplt 


\Htb.fcdfc 

hoodcrlie. 


Or,  C'Uti. 


\  agamlt  tbcc,02  agamlt  thy  fcruants ,  o? 
agamft  this  people ,  tljat  yccbaucput 
inempnfon; 

19  V&\)ttC  are  now  pottt  P20pbCtS, 

lbbicb  pzophectcD  Dnto  you  ,  foymg, 
Xhc  Ring  of  i5abylon  0)aU  not  come 
againlt  you,no:agatnftthis  lanD  i 

20  Xhcrcfo2c  heare  noib ,  J  pjay 
thee,^)  mp  ?Lo?D  the  King ;  t  let  my  ftip-- 
plication,  J  pjav  thee,  be  acceptcD  bc^ 
fozcthec,  that  thou  caufemenotto  rc^ 

turnc  to  the  houfe  of  Jonathan  the 
fcnbclcltJDiethere.  ■> 

2i  Xljcn  zcDctuah  the  king  com- 
manDcD  tljat  thcvfl)OulD  commit  Jcre= 
mialj  into  the  court  of  thcpzifon,  anD 
that  the?  fbouiD  giuc  Ijun  Daiivapiecc 
ofb^caDoutoftljc  bakers  (trcctc,  Dntill 
all  the  b:taD  m  the  ntic  ibcte  fpent. 
Xhus  Jeremiah  rcmauicD  in  the  court 
ofthepnfon. 

CHAP.    XXXVII r. 

i  Ieremiah  by  a  falle  fuggeftion  is  put  into  the 
dungeon  otMalchiah.  7  Ebed-melech,by 
fuitcgetteth  himlomeinlargement.  14  Vp- 
on  fectet  conference  ,  he  connfaileth  the  king 
byyee'dingtofauehislife.  ^4  By  the  kings 
inftrudions ,  he  concealcth  the  conference 
from  the  Princes. 

fi^cn    £>hcphatiab    the 
1  fonneofODattan,  anD©C' 


^Dauah  the  fount  of  0a> 
^§Y  fl)ur  anD  Jural  the  fount 
3  of  S>hcltmiah ,  J  |3afl)ur 
the  fonnc  of  Q^aicljiaJj  hearDtijc  IbOiDS 
that  Jeremialj  haD  fpoRcn  Dnto  all 
the  people ,favnng, 

2  Xljus  faith  the  fLois©,*  ^c  that 
rcmamcth  mthts  nttc ,  fljail  Die  bp  the 
fmo2D ,  by  the  famine ,  anD  by  the  pcltt- 
lcnce,but  he  that  gocth  fo?th  to  the  Cal 
Deans ,  Cljail  Hue :  fozhefljaiiljaueljis 
life  foj  a  p:av,anD  (hall  ime. 

j  Xhus  faith  the  %o  k  id,  Xhisct- 
tic  fliail  furclv  be  giuen  mto  tljehanD  of 
the  lung  of  26abvions  acmie,  ibljiclj 
(hall  take  it. 

4  Xhcrcfo2c  the  p2iuces  favDbnto 
the  lung ,  D3c  befcech  thee  let  this  man 
beput  to  Death :  fo?  thus  he  vueakeneth 
.thehanDs  of  the  men  of  TDarrethat  re- 
I  mame  m  this  citie,  anD  the  hanos  of  all 
the  pcoplcm  fpcakmg  fuch  iD02bs  Dnto 
thcm:fo2  this  man  fecketh  not  thetiDel 
fare  of  this  pcoplcbut  the  hurt. 

5  Xhen  zcbek.ah  the  kmg  favD, 
25cholD,hc  ^  m  rour  hanD  fo:  the  king  is 
not  be  that  can  Do  any  thmgagamlt  rou. 

vHuu  2        c  Xhen 


\  Hct.lt 
my  fupphca. 
tionfall. 


'Cha.tl.5i 


X'Aclpcuc. 


The  king  talketh        lercmiah.  with  Icremiah. 


iftbc 


\HJrr.hl 

will  lite. 


tftilr.m 
thine  hxr.el. 


\\0r.piK 


6  %bcn  tooHc  tljtp  3fcrcinwl),  ano 
tall  Dim  into  tl)e  Dungeon  of  i^aitliiaD 
tDefonnc  of  j|J?ammcletD  tl>it  wa,  inttje 
court  of  tl)c  pjifon :  anD  tljcv  let  Dottmc 
3JercmtaDtt>itDco2DS:anD  in  tftc  Dun* 
gcon  there  was  no  water ,  but  mire :  fo 
3fccermaD  funUcuttDcmirc. 

7  C43ounbDcn€bcD  mclccfttftc£' 
tDioptan.oncofpcunucDcsibDttftibas 
m  the  lungs  Doufc,  DcarD  tljat  tticy  ftao 
put  gjcrcnuaft  in  tljc  onngcon(tl)e  Sing 
tDcn  ftttmg  m  tftc  gate  of  Bcniamm) 

8  coco meicct)  lbcnt  foojttj  out  of 
toe  lungs  Doufc ,  anD  fpaftc  to  tlje  umg, 
faying, 

9  SS9plo?D  tftc  lung,  tftcfc  mcnljauc 
Done  emu  m  all  tftat  tlicpDaucDoncto 
gjcrcmial)  tlje  $?opDet ,  uiftom  tDcy 
Daue  call  into  tl)c  Dungeon ,  anD  tijcls 
UHcto  Diefo:l)ungcr  in  tftc  plate  ibfterc 
i)ciS,fozthereivnoino2CbjcaDintljceltv. 

ioXftc"tDcUingcommanDcD€bcD 
mclecft  tftc  (Ethiopian ,  faying ,  1taRc 
from  Deuce  tl)icnc  men  t  ibitrj  tDcc,  anb 
tafec  top  3JcremiaI)  tl)c  ftzopDct  out  of 
tDcDttugconbcfojcDcDie. 
,n  5>o  CbcD-mcletfj  tooKc  rne  men 
With  Dim ,  anD  lbcnt  into  tlic  Doufc  of 
tlje  lung  touDcr  trjc  trcafuric,  anD  toobc 
trjente  olD  eaftcloutcs,  anD  olD  rotten 
raggcs,anD  IcttDeniDonmcbp  tojDcs 
into  thcDungcon  to  gicrcmiaD. 

u  3lnD£bcD-mclccD  tt)c  ctDiopian 
faiD  bnto  31crcmiaD,putnoiutftcfcolD 
caft  cloutes  anD  rotten  ragges  bnbet 
tftme  armc  Doles ,  bnDer  tftc  cojDcs. 
^nDjcrcmiaDDiDfo. 

13  5>o  tl)CT?Dtfibi)p3Icttmiarjnnfl) 
cojdcs ,  anD  tooftc  Ijim  bp  out  of  tDc 
Dungeon ,  anD  3k  rcnuaD  rcmatneD  in 
tftc  court  of  tftc  pnfon. 

14  CXDcnzcDcRiaft  tftc  Ring  fern, 
ano  tooltc3IcrcmiafttDc>2opDct  bnto 
UimiutotlxlltrjitD  enrne  tftat  is  tntftc 
ftoufe  of  flic  %  <$>  is  ©,  anD  tile  Ring  faiD 
bnto  gictemiaD ,  31  lbtll  afttc  tljec  a 
tftuig :  nibc  not ftmg  from  me. 

15  £ften  3Icrcnuaft  Cud  bnto  ~Zt- 
Denial),  3Jf3J  Declare  it  bnto  thee,  Unit 
tl)ounot  furcU'putmcto  DcatD?  anDif 
31  ginc  thec  counfcll ,  ibilt  tftou  not 
ftcarlienbutomc* 

i6  5)0  tlic  lung  froare  fecrctly  bnto 
3lctcmiaD ,  faying,  3ls  tl)c  JLadi^id  li< 
uetl)  tftat  maDcbs  tine  foulc,  3llbil  not 
put  tl)cc  to  Dcafft ,  ncttftcr  lbiligjgtuc 
tftee  into  tl)e  IjanD  of  tftcfc  men  tljat 
fecbe  thv  life. 

17  3:ftcnfaiD3Jctxiniaftbnto  Ztw 


toiai)y%\)us  faitli  tfte?l©i5E>  tfteGoD  of 
l)oft£S,tt)c<5oD  of^ifraei,  J/frtjouilult1 
affurcDlp  goc  foonl)  bnto  tlic  lung  of 
25abplons  panics,  tften  tin;  foulc  tftail 
line,  anb  tftis  Citie  tftail  not  be  burnt 
umi)  Bee,  ano  ttjoti  Ojait  line,  anD  t^itic 
ftoufe. 

18  aSntiftftouUnltnotgocfoouljto 
tfic  Ring  of  23abplons  tyimes ,  tljen 
tftail  trjis  Citv  begiucn  into  trjc  DanD  of 
tftc  CaiDcans ,  anD  tftep  tftail  burnc  it 
ibttft  fire ,  anD  tftou  fftait  not  efcape  out 
of  tfteir  ftanD. 

19  3lnD  zcDcRiaft  tljc  Ring  faiD  bnto 
3crcmiali,  3)  am  afraiDoftljegicibcs 
tftat  are  fallen  to  trjc  CaiDcans.lcft  tl)c  p 
Dcliuermcc  into  tljcirljanD ,  anDtljcy 
motRcme. 

io  26ut 3Jcrcmial) faiD ,  Hrjcv  loan 
notDclmcr  thee:  obey,  3bcfcccD  tljec, 
;  trjc  boyce  of  tlic  %  o  k  b>  ,  Vbljtel)  3J 
fpcaKebntotl)ce:foit  fliail  be  tbell  bn- 
to tl)cc,anD  tljp  foulc  fbail  Hue. 

zi  25ut  tf  tljou  rcfufc  to  goc  foozrl), 
tl)iS'stljcibo?D  tljat  tl)c2L©tfjD  fjact) 
fljcVbcDme. 

ii  3tnDbel)olD,ailtlicibomen  tftat 
arc  left  m  tlic  Ring  of  gjuoaljs  Doufc, 
Qjalbc  bjougftt  font)  to  tf)c  Ring  of  2Sa> 
bj'lons  Ounces ,  anD  tftofc  v.  omen  iftail 
iay,  t  Xftp  fricnDs  ftauc  fct  tljcc  on ,  anD 
ftauc  p^cuaiicD  agamfttliec :  tftv  feet  are  \ 
flmueintftc  mire,  and  tljcp  are  tunicD; 
attjapbacftc. 

xj  5o  tftep  fftail  bflng  out  all  tft$> , 
Ibiues,  anb  tftv  tl)tlD:cn  to  tftc  CalDe- : 
ans,  ano  tftou  fliaitnot  cftapc  out  of 
tftctr  ftanD  ,  but  fftalt  be  taUcu  by  tftc 
ftanD  of  tftc  Bmg  of  2Sabvlou :  ano ' 
ttftou  tftait  caufc tftis  tincto  be  burnt  t«- 
ibitftnrc. 

14  CXftcn  faiD  ZcDcluaft  bnto  3!c  ! 
ramaft ,  ?Lct  no  man  Imolb  of  tftcfc  | 
Xbo;DS,anD  tftou  fftalt  no  t  Die. 

15  2Sut  if  tftc  juices  ftcarc  tftat  3J 
ftauctaiUeD  \bitft  tlicc,  ano  t^cv  come 
bntotftcc,  anD  fap  butotftcc ,  Declare 
bnto  bsnolb  lbftat  tftouftaftfaiDbnto 
tftebing,  ftibcit  not  frombs,  anbibce 
ibilnotputtftectoDeatftiaifolbftattftc 
Ring  faiD  bnto  tftcc: 

te  %l)tn  tftou  fljait  rav  bnto  tftem, 
35p?cfcntcD  mv  fuppltratiou  before  tfte 
Ring,  tftat  ftcttioulD  not  canfeme  to  ro 
tunic  to  3fonatftans  Doufc  to  Die  tft  c re. 

17  ICftcn  came  all  tftc  pnnccs  bnto 
"Jctcmiaft  ,anDanicDftan,anD  DctolD 
tftem  aetojDing to  all  tlicfe iboiDs,  tljat  t 
tftc  umgljaD  tommanDcD :  fo  t  tftci'  left  Z3T 
off 


t  P.tbr.  van 
ofthjfface. 


(halt  bxrtic, 


Zedekiah  taken.  Chap.xxxix.xl.  OfEbed-mclech. 


*  l.Kirt.i (. 
i.ihap.  51. 
4* 


1H*t~.fpmk* 
with  him 
itid*nrtnttj. 


\Heb.-mth 

two  f>r*J<n 

cbitnes  ,  or 

fetters, 

\\Ortcl»rfr 

Marfball. 

Htbr.chefe 

aftheexecu- 

uaners  or 

f.aaghter 

mrn. 

A'idfo  vrrfe 

lO.li.i^-r. 


off  fpcantug  mitt)  tjirn,  foj  the  matter 
ttiasnotpcrcciucb. 
28  So  Jeremiah  abobc  in  the  court 

of  tljcp2ifon,tonniitbcbaytbat3Jcru 
falem  mas  taken ,  anb  l)ec  mas  there 
rpben  Jcrufaiemitoastalten. 

CHAP.    XXXIX. 

I  IeruialcMi  is  taken.  4  Zedekiah  is  made 
blindc, and  lent  to  Babylon.  8  The  city  rui- 
nated, 9  the  people  capttuated.  11  Nebu- 
chad  rezzars  charge  for  the  good  vfageofle- 
reiniah.    is  Godspiomileto  Ebcd-melech. 

Jri  the*  ninth  yeere  of  zc 
Deftiarjftmgof  3uoal),  m 
tl)c  tenth  monetb ,  tame 
iftebucljab  rc}5ar  Rtugof 
asabylon ,  anb  all  bisar; 
mte  againtt  3Jerufalcm ,  anb  they  befie 
gebit. 

i  AndmtbeelcucutbyeercofZebe; 
Rial),  in  the  fourth  monetb  ,  the  ninth 
Day  of  the  monetlj ,  the  cittcibas  bro- 
ken bp. 

j  anDalltbephncesoftbCBiugof 
iBabyloncamein.anb  fate  m  the  mtbble 
gate,euen  tergal -Share^cr,  Sam- 
gar  jfJebo,&arrccbim,ftabfans,|5er 
gal -:S>barc3cr,©abmag ,  mith  all  the 
rcfibueofthepniuesofthctnngofffia; 
bylon. 

4  C3nb  it  came  to  paffe.that  itoben 
Zebeftiab  the  Ring  of  3Jubab  fall)  them 
aubali  the  men  ofitoarrc.tbcn  they  flcb 
anbtt>entfonboutoftbecittebymgbt, 
by  the  ttiavof  the  lungs  garben,  by  the 
gate  bctvbtrt  the  tltoo  Wjalles,  anb  bee 
Vbcnt  out  the  ltoay  of  the  piatne. 

5  25ut  the  Caibeans  armie  purfucb 
after  them ,  anb  ouertoohe  zcbcluab 
m  the  plaines  of  Jmtho :  anb  ltobcn 
the?  hab  tafeenhim ,  they  brought  bun 
top  to  il5ebuchab-nc5?ar  Ring  of  25aby; 
ion  to  ftiblab  in  the  lanb  of  fyamarb, 
tbfjere  he  tgaue  iutjgcment  topon  hun. 

6  XbentbetnngofSabyionflcUic 
tljcfonncs  of  zcbetuab  m  Hibiah  bc; 
fozebis  eyes :  alfo  the  Ring  of  JSabylon 
flelto  all  the  nobles  of  Jubah. 

7  fi0o:eoucrl)eputoutzebeRiahs 
eyes,  anb  bonnbhtm  tuntljtljaincs,  to 
carybmtto  zsabylon. 

8  C  3tnb  the  Caibcans  burnt  the 
Rings  boufe,  anb  the  boufes  of  the  peo- 
ple ttntb  ftre,anb  bja&c  botunc  the  itoais 
ofjcrufalem. 

9  ILhen  /]5ebu5araban  the  ||  cap; 
tatneof  the  guarto  cartcb  attoaycapnue 


into  iSabylon  the  remnant  of  rhepco= 
pic  that  rcmameb  intbccmc,  anbtbofc 
that  feu  aitoay,  that  fell  to  bim.Untb  tlje 
reft  of  the  people  that  remameb. 

10  But  iriebu^araban  the  capcainc 
of  tlje  guarb  left  of  the  pooje  of  the  peo; 
pie  UjIjicIj  hab  nothing,  m  the  lanb  of 
Juoalj,  anbgauctljem  btncyarbsanb 
fielbcs  tat  the  fame  time. 

11  CiRott/Sebutbab- remarking 
of  Babylon  gauc  charge  coucerning 
Jeremiah  t  to  /ftcbirsaraban  the  cap; 
tame  of  the  guarb,  faying , 

11  XaUehim.anbtiooUeiDcUtohim, 
anbboc  hun  no  harmc,  butboc  tonto 
him  cuen  as  he  (bail  fay  Unto  thee. 

13  So/Bcbusaraoantbccaptameof 
the  guarb  fent,anb  jf3ebu(baf  ban^ate 
fans,  anb  4!3ergal  -  Sharker  ,3Rab- 
mag ,  anb  all  tlje  Bing  of  ffiabylons 
£nnccs: 

14.  <£ucntbcyfcnt,anbtooRc3Jcte< 
mtab  out  of  the  court  of  the  pztfon ,  anb 
committcb  him  bnto  <5ebaiiab  the  fon 
of  abtbam  ,  the  fonnc  of  Sbapban, 
that  bee  ujoulb  carte  bun  home  :fo  bee 
bitoelt  atnong  the  people. 

15  C  #oito  the  Uwb  of  the  %  ©  is  © 
came  tonto  Jeremiah ,  itobile  bee  ltoas 
(but  top  m  the  court  of  the  pn'fon ,  fay; 
mg-. 

i6  Goeanbfpeaue  tovSbeb-mciecb 
tbe<£tbtopian,£aying,Xbusfaytbtbc 
%  o  is  ir>  of  bofres  the  ©ob  of  jfcael, 
25cbolb,3l  ltotllbnng  my  Vbojbs  topon 
this  cine  to:  euill,  anb  not  fo?  goob,  anb 
rliey  (ball  be  accomplished  tn  that  bay  be; 
fo?c  tljee. 

17  25ut  J,  ltoill  bclmcr  thee  in  that 
bay,  fayth  the  %  ©  «  ©,  anb  thou  (bait 

;  not  be  gtuen  mto  tl)c  ijanb  of  the  men  of 
ltobomtbou  artafraib. 

18  5f 02  3  uJit  furcly  bcliuer  th«,anb 
tbou(baltnotfailbytl)cfroo2b,buttby 
life  (Ijall  befoj  a  p?ay  bnto  tbecbctaufe 
IthoubaQput  tby  tru(lmme,faytb  tlje 

CHAP.  XL. 

i  Icremiah  being  fet  free  by  Nebuzaradan,  go- 
eih  to  Gedaliah  7  The  dilperled  Iesves  re- 
pairevntohim.  13  Iohanan  renealmg  I(h- 
maels  confpiracie,  ii  not  bcleeued. 

^t  ttJOJb  ibbtcb  came  to 
Jetcmtab  fr6  the  3Lc>isjd 
after  that  /i5cbu^araban 
rbcllcaptatne  oftheguaro 
Ijablct  htm  goe  from  3Ka- 
iHua  j        math, 


that  day. 


hand  cf. 

Ibaie  cjei 

vpenbim. 


\\0, 


50 


Ieremiah  fet  free,        leremiah. 


A  con  ft 


piracie. 


t  H*&.  7 
toillftt  m%nc 
tyt  Vfert 
tbet. 


mart) ,  ibhen  hec  hab  taben  him  bv 
tng  bottnb  m  chatnes  among  all  that 
Were  carieb  att)aptaptuteof31ctui*& 
lemartD  3Htbah ,  itohtthtt>rce  cartcba' 
lbap  taptme  bnto  asabplon. 

2  3nbthecaptatncofthegarbtoob 
3ieremtah ,  anb  fapb  bnto  hint,  1-hc 
%®k®  thp  <5obhath  pionounceb  this 
eutllbpon  this  place. 

j  /jSotb  the  %  €>  m  id  hath  bzought 
it, anb  bone  aecozbmg  as  he  hath  fapb : 
becaufe  pee  haue  finneb  agatnft  the 
%  0  is  © ,  anb  rjauc  not  obepcb  his 
uorcc,tl)erefo.:c  this  tying  is  tome  bpon 
pott. 

4  3nbnoibbeholb ,  31  loofc  thee 
this  bap  from  the  chaines  tbhtch  were 
bpon  thine  hanb :  if  it  fecme  goob  bnto 
thee  to  come  tbith  me  into  28abplon, 
come,anbt3JiiulUoobcibeH  bnto  thee: 
but  tfttfcemctU  bnto  thee  to  comelbith 
me  into  Babplon,  fozbearc :  beholb,  all 
ttic  lanb  is  bcfo?c  thee :  Ibhtthct  tt  fecm* 
cttjgoobanb  conuenientfozthceto  goe, 
thither  goe. 

5  /Boibrbhtlehetbasnotpetgonc 
batt$c,hc  fayd,  <5oe  bacbe  alfo  to  C5tbaiu 
ah  tfjc  fonne  of  3htbam  the  fonne  of 
<3>haphan,tbhom  the  bing  of  asabplon 
l)athmaoegouetnonroucralltbecmes 
of  3Iubah,  anb  bibcll  lutfh  htm  among 
the  people :  oz  goe  iDhcrcfocucr  it  fecm- 
eth  conuentent  bnto  thee  to  goc.S>o  tfjc 
captamc  of  tfjegarb  gauehtmbttatlcs 
anb  areVbarb,anb  let  him  goe. 

6  Xhen  uJcnt  giercmtah  bnto  <5t- 
baitah  the  fonne  of  3htbam  to  ££iv 
pah,anbbibclt  ttnth  him  among  the 
peoplcthatibere  leftm  the  lanb. 

7  C  i!5oib  ibhen  all  the  taptalnes 
ofrtjefo2cesibhichwereinthcfielbS,eiini 
thep  anb  their  men,  hearb  thatthc  htng 
of  25abplon  hab  mabe  C5cbauah  the 
fonne  of  3fhibam  gonernonr  m  the 
lanb  ,  anb  hab  tommitteb  bnto  him 
mcn,anb,  \bomenanb  rhilbien ,  anb  of 
the  poo:e  of  the  ianb,of  them  that  Ibcrc 
not  cancb  aibap  captmc  to  ffiabplon ; 

8 1EhcntheptamctO(5ebaltahtofl0t3 
pah ,  cucn  gjnnnacl  the  fonne  of  $it 
thamah,anb  3Johanan,anb3Jonathan 
thefonnesofBarcah,anb5>etaiahthe 
fonne  ofXanhumcth ,  anb  thefonnes 
of<£phatthc/5etophathitc,anb  3e^ 
niah  the  fonne  of  aQ3aachathttc,  thep 
anb  their  men. 

9  3!nb  (Sebaliah  the  fonne  of  %\)\- 
bam  the  fonne  of  £>haphan,fiuar  c  bnto 
them  anb  to  their  men ,  fapmg,  jfcare 


not  t  to  feme  the  Calbeans :  mbeil  m 
the  lanb  anb  feme  the  btngofzSabp* 
lon,anbtt  Chalbe  ftcll  ttnth  pou. 

io  3s  fomtc,beholb,3Jttnii  bibcll  at 
$3i5pah  to  fcruc  the  Calbeans ,  ibhith 
lbtll  tome  bnto  tos :  but  pee,  gather  pee 
tbtnc,anbfummcr  fruits,anb  ople,  anb 
put  them  tnpoutbcffels ,  anbbtbeilin 
pour  cmcs,that  pee  haue  taben. 

ii  iLtbcttnfc  ttmen  all  the  TJeibes 
that  were  m£{9oab,anb  among  the  3m- 
monttcs,anb  m  €bom,  anb  that  were  m 
allthc  tountries,  hearb  thatthc  bing  of 
asabplou  hab  left  a  remnant  of  5 ubah, 
anb  thathehab  fet  ouer  them  ©ebaiiah 
the  fonne  ofahtbam  the  tonne  of  S>ha- 
phatt; 

ii  encnallthe3Jc*bestcturnebout 
of  all  plates  tbhtther  thcptticrebnuen, 
anb  tame  to  thcianb  of  3Itibah,to  <5v 
baliah  bnto  £Di5pah>  anb  gathercb 
Vbtne  anb  fummct  frutts,b  crp  mud). 

i  j  CflBoieoner^ohanan  the  fonne 
of  Bareah,anb  all  the  taptatnes  of  the 
fozees  that  were  in  the  ftett)s,came  to  <&& 
bauahto$)i?pah, 

14  3inbfap&bntohint,2>octtthou 
ccrtatnlp  bnotb,  thatasaaits  thebtng 
of  the  Ammonites  hath  fent  gjfbmacl 
the  tonne  of  i!5ethamahtto  Qapthee? 
25ut  ©cbaltahthcfonneofahtttambe: 
leeucb  them  not. 

15  Xhen3!ohananthefonneofBa5 
reah ,  fpabetod5ebaltahtnfl0i?pah  fc- 
tretlp,faputg,1Let  mcgocUpzapthee, 
anb  3  lbtll  flap  gjlhmael  the  fonne 
of  /Rcthantah  ,  anb  no  man  (hall 
bnoib't.  ©Ijcrcfoiefboulbhc  flap  thee, 
that  all  the  3Jcibes  ibhtth  arc  gathercb 
bnto  thecflioulb  be  fcattcrcb,anbthe 
remnantin  IJubah  penfh  i 

16  asut  ©ebaitah  the  fonne  of  3hi< 
bam  fapb  bnto  Johanan  the  fonne  of 
Bareah;  Xhou  fliait  not  bo  this  thing, 
fo?  thou  fpeabeft  falfelp  of  Jfl^mael 

CHAP.    XL  I. 

1  Ifhmael,treclicroufly  killing GedJiah  and  o- 
thers,  purpofcth  with  the  refiduetoflievnto 
the  Ammonites,  n  lohanan  recoucreth 
the  captiues,andn)indeth  to  fly  into  Egypt. 

©lb  tt  tame  to  paffe  tn  the 
fmenthmoneth,  tiut'jfh; 
mael  the  fonne  of  /Rctha- 
niah  the  fonne  of  tflrfhfr 
mah  of  the  feebc  ropall, 
anbthepnntes  of  the  bing,  cucntennc 
mcnibith  him, tame  bnto  Oebaiiahthc 
fonne  of^ljibam  to  Q9i5pah,  anb  there 

_^__ thep 


t  Hit.  tn 
(landhefori 

Andfa  Vfrfe 

10. 


jfrikftbee 
m[omUT 


Gedahah  flame.      Chap.xl[.xli|.     Iflimael  efcapeth 


weeptr>£. 


\\Orf»eere 

Cedaluth, 
Deb} j  the 
hand  or  by 
thejidt  of 
GaLdiah. 


tljcpDiu  catc  bjeab  together  m  C^tspah. 
i  Xhenarofc3Jlhmacl  the  fonnc  of 
/Rcthaniah ,  anb  the  ten  men  that  were 
njcthhun,  anb  fmotc  oebaitah  tl)c  fon 
ofah&am  the  fonnc  of  £>haphan  With 
the  mwb ,  anb  new  hmi,  Whome  the 
bins  of  Babylon  hab  mabe  gouernour 
fucrthclanb. 

3  3fl)tnati  alfo  new  allthc^lcwcs 
that  rbercVbith  hint,  euen  with  ©cbali- 
ahatfl9i?pah,  anb  the  Caibcansthat 
Wercfounb  there,and  themen  of  warrc. 

4  anb  tt  tarae  to  paffc  the  feconb 
bap  after  he  hab  name  <5cbaitah,  anb 
no  man  anew  u, 

5  Xhat  there  tame  certainc  from 
£>hechem,from  *>htloh,anbfrom3>a; 
mana.cuenfourcftojcmcn^aums  their 
bcarbsfhauru,  anb  their  clothes  cent, 
anb  haumg  tut  themfclues,  With  offe- 
rings anb  in tenfc  m  their  hanb  ,to  tying 
hem  to  the  houfe  of  the  %  ©  K  E>. 

6  anb  33fhmael  the  fonnc  of  &t> 
thamah  went  foojth  from  a^pahto 
mcetethem,tibecpmg  all  along  ash" 
Went :  anb  it  tame  to  paffe  as  hce  met 
them,  he  faib  bnto  them,  Come  to  <&t- 
baliah  the  fonne  of  ahiftam. 

7  anb  itwasfo  when  they  came  in- 
to the  nubft  of  the  tittc ,  that  Jfhmacl 
thefonnc  of  /5ethaniah  flctt>  them,  and  j 

call  them  UttO  tt)t  tUlbfl  Of  t\)C  pit,  l)C,  anb  | 

the  men  that  mere  lb  ith  h'-m. 

8  2Sut  ten  men  wcr c  founb  among l 
them,  that  faib  bnto  3f  fl)macl,diap  tos 
not :  foj  U)e  haue  treafures  in  the  ftclb, 
of  Wheatc,  anb  of  barley ,  anb  of  oyle, 
anb  of  hony:  fohc  foWarc,  anb  newc 
them  not  among  their  bjcthjen. 

9  /Bow  the  pit  whercm  IJfhmacl 
hab  tall  all  the  beab  bobies  of  the  men 
(Whom  he  hab  flame  i|  betaufc  of  ©cbfc 
Uatj)was  it,  Which  afa  the  mng  hab 
mabe,  fo:fearc  of  ffiaafha  mng  of  33f 
rael.and  3Khmacl  the  fonne  of  /5etha- 
mah  ftlleb  « With  them  that  were  Oame. 

ioXhenUfhinaeltanebaibaytaptiuc 
all  the  rcfibuc  of  the  people,  that  wc  c  m 
£0t5pah,  <^en  the  ftmgs  baughtcrs,anb 
ai  the  people  that  remameb  m  fljtopah, 
Whom  /Rebwaraban  tlie  taptainc  of 
the  guarb  hab  tommittcb  to  ©ebaliah 
the  fonne  of  amaam,  anb  llfhmael  the 
fonnc  of  i^ethaniah  tancb  them  away 
taptiuc,  anb  bepartcb  to  goc  ouct  to  the 

Ammonites. 
ii  C2Buttbhtn3Johananthtfonnc 

of  i&areah,  anb  all  the  taptames  of  the 
fojees  that  were  with  Dim,  hcarb  of  all 


the  eaill  that 'Jfhmael  the  fonnc  of  Jl5e 
thantah  hab  bone, 

ii  1Dicn  they  toofec  all  the  men,  anb 
went  to  aghttt)ith3)fl)macl  the  fonne 
of  /Bethamah ,  anb  founb  him  by  the 
grcatibatcrsthatarctu  ©ibeon. 

u  iftoiw  it  tame  to  paffc  that  when 
ai  the  people  which  were  with  3  (hmacl, 
fawc  giohanan  tlje  fonnc  of  l&areah, 
anb  all  the  captaincs  of  the  fozces ,  that 
wereiuith  him,  then  they  mere  giab. 

14.  S>o  all  the  people  that  gjfhmacl 
hab  caricb  away  capnucfrom  £J3i3pah 
caft  about  anbrctiirneb,anbWcntton5 
to  giohanan  the  fonnc  of  isarcah. 

15  asutJmmacithcfonncof/Rctha; 
niah  efcapco  from  Johanan  With  eight 
men,  anb  went  to  the  ammonites. 

i6  Xhcn  tooKc  giohanan  the  fonnc 
of  Bareah,  anb  an  the  captaincs  of  the 
forces  that  were  with  him ,  ailthcrcnv 
nantof  the  people  Whom  he  hab  rcco- 
uerebfrom^immacl  the  fonnc  of  /Re-- 
thamah,from  Jp5pah(aftcr  thai  he  hab 
name  ©cbaliah  the  fonne  of  ahi&am, ) 
eucn  mighty  men  of  warr  e,  anb  the  wo- 
mcn,arib  the  thilb?cn,  anb  the  cunuches 
Whom  he  hab  brought  agamc  from  <3v 
bcon. 

17  anbthcybcpartcbanbbWeltin 
the  habitation  of  Chunhan^which  is  by 
Bethlehem,  to  goc  to  enter  into  egypt, 

13  Bccaufc  of  the  Caiocans  :  m 
tl)cy  mere  afraib  of  them,  betanfe  3fl)- 
macl  the  fonnc  of  /Rcthamah  hab  name 
©cbahah  the  fonnc  of  ahtaam,Vbhom 
the  bmg  of  Babylon  mabe  gouetnour 
tnthcianb. 

CHAP.     XL1I. 

1  lohanan  dehreih  Ificmijhto enquire ot  God, 
promifins  obedience  to  his  will.  7  Ieremiah 
afllirethhimoHJtetyinludea,  15  anddeftru- 
(ftion  in  Egypt.  19  He  reprouedi  rheir  hy- 
pocrilie  in  requiringof  the  Lord,  that  which 
thev  meant  not. 

?>cn  all  the  taptames  of 
the  forces ,  anb  ^ohanan 
■&  thefonnc  of  isarcah,  anb 
%H  Jcmiai)  the  fonnc  of  $o- 
^f£*  fhatah,  anb  all  thcpcoplc 
from  the  lean  cucn  bnto  the  grcatctt , 
came  nccre, 

2  anb  faib  bnto  "Jeremiah  the  pjo- 
phct ,  ||  !Lct,me  bcfccch  thecour  fuppli 
canon  be  acccptcb  before  thee,  anb  p;ay 
foi  bs  bnto  the  ft  ©  is  £>  thy  <5ob ,  cuen 
fo:  all  this  r  cmnant  (fo  J  Wc  are  left  but  a 
few  of  many , as  thine  cies  bo  behoiobsN 

3    Xhat 


il0'. 

hrt 


let  crrr 
CMion 
f<rc 


r.o  j 


Diffembling  Icremiah. 


lypocntcs, 


i  £battbe!L©i3©tby©oDmay 
fbctb  us  ttjc  ibay  tbberem  roe  map 
roai&canb  tbetbmgthatlbcmayDoe. 

4.  Xben  3JcTcmiab  ttjc  p?opbet 
fayD  Unto  them ,  31  baue  bearD  vou ;  be- 
boio ,  3 rotll p;ay bnto the  ?L  ©  m  © 
your  <soD ,  acco?Dmg  to  your  tbo;DS, 
anD  it  (ball  tonic  to  pafle  ■  •  >  a  :  \utiatfoc 
ucc  tbmg  the  fL©is©  (ball  anfroere 
you,  3J  will  Declare  itbnto  you  :3J  rotll 
Ueepc  nothing  bathe  from  you. 

5  Xhcn  tbey  fayD  to  3Jetcmiab, 
Xbe  fL®  is©  be  a  true  anD  faithfull 
roitneffe  betroeenc  bs,  if  ibe  doc  not, 
cuen  accortnng  to  all  things  fo?  the 
robicbtbc  3L©«©  thy  <3oD  (ball  fenD 
thee  to  bs. 

6  B3i)ctbcritb<rgooD,o?robctbcrit 
b  emu ,  ibe  ibill  obey  the  boice  of  tbc 
JL  &  13  ©  our  <E»oD ,  to  robom  roe  fenD 
tbee,tbatitmaybcrocliroitbbs,robcn 
ibe  obey  tbe  tooitc  of  the  %  ©  is  ©our 

<S0D. 

7  OnD  it  tame  to  pafle  after  tennc 
Dayes,tbat  tbe  roo?D  of  the  %  013© 
came  bnto  3Jcrcmtab. 

5  Xbcn  taiieD  bee  3Jobanan  the 
fotmcofBarcab,  aiiDailtbccaptaincs 
of  the  forces  robteh  were  uiirt)  him ,  anD 
all  the  people,  from  the  IcaQ,cuen  to  the 
greatcft, 

9  2nDfaiD  bnto  them,  Xbusfattb 
tbc  TL  ©  r  © ,  tlje  <SoD  of  3Ffracl,  bnto 
robomyefentmctop?efcntyourfuppu 
cation  befo?cbim: 

10  3Jf  ye  Vbill  mil  abiDe  in this lanD, 
then  mill  31  buiiD  you ,  anD  net  pull  you 
bourne ,  anD  3J  mill  plant  pou ,  anD  not 
plucbc  vou  bp :  fo?3J  repent  mee  of  the 
eutll,tbat3l  baue  Done  bnto  you. 

11  2Se  notafraiD  of  the  Umgofffia^ 
bWon,  of  robom  yce  are  afraiD:  be  not 
afraiD  of  bun ,  faith  the  %  ©  is  © :  fo?  3 
am  lbith  vou  to  faue  you,  anD  to  Dchuer 
you  from  bis  banD. 

12  3nD  3  roill  (hero  mcrrtes  bnto 
vou,tbat  he  map  banc  mercy  bpon  you 
ano  caufcyou  to  rcturnc  to  your  ovbne 
lanD. 

ij  C^utifycfay.teevbfllnotDttJCH 
in  this  lanD  ,  neither  obey  the  boice  of 
tbc !L©  is  ©your  god, 

14.  laying,  /"3o, but  roe  roill  goc  in 
totbelanDof<£gypt,robercrocChalifcc 
noroacre ,  no?  bcarc  tbc  founD  of  the 
Crumpet ,  no?  baue  hunger  of  b?caD, 
anD  there  row  roe  Dtbell: 

15  ( 3nD  noro  tbcrcfo?c  bearc  tbc 
tbojD  of  the  %  ©  is  ©,  yce  remnant  of 


JjiiDah ,  1^bus  faith  the  %o  is  ©of 
hoOestbe  <5oD  of3Ifracl,3)fyerbbolly 
fet  your  faces  to  enter  into  <£gypt ,  anD 
got  to  foiourne  there:) 

1 6  Chen  it  (ball  come  to  pa(Te ,  that 
tbe(h)02Dtbbitb  ?cc  fearcD,  (balloucr- 
tabe  you  therein  the  lanD  of  «gypt,anD 
the  famine  robercof  yce  rocre  afraiD, 
tfljail  folloiD  clofe  after  youm€gypt, 
anD  there  ye  (ball  Die. 

17  +5)0  (ban  it  bcerottb  all  the  men 
tbatfet  their  faces  to  goe  into  <£gyptto 
foiourne  there ,  they  (bail  Die  by  the 
UU02D,  by  the  famine ,  anD  by  the  peflv 
icncc:  anD  none  of  them  (ball  rematne 
0?  efcapc  from  the  cuil  that  31  rotll  tying 
bponthem. 

18  jfo?  thus  faith  the  %  ©  m  ©  of 
boQstbe<SoDof3Jfrael,;asmmcangcr 
anD  my  funchath  bene  pottucD  foo?tb 
bpon  the  inhabitants  of  3Jerufaiem  :fo 
(ball  my  furie  beepolb?eD  foo?rbtopon 
you,  ibbenyce  (ball  enter  into  €gypt: 
anD  ye  (ball  be  an  erccranon ,  anD  an  a 
(toniQmient, anD  a  curfcanD a  rcpzotb, 
anD  yc  (ban  fee  this  place  no  mo?e. 

19  <LXhe?L©i5©batbfaiDtonter< 
n(ngyou,£>  yeremnant  of  3iuDab,<3oe 
ye  not  into  egypt:hnoro  tcrtainly,tbat 
31  hauc  t  aDmonifheD  you  this  Day. 

io  ifozycSDiffemblcDm  your  hearts 
ibhen  yc  fent  me  bnto  tbefL©  «©  your 
<5oD  ,  laying ,  0?ay  fo2  bs  bnto  the 
%  ©  is  ©  our  god,  anD  acco?Dmg  bnto 
ail  that  the  iL©  is©  our  god  (bail  fay, 
fo  Declare  bnto  bs,anDtt)eU)tlDoeir. 

2 1  3lnD  now  3  hauc  this  Day  Declar  eo 
it  to  y  0  u  ,bu  t  y  c  banc  not  obctcD  theboite 
of  tlie  H©«©  your  (50D,  no?  any  thing 
fo?  the  itohicb  lie  bath  fent  me  bnto  you. 

ix  /ftotti  therefore  UnoiD  certainly, 
that  ye  (ball  Die  by  tbe  froo?D ,  by  the  fa^ 
mme,  anDbytbepcfblence,  in  the  plate 
mhitber  ye  DcOrc  to  go  and  to  foiourne, 

CHAP.    XLIII. 

t  I.iluiun  ,  dilcredinng  Iereniiahs  prophecie, 
caricthkremiah  and  ochers  into  Egypt.  8 
Icrcmiah  prophccieth  by  a  tvpc  die  conquefl 
ot  Egypt,  bv  the  Babylonians. 

m  0  2D  u  tame  to  pafle  that 
JjS  ujIjc  3Iercnuab  haD  maDc 
^§J  an  cud  of  fpcahmg  bnto 
i  aiithcpcoplcaltbtibojDs 
I  oftbc?l©K©tbctr<5oD, 
fo?  Vbbich  the  iL©is©  their  C5od  haD 
fent  him  to  tbenuuen  all  tlicfc  tbo?DS ; 

i  Xben  fpalic ^analj  tliefonnc of 
Dofbaiab, 


clow after 
yen. 

thai  all  the 
meoee. 


Hrir.tefh- 
fifdjgatn!} 
ten. 

\\Or.jem 
hauevfed 
tiecnt  s- 
•fijenr 


Joule t. 


Threatnings for       Chap.xliii).    thcirdifobedicncc 


•Chap.tj.: 
zath.  I  I.J 


Dofbaiab ,  anD  3Jobanan  ti)c  Comic  of 
l&areab,anballtbep20Ubmcn,  raping 
bnWJcrcmtab ,  XboufpeaBcttfaiap: 
tt)C  1L  €> «  V>  OUt  (50b  batl)  notfent 
ttjcc  to  Cap ,  (5oe  not  mto  Cgppt,  to  Co* 
tonrnt  tbcrc. 

j  JSutJSarttcb  tbe  tonne  of /Scrtab 
fcttetb  tbee  on  agatnft  bs  ,fo;  to  bcluter 
bsmtotbcbanbof  tbc  Calbcans,  tbat 
tbcpmigbt  put  bs  tobcatb ,  anb  tanc 
bsaibap  tapttuts  into  Babylon. 

+  fl»o  Jobanan  tbe  fonnc  of  laia- 
rcab,  anb  all  tbc  taptaincs  oftljc  forces, 
anb i all tbe people,  obnebnot  tbcboicr 
of  tbe  1L  ©  k  je>,  to  mbeii  in  tlje  lanb 
ofjubab. 

5  2Sut  5Joljanan  tbc  fonnc  of  Bifc 
reab,anb  ailtlje  taptames  of  tljcfojees, 
toofee  all  tlje  remnant  of  3Jubab ,  tbat 
iberc  rcturncb  from  all  nations  »)l)t 
tbertbepbab  bene  bnucn,  to  btbcll  tn 
tljciant>of3JuDal), 

6  Eucn  men ,  anb ibomcn,  anb tljiU 
b?en,aubtl)cmngsbaugljtccs,anoeue! 
rp  perfon  tbat  jftcbusaraban  tbe  tap; 
tame  of  tl)e  gnarb  bablcftttntb  <£>cba= 
Iial)tl)c  fonne  of5tl)tUam,  tbefonneof 
*>bapban,anb'Jcrcmiabtbc£zopbct, 
anb  aBarucb  tlje  fonnc  of  jBcnab. 

7  S)o  tbcp  tame  into  tbcianb  of  C* 
gppt:  foi  ttjep  obepebnot  tbebopceof 
rtic  ILchsid,  tbus  came  tbcp  cuen  to 
Xaftpanftes. 

8  C  Xljcn  came  tbc  ttwb  of  t\)t 
ILsd  «ss>bnto  gjctcnual)  in  Xabpan* 
bes,faptng; 

9  xaae  great  (tones  in  tbinc  banb, 
anb  l)ibe  tfjem  in  tbc  clap  tntbcbnrttc 
bill,  tbrjicli  is  at  tbecntrpofj&baraobs 
ijoufc  m  Xal)panl)cs,in  tbc  figbt  of  tbe 
mcnofjubal): 

io  anbrapbntotbcm,Xbusfaictb 
tbc  iLcmi?  of  bofts  the  (Sot  of  JJfracl ; 
fficbolbc ,  3J  lbill  fenbanb  mc&tbw 
tbabre^ar  tbc  ning  of  aBabplon  mp 
fcruant ,  anb  ttnll  fet  Ijis  rhjone  Upon 
tlicfc  ftonestnatll  bauebibbc,  anb  lice 
(ball  fpjcab  bis  ropall  pauilton  ouer 
tljem. 

1 1  3inb  tobenbe tommetb,b«  wall 

fttlltC  tbC  lanb  Of  CETPPt,  and  deliuer*  fUCb 
asarefo^beatb,  tO  bCart)    anbfUCbas  are 

fo?  captiuitie  to  capmntic  anb  fuel)  as  are 
fojtbcfU)02b,totbeflbojb. 

n,  3mb3J  lbilmnbicafirclntbebou* 
fesof  tbc  gobs  of  £gppt,  anb  bee  (ball 
burnt  tbcm,  anb  tarrp  tbcmaibap  cap; 
ftucs,  anb  bee  (ball  arap  bimfclfc  tbttb 
tfjelanbof  egppt,  as  a  fbepbearbput* 


tetb  on  bis  garment,  anb  bee  (ban  goc 
foitJj  from  tbentc  m  peace. 

ij  ^e  (ball  b^eabcalfo  the  t  images  of 
II  JSctb  fbemefb tfjat  ^tn  tbc  lanb  of  e- 
gppt,  anb  tbc  boufes  of  rtje  gobs  of  tbc 
egppnans  (ball  be  burnc  tt»tti)  fire.  ' 

CAP    XLIIII. 

i  leremuh  exprefleth  the  deflation  of  ludah 
for  their  idolatry,  n  Heeprophefieth  their 
dcftruclion,  who  commit  idolatry  in  Egypt. 
15  The  obfhnacie  ot  the  lewes.  io  leremiah 
threatneththem  tor  the  fame,  10  And  for 
a  iigne,prophecieth  the  delrrudion  of  Egypt. 

$ctbo?b  tbat  came  to  3Jcs 
remialj  concerning  all  tbc 
3lctticsrbbicbbrbciintbe 
lanb  of  «gppt ,  lbbicb 
_brueliat^igboi,anbat 
Xaljpaubcs,  anb  atiBopb.  anb  in  tbe 
tountrcp  of  laattyos,  faping, 

2  XbU5faitbtbe!L€)is©ofboQs, 
tbe  (Sob  ofjjftael;  Pt  bauc  fecne  all  cije 
emll  tbat  yfymc  bjougbtbpon^cru* 
Calcm,anb  bpon  all  tbc  nnes  of  Uuoab: 
anbbcboio.tbisbavtbcv  are  aeefoian- 
on,anb  no  man  bibelletb  tbcrem, 

j  25ecaufcoftbciribicBcbnes  lbbicb 
tbcpbauccommitteb.to  pjouohemeto  I 
anger,  in  tbat  tbey  rbent  to  burnetii*  > 
cenfe,  and  tofcruc  otbct  gobs,  ibbo'n  J 
tbey  tmerb  not,  neither  tbep ,  pott,  no? 
pourfatbers. 

4  Jt?orbbeit3  fent  bnto  pouallmp 
fcruantg  tbc  0iopbcts,n(ing  earlp  anb 
fenbing  them,fapmg,  £>b  boenottbis 
abommable  tbing  tbat  3  bate. 

5  2SuttbcpbcarBenebnot,no?enclt'- 
nebtbeir  care  to  turne  from  tbeiribip 
Rtbncs,to  burnc  no  mtenfebnto  otber 
gobs. 

6  nabcrcfojcmpfuric  anb  mine  an> 
ger  ibas  pon«cb  fo?tbanb  ibas  Hmbicb 
in  tbc  nttes  of3Jubab,anb  tn  tbe  ftrccts  I 
of  3lcriu"alcm,anb  tbeparc  tbafteb  anb  j 
bcfoiatcasattbisbap. 

7  Xbcrcfoie  nott)  tbus  faitb  tlje' 
lLois  jd  tbe  ©ob  ofboftcs,tbc  oob  of 
31fracl,  n9bercfo;c  commit  ve  this  great 
cuill  agamfi  pour  foulcs,to  tut  off  fron  i 
pou  man  anb  iboman ,  cbilbe  anb  fttcu^ 
ling  tout  of  3Jubab,  toleaucpounonc 
toremainc. 

8  3n  tbat  y>tt  pjouone  mcc  bnto 
ityatb  tbitb  tbc  tbojftes  of  pour  banbs, 
burning  intenfe  bnto  otber  gobs  m  tl)c 
lanb  of  tfgppnbbitber  pe  bee  gone  to 
btbcll,  tljat  pccmtgbt  cut  pour  fclucs 

off 


:Hrr,m-Jta»- 
cbngirmgtl. 
\\Or.Th, 
hotter    :  ih* 
Shmt. 


t  Htbr  ohi 
cfihe  mtdii 
oduA.lh. 


Theoblhnacie 


[cremia 


h. 


ofldol 


oiatersj 


kedneffes.or, 
'Mm(hm;ntt 


f  Hebr.con 

trite. 


A:l!OS  p 


\Hei  l,f: 
vf  their 
/ox/.-. 


\\Orjrmu 
tfhetuen 

'Chap. 7. 

1 8. 


off  ,anu  that  re  might  be  a  turfc,  anu 
a  rep2ocb  among  all  tljc  nations  of 
the  earth* 

9  $?auc  ft  forgotten  the  t  ttiicRCUncs 
ofpoucfatljers  ,anutbett)tcRconcHc  of 
the  Kings  of  Jjiioab ,  anu  the  lbicRcU 
ncsoftbcirlbiucs,  anu  pour  olbncibtc; 
RCDiicfTe ,  anu  the  ttncRcuncffc  of  pour 
unites,  tbbiclj  tbcp  bauceommtttcum 
tUc  lanu  of  3JuUaD ,  anu  m  ttjc  Greets  of 
3)erufalenK 

io  Xbcp  aw  not  Mjumbleuetttn  Un- 
to tins  uap ,  neither  hauc  tbcp  fcarcu, 
noz  lbalRcU  in  mp  fUlb  ,no2  in  mp  S>ta 
tutes  that  3J  fct  before  pou ,  anu  before 
pout  fathers. 

1 1  C  1El)crcfo2c  thus  fapctb  the 
%  0  is  ©  of  Ijoltcs,  the  Gou  of  Jftacl, 
iscboiu,*  5  \Mfct  mp  face  agamtt  pou 
fo:  ciulianu  to  tut offall 3uUab. 

i2  3mu  5  .bill  taUc  the  remnant  of 
Juoah,  that  banc  fcttbcit  faces  to  got 
into  the  lanu  ofcgppt  to  foiournc  there, 
anu  tbcp  (ball  all  be  confumcu  jnd  fall  in 
tbcianu  of  Cgppt:  tbcp  than"  tucn  bee 
confumcu  bp  the  fiuojt),  and  bp  tfjc  fa- 
mine:  they fbauuic,  fromtbclcaftcucn 
bnto  the  grcatcft,  bp  tbcftuo20anUbp 
the  famine :  anu  tbcp  fbalbc  an  cremv 
ttonandan  aftotufbmtnt ,  anu  a  curfc, 
anuarepjocb. 

13  Jfoz  3  Mil  punifl)  them  that 
Mbcli  m  tbcianuof  <ggppt,as3lbauc 
pumfycu  Jcrafaiem ,  bp  thcftuo2U,  bp 
ttjc  fammcano  bp  ttjc  pcfhlcncc  ■, 

i+  £>o  ttjat  none  of  ttjc  remnant  of 
3JuuaIj  ibbicb  arc  gone  into  the  lanu  of 
egppt  to  foiournc  tbcrr,fball  cfcapco: 
rcmainc ,  that  tbcp  fljouiu  returncinto 
the  lanu  of  IJuuab  to  the  ibbicb  tbcp 
t  rjauc  a  ocfire  to  r  cturnc  to  much  there: 
fonionc  (ball  tcturuc  but  fitch  as  (ball 
cfcapc. 

«5  ft  Xben  all  the  men  ibbicb  tmetb 
tljat  their  ibtucsbao  burnt  tnccnfcbn 
to  other  i5ous,  anu  all  the  ibomcn  that 
ftoou  bp,a  great  multittiUccucn  all  tljc 
pcoplctlrat  uibctt  m  the  lanu  of  egppt 
m  patbjtos  ,  anfrocrcu  'Jcrcnuaij, 
fapmg, 

i6  3ts  foz  the  rboju  tljat  thou  Ijaft 
fpottcn  bnto  bs  m  ttjc  name  of  tljc 
%  o  is  d  ,  idc  Uiill  not  hear  tun  buto 
tftcc. 

17  Butineibaitmainipuoctbbat; 
focucr  thing  goctlj  foitt)  out  of  our 
oiune  mouth ,  to  burnt  tnccnfc  bnto  the 
II*  cjuecne  of  hcaucn ,  anu  to  poibjc  out 
Ujinhc  offnngs  bnto  her ,  as  ibebauc 


Uonc,  Ibe  anu  our  fathers,  our  mugs 
anu  ourpnntcsmtije  cities  of  31uoab, 
anu  in  the  frccctcs  of  '3ctufaicm :  fo? 
then  hau  U)t  plentte  of  t  bitailcs ,  anu 
lucre  lbcit,anufaib  no  cutll. 

is  asm  fmte  ibe  left  offto  burneuv 
tenfe  to  the  queene  of  hcaucn,  anu  to 
poibje  out  ujinuc  offemgs  bnto  Ijcr, 
rbc  Ijauc  ibantcu  all  things ,  anu  bane 
becue  confumcu  bp  tljc  fmojU ,  anu  bp 
the  famine. 

1 9  ^nu  *  ibbtn  \bc  burnt  intenfc  to 
thcquccncofljcaucn,  anupoib?eu  out 
Unnbeoffcingsbnto  bet,  Uiuibcmaltc 
her  caaes  to  uiozflnp  gee,  anu  poibzc 
out  ujmac  offrmgs  bnto  Ijcr  lbttljout 
our  ||  men  t 

zo  cXhcn^crcmiahfapu bnto  all 
the  people,  to  tljc  men  anu  to  thc\bo= 
men ,  anu  to  all  the  people  Which  hau 
giuctt  him  tljat  anfracrcfaping ; 

zi  Xhe  intenfc  that  pec  burnt  m  the 
nttesofjuuah ,  anu  tn  thcftrcctcs  of 
3  erufalcm,  pec  anu  pour  fathers,  pour 
lungs  anUponrpnnccs,  anu  the  people 
of  the  lanu  ,UiU  not  the  ?L©ia©  remem- 
ber them  ,  anu  came  tt  not  into  bis 
minuei 

zz  ^>o  that  the  H€H3©  toulu  no 
longer  bearcbccaufc  of  the  cum  of  pour 
uomgs ,  and  becaufc  of  tljc  abominati- 
ons, ruijicl)  fee  Ijauc  comnuttcu :  thcr  & 
fozeis  pour  lanu  a  urfoiatton ,  anu  an 
aftomfhment,  anu  a  curfc  ibitljout  an 
inhabitant's  attbisuap. 

z3  26ccaufe  pou  banc  burnt  uucnfe, 
anu  betanfe  vu  hauc  fumeU  agamft  the 
?L©h  jd,  anu  Ijauc  not  obepcu  tlic  bopce 
of  tljc  %  ©  is  £>,  1102  tbaiftcu  in  Ijisiaiu, 
no?  in  bis  Ratutcs ,  no?  mbtstcfhmo- 
ntes:  trjcrcfojc  this  cmll  is  Ijappcneu 
bntopou,asatthisuap. 

Z4  ^ojeottcr  gicrcmiab  fapubnto 
all  tljc  people ,  anu  to  all  tbcVbomcn; 
fccate  the  Vb02U  of  tljc  %  <s>  is  t> ,  all 
3Iuuab,tbataremtbcianuofiegppt. 

z5  Xljusfaitb the  H©isoof boftcs 
the  ©ou  of  Dfracl,faptng;  Ptt  anu  pour 
Vbiucs  hauc  both  fpottcn  tbtth  pour 
mouths ,  anu  fulfillcutbitb  pout  banu, 
fapmg, tiDcUnll  furelp  pcrfo?mc  our 
boibcstljatiuc  bancboUicu,  tobnmc 
uucnfe  to  the  quccne  of  hcaucn ,  anu  to 
polluc  out  U2inhc  offrings  bnto  her: 
pec  lUill  furelp  accotnplifb  pour  boibes, 
anu  furelp pcrfo2inc pour  bolbcs.       I 

z6  Xbcrcfo?cbearcpcctbcibo2Uof 
the  %  ©  is  © ,  an  3Uioab  that  much  m 
the  lanu  of  Cgppt ,  25cljolu ,  3  ijauc 

fruo?ne 


t  H,i. 
bread. 


'  Chap.7. 
18. 


II  0: 
bands. 


h*f 


Baruch  faint.  Chap.xlv.xlvj.       Againlt  Egypt. 


"f  Heb.  front 
rru  or  from 
ihem. 


•Chap.  )j> 
18. 


ftoome  bv  mv  great  jftame ,  faitt)  tljc 
|L©i3©,thatmv4i5aiuc  ujalno  mo2c  be 
namcDin  the  mouth  of  anv  man  of  J" 
oar),  in  all  the  lanb  of  Cgypt,  favuig, 

3El)ClL02DC5O£>HUCt!). 

17  23el)0lD,3J  mill iDatcr)  oucr  them 
fo:  ciull,  ana  not  foi  goob,  anu  all  the 
menofiiucahthata.-mthclanbofe 
gpptChalbcconfuiucbbvthcfroo2bv*bvi 
the  famm,bntil  there  be  an  hid  of  them. 

is  Pet  a  ftnail  number  that  cfcape 
the  fiuo:D,  fhall  rcturnc  out  of  the  lanb 
of  cgypt  into  the  lanb  of  3nibah :  anb 
all  the  remnant  of  Jutwh  that  arc 
gone  into  the  lanb  of  cgyptto  foiournc 
there,  fl)ali  Knoll)  tbtjofc  ltoozbes  (hall 
Oanbjmmc  02  theirs. 

19  i\  JtntJtliisiiuibeafignetontovou, 
fait!)  the  ILoia  © ,  that  3  mill  pumfb  \ 
you  at  this  plate ,  that  ve  map  hnoibe  ■ 
thatmv  uwbsfhaifurcly  ftanb  agamft 
youfomuU. 

30  XrjusfaitljtrjefLoisjp.iScholD, 
3  imagine  Pharaoh-  $oph2aBingof 
<£gypt  into  the  hanb  of  his  enemies, 
anti  into  the  hanbe  of  them  that  fccUc 
his  life ,  as  3  gauc  zebemah  King  of 
jjubah  into  the  hanti  of  jftcbuthafr 
rc^ar  mug  of  iSabylonljis  enemy  ,anb 
that  fought  his  ufe. 

CHAP.    XLV. 

Bar.xh  bems;  difinayed,  4  Iercmiah  inftru- 
ctech  aid  corntorteth  him. 

g^^a,^^  ^c  11)0Il)  ti)at  Jeremiah 
"  lUff  the  #2ophct  fpafee  bnto  i 
:§?>&  iSaruch  the  fonuc  of  il5c- ! 
nah,mhcnhchaDtbntten| 
„  thcfciboibsmaboofttat! 
the  mouth  of  Jeremiah,  m  the  fourth ; 
reete  of  ^ehoiatum  the  fonnc  of  5o  ' 
hah  Umg  of  Ihioah,  faying, 

2  Xhustatth  the  ILois©  the  <Sob  I 
of  llfracl  bnto  thee ,  £>  asarucfc, 

3  3Zhoubibftlay,D3oetsmenolb, 
foi  the  *L©hs>  hath  abbeb  gnefc  to  niy 
fo20Vb,3f  famtcbin  niyGghmg,  anbj 
fuibnoreft. 

4  CXhusfhait  thou  far  bnto  hint, 
XhciLoisD  faith  thus,25choiD,  that 
tbftich  3  hauc  built  lbili  3  bzcaac 
Dottme,anb  thatlbhithD  hauepianteb 
3  ibtllpuicRcbp,cuenthisibhole  lanb: 

5  Cant)  fectteft  thou  great  things  fo2 
thy  felfc  <  feeue  them  not :  fo:  bcholb,  3 
ibtl  b:mg  cuill  Upon  all  flefb,  faith  the 
Hon©:  butthytifclbiUjgiucbnto 
thee  *fo2  a  ym  »« a»  Placcs  WJcr 
thougocft. 


CHAP.     XL  VI. 

Icrcmiah prophciieih  the  uu:rihiowor  Pha- 
raohs armie  at  Euphrates,  15  and  the  con - 
cj'.ieftof  E«ypt,byNcbuchad  rezzar.  17H1; 
comforted]  Iacob  in  then  chaftuement. 

J?c  11102b  of  the  fLois© 
lbhirhcamcto  Jeremiah 

J&  the  p2ophct ,  againlt  the 

£3  Gentiles, 

&S  2  agamft  <£gypt,againfl 
the  armie  of  Pharaoh  Ji^echo  Umg  of 
Egypt,  lbhich  lbas  fey  tljc  nuer  €\x- 
plnatcs  m  Carchcmtfl) ,  lbhich  0iH\x 
cljab  res5ar  aing  of  asabylon  fmotc  m 
the  fourth  ycerc  of  Jlchoiaaim  the  fon 
of  Jotiah  umg  of  5!ubah. 

3  02bcr  ye  the  buchler  ant)  fljielb, 
anb  b2aiD  nee  re  to  battcll. 

4  toarneffe  the  ho2fes,  anb  get  bp  yc 
ho2femcn ,  anb  ftano  fo2th  Ibuh  y°ur 
helmcts,furbifhthefpeares,aidputon 
thcbjiganbmes. 

5  Bahercfo;ehauc  3  fecne  thcmbif- 
uiaio,andturncoaiDapbacUe?anbthctr 
mightie  ones  are  t  beaten  bomnc,  *  are 
|  tfkoapatcanti  loobciiotbaru :  for  fcare 
was  rounb  about,  faith  the  Hois©. 

6  net  not  the  froift  flee  alba?,  no? 
ti)c  mightie  man  cfcape :  they  thai  (rum- 
ble anb  fall  toinarb  the  jftojth  bv  the  tv 
ucr€uph2atcs. 

7i©ho«thtsthatc6mcthbpasafloob, 
ibhoferbaters  arcmoucoas  p  riucrs* 

8  cgFPtrifethbplibcafloob.anohis 

luatcrsarcmoucbliBe  the  nuers,  anb 
heratth^unlgocbp^.idtbmcouerttjc 

earth,  3  null  befttop  the  ntic  anb  the 
inhabitants  thereof. 

9  Come  bp  ve  hotfes,  anb  rage  vce 
charets,  ano  let  the  mighne  men  come 
fo2th,  the t Ethiopians  anb  the* lib?' 
anstliathanble  thefhtelb,  anb  the %r- 
bians  tiiathanblr  and  benb  the  boll). 

io  jTo:  this  is  the  mv  of  the  ?Lo2D  G€>© 
of  hoftes,  a  bap  of  Dcngcaucc,  that  he 
map  aucngc  hmi  of  his  abucrfaries  '. 
ant)  thefioo2b  dial  bcuourc,  anb  it  (halt 
befatiatc,  anbmabcb^unhe  iiuth  their 
|bloob:fo2thc?L02bC©iDofhoffshath 
!  afaenfitem  the  iiioitl)  countrey  by  the 
nuer  Cuphjatcs. 

i  i  C5oe  Dp  into  dlcab  ,  anb  ta&c 
baimc ,  £>  birginc ,  the  Daughter  of  e 
gvpt :  m  name  Qjait  thou  bfe  manp  me- 
Dittues :  tor  thou  (halt  t  not  be  tur  cb. 

ii  Xhe  nations  hauc  htarb  of  thv 
niamc,  anb  thv  eric  hath  filicb  the  lanb : 
fo2  the  mightie  man  hath  ftumblcb  a 

gamft 


t  Hobbro- 
tip}  in  pieces 

t  Hcb.jUd 
af,jht. 


t  Hcbr.  Put. 


( Htbr  ™ 
ewe  fhalbc 
vntothtc. 


Againll:Egypt,and    Ieremiah.  thePhilifhnes. 


t  Hibr.mul- 

falUr. 


\Hcb.maks 

thremtlru- 
mrnrsofiAp- 
r  tattle. 


t  Hehr.lnl 
locks  of  the 


#aB. 


\\0r.  noun- 
■ 
Htb.  Amor., 


gamft  t!jc  migbttc,  and  tbcparcfallcn 
both  togctl)tr. 

13  €  Hbcib02b  that  the  %  0  is  © 
fpafec  to3?cccmuil)  tye  pzopbct,  boib 
/•2cbutba'02C35ar  i&ng  of  iSabplon 
mouib  come  &fmttc  the  lanb  of  cgypt. 

14  ©cciarcyctn£gppt,anbpubli(b 
in  d9tgbol,  anb  pubUfb  in  /5opb ,  anb 
m  Xabpanbes :  fay  pe,  S>taub  fa(l,anb 
pjppartthcc  fo2tbcuuo2bft)albcuoiirc 
rounb  about  thee. 

15  nDbraretbpbaiiammcnfrocpta 
ujapahcpftoobiiot,becaiifetbc1LoB3D 
bib  tmue  them. 

i6  tir>e  mabc  many  to  fall,?ca  one  fell 
bpon  anotber,anb  they  faib,2(nre,  anb 
let  us  got  agamcto  our  oibnr people, 
anb  to  the  lanb  of  our  natuutie ,  from 
thcopp2cffingfiuo2b. 

17  %\)ty  bib  trie  there ,  Pharaoh 
Huig  of  <£gvpt  is  butanotfe ,  be  bath  paf 
febtbertmeappotnteb. 

is  3s  ^  line,  fatth  the  B<ng,ibbofc 
i^amci  tfieH^KiD  ofl)oltcs,S>urclp 
as  Xab02  is  among  the  motmtames, 
anb  as  Carmcl  bp  tlje  S>ca ,  fo  (bail  Ijce 
come. 

19  jaDbtbottbaugbterblbcliinginC; 
gppt,t  tumid)  tbp  fclfc  to  goc  into  eapn 
uitic  :fo2/3opb  maibc  ibaftcanb  befo- 
late  Without  an  inhabitant. 

20  <egvpt  ts  UUc  a  bcrp  fair  c  heifer, 
but  brfrructton  tommctb :  it  tommctb 

OUtOftllCi!502tl). 

21  :MolKrmrcbmen.ircmtnemibft 
ofber,  liftetfattcb  btilloelts,fo2thcpai 
fo  arc  turncb  barkc ,  and  are  flcb  a\bap 
together  tbcpbtbnotftanb.bccaufctbc 
bap  of  their  calamine  lbas  come  bpon 
tbem^ndtbcttmcoftbcirbtfitatton. 

22  %\)t tootcc thereof fball goc lihe a 
fcrpeut ,  f02  tbcp  fbail  marcb  lbitb  an 
armie,  anb  come  agauift  her  ibttl)  arts, 
as  bribers  of  luoob. 

2  3  Xhep  (ball  tut  boxbuc  her  foireft, 
fatth  the  XL  0  ia  jd,  though  it  cannot  be 
fearcbcb,becattfctbep  arc  nwc  then  the 
grafl)oppers,anb  are  tnntimerablc. 

24  Xhe  baughtcr  ofCgyptfbalbe 
coufounbcb ,  fbe  fbaibc  bcluicrcb  into 
the  hanb  of  the  people  of  the  /i5o2th. 

n  XhciLoix^ofhoffcsthceob 
of  ^Jfrael  fatth,  iSeholD,  31  lbilipuntfl) 
the  Imuintubr  of P.o  ,  anb  pharaob, 
aubCrjppt.njttb  their  gor>o,anbtbtir; 


lungs,  euen  pharaob ,  anb  all  them! 
that  truftm  him. 

26  3nb  31  Null  ticlutcr  them  into  the 
hanb  of  thofe  that  feebe  their  liues,  anb 


into  the  hanb  of  /Eiebuchabjc$3at  iting 
ofasabplon,  anb  into  the  hanb  of  his 
fcruants ,  anb  aftctibarbs  it  fliaibcin- 
habittb,as  in  the  bapes  of  olb,  faith  the 

JLOISJD. 

27  C*2Sutfcarcnottbou,£>mpfcr; 
uatu5acob,anbbenotbt(maicb,£>3if 
rael :  fo2  bcholb ,  31  ujiII  fane  thee  from 
afarr  c  off,  anb  thv  fre  b  from  the  lanb  of 
their  capnumc ,  anb  3Saeob  fball  re- 
ninic  anb  be  in  reft  anb  at  cafe ,  anb 
none  fball  mabcium  afraib. 

2S  .fcarctbounot,£>3Jatobmpfcr; 
nam,  faith  thdL©fijD,fo23J  mibitb 
tbecftu'J  ujillmaRcafuiicnb  ofailtbe 
nanons  lbbttber  3  hauc  b2iueu  thee, 
but3Jibiiinot  mabc  *  a  full  cub  of  thee, 
but  t02r  ect  thec  in  mcafurc,  1 1  p  et  ujtll  3 
notleaucrtjetujhollybnpunifbcb. 

CHAP.    XLVII. 

ThedcftruifticmoftheFLjhflmes. 

lit  lb02bOfthC|L©lS5> 

13  that  came  to  "Jeremiah 
the  p2opbct  agamft  rrjc 
pbiliftmcs  ,  before  that 
Pharaoh  fmotet<Fa3a. 

2  Xtiuc  faith  the  ILo  n  3?,25ebolb, 
*  waters  rife  bp  out  of  the  jl5o2tb,  attb 
(ball  be  an  ouerflo  ttnng  floob ,  anb  fhail 
oucrfloib  the  lanb ,  anb  t  all  that  ts 
therein,  thenne,  anb  them  that  blbell 
therein  :thctt  the  men  fball  cric,anb  all 
the  inhabitants  ofthc  lanb  fball  bolblc. 

3  3U  the  noifc  of  the  ftamptngoftbc 
hoofcsofhisftrongiioifa,  at  the  ruu> 
mg  of  his  chatcts,^nd  at  the  rumbling  of 
his  ibbeelcs,tbc  fathers  fball  not  loose 
baebe  to  their  cbtlb2cn  fo?  fceblcnef fe of 
hanbes. 

4  25ecaufcoftliebavtbatcommeth 
to  fpoilc  all  the  pbmmties,and  to  nit  off 
from  1lv2us  anb  Hibon  cucrp  helper 
that  rcmamcth :  fo;  the  %  o  is  ©  lbill 
fpoilc  the  pbililhncs,  the  remnant  of 
tlje  t  countrey  of  Capbtoj. 

<,   25aibneffe  ts  tome  bpon  (5&W 
^tlibcion  is  cut  off  w.th  tbcremnantof 
their  bailep  :bolb  long  lbilt  tljon  cut 
thy  fclfc? 

6  £>  thou  fruo2b  of  the  ?lo«iD,hotb 
long  will  u  be  ere  thou  be  quiet  i  t  put  bp 
thv  fclfc  into  thv  fcabbcrb  ,rcft  anb  be 
mil. 

7  f  l)oib  can  it  bee  quiet,  fenng  the 
IL011;  *d  hath  giucnita  charge  agamft 
^iflibclon,  anb  againllthe  fea  fboare; 
there  hath  he  appomteb  it. 

CHAP. 


"Ifai.  41. 
1  j.and  43. 
j  .and  44.1, 
cha.tb.io. 


*Chap.  ^0. 
1 1  and  io. 
24. 

\\Qr,notvt- 
ttrh  cut 
thee  of. 


zab. 

Mfd.8.7. 

\H1tr.1he 
f*faef[c  tbtT' 

1Hrl.  ibe 

i/e. 

fHct.  gf 

rbrr  thy 

lilfe. 

^Mrkhm 

ciiiltbm  f 

Moabsfccuntie,       Chap.xlvir 


an 


dpnd( 


Or,  the  hi 
pUce. 


\Or,i»r 
rren»hlie 
finer. 
jHrkpr 
tftcrlhrr. 


\'rlrh.wrr- 
ping  mth 
wcrping. 
•lfai.155. 

\\Or,ana{ril 

tree. 

'Clu.I7.l5. 


*  Cha.4?-5 


||0r,», 

gintlj. 


\Hrl:Jlocd 


CHAP.   XLVIII. 

Tru'i.id^cment  ot  Moab,  7  for  their  pride,  | 
11  for  their  lecmitic,  14  tor  their  carnall  con- 
fidence,  :6  &  tor  (heir  contempt  of  God  and  I 
his  people.  47  ThercftaurationotMo.ib. 

„  <3ainft  £$oab  thus  favth 

&M ^Hsfc t,K  ^  ^  w  ®  of!)oftc0,tljc 
-  god  of  3Jfracl,  teoc  bnto  i 
/5cbo,fojit  tsfpotleD:  ua- 
_nad)aim  ts  confounbcb 
and  tauen.il  $3j?tfgab  ts  confouttDeD  anD 
btfmapeD. 

Z     There  fhall  bee  HO  H10ZC  P2apfC  Of 

£0oab :  in  i^cfhbon  t  hep  hauc  bcuifcb 
cmll  agatnft  tt  tome  anb  let  bs  rat  it  off 
from  bemg  a  nation  ;  alfo  thou  (halt  bee 
||  tut  Dottinc,  jD  i^abmen ,  the  fruo2b 
(hailtpurfucthcc. 

j  ^botteof trains fhaiibeftom^o* 
ronaim;  ;S>poiUng*grcatDcftrucnon. 

4  £0oab  is  bcftropcD,hcr  little  ones 
hauc  cattfcD  a  cne  to  be  hcarD. 

5  5fo:  m  the  going  top  of  Unhid) 
fcontttiuall  weeping  (hall  go  bp  fo2  in 
the  going  bourne  of  toojonatm  tl)t  ene- 
mies hauc  hcarD  arrtc  of  Dcftructtott. 

6  jFlcc ,  faue  pour  luics ,  anb  be  itbc 
the  II*  fteatb  in  d)c  lbtlDernctTc. 

7  C  5f02  betatife  thou  halt  trttflcD 
inthp  ujoiftcs,  anb  in  thy  ttcafutes, 
thou  (halt alfo  bctattcn, anb  Chemottj 
(hall  gocfoonhmto  capnuttic  with  bis 
*  pztefts  anb  his  pnnccs  to  getber. 

8  2lnD  the  fpoplcr  (hall  tome  Dpon 
cuerp  cine,  anb  no  cttic  (ball  cftapc :  the 
pallcp  alfo  thai  pcrifb,?  the  piamc  fljail 
bcbcftropcD, as  v  fLoisPtoatb  fpoacn. 

9  Giitc  nnngs  bnto  Q3oab ,  that  it 
map  Act  anb  get  arbap  :  fo:  the  cities 
thereof  (halbc  befoiatc,  ibtthout  any  to 

Dihell  therein. 

10  CttrfcDbehethatDocththc  mojHe 
of  the  %  o  is  c  1 1  Deceitfully ,  anD  turftb 
be  he  tljat  uccpeth  bacHc  his  fawb  from  | 
bloob.  .  .      U.J 

11  c*Boab  hath  bene  at  cafe  from  his 
youth,  anb  Dec  hath  fctleb  on  his  lees, 
anb  hath  not  been  cmpticb  from  bcttcll 
totociTclUicttbccbatbbcgoneintotap; 
tuiitic :  thcrcfojchis  taOc  t  remameb  m 
him,anbhis  fentis  not  thangeb. 

u  Xbcrfo2ebcbolb,tbcDaycscomc, 
faptb  the  %  ©  is  ip,  that  J  null  fctiD 
tonto  him  wanDcrcrs  that  n>alt  taufc 
him  to  luanDcr,  anb  (ball  cntpticbis 
bcffcls,anbb2calicthcit  bottles. 

15  3nD  33oab  (hall  bee  afbameb  of 
Chemoflt ,  as  the  houfc  ofjlfcacl  was 


'i.Kin 


■'f- 


\HtkixhA- 

bitrefc. 


"ifai.itf.7. 


afbamco  of  Bethel  dmrconftbcncc. 

•4-  C^oib fappecnac  are* migbttc 
anb  ftrong  men  fo?  tDcUiarr  c  *. 

15  $5?oab  is  fpoileb  anb  gone  bp  out 
of  her  cities,  anb  t  Distfiofen  pong  men  * 
arc  gone  bourne  to  ttic  flaughtcr ,  favth  "' 
thcBing,U)horc/2amc  »  theH o n s> ; 
ofhoftes. 

16  Xbc  calanutie  of  93oab  is  neere 
to  come,  anb  his  affliction  haded)  fan. 

17  311  pee  that  arc  about  htm  be- 
moane  him,  anb  an  pee  that  Hnoib  his 
i5ame,  fap ,  5)o\b  ts  the  fttoug  ftaffc ! 
b:oIicn,  and  thcbcatttifitllrob1 

18  Xhott  Daughter  that  bocfi  inha- 
bit £>tbon,  tome boiDitc  from  thy  giozp, 
anb  fit  tit  third  :  fo?  the  fpoticr  of  ^)o- 
abfltaiicomcbpottthcc,  andijefhaUDC' 
ftropthp  ftrong  holbcs. 

19  £)  t  inhabitant  of  3rocr,  if  anb  bp 
the  lhap  anb  cfpie,  afKc  Ijtm  that  flceth, 
anb  her  tljat  efcapeth ,  and  fap,  xoijat  J 
is  bone; 

20  £i3oab  is  confottnDcb,fo2  it  is  bio- ! 
Hen  bomnc :  *  homic  anb  crp,tcll  pc  tt  tn 
^rnon,thatQ5oabtsfpotlcb, 

ii  ^nb  tttbgement  ts  come  Upon  the 
plaittecottntrcp,bponi}olon,anbbpon 
3aha?ah,anb  bpon  £0cphaatl), 

2i  3lnD'l)pon3>ibon,  anb  bpon  Ji5c- 
bo,  anb  bpon  2Scd)-D:bladjaim, 

13  ^nD  bpon  Btrtathatm,attD  bpon 
26cth-Gamul,anD  bpon  23cd;-mcon, 

14.  3lnD  hpon  Bcrtotl) ,  anD  npon 
25o?2ah,  anD  npon  all  the  cities  of  the 
lattD  of  ©oab  farrc  oi  nccrc. 

25  %ty  ho?nc  of  Q3oab  ts  cut  off, 
$  his  armt  is  b20rten,fatth  the  %  o  m  s».  | 

26  C^aRepchmtD2unRen:fojhcel 
magmaeD  himfelte  agauttt  the  !L  o  is  p :  j 
29oab  alfo  (hail  lballott)  tn  his  bomtt, 
anb  he  alfo  (halbc  tn  Dcrtftott. 

I  27  ifoz  mas  not  gjfracl  a  benCon  j 
Onto  thee  <  lbas  Dec  fottnb  among 
thceues  <  foj  fmce  djou  fpauett  of  htm,  I 
thou  I  f  tttppcbft  foz  top.  i  11 0r:m'°- 

28  ^D  pee  that  Dtticli  ut  ^oab ,  leauc  J,f,y] 
tin  cities  ant)  bihclluuherocltcanbbe 
nuc  d)c  bouc  that  malted)  her  ncft  in  the 
fioes  of  d)c  holes  moud). 

19  nae  hauc  hcarb  the  *  pr.Dc  o  f  <J9o* 
jab,(hciscjrcccbingp20ub)h,.siofr.uc(Ic 
anbhisarrogattctc ,  anbhtspiiDe,  anb 
the  hauttneffc  of  his  heart. 

30  3)imoUichtsih2ad),fapcd)thc 
IlLOKC  but  it  iiuiinotbc(b,||l)islpcs 
(l)allnotfo  effect  it. 

I    31  i:hercfo2c  iiulig}ho)hlefo2fl9o' 
ab ,  anb  3  lbtll  crp  out  fo?  all  fl3oab, 
rrr 


•ifai.ltf.A 


\\Or,ttc[ia 
vrhomhee 
flajtlh(hti. 
bub*rrn) 
tic  net  right. 


care,pir,an 


dfnare.    Icremiah.      Againft  Amnion- 


•IfaLlj. 


Uimm. 


"Ifai.IJ- 

\Hth.imi- 


\Hcl.Mckf. 


\Or,thc 


■irJ,.»4. 

17,18. 


mine  heart  0>atl  JtlOUmC  f02  tt)C  HlCtt  Of 

Bit  hercs. 

32,  £)bineofSnbmah,'3Jttnirbcepe 
fo2  thee ,  ibith  the  tbecpmg  of  3Ja?ct  \ 
thy  plants  ate  gone  ouettbcfca,  thct; 
teach  cucn  to  the  tcaof  3Ja3Ct,  ttjcfpo^  j 
let  is  fallen  bpon  thv  wmmet  fruits, 
anb  bpon  thy  bintage. 

33  3nD  *  10?  anD  giabnetTc  is  fatten 
from  the  plmtifullfielD  ,  anD  from  the 
lanD  of  s©oab,  anb  3  hauc  taufcD  ibme  1 
totailcfromtbcmncp2eu"cs,none(bail 
treao  tt)itD  fl)onttng,tiic;  fljoWting  fhaii  I 

bcnofljoibtmg. 

34  jFromthccrv  of  tycfljboncucn1 
bnto  eicaleh ,  and  euen  bnto  3Jalja5 
haue  the?  bttcrcD  then:  bovee,  from 
Zoac  cucn  bnto  $o2onaim  as  an  ijcifcc 
of  tl)2cc  pceccs  olb :  fo2  the  ibatcrs  aifo 
ofiRimrtmfbailbctbcfoiatc. 

35  flitocouer^  mil  taufc  to  tcafr  m 
t$oab,faith  the  JL  $>  is  ©,him  that  offo  ■ 
ml)  m  tlje  high  plates ,  ano  bun  that 
burnetii  tntcnfc  to  1)is<5ods. 

36  Xbcrcfo2C  mine  l)cart  fliau  founD 
fo2  i©oab  liUc  pipes,  anD  mute  heart 
fliau  foimb  line  pipes  fo2  ttjc  men  of 
Bit  betes  :  betattfe  tbcticbcs  that  her 
bath  gotten  is  pcrtfbeD. 

37  5fo2  *  cucrp  rjcab  (ball  be  balb, | 
ano  cucrp  bcarb  t  dipt :  topon  all  the 
banDs  fbaii  be  cuttings ,  anb  bpon  the ! 
lomcs  CacftclotJj. 

38  Xbcrc  (ball  be  lamentation  gcnc= ' 
tally  bpon  all  the  boufctoppes  of  s©o- ' 
ab ,  ant)  in  the  ftrcetes  thereof :  fo2  5 
haue  b2oUcn  Sj9oab  Imc  abctTcll,  ibbct; j 
m  is  no  pleafurc,faitb  the  %  0  k  ©. 

39  Xhevfhaiihoibiciavmg.^olbis 
u  b2ofecn  boibnc  i  hotb  hath  £0oab  tur= 
neb  the  t  batltc  Ybitb  (bamc  i  fo  (hall 
£|3oab  be  a  Denfion,  anb  a  Dumaptng  to ' 
all  them  about  hint. 

40  f  02  thus  faith  the  !L©ms*,z5c*  1 
holD,bec  mall  fly  as  an  eagle,  anb  (hall 
fpjeaD  his  lbmgs  oucr  £|3aob. 

41  HBcriothistaften.anDthtftrong 
bolbs  arc  furpiifcb,*  the  mighty  mens 
hearts  m  {©oab  at  that  bap  (bail  be  as 
tlje  heart  of  a  iboman  m  her  pangs. 

41  anD  tpoab  fl)ail  be  DcttroycD 
from  being  a  people ,  became  he  hath 
magnified  liinifeifeagamlr the  #,©  K jd.  ' 

43  * Jfcarc,anDrhepit,anbthcfnarc 
fhaii  be  upon  thee,  <D  inhabitant of  G&a- 
ab.fuiththclLoisD. 

44  ixc  that  flcrtb  from  the  fcare 

flwil  fall  into  the  pit,anbhethatgettcth 
bp  out  of  tlje  pit  (ball  be  taucn  tn  tlje 


mate  :fo23JJbillb2ingbponit,  euentp. 
on  ££oab ,  the  yeete  of  tptlr  bttttation, 

faith  the  %  ©m©. 

45  Xbey  tbatflcD,  ftoobbnberthe 

fbaboib  of  li?cfhbon,becaufe  ofthefojee: 
but*  a  fire  (hall  tome  fimh  out  of  H?euV 
bon ,  anb  a  flame  from  rhenubbeft  of 
<S»ihon,  anb  (hall  bcuoure  the  comet  of 
fi^oab,  anb  the  trotbnc  of  tbebcaD  of 
tbettumultuousoncs. 

46  ieoe  be  bnto  thee,  £>  S0oab,  the 
people  of  Chemofl)  pcttlbctb :  fo^tby 
fonncs  arc  tauen  t  captiucs ,  anb  th? 
Daughters  taptiues. 

47  C  Pet  mil  II  b2ing  againc  the 
eaptuutic  of  $Boab  m  the  later bayes, 
faith  the  ?L©isjd.  %l)us  facte  is  the 
lUDgement  ofS0oab. 

CHAP.    XLIX. 

1  The  judgement  of  the  Ammonites.  6  Their 
reihuration.  7  The  judgement  or"  Edom, 
13  orDamafcus,  18  ofKedar,  50  olHazor, 
34  andot  ElaiTu  ;jThe  reftauration  ot  Elam. 

£>nccmmg  the  ^mmo- 
mtcs  ,  thus  fapth  the 
jXokp  .^ath^fraelno 
*©§4sf  fonncs?  hath  hcnohcire? 
'^©a^2tE»hPthe"  both  II  their  Bmg 
inherit  *<5ob ,  anb  his  people  bVbclltn 
his  cities? 

x  Xherfojc  bcholb,  the  bapes  come, 
faith  the  %  ©  is  jd,  that  1J  mil  taufc  an 
alamtc  of  mirrc  to  be  hcarbm*3Kab 
bah  of  the  Ammonites,  anD  it  (ball  be  a 
Dcfolatchcape,anDhcrt)aughtctsObaii 
be  burnt  ttnth  fire :  then  fbau3jfracl  be 
heirebnto  them  that  lberc  his  hnrcs, 
faith  the  ILaDis©. 

3  foible,©  ltK(l)bon,fo2aiisfpoi 
leb :  trppccbaughtcrsof  Habbah,  girb 
vec  mth  fatKclotl):  lament  anb  nmnc 
to  anb  fro  bp  the  hcbges:fo2  II  their  mng 
(hall  goe  into  captiuitic :  and  his  *  pjicfts 
anb  his  minces  together. 

4  i©herfo2cglo2ic(lthouintl)ebah 
leps,  HtbV  flomng  uailcv ,  £>  bacUfli 
bmg  Daughter  t  that  truftcb  in  her  trea 
totcs/avin^naho  (l)aiicomc  bnto  nice; 

5  25eholb,3Jtbillb2ingafcarcbpon 
thee,  faith  theHo2D  C5o3D  of  holies, 
from  all  thofcthat  be  about  thee,  anb 
vec  (hail  bcD2tucn  out  cuciyman  right 
fo2th,anD  none  Qjai  gather  bp  him  that 
ibauDerctl). 

6  31nD  aftcnbarD  3J  mil  b2ing 
againc  the  capmutic  of  the  thilD2cn  of 
amnion ,  faith  the  1L®\r  jd. 

7  CConternmg  i£Dom  thus  faith  the 

U©1S  3D! 


'Mum.  11. 


\Hib.<h,l- 

dren  afnotfe, 

|  Htb.  m 

csxtimtit. 


W'K'H*- 


I  Or,  Mel. 
em. 

*  Amos  I. 
'3> 


•Amos.  1. 
■  4. 


\\Or,MtU 

com. 

'  Chip.  48. 


\OrjhjvtL 
In  flojvelb 


AgamftEdom,        Chap.xlix.  and  Damafcus- 


Obad' 


1 1 Or,  thij 

Are tHmii 

Ukf. 


'Objil.- 


\Hth.ihtv 

[uf.cic  ictc. 


•Oba.lv 
I. 


'Obad.vcr. 


:  Chip.  50 


Jf. chap. 50 
40. 


\\Or,cotiuetit 
meinin4pe 
mem . 

•Job.il.l 
chap.  50. 
14,45. 


fL©iac>of  hofts,  *  islliifcDoincnotnoie 
in  £eman<  is  counfcll  perifheb  fcom 
the  pmbenms  their  Wifcbom  banftycD; 

8  f\tt  pc,  I  tunic  baclte,  bibcll  Dccpc, 
£>  inhabitants  of  Dcban :  to:  3  Wnll 
biing  the  calamine  of  Cffau  Upon  him, 
the  time  tl)at  3  mill  mfite  him. 
-  9  3lf*  grape  gatherers  come  to  thee, 
lbouib  thep  not  leaue  tome  gleaning 
grapes  *  3if  thecucs  bp  mght,thcp  mill 
beftrop  t  tin  njep  haue  enough. 

10  2i5ut  3  haue  mabe  efau bare,3J 
haue  bneoucreb  his  fecret  places ,  anb 
he  fhail  not  be  able  to  hibehtmfclfc :  his 
feeb  is  fpoileb,anb  his  bictl^cn  anb  his 
neighbours,  anb  he  is  not. 

ii  ftcaue  thpfathecieffechtlbmi.^ 
Tbill  pieferuc  them  aliue :  anb  let  thp 
ttnbomestrufttnme. 

12  f02  thus  fasth  the  ft©  15  r\  26c- 
holo,  thepibhofciubgement  was  not  to 
bzmfcc  of  thecup,  haue  afTurcoipbrnm 
Sen.anb  >n  thou  he  Hut  fhail  altogether 
go  bnpumfbeb^thou  fliait  not  go  bnpu= 
nifljeb,  but  thou  fhaltfurclpbrniBC  ofu. 

13  foi  3  Dauc  finomc  bp  lupfclfc, 
faith  the  ft  ©irje>,  that  aso^rah  mail 
become  a  Defoliation ,  a  rcpzoch.a  lbaftc, 
anb  a  curfe,  anb  all  the  ernes  thereof 
Qjall  be  perpctuall  lbafres. 

1+  3  haue  hearba  *  rumo:  from  the 
ft©i3E\jauambaffabourisfentbuto! 
theheathen,ijy;n5,<3athcrt>e  together* 
come  agamft  her,?  rife  bp  to  the  battcll. ' 
15  jfo2lo,3ibil  mane  thee  fmaiamong; 
thchcathen,  andocfpircbamougmcii.  I 

16  £hp  terriblcncffc  hath  bccctucb 
thce,andthcpjibeofthmcheart,iDti)ou 
that  blbelieft  m  the  clefts  of  the  rocttc, 
thatholbeftthehctghtofthehiil:thogh 
thou  fboulbert  maBethp'neftas  htgh 
as  the  eagle,  junilbmig  thee  boibnc 
fcom  thence, faith  the  ft  ©  a  ©. 

i7^llfo€bomn)albeabefolanon:*e^ 
uerp  one  p  gocthbv  it  ttjaibe  aftomfheo, 
anbrnailhiffeatallthepiagucsthercof, 

18  *asinthcouerth20iHof5)ODom 
anb  <5omoirah,anb  the  neighbour  cu.es 
thereof, faith  the  ftoK© :  no  man  fhail 
abibethere.neitherfrjallafonncofmaii 

bibeli  m  it. 

19  25eholb,hefl)alcomcbpuBcalpon 

fcom  the  fmelling  ofjlomanc  agaiitft 
the  habitation  of  the  ifrong :  but  3  mil 
fubbenlp  maae  h:m  runueaibaptrom 
her,  anblbho  «  a  chofrn  man  thai  3 
map  appoint  ouer  her  <  fo:  mho  « 
line  mee  i  anb  mho  IMI II"  appoint  me 
the  time  i  ttmo  is  that  fljephcarb  that 


mill  ft  anb  before  mee  i 
I  20  Xhcrfo2chcacethecounfellofthc 
I  ft©  m  d,  that  he  hath  tanen  agamft  e* 
|bom,  *  his  pucpores  that  hec  hath  pur= 
pofeb  againft  the  inhabitants  of  %& 
man:  furclvthc  leaftof  the  flocRCfhail 
D;aib  them  out :  furelp  hee  fhail  make 
their  habstanons  ocfoiatc  ibith  them. 

ii  3-hecarthtsmouebatthenotfeof 
theirfall:  at  theme ,  the  noife thereof 
:  was  hcarb  in  the  t  ceo  5>ea. 

21  23eholb,  he  (hall  come  bp  anb  flie 
as  the  eagle,  anbfpjeab  his Unngsoticc 
i5o  vah :  ano  at  that  bap  fhail  the  heart 
of  themighticmcn  of  CDom,  be  as  the 
heart  of  a  Vbomanin  her  pangs. 

15  <C  Concerning  Damafcus,  %& 
math  is  confounbeb,  s  3Upab,fo2thcp 
hauehearbcml  tibings,  thep  are  tfatnt 
hcatteb.thereibfojcoVbSiouthefea/.tcan 
not  be  quiet. 

24  SDamafcus  is  ibateb  feeble,  and 
iturncthhcrfclfctoflec,  anb  fearc  hath 
feifeb  on  her :  anguifh  anb  fojrotbes 
Ijauc  taken  her  as  a  lbomatt  in  traucli. 

25  $ott)  is  the  cttie  of  p:aife  not  left, 
|thccittcofmpiop? 

1  26  Xhecefojcherpongmeufhaifail 
I  in  her  ftrccts,  anb  all  the  men  of  marcc 
I  (hall  bee  cut  off  in  that  bap,  faith  the 
ftsDHiDof  hofts. 

i  27  3nb3)bill&inolea*ftrcmtht 
wall  of  Damafnis,  anb  it  Qjal  confume 
the  palaces  of  iSen  habab. 

28  <T  Concerning  Bcoar,  anb  com 

ccrniugthchingbomsof}?)a502,ibhtch 
Jl5ebuchab-re55ar  lung  of  26abvlon 
n»au  finite ,  Xhus  faith  the  ft  <d  js  © : 
Sttfle  pe,  goe  bp  to  Bebar,  anb  fpotle 
themeuofthceaft. 

29  Xheir  tents  anb  their  flocHSftiau 
"thep  tabe  aump:  thep  fl)altaSeto  them- 
fciues  their  curtames anb  all  their  bc(f 
fels,anbthnrtamels,anbthepfhalcrte 
bnto  them,  jrcarc  >'s  on  eucrp  fibe. 

30  C'JFlee.tgctpoufarreoff.biajcll 
beepc,  £>  ^c  inhabitants  of  ^a^o:,faith 
the  }U>ke>:  foz  ilt}cbuchab-m3ar  tang 
of  26abplon  hathtauencounfel  againft 
pou ,  anb  hath  tonceiueb  a  purpofc  & 
gamftpou. 

31  ^nfe,  gctpoubpbntothc||tt)cai; 
!thp nation  that  blbrilcth  Ibithout  care, 
faith  the  ft©  wa>,  which  i«ue  neithct 
gatesno2barres,^n,chDii>cli  alone. 

3  2  3lnb  their  camels  fhail  be  a  bootte, 

anb  the  multitubc  of  their  cattcll  a 

fpoilc,  anb  3J  mill  fcattcr  into  aium'nbs 

them  that  are  in  the  t  utmoft  comers, 

% zk  2  anb 


\Htl.n 

iu  SeA. 


\Hcl.m:l. 
•ri. 

||  Or  *,,„ 
t^t  S--a. 


'  AjTiOSI.4. 


"VcrfcS, 
tH^./i» 


1 1  Or,  rA«j, 
Jl  eafc. 


fHfl.ctileff 

~to  corner!, 
■  ihM  rnvre 

t^e  amais 
of  their 
httire  polled. 


AgainftElam.  Ieremiah.        Thedcftruftion 


•Ch.ip.  49. 
6.  and^fc. 
47- 


\lhh.h 
thehjni  of 
Icremi.ih. 


\rjift 


anD  3  lbill  b:tng  tlictc  calamine  from 
all  ftDcs  thereof,  faith  tDe  %  ©  a  w. 

33  3uid  tyasoi  ujaii  be  a  Duelling  foz 
O2agons,andat)cfoiationfo2cucr,tl)etc 
ujailnomanabibcthcrcnojanpfonnc 
ofmanDibcllmtt. 

3+  C3CDcibo2DoftDe!L©a?DtDat 
came  to  3eremialj  tDe  0:opljct  agamft 
Clam  in  the  beginning  of  the  teigncof 
ZeDcbsaD  bmgof3ubalj,fapmg, 

3<>  %imstM\)ti)t%om&  of  Dolls, 
ineDolD,  3  mill  bjeabe  tlje  boib  of  €- 
lam,tDc  cDtefc  of  tlicir  mtgDt. 

36  2nb  bpon  Clam  tt)tU3  bnngtrjc 
fourc  minDes  from  tDe  fourc  quarters 
of  Ijcauen,  anu  lbill  fcattcr  tDem  to- 
marDsailtDofcmmDcs.atiDtDcrcujail 
be  no  nation ,  tbljitDcr  tlje  outcatts  of 
Clam  ujail  not  come. 

37  3Fo?3rbtllcaufc€iamtobccbtk 
mapcD  bcfo;c  tljcir  enemies,  anu  befoze 
rtiem  tDat  feebe  ttjetc  life :  anD  3  lbtll 
bnng  null  bpon  tljem,eucn  mp  fierce  an* 
ger,fattDtDclL©a  id,  anojibillfctiD 
tDe  fttjozo  after  tliem,  till  3  Ijatictonfu 
ntcDtDcm. 

3S  3inD  3  lbill  fet  mp  tljionc  in  C* 
lam,  anb  lbtll  Dcftrop  from  thence  tlje 
lung  ann  tDe  pnnccsiattD  tDe  JLokp. 

39  *C23utttfliaiicomctopafl"emthc 
*  later  baies  An  3  mil  bmig  againc  tlje 
taptuutie  of  Clam,fattlj  tljc  %  ©  a  jd. 

CHAP.    L. 

1.9.2.1.35.  The  iudgementof  Babylon.    4.17. 
33.   The  redemption  of  Ifrael. 

$c  ibo:D  tfjat  tljcIL  ©  a  £■> 

fpabc  agamlt  26abplon, 

™  and  agamft  tDe  latib  of  tDe 

•_W  Caibeatts  t  bp  3erenuaD 

^StDcj&opDct. 

z   declare  pec  among  tDe  nations, 

anb  publi(l),anb  t  fct  bp  a  ftanDart,pub; 

lifljandconccalcnot :  fap ,  zBabplou  is 

talun,i5clisconfounbeb,^crobarDis 

bjohcti  m  pieces,  Dec  ibols  arc  confoun- 

DeD,  Der3»nages  are  bzohcnm  pieces. 

3    f  01  out  of  tDe  floitl)  tDcrc  com 

met!)  bp  a  nation  agamft  Ijcr  ,  lbDtrD 

ujail  mahc  Dcr  lano  befoiatc,  anb  none 

(DallDmcll  therein :  thep  ujallrcntouc, 

rhep  (hail  Depart  both  man  anb  bcaft. 

'  4. 4r3ntDofcbaics,anbuitDatnmeJ 

raitD  the  H©aiD,  iDcrDiUwcn  of3C 

racl  (Dail  comctDcp.attD  tDe  cDilDmt  of 

3uDap  together ,  going  atiD  lbcepmg: 

rDcp  (ban  goc,  anD  feelic  the  !L©ajD 

tDeir  (5ob. 

5   XDep  ftiall  af be  tDe  map  to  Zton 


lbttlj  tDeir  faces  tljitDeribarD ,  tying, 
€ome,anD  letbstopnc  our  femes  to  the 
%  ©  a  *d,  in  a  pcrpcmall  Couenant  that 
(hall  not  be  forgotten. 

6  ©p  people  DatD  bene  loft  ujeepe: 
their  ujephearbs  Dauc  caufeb  rtjem  to 
goc  aftrap,  tDcp  Ijatic  tunicb  them  a 
lbap  on  tDe  mountames  :  they  haue 
goncfromniountainctoDill,fDcpDaue 
forgotten  tDeir  t  rcftmg  place. 

7  ail  tDat  founbtljcm  Dauc  Dcuou* 
ccd  tDcm,  anD  rljctt  aDucrfanes  faiD, 
wt  ofFctiD  not,bccaufc  they  haue  Dnneb 
agamft  the  1L  ©  a  id  ,  the  Ijabitanon  of 
iiifticc ,  cucn  the  fl  ©  a :  p ,  tlje  Dope  of 
tDctrfatDcrs. 

8  *3KcmoucoutoftDcnnbftof28a 
bplon,  anb  goc  foo;tD  out  of  tDe  lanD  of 
tDe  CalDeans ,  anD  be  as  tljc  Dec  goats 
bcfojctDcflocbs. 

9  Cifo:  loe ,  3  mill raife  anb caufc 
to  come  bp  agamft  isabplon ,  an  aCTcm* 
blp  of  great  nanons  from  tlje  /BojtD 
rountr  cp ,  anD  tliev  (Dail  fct  tDcmfcluts 
m  arap  agamft  Dcr,  from  tDence  (Dee 
flialbc  taben :  tDeir  ar  rolbes  fhaibe  ag  of 
amigDncllerpert  man  :  none  fljall  re* 
turne  mbamc. 

10  3lnD  CaiDca  IDaiibcc  a  fpotle :  all 
tDat  fpotle  Dcr  ftjall  be  fatifficDjatrD  the 
IL©a©. 

1 1  Becaufc  pc  liter  c  glaD ,  becaufe  pee 
rctoyceD ,  <D  vcDeftrovcrsofmtncDcns 
:  tage,  becaufe  vc  arc  grolbcn  t  fat,  as  tlje 
;  Deifcr  at  graffe.anD  bciioib  as  builcs : 

11  PottrmotDcrfl)aibcfo2c  confoun* 
dcd  ,  uje  that  bare  pou  n>aibc  aftjatneb: 
bcholDc,  the  httiDcrmoft  of  tlje  nations 
(iuibealbUDcrnes,aD2vianD,taDefert. 

13  Becaufe  of  tlje  lbjath  of  the 
?L©aiD,ttfl)aunotbtinhabiteb,butit 
(l)albc  lbhollv  bcfolate:  *  eucrv  one  tljat 
goctD  byiSabylonlDall  be  aftonift^eD, 
anb  Dtffe  at  all  Ijcr  plagues. 

14.  ^ut  pour  fclues  in  arap  agamft 
Babylon  rounD  about :  all  pc  tDat  benb 
tDcbolb,fl)ootathcrfparenoarrolbs: 
fo:  fl)C  DatD  fttmcb  agamft  the  %  ©  a  ©, 

h  5>Dout  agamft  Dcr  rounD  about: 
ftKcDatDgiucnDer  Danb:  Der  founoa* 
nous  arc  failcn.Dcr  malls  arc  tDzcibcn 
Doibnc :  fo:  tt  <■>  the  bcngcancc  of  the 
%  ©  a  id  :  tahc  bcngcancc  bpon  Ijcti  as 
fl)C  IjatD  Done,Doe  bnto  Dcr. 

16  CutorTtDcfolbctfromBabvlon, 
anD  Dim  tDat  DatiDletD  tlje  1 1  firblc  m  tDe 
nmcofDarueft:foifearc  of  the  oppjef- 
fmgftuo;D ,  tljej'  ujail  turne  cucry  one 
to  Dispeople,  atiD  thep  ftiall  flcceucrp 

one 


\Hth.flMt 

to  lie  dewnt 


"Ifa:.48. 
20.  chap. 
5  i.6.rcue. 
ib-4. 


Or,  dt. 

Jlrejcr. 


f  Hcb.  ingge 

or  lertmfcni 


'Chap.  40 
»7- 


\Or,[jtbe, 


of  Babylon.  The         Chap.!.  reward  of  pride 


\\Or,efthc 
rebeti. 

||  Or,vtj!u 


\Heb.from 
I  be  end. 

OrjrtiA 


one  to  Ins  oitone  lanoc.  i 

17  €t 3Ifcact  >•  a  fcattccct)  (IjctpctUe 
lyons  bauc  ttnucn  him  attoay  :  nrft  the 
hingof  3tty2iabatbbcuourcbbimano , 
lad  this  iftebuchaD  xkv>sx  BingoftSa  ■ 
bylon  bath  bjoben  his  bones. 

is  1Cbcrefo2e  thus  faith  the  tLoia©! 
of  boftcs  tlje  @ob  of^Jfrael;  26cbolb,l 
3  Hull  punifl)  the  Btng  of  JSabylon  ant)  \ 
bis  lanb,  as  j  baucpumfljeo  tljcBmg 
ofaffyna. 

19  3lnb3Jrbillb2ing3Jfcaclagameto 
bis  habitation,  anb  be  fbalfecb  on  Car;  | 
ntel  anb  aBafban ,  anb  rjxs  fouic  (ball 
be  fanffieb  upon  mount  cpbzatm  anb 
<5tlcab. 

io  3Jnfbofebaycs,anbintbattimc, 
faytb  the  !L  ©  ib  © ,  the  uuquitie  of  "Jf- , 
racl  (ball  be  fought  fo2,  anb  there  fhalibc 
none  anb  the  finnes  of  3Jubab ,  anb ' 
they  (ball  notbc  fount) :  foi  3J  lbillpar= , 
bon  tbcm  ltobom  3  refcrttc. 

11  Cd5oe  top  agamft  the  lanb  ilof^Dc; 
tatbami ,  «i«i  agamft  it ,  anb  agamft 
rlje  inhabitants!!  of  0efeob :  ltoafte  anb 
tottetly  bettroy  after  tbcm ,  fayetb  the 
%  o  «  ©,  anb  boc  acco2bmg  to  all  that  | 
3J  baue  commanoct)  tbce. 

11  a founb  of battcll  is  in  tbe  lanb, 
anb  of  great  bcttructton. 

13  $oVb  is  the  hammer  of  tbelbbolc 
earth  rut  afunocr  anb  b;often  i  hotb  ts  j 
usabylon  become  a  bcfoiation  among 
the  nations* 

14.  'Jhauelaibeafnarefo^tbee.anb; 
thou  art  alfo  tattcn ,  £>  25abylon ,  anto  j 
thou  ltoaftnot  atbarc :  thou  art  founb 
anb  alfo  taught,  betaufc  thou  baft  (to 
uen  agamft  the  %  $>  is  © . 

15  %])c  fL«i>ia©batb  openebbis 
armo2ie ,  anb  bath  brought  foo2tb  the 
meapons  of  his  mbignation  :  foz  this 
is  the  tbojfce  of  the  TLo2b  00©  of  bofts, 
tntbeianboftbcCalbeans. 

i6  Come  agamft  her  t  from  the  tot 
moftbozber,  open  bet  ftoic  houfes:1 
||  caft  her  top  as  beapes ,  anb  ocftroy  her  ■ 
tottcrly :  let  nothing  of  her  be  left. 

17  5>lap  all  her  bullocks  :lct  them 
goebovtmc  to  tbenaugbtec :  moetonto 
tbcm,  fo2tbctr  bay  is  come,  the  nmc  of 

tbcirtoifitanon. 

18  Xbc  tooicc  of  them  that  flee  *  cfcape 
out  of  the  lanb  of  asabylon  to  Declare  m 
ZiontbetocngcanccoftbclLouDour 
d5ob,tbc  toengcancc  of  Ins  Xeinplc. 

19  Call  together  the  archers  agamft 
aBabylon  :  all  ycc  that  btnb  the  bolto, 
tampe  agamft  it  rounb  about ,  let  none 


thereof  cfcape :  reconipcnfe  her  accoj; 
bing  to  her  ltoozKc  ■,  accozbmg  to  all  that 
fbec  bath  bonttouto  her :  fo?  (bee  hath 
bene  pjoub  agamft  thcHoE©,  agamft 
tbc$?olyoncof  Jfraci. 

30  Xbcrcfoic  (ball  bcryongmen  fall 
intheftrects,  ?  all  bcr  men  of  war  (ball 
be  mt  offm  that  bay,  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

31  25eholb,3Ijni  agamft  tbec,£)  thou 
mod  t  pjoub,  faytb  the  ?Lo2b  d5  0  ©  of 
boftcs :  fo2  thy  bay  is  conic  ,tbe  nmc  tiiat 
^itoilltoifittbec. 

31  3nb  tljc  moft  t  pjoube  (ball  ftutm 
blc  anb  fau.anb  none  fbai  raifc  bun  top : 
anb  31  ltoill  hmble  a  tire  m  bis  cities,  anb 
it  (ball  beuoure all  rounb  about  bun. 

33  CXbus  faith  the  H©ia©  of  bofts ; 
Xhc  cbilbjen  of  3lfrael  anb  tbe  cbilbjen 
of  Jubab  ^ere  oppieffcD  together ,  anb 
all  that  tooBe  them  captiues,  belb  tbcm 
faft,  tbcv  rtfufeb  to  let  tbcm  goe. 

3+  Xbetr  ftebeemcr  is  ftroug,  the 
ILtDia©  of  bofts  isbiS43amc,be(ball 
ttyougbiy  plcaoe  tbeircaufc ,  that  bee 
I  map  giue  reft  to  the  lanb,  anb  bifquiet 
tbe  inhabitants  of  aSabylon. 

35  Ofroomis  topon  the  Caibeans, 
faith  the  VL  o  is  © ,  anb  topon  the  inha- 
bitants of  zsabylon,  anb  topon  bet  p?m- 
ces,ano  topon  her  ltoife  men. 

36  afroom's  topon  the  II lycrs,  anb 
tbey  (ball  bote :  a  froo2b  is  topon  her 
mighty  men,  anb  they  (baibc  bifmay  cb. 

37  2froo2bistopontbcitbo2fcs,anb 
topon  their  charcts,  anb  topon  all  the 
mmglcb  people  that  ^  m  the  mibbcft 
of  bcr,anb  tljey  (ball  become  *>  tbomen: 
afmojb  is  topon  her  tteafures,  anb  tbey 
fballbetobbeb. 

3s  ^b20ugbt  is  topon  her  ltoatcts.anb 
tlicy  (baibe  bnebtop :  fo:  it  is  tbe  lanb  of 
grauen  images  ,anto  tbey  ate  mabbc  top 
on  their  iboles. 

39  Xberefce  the  Vbftbe  beads  of  the 
befert  ltoith  the  ltotlbe  bcaftcs  of  the 
j  TJianbs  (ball  bitocl  there,  anb  tbe  ovules 
fballbitocll  therein :  tj  it  flialbe  no  mojc 
inbabitcb  fozeucr :  ncttber  fliailit  bee 
bVtocitm  fro  generation  to  gencranon. 
!  4.0  *T(sc5obouertb2eitoS)obomanO 
(3omo2rab  ,  anb  tbe  neighbour  cities 
thereof,  faytb  tl)c  1L  o  is  © :  1  >  (ball  no 
man  abibc  there,  neither  (bal  any  fonnc 
of  man  bitoell  therein. 

41  25eholb,a  people  fliall  come  from 

the  /i5o2tb,  anb  a  great  nation  anb  ma 

uy  Rings  (l)ail  bee  raifcb  top  from  the 

coafts  of  the  earth. 

41  1Lhey  (ball  boibe  the  bolto  anb 

,«rr  3  the 


\H^b.frtde. 


\Uel  fntle. 


\\Or,thicfi 

lUui.Heb. 
bjrrtl. 


■Gtn.19. 
M.chjp. 


F: 


annersient 


fe 


ieremia 


ah. 


ap-ain 


ilBab 


v 


on. 


*  Chap.  4p- 
19 


Mob. 41.1. 

chap.49. 

19. 

\Or/onue»t 

me  to  plead. 


^Heb. heart. 


the  lance :  they  arc  mull  ant  Will  not 
Chewc  mercy :  their  botcc  fliall  roare 
niic  the  fca ,  anb  they  than  ube  upon 
hozfcs.cucivoncputmatavlilicaiiianto 
the  batten,  agamft  thee,  Q  Daughter  of 
zsabylon. 

43  Xhc  king  of  ffiabylon  hath 
heart)  the  report  of  thcm.antihtshanDs 

warcb  feeble ;  angmfli  tooht  holb  of; 
htm ,  and  pangs  as  of  a  Woman  m 
trautll. 

44  25cholb,htfl)ancomcbp*likca 
lyonfrom  thefrocllmg  of  3J02ban,bn;j 
to  the  habitation  of  the  ftrong :  but  3J 
will  make  thcmfutbcniy  runncaway 
from  her  :  anb  il>rjo  is  a  chofen  man 
that  31  mav  appoint  oucr  her  *fbJWho 
is  line  me ,  anb  *  Who  U)tll  ]  appoint  me  | 
the  time  <  anb  ibho  is  that  (hephearb 
that  Will ftanbbcfac me; 

45  Hhercfo2chcarcyccthccounfcll 
of  the  %  o  is  ©  that  Dec  hath  taken  a* 
gainft  sabvlon,  aub  his  purpofes  that 
he  hath  purpofeb  agatnft  the  lanb  of 
the  Caibcans :  furcly  the  leaft  of  the 
flocuc  fliall  bjatnc  them  out  :  furcly  he 
(hall  make  their  habitation  bcfoiatc 
With  them. 

46  Zt  the  noife  of  the  taking  of  Ba- 
bylon the  earth  ismoucb,  anb  the  cry 
tshearb  among  the  nations. 

CHAP.   LI. 

1    The  fcuere  Judgement  ot  God againA  Baby- 
lon, in  renengeofllrael.   59    Iereroiah  deli- 

uerctluhe  bookeof  thisprophecietoShera- 
iah,  to  be  caft  into  Euphrates ,  111  token  oi  the 
perpeuiall  finkingol  Babylon. 

SffDus  faith  the  !L©K3E>: 


sviDCholo/JWtllratfcbpa 
)pm  gamft  zsabylon ,  anb  a 
f^?  gamft  them  that  bwcll  in 
I^SsthetimbtJCft  of  them  that 
rift  up  agamft  me,a  beftroymg  Wtnb ; 
3hib  ibiufcttb  bnto  zsabylon  fan- 
ners, that  fljau  fatiuc  her ,  anb  fliall 
cmptichcr  lanb  :fo2in  the  bay  of  trou- 
ble they  (hall  be  agamft  her  rounb  a- 
bout. 

j  Agamft lumth.-nbrnbethletthcar 
thtr  benb  his  bow ,  anb  agamft  him  tint 
lifteth  h'.mfclfc  bp  m  I)ts  bnganbme  < 
anbfparcyce  not  her  young  men,  bc- 
ftroy  yec  utterly  all  her  hoftc. 

4  Xhus  the  flame  fliall  fall  in  the 
lanb  of  the  Caibcans.aiib  they  that  arc 
th.Hifl  tluough  m  her  flr  cctcs. 

5  fo:  gifracl  hath  not  becne  fojfrV 
lien  ,  no;  3Juoah  of  hts  oob ,  of  the 


ILdisid  of  hoftcs  though  their  lanb 
was  filleb  with  fitmc  agatnft  the  holy 
oneofjfracl. 

6  *  5? ice  out  of  the  mibbcft  of  15a- 
bylon,anb  bcltucr  cucry  man  hisfoule : 
beenotcutoff  inhtrmtquittc  :foz  thts 
is  the  tunc  of  the  ?L©isid§?  bengcance: 
he  Wtllrcnbcr  bnto  hctarccompcnte. 

7  zsabylon  hath  beene  a  golDcn  cup 
in  the  %  o  is  jd  *>  hanb ,  that  mabc  ail 
the  earth  bmnken :  the  nations  hauc 
bmnken  of  her  Wmc,  therefore  the  nan- 
onsarcmab. 

8  zsabylon  is  fubbcnly  *  fallen  anb 
bcftroyc&:hoWJefo2hcr,takcbalmcfo2 
her  patnetf  fo  be  flic  may  be  hcaieb. 

9  tee  Woulbhauchealcb  zsabylon, 
but  foe  is  nothcalcb  :fo2fakc  her,  anb 
let  b5  goc  cuery  one  into  his  otbnc 
counttcy:f02  her  tubgement  rcaehcth 
bnto  hcaucn ,  anb  is  liftcb  bp  cucn  to 
thefktcs.  * 

10  £hc1l©miDhathb20ughtfo2fh 
our  rightcoufncflc :  come  anblctbsbfc 
clarcinzionthctt)02kcofthc1L£Di33© 
our  00b. 

11  fijakc  t  bjight  the  arrowes :  ga? 
thcr  the  fljiclbs :  the  II  ©  m  ©  hath  rai- 
feb  top  the  fpirtt  of  the  kings  of  the 
$)cbcs :  fo2  his  bctttcc  is  agamft  iSaby- 
Ion,  to  beftroy  it;bccaufc  it  "the ben- 
gcantc  of  the  %&&&,  the  bengcance  of 
hts  temple. 

ii  §>ct  bp  the  ftanbart  bpon  the 
Walles  of  zsabylon,  make  the  watch 
ftrong:  fct  Dp  the  watchman :p2cparc 
tthc  ambufhes :  foj  the  %  ©is  id  hath 
both  bcuifcb  anb  bone  that,  Which  hec 
fpaiic  agamft  the  inhabitants  of  zsabv 
Ion. 

1  j  £>thou  that  DWcllcftbpon  many 
Waters,  abunbant  m  treafurcs;thme 
cnb  ts  comcand  the  mcafur  c  of  thy  tout- 
toufneflc. 

14  *%\\t  H© kid  of  hoftcs  hath 
fiuo2nct  by  htmfclfc,  faying,  <g»urely  3 
Will  filithcc  With  men,  as  With  tatcr^ 
pillcrs ;  anb  theyfl)ailtnftDpafl;oute 
agamft  thec. 

15  *  fytt  hath  mabc  the  card)  by  his 
powcr,hchart)cftablifhcbthcwo2U)by 
his  wifcbomc ,  anb  hath  ftrctchcb  out 
the  hcaucn  by  his  Dnberftanbing. 

i6  ©hen  l)e  bttcreth  hi^  boyce,  there  is 
a  1 1  muintubc  of  waters  tit  the  heauens, 
anb  he  taufcth  the  bapoursto  afenib 
from  the  cnbs  of  the  earth ,  hrniakcth 
lightnings  With  ratnc ,  anb  b2tngcth 
f  02th  the  Wmb  out  of  his  trcafurcs. 
17  *<ffucry 


"Chap.  50. 
B.rcu.iS 


•Ma. II  9. 
rcu.14.8. 
and  18.2. 


f  Htb  pure 


fHtf.  lj:rs 
m  WMte. 


'Amos  6.8 

joule. 
\Hcb.-Aler. 


"Ccn.6. 1. 
6. chap. 10, 


lOrj 


Chap.  I  o 

14- 

Or,  is  more 
hruti/h  then 
to^yon*. 


Thedefolation  Chap.lj. 


o 


•Oup.10. 

16 


\\0r  tntkff, 

t}  thee. 


\Hefa.nter 
tailing  defo 
Itltions. 


17  *  <£uerp  man  is  ||  buttifb,  bp  bis 
ImoiOlcDgc :  cuerp  tounbet  is  touf outv 
oco  bpthegraaen  image :  fo?  ins  motti 
ten  image «  falfchoob ,  ana  that  is  no 
bicarb  m  them. 

is  XbcpareoanirictbettHMheofer; 
rours :  m  the  time  of  their  btfitanon 
thep  (ball  pcu(b. 

19  Xbcpo2Uonof3Jaeobisnotltbe 
them,  fo2  he  is  the  fomter  of  all  things, 
anb*  mad  is  the  rob  of  bis  inheritance : 
tl)c  %  ©. 11  ©  of  bottcs  is  his  iBamc. 

zo  Xhou  a.  r  mp  battel  arc  and  tbca- 
pons  of  Vbarre :  fo;  ||  Ibttbtbee  Vbtll'J 
b2eabetn  pieces  the  nations ,  anotbin) 
thee  Unll^  beftrop  bingbomes ; 

21  3inD  ibttb  thee  mill  3  b2cabc  in 
pieces  the  ho:fc  anb  his  riber ,  anb  rbitb 
thee  null  3  bicabcinptctcstbccbarct, 
anblnsnbcr, 

zx  nattb  thee  aifo  ibill  3  bjeafee  m 
pieces  man  anb  iboman,  anb  lOitb  thee 
Vbill  3  b2cabc  in  pieces  olb  anb  pong, 
anb  forth  thee  Vbtll  3  towbe  in  pieces 
the  pongman  anb  the  maioe.    , 

23  3  Vbill  aifo  bzcaac  in  piccesittiitl) 
thee,  the  (bepbearb  anbbisttocbcanb 
With  thee  Hull  3  b:eafte  In  pieces  the 
hufbanbman,anohtspobcoforen,ano 
ibttb  thee  U)ill  3  tycabem  pieces  Cap; 
tames  anb  rulers. 

24  3nb  3  lbtll  renber  Onto  ©abp; 
Ion ,  anb  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  <£ai 
bea.all  their  ciul  that  thep  hauc  bone  in 
Zioninpour[igbt,(aith  theH  <d  e  ©. 

15  2Sebolo,3J->>"agaiu(rtbcc,  £>oe= 
frroptng  mountain  e, faith  thtTL  0  k  ©, 
Vblncb  btftr  oicft  all  the  eactb.anb^j  Vbil 
Qretch  out  mine  hanb  bpon  thee ,  ano 
roule  thee  bovbnc  from  the  rocbes,  anb 
Vbill  mabc  thee  a  burnt  monntamc. 

i6  3lno  thep  (ball  not  tabc  of  thee  a 
ftonefcu  a  co2ncr ,  no:  a  fionefo2foun 
bartons ,  but  thou  (halt  be  t  bcfoiatc  foi 
euer,faiththcTloi3©. 

27  £>etpebpattanbartintbcianb, 
bloVb  the  trumpet  among  the  nanons : 
prepare  the  nations  agamtr  her:  tall  to; 
gether  agamft  l)tt  the  bingbomes  of 
Tlxammnm^  3fbcbena5 :  appoint 
a  captame  agamO  her :  caufc  her  bo2fcs 
to  come  bp  as  tbc  rough  caterpillcrs. 

is  02cpareagainahet  the  nations 
Vbith  tbehutgs  of  the  flpebes,  the  cap; 
tames  thereof,  anb  all  the  rulers  thcrc^ 
ofanb  all  the  lanb  of  Ins  bomtnion. 

i9  3ln0  the  lanb  (l)all  tremble  anb 
fozrotb  :  fo:  euerp  purpofc  of  the 
%  sd  is  jd  (balbc  per  fbnncb  againft  25a; 


fBabyl 


:on. 


imtthat  be 
'hrrfketb 


bplon,  to  mabc  the  lanb  of  26abplona 
bcfolanon  tbithout  an  inhabitant. 

30  Xbc  mlghtie  men  of  zSabplon 
haue  fojbojne  to  figbt:tbcp  tjauc  rcmat, 
neb  in  their  bolbcs:  their  might  hath 
faileb ,  thep  became  as  Vbomcn :  thep 
hauc  burnt  their  bibcllmg  places :  her 
barrcsarcb20bcn. 

j  1  <Dncpoftcfbailrunnctomcctan 
other,  anb  one  meflcnger  to  mcttc  an 
otber,to(bcVbtbcbmgof25abplontbat 
hlscincistabcnatonccnb, 

32  3nb  that  the  paffages  arc  flop 
peb  ,  anb  the  reebes  thep  hauc  burnt 
tOith  fire,  anb  the  men  of  Vbarre  arc 
afrightcb. 

33  ifo:  thus  faith  the  %  ©kip  of 
hofrcs,thc  ©ob  of 35frael  Xhc  oaugb 
tcrof2SabplonisiiUcath2cfhingfloo2c 

>nsnmetotb:c(bbcr:pctaittticvbhiie, 
ano  the  tune  of  her  haruefl  (hall  come. 

34  iBcbuchab2C55arrliefetngof25ai 
bplon  hath  bcuourcb  niche  hath  cru(h 
cb  mc  i  he  hath  mabc  mc  an  empnc  bef 
fell:  hec hath  ftuallolbcbmccbplinca 
b2agon  ;  he  hath  fillcb  his  bcllic  lOith 
mp  bclicatcs.he  hath  tall  mc  out. 

35  txhcbiolcncc  bone  tome  anb  to 
mp  Hflcfh ,  be  opon  25abplon,  Qjau  the  j  [('<£"'m 
t  inhabitant  of  Zionfap ,  anb  mpbloob :  *«■ 
bpon  the  inhabitants  of  Calbea,  fljall ! 
3Jcrufaiemfap. 

36  Xhcrcfo2C  thus  faith  thcHem*?, 
26cholb,3l  Vbil  pleab  thp  caufcanb  tabc 
bengcantc  fo2  thec ,  anb  3  null  bjic  bp 
hcrfca,anb  mabc  her  fpnngs  021c. 

37  ^nb25abplonn)ai  become  heaps, 
abibclltngpiacc  fo2  b2agons  ,  anauo 
ni(hmcnt,anb  an  hiffmg  tbithout  an  in- 
habitant. 

38  Xhcp  (hall  roarc  together  lifte 
Itons ,  thep  (hall  ||  pell  as  lions  ibhclps. 

39  gjn  tlicit  heat  3  Mil  mauc  their 
feafts,  anb  3  Vbill  mabc  them  b2iinbcn, 
that  thep  map  rctopce,  anb  flccpe  a  per 
pctuaiiacepc,  ano  notioabe,  faith  the 

1L©IS1E>. 

40  3  tbill  b2ing  them  Dotbne  libc 
lambcs  to  the  (laughter,  libe  rammes 
tbitl: ihccgoatcs. 

41  J^oVb  is  ^hefliach  taben ;  anb 
hotb  is  the  P2atfc  of  the  rbholc  earth 
furpnfeb  i  hoib  is  ffiabplon  become  an 
attomfhment  among  the  nations  < 

42  Xhcfeais come  bp  bpon  25abp 
ion :  (he  is  couereoibith  the  multmioc 
ofthcioaues  thereof. 

43  ifjcrnttcsare  abcfoiation ,  a  b:v 
lanoanb  aiOUDcrnes  ,a  lanb  inherent 

no 


violen 


hafit 


||'*M.' 

(hefnlelnet. 


Bel 


s  vomit 


.Th< 


Icremiah.        booke  drowned. 


vpc*. 


||f>.J<>(A 

Bahhmn 
It  fill.  O  y, 
fljl*r  of  //'- 

Babylon, 

<t-c. 

I  Or.  the 
cowilrry 


no  man  btbcllcth ,  neither  bocth  an? 
tonne  of  man  paflc  thereby. 

44  3nb  3  tt)ill  puntQ)  Bel  in  ffia- 
by  lou ,  anb  3  iniu  b;mg  fo;th  out  of  his 
moutt)  cbatlimith  he  lint!)  fmaiiowrb 
top ,  anb  the  nations  (ball  not  flovb  togc- 
thcranymo:c  bnto  him, yea,  thciball 
of  Babylon  (bail  fall. 

45  iT3ypcopic,gocycoutofthemiDlr 
of  her,  anD  beliuer  ye  eucry  man  his 
toulc  fro  trie  fierce  anger  of  thesis©, 

46  3ub  left  your  heart  faint,  anb  ye 
fear  c  fo  ;  the  rumour  that  Qiail  be  liearb 
m  the  lanb :  a  rumour  (ball  both  tome 
one  vccrc.anb  after  trjatmanochcipccrc 
dull  come  a  rumour,  anb  biolencemthe 
laub ,  ruler  agamQ  ruler. 

47  1Lhercfo;c  bcholb ,  the  bayes 
come,  tliat  ^  Unll  t  boe  mbgment  bpon 
the  graucn  images  of  Babylon ,  anb 
her  whole  lanb  fliail  bee  toufounbcb, 
ano  all  herflainc  (ball  fallm  themiblt 
of  her. 

4$  Xbcn  the  heaucnanb  the  earth, 
ann  all  that  is  therein,  fliail  ftng  fo:  Ba= 
byloti :  to:  the  fpoilers  (bail  tome  bnto 
her  from  the  j3o;tb, faith  the  %o  is  id. 

49  ||  3s  Babylon  Krith  caukd  the 
flame  of  IJfracl  to  fall :  fo  at  Babylon 
(ball  fall  the  Qainc  of  ail |  the  earth. 

50  Pc that hatic cfcapcb tbcfiuo:b,go 
aibay ,  ftanb  not  mil :  remember  the 
ILois©  afarrc,  off:  anb  let  jjicrufa 
lemcome  into  your  nunb. 

51  nocarc  confounbeb,  becaufc  ibec 
haue  hcarD  rcpzocl),  (bame  hath  tont- 
rcb  our  faces :  fo;  Grangers  are  tome 
into  the  Sanctuaries  of  the  Jlois©£> 
houfc. 

51  B3berfo;cbeholb,thcbayestomc, 
faith  the  1L  e>  is  ©,  that  3  lbtll  bo  mbg 
ment  bpon  her  graucn  images,  anb 
tlnough  ail  her  lanb  the  ibounbcb  ft>aii 
gronc. 

53  Xhough  Babylon  (boulb  mount 
bpto  heauen,  anb  though  (hce  (homo 
fouific  the  height  of  her  flrcngth ,  vet 
from  me  (nail  fpoilers  come  bnto  her, 
faith  the II o kid. 

54  31  tomiD  of  a  trie  commetli  from 
Babylon ,  anb  great  bclrruttiou  from 
thcianbofthcCaibcans. 

•^  Bctaufc  thelitis  ©batbfpoiirb 
Babylon,  aubbefrroyeboutof  her  the 
great  bovee  lbbcn  her  ibaues  boe  roarc 
line  great  ibatcrs,  a  noifc  of  their  boitc 
isuttcreD. 

56  Bccaufe  the  fpoilens  tome  bpon 
fjer,  fun  bpon  Babylon,anb  bet  migh 


tie  men  arc  taben,  euery  one  of  their 
bolbcs  is  b;ofecn,  fo;  the  %$>  k  ©  ©ob 
of  retompcufes  (bail  finch1  requite. 

57  3nb  3  Vbtll  matte  bjunbe  her 
pzmtcs  anb  her  Vbifc  ineu.her  taptatnes 
anb  her  rulers,  anb  her  mightic  men : 
anb  they  fljall  fleepe  a  pcrpctuall  fleepe, 
anb  not  ibabc ,  faith  the  lung ,  umnfr 
iBame  is  the  1L  ©  is  ©  of  hods. 

5s  Xhus faith  rbcfLois©  of  holts, 
1Ehc||b;oab  wanes  of  Babylon  (balbe 
tottetly  ||  b:o&en,anbbcr  high  gates  thai 
\  be  burnt  With  fire,  anb  the  people  (ball 
labour  in  toainc,anb  the  folbcmtljc  fire, 
atib  they  fliail  be  weary. 

59  C  ILbc  wo:b  which  "Jeremiah 
I  the  p:ophct  commanbeb  3>craiah  the 
\  tonne  of  /ftcnah ,  the  tonne  of  fipaafc- 
iab,WbcnbcWcnt||Witbzcbcfeiabtbc 
king  of  IJubah  utto  Babylon ,  in  the 
fourth  ycerc  of  his  reignc,  anb  this 
5>ccaiah  was  a  1 1  quiet  pnntc. 

60  ^>o  ^Icremiah  ibiotc  in  a  boobc 
all  thecuill  tljat  flioulbcomc  toponffia= 
bylou :  en™  all  thefe  lbojbcs  that  are 
lbnttrn  againil  2Babylon. 

6 1  31nb  3Jcrcmiah  faib  to  *>craiah, 
nahen  thou  tommeft  to  asabylon,  anb 
flialtfccanbniaitrcabaiitlitfcibojbs, 

61  Xhen  (halt  thou  fay,  $>%®\m, 
thou  haft  fpofeen  agamtt  this  place,  to 
cutit  off,  that  none  fliail  rcmamc  m  it, 
neither  man  no;  beaQ,  but  that  it  fbaibe 
ibetoiatefo;cucr. 

63  31nD  it  fliail  bee  lbhen  thou  haft 
mabe  an  cub  of  reabing  rfjis  boohc,  thai 
tlioufliaitbmbe  afloncto  it,  anbtaftit 
into  the  mibfl  of  €uph;ates. 

64  3tnb  thou  flialt  fap,  Xhus  fliail 
Babylon  fin&e,  anb  (hall  not  rife  from 
the  cum  that  "j  unll  b;mg  bpon  her : 
anb  they  fliail  be  ibearic.  Hhus  farrc 
are  the  U)o;bs  of  ^crctnialj. 

CHAP.     LI  I. 

1  Zedeknli  rcbelletli.  4  Ieriif.ilem  isbeficged 
and  taken.  S  Zcdckialis  formes  killed, and  his 
owne  eyes  put  out.  11  Ncbuzaradan  bur- 
neth  and  Ipoileth  the  citie.  14  Hee  carieth 
away  the  captiues.  3^  Euil -mcrodacli  ad- 
uanceth  Ielioukim. 

Cbehiah  was  *  one  anb 
tibcntic  yeere  oibc  lbhen 
he  t  began  to  rcigne ,  anb 
he  rcigncb  claim  yeeres 
in  Jlcrufaiem  ,  anb  his 
mothers  name  was  fya 

nuttai  the  baughtcc  of'Jctemial)  of 

ilibnah. 

i   5lnb 


.Or.ti-r 
nalitt  or 

lro*d  liu 

||  Or,  mule 


|j  Or.   oh  tht 
Muljcof. 


\\Or.fr,^r 
of  Mtnuiha] 
or  thicfc 
chumbtr 


t  H<i.  itft- 

iMtom. 


'  1.  Kings 
14.18. 

\H,i.r„i. 
nti. 


TheTcmpIe,and       Chap.l 


the  cine 


i  3Cnu  bee  btb  that  winch  w*s  null  m 
the  eye  s  of  the  ?L  o  is  ©,act02bmg  to  all 
that  JJcboiatum  bao  Done. 

3  foi  tt)iougl)  the  anger  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  it  came  to  paffc  in  JJerufalcm 
ano  "Jubab,  nil  hce  bab  eaft  them  out 
from  his  picfcntc,  that  zebetnab  rebel 
leb  agamft  the  king  of  i3abylon. 

4-  Ono  it  tame  to  paffe  in  tbCnintb 
ycrcoffjisrcigncmtrje  tenth  monctb, 
in  the  tenth  davof  the  moneth,  that  0t- 
bucbab  xtwax  bmg  of  JSabylon  tame, 
bee,  ano  ail  hisarmte  agamft  Jlaufo 
lem ,  anb  pitcbeb  agamft  tt ,  ano  built 
fo?tts  againft  it  rounb  about. 

5  Sotbenttcibasbcftcgcbbntotbc 
clcucnth  ycere  of  king  zcbcluab. 

6  3uto  in  the  fourth  moneth,  in  the 
ninth  day  of  the  moneth ,  the  famine 
Was  fo2Cinthe  nnc,  fo  that  there  lbas 
no  iMcao  fo:  the  people  of  the  lano. 

7  Xbcn  the  city  ltoas  biotsen  bp, 
anb  all  the  men  of  ltoarrc  ftcb,  anb  ltoenr 
footfb  out  of  the  titic  by  night ,  by  the 
ujayoftbcgatcbcntoeentbetiboitoais, 
lbljtcb  ^s  by  the  Rings  garben  (noito 
the  Calbcans  were  by  the  nty  rounb  a 
bout)  anb  the?  Vbentby  the  may  oftljc 
plame. 

8  C25utthcarmieofthcCalbeans 
purfucb  after  the  bmg,  anbouertooRe 
zcbcRtabm  the  plamcs  of  Jericho, 
$  all  his  armic  ltoas  fcattcreo  from  him. 

9  XhcnthcytooHcthcUing.anbtciri' 
cb  him  top  tonto  the  Ring  of  25abylon  to 
3&ibiab  in  thcianb  of^amarh :  lbbcrc 
he  gaiic  uibgcmcnt  topon  him. 

10  3nb  the  Ring ofiBabylonflcib  the 
fonnes  of  zeockiab  befozc  his  eyes :  he 
ftcrbe  alfo  all  the  pnnces  of  Jubalj  m 
£ibiab. 

1 1  Xljenbe  t  put  out  theses  of  ze< 
bemab,anb  the  Ring  of  26abvlon  bounb 
him  ||mtbames,anbcancbbmuo  25a^ 
byion,anb  put  bun  in  tpjifon  nil  the  m? 

of  his  bcath. 
iz  O2ommthenfthmoneth,ittthc 

tenth  dav  of  the  moneth  (itohich  was  the 
nineteenth  ycere  of  jftcbucbab-m^ar 
Wngof  asabylon)  tamtirlebu^araban 
||  taptame  of  "the  guarb ,  winch  tfcrucb 
the  Ring  of  25abylon,mto  Jerufaitm  ■, 
13  2nb  burnt  the  honfc  of  tbcfLosv, 
anb  the  lungs  houfe, anb  all  the  houfes 
of  Jerufaicm,  anb  all  the  houfes  of  the 
great  men  burnt  he  ibitb  fire. 

14  2nb  all  the  armic  of  the  Caibe 
ans  that  were  with  the  captamc  of  the 
guarb ,  toaRc  bourne  all  the  ltoalles  of 


fpoiled. 


•  1  Kings 
if. 1  chap. 
}9< 


t  HekMm 

id. 

\\Or.frltm. 


\\Orfhiifc 
AUrfijll. 
Htb.  chrfc 
of  the  cxecH 
ttitnen  or 
fltli^btrr- 
mt.i.  And  jo 
vtrf.l^. 

\Htk.fooi 

befor:. 


3Jcrufalcm  rounb  about. 

15  Xhcn /ftcbu^araban  the  captamc 
of  the  guarb,  raneb  away  taptiuc  «r- 
tan.cof  the  pooic  of  the  people,  anb  the 
rcfibue  of  the  people  that  rcmameb  m 
the  nne ,  anb  tljofc  that  fell  aibay ,  that 
fell  to  the  Ring  of  ffiabylon,  anb  the  reft 
of  tljc  multitube. 

\6  26ut  jftcbu^araban  the  taptainc 
of  the  guarb ,  left  c-n ame  of  the  poozc  of 
the  lano  fo:  SIhnc  buffers  anb  fo;  buf 
banbmen. 

17  2lfo  the  *  pillars  cf  bzattc  that 
weremthchoufcofthe?Lo  iaiD,anD  the 
bafes,anb  tbebjafen  fcatljat  ■•■•■>.  in  the 
houfe  of  the  IL©is©,  the  Calbcans 
bzafec,  anb  cancb  all  tljc  tyaffeoftbem 
toiSabylon. 

13  Xhecaulb2onsaifo,anbtl)e!|ft)0^ 
ucls,  anb  the  fnuffcrs,anorbc||bollcs, 
anb  the  fpoones,  anb  all  the  tocffcls  of 
biaffc  ibberclbitb  they  mmiQreb.tooRc 
ttjeyamay. 

19  3lnto  thcbafons,anbtbCijficcpans, 
anb  the  bollcs,anb  the  caultaons,  anb 
the  canoicftuRcs,  anb  the  fpoones,  anb 
the  cuppes;  tbatitobicb  was  of  golbc,  in 
golbc,  anb  that  ltobicb  was  of filucr,  m  fif 
ucr,tootu  the  taptame  of  tljc  guarb  a 
itoay: 

10  Xhe titoo pillars,  one 5>ea,  anb 
tltoeiuc  b;afcn  bullcs ,  that  were  tontoer 
tljcbafcs,  Vbhich  &mg  Solomon  hao 
mabc  m  the  houfe  of  the  !L  ©  is  © :  t  the 
bmfTe  of  all  tljcfe  toeftcls  rbasitoitfjout 
ibeight. 

1 1  3nb  concerning  tljc  *  pillars ,  tljc 
height  of  one  pillar  was  cigljtccnc  cu- 
bitcs,  anb  a  t  fillet  of  tltoeiuc  cubitcs  bib 
compaOe  it,  anb  tljethiCBencffe  thereof 
was  fourc  fingers:  it  was  hollo  Vb. 

zi  ^nb  a  chapiter  of  bjaffc  ^  topon 
it,  ano  the  height  of  one  tbapitcr  was 
fiuc  cubitcs ,  VtoithnetitoodUe  anb  pome 
granatcs  topon  the  chapiters  rounb  a 
bout,  all  of  bzaffc :  the  feconb  pillar  alfo 
anb  the  pomegranates  were  ntte  tonto 

theft:. 

i3  ano  there  ttotre  nmrtie  anb  fire 
pomegranates  on  a  ftbe ,  and  all  the 
pomegranates  topon  the  nctitoojRc  were 
anhunbzethrounbabout. 

14  C3hibtljc  taptame  of  the  guarb 
toohc  Scraiah  the  chiefc  pncft,ano 
zephamah  tljc  feconb  pneft ,  ano  the 
tljjccftecpcrsofthctooojc. 

1$  ftcc  toottc  alfo  out  of  the  erne  an 

<£itnuth ,  Vbhuh  hab  the  charge  of  the 

men  of  ltoarre ,  anb  feucn  nun  of  them 

that 

51 


"  Chjp 
19. 


\\Or  mlhu- 
menti  (ore 

mooHc  t k e 

bxjor.i 


\\Or 


\\°', 


\  h'ett.  thetr 
brtfc. 


•l.King.7. 

15.  i.kinj 
25-17.1. 

chro.  \.  I  5. 
\Hcb.lhrttJ 


t  Htb.tirt. 

lhiU, 


The  number  of     Lamentations. 


thecaptiues. 


I  Hrk.  /j» 
the  f  tee  if 
the  ktnjr. 
|  Orjaritt 

cfthectp- 
tsitcof  the 
bsjte. 


I  lHci.fi*/„ 


•In  ■;. 

'7- 
•lob  7  i 


fHeb  fcr 

the  »<  e.:r. 
ttrlfe  offer- 
HUnde 


ttjat  t  mere  neetc  the  lungs  perfon 
Bjjjicljmerc  founbin  the  tine,  anbtbe 
|ipnnnpall&cnbcofthcbou\lbbomu''; 
flctcotbepcoplcof  tbcianb ,  anbthKo: 
fcojcmcn  ofcrjc  people  of  the  lanb,  that 
tber  c  fount)  tn  the  nubbeft  oftljc  erne. 

26  £>o  jftebirsar-abantbctaptame 
of  tljcguaro  toofectbem,  ario  bjongbt 
them  to  the  King  of  Babylon  to: 
mibiab. 

17  3tno  the  Ring  of Babylon  fmotc 
tbem.anbput  them  to  Death  in  &ibiab,: 
m  the  lanb  of  tyamatb :  tl)ii0  Dubai) 
llias  caricb  aluay  tapnuc  out  of  bis 
omncianb. 

is  Xt)ts>s  the  people rbbom/^ebu; 
cbab  rc^ar  tartcbamay  captiucintbc 
fcuent!)  peerc ,  tbjectboufanbDeitocs 
anorbiccanbttticntte. 

19  gjn  the  ctgljtccntb  ycetc  of  0t 
bucbab  r^ar  bee  cariebatuaycapnuc 
from^crufalcm  cigtjt  bunbjctb ,  fyit- 
ticaubtibotperfons. 

50  31ntlKtl)>ccanbtU)cnritl)yeerc 
of  /3cbutbao  rc^ar ,  /ft  cougar  aban 


tbttaptameofthegaarb,  carieo  atbay 
captiue  of  the  "Jetties  feuen  Uuntyett) 
fojtieanbfiue  perfbns :  all  the  perrons 
wcrcfoucc  tboufanb  anb  Gre  bunbzetb. 

31  Ci^nb  it  tame  to  paflemtlje  feuen 
ano  tbtrtterb  yeete  of  tlje  taptiuttie  of 
3lcnotabin  lung  of  Jubat),  m  tlje 
twelfth  moncrb ,  in  the  fiue  anb  ttuentv 
ctljdjv  of  tnemonetl),tha(€uilmcco^ 
bad)  Hmg  of  Babylomm  tt)e  firrt  yeerc  of 
bis  rctgne ,  ufteo  top  the  bcab  of  Dctjo; 
taRmfemgof3Jubat),  anbb:ougbt  bun 
fouboutofpufon, 

51  2inDfpa&et&tnbli>butol)im,atU> 
ftt  bis  throne  abouc  tl)e  throne  of  tlje 
Rings  that «  «« ttntb  bun  m  Babylon, 

33  3nb  tbangeb  bis  pnfon  gar< 
ments :  anb  hec  bib  continually  catc 
bjeao  before  iftm  all  the  bayes  of  bis 
life. 

34  2nbfc:btsDict,tberctbasacon; 
tinuall  bict  giucn  l)un  of  tlje  Rmg  of  B& 
bylon ,  t  cuery  bay  a  pomon  bnnil  tlje 
bay  of  tjis  Death ,  all  the  bayes  of  bts 
lift. 


|  Heb.  geod 
him. 


\ficb.  tic 

master  of  tht 
daj  m  htt 
day. 


«|The  Lamentations  ofleremiah. 


CHAP.    1. 

The  lmfcrablccflatc  of  lerufalcm  by  reafon 
of  her  lmnc,  11  Slice  complaincth  of 
her  giiete,  18  and  confefleth  Gods  Judge- 
ment to  be  n°htcous. 

&>Vo  boettj  tlje  title  fit 

fOlttariC  that  was  full  Of 

people  i  ho  a  tsfl)?  be 
comcasattnoottK&bc 
that  was  great  among 
the  nations,  ano  pun- 
ceffe  among  the  pjo- 
uuuesMv  is  fhe  become  tributaric  t 

2  £>bec'tt>cepctb  fojcmtbc'nigbt, 
anb  her  teares  ate  on  her  Cheches  :  & 
mongall  Ijcr  loners  flic  hath  none  to 
comfoubcr,  ailljerfricnbsljauebeait 
trcatherouny  lDit!)  her ,  tfjcv  arc  be- 
come Der  enemies. 

3  jjlubal)  is  gone  tnto  capnume,  be- 
caufc  ofaffltction,anb'  becaufe  of  great 
fcruitube :  flic  bmellcth  among  tlje  Ijca- 
t!jcii,fl)cfmbetljnorcft:allljcrperfecu- 


tojs  ouertoob  Ijtr  bettbeene  tlje  ffraits. 
4.  XljeJbavesofZionbomourne, 
bccaufcnonc  come  to  rhcfolcmncfcafls: 
all  Ucr  gates  arc  bcfoiatc :  Der  pnefts 
figlj :  Ijcr  birgmsarc  afflictcb,  anb  flje  is 
m  bitterneflc. 

5  ijn  abucrfaries  *  art  the  chicfe, 
her  eucnucsp20fper:fo2tl)t  jLoepI 
hath  afflictcb  her ,  fo?  the  multuube  of  i 
her  tranfgrcflions ,  her %  chribzen  art 
gone  into  capnume  bcfoie  the  cnemie. 

6  ^no  from  the  oaugljtcr  of  Zton 
aliherbcautic  is  bcpartcb:herp2inces 
arc  become  Uhc  l^arts  that  tmo  no  pa^ 
frure,  $  they  arc  gone  Unthout  frrcugrb 
bcfoicthtpurfucr. 

7  3lerufaicm  remembjeb  in  the 
bayes  ofherafflicnon ,  anb  of  bet  nufo 
rics,  all  her  llplcaGmt  things  that  flje 
habm  thcoaycsofolb ,  luhcnhtr  peo- 
ple fell  into  the  hano  of  the  cnemie,  anb 
none  bib  heipe  hcr,ttjc  abuerfancs  fall) 
her,anJDibmorfecather  Sabbaths. 

8  Jcrufalcmhathgricuouflyfumeb, 
'  thrre- 


"Drut.  18 
■J- 


Io.  5J. 


\Or,irfr, 
able. 


Theyokeoffinnes.    Chap.ij. 


Gods  wrath. 


tijcccfoyc  (be  t  is  reinoucb :  all  that  bo; 
noucebhee,  bcfpifc  her,  becaufethep; 
haue  fcetie  her  nafeeDnefTe :  ^ea,  rtjee : 
Ogheth  anb  tueneth  bartttbacb. 

9  $ccfiltbines>ntthcrfBirts,tberfc 
mcmhJcth  not  her  laft  enb,  thctrOje  t~hc 
tamebottmc  ibonbtr  tulip :  frjee  had  no 
comforter :  £>  &ojb,  beholb  mp  aflUcti* 
on :  fo:  ^  eneniic  Ijatft  magniRcb  himieite. 

io  Xhe  abuerfarie  bath  fpjcab  out 
hishanb  bponallhcr  ||  pleafant  things: 
fo2  fl)c  f)atl)  fccnc  tha  t  ttje  Deatnttt  entccb 
into  l>cc&aiutuanc,ibbonithoubiDft 
tommatiD  that  *  thcp  fboulb  not  enter 
into  rt)p  congregation. 

ii  3aiherpeopicfigh,thcpfccftb2eab, 
thev  haue  gttten  their  plcafant  things 
fi»  tneate  to  ||  telicue  trie  foulc :  fee,  <D 
#,0:0,*  eonfiDcr  :fo2j  am  betomebile. 

12.  CI|isitnofbingtopou,aupethat 
t  paffe  bp  <  bctjolb  anb  fcc,if there  be  an? 
fo:ott»  like  bnto  my  fojoibc,  ibhtchis 
bone  bnto  me,  ibhetcibith  thc?L©K© 
tjatl)  afroctcb  me,  in  the  bay  of  his  fierce 
anger. 

i  j  if  com  abouchath  be  fent  fire  into 
mp  bones ,  anb  it  pjcuatlctb  agamft 
them:  Dcrjart)  fp2eabanetfo?mpfcetc, 
fje  rjatfj  tumcb  me  bacfte :  he  hath  mabe 
me  befoiate,  and  faint  all  the  bap. 

14  XhtpofccofmptranfgccOionsiS 
bounb  by  hishanb  :ttyparerb2eatheb, 
anb  come  bp  bpon  my  nccftc :  he  hath 
maoe  mp  ftrengtb  to  fall ,  the  &02D 
tjatt)  bciiuer  eb  me  into  their  hanos,  from 
whom  3J  am  not  able  to  rife  bp. 

15  XhefLojb  hath  trobcnbnbcr  foot 
all  my  nugbtte  men  in  the  mibft  of  me : 
Ijctjatti  caiuoanaflcmbly  agamft  mec, 
to  crufh  my  pong  men.Xhc  IL02D  hat!) 
troben!!  the  birginc ,  the  Daughter  of 
jubah, « in  a  tome  pjeffe. 

i6  ;ffo2thcfe  tilings?  lbeepc,*  mine 
eyeminc  eye  runneth  boibnc  mttt)  iba^ 
ter,  becaufc  tl)c  comforter  ttjat  fbouio 
trelieue  nip  foulc  isfarrc  from  tnc :  my 
ctiilbjenare  befoiate,  becaufc  the  enemy 
pjcuailcb. 

17  zionfpjcabcth  forth  her  hanbs, 

and  there  is  nOttC  tO  COI1lf02t  l)CC  !  tl)C 

%  €>  is  m  hath  commanbcb  concerning 
Jacob,  ttjat  tjis  aoucrfancs  inouid  bee 
rounb  about  tjim:  Jcrufaiem  is  as  a 
menftruoustboman  among  them. 

is  cXl)e3L£>fiSMS*rigt)teous,to2 
3J  banc  rcbciico  agamft  his  t  tommaiv 
bement:  bearc,  Jp2ayyou,  all  people, 
anb  bchoiD  mp  fojoib :  mv  bir gms  anb 
mp  pong  men  art  gone  into  eapnumr. 


\Hibiibi- 

mating  or 
vyarJcrttig. 


{\Or,drfri 

able. 


•Ucu.ij.j 


ihefoule  10 
comejgjirK. 
\\Or,ti  mm- 
thing. 

1Hcb.t4< 
by  the  Win. 


\\Or,thf 

wtnepreffe 
of thevir- 
ewe,&c. 

"Icr.13.17 

and  14  17. 

f  Heb.bnng 
bake. 


"Danpj. 
XHcbmsHth 


19  J  calico  foj  my  loucrs>n  they  dc« 
ceiuebme :  my  pnefts  anb  mine  elbers 
gaucbpthegl)oGmthcnttc,tt)hiletbep 
fougtjt  tbcirmcat  to  rclieuc  their  foulrs 

10  25el)olb,£)1LOK5>:fo23aniinDi' 
ftceffe :  mp  *  boibels  arc  troublcb :  mine 
Heart  is  turncb  ibithtnmec,  fo:  3  haue 
gncuouap  rcbcllcb :  abjoao  the  fioo;b 
bcreauctl),  at  borne  there  isasDcattj. 

ai  Xtjcptjauctjearb  ttjat  33  Dgtj/here 
is  none  to  comfort  me :  all  mine  enemies 
hauchcarb  of  mp  troubicthcy  arc  gtab 
that  thou  haft  bone  it :  thou  ibilt  bmig 
the  bap  that  thonhaftlicailcb,  anbthep 
(ball  be  IiKe  bnto  me. 

zi  iLetallttjcir  ibtclicbncs  comebe^ 
fo2e  thee:  anb  bocbntottjcm,astr)ou 
haft  bone  bnto  mcfojaiimptranfgrct 
Rons:  fo?  mp  figljesaremanp,  anb  nip 
heart  is  faint. 

CHAP.    II. 

r   Ieremiah  lamcnteth  themiferyof  Ierufalcm. 
10  He  complaineth  thereof  to  God. 

£>ibhath  the!Lo2b  coucrco 
the  bangtjter  of  ztonttnth 
a  eloub,tn  his  anger,  and  caft 
boibne  from  hcaucn  bnto 
the  earth  the  beauttcof  Jii> 
racl,  anbremembicb  nothisfootftoolc 
mthebapofbts  anger; 

1  Xtje1Lo2Dha|hfraailo«)ebbpali 
the  habitations  of  3facob,anb  hathnot 
pitub :  he  hath  thjotben  boibnc  in  his 
ib2atl)theOrongholbs  of  the  Daughter 
of  Jubah:  he  hath  thought  them  bo ibn 
to  the  grounb :  hee  hath  pollutcD  the 
WngDome  anb  the  p2tnccs  thereof. 

j  ^etjath  cut  off  m  his  fierce  anger 
all  the  home  of  IJftacl:  he  hath  bjaibcn 
bactte  his  right  rjanb  from  befojethe  v 
nemp^nbhcburncbagatnft3!acobi:Hc 
a  flaming  fire  which  ocuour cth  rounb  a^ 

bout. 

4  $chathbcnthtsboibliKcancnc' 

mp:  he  ftoob  rbith  his  riglit  hanb  as  an 
abucrfarp,anb  ftclb  all  that  ibcrc  t  pica 
Cant  to  tl)c  epe,  m  thctabcrnaclcof  tl)c 
oauglncr  of  zion:  he  poibicb  out  his 
tunc  Uftc  fire. 

5  Xbc  H02D  tbas  as  an  enemic :  he 
hath  fmallottieD  bp  Jfracl ,  hec  hath 
fiuaiioibcD  bp  all  her  palaces :  he  hath 
Dcftropcb  his  ftrong  holbs,  ano  hath 
mtrcafeb  in  the  Daughter  of  Jubah 
mour  iiing  anb  lamentation. 

<s  3lnb  he  hath  btolcntlp'talun  aibay 
his  ||  tabernacle,  as  it  itwereoi  agarben, 
Dec  hath  Dcftropcb  his  places  of  the 

affem 


*  Ifai  <>.  1 1 

icre.48.  j6. 


||  Or,prc- 
claimed. 


\  Heb.  made 

tC C9HCh. 


f  Heb  All  the 
defrenttlc  of 
the  ne. 


■Pfal.8o. 

1  j.  and  ffp. 
41.  audita- 

U  Or,  httig* 


Gods  indignation  Lamentations.         on  Icrufalcm. 


'Pf.il.  74. 


\Or,f.i 


and  5.3  I  ■ 
anrl  14. 14. 
anJ  z).  16. 


tMr.  y 
the  -*ay. 


artembiv> :  the  %  o  k  ©  hath  caufcb  the 
tolemne  feaftsanb  Sabbaths  to  be  fo^ 
gotten  m  z  ion,anb  hat!)  bcfpifcbm  the 
mbignation  of  tits  anger  the  l&mg  anb 
thepzteft. 

7  Xhc  ?Lozo  Hath  cart  off  his  %l 
tat :  hec  hath  abhozreb  hi3  ^anctua- 
ne :  he  hath !  gntcn  top  into  the  hanb  of 
the  encmie  the  ibaiics  of  her  palaces : 
they  hauemabe  a  notfc  m  the  houfc  of 
the  %  0  k  jd  ,  as  in  the  bay  of  a  foiemnc 
feaft. 

8  Xhe  %  Dm©  hath  purpofeb  to 
bertroy  the  loan  of  the  baughter  of  zt 
on:hehathftretchcooutaime:hchath 
not  lbtthbzavbcn  his  hanb  from  t  be 
ftroytng:thcrcfozehcc  maoc  the  ram 
part  anb  the  lbau  to  lament  :thcvlan 
guifljeb  together. 

9  V)tt  gates  are  fimhc  into  the 
grounb :  he  hath  beftroyeb  anb  bjoften 
her  barres:  her  liinganbhcr  0zmces 
•ne  among  the  ©entiles:  the  iLatbMio 
n'o.c,her*p!ophets  aifofmbenobifion 
fromtheHoisi?. 

10  Xhe  fibers  of  the  baughter  of 
zion  fit  bpon  the  groimb  and  fecrpefi- 
lence :  they  hane  cart  bp  buft  bpon  their 
heabs  :  they  hane  girbcb  thcmfclucs 
tbithfacKclofh :  the  birgmsof  Jjcrufa 
lem  hang  boibnc  tljeir  heaocs  to  the 
grounb. 

1 1  s3jhnc  eyes  boe  faile  Unth  tcarcs : 
my  boibtls  arc  tronbleb  :  mv  Uuer  is 
pottueb  bponthe  earth,  fozthebertru 
ttson  of  the  baughter  of  my  people,  be 
caitfc  tfjc  dnlbzcn  anb  the  fucniings 

frooonemthe  flrcctsof  the  cute. 

iz  Xheyfayto  their  mothers,n9hcrc 
is  tome  anb  \buiei  When  tliey  fiuooneb 
as  the  lbounoebm  the  rtrects  of  the  ct 
tte,ibhen  their  fonle  ibas  poibzco  out 
into  their  mothers  bofomc. 

1?  ndhat  thing  fbauj  take  to  ibit 
nefTc  fo:  thec  <  lbhat  thing  fhail  3  li&en 
to  thee,  £>  baughter  of  3icrufatcm? 
\bhat  fhairj  equal  to  thee, that  3  may 
comfo2t  thee ,  s)  iLlirgm  baughter  of 
zion  t  fo:  thy  breach  "  great  li&c  the 
fca:  lbho  can  healc  thee; 

14. Xhy*pzophctshauc  fcencbame 
anb  fooiifl)  things  foz  thee ,  anb  they 
haue  not  bifcoueceb  thtnc  intquttic,  to 
turnc  away  thy  captuuttc :  but  hane 
feencfoz  thecfaifcburbcns,  anbeaufes 
ofbamflimcnt. 

15  3lll  that  parte  tuv,ciap  their  hanbs 
atthee:theyhiflcanbibaggethtitheab 
atthc  baughter  of3lcriifalcm,iav>n3,  is 


this  the  nttc  tftat  jnen  call  *  the  perfects 
on  of  beauty  ,thc  icy  of  the  lbhoie  earth? 
is  311  thine  enemies  hane  opencb 
their  mouth  agamft  thee:  they  htflc  anb 
gnafh  the  teeth:  they  fay,i©e  haue  final 
loibcb  her  pp  :  certainly  this  is  the  bay 
that  lbc  looHcb  foz :  ibe  haue  fouub.ibe 
haucfecneit. 

17  Xhe  JL  ©  is  ©  hath  bone  that 
lbhirh  hchao*  beuifcb-.hehathfulfilieo 
his  ibozo  that  he  hab  commaubcb  m 
the  bayes  of  olb  :  hec  hath  fhzoibcn 
boibne  anb  hath  not  pmeb:  anb  he  hath 
canfeb  thine  cucnuc  to  reioyce  ouer 
thechce  hath  fct  bp  thchozneofthmc 
aouerfaries. 

18  XheirheartericbbnrothelLozb, 
*CU»all  of  the  baughter  of  zion,lct 
tcarcs  runne  boibne  lifcc  a  ruier ,  bay 
anb  night :  giuc  thy  fclfe  no  rcrt,  let  not 
the  apple  oftlnnc  eyes  ccafe. 

19  3Jnfe,  cry  out  mthcmght:inthe 
beginning  of  the  matches  poUuc  out 
thine  heart  liftc  ibatcr  befozcthe  face  of 
thcHozb  :  lift  top  thy  hanbes  toibarb 
htm ,  foz  the  life  of  thy  yong  chtfbzcn, 
that  faint  foz  hunger  uuhc  top  of  cue 
ry  rtreete. 

20  CBcholb,£>IL©ia!D,  anbeon 
fiber  to  lbhom  thou  hart  bone  tins:  dial 
themometi  eat  their  fruit,  jndchtlbzen 
of  a  I  fpannclong;  fhail  the  pzicft  anb 
the  pzophctbc  rtatuc  uuhc  Sanctuary 
oftheiLozb; 

21  Xhc  yong  anb  the  olb  lye  on  the 
grounb  tn  the  Qrcets :  my  birgmsaub 
my  yong  men  are  fallen  by  the  froozb: 
thou  hart  flame  them  m  the  ^  of  thy 
anger :  thou  hart  HUlcb  anb  not  pitieb. 

22  Xhouhartcailcbas ma  foiemnc 
bay  my  terrours  rounb  about ,  fo  that 
m  the  bay  of  the  H©is©&  anger,  none 
cfcapcb  noz  rcmameb  :  thofc  that  31 
haue  ftoablcb  anb  bzought  bp  ,  ijatlj 
mine  enemy  confumeb. 

C  HAP.    III. 

1   The  faithfullbewaile  their  calamities,    n  By 

the  mercies  of  God  thev  nouiilh  their  hope. 
37Thevacknow]edgcGodsiuftice.  5^  They 
prjy  for  deliuerance,  ($4  and  vengeance 
on  their  enemies. 

Am  the  man  that  hath 
fecne  affliction  by  the  rob 
ofhtsibzath. 

2   tyc  hath  leb  mc  anb 
bzought  mee  into  barue 
nefl'ebutuottnto  light. 
3  Purely  agamft  mc  is  hetumeb.hc 
turncth 


'Plil.48  2 


'Lcuir.!5. 
1S.dcur.28. 
'5- 


Tcrc.  14. 
r7-tlnp.  1 


\\Or,frjJ. 
led  vrith 
their  htvidj. 


Th 


e  mercies 


Ck 


a 


\Hth.fons. 

'Iere.io.7, 

\Hek  hit- 

ter/tejfef. 


turncthhtshanbagamitmealithcbay. 

4  £0y  flclhanbmy  ffeuinc  hath  he' 
mabe  olo,hchath  biohcnmy  bones. 

5  i?c  Datlj  builbcb  agamft  me,  anb ! 
compaffcb^enr.thgailanbtrattel. 

6  $c  ijatli  fct  me  in  cache  places ,  as 
theythatbeocabofolb. 

7  $e  hath  hebgcb  me  about ,  that  3 
cannot  get  out :  Dee  hath  mabe  my 
chameheauic. 

8  3llfo  When  3J  cry  anbfhout,  he 
(huttethoutmypzayer. 

9  $ce  hath  inclofcb  my  wayes  with 
hewen  (lone :  he  hath  mabemy  pathes 
crooheb. 

io  tyc  was  tmto  me  as  a  Bear  c  lying  tn 
Wane,  and  as  a  ILioninfecret  places. 

1 1  I5>ec  hath  turneb  afibe  my  Wayes, 
anb  ptiilcb  mcmptcccs :  hee  hath  mabe 
mcbcfoiate. 

ii  i?chath  bent  his  bow,  anbfctme 
as  a  marhe  fc>2  the  arrow. 

15  ftec  hath  cauftb  the tarroWesof 
his  qusuer  to  enter  into  mv  r  cities. 

14.  3JWasa*bertfiontoaiimypeo 
pie,  md  their  fongall  the  bay. 

15  $ee  hath  fillcD  me  with  t  bitter 
ucfte,  hechathmabcmcbmn&en  With 
Wozmcwoob. 

i6  $>e  tiath  altb  bzohen  my  teeth  With 
or."^  i  grauell  ftones ,  hee  hath  1 1  couer cb  me 
™1'*    jwsth  allies. 

17  3nbthouhaftrcmoucbmyfoulc 
''*•!>>*•  farce  offfrom  peace :  3  folate  t  pjofpc 
rule. 

is  3tnb'3Jfaib,Sij)yftrcngthatibmy 
hopets  perilrjeb  from  the?L  ©  is  ©: 

19  I  l&emembjmg  mine  affliction  anb 
mv  miferic,  the  wozmcWoob  j  the  gall. 

10  fl^fouu  oath  them  fttllmremenv 
bjance,  anb  is  t  humbleb  in  me. 

zi  Zhtsgjt  recall  to  my  mutb,therc 
fojc  haue  3i  hope. 

22  C't u ot the  1L£>H id %> mercies 
thatweearcnotconfumcb ,  becaufcfjis 
companions  faile  not. 

23  They  are  ttewc  cuery  morning: 
great  1  all  vfaithfulnelTe. 

24.  Zhc  1L  0  is  d  is  my  *  ponton, 
fayth  my  foule,  therefore  Will  3  Dope 
infjim. 

25  3Zl)t  %.  o  k  i>  n  goob  bnto  tlicm 
that  wane  foz  htm,  tothefouie  thai  fee  | 
ftcthlmn. 

z6  it  is  goob  that  a  manfliouib  both 
htmeanb  quietly  wait  fo?  the  faluatton 
ofthcHow©. 

27  insgoobfo2amanthathebearc 
the  yottem  his  youth. 


pjij. 


ot  the  Lord  J 


\\Or/emem 
her. 


\Hcb  bowed 

f  Heb.  make 
to  returnt  to 
my heart. 


*PfaLlrf.y. 
a:iH  73. 16. 
and  119.^7. 
iere.  10.16 


I    28  free  fittcth  alone  atto  hecpeth  fc 
i  lence ,  becaufc  hce  hath  bonic "  Dpon 
hmi. 

29  ftcputtethhts  mouth  m  the  buft, 
I  if  fo  be  there  may  be  hope. 
!    5°  fcecgatcthhischceitctohmithat 
fmiteth  him ,  hce  is  fillet)  full  Wirt)  re^ 
pjocl). 

31  f  0.:  the  %m  will  not  taQ  off  fo; 
eucr. 

32  25ut  though  hce  catifc  grtefe,  yet 
Hull  htt  haue  companion  acwmng  to 
thcmultttubc  of  his  mercies. 

33  tfw  heboth  notaffltct t ibilltngly, 
no:  gneue  the  chilbzcn  of  men. 

3+  Zo  crufli  pnber  htsfcctcail  the 
pjtfoners  of  the  earth, 

35  Eo  tunic  afibe  the  right  of  a  man 
befojc  t_hc  face  of  the  molt  high, 

36  }.ofubttectamanmh!Scaufe,thc 
JLo:bijapp:oouethnot. 

37  Cu3ho^hcc*thaifayth,anbit 
tommeth  to  palTe,  who  tljc  Jlojbcom- 
manbethitnoti 

33  £)utofthcmoiithofthcmoChtc 
p:oceebeth  not*eutllaubgoob< 

39  naherefoic  boeth  a  luung  man 
llcompiame ,  a  man  fo?  thepumfhment 
of  l)is  fumes J. 

4-0  fLct  bs  fcarch  anb  try  our  tbaies, 
anb  turtte  agame  to  the  fL  0  is  jp. 

4.1  ?ictbsitftbpoiirhcartU)ttl)our 
hanbs  tonto  Oob  in  the  heauens. 

42  10c haue  tranfgrcfleb,  anb  haue 
r  cbcllcb ,  thou  haft  not  parboncb. 

43  Zhou  haft  couercb  lbith  anger, 
anbperfecutebtos:thouh<iftflame,thou 
haft  not  pitteb. 

44  Zhou  haft  couercb  thy  felfe  rotth 
a  cioub,that  our  player  fljouib  not  paftc 
through. 

45  Zhou  haft  mabe  bs  as  the  *  off 
fcourmg  anb  rcfufc  tn  the  mtbbeftof  the 
people. 

46  3U  our  enemies  haue  openeb 
thetr  mouthes  agatnft  bs. 

47  *  f  care  anb  a  fnarcts  come  bp- 
on  ps,  befoiatton  anb  beftructiott. 

48  tiQuie  ere  runneth  boitonc  lbith 
nuers  of  iDatcr ,  fo:  the  beftruction  of 
the  Daughter  of  my  people. 

49  t19tne  eye  truUlcth  bolbne  anb 
ccafeth  not.iDrthout  any  mtcrmimon: 

50  XiUthcli.«pisiDlooUcboibnc, 
anb  bcholb  from  hcauen. 

-51  <33inc  eve  affetteth  f  mine  heart, 
i|becattfeofall  thebaughters  ofmyctty. 

52  ©tttc  enemies trjafeb  me fo;el:fte 
a  biro,  Without  caufe.  ^_x 

Pyv        5?  Zhey 


bit  hear:. 


\\Or.afuf,- 


\\Or,f,t,h 
noT. 

'MA33*. 


'Ames  j.f 


'  1  Ccr.4. 


'Ifai.24.i7. 


I  Hrt.  mj 

\<Jr,moe 
bfHdfft 


Thcmifencs  Lamentations.         oflerufal 


em. 


\\Or.,ijH- 
TtACte  of 
htArl. 

•Plil.8.4. 


cilucs. 


5j  Ihcp  haue  tut  off  mp  life  in  the 
mmgco  u  ,anD  caft  a  done  bpon  me. 

5+  teatersflotbeD  oner  mute  heab, 
thcngitoj)t),3Jamtutoff. 

55  C  3  talleu  bpon  thp  name ,  €> 
?L  ©  is  E>,out  of  the  low  Dungeon. 

56  XhouhafthtatDmpbotce,htDe 
not  thine  eacc  at  mp  bjeathmg ,  at  nip 
trie. 

57  Xhou  DjcWcft  neetc  in  the  nap 
that  31  tailcD  bpon  thee :  thou  faiDft, 
Jf  care  not. 

5s  €>  Horn,  thou  naff  plcaDCD  the 
taufes  ofmpfoule ,  thou  haft  rcDccmcD 
mpltfe. 

59  £)  1L© is©, thou  haft  feenemp 
W2ong,iuDgethoumpcauft. 

60  Xhou  tjatt  feene  all  their  ben^ 
gcancc ;  and  all  their  imaginations  a- 
gatnftmc. 

6i  Xhou  haft  heart)  their  repjoch, 
£)  IL©  a  jb>,  ^d  an  their  imaginations 
agamftme: 

61  Xhclippcsofthofethatrofc  bp 
agamftme,  aim  their  Dcuiceagamft  me 
all  the  Dap. 

6 j  iSeholb ,  their  fitting  DoWnc  anD 
their  rtfing  bp,  3J im  their  muftcfte. 

64.  C  ficnucr  bnto  them  a  rceom-- 
penfc ,  £>?L©ik£>  ,  accojDmg  to  the 
rtw&coftheirhanos. 

65  ©itiethcmllfojrow  of  heart,  thp 
curfc  bnto  them. 

6  6  0crfetute  anb  Dcftrop  them  m  an;  I 
ger ,  from  bnber  tlje  *  heauens  of  the 

?L©15?E>. 

CHAP.   IIII. 

Zion  bewaileth  her  picitull  eftate.  ij  She 
contefleth  her  fmnes.  2.1  Edoin  is  chreat- 
Zionis  comforted. 

€>W  is  the  golD  become 
bimrnc  i  how  13  the  moft 
fine  golb  thangeb  '  the 
ttoncs  of  the  fanttuanc 
arcpoWicD  out  in  the  top 

ofcuerpftreete. 
i   Xhc  p;enous  fonnes  of  Zion, 

comparable  to  fine  golb,  howarethep 

efteemcb  as  earthen  pitchers.thc  Wortte 

of  the  hanbs  of  the  potter  i 

3  <£uenthe||fca-monftersD:awout 
thcbjcaft,thepgiucfucftctotheirpoung 
ones:  the  Daughter  of  mp  people  is  be- 
come truell,  like  the  oftrtches  tu  the  Wil= 
DemcfTe. 

4  Xhe  tongue  of  the  rinsing  thUD 
r icaur tl)  to  the  roofe  of  his  mouth  fo? 
third :  the  poung  thUDjcnaf&etyeaD, 


and  no  man  bjca&cth  <t  bnto  them. 

5  1ChcpthatDiDfccDcDelicatlp,arcl 
Dcfoiatc  in  the  ftrectes:  thep  that  Were! 
bjoughtbp  in  fcatlet,  cmbjaceDoung  | 
hillcs. 

6  ifajthellpummmcntoftheimcnii >\ 
tie  of  the  Daughter  ofmppeoplc,is  grca- 
terthntthcpunifhrnentofthcftnuc  of 
3>oDom,  that  Was  *  oucrthjoiben  asm 
a  moment,  anD  no  hanDs  ftapcD  on  her. 

7  $er  il^asarites  were  purer  then 
fnolb,  thep  Were  Whiter  then  mime, 
thep  were  ntoje  r  uDDie  in  bobp  then  ru- 
bies,thctr  polifhmg  was  of  5>aphir. 

s  Xheir  btfagc  is  t  blacUcr  then  a 
tole:thep  are  not  nnoiben  in  the  Greets: 
their  f  mnnc  tleaucth  to  their  bones :  it 
is  WtrhcteD,itts  become  itftc  a  (tube. 

9  Xhep  that  bee  flame  With  the 
fmo?D,  arc  better  then  thep  thatbc  flam 
With  hunger  :  foz  thefe  t  pme  awap, 
ftrirBcnthioughfojwatitofthcfruitsof 
thefielD. 

10  XhchanDsofthcpitifuUlbomcn 
haue'foDDenthcttou.incthiiDmi.rhcp 
Were  their  meate  in  theDcftruction  of 
the  Daughter  of  mp  people. 

11  Xhe  %  ©  13  jd  hathaceompiifhcD 
hisfurie,  hehathpoVbjeD  out  his  fierce 
anger,  anDhathRinDleDaficetnZion, 
anb  it  hath  DcuourcD  thcfouitDatiotts 
thereof. 

11  %*iz  Rings  of  the  earth ,  anD  an 
the  inhabitants  ofthcWojiDWoulD  not 
hauc  belecucb,  that  the  aDuerfarieanD 
thccucmtc  (houlDhaueentrtD  into  the 
gates  ofgjcrufalcm. 

ij  C'JFonhe  fumes  ofhcrpiophcts, 
and  the  mtqutties  of  her  pnefts,  that 
hauc  fhcD  the  Wood  of  the  tuft  m  the 
miDDcftofher: 

14  IChephaucibanDicD  isbltnDmcn 
intl)cftreetcs,thephaucpolluttDthcnv 
fciucswithbloob ,  ||  fo  that  men  toulD 
not  touch  that  garmnits. 

15  Xhcp  crpeD  bmo  them  2>epart 
pee,  ||ic  is  bncleane,bepart,Depart,  touch 
not ,  ibhcn  thep  flcD  aibap  anD  *ban- 
DieD  :  thep  faib  among  the  hwthen, 
Xhtp  fljail  no  mo2e  foionrne  there. 

16  Xhe|!angcroftheH©is©hath 
btuibcD  them ,  he  lbill  no  mo;eregarD 
them :  thep  rcfpccteD  not  the  pcrfons  of 
the  p.ucfls ,  thep  fauourcD  not  the  el- 
Dcrs. 

17  3s  foi  bs ,  our  epes  as  vtt  faiieD 
fo:  our  bamc  helpe :  m  our  watching 
We  hauc  watch  c d  to:  a  nation  that  coulD 
uotfauebs. 
18  Xhcp 


\\Ortinvjut- 
tic. 

'Gen. 19. 


f  Htb.  xa 

kfr  then 


|  Hel.fiw 
cur. 


'l.Kuigs 
6.19.  ncuti 

18.57. 


.cr  j.ji. 

and  17.  XI 


the  j  could 
net   but 
touch. 

lHted> 


I  Or,  fee. 


Th 


e  great  mi lene 


ife 


•Gen.  2.7 


\\Ortth,ne 
Vnatutie* 


\  Or, c Arte 
thee  CAptiue 

far  ibjfnncs 


t  Heb.  com- 

mcibfor 

price. 

\  Heb.on  our 

ntckj  Are  we 

pcrfcCHlect. 


18  Xhey  hunt  our  fteps  that  rbe  can* 
notgocinourftrects:ouren0i6neerc, 
our  Daycsarefulfilleb,  fo2  ouc  enbe  is 
tome. 

19  jDur perfecutoursare froifter  then 
ttje  eagles  of  theheauen :  thcyputfucD 
us  Upon  the  mountatnes,  they  laibe 
ttiaitefcubsmthe  rbilbctneffe. 

20  1Chc*b2cathofoutnoftcels,thc 
anointeo  of  the  %  o  is  ©  rbas  taken  m 
theit  pits,  of  ilihorn  itoc  faib,  3Hnbec 
his  fhaboibc  ibe  (hail  imc  among  the 
heathen. 

ii  CBeioyceatiD  be  glao,©  Daugh- 
ter of  €oom,  tlKUDtticlieftiti  theianbe 
of  II5,  the  tup  alfo  (hail  paffc  th20ugh 
bntothec:  tljoufbait  be  b:unticn,  anb 
(halt  mane  thy  fclfe  na&eb. 

22  CXhc II pumfhment of  thine  \\\v 
(untie  is  attompliftjcb ,  £>  Daughter  of 
zion,  hennll  no  11102c  cane  thee  arbay 
into  taptmitic:  hce  1MI  totGt  tbineuu* 
nuitte,  £>  Daughter  of  etiam&ttvoia 
llbtftouccthyunnes. 

CHAP.    V. 

A  pitifull  complaint  of  Zion,  in  prayer 
vnto  God. 

Cmembcc,  €>  ?L©k©, 
mhatis  tome  toponbs: 
confiDcr  anb  beholbc  ouc 
tcp20th. 
x  £)ut  inhecitanee  is 
tucncD  to  ftcangecs,  out  honfestoate 
ants. 

3  D9e  arc  02phanes  anDfatherleflc, 
ouc  mothers  »i  c  as  Uiiboibcs. 

4-  nac  hatte  bmnden  ouc  Vbatec  ft>2 
money,  ouc  ibooo  t  is  folb  bnto  tos. 

$  t  £)ur  nccltcs  are  tmbcr  perfecuti 
on :  iDc  labour  anb  hauc  no  reft. 

6  naehauegutcnthchanbtothce 
gyptians,  and  to  thcSKTyjians,  to  be  f& 
nfneDVbtthbicab. 


Chap.v.  of  the  people. 


•  [cr.j1.s9 


"PTal  n.j8 

\\Orttcrron 

or  'birrna. 


7  *£>uc  fathers  hauc  Qnneb  anb  are, . 
not,  ana  ibce  hauc  borne  tljcic  iniqat=  U£  1 
ties.  ' 

8  S>cruants  hauc  ruicb  oner  bs- 

there  is  tlOUC  that  DOCtl)  DCilllCt  w  Ollt  Of 

their  hano. 

9  nae  gate  our  b:eab  vbitft  the  periii 

ofourliucs,betaufeoftljcfnjo:bofthc 
Mlbcrneflc. 

10  sDur*  fhinnetbas  blaefcc  like  an 
ouen,  betaufe  of  the  ||  teccibic  famine. 

1 1  Xhcy  cauifljcb  the  ibotutu  m 
"lion,  and  the  maibes m  the  tmes  of 
3Jubal). 

12  pimtts  ace  ftangcb  bp  by  their 
hanb :  the  faces  of  eibcrs  lbccc  not 
Ijonoiiccb. 

13  Xhcy  tooKc  the  young  men  to 
gnnbe,  anb  the  cDiltycn  fell  bnber  the 
ibooD. 

14  Xhc  €ibets  fjaue  teareb  fcom 
the  gate,  tfjc  young  men  fcom  thcic 
mufitBC. 

15  Xhe  toy  of  ouc  heart  is  teafeb, 
ouc  bauntc  is  tucneb  into  moucmng. 

i6  Xhe  croibnc  is  fallen  from  ouc 
ocab:  B9oc  bnto  bs,trjat  rbce  haue 
finncb. 

17  if 02  this  our  fjcart  is  faint,  ft>2 
thefc  things  our  cyesare  bimmc. 

18  asccaufeof tlje  mountamcof  Zfc 
on,  rbljiclj  is  ocfoiatc,  ttje  fores rbaitic 
Dpontt. 

19  1Cljou,£DIL©i3©,*rcmamcft 
fo:  cuer :  thy  throne  from  generation 
to  gencranon. 

20  n9|)crcfo2c  bocft  tl)on  forget  bs 
fo?  tucr  ,  and  fojfa&c  bs  t  fo  long 
time? 

zi  *3Curnctf)ou  bsbnto  tl)ec,^D 
?L©ia© ,  anb  IDc  fljall  be  turncb :  re- 
new our  bayes  as  of  olb. 

22  ||  25ut  thou  haft  bttcrly  rcicctcb 
bs:  thou  art  Decy  lb?oth  agamft  bs. 


crrwne of 
our  hfiJ 
ufaSra. 


.the 


■PfiI.9-8. 
and  29.  10. 
and  102  ij. 
&  145.13. 

\Htb.fcr 

Light 

J*/es. 

'Icr.M.iS 


Yyy 


fTHE 


\\Or.f„ 

Trt/t  thjH 
Vlter/yre- 

Uttvs! 


Thcviiionof  Ezekiel.         liuing  creatures. 


^THE  BOOKE  OF  THE 

Prophet  Ezekiel. 


t  H'hr  It. 


\Jictcitc\i- 
mg  itftlfc. 


t  Mfh.  * 

jirjtght 

foot. 


CHAP.    I. 

The  rime  of  Ezckiels  prophecie  at  Chebar.  4 
His  vifion  ot  foure  Cherubims,  15  Of  ihe 
foure  whecles,   16   and  of  the  glory  of  God. 

£>ib  tt  tame  to 
paflc  tn  tlje  rtjtc 
tictl)  pcerc ,  in  the 

fourth  moncth  ,  ill 

the  fifthly  of  the 
moncth ,  ( as  3) 
ibas  among  ttiic 
taptutesbptheri- 
ncrofChebar>hat 
thehcauens  lbcre 
opcneb.auD'J  fall)  btftonsof  eob. 

2  31n  the  fifth  day  of  the  moncth, 
fibhtch  was  the  fifth  peerc  of  ding  3Jcho- 
ta&instaptuutic,) 

3  Xhc  ilwb  of  the  %  0  k  id  tame 
crpzcllp  Unto  t£$cfcicl  the  j&ucft,  the 
fonne  of  2j5ui.e,  m  the  lanb  of  the  Caioc 
aits,bpthc  mtcr  Chebar,  anb the  hanb 
of  the  ?Lo2b  ibas  there  bpon  him. 

4  C  anb  5  loolicb ,  ano  beholD,  a 
ibhtrlcibinbc  tame  out  of  the  /iSozth ,  a 
great  tloubc ,  ano  a  fire  t  infottlbmgtt 
feife ,  ano  a  bnghtnefle « as  about  it,  anb 
out  of  the  mtbft  thereof  as  the  colour  of 
ambcr.outofthcmtoftof  the  fire. 

5  aifo  out  of  the  miblt  thereof  same 
the  l.Uencffc  of  foure  humg  creatures, 
anb  thts  a  as  thctr  appearance  :thep  hab 
thcliueneffcofaman. 

6  anb  cucrv  one  hab  foure  faces, 
anb  cucrp  one  hab  foure  Brings. 

7  anb  thctr  feet « ere  t ftraight  feet, 
anbthefole  of  thctr  feet  was  ltucthcfolc 
of  a  tallies  foot,  anb  thep  fparhieb  liftc 
the  colour  of  burnlfbeb  biaflc. 

8  ^nb  thep  hab  the  haubes  of  a 
man  bnber  their  lbtngs  on  thctr  foure 
fibes,  anb  thep  foure  had  thctr  faces  anb 
their  lbmgs. 

9  %\)tit  lbmgjSlberetopncb  one  to 


another,  the?  turneb  not  ibhen  thep 
ibent :  the?  ibent  cucrp  one  ftraight 
fojibarb. 

10  as  fo?  the  liftenefTe  of  their  fates, 
thep  foure  had  the  face  of  a  man  ,  anb 
the  face  of  alponon  the  right  fibc,  anb 
thev  foure  had  the  face  ofanorconthc 
left  ftbe :  the? foure  alfo  had  the  faccof 
an  eagle. 

11  Xhus  were  thctr  faces :  anb  thctr 
ilnngs  lbcre  ||  ftrctchcb  bpibarb ,  tibo 
winos  of cucrp  one  lbcre  topneb  one  to 
an  other , ano  nuo  coucrcb  their  bobies. 

1 1  3nb  they  ibent  cucrp  one  ftraight 
tonbarb:ibhitherthcfptrttibastogoc, 
thep  ibent:  and  thep  turneb  notibhen 
they  litem. 

13  as  fo:  the  ItttenctTe  of  thciumtg 
creatures ,  their  appearance  was  ukc 
bunimgcoicsoffire,  andubetheappea 
ranee  of  lamps :  tt  went  bp  anb  boibnc 
among  the  Itutng  creamrcs ,  anb  the 
fire  ibas  bnght,  ano  out  of  the  fir  c  Went 
foonh  lightning. 

14  anb  the  luung  creatures  ratine, 
anb  rcturneb  as  the  appearance  of  a 
fiafl)  of  lightning. 

is  C  /loth  as  3*  bchelbc  the  liuing 
creatures:  Ucholb  one  lbhcrtc  bpon  the 
earth  bp  the  luung  creatures,  lbith  his 
foure  faces. 

16  Xhe  appearance  of  the  lbhcclcs, 
anb  their  iboiltc  w«  itHCbnto  the  colour 
ofaBcnll:  anb  thep  foure  had  one  littc 
neffc ,  anb  their  appearance  anb  their 
lbojUc  was  as  tt  lberc  a  ibheele  in  the 
mtbbleofaibhccle. 

17  nJhcn  thep  lbcncthcplbcnt  bpon 
their  foure  fibes :  and  thep  rcturneb  not 
lbhcn  thep  ibent. 

is  31s fo2  their  rtuga:,  thep  lbcre  fo 
htgluhatthcp  lbcre  b:cabftti,  anb  their 
||  rings  lbcre  full  of  epes  rouitb  about 
them  foure. 

19  anb  ibhcn  the  Itumg  creatures 
lbcnt, 


rfir..\t!. 


iThevifion. 


Ch. 


ap.ij.iij.       Rebellious  Ifrael. 


prtflife. 


\\Or,of/fr. 


lbent,  the  tt>b«tesibentbp  tbem :  anb 

ibbentbe  luimg  creatures  inert  lift  top 
from  the  eartb,tbcttibcelstt>eteufttop. 

20  ©bitbcrfbeuec  the  fpint  was  to 
goc,  tbepttient ,  thither  was  their  fptnt 
to goc , anb  the  ibbeclcsttiercltftcb  top 
oucr  againtttbem :  fojtbe  fptru  ||  of  the 
ttuing  creature  was  tntberbbeclcs. 

21  <c©bentbofctt>ent,theieU)cnt,anb 
tt)bentbofc(toob,theic  ftoob;  anbibljcn 
tbofeibcrcltftcbbp  from  tbe  earth,  the 
ibbceles  were  iiftcb  tip  oucc  agamft 
tbem:  fiwtbc  fptnt  ||of  t!)c  lutingtrca-' 
tnre  w.rstntbeibbttles. 

21  3nb  the  UKcneCre  of  the  firma* 
metitbpontbcbcabsoftbcutungtrca* 
turc  was  as  the  colour  of  the  terrible 
cb2pftau ,  (rceccbcb  footfb  oucr  tbetr 
beabs  about. 

23  3nb  bnber  the  firmament  were 
their  lbings  ftcaigbt,  the  one  totbarb 
the  other,  cucrp  one  babttbottibteb  co- 
tter eb  on  this  ftbc,  5  euerp  one  hab  tibo, 
Jtobtcb  coucr eb  on  that  fibc  their  bobies. 

24.  2tnb  Vbljcn  thep  tbent ,  11  hearb 
thenoife  of  their  ttmtgs ,  Ube  the  noifc 
of  great  ibatcrs,  astbebotceoftbc  31- 
nughtie,  the  tootce  of  fpeeeb,  as  tlje  noifc 
of  an  bofte :  itobcn  thep  ftoob,  thep  let 
boibttc  their  itotngs. 

15  2lnb  there  mas  aboicefcom  the 
firmament,  that  ^  as  oucr  their  beabs, 
lbhen  thep  ftoob ,  and  hab  let  bottme 
their  ttnngs. 

26  C^ttioaboue  the  firmament  that 
was  oucr  their  hcaos,wastheliUcncu"e  of: 
a  £bione ,  as  the  appearance  of  aS»a?  I 
pDvic  ftoue ,  anb  bpon  the  liUencflc  of: 
theXhJone  was  tbcliReneCTeas  rljc  ap- 
pearance of  a  man  abouc  bpon  it. 

27  ^nogifaib  as  the  colour  of  ani'-j 
ber,  as  the  appearance  office  rounb  a 
bout  ibithm  it :  from  the  appearance  of; 
btslopnes  cuenbpibarb,  anb  from  the ! 
appearance  of  btslopnes  cuen  bottme  1 
ibarb ,  J  fatt)  as  it  tticre  the  appearance 
of  fire ,  9  it  Had  bjigbtnefTe  rounb  about. 

2$  3Js  the  appearance  of  the  bott> 
that  is  in  the  doubt  in  the  bap  of  rainc , 
fo  was  the  appearance  of  the  blight- 
neffe  rounb  about.  %\v£  was  the  appear 
rante  of  the  liUenelTe  of  the  gl02p  of  the 
%  ®  k  ©-.anbttihcngi  faibit,3l  fell  bp- 
on mp  face,  anb3Jhcarb  aboicc  of  one 
tbatfpalu. 

CHAP.   II. 

1    Ezekiels  coinmifsion  ;    6    His   inftru&ion. 
51    The  roule  of  his  heauie  prophecie. 


I  S^^Si?l>hcfatbbiitome,  £>on 

$SM&$1 of  man '  ftanD  toPO"  thp 
lg£S$Sf  f«te ,  ano  31  ibill  fpeaac 
ffp^bntothee. 
s?sukt*s.-±&  2  3nbtbefptritcntrcb 
into  me,  when  heefpafiebntome,  anb 
let  me  bponmpfeete,  tljat  J  Ijcarb  htm 
that fpaae  bnto  me: 

1  ^nbheefaibbntomc,  §>onnc  of 
man,  gifcnb thee  totlic  thiKuenof  3Jt 
rael,  to  a  rebellious  t  nation  that  hath 
rebclieb  agamft  mee :  thep  anb  their  fa- 
thers hauc  tranfgrefTeo  agamft  mee, 
cuen  bnto  this  berp  bap. 

4  fw  thep  arc  t  unpubeut  chilbicn 
anb  ffcffc  hear teb :  31  boc  fenb  thee  bnto 
them,  anb  thou  ftjalt  Cap  bnto  tbem , 
SPntsfaptbtbe  jloib  (5©©. 

5  3nbtbcp,tt)bctbcrtbeptt«lheare 
o;  ibljether  tbcpttnll  ftubcare,  (fin  thep 
are  a  rebellious  houfe)  pet  (ball  nnoib 
that  tljete  bath  bene  a  &iopbct  among 
them. 

6  C3mbtboufonneofman,benot 
afcaib  ofthem,neitber  beafratb  of  their 
iboibes,  though  II  b2parsanbthomes 
be  until  thee,  anb  tbon  bocft  bibell  & 
mong  fcojpions :  be  not  afratb  of  their 
tt)02bs,no2  bcbtfmapcb  at  their  looses, 
though  thep  be  a  rebellious  houfe- 

7  3nb  thou  (bait  rpeaacmpttiojbs 
bnto  tbem,  ttibctbcr  tbepttnllbcareo: 
tbbctber  tbepibtll  fr.2bcare,fo«!tbcp  are 
moft  t  rebellious. 

8  zsut  thou,  fonnc  of  man ,  bearc 
ttmafjfapbnto  thee;  iSi  not  thou  re- 
bellious  littc  that  rebellious  houfe :  o- 
pen  thp  mouth  anb  *  cate  that  3  gtue 
thee. 

9  C  3lnb  ibben  3J  Ioobcd ,  bcbolb, 
an  hanb  was  fent  bnto  mee,  anb  loe,a 
roule  of  a  booac  was  therein. 

io  3nbbcfp2cabtt  befo2cmc,  anb  it 
ibas  ttvittcnttntbtn  anb  ttntl)out,  anb 
there  tbas  ib2itten  therein  lamcntati* 
oiis,anbmournmg,  anbiboe. 

CHAP.    III. 

I  Ezekicl  catcth  the  roule.  4  Godcncoura- 
gcth  him.  15  Cod  fhewcth  him  the  rule 
of  prophecie.  11  Godfhutteihandopeneih 
die  Prophets  mouth. 

^>^fk?f  £>2eoucrbefaib  bnto  me, 
~?M  f^  ^>onneof  man ,  cate  that 
tbon  finbtft  :  cate  this 
^  roulcanDgocfpcattcbn; 
s^^S  totbeboufeof  jfrael. 

2  S>o3l  openebmp month, anb  Ijec 
taufeb  me  to  eate  that  roule. 
l»pp  i        ?  ^nb 


\Heb.natf 


\H,b  hard 
°ff«c. 


\\Or?,hlt. 


hen. 


Tlcu  10.9 


Arouleeaten. 


Ezckicl.    Watchmens dutie. 


•Reu.io. 
9- 


\  Heb.  deepe 
oflippei  M*d 
heaxtg  of 

tongue,  dxd 
fover.6. 
f  Hti.drep* 

of  lift  *o*i 
k tattic  Loig 

\\Or,iflhad 

Tent  thee  &-c. 
would  they 
nothoHo 
hearkjned 
vnto  the* .' 

efforhesd 
And  hard  of 
hcitrt. 


la  1.8. 


\HtbMi(fcd. 


tffeo.  bi- 
ter. 

\  Heb.  hot 
a/tfer. 


$  3  no  he  fait)  inito  mee ,  S>onne  of 
ntan,  taufc  thy  belly  to  cate,  anD  fill  thy 
boiDcis  ID! til  this  route  that  3  giue 
thee.XhcnDrt)3J*catcit,  anbitibasut 
my  mouth  as  home  fo?  fujectntffc. 

4  C  3nt)  he  fato  Din o  mc ,  Pontic 
of  man,  goc,  get  thee  Dnto  the  houfe  of 
■Jfrael,  anDfpeaRcrDithmyn>o;bsbn 
to  them. 

5  3Fojthouannotfenttoapeoplcof 
atftrattgefpeach,  anbofanhacDian* 
guage,  but  to  the  houfe  of^fracl. 

6  /Rot  to  many  people  of  arrange 
fpeath  anD  of  an  t  harb  language, 
tbbofe  ttjojus  thou  canft  not  bnDcr- 
ftanD :  ||  furcly hab  3  fent  thee  to  them, 
they  VboulDhauchearRcneD  Dnto  thee: 

7  26ut  the  houfe  of  3Jfrael  lDUl  not 
hcacRcn  bnto  thee ,  fo;  they  lDUl  not 
hcarRcn  Dnto  me :  fo;  all  the  houfe  of 
3Jfraci  are  t  impatient  anD  harD 
heartcD. 

s  25cholt> ,  3  ftaue  maoc  thy  face 
ftrongagamttthctr  faces ,  anD  thy  fo?c- 
hcaD  ftcong  agatnft  their  fozebcaDs. 

9  3s  an  aoamant  harDer  then  flint 
hatie  3  nuibe  thy  fo  ;chcab :  "fear  e  them 
not,neuhcr  be  Difmayeo  at  their  looRcs, 
though  they  be  a  rcDellious  houfe. 

io  £0o;coucr hcfaiDDnto mc&oime 
of  man  ,  all  my  lboios  that  3  (hall 
fpeaRc  Dnto  thee ,  rcccluc  in  thine  heart, 
ano  hearc  lbith  thtnc  cares. 

n  3nD  goc ,  get  thee  to  them  of  the 
capttiuty,  Dnto  thy  people ,  anofpeake 
Dnto  them  anD  tell  them ,  Xbus  faith 
the  ?Lo;D  <5o®,  XDhcthcr  they  lDUl 
hear  c,o;  Whether  they  ibill  fo;bcare. 

11  Xhcn  the  fpirit  tooRcmc  Dp,  anD 
3  hearD  behmD  mc  a  Doycc  of  a  great 
rufhuig/aMng  usicffeb  betljc  glo;y  ofthe 
|L  ©  is  id  from  his  place. 

13  1  heard  alfo  the  noife  of  the  VDmgs 
of  the  lining  creatures  that  t  toucbeb 
one  another,  ano  the  noifc  of  the 
\Dheeles  ouer  agamftthem,  anD  anoife 
ofagreatrufhmg. 

14  £>o  the  fpirit  liftcD  mc  Dp ,  anD 
toobc  me  aruay,  ano 3  Ebent  in  t  bitter- 
neffe,  m  the  tbeate  ofmy  fpirit ,  but  the 
hattD  ofthe  Hsdisjd  lbas  ftcong  Dpon 
nice. 

15  C  Xhcn  31  came  to  them  of  the 
captiuity  at  Xcl  aDib,  that  DiDelt  by  the 
tiucr  of  Chcbar ,  anD  3  fate  lDhcrc  they 
fate ,  ano  remamcD  there  aftotuthcD  & 
mong  tl)cmfcucnDaies. 

i6  StttD  it  came  to  pafft  at  the  cud  of 
feucn  Daycs  ,  that  the  lDo;D  ofthe 


%  sd  is  v>  tame  Dnto  me,  faying  ■ 

17  *  ^>onne  of  man ,  3  banc  maoc 
tbeeaibatchmanDntothc  houfe  of  3t 
rael:therefo;e  hearc  the  rbo;D  at  my 
mouth,  f  gme  tl)cm  lDaming  from  me. 
is  nahen  3  fay  bnto  the  idicRcd  i 
Xbou  (halt  furcly  Die,  ano  thougiucft 
him  not  Vbarnmg  ,  no;  fpeattcft  to 
iDame  the  lbtcRcD  fcom  his  lDicRcb 
Ibay  to  faue  his  life  the  fame  lbtcReb 
man  (hall  Dte  tn  his  uuquitie:  but  his 
bloobtbill  3  require  atthutchanD. 

19  ^etifthouiDamethciDtcftcb,anb 
heturncnotfcomhisiDtcReDttcfre,  no; 
from  his  lbicRcb  ibay,  he  (hall  Die  in  hts 
intqutty,  but  thou  haft  beliuercb  thy 
Conic. 

20  3game,tbhena*rtghtcousman 
Doth  turne  from  hts  *  nghteouftteffe 
ano  commit  intqutty,  anD  ^  lay  a  (turn 
bltng  blocRc  before  him,  he  (hall Die :  be 
catifc  thou  haft  not  giuen  him  tbar- 
ning ,  he  (hall  Die  tn  his  fume ,  anD  his 
rightcoufneffe  lDhich  hehath  Done  dial 
not  Dc  remcmb;eb:buthtsblooDlDill 
3  require  at  thine  hanD. 

21  jiSeuerthelcffe  if  thou  tbanic  the 
righteous  man  ,  that  the  righteous 
finnenot,anD  he  Doth  not  funic  he  (hall 
furclyliue ,  bctaufchctsiDarncD:aifo 
thouhaft  DeliuercDthyfoule. 

xx  ^r.^uDthehanD  ofthe  ILeis© 
ibas  there  Dpon  mc ,  anb  he  faiDDnto 
mc,  3  rife,  goc  forth  into  the  piatnc,anD 
3  Mil  there  talRclDitbthee. 

25  Xhen  3  arofe  anb  rbent  fojth  m* 
to  theplame, anD  beholb,  theglojyof 
the  %  0ir  ©  ftoob  there  as  the  glojy 
Vbhtch  3 "  farb  by  the  rtutr  of  Chebar, 
anb  3  tch  on  my  face. 

24  Xbcn  the  fpirit  entreD  into  me, 
ano  fct  mc  Dpon  my  fcet,anD  fpattc  lDtth 
mcanDfatDDntome,  <3oefl;utthyfclfc 
iDithm  tlv.nc  houfe. 

25  25utthou,  j©fonntofman,bc^ 
hoib,  they  (hall put  banDs Dpon  thec, 
ano  (hall  binb  thee  tbith  them ,  ano 
thou  (halt  not  goc  out  among  them. 

26  3ttD  3  N'lll  mahe  thy  tongue 
clcaucto  tberoofe  of  tl)y  mouth,  that 
thou  (halt  be  Dummc  anb  (halt  not  be  to 
them  l|  a  repjouer :  fo;  they  ^  a  r  cbclli- 
ous  houfe. 

27  zSutlDhctt  gffpeabc tbith  thee, 
3  mill  open  thy  mouth ,  anD  thou  (halt 
fay  Ditto  them  Xhus  faith  the  1Lo;b 
<S  <£>  £>,  fyc  that  hear ctii ,  let  htm  hearc, 
anD  he  that  fo;bcar  cth,let  him  fo;bear  c: 
fo;  they  are  a  rebellious  houfe. 

CHAP. 


'Chap;  3  7 


•Chap.  1 8 

14. 

\Httmh- 

tecufuejfrl. 


Chap.  1. 


||  A  mx»rc- 
orimnr. 


The  peoples  finncs.   Chap.inj.v.         Great  fl 


]\Or,chi<fe 
tcxeUrt. 


\\Or,a{L>' 
fUt€t<arJUct. 


'Num.  i  ^. 


tLy  for  * 
Jtcre,a  dxj 
for  ajeerc 


ikyfijrla 
it;  fit. 


\\Orfrk. 


CHAP. 

Vndcr  the  type  of  a  fie 


mi. 


edt! 


the  time 
ap 
lege,  is 


ege ,  is  (hew 
from  the  defection  of  leioboam  to  th 
tiuitie.     9    By  die  piouifion  of  die  (i, 
(hewed  the  hardncile  of  the  famine. 

fr^gm  *?ou  alfo  fonnc  of  man, 


ano  lap  it 
befiwtbec,  attopouctrap 

l)pontttl)tnnc,euen3ie^ 

rufalcm, 

i  3lnD  lap  ficgc agatt'R  it ,  anb  butlb 
a  foit  agamQ  tt ,  ano  call  a  mount  a- 
gamft  it:  kt  the  tampe  alfo  agatnft  it, 
ano  fet  ||  battering  rammes  agamft  u 
couno  about. 

3  O3o2coucr  take  thou  bnto  thee  an 
Hpjonpanncanb  fct  itfo:  a  roan  ofpjon 
bctibecnc  tbccanbtbccitp,  ano  fct  ti)v 
face  agatnft  tt,anbitfbalbebcfiegeb,anb 
thou  (bait  lap  ficgc  agamft  it :  this  fhaibe 
a  figne  to  the  home  of  3)frael. 

4  flic  thou  alfo  bpon  tl)p  left  fioc 
anD  lap  the  miquitie  of  the  houfc  of  $[■ 
cacl  bpon  U :  according  to  the  number  of 
the  tapes  that  thou  (bait  lie  bpon  it, 
tf)ou  (halt  bcarc  tfjeir  miquitie. 

5  3fo2  1J  haue  lapcb  bpon  thee  the 
pcercs  of  their  iniquirtcaccojbmg  to  the 
number  of  the  Dapes,  tb;ee  btmDjcth 
anb  mnetic  bates.  *  £>o  (bait  thou  bearc 
tbcmtquitieoftbcbotifeorjfracl. 

6  3nb  ibbcn  thou  haft  accompiiu> 
eb  them ,  lie  agame  on  thp  right  fioc, 
anb  tljou  ftjalt  beare  the  miqmtte  of  the 
houfc  of  ^ubabfbitrrtc  bapes: 31  haue 
appotntcb  thee  t  each  bap  fo2  apecre. 

7  Xberefctfc  thou  (halt  fct  thpfatc 
toibarb  the  ficgc  of  ^Jecufaiem  ,  anb 
thtncacmcfriaibebncoueceD.anbrhou 
(bait  p2opbecic  agatnft  it. 

8  2(nb  beholb ,  J  ibil  lap  banos  bp; 
on  thee,  anb thou  malt  not  ttirnethcc 
tfcomoncfiOctoanother,ttllthouhaft 
cnbcb  the  bapes  of  rbp  ficgc. 

9  C  Xa&c  thou  alfo  bnto  thee 
tbbcat.aub  barlep  ,anb  bcancs,anb  len- 
tils, anb  millet,  anb  llfitcljcs,  anb  put 
thcmmoncbcffclUnbmaUcthccb^cab 
thereof  accoidmg  to  the  number  of  the 
bapes  that  thou  (halt  lie  bpon  thp  fibc  ■. 
tbjee  bunbjetb  anb  ninctie  bapes  (halt 
thou  eatc  thereof. 

io  3tnb  tbpmcatcrobtcb  thou  (halt 
cat,  nuibcbptticighttibcntic  fbcftclsa 
bap :  from  time  to  tunc  (halt  thou  cat  it. 

ii  Xhou  ftjalt  tyinhc  alfo  ibatcr  bp 
meafure,  the  fict  part  of  an  bin:  from 
time  to  time  (halt  tboubiinbe. 


ramine. 


u  3iuO  thou  (halt  eatc  it 


barlcv 
caitcs ,  $  thou  ftjalt  baucit  With  bouug 
that  tommctl)  out  of  man  in  their  fight. 

13  SmotbelLsDrmfaib  euenthus 
(hail  the  tbiltyen  of  Jfraci  cat  their  be- 
fileb  bjcab  among  the  ©ennics  ,  iutiu 
thcT3JU)iiibmiethem. 

14  Xhenfaib'5,^h3Lo2b(5c>©, 
beholb,  mp  foulc  bath  not  bcucpollu 
tcb:fo2frommppoiithbpcnenniuoib, 
haue  3  not  eaten  of  that  lbhich  bicth  of 
it  fclfcozisto.mc  mpicces.ncithcc  came 
there  abominable  flefb  into  mp  mouth. 

tf  Xbcu  he  fatb  bnto  mc ,  ?Loc ,  ^ 
baucguien  thee  toWes  bouug  fo?  mans 
boung  anb  ttjoufljrtlt  p2cpare  tbp  b2cab 
therewith. 

16  ^o2eoucr  hcfaib  bnto  mcS>onnc 
ofmai^bcholb.Jibilb^caUethc'ftaffc 
of  b2cab  m  JJetufalem ,  anb  tbcp  (ball 
cat  b2eab  bp  weight,  ano  lbith  carcanb 
thep  a>ai  tzmbc  ibatcr  bp  meafure,  anb 
Witbaftomfbnient: 

17  Xbatthcp  map  Want  bicab  anb 
water  ,j  be  aftomco  one  lbith  an  other, 
anb  tonwmc  aibap  fo?  their  miqutttc. 

CHAP.    V. 


Vnder  the  type  of  hairc, 
lud: 


5    is  (hewed  the 


•  Lcuir.  16. 
16. chap  5. 
1 6.  wd  1  l 


aemeat  ofletufaleni  foi  their  rebellion, 
by  famine/word  and  difperfion. 

jRb  thou  fonnc  of  man, 
6*  taHc  thee  a  ftjarpe  Hnifc, 

•  VS ta6e  ^te  a  Darbours  ra 
j5^\vf  fo2,anb  canfc  ii  to  paffe  bp^ 
§m3iM  on  thine  heab  anb  bpon 
thp  bcacb :  then  tabc  the  bailances  to 
Vbcigh,  anb  biuibc  the  ha,rc. 

z  1Ehou(haltburncibithfircathtrb 
part  in  the  mibft  of  the  ntp,  ibhcn  the 
bapes  of  the  ficgc  are  fulfilleo,  anb  thou 
(halt  tah e  a  thirb  part ,  anb  finite  about 
it  lbith  a  ftnife ,  anb  a  thirb  part  thou 
(bait fcattcr in  the  ibmbc,  anb  "J  ibill 
tyalb  outafroo2baftcr  them. 

3  1Thou  ftjalt  alfo  taftc  thereof  a  fcib 
in  numbecanb  bmb  them  m  thp'fbirts.  t , 

4.  %\)ti\  talit  of  them  agame ,  ano 
caft  them  into  the  mtbft  of  the  fire  anb 
burnc  th  cm  m  the  fire:  foi  thereof  (ball 
a  fire  come  foo,2th  into  all  tlic  houfc  of 
Jlfracl. 

5  C  Xhus faith  the  Ho.'b©^  id 
XhtSis'Jcrufalcm :  31  bane  fet  it  in  the 
mibft  of  the  nations  ano  countrepsdut 
ire  rounb  about  her. 

6  3iitb  ftjehatl)  cbangeb  mp  uibge 
incuts  into  Uncticbncflc  mo2etl)en  the 

natioiiB 


Peftilence,  famine,     Ezckiel.  and  the  fword. 


•Lcuit.:6. 

19- 

dcut.18.5). 
1.  kin. 6. 29. 
[amen.4. 

10. 
batuch.:.;- 


•Chap.7.4! 


•Dcut.:S 
37- 


nations,  anb  nip  Qatutcs  mo:e  then  the 
countrepes  that  are  tonne  about  l)tr: 
fo:  thep  hauc  refufeb  mp  lubgcmcnts 
anbmpOatutcs,  thep  baue  not  ibaifeeb 
in  them. 

7  Xberefozc  thus  faith  the  ?Lojb 
<25©3s»,26ccaufe  pee  mumpiicb  mojc 
then  the  nations  that  arc  rounb  about 
pou ,  and  banc  not  malRcbtn  mp&ta* 
tutcs,ncttbcr  banc  bept  ntp  tubgments, 
neitljcc  hauc  Done  arwbmg  to  tbe 
lubgements  of  the  nations  that  are 
ronnb  about  pou: 

S  Xherefojc  thus  faith  the  JLofli 
<503E»,25ehoID,  3,eiien3Jam  againft 
tbee,anb  ttiill  execute  lubgcmentsm  the 
mibft  of  thee  in  the  fight  of  the  nations. 

9  3nbgj  mil  boe  mtbec  that  ruhich 
gjbaue  not  bone,  anb  lbhcrcuntojl 
unll  not  boeanpmo?c  tbeltltc,  becaulc 
of  all  thine  abormnanons. 

10  %tyttdait the  fathers CbaU'catc 
the  fonncs  in  th  c  mibft  of  thee,  anb  the 
fonncs  (hall  eate their  fathers,  anb  3 
ttitll  crerute  lubgements  m  tbecanb  the 
whole  remnant  of  thee  1MI  3  ftatter 
into  all  the  ibmbes. 

11  n9hetefo2e,  as  3  hue,  faith  the 
?Lo:b  C5©©,  5>urclpbctaufe  thou baft 
befilcb  nip  &anctuarp  Vbith  all  tbp  be; 
tcftablc  things,  anb  ibitb  all  thine  abo< 
mtnanons,  therefore  ibtll  giaifobitm 
mfl)  tbee,  neither  (ball  mine  "epefpare, 
neither  voiU  3  hauc  anp  pitie. 

11  C  31  thirb  part  of  thee  fbaiibic 
ttntb  the  pefhlcnce ,  anb  Vbitb  famine 
(hall  thep  be  confumcb  in  the  mibbeft  of 
thee :  anb  a  thtrb  part  than  fall  bp  the 
fiuo:b  rounb  about  thee :  anb  3  lbill 
ftatter  a  thtrb  part  into  all  the  ibmbes, 
anb  gittnltoaib  out  a  ftrjo,zb  after  them. 

13  Xbus  (ball  mine  anger  be  accom 
pltftieb.anb^lbillcatifempfurptoreft 
Upon  them ,  anb  3  lbtll  be  comforteb : 
anb  they  maimioib  that  gj  the  &©H£i 
hauc  fpoften  it  m  mp  ^eaie,  lbbcn  31 
haue  accomplttbcb  mp  ftirp  in  them.  " 

14.  ©ozeouec  gi  Will  made  thee 
ibaftc,  anb  a  rcp,:ocb  among  the  natu 
ons  that  are  rounb  about  thee,  tn  the 
fight  of  all  that  paffebp. 

15  *>o  tt  fliailbeca'rcpjocbanba 
taunt,  an  mftrucnon  anb  an  aftonifb- 
ment  unto  the  nations  that  are  rounb 
about  thee,  when 31  fliailcrccutciiibg-- 
ments  tn  thee  in  anger  anb  in  func, 
anb  m  furious  rcbulics:  3  the  JL©ise> 
baucfpolietiit. 

16  nabcngjfbaiircnbbpon  them  the 


euill  arcotbes  of  famine,  ibbtcb  (hall 
be  fo:  their  betttuction,  and  ibbirb  3  HMII 
fenb  to  befrcop  pou :  anb  gj  ibil  tntrcafe 
the  famine  topon  pou,  anb  ibill  bjeafee 
pout*ttaffeofbjeab. 

17  5>o  1M13  fenb  bpon  pou  famine, 
anb  *  cum  beads,  anb  thep  (hall  bcr  eauc 
thcc,anb  pclhlcnee  anb  bloob  thai  patTe 
through  thee ,  anb  3  lbtll  bung  the 
fmoib  bpon  thee :  3  tl)t  %  ©  ib  js>  hauc 
fpofecnu. 

CHAP.     VI. 

1  The  Judgement  of  Ifrael  for  their  idol.itrie. 
8  A  remnant  fhallbebleffed.  11  The  faith- 
tull  are  exhorted  to  lament  their  calamities. 

0  ©  the  ttojbc  of  the 

IL©ke>  tame  bnto  mcc, 

faptng, 
2   5>onneof  man,fet 

thp  fate  toibarbes  the 
*  mountatnes  of  gifracl,  anb  pjopberte 
agamtttbem, 

5  ^nbfap.jaemountaincsofjfra; 
cl,  $eare  the  ttwb  of  thefLoib  0  ©  ©, 
1Lhus  faith  the  ?Lo?b  ©  ©  jd  to  the 
mountaincs  anb  to  the  hillcs,  to  the 
rmcrs  anb  to  the  ballcps,  25cholb,  % 
enen  3  vbiiibnng  afino^b  Pponpott,anb 
gi  ibill  beftrop  pour  high  plates. 

4-  3nb  pour  altars  (halbe  bcfoiatc, 
anb  pour  1 1  images  fballbctyoUen:  anb 
3  ibtll  tall  boibne  pour  (lame  men  be* 
fozepouriboles. 

5  ^no3Jn)iutiapthebeabtarfteu"es 
of  the  rhilbzen  of  gjfracl  before  their 
iboles,  anb  3  fill  ftatter  pour  bones 
rounb  about  pour  altars. 

6  gin  all  pour  bibeiiing  places  the 
mtes  (ball  be  latb  ibaQc,  anb  the  high 
places  (haibc  bcfoiatc,  that  pour  altars 
map  be  laib  iPaftc  anb  mabc  bcfolate, 
anb  pour  ibols  map  be  bjofecn  anb  ccaft, 
anb  pour  images  map  bee  cut  boibne, 
anb  pour  morties  mapbcabolifljeb. 

7  3nb  the  (lame  (hall  fall  tn  the 
mibft  of  pou,  anb  pc  (ball  Unolbe  that 
3  am  the  %  ©is  ro. 

i  iLPtt  unll  gj  leauc  a  remnant, 
that  he  map  hauc  feme,  that  njau  cftapc 
tlicfmo2b  among  the  nanons,  When  pc 
n>iibc  ftattcrcb  thjougl)  the  countr  cps. 

9  3lnb  thep  that  cftape  of  pou  fliali 
remember  me  amongthc  tiations,iPht' 
tber  thep  il)albecaritbcapmtcs,bccaufe 
gi  ambiolien  ttntl)  their  rbbozifl)  Ijeart 
lbhich  liath  bepartcb  from  me,  anb 
1Mb  their  cpes  ttifjith  goc  a  ibhomtg 
after  their  iboles :  anb  thep  (ball  loathe 

them; 


'LcuiMi. 

26. 

chap^.itf. 

and  14. 1  j. 

'LcuiUJtf. 

-•1. 


*Cha.j6.i 


\\Or,fmxt 
fovrrf.6. 


Thedefolation  Chap 


.VI 


of  Ilrael. 


"Chap. 2 1 
'7- 


\\Or,dtfc 

Idle  from  thi 
\ldcmt§?. 


\Hd.i 


tbemfciucs  foi  the  cutis  ibbieb  they 
baue  commtttcb  in  all  tbeir  abomina- 
tions. 

io  3ino  they  (ball  ftnoH)  that  3J  am 
the  ?L  an  is  ©,  •;  >a  dut  5  Dane  not  [am  in 
Dame ,  that  3J  u<ouio  doc  t|)is  euiUDn 
totbctn. 

it  CXhusfaytbtbe1Lo2b  d5«D© 
finite  *  iDitb  tl)mc  hano ,  anb  Itampc 
umb  thy  foot,  ano  fay ,  3ias,  foi  all  the 
cuill  abommanons  of  tbcboufe  of  3lf 
rael:  fo2tbry  (bail  fall  by  the  fao2b,  by 
tbc  famine,  ano  by  tbc  pcfttlcnce. 

ii  ^e  that  is 'farce  off  (bail  bit  of  tl)c 
pcfhlence,  anb  be  that  tsneece  (ball  fall 
by  the  fttwb,  anb  bcetbatcemamctb 
anb  is  beftegcb,  (ball  bie  by  tbc  famine : 
tbusttnUj!  atcompliu)  my  fune  bpon 
tbem. 

ij  XbenlbaiyelmoiDtbat^amtbe 
iL  <d  ie  ©,  ttiben  tbctc  name  men  (balbe 
among  their  iboles  rounb  about  their 
altars ,  Dpon  eucry  bigb  bill  in  all  tljc 
tops  of  tbc  mountamcs,  anb  Dnuer  eue; 
try  grecnetcte,  anb  buoer  eucry  tbicKC 
o&e,tbe  plate  Habere  they  bib  offer  fwcet 
fauour  to  all  tbeir  iboies. 

14  ;£>o  IDill  3  ftretrt)  out  my  banb 
Dpon  tbeni ,  anb  maae  tbc  lanb  bcfo- 
late,  yea  mojc  ||  oefoiate  then  tbc  \Dil- 
bcrncu"cto\barD3  Dtbiatlunail  tbeir 
habitations,  anb  tbcy  (ball  imoibtbat 
^amtbelLffliR©. 

CHAP.     VII. 

i  The  final  defolationoflfrael.  16  The  mourn- 
full  repentance  of  them  that  efcapc.  10  The 
enemies  defile  the  Sanctuarie,  becaufe  of  the 
Ilxaelites  abominations.  15  Vnder  the  type  ot 
a  chame.is  fhewed  their  miferable  captitntie. 

^laD^coucr  the  ttwD  of  the 
I  %  ff>  k  m  tame  Dnto  mee, 

Staying 
p    %  3Ufo  tbou  fbtmt  of 

l^^re&man,tb«sfaitb  the  H020 
©£>id  bnto  the  lanb  ofjfracl/^nenb, 
tbeenbets  tome  Dpon  the  fourc  comers 
of  tbc  lanb. 

3  /ftouj  is  tbeenbe  come  Dpon  tbee, 
anb  5  IDill  fenb  mine  anger  Dpon  tbee, 
anb  tbill  mbge  tber  accozbtng  to  thy 
lDayes,anb  IDill  t  rctompcufc  Dpon 
tbecailtbme  abominations. 

4.  3tib  mine  eye  thai  not  fparc  tbee, 
neither  ttnll  Jf  bane  pine :  but  gjlDill 
recctmpenfe  thy  ujaycsDpon  tbee ,  anb 
thine  abominations  (balbe  in  the  tmbff 
of  thee ,  anb  yee  (ball  ftuott)  that  J am 
tbc1L©!m>. 


t  Heb.  aw.i- 

iet'n  ttgaiHf} 

thee 


thee. 


5  Xhus  fayth  the  TLoib  <5  ©  © , 
3ttcmll,  an  oncly  emu,  bchotfuscome. 

6  3nenbtscotnc,tbeenbtscome,tt 
t  tbatcbeth  fo:  thec,  beholb  ,u  is  tome, 

7  Xhc  morning  is  come  Dnto  thee, 
jiD  thou  that  DiDcilcft  m  the  lanb :  the 
I  time  is  come ,  the  bay  of  trouble  is  neerc, 

anb  not  the  |j  founbmg  agamt  of  the  \\<>r.«cb.. 
mountamcs. 

3  jBotb  IDill  5  0)02tly  poU)2C  out 
my  func  Dpon  thee,  anb  atcompltfli 
mme  anger  Dpon  thee:  ano  J>  1DU  mbge 
thee  accojbmg  to  thy  ruayes ,  anb  lbtii 
rccompcnrc  theefo:  all  tbme  abomina- 
tions. 

9  3mbmme  eye  (hail  not  fpare,  nei 
tbee  null  3  banc  pme :  J  rbtii  recom- 
'.  penfe  t  tbee  accozbmgto  thy  lDaycs,  anb 
tbme  abominations  that  arc  tn  the  mifr 
!  beff  of  tbee ,  anb  vtt  (ball  tmott)  that  3 
\  am  the  %  o  is  ©  that  ftmtetb. 

10  Bebolb  the  bay , beholb,  it  \&  tome, 
the  morning  is  goncfoouh ,  the  robbe 
hath  bloffomcb,p2tbe  hath  bubbeb. 
j  11  Violence  is  rifen  Dp  into  a  rob  of 
1  UmfteDneffe :  none  of  them  rhaii  remame, 
|no:  of  i|thcir  multitubc,  1102  of  any  of 
;  theirs,  neither  (ball  there  be  iDaiimg 
fojtbcm. 

ii  Xbe  time  is  come ,  the  ts&^  mvo 
;  etbnccre,  let  not  the  buyer  reioyce,  1102 
tbefrtiermournc:fo2Dj2atbtsbponali 
tl)c  multitubc  thereof. 

ij  JF02  the  feller  (ball  not  returneto 
that  ibbicb  is  folbe,  t  although  they 
JDerc  yet  aliue :  fo?  the  DiGon  is  touching 
the  iDbole  multitubc  thereof  ttibicbfbai 
not  retucne :  neither  (ball  any  ftreng 
thenhunfelfem  !l  the  iniquity  of  his  life. 

14  Xbcybaucbloibett  the  trumpet, 
eucnto  matte  all  reaby,  but  none  goetb 
to  the  battel! :  fojmy  ttuatl)  ^Dpon  all 
the  multttubc  thereof. 

15  XhefiD02bis»jitbout,anbthepe 

mlencc  anb  the  famine  umbin :  he  that 

I  is  tn  the  fielb  (ball  Die  tuith  thefuiojb, 

j  anb  bee  that  is  m  the  city , famine  anb  pe 

ilhlencetballbcuourehun. 

i6  C25utthev  that  efcape  of  them, 
I  (ball  eftapc ,  anb  ffiail  be  on  the  moun 

tames  Uftcooues  of  the  baileys ,  all  of 

them  mourning,  euery  onefo;  tys  mt- 

cuimc. 
i    17  ^il*banbs(bal!befecble,anbail 

Btieest  (baibcmealte  as  TDater. 

i     18  Xhcy  (ball  alfo  *  gilOC  themfelues 

'  llntb  facftclotb ,  anb  h02rour  Hiall  couer 
j  them,  anb  (name  fh.iii  be  Dpon  all  fates, 
1  anb  balbncffe  upon  all  their  beabs. 

I 19  Hhcy 


l|  Or.lhir 
tumuh  u;m 
prrfont. 
Httr.tx- 


W't>-  thegb 

ihe-.rltfe 
wcrcTrt  J- 
maniT  the 
hung. 

\\Orjehofe 
life  15  in  hu 
1  iitjuine. 
He's  htiim* 
qmlte. 


"Ifil.I1  7. 

i«r«  eJ.!4. 
\Htb.£*e 

into  was er . 


Godsiudgcmcnts.     Ezckicl.  Vileidolatrie. 


'ep4r-*'iort  or 

"Prou.i  i. 
4.  zcpKl 
iS.ccclu.. 

I  \Cr  ,beeaufe 
their  tntqm- 
tie  it  their 
ftumbltn" 
blocks- 


Or,maJe 
it  yn'.o  them 
Axvnilew 
thing. 


\\OrMs- 
liri. 


I  Or,  tke} 
ha'tmbrrit 

thnrhelj 

placet. 

t  Heb.eut- 

tmicf 


t  Htb.mih 
their  tudqe- 
mentt. 


19  3Ehep  fljau  tad  their  filucr  in  the 
dteets,  anb  their  golbefljaibc  tremor 
ucb :  their  *  filuer  anb  their  golbclbail 
not  be  able  to  beliucr  them  in  tijc  bap  of 
the  ityath  of  the  SLsDia© :  thep  Q)all 
not  fatifnethctrfoules,  neither  fiiltheir 
boibcls :  ||  bttaufe  it  is  the  ftumbltng 

blocUeoftheirimquitiC' 

20  C^sfo:  thcbeautie of his orna- 
ments fet  it  mthatedie:  but  they  mabc 
the  images  of  their  abominations,  and 
oftheirbetedablc  things  therein:  there* 
fojc  hauc  3  ||  fet  it  farrc  from  them. 

21  anb  3  rbill  guie  it  into  the  hanbs 
of  the  Grangers  fo?  a  p?ay ,  anb  to  the 
lDitaeb  of  the  earth  fo?  a  fpoile}anbthcy 
fljau  pollute  it. 

22  £0?  fate  UtiU  3  tnrnc  alfo  from 
them ,  anb  they  fljau  pollute  my  fectet 
plate :  fo?  the Hrobbers  (ball  enter  into 
itanbbcfileit. 

23  C^alte  a tbaine:fo2 theianbis 
full  of  blooby  crimes ,  the  citie  is  full  of 
Diolence. 

24-  robcrfojc^vbillbjingtbcnwd 
of  the  heathen,  anb  they  (ball  poflcflc 
their  houfes  :  3  itoill  alfo  mane  the 
pompe  of  the  ftrong  to  teafe,  anb  ||tbett 
holy  plates  (ballbc  befilcb. 

25  t2)edcucttontommefb,  anb  they 
(hall  feebe  peate,anb  there  (hall  be  none. 

26  fl^ifthicfe  than  tome  bpon  mif- 
thiefe ,  anb  rumour  fl)au  be bpon  ru* 
mour ,  then  fhall  tbcyfecBcatoifion  of 
thep;ophet:but  the  law  fbaupcrrfb 
fcom  the  pnett,  anD  tounfell  from  the 
ancients. 

27  lEhctung  foallmourne,  anb the 
pnnte  fliali  be  tiothcD  untb  befolatioit, 
anb  the  banbs  of  the  people  of  the  lanb 
(hall  be  troubleb :  3  ttnll  boe  bnto 
tbemafter  their  tbay.anu  tattojbingto 
their  befcrts  Mil  3  mbge  than ,  anb 
the?  (hall  tmoib  that  3  am  the  JU>ibjs>. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

1  Ezekiel  in  a  vifionofGod,  at  Ierufalem,  5 
is  (hewed  the  imas;e  ot  Ieloufie.  7  The 
chambers  ot  Imagery.  13  The  mourners  for 
Tammuz,  15  the  worlhippers  towards  the 
Gods  wrath  for  their  idolatry. 

jfrb  it  came  to  palfe  in  the 

firtyeerc,intbc  firtmoneth, 

mrhc&ftdavofthcmonth, 

as  3  fate  m  mm  houfe, 

anb  thcclbersofJJubah 

fate  before  me  that  the  hano  of  the 

SLojb  <5op  fell  thereupon  me. 

2   %t)tn3  behclb ,  anb  loc ,  a  UKc- 


ncCfc  as  the  appearance  of  fir  e :  from  the 
appearantc  of  his  lomes  euctiDoUme 
Ujarb ,  fire :  anb  from  his  lomes  euen 
Dptbarb,  as  the  appearanteof  bngbfc 
neffcasthe  tolour  of  amber. 

$  ^nbhCputfoiththefomicofan 
hanb ,  anb  tookemcbyaloeltc  of  mine 
hcab,  anb  the  fpirit  lift  me  bp  betucenc 
the  earth  anb  the  hcaucn ,  anb  b:  ought 
mcintbcbt(ton£of<5obto3ferufalem, 
tothcboo?eofthe  inner  gate ,  that  loo- 
bethtoVbarbtheiJ5o2th,  Vbherewastlje 
feate  of  the  image  of  ieloufie,  U)bicb  p?o- 
uofeeth  to  ieloufie. 

4  3nb  beholb,  the  glo?y  of  the  (5ob 
of  jfrael  was  there  attojbing  to  the  tn& 
on  that  3  *  fatt)  in  the  piamc. 

5  CXhenfaibhctontomc,S>onnc 
ofman ,  iiftbp  thine  eresnotbthettjap 
toibarbsthe  Jftojtb :  to  3  lift  bp  mine 
eyes  the  ibay  toibarbfbc  jftotfb  >  anb 
beholb,  4!3o2th*barb  atthegatcofthe 
aitar,this image  oficlouficin  the  entry. 

6  $e  faib  furthermore  bnto  me, 
£>onne  of  man ,  feed  thou  ttibat  they 
boe^euen  tljc  great  abominations  that 
the  houfe  of  3Ifracl  comnuttcth  htetc, 
that  3  Qioulb  goe  farre  off  from  mv 
fantmane  t  but  turne  thee  vtt  againe, 
and  thou  (halt  fee  greater  abomina- 
tions. 

7  C  3nb  h«  bzought  me  to  the 
boo2eofthetoiirt,anbU)hen3HooHcb, 

beholbaholcutthclbaii. 

8  Xhcnfaibhebntome,5)onneof 
man,  bigge  nolb  in  the  wall :  anb  tohen 
3  hab  biggeb  m  the  Vbau ,  beholb  a 
boo;e. 

9  ^nbhcfaibbntomc^oeu^anb 
beholb  the  micfteb  abommanons  that 
thepbochcere. 

io  do  31  tbent  in  anb  fatt) ,  anbbc-- 
holb  euerp  fomic  of  creeping  things, 
anb  abominable  beads , anb  all  the  tools 
of  the  houfe  of  3)frael  purtrapeb  bpon 
the  mall  ro uub  about. 

ii  3lnbthcredoobbcfo2cthcmfeuen^ 
tic  men  of  the  ancients  of  the  houfe  of 
3  f racl  ,anb  in  th  c  mtbbcd  of  tl)  em  doob 
3Jaa5amah  the  fonne  of  S>haphan, 
ibith  cucrp  man  his  tenfermhishanb, 
anb  a  tfncftc  tloub  of  intenfe  ment  bp. 

r,  Zhenfaibhcbntomc,  Pontic  of 
man,  had  thou  feenc  luhat  tlie  anttcnts 
oftljc  houfe  ofjfraclboe  in  the  barUc, 
cucrvmanm  the  thatnbersof  hisima 
gcrpffo2  thevfap,  *Xhe!LoKE>feefh 
bs  not,  the  5l)©a^ljathfo2faHenthe 
earth. 


'Djn.j.j. 


Cbi 


•Qaf.9.9 


Vile  idolatne. 


Ch 


ap.ix.x. 


The  marked. 


\\Or,ii  there 
anything 
lighter  then 
a  commit  ? 


*Chap.y. 

i  i.and  7.4 

•Pro.i.iS. 
ifs.l.l  5. 
icr.l  ill. 
mkh.7.4. 


\Hek»hich 

is  turned. 

\Hek  dwed- 

ffhu 
fcremkinf tn 
piecei. 
\Hel>  'j pen 

4  lit  ,    '. 


n  C  ^«  faib  alfo  bnto  me,  Xurnc 
thee  yet  agamc,  and  thou  fbaitfccgrca 
terabomtnanons  that  they  boc. 

14  Xhcn he  brought  mc  to  thcboo2c 
of  the  gate  of  the  limits  houfc 
i  Which  ^toibarbsthc  jftoith,  anbbc 
holb,  there  fate  Women  weeping  fo; 
jZammu*. 

15  C  "Ehen  faib  hec  bnto  me,  Dart 
fl)oufcenerhis,£>fonnc  of  titan;  ICurnc 
thee  yet  agamc ,  and  thou  (halt  fee  grea- 
ter abominations  then  thefc. 

16  3nD  he  brought  ttte  into  the  inner 
I  court  of  the  %&&&£>  houfc,  anb  be 
'holbat  the  0002c  of  the  temple  of  the  | 
I  JL€»!R©,  betweehc  the  pozch  anb  thC; 
I  altar ,  were  about  fine  anb  twenttc  men, 

!  With  their  bacbes  toWarb  the  temple 
!  of  the  %o  ke>,  anb  their  faces  towarbs 
:  the  call ,  anb  they  wo:fbippeb  the 
funnctowarbsthcealt. 

17  C  %l)tn  he  faib  bnto  me,  $>a(t 
thoufccnctius  iDfonncofrtUuuiigjsit 
a  light  thmg  to  the  houfc  of  3iuoah, 
that  they  commit  the  abominations, ! 
Wlnth  they  commithccrc^fojthcy  Dane: 
filleb  the  lanb  With  btolence ,  anb  hauc ! 
returncbto  p20iioHc  mcto  anger:  anb 
lot,  the?  put  the  b:anch  to  their  nofr. 

is  Xhcrcfo:c\bill'JalfobcaietnrU'j 
rie :  mine  *  eye  (hall  not  fparc,  neither, 
mil  31  hauc  pmc :  anb  though  they! 
*cnc  tn  mute  cares  With  a  loubboytc, 
yet  mill  3  not  Ijearc  them. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  A  vlfion  whereby  is  fhewed  the  prefcruation 
of  fome,  <,  and  the  dertruclion  ot  the  lelr. 
8    God  cannot  be  intreatcd  tor  them. 

<£e  crycb  alfo  m  nunc 
cares ,  With  a  loubc 
boyce,  faying;  Caufc 
them  that  haucthargc 
.,  oucrthecmctobjaw 
fey^G^Jg  ncerc,  euen  cucrv  man 
l1^  ^^u.th  \)is  beftroytng 
ibcapontnhishanb. 

2  31nb  bcholb ,  firemen  came  from 
the  way  of  the  h.gher  gate,  t  which  Ip 
cth  toWarb  the  /Ro2th,anb  cucry  man 
at  (laughter  weapon  m  Ir.sbanb:  anb 
one  man  among  them  ibas  clothcb 
With  lumen,  With  a  lbntcrs  mbchomc 
tby  hisfibc,  anb  tlicv  went  in  anb  Itoob 
beftbe  the  bzafen  altar. 

1  3lnb  the  glo:y  of  the  Gob  of  ^IfracI 
Was  goncbp  from  the  Cherub  whcre*| 
upon  hccibas,  to  the  th:eiliolb  of  the 
houfc,  anb  he  talieb  to  the  man  clothcb 


PM  m*rkr  I 
m  m.vkt 
■Exod  11. 


rend  7. ; 

* Hr!-  mint 


frulhim. 


With  lmncn,tbhich  had  the  routers  m&e 
h02tte  by  hisfibc. 

4  3nbthc?L©iaisr>fayb  bnto  him, 
©oc  thiough  the  mibbclt  of  the  cine, 
tb20itghthcmiObcltof3Jcrufaicm,anb 
fct  t  *a  marttebpon  the  to:chcaos  of  the 
turn  that  figh .  ano  that  cry  foj  all  the 
abominations ,  that  bee  bone  m  the 

mibbclt  thereof. 

5  C^nbtotheothcrshciaibmtiiimc 

hearing,  coeyc  after  him  through  the 
'  nticanb  finite :  let  not  your  eye  fparc, 
:  neither  hauc  ye  pttie. 

6  s>iay  t bttcrly olbc  and  yong.  both 
matbes,anb  litlc  chiltyen,  anb  ibomcn : 
but  come  not  ncerc  any  man  bpon 
Whom  is  themarbc,  anb  begin  at  my 
fanctuaty :  then  they  began  at  the  anct 
cut  men  which  were  befo2c  the  houfc. 

7  3inb  hec  faybbnto  them ,  2>cfilc 
the  houfe ,  anb  fill  the  courts  With  the 
flainc,goc  ye  forth:  anb  they  Went  forth 
anb  acwin  the  cine. 

8  <[3nb  it  tame  to  pafTc  While  they 
were  Haying  them,  ano  3  was  lefUbat 
3J  fell  bpon  my  face,  anb  crycb  anb  faib, 
Sh,  !t02b  <5ow>,vo\\t  thottbcltroy 
all  the  rcubttc  of  3H*rael,m  thy  powmtg 
out  of  thy  fury  bpon  3  erufalcm; 

9  ILben  fayb  hebnto  me ,  Xhcnit- 
ciiuty  of  the  houfc  of  3ifrael  anb  "Jubah 
is  crecebmg  great,  anb the  lanbtstfuii 
of  blooo,anbthc  ntte  full  of||pcrucrfr< 

'  neffe:  fo:  they  fay  *Zhc!L©  ee>  hath 
fo2faben  the  earth,  anb  the  JLoisp 
ftcthnot. 

10  ^nb  as  foi  mc  aifo,mmc  *  eye  fbal 
not  fparc,  neither  Will^l  hauc  pitie,  but 
3J  will  rctompencc  rljcir  voa]>  bpon 
their  heab. 

n  2Cnbbeholb,theman  clothcb  With 

1  imncn,wbichi>^  tl)e  tnUeho2ticby  his 

fibc,  t  rcponcb  tlje  matter,  fay  tug,  31 

hauc  bone  as  thou  halt  commanbebmc. 

CHAP.    X. 

Thevificmof  thecoalesot  fire,  tobeefcat- 
tered  ouer    the  cuic.     X     The  vifibn  ol 


I)en  3J  looUeb  ,  anb  be  | 
holbc ,  tn  the  'firmament  -a....  .*« 
that  a.  about  the  heab  of 
the  Chcrubuns,  there  ap 
pcarcb  oner  them  as  « 
a  j&aphirftone,  as  the  appearance 
of  thclibcncvTc  of  a  th:one. 

1  ^nb  hec  fpalic  bnto  the  man  tlo 
theb  With  lumen,  anb  fayb.ooe  tube 
twecu  the  Xbhcelcs,  eucn  bnber  the  Crje 

rub,  I 


\Htl.fliri 
mtb. 
Ortwre. 

fi»S  °{ 

judgement 

•Ch».8.n. 

•Chat. 1 1. 
and  7.4.81. 
8.  IS. 


n,A  tht 

TVSTli. 


Theviiionof 


Ezekicl.         theChcrub 


lms. 


jF.elj.tbc 
hollore  of 
thim  band. 


Ufudvf. 


'Clup.i. 
24- 


\tMr.fcnl 
foorttl. 


"  Chap, I. 


\Htbrfltj:,. 


\\Or,tbej 

were  called 
mmyhfs- 
rtng,tvbeeU , 
rq  algal. 


rub,  auD  t  fui  tt)tne  hanbttnthcoaicsof 
firefrombenbeenethcChctubims.aub 
fcatter  them  once  tfjc  atp.  3lub  he  ttient 
in  my  fight. 

3  iBomtheChctubunsftoobonthe 
right  fine  of  tlje  houfe,  when  tije  man 
ment  m,anb  the  clouD  ftllcb  tlje  inner 
court. 

+  Xhen  the  glo^y  of  the  ft© a© 
t  ttient  top  from  tlje  Cherub ,  and  flood  o- 
ucrthe  th:efholb  of  the  t)oufc,  anb  the 
lloufeW>asfxUeDU)itftti)Ctloul3,anDtl)c 
court  ttias  full  of  the  tytghtncOeof  the 
3LflDB©^>glo2y. 

5  3nb  the  *founb  of  the  Cherubims 
things  mas  hearb  euen  to  toe  totter 
court,asthcDotccofthe3llmighty<!DOb 
ttihctihcfpeafteth. 

6  3mbitcameto paffc that  ttihcnhe 
habcommanbeb  themanclothcb  ttnth 
Unneu  ,  faying  XaKc  fire  from  be- 
tVbcene  the  ttiheele$,from  betttieene  the 
Cherubims  then  he  ttwitm  anb  ffoob 
bcfibethettihecles. 

7  3lnb  one  Crjcrub  t  ftretcheb  fo«h 
his  nana  from  benncene  the  Chew 
buns  bnto  the  fire  that  was  betttiectic 
the  Cherubims:  anb  toonc  thereof,  ana 
put  tt  into  thehanbesof  himfhatttias 
clothebttiith  lumen,  ttihotoottc  it,anb 
tticntout. 

8  Onb there appearebuuhe Che- 
rubims,  the  fonncof  amanshanbDn- 
ber  their  Wings. 

a  31nb  ttihen  3  loofteb ,  beholb  the 
foure  lPheeles  by  the  Cherubims,  one 
tbheelc  by  one  Cherub ,  anb  an  other 
tthccle  by  an  other  Cherub :  anb  the 
appearance  of  the  lbhcelcs  was  as  the 
colour  ofa*25criU  (lone. 

io3lnb  as  fo:  their  appearanees,fhcy 
foure  had  oncUUencs  astfaibheclehab 
bene  in  the  mtbft  of  a  ttiheelc. 

ii  nahen  they  ttient,fhey  ttient  Dpon 
their  foure  fibes ;  they  turned  not  as 
they  Went,  but  to  the  place  ttihtthcr 
the  heab  looltcb ,  they  follovbcb  tt ;  they 
turnebuotas  they  ttient. 

ii  3lnb  their  ttihole  t  boby ,attb  their 
batUcs,  anb  their  hanbes ,  anb  their 
ipmgs,anbthcibheclcs,wercfiii  of  eyes 
rounoaboutjcuenthcibheelesthattfjey 

fOUre  had. 

ij  2s  foj  the  ttiheeles,  II  it  ttiascncb 
bnto  them  in  my  hearing,^  mh  eele. 

14  3iub  euery  one  had  foure  faces: 
the  firftfarc  was  the  face  of  a  Cherub, 
anb  the  feconb  face  was  the  face  of  a 
man,anb  the  thirb  the  face  of  a  lion  ,anb 


t!)e  fourth  the  face  of  an  eagle. 

15  3inb  the  Cherubims  mere  Ufteb 
bp,this  is  the  Uumgcccaturc  tharJJ  fatti 
bythenuerofChebar. 

i6  3nbftihen  the  Cherubims  ttient, 
the  ttiheeles  ttient  by  them  :anb  ttihen 
theChcrubtms  lift  top  their  ttiings,  to 
mount  Dp  from  the  earth ,  the  fame 
wheels  aifotut neb  not  fro  befibe  them. 

17  nahen  they  ftoob,  thefe  ftoob, anb 
ttihen  they  iPere  liftebbp ,  thefe  uft  pp 
themfelucs  alio :  fo:  the  fptrtt  of  the  ||  it= 
mng  creature  wa  s  in  th  cm* 

18  Xhen  the  glojy  of  the  %  o  w  © 
beparteofcom  off  the  thJcfholb  of  the 
houfe,  anb  ftooo  ouer  the  Cherubims. 

19  3lnb  the  Cherubims  lift  Dp  their 
ttiings,anb  mounteb  bp  from  the  earth 
in  my  fight :  ttihen  they  ttient  out,  the 
ttiheeles  alfo  were  befibes  them ,  anb  e- 
ucvy  one  ftooo  at  the  boo2e  of  the  €aft 
gate  of  the  1L  <o  ik  jd &>  houfe ,  anb  the 
glone  of  the  C5ob  of  IJfrael  was  ouer 
themaboue. 

20  Xhis  is  the  luiuig  crcantte  that 
3  faibPn&erthcGob  ofgifrael  ,by  the 
nuerofCl)cbar,anb3  Kncttithatthcy 
weietheChcrubims. 

21  €ncry  onchab  foure  faces  a  piece, 
anb  cttery  one  foure  ttimgs,  anb  the 
libcnefrcofthe  hanbes  ofamanwaspii; 
bet  their  ttnngs. 

22  2nb  the  tittenefTe  of  their  faces 
wasthcfamefaccsttihich  3  fatu  by  the 
rutcr  of  Chebar ,  their  appearances 
aub  thcmfclucs:  they  ttient  euery  one 
Gratghtfo2ttiarb. 

CHAP.    XI. 

The  preemption  ot  die  Princes.  4  Their 
finneandiud^cmenc.  13  E2ekicl  complai- 
ning, God  iheweth  him  his  purpofe  in  failing 
a  remnant,  11  and  punifhing  the  wicked. 
xt  The  Glory  ot  God  leauetii  the  Citie.  14 
Ezekiel  is  returned  to  the  captiuitie. 

^^%;  £)2Coucr  the  Spirit  lift 
Nffl*  i  a  tne  Pp ,  anb  bzonght  me 
^Pntothc«£aagateofthe 
ft  1L  €>  is  id  &  houfe ,  ibhtch 
1te^l#§5ns^  looHeth  caftttiarb :  anb 
beholb  at  the  booze  of  the  gate  fate  ano 
ttticnty  men  s  among  lPhom  3  fain 
3/aa^atuah  the  fonne  of  ^5ur ,  anb  £e- 
latiah  tl)c  fonne  of  28enatah,  ^mues  of 
the  people. 

2  Shenfaibhebntomc^onneof 
man,  thefe  are  the  men  that  beiufc  mif 
chieft,  9  giue ttucheb  counfel  in  this  city. 

3  nBljuh  fay,3til  ^not*neerc,lcttos 

builb 


\°r,tf/ifi. 


Or  it  it  not 
torvi/17 
ktttld  hoxfes 
ne  ere. 

•:.Pet.?.4. 


The  cauldron.  Cha 


p.xij. 


\pr,wbich 
halt:  mc: 

WdlkrJ. 


bmiohonfcs :  tljiflcitie  .sthc  taiDion,ano 
lbcbcthcflcfh. 

4  c  Xhetcfo2c  prophetic  againfl 
thtm,p2ophecic,!Dfonncofman. 

5  3lnb  the  Spirit  of  the  H© is© 
fell  bpon  me,ano  faio  bnto  me,S>pcaae, 
tints  faith  the  1L  <r>  is  ©,  'Ehus  haue  ye 
faio,  <©  houfc  of  3Jftacl :  foj3  Knott) 
the  things  that  come  Into  your  minor, 

CUCryOUC  or  them. 

6  Pc  haue  ntuinplpct)  pour  flame  m 
this  ctttc,  ano  pee  haue  fillco  tlje  flrcctcs 
thereof  ttmh  the  flame. 

7  Xhercfo2C  thus  fayth  the  Hojo 
©OB;  Pour  flame  tbhomyc  naue  laib 
m  tlje  nuooeft  of  tt,tl)ev  jre  tfjeflefl),  ano 
tins  citie  is  the  cauiozon :  but  3J  ttnl  bnng 
yonftwth  outofthemtooctt  of  it. 

8  Pe  haue  fcarco  the  fmozo ,  ano3J 
ttnll  bung  a  fuwD  bpon you ,  faith  the 
ILojD©©©. 

9  3(nD  3  lbtll  bjing  you  out  of  the 
miODeft  thereof,  ano  ocliucr  you  into 
tlie  hanos  of  ftrangcrs.ano  ttnll  crtcute 
luogemcuts  among  you. 

io  Pcefl)allfallbythcfroo20,35tt)fll 
I'uDge  you  in  the  bozbet  of  llfrael,  anb 
ye  fljall  KnoVb  that  3 am  tlje  %  0  k  ©. 

1 1  Xhis  citie  (hall  not  be  your  caul- 
b2on,  neither  mall  ye  be  the  flcfl)  in  the 
uuDDtfl  thereof,  but  3J  unll  moge  yon  in ; 
thcbojoetofjfracl. 

u  ano  w  mail  unott)  that  ^  am  the 
JL©ia  jb  :  fo?  ||  pec  haue  not  ttiaiaco  in ! 
myftatutcs,ncithcrcrceutcomyiuogc  A 
ments ,  but  liauc  bone  after  the  mantrs 
ofthcheathenthatrcrounoaboutyou. 

ij  C  3nb  it  tame  to  pafle ,  ttihcn  31 
pzophenco,  tnat  #cianahthc  fonnc  of 
26euaial)  bieb :  then  fell  31  ooibnc  Upon 
my  faccano  eneb  ttnth  a  louo  boucano 
faio .  3tl) IL020  <5 0  ©,\bflt  thou make 
afullenooftljercmnautofjffaelf 

14  3igamcthctt)020ofthc?l©iRjD 
came  bnto  me,  faying; 

15  £>otme  of  man ,  thy  bjetmtn ,  euen 
thy  b2etl)2tn,tl)e  men  ofthy  Binrtb,anb 

all  tl)Cl)OUfC  Of  gifracl  lblJOlly  are  they, 

bnto  ibhom  the  inhabitants  of  31erufa; 
lem  Dane  fayb ;  <5rtyec  farrcfrom  the 
%  0  w  © :  bnto  bs  is  this  lano  gtucn  m 
poflcflion. 

i6  Xnercfozefay,  Xhus  faytl)  the 
?Lo;b  <s  0  m-,  Although  J  liauc  caft 
theinfarrcoff  among  tDc  Heathen, anb 
although  3  ijauc  fcattcrcb  them  a^ 
moug  the  countrcys ,  yet  lbill  31  be  to 
them  as  a  Ifttle  S>atimianc  m  t(Jc  toun 
treys  where  they  fhall  come. 


Ancwfpinr. 


17  Xhctcfojc  fay,  Zhus  faith  the 
?L02b  (5©©;  3}  rbill  cucn  gather  you 
from  the  people, anb affembic yon  out 
of  the  countrcys  lbhcrc  ychaucbccne 
fcattcrcb,  anoj  ttnll  gtue  you  the  lanb 
of3jrraci. 

13  3inb  they  (hall  tome  thither,  anb 
they  (hall  tatte  atbay  all  thcbctcftabic 
thuigs  thereof,  anballthc  abominate 
ons  thereof  fromthence. 

19  3lno*  3  UJ'I  gtue  them  one  heart,  'iw.31.39. 
anbjlbtlputancujfplrttttnthmyon:  ch«- !<•>«• 
anb  3  Hull  taac  the  ftonie  heart  out  of 
their  flcflj ,  anb  uiill  giuc  them  an  heart 
offlefh, 

20  xhat  they  may  ibaiacmmyfla; 
tutcs,  ano  Scepc  mine  02binanccs,  anb 
Doe  them :  ano  they  (hall  be  my  people, 
anoJibilibcthcircsoD. 

II   26lltJs  tor  them  UlhOfC  IjCatt  VOUV 

ftcth  after  the  heart  of  their  betcftablc 
thmgs,  ano  their  abominations,  3  tttil 
retompenfe  their  Vbay  bpon  their  olbnc 
heaos,  faith  tlie  U02D©©©. 

zi  C^henoio  the  Chetubmis  lift 
bp  their  Untigs,  ano  tiieibheelcsbcfibcs 
them,  ano  the  glozy  of  the  4500  of  "Jfra- 
el  was  oucr  them  about. 

ij  ano  the  glozv  of  the  %  0  is  © 
lbent  bp  from  the  miODcft  of  the  cittc, 
ano  ftooo  bpon  themountame,  ruijtrij 
is  onthecaftfiDcofthenne. 

24  C  ^tfteribaros  the  fpirit  tooae 
mcbp.ano  brought  mcinbifion  by  the 
fplnt  of  ©oo  mto  Caioea  to  them  of  the 
capnuity  :fo  the  biflon  that  3  hao  fcene, 
lbent  bp  from  me. 

i$  %\)tx\  3  fpaaebnto  than  of  the 
caphutti',aiithethmgsfhattheJl©is3D 
haofhcibcDmc. 

CHAP.    XI f. 

1  The  type  of  Ezekiclsreinouing.  S  Itfhcw- 
ed  the  captiuitie  of  Zedckiali.  17  I  zekicls 
trembling  fheweth  the  lewes  defolation,  11 
The  lewes  prefumptuous  prouerbc  is  reproo- 
ued.  16  Tne  IpecdinciTe  of  iheVifion. 

^eibo2D  of  the  fLois© 
aifo  came  bnto  me, faying 
x  5>onncofman,thou 
bibciicft  in  the  nuoocft  of 
_„a  rebellious  houfc,  lbhith 
Ijauc  eyes  to  fee,  ano  fee  not :  they  haue 
cares  to  hcarc ,  anb  hearc  not :  fo;  tijev 
arc  a  rebellious  houfc. 

3   1Lhcrcfo2C  thou  fonnc  of  man  ,p;c^ 
parcthcellffuffc  fo2rctnooumg,anbrc;  n  or,i^h 
mooucby  oay  in  their  fight ,  ano  thou  mm 
z?5  flmit 


iTh. 


typ 


eo 


f 


Ezckiel. 


:h 


\Heb.*:lke 
mgiftmh 
of  cjptiuity 
\Hebr 
diggtfir 


the:. 


■fH,i.  d,g- 
'edfor  me. 


\Hcb.bjr:- 
mourn  j  eoe 
ittocaptmt- 
tie. 


'Chap.  17 
Jo. 


\llek  m, 
ofnuftibei 


(halt  rcmouc  from  thp  place  to  another 
place  tn  their  fight;  it  map  be  thep  null 
confiber,  though  thep  bee  a  rebellious 
houfc. 

4  Xhen  (halt  thou  b2tngfoo2th  thp 
(ruffe  bp  oap  m  rl)cir  fight ,  as  (ruffe  foj 
rcmooutng:  aub  thou  (halt  goc  foojtrj 
at  cucn  tn  their  fight,  t  as  thep  that  goc 
ftwthiutocapttuttie. 

5  1 £>jggc  thou  tljiougl)  the  wall  m 
their  fight,  anb  carp  out  therebp. 

6  3Jn  their  fight  (halt  thou  bearctt 
bpon  tin  (houlbers,  and  tarp  it  foo;th  tn 
the  tibp  light :  thou  (halt  totter  thp  tact, 
that  thou  fee  not  the  groimb:fo23Jhauc 
fet  thee  to?  a  figne  bnto  the  houfc  of  Jt 
raei. 

7  3nD3Jbtbfoas3Ifl)astomnum; 
Deb :  3  b20tightf02thmp  (ruffe  bp  bap, 
as  (tuffe  foj  tapttuttp,  anb  tn  the  cucn  gj 
tbtggeb  thjough  the  Xball  Ibith  mine 
hanb ,  3  bzougrjt  it  foo2th  in  tt)c  ttbp 
light,  H^3barcitbponmvtl)oulDcr  in 
their  fight. 

s  C3lnb  in  the  morning  tame  the 
tbozb  of  the  %  o  k  ©bnto  me,faptng, 

9  &onneofman,hathnotthchoufe 
of  3tfracl,tf)e  rebellious  houfe,fapo  ton; 
to  thee,  ©hat  boctt  thou; 

io  &ap  tfiou  bnto  them  Clms  faith 
trje  ?Lo2b  ©  ©  © ;  Xhts  burben  eon- 
cemeth  the  p2ince  in  3lcrufaicm,anb  ail 
the  houfc  of  "Jtrael  that  arc  among 
them. 

it  5>ap, 31  am  pour  figne :  hue as  3 
liauebonc  fothailubcbonebntothem: 
tthep  fljail  rcmoouc  and  goc  into  cap= 
ttuitic. 

ii  3tnb  thcj&ince  that  is  among 
them,  fl)ail  bcarc  bpon  his  (honlbcr  tn 
thctltopltght.anb  (hall  goefozfh :  thep 
(haiioiggcfhioughtheibailto  carp  out 
therebp :  he  Ihaiicoucr  his  fate,  that  he 
fee  not  the  grounb  with  h«  epes. 

15  Q5p  *  net  alfo  ibtll  3  fpjcab  bpon 
htm,  attohcfhalibetaften  tnmpfnarc, 
anb  3  Vbil  bang  htm  to  zsabplon  to  the 
lanb  of  thcCaibeans,  pet  (hail  hec  not 
fee  it,thoughhc(haubic  there. 

14  3nb3libMfcattcrtoibatbeucrp 
tbtnbc  all  that  arc  about  himtotjeipe 
htm,  anb  all  his  bancs,  anb  3  iMtwatb 
outthcfiuo2b  after  them. 

1$  2utb  thep  (hall  imoU)  that  3  am 
the  %  ©  h  ©,  When  3  n>ai  Ratter  them 
among  the  nations,  anoDtfpcrfe  them 
mthetotmtreps. 

i6  But  3  will  leauc  fflfetb  men  of 
tljem  from  tljcftuojb,  from  thefamtne, 


ecaptiuine. 


anb  from  the  prfhletuc,  that  thep  map 
bctiaccaii  their  abominations  among 
the  heathen  itohtthet  thep  tome ,  anb 
thep  (hall  t$noib  that  3  am  the  3Loke>. 

17  CQ3o2Couer,the  lbozbe  of  the 
%  ©  is  ©  came  to  me,  fapm& 

13  £>onnc  of  man ,  cate  thp  tycab 
iDtth  quatrtng,  anb  Dmifce  thp  water 
tbttt)  trembling  anowtth  carefulncffe, 

19  3lnb  (ap  bnto  the  people  of  the 
lanb;  Xhtis  fapth  the  2.02b  ©©p ,  of 
the  mhabttants  of  jtrufaicm,  and  of 
the  lanb  of  3ifracl •,  Xhep  (ban  cat  thttr 
tycabWithcaretulnes,  anb  bitnbe  their 
Water  With  aftont(t)ment,that  her  lanb 
map  bebefoiate  from  tall  that  is  there; 
in.bctattfe  of  thebiolcnccof  them  that 
bVbell  therein. 

zo  ztxn  the  titles  thatarcinhabitcb, 
(hall  be  latb  aaac,anb  the  lanb  vhaii  be 
befoiatc,anb pec  (hall  mtoib  that3  am 
theiLoisB'. 

21  C^nbthcibojbofthc^LffiMsjD 
came  bnto  mcfaptng; 

ii  ^onnc  of  man,  what  &  that  pzo-- 
ucrbe,thatpehauetnthe  lanb  of  3fra^ 
el,  taping, Xhe  bapes are  piolongeb, 
anbcucrpbtftonfailcth^ 

13  XcllthemthercfoicXhusfapth 
the  H,02b  <5  ©  ©j  3  WtU  mafec  this  pio* 
ucrbc  to  ccafcanb thep  (hall  no  moje  bfe 
it  as  a  pzouerbe  urjifracl :  but  tap  bnto 
them,  Xhe  bapes  arcathanb,anb  the 
cffcttofcncrpbiBon. 

14  foi  there  njall  bee  no  mojc  anp 
batne  bifton ,  1102  flattering  btumation, 
UHthtnthchottfc  of  3frael. 

15  5r02  3amthe?L©«©:3lbm 
fpcaftc,  %  thc«J02b  thatlidiaufpcabc, 
(hall  rome  to  paffe :  it  fljall  be  no  mozc 
pzolongcb :  fo?  tnpour  Dapcs,<D  rebels 
lioushoufc ,  ttjtlij  fap  the  Vbojb,  anb 
ibtll  pcrfomic  tt^apth  the  %mn  <5  ©  ©. 

16  <C^gatncthcibo2bofthe  %,$>&& 
tame  to  mcfaptng; 

17  £>onneofman,bcholb,thcvofthe 
houfc  ofjftacltapi  Xhetoifionthathe 
fcctl)i^fo2  manpoapesto  come,  anb  fjc 
P2ophcncthofthc  times  tl)atarcfar  off. 

18  Xhcrcfo2C(apbntothem,'3CI)us 
fauli  the  !Lojb  C5  ©  ©,Xherc  (hai  none 
of  mp  tbojbs  be  p2olongeb  anp  mojc, 
but  tlje  Ibo2bc  ibhtth  3  haue  ipofecn, 
fl)ali  be  bone ,  tapth  the  Jloib  C5  o  ©. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

1  The  reproofe  of  lying  Prophets,  io  and 
their  vnrcmpcred  morter.  17  Of  Prophc- 
tcfics  and  their  pillowes. 

^nb 


tHet.lbt 

fulneffe 

thereof. 


•j.Pet.3.4- 


Falfe  prophets.  Chap.xnj.V 


\Heb.them 
that  are  fro- 
pheti  out  of 
their  otvne 
hearts. 
•lcr.23.ltf. 

fHekwalks 
after. 
\pr,xjiti 
tilings 

Inch  the] 
hate;  not 
feene. 
\\Or,pret- 
cbei. 

tHet  bed- 
fed  the 


\pr,  ferret 
arcoitnfelL 


'!cr.«.i4. 

HOiyl/Znj&l 


0  &>  the  vooibt  of  the 

%  ©  is  ©  tame  into  met, 

faying  -, 
z   £>onneofman,p2o* 

phecte  agamft  the  ^o- 
phctsof3fraelthatp2ophecte,  ano  fay 
thou  tonto  them  that  tpjophene  out  of 
their  orotic*  hearts,  $earc  ycthe  roojo 

0fthe1L©13©. 

j  3Chusfaiththc!Lo20<5©©-i©oc 
onto  the  foolifl)  pjophets,  tt)at  t  follow 
thctroronefpirit,  ||  ano  haucfecne  no- 
thing. 

4     £)  gjftael,  tt)y  PJOptjCtS  are  uhc 

thcforesinthc  oeferts. 

5  Pee  hauc  not  gone  tip  into  the 
||  gaps ,  neither  t  maoc  op  ttje  i)cugc  foj 
toe  houfe  of  35frael ,  to  ftatiD  tn  tiyt  hat* 
telltn  theoay  of  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

6  XheyhauefccneDaniry, ano  lying 
Dutmation,faymg  Xlje  %  ©  is  ©  faith, 
ano  ti)e  H  ©  is  ©  hath  not  fent  them : 
ant)  they  hauc  mane  others  to  hope,  tljat 
they  roouio  confitmcthe  roozb. 

7  ^aueyettotfecncaOautePlfton, 
ano  haueye  not  fpoKcn  a  lymgoiutna^ 
tton,rohcreas  yee  fay^helL©^© 
fayth  >t,  albeit  3J  hauc  notfpotten  * 

8  lOjerefoie  thus  fattrj  toe  3Lo2b 
d5  ©  ©  i  asecaufc  ye  haue  fponctt  Pantty 
ano  feene  lyes,  thctcfoze  bel)olb,33 3in 
agamft  yon,  faith  the !Lo2b  <5 © ©. 

9  ZnD  mine  hanb  (pall  be  Ppon the 
#zophets  that  fee  bamtie,  ano  thatoi* 
tune  lyes :  tl)ey  (hall  not  bee  m  tl)c  ||at 
fembly  of  my  people,  neither  (hail  they 
be  rozitten  tn  the  Uniting  of  the  houfe  of 
3  fracl,  neither  (nail  they  enter  into  the 
lano  of  3Jfcael,  ano  ye  (hall  tworo  that 
3Jamthe?Lo?Dc3©©. 

10  C25ctaufc,ettett  betattfc  they  hauc 
feoucco  my  people,  faying  *£catc,ano 
there  wa^  no  peate :  ano  one  built  Pp  a 

roan,  anDloe ,  othersoarobeDitroith 
pntempeteomo2ter, 

11  &ay  Pttto  them  rohich  oatbbc  «■ 
roith  ontemperco  morter,  tljat  it  (hall 
fall :  there  (pall  bee  an  ouerfloromg 
(horoze,  anD  yee ,  £>  great  haile  ftones, 
thai  fail,  anD  a  ft02tme  route  (pal  rent  *, 

i%  H,oe,rohcntheroail  isfaiien,(haii 
itnotbeefayoe  Pnto  you  1  nahctc  is  the 
oarobutgrohetroith  ye  hatteoarobcb  it? 

1  j  1Erjerefo2e  thus  fayth  thelLojO 
d5  ©  ©  •>  3  tbill  euen  rent  it  lPitlj  a  fto2< 
mic  routo  utmy  fury:  anb  there  fljall 
btanouerfloVbing  nioVbjeut  mine  an^ 
ger,  anb  great  halftones  m  my  fury, 
totonfuntC't. 


ntempcrc 


d 


morter. 


14  5>oiPir3ib2caUtboiPncthciPall 
thatychauebalPbebWiithbntempcreb 
morter,  $b2ittg  itboibneto  thcgrouno, 
fothat  the  founbatton  thereof  than  be 
Diftoticrcb,  ano  it  (hail  fail,  attbycftiaii 
be  tonfitmcb  m  the  mtbbcft  thereof:  anb 
ye  (hail  fenoVb  that  3  ™  the  %  ©  is  je>. 

15  Xhus  lPtll  3  attompliftj  my 
ttwath  bpon  the  ibaii ,  ano  Ppon  them 
that  haucbarbbebit  wmh  Pntcmpcrcb 
morre.  .anbipill  lay  Pnto  you  Xhctoaii 
■s  no  more,  neither  they  that  oaibbcb  it : 

i6  To  wit,  the  $2ophets  ofgifrael 
lPlnth  p2ophcne  tontcrnutg  gjertifa; 
leiii ,  ano  ttiljith  fccDifions  of  peace  fo2 
her.ano  there  is  no  peace,  faytlj  tlje  IL020 

d5©3T\ 

17  CfUUevotfcthottfonuc  of  man, 
fet  thy  fate  agamftthe  baugljtcrs  of  thy 
people;  Whtth  pjophenc  out  of  their 
oiPne  heart,ano  pjophenc  tljou  agamft 
tljem, 

is  3(nDfay,  Xljus  fatth  the  H02O 
d5  ©  © ;  naocto  the  women  thatfoip  pit 
loujes  to  all  ||  atme  holes ,  ano  mane 
Itcrchicfes  Ppon  the  heap  of  ettcry  fta; 
turc  to  hunt  fottles :  nam  ye  hunt  the 
foules  of  my  people ,  ano  rpill  yee  fauc 
the  foules  aiiuc  chat  come  pnto  you  i 

19  ^nb  lPill  yee  pollute  me  among 
my  people  fo2hanbfuls  of  barley ,  anb 
fo2  pieces  of  b2eao,to  flay  the  foules  that 
fhoulDttotDicattotofauc  the  foules  a* 
line  that  fhoulb  not  Hue,  by  your  lying 
to  my  people  that  htarcvour  jyes  f 

zo  n9herefo2e  thus  fayth  the  2,020 
d5©©,26cholD,3  am  agamft  your  pti- 
lo\Pes,  lPljererbith  yee  there  hunt  the 
foules  to  matte || them  flic,  anb  3  lPill 
tcarc  them  from  your  armes ,  anb  low 
let  the  foules  goc,  euen  the  foules  that  y  e 
hunt  to  malte  them  flic. 

1 1  Pour  Kerthicfcs  alfo  mill  3  tcate, 
anb  beliuer  my  people  out  of  your 
hanb,  anb  they  fhalbe  nomo2C  in  your 
hanb  to  be  huntcb ,  ano  yee  (hall  UnoiP 
that 3  am  then  ©is©. 

it  25ctaufe  tbith  lyes  yee  hauc 
maoe  the  heart  of  the  righteous  fab 
iDhom  3  hauc  not  mabc  fab-  anb 
ftrengtheneothc  hanos  of  the  ttncltco, 
that  hec  (l)Oiilb  not  rcturnc  from  his 
iPirttco  may  II  by  pjonufmg  him  life : 

2  j  Xhcrefo2e  yee  fliail  fee  no  mo2t 
banitie ,  U02  otume  oitunanous ,  fo2  3 
mill  Oeliuer  my  people  out  of  your 
hanb,  ano  ye  (pall  ttnoibe  that  3  am 
thcH©ts©. 

Zzz  z       CHAP. 


\\Or,el- 

boyoes. 


g*rdci 


\\Or,rhar! 

fho**ld[*U 
hUhjt. 
Heir  by 

him 


Idolaters  in  heart.        Ezekiel.      Noah,Daniel,Iob. 


O,0tll< 


'Dcut.  iS 
;7.chjp  5 
"J- 


■  l  King*. 
jj.ij. 


CHAP.    XII1I. 

I  God  anfwereth  idolaters  according  to  then 
own e  heart.  6  They  are  exhorted  to  re- 
pent,iorfeareotiiidgements,bymeanesof  le- 
duced  prophets,  n  Gods  irrevocable  (en- 
tenccot  famine,  15  ol  noilomebcafts,  17  ot 
thefword,  ic;  andofpeltilence.  n  A  rem- 
nant fhalbc  lelerued  tor  example  ol  others. 

rKM£K3feg  J;>encamcccrtaincofthc 
S^ciocrs  of  3JfraciDttto 
^|rmc,anDfatcbefo2ctnc. 

m   :p2t    2  3lllbthClb02bofthC 

m  ps^SLemjPcamctontomc, 
'fe&£S^  fapmg, 

j  Sonne  ofmamthcfc  men  haucfet 
bp  their  ibolcs  in  their  Heart ,  attD  put 
the  {tumbling  blocfec  of  their  tntqtutic 
bcfwcthctr  fate:  fhoulD3JbccuquircD 
of  at  all  by  them; 

+  1^hercfo2crpcaltcbntothcm,anD 
faptouto  them  ,  Xhus  faith  thc?L02b! 
(5€>?D;  euccp  manof  trjerjoufcof^f 
rati  that  fcttcth  top  his  rooks  in  his ' 
heart,anD  putteth  the  (fumbling  blocUc ! 
offttsmiquitic  befoje htsfacc, anb com  ' 
mcrh  to  the  ^zophct ,  3  the  %  <s>  is  o  [ 
UhU  anfiucrc  him  that  commcth,acco2: 
biugtorhemuinnibcofhisibolcs, 

5  Xhat  3  map  ta&c  the  houfc  of^Jf 
racltn  their  oWuc  heart,  becaufe  thep 
arc  all  eftrangeb  from  mec  though 
their  tboles. 

6  C  Xherefojc  lap  bnto  the  houfc 
of  5fracl,Hhu5fatth  theHo.'b  go  jp, 
Repent,  ant)  mrnc  Hpour  fclues  from 
pour  iDolcs,aiU)  nimc  atbap  pour  fates 
from  all  pour  abominations. 

7  f  02  cuerp  one  of  the  houfc  of  Jf 
racl,  oi  of  theftrangcrthatfoiourncth 
in  'Jjfracl ,  Which  feparateth  himfclfc 
fronunc ,  ano  fcttct!)  bp  hts  iDols  in  his  \ 
heart  ,aub  puttcth  the  (tumbling  blocUc  I 
of  his  immune  befoje  his  fate,  anb  com 
mcth  to  a  pzophct  to  cuciuirc  of  him! 
concerning  mc,3l  the  %  o  is  jd  Will  an=  | 
fwcre  htm  bpmp  idle. 

8  2tnt)3I  lDil  fet  mp  fate  againft  that : 
man ,  aub  \bill  mane  him  a  *  fignc  aub  a  i 
pzouerbc ,  ant)  3  Will  cut  him  off  from ' 
the  miDft  of  mp  people ,  anb  pec  (hall 
hnonuhat  3?  am  the  1L  €>  e  id. 

9  Tlrib  it  the  p2ophet  bee  DcteiucD 
When  hce  hath  fpobcn  a  thing,  3  the  J 
fL'o  is  £>  *hauc  bcceiucb  thatpiophct, ; 
anb  3  MI  ftretch  out  mp  hanb  bpon  i 
htm ,  anb  mill  beftrop  him  from  the 
mibfrofmp  people  lifracl. 

io  3(ud  thep  than  bearc  the  punftb 


ment  of  their  iniQtiitic :  the  puiiiflininn 
of  the  pjophctlhaii  beccucnas  thepu 
moment  ofhttnthatfcchcthbnto  him: 

ii  Xhat  the  houfc  ofjfraci  map  goe 
no  nuwaftrap  from  mc,  neither  be  pot 
lutcb  anp  inojc  With  all  their  tranf 
grclTions;butthatthcpmapbc  mppco 
pie,  anb  3J  map  bee  their  Gob  ,(apcth 
the  Ho2b  god. 

it  CXhcrbozbofthcHoKPtamc 
agautctomefaputg, 

ij  Sonne  of  man,vbhcn  the  lanb  fin- 
ncth  againft  nice  bp  trefpaffmg  gnc 
uounp ,  then  Will  3  ftrctch  out  nunc 
hanb  bpon  it.anb  Will  b2caiic  the  *ftaffc 
of  the  bicab  thereof,  anb  ibill  fenb  fa 
mine  bpon  it,  anb  ibillcutoff  mauattb 
bcaftfromtt. 

1+  *£hough  thcfctluccmcn^oah, 
Daniel  aub  3Job  Were  m  it ,  thep  (l)ouib 
bclutcr  bm  their  ollmc  foulcs  bp  their 
nghtcoufncs,faith  the  ?Lo2b  G  o  ip. 

is  CJf  3  caiifc  noifomc  bcaftcs  to 
parte  through  the  lanb,  anb  thep  ||  fpoilc 
it,  fo that  it  bee  bcfolatc,  that  no  man 
map  parte  tluougl)  becaufe  of  thebcafts: 

16  Though  tI)CfC  tlUCC  men  wei  c  t  ui  it, 

assume ,  faith  the  JLoin  gop,  thep 
(hall  bcliucr  neither  fonncs  1102  Daugh- 
ters: thep  onelp  fhalbc  DcliucreD ,  but 
the  lanbfhalbc  bcfolatc. 

17  C  j©2  if  3  b2ing  a  Quo2D  bpon 
thatianD,anD{ap,S>ll)02b,qocth20ugh 
the  lanbc ,  fo  that  31  cut  off  man  anb 
bcaftfromtt: 

18  Xhotigh  thefe  thzec  men  were  m  it, 
a53Jliut,  faith  thclLojb  god,  thep 
rtiallbciiucr  neither  fonncs  no2baugh 
tcr  ,but  thep  onelp  fljail  bee  bcliuercb 
thcmfclucs. 

19  C€><8'"f31  ftnb  a  pcfhlcncc  into  that 
lanb,  anb  poib2c  out  mpfnrp  bpon  itm 
bloob ,  to  nit  offfrom  it  man  anb  bcaft: 

20  Xhoughii3oah,Dantcianb'3Job 
wereiu  it.as^  iiucfaitl)  the  IL02D  god, 
thep  fhal  Dciiucr  neither  fon  1102  Daugh 
tcr  :  thep  (hall  but  ocliucr  their  olbnc 
foulcs  bp  their  nghtcouftics. 

21  fm  thus  faith  the  H02D cop, 
i|  ^oll)  much  mo2C  lbhctt  3  fenb  nip 
fourc  fo2c  uibgcmcnts  Upon  "Jcrufa 
lem  thcfmo2D,anDthcfamtnc,anDtt)c 
notfomc bcaft,  anbthepcfhicncctotut 
off  from  it  man  anb  bcaft  < 

22C:  jict  bcholb ,  therein  fhalbc  left 
a  remnant  that  fhalbc  bzoughtfootfh, 
both  fonncs  anb  Daughters :  bcholb, 
tl)cpfl)aiiconiefoo2thbntopou,attDpc 
fljail  fee  their  map  ano  their  Doings: 
ano 


'  Lcuir.2£. 

:6  chap.  4. 
1 6. jnd  5 
16 


■la: 


ij.i. 


\0r,  h. 
eatte 


f  H, ir  m 
the  majl 


\\Ot-Mft 

»hc. 


Of  the  Vine.  Chap.xv.xvj.      Ierufalemsftate. 


anDvc  ft)aibecontfo2teD  concerning  the 
null  that  3  bauc  bzougbtDpon^ieru" 
falem,  euen  concerning  all  that  31  bauc 
b2ougbtnponit. 

xj  3inDtbevfl)all  comfotfvourbben 
vce  fee  their  ibaves  anD  their  Doings: 
anD  vc  tl)"al  SnoU)  tDat  3  hatte  not  Done 
imtbout  caufc,  all  tDat  JbaueDonem 
it,faitbtbe?Lo2D<30jD. 

CHAP.     XV. 

i    By  the  vnfunelle  of  the  Vine  bunch  for  any 
vvorke,  i 6  is  fhewed  the  reiedion  ot  Ierufale. 
yA\H^ii5DtDcVD02D0fp?L©!SJD 

H^  came  Dnto  me  Japing : 
^S^\V?   i  5>ouucofman,nabat 


\Heb  mil 
tt  projper  ' 


\H«h  made 

p. 


\Hel:tref- 

pafledatref- 

P'f- 


Ji  is  tl)c  33  me  tree  inozc  then 
w^3z&£{  anp  tree,  02  then  a bjaneb 
lbbitb  is  among  the  trees  of  tt)e  fb2reG ; 

j  5>l)ailiDooD  bee  taken  thereof  to 
Doe  anv  ID02UC  ?  02,UnU  men  tattea  pin 
ofit,to  bang  any  tocffell  thereon  * 

4.  iSetjolD ,  tt  is  cad  into  the  fire  fo: 
fcmelUtbcfireDcuoitrctbbotbtbcenDs 
of  u\anD  the  miDDett  of  it  is  burnt,  t  Js 
itmeetefoMnvibozUci 

5  2Sel)olD  ,  When  it  was  whole  it 
TDas  t  meete  foz  no  \Do:Se :  bow  much 
leffcfhalltt  be  meete  vet  faauyuwBe, 
wbnubc  fire  bath  DcuouteDtt,  anD  it  ts 
bumeD  < 

6  Cd)erefozc  thus  faith  tbc?Lo20 
(Ssd©!  7ls  the  3Hme  tree  among  the 
trees  of  the  fo2rcu\liibtcb  3  bauc  gtucu 
to  the  fire  fo;  fcibell,  foUMl  3lgiuctbc 
inhabitants  of  Jerufaicm. 

7  3lnD  3  null  fct  my  face  agatnlt 
tl)cm,tl)cv  fbailgoc  out  from  one  fire, 
auD  inotherfirc  fljail  Dcuourctbnu,  anD 
ye  OjailRnoU)  tbat3J  am  tlje  %®  b 2?, 
When  3  fct  mv  face  agamft  tuctn. 

8  3lnD  3  unll  inane  tHe  lanD  Dcfo- 
late ,  betaufe  tljey  Dane  t  committcD  a 
trefpaffcfaitljtDc  ?Lojd  C5  op. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

i  Vnder  the  fimilitude  of  a  wretched  infant,  is 
fhewed  the  naturall  ftate  ot  lemfalem.  6 
Gods  extraordin.irie  loue  towards  her.  is, 
Her  monfh'ous  whoredome.  35  Her  grie- 
uousludgement.  44  Herfinne,  matching 
her  mother,  and  exceeding  her  filters,  So- 
domeand  Samaria,  callethforludgerrients. 
60   Mcrcv  is  promi(ed  her  in  the  end. 

(^/%^<sainc  the  rbozDc  of  the 
(gP&rag  IL  ©  k  jd  tame  tonto  me,  fay- 

lipilii    x  5>onofman,caufeKc= 
rufalem  to  unotD  bet  abommanons, 


1  3nD  fay,  Xljus  faith  tlje  Hojd 
<S©  ©  Dnto  3Jtfufaiem  %bv 1  btrtlj 
anD  thy  natuutic  is  of  the  lanD  of  Ca- 
naan ,  thy  father  was  an  Slmonte,  anD 
thy  mother  an  fyittite. 

4  3mDasfo2tbynatiuityintbcDay 
thou  Vbafl  borne ,  thy  naueu  was  not 
cut,  neither  rbaft  thou  rbafbeD  in  water 
to  ||  fuppletbee :  thou  waft  not  faiteDat 
ail,no2froaDicDatau. 

5  ii5onccvcpittcDthectoDoeanvof 
thefe  Dnto  thee ,  to  banc  compafftonDp* 
on  thee,  but  thou  luaQ  calf  out  in  the  o- 
pen  ficlD ,  to  the  lothmg  of  thv  perfon, 
m  tl)CDav  that  tbourbaft  borne. 

6  canDiDhen3}pa(TcDbvthee,anD 
falb  thee  |  ipollutcD  tn  tljuic  oiDne  blooD, 
3  Ca*D  tonto  thee  when  thou  wart  m  thv 
blooD,1Liuc:  vca^lfaiDDnto  ttjeewhen 
thou  wart  tnthv  blooD,?Liue. 

7  31  hauc  t  canfcD  thee  to  multiply 
as  the  buDof  thcfielD,  anDthouhaQut- 
creafeD  anD  ibarcn  great,  anD  thou  art 
come  to  t  crccllent  ornaments  :  thy 
bzcatts  are  falhioncD,  anD  thmc  haire 
is  grotben ,  Vbhereas  tljou  wait  naueD 
anDbarc. 

s  ii5o\DiDhcn3Jpa(reDbvthcc,anD 
loo&eD  Upon  thee ,  beholD ,  thv  tunc  was 
tlje  tunc  of  loue,  anD  3  fpjeaD  mv  f  Rirt 
oucrthec ,  anDcoucrcDthvnahcDneffc : 
vca,  3  foar  c  Dnto  thee,  ano  nitr  CD  tnto 
a  coucnantibtth  thee,  favth  the  ?Lo?D 
;  0  0  id,  anD  thou  becameft  mine. 

9  mjeniuafbcDTitbccttMbttmtcr: 
vea ,  3  tbJougbiv  ibanieD  aiDav  thv 
t  wood  fcom  tljcc,  anD  3  anomteDtbec 
;  \Dith  ovic. 

io  3  clothcD  thee  alfo  ttiith  b?oiD2CD 
lliozRc ,  f  fl)0D  thee  lbitlj  baogcrs  f  Km, 
I  anD^  girDcD  thee  about  ibith  fine  imcn, 
anD  3  coucreD  thee  \Dith  fUHc. 

1 1  3  DeclicD  tljcc  alfo  iDith  0211a- 
ments,  anD  3  put  bracelets  Dpou  thmc 
hanbs,  anD  a  cbamc  on  thv  nertte. 

u  3inD  3  put  a  icvbell  on  thv  foJC' 
hcaD,anDcare-rmgsinthmeeares,anD 
a  bcautifull  croibncljpon  tljine  hcaD. 

15  XbusiDaft  thouDccUeDHuth  golD 
anDfilucr,  anD  tbv  raiment  was  of  fine 
linen  ?  filftc,  ano  bjoiDer  eD  \D02he,  thou 
DiDll  cate  fine  rlourc  anD  home  anD  ovle, 
anDthouiDaaertceDingbeatmful.auD 
thouDiD(tp2ofperutto  alnngDome. 

14  3lnD  thv  rntoiDme  llient  fooith 
amongthe  hcathenfoz  thv  bcaune :  foz 
it  was  pcrfctt  tl)2t>ugl)  mv  tomelmcffc 
uihirh  3  hao  putnponthec,  favth  tlje 

fL02D  C5©JD.  ^_  . 

Z55    j       MCffiUt 


t  Htt.CHt. 

tine  our.  or 
bjt'iljri'yn. 


\\Or,Tvher. 

looktdl'poi 
thee. 


\\Orlrodin 
vndirfoot. 


f  Hel.modi 

theearml- 

lion. 

f  Heb.  orna- 
ment of  orna- 
ment!. 


\Hciitadi. 


Thevnkindnefle,      Ezckiel. 


and  idolatrie'i 


t  f-H  of* 

m.dc. 


\Hd-.lf.,- 

HOHrOJrcj}. 


Heb  lode 


\]  OrJ.ro. 

thetlhoufe. 


I  Or  citie$. 


15  C2Sutthoubibbefttruftmthme 
owne  beauty ,  anb  piaycbft  thchariot, 
becaufcof  thy  rcnoWnc,  anbpoW2cbft 
outtliy  foznitattons  on  cucry  one  that 
paflcbby^tsitwas. 

i6  3lnD  of  thy  garments  thou  bib 
befttaKc,  anbbccHcbft  thy  high  plates] 
With  outers  colours ,  aubplayebft  the 
Harlot  thereupon :  the  like  things  (halt 
not  eome.nci'thcr  (hall  ttbe  fo. 

17  XIiou  haft  alfo  taKen  thy  faire 
icwcls  01  my  golb  ano  of  my  ftlucr,' 
Which  IJhabgiucn  thec .  anbmabeftto  j 
thy  felfc  images  t  of  men,  aubbiboefti 
commit  Whoicbomc  With  them, 

is  2lnb  tooUcftthy  bjoiberco  gar^ 
ments  anb  touerebft  them :  ano  thou 
haft  fet  mint  oylcanb  miucmcenfc  be 
fojethem.  I 

19  U0y  mcateaifo  which  3  3^' 
thee,  fine  floW2e,  anboyle,  anb  home, 
wherewith  3  feb  thecthou  haft  eucn  fet  it ! 
bcfo:c  them  fo:  atfrocctc  fauour  :aub| 
thus  it  was,  faith  the  %oid  @oa 

20  <33o2coucc  thou  haft  taken  thy ; 
founts  ano  thv  baughtcrs.Whom  thou 
haft  bozttc  bnto  me,  ano  thefchaftthou 
fcitnfiteb  bnto  them  t  to  be  bcuourcb :  is  j 
his  ofthy  Whozcbomcs  a fmail matter,  | 

21  Xhat  thou  haft  name  my  chti 
b:cn ,  anb  bcliucrcb  them  to  caufc  them 
to  paffc  thiough ,nc  firc  foz  them  < 

22  ^ubiu  all  thine  abominations 
anb  thy  Whoojcbomes ,  thou  haft  not 
tcmemb:eb  the  bayes  of  thy  youth, 
when  thou  waft  natteD  anb  bare ,  and 
Waftpoiiutcbinthybloob. 

25  3lnb  it  tame  to  pafte  after  all  thy  j 
lbicucbitcflc  (woe,  Woe  bnto  thee,  faith: 

thc2Lo2b<3or>.) 

24  That  thouhaft  alfo  builtbuto  thee 
an  1 1  eminent  place,  ano  haftmabc  thee 
an  high  piate  m  cuery  ftrecte. 

25  Hhou  haft  built  thy  high  place  at 
cucry  heao  of  the  way,  anb  haft  mabe 
thy  beauty  to  be  abh02reb,anb  haft  ope 
neb  thy  fcetc  to  nitty  one  that  paftcb 
by,atibmultiplicbthyWhoo2Cbomes. 

26  Xhouhaft  alfo  committcbfcmit 
cation  With  the  (Egyptians  thy  neigh* 
bours  great  of  flcfl) ,  $  haft  incr  cafeb  thy 
Whoo2cbomcs,top2ouoKcmc  to  anger. 

27  i5cholothercfo2c,  gjhattcftrct 
cheb  out  myhanbouerthec,  anbhaue 
bimiuiflicb  thine  O2binartrtoo<ic,ano  be 
liucccb  thee  bnto  the  Will  of  them  that 
hatcthee,  thdlbaughtcrs  of  the  phut 
ftmes,  Whith  arcaihamcb  ofthyleWb 
lbay. 


\\Or 


t  Hct.hU 


28  XhouhaftplayebtheWhoo2cai<; 
fo  Wirt)  the  3fly2ians  ,  bctaufe  thou: 
waft  bnratiable:  yea  thou  haft  playcb 
the  harlot  With  them,  anb  yet  coulocft1 
notbefatifftco. 

29  Xhou  haft  mozeouct  multiplied 
thy  fornication  in  the  lano  of  Canaan 
buto  Caioca,  ano  yet  thou  Waft  not  fa- 
tifficohccrcwith. 

30  fioWWcaHc is thmt heart,  faith 
the  IL020  C5ojd,  fecutgthott  bocft  all 
thefc  things,  the  W02K  of  an  imperious 
Whojifh  woman  t 

31  gjnij  that  thou  butlbcft  thine  emi- 
nent place  in  the  heab  of  cucry  way,)^™. 
anb  malteft  thine  high  place  in  cuery 
ftrecte,  anb  haft  not  btcne  as  an  harlot, 
in  that  thou  feojneft  hue: 

32  Butasawifethattommittethabul 
tcric,  viiiciitaRcthftcangcrsinftcebc  of 
hcrhufbanb. 

33  Zhcygiuc  gifts  to  all  Wh02cs,but 
thou  giucft  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  loiters, 
anb  thy2cft  them,  that  they  may  come 
bnto  thee  on  cucry  fibc  602  thy  Whoje 
borne. 

34.  3nbthc  contrary  ism  thee  from 
other  women  In  thy  whozebomes, 
Wljcrcas  none  folloWcth  thee  to  ton; 
mtt  Who2tbomes :  anb  in  that  thou  gi 
ucft  a  rcwarb ,  anb  no  rcWarb  ts  giucn 
bnto  thee  :  therefore  thou  art  con 
trary. 

3s  C  n9hcrcf02C,O  harlot,  heart  the 

W02b  OftllCfLOW  £\ 

36  Xhusfajththcli.02bGoP:25c- 
caufe  thy  fiithincflc  was  poWzcb  out, 
anb  thy  naRcbneflc  bifcoucrcb  thzough 
thvWho2cbomesWith  thy  loners ,  anb 
With  an  the  tools  of  thy  abominations, 
anb  by  the  bloob  of  thy  chitbjen ,  Which 
thoubibbcft  gtuc  bnto  them, 

37  25choio  therefojc,  3  Will  gather 
all  thy  loucrs,Wtth  whom  thou  haft  ta 
hen  pieafure ,  anb  all  them  that  thou 
haft  lotteb,  with  ail  them  that  thou  haft 
j  hatco :  3  Will  eueu  gather  them  rounb 
about  agamft  thec ,  ano  Will  bifcoucr 
thy  nauenneffe  bnto  them  ,  that  they 
iuiayfcealithynaltcbttelTc. 

3s  3tnb  3  Wtlliubgc  thectas  wo- 
men  that  b2caltc  Wcbiocltc  ano  (hcao 
bloob  arctubgcb,  anb  gi  will  gtuc  thec 
bloob  m  fury  aubtealouuc. 

39  3nb  51  Will  alfo  giuc  thee  into 
their  hanb,  anb  they  thai  tlnow  oownc 
thmc  eminent  place,  anb  (hall  b2cahe 
bowuc  thy  htgh  places :  they  (hall  Grip 
rtjee alfo  of  thy  clothes ,  anb  (hail  taitc 

thy 


ludfimtnls 


oflerufalem. Chap.xv).  Her  iudgmenr. 


mntli  of 
tbirte  orna- 
ment. 


*  I.Kings. 
lj.J.nrt.j; 


tbtnthoH. 


\\Or,that 
w  Allot  bed 
itmfmaH 
thing. 


•Ctn.ij. 
1+ 


thp  t  fatrc  lewels,  anD  leauc  thee  nafeeb 
anD  bare. 

40  3~l)v?  fhail  alfo  tying  top  a  com 
pameagatnftthec,  anb  the?  (hail  ftonc 
thee  With  ftones,  ano  ttnuft  thee  tho- 
rough With  their  fnwbs. 

41  3lnb  thep  (hall*  burnethinchou' 
fes  VDxtt)  fire ,  anD  crecutc  uiDgemcnts 
bpon  thee  m  the  fight  of  man?  women : 
anb  3  rtttl  caufc  thee  to  ccafc  from  play 
ing  ttje  harlot ,  anb  thou  alfo  fhalt  guie 
no^ircanpmoje. 

41  do  Will  3  mane  nip  rurp  to^ 
WarDS  thee  to  reft ,  anb  nip  tcaiouGe 
fl)ail bepart  from  thee,  anb  3  Will  be 
quict,anD  Will  be  no  mow  angrp. 

4i  26eeaufe  thou  haft  not  rcmem- 
bjeb  tljc  bapes  of  rtjp  pouth ,  but  haft 
fcetttb  mee  m  all  thefe  things  ■,  bdrjolD 
therefore ,  3  alfo  Will  recompence  thp 
wap  topon  thine  heab ,  faith  the  ILojb 
<5®w  :  anb  thou  fhalt  not  commit 
tins  IcWbneffc,  aboueail  thine  abomi 
nations. 

44  c ^Beholb.cucrp one  that bfeth 
p?oucrbS,  (hall  bfcth.sp2oucrbcagatnft 
thee ,  taping ,  3Cs  is  the  mother ,  <»  is  her 
Daughter. 

45  iCljottm  thp  mothers  Daugh 
tec ,  that  lotheth  Dec  hufbanb  anb  her 
cfjilbjen,  anD  thou  ;>«  the  fitter  of thpfi 
tiers  Which  lotheD  their  hnf  banbs,  anb 
their  ctnlDzen :  pour  mother  was  an  i?it 
tite,anD  pour  father  an  Simon te. 

46  Stab  thine  elbct  Offer  is&fima* 
ria,  njeanbher  Daughters,  that  bwcll 
at  thp  left  h»«b :  anD  thp t  pounger 
fitter  that  bWelleth  at  thp  right  hanD, 
.s^obom  anD  her  Daughters. 

47  Ptt  haft  thou  not  waiHtb  after 
their  Wapes,  noz  bone  after  their  abo- 
minations: bUt  aS'f  H  that  werca  ticrT'li^ 

tie  thing,thou  Waft  tomipteb  mow  then 
thep  mall  thp  wapes. 

4S  3s^lutc,faiththe!LojD<S£>©, 
feoDom  thp  fitter  hath  not  Doncttjc  no; 
herDaughtcrs.asthouhatt  Done,  thou 
anb  thp  Daughters. 

49  25cholo,thisWasthemiqtutteof 

thp  fitter  5>oDom ;  $ifot ,  rulnefle  of 
mcab.anb  aboimDance  ofiDlencffc  was 
mheranbinherbaughters,ncitherbib 
fhe  ftrengthen  the  hanD  of  the  pooje 

anonceDp. 

50  sinDthepWerehauncanbcom 

mittcb  abomination  before  me  :*therc 
fo?e  3  toonc  them  awap,  as  3  faw 

"ood. 

51  ^either  hath  Samaria  commit 


teb  haifc  of  thp  fmnes ,  but  thou  hatt 
multiplieD  thine  abominations  mott 
then  thep ,  anb  haftiutttfieb  thp  filters 
mall  thine  abominations ,  Which  thou 
haft  bone. 

5x  Xheu  alfo  Which  haft  uibgcD  thp 
filters,  bcarc  thmc  owuc  fhamc  fo?  thp 
Gnnes,  that  thou  haft  comimttcDmojc 
abominable  then  thep :  the?  are  moze 
riglneous  then  thou :  pea  be  thou  con^ 
founbcoaifo ,  anD  beare  thp  fhamc,  m 
that  thou  haft  luftifieb  thp  fitters. 

53  nahen  3  (hall  bnng  agamc  their 
captiume,  thecapttuiftcof&oDomanD 
her  Daughters ,  anb  the  capnuitie  of 
damanaaiiD  her  baughters,  thenw.11 

1  bring  againe  t!jC  CaptlUltp  Of  tt)P  CapHUCS 

mthemiDftofthem, 

54  Xhat  thou  mapett  beare  thine 
0  Wne  fb,ame,anb  mapett  be  confounoeb 
in  all  that  thou  haft  Done ,  in  that  thou 
art  acomfoztbntothem. 

55  nahen  thp  filters ,  5>oDom  anD 
her  Daughters  thai  r  cttirnc  to  their  fo^ 
mer  eftate ,  anb  5>amana  anb  her 
baughters  (hall  returne  to  their  fonnet 
eftate ,  then  thou  anb  thp  Daughters 
fhaii  returne  to  pour  fbnner  eftate. 

56  jfoi  thp  filter  5>oDom  was  not 
t  mcnnoncD  bp  thp  mouth  m  the  bap  of;  tHri_fi 

fl)ptpn0C;  \rtfOrtor 

57  Bcfozethp  WicftenneOe wasmf'-ii"^^ 
coueteD.asatthctimcofthprcpzoch  of  «-««&»' 
the  baughters  oft  5>pzta,  anb  all  that  a  re 
rounb  abouthet ,  the  baughters  of  the 
0hiliftines  Which  II  Defpife  thee  rounD 
about. 

5S  Shou haft t borne  thpleWbnefTe, 
anb  thine  abominations ,  faith  the 

59  itoz  thusfaith  the  ILozb  ©©©•. 
3  Will  cuen  beale  With  thee  as  thou 
haft  bone ,  which  hart  DcfpifeDthc  oath 
m  bzcauing  the  coucnant. 

60  C  /Rcuerthcleffe  3  Will  remem- 
ber mp  couenant  with  thee  in  the  bapes 
ofthppotith,  anb3l  Will  cftablifhbnto 
thee  an  eucr  lafting  couenant. 

6i  Hhen  thou  (halt  remember  thp 
wapes  anb  be  afhameb,Whcn  thon 
fhaitrecciuethp  filters,  thme  elbcr  anb 
thp  pounger ,  anb  3  Will  gmc  them  bn 
to  thee  for  baughters,  but  not  bp  thp 
coucnant. 

6%  3ln0  35  Will  eftabltfl)  mp  coue^ 
nant  With  thee,  anb  thou  fbaltUnoW 
that^jnithcIL©iK5r>: 

63  Xhat  thou  mapeft  remember, anD 

bee  confounbeb ,  anb  neucr  open  thv 

mouth 


\Hei.  A- 
ram. 

\\OrffiUt. 

f  H*l>.  borne 
them. 


•Gal.4.i«. 


Tl 


letwo 


Easl 


les. 


Ezekiel. 


Breach  ofoath. 


fHttr.m- 

frroydtnn*. 


t  Hrhr  put 
rffecd. 


fHelrfirU. 


mouth  anp  mo;c :  becaufc  of  thp  (hame, 
ttihen  _)  am  pactneb  totbarb  thecfo;  all 
that thou  haft  Done,  fapcfh  the  JLoio 

CHAP.    XVII. 

i  Vndcr  the  parable  o(  two  Eagles  and  a  Vine, 
I  i  is  (hewed  Gods  judgement  vpon  Ie 
rufalem  for  reuolting  from  Babylon  to  E- 
gvpt.  m  God  promifeth  to  plant  the  Cedar 
of  the  Gofpel. 

/I5  2E>  tf)C  ttwo  of  the 
ILcubjd  tame  Ditto  nice, 
Taping, 
i  domtcofman.put 
_  foojthartbblcanbfpeakc 
a  parable  bnto  the  houfc  of  Jfrael, 

3  3tnb  fap ,  Xhus  faith  the  Horti 
d5©©3  great  eagle  iDith  grcatiDings, 
long  ibing  D,full  offeathcrs,lDhtch  hab 
tbiuers  colours,  came  bntolLcbanott, 
ano  tookc  the  ^icjljctt  b:anch  of  the 
Ccbar. 

4  5?cctroptoffthctopofhispong 
tlbigs ,  anb  cancb  tt  into  a  lanb  of  traf> 
fiquc  he  fct it m a  citp  of  merchants. 

5  tytc  tooftc  alfo  of  the  feeb  of  tl)e 
lanb ,  anb  t  piantcb  it  in  a  fmitfnll  ftclb, 
l)c  piaceb  tt  bp  great  ruatcrs,  and  fct  it  as 
amnion)  tree. 

6  3ttD  tt  gretb ,  anb  became  a  fpjea- 
Ding  time  of  loin  nature,  mhofe  blan- 
ches turneb  totbarb  l)tm,anb  tlje  roots 
thereof  were  bnber  him :  fo  tt  became  a 
Mute,  anb  b:ought  fozth  branches,  anb 
fhotfoojthfpzigges. 

7  Xhcre  ibas  alfo  an  other  great 
eagle,  mtth  great  iDtngs  anb  manp  fca 
titers,  anb  beholb,  thtsfllmc  btbbettb 
her  rootrs  toibarbs  htm,anb  ftjot  fojtl) 
Ijer  branches  toiDarb  l)tm  ,  that  l)cc 
might  lbater  it  bptfje  furroibcs  of  her 
plantation. 

8  3It  mas  pianteb  in  a  goob  t  foiie 
bp  great  maters ,  that  tt  might  bnng 
fonh  branches,  anb  that  tt  might  bcare 
fcuit.that  it  might  be  a  gooblp  Ume. 

9  £>ap  thou ,  n:hus  faith  the  Jlojb 
o©  &■.  <§>hail  it  pwfpcr^  fljaii  he  not 
pull  Dp  the  rootes  thereof,  anb  cutoff 
the  fruit  thereof,  that  tt  Unther  t  it  than 
mtthcr  m  all  the  leaucs  of  herfpmtg, 
cuen  lbtthout  great  poibcr  ,  o?  manp 
people  to  pluche  it  Dp  bp  the  rootcs 
thereof. 

to  j*eabeholD,bctngpiantcb,fhaliu 
pjofper  <  fljail  tt  not  bttcrlp  lbither, 
inhcn  the  <£aft  mtnb  tottchcth  it  <  tt  Ojai 
Unthcr  in  tlje  furrotbes  mherc  itgtctt). 


1 1  C  £0oieoucr  the  iDoib  of  the 
%  o  ib  ©  came  Ditto  me,fap ing, 

ti  S>apnom  to  the  rebellious  houfe, 
BnoiD  pc  not  Vbhat  thefc  things  meane? 
tell  them,  bcholD,  theblngofasabplon 
is  come  to  JJmsCaicin,  ano  hath  taken 
the  Btng  thereof ,  anb  the  Outers 
thereof,  anb  lebbc  them  tbtfh  him  to 
asabplon, 

13  ^ttb hath tahtnof the kmgstccb, 
anb  tttabe  a  touenant  troth  him ,  anb 
hath f  taken  an  oath  ofhim :  he  hath  al- 
fo taken  the  mighty  of  the  lanb, 

14.  Hhat  the  fetngbomc  migltt  bee 
bafe,that  it  might  not  lift  it  fclft  Dp,  t  but 
that  bp  keeping  of  his  Couenant  tt 
might  (tanb. 

15  aButhercbrtlcbagainfthiminfcn* 
btng  his  ambaffabours  into  <£gppt, 
that  tlicv  might  gtue  him  ho:fcs  anb 
much  people:  (halt  hep:  of  per  <  (1)  all  lnv 
cfcapcthatboerh  fuch  things  *  0?  (hall 
hec  bjeabe  the  Couenant,  anb  bee  bcu> 
iter  cb; 

16  as3liuc,faifhthe?Lozb<5€>jD, 
futclp  in  the  place  *here  the  mng  dwel- 
led! that  mabc  him  Ring,  tbhofe  oath  he 
btfpifcb,  anb  \bhofc  couenant  he  bwhe, 
cuen  unth  h»m  >  m  the  miDft  of  ^abplon 
he  than  Die. 

17  ^cither  fljaii  Pharaoh  tbtth  his 
nughtte  armte  anb  great  compatue 
matte  fo?  htm  m  the  lbarre  by  caQmg 
Dp  mounts,  anb  butlbtng  fojts,  to  att 
otTmattv  pcrfbns. 

is  S>cctng  hec  bcfpifeD  the  oath  by 
leaking  the  couenant  ( mhen  loe,  he 
hab  gittcn  hts  hattb)  anbhathbonc  all 
thefc  things,  he  (hail  not  cicapc* 

19  Xherefojc  thus  faith  the  JLo;b 
©£>©,  Zb  3  hue ,  furcly  nunc  oath 
tltathchathbcfpifeb.atibmvCoitcnant 
that  h£  hath  bjoben,  cucntt  ibtllj  re? 
compenfcDponhts  olDuehcab. 

20  3utb3J  VDiir  fpjcab  mp  netDpon 
htm,f  he  fhalbc  taken  in  mp  fnare,anb 
31  iDili  byng  him  to  25abplon,  anb  iDiil 
pleab  ibith  him  there  fo;  his  trefpafTc, 
thathclhtthtrrfpafjfrbagatnftmc. 

21  3lnbaiihtsfugtttucs,tDahallhis 
banbs,  fl)aii  fall  bp  rite  &uo;b,  anb  tltcp 
that  rematttc  fljaibc  fcattercb  tolDarbS 
all  lDinbcs :  anb  pc  fhall  bnoiD  that  3J 
the  %  ©  is  chaue  fpoftcn  it. 

22  CXhusfatththcHojb<5€)!D, 
3  ibil  alfo  take  of  the  htgheft  bjatich  of 
the  high  Cebar,  anb  iDillfet  it ,  3  idui 
eroppc  off  from  the  top  of  hts  pong 
tiDiggcs  a  tenber  one ,  anb  lbtll  plant  it 

Dpon 


tHrtr. 

brought  b:r 
to  an  OAlh. 

\Hchr.to 
kceyehu  co 
Hcnani  to 
ft  and  toti. 


'Chap. 11. 
1 5.  and  32. 


Gods  lull: 


ice 


Ch 


ap.xvm 


•icc.31.29. 


t/M.iWj 

mint  and 
ufhct. 


*Lcui(.  18. 
10. 

"Lcuit.  18 
19.  and 
20.18. 

•Exod.25. 
21   ICUit.  19. 

i  5  and  25. 

'Dcut.24. 
12  exod. 
22. :o. 
*Deu.  1  5.7, 
ifai  58.7. 
mac. 25  35 
*£xod.2  3. 
2  5  Icui  2  5. 
36.2  7.dcu. 
'}>9  pfal. 
I5.5. 


bpon  anhiehmountamcanbcmmcnt. 

i?  '3"thcmountamcofthcbcigbt 
of  3Jfrac!  U)M  5  plant  it :  anb  it  (halt 
bungfootfh  bougbcs,  anobearefruttc, 
ano  be  a  gooblp  Cebar ,  anb  bnber  it 
(hail  bibcll  all  foulc  of  euerp  ibing:  m 
the  fljaboib  ofthe  branches  thereof  thai 
thcpbibell. 

Z4.  3lnu  all  the  trees  of  the  nelb  a^ali 
bnoUuhat^J  the!U>ia©hane  brought 
bolbnc  the  high  tree,  haue  craitcb  the 
lotbtrec,  haue  bnebbp  the  grecnetrce, 
anb  l)aue  inabe  the  b:ic  tree  to  floor  ifb, : 
31  tl)c  %  o  is  ©  haue  fpottcn,  anb  bane 
bone  it. 

CHAP.    XVI II. 

1  God  rcprooueth  thevniull  parable  ot  (bwre 
grapes.  5  He  fhewedi  how  lie  dealeth  with 
a  lull  father:  10  with  a  wicked  fonne  ofa  mft 
father:  14  with  a  mil  fonne  ot  a  wicked  fa- 
ther: ly  widi  a  wicked  man  repenting:  2.4 
with  a  111ft  manreuohing.  2.5  Hee  deteudeth 
hisiiiflice,  31  and  exhoiteth  to  repentance. 

j|5b  the  tt»02b  of  p  JLo  ts  © 
K  tame  bnto  tnc  agame,  Cap* 
$mg; 

z  nshatmcanepethat 
pec  bfc  thtspjonctbe  con; 
earning  the  lanb  of  3?fract4apmg,Xhe 
*  fathers  hanc  eaten  foib:c  grapes,  anb 
the  thiuwens  teeth  arc  fet  on  cbge  i 

5  ^sgjlmcfaiththeJLoJb  <s©©, 
pee  (hall  not haue  occafion  anp  mo?e  to 
bfc  thtspjoncrbcm3ifracl. 

4  aseholo ,  all  fonlcs  arc  nunc ,  as 
the  foulc  of  the  rather ,  fo  alfo  the  foulc 
ofthe  fonne  isnune:thefoulcthat  fiiu 
ncth,tt(hallbtc. 

5  CButtfanianbeiuCanbbothat 
lbhith  is  t  laibfuU  anb  right : 

6  anb  hath  not  eaten  topon  the 
mouutames  ,  neither  hath  lift  bp  hts 
eyes  to  the  iboles  of  the  hotife  of  "Jfracl, 
neither  hath  *  befilcb  his  neighbours 
tbifc,  neither  hath  come  necre  to  *  a 
menfrruousiboman, 

7   31nb  hath  not  "oppzeHeban^,  but 

hathreft02cbtothebebtourhts*plcbgc, 
hathfpotleD  none  bp  btolence,  hath  *  gi- 
uen  his  b:eab  to  the  hungrie ,  anb  hath 
couereb  the  naneb  ttitth  a  garment, 

3  $e  chat  hath  not  giucn  footfh  bp^ 
on'bfurtc,  neither  hath  taHen  anp  in 
creafe,  that  hatiniuthbjaiben  his  hanb 
from  imquitie,  hath  crccuteb  true  mbg 
ment  betibeene  man  anb  man, 

9  t*athti)atBebinmp£>tatutes,anb 


inpunilhing. 


hath  ttept  mp  Jubgcmcnts  to  beale 
truelp,  hee  is  ma,  hecfhali  fureipiiue, 
faith  the  SLojb  <£>©©. 

10  €  Uf  hec  beget  a  fonne  that  is  a 
II  robber,  a  fhebber  of  bloob,ano||that 
both  the  iiae  to  anp  one  of  thefe  things, 

1 1  2tnb  that  bocth  not  anp  of  tbofe 
duties,  bnt  euen  hath  eaten  bpon  the 
mountains,  ano  befilcb  his  neighbours 
ibtfe, 

12  $arh  oppKffcb  thepoojc  anb  nee; 
me,  hath  fpoileb  bp  biolcncchath  not 
remwb  the  picbge,  anb  hath  lift  bp  his 
cpcstothcfboles,  hathcommittcoabO' 
initiation, 

ij  ^artj  giucn  foojth  bpon  bfurie, 
anb  hath  tanen  encrcafc:  (hall  he  then 
hue;  hec  (hail  not  hue :  hec  hath  bone 
an  thefe  abommanons,  hee  fhallfurclp 
bie,  his  t  bloob  fhaibc  bpon  hun. 

1+  €/15oiblot,  it  hee  beget  a  fonne 
that  feethaii  his  fathers  Onncsibhtch 
he  hath  bone,anb  conubcteth,anb  Dot!) 
not  fiich  use, 

15  That  hath  not  eaten  bpon  the 
mountatnes,  neither  hath  lift  bp  hts 
epes  to  the  iboles  ofthe  houfe  of  jit 
racl ,  hath  not  befileb  hts  neighbours 
tbifc, 

16  iSeitherhathopp^effebanp,thath 
not  ibithholbcii  the  plebge ,  neither 
hathfpoucbbpbiolcnce,  but  hath  giucn 
his  bicab  to  the  hungrp,  anb  hath  t our- 
reb  the  nabeb  ibith  a  garment, 

17  That  hath  taken  ofifhtshanb  from 
thepooje ,  that  hath  not  receiueb  bfune 
no?  tnercafe ,  hath  cjcccutrb  mp  "Jubge^ 
ments,  hath  ibalacb  inmp  Statutes, 
he  fhari  not  bie  to?  the  tntqumc  of  his  fa; 
thcr,hefl)aufnrcipliuc. 

is  Hsfoi  his  father,  becaufe  hec  cru= 
elrp  oppjeffeb ,  fpoileb  hts  b;othcr  bp 
biolcnccanb  bib  that  Vbhtch >•>  not  goob 
among  hispeoplc,loc,nicnhc  (hall  bie 
inhismiciume 

19  C  Pctfap pee,  "oshP* bocth  not 
the  fonne  bearc  the  imquitie  of  the  fa 
ther?  rbhen  the  fonne  hath  bone  that 
lbhich  is  unbfuil  anb  right,  and  hath 
nept  all  mp  Statutes ,  anb  hath  bone 
thcm,he  Qiaufurclpline. 

io  ^hcfoulethatfmncth.it  dial  bie: 
tl)c  fonne  (hall  not  bcart  the  iniqutnc  of 
the  father, neither  fbaitbc  father  bearc 
the  imqnitic  ofthe  fonne  the  rightcouf 
ncfTe  ofthe  rtgbtcous  fliaii  bee  bpon 
him,  ano  theUutbcbncffc  of  the  ibicbcb 
fhaibc  bpon  him. 

2i  ffiutrfthcibirfeebibillturncfrom 

all 


lOr,Breakrr 
Vfofv, 
honfe, 
\\Ortrbar 
dotih  to  hn 
br  other,  he- 
fdfSjHJ  of 

hefe. 


\HebMnds 


\Heb  huth 
not  pledged 
the  pledge 
cr  rji^fnto 
fledge. 


*Dcur.!4. 
!(5.  2. kings 
14.6.1. 
chron.25  4. 
icre.  31.1?. 


Godswaycsequall.     Ezekiel.  Twolyons. 


■Chap.  3  3' 


•Chip,  j 3 


•Miuh.j.1 
l^r.othcrs. 


•Ict.;i. 
!9  chap. 
it.  19. and 
16.16. 
•Chip.,;. 
1 1. 2. pet. 

!  9- 

||9r.otlicr». 


an  iiis  fumes  tliat  he  had)  comnutteD 
anD  ftcepe  aiimvftatutcs ,  anD  Doc  that 
Vbhtch  is  lalDful  anD  rtgbt,bc  (hall  fucc- 
lyliucbe  (bail  not  Die. 

ii  2lil  his  tranfgrcffions  that  he 
hath  committeD ,  tljcy  (hailnotbemetv 
tioncD  Unto  httn :  in  his  ngbtcoufiiclfc, 
that  he  hath  Douc,bc  (ball  line. 

13  *  fyauc  3  any  pleafure  at  all  that 
the  tbicbcD  (boulD  Die ,  faith  the  ?Lo?D 
<5  ©©<  And  not  that  befboulD  rcturne 
from  his  uiayes.anD  hue  t 

14.  <r  26utU/hen  the  righteous  nir- 
nctbarbayfcobisrigbtcoufncs,9conv 
mitteth  iniqiutie ,  and  Doth  acto?Ding  to 
all  the  abominations  that  the  idicUcd 
man  Doth ,  lhail  he  Uuc^all  bisrigbtc 
oufncfTc  that  he  hath  Done,  fliall  not  be 
mcnttoncD :  m  his  trefpaffe  that  he  hath 
tccfpaffcD ,  anD  in  his  finnc  that  he  hath 
fmncD,  m  them  (bail  he  Die. 

15  CPctyccfay^Xbeibayoftbc 
ILojd  is  not  equaii.  D)eare  noib ,  <f) 
boufeofJfcaclIJsnotmyiDayequailf 
arc  not  your  ipay  cs  bncquaii  < 

16  i©hcn  a  righteous  man  turner!)  a- 
•bay  from  bis  ngbteoufncffr,?  commit 
tcth  imqmticanD  Dicth  in  them ,  to?  his 
uuqmtic  that  he  hath  Done,  (ball  he  Die. 

17  againe,  When  the  ltoitlieDtnan 
turneth  arbay  from  his  tbicftcDncffe 
that  he  hath  commltteD,  anD  Doth  that 
ttJbtch  is  lattjfull  anD  nght,he  fbail  faue 
hisfoulcaiiuc. 

is  fficxaufcbceonftDeretbanDtur; 
net!)  atbay  from  all  his  tranfgrtlfiotis 
that  he  hath  tommittcD ,  bc(ballfuccly 
huebe  (ball  not  Die. 

19  Pet  faith  the  boufe  of  Jfracl  1 
ILbcVbapof  thcHojDis  notcquau.  £> 
houtc  of 'Jftacl ,  arc  not  my  ibayes  c- 
quail  <  arc  not  your  ibayes  bncquaii  t 

30  Xhcrcfo?c  3  Vbill  lubgcyou ,  £) 
houfcof  3Jfrael,  cucryoneactozDing  to 
his  ibaycs.faui)  the  %Qid  <5  ©  ©  •.  *  re- 
pent ,  anD  turncHyour  fclucs  from  all 
your  tranfgrcffions :  fo  imqume  (ball 
not  be  your  nunc. 

31  ItCaft  avbay  from  you  all  your 
ttanfgr  cflions,  lbbccby  ycc  bauc  tranf 
grcffcD  ,anD  mane  you  a*neVb  heart  anD 
a  netb  fpirit :  fo?  lbby  ibill  ycc  Die ,  © 
boufcofjfraei; 

31  foix3\  banc  no  pleafure  in  p  Death 
of  him  that  Dtcrb,faitb  the  Hojd  <£>€>©: 
U)bercfo?c  turnc  1 1  your  fclucs,  $  hue  v^ 

CHAP.  XIX. 

1    A  lamentation  for  the  Princes  of  Ifrael,  vndrr 


the  parable  of  Lyons  whelpes  taken  in  a  pit 
10  and  for  Ierufalem  ,  vnder  the  parable 
ofawaftedvine. 

tfttx®^  £>*eouet,  tanc  thou  Dp  a 
s  lamentation  fo?  the  pjuv 
Sjccsofjfracl, 
^1  3mDfay,n9batistby 
,  J3el  mother  i  a  lyonefTc:  (lice 
lay  Doujnc  among  lions,  (be  nourtttjeD 
her  ftibclpcs  among  yong  lions. 

3  3tuD  fbec  brought  bp  one  of  bet 
iDhtlps:  it  became  a  yong  lion,  9  it  lcat= 
ncD  to  catch  the  p?ay,  it  DcuourcD  men. 
4-  1tbe  nanons  aifo  bearD  of  htm, 
hec  iDas  taacu  m  their  pit,  anD  tbey 
brought  bun  iDitb  cbames  buto  the 
lanbof'Cgypt. 

5  .^ottjibbm (befall)  that  (bccbaD 
tbattcD,  and  her  hope  urns  loft,  then  (be 
tooHcanotbcr  of  bcrtbbclps,  ^maDe 
bimayonglion. 

6  ^uDbctbcntbpanDDotbncamong 
the  lions,  be  became  a  yong  lion ,  anD 
icarncD  to  catch  the  p?ay,  and  DcuourcD 
men. 

7  2nD  he fencm  there IIDcfoiatepfc 
iaccs,aiiD  be  laicDibaOctbcirntics.anD 
rbelanDtbasDcfolatc,  anDtbefulnctTc 
tljcreofby  tbenoife  of  bis  roaring. 

8  Xbcn  the  nations  fctagamft  him 
on  cuery  tiDc  from  the  pjouinces,  anD 
fpjeao  their  net  oner  him:  be  mas  taiicn 
m  their  pit. 

9  3lnD  they  put  him  in  tt>arD||  in 
chaincs,anD  brought  bun  to  the  King  of 
25aby  ion, tbey  biougbt  bunmtoholDs, 
that  bisDoytctboulDnomojebebcarD 
bpon  the  mountames  of  3!fcacl. 

10  C^hy  mother  «s  iiacabmc||in 
thy  blooD ,  plantcD  by  the  waters,  (be 
mas  fruttfull  anD  full  of  tyancbesby 
rcafou  of  many  ibaters, 

iiSnDftfcbaDlrrongroDsfojtbefcep; 
tcrs  of  them  that  bcarc  rule,  anD  her 
ftaturc  IDas  eraiteo  among  the  tbicac 
bjanrbes,  9  (bcappeareDm  her  bctgbt 
rbitbtbcmuitituDc  of  her  branches. 

u  25ut(bcibasplutlicD  Dp  mftiry: 
OiciDascaftDoiDnetotbcgrounD,  anD 
the  *<£aftiDinDD?ycDDpbcrfruitc  :ber 
ftrongroDsujcrctaoftenanDUntbcrcD, 
the  fire  confumcD  them. 

13  3lnDno.blbe'spiantcDintbclbn 
Dcrnefrc,  m  a  D2y  anD  tbirfty  grounD. 

1+  2lnD  fire  is  gone  out  ofarobof 
her  bjandics,  ^  h.ch  bat!)  DcuourcD  her 
fruitc ,  fo  that  (be  bat!)  no  ftrong  roD  to 
be  a  fecpter  to  rule :  this  sa  lamcntatt 
on,anb  (bail  be  fo?  a  lamentanon. 

CHAP. 


"  2.  Kings 

ij.J3aer- 

22.11. 


\Orythrir 
ndcxes. 


Or ,  m 

hook's* 


\  Or y in  thy 
qutetneffe 
orintfryUkf- 


•or.  1 3. 

>5- 


The  rebellion 


Ch 


ap.xx. 


o 


flfrae). 


\\0r,p/c.ui 
for  them. 

j, ana  :  j. 
3«- 


\\0rfrtrt, 
and  fo  vcrfe 
6,0-c. 
*Exod,;i. 

S.anJ4.  ■  j. 


CHAP.    XX. 

i  Godrefufeth  to  be  confulted  by  the  Elders  of 
Ifjael.  5  Hefheweth  the  rtovy  of  their  rebel- 
lions in  Egypt,  10  iu  thewildemes,  ^7  aud 
in  the  land.  3  3  He  promifeth  to  gather  them 
bytheGofpcl.  45  Vnderthenaraeofaforeft 
he  fheweth  the  deft  met  ion  ot  Ierufalem. 

*£3&&g!£  iSDitcamcto  paffe  in  the 
ng  (cuenth  yeerc,  tit  the  fift 

g  moneth,t}jCtCntl)dayOftt)e 

moneth ,  that  certaine  of 
thcclbersof^fraclcame 
to  cnciutrc  of  the  %  ©  is  3D,  anb  fate  be- 
fojemc. 

z  Xl;etuametl)cU)0?ooftDe?L£)B3D 
bnto  me,  faying, 

i  5>onne  of  man,  tpeafee  bnto  the 
ciDcrs  of  Jfrael ,  ano  fay  onto  them, 
injusfctth  the  fLojD  ©a>©,  Ztt  yee 
comcto  enquire  of  mei3s31  liue,fatth 
thcTLojb  d5f©3B,3J  tuillnot  be  enow 
rebofbyyou. 

4  nam  thou  p  *iubgethem,romtc  of 
man,  ibtlt  thou  lubge  them  ?  tanfe  them 
totmott)  the  abominations  of  their  fa? 
thers: 

5  C3wbfapt>ntothem,Xhusfaitl) 
the  ILotfxS©©,  ^nthc  Day  tbhen3 
chofe3Jfrart,  ano  HUftcDbpmfnchanb 
bnto  the  feeb  of  the  houfe  of  3Jaeob,anb 
maDemyftlfc  *i$noiben  bnto  them  in 
the  lanb  of  egypt,  ttihcn  3  liftco  Up 
mine hanD  &wo  them, faying,  3  am 
thefL  ©is  ©your  ©od, 

6  gjn  the  bay  that  3  uftcD  ftp  mine 
Ijanb  bnto  them  to  bung  them  foojth  of 
thelanbof  Cgypt,  into  aianDetbafJ 
hab  cfpieb  fo?  tftemJtolbmg  lbttb  mtl&c 
anb  hony, which  is  the  glozy  of  all  lanbs: 
-  7  Xhen  taib  3  bnto  them,  €aft  ye 
atbay  cucryman  the  abominations  of 
his  cycs,anb  befile  no  t  your  (clues  lbtth 
the  tbolcs  of  egypt :  3  am  the  V.  £>  is  © 
your  (Sob. 

8  26uttheyrebelleb  againft  mcanb 
tboulb  not  fteatlieu  bnto  mce :  they 
bib  not  encry  man  tail  albay  the  abomfc 
nations  of  their  eyes ,  neither  bib  they 
foz&fte  the  iboies  of  egvpt:then  31  tato, 
3  tbiU  pottueoutmy  furiebpontbem, 
to  attompltn)  my  anger  againft  them  m 
the  rnibbctt  of  the  lanb  of  egypt. 

9  26ut  3  lbjougttf  fo2  my  names 
faRc  that  it  (bouibnot  be  polluteb  be* 
fo?c  tfte  heathen ,  among  ibbom  they 
were ,  m  ibhofe  fight  3  mabe  my  ftlfc 
miotben  bnto  them ,  in  banging  them 
foonth  out  of  the  lano  of  £gypt. 


10  Cnahccefo:e3Pcaufcb  them  to 
goe  foojth  out  of  the  lano  of  egypt,anb 
brought  them  into  the  rbtlbetneflc. 

11  3lnb  5  gaue  them  my  ftatutcs,anb 
t  Qjrtbcb  tl;em  my  iubgements,*  ibhitb 
tf  a  man  bochc  (ball  euen  hue  in  them. 

n  i0ojeouetalfo,gj  gaue  them  my 
Sabbaths,  to  be  a  fignebettbeenemee 
anb  them,  that  tbey  might  ttnoibthat 
3  am  the  %  sd  «  e>  tfjat  fanctific  them. 

13  But  the  houfe  of  3lfraei  rcbeileb 
agamftmcmtheibilDernefre:theyibai 
beb  not  mmy  flatutes,anb  they  befptfeb 
my  iubgements ,  which  if  a  man  boc, 
hec  (ball  euenlmc  in  them,  anb  my  fab 
baths  they  greatly  *  polluteb :  then  3 
faib3Jlboulbpottvc  outmyruricbpon 
them  in  the*ibilbcrnefTe,  to  confumc 
them: 

14  istit  3  brought  fo?  my  names 
fafec,thatitQ)oirtb  not  bet  polluteb  bt 
fo?c  the  heathen ,  in  ibbofc  fight  3 
brought  them  out. 

15  J^etaifo  3  liftco bp  my hanb bnto 
them  in  the  ibtlberncflc,  thafjiboulb 
not  bang  them  into  the  lanb  lbbtcb  3 
hab  giuen  them ,  floibtng  Vbuh  niilUc 
anbl)ony,whichisthcglo2yofaiuanbs, 

16  26ctaufe  they  befpifeb  my  uibgc? 
ments,  anbibaiftcbnotinmyftatutcs, 
but  polluteb  my  Sabbaths :  fo?  their 
^eartibcnt  after  their  iboles. 

17  iBeuertheleffe ,  mine  eye  fpareb 
them  from  beftroymg  them,nettbet  bib 
3  mafee  an  cnb  of  the  m  the  rbiioernes 

is  25ut3J  fato bnto  their thiltyen m 
the  tbilberncfle .  naalhc  ye  not  in  the 
ftatutcs  of  your  fathers,  neither  ob- 
ferue  their  iubgements,  no?  befile  your 
femes  lbtth  their  iboles. 

19  3  am  the  JloisjDyour  C5ob: 
tbame  in  my  fiatutes ,  anb  feeepc  my 
iubgements  anb  Doe  them : 

io  3lnD  halloib  my  5>abbaths ,  ano 
they  (hail  be  a  figncbctibcenemce  anb 
you,  that  yee  may  fenoib  tljat  3 am  the 
%®  is  ©your  ©ob. 

ai  ii5ottt)ithftanDingthechiib2en  re= 
belleb  agamft  mertheyibalheb  not  in 
my  ftatutes, neither  bept  my  tubge 
ments  to  boe  them  ,  lbhich  if  a  man 
boe ,  hce  (hall  euen  hue  in  them  they 
polluteb  my  £>abbatbs :  then  3  fafo  3 
lboulDpottue  outmyfune  bponthem, 
to  attompUCb  my  anger  againft  them 
mtheibtlberneflc. 

ii  ^euertheleffellttMthbjetbmint 

hanb  anblbjought  fo:  my  names  fahe, 

that  it  fljoulb  not  be  polluteb  m  the 

v  fishi 


"Exod.13. 
iS. 


\Heh.madt 
them  :o 
know. 
'Leuit.l?. 

5 

roni.lo  5. 
gal.j.12. 
■  Exod.  :o. 
8.and_ji. 
i3,&c.3nd 

55  *■ 

dcu:  5.1 1- 


*Exod.i6. 


*Numb.  14. 
29. and  16. 


Children  offered.       Ezekiel. 


Gods  Name. 


•Chap.  1 6. 


HP- 


Or J t old 
i htm  what 
the  hie  place 
uw, or  Bn~ 
mih 


fight  of  the  heathen ,  m  Whoft  fight  3f 
b?oughtthcmfoo?th. 

23  3  Uftct>  top  nunc  hanb  bnto  them 
alfo  tntlje  Wilbcrncffe ,  tljat  3J  rbouio 
fcattcr  ttjem  among  the  heathen ,  anb 
bifpcrfethcnuhjoughthccountrcys; 

24  zsccaufc  they  hab  not  ejcccutcb 
my  itibgcments,  but  hab  be fpifcb  nip 
Statutes,  anb  hab  pollutcb  my£>ab 
baths, anb  tljetr  eyes  were  after  their 
fathers  ibolcs. 

25  i©hcrefo2C  31  gauc  them  alfo  tt&= 
tutcs  that  lucre  notgoob  ,  anb  tuogc^ 
ments  Whereby  they  fhoulb  not  Uuc. 

16  ^i\q  3  pollutcb  them  m  their 
owne  gifts,  tn  ttjat  they  caufebtopaffe 
*  trj2oug!)  the  fire  all  that  openetl)  tl)c 
lbombc,trjat  35  uugljtmahc  thenmrfo' 
late,  to  the  cnb ,  that  they  might  ItnoW 
tl)at3J.iiiitl)c?L©i5©. 

17  4C1trjerfo2C  fonne  of tnan,fpeahc 
Pn  to  the  houfc  of  SJfrael,  anb  fay  bnto 
th  em,H:hus  faith  the  ?Lo?o  G  0  p,  *>et 
in  this  your  fathers  hauc  blafphcmcb 
mean  that  they  hauc  tcommitteb  a  ttcf 
pafTcagamltmc. 

28  For  when  3  hab  b20ttght  th  cm  itv 
to  the  lanb,  fo2  the  rbhich  3  lifteb  Pp 
mine  hanb  to  giuc  it  to  them,  then  the y 
favb  cuery  high  hill,  anb  all  thctixcttc 
trees,  anb  they  offcreb  there  their  tarn 
fices,  anb  there  they  p2efctttcb  the  p?o 
uocation  of  their  offering  :  there  alfo 
they  maoc  their  ftucctfauour,anbpow 
reb  out  there  their  bzinhc  offerings. 
>i9  Xhenl!3lfaibbntothcm,  rtahat 
ts  the  high  place  whercunto  ye  goc^anb 
the  name  thereof  is  cailcb  Z5amah  imto 
this  bay. 

30  lohctcfcucfaypnto  the  houfc  of 
lifraci,  Xhus  faith  thcHoib  C  0  p, 
Tire  ye  pollutcb  after  the  mancr  of  your 
fathers  MnbcommitycWh02cbonicaf 
tcr  their  abomtnanons? 

31  if 02  When  ycc  offer  your  gifts, 
Itorjcn  ycc  malic  your  fonucs  to  paffc 
th:ough  thcfircycpollutcyour  fclucs 
\lnth  all  your  ibolcs  cucn  Unto  this  bay: 
anb  than  3  be  tnnuircb  of  by  you,  O 
houfeof3Ifraci  f  3Js  31  line,  faith  the 
1Lo2b  G  0  p  ,  3  Will  not  be  inriuircD 
of by  you. 

32  3lnb  that  Which  comcthtntovour 
mmb^fhallnotbeataiuhatycfay.ior 
Wil  be  as  theheathcn,as  the  families  of 
the  countrcys,to  feme  Woob  anb  flotic. 

33  It  33  3)  Hue,  faycth  the  ?Lo:b 
C5  <o  p,  finely  With  a  mighty  hanb.anb 
With  a  ftcetcheb  out  ar  me ,  anb  With  fu 


rtc  poW?co  out,ibill  3  rule  otter  you. 

$4-  2nD3J  Will  b2tng  you  out  from 
the  people,  anb  Will  gather  you  out  of 
the  tountr  cys  Wherein  y  c  ar  e  frattcreb, 
With  a  mighty  hanb,  fjwith  a  Oretchcb 
out  arme,anb  With  fury  poW?eb  out. 

35  2lnb3JWiib?ing  you  into  the  itoil- 
bcrncsof  the  people,  anb  there  Will  3! 
plcaounth  you  fate  to  fate. 

36  Hmeas'Jplcabcbibtthyotrcfa^ 
thcrs  tn  the  wubcrnes  of  the  lanb  of  €■ 
gypt,  fo  ibil  3  pieab  With  you^aitl;  the 

JL020d5OP. 

37  3nb3l  Will  eanfe  yon  to  paffc  bn; 
ber  the  rob ,  anb  31  wtlib?tng you  into 
the  j  bonb  of  the  Couenatu, 

38  3lnb  31  mm  purge  out  from  a? 
mongyon  tT)c  rebels,  anb  them  that 
tranfgreffe  agamft  nice :  3}  Will  b?mg 
tl)cmfoo2th  out  of  the  tountrcy  inhere 
they  foiottrne,  anb  theyfljau  not  enter 
into  tlje  lanb  of3ifracl,  anb  ycc  Ojail 
Unoih  that  3  ■""  the  1L  0 13  p. 

39  3ts  fo2  you,  ^>  hottfe  of  3Jfcael, 
thus  faith  the  How  oop,  <3oeyee, 
fcrttc  ye  cuery  one  his  ibolcs ,  anb  here- 
aftcr.ii(o,tfycipiinothcarHcnPntome: 
but  pollute  ye  my  holy  iBamc  no  mo?e 
Wtthyourgtfts,anbWithyottriboles. 

40  if 02  miniiic  holy  mountainc ,  in 
themountaineof  the  height  of3IfraeI, 
faith  the  Ho2b  (5  0  p,therc  (hall  aurtjc 
houfc  of  3(frael ,  all  of  them  in  the  lanb 
feme  me :  there  Hull  3J  accept  thcm.anb 
there  lbtl  3  require  your  offcrtngs,anb 
the  1 1  fir  ft  fruits  of  your  oblations,  luith 
all  your  holy  things. 

41  3  Null  accept  you  luith  your 
tfutcct  fauouclPhm  j  b2ingyou  out 
from  the  people ,  anb  gather  yon  out  of 
the  tountreys  inherent  ycc  hauc  bene 
fcartcrcb,  anb  3  lbti  be  fancttflcb  tn  you 
bcfo2C  the  heathen. 

41  31nbycfliaiimioH)  that  3Jim  the 
%  0 15  jp  ,  lbhen  3  fljall  b2ing  you  into 
the  lanb  of  3Jfracl,  into  the  countrcy  fo? 
the  lbhich  3  lifteb  Pp  mine  Dmn,  to 
giuc  it  to  your  fathers. 

43  3lnb  there  fljall  ycc  remember 
your  ihayes.'jallyourboiugs,  inhere- 
m  ye  hauc  bene  bcfilcb,  anb  ye  fljal  lothe 
your  fclucs  m  your  oiPnc  fight,  fo?  all 
yourcuilsthatyc  hauc  commlttcb. 

44  ^nbycnjailuioibthat  3l""ti)c 
%  o  a  je>,  lbhen  3  Dane  llvottght  Unth 
you  fo2  my  il5atncs  falie,  not  atco2btug 
to  your  liucftcb  waves,  no?  accoibmg 
toyourco2ruptbotngs,  ^yeehoufeof 
3Jfraci,fattlj  the  ?Lo?b  O  0  p. 

45  C^o?e- 


\\Or.ndtti- 


\\Or,dufr 


wrcfrtf. 


The  fword  drawen,  Chap.xx).         and  fourbifhed. 


Heb.  frill 
got  tnto  wa- 


4-5  Ci©ojcouer,the  tbojbeofthe 
%  ©  is  jd  came  bnto  me,  laying, 

46  Sonne  of  man ,  fet  thp  face  to- 
tbatb  the  South ,  anb  bjop  thy  word  to- 
ibarbthc  South,anbp2ophcfieagainft 
the  fo2reft  of  the  South  ficlb. 

47  AnbraptothefojeftofpSouth, 
$care  the  tb02b  of  the  %  ©  is  ©:  Xhus 
faiththcfU2b<s©©,  ascholb.giibiil 
mnbleafteeiuthee^nbttfhaiibcuourc 
cucrp  greene  tree  mthee,  anb  eucrp  b2p 
tree:the  flaming  flame  (hai  not  be  quen? 
cheb,  anu  all  fates  from  the  South  to 
the  irlonh  thalbe  burnt  therein. 

48  Anbaliflelh(halifeethat3lthe 
%  ©  is  ©  haue  lunbleb  it:  it  (hall  not  be 
quencheb. 

49  Xhen faib%  Ah 2.02b  (5  © », 
thep  rap  of  me,  3>octhhenotfpeaaepa: 
rabies* 

CHAP.   XXI. 

1  Ezekiel  prophecieth  agamftlerufalem.witha 
figneof  fighing.  8  The  fharpc  and  bright 
fword,  1 8  againftlcrufalem,  15  agamftthe 
kingdome,  18  and againltthe  Ammonites. 

4l5bthctbo?bofp!L©iB© 
^  came  bnto  mc,faping, 
$  z  Sonne  of  man,  fet 
thp  face  totbarb  3Jerufa- 
*&*#«  lem ,  anb  b2op  thy  word  to- 
ttiarbthc  holp  places,  anbpjopheciea-- 
gamft  the  lanb  of '^ifrael, 

3  Anbfaptop^anbofJfrael.Xhus 
faith  the  ?L©ire>,  25eholb,3I  am  againlt 
thee,  anb  mill  b^alb  fo2th  tup  f\b02b  out 
of  his  (heath,  ano  Hull  cutoff  from  thee 
the  righteous  anb  the  ibieReb. 

4  Seeing  then  that  3J  tbill  cut  off 
from  thee  the  righteous  anb  the  Wjic- 
neb,  therefore  (hall  mp  fmozbgocfojtl) 
out  of  his  (heath  agamft  all  fleth  from 
the  South  to  the  /ftotfh: 

5  Xhatailfle(hmapRnoib,fhat3I 
the  1L©irid  hauebiaibcn  fooith  mp 
fnwb  out  of  his  (heath:  it  (hall  not  re 
turneanpmoze. 

6  Sigh  therefor  thoufonneofman 
ttnth  the  bje'ahmg  of  thy  lopnes ,  anb 
Ibith  bitternefle  figh  before  their  ms. 

7  Anb  it  Ojall  bclbnen  thep  fap  bn^ 
to  thee;  i©herefo2efighefttl)oui  that 
thou  fhait  anfioere,  jf02  the  tiblngs.bc 
taufe  it  commeth :  anb  cuerp  heart  (hall 
melt,  anb  allhaubs  fbalbe  feeble,  anb  c 
uerp  fptrit  (hai  faint , anb  all  tmecs  t  (hai 
beiliealieasU)ater:beholb,itcommeth, 
anb  fhaibe  bzought  topaffe,fapth  the 
H020©©©. 


s  <[Agame,thcH)ojbofthe?L©M© 
camebntome,faptng, 

9  Sonne  ofman,p2ophene  anb  lap, 
Xhus fapth the  ft  ©  m  »,  Sap, 31 
fiuo2b,  a  ftuo2b  is  fharpencb ,  anb  alfo 
fourbtthco. 

10  3Jt  is  (harpeneb  to  mafec  a  fo2e 
(laughter  it  is fourbifljeb ,  thatu map 
glitter:  (houib ibe then make  mirth • 
II  'Jtcontcmncth  tljcrobof  mp  fonnc,  as 
euerptrec. 

n  Anbhehatijgiuenlttobcfourbi; 
(heb,thatit  map  be  hanbleb :  thtsftnojb 
is  (harpeneb ,  anb  it  is  fourbifheb  to 
giuc  it  into  the  hanb  of  the  flaper. 

ii  Crpanbhoiblc,fonncofman,fo2 
it  fljalbe  topon  mp  people ,  it  fhaibe  bpon 
all  the  p;tnccs  of  Jfcacl :  ||  tcrrours,  bp 
rcafon  of  the  fmojb ,  fl)ail  be  bpon  mp 
people:  *  finite  therefo2e  bpon  thy  thigh. 

13  ||2Sccaufeitisatrpall,anbrbhat 
if  the  fword  tontemne  euen  the  r obbe  <  it 
O)ailbenomorc,fapththc  Uo2b  g©5e> 

14  Xhou  therefo2e  fonnc  of  man, 
p2ophecieano  finite  thine  thanbstoge 
ther,  aub  letthefruoib  bee  boublebthc 
thitb  time,  the  fnwb  of  the  flame,  it 
is  thefuwb  of  the  great  men ,  that  are 
flame ,  ibhtth  entrcth  into  their  pjiuie 
chambers. 

15  3hauefetthe|!pomtofthefitJ02b 
againlt  all  their  gates,  that  the,  heart 
map  faint,anb  their  ruines  be  multiple 
eb.  ah,  itts  mabc  b;ight,  it ts  || tb?apt 
bpfo;  the  {laughter. 

16  <£>oe  thee  one  ibap  02  other , either 
on  the  right  hanb,  to2onthelcft,ibbb 
thetfoeuer  thp  face  is  fet. 

17  3  Hull  alfo  finite  mine  hanbsto^ 
gether,anb  3  ibil  caufc  mp  fune  to  reft : 
3J  the  %  ©  is  ©  haue  fapb  ft. 

18  CXhett)02bofthelL©KjDcame 
bntomeagaine,fapmg, 

19  Alfo  thou  fonne  of  man,  appoint 
thee  tmo  ibapes,  that  thefuwbofthe 
mng  of  25abplon  map  tome :  botl) 
tvbatnc  fliall  come  f02th  out  of  one  lanb: 
anb  choofe  thou  a  place,  choofc  it  attljc 
heaboftljeibaptothecttie. 

xo  Appoint  a  ibap ,  that  the  fraoJb 
map  come  to  Babbath  of  the  Ammo- 
nites, anb  to  3luoahin3Jcculaicm  trje 
befenceb. 

21  fo2fhclungon5abplonftoobat 
the  t  parting  of  themap,  attlie  lieabof 
the  tlbo  ibapes,  to  bfe  biumation :  he 
mabehis||arroilicsb!igm,Heconfiiltcb 
ttnth  t  images,  he  looReb  in  the  Ituer. 

2i  At  his  ngljt  hanb  ibastncotiu 
Aaaa         nation 


\\Or,!rii 
therodof 
m"/fenne,it 

Hcrj  tret. 


1 1  Or,  thty 
jrr  thrufl 
dolvnt  to  the 
/werdwttb 
my  people. 
'Icic.31.19 
\\Or,vhea 
theirmti 
hath  beent, 
rehat  then  ? 
Jhallthey  not 
alfobelon? 
to  the  dejpt- 
ftng  rod .' 
tHchhand 
hand. 


\\Or,gUlf 

r.ng.or 

feure. 

\\Or,ftnr. 
pened. 


\HebJet 
tlrtfelfe, 
take  the  left 
hand. 


t  Heb.me. 
there* the 

IT-    It. 

||  Ortknilttt, 
\Hel:Te- 


AgainftAmmon.       Ezckicl.       Ierufalemsiinnes. 


:  Or,bactr- 
tinp  rami 
|  Hcb.tnms 


\\OrJor  the 
jalhei  m.tUe 
Vil3llirm. 


\H'b.  p.-r- 
Htricd,pcr- 
Htrleti,per 
uerteiixrill 


iOr.eait/rte 


Or.b* 


nation  fo:3ierufaiem  to  appoint  ||  cap- 
tames,toopenthcmouthtnthefiaugr> 
tcr,to  lift  Dp  the  bottc  With  fhounng,to 

appoint    battel iiig-rammes    agaitlft    tl)C 

gate s,to  taft  a  mount  and  to  builb  a  fojt. 

23  3inD  it  fljail  be  bnto  them  as  a 
faifcDiumation  in  their  fight,  ||to  them 
ttjat  hauc  froome  oathcs:but  he  lbill 
canto  remembrance  tljcmiqume, that 
they maybe  taken. 

24.  Xhercfozc  thus  faith  tl)c  JLoib 
Oop,  asecaufc  pec  hauc  mabe  your 
iniquitie  to  be  r cmemtyeb,  in  that  your 
tranfgreffionsarcDifcouereD.fothatin 
all  your  bomgs  your  fmncs  Doc  ap< 
pcarc:becaiifc,i(3>,tl)atyecaretometo 
remembrance ,  yec  fhall  be  taken  With 
the  fjant). 

25  CE  ^ub  thou  prophanc  wickcb 
prince  of  Ufrael ,  Whofc  n^  is  come, 
U)|}en  imqu'.tie  null  luucan  enb, 

26  1Lrnisfaitr)tljc?Lo2D(30£>,£c< 
moue  the  Diabcme ,  anD  take  off  the 
cro Wne :  this  <h^  uot  be  the  fame  :crait 
him  that  is  low ,  anD  abafe  htm  that  is 
high. 

27  tjjttKllouerturnc,  ouernirne, 
ouerturnc  it.anb  it  (hall  be  no  morc,bn- 
wihecomc,whofcrightitis,anb3lwu" 
guicithim. 

28  C^lub  rhoufonneofman,p?0' 
phecte ,  anb  fay ,  Xhus  faith  the  liorb 
<5  0  id  concerning  the  Ammonites, 
anb  toncerntngthettreprocl):  ffiuenfay 
thou  Xhefujozb,  thcftnorDisDraWcn 
fo:  the  daughter  it 'ifoutbEfheb,  to  ton 
fume  becaufc  of  the  glittering : 

29  rohilcsthcyfeebantttcbnto  thee, 
Whiles  they  Diume  a  lie  bnto  thee ,  to 
b:ing  thee  bpon  the  necks  of  them  that 
are  name ,  of  the  ttnckcb  Whofc  bay  is 
come,  When  their  tmquitie  lhall  luucan 
enb. 

30  ||  Shall  3  caufe  it  to  refnnic  into 
hisfheath  J<  3  Hull  uibgc  thee  m  the 
place  Where  thou  waft  crcatcD,  mthc 
lanbofthynatiuitie. 

31  3lnb  3  Will  powrc  out  mine  in- 
bignanon  bpon  thee ,  3  Unll  blow  a 
gamft  thec  m  the  fire  of  my  wrath ,  anb 
Dcliucr  tliec  into  the  hanb  of]  bruttfh 
incited  fkiifull  to  beltroy. 

32  3Er)ou  fhalt  be fo? fucll to  tf)c fire : 
thy  bloob  fliail  be  in  themiooefr  of  the 
lanb  .thou  fhalt  be  no  moi  e  remembreb : 
forjl  the  ILapu  ©hauc  fpokenic. 

CHAP.   XXII. 

A  Catalogue  of  finncs  in  [erufalcm.  15  God 


will  burne  them  as  droiTe  in  his  furnace.  13 
The  generall  corruption  of  Prophets, 
Pnerts,  Pi  inces,and  people- 

$$&.  Drcoucr  the  Worb  of  the 

*JLok3d  came  bnto  me, 

faying 

2  /5owthoufonneof 
man,  *  Wilt  thou  tuibgc, 
Wilt  thou  iubge  the  t  bloobicciticiyea 
thou  t  fhalt  tytvo  her  all  her  aborning 
nons. 

3  Xhen  fay  thou ,  Xhus  faith  the 
Horb<5©3D,n:hccitic  fbeabeth  bloob 
m  the  mtbbeftofit,  that  her  tunc  may 
come ,  anb  makcth  iboles  againft  her- 
fclfetobcfilcherfeife. 

4  Xhou  art  betome  guilty  in  thy 
bio  ob  that  thou  haft  *  fheb,  anb  haft  be 
filcb  thy  felfe  in  thine  ibolcs,whieh  thou 
haft  mabe ,  anb  thou  haft  taufeb  thy 
bates  to  braw  nccre ,  anb  art  come  cuen 
bnto  thy  yecres ■,  thcrrbrehauc 3  mabe 
thec  a  rcproch  bnto  the  hcatljen ,  anb  a 
mocking  to  all  countries. 

5  Xhofc  that  be  nccre,  anb  thofe 
thatbefarrefromthcc,fhallmockethec 

which  art  ttnfamOUS,and  milCl)  bejeb. 

6  2Seholb  the  prunes  of  3Jfracl,cuc; 
rieonc  were  in  thee  to  their  tpoWcr  to 
fhcaD  bloob. 

7  3»theehaue  they  fet  light  by  fa^ 
ther  anb  mother:  in  the  mibbcft  of  thee 
haucthcybcaitby||oppreffion  with  the 
ftrangcr  :  in  thee  hauc  they  toereb  the 
fathcrlcffe  anb  the  WiboW : 

8  Xhou  haft  Defptfco  mine  holy 
things,  f  haft  prophancD  my  fabbaths : 

9  3fn  thee  are  t  men  that  carte  tales 
to  fheab  bloob :  anb  in  thee  they  catc 
bpon  the  mountain es :  in  the  mtbbefi  of 
thec  they  commit  IcWbneffe. 

io  3n  thec  hauc  they  *  bifcoucreb 
their  fathers  nakebneffc:in  thee  haue 
they  hnmblcb  her  that  was  *  fet apart 
fo?  pollution. 

n  3nb||onehathcommitteb*abo< 
mination  With  his  neighbours* Wife, 
anb  1 1  an  other  hath  II  leWbly  bcfileb  his 
*  Daughter  in  law ,  anb  an  other  in  thee 
hath  humblcb  his  filter ,  his  fathers 
Daughter. 

12  gin  thec  haue  they  taken  gifts  to 
flieab  bloob :  thou  haft  taken  bfury  anb 
mcrcafe ,  anb  thou  haft  greebily  gaiueb 
ofthy  neighbours  by  erto?tton,anb  haft 
fo.'gottcnmc.faith  thc?lo2b(5iD3D. 

13  Cfficholb  therefore,^  haue*fnut 
ten  mine  hanb  at  thy  bifhoneft  game 
which  thou  halt  mabe,anb  at  thy"  bloob 

which 


"  Cliap.  io 

4i • and  z  i 
3  6. 

for. 

\  Heb.  citie 

ofkhods. 
\Hcb.makf 
her  know. 


2.  Kings. 
ii6. 


t  He  b.  pollu- 
ted of  rums, 
much  m 
vexAttott. 
t  Heb.jrme, 


Or,  deceit 


t  Heb.  men 
of  jUnderf, 


Lcuit.  i3. 

.  jnd  io. 

r. 
'Lcuit.  1 8. 
19. 

\0r,  enery 

one. 

*  Lcuic.  l3. 

lo. 

'Ier.5.8. 

\\0r,  curry 

we. 

1 1  Or.  bl 

leyrdmeffe. 

"Lcuic  \  3. 


Ch 


jp  1 1. 


Ifrael  as  drofle.  Chap.xxiij.  Falfe  prophets 


tbhich  hath  bene  m  the  mtbQ  of  tt)ee. 

14.  Can  thine  Dean  tnburc,  or  tan 
thine  hanbs  be  ftrong  in  the  bay  es  tljat 
3  (hall  bcale  tbith  thee*  3fthc1U>iSE> 
0auc  fpofcen  it,  anb  tbill  boe  it. 

1$  3nb  3  rum  feattcr  thee  among 
the  heathen,  anb  bifperfe  thee  in  the 
eounttcys,  anb  tbill  conwmcthy  fim> 
nelFcoutofthee. 

16  3lnbtI)on ||  Qjait  ta&cthincinheri* 
tancein  thyfelfetn  rhcSghtof  the  hefc 
then,  anb  thou  tljait  ftnotb  tljat  3  am 

thC  ?,©£©. 

17  3nb  the  tbo?bofthc  Hsdh© 
came  bnto  me,  faying, 

18  <§>onneofman,thchourcof3Jfc 
rael  is  to  me  become  b?ouc:  auttjevjr^ 
bafle,  anbttnnc,  anby?on,anblcabin 
the  mibft  of  the  furnace :  tljey  ate  euen 
thctb?o(reoffiluer. 

19  Xhercfo?c  thus  fattt)  the  Ho?b 
d5©©,  usecaufc  ye  ace  all  become  b?ofle, 
bcholb  thetefoie  3  tbill  gather  you  in; 
tothemibftofDctufalem. 

20  tAStbeygathetfuuer,anbb?aflc, 
anby?on,  anb  leab,  anb  nunc  into  the 
mibft  of  tt)c  furnace ,  to  biotb  the  fire 
bpon  it,  to  melt « :  fo  null  31  gather  you 
in  mine  anger,  anb  in  m?  fury,  anb  3 
anil  leaue  vou  there,  anb  melt  you. 

ii  jaca,  5tbfUgatheryou,anoblouj 
bpon  you  mthe  fire  of  my  tb?ath,  anb 
ycmalbemcltcbm  the  nnbft  thereof. 

11  ^sfiluerismeltcbmthemibftof 
thefutnace ,  fo  (hallyc  bcmeltcbmrhc 
nutjbeft  thereof,  anbyc  (ball  Hnoib  that 
3JthcfL£>i3£>haiiepott>?eb  out  my 

tunc  bpon  you.  _, 

13  C3nbthctbo?bofthc?L©ia£> 
came  bnto  me,  faying, 

14.  Sonof  man,faybntohcc/£hou 
art  the  lanb  that  is  not  clcanfeb ,  no? 
ramcb  uponlnthe  bay  of  mbignation. 

25  There  is  a  confpitacie  of  her  p?o< 
phetsin  the  mibbett  thereof  use  area- 
ting  lyon,  rauening  the  p?aye:they 
•haue  beuoureb  foulcs :  they  hauc  ta? 
ben  ti)t  treafurc  anb  p?ccious  things : 
they  haue  mabe  Dec  manyttnbolbcsm 
the  mibft  thereof. 

16  $er  p?iefts  hauc  t  bioiatcb  my 
latb,  anb  haue  p?ophaneo  mine  holy 
things :  they  haue  put  no  biftcrcucc  be- 
ttbeeue  the  holy  anb  p?ophane,  neither 
haue  they  fhctbeb  difference  between  the 
toncieaneanb  the  clcanc,  anb  hauc  hib 
their  eyes  from  my  Sabbaths,  anb  3 
amp?ophanebamongthem. 

%l  J?ec " p?uucs  in  the  nubft  thereof 


Or,  th*I: 
ieprvphdied 


\Heb.drtf. 


cordingra 
thegAthe- 


'Mltlh. 
I* 


iHei.ofe- 

red  violent 


•Mic.J.u 
zeph,;.3. 


are  lifee  tbolncs  rauenmg  the  p?aye,to 
fbeb  bioob,  and  to  beftroy  foulcs,  to  get 
bllboneft  gallic. 

18  3lnb  her  p?ophets  hanebaujbeb 
them  ttnth  bntcmpctcb  moner ,  feeing 
banity,  anb  biuming  lies  bnto  them, 
faying,  Xhus  faith  the  iLojb  <B>©3D, 
tbhen  the  %  ©  a  %>  hath  not  tpotten. 

19  Xhcpcopleofthelanbhauebfcb 
II  opp?cffion,  anb  ercreucb  robbery,  anb 
rjaue  bcreb  the  poo?c  anb  necbie :  yea, 
they  hauc  oppjeflcb  the  ftrangcr 
ttb?ongfully. 

30  3lno  3  fought  fo?  a  man  among 
them,  that  Irjoulb  matte  bp  the  hebgc, 
anb  ftanb  in  the  gap  before  me  to?  the 
lanb,  that  3  ujoulb  not  beftroy  tt :  but 
3founononc. 

31  Xrjcrefo?c  hauc  3  potb?cb  out 
mine  mbignation  bpon  them ,  3  hauc 
confumcD  them  tbul)  the  fire  of  my 
ru?ath :  their  ottneibay  haue  3  reconi^ 
penfeb  bpon  their  heabs ,  With  the 
2Lo?bd&£>3©. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

1  ThewhoredomesofAholah&Ahohbah.ir 
Aholibah  is  to  be  plagued  by  her  louers.  36 
The  Prophet  reprouctn  the  adulteries  ot  them 
both,  45  and  fheweth  their  judgements. 

^eJbo?bofthe1LffliBS» 

came  agame  bnto  me,  fa?- 

tng, 

1  Sonne  of  man,therc 

^rbere  tibo  Vbomcn,  the 

baughters  of  one  mother. 

3  anbthcycommtttebibhojbomes 

in  €gypt,  tfjcy  committcb  tbho?oomcs 
in  their  youth :  there  ibere  tfjetr  b?efts 
p?eflcb,  anbtbcrcthcyb?uifeb  theteats 
of  their  birgmme. 

4  ^nbtrjc  names  of  them  were  ^ho^ 
lah  the  elber,  anb  Aholibah  her  fitter : 
anbtt)cyibercmine,ftheybarcfonnes 
anb  baughters :  thus  were  their  names: 
Samaria  ^hoiah,  anb  Decufalcm 

Aholibah.  t  u   ,  . 

5  ^nb  3Iholah  piayeb  the  har  ot, 
When  fheVbas  mine,  fjlhcboteb  on  Ijcr 
loucrs,onthe^fry?iansherncighbo;6, 

6  nahich  tberc  tlotheb  tbith  bleuj, 
taptaincsanbrulcrs,auofthembcfirc; 
ableyong  men,  l)o?femen  nbtng  bpon 

ho?fcs.  . 

7  Xhustfljcconnnittcbhcrvbho? 

bomesibiththem,  tbith  all  them  that 
lucre  the  tchofen  men  of  3lfiy?ia,  anb 
lbith  an  on  lbhom  (hebotcb ,  ttnth  all 
their  ibolesfl;cbcfilebl)ccfclfc. 
J  2laaa  2       8  iBcj: 


I  Or,  deceit. 


t  Heh  with' 
SHtrttht. 


P.  eve  d  her 
rr hart dcrtui 
vtonthrm. 

\  Hcb.the 
choifecftht 
children  ef 

Aifbitr. 


AgainilAholah,        Ezckiel.  andAholibah. 


•j.King, 
17.18. 


TiAms. 


ampttd 

her  inordi- 
nate loue 
tnarethct 

|  Hcbjwrc 
then  the 
trboredomei 
ef 'her  fitter. 
*  1.  Kings. 
16.7. 


\Helr.M 

thefghtof 
herejei. 


\HebrchU. 

Urenof £4- 

tti. 


\Htlr.hc 

JtdcrtLf. 
lo)ntetL 


8  Neither  left  (be  bertbbojeSomcs 
brought  from  €gypt :  for  in  bcr  youth 
they  lay  ttAtb  l)tr ,  anD  tbcy  tjjui«Dtt)e 
breads  of  her  birginitic ,  anD  potbreb 
tljetr  lbboreDomc  boon  [jet. 

9  naherefore  3  bauc  DcliuercD  I)tt 
into  the  banD  other loners,  into  the 
banD  of  the  *3ttTyrians ,  bpon  whom 

(bCDOtCb. 

10  XbefebifcoucreD  bernafteDnes, 
tI)cptooftc  Der  tonnes  anD  her  naug!) 
tets,  anD  ftctt>  her  rbrtb  the  froorb:  ant 
(be  became  t famous  among  ibomen, 
for  they  bab  erecutcbiubgemera  bpon 
her. 

11  ^nD  ibljcn  Ijcc  Cfier  ^fjolibat)  fatb 
this,  (be  t  ibas  more  corrupt  in  beruior; 
binatc  loue  then  (be,  anD  tn  bcr  iboojc- 
boms  tmo?ctf)en  ijer  filler  m  her  tti!jO(!e 
Domes. 

ix  5>hc  boteb  bpon  the  *3Jflyrians 
her  neighbours,  captaincs  anb  rulers 
clotbeD  moll  gorgcouHy,  borfemen  rv 
bing  bpon  borfes ,  all  of  them  Defirea- 
ble  young  men. 

13  Xben3Jfatt>fbat(beibasDefilcD, 
that  they  tooke  both  one  tt>ay ; 

14  3ttDtbat(bctncreafebbertt>bore; 
Domes  :  for  tttbenmecfatbmen  pour- 
trayeD  bpon  the  ibau,tbctmagesofthc 
daibeans  pourtraveb  ttutb  bermilton, 

1$  GirbeD  ttntb  girbles  bpon  their 
loynes ,  erceeDtng  m  DyeD  attire  bpon 
tbeirbeaDS,auoftbcm  princes  to  loose 
to,  after  the  matter  of  the  Babylonians 
of  CalDca,tbe  lanD  of  their  nattttitic : 

i«  3nD  tadbonc  as  (bee  faro  them 
ttritt)  bcr  eyes,  (be  DotcD  bpon  them, 
anb  fent  meflcngers  bnto  them  into 
Caibca. 

17  3lnD  the  t  Babylonians  tame  to 
her  into  the  beb  of  loue,  anD  the?  DcfilcD 
her  Ibitb  their  roboreDome,  anb  (bee 
tbaspoliutcbibith  them,  attDbcr  mitiD 
Ibas  t  aiienatcD  from  them. 

is  5>o  fl)ec  btfeouereb  her  roborc; 
bomes,  anDDifcoucrcDbcrnabcDnclTc, 
then  my  mtnD  ibas  aitcnateb  from  her, 
lifee  as  my  mtttbe  ibas  aitenateb  from 
berfiftcr. 

19  Ptt  (bee  multiplieb  her  roborc- 
Domes,  in  calling  to  remembrance  the 
Dayes  of  her  youth,  robctcm  the  bab 
playcDtbc  harlot  mthe  lanbof  cgypt. 

20  5fo?  fl)c  DotcD  bpon  their  para 
mours,  ibbofcfU(b  is  as  the  fled)  of 
alles,  anb  ibhofcuTuc  is  like  tbcuTuc  of 
borfes. 

21  Zbus  thou  caileDlt  to  rcmem 


brantc  the  lerobnefle  of  thy  youth ,  in 
bruiting  thy  teatcs  by  the  Egyptians, 
fortbcpapsoftbyyciutb. 

xr  C%berefore,£>2lbolibab,tbus 
faith  the  fLorb  <3  ©  © ,  zScbolb,  3  tbill 
raifc  bp  thy  louers  againft  thee,  from 
robom  thy  mmbe  is  aitenateb,  anb  3 
ibtll  brtng  them  againft  thee  on  euery 

fiDC; 

23  Zbc  Babylonians ,  anb  all  the 
CaiDcans ,  #efcob ,  anb  dboab ,  anb 
Boa,  all  the  the  3lfly?tans  rottb  them, 
all  of  thcmbeureable  young  men,tap< 
taincs  anbntlcrs ,  great  lorDS  anb  rc^ 
noromeD,  all  of  them  rtbing  bpon  ho?* 
fes. 

24  2(ud  they  than*  tome  againft  thee 
ibith  cbatets,  ibagons  anb  robeclcs, 
anb  ttutb  an  aflemblte  of  people  which 
(ball  let  againft  thee  bucfelct,anD  fbielb, 
anb  helmet  rounb  about :  anD  31  null 
fct  tuDgemcnt  before  tbem,  anD  they 
ft)ai  tuDge  thee  atto?Ding  to  tljeir  tuDge= 
ments. 

25  ^nD  3  ibtll  fet  my  ieloufie  againft 
thcc.anb  they  (hall  beale  fnrtouQy  ttuth 
thee :  they  (ball  tabc  aibay  thy  nofe  anb 
thtne  eares ,  anb  thy  remnant  (hall  fall 
by  tbefioojb:  they  (hailtafetthy  fonncs 
anb  thy  baughtcrs,anb  thy  refiDuc  ftjal 
beDeuoureDbythefirc. 

26  %hey  (hall  alfo  ftrippc  thee  out 
of  thy  clotbes>anD  taae  amay  thy  *  faire 
leibels. 

27  1Ehus  mil  3  mafec  thy  leibb^ 
ttefte  to  ceafe  from  thee,  anD  thy  Vbho2C; 
Dome  brought  from  tbcianD  of  Cgypt: 
fo  that  thou  (halt  not  lift  bp  thtne  eyes 
bnto  them ,  no?  remember  Cgypt  any 
mo;e. 

28  Sfon  thusfaith  the  %0}H  <5© ©; 
ffieholbe,  3  ttuli  beiiuer  thee  into  the 
banD  of  them  tbhom  thou  hateft;  into 
thchanb  of  them  from  JbbomtbyminD 
is  aitenateb. 

29  3lnD  they  (hall  beale  Ibith  thee 
hatefully,  anb  (bail  tafte  attwyail  thy 
labour,  anb  (ball  leaue  thee  nabeb  anb 
bare,  anb  the  naftcDncfle  of  thy  ibhore* 
Domes  (bail  bee  DifcouereD,  both  thy 
IcibDtuftcanDtby  ibhoreDomes. 

30  "JlbilDoethefetljingsbntothee, 
becaule  thou  haftgone  aibhonng  after 
the  heathen ,  and  becaufc  thou  art  pol- 
luttDtttiththctrtbolcs. 

31  "£bou  haft  ibailtcD  in  the  way  of 
thy  ftftcr,  therefore  tt>ill  ^  gtue  her  cup 
tntothtnehanb. 

32  Xljus  fayfb  the  ?Lo?b  a  ©», 
Xhou 


Jhitmttiti  o\ 


thj  dtckntg. 


Aholah,and  Chap.xxiii 


'Cha.io  4. 
and Ji  2. 
\\Or,plc*J 
for. 


i.Kii 
1.4. 


\Hcb.am 


\Hth.hi- 
ncHrjblc. 
Prou.7.17 


t  Htb  cf,h, 
mnlt;:n»U 
of  men. 

Or,  dmn- 
\1rd1. 


Her  whir- 


Xtjon  (halt  brmfce  of  thy  fitters  tuppc 
bccpcanb  large:  thou  (halt  be  laugheb 
tofcorneanb  hab  »n  bectfion;  ucontat 
nethmurlj. 

33  Xtjou  (halt  be  fiiieb  UJitO  matt 
ftenneffe  anb  forrott) ,  ibith  the  tap  of 
altonitomcnt  anb  befolanon ,  tt»itt>tt»c 
cup  of  thy  fitter  Samaria. 

34  Xhou  ujait  eueo  brinfec  it  anb 
fuctse  tt  out ,  anb  trjou  (halt  brcabe  the 
fhearbs  thereof,  anb  piutse  off  tome 

oibne  bjcafts:  foj  31  fjaue  fpoaen  k  fait!) 
tbclLorb©©©. 

35  therefore  tljus  fayth  tl)e  ?Lorb 
<S  ©  ©,  2Setaufc  thou  halt  forgotten 
mc,  anb  call  me  behtnbe  toy  bacae,thct; 
fore  beare  thou  alfo  thy  lerbbncffe,  anb 
thyibhorcbomes. 

36  CXHc1L©a©fatbmo?eoucr 
into  mce  Sonne  of  man,  Unit  tljou 
liubge  3holahaub3tholibah  ;yeabc; 
rtarc  bnto  trjem  their  abominations; 

37  Xhattheyhattccommittebabul' 
tcrtcattbbloob  is  in  ttjeir  hanbcs,anb 
Unto  then  tboles  hauethcy  tommitteb 
abultcttc ,  anb  Ijaue  alfo  caufeb  tljcit 
fonncs,  ibfjom  trjrp  bate  unto  me,  to 
paflc  for  them  through  the  fire  to  be- 

UOUrCthem. 

3s  Q3orcouer  tfjts  ttjrp  haue  bone 
tonto  mc :  tljcv  Ijauc  befileb  my  Sanctis 
anetn  thefamebay,  anb  haue  profanes 
my  Sabbaths. 

39  j?  or  lbhen  they  hab  flainc  tljctr 
crjtiuien  to  tljctr  tboles ,  then  they  came 
tlje  fame  bay  into  my  Sanetuarie  to 
profaneit,anbloe,*thushauetljeybone 
tn  thenubbcttof  minehoufr. 

40  3tttb  furthermore  that  yet  Ijauc 
fentformen  t  to  come  from  farre,  tonto 
ltoljom  a  meffenger  lbas  fent ,  anb  loe 
the?  came  for  ltohom  thou  bibttitoafli 
thy  fetfepamtcbtt  thy  ey  es,anb  becnebft 
thy  fclfe  lbtth  ornaments, 

41  3nbfate(t  topon  at  (lately  bebbe, 
anb  a  table  prepareb  before  it ,  *  inhere 
upon  thou  Ijatl  fet  mine  incenfc  anb 
mtneotle. 

41  3nb  a  botce  of  a  multitubc  being 
at  cafe  was  unto  her ,  anb  ttitth  the  men 
of  the  t  common  fortUicrebrottght!|Sa* 
bcansfromthe  uniberneffe,  tt'htchput 
bracelets  topon  their  hanbs,  anb  bcautt 
full  ccoUmesbpon  their  heabs. 

43  Zhen  fatb  3i  tonto  her  thatttoas 
olbentaoultenes  naill they noU)  com 
mit  II  itohorebomes  Uittlj  her,  anb  (gee 

'iihthem? 

44  juct  the?  itoent  in  tonto  ijer ,  as 


Aholibah. 


thcygoetnbntoaibotnanthatpiaycto 
the  Ijariot :  fo  tbeutthey  in  unto  3fljo* 
lalj  f  tonto  31joltbah  thctcibb  ltoomcn. 

45  C3lnb  the  righteous  men,  they 
(hall  *  tuogc  them  alter  the  manner  of 
aDultcrcOes,  anb  after  the  manner  of 
itoomen  tljat  fycb  bloob  1  becaufc  they 
are  abultcrtffes ,  anb  bloob  is  tn  their 
hanbes. 

46  JFor  thus  fayth  the  TLorb  <5<ds>, 
J  lbillbrtngbp  a  company  bpon  them, 
anb  UJiUgutethemttobcremoucbanb 
fpotleb. 

47  3nb  the  companie  (hall  (tone 
thcmibttlj  Hones,  anb||bifpatch  them 
Unth  their  fiuorbs:  they  (hall  flay  their 
fonnes  anb  their  baughtcts,  anb  burae 
bp  their  homes  tbtth  fire. 

48  Zljusitoflljcaufelcttibnefleto 
teafc  out  of  the  lanb ,  that  all  women 
map  be  taught  not  to  boe  after  pour 
leUjbnefTc. 

49  3nb  they  (hallrccompenfe  your 
Iciubneffc  bpon  yon ,  anb  ye  loan  beare 
the  finnes  of  your  tboles ,  anb  yee  (hall 
anorbthat3i  amthe&ojtb  ©jd©. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

1  Vnder  the  parable  of  a  boiling  pot,  6  isfhew- 
ed  the  iireuocable  deftruc"tioiioflenjialem. 
15  By  the  figne  of  Ezekiel  not  mourning  for 
the  death  ot  his  wife,  19  is  fhevved  the  cala- 
mity of  the  lewes  to  be  beyond  allforow. 

3(8©\9!§£  <sainc  in  tlje  ninth  yetre, 
9^-m\M  m  r&e  rcntt)  moneth,m  the 
^£gjfe%  tenth  dav  of  the  moneth, 
ffiMBvvf  the  »)02b  of  the  ?l  ©  k  p 
e*&&3sP%  camebntome,faytng; 

x  Sonne  of  man ,  n&ite  tljee  the 
name  ofthe  bay,  euen  of  this  fame  bay: 
the  King  of  ZBabylon  fet  hrmfelfe  a? 
gautft  1Ieriu"aicm  this  tame  bay. 

3  ^nbbtter  a  parable  bnto  there? 
bcllious  houfc,  anb  fay  bnto  them, 
Xhusfayth  the  Horb  ©o©,  Set  on 
a  pot ,  fet  u  on ,  anb  alfo  police  umter 
into  it. 

4  ©afhertheptctesthcreofsntoit, 
eiien  eucry  goob  ptecc,  the  thigh,  anb 
the  fltoulber ,  fill  it  Unth  tlje  cljotce 
bones. 

5  XaRcthcchoiceofthcflocltc,ano 
||  burnc  alfo  the  bones  btiDer  tt,  and 
maite  itboyle  men ,  anb  let  him  feethc 
tlje  bones  of  tt  therein. 

6  Ciohcrefore  thus  fayth  the  1*.  orb 
<5©p,  tt)oetothc  bioomccttte,  to  the 
potU)ljofcfcumme^thereiu,anbU)hofc 

3laaa  3        fcunune 


*  Chap.  1  tf 
1%. 


Hr&.fcra 

remoaxmcr 

them  oHi. 


W°rM;< 


Ezekiels  wife.  The    Ezekiel.       Prophet  is  afigne. 


•Nah.5.1. 

Atuc.i. 


t  Heb  £oe. 

fHeb.  befi. 
tea. 


t  Meb.vpper 
Uf.  And  fa 
verf.il. 


ftumnit  is  not  gone  outof  it;  bung  tt  out 
piece  bp  piete,lctno  lot  fall  bpon  it. 

7  irojbcrbloobtstntbcmibbeftof 
ber.fbeletttbpontbe  toppcofatoefce, 
fl)  c  (>Q\\};m  it  bpon  tbe  gtounb  to  tout* 
ttttittbbuft: 

s  ICtjat  it  mtgbt  eaufc  furic  to  tome 
bp  to  taae  bengeante :  3  bane  let  bet 
biooo  bpon  tlje  top  of  a  tocKe ,  tbat  tt 
ftjoulb  not  be  toner  cb. 

9  ICberefoje  tbus  fattfj  tbe  Hojb 
<&  ©  © ,  *  ©oe  to  tl;e  bio obp  cttic,3J  mil 
cucn  mafte  tbtpile  foj  fite,gt  cat. 

io  $eape  on  iboob ,  btnoie  tbe  fire, 
eonfumerfjefleO),  anbfptccttlbcll,  anb 
let  ttje  bones  be  burnt. 

ii  Xben  fctit  emptp  bpon  tbe  coalcs 
tbcreof,  tbattbebjafleofttmapbebot 
anb  map  burne,  anb  ti)at  tbe  filtbmcfTe 
of  it  ma?  be  molten  intt>ttjat  tbe  fcum  of 
ttmapbeconfumeb. 

u  S>bc  barb  meartcb  herfeife  nritb 
lies ,  anb  bet  great  fcummc  tbent  not 
fotfb  out  of  ber:bec  Gramme  (hail be  tn 
tbe  fire. 

13  'Jntbpfilrbmeffeisicibbneu'e.be' 
taufe  3  baue  purgeb  tbee ,  anb  tbou 
tbaft  not  purgeb,  tbou  (bait  not  be  vm 
geb  fromtbpfiUbtnc(Teanpmo2C,ttll3J 
baue  taufeb  mp  fury  to  reft  bpon  t\)tt. 

14  5  tbe  %  ©  is  ©  bane  fpoben  it,  tt 
(ball  come  to  paffe ,  anb  3  il>tll  boe  it, 
3  tbtll  not  goe  baebe,  nrttber  tt>tll3i 
fparc ,  nettber  Ibtll  3J  repent,  aceoftmg 
totbpibapes  anbaeeozbing  to  tbp  bo 
tngs ,  (ball  tbcp  tubgc  tljcc,  fattt)  tbe 
1Lo;bd>€>je». 

i$  C:Motbettwboftbc!LiDis£> 
tamebnto  me^aptng-. 

i6  &onne ofman.bebolb,  3  tabe as 
Ibap  from  tbee  tbebefire  of  tbmeepes 
ibttb  a  ftrobc  :  pet  nettber  (bait  tbou 
mournc ,  noz  ibeepe ,  nettber  (ball  tyy 
tearestrunneboibnc. 

17  tjFozbcarctocrtejmabenomour 
ntngfoztbebeab ,  bmb  tbettre  oftbmt 
beabbpon  tbee,  anbputontbpfboocs 
bpon  tbp  ftete,  anb  touer  not  tbp  *  Itps, 
anb  cate  not  tbe  bzeab  of  men. 

18  5>o5ifpaUcbntotbepcoplctntbc 
moznmg,anb  atettcnmpttufcbico,  anb 
3J  bib  in  tbe  mozumg  as  3  ibas  torn- 
manbeb. 

19  <[3nb  tbe  people  faib  bnto  me 
n9tlttbounottellbsibl)attbefetbtngs 
arctobs,tbattboubocftro? 

20  Xben  3  anftocreb  tbem ,  3Cbe ! 
ibozboftbe  |L©i3P  tamebnto  me, J 
taping ; 


\Hel.tht 

fo*te. 


tH.i.lhe 


%i  £>peabe  bnto  rt)t  borne  of  3Jfracl; 
1LbtisfaitbtbeHo?b  <3©©;26cbolb, 
3ibtJip2opbancmptanrtnarte,  tbec^ 
ccllencteof  pour  ttrengtb  >  tbebefire  of 
pour  cpes ,  anb  t  tbat  lbbttb  pour  foale 
pttittb  i  anb  pour  founts  anb  pout 
baugljters,  Jbbom  ^tt  baue  left,  fbafl 
fall  bp  tbe  fraozb. 

ii  3lnb  pee  (ball  boe  as  31  bane 
bone :  pee  (ball  not  touct  pout  Itps ,  no: 
cate  tbe  bzeab  of  men. 

13  3nb  pour  tires  (hall  be  bpon  pout 
bcabs,anb  pout  Ojoocs  bpon  pour  feet : 
pee  (ball  not  mourne  no*  ibeepe,bttt  pee 
(ball  pine  atbap  foz  pout  iniquities,  anb 
mourne  one  tolbarbsan  otber. 

14.  1Cbus  ejebtel  is  bnto  pou  a 
Ggnc:acto?bmgtoalltbatbebatbbone, 
(ball  pee  boe :  anb  Tbljcn  tljts  tommctb , 
pee  (ball  bnoib  tbat  3  am  ttje  ILozb 

1$  aifo  tbou  fonnc  of  man ,  Oiallit 
not  be  m  tbe  bap  lbben  3J  tafic  from 
tbcm  tbtir  ftrengtb,tbe  top  of  tbctr  glo* 
rte ,  tbe  befirc  of  tbeir  e^ts ,  anb  t  tbat 
ibbereupontbcpfettbcirmtubs,  tbctr  '{y^f 
Cannes  anb  tbeir  baugbters ; 

26  Xbatbetbatefrapetbtntbatbap, 
(bail  tome  bnto  tbee ,  to  taufe  thee  to 
bearcuibitb  thine  earesf 

17  3Jn  tbat  bap  (ball  tbp  moutb  be 
opentb  to  btm  lbbteb  ts  eftapeb ,  anb 
tbou  (bait  fpeabes  be  nomoicbumbe, 
anb  thou  (bait  be  a  figne  bnto  tbem^nb 
i\)cv  fbail  itnoib  tbat  3J  am  tbe  JL®we>. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  Gods  vengeance,  tor  their  infolcncie againft 
the  Iewes ,  vpon  the  Ammonites.  8  Vpon 
MoabandSeir.  11  Vpon  Edom,  15  and 
vpon  the  Philiftincs. 

^elbojboftbc  IL^fi© 
tame  agatnc  bnto  me,  taps 
mg; 

1   S>otmeofman,*fet 
tbp  fate  agamft  tbe  3nv 
monitcs,anb  p;opbetie  agamft  tbem, 

3  3lnb  fap  bnto  tbe  2mmonueS; 
locate  tbe  Vboib  of  tbe  ILozb  <5€>©, 
Xbusfaitb  tbefLojb  d5s>©;25craufc 
tbou  fatbft ,  3lba,  agamft  mpfanetua* 
rie ,  lbben  it  ibas  piopbantb ,  anb  a* 
gamft  tbeianb  of  Jifrael ,  lbben  uvbas 
bcfolatc,  ft  agamft  tbe  boufc  of  3Juoab, 
lbben  tbep  ibent  mto  capttuttte ; 

4-  25ebolbtbercfo2e,3J  lbtllbclmer 
tlicc  to  tbe  t  men  of  tbe  caft  fo?  a  pofs 
fcftion,  anb  tliepQjall  fct  tbeir  palaces 
in  tbee ,  anb  mafec  tbeir  bibcllmgs  m 

tbee : 


"la.  49. 
i.8cc. 


\Heb.  tbd- 

dren. 


AgainftMoab.         Chap.xxv).         AgainftTyrus. 


tHrl.bmJ. 
f  Heb.  foo'e 

IH't-fi'l'. 


'!er.48.i, 
tie. 


^  Hebjhoul- 
aero/A/ojl- 


\\Or,j^unH 
the  children 
ef  Amman. 


XHek.kjre. 
aenoing  re~ 
uevgemem . 


\\Or,,ht7 
fhall  fall  by 
the  [word 
vntoDedin. 


\\  Or,  with 
p.-rpertiali 
isAtred. 


tijcc :  tbep  (ball  eatc  tbp  frmt,  anb  ttjcp 
(ball  OjtttUe  tbp  mtlBe. 

5  anb3J  Unll  mane  Babbab  affable 
fm  camels,  anb  the  Ammonites  a  cotr 
cfjing  place  fo2  fioebs:  anb  pc  (bai  aiiom 
that 9  am  the  2Lo  is©. 

6  5fo?  thus  fattb  the  H02D  <5  o  s\ 
2Secaufc  thou  baft  ciappcbtbmetbanbs 
anb  ftampeb  ibitb  the  t  feetc,  anb  rctop^ 
ccb  in  t  heart  Unfl)  all  tbp  befptte  agamft 
tbclanbof3!fracl: 

7  2Scbolb  therefore,  31  Unll  fttetcb 
out  mine  battbbpon  thee,  anb  Vbtllbe- 
Utter  tljec  foz  a  ||  fpoflc  to  ttjc  heathen, 
anb  3}  Unll  cut  thee  off  from  the  people, 
anblJUnlcaufetbcetoperifboutoffhc 
coutirrcps :  3  Unll  beftrop  thee,  anb 
trjou  (bait  ano lb  that  %  am  the  ?Lohc. 

s  tl  Xbus  faith  tfjc  Ho.2b  <3  o  e>, 
*  25ecaufe  that  £Boab  anb  S>cit  boe  Tap, 
2Seholb,thchonfcof3Jnbab'>lifccbnto 
all  the  heathen: 

9  Xherefozc  bcholbc ,  31  ibtll  open 
tthefibeof  s^oabftom  the  nnes,  from 
his  tines  winch  are  on  his  frontiers,  the 
glo^p  of  tbccotmtrrpi3cfb-tcfbtmorb, 
25aai  -  mcon  anb  Btrtatbatm, 

io  5lnto  the  men  of  the  caftij  untb 
the  Ammonites, anb  Unll  gutctbem 
m  pofTeffion ,  that  the  Ammonites  map 
not  be  rcmcmbjcb  anions  the  nations. 

ii  3nb  31  Ibtll erctntetnbgmcnt5  bo- 
on ©oab,  anb tbep  njallttnolttljatg! 

amtrje?LOS£\ 

ix  c  xhus  faith  the  U.02D  <5o  i\ 
2Secaufethat€bom  hath  Dealt  agamft 
the  botife  of  3Jubah  t  bp  tatung  bengc; 
ance,  anb  hath  grcatlp  offenbeb ,  anb 
reucngeb  himfclfe  bpon  them : 

15  Xbercftue  thus  faith  the  flozb 
<5®  £>,  3  Unll  alfo  ftretch  out  mine 
hanb  bpon  Cbom,anb  ibtll  tut  off  man 
anb  beaft  from  it,  anb  %  Hull  maite  it 
befolatc  from  Xeman,  anb  ||  tbep  of 
Dcban  (ball  fall  bp  the  fnwb. 

14  anb 35  Unll  lap mp bengeance bp- 
on Cbom  bp  the  hanb  of  mp  people  3lfj 
rael,  anb  thep  fbailboemCbomacco^ 
bing  to  mine  anger ,  anb  atcojbmg  to 
mp  funic,  anb  tbep  (ball  HtioUimp  ben- 
geance, faith  the  iLoib  <5  0  p. 

15  i\.  Xbus  faith  the  !Lo?b  <5©  &, 
zSecaufe  the  tfibtltftmes  hauc  Dealt  bp 
reuenge,  anb  hauc  taften  bengeance 
lbttbabcfpttefulbcart,tobcftrop>i!!fo2 
thcolbhatreb: 

i6  Xbcrcfo2C  thus  faith  the  2.02b 
<5€>iD,26eholb,3lU)!liaretchoutmme 
hanb  bpon  the  $btlf  femes,  anb  3  Unll 


cutoff  the  Cbcrctlnms,  anbbcftroptbe 
remnant  of  the  II  £>cacoaff. 

17  3ltiD  3i  Unl  execute  great  t  beugc 
ance  bpon  thrm  ttntb  furious  rcbu'aes, 
anb  tfjcp  (hall  hnovbc  that  31  an,  the 
JLotsi?,  ibhcn  3)  (ball  lap  mpbenge 
ance  bpon  them. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  Tyrui  ,  for  infnlmig  againft  leuifalem,  15 
ihreatned.  7  The  power  ot'  Nebuclud 
rezzar  agamft  her.  15  The  mourning  and 
altonifhment  of  rhe  fea,at  her  fall. 

5^S^  &* lt  tm"c  t0  Pau"c  to  the 
£^M%  elcttcnth  peere,  m  tbcfirft 
W/$&P dj  v  of  the  monetlj,  rhat  the 
MflTlrti  ll,02°of  the  Hob jd  came 
sk^s>'.^^k  buto  me,  favmg, 

r  Sonneofman,  becanfcthatlTp 
mshathfatb  againft^erufalcm,  aha, 
flie  is  bjolten  that  was  the  gates  of  the 
people,  fhcis  turneb  bnto  me,  3)  fljaibc 
rcpleniftjcb  •  owfljcislatbibaftc : 

3  Xherefo2c  thus  faith  the  2.02b 
©op,  26cholb,  3Jamagatntt  thee,  £> 
3Cp2us,anb)biIlcaufcmanpnaf.onsto 
come  bp  agamft  thee,  as  the  fca  caufcth 
hisibaucstocomcbp. 

4  ^nb  thep  (hall  beftrop  the  ibailcs 
of  Xpzus ,  anb  b;eakc  bottnie  her 
totbits :  3J  Unll  alfo  fcrapc  her  buft 
fromher ,  anb  mane  her  hfee  thctopof 
arothe. 

5  3H  fl)ail  be  a  place  foz  the  fpje* 
bing  of  tietsm  tlje  mibbeft  oftlje  fea :  ft)2 
31  hauefpoiten  it,  faith  theHo^b  ©o©, 
anb  it  (bail  become  a  fpoile  to  the  na- 
nous. 

6  anb  her  baugbtcrs  ttibicb  are  tn 
the fielb  (ball  be  Qame  bp  tlje  froo?b,anb 
thep  (ball  imotti  that  9  am  the  Hois©. 

7  CEfoitliusfaiththcfLoJbOojP, 
23cholb  ,  3  Unll  tying  bpon  Xpnis, 
i^ebtichabre33ar  Ring  of  ffiabplon,  a 
Hmgof  Rings, from  the  jBoitb ,  unth 
ho2fes,  anb  ttilth  tharets,  anb  lbith 
h02fcmen ,  anb  companies ,  anb  much 
people. 

s  i)cc  (bail  nap  unth  the  froozb  thp 
bauglners  in  the  ficlb,anb  he  dial  nwBe 
a  fo2t  agamft  thee ,  anb  I !  caft  a  mount  a= 
gamft  thee,  anb  lift  bp  the  bucaler  a- 
gamftthee. 

9  l^ee  (ball  fet  engtnes  of  Uiarrea= 
gamft  thpttallcs,  anb  Unth  Ins  arcs  he 
(ball  bicafteboUme  thy  touves. 

10  25p  rcafon  of  the  abutibancc  of 
btsh02fcs  ,  their  buft  (ball  coucrthcc : 
tljp  italics  fl)all  fl)ahe  at  the  noife  of 

the 


\\0r,  hem 
»/  the  See, 

I  Hei  -  „ 
'eantrj. 


utrhrett- 

me  of  (hot. 


13 


Tyrus  threat*)  ed.        Ezckiel. 


H 


er  riches, 


Hebr.ac 
cordtrtgro 
the  entringi 
if  a  cttj  bra 
krnvp. 


\Heb.houfe. 

ofthjdejire. 


'I&.J4.S. 

■«t-7-?4. 
and  16  $. 


\Hebr. 

trembhtgt. 


•Reuel.  if 
9- 

\Uebr.of 
tkefen. 


tbcbo2femen,  anb  of  tbclbbcclcs,  anb 
of  tljc  cljacets,  rbbcn  he  (ball  enter  mto 
tby  sates,  tag  men  enter  into  a  ntte 
ibbcreimsmabeab2eacb. 

ii  nattl)  tl)e  tioofcs  offtis  f)o;fcs  fl)all 
lie  treab  bolbne  all  tby  ftreets :  tjc  (bail 
flap  tby  people  by  the  froozb ,  anb  thy 
(Irons  ganfons  fbailgoe  bolbne  to  tl)e 
grounb. 

ii  3ltib  fbey  a>all  mabc  a  fpoile  of 
tby  riches,  anb  mane  a  p?ay  of  tt)p  mcc- 
chanbtfc,  anb  tbey  (ball  bjcanc  bolbne 
tby  iballes,  anb  beftroy  ttbypleafant 
Ijoufes,  anb  tbey  (ball  lap  tby  (tones, 
anb  thy  timber,  anb  ity?  butt  m  tbe 
mtbttoftbeibatcr. 

u  *  3tnb  %  ibil caufc  tbe  notfc  oftby 
fongs  to  ccafe ,  anb  tbe  founb  of  tby 
barpes  (balbc  no  mojebcarb. 

i+  Sliib  51  mill  make  tljcc  line  tbe 
top  of  a  rocbe :  tbey  fl?all  bee  a  plate  to 
fpjeab  nets  bpon :  tbou  (bait  bee  butlt 
no  mo  :e :  fo2  j  tbe  ?L€>  K  id  banc  fpo^ 
Ken  it  fattb  tbe  HoJb  <5  ©  ©. 

15  C  £bus  faitb  the  3Lo2bC5©  ©to 
%yius ,  £>hall  not  the  3Jlcs  lbaae  at 
tbe  founb  oftby  fall,  ibben  tbciboun* 
beb  trie,  ibben  the  ttaugbtet  is  mabem 
tbemiDftoftbee* 

16  %\)m  ail  the  ^nuces  of  tbe  fca 
(ball  tome  bolbne  from  tbctr  tbzones, 
anb  lav  aibay  tbeir  robes,  anb  put  off 
tbctr  b:oib2cb  garments  :  tbey  (ball 
tlotb  tbemfelucslbitb  t  trcmbltng,rbcy 
(ball  fit  bpon  tbe  grounb ,  aub  fbau 
tremble  at euerV moment,  anb  be  afto- 
ntfljebattbec. 

17  3mb  tbey  (ball  tafte  bp  a  *  lament 
tatton  fo:  tljecanb  fa?  to  tbcc,$oib  art 
tbou  bettroyeb  tbat  lbaft  mbabttcb  of 
t£>ea  faring  men,  tbcrenoibneb  cme, 
lbbicb  lbaft  ftrong  m  the  fca ,  (be  anb 
ber  inhabitants ,  lbbicb  caufc  tbctr  tcr- 
rour  to  be  on  all  tbat  haunt  it  i 

18  iBoib  fbali  tljc  3fles  tremble  m 
tlje  bay  of  tbv  fall,  yea  tbcjlcs  tbat  are 
m  tbe  fea ,  (ball  bec  tr  oublcb  at  tljy  be* 
parture. 

19  foi  tljus  faitb  tbe  % 02b  0  ©3D; 
nahen  5  (bal  malic  tbccabcfoiatcntlc, 
lihe  tbe  cities  tbat  arc  not  mbabttcb, 
ibbcngifbail  bmigbp  rl)c  bcepebpon 
tbcc.aiio  great  maters  (ball  coucr  tbec ; 

20  tt)bcn  3  (bail  bung  tbec  bolbne, 
Vbitb  tbem  tbat  befcenb  into  tbe  pit, 
ibitb  tbe  people  of  olb  tnne,anb  (ball  fct 
tbec  in  tbcloib  parts  of  tbe  earth,  m 
places  bcfolatcof  olbcibith  tbem  tbat 
goeboibuc  totbcpit,tbattbou  becnot 


mbabttcb ,  anb  31  (bail  fetgionc  in  the 
lanboftbcltumg: 

ii  3Hbtilma6etljecatterrour,anb 
tbou  (bait  bee  no  more :  rbougb  tbou  be 
fought  fo?,  yet  (bait  tbou  neuer  bee 
founb  agame^aitb  tbe  %  02b  <B  0  jd. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

1   The  rich  dipplyofTyrus.  16  The  great  and 
vnrecoucrablc  fall  thereof. 

$ett)02boftbc  ILokjd 
came  againe  bnto  mec, 
faying, 

1  iBotbtboufonneof 
man,  ta&ebp  a  lament* 

tlOtlf02  XWUS; 

3  3nb  fay  bntoXy2us,£>  thou  that 
art  fititate  at  tbe  cntttc  of  tbe  fea ,  which 
art  a  merchant  of  tbe  people  fo?  many 
35  les,  Xbus  faitb  tbe  !l02b  <5  ©  © ;  & 
xyjus,  tbou  baft  faib ,  3  am  t  of  perfit 
beautte. 

+  %\y?  b02bers  are  in  tljc  tmibftof 
tbcfcas,tby  bmlbcrs  bauc  pcrfcctcb 
tby  beautte. 

5  Xbcy  bauc  t  mabc  all  tby  fhippe 
b02bs of  firre  trees  of  £>cnir :  tbey  bauc 
taactt  Ccbars  from  Hcbanon,  to  mabc 
mattes  fo2  tbec 

6  ^DftbeobesofBafbanbauetbey 
mabc  tbtne  1 1  oares:  tbe  tcompamc  of 
tbe  aflnmtcs  bauc  mabc  tby  benches 

Of  J3U021C,  brought  OUt  Of  tljC  351CS  Of 

Cbtttim. 

7  f  tnc linncn tbitb  b2otb2cb  Xb02tic 
from  cgypt ,  lbas  that  tbbtrt)  thou 
fp2Cbbeftfo2tb  to  be  tby  fatlcllblcibanb 
purple  from  the  3Hes  of  eitfbab  lbas 
tbatlbbtcb  coucr  eb  tbec. 

8  Xhe  inhabitants  of  Ztbon  anb 
^ruab  iberc  thy  manners :  tljy  ttnfc 
men,  £)  Xynis,  that  iberc  in  tbec,  iberc 
tbyptlots. 

9  Xbc  ancients  of  ©ebai ,  anb  tbe 
ttnfcntcn  thereof  ibere  mtbectby  Ileal* 
bets,  all  the  (hips  of  thcfcaibttb  tbctr 
mariners  mere  m  tbec ,  to  octupic  thy 
mcrcbanbife. 

10  1Cbcyof0crfia,anbofHub,anb 
of  |Sbut  ibere  m  thmc  army.thy  men  of 
ibarrc :  they  hangcb  the  (biclb  anb  bel- 
mettntbcc:tbcyfctfo2tl)tbycomcltncs. 

11  %be  men  of  £ruab  ibitb  thine 
armic  were  bpon  thy  ibais  rounb  about, 
anb  the  <5ammabims  mere  tn  tby 
tott>2cs:  they  bangcb  their  fbiclbsbpon 
thy  ibais  rounb  about :  tljcy  bauc  mabc 
tbybcanttc  perfect. 

n  Xar 


tHih. 

ronrs. 


Wtlrprr- 

fu  of b  tonne. 

\Helr. 
heart. 


\Hch.tH-.lt. 


\\OrJhey 

hiHemadc 

hMchetof 

Yuone  veil 

rrodert. 

fHeb.the 

daughter. 


||  Or,  purple 
idjCArlct. 


\Or,(lop' 
per:  of 
tnr.ki-  H.4. 
fhagb. 

net;. 


Tyrus  riches,     Chap.xxvij.xxvn).  anddellru&ion. 


\Ortmrr 
ch.vt{tfe. 


worths 


Or.Chry 
foprafc 


\\0r, Men- 
ill. 


clothes  of 
free  dome. 

f  Heb  they 
were  the 
merchant  i 
of  thy  ha/id. 


1 1  Or ,  excel- 
lent things. 
\Heb.foU 
Amps. 


n  Xartt)i(b  v.as  tby  merchant  by 
reafon  of  the  lrxuintutic  of  all  kmdcofrp 
rt)cs :  )Ml)filucr,y;on,  nnnc,anblcab 
tber  trabcb  tn  tby  faires. 

i}  giauan.Xubalanb^cfbccb.tbey 

•re  tby  merchants :  they  tcaoeD  tije 
petfons  of  mm,  anbtocffeisofbiaffun 
tby  |]  market 

14-  Xhey  of  the  Ijoufe  of  Xogar; 
tnal)  trabeb  in  tby  faires  tt)it!)  l;o3cs, 
anb  bozfemen ,  anb  nntlcs. 

15  Xbe  men  of  SDcoan  were  tby  mcc- 
chants  /many  JlteS  were  the  merchant 
btfe  of  thmc  banb  :  they  bjought  thee 
foj  a  piefent ,  bomes  of  3\xa;\e ,  anb  €■ 
benie. 

i6  <&yjia  was  thy  merchant  by  re& 
fon  oftfje  mulritnbeof  thetwarcsof  tljy 
mabing  :  they  occupicb  m  thy  faires 
tUttl)  i2meraulbs,purple,anb  tyotbercb 
tbozbe ,  anb  fme  linen,  anb  Cozall,  anb 
legate. 

17  3Jubah  ano  the  lanb  of  3k&i\ 
they  were  thy  merchants :  they  trabeb 
inthymarbetil>heateof^;nmth,anb 
pannag,anbbonie,anboyle,fj;|baime. 

is  2>amafcns^s  thy  merchant  m 
the  multitubc  of  the  wares  of  thy  ma; 
amg,fo:  tbcmultitubcof  all  nerjesan 
the  wine  of  ^clbon,  anb  White  wooll. 

19  £>an  alfo  anb  giauan  R  going  to 
anb  fro ,  ocenpyeb  m  thy  faires :  bugbt 
yion,Caflia  anb  Calamus  mere  in  thy 
marftet 

x  o  a>eban  was  tby  merchant  tn  t  p^ 
cionsclothesfo2tbarcts. 

11  Arabia  anb  allthc  pnucesofmcj 
bar  ,t  trj  cy  occupicb  With  thee  in  lambes 
anb  rammesanb  goats :  in  tbcfe  were 
they  thy  merchants. 

iz  Xbe  merchants  of  S>bcbab anb 
Baamah ,  they  were  thy  merchants: 
they  occupicb  in  thy  fate esibith  chtcfc  of 
all  fpiccs,  anb  With  all  precious  Cones 
anbgolbe. 

23  $acan ,  anb  Cannch ,  anb  «bcn, 
the  merchants  of  Sbcbah,  Siflbur  and 
Chilmab  were  thy  merchants. 

24  Xbefe  were  thy  merchants  in  all 
I  Ifons  of  things ,  in  blcWe  t  clothes  anb 
bjoibercb  W02be ,  anb  m  cherts  of  rub 
apparell ,  bounb  vbitb  co;bcs  ano  mabe 
of£ebar  among  thy  mtrcbanbife. 

i<>  Xbc  fljtps  of  Xarfbifb  bib  fmg 
of  tbeem  tl)y  mataet,  anb  thou  wart 
rcplenifbeb,anbmabebery  glonons  m 
tbemibbertoftbefeas.  u,„,nUt 

16  C  Xby  rowers  ljaue  biougbt 
tbee  into  cjr  eat  waters :  the  cart  wmbe 


barb  totofeen  tbccmtbctmibbcrtof  tbe 
S>cas. 

27  Xby  *  riches  anb  tl)y  faires,  tby 
mercbanb-.fe,  thy  manners,  anb  tby  pt; 
lots,  tby  canters,  anb  the  occupiers  of 
tby  mcrcbanbife,  anb  all  tby  men  of 
ttiarre  that  jre  m  thee,  || anb  m  all  tby 
company,  Vbhtcf)  b  intbcmiofloftbte, 
rtjall  fall  into  the  llnubbcft  ofrt)eleas,in 
tljc  bay  of  tby  mine. 

2$  3Cbe  n  fubnrbs  Q)all  thane  at  the 
founb  of  tbccneoftby  pilots. 

19  3Jno  all  that  banble  the  oare;  tbe 
manners,  mdailtbe  ptlotsoftbe&ca, 
(baicomcboWncfromtbetrtbips.tbey 
rt)  all  ftanbbpou  the  lanb, 

30  2nb  (bail  caufc  theft  boiccto  be 
bearb  agatnrt  thee ,  anb  (ball  crte  bit; 
tcrly.anb  (ball  cart  bpbuft  bpon  tbcit 
bcabs,tbcyfl;ailwailowtbemfelucsm 
the  afbes. 

31  21nb  they  (ball  mane  tbcmfclues 
bttcrly  balbc  foz  thee,  anb  girbctbcm 
With  fatRcclotb,  anb  they  (ball  Wcepe 
fo:  thee  lbitlj  bittcrnrfTe  of  beart  and  bit? 
ter  wailing. 

iz  3nb  in  their  lbarting,  they  Qjall 
tabtbp  a  lamentation  fojthcc,  anb  las 
mentoucrtbee,  fayingj  n^batcuieisitbe 
Xy:us,libetbebcftrbyebintbcnuobeS 
oftbefcai 

33  nabenfbymarcsibentfoonbout 
of  the  fcas,  thou  fillebrtmany  people, 
tijoubtbrt  enncl)  the  Rings  of  the  earth, 
lbith  the  mumtube  of  tbyncbes,  anb 
of  tby  mcrcbanbife. 

34  gin  the  ntnc  when  tbou  (bait  be 
taoben  by  the  fcas  m  tlje  beptrjs  of  tbe 
waters,  tby  mcrcbanbife  anb  all  tby 
companieintbcmtbbcrtoftbecfl)alfall. 

3«5  3111  tbe  inhabitants  of  tbcjjlcsi 
Ojall  bee  artomfl)Cb  at  tbee ,  anb  their 
nings  (bail  be  To:e  afratb,  tbey  (ball  be 
troublcom  their  countenance. 

36  Xbe  mcrtljants  among  me  peo- 
ple (ball  biffc  at  tbee,  thou  (bait  bee  a 
t  ter rour,aub  t  neucc  iiuit  be  any  mo?e. 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

Gods  ludgemcut  vpon  the  prince  of  Tyrus, 
(or  his  facnlcgious  pride,  n  A  lamenta- 
tion, of  his  gre.u  glorv  corrupted  byfinnc. 
10  Theiudcementot  Ztdon.  14  Thcrc- 
fhurationot  Iliael. 

^)CW02b0ftbeil€)lSE» 

came  agamc  bnto  me,fay 

SSjjSI  |Q     1    ^onneofmanjay 
$m&m  bnto  the  pnuce  of  Xyjus, 
Xbus 


\Hth.bwt. 

•Rtu.  18. 


\\9r,run 

\OrJ,tin. 
'■Or.waMti 


t  Hcl>  ter- 

roHri. 

t  Hei.  fieh 

nsl  he  for 

inert 


Tyrus  no  God.  Ezekiel.  Her  vttcr  mine, 


\Htt>Jx*x. 

"Ifai.jl. 

■3- 


\Hit.lyth, 

greatneff:  ef 
thy  wift- 

OffTjt. 


j  j  Or,TP0HK- 

itih. 


Or.ruhj. 
Or,  chry- 
felitt. 
Or,  Ckyfi- 


Xhus  faith  the?LojD<I>£>©;Z5ecaufc 
thine  heart  is  ItftcD  bp ,  anD  thou  haft 
fatD,  3  am  a  45oD,  gj  fit  in  thefeateof 
©od  in  thet  miDDeft  of  the  feas ;  'yet 
thou  an  a  man  anD  not  <©od  ,  though 
thoufct  thine  beattasthehcattof<5oD. 

j  25ehoU> ,  thou  art  ibifcrtljeit  2>a* 
nicl:  there  is  no  fctcet  that  they  tan  IjiDc 
from  n)ee. 

4-  ©ith  thy  JbifcDome  anD  ibith 
thrne  bnDcrttanDtng  thou  haft  gotten 
thee  riches ,  anD  haft  gotten  goto  ant) 
filuer  into  thy  treafur  es. 

5  t  as?  thy  great  tbifcDomc ,  and  by 
thy  traffiquehaft  thou  incrcafeD  thy  rv 
thcs,anD  thine  heart  is  UftcD  bp  becaufe 
of  thy  riches, 

6  Xhcrcfoje  thus  faith  the  ILojD 
<Efi>©  ;25ccaufe  thou  haft  fet  thine 
heart  as  the  heart  of  <5oD ; 

7  2ScholD  therefo:e ,  3  Ibill  bang 
ttrangers  bpon  thee ,  fhetcrnblc  of  the 
nations  :  anD  they  (hall  Djatb  their 
froojDS  againft  the  beauttcof  thyibu> 
borne,?  they  (hall  Defile  thy  bnghtnefte. 

8  Xhey  fljall  tying  thee  Dorone  to 
the  pit ,  anb  thou  (halt  Die  the  Deaths  of 
them,  that  are  flainc  in  the  miDDcft  of 
the  feas. 

9  nailt  thou  y tt  fay  before  him  that 
flayefhthee,  3 am  ©od;  but  thou  foaic 
be  a  man,  ano  no  ©oD  mthc  IjanD  of 
himthatliaaycththee. 

io  Xhou  (halt  Die  the  Deaths  of  the 
bncitcumnfeD ,  by  the  hanD  of  Aran* 
gcrs :  fo:  3  haue  fpoaen  it ,  faith  the 
fLo«iD  ©  ©id. 

ii  C  £J3o;couct  the  ttwD  of  the 
%  &  ir  jd  came  bnto  me,faying ■ 

iz  5>onnc  of  man ,  tafcc  bp  a  lamen- 
tation bpon  the  lung  of  Xyms,anD  fay 
bnto  himXhus  faith  the  JLojd  ©€>©, 
Xhou  feaieft  bp  the  fumme,full  of  vbifc- 
Dome  anD  perfect  tn  bcautie. 

ij  Xhou  haft  bccnem<£OCtt  the  gar; 
Den  of  ©oD;euery  pzenous  ftonc  was  thy 
couering,thei|5>arDuts,  Xopajc,  anD 
thc2>iamonD,thc||Beril,thc€>ny)r:,anD 
the  Uafpct ,  the  £>apl)ir ,  the  ||  €me> 
taiiDcanD  the  Carbuncle  anb  golD :  the 
Vbo^Rmanfbip  of  thy  tablets  anb  of  thy 
pipes  ibas  picparcD  m  thee ,  m  the  Day 
that  thou  matter  eatcD. 

14  Xhou  art  the  annointeD  Cherub 
that  toucreth :  anb  3  haue  fet  thee  fo  ■. 
thou  tbatt  bpon  the  holy  mountamc  of 
d5oDjthou  hatt  maifteDbpaiiD  Doibne 
in  the  miDDeft  of  the  (tones  of  fire. 

15  Xhou  waft  perfect  m  thy  ibaycs 


from  the  Day  that  thou  tbattcrcateD,  till 
mtquttie  ibasfounD  m  thee. 

i6  26y  the  multituDc  of  thy  merchant 
Dife  they  hauefilleD  the  miDDeft  of  thee 
lDtth  biolcnce, anD  toon  haft Gnneo: 
therefore  3  tbill  raft  thee  as  p?ophane 
out  of  the  mountaine  of  ©oD:anD  3  tbil 
Deftroy  thee,  O  cohering  Cherub,  from 
the  miDDeft  of  the  ftones  of  fir  e. 

17  Xhine  heart  ibas  ItfteD  bp  be= 
taufe  of  thy  btautie,  thou  haft  co?ruptcD 
thy  ibifcDome  by  reafon  of  thy  might; 
ntfle  :3  ibill  taft  thee  to  the  gtounb : 
3  ibill  lay  theebefoje  Rings ,  that  they 
niaybcholDthee. 

is  Xhou  h^  befileD  thy  fanctuancs 
by  the  multituDc  of  trjmc  iniquities,  by 
the  tniquftie  of  thy  traftique :  therefore 
ibill  3  tying  forth  a  fire  from  the 
nnDDcft  of  thee,  it  (hall  Deuoure  thee: 
anD  3  will  biing  thee  to  athes  bpon  the 
carthintfjcGghtofallfhcmthatbcholD 
thee. 

19  3lll  they  that  anoib  thee  among 
the  people,  (hau  be  aftontfhcDatthee: 
thou  (halt  be  a  t  tcrrour,  anb  neuer  ftnit 
thou  be  anymore. 

10  C^gaincthett)o?DoftheJL©iBjD 
came  bnto  mcfaytng. 

11  5>onneofman,fctthyfaceagainft 
ziDon,anD  pjophecic  againfttt, 

11  anD  Cay ,  Xhus  faith  the  Ho?D 
45©©;2SeholD,  5  am  againft  thee,  jD 
ZiDon ,  anb  3  ibill  be  gionficD  in  the 
miDDeft  of  thee :  anD  they  (hall  tmotb 
that  3  *m  the  %  ©  is  jo ,  lbhen  3  (hall 
haucejreniteD  tuDgements  in  her ,  anD 
(hailbefanttifieDinher. 

2.  j  $<x  3  will  fn»D  into  her.peftilenee, 
anD  blooD  into  her  ftrcctes ,  anD  the 
tbounDcDlhaii  be  (ubgeD  mthc  miDDeft 
of  her  by  the  froozb  bpon  her  on  cuery 
fiDc,  anD  they  ft)ail  anotb  thatj  am  the 

%0  tf  3E>. 

14-  C^nb  there  fljail  be  no  mojc  a 
pncHing  tyiar  bnto  thchoufe  of  3frael, 
no?  any  grtcuing  thome  of  all  tftat  are 
rounD  about  them  that  befpueD  them, 
anDtljey  (halhnolbthat^  amthc?Lo;D 

CJ5£>1E>. 

15  Xhus  Caith  the  flojD  <5®W>; 
lBhen  3  (hall  haue  gathcreD  the  houfe 
of  5Ifcael  fr6  the  people  among  lbhom 
they  are  fcattercD.anD  (hall  be  fanenfieb 
tnthem  intheGglrt  oftheheathen,then 
ftjauthey  DVbell  in  their  lanD ,  that  3 
haue  giuen  to  my  fcruant  3Jaeob. 

i6  3lnD  they  thai  Dibeli  1  jfafily  there-- 
in ,  anD  (hall  builD  houfes,  anb  plant 

btncyarPs; 


\Hch.ttT- 


[Or.OTtli 


A  ftaffe  of  reed.         Chap.xxix. 


\\Or,JW<- 


•PIil.74. 
Ij.l4.ifa. 
17.1.  &j«. 
9- 


cfihcfiiU 


Z.Kings 
18.21.1fa. 
56.6. 


Oincvarbs :  vca,  tficv  (bail  omcll  mufi 
confiociuc  lOfien  3  fiaue  crccuteoiuog- 
ntcnts  Upon  ailtfiofc  tfiat  ||  ocfpifc  them 
rounoabouttficm,anb  tficv  (baitmott) 
that  3  m  tfie  &020  tficir  C5©^. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

The  judgement  of  Pharaoh,foi  Ins  treachery 
tollrael.  S  Thcdelolaticnot  Egypt.  13  The 
refhuration  thereof,  after  fourtie  yeeres. 
17  Eeypt  the  reward  of  Nebuchad-rezzar. 
2.1  Iiraelfhailbereftored. 

B  tfie  tmtl)  v«te,  m  tfic 
tcntl)  noneth,  mtfjcttbclft 
day  of  tin  monctfi ,  tfic 
,11)020  of  the  ?££Ma?E>  came 
_Jbntomc,favmg, 
z  S>omicofman,fcttfivtatcagamft 
$fiaraofitungof€gvpt,anbp?opficnc 
agamft  Inm ,  atib  agatttG  all  c  gvpt. 

j  5>pcattc  ant)  fav,  Xfius  faitfi  tfic 
5,020  oe>p ,  zScfiolo ,  U  am  agamft 
tfice,  ^fiaraofi  mug  of  cgvpUfic  great 
*D:agon  tfiat  uctfi  mtfic  mioocftof  fits 
rtucrs ,  Vbfitcfi  fiatfi  fame ,  U0V  riucr  is 
nunc  orotic,  ano^lfiaucmabc  ufojinp 
felfc. 

4  z5ut  3  mill  put  fiooscs  m  tfiv 
tfian)cs,anb3j  rotilcaufe  tficfftb  of  tfiv 
nuets  to  fhcftc  unto  tfivfcales,  ano  3 
rum  bjmg  tfi cc  Dp  out  of  tfic  mtbbeft  of 
tfiv  rmers,  ano  all  tfic  fi(b  of  tfiv  nucrs 
(fiallftidtcuntotfipftales. 

5  2nb  31  lblll  IWUC  tfiCC  thrower  tntO 

the  milbcrucs,  tfice  ant)  all  tfie  a(fi  of 
rfiV  nuets  :  tfiou  (bait  fall  Upon  tfie 
topenfteios,  tfiou  ffiait  not  bcb?ougfit 
togetfier,  nozgatfiereo:  3  fiaue  gtucn 
tfice foj meat  to  tfic  beaftesof  tfic  ficlb, 
ano  to  tfic  fonies  of  tfic  fieauen. 

6  3lno  an  tfie  inhabitants  of  Cgppt 
(ban  uuom  tfiat  3  am  the  %  o  is  *?,  be- 
tanfc  tficv  fiaue  bene  a  *  ftaffe  of  r  cebe  to 
tficfioufeof^ifracl. 

7  tDficn  tficv  tooltc  fiolb  of  tfice bVj 
tfiv  fiano,  tfiou  moft  b2caue,  aim  rent] 
ail  tficir  (boulbcr :  anD  mficn  tficv  lea* , 
neb  v>pou  tfice,  tfiou  bjabcft,anb  mabeft  \ 
all  tficir  lovnes  to  bcataftanb. 

s  C^ficrcfojttfittstaitfitfielLojb; 
<2£>5?,2Scfiolo,  3  mill  bnng  a  ftuom 
upon  tfice,  aim  cot  off  man  anb  bcaft 
outof  tfice. 

9  3nD  tfic  lano  of  egvpt  (fiaibc  oc< 
folate  ano  maftcano  tficv  ffiaii  ftnomc 
tfiat  j  am  tfic  %okw.  becaufc  he  fiatfi 
faibe,  Xfic  nucr  is  mine,  anb  3  fiaue 
mabeit. 


'Ml 


defol 


arc. 


io  25cfiolbetfiercfo2e,  3  am  agamft 
tfice,  anb  agamft  tfiv  rmers,  anb  3  mil 
malic  tfic  lanb  of  cgppt  t  bttcrlvmaftc 
ano  bcfolatcfrom  tfie  tomje  of  t&venc 
eucn  onto  tficb02Dcr  of  Ctfiiopia. 

ji  ji3o  foot  ofmanffiai  paffc  tfizougfi 
it,  no?  footc  of  bcaft  (ball  paffc  tluough 
!t,ncttficr  (ball  u  bccmfiabitcb  fourtie 
vecres. 

iz  3inb  3  mill  mabctbc  lanb  of  <£; 
gvpt  bcfolatc  In  tfie  mibft  of  tfic  coun 
trevs  tfiat  are  ocfoiatc,  ano  bet  cincs 
among  tfic  cities  tfiat  arc  lavco  tbafte, 
(fiallbc  bcfolatc  fourtie  vceres:  ano  3 
lOUl  fcattcr  tfic  Cgvptians  among  the 
nanons,aubmtloupcrfctficmtfi2ougfi 
tfic  countr  evs. 

13  CPCttbUSfaitfitfiC)X0?b©4>1P, 

3ttfic*enOoffourneveercsmill3Jga 
tficr  tfie  cgvpttans  from  tfic  people 
vufiitficr  tficv  mere  fcattcr  cb. 

14  3lno  3HO1II  b2lngagame  tfic  cap 
niutlcof  egvpt,  anb  mill  taufctfiemto 
rcturnemto  tfic  lanb  of  £atb?os ,  mto 
tficlano  of  tficir  Hfiabttanon,  anb  tficv 
(bailbctficrcatbafcRingbome. 

15  3Jt  (ball  be  tfie  bafeft  of  the  lung* 
bomcs,ncitficr  fljail u  crait  it  felfc  anv 
mo2e  about  tfic  nanons :  fo2  3  tbillOt- 
immffi  tficm ,  tfiat  tficv  ffiau  no  mo^c 
rule  oucr  tfie  nanons. 

16  3noit  ffiail  be  no  mo2Ctfie  confi 
bence  of  tfic  fioufc  of  3!fracl ,  mfiicfi 
b2ingetfi  their  mtnuttv  to  remembzante, 
mfien  tficv ffialllootic  after  them:  but 

thev  (bail  ftnom  tfiat  3  am  tfic  ?io20 

17  C^nblttamcto  paffc  m  tfic  feuen 
anotmcntictfivccrc,  m  thefirftmoneth, 
in  tfiefirftdav  of  tfic  monctfi,tl)c  mo2bc 
of  tfic?L©KP  came  Onto  mcfavmg, 

18  5)onncofman,/^cbncfiab  rwar 
lung  of  25abvlon  caufeb  fits  arnuc  to 
feme  a  great  fcriucc  agamft  l-vms : 
eucrv  ficao  mas  ntaoe  balbc,  ano  cuerv 
(fioulbermaspcclcb:vctfiabficnoma 
gcs^ozhtsarmiefozxv^S.foJtficfcr 
mcc  tfiat  fie  fiao  fcruco  agamft  it. 

19  1Lficrcfo2C  tfius  faitfi  tfic  Ho2b 
©ojD,25cfiolD,Dmtllgiuetficianbof 
eg>'pt  onto  i!5cbucfiab-  rc35ar  fttngof 
26abvlon,  anb  ficftiail  taHe  ficr  nmltf 
tube,  anb  ttaluficrfpoilc,  ano  taiicficr 
pzavc,  anb  it  (ball  be  tfic  mages  fo:  bis 
arnuc. 

zo  3  fiaue  giucnfimi  tfic  lanb  of  e 
gvpt  |[fo2  his  labour  mficrcibitfi  fie  fcr 
ucb  agamft  tt,  betaufc  tficv  mjougfit  fo? 
me,  faitfi  tfic  ILojb  <5  ov.  _ 

zi  C3fn 


fH.i  vrajia 
cftr.lflt. 

neh. 


•IfaLip. 

a  J  kr.46. 
16. 


\\OrM'k- 


herjhoile 
jni  IrAjhit 

rv- 

Or, fir  1 11 


The  defoliation  Ezekiel. 


ofEgypt. 


\Or,fiere. 


IHch.Piul. 

\Hibr.cb,l- 
drcn. 


t  Hibr.  bro- 


il C3J"  that  bay  lbiii^Jtaufe  the 
borne  of  ttjc  boufe  of  3Iftacl  to  bubbe 
forth ,  anb  3  ibill  giuc  tbcc  the  opening 
of  the  mouth  tn  the  mibft  of  them,  anb 
they  (bal  knolto  that  3  am  the  JL©  k  ©. 

CHAP.    XXX. 

Thedelolation  ofE°ypr,and  her  helpers.  :o 
The  arme  oi  Babylon  Pnalbe  111  cnedicncd  to 
breake  the  arme  of  Egypt. 

ftEibojboftbcTLfiPia© 

came  agamc  unto  mc,  fay 

ins, 
i  £>onncof  man.pjo 

poetic  ant)  fay  ,Xbus  faith 
ttjc  JLojb  ©  ©  foible  ye,lboc  rboztb 
the  bay. 

j  Jtytbebayisnecrccucntbcbay 
oftlKlLiDH©  isttecre,acloubtcDay;it 
fbalbc  the  rime  of  the  heathen. 

4-  3nb  the  fnwb  (ball  tome  bpon 
Egypt,  anb  gteat  ||  panic  fbalbc  inE^ 
thtopta,  lbhen  the  dame  (ball fall  in  E 
gypt,anb  tbey  (ball  tattc  aibay  her  mnl- 
titubc,  anbbccfoiuibationsfbaibc  too- 
feenbottmc. 

5  Etfjiopia,anbtjUbya,anb?Lybia, 
anb  all  the  mingicb  people,  anb  Chub, 
anbthetmen  of  the  lano  that  is  in 
league,(bal  fai  ibith  them  op  the  froojb. 

6  Xbus  faith  the  ILsk©,  Xbcy 
alfo  that  bphoib  Egypt  ftjau  fall,  anb 
the  pjibe  of  her  potber  (bail  tome 
boibne :  front  the  tolbjeof  £>ycne  (ball 
the?  fall  t'n  it  by  the  frooib,  faith  the 

?L02b<i5©E». 

7  3lnb  tbey  (hall  bee  bcfolate  in  the 
mibfl  of  the  tountnes  that  arc  bcfolate, 
auDbecetttes  (baibe  mtbentibftoftbc 
cities  that  arc  ibartet). 

S  3tnb  tbey  0)811  Unolb  that  3  am 
the  1L  0  u  © ,  lbhen  3  hauc  fet  a  fire  in 
Egypt,anb  when  all  Ijcr  helpers  (ball  be 
tocftroico. 

9  gin  that  bay  fhallmctTcngersgoe 
foonh  from  me  m  flnppes,  to  made  the 
carclcffc  Ethiopians  afraio,  ant)  great 
patne  Chan  tome  bpon  them,  as  in  the 
bay  of  Egypt  :fojloc,tt  commcth. 

10  Xbus  faith  the fLojb  ©op,  3 
null  alfo  malic  the  multittibc  ofEgypt 
to  tcafc  by  the  bant)  of  j^cbttcbab  rty 
5ac,lnngof23abyIon. 

1 1  Dcanbbts  people  ibith  him,  the 
terrible  of  the  nations  (ball  be  b20ugbt 
to  bcflroy  the  laubuinb  they  fbau  biaib 
their  fioo2bsagalnftEgypt,  anb  fill  the 
lanblbttb  the  (lame. 


it  3nb3Jibtlma&etbcnuerstD2ie, 
anb  fell  the  lanb  into  the  hanb  of  the 
lbicbcb,  ano  3  lbil  make  the  lanb  lbaft, 
ano  tail  that  is  therein,  by  the  hanb 
of  fttangers :  3  tbeH  0  is  &  pauc 
fpoHen  it- 

13  Xbus  faith  the  ILojb  <5®  ©,  3 
ibid  alfo  'Dcftroy  ri)eiboics,anb  3  ibill 
caufc  their  images  toteafc  out  of  Jftopb: 
anb  there  fbalbc  no  moje  a  pjincc  of  the 
iant>  of  Egypt,ant>3)  ibill  put  a  fcarc  in 
1  the  lano  ofEgypt. 

14  3nti  3  mil  mabc  $atb20Sbefo< 
late,  ano  lbil  fctfire  in  ||  zoan,  anb  flnll 
crccutc  iubgements  in  flo. 

15  ^nb  3  lbil  pottvc  my  furie  bpon 
ll&HUbcfrccngtbofEgypt^nbjJ  lbil 
tut  off  the  multituDc  of  J3o. 

16  ^nogfttnllfet  fire  in  Egypt,  5>tn 
(ball  hauc  great  paine,  anb  Bo  (ball  be 
rent  afunber,  anb  jf3opb  (ballhauebi^ 
(trcffesbaily. 

17  Xbcyong  men  of  ||  3uen  anb  of 
1 1 0hibcfcth,(bau  fail  by  the  froozb :  anb 
rtjefe  cities  (ball  goc  into  capttutric. 

18  3it  Xebapbncbes  alfo  the  bay 
(balbc  Hbarbeneb  ibbcn  3  (bailbjea&e 
there  the  yoU.cs  ofEgypt :  $  the  pompc 
of  her  ftrcngtb  (ball  tcafc  in  her :  as  102 
her ,  a  ttouo  (ball  touer  her ,  anb  Ijer 
baughtcrs  (ball  goe  into  taptiuirie. 

19  Xbus  ibill  gjerccutc  iubgements 
in  Egypt ,  anb  they  (ball  bnotb  that  3 

am  the  1L©  IS©. 

10  c  3nb(tcameto  paffe  in  therte- 
ucnth  yeete,  m  the  firft  moneth,  m  the  fc^ 
ucnthdavof  themoneth,  J«t  the  ibozb 
of  the  jL  ©  is  ©  tame  bnto  me,faymg, 

zi  5>onnc  of  man ,  3  hauc  bjoften 
tl)c  arme  of  Pharaoh  bmg  ofEgypt, 
anbloe ,  it  (ball  not  be  botinb  bp  to  be 
heaicb ,  to  put  a  roulcr  to  binbe  it ,  to 
mane  it  (trongto  holbthe  fioojb. 

it  Xherefoie  thus  faith  the  %otb 
<5  o  ©,n5cbolb,3J  am  agatnft  Pharaoh 
bmg  of  Egypt ,  anb  inill  bzeaftc  his 
amies,  the  ftrong,anb  that  ibhith  lbas 
bzoftcii;  anb  3  lbil  caufc  the  fwoib  to 
fall  out  of  bis  hanb. 

13  3hib3i  lbil  fcatter  the  Egyptians 
among  the  nations,  anb  lbil  bifperfc 
them  th20itgh  the  countries. 

24  2htb  3  unl  (trengthen  thearmes 
ofthchingof  25abylott,ano  put  my 
froojb  m  his  hanb :  but  3  ibill  bieabc 
pharaohs amies,  anb  he  (ball  gronc 
befoic  l)un ,  ibith  the  groanings  of  a 
bcablyibounocbman. 

15  25ut  3  lbil  Orcngthcu  the  amies 

of 


t  Hcbr. 
draught. 


\Htbr.thc 
fm'ncjfe 
thereof. 


"Zwh.  i 


\Or,TirJi. 


Orcein- 
fum. 


\,or,mu. 

polit. 

|J  Or,  tuii. 

{turn. 

\  Or,ref(rdi' 
ted. 


Thcgl 


g°ry; 


an< 


Ch 


\tM.fvrt 

cfbrxtcba. 


\\Or.neurt 
lied. 

[Or,lrct*ghl 
htm  vp. 
|  Heb  con- 
duit:. 


\\Or,rvbt>' it 
■fvnt  them 
foeytb. 

■  Dan.4. 


"  Ccn.2. 


of  the  ftmg  of  JSabplon,  anb  thcarmes 
of  pharaoh  (ball  fall  bolbne ,  ana  thep 
(ball  mtoibc  that  3  am  the  ?,£>»©, 
tbhcn  3  Ctjaii  put  mp  froojb  into  the 
hanb  ofthe  lung  of  ©abplon,  %  he  (ball 
ftretcb  it  out  bpon  the  lanb  of  egppt. 

%6  3(nb  3  lbil  Ratter  the  tfgppttans 
among  the  nations,  anbbifpctfe  them 
among  the  countteps ,  anb  the?  (hall 
bnoib  that  31  am  the  %  ©  is  je>. 

chap.  xxxr. 

i  A  relation  vnto  Pharaoh,  3  ofthegioryof 
Aflyria,  10  and  the  fall  thereof,  forpride. 
18   Thclikedeftruift-ionof  E^ypr, 

i!5bit  cametopaflcin  the 
elcuenth  pcerc,in  the  thirb 

moneth  ,  tU  tl)C  fitft  day  of 

the  moneth,  that  the  lbojb 
ofthe  HsDisjDtamctnv 

to  mccfapmg  ■, 
z  3>onncofman,fpca&ebnto0ha; 

raoh  fttng  of  Cgppt,  anb  to  his  multi- 

tutje ,  nsijom  art  thou  UHc  m  thp  stca£ 

luflr  i 

3  teeholb ,  thc:Mw(an  was  aCc- 
oar  tn  Hcbanon  t  untft  faire  b;and)c^ 
anb  ibith  a  (habotbing  (tyotbb ,  anb  of 
an  hie  Qattttc,  anb  ins  top  ibas  among 
the  thicbc  boughes. 

4  1Ehe  ibatcrs  II  mabe  him  great, 
fhebcepe  ||fct  him  bpon  high  ibtthher 
rtuersrunntngrounbabouthispiants, 
anb  fent  out  bcr  turtle  riucrs  bntoall 
the  trees  ofthe  fielb. 

<,  ICbcrcfotcbtsbcightttjascjeaiteb 
abouc  all  the  trees  of  the  ficio,  anb  his 
boughcsiberemultiplicb.anbbisbiatts 
thes  became  long  becaufc  of  the  mum* 
tubeofibatcts,!libhenhc(botfoo?th. 

6  3M  the  *  foules  of  hcauen  mabe 
their  ncfts  tn  hisboughes ,  anb  bnber 
hts  branches  bib  all  the  bcaftcs  of  the 
fielb  bnng  fooith  their  pong,  anb  bnber 
his  (bauoib  DVbelt  all  great  nations. 

7  Xhusibas  bee  fatrcm  his  great; 
neffcin  the  length  of  his  branches  :fo? 
his  rootcibasbp  great  ibatcrs. 

8  Xhc  Cctiars  tn  the  *  garben  of 
©ob  coulb  no  t  bibc  him:  the  f  trr  c  trees 
lbercnotlifcchis  boitghcs,attb  the  chef 
nut  trees  ibere  not  line  his  bzanches : 
not  any  tree  m  the  garben  of  Gob,  ibas 
line  bnto  him  m  his  bcautie. 

9  3  banc  mabe  him  faire  bp  the 
muititube  of  his  branches  :  fo  that  all 
the  trees  of  Cben ,  that  were  m  the  gap 
DcnofGob,cntuebIjun. 

10  CEhcrcfoje  thus  faith  the  l^ozb 


ap.xxxj.  fall  of  Aflyria, 


<s  o  ©,  aSetaufc  thou  baft  lifteb  bp  thp 
fclfem  height,  anb  hee  hath  (botbp  his 
top  among  the  thiefce  boughes,  anb  hts 
heart  is  itftebbpinhtsbctgbt; 

1 1  3  banc  therefor  beiiuetcb  him 
into  the  hanb  of  the  migbttc  one  of  the 
heathen :  hee  (ball  furcip  tocaicibttb 
him,  3  haue  bnucn  him  out  fo?  his  rbic^ 
bebneffe. 

it  anb  Grangers,  the  terrible  ofthe 
nations  haue  cut  him  off,  anb  haue  left 
him:  bpon  the  mountaines  anb  m  all 
tbebailepshis  benches  are  falien,anb 
hts  boughes  arc  bjotten  bp  all  the  tfc 
uersof  the  lanb,  anb  all  the  people  of 
the  ear th  are  gone  bolbne  from  his  fha= 
bolb,  anb  haue  left  him. 

n  ?Upon  his  ruinc  thai  all  the  foules 
of  the  hcauen  remauie,  ?  all  the  beads 
of  the  fielb  (halbe  bponhtsb^nches, 

14  Xothcenbe  that  none  of  all  the 
trees  bp  the  Ibaters  otait  themfcutes 
fo?  their  height,  neither  (hoot  bp  their 
top  among  the  thtc&e  boughes,  neither 
1  their  trees  Qanb  bp  in  their  height,  all 
tbatbtinfte  ibatet :  fojthepateaii  belt- 
ucrcb  bntobeath ,  to  the  nether  parts 
of  the  earth  in  the  mibbcft  of  the  chit 
b?enof  men,  tt)ithrt)em  that  go  bourne 
to  the  pit. 

15  Xhus  faith  the  Ho?b  ©05?,  3Jn 
the  bap  lbijcn  hee  lbcnt  boibnc  to  the 
graue,  3  taufeb  a  mourning,^  coue^ 
reb  the  becpefoihun,  anb  3  rcftrameb 
tl)cfloobstherof,anbthegreatibatcrs 
lbereftapeb  anb  3  caufeb  |Lebanon||to 
mournc  fozhun,  anb  all  tlje  trees  of  the 
fielb  faintebfo?  him. 

i6  3  mabe  the  nations  to  (babe  at 
fbefounb  of  his  fall ,  rbhen  3  cattbim 
bolbne  to  hell  Ibiththcm  that  bt&enb 
into  the  pit :  anb  all  the  trees  of  <£bcn, 
the  choice  anb  bctt  of  flebanon.ali  that 
bzinbclbater ,  fhallbe  comfo?tcb  in  the 
nether  parts  of  the  earth. 

17  ILhtpalfo  ibent  bolbne  into  hell 
ibtth  hunbnto  them  that  be  aaincttufh 

tljC  fU)02b,  anb  they  that  were  biS  amtC, 

that  mbclt  bnber  his  (babolb  lit  the  mib- 
bcltofthehcathen. 

is  CCo  ibhom  art  tljou  thus  line  in 
glo ?p  *  m  greatneffe  among  the  trees  of 
€bcn<  pet  fbalttbou  be  brought  bolbne 
ibith  the  trees  of  €bcn  bnto  the  ne- 
ther parts  oftbc  earth :  thou  (bait  lie  m 
the  mibbcft  of  the  bncircuincifcb ,  ibith 
tl)cm  that  be  name  bp  the  fioom;  this 
is  pharaoh  atiballhismuintubc,  faith 
thc2Lo;tb  ©©p. 

Bbbb  CHAP.l 


\Hil.m 
lotng  hee 
jhttli  due  mv 


\\Or,J!mJ 
.yontbem- 
felueifor 
it  bright. 


\Hcbr.ttbe 
blacks. 


Thedefolation  Ezekicl.  of  Egypt.  The 


\\?r,dr. 


'Chap.  1 1, 
i  ; .  and  i  7. 


J  [Or,  the 
(and  of  thy 

\\0r, extin- 

gKijh. 

Mfai.13. 

JO  ioel. '. 
I  r  and  J. 

1  5-matth. 

2429. 
^Heb.Ughts 
of  the  light 
mhedHcn. 
t  Heb.  them 
dxrl^e, 

\Ueb.pro- 
noke  to  an- 
ger^or  qrtrfe. 


CHAR   XXXII. 

1  A  lamentation  for  the  fearefull  fall  of  Egypt. 
1 1  The  (w  ord  of  Babylon  fliall  deftroy  it. 
17  It  fhall  be  brought  downe  tohell,among 
all  the  vncircumcifed  Nations. 

e .'->  ■".  v£Bs>  /!3d  it  tame  to  patfe  mthc 
m  Wj  tvuciftf?  ycerc ,  m  the 
%£?M^®&  twclftmoncth,  mtijcfirft 

dayOftl)CtllOnett),thattt)C 

-^irigs  wo?D  offhcIL©  KJBCamt 
Vinto  me,  facing-, 

i  £>onneofman,taBcfopaiametv 
tanon  fo2  Pharaoh  tttng  of  €gypt,  anD 
fay  Dnto  Ijim  ;  Xljou  art  like  a  young  ly 
on  of  the  nations,*  thou  an  as  | 1  a  Whale 
m  tljc  fcas :  ant>  thou  camefl  fojth  With 
thy  nuers, anD  trottbleDft  the  waters 
Witljthyfeet,  anD  fouleDftthcttrmcrs. 

3  Xhus  fair!)  tfje  3L02D  <3  o  id  ;  31 
ibill  therefo2C,Tp2caD  out  my  netouet 
tfjee ,  With  a  company  of  many  people, 
anD  they  fhall  bntig  thee  Dp  in  my  net. 

4  XhenWilljlcaucfhccbponthc 
ianD,3J  Will  cattthec  fbjth  bpotulje 
opcnfieio ,  anDiDtll  taufc  all  thcfoulcs 
of  the  heauen  to  rcmamc  Dpon  thee, 
anD  3  Will  fill  the  bcafls  of  the  Whole 
earth  With  thee. 

5  5tnD  3  Will  lay  tt)y  fled)  Dpon  the 
mountames,  anD  fill  the  Dallcts  With 
thy  height. 

6  3  itidl  alfo  water  With thy DIood 
||  thelanD  Whercm  thou  frotmmeft,  euen 
to  the  mountames,  anD  tljc  nuers  (ball 
De  full  of  thee. 

7  2nD  iDhen  3J  fhall  ||  *put  tljcc 
out,  3}  Wil  touer  the  heauen,  anD  make 
thellarrcs  thereof  DarBc:3iiDillcouer 
thefunnewttha  cloiiD,  auDthcmoonc 
(ball  not  guie  her  light. 

8  3111  the  t  bnght  lights  of  heauen 
ttnll  31  maftc  t Darke  oucrtbec,  anDfct 
Darkcneffc  Dpon  thy  lattD,  (attb  the 

3L02D<S£D£\ 

9  3J  lDtiaifotDejcthefjcartsofmanv 
people,  wijcn3J  (ball  b2mg  thy  Dcflcuc 
tion  among  the  nations,  into  the  coun 
tries  lDhith  thou  haft  not  knoWcn. 

io  j'ea3I  ttnilmakcmanypcoplca; 
ma^eD  at  thee,  anD  their  Rings  fhall  be 
hozriblyafratDefo:  thee,  When  3J  (bail 
b:anbirt)  my  fiuozb  bcfoie  them ,  anD 
they  fliall  tremble  at  euery  moment,  eue« 
neman  foiljisolbnelife,  mthcDay  of 
thvfail. 

n  C.fo:  thus  fatth  the  H02D  Gop, 
the  fuiozb  of  the  Ring  of  Babylon  (bai 
comebponthee. 


ii  2Sy  the  ftmuDs  of  the  mighty  Will 
3  taufc  thymuintuDcto  fall,  theterrv 
blc  of  thcnationsallofthemtanDthcy 
fhall  fpoilc  the  pompc  of  €gypt,  anD  all 
the  multttuDc  thcrof  fljail  be  DeflroycD 

13  3J  Will  Deftroy  alfo  all  the  beafls 
thereof  from  befiDcs  the  great  tbatcrs, 
neither  fhall  the  foote  of  man  trouble 
them  any  mo2c,noz  tljc  hoofes  of  beafls 
trouble  them. 

1+  3Eben  Will  31  make  their  Waters 
beepe,  anD  taufc  their  rtucrs  torunne 
like  oyle,fauh  fhcllo2D  cob. 

1$  xrjljcn  3f  (ball  make  tljc  lanD  of 
egypt  Dcfolatc ,  anD  the  countrey  (hail 
be  t  Dcftitiitc  of  that  Wberof  it  was  full 
iDhen  3J  (bailfmite  all  them  that  Drbcll 
therem,then  fl;ai  they  tmott)  that  31  am 

thCjtOES>. 

i6  Xhis  is  the  lamentation  Vbhcre- 
With  they  (ball  lament  her  :tbeDaugb 
ters  of  the  nations  fhall  lament  her: 
tljcy  fliall  lament  fo?  hcrvuen  fo2  tffgypt 
anD  fo:  ai  her  muintuDc,(aitb  theJLoJb 

(303?. 

17  C  3*t  tame  to  paflc  alfo  in  the 
twelfth  ycere,  m  the  fifteenth  day  of  the 
monctlj ,  that  the  W02D  of  the  %  0  is  jr> 
tamebntomclayiMg; 

13  ^>onneofman,ttiailefo2  the  mill 
mtiDc  of  egypt,?  eafl  them  Dottmc.euen 
her,  auDthc  Daughters  of  thefamous 
nanons,Dnto  the  nether  parts  of  the 
earth,  With  tljem  that  gocDolbne  into 
the  pit. 

19  lehomDocfl  thou  paffe  in  beauties 
goc  Dottmc,  anD  be  thou  layeD  ttntlj  the 
bncircumnfcD. 

10  %\)t\y  fliall  fail  tnthemiDDctt  of 
thcmthatarcflaincbythcfiti02D:flicis 
DcltucreDllto  the  frao2D;D2att)  her  anD 
ailhcrmuitituDcs. 

ii  %\)c  ftrong  among  the  mighty 
fliall  fpcaRc  to  Ijmi  out  of  the  miDDcfl  of 
hell  With  them  thathelpehimttfieyarc 
gone  Dottmc ,  they  lie  DunrcumnfcD, 
flame  by  tl)cfiuo2D. 

2i  3lfhur  is  tljercanD  all  her  tompa 
tuc:his  graucs  21  e  about  ljim:al  of  them 
flamcfallen  by  tljc  fmo2D. 

11  naljofe  graues  arc  fct  m  the  fiDes 
of  thepit,  anD  her  company  is  routiD  & 
bouthcrgrauc:ailofthcmflaine,falien 
bythcfrao2D,  Which  taufeD||terrourm 
fhcianDoftheliumg. 

14.  Xhcre^  Clam  anD  ail  her  multi 

tube  rounD  about  her  grauc,ail  of  them 

flame  ,  fallen  by  the  fmo2D ,  which 

arc  gone  DoWnc  bimrcumcifrD  into 

th_c_ 


f  Hcl>.  iifo- 
litefrom  the 
fnl>:t{j'ethcr- 


\Or,lht 
l.,,J. 


\\Or,J,fn 
"I- 


endoftyrants.         Chap.xxxiii.       The  watchman. 


fHeii 

weapons  o\ 
their  warrc. 


°f 


■pnt. 


nap. 

the  nether  parts  of  tljc  earth ,  "vuljtclj 
taufcbtbevr  terrour  mtbe  lanbe  of  the 
lining,  pet  bane  they  bo2ne  their  fbame 
ttntb  them  that  gocboibne  to  the  pit. 

i<>  1Chev  haue  fct  bet  a  beb  m  the 
nubft  of  the  name  lPttb  all  hec  multe 
tubcs:bcrgraues  are  ronnb  about  btm, 
all  of  them  Pncircumcifeb,  flame  by  the 
fojozb:  though  their  terrour  lpascau; 
feo  m  the  lanfi  of  the  lining,  yet  haue 
the?  boznc  their  fhamc  lbitb  them  that 
gocboibne  to  the  pit:  he  is  put  m  the 
nubft  oftbem  that  be  flame. 

i6  Xhere  »  CBefbecb ,  Xubal ,  ant) 
ailhcrmultituDe:hergraucsareroimD 
about  him :  all  of  them  bncircumcifeb, 
flaine  by  the  froom,  though  they  caufeb 
their  terrour  m  the  lanb  of  the  liumg. 

17  3nb  they  (ball  not  lie  ttuth  the 
mtghtie,th  u  arc  fallen  of  the  bncircumci- 
'i'  feb  ,  which  arc  gone  bottmc  to  hell 
tipttb  thctr  lbeapons  of  ttmrre :  anb 
they  haue  laib  their  fruojbs  Pnbec  their 
hcabs,  but  their  intquitics  tljaibc  bpon 
thctr  bones,  though  they  were  the  tcr 
rour  of  thenughtic  in  the  lanb  of  the 
luting. 

is  jaca  thou  (halt  be  toolten  in  the 
mibft  of  the  Pncircumcifeb,  anb  (halt  lie 
ttntb  tbcm  that  arc  flaine  iPitbMroo2b. 

19  XherC's€bom,hcrbmgsanbail 
her  pnnccs,U)hich  Until  their  might  arc 
t  laib  by  them  that  lucre  flame  by  the 
fmo2b  :  they  (hall  lie  ttntb  the  pnetr; 
cumnfeb,anb  ttntb  them  that  go  bottmc 
totheptt. 

30  Inhere  be  the  pitnees  of  rl)cii5o2th 
all  of  them ,  anb  all  the  zibonians 
lbhtchatc  gone  bottmc  ttntb  the  flame, 
ttntb  their  terrour  they  are  afhamcb  of 
thctr  might ,  anb  they  lie  Pncircumcifeb 
ttntb  them  that  be  flaine  by  the  fmo2b, 
anb  bearc  thctr  fbame  ttntb  them  that 
goe  bottmc  to  the  pit. 

31  Pharaoh  (hallfecthcm,anbfl)ail 
bee  comfojteb  ouer  all  his  multituoe, 
euen  $bataob  anb  all  his  arnue  flame 
by  the  ftuo2b,  faith  the  IL02b  C5  ff>  ©. 

31  f  02  3  haue  caufeb  my  terrour  m 
thcianb  oftbe  luting :  anb  he  fhaiibcc 
latb  in  the  mibfl  of  the  pncircumcifeb 
ttntb  them  that  are  flame  Ibtth  the 
froo2b,  euen  ^baraob  anb  all  btsmulti; 
tubc.faith  the  %o}H  <s  ©  je>. 

CHAP.    XXXIII. 

1  According  to  the  duetie  of  a  watchman,  in 
wamingthe  people,  yEzekiel  isadmonifhed 
ot  his  duetie.    10  God  (heweth  the  luihce 


or  his  wayes  toward*  the  penitent,  and  to- 
wards reuolters.  17  Hee  maintained!  his 
luftice.  11  Vpon  the  ncwesof  the  taking  of 
lerufalem,  heprophccieth  the  defolationof 
the  land.  30  Gods  ludgment  vpon  the  moc- 
kers of  thr  Prophets. 

*t^\3£S  <5&\nc  #*  «)02bc  of  the 

~'&&X$VL  °  a  e  camc  tont0  mec, 
tf'^W;  faying, 

^Sw   1  ^onneofmanXpeabc 

m-'&zzt  to  the  chilb2en  of  thy  peo 

pic,  anb  fay  bnto  them,  ?©ben  3)  b2ing 

thefu)020  uponaianb,  if  the  pcopieof 

the  lanb  take  a  man  of  their  coafls,  anb 

fet  htm  fo2  their  lPatchman, 

3  3JfiPhenhcfecththcfmo2bcomc 
ppon  the  lanb,  hec  blott)  thetrumper, 
anb  iParne  the  people, 

4  Xhen  t  lpbofocuer  hearcth  the 
fouub  ofthe  trumpet, anb tabctb  not 
lparnmg,  if  the  fruo2b  tome,  anb  taftc 
him  attiay ,  bis  bloob  (hall  be  Ppon  fjts 
ottmebcab. 

5  fcccbearbtbefounboftbettimv 
pet,anbtoo&enotttiarmng,  bis  bloob 
(ball  be  ppon  bun:  but  be  that  taheth 
lparnmg,  (ball  bcluier  bis  fottle. 

6  iSutif  theipattbmanfeetbemi02b 
tome,  anb  bloiP  not  the  trumpet,  anb 
the  people  be  not  lPameb:  tf  tbefttwb 
tome  anb  talic  any  pcrfon  from  among 
them,  be  ts  taUcn  ailiay  m  bis  miqui- 
ttc :  but  hts  bloob  lPtll  J  require  at  the 
lpatcbmansbanb. 

7  4C  *£>c  thou ,  O  fontte  of  titan, 
3  haue  fet  thec  aipatcbmanPnto  the 
hottfc  of  3frael :  tberefo2c  thou  (bait 
bearc  the  iP02bc  at  my  mouth  ,  anb 
ibarne  them  from  me. 

8  naben  3  fay  bnto  the  ttntlicb ,  £) 
ttnttub  man,  thou  (bait  (urcly  bte,  tf 
thoubocflnotfpealietoiParncthclPit 
heb  from  his  lbay ,  that  ltucHcb  man 
fhall  bic  m  bis  mtqiutic :  but  his  bloob 
lPtll  3  require  at  thtttc  banb. 

9  jRcitcrtbclcffc  if  thou  ibarne  the 
lPitltcb  of  Ins  ipay  to  turne  from  it : 
ifbebonotturncfrombtsiPay,bcfbal 
bic  in  his  miquttte :  but  thou  hafl  beltuc- 
rcbtbyfoulc. 

io  Hberefo2cO  thou  fount  of  man, 
fpeatte  Pnto  the  boufc  of  ^frael,  Hints 
yefpcahc,faying,3ifourtranfgrcflions 
anb  our  fumes  be  ppon  lis,  *  ibcpmca- 
ttiay  m  tbem,bolP  (boulb  iPe  then  Hue i 

1 1  £>w  Pnto  them,  *  as  3  lmc,faith 

the  Uo:b  <30ir> ,  3  haue  no  pleafure  in 

the  beatb  of  the  umfeeb ,  but  that  the 

ttnt&eb  turne  from  his  lbay  *  liue:turne 

25bbb  i  ye, 


trJd.aLnJ 
when  1  bring 
4  faorcl  VD- 

enher. 


IhlU 


hcArtih. 


*  Chap.  3. 
i;Ac. 


■i  c1ud-i8 


Gods  wayes  ccjuall.    Ezckicl. Aloue  fongj 


■Chip.  1 8 


*Ch,p.  18. 


ntrnt  .ir.d 
iuificr. 


•Chap.  18. 


"  i.Kings. 


'Ct«p.!<). 

=7. 


r>e,  turneye  from  your  rail!  lbayes,  fo: 
*  lbby  il)ti  ye  Die,  £>  houfc  of  3Jfcaci  ; 

11  Xhercfo2etboufonncofman,fay 
Unto  tl)e  ehilbjen  of  thy  people ,  Xhe 
"cightcoufnes  of  the  righteous  thai  not 
bebuer  htmin  the  bayofhtsttanfgrcf 
fton :  as  foj  the  ibtcKebnes  of  the  Unt- 
Keb.helball  not  fan  thereby  m  the  bay 
tf)at  hee  ntrnert)  from  his  ttntaebnes, 
neither  fljait  tfjc  ngtjteous  bee  able  to 

UUC  for  his  nghteoufnes  Ul  tl)C  Da?  that  l)C 

fmnctr). 

r3  i0ben3J(balfaytothcnghtcous, 
that  lie  (ball  furcly  hue  tfijc  trutt  to  his 
oibne  nghteoufnes  anb  commit  imqui* 
tie,  all  his  righteoufncffes  (ball  not  be 
remcmb2eb  but  fo?  his  imquitie  that  he 
hath  comnutteb,he  fljallbicfo:  it. 

1+  $gaine ,  toben  3  fay  bnto  the 
ibieUcb,  Xhou  (halt  furely  bie,  if  hee 
turnefrom  hts  finne,anb  bo  that  ibhtth 
is  tiaiDftjllanb  right; 

15  if  the  ibicbcb  rcfloic  the  plcbge, 
guie  agamc  that  he  liab  robbeb,  lbaiftc 
in  the  Statutes  oflifc  ibithout  commit 
nnguuquittc,  hee  (bail  furely  ituc,  bee 
flmllnotbtc. 

i6  jftone  of  btsfinnes  that  bee  hart) 
tommitteb  ,  fhail  be  mentioneb  bnto 
jnm  :h  c  hath  bone  that  lbhirh  is  laibfull 
anb  right  he  (ball  fnrely  liue. 

17  it  &tt  the  cbtlDjcn  of  thy  people 
lay ,  Xhc  lbay  of  the  H02D  ts  not  r 
quail :  but  as  fo?  them,  rbnt  lbay  is 
notcquail. 

18  BDhen  the  righteous  rurnerh  from 
his  nghteoufnes,  anb  tommittetbuu 
quitiche  fbalieuenbie  thereby. 

19  iSutiftbelbtcttebnirncfrombis 
lbtcbebncs,  anb  boc  that  lbhich  is  lalb 
full  anb  r  ight.hc  (hall  hue  thereby. 

10  CPetycefay,*1!:hcibayofthc 
ILoibisnotequail,  £>ycchoufeof3(£= 
rael .  3  mill  mbge  you  mery  one  after 
hisibaycs. 

ai  IU  3lnD  it  tame  to  pane  m  the 
tibclfrt)  yecre  of  our  taptiume ,  in  the 
tenth  ""oncth,  m  the  fifth  day  of  the  mo- 
ucth , thit  one  that  hab  efeapeb  out  of 
^Icrufalem  ,  tame  bnto  mec,  faying, 
•Ihceitvisfmittcn. 

2i  jftoib  the  hanb  of  the  JL  o  r  id 
lbasbpon  mce  m  the  cuenmg,  aroze  hee 
that  lbas  efeapeb  tame,  anb  hab  openeb 
my  mouth  bntill  hee  tame  to  mec  in  the 
morning,  anb  my  mouth  lbas  openeb, 
anb  3  lbas  no  mo:e  *  bumbc. 

2;  £hcn  the  lbort)  of  the  Hois jd 
came  bnto  me  .faying, 


24  S>onne  of  man, they  that  mba- 
bitethofoibaffcs  ofthcianb  of  ^jfcael, 
fpeaae,  fcymg,  ^bzaham  lbas  one,  anb 
i  he  inhentcb  the  lanb :  but  lbe  ai  c  many, 
j  the  lanb  is  giucn bs  foz  mhentante. 

25  lehercfoze  fay  bnto  them,  1Chus 
faith  thcJLojb  <5®w,  pecate  lbith  tlje 
bloob ,  anb  lift  bp  your  eyes  toibarb 
your  iboles,anb  fycb  bloob ;  anb  (balye 
poffefTc  the  lanb  i 

26  j3cc(tanD  bpon  your  frooib ;  yee 
ttwfec  abomiuanon,anb  ye  bcfiiccuery 
oncbtsnngbboursibtfc ,  anb  fljallye 
pofTcffc  the  lanb; 

27  5>ayrt)outhusbntothcm,Xhus 
faith  the  3L02D  <3  o  s>,  2s  31  liucfur  cly 
they  that  arc  m  the  lbafres,  (hall  fall  by 
tbcfujo2b .  anb  him  that  is  in  the  open 
ficlb  lbill  3  Suie  to  the  beads  t  to  be  be 
uourcbranb  they  that  bcmthefo2ts  anb 
intl)ecaucs,(hallbieofthcpcfhlence. 

28  Jfojgjibiiuay  the  lanb  t  molt  be- 
folate ,  anb  the  "pompc  ofber  ftrcngrt) 
fl)alltcafc:anbthemountainesof<jf' 
rael  (ball  bee  bcfolatc,  that  none  (ball 
pafletb.'ough. 

29  Xhcn  (bail  they  tutotb  that  3 
am  the  1L®  is  ©,lbljen3J  haue  layeb  tf)c 
lanb  mod  bcfolatc,  becaufe  of  ailrtjctr 
abominations  ibhicb  they  banc  com- 
nuttcb. 

30  C^ifo  thou  fonnc  of  man ,  the 
chilb.'cnofthy  people  (hll  are  taitung  a 
gamfr  thee  by  the  lballes,  anb  m  the 
boojes  of  the  houfes,  anb  fpcaUe  one  to 
another,  mery  one  to  bisb2ort)cr,  fay 
ing.Comcg}  pzay  you,anb  hearc  lbhat 
ts  the  ibo:b  that  commcth  foo2tb  front 
tbelLois©. 

31  3nb  they  come  bnto  thee  tag  the 
people  commcth ,  anb  they  ||  ftt  bcfo2c 
thee  as  my  people,  anb  they  hearc  thy 
lbo2bs,  but  they  lbill  not  boc  them :  fo2 
lbith  thctt  mouth  *  they  fbcib  much 
louc ,  but  their  heart  gocth  after  their 
touetoufneffc. 

31  ^nbiocthouartbntorticmasta 
bcry  loueiy  fong  of  one  rliat  hart)  a 
plcafant  boyce,  anb  can  play  ibcll  on  an 
tnflrument :  fo2  they  hcare  thy  lboibcs, 
but  they  boc  them  not. 

33  3lubibhcnthiscommcrt)topaflJf, 
( lot  tt  lbill  come )  then  (hail  they  hnoib 
that  a  prophet  hartj  bote  among  them. 

CHAP.    XXXIIII. 

1  Arcproofcol'thellicplieards.  7  Godsiud^c- 
ment  againftthem.  11  Hisprouidcnce  tor 
hisflockc.   10  ThekingdomeoiChnfr. 

^nb 


dcHCHrc 
him, 

t  H,hM- 

{ol*tiandnd 
dcfoUtton, 
"Chap.  7. 
34. jnd 14. 
*  I.  an  J  30. 

*-7. 


t  Htb 


<rd,n 


thee 


commmf 
of  the  people. 
\\Or,m, 
people  fit  &<• 
fore  t  hee. 
t  Hekr.  they 
tn*hs  tones 
urulla. 

tHcir.a 


The  euill,  and         Chap.xxxiii).      good  ihcpheard. 


||  Or,»ub- 
ant  a'hrp 
icard  ■  ,:»d 


lerc.  1 3.1. 


iTcr. 


J-3- 


f  Hch.ttccor 


fvAS-^  ^*°  fyi  Uwb  of  p 1U>  k  © 

fe®M&&  ca,nctonto  mc,faptng  ,• 
f^/r~>^  i  &onncofnian,p20' 
|/fe#)Ah  P^ctlc  a3amft  the  *  {ycp^ 
$Z£&£kzi  hcarosof  3Jfraei,p2ophc 
cic  anb  fap  bntotheni,  Xhus  faith  the 
Hojd  gob  bnto  the  aiephcaros,  naoc 
be  to  the  fliephearbsof  Jfraelthatboc 
fccDc  thcmfelues:  Aioulb  not  the  tycp- 
hearosfccbethcflocacs* 

5  Pee  catc  the  fat,  ano  pc  clothe  pou 
lbith  the  lbooll ,  pec  bill  them  that  are 
feb:  but  pe  feebe  not  the  flockc. 

4.  Xhcbifeafcb  hauepc  notflrcng 
theneo ,  netther  tiauc  pc c  tjtaietj  that 
Which  lbas  uche.nctther  hauc  pe  bounb 
bp  that  lbhtch  lbas  bjoUen ,  neither 
haue  pec  brought  agamc  that  lbhich 
was  b2iuen  awap,  neither  haue  pec 
fought  that  lbhich  was  loft;  but  ibirt) 
*  fozceanb  lbith  crucltte  hauc  pee  rulcb 
them. 

5  3nb  thep  lberc  fcattcrcb  ||becaufe 
Jiercis  no  fljeptJtarti:  anb  thep  became 
meatetoailtlicbcaasofthc&elb,ibhen 
thep  lbere  fcattcrcb. 

<s  <39pfliccpcibanberebth2ongf)au 
the  moimtames ,  anb  bpon  cucrp  high 
hill:  peamp  flocKclbasftattcceo  bpon 
all  the  face  of  the  earth,  anb  none  bib 
fearchojfeeheatteithem. 

7  C  Xhercfoze,  rce  fliephcarbS, 
hearethctti02bofthelLoE£>. 

8  3Cs3  itucfatth  the  £0200  ©  ©, 
furelpbecaufc  mpfloc&e  became  a  pjap, 
anb  mp  flocfee  became  meate  to  cuerp 
bead  of  the  nclb ,  betaufc  there  was  no 
flicpheacb ,  neither  bibmpflicphearbs 
featrt)  fo?  mp  floc&c,  but  the  flicphearbs 
feb  thcmfelues,  anb  feb  not  mp  flochc : 

9  Xherefojc ,  £>  vtc  flicphearbs, 
heare  the  ib02b  of  the  1L  ©  k  ©. 

10  Xhusfaiththe?Lo2b<5©3\Bc' 
hoib,3J  am  agamft  the  flicphearbs,  anb 
^  ibill  require  mp  flockc  at  their  hanb, 
anb  caufe  them  to  ceafc  from  feebmg 
the  flocftc,  neither  fliall  the  flicphearbs 
feebc  thcmfelues  anp  11102c :  foz  35  MjUI 
bciiuecmv  flock  from  their  moutT),that 
thep  map  not  be  meat  fo:  them. 

11  ILfojthus faith  the  IL020  G  ©p, 
2Scholb,  3,  euen  3  will  both  featch 
mp  fliecpe,  anb  fechc  them  out. 

12,  tasafliephearbfeciiethouthis 
floefcem  theoapthathee  is  among  ins 
flieepe  tliat  are  fcattcrcb :  fo  lbil  3  fcelte 
out  mp  (beep  ,anb  ibill  celtuce  them  out 
ofallpiaces.ibhere  thep  haue  benefcat; 
tereb  m  the  cloumc  anb  oar&e  bap. 


t  Hihfoull 

cxtttUef 

.  am  .-    -'-~ 

kjJt 

t  Hlbgrtlt 


13  3lnb3iibiUb2ing  them  out  from 
the  people ,  ano  gather  themfrom  the 
countrcps,  anb  ibill  bmig  them  to  their 
oibnc  lano,  anb  frebe  them  bpon  the 
mountames  of  ^frael  bp  the  nucrs, 
anb  m  all  the  mhabiteb  places  of  the 
countrrp, 

14  3  ibtll  fetbe  them  in  a  goobpa- 
fturcanb  bpon  tlic  high  mountames  of 
Jfracl  (hall  their  foioe  be :  there  fljati 
thep  lie  m  a  goobfolbc,  anb  m  a  fat  pa 
(lure  mail  thep  fcebc  bpon  the  moun^ 
tames  of  3ifracl. 

i<;  lintiiifccbmpflocfecano^rbiii 
caure  them  to  lie  boibnc,  faitlj  the  2.02b 

is  3J  ibili  feeue  that  lbhich  was  lott, 
ano  b2ing  agamc  that  rbljich  lbas  021^ 
uen  arbap.anbVbilibmbbpthatrbhich 
tbasb206cn,  anb  null  ftrcngthenthat 
rbhich  lbas  ficfec:  but  3J  ibill  beftrop 
the  fat  anb  the  ftrong,3J  ibill  fecb  tl)cm 
Uitth'ubgcment. 

17  3no  asfo2pou,£>mp  flocfec.thus 
faith  the  Ho20<5£>©)25choib,5iubgc 
bctrbccnc  t  cattcll  anb  cattell,  betibecne 
the  rammes  anb  the  t  hec  goatcs. 

is  5>eemcth  it  a  ftnall  thing  bnto 
pou,  to  hanc  eaten  bp  the  gooo  palrurc, 
but  pc  muQtr cab  botbne  ibith  pour  feet  h"g°'"- 
the  rcfibuc  of  pour  patturcs  <  anb  to  I 
hauc  b2unbc  of  the  beepe  ibatcrs,  but 
pec  muft  fonle  njc  rcfibuc  ibith  pour 
fcete; 

19  3(nb  as  foj  mp  floc&e,  trjcp  catc 
that  lbhich  pec  hauc  trobenibitljpour 
fecte :  anb  thep  bnnftc  tliat  lbhich  pee 
haucfoulcbiluth  pour  feete. 

10  CXhcrcfojc  thus  faith  the  !Lo2b 
©  ©  id  bnto  them ,  26eholb,  5,  cum  5 
null  lubgebetnjcene  the  fat  cattcll,  anb 
bctibccne  the  icanc  cattcll. 

zi  23ccaufepcchaue  tlmift  ttiithfibe 
anb  ibith  flioulbcr ,  anb  puflit  ail  the 
oifcafcb  lDttt)  pour  homes,  till  pec  haue 
'■.  fcattcrcb  them  abjoab: 

2i  1-hcrcfo2cibill3JfaucmpflocUe, 

ano  thci'  fliall  no  mo2c  be  a  p:ap ,  anb 
31  ibill  mbgc  bctibccne  cattcll  anb  cat- 
tcll. 

23  ano  3  ttnllfct  bp  one*  (hep; 
hcarb  oucr  them,  ano  hec  fliall  feebe 
them ,  euen  niv  fctuant  3?auio  ■,  he  mall 
feebe  tljcm ,  anb  hce  fliall  be  their  fbep- 
hcarb. 

2+  31nb  3  the  fL©«f  null  be  their 
C5oc ,  anb  mp  fcruant  S)aiub  a  p2incc 
among  them,  3  the  %  o  is  p  hauc 
fpoUcit't. 

25bbb  3      ^  3nb 


•Ifai40.ll. 
rah.  10.11. 


The  judgement  of      Ezekiel. 


mountoeir. 


s< 


Miai.i  i.i 
ier.sjt.;. 

\\OrJorre 

HOTTfte. 

f"  Heb.  t.iken 

AVfA), 


"Ioh.io. 


\  HcbJefo. 
I  At 1  on  and 
defoUtien, 


\\  Or,  hatred 
•fold. 

red  out  the 

JtlJren. 
\Htb. hands. 


25  3jnb  3  null  matte  lbtth  tftctn  a 
couenantofpeace ,  ano  null  caufcthec? 
mil  beads  to  craft  out  of  tti rhino ; ano 
they  (hall  Dtbell  fafcly  m  the  Unloet* 
ticfJcanD  flecpe  m  the  woods. 

26  2lnD  3  itotll  matte  them  anD  the 
places  tounD  about  my  hill,  abutting; 
ant)  3  ibill  cauft  tlje  fhorbjc  to  come 
Doitonc  m  his  feafon:  there  (hail  bee 
fliollycsofbleffuig. 

27  3nbthctrccofthcficID(haiycclD 
hcrfrmtc,  anD  thceatth  (hail  yeclDher 
uureaft ,  ano  they  (halt  be  fafe  in  their 
lanD ,  ano  (hall  ttnott)  that  3  am  the 
TL©ise>,  ltohen  3  haue  biottrn  trje 
bancs  of  their  yotte,  ano  DcliucreDthem 
out  of  the  hanb  of  ttjofe  that  fctucD 
themftluesofthcm. 

2S  3lnD  they  (nail no  mo2cbcapjay 
to  the  heathen ,  neither  (hall  the  beafts 
oftlic lanb beuourc  them  but  they (hall 
bibelifafcty ,  anonone  (halt  matte  them 
afraiDr. 

19  3tnb  3  rum  raift  bp  foi  them  a 
*  plant  !|  of  renolbne,  ano  they  (hall  be 
no  moze  t  coniumeo  ruitii  hunger  in  the 
tanb.netther  bcare  the  (hame  of  tljcljea- 
then  anymore. 

30  i~intsfl)aii  they  tmotb  that^J 
thc3L©is®  their  C50D  am  miththem, 
anD  that  they ,  men  thchoufcofjfrael 
arc  mp  pcoplcfaith  the  !L02D  <5  ©  e>. 

31  3nDyecmy*flottteofmypairure, 

are  men,  andjfam  yottC  (SOD  ,  faitl)  t\)t 
fU)2D<!5©P. 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

The   iudgment  of  Mount   Seir  ,    for   their 
hatred  of  Ifiae!. 

f.  ^Dzcoucr  the  H102D  of  the 
f  IL  ©  is  ©  tame  bnto  mec, 
"  faying  • 

§   1  Sonne  of  man,  fet 
thy  face  agatnrt  mount 
S>cir ,  anb  pjopherte  agamft  it, 

3  3tiD  fay  tonto  it ,  Xhtts  faith  the 
H.02D  <5  ©  d  ;  aScholD,  jD  mount  S>eir, 
3  am  agamft  thee ,  anb  3  mill  ftretth 
out  mine  hanbagamflthee,  anb  3JUnll 
mahethce  t  moftbrfoiate. 

4.  3  mm  lay  thy  cities  mafic ,  anb 
thou  (halt  be  Dcfoiate,  anb  thou  (halt 
ttno\b  that  3  am  tlje  ?t  o  is  id. 

5  25ctaufe  thou  haft  ban  a||  prrpe 
tuailhatrtb,  anb  haft  t  (hcD  the  Wood  of 
the  chilDzcn  ofjfrael  by  the  tfo:tc  of 
the  frooib  in  the  time  of  their  calamine, 
in  the  time  that  thai  mtctumc  had  an  cnD; 

6  Xljeccfojc,  as  3  Hue,  fattf)  the 


?L02b  <&  ©  ©,  3  itotll  prepare  thee  Dnto 
bloob,  anb  bloob  (hallpnrfuc  thee :  fith 
thou  haft  not  hatcb  bloob ,  turn  bloob 
Ojallpurfuethet, 

7  Xhustbill^IniaBC  mount  5>eir 
tmoftbcfolatc,anbtutofTftom  it  him 
that  padctrj  out,i?  htm  that  returncth. 

s  3lnb  3  lhill  fill  his  mountames 
tblth  his  flame  men :  in  thy  hihcs ,  anb 
in  thy  Paiieis,anb  in  all  thy  rmcrs  (hail 
they  fall  thatarcflainc  ibiththcfooib. 

9  3  *WH  "tafte  thee  pcrpctuail  be- 
foiarions,fjrI)yntics  (hail  not  rctutne, 
anb  ye  fljai  imoiP  that  3  am  the  Hokid 

10  25ecauft  thou  haft  faib  ■,  Xhefe 
ttbo  nahons,  anbthefetuiotountnes 
fliailbcmtnc,  anbllte  ibiirpou"efl*c  it, 
||  mhcrcas  the  %  o  is  &  ibas  there : 

11  Xherefoje,  as  3  hue,  faith  the 
H02bd5OD,3I  Unll  eucn  Doc  atco^ 
Ding  to  thine  anger ,  ano  accojbmg  to 
thine  crime,  ibhich  thou  haft  PftD  out  of 
thy  IjatrcD  agautft  them :  anD  3  tbill 
mabemyfelfc  tmolbcn  amongft  them, 
rbhen  3  hauc  uibgeb  thee. 

12.  ^nbthoufl)altbiio\D,  that 5  am 
thcHLfiDK©,  and  that^j  i)aucl)caru  all 
thy  blafphemies  ibhich  thou  haft  fpo- 
ftcnagamft  tlje  mountames  of  3Jfracl, 
faymgjXhcy  are  layeD  Dcfoiate ,  they 
arc  giucn  bs  t  to  confume. 

ij  Xhusrotthyour  mouth  ycehaue 
tboaftebagamftme,  ej  hauemulfplicD 
yourttioiDsagamft mc:3J  hanchcarD 

them. 

14  Xhus  faith  the  H02D  Co© ; 
JBhcn  tlje  ibholc  earth  rnoyteth  >  3 
Mil  matte  thee  Dcfoiate. 

15  asthouDiDQ  rcioyteatthcmhc: 
ritante  of  the  houfe  of  2frael,bctaufc  it 
masDcfoiatc ,  fo  lb  ill  3  Doc  tonto  thee : 
thou  (halt  be  Dcfoiate ,  £>  mount  £>tir, 
anb  all  Noumea,  euenailoftt,  auDttjey 
fl)au  rtnoito  that  3  am  tlje  %  ©  is  s>. 

CHAP.   XXXVL- 

1  Thelandof  I  frael  is  comforted  ,  both  bv  de- 
fault ion  of  the  heathen ,  who  fpitefully  vfed 
it,  S  and  by  the  blcfsmgs  ol  God  promilcj 
vino  it.  16  Iirael  was  reiecled  for  their  finne, 
1 1  and  fhall  be  rcftored  without  their  dcfci  t. 
15    The  blcfsingsofChnfakingdome. 

^*l-,\frg&%h  thou  fonric  of  man, 
"  )2ophcnc  tonto  the  moutu 
iy^v^iaincs  of  3frael  ,  anD 
jf^^lv^fay  .  &t  mountames  of 
«^aP3ft*3Jftaei3  i?carc  tljcitooiD 

Of  tljC  ?L  ©  «  5?. 

i  Xhus  Caul)  the  S.02D  <&  ©  s», 
*  2Setaufc 


t  Hti.  d,f„. 

1  at  tin  and 
dtfititlion. 


•Pfil.83. 

4.1  ;• 

the  Lordvm 
there. 


\  Heb.  tide- 

HBttre. 

t  Hfl>.  mag- 
nified. 


Comfi 


ortto 


Ch 


ap.xxxvj. 


thelfrael 


ites. 


*Chjp.6j. 


CMtfe  far  be 


I  Or, ye  art 
made  to 

cornel  pan 
the  Up  efthe 
tenine 


\\Or,hf 

tomtt  or 

dalet 


"  25etaufe  the  enemp  Dab  lam  agamtt 
pou,  aha,  cuen  the  ancient  Displaces 
are  ours  mpoflclTion: 

3  Xherfozcpjophcneanbfap/Ihus 
faith  the  JLotf)  <5o©,  t2Sccaufc  tljrp 
hauc  maoe  pou  bcfolatc ,  anb  (tDailotb- 
cbpoubponeucrpfiDcrhatpc  might  be 
apoffefuonbntothc  rclioucof  thchca; 
rlien ,  anb  1 1  pe  arc  taftcn  bp  in  the  lips  of 
tallters,anb  a  re  an  infanip  of  the  people : 

4  Xherefoicpc  mountames  of  3J£ 
racl,l)care  trje  lbojb  of  tljc  Hojb  ©©©, 
Xhus  faitl)  the  Hojd  <5©s>  to  tt)e 
mountames  ano  to  the  hilles,to  rtjc  ||  rv 
ucrs  anb  to  tl)e  baiicps,  to  the  bcfoiate 
mattes,  anb  to  the  cities  tfjat  arcfoifa; 
ftcn,  Tbbich  became  a  p:ap  anbberition 
to  the  refibuc  of  the  heathen  that  are 
ronnb  about : 

5  Xhercfojc  thus  faith  the  Horn 
d5©5?,  &urclpmthcfirtof  mptelouftel 
haue  3  fpoben  agamQ  tl)c  refibue  of  the ' 
l)catfjcn,anD  agamtt  al  5lbuniea,ibl)icl) ; 
haue  appointee  mp  lano  into  their  pot 
feflion ,  With  the  iop  of  all  their  heart,' 
With  befpitcfull  mmbsto  call  it  out  fo; 
apiape. 

6  j&ophecic  tbetcfoze  concerning 
the  lanb  ofjfracl,  aim  fap  bnto  the 
mountames  anb  to  toe  miles,  tothetb 
uers  anb  to  the  ballcps,  Xhus  rattt)  the  [ 
jLo:b  (5  o  p,  25cliolb,  5  bane  fpotten  I 
mmp  iealoufieanbtn  mp  furic,  becaufe 
pe  haue  borne  the  (hatnc  of  the  heathen, 

7  Xbctcfbzc  thus  faith  the  Horn 
<5£>T2>>3  haue  Itftcb  bpnunehanb, 
:5>urclp  the  heathen  tliat  arc  about  pou, 
tfjcp  than  bear  c  their  (name. 

8  C^Sutpc,  £> mountames  of  3Jf 
tael,pe(hall  fhootforth  pout  branches, 
anb  peelb  pout  fruit  to  mp  people  of 
3Jfraci,fo2  thep  are  atfjanb  to  come. 

9  ifoi  beholb,  3  am fojpou,  anb  3 
Will  turtte  bnto  pou,  anbpc  than  be  ni- 
leb  anb  fowen. 

to  3inb  3  mill  nminplie  men  bpon 
pou,  all  the  houfeof  51frael,  euen  all  of 
it,  anb  the  cities  (hall  beinhabiteb,  anb 
the  wattes  than  be  builbeb. 

1 1  3tnb  3  mill  muinpip  bpon  pou 
man  anb  beaft,  anb  thep  fhailtncrcafe 
ano  bnngfruitc,  anb  3  Will  fettle  pou 
after  pout  olbe  etrates :  anb  Will  boc 
bettet  bnto  pou,  then  at  pour  begins 
mngs,  anb  pe  fbail  Unoib  that  3  am  the 

fLsDIB©. 

12  Pt&  3  Will  taufe  men  to  walbc 
bpon  pou,  wen  mp  people  3Kcacl,  anb 
thep  (hall  potfefle  thee,  anb  thou  Q)alt 


be  their  inheritance,  anb  thou  (halt  no 
!  mojc  henceforth  beteaue  them  of  men. 

n  Xhuslaiththe1Lo2b<5fiD©,2i3e^ 
caufc  thep  tap  buto  pou,  Xbou  landoc- 
uourcft  bp  men,  anb  had  bercaueb  thp 
nations, 

i+  Xhecefoje  thon  (halt  beuoute 
mennomojc,  neither  Hbereaue  thp  na- 
tions anp  mojc ,  faith  the  Hojb  <3  ©  s>. 

15  /SctthetWill^icautetnentohcate 
m  thee  the  thamc  of  the  heathen  anp 
moze,  neither  (halt  thou  beate  the  re* 

Swell  of  the  people  anp  moie,  neither 
jait  thou  caufe  the  nanons  to  fall  anp 
mo:e,  faith  the  ILojb  C5  o  ©. 

i6  <L  s$02coucr  the  Womeoftbc 
U  ©  is  ©  came  bnto  me,  fapmg, 

17  £>onne  of  man,  ibhen  the  houfe 
of  3Jfrael  DUiclt  m  their  otbn  lanb,thep 
btnleb  it  bp  their  oibnc  map ,  anb  bp 
thcit  bomgs :  that  map  lbas  befo  jc  me 
as  the  bnclcanncffc  of  a  temooueb  ibo 
man. 

is  nahctefojc  3  potbieb  mp  futie 
bpon  them  fo.i  the  blooothat  tbephab 
Iheb  bpon  the  lanb,  anb  fouhcitioolcs 

wherewith  fhCp  hab  pOllUtCb  It. 

19  ^nb3Jfcattereb  them  among  the 
heatljcn ,  anb  thep  lbetc  bifperfeb 
thzough  the  countteps  :  acco:bmg  to 
theit  tbap  anb  accozbmg  to  thcit  bo- 
mgs3liubgcbthcm. 

20  3lnbibhcnthepentfeD  bnto  the 
heathen  ibhithet  thep  ment,  thep'pzo^ 
phaneb  mp  holp/Bame,ibhen  thep  fam 
to  them,  1Ehcfe  are  the  people  of  the 
1L©is©,  anb  ate  gone  fojth  out  of  h«s 
lanb. 

it  C  2But  3  hab  pific  foz  mine  holp 
/Same,  which  the  houfe  of  3fracl  hab 
pzophancb  among  the  heathen ,  tblji- 
thet  theptbent. 

2z  Xherefojefapbnto  the  houfe  of 
l^Kracl,  1Chus  faith  the  ILo:b  ©€>©, 
3  boe  not  tin?  fo:  pour  fahes,  £>  houfe 
ofjfcacl,  but  fo:  mine  holp  Raines 
fahcibhichpe  hauc  pjophancb  among 
tljc  heathen  ,ibhithcr  pe  ibent. 

ij  3lnb  3  will  fanctine  mp  great 
/!5ame  ibhtch  ibas  pjophancb  among 
the  heathen,  lbhichpe  hauepjophaneb 
m  the  mibft  of  them,  anb  the  heathen 
fyail  &nom,that  3!  am  the  H©Kfc\faitb 
the  Uojb  c  o  m ,  ibhen  3  (hall  be  fen? 
ctineb  m  ponbefo;c  |:  thcit  epes. 

14  jfo23llbilltabepoufroniamoiig 
the  heathen, anbgathcrpououtof  all 
countrcps,anblbillb;mg  pou  into  pour 
oibnc  lanb. 

25  Xhcn 


1 1  Or  ftllife 
to  fall. 


M&52.5 


II  Or,pi 


A 


new  heart. 


Ezekiel. 


Drieb 


ones. 


*  If  re. :  I . 
illy. 


•Oijp.ii 

9- 


•Chap.:  8. 
'5- 


•Owp.  17 
14  .mi  I*. 
14- and  J7. 


f  Httr. 
x^t  of  hoi} 


z5  CXUcn  Hull  3  fpjtncfelc  elcanc 
ibatet  bpon  pou,anbpeujalbeelcane: 
from  all  roar  nithincitc ,  ant)  from  all 
pout  tfioles  ttnl  31  clcanfe  pou. 

x6  71  *netb  hcatt  alfo  ttnll  3  giuc 
pou,  anb  anctt>fpitittt)M3Jputttntb; 
in  pou.snb  3  ttnll  tsitc  aibaptbe  Come 
bestt  out  ofpoutfleffo,  anb  j  ttnll  giut 
pouanhesttofflefl). 

i7  3no  ^  ttnl  put  mp'&pitit  tt>itl> 
myou ,  anb  caufe  you  to  ttiaibe  in  nip 
Statutes,  anb  pe  (ball  ftcepempiubgc 
mcnts,anb  boe  them. 

x8  3lnbpc  0)311  btbeim  the  isnb  that 
IJgaue  to  pom:  fathers, ana  pcujallbc 
mp  people,  ano  51  roil  be  pout  «5ob. 

29  3(  ttnl  alfo  fiauc  pou  from  all  pout 
bncieanneffes,  ano  J  ttnll  tall  fojtbc 
tomcano  ttnll  tnttcafc  it,  anb  lap  no  f& 
mine  bpon  pou. 

jo  3lnb  3  ttnll  multiplp  the  fcuit  of 
the  ttce,anb  the  mctcafe  of  the  fieib,tbat 
pec  ft)ail  tettuie  nomojetepjocb  of  f& 
mine  among  the  heathen. 

31  Xben  fl)all  pee  temembet  pout 
ottme  euil  lbaics,  anb  po  u  t  bo  mgs  chat 
were  not  goDb  ,  anb  fban  lotbe  pout 
femes  in  pout  ottme  fight  fiw  pontine 
etumes,  anb  fo?  pout  abominations. 

32  il5ot  (oi  pout  fanes  boe  3  this, 
faitlj  tl)e  ILoib  (5  ©  ©,be  it  mtotben  bn; 
tovou:lK3f!)3mcb3nbtonfousibebfoj 
pout  ottme  ib3pes,3D  boufc  of  3ft ael. 

j  j  1Cous  faith  tl)e!Lo?b<i5©©,3n 
tbcbsp  tl)3t  3  fbsll  banc  tleanfcb  pou 
ftom  all  pout  iniquities ,  3  ttnll  alfo 
caufe  you  to  bibcll  m  the  cities,  anb  the 
Vbaftesfljaibcbuilbeb. 

34.  2nb  tlje  bcfol3tc  Umb  ujaibcltt 
leb,  tt)l)ctc3sit  lap  befotatem  the  fight 
ofalltbatpaffebbp. 

35  3uo  thep  (ball  fap ,  1Cf)is  lanb 
that  lbas  be  folate ,  is  become  liltc  the 
gatbenof  *€ben,anb  tbettjaftcanobe 
folate  ano  tumeb  ntics ,  are  become  fctv 
ceb,andateinl)abitcb. 

36  Xften  the  beatften  tljat  ate  left 
tounb  sbout  pou ,  fhsll  bnott)  that  31 
tl)c  %  o  kh>  builb  the  tumeb  places, 
and  pumt  that  that  ibas  bcfol3te :  3 
•the  ?L  ©  is  © haue fpoHcn it , ano 3 
ttnlbocir. 

37  Xhus faith  tlje  %m  <B a © ,3 
ttnl  pet  fiw  this  bee  enquiteb  of  bp  the 
boufc  of  3Jft3cl,  to  boe  it  fojthem:3! 
ttnll  mcteafe  them  ttntb  men  lute  a 
Aortic. 

38  3ls  tlje  t  holp  flocbe,  as  the  floebe 
ofJJctufalcmmhet  folemnc  ftaftcs,fo 


fbaitbctt)3ttentiesbcffllcbttntbflort$s 
of  men,  ano  thep  fhall  tmott)  that  3  am 
tbcH©is©. 

CHAP.    XXXVII. 

i  By  the  refurredion  ofdry  bones,  nthedead 
hope  oflfraelisreuiued,  15  by  the  vmting 
oftwofhekes,  18  is  fhewed  the  incorpo- 
ration of Krael  into  Iudah.  10  Thepromifes 
of  Chrifb  kingdome 

naa&eaa^  $c  banb  of the  %  ©  is  © 
masbponmecanbea; 
ticbmceoutinthe&pi' 
ntoft1)eH©ia©,anb 
fet  nice  bottmc  m  the 
mtbbett  of  tlje  ballcp 
ibhichAasfuiiofbones, 

1  anb  caufeb  mee  to  paffc  bp  them 
tounb  about,anb  bebolbc,  there  were  bc= 
tpmanp  in  the  open  ||b3llcp ,  anbloe, 

they  were  bCtpbUe. 

3  2inbhcef3ibbntomce,£>omicof 
man ,  can  thefe  bones  hue ;  ano  3  an? 

j  fmetcb,  Q  iLom  <5  ©  ©,tbou  imoibctt. 

4  3gainc  he  faib  bnto  me,i&jopbcnc 
bpon  thefe  bones ,  anb  fap  bnto  them , 
£>  pee  out  bones,  hcate  the  ibojb  of  the 
JL©ia©. 

5  •Eousfeitft the !Lo;b (5(0 ©bnto 

thefe  bones.JSchoio^ttnlcaufeb^eath 
to  entet  into  pou,ano  pe  fl)all  liuc. 

6  3mb3lttniiapfmctt)CSbponpou, 
sno  ttnl  bnngbp  flefh  bpon  pou,3ub  to- 
uet  pou  lbith  flttnne ,  3nb  put  bjcatl)  m 
pou,ano  pc  (hall  liue.anb  pe  (hall  Huoib 
that  3>am  then  ©a  2D. 

7  5>o3Ip?ophcncbas3Ilbascom' 
manbeb :  anb  as  3  pjopbectco ,  there 
ttias  a  nou"c ,  anb  bcholbc  a  fljalnng, 
anb  the  bones  came  togctbet ,  bone  to 
his  bone. 

s  anb  lbben  3  behelb ,  loe ,  tlje  & 
ncttjs  anb  the  flcuj  came  bp  bpon  them, 
anb  the  f  bin  coueteb  them  abouc;  but 
there  was  no  b?eath  in  them. 

9  3Ebenf3lohcbntomcc,0jopbecic 
bnto  the  II  iblnbe ,  p;ophene  fonnc  of 
man,  anb  fap  to  the  ttnnbc,  lEhuslaith 
the  %m  <3  ©  je>  ;  Come  from  the  foutc 
ibmocs,  £>  breath ,  anb  bjeathe  bpon 
thefe  (lamcthat  thep  map  hue. 

io  5>o  3  p;ophecicb  as  he  commas 
beb  mee.anb  the  b;cath  came  into  them, 
anb  thep  liueb,  anb  ftoob  bp  bpon  thetc 
feet,  an  etccebing  gteat  atmic. 

j  «  C  Xhtn  he  faib  bnto  me,  5»onne 
ofman,thefe  bones  ate  tljcibhole  houfc 
of  3Jftaci :  bcbolb,tbcp  fap  ■,  €mx  bones 

ate 


|  Ort  cham- 


[J  Or,t>reath. 


»f  Ch 


1  hevnitieor     Chap.xxxvi|.xxxvii|.      all  the  tribes. 


•lotin  10. 
16. 


arc  bncb ,  anD  o ur  i) ope  is  loft,  ttcc  are 
cut  off  feu  out  parts. 

n  Xbcrcfoie  p2opbccicanb  fay  ton* 
to  them,  1Ebus  faith  the  fLozb  <s  <d  ©, 
2iScbolD,jaD  my  people,  3  tbil  open  pour 
graues ,  ano  tanfe  pou  to  tome  t)p  out 
of  pour  graues ,  anD  bung  vou  into  the 
laiiD  of  jfracl. 

u  3nb pe  than know  that 3  am  tlie 
%  £>  a  © ,  mben  3  haue  openeb  pour 
graues,  Q  my  people.ano  brought  pou 
up  out  of  pour  graues, 

14.  3tnb  mall  put  my  fptrit  m  you, 
ano  pee  mall  lute,  anb  3  fljali  plate  pou 
m  pour  omne  lanb :  then  fljallpc  knolb 
tljat  3  the  1L  ©  ih  ©  haue  fpoken «,  ano 
perfourmeb  >t,  faith  the  ?L  ©  is  ©, 

15  CXheWo:Dofthe|lfiDKjE>tamc 
againc  unto  me,faymg 

16  33ojeouer  thou  fonne  of  man, 
take  thee  onefhtke,  anbumte  bpontt, 
3fo23uoabanb  foi  the  cbtuuen  ofjf- 
rael  his  tompanions  :  then  take  ano- 
ther fhtke,  anbUmtcbpouit,  fo^Do- 
feph  the  (tickc  of  €ph?aim ,  ano  fo:  all 
the  ooufe  of  J  frael  his  tompanions. 

17  3tnb  lopne  them  one  to  another 
into  one  fluke,  anb  thep  (IjaU  betome 
onemthmehanD. 

18  C^mbibhentbctbiKuenoftbp 
people  fhail  fpeake  bnto  thee ,  faptng . 
D3ilt  thou  not  fbembsmhatthou  mea- 
nen  bp  thefe ; 

19  :=>ay  unto  them ,  1Lbus  faith  the 
%oin  C5©  ip,  zscboio,  3  mill  taiicthc 
Quite  of  3ofepb  ibbitb  is  m  the  hano  of 
€phJaun ,  anb  the  tribes  of  gjfraelhis 
f ellomes,  anb  Vtnll  put  them  lbitb  him, 
c-ucnU)iththemcl5eof3uOah,anDmaUe 
them  one  ftukc,ano  thep  fhall  be  one  in 
tnincbano. 

10  CSnb  the  tfttkestbbcreon  thou 
nmteft.fyalbe  in  tbme  hano  before  their 
epes 

21  3nD tap  bnto them,  Xbus faith 
theHo:b  C5<£2>,25ebolb,3«billtake 
the  ttuunen  of  3frael  from  among  the 
heathen  lbbuber  thep  be  goncanb  bull 
gather  them  on  euecp  fibe ,  anb  bung 
them  into  their  omne  lanb. 

11  ami)  3  mill  make  them  one  nan 
on  in  the  lanb  upon  the  mountames  of 
3fracl,  anb"  one  H<mg  mall  be  king  to 
them  all :  anb  they  maibe  no  moie  two 
nauons,  neither  mall  thep  bccbiuibeb 
into  tttio  kmgoomes  anp  moie  at  all. 

13  Neither  (ball  they  befile  them 
feluesanp  moze  ibitb  their  ibolcs ,  no? 
ttmh  tljeir  beteflablc  things,  no?  ttttl) 


any  of  their  tranfgreffions :  but  3  ibill 
foue  them  out  of  an  their  omening  pia* 
tes,  tbheretn  they  haue  fmneb ,  anb  mill 
tlcanfe  them :  fo  (ball  tbepbe  mp  peo- 
ple, anb  3  bull  be  their  ©ob. 

14  %nn  *2>auio  mp  feruant  fhaiibe 
Bing  ouer  them,anD  thep  all  ttjall  haue 
one  (bepbeaco  :  thep  (hall  alfo  ibaike 
mmpinbgements,  anDobferuempfta- 
tutes,  anb  boe  them. 

15  3no  thep  (hall  buieii  in  the  lano 
that  3  haue  giuen  bnto  3a«»b  mpfcr= 
uant,ibbermpour  fathers  haue  blbett, 
anb  thep  (hail  oibell  therein,  ^1  thep 
anb  their  chilbjcn,  anb  their  cbilbjens 
ebiHwcn  fc>2  euer ,  anb  mp  feruant  3>a= 
uib  (haibe  thetrpuncefoieuer. 

26  Q9o2coiirr3tb!llmakca*coue 
nam  of  peace  mith  them,  it  (ban  bean 
euerlafhng  touenant  lUirt)  them ,  anb 
3  mm  plate  them  anb  muinplp  them, 
anb  mill  fet  mp  *  5>anctuarp  in  the  miO= 
befl  of  them  fo:  eucrrao:e. 

17  Q3p  Xabernatlc  alfo  (balbc  Ibith 
them :  pea ,  3  mill  be  *  thetr  <5ob ,  anb 
tljep  (baibemp  people. 

is  3tnb  the  heathen  foal  knom  tftat 
3  the  %  <*>  is  jp  boe  fanttific  llttaci, 
mhen  mp  ^anctuarie  malbe  m  tpc  mrt^ 
befl  of  them  fo:  euermoje. 


A  P.    5CXXVI1I. 


!    and  malice  oi  Gog. 
'amft  him. 


M 


God: 


/Bb  the  moib  of  p%®  « 50 
tame  bnto  me,fapittg; 

1  £>onne  of  man ,  fet 
thp  fate  agamfl  *  ©og,  tlie 
ianbof^agogthc||cl)icfc 
p2inte  of  flScmech  anb  lubal,  anb  p?o- 
pheneagamfthim, 

$  3lno  lap,  Xhns  faith  the  H020 
(5  ©  ©;  25eholti,  3  mi  agamft  thee ,  D 
©og ,  the  thiefc  pitntc  of  £pctyech  anb 
Xubal. 

4.  2no  3  mill  turne  thee  backe.anb 
put  *hookes  mto  flip  chames,  anb  3 
mill  bung  thee  foojth,anbailthineac- 
mic,  ho?fts  anb  hozfemen ,  an  of  them 

ClOtheb  tbUl)  all  fOJtS  ot  armour,  eucn  a 

great  tompanp  tbith  bucklers  ?  fljielbs, 
all  of  them  hanbling  froojbes. 

5  ^erfia,€thiopiaanb HlLibpauutb 
cfjem  all  of  them  mith  fluclb  ^  hebnet : 

6  bonier  anb  all  hts  banbes ,  the 
hottfeofXogannahofthe/!5o2t1)qaar^ 
ters,anb  all  his  banbs , -mJ  manp  pco 

pic  unth  thee. 

7  25e 


"Ifai  40. 1 1 . 
icrc-  2j.j. 
and  30.9. 
cha.  J4.1J. 


•Pfil  894. 
cha.34.jj. 


•1  Cor. 
16. 


•Oiap.  1 1 
10. and 
14.II. 


"Rfu  10  8. 

eflhechirfe. 


•Cha-jp.i 


\\Or.Pha. 


:a 


Again  It  Gog, Ezekicl. 


an 


dMi 


<W 


\]OrtCCi- 
cttHt*mtf~ 
chief  out 
pvrrfe. 

\\Or,cor;ji. 
dentty. 


jpotle  the 
lpoii-,(Ouitt 
prajc  I  be 


T  Hek  m- 
nett. 


7  2&e  thou  pjcpatco ,  anb  pjepate 
foi  tbpfclfe.tbouanoaiitbp  company, 
that  ate  affctubleb  bnto  tijee ,  ano  be 
thou  aguaco  bnto  them. 

s  C3ftct  manp  oaicstbon  (bait  be 
biftteb :  m  the  lattet  pcetes  thou  (bait 
tome  into  the  lanb ,  that  is  brought  back 
from  the  fiuojb ,  and  \s  gatheceb  out  of 
main'  people  againft  the  mo  untames  of 
3!frael ,  ibbicb  baue  btenc  aioapes 
ibaftc  :butttis  brought  fojtb  out  of  the 
nations,  ano  tljcp  (ball  blbelllafclp  all 
oftbem. 

9  Xboufbaltaftenbanctomeltrica 
ftonirthoufbaltbchUcaclouOtocouer 
the  lanb ,  thouanb  all  tbp  bancs ,  ano 
man?  people  lbin)  tljee. 

10  lCbusfaitbtbc!Lo2b(i5©©;3b 
(l)allalfocome  to  pa(Tc,  that  at  tbe  fame 
tunc  (l)all  tljtngs  tome  into  tbp  minbe, 
anb  thou  (balt||  thtnbe  an  eutll  thought. 

ii  3nb  thou  (bait  fa?  31  Unit  goebp 
to  the  lanb  of  bnvbailcb  biilagcs;3 
lbill  goe  to  them  that  areattcft,  tbat 
trttoelli  Ifafeip  all  of  them  bibclhng  ttntb- 
out  wanes,  anb  hauing  ncitljct  bartes 
no;  gates  ■, 

1 1  t  %o  tafee  a  fpoile ,  anb  to  taac  a 
pjapc,  to  tutnc  thine  banb  bpon  tbe  be- 
folate  plates  that  ate  now  inbabtteb.anb 
bpon  tbe  people  that  ate  gatbereb  out 
of  the  nations  ibbicb  baue  gotten  tat? 
tel  anb  goobs.tbatbibell  mtbetmtbCett 
of  the  lanb. 

i3  S>beba,  anb  SDeban,  anb  the  mat 
chants  of  Xatfbifb,  ibttbailtbepoung 
lpoustbcteof ,  (ball  fapbnto  tf>cc  Zn 
thoiicometotaftcafpoile^hafttbouga- 
thetcotbp companv  to  tafceapjapcfto 
cane  awap  bluet  ano  golb  ,  totaaca 
ibapcattell  anb  goobs ,  totattcagtcat 
fpoile  < 

i+  C3Ehctefo;e,fonncofman,p20- 
phctie  anb  fay  bnto  <5og ,  thus  faith 
the  ?Lo2b  <5o©  /$n  that  cap  Vbben  mp 
people  of  Uftacl  bibellctbfafelp ,  (bait 
tbounotbnolbit? 

15  3lu0  thou  (bait  come  ftom  tljp 
place  out  ofthcjftotfb  parts,  thou  anb 
manppeople  ibttb  thee,  all  of  them  tr- 
omgbponbo2fcs,agtcatcompanp,anb 
amightpattme. 

i6  'vino  thou  (bait  tome  bpagamft 
mp  people  of  3Ifrael,asacloub  to  couct 
tbe  lanb;  it  (bail  be  m  the  lattet  bapes, 
anb  31  ibill  bung  tbec  agatnftmp  lanb, 
tbat  the  heathen  map  fenoib  me ,  iliben 
3J  (ban  be  Gmtttficb  m  tbec,  £>  C5og,  be- 
fore tljcitcpes. 


Orfltirei. 


17  Xbus  foith  the  &02b  d5<D© 
Artthouhec,  ofu)hom3Jbauefpobcn 
in  olb  time  t  bp  mp  fctuants  the  p;o*|tfw-  b 
pbets  of  3iftael,  Ibbicb  pjopbencb  in  ,hthwl'- 
tbofc  bapes  mam  pecrcs,  that  3  iboulb 
bung  thee  againft  them  t 

is  3nb  it  (ball  come  to  paflTc  at  tbe 
fame  tmtcibbcn  ©og  dial  come  agamft 
the  lanb  of  3Jftael ,  faith  tbe  2.02b 
©  ©© ,  that  utp  tunc  (ball  come  bpin 
mpface. 

19  Jf  02  in  mp  tealoufie ,  and  (n  the  fit e 
of  mp  tbjatb  baue  3}  fpo&cn:furelpm 
thatoap,  there  (bail  beagteatlhatung 
mthelanbof3iltael. 

20  &o  tbat  the  fttbes  of  the  fea,  anb 
the  foules  of  the  beaucn ,  anb  the  beatts 
of  the  (tele,  anb  all  ct  cepmg  thuigs  tbat 
ttecpebpontbc  eattb,  anb  all  the  men 
tbatatebponthcfaceoftl)ecatth,(ball 
(babe  at  mp  p2tfctuc,  anb  tlje  moun» 
tames  (bail  bctfnoilirttCoibncanctbc 
1 1  tteepc  places  (bail  fall ,  anb  euetp  roan 
(ballfaiitotbegtounb. 

ii  3lno3J  ibiii  call  fo;  a  fuwb  a 
gainft  Ijiin  throughout  all  mp  moun^ 
tames,  faith  the  flD2b  ©£>£>: euetp 
mans  too2b  (balbc  againft  bis  toother. 

11  3lnb  3*  tbill  pleab  agamft  bun 
ttntb  pcftilencc  anb  ttntb  bloob ,  anb  3J 
null  tame  bpon  bun  anb  bpon  bis 
bancs,  anb  bpon  the  manp  people  that 
areiwthbim,anouctflolbmgtamc,anb 
gtcatbaileftones,ntc,anbb2unOone. 

ij  mbus  \totli3j*  magnific  mp  felfc, 
anb  fanctific  mp  Tclfc,  anb  3  lbill  be 
i;u  olb  en  in  tbe  epes  of  manp  nations, 
anb  tbep  (bail  fenolb  tbat  3!  am  tbe 

CHAP.   XXXIX. 

1  Gods  iudeuientvpon  Gog.  8  Ifraels  viciory- 
n  Gogs  burull  in  Hamon-Gog.  17  The 
fcall  of  the  Foules.  13  Ilrael  hauing  becne 
plagued  for  their  ilnnes,  fhall  be  gathered  a- 
g.une  s\  ith  eternall  tauour. 

^ctcfo;c  tbou  fonnc  of 
man ,  pjopbeeic  agamft 
C5og,  ancfap,Xbusfaitb 
tbe IL02C  <5  «r>  ©  zseholo, 
3 jm  againft  tbec  ©  <5og, 
tljc  cbiefe  P21UCC  of  t0efl)ccb  9  Xubal 

i  ^nb  3J  mill tutnt  thee  bacfec,  anb 
||  leaue  but  tbcfitt  patt  of  tbec,  anc  lbill 
caufe  thee  to  tome  bp  ftom  tbe  t  /Bojtl) 
patts ,  anb  lbill  bung  tbec  bpon  tljc 
mountatnes  of  3Iff  acl : 

j  ^nb^ibiu  fnntc  tbpboibout  of 
tbp 


•Ch=rU<S. 
«1.  and  tf. 
18. 


thee  mrb 
jlxe  pU^uci, 
Or,drowe 
theebtukf, 
mib  on  beo^ 
of  fix  teeth, 
as  chtta.    3  ?. 
f 

\Hth.thc 
lietcf  the 
North. 


Again  ft  Gog,        Chap.xxxix. 


an 


dMa 


fHekto/: 

ticrtre. 

|  Heir  the 


\\Or,eonft 


\\Or,,Mr- 
lim. 

|l  Or,  make 
fire  oj  then. 


Ithcs. 


\Thtttu, 

hem»h't- 
tude  of  Got. 


t  Hei  men 
of  commit- 


tliv  left  hanb ,  anb  uull  caufc  thine  at; 
toibes  to  fall  out  of  thp  right  hanb. 

4.  Zhoufhaitfall  bpon  the  moun 
tames  of  Jftaei,  thou  sail  thp  banbs, 
anu  the  people  that  ^  unth  tf)ce :  3  rmu 
giuc  thee  bnto  the  raucnous  biros  of  v 
ucrr  tfoit,  anbtothebeafts  of  the  ficlb 
ttobcbctiourcb. 

5  Xhou  (halt  fall  fcpon  t  the  open 
ficlb ,  fo:  3  haue  fpoKcn  a ,  faitlj  the 
2L02D<5©e». 

6  3no3Jrbilircnbafirconfi0ago8, 
anb  among  them  that  bibeli  ||  wreicQp 

mthcples,anbthepfl)ailUnoU)that3J 

amtheHOlBI?. 

7  S)Dibtll3ltnaltcmpholp49amc 
ftuoinen  uitDc  mtbft  of  mp  people  3it 
rael,  ano  3  iDtll  not  let  them  pollute  mp 
holp  ji3amcanpmo,2C  anbthehcathen! 
ttjail  hnoib  that  31  am  the  %  o  a  »,  the ! 
holp<£>nem3?fracl. 

8  €  fficholb ,  it  is  tome ,  anb  (t  is 
bone,  fatth  the  !Lo2b  <££>*>,  this  is  the 
bap  Whereof  3  haue  fpofcett. 

9  3lnb  thep  that  btttcll  m  tlic  cities 
of '3irracl,fhaii  goe  fozth,  atibfhaufetj 
on  fire,  anbburne  rt)c  lbcapons,  both! 
the  fhteios  anb  the  bucklers,  the  botbes 
anb  rhcarroUies,  anbtlKi!l)anbQaucs! 
anb  the  fpeates,  anb  thep  (hall  butne 
them  unth  fir  cfciicn  peer  es. 

io  s>o that rhcpfhall take  no tboob 
out  of  the  ficlb,  neither  rut  bourne  any 
out  of  the  fcurefts:  fin  thep  (hall  burnc 
the  tbeapons  fttth  fire,  anb  they  (hall 
fponethofcthat  fpoileb  them,  anb  rob 
rhofc  that  robbeb  them,  faith  the  2l02b 

ii  C3mDtt(halcomctopaffcatthat 
Dap,  th«gi  unii  giuc  bnto  <5og  apiacc 
there  of  gtauesm  3Jfracl,  the  baucp  of 
the  paffengers  on  the  caff  of  the  <S>ea : 
anb  it  (hall  (top  the  ||  nofes  of  the  palter 
gcrs,  anb  there  (hall  thep  bunc  C5og, 
anb  aiihts  multttubcanb  thep  fhal  call 
it,  thctoailep  of  ||$amon-  gog 

it  3tub  fcuen  moneths  fliall  the 
houfc  of  3Jfrael  bee  burping  of  them, 
that  thep  map  eleanfe  the  lanb. 

ij  Pea  all  the  people  of  the  lanb  (hail 
burletiiem,  anb  it  (hall  be  to  them  a  rc- 
noinne the oap that  3  (hall  bcglonfieb, 
faith  the  H  02b  ©<Di>. 

14.  3lnb  thep  (hall  fcucr  out  tmen  of 
conrtnuaicmplotmcttt.paffmg  through 
the  lanb,  to  bune  unththe  paffengers 
thofethatrcmamc  bponthc  faceof  the 
earth  to  denfett:  after  the  cnb  of  fcuen 
moneths  (hallthcpfearcl). 


g°g' 


\\rkjtu,rhe 
multitude. 


%Jltugh- 


\Heb.areal 
go*i,. 


15  3lnb  the  paffengers  that  paffc 
thjongh  the  lanbcnjijcn  any  fcetha 
mans  bone,  then  (hail  he  t  fct  bp  a  figue '  t  H.i.h,u 
top  it,  till  the  burtcrs  haue  buncb  u  m 
the  bailep of  Canton -gog. 

i6  ^nbatfothctwmeoftheemcfhjii 
be  1 1  Djamonalj :  thus  thai  thep  clcufc  the 
laitb. 

17  C3nbthoufonncofman,irhus| 
faith  the  2.02b  gojd,  §>pcakefbntoif *<•*.»,*, 
cucrp  fcathercb  fonlc,anb  to  cucrv  bcaft  I 
of  thcfielb,  ^ffcmble  pour  fclucs,  anb 
come,  gather  pour  fclucs  on  cucrp  ffoc 
to  mp  ||  fatrtficc  that  3  boc  farrtficc  fo: 
ipou  ,  cuen  a  great  faenfice  bpon  tl)c 
mountatncsof'JfcacUhatpcmapcat 
fled)  ano  b2inlicbloob. 

18  Pefhallcatcthcflcnjof  thcmigh- 
tic,  anb  b2inSc  the  bloob  of  the  piiuccs 
of  the  carrh.of  rammcs,of  lambcsanb 
of  t  goats,  of  bullocUs,  all  of  them  fat? 
lings  of  ffiafhan. 

19  3inb  pee  (hall  cate  fat  mi  pec  be 
full,  anb  b2inftc  bloob  till  pccbcb2im^ 
bcn,of  mp  facrtficc  ibhtth  31  haue  £acrt&= 
cebfo2pou. 

io  Xhus  pee  (hail  be  filleb  at  mp  ra^ 
ble  Vbitl)  ho2fcsanb  charets,lbtth  mtgl> 
ttc  men,  anb  lutth  all  men  of  tuarre, 
faith  the  iL02b<3o©. 

zt  3lnb3JVbill  fct  mpgl02p  among 
the  heathen,  anb  all  the  heathen  thai  fee 
mp  uibgemcitt  that  3  haue  erecutcb, 
anb  mp  hanbe  that  3  Ijauc  latb  bpon 
them. 

%%  £>o  the  houfc  of  3Jfrael  (ball 
ftnoU)  that  3 jm  the  ILovtp  their  <5ob 
from  that  bap  anb  fo2iuarb. 

z3  C3nbthc  heathen  (IjailUttottic 
that  tl;e houfc  of  3Ifraelibeiuitito  cap- 
nmtlc  fo2  tl)cir  tntciuttie :  becaufc  thep 
ttcfpaffcbagamftme,  rhcrefoje  htb  3 
mp  fate  from  them,  anb  gauc  them  into 
the  hanb  of  thctr  enemies  fo  fell  thep 
allbpthefiuo2b. 

24-  3(cco2bmgto  their  bncleanncITe, 
anb  acco2bittg  to  their  tranfgrcffions 
haue  3  bone  bnto  them,  anb  IjiD  mp 
face  from  them. 

25  Xhercfojc  thus  faith  the  Ho2b 
(P©e>  ,  irJoibunll  Jbnttgagainc  the 
capttuttteof^acob,  attb  haue  tneretc 
bpon  the  \bholc  honfc  of  3tfracl,  attb 
Vblllbciclousfo2mpholpiyamc : 

26  Sifter  that  thep  haue  b02ttc  thcit 
n)ame,atiballtheirtrefpaffcs,\bhcrbp 
thep  haue  trefpaffeb  agaitift  me ,  ttihcu 
thep  MbcU  fafclp  in  tljctr  lanbe ,  attb 
noncmabetiiemafcaiD. 
27  aahen 

54  2 


jThe  meafuring  Ezekiel.  of  the  Temple, 


*Clup  36. 


\ftth  h 

my  caujing 

of  them  c~c 


Mods. 28, 

a£lS.2.l7. 


|j  Or,  VMH 

which. 


27  nabcu  3  baue  brought  them  a*  | 
game  from  the  people,  anD  gatbeteb 
them  out  of  their  enemies  lanes,  anb ! 
*am  fanctificb  tn  them  in  the  Cgijt  of 
many  nations; 

28  3Cl)enfl)ailtl)n?bnotbtnat3lam; 
tlie  H  «D  h  id  ttjeit  god,  t  lbljitb  caufeb  | 
tljcm  to  be  leo  into  taptiuttle  amongrbc 
heathen  :  but  3  baue  gatbeteb  them 
bnto  their  oibne  lanb,  anb  baue  left 
none  oftbcniatunnoic  there. 

29  /Rcitljetibill^bibcmyfaccanp 
mo2C  from  them :  foi  3  baue  *  poibicb 
out  my  Spirit  bpon  the  Ijoufc  of  3JC 
racl,faitb  tljc  3to?b  <5o  jd. 

CHAP.    XL. 

1  The  time,  nianer  and  end  of  the  vifion.  6 
ThedefciiptionoithcEafrgate,  to  oiche 
North  gate,  14  oftheSouth  gate,  32.  ot' 
the  Eaft  gate,  35  andoftheNoithgate.  39 
Eight  Tables.  44  Thechambcrs.  4S  The 
porch  of  the  houfe. 

■<SE  & tl^ fiuc  anl)  rommctt) 
Sy  yecrcof  our  taptiuitic ,  in 
iw*  the  beginning  of  the  ycre, 
a  m  trjt  tenth  day  of  tlje  mo; 
nctl) ,  in  tljc  fourteenth 
yecre  after  that  trjc  title  lbasfmittcn.in 
the  fclfc  fame  bav  ,  the  banD  of  the 
Houb  ttias  bpon  mcc,  anb  brought 
mt  thither. 

1  3Jn  the  bilious  of  Gob  brought 
he  me  into  the  lanb  of  3jfracl,anb  fct 
nice  bpon  a  bery  high  mouutatne,  ||bj> 
ibljitl)wasas  theframeofa  ntic  ontlje 
<S>outb. 

3  3(nb!)t  brought mcc  thither ,  anb 
bcholb,  thcie  wasaman,  ibljofc  appea- 
rance was  iibc  the  appearance  of  bjafJc, 
uuth  a  line  of  flare  m  his  hatib,  %  a  twa* 
rutins  reeb .  anb  he  ftoob  m  the  gate. 

4  3lnD  the  man  faibc  bnto  mcc; 
Sonne  of  man,beholb  lbttb  thine  epes, 
anb  hear  e  lbitb  thine  cares,  9  fct  thine 
heart  bpon  all  that  3  (ball  (hew  thee : 
foj  to  the  intent  that  3  might  fbcib 
tlicmbnto  thee  artthoubjought  hither: 
Declare  all  that  thou  fecit,  to  the  Ijoufc 
ofljfrael. 

<,  3(nD  bcholb  a  ibail  on  the  outfiDc 
of  the  houfe  rouno  about :  anb  m  the 
mans  hanb  a  meafurmg  rccb  of  fire  tu 
bite3  long,  bf  the  cubitc ,  anD  an  hanb 
b;eabtb :  fo  bee  mcafurco  the  bieabtb  of 
the  builDlng ,  one  rccb,  anb  the  height 
onerccb. 

6  C  £heu  came  bee  bnto  the  gate 


tibbicbioottctb  toibarb  the  eaft,  anb 
ibentbptbe  ftarrcs thereof ,  anDmea* 
furcb  the  tbjefbolb  of  the  gate,  which  wa 
one reeb  bjoab,  anb  the  other  tbzcfbolb 

Of  the  gate,  which  w  as  OM  tttD  b20ab. 

7  3inb  euery  uttlc  chamber  was  one 
reeb  long ,  anb  one  reeb  bjoab,  anb  b^ 
tibccnc  the  Utle  chambers  were  fiuc  cu= 
bites,  ?  the  rbzcfbolb  of  tljc  gate,  bp  the 
pojcb  of  the  gate  lbitbm  was  one  reeb. 

8  J?e  meafurcb  alfo  tlje  poztb  of  the 
gateibithm.onerecb. 

v  Xljcn  meafurcb  bee  the  pozch  of 
the  gate,  eight  tubitcs,  anb  the  polfcs 
thereof  tibo  cubits,  anb  the  pojcb  of  the 
gatewasinibarb. 

10  2inb  the  Utle  chambers  of  the  gate 
€aftibarb,  were  tbjee  on  this  Cbe,  anb 
tb:ec  onthatfibe ,  tbcptbjce  were  of  one 
mcafure,  anb  the  poftcs  hab  oncmea-- 
furc  on  this  fibe,  anb  on  that  fibc. 

1 1  Stub  bee  meafurcb  tlje  hzcaotb  of 
the  cnttie  of  tlie  gatctcn  cubits,  and  the 
length  of  tlje  gatctbirtecnc  cubues. 

12  Xlje  t  fpace  alfo  befw  the  litlc 
chambcrswas  one  nibitc  on  thisfide,  anb 
the  fpace * as  one  cubitc  on  that  fibc,  anb 
the  litlc  chambers  were  fire  cubitcs  on 
this  fibc,  anb  fire  cubits  on  that  fibe. 

13  fyeemcafurcb  then  the  gatcfrom 
tberoofroftbeone  Utle  chamber  to  the 
roofc  of  another :  the  b:cabtb  was  fine 
anbt\bcnticcubits,Doo:eagauiftDoo2e. 

14-  ftcmabc  alfo  polks  of  tlnccfcojc 
cubitcs,  euen  bnto  the  pofte  of  tlje  court 
rounb  about  the  gate. 

15  3tnb  from  the  face  of  the  gate  of 
the  entrance,  bnto  the  faccofthcpoiclj 
of  the  inner  gate,  w  n  e  fiftic  tubites. 

16  3nb  ihe.e  were  tnarroib  ibmbolbs 
to  the  litlc  chambers,  anb  to  their  pofts 
lbitbm  the  gate  rounb  about,  anb  line- 
ibifc  to  the  ||  arches :  anb  lbmboibes 
were  rounb  about  ||  mibarb :  anb  bpon 
ccbpofr  w  ere  painic-  trees. 

17  Xbcn  brought  be  mc  mto  the  out 
lbarb  court ,  anb  loc  dierc  were  cbam 
bers ,  anb  a  pauemeut ,  mabc  fo:  the 
court  rounb  about :  trjtrtic  tljambcrs 
wee  ppon  the  paucment. 

18  3lnb  the  pauement  by  the  fibc  of 
the  gates  otter  agamft  the  length  of  the 
gatcs.was  the  loiber  pauement. 

19  Xbcn  bee  meafurcb  tlie  bjcabtb 
front  the  ftucfront  of  the  lo\bcr  gate, 
bnto  the  fozefront  of  the  inner  court 

uutboutanbiitiDicb  cubits  tafUbarb 
aub/5o:thU)arb. 

20  C3lnb  tljcgatcofthconabarb 
court, 


I  Hcb.  whofe 
facewi%  the 
ivjyrcw.ird 
the  Eait. 


\Hchr.h- 
mtt ,  er 
icmi. 


\Htt  Mtl 


htt. 

I  Or,  uuh. 


\Or.fm 

vilhcat. 


an 


dofthi 


\Heb.  whofe 
face  was. 


net  or  por- 
ches. 


\Hthr. 
breadth. 


court,  t  that  lootico  toibatb  the  ji2o:rh, 
he  meafurcn  the  length  thereof,  anb  the 
tyeaoth  thereof. 

21  anb  the  little  chambers  thereof 
were  thjee  on'this  fibe,  anb  thjee  on  that 
fibcanb  the  poftes  thereof,  anb  the  Hat- 
ches thereof  ructe  aftetthc  meafutc  of 
the  ftrft  gate :  the  length  thereof  was  fit 
tie  cubites ,  ano  the  bicabth  fiuc  anb 
tibentic  cubites. 

ix  anb  their  lninbolbcs,  anb  their 
arehes,anbthnrpalmctrccs,wereaftcr 
the  meafurc  of  the  gate  that  loo&eth  to- 
Vbarbs  the  Call,  anb  theyibcntbpbn- 
to  it  by  fcuen  ftcps,anb  the  arches  tt)tvt 
of  were  before  thctn. 

23  anb  the  gate  of  the  inner  court 
w«  oucr  agamft  the  gate  toibarb  the 
/2ozth  anb  toibarb  the  €aft,  anb  hee 
mcafureb  from  gate  to  gate  an  htm- 
bjeth  cubites. 

24  IE  after  that  hee  brought  me  to 
ibarb  thc£>outh,anb  bcholb  a  gate  to- 
ibarb the  £>outh,  anb  he  meafurcb  the 
poftes  thereof,  ano  the  arches  thereof 
aceoiomg  to  theft  meafures. 

25  3tttb  there  were  lbttlbOlbcS  til  it, 

anb  m  the  arches  thereof  rounb  about, 
li&cthofcU>mbolbcs,thc  length  was  fi£ 
tie  cubites,  anb  the  tycabth  fiuc  anb 
ttbentie  cubites. 

26  ^nb  there  were  fcUCtl  CCpStOgOC 

bp  to  it ,  anb  the  arches  thereof  were  be- 
fo:e  them ,  anb  it  hab  palmc  tttcs ,  one 
on  this  fibe ,  anb  another  on  that  fibe 
bponthc  poftes  thereof. 

27  anb  there  was  a  gate  m  the  inner 
court  tolbarbthc  3>ourh,  anbhemea- 
fureb  from  gate  to  gate  toibarb  the 
£>outh  an  hunbzcb  cubites. 

25  anb  hee  brought  me  to  the  inner 
court  by  the  S>outh  gate,  anbhe  mcaf* 
rcb  the  £>outh  gate  acco?mng  to  thefe 
meafures, 

29  anb  the  little  chambers  thetcof, 
anb  the  poftes  thereof,  anbthcarches 
thereof  accozbmg  to  thefe  mcarures, 
ano  there we,eib!nboiHcsinit,anbintl)t 
arches  thereof  rounb  about :  it  wa^nttlc 
cubites  long,  anb  Sue  anb  tlbcntic  cu^ 
bites  bzoab. 

30  ^nb  the  arches  rounb  about  were 
fiue  anb  ttbenty  cubits  long,  ano  fine  cu= 
bites  tbzoao. 

31  ^nb  the  arctjes  thereof  were  to; 
ibarb  the  btter  court,  anb  paime  trees 
were  bpon  the  poftes  thereof ,  anb  the 
going  bp  to  it  iiad  eight  fteps. 

32  C  anb  hee  fought  me  into  the 


Chap.xl.  buildings  of  it. 


inner  court  toibarb  the  €aft,  aub  hee 
meafurcb  the  gate  acco;ouig  to  thefe 
meafures. 

33  anb  the  little  chambers  thereof, 
anb  the  poftes  thereof,  anb  the  arches 
thereof  were  accozbmg  to  thefc  mca 
furcs,anbihere\\creU)inboibcsthcrnn, 
auo  in thcarthesthcrcof rounb  about, 
'twas  fifnc  cubites  long,  anb  fiuc  anb 
tibenne  cubits  bjoao. 

34-  anb  the  arches  thereof  were  to- 
ibarb the  outibarb  court,  ano  palmc 
trees  w^ebpon  the  poftes  thereof  on 
this  fibe,  anb  on  that  fibe,  ano  the  going 
bptottiiadctghtftcps. 

55  €  anb  hee  brought  me  to  the 
/[3o2th  gate,  anb  meafurcb  »  accorting 
to  thefe  meafures. 

36  Xhc  little  chambers  thereof,  the 
poftes  thereof,  ano  the  arches  thereof 
ano  the  ttnnboibcs  to  it  rounb  about : 
the  length  was  fiftic  cubites  ,  anb  the 
bzeabth  fine  anb  ttbentie  cubites. 

37  anb  the  poftes  thereof  were  to^ 
lbarb  the  bttcr  court,  anb  palmc  trees 
were  bpon  the  polls  ttjcTcof  on  this  ftt)C, 
anb  on  that  fibe ,  anb  the  going  bp  to  it 
had  eight  ftcps. 

38  anb  the  chambers ,  anb  the  en 
tries  thereof  were  by  the  poftes  of  the 
gatcs.tbherc  they  lbafhcb  the  burnt  of 
fenng. 

39  Onbin  the  pozch  of  the  gate  were 
tibo  tables  on  this  fibe ,  anb  tibo  tables 
on  thatftbeto  flap  thereon  the  burnt  of 
fenng ,  ano  the  untie  offering ,  aub  the 
teefpafle  offering. 

40  anb  at  the  fibe  without,  liasone 
goeth  bp  to  the  entry  of  thciftonh  gate, 
were  tibo  tables,  anb  on  the  other  fibe, 
ltohich  was  atthepozchof  thegate,  were 
tibo  tables. 

41  jfoure  tables  were  on  this  fibe,anb 
fourc  tables  on  that  fibe ,  by  the  fioe  of 
the  gate .  eight  tables,  thereupon  they 

flCll)  their  lacnfices. 

42  anb  the  foure  tables  were  ofhclbcn 
ftoncfo:  the  burnt  offering,  ofacubitc 
anb  an  halfc  long,  anb  a  cubitc  y  a  haifc 
bioao,  anb  one  cubit  high  :ibhereupon 
alfo  they  laibcthc  inftruments  inhere 
lbtththcy  fleiDc  the  burnt  offenuganb 
thefatnfice. 

43  anbibithinwerc|hooli5,anhanb 
bioab,  fafteuco  rounb  about,  ano  bpon 
thctablcs  watheflcfi)  ofthc  offering. 

44  canbibithoutthc  inner  gate 
were  the  chambers  of  the  fingers  in  the 
inner  court,  ibhtch  «-^attl)cfrt»cof  the 

Cccc  jHoith 


\\Or,atiht 
Hi'- 


\\0,,> 


mat- 
ron/ or  the 
twoh.trth- 
(Itnet. 


The  buildings,  Ezckiel.  and  chambers 


Orw.ird 
teraitMtKc 
and  fa  ver. 


||  Or,  m 
irnnce. 


/ftozth  gate :  anb  their  pzofpectwas  to^ 
iu<arD  the  ^poutl) ,  one  at  tDc  noe  of  the 

€aft  gate,  !)aiung  the  pzofpect  toibarb ; 

thC/30Ztl1. 

45  31nt)  lice  faib  buto  me  ;  Xhts 
chamber  ibhofc  p:ofpctt  is  toibarb  the  | 
£>outh,  >=  foz  the  pzictts ,  the  Keepers  of 
the  i|  charge  ofthchoufc. 

46  3no  tlic  chamber  ibhofc  pzofpect 
is  toibarb  tlie  /3o.ztl),is  foz  the  pziefts  the 
Ueepers  of  tl)e  charge  of  theaitar :  thefe 
are  tlic  fontics  of  zabofc  among  the 
fonncs  of  ?Leui,  ibhtch  tome  nccreto 
tlje  IL  o  k  id  to  inmtflcr  buto  him. 

47  S>o  tic  mcafurcb  tlic  court ,  an 
hunbzeth  cubitcsiong,anbanhunbzeth 
cubites  bzoabfourefquarc,  anb the  ai 
tar  1h.1t  was  before  tlic  tioufc. 

4S  C  31nb  lie  bzought  tue  to  tlic 
pozch  of  the  houfe,  anb  mcafurcb  each 
pofrofthcpozch,fiuc  cubitcs  on  thlsfibc, 
anb  fine  cubitcs  on  that  fibe: anb  tlic 
bzebth  of  tlic  gate  uptime  cubitcs  on 
this  fibc,  anb  thzee  cubites  on  that  fibe. 

49  3Ehe  length  of  tUc  pozch  was 
tlbcntic  cubitcs ,  anb  tlic  bzebth  clcucn 
cubites,  anb  he  brought  me  by  thcltcps, 
whereby  they  ibent  bp  to  tt ,  anb  there 
were  pillars  by  the  potts,  one  on  this 
fibe,anb  another  on  that  fibc. 

CHAP.    XL  I. 

The  meafures  ,   parts ,  chambers   and  orna- 
ments of  the  Temple. 

¥l$V8$g  fteniiarb  he  bzought  me 
^:^m\f^  ^  the  Hcmplc ,  anb  mea* 
$3£s^  fnrcb  the  potts,  fir  cubitcs 
^bzoab  on  the  one  fibc,  anb 
■?£&&££$  fire  cubitcs  bzoab  on  the 
other  ODe,  which  was  the  bzcbth  of  the 
Xabernaclc. 

1  3tnb  tlic  bzebth  of  the  llbooze  was 
teunc  cubites,  anbthcfibcsofthcboozc 
were  fine  cubitcs  on  the  one  fibc,  anb  fine 
cubitcs  on  the  other  fibe,  anb  he  tncafu- 
rebthe  length  thcrcoffozttecubttcs,aub 
the  bzcbth  tlbcntic  cubitcs. 

3  Hhcuibcnthcmibarb,  anbinca- 
fureb  the  pott  of  the  booze  tibo  cubites, 
anb  the  booze  fire  cubitcs  ,  anb  the 
bzcbth  of  theboozefcuen  cubitcs. 

4  £>o  he  mcafurcb  the  length  thcr 
ofttt)cnttccubttcs,anb  the  bzcbth  tiben 
tic  cubitcs  befozc  the  tcmplcaub  he  faib 
unto  me  1 this  •  tlic  molt  holy  place. 

5  Sifter  he  meafiireb  the  lball  oftlje 
houfe  fire  cubites,  anb  the  bzcbth  of  euc- 
rie  fibc  -  chamber  foure  cubitcs  r ounb  a? 


bout  the  houfe  on  cuery  fioe. 

6  3lno  the  fibc- chambers  wcuttlnec 
one  oucc  an  other,  anb  ||  thirtic  in  ozber, 
anb  they  cntrcb  into  the  lball  ibhicl) 
was  of  the  houfe  foz  the  fibe  chambers 
rounb  about,  that  they  might  t  haue 
hoio ,  but  they  hab  not  hoio  m  the  lball 
of  tlje  houfe. 

7  3tnbttherewas  an  enlarging  anb  a 
llunbing  about  (till  bplbarb  to  the  fibc 
chambers,  foz  the  lbmbtng  about  of  the 
houfe  lbeut  ttill  bplbarb  rounb  about 
the  houfe :  thcrcfozc  the  bzcbth  of  the 
houfe  was  iwi  bplbarb,  anb  fo  tnercafeb 

from tllClOlbCft chamber  tO  thChighettby 

thcnubbclt. 

s  35faibaifothc  height  of  the  houfe 
rounb  about  the  founbations  of  the 
fioe  chambers  were  a  full  reebe  of  fire 
great  cubites. 

9  Ulic  tht'clmcflc  of  the  lball  Which 
was  foz  the  fibc  chamber  ibithout,  was 
fine  cubitcs,  anb  that  Which  lbaslcft, 
was  the  place  of  the  fioe  -  chambers  that 
sercibithin. 

10  31nb  bctibeene  the  chambers  was 
the  lbibcuefle  of  tibentte  cubitcs  rounb 
about  the  houfe  on  cuery  fibe. 

1 1  3nb  the  boozes  ofthe  fibc  -  chain* 
bcrs  were  toibarb  the  place  thatYbas 
left,  one  booze  towarb  the /3ozth,  anb 
an  other  booze  toibarb  the  3>outh,  anb 
the  bzcbth  of  the  place  that  mas  left,  wa 
fine  cubitcs  rounb  about. 

11  iSoibthc  builbmg  that  was  befoze 
the  fepcrate  piaccat  the  enb  toibarb  tlic 
tectt,  wis  fcucnty  cubitcs  bzoab.anb  the 
lball  of  the  builbmg  was  fine  cubitcs 
thtcUc  rounb  about ,  ano  the  length 
thereof  ninety  cubitcs. 

13  5>o  he  mcafurcb  the  houfe,  an 
huubzett)  cubitcs  long,  anb  the  fcparate 
place  anb  the  builbmg  With  the  waiics 
thereof  an  hunbzeth  cubitcs  long. 

14  3llfo  the  bzcbth  of  the  face  ofthe 
houfe, ano  of  the  fcparate  place  toibarb 
the  call ,an  hunbzeth  cubitcs. 

15  3tub  he  mcafurcb  the  length  ofthe 
biitlbmgoucr  agatntt  the  fcparate  place 
lbhich  wis  bchmb  it,  anb  the  !l  galleries 
thereof  on  the  one  fibe.anb  on  the  other 
fibc  an  hunbzeth  cubites  lint!)  the  inner 
temple ,anb  the  pozches  ofthe  court. 

i6  Xhc  booze  potts  ano  the  narrow 
lbinboibs ,  anb  the  galleries  rounb  a 
bout  on  their  thzec  ftozies ,  oner  agamfl 
the  booze  t  fieieb  With  lboob  rounb  a- 
bout ,  ||  anb  from  the  grounb  up  to  the 
Wmboibs,?  the  lUinbotbs  were  coucrcb. 
17   Co 


I  H.I.  fir- 
chamber  o 

chamber. 

I I  Or,  three 

and  thirty 
timet, or  foot. 
f  Heb.  be 

hoi  den. 

\Heb  it  v*s 
made  broa- 
der an  {  Trent 
re  and. 


Or,feue- 

1,1  n\i,'i-ett 

Or,  ivj/irt 

ilh  p!!*rt 


t  HebfxUn* 

- 
\\Orsand 
the  ground 
ZWO  the 
u-.ndtwet. 


of  the  Temple,         Chap.xl 


n 


forPriefbj&c. 


\Heh.7THA~ 

fnrel. 


\Hil.pcft 


i7  3:othataboiicthcboozc,cucnbn 
to  the  inner  Ijjoufc  anb  without,  anD  bp 
ail  tfjc  u>aii  routtb  about  Withm  anb 
ttuthoutbptnicafiire. 

18  anb  it  Was  mabc  With  Cheru 
bints  anb  0altnc  trees ,  fo  that  a  Valine 
tree  was  bctwccuc  a  Cherub  anb  aCh£ 
ntb;anbeucr>  Cherub  h  id  two  fates. 

19  £>o  that  the  fate  of  a  man  was  to- 
warb  tDc  $alme  -  tree  on  the  one  fibc, 
anb  the  fate  of  aponglpontowatbthe 
l&Umc-trcc  on  the  other  fibc :  it  Was 
ntabc  th.zough  an  the  Ijoufc  rounb  & 
bout. 

20  5rrom  the  grounb  V>nto  about 
the  booze  wcrcCherubuns  anb0abne 
trees  mabc,  $  on  the  wall  of  the  temple. 

11  XhetpofrcsofthcXcmplcVbcre 
fquarcb ,  and  the  face  of  the  £>attctuarp, 
the  appearance  ot  the  one  as  thcappca= 

ratUC0' the  other. 

11  Xhe  altar  of  Woob  was  thzce  eu;  t 
btts  high,  anb  the  length  thereof  two  i 
tubus ;  anb  the  comers  thereof  anb  the ! 
length  thereof  anb  the  wanes  thereof 
were  of  Woob:  anb  l)cc  faib  onto  nice, 
£hts  is  tljc  ^ablc  that  is  befoze  the 

HO  HI?. 

13  anDthcZcmpleanbthc&anc; 
tuanc  had  two  boozes. 

14  anb  the  boozes  had  rwoleaucs 
picce,trbotunung  itaues,  tvbolcaucs 

foz  the  one  Dooze,  anb  two  leaues  foz 
the  other  booze. 

15  ^nb  there  Were  mabe  on  them, 
on  the  boozes  of  the  Xcmple ,  Cherts  ! 
bims  anb ^aintc -trees,  hfee  as  Were 

mabC  t)pOntI)Cll)allCS.anb  there  were 

thiclte  pianettes  topon  the  face  of  the 
pozch  Without- 

16  anb  there  were  narr  oro  WinboWcs  - 
anb  tealntc- trees  on  the  onefifce  anb! 
on  the  other  fibe,  on  the  fibes  of  the! 
pozch,  anb  topon  the  fibc  chambers  of 
thchoufe,  anbthitKcpianKcs. 

CHAP.    XLII. 

1  The  chambers  for  the  Pneils.  13  Thevfether- 
of.    19  The  meafures  of  the  outward  court. 

$euhcbzoughtmefoozth 
into  the  Dttcr  court,  the 
wap  tomato  the  jfrozth, 
anbheebzought  nice  into 
thechamber^hatwasouer 

agamft  thefeparatc  place,  ft  whith  wis 

befoze  thebuilbmg  towarb  the  Jftozth. 
2  Befoze  the  length  of  an  huubzeth 

tubites  was  the  /ftozth  booze ,  anb  the 

bzeabth  was  fifttc  cubits. 


*  isDucc  agamft  the  twentte  ibices 
Which  wac  foz  tlje  tuner  court,  ano  oucr 
agamft  the  paucment  Which  was  fo:  the 
Utter  court,  was  gaiiertc agamft  gallery 
inthzeertoncs. 

Ar  anb  befoze  the  chambers  was  a 
ttiaiftc  of  ten  cubitcs  bzeabth  tttwarb,  a 
Wapof  ouccubitc,  anb  their  boozes  to; 
warb  the  i^oztlj. 

5  /5ow  the  topper -thambcrs  we,e 
(hoztcr :  foz  thegaiicricsilVbcrchigljer 
then  thcfcllthcn  the  lower,  auo  then 
the  nubblemoft  of  thebuilbmg. 

6     jfOZ  tilt?  were  lit  thZCC  Hones ,  bttt 

had  not  pillars  as  the  pillars  of  the 
courts  :thercfozetiiebui!dinuU)as(irait 
nebmozc  then  the  lowcft ,  anb  the  mite 
blcmoft  from  the  grounb. 

7  anb  the  Wall  that  was  wtthout 
oucr  agamft  the  chambers  toWaros 
the  Utter  court  on  the  fozepart  of  the 
chambers ,  the  length  thereof  was  fifttc 
tubites. 

8  ifoz  the  length  of  thcthambers 

that  were  ttt  tl)Cbtttt  COUrt  was  fifttc  tu; 

bites:  anb  loe,  befoze  the  1-cmplc were 
an  huubzeth  cubttes. 

9  anb llfromrmbcr thefethambcrs 
||wasthccntrieonthe€aftfibc,!iasonc 
goeth  mto  them  fromthcDttcr  court. 

10  Xhethambcrswcretn  thethitfic- 
nesofthetbailofthe  court  towarb  the 
€aft,  oucr  agamft  the  feparate  place, 
anb  oucr  agamft  the  butlbtng. 

11  anb  the  wapbefozc  them  was  io$c 
the  appearance  of  the  ehambcrs.Whtch 
were  towarbthcJ?ozth,asiongas  thep 
andasbzoat)  as  the? ,  anb  all  their  go-- 
ings  out  mere  both  atcozbmg  to  their 
fafl)ions,anbaccozbtngto  their  boozes. 

ii  anb  atcozbmg  to  the  boozes  of  the 
thambcrs  that  were  towarb  the  S>outh, 
>.vas  aboozcmthehcaDof  thcvbav,^n 

the  wap  btrcctlp  befoze  p  mail  towarb 
the  Caft,  as  one  cntrcth  mto  them. 

1  j  CIEhcn  fapb  hec  bnto  nice,  Xhc 
/Bozth  chambcrs,andthcS>outh  chains 
bcrs,\Dhicharcbcfozcthefeparatcpiacc 
thep  be  holp  chambers ,  Where  p  pztcfts 
that  appzoath  unto  thejL©K5?  fl)all 
eatcthe  moft  holp  things :  there  fl)all 
thep  lap  the  moft  holp  things,  anb  the 
meat  offering,  <*  the  finite  offering  anb 
thetrefpaffe  offrtng,fozthc  place  >-  holp. 

14  nahett  the  pziefts  enter  tlicrem, 
thcnntail  thep  not  gocoutof  the  holp 
plate  into  the  Dttcr  court,  but  there  thep 
than  lap  their  garments ,  mheretn 
thepmttuftet  :  foz  thep  are  holp,  anb 
•    Crcc  z  mail 


\OrJidtjlt 
fihtfe. 
\\Or,mdthc 

filled  cfrl:t 
timer  md 
themiddlc- 
mft. 


\\Or.frovt 
ihepl&t. 
\pr,hr,thu 
broHght  me. 
\Or,  Hi  hec 


iGod 


return  eth. 


Ezckiel.  TheAItar,and 


fbail  put  on  other  garments ,  anb  (ban 

app^OCt)  tO  tlJOfC  tt)tngS  Vbbttl)  are  fr)2 

tl)e  people. 

15  jRoib  llirjen  bee  !)ao  mabc  an 
cnb  oftneafurtng  the  inner  boufc ,  hec 
b2ougbt  mce  foojtb  toibarb  the  gate, 
lul)ofep:ofpecttstott>arDtDc<£au\ano 
mcafureb  tt  rounb  about. 

16  i)c  lueafttrcD  the  €aO  t  fibc  lVntli 
tl)e  mcafurtng  rceDe ,  fuic  DunD:etI) 
recbes,  ibitb  the  meafunng  reeb  rounD 
about, 

17  J?cc  mcafureb  the /fto2tb  fibc  fine 
Dunmetl)  recbes  ,  mul)  a  mcafurtng 
recD  rouno  about. 

is  tocc meafurcbtbe  §>outb fioc  fine 
bunmctbreebes ,  Untb  the  meafunng 
reebc. 

19  <[  V)tt  turneb  about  to  the  nDcft 
fibe ,  and  mcafureb  fiuc  buntyctb  recbes 
Until  the  meafunng rccb. 

20  $e  mcafureb  it  bv  the  fourc  fibes: 
rtiud  a  mail  rouno  aboutfiuchunbjeth 
reedc.  long,  anb  fine  hunbjeth  bjoao,  to 
malic  a  reparation  bctmeenc  the  ^>an 
ttuary  and  the  pjophanc  place. 

CHAP.    XLIII. 

1  The  returning  of  the  glory  of  God  into  the 
Temple.  7  The  linneot  llrael  hindered 
Godsprefence.  10  The  Prophetexhorteth 
them  to  repentance,  and  obferuation  of  the 
Lawofthehoule.  13  Themeaiures,  iS  and 
the  ordinances  of  the  Altar. 

5Ftcrtt»arbbc  brought  me 

tothe  gate,  euentlic  gate 

that  loohcth  toibarb  the 

Call. 

2   ^nbbeholb.thcglO' 

ty  of  the  ©ob  of  ^Ifraclcamc  from  the 

mavofthc^aft:anbIjisl)Oiccwasiiftca 

noifeof  many  *  maters,  anb  tljc  card) 

fbmcb  untb  ins  gtojy. 

j  3lnb  it  was  *acco2btng  to  the  appea 
rantc  of  the  bifionibbitb  3  fattvuen  at 
cozbtng  to  the  bifion  that  $  faU),l|lbhcn 
U  cametobcftroytbecitic :  anb  the  bt 
Rons  were  uuc  the  btfiott  that  3Jf<Ubby 
the  nucr  Chebar  :  and  5  fell  Upon , 
my  fate. 

4  3lnb  the  gl02ic  of  the  %  ®  m  id 
came  into  the  houfc  up  the  lbay  of  the 
gatc.ibbofc  p2ofpcct  is  toibarb  rbc€aft. ! 

5  Motile  £>pinttooHemebp,  anb 
b2oughtmee  into  the  inner  court,  anb 
beholb,  the  glo.2pof  tl)c  ILoiHjpnllcb: 
thehoufe. 

6  3lnb  3  fiearb  him fpcaiting  bnto  mc 


"Chap,  i- 
14. 

*  Chap.  1. 
andS.4. 

J  Or,  when  I 
c.tmc  to  pro- 
phecic/£«tf 
the  cttie 
foouldbt  de 
flroyed.See 
chsp  9.  2,5. 


out  of  the  houfc,*  the  man  ftoob  bv  me 
7  tLSubhefaibbntomc&onneof 
man,  the  plate  of  mp  th2one,  ano  the 
place  of  the  folcs  of  my  fectc,  inhere  3 
mm  bibcll  in  the  mibQ  of  thccbil02cn  of 
3lfracl  fo2  cucr,  ano  my  holy  flame, 

than  the  houfc  of  3Kracl  no  mo2Cbefilc, 
neither  they,  1102  their  lungs,  by  their 
mho2cbomc ,  no2  by  the  carHcifcs  of 
their  lungs  in  their  high  places. 

s  3Jn  their  fcttmg  of  their  th-'cfljolb 
by  my  tfjzefboltw,  anb  their  port  by  my 
poftcs,|janbtbcibaiibctibccncmcanb 
them,  they  hauc  cucn  bcfilcb  my  holy 
iRamc  by  their  abominations  that 
they  hauc  comttuttcb  :  lbhercfo.'c  3J 
haucconfumeb  them  in  mine  anger. 

9  fiolb  let  them  put  albay  their 
lblwcbome,  anb  the  carRCtfcs  of  their 
kings  farrc  from  mc ,  anb  Jl  Uul  blbcll 
m  the  miobeft  of  them  fo;  cucr. 

10  C  SChoufouncofmait,  (bcibtbc 
houfc  to  the  houfc  of  Jfraci,  that  they 
may  beafljameb  of  their  uuquttics^nb 
let  them  mcafurc  the  !l  patternc. 

11  3tnb  if  the?'  be  afhamcb  of  all  that 
the?  foauc  bonc;fl)elD  them  the  fo2me  of 
the  houfc,  anb  the  fafhion  thereof,  anb 
the  goings  out  thereof,  anb  the  com 
mings  in  thereof,  anb  all  the  fo2tnes 
thereof,  ano  all  the  02bmances  thereof, 
anb  all  thefomtcs  thereof ,  anb  all  the 
latbes  thereof :  s  Unite  it  m  their  fight, 
that  they  may  itecpe  the  ibbolc  fo.'mc 
thereof,  anb  all  the  £>2butances  tljcrof, 
anb  boc  them. 

12  Xbis  is  the  lam  of  the  houfc  Sip 
on  the  top  of  the  mountamc,  the  Ibbole 
limit  thereof  rounb  about  fhaiibemoft 

jhoiy:behoib,tlns>  the  lam  of  thehoufe. 

ij  Onb  thefc  are  the  mcafurcs  of  the 
3lltar  after  the  cubites  the  cubitc is a  cm 
1  bite  anb  an  hanb  b2cabth,cuni  the  t  bot- 
tom ih albe  a  mbitc,  anb  the  b2cabth  a  cm 
j  bitcanb  the  b02bcr  tljcrcofby  the  tcbgc 
I  thcr  of  rounb  about  lhaibe  a  (panne,  anb 
.  tins  iiiaihe  the  higher  place  of  the  aitar. 

1+  3lnb  from  the  bottom  vpon  the 
grounb,  cucn  to  the  lo\ber  fettle ,  (haibe 
tlbo  atbits  ,anb  theb2eabth  one  nibttc, 
anb  from  the  lefTcr  fettle  cucn  to  the 
greater  fettle  fhaibe  fourc  mbites,  anb 
the  b2cabth  "if  cubitc. 

15  £>o  the  t  ^itar  fhaibe  fourc  cubites, 
anb  from  the  t  altar  anb  bpibarb  Huibe 
fourc  Homes. 

i6  3lnb  the  altar  fhaibe  tlbeluc  cubites 
long,tvbelucb2oab ,  fquare  in  tljc  fourc 
fquarcs  thereof. 
17  anb 


||  Or,f,r 
there  was 
tut  x  ivitf 
hltxeencmc 
antithem. 


|J  Or  fnmrnr 
or  number. 


t  HthrU 


\Hchrhff, 


\Rth.Mnr. 

el.  that  a, 
the  Afaun- 
t  atre  of Cod. 
\Helr.A- 
n.'/  tl-A!  it. 
the  Lien  of 
Cod. 


Ins  ordinances. Chap.xliiij.      ThePrinces gace^ 


tHAfi.1 

tbnr  bajjdj 


17  3nb  the  fettle  fhaii  bee  fourteene 
cubitcs  long ,  anb  fourteene  b:oaD  m  t!)c 
foure  fquarcs  thereof,  anb  the  bo2bcr 
about  tt  OuIl.c  haifc  a  cubttc,anb  the  bot 
tomcthcreof  fiuiibea  cubitcabout,  ana 
htsftaircslhaiilookctowarbthcealt. 

is  C:3nbhefaibbntomc,:S>onncof 
man,rhus  faith  the  fLo:b  Gotd,  Xhcfc 
"f  the  omittances  ofthe  3iltac  tuthe 
bap  when  tlir>>  (halt  malic  tt  to  offer 
bucntoffnngsthcreon,  anbto  fpjmfelc 
bloob  thereon. 

19  3Inb  thou  (halt  gtue  to  the  p2icfts 
the  ?lcuttcs  that  be  of  the  fecbe  of  za=  j 
bofe ,  Which  appzoth  bnto  me ,  to  tnuu- 
ftec  bnto  mc,  faith  the  !Lo2b  <5  ©  p,  a 
pongbullocfeefcuafinne  offering. 

10  2nb  thou  fljait  ta&c  of  rtjc  bloob 
thereof,  anb  put  it  on  the  foure  homes 
of  it,  anb  on  the  foure  comer  s  of  the  fet- 
tle, anb  topon  the  bojbcr  rounb  about: 
thus  (halt  thou  tleaufe  anb  purgett. 

21  XhouthalttaUcthcbullocBcalfo 
of  the  fume  offcrmg,anb  hefhall  bnrne 
tt  tn  the  appotnttb  place  of  the  houfc 
Without  the  S>anctuarp. 

11  3nb  on  the  feconb  bap  thou  (halt 
offer  a  feib.be  of  the  goats  Without  blt= 
mifh  fo:  a  finnc  offering ,  anb  thep  (hall 
rtcanfcrhe^itar,  asrhcpbtb  ricanfett 
Wtththcbullocfee. 

25  ashen  thou  haft  mabeauenbe  of 
tleanrmg  it,  thou  (halt  offer  apong  bul 
loche  Without  blcmrfh,  anb  a  ranimc 
out  of  the  flocfee,  Without  blemifl). 

24-  3nb  thou  (halt  offer  them  befo2t 
the  %  ©  is  id,  anb  the  V^ncfts  (hail  tail 
fait  Upon  them ,  anb  thep  (hall  offer 
them  bp  fo?  a  burnt  offenng  bnto  the 
?L©ts©. 

25  £>euen  bapcsthalt  thou  prepare 
cuerp  bap  a  goatc  fo:  a  fume  offenng : 
thep  (hall  alfo  prepare  a  pongbullotfec, 
anb  a  ramtnc  out  of  the  flocfec ,  Without 
bletmth. 

16  5>euenbapes(haithep  purge  the 
3Htar  anb  punfieit,anbth  ep  (hall  t  ton- 
fetrate  thcmfclucs. 

27  3nb  when  theft  bapes  arc  erpi- 
reb ,  it  (hall  be  that  bpon  the  eight  bap 
anb  fo  fo?Warb,rhe  j^icfts  (hall  mafec 
pour  burnt  offerings  bpon  the  3ltar, 
anb  pour  ||  peace  offerings ;  anb  3J  Will 
accept  pou,faith  theJLow  <5  ©  js>. 

CHAP.    XLIIII. 

1  The  Eafl  eatc  afsigned  onely  to  the  Prince. 
4  The  Pneftes  reprooued  for  polluting  of 
theSjnduary.  9  Idolaters  vncapablc  of  the 


Prieih  office.  15  The  fonnes  of  Zadok  are  ac- 
cepted thcrto.  17  Ordnance:,  lor  ihcPnelts. 

"  tfytn  he  brought  me  bacae 


^thc  wap  ofthe  gate"  of 


the  outwaro  ^atuttiartc 
which  looftcthtowarb  the 
..  <£aft,anbu  was  unit. 
2  _  Xhcn  faib  the  !L  ©  is  id  bnto  me, 
Xljis  gate  (hail  be  (hut ,  ft  (hail  not  be 
openeb,  anb  no  man  (hall  enter  mbp  it- 
becaufc  the  jL© k 30  the  cob  of  Jfra 
el  hath  cntrcb  in  bp  it ,  thcrcfoic  tt  fliau 
be  (hut. 

j  it  is  foj  fhe02tncc,  thc^nncchec 
(hail  fit  m  it  to  cate  tycab  bcfo:c  the 
H©  k  © :  hec  (hall  enter  bp  the  wap  of 
tljcpoKhofthat  gate,  anb  (hallgoeout 
bp  the  wav  ofthe  fame. 

4  CXhcn  bjoughtheme  the  wap 
ofthe  Boitl)  gate  bcfo2c  the  houfc,  anb 
3lloofecb,anbbcholb,  tljegloip  of  the 

%  ©  IS  JPfillCb  the hOUfC  OfthC  JL©13JE>, 

anb  3  fell  bpon  mp  face. 

5  3Inb  the  H  ©  is  id  fatb  bnto  mc ; 
5>onnc  of  man ,  tntarftcwrll,  anb  bc; 
holbWtth  thmc  epes,  anb  hcare  With 
thmc  cares ,  ail  that  3  fap  bnto  thee, 
concerning  all  the  ojbtnances  of  the 
houfc  of  chc  %  ©  is  <D,anb  all  t\)t  lawes 
thereof ,  anb  marfee  well  the  cntrtng  tn 
ofthe  houfc,  With  eucrp  going  foouh  of 
the&anttttarp. 

6  2{nb  thou  (halt  fap  to  the  rebelli- 
ous, eiR-n  to  the  houfc  of  3frael ,  Xhus 
fapth  the  JLoib  (3©  © ;  £>  pec  houfc  of 
3lfrael,  let  tt  fufnee  pou,  of  all  pour  abo- 
mtnanons, 

7  "Jn  that  pc hattcb.'ought into  mp 
5)anctiiartc  t  ftrangcrs  bncircumcu'cb 
tn  heart,  anb  bticircumctfcb(nflc(h ,  to 
bcitt  mp^anctuancto  pollute  tt,  eum 
mpI?oufc,  wheupe  offer  nip  bieab,  the 
fatanbtheblooD.anbthcphaucbzofecn 
mp  Couenant ,  becaufc  of  all  pour  abo= 
mutations. 

8  3lnb  pec  hauc  not  fecpt  the  charge 
of  mine  holp  things:  but  pc  haue  fct  bee; 
pcrsof  mp  ||  chargein  mp  £>anctuanc 
fo2  pour  fclucs. 

9  IE  Xhus fapth  the  Ho2b©©o, 
Bo  ftrangec  bncircumctfcb  m  heart.noi 
bncircumcifcb  in  flefh ,  (l)all  enter  into 
mp&anctuane,  ofanpftrangertljat  is 
among  the  chiibjen  of  3fcacl. 

10  ^inbthelLeiittes  that  arc  gone  a- 
Wap farrc  from  mc,  When  3frael  Went 
aftrap ,  which  Went  aftrapawap  from 
mc  after  their  tboles ,  thep  fljall  tuen 
bcare  tljeir  intquitie. 

Ctcc  ;        11  Art 


tLtnrkejr:. 


drcn  of  a 


\\Or.ward, 
or  ffrStnantt. 
And  fa  z-erfe 
14.  Aiti  16. 


The  office 


Ezekiel. 


o 


fthePnefts. 


t  Hei  were 
for  a  Hum- 
tt'tnt  block* 
afirJKjujrie 
Vrtto  &c 


\\Or,(nfoe* 

Heh.  m,  or 
wtthfiveat. 


ii  J9ct  they  (ball  be  mmifters  m  my 
S>anctuacp ,  hauma  charge  at  tijc  gates 
of  the  Ijoufc ,  anb  mimtttmg  to  the 
houfe :  tfiev  fhall  flay  the  bntnt  offring, 
ano  the  faenfice  foi  t!)e  pcoplcanb  they 
fliall  ttanb  before  them  to  mimftcr  Unto 
them: 

i  z  25ccaufe  they  mimttrcb  tonto  them 
before  their  tboles,anbt  taufeo  the  houfc 
of  3)frael  to  fall  into  immune ,  therefore 
hanc  3  "ft  bp  mine  hano  agamft  them, 
faith  the  Ho2D  gojp,  ano  they  (hail 
beare  their  imcuuttc. 

13  3mb  they  (hall  notcomettecrcbm 
to  me  to  Hoe  the  office  of  a  pitcttunto 
me,no2tocomencccctoanyofmy  holy 
thtngs ,  m  the  mottholy  plate :  but  they 
(hall  bearc their  (name,  ano  their  auo- 
mutanonslbhich  they  hanc  comnutteb. 

14  25ut3  Unllmaftc  them  beepers 
of  the  charge  of  the  houfc  fo2  all  the  fer 
uiccthercof.anbfoiail  that  (haibc  bone 
therein. 

15  €  ioutthcpjicasthctLcuitcs.thc 
tonnes  of  zabott,  that  ucpt  the  charge 
ofmy  fanctuanc,  tthen  thechilDKn  of 
3lfracl  lbcnt  attray  from  me,  they  fliall 
comeneere  to  mcto  mmtttcr  unto  me, 
ant)  they  fljail  ttanb  befojeme  to  offer 
unto  mc  the  fat  ano  the  bloob,  faith  the 

H02DC>£>3P>. 

i6  Xhey  (ball  enter  into  my  fatutu- 
ane,  anb  they  (ball  come  nccrc  to  my  ta^ 
blc  to  mmiflcr  unto  mee,  ano  they  (ball 
heepc  my  charge. 

17  IC  31no  it  fliall  come  topaffcth.ii 
tbhen  they  enter  m  at  the  gates  of  the 
inner  court,  they  (ball  be  clothebiuttb 
lumen  garmeius ,  anb  no  lUooll  fliall 
come  Upon  them,  ttihtles they  miniftet 
m  the  gates  of  the  inner  court  ano 
tbtthtn. 

is  Hbcy  fhall  hanc  linncn  boncts 
Upon  their  hcabs,anb  fliall  haue  imnrn 
biecchcs  Upon  their  loynes  :thcy  fliall 
not  girtic  chemfelues  Ujitfj  any  tljing!  Itfjat 
caufcthfiucat. 

19  aubiuhen  they  gocficutb  into  the 
Utter  court,  eucn  into  the  bttrr  court  to 
the  people ,  they  fliall  put  off  their  gar 
metus  lUhcrcm  they  muuttrcb,  anb  lay 
them  m  the  holy  chambers,  ano  they 
(hail  put  on  other  garments,  ano  they 
(hall  not  fanctifie  the  people  ttntb  their 
garments. 

20  /^cither  fliall  they  (haue  their 
heabs ,  no:  fuffer  their  locUcstogroU) 
long,they  fliall  only  polle  their  bcabs. 

21  jReithcc  fliall  any  p/tcft  onnhc 


tuine,  tbhen  they  enter  into  the  inner 
court. 

xx  Neither  than  they  tahe  fo?  their 
ibutcsa'ttnboiu,  02bcrtbattstputa; 
luay  :  but  they  fhall  tafec  maioens  of 
tbcfccbcoftbchoufcof3ifracl,o2an> 
bom  t  that  hao  a  pneft  befozc. 

x  3  3mo  they  fliall  teach  my  people 

the  difference  bCtlUCCHC  tflC  tjOlV  anDp20' 

phane ,  ano  caufc  men  to  buccrne  be- 
ttuccne  tiicUnclcanc  anbtbceleane. 

24  3nb  m  controucrfte  they  fliall 
daub  intubgcment.anb  they  fliall  uibge 
it  accojbmg  to  my  tubgements :  anb 
they  (hail  Ueepc  mylattiesanbmy  tta- 
tutcsm  all  nunc  affcmblics,  anb  they 
fball  haloiu  my  Sabbaths. 

25  2nb  they  fliau  comcatno'bcab 
pcrfonto  Defile  thcmfclucs :  but  few  f^ 
thcr  02  fo2  mother,  0:  fo2 fonnc  02  fo: 
Daughter ,  foz  bzothcr  02  fo:  fitter ,  that 
hathhabuo  hufbanb ,  they  may  Defile 
thcmfclucs. 

26  anbaftcrhetsclcaufcb.tbcyfbai 
recKonUnto  h'.mfeucn  bayes. 

27  3nb  m  the  bay  that  Ik  gocth  into 
the  fanctuanc ,  Unto  the  inner  court  to 
mmifter  m  the  fanctuanc,  he  (hail  offer 
hisfinncoffctngXaith  the  JL02D  <5  ©  ©. 

28  ^nb  it  fliall  be  Unto  them  foi  an 
inheritance ,  3  *  an,  their  inheritance : 
anb  yee  fhall  giue  them  no  poffcffionm 
■Jfrael  ,3J  .mi  their  poffeffion. 

29  XhcyfliaicatctbcmcateorTring, 
anb  thefmneoffrtng,  anbtlictrcfpaffc 

offring,  anb  eucry  T)ebicatctbingui3lf' 
racl  fliall  be  theirs. 

30  ^nb  the  ||  *  firtt  of  an  the  firtt 
fruits  of  all  tilings,  anb  eucry  oblation 
of  all  of  eucry  fo;t  of  your  oblations 
(hall  be  the  pztctts :  yee  fliall  alfo  giue 
Unto  the  p2ie tt  the  firtt  of  your  bough, 
that  he  may  caufc  the  blcffmgto  rttt  in 
thine  houfc. 

31  Xhc  p2tctts  fliall  not  catc  of  any 
thing  that  ts'bcab  of  it  fcife  02  tome, 
Uitjettjcr  it  be  foule  02  bcaft. 

C  HA  P.   XLV. 

1  The  portion  ot  land  for  the  Sanduaric,  6 
for  the  citie,  7  and  for  the  Prmce.  9  Or- 
dinances toi  the  Prince. 

*%  02eoucr,Huhenyccfbail 
"  Diuibc  by  lot  the  lanb  fo: 
inheritance ,ycc  fliall  offer 
an  oblation  Unto  the 
Kwc^  !lo2b,tauholypo2tionof 
ttjc  lanb :  the  length  a,a"  ^tbc  length  of 

Que 


fosrih. 


"Lcuit.  IT. 
1,1  I. 


'Numb. 1 8. 
20.dcur.10 
9.2nd  1  3. 
■  ,1.101X1.13 


||  Or.  d,IU- 

•cd. 


1.  an< 


9  jr. 
o.numb.; 
I  ind  1 8.' 


er. 


E10J.11. 
i.lcuK.12 


t  Hit.  whin 

jec:ttHrethc 
tsudiJui 


f  Hd.  h.U. 


The  land  diuidech     Chap.xlv.       D 


||  Or,voiJ 
flatci. 


f  Hit.  «.<■- 

pvtfiotil. 
*Lcuit.i9. 


'lucrsortcnn 


a; 


fiuc  anb  rtbcnne  thoufanb  reedcs ,  anb 
the  tj?ct»ti)  Oiaibc  ten  thoufanb:  this  ftuii 
be  holyui  all  the  borers  thereof  rounb 
about. 

i  £>fthistbcrc(balbetb;the£>an* 
etuartefiuc  hunb;etftw  length,  rpvthfiue 
hunb;cth  mbrcdth.ftjuacc  rounb  about, 
anb  ftfttc  tubites  rounb  about,  fo;  the 
||luburbs  thereof. 

3  3nD  of  this  mcafure  (bait  thou 
mcafure  rtic  length  of  cute  anb  ttbentie 
thoufaub,  anb  the  b;cbth  of  ten  thou* 
fanb :  anbm  it  (ball  be  the  3>auctuarie 
and  the  moll  holy  plate. 

4  Xhe  holy  po;tton  of  the  lanbfbal 
bee  fo;  the  p;icfts  the  mtmftcrs  of  the 
S>anctuartc,  Ibhtcb  (ball  come  nccre  to 
minlftct  bnto  the  %  ©  »  ©,  anb  it  fljall 
be  a  plate  fo;  their  houfes,  anb  an  holy 
plate  fo;  the  £>anttuarte. 

5  anbtbefiucaubribenrytbouianb 
of  length,  anb  the  ttnne  thoulanb  of 
tweabtb,  (l)aiialfo  tbe&cuitcs  therm* 
mftcrs  of  the  houfc  haue  fo;  them* 
fdues,fo;apoffe(Tionfo;ttUenttechams 

bees. 

6  C  anb  ye  (hall  appoint  the  pot 
CelTton  of  the  ctttc  fiuc  thoufanb  b;oab, 
anb  fiuc  anb  nbenttc  thoufanb  longo- 
net  agamtt  the  oblation  of  the  holy  poz* 
tion:  it  (ball  be  fo;  the  ibbolc  houfc  of 
gjftaei 

7    C^»baponionfhalbefo;thep«tUe 

on  the  one  fibe,  anb  on  the  other  fibc  of 
the  oblation  of  the  holy  pomon ,  anb  of 
the  poflcflion  of  the  one,  bcfo;c  the  ofr 
lation  of  the  holy  po»10"- anb  before  the 
poffetTion  of  the  ntie  from  the  teeftfioc 
r©tftibarb,anbfromtbe€aftftbe  tfaft* 
\barb,anb  the  length  fo^eoueragamft 
one  of  thepomons  from  the  nacft  bo;* 
Derbntotbceaftbo;ber. 

s  ^ntbeianbfljailbclnspolTeu'ion 
m3Jfracl,anbmyp2inccs(ballnomo;e 
oppzeffe  my  people ,  anb  the  rert  of  tfic 
lanbftjau  they  gme  to  the  houfe  of  Jf= 
cael  acco2bing  to  their  tribes. 

9  C  Xhus  faith  the  Hojb  <B  &  b, 
ILctttfiiffueyou,  £)pnnccsof  Ilfratf : 
remouc  biolcncc  anb  fpoile,  anb  erceutc 
tuogement  anb  tuirtce,  taKcaibayyonr 
t  cracttons  from  my  people,  faith  the 

io  pc  (hall  haue  mft  *  baliances,  anb 
awft  «phah,  anb  a  uift  aBath. 

ii  Xhc<spbabanDibe25ath(halbc 
of  one  meafuce,  that  the  zsath  may 
contamc  the  tenth  part  of  an  Corner, 
anb  the  €phah  the  tenth  part  of  an  $o- 


IgS 


mer :  the  mcafure  thereof  ibatl  be  after 
the  corner, 

u  3nb  the  *  (hchell  null  be  ttbentie 
d5erahs:tibtnty(heUels,fiueant)tujen' 
tie  lbe&els,fiftecnc  (befcels  tl;au  be  pour 
$)aneh. 

13  Xhts>s  the  oblation  that  ye  ftjai  of 
fet,tbc(irtpartof  ancphab  of  an$o* 
met  of  Wheats  ye  fljal  gme  the  Grt  part 
of  an  Cphab  of  an  Corner  of  barley. 

14.  Concerning  the  o;bmancc  of oile, 
the  Bath  of  oyle ,  yc  ihaiioffct  the  tenth 
part  of  a  25arh  out  of  the  €0;,  winch  » 
an  Corner  of  ten  23aths,fo;  ten  2Saths 
ate  an  Corner. 

15  anbone||lambeout  of  tbcflotRe, 
out  of  nbo  butttycb,  out  of  the  fat  pa* 
ftures  of  3Jfracl  fo;  a  mcatc  offering, 
anb  fo;  a  burnt  offering,  anb  fo;||  peace 
offerings  to  mafec  reconciliation  fo; 
them,  faith  the  jLo;b  <2>©  9* 

i«  ail  the  people  of  the  lanb+fhaii 
&iuethis  oblatton  ||fo;thcp;tntc  m  3lf* 
rael. 

17  anb  it  (ljall  be  the  p2intes  part  to 
gme  burnt  offermgs,anb  meat  offrmgs, 
anb  b;inUe  offerings,  in  the  fcafts,  anb 
in  the  nctb  mooncs,  anb  in  the  S>ab* 
baths,  m  all  folcmnttics  of  the  houfe 
of  3Jfrael:  bc(bailp;epare  tbefinneof* 
fermg,  anb  the  mcatc  offering,  anb  the 
burnt  offertng.anb  the  1 1  peace  offruigs, 
to  rnabc  rcconcUiation  fo;  the  houfe  of 
3lfrael. 

is  Xbusfaiththe?lo;bc5©s>,'5n 

tlje  ficft  monedi,  in  tf)C  firft  day  of  the 

moneth,  tbouihaitta&eayongbuilocb 
Ibtthout  blemiQb, ,  anb  elenfe  the  ;§>an* 
ttuarte. 

19  anb  the  p;ieft  (hall  tafte  of  the 
bloob  of  the  fmnc  offermg,  anb  put  it 
bpon  the  poftcs  of  tl)c  houfc,  anb  bpon 
the  fourewncrs  of  the  fettle  of  the  %h 
tar,  anb  bpon  the  poftcs  of  the  gate  of 
the  inner  court. 

20  anofothoumaitboethefeuenth 
day  of  the  moneth ,  to;  eucry  one  that 
erreth,  anb  fo;  him  that  is  Gmple :  fo 
(hall  ye  teconnle  the  houfc. 

zi  ^n  the  firft  moneth ,  tn  the  four* 
tecnth  bay  of  the  moneth,  ye  (bail  haue 
the  paflcouer  a  fcaft  of  fcucn  baycs,biv 
leaucneb  b;cab  (ball  be  eaten. 

ii  anb  bpon  that  bay  (hall  the 
p;mte  p;epare  fo;  himfclfe,  anb  fo;  all 
the  people  of  the  lanb,  a  butlocncfo;a 
fmnc  offering. 

u  anb  fcucn  bayes  of  the  fcaft  he 
fljall  p;cpare  a  burnt  offering  to  the 


•  Exod.jo. 
1  ;.lcuit.27 
2S  nunib.j 
47- 


\Or,kiJJ,. 


\\Or,,h^ki 
'firmp. 


tHtt.fittt 

befer. 
Or,  with. 


I  Or,lhjr\r 
'ffrinft. 


Of  the  Prince, Ezekiel.        and  his  offerings. 


1 1 


f  H,hr  tl„ 

fifiofhu 

bind. 


%  ©  is  © ,  fcucn  bullocacs ,  anb  fcuen 
rammes  Without  blcmifl)  bayly  the  fc- 
ucn  bay  cs ,  anb  a  bibbe  of  the  goats  Dai- 
ly fo,i  a  finne  offering. 

14  3nD  bee  ajall  meparc  a  meat  of- 
fering of  an  ephahfoabuiiotBe,  anD 
an  <£pbab  fiuacamme ,  anD  an$?inof 
ovlefcuanephab. 

15  3n  tlje  fcucntb  moneth,  m  the  fifc 
tcentl)  Day  of  the  monctb  (hall  be  Doc 
the  like  m  tbc'fcaft  of  tbcfeucnDaycs, 
atcoibmg  to  the  fmne  off tuig,  actortmg 
to  tl)e  burnt  offering,?  accojbing  to  tlje 
meat  offerttjg,auDacco?Dingto  the  oilc. 

CHAP.    XLVI. 

i  Ordinances  foe  the  Prince,  in  his  wotfhip,  j 
and  tor  the  people.  \6  An  order  tor  the 
Princes  inheritance.  i<?  The  courts  for 
boylmg  and  baking. 

AS*£23&  fcns  faith  tljelLojo  <5£>  ©, 

ip&  court ,  that  looUctt)  to- 
&gx)  warbtbcCatt.fbalbcfbut 
&&SH(ktl)t  ftre  Wo?King  Daves: 
but  on  tljc  Sabbath  it  (baiibeopcncb, 
aub  m  tl)c  bay  of  the  j13ew  moonc  tt 
fbaibe  openeb. 

z  2iub  the  0muc  (ball  enter  by  the 
way  of  the  poiri)  of  that  gate  without, 
aub  (ball  ttanb  by  the  pott  of  the  gate, 
anD  the  i&icttsfbail  prepare  bis  burnt 
offering,  anb  his  peace  offerings,  anb 
bcfbailWo2(bip  at  tbetlnefboiooftbc 
gate:  then  he  (ball  goe  foouh,  but  the 
gate  (ball  not  be  (but  bntil  the  enenmg. 
5  fLiacWifc  the  people  of  the  lanb 
(bail  wo2fbip  at  the  boo2C  of  this  gate 
befoze  the  Hois©,  m  the  Sabbaths, 
anbm  the  j3ew  moones. 

4  3nb  the  burnt  offering  that  the 
$2ince  (ball  offer  bnto  the  %.  o  is  ©  in 
the  Sabbath  bay ,  (hail  be  fire  lambcs 
without  blcmifl),  anb  a  rammc  With 
out  blcmifl). 

5  2nbthemcatoffringfhaibeanC 
phah  foi  a  rammc,  anb  the  meate  of 
feeing  fru  the  lambcs  t  as  be  fbaibe  able 
to  giuc,  anb  an  ijm  of  oilc  to  an  Cpbab. 

6  3nb  m  the  bay  of  tbe/i3cw  moonc 
u  (hail  be  a  youg  builocUc  without  ble^ 
mifli,  aub  fire  lambcs,  anb  a  rammc : 
they  (baibc  Without  blcmifl). 

7  3nD  hce  (bail  p:cpare  amcat  of 
fcrmg,atiCphahfo2abulioclic,anban 
epbab  foi  a  rammc, aub  foi  the  lambs, 
accoiDuig  as  his  hanb  fhail  attaine  bn- 
to,anb  an  $m  of  oilc  to  an  Cphah. 


8  2nb  When  the  pjmee  (ball  enter, 
hcfhallgoc  mby  the  way  of  the  pojcb 
of  that  gate  ,anb  hcftjali  goc  foo2tbby 
thcttiapthcrcof. 

9  C  2Sut  When  the  people  of  the 
lanb  (hall  come  before  the?,  ©is©,  in 
tbefolcmncfeafts,  betbatcntrctblnby 
the  way  of  the  iSoitb  gate  to  wojfhip, 
fljail  goe  out  by  the  way  of  the  South 
gate:  anb  he  that  cntrcth  by  the  way  of 
the  South  gate,  (bail  goc  foitb  by  the 
Way  of  tbc/r}02tbgatc:bc  (hall  not  re 
turneby  the  Way  of  the  gate  Whereby 
he  came  m ,  but  fhaligoe  footfh  oner  & 
gamtttt. 

io  3inb  the  02ince  in  the  mibtt  of 
themwhen  they  goem,tt)ai  goe  m, anb 
When  they  gocfoo2tb,(bau  goe  fouh- 

n  3nDinthe fcatts.anb in tbefolem- 
nltics,  the  meat  offering  fhaibc  ane= 
phah  to  a  buliocac,  anb  an  <£pbab  to  a 
ramme,  aub  to  tlje  lambes,as  he  is  able 
to  glue,  anb  an  $m  of  oilc  to  an  ephah. 

ii  jrioW  When  the  0jmce  tt)ail  p;e- 
pare  a  Voluntary  burnt  offering  oj 
peace  offerings,  boluntanly  unto  the 
%  ©  is  ©,  one  (hall  then  open  him  the 
gate  that  looBctb  towarb  the  catt, anb 
he  fljail  prepare  his  burnt  offering,anb 
his  peace  offerings  ,  as  bee  DiD  on  the 
Sabbath  bay, then  hc(bailgocfoo2tb, 
anb  after  his  going  foo;th ,  one  fljail 
(hut  the  gate. 

«  Xhou  (halt  baiiyp2epare  a  burnt 
offering  bnto  tlje  !L  ©  is  ©,  of  alambe 
oft  the  firftyccre,withoutblcmifh  thou 
(haltp2epareit  teucrymomtng, 

14  ^nb  thou  (halt  p2Cparc  a  meat  of- 
fer mg  fo2  it  eucry  morning  the  firt  part 
ofan€phah,anbthcthitb  part  of  an 
Dm  of  oyle,  to  temper  With  the  fine 
floW2c  a  meat  offermg  continually ,  by 
a  perpetual  o2bmanccbntotheILoH©. 

15  Xhus  fljail  they  p2epare  the 
lambc,  anb  the  meat  offering.anb  the 
oyle,  cuery  mo2iung, fo?  a contiuuall 
burnt  offering. 

\6  c  Xhus  faith  the  Ho2b  (5  o  ©, 
%f  the  pjmtc  giue  a  gift  bnto  any  of  his 
fonncs.theinheritancethereofihallbc 
hisfonncs ,  it  (hall  be  their  poffefftonby 
mhentancc: 

17  25ut  if  hce  glue  a  gift  of  his  inhe- 
ritance to  one  of  his  fcruants ,  then  it 
fhaibc  his  to  the  ycerc  of  libertie :  after, 
it  (hail  returne  to  the  p2ince ,  but  his 
mhentancc  (haibe  his  fonnesfoi  them. 

is  £Do2couer,  the  pnnce  fljail  not 
tafce  of  the  peoples  mheritancc  by  op^ 
I pieffion, 


hnytere. 
I  Hebr.ntcr- 
"ing  bj  mcr- 


Thevifion  Chap.xlvi 


,f 


or  waters. 


p2cmon,totftmfttftemoutoftftctrpot 
fcflion :  but  fjrc  (ball  giue  bis  fotmcs  in- 
heritance out  of  bis  ottmc  pofleffion, 
tbat  my  people  be  not  fcattereb  cucry 
man  from  bis  poffefuon. 

19  C  3ftcr ,  be  b?ougbt  me  tljzougb 
tfje  entry,  U»t)icl)  was  at  tbe&bc  of  tbc 
gate ,  into  tl)c  l)olv  chambers  of  the 
j&tcfts  itobicb  lootttb  toitoarb  p  /ftoifft : 
anbbcbolb.tbcrcwasaplaccontftctitoo 
ubesi©c(htoarb. 

zo  Xbcnfaibbce  tonto  me,  %\)\s  is 
the  place  ltobcrc  the  0ne(ts  (nail  boyle 
the  trefpaffe  off  ring,  anb  tbc  finnc  off c- 
ring,  Vbbetctbey  (ball  babe  the  mcate 
offering :  tftat  tftcy  bcarc  them  not  out 
into  tftc  totter  court,  tofanctificttjcpco- 
pic. 

ii  XftenljecbjougfttmefoonlJinto 
the  totter  court,  anbtaufebnte  to  paffc 
by  the  foure  comers  of  tbe  court,  anb 
bcftolb ,  t  m  eucry  comer  of  the  court 

there  was  a  COUtt. 

2i  ^n  the  foure  comets  of  trje  court 

there  were  COUrtS  ||  (Oyntb  Of  fOUrtlC  cu- 
bits iong,anb  tbirtic  bjoab  :tbcfc  t  foure 
comers  were  of  oncmeafure. 

2}  3nb  there  was  a  ncito  building  rounb 
abotttinfftem.rounbabouttbemfourc 
anb  it  itoas  mabc  tttub  boylmg  places 
bnbcrtbe  rovtocsrounb  about. 

24.  XbenfaibbctontomcXbefcare 

the  places  of  tftcm  tljat  boyle,  ibbere 
tl)e  miniltcrs  of  tbc  houfc  (ball  boyle 
tbcfacrificc  of  tbe  people. 

CHAP.    XLVII. 

1  The  vifionofthe  holy  waters.  6  Thevertue 
ofthem.  13  The  borders  of  the  land,  tr  The 
diuifion  of  it  by  lot. 

^%i$*£&  fteritoarbbcctyougfttme 
wSHSB  agamc  tonto  the  boo?c  of 
I^vi  tbcboufcanb  bebolb,itoa 

nm^S®  tctstffucb  outfromtonber 
J?WMs$*t\yt  tluefbolb  of  the  Houfc 
€afiitoarb:fo2  tl)c  fo?eftont  of  the  ftoufc 
flood  toitoarb  the  caff ,  anb  tftc  itoaters 
cameboitonefromtonbcrfromtberigbt 
fibe  of  tbe  houfc,  at  tftc  Soutftfibcof 
tftcaitac. 

2  Xftcn  brought  bee  me  out  of  tftc 
ltoay  of  fbc  gate  iftoitljitoarb,  anb  lebbe 
me  about  the  ltoay  Without  tomo  tftc  tor 
tec  gate  by  tftc  ltoay  tbat  looftefb  «aft 
ibarb.anbbcbolb.tbcrcranncoutitoa: 

tcrs  on  tbc  right  fibe. 

j  3nb  \tobcn  tbc  man  tbat  bab  tbc 
line  in  bis  banto,  lbcnt  ton!)  <£aftitoarb, 
bcmeafurebatftoufatibcubttcs>anbbe 


\Htb.it  court 

in  a  corner 
of  a  court, 
and  a  court 
m  a  corner 
of  a  court. 
Ot,  made 
■with  chim- 
neys. 

\Htb.  car- 
tiered. 


fcougftt  me  tftzougft  tftc  lbaters :  t  tftc 
itoaters  were  to  tftc  ancles. 

4  Stgatne  ftc  meafur cb  a  tftoufanb, 
anb  bjougbtme  tbzougb  the  lbaters 
tbc  lbaters  were  to  tbc  fences :  agamc 
be  meafureb  a  tboufanb,  anb  b2ouglit 
mcc  though;  tftc  itoaters  were  to  tftc 
loyucs. 

5  3iftcritoarb  bee  meafureb  a  tbou 
fanb,  and  it  was  a  nucr,tbat  3}  toulb  not 
paffeouer :  fo?  tbe  itoaters  ltoercrifen, 
t itoaters  to  fioimme  in,  a  nucr  tftat 
coulb  not  be  paffcb  ouer. 

6  C^tnb  bee  faib  tonto  me,  Sonne 
of  man,ftaflfftoufccncthis?  Xftenftee 
brought  me ,  anb  taufebmeto  rcturnc 
totbcbmiUcoftbcriuer. 

7  iSolb  Ibften  3  bab  retnrneb ,  be- 
bolb,  at  tlje  t  banuc  of  tbe  riuer  were  be- 
ry  many*  trees  on  tftc  one  fibe  anb  on 
tfteotber. 

s  ICftenfaibbetontomcXbefertoas 
tcrs  blue  out  toitoarb  the  €aft  country, 
anb  go  boitoneinto  tftc  ||befert,  anbgoc 
intotftefca:  which  being  biougbtfooztft 
into  tbefea,  tftc  itoaters  (ftaibe  bcalcb. 

9  iSnb  it  fftaii  come  to  paffc,  that  c- 
ucry  tbmgtl)atliuetft,itobicb  moouetb, 
ltoftitbcrfocucr  tbc  t  nuers  (ball  come, 
(ball  ltue,anb  tftcre  (ball  be  a  tocry  great 
multttubc  of  fifft.bccaufc  tbcfc  itoaters 
(ball  come  tftttftcr :  fo?  tftcy  (ball  be  hca* 
leb,anb  cuery  thing  (ball  liuetbftitfter 
tftc  riuer  commctb. 

10  3lnto  it  fftaii  come  to  paffc  that  tftc 
fifbers (ball  ftanb  topon  it,  from  Cn- 
gebi  cucn  tonto  €n-cgiaim  -,  tbey  (ball 
be  a  place  to  fpzcab  foojtb  nets,  tftctc 
fifl)  fl)ail  bee  accojbmg  totbcirHmbes, 
as  tlje  fifl)  of  tftc  great  3>ca,ercccbing 
many. 

1 1  asut  tbc  myjlc  places  tlicreof ,  anb 
tbcmanlbcstbcrcof,  litbaiinotbcbca^ 
lcb,tbeyfl)aiibcgiucntofait. 

12  ^nb  by  tbe  riuer  topon  tbc  banac 
thereof  on  tljis  fibe,  anb  on  tftat  fibe, 
tfftall  grolto  alltrtcsfo:  meat,  ltobofc 
leafe  dial  not  fabe,  ncitbcr  fljal  tbe  fruit 
tbcreofbcconfumcb:itfl)alib2ingfo2tb 
Uncito  fruit,  accozbmg  to  bis  monctbs, 
becanfe  tbeir  itoaters  tbey  tffuebout  of 
tftc  Sanctuaricanbtbc  frmtctbereof 
mall  befoj  mcate,  anb  tftc  Icafctftcreof 
||fo2*mcbinnc. 

u  c Xftus  faytft  tftc  ?Lozb  <5 o  p 
Xftis  (hail  be  tbc  bojbcr,  tbbcrcby  yec 
mail  inberitetbcianb,acco;bmg  to  tbe 
titocluc  tribes  of  lifrael :  3?ofcpft  ftwil 

haue  two  pOJtiOHS.  _ 

14  5lnb 


tm  of  the 
am  If  it 


)Htl>  im- 
it  rs  of  (win, 


\Hib.l,p 
•Rcu.zi.j. 


\\Or,  plm 


jHtb.twi 
rmers. 


\\Or,Md 
that  which 
/ha/I  no:  be 
hold. 

XHtb.lhull 
come  vp. 


II  f^rIprulf'- 
pill. 


\\Or,fir 

r  ■  •• .  .-  .1  and 
fores. 
Keu.U.i. 


Theborders,and       Ezekicl.  portions ofthe Tribes. 


1 1  Or, [wore. 
•  Gtn.i  2. 
7-andi7. 
8.2nd  i<5. 
3. and  28. 
■3- 


\\Or,the 

m%ddlcvtU 

tare. 


\  Hehfrom 
bct&erne. 


\\  Or,  Afcn- 

bah. 

|)  Or,vaIlcj. 

1]  Or.,  toward 

Temjn, 


14-  anbyce  fhailinheriteit,  one  as 
lDcll  as  an  other :  conccrmng  tl)c iDl)trt) 
31 1|  *  itfteb  top  nunc hanb  to  giuc it bnto 
your  fathers,  anb tljjts  lanb  thai fall  btv 
toyoufonnhcrttance. 

15  3tnD  tftis  fha!ib;thcbo?toeroffhc 
lanb  toibarb  tj)c  Monti)  fibc  from  tl)c 
great  ;S>ca,thc  way  of  l^ethloit,  as  men 
goctozebab: 

i6  $amath,  zSerothah,  Snbzaim, 
ibhith  is  bctitoccnc  the  bojbcr  of  2Da- 
maftus ,  anb  the  boiber  of  $amath  : 
||l)?a3ar$ameoti,lbhich  <sbythecoaft 
ofl?autan. 

17  3nb  the  bojtocr  from  tfje  5>ea 
thaiibe^asar-enan,  tijcbojbccofSDa; 
maftus ,  ano  the  ii5o?tfj  noztljibarb, 
anb  the  bo?bcr  of  n?amatl):am)  this  is  the 

jBOJthfibC. 

18  3Uib  thecaftfibe  yee  fbaiimca' 
fure  from  $auran,  anb  tfromSDamaf- 
eus,antofcom<3ilcab,anbfromthelaub 
of^Bfracl  bv  giojban,  from  thebojber 
tontothecaftfea :  9  this  is  thecaftfioc. 

19  3inb  the  £>outh  fibc  S>outljibarb 
fromXamar,  cuento  the  waters  of 
||ltrtfemBabcfl),tl)c||rtuer,totl)cgrcat 
dea  ano  th.s  is  the  £>outh  fibe  [|  South' 
ltoarb. 

20  xhc  nacft  fibc  alfo  fhaii  be  the 
great  £>ea  from  the  bobber,  till  a  man 
tome  oucr  agauiftlpamatlj :  this  >sthe 
naeftfibe. 

ii  £>olhaliyecbitubcthis  lanbtonto 
you  accojbmgtothe  Xribesof^fracl. 

11  C  anb  it  than  come  to  pafle,  that 
pee  fl)aii  buiibc  tt  by  lot  fo?  anmljcri 
tante  bnto  you,  anb  to  tlje  ftrangcrs 
thatfoioume  among  you ,  which  than 
beget  chiiojen  among  you ,  anb  they 
than  be  tontoyou  as  boznc  tn  thecoun 
trey  among tlKttjtlDjm  of^lfracl  ■,  tfjey 
mail  hauc  inheritance  With  you  among 
tDcXmksofJfracl. 

13  anbit  (hall  come  to  patTe  that  in 
tbljat  Xnbc  tl)e  ftranger  foioumctfj, 
there  than  nt  giuc  him  his  inheritance, 
faith  ttje3Loib(5£>©. 

CHAP.   XLVIII. 

1.  13  The  portions  ofthe  twelue  Tribes,  8  of 
tlicSanifhiarie,  15  ofthecitieand  Subuibs, 
ii  and  ol  the  Prince.  30  Thedimcnlions 
and  "ares  ofthe  citie. 

„  <©w  theft  iretrjenamesof 

I  W^W  a  tDc  Xnbes  ,  from  tlje 

c  0oiti)  cno  to  the  coaft  of 

thcwayoft?athlon,asone 

I  goctfj  to  tyamarh,  tyajar 


man,  tlje  bozberof  2Damafnisi5o?rrj 
warb,to  p  coaft  of  l?aniath(fonijcfcare 
Ijis  fibes  call  f  nacft>  po;  tion  fo?  2>an. 

I  3lno  by  the  bozocr  of  Dan ,  from 
thecaftfioc  tontothenaeft,  a  portion  foj 
athcr. 

3  anb  by  tlje  bobber  of  ather,from 
theCaftfibe  euen  bnto  thcieeftfibc, 
portion  fo?  4i5apljtait. 

4  anb  by  tljcbo:bcrof  j3aphtaii, 
from  the  call  fibc  tontothcn3cftfibe,a 
portion  fojtDaiuuTerj. 

5  anb  by  trjeboibcr  of£3anafleh, 
from  the  call  fibc  bnto  the  nacft  fibe ,  a 
portion  to?  Cpljzaim. 

6  anb  by  the  bojbec  of  €plj«uiim, 
fromtljc  call  fibc  cum  bnto  tlje  jeell 
fibc,a  portion  fo?  Seubm. 

7  31nb  by  tl)e  bozbtr  of  Hcubcn, 
from  tlie  eaft  fibc  bnto  tljciecft  fibe ,  a 
pomon  fo2  3Hibal). 

8  e.  3tab  by  ttjc  bo:ber  of  31ubalj, 
from  tlie  €aft  fibc  bntotlje  nacft  Cbe, 
(l)all  be  tlje  offcmgibljicfjtDeyftiail  of- 
fer of  fine  anb  trbcutie  tljoufanb  reedes 
in  tycbtfj ,  anb  in  length  as  one  of  tfje  » 

Sarts ,  from  the  eatt  fibe  bnto  tlje 
fibc,  anb  tfje  ^auctuanefljailbc 
intrjenubftofit. 

9  %\)t  oblation  tljat  ycc  (liall  offer 
bnto  the  fL©K©,  ihaii  be  of  rate  anb 
tibentietljoufanb  in  length ,  anb  of  tm 
tljoufanbinbjebth. 

10  3inb  fo;  tljem ,  euen  fo?  the  pnefts 
fljail  be  this  holy  obianon ,  roibarbthe 
Mont) ,  fiuc  anb  tibcunc  thoufanb  m 
length,  anb  toibarb  thciBeft  ten  thou; 
fanbm  bjcbth.anb  toibarb  thecal!  ten 
thoufanb  m  bjebth  ,  anb  toibarb  the 
S>outI)  fiue  anb  tibentic  thoufanb  in 
length,  ej  the  fancmaric  of  tlje  %  o  is  jd 
than  be  in  the  nubft  thereof. 

II  itfhaiibeiifoj  thc0jicfts  that  arc 
faiictificb ,  of  tlje  tonnes  of  zaboh, 
ibhiclj  Ijauc  Ueptll  my  charge ,  ibljich 
lbcttt  not  aftray  ibhtn  tlje  cljilb2en  of 
3ifracl  ibent  aftray ,  as  the  ?Lciutcs 
ibmt  aftray. 

11  ^nb  this  oblation  ofthe  lanb  tljat 
is  offrcb,fl)albc  bnto  them  a  thing  mod 
holy  bv  the  bobber  of  the  Hciutcs. 

13  ^nb  oucr  agamft  tlie  bojbcr  of  the 

#2lC(lS,  tl)C  HCUltCSOiall  haue  fine  311b 

tibentic  thoufanb  m  length,  anb  tenne 
thoufanb  m  bicbtlj:  all  the  length  ftu'bc 
fiuc  anb  tibentic  thoufanb  ,  ano  the 
bicbthtcnnc  thoufanb. 

1+  3Uib  they  (hall  not  fell  of  it ,  nei- 
ther crcljangc ,  no;  alienate  the  firft 

fruits 


\\Orthcfin. 
ilifudaarti 

.htprijh. 

\\0,,~rJ. 
or.orMnAnce. 


The  fuburbs,  and    Chap.xlvu  j.       gates  or  the  citie. 


feints  ofthe  lanb;  foj  unholy  bnto  the 

H  C 3nb the  fine  tboufanbtbatarc 
lcftintheb:cabth  outc  agamft  the  Rut 
anD  tlbentic  thoufanb,  fhail  bee  apjo* 
phane  place  fo:  the  erne,  ftu  btbelling, 
anb  fo:  fuburbs,  aub  the  ntic  fhail  be  in 
the  nubft  thereof 

i6  3inb  thefe  fhail  bee  the  meafures 
thereof,  the  5302th  fibc  foure  thoufcmb 
anb  fiue  hunbnb,  aub  the  South  fibe 
foure  thoufanb  anb  fine  Intnbieb,  anb 
ontheeaftfioefourethoufanb, anb  fiue 
huntacb,  anb  the  n^cftfibc  foure  thou 
fanb  anb  fine hunbjeb. 

17  3lnb  the  fuburbs  of  the  city  fhail 
be  toiuarbthc  jftorth  two  hunbicbanb 
ftftie,  anb  tolbarb  the  South  tlbo  hum 
mtn  anb  fifty , anb  tolbarb  the  caflttuo 
hunbieb  anb  ftftie  ,anb  tolbarb  the  naeft 
tttiohunbrtbanbfiftie. 

18  3nb  the  refibue  in  length  oner  a 
gamftthe  oblation  of  the  holy  portion, 
fhaibe  ten  thoufanb  Caftibarb ,  anb  ten 
thoufanb  teeftVbarb :  anb  tt  (bail  be  0 
tier  agamft  the  obianon  ofthe  holy  po:^ 
tion,  anb  the  mcreafc  thereof  (bail  bee 
fo;  foob  bnto  them  that  ferue  the  cine. 

19  3inb  they  that  ferue  the  erne,  (ball 
feme  tt  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Jfrael. 

io  311  t\)t  oblation  fhalibee  fiucanb 
tVbcntic  thoufanb,  by  fiue  anb  ttbennc 
thoufanb :  ye  fhail  offer  the  holy  obiatt 
on  foure  fquare,  ilurtjtbcpoffcffionof 
the  erne.  ,    , 

ii  C^nbtbercfiouc  fhail  bee  fonfte 
prtnecontbeoncfibe,  anb  on  the  other 
of  the  holy  oblation,  anb  of  the  poffef 
fion  of  the  citie  ouer  agamft  the  fiue  anb 
ttbentte  thoufanb ,  of  the  oblation  to 
tbarb  tt)t€aft  bo:ber,  aub  uacfttbarb 
ouer  agamft  the  fine  anb  ttticntic  thou 
fanb  tolbarb  the  ©eft  bo:bcr ,  ouer  a 
gamft  the  portions  fo?  the  pnnce,  anb  it 
fhail  be  rhe  holy  obiatton.anb  the  Satv 
ttuaneoftfitljoufe  mail  be  in  the  uubbeft 

11  ^ortouer,fromthtpoffeffionof 
the  fLcuttes,  mib  from  the  poffeffion  of 
thcciticbemcinrhemibaofthatibhich 
ts  the  punces ,  bctiDccnc  the  boiocr  of 


3Jubah,anbtbc  bobber  of  zieniamui, 
fhail  bee  fo?  the  pance. 

15  3tsfo;therefrof  the mbes,  from 
the  caftfioe  bnto  the  naeft  fibc,  i5ema 
nuni^jiihauctaportion: 

1+  3nb  by  the  bortJec  of  i3ematmn, 
from  the  CaO  fibc  bnto  the  uoeft  fibc, 

SlUlCOU  (hall  bjue  a  portion  : 

15  3nb  by  the  bojbet  of  Simeon, 
from  the  eaft  Hoc  bnto  the  aacft  fioc, 

Jffacharaport.oii: 

16  3tnb  by  the  boiber  of  3KTachar, 
from  the  calf  fibc  bnto  the  ttKft  fibc, 

ZebUlUtt a  portion: 

17  3nb  by  the  bo:ber  of  zcbulun 
from  the  Caft  fibc  bnto  the  nacft  fibc, 

(5ab-i  portion: 

18  3lnbbythebo2bcrof  (5ao,atthc 
South  fibc  Soutbibarb ,  the  bo:bcr 
fhail  be  cueu  from  Xamar.'iHo  the  lba 
tcrsof  ftrtfc  in  fcabefl),  aid  to  the  riucr 
tolbarb  the  great  Sea. 

19  Xhis  is  the  lanb  ibhuh  ye  fbal  tsi- 
uibe  by  lot  bnto  the  tribes  of  jfraci  foi 
mheritanccanbthcfcirc  their  pomons, 
faith  the  ?Lo2b  ©or. 

30  C  3ub  thefe  are  the  gomgs  out  of 
thecitte,  on  the /3ortb  fibe  foure  thou 
fanb  anb  fiue  hutibjcb  meafures. 

31  5lub  the  gates  of  the  ntic  fhaiibee 
after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Jfracl, 
tlnec  gates  /fJortblbarb ,  one  gate  of 
Kcuben,  one  gate  of  ^ttbah,  one  gate 
offLeui. 

31  3no  at  the  €aft  fibc  foure  thou- 
fanb  anb  fiue  htmbjeb:  anb  tlucc  gates 
anb  one  gate  of  Jofcph ,  one  gate  of 
aSemamm,  one  gate  of  Dan. 

33  3nbatthcSoutbfibcfourctbou 
fanb  anb  fiue  hunb:cb  meafures  ,  anb 
tbicc  gates :  one  gate  of  Simeon ,  one 
gate  of  ^ffacljar ,  one  gate  of  zc 
bultm. 

34  3lt  the  tt?eftfibc  foure  thoufanb 
anb  fiue  hunbzcb,  with  thctr  th:ce  gates : 
oncgatcof<3ab,onegateof3Ubcr,one 
gatcof^aphtaii. 

35  u  w.i  rounb  about  cightccnc  thou 
fanb  meafures,  anb  the  name  of  the  ntic 
from  that  bay  mail  be ,  t  %\y%  %owo 
is  there. 


iTHE 


\Hel:onc 

portion. 


\\Or,Mm. 

tab  Kldrfi. 


t  Hd  hho- 

m*ht 


Yongmencholcn         Daniel.       to  feme  the  King. 


•iJCingi. 

14.2. 

z  chjo  36. 

6. 


t  H,h.*h, 

if  of  hu 
tjrinkc. 


n 


THE   BOOKE   OF 

Daniel. 


CHAP.    I. 

Ichoiakims  captiuiue.  3  Afhpenaz  ta- 
keth  Daniel,  Hanamah,  MilTiael  and  A- 
zanah.  8  They  refilling  the  Kin°s  por- 
tion ,  doe  profper  with  pulfe  and  water.  17 
Their  excellence  in  wifdomc. 

0  the  thtrbc 
ycrcofthcrngnc 
of  *  3Jcl)otaSim| 
Bmgofjubah,' 
tame  jScbuchab- 
tic^ar  Btng  of 
25abylon ,  tonto 
^5 '  ^cTrufaicni ,  anb 
SjS=j  bcfttgcD  it. 
1  3lnb  the  jlojb  gauc  JriioiaKim 
King  of  Jiutoah  into  his  hanb.itoith  part 
ofthcbcCrelsofthehoufcof(5ob,ltohtch 
he  carieb  mto  the  lanb  of  £> lunar  to  ttic 
houfcofrnsgobaiujhcb2oughtthcbcf 
fcls  into  tl)c  trcafurc  houfc  of  his  gob. 
3    C3nb  ttic  sing  fpabc  lmto 3iuV 

Scna^thcmaltcrofhiseunuchcs.that 
c  fhonlb  bang  cenaine  of  the  Chtlb2Ctl  of 
3Jfracl,anboftl)c  Kings  feeb,  anb  of  the 
l&uucs : 

4.  Chtlb:cu  (n  itohom  was  no  ble 
mtm.butitocllfauourcb.anbfKtlfulliu 
all  itoifcbomc ,  anb  tunning  m  Knolls 
lebgc ,  anb  tonbcrftanbing  fncntr ,  anb 
fuel)  as  had  abilitit  m  them  to  llano  m 
the  Bings  palate ,  anb  itohom  they 
tmgtit  trad)  the  learning ,  anb  the 
tongue  of  thcCaibcans. 

5  3lnb  the  Bmg  appomteb  them  a 
bailyp:ouiuonofthe  Rings  meat,  anb 
of  Ul)c  Unne  ltohteh  hcnjanRcifonou 
rifbtug  them  tlncc  yccres,  that  at  the 
cube  thereof  they  nugl)t  ftaub  bcfo;c 
the  lung. 

6  fiaVo  among  thefc  itoerc  of  the 
chiKuen  of  Jubah,  Daniel,  $ananial), 
<©i(naci,anb  pariah: 

7  SLlnto  itohom  the  ¥>2tncc  of  the 
tfunuchcsjjauc  names :  fo?  he  gauc  ton 


to  Daniel  the  name  of  Bcitcfha^ar  anb 
to  tyanamah,  of  £>hab2ath  ■,  anb  to  Q&v 
fliaci,  of  ^cfhath,  anb  to  pariah  of 
3bebncgo. 

3  |[  25ttt  Daniel  purpofeb  m  his 
heart,  that  he  itooulb  not  bcfilchimfelfc 
ltoith  the  portion  of  the  Rings  meat,  no: 
ltoith  the  lbinc  ltohteh  he  bjanfec :  there- 
fort  Dec  reqnefteb  of  the  0micc  of  the 
^unuches ,  that  hce  might  not  btftic 
htmfclfc. 

9  /15oito  <5ob  hab  bjought  Daniel 
into  fauonr  anb  tenber  loue  ltoith  the 
$2tncc  of  tl)c  <2nnuchcs. 

10  ^nbthetfmtttcofthcCunuches 
faib  tonto  Daniel,  31  fcarc  my  lozb  the 
King,  ibho  hath  appomteb  your  meat, 
anb  your  b2inRc :  foj  ltohy  fhoulb  he  fee 
your  faces  t  lbojfc  lifting  then  the  thil* 
ojen ltohirl)  are  of  your  ilfou;  then  fliail 
y  ce  ma&c  nice  tnbauger  my  hcab  to  the 
Bins. 

1 1  Xhcn  faib  Daniel  to  ||  ©clytr, 
itohom  the  p2incc  of  the  Cunuches  hab 
fet  ouer  Daniel,  ^anantah ,  £@ifhacl, 
anb3hariah, 

u  02OUC  thy  feruauts,5  befceth 
thcc,tenbaycs,anb  let  them  giuc  t  pulfc 
t  to  cat.anb  water  to  b2inRc. 

1 5  Xhcn  let  our  touutcnantcs  be  loo 
Ucb  topon  bcfo2C  thec,  anb  the  counter 
nance  of  the  chtlb:cn  that  cat  of  the  po2 
non  of  the  Bings  mcatc:  anb  as  thou 
fcelt.bcaic  ltoith  thy  fcruants. 

14  ^>o  hce  confentcb  to  them  m  this 
matter ,  anb  p2oucb  them  tenbayes. 

15  3lub  at  the  enb  often  bayes,  their 
countnianccs  appcarcb  fairer,  anb  fat 
tcrinflcfo,  then  ailthcchilb2cn,ltohich 
bib  catc  the  po2tion  of  the  Rings  meat. 

i6  Xhus  eDcl^ar  tooRc  aitoay  the 
pozttonofthcirmeat.anbrhcitoincthat 
they  flioulb  b2inh:  anb  gauc  them  pulfc. 

17  C  3s  foz  thefe  fourc  chilb2m, 
C5ob  gauc  them  tmoniiebgcanbfhil  m 
all  learning  anb  ibifebome,||anD  Da- 
niel 


t  Heir  pu- 
ttier. 


Or,lhf 
jtewjsti. 


t  Hike  ./ 

t  H'kr.  tl 
uf  rrui  fi'ft 


\\Or.l:« 

Tthiiie  Pu- 
mtl-Mier- 
find. 


Daniels  wild ( 


J'"i'.'   V.l- 


•D.iu 


omc.       Chap.ij.        The  Kings  fury. 


\C*ld.nuuU 
f'tccet. 


Or,Fcr, 
75^.5.17. 


ntel  hab  bnberftanbiug  in  all  billons 
anbDzeames. 

is  fftoUiattheenbofthcbaycsthat 
tbeBmghabfaibhefhoulbbzingthem 
in,  tf)en  thr  prince  of  the  Cunuchcs 
bzought  them  in  befozc  /5cbuchab 
ne^ar. 

19  3lnb  the  Bmg  communeb  lbith 
tliem:anb  among  tliemail  Uiasfouno 
none  UKc  Daniel,  ftananiah,i33ifl)aci, 
anb  pariah  :  therefore  floob  they  be 
foictlic  ititng. 

10  3nD  in  all  matters  off  Unfebome 
jnJtonberftanbmgthat  the  Uingenqui 
reb  of  them,  hee  founb  them  ten  times 
better  then  all  thc$)agicians  and  ^ftro 
logersthatvercinaiihislxeaiinc. 

zi  3nb  Daniel  contuuicb  euenbnto 
the  tuft  vcere  of  lung  Cy  zus. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Nebuchadnezzar  forgetting  hisdreamc,  re- 
Cjuiieth  it  of  the  Caldcans ,  bypronulcsar.d 
ihrealnines  10  Thevacknowledamgtheir 
inabilitic,  aieiudgcdto  die.  14  Daniel  ok- 
tjiningfonie  refpite  ,  findeih  thedrcame.  i<? 
1  IcblefTethGod.  14  He  flaying  the  Decree, 
i',  brought  [o  the  King.  31  The  dreame.  $6 
Thcmierpretaiio.  46  Daniels  aduanceiucnt. 

&J&ft$t&  fi  D  in  the  frcouo  pee  re  of 

^i£»\Cne\vir,  ^cbuchab-nc5W 
!  3MMt  ~\\&  bzcamcbbzcamesabhrrc 
ttkWrzk  lbtth  his  fptnt  was  trou 
bleb, anb  his  flcepebzatie  from  Inm. 

i    Hhen  the  Bmg  commanbeb  to 
i  call  the  iBagicians  ,  anb  the  3ftrolo 
igers,anbthe£>ozccrcrs,anbthcCalbc 
1  ans,  foz  to  flicib  the  Bmg  hts  blames : 
fo  they  came  anb  ftoob  befozc  the  lung. 

3  3nb  the  Bingfaib  bnto  them ,  3J 
haue  bzeameb  a  b.'eame ,  anb  my  fpint 
mas  troubleb  to  Isnoib  the  b;eame. 

4.  Xhen  fpalie  the  Caibeans  to  the 
IRingin  §>yziacKe  *  Dhmg,  line  fo;  c 
ucr :  tell  thy  feruants  the  bzeame ,  anb 
tbelbillfhett)theintrrp;etanon. 

5  Hhe  Bmg  anfwereb,  anb  faib  to 
the  Caibeans,  Xhe  timig  is  gone  from 
mec:  ifye  Hull  not  make  ftnoHieubuto 
methebzeamcibith  themterpzetatiou 
thereof,  y  re  fliall  be  *t  cut  in  pieces,  anb 
pour  houfes  fhaibe  mabe  abunghill. 

6  25ut  if  y  ce  fhelbe  the  bzeame ,  anb 
the  mterpzetattou  thereof,  yeefliail  rc 
tcme  of  me  gtftes  anb  ||  reUiarbs ,  anb 
great  honour :  therefore  fncibeme  the 
bzeame,  anb  thetnterpzctation  thereof. 


-7    Xheyanfiuerebagamcanbfaib 
iUt  the  Bmg  tell  his  feruants  the 
I  bzeame ,  anb  ibe  lbill  fheib  the  mterpze 
;  tatton  of  it. 

8  30)eBinganfu)ercb,anbCa!b,3J 
huotti  of  certemty  that  ye  lbouio  t  game 
the  time,  becaufe  ye  fee  the  thing  is  gone 
from  me. 

9  35uttfyeeU):lI  not  mane  Unolben 
bnto  me  the  bzcame,  there  is  but  one  be; 
tree  foz  you :  fo;  re  hane  pzepareb  lying, 
aubtozruptUiozbsrofpcaljebefozemc, 
till  the  time  be  changcb:  therefo.'e  tell 
me  the  bzeame ,  anb  "J  (hall  hnoib  that 
yee  can  fheibe  mce  the  interpretation 
thereof. 

io  ICEhe  Caibeans aufiuercbbcfo;e 
theBmg,anbfaib,i:hereisnotaman 
Upon  the  earth  that  tan  fbeib  the  lungs 
matter :  therefoze  there  is  no  Bmg, 
lozb,noz ruler,  that  afhcb  fitch  things 
atanyi^acju'.an^z^ftrologc^ozCai 
bean. 

ii  3nb  'tis  a  rare  thing  that  the  lung 
rrqmreth,  anb  there  is  none  other  that 
can  (hemic  befozc  the  Burg,  ercept  the 
gobs.uihofebibciimgisuotibithflcrii. 

ii  fo:  this  caufethcBmg  ibasan 
gry  anb  bcry  furious,  anb  commanbeb 
to  beftroy  all  the  lbsfc  men  of  iSabylon. 

15  3nb  the  Decree  Went  foozti)  tlwt 
the  Wife  men  fnouib  be  flattie,  anb  they 
fought  Daniel  anb  h;s  fellowcs  to  be 
flaine. 

14  CXhen  Daniel  tanfmercbUuth 
:  couufcli  anb  Unfebome  to  Priori)  the 

captamc  of  the  Btngs  gnarb,  winch 
was  gone  foozth  to  flay  the  Wife  men  of 
Babylon. 

15  $?ce  anfmereb  anb  faibto  3lrtoth 
theBmgs  captamc,  nahyisthcbccrce 
fo  hafliefrom  the  Bmg ;  Hhcn  3noch 
mabe  the  thing  tmoWcnto  Daniel. 

16  XhcnDamelWeutinanbbefireb 
of  the  Bmg,  that  hee  wottlb  ginchim 
tune,  anb  that  he  Woulb  (hcib  tljcUing 
themtcrpzetanon. 

17  XnenDanicUbenttohishoufe, 
!  anb  mabe  the  thing  Hnomen  to  Dana^ 
\  niah, t^ifliael, anb  pariah  hiscompa- 
j  ntons : 

18  Xhat  they  Vboulb  befire  mercies 
t  of  thcoobofheauen  concerning  this 

ifetrct.that  Daniel  anb  hts  feiiotbes 
1  fhoulb  not  perifh  Vbtth  tl;e  reft  of  the 
tt)ifcmenofi?atirlon. 

19  CXhen  Uias  the  fecret  rcucaleo 
bnto  Daniel  in  a  night  bifion :  then  Da 
mcl  bleflcb  the  (5ob  of  hcaucn. 

Dbbb       20  Daniel 


\C*td  huy. 


Utrncd. 


Cf.t.i  ckiefe 
efthetxtcM- 


rtghiet 


rr  CoA, 


\)Qr,rb*t 

W9(  dfilrgy 


Daniel  expoundeth     Daniel.       the  kings  dreame. 


P.'al.  il  ;. 
.  and  :  i  5. 


lh*Ht  found 

t  CM. 

children  of 
theLjptiui- 
tieofhuUh. 


t  Cald. 
hath  made 
knmtn. 


fCtllJ.CWIr 
Vf. 


20  Daniel  anfajcrcb  anb  faib  *26lct 
febbcrhc  name  of  <£>ob  foz  cucr  anb 
cucr:fo2  ttnfcbomc  anb  might  arc  his: 

ii  3ub  he  changcrD  ttjc  turns  ano 
the  fcafons :  he  remoucth  Bmgs ,  ano 
fettcth  bp  Bmgs :  he  giucth  Unfcbome 
bntotheibifc,anbmiott)leogctorhcm 
that  Unoib  bnbcrftanbmg. 

22  iKreucaieththebccpcattbfcerct 
things :  Ijce  Hnolbeth  lbhat  is  ut  the 
oaclut  es,f  the  light  bttieiicth  Utith  htm. 

2 3  5  rhahae  thec  anb  pzatfc thee,  £>  I 
thou  <Sob  of  my  fathers,  mho  haftgi 
uenmciuifebomcanb  might ,  anb  haft , 
mabe  ftnolbcn  bnto  me  nolbibhatibe 
befitrb  of  thee:  fo2  thou  baft  nolo  maoe 
huoibcn  bnto  bs  the  Kings  matter. 

24  C  Xhcrcfo2c  Daniel  ibent  m 
bnto  5tnoth  iObomtbcBmgbab02bat^ 
neb  to  beftroy  the  Vbtfc  men  of  26aby^' 
ion :  lie  tbent  ant  faib  thus  Onto  bun,  | 
Deftroy  not  the  Vbifc  men  of  ffiabylon : 
b:mg  me  in  bcfo:c  the  lung ,  anb  3J  rbill 
(beio  bnto  tbcKingtbemterpJctanon. 

25  Xhcn  3irioth brought m  Daniel 
befcue  the  lung  mbatte,  9  faib  thus  bn- 
to him ,  t  gj  iiauc  founb  a  man  of  the ! 
ttaptuies  of  "Jubah  ,  that  mill  mabc 
tuioiben  bnto  the  lung  rtjc  intcrpieta^ 
non. 

26  Xhe  Bmg  anfrocrcb  anu  faib  to 
Daniel  ibhofc  name  was  25cltc(ba55ar, 
3rt  thou  able  to  mafcc  tmoiOcn  bnto  I 
me  the  bzeame  lbhicb  3  baue  fecue,  anb ' 
the  tnterpzetatton  thereof? 

27  Daniel  amujcrcb  in  the  p.'cfcnce 
of  the  Bt'ng,anb  fatb,  Xhc  fecret  lObtcb 
the  Bmg  hath  bemaubcb ,  tannot  the 
ibife  mcu,the  aftrologtans,  the  magm  , 
ans,  v  fouthfaiers  fljeib  bnto  the  mug : 

18  i5ut  there ts  a  C5ob  in  hcaucn  that ' 
reueaieth  ferrets,  anbtinabcthunoiucn 
to  the  lung  Bebucbab-nc^at,  Vbhat 
fbaibc  in  the  latter  bayes.  Hby  bjeame, 
anb  the  bifions  of  thy  heab  bpon  thy 
bcb.arethefe. 

29  3ts  foi  thee ,  £>  Bmg  ,  thy 
thoughts'  ramcintot'nvminJebponthy 
beo.ibbattboulbtomcto  paffc  hereaf 
tct:anb  he  that  rcuealethfetrcts,  ma- 
KetbRnolbentotbec,  lbhat  (ball  come 
to  paffe. 

■>  30  25utasfonnc,  tbisfccrettsnot 
r  eueaieb  to  me,fo;  any  lOif  borne  that  3J 
banc  mo2c  then  any  lining,  butfo,2tl>nr 
fanes  that  (bail  matte  imoibcn  the  ixv 
tcrp:ctattou  to  the  Bmg,anb  that  thou 
mighteft  Imoib  the  thoughts  of  thy 
heart. 


31  CXbou,£)Bing,  tfaibcu\anb 
bebolbagreatunage :  this  great  image 
ibhofc  bngrjtnefle  lbas  ettclleut ,  ftoob 
before  thee,  anb  the  fozmc  thereof  ^ 
terrible. 

32  5Chts  images  beao  rbas  of  fine 
golb,  hisbjcaftanbhisarmesofOluer, 
his  belly  anb  hts  |  thighes  of  bjafte : 

33  l?ts  legs  of  y2on ,  his  fecte  part  of 
y;  on, anb  part  of  tlay. 

34  Xboufaibeftniltbataftouettias 
tut  out  I  without  hanbs,  rbhirrj  fmote 
the  unagc  bpon  his  ftetc  that  were  of 
y:on  anb  tlay  ,anb  tease  them  to  ptetes. 

35  XheniPastheyjon,  the  tlay,  the 
bjaffc,  the  flitter,  anb  the  golbe  b2oucn 
to  ptetes  together,  anb  became  line  the 
rhaffc  of  the  fummer  trncftmtg  fiooKS, 
anb  the  rbmbtaricb  them  attmy ,  that 
no  piaccmas  founb  fozthetmjthcftone 
that  fmote  the  image  betamc  a  great 
niountame,  anb  fillcb  the  tthole  earth- 

36  Cl  ichis  <  thcb2camc,anbiPerbill 
tell  the  mtctp2etation  ihereoi  befo:crt)e 
Bmg. 

37  T\)o\x ,  £>  Bing ,  art  a  King  of 
Bmgs :  fo;  the  C5ob  of  hcaucn  hath  gt- 
uen  tljce  a  tnngootne ,  poiber ,  anb 
ftrcngtl),anbglo2y. 

3S  3lnb  mhcrcfocuer  tne  chflbjen  of 
men  bU)d,thc  beafts  of  the  nclb.anb  the 
foulcs  of  the  tjeauen  hath  he  gtucn  into 
thmc  hanb,anb  hath  mace  thec  ntlcr  o-- 
ucr  them  all :  thou  art  this  heab  of  golb. 

39  3nb  after  thec  fhalianfe  an  other 
Rtngbome  mfenour  to  thec ,  anb  ano« 
thcr  thiro  htngbomc  oftyafle,  Vbhirh 
;  (hall  bcare  rule  oner  all  the  earth. 

40  3nb  the  fourth  Umgbomc  fhai! 
be  ftrong  as  yjonifoiafmuth  as  y;on 
b2eaaeth  in  pieces  anb  fubbucrh  all 
things  anb  as  \non  tljat  b2caRctl)  all 
thefc,fliaii  it  b2canc  in  pieces  anb  b-unfe. 

41  ^ttb  lbhcrcas  thou  fauicft  the 
feetc  anb  tocs,part  of  potters  tlay,  anb 
partofy2on:thcRingbomcfl)albcbiuu 
bcb,bttt  there  fljaibc  in  it  of  the  ftrengrn 
ofthcy2on  ,  fojafmuth  as  thoufaitoeft 
the  y2on  tnut  Uutt)  my2ic  clay. 

4.2  ^nb  as  the  toes  of  the  feetc  wei  e 
part  of  y2on  ,  anb  part  of  tlay ,  fo  the 
Umgbomc fbali  be  partly  ftrong,  anb 
partly  i|  b.'oacn. 

43  3nb  lbhcrcas  thou  ratbeft  y2on 
intrt  lbirhtny2tc  tlay,  tlicyfljall  mingle 
thcmfclttcs  lluth  thefcebcofmcn:but 
theyfhall  notclcauc  tone  to  an  other  ,e- 
uen  as  y2on  ts  not  mtrcb  ibtth  tlay. 

44  ^nbmtthcbatcsofrhcfcBmgs 
(hail 


■CM. 
mng. 


ht/l 


{Or  Utt. 


II  Or.wbich 

handt.  .is 


\\Orfntt/e. 


t  CM.  thu 

mrbthu. 

t  CM.thcw 
dtnei. 


A 


n  image  let  v 


f< 


geietvp. 


ci 


iap.ii 


p.iij. 


and  dedicated. 


'Chap.4.3. 

,4. and  6. 
27. and  7. 

I4,:7- 
mith  4.7. 
lukc  t.H- 

tC4/i*»f- 
<&n»  there- 

'/■ 


hid- 


II*; 


"Chap. 49 


fl)ail  tt)c  ©00  of  hcaucn  Ttt  top  a  femg 
borne,  *  which  fl>dlt  ncucr  be  bcfiroycb: 
anothcticungbomc  (tjallnotbe  left  to 
other  people, but  it  fhail  bzeabe  tn  pieces, 
anb  confume  ail  thefc  tungbomes ,  anb 
itfl)aUQanbfo;cucr. 

45  iforafmuchas  thou  faitocft  that 
the  ftonc  itoas  tut  out  of  the  mountatnc 

itoithout  hanbs ,  anb  that  it  brahc  tn 
pieces  the  y2on,  the  b2affc,  the  clay,  the 
filucr  ,anb  the  golb.the  great  Gob  Hath 
mabc  hnoitoento  thcBtng  Vbhat  (ball 
tome  to  paflct  hereafter,  ?  the  02came 
is  certame,  anb  tbc  interpretation  there- 
of furc. 

46  CXhcn  the  Btug  jSebuchafr 
uc^ar  ftiltoponhis  face,  auo  «to02(lnp; 
peb  Daniel,  anb  cotumanbeb  that  the? 
fhoulb offer  an  oblation,  anb  fttoccto; 
bours  tonto  him. 

4.7  Xhc  ismg  anfitocreb  tonto  2>a-. 
nicianbfaib,£>fatructhns,thatyour 
Gob  is  a  Gob  of  gobs,  anb  aHo2b  of 
■&mgs,anb  a  rcucaler  of  fecrcts ,  feeing 
thou  couibcO  rcucaic  this  fecrct. 

48  Xhcnthcixmg  mabc  Daniel  a 
great  man,  anb  gauc  hint  man?  great 
gifts,  s  mabc  htm  ruler  oner  the  ltohole 
piouinccof  asabulon,  anb*chtcfcofthe 
goucrnours  oucr  all  the  roifcmcn  of 
26abyIon. 

49   Xhcn  Daniel  tcrtucftcb  of  the 
!ung,anbhefct£>hab2ach ,  49c(bach, 
anbSlbcbnego  oucr  the  affaires  of  the 
proumcc  of  asabyton:  but  Daniel  Tate! 
mthcgatcofthcBmg. 

CHAP.    III. 

I  Nebuchad-nezzardedicatech  a  golden  image 
in  Dura.  8  Shadrach.Mefhach and  Abed-1 
ncgo  are  accufed  tor  not  woifhippmg  the1 
image.  15  They  being  threamed,  make  a 
good  conf'efsion.  io.  God  deliuereth  them 
out  or  the  furnace.  16  Nebuchad-nezz.u 
feeing  the  miracle  ,  bleflethGod. 

^glj^2F£burhab  nnytr  the  lung 
fh-vXf(£'  §  mabc  an  image  of  golb, 

I I  LV'^X&J  5  ^VlllOfC   hCigljt   was  tl)2CC- 

7  23$&:  I  fcorc  cubits,  ^d  p  bicabth 
SwJI  thereof  fire  utbttcs:  hefet 
it  top  mthepiame  of  Dura,  tn  the  pro; 
utnccof26abylon. 

z  Xhcn^ebuchabuc'^artheUtng 
fent  to  gather  together  the  £2tnccs,thc 
Goucrnours ,  anb  the  Captatncs ,  the 
%tbgcs,theXrcafurrrs,  the  Couufcl- 
icrs,  the  £>hcnfes,  ano  all  the  rulers 
ofthcpjoutntes,  to  coinctothebcbtca; 
ttori  of  tlje  im«ae  Xbt)tc!j  /2  cuuct)au-nc5- 


\C*U.mth 

might. 
\C*ld  they 

command. 


I  Or  H 


^rthcBtughaofctbp. 

j  Xhen  the  pnnccs ,  the  Goner 
noursano  Captatncs,  the  JJubges,  the 
,  Hrcafurers,the  €ounfcllcrs,thc  She 
nfes,  anb  all  the  rulers  of  the  promn- 
;  ccs  itocrc  gathcrcb  together  tonto  the 
bcbicatto  of  the  tmagc,  that  ^cbuchab 
nc53ar  the  Bmg  hab  fct  top ,  anb  thev 
froob  before  the  image  thaui3ebuchafr 
nc55arhabfcttop. 

j  4  Xhen  an  heraulb  cryebtaloub, 
Ho  yontittscommaunbcb,sD  people, 
nations,  anb  languages, 

5  Tim  at  Vbhat  tunc  ycc  hcare  the 
founbof  the co2nct, flute,  harpe,  facK- 
but ,  pfaltcncl  bulnmcr,anbalilnnbs 
of  muftcHe,  ycc  fall  boltonc,anb  itoo2fl)ip  £t* 
thcgolbcn  image  that  /iScbuchab  ncy- 
;5ar  the  l^ing  hath  fct  top: 

6  3lnb  itoho  fo  faiicth  not  bourn anb 
I  Vboillnppctl) ,  (hall  the  fame  hourcbee 
i  caft  into  the  mtbbeft  of  a  burning  ficrtc 
furnace. 

7  Xhcrcfo2c  at  that  time,  tbheu  all 
.the  people  hcarb  the  founb  of  the  tor^ 

net,flute ,  harpc,facUbut,pfaitctic,anb 
!  allhtnbcsof  muftcfccail  thepcoplcthc 
|  nations,  anb  the  languages  fell  bo  tbnc 

anditoo2flnppcb  tl)c  golbcmmagc,  that 
!  /5cbuchab  ne5?ar  the  Bmg  hab  fct  top. 
I    s   CJjOhcrefoje  at  that  tunc  ccrtainc 

Caibcaus  camenccre,  anbaccufcbrhc 
l3jcitocs. 

9  Xhcy  fpafec  anb  fayb  to  the  "&ing 
/Bebucljab  nc55ar ,  Q  Btng,  line  fo? 
euer. 

io  Xhou,  ©Bing,  haflmabe  a  be- 
er ccthat  cucrv  man  that  fliai  hcarcthc 
founb  ofthc  coutct,flutc,harpc,facUbut, 
i  pfaltcrtr,anb  bulnmcr,anb  all  lunbs  of 
'  muftcfec,fl)all  fall  boitouc  anbiborfhtp 
the  golb  en  image: 

11  3lnb  ltohofo  failed)  not  boltonc 
'  rj  ito02fhtppcth ,  that  ijc  fljoulb  be  caft  in- 
to tfjc  mtoft  of  a  burning  ftcne  furnace. 
ix  Inhere  arc  certain 3Jc«bcsil>hom 
'thou  haft  fct  oucr  the  affaires  of  the 
pioutncc  of  iSabylon,&>hab2ach,  39c- 1 
ifhach,  anb  ^bebnego  :  thefc  men,  D   „ 
idling, thane  not  regarbeb  thee,  thev  T  : 
feme  not  thy  gobS,uoj  itoozflup  the  go!?  -. 
I  ben  image,  itohtch  thou  haft  fct  top. 
i}  <r  Xhen  ^cbuchao  nroar  mbis 

j  rage  anb  furic  commaunbcb  to  b:tng 
S>hab2ach,  CI3cfl)acl) ,  anb  ^Ibcbncno : 
then tljcy  brought  thefc men  before  the 

liuug. 
i+  Ocbuchab-nc^arfpaueanb  faib 

tontothem,  Jsitlltruc,  O  Shabrach, 


wi 


||Or../, 

■    I  ■ 

till!  21.1} 


Deli 


luerancerrom 


fr 


D 


anie 


rheficnefornace. 


tCd.flltJ. 


I  CaII. 

ftrenglht 


'\0rfrnamle 
\\0r,tur. 


fC^U.wcrJ. 
\Or$*rkf, 


|  Qr,  goutr- 


fl3c(l)acl)  anb  ^lUcDucgo ;  Doc  not  pec; 
fecue  my  goos  ,1102  luojfljip  tbcgolbcn  | 
image  ibbicb  5  bauc  fct  Dp  * 

15  0o\\tii yc  be  rcabytbat  atlbbat; 
timcyec  ljcatc  tljc  founb  of  tlje  eojnct,; 
flutc.bacpc,(acltbut,pfaltctic,anbbulci: 
nice ,  anb  all  tunbesof  muSettc,  yefaii 
bourne,  anb  lbojflnp  the  image  ttmich 
5  baue  mabc ,  ^  cii :  but  if  ycc  tt)02fl)ip 
not ,  ye  fballbc  caft  the  Came  Dotirc  into 
tlic  mibft  of  a  fier  ic  furnace ,  anb  lbbo  is 
that  (Sod  that  fl)ali  Deliucc  you  out  of 
mybanbes* 

i6  £>baD2acb,  40cfbach,  anb  3bcb 
negoanfiucrcbanbfatbto  the  tung;£) 
/ftcbucbab  nmar,  Vbc  arenottarcfull 
to  anfmcce  tbec  in  this  matter, 

17  31ftt  be  fo,  out  <5obU)«om\bcc 
fcrncis  able  to  Dcuucc  bs  from  the  bur- 
utngficrie  furnace,  anb  lie  lbillDcliucr 
bs  out  of  thine  hanD,£>  inng. 

18  But  ifuot,bcctt  fenoVbenbnto 
tbcc,£>mng,tbanbcU)illnotfcruetby 
gobs ,  no:  lbojflnp  tbp  golbtn  image, 
lblwb  thou  haftfetbp. 

19  C  Xbcnibas  jfJcbucbab  nmar 
tfull  of  funcanb  the  fojmc  of  Dis  bifagc 
ibas  cDangcb  agamft  £>Dab2acb,£0c; 
(DacbanD  3tbcbuego :  thereto,  -e  befpalte 
anb  commanbcb ,  tDat  tbey  flioulo  Dcat 
tlic  furnace  onefcuen  tunes  11102c  tDcn 
itibasibonttobcbcat. 

10  5lnb  Dec  commaunbeb  tDe  moft 
f  migbtv  men  tDat  lbcrc  in  Dis  arnucto 
binbe  ^DabzacD,  fiPctbacb  anb  3bcb 
nego ,  and  to  caft  them  into  the  burning 
ficric  furnace. 

21  Xbcn  tDtfc  men  iberc  bounb  in 
tDclr  I  coates ,  their  Dofcn  ,  anb  time 
II fiats ,  anb  tDcir  other  garments,  anb 
lbcrccaftmto  the  nubft  of  tljc  burning 
ficric  furnace. 

22  Xl)crcfo2C  becaufc  tDc  l-ungs 
t  commanbcmcntibasb2geut,  anbtbc 
furnacccrcccDingDot,tDc|!flamcoftDc 
fire  flcU)  tDofc  mm  tDat  tooltc  bp  £>l>i 
bzacD,  4$efbacD  anb^bebnego. 

23  3lnbtbcfc  tD2Ccmcn3Dab:acD, 
iTBefbacb ,  anb  3bcbncgo ,  fcllboibnc 
bounb  into  tljc  nubft  of  tljc  burning  fie 
rte  furnace. 

1+ XDcn  BcbutDabnmar  tDc  lung 
ibas  aftontcb,  anbrofc  bpinljaftc,  and 
fpaltc  anb  faib  bnto  Dis  |]  counfcllcrs, 
Dib  not  mcc  caft  tlnce  men  bounb  into 
tl)c  mibft  of  tDc  fire  <  XDcy  aufiucrcb 
anb  faib  bnto  tDc  lung  XrucDlung. 

!<,  i)c  anfiucrcb  anb  faib,  ILoc/^i  fee 
fouccmcuioofc,  Xbailuug  in  tljc  nubft 


of  tDc  fire ,  anb  t  tijev  Dauc  no  Duct,  anb 
tDc  fomie  of  tljc  fourth  is  Wt  tDc  fonnc 
of  (Sob. 

16  CXheu  jftcbucDab  nwar  came 
nccre  to  tDc  t  moutl)  of  tljc  burning  fie 
nc furnace,  and  fpattc  anb  faib ,  £>Da 
Djacb,iJPcft)acDanD3(bebncgo,  pc  fcr 
uants  of  the  moft  $igb  (Sob  ,  tome 
fo2tlj,ano  tome  imher.  XDcnS>Dab2acD, 
t©cfbacD ,  anb  3ibcDncgo  tame  fo?tb  of 
tDc  nubft  of  tDc  fire. 

27  3nD  tbcp2tnccs,gouernours,anD 
captames ,  anb  tDc  lungs  counfcllcrs, 
being  gatDcrcb  togctDcr ,  faib  tDefc 
men  bpon  lbDofe  bobics  tDc  fire  Dab  no 
poibcr,  1102  ibas  anDairc  of  tDcir  Dcab 
fiugcb,  neitDcr  ibere  tDcir  coats  cbatv 
gcb ,  no:  tDc  fmcll  of  fire  baD  paffeb 
ontDcm. 

i%  Then  j^ebucbaD  ne?5ar  fpancanD 
faib ;  ssicffcb  bectDeOobof^DabzacD, 
i$)cfDacD ,  anb  3lbebnego ,  luDo  bath 
fctu  bis  3ngcl ,  anb  bcliucrcb  Dis  fcr 
uants  that  truftcb  in  him ,  anb  hauc 
changcb  tbcl£iugsib02b,  anbycclbeb 
their  bobics ,  tDat  they  might  not  fcruc 
no?  ibo2ll)ip  any  00b ,  crrcpt  their 
oVbne  00b. 

29  Xhcrefoje  t  5  niabc  a  Decree, 
Xhat  cucry  people,  nation , anb lan 
gnagcibhich  fpcauc  tany  thing  ainuTc 
agamft  the  00b  of  £>Dab2<HD ,  fc^e- 
fliacD.anb^bcbncgo ,  fliall  bc'ttutm 
pieces ,  anb  tDcir  Doufcs fliall  be  mabc  a 
bungl)ill,bccaufctDercisnootDer(25ob, 
tDat  tan bcliucr  after  tDisfo2t. 

30  XDcn  tDc  Bmg  tp2omoteb  §>Da 
bzacD,  iipefliach ,  anb  ^bebnego  m  tljc 
p2ouuucof25abylon. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  Nebuch.id-nezzar  confellcth  Go(.^^  Kinc;- 
dome,  4  makcth  relation  of  his  drcames, 
which  the  Magitians  could  not  interpret.  S 
Daniel  hearedi  the  dreame.  19  Heeinter- 
prctethit.    iS   Theftoneottheeuenr. 

*o&  cbuchab-nmarthcUmg. 
-  bnto  all  people ,  nanons, 


anb  languages  that  blbcll 

m  all  tDc  cartD ,  peace  be 

'mM  multiplicb  bnto  you. 

1    1 31  tDought  it  goob  to  flicib  the 

fipc5,anDUioubcrs,thattljchigh<5ob 

hath  \b20ught  tomarb  me. 

3  i?oib  great -ve  his figncSMnbholb 
mighty  are  ins  Uionbersi  Dis  lungboinc 
is  'an  cucrlaftmg  lungbomc.anb  Dis  bo 
minion  « fio  generation  to  generation. 

4  C3J 


f  C.tl.ihcrt, 

!  >  ro  hurt  tn 
them. 


\CMJ01 


cree  u  mjJf 
by  rw. 
\  CM.tr- 

'Ciup.2.5. 

ptecti. 


\CM  mile 


,frofn 


fCM 


Chap.; 


TheK 


*Ch3.I.-)3. 


\CM.1 
Kuftcag. 


gsdreame    Chap.iiij.  is  interpreted. 


\CM.wiih 


A-  C3J/Bcbuchabnc33anbasatrcd 
m  mine  hottfc,  anb  {foundling  in  nip 
palace. 

5  ^favba  breame  tbhich  mabc  mc 
afcatb,anb  the  thoughts  topon  mp  beb, 
anbthctoiuonsofmphcabtroublcbme. 

6  3C!)crcfo?c  mabc  3  a  Decree,  to 
bring  m  all  the  Ibife  men  of  rSabplon 
before  mec,  that  thep  might  mafee 
hnoiiten  tonto  mc  the  interpretation  of 
the  breame. 

7  Hfjcn  came  (n  the  Magicians, 
thc3Jdrologcrs,thc€aibcans,anbthc 
douthfapcrs :  anb  %  tolbe  the  breame ! 
before  them  but  they  bib  not  matte! 
ftnotben  bnto  mec  the  interpretation 
thereof. 

8  C  2Sut  at  tfjc  laO  Daniel  came  in 
before  me,  (ltohofcnamc  wasrscitcfhay 
3ar,accorbing  to  tfjc  name  of  mp©ob, 
anb  m  itohom  is  the  fptnt  of  the  holp  I 
©ods)  1  before  ljun  J  tolb  the  breame,  j 

dying, 

9  ^E>  2Scltcfl)a55ar ,  *  matter  of  tl)c 
Magicians,  becaufe  3J  tmoibthat  the 
fpiritofthcholp<3obsisinthcc,anbno 
ferret  troublctfj  thec,  tell  me  tfjc  toifions 
of  mp  breame  that  3J  hauc  fecne ,  anb 
the  mtcrprctanon  thereof. 

10  Xhus  were  the  toifions  of  mine 
hcato  mmpbcb:tgjfaib,anDbeholD,a 
tree  in  tfjc  nnbbcft  of  tfjc  earth ,  anD  tfjc 
fjeigfjtthcrcof  was  great. 

n  3Cl)c  tree  grcito,  anb  ibasdrongj 
anb  tfjc  height  thereof  reachcD  tonto 
heauen,  anb  the  fight  thereof  to  the  enb 
of  all  the  earth. 

n  Xhc  icaues  thereof .vcrc  faircanb  \ 
thcfruitc  thereof  much,  anb  m  it  was  j 
meatc  for  all :  the  beads  of  the  ficib  hab 
fhaDoito  unbec  it,  anD  the  foulcs  of  the 
hcaticn  Ditoelt  m  the  boughes  thereof, 
anballflcdjibasfcboftt. 

13  3fatocinthetoifionsofmph«U> 
topon  mp  beb ,  <j  bcholb,  a  Watcher  anb 
an  holp  one  came  bourne  from  heauen. 

14  $e  ccpcbtaiouDcanDfatb  thus 
fccito  boitonc  the  tree ,  anb  cut  off  hts 
branches  thane  off  his  lcaucs,anb  feat- 
tct  his  fcuitc ;  let  the  beads  get  aitoap 
from  tonbcrtt,anb  the foulcs from  his 
brandies. 

15  4!2eucrthclcffclcaucthclrampcof 
his  rootcs  m  the  earth ,  men  ltoith  a 
banb  of  pron  anb  braffc,  in  the  tenber 
graffc  of  the  ficlb ,  anb  let  it  be  ttict  mitt) 
the  onto  of  heauen,  ano  let  hispornon 
bciuith  thebcades  m  the  grade  of  the 
earth. 


i6  |Lct  his  heart  bee  cljangeD  from 
mans,  anb  let  a  beads  heart  be  giuen 
bnto  him,  anbictfcucn  nmes  paffe  0- 
uerhim. 

17  XhiS  matter  is  bp  the  bccrcc  of 
the  matchers,  anD  the  bemaunb  by  the 
lborb  of  tlje  $?olp  ones :  to  the  intent 
.that  the  Uumg  map  fenoito,  that  the 
;  mod  litgh  rulcth  in  the  hmgbomc  of 
!  men,  anb  gmeth  it  to  ibhomfocucr  hec 
Uuii.anb  fcttcthbp  ouecitthcbafcdof 
men. 

is  Xhis  breainc,3I  King  $ebucrjate 
nc35arhaucfccnc:  /Sotbtljou,  £>25cl= 
teniae ,  bcclarc  the  mtcrprctanon 
thereof,  foradnuchasau  thenaffemen 
of  mp  tnngbomc  arc  not  able  to  mane 
jtmorben  bnto  nice  the  interpretation: 
but  thou  art  abie,for  the  fpmt  of  tlje  ho 
lp<5obs>sinthce. 

19  C1Chen2!)aniel(tbhofe  name  was 
Bcltcfba^ar )  roas  adontcb  fo:  one 
hourc,  anb  his  thoughts  troublcb  him: 
1Ehc  Bmg  fpanc ,  anb  faib,  rscitcdjay 
sar,  let  not  the  breame,  or  the  interpret 
tation  thereof  trouble  thec.  iocltcfhav 
5ar  anfrocreb  anb  faib ,  t^p  102b ,  tlje 
breame  be  to  them  that  hate  thee ,  anb 
the  interpretation  thereof  to  tljiuc  enc 
mtes. 

zo  l^ctrecthatthonfamed.itohich 
greil),ano  was  drong,  tt'hofc  height 
reacheb  tonto  the  heauen,  anb  the  fight 
thereof  to  all  the  earth: 

11  aMjofclcattcSweK  fairc,  anbtljc 
fruit  thereof  much ,  anb  in  it  •■  as  meatc 
forall,tonDcritohich  the  beads  of  the 
ficlDDibclt,  anbtopon  ltohofe  branches 
the  foulcs  ofthc  heauen  hab  tljcichabi 
tation: 

ix  3!t  is  thou,  3D  Sing,  that  art 
groitocn  anb  become  drong :  for  thp 
greatneffe  isgcovtoen  anb  reailjcthtons 
to  heauen,  anb  thp  Dominion  to  the  enb 
of the  earth. 

13  2lnD  ltoljcrcas  the  Bing  falto  a 
matcher ,  ano  an  holp  one  comnuug 
bottmc  from  heauni,  anb  fapmg ,  tycito 
thctrccDoil)nc,anDbedropit,pctlcaue 
the  dumpc  of  the  rootcs  thereof  in  the 
earth,  eucn  «nth  a  banb  ofp:onanb 
braffc  m  the  tenber  graffe  of  the  ficlb 
anb  let  it  be  ltoct  ttntljthc  bcibc  of  hea^ 
ucn ,  anb  let  his  poition  be  lbith  the 
beads  of  tlje  ficlb,  nilfeueu  runes  paffe 
oucrljim: 

24  %\)is  is  the  interpretation,  £> 
Umg,  1  this  "s  the  bccrcc  of  the  mod  $ic; 
ltoljich  is  come  topon  mp  lorb  the  Ring : 
2>Dbb  3      15  Chat 


The  kings  fall.  Daniel.  A  hand  writing, 


10.  5iC. 


Or,  an 
healing  of 
thinccrronr. 


Or,  vpon. 


*  Chap.  7 

I4.mic.47 

luc.I.;3. 


z<,  Zhatthcpfliau  *  Djiuc  thee  from 
incu,anDthyDiPcllingfI)allbciPiththc 
beads  of  the  ficlD ,  anli  tl)cv  fliaii  maKc 
thee  to  rate  graffc  as  orcn ,  ano  the? 
frjailipet  thec  tbiththeDcVbofhcaucn, 
anD  fcucn  times  mail  paffc  oucr  thee, 
till  tijou  UnoiPtrjat  the  moft  high  ra 
IcthtnUicKuigDomcofmcn.auDfltucth 
ittott)l)omfocucrhctt»ll. 

16  3tno  iPhcrcas  they  eommaiiDcD 
to  icauc  tl)c  mimpcof  thctrccrootcs 
tliv  ftmgootnc  fliall  be  furc  Pnto  thec, 
after  that  thou  (halt  hanc  anoiDcn  that 
the  hcancus  doc  rule. 

17  tt>hercfo:c,£)  Bmg,letmyeomv 
fell  be  acceptable  Pnto  thec ,  anD  b2caae 
off  tl)v  fumes  by  nghtcoufnefrc,  ano 
thine  iniquities  bv  flicttnng  merry  to 
tlic  poo2e.ifit  may  be  ||  a  lengthening  of 
thy  tranqiuintic. 

zs  CC  3W  this  came  Ppon  the  lung 
jftcbuchaD  nc55ar, 

29  3ttthccitD  oftibeluc  moncthshc 
rbalRCDlimtlie  palace  ofthc  BingDomc 
offfiabylon. 

3oH:hcBmgrpaBe,anDfaiD,3J£:not 
tins  great  zsabylon ,  that  31  hauc  built 
fo:  tlic  houfc  of  trie  Sungtomc,  by  tlic 
might  of  my  poitocr  ,anb  ?02  the  honour 
ofinytnatcfttc; 

31  nahilc  the  lbo2D  was  m  the  Bings 
mouth ,  there  fell  apo-.tcfrom  hcaueu, 
faying,  jg>  Btng  jftcbttchaD-ne^ar,  to 
tliec  it  is  fpoaen  %\)t  aingDomelsDe- 
partcD  from  thee. 

31  3lnD  they  (bail  D2iuc  thee  from 
men ,  anotfjyDlPellingfruiibciipitfjthc 
beads  ofthc  ficlD;fbey  than  make  thee 
to  catc  graffc  asojeen ,  ano  fcucn  times 
fliail  paffc  oucr  thee,  Pntillthou  Btioib 
that  tlic  molt  high  euleth  m  the  Hmg 
Dome  of  men ,  anD  giucth  it  to  luhomfo 
cucrhcttnll. 

33  Xhc  fame  houre  Vbas  the  thing 
fulfillcD  Ppon  jftcbuchaD  -  nc^ar ,  ano 
hcibasDmicnfrom  men,  anD  DiDeatc 
graffc  as  orcn ,  anD  his  boDviPasibct 
nnththcDcU)  of  hcauctt,  till  his  haircs 
ibcrcgroibcn  lihccgles  feathers,  anD 
his  nailes  liac  biros  dawes. 

3+  3inDatthe  enD  ofthc  Daycs,  3J 
/ftcbuchaD  ne^ar  lift  Pp  mine  eyes  ton  ; 
tohcaucn,  anDniincPtiDcrftanDingrc 
turucD  buto  mcaiiD  Ji  blcffcD  the  moft 
high ,  auD  31  p:atfcD  ,anD  honour  cD  him  | 
thatliucthfoieucr,  lPhofc  Dominion  1  ' 
*aneueria(hngDomtnton,anD  his  lung 
Dome  i  from  generation  to  genera 
nou. 


35  3uD  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  arc  rcputcD  as  nothing:  anD  hec 
Doth  actoJDmgto  hisiPtli  tntbearmic 
of  hcaucn,  anD  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth  :  ano  none  tan  day  his 
hanD ,  0?  *  fay  Pnto  him ,  aahat  Doeft 
thou* 

36  %t  the  Came  rime  my  reafon  re; 
tutncDbnto  me,anDfo?thcglo2y  of  my 
BmgDome,  ntme  honour  ,atiD  bnghtnes 
rcturncDPnto  me,  anD  my  tounfciicrs, 
anDmy|Lo2DsfoughtPutomc,  anD  Ji 
ipas  cftabliflicD  m  myUmgDomc,  anD 
crcclient  fi0atcftic  ipas  aDDeD  Pnto  mc. 

37  iflotbll  JBcbuchaD-nc^arp.'aife, 
anD  crtoll  anD  honour  the  Btng  of  hca- 
uci^allibhofcrbozBesaictruth.anDhis 
\Paics  uiDgemcnt.anD  thofc  that  iPaiBe 
inpubcheisablc  to  abafc. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Belfhazzars  impious  fcafr.  5  A  hand  wti. 
ting.vnknowentotheMagitians,  troubleth 
thekmg.  10  At  the  commendation  ot  the 
Queenc,  Daniel  is  brought.  17  Hereprc- 
uingthekingofpiidcandidolatry,  15  rea- 
deth  and  intcrpreteth  the  writing.  $0  The 
Monarchic  is  tvanflated  to  the  Mcdcs. 

$  eifhajjarthcBingmaDe 
i*£  a  great  feaft  to  a  thou 
J^*t  fano  of  Ins  2Lo2Ds ,  anb 
M)  U  D2aiiBC  Ibiuc  befo2c  tljc 
thoufanD. 
z  26cifi)ar,ar,  iPhiicshc  taftcbthc 
Vbmc,  tO!iimaiinDcDtob2ingrlicgolDni 
anD  filucr  Pcffcis.Uihith  his  father  #c 
biicliaD-uc35ar  haD  t  taken  out  of  tlic 
temple  ibljith  was  m  ^crufalcm ,  that 
the  King  anD  his  p2intcs,his  lPiues.anD 
hi5tonntbmcs  might  D2inUc  therein. 

3  Xhcn  they  b20ugl.1t  the  golDcn 
Pcffcls  that  lPcrctaUcnout  of  the  tem- 
ple of  the  houfc  of  0oD ,  iPIjith  was  at 
3!erufaicm,  anD  the  lung  auD  his  pjin- 
tes  ,  his  iPiucs,auD  Ijis  concubines 
D2aiiBcmthcm. 

4  Hhcy  D2imlte  \hmt ,  anD  pjaifcD 
thcgoDsofgolDanDoffiluer,  ofb:an"c, 
ofy2on,ofU)ooD,anDofftonc 

5  it  5"  the  fame  hourc  tame fo2th 
fingers  of  a  mans  hanD ,  anD  ilnotc 
oner  againft  the  canDlcfhtHe  bponthc 
plaiftcr  of  the  tuaii  of  the  Bings  pa^ 
lace ,  anD  the  mug  faib  the  part  ofthc 
hauDthatUnote. 

6  3thcn  the  lungs  t  countenance 
tiPaschaugcD,  anD  his  thoughts  trou 
blcDhiiu,fflthatthe||iointsofhisloincs 

mere 


'Iob.o.  1 
ifai.45  9- 


t  Ca!J. 
fosr:h. 


tC-'J- 

\  C*l J. chan- 
ged ir. 
if  Or.^trdlft. 
C*tL  bind. 
'  ("if;  or 

kwit. 


Daniel  recjui  red         Chap.v.  to  interprets  it. 


\Cdde. 
vnlh  might. 


||  Or,  purple 


\Ctlde. 
brightnef- 

fa. 


•Cha.2.48 

l\Or,grand- 
fatber. 


l|0r,  grand' 
father. 
Cha.4.  6. 


\\Or,tfm 

interpreter, 

tfv. 

\\Or,of* 

ebffobttr. 

}C*Ue. 

Itnti. 


,1  Or^grand- 
fasber. 


tbcte  loofcb,  and  his  knees  (mote  one 
againftanatfter. 

7  XhcRing  tneb  t aioub  to  bring in 
the  &ftrologers,  the  Catbcans,  anb  tnt 
foothfaycts:  and  theinng  fpafee  ana  faib 
tothctbifc  men  of  25abyton ,  aahofoe 
ucr  (ball  reabe  thistbriting,  an&tbcibe 
me  the  interpretation  ths iteof,  ft) all  bee 
ciothcb  tbith  ilfcaritt,  anb  haue  achainc 
of  golbabonth»snccfte,anblbailbethe 
thttb  ruler  m  the  Rtngbome. 

8  Chen  tame  in  all  thc&mgs»ri(c 
men,  bntthcy  toulb  not  reabe  the  voiv 
ting,  normaReRnotbeu  to  the  Rlngthe 
interpretation  thereof. 

9  Xhen  tbas  2&ng  aSeKbassat 
greatly  troubltb,anbhis  t  countenance 
tbas  tbangcb  in  him,  anb  his lorucs 
ibcrcaftomrb. 

10  <c  Now  tlje  cmcenc,  by  reafon  of 
the  tborbes  of  tDc  Ring  anb  his  loros, 
tame  mto  the  banquet  hou(c,  and  the 
quecne  fpafteanb  faib,  iDtang,  Hue  for 
met :  let  notthytbougbtsttoume  thee, 
no?  let  thy  ccuutenante  be  changed. 

11  "IChcrctsanianmthyRmgbom, 
intbhomc  is  the  fptrit  of  theboly  gobs, 
anb  in  thedayes  of  thy  |  father  light  anb 
tmbctftanbmg  anb  tbtfebome  lifec  tfte 
tbifraomc  of  ti)c  gobs,  tbas  founb  m 
ijim :  tbhom  ri)c  Ring  iftebuchaa  -  my 
5at  ||  thy  fatbet,the  Ring,  1%.  thy  father ; 
mabt  'matter  of  the  magicians,  aura* 
logcts,  Calbcans,  and  foothfaycts, 

ii  iforaf.nuthasanctecllcntfpirit 
anb  Rnotblcagc  anb  bnbcc0anbing,!|i«5 
tcrprcting  of  areames,  anblbctdingof 
ijarb  fententes,?  1 1  biOolning  of  tboubts 
tberefounbinttjefatwDamel,  tbhoni 
the  BingnamcD  25clte(ba5$at:  notb  let 
2>aniclbeeallcb,  anb  he  ttHllfbctbcthc 
interpolation. 

13  Chen  mas  Swrael  brought  in  be- 
fore  rhebing,and  the  RmgtpaRc  anb  faib 
bnto  2r>anlcl ,  Art  thou  that  3>antcl, 
tbhith  an  of  the  tbilbrcn  of  the  taptiiuty 
of  5iiaah,tt)bomthe  Ring  iny  Hfathct 
bought  out  of  3!cttirtc< 

i+  3J  ijauc  enen  hearb  of  thec ,  that 
thefpirit  of  the  gobs  Mnthce,  anb  that 
light,  anb  tmbctftanbmg,  anb  excellent 
tbifebome  is  founb  in  thee. 

15  3nb  notb  the  tbife  men,  the  aftto- 
logersbaue  bencbrougbt  in  before  me, 
that  they  ftjoulb  reabe  this  tbrmng,anb  | 
maRCRnolbcntonto  me  tbeintcrprcta 
tion  thereof:  but  tbcycoulb  notfhctbe 
the  interpretation  of  the  thing. 

16  2wb  3  haue  hcarb  of  thee,  that 


\\Or.fce,* 

chap. i.6. 


thoucanft  t  malic  interpretations,  anb  j-, 
biffolucboubts:  notbutboucanftreab  "v« 
thctbritmg,  anb  maReRnoibcn  tomce 
the  interpretation  thereof,  thou  ftjajt 
be  tlotheb  tbith  ftarlct,  (jfhaueacbairt 
of  golb  about  thy  nccsc,  anb  (bait  bee 
the  thiro  ruler  in  the  Rmgbomc. 

17  C  3Chen  SDamci  anfroereb  anb 
faib  before  the  Ring,  ILet  thy  gifts  be  to 
thy  ftlfe,  anb  giue  thy||rctbarbstoan 
other,  vet  5  tbtll  reabe  the  tbntmgbn; 
to  the  Ring',  anbmabe  Rnotbento  him 
the  interpretation. 

18  £)  thou  Ring,  the  mott  high  <5ob 
gaue  iBebuehab-nc^sar  thp  father  a 
Ringbome,  anb  tnaiemcanbglorp.anb 
honour. 

19  anbforthemaietticthathecgaiie 
him,  ailpeoplc,nations,anb  languages 
trembleb  anb  feareb  before  him:  tbhom 
hetboulb,heOcuji,  stbljom  hctboulb, 
hcReptaituc,  anb  tbhom  he  tboulbhee 
fet  bp,  anb  tbljom  he  tboulb  hec  put 
botbne. 

to  2tsnt  lPhen  his  heart  tbas  Uftcb 
bp,  anb  his  minbe  harbeneb  ||m  pribe : 
hce  tbas  t  bepofeb  from  his  Rmgli' 
throne,  anb  they  tooUe  Ijts  glorv  from 
him. 

ii  3mb  hee  tbas  *briuen  from  the 
fonncs  of  men,  anb  ||  his  heart  tbas 
mabc  Iirc  the  beads,  anb  his  btbcilmg 
tbas  Ibith  tlje  tbilbe  affes :  they  feb  him 
tbith  grafle  ubc  oren,anb  his  bobj»  tbas 
tbet  tbith  the  btlb  of  heaucn ,  till  Jjec 
Rnctbthatthc  mofthtgh  €>ob  rulcb  m 
the  Rmgbomc  of  men,  anb  that  hce  ap* 
pomteth  ouer  it  tbhomfocucr  he  tbill. 

ii  %xai  thou  his fonnc,jD2Selfha5> 
5ar ,  haft  not  humblcb  thmc  heart, 
though  thou  ftnetbtft  all  this : 

2j  25ut  halt  lifteb  top  thvfeifeagaintt 
the  Horb  of  heaucn ,  anb  the?  haue 
brought  thetocfleisof  his  houfc  before 
thee,  anb  thou  anb  thy  lorbs,  thy  unites 
anb  thy  concubines  haue  brunRc  tbmc 
in  them,  anb  thouhaft  praifcb  the  gobs 
of  ftluct ,  anb  golbc,  of  brafte ,  yron, 
iboob  anb  ftone,  tbhtth  fee  not, nor 
hearc,  nor  Rnotbe :  anb  the  <5cb  tn 
ltihofc  hanbethy  breath  is.  anb  nmofc 
ate  all  thy  wayes ,  haft  thou  not  glo 
tifitb. 

14  Xhen  tuas  the  part  of  thchaub 
fent  from  hmi ,  anb  this  ttirmug  u»as 

z<  ec^nb  this  «  the  tbntuig  that 
tbasttuittcn,  mini:,  mene,  n- 

K.EL  VPHARSIN. 

16   H!)!3 


{]  Or/fl  deale 
proudly. 
t  £nl.  made 
tocome 
down.'. 

"Cha.4.22 
II  Or.hei 
made  hu 
heart  tautS, 


Bclfhazzar  flaine.        Daniel.       Darius  his  decree. 


at  the  Sonne 
j  [  Or,  ww. 


1 1  Or,  c amc 

tumult  H~ 

mfy. 


i6  iChts  is  the  interp2Ctanonofthc 
thing,  mene,  <E>obhath  numbjebthp 
Ringbome,anb  fimfbcD  it. 

17  TEKEL,thouartWcighcDinthe 
baianecs,anD  artfouno  tbanting. 

18  peres,  thp  Rtngoome  is  Hi 
uibcD ,  anu  giucn  to  the  Refits  anD 
tertians. 

29  Xhcn  tommanbeD  iSclfbassar, 
ano  ttjcp  ciothcb  Daniel  with  fcatiet, 
anD  put  a  ehamc  of  solo  about  his  ncchc , 
anD  maoc  a  i&joeiamatton  tonecrntng 
htnuhathefhoulbbe  the  thirb  ruler  in 
theRtngbome. 

jo  C  3n  that  ntgljt  was  zBel(ha5- 
5ar  the  Ring  oftfjc  Calbcansaatnc. 

51  3nb  Darius  the  40ebtan  tooRc 
theftingDomc,t  being  ||  about  thzcefcoiie 
anDtWopecreolD. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  Daniel  is  made  chiefe  of  the  Prxfidents.  4 
They  confpiring  againft  him.obtaine  an  ido- 
latrous decree.  10  Daniel  accufed  of  the 
breach  thereof",  is  cart  into  the  Lions  dennc. 
iS  Daniel  is  faued.  14  Hisaduerlariesde= 
uouied,  15  and  God  magnified  by  a  decree. 

gjl^ga^S  %  plcafcb  Darius  to  fet  o* 
ts^uctthc  Rtngbomcanhun 


v  men  anD  twenty  0nntcs, 
*  Which  fboulbbe  ouer  the 
whole  lungbomc. 

x  ano  oucr  thcfe,thjee  Uwftbcnts, 
C  of  Whom  Daniel  was  firft)  that  the 
juices  might  giue  accotnpts  tmto 
them ,  ano  the  Bmg  fbouib  hauc  no 
Damage. 

j  Xhcn  this  Daniel  lDas  pjeferreb 
aboucthci&cfibcnts,  anbi&tntcs,  bc= 
caufcan  crcellent  fpirit  was  in  htm.anb 
the  Ring  thought  to  fet  him  ouer  the 
whole  rcaime. 

4  CXhcnthc0ieuDcntsanDi&zin' 
tcs  fought  to  finbe  ottafion  againft  Da- 
niel concerning  the  tun  gnome ,  but  th  rr 
coulb  finbe  none  occafionmo?  fault :  to;- 
afmuchashcwasfaithfiill  ,ncuhcr  lDas 
there  an?  errour  02  fault  founb  in  Dim. 

<,  3LhtnfaiDtl)cfenicu,n3cfliaitnot 
finbe  any  occafion  againft  this  Daniel, 
except  Wee  finbe  it  againft  him  concer- 
ning the  ?Law  of  his  C5ob. 

6  IChen  thefc  jtocfiocnts  anb  02in 
tcsllaffcmbleb  together  to  thclung,anb 
faio  thus  bnto  him ,  liung  Darius.liue 
foieuer. 

7  311  the  tfwuocnts  of  the  Rmg- 
bomc,thcgouemours,anD  the  pnnccs, 


thecounfclletsanD  the  captatnes  haue 
tonfulteb  together  to  ettablifh  a  ropail 
Qatute ,  anb  to  matte  a  ftrme  ||  Detrec, 
thatwhofocuctfhau  afhc  a  petition  of 
art?  (5ob  02  man  to;  thirty  Day  es ,  fane 
of  thee,  £>  Bmg,  hee  (hall  be  taftinto 
thcDenneofiUons. 

8  49oW  ,iO  Ring ,  cftablifh  the  be 
trecanb  figne  the  Wztnng,that  it  be  not 
changeD,  atcojbing  to  the  *  latb  of  the 
£0cbes  s  0ctGans,Whichtaitereth  not. 

9  lehetefoje  Hing  Darius  fignco 
the  Uniting  anD  the  Decree. 

10  Cii*oW  When  Daniel  Knew  that 
the  Wjitlng  was  CgncD ,  hee  Went  into 
his  houfc ,  anD  his  WinboWes  being 
open  in  his  chamber  *toWarb3Jerufo 
lent,  hee  Rneelcbtopon  his  fcnces*thjce 
times  a  bap ,  anb  pzaycb ,  anb  gatie 
thanfecs  before  his  d5ob ,  as  hee  did  as 
foretime. 

11  Xhcrt  thefe  men  affcmbleb,  anb 
founb  Daniel  p?aying,anb  maftmg  fop* 
plication  before  his  ooo. 

iz  Xhcntheycamenccre,anbfpafec 
befo?cthcRmgconcctnmgtheRingsbC' 
cree;  ^aft  thou  not  Ggnebabccree,that 
eueryman  that  (hall  afttc  a  petition  of 
an?  <KoD  0?  man,  Within  thirty  bayes, 
faue  of  thee,  £>  RMg,  fbaibe  call  into  th  e 
benne  of  fUons?  %\yi  Ring  anfroereD 
anb  faiD,  %\yt  thing  is  ttue,acco2btng  to 
the  law  of  the  ^cbes  anb  ^erfians, 
ibhichaitcrethnot. 

ij  Xhen  anfroereb  the?  anb  fatb  be< 
fo?e  the  Ring  1  3Lhat  Daniel  tbhich  is  of 
thecaptiuitvof  the  chflDzen  of3iubah, 
r  cgarbcth  not  thee,  £>  Ring,  no?  the  De- 
cree that  thou  haft  figneb,  butmaRcth 
his  petition  tt»ee  times  a  bap. 

14.  Xhtn  the  bmg ,  when  hechearb 
thefe  ifl)o;bes ,  was  fo:e  oifplcafeb  With 
himfelfc,  anb  fet  his  heart  on  Daniel  to 
beliuer  him:  anb  he  labonrcb  till  tlje  go- 
ing DoWnc  of  the  funne,  to  beliuer  him. 

15  Ihen  thefe  men  affcmbleb  imto 
the  Rmg,anb  fatb  tmto  the  Ring,BnoW 
s3D  Ring,  that  the  law  of  the  QJcbcs  anD 
0crfians  is,  that  no  betrce  no?  ftatutc 
which  the  Ring  cftablifheth ,  map  bee 
changeD. 

16  Xhcn  the  Ring  commanbeb ,  anD 
tliepb?ought  Daniel,  ano  caft  him  into 
the  benne  of  fLions :  now  the  Ring  fpaRc 
ano  faibe  tmto  Daniel  (  SCfty  d5ob, 
Whom  tliou  ferucft  tontinuallp,  he  Will 
Dcliucrtrjee. 

17  ^nbaftonewasbjoughtanblaib 
upon  the  mouth  of  the  benne,  anb  the 
j&ng 


I II  Or^nter- 


•Efth.j.i. 
and  8.8. 

feth  nor. 


'I.King.  8 
48. 

•PW.j,. 
18. 


Daniel  dcliuercd.      Chap.vi).         Daniels  dreame. 


\\Or,uble. 


'Clia.2  <J4- 
and  4.3. 
and  7  14, 
27  lukt 
*  33- 

\Htb.h*nd. 


Cha.1.22 


ButgfcateD  u  itmU  his  ottmefignet, 
anb  ibtth  the  fignct  of  his  Iojds;  that 
thepurpofc  might  not  be  changcD  con= 
ecrmng  Daniel. 

is  tCXhenthcRingxbctutohispa; 
lacc,anbpau"eD  the  night  falling:  net 
thee  lbere  II  mttruments  of  mufiefte 
brought  befojc  him.anb  his  aecpe  tbent 
from  htm. 

19  Xhcn  the  Ring  aroft  berp  carlp 
m  the  morning ,  ant)  ttientm  hafte  bnto 
the  ben  of  Hvons. 

20  2utDtbhenhccametothcben,be 
crpcb  ibith  a  lamentable  bottc  bnto 
Daniel,  and  the  fetng  fpa&eanb  fait) to 
Daniel  <0  Datttel,feruant  of  the  luting 
d50D,  3s  thpC5oo  vuhomthott  ferueft 
continually ,  able  to  beUucr  thee  from 
thcILpons? 

21  Xhen  fail)  Daniel  bnto  the  Ring, 
<©Ring,liuefo2eucr. 

22  #p©oDhathfcnthts3lngel,anD 
hath  (hut  the  iponsmouthcs  that  the? 
haue  not  hurt  me :  fozafmuth  as  bcfoie 
him ,  mnocenne  mas  fount) m me;  anb 
alfo  befojc  thee ,  £>  Ring ,  haue  3  bone 
no  hurt. 

2}  Xhcn  tbas  the  hmg  crtecbtng 
glab  fo;  him,  anb  commanbeb  that  they 
IhottlD  tafee  Daniel  bp  out  of  the  benne: 
fo  Darnel  VbastaRcnbp  out  of  the  ben, 
anb  no  mancr  of  hurt  lbas  founb  bpon 
htm.becaurehcbclccuebuthtseob. 

2+  C^nbthcRingcommanbeb,anb 
the?  brought  thofc  men  ibhteh  hab  ac- 
cufeb  Damel,anb  they  call  them  into  the 
DenoflLyons,thcm,thcttchilb2en,anb 
their  U)iuc5  :  anb  the  ILyons  nao  the 
matter?  of  them ,  anb  toa&c  all  their 
bones  m  pteccs  02  cucr  they  tame  at  the 
bottomeofthetjen. 

25  C  Xhcn  Ring  Darius  lbiotebn- 
to  all  people ,  nations ,  anb  languages 
that  Dibell  m  all  the  earth  pcate  be 
multtpucD  bnto  you. 

26  33  matte  a  bctrcc ,  Xhat  in  cucr? 
Dominion  of  nip  hutgbome ,  men  ttcm 
ble  anb  fcare  before  the  Gob  of  Daniel : 
foiljc  uthc  lining  Gob,  anb  ftebfaft  fo: 
cuer,anb  hisRmgDomcth.u,ibhich  thai 
not  be  *  DeftroyeD ,  anb  his  Dominion 
(hall  be  cuen  bnto  the  cub. 

27  $?e  bcliucreth  anb  refeneth ,  anb 
he  Vboiketh  fignes  anb  Vbonbers  in  hca- 
uen  anb  at  earth :  lbho  hath  behuereb 
Daniel  from  the  t  polDcr  of  the  lyons. 

28  £>othts  Daniel piofpercDtn  the 
reigne  of  Darius,  anb  tnthcrcignc  of 
"Cyntsthepecuan. 


Or,  nhtre- 
itb. 


CHAP.    VII. 

1    Daniels  vifion  of  foure  beaftes.    o    OfGods 
kmgdome.   is.  The  interpretation  thereof. 

*  4i2  the  firft  yecre  of  26cl- 
Iha^arRing  of  25abylon, 
&3  Daniel  t  hab  a  b2catnc,anb  t  c*n  r*> 
61  bifions  of  his  hcab  upon 
t»sbcb:thcnhcib2otcthc 
Djeame ,  and  tolbe  the  fummc  of  the 
1  matters.  nor.wr*. 

2  Daniel  rpafte,  anb  raib ,  31  fam  m 
mybtfionbytugot,  ?  beholb ,  the  foure 
Vbinbcs  of  the  heauen  ftrottc  Upon  tlje 
great  5>ca. 

3  31nbfoure  great  beaftes  tame  Dp 
from  the  fea,  btuers  one  from  another. 

4  Xhe  firft  was  ithe  a  Upon ,  anb 
had  <cagles  ibmgs  :  %  bchelb  till  the 
lbtngs  thereof  mere  ptucat,!  |anb  ttlbas 
liftcb  bpftom  the  carth.anb  mabc  ftanb 
bpon  tbe  fecte  as  a  man ,  anb  a  mans 
heart  rbasgiuen  to  it. 

5  3Cno  beholb ,  another  beaft ,  a  lc^ 
tonb,UUe  to  a  iSearc,  atibilitratfcbbp  n< 
itfelfe  on  oncftbeanb  it  had  rhjec  nbbes   '/ 
mthemouth  ofttbcttticenc  the  teeth  of] ' 
it,  anb  they  fatD  thus  bnto  tt ,  Slrtfe,  bc= 
nourcmuchflefh. 

6  2ftcrthis3Jbehelb,anbloe,ano- 
thtr  lifte  alLeoparb ,  ibhteh  had  bpon 
the  bacfee  of  it  foure  lbmgs  of  a  foule, 
the  beaft  had  alfo  foure  heabs ,  ano  bo= 
mutton  inasgiucn  to  tt. 

7  3lftcr  tljts  31  fatb  m  t!)e  mgl)t  t>t= 
fions,attDbeholo,afourthbcaQ,ojeab- 
full  anb  terrible ,  anb  ftrong  crtecbtng 
h>;anDtthabgrcatp?ontcetb:itbcuou- 
r  et>  anb  brahc  in  pteces,anb  ftampcb  the 
reftbueU)tththefeetcoftt,aiibit  was  du 
ucrsfrom  authcbeaftstljat  were  before 
tt,  anD  it  hab  ten  homes. 

s  31  conftbcreb  the  homes ,  anb  be 
holb ,  there  came  Dp  among  them  ano^ 
thcr  little  home,  befoic  tbljom  there 
iberc  thzee  of  the  firft  homes  plucfttbp 
bp  the  roots :  anb  beholb,  tn  tins  home 
were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man ,  anb  a 
mouth  fpcaRtng  great  thtngs. 

9  CI  behelb  ttllthcthioncs  iberc 
caft  boibnc ,  anb  the  Ancient  of  bares 
bib  fit,  llthofe  garment  was  lbhitc  as 
fnoib,  anb  the  hatre  of  his  hcab  ItRe  the 
pure  ttjooll :  his  thzone  w  x  like  thefterte 
flame,  and  his  Vbhccles  as  burning  fire. 

10  31  ficrtc  ftrcame  tfturb ,  anb  came 
footth  from  before  htm :  *  thoufanD 
thoufanbsminiftrebbntohtm,anbten 

thoufanD  nmes  tnt  tljoufanb  ftoobbe 

foie 


•Rcu.511. 


Chrifts  dominion.       Daniel. 


t  CM.  a 

bro  tinging 
mhfewat 
gtHcn  them. 


Tenh 


ornes. 


•Reu.Js. 
ll. 


•Chap.:. 
44.111104. 
7-luc.i.  55 


t  CM 

fieath. 


\CaliMgh 
onet.t  things 
ornlttccl. 


■\  Cttld  from 

bofc. 


fo?c  him  :thc  tubgement  tbas  frt,  anb 
the*  boobesweteopeneb, 

11  3  bcl)dD  then,bctauft  of  the  Pouc 
of  the  great  wd?.bs  which  trsc  home 
fpabe:  35  behelb  cum  nil  the  bead  tDas 
Gate ,  anb  his  boby  beftroycb,  anb  gi* 
ucnto  the  burningflame. 

ii  3ls  toncernmg  the  reft  of  the 
beads,  they  habthcirbonuniontaben 
amay :  vet  t  their  Itues  Vbcre  pjolongcb 
fojafeafonanbttmc. 

13  3  fatb  in  the  uigltt  PiGons ,  anb 
beholb,oneiiBethefonneofman,tame 
with  the  cloubsofheauett,  anb  tame  to 
the  ancient  ofbaics ,  anb  they  brought 
htm  neere  before  him. 

14.  anb  there  was  giuenhimbomi* 
nion  anb  glo?|> ,  anb  a  bmgbome,  that 
all  people,  nations  ,  anb  languages 
fljouib  ferae  him  :fjts  Dominion  is  *an 
euerlafting  Dominion,  which  djailnot 
paffe  away  -,  anb  hts  Hingbome  that, 
Which  fl)all  not  be  bedtoy  cb. 

15  C  3  S>aniel  was  grieueb  in  my 
{pint  m  the  nubdofmvtboby ,  anb the 
Diftons  of  ntpheabtroublebme. 

16  3  fai«e  were  two  onc  of  them 
that do ob  by,  anb  afbeb  htm  the  truth 
of  all  tins :  fo  Dc  tolb  nice,  anb  mabe  me 
bnow  the  interpretation  oftlje  things. 

17  Xhefc  great  beads ,  Wljtch  are 
foure,  irefotirc  l&mgs ,  which  thaiiartfe 
out  of  the  earth. 

is  ffitttthc  5>atntsofthct  mod  high 
fl)ail  tabethe  Hingbome,  j poffeflcthe 
Hmgbomc  foi  enet,eticnfoz  cuer  9  euer. 

19  XhcnSJWoulbbnoW  the  truth 
of  the  fourth  bead ,  which  was  biuerfe 
tfrom  al  the  others,  erceebmg tyeab  fttl, 
WhofctccthWcrcofy2on,anbhisnatics 
ofb2afrc,whichi)cuourcb,b2aHctn  pieces, 
anb  ftampeb  tl)c  rcfibue  With  hts  fcete, 

zo  3tub  of  tlic  ten  homes  that  were  in 
his  heab,attbof  the  other ,  Which  tame 
pp,  anb  bcfo2Ci\>rjomtl);ee  fell,  euen  of 
that  home  that  had  eyes ,  anb  a  mouth 
that  fpabe  Dcry  great  things,  Wljofc 
looucw.is  more  (tout  then  htsfcllowcs. 

11  3  behelb  ,  anb  the  fame  home 
mabe  war  r  e  With  the  5>amts>  anb  p?e^ 
ttailebagamdthcm. 

it  HntiUthc3lttctcntofbaicscamc, 
anb  uibgment  was  gmen  to  the  faints 
of  the  mo(f  high:  anb  the  time  tamcthat 
the  faints  poflcflcb  the  bmgbome. 

23  Xhus  he  faib ,  1Che  fourth  bead 
fliail  be  the  fourth  bmgbomc  Dpon 
earth ,  lbhtrh  fliall  be  biuerfe  front  all 
btngbomes , » fhaiibeuottrethc  Whole 


I  Or,  tuUts 


earth >  anb  (hall  treab  it  bowne ,  anb 
b:eabett  in  pieces. 

Z4  anbihetennehomesoutofthis 
bmgbome  ^  tcnncBingsihat  fhail  a* 
rtt"c:anb  an  other  thallnfe after thera, 
anb  he  ftjail  be  Dtuerfe  from  the  &rd, 
anb  he  fljail  fubbue  th?ce  Bmgs. 

15  3nb  he  Challfpcabe  great  Woibs 
agatnd  the  mod  htgh,  anb  than  wcare 
out  the  faints  of  the  mod  high ,  anb 
thmbc  to  change  timcs,anb  laibcs:anb 
theydmilbcgiucnintohtshanD,  tmnil 
a  time  anb  times,  $  the  biuibing  of  nme. 

16  25ut  the  tttbgement  (hall  fit ,  anb 
theyflialltabc  away  hts  Dominion,  to 
tonfume,atib  to  beftror  «  bnto  the  cub. 

17  anbthc*bingb6meanbbomtni*|*Lut..33 
on,  anb  the  gteatnede  of  the  bmgbome  1 
PnbcrthciPhoieheauen,  fhailbcgiuen 
to  the  people  of  the  faults  of  the  mod 
high,U)hofcbtngt)omc8saneucriading 
bmgbome,  anb  all  ||  bommtons  ft)aii 
ftraeanbobevhitn. 

1%  hitherto  >s  the  enb  of  the  matter. 
3ls  fo?  me  2>amcl,ntp  togttationsmuch 
tr oubleb  me,  anb  my  tountenante  chan^ 
gcb  itiine:  but  3  bept  the  matter  in  my 
heart. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

1  Daniels  vilion,ot  the  Ram,  and  he  Goate.  13 
The  1300.  daies  of  facrifice.  15  Gabriel  com- 
forteth  Daniel;.ind  interpreteth  the  vilion. 

ii5the  thirb  yecre  of  the 
rcigne  of  using  ascld^- 
5ar,abifion  appearcb  bn* 
to  nice,  ei-enpntome2Daf 
nicl,  after  thatlPijuhap? 
ptarcbuntomeat  thefirft. 

1  3lnb  3  favb  m  abifion(anb  it  came 
to  paffe  lPhcn  3  favb,  that  3  was  at 
£>hufl)an  1.1  the  palace ,  Which  ism  the 
p;oumceof<£lam)anb3JfattimaPifton, 
anb^tbas  by  the  rmec  ofJUiat. 

j  Xhen  3  iiftcb  Pp  mmc  eyes ,  anb 
fatt) ,  anb  beholb,  there  doob  before  the 
rtuer,  a  rammc  mhich  had  tibo  homes, 
anb  the  two  homes  were  high :  but  one 
was  higher  then  t  the  other ,  anb  the 
higher  came  pp  lad. 

4.  3  favb  the  rammc  pufljtng  tt)cd 
roarb,?  i!5o?tim>arb,anb  ;S»outl)iParb: 
fo  that  no  beads  might  danb  befoze  him, 
neither  was  there  any  that  coulbbcltucr 
outofhishanb,  but  he  bib  acco,tblng  to 
htsumi.anb  became  great. 
5  3nbas'5n>asconfibcrmg,bcholb, 
an  he  goat  came  fro  the  ibed  on  the  face 
ofthe whole  earth,  ?||touchcb  not  the 
grounb : 


\Htb.thc 
{cartel. 


\\Ort  none 
louchtd  him 
tnthe  txrth. 


The  viiion  of  the      Cliap.vii  j.ix. 


horntof 
ftbt. 


•Cha.M-4 


•Pill. 43  l 
czck  :o  6. 
\\9r,«*i»P 

xkehofte 


Or,  from 


Or, the  ticjl 
VeM  sitter, 
ouer  for  the 
tranforeffion 
a^aind  the 
tUilyfftcri- 
foe. 


\\The  num- 
berer  affe- 
crets  tor,the 
won.  i  erf "nil 
nnmaerer. 
Heb.Pat- 
mon:, 
\]Qr,ma- 
fag  defi- 
ne. 

\Heb.eut- 
ningmor- 

\  Hc'o.tu$%- 
fed. 


"Cha.J.ll. 


grouno :  ants  tlje  goace  iudt  a  notable 
home  betibccnc  tjis  eyes. 

6  3no  he  came  to  tlje  rammc  that 
hab  t)Uo  homes ,  mhich  3  Dao  fecne 
ftanmngbcfo2Cfhcruicr,anbrannebn= 
to  btm  m  the  tunc  of  l)ts  poibcr. 

7  3um  3  faib  l)tm  conic  clofc  bnto 
the  rammc ,  ano  l)c  ibas  mooucb  lbtrh 
diolcr  agamft  htm,  anD  fmotc  the 
rammc,  aim  bjaachtstmo  homes,  ano 
there  mas  no  pomcr  m  the  rammc  to 
ftauDl'rfo:chim,butheca(thmiooUmc 
tothegrounb,  anD  ftaiupcbbponhim, 
ano  there  mas  none  that  coulbbcliucr 
the  rammc  out  of  his  hanD. 

s  Xhercfojc  the  hec  goatc  Vbarcb 
bcry  great,  ano  iDhen  he  mas  ftrong, 
the  great  home  mas  b:oacn:  ano  font 
came  bpfourc  notable  ones,*tolbarb 
thcfourcibmocsofhcaucn. 

9  3lnboutofoncofthcmcamcfo2th 
a  Utlc  home ,  mhich  marcb  crcccbmg 
great,  tomarb  the  £>outh,  anD  tomato 
the  €aft,anDtomatDthc*plcafant  und. 

io  3uo  it  mareb  great  cucn  j|  to  the 
hoftcof  hraucn,  ano  it  caft  bourne fome 
of  the  hofte,anD  of  the  ftarrcs  to  the 
grounb ,  aim  ftampcb  Upon  them. 

1 1  Pea IK  magnifico  himfdfe  cucn  ||  to 
thepnneeof  rhchoftc,  anb  ||  by  him  the 
oayiy<  ih^mastabcnamap, ano  the 
place  of  his  Sanctuary  mas  taftbolbn. 

it  3inD  I  an  hofte  mas  giucn  him  a- 
gamft  the  bailv  facrifice  by  rcafon  of 
tranfgreffion ,  anb  it  cad  bomuc  ttjc 
tructh  to  the  grounb,  anb  it  pzactifcb, 
anbpjofpctcb. 

13  C  £hcn  3  hcarb  one  £>aintfpea 
Ring,  anb  another  ^amt  fame  bnto 
l!that  ccrtamc  SainttWrjicl)  fpasc,  foom 
long  ("halt  bee  thcbifion  concerning  the 
Daily  Sacrifice,  anb  the  traiifgrctfionljof 
bcfoiattotuogtucboth  the  Sanctuary, 
anothehoftctobctroDcnbtiocrfoot; 

14-  3lnD  he  faib  bnto  me,  SUnto  tmo 
thoufanb  anb  tlnce  hunbzcb  t  bayes : 
tljcn  fliall  the  Sanctuary  be  t  elenfeb. 

15  C^nbittamctopaffc,  mhen'J, 
euen3jbanielhabfccncfhcbt0on,anb 
fought  fo2  the  meaning,  thenbehoibe, 
there  ftoob  bcfbjc  me  as  the  appearance 
of  a  man. 

16  2ino  3  hcarb  a  mans  boyte  be 

tttlCCnC  thebankesot  Hiai,  lblHCh  CallCb 

anb  faib ,  *  ©abaci,  maac  this  man  to 
bnOcrftanDthcbtfion. 

17  ^0  he  camcnccremhcrc  31  ftoob: 
anomhcnhccamc,  3Jlbasafraib,  anb 
fell  bpon  my  fate :  but  he  faib  bnto  mec, 


ramme  and  goat. 

Q 


Heh.moAe 


onmyjli 


f  Keh.  are 
accompit. 


Slnberftanb ,  £>  fonnc  of  man  :  fo:  at 
the  time  of  the  cnb  !ii  iU»  the  biQon. 

is  /ftoib  as  he  mas  fpcatung  mitti 
me,  'j  mas  m  a  beepe  (Iccpc  on  my  fate 

tomarothcgroimb:butljctoucljcDme, 
anbtfctmcbpjtght. 

19  3Jnbhclaib,25choib,3JmiimaRc  m'^t 
thec  anom  mhat  fljaii  be  m  the  laft  nib  " 
of  the  tnbtgnation :  foi  at  ttjc  time  ap^ 
pointcotfjcenbOiJbe. 

io  Xhcramme  ibfjicfj  thou  famed 
haumg  tmo  homes ,  are  the  mugs  of 
JjpcDia.aiibpcrfta. 

11  3nb  the  rough  goat  ><the  King  of 
<2»rccia ,  anb  the  great  home  that  is  be- 
tmccne his  eyes,  is  the  fitftamg. 

11  ^5omthatbcingb:oacn,mhcrcas 
fourc  ftoob  bp  fo:it,  fotircHmgoomcs 
fliall  ftano  bp  out  of  the  nation,  but  not 
mhtspomcr. 

13  3lnb  m  the  latter  time  of  then* 
Kingbomc ,  lbh'en  the  traiifgrclTours 
tare  come  to  the  full,  a  amg  of  fierce 
countcnantcanbbnDcrOanbmgbaritt 
fentences,  fliall  ftanbbp. 

14  ^nb  his  pomcr  fljall  be  mighty, 
but  not  by  his  olbne  pomcr :  anb  fjee 
fljall  beftroy  monbcrrully  ,  ano  fljall 
p:ofper,  anbpzattife,  anb  fhallbcacoy 
the  mightie,  anb  tljc  t  holy  people. 

i5  Stub  through  his  politic  airohec 
fljailcaufc  craft  top^ofper  m  hishanb, 
anb  hec  fliall  magnific  himfeife  m  his 
heart,  anb  by  1 1  peace  fljai  brftroy  ma 
ny :  hr  fl)a»  alio  ftanb  bp  agamft  the 
pnnccof  p2mccs,buthcfl)aibc*b.20Rcn 
mirtiouthanb. 

16  3nb  the  bifion  of  the  cuenmg, 
anb  the  morning,  mhich  mastolbc,  is 
true :  mher  fo:c  fliut  thou  bp  the  bifion, 
fo?  it  i^aibe  foj  many  bayes. 

17  ^nb  3  2>anictfatnteb  anb  mas 
ficae  cerraine  bayes :  aftenbarb  3  tofe 
bp  anb  bib  the  tungs  bufineffc,  anb  3 
mas  aftoniflicbat  ttjcbifion,  but  none 
bnberftoob  it. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  Daniel  confidering  the  rime  of  the  capuuiuc, 
3  makcth  conlefiion  of  finnes,  16  jndpray- 
ethforthercfiaurationot  Ierufalem.  10  Ga- 
briel informeth  him  of  the  feuentie  weekes. 

;«a  0  the  firtt  ycere  of  ©a^ 
nus  the  fonnc  of  3»ha- 
fucrus ,  of  the  feebe  of 
thcfi0cbcs,l|mhithmas 
mabc  Btng  ouer  ttje 
rcaimeofthcCalbeans, 

z  3(n 


f  Heb.pt ofli 
of  the  hclj 


\\°'.t"!h- 

ritK. 

.Mac.  d.j 


I  Or,  a 
'hxhhe, 


Daniels  con fefiion,      Daniel. 


an< 


prayc 


r. 


Merc. 35- 
ii.  and  29. 


<ituc-7  9 


•Bar.i.  17- 


||  Or  thou 


*  Bar.  1.15 


"Lcuit.  16. 
I4.&c.deu. 
j8.  15. &c 
and  19  20. 
&c  and  ;o. 
[7, 18. and 
%i.  17&C 
and3i.  ij 


i  gin  the  firfty  cere  of  his  r  eigne,  311 
Darnel  bnberftoob  by  boofces  the  numH 
berofthc  yeercs,  lPhcrcof  tl)c«>o?D  of 
tDc  Hois©  tame  to  *  Jeremiah  tbe 
02ophct,that  he  rooulb  accomplish  fc< 
ucntit  yeercs m  the  bcfoiationsofjjc; 
rufalcm. 

3  c  3nb  3  fct  my  face  bnto  the 
?Lo2b  ©ob  to  fecfee  by  pjaycr ,  anb  tup- 
plications,  lPithfaft.ng.anbtacKcloth, 
anbafhes. 

4-  :3lnb "Jpjayeb  bnto  the  ILom© 
my  €>ob ,  aub  mabc  nip  confeffion,  anb 
faiD  £>  *  ?Lo2b ,  the  great  anb  bjcabfull 
C5ob,  Keeping  the  couenant ,  anb  mercy 
to  them  that  louc  l)tm,anb  to  them  that 
feeepe  his  Commanbements: 

5  *  20c  Dane  fmneb ,  anb  hane  com; 
mitteb  tmqutttc,  anb  hauc  bone  tbtchcb; 
ly,anbhauerebelleb,cucnbybeparting 
from  thy  precepts ,  anb  from  thy  tubgc 
ments. 

6  /i5cithcthaucn)ehcarfecncbPnto 
thyfcruantsthc02ophcts,tt)hiehfpa&e 
in  thy  0amtto  our  lungs ,  our  pnntes, 
anb  our  fathers,  anb  to  all  the  people 
of  roc  lanb. 

7  <©  Ho2b , tighteoufncsll bdonceth 
bnto  thee,  but  bnto  bsconfufionoffa 
ces,  as  at  this  bap  :  to  tne  men  of  3* 
bal),  anb  to  the  inhabitants  of  gierufiv 
lem,anb  bnto  all  gifrael  that  arc  neetc, 
anbthatarc  fatreoff ,  through  all  the 
countrcys  ibhtthcr  thou  haft  bnucn 
them ,  becaufe  of  their  trefpaffc ,  that 
they  hauc  tr  efpalTcb  agatnft  thee. 

€>  flOZb  ,  *  tO  PS  bclongetb  C0nflt< 

fiou  offaccto  our  tungs,to  ourpnntes, 
anb  to  our  fathers  bctaufc  Ujc  hauc  fin- 
neb  agamft  thee. 

9  Xo  the  Ho:b  our  ©ob  belong  mcr^ 
tics  anb  foKjtucncflcs,  though  toe  hauc 
rcbcllcb  agamft  him. 

10  j^ctther  hauc  ibcobcyeb  the  PottC] 
of  the  !L£>i3©  ourd5ob  ,to  tbaibem 
hisHaibcsibhtth  he  fct  before  PS ,  by 
his  feruants  the  #2ophets. 

11  *'ca,  all  llfracl  hauc  tranfgrclTcb  j 
tl)y!Lau>,  cuenbybepatttng,  that  they  | 
might  not  obey  thy  Poicc, therefore  the ; 
curft  ispotlwb  Ppon  bs ,  anb  thcothc  1 
that  is  Uuittcn  m  tljc  *|Laib  of  ©ofes 
the  fetuantof  (Bob.betaufcibchaucfin;  1 
neb  agamft  him. 

ix  ^nbhchathconfirmcbhisroo:bs 

ibhich  he  fpaitc  agamft  bs,  anb  agamft 

our^Jubgcs  that  uibgcb  bs,  by  bung  ! 

mgbpon  bsagrcat  emu :  foi  bnber  the  I 

lbhoic  fatten  hath  not  bene  bone,  as 


hath  bene  bone  Ppon  3Jcrafalem. 

ij  3ls*  it  is  tbntten  m  the  ILatb  of 
£0ofcs ,  all  this  euill  is  come  bpon  bs : 
yet  t  mabe  Ibc  not  our  piay  cr  before  the 
ILiDiBjD  our  <5ob ,  that  tbe  might  tume 
from  our  iniquities ,  anb  Pnbcrftanb 
thytructh. 

14  Xhcrefojc  hath  the  jLoisi?rbat; 
cheb  bpon  the  eutl,  anb  brought  it  Ppon 
bs :  fo2  the  %  ©  k  ©  our  (Sob  is  rightc- 

ousmailhisiPo2ttcs,tbhtchhcboeth: 
foj  ibc  obeyeb  not  hisboicc. 

h  3lnbno.b£)ILo2bourC5ob,that 
haft  bought  thy  people  forth  out  of  the 
lanb  of^gyptiiiith  a  mighty  hanb,aub 
hafttgottcn  thec  rcnoiPnc ,  as  at  this 
bay ,  rbce  hauc  fiuncb,  ipcc  hauc bone 
ttncbebly. 

16  C  O  fLo2b ,  atcoibiug  to  all  thy 
rightcoufnes  ,gj  befeech  thee,  letthmc 
anger  anb  thy  furtc  bee  turncb  arbay 
from  thy  cine  "Jcrufaicm  ,  thy  holy 
530ountainc :  becaufe  fo?  our  finncs,anb 
foz  the  intquttics  of  our  fathers ,  3Jcru> 
falem  anb  thy  people  are  become  a  xc 

P20tht0all  thatareabOUtbS, 

17  0ovo  thcrefo2e,£>  our  <5ob,hcare 
the  pjaycr  of  thy  fcruant ,  anb  his  fup; 
plitanons,  anb  cattfc  thy  face  to  thine 
ppon  thy  Sanctuary  that  ts  bcfolate, 
fo?  the  1L02bs  fane. 

is  3Dmyc5ob,cnelmcthmcearcanb 
hcarc :  open  thine  eyes,  anb  bcholb  our 
befolattons,  $  the  city^iphtchiscailcb 
by  thy  name:  fo;  lpe  00  not  t  pjefent  our 
fupplicanons  before  thec  fo2  ourrigh' 
tcoufneftes,  but  fo;  thy  great  mercies. 

19  £>|Lo2Dhearc,s©Ho2bfo2giue,€» 
!Lo2bhcarlicn  anb  boe  :bcfcrrenotfo2 
thme  oibne  faltc,  £>  my  Cob :  fo;  rt)pci= 
tic,(t  thy  people  arc  cailcbbythvi^ame. 

20  <£  ^iio  lphiics  J  lbas  fpcahlng, 
anb  p2aymg,  anb  confefftng my  finnc, 
anb  tlic  finnc  of  my  people  fjtrael,  anb 
P2cfcnnngmy  fuppltcanon  bcfo2e  the 
!L©isir>  my  00b,  fo;  thcholv^oun; 
tame  of  my  (Sob: 

xi  |9ca  lbhilcs  31  lbas  fpcafting  in 
p2atcr,cnenthcman*oab2tcl,lbhoni3J 
hab  feme  m  the  bifion  at  the  beginning, 
being  caufeb  to  flic  t  ftuifriy ,  touchcb  me 
about  the  tunc  of  the  cuetnng  oblation. 

xx  3nb  he  mfomieb n.ce .  anb  talftcb 
tbith  mcc ,  anb  faib  i  €>  Daniel,  3  am 
noiPtonicfoorth  ttogiucthec  fbillanb 
Pnbcrftatibmg. 

i j  3lt  the  beginning  of  thy  fupplita; 
ttonsthctcommanbement  came  fonh, 
ianb3J  a>n  come  to  fhci&thee :  fo2  thou 
I art 


*  Lcuit.  i(5» 

14.  deu.38. 

1 5.  lament. 
2.17. 

t  Bcbr.  in- 
treated  I  he 
f*ce. 


"Exod  L4. 
28. 

\  Heb.  tnA<t/ 
theeanamt. 


|  ttth.reher- 
upen  thy 

Afcw  ««/• 

\Heb.c*ufe 
tefail. 


'Dm.t.l6, 


f  Heh.  with 

rvearweffe 
erfit?kr. 


t  Hdr.tt 
make  thec 
tkitftttiofvn- 
dcr>lan(tin£. 
\  Heb.tvcrJ. 


Daniels  vifi 


cfdefirc:. 


\LQr,  to  re- 
ft rairtc. 
\\Or3tof:*lt 


Ch 


ap.x. 


He  is  dumb 


e. 


\Hti.fn 
fbtt. 


returns  and 
fa  built. 
\\QrM-ich 
or  ditch. 
t  Hehr.  m 
jhait  of 
tiroes. 
\llr,fh*S 
hua:tio- 
thin*. 


\\0r,ttfhx1 

bt  eta  off  by 
defolMions. 


\\Or,vnrb 

the  ahomi- 
noble  at- 
mies. 
•Mat.  24. 

f  5.  marke 
I  ;.i4.lukc 


fW.i.^i 


ofdayet 
fH'k  triad 
of  dejiret. 


"Gen.  1. 14. 

\  Htb-  o^e 
man. 
•Rcu.l. 
'3.  ■•»■'*■ 


art  tgrcatlp  brtoueD :  therefore  UnDeri 
ftanD  the  matter,  *  conftDtr  the  umon.  ! 

- 14  •Smieuttc  lUccfees  ace  Dctcrmi  | 
neD  Upon  thy  pcoplc,anD  Upon  thy  holy 
citte,  ||  to  fimfl)  thctranfgrc(uon,anD  to 
llmaHcanenDeof  finncs,  anD  to  ma&c 
reconciliation  fonmqmtic,  anD  to  b2ing' 
in  cucriafting  righteoiimcE,anD  to  feale  i 
Up  the  UiBon ano  t  pioprjccic-  anD  to  an- 
oyntthcmoftl?oly. 

15  Bnotbtherefo2canDUnuerttanD, 
tiiu  from  the  going  fcwth  of  trjc  coni^ 
manocmenttoteftoze  anD  to  builD'Je 
rufalcm ,  Unto  trie  Ul9cffial)  tlje  i&nncc, 
(hail  be  fcuen  tticeltcs  -,  anD  tmccfcozc  anD 
tu>olbeelKS,thcfrteet  tlballbebuilta^ 
game ,  anD  the  ||  ibail,  cucn  t  in  trou- 
blous times. 

t6  3nD  after  tmeefc8?e  anD  ttbo 
lUccttcs,  IbaU  £0cffiah  be  cut  off,  II  but 
not  fo?  hunfrtfc ,  anD  the  people  of  tin 
$jlnce  that  (ball  come,  (hall  Dcftroy  the 
title ,  anD  the  S>anctuanc,anDthe  enDe 
thereof  (hall  be  ttnth  a  flooD ,  anD  unto 
theeiiDeofthc  iuartc||Oefoianons  are 
Determmco. 

17  3nDhcefbaileonfirmctbccoufc 
nanttbith  man?  foj  one  lueefec :  anD  m 
the  miDfl  of  the  lUeefec  he  thall  taufc  the 
Cacnfiec  anD  the  oblation  to  ceafc,  anD 
||fo;the  ouerfp:eaDmg  of  'abonunati 
onshcefballmaRe  it  DefoiatceucnOn 
till  the confummation,  <f  that  Deternu 
neD.fhalbe  poflwD  Upon  the  Defoiate. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Daniel  hauing  humbled  himfelfe ,  fceih  a  vi- 
fion.  10  Being  troubled  with  feare,  hee  is 
comforted  by  the  Angel. 

c^ps^?  0  the  thirDyere  of  Cy2iis 
%  (^flBing  ofperfia,  a  thing 
^>lbasreucalcDOnto  Dam 
el(tt>hofcnamc\uascal 
_lcDi5eueCl)a5Vir)  anD  the 
thing  was  true ,  but  the  time  appomtcD 
was  t  long.ano  he unoerftooD  the  thing, 
anDhaounDcrftanDing  ofthc  Utfton. 

1  3jn  thofc  Daves ,  3  Daniel  lUas 
mourning  tbjec  tfulllbeefecs. 

3  3  ate  no  t  pieafant  b:cao ,  neither 
came  Mb,  noitbmcmmy  mouth,  nei- 
ther Did  3  anoint  my  felfe  at  all,  nil 
tb2cett)boiciuec&csrbmfulfillcD. 

4.  3no  m  the  fourc  anD  tlUciittetb 
Day  of  the  tuft  montth  ,as  3  ims  by  the 
(toe  ofthc  great  ruier^h.chVtyiDDeliel: 
5  Xhen^J  lift  Op  mint  eyes  anD  loo 
UeD ,  anDbcholD ,  ta  ccrtainc  man  do 
thtD  m  linen,  ibbofe  loyncstt)cre*gu; 


!  DeD  rbith  fine  go  ID  of  5Upha?. 

6  $?isboDyalfo  was  itbethe  fficrill, 
anD  his  face  as  the  appearance  of  itght 

:  ning,  anD  his  eyes  asiampes  ofarcanD 
\  his  atmes ,  anD  bis  feete  liftc  in  colour 
.  topohfbco  toaffe,  anotheUoicc  of  his 
tbo?Dsitfec  tl)e  uoicc  of  a  mumtuDc. 

7  2nD  3  Daniel  alone  fatt)  the  Ui^ 
fion :  fo?  the  men  that  lucre  lUttb  mce 
faUniottheUiftombutagreatQuaftmg 
fell  bpon  them,  fo  that  they  flcDto  IjiDc 
themfelues. 

8  Xhcrefott  31  lbas  left  alone,  anD 
faiu  this  great  UtQon,  anu  there  rcmai 
ueDnoftrcngth  mmc:  ft>2  my!*  come 
uncfleioas  turneDin  me  into  coirupti 
on.anD^I  retamcDno  ftrength. 

9  J>et  hearD  3}  the  botce  of  his 
Uwds  :  anD  \uhen  3  hearD  the  boice 
of  his  iuoidcs,  then  inas  31m  aoeepe 
(lecpe  on  my  face,  anD  my  facetoiuarD 
the  gromiD. 

10  C AnDbcholD, an hanDtouchcD 
me,  lnhich  t  fct  me  bpon  my  ttuecs,  ano 
vpon  the  paimcs  of  my  hanDs. 

11  ^nDheefaiDbnto me,  ©Daniel, 
t  a  man  greatly  beioueD  ,UnDerftanD  the 
tbojocs  that  3  fp&tee  Unto  thee ,  ano 
t  ftanD  bpught :  foz  Unto  thee  am  31 
nottjfent;  anD  rbhenhchaofpoBen  tt)ts 
1 1U02D Unto  me,  3  ftoof  trembling. 

11  Xhen  fayD  hee  Unto  me  JFcarc 
not,  Daniel :  fo:  fcom  the  Rr ft  Day  that 
thou  DtDDeft  fct  thme  heart  to  unDcr 
;  ftanD, anD  to  chaften  tliy  felfe  befoze  thy 
©od,  thy  \u02Des  lucre  IjearD ,  anD  $ 
amcomefo2thviuo2DS. 

13  26ut  thcp2uiccof  thelungDomcof 
^crfia  ibithftooD  nice  one  anD  nutn 
Uc  Daycs :  but  loc ,  Michael  ||  one  ofthc 
chicfc  juices  cameto  hdpt  nice ,  anD 
3J  remameD  there  ttnth  the  X^mgs  of 
perfia. 

14.  iBott)  3  am  come  toma&c  thec 
UnDerftanD  lUhat  fljail  befall  thy  pco 
ple,in  the  latter  Daycs :  fojyet  tlje  Uifton 

is  f02  many  DayCS. 

15  3lnD  lUhcn  hec  haD  fpoUen  fuch 
UJ02DS  unto  me ,  3  fct  my  face  toiuarD 
the  grouuD,  anD  3  became  Diuubc. 

i6  anD  beholD  ,  one  ufec  the  fmulr 
tuDe  ofthc  fonnes  of  men  touchcD  my 
lippcs :  then  3!  opencD  my  mouth,  anD 
fpafte,  anD  fayD  unto  him  that  ftooDc 
bcfo2C  me ;  ©  my  IL02D ,  by  the  Uifion 
my  fo2roiucs arc  tunitD  Upon  me ,  anD 
3  haur  retamcDno  ftrength. 

17  5fo2horocan  llthcumantof  tins 
my  2Lo2D,talKc  lUith  this  my  JLW  t  to: 

r  ettt  as 


tOr,v& 

"Dan. 7. 


^Hel.  *  m.v. 

.-•  j-  trt  1. 

tHri.Jlj- 
vpon  thy 
fi«ndix£. 


II 0' 


1|  Or, 


,  Lord. 


Kings  ofthe 


Daniel.       North  and  South. 


\Hcbfireng- 
thench  hint- 
fclft. 


\Heb.fbaU 

affocidte 

thcmjclucf. 

rights. 


as  foj  mc,  ttcaigbtitoay  there  rcmatneb 
no  ftrcngtb  in  mcc ,  neither  is  there 
bjeatblcftmmc. 

is  Xben  there  came  agatne  anb  totfc 
cbco  mc  one  nfec  the  appearance  of  a 
man,  ant)  be  ftrengtbncD  me, 

19  3nb  faiD  ;  3D  man  greatly  belo- 
ucb,  feare  not :  peace  bebntotbec,  be 
ftrong,  yea  be  ftrong  anb  when  be  rjao 
fpofecn  bnto  mc ,  3  ibas  ftrcngrheneb, 
anb  faib  ■,  2Letmy  fLoib  fpeafeC;fo?  tbou 
bsftttrengtljencbme. 

20  Xbcn  faib  bee ,  Bnolbcft  thou 
iDbercfo2C35  come  bnto  thee  <anbnott> 
ibill  31  returncto  fight  ruttb  the  pnttee 
of  i&crfia :  anb  ibbcn  3  ant  gone  fonb, 
loc,  the  pnntc  of  ©recta  (ball  come. 

21  ButJ  Mil  (1)CU)  tljectbat  which 
is  notebintbe&eriptureoftructb:anb 
there  is  none  tbattbolbctbibttbmcin 
tbefc  thtngs,  but  fiJBicljaci  your  puttee. 

CHAP.    XI. 

1  The  ouerthrow  ot  Perfiaby  thekingofGre- 
cia.  5  Leagues  and  conflicts,  betweenc  the 
kings  of  the  South  and  ot  the  North.  30  The 
inuafion  and  tvrannie  ot  the  Romanes. 

'  lLfo3,uttbefitttyeercof 
i>J:A\M5  SDartus  t!)c^ebe,eueng} 
ft£/£iS£&\  ftoob  to  confirme  anb  to 
WMmk\$  ftrcngtljen  bun. 
%gtm%£s  i  3tnb  nott)  Will  3 
ftjett)  thee  tl)e  truetb.  zscbolb,  there 
(ball  ftauD  bp  yet  tlnce  Btngs  in  0er 
fia,f  rtje  fourth  ttjaibcfarrc  richer  then 
they  all :  anb  by  his  ftrcngtb  tljzougl) 
bts  riches  be  (ball  ftirre  bp  ailagattitt 
tl)crcalmeof<2!rcna. 

3  3no  a  nugbty  iking  fljal  ftanb  bp, 
that  (bail  rule  ittntb  great  Dominion, 
anb  boc  atcoibtng  to  !)ts  Hull. 

4-  3nD  ibben  lie  (ball  ftanb  bp ,  bis 
lungbomcmailbcbzoKcn,  anb  fljalibc 
bnubeb  toibatb  the  foure  lbtnbs  of  bea^ 
ucn  anb  not  to  bts  potterme,no2  atcoi- 
btng to  bis  Dominion  lbbicb  lie  ruleD : 
fojbts  BingDomc  (l)allbe  plurUtbp,  v 
ucn  fo2  otl)ers  brfiDes  tbofc. 

5  C3utD  the  Bmg  of  the  S>outb 
(ball  be  ftrong ,  anb  one  of  bispnnces, 
anD  be  (ban  be  ftrong  abouc  Dun ,  anb 
bauc  Dominion :  bts  Dominion  (hail  be  a 
great  Dominion. 

6  3lnDut  the  cud  ofyecres  they  (ball 
t  loyne  thcmfelues  together  :  fa?  the 
Bings  baughtct  of  the  5>outb  fbail 
come  to  the  icting  ofthe  i!3o2tb  to  mafte 
t  an  agt  cement  ,but  fl)C  fljail  not  retatne 
the  poibcr  ofthe  armc ,  neither  (bail  he 


ftanb ,  no;  his  armc :  but  (be  fljail  be  gt 
ucn  bp,  anb  they  that  brought  her ,  anb 
||  he  that  begatc  her ,  anb  he  that  ttrcug 
tbcncD  her  in  tbefe  antes. 

7  26ut  out  ofa  branch  of  her  rootes 
(ball  one  ftanb  bp  tn  btseftate ,  which 
(ball  come  lbith  an  anme,  anb  Qjalt  en- 
ter into  tljc  foitrefle  ofthe  i&ingof  the 
/Boub  >  anb  fbail  bcalc  agatnft  them, 
anD  (ball  pmiailc: 

8  3nD  (ball  alfo  carte  captutcs  into 
€gypt  their  gobs  ftntb  thctr  pnntcs, 
andiptth  thctr  tpieciottsbcffciscffilucr 
anbofgolb,  anb  he  (bail  continue moe 
yeer  cs  tljcn  the  l&tttg  ofthe  iiSojtb. 

9  £>o  tljc  Btng  of  tljc  S>outb  (ball 
come  into  his  Ktugbomc,  anD  fljail  re- 
tumc  into  his  oibnc  lanD. 

io  25ut  his  fonncs  ||  Q)ail  be  ftirreb 
bp ,  anb  (ball  aflimble  a  multttubc  of 
great  fozecs  :  anb  one  (ball  certainly 
come  anb  oucrfloib  anb  paffc  th?ougl) : 
then  (ball  he  tcturac,  anb  be  ftirreb  bp 
cuentohisfojtretTe. 

h  3lno  thciamg  of  the^>outh(l)all 
be  motteb  ibtth  choice ,  anb  (ball  come 
foitb  anb  fight  lbith  hint , ««"  ibtth  the 
Bmg  of  the  /1502th:anb  hec  (ball  fct 
fonh  a  great  muintubc,  butthemultu 
tube  (Ijaiibc  gtttcn  into  his  hanb. 

12  And  ibhcn  he  hath  taUcn  aibay 
the  multttubc ,  bis  heart  (ball  bcltftcb 
ibp:  anb  be  (bail  caftboibnc  manytenne 
thottfanbs :  but  he  fljail  notbeftreng; 

-tbCttCbbyir. 

13  5^02  the  l^tng  of  the  iI5o?th  fljail 
rcmrnc,  anbfl)aiifetfo2tbamuinwbe 
greater  then  the  fanner ,  anb  fljauccr- 
j  tatnly  t  come  (after  ccrtautc  ycercs) 
ibtth  a  great  srntte  jlbith  much  riches. 

14-  3hib  m  thofe  times  there  (ball 
many  ftanb  bp  agamftthcBtttgof  the 
£>outh :  alfo  t  the  robbers  of  thy  people 
fljail  cralt  thcmfelues  to  cftabliflj  rtjc 
btfiott.buttbey  (ban  fall. 

15  5>o  tin  Btng  of  the  jRotfb  fljail 
tomcanb  caft  bp  a  mount,  anD  tattcttlje 
moft  fettccb  ntics ,  anb  tljc  amies  of  the 
£>outlj  fljail  not  ibithftanb.ncithertbis 
ebofen  people ,  neither  fluii  there  beany 
ftrengtljto  XbtthftanD. 

i6  ffiuthethatcommcthagsmfthtm, 
fl)3U  Doc  atco2butg  to  his  olbnc  unll, 
anD  none  fltaii  ftanD  before  him :  anb  he 
flj3llft3nbintljc  HgionousianD,  lbljicl; 
byhishanbfl)ail  beconfumeb. 

17  ^c  fljail  alfo  fct  htsfacc  to  enter 
lbith  the  fttcngtb  of  his  lbholc  lung 
borne  anb|  Ibpnght  ones  lbith  bmutbus 

fl)3ll 


Or,rehom 
pte  brought 
forth. 


fHfb.vefeti 

yf  their  de- 


\  Or^fboH 
want. 


t  Hfb.  at 
theendof 
fonts  of 
jeerest 

\Hd.iht 

children  of 
robbers* 


t  Heb.  the 
citte  of  no*' 
mtiom. 
\Heb.  the 
people  ofhii 
choices. 


lOr^geodly 
l.ind.Hcb. 
The  laid  of 
ornament. 
j|  Or,  much 
vpn^htnet  : 
Or  eqttall 
1  endtttoni. 


Kings  of  th< 


Ch 


\Heb.tocor. 

THft. 


\Htk.for 

htm. 

f  Heb.  h» 

refroeh. 


t  Heb.one 
that  caufeth 
An  txatloHr 
topajfewcr. 
\Het>.*n- 


\\Orjntothe 
pt ££e able  or 


fHeb.thinke 

thoughts. 


\  Heb.  their 
hearts. 


(hall he  Doe,  anb  be  (bailgiue  htm the 
Daughter  of  women  tro;rupttng  her: 
but  (be  (ball  not ftanD  on  his  iide,  neither 
befojhim. 

18  ;McrthiS(baiif)cturnc  his  face 
into  thepics,  ano  (balltaRemanp,but 
a  pjincc  t  fo?  his  ottm  bchaife  (haiicaufe 
ttberep?oehoft*ccbbphimtotcareibm> 
out  bis  oibnc  rep;oth :  fte  fljail  caufeu 
toturnebponhim. 

19  IChen  be  (ball  turoc  l)is  fate  to* 
tbarbsthc  fonof  btsoibnclanDe:  but 
lie  fljaii  (tumble  anb  fail ,  anb  not  bee 
founb. 

20  Xben  (ball  ftanD  top  in  biseftate 
tarailcroftarcsintheglojpoftheiiing 
borne,  bntttnthmfctb  bapesbe(hailbc 
DeftropeD,  neither  in  t  anger,  no?  in 
battel). 

ii  anD  tn  his  cttate  fljaii  ftanD  bp  a 
bile  pcrlbn,  to  lbbom  thep  (hai  not  gtue 
the  honour  of  rtjc  Bingoomc :  bnt  hee 
(ball  tome  in  pcaceablp,  anb  obtaine  die 
Kingbomcbp  flatteries. 

ii  3nD  ttiitt)  tbc  amies  of  a  floob 
(ball  thep  bee  ouerflolbcn  from  before 
bim,  anb  (ball  be  tyoftcn :  pea  aifo  ttje 
pnnec  of  the  couenant. 

ij  3nD  after  the  league  made  rbitlj 
bim  he  (balllbojrtc  Deceitfully ,  fo:  bee 
(ballcomebp,  anb  fljaii  become  ftrong 
tbittj  a  fmail  people. 

24.  $c  (ball  enter  ||  peaccawp  cuen 
bpon  tbe  fattcttpiaccs  of  the  pjouinee, 
anbtjeftjail  boetbatibhicbhts  fathers 
t)auenotDone,no«2hts  fathers  fatbees, 
he  (ball  featttr  among  ttjem  the  pjape 
anb  (poile,  anb  ricrjes :  pea  anb  he  (hall 
tfcwecaft  hiSDcutccs  againft  tbe  ftrong 
holbcs,euenfojatime. 

25  ^nbbefljallftirrebpbiSpolbcr, 
anD  bis  courage  againft  the  lung  of  tbe 
Soutb  ibtth  a  great  armp,anD  the  Ring 
of  the  South  (hall  bee  ftirrcD  bp  to 
battcll  ibtth  a  bcrp  great  anbnughtic 
armte :  but  be  (ball  not  ftanb :  fo?  tljep 
(hall  fojeeaft  beuiccs  againft  him. 

16  Pea  thep  that  feebe  of  the  portion 
ofbtsmeate,iT)ailDeftrophim,anDhts 
armic  (ball  oucrflolb :  anb  mattp  (hall 
fall  bourne  flame. 

17  3JM)  both  flicfc  Rings  t  hearts 
(hail  be  toboc  mifthiefc ,  anb  fhcpfhail 
fpeafte  lies  at  one  table:  butit  fballnot 
pjofpet :  fo?  pet  tlje  cud  rtuii  bee  at  the 
time  appointed. 

28  ^Thcn  (l)allhce  returue  into  bis 
lanb  ttrith  great  riches,  anb  his  heart 
fell  be  againft  the  holy  couenant:  anb 


ap.xj.      North  and  South. 


he  (hall  boc  exploits,  anb  retume  to  his 
ottmclanb. 

29  %t  the  time  appointcb  he  (hall  re 
turne,anb  come  tovbarb  the  South  :but 
it  (hall  not  be  as  the  fojmcr,  02  as  tlic 
latter. 

jo  C  fez  tlje  fl)ips  of  Chitrttn  (hall 
come  againft  him :  therefore  he  (ball  be 
grieuebanbreturnc,anbhaucinbigna 
tion  againft  the  ijolp  Couenant :  To  thai 
he  Doe,  he  fhailcucn  rcturncanb  hauc 
intelligence  ttnth  them  tljat  foifaactljc 
holp  Couenant. 

31  ^noarmes  dial  ftanb  on  his  part, 
anb  tjhep  (hall  pollute  the  Sanctuane 
offtrength,anb  (ball  taltearoap  the 
Datlp  (acufice,anb  thep  thai  place  the  abo- 
mination that!!  mabcthbcfoiatc. 

32  3(nbfuchasbocU)icheblp againft 
the  toucnant,(hall  he  ||  corrupt  bpflattc> 
ries:butthc  people  thatboUnolb  their 
C5ob,  (Ijall  be  ftrong  anb  boe  exploits. 

33  ^nb  thep  that  bnberftanb  among 
the  people  ftjall  inftruct  man? :  pcttljcv 
(ball  fall  bp  the  froozb,  anb  bp  flame,  bp 
captiume,  anb  bp  fpoilc  many  bapes. 

34-  iBott)  ibhcn  thep  fljaii  fall,  thep 
ftjalbe  holpen  uiith  a  litlc  help :  but  ma; 
npftjallcleaucto  thcmlbitli  flatteries. 

35  3nb  fome  of  them  of  bnberftan- 
buig  (hall  fall,  to  trie  ||  them,  anb  to 
purgcanb  to  mafte  them  rbhstc,cucn  to 
the  time  of  the  enb :  becaufc  k  ^pct  foz 
a  time  appointcb. 

36  ^nbthcluiig(l)ailboeatcojbing 
tohis\bill,anb  he  (hall  crait  htmfcifc, 
anb  magmfic  hunrelfc  aboue  euerp  gob, 
anb  (hallfpcaue  maruertous  things  a 
gamft  the  ©ob  of  gobs,  %  fliall  pzofper 
nllthembignationbeaccompli(l)cb:fo; 
that  that  is  Determined,  (ball  be  bone. 

37  Neither  Ibailhecrcgarbthcgob 
of  his fathers,no? the bcDrc  of  lbomen, 
no?  regarb  anp  gob :  fo?  ht  fljaii  magm 
fie  himfclfc  aboue  all. 

38  zSutmhiscttatefballhehonour 
tbegobof  ||  fo?tes:  anb  a  00D  lbhomc 
his  fathers  fcnclb  not,  fljallhee  honour 
ibithgolD.aiibfiUier.atibibithpzccious 
(tones,  anb  t  picafant  things. 

39  XhusftiallhceDoeinthetinoft 
ftrong  holbsiluth  a  fttangc  gob  .lbhom 
he  fljaiiacKnolblcbge  and  tnercafe  nnth 
glozp :  anb  he  (hall  caufc  them  to  rule 
outtmatip,aiiD(hailDuuDethclanDfo2 

tgaine. 

+o  3Cnbatthetimtof  thcenb  (ball 

them'ngof  thcSouthputbatlum.aiiD 

the  Umg  of  the/j5o?th  (hai  come  againft 

€ecc  2  him 


Or  %a(iom- 
Jbeth, 

I  Or,  caitfc 
0  diffemble. 


\\Ortyht 


\\0r,mu- 
'utioK-i  Hcb. 

or,  <tt  fcr 
tie  almighty 

CodmhiS 
nie  ht  haH 

hct'CHi -.  ye.i 
hefhAtth- 
tfiur  a  Qodt 

■ 
.if  .re... 
\Hd>.f.r- 

trefftsofmt' 
nitiont 

\lhb  ,f,u 


The  refurreftion.        Daniel. 


Ofth 


c  times. 


\\Or,goiJtj 
laid.  Htbr. 
land  of  dt- 
light,  Tror~ 
namsnt. 


jHcbr.ftn 
foortb. 


\\0r£03dly. 

Hebr.m3Mn- 
taint  of  de- 
light of  ho- 
Imtfe. 


•Matt.lj, 

45-ioh-5. 

\\0r, let- 
chert. 

•Matth.i;. 
43- 


him  Ufte  a  tbhirlelbtnD  ltoith  tharcts, 
attD  rbitlj  hojfemen ,  anD  lbith  many 
(hips,  anD  he  (hall  enter  into  thecouu 
treys,  anD  (hall  ouerflolb  ano  pafTe 
otter. 

41  tyt  fhailenter  alfo  into  tlje  ||glo 
rtous  lanft  ,ano  manp  countre)  s  njau  be 
oucrthjollien :  butthefe  (hall  cftape  out 
ofhishauD,eueneDom,anD£0oab,anD 
the  chiefe  of  the  chilDjen  of  Amnion. 

4z  ^emailtBretehfoojth  his  hanD 
alfo  bpon  the  countreys ,  anD  the  lanD 
of  Cgypt  (hall  not  eftape. 

4j  23ut  he  (hall  hauc  potter  ouer 
the  treafures  of  golD  anD  of  tinier,  ano 
ouer  all  the  pzccious  things  of  <£gppt : 
anD  tt»c  Htbyans  anD  the  ethioptans 
rtuibeathisfteps. 

44  iiSuttiDtngsout  ofthc€afl,anD 
out  of  the  il5o?tfj  fl)all  trouble  him : 
therefore  he  (hall  goefoojth  tbith  great 
furytoDeflroy,  anD  bttcrly  to  matte  a= 
ibaymany. 

45  3(nD  Dee  (hail  plant  the  taberoa- 
ties  of  his  palace  betibeenc  the  fcas  in 
tfjc  ||  glo?tous  holy  mountamc ,  yet  fje 
(hall  come  to  hts  enD ,  ano  none  (hall 
htlpehtm. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1    Michael  fhall  dejiuer  Ifracl  from  their  trou- 
bles.  5    Daniel  is  informed  of  the  times. 

/Boat  that  time  (hall  fi^i 
chart  llano  Dp ,  the  great 
^mtcrbljid)  ItanDcthfoj 
thechilDjcn  of  thy  people, 
anD  there  fhaibe  a  tune  of 
trouble,  fuel)  as  neuer  ibasfincc  rfjere 
urns  a  nation,  euen  to  tl)at  fame  time: 
anD  at  that  time  thy  people  (l)albc  Deli 
ucreD,eucryonethatlhalbefounD  (bat- 
ten in  the  boottc. 

2  Z\\D  many  of tlicm  that  fleepc  in 
trje  Dull  of  ttjc  cart!)  fljall  albaftc,  Tome 
to  eucrlafting  life,  anD  fomc  to  fhame 
and  euerlaflmg  contempt. 

j  anD  they  that  be  ||tbifc  fljairfljinc 
as  the  bngrjtncae  of  the  firmament, 


t  Hrtr.t.f 


"Dan.10  5 

||  Or  ,/>»•» 


Rcucl. 


\\Or,(Art. 


anD  they  that  turne  many  to  ngljtcouf 
neflc,  as  tl)e  ttarrcs  foj  cucr  anD  euer. 

4  25uttl)ou,&> Darnel,  (htitbpthe 
Vbo;Dcs ,  anD  feale  tDe  boolic  euen  to  trje 
time  of  the  enDe:many  (hall  rnnncto 
anD  fro ,  anD  anolbleDge  fl)ail  bee  to 
creafeD. 

5  C  £hen  3J  SDaniel  loobeD ,  anD 
beljolD,  tl)erc  (tooD  other  tibo,tl)c  one 
on  tilts  fiDe  of  the  baubc  of  trje  rtuer, 
anD  the  other  on  that  (toe  of  the  1  bat  it$  c 
of  rt)e  rtuer. 

6  ^nDonefaiDtothcmantlotheDin 
*  imnen,  lbhich  was  ||  bpon  the  maters 
ofthertuer;  ^oiDlong  fhallit  bee  to  the 
enDofthefcJbonDers? 

7  3lnD3hearDthemantIothcDm 
Unnen,  (bbtth  was  bpon  the  nmtcrsof 
the  riucr ,  lbhcn  he  *  hclD  bp  his  right 
hanD,  anD  his  left  hanD  Dntdheaueii, 
anDfroare  by  him  that  liucth  fo?  euer, 
that  itih.iibefo?  a  tune ,  tunes,  anD||an 
haife:anDtbhcn  hee  fl)ail  haucatcom- 
plilheD  to  fcatter  thepoibcr  of  the  ho= 
ly  people ,  all  thefe  things  (hall  bee  ft- 
nifljeD. 

8  atiDTJhearD^utgibnDcrllooD 
not :  then  faiD  31,  £>  my  floto ,  (bhat 
j  fhaibc  the  enD  of  thefc  things  i 

9  3inDhcfatD,<3octhyibay,Danid: 
to?  the  ibortjesare  clofcDDpanDfeaicD 
tillthetimeofthecuD. 

10  iJ^anyihaibc  punfieo ,  anDmaDe 
lDhite  anD  tncD :  but  the  mirfceD  lhail 
Doe  \DicHeDlp  :anD  none  of  theibicUcD 
(hallDnDcrftanD,  buttljt  iDifc  fhailDn; 
DerllanD. 

n  31nD  from  the  time  thatthcDaprp 
faenfice-  (halbe  taaen  arbav.anD  ttl)t  abo^  1 1  H^r" 
mination||that  mahethDcfolatc  fetbp, 
rherefhaibeathoufanDtiDohiiubjcDanD 
mnetic  Daves. 

ii  25leueD  is  he  that  Vbaiteth  ,  anD 
commeth  to  the  thouIanD ,  th?ce  hun^ 
D2CD  anD  fiuc  anD  tljirtit  Dapes. 

u  2Sut  goc  thou  thp  iDay  till  the 
enD  be :  ||  foj  tljou  (l)ait  r  ell,  anD  flaiiD  in 
the  lot  at  the  enD  of  the  Dapcs. 


^HOSEA. 


if  the  ab*- 
C-c. 
mpmb. 


\\Or,and 
thoit^c. 


Hofeaswife,  Chap.j.ii.  andchildren 


^HOSEA. 


CHAP.    I. 


\M.vifi 


\\Th*tii}nct 

hatting  ob- 

txittcdmer- 

cte. 

\Hev.  I-xiR 

not  addt  any 

more  ro. 

Or, that  I 
fiouldalto- 
gflherpar- 
donthtm. 


i  Hofe J  to  fhc w  Gods  Judgement  for  fpirituail 
whoiedome.takcchGomer,  4  andhathby 
her  Iezreel,  6  Lo-ruharoah,  8  andLo-am- 
mf-  10  Thereftaurationof  Iudahandlfrael. 

ifxEMubof  the 
?Ls>isrotljatcainc 
bnto  $ofea,  the 
tonne  of  K5ccri,in 
the  Daves  0f?Ll5J 
tfan,3Jotbam,3- 
f)a5,andSncUial) 
tongs  ofjuual), 
ant)  in  the  napes 
of^ieroboam  the  tonne  offload)  tong 
of  Jfracl. 

1  3njebeginningoftbeM)2boftbe 
fU>K©  bp§ofea:  anD thelitis© 
fayD  to  ^ofea ,  <5oc,  tafte  bnto  thee  a 
Mfc  of  M>2eDomcs,  anb  cbilbjen  of 
W)ho«bomes :  to?  the  lanD  hath  torn; 
mitteDgrcatttJhojebomcdepartingftom 
the  |L  ©tap. 

3  £>obcMmtanDtoofte<£>omertbe 
Daughter  of  SDibiatm.M^lcb  toncemeb 
anb  bare  htm  a  tonne. 

4.  3nb  the  %  o  a  £>  faiD  bnto  Dint, 
Call  hts  name  gtereel ,  to?  yet  a  itttie 
while,  anD  31  mill  t  aucngc  the  blooD  of  i 
3Je5reelbpon  the  houfc  of  31cbu,  anb1 
Mil  taufe  to  ceafe  tljc  tongbome  of  the 
houfe  of  Jfrael. 

5  ^uDitfballtometopafreattbat 

Day,  that  3  Mil  bicaftc  the  boib  of  3n 
raelin  tbcballcy  of^rccl. 

6  c  3lnD  flice  tottteiucb  agautc  anb 
bare  a~oaugbter ,  anb  God  fayD  bnto 
him,  Call  her  name  ||  Ho-ruhamah :  to2  j 
t  ji  Mil  no  mozc  haue  mercy  upon  the 
houfe  of  IJfracl :  ||  but  3  Mil  bttcrly 
tafte  them  away. 

7  asm  31  wiuhauc  merry  upon  the 
houfe  of  3Juoab,  anb  wsllfauctbcmby 
the  1L  <d  k  jd  their  000 ,  anD  Mil  not 
fauctbembyboW,no2byfWo2b,no2by 
battell,byho2fesuo:byho2femen. 

8  C  #oW  When  ft«  &aI)  u>t<™cD 


ILo-rubamab,  (IjecouceiueD  anb  bare  a 
tonne. 

9  %hcn  faybc  God ,  Call  his  name 
||?Lo  - ammi :  to;  ycc  irenot  my  people, 
anD  3  Mil  not  be  your  God. 

10  CPet  the  number  of  the  chtlbzen 
of  gjfracl  (ball  be  as  the  fanb  of  thefca,  | 
Winch  cannot  bee  meafureD  no?  num?! 
bzeb.'anbitniaiicometopatre,  that||tn! 
the  place  Where  it  MisfaiD  tontothcm,j 
Ptt  ^e  not  my  people ,  there  it  (ball  be 
faibbnto  them,  Yearetbetonncsoftbe 
ltuingd5oD. 

11  lEben  (bail  the  cbilDzcn  of3taDab 
anDthechUD2enof5fraelbe*GathereD 
together ,  anD  appoint  themfeiucs  one 
hcaD.anDthey  (hail  come  up  out  of  the 
ianD:fo2grcatihaibetbcDayof3JC3rccl. 

CHAP.    II. 

1    The  idolauie  of  the  people.    6   Godsiudge- 


\That  it,r.ot 
njpeopte. 


"Rom. 9. 
r<i.l6. 

\\tJr,w  field 

of  that. 


Mcre.3.18 

ejek.  34.37 


mentsagainftthcm.    14 
conciliation  with  them. 


His  promifes  of  re- 


i^^yyebnto  your  b2Ctb?cn, 
^  "3inmi ,  ?  to  your  fillers, 
£>||ftubamab: 
.  Ja    z  pieaD  with  your  mo 
,„.  Js&i  trjet,  pleaD :  to:  *  die  is  not  I 
my  Mfc,  neither  am  3  her  hufbanb : 
let  her  therefore  put  away  her  Who?- 
Domes  out  of  her  fight,  anD  her  abulte 
ncsfrombcnbccnc*herb2caftS; 

3  Jtcft  3J  (trip  her uahcb,anD  fet  her 
as  in  the  bay  that  (lite  Was*bo2tie,  anb 
mafic  her  as  a  MlDerneffe ,  aitofctbcr 
Ufic  a  D2tc  lanb , anb  flay  her  Mth  third. 

4  3tnD  3  Mil  not  haue  mercy  Dp 
onher  chilD2en ,  fojtheyMbecbUDjen 
ofwbojbomes. 

<,  fm  their  mother  hath  plavcb  the 
harlot :  (bee  that  concciucD  them  hath 
Done  (harmfully :  to2  (bee fayD,  3 Mil 
goc  after  my  loners ,  that  giue  me  my 
b2cab  anD  my  water,  my  wooiianDmy 
flarc,mmeoyle,anD  my  tmmhe. 

6  cXhcrcto2cbeho!b,'3(MlheDge 
bptby  way  With  tho2nes,  anD  t  mafic  - 


'Eic.iS.is 


'Eze.iS- 


C  CCC  3 


)Htl.d>>rM; 


filei 


wau\ 

56 


God: 


s  promne 


p 


ife 


Hofi 


ea. 


of; 


ill; 


reconciliation. 


I  Hth.  ntw 

mine. 

||0r,wlierc- 

wuhtbey 
made  B-tal. 


\\nrt\*ke 
Airy. 

t  Hcbfwllj 
crldlame. 


\Hrb   mjti 
d'filiur. 


||  Or  friend- 
h,  Heb.le 
her  heart. 


I  Tbjl  ■/, 

nn  hufband, 
t  Th.tt  u, 
mj  Lord. 


'Iob.< 


max,  that  ujc  n>au  not  fittbrjer  patljes. 

7  3inb  (be  ajail  folloib  after Jjec  lo- 
uers,  but  Qjc  (ball  not  ouertabetrjem, 
aim  (be  ujau  fceftc  tocm ,  butfyallnot 
Gnu  them :  trjen  fljail  ujc  fay,  3}  mill  soc 
anb  rcntrnc  to  my  firtt  Ijufbanb ,  fo<t 
tljcn  wis  n  better  Vbitljmctljcnnoib. 

8  5FojfJ)cbibnotanotbtl)at3Jgaite 
Ijer  comc,anb  t  unne,anb  oylc.anb  mul- 
tiplier) Ijer  fuuec  anb  golb ,  ||  which  t|)cp 
pjcparebfojzsaai. 

9  Xbcrcfojc  ruill  3  rcturnc.anb 
take  amay  my  Come  in  trje  nine  there- 
of,  anb  my  ibinc  intljefeafontljcrcof, 
anb  ibilll  rccoucr  my  ibooll  anb  mv  flare 
iiiucn  to  toucr  Ijer  naBcbncfle. 

"  10  2uib  noib  null  3  btfeoucr  !)cr 
tierbbneffe  in  roc  ftgljt  of  l)crloucrs, 
anb  none  (ball  bcliucr  tjcr  out  of  mine 
rjanb. 

11  3  mill  aifo  caufe  all  rjer  mirtfj  to 
ccafchcrf  call  bates ,  tjcr  ncru  mooncs, 
anb  Ijer  S>abbatljs,anb  all  Ijer  folcnme 
fcatts. 

11  3lnb  3  ibill  t  beftroy  l)cr  bines 
anb  tjcr  figgc  trees ,  rbtjereof  ujc  tjarlj 
faib .  Xbcfc  «c  my  rclbarbs  ttjat  my  to* 
ucrsbaue  guten  me :  anb  3  Will  mafte 
tlicm  a  fojreu\anb  the  bcattsof  tlje  ficlb 
(l)au  catetbem. 

n  3nb  3  ibill  bifite  bpon  tjcr  ttjc 
bates  of  ffiaalim ,  tbrjeretn  ujc  bnrnt  i\v 
tenfc  to  tljcm ,  anb  ujc  betUeb  tier  felfe 
Unto  Ijer  carryings ,  anb  tjcr  Ueibrts, 
anb  fljclbcnt  after  tjcr  loucrs,anb  to;* 
gatemc,faitntne!t©Kjp. 

14.  lEXljercfojc  befjolb,  3Jibfliai^ 
lurcljcr,  anb  tying  l)cr  into  tljctbtlbcr-- 
neflc,  anb  fpeaac  ||  comfortably  bnto 
fjer. 

i<>  ^nb3Hbilgiucl)er,nerbincvarbs 
from  tljcncc,  anb  tbc  bailey  of^ctjo?  fo? 
aboojeofnopc,anb(ncfl)aliungttjro, 
asm  tlje  bayes  of  tjcryoutlj,  anbasin 
trje  bay  lbljen  (be  tame  bp  out  of  tlje 
lanbofegypt. 

i6  ^iid  it  ujau  be  attfiatbay ,  faitlj 
tlje  %®mw> ,  that  toott  fljalt  tall  mec 
t  310)1  ;  anb  fljalt  tan  mec  no  more 
tasaau. 

17  foi  3JibflltaUearbavtl)e  names 
of  asaaltm  out  of  tjcr  mourn ,?  tljcy  ujai 
no  mojc  be  rememtyeb  by  tbeir  name. 

18  3lti&  in  ttjat  nay  ibill  3  malic  a 
"concnant  fo^tyem  ibitlj  ttjc  beads  of 
tbeficlb,anbibitljtijcfoulesof}jcaucn, 
anb  ibitr)  ttjc  creeping  rfjtngs  of  rl)c 
grounb :  anb  3  Will  bzcafcc  ttjcbolb 
anb  ttjc  fiuo^anb  ttjc  battcll  out  of  ttjc 


cartl)  ,  anb  tbtll  make  them  to  lie 
boibnc  fafely. 

19  ^nbjnrilibetrottjtfjeebntome 
fo?cucr  yea,  3  Will betrotfjtljccbnto 
ntc  in  ngl)tcouTncfrc,anb  in  lubgcment, 
anbinlouingfetnbncflc^nbinmcrncs. 

20  3  lDtii  cuenbetrotrjtoce  bnto  mc 
in  faitbruincffe,  anb  tljou  Ojaitftnott) 

tt)C?L€>B^. 

2i  ^nb  it  njailcome  to  pattern  trjat 
nay,3  tbtiitjearcfaitfjtfjclL  ©  mw>,3 
null  ijearetljc  tjeauens,  anb  tbcp  (gall 
l)carc  tbe  ear  tn, 

12  ^nb  tfje  cartl)  fbail  Ijcarc  tlje 
come,  anbtljc  rbme,  anbtljcoylc^anb 
tbevlmaiirjearcJJwccl. 

13  3nb  3  ibill  forb  Ijer  bnto  mc  in 
tDeeartt),  anb  Ktbillljauenicrep  bpon 
rjer  tfjat  Ijab  not  obtatneb  merep^nb  3 
*  ibill  favto  them  ujijitl)  acre  not  my 
people  jfcfjou  art  mypeoplc,  anb  tl)cy 
fljaiilay,  Thou  an  my  ©ob. 

CHAP.   III. 

1  By  the  expiation  of  an  adultereffc,  4  is 
(hewed  the  dcfolation  of  Ifrael  before  their 
reftaUration. 

^cnIaibtI)c1Ls)K^bns 
tomc,©ocycr,  loueavbo? 
man(bcloueb  of  her  frtcnb, 
yet  an  abultcreflc)  atco?* 
_bmg  to  tftc  loue  of  tfje 
1L©kb  toibarb  tljc  cl)ilb;cn  of  3Jfrarl, 
rbljo  loofectootfjcrgobs ,  anbioucfla^ 
gonstofrbinc. 

z  <s>o  3  bougpt  Det  to  mc  fo?  fifc 
tecne  pieces  of  Olucr  ,anb  to;  an  Ijomer  of 
barley  anb  an  t  palfc  homer  of  barley. 

3  ^nb  3  faib  bnto  tjcr ,  Xftou  (bait 
*abibc  fo?  mc  many  bayes,  tljou  fbalt 
not  play  tfje  Ijarlot,  9  tboud^aitnotbc 
fo?  an  other  man,  fo  will  3  aifo  be  fo;  thee. 

4  5fo2  tlje  cl)ilbjcn  of  3Jfrael  fball 
abibc  many  bayes  ibitrjout  a  Bing,anb 
rbitljout  a  pmuc ,  anb  ibitfjout  a  fan* 
ficc,anb  lbitfjout  t  an  image ,  anb  lbitrj 
out  an  Cp!)ob,anb  without  Xcrapgim. 

^  aftcrtbarb  (ball  tfje  cfjilbjen  of 
3ifracl  returncanb  fecac  tftc  Horn© 
tlicir  ©ob,anb  *  ©auib  tl)clc  isung,anb 
njaiifcaretlic  JLspib©,  anbljtsgoob- 
neflc  uitljc*  latter  bayes. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  Gods  Judgements  againft  the  finnes  of  the 
people,  6  andofthepriefts,  it  and  againft 
theiridolatrie.  15  ludahisexliortedtotalce 
warning  by  Ifiacls  calamitie. 

. $carc 


■  Rom. 9. 
26  1,  pec.  1. 
10. 


tftel.ef 


\Heb.U- 

thecb. 
Deur.11. 


jHeb,  4 

ftandtng  c 
ftaluc. 


9. czech. 

34-*?. 

Mki.2.1. 


Pricfts  reiedted.         Chapiiij.v.  Ifracls  prid< 


'  Mica.6,1. 


t  Heir, 
bloods. 


\Hcb.cut*f 


\Heb.cutoff 


\Heh.ltft 
Vp  tijctr 
fouletotbar 
imquittc. 
'IU.24.2- 
f  Heb.  vi fie 
vpon. 

f  Heb.  eau fe- 
te rcturne. 


WOr.fhali, 
net.'&c. 


eatc  tlje  tto?oc  of  tDe 
Horn©,  ycc  d^UDjeti  of 
JJCcacl :  fb?  tDcfLois© 
DatD  a  *  comrourrac  tdict) 
rt;e  inhabitants  of  rt)e 
lano,  bcraufc  there  is  no  tcuctl),no?  mcr- 
cie,no?&nottlcbgcofci5obtiitDcianb. 
i  25p  frocanng.anb  Ipmg,  anb  fell- 
ling,anbllcaang,anb  commuting  abuls 
tcrte ,  tljcp b?cafcc out , ano  Moot)  touc^ 
crtjtbiooo. 

3  XDcrcfojc  tDailtDcianb  moumc, 
anb  cucrp  ottc  tDat  bttelletD  therein 
fhail  langiua) ,  ttitD  tDe  beauts  of  tDe 
6elb,anb  tttrt)  the  fouics  of  hcaucn,pca 
the  fifyes  of  tlje  £>ca  alfo  (hall  be  tafcen 
attar. 

4  #ctlctnoman(triue,no2rcp?ouc 
another :  fo?  this  people  are  as  the?  tljat 
flrtuc  ruitlji  tlje  p?tcft. 

5  1Cherefo?c  (bait  thou  fall  in  tlje 
Dap,  ano  the  p?ophet  alfo  (ball  fall  ttitD 
tbee  in  the  night,  ano  3J  tttll  tbefttop 
th?  mother, 

6  C  £?9p  people  ate  t  bettropcb  fo; 
larlir  of  taiottlebgc:  betaufc  thou  baft 
rctcctcb  tuiotticbge,  3J  ttill  alfo  meet 
thee,  that  1 1)  on  (bait  be  no  pacft  to  nic : 
feeing  thou  Daft  fojgottcn  tfjc  latte  of 
tbp  <25ob,  3  ttil  alfo  fo?gct  ttiv  tbtlb?en. 

7  3s  the?  ttcre  tnercafeb ,  fo  tfjep 
finncb  agatnfl  me:  therfore  tttl  J  change 
tbcirglo?)nntolbame. 

8  XbepeatebptbeGnneofmypcos 
ple,anbtbc?trcttbetrbcatton  tbett  tni- 
quttie. 

9  3nbtbcrcfbailbcli&epcoplc,liBc 
*  p?fcft :  anb  3  tttll  t  ptmtfl)  ttjent  fo? 
tDeir  ttapes,  anb  trettarb  tljem  their 
Doings. 

10  5fo?  the?  (ball  eatc,  ano  not  baue 
enough  :tbcp  fbaUeommitttbo?bomc, 
anb  (ball  not  utcrcafe,bceaufe  they  Daue 
left  off  to  taftc  l)tcb  to  tlje  %  €>  is  s\ 

m  naho?er»ome,anbtttne,anbncttc 
ttme  take  attap  the  Heart. 

11  C  fi^v  people  af  be  eounrel  at  rfjeit 
ftocas,  anb  their  ttaffc  bcciaretb  tonto 
tDcm:  fo?  rt)c  fptnt  of  ttbo?bomcs  Dart) 
caufcb  them  to  crre ,  anb  tbep  Daue  gone 
attbo?tngfrom  bnber  their  (5ob. 

13  XDcpfocnacetopontDctopsoftDc 
mountaines,  anb  burne  mtenfe  bpon 
tDe  Dtllcstmbcr  ottcs  anb  poplars,  anb 
times,  becaufe  tDe  (baoottc  thereof  is 
goob :  fbcrcfo?c  your  baugDtcrs  (ball 
commit  ttbo?ebomc,  anb  your  fpoufes 
Qjall  commit  abultcric. 

14  31  ||ttUl  not  puniO) your  baragD5 


H0r,ilfll. 


«w. 


*  i.King. 

12.2?. 


\Htbr.u 

9ene, 

\Hthr. 
Ihittdl. 


tcrstthcntbcycomnutttDoiOomcno? 
your  fpoufes  ttljcn  rt)ey  commit  abnl 
tcrte:  fo?  tDcmfclucs  arc  fcparatcb  ttulj 
ttno?es,anbtl)cyfacrtace  Hurt)  harlots: 
rt)CTfo?t  rt)c  people  that  botlj  not  bnbcp 
ftanb,!iO)aiifali. 

15  C  XDougtj  tDou  Jfracl  play  tDe 
Darlot,  y«  let  not  Jubaf)  offenb,  anb 
come  notyc  unto  cStigal,  neither  gocyc 
bp  to  *2Scrt)-aucu,  no?  ftucarc,  Xlic 
HflDlSDltuctl): 

16  Jro?  3Ifracl  QibetD  bache,  as  a 
uactJcOtbingDcifcr:  nottrtjc  |L©is© 
tttll  feebe  tDcm  as  a  lambc  m  a  large 
place. 

17  €pD?aimis<ornebtoibolcs:  let 
Dim  alone. 

18  XDcirb2(nbetisfott?c:tDepDaue 
cominittcbttDo?oomcconttnuaiij>:l)cr 
t  rulers  with  (Dame  boc  lottc ,  csiuc  vc. 

19  XDetttnb  DatD  bouno  Dcr  bptn 
Dcrttmgs,  anbtDey  fljaii  bcafDamcb 
becaufe  of  ttjcir  facriaces. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Gods  judgements  againft  the  Pnefts,  the  peo- 
ple, and  the  princes  ot  Ifrael  for  therr  mani- 
fold finnes,  15  vntill  they  repent. 

€arcvectDis,^)pncOs, 
anb  Dearucn,  pe  Doufc  of 
^fracl^nbgiucyecearc, 
2)DoufcoftDeUmg:fo? 
lubgement  >■>  tottarb  j>ou, 
becaufe  pec  Daue  becne  a 

fnarc  on  spjpalj.anb  anctfpjcab  bpon 

£aboz. 
1  Zm  tDe  reuoltcrs  arc  p?ofounb  to 

mafec(laugl)ter,  ||tDougD!J  Daue  bene 

tarcbuKeroftDemali. 
j  3fenott<fpD?atm,anb3lftaelis 

not  Dib  from  me:  fo?  nott,£>  €pD?aun, 

rt)oucommtttellttDo?bome,and  3lfrael 

isbeflleb. 
4   txDevttillnotframetDctr||bo^  wait? 

tngs  to  turne  bnto  rtjeir  <5oo :  fo?  rtje  I  ^r*«- 


\\Or,<uJ, 

&c. 

t  Heb. a  ter. 

rtQicn, 


fptnt  of  ttDo?cbomcs  is  m  tDe  mibft  of 
rtjem ,  anb  tt)ev  Dane  not  Knottcn  tDe 

|L€>JSD. 

5  3lnb  tl)c  p?ibc  of  Ufracl  botD  te^ 
ftifieto  Dis  face:  rt)crcfo?c  fljail gifracl 
anb  €pD?aun  fall  m  tDeir  mtquit}' :  Jus 
bal)  alfo  (Dailfau  ttitD  tDcm. 

6  XDeyfl)aiigocttttDrt)ctrflocKs, 
anb  ttitD  tDeir  Dcatos  to  fecfee  tDe 
JLjDK©  :  buttDer  fljallnotfinoc  him,  ije 
DatD  ttitDb?attcn  Dtmfclfc  from  tDcm. 

7  XDcvDaucbcaittrcacDcrouOva' 
gatnft  tDe  !L<dis©  :  fo?  tDcv  Daue  be 
gotten  ftrangc  ttymm,  uott  (Dalia 

moncrt) 


doings  ir, 
notjujftr 
them. 


God  fmiteth,&c.  Hofea.        Mercy  preferred. 


<^Or,arvffrme 


\\Or,tothe 
ktneofU- 
re  f. Or, to 
the  king  that 
pjoiiU plead. 


XHcb.nll 
ihtybe  guil- 
ne. 


ri.C 

4 


:or.i5. 


\\  Or  t  mercy. 
ar>kl*idnc§t. 


\\Orjhat  thy 
mdgrmenti 
might  be, 


monctb  bcuoutc  them  Untb  tbetr  po^ 
tions. 

8  25Iott)  ycc  the  eoznet  in  <5ibcab, 
nd  the  trumpet  m  J&amab :  cry  aioibb 

at  26cth-auen:after  thecs©  aBcmamtn. 

9  epbjaim  (ban  be  bcfblatc  in  ttjc 
nap  of  rcbufec :  among  the  tribes  of  3lf 
raclbaue  3lmabe  &noibcntljattbbiclj 
(ballfurclybc. 

io  XbciDnnccsoflmbab  There  libc 
them  that  rcmooue  the  bounb :  therefore 
3  ttnll  poifyc  out  my  ibjartj  bpon  tljcm 
UReibatcr. 

n  €pJ)2atmtsopp2eflctj,mdbjofeen 
in  iubgcmcnt:bccaufe  be  Willingly  ami- 
fecb  after  tlje  eommanbement. 

\z  5Cr)crcfo2Cwiig}beDnto€pmaiin 
as  a  mod) :  ant  to  ttjc  Ijoufc  of  3iubab 
asllrottcnncflc. 

13  i@hen  epbjaim  fall)  I)ts  ficlmeffc, 
anb  3Jubab  raw  jus  ibounb :  then  vbent 
epbwimto  the  Stflynan,  anb  tent  ||  to 
fttngjarcbyctcouiobcnotljcalcyou, 
nomutyou  ofyour  inounb. 

14  $ 013  will  bee  bnto  epbjaim  as  a 
$Lion,anbasayong!Liontotljeboufe 
ofjjubab  .3,  euengjtbi!  tcarcanb  goc 
avbay :  3  mil  tauc  aibay  ,  anb  none 
(bail  refcue  him. 

«  C3  null  goc  and  rcturnc  to  mv 
place,  tnil  tbey  acfenotttlcbgc  tljctrof 
fence, anb fccltc  my  face:  mtljcir afflic- 
tion they  tbill  feche  mc  early. 

CHAP.     VI. 

1    An  exhortation  to  repentance.     4    A  com- 
plaint of  their  vntowardnefle,  and  iniquitie. 

£>mc,  anb  let  bsreturne 
bnto  tljc  ?l£>  is  ©:fo2  bee 
0  bath  tome ,  anb  lice  mm 
*bcaictos:lKbatljfmittcn, 
_anb  bcibillbnibcbsbp. 
z  *  after  two  bales  null  be  reutuc 
bs,intljc  tlnro  baybciimiraifc  bsbp, 
anb  mc  (bail  uuc  m  i)is  fight. 

j  SOjcn  fbal Vbc lmoib,iftbc  follolb 
on  to  ftnolb  tljc  %  ©is  w>  :  bis  going 
fo2tbispjcparcb,astbcmo2tung;  ?  be 
(nail  come  bnto  bs,as  tbc  rainc  j  as  tljc 
latter  and  fo2iucr  rainc  unto  tbc  earth. 
4-  CC>(ffpInaim,tt»hatfl)ail3Jboc 
bntothec;  sD3Jubab,ibbat  fbaiijjoo 
bnto  tljcc*  foz  your  Hgoobncflc  is  as  a 
morning  cloub,  anb  as  tljc  early  bclb  it 
goetbaibay. 

5  Xbcrcfac  ftaue  3  flicUicb  them 
by  tl)c  ijnopbets:  3  banc  flame  tljcm 
by  tljc  uiojbcsof  my  mouth,  ||anb  thy 


lUbgtmentS  are  as  tl)C  ligljt  that  CJOCti) 

foojtb. 

6  jFo?35bcCrcb*mcrcie,anbuotfa; 
enficcanb  tbctmoiblebgc  of  ©ob  moje 
then  burnt  offerings. 

7  26ut  trjey  ||  lifec  men  ftaue  tranfc 
greffeb  tljc  Coucnant :  tljerc  fjauc  rtjcy 
bcalt  treacrjeroufly  againttme. 

8  0iicabisacityoftl)cmtl)attboz6c 
iniquitie ;  and  is  ||  pollutcb  Unto  bloob. 

9  ^nb  as  troupes  of  robbcrsibaitc 
fo;  a  man ,  fo  tfjc  company  of  pneflcs 
murrtjer  in  toe  tbay  t  by  confent :  fo: 
rtjcy  commit  II  ictttbncfTc. 

io  3  ijauc fecne  an  Ijoznblc  tljtng  in 
tfjerjoufeoflifracl:  tljerc  istfjciDljoJC' 
bomcof€pli2aim,'Jfraclisbcfilcb. 

i  i  3lifo  fl>  giubal) ,  lice  Date  fct  an 
Ijarucltfo: tljcc ,  rbfjen  3  returncb  tljc 
captiuinc  of  my  people. 

CHAP.    VII. 

i  A  reproofeot manifold finncs.  n  Godswrath 
agamft  them  tor  their  hvpocnlic. 

tytn  3  lboulb  fjauc  Ijealcb 
3Tracl,  then  tljemimutic 
of  €pli2ann  lbas  bifcouc 
rcb,  anb  tnetrbicUcbneffc 
of  S>amaria:fo2  tljcy  com- 
mit falfcljoob :  anb  tfjc  tljicfc  commctfj 
in,  and  tlje  troupe  of  robbers  tfpoilctlj 
ibitljout. 

z  ^nb  trjcy  t  confibcr  not  in  rijeir 
Hearts  thatjf  remember  ai  tljcir  Vbicfecb 
nctTc:  novbtfjcir  olbnebomgsljauc  be- 
fct  rtjem  about,rijty  arc  befozemy  face. 

3  Xlicy  maSc  tljc  King  glan  \bitli 
tljcir  tbichcbncffc ,  anb  tljc  pmiccs  rbitl) 
tljcirlics. 

4  Xfjey  are  ai  abultcrcrs,as  an  ouen 
licatcb  by  tfjc  bahcr :  ||  tbljo  ccafcth 
llfcom  raifingaftcr  He  liatli  ftucabcb  tljc 
bougli,  6nnil  it  be  icauencb. 

5  3Jntljcbay  of  our  Blng,  tnc  pun 
ecsnauc  mabe  him  ficUc  ||  ibttli  bottclc 
of  lbmc ,  fjc  Itrctcljcb  out  Ijis  fjanb  tbitlj 
fco2iicrs. 

6  5Po2  tlicy  Ijauc  ||  mabc  rcaby tlicir 
Ijcart  liUc  an  ouen ,  lbhilcs  tljcy  hem 
lbait:  tljcir  baftcr  flccpetli  all  the  night, 
in  the  morning  it  burnctlj  as  a  fla 
mmgfirc. 

7  Xljcy  arc  all  hot  as  an  ouen ,  anb 
hauc  bcuourcb  tljcir  JIubgcs  all  their 
l&mgs  arc  fallen ,  tljerc  is  none  among 
tljcm  that  taiicth  bnto  mc. 

8  Cphjaim,  he  Ijath  mircb himfelfc 
among  ttic  people,  €plj2atm  isacaiic 
notnirncb. 

9  5>tran< 


'Matth.p. 
I  J.  and  io, 
7«clcj.  4, 
■7  I. fam. 
'5-12. 
11*,% 

niLim, 


\\Qr  xitnnin 
'    blood. 


|  Hcbr.  vrtth 
one  JbouJ- 
der.  Or ,io 
Stchem, 
lOr.enor- 
mittt. 


Hebr.emh 


t  Hebr.pnp- 
peth. 

\Hebr.fay 

not  ta 


\\Or,tbe  rai- 
ferrvt/ccjfe. 
[  Or, from 

ftettttknti "'.' 
ivttit. 

I0rtttppi'i(d. 


Thecalfe 


Ch 


ap.vnj.ix. 


oTSz 


amana. 


kSfi. 
•Ch«.y.j. 


\Ht!:jfdlr 


\0r,ch4- 
Ittntd. 


•prai.73.$>. 


Vitt.the 

■oofeofihj 
mcHlh. 


9  Strangers  hauc  bcuourcb  his 
flccngth , ant) litchnomctl)  it  not: yea, j 
gravhatrcs  arc  there  ant)  rljcrc  bpon 
him,  vet  rjc  Uttolbcth  not. 

io  3nbthc*p«bcof3jrracltcftifieth 
to  his  face,  anb thev bocnot  rctnrncto 
the  II©  is  ©their  <3oo,no2fcclichtm 
fo:  all  tins. 

ii  C<£pl)*aim  alfo  is  itftc  a fill? tiout, 
ttnttjout  heart :  thev  canto  egvpt,  thev 
goctoStffytia. 

ix  nahen  thev  (hall  goc,3J*bilfp2cab 
my  net  Dpon  them ,  3  tbtll  bnng  trjem 
boitoieasthcfoulcs  of thchcaucn:  3 
tbffl  chafttfc  them  as  their  congtcgatt 
on  hath  heart). 

13  n3ocbntothem,fo2  they  hauc  flcb 
from  me :  tbeftructton  tonto  them,  be- 
taufe  they  Dane  tranfgreffeb  agatnft 
me,though3ihaucrcoccmcbthem,yct 
they  1) au e  fpo ben  lies  agatnft me. 

14-  zm  thev  l)auc not  crycb unto  me 
ttnth  their  heart,  tt)l)cn  they  l)ott>leD 
topon  thetr  bebs :  thev  aftemble  them* 
felues  foacojnc  anb  lbme,  and  thev  re- 
bell  agatnft  me. 

15  though  3  II  hauc  bounb,  and 
ftrengthencb  their  armes,  vet  bocthev 
imagine  mifchtefe  agatnft  me. 

16  3£hcyrcturnc,  butnottothemoft 
tyigh :  the?  arc  ItHc  a  fccccltfull  botb: 
their  pnneeslhail  fallbv  thcft»o?b,fo: 
the  *  rage  of  their  tongue :  thts  fhaii  be 
thetr  benfiontn  the  lano  of  cgvpt. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

i.    ii  Dcftruifrion  is  thrcamed  tor  their  impie- 
tie,  5  andidolatrie. 

ETthc  Xrumpct  to  thv 
t  mouth .'  'iec  1^1J" come  as 
an  eagle  agamft  the  houfc 
„  of  the  H01S1D,  betaufc 
.Jan.  thev  hauc  tratifgreffeb  mv 
Couenant ,  anb  trefpaffeb  agamft  mv 
JLavbe. 

z  3Jfracl  ttjall  me  tmto  mc,  *$v 
©ob.ibcfcnoiDthec. 

3  3}fraclhathcaft  off  the  thing  that 
is  goob :  the  encntic  than  purfuc  htm. 

4  Xhcv  hauc  fctPpBmgs,but  not 
bV  mc :  they  hauc  mabc  tfwttccs,  anb  3 
ftnctb  it  not :  of  thetr  Clucr  anb  thetr 
golbc  Ijauc  thev  mabc  them  ibolcs,that 
thev  mav  be  rut  off. 

5  CXhycaife,  ©Samaria, hath 
taft  thee  off :  nunc  anger  ts  hinoicb  a> 
gainft  them :  hotb  long  TtnU  it  bee  ere 
ttjev  attameto  innocntne* 


6  f  02  from  3)frael  was «  alfo ,  the 
Uwheman  mabc  tt,  therefo2c  it  tsnot 
C5ob :  butthctalfc  of  Samaria  fhalibe 
bjoUenm  pieces. 

7  J?02  thev  hauc  fott) en  the  ttunbe, 
anb  thev  (hail  teapc  thcibhiriettjinbe: 
ithathuo!;ftaitie:  the  bubbc  (hall  yeelb 
nomeale:  tffo  bettycclb,theftrangcrs 
njalifujaiioru  ttup. 

3  3Jfraclt5ftoailott)cbr>p,notbfhai 
thev  bcamong  the  Genttles^satocfrell 
lbhecetn  is  no  plcafttrc. 

9  JF02  thev  arc  gone  Dp  to  3u"V2fa,a 
tbtlbe  3tffc  alone  bv  rjimfclfc ;  €ph2aun 
hathhtrebtioucrs. 

io  j*ca,  though  thev  hauc  htreb  & 
mong  the  nations ,  norb  mil  3  gather 
them,  anb  thev  than  1 1  fo?r  oib  a  little  fo? 
the  burben  of  the  Btng  of  p2tnces. 

1 1  2Sccaufe  cphjatm  hath  mabc  ma= 
nv  altars  to  finne ,  altars  fl;aii  be  Pnto 
himtofmne. 

ii  3  haue  U)2itten  to  him  the  great 
things  of  mv  %*Vo,  but  thev  ttier  e  coun 
tcbasaftrangcthtng. 

13  Xhcv  facrtfice  flcft)  Hfozthcfacruv 
tcs  of  nunc  offcnngs,anb  catc  itj  but  the 
%  o  «  jd  acccptcth  them  not :  noVb  Will 
he  remember  tljctr  tniqurttc ,  aim  rnfitc 
their  ftnncs:thcvfl)ai  returne  to  <£gvpt. 

i+  5f02  llfracl  hath  fo2gottcn  Ins 
mafecr,  anb  builbcth  temples  anb5?u^ 
bah  hath  multtphcb  fenceti  cities :  but 
3  \m\  fenb  afire  upon  his  nttcs ,  anb 
it  fhallbcuourc  the  palates  thereof. 

CHAP.    IX. 

The  diftrciTeandcaptiuitie  oflfrael,  fortheir 
finnes  and  idolatrie. 

eiovtc  not,  £>  3JfracI,fo2 
iov  as  other  people  :  fo: 
thou  haft  gone  a  lbhonng 
from  thv  <5ob,  thou  haft 
loucu  a  *  reiparb  ||  Ppon 

cucrvto2ncfloo?e. 
i  1Lhc  flooje  ant)  the  ||tPincp2effe 

ft)au  not  fecbe  them,  anb  the  nerbtbme 

fl)allfatlemhcr. 

3  Xh£VthalnotbtbelinpIL©BP& 
lanb  :bnt€phjatm  ft)all  rcmrncto  €■- 
gvpt,ano  thev  (hall  cat  bntieaue  things 
uiSlffvJ'a.  „  _. 

4  %\yvf  (hall  not  offer  lDtnc  offl  m^s 
to  the  %  ©  is  © :  neither  (hall  thev  be 

plCafttigtontOhUmtheirfjcrificesnialbcpU' 

to  them  as  the  b2cab  of  mourners :  all 
that  catc  thereof  (hall  be  pollnteb :  fo2 
thetr  bjcab  fo?  their  fotile  n>all  not  tome 
uuothchoufcoftheJLsDisP- 


\\Or,fjn. 
ding  corne. 


\Het.  louci. 


\\Or,brgn 


\\Or,mlhe 
ftcrtjicfs  of 
mine  ejfe- 
n«gs,thij 
Crr. 


*  Icrc.  44. 

'7 

\\Or,i",dc 
if  Or,  Ktnc- 
fa. 


Ifracl  is  thrcatned  Hofea.  for  her  idolatry. 


\\Or,thtir 
ftUterpj.tll 
be  dejtrej, 
the  nettle 
&c :  Heb. 
the  deftre. 


J  Heh.m.m 
of  the  ftirtt, 


\0r,  a2ain$ 


'IuJg.19. 
18. 


'Num  15 


ctfltth  lh- 
frmte. 
Chip  .11 


defra 


b.  the 


5  natjatVbill  ycc  Doc  itt  the  folcmnc ! 
Day ,  ant)  in  tljc  Da?  of  tljc  feaft  of  tljc! 

6  ifo2locthcy  arc  gone ,  betaufc  of 
tDcftructton:<ZFgypt  Ojail  gather  them' 
Dp ,  Memphis  fhall  burtc  tl)cm :  ||  the 
plcafantpijce5fo2tl)citfilucc,netlesfl)ai 
poffcffc  tljcm  :  thomcs  fhall  be  m  tt)ctr 
Xabcrnaclcs. 

7  XljcDaycsofbifitation  ate  tome, 
tfje  bayes  of  rccompencc  arc  tome ,  3Jf; 
racl  (hall  imott)  it  .  the  02opljet  is  a 
foolc,  t  the  fpintuall  man  is  maDDc,fo2 
the  multituDc  of  thine  imqmtieanDtljc 
great  hatrcD. 

8  %\)c  ibatchman  of  Cphjaim  was 
ttnth  my  d5oD :  but  tljc  02ophct  's  a  fnar  c 
ofa  fouler  mall  Ins  ibayes,  andhattcD 
i|intljchoufcofljis<3ob. 

9  Xljcy  Ijauebccpiy  cozrupteDtW 
felucsas  mtljcbaycs  of*C5ibcah :  theie- 
forej)cl\)ill  remember  their  iniquitichc 
ttiUltoifitc  their  finncs. 

10  3  founD  Ufratl  Ukc  grapes  in  rtjc ! 
ibtlDcnttfft:3J  fa\D  rout  fathers  as  the  j 
firft  ripe  in  the  fig  tree  at  Ijcr  firft  time : 
but  they  lbcut  to  *  2Saalpco2,anD  fcpara- : 
teD  thcmfelucs  bnto  that  fhame ,  anb 
their  abominations  Were  atto2Dmg  as! 
thcyloucD. 

11  7is(oi  €pl)jaim ,  their  gl02y  (hall 
flee  aibay  line  abirD :  from  tljc  birtl) 
anD  from  tljc  lbombc,anb  from  tljt  ton- 
ccption. 

11  Xhough  tljcvbjing  bptljcir  djil- 
D2cn ,yct  lbil  3  bcr cane  tljcm  that  there 
(hail  hot  be  a  man  left  •.  yea,  lbocalfo  to 
tljcm  ibhcn  3  Depart  from  them. 

13  €plj:aim,  as  3  faib  Xy2iis,  is 
piantcDtn  a  picafant  piate:but  ephisaim 
(hall  tying  footftj  ijis  ehtlbicn  to  tljc 
murDcrer. 

1+  Giuc  tljcm ,  <©  %  ©  is  © :  ibftat 
Unit  tljou  gmc  <  giuc  tljcm  atmiftary; 
ingftiombcanD  D:ic  bicafts. 

H  3(11  tl)cit  UntKCDncuV  is  in  <5il 
gal :  fin  there  3  hatcD  them  :fo:  tlje 
tbtthcDiicffc  oftheir  Doings^!  llullDnuc 
them  out  of  nunc  houfe,  3  Vbtlllouc 
tljcm  no  11102c:  all  tljcir  pnnces  arcrc- 
uoltcrs. 

i6  <£ph2aimisfmittcii,thcirrootcis 
D2icDbp ,  the?  fhall  bear c  no  ftuitc:yca 
though  they  b2ingfoo2th,yct  \M\\3  flay 
cuen  t  thcbcloucb  twite of  their  iDombc. 

17  $)y  <5oD  lbilltaft  them  aibay, 
becaufe  they  bib  not  hear Hen  bnto  him: 
another  Chalbe  lbanberers  among  tljc 
nations. 


CHAP.   X. 

Ifracl  is  reproued  and  threatned  for  their  im- 
piecieand  idolatry. 

*5>racl  is  |lan  empty  bine, 
Ije  bnngcth  fo?th  fruitc 
P  bnto  hunfcifc :  acco2Ding 
"to  tlje  mulntuDc  of  his 
fruttc ,  he  Ijath  mtreafcD 
j  tljc  altars,  a«02Dmg  to  the  gooDtteffc 
I  of  Ijis  lanD ,  they  Ijaue  mabc  gooDly 
It  images. 

2  I.Xljtir  Ijcart  is  DiuiDeU  :  noVb 
fhall  they  be  founD  faultie :  Ijee  fhall 
t  bitafec  bourne  their  altars :  Ije  (hall 
fpoilc  tljcir  images. 

j  if 0?  noib  tljey  Qjau  fay,  BDehauc 
no  Bmg,  betaufc  Ujc  fcarcb  not  the 
IL  o  13  jD,t©ljatthen  tt)oulb  aBmgboe 
robs? 

4  1Eijey  Ijaue  fpoaeu  ibojDs,  froca- 
nng  falfely  in  mabing  atouenant:tl)us 
luDgcmcnt  fp2ingcthbpa5hemlocBem 
tljc  furrolbcs  of  tlje  fielD. 

5  1thc  inhabitants  of  Samaria 
(hall  fcarc ,  betaufc  of  tljc  taiucs  of 
25cthautn :  fo?  tljc  people  thereof  (hall 
mourneoucr  tt,anD  the  I!  p2iefts  thereof 
that  reioytcD  on  it ,  fo2  the  glojy  thereof, 
betaufc  it  is  DcpartcD  from  it. 

6  3}t(halibtalfotaneDbnto^ffy^ 
ria  fo2  a  p2efcntto  *  Bmg  ^lareb:  & 
phwini  (haiireccuie  fhamc,  aiiD^frael 
fhall  beafhanicDofliis  ovbnctounfeli. 

7  3sfo2&amaria,ljerlkingiscut 
off  as  the  tome  bponttljcttiatcr. 

8  XIie  high  plates  alfo  of  3uen,thc 
fmneof  ^fracl,  fliaiibcDcftroycD  :the 
th02ncanD  tlje  thilHe  u)ailcomc  bpon 
tljcir  altars  *  anDtljcy  fljaufay  to  the 
mountames ,  Coucr  bs  ;  anD  to  the 
ljtllcs,faiionbs. 

9  flD  Ufracl ,  njou  haft  finntD  from 
the  Daycs  of  ©ibeah :  there  they  ftoob : 
the  battcll  in  ©ibeah  agamft  tljc  thiV 
D2cn  of  iniqumc  Did  not  oucrtaUt 
tljcm. 

10  icisfti  my  Deftrcthat 3  fl)OiUD  cha= 
(hfc  tljcm,anD  the  people  (hall  be  gathc- 
reD  agamQ  tljcm,||  ibhcn  tljey  fljail  bmb 
thcmfelucs  m  tljcir  tibo  furrottics. 

11  anD  tfphjaim  is  as  an  heifer  that 
is  taught  and  louctlj  to  trcaD  out  the 
c  >rne,  but^paffcD  oucrbpon  tljcrfaire 
nctUe :  3  ibill  mabc  <£ph?aun  to  riDc : 
•JuDah  fljaii  piout ,  and  3Jacob  fljail 
b2catichiscIoDS. 

1 2.  5>otti  to  your  fclucs  in  rigljtcouf 

neffe,  reapeinmcrcic  :*b2eafecbpyour 

failolb 


Or,  avtnt 

npjmg  the 

fmite  vhtch 

gmeth. 


\Reh.ft+ 
tuett  or 

ftAniing  v 

m,tgts. 

,j  Or  fa  hath 

diitided 

their  heart. 

t  Htb.  b:- 

head. 


I  C'ie#u- 
rtmt, 


'Chip.y 
•3- 


face  of  the 


MtYi.i.  19. 

I'JC.XJ.JO. 

rcu.6.16. 
and  9.6. 


||  Or,  yvbett 
[jhtUbind 
theft  far 
their  twj 
tnafertph 
ons'y  or  ui 
theirtrryhj- 
■■tt  At  ant. 
\  Hcb.  the 
beam*  of 
her  necKS- 


Iiraelvnthankcrull.  Chap.xj.xij.  YVaitonGod, 


*  l. King.!  S 
>9 


\Hcbrlh; 
em'// of  your 


Mat.  i. 


\  HebSift 
vp. 


|  Hcbriage- 
t'oer  they  ex 
a/ ted  not. 


'Gene.  19 


failom  gcounb :  foz « is  tunc  tofccRcthc 
1L  o  is  ©,  till  he  tome  anb  ra:nc  rtohtc; 
onfuclTcbponyou. 

13  Jf'ehaucplomcomuUcbncffc,  yet 
hanc  rcapco  uuquine,  ye  haue  eaten  me 
fnntcof  lies :  bccaufcthoubibfttrufttn 
thy  may,  mthcmultituoc  of  fhynugh 
tie  men. 

14.  Xhcrcfojc  (hall  a  tumult  ante 
among  thy  people ,  ano  all  tin;  fo:^ 
treffes  (hail  bee  fpoileb,  as  5>halman 
fpoileb  *  ffieth  atbel  m  tlie  bap  of  bat 
tell :  tlie  mother  urns  bafbeb  in  pieces 
bponherchilb:cn. 

15  S>o(hali25ethclboebntoyou,bc; 
caufe  of  tyour  great  UKCKcbncffc:  ma 
morning  (hail  the  Umg  of  Jfracl  be  bt; 
terly  cutoff. 

CHAP.   XI. 

1  The  ingratitude  of  Ifvael  vnto  God  for  his  be- 
nefits. 5  His  Judgement.  S  Gods  mercv 
toward  them. 

fi®j»fe5i|se$m  3ifracl  was  a  chilbc, 
$£  then  3  lottcb  him ,  anb 
"'  *  cailcb  my  fount  out  of  £ 

^SVPf- 

€S  1  As  they  cailcb  them, 
fo  they  ment  from  them :  thcyfacrifiecb 
bnto  Saalun,  aim  burnt  inccufc  togra 
uen  images. 

3  3  taught  CphMim  alfo  to  goc,  ta 
lung  them  by  thcic  armes  :  but  they 
(mem  notthatgjhcalco  them. 

4  3  Dzcm  them  nnth  tozbs  of  a  man, 
mtthbaubsofloue,anb3Jmastotuem 
as  they  that  t  take  off  the  yoke  on  their 
iaibes.ano  3  lasb  meat  bnto  thtm. 

5  C  l)c  (hall  not  rcturuc  into  the 
lanb  of  <£gypt .  but  the  ,3iTv2ian  (hall  be 
his  mng.becaufc  they  refufeb  to  rcturuc 

6  3nb  the  fiuom  (hall  abibe  on  his 
cities,  anbfhallconfumc  his  branches, 
anb  bcuoure  them,  becaufe  of  their  ottrn 
tounfcls. 

7  3lnbmy  people  arc  bent  to  bathe 
fUbing  from  mcc :  though  they  calleb 
them  to  the  moft  $sgh ,  t  none  at  all 
tboulbetaitium. 

8  i?om  (hall  3  guic  thec  bp,eplua 
inn  how  fhail  3  ocl'.ucr  thee ,  31frael; 
horb  (hall  3  malie  thee  as  *  3bmah? 
hov.  fiiau  3)  fetthec  as  zeboim?  mine 
heart  ts  turncb  iDithm  nice,  my  repett 
tings  are  tuubleb  together. 

9  31  VUall  not  erecutc  the  ficrccncs  of 
mine  anger,  3  mill  not  rcturnc  to  be 
ftroyCplnann,  for  3*  ■""Cob ,  anb  not 
man,thcl?olyDuc'.nthcmib(tofthcc, 


anb  J  mm  not  enter  into  the  nttc. 

10  Xheyfbaimamc  after  the  |L©k»: 
he  (hail  roarc  itKc  a  lyon :  mhen  he  Ojau 
roarc,  then  the  chilbrcn  (hall  ttemblc 
from  the  wiQ. 

1 1  Xhcy  (ball  tremble  as  a  barb  out 
of  €gypt,anb  as  a  bouc  out  of  the  lanb 
of  atffpaa  :  anb  3  mill  place  them  in 
their  houfes,faith  the  ILoisjd. 

ii  epbraun  compaffeth  mcc  about 
mith  lies, aim  the  houfeof  3lfraei  mnh 
bcceit:  but  3  ubah  pet  ruicth  mith  00b, 
aim  is  faithfuii  |]  mith  the  faints. 

CHAP.     XII. 

A  reprootc  of  Ephraim  ,  [udah,  and  facob. 
5  By  former  fauours  he  exhorteth  to  repen- 
tance. 7  EphiaimsfinnesprouokeGod. 

:  0h?aimfccbcthoumiubc, 


W&§  anb  foiiomcth  after  the 
?ZXy®  €aftmmbc :  hec  batly  ui- 
vj^;i-/f^  trcafcth  lies  anb  bcfolafc 
ii/4*»^  on,  anb  they  boe  ma&e  a 
coucnantnnth  the  ^(Tp.nans,  anboylc 
iscanebmtocgypt. 

1  Xhc  %  o  15  r>  hath  alfo  a  contro^ 
ucrfic  mith  3mbah,  anb  mill  t  punifh 
gjacob  accommg  to  his  mayes,  atcoz- 
bmg  to  Ijisbomgs  mm  he  recompense 
him. 

5  €  l?f c  tooUc  his  biothcr  *  bp  the 
heele  m  the  mombcanb  by  Ijts  ftrcngtlj 
hct*l)abpomcrlbithGob. 

4.  J»ca,hehabpomerouerthc3ui' 
gel  anb  p^cuaileb:  hee  mentanb  mabc 
fupplication  bnto  him :  he  founb  hmi in 
*  ffiethtl,  anb  there  htfpaRemitlibs. 

5  <eucn  then  ©15  id  eob  of  hods, 
the  n  ©  15  p  1^  his*  mcmo?iail. 

6  Xhctcfo2CturncthoutothyC5ob: 
liccpc  mercieanb  uibgcmcnt ,  anb  malt 
on  thy  ©ob  continually. 

7  C  i-'c  is  1 1  a  mcrchant,thc  balances 
of  beent  a.e  m  \)i2  hanb :  Ijce  loucrlj  to 
iloppieffc. 

s  ^nb  eph:aunfaib,^ct3l atnbt 
come  rich,  3  haucfounb  mec  out  fub 
fiance :  l|  in  all  my  labours  they  (hall 
rmbc  none  uuqiuuc  m  mec ,  t  tl;at  were 
fmue. 

9     3tlb  3J  that  am  tI)C  %  0 15  V>  thy 

(5ob  from  the  lanbe  of  egypt ,  mill  yet 
mafccthcctobmcllmtabernaclcs>asin 
tljcbayesof  thefolemncfeaft. 

io  3  hauc  alfo  fpolten  by  the  pro- 
phets ,  anb  3  haue  multiplieb  bifions, 
ano  bfeb  ftmiUtubcs,  t  by  the  miuifteric 
ofthepjophets. 


[\0r, ■*,<!, 
ihemejlholy 


*Gcnc.25. 

id. 

|  Htl>.  ViUA 

prmce,arl>e- 
hiutdhim- 
fclft  prtneeh 

*Gcn.32. 
>4- 

•Gcn.35. 
9,10. 
'E10.3.  I J 


[  Or, Canaan 
11  OrJiccvtt 


\\Or,allmy 
l-tbourl fuf- 
p:f  me  no:  : 
hcefhall 

ment  oftm- 
ejttme  m 
jrbom  is 

;/'  ne 

tHeijrikh 


:    ,     - 
LnJ. 


Godonelyfaueth.       Hofea.         Caluesofthclips. 


•Clap  4. 
1  vmJ  y- 
'S- 
•Gcn.J8 

5- 

•Gene. 19. 
:o,:8. 
•Exod.  'l. 
50,  ^  1.  and 
',■>■ 


t  Hrbr  »i(/j 
•'■itterHcjfei. 
\Htbr 
blwdi. 


uAdf  to 


\OT,thef*- 
crtficcri  of 
men. 


'I6.4j.tl. 

[hap. 11. 
10. 


1  Heir, 
draught  i. 


t  Bebrthc 

1/?  ej  the 
field. 

^Heh.us 
thy  he/pe. 


1 1    Is  there  miCMltlC  111  <5\ltSQ  i  filtely 

they  arcbamtie,  they  facriuee  bullocbs 
«i*Oilgai,Vca  their  altars  are  as  heapes 
in  the  fur  r  oibes  of  the  ftclbs. 

ii  3tnD3jacob*fleDmto  the  coutv 
trey  of  £>yna,  anb  3Jfrael  feraebfoj'a 
lbife,anb  fojaibifehcltcpt  fheepe. 

15  3lnb*by  apjophcttbcfLsDK© 
b20ugbt3Jfracloutof€gypt,anbbya 
j&ophctibashcpjefcrucb. 

14.  epbiaim  pjouofeeb  Dim  to  atv 
ger,  tmoft  bitterly :  therefore  (ball  he 
icaucbistbloob  bponhim,  anb  his  re* 
p:och  (hall  bis  TLofr  rcturnc  bnto  bun. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Ephraims  glory  ,  by  1  eafon  of  idolatry ,  va- 
nifheth.  s,  Gods  anger  tor  then  vnkindnes. 
9  A  proimteotGodsnicrcic.  15  Amdge- 
ment  tor  rebellion. 

D?cn€pb2aimfpaUc,trcm 
bung ,  be  cralteb  bunfclfcj 
m3Jfrael,  but,lbben  be  of 
fcndebmz5aai,bebteb. 
1  3nbuo\bttbcyfutnc 
mow  anb  mojc ,  anb  bauc  mabc  tbem 
molten  images  of  their  filucr,and  ibolcs 
accojbtng  to  tljjcitr  olbne  bnberftan; 
bmg,  all  of  tt  the  tbojbc  of  the  craftcf* 
men:  they  fay  of  tbem  ,  ?Lettbc||mcn 
that  facrifice,feilTc  tl)c  talncs. 

5  %\)ttefo;c they  (balbcas  the  moz* 
mngcloub,anbastbccarlybclbitpafc 
fctbanmy ,  as  the  tbaffe  tbatisbmien 
ttntb  a  ibbitlcibmbe  out  of  the  ftoo?e, 
anb  as  tljc  fmobe  out  of  the  chimney. 

4-  Pet  3J  am  the  2L©  is  ©thy  <Sob 
*fcom  the  lanb  of  €gypt,anb  thou  (halt 
bnoibno  (5ob,butme:foztheiei!,nofa* 
utourbefibemc. 

5  C  libtbtmoib  thee  in  the  lbtlbcr* 
nefTcm  the  lanb  oft  great  brought. 

6  3cco,JDuig  to  their  pafturcfoibcrc 
tbcyfUlcb :  they  lbcre  filled,  anb  their 
heart  ibas  ejralttb :  therefore  hauc  they 
forgotten  me. 

7  Xhcrefo2c3Jnull  bee  bnto  them 
as  a  Hion ,  as  a  Jtcoparb  by  the  U>ay 
ibiU35obfeructiiem. 

8  3Jjbillmcctthcm asabeatcthat 
isbcrcaueb  of  herwhdpes,  anb  lbill  rent 
the  ball  of  their  heart,  anb  there  lbill  3 
beuourethem  libe  a  JUon : I  the  liuibr 
bcaft  (bail  tcare  tbem. 

9  C  £>3frael ,  thou  baftbeftroicb 
thy  fclfc,but  m  me  t  is  thine  helpe. 

10  "5  ibillbc  thy  Iking :  Ybhcrc  u  anV 
other  that  may  fauc  thee  in  all  thy  cities; 


anbthylJuoges  of  ibhom  tboufaibft, 
<5iue  me  a  Bmg  anb  juices ; 

ii  3Jgauctbeea*Hinginminean* 
ger,  anb  toobe  him  aibay  in  my  ibjatb. 

ii  Xbc  intquitie  of  Cphjaim  is 
bounb  bp :  his  finne  is  bib. 

13  XhefoHoibcsofatraueilmgibO'' 
man  (bail  come  bponhim,  beisanbn* 
•Mcfonnc.fozbcfboulbnotftaytiong 
m  the  place  of  the  bjcatnng  foojfb  of 
chilbjen. 

14  31  lbill  ranfomc  them  from  the 
t  poibcr  of  the  graue :  3  Will  rebceme 
them  from  beach :  *  jD  bcati),5I  ibillbc 
thy  plagues,)©  graue,  3J  ttnll  be  thy  ot- 
ftruttion,  repentance  (ball  be  hib  from 
mine  eyes. 

15  ftXhougbhcbefruitfullamong 
hisbjctbmC  an  eaftttnnbc  (hall  come, 
tlK  lbmbc  of  the  %.  o  k  e>  (hall  comebp 
from  the  ibtlberncffc ,  anb  his  fp?ing 
(hail  become  b?ic ,  anb  his  fountaine 
fljaibcbjtebbp :  he  fljail  fpotlc  tljc  ttca* 
fur  c  of  all  tpieafant  tocffeis. 

i6  s>amarta  Ojail  become  befolate, 
fojfljc  hath  rebelleb  againft  hcr©ob: 
they  fliali  fall  by  the  fiuo?b :  their  in* 
fants  (haibe  banieb  in  pieces,  anb  their 
Vbomen  \bitlj  thilbe  fl;albe  ript  bp. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

An  cxhoi  cation  to  repentance.   4  A  promiie 
ofGodsblelsing. 

3ifrael,rcturncbnto  the 
II©  k3d  thy  <sob  i  fiw 
thou  haft  fallen  by  rt)tne 
uuquitic. 

z  Xahcibithyouibozbs, 
anb  turnc  to  the  ^Loisd,  fay  bnto  hun, 
Xabc  aibay  all  iniquitic ,  anb  Hrecciuc 
vs  gcaciouQy :  fo  lbill  Vbcc  renber  the 
*calucsofourlips 

$  3if(hnr  ftiaii  notfaue  bs,  tbeibill 
not  ribc  bponhojfcs,  neither  ibiUlbec 
fay  any  mojc  to  the  iboiU  of  our  hanbS, 
Yec  are  our  gobs :  fozuuhec  tljc  father 
leffefinbcthmerne. 

4-  C^UnllbealctheirbacRflibing, 
3lU)ill  lone  them  freely:  fo:  mine  an* 
ger  is  turncb  avbay  from  him. 

5  3JibilbcasthcbeVbbnto31fracl: 
hccfball  llgroib  as  the  lillic,  anb  t  call 
fo  02th  his  r  00  tes  as  llcbanon. 

6  it)is  b2anches  fliall  t  fp;eab ,  anb 
his  beautic  fliaibt  83  the  oliuc  tree ,  anb 
hisfmcliasUcbauon. 

7  Xhcy  that  blbcll  bnbet  his  &)& 
boibfbailrcturnc :  they  (hall  rctuueas 
the  tome,  ?  ||groib  as  the  bine,the  llfent 

there* 


'  i.Sam.  8. 
!  >nd  15. 
2;.  and  16. 


\Hibr.a 

time. 


\Hdr.tht 

hand. 

•  i.Cor,!;, 

55- 


12. 


\Hebr.vif- 
ftll  cfdf 

fir?. 


\\Or,£iuc 

•Hcbr.13. 
'5- 


\Htb.fir>kf. 


\Hclr 
It. 


!b*u 


;Or,lUp>m. 
nMl. 


Great  famine, 


Ch; 


ip.J. 


id  a 


and  arou 


\Hch.  the 
reftdut  of 
thepalmcr- 
worrm. 


XHet.Uid 

m)  hi"r" 

forabur- 


thereof  (habeas  ttjc  nunc  of  fLcbanon. 
8  tffpl)jatni  fhaii  lay ,  nDijat  haue  33 
to  Doe  an?  mo;c  ttnth  iDolcs?  3  bauc 
hearD  him,  ano  obferucb  htm :  3)  am  unc 
agreeneftrrctrcc,  fcomnie  istfipfrnitc 
founo. 


9  iBho  is  Vbifc ,  ant)  lice  (hall  bnocr- 
llano  thefc  things ;  pniocnt,  ano  hee 
(bail  tmoib  them?  fo;tbe  wapesof  the 
?L  so  « 3?  are  right ,  ano  the  tuft  (ball 
malfte  in  them :  but  tbctranfgrcflburs 
(ball fall  therein. 


10  EL. 


C  H  A  P.    I. 

i  Ioel.dedaringfundry  lodgements  ofGod, ex- 
horted] to  obfei  lie  them,  S  and  toniGimie. 
1 4  He  prcfci  ibeth  a  laft,  tor  complaint. 

a$e  ruojo  of  the 
JNLoisiDtbatcamc 
to  "Joel  the  tonne 
of  pcttjucl. 

z  ideate  this, 
pecolDcmcn,  anD 
gutc  eacc ,  all  pec 
inhabitants  of  the 
lanDc :  $atb  this 
been  tn  pour  Dapcs,  0;  cucn  in  the  Dapcs 
of  pour  fathers; 

3  Xell  vt  pour  cbtlo;cn  of  it ,  ano  let 
ponrthtltycn  ceil  their  chtlDKn,ano  their 
cbtlD;cn  another  generation. 

4.  txbatibbicbthc  palmer  ttiomie 
hart)  lcft,hath  thcloruft  eaten ;  ano  that 
tthiththc  lorufthath  left,  hath  thecal 
Ker-tt)o;me  eaten:  anothat  ibbtcb  the 
canfter  lbozme  hath  left,  hath  the  cater- 
pillar eaten. 

5  3tt)altepeD;unt$arDS,anDlbecpc, 
anD  boiblc  all  pec  Dnnhcrs  of  ttnnc,  be- 
caufc of  the  neib  ttwic,  fo?it  is  rut  off 
from  pour  mouth. 

6  ;fo;ananoniscomebpbponmp 
lanbc,  ftrong ,  ano  tbitbout  number, 
mbofe  teeth  are  the  teeth  ofa  Ipon ,  ano 
he  hath  thechccbe-tcethof  a  great  Ipon. 

7  $cbatblatbempbtneujaftc:anb 
tbarfeeb  mp  figgc  tree: bee  bath  maoc 
it  tleane  barcano  caft  it  ainap,  the  b;an 
ches  thereof  arc  maocibhite. 

8  C  lament  lifcc  a  b:rginc  gtrDcb 
tbitl)  facKcctoth  to;  the  bufbanb  of  her 
poiid). 

9  XbcmeateoffnnganDtbcD;uiBC 

offering  ts  cut  off  from  the  houfe  of  the 


IL  &  is  © ,  the  0;tcftcs  the  %  0  is  jd  & 
miniftersmourne. 

10  Xhc  ftcio  is  maftcD ,  the  lanDe 
mounicti)  fo:  the  co;nc  is  ttiaftco :  the 
nctt)  itoinc  is ;;  d;icd  bp ,  the  optc  languid 
fheth. 

1 1  iBcpceaniamcii,  <D  pec  hufbano- 
men :  hoiblc,£>  pccbmc-Djcftcrs,  foi 
the  Vbljcate  ano  fo;  tbebarlep,  becaufc 
the  hanicfiofthcficlDispcnfhcO. 

ii  ZbcbtncisDncDbp.anDtbcftggc 
tree  langiu(l)cth,the  pomegranate  tree, 
the  palme  tree  alfo  ano  the  apple  tree, 
euen  allthetrccs  of  the  ficioare  tbttbc- 
r  co :  becaufc  top  is  lbitbcrcb  aibap  from 
thefonncsofmen. 

13  (StrDpour  fciues,anD  lament,  pec 
0;tcfts :  holblcpc  nuniftcrs  of  the  31- 
tar:comc,ltc  all  night m  facbccloth ,pt 
nuniftcrs  of  mp  <3oD :  fo;  the  meat  offc- 
nuganDthcDnnHcoffcrtugisrbtthhol 
Den  from  the  houfe  of  pour  Gob. 

14.  <c*5>ancnfie  pec  a  faft:  taiia||foj 
icnmcaffcmblp:  gather  the  ciocrs,  and 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  lano  into  the 
houfe  of  the  Hotw  pour  00b ,  anD 
crpbntotlKHoisiD: 

15  31ias  fo;  the  bap :  fo;  "the  Dap  of 
the  JLotf  £>  1  at  hano,  anb  as  a  be- 
ftruction  from  the  aimtghtic  (ball  it 
come. 

16  3Js  not  the  mcatc  nit  off  bcfo;e 
pour  epes,  yea  top  anb  glabncffc  from 
the  houfe  of  our  <5oD; 

17  Hhc  t  fccDc  ts  rotten  ImDcr  their 
dobs :  the  garners  arc  latbc  bcfolate : 
the  barncs  arc  b;ol«n  oolitic  fo;  the 
comcisilutbcrco. 

is  l?oii)  Doe  the  bcaftes  gronc?  the 
hcarosof  cattcliatcpcrplcrco ,  becaufc 
thcphaucnopafturcpca  theftorttes  of 
fliecpc  arc  maoc  bcfolate. 

;Tfff  »  O 


led. 


'Ctu.l.ij. 
I  Or.tbrjcf 
■tflrautc. 


Ifai.  13.6. 


tH'l-Sr. 


Dcuouringfirc.  loci.  Rentthe  heart. 


\\Or.han- 
latum. 


Or,cn>ttl 


I  rttt.  °f 

and  Jiitera- 
lutrt. 


\  Hch.pt. 


[Or.  dart. 


"Ifai.1!. 
lo.excch. 

Ji.l. 


19  £>|L©E©,tott)cett)iU3Jcne 
fo;thefirehathbcuoure&the||patturcs 
ofthcinilbcrncfrc ,  anb  the  flame  hath 
burnt  all  the  trees  oft!je  ficlb. 

io  %$i  beads  of  the  ficlb  trie  alto 
bnto  thee  :foz  the  ttuers  of  maters  are 
b:icbbp,anbthcfitehathbeuourebthe 
patturesofthcibilbernefre. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  He  fheweth  vnto  Zion  the  terriblencfie  ot 
Gods  judgement,  it  He  exhorteth  to  re- 
pentance, 15  Prefcnbeth  a  taft,  18  Pro- 
mifeth  a  biefsing  thereon.  11  He  comforted) 
Zion  with  prefent,   18   and  future  blefsings. 

Horn  vet  the  ||  trumpet  in 
Zion,  ffounbanalarme 
in  mp  holp  mountamt :  let 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
_  Ts^s^sa.  lanb  trcmblctfoJthcbap  of 
tlje  H©is  jd  tomcth ,  fo?  it  is  me  at  hanb ; 
z  ^bapofbarttencffcanbofgioo^ 
mmeffe,  a  bap  of  tloubs  anb  of  thicRc 
barKeneffe,as  tlje  mo?nutgfp?eab  bpon 
the  mountaiucs:a  great  people  anb  a 
Qrong,tiierc  hath  not  becue  cuct  the 
hue,  neither  (hall  be  an?  mo?c  after  it, 
eucn  to  the  pcrrsf of  manp  generations, 
j  2ifircbcuourcth  before  them,  anb 
bthmbtljem  a  flame  burncth:  the  lanb 
1$  as  the  garben  of  €ben  befojc  them, 
anb  behtnb  thcmabcfolatcmilberncs, 
pcaanb  nothing  fhail  cfcape  them. 

4  Xheappcaranceofthemisasthe 
appearanceofho?feS;anbashojfemen, 
fo  (hall  thep  runne. 

5  ILtfcc  the  noife  of  tharets  on  the 
tops  of  mountames  fljali  tbcp  leape, 
liuethenoifcof  a  flame  of  fire  that  bc^ 
uour  cth  the  (nibble,  as  a  ftrong  people, 
fctmbattellarap. 

6  asefozc  their  fate  the  people  (ball 
be  much  pauicb :  all  faces  (ball  gather 
tbiaclmcffc. 

7  Xhep  (hall  runne  hue  mightv 
men,  thep  (bail  clime  the  lball  Wie  men 
of  lbarre,  and  tbcp  (hall  march  eucrp 
one  on  his  \bapes,  anb  thep  itjail  not 
bzeauc  their  ranUes. 

8  ^cither  (ball  one  tbmft  another, 
thep  fhail  ttmlUc  cuerp  one  m  his  path: 
anb  iftjrjtti  thep  fall  topon  tlje  ||  ftoo.ib, 
thep  (ball  not  be  lbounbcb. 

9  Xhcp  (bail  runne  to  anbfro  in  the 
ritte: thep  mall  runne  toponthe  lball: 
thep  (hall  clime  bp  topon  the  houfes : 
thep  (hall  enter  in  at  the  romborbes, 
liHcatheefr. 

10  Xhc  *  earth  Cljall  c\uatec  befo?e 


them ,  the  heauens  (ball  tremble ,  the 
<£>un  $  the  QjJoone  (ball  be  bacKc ,  $  the 
flarresfhall  roitbbttlbc  their  fljinmg. 

n  3inb  the  %  ©  a  T2>  (ball  utter  his 
bopec  befojc  his  ar  tnic ,  fo:  his  campc  is 
berp  great :  foihe  is  ftrong  ttjat  crccu*  | 
tcth  his  ttwb  :  fo:  the '  bap  of  the 
?L€>i3©  is  great  anb  berp  tcrnble,anb 
ibbocanabiocit? 

12.  CXbcrefojc  alfo  now ,  faith  the 
Hokjd,  *  turnc  pec  eucn  to  me  ttnth  all 
pour  heart,  anb  luitb  fatting,  anb  \bith 
Vbecpmg,anb  tbtth  mourning. 

13  3Jnb  rent  pour  heart  ano  not  pour 
garments;  anb  turnc  bnto  the  fLcia© 
pout  ©ob :  fo?  he  is  *  gracious  anb  met* 
cifull,  floib  to  anger,  anb  of  great  ruid- 
ncfre,anbrcpcntcthhunofthc  cuill. 

14  *ii9hoBnoibeth  'fbclimircturnc 
anbrepent,  anb  icaucablcfftugbchinb 
hnn ,  eucn  a  meatc  offnnganbabnnbc 
offrtng bnto  the  %  ©  m  ppour  d5ob  < 

15  €  25iom  the  trumpet  in  Zion, 
*  fanctifie  afaft,  caila  folcmnc  affcmblp. 

i6  (Sathet  the  people :  fanctifie  the 
congregation :  attcmblc  the  elbers :  ga= 
thee  the  chilbjcn,  anb  thofc  that  fucfec 
the  bieafts  :  let  the  bnbtgroomc  goc 
fonh  ofhis  chamber,  anbthctytuc  out 
ofhcrclofct. 

17  fLetthcpUctts,  tbcminittcrsof 
thclLoia©,  ibeepebctVbcencthcpojth 
anbthcaitar,?lcttbcmfap;S>parcthp 
people  DHo  kjd,  anb  gtucnotthme 
heritage  to  repjoch  i  that  the  heathen 
fhoulb  ||  rule  ouct  them :  *  natjercfoje 
(houlb  tbcp  fap  among  the  people, 
nahrrc  is  their  Gob? 

is  <L  Xhcn  Hull  tlje  %  sd  ih  id  be  iea* 
lousfo?  bis  lanb,  anb  pine  his  people. 

19  J*ea  the  %  01s©  lbill  anfiocrc 
anb  fap  bnto  his  people :  iScholb,  3 
lbillfcnb  pou  come  anb  lbinc,  anb  oplc, 
anb  pec  (hall  be  fatifficb  thercttnth :  anb 
3Jtbill  no  mojemaae  pouarepjocha- 
mong  the  heathen. 

20  25ut  31  lbill  renujuc  farrc  off  from 
poutheno;th.2cnarmie,  J  lbill  bjiue  htm 
into  a  lanb  barren  anb  bcfoiatc,  with 
his  face  totbarb  the  eatt  lira ,  anb  his 
htnbcrpart  toibarbs  the  btntoft&ca, 
anb  his  ttinbe  fhail  come  bp,  anb  his  ill 
fauour  (hall  come  bp ,  becaufc  t  ijehart) 
bone  great  things. 

21  Cifcarcnot,£>lanb,bcgiabanb 
rc(opce:foithc  H£>KpU)illbocgreat 
things. 

22  ffic  not  afraib ,  pee  beafts  of  tlic 
ficttufozthepatturcs  ofthcIDiIoerneffc 

boc 


Mtr.u.  j, 
zcpL  1. 1  J, 


*Elo,l.  54. 
6  plal.86. 
3  5. ion. 4.:. 


•Io 


.3.0. 


•Chip  1. 


\\Or,vfc* 
byword  J- 
giunji  them. 
*Pfai.4J. 


ind79. 
lo^ndi 15 


\Htb.bre 
hath  fa? 
nifiedlojoe. 


iThetcrribled 


ay. 


Ch 


\Ortalu~ 

chcrofri^h 
teoufatfe. 
\  Hcb.accor- 
ttingto  ri^li 
teOHjne[[ts. 
•Leuit.jtf 
J4.dcut.14. 
14- 


'IfM4.8. 

acts  2. 1 7. 


•Chi 


3'5 


•Roui.io. 
'J- 


Doc  fpung.foz  the  tree  bcarcttj  ijee  fnut, 
the  figtrccaiiD  the  bine  Hoc  peelD  their 
ftrengttj. 

23  26c  glaD  tljcn,yc  cljilD2cn  of  zion, 
anD  retoyce  in  the  %  o  k  ©  pour  ©00 : 
fo«r  l)c  hath  stum  you  the  Hfomiecramc 
t  moDeratcly,anD  he  *ibill  cerate  to  conic 
Dottmc  fojyouthcramc,  the  former 
tatncf  tlic  latter  came  m  the  fitft  mom!.. 

24.  3lnD  the  floods  fljau  bee  full  of 
ibhcatc ,  anD  tljc  fats  fbail  oucrflolbc 
HHthttnncanDoylc. 

25  3nD  3  ttnll  rcfto^e  to  you  tljc 
yccrcs  that  tljc  locuft  hath  eaten,  tljc 
canKcrlb02inc,anDtIjccatctptllcr,aiiD 
tljc  palmer  Uwmc ,  my  great  armic 
lbljich'^fmtamongyou. 

26  3luD  ye  (ball  eate  m  pietitic,  anD 
bcfati(fieD,atiDp.2aifc  the  jBamcof  the 
H*kb  your  (50D,  that  hath  Dealt 
lbotiDcroufly  urnl)  you :  ant  my  people 
IballncuerbeatbameD. 

27  3lnD  yc  fljal  Knott)  that  II  am  m 
tlje  mtDlt  of  3Jfracl ,  anD  that  3  am  tljc 
Hois©  your  <3oD,anD  none  clfc:  anD 
my  people  (ball  ncuet  be  afljameD. 

2s  C3lnD  it  fljall  tome  to  paffc  after; 
lDarD ,  that  gj  ttnll*  poityc  out  my  S>pt 
ritbpouallflefb,  anD  your  fonncs  anD 
your  Daughters  (ball  prophetic,  your 
olD  mm  (ball  Dzcame  Dzeamcs ,  your 
yong  mm  (ball  fee  bifions. 

29  3nDalfo  Upon  the  fcraants,anD 
topon  the  rjanDmaiDs  in  thofc  Daycs 
IbUl  3  pottnc  out  my  Spirit. 

30  3nD3,ttnllfbett)luonDcrsmtbc 
heauens,  anD  in  the  cartlj ,  blooD  anD 
fire,  anD  pillars  offmofoc. 

31  *Xbc  £mtmc  (ball  be  turncD  into 
DarBcnc(ft,anDthci5)oonetntoblooD, 
befoic  tljc  great  anD  tljc  terrible  Day  of 
the  Ho  is  ©come. 

32  3nD  it  (hall  come  to  paffe  tha 
*Vbbofocuer  mall  call  on  the  jftame  of 
the  Ho  is©,  fl)all  bceDcliucrcD:fo2m 
mount  Zion  anDin^erufalcm  fbalbc 
Dcliuerance,  as  the  Co  is©  hatljfaiD, 
anD  in  the  remnant,  tbbom  the  Hois© 
(ball  call. 

CHAP.   III. 

1  Gods  nidgemcnts  as;ainft  die  enemies  of  his 
people-  9  Godwill  beknowen  in  Ins  iudge- 
ment.  1S  His  blefsingvpon  the  Church. 

-$<%  £>2bebolD,  in  thofc  Daycs 

»$¥*  anD  in  that  tunc,  tbhcngj 

M  fljail  bung  agamc  the  tap 

^Jf  tfuitie  of  ^tiDaljanD  3Je 

1  rufalcm, 


ap.iij.         Theharueftripc 


2  3  vuu  alfo  gather  all  nations,ano 

ttnll  turns  them  Dottmc  into  the  bai 

ley  of  3Jcho  (bapbat,anD  ttnl  picaD  ttuth 

tljem  there  fo2  my  people.anD  fo;  my  lie 

ntagegjfracl,  lbhomtheyhaiic  fcattc 

rcD  among  tljc  nations,  ano  parteo  mv 
latiD. 

3  2htD  they Ijauc  caft  lots  foz my  pco; 
plcatiD  Ijauc  giuen  a  boy  fo2  a  harlot, 
ano  folbc  a  girle  fo;  ttmic,  tljat  they 
might  D2tnttc. 

+  JJcaanDttujatljaueyctoDottnth 
me,  £>  Xyze  anD  ZtDon  ,  anD  an  tljc 
coafts  of  i&alemne  <  ttnll  ye  rcnoer  mcc 
a  rctompentc  <  anD  if  yc  rccompmfe  me, 

fiotftly  jnd  fpecDily  lbill  gi  rcturneyour 
recompenfe  bpou  your  olDnc  IjcaD. 

5  25ccaufe  yee  Ijaue  fatten  my  filucr 
anD  my  gold,  anD  hauc  caricD  into  your 
temples  my  gooDly  t  picafant  things. 

6  Xbe  cbtKum  alfo  of  3JuDah  anD 
tbccbiUwcn  of  3Jcrufalcm  0aucycfolD 
bnto  t  tljc  ©renans ,  tljat  ycc  might  r  t- 
mouctbemfarrcfrom  their  b02Dcr. 

7  25cljolD,3lrbillraifcthctnoutof 
the  place  lbbither  ^tz  haue  foiD  them, 
anD  mil  rctume  your  r ccompcnce  bpon 
yotiroiDnchcaD. 

3  ^nD  3  TbtH  fell  your  fonncs  anD 
your  Daughters  mto  tljehanDc  of  the 
cIjtlD?cn  of  3mDah ,  anD  tljcy  fbaii  feu 
them  to  tljeSabcans,  to  a  people  farrc 
off,  fo?  the  %  o  is  ©  hath  fpofcen  it. 

9  C  ^zoclaimc  yc  tijts  among  tlic 
gentiles:  t  prepare  Djarte,lbabc  Dp  the 
nughtic  men,  letaiitljc  men  of  Vbarre 
Djarbnccre,  let  tljcm  come  bp. 

10  *  25cate  your  plolbe  fharcs  into 
fuiojDS.anDyoucllpmninghooUcsinto 
fpearcs,letthe  Vbcahe  fay,3J  am  ftrong. 

11  StUemblc  your  felucs,  anD  come 
all  ye  heathen,  anD  gather  your  felucs 
together  rounD  about :  thither  llcaufc 
thy  migljtic  ones  to  come  Dolbnc,  j© 
Hois©. 

12  Hcttbe  heathen  be  lbaUencD.anD 
comebptothcDallcyofJeljonjaphat: 
fo2thcrc  \btll3ffit  to  lUDgcaiitijehea 
tfj  en  rounD  about. 

13  *l&ntycintfjencftle,fo2tbcharuclr 
is  ripe ,  come,  get  you  DoiDnc ,  foz  the 
picflcisfuil,  the  fats  ouerfloUjcfo;  tljc 
vbicftcDnelfcissreat. 

14  09uitttuDts,multitiiDcstn  the  bai- 
ley of  II  Dcnfiou :  fo?  p  Day  of  tljc  Hois© 
is  nccre  in  the  bailey  of  oenfton. 

15 1Cljc*S»unne  anD  the  SOoonc  fljall 
bcDarhmeD,anD  the  ftarres  (baUibitb 
D:a\b  their  fljiuing. 

jFfff  2         16  Xhe 


t  Hrb.  ih, 
(enna  of  the 
Grtmau. 


f  Hi i  fie- 
aifit. 


"10. 1.4. 


\\0r,  Ihr 
Urdfiill 
bnn£  djvnr 


*  RctK- 14 

'5- 


||  Or,  tsit'i- 
lijnt9r  thre 
fimr. 
•Chi.J.jl 


Againftth 


e  enemies 


A 


mos. 


of  the  Church. 


•icrc.25. 

jo.amos  1 

2. 

t  Hi'vr  place 
ofrepatre,  or 
harbour. 


\Btir.  ho- 

limp. 

•RtucUl. 

*7- 

*  Amos  9. 
»3- 


'Zccli.t4. 
5- 

•Icrc.2  5. 
;o.iod  3. 
18. 


Or,  hi  for 
foure. 
\\Or,conuert 
u.orlettt 
be  quiet. 
And  jo  ver. 
6.CTC. 


16  XbelUDisisalfofbarroareoiit 
of  Zion,  anD  totter  bis  boicc  from3Je> 
rufaiem  ana  tlje  beauens  anD  tlje  ear  tl) 
fball  (babe,  but  tljefLcusBwiiiMfie 
t  nope  of  bis  people,  anD  tlje  Qrcngtb 
of  tlje  cljiiwcn  of  3Ffrart. 

17  5>o  (bail  pc  unoru  tbat  3  amflje 
%  0  13  ©  pour  0oO,DU)elling  in  zion, 
myboiv  ^ountainc :  tljcn  tyalljjenb 
falem  bctbolp,anD  tberc  (ball  no'ftram 
gcrspatTctlnougbbcr  anymore. 

18  €  3nD  it  0)311  tome  to  paffe  in 
tbat  Dap,th.it  tlje  mountaincs  fbal*D2op 
Doibne  nrtb  ltoinc,  anD  tlje  Ijils  fljaii 
flolto  ttntb  milttc,  anD  an  tbcriucrsof 


Juoalj  frjalt  t  flolto  rbinj  Vbatcrs ,  anD  a 
tountaincfbatl  comefoztb  of  tbc  tjoufe 
of  tlje  Ho  a  s»,anD  (ball  water  tlje  l>al= 
leyof&bitttm. 

19  egypt  fl)ail  be  aDcfoiation ,  anD 
CDomtiJallbeaDcfolatcibilDcrnes.fo? 
tl)e  biolente  agamft  tlje  cbilDzcn  of3fu- 
Dafj ,  betaufc  tbey  bauc  fbcD  tnnotcnt 
blooDintbeirlanD. 

20  26ut'JuDaba)ail||Dtt)cHfozcuer, 
anD  ^Jcrufalem  from  generation  to  gc* 
iteration. 

x\  iFo:3libiUlcanrctljcirblooD,^at 
3J  banc  not  tleanfcD ,  ||  fo?  the  %  o  is  m 
DibcllctbinZion. 


t  Hctr  go 


,AMOS. 


CHAP.    I. 

Amos  fhewcth  Gods  judgement  vpon  Syiia, 
6  vpon  the  Philiftines,  9  vponTyrus,  n 
vponEdom,   13  ypon  Amnion. 

5TI  $c  ltoozbes  of^t 
ntos.tbrjoibasa' 
mongtbcbcarD 
men  of  Xckoa, 
lbljicb  bee  favbc 
concerning  3t 
rael,  mtbe  Dates 
of  tibial)  Btng 
orjuDab,  anD  in 
tbc  Daycs  of  IJcroboam  tbc  fonnc  of 
Joafb&ing  ofjfracl.tlbo  ycrc  befoze 
tbc*eartbqua&e. 

x  3tnD  Ijc  faiD ,  Xbc  Horn©  itoill 
*  roare  from  zion,  anD  bttcr  Ijis  boite 
fcom'Jcrufaicm:  anD  tlje  Ijabitations 
of  tbc  fbepbcatDS  (ball  mourne,  anD 
tlje  top  of  Carmcl  fball  ttntber. 

3  XbusfaitbtbclLois^.ffoztbzce 
tranrgreffions  of  SDamafcus,  anD  ||foz 
foure  31  ibil  not  1 1  turne  aitoay  the  puntfh- 
me.H  tfjcrcof,bccaufc  tbey  hauc  tb2Cfbeb 
(5iieaD,rbitl)  tJj2cfl)tns  inftruments 
ofyton. 

4  28nt  3  Mil  fcnD  a  fire  into  the 
boufe  of  tyavJd,  lbbicb  fljallDcuourc 
tbc  palaces  of  zBcnbaDaD. 

5  3JttUb2eabcalfotljcbacrcofa>a* 


mafcns^nDcntofftljetnbabitantfrom 
tbc  ||  plame  of  3uen :  anD  bim  tljat  bol- 
Dctlj  tlje  fceptcr  from  the  ||  boufcofc- 
Den ,  anD  tbc  people  of  £>pzia  fljali 
goe  into  capttutfic,  tonto  lur  .faittjtbc 
2t£Dis©. 

6  €1tbnsfaitbtbc|L©ts5T»,5fo? 
tbzeetcanfgrctuonsor  <5a3fl,  anD  fbz 
foure  3J  Mil  not  turne  aitoay  the  punifh- 
mem  tbcrcof:  betaufc  the?  HcartcD  aibay 
captiuc  tlje  tbljolc  captimtic,  to  Dcliucr 

themfcptoCDom. 

7  2Sut  U  ibil  fcnD  a  Brc  on  tlje  tball 
of  ca^a ,  lbbttlj  fljaii  Dcuourc  tlje  pa^ 
laces  tbcrcof. 

8  ^nD  3J  ibil  nit  off  tlje  inhabitant 
from  3lfbDoD,anD  bim  tljat  bolDctlj  tfjc 
fceptcr  from  3tfl)ftclon,anD3i  ibil  turne 
nunc  IjanD  agamft(£ftron;  anD  tbc  rem* 
nant  of  tljc^bibfbncs  Cljail  periuyaith. 

9  C  Xlnis  faitb  tbc  %  ©  a  jd  ,  if  02 
tb;cc  tranfgrcffionsofXv-Jus,  anDfo? 
foucc 3J  ibil  not  turne  atbaythepunifh- 
ment  thereof ,  btcanfc  tfjrp  DdiucccDbp 
tljcibljoic  captuiitic  toCDom,  anD  re* 
mcmbzcD  not  t  tbc  b20tljcrlp  toucnant. 

10  iSut^tbiifcnDa&rtontbetbail 
ofXvzus  ,u)ljicb  tball  Dcuourcthe  pa- 
laces tbcrcof. 

11  C  Xbus  faitl)  tbc  %  ©  k  jd,  ifo? 
tb2ct  tranrgreffions  of  <2Dom,anDfo2 

fonre, 


I  Ortabide. 


[|0,EuenI 

the  Lord 
ihat  dwel- 
U thin  Ztoi 


\\0r,  S,- 
k*tb  AHen. 
||  Or,  "Beth- 
Eden. 


"i.Cbro. 
28.18. 

\\Or,CJr,ei 
iliem  jtvzy 
with  tin  ert- 
lirecaftim- 
tie. 


t  Hehthe 
couctiant  of 
brethren* 


AgainftMoab,      ~Ch 


\Htt.eta- 

rupte/ihit 
comp*iJJiens. 


\\OrtjMulei 

the  rnonn- 


'  i.Kings. 


fourc,  3  lbtllnot  tucne  aibap  chepuhifh 
mem  thereof,  bccaufc  he  bib  purfuehts 
brother  Vbith  the  froojb,  anbbibtcaft  off 
nilpitic,  anb  his  anger  bibtcareperpe; 
tuaiip,  anb  aept  his  Math  fo?  cuer. 

n  25ut  3  ibtil  fcnb  a  fire  bponXc- 
man ,  whirl)  (hall  beuourcthe  palaces 
ofBosrah. 

13  CC  l&us  faptt)  the  %  ©  is  ©,  jFo; 
thjce  tranfgrcOions  of  the  chtlbten  of 
^mmon^nbfojfoure^ibtlnottutne 

aftap  the  pumfhment  tljCtCOf ;   bCtailfC 

thep  haue  ||  ript  bp  the  tttomcn  ibith 
thtlbc  of  <5ileab,that  thcp  might  cn< 
large  their  bo2bcr. 

14.  2Sut  31  ibill  binble  a  fire  in  the 
ibail  of  £abbah ,  anb  it  (hail  bcttoutc 
the  palaces  thereof,  ibtthQioibttng  m 
the  bap  of  batttll,  tbtthatempcftutthc 
bapoftheibhlrlciblnbe. 

15  3Cnb  thetr  tttng  (hall  goe  into  cap- 
tttutie,  hcc,  anb  his  pnnces  together, 
favththefLsDim 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Gods  wrath  a^ainflMoab,  4  vponludah, 
6  and  vpon  Ilrael.  9  God  complaincch  ot 
their  vnthankefuinefle. 

l?usfapththc1L©iBiP, 
iFojfhzcc  tranfgrefTions 
of  £*9oab,  anb  fo?  fourc, 
31  IDA  not  turne  ainap  the 
punifhmem  thcrcof,becaufe 
hec*butnttl)eboncsofthcBingofC' 
bom  into  lime. 

z  28ut  JUMl  fcnb  afirebpon^o- 
ab,  anbit  (hall  ocuonrc  the  palaces  of 
tserioth ,  anb  $)oab  (hall  bic  iDtth  ti\- 
mult,tbtth  (houting.and  with  the  founb 
ofthctrtmipet: 

3  SnbJI  mil  cut  off  the  (nbgc  from 
the  mibbctfther  cof,  anb  ibil  flap  all  the 
piinccs  thereof  Ibith  him,  fapcththe 

4  C3nn»sfapfhfhe!L©isi9,;ffo2 
th2ce  tranfgrcffions  of  3lubah,  anb  foz 
foure,  31  Mil  not  turne  atbap  thepunifh- 
ment  thereof ;  becaufe  thephauebefpifeb 
thc?Latt)ofthc?L©irUP,  anbhauenot 
kept  his  Commanbcments,  anb  their 
Ites  caufeb  them  to  erre,  after  the  Uihith 
their  fathers  hane  ibalbcb. 

5  But  3  null  fcnb  a  fire  bpon  3f it- 
bah,  anb  it  (hall  bcuourethepalacesof 
3Jerufalem. 

6  CXhusfapththe1L©is3D,5Po2 
thice  tranfgrcOions  of  3ifrael,aub  foi 
fourc,  3  Mil  no  t  turne  arbap  the  pumfh- 


ap.ij.iij.       Iudah,  and  Ifrael. 


||0r,/>« 


\\Or,fcliM 
haue  fined  or 
mntcled. 
'Num.ji. 
14-dcut.  2. 


•Exod. 
S1 


mem  thereof  becaufe  *thcp  foibc  tlje-ci.ap.ss 
nghteousfo?  filucr ,  anb  the  poo2c  fo?  a 
patreoflhooes: 

7  IChat  pant  after  the  butt  of  the 
earth  on  the  heab  of  the  poojc,  anb 
turne  afiDetheibapofthemeeBC;anDa 
man  anb  his  father  ibill  goe  m  bnto  the 
fame  llmaib.topjofane  mpholp /frame. 

3  3lnb  tljcp  lap  thcmfelucs  boibnc 
bpon  clothes  laibc  to  plcbge,  bpettcrp 
^Itar ,  anb  thep  bJinlie  the  lbtne  of  ||  tljc 
conbemncbm  the  hottfe  of  their  <5ob. 

9   €  Pet  bettcovcb  3  the*  3htio2ttc 
before  tliem ,  tbhofchctght  «as  nuc  the 
height  of  the  Cebars,  anb  hcc  Ibas  £8 
jftrongas  theoftcs,  pet3JbcOcopcbhts 

fcuitefromabouc,anbhisrootcsfrom 
beneath. 

io  31fo  3?  brought  pou  bpfrom  the 
lanb  of  *€gppt,  anb  lebbepou  fourtic 
veeves  through  the  ilulberncOc,topo£ 
feffe  thcianbofthc^monte. 

1 1  3iib  3  ratreb  bp  of  pour  fomics 
fo*  i&ophets ,  anb  of  pour  poung  men 
fo2iI5a5aritcs.  isit  notcuenthus,£>pe 
chilbjen  of  3Jfrael,  faith  the  %  ©  is  s>  t 

n  ffitttpcgaue  the  i!3a5aritcs  Untie 
to  bzittRc,  anb  commaunbeb  the  $20; 
pljcts,  *  faptng ,  ^?ophccic  not. 

13  25eholb,!l1Jamp?e{&bbnbcrpou, 
as  a  cart  is  pjeffeb  that  ts  ful  of  fhcaucs. 
!  14  ICherefoze  the  flight  (hall  penfh 
i  from  tlic frdift,  anb  the  ftrong  (hall  not 
ifrrengthcn  his  foitc,  neither  (hall  the 
|  mtghtie  bcliner  t  himfclfe : 

15  Neither  (hall  hce  ftanbthathaiv 
I  bleth  the  boib ,  anb  hcc  that  is  froift  of 
foorc ,  (hall  not  bcliuer  h.mfeiie ,  neither 
fljall  hetthat  ribcth  the  ho?fc,  bcliuer 
himfelfe. 

16  3nb  hec  that  is  tcouragiousa* 
mong  the  mightp,  (hall  flee  aibap  na= 
beb  in  that  bap,  faith  the  %  ©  is  jd. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  The  necefsitie  ot  Gods  ludgement  againll 
Ifrael.  9  The  publication  of  it ,  with  the 
caufes  thereof. 

care  this  ttwb  that  the 
JL©k)e»  hath  fpolicn  a- 
gamft  pou ,  £)  clulb^ni  of 
^Jftacl.againftthc  lbfjolc 
familv,ibhichU  brought 
bpfcom  the  lanb  of  Ccj^'pt, fapmg  \ 

1  Pou  onelp  hatte  3  itnottieti  of  all 
the  families  of  the  earth:  therefore  3 
lbtll  f  punilh  pou  foj  all  pour  iniquities,  t 

3  Can  tibo  waittc  together ,  erccpt 
thepbeagrceb^ 

jffffj       4  m\l 


"Ch3.7.n. 

\\Or,Iwil 

frtfcjovT 

fUceAia 

cartfullcf 

Jhtautipref- 

f,th. 

t  Hib.  hi, 
foulc  or  life 


f  Heb.firof!i 
of  ha  heart. 


Godsvifitation. 


Amos.         Ifraels  obftinacie. 


foorih  I 
voyce. 


\\  Or ,  not 

rtwnetoae- 

lhrr. 

|  Or,  And 

ftjUnot  the 
L.doe  fome- 
whac s 


\\Or>'tfrtf~ 
font. 


\\Ovfrd,. 


uereth. 


\\Ot  pnthe 
rejffcete. 


\\Or,pum/>, 
J/r.„//or. 


4-   i©ill  «i  Ivou  roarc  m  ttjc  foittft,\ 
lbhcn  he  hath  no  pjayftbiliayoungly 
on't  ctv  out  of  his Den ,  if  he  hauc  taken 
noticing; 

5  Canabirbfall mafnarebponfhc 
earth,  ibhctcnogume  isfoj  Ijmwfbail 
one  take  Up  a  fnarc  from  the  carth,anb 
hauc  taken  nothing  at  all  < 

e  £>ljail  a  trumpet  be  blolbcn  in 
the  citie ,  anb  the  people  [|  not  be  afraib  < 
1  fl)all  there  be  euilUn  a  titie, || anb  the 
%  ©  a  ©  hath  notbonc  it? 

7  Purely  the  Ho2b  (15  ©32>lbillboe 
nothing,  but  Ijc  reueaietlj  his  fetcet  biv 
tohisfcruants  thcj&ophcts. 

s  3Cl)c  lyon  hath  toaccb,  naljo  tbill 
not  (tare  itljcHojb  d5©©hathfpokcn, 
naho  tan  but  p2ophcctc j. 

9  <[  piblith  m  the  palates  at  3W) 
bob,  anb  m  the  palates m  the  lanb  ofe^ 
gypt,  anb  fay  ;2tircmblc  your  fclucsbp-- 
on  tlje  niountaincs  of  Samaria :  anb 
bcholb  the  great  tumults  m  fhemiblr 
thereof,  anb  the  ||  opp2cu"cb  m  the  nublt 
thereof. 

io  foi  they  Unoib  not  to  boc  right, 
faith  the  %  ©  is  3D  :  ibljo  fto?c  bp 
bioience  ,  anb  ||  robbene  m  their  p& 
latcs. 

u  Xhercfojc  thus  faith  tlje  Ho;b 

(35  ©  ©,  3tt  abUCrfariC  there  fhall  be  cucn 

rounb  about  the  lanb:  anb  he  (bal  tying 
bourne  thy  ftrcngth  from  thee,  anb  thy 
palaces  (hall  be  fpotlcb. 

iz  Xhusfaiththe  S,©is?p, 3(sthc 
Oicphcarb  t  taheth  out  of  the  mouth  of  i 
the  lyon  tibo  legges  02  a  piece  of  an  J 
care. fo  Cbailthe  cljilbjcn of  3JfraeI  bej 
taken  out  that  Mbcll  in  damarta,  in 
the  tomcr  ofabcb,anb  in||2Damafcus  m 
a  couch. 

1  j  irjearc  yce  anb  tcflific  m  thchouft 
ofjfjacob,  faith  the  ?Lo;b  ©©jd,  thei 
<5o*bofholtcsj 

14.  Hhatm  thebay  that  l!  (hall  ||bt, 
fttc  the  ttanfgrcflions  of  3lfracl  bpon; 
him ,  3  ibiil  alfo  bifitc  the  altars  of  2Sc= 
tljcl,  anb  the  homes  of  the  altar  Ihail  be 
tutoff,anbfalltothc  grounb. 

15  31nD  3  lbill  finite  the  unmet 
houfc  with  tyc  fummcr  houfc ;  anb  the  1 
houfes  of  vuohe  (hail  perifl) ,  anb  the 
great  houfes  (hall  hauc  an  cnb,faith  tlje 

?L©1BJ&. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1    Hereprouethlfracl,  for  opprefsion.    4    for 
idolatry,   6  and  for  their  lucorrigiblenefTe. 


fS-  €  arc  this  ib02b  vca  tunc  of 
*  £25a(han,  that  are  m  the 
%  niountaiuc  of  £>amana, 
lbljich  oppjcfTc  the  poozt, 
which  crufh  the  nccby, 
ibhichfayto  their  mailers  25nng,anb 
ictbsbnu&c. 

z  XhcHo2bGoir>hathfroomcbv 
his  holincffc ,  that  loe ,  the  Daves  (hall 
comcbponyou,tljathcunlltakcyoua 
ibav  ibith  hookes,  anb  your  pofrcritic 
Unth  &(h  hookes. 

3  3nb  yce  (hat!  got  out  at  the  blea- 
ches, eucry  Cowatfhatu-hichisbefoje 
her,  anb  n  yce  (hail  tad  them  into  tlje  pa- 
lacc/aiththcllois©. 

4.  C  Come  to  iBctljcl  anb  tranf 
great,  at  C5ilgai  multiphctranfgrcm 
on;  anb  bung  your  facn&ccs  cuerv  mo^ 
ntng,  md  your  titljcs  after  t  tlucc  yeeres. 

5  Zv.ti  t  offer  a  faenfice  of  than&fgi; 
uing  lbitlj  Icaucn ,  anb  pjoclaime  anb 
publtfh  the  free  offrmgs;fojt  tljts  liHeth 
vou,  2D  rccdjiltycnof^fracljaitljtljc 

JL02DC5O??. 

6  c  3inD  31  alfo  hauc  giuen  you 
clcanncffc  of  teeth  m  all  rourrmes,  anb 
ibant  of  b2tab  in  all  pour  plates :  pet 
hauc  rec  not  rcturncb  bnto  me ,  faith 
thcHoK©. 

7  3mb  alfo  9  Ijaue  ttnthholbcnthc 
ratnc  from  i>ou  ,  when  there  were  yet 
tljjee  moncths  to  the  harucQ,  anb  3 
caufeb  it  to  ramc  bpon  one  citic ,  anb 
taufeb  tt  not  to  ramc  bpon  an  other  tit?: 
one  piece  ibas  ramcDbpon,  9  thcpictc 
ibhcrupon  it  ramcb  not,ttuthcreD. 

s  ^>o  tibo  or  thjee  cities  lbanbcreb 
bnto  one  citie.to  bnnUc  ibatcr ,  but  the? 
iberc  not  fatifficD :  vcthancyecnotre- 
tumeb  bnto  mcfaith  the  %  o  m  ®. 

9  3  hauc  fmirtcn  you  lbtth  blafhiig 
anb  milbetb  ||  ibhm  your  gatbensanb 
your  btneyarbs,anb  your  figtrccs,anb 
your  oltuc  trees  mcrcafcb ,  the  palmer 
mo2me  Dcuonreb  them,  yet  hancyce  not 
retumcD  bnto  mc,  fatth  the  %  ®  is  e>. 

10  3  hauc  fent  among  you  the  pelh^ 
lencc,  I)  after  the  mancr  of  Cgypt :  your 
y  ongiucn  hauc  3  nam  lbtth  the  &uo?D, 

I  anb  t  hauc  taken  attiay  pour  hojfes,?  3 

\  hauemabc  the  llinkcotyourcampcsto 

1  tome  bp  bnto  your  noflrils,  yet  hauc  yc 

not  rcturncb  bnto  me,faith  the  £©Kp. 

n  3  haueourrMolbcn  feme  of  you, 

as  ooboucrth2clb*5>oDomc^  ©orno^ 

rah,  anb  yce  u^erc  as  a  firebjanb  plntkt 

out  of  the  burning:  yet  hauc  yce  not  re* 

tumeb  bnto  mcfattlj  the  %  ©  is  ©, 

n  Hhcrcfoje 


Or,yte 
JbuBcaft  a- 

'  the 
iy  of  the 

pjldce, 

\Hd.  three 
jceret  of 

dayet. 

tHek    o$r 
fj  burning. 
t  Heb.fojee 
lone. 


||  Or ,  the 
multtfad*  of 
7  our  gardens 
&C :  did 
the f aimer 
wcrme  &  c. 


[Or,  tn  the 

WAJ. 

f  Heh.  *nth 

moWHh 

fteefyostr 

horjej. 


*  Gen.  15. 


Seeke  the  Lord. 


ci 


|  Orjpint. 


•Icr.4-4. 


*Iob  0  9 
and  58.51- 


'Chip.9.6. 


iHei.:Wc 


12  Xhcrefoze  tl)U3  IMI  Jl  Doc  Unto 
tbcc,  €>  Jfrael :  and  became  3  lbillDoc 
this  Unto  tbcc,  pzepare  to  mccte  thy 
GOD,  £>3Jfrael. 

13  if  oz  loebe  that  fozmctb  the  momv 
tames,  atiD  created)  tUc||UritiD,anD  De- 
clare!!) btuo  man,  lbbat»bts  thought, 
that  makcth  the  moznuig  DarKencffc, 
anD  trcaocth  upon  the  high  places  of 
the  earth  :  the  IL©H£>,tbe  ©oD  of 
Jjoftcs  'sljis  /flame. 

C  II  A  P.      V- 

1  A  Lamentation  lor  Idael.  4  An  exhortation 
torepenance.  11  God  reie&eth  their  hvpo-  [ 
cnticall  leruice. 

?p£^il  care  ye  this  ibozu  Vbljith ' 
Mm  I  3  tauc  bpagainft  you, 
|^J  $  eucn  a  lamentation  ,  £> 
rail  [S  boufeofgjfrael. 


lap.v.  Louc  the  good. 


"Ztpl).I. 
■5. 


§gy§||  2  Xhcmrgmof^fracl 
- — —  ts  failen,fl)e  tbaiino  11102c 

rife:  rJbcisfozfaKcnijpou  her  lanD,tbcrc 

■stionctoratfchcrbp. 

3  5*  oz  thus  faith  the  ?LozD  gotd, 
•jEljc  atic  that  ibcnt  out  by  a  thoufanD, 
fbaillcaucan  hunD2CD,  anD  that  mind) 
ment  foo2tl)bvan  Inmt»:cD,fl>au  leaue 
tcntotbeboufcofUfracl. 

4  C:fonlnisfaiththcHoiiDlm< 
to  the  houfc  of  3/fcacl,  £>ttUw  mec, 
anDyefbatllwc, 

5  2i3tttfeebcnot*2i3cthcI,  no:  enter 
into  (Stlgal  anD  pafTc  not  to  zsccr  -  (be- 
ba :  foz  Gilgai  (ball  furcly  goc  into  eap- 
nuitte,anD25ctbclfbaicomcto  nought. 

6  5>ce&c  the  %,  €>is©,  anD  ye  (bail 
line,  left  hec  bzcanc  out  htte  fire  m  the 
houfc  of  35ofcph  anD  Dcttottrc  it ,  anD 
therebenoncto  quench  >tm2i5etl)cl, 

7  Pt  Ibho  tunic  mDgment  to  mozm 
ID00D ,  anD  leaue  off  ngbteoufneffc  m 
the  earth: 

S  Seekehim  that  maltctl)  the  *fetten 
u\tcresanDOzton,anDturnctbtbeiba 
Doib  of  Death  mto  the  moztung ,  anD 
mabeth  the  Day  Darnc  lbith  night :  that 
*  cailcth  foz  the  lbatcrs  of  the  5>ea,  anD 
ponwri)  them  out  upon  the  fate  of  the 
earth:  tbc  3Lo$ur>  i>  bis /flame. 

9  Xbar  ft  rcngtbeiietb  the  t  fpotlcD 
againft  the  frrong :  fo  tlwt  the  fpotlcD 
(ball  come  agatuft  tl)c  f  oztreffc. 

10  %\yv?  hate  htm  that  rcbulietl)  m 
I  trie  gate:  anD  tljcy  abljozre  Jjtm  that 
fpeaftetl)  bpzigbtly. 

n  /rozafmucl)  thcrfozc  asyottr trca^  I 
DuigisbpontbepoozcanDyctaucfrom 
ijimburDcnsof  ibheatc ,  *yc  Dane  buflt 


'PGi.74. 

'5&7J>. 

lc.rcin.ll, 


houfesof  bcibenuonc,  but  ye  (ball  not, 
pmcllmtbcm :  yeebauepianteDtpiea;  t/« 
fantDincyarDs,  but  ye  (hall  not  Dzinltc 
Untie  of  tbem. 

12  ^ozjHnottiyourmanifoiDtranf 
grrffions,anDyour  mighty  fmnes-.they 
afflict  the  tuft,  they  ta&e  ||  abnbe,  anD 
tbcyturne  afiDe  tlje  pooze  m  tfjegate 

from  their  rieht. 

13  Xbcrcfozc  tbc  p2uDcnt  (ball  ucepe 
filcncc  in  that  tuncfoz  it  is  an  eum  nme. 

1+  £>eeUcgooDanDnotcuili,thatyc 
may  Hue :  anD  fo  the  %  0  k  ©,  the  ©od 
of  holts  (ball  be  ibttb  you,  as  yee  hauc 
fpoftcn. 

15  *$atetbccufll,anDlouctbegooD, 
anD  cttablifb  iuDgcmentm  the  gate:  it 
may  betbatthc  1L  oiihd  god  of  holies 
null  bee  gracious  Dnto  the  remnant  of 
JofepJ). 

i6  xherefozetDe!LoKr>,theGioD 
of  bottcs ,  the  ?Lozd  faith  thus :  naai 
ling  Hull  bem  all  Itrcets,  anD  they  fliau 
fay  mail  the  high  Wayes,  Silas,  ^las : 
anD  they  fhailcail  thchufbaiiDmanto 
mounimg,  anD  fuel)  as  arc  f  Kiiful  of  la 
mcntatton,to  Mailing. 

17  ^nD m  all  bmcyarDs  i>«ii  be  ujafc 
img :  for  5  mill  paOTc  through  tljce  ,faith 

tl)C?L©K)D. 

is  *n9oebttto  you  that  Denre  the  Day 
of  the  1L  ois *>:  to  lDljat  cnDcisitfo2 
youahcDayofthcJLoisjDisDarBncs 
anb  not  light. 

19  31s  tf  a  man  DiD  flee  from  a  lyon, 
ano  a  bearcmet  Dim,  02  lncntinto  the 
houfc, anD  icaneD  hts IjanD  on  tlje  uwil, 
anDafctpentbtthtm. 

20  5>hailnotthcDayofthc?L^«jD 
bcDarfecnes,  anD  notltgln  <  cuenbery 
DarUcanD  no  bzightncffc  m  it  < 

z  1  C  *  J  hate ,  J  Dcfpifc  your  feaft 
Daycs,anD3JU)illnot||fnicllmyourfo 
icmncaffcmblses. 

2i  1-hough  ye  offer  me  burnt offe 
rings,  anD  your  meat  offenngs,3J  ibill 
not  accept  them-. neither  nnll^JrcgarD 
thcllpcaccofferingsofyourfatbcafls. 

23  Ulalsc  thou  aibay  from  mcctfjc 
noifc  of  thy  fougs :  foz  3  mill  not  Ijcarc 
thcmcloDtcofthylnolcs. 

24.  J5ut  let  tuDgement  t  run  DolDnc 
as  lbatcrs ,  anD  nghtconfncffc  as  a 
lmgfjtieltreamc. 

25  "i^aucyce  offcreD  bnto  nice  fa- 
criftccs  anD  offerings  m  thcUulDcrucffc 
fourtit  yccrcs,  <D  houfe  of  JlfracI  * 

26  25ut  yee  haue  bozne  the  ||  taber 
uatlcofyourt]3oloch ,  atiDChttinyotir 

images, 


"Ifii.J.tp. 
icr.;o.7« 

iocl l.z. 

zcpb.z.  15. 


"16.1  1 1. 

icr.6.,0. 
\\Or,fmclL 

u  iff  i  o/j 


\Or.ibakf 

•■-,■■:,. 


v>-> 


Acta  -  45 


I 


IfraelswantonndTe      Amos. 


th 


is  tnreatne 


a.! 


•Lukc«. 

|j  Or^refe- 
tare. 


"Exod.  19 

\\Or.frSt 
frmtt. 


'Exclc.n. 

*7- 

"Chap.  5. 

18. 

||  Orjiakuet. 

tion 

\\Or,nteilnd 

with  fnper- 

fhtitta. 


rqiLzuzr 


1 1  Or,  if, 

bo-xlesof 
wtr.e. 

\Helr. 

breach. 


"Iere.  51. 


f  H.-h  ibt 
fulnes  there. 


'  Ch.ip.5. 

13- 

\\Or,lhey 
mlhiQtjjr 
ham' not. 


images,  the  ttarteof  your gob,  ibfticb 
yemaoetoyontfclues. 

X7  Xhcrcfo?cttHl3ltaufeyoutogo 
mto  captiuitte  bcyonb  Damafcus,  faith 
tbefL^is©,  tohofe/Same  *  the  (Bob 
ofhoftcs. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1   The  waiuonnesoflfrael,    7    fhalbe  plagued 
wichddolation,  n  and  their  incomgiblenes. 

Ce  to*ti)cm  tl)at  ||arc  at 

cafe  in  zion ,  anbtruftm 
the  mountatnc  of  £>ama* 
na  ,  lbbich  arc  namcb 
*  II  ehttfe  of  the  nations ,  to 
tbbom  the  houfe  orjftaclcame. 

x  0aflc  ye  bnto  €amch,anb  fec,anb 
from  thence  go  ye  to  $emath  the  great: 
then  goebofbneto  ©at!)  of  the  $hili< 
fhnes :  bec  they  better  then  tbcfe  Ring* 
Domes  i  0}  their  bojDer  greater  then 
yourbojber? 

3  J3cthat*putfarrcatbaythe,[eutl 
bay,  anb  taufc  the  ||fcat  of  btolente  to 
comcnccre: 

4.  Xhat  lie  bpon  bebs  of  jano?ie, 
anb  I!  ftcetcb  thcmfelues  bpon  their 
couches, anbeate  the  lambes  out  oftbe 
flocac,  anb  tftc  talucs  out  of  the  mibft  of 
theftail: 

5  XhatUchauntto  tfjc  founbofthc 
lliolc,  and  muentto  tbemfciucsmttru' 
mentsofmuficHcli&cSDauib: 

6  Xljat  bnnfte  ||  tbinc  in  boibics, 
anb  anoint  thcmfelues  Ibiththeebtefc 
ointments:  but  they  arenotgrteuebfo? 
the  t  affliction  oPJofeph. 

7  C  Xfjerefoze  nolb  (ball  they  goc 
captincibiththcfirft  that  goccaptiuc, 
anb  the  banouct  of  them  that  ttretcheb 
themfclues,  fhalbe  r  emoueb. 

8  *  Xhc  2Lo?b  (5  0  ©  hath  froomc 
by  rjimfcifc,  faith  thc!L  «d is  ©the  C5ob 
of  hoftes,  3  abhojrc  the  octcUcncie  of 
■Jacob, anb  hate  hispaiatcs :  therefojc 
tbtt  3  bciiucr  bp  tfjc  cmcibith  *  all  that 
is  therein. 

9  Znn  it (bail  tome  to  paflc,tf  there 
remamc  tenne  men  in  one  houfe,  that 
they  (ball  Die. 

10  3(nb  a  mans  bncle  (ball  tafee  him 
bp,  anb  he  thatburncth  htm,  to  bnug 
out  the  bones  out  of  the  boufc,anb  (l)ail 
fay  bnto  him  that  is  by  the  Dbes  of  the 
houfe  is  there  yet  any  tbitft  thec^anb 
hec  (hall fay, iI5o.  Xhen  (hall  he  fay, 
*l?olbc  thy  tongue :  foj  lllbcemaynot 
malic  mention  of  the  /frame  of  the 

JL©15£\ 


n  5fo?beholbe,thc3L©iii©com; 
manbetb ,  anb  hec  ibill  fnutc  the  great 
houfe  ibith  II  Reaches ,  anb  the  little 
houfe  lbith  clefts. 

u  {[  «S>ball  hozfes  runnc  bpon  the 
rocne?  tbil  one  ploib  there  nmhoren* 
to;  ye  hauc  tnrncb  lubgcmcnt  into  gall, 
anb  the  fcutte  of  nghtcoufneffe  into 
hcmlocKc. 

ij  Pet  ibhtth  rcioyce  in  a  thing  of 
nought,  lbhtch  fay ,  $aue  tbc  not  taken 
to  bs  homes  by  our  oibnc  fttcngtb  < 

14  26ut  beholbc ,  31  ttnl  ratfc  bp  a= 
gamft  you  anatton,£>  houfe  of  Jfracl, 
faiththc  H©«id,  the  <sob  of  hoftes, 
anb  they  (ball  afflict  you  from  the  en- 
tring  in  of  5?cmatft ,  bnto  the  ||  nucr  of 
thennlbcrncflc. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  The  judgements  of  the  grafhoppers,  4  and 
of  the  fire,  are  diuerted  hv  the  prayer  of  A- 
mos.  7  Bythewallofaplumb-line,is(igni- 
fied  the  reie&ion  of  Ilrael.  10  Amaziah 
complauieth  of  Amos.  14  Amos  fhevveth 
\6  and  Amaziahs  judgement. 

^us  hath  the  3Lo;tD<foD£> 
(beibcbbnto  me,  anb  be* 
bolb,hefonneb||gra{&> 
hoppers  in  the  beginning 
of  the  (hooting  bp  of  the 
latter  grouth :  anbloc,  >t  w^tijc  latter 
grouth  after  the  feings  motbings. 

%  ^nb  it  tame  to  pafte ,  that  ibhen 
they  hab  mabe  an  enbe  of  caring  the 
grade ofthclanb,fhcn3Jfatb  £>1Lo?b 
©€>©,  fojgiuc,  3  befeech  thee,||  by 
Ibhom  ftjai^acob  anfc  i  fo:  he  isfinall. 
j  Xhe  %  ®  is  ©  r  epentcb  fo?  this. 
3lt  (hall  not  be,  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©. 

4  C  Xhus  hath  the  Hojb  <&  0  © 
(beibcbbnto  mc  i  anb  bcholb,thc!Lo?b 
<Ssd©  taiicbto  tontcnb  by  fire,  anb  it 
bcnourcbthegreatbcepc,  anb  bibcatc 
bpapart. 

5  Xljen  faib  3 ,  $D  1Lo2b  ©*>», 
teafe3bcfccththce,byibho»iQ;ai3Ia5 
tobarifc<fo?hcisfmail. 

6  Xhe  IL  0  is  jd  repentcb  foj 
this.  Xhts  alfo  (l)all  not bec,  faitf; the 

%Ofli(5®1S. 

7  CXhushce  ft)cibcb  nice,  atU)  bc> 
holb,  the  fLo,!b  ftoobbponaibailmade 
i  by  a  plumbline,  tbitlj  a  plumbltne  in  his 
lhanb. 

8  3nb  thcIL  0  is  jd  faib  bnto  mce, 
^mos ,  tbhat  fceft  thou  <  ^nb3J  fayb, 
^plumb-line.  Xhen  la^n  the !Lo;b, 
aschoib, 


Ortdriro~ 
fmp. 


II 0'.' 


\\Or,grecr:c- 
wormes. 


Ii  Ortwho 
efforts) 

Hani! 


Amos  is  accufed.       Chap.viij.  Summerfi 


ruic. 


\\Or,Sm- 

t  Hci.  Iwufi 
>fchtl(inff- 


\\OrjmUe 

hi"- 

tHri.fnrn 
mi. 


Eze.zi.2. 


zeeholb ,  3  toll  fct  a  plumb -lute  in  the 
miDlr  of  mv  people  ^jfcaei,  3  rbtll  not 
agame  paffe  by  them  anv  mo2C. 

9  3nb  the  high  places  of  Jfaae  (hail 
bebefoiatcanbtheSatutiianesof^Jf' 
raei  ftjaibc  laibe  lbafte :  anb  3  ibill  nfe 
agamft  the  houre  of  Jeroboam  ttnth 
tbeftuozb. 

10  C  Xbcn  3tma%iah  the  pzicft  of 
26etb-  el  fentto  Jferoboam  Bingorp 
rati,  faymg;  3lmos  hath  tonfpireb  a< 
gamft  thee  in  the  mibft  of  ttjc  lioufe  of 
Jjftael :  the  lanb  is  not  able  to  bcarc  an 

f)iSU)02bS. 

ii  ;fo2thtis3mosfa!th,'Jctoboam 
(hail  bie  by  the  fwo2b,anb3jfi:ael  than 
furely  be  leb  albay  captme ,  out  of  their 
oUmclanb. 

ii  2Kb  3(ma5iah  faib  bnto  3fmos, 
<aDthou:§>eer,goc,  flee  thee  aibay  into 
tbelanbof3Jubah,anbtberccatetycab, 
anopiopnerie  there. 

ij  25ut  pzopbenc  not  againc  any 
moze  at  zseth-et :  fo?  it  is  the  Bings 
||Chappeil,anbit  is  the  things  Court. 

14  c  Xhen  anfratreb  3mo3,  anb 
faybe  to  3lma5tah;  3  was  uo^zophet, 
neither  was  3Ja0zopbctsfonne,bttt3J 
was  an  hearDinan,  anb  a  gatherer  of 
||  <S>ycomozc  fruit. 

15  3ttbthe!L©K2Dtoolicmetas3J 
follolbeb  the  floefte,  anb  the  ?L©is© 
faib  bnto  me ,  <soc ,  pzopherie  bnto  tup 
people  "Jfrael. 

i6  c/Borbtherefozcheare  thou  the 
lbozbe  of  the  IL  ©  is  © ;  Xbou  fayeft, 
i3jophetienotagainfl31fracl,anb*b2op 
not  thy  word  agamft  the  houfc  of  Jfaat. 

17  Xbcrfo2CthusfayththclLoH© 
Xhyibtfc  (hall  be  an  harlot  tn  the  ntp, 
anb  thy  founes  anb  thy  baughters  fbaii 
fan  by  the  fu)02b,  anbthyianbfhail  be 
biuibeb  by  line :  anb  thou  lhait  Die  in  a 
pollutcb  lanb ,  anb  3Jfrael  (ball  furely 
gotlntoeaptiumcfoozthofhtslanb. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

i  By  a  basket  of  Summer  fruite,  is  (hewed  the 
propincptieof  Ifraelsend.  4  Opprefsionis 
reproued.  1 1  A  famine  of  die  word  threatned. 

^us  hath  the  ILozb  <5£>© 

a«  Qieibcb  bmo  me ,  anb  be 

holbe,abafltetof5>wu' 

^sf\  mer  fruit. 


2  3uibhcraiD,3unos, 
ibhatfeeft  thou;  3nb3J  faybe,  31  baf> 
feet  of  Summer  fruite.  Xbcn  faib  the 
It  ©  h  ©  bnto  mce ,  Xhe  cube  is  come 
bpon  my  people  of  3Jfrael  3  ibill  not 


agamc  paffe  by  them  any  mo2e. 

5  3nb  the  fongs  of  the  Xemplcs 
t  (haibe  hovbimgs  m  that  bap,  fay th  the 

lt02b  <5©©  :  there  (hall  be  niatly  bC8D 

bobies  m  euery  piace,fbcy  (hail  caff  them 
fooztb  Ubttb  filcnce. 

4  <E$earetbts,£>yethatfujalioib 
bptbcneeDy,euentomaiietbepoo2cof 
tbclanbtofaile, 

5  laying.  ADljcn  Mil  the  || ne\bc 
s39ooncbegone,thatlbemay  fell  come; 
anb  the  Sabbath ,  that  lbec  may  tfet't 
fo2tli  lbheat ,  mailing  the  Cphah  fmaii, ! 
anb  the  (bckcl  great,  anb  \  faififymg  the 
balances  by  bcceit; 

6  Xbat  ibecmaybiiy  the  poo2C  fo? 

*filiicr,*thenecbtefo2apatrcof(hoes, 
yea,  ano  fell  the  refufe  of  the  ibheatc  < 

7  Xhc  ft©  a©  hath  fiuo2ne  by 
the  ercellencie  of  3Jatob,S>urely  3  lbiii 
ncuer  fo2getany  oftheir  lbozbcs. 

8  £>hail  not  the  lanb  tremble  foz 
this,  anb  euery  one  mourne  thatbibcl 
letlj  therein;  anb  itlhail  nfcbpvbholly 
as  a  floob;  anb  it  (ball  be  taft  out  anb 
Dzotbncb,  as  by  the  floob  of  egypt. 

9  3nb  it  (ball  tome  to  pafTe  m  that 
bay,faith  the  llozb  ©  ©  ©,  that  3  null 
taufc  thtSmnneto  go  boibnc  at  noone, 
anb  3  ibill  barhen  the  earth  m  the 
tlearebay. 

io  3nu  3  Uifll  turne  your  fcafts  m 
to  mourning,  anb  all  your  fongs  into 
lamentation,  anb  3J  ibill  tying  bp  facfe- 
clothbpottaiiloynes,anbbaiDneflebp; 
on  euery  heab :  anb  3  ib«u  malic  it  as 
the  mourning  ofanonclyfonne,  anb  the 
enb  thereof  as  abitttr  bay. 

ii  CiBcboib.thcbatcscomc.fatthtbc 
Ho2b  d5©5?,  that  3  Mil  fenb  a  famine 
mtheianb,notafammcofb2cab ,  1102a 
thirft  foz  Vbater ,  but  of  htanng  the 
lbo2bsofthcH©is©. 

it  ^nb they fhauibanber  from  S>ea 
to  S>ca ,  anb  from  the  j3o2th  euen  to 
the  call  they  mail  runneto  anb  fro,  to 
fceftc  the  tbozbe  of  the  1L  ©  is  © ,  anb 
(hallnotfinbcit. 

13  Hit  that  bay  Qiail  the  faire  btr 
gincs  anb  young  men  faint  foz  thirft. 

14  Xbcy  that  frucare  by  the  fume  of 
£>amaria,anD  fay,  Xhy  ©ob,  £>  Dan, 
luteth,  anb  the  manner  of  Beer  -  fticba 
imeth ,  cnen  they  (hall  fall ,  anb  ncuer 
rifcbpagaiue. 

CHAP.    IX. 

1    The  certciutie  of  the  deflation.   11  Therc- 
ftorinjrof  the  Tabernacle  of  Dauid. 


iHcb.fidi 


\Hckbc 
flat. 


\\Or,mi- 


•hi: 


fin. 


\Hil.?ir. 

tarltngthe 
b.iUnccsof 
deceit. 
*Chap.2.6. 


The  power,and        Obadiah.      goodnefTeofGod. 


||  Or.ck.ipi- 
trr.er  k»cp. 
|]  Or,  *ound 
them. 


•Pfal.  I  J9- 
S.&c. 


Mfr.44- 


\Or,fyhc,trel 
h?t>.nfeenji- 
enf. 

"Pfil.  104. 
7. 
||0r,4Wf//. 

"  Cliap. 
,.8. 


kr.47. 


Eft^r&SjS  £>an>  the  Hozb  ttantrtns 
*  topon  the  aitacanto  he  faib, 
S>mttc  tljc  iiimtciiofthe 
boojctfjattljc  potts  may! 
QjaUc : anu ||  cut  them  uv 
toeh^abatioftljcm.anb^Willflaythe! 
lad  of  tljem  lbttlj  the  frooW  :l)ec  tljat 
flccth  of  them ,  Hiall  not  flee  aibay ,  anb 
t)c  that  cfcapeth  of them,fhail  not  be  be- 
uuereb. 

i  'Xljouglj  they  biggc  mto  Ijcll, 
t!)cnce  (hall  nunc  Daub  tauc  them  : 
though  they  dime  Dp  to  hcauen ,  thence 
Mil  3  bnng  ri)cm  boWttc. 

3  2lnb  though  they  htbcthemfeltics 
in  the  top  ofCatmel,  3JWtllfcarchanb 
taftctljcm  out  thence,  anb  though  they 
berjibfeommy  fight  in  tljcbottome  of 
thc£>ea,  thence  Will  31  commaunbthe 
fctpcnt,anb  he  fhall  bite  them. 

4.  3lnb  though  they  goe  into  tapti- 
uine  befo2C  their  enemies,  thence  ttitll  3 
commaunb  the  fnwb,  anb  it  fljall  flap  1 
them :  anb  *  3  Will  fet  mine  eyes  topon 
them  fo;  cuill,anb  notfo:  goob. 

5  3nbthc?Lo2b  <5£>©ofhottcsH 
he  that  touchctl)  the  lanb,  anb  it  man 
melt ,anb  all  that  biuelleth  therein  fhall ; 
moutne,  anb  it  fhall  rife  top  Wholly  like 
afloob ,  anbfl)ailbcb20Wncbasby  the! 
floobofCgypt. 

6  ic  is  he  thatbuilbethhtsll  *tt02ies 
in  the  Ijcauen  ,  anb  hath  founbeb  hts 
||  troupe  m  the  earth,  he  that*  caucth  foz 
the  waters  of  the  3>ea ,  anb  poibmh  I 
them  out  topon  the  face  oftlje  earth:  the  j 
%  ©mroii  hts  name. 

7  3rcyccnot  as  chiKuen  of  tfieC* 
fhiopums  tonto  me,  £>  thiio>en  of  31f-! 
rati,  faith  the  H©KPf  hauenot  31 
biought  top  "Jfrael  out  of  the  lanb  of  <£;  j 
gypt  i  anb  flje  *  ^htltttmc  s  from  Caplj- 


t  He  i.  ciutjt 
tonioue. 

\Heb.ftne. 


toj,  anb  the  £>y?iansfrom  Btr 

8  aSeholb  ,  tljc  eyes  of  the  Ho?D 
<B®1&  ar<;  topon  the  Dnfull  Bingbome, 
anb  3  Will  beftroy  it  from  off  the  fate 
of  trjc  earth  s  faumg  that  "5  Mil  not  tot* 
terly  beftroy  the  houfe  of  3Jacob ,  faith 
theSLois©. 

9  if02  loc,  3  Will  commaunb ,  anb 
3  Will  t  fift  tljc  noufc  of  3(frael  among 
all  nations,  lifee  as  come  ts  fiftcb  in  a 
fieuc,  yet  (hall  not  tljc  leafttgcame  fall 
topon  the  earth. 

10  3lii  tljc  tinners  of  my  people  fhall 
bicby  thefroojb,  Mjicljfay:Xfjccuill 
fhall  not  ouctta&cnojpjcucnt  tos. 

n  C  Un  that  bay  Will  3fraifc  top  the 
'tabernacle  of  Dauib,thatisfallcn,anb 
t  clofe  top  the  bleaches  thereof,  anb  3 
Mil  raifc  top  his  mines ,  anto3J  Will 
builb  it  as  in  the  bayes  ofoib  -, 

n  Xhat  rtjcy  maypoffeffe  therein* 
nantof€bom ,  anb  of  all  the  heathen; 
tMjicljarccaUcObyinynamc,fattljtljc 
H©  is  jd  that  both  this. 

13  ascljolb,  the  bates  come,  faitfjtrjc 
%  sd  k  £>,tljattheploWman  fhall  ouer* 
tauc  the  reaper,  9  the  tr  caber  of  grapes 
him  that  tfoitorthfcebe ,  anbttjemoun* 
tames  (ball  bjopirfuicete  Wine,  anb  all  t  "'*•*■ 
the  Ijiisfbaii  melt.  J§££ 

14  3lnb 3  wui  bmtg agatne  ffjecap- '  »-»<• 
tiumc  of  my  people  of  3Jfracl :  anb  they  *8Iocl  3 
(ball  butlb  the  wafle  cities,  anb  inhabit 
them. anb  they  fhall  plant  tomtyarbs, 
anb  DUn&c  the  Wine  thereof:  they  (hall 
alfo  mane  garbens ,  anb  eatc  the  fruitc 
ofthem. 

J5  3lnb  3  itoill  plant  tliem  topon  their 
lanb,  anb  they  fljailuo  mozebeptiueb 
top  out  of  their  lanb  ,  umtch  31  ijauc 
guten  them ,  faith  the  %&■&?>  tl;y 
Gob. 


•Aasij. 

\Heb.\>edie, 
or  TcalL 


t  Heh-  vpou 
nham  mj 
name  it  (al- 
lei. 


^OBADIAH. 


Tliedcfttucflionof  Edoin,  3  for  their  pride, 
10  and  lor  their  wrong  vinolatob.  17  The 
faliution  and  vicrory  ol'Iacob. 

sl)etoifion  of£)babial): 

t  Xhtis  faith  the  ?Loib 

SVT  C5©jd  ,  concerning  & 

|2g§|  bom .  *  U3cc  hauc  hearb 

JR3B  a  rumour  from  the 

^ItoisjD,  anb  an  am 


baffabo;  is  fent  among  the  heathen 

arifcyce,  attblct  tos  rife  top  again  filler 
tnbattcii. 

1  25eholb,  U  hauc  mabc  thee  fmall 
among  tljc  Ijcatljcn :  thou  art  greatly 
btfpifcb. 

3  C  Xhc  pjibe  of  thine  heart  hath 
bceciuebthcc :  thouthatbitoclicQutthe 
clefts  of  tljc  tocBc ,  naljofe  Ijabitanon  is 
high, 


Edomth  reamed 


ci 


a  a 


'Icr.+Jif 


'Icr  ^9.9 


t  Hitr.the 

»f'h 

peace. 
\H  h.ihz 
ncn  of  thy 
'iread. 

\\Ortfi,. 

'     Jia49      14' 
a-497. 


'Gen. 27. 
5.3:110s  J. 


H  Or. carted 
anray  hts 
fuhflancc. 


I  Or,  doe  net 
behold^  crc. 


f  Ueb.  mag- 

tficdtbj 
month. 


IjtBb,  tftatrauh-.n  his  heart, BDliofl^aii 
tying  me  bolbneto  thegrounb; 

4.  '  though  thou  erait  ttn>  fclfe  as 
tl)c  eagle,  anb  though  thou fet  thy  ncft 
amongtheftarres,thencciliiU3J  tying 
thee  bourne,  faith  the  ?Loisr\ 

5  3Jf  'tlKcuescameto  thee,  if  rob 
bers  by  night  ( hoib  art  thou  cut  off- ) 
\boulb  they  not  hauc  flollen  til  they  haD 
enough  <  if  the  grape  gatherers  tame 
to  thee ,  iboulb  they  not  leauc  ||  fomc 
grapes  t 

6  V)q\x>  arethctiiinasofcfaufcar 
cheb  out  i  ho .%  arc  tns  hit)  things  fought 
bp? 

7  3tll  tlic  men  of  thy  confcbcractc 
hauc  brought  thee  cuen  to  the  bojbcr : 
t  the  men  that  Were  at  peace  ttnth  thec, 
haucDeceiucbthcc'^pmiailcbagainft 
thee :  t  cIk-v  that  eatt  thy  tycab  hauc  laibc 
a  ibottub  bnber  tfjee :  there  is  none  t>n- 
toerftanbing||mhim. 

8  *&nai3Jnottnthatbay)iaitl)tl)e 
%€>  is  m,  cuen  beftroy  the  ibifc  men  out 
ofebom,anbbnberftanbingoutofthe 
mount  of  <£fau? 

9  3nbthynughtic men, £>Zcman, 
fliailbemfmaycb,  tothccnbthatcucry 
oneofthcmountofcfaumaybccutotTj 
by  naughter. 

10  C  f  oi  thy  *  biolcucc  agamft  thy  I 
brother  gjacobfljamc  fljau  concr  thec, 
anb  thou  fbalt  be  cut  off  foj  cucr, 

n  gin  the  bay  that  thou  ftoobeft  on 
theotncrfibc,mthcbay  that  theftcan^ 
gcrs  1 1  cancb  a\bay  capttuc  his  forces, 
anb  fojrrmcrs  cntrcb  into  hts  gates,  1 
anb  cart  lots  bpon  Jlerufalcm ,  cuen 
tljou  villas  one  of  them. 

uaSittllthouftiouitJcftnotDaucloo- 
ftcb  on  the  bay  of  thy  tyothec  m  the bay ; 
that  hee  became  a  ftrangct ,  neither 
fljoulbcft  thou  hauc  rcioyceb  oner  the 
cijiltycn  of  giutjah  in  the  bay  of  tfjrtr  nv  J 
ftructton :  neither  flioulbcft  thou  hauc 
tfpottenpioublyin  t!it  bay  of  biftreflc.| 

13  Zhou  flioulbcft  not  hauc  cntrcb 
mto  trjc  gate  of  my  people  in  the  bay  of; 


p.j. 


f< 


orcrueJtieJ 


thcircaiamittciyca.thoufhoulbcftitot 
hauc  looucb  on  thnr  affliction  in  the  bay 
of  their  calamine,  no:  haue  lafljlunds  on 
their  l  i  fubftauce  m  the  bay  of  their  caia 
mine. 

1+ /^cither  ffjoulbcftthou  haue  ftoob 
mthecrofle  lbay  to  cut  off  rhofeof  hts 
that  bib  efcape,  neither  ifjoulbcft  thou 
haue  ||  beiiucrcb  top  thofc  of  his  that  bib 
rcmatne  m  the  bay  of  biftreffc. 

15  fonhebayof  thc?Loi30iqiccrc 
upon  all  the  heathen:  *  as  thou  haft 
bone ,  it  (ban  bee  bone  tonto  thec,  thy 
mtoatb  ft;atircturne  topott  thine  ottme 
hcab. 

16  Sfoi  as  ye  hauc  tyunKc  bpon  my 
hoiymouutainci  fliaiiauthc  heathen 
onufee  continually  :  yea ,  they  fljall 
bnnlic,anb  they  fljall  ||  ftoalloito  bottmc, 
anb  they  ftiall  bee  as  though  thcyhab 
not  bene. 

17  C  25ut bpon  mount  Zionfljail 
bcllbcliucrance,  anb  rrjere  |lfl)alibcho= 
lincftc,  anb  the  Ijoufe  of  jfacob  fljall 
poffeffe  tljeitpoflcfuons. 

18  3nbthchoufeofJJacob  fljall  bee 
aficcanbtftchoufcof  Jofcph  aflame, 
anb  thehonfeof  <£fau  To:  ftubble,  anb 
they  fljall  tnnble  ut  them  anb  bcuourc 
them,  anb  there  ftiall  not  be  ^n  rcniat^ 
nmg  of  the  houfe  of  Cfau ,  foj  the 
H©m©h<uhfpohcn!t. 

19  3nb  tljcy  of  the  g>outh  fljall  pof 
tcflc  the  mount  of  efau ,  anb  they  of 
the  plame,  the  ^hililhnes :  anb  trjey 
fljalipofleffcthcficlbsof  <£ptyaim,anb 
the  ftclbs  of  S>amana ,  anb  zscniamm 
fhaii  poiicflf  <5tlcaD. 

io  3(nb  the  captiutttc  of  this  hofle 
of  the  djiltycn  of  gjftrael  fhaii  pofMe  tljat 
of  the  Canaamtcs  cuen  tonto  zart- 
pDatn.anbthctaptiuiticofgjcrufaiem 
librjich  i^  m  S>cphatab,Q)ali  pofleffe 
tfjedtics  of  the  £>outh. 

21  ^no  *  :§>auiours  fljall  come  top 
on  mount  zion  to  urogc  the  mount 
of  €fau,  anb  tljc  *  Binsuome  fljall  be 

tl)C|L©HJC>^. 


"1 


^IONAH, 


I  Orjarctl. 


I  >,^« : 


■EzcV.  j5 


rjkfvf. 


th*t  efcapi 
\\Or,  tt(h*il 
be  holy. 


poflcfTc 
thai  which  u 
%n        ■  •  j  ■  j  i 
'  I.Tim.4. 
1 6.  ianici 5 


Lut 


CI.)} 


By  lot  J  on  ah  is  Ionah.  call  into  the  Tea, 


Called 

Matth.  i ; 


t  He!:c, 
j  north. 


thought  to 
be  broken. 


«  I  O  N  A  H. 


CHAP.   I. 

Ionah  lent  to  Nineueh,  fleali  toTarfhifh. 
4  Heisbcwrayedbyacempefr,  u  tlirowcn 
into  the  fea,   17   andl.valiowtdby  afilb. 

3  :©in  the  woib  of 
thelL©!SD  tamcj 
unto  H3Iona!)  the', 
fonncofanuttai,1 
raying, 

2  anfc,  got 
to  /Fhneuch  that 
*  great  ntte,  anb 
eryagamftit:  foj 
tljcttlUitfteDnes  is  come  Up  bcfoie  mc. 
j  25ut  3Jonah  cofe  Up  to  flee  unto 
Xacfhift),  from  the  picfencc  of  the 
!L  ©  is  5D ,  ano  wentbottmc  to  ^Joppa, 
anb  he  fount)  a  Chip  going  to  Xarftnth : 
fohe  payeo  the  fare  thereof ,  ano  went 
boiunc  into  it ,  to  goc  Until  them  bn- 
toXarftjifl)  from  the  picfcncc  of  tlje 
It©  KID. 

4  C  23ut  the  %  ©  is  s>  t  fent  out  a 
great  luinbe  into  the  fca,  anb  there  ttias 
auughtictcmpeftinthe  fca,  fo  that  the 
fl)ip  t  mas  htte  to  be  tobucu. 

5  Xhcn thc^annersinercafraib, 
anocneb  cucry  man  Unto  his  gob ,  anb 
caft  fooith  the  wares  that  Were  in  the 
ftyp,  into  the  fea, to  lighten  it  of  them: 
butjfonah  mas  gone  boiunc  into  tlic 
fibesofthcftiip,  anb  heclay,  anb  Was 
faftafleepe. 

6  £>o  tlic  flnpmaftcr  tame  to  him, 
ano  faib  Unto  himiohat  mcancft  thou, 
Oflcepcr;  3lnfc,  call  l>pouti)vC5oD,tf 
fo  be  that  Gob  Wil  tljiuUe  Upon  Us.that 
Wepenftinot. 

7  3lub  they  faib  eucrv  one  to  hisfcl- 
loll) ;  Comcaub  ictus  cafl  lots,that  we 
map  huow  foz  ilihofc  taufc  this  etui  is 
upon  us.  So  they  tart  lots,  anbthclot 
fell  upon  3lonah. 

8  XhenfaiotheyUutohimXcIUS, 
Wc  p:ay  thee  ,fo:  whofc  caufc  this  cuill 
i.  upon  us :  nahatis  thine  occupation; 
anb  lVhente  commeft  thou  *  nshat  is  thy 
countrcy;  anb  of  mhat  people  art  thou  t 

9  3lnbhee  faib  Unto  them,  3J  iman 


l^cbzcib,  anb  3  fcarc  the  %  $>m  ©  tfte 
©00  of  heaucn ,  which  hathmabe  the 
fea,anbthct):yianb. 

io  Xhcn  ibere  thcmcntcreccbingiy 
afraib,  anb  faibe  unto  hun, nahyhaft 
thou  bone  this;  (foz  the  men  tsnetti  that 
heflcbfromthep:efenceofthc?LoHj?, 
betaufchehabtolbthem.) 

n  CXhcnfaib  they  unto  hun.nahat 
fliall  lUe  boe  Unto  thee,that  the  fca  tmay 
be  talmc  Unto  us;(fo2  the  fca  jiityought 
anowastempcftiious.) 

12  3inb  he  faib  unto  them,  Xabcmc 
Up ,  anb  caft  nice  foo2th  into  the  fca  i  fo 
(hall  tlic  fca  bccaimennto  you  :  foz3J 
Hnow  that  foz  my  fafccthis great teim 
peftisuponyou. 

i3  jftcuertheleflc  the  men  t  rollict) 
harb  to  b:ing  it  to  the  lanb  ,  but  they 
coulbnot:fo2thcfeaW20ught,anbWas 
tempeftuous  agamft  them. 

i+  r©hercfo2c  they  crico  Unto  the 
!L©is©,anbfa!b,  nac  bcfccchthcc,^) 
!L©K©,ti9cbcfccchthcc,lctUsnotpc' 
rifljfo:  this  mans  lifcanb  lay  not  Upon 
Us,itmocctUbloob:fo2thoni)?L©i3£>, 
Ijaft  bone  as  it  plcafcb  thec. 

15  3>otheytool$eup3Jonah,anbeaft 
him  fooith  into  thefca,  anb  the  fca  Uuv 
feb  from  her  ragmg. 

i6  Xhcn  the  men  fcarebthcfL©isiP 
crcccbuigly,  anb  t  offcrcb  a  fatnficc  Un- 
to the  JL  ©  is  r>,ano  mabc  UoWcs. 

17  C  Ji3ow  the  h©k©  habpicpa- 
rcb  a  great  fifl>  to  fmallolU  Up  "Jonah, 
i  anb  3Jonah  was  in  the  t  belly  of  tijc  fifli 
tljiccbapcs,  anb  thicc  nights. 

CHAP.    II. 

i    TIk-  prayer  of  loiuh.     10    Heeisdeliucred 
tmm  the  tilh. 

g^f^a  Bcnjjonah  piaycb  Unto 
jSSi  K^  thcC ©  is  b  his  oob,  out 
of  the  fifties  belly, 

2  ^nbfaib,3J"trtebIIby 
rcafon  of  muie  affliction 
UntotlicfL©isip,anohcehearbmce; 
out  of  the  belly  of  |  hell  eneb  3J,aud  tljou 
hcarbcftm^Uoytc. 

j  5fo?  rtjou  habft  caft  mcc  into  the 
becpe, 


f  hilr.  m.lj 
be  f lent 
from  ix. 
\\Orj»ew 
more *n  I 
more  tern - 
oetlaosa, 
Heb.  went. 


t  Heir, 


tHeh.J!»J. 


\Hehfr 
crtfieeJjft- 
crtjicey  an  J 
vowed 

vorrei. 
•Mull!. 

40.  and  1(5. 

+.Iuke  II. 

I". 

t  Heir. 

iowelt. 


«6 


•Plal.no. 
I. 

]  minejfP.i' 
a,on. 
II  Or, the 
{rate. 


A  fail: proclaimed.    Chap.ii|.mj.  Gods  mercy 


•piii.  (9. 1 


Hrb  cur- 

utat  off. 


I  Or,  rhepii 


'PPa! 


14,1 3  and 
i4.:.htb. 
•pfal.'}.?. 


r/w.wr  Dccpe,inthctmiDDeQofthc£>eas,  anD, 
thcflooDs  compaflcDmc  about:  all  tbp 
billoVbcs  <t  thy  itoaucs  paffeb  ouer  mc.  I 
4.  Xhen3JfaiD,3Jamca(toutof 
thy  fight;  yet  J  tt>sU  lookc agautc  to 
itoarb  thy  holy  Xcmplc. 

5  3Chc  *  maters  compaflcb  mec  a 
bout  eucn  to  the  foulc  the  Depth  clofcb 
mce  rouub  about    the  ltoccDcs  lDcrcj 
iDjapt  about  myhcaD. 

6  jntoentbottmctothctbottomes! 
of  the  inountames :  the  earth  itoitt)  her  { 
batrcs  was  about  mc  fo:  cuer  :yct  haft 
thou  brought  Dp  my  life  from  iicomtp 
non, £>  1L  &  is  id  my  Gob. 

7  i©l)cn  my  foulc  faiuteb  llnthin 
mce, 31  rcmcmb2CDthclL<0>s£>,  anD 
my  p  jay  er  tame  in  Unto  thec ,  into  thine 
hoIylEcmplc. 

8  1Chcy  that  obferue  lying  baiutics, 
fefaKc  their  otbnc  mercy. 

9  25ut  3  mil faenfice  bnto  tfiec  Unth 
the  boicc  or  thati&fgiutng ,  3  ttnll  pay 
that  that  3  hauc  tooitocD :  *  tarnation  is 
of  the  Hoise*. 

io  <T3nDfhc  fLoiKJDfpaSctonto 
the  fid),  aiiDtttooimteD  out^Jonahtop; 
on  the  one  lanb. 

C  HAP.    III. 

1  lonah  fent  asraine.preachcth  Co  the  Nineuites. 
$  Vpon  their  repentance,  10  Godrepenteth. 

**S8$S&JQ  ilD  the  ltoom  of  p  IOLoistd 
--$  came  tonto  gjonah  the  fc; 
^VjgcotiDttmc, faying; 
w@$ffl&®k  *■  2nfc,  goc  tonto  Ji5i; 
S^»^3^  neuch  that  great  citic,  anD 
pjcach  tonto  it  the  pjcachuig  that  3  WD 
thec. 

?  S>o  Clonal)  arofe  anD  Ibcnt  bnto 
4t5incueh ,  accoiDtng  to  the  tbozb  of  the 
%€>  is  © :  now  /!2meucb  ibas  antrrcee; 
Ding  great  cmc  of tlnec  Daycs  tourney. 

4.  3inD  "Jonah  began  to  enter  into 
the  rmca  bayesioumcy,  anD  hce  erycD, 
anD  faiD ;  Pet  fourtie  Daycs,  anD/5int- 
ncI)fhalbcQuert!)20itocu 

5  Clothe  people  of  /I3incueh*bc; 
IccneD  GoD ,  ano  pjoclaimcDafaMnD 
put  on  facftctloth  from  the  greatcft  of 
them  eucn  to  the  leaft  of  them. 

6  f  0211102D  came  tonto  the  Btng  of 
#uiCYich,anDhcarofefromhtsth?onc, 
anD  he  latD  h«s  robe  from  himanD  couc; 
rcohim  lDith  facltcloth ,  *  fate  in  afhes. 

7  3lnD  he  caufeb  it  to  be  pjociauucD 
anD  t  pubufbcD  trj?ougl)iI5ineueh  (by 
the  Decree  of  the  Bing  anD  his  t  nobles) 
'faying  .  fLct  neither  matt  no,:  beau, 


\Hti.of 
God. 


•Mattn.IS. 
41.  luke 
11.3:. 


"f  Ihl'.grcn 
mt'i. 


hero  no;  Aortic taftc anything  letthem 
iiotfccDc,nojDunticibater. 

S  iSutletmananDbeaftbc  coucrcb 
With  racfteclotb,  anD  cry  mightily  bnto 
Gob  :  yea,  let  them  tunic  cucry  otic 
from  his  cum  Way ,  ana  from  the  lw 
lenccthat  bin  their  haiibs. 

9  *  r©ho  can  tell  if  god  Hull  turnc 
anD  repent,  anb  turnc  away  from  his 
fierce  anger,  that  We  penfl)  not  < 

10  C  3ltib  Gob  fail)  their  ii>o:kcs, 
that  they  turneD  from  their  cutii  ltoy, 

i  anD  <soD  repcutcb  of  the  cum  rhae  hce 
I  habfayD,that  he  Woulb  Docbuto  them, 
'anbhcDiDitnot. 

CHAP.    mi. 

i    Iouahrepinine;  at  Gods  mercy,   4  isreproo- 
lied  bv  the  type  of  .1  Gourd. 

?UtitDirpicafcD3Jonahcr; 
v  JC  tcrl)in9iy  >  anD  he  was  toe; 
^ry  angry. 

1  3uiDhcp2aycDbnto 
the1L©isj?,anDfayD,3J 
p;ay  thec ,  *  €>  H  o  is  je> ,  was  not  this 
my  fay  ingAbhcnJ  mas  yet  m  my  coun^ 
trey  ^  Xhcrcfozc  3  fleDDc  before  bnto 
lEarfliifl) :  fo2  3  bncib  that  thou  an  a 
*  gracious  Gob,  anD  mernfuii  ,'floil)  to 
anger ,  anD  of  great  UtnDncffc,  anD  vc- 
pcntcftthccofthceuill. 

5  Xhcrcfo^c  noil) ,  £)  %  o  h  jd, 
XalicJ  bcfccch  thee,  my  life  from  mc ; 
fo;  it  >  be  ttcr  foi  mc  to  Die  then  to  liuc. 

4  C1-hEnfaiDthc|L©BjD,||aDocft 
thou  lncil  to  be  angry  t 

5  £>o  3Jonah  went  out  of  the  citie, 
anb  fate  on  the  caftfiDc  of  the  nty ,  anD 
there  maDc  hnn  a  boothc ,  anb  fate  tn- 
bcr  it  in  the  fhaDoiD,  till  hce  might  fee 
What  iboulD  become  of  tlje  citie. 

6  ^nD  the  %  ©  m  w>  GoD  p;eparcD 
a  ||  gourD ,  anD  maDc  it  to  come  top  ouer 
5(onah,  that  it  might  be  a  fhaboib  ouer 
his  heaD,tobcliuer  him  from  his  gnefe. 
£>o33onah\bastcrcecDinggiaD  of  the 
gourD. 

7  ButGoDpjcparcDaibomiclbhcn 
the  morning  rofc  the  nertbay,  anD  it 
fmotcthcgourDthatittbithcrcD. 

8  ^iid  it  tame  to  paffc  ltoljcn  the 
S)unncDiD  anfc,  that  God  pjcpareDa 
jtochement  CaflitoinD  -.anDtheSwnnc 
beat  toponthc  hcabof  3ionah,  that  hce 
famtcb,  atibWifljcb  m  himfclfeto  Die, 
anDfaiD,  3Jt>s  better  fonue  to  bit,  then 
to  lute 

9  3mD  Gob  faiD  to  gionah ,  ||  Docft 
tljou  lbcll  to  be  angry  fo;  the  goutb  t\ 

Gggg anD' 


'loci 


•4 


'Chap.  1.8. 


*Exo.;4-c5. 
pfal-86.  j. 

iocl  1. 1  J. 


\\Or,art 
hoM  yrea!- 


\\Or,pilm.: 
Cr,fl  Htb. 
Ktkjton. 

t  Heir,  reitj- 
ccd  with 


|[0r,„r, 


God 


s  wrati 


Micah.         againftldolaters. 


\\or  um  ianbhcraib,!|3lbocu)cllto  beangty,  t> 
| :;"-""'  uentontobeath. 

io  XhenfaibthcfLsDis©,  Xhou 


the  Tonne  of 
the  night. 


^  rich,  htixre 
jeeprcp/e  all 
of  than. 
*  Deut.:2. 
I.  ifai.  12. 
t  Htb.  the 
futncfether- 

"lfji.2l5.Jl 
pfil.l  I  J.  3- 

•Drue.  ;J 
ij.andji. 

"Pfal.?7.j. 

\r1ck.adcf- 


Ibhiehthou  halt  not  labourcb,  neither 
niabcll  it  grotti ,  tbhtch  t  came  bp  in  a 


night,  anb  pertfbebm  a  night: 

n  anbtt)oulbnot3Jfparc/i2incuch 
that  great  ntic ,  ilihcrein  are  moje  then 
firfcoKthoufatibpcrfoiis ,  that  cannot 
oifcerne  betlbcenc  ttjeic  rigljt  hanb  ano 
thm  left  hanb  .anbaifo  much  cattcllf 


•  MICAH. 


CHAP.   I. 

Micah  fhewcth  the  wrar.li  of  God  a- 
gainlt  lacob  ,  for  idolatry,  io  Hcc  cx- 
hortcth  to  mourning. 

$etbo,ibofthe?U>>RiD 
thatcame  toxica!)  the 
,   fcTBojairhitcin  trje  bayes 
raof1Jotl)am,3tDa3,and 
^ W  $C3cmah  Bings  of  gju- 
,,s*  bah,ibhichhecfaujcon; 
cermtig  Samaria  ano  3Jcrufaicm. 

i  t^carc^ailyepeoplchearlicnflp 
earth ,  ano  t  all  that  therein  is ,  ano  let 
the  %om  (5 ©id  be  lbitnciTc  againfl 
you,  the  %oin  from  his  holy  temple. 

3  foi  bcrjolb ,  *  the  %  «d  is  ©  com- 
mcth  fouh  out  of  his  "place,  ant>  unll 
comcboilmcanb  treat)  bponthChtgh 
places  of  the  earth. 

4-  3lnb  *  the  mountaines  fhall  be 
molten  bnberhtm,anb  the  baiicis  (hail 
bccleftt  as  marc bcfo2ethc  fire,  andas 
theibaters  that  arc  poibjcb  bourne  t  a 
(tccpcplace. 

<,  foi  the  tranfgrcfuon  of  31acob  is 
allthis.anbfozthefmncsofthchoufcof 
3Jfracl :  iBhat  is  the  tranfgreflion  of 
3Jacob^  i  it  not  £>amana*anb  tbhat 
are  the  high  places  of  3Juoah  <  aiethcy 
not3Jfriifaiem? 

6  Xlierfo2C"3J  null  malic  Samaria 
as  an  hcapc  of  the  ficib, and  as  plantings 
of  a  bmeyarb  ano  31  unll  pouw  bounic 
the  (roues  therof  into  the  bailey,  ano  31 
unll  bifcoucc  the  founbanons  thereof. 

7  31tib  all  the  grauen  images  there 
offhall  be  beaten  toptcccs,  auoallthc 
hires  thereof  (hall  be  burnt  nnth  the 
fire,  anb  all thetboIcsthcrofuiill3nay 
Defoiatc :  fo:  flic  gathcrrb  it  ofthehire 
of  an  harlot,  anb  they  (hall  rcturneto 
the  hire  of  an  harlot. 

s  Xhctfo?c3I uui  untile  anb  houlc, 


3Jnnllgoe  ftnpt  anb  nafeeo  :  31  null 
maiie  a  mailing  hbc  the  bjagons,  anb 
mourningasthctoiblcs. 
9  Jfoj||l)crU)ounb'sinnirablc,fo?itts 
comcbnto3lnbah:  heiscomebntothe 
gate  of  my  pcoplc,cucn  to  3Jcrufaiem. 

io  c  *  Declare  pec  it  not  at  <©ath, 
Ibccpc  yce  not  at  all :  Jn  thchoufcof 
||  apiiiah  *  rotblc  thy  felfc  m  the  buff. 

ii  palTc  yce  aibay  thou  t  inhabitant 
of  ||  5>apbir ,haumg  thy  *  lhamc  naheb , 
the  inhabitant  of  ||  zaanan  came  not 
fouh  m  the  mourning  of  ||  fficth  C5el,hc 
fljail  recciuc  of  you  his  flanbmg. 

ii  ifo.z  the  inhabitant  of  sparoth 
||  lbatteb  carefully  fo?  goob ,  but  euill 
came  bourne  from  the  3Lsdib3e>  bnto 
thegatcof3Icrufalem. 

13  £>  thou  inhabitant  of  fLachiflj, 
biub  the  charct  to  thcftuirtbcaft :  fbeis 
the  beginning  of  the  finnc  to  tl)  c  baugfc 
ter  of  zion  :  foj  the  tranfgrcfTions  of 
3Jfracl  lbcrc  founb  m  tljce. 

14  Xhcrfojcfhaltthou  glucp2cfcnts 
II  to  fi0o;e(hcth-<i5ath  :  the  houfes  of 
||  3ch5ib  fhaib-  a  lie  to  p  hmgs  of  3Jfrcal. 

h  fet  rati  3)  bnng  an  hcire  bnto  thee, 
€)  inhabitant  of  siparefhah  :  II  he  fliall 
come  bnto'Jlbullanuhc  glojy  of  3Jfracl 

i6  Oi)a&cthec*balb,anbpollethecfoj 
thybclicatc  cl)iibjcn,  nilargc  thy  baib- 
ncfTeastlje  €agic,fonhey  arc  goncin; 
to  taptiumc  ftom  thee. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Againft  opprefsion.  4  A  lamentation.  7  A 
reproolcot  lniufticeand  idolatnc:  n  Apro- 
nuleot  rtllorin"  lacob. 

Or  to  them  that  beuift 
micnutte,  anb  nio.'lir  eiuii 
bpon  their  bcbS:  lbhcn 
_  thcmomingisiight.thcy 
.i.n  pMctifc  it,  becaufc  it  15  m 
thcpoibcroftfjcirhaub. 

z   3nb 


daughter!  »f 
the  otvlr. 
\\OrJbeh 

grieneuftj 
fckfofher 
wounds. 

*  a. Sam.  i. 
10. 

llThatij, 
dull. 

Mcr.(5.:rf. 
\Heb.  trtha- 
bitrejfr. 
1 1  Or,  them 

that  dweBefl 
frrel;. 
'IUi.47.30 
||  Or,  the 
coMntrej  of 
Rocket. 
\\0r,  zptace 
neere. 

Or,  was 
opened. 


\OlfT. 

1  Thai  is. 


Or,  the 
fjorj  oflf- 

.cllhilt 
come  c  .'• 

Uki.U.I 


Id  j  .8 

Or,  At- 
trittAt. 


Iudahs  plagues.  Chi 


Pleaf 


|  H?b  nirti 

<j  I.tmt-Jtati. 
on  if  lumen- 
tAtions . 
\\Ortinf}r.t 
of  refterinJ 


"Dcut.  p 
8,9-     • 
||0r,fH>p6f 

theyproph;- 

£lt. 

|  W^.  drop, 

&C. 

'Ifa.30.IO. 

\\Or,P.DT!c 
tied, 

tHclr.vp 
right. 
\rU.,e- 
Jlcrda, 

\  Heb  ontr 
H/Jtnji  a. 
fxrmtnt. 
x0r  ,mttfj. 


\OrtXHilhs 
vrith  the 
wi/ide,dnd 
l.cfiljlj,. 


z  3Cnt>  tbcp  touct  *  BclDs  anD  tabc 
them  by  btolence :  ano  boufes,  anD  tabe 
them  aibap:  fo  tbcp  ||  oppzefJcaman  aiiD 
bis  Ijotifc,  euen  a  man  ano  bts  heritage. 

3  XberefozetbusfMbthclLoBjr), 
BebolD,  agamft  this  famine  Doc  3  Dc 
uife  an  euill ,  f  com  lbbicb  pe  (ball  not  r  e- 
moue  your  neebs,  neither  (ball  vc  goc 
baugbtilp :  ft>2  tins  time  i*  cmll. 

+  C  3In  that  Dap  iball  one  tabebp 
a  parable  agamft  pou, anD  lamcntUntb 
a  t  Dolcfulllamentation,  and  fap,  nac  be 
btterlp  fpoilcD :  bee  batb  cbangcD  tljc 
poznon  of  mp  people :  boU)  batb  be  ce^ 
tnoueDit  from  me^  ;|  turning  attiap  bee 
hath  duudcd  out  ficlDs. 

5  Xberefozc  tbon  fljalt  baue  none 
tbat(baircaftaco2Dbplotiuthc<Con; 
gcegation  of  tbe  %  ©  is©. 

6  ||t*02opbccieyenot,ftythe\\tothemj 

mpzopbecic:  tbcp  (ball  not  pzopbecic 
to  them,  that  tbep  (hallnottahc  Cbamc. 

7  C  <£>  tbou  tbat  art  namcD  the 
bonfc  of  lacob ,  is  tbc  Spirit  of  tbe 
?L©tfi?!lftrairneD^retbcfebtSDongs;! 

Doe  not  mpibozDs  Do  gooD  to  bun  that 
waibetbtbpzigbtip* 

s  t€uenofiatc,mp  people  is  riCcn 
bp  as  an  enemic :  pe  pull  off  tbe  robe  j 
tibitb  tbc  garmcnt,ft6tbcmtbatpaffc 
bp  fecurelp,  as  men  auerf e  from  lbarr  c. 

9  Xbe  II  tbomen  of  mp  people  baue 
vc  caft  out  from  their  plcafant  boufes, 
from  their  chilDzen  baue  pctabcnaibap 
mpglo2pfo2euer. 

10  3rtfepeanDoepart,fo?ibiSisnot 
your  reft :  beeaufc  itispolluteD,  it  (ball 
bcttrovyoueucnibitbafojcDcltruttion. 

1 1  gjf  a  man  ||  lbaibing  in  tbe  fpirit 
auDfainjooD.Dociicravmoj.^iibiilpzo- 
pbectebntotbeeof  lbmc  ano  of ftrong 
tmnfte,  be  (ball  eucnbcctbcpjopbetof 
tbis  people. 

1 1  <r  5  null  fur  clj>  affcmblc©  %v 
cob,  all  of  tbee:  3  lbill  furelp  gather 
tberemnantofJfracl/JttHllputtbcm 
together  as  tbc  (beepe  of  25o5tab,  as 
tbe  floefce  in  tbc  mioft  of  their  folD :  trjev 
(ball  make  great  noifc  by  rcafon  of  ^ 

multitude  of  mCU. 

13  %l]t  bzcaber  is  come  bp  befozc 
them:  tlicv  baue  bzoben bp ano  baue 
paffeD  tbzougb  tbc  gate,  anD  arc  gone 
outbvttanDtbcirbmgftalpalTcbefozc 
tljem,?  tlje  %$>&&  on  the  bcao  of  them. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  The  cruekieof  the  Princes.  5  The  Ulfhood  of 
the  Prophets.  S  The  fecutity  of  them  both. 


ingprop 


lets. 


%£$&&  /2D3JfaiD,  &earc,3Jp*ap 

\&j&\%t v°[l '  ^ l1cat,s  of  Jacob, 
,  anD  pepzmces  of  tbc  houfc 
ofJfrachHiuiotfozpou 


^$r=£  to  Itnolb  luDgcmcnt 
z   rwbo  bate  tbc  gooD  ano  louc  tbc 
jetu'll,  ibbo  plttcUe  off  their  flunnc  from 
offtbem,  anD  their  flclb  from  off  their 
:  bones. 

3  ttMio  aifocatctbcflcfbofmrpco 
pie,  ano  flap  their  fbtnnc  from  offtbem, 
ianDtbcpbzcatic  tbetr  bones,  ano  chop 
tbcmmpieccs,asfoztbepot,atiDasflefb 
UntbttitbccaulDzon. 
j  4  Xbcn  (ball  tbcp  crp  bnto  the 
,  Hoisjd,  but  he  lbill  not  heare  them :  be 
lbill  cucn  biDc  his  fate  from  tljnn  at 
that  tunc,  as  tbcp  baue  bcljaucD  them- 
fclncs  til  m  their  Doings. 

5  CCXbusfatth the  TLouv corner 
mng  the  02ophcts  that  mabe  mppeo 
pic  err  c ,  that  *  bite  lbttb  their  teeth  anD 
trie;  ^cace :  anD  he  tbat  pnttctb  not  in- 
to tbetr  mouths  ,  tbcp  cucn  p2cpacc 
lbar  re  agamft  htm: 

6  Xhcrcfo2c  night  fhaii  be  bnto  pou, 
t  that  pee  (ball  not  haueabtfion,anD  tt 
(ball  be  Dar  be  bnto  pou,  t  that  pec  (hail 
not  Dunne ,  anD  the  5>unnc  (ball  goc 
Dolbnc  ouec  the  gophers ,  anD  the  Dap 
(hall  be  Darbc  ouet  them. 

7  Xben(bailtbcfeersbc  atbamcD, 
anDthcDiuuttrstonfounDcD  :pca,  thep 
(liaiiallcoucrtljeirt  lips,  fo? there n, no 
anftnerc  of  <Sot. 

s  CE25uttruelp3Jamfuiiofpott)cr 
bp  the  (pint  of  the  |l4Dis©,  anD  of  tuDg- 
ment  anD  of  might ,  to  Declare  bnto  3Ja; 
cob  his  tranfgrcffion,  anD  to  "Jfracl  bis 
fume. 

9  5?earcfbis,3!p?appou,yccbcaDs 

oftbcboufeof3acob,anDp.'tncesoftbc 
houfc  of  ^Ifract ,  tbat  abboire  tuogc 
ment  ano  peruert  all  cciuitic. 

10  XhcpbuilDbpZionibith'fblooD, 
anD^Jerufaicmibith  mtciuttic. 

11  Xhe  hcaos  thereof  uiDge  fo2  re 
Vbarb,  anD  thepztcfts  thereof  teach  foz 
hp?c ,  anD  the pzopbets  tiicrcof  Dtutnc 
foz  monep :  pet  lbill  tbcp  icane  bpon  tbc 
|L«DKP,t  anDfap ,  Jsnot  the  1L  sr> «  id 
among  bs  <  none  cum  tan  come  bpon 
bs. 

u  IChcrcfoze  (ball  Zton  fo2  pour 
(abebe  *ploibcD  j  aficlD,  aiiD^lcmfa' 
lent  (bai  become  Ijcapcs,  anD  the  moun 
tainc  of  the  houfc ,  as  tljc  high  places  of 
tbc  fozreft. 

Ggge  a     CHAP 


'Chap  !  !  1 


(  Hrir  frm 

\Htb.fnrr. 


f  Hc&.vppri 
iifft. 


•E*ck.:i. 
17  zeph.j 

bleoeb. 


Ut.:6  iS 


The  glory  of 


Ioel. 


the  Church. 


•ICii.z.2. 


•Ifc.j.4. 

ioel  3.  j  o 


•Zcph.  5. 
19. 

•Dan  7  14. 
lukc  1.53. 


CHAP.    IIII. 

The  Glory,  3  Peace,  S  Kingdomc,  11  and 
Vi&orieof  tlie  Church. 

i1  tut  *m  the  laft  bapes  it 
dial  tome  to  pa(Te,tJiatttie 
mountainc  of  the  Do wft 
of  tDcflo  B©  (ball  be 
cftabliflieb  in  tt)c  top  of 
tDt  mountatnes ,  ano  it 
tbalbccraltcDabouctDcbillcs.an&pco 
plctbaliflorbbntoit. 

i  3nb  man?  nations  fball  come, 
anbfap;£omc,anMctbsgocbptotbc 
mountainc  of  tDeH  ©8  ©,ant>  to  the 
DoufcoftDtOob  of3facob,anbbcibill 
teach  bs  of  Dis  lbaycs,  anb  ibec  ttnil 
ibalac  tn  Die  parties :  foi  tDc  Haib  (ball 
gocfoo2rt)ofZion,anDrt)cn»o?Doftbc 
%  o  is  ©  from  3Jcnifalcm. 

3  C3mbDc  (bail  uibgcamongma 
nv people,  anbrcbuUc  ftrong  nations 
afarrc  off ,  anb  tlin1  fball  bcatc  their 
froojDS  into  *  pioibftiarcs  ,  anb  their 
fpearcs  into  |  paining  Doolies: nation 
(l)aiinot  lift  bp  afiuoib'agamll  nation, 
neither  ibail  tlje\>  learnc  ibarrc  any 

mwe. 

4  25nt  tljtr  fball  fit  eiicrv  man  bn 
berDis  *Llmc,  anb  tonberbis  figgettce, 
anb  none  dial  malic  them  afraiD:  foi  the 
month  of  the  %  ©  is  w  of  boftcs  hath 
fpoben  it. 

5  iFoz  all  people  lbfll  ibaihc  cucry 
one  m  the  name  of  Dis  gob,anb  ibe  ibill 
UialRC  m  tDc /5amt  of  the  H  o  «  jd  onr 
dfobfoieucranbcncr. 

6  3Jn  tliatoap,  fattD tDc  Hois©, 
lDtll  3  affemblc  Dec  that  DaitctD,  ano 
3J  Will  gather  her  that  is  Dnuen  out, 
anb  her  that  3  hancafflittcb. 

7  35nb  3  null  maae  her  that  *  hat 
ttb ,  arcmnant  anb  her  that  lbascaft 
farrc  off ,  a  ftrong  nation  anb  the 
%  ©  is  id  *  fbaii  teignc  oucr  them ,  m 
£Pount  Zion  from  Dcnccfoo;tlj,cacn 

fo?  eucr. 
g  C3nt>tDou,£>toVwcoftDcflotn, 

tDc  ftrong  hoib  of  tlicbauglitcrof  zi 
on.bnto  tbec  fljail  it  tome,  enen  tDc  firft 
Dominion,  the  tungnomc  (hall  come  to 
the  baugDtcr  of  3fcrufalcm. 
9   Ji5oib  lbby  bocft  thou  crp  out  a 

lOVbb  i  is  there  UO  UUig  III  thCC  i  IS  til? 

cottnfcllcrpcrtfbcb?  fbz  pangs  Daucta- 
ben  tDce,as  a  iboman  m  traucll. 

io  25cc  in  panic  anb  labour  to  bjmg 
foul) ,  £>  baugDtcr  of  zion,  liae  a  ibo 
manmtraucll:  fo^  noib  ft;alttbougoc 


foojtD  out  of  the  cine ,  ana  thou  (halt 
nrbclinthe&clb.anDtDoufbaitgo  eucn 
to  25abplon :  there  ftjalt  tDou  be  ueliuc 
rcb:  there  the  H©k©  fliail  rebceme 
tDet  from  tDc  Danb  oftDme  enemies. 

1 1  C  jBoib  alfo  manp  nations  arc 
gatber  eb  agamft  thee ,  rtjat  fap,!Let  Dcr 
be  bcfilcb,  <f  let  our  eye  looa  bpon  zion. 

u  zButtDeytinolbnottDetDougDts 
of  tDe  fLiDiBEMicitDet  bnocrftano  thep 
histounfcll:fb?  Dee  fball  gather  them 
as  tDe  fbeaucs  into  the  flooje. 

i)  3rifc  ano  tD;efl) ,  €>  baugDtcr  of 
Zion :  fo:  3  ibill  maae  tljmc  home 
p«m,  s^^billmaKcthvDooucsbzairc, 
anb  thou  fliait  beat  tn  pictcs  inanp  peo- 
ple: anb  'Jibill  tonfettatc  thetr  game 
bnto  the  C  £>  is  © ,  anb  their  fubftancc 
bnto  the  Hoib  of  tDc  ibbolc  earrij. 

CHAP.    V. 

i    The  bmh  ot  Chnft.     4    His  Kingdome. 
S    His  conqueft. 

£>lb  gather  rt)y  Cclfe  in 
troupes ,  <S>  baugDtcr  of 
troupes :  Dc  hart)  lam  fiegc 
agamft  bs:  tbcp  dial  fnutc 

tDc3ungcof3fcaclU)itD 
arobtoponthcthccUc. 

r  28uttDou*J5etDlccm<CpD;ataD, 
though  thou  bee  little  among  tDc  thou- 
fattDsof3JuDab,  >  «  out  of  thee  flialihc 
come  fooJth  bnto  nice ,  thai  is  to  bernlcr 
111 3feacl :  ibhofc  gomgs  foojth  haue 
bene  fromof  ouV  fromcucriafting. 

3  XDercfort  ibill  Dee  giuc  them  bp, 
bnnil  the  tunc  that  fhccibhithtrauai? 
letD,  hart)  bought  fonb:  then  the  rem 
nant  of  bis  bjctlucn  fliail  rcturnc  bnto 
tI)ccbilD2cnof3Jfracl. 

4  C^nbDc  fball  ftanbanblifceDm 
the  ftrcngth  of  tDc  %<s>  k  ©,  m  rtjc  $9& 
icfhe  of  the  /Bamc  of  the  %  0 m ©  Dis 
(5ob,aub  thepflialiabibc :  fo:  uotti  fliail 
Dc  be  great  bnto  the  cuds  of  the  earth. 

5  2nD  tins  man  fball  bee  the  peace 
ibbcn  tDc  3flp2tan  fljail  come  into  our 
lanu :  anb  iblicn  Dee  fljail  ttcaDinour 
palaces, then  ftjall ibcratfc agamft  Dun 
fcucn  dhcpljcarbs ,  anb  eight  fp^m- 
cipailmcn. 

6  ^nb  tDey  ftiall  t  \baftc  tDc  lattb  of 
"Mgna  ib«D  the  frooib ,  ano  the  laub  of 
/Stmrob  il  in  tDc  entrances  tDerrof : 
thus  fliail  Dec  bcliuer  vs  from  the  3fly 
nan,ibhcnhccommcth  into  our  lanb, 
anb  ibhcn  Dee  trcabctD  u>itbm  our 
bobbers. 
7  3nD 


'  Marth.i. 
6.ioh.y.^i, 


\Hebr.tht 
iLilei  of 


I  Or.nJt. 


\Hth.ftin- 

cei  of  mm. 
t  Hcbr.tMe 
t/>. 

\\Ortwuh 
herorentr.A- 


\\Qrtg04tj 


Gods  controuerfie      Ch 


7    3(no  the  remnant  of  Jacob  (hall 
be  in  the  tnibff  of  man?  people,  as  a  bell) 
from  ttjc  ?L  ©  is  ©,  as  the  (holmes  Dp 
on  the  gcaffe  that  tarieth  not  foz  man, 
nozlnaitcth  fo;  the  tonnes  of  men. 

s  Onto  the  remnant  of  Jacob  (hai 
be  among  tl)e  Pennies  in  the  mibbcft  of 
many  people ,  as  a  ILpon  among  the 
bcaftsof  the  fo2rcft,asapotig?Lpona; 
mong  the  flocfecs  of  ||  (heepc :  rbho  if  lie 
goc  tluough,  both  treabcth  boiDnc,ano 
tcarcth  in  pieces,  anb  none  can  beliuer. 

9  XDmc  hanb  Qjail  be  lift  top  topon 
thine  aoncrfancs ,  aub  all  thine  ene- 
mies fhalbe  rat  off. 

10  anb  it  (hall  tome  to  pafle  in  that 
oap,fapth  the  JLo  is  isthafj  rbiiieut 
off  thp  hojfcs  out  of  the  ntflJB  of  thee, 
anb  3  lDillbcffrop  thp  charets. 

ii  AibJiMiratoffthccinesofthp 
lanb,  anb  thjolto  bourne  all  thp  ttrong 

l)OlOCS. 

11  ^nbJrbiiicutoffiDittfjttaftsout 
of  thine hanb,  anb  thou  (halt  hauc  no 
mozc  £>outhfapcrs. 

15  Xhp  grauen  images  aifo  tbill  3 
cut  off ,  anb  thp  II  flanbing  images  out  of 
the  mibQ  of  thee :  <?  rtjou  (halt  no  mojc 
ilwfhip  the  lhozBc  of  thine  hanbs. 

i+  2(nb3J  Hull  plurttebp  thp  grouts 
out  of  the  ntiobcft  of  thee :  fo  iDiu"  3  be 
ftrop  thp  II  cities. 

i5  3nb  J  ttnll  crecutc  bengcancem 
anger,  anb  furic  bpon  the  heathen, lucn 
asthrphaucnothcarb. 


\\Or,JIM 


||  Or 


IjOr.lw'ri 
•I  fa.  i.j 


•ExoJ.  i  j. 
5 1,  and 

"Num. 2i. 
j.andij.7. 


CHAP.    VI. 

Gods  controuerfie  for  vnkinduefle,  6  for  ig- 
norance, 10  for  iniulhce,  16  and  for  idolatry. 

€arc  pee  noil)  ibhat  tt)e  i 
v  1L  o  is  id  faith,3irifjc,  ton 
|tenb  thou  ||  before  the 
*mountaines,anblctthc 
liillcshcarcthpboict. 
z  locate  pee ,  50  mountalnes ,  the 
1L  ©  is  id  s>  conttoucruc,  anb  ^t  Qrong ; 
founbations  of  the  earth  :  fo?  the| 
XL  ©is  id  hath  a  tontroucrGcibith  his 
people,  anb  he  lbill  plcabciDith  Jfracl. 

3  £Mnp  people,  Ibhat  hauc  5  bone 
bnto  thee, anb tDhctetn hauc  3 iDca 
ncbthee;  telMcagamfrmc. 

4  fo:3Ib2oughtttjecbpoutofthc 
lanb  of  *  cgppt,  anb  rcbccmcD  thec  out 
of  tlKhoufcof  fcruants,anb  Jfcntbc^ 
■  fo;c  thee  iT3ofcs,  3aron  anb  pinam. 

5  £>  nip  people,  remember  noil) 
ibhat  *  iSalalt  King  of  t^oab  tonfulteb, 


anb  ibhat  Balaam  thefonnc  of  Bcoj 
anfmcrcb  Ijun  from  *  3>hitnm  bnto 
<3ilgai,  thatpecmap  finotbthcrightc; 
oufnefrcoftheftoeo. 

6  c  tEhcreihith  (hall  3  come  be 
fo:c  rtic  JL  ©  is  ©,  and  boib  nrp  fclfc  be 
foje  the  high  C5ob;  fhaiijcomcbcfojt 
himibith  burnt  offerings,  rbtth  talucs 
fofapecrcolbei 

7  nauithelLiPisJDbcpicafcbibuh 
fhoufanbs  of  rammes,  o.  ii)ith  tenne 
thoufanbs  of  niters  of  oplc  t  (hall  j 
giuc  mp firff  borne  for  mp  tranfgr clTion, 
the  fruit  of  mp  t  bobp  for  the  Gnnc  of  mp 
toulc; 

8  ^eehath  'fhetbeb  tl)cc,  £>  man, 
ibhat  is  goob  \  anb  tt>hat  botch  the 
Ho  is  id  require  of  thee,  but  to  bo  mfc 
ip,  ano  to  louc  mercp,  anb  to  t  maiac 
humblpibiththp<5ob; 

9  Xhe1L©m©*boitetrpethbn^ 
to  the  ntie ,  anb  !|  the  man  of  tbifcbomc 
fhall  fee  thp  iftamc :  heare  pe  the  robbe, 
anb  ibho  hath  appotnteb  it. 

10  C II  Are  thercpet  thctrcarures  of 
rbicKCbncOem  thcrjoufeof  thcibicReb, 
ano  the  t  ftant  mcafure  that  tsabomi- 
nablc. 

1 1  II  £>hau  3  count  them  pure  tbith 
the  lDtc&eb  balances,  anbibith  the  bag 
ofbcceittullTbcights* 

u  ifo?  the  nch  men  thereof  are  full 
of  l)iolencc,aito  the  inhabitants  thereof 
nauc  fpoRcn  lies,  anb  their  tongue  is  be* 
tcirfull  in  their  month- 

1  j  ILhcrcfojc  auo  ttiilij  malie  thee 
ficKcinfmituigthcc,  mmabing  thecfits 
folate,  becaufc  of  thp  finnes. 

1+  Xhouaiaitcate,  butnotbefatit 
tico,anbtrjptaflingboil)ne(iS.iiit.emthe 
mibftofthee,  ano  thou  (halt  tabeholbc, 
but  (halt  not  bcliuct :  9  that  lbhich  thou 
ocliuercQ,  mill  J  giuc  bp  to  the  fioojb. 

15  Xhou (halt* foil),  but tliouttiait 
notrcape:  thou  (halt  trcab the  oliucs, 
butthoufhaitnotanointtlicciDithoilc, 
^  fiocct  lbint,  but  (halt  not  bntiHC  lDme. 

16  CfojIlthcltatutcsof'iDmriare 
Hcpt,  anb  all  the  liioiucs  of  the  houfc  of 
*  3hab,  anb  peibaiBcm  their  counfcls, 
thatJfhoulomaRcihccalibcfoianon, 
anb  the  inhabitants  thereof  an  hiding : 
thercfoje pec  (hall  bearc  the  rcp:och  of 
nip  people. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  The  Church  complaining  of  her  Inull  num- 
ber, 3  and  the  gencrall  corruption,  5  put- 
tedi  her  confidence ,  not  m  nun  but  in  God. 

Gggg  3 8    Shec 


•lofh  5. 


\H<b.fa*„ 
'J'erc. 


tH't.i'l'j. 


"Dcut  10. 


hjel>  hum 
hitthjfelft 

to  waflzt. 
\\Or,thj 


tcthdt 
>kub  ts. 
Or  }id  there 
jtivnto  me- 
m*M  tin 
>ufc  of  the 
wicked?  &~c. 

fure  cf '  lean- 

\\Ort(ha£l 

cepirre 

mtht&c. 


*Deut.»8. 

38.hagg. 

1.6. 


\  Or, he  Jot  I 
Timch  kftp* 


*-f. 


•  1  .Kin.  16. 

*  i.Kin.itf. 

\[Or}aJit- 
mfimen:. 


[Perill 


ous  times. 


Mical 


ican. 


God 


s  mercie. 


\ny-  the 


'Pfal  >:. 
3  .ifii.57.i- 

\Or,!»ollj, 

or  merciful]. 


\Hchih, 

Imfchtcfc  of 
!  fit fault 


'  Mitch. lo 
(uc.J4.K5. 


S  She  tuumphehouer  her  enemies.  14  God 
comforiethher  by  promilcs,  16  byconfuli- 
on  or  the  enemies,  18    and  by  his  mercies. 

iDcismcc,  foj  3  am  as 
lbbcn  they  hauc  gatbcrcDi 
the  t  fumtner  fruits,  as  the 
grape  gleanings  of  the  urn  | 
tagc :  there  is  no  clutter  to 
catc :  my  foulc  DcfircD  the  firft  npc  fruit. : 
i  Xhc'HsooDmamspcrtflicDoutl 
of  the  earth ,  ano  there  isnonebpnghta 
mong  men  :  they  all  he  m  ibaitc  fo: 
bloob:  they  hunt  eucry  man  his  b;otbcr 
mtbanct. 

3  c  £hat  they  map  doc  cuili  lbitb 
both  hanbs  caracftly,tbc  pmuc  af  neth, 
anb  the  uiDge  asketh  foz  a  rcibarD :  aub 
the  great  man,bcbttcrcth  his f  mifcbtc- 
uous  befire :  fo  the?  ibjap  it  Up. 

4.   3Ehebcftofthtm^asab2icr:thc 
moft  bpngbt  is  fharpet  tljcn  a  tbomc 
hebgc :  the  bay  of  thy  Watchmen ,  and ! 
tbv  bifitanon  tommcth  noib  (ball  be 
their  pcrplcrme. 

5  CZruftyccnottnafacnD,putyc 
not  confibcncc  in  a  gnibc  :  hcepcthc1 
boojes  of  thy  mouth  from  her  that  ly- 
ctbmtbvbofontc. 

6  Jror  thefonne  bilbonourcththc 
father :  the  Daughter  nfctli  topagatnft 
her  mother  :  the  Daughter  mlaiba 
gamft  her  mother  m  law  -,  a  mans  cue 
nues^tbcmcnothiso.bnchoufc. 

7  1Lbcrcfo2c  3  Will  loouc  bnto  you 
the  IL  o  is  I?  :  3  Mil  wane  foz  the  I 
<5od  of  nip  faluanon :  my  Cod  Will 
hearcmc. 

8  C  Kcioycc  not  agamft  mce ,  *D ' 
nunc  encnue :  lohen  3  fall ,  3  (hail  a  ' 
nfc ;  wbcu'J  fit  inDarHnes,thc1L©iii?D ! 
(hail  be  alight  bnto  me. 

9  ^Ibill  bearc  the  mbignarton  of 
the  IL  0  b  © ,  becaufc  31  hauc  finncD  a* ! 
gamft  bun  .bntill  he  plcaD  nip  caufc,anb 
OCCtutcitiDgcmcntfo?  me  :bc  WtllbJtrg 
me  fojtb  to  the  light,  and 3  (ball  beholb 
hisnghtcoufncfTe.  I 


10  Chen  I  flic  that  is  nunc  encnue  iH,0r "^ 
(ball  fee ; ,  aub  bailie  (bail  coucr  bet  \tZllt 
*  U)h:ch  fatD  bnto  mce ,  nahcrc  is  the  ««.»«* 
|Lo«©  thy  Gob  i  mine  eyes  (bail  be;  J"'""T 
holb  her :  nolb  (ball  t  fye  bec  troben  iw° 
bowhcastbcmyjcofthc  ftrccts.         |'pf^7?- 

n  Mbcbaytbattby/Wailcsareto  113d",! 
be  built ,  in  that  bai>  fbail  the  Decree  bee  t««*.  i, 
farrcrcmoucb.  \jh*""f°r 

ii  in  that  bay  alfo  he  thai  come  cuen  vlZ"' 


ik«b 


II"'. 


to  thee  from  "Suy.«a,anD  ||from  the  fojtrt*  I' Amo>  0 
ficD  cities,  anDfiom  the  fonrefTc  cuen  to  mo*" 
the  nucr ,  anD  from  &ca  to  3>ca ,  anD 
from  mountainc  to  mouutatne  •. 

13  ||  tfotWitbftauDuig  the  lauD  (ball 
be  Dcrolatc  becaufc  of  them  tbatbWell 
thercm,fo2  the  fruitc  of  their  boings. 

1+  Cllifccbc  thy  people  with  thy 
rob ,  the  ftotlsc  of  thine  heritage,  Which 
bWcilfolitaniy  in  the  woob.tn  the  mibft 
of  Car  met :  let  them  fcebc  in  iSafban 
anb  oacab,as  in  the  bayes  of  olD.     • 

15  3cco2buig  to  the  Daycs  of  thy  com 
tiling  out  of  the  lanD  of  CgyptWUl^j 
fhcib  bnto  him  meruaiious  things. 

16  ftZbc  nations  (ball  fee ,  anD  be 
confounDeD  at  an  their  might :  tbey 
(ball  lay  their  hanD  bpon  cheit  month : 
their  cares  (bail  be  Dcafc. 

17  Xhcy  fbail  ucUctbe'Duft  Uhca 
ferpent,  they  (bail  mouc  out  of  rbeir  ■'• 
holes  UUe  ||  ibomicsof  the  earth:  they  II0' ™ 
fliaiibcafraibof  the HoBDour  cob,  ■'" 
auDlbailfcarcbccaufcofthce. 

is  nahoi  a eobiiUc bnto  thee,  that 
'  parboncth  inieiuitie,anD  paffcth  by  the  *  E*°d  34 
traiifgrcfTionof  the  remnant  of  his  he- 6' 
ntage^  bee  rctauicth  not  his  anger  foj 
cucr,  becaufc  he  bcligljtcth  ■  mercy. 

19  V)c  lbil  tunic agautebe  lbtli hauc 
compaCTion  bpon  bsibeibUlfubbuc  our 
iniquities,  ant  rhou  unit  taft  all  their 
funics  into  the  Depths  of  the  Sea. 

20  Chou  lbilt  pcrfonne  the  tmetb 
to  35atob ,  and  the  mercy  to  ^Ibttbam, 
\bbich  rhou  baft  fmozuc  bnto  our  fa; 
theirs  from  the  bayes  of  olb. 


■pf.d.72. 


NAHVM. 


\Or,,l„ 

Lordtane- 

lom  Cjod,anii 

areacnger, 

&c. 

*  Exo.lo.  ^ 

ffM.tb.it 

hxlbftiry. 

"Exo.34.7 


■■■}• 


\\Or,flrength 


^NAHVM. 


CHAP.     I. 

The  Maieftie  ot  God  ,  in  goodnefle  to  his' 
leueiitie  againft  his  enemies. ! 

Ijcburbcnof  Ji3i'- 
^>|ncuclj.1EhebooB 
of  the  Difion  of 
il5aljum  the  CI 
UoCbitc. 

%    ||<250b  is  *ic« 
lous,  anb  the 

%  SD  IS  TD  ttVLtttfi 

gctlj:thc?lois© 
reuengeth ,  aub  1  i  t  furious,  tljc  ?L©is© 
run  taUc  Dcngcancc  on  Ins  abuerfancs, 
aub  he  rcfcructl)  wrath  foz  his  enemies. 
$  X\)t  TL  o  is  ©  is  *  flolb  to  anger, 
anb  great  mpoiDcr,  anbUnllnot  at  all 

aCCllUt  (he  wicked-  fljC  ?LOE3D  hatli  htS 

ibap  m  the  lDhirlcttnub,  anb  in  the 
ftoztnt  ,anb  the  cloubs  are  thebuft  ofljus 
fecte. 

4  $?c  rcbuRCt!)  tljcfca,  anb  maftcfb 
ttbne,  anb  bnctli  bp  all  the  nucrs :  25a- 
Chan  languifheth,  anb  Carmcl,  anbthe 
flourcof  ILcbanon  languifheth. 

5  Xhe  ntountames  quake  at  Dim, 
anb tljcfnilcs melt, anb  the  cart!)  is 
burnt  at  ins  ptf  fence, pea  the  rbo?lb  anb 
ail  thatmbcil  therein. 

6  nai)o  tanflanbbcfo2chisinbtgna^ 
tton?  anb  ttnjo tan tabibe  mtfiefiero* 
neffeof  his  anger?  his  funcispoujjcb 
out  Iihc  6re,  anb  the  rocks  are  thjoVbcn 
botbncbphim. 

7  XljellfiDKiDisgoob.allftrong 
holb  m  the  bay  of  trouble,*  he  imonjeth 
them  that  trull  in  him. 

8  25ut  lbtth  anoucr  ruintingfloob 
DcVUill  maUcanDttct  cube  of  the  place 
thereof,  anb  bar  Hcncffc  fl)ail  purfuc  his 
enemies. 

9  naljatboc  ye  imagine  againlr  the 
%  <s>  is  wAyt  Unll  malic  an  totter  cube : 
affliction  fhail  not  rife  Dp  the  feconb 
time. 

10  ifonooilc  they  bcfoibcntogctljcr 
astljoznes.anblbDile  thcyarc  iminhra 
as  bumttarbs,  they  (hall  be  bcuourcb  as 
ftubblc  tulip  b2ic. 


1 1  Xljcrc  is  one  come  out  of  thec,that 
imagined)  cutll  agamft  the  fLouj?: 
taiDtcUebcounfcllcr. 

iiXljusfaiththe1Lois©,|Xhough 
tljcv  ^  ciuict,  anb  litmbifc  many,  pet 

thus  fliailthcybct  cut  bonji^uihenhe 
Cliiill  paffc  tlnough :  though  3}  Dauc 
afflutcb  thee ,  3J  lDill  afflict  thee  no 
mo2e. 

15  Jfo:  noib  lDill  3  tycaftc  Ins  yoftc 
from  off  thec,  anb  Unll  buttt  thy  bonbs 
mfunber. 

1+  ^nb  tljc  IL^is©  hath  giucn 
a  commanbcincnt  concerning  thee,  that 
no  11102c  of  flip  name  be  foU>cn :  out  of 
tljchoufeoftljygobsibiu^lcutoffthc 
graucn image,  anb  tljc  molten  image, 
3J  1DU  inaue  thy  graucfoj  thou  art  bile. 

15  2Sefjolb  bpon  the  "mountames 
the  feetc  of  him  that  bnngcth  goob  ti 
bingsjljatpublifhcth  peace.  $£>3Jubah 
t  beepe  tljv  folcmne  fcafls,  pcrfonnc  thy 
DoiDes :  to:  the  t  Uucftcb  ftjall  no  11102c 
paffe  through  thee,  he  is  btterly  cut  off. 

CHAP.    II. 

The  fearefull  and  victorious  armies  of  God, 
aoainftNineuch. 

lie  that  baflicthm  pieces 
is  come  Dp  bcfo2C  thy  face: 
beep  tljc  munition,  ttiatclj 
thclDay :  maKetin  lomes 
M  flrong :  fojtific  thy  polber 
^miglmiv- 
5F02  the  %  ©  k  ©hath  turneb  a 
\X>ay  tljc  ||  crcellenncof  3iacob,  as  the 
ercellcnnc  of  3Jfrael:  foj  theemptiers 
Jiaucempticb  them  out,  anbmarreb 
I  their  Dine  branches. 

j  Xhc  njiclb  of  his  mightic  men  is 
mabcrcb,  thcDaliantmcnarc  ||mfcar> 
let :  tlje  cljatets  fhaiibee  ibitljt  flaming 
to2cljes  m  the  bap  of  his  p2cparation, 
anb  tlje  here  trees  (ball  bee  tcrnblp 
fhaucn. 

4  Xhc  charets  fljail  rage  in  the 
frcccts ,  thev  fljail  lufllconcagamftan 
other  m  the  bjoab  \barcs:  Uhcpfliau 
fecme  lilic  t02thcs ,  tljtv  fljall  runnc  uitr 
tlje  lightnings. 


t  Hrbr.  a 
counftllcr 
•f  BtlM. 
\\Or,,f<h,j 
would  haue 
btn  atpeacrt 
fofkonld 
they  bane 
becne  nufK?, 
andfojkouid 
'hey  h.we 
I'eyirpjorttt, 
&  he  fhould 
banc  faffed 
away. 
XHcb-piornc 


M6.J2.7 
rom.10. 15. 

\Hcb.fetf. 
Lit. 


\\Orfbedif- 

ptrfer  or 
hammer. 


*  Ifa.10.12, 

\\Orjhe 

pride  of 1a- 
cobandthe 
pride  of  If- 
rue/. 


J|  Or,  d,et 
f,rlit. 
f  Hcb.  fieri* 
torches. 


fHthheir 


Thedeltruftion         Nahum. 


ofN 


incuci 


\Qr  gallants 


\Hebr.cotte- 
ring  or  cohc- 
rer. 

|i  Or,  molten. 
\\OrO~bat 
which  rrat  e- 
fta'sHfied, 
or ,  there  rvas 
al}.wdm,tdt, 
\\Ortd<fceue- 
red. 

ii  Or, from 
i  he  dayes 
rf-atjhe  hath 
bene. 

Or,  caufe 
themtoiiern, 

[J  Or,A,id 
their  infinite 
Hore,&c, 
|  Beb.veffelt 
ofdefre.. 
"•  lfai.13. 

7,8. 


\HeLCitie 
ofbhedt. 

hab.z.io. 


\Hcl:the 
flume   cf 
the  [word 
and  the 
ItjZhtmngcf 
l)}c[pc*re. 


5  J?ce  (hall  recount  his  t  ibo2thics: 
they  (hall  ttumblctn  their  ltoalhc :  they 
(hail  mane  hafte  to  the  lbai  thcrcof,anb 
tDct  Defence  (hall  bee  pjcparco. 

6  Zhc  gates  of  the  nucrs  (hall  bee 
openeb,  ami  the  palace  (hall  bee  ||  bit 

foltlCD. 

7  anb  1 1 0U5*ab  fljail  be  ||  leb  atbay 
capttue,  (he  (hall  be  b20ughttop,antohct 
maibsfhailleabcheras  itoifh  thetooyce 
of  boues,  tab2ing  topon  their  breads. 

8  26ut  jftmcuch  is  ||  of  olbc  Itftc  a 
poolc  of  lbater :  yet  they  (hall  flee  aitoay. 
S>tanb,(ta»t)  fhaii  they  cry :  but  none  (hai 
lllooftebaeftc. 

9  Zaftcyethefpoylcofulucr,taftc 
the  fpoilc  of  golbc:  ||tb?  there  ts  none 
cub  of  the  (toe,  andgiojyoutof  all  the 
tpieafant  furniture. 

10  s>\)tt  is  cinpttc ,  anb  boibe ,  anb 
tbaftc,  anb  the  *  heart  mcltcth,  anb  tfje 
ftnees  finite  together,  anb much panic 
is  in  all  loyncs.anb  the  faces  of  them  all 
gather  biacBncfTe. 

n  naherc  is  the bitoclling  of  the  Hi* 
ons,  anb  the  fcebmgpiace  of  the  pong 
3Ltotis;itoherethcfUon,  cuen  the  olbe 
Hion  ltoaiftcb,  anb  the  Hions  itohclpc, 
anb  none  mabc  them  afraib. 

iz  Xhc  Hion  bib  teare  in  pieces 
enough  fo?  hisitohclpes,  andftranglcb 
fo:  htsfLtonefles,  anb  ulleb  his  holes 
Itoithpjay,  anb  his  bens  ltoith  rauinc. 

15  aseholb ,  3  am  agamft  thee ,  faith 
the  %  o  is  ©  of  hofts,anb  3  ttnllbumc 
hcrcharctsinthcfmo6e,anbthcftbo2b 
(hall  beuourc  thyyong?Uons,  ano^J 
ibil  nit  off  thv  P2ay  from  the  earth,  anb 
the  boicc  of  thy  ntcfTcngcrs  fbau  no 
mojebchearb. 

CHAP.    III. 

The  mifei  able  mine  of  Nineueh. 

£>ctothct*blooby<City, 
it>  all  full  of  lyes  and  rob- 
bcric,  the  p?ay  beparteth 
not. 
2  SDhcnoifeofaibhip, 
anb  the  noifc  of  the  rattling  of  the 
itohceies ,  anb  of  the  pwunfinghotfes, 
anb  of  the  luinptng  charets. 

j  1Lhcho2fcman  uftcth  top  both  the 
tbnghtfito02b,  9  the  glittering  fpcarc, 
anb  there  u  a  multitube  of  flame,  anb  a 
great  number  of  cacftcifcs :  anb  Aere  is 
none  enbe  of  their  cozpfes:  they  (tum- 
ble topon  their  onpfes, 
4  23ecaufe  of  the  multitube  of  the 


lbhojcbotucsofthcibcl  fauourcto  har- 
lot, the  milrrcffc  of  mitchcrafts,  that 
fcllcfh  nations  through  her  ltoho2C* 
ibomes,  anb  families  thjough  her 
ltoitchcrafts. 

5  26cholb,*3l  am againtt thee, faith 
the  ?L  ©  is  ©  of  holies ,  anb  3  lbtll  bif- 
coucrthyfturtcs  topon  thy  face,  anbjl 
lbill(hclb  the  nations  thv  naftctonctic, 
anb  the  ftingbomcsthy(hamc. 

6  3lnb  3  tbill  tafl  abominable  aith 
topon  thee,  anb  matte  thectoile,anb  itoill 
fct  tljee  as  a  gating  ftocbe. 

7  3lnb  it  fljail  come  to  pafle,  that  all 
the?  that  looue  topon  thee,  fl)ail  flee 
from  thee ,  anb  fap  -,  iBmeueh  is  lapbe 
ltoaflcitoho  ltoillbemoaneher  i  itoljcncc 
fljail  3  fceue  tomfo?ters  foz  thee? 

s  art  thou  better  then  ||  populous 
iI5o  ,thatitoas  fcituatc  among  the  rtuers 
that  had  tljc  maters  rounb  about  tt, 
itohofc  rampart  was  the  fea,and  her  itoall 
was  from  the  fea* 

9  cthiopta  anb  <ff£r?pt  were  her 
ftrcngthanbit  was  mfimt,^ntanb  JLu* 
bun  lucre  ttljp  helpers. 

10  J3ttwastbecaricbaibap,fl)eltocnt 
into  taptiuttie:  her  vong  chilbjcn  alfo 
tbcrcbafhcb  m  pieces  at  the  top  of  an 
the  ftrcetes:  anb  they  call  lotsfo?  her 
honourable  men,  anb  all  her  great  men 
itoerebounbtnthaines. 

11  Xhouaifofbaitbe*bnmKcn:thou 
(bait  bee  htb ,  thou  alfo  (halt  fecfee 
flrcngth  becaufe  of  the  enemte. 

ii  ailthvftrongholbSrtiaiibelikefig 
trees  tbith  the  fitft  ripe  figs :  if  thev  bee 
fhaRnt,thev  fhaii  cuen  fall  into  the 
mouth  of  the  cater. 

13  2Scholbc,  thp  people  in  the  mtofl 
of  thee  are  Voonxcn :  the  gates  of  thp 
lanb  (hall  be  fct  itoibe  open  tonto  thine 
enemies ,  the  fire  fbau  beuourc  thy 
barrcs. 

14-  SD^aito  thee  ruatersfo:  the  ficge: 
fojnfic  thp  Or ong  holbcs ,  goc  into  clay, 
anb  trcab  the  mo2tet :  maac  ttcong  tljc 
bjtcBeBill. 

15  Xhcrefhail  the  fire  beuourc  tljee: 
tljc  froojb  Oiaii  nit  n)ee  off :  it  (hall  catc 
thee  top  liBc  the  tanBcrltoo^me :  maftc 
thy  fclfc  many  as  the  canBerltoonnc, 
maftc  thv  fclfc  many  as  tfje  locufls. 

i6  Xhou  haft  uuiinpiieb  thy  met? 
chants  abotic  the  ftarrcs  of  heaucit;  the 
canftcrilwmcllfpoilcth  f  flieth  aitoay. 

17  Xhccrottmcb  are  as  the  locufls. 
anbthy  captainsas  the  great  grafbop 
pcrsttiljich  campc  mthc  hebges  mthc 

colb 


Era.47.;. 

czek. 16. 
i7- 


P.m.. 
Heir.  A  « 
Amon. 


W'iM 

help. 


"Iere.ij. 

'7- 


\\Orrfr„,. 
deth  htm- 


Thciniauitie 


Ch; 


£t 


of  the  land. 


\\Or,V*/t'**t 


•lob  J  1.7. 
icre.11.1. 

pr,nrejied. 

"AaCsi3. 
4'. 


IHeir. 
breadtht. 


||  Or,  from 
them  (hall 
proceed  [he 
tud^ement 
ofthefe,  and 
theciplimtj 
ofthefe. 
^Heb.fnarp. 

•Zrph.;.3. 


coib  bap :  but  U)l)cntl;e  £>unne  actfetlj, 
tljcvfltc  aibap ,  anb  tijcir  place  is  not 

ftnOVUClt  VO\)ttt  tljCp  arc. 

is  Xl)pmcphearbSflumbcr,<©RUtg 
of3l{r^ia :  tj)p  II  nobles  fljall  DibtU  m  the 
duih  tl)p  people  is  fcattereb  bpon  ttje 


mountaines,f  no  mangatrjetetlj  them. 
19  Xtjereis  no  njcaimgottrjp  bwife: 
tl)p  ltoounb  ts  gricuous:autrjatrjearc 
the bunt  oftljec ,  (bail  clap  trje  tjanbs  o- 
uec  tljee ,  for  bpon  tbtjom  liatt>  not  trjp 
ttjicHcbneffe  paffeb  contimiaiiv  < 


•jHABAKKVK. 


CHAP.    I. 

VntoHabakkukcomplaimngotthc  iniquitie 
of  the  land,  5  is  (hewed  the  learcfull  ven- 
geance by  the  Caldeans.  11  Hee  complai- 
ncth ,  that  vengeance  fhould  be  executed  by 
them  who  are  fancworie. 

ftcburbcutbhicl) 
fcabauRuu  pro- 
phet bib  fee. 

1  £>?LflDis©, 
boiDc  long  fljall 
3  eric,  anb  thou 
Unit  not  Ijeatc! 

euen  ttp  OUt  bntO 

tljee  ot  biolencc, 
anb  trjou  unit  not  fane; 

j  nahpbocftthoutycUjmcinlauitp, 
I  tanfeme  to  btl)olb  gricuancc  ;fo?  fpoi< 
ling  anb  btolencc  are  before  me:  furjete 
arc  tiut  raifebpflnfc  ano  contention. 

4  Xrjcrcfo2C  the  TLaibc  is  flacfecb, 
anmubgcmentboctnncucrgoefoortl): 
for  the  *ujicRcb  boctn  tompafle  about 
thengrjtcous:tljcrforc||lfcrongtubgc; 
mentpzocccbetrj. 

5  iDScrjolb pc  *amoog  tDcljcatijen, 
anb  rcgarb,anbibonbcr  marueilouflp: 
for  3  ttnl  ibozRc  a  iborUc  m  pour  bates, 
which  pec  will  not  bclecuc,  though  it  be 

tOlbCyou. 

6  5Fojloe,3Jrau"ct)ptI)cCaibcan5, 
tljat  bitter  aub  hamc  nation ,  lbotro 
(hall  march  thzough  the  t  breabtft  of  the 
lanb,to  polTefTc  tlje  bVbcllmg  places 

thatarenOttl)CirS. 

7  Xl)cp  arc  terrible  anb  brcabfull : 
HtlKir  utbgcmcntanu  tljcir  bignup  (hai 
pjotcebofthcmfclnes. 

s  Xhcir  Wits  alfo  arc  ftulftcr  then 
the  Icoparbs,  anb  arc  mo re  t  fierce  then 
tnc  *  cucmng  loolucs :  *  their  hortcmen 
a)ailfp2eabt!)ciufciiics,anbtlKtrUo2fc 
men  (nail  come  from  farrc ,  trjcp  (hall 
file  as  tlje  eagle  that  haftcthtoeatc. 


Wieb.Jrirt- 


9  Xhep  (hall  come  an  for  biolencc 
t  trjctr  faces  Hall  fup  bp  as  the  eaft 
tbtnbc ,  anb  thep  n;ail  gatljcr  the  capti- 
uttic  as  ttje  fanb. 

10  2nb  thep  thai  fcoffe  at  the  mings, 
anb  the  princes  ftwii  bee  a  fcozne  onto 
trjem :  thep  (hall  bcribc  eucrp  ftrong 
holbe  for  thep  (hall  heape  bull  s  taac  it. 

11  Xrjen  fl>ail  his  mmbc  crjangc,anb 
hemailpalTeouer,  anboffenb,  imputing 
this  his  potter  bnto  his  @ob, 

it  Orttrjou  notfrom  eueriafting, 
£>  IL©  a  id  nip  d5ob,  nnncfcoiponc? 
Vbevhailnotbie:  £>JL£>K©,thouha(t 
orbamcb  them  foz  utbgement,  anb  © 
tmigntic  ©oo,  trjou  tjatt  t  cOablifb,eb 
ttjemfo;  correction. 

13  Thou  art  ofpurcr  t?cs  tfjen  to  be« 
fjolbeeuill,  anbcandnotlooRcon  ||ini- 
rraitie :  ibrjerefo?c  looacft  tljou  bpon 
thcmtrjatbcaie  treacrjerouflp,  and^oh 
beft  tbp  tongue  rbrjen  tlje  lbtcUcb  be? 
uotrreto  tlje  man  tljat  is  more  rigrjtc* 
oustljcnDcc; 

14.  ^nbmaRcftmcnastocfifhcsof 
trje5>ea,  as  trje  || creeping tljuigs,trjat 
haue  no  ruler  oucr  trjem. 

15  XrjcytaRcbpailoftrjnnttriffjtrjc 
angle  :tfjev  tatcntljcmin  rljcicnccanb 
gatOcrtrjcmintrjctrllbraggc.trjcrefore 
tfjev  rctovtc  anb  arc  glab. 

16  ICrjcrcforctljcvfacnftcebuto  tljeir 
net,  anb  bucne  mcenfe  bnto  ttjeir  bjag : 
bccaufcbvtl)ctntrjcirpo?ttoni5fat,anb 
trjeirmcat  ||  plenteous. 

17  &!)aiitbcp therefore  empttc  their 
net,  anb  not  fparc  continually  to  Hap 
trjenations? 

C  HAP.    II. 

1  Vnto  Habakkuk  ,  waiting  for  an  anfwere,  is 
fhewed  thathemulhvaiteby  taith.  5  Tli: 
iudgementvpon  the  Caldean  forvnfatiahle- 
nefle,  9  forcouetoufDefie,  11  lorcrucltic, 
i<  tordtunkenneiTe,  18  andforidolatrie. 

3ivbili 


\Hd.ih 

fuppmgvpcf 

therrfjeer, 

C^C.Or^hetr 

faceiP>afi 

loik'  twtrrd 

the  Erf: 

Heb.theep* 

pojtnonof 

theirfacei 

toward  the 

Ea/l. 


^Heh.rocke. 
t  Heb.  foun- 
ded. 

pr.grtt. 
ujnte. 


||  Or,  moo- 
tang. 


\Or,ptt  vet 


Het.fat. 


s 


tones 


fliall 


cnc. 


Habakkuk.     Woe  to  idolaters. 


•Ifai.u.  3. 


\Htbf,*- 
■edpUce. 
\\Or,mnv. 

|  Or,  xrhen 
J  Am  tirOMcd 
nth.   Htb. 

1-pon  my  rc- 
iroofeor  ar- 


'Hcbr.10. 
37- 


*Iohn;. 
;6.rom.l- 

hcb.io.  ,c 
,  ||  Or,  bow 
1  much  more. 


\\OrJ:oc,he 


tfieb.b/^dt. 


"Icr.2  2.1  ? 
\  Or, gam  ft h 

n   tudl 
game. 
f  Heb.palme 
of  the  band. 


|  ^r, piece, 
>r,faftemn%. 
I  \\Or,jvttnejfe 
againjttt. 

"Ez.cch.34. 
9- 

nahtim.^.i . 
^HcbMosds. 

||  Or,  in 

vame. 
\\Or.b, 

knowing  the 
fhryofthc 
'Lord. 

»I6i.n.s>. 


n&iil  *  ftanu  bpon  mp 
ibattb ,  $  fct  mee  upon  the 
t  torbjeanb  ibill  tbattt)  to 
fccttJbatbcibiUfapllbnto 
mc,anbibhat3Jibaiiaii* 
fujccc  j|  ibben  31  am  repjoueb. 

2  3lnb  the  ?L©is©  anfcucrcb  me 
ant)  fatb,  n&ttetbebifion,  anbmabcit 
piame  bpon  tables ,  that  he  map  runnc 
thatrcabcthit. 

3  jfoztbebifiontspetfoianappoin* 
tcbtimcbutattbctbecnbitfbaiifpcaB, 
anb  not  lic:tbougb  it  tatp,ibau  fo?  it,be* 
caufcitnnirTurcipcomc.itrbtlnottatp. 

4.    23cb0lb,  blS  fOUU  which  iSltftCD 

top ,  ts  not  bpngbt  in  Dim  >  but  the  *  iuft 
(ball  hue  bp  his  faith. 

5  €  I!  J3caalfo,bccauCcbc  tranfgrcfc 
fcthbp  rbtnc,  heisap;ioubmatt,ncitbcr 
Bcepcthatbome,\bhocniargcfhbtsbc; 
fire  as  Dell ,  anb  is  asbcath.anb  cannot 
befatifficb ,  butgatberetb  bnto  him  all 
uations,$hcapctbbntobimailpcoplc: 

6  §>hal  not  all  theft  tahc  Dp  a  para 
ble  agamfthimanb  a  tantmgpjoucrbe 
agamitbnn,  anbfap ;  ||  ©octobtm  that 
mewafctf)  that  which  tsnot  bis  :  bom 
long  *  ano  to  him  that  labethhimftlfe 
lbitbtbtcBcciap. 

7  S>ball  tbep  not  rift  bp  fubbcnlp 
that  (bail  bite  thee* anb  atba&ctbat 
(ball  bere  thee*  anb  thou  (bait  be  fa? 
booticsbntotbemi 

8  25ecatift  thou  baG  fpoilcbmanp 
nations,  all  the  remnant  of  the  people 
(bai  fpotlc  thee :  bctauft  of  menstbloob, 
ano  fo?  the  biolcncc  of  the  lanb,  of  the  ci* 
tic,anb  of  all  tbatbibcll  therein. 

9  Craoetobimtbatlcouctctban 
cm  11  couctoufncDTcto  htshoufc,  that he 
map  fct  his  ncft  on  high >  that  bee  map 
hcbehucrcbfromtbctpotbcrofeuili. 

10  Xhoubattconfuite&fbametotbp 
houfe ,  bp  cutting  ofFmanp  people,  anb 
baftfinncb  a^amittbpfoulc. 

n  foi  the  (tone  (ball  trie  out  of  the 
mail,  anb  the  ||  bcamc  out  of  the  timber 
llibaliaiifiucrcit. 

it  fLtt)oe  tohini  that  builbcth  a 
tottmeibitb*  toioob,  anoftabltibctb  a 
citiebpuitciuittc. 

u  nscholb,»s  it  not  of  the  %  «r>  is  ©  of 
holies ,  that  the  people  (ball labour  in 
the  berp  fire,  anb  the  people  fbanucaric 
themfciucs  fiw  1 1  berp  bamtte  < 

14  jf  01  the  earth  (ball  be ffllcb  ||  Vbitrj 
the  *lmoiblcbgc  of  the  glozp  of  the 
%  ©  K  ©,as  the  ibaters  coucr  thc5>ca. 

15  C  ttJoc  bnto  bun  that  gtucth  his 


neighbour  tKinfte:  that  puttcftthpbot^ 
tell  to  him ,  anumabctt  himbmn'feenat 
fo  that  thou  mapeft  Ioorc  on  tljcirna^ 
Bebncfft. 

16  Xhou  art  filleb  11  Ibitb  (bamc  foj 
glo;p  :  *b?inBe  thou  alfo ,  anb  let  tbp 
fo?cfBm  bee  bncouercb:the  cup  of  the 
%  <s>  is  ©  &  right  banb  (ball  be  turneb 
bnto  thee,  anb  fljamcfullfpcibuig  foaibc 
onthpglo?p. 

17  jfo?  the  biolcnce  of  Lebanon 
(bail  couer  tbec:anb  thcfpoilc  of  beads, 
which  mabe  them  aftaibe ,  becaufe  of 
mcnsbloob ,  anb  fojthe  biolcncc  oftlje 
lanb,ofthecitp,?ofaithatbibcltherin. 

18  C  B9bat  p?ofiteth  the  graucn 
tmage,thatthemaBcrthctcofhathgra= 
ucn  it ;  the  molten  tmage,anb  a  *  teacher 
of  lies ,  that  t  the  mabcr  of  his  tbojifec, 
truficth  therm,  to  maBebumbciboics. 

19  !©oe  bnto  him  that  faith  to  the 
iboob,  3ltbaBc :  to  the  bumbc  flone, 
strife,  it  fl)aii  teach  :bcbolb ,  it  tsiapeb 
oucr  Vbtth  golb  anbfiluer,anb  there  is  no 
b:  each  at  all  in  the  mibbcft  of  it 

io  26ut*thc  ILsdis©  isinhiSholp 
templc-.t let  all  the  earth  Bccpcfilencc 
befojehim. 

CHAP.     III. 

1    Habakkuk  in  his  prayer,  trembleth  at  Gods 
Maiertie.    17  The  confidence  ot  his  faith- 

p:apcr  of  nabaUHuU  the 
p?ophet||bponS>igionoth 
z  £>?L©BjD,3Jhaue 
hcarbtthp  Ipeath,and  ibas 
afraibc :  &)  %  o  w  p,  J|  re? 
uiuc  thp  ibo?Bc  m  the  nubft  of  the 
pecrcs ,  mtbemtbft  of  tbcpecrcsmaue 
Bnoibcn  mrb?ath  remember  mcrcp. 

j  d5obcamefrom||Xeman,anbthc 
holp  on  from  mount  paran  dcialj. 
l^is  glo?pcoucrcb  thehcauens  anb  the 
earth  ibasfuil  of  his  pjaifc. 

4-  ^nb  his  bnghtneffe  lbas  as  the 
light  :ljc  had  ||  homes  comm.ne  out  of  his 
hatib ,  anb  thcreibastljc  bibuigof  ijis 
pott/er: 

$  25cfojc  i)im  lbcnt  the  pcfiiletuc, 
anbllburmng  coaics  lbent  fojtb  at  his 
fectc. 

6  i^cftoobanbmeauircbtheeartl) 
hec  behclb  anbbjoue  afunbcrthenatis 
ons,  anb  the  cucrianmg  mountatnes 
ibcrcfcattcrcb,thcpcrpctuallhillesbib 
bolb  c :  his  ibapes  a  re  cucr  lalbng. 

7  3J  favb  the  tents  of  ||€iifban  fltti 
affliction:  andthc  curtamesof  theianb 
of  i^ibian  bib  tremble, 

8    tt\15 


||  Or,  more 
th  fame 
then  with 

gbrj. 

'Icr.25.2t5. 


"ler.  10.8, 
14-zcc.  10. 
i. 
\Heh.The 

factoncrof 
htsfacion. 


tHeb.hef,. 
text  oBtbe 

ejrth  btfere 
h\mt 


\)Or ,  accor- 
ding to  vari- 
able fongt  er 
tunes  cailid 
trth(brcrrt 
Shtguwcth. 
XHeb.  thy 
report  or  thj 
bearing. 
\Or,preferue 
ahue, 
\Or,tU 
South. 


bright 


no, 

beames  ou 
ofhajide. 


||  Or  .bur. 
rwigdifcafcs. 


\\Or,Etbio. 

\Or,'jnder 
affiitium  er 
varritit. 


God 


l|0'.'*7 

chare  tswtft 

\\0r,th<fH 
didfl  cleaue 
the  riners  of 
the  earth. 


*  loik  I  o. 

|  Or,  thine 
arrow  etrra  l- 
ktdtnthe 
tight, &c. 
•Jofh.IO. 


t  HAflW- 
kin°  raked. 


^Hcb.bytz 

fyngarray/ 
will  maksan 

tHeB.  the 
face  of  the 
land. 
\\Or,/dolet. 


s  wrath Chap.).         fordjuersfinncs. 


8  naas  the  Hspis©  DifpieafeD  a* 
gamft  the  nucrs  *  was  tljtine  angers 
gamft  the  nucrs « was  thp  ru^att)  agamft 
the  S>ca,tbat  thou  DiDft  ribe  upon  thine 
botfes,  and  ||  tl)p  cbatets  of  tarnation '. 

9  Xbybowwasmaoc  quite  nafeeo 

according  tO  tIjC  OatbCSOf  tt)C  tTlbCS,euen 
thy  IDO^D.  dClal).  ||XbOUbtDft  clcauc 

the  earth  With  nucrs. 

10  %$i  mountatnes  fame  thee,  and 
tljcy  ttemblcD:  the  ouerfloWingof  the 
water  paffcD  by :  the  bcepe  DttereD  bis 
Poyce,  and  uft  pp  f)ts  fjanbs  on  high. 

ii  Xbe  Smnne  and  <©oonc  *  ftoob 
fttll  in  their  habitation :  ||  at  the  ligljt  of 
thine  *  arrowes  tUcr  Went,  and  at  the 
(bmmg  of  tljv  gltttcttng  fpcare. 

ii  Xbou  Dioft  march  tlwougti  the 
lanb  in  moignation ,  thou  Dtbft  thjeft) 
the  heathen  manger. 

13  Xbouwcntcftfo?tbfo;tbcfaiua= 
tfon  of  tfjp people,  cucn  fo;  faluation 
With  thine  Slnointcb,  thou  WounbcDft 
tljc  heap  out  of  tlic  boufe  of  tbe  WtcftcD, 
tby  bifcoucrmg  tb  c  fouiiDatton  Dnto  tlje 
ncche.  S>ciab. 

14  Xbou  DiDft  ftnlte  through  xuttt) 


bis  ftaues  the  beaD  of  bis  billagcs:  they 
t  came  out  as  a  Wbirle  WmDc  to  fcattcr 
me :  their  retoyemg  wa,  as  to  Dcuourc 
tbcpoojcfctretly. 

15  Xbou  DiDft  ipaifte  tbzougb  the 
<S>ca  With  tljine  bozfes ,  through  the 
1 1  tjeapc  of  great  rbattrs. 

i6  i©ben  31  ncaru,  my  belly  trem* 
bleb:  my  lips  curiucrcD  at  tlje  Doiec:rofc 
tenneffe  cntrcb  into  my  bones,  anb  3 
tccniblcDin  myfclfc,  that  3  might  reft 
in  tbe  Day  of  trouble :  when  ljec  com^ 
mctbbpPntotbepcopuMjeWtlllinuaDc 
tbcm  With  bis  troupes. 

17  C  3ltljougb  the  fig  tree  (ball  not 
bloffome,  neither  fhali  finite  bee  m  the 
Pines:  the  labour  of  the  £>iiuc  (ball 
tfailc,anDtljcficlDs(baiycelDnomcat, 
tt>c  floctte  fl)ail  be  nit  off  from  tbe  folbc, 
anb  there  o^tbc  no  hears  m  tl)t  Italics : 

is  Pct3JWtllretoyceintbe!Loi3£>: 
3  Vbtll  toy  in  the  C5oD  of  my  faluation. 

19  Xl)cfl©iKBC5oDismyftrengtl), 
anb  he  will  malie  my  fcctlilie  *bmDcs 
feci,  anb  be  will  maUc  meto  waluc  Ppon 
mine  high  places.  %o  the  tbiefc  finger 
on  my  t  ftringcD  mftruments. 


\H,b.xrrre 
tcmpeJtHoxi, 


\\Or,mui. 


^ZEPHANIAH. 


CHAP.      1- 

Gods  feuere  judgement  againft  Iudah  for 
cis  finncs. 

$e  vooibt  of  tbe 
%  sd  a  ©  rufjict) 
tame  bnto  zes 
pbamab  tbe  fon 
ofCutbi,  tbe  fon 
of©ebaiiab,tbc 
foune  of  ^mari* 
ab ,  tbe  fonnc  of 
I?i5Biab ,  m  u> 

fiayes  of  3ofiab ,  tbe  fonne  of  Simon 

ftingof'Jubab. 
z  3  tvpillPtterlyconfume  all  things 

from  off  t  the  ianb,faifb  the  %  ©  is  s>. 
3   3  tttll  confumc  man  anb  bead: 

3J  Vbill  confume  thcfoules  of  the  \)t& 

uen  anb  the  fifbes  of  the  fea ,  anb  the 
(rumbling  blocns  ttntb  the  rbicaeb, 

anb  3J  ipiu  cut  off  man  from  off  the 

lanb,  faitlj  the  3L©  E  je». 


4  3totliaUoftcetcboiitmincbanD 
Pponjubab,  anb  Ppon  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  ^icriifaicm,  anb3I  iPili  cut  off 
the  remnant  of  isaal  from  this  place, 
and  the  name  of  tlje  Cbemaruns  rnttb 
tbepnefts: 

5  Slnb  them  that  llwflnp  tlje  boftc 
of  btauen  upon  tljchoufc  tops,  jtljcm 
that  lnojtbip,  and  that  fmcarc  ||by  the 
%  ©  is  w,  a  nd  tljat  frocare  by  fl|9alcham: 

6  Slnb  them  that  arc  turucb  bacfec 
from  tlje  ILsdis©,  ^tljofc  that  banc  not 
fought  p  |l€>KjD,noj  enqiurcb  foi  him. 

7  i)oio  thy  peace  at  the  pjcfcncc  of  the 
ILozb  (5  o  id  :  fo^  the  bay  of  the  #.«mki> 
tsat  banb :  fouhc  H  €>  a  ©  hath  pjepa^ 
r  cb  a  faenfice :  he  hath  t  btb  bis  ghefls. 

8  3lnD  tt  (ball  come  to  paffc  m  the 
Day  of  tlje  H©ik©£>  Sacrifice,  that  gj 
Will  tpunifl)  tbe  pnnces,  anb  tbe  htugs 
tbilDjen,  anD  al  fuch  as  are  clotljtD  With 
(tcangcapparell. 

9  fnthefameDayaifoWil^punilb 

all 


I  Or,  cut 


tHct.lu 


•  :.Sam. 
ii. 54  pfa!. 
i8.,4. 
\Hct  Ncgi. 
noth. 


ll  Or,  to  ihc 
Lcrd. 


\  Hct.fin. 

U'ficJcr 

prcftrrJ. 

'jfon. 


Setled  on  the  lees.    Zephaniah.       Seeke  the  Lord 


fHttr.nr- 

tUd>orth, 
■ntd. 


•Dcu.sS. 
ainui  J.  I ! 


«rcrc.;o.7. 
iocll.n. 

21DOt  J,  1?. 


•  Prou. 1 1 

4.C7.CV.7. 

>9- 
Zeph.;8. 


||  Or,  ml  it 
jiratu. 


all  ttjoft  tljat  leapt  on  the  thjctboib, 
lbbich  611  their  matters  houfes  ilnth 
molenecatibbcccit. 

10  anb  it  (ball  tome  to  pattern  tljat 

Da?,faitl)  tljelLfiDK©,  thattherefhall  be 

thenoifeofactpfromtheti(bgate,anb 
an  boiulmg  from  ttjc  feconb  ,  anb  a 
great  craQjtng  from  tl)t  htls. 

11  $on>Ie  pee  inhabitants  of  ^ab- 
le (b  ,  fo?  all  1 1) r  merchant  people  are  cut 
bourne :  all  tljrv  tijat  beare  bluer  are 
cut  off. 

11  ^nD  ttft)ailcotne  to  pafleat  that 
time,that3Jtt)ii  featch  Jctufalem  ttnth 
tanbles,  anb  pumfl)  the  men  that  art 
t  fttleb  on  there  lees,  that  fap  in  their 
heart,H:he  %  ©  k  ©  ttrillnot  boe  gdob, 
neither  tbill  he  boeeutll. 

13  1Chcrefo«  their  goobs  (ball  be* 
comeabootp,anbfbetrhoufcsa  bctoia* 
tion :  thep  (ball  alfo  builb  houfes,  but 
*  not  inrjabite  them,  anb  the?  (hall  plant 
SHine parbs ,  but  not  bjinae  the  Ibine 
thereof. 

14.  Xlje  great  bap  of  the  31©  k©  « 
neere ,  it  tsneere,  anb  hattctb  greatly, 
euen  the  boitc  of  the  bap  of  the  %  ®  »  m 
the  inigbtp  man  (hall  crp  there  bttterlp. 

15  1Chatbap'sabapof*tt)?atb,abap 
of  troubleanb  bidreue,  abapoftbadc* 
nefleano  befoiation,  abap  of  bartmede 
anbgloonuneffe,  abap  of  tloubcs  anb 
fhicBebarfeencfle; 

us  abapofthctrumpetanbalarme 
againft  the  fenteb  cities ,  anb  againd  the 
hightott>?cs. 

17  anb  3  ttill  bang  biftrtffe  bpon 
men,  that  thep  (ball  ttaibe  line  blinbe 
men ,  becaufc  thep  haue  ftnneb  agatnd 
thellflDiH©,  anb  their bloob (hail bee 
poitytb  out  as  bud,  anb  their  fled)  as 
the  boung. 

is  *  Neither  their  filuec  no?  their 
golDcmailbeabletobeUUerthcminihc 
bap  of  the  JL«Dia©$)  tb?ath.  bnt  the 
ibholeianb  (hall  bec'bcuonrcb  bp  the 
fire  of  his  tealoufie:  fo:  hee  (ball  matte 
euen  afpeebpribbantf  of  all  thenifhat 
bUifiunthf  lane. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  An  exhortation  to  repentance.  4Theiudge- 
ment  ot  the  Philifrines,  8  OfMoaband 
Amnion,  u  Of  Ethiopia  and  Afsyria. 

athcr  pour  fclues  togc* 
thcr,pea  gather  together, 
£>  nation  1 1  not  befircb. 

2    2Sefb?c  the  bctrce 
bung  foourj,  before  tbe  bap 


paffc  as  the  cbaffe ,  before  the  fierce  an 
gerofthelLtf>iB©comebponpou,be* 
fo?e  the  bap  of  the  %  ©  m  $>  £>  anger 
come  bpon  pou. 

3  S>eefeepcthe!L©i8©allpcmcel$c 
of  the  earth  >  Which  haue  ifo?ought  bts 
mbgement,  feeturtghteoufneffe,  fecfee 
meelmcfle:  it  map  be,  pe  (ball  be  bib  in 
the  bap  of  the  3L  ©  is  ©  s>  anger. 

4  C  5Po?  (Ca^a  (ball  bee  fotfaften, 
atibafljculon  a  befoiation  :  thep  (ball 
biiue  out  afbbob  at  the  noone  bap,  anb 
Citron  (ball  be  rootebbp. 

5  Wot  bnto  the  inhabitants  of  the 
(ea  coaft :  the  nation  of  the  CheretbtteS, 
thett/o?bofthe!L©m©  is  againd  pou: 
^>  Canaan,  tbeianbofthepmlidines, 
3  ibill  euenbedrop  njee,tljat  tiherc  fhal 
be  no  inhabitant. 

6  anofhefeatoad  (bail  bee  btbefc 
lings  and  cottages  fo?  (bepljcarbs,  anb 
folbesfo.'floclits. 

7  anb  the  toad  (ball  bee  fo?  the 
remnant  of  the  houfe  of  3Jubah ,  t^ 
(bail  feebe  thereupon,  in  the  houfes  of 
afb&clon  (ball  thep  lie  bolbneintbe  v 
uentng:||fo?  the  %  ©  is  ©  their  d5ob 
(ball  btute  them,  anbturncaibaptbeit 
captiuitie. 

i  €3  banc  bearb  the  tcp?oatb  of 
fiJ9oab,anb  the  reutltngs  ofthc  thtlb?en 
of  amnion,  iWherebp  tbepbaue  rcp?o- 
rtjeb  mp  people ,  anb  magntfieb  them- 
feiues  agamfttheir  bo?ber. 

9  1Chercfo?c ,  as  3  Hue ,  (aith  the 
%  €>  k  ©  of  hoftes  tiie  <5ob  of  ^frael, 
lurelp  fi^oab  (balbeas&obom.anb  the 
tbilb?en  of  ^mrnon  as  (25omo?rab, 
euen  the  b?eebing  of  netles,anb  fait  pus, 
anb  a  perpetual!  befoiation ,  the  refv 
bue  of  mp  people  (ball  fpoile  them ,  anb 
the  remnant  of  mp  people  (ball  poD 
fetTethcm. 

io  iChis  (bail  thep  bauc  to?  their 
p?ibc,  becaufe  thep  haue  rep?otheb  anb 
magnifieb  themfeiues  againd  the  people 
ofthefL©«©  of  bodes. 

ii  1CheHsDH©wiiibcterrtblebnio 
them :  fo?  be  tbill  tfamifb  all  the  gobs  ot 
tbceatth,  anb  men  (ball tto?(bip him, 
ettetp  one  from  his  place ,  euen  all  the 
5les  ofthc  heathen. 

n  IE  Pc  Ethiopians  alfo ,  pc  djaibc 
flatnebpmpfttjojb. 

13  3lnb  he  ibil  dretch  out  bis  hanb 
agamd  the  /15o?th ,  anb  bedrop  affp^ 
ria ,  anb  ibil  mabc  i!5tneueb  a  bcfolan* 
on,and  bzp  libe  albtlbctnes. 

1+  anb  flortts  (ball  lie  bouinein  the 

mibd 


\\Orjx>hrr:t 


Jcfli 


ecareieuecitie. 


Ch; 


"Ilii34.ll, 

!£C. 

J  >.**?'• 

or  thapttert 

\\Or,wbrn 
he  hath  vn- 
cottereU. 


•!fai-j7  8. 


\\Or.gt-t. 

tenom.  HeK 


\\Or,iiJtn- 
iiton. 


•Erck.2a. 
17.171105. 
11. 

•lcn;.ll 

hofc.y  7. 


•Ezek.12. 
z6. 

\  Heb.mor- 

mng  If  1  mor 

■MJ. 


\\Ortcomeri. 


mibft  of  bee ,  all  the  beafts  of  the  na< 
turns:  both  the  ||  Co?mo2ant,anb  the 
26ittcnic,  (ball  *  lobge  m  tt>e!lt»ppcc  iin^ 
tels  of  it :  their  boite  (bai  (mg  in  the  ibm-- 
boibcs ,  bcfolation  ihaii  be  m  tt)e  tb?c- 
Q)Olos:  ||  fo^  l)c  ftjall  tmcouctr  tl)c  debar 
ttioj&c. 

15  %l)\s  is  t!)e  rcioyeing  ritic  that 
miielt  caceicfTciy,  tbat  faib  m  tjcr  tjcart, 
*3I<rn,anbrt)cceisnoncbcfibemc:I)oib 
is  0)ec  become  abefoiation,  apiacefo? 
beads  to  lie  ootbnc  in'  encry  one  that 
paffett)  by  bcr,  (ball  buTe  and  ruaggc 
hisbanb. 

CHAP.    I'll. 

i  A  fharpe  rcproote  of  Icrufalem  for  diuers 
finnes.  8  An  exhortation  to  wait  for  the  re- 
ftauration  of  I/rael :  14  and  to  reioyce  for 
then  faluation  by  God. 

£>e  to  Her  that  is  ||  filtljie 
anb  pollutes,  to  the  op 
p?eu"ingcitte. 
i  £>bcobcyebnottbe 
_  boitc:fl)eretetnebnot|lco^ 
rettton :  fl)t  ttuttcb  not  m  t!)e  1L  €>  33  jd  : 
fye  b?ett>  not  nccrc  to  bcr  <5ob. 

3  I5ec  p?mecs  ilntrjin  bee  ace  roa* 
ring  *  lyons :  ijet  3iubgcs  are  cuening 
tbolucs,  they  gnaib  not  the  bones  till 
tbcmoiroib. 

4  $cr*p?opbets  ate  light  and  trea- 
ebetous  pecfons :  her  p?ielts  bane  pol* 
lutcb  the  Smnctuatte,  they  baue  bone 
*bioientetofbe!LaU). 

5  XljctuttlLfiDK^istnrtjenuDbett 
tbeceof:  bcibillnotbocuuquitic  :tcue- 
cy  morning  boctb  l)cc  tying  bts  tubge* 
ment  to  bgbt.be  failetb  not :  butthebn= 
iuttKnoibctbnofbame. 

6  3  Dane  cut  off  the  nations :  trjeic 
litotes  arc  befolate  ,3  mabe  theic 
Qcectes  watte,  that  noncpaffcrb  by: 
tbcit  cities  ace  bcttroicb.fo  that  there  ts 
no  man,  tliat  there  isnonc  inhabitant. 

7  3!  faib ,  Purely  thou  ibilt  feace 
mec :  thou  ibilt  ceteiue  inttrucnon  :  fo 
their  blbelling  fboulb  not  bee  cut  off, 
rjoTbfocucr  3  punifljeb  them :  but  tbey 
rofc  early,  &to2rupteb  all  tljcirboings. 

s  CXhcrcfo?etuaiteycbponmee, 
faytb  the  1L©iK©,bnnilthc  bay  that 
3  rife  bp  to  tbcp?ay :  fo:  my  betermi- 
nation  is  to  gather the  nations,  tbat3J 
may  affcmblctbc  hingbomes  to  pouuc 
bpon  them  nunc  mbignation,  eu«i  all 
my  fierce  anger :  fo?  all  the  cacti)  0>aibc 


p.ll). 


Godsl 


oue. 


bcuouceb  ibitl)  the  fice  of  my  *  leaioufic. 

9  JFo?  then  \bill  3  turne  to  the  peo- 
pie  a  pure  t  language,  that  they  may  all 
call  bpon  the  ji5amc  ofttjc  %  ©  is  ©,  to 
fecuc  him  ibitrj  one  t  confent. 

io  jfcombcyonbtberiucrsof£tl> 
opia,  my  fuppliants,  euentbebaugbter 
of  mybirperfcb  ttjai  tying  mine  offnng. 

1 1  3n  that  bay  (bait  thou  not  be  a* 
fljameo  fo?  all  thy  boings,  ibrjecent 
tljou  liaft  teanfgeeffeb  agamft  me :  fo? 
then  3J  tbill  tabe  atbay  out  of  the  nubft 
of  thee  them  that  reioyce  in  thy  pztbe, 
anb  tljou  (halt  no  moje  be  hanghty  tbe^ 
caufeof  mine  holymountaine. 

ii  3IU)iiialfolcaucuithemibbcftof 
thee  an  afflicteb  anb  poozepeople :  anb 
they  fljaii  tcutt  in  the  i^ame  of  the 

ILfiDJS©. 

13  %\)t  remnant  of  3ffrad  (hall  not 
boc  iniquitie,  no?  fpeabe  lies :  neither 
(hall  a  beccitful  tongue  be  founb  m  their 
mouth:  fo?  they  (hall  fecoe ,  anb  lie 
boibne,  anb  none  (hall  maac  them  & 
fcaib. 

14  C£>tng,  £>  daughter  of  zrion: 
(hout ,  £>3Jftael:  be  glab  anb  reioyce 
tbith  an  tlje  heart,  £>baughter  of  <$v 
cufaicm. 

1$  1Ehe  %  ©  k  ©  hath  taben  aibay 
thy  iubgements ,  he  hath  caft  outthme 
enemy :  the  Bing  of  3Jfcael,cuen  the 
H€)K©  iiinthtmiDbe(tofthce:rt)ou 
fljalt  not  Tec  cuiuany  mo?e. 

i6  3Jnfbatbayit(haiiberaibto3Je* 
rufa(em ,  if  care  thou  not :  and  to  Zion, 
Hctnotthmc  hanbsbe||flacbe. 

17  %\yt  %  ©  ir  ©  rt)y  <5ob  in  the 
nuDft  of  thee  is  mightie :  bccttHll  fane, 
he  lbillcetoy  cc  ouec  thee  lbithioy:  thee 
tbill  ccfl  mhis  louc,  hce  Ibtll  toy  oner 
thec  iDuh  finging. 

is  3  lbiii  gathec  thnn  thatate  fo?^ 
rorbftill  fo?  thcfolcmnc  affcmbly,ibho 
ace  of  thee,  to  whom  the  trep?och  of  it  was 
a  burben. 

19  25eholb,atthatri'mc3tt)ilIbn= 
boc  all  that  afflict  thee,anb5»billtiuc 
her  that  *baltcth,  anb  gather  hec  that 
Vbastyiuen  out,  anb  t^jnjtu  get  them 
p?atfe  anb  fame  in  cuery  lanb,  tuiljece 
they  haue bcene  put  to  fbame. 

20  2U  that  tune  null  3  tying  you 
aeaine  cucn  in  the  time  tljat  3  gather 
you:  fo?  3  tbill  mabe  you  a  name  anb 
a  p?aifc  among  all  people  of  the  earth, 
mhcn^Jtucncbacbe  your  capnumebe^ 
fo?eyouc  cyes,faiththdL©imp. 

Hhhh      fHAG- 


•Chap.1.18. 
[Hib.hf. 


dcr. 


\Htb.inrri] 

hoht 


:i.iiu.«. 

and  54. j. 


\\Or,fsht, 


\HJ.hc 

wtUfofUiit. 


tMfkihe 

burden^y- 
m  it  was 
rcproch. 

"Mic.4.7. 

fit  them  for 
jprai/e, 
\Hebr.of 
their  [hsme. 


58 


Contempt  of 


H; 


m 


ai. 


reli 


gion,p 


uni 


ifhed. 


\Hcb.bytbc 

band  of  Hag 


tune. 


your  heart 
on  year 
vajes. 
rDcut  23. 

38.1111c.  6 


fHe&.pur- 
ced  through. 


||  Or,  blare  it 
awaj. 


^HAGGAI. 


CHAP.    I. 

i  Haggai  reproueth  the  people  forncgle&ing 
the  building  of  the  houlc.  7  Hceiucitetli 
them  to  the  building,  it  HepromifethGods 
afsiftaiKe  to  them  being  forward. 

0  tl)c  fcconD 
yeetc  of  2>artus 
t&e  tnng ,  in  tlje 
urtmonctl),mtlje 
tuft  bay  of  tJjc 
monetljcamettje 
il)o:t>c  of  tlic 
H©is©tbv^ag'- 
.  £  gat  trje  i&jopfiet 

bnto  zerubbabelfnc  fonnc  of  £>ljeal; 

del,  I!  goucrnour  ofjubat),  anD  to  3lo- 

ftiat)  toe  fomie  of  jofcbecl)  tl)c  ijigtj 

pneu\faying-, 
i   Xl)«s  fpcancff)  trjc  fLfi>mj©  of 

fjoftes,  faying s  Xl)is  people  fay,  %\)t 

time  is  not  come ,  tile  time  tQat  the 

Ho  wr>s>  I)  oufc  Q)onlD  be  built, 
j   Xt)cn  tame  tl)e  ttwb  of  tl)c 

Hsdisjd  by  $?aggaitl)epjopI)et,  faying; 
4   isittimcfojyou,  €>yce, tobibcll 

ut  your  ficltD  Uoufcs ,  anb  tljis  n  oufc  ite 

tbafte* 
$   iftotoc  ffjcrcfojc  tints  faitl)  tlje 

%  ©  is  je»  of  Dottes ;  t  Confibct  your 

ibayes. 

6  i&ecljauc'foibenmucljanbbnng 
in  litle :  ye  cate,  but  ye  Ijaue  not  mougb : 
ycc  Dwifce,  but  yee  ate  notfillcb  lbitl) 
b;inbe  :yecclofljyou,  but  tlicrc  is  none 
ibatmc:  anD  rjee  t&at  earnetl)  tbages, 
carnctlj  tbagestoputit  tntoabagtuiitj) 
Ijolcs. 

7  CXljus  fattl)  tljc  H^a©  of 
tjofrcs,  ConliDcryouribayes. 

8  (5oc  bp  to  tlic  ntountaine ,  anD 
bnnglboob,anbbuiIb  the  noufc  anD 31 
ibtll  tabc  plcafure  mtt,  anb  3J  Will  be 
gl02ificb,faifl)  the  %  ©  8  9. 

9  39clooUeDfo;mucl),anDlocitcame 
to  ittle:  anbibljcn  ycc  broughtitljome, 
3J  Did  ||  blotb  bponit :  toby,  faitl)  tl)e 
U€)is©  of  hoftcsrtctaufc  of  mine  houfc 
ttiattsiDaflc,  aiiDyccrunnccuetyman 
bntoljisoluncljoufc. 


io  Xbetcfojetljehcauenouetyouis 
ftaycb  fcombeib.anb  the  carth*ts  ftatcb 
from  her  frmte. 

ii  2inD3JcallcD  foj  aDjougljt  bpon 
the  lanD  anD  bpon  the  mountaines.anb 
bpon  the  tomcanb  bpon  the  ncib  lbme, 
anb  bpon  the  oylcanD  bpon  that  Xbljtcl) 
the  grounb  bnngcflj  fojtb,?  bpon  men, 
anb  bpon  tattcll,  anD  bpon  all  the  la- 
bour of  tbehanbs. 

\%  CXbmzcrubbabeltljefonncof 
S>l)camci,ano  3ofuab  tlje  fonnc  of 
3lofcbetl)  the  high  pnett,  tbitlj  all  t&c 
remnant  of  the  people  obeyeb  tljebcyce 
of  tlje  Hois©  their  ©ob ,  anb  the 
\bo?bs  of  *?aggai  tljc  i&opbet  (as  tlje 
%  0  m  ©  their  C5ob  hab  fent  him)  anb 
tljcpcoplc  did  fear  c  before  tljc  |L©isje?. 

13  XljcnfpaBc$aggaitljc?L©K©s> 
meffenger  in  the  |L©m©£>  meffage  bn 
to  tl)c  people,  faying^  -*1"  tuu^you 
faitljtIjelLoisjD. 

14  3nDtl)clL£DK©  OirtebbptDe 
fpirit  of  Zerubbabcltfjcfonneof&bc- 
aiticl  gouernour  of 'Jubah,  anb  tljc  fpi- 
:  rtt  of  3JofuaIj  tlic  ronnc  of  gjofebeef)  tl)e 
l)igl)  pneft ,  anb  tl)c  fpirit  ofall  tljcrems 
nantoftl)c  people,  anD  tnry  tame  anb 
bib  ttwttc  in  tbe  Ijoufeof  t^c  IL^iejd  of 
Ijottcstbcireob: 

15  3Intl)efoutcanbti(bcnfietI)  bay 
of  tbcftrtmonetl),mtl)efetonbycereof 
Darius  UjeBing. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  He  incourageth  the  people  to  the  vvorke ,  by 
promife  of  greater  glory  to  the  fecond  Tcm- 
ple.then  was  in  the  firft.  10  Inthetype.of 
holy  things  andvndeane.hee  fheweth  their 
finnes  hindred  the  vvorke.  10  Gods  pro- 
mife to  Zerubbabel. 

i!5  tl)e  feuentl)  nionctlj,in 

the  one  anb  tibcntitj)  day 

oftljemonetlj,  tame  the 

lbojb  of  tl)e  ILfiDKDtby  tl)c 

l&opl)ct$aggaf, faying; 

i  ^peanc  noib  to  zerubbabel  tlje 

fonnc  ofS>f)caitiel,  goucniour  of  3fti; 

bal) ,  anb  to  3ofual)  tljc  Tonne  of  3  bfc 

Deri) 


*  Dtut.  ii. 
»3. 


\Heb.bjthe 
hand  of. 


AglonoiBhoufe,       Chap.i 

I  t»ecD  the high  p;tcft\ anb  to  the rcfibuc of   £>i 


•Hcb. 
26. 


bcch  the  high  p;tcft,  ant;  to  the  rcfiouc  of 
the  people,  fapmg, 

A  J0^0  tt  ,cft  anions  rou  that  fame 
this  houfe  in  her  firftgio2p;anb  both  00 
pc  fee  it  norb  i  is  it  not  tn  pout  cpes  tn 
comparifon  of  it,  as  noting t 

4  PetnorDbcarong.^zerubba* 
bcl,  faith  the  H  £>  is  ©,  anb  bet  ftcong, 

a>3onma,fomtcof3lofcbcchtbcbigh 
0;teu\  anb  be  ftrong all  pe  people  of  Che 
lanb,  faith  the  Hsdis©,  ant  tbo:ttc :  (fiw 

31  am  Ibith  p0U ,  faith  the  &£>E©  of 

Doffs,) 

5     According  to  the  Vb02b  that  31  COUC* 

nantcb  ibtthpou,  rohen  pc  tame  out  of 
<£gppt,  fo  mp  S>ptrit  remainetb  among 
pou,5fcarepcnot. 

6  jffojthtts  faith  the  !L©e©  of  botts, 
*  ^ec  once,  tt  >s  a  utle  tbhiic,  anb  %  ibiU 
fljattctlje  heauens,  anb  ttjc  earth,  anb 
tbcfca,anbtheb2icianb. 

7  3Snb  3J  rmii  (babe  all  nations, 
anb  the  beficc  of  ail  nations  (ball  come, 
anb  3J  tbtu  fill  this  houfe  rbtrtj  gio?p, 
faith  the  1L©  is  ©of  hods. 

8  Xhefiiuccismincanbthcgolbis 
mine,  faith  the  ILom  ©of  boils. 

9  lOjccjlojp  of  this  latter  houfe  (bai 
be  getatcrthen  of  the  fomter ,  faith  the 
ftos©  of  boftes :  anb  tn  this  place 
itofU3!cjtucpcacc,  faith  the  Hoisje»of 
holies. 

io  C3m  the  fonrc  anb  twentieth  day 
of  the  ninth  ^ouek,  mthe  feconbpeere 
of  2>arius ,  tamcp  nwb  of  the  fL©is© 
\>^  §aggat  the  j&opbct,faping, 

n  XhnsfaiththcfLfiDasofhoas, 

^TftC  nott)  ttje  pnCftS  concerning  fl)C  latt), 

faping, 

n  3Jfonebcarcbolpflc(bmtbeffcirt 
of  his  garment,  anb  unth  his  Hurt  boe 
touch  bteab  o;  pottage,  o:  vumc,  02011c, 
0?  anpmeate,  (hall  tt  be  hoip*  anb  the 
pncQsanfmctebanbfaio,  !3o. 

ij  IChen  faib $aggat, 3f  onethatts 
bncicane  bp  a  bcab  bobp ,  touch  anp  of 
thefc,tt)ai  tt  be  bndeane  t  anb  the  pnefts 
amntcrebanbfaib,  3ft  fbaioc  bncicane. 

14.  XhcnanfroereD^agga^anbfatb, 


Godsfignet. 


£>o  is  this  people,  anb  fo  is  this  nation 
before  mc,  faith  the  %  ©  is  ©,  anb  fo .-,  e< 
ucrp  tbojlte  of  their  hanbs ,  anb  that 
ibhichthcp  offer  there,  ts  bncicane. 
i5^nbnoU)3Jp!appouconfiDecfcom 
this  bap  anb  bptbaro,  from  befote  a 
ftonc  ibas  laib  bpon  a  (tone  tn  the  Xenv 
pie  of  the  ?,©«©. 

16  ;S>tnccthofc<iavesibetc,N)hcnonc 
came  to  an  heape  of  ttbentie  metres, 
there  ibercbtttten :  lbhen  one  tame  to 
the  pjeffic  -  fattc  fo,t  to  bjaib  out  fifne  vef- 
(ek  out  of  the  p?eu"e,  there  mere  but 
ttbentie. 

17  3Jfniotepou*tbltb  Wafting,  anb 
tbithmilberb,  anb  tbith  hatle  mall  the 
labours  of  pour  hanos :  pet  pee  turned 
not  to  me,  faith  the  IL  ©  a  ©. 

is  Confibcmoib from  tbtsbap,  anb 
bptbaro  from  the  foure  anb  rrocnnctb 
bap  of  the  ninth  moneth,  euro  from  the 
bap  that  the  founbatto  of  the  ?L©k©£> 
Xcmple  rbas  latb,  confibcr  tt. 

19  istbefccbpettntbebaMe<pea,aS 
pet  the  btne  anb  the  fig  tree,  j  the  pome* 
granatc ,  anb  the  4Ditue  tree  hath  not 
bjougbtfoojtb :  from  this  bap  vbtll  3 
blcffcyou. 

20  C  2nb  againe  the  nwbc  of  the 
%<s>  s  ©  came  bnto  $aggat  m  the  foure 
anb  ttbentteth  day  of  the  moneth,  lap* 
tng, 

ii  ;S>peattetoZetubbabrlgoucrno2 
of  JJuoab,  faptng,  3  run  (babe  the  hca* 
uens  anb  the  card). 

22  3no3Jlbillouertb;totbtbctlttone 
of  Hingbomcs,  anb  3Jtbillbc(troptbe 
ftrcngth  of  the  Hingbomcs  of  the  bca* 
then ,  anb  3  tbtll  oucrtbitotb  the  tha* 
rets,  anb  thofc  that  rtbc  ut  them,  anb 
the  hon"cs  anb  their  rtbers  than  come 
bovone,  cnerp  one  bpthe  too;b  of  his 
brother. 

zj  'JnthatbapjfanhthefLoisisof 
hotts,  rotll3J  tafte  thec,£)  zerubbabel, 
mp  fcruant,  the  fon  of  dheaincl ,  faith 
the  ?L©K©,anb  tbtll  mabc  thec  as  a  fig^ 
net:  fo;  3  haue  chofen  thee,  tatth  the 
5,©ts©ofho(is. 


Hhhh 


fZE 


Amos  4.9 


58  2 


Thevifion 


Zechariah. 


ofhorfcs, 


\Hcbr.witb 
dtfhUafitre, 


'Mai.3.7. 


•ifa.3t.tf. 

ierc.j.ii. 

jnd  iS.  II. 
hole.  14  1. 


J|  Or,ouer- 
Ukf. 

*Lam.i.t8. 


,ZECHARIAH. 


CHAP.   I. 

Zechariah  exhorteth  to  repentance.  7  The 
vifionohhehorfes.  I*  At  the  prayer  of  the 
Angel,  comfortable promifes  are  made  tole- 
rufalan.  18  Thevifionofthefburchornes, 
and  the  foure  Carpenters. 

#theeigi)t  mo* 
neth ,  in  the  ft 
tonDe  ycerc  of 
2Darius  ,  came 
the  tboJD  of  the 
%  ©  k  id  tonto 
zechariafi ,  the 
fonne  of  aBara* 
chiah,  the  fonnc 

of^Dtio  tbc$zophet,faying, 
2  Xhc?l©isiDhathbenetfo2eDtfc 

pleafeD  \btth pout  fattens, 
j   Xhercfiwe  fay  thou  bnto  them, 

Xhus  faith  the  H©  s  jd  of  huftcS; 

*Xume  ye  tonto  tne,fatth  thelL©is© 

of  hoftes,  anD  3J  tutll  turnc  tonto  you, 

faith  the  C  o  is  ©  of  holies. 

4  *25eyenotasyourfarr)ers,tonro 
inborn  the  fomierpjophetshaueerteD, 
facing,  Xbus  raitf)  the  H  ©  is  ©  of 
holies,  Xurneyenoito  fromyourcuill 
ibar  es,ano  from  your  eutl  Doings :  but 
they  DiD  not  heart ,  no;  hearten  tonto 
me,  faith  then  ©is©. 

5  i*ourfathers,tt)here  are  they*  anD 
the  ^ophets,Doe  they  liucfoj  euet  * 

6  z3 ut  my  ID 0 2Ds  anD  my  (law t es , 
tbhith  3  commanDeD  my  femants  the 
$2opbcts,DtD  they  not  ||  taucbolDeof 
your  fathers?  anD  they  retumcD  anD 
faiDe  -,  *  fUUe  as  the  %  ©  is  id  of  hoflts 
thought  to  Doe  tonto  tos ,  acco.zDing  to 
out  «baycs,anDacco2Ding  to  our  Do* 
ings,fohath  he  Dealt  lbitbtos. 

7  CtlponthefoureanDtitoentfcth 
Day  of  the  elenenth  moneth,  itobicb  is 
the  moneth  &> ebat,tn  the  fctonD  yerc  of 
a>atius,tamc  the  iDozD  of  the  ?L  ©  is  jd 
tonto  Zechariah  ,  the  fonnc  of  25ara= 
chiah ,  the  fonne  of  3JDDo  the  ^ophet, 
faying. 

8  3lfaiDbynight,anDbcholDaman 
rtDing  topon  a  reD  hojft ,  anD  he  ftooD  a= 


mong  tbemirtle  trees  that  were  ui  the 
bottomcanD  behuiDe  him  were  there  reD 
hozfes,  ||  fpecttleD  anD  tbhtte. 

9  XhentaiDlJ,4Dmy!Lo2D,tbhat 
are  theft  i  anD  the  angel  that  tamcD 
tbtth  me.fatD  tonto  mc,3J  tbil  (bclb  thee 
tbhatthefebe. 

10  anD  the  man  that  ftooD  among 
the  myrtle  trees  anfroetcD ,  anD  faiD, 
Xhefe  are  they  .ltohom  the  !L©i3©  hath 
fent  to  ibaiae  to  anD  fro  through  tljc 
earth. 

1 1  anD  they  anfrocreD  the  angel  of 
the  3L©is©  that  ftooD  among  the  mtr* 
tic  trees,  anD  faiD,  naeehaucttiaibcDto 
anD  fro  through  the  earth :  anD  beholD, 
all  the  earth  fitteth  frill ,  anD  is  at  reft. 

it  CXhentheangclofthe?L©i3© 
anftocreD,anDfaiD,j3D?U>i3©  of  holts, 
hoib  longibiJttbounot  haue  mcrcte  on 
3Jcrufaiem,anD  on  the  cities  of  3JuDah, 
againil  ibhich  thou  baft  haD  inDigna* 
tion  theft  th2ccfeo.2canD  ten  ycetes; 

ij  anD  the  !L©  is  ©  anfmereD  the 
angel  that  talUeo  ibith  me ,  ibith  gooD 
tboiD6,and  comfortable  ibojDs. 

14  5>o  the  angel  that  communeD 
With  mc,faiD  tonto  me ;  Cry  thou,  fay* 
ing;Xhus  faith  the  !L©ra©  of  bolts, 
3J  am*  ieaious  fi»3fe  rufalem,  anD  to? 
ZionAtottb  a  gt  cat  icaioufte. 

1?  ^nD  gj  am  tocty  fozc  DifpleaftD 
tbith  the  htathen  that  arcatcaft :  foz  3 
tbas  but  a  little  DifpleaftD,  anD  they  Ijcl- 
pcD  fonbarD  the  affliction. 

16  Xhercfoje  thus  faith  the  |L©«id, 
3  am  returncD  to  3ferufalem  ibith 
incrfirs:  tnvhoufc  (ball  bee  built  in  it, 
faith  then©  r©  ofhoftcs,  anD  a  Imc 
fbaibc  (IrctdKD  foith  bpon  gjcrnfaiem. 

17  Cry  yet,  faying,  Xhus  faith  the 
ill©  ibp  of  holies,  fiBy  cities  through 
tpjofpcriticfljaUyet  be  fpjeaDabzoaD, 
:  anD  the  %  ©  is  id  (hall  yet  comfozt  Zi- 
on,anD  ttialiytt  chooft3Jctufaiem. 

i8  CXlien  lift  gibp  mine  eves,  anD 
j  fatt),anD  beholD  foure  homes. 

i9  anD^taiD  bnto  the  angel  that 
taiiieD  ibith  me ;  i©hat  be  thefe  *  anD  he 
ati&ocrcD  mce ,  Xhcft  arc  the  homes 
I lbhteh 


\Or,bq. 


•Chip.  8.j. 


t  Htbr.y>Qtl 


A  wall  of  fire.  Chap.ij.nj]  Samn  rebuked. 


*DtUt.J2. 

o.pfal. 
.7.8. 


•Ifaiu.tf. 
and  54,1. 
'Lcuit.ltf. 
1 1.  czek. 
37.27.  2. 
ccr.«.i8. 


ibljtci)  Dauc  fcattcccb  3JtiDal; ,  3Jfcaci, 
anb^Jetufaicm. 

xo  3inb  tt)C  ?,  ©  IS  3D  fl)Ctt)Cb  mcc ' 

fourecacpentecs. 

21  XIjcn&ii>3J,iiDDatcomct8cfcto 
Doc?  3inbDccrpaKc,  raying,  XDefore; 
tDe  Domes  ttfjiti)  Dancftatteceo^tt* 
Dag,  fo  tDat  no  man  did  itft  tip  Dis  Ijeab : 
but  tDcfc  ace  tome  to  fcap  tDcm,  to  taft 
out  tDe  Domes  of  tDe  Gentiles ,  mincD 
UftbptDeit  Dojnc  oucrtDc  lanbof  3w 
DaDtofcattectt. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  God  in  the  care  of  Ierufalem  fendeth  to  mea- 
fure  it.  6  The  redemption  of  Zion.  10  The 
promife  of  Gods  prefence. 

I  fLiftbpminecpcsagaine, 
p>  anbloohcb,  anb  bcDolb,  a 
man  ibitD  a  mcafnring 
line  in  Dis  Danb. 
^  XDcttfaib3J,B3Di; 
tDcr  goeft  tDoii^nbDccfatbbntome, 
Xo  meafute  3Jcrufalem,  to  fccibDat  is 
tDe  b?eabtD  tDcccof ,  anb  lDijac  is  tDe 
icngtlnDctcof. 

j  ^nbbeDolb.tDc^ngcltDattaifecb 
lbttD  mc,n>ent  foo  ?tD ,  anb  anotljer  2uv 
gcirbcntout  to  mcetc  Dim  : 

4  3lnb  faib  bnto  Dim,  &un,fpcafte 
totDiSroungman,faving:.gjmriaiem 
fDail  be  mDabtteb  as  toibncs  ibttDout 
tballes,  fo?  tDe  malfltnbc  of  men  anb 
cattelltDecetn. 

5  Jfo?  %faitf)  tDe  1L©  is  2D,ttnii  be 
bnto  Dec  a  lbali  office  coimb  abont.anb 
tt>iUbetDcglo?pintDcmtb(rofDcr. 

6  tE^o,Do,<:omefoorth,  anb  flee  fcom 
tDcianboftDcj!5o?tD,faitDtDe!Loi3©: 
fo?  3  Dane  fp?cab  pou  ab?oab  as  tDe 
foucc  ibinbes  of  tljc  Ijcauen ,  faptD  tDe 

7  SMiucc  tljv  felfc,  4E>  Zion ,  tDat 
Dlbcllcft  with  tDcbaugDtcc  ofasabplon.  i 

8  5fo?  tDus  faptD  tDe  %  o  is  jd  of 
Doftes,  3ftcr  tljc  glo?p  DatD  Dcfcntmc  | 
bnto  tDe  nations  tbDicDfpotlcb  pon:  fo? ' 
DctDatnoutDctDvon^oncDctDtDcap'; 
pleofDisepc. 

9  ifo?  bcDoIb ,  3  Ml!  fbaftc  mine 
Danb  bpon  tDcm,  anb  tDe?  fDall  bee  a ; 
fpoilc  to  tDeic  fecuants :  anb  pec  f^all 
RnoTbtDattljc  JIoep  of  Doftes  DatD 
fentme. 

10  C&inganbtciopcciaDbangDtcc 
of  Zion :  fo?  loc,3lcomc)anb3!  *U)ill 
orbell  in  tDe  mibbeftof  tDec,  faptD  tDe 

1 1  3Dib  man?  nations  fDaibe  iopneb 


to  tDe  %  ©  is  jd  in  tDat  bap,  anb  Qjali  be 
mp  people :  anb  3  lbili  bibel  m  tDe  tmb* 
bea  of  tDce,  anbttjou  (Dait  ftnoib  tDat 
tljc  !l€>3SjD0f  DoflesDatlifent  mebti* 
totljce. 

ii  3lnb  tDe  ?Lokp  flmli  inDcrite 
JuDaDDispoitionintDcDolyianD^tib 
fbail  clioofc  3Jccnfalcm  agatne. 

15  26c  filcnt ,  <©  ail  flefb ,  bcfo?e  tDe 
?lOK©:fo?DciscaifebbpoutoftDis 
Dolpljabitation. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  Vnder  the  type  of  Iofhua ,  the  reftauration  of 
the  Church.  iS  Chrift  the  Branch  is  promifed. 

515b  Dc  fljeibeb  me  JofDua 
tDe  DiSD  ^?ielt,  ftanbing 
bcfo?c  tljc  angel  of  tDe 
%^%w  It  ©  k  d,  anb  11  3>atan 
imfz^i  Banirtttfl  at  Dts  cigDt  Danb 
t  to  cefilt  Dim. 

i  3tnb  tljc  %  ©  is  D  faib  bnto  5>a* 
tan-,  *XDc  iLiDis©  rcbubc  tDce,£) 
mm,  cucn  tDe  %&%&  tljatDatlj  tDo^ 
fen  fccufaicm  ccbubctDec.  is  not  this 
ab?anb  pluthtontof  tDcfice^ 

3  i!5o\b  3IofDna  ibas  clotDeb  IbitD 
fittlncsacmcnts,  anb  ttoob  befo?c  tDe 
3ingcl. 

4  ^nb  Dc  anfroeccb ,  anb  fpafte  im* 
to  tDofctDat  ftoob  bcfo?c  Dim,  faring, 
XaUcaibaptDefiltDie  garments  from 
Dim.  3nbbnto  Dmi  Dcfatb,2SclKiib,  3 
Daue  taufeb  tDmc  iniciuitv  to  pafle  from 
tDecanb  3  ibil  ciotljc  tljce  rbitD  cDangc 
of  raiment. 

1  3tnb 3  faib ,  %tt  tDcm  ret  afatre 
mitre  bpon  Dis  Dcao.  5»o  tDep  fet  a  fatce 
mitre  bpon  Dis  Dcab ,  anb  clotDeb  Dim 
lDitD  garments,  anb  tDe  ^tusel  oftljc 
fLiDiapftoobby. 

6  ^nb  tDe  3ltigci  of  tDe  %  o  m  w> 
p?oteQcbbnto  3}oiDua,favmg-, 

7  XDusfaptDtt)e?LtiDi3jDofDofts, 
31  f  tDou  lbilt  ibaihe  m  mp  lbapes,  anb 
tftDonUnlt&ccpcmpllcDacgctDcntDou 
fljalt  alfo  inbgc  mp  ^onfc ,  anb  fbait  at 
fo  ftcepc  mp  Coucts,  anb  3  Jb'U  S111^ 
tDce  t  piaccsto  tbailtc  among  tljcfc  tljat 
Qanbbp. 

s  ^carcnoib,£>gion)uatDclngD 
0?icft,  tljouanb  tDv fcllottcs  tliat  fit  be* 
fo?c  tDce :  fo?  tDep  are  t  men  ibonb?cb  at : 
fo?  bcDolb ,  3  rbilib?tng  foo?tD  mvftr* 
uanttDc*26Kafic©. 

9  jFo?  bcDolb  tljc  Cone  tDat  3  Dane 
lapbbcfo?c3iofl)ua:bpononeftoncii"ii 
befcuencpes,  bcDolb,  3  *btU  engcauc 
tDcgraning  tDcreof,  faitD  tDe  %  0  m  jd 

■      ^DDD  ?  of 


tHet>.  the 

habitation 
of  his  holmes. 


|!7*/;4/M,4fl 

adutrfxrif, 

\Hcb.tobt 
hisaduer- 
firic. 
Iudcp, 


I  Ir.crdi- 


\Htbjvalki. 


f  Heb.  men 
of  wonder t 

'Ifaiii.l. 

ierc.  i  j.j. 

chap,  tf.i  1. 
Iukci.78. 


Golden  candlefhcke.  Zechariah.       A  flying  booke. 


\Heh.w,th 
herhfftvie. 

||  Orfrten 
faicrull fpei 
tothclampes 
0-c. 


{Or,« 


I  Or,pth  the 
feueneyct  of 
the  1 '  ■ 1 
Jhaliretayce. 
f  Hct  jlont 
tfthme. 
•Chap.;.?. 


of hottes,ant)  3  WUI  temoue  the  uiiqui* : 
tie  of  that  lanb  m  onebay. 

io  3nthatbay4atthfhe1L!©K©of 
holies ,  (hai  ye  tall  cuety  man  bis  neigh- 
boat  bnber  the  tunc  anb  bnber  the  figge 
ttee. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

By  the  golden  Candlefticke  is  forefhewed 
the  good  fuccelTe  of  Zerubbabels  founda- 
tion, n  By  the  two  Oliue  trees  the  two 
anointed  ones. 

i!2b  the  angen  that  tai- 
Bcbtblthme,  tamcagatne 
anbtbafeebme ,  as  a  man 
t ha t  is  ibaacuet)  out  of  hts 
fleepe: 
i  anb  fata  bnto  mee,  ©hat  fees' 
thou?  anb  3J  faib,  ^FbauelooBeb,  anb 
bebolb  a  tanoicftttfte  all  of  gohV  ibttb  a 
boiblc  bpon  the  top  of  tt ,  anb  t»s  fenen 
lampts  thereon,  anb  ||  fcucn  pipes  to 
the  fcucn  iampes,lfohitbibetebpontbe 
top  thereof. 

3  anb  nbo  £>liue  trees  by  it ,  one 
bpon  the  right  fibc  of  the  boible,  anb 
tbcotbcrbpontbcleftfioetbereof. 

+  S>o  3  anfracr  eb  anb  fpafte  to  the 
angcll  tljat  taiueb  tbitb  mec,  laying: 
nabat  a  re  tbcft,my  tt  o?b  i 

5  XbentbcangcltbattaiBcbrbirb 
mcanfocrcb  anbfaib  bnto  me  Bnoun 
eft  thounottbbat  theft  be;anb3  faio 
^o.myUojb. 

6  xben  bee  anfmcreb  anb  fpafte 
bnto  mce ,  faying ;  1tbts  h  the  Voofli  of 
trie  %  ©  is  id  bnto  ZcrubbabeUaytng 
/9ot  by  I!  might ,  noz  by  potter,  but 
by  my  fptrit,  fatrt)  the  %  <D »  ©  ot 
bodes. 

7  n9Do  art  thou ,  £>  great  moan- 
tame  <  befoje  zerubbabrt  thou  (halt  be- 
come a  piame ,  anb  be  (hail  tying  fojtft 
tbchcab  (lone  thereof  ibitb  (bouttngs, 
crying .  ©rate,  grate  bnto  it. 

S  ^o»oucrtf)elbo?boftl)c3LsDKjD 
tamcbntome,faying: 

9  Xbe-banbsof  Zcrubbabclbauc 
layebtbcfounbation  of  tbtsboufttbts 
Ijanbs  fliall  alfo  ftnifb  it,  anb  thou  (bait 
ftnoib  that  trjelL  ®  is  s>  of  holies  bath 
fentmebntoyoa. 

io  itottmonatljbcfpifcbthebayof 
fmail  things  *  ||  foz  they  (balirctoyte 
anb  fhall  fee  the  t  plummet  ui  thchanb 
of  zcrubbabclibttbtboftfcucn  :"tbey 

are  thCCyCSOf  tl)t1L©K)S»,whichruh  tO 

ant)  fro  thzottrjb  the  lbholc  earth, 
ii  CXf)cnanfroercb3J,anbfaibbtv 


to  h«a  i  what  a^  ttjcfc  nbo  oliue  trees 
bpon  the  tight  fi<fc  of  tbetanblefhtRe, 
anb  bpon  the  left  fide  thereof  i 

n  ^nb  3  anfroereb  againc  anb  fatb 
bnto  him.JDDatbe  tbcfetlbo  olmc  bwtv- 
cbes^bttbtthwiugbtbctibo  golben 
pipes  ||  emptic  t  the  golben  oyieout  of 
tbemfelues* 

i}  anb  hee  anfuiereb  mee  anb  faib  • 
mnotbeft  thou  not  tbbat  theft  be  i anb 
3Jfaib,#o,my?Lo?b. 

i+  Chen  fatb  he ;  %tyft  arerbctibo 
t  annointeb  ones ,  that  ftanb  by  the 
&o?boftbeibbole  earth. 

CHAP.    V. 

i  By  the  flying  rowle  ,  is  (hewed  the  curfe 
of  Theeues  and  Swearers.  5  By  a  woman 
preffed  in  an  Ephah  ,  the  final!  damnati- 
on of  Babylon. 

H&  tym  3  rurncb ,  aab  lift  bp 
"*  mineeycs,anbloo&eb,anb 
ibeholb,aflymgroule. 

:  anb  hee  faib  bnto 
mrctebatfceftthouf  anb 
3  anoocreb ,  3  fee  a  flymg  roule ,  the 
length  thereof  is  ttbentie  tubites,  anb 
theb^cabth  thereof  tcrmetubites. 

j  %hcn  faib  hee  bnto  met  j  1ChiS  is 
theturft,  that  goethfo?thouerthefate 
of  tht  lbhole  earth  :fo?||euery  onethat 
Qcaieth  fhall  be  tut  off  as  on  this  fine,  ae 
tojbuig  to  it ;  anb  eucry  one  that  frae* 
teth  (hall  be  tut  off  as  ontl;atftbe ,  atto^ 
btngtott. 

4  3  mill  bimg  it  fojth, faith  the 
ILa>Es»ofhoftcs,anb  it  (hall  enter  into 
the  houfe  of  the  thetft ,  anb  into  the 
houfe  of  htm  that  froeareth  falfcly  by 
my  name :  anb  tt  (hall  remame  in  the 
nubftofhis  houfe,  anb  (hall  tonfnme 
it ,  vbtth  the  timber  thereof,  anb  the 
(tones  thereof. 

5  CSChen  the  angell  that  tal&cb 
ibtth  me,lbent  fonh  anb  faib  bntomt , 
ILi&bp  noib  thine  eyes ,  anb  fee  ibhat  is 
this  that  goethfojth. 

6  anb  3  faib ,  what  is  it  <  anb  hee 
fatb,1Chis  is  an  Cphahthat  goeth  fo^h* 
ore  faib  mo;roucr ,  Xhis  is  tljnr  rc- 
fembiant e  through  all  the  earth. 

7  anb  bcholb ,  there  Ibas  lift  bp  a 
||  talent  of  Iran :  anb  this  is  a  xuoman 
thatftttcth  inthemtbfroftheephah. 

8  anbhcfaib ,  Xh«8|SttntBCDncu"f, 
anb  he  taft  tt  mto  the  mibtt  of  the  €t 
phah,  anb  he  taft  the  ibeight  of  leab  bp* 
on  themouth  thereof. 
9  Chen 


Hct.b}tk 

'and. 

||  Or,  nrntie 
cut  of  them- 
/f/wttoyle 

into  the 

\Htb.tht 
pli, 

\OA  fimtt 
•fyle. 


\\  Or  fairy 

oiteefthit 

ptoptethat 

fltdethybol- 

deth  htm- 

filftgmlt- 

/efeajit 

doth. 


j  Orftelfhty 
puce. 


ourecharets. 


Ch 


ap.v|.vj). 


TheBranch. 


\\OrJrcng. 


J  0rt  winds . 


9  Xrjentift3J  top  mine  eyes,am>loo' 
6e0,  fbcholD,  there  came  out  ttbo  voo 
men,  anb  tlictbmbe  was  mtbeir  wings 
(fo2thcy  hab  wings  U&e  the  luingsof 
aft02fce)anDthey  uft  bp  the  «£pliat)  be= 
titoecne  the  eacth  anb  trjc  hcancn. 

io  Xhen  faiDt  J,  to  the  3ngcl  that 
talBCD  ttnth  me,  ©hither  both  cfc  bcarc 
theephahi 

1 1  3nD  he fain  tmto  mee,  Xo  builb  tt 
an  houfe  m  the  lanD  of  £>htnar,  ano  it 
(hail  be  cffablifhcD ,  anD  fct  there  bpon 
jjetoitmebafc. 

CHAP.   VI. 

i   The  vifion  of  the  foure  charcts.    9   By  the 

Crownes  ot  Iofhu.i,  is  (hewed  the  Temple 
and  Kingdomc  of  Chnlt  the  Branch. 

®&$%>&<!5  iao^turncD,  anD  Uft  Pp 
xSmS^^  nunc  eyes  ,  ano  Ioo&cd, 
jg^fj^Sg  ano  bcholbc ,  there  came 
i$rf?^V&S  foure  charcts  out  from  bt- 
s8!*£*|=3i;  ttbecne  ttbo  mountames, 
anb  the  mountames  were  mountames 
of  bzaffc. 

z  3ntfte&rftct)arctwe.ete&no2fcs, 
anoin  the  fctonD  charccblatUc  hojfcs. 

j  ^Dm  the  thrtD  char  etiDhittho; 
fes,anDtn  the  fourth  rharct  grillcDand 

bayfioifes. 

4.  XhcnlJanmjercD.anDfaiDPnto 
tt)c  3ngci  ttjat  taiucb  uuth  nice ,  nahat 

arettjefCtnvILORID; 

5  3(nbthc3ngcianfrocrcDanDfaib 
teutonic,  Xhcfc  ..rethcfourcjifptrits  of 
thehcauens,  Which  go f 02th  froni Oaiv 
bingbcfo2etoc!Lo2bofatlthccarfh. 

6  XticDiacUc Iioifesiuflirt)  arc ttjet* 
ut,gocfo2th  into  the  /!5o2th  couurrcy, 
anb  the  umite  goe  fo2th  after  tr)em,ano 
trjc  gttflcD  goc  forth  totbarb  the  5>outh 
coumrcv.  _     . 

7  3tnb  the  bayc  ttient  foo2th ,  anb 
fought  to  gocthatthcy  might  ttwiucto 
anb  fro  thiough  tl)e  earth :  anb  he  faib, 
<5etyehcnct,  ipal6ctoanbfroth20iigh 
the  earth.  £>o  they  lbaiHcD  to  anb  fro 
tfuouuh  the  earth. 

8  Xhcn  crtcb  he  upon  mranb  fpa&c 
bntomelayutg.BcholD-thcfcrhatgoc 
totnarbthc  tf}02th  tonntrcy,hauequtc; 
tcb  my  fpint,  in  the  /5o2th  tounrrev'. 

9  fiUnh the IP02D of ti;e JL oe £> 
tame  Dnto  me,  faying, 

10  take  Of  rhem  of  th C  CaprtU->tlC ,  euen 

of^etDai,ofXobnah,anDof5ebau»l), 
Which  arc  come fcom Babylon, anD 
come  thou  thcfamcDay,auD  go  into  the 
houfe  of 'Joaahthcfouofzcphamah. 


"Chap.  5.4 
I  Or ,  branch 

vpfrom  Vo- 
der him. 


1 1  Xhcntaacftiuer,  anbgolDe,  anD 
make  trowncs,  anb  fct  them  bpon  the 
hcaoof  ^omuathefonneof  Jofeocch, 
the  high  pjtcft. 

iz  3nb  fpcaftc  bnto  htm  ,  faying, 
Xhus  fpeahcth  the  ?L  ©  h  d  of  hoftcs, 
faying,  z5cholb,thc  man  Whofcnamc  is 
the  *26Baec©,  anD  hcfhaii  ijgroroc 
Dp  outof  hispiacc,anbhcfl)aibutlbthe 
Xcmpleof  thcHff>K©: 

i?  <£ucn  he  (hall  builD  the  temple  of 
the  ?L£>iro,anb  he  thai  bcarc  the  gi02y, 
anb  (ball  fit  ano  rule  topon  his  th2one, 
anb  he  (hall  be  a  p2ieft  Pptm  his  rlwonc, 
anb  the  counfcll  of  peace  fbail  bee  be- 
tWccnc  them  both. 

14  3nDthctroWncsfl)anbecto$c; 
lem,  anDto  Xobuah,  anb  to  Jebaiah, 
anb  to  Hen  the  fonne  of  Zephaniah  fo* 
a  memo2iail ,  m  the  Xcmplc  of  the 

JLfOB©. 

1  <;  3nD  they  that  are  farre  off,  than 
tome  anb  builb  in  the  Xcmplc  of  the 
3L©is©,  anbyefhallunotbc  that  trjc 
Horn©  of  hofts  hath  fent  me  tonto 
,you.  2nD  this  thall  tome  to  paffc,  if  ye 
Will  biligcntly  obey  ttjc  tooyce  of  the 
'ILokjd  your  god. 

CHAP.    VII. 

The  captiues  enquire  of  failing.  4  Zechariah 
rcprouetli  diciv  faftmg.  S  Sinnethccauleot 
their  capnuitie. 

fc^x^59  ^D  rt  tamt  t0  psffeta  the 
w£\h!  fourtll  V««  of  Bmg  ©a* 
j^^jg  nus,  that  the  ID02D  of  the 
ILok©  tame  tonto  ZP 

.^■•sffee  thanah  m  the  fourth  day 
of  themnth  monctIvuei>mChifleu. 

i  nahen  they  hao  fent  bnto  the  houfe 
of  cob  ,  ^>hcrncr  anD  Scgcm-me* 
lech,  anb  their  men  t  to  p2aybcfo;c  tfie  \m.t„ 

JL  &  K  JD  i """" <hc 

3  And 'to  fpcaftctinto  the  pjieftes,  f£2'k 
Tbhuh  were  in  the  houfe  of  ttje  %  ©  s  ©  \ 

of  holts,  anD  to  the  p2ophets,  faymg, 
S)houlD'3J  lPccpctnthcfiftmoueth,  fc- 
paratiugmy  fclfc,as3  haucDonethefe 
fomanyyecresi 

4  CL  Xhcn  tame  the  II102D  of  the 
%,  €>  a©  of  hoftsPnto  mcfaymg, 

<,   5>pcaKc  bnto  all  the  people  of  the 
tano.atiDtothepncttsJayuig.ttJhcnyc 
*  fallctj  anb  mouruco  in  the  fift  aubft-  ■ifa.S8.s 
uenth  moneth.encn  thofc  fcucnty  yccrcs^ 
DibyeatallfartPntome,emntomc; 

6  anbiDhcnycbibcacauDinhcnye 

DID  D21URC  ,  1 1  bib  UOt  ye  eat  lor  your  (elues, 


\\Orbrmt 
yrthejlhtt 
\&C. 


Rebellious  people.  Zechariah.  Thelewesrellored. 


j|  Ortarenot 
theft  the 
wordri. 
\H'br.bj 
thehltndof> 


f  Heb.  ittdgt 

judgement 
oftrueth. 

'  Exod.  2  J 
21.  Ifa.I. 
21  icrt.j. 
28. 


\Heh.thn 
oaue  a  back; 
fUdtngfljotll- 
der. 

f  Hebe  made 
hctuac. 


tHtfr.h 

the  hand  of 


*Pro.i.28. 
id.  i.i  j, 
icce.  1 1 . 1 1 . 

and  14.  2. 


\Heb.l,md 
ofde(ere. 


»Cba.i. 

■4- 


7   ||  Should  yee  not  hearc  tl)C  lOOjOeS, 

millet)  ttjc  %  a>  m  jd  hath  crteo  t  by  tlje 
fojmcr  i&ophcts ,  mhen  3Jcrttfalem 
masmhabitcb  ,anb  in  pjofpenttcano 
the  cities  thereof  rouno  about  rjcr, 
mhen  meninljabitcD  the  £>outh  of  the 
plainer 

8  C2utothcmo?ooftheli£>iiijD 
cameonto  Zcchartah,laying; 

9  Xhus  fpeatteth  the  ?L  sd  is  jd  of 
hoftcs,  facing ,  t  Cjcccutc  true  tttoge- 
ment,  ano  (herb  meretc  ano  tompafli 
ons  cucry  man  to  his  bjotljer. 

10  3(no  opp^effe  not  the  *  IDtooiD, 
no?  toe  fathcrteu"e,thcftcattgcr,tio2  the 
poo.'canoictnoneofyoutmagmceuill 
agamfthisbjothermyourheart. 

1 1  26ut  tljcp  refufeb  to  hearken,  aim 
tpuileb  aibay  the  (houiocr,  ano  t  (top. 
peb  trjeic  cares ,  ttjat  tljtv  fhouionot 
heare. 

iz  #ea,they  maoc  their  fjcarts  as  an 
abamant  (tone ,  left  they  thouio  fjearc 
tDe  Halt),  anb  the  VbojOes  ibhich  the 
jL  ©  «  m  of  holies  hath  fent  in  Ins  h> 
rtt  t  by  the  fo?mcr  $2ophcts :  therefore 
came  a  great  mjath  from  tlje  %  so  m  jd 
ofhoftes. 

13  1Lherefo?cltiSepmetopaiTc,  that 

as  he  trico,ano  they  ibouio  not  heare, 
fo  "they  tneb ,  anb  3  ibouio  not  heare, 
faith  the  %  o  is  jd  ofhoftcs. 

14.  2Sut  31  fcattereb  them  Unto  a 
mhirlettnnoc  among  all  the  nations, 
IDljom  they  unettmot :  thus  the  lanb 
masbcfoiate  after  them ,  that  no  man 
paffeo  through  ^102  rcturneo :  fo?  they 
lay  co  tlje  t  pieafaut  lanb  bcfoiatc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  ThcrcfUurationolIerufjlem.  9  They  are 
incouvjged  to  the  building  by  Gods  fauour 
to  them.  \6  Good  workes  are  required  of 
them.  lS  Ioy  andml.irgeiiienraiepromifed. 

$®?\^?#  <5A\\\t  the  10020  of  tlje 
%^WSr"k  y-°  w  ^  ofljoftes  came  to 
'Wi-^-V^  i"  facing; 
%/fc  i-\yi    r    Xhus  faycth  the 


_Ms  IL  o  is  jd  of  hottest  mas 
icaious  fo?  Zion ,  llr.th  great  icaiou- 
fie,  anb  3  mas  *  icaious  fo?  her  ttmh 
great  fur  ic 

3  Xhus  faith  the  1L  ©  is  © ,  3J  am 
returneb  Ditto  zion  ,ant>  ttuliomclim 
thcmtoftofjcrufalem.ano'jfcrufaicm 
(hail  be  callcb  a  Cute  of  tructh ,  anb  the 
fl3ountamc  of  the  1L  o  is  jd  of  hoftcs, 
thcholviljountame. 

4  Xhusfau1jthc?l£>iKjDofIjofts 


Xhercfhail  pet  olb  men ,  anb  olt>  mo- 
men,  omcllm  the  (treets  of  jScrufalcm, 
anb  euery  man  tutth  bis  Darrein  his 
banotfoztocryagc. 

5  3ttO  the  Greets  oftbe  title  (ball  be 
full  of  boyes  anb  gtclcs  placing  in  the 
ftrccts  thereof 

6  XhusfaidjtfjcHi©1K©ofho(rs, 
31f  tt  bee  marucilous  in  the  eves  of  trjc 
rcnuiaut  of  thtspcoplc  m  tbefcoayes, 
(liouib  it  alfo  bcx  U  marucilous  in  my 
crcs4aiththe1Lois©  ofljoftes? 

7  XhusfaiththclLoiSjDofhofts, 
25cholbc,  35  Vbiil  fauc  mp people  from 
the  €aft  country, anb  fromthetiecft 
countrcv- 

s  3ltH)35Vbillb2ingthcm,anbthev 
(hail  bibcll  in  the  mibftofgjcrufalcm, 
another  fhaibc  nip  people,  anb  3j  ibill 
bee  their  000,111  Xructlj  ano  m  Bigh- 
teouuiefle. 

9  C  1-hus  faith  the  %o  k  ©  of 
hoftcs ,  Hctyour  hanbes  be  ftrong  ,pc 
that  fjearc  m  thefc  baves ,  thefc  lbomcs 
bp  the  month  of  the  0:ophcts ,  ibhich 
were  m  tl)c  My  that  tlje  fouuoation  of 
thchoufcofthclLoisjD  of  hotts  mas 
laico.that  the  Xcmplc  might  be  built. 

10  fot  before  thefc  bases  there  mas 
no  ||*hnc  fo?  man,no2  any  hire  foj  bcaft, 
neither  was  there  anp  peace  to  him  that 
ment  out,  02  came  in ,  becaufc  of  the  afc 
flicnon :  to?  3j  fct  all  men ,  cticrp  one  tm 
gamft  his  neighbour. 

11  ffiut  nom  3  mill  not  bee  Onto  the 
refibuc  of  tilts  people ,  as  in  the  fo2mer 
oaics.faith  the  %  o  h  jd  of  holies. 

ii  5Fo?  the  feco  fhaibe  tpjofperous: 
the  fthnc  (hall  guic  her  fruit,  ano  the 
grounofhaugtuchcrinrrcafe,  ano  the 
hcaucus  fliail  giuc  their  ocm,  ano  31 
mm  caufc  the  remnant  of  this  people  to 
poffeffe  all  thefc  things. 

13  ^noitihautomctopaftc,  that  as 
v>ec  mere  a  curfc  among  the  heathen,  i£) 
houfcof  3Juoah,  ano  hottfc  of3Ifraclj 
fo  mill  3  fauc  you,  ano  ye  fhaibc  a  bicf 
fmg:fcarcuot,  ^ut  let  your  hanbes  bee 
ftrong. 

H  foi  thus  faith  the  %&  in  jd  of 
hoftcs,  3s  3J  thouglit  to  ptmifh  you, 
mhen  your  fathers  p2ouoHco  nice  to 
mwth, faith  thcjX  o  h  p  of  hoftcs,atio 
3ircpcntconot: 

15  5>o  agamc  haue  3  tltouglit  in 
thefc  oayes  to  00c  men  onto  Jicrufa 
lem  ,ano  to  tlje  houfc  of  Jluoalj :  fcarc 
ye  not. 

i6  €  Xhcfc  arc  the  tljmcjs  thatyce 
'  thai! 


\U,br.far 

m»/tttnde 
ofdajel. 


I  Or,hari 
v  dtfjicttli. 


\Hctr.tht 
cottntrey  cf 
the  going 
down:  of  the 
Sunlit. 


\\Or.tho 
hire  of  man 
becimeno- 
ihme.rtrc, 
Hagga.i. 


\  Heir. of 
peace. 


Gentiles  called. 


Ch; 


ap.ix. 


p 


Prifc 


rnonersof  nope. 


fh« 


IE 


EplwM. 
*V 

f  H<b.  tudge 
rr ttfth)  and 
he  tudje- 
mens  of 

petUt. 


\  Httr.fi- 

tcmne,  or  fit 
limtl. 


Mfi.5.1. 
mic.4.1 I. 
J  Or, emit 
wsa/ty.Het/t 

\Hci>rlo» 
treat  the 
face. 


Z.tcc. 


(hall  Dot ,'  £>peafte  yee  cucryman  the 
truth  to  hts  neighboj:  tetecute  the  tubg- 
ment  of  truetl)  anb  peace  m  pour  gates. 

17  3lnD  let  none  ofyou  imagine  cutll 
myour  hearts  againfthts  neighbour, 
ano  loue  no  falfe  oath :  foi  all  theft  are 
things  that  3  hate,  faith  the  %  o  is  ©. 

18  C  3luo  the  U)02D  of  the  %  <o  k  © 
of  holies  tame  bnto  me,faymg, 

19  Xhusfaiththe?l<£>i3©ofhoirs, 
Xhe  faft  of  the  fourth  moneth,  ano  the 
fair  of  the  fift.ano  the  fart  of  the  feucnth, 
ano  the  faft  of  the  tenth  fhaiibetothc 
houfc  of  gjuoah  ioy  anD  glabncffc ,  anD 
chcerefull  t  feafrs  :  therefore  loue  the 
trueth  ano  peace. 

zo  Xhus fauh  the %om>  of  holts, 
it  (Tuii  pet  come  to  pjiie ,  that  there  fhali 
come  people,  anD  the  inhabitants  of 
many  cities. 

zi  3lno  the  inhabitants  of  one  citie 
fhall  goc  to  another,  faying,  *  ILctbs 
goc  ||fpecDiIy  totp2ay  befoic  thefLos©, 
anb  to  fceftc  the  %  ss>  js  js>  of  holies ;  3 
Mil  go e alfo. 

ii  Pea  many  people  anbftrongna 
tions  0)811  come  to  fccltc  the  Ho  in  ©  of 
hofttstn3Jcnifalcm,anDtop2aybcfo:e 

the  %,  ©is©.  „ 

u  Xhus  faith  the  ?Loi3je>  of  hofts, 

■JnthOfC  baiCS  it  fhall  comeropalTe  ,  that 

ten  men  fhall  tahcholbe  out  of  all  lan- 
guages of  the  nations,  cucn  fhall  tafcc 
holb  of  the  frntt  of  him  thatts  alkib, 
faying,  naec  ruillgoe  With  you  ifozibc 
haue  hcaro  chat  <eob  is  Mth  you. 

CHAP.    IX. 

God  defendeth  his  Church.  9  Z ion  is  ex- 
horted to  reioyce  for  the  comming  of  Chnlt, 
and  bis  peaceable  Kingdomc.  11  Gods  pro- 
mifesolViftorv  and  Defence. 

^JtK  burben  of  the  tbojb  of 
a  Mf  the  %o  is  ©  m  the  lanb  of  I 
*  wk  iwwatl) ,  attb  Damafcns 
£«£?  thaii  bee  the  red  thereof: 
g^gtk  tbheu  the  eyes  of  man ,  as 
of  all  the  tribes  of  Ufracl  fhaibe  tomarb 
the3L<ois©. 

2  2nu  framath  alfo  fliaii  bo2ber 
thereby ,  %ms  ano  ztbon,  though  tt 
betocry'ibifc.  flPA 

j  3Jnb  Xynis  bib  bmlbc  her  felfc  a 
ftrongholb,anbhcapcbbpfiluerasthc 
Duff ,  anb  anc  golbc  as  the  myjc  of  the 

(TtCCfS 

4.  SeholD  ,the  E02D  Ml  can"  her  out, 
anbhe  VbUlfnute  her  poibermthefea, 


f  Heir. 

■•taettt. 


•Ifa.«i.II 

mairh.  21. 
J.ioh.12. 

W*  fitting 
filfi. 


anb  (he  (haibc  bcuourcb  ibitb  fire. 

5  3(h&clon  (hail  fee  ft ,  ano  feare, 
<sasa  alfo  fhaii  fee  it  anb  bebecy  fcuroM 
fuU,aub  citron  :  foj  her  expectation 
(haibeadjameb,  anb  the  Ring  (hall  pe* 
till)  from  oaja,  ano  athaeion  thai  not 
bcmhabitcb. 

6  anbabaftarbnjaiibibcUni^fl)', 
bob,  anb  3  ttnii  cut  off  the  p;ibe  of  the 
j^htlifhnes. 

7  anbgjibiUaKcavbayhtstbloob 
out  of  \)is  mouth,  anb  his  abomina- 
tions from  betibccnc  his :  teeth:  buthe 
thatremameth,euen  ljce  ihaibe  fo2  our 
:Oob,anbhefbaiibc  as  agouernoutin 
3Ju&ah,an&euronasa3Slcbuutc. 

s  3lnb  3i  ibtii  encampe  about  mine 
houfc  becaufe  of  the  armic ,  becaufc  of 
hunthatpau"erljby,anbbecaufeofhim 
thatrcttrcncth:anbnoopp2ClToiirfhall 
paffetl)20ugh  them  anymore:  fo2ttolb 
haue  3  fecne  ibtth  mine  eyes. 

9    C *  Seioptc  grcatlp, hD Daucjclncr 

I  of  Zion ;  fhout  ©  baughter  of  3lerufiV ! 

!  lem :  brholbc,  thy  Biug  commeth  bnto  I 

thee :  l)te  is  mil  ,anbj|haumg  faiuation, 

lomly ,  anb  ribtngbpon  an  afJc,anb  bp- 

on  a  colt,  the  foalc  of  an  affe. 

io  5lnD3Jibilcntoffthccharctfrom 
€ph2aim ,  anb  the  l)02fc  fromgjerufa- 
i  lem :  anb  the  batten  born  Chaibc  nit  off, 
lanb  he  fhali  fpeafce  peace  bnto  ththea* 
j  then, ano  his  bomuuon  (halbe  "from  fea  •  pfj.71. 
!  cucn  to  fca.anb  from  the  3Kincr  ,cueu  to 
theenbs  of  the  earth. 

11  31s f 02  thee  alfo,  I!  by  the  bloobof 
thyCouenant ,  3  haue  fentfoo2thtl)y 
1*  pjtfoucrs  out  of  tf;e  pit ,  lUhcrcm  is 
notttater. 

ii  C1-unicyc  to  the  frrong  holb, 
yep2ifoncrs  of  hope,  cucn  to  bay  boe^ 
Declare  that  3  \bill  rcubcr  Double  bn- 
to thee: 

i}  nahen  3  haue  bent  fnbah  fo?  me, 
flllcb  the  boib  ibith  <£ph;aim,  anb  rai^ 
febbp  thy  fonnes;©  Zion  ,agamftthy 
fonnes,!aD  Greete,anb  mabc  thee  as  tf)c 
ftuo2bofamtghncman. 

14  3nb  the  1L  o  «  ©  fhalbe  fcene  0= 
uer  thrm,anb  his  arrow  fliail  goc  fo2th 
asthc  lightning :  anb  theH02b  <5©© 
fhall  blo\b  the  trumpet,  anb  fliaiigoe 
ttnth  ibhtrlc\binDs  of  the  jS>outh. 

15  Che  %  o  k  ©  of  hoftes  njaliDe- 
fenb  them,  anb  they  (hall  ocuourc,  anb 
i|fubbucibuhuuig«ones,anbthcyfhal  l« 
DnnUe  and  mahe  a  notfc ,  as  tlnough  ' 
lbiue ,  anb  they  II  fhall  bee  fillcD  line 
boibles}andasthcco2ncrsoftht3lltar. 

16  31nD 


pr,nioft 
C:utnantU 
'  1  Hoed, 


!  Or,  fmhime 
(ienn  *f 
. 
\0r,P:*Iifu. 
hth  the 
bowttt*  C*r. 


Corner,naile,&:c.      Zechariah.  Twoitaues. 


||Or,£«-, 

orfpcakc. 


\\Orfi£bt. 
mitgi. 


•Icr.io.8. 
abac.  2. 18. 
t  Hti.  trra- 
pbtmi. 

||  Or^jjfwt- 
ndthtU  &c. 


fFfei.vijttcd 

vpcn. 


\9r,thrt 

the  rider  1  oh 

korfeittjha 
mcd. 


i6  2nbthe!Lc>i8©thctr<2»obfl)au 
CauctheminthatDapastbefloc&ofbis 
people ,  fo?  they  (hail  be  ^  tljc  Cones  of  a 
croiimelifteb  Dp  as  an  enttgne  bpon  his 
lanb. 

17  fat  l)oin  great  is  his  goobnefle, 
anb  h  oib  great  is  his  beautie ;  come  thai 
matte  the  pong  men  ||  chccrcfull,  anb 
neib  mine  the  maibes. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Godistobefoughtvnto,andnotidolcs.  5  As 
he  vifited  his  flocke  for  finne ,  Co  he  will  laue 
and  rcftore  them. 

due  pec  of  the  H©  is© 
raine tn  tfjc  time  of  the  lat> 
ter  raine,  fofhc?L©ra© 
fhaimane||bjightcloubs, 
,  ano  giuethem  fboibjcs  of 
ramctocucrpone  gratTcmthefielb. 

z  5fo,:the*Uboicshaucfpoltcnba= 
nltie,  attbthcbiutnctshanc  fcene  alpc, 
anb  hauc  tolb  faife  tyeames ,  thep  com* 
fojttnbainc:  therefore  thep  ibcnt  their 
tbap  as  a  flocftcthep  1 1  tber  e  troubUb  be- 
caufc  there  was  no  fbephcarb. 

3  fiPinc  anger  ibas  mnblcb  agatntt 
the  fljephcarbs,  anb  3  tpunifbcb  the 
goats :  fo?  the  %  o  is  ©  of  fjofrts  hath 
btfitcb  Ins  flocRC  the  houfe  of  Jubah, 
anb  hath  inabe  them  as  his  gooblp 
hotfemthcbattell. 

4  _>ut  of  him  came  forth  the  comer, 
out  of  him  the  naue,  out  of  htm  the  bat* 
tell  boib ,  out  of  him  cucrp  opp;cu"bttr 
together. 

5  C  3inb  thep  fljall  bee  as;  mighhc 
men  tbhich  trcabboibnc  their  enemies  tn 
ttjempje  of  ttje  ttcectsinthe  battell,anD 
thep  (hall  fight  bctaufc  the  1L©b©  is 
lbtth  them,  anb  tlje  llrtbcrs  on  hojfcs 
(hailbcconfounbcb. 

6  3nb  31  ibill  ftrcngthen  toe  fjonfc 
of  gjubah, anb  3  lbtllfauc  tlje  houfe  of 
'Jofepl),  anb  gi  lbtll  bnng  tljcm  agatnc 
to  place  them,  fo;  31  hauc  mcrnc  bpon 
tl)cm :  anb  thep  fljall  be  as  tftougt)  3 
hao  not  raft  them  off :  fo2  3  am  the 
!L  o  is  ©  their  <5ob,  %  Hull  fjcarc  them. 

7  2nb  they  ot  cphzaimftjail  be  bite 
a  mtgijne  man ,  anb  their  heart  (ball  re- 
lopecas  through  lbmc :  pea,  thctr  ctjil- 
02m  (hall  fee  ir,  anb  be  glab,  their  heart 
(ball  rcioptc  in  the  ?L  o  is  ©. 

s  3  null  Ijiffc  fo:  them  anb  gather 
tbenufojgibauc  tcbccmcb  them:  anb 
thep  (ban  mcreafc  as  tljep  hauc  uurea- 
feb. 


9  3nb  3  Jbfll  foib  ttjem  among  the 
people ,  anb  thep  (ball  remember  mem 
farrc  countncs,anb  thep  fl)all  lute  lbtth 
tbeicchilbicnanb  fume  agatne. 

io  3  ibtll  bang  tbem  agamc  alfo  out 
of  tlje  lanb  of  Cgppt ,  anb  gather  them 
out  of  aopna ,  anb'J  ibtll  bnngtijem 
Utto  the  lanb  of  ©ilcab  anbUcbanon, 
anb  place  Ojail  not  be  founbfoz  them. 

ti  anbheajaiipaacthjoughthefca 
tbtth  affliction ,  ?  ftjallfnute  the  lbaues 
tnthe5)ea,  anbauthebcepesofthert 
ucr  fhallb;pbp:anbthep?ibcof^lTpna 
fhailbebjoughtboibne^anb  tijefceptec 
of€gpptft)aii  brpartaibap. 

ii  2nb  3  ttitll  ftrcngthen  them  in 
the  %  ©  k  © ,  anb  thep  (hall  ibaibc  bp 
anb  boibne  in  his  name ,  faith  the 

CHAP.    XI. 

i  The  deftruftion  ot  Ierufalem.  3  The  cleft 
being«redfor,therel1arereiefted.  10  The 
ftaues  ot  beauty  and  bands  broken  by  the  re- 
ieftion  of  Chnft.  15  The  Type  and  curie 
ofafoolifhShepheard. 

#cnthpboo;tes,j©1Leb& 
non,  that  the  fire  map  be« 
uourcthpeebars. 
z  foible  firrc  tree,  fo? 
._  the  tcbarts  fallen  .betaufc 
all  the  ||  mtgljtp  arc  fpoilcb;hoible  0 
pceobesof25aft)an,  to?  thc||fo;rca  of 
the  bintage  is  come  botbne. 

J    C  There  is  a  bOptC  Of  tt\t  hOlbling 

oftheCt)ephcarbS;fo?theirglo?pisfpot? 
let)  tabopceof  the  roanngof  poungip^ 
ons ;  foi  the  pnbe  of  giozoan  is  fpoileb. 

4  Xhnsfaiththe1Blois©mp<5ob; 
jpeebe  thcflocBe  of  the  flaughter; 

5  !©hofepoffeflbursaaprhcm,anb 
holb  thcmfelucs  not  guiltic :  anb  thep 
that  fell  tlje  tap,  JSieffeb  be  th  e  Hois© ; 
foz  3  am-rich :  anb  their  oibnc  ft)ep< 
hcarbspttic  them  not. 

6  ^ojgiiuilliioniojcpitietheinha^ 
bttantsofthc  lanb,  faith  the  Hoia©: 
but  loe ,  3  ibill  t  ocliucr  the  men  euerv 
one  into  his  neighbours  hanb ,  anb  into 
the  hanb  of  his  ming,  anb  thep  than* 
fmuc  the  lanb,  anb  out  of  thctr  IjanD  3 
ibill  not  ocliucr  them. 

7  2nb  3  null  feebe  the  flocite  of 
daughter ,  cuen  pou,  0 1|  poo;c  of  the 
rlocH:aiH)  3  to  otic  bnto  me  tttio  ftanes; 
thconcgi  caiicb  ffieauticanb  the  other 
3J  caiieb  ||  25anbcj5,  anb  3  feb  tlje 

8  1Th?ce 


Unit. 
\\Or,thede- 
fenctdfar* 
fjf. 


tHey.m*kt 

t$  he  found. 


|!  Or, verily 
tbepecre. 


\OrfiwUi 


Twoftaues. 


Ck 


jtr Aliened 
for  theft. 

Mcr.15.2. 


\Hchr.  of 
btsfclloiv  or 
mtzhbcHr. 


\\Oftthe 

pjereofche 
Jbckf,  &c. 
certainly 
knrtve. 

fHek-.ifit 

be  goo  A  in 
lour  ejes. 
"Mactll.lfi. 

■5- 

'Matth.27. 


\\0r, bm- 
ders. 


\\Or,hidJen. 

\\Or,beare. 


ezek.  34. 2 
lohn  10.12 


8  %\);et  OjtphcatDs  alfo  3  cut 
off  in  one  moncth,  anD  mp  fouletioa^ 
theD  them ,  ant)  their  foulc  alfo  abhoj* 
vcD  met. 

9  Xhcn  faiD  3 , 3  *  Hjfll  not  fecDc 
pou :  that  that  Dicth,  let  tt  Die:  anD  that 
that  ts  to  be  cut  off,  lent  be  cutoff,  anD 
let  the  veft  catc ,  cucrp  one  the  flcih  of 
t  another. 

10  it  3nD  3  tooKc  nip  ftaffe,  wen 
Bcamnc,  anD  cut  it  afunDet,fhat3 
might  DzeaHc  mp  coucnant  Which  3 
IjaD  mabe  with  all  the  people. 

11  3tnD  it  was  b:oUen  m  that  Dap : 
anDfo  lithe  poo2C  of  the  flotUcthatwai' 
tcD  bpon  me,  tmelD  thatit «  a  rtjc  W02D 
of  the  Ho  kid. 

iz  3lnD  3  faiD  tmto  them ,  1 3f  pec 
thutne  gooD ,  gtue  me  mp  pike:  anD  if 
not,  fozbeave :  fo  thep  *  weighcD  foj  nip 
pzicc  fhirtte  pieces  of  ftluev. 

1  j  ;3tnD  the  %  o  k  &  faiD  fcnto  mec, 
Caftitbntotl)e,'potter:agooDlppnce, 
that  3  was  pnfcDat  of  them.  3lnD  3 
tooUe  trjetlnvtic  pieces  of  Oluet,  anD  caft 
them  to  the  pottct  in  tfjc  houfe  of  the 

14  Xhcn  3  cut  afuiiDev  mine  other 
ftaffe,  euen  ||  25anDs,that  3  might  tycah 
thcb20therhooD  bctwecncJuDah  anD 
3lfrael. 

15  f^nDthclLoKiDfaiDDntome, 
Xafte  into  thee  pet  the  infttuments  of 
afooun)fl)Cpl)eavD. 

16  jF<Bloe,3J  WilvaifehpafhephctDm 
the  lanD,  which  fl)all  not  Dint  thofetl)at 
bcc||rot  off,  neither  niallfccttethepong 
one,  nojt)calctDat  that  isbioBen,  no: 
||  fceD  that  that  ftanbeth  mil:  but  he  (hal 
eatctheflefh  of  thefat,  anDtcavethciv 
clawes  in  pieces. 

17  *i©oeto  the  iDollfhcphearD  that 
icauethfheflocBc:  the  fraozDrhaiibebp^ 
on  his  acme,  anD  bpon  h*s  tight  epe : 
his  armefhailbc  cleanc  D2pcDbp,  anD 
his  tight  cpelhallbc  DttctipDarRencD. 

CHAP.  XII. 

1  lemfaleru  a  cup  of  trembling;  to  her  felfe,  3 
and  a  burdeniome  ftone  toW  aduerfaiies. 
6  The  victorious  rcftothigoiludah.  9  The 
repentance  ot  Ierufjlem. 

y^a^^g^  ?><£  butDcn  of  the  W02D 
^ofthcfL^BJDfoi^frael, 

§£5 faith  thc?L  ©  k  ©,  which 
H^!  ftcctchtth  foonhthcjf?ea 


„  ucus,  anD  latth  the  fonit* 
Dation  of  the  earth ,  anD  fo.nncth  the 


ap.xij. 


Great  mourning. 
o 


fptnt  of  man  Within  him. 

i  BtholD^rbUimauclJcnifalcm 
a  cupof  Utrcmbungbnto  all  thcpcople 
vounD  about,  ||  When  thep  Qjaii  bcui  the 
ficgc  both  agamft  JuDah  ^d  agamft 
3Jerufalem. 

3  «[  3nD  m  that  Dap  Will  3  mane 
3Jcvtifalem  a  buvDenfome  ftone  fo:  all 
people :  all  that  buvDcn  thcmfelucs 
Until  it,fhail  be  rutin  pieces  though  all 
the  people  of  the  earth  bee  gathcrcD  to^ 
gctherngamflit. 

4.  gjn  that  Dap,  faith  the  %  ©  k  js>, 
3  null  finite  cucrp  Ijozfc  ibith  aftomflr 
ment.auDhisriDeriDithmaDnclTcaiiD 
3  Will  open  mine  cpes  bponthc  houfe 
of  3?uDah,  anD  lMl  finite  euctp  ho:fc 
of  the  people  ttnth  bUnDneffe. 

5  3nD  the  goueruours  of  gjuDah 
(hall  fap  in  their  heart,  \\%\)t  inhabi- 
tants of  3knifalem  fliaii  be  mp  ftrcngth 
in  the  %  ok  p  of  hoftes  their  0oD. 

6  C  3Jn  that  Dap  m\\  3  mane  the 
gouernours  of 'JJtiDah  l*Mt  a  harth  of 
fire  among  theihooD,  anD  UBc  a  to:ch  of 
fircm  a  (heafc;  anD  thep  (hall  Dcuoure 
allthepeoplcvounDabout,ontheright 
hanD  anD  on  the  left:  anD  3Jerufaiem 
(hailbce  mhabiteD  agame  m  her  ottmc 
place,  euen  m'Jerufalem. 

7  Xhe ILoira  alfo  (hallfauc  the 
tentsof  ^iioahfirft,  that  tl)e  gio:p  of 
the  houfe  of  S>auiD,anD  the  glo:p  of  the 
inhabitants  of  gjcrufaltm  Do  not  mag 
nificthemfeiiiesagatuft^JuDah. 

8  gm  that  Dap  (halt  then  ok  jddc* 
feno  the  inhabitants  of  Jerufaiem.auD 
he  that  is  ||  feeble  among  them  at  that 
Dap  (hall  beasS>atuD;  anD  the  houfe  of 
S>auiDfha!ibe  asooD,  as  the  3lngcl  of 
the  %  o  k  id  before  them. 

9  <L3nD  it  fhail  come  to  paffc  in 
that  Dap,  that  5  Utill  feeBe  to  Deltrop  all 
the  nations  that  come  agamft  3Jcru- 
faicm. 

10  ^nDUiDilpomjeDponththoufc 
of  SDauiD,  anD  Dpon  the  inhabitants  of 
gjmtfalcm  the  fpint  of  grace  anD  of 
fuppltcations,  anD  thep  fljail*  loonebp^ 
on  me  whom  fhep  haue  pearceD,  anD 
thcpfl)almourncf02him,asoncmour5 
nctl)  fo:  his  onelp  Tonne,  anD  (hall  be  in 
btttevneffe  fo.2  him,  as  one  that  is  m  bit* 
tcrncffefozhisfirft  boitic. 

n  <JnthatDav(hallthctebccagrcat 
mouriungtn3!erufalcm,asthc*mour 
mug  of*  DaDatwunmon  in  the  bailcp  of 
©egtDDon. 

ii  ^InD tlieianD  njal mournc ,t  euerp 

famine 


\\Or,fum 
her  orooi{jrt 
\\Or,tnld 
foaoiunjl  Ih 
dJfhMb 
be  nhtch 
(hall  be  tn 
fege  agunjl 
lerujattm. 


\\Or,tberets 
jlrength  to 
w  And  10 
thrinhabt' 
tanii-jO-c. 


[Or.abna. 
Htbr.faSen. 


Ioh.19. 
4.*>7- 

ttucil  7 


A&2.37- 
■».Cht< 


\Hebfj™ 
hetjiam- 


An  open  fountainc.    Zechariah.        God  trieth  his. 


t  Hel.fepe- 
ration  for 

vne/ennnrffe 


dt: 


jHeir.a 
garment  of 
neure. 
\Hthr.totte. 


«  Matt.  16. 
jjl.  mat.  14. 
*7- 


famine  apart ,  the  familic  of  ttje  houfc 
of  2>aiub  apart,anb  their  amies  apart, 
trjc  fanultc  of  the  houfc  of  iBathan  a? 
part,  anb  tUcit  rbtucs  apart : 

13  Xhc  familic  of  the  houfc  of  ILcui 
apart ,  arm  rtjctr  Wiucs  apart :  trjc  fa- 
mine of  £>hmm  apart,anb  their  tbiucs 
apart: 

14.  ail  the  families  that  rcmainc,  c= 
ticry  family  apart,  f  their  Unites  apart. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  The  fountaine  of  purgation  foi  Icrufalcm,  1 
tromidolame.andlalfeprophecie.  7  The 
death  of  Chrift,  and  the  trial!  ot  a  third  part. 

ji5tfjattiartl)crcfl)aibca 
fotmtamc  openeb  to  the 
houfc  of  3>auib ,  ano  to 
the  inhabitants  of  3c- 
_  rufalcm ,  to?  fmnc ,  ano 
fojtbntlcanncffc. 

z  c  2ino  it  fljal  come  to  paffc  ui  that 
rjar,fattl)the?L£>i5jE>  of  hoftes.thaigj 
nnlPcutoffthc  names  ofthctbolcs  out 
of  tl)c  lanb :  ano  they  (l)al  no  mow  be  r  e- 
membzeo :  ano  alfo  3  iM  caufc  tlic  pro- 
phets, ano  the  bnclcanc  fptrit  topaffc 
outofthcianb. 

5  2nb  it  fijal  come  to  paffc  th.ntbhcn 
any  (hall  yet  prophetic,  tlien  Ins  father 
ano  Ins  mother  that  begatchim,  (hall 
fayrmtohim  Xhou  (halt  notliuc-.for 
tliou  fpeancft  lies  m  the  flame  of  the 
JL  o  k  o :  ano  his  father  ano  his  mo 
thcr,  that  begatetnm,  (hall  thmfthim 
through  W)hcn  hemophccicth. 

4  3mo  it  (hall  come  to  paffc  in  that 
bay  ,that  the  prophets  (halbcafoamcb 
cucry  one  of  his  Difion,  when  hec  hath 
prophccicb :  neither  (hall  they  lbcarc  a 
t  rough  garment  t  to  occciuc. 

5  aSuthelhal  fay,  Ifim  no  prophet, 
31  am  an  huf  banbnian :  for  man  taught 
me  to  ttcepe  cattcll  from  my  youth. 

6  3nDoncihaifayDntohim,tt)hat 
are  thcfciPouubsin  thine  hanosfXhen 

hccfhallanfiucrc :  Thofetb.tr,  iMnth  31 
was  toounbeb  m  the  houfc  of  my 
fcienbs. 

7  cattialte,  £>  fmorb,  agamft  my 
flicphcarb ,  anb  agamft  the  man  that  is 
my  fellow,  faith  the  %  0  is  jo  ofhoftcs: 
*  finite  the  Shephcaro ,  anb  thclhccpc 
(halbc fcattercb  anb  31  ttnl turnc  nunc 
hanb  upon  thcutle  ones. 

8  3lnb  tt  (ball  come  to  pafte ,  that  in 
all  the  lanb, faith  the  ?L$t>i<;id  ,  two 
parts  therein  (hall  be  cut  off ,  and  bit, 


but  the  thirb  (hall  be  left  therein. 

9  2lnb  3  Will  bnng  the  thirbc  part 
through  the  ftrcanb  WU'rcfinc  them  as 
ulucr  is  reftneb,  $  Will  try  them  as  golb 
is  tricb:  they  Cljall  call  on  my  /Same, 
anb3  Wtl  hearc  them :  3  ibil  fay ,  3t  fs 
my  people :  anb  they  (hall  fay  ,  Xhc 
?L©isjDismy(i5oo. 

'     CHAP.    XIIII. 

Thedeftroycrsotlerufalem,dcftroied.  4  The 
comming  of  Chrift  ,  and  the  graces  ot  his 
kingdome.  u  Theplagueot  lerufalems ene- 
mies. lfJTheiemnantfhaltiirne  totheLord, 
:o   And  their  fpoilesfhalbe  holy. 

eholbc,  the  bay  of  the 
JL  o  is  ©  commcth  ,  anb 
thy  fpoiie  (ban  be  btuibcb 
tiitbcnubftoftbcc. 
1  jforlJWU  gather  all 
nations  agamft  3}cruTalcm  to  battcll, 
anb  the  cmc  (hall  be  tancn,  ej  the  houfc? 
rifclcb,  anb  the  women  rautlbcb ,  anb 
halfe  of  the  cttic  (hall  goe  forth  into  tap* 
tiuiticanbthc  refibuc  of  the  people  (hai 
not  be  cut  offfcom  the  cine. 

3  Xbcnfljali  the  ?U>  is  *o  goe  forth 
ano  fight  agamft  tljofc  nations ,  as 
When  he  fought  tn  the  bay  of  battel. 

4  C  3nb  his  feet  (hall  ftanb  m  that 
bay  bpon  the  mount  of  sDIiues,  Which 
is  before  31crufalcm  on  the  €aft,anb  the 
mount  of  sDlttics  (bah  clcauc  m  the 
nubfttlicrcof  towatb  tljccaft,  anbto- 

IDatb  the  nSCft,  and  there  fh.ill  beeapcry 

great  bailey,  ano  halfe  of  the  Q)oum 
tamcfliallrcmouctoibarb  the  tflonW, 
anbhalfc  of  ittottjarbtheS>otith. 

5  3no  ye  dial  flee  to  tlje  Pailcy  of  lithe 
mountatnes  :  II  foj  the  ttalley  of  the 
moimtamcs  fl)ai  reach  bnto  3l3ai:  yea, 
ycfliail  flee  liUcas  ycc  ftcbfrombcfo:e 
the  "carthquauc  in  the  bayes  of  Hv 
5iah  lung  of  liubah :  anb  the  1L  $>  is  jd 
my  <5ob  (hall  come  ,aud  all  tlje  Saints 
ttjiththee. 

6  3inb  it  fliall  tome  to  paffc  m  that 
bay ,  that  the  light  (hall  not  bctclcarc, 
nortbarhc. 

7  ffiutllitaiallbc'oncbay.iuhich 
ftjaibc  Imolben  to  the  ft  €>  is  jo,not  bay 
noz  night :  but  it  dial  come  to  paffc  that 
at  'nieningtimcitflmlbc  light. 

3  3uibit  ftial  be  *m  that  bay,  that  ifc 
mng  *  maters  fliall  goe  out  fr om  ^icru- 
faicm :  halfe  of  them  tottiarb  the  II  for- 
mer fi>ca,  anb  halfe  of  fhciu  tolParb  the 
hmber  &ca :  m  Summer  anb  mttmi 
terfhallitbt. 

9  ^nbl 


'  1. Pet. 

«.7- 


\\Or,mj 
mowtlotmt. 
||  Or,  when 
he  fill  touch 
the  vaIIcj  ef 
the  mettn- 
t.iincs  to  tht 
fUcehrfc- 
r  -r .t:.-J. 

'Amos  j.i 

t  Heir,  pre 
eiotti. 
\Hebr. 
thie^neffe. 
||  Ur  their) 
(halbe  one. 

"Rcucl.  jo. 

M 

*  Ifa.  (So. 
16  rcu.  }l. 
il. 

•Eze.47. 
i.iod J.  i£. 
rcuc.  si. I. 
,\Or.  Ei. 
jieriu. 


Againfl:  the  enemies 

o 


Cfe 


a 


D.XI11J. 


oflerulal 


em. 


\\Or,eom- 


\[Or,/Zafl 
abide. 


abidt. 


\  Or,tho*Ai- 
fo  0  Iud*h 
P>*lt. 
|  Or,JgMnj}, 


9  3tnb  tljc  1L  o  u  i?  (ball  be  Bmg 
ouec  all  the  carthan  that  bay  fbai  there 
Uc  one  1L©  Kp,atibhisj3ameonc. 

10  3lii  the  lanD  fljaii  be  j|  tucncb  as  a 
plaine  fcom<5ebato  Simmon,  S>outlj 
of  3Jerufalem:  anbit  fbailbe  nftcD  up 
anb !  I  mhabitcb  m  her  place :  from  iSctv 
tamms  gate  bnto  the  place  of  the  firft 
gate,  bnto  the  comer  gate ,  anb  from  the 
toMe  of  tyanamcl  buto  tljc  Bmgs 
Mncp2clTcs. 

ii  3nb  men  fbail  bVbcll  in  it ,  anb 
tl)crc(\)albc  nonuuebtter  beftruction : 
but  'Jcrufaicm1  ifbalbc  fafcly  uihabucb. 

il  c^lnbthis  fbali  be  the  plagite, 
MjercMtl)  the  ILsdisjd  Mil  ftniteau 
tijcpeoplc.thatbauefoughtagamttjc 
rufalcm  :  their  flcQ)  (ball  confumc  a 
Miy,ibbUctbcy(tanb  bpon  their  feetc, 
anb  their  eyes  (ball  confumc  aMiy  tn 
their  boles,  anb  their  tongue  than  con 
fume  aMiy  m  their  mouth. 

13  3JnD  it  (ball  come  to  paffcm  tliat 
bap ,  that  a  great  tumult  from  the 
%  <d  is  ©  Cbaibc  among  them ,anb  they 
(ball  lap  fjolbc  cuery  one  on  tl)c  fjaub  of 
rjisneighbottr ,  anb  b«.s  Daub  (ball  rife 
bp  againlttbcbanbof  htsnctgbbour. 

i+  3uib|l3fubab  alto  (ball  fight  II  at 
^Jcrufaicm ,  anb  the  wealth  of  all  the 
Ijcatbcu  tounb  about  (ball  be  gatbercb 
together,  golbc  anb  ulucr,  anb  apparcll 
m  great  abunbance. 

«  3lnb  fo  (ball  be  tl)c  plague  of  tljc 
Ijojfc,  of  tljc  mule,  of  tljc  camcll,  anb  of 


tljc  affe,  anb  of authc  beads  that  (ball 
bcmtbefctents,astljispiaguc. 

i6  <[  3nb  tt  mail  come  to  pafle  that 
euery  one  tljat  ts  left  of  all  tljc  nations 
Mwb  came  agatnd  Jcrufaiem ,  fljau 
cunt goc  bp  from ycerc  to  y eerc to  bJo: 
fl)ip  tDc  Bmg  the  ILoisjd  of  bodes, 
anbtokccpetbefeadoflCabernaclcs. 

17  3tno  it  man  be,  that  lbljo  fo  Mil 
not  come  bp  of  .«n  tljc  families  of  the 
cartljbntoijerufalem ,  tottwflnp  the 
Using  the  Coke*  of  nodes,  cuenbp 
ontljcmfljaiibenoraitic. 

is  3inb  tf  tljc  family  of  €gypt  goc 
not  bp ,  anb  tome  not ,  that  t  banc  no 
raine:  tnerc  fljailbcc  the  plague  Mjerc- 
Vbitlj  tljc  7Lok£>  Mil  finite  the  Dea- 
then  tbatcomenot  bptonccpctljcfcad 
ofZabcrnaclcs. 

19  Xbisfljail  bctbellpumfljmcnt  of 
(Egypt,  anb  trjcpumujmcntofailnatb 
ons  that  come  not  bp  to  fecepe  thcfcafl 
ofXabcrnaclcs. 

i°  CJn  that  bay  d^all  there  be  bp< 
on  tl)C !  |  bcls  of  tljc  Ijotfes ,  §'®V3.m$> 
Una©  X$c  ILoisd,  anb  tljc 
potsm  the  2Lsde©£>  boufcfbail  bee 
ItHc  tljc  boMes  before  the  3lltar. 

ii  Pea, eucry pot m 3Jcrufalcm anb 
m  5«balj  diall  bee  ^olincffc  bnto  the 
fL<Dis©  ofl)oftcs,anballtl)cytljatfa' 
enfice,  fljau  come  anb  tattc  of  tljem,  anb 
fecthe  therein :  anb  m  tljat  bay  there 
(ball  beno  moic  the*  Canaamtctn  tljc 
IjoufcofthclLoK©  of  bodes. 


^Htb.hjthi 

hand  ofMu 
Uchi. 


^MALACHI. 


}  Htb.  vbm 
bom  there 
u  no:. 


\\Qr,fane. 


\\Or,kridUs. 


iocl  3.17. 
rcu.  11.27. 
andii.15. 


*Rom 


9.13. 


CHAP.    I. 

Malachi  complaJneth  of  lfracls  vnkindneffe. 
6  Of  their  irrcligioufhes,  liandprofanenefle. 

tyc  burben  of  tljc 
Ui02bofp!L©yE> 
to'3JfraclbyttT3a= 
laclji. 

1  31  hauc  10 
ucbyou.faytljtljc 
!L©iGP:yctycc 
fay.iehcremhalt 
rljou  lottcb  bs^ 
wasuot  <££au  Jacobs  brother,  faytlj  tljc 
HiOis  j>i  yet  3*loucb  'Jacob, 


3  ^nb  3  Ijatcb  cfau,  anb  laybc  Wis 
mountaines,anbljisljcntagc\baftc,fo2 
thebzagons  of  thcibilbetncffc. 

4  nahcr cas  Cbom  fay th ,  note  arc 
impoumnjcb.butMMlltcrurneanb 
butio  the  bcfoiatc places;  Xhus raytlj 
thelLoH©  of  hoflcs.Xhcy  fljai  bmio, 
but'31  ibill  tli2oib boMie  anb  tljcy  dial 
call  tljem,  Xhcb02ber  ofibicUcbncffc, 
t  the  people  aga.nft  lbljom  tljc  %<£>  is  p 
Ijatlj  tnbignation  fo;  cucr. 

5  3lnb  your  eyes  man  fee ,  anb  yce 
(hall  fay ,  %\)t  JLosd  Mil  be  magiu 
ficb||fromthcl)02berof3ifracl. 

6  C  31  fonnc  Ijououreth  his  father, 
^liti  anb 


\\Or:-f>. 

Hct  fran 


Thepeople,and         Malachi.       Pried: 


s,rcprou 


dJ 


\\Or,i„„g 

vrtto  &c. 


j  Heb.tofa 
crifiee. 


\Heb.the 
face  of  Cod. 
f  Hehtfrom 
jour  hand. 


Ilai.i.  1  I. 
ter.6.20. 
amos.j.ii 


Or,  where 
at  you  might 
hone  hlOTten 

arraj. 


\Heb.  in 
vfhcfejloeks 


anb  a  fcruant  Ijis  Rafter.  3Jf  then  3J  be 
a  father ,  lnhcrcismtnc  honour?  anb  if 
3  be  a  scatter,  inhere  ismpfcarc,  faith 
rhclLfiDis©  of  holies,  nnto  pou  j3D 
ptfetts ,  that  ocfpife  mp  name;  anb  pee 
fap  ,  ©herein  haue  ujc  DtfpifcD  thp 
name; 

7  ||J9ee  offer  pollutcb  bjcab  bpon 
mine  altar  •,  anb  pee  fap ,  tehcrcmhauc 
Ujc  polluted  ttjee  <  3Jn  that  i>ec  fap,Xhc 
table  of  the  1L  o  is  ©  is  contemptible. 

s  3lnD  tfrjee  offer  the  blinb  t  foj  fa; 
trtfite,  is  it  not  null;  ana  if  pec  offer  the 
lame  ano  tittic,  "it  not  euilWoffer  it  nott) 
bntothp  goucrnour  :tt)illhcbeplcafcb 
ttnth  thec,  o?  accept  thp  perfonjatth  ttjc 

JLfiDlSIDOflJOttCSi 

9  ^no  noib  3  PJap  pou  ,  beteerrj 
t<5ob,  that  Dec  ttnll  be  granousbnto 
bs  :tl)is  tjatb  beenctbppoutmeancs: 
mil  he  regarbpourpcrtons,  faith  the 
jLois©  of  holies; 

io  ddDo  is  there  eucn  among  yon 
tfjat  ttiouio  (hut  the  booses  fomought.' 
neither  boc  yec  innble  fire  on  nunc  altar 
to? nought,  gjiiaueno  plcafurctnpou, 
faitrj  the  fLflDis©  of  hottcs,  neither  ttnll 
31  accept  an  *  offcing  at  pour  hanb. 

ii  jtfojfcomthcriGngofthc&unnc, 
cuen  unto  the  going  bottme  of  the  fame 
my  name  fhallbe  great  among  the  ©en-- 
tiles ,  anb  in  cucrp  place  mcenfe  Bull  be 
offerebbnto  mp  name,  anb  a  pure  of- 
frtng :  to:mpnameftuii  be  great  among 
the  heathen,  faith  the  % ®  is  ©  of 
hottcs. 

ii  C  2But  pec ijaue  pjophancb  it ,  in 
that  yec  fay ;  IChc  table  of  theft  <d  is  © 
tspollutcb,  anb  the  fruitc  thereof,  ^a 
htsmcatc,  is  contemptible. 

13  J^ce  faib  alto  ,  ffichoib  tbhat  a 
lDcanncffcis  it,  ano||  veehauefnuffebat 
tt,faith  the  %  0  ik  ©  of  hottcs ,  anb  pec 
brought  that  ibhichvbastomc,  anb  the 
iame,anb  the  Acne :  thus  pee  brought  an 
offrmg :  fboulb  3(  accept  this  of  pour 
hanb,faiththcJL<Dia©; 

14  25utcurfcbbethcbceeiucr,tibhich 
hath  m  hisflocfecamalc,  anbboibcth 
anb  famftcrtl)  bntothc?Lo;t>  a  corrupt 
thing :  to?  31  am  a  great  Btng,  faith  the 
ft©  is©  of  hottcs  ,  anb  mp  name  is 
ojcabruliamongthc  heathen. 

CHAP.     II. 

1  He  fharpcly  reprooueth  the  Piicftsfor  neg- 
lecting their  couenant.  1 1  and  the  people 
for  idolatrie,  14  lor  adultene ,  17  and 
for  nifidelitie. 


4!2b  nott),  <D  pec  tfwtts, 

this  commauntjcmcnt  is 

to?  pou. 
1  3Ifpe  ttnll  not  hcare, 

ano  ifpccibilinotlapitto 
heart,to  giuc  glojp  bnto  mp  name,faith 
thelitis©  of  hottcs  31  null  cuen  feno 
a  *  curfc  bpon  pou  ,  anb  ttnll  curfc 
pour  blcflings:pea,3i  hauc  curfebthem 
ialrcabp,  becaufc  pee  boc  not  lap  it  to 
;  heart. 

j  26cholb,3tt)ilI||e«rupt  pour  feet), 
anbtfpjeab  boung  bpon  pour  faccs,euen 
!  the  ooung  of  pour  folcmnefcatts,  anb 
||  one  ttiau  taac  pou  arbap  Uiith  it. 

+  3lnb  pec  (hall  knott)  that  3J  hauc 
fent  this  commaunbement  onto  pou, 
that  mp  couenant  might  be  ttnth  ILeui, 
faith  the  %  ©  is  ©  of  hottcs. 

5  #p  couenant  tbas  ttnth  htm  of 
life  anb  peace,  anb  31  gauc  them  to  him, 
forthefearc ,  tbhcrcttuthhefcarcbmcc, 
anb  ibas  afraib  bcfo?e  mp  name. 

6  lEhe  latt)  of  truth  tt>as  fit  his 
mouth,  anbmiquittcibasnotfounbin 
his  lips :  he  ttaiitcb  nnth  me  fit  peace 
anbequittc,  anb  bib  turncmanpaibap 
fromuuciuine. 

7  5Fo? the  pMcflslipsfhoulbBcepc 
HnoiblcDge,  anuthep  fhoulb  fceftc  the 
latb  at  his  mouth :  to?  he « the  mefrcn- 
gee  of  the  Horn©  of  hottcs. 

8  2Sut  )>tc  arc  Dcpartcb  out  of  rtje 
Ibap :  ^t  hauctaufcbmanptollftumblc 
at  the  lain :  pc  hauc  cojruptcbthc  coue- 
nant of  ?Uui,  faith  the  %&is,®  of 
hottcs. 

9  3Chereto2Chauc3faitomat)epou 
contemptible  anb  bafe  before  ai  the  pco 
pic,  accojbing  as  pec  hancnotbeptmp 
rbapes ,  but  ||  hauc  bin  par  nail  fit  p  latt) 

10  *Haireifocnotailoncfathcr*hath 
not  one  <sob  crcatcb  t>s  t  nahpboe  rue 
ocaic  trcachcrouQp  cucrp  managaintt 
his  brother ,  bp  pjophantng  the  couc- 
1  nam  of  our  fathers; 

11  CUubahhathbcaittrcachcrouflp 
anb  an  abomination  is  tommittcb  in 
35fracl  anb  fit  3Jcrufaiem :  fojStitah 
hath  piophancb  the  holineffc  of  the 
?U>EiDtt)hith  llhcloucb,  anb  hath  ma= 
neb  the  baughtcr  ofa  ftrangc  <5ob. 

n  Xhc?Lfl»s©tt)illcutoffthcman 
that  both  this  :  the  ||  fatter  anb  the 
fcholler  out  of  the  tabernacles  of  gja? 
tob ,  anb  him  that  offerethau  offrmg 
bnto  the  %  &  is  ©  of  holies. 

ij  Zm  this  hauc  pec  bone  againc, 
couenngthcaitar  of  thc|l€viB©tt)ith 
tcarcs, 


*I.cuit.  16. 
J4.dcut.*8 
»5- 


\Ortreprone. 
\Heb{cAt- 
er. 

Or ,  &  fan 

•tksyotia- 
traj  to  it. 


||  Or, fiS  in 
theUa. 


\\Or>hfiid 
vp  the  fact 
agOinft.Heb. 
accepted]*- 
ctt. 


\\0r,  ought 

to  lent. 


j!  Ors  hin 
thai  wakfth 
and  hum  that 
avjwtrtth. 


GodwitnefTeth  Che 


p.nj, 


iga 


iftfi 


againitnnners. 


||  Or ,  exctl- 
IntcU. 

\Htb..ifnd 
of  Cjod. 
\\Or,vn- 

Jvlhfrllj. 


I0r,,fhrc 

t  Hob. tophi 
OWJJ. 


*M,tr.l  I. 
lo.mar.i  I 
luk.l.76.& 
7'7- 


tcares,  Vbitl)  tttccpmg  anD  ibith  trying 
out,  in  fo  much  that  hec  tcgatucthnot 
the  offering  any  mo^c,  02  rceciueth  u 
Vbitl)  goob  Uull  at  your  hanD. 

14  CPctycfay.nahetcfojeiaSccaufc 
ti)c  ILokb  hath  bene  Uiitncs  bctlbctnc 
theeanb  thcibifc  of  tljppoutt),  agamft 
mhomc  tljou  haft  bcaittreachcroufly : 
pet 's  the  thycompamon.anb  the  ibtfc  of 
thycoucnant. 

15  3tnD  bibnothemaueone?  ycthad 
he  the  ]|  rcfiDite  of  the  fpmt :  anu  inhere* 
fozeone?  that  hec  might  feeue  t  agoDly 
fceD :  thercfoictauc  hccDto  yonrfpint, 
anu  let  none  Dcale  ||  treacheroufly  a- 
gainft  tlic  ttufc  of  his  youth. 

16  5f02tf)e!L©isjDtfjeGoDof3It 
tael  faith,  that  ||hc  hateth  t  putting  a* 
may  :  fctf  one  toucrctl)  toiolenee  tbttt) 
his  gatment,faith  the  2L©kid  of  hotts, 
therfcue  taltc  heeo  to  your  fptrtt,that  ye 
Dcale  not  treacheroufly. 

17  CPc  hauc tticaneD theft  ok© 
ttnthyourmojDS:  yet  ye  fay,  ©herein 
hauc  *be  VbcartcD  htm  <  U)hcn  ye  fay,  e 
uery  one  thatDocth  euill,  '5  gooDmthc 
fight  of  the  %  <d  k  d,  anD  he  Dclightcth 
m  them ,  0?  Where  is  the  <SoD  of  iuDgc- 
ment ; 

CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  Meflene;er>Maiefty,&  Grace  of  Chnft. 
7  Of  the  rebellion,  S  faculedge,  13  andm- 
ridcluie  ol  the  people.  16  The  promife  of 
blefsing  to  them  that  fearcGod. 

f  «holDc,3rtbillfcnDmy 
*  meffrngcr,anD  he  fhai  pjc* 
pare  the  Vbay  bcfo;c  mec: 
anb  the  ft®  k  ©  tbftom  y  e 
fcclte,  fhallfuDDenly  tonic 
to  his  Xemple :  cucn  y  meffenget  of  the 
€oucnatu,ibhomycDclightm:bcholD, 
he  fljail  comcfaiththefLoKPofhofts. 
i  36ut  Who  may  abibc  the  bay  of 
his  commtng  <  anb  lbho  fhall  ftatib 
when  he  appeared)  t  fo?  he  MiKca  rcfr 
ncrsfire.anb  lihe  fullers  fopc. 

1  3mb  he  (hall  fit  as  a  refiner  anb  pi- 
nner of  fiiuer  :  anb  he  (hall  punfic  the 
fonncs  of  Hem,  anb  purge  them  as 
golb  fj  filucr,  that  they  may  offer  tonto 
the  ft©K©  an  offnug  m  nghtcoufnes. 

4  Tl)cn  fljail  the  offcrmgsof  3Ju* 
bah  anb  ^erufaicm  bee  picafantbnto 
thefL©K2>,asmthcbaycs  of  olb,  anb 
asin|lfo2mccyceres. 

5  3lnb  3J  null  tome  ncerc  to  you  to 
lubgement,  anb  3  lbillbec  afimftttiifc 
neffe  agamft  the  fwerers,  anb  againft 


\CrJrfaud 


'Z«h.  i.j 


"Gen. 7. ii 

f  Hcb.tmp- 
l.'e  out. 


"ft. 


thcabultcrcrs,  anb  agamft  faifc  fiuea 
rers,  anb  agamft  tliofc  that  Hoppjcffc 
thchirelmgmhisibagrs,  the  njiboibe, 
anb  the  fathcrleffc,  anb  that  turne  afiue 
theftrangcr  from  his  right,  anbfearenot 
mc,fatth  the  %  o  k  ©  of  hotts. 

6  Jro?  3 -mi  the  IL  sdk  ©,3  change 
not:  therefore  ye  fonnes  of  jacobarc 
notconfumeb. 

7  C<£uen  from  the  bayes  of  your 
fathers  ycc  are  gone  aibay  from  mine 
ojbtuanccs.anb  hauc  not  Kept  them:  *  re* 
tunic  bnto  mcanb  3  ibill  r  ctumc  tmto 
you,  faith  the  ft©  is  jd  of  hofts :  25utyc 
faib,  naheretn  (hall  rbc  returnc  t 

8  ii  nail  a  man  r  ob  <5oHi  yet  ye  hauc 
robbeb  mc.  25utycfay,  iehcremhaue 
Hit  robbeb  thee  i  "jn  tithes  ?  offerings. 

9  lac  are  airfeb  lbith  a  curfc :  fo?  ye 
haucrobbcbmc,euenthtsii)holcnanon. 

10  JSnng  ye  all  the  nthes  into  the 
ftojc  -  houfc,  that  there  may  be  mcate  in 
nunc  houfc,  rjpjouc  menoVbhereibith, 
faith  the  !L©KjD  of  hoftcs,  if  3  UjiII 
not  open  you  the  *  ttnnDorucs  of  hea> 
uen,anbtpoU)?cyououtablcffuig,that 

therefhall  ttOt  be  roome  CttOUgh  t°  rcceine  it. 

11  ^nb30ttilrcbuBetl)ebcuourcrfo? 
your  faUcs:anbhc(hai  hot  toeftroy  the  l+^r^ 
rnutsofyourgrounD,nctthcrfhalyour  " 
bmccaft  her  fruit  before  the  tune  mthc 
ftclb,  faith  the  %  o  k  b  of  liofts. 

ii  3nb  all  nations  fljail  cailyoublef^ 
fcb :  foiyc  (hail  be  a  belightfomc  lanb, 
faith  the  It  okjd  of  hofts. 

ij  CPouriiio?bShaucbm*ftouta5 
gautft  me,  faith  the  &®  k  ©,  yet  yc  fay, 
nahat  hauc  U>c  fpouen  fo  much  agamft 
tljee^ 

14  Pehauefatb,  3Jt is batnc  to fcruc 
©ob :  anb  ibhat  profit  is  it,  thatibchaue 
acpthistojbinantc,  anb  that  lbcc  hauc  f,?;"\ 
ibaiucbtmournfiillybcfo;cthc|LoKjD  ■ 
of  hofts  i 

15  ^nb  noib  roc  tall  tf)e  pzoub  happy: 
yca,they  that  ibozKc  rbtcaebnes  t  arc  fct 
bp,yca  they  that  *  tempt  ©ob ,  arc  cucn 
bcliucrcb. 

16  C  £hcn  they  that  fcarcb  the 
Hokp,  fpalic  often  one  to  another, 
anb  the  %  o  at  p  hearheneb  anb  hcarb 
itdabooBcof  remembzante  lbasibju 
ten  befoje  him,  fo?  them  that  fcarcb  the 
?L©K£\*  that  thought  bpon  his  name. 

17  3nb  they  n)ail  be  nunc,  faith  the 
%  ok  ©  of  hofts,  m  that  Day  lhhcngi 
maRcbpmy||ictticls,anD  gjnnlfpare  \\^. 
them  as  a  man  fparctlj  his  oibnc  fonne 
that  Ccructh  t)tm» 

3ii}t        is  •jgftcn I 


'iob.1.14 


\Htkrin 
blacks. 

\Heb.tre 

builr. 


The  comming,  and 


Malachi.        Office  of  Eliiah] 


is  Xhenfhallyeeretntne  anb  tut 
cerne  bctitocenc  tljc  righteous  anb  the 
itoic&cb ,  betltoeene  him  tljat  fetuctlj 
©ob.anb  him  that  ferueth  htm  not. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

i  Gods  judgement  oiuhe  wicked,  •-  and  his 
blefsingonthegood.  4  Hee  exhorteth to 
the  ftudie  of  the  Law,  5  and  tellcih  ot  E 
liiahs  comming,and  OtHce. 

t^^^  <©2  bet)olT3c,tI)ct)av  com- 
■®»i  mcth,  thatfljail  bnrneas 
anoucn,aiU>allthep20iib, 
yea  anb  all  that  doc  ltotc; 
!&  feebly  fbalbe  aubblt :  anD 
the  baythatcommcth,Chaiburnc  them 
bp ,  faith  the  %&  is  3D  of  holies ,  that 
it  fl)ail  icauc  them  neither  roote  no? 
taanch. 
2   <[25nt  unto  yon  that  fcarc  my 


#ame,  fljau  the*5>unneofnghtcouf' 
ttclTcarifc  \Ditli  healing  m  his  ltomgs, 
ano  (bail  goc  fooitl)  anb  groin  top  as 
taiues  of  tfje  ftaule. 

j  anb  yee  Chall  treabe  toolbnc  the 
Uncttcb:  foz  tfjep  (ball  bee  afbestontoer 
tbefolesofyour  feet, in  ttjc  bay  that'll 
(baliboe  th,^,faitl)  ttjc  fL  ©  k  ©  of  hofts. 

4  C  Scmcmbet  yee  the  *  !la\to  of 
i!5ofcs  my  fetuant.itobicb  31  commas 
beb  tonto  Dim  in  $ozeb  foz  all  3Jftacl, 
itottb  the  Statutes  anb  lubgements. 

5  C23cl)olbc,3  ttnll  fenb  yon'C- 
Utah  t^c  £:opbet ,  befoze  the  comming 
of  the  gtcat  anb  bzeabfull  bay  of  the 

ILsDIBID, 

6  3lnb  Dec  mail  turne  the  heart  of 
the  fathers  to  the  cbtlbzen ,  anb  the 
heart  of  the  chtlbzen  to  their  fathers, 
left  3  come  anb  finite  the  earth  ibitba 
ctirfc. 


Luke  1. 


«*5  The  end  of  the  Prophets. 


APO 


"  Exod.  jo. 
J. 


'Mactli.i  j, 
14-lukc  1. 
17. mark.?. 
u. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


.p.  j. 


Apocrypha. 


*s.King.»3. 

33.  l-cluo. 
J5... 


APOCRYPHA. 


^1.  ESDRAS. 


CHAP.     I. 

Iofias  liis  charge  to  the  Priefts  and  Leuites. 
7  A  great  Paileouer  is  kepr.  31  His  death 
is  much  lamented:  34  His  Succeflburs.  53 
TheTemple,  Citie,  and  people  are  destroy- 
ed. 56  The  reft  are  cariedvnto  Babylon. 


0a  3fofias  fjcioc 

tpe*JFcattoftl)c 
$au"coucrm3Je; 
rutalembnto  Ijis 
fLoib.anboffctcb 
tUci&atTcoucr  ti)c 
fourtecntljbapof 
tt)enrftmonetl) : 
2.  $aumg  fct 

Q)c$iM8  accojmngto  tl)eit  batlp  tour; 

fes,  beingarapcbinlonggarmcnts,  in 

tlic  temple  of  tljcftojB. 

3  3lnb  ftee  fpaltc  bnto  rt)c  ILcuttcs 
tfte!)oIpmmtttcrsof  Uftacl,  rtjattfjcv 
fboulb  Dauoib  tOcmfclucs  Unto  tftc 
Hozb,tofcti1)eliolv  atltcof  tt)c3Lo2b, 
fn  tlje  l)oufe  ttj'at  king  Solomon  ttjc 
fonneof  DauiD  Uao  built: 

4  3mbCaib,Pcfl)allnomozebeatc 
the  3lrtte  bpon  pour  numbers:  notb 
tlicccfoje  fecuc  tfte1Loft>  pour  <25ob  ,anb 
mintfter  Unto  Iits  people  Tjiracl,  anb 
prepare  pou  after  pour  families  anb 
Ktnrebs.  Mr 

5  actojbtngas 2>autb the lung of  Jl 
raclpjcfmbcb,  «acto2bmgtotfje  mag 
ntficence  of  Solomon  Disfonnc :  $  flan 
bmgin  tlje  Xcmpie  atto2bing  to  tt)c  fc 
uctallbigntttc  of  tlic  families  ofvoutlic 
JLcuites,tbllo  mmtftcr  m  the  pKfcnce  of 
pour  bietmen  tl)c  cntlbzcn  of  "Jfcacl. 

6  £)ffcrff)c0au"eoueruio2bcr,anb 
mabe  reabp  toe  fatrifitcs  foj  pour  \nt< 
tijzcit ,  anb  fecepe  tlje  ^aflcoucr  actor 
blng  to  tlje  tommauttbement  of  t\)t 


3Lo?b,n)l)icl)ibasgiucn  bntosJ0opfes. 

7  anb  tontc  tl)t  people  tiiac  lbas 
fottnb  there,  3Jofiasgatte  tftirttc  tl)ou> 
tanblambes,  anb  tubs,  anb  tU.'ec  rtjou- 
fanb  tallies :  tftefe  tl)mgsn>crc  giuen  of 
the  lungs  aiioibaiue ,  accozbmgasljcc 
pzomifcb  to  the  people,  to  thc#ucftcs, 
anbtothclLeiutes. 

8  anb  fcclluas,  zathartas,  anb 
||S>telus  the  goucrnours  of  the  %mv 
pic ,  gaue  to  the  knells  foj  the  laaffco- 
uer,  t\bo  thoufanb  anb  fire  hnnbjeb 
fbeepe,  anb  thzee  hunbzeth  tallies. 

9  anb  'Jechomas ,  anb  £>amatas, 
anb  /Rathanaclhisbjother ,  anb  afl& 
bias,  anb  ^Dthicl.anb  362am  captaiucs 
oucr  thoufanbs,gauc  to  theHciutes  foz 
the  ^afleouer  fine  thoufaub  (heepcanb 
||fcucnl)uno«tD  tallies. 

10  anb  tbhen  thefe  things  tbece 
bone,  the  knells  anb  SLctiitcs  hauing 
the  bnicauencb  bzeab ,  ftoob  m  bcrp 
tomelp  ozber  atcojbing  to  the  Smrebs, 

1 1  anb  atcoibing  to  the  fcuerail  big; 
nitics  of  the  fathers,  befiw  the  people, 
to  offerto  ttJC  Hojb,as  it  isibnttcn  ut 
the  boofec  of  ^3opfcs :  t  ana  thus  bib 
theptnthemonung. 

iz  ^nb  thep  roltcb  tlje  ^aflcoucr 
ttnth  fire,  asappcttauicth :  as  fo:  toe  fa* 
tri&tcs,thcpfobbethcm  m  bzafle  pots, 
anb  pannes  lllbith  a  goob  fauour. 

13  anbfctthcmbcfozeailthcpcople, 
anb  aftcrtbarb  thep  pzeparcbfoz  them 
fclues,  anb  ftn  tlje  ^nctts  tl)cit  bicthmi 
the  tonnes  of  aaron. 

14.  5Fo?  tlje  0neQs  offer  cb  tlje  fat  bn- 
till  nigftt :  aub  the  lleuues  piepareb  foz 
tDcmfciucs,  anb  tlic  02iefls  ri;cir  bit 
tfjjen  tfjc  fonncs  of  aar  on . 

15  %X\t  Dolp  dingers  alfo  ,the  fonncs 
ofataplj^ercmtDciroioer.atcozbiiig 
3>in  3 to 


lOr.Mi'l. 


j|  FtUt-hun- 
i.thro-lyg. 


f  1.  Cirn. 
JJ.II. 

Andfs  of  the 


tfced,  or  ml- 
- 

I)- 


59 


Apocrypha. 


I.Efd 


ras. 


Apocrypha. 


2.Chron. 

5  5-  M- 

ot  Dauid 
and  Afaph. 
•  :.  Chro. 
5j.l5.the 
kings  fccr. 


\\Orwere 

wodly. 


l.Chron. 
5  $•*<>. 


to  tlje  appointment  of  *£>auiD,torbit, 
3fapn,  zacfjanas,  anb  gjcbutljun, 
lb  Jjo  mas  *  of  tljc  Sings  retinue. 

i6  £I9o?eoucr  ttjc  po?tcts  acre  ate- 
uery  gate :  it  Jfoas  not  laibfull  fo?  any  to 
goc  from  Ijis  o?btnary  fcrutcc :  fo?  tDcir 
b?ctlj?cn  tljc  Olenites  p?cpareb  fo? 
ttjent. 

17  XljusiberctW  tWngs  rfjat  bv 
iongct)  to  tljc  facrtnees  of  tljc  %om  at* 
complifljcb  in  tWttbay,  tljat  tljey  mtgljt 
Ijolbtlje^affcoucr, 

18  3nn  offer  Cacrtfiees  bpon  tljc  altar 
oft!jc?to?b ,  acco?btngtottjccomman' 
ocnicntofking^Ioftas. 

19  &o  tljc  cljilb?cn  of  llfracl  lbljul) 
Sberc  p?cfent,tjclb  tljc  0affcouct  at  tljat 
eime,  aub  ttjefcaft  of  fuicctb?cab  fcuen 
oaves. 

20  3nb  fuel)  a  i&affeouer  lbas  not 
kept  in  gffrael  Once  tljc  time  oftt)c^?o 
pljet  Samuel. 

ii  ?3ca  an  tDc  Rings  of  UfraclDclo 
notfuclj  a^affcoucr  as  3Ioftas,anb  tW 
$?teftsanb  tljc  Hcuitcs,  <jetIjc3Jcibcs 
tjclb  ibith  au  ffraci  tljat  iberc  founb 
brbclluigat'Jcrufalcm. 

21  gjn  tlic  eighteenth  ycere  oftW 
rctgnc  of  3iouas  ibas  tljis  ^atlcoucr 
Kept. 

23  3Wbtljcibo?Rcsof3Jouastt/ere 
bpugljt  before  Ws?Lo?b  ibittjantjcart 
full  of  goblmcfTc. 

1+  3s  fo?  ttjc  ttjings  tljat  tame  to 
paflcmljtstimc,  tljcf  tticrc  ib?ittcn  in 
fo?mer  tiines,tontetntng  tljofctljat  6n* 
neb,  anb|  |btb  ibic&cbly  agatntt  ttjc  3Lo?b 
^boucail  people  anb  Rtngbomcs,  anb 
fjotb  tfjcy  gneueb  Dim  ||  ercccbmgly ,  fo 
tljat  tnc  voom  of  tljc  Ho?b  rofc  bp  a- 
gainftgifracl. 

25  */BoJb  after  alltncfcactsof3IO' 
ftas,  it  came  to  paffc  tljat  jSftarao  tljc 
lung  of  egypt  tame  to  ratfc  Vbarre  at 
Cartljanus  bpon  enpWatcs :  anb  3Jo- 
fiasJbcnt  outagainftljim. 

26  26ut  tnc  Ring  of  egypt  fent  to 
Win  faying ,  ttMjat  liauc  3)  to  boc  ibitlj 
tljec^lungofjfubca; 

27  3  amnotfcntoutfromtljc?Lo?b 
(Sobagamft  tljcc  :fo?  mylbarretsbp; 
on  <euplj?atcs ,  anb  noib  tljc  1Lo?b  is 
Untlj  mcc,  yea  tljc  !Lo?bis  ibitt)  nice 
ljafhngmcfo?\batb :  2>cpart  frommc 
anb  bcnotagam(ttl)clLo?b. 

28  tyoJbbeit  3tofias  bib  not  tumc 
bacueWscljariotfromljim ,  butbnbcr= 
tooUetougljtttntljWm,  notrcgarbmg 
tljc  ttwbs  of  tljc  £?opljet  3ercmie, 


fpoRen  by  flje  niouttj  of  tlje  !Lo?b: 

29  Z5ut  ioyneb  battelllbitlj  Wmin 
tljepiameof£0agibDo ,  anb  tljc  pnntes 
tamcagatnttRtng3Jofias. 

30  ^enfatbtDcbingbntoljtsfcr' 
uants,  tarry  me  avbay  out  of  tljc  batten 
fo?  3fambcry  lbeaRe:  anbimmcbiatf- 
ly  Ijts  feruants  tooRc  Wm  albay  out 
of  ttjc  battel!. 

31  H3)en  gate  Wbp  bpon  Ijisfttonb 
cWirtot,anb  being  b?ougW  batRc  to  3jc- 
tufalem,bycb,anb  ibas  burtcb  in  Ijis  fa^ 
tijersfepuleUK. 

32  3nb  in  all  JJury  tljcy  monrneb 
fo?  3ouas ,  yea  'Jcrcmie  tlje  $?opljct 
lamcntcb  fo?  3fouas  %  anD  t})e  tljccfc 
mmtbttDtW^ibomen  mabelamentatiJ 
!  on  fo?  Wm  bnto  tljis  bay :  anb  tWs  Vbas 
gtucn  out  fo:  an  o?binantc  to  be  bone 
continually  in  allttjcnatton  of  3Jfrael. 

35  XWfc  tljtngs  arc  ib?ittcn  in  ttje 
booRc  of  tljc  Oo?ics  of  tljc  Rings  of  Ju 
1  baWanbcucry  one  of  tftc  acts  tljatjo- 
fiasbtb ,  anb6isglo?y ,  anb  Ws  bnber- 
Oanbmg  in  tDc  lalbof  tW1^o?b,  anb 
tDctbings  tljat  W^W^bboncbcfo?e,  anb 
tljctljings  noVb  rctiteb,arcrepo?tcbin 
tlje  boobes  of  tlje  Btngs  of  3Jfracl  anb 
3Jubca. 

34  *3Inb  tljc  people  toofec  5JoatW^5 
tljcfonncof3ortas,anbmabcfjimbing 
infteabof3JofiasWsfattjer,  lbljenljce 
jtbastibctmeanb  tl)?tcyeeresolb. 

35  Zlvb  lit  rcigneb  in  3Jnbca  anb  in 
■Jcrufalcm  tlj?cc  monettjs  :  anb  tWn 
tljeBtngofCgyptbcpofeb  Ijnnfrom 
rctgntngm  3J^ufalcm. 

36  ^nbhcfctatarcbpontljcianbof 
an  ljunb?ctl)  talents  of  filucr ,  anb  one 
talent  of  golb. 

37  lljc  Ring  of  cgypt  aifo  maoc 
Ring  3oaruu  l)isb?otljcr  Ring  of  3Ju- 
bca  anb3Jcrufaicm. 

38  3nb  \)tt  bounb  3loanm  anb  tlje 
nobles :  but  zaraccs  Ws  b?otljer  Ije 
app?cW>nbcb ,  anb  b?ougl)t  Ijim  out  of 
<£gypt. 

39  Jfiuc  anb  tibcnrtc  ycerc  olb  vbas 
■Joacim  tiuijcn  ljc  ibas  mabc  Ring  in 
tljc  lanb  of  Jubca  anb  'Jcrufalcm.anb 
ljc  bib  cuill  bcfo?c  tljc?Lo?b. 

40  a@Wrcfo?c  agamfl  Wm  iI3abiv 
1  tljobonofo?  tlje  Bmg  of  Babylon  tame 
bp ,  anb  bounb  tjim  lbitl)  a  cliamr  of 
;b?affc,  anb  carnebWmbnto  2Sabylon. 

41  iBabutijobonofo?  alfo  toone  of 
tljcfjolybeffclsofttjc  ILo?b,  anb  tarn- 
eb  tljcin  aibay,anbfct  tljcm  in  Ws  oibnc 
temple  at  Babylon. 

42  2Sllt 


Living. 
2!. 30.2. 

chron.3tf.i 


6.4;.  /<■- 
boubpnter 

Elinhm. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch 


a 


41  aSutthofethingsthatarerccoz 
bcbof  htm.anbof  hisbnctcanncs,  anb 
impicttc,  arc  written  m  tlje  Chiomtlcs 
ofrhebmgs. 

43  3tn0  'Joattm  hisfonne  tctgncb 
m  his  ftcau :  he  Mm  mabc  utng  bemg 
cigljtccne  vecrcs  olD, 

44  3nbrctgnrbbutth2Ccmoncths 
anil  ten  bapes  m  3Jerufalcm ,  anb  bib 
ctullbefozcthc&ojb. 

45  £>oaftcrapcrc/!3aburhobonofo2 
fetit,  anb  tatifcD  Dim  to  be  bzought  into 
26abplon  n>ut)  p  hoi?  bcffcls  of  p  ?Lozb, 

46  3lnb  mabc  zcbcchias  lung  of 
JJubcaauo  Jfcrufalcm,  rbl)cn  lie  lnas 
oncanb  nbctittci>ccrcs  olb,anb  hereig; 
nebelcuenpccrcs: 

47  3lnb  he  bib  mill  atfo  ut  tDc  fight 
of  the  ?t02b,f  tarcb  notfo?  thcnwbs 
that  itoerefpoben  bnto  him,  by  the  &20; 
phet  ^cremtc  from  the  mouth  of  the 

45  3mbafterthatRing/9abuthobo; 
nofo:  hab  niaJ5c  Dwn  to  frocatcbp  the 
/ftame  of  the  3tozb ,  he  fojfraozc  htm; 
fclfc,  anb  rebcUcb,  anb  harbenmg  his 
nccucanb  his  heart ,  hec  ttanfgrcfTcb 
rheiarbesof  th'cfUub  <3obof  3Jfcacl. 

49  3Chcgouernoursalfoof  thepeo- 
pie  anb  of  the  pztefts  bib  man?  things 
agamft  the  latbes,  anb  paffeb  ai  the  pol 
luttons  of  all  nations,  anb  befrteb  the 
temple  ofthe  ftozb  \bhsch  ibas  fantti- 
ncbin^erufaicm. 

50  |5eucrthcicu"c,  the  <5ob  of  their 
fathers  fent  bp  his  meffenger  to  tall 
them  batKe,bctaitfc  he  fparcb  them  anb 
j)is  tabernacle  aifo: 

51  2Sut  they  hab  fits  meffengers  m 
bertfion ,  anb  loohe  ttihcnthcHozbci 
fpattc  bnto  them,  the?  mabc  afpoztof 
hispzophcts, 

52,  &o  farrc  foozth  that  he  being 
ttttOfhibtrh  his  people  foz  their  great 
bngoblmcffc,  tommanbeb  the  lungs  of 
theCalbccsto  comebpagamfrthem. 

5?  I0ho  flctt)  thar  yong  men  Uuth 
thefujojb.vcacucnttjithmthctompafrc 
of  theitholp  Xcmplc,  *  fparebneither 
pongmannonnatb,  oib  man  noz  tfiilb 
among  them,  foz  fitc  bcltutreb  all  into 
theirhanbs. 

54  3tnb  they  tooltc  all  the  holy  bef 
fclsof  thc1Lo2b,  both  great  anb  fmall, 
tbtththcbciTclsof  the^rltof  (5ob,anb 
the  Rings  treafurcs,  anb  taricb  them  a- ■ 
Vbay  into  Babylon. 

55  3tsfo2thehonrc  of  thcflozbthcy 
butntit,b?aUc  boiDne  tljc  maues  of  Jc 


p.l). 


Apocrypha. 


rufaicm,fct  fire  bpon  her  toibzcs. 

56  3nb  as  f02  het  gunious  things, 
they  ncuer  ecafeb  ni  they  hab  tonuuncb 
anb  brought  tlitin  all  to  nought,  ano 
tljc  people  that  lbcrc  not  (lame  tt)»th  the 
fmo2b,ht  taricb  bnto  Babylon : 

57  nahobccamefcruautstohimanb 
histhilbjcn ,  till  the  pcrfians  rcigncb, 
to  fulfill  the  *ibo2bof  thcilozbfpoken 
by  the  mouth  of  3Jercnuc : 

58  fllntill  the  lanb  hab  entoyeb  her 
Sabbaths,  the  ibholc  time  of  her  befo; 
latton  fhai  (he  [  |  r cu\bnttll  the  full  tcr me 
offeucnticyccrcs. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Cyrus  is  moiled  by  God  to  build  the  Temple, 
s  And^meth  leaueto  the  Iewes  toreturne  & 
contribute  to  it.  u  He  deliuereth  againethe 
veflels  which  had  bin  taken  thence.  15  Artax- 
crxes  fbi  biddeth  the  Iewes  to  build  any  mor? 

VeSP&six  &  the  firft  ycerc  of  Cyzus 
tir^  ftmgof  thepcruans,that 
iwtftc  nwoe  of  the  %om 
©^  might  bee  arcompiifhcb, 
thathcchabpzomifcbby 
thcmouthof^cremic: 

i  %he  lLozb  raifcb  bp  the  fpirit  of 
Cy2iis  the  Sing  of  the  tertians,  anb  Ijc 
maocp20tlamation  tho2oib  ai  his  lung- 
borne,  anb  alfo  by  uniting, 

3  ;S>ayiug,Xhus  faith  Crushing  of 
tljc  pcrfians,  XhcfLozb  of  ^frael  the 
moft  high  fto2b,  ijatlj  mabc  me  King  of 
thcibholcvbojio, 

4  3lnb  commanbeb  mc  to  builb  Ijun 
anhoufeat3Jcrufalcm  in-line. 

5  3frt'ercfo2Cthcrcbccam>ofvou 

rliat  arc  of  his  people,  let  the  |Lo2b,  t 
ucnhis?i02b  bclbithhim,  anb  let  him 
goc  bp  to  3Jcrufaicm  that  is  in  3lubta, 
anbbuilbthehoufcof  the  !Lo2b  of  3)f 
raci :  fo2  II  he  is  tljc  &02b  tljat  mbclleth 
in^Jetufaicm. 

6  tohofocucr  then  Mbcll  in  the  pla- 
tes about,  let  them  hclpc  htm ,  thofcjl 
fav  that  arc  his  neighbours,  unthgolb 
anbibithfilucr, 

7  uDith  gifts,\bith h02fcs,anb  ibith 
cattcll,  anb  other  things,  lbh'.th  haiic 
bene  fctfozth  bv>Po\\Jc,  foz  the  temple 
of  the  iLozb  at  3Jcrufaicm. 

s  CXhcn  the  chicfc  of  the  families  of 
3Inbca,anb  of  thctribcs  ot  zscwainm 
ftoob  bp :  the  pnefts  aifo  anb  the  %v 
intcs,  anb  all  thev  ibhofe  mmbc  the 
jLo2bhabmoucbtogocbp,anbtobwab 
anhoufcfonhc!Lo20  at  Jlerufaiem, 

9  3lnb  tljcv that  muclt  rounb about 

thnn, 


"Icr.  2j.ii 

and  251.  10. 


I  Or,  Kent 
Sabb.'.th. 


'z.Chron. 
36.12. czra 
l.l.&c. 


Apocrypha. 


I.Efd 


ras. 


Apocrypha. 


\Hehr.fnb. 


the  firflpjrr 
eft  he  word 
«  cffrrmilr 
ioyncdto  ;he 
werdgoir.^ 
before t  Ezra 

1.9. 

19- 

t  Eznt.I. 

IO.  bur  foure 

hundr;d,',nd 
ten. 

"\£<j-.i.i. 
I  x.but  fine 
thou/and 
foure  h  an- 
Jrcd. 
*£ir4  4.S. 

andthfH.tmc 
■whichfoL 

an  emtbstc 
Iff  the  for- 
mer, Exj-a 
A9- 

fSbimJhia, 
£ir.H.!>- 


tbcm,  ano  I)elpfO  rtjcni  in  all  tbmgs 
rbitb  filucc  ano  goio,  Vbitljt  i)oitts  ano 
tattcll,  ano  tt)itb  berp  free  gifts  of  a 
great  number  ibbofe  mmocs  mere  ftir- 
reD Dp  thereto. 

io  "EmgCpms  alfo  b20ugbt  fooitfj 
tbtbolp  totfTels  rbijtrti  /5abuc!)oOono- 
foz  rjao  carico  aroap  froin  JJcrafaiem, 
ano  Ijao  fet  bp  m  bis  temple  of  toolcs. 

1 1  /9otO  robin  Cp;us  ftmg  of  tbc 
0crfiansbaob2ougbt  tbcm  foo2tb,bcc 
ocliuerco  tljcin  to  i$itb.2ioatcs  rjts 
trcafurer: 

u  3no  bp  Dim  tbcp  ibcre  ocliucreo 
to  t£>anabaflar  p  gouernour  of  3Juoea. 

13  3no  tbts  roas  tf)e  number  of 
tl)em ,  a  trjoufano  golOcn  ettppes,  ano  a 
tboufano  of  Glucc ,  t  eenfers  of  filucr 
tibcnticnine,  biaisofgoiotljirtie,  ano 
offtlucrttlbo  tboufano  foure  buitfnco 
aub  tcit,  ano  a  tboufano  otbec  beflcls. 

i+  £>oailtbcbcu'clsofgolD,anoof 
ftiucr  roljtcb  ibcre  tarteo  aroap,  rocrc 
f  ftue  trjoufano ,  foure  button ,  ttytt- 
fto2C  ano  nine. 

15  Xtjcfc  roerc  tyougljt  bacu  bp  &a* 
nabaffar,  togctber  rottb  tbcm  of  the 
taptiuitp,from  JSabplon  to^lcrufalem. 

i6  *  26ut  m  tftc  tunc  of  3Crtarcrrcs 
King  of  tbc  ^erfians ,  ffielcmits ,  ano 
s©itl)2ioatcs,  ano3CabeUius,anD  t  ftfc 
tbumus,ano  asceltctfmms ,  ano  t^c; 
mcllius  the  jS>ccretartc ,  ibitl)  otfjers 
tbat  ibcre  in  commifftou  rottb  tljcm, 
oibelling  in  £>amarta  ano  otber  pia; 
ces,  Uj:otc  onto  turn  agamft  tbcm  tbat 
ovbcltm3Iuoea  ano^crufaiem,  tljefc 
letters  foiioromg. 

17  %q  i&mg  3ctarcrrcs  our  1020, 
Xbp  fcruantsJSatrjumustbc  fto2pro2t^ 
tcr,  ano  ^cmcllmstljcfcrtbe,  anotbc 
reft  of  tbeir  tonnfcll ,  ano  tbc3Juogcs 
tljat  arc  in  Coelofpna  ano  jDbcntrc. 

is  ascttnorobnorocntotbclojotbc 
hmg,tl)at  tbc  3fcrocs  tbat  are  tome  bp 
frompoutobs,  bcingtomemto  Scru- 
faiem  (fljat  rebellious  ano  roic&eo  cu 
nc,)Docbiulotbcmacbctpiaccs,anDrc: 
patrctfjc  roailcs  of  it,  ano  ooc  lap  tbc 
founoanon  of  tbc  temple. 

19  i9oib  if  tljis  ctttc,  ano  tljcroallcs 
tfjereof  be  maoc  bp  agamc,  tbcprotll 
not  onelp  refufc  to  giuc  trtbutcbut  alfo 
rcbcll  agamft  Kings. 

lo^tnofozafmutbastbctbingspcr' 
raining  to  tljc  Xemplc,  arc  noib  m 
bano.ibc  tbinttc  ttmcctcnotto  neglect 
fuel)  a  matter, 

ii  25ut  to  fpcauc  bnto  our  lo.zotljc 


mng,  to  tbc  tntenttbat  ifitbetrjppica^ 
fure,itmav  be  fougrjtoutintbeboobes 
oftbpfatbers: 

2x  ^notrjoufr)aitfinocintf)eCl)20= 
nicies ,  Ibbat  is  ttwttcn  concerning 
tfjefe  tfjings,  ano  tbait  bnocrftano  tbat 
tljat  cuic  ibas  rebellious ,  troublmg 
ibotljbuigs ano  ones: 

ij  3no  tbat  tbe3Jetbes  ibcre  rebel- 
lious, ano  raueO  alttiapes  lbarrcs  tbcr= 
[in ,  fo;  tbc  lbhtrl)  caufe  eucn  tl)is  ntic 
lbasmaoeoefoiatc. 

24  wfytvtfote  notbtbee  oococclarc 
bnto  tbee ,  (®  lo?D  tijc  bmg)  tbat  if  tbis 
nnc  bee  built  againe ,  ano  tljc  ibailcs 
|tljercof  fet  bp  ancib,  ttjou  ftjalt  froin 
benccfoo;rt)  bauc  no  paflagc  into  Coc^ 
lofp2iaajiopIicmcc. 

15  Xben  ttjc  Bmg  ib^ote  bacftc  a? 
game  to  aaatbumus  tljc  ftoue  ib^itcr, 
to  25celtctljmus ,  to  ^cmcllius  tljc 
fenbeano  to  trjc  reft  tbat  Vbcrcm  coup 
million,  ano  oibeiicrs  m  Samaria  ano 
5>p2ia,ano^ljcmcc,aftcr  tljis  mancr. 

26  3baumaotbcepiftieU)btcbpe 
bauc  (cut  bnto  mcc:fbercfo2c3lcom- 
manbeoto  maHcoiltgcntfearcl) ,  ano  it 
barb  bene  founo ,  tbat  tbat  citp  mas 
from  tbc  beginning  p2actifing  agamft 
Bmgs. 

27  ^notbcmentbcrein\bercgiucn 
to  rebellion,  ano  ibarrcano  tbat  migi) 
tie  Bmgs  ano  fierce  ibcre  tn  3Jerufa? 
lem,  ibborcignco  ano  cractco  tributes 
mCoclofp2ia  ano  ^boue. 

28  /9oU)tbcrcfo2c3lbauecomman- 
oco  to  btuOcr  tbofemen  from  builOmg 
tbcciticanobecotobctafecntbattbcrc 
bcnomojcboncmit, 

19  3tn0tbat  tbofe  ibicfeco  Ib02bcrs 
PiocecD  nofurtberto  t\)t  annopance  of 
Bmgs. 

30  Xbcn  bing  ^rtarcrrcs  liis  Ut 
tcrs  being  rcao ,  JSatbumus  ano  &c- 
mcllius  ttje  feruje ,  ano  tbc  reft  tbat 
lbcrc  in  conumffion  ibitl)  ttjcm,r  emoo; 
uingin  baft  totbatos  ^ctufalnnibitb 
atroupeof  bo2femcn,anoa||  multituoe 
of  people  tn  battell  arap ,  began  to  Inn 
Dcr  tbc  btuloers,ano  tbc  D  uilOing  of  tbc 
3Ccmplcm3lcrufalemccafeDbntill  tljc 
fecono  peerc  of  tberetgne  of  2Danus 
Bingoftbc0crfians. 

CHAP.    III. 

4  Three  ftrme  to  excell  each  other  in  wife  fpea- 
ches.  9  They  referee  themlelues  to  the 
judgement  of  the  King.  18  Thefiiftdeda- 
rctli  tlKllrcngthot  Wuie. 

iRoib 


\\0r.agrt4t 
nxmber  of 

fmiditrt. 


\Or_amn- 
fell. 


£>\\)  iDhen  Darius  retg- 
s,  ncD,hccmaDcagccatfcattj 
\NSJ  |  Dnto  an  his  Smtoectsano ' 
*N  3  Dnto  all  his  hottfljolb,anb! 
Ditto  ail  the  pitnecs  of  £^c  | 
ma  anb  pcrfia, 

2  3lnb  to  all  the  goticrnours  anb 
taptatnes ,  anb  lieutenants  that  Vbcrc 
Dtibcchmi,from3lnDiaDuto€thiopia, 
of  an  hunb2cth  twenty  anb  fenen  p2o 
unices. 

j  3lttb  When  they  hab  eaten  anb 
Dzunften ,  anb  being  fattfficb  mere  gone 
home,  then  Darius  the  lung  went  into 
his  beb  chamber,  anb  flept,  anbfoonc 
after  awaucb. 

4-  Xhcn  tlnccyoug  men  that  lucre 
of  the  guarb,  that  Kept  the  mugs  boby, 
fpaac  one  to  another: 

5  ?Lct  cucry  one  of  Dsfpeafee  a  fens 
tence :  hec  that  (ball  oucrcomc,  f  Whofc 
fentence  (hall  fecme  Wifcr  then  the  o; 
thcrs,  unto  nun  (hall  the  King  Darius 
glue  great  gifts,  anb  great  things  into 
licit  of  Dicto2y: 

6  3s  to  be  clothcb  m  purplcto  bzinb 
mgolbc,  anbtoflcepcDpongolbc,  anb 
a  chariot  Until  bubles  of  golbe ,  anb  an 
heaD-tyjeof  fine  linen,  anb  achamca 
bout  his  ncctte: 

7  3lnb  hee  fliaii  fit  ne.rt  to  Darius, 
bccaufcofhismfcbomc,anbfljaibccal 
leb,  Darius  his  coufin. 

S  3lnD  then  cucry  one  lb:otc  his  fen- 
tence ,  feaicb  it ,  anb  latbc  it  Duber  lung 
DatiushispilloW, 

9  3lnD  fayD ,  that  lDhcn  the ftmgts 
nfen ,  fomc  Will  giuc  him  thciluitmgs, 
anDofWhofefibc  toe  lung,  anb  the  th,2ec 
pnecsof^crfia  fliail  oibge,  that  his 
fentence  is  the  lDifeft,  to  hint  (hall  the 
Dtctozv  be  guicn  as  was  appouiteb. 

io£hcfirfrW2otc:Bf)tnctstheftrotv 
gelf. 

ii  1~hcfccoiibW20tc:  XhcBmgis 
ftrongefr. 

iz  Xhc  thirb  iDsote ;  toomen  are 
freougefr ,  but  abouc  all  things  truer!) 
bcarcth  away  the  ntct02y. 

13  C  4BoW  lbhcn  the  lung  was  n 
fen  Dp,  they  toolic  their  iimnugs,  anb 
bcliueccb  them  Dnto  him,  anb  fo  hee 
rcabthem. 

14-  3inbfcnbmgfoo:th,hcccallebail 
the  $2tnccs  of  pcrfia  anb  33cbta,  anb 
thcgoucmoiirs,anDthccapta:ncs,anb 
the  lieutenants,  anb  the  thicfc  officers, 

i$3mbfatchtmDownnnthc!|royau" 
fcateof3Jubgemcnt,a!ibthcil':uitigs 


Chap.iij.iiij.  Apocrypha. 


Were  veaDbcfo2c  them: 

i6  3lnDhcfaib,  Call  the  young  men, 
anb  they  fl)all  bcclare  their  oibnefctu 
tcuccs:fo  they  were  cailcb,anb  came  in. 

17  3lnbhecfaibbiitothcm,  Declare 
Dnto  Ds  your  mtubc,  concerning  the 
nuttings.  IChcn  began  the  tuft,  lDljo 
haofpohcnoftheftrengthofiU'tic; 

is  3inb  he faib  thus:  €> yc  men ,holD 
erccebmg  firong  is  iDsnc  \  it  caufeth  all 
incntocrrcthatDjinftctt: 

19  Jtmalicth  the  niinbc  of  the  lung, 
anb  of  tljc  father  leffcchilbc  to  be  all  one, 
of  the  boubman  anb  of  the  freeman ,  of 
thcpoo2cmananb  ofthe  rich : 

20  gjt  turneth  alfo  cuery  thought 
into  ioilitic  anb  msrth.fo  that  a  man  re 
memfoeth  neither  fozoiD  noj  bebt : 

21  3Jnb  it  maHcth  cuery  heart  rich, 
fo  that  a  man  rcmenuueth  neither  lung 
nojgoucmour  aubitmattcthtofpeaue 
all  things  by  talents: 

21  3lnb  lDhcn  they  are  m  their  nips, 
they  foigct  their  louc  both  to  fnenbs 
anb  b:ethicn  ,anu  a  title  after  bjaiD  out 
fiuozbs: 

25  25ut  When  they  are  from  the 
Untie ,  they  remember  not  What  they 
haucbone. 

24.  £>ycmcn,iSnotu)iiietl)cfrron 
geft,  that  enfozceth  to  boe  thtis*  3lnD 
lbhcn  hec  hab  fofpoHcn,  hechclbehts 
peace. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  The  fecond  declareth  the  power  of  a  King. 
14  Thethird, the torceof women:  53  and 
ofTructh.  41  The  third  is  judged  to  be  wi- 
feft,  47  and  obtaineth  Letters  ot  the  King 
to  build  Ierufaleni.  58  Hepraif«hGod,and 
fhewethhis  brethren  what  he  had  done. 

T^cn  the  feconb  that  Ijab 
fpohen  of  the  ftreugth  of 
«thci-ung,begantofay, 
v  2  j2Dyccmcn,boeiiot 
!S^y^%5  men  crcclm  ftrcngth,that 
!  I  bear  e  rule  oner  Sea  anb  lanb ,  anb  all 
things  in  them; 

3  23utyttthcBuigiSmo2cniigI)ty: 
f02  hceisioib  of  all  thefc  things ,  anb 
hath  Dominion  oner  thetn,aub  whatfo 
cuer  Ijc  commattDeththcm,  they  boe : 

4  gif  hec  bib  them  mane  marrc  the 
oncagatuftthcothcr,theyboctt:tfhcc 
fenb  them  out  agattift  the  cucmies,thcy 
goc ,  anb  luealic  boWttc  motiutaities, 
wanes  anb  toibjcs. 

5  Xhey  flay  anb  arc  flame ,  anb 
traiifgrcffcnot  the  isnigscommanbe 

ment: 


\\CrM 

the  cam- 
mand. 


Apocrypha. 


I.Efd 


ras. 


\\Or.cv:. 


tHri.iscf 

force. 


ment :  tf  tljcv  get  tbe  bittoiv,  tbcvb2tng 
all  totbc  Bitig.aslbclltbe  fpoueasaii 
tbtngs  elfc. 

6  3Ufce\bu"c  for  tbofc  tbat  arc  no 
fottlbicrs ,  anD  baue  not  to  Doc  ttntb 
marrrs,butbrebufbanb2ictt)bcntbcv 
banc  reapeb  againe,  tbat  tbbicb  tbcv 
ban  folben ,  tbep  bnttgit  to  tbe  Bing, 
ano  tompctl  one  another  to  pay  tribute 
bntothcBing. 

7  ^nbvet  be  tsbutoneman;  if  bee 
commaunb  to  lull,  tbcv  lull,  if  become 
manb  to  fpare.thev  fparc. 

s  "Jlf  be  commanb  to  fmitc ,  tbcv 
fmiteufbe  commanb  to  maKebcfoiate, 
tbcv  mafcc  bcfo  late ;  ifljee  commanb  to 
biulb,tbcvbinlD: 

9  '3lf  be  commanb  to  tut  boibne, 
tbcv  cutbottme  tf  lje  commauDto  plant, 
tbcv  plant. 

io  So  ailbispcoplcanblnsarmics 
obcvbim;  furtbermoic  be  lictb  bottmc, 
be  catcrtianDDzinftctb,i  tauctb  bis  reft. 

n  aiiib  tbcfc  fceepe  (Vbatcb)  cotmb  a 
bout  bun,  ncitber  llmav  anv  oncbepart, 
anb  boc  bisoibncbufmciTc,neitbcrbif 
obey  tbcv  b'.m  m  anv  tljing. 

iz  £>yccmcn,bott>fl)Oulb  not  tbe 
"Sung  bcinigbtieft ,  ibben  innicbfojt  be 
is  obevcb  i  anb  be  belb  bis  tongue. 

I?  CXbcntbc  tbirb ,  lbbo  bao  fpo= 
Uen  of  tbomen,  anb  of  tbe  mitb(tbis 
Vbas  rc20babci)bcganuctofpcaltc. 

14.  £)  vee  nicn,  it  is  not  tbe  great 
Bmg ,  1102  tbe  nutltitubc  of  men ,  nci 
tbens  it  ttmte  tbat  t  crccilctb ;  lbbo  is  u 
tben  tbat  rulctb  tbcm,  02  batb  tbe  102b 
fbipoucrtbcm ,  arc  tbey  notibomen ; 

H  odomen  baue  bojnc  tbe  Btuganb 
all  tbe  pcoplctbat  bearc  rule  bv  fca  anb 
lanb. 

i6  eucnoftbccamctbcy:jtbeynou< 
rinjeb  tbcm  bp  tbat  planteb  tbe  bine 
yarbsfromibbencctbettnnctommcrt). 

17  tbcfc  alfo  matte  garments  fo: 
men.  tbcfc  bjmg  gl02v  into  men,  anb 
lbitbout  tbomen  cannot  men  be. 

13  J'ca  anb  if  men  baue  gatbereb  to 
getber  golb  anb  filuer ,  02  anv  otber 
gooblv  flung,  boetbev  not  loucaibo= 
man ,  Vbbub  is  cornel?  m  fauouc  anb 
bcaune  t 

19  3lnb  letting  all  tbofc  tilings  goc, 
boc  tbcv  not  gape ,  anb  men  ibub  open 
moutb  fire  tbeir  eyes  fall  on  ber  anb 
bauenot  all  mcnmo2c  betirebnto  ber, 
tbenbntofilncr  02  golb,  02 anv.  gooblv 
tbmgibbatfocucr* 

20  ^man  icauctb  bis  oVbncfatljct 


Apocrypha. 


tbat  b2ougbt  bun  bp,  anb  bis  ottme 
couutncanbtlcauctbbntobiSlbtfc. 

x  1 19c  fhcucs  not  to  fpcnb  bis  life  ttntb 
bis  lbife ,  anb  rcmemb2ctb  ncitbcr  fa= 
tber  ,no2  motber,  no2  countrcv. 

22  25v  tin's  alfo  vou  mutt  hnolb, 
tbat  lbomcnbauc  bomuuonouccvou : 
Docvccnot  labour  anbtovle,  anb  giuc 
anb  b2ing  all  to  tljc  lboman  ; 

23  ^ca  amantabetbbisfu)02b,  anb 
goctbbisibaytorob ,  anb  toftcale,  to 
failc  bpon  tbefca,anb  bpon  nucrs, 

24.  SmDiooUctbbponaivon.anbgO' 
ctb  m  tbe  badmeffe,  anb  ibbcn  be  batb 
ftoicn,ipoilcoanbrobbeb,bcb;ingctbtt 
tobislouc. 

2<;  B@bcrcfo2camanlouetbb!Slbifc 
better  tbenfatber  anb  motber. 

26  pea  mauv  tbcre  be  tbat  bane 
ilrunotttoftbcinbitsfo2rbomcn,anb 
become  fcruantsfo2tbnrfahes : 

27  UlDany  alfo  banc  pcnfbcb ,  baue 
crrcb,anbfinncb  fo2lbomcn. 

28  3lnbnoibbocyecnotbcIteucmc? 
is  not  tbe  Bmg  great  in  bis  polbcriboc 
not  all  regions  fcarc  to  toucb  bun  i 

29  #ttbtb3JfcebimattD3{pametbc 
lungs  concubine ,  tbebaugbter  of  tbe 
abmirablc  zsartacus  ,  fitttng  at  tbe 
rtgbtbanboftbcBing, 

30  3tnb  tahmg  tbe  crolbnc  fromtbc 
Buigs  beab ,  anb  letting  tt  bpon  bet 
ottmc  bcab  ,flie  alfo  ftroofec  tbeBiug 
Vbitbberlcftbaiib. 

31  3inD  vet  I !  fo2  all  tbis,tb c  Btng  ga^ 
peb  anb  ga^cb  bpon  ber  ttntb  open 
moutb  ■  tf  fl)C  laugbeb  bpon  bun,  bee 
laugbcb  alfo  :  but  tf  flic  tooue  anv  bit 
plcafure  atbmube  Bmgibasfamc  to 
flatter,  tbatfbcnugbtllbctcconnlcD  to 
bun  againe. 

32  £>ycmen,bolbcanitbcbtttlbomcn 
fbouib  bcftcong,fccmg  rbevboe  tbus  i 

33  Xben  the  lung  j  tbe  p2inccs  loofecb 
one  bpon  anotbcr:fo  be  began  to  fpcaftc 
oftbetructb. 

34  4Dycmcn,atcnottt>omenftrong; 
great  istbccartl) ,  bigbis  tbe  bcauen, 
funftts  die  Smnnctnbiscourfc,  fozljc 
tompau*ctl)  thebcauens  rounb  about, 
anb  fetebctb  ins  coutfe  agatne  to  bis 
ottmc  place  m  one  bay. 

35  3sbcnotgrrattbatmal$ctbtbcfc 
tbmgs^tber  cfozc  great  ts  tlje  ttntb  ,anb 
ftronget  tfjen  all  tbtngs. 

36  2ll  tbe  card)  ||  calletb  bpon  tbe 
trutb,itbcbcaucublc(reti)it,ailtt)02BS 
fbatte  anb  tremble  at  it ,  anb  lbitb  »t  ts 
nobnngbteoustbuig. 

37  tome 


foftrpU.aKtiiJ. 

Uh.  1 1  .ejp. 
4.  R.ibfitftt 
Thrm*ju*s. 


||  Orjaeerc 


Or,h 

fnauis  n 
htm. 


ah 


\\Ortpra*f-tb 

:hetr*ib. 

Athens*'. 


*m  —  ■  ■  ■ 

Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


.p.lllj, 


Anocrynha. 


37  name  is  rmctecD,  the  feing  is  voiv 
feet) ,  ibomcn  arc  ibicfecb,aii  tJjc  cbtltyen 
of  men  arc  ttnefecb  ,anb  fuel)  arc  all  their 
ttnclteb  ttiozfecs ,  anb  there  is  no  trueth 
in  them.  3ln  their  bnngbtcoufties  alfo 
thepttjailpenth. 

3s  2sfo:thctruethitenbureth,anb 
is  altbapcs  ttrong,  it  liucth  anb  conquer 
rcthfozcuermozc. 

39  i©ith  her  there  is  no  accepting  of 
perfons,  oj  r  eibarbs,  but  fbc  boctb  tlic 
things  that  are  uift,  ano  reftaincth 
from  all  bniufl  ano  uncfecb  things,  ano 
all  men  doc  lbelllifec  of  her  ttwbcs. 

40  jfrcithertohcriubgcmcntisanp 
bnrtghteoufnefre  ,  ?fbcts  the  ftccngtb, 
ftmgbomc,  poiber  anb  maieftic  of  all  a 
ges.  25lcf&bbcthc<5obof  trueth. 

4.1  suiDttHththathchciDhispeace, 
anoal  the  people  then  fboutcb  ana  fait), 
<£>rcat  is  trueth,  anbmtgbttcabouc  all 
thtngs. 

41  Xhen  faibc  the  feing  bnto  him, 
2lffee  lbhatthou  ibilt,  mo?cthenisap= 
poutteb  m  the  uniting,  ant)  me  ttJil  giue 
it  thee,  beeaufe  thou  art  founb  tbifcft, 
anb  thou  (halt  fit  nert  me,  ant)  (halt  bee 
eallebmpeounu. 

43  Xhcn  faib  hec  bnto  the  femg, 
Bcmembcr  thp  boib  rbhith  thou  hatt 
boibcb  to  builb  3Jerufaiem  in  the  bap 
tphcnthoucaincfttothefetngbomc, 

44  3nbtofcnba\bapalltbebcflcls 
that  iberc  tafecn  aibap  out  of  3Jcrufa- 
lcm,lbhich  Cp*ms  fct  apart,  lbbcnhcc 
botbeb  to  bettrop  2Sabplon,  anb  to  fenb 
them  agame  thither. 

45  Xhouaifohaftboibcbtobuflbbp 
the  £cmple,lbhich  the  eoomitcs  burnt 
ibhen  3lubea  tbas  mabc  Dcfoiatc  bp  the 
Chaibecs. 

46  3inb  noib,  £>  Io?b  the  femg,  this 
tSthatibhtth^J  require,  anbibbichU 
befirc  of  thee,  anb  this  is  the  pnncelp  li> 
bcraiitie  p:occcbmg  from  thp  rclfc :  3 
befirc  therefore  that  thou  mafic  goob 
theboro,theperf02manceibbcroflbtth 
thmcotbnc  mouth  thou  haft  botticbto 
the  feing  of  hcaucn. 

47  ■EhcnS>ariustbclungftoobbp 
anb  biffcb  htm ,  anb  ib;otc  letters  fo? 
him  bnto  ail  tljetrcafurers  anb  licutc< 
nants,  anb  captames  anb  gourrnours 
that  thep  CbouiD  fafelp  tonucv  on  their 
roap,both  him,  anballtbofcthat  go  bp 
ttnth  him  to  builblierufaicm. 

4S  $cc  ttijotc  letters  alfo  bnto  the 
UcutenantsthatibcrcinCoclofpnaanb 
^henict,  anb  bnto  them  m  iLibanus, 


that  thep  fljouio  b^ing  <£ebar  wood  1 
from  Hibanus  bnto  J  crufalan ,  anb 
that  thep  fl)oulb  bmlb  the  citp  until  him 
j  49  £0o;tcoucr  he  lbjotc  foz  all  the! 
3Jclbcs  that  ibent  out  of  his  r  caitnc  bp ! 
j  into  3ninc, conternmg  their  frecbomc,  | 
that  no  officer,  no  ruler,  no  lieutenant, 
inoilltreafurcr,  fhoulD  fomblpnitcntp 
to  their  bojes, 

I    50  3lnb  that  all  the  countrcpumub 

thep  holb,  fhoulb  be  free  ttntbout  tn 

bute,  f  that  the  Cbonutcs  (houlb  giuc 

ouer  the  billagcs  of  thc^Jcibcsibbicb 

j  then  thep  hclb, 

51  mthatthcrc  fhouib  bcpercclpgi 
1  ucu  tmcntic  talents  to  p  bmiDing  of  the 
i  Zcmplc,bnnii  p  time  that  it  mere  built, 

5 1  3lnb  other  tenne  talents  pecrelp, 
( to  mamtamc  the  burnt  offerings  bpon 
,  the  3ltar  cuerp  bap  (as  tljcv  hao  a  com? 
:  maubcmcntto  offer  rcueutccnc) 

53  31nb  that  all  thep  that  went  from 
25abplontobuilbthccitic,  fljonibhauc 
free  libcrrp  asibcll  thep  as  thctr  pofteri 
tic,  anb  all  the  pnefts  that  ibent  arbap. 

54  ^cujzotc  alfo  concerning  the  char- 
ges,  anb  the  p;tcfts  bclhnents  rbbcrcm 
thepmintftcr: 

55  3nb  lifecibifc  fo:  the  charges  of 
the  ILeuitcs,to  be  giuen  thcm,bnnll  the 
bap  that  the  houfc  iberc  fimfhcD ,  anb 
3Jcrufaicmbuilbcbbp. 

<>(,  3nbl)e commanbeb to  giucto all 
that  fecpt  the  titp  Jpcnfionsanb  lbagcs. 

57  V)c  fent  albap  alfo  all  the  bcffels 
fro  23abplon  that  Cpms  Ijao  fct  apart, 
anb  all  that  Cpms  hab  giucn  m  com 
manbement,  the  fame  char  gebhec  alfo 
to  beboncanbfentbuto  "Jcrufalcm. 

58  /15ott)ibhcn  this  pong  man  lbas 
goncfozth,  he  liftcb  bp  his  face  to  hca 
ucu  totbarb  3erufalcni,anb  pzaifcb  the 
femg  of  hcaucn, 

59  3lnofaib,5fromthcccommcthbi 
ct02p,frointhcccommcthlbifcboni,anb 
thmeistlK  glojp,  »3Jamthpfcruaut. 

60  25ieffcb  art  thou  lbho  haft  gutcn 
mcmifcbouufouo  thcCj  giuethanfes, 
^Ho2b  of  our  fathers. 

6i  3nb  fo  he  toofec  the  letters ,  anb 
Ibent  out,anbcamcbnto2i5abpioii,aub 
tolbitaiihisb:ctl)2cn. 

6%  3utb  tl)cpp2aifcbthc(5obof  their 
fathers:  becaure  he  Dab  gtucn  them  frec- 
bomc anb  liber  he 

63  lEogoet)p,anbtobuilb3Jcriifa 
lcm,anbthci:cmplctbhich  is  calico  bp 
his  #ame,aubthcpfcaftct!U)itb  mftrti 
ments  of  muficft;?  giabncs  fcucn  nm^ 

CHAT. 


\\0r,prv- 

ard. 


\\Or.rn- 

arts  of  UnJ. 


Apocrypha.  I.Efdras. 


Apocrypha, 


1 1 foachim 
and  Z  or  ok  A- 
Bet.  This 
place n  cor- 
rupr.FcrJc- 
acktmrfAi 
the  fount  of 

Iofcdcch) 
2Vcb.iz.ia. 
anir.ct  Zo- 
rolabtl,  rvke 
RW  of  the 

rtbe  of  Sti- 
lt. 

Zorob.il-el. 


*  StVAUi  h . 

c  Or  Mttf.tr, 
'Or  7^f/4- 
taJj. 

TATofa 

Evj  l.}, 
Nehem.  7. 
9. where  fcr 

irreuity  loAtf 
fortbeirtie 
numbers  ef 
thep&rttcH- 
Ur: ■  follow- 
ing:  for  here 
theyv*  •  > 
mucb,(*-  the 
nam.-t  much 
more. 

(  Shephstij. 
e  Or  thee 
'  hwtdrrdfe- 
Ltotnetne. 


CHAP.     V. 

4  The  names  and  number  of  thelewes  that  re- 
turned home.  50  The  Altar  is  fct  vp  in  his 
place.  57  The  foundation  ot  the  Temple  is 
layd.   73  Thewoikeishindredfoiatime. 

<§|4SfX$^  f  terfhtstticre  the  pnntu 
^,|W  pall  mm  of  the  families 
M/£^®&  chofen  accojoing  to  tl)c\t 
mmw&  tnbcs,to  so  Dp  untl)  tljcir 
^<P^i  lbiucs ,  ano  fonucs ,  ano 
oaughtcrs ,  lbith  their  men  -  fcruants 
ano  maio  fcruants.ano  their  tattel. 

2  3lno  Dartus  fent  With  them  a 
thoufano  l)o?fmen,ttI  the?  hao  brought 
them  bathe  to  3Jcrufalcm  fafelp ,  ano 
lbith muficall  [mtttuments, ]  tablets 
ano  flutes: 

j  3noallfhcir  tycthjenplayco^no 
hec  maoc  them  50c  bp  together  lbith 
tlKm. 

4  3JnD  ti)cfe  are  the  names  of  the 
menlbhithlbcutbp  .accojomg  to  their 
families,  amonglt  their  tribes,  after 
their  fcucraliheaos. 

5  1tfjc  02scftes  the  fonncs  of  0hi 
nces,  the  Tonne  of  3taron :  Jitiixs  the 
fonnc  of  JJofcOtcthcfonnc  of&araias, 
anOliJjoachtm  the  fonnc  of  Z020babcl, 
the  fonue  of  S>alathtel  of  the  houfc  of 
2>auso,  out  of  the  Bin02eo  of  £harcs,of 
the  tribe  of  3hioa; 

6  an3hofpaRcibtfcrentcnecsbcfo2c 
&>artusrhclungof0crfia,inthefceono 
yccreofhis  reignc,  m  the  moneth^t> 
fan,U)htchtsthefirltmoneth. 

7  3no  thefcarc  they  of  3}cil)2tc  that 
tamebp from  the  taptuutte,ibhcrcthep 
Olbclt  as  Grangers,  lbhom  /Ftebucrjo 
oonofo:  the  lung  of  asabpion  hao  tar 
neb  aibay  Unto  2Sabplon : 

8  3ino  they  tctumct)  bnto  ^crufa; 
lem,  aim  to  the  other  parts  ot"3Jutic 
cucry  man  to  his  ottmc  nty ,  Who  tame 
With  Zozobabcl,  With  IJcfus,  ftt\)t 
mias.ano1,  zachanas,ano  Hccfatas, 
cncmus^aroochcus,  25cclfarus,c  %- 
fpharafus , d  Sceiius ,  Koimus,  ano 
Saana  their  giuocs. 

9  3-he  number  of  them  of  the  na- 
tion ,  anothetcgoueruourstfonucsof 
rpho203  nbo  thoufano  an  huno.'co  fc 
ucntieanotwoithcfonucsof'^aphat 

fourehunozeofcuenncanotwo; 

10  Hoe  founts  of  3lrcs  fcttcu  Ijun- 
D2C0fiftte  ano  fire: 

n  Xhe  fonnes  of  Shaath  CBoab. 

two  thoufant)  eight  tmuDzcD  ftibcluc : 

12  Zhe  fonnes  of  £  lam,  a  thoufanb 


tWohunD2cD  fiftv  aub  fourc:  the  fonncs 
of h  zatbm,  nine  himOjeo  fourtie  ano 
fuic :  the  fonncs  of  Co2bc  fcueu  huu- 
02CO  ano  flue:  the  fonncs  of  25am,  fire 
hunb2cofoutticanO  eight: 

13  Xhe  fonncs  of  2Scbai,firc  hunojeo 
twentic  ano  tlncc :  the  fonncsof  k5>a; 
Das.th.zee  thoufano  tVbo  hunojco  tUicn- 
ticanotvbo: 

14  %\yt  fonncs  of  3Jbontcan ,  fijte 
hunD2cDfirtlcauo  fcucu :  the  fonncs  of 
1  25agoi,tlbo  thoufant)  firtic  ano  Ore: 
tlje  fonnes  of  ^bm,  fourc  huntyco  fif  tic 
anb  fourc: 

1$  Xljc  fonncs  of  "^tcrc^ias.umetic 
ano  two :  the  fonucs  of  Ccilan  ano  %■■ 
5ttas,  th2Ccfcoze  anbfeucn:thefonnes 
of35urau)fourchun02cbthirtte$tu.io. 

i6  %hcfonncs  of 3lnaiuas,anhun= 
tytXi  anb  one :  the  fonncs  of  3rom  tljir? 
tic  til)o,aub  the  fonncs  of n  25afl*a,th2cc 
hiiuD2cbtU)enttcanbth2CC :  thefonncs 
of  ^3ephunth,anhuub2cbanonbo : 

17  Xhc  fonnes  of  icterus,  thjee 
thoufant)  anb  fiuc:  the  fonncs  of  °26ctl> 
lomon,anhunb2cDtujcnticanbth2ce. 

18  IChcvof  jftctophahfifticanb  fiue: 
tl)tv  of  3tnatljotl)  ,an  huubjcb  fiftic  ano 
eight  :  the?  of  ?  2octljfamos,  fouttic 
anbtujo: 

19  Xhcv  of  1 1iiriathtanus,tH)cntEC 
ano  fine :  they  of  Caphira  ano  locroth, 
feucn  hun02cOfourtic  ano  tljjcc :  tljtrp 
of  0p2a,  fcucu  hun02cO: 

20  Xhcr  of Chaoias  anb^mmtOioi, 
fourc  hnn02co  nocntv  ano  tibo :  thep 
of r  Cp?ama,anb f  oabbcsjirc  IjunOzcD 
tlbtnticanoone: 

ii  Xhev  of '  $)acalon ,  an  hun02eo 
tlbcnticanotibo :  they  of  u26etoluis  fif- 
tic ano  tibo  :thcfonncsof  xil5epl)is,au 
huno.ico  fiftic  ano  fire. 

xi  %\)t  fonnes  of  >'  Caiamoiaius, 
ano  £Dnus ,  fcucn  hunOKO  uptime  ano 
fiuc:  the  fonucs  of  Jcrethus,  tibo  \y\x\v 
02CO  four  tic  ano  fiuc: 

zj  Xhc  fonncs  of  *  3Junaas,  tl)2ec 
thoufanb  thJec  hunoieo  ano  thirtic : 

24.  Xhcp2tcfis,thc  fonucs  of^eO- 
Du,  the  fonnc  of  3Jcfus ,  among  the 
fonncs  of  S>anafib,nmc  lnin02eo  fcucu 
nc  ano  tibo :  the  fonncs  of1,  U9eruth,a 
thoufano  fiftic  ano  tibo: 

25  Xhc  fonncs  of i  phaffaron ,  a 
thoufanb  four  tic  ano  fcucn :  the  founts 
of'1  Caruic  ca  thoufano  ano  fruenteenc.  \ 

26  Xhc  ILcuitcs:  the  fonucs  of' 7lcf 
fuc ,  ano  Caoimcl ,  ano  iSanuas,  ano 
Quotas,  fcucntic  ano  fourc. 
27  Xhe 


v<^r"Ai. 


H-- 


1  zSflcrhe- 
,fyu 


'"Sefii, 


S,:hle- 


P  AfmMtth. 


1  Kiriajlia 


G.it/ah. 

Bethel, 
■  MtthbU. 


>  Ltd.li.liii. 


SeKub. 


leiuuli. 
Imm.'.r. 

r.,j;„r. 

J  Harm. 
Cr.Jiy. 

ecordmvto 
feme  tep-.es. 
'  Thus  it  is 
•*d,E*rA 
1.40.  the 
founts  ofle- 

Crime./, of 
t're  formet  of 

Hodminh* 


Apocrypl 


:>ha. 


ci- 


lap.v. 


*Stehm. 

J  Ham  a. 
*  Sho'vA*. 


8  H^jnfh.t. 

h  Kcrot. 

*  St*h.\. 
k  PaJon. 

'Akkni. 

n  ShAmUi. 

'  Rr-aiah. 

1  firw>. 

*  NccvdAh 

■  Hux.z*i. 
V  PaftJi. 

atyfjnah. 
<  Ntfhfm. 

*  H*cupj. 
I  Htrhnr. 
I  B**l*:h. 

1  Harp,*. 
^S trees. 

1  Ji/"*' 

'"Tbjmsi. 

"  XdlAb. 


°  Sophertll). 
tPcrnU. 
11*aMi. 
'  'Dxrccn. 

<G,Jdcl. 
'  Shcfkatuh 
"  Ham. 
[  Pbocrrortj 

>.1S. 


IDcLitb. 
'7obUh. 

'SunUb. 


17  Xhc holy  fingers:  the  fonnes  of 
3lfaph  an  bumycu  ttbenne  anb  eight. 

a8  Xhc  powers :  the  fonnes  of  *  5>a= 
Umuhc  fonnes  of b  Jatai,  (tie  fonnes 
of  Xalmon.thcfonncs  ofc  S>acobi,  the 
fonnes  ofJXcta,thc  fonnes  of  c<S>amt, 
tn  all  an  hunbjcb  thirty  ano  nine. 

i9  Xhc  fcruants  ofthcXcmplc:  the 
fonnes  of f  crau,thc  fonnes  of  s  3fipha, 
tnc  fonnes  of  Xabaoth ,  the  fonnes  of 
hCcras :  thefonnesof  ■  &uD,thc  fonnes 
ofk0fjaieas,trje  fonnes  of  JLabana,the 
tonnes  of '©caba: 

jo  Xhc  fonnes  of  m3fcua,fhcfonnes 
of  21ta,tl)c  fonnes  of  "Cctab,  thefons 
of  3(gaba ,  the  fonnes  of  °  £>ubai ,  the 
tonnes  of3nan,thcfonncsofF<Cathua, 
the  fonnes  of  ^©ebbur: 

ji  Xhc  tonnes  ofr:3urus,the  tonnes 
of '  2Datfan,thcfonnes  of  •  j!5ocba,  the 
fonnes  of  Chafcba,  tl)c  fonnes  of u  <&& 
5era,  the  fonncsofx3l5ia,  thefonnesof! 
y  |&hinccs,  tnc  fonnes  of  3;ara,  thej 
tonnes  of  z25aftai,  the  tonnes  of  a^fa-! 
na  the  fonnes  of b  i$3cani,the  fonnes  of 
c  jftaphuX  tfjc  fonnes  of d  3tcub,the  tons 
of c  3upha ,  the  fonnes  of '  2flur ,  the 
fonnes  of  pharacun,  the  fons  of  625a; 
falotlj. 

ji  Xhc  fonnes  of  h£19ecba:  the  fons 
of  Coutha,  the  tonnes  of '  Charea,  tnc 
fonnes  of k  Charctis,  the  fonnes  of '  % 
fcrcc,  tfjc  fonnes  of  m  Xhomoi,  tlje 
fonnes  of  n43afith,thc  fons  of  anpha. 

j  j  Xhe  fons  of  the  fcruants  ofS>o- 
lomon  :  the  fonnes  of°35aphton,  tfic 
fonnes  of  p£hanra,thc  fonnes  of  i  3o- 
cli,thc  tonnes  of  r#.05on,thefonnes of  i 
1  •Jfbacl,  thefonnesof  [:£>apheth: 

3+  Xhefonnesof  "ftagia,  the  Tons; 
of  *  0hacareth ,  the  fonnes  of  £>abic, 
the  fonnes  of  S>arothic,  the  fonnes  of 
Mafias,  the  fonnes  ofoacthcfonsof ; 
3tt>Dus,  the  fonnes  of^>uba>tl)c  fonnes 
of3phcrra,thcfonncsof25arobis,thc 
fonnes  ofS>abat,  the  fonnes  ofSllom.  j 

35  H\\  thcminifters  ofthcXcmplc, 
anb  the  fonnes  of  the  fcruants  of  S>olo- 
tnon,U)crc  ffyce hunbzcb  fcucnty  s  nuo. 

3<j  Xhcfc  tame  top  from  Xhcrntc^ 
leth.anbXhclerfas.Charaathaiarlcfr 
Ding  them  anb  31aiar. 

37  Neither  coulb  they  fhcrbc  their 
famiues,no:  their  ftocu,hoiu  they  lucre 
of  gifcacl :  the  Tonnes  of  y  fUban ,  the 
fonnes  of7  26an ,  the  fonnes  of  a/i2eto- 
Dan,  fire  hunb;eb  fiftic  anb  nuo. 

38  3nD  of  the  pziclTs  that  ufurpcb 
the  office  of  the  pjteffhoob  ,  anb  mere 


Apocrypha. 


not  founb,  tlje  fonnes  of b  £)bbia :  the 
fonnes  of c  ^ct05,  the  fonnes  of d  Kb 
bus  ,  \bho  inarrieb  5lugta  one  of  the 
baughtcrs  of 25er5rtus, anb  ll'as na^ 
meb  after  his  name. 

39  3inb  rbhen  the  beftrtption  ot  the 
feinrcb  of  thefc  men  Ilias  fought  m  the 
3Kcgincr,anblbasnotfounb,thcvlbcre 
remooucb  from  crctunng  tlje  office  of 
trje^nefthoob. 

4°  ^02  Unto  them  faib  I  ischemias, 
anb  3tharias,that  thep  fhoulbnot  be 
partakers  of  the  holy  things,  nil  there 
arofc  up  an  high  ^tcrt,  ciorhcbiuith 
t^octnncanbXrueth. 

4i  £>o  ofgjfracl  from  them  of  tlbelue 
yccrcs  olbcanb  bpiuarb.thcyiucreail 
m  number  fournc  tljoufanb ,  befibes 
men  fcruants  anb  tbomen  fcruants, 
tvbo  thoufanb  thjeehunbjeb  anb  firnc. 

4i  Xhcir  1 1  men  feruauts  anb  hanb^ 
maibstbcrc  fcucn  tljoufanb  tlnec  foun* 
bjcb  fournc  anb  feucn :  thcfmgingmcn 
anb  fingmg  lUomcn ,  ttt)o  ljnnb:cb  fo:- 
ticaubfiuc. 

43  fourc  hnnbjcb  thirtic  anb  fine 
camels,  fcucn  thoufann  turtle  ana  fire 
hon"es,  tiuo  hunbzcb  fourttc  anb  fiue 
mules ,  *  fiue  thoufanb  fiuc  huttfueb 
tuicnticiifiucllbcaftsufebtothcyofte. 

4+3lnbccrtaincofthtchtefcofthcir 
families, lUhcn  rfjcp  came  to  the  Xem^ 
pic  of  C5ob  that  ism  3Jerufalem,UoiUeb 
tofct  up  the  houfcagame  m  his  olUnc 
place  accojbing  to  their  abtlinc : 

45  3lnbto  giuc  into  the  holy  trcafu- 
rieofthciuojftcs.athoufaubpounbsof 
golbc,  fiuc  thoufanb  of  filuer ,  anb  an 
fjuntycb  pnefrly  Uefrments. 

46  ^ubfobtt)citthcV>ucfls,anbthc 
ILcuitcs,  anb  the  people  m^Jcrufalcm, 
janb  m  the  couutrcy :  the  Singers  alfo, 
anbthcpowcrSjauball^ftacliu  their 
Uillagcs. 

47  26ut  lUhcn  the  fcucuth  moncth 
jnjasat  hanb,  aubiuhenthcchilbjenof 
Jlfrael  lucre  cucry  man  m  his  oibnc 
place,  they  came  all  together  Uuth  one 
confcntmto  the  open  place  of  thcjjfitft 
gate,  iUhichistoujarbsthc€aft. 

48  XhcnftoobUpgjcfusthcfonnc 
ofjofcbccanbhisbictlKcutlicpMcfts, 
anb  Zojobabcl  the  fonnc  of  daiatlnel, 
anb  his  tocriucn ,  anb  mabc  rcaby  the 
31ltarofthcco0of3)fracl, 

49  Xo  offer  burnt  farrifircs  Upon  it, 
atco2bmg  as  it  is  erpjefly  commanbeb 
in  the  booltc  of  i©ofcs  the  man  of  Gob. 

50  ^Jnb  tljcrc  lUcrc  gatljcreb  Unto 

lanltU  them 


'  Hoi-Atah. 
'Ear<.c/at. 


trho  alfo  is 

Al  hATlAS> 

chap  2,6 ;. 
\Htb.  Vrim 
>mJ  Thnm- 


\SerNche. 
\66. 


\Orj-Ser 


Apocrypha. 


I.Efd 


ras. 


Apocrypha. 


[  or.j.„r} 

jacrijict. 


\Crtk,  tut 

laned. 


\Scc  £z.ri 
1-9- 


\\Or,aur- 

fcerlor  en 

them  thjr 

•srrnuA't  in 

i> 
thebotif-of 

•hcLni. 


tbem  out  of  tbc  otbec  nations  of  ttjc 
lane,  anD  tf)ey  erccteD  tljc^ltat  upon 
bis  oiimc  plate,  becaufe  all  tlje  nations 
of  tbeianbitoereatcnmuneitoith  tbcm, 
anD  oppjcCTcU  tbem,  anD  tbey  offeree  fa? 
trifites  accojDtng  to  the  time,  anD  burnt 
offerings  to  trje  ?Lo?D  botfj  morning, 
anDeuentng. 

51  2Ufo  tbey  bclD  tljc  fcatt  ofXaber- 
nacles,  asiuscommanDcD  mtljclaito, 
anD  oiFeied  facrifiics  Daily  as  lbas 
meet: 

52,  3tnD  after,  tbattbelltouttnttali 
oblations ,  auDtbe  facrificcoftbc5>ab 
baths,auDoftfjcncuj  £0ooncs,  anD  of 
ailljolv  fcaftsr- 

5  j  3lno  all  tbey  tljat  t ijab  maDc any 
tooitoto  (5od,  beganncto  offer  facnfites 
to  GoD  fromtbcfirfrDayofthcfcuentb 
monctl),  altljougb  the  Xcmplc  of  tljc 
JL02D  lbas  not  yet  built. 

54  3nD  tbey  gauc  tonto  tbc£Pafons 
anD  Carpenters,  money, mcatc  anD 
Dmittc  lbttlj  cbcerefulncffc. 

55  Slnto  tljcm  of  £>iDon  aifo  anD 
Xy2c,tbcygauccatrestbattbcyfboulD 
bjutg  Ccbar  trees  from  ILibanus, 
\bbtcb  fbouiD  bee  bjougbt  by  flotcsto 
ttie  baueu  of  Joppc,  atcojDing  as  it 
was  tommanDeD  ttjem  by  Cyuis  Bmg 
oftbcpecfians. 

56  3UD  m  tUc  fctouD  ycerc  anD  ft- 
conDmonetb  .after  hiscommuig  to  tl)c 
■£cmplcofGoDat3Jcrufalcm,bcgannc 
ro20babclt}jcfonucofS>aiatl)icl,anb 
3(efus  tbefonne  of  ^ofcDcc,  anD  tbctr 
b2etl):enanDtl)cpne(fs,  anD  tljc  ILc- 
uitcs,anDail  tljcy  tbatiberc  tomebnto 
^Jcrufalem  out  of  tbc  captiuity : 

57  3nD  tbey  layD  tlje  fouiiDatitm  of 
tbc  boufc  of  God  ,  m  the  firfr  Day  of  the 
rcconDmoneth,m  tbc  fccouD ycerc  after 
trjevllicrc  come  to  3Jury  9  ^crufalcm. 

58  H'3nD  tbey  appomtcD  tbc  %t 
tutesfrom  twenty  yccresolD,  oner  tbc 
UiojHes  of  the  H02D.  Xhcu  ttooD  top 
Refits  anD  ins  fonucs,  anD  b'ctlucn, 
anDCaDtniclhisb20tber,  9  tbefonnes 
of*BaDiabun,\bttb  tbefonnes  of  Jooa 
the  fonnc  of  (£liaDun,ibirt)  their  fonncs 
anDbKtlven,  aiilLciutes,ttntb  one  at 
co2D|irettersfoniiarDoftlicburutefrc,la 
bouruig  to  abuante  the  ibo:besm  tbc 
boufcof  GoD.  i=>o  tbc  U)0?ftmcnbinlt 
tf)etempleoftl)c?ioiD. 

59  3nDtbe  pucftsfiooDarayeDfn 
their  befhments  lbith  muficall  inftcu* 
meiits.auDtriunpfts,  anDtbclLcuitcs 
tbefounesof  Sfapn  bao  Cymbals, 


60  §>ingmgfbugs  of  ttjanafguiing, 
anDp2ai(ingtbe!Lo2D||atto;DmgasS)aj 
uid  tljc  Ring  of  JfraeiljaD  02DantcD. 

6i  2nDtbey  fung  with  louDtooiccs 
fongsto  tl)cp2aifeoftl)e?tojD :  becaufe 
fjis  mcrty  anD  glo?y  is  fo?  cucr  m  all  3Jf- 
racl. 

6i  3lnT)  all  tbc  people  fonnDcD 
trumpets ,  ano  tboutcD  ttntlj  a  Ioud 
tooyce,  ringing  fongs  of  tbauKcfgiumg 
tonto  tljc  IL02D  foz  tljc  rearing  top  of  tljc 
ljoufeoftljc'jL02D. 

65  *3irooftbc02ictrsanD?Lcuitcs, 
anD  of  tbcclncfc  oftljcir  families  tbc  an- 
ctcntsitobo  bao  fecnetbefrmner  boufc, 
came  to  tbc  burning  of  tljis  itoittj  Voce 
ping  anD  great  crying. 

64.  25ut  many  ltoitlj  trumpets  anD 
toy  flioutcD  ltoitb  Ioud  tooyce. 

65  ginfomtul)  tbat  tljc  trumpets 
migbtnotbe!|ljcarDfo2tl)eltoccpingof 
tbc  people :  yet  tbc  multituDt  fouitDcD 
marucilouQy,fot!jat  it  lbas  IjearDa 
farrc  off. 

66  nabcrcfoje  ltoljcn  tbcencmics  of 
tbc  Xrtbc  of  3UiDa  anD  aseniamin 
Ijcarb  it,  tbey  came  to  bnolb  itofjat  tljat 
uotfc  of  trumpets  fbouiD  meant. 

67  31nD  tbcv  pcrcciucD ,  tbat  tljcp 
tbat  iberc  of  tljc  captiuityDiD  builDtlje 
temple  tonto  tbc  Ho:d  god  of  Jfracl. 

6S  ^)Otbcyitotntto~:o2obabclanD 
5efus,anD  to  tbe  cl)icfe  of  tbefamilics, 
anD  faiD  tonto  tbem,KicVtoillbuilD  togc^ 
tbcrlbitljyou. 

69  5fonbcitbcitoife,asyou,Doeobey 
your  IL02D,  auDDoc  fatrtfice  tonto  bun 
fromtbeDayesof^fba^arctlnbfHing 
oftbc^nVnansibljobzougljttosbitljcr 

70  Xbcn  nojobabel  anD  gicfus, 
anbtbccbicfe  of  tbc  families  of  3Jfrael 
faiD  tonto  tbem/Jt  is  not  fojtosauD  you 
to  buiiD  togctljcc  an  Ijoufc  tonto  tbc 
ILozDourGoD. 

71  noe  our  fclucs  alone  ltoiil  builD 
tonto  tbc  H02O  of  gjfracl ,  accozDtng  as 
Cyms  tbc  l^iug  of  tljc  pcrftansbatb 
tommanDeD  tos. 

7 1  But  tbc  beatben  of  tljc  lano  lv 
mgljcaiu'  upon  tbc  inhabitants  of  3!u 
Dca,auD  bolDtngtfjcm  flcaitc ,  ljmD;cD 
tbeirbmiDing: 

75  3lnD  by  tbeir  fecret plots,anD  po 
pular  pcrfujafions ,  anD  tommonons, 
ttjcy  bmDicD  the  fuufljmg  of  tbc  buil 
Ding ,  all  tbc  tune  tbat  lung  Cyms  It 
ucD ,  fo  tbey  mere  buiDcrcD  frombuil 
Dingfo2tbrfpaccof|!titooyccres,  tounu 
the  rcignc  of  Darius. 

CHAT 


\Or,af:n- 
tbemanercf 
Dautd  kt*X 
oflfrAtt. 


'Ezn].ii 


I  Or,  Mfctt- 

•a. 


II  Afjr-hld- 

do:\,chap. 

4!- 


]\Viuillht 
fectiul  yetri 
«\"D-trt*t. 

<5.7- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vj. 


Apooypf 


la. 


\\Or,Iddo. 


I  Ort  which 
was  called 
on  l  hem. 


*Ezia.  5.;. 

\\OrtTatnai 

Or,Shr- 
tbcr-bovtai. 


CHAP.    VI. 

1  The  Prophets  ftine  vp  the  people  to  build  the 
Temple.  8  Darius  is  foliated  to  hinder  it.  17 
But  he  doth  further  it  by  all  meanes,  y.  and 
threatneth  thole  that  fhall  hinder  it. 

iDtb  in  tl)e  fceonb  ?cerc  of 
the  tcignc  of  2>artus,  ^g- 
gcus,  anb  zachatias  the 
fonnc  of  It^lDDo ,  tijc  p^o- 
_  phcts  pjopheficb  bnto  the 
■fjcibes.m  June  anb  jerufalcm  in  ttjc 
/ftamc  of  the  %oin  ©od  of  3Jfrael 
Hibhtchibasbponthcm. 

I  %hin  ftoob  Dp  zo:obabcl  the 
fonnc  ots>aiathicl,  anb  Jefusthcfon 
of  3f  ofebee,  ano  beganne  to  butib  the 
houfe  of  the  %mti  at  3Jerufalem ,  the 
pzophcts  of  the  ILozb  being  tbith  them, 
andfjciptngtljcm, 

?  *3tthc  fame  time  tame  bnto  them 
SnGnnesthcgoucmozof  £>?:ia,  anb 
$hentce ,  vmth  ||  5>ath2abU5ancs ,  anb 
hts  companions,  anb  faib  bnto  them, 

7  25?  ibhofc  appotntmcntboc?ou 
bntlbthis  houfcanb  this  roofcanb  per* 
fo?me  all  the  other  things J.  anb  UjIjo 
are  the  tbozRemcn  that  pcrfozmcthefc 
things* 

5  jJ3enerthclcffc  the  Clbers  of  the 
3Je\bes  obtameb  fauour :  becaufc  the 
%ofb  habbifttcb  the  capttuttie. 

6  3lnb  the?  tberc  not  hmbzcb  fcom 
builbutg  bnttl  fuch  time  asOgnt&cation 
ibas  giuen  bnto  SDarius  concerning 
them,  anb  an  anfracrc  rcteiucb. 

7  Xhe  topic  of  the  letters  tbhtth 
S>ifinnes  goucrnout  of  S>??ia ,  anb 
Venice ,  anb  S>athzabii5ancs  tbtth 
their  companions  rulers  in  S>?ziaanb 
#hcnice ,  tbzotcanb  fcntbnto3>arius, 
%ts  femg  SDaritts,  greeting. 

8  %tt  all  things  bee  Rnotbcn  bnto 
our  lo;b  trje  13nng,  tijat  being  come  into 
the  couture?  of  'Jubca,anb  cntrcb  into 
trjcntieof^crufalem,  tbc  founb  in  the 
citic  of  gicrufalcm  the  ancients  of  the 
3Jctbcs  that ibere  of  the  capnuitte  ■, 

9  2iSutlbing  an  houfe  bnto  thcflozb, 
great,  audnctbc,  of  hcibcn  anb  com? 
ftoncs,  anb  the  timber  aircab?  laib  Dp? 
onthetballes. 

10  Smbthofctbozhes  arcbonc  tbith 
great  fpeebe ,  anb  the  tbozRc  goeth 
on  pzofperoud?  in  their  hanocs,  anb 
tbith  all  glow  a»b  biligence  isitmabc. 

II  Xhen  afRcb  tbec  theft  £lbcrs, 
fa?ing ,  26?  ibhofc  commaunbcmcnt 
builbe  ?ou  this  houfe,  anb  la?  the 


founbations  of  thefe  ibozRcs  i 
it  Xhercfozetothe  intent  that  tbee 

might  giuc  Rnotblcbgc  bnto  thee  b? 

ilmnng ,  tbc  bemanbeb  of  them  tbho 

tberc  thechicfebocrs,anbU)c  rcqutrcb 

of  tfjem  the  names  in  tbzrttngof  their 

pzincipau  men. 
U  £>o  the?  gaue  bs  this  anfnicre : 

tec  arc  tljc  fcruants  of  the  JLozo  lbhtch 

mabcheaucn  anb  earth. 

14  3nbasfozthishoufc,itibasbuiV 
m  man?  ?ecrcs  agoc ,  b?  a  Ring  of 
jfcacl  great  anb  llrong,  anbibasfint 
fheb. 

15  25ut  tbhenouc  fathers  pzouoacb 
0obbntoibzath,anbnnnebagamathc 
Hozb  of  Jfracl  mhich  is  m  heaucn,  hec 
gaucthemouee  intothepoiucrof  Ba= 
buchobonofoj  lung  of  26abviou  of  the 
Chaibces: 

16  aahopunebborbncthchoufeanb 
burnt  it,  anb  tartcb  aiba?  the  people 
captiucsbnto25ab?lon. 

17  2iSutinthcrirft?eercthatBing 
C?uisrcigncb  oucrthetountr?of  26a- 
b?lon,€?«tusthcHingUji!otetobuilbbp 
this  houfe. 

is  Snbthehol?beu"clsofgoibanb 
of  ftluer,  thati5abuchobonofoz  hab  ca^ 
rtcbaiba?out  of  the  Ijoufc  at  ^fcrufa^ 
lent,  anb  hab  fet  them  m  his  oibnc  tern 
pie, thofe  C?;us  the  Ring  b:ought  fozth 
agatnc  out  of  the  temple  at  2Sab?lon, 
anb  the?  tberc  beliucrco  to  1 1  zo?obabcl 
anb  to  5>anabalTatus  the  ruler, 

19  iDtrti  tommaunbement  that  her 
(houlb  tartte  arba?  the  fame  peCTcis, 
anb  put  them  in  the  Xemple  at  5cnt' 
faicm,  anb  that  the  Xemple  of  pJLozb 
ftjoulb  be  built  in  his  place. 

20  Xhen  tlic  fame  £>anabau"arus 
being  conic  hither,  laib  the  founbati 
ons  of  the  houfe  of  thelLozb  At  3Jcru 
falem ,  anb  from  thatnme  to  tins,  be^ 
ing  M  a  builbutg,  it  is  not  ?ct  full? 
enbeb. 

21  /!5ofti  therefore  if  it  fecme  goob 
bnto  the  inng.lct  fcarch  be  maoc  among 
fhc||rennbsof  l*mgC?nis, 

21  ^nb  if  it  be  founb,  that  the  but! 
bingof  thehoufe  of  thelLozoat  licru 
falem  hath  bene  bone  ibith  the  tonfent 
of  Butg  C?2its ,  anb  if  our  lo:b  the 
Ring  be  fominbcb,  let  hunfigmfie  bnto 
bs  thereof. 

2j  Xhen  commanbeb  Ring  ©amis 

to  fccRc  among  the  rcco:os  at  i3ab? 

Ion :  anb  fo  at  €tbataua  the  palace 

lbh«ch  ts  tn  the  couture?  of  t^cota, 

BRRR2         there 


\Or,Zm- 
t>xbel}rvbtch 
11  alfo  San,i- 
tujftrthc 
ru/efjfb  Of 
Zarobahtl 
fcemelh  :a 
beAMedto 
the  text tEx 
r.»  I.S. 


\Or3mtles. 


Apocrypha. 


I.Efd 


ras. 


Apocrypha. 


|  Or.fl.it 


II  Drinie  »/- 
ferwgi. 


there  lbas  fount)  a  ||  roulc  itohcrcm 
theft  things  ibcrerecojbcb. 

24  3mthenrftyccreofthcrctgncof 
Cyms,  fttng  Cy?us  commaunbcb  that 
the  houfe  of  the  Jlojb  at  3!crufaiem 
iltoulo  bec  butlt  again  c  where  thev  Doc 
faenfice  ibitb  tonttnuaiiarc. 

25  B9hofc height IhaibeGrtiecubtts, 
anb  the  tweaoth  Owe  cubtts ,  ibtrh  tbjee 
roibcsofhcibctiltones,anboneroib  of 
ncll)  lboob  of  that  countrey,  ano  the  zp 
penfes  thereof  to  bee  giuen  out  of  the 
houfe  of btngCyms. 

26  3inb  that  the  holy  bcfTcls  of  the 
houfe  of  the  ILojb,  both  of  goioanbul 
ucrthatif2abuchobonofo2tooRcoutof 
the  hottft  at  3Jerufalem,anb  brought  to 
25abylon,fl)oulb  be  reftojeb  tothe  houfe 
afjerulalem ,  anb  bee  fet  in  ttjcplacc 
ibhcrc  they  lbcre  before. 

27  3nbau*b  hccommanbebthat5* 
fmncs  the  gouernour  of  5>y2ia  anb 
#hcnicc,  anb  5>ath?abU5anes ,  anb 
their  companions,  anb  thoft  ibhieh 
lbcre  appottttcb  rulers  in  <§>y2ta,  anb 
j&henice  Ihoulbbc  carcfullnottomc&= 
blc  Vblth  the  plate ,  but  fuffcr  zozoba^ 
btl  the  fcruant  of  the  ILojb,  anb  go< 
uernour  ofjmbca,  anb  the  eibcrs  of 
the  3fclbes,  to  builb  the  houfe  of  the 
5,02b  m  that  place. 

28  3  ftaue  tonmianbcb  aifo  to  haue 
it  butlt  bp  lbbolcagautc,  anb  that  the? 
looRCbiugcntly  tohclpcthoftthat  be  of 
the  capnumc  of  the  3Icibes,  till  the 
houfe  of  thc3L02bbcrmt(beb. 

29  3nb  out  of  the  tribute  of  Coclo- 
fy2ta,anb  ^hcnice,a  portion  carefully  to 
be  giuen  theft  men,  fi»  the  facrificesof 
thclLojb  that  is,  to  zojobabel  the  go= 
uernour,  fo?  bulIocRS,anb  rammes, 
anbiambcs: 

jo  3nb  alfo  tomc,falt,iCbtne  anb  otic, 
anb  that  continually  cuery  ycerc  tbitfr 
out  further  ruiclTton ,  accozbtng  as  the 
tencftsthat  bcin  3Jerufalcmfhallfigni; 
ne,tobcbailyfpent: 

31  Xhat  ||  offrmgsmay  be  mabc  to 
the  molt  high  <5ob,fo2  the  Ring  anb  fo2 
Ills  thilb:en,aitb  that  they  may  pjay  fo2 
their  lutes. 

32  3ttbhecominanbcb,thattt)bofo' 
titer  flioulb  tranfgrcflc,  yea,  02  mabc 
hght  of  any  thing  afo2c  fpoHctt  02  ibnt- 
ten ,  out  of  his  oibnc  houfe  fljoulb  a  tree 
bctaRett,aitbhctbcrcotibchangcD,anb 
all  his  goobsfcBcbfo:  the  Ring. 

33  Zhc?Lo:b  thcrfo2e  lbhoft  /Same 
ts  there  cailebbpon.bttcrlybcftroy  rue; 


ry  Ring  anb  nation ,  that  (tretchctb  out 
his  hano  to  hmbcr  0 :  enbammage  that 
houfe  of  the  fLojb  tn  31  erufaiem. 

34  3  2>artus  the  Ring  haue  ojbci- 
neb ,  that  accojbing  bnto  theft  things  it 
bcboneU)ithbiltgcnte. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  Sifinnes  and  others ,  helpe  forward  the  buil- 
ding. 5  TheTemple  ib  finifhcd,  and  dedi- 
cated,   io   ThePafleoueriskept. 

$en*£>tftnnes  thegouct= 
nour  of  Coclofyna ,  anb 
0hcntcc,  anbS>ath2abU5 
5attcs ,  ttnth  their  compa- 
._  ntonsTolloibingtbccom* 
manbentcnts  of  lung  Darius, 

2  DibbcrycarefullpoucrfecthehO' 
unboxes,  aflimng  the  ancients  of  the 
3Jcibcs,rjgottecnoursofthcXemple. 

3  3lnb  fo  the  holy  lb02Res  p2ofpc- 
rcb,ibbcn  3lggcus,  anb  zaehartas  the 
l&tophctspjophecicb. 

4.  3nb  they  fimfbcb  theft  things,  by 
the  commanbement  of  the  |Lo2b  ©ob 
of3?Crael,  anbtbith  1 1  the  content  of  Cy* 
rus,  2>atius,  anb  ^rtarerres,  lungs 
of^crfia. 

5  3nb  thus  lbas  the  holy  houft  & 
ntfhcb,  in  thct  tbjee  anb  twentieth  bay 
of  the  motteth  ^bar  ,intheftrtyccreDf 
2>artus  Ktngoftbcpcruans. 

6  3lnb  the  chiibjen  of  3fracl :  the 
02tefts,  anb  the  Heuttcs ,  anb  other 
that  iberc  of  the  taptiutttc,  that  lbcre 
abbebbnto  them ,  bib  acco2bmg  tothe 
thutgs  lb2ittcn  in  the  boobc  of  QMcs. 

7  ^tibtothcbebtcationoftheXem^ 
pic  of  the  Ho2b,thcy  offcreb  an  hunb2cb 
buiiocbes,tibo  hunb2cb  rammes,fottrc 
htmb2cbiambcs. 

8  ^nbtibcltte  goats  fo?  the  ftnttc  of 
ail^Ifrael,  accojbing  to  the  number  of 
1 1  the  chiefc  of  the  tribes  of  Jlfracl. 

9  Xhc  Clefts  alfo  anb  the?Lcuitcs, 
floob  arayeb  ut  their  belhnents  acco2« 
bmgto  their  t  bmrebs.ittthcftrutccs  of 
thc|lo2b  00b  of  gffracl,  accojbing  to 
the  boofec  of  tT9ofts :  anb  the  po2tcrsat 
cuerygatc. 

10  3(tiothccI)ilb:cn  ofjfracllltbat 
rbcrcofthccaptiumc,  hclb  tljc^afTco' 
ucrthe  fourteenth  bay  of  the  firft  mos 
ucth,  after  that  the  p2tcfts  anbtbe^ 
uitcsibertfanctifieb. 

1 1  Xbey  that  lbcre  of  the  captutitie 
lbcre  not  all  fanrtiftcb  together:  but  tljc 
Unutcsibercailfattcnficb  together, 

12  3lnb 


'EznC. 


\\Or.tht  de- 
cree. 


\Hebr.lUe 

third  duyt 
E*-r*6. 15. 


[  Or, tribes 


\Hekr.dtm- 

fi.n,,Efdr. 

6.IS. 


g  Or.tritlt 

Cre- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.viij 


\\Or?mtnJ. 


I  Aw 


j  Ateraioth, 

I!  ?***• 

vau!  theft 
three  names, 

tHekwM 
firJl,Ezr, 

71. 


\\N*th>- 

mms. 

fS«E^ 
7-7.S.9- 


'J-"'lf' 


it  Z\\n  fo  ttjep  offcrcb  the  #atteo 
uer  fo?  all  tljcm  of  the  captitutte,  anb  fo? 
their  b?cth?cn  tlje  0?icttcs ,  anb  fo? 
themfelues. 

13  3itib  tlje  cljilDicn  of  3Jfraci  that 
tame  out  of  rt)c  captiuiticbib  catc,cucn 
all  they  that  hab  fcparateb  themfelues 
from  the  abominations  oft  j)c  people  of 
tlje  lanti,  anb  fought  tlje  Mom. 

14  3ub  they  ftept  the  featt  of tonlca-- 
uencb  b?eab  feuenbayes,  malting  mcr; 
rybefo?ethe!Lo?b, 

15  jfo?thathc  Ijab turnco the  ||  eoun* 
fell  of  the  Bing  of  3fTy?ia  totbarbs 
them  to  ftrcngtben  their  hanbs  in  the 
U)o?bcs  oftl)cHo?bc5obof  3!fcael. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

1  Efdras  bringerh  the  Kings  Commifsion  to 
build.  8  The  copy  of  it.  18  Hededareth 
the  names  and  number  of  thofe  that  came 
with  him:  61  And  his  iourney.  71  Hee 
lamenteth  the  finnesot  his  people,  96  And 
fweareth  the  Piieftes  to  put  away  their 
ftiange  wiues. 

&$>  after  tfjcfe  things, 
ibDen^utapcrjccs  the  Btng 
of  the  ^crfians  retgneb, 
came  €fb?as  the  fonnt  of 
£>araias,thcfbnne  of  ||  e< 
3ectas, the  fonnc  of  $cu-hiah,thc fonnc 
of&aium, 

i  %Dc  fonnc  of&abbuc,  the  fonnc 
of  3Cchitob,  the  fonnc  of  ^marias,  the 
fonnc  of  I!  j©5ias,tl)c fonnc  of  ||  flDemc* 
roth  ,t|)e  fonnc  of  Zaraias,  ttic  fonnc 
of  ||S>auias,  thefonnc  of  isoccas,  the 
fontte  of  3lbifum,the  fonne  of  ^Ijtnccs, 
the  fonnc  of  <£leafar ,  the  fonnc  of  %& 
tonthctcljicfe^icfl- 

3  Xhis  €fb?as  lbent  bp  from  Z5a^ 
bylon,  as  a  Scribe  being  beep  reaby  in 
the  Ham  of  <0oyfcs,  thatibasgiucn 
bythe<5obof3Jfrael, 

4.  31nb  the  King  bib  him  honour : 
fo?hc  founb  grace  m  his  tight  in  all  Ijis 
requcfts, 

5  Xljcrc lbcntbp  lb tth  him alfo  ccr^ 
tame  of  tl)c  chiltocn  of  3Jfracl ,  of  tlje 
#?icfts,  of  the  JLeuttcs.of  the  holy  5>m 
gcrs,  goiters,  anb  ||iI0tntftcrs  of  tlje 
temple,  bnto  ^crufalcm, 

6  3In  ttljcfcuentU  ycre  oftfjc  reignc 
of  Bing^rtarcrrcs.tn  tlje  fifth  nioncth, 
( this  ibas  the  lungs  fcucnthycerc)  fo? 
tUep  ibent  from  asabpton  in  tlje  firft 
bay  oftlje  ficft  monctl),  anb  tame  to  $c- 
rttfaicm,  acco?biugto  the  |p?ofpcrous 


Apocrypha. 


tourney  ibljttlj  the  Ho?b  gauc  them. 

7  5Fo?  <£Cb?as  hab  tocry  great  fail!, 
fo  that  he  omtttcb  nothing  of  the  ?Laib 
anb  Commaunbcments  of  the  ?Lo2b, 
but  taught  all  3Jfraclthe  j£)?binanccs 
anb^Jubgcments. 

8  i5on)thctoppofthe||Commin"ion 
lbhuh  was  ib?itten  from  artarcrrcs 
thcBing,anb  camcto€fb2asrhcp?ictt 
anb  reaocc  of  the  ILaib  of  the  1Lo?b ,  is 
this  that  folloitoeth. 

9  Bing  ^rtarcrrcs  bnto  €Ib?as 
the  p2iefl  anb  rcabcr  of  the  %m  of  the 
Ho?b,fcnbcth  greeting, 

10  $auing  betermineb  tobcale  gra 
nounp.'J  hattcgiuen  o?bcr,  that  fuel)  of 
the  nation  of  the  3Jcibes,anboftbe 
^?tetts  anb  ILcmtcs  being  lbtthm  our 
Ulealmc,  as  are  ibillmg  anb  befirous, 
fljoulb  goe  ibith  thee  bnto  3lcnifalcm, 

1 1  1&s  manp  thcrcfo?e  as  hauc  a 
minbe  tljercnnto,  let  them  bepart  Jbith 
thec,  as  it  hath  feemeb  goob  both  to 
mc,  f  my  fcuen  frienbs  the  tounfcllo?s, 

n  %i)at  tlycy  map  looue  bnto  the  af 
faircs  of  ^ubca  anb  3ferutalem)agree' 
ablp  to  that  tbhich  &  in  tlje  %m  of  the 
Ho?b. 

13  ^nbtarpthcgiftsbntothc!Lo?b 
of^lfrael  to3Icrufaiem,  tbljithilanb 
tup  frienbs  hauc  tootbeb,  anb  an  the 
golbc  anb  filucr  thatinthetountrei>of 
ffiabvlon  tanbc||founb,tothc]BLo?bin 
3Jerufalcm, 

14  i©ith  that  alfo  \toljich  is  ginen  of 
the  people,fo?  the  lEemple  of  the  5Lo?b 
their  d5ob  at  3Jerufaiem '  anb  that  Gfc 
ucr  anb  golbc  may  be  collccteb  fo:  tui 
lotfts.rammes  anb  lambcs,  anb  things 
thereunto  appertaining, 

15  %o  the  enbthatrhev  may  offer  f& 
mfitcsbnto  thc?Lo?b ,  topontl)c3Utar 
of  the?Lo?b  their  ©ob,  tbhich  is  in  3(cs 
rufalcm. 

16  3lnb  tbhatfoeuec  thou  anb  thy 
b?eth?cnltoill  boc  ||  ibith  the  filucr  anb 
golbc,  that  boc  atco?bingto  fhctuill  of 
thy  ©ob. 

17  3nb  the  holy  befTels  of  the  Ho?b 
ibhicharc  giuenthee,  fo?thebfeof  the 
Icmplc  of  thy  ©oblbhith  ism  3Fcrir- 
falcm ,  thou  (halt  fet  bcfo?e  thy  ©ob  in 
3Icrufalcm. 

is  ^nb  lbhatfocucr  thing  clfc  thou 
(halt  remember  fo?  the  bfc  oftfjcXcm 
pic  of  thy  ©oo,thou  fhait guic  tt  out  of 
themngstrcafury. 

19  3liib  3 ,  Uing  ^irtarcrrcs ,  hauc 

alfo  commaunbco  the  beepers  of  the 

BURR  3  trca 


\[OraJtcrte, 


\Or.S"- 


\\Withtht 
nftcf.Ei.- 
^7.18. 


Apocrypha.  I.Efdras. 


Apocrypha. 


Orfnftt- 
fares  or  fait, 
E^raJ.  12. 


tHt&.of 

ihofe  that 
know  Ez.r.i 

7.15. 


\\Or,Dtm,l. 

IHI. 

•K7n8.-,. 
ofibcfons 
of  Srchcni 
ali,ol  the 
fonncs  of 
Parofli. 
||  ZeritcbA- 


treafurcs  in  S>y2ta  anD^hcnicc,  that 
ibbatfocucrctoas  t!je  p2icft,  anD  the 
r eaocc  of  the  laib  of  tftc  moft  high  d5ot> 
fbau  fenb  fo: ,  they  fljoulD  siuc  it  htm 
IbithfpeeD, 

zo  Xo  the  fumnte  of  an  hunDjcD  ta^ 
lents  of  filttcr :  libelbifc  alfo  ofruijcat  e* 
ucn  to  an  htunncD  ||  C02CS ,  anD  an  hun- 
D2eD  pteccs  of  ibmc,  ano  other  thingsin 
abundance. 

11  lUtalltbingsbeperftmncDaftcr 
the  laib  of  ©on  Diligently  unto  the  moft 
btgh©oD,  tbatttnath  comenotbpon 
the  BtngDomc  of  the  using  anD  ijts 
fonncs. 

22  3}  eommanDyou  alfo  that  vet  re- 
quire no  tarcnozany  other  impofitton 
ofany  of  the  0ncfts  olenites,  02holy 
fingers,  D2po2tcrs,  02  nutuftcrsofthc 
temple ,  02  of  any  that  haue  Doings  m 
this  temple,  ano  that  no  man  haue 
authority  to  tmpofc  any  thing  bpon 
them. 

2 3  3lnD  thou ,  eftnas,  aceo2Dtng  to 
tbcibtfcbome  of  ©od,  02bametuDges) 
ano  utfttccs,  that  they  may  uiDgetn  all 
S>y2ia  ano  iterate ,  t  all  thofc  that 
hnoibtbe  laiu  of  tbyOob,  anD  thofc 
that  tmoib  it  not  thou  (halt  teach. 

24 3nD*ibbofoeucrfl)altranfgrcfle 
the  laib  of  thy  (5od  ,  anD  of  the  lung, 
fl)all  be  pumfh  cd  Diligently ,  lbbcthcr  it 
be  by  Death  02  other  pumfliment,  by  pe- 
nalty of  money,  02  by  unp2ifonment. 

25  CXhcnfaiDCfD2as  the  Scribe, 
SBleffeDbc  the  onely?Lo2D  <3oD  of  my 
fathcrs,ibbo  hath  put  thefe  things  into 
the  heart  of  the  lung,  to  glojific  his 
houfethatismjlcrufalem  ■, 

26  3lnD  hath  honourcDmecm  the 
Tight  of  the  lung  anD  his  tounfcllets, 
anD  all  his  fnenDs  anD  Cobles. 

27  Xherefozc  ibas  31  cncouragcD, 
bythehelpe  of  thc?Lo2Dmy  cob,  anD 
gathcrcD  together  men  of  3tfrael  to 
goebpibithmc: 

28  3inD  thefe  are  the  chiefc  att02Ding 
to  their  families  anD  feucrall  Dignities, 
that  lbent  bp  lbtth  me  fromzsabylon 
in  the  rcignc  ofUmg^rtarerrcs. 

29  jDfthe  fonncs  of  Chinees,  <5tv 
fon :  of  the  fonncs  of  3ltbamar ,  ||  ©a 
matl :  of  the  fonnes  of  ©auiD ,  ||  ILcttus 
*tbc  fonnc  of^cchentas: 

30  £>f  the  fonnes  ofpbarc?,zacba- 
nas,  anbibith  him  lbere  cottntcD ,  an 
huuDjcDanDbftymen: 

?i  £>fthc  fonncs  of  0ahath,ffl5oab; 
£  uaomas,the  fonne  of  1 1  zaraias ,  anD 


With  h»n  tibo  bunD2CDtnen : 

3t  £>f  the  fonnes  of  II  zathoc ,  £>c;  \ 
chenias ,  the  fonne  of  3taclus,  anbi 
lbtth  him  tb2cc  hunD2CD  men  £>fthe 
fonnes  of  3tt>m  ,  <£>beth  the  fonnc  of 
3Jonatban ,  anbibith  h»»» f  tibohutv 
D2CDanD  fifty  men. 

33  <©ftbc  fonnes  of  €iam,  3Jofias 
fonnc  of  ||  ©otholtas,  anD  lbtth  him 
fcucntymen: 

3+  €>f  the  fonncs  of  £>aphattas, 
||  zaraias  fonnc  offi!9ithacl ,  anD  lbtth 
him  ||  th2ccft02canD  ten  men : 

3'?  £Dftbc  fonncs  of  3Joab,!l3babias 
fonncof||3le5rtus,  anD  lbtth  him  tlbo 
hunD2CDanD||ttbrtucmen : 

36  £)fthe  fonncs  of  26amD,  II^HTait- 
moth  fonnc  of  gjofapbias,  anD  lbtth 
himanhunD2CDanD  th2ccfto2emcn : 

37  iDftbc  fonncs  of  2Babi,zacbari= 
as  fonnc  of  a5ebai,  anD  lbtth  him  ttbea 
tie  anD  eight  men: 

3S  £)ftljc  fonnes  of  H^Qath,  Jo- 
hannes fonne  o(  ||  :#catan ,  anb  lbtth 
htm  an  hunD2eD  anD  ten  men : 

39  £>f  the  fonncs  of  3iDonicam  the 
laft,  ano  thefe  are  the  names  of  them, 
<£  lipbaict,3fcurt ,  anDH^amaias  ano 
lbtth  them  llfcttcnty  men : 

40  4Dfthcfotmesoftz5ago,tlthi, 
tbefomieofjftalcurus,  anb  Vbithhttn 
fcucntymnt: 

41  3nb  thefe  3IgathcrcD  together 
to  tbcriucccailcb  ||1Chcras,lbherclbc 
pttcncDourtcnts  ttycebayes,  anD  then 
3I  furuaycD  them. 

42  isutibbcn  31  haD  founD  there, 
none  ofthep2i  efts  anD  ILcuites, 

43  Xhcn  rent  3  bnto  Cleajar  anD 
II  3JDuci,anD  !i£0afinau, 

4+  3lnD^inathan,  anDflpamaias, 
anD  H3Jo2ibas,anD  Nathan, Cunatan, 
zachanas,attD  S|9ofollamon  p2innpai 
men  anD  learneD. 

45  3lnD  3}  bab  them  that  tljcy  ftioulD 
goc  bnto  §>aDDctts  the  taptame,lbho 
ibas  in  the  place  of  the  treafury : 

46  3lnD  tommanDcD  them  that  they 
ftiottiD  fpcauebnto2DaDbcus  ,  anD  to 
II  htsb2Cth2cn,  anb  to  tlic  trcafurcrsm 
that  placcto  fcttD  bs  fuch  men  as  might 
crecntcthc  pztefts  office  m  t!jc  Ijoufc  of 
thcHo2D. 

47  ^t'D  by  the  mighty  hanb  of  our 
IL02D  they  biottght  bnto  bsflulful  men 
of  the  fonncs  of!  s33oI:,tbc  fonnc  of  %t 
in ,  the  fonnc  ofjfrael,  ||  ^Ifcbcbw  anb 
his  fonnes  anD  his  bjctbjen ,  ibl;o  lbcrc 
ctghtceue. 
48  21nb 


lOrrfihe      , 
fonnes  of 
SbccheniAh 
the  fonnc  of 
Uha<.icl. 

tHct.fifij 
men. 


Or,Alh.,- 
liAh. 

J  Or,Ztl*- 
Jub. 

\Or,fonrc- 
fecremen. 
I|  Orfitad:- 

Or.lehici 

teenemen. 
\\Or.ofthe 
formes  of 
Shelomith 
the  fonne  of 
Iajphuh, 

M 

i;  Or,  Catan, 

\\Or,Shf 

?.iaiA* 

\  Or.fxty 

men. 

)}Orttethe 

rtuerciiJled 

Ahaue.  Ez. 

8.U. 

\\Or,hc 

m*Tnbredth£ 

peoflt  <m£ 

theprnjic 

hut  found 

none ef the 

fonne  l  of 

Lent. 

\Or,  Ariel. 

[OrtShe- 

mauih. 

WOrJarib. 

\Ortthtfe 

mens  njryes 

TVtth  their 

(cntr.iitons 

•xre  rightly 

dtfttngMtlhcd 

Ezra  8.  16. 

||  Orjddt. 

,Or,of 

\\Or}C*fi. 

phi  a. 

||  Or,  the 

Nethinitm 

•it  the  phce 

ofCafiphta. 

\\OrtMAih- 

li. 

f  Shereba 
EvaB.  18. 
\Or,  a! fa 

H.i   '•  -it  1  .J, 

Andxnthhtm 
Iepjjtah  of 
the  fonnes  of 
Affrart 
wtth  his 
bnthrery 
E.*i-*%.  I  p. 


Proclai- 
med. 


\H<bfub- 
fiatice. 


Apocrypha. Chap.vii). 


SeremM 

atJHaJ/i- 

.v„7. 


v:Jfcls,Ew. 
i.zj. 


48  2lnb:3febia,anb:annuus,  anb 
£>faias  \)\s  b:othcr  of  die  fonucs  of 
Channuncus,  anb  thcirfonnes  torn 
ttbenttcmen. 

49  :#nb  of  the  fcruants  of  the  Xenv 
pic  tbhom  3Dautb  hab  ozbeutcb,  anb  the 
principal!  men,  fo?  the  Cetuicc  of  fyt%t- 
\xitts  (to  tint)  the  fetuants  of  the  %tm 
pie,  trbo  hunbicb  ano  nbcutic,  tt)e  cata- 
logue of  vuhofe  names  tbcretheibeb. 

50  3tno  there 3 II  botbcD  a  fall  bnto 
the  yongmen  before  ouc  ?Lo?b,  to  brine 
of  htm  a  p *o fpcrous  tourney,  both  fa  2 
bs,  ano  them  that  ibece  tbirt)  bs :  foj 
ouc  rhilbjen  ano  fo^ttjet  cattcll : 

51  iFoj^JibasathamcbtoafBethc 
tang  footmen,  $ b02fcmen,anb  eonbuct 
fbjMegarb  agamftour  abuerfancs : 

51  JF02  Sbec  Dab  fatb  bnto  theaing, 
that  e^c  poiber  of  the  ?Lo?b  our  ©ob, 
(houlb  uriDitt)  them  that  fecac  Dim,  to 
fuppotftheminalllbaycs. 

55  Sinb  agatne  tbee  befought  out 
ILojb ,  as  touching  thefc  thtngs,?  fonnb 
j)im  fauourable  bnto  bs. 

54  XbenUfeparatebttbclucoffhe 
d[)Ufcoft})cp?icfts,||€felMtas,f^a"ani- 
as,  anbtenmmof  tljeic  bjethjen  tbtth 
them. 

$5  anb  5  tbcigheb  them  the  goloc, 
anb  the  muec,  anb  the  holybcflels  of 
thehoufe  of  ouc  ?Lo2b,  tbhichthefctng 
anbhiscounfeil,anbthep2uues,anbau 
gjfraelhabgiuen. 

56  3lnb  ibljcn  3  hab  tbcigheb  it,  3J 
acltuercb  bnto  them  fitc  hunb?cb  anb 
flftte  talents  of  ftlucr,  anb  filuer  bcfTcis 
of  an  hunbzeb  talents,  anb  anhuntycb 
talents  of  golb, 

57  anbrtncntiegolbenbettcls,anb 
tttbelucbcffcis  ofbjaffc,  euen  of  fine 
bjaOe,  glittering  itacgolb. 

5$  3nb  3  fatb  bnto  them,i5oth  you 
ateholybntothc1Lo2b,anbthcbcu'cis 
archoly,anbthegolbc,  aim  the  Outer  u 
a  botbe  bnto  the  &02b,thc  Ho?b  of  our 
fathers.  ^     ^„ 

59  naatchye,  anbucepcthem  ttliycc 
bcluter  thcmtothcehiefc  of  the  pneftcs 
anb  iLcuitcs,  anb  to  the  pmrnpall  mm 
of  thcfamilicsof  Hfrael  in^Jcrufalem 
into  the  chambers  of  the  houfe  of  our 

d5ob. 

60  £>o  the  pncftS  anb  the  fLctutcs 
ibho  hab  tcccuub  the  ulucc  $  the  goibc, 
anb  the  befitis ,  bjought  them  bnto 
3Jerufalem  into  the  £emplc  of  the 
II  02b. 

6i  anbfrom  tl)eciuec1Cl)cras  ibec 


Apocrypha. 


bepartcb  trjc  ta>rttt  bap  of  tbe&rftmo; 
nctb,  anb  came  to  Jmuaiem  by  the 
migbtiehanb  of  our  ?Lo2b,ibbtcb  tbas 
Hiitbbs:anbfcomtbebegmntngofouc 
||tourncy,thc?lo?bbeltucrebbs£rome; 
ucry  enemy,  anb  fo  ibee  came  to  3jeru= 
falem. 

6i  anb  tbhen  tbee  ijab  bene  tijerc 
tljiee  bayes,  rije  golbe  anb  Diuer  tbat 
Ibas  ibeigljeb,  Ibas  beltuercb  m  the 
!)oufc  of  our  Ho2b  on  tnc  fourtl;  bay 
bnto  ll^acmot!)  rtjc  pjieft,  tlje  lonne  of 
3Jtt 

6j  ^nbtbitDljtmrbaseica^artDe 
fonne  of  0!)tnees,  ano  ibitb  tljnn  ibece 
3lofabab  tlje  fonnc  of  3Jefu,  anb  ||  £^o- 
ct!)  flje  fonne  of  ^>abban,  fLeuites: 
all  ibas  deiiuercd  them  by  number  anb 
tbcigtjt. 

64  ^nb  all  tfjc  tbeigi)t  of  tljcm  u>as 
tb2tttcn  bp  tl)e  fame  l)ouce, 

6$  spojeouee  tljey  tftat  Jbcce  tome 
outof  tlje  capttuitieoffcrcb  famfitebn* 
totl)clLo2b(!l5ob  of|[[racl,eucntit)elue 
bullotns  fo2  all  3Ffwel,  fourefto2c  anb 
firtcencrammes, 

66  1 3Lt)2ccfco2e  anb  tibeluc  lambes, 
goatesfo2a  peace  offering,  tibeluc,  an 
of  tljcm  a  faccince  to  tlje  fl02b. 

67  ^nbtljcybcliucrcbtljeKtngscom* 
tnanbentents  bnto  tlje  feingsGt»!acbs, 
anb  to  tlje  gouernours  of  Coclofy2ta, 
anb  ^Ijcmcc, anb  tljcy  Donoureb  tlic 
peoplcanbtheXenjple  of  <5ob. 

68  i5otb  lb!)cn  tljcfc  things  Sbere 
bonc,tt)c  cuiccscame  bntomc,anbfaib: 

69  lOJenattonofJJfracMDcpnn* 
ccs,  tlje  p2te(ts ,  anb  Cemtcs  !)auc  not 
pntaibay  fromtljcm  t!)e  ftraugepcoplc 
of  thcianb :  no?  the  pollutions  of  tlje 
d5cnttlcs,  to  wit,  of  tlje  Cljanaanitcs, 
^tttttcs,^nercOtcs,  UrtmOtcs,  anb 
tbc^oabttes,€gypt{ans,  anb  €bo- 

mites,  ,  _,  „ 

70  5fo2botl)rtKy,anbffteirfonncs, 
Dauc  maneo  ibttl)  their  baugl)tcts,anb 
the  holy  feebts  mircb  tbith  theftrange 
people  of  the  lanb,  anb  from  the  begin? 
ning  of  this  matter,  the  rulers  ano  the 
great  men  haue  bene  partaftcrs  of  this 
tniquitic.  ,_, ,      .     ^ 

71  3lnb  affoouc  as  3  hab  hearo 
thefc  things,  3  rent  my  clothes,  anb 
the  holy  garment,  anb  pullcb  off  the 
haircfromoffmyhcao,anbbcarb,anb 
tatcmebotbnefab,  anbbciri'hcauy. 

71 5>o all  they  tbattticrcthcnmoo_ 
ueb  at  the  ibo?b  of  the  %m  ©ob  of 
Dfracl,  affembleb  bnto  me ,  ibhsieuj) 


j  'Dangers 
n  (he  way. 


\  Or,  vnto 
fJMtrtmoth 

tbefimcrf 

ZJnahthc 

thefenncef 
Sinnui. 


tff't-77 

lambes.  I  ?.. 
hee goats  for 
ajimte  offr* 
rwg.Eir* 
8.31. 


Apocrypha.  I.Efdras. 


f  Greek?. 

baue  aboun 
ded. 


\HJir.hfe, 
£i'.J>.8. 


mourneb  fo?  tfje  iniqmtie:  but  3  fate 
mil  full  of  beauincu"e,bnttu  tbe  turning 
Eatnfitc 

73  Itbenri&ngbpftomtbefaaibiti) 
nip  tlottjcs  anb  tfje  fjolp  garment  tent, 
anbbolbtng  mp  ftnees,  anb  ttretcbmg 
foo?ttjmp  bancs  bnto  fyt%Q}H: 

7+  5fe^,£>?Lo.i6,3lamtonfii3m^ 
bcb,anbafl)amcb  bcfb?etbpfate; 

75  jfo?  our  finncs  t  are  murapUcb  a* 
bone  our  fjeabs ,  anb  our  igno?ances 
Ijaue  rcaebeb  bpbnto  Dcauen. 

76  5Fo?euctunce  ttje  nme  of  our  fa-- 
tbers  rbce  lwue  bene  anb  are  in  great 
finne,etten  bnto  tbisbap: 

77  3nb  foz  our  finnes  anb  our  fa? 
tbecs,  tbe  ibulj  our  b;ctlnen ,  anb  our 
mngs,  anb  ourp2ic(ts,  tbcregiuenbp 
bnto  tf)c  Kings  of  tfje  eartb ,  to  tfje 
froojtb,  anb  to  captiumc,  anb  fo?  a  p?ap 
tbitb  tbamebnto  tfjisbap. 

7S  &nb  notb  in  fome  mcafure  fjatfj 
merepbenc  tbctbcb  bnto  bs,ftom  tfjee, 
€>  |Lo?b,  tfjat  tbere  fboulb  be  leftbsa 
rootc ,  anb  a  name ,  in  tfje  plate  oftljp 
£>anttuarp. 

79  3lnb  to  bffeouer  bnto  bs  a  !igf)t 
intbefjoufc  of  tbe  !Lo?b  our  <5ob,  anb 
to  giuc  bs  t  foobe  in  tbe  time  of  onr  fcr 
uitube. 

So  $?ca,tbbcnrbetbcreinbonbagc, 
tbe  tbcre  not  fo?fafecn  of  our  ILojb;  but 
fjemabebs  gracious  bcfo?c  tljeiaungs 
of^crfta,fo  tbattljcp  gautbsfoob. 

8i  Pea ,  anb  fjonoureb  rt)e  Xemple 
ofour?Lo?b,anb  raifeb  bptljebcfotatc 
Snon,  tbat  rbcp  baue  giuenbsafurea= 
bibmg  in-line,  anb  Iferufaieni. 

8i  3tnbnoiEb,flD1Lo2b,iblwtfl)aU 
tbee  fap  tjauing  tljcfe  tbings  *fo?  tbee 
fjaue  tranfgreffeb  tbp  Commaunbe; 
ments,  tbbtcb  tbougauettbptbebanb 
of  tbp  fcruants  tfje  j&opljcts,  fapmg, 

83  Xbat  tfje  lanb  lbfjiefj  pc  enter  in? 
to  to  pofTcfTc  as  an  fjentage ,  is  a  lanb 
pollutcb  Until  ttje  pollutions  of  tbe 
ftrangcrs  of  tbe  lanb,anbtbep  Ijaue  fil 
lebit  lbttl)  tljcit  bntlcanncfTe. 

84-£bcrefo2enolbfl)aly,cnotioimc 
pour  baugbtcrsbnto  tbeir  fonnts,nci- 
thcr  fball  pc  taac  tbeir  Daughters  bnto 
pourfonnes. 

8?  £J9o?couer  poti  fljail  neucr  feebe 
to  baue  peace  tbitfjtbcm,  tbat  pec  map 
be  flrong ,  anb  eatc  tbe  goob  tbmgs  of 
tbe  lanb,  anb  tbat  pc  maplcauctbem; 
bcritantc  of  tfje  lanb  bnto  pour  cljilb?cn 
fo2cuermo2c. 

86  anb  all  tfjat  is  befallen,  is  bone 


Apocrypha.' 


bnto  bs  fo?  our  tbictteb  ibo?Bcs ,  anb 
great  fumes :  fo?  tljou,  j©  ?Lo?b ,  bibll 
matte  our  fmnes  ligfjt: 

87  3nb  bibtt  giue  bnto  bs  fuel)  a 
rootc:but  tbe  baue  turncb  bacfee  agame 
to  tranfgreffe  tbp  %axo ,  anb  to  mingle 
ourfeluesibitljtfjc  bnclcanneffe  of  tbe 
nations  of  tbe  lanb. 

88  IH©tgbtcltnottfjoubeangr?ibitb 
bstobeftropbs,  till  tbou  fjabtt  leftbs 
ncitljcrroot,fccb,no?name* 

89  ^D!Lo2bof5ftacl,tbou  art  true: 
fo?  tbe  arc  left  a  root  tfjts  bap. 

90  26ebolb ,  notb  arc  ibe  bcfo?e  tbee 
in  our  iniquities,  fo?tbce  cannot  Qanb 
anp  longer  bp  reafbn  of  tbefe  things 
bcfo?etbee. 

91  3(nb  as  <£fo?as  in  l)is  pjaicr  mabe 
fjis  confcffion,ibecping,  anb  Iping  flat 
bpon  tlje  grounb  bcf02e  tbe  Xcmple, 
tberc  gatbereb  bnto  fjim  from  Tletu- 
falem,  a  berp  great  multitubc  ofnien, 
anb  tbomen ,  $  cbittyen :  fo2  tljere  tbas 
grcatibeepingamongtfjemultirube. 

9i  ^tljen  ^ccbontas  tbe  fonnc  of 
3Jeclus,  one  of  tfje  fonncs  of  3!fracl  eal- 
leb  out  anb  faibe ,  ^D  Cfiwas,  ibee  tjaue 
finneb  againft  ttjc  ?Lo2b  ©ob,  tbec  fjauc 
maricb  Grange  Djomen  of  tfje  nations 
of  tbe  lanb,*  noib  is  ail  3ifrael!|  aloft. 

93  %et  bs  mabe  an  oattj  to  tfje 
H02B,  tbat  ibee  ibill  put  aibapaiiout 
lbiues,tbbicb  ibe  baue  taben  of  tfje  l)c& 
tbcn,tt)itf)  tljcit  cbilb2cn, 

94  Hibeastljoufjaftbctrceb,  anb 
as  manp  as  boe  obep  tfje  Hatb  of  tfje 
?Lo?b. 

9$  ^rife ,  anb  put  in  execution  :  fo? 
to  tfjee  boetb  tbis  matter  appcrtamc, 
anb  ibee  rbtll  bee  ibttfj  tfjee :  boe  ba? 
liantlp. 

96  £0  efbias  arofe ,  anb  toobe  an 
oatlj  of  tbe  cbicfe  of  tbe  02ieftcs ,  anb 
TLniitcs  of  an  1 3frael,to  bo  after  tbcfe 
tbmgs,anb  lotljcpfujare. 

CHAP.    IX. 

3  Efdrasjflemblethall  the  people.  10  They 
promife  to  put  away  the  ftrange  wiues.  10 
Tlie  names  and  number  of  them  that  did  fo. 
40  The  Law  ol  Mofes  is  read  and  declared 
befoiealhhe people.  4^  They wcepc.and 
are  put  in  mind  of  the  Feafl  day. 

£££.*|^»Dcn  «fb2as  nfmg  from 
W;  W$R  ft*  touct  of  tbe  Xcmpie, 
^^  lbent  to  tbe  cbambcr  of 
SK^oanan  tfje  fonnc  ofc 


I  liaftb, 


i  3mb 


\\Or,kcmt 
A»gr),C-c. 


||  Or,extl- 
seifDeut. 
J8.U.O- 
'Bmiuti.i. 


\Uehmi 
of  all  Ifrael, 


Apocrypha.  Chap.ix. 


\\Vtlcrly 
icjlrojcd. 


\\Or,fiar,J. 


z  anb  rematueb  there,  anb  bib  eatc 
nomcate  nojbnnftc  tbater,  mournmg 
foj  tt»c  great  iniquities  ofttjc  multttube. 

j  3nb  there  ttjasapjoelamationin 
all  3iurpanb  3Jerufaicm,  to  all  them 
that  ibere  of  the  captiuitic,  that  tijep 
fljouib  be  gathcreb  together  at  3lcru 
falcm: 

4-  3no  that  tbhofocucr  met  not 
there  ttnthuttibo  o;  thjee  oapesaeco?* 
Ding  as  the  Clbcts  that  bate  rale,  ap* 
pouitcb ,  thcit  tattell  (houlbbefet5eb  to 
the  tofc  of  the  Xcinple,  anb  himfcifc 
||  eaft  out  front  them  that  tbete  of  the 
capttmtic. 

5  anb  in  thjee  bapes  rbcrc  all  the? 
of  thembeof  jubaanb  i5cniamutga< 
there&togcrtjetat^cruraicmthctrbctv 
tieth  bapofthemnthmoneth. 

6  ana  all  the  multttube  fate  trenv 
blmgin  the  b:oab  court  of  the  temple, 
bccaufcofthcp;cfetttfoule£beathcr. 

7  5>o  €ft«as  arofe  bp,  ano  fain  bn? 
to  them,  JJc  haue  tranfgreffeb  the  latb 
in  marrying  ftrange  tomes,  thereby  to 
intreafc  the  funics  of  3ifeael. 

8  anbnoibbpconfcftmggtucglojp 
Pntothe  %otb  <5ob  of  our  fathers, 

9  £nb  boc  his  tbill ,  anb  feparatc 
your  femes  from  the  heathen  of  the 
ianb,anbfromthcftrangelbomen. 

io  Xbmcrpcbthetbhottnmltitubc, 
anb  fapb  tbith  a  loube  uouc .  fUbe  as 
thou  haft  fpoftcn,  fb  tbilltbeboe. 

1 1  26ut  fojafmueh  as  the  people  ate 
man? ,  anb  it  is  foule  leather ,  fo  that 
tbee  cannot  ftanb  unthout ,  anb  this  is 
not  a  tboz&e  of  a  bap  ai  ttbo,  feeing  our 
Cmnetn  thefc  things  is  fpjeabfatre: 

ix  Xhtrttoe  let  the  rulers  of  the 
multttube  ||  ttap,anb  let  an  them  of  our 
habitations  that  haue  ftrange  tbiues, 
come  at  the  time  appomtcb, 

u  3mb  tbith  them  the  Rulers  ana 
3Jubgesofcncry  place,  Ml  tticturne  a- 
rbap  thctbitath  of  the  fLo?b  ftombs,fo? 
this  matter. 

14  Xhen  Jonathan  the  fonne  of » 
5ael ,  anb  escchias  the  fonne  of  Xhco- 
canns,  accozbtnglv  tooltc  this  matter 
bpon  them:  anb  #ofoliam,anb  Hcuis, 
anb  SKibbatheushelpcbthcm, 

1$  anb  the?  that  ttcrc  ofthc  capti  & 
ticbibaceotfJing  to  au  thefe  things. 

i6  31nb  cflnasthc  pacft  ebotebnto 
him  the  principal  men  of  then:  families, 
aiibpnamc:  anbinthearftbayof  the 
tenth  moncth,thcy  fate  together  to  era* 
mine  the  matter. 


Apocrypha. 


17  &o  their  caufe  that  hclbe  ftrange 
ttmtcs ,  ibas  bjought  to  an  cube  in  the 
firtt  bay  of  thefirft  monetb. 

18  3iub  ofthc  £nctts  that  ibere  come 
together,  anb  hab  ftrange  iblues,  there 
lucre  fbunb: 

19  £>fthefonncsof3Jcfusthe  fonne 
of  3fofcbct,  anbhts  tocttnen,  ||  spatthe; 
las,  anb€ica5ar,  anb|i3tonbus,  anb 
i!'j5oabanus. 

20  anbthey  gaue  their  hanbs  to  put 
aibay  their  ibtucs,  $  to  offer  t  rammes, 
to  mahe  r  cconetlemcnt  foj  their  |  lerrojs. 

ii  anb  of  the  fonnesof <Emmcr,  a= 
nanias^nb  zabbeus^nb  ^(Sancs^nb 
b  famous,  anb c  $terel,  anb d  Farias. 

22  anb  ofthe  fonncs  of c#haifur, 
«luonas,  Raffias,  3}fmacl,  anb  0& 
thanael,  anb f  £>nbelus,anb  s  Xaifas. 

23  anb  of  the  fLcuites :  3Jofabab, 
anb  5>cmis,  anb h  Coliusibho  mas  cai- 
leb  ■  Calitas,  anbk#athcns,  anb  3Ju- 
bas,anb  "Jonas. 

24-  €>T the  holy dingers: '  eica$u* 
rus,  2Bacchurus. 

25  ©f the^ottcrs :  S>ailumus,anb 
mXolbanes. 

26  £>f them  of 3ffrad,  ofthc  tonnes 
of n  0ho;os ,  °  l^iermas,  anb  e  eobias, 
anb  SjJJclehias,  anb  q  fl0aclus,anb  eica? 
5ar,  anbratibias,anb26aantas. 

27  £>f the  fonncs  of €la,  £pattba* 
nias ,  zacharias ,  anb f  ^tcriclus,  anb 
J?ieremoth,anb  ^ebias. 

28  3nbofthe{bnnesofuzamoth, 
x  €ltabas,  yCIiumus, z  £>thonias,3Ja* 
rimoth,anb  s5>abatus,anb b  £>arbcus. 

29  £)fthcfonnesof26cbai,3}ohan5 
ncs,anb^nantas,  anbc3Jofabab,anb 
d3unatheis. 

30  £)fthcfonncsofefiPaiiv,f£)ia? 
mus,s  ^amuchus,h5cbcus,5arubus, 
■  3Jafacl,  anb  i^icremo  rt). 

31  t^nb  of  thefonncs  of  ^bbi,  iBaa- 
thus,anb^oofias,lLaaitius,anb  i!5ai= 
bus,anb£0athantas,aiib5)cfthel,26a 
lunus,  anb  UBanaffeas. 

32  ^nb  of  the  fonncs  of  3umas,  €li 
ouas, anb  ^fcas,  anb£0ilchias ,  anb 
£>abbcu0,anb  S>tmon  Chofamcus. 

33  ^uo  ofthc  fonncs  of  3lfom,k3»ta' 
ncus,  anb '  Matthias,  anbm33annaia, 
eiipljaiat,  anb  ^anaffcs,anb  demct. 

34  ano  of  the  fonncs  of  £©aam,3Jc 
rcmias,  Zombis,  j©niacrus ,  Jwrt, 
tJ9abbai,anb  fellas,  anb  3lnos,  €ara* 
bafion,anb€tiafihus,  9  (©ammtanat* 
mus,€liaGS,25annus,€liaii,S»ainis, 
S»cienias,/Sathanias :  ^nb  ofthc  fons 
ofl 

GO 


I  Maafai. 
\(jtdaluih. 


t -Hetr.  a 
ramme 
\lOr,punfi. 
cation. 

•Hxrw!. 

hMMfab. 

'Iehttl. 

iyvuah. 

Pa/har. 

Iofai>aa\. 

Ehfih. 

hKekizb. 
'Kebab. 
*Peth*l,iah. 

>Eli«/i,h. 


mTc!m. 


'Ramiah. 
Vltfatah. 
**  Aitamin. 
TAfalcbn.:b. 

'frhul. 
'Atdi. 
°Zattu. 

*  EfotKo. 

lElufiik 

'Mm«- 

iiLtfy. 

■  Sabad. 

*>Au±a. 

'Zaita. 

'A:bld. 

e  Htm. 

!MeJbullwi 

%AUIluch. 

^Adaui,. 

'Sbeal. 

t  Of the 

names  in 

vtrf.lt.Vt, 

34.;  JxT" 

Ezr.  10.  iO, 

31.34.CJ-'-- 

'  Mattmu. 

^Mattilhiah 
"Zaiad. 


Apocrypha. 


II.Efdras.  Apocrypha, 


gel. 
*Nehe.8  I. 


'Ezra  7.1 


turn. 


\\Or,H,Ik.- 
all. 

\Or,Maafi. 
ah. 

\  Or.Peda- 
tah. 

||  Or.  Ha 
lhnm. 
\S«Nc 


tus,zambis,  3Jofipbus, 

35  Smbofthc  tonnes  of  €thma,Qi)a* 
3itias,  zababatas,  cnes,  3iuel,  26a; 
naias. 

36  SMthefehab  ta&cn  ftrangetbtues, 
anb  thep  put  tljem  atbap  tbith  their 
thtlbjcn. 

37  anbthepnefts,anblLenites,anb 
thcpthattbetc  of  3Jfracl  btbelt  in  3& 
rufaiem,anb  tn  the  tountrep,  in  the  firft 
Dap  ofp  fcttcnth  month  :  to  the  thtlbjen 
of  3Sftael  tbere  in  their  ||  habitations 

38  *3nb  the  tbholenuiltitubc  tame 
together  tbith  one  atto?b,into  the  bzoab 
plate  of  the  holp  pojrtj  totbarb  the  eaft 

39  2nb  thep  fpaae  bnto  cftnas  tlje 
pneftanbrcaber ,  that  he  tboulb  bang 
theiaiboffl^ofcs,  thattbasgtucnof 
ti)c?L02b<250D0f3jrracl. 

4.0  £>o  efbzas  the  cfttcfe  pneft, 
brought  the  latb  bnto  the  tbhole  multe 
tube  from  man  to  rooman ,  anb  to  all 
thepnefts,  to  hcarc  trie  latb  in  the  firft 
bap  of  the  feucnth  moneth. 

4.1  3tnb  hce  rcab  m  the  bjoab  toutt 
btfozethcholppojch  from  morning  bn^ 
to  nuobap ,  before  both  men  anb  ibo- 
men  ■,  anb  all  the  multttube  gaue  hecb 
bnto  the  latb. 

4z  3lnb  efbjas  tlje  pneft ,  anb  tea* 
berofthelaibftoobbp,bponapttJpttof 

lbOOb  tbntd)  IbaS  mabC  tor  that  purpofe. 

43  3lnb  there  ftoob  bp  bp  htm  £0a- 
tathtas,S>ammus,:3uiamas,  Cartas, 
^anas,t|€5cnas)||26aiafamus,bpontl)c 
right  hanb. 

44  ^nb  bpon  fjts  left  hanb  ftoob 
jl^haibauts,  £{9ifaei,  £0clcrjias,  lifLo- 
thafubttsanb  ||i3abartas. 


45  linden  tooae  efbjas  trjc  boofee 
of  the  latb  before  the  multttube  :fo?  he 
fate  t  hononrablp  tn  the  firft  plate  in  the 
ftghtofth  email. 

46  3nb  tbhen  hec  openeb  the  latb, 
tbcp  ftoob  an  (freight  bp.  S>o  efbjas 
bicffcb  the  H02b  (Sob  moft  high ,  tlje 
<5ob  of  holies  Sllmightp. 

47  3nball  the  people  anfroereb^ 
mcn,anb  lifting  bp  tbctr  hanbs  the?  fell 
to  the  grounb,?  tbozfblppeb  the  ?Lo2b. 

48  3ilto  3Jefu5 ,  3inus,  S>arabias> 
3toinns,  Rambus,  &abatens,  Haute*! 
as,  Q9aiancas,anbCaittas ,  Cartas, 
anb3foa5abbus,anb^nanias,25tatasJ 
the  fUttttcs  taught  the  latb  of  the 
ILozb ,  malting  them  tbtthallto  bttber- 
ftanbit. 

49  ||Xhen  fpafee  attharatcs  bnto 
efo2asthethiefepueft,anbreaber,anb 
to  the  ILeuttcs  that  taught  the  multe 
tube,cuen  to  ail,faping, 

50  XhisbavisholpbntopHo2bfoz 
thep  all  tbept  tbhen  tbep  hearb  the  latb. 

51  (5oe  then  anb  eate  the  fat,  anb 
bnnaethefraeet,  anbfenbpamolifhtm 
that  haue  nothing. 

51  foi  this  bay  is  holp  bnto  the 
?Lo?b ,  anb  be  not  fozrotbfull  ,■  fo?  the 
llojbtbillbzingpou  to  honour. 

53  £>a  the  iteuites  publtfhcb  all 
things  to  the  people,  taping :  SChis  bap 
isholVtothe2.02b,benotfo2roVbfull. 

54  Xlmttbmtthepthetttbap,cuc; 
rp  one  to  eate  anb  bnnbc^maHc  mcrv, 
anb  to  gtue  part  to  them  that  hab  no- 
thtng,anb  to  maac  great  thecre, 

55  25ctattfc  thep  bnberftoob  the 
ibozbs  ibbcrcinthep  tbetemftruttcb, 
anb  fo2  v  ibhtth  thep  hab  bm  affcmblcb. 


•htKalL 


\\Or,Uoi,- 


kemurf)  anj 
Eva  the 
priefl  and 
Scn6et  and 
the  Leu  iter 
tkalinffru' 
Red  the  pcQ~ 
ph'fatd  vro 
<i!likt  people. 
Nrhem.  if.p 

\\Or,tbt 


nU.  ESDRAS. 


CHAP.    [I. 

Efdras  is  commanded  to  reproue  the  people. 
14  God  thrcatneth  to  cart  them  oft',  ^ 
and  to  giue  their  houfes  to  a  people  of  more 
grace  then  they. 

S&lf  i>c  fetonb  booltc  of  the 
p3^-pjophct  *  <Efb2as  the 
fount  of  ,§iaratas  ,  the 
I ',--5$ tonne  of  Farias,  the 
-  ■  >!  WfM  tonne  of  i?eltl)tas,  the 
;-■-'  -o  tonne  of |!£>abam:as,thc' 


tonne  of  ^>abot,thc  tonne  of  2tthttob, 

•l  3Chc  tonne  of  3lthtas ,  the  fotmc 
of  Chinees,  tlje  tonne  of  J?eli,  the  tonne 
of  Miliarias  ,  the  tonne  of  3l3tei,  the 
tonne  of  fi0arimoth,thc  tonne  of 3(raa, 
the  tonne  of  <DMas,thc  tonne  of26o2ttl), 
the  tonne  of  abtfet ,  the  tonne  of  0hi-- 
i  necs,  tlte  tonne  of  Clcavir, 

3   Xhctonncof^aron,oftheXrtbc 
of  V- eut,  tbhuh  tbas  tapnue  tn  the  lanb 
I  of  thefl9cbcs,intheretgneof  ^rtajtcr- 
rcslutigofthcpctfiat'is. 

4  *3InO 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vnj. 


Apocrypha. 


•1U.5S.1. 


Exod.  14. 


"Nam  2  1. 
2  4.ioih.8. 


•Eod.14. 

||  Or,flreet 
"Exo.3.10. 
30134.14. 
*Exod.  13. 


"Exod.  16. 
1  J.pfal.104 
40. 


Nun 


*  Wifd.li. 

Jo. 


4.  *3lnb  the  lUorboftbclLorD  came 
Unto  mc,  faying, 

5  (Boe  thy  ibay,  anb  (beiu  my  peo 
pit  tljeic  Gnfull  becbs,  auD  their  cbilbren 
tljeiciDicfetUnes  lUbicb  they  haue  bone 
agautttmc,  that  tljcv  map  tell  tljcir  chf  l; 
brcnscbtlDrcn, 

6  2Becaufe  tDc  finues  of  their  fathers 
are  mcreafeb  in  them :  fo:  they  haue  for- 
gotten mc ,  f  rjauc  oftercD  unto  Grange 
gobs. 

7  3lm  not  33  enen  bee  that  brought 
them  out  of  the  lanb  of  £gypt,  from 
the  boufc  of  bonbage*  but  they  haue 
prouottcb  mc  unto  iDratb ,  anb  befpifeb 
mycounfets. 

8  ^uilthou  off  then  tbebairc  of  thy 
bean,  anb  caft  all  eutil  upon  them ,  for 
they  haue  not  becne  obcbicut  unto  my 
latD,  but ttisa  rebellious  people. 

9  l?olU  long  (ball  33  forbearc  tljttn 
Unto  lUbo  31  haue  boncfo  much  goob  i 

10  *  ©any  nmgs  haue  33  bcGroycb 
for  their  fanes,  pjarao  iDitb  hisfer- 
uants,  anb  all  his  poibcr  baue3J  unit; 
tenboiuuc. 

1 1  3W  the  nations  haue  J  beftrowb 
before  them,  *  fin  the  calfj  haueftat  • 
tctcb  the  people  of  tiUo  proumces,  euen 
of  Xyrus  ano  5>ibon,  anb  haue  name 
all  thctr  enemies. 

11  £>ptaHethoutherefojeUntorhem 
faymg,  3Cbus  faith  the  florD, 

15  *  33  let)  you  through  the  £>ca,  anb 
in  the  beginning  gaueyou  a  large  anb 
fafe  ||  paGage,  *  fl  gaue  you  ©oyfes  for 
aleaber,anb3aronforapricu\ 

14.  *3J  gaue  you  light  in  a  pillar  of 
fircano  great  lDonbers  haue  33  bone  a- 
mongyou,  yet  haue  you  forgotten  mc, 
faith  the ILorb. 

15  1!:hnsraiti)the3tlmicjhfic1Lorb, 
%fit  cuiasles  *  lucre  as  a  rotten  for  you, 
33  gaue  you  tents  for  your  fafegarb,nc= 
uerthcleffe  yonmurmttreb  there, 

i6  3nD  triumphcb  not  in  mynamc 
for  the  Dcftntctton  of  your  enemies,  but 
cucrtothisbayboeyeyetmurmure. 

17  aabcrc  are  the  benefits  that  33 
hancDoncforyoumjhcnyoulUcrehtui'- 
gry  anb  tbirGic  m  the  lUtlDcrncOVDiD 
you  not  trie  Unto  me* 

18  laying,  JDby  baft  thou  brought 
Us  into  this  lUilDcrncfteto  Still  us  i  3!t 
hab  bin  better  for  us  to  haue  fcrucDtbc 
egyptians,  then  to  Die  m  this  ttulbcr 
neffc. 

19  Xhenhao3}pityUponyourmour'- 
niugs,anD  gaue  you  ©anna  to  eat,  *fo 


ye  bib  catc  Angels  breab. 

20  *  naben  ye  lucre  thirmc,bib  3J  not 
clcauetberocttcanuiuatersfloiuebout 
||  to  your  fill  i  for  the  hcate  3J  toucreb 
yomuith  the  icaues  of  the  trees. 

ii  33bmibeb  amongftyouafruitfull 
lanb ,  33  tall  out  the  Canaamtcs ,  the 
pherc3itcs,  anb  the  pbiliftmes  before 
you :  *  lUbat  fliaii  33  yet  boc  more  for 
you,  faith  the  %otia 

22  Xbusfaitb  the  Almighty  ?Loru, 
lUben  you  lucre  in  the  ttnlberncs  m  the 
nuer  of  the  ||3morttes,  being  atljuft, 
anb  biafphemingmy  j!5ame, 

1?  33  gaue  younotfirrforyourblaf 
phonics,  but  call  a  tree  in  the  ibatcr, 
anb  mabe  tlje  nuer  ftoect. 

24-  nabatftiait  33  Doc  Unto  thee,  £D 
3Iatob;  thou*  33»ba  iDoulbeft  not  obey 
mc:  33  iDillturne  me  to  other  nations, 
anb  Unto  thofe  lUill  33giuemyi5amc, 
that  they  may  Keeps  my  Statutes. 

2$  £>ccingyeebaucforfaKenmee,33 
lUill  forfaltc  you  alfo  :  lUben  yee  Dc= 
fire  me  to  be  gracious  Unto  you,  33  fl)all 
haue  no  mercy  Upon  you. 

16  *  ttohenfoeuer  you  (ball  call  upon 
me ,  33  iuillnotbcareyou :  for  ycc  haue 
befileb  your  banDs  lUttb  bloob,  anb 
your  fecte  are  fmift  to  commit  nratv 
flaughtcr. 

27  J?ee  haue  not  as  itiDcr  e  forfaltcn 
mc,  but  your  oiUne  felues ,  faith  tljc 
JLorb. 

23  Xbus  faith  the  Almighty  %  orD, 
l?auc  33  not  prayebyou  as  a  father  his 
fouues  ,  as  a  mother  her  baughters, 
anb  a  nurfe  her  young  babes, 

29  Xhat  yee  iboulb  be  my  people, 
||  anb  33  ft)0"t>  be  vour  00b  ,  that  yc 
tuoulbbeinycbilUrcn,  anb  33  Gjoulbbe 
your  father* 

30  *3J  gather  cb  yon  together ,  as  a 
hemic  gatberctb  her  chickens  Unbcr 
hcriUuigs:butuoVb,iUhatniau3(boc 
bntoyou '.  33  tbilltaftyououtfrommy 
face. 

31  *iDhen  you  offer  Dutomc,3fUJill 
tunic  my  face  from  you :  for  your  fo 
lemncfcaftbayes,  your  neiuc  £J3oone, 
anb  your  ctrcumciftons  haue  33  for 
ratten. 

32  3jfcntUnto  you  myfcruautstbc 
prophets ,  lbhom  ycc  haue  fatten  anb 
name ,  anb  tome  their  bobirsinptcccs, 
mhofc  bloob  33  lUill  require  of  your 
hanbs,faiththc?Loru. 

33  Xbusfaitb  the  Almighty  ILorb, 
t>ourboufeisbcfolate,3!  mill  cart  you 
out, 

GO  2 


jinb. ; 
vlJ.  1 


n  Or  ooh 


'  Hi.  5  4  & 
cxod.l  yi  3 


||  Or,  a,  ,he 
t'irirr  n.i- 
ten,  or  ttj- 
ten  of  Me- 
rit,. 


•Exo.31.3. 


IIJ.I.IJ. 


\\Or,*T 
<im\our  Co, 

*Mlt,23. 
J7- 


'Ifa. 


■')■ 


Apocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


Mala.  j.i. 


out,as  rt)c  lbmb  Coil)  Hubble. 

34.  3tU)  your  cljtlbzen  fl^ail  not  bee 
fcuitfuufo?  ttjcy  hauc  befptfeb  my  Con  v- 
manocnicnt,  anb  bone  tlje  tying  tljat  is 
mill  before  me. 

35  Poucljotirestbil  31  Sine  to  a  peo- 
ple that  ujall  tome,  lbbicnnotljauing 
tjtarbofmee,  yet  ujaiibeiecucmce,to 
ibljom  3Jfjaue  (bcibcb  no  figncs ,  yet 
tljey  ujall  boc  tljat  3  ttfue  tommaun* 
beb tnem. 

36  Xi)ey  Ijauc  feene  no  #?opIjcts,yct 
tljey  (qail  tall  ttjctr  fumes  to  remem* 
b?ancc,anb  actmoibiebgc  tncm. 

37  3  tafee  to  lbttneffc  tlje  grace  of 
tlje  people  to  comcibljofc  little  ones  r  e- 
ioyte  in  glabncflc  :  anb  tfjougi)  tt)rj> 
Ijaue  not  feene  me  lDtrtj  bobily  eyes,  pet 
in  fpint  ttjcy  belceuc  tlje  tljtng  tljat 

3  fa?- 

38  SJnbnoib  b?otficr,  brijolb  tbljat 

glo?y :  anb  fee  tlje  people  tljat  tommcrtj 
from  tl)c  call. 

39  tlttto  ibljom  3  Mil  giuc  fo?  lea- 
bcrs,3b?a«am,  gjfaat,anbJatob,£>- 
feas,3mos,  anbipctjeas,  3oeI,  afr 
Mas,anbgjonas, 

40  i!5anttm ,  anb  3ibarue,  £>opl)o< 
mas,3ggeus,zacl)aric,anb^alacr)ie, 
tblnel)  is  tallcb  alfo  an  *  3ingei  of  tlje 
&o?b. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  God  complainethot  his  people:  io  YetEf- 
dras  is  willed  to  comfort  them.  34  Becaufe 
they  re(ufed,the  Gentiles  arc  called.  43  Ef- 
dras  feeth  the  Sonne  of  God ,  and  thofe  that 
are  crowned  by  him. 

tyusfaitb  tlje  fLo?b,3! 
.  b?ougfjt  tljts  people  out 
H  of  bonbage ,  anb  3  ganc 
gltijcm  my  Conunaunoc^ 
sdsg>  mcntsbymyfcruantstlK 
p?opl)cts,.bl)omtl)cyibouIbnotijeare, 
but  befptfeb  mj>  eounfatles. 

i  Xljemotljcr  tljat  bare  tl)cm,faiftj 
bntotljem,  dpocyouribayye  cl)tlb?en, 
fo?  3  am  a  «bibo\b,  anb  fo?faBen. 

3  3  b?ougl)t  you  bp  Until  giabnelTc, 
"outibitl)fo2toibanbi)cautiicfrcI)auc'J 
loft  you :  fo?  pee  Ijauc  finncb  bcfo?c  tlTe 
!Lo?b  your  (Sob ,  anb  bone  tljat  tljtng 
tljat  is  ctiilbefo?c  mm. 

4-  2i5ut  ibljat  (ball  3  noib  boe  bnto 
pott  <  3  ant  a  ttuboib  anb  fo?fafccn :  goe 
your  lbay ,  0  my  cljtlb?cn,  anb  af He 
mercy  of  tfjc?L020. 

5  :3s  foimccCifatner^  call  bpon 
tfjee  fo;  a  lbttncflc  oucr  tljcmotljerof 


tfjcfc  djilb?cn,  tbljirtj  iboulbnot  ftcepc 
myCoticnant, 

6  ICljat  tl)ou  b?ing  tljcm  to  tonfa= 
Gon,  anb  rtjett  motDer  to  a  fpotle ,  tljat 
tljcrc  may  be  no  off  fp?tng  of  tljem. 

7  fLet  tljem  becfcattcrcbabJoaba* 
mongthe  tjcatl)en,lct  tljeir  names  bee 
put  out  of  the  cartij:fo?  tljey  fjauc  befpt^ 
febmy||€oucnant. 

8  n3ocbcbntotljce:3u"ur,tlJoutl)at 
l)ibefttl)cbnngl)tcoustntl)ce,  1D  thou 
ibttlicb  people,  remember  *  lbijat  3  bib 
bnto  5>obome  anb  <Somo?rtjc. 

9  nsijofc  lanb  licttj  in  tiobs  of  pad) 
anb  hcapes  of  allies:  eucn  fo  alfo  ibii3J 
coc  bnto  tncm  tljat  Ijcare  me  not,  fatrtj 
tl)e3amiglitic?Lo?b. 

io  Xlju's  faitl)  tl)c  ?Lo?b  bnto  €b 
bras,  %t\\  my  people  tljat  3Jttiillgiue 
tUcm  tlje  fetngbome  of  $tcrufalem, 
.bljtetj  3  lboulb  Ijauegiucn  bnto  3Ifc 
racl. 

ii  %l)etrglo2paifotbtl3ltauebnto 
mcc,  anb  gtue  tfjcfe  tlje  enetlafttng 
Xabcrnatlcs,  lbljitl)  3  Ijab  p?epareb 
fo?  tljcm. 

n  XDevftJail  ijaucrtje  tree  of  JLife 
fo2  an  cyntment  of  (meet  fauour ,  ttjep 
ujail  ncttjer  labour,  no?  bcrbeary. 

13  <5oeanbyceuJallretciue:p2ayfo? 
fen*  bayes  bnto  you , tljat  rtjcy  maybe 
fl)o?mcb :  tljcbtngbomctsalreaoy  p^ 
parcbfozyotKioattl). 

14.  XaHc  Ijcaum  anb  cattfj  to  tbit^ 
nclTc  fo?  3  Dane  bzoben  tlje  emll  in  pic* 
tcs,  anb  ttcatcb  rtje  goob ,  foz^ltue, 
ifaitljthefLojb. 

1$  flBotljcr.cmbzatetnytfjtlbKn.anb 
||b2ingtljem  bp  rbitij  giabnefTcmafee 
tlictrfcctasfaftasaptllar:  fo?  ^Ijaue 
cljofen  tl)ec,faitlj  tlje  !Lo?b. 

i6  3nbtl)ofctl)atbcbcablbil3Iraifc 
bpagamc  from  toeit  plates,  anbbnng 
tljcm  out  of  the  graues:  fo?  3  bane 
fenolben  ||my  iBamein  gifracl. 

i7.fcarenottljottmotl)croftl)ctUiV' 
:  o?en :  fo?  3  Ijauc  tljofcn  tljce,  fatrtj  tlje 
jHo?b. 

18  5fo?  tljy  hclpc  3  tttll  fenb  my  fer- 
uants  «£fay  attb  3lcremte ,  after  ibliofc 
tounfatlc  31  Dane  fancttficb  anb  p^pa- 
rebfo?tljtc  tibclue  trees,  labenttutlj  bi< 
ucrs  fruits ; 

19  ^nb  as  many  fountaincs  flottnng 
ibttl)  milUc  anb  l)on  y :  anb  fcuen  mtgl)- 
nc  mountatnes  ,  nnjercupon  tljerc 
groib  r  ofes  anb  lillics,  ibljcrcby  31  Ibill 
fill  tljycl)ilb2cn,bttl)  toy. 

zo  iDocttgljtto  tlje  abtbotb ,  mbgc 

fo? 


orevb. 


"Gene.  iy< 


IJO.tVtVj 
them  t-p 
uttbgLid- 

douermdks 
their  fen 
fJi.For, 

Ii  0ri  ih 

ruvncp  If- 
ratl 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


■  rob.  1 7. 
18. 

f-urj  thim. 


\\Or,fretuh. 


fo*  the father  icffe,  giue  to  the  poo2c,bc 
fenDtheo2phanc,tlothetbenaueo, 

ii  $eale  the  b20fccn  ano  the  ltocafec, 
laugh  not  a  lame  man  to  fco2ne,  befenb 
themaimcD,anb  let  the  bltub  man  come 
into  the  fight  of  nip  clcarencffe. 

11  Beepe  the  oloc  ant> pong  mithtn 
tt>p  ruaiies. 

zj  *  nahercfoeuct  thou  finoeft  the 
otao ,  t  taac  them  ano  bury  them,  anb 
^  Unll  giue  thee  the  firft  plate  m  nip  re 
furrettion. 

24  2bibefhll,©trn?people,anDtaite 
tbp  reft,  fo2  thp  quictneffe  (hall  come. 

15  /Rouctfh  thp  chilD2en  ,  ©  thou 
goob  nourte,  ftablifh  their  feete. 

16  2sfo2thefetuantsU)hom3  haue 
giuen  tijee ,  there  (hall  not  one  of  them 
perifl)  j  foj  3  will  rcQntrc  them  from  a 
mong  thp  number. 

17  Be  not  vncarp,fo2tt)I)en  the  bap 
of  trouble  anbheauuteffecommctb,  0 
thers  fhal  ibeepe  anb  be  fo2r  oitofuli,but 
thou  fbalt  be  mtrrp,  anb  haue  abun- 
bantc. 

is  Hheheathenfballenuiethccbut 
thep  (ball  be  able  to  doc  notbuig  agatnft 
thee,  fapth  the  Ho:b. 

i9  £0pbanbs  fhal  conertbce,fo  that 
tbpebiKwcn  mall  not  fee  helL 

30  25etopfull,£)thoumother,rbtth 
thp  chtlb:en ,  fo;  3  U)ill  Deliucr  thee, 
fapth  the  5,02b. 

31  Remember  thp  cbittuen  that  fleep, 
foz3f  frjaUbzingthemoutofthcfibcs  of 
the  tarth>anb  (bcito  mcrcp  bnto  them : 
fo:  3  am  metcifull ,  fapth  tye  ^t>;D  %\- 
nughtie. 

31  Cmtoace  thp  thiTDicn  tonttll  3 
conuanDlifhcUimertp  bnto  them  :  fo? 
mp  ttiellcs  runnc  ouer,  anb  mp  grace 
(ballnotfatic. 

33  3l«cfD2asretetueDachargeofthe 
XL02D  topon  the  mount  ®itb ,  that  3 
(boulD  goc  bnto  Jfcacl ,  but  lbhcn  3 
cametontotbem,tbepfetmeatnougbt, 
anb  bcfpifeb  tlje  commanDcmcnt  of  the 
?UjD. 

34  3nD  tbetcfo2C  3  fap  bnto  pon, 
©pec  heathen ,  that  hcarc  anD  tonocr 
ftanb ,  iUoiunwpour  (bepbearb ,  bee 
(hall  giue  pou  eucriafhng  reft  ■,  lot  he  is 
mgh  at  hanD,  that  mall  come  ui  the  cnb 
oftbcttwiD. 

35  23e  reabp  to  the  rerbatb  of  the 
bmgDome,fo2  the  cuer  lafhng  light  fhal 
(bine  topon  pou  foz  euernwe. 

36  5?leethcfhaDo\bofthtsrbo2lD,tc* 
cetoc  the  lopfulneflc  of  pour  glo?p :  3  w 


.p.lj. 


Apocrypha. 


t  Lit,  con 

c/hm. 


j  tttfte  mp  S>amour  openlp 

37  O  receiue  the  gift  that  is  giuen 
pou,  ano  bcglab ,  giumgtbanfccs  bnto 
hunthat  hathcaiicovoutothe  heaucu 
IpUingbome. 

3S  strife  top  anb  ftanb ,  bcholD  the 
number  of  thofc  that  bcfealcb  ||  m  tlje 
feattofthe?Lo2D: 

39  tehich  are  Dcpartcb  from  the  fha 
Doito  of  the  U)02lD ,  anb  hauc  rcceuico 
glorious  garments  of  me  JLo2b. 

40  Xafeethpnumbcr,£><3>iou,anD 
tfhut  top  thofc  of  thmc  that  are  ciothcb 
m  White,  ltobicb  haue  fulftllcb  tlje  %aito 
ofthclLojb. 

41  Xbe  number  of  thp  chiUucn 
Vbhomrhoulongtbftfo2,tsfulfilleb :  be 
leech  tbepoitoer  of  the  H02D,  that  thp  I 
people  lbnich  hauc  been  calico  from  the 
beginning,  map  be  halloibeD. 

41  *  3  CfDjasfaito  topon  the  mount  -^79 
5»on  a  great  people,  itohom  3  couiDJ 
not  number,  anb  thep  all  p.2atfeb  the 
?Lo2Dltoithfongs. 

43  ^nbintbcnubbcftofthemthcre 
was  a  poung  man  of  a  high  ftaturc,  tat 
lcr  thniailthc  reft,  anb  topon  cucrp  one 
of  their  beaos  he  fct  cro  ibncs,anb  ibas 
11102c  craitcD ,  ltotjiclj  3  maumieb  at 
greatlp. 

44  SJoJafkebtbe^ngcUnDfaib, 
||S>it,ibhararethcfc? 

45  ^ecanfrocrcb,  anbfaibtontome, 
Xhcfc  be  thep  mat  haue  put  off  the 
mo2tatl  clothmg,anb  put  onthc  immo: 
tall ,  ano  haue  confeffeb  the  jlamc  of 
(5ob :  noib  are  thep  croitontb ,  anb  re 
cciuepalmcs. 

46  Xhcn  fapb  31  tonto  the  5tngcl, 
nahatpong  perfonisit  that  ctoumcrh 
them,  anD  giueth  them  patmes  m  their 
banbes* 

47  S>ohceanutjercD,anbfatbtonto 
me,  Jt  is  the  fonnc  of  ©ob,\bhom  thep 
hauc  confeffeb  tntbelbozlb.  Xhen  be 
gan'J  greatlp  to  commenDthem ,  that 
(tooD  fo  ftiffelp  fo2  the  iRame  of  the 
H020. 

4S  Xhen  the  3ngel  fapb  bnto  mc, 
(5oe  thp  itoap ,  anb  tell  mp  people  mhat 
maner  of  things,  anbhoito  grcacmon 
btrs  of  the  !Lo2b  thp  oob  thou  haft 
fctne. 

CHAP.     III. 

1  Efdras  is  troubleJ,  n  and  acknowledgeth 
the  fumes  of  the  people :  ;8  yet  complai- 
neththat  the  heathen  were  lords  ouet  them, 
bcioe  more  wicked  then  they, 

Lin'  3?n 


\0r,  '    -1. 


Apocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


Gen.:.- 


•Gen. 6. 
la. 


'Gen. 7.10 


i.  Pet 


•Ccii.u. 


'Gen, 1 7.  j 


fl  the  thirtieth  ycerc  after 
the  nunc  of  the  title ,  3 
lbasmiSabylon ,  anb  lay 
troublcb  topon  my  beb, 
ant»  my  thoughts  came  bp 
oucr  my  heart. 

2  5foj  JJ  fare  the  Dcfoiation  of  S* 
on,anbthcmcaith  of  them  that  oibelt 
atasabyion. 

3  ^nbniyfpiritlbasfozcmoucb.fo 
tijat  3  began  to  fpcafcc  ttwbs  fnll  of 
fcarc  to  tl)c  moft  J?igh>anb  falb, 

4.  jj[> ?Lo?u,  «3l)o  bcarcft rule,  tliou 
fpaucft  at  the  beginning,  lbhen  thou! 
Dioft  plant  tlje  earth  ( anb  that  tin'  reifc 
alone)  anb  commanbebft  tftcpeopic, 

5  *  3tnb  gaucft  a  boby  bnto  3ibam 
Vbitljout  fonlc,  which  Vbas  tl)cU)02bc- 
manfhtp  of  thine  bancs,  9  bibft  bjeatrjc 
tnto  Dun  tl)cbieatl)  of  itfe,  anbbcibas 
maoc  uuing  before  tbce. 

6  2(nD  thou  lebbeft  intn  into  para- 
bifc,u>bicb  thy  ngljt  banc  nab  piantcb, 
befojeeuer  the  earth  tame  fojlbarb. 

7  3mb  bnto  bun  tfjou  gaucft  com 
manbementto  louctby  may,  lbbicbbc 
tranfgeeffeb,  anb  immcctatly  thou  ap 
pointcbftbcatbmbun,  anb  m  Ins  gene 
rations.ofibbomtamcnationstribes, 
peoplcanb  Uthrcbs  out  of  number. 

8  *  2inb  cucry  people  lbaittcb  after 
tbctr  olbnc  ibill,  anb  bib  lbonbcrfull 
things  befoje  tl)cc ,  anb  bcfpifeb  thy 
commanbements. 

9  *3tnb  agame  in  p?occffc  of  tunc 
thou  bjottgbtcft  tl)c  floob  bpon  thofc 
tbatbmcltmtbctt)o?lD,anDbcftroycbft 
them. 

10  3InC  it  tame  to  paffc  m  cucry  of 
them,  that  asbcath  tbas  to  3lbam,  fo 
rbas  the  floob  to  thefc. 

11  /fteucrchelcffc  one  of  tbcm  thou 
lefteft,  namely  *j[3oab  with  his  botifc 
Ijolb.of  inborn  came  allrtgbtcousmen. 

12  Slnbit  bappettcb,tbatibbcntbcy 
that  Mbcitbpo  the  eanh  began  to  mul- 
tiply, anb  hab  gotten  tljcm many  tftfl* 
bzcn,anb  Were  a  grcatpcoplc,  they  be 
gannc  agamcto  bemoje  bngobly  then 
thcftrlr. 

13  flo\X>  icbcn  they  liucb  fo  lbicUcb 
ly  before  thec,  *  thou  bibbed  thoofc  thec 
a  man  from  among  them,  Whofc  name 
ttjas*3lbiaham. 

1+  Vim  thou  loucbft ,  anb  bnto  him  i 
oncly  thou  fbcmcbft  thy  ibill : 

15  ^nbmabeftan  cucrialhng  coue 
mint  lbitb  him  ,  pjotmfmg  him  that 
tljou  lUouiocft  ncucr  fojfahc  his  feebc. 


i6  *2utb  bnto  bun, thougaucftlif^ 
bac,  anb  *  bnto  Jfabac  alfo  thou  gaucft 
3Jacob  anb  efau.  ^s  fo?  gjacob  thou 
;  ^ibQ  choofc  him  to  thee ,  anb  put  by  €; 
fau :  anb  fo  Jacob  became  a  greatmufc 
tttubc. 

17  ^nb  it  came  to  paffc,  thatlbljcn 
thou  lebbeft  his  feebe  out  of  egypt, 
'thou  bzougljtcft  tljcm  bp  to  tlje  mount 
S>ma. 

is  3inb  botbing  the  heauens ,  thou 
bibcft  fet  faft  the  earth  >  mouebft  the 
lbbolcuwio,  anb  mabeftthebepthto 
tremble,  anb  troublcbft  the  men  of  chat 
age. 

19  3tnb  tijy  glojy  tbent  through 
four  e  gates,  offtre,  ancofcartbquaBc, 
anb  of  Unnb,  anb  of  colb,  that  thou 
migbteft  giuc  the  lavb  bnto  trjefeebof 
IJacob ,  ||  anb  bihgencc  bnto  the  genera 
ttonofjfracl. 

io  3lnb  yet  tooncft  thou  not  attiay 
fcom  them  a  VbtcBcb  hcattthat  thy  latb 
might  bnng  fojtb  fruitc  in  them. 

21  5Fo?thcrTrft3JbainbearingaU)iCi 
scb  heart  tranfgreffeb,  anb  Vbasouct- 
come  anb  fo  be  all  they  that  arc  borne 
ofbim. 

22  Xhus  infirmity  leas  mabc  per< 
mancnt  anb  the  larb  (alfo)  in  the  heart 
of  the  people  umh  the  malignity  of  the 
roote,fothattl)cgoobbcpartcbaibay, 
anbthceuillabobcfhll. 

23  £>o  the  times  paffcbaibay,  anb 
flic  yeercs  lbcrc  brought  to  an  cnb: 
*  then  bibbeft  thou  raife  thec  bp  a  fcr^ 
uant,caiicb2>auib, 

24  *nahom  tliou  commanbebft  to 
builo  a  cine  bnto  thy  name ,  anb  to  of* 
fer  tucenfc  anb  oblations  into  thee 
therein. 

15  «©hen  this  roas  bone  many 
y  ccr  csthen  tljcy  that  mhabitcb  the  citie 
fojfoobcthtc, 

26  ^nb  in  all  thingsbib  cucnas^ 
bam ,  anb  all  his  gencranons  hab  bone, 
fo  j  they  alfo  hao  a  lbicfecb  heart. 

27  3mbfo  thou gaucftthenne oucr 
into  the  hanbs  of  thine  enemies. 

28  3rc  their  beebsthen  any  better 
that  inhabitc  Babylon  ,  that  they 
ftioulb  tl)ercfo;c  Ijauc  the  Dominion  o* 
ucr&ion? 

29  Jfoj  tbhen  31  came  thither ,  anb 
hab  fecne  unptctics  Unthout  number, 
thcnmyfoulc  favb  many  cuillbocrs  in 
this  thirtieth  yccrcfb  that  my  heart  fat- 
leb  me. 

30  3! 0 j  3  hauc  feme  hoib  thou  fuffc 
reft 


1  Gen.  2i. 

2>  ?■ 

"  Gen.  25. 

*  Mai.  1.2,3 


*  Rom.9. 
1  J.exod. 
ip.i.dcut. 
4.10. 


J|  And  so  all 

the  generati- 
on oflfraeiy 
that  they 
fhculJi^erpc 
it  mibdiU* 


*  i. Sam. 
16. i'it 

*  t.Saui.;. 
t  .and  7. 5. 
<3- 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


\OryJccn- 
ceiHC. 


I  Or  a  ton*. i 


reft  them  finning,  anb  haft  fpatcDrbtc; 
SeDDocts :  anD  haft  Dcftcopeb  thp  peo- 
ple, anD  haft  p2cferueD  thine  enemies, j 
anD  haft  not  figmficDU. 

31  |l  3  Doc  not  remember  hott)  this] 
tbapmapbcleft:  3rctbcpthciiof  25a- 1 
bplon  better  then  thep  of  £>ton  < 

31  £\2isthercanpothctpeoplcthat 
snoibeti)  thecbefibcs  3Jfcacl^  ozrbljat 
generation  hath  fo  belccncb  rhp  Coue^ ; 
nantsasjiacob* 

33  ;3no  pet  their  rcibarD  appeared) 
not,anb  their  labour  hath  no  mute  :fo2 
3}  hauc  gone  here  anD  there  tl)20ugh 
theheathm,  atiD3Hccthatthcp||flotbe 
in  tbcalth ,  anD  tljmfe  not  bpon  thp  conv  J 
matiDements. 

34  tengh  thou  thcrfo2C  our  UntHcD;: 
netfe  nott)  tri  the  baiiantc,  anD  theirs  ab  \ 
fo  thatDVbell  mthc  ID02ID :  anD  fo  (hall  i 
thp  jfJame  no  ttfterc  be  founD ,  but  m 
Tlfracl. 

35  £>:  ibhcn  *»as  it  that  they  nrtjicb 
Dtbcllbpon  the  earth,  Dane  not  ftnncD 
inthpaghti02U)ljatpcoplchathfoKept 
thpcommanDcntcnts? 

36  Xhou  fhait  anD  that  3lfrael  bp 
name  hath  Kept  thp  Precepts:  but  not 
the  heathen. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  The  Angel  dedareth  the  ignorance  ol  Ffdias 
in  Gods  udgmencs,  13  andadmlethhimnor 
to  meddle  with  things  aboue  his  reach.  13 
Neuerthelefle  Efdras  asketh  diuers  cjucllions , 
and  receiueth  anlweres  to  them. 

*£3®&*9»  ir5D  the  3ngcl  that  lbas 
nK  fiSSBn  fcntbntomcibhofcname 
M/M^Sk luas  ^ncl  >  Sauc  nice  an 
W'Mm^M  anfroerc, 
39IKS  2  3nDfaiD,Xhp  heart 
Oath  gone  too  farrem  tins  ID02ID,  ano 
thmfeeft  thou  to  compjeheno  the  ttiap 

ofthemofttysgh? 

3  XhenfaiD3l,^eamp1Lo;D:anD 
heanfroercDmeanDfaiD,  j  am  tent  to 
fheiDthcctlueenjapcs,  anD  tofetfojth 
thJcefinulituDcs  before  thee. 

4.  thereof  if  thou  canft  Declare  me . 
one,  gj  ibill  fhclb  thee  alfo  the  ibap  that  | 
thou  Defir  eft  to  fee ,  ?  H  Chail  fhetb  thee  1 
from  ttihenccthettncBCD  heart  comcth..; 
5  ^nD5faiD,Xtlonmp?Lo2D.Xt)en 

faiD  he  tonto  me,  0oe  thp  ibap,  lDetgh 
metherbcightofthe6re,o2meafurcmc 
the  biaftof  theibmD,02  callmeagame 
the  Dap  that  is  paft. 
6  5:henanirtJcrcD3IanDfaiD,nahat 

mams  abteto  Doc  thawhattHouChotrt; 


Lp.lllj, 


Apocrypha. 


Deft  affec  fuch  things  of  mec  i 

7  3lnD  he  faib  bnto  me,  3Jf  31  fooulb 
af  fee  thee  hoib  great  Dwellings  arc  in 
the  miDft  of  p  fca,  02  hoib  manp  fp2mgs 
arc  in  the  beginning  of  the  beepe ,  02 
hott)  manpfp2ings  arc  aboue  the  firma; 
ment,  02  ibUich  ate  tlje  outgoings  of 
^arabifc : 

8  pcrabucnture  thou  lboulbcft  fap 
bnto  mc,3J  ncucr  ibentbolbucinto  the 
Dccpc,  no2  as  pet  into  hcll,ncithcr  did  j 
eucr  clunbc  bp  into  hcauen. 

9  ji2cuerthclcfCc,noibhauc3JafBCb 
thec  but  onelpofthe  fire  ano  UunDcanD 
of  the  Dap  inhere  th20ugh  thou  haft  paf 
feD,  anDof  tilings  fro  ujhuh  thou  canft 
notbcfeparateD,auDpctcanftthougiuc 
me  uo  anfracere  of  them. 

10  $?c  faiD  mo2couer  bnto  me,  Hhme 
ottnc  things,  anbfuchas  arc  grolbcn 
bptbirhthcccanftthounotBiioib. 

11  ^oibCboulbthpbcffclthetibcca' 
blc  to  comp2chcnD  the  ibap  of  the  high- 
eft,  anbtheibo2iD  being  noiu  ounbarD- 
Ip  co2mptcb,to  buDcrftanb  the  :|  co2rnp< 
tion  that  is  ctubent  m  mp  ftght  < 

11  Xhen  fatD  3J  bnto  him ,  3>t  rbctt 
better  that  unujerc  not  at  ail,thcn  that 
rbe  Choulbliuc  ftillitnbtc&ebtiefrc ,  anb 
to  fuff  cr ,  anD  not  to  biiouj  Vbhcrcfo2e. 

13  DcaufiucreDmcanDfaiD,3i ibcut 
into  a  fo2eft  into  a  piamcanb  the  *  trees 
tooftc  tounfcll, 

14  2Cnb  faib,  Come,  let  bs  goe  anD 
make  \barrc  agamft  the  &ea,  thatit 
map  Depart  aibap  bcfo2e  bs,  anb  that 
Vbe  map  make  bs  11102c  ibooos. 

\<,  Xhcfloobsofthe&eaaifoinliRC 
matter  toottc  counfclt,  anD  faiD,Come, 
letbs  goe  bp  ano  fubDuc  the  tbooDsof 
the  plamcthat  there  alfo  ibe  map  mane 
bsanothercountrrp. 

16  Xhc  thought  of  the  lDooDibasm 
bamc,fo2  the  fire  came  anb  confumeD  it. 

17  Xhc  thought  of  the  flooDs  of  the 
S>ca  came  litmDtfc  to  nought, fo:  the 
fanD  ftooD  bp  anb  ftoppeD  them. 

18  ^fthonibertmDgenottibetlbirt 
thefctibo,  ibhom  lboulbcft  thou  begin 
totufti&c,  o2iDhomiboulDtft  thou  con^ 
Demnei 

19  31  anfiocrcD  anb  fate,  Slcnlp  it  is 
a  foolifh  thought  tl)at  thep  both  haue 
bcuifcb :  f  02  the  i  I  gtounb  is  giurn  bnto 
thtiDoob,anDtfjcfcaalfohathhispiace 
tobcarchisiflooDs. 

10  Xhcu  anfrocreb  he  me  anD  faib, 
Xhou  haft  giucn  a  right  lubgment ,  but 
ibhp  mbgeft  thou  not  thp fclfcalfo  < 
I  ?Lllli  il  foi 


ruiiian. 


'Iudg  p  8^ 
l.<hron.I5 


\\Or.tht 
tud. 

\\Or%lSixtt 


Apocrypha. 


I.Efd 


ras. 


Apocrypha. 


j|r'>»'j«< 


!jy  55- 

S.9  lolm  ; 
*  1. 1. cor  J 
'!- 


vhere. 


|  9-,  /!«. 


ii  fo:  UUe  as  i!  ttic  grounb  is  giucn 
bnto  the  Woob ,  ■*  the  fca  to  his  floobs : 
men  fo  'they  that  bWell  Upon  the  tartt) 
may  bnbcrftanb  nothing  ,  but  that 
which  is  upon  the  earth:  anb  hec  that 
b  wcileth  abouc  tlic  hcaucns.may  oncly 
bnbctltanb  tt)c  things  that  arc  abouc 
the  height  of  the  hcauens. 

2 1  Xbcn  anfnjcrcb  31 ,  anb  faib ,  31 
beftech  thec,  <£>3Lo:b,  let  me  banc  bit 
ocrftanbtng. 

23  forttwasnotmyminbe  to  be  cu- 
rious of  the  high  things ,  but  of  fuel)  as 
paffc  by  bs  bayly ,  namely  Wherefore 
llfracl  is  giucn  bp  as  a  reprocb  to  tDc 
heathen ,  anb  fo;  What  taufc  toe  people 
lbnom  thou  Daft  loueb ,  is  giucn  oner 
bntobngooly  nations,  anb  why  the 
ILaWc  of  our  forefathers  is  brought 
to  nought ,  anb  the  Written  <£oucnants 
conic  to  ||  none  effect. 

24  3nb  wee  paffc  away  out  of  the 
worlb  as  graffeboppers,  anb  our  life  is ! 
attomflimcntanbfcarc,  anb  We  arc  not 
worthy  to  obtamc  merrtc. 

25  nabat  Will  be  then  boe  bnto  bis 
^JanicWbercbyWcarccalleb^oftbcfe: 
things  banc  JFafltcb. 

i6  Xhcnaufracccbhcnic  ,anbfauv 
Xhe  more  thoufcarchcft,tf)c  more  thou 
(bait  marurilc ,  fo:  the  Worlb  baftctbl 
faft  to  paffc  away, 

27  anb  cannot  comprcbenb  tl)c! 
things  that  arc  pjonufco  to  the  rigbtr 
ous  in  tunc  to  come :  for  this  worlb  is 
ful  of  bnrightcoufncflJc  anb  infirmities. ! 

28  26ut  as  concerning  the  things 
Whereof  thou  af  Scft  me,3J  wu  tell  thec; 
fo:  the  cutlisfoWcn,  but  the  bcftrucrion 
thereof  is  not  yet  come. 

29  3Jfthcrcfo2cthatibh:chtsfoibcn, 
be  not  turncbbpfibc  boWne ,  anb  if  the 
place  lbhcrc  the  etui  is  foibcn  paffc  not 
away  ,  then  cannot  it  come  that  is 
fowen  with  goob. 

}o  f  0?  the  grainc  of cuill  feeb  hath 
bene  foibcn  mtbebcartof^oamfrom 
the  beginning,  anb  how  much  bngobli 
neffe  hath  it  brought  bp  bnto  this  tunc; 
anb  how  much  (ball  it  yet  bring  foortb 
bntill  the  1  tunc  of  tbrcflimg  come. 

31  pouber  now  by  thy  fclfc ,  how' 
great  fnut  of  Wiclicbncffc  the  grainc  of 
cuiifcco  hath  brought  fo:th. 

32  anb  when  the  cares  fballbcc  cut 
boWne,  Which  arc  Without  number, 
how  great  a  floorc  (bail  they  fill  i 

33  IThci^'infiucrebanbfaib.fioW 
anb  When  thai!  thefe  things  come  to 


paffc  i  wherefore  arc  our  yceres  fcVb 
anoeutii? 

34  anb  be  anftuercb  me,  faying,  Do 
not  thou batten  abouc  the  mott^igbett: 
for  thy  hade  is  inbauic  to  be  abouc  him, 
fo?  thou  haft  much  crccebcb. 

35  2T>iD  not  the  foulcs  alfo  of  the 
righteous  affcc  qttcttton  of  thefe  things 
in  their  chambers,  laying,  tyow  long 
fhail  3J  hope  on  this  fafbion  i  when 
commeth  the  fruit  of  tljc  floorc  of  our 
rcWarb  < 

36  3tnbbntotljefcthmgs||?anclthe 
archangel  gauc  them  anfrocrc ,  anb 
faib,  <£ucn  when  the  number  of  feebes 
is  fiilco  in  you :  for  he  hath  Weigfjeb  the 
Woribiuthcbailance. 

37  T$y  meafurc  hath  lice  mcafnreb 
the  times,anb  by  number  hart)  he  nunt 
brcb  the  times  anb  he  bocth  not  mooue 
norftirrc  them,  bntill  rhcfaibmearurc 
bcfulfillcb. 

3s  3Dicn  anfinctcb  31,  anb  faib,  © 
ILorbthat  bearcftruic,  cucn  Wcailare 
fulloftmpictie. 

39  anb  for  our  faUes  pcrabucnture 
it  is  that  the  floorcs  of  the  rtgbtcous 
arc  not  filleo,  becaufc  of  the  fmnesof 
them  that  bWciibpou  the  earth. 

4.0  5>o  hcanfiocrcb  mc,anb  fatb,Go 
thy  Way  to  a  Wman  With  chilbc ,  anb 
af  He  of  hcr,whcn  flic  bath  fulfiiicb  her 
nincmonctbs,tfbcrwombemay&ccpe 
the  birth  any  longer  Within  her  < 

41  Xhcnfaib5>/5olLorb,thattan 
flic  not.  anb  he  faib  bnto  mcc,  3Jn  the 
graue,  the  chambers  of  foulcs  arc  U&e 
tbewombcofawoman: 

41  for  littc  as  a  woman  that  tea* 
uaiicth,  ma&ctb  haflc  to  eft-ape  thenc^ 
ccffitie  of  the  trauailc :  cucn  fo  boc  thefe 
places  haftc  to  bctiucr  rhofc  things  that 
arc committcb  bnto  them. 

43  .from  the  begmmng  loose  Wbat 
thoubefireft  to  fecit fliaibtflicWcb  thec. 

4+  Xhenanfrocreb'j,  anb  faib,  3Jf 
•31  haue  founb  fauour  m  thy  fight,anb  if 
it  be  poffiblcanb  if  31  be  meet  therefore, 

45  Smew  me  then  whether  there 
be  more  to  come  tlicn  is  paft ,  or  more 
paftthenistotomc. 

46  nahatispaft'3JimoW  but  What 
isfortotomcTimioWnot. 

47  anb  he  faib  bnto  me,  S>tanbbp 
bpouthcrightfiocanb^fliaicrpounb 
the  fimilittibe  bnto  you. 

43  ^0  31  ftoob  anb  faw,anb bcholb 
an  hot  bunting  oucn  paffeb  by  before 
mcc:  anb  tt  happeneb  that  Wljen  the 
flame 


]  Itrtmtl. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.v. 


u°'. 


nxfirip;? 


found  with 
Qtca'.  wealth 


'Mat.  24.1 2 


||  Or  f  hat 

tboutrca- 
tiejlvpo* 
andfctfi. 


flame  lbas  gone  Dp,  31  loofeco ,  anb  be; 
bolb,  the  fmouc  remained  Bill. 

4.9  31ft cc  tbts  there  paffed  by  befojc 
me  a  lDatncdouoc,  and  fent  Dolbne 
much  raute  ibttb  a  (lo;me,  anb  lb!)  en 
the  d02tnicramc  lbas  pad,tbcb2opsrc^ 
maineddill. 

50  Xben  faib  be  bnto  me ,  Confiocr 
lbith  thy  felfc :  as  the  rame  is  mojc  then 
tbcd2ops,and  as  the  fitcisgr  cater  then 
the miotic :  but  tlje d2ops ano  the fmofeo 
temaincbebmb:fotbc||ctuantityibbicb 
ispad,bidmo2cercecdc. 

51  Xben3Jp2ayed,  andfayd,  {©ay 
"5  line ,  tbuiBcft  thou,  bnttll  flat  time  i 
||  ojVbbat  fbailbappcntntbofebaycs  < 

51  $canfttjercdmc,andfayd,asfo2 
the  tofecnsibbercof  thou  anted  mc,  3 
may  tell  thee  of  tbcm  in  part;  but  as 
toucbingthylife,3I  amnotfentto  fljcib 
tt)cc,fo?3J  00c  not  bnoibit. 

CHAP.   V. 

1  The  fignes  of  the  times  to  come.  2.3  Heaf- 
keth  why  God  choofing  but  one  people ,  did 
caft  them  off.  30  Heeis  taught ,  that  Gods 
lud-'ements  atevnfearchable:  46  and  that 
God  docth  not  all  at  once. 

€uettbclcsas  concerning 
tt)c  toKens,bcboloc,tbe 
dayes  (ball  come  that  tfje-p 
lDbieh  bibell  bpon  earth, 
.  ||  (ball  bee  taken  in  a  gtcat 
number,  anb  tt)c  lday  of  truetl)  (ball  be 
bidden ,  anb  tl)c  lanb  (ball  be  batten  of 
fait!). 

i  25ut* iniquitic  fljalbc  tnetcafeb  & 
bouc  that  ibljicb  noib  tljou  fced,o?  tljat 
tbou  bad  tjearo  long  agoe. 

3  anb  tt)e  lanb  ||  that  tbon  feed  nolb 
to  l)aue  tootc,  (bait  thou  fee  ibadeb  fub 
denly. 

4.  ffiutiftbcmodbigbgraunttbcc 
to  Hue,  tbou  fljalt  fee  aftet  tl)e  third 
trumpet,  that  the  Snmne  (bailfuddcn 
ly  (bine  agamc  in  the  ntgftt ,  anb  tlje 
#oonetb2iccintbeday. 

5  andbloobfbalb2opontofiboob, 
anb  the  done  a)all  gtue  hts  boue,  anb 
the  people  fbaibc  troublcb. 

6  anbcnenbcfbalrulelbbomtbcy 
looue  not  fcn  that  blbel bpon  the  earth, 
anbthefoulcs  (hall  tabe  their  flight  a 
ibay  together. 

7  anb  the  3>obomttt(b  Tea  (hail  cad 
out  fid) ,  anb  maHe  a  nopfc  m  the  night , 
lbhich  many  hauc  not  fenolbcn :  but 
they  (bail  all  ijeare  the  botce  thereof. 


Apocrypha. 


8  Xbcrc  (ball  be  a  tontuCon  alfo  m 
many  places,anb  the  Arc  Qjaibe  oftllfeut 
I  out  agame,  ano  thetbilbe  beads  (bail 
change  their  places ,  anb  mendraous 
lbomcn  (ball  bnngfooitb  inonders. 

9  and  fait  ibatcrsfljalibc  found  in 
the  fiucetc,  and  all  friends  (ball  dedroy 
one  another :  then  (ball  lbit  biDctt  frife, 
anb  bndetdandmg  ibitbb;aib  it  felfc 
mto  his  fecret  chamber , 

10  and  (ball  be  fought  of  many,  anb 
yet  not  be  found :  then  (ball  bnrtgbte; 
oufnefle  anb  tncontmcncic  be  multiply 
cb  bpon  earth. 

1 1  :©ne  lanb  alfo  (ball  afUc  another, 
anb  fay, gjsngbtcoumes  that  makcth 
a  man  righteous ,  gone  th:ough  tbcc< 
^nDitniallfay,jr2o. 

it  3t  the  fame  tunc  (ball  men  hope, 
but  nothing  obtamc :  they  (ball  labour, 
but  their  lbaycs  (ball not  ||  pjofper. 

13  %o  (bcib  thee  fucbtoBens3l  hauc 
leatic :  anoiftboulbiltpiayagamcano 
ibeepe  as  nolb ,  anb  fad  fcucn  bayes, 
tljou  d)alt  Ijcar e  yet  greater  things. 

14.  n:hcn3JaibaBeb,fiancrtrcme 
fearcfulncffc  ibent  through  all  my  bo- 
by ,  anb  my  nunbe  lbas  troublcb,  fo  that 
ttfamtcb. 

15  S>o  the  angel  that  lbas  tome  to 
taiac  lbith  me,  hcioc  me,  comfojtcb  me, 
ano  fct  mc  bp  bpon  my  fecte. 

i6  anb  in  the  feconb  night  it  came  to 
paffc,tbat£>aiatbirttbccaptaincoftbc 
people  came  bnto  nice,  faying ,  nabcrc 
had  thou  bcene;  anotbby  is  thy  coun- 
tenance fo  hcamc  i 

17  l&ioibcd  thou  not  that  gjfrael 
is  committed  bnto  thee ,  mtbc  land  of 
their  capttuitici 

is  ^Hptben,andcatcb2cad,andfo.Z5 
faBc  bs  not  as  the  fbcpbcacb  that  lea? 
uetb  his  flocuc  in  tbcljanbes  of  cruel! 
lbolucs. 

19  Xben  fayb^J  bntobim,©oetby 
ibaicsfrom  mcanb  tome  not  ntgb  me  : 
anb  be  heard  ibljat  3J  faib ,  and  ibent 
from  me. 

io  and  fo  3J  faded  feneu  dayes, 
nionmmg  and  lbccpmg ,  urc  as  Jllricl 
tbe  angel  commanded  mc. 

z\  and  after  fcucn  dayes,  fo  it  lbas 
tbat  thctbougl)ts  ofmy  bcartibcrc  be- 
ry  grieuousbnto  me  againe. 

ii  anb  my  foulc  rccoucrcb  the  fpint 
of  bnbcrdanbmg,ano  3  began  to  talUc 
lbith  the  mod  high  againe, 

ij  ano  faib,  <©Ho20,  that  beared 

rule  of  cucry  ibooo  of  the  cartb>  and  of 

Hill  3  all 


Or.fjkjJ. 


\Or,hrr- 


Apocrypha. 


1 1.  Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


|  Ortoutr. 


all  the  trees  thereof,  tDou  Daft  tljoCrn 
tDcconeonelptoine. 

24  3nto  of  all  lantos  of  tt)e  tbhole 
rb02lDtDonDaftchofentDcconepit:anto 
of  all  tDcfloitoerstDereof,  one  ILillie. 

25  3lnD  of  allthe  Depths  of  the£>ea, 
thou  haft  fillet*  thee  one  nnct :  ano  of  all 
butltoeto  cttics,thou  hafthallott>eto;S>ion 
tonto  fDpfclfc. 

16  3inDofailtDcfoules  that  arc  erea* 
tcto,  thou  haftnameto  thecone  3Douc: 
anto  of  all  the  eattcll  thatarc  matoc,thou 
haft  pjottttocto  rtjee  one  fljeepc. 

27  3lnto  among  all  the  ntulritutocs 
of  peoples,  trjoa  haft  gotten  thee  one 
people :  ant)  tonto  this  people  itohont 
thouiouetolt ,  thougauctta  latttthatis 
appzoneto  ofall. 

28  3ntonottj£>fLo2to,ttoDphattthon 
giuenthis  one  people  oucr tonto  many J. 
anto||topon  tDe  one  roottDafttDonpjc* 
pareto  others,  anoitoDp  Daft  thoufcat- 
tetcD  tljp  cmclp  one  people  among 
manp* 

29  SmDtDeplbhithtoitogaincfaptDp 
pjomtfes ,  anto  beleeucto  not  tifl?  coue- 
nants,UauetrobtoentIjcmDott)ne. 

30  31  tfton  tottoft  fo  much  hate  thp 
people ,  pctfhoulbcft  thou  pumfh  them 
ttnth  thine  ottntchantos. 

31  J5ott)  tttljen  3  Ijato  fpoltcn  fhcfc 
itoo2tos ,  tljc  3lngellthatcamctomethc 
nightafb2C,tt)asfcnt  tonto  me, 

32  3into  fatto  tonto  me,  ii?carc  me,  anto 
3  null  tnttcuct  thee ,  hearken  to  the 
thing  that3i  fap,?  3  fDaitclltljccmojc. 

33  3lnD3Jfaito,:S>peaKcott,mp!Lo2D : 
tDen  faito  !jc  tonto  mctDou  art  fo?c  trou* 
bleto  m  mtntoc  fo2  gjfratls  faUc:  lotted 
tljou  that  people  better  ttjett  Dee  tljat 
matte  them « 

34.  ^ntogifatto^oJLojto.butofberv 
grtcfc  Dauc  3Jfpotten:  jf02  mp  rentes 
pameme  cucrpDottre,  itoljtlc  3  labour 
to  tompjcljento  tlje  tttap  of  ttje  molt 
i?tgl),anto  to  fcene  out  part  of  ijtsiutogc; 
ment. 

3$  intone  faito  tonto  me,  Xhouranft 
not:  anto  3  faib,itonerfoK  fLo^rbrjcr- 
unto  itoas  3  borne  tDen  ?02tt)hpitoas 
not  mp  motDcrs  ttiombc  tDen  my1 
grane,  tDat  3  might  not  Dauefecne  tDc 
traucll  of  Jlatob ,  anto  tDc  ibcacifome 
topic  of  tDc  ftoritc  of  3Jfrael  t 

36  3lnto  Dc  faito  tonto  me,/3umbcr  me 
the  things  tDat  arc  not  pet  comegather 
me  togctDcr  tDc  b:oppcs  thatarc  feat- 
tcrcto  abjoato ,  mane  mcc  tDc  floltozes 
grcencagamc  that  arc  ttnth crcto. 


37  £>pen  me  the  places  tDat  arc  clo= 
fco2anto  lying  me  foiththettKntostljat 
in  them  arc  (hut  top,  (herb  mc  tDc  image 
ofatoopce:anD  tDen  3  ttnll  Declare  to 
tDce  tlje  tljmg  tljat  tljou  laboureft  to 
nuoitoc. 

38  2inb3ifaito,£>!Lo2to,tDatbcarett 
rule,  ltoDo  map  Knott)  tDefe  things,  but 
Dee  tljat  I)atl)  not  his  toitocllmg  itoitlj 
men* 

39  3s  fo?  me,  3  am  tonttiife :  Ijott) 
map  3  tDen  fpeaftc  of  tDefe  tljmgs 
rbljcrcofthQuafttcftmc; 

40  %ljcn  faito  Dc  tonto  mcHiftc  as 
thou  canft  tooe  none  oftrjefc  tljmgs  tDat 
3  Dane  fpo&cn  of,  cuen  fo  canft  tljou 
not  finto  out  mp  mtogement  02  tn  tlje  cnto 
the  lone  tljat  3  Dauc  pjomifcD  tonto  mp 
people. 

41  3lnto3Ifaito;bcDolto,£>|lo2D,pet 
art  tDou  ntgD  tonto  tDem  tDat  be  refer* 
ucto  till  tlje  cnto ;  anto  tbfjat  ujail  thcpDoc 
tljat  Dauc  beenebefoze  me,  02itoc(that 
be  nottOoz  tDep  tDat  ujall  tome  after  tos? 

42  ^ntoDe  faito  tonto  me,3ltt)illtHcn 
mp  tutogetnent  tonto  a  ting :  lilte  as 
tDcrc  is  no  flatmicffc  of  tDc  latt ,  cuen  fo 
tljerc  isno  froiftneflc  of  tlje  firft. 

43  55o3Ja»frocrctoanDfaito,CoultoO 
tljou  not  mahe  tljofe  tDat  haue  becne 
mace,  anto  benott),  anto  tDat  arc  foj  to 
come,  at  ontc,  tDat  tDou  mtgljtcft  fDcitoc 
tljp  tutogetnent  tDc  fooner  < 

44  XDcnanfmerctoDcmcantolaito, 
XDc  creature  map  not  Daft  atoottc  tDc 
matter  ,  nettDcr  map  tlje  tt)02lto  Dolb 
tDematontetDatuJaibccrcatttotDcrtn. 

45  Slnto'jratto^stDouDaftfaitoton* 
to  tDpfctuant,  tljat  tDou  itoDicD  guteft 
life  to  all ,  Daft  gtuen  life  at  once  to  tDc 
crcaturctDattDouDaftcreateto,  anto  tDc 
creature  bare  it :  eucn  fo  it  might  no  lb 
alfobcarc  tDem  tDat  noitobe  p/cfentat 
once. 

46  3nto  Dc  faito  tonto  me,  ^ffee  tDe 
ltoombc  of  a  itooman,  %  fap  tonto  Der,  Jf 
tDoub2mgeftfo?tD  cfjtlDJtn ,  VbDp  toocft 
tDouuttottogetDer ,  but  one  after  ano 
tDctip2ap  Der  tDerefo^c  to  bnng  fo?tlj 
tennecDtito^ett  at  once. 

47  3nb3Jfattov£>Dctannot:butniuft 
tooe  itbptoiltancc  of  nme. 

48  XDcnfatto  De  tonto  me ,  Cuenfb 
Dauc  3  gtuen  tDc  lbombe  of  tDe  earth  to 
tDofe  tDat  be  (often in  it,  in  tDetr  times. 

49  iTojlthcasapoungrDtltotnapnot 
b2tng  foztD  tlje  things  that  belong  to 
the  agco ,  cuen  fo  Dane  3  toifpofco  tlje 
tt)02itott)ljich3trcateD. 

5°  3nO 


|Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


p.Vj. 


\\  Or, circle   j 

of '  tktCArth. 


50  Hublfr affccb  anb  {aib,S>ccmg  thou 
haft  now  gmen  me  the  Vbay,3i  will  pro- 
ceed  to  fpcati  bcfozc  thee :  foj  oat  mother 
of  ibhom  thou  haft  toiDmethatthcis 
yong,D2aU)ethnoib  mghunto  age. 

51  ^eanfiocrcomcaiiDfaiD.^fftea 
iboman  that  bearethrijilbicn,  anb  fbee 
(Ijall  tell  thee. 

51  &ayl)ntohcr,n9hcrefo2earenot 
they  lbhomc  tljou  J)aft  noib  toought 
fo2th,  Ufte  thofc  that  lbcrc  befoje ,  but 
icfTcof  ftatutrcf 

55  2iibUKfl)ailanfiocrcthcc,Xhcy 
thatbebome  m  the  ftrcngth  of  youth, 
are  of  one  favtyon,  anb  they  that  arc 
borne  m  the  time  of  age  ( lbhcn  ttjc 
il)ombefatlctl))atc  otheriMc. 

54  ConfiDerthouthcrfo2calfo,hoil> 
that  yce  arc  IcCTc  of  ftaturc  then  thofc 
that  lbcrc  beftueyou. 

55  3nb  fo  are  the?  that  come  after 
youlcftcthcnyc,asthcctcatutesibhtch 
noil)  begin  to  be  olb,  anb  hauc  paffeb  o^ 
tier  the  ftrcngth  of  youth. 

56  Xhcn  faloe  j> ,  %oin,  3  befcech 
thee,  if  3J  hauc  founb  fauo?  m  thy  fight, 
flbeib  thy  fcruant  by  lbhom  tljou  Difitcft 
thy  creature. 

CHAP.   VI. 

i  Godspurpofe  is  eterrull.  S  The  next  world 
(hall  follow  this  immediatly.  13  What  (hall 
fallout  at  the  lalt.  51  Hee  is  promifed  more 
knowledge,  j8andieckoncthvpthe  workes 
of  the  creation,  57  and  complaineth  that 
they  haue  no  part  in  the  world  for  whome 
it  was  made. 

j3b!)cfaiDbntome,inthc 
beginning  lbhcn  pj  earth 
rbasmabe,befo2Cthebo2' 
DcrsofthciD02lDftooD,o? 
,  eucrthelbmbcsbleib, 
z  23cfo:e  it  tinmtwcD  anb  nghtnee, 
02  enct  the  founbauons  of  parabifc 
lDcreiaibe, 

5  2Sefo2c  the  fair  c  floibcrs  lbcrc  fecne, 
02  ener  the  moucablcpoibcrs  mere  cfta 
bun)cb,bcfo2epinmimerablcmuttituDc! 
of  2Cngels  lucre  gathcrcb  together,    | 

4  £>i  cucr  the  heights  of  the  aire 
lbcrc  Uftebbp ,  bcfo2e  the  mcafurcs  of 
the  ftrmament  tberc  namcb  ,02  cucr  the 
thimmcs  in  £>ton  iber  e  hot, 

5  3inD  ere  the  pjefent  yccrcs  lbcrc 
fought  out,  anD  02  cuer  the  munitions 
of  them  that  noib  finne  ibere  rurncb, 
befo2C  they  tbete  fcaleo  that  hauc  ga> : 
thcreb  faith  fQJ  a  trearurc : 

6  Xhcn  did  3  conlibcc  thefc  things, 


Apocrypha. 


anb  they  all  lbcrc  mabc  tlnough  nice  a 
lone,  anb  though  none  other :  bymte 
alfo  thev  (hall  be  cnbcb,*  bp  none  other. 

7  Xhenaufrocrcb^iaiiofaib.nabat 
(hall  bee  the  parting  afunoer  of  the 
times  1 02  lbhcn  fliau  be  the  cube  of  the 
firft,  anb  the  beginning  of  it  that  fot 
loibcth? 

8  2inbhcfaibbntomc,;froni31b2a 
ham  btuollfaac,  lbhcn  3lacob  anD€> 
Cau  lbcrc  b02iie  of  him,  *  Jacobs  hanb 
hclbj|ficftthcheeicof€fau. 

9  Jf02Cfauis  thceno  of  thcibo2ib, 
anb  "Jacob  is  the  beginning  of  it  that 
folloibcth. 

10  Xhc  hanb  of  man  ts  bctibtrt  the 
hecic  anb  the  hanb  :  other  qucftiou, 
Cfb2as,afBcthounot. 

1 1  It  3  anftaeteb  then  anb  faib,  <© 
!Lo  2b  that  bcarcft  rule,  tf3J  hauc  founb 
fauour  in  thy  fight, 

it  3  befcech  thec,  fljcib  thy  fcruant 
the  cnb  ofthy  to&ens,ibhercofthou 
fljcibcbft  mc  part  the  laft  night. 

13  £>o  he  antoereb  anbfaiD  bnto  me, 
S>tanbbp  bpon  thy  feete,  anb  hearea 
nughticfounbuig  boyec. 

14  3inb  it  (nail  be  as  it  ibere  a  great 
]|mofcon,butthcplateibhcrcthouftan; 
Deft,  (ball  not  be  moueD. 

15  3nD  thcrcfo2e  lbhcn  it  fpeabeth 
bcnotafraiD:f02thell)02Disofthecnb, 
anb  the  founoation  of  the  earth  is  btv 
bcrftooo. 

16  3mo  ibhy  i  becaufc  the  fpecch  of 
thefc  things  trcmbleth  anb  is  mooucb : 
foz  it  fenoibeth  that  the  c\m  of  thete 
things  inuft  be  changcD. 

17  3nb  it  happeneb  that  lbhcn  3HW) 
hcarbicUftooDbpbponmy  feet,  anb 
hearfeencb,  *  bchoib ,  there  ibas  a  boicc 
tliat  fpaHc,  anb  the  founD  of  it  tbas  Uhc 
thefoiuiDof  manyibatcrs. 

is  3tnbtt£aiD,  zBcholb,  the  bayes 
tome,  that  3  ibtll  begin  to  02aib  nigh, 
anb  to  bifit  them  that  bibcU  Upon  the 

earth, 

19  Xnw  lbill  begin  to  mane  mauituv 
on  ofthcm,ttmat  they  be  that  hauc  hurt 
bmuftly  ttnth  their  tmrightcoufncffe, 
anb  lbhcn  the  aftucnon  of  £uonfhalbe 

fnlfilleb. 

to  3Jnbii>hnttheiD02ibthatfl)aibe^ 
gin  to  baniniaibayfljall  bee  lifiiiifticb: 
then  ibill  3  flicib  thefc  tobens,  tlje 
boons  fliaibe  opencb  befo2c  the  fitma 
ment,  anb  they  ftjall  fee  all  together. 

ii  3nb  tlie  chilD2cu  of  a  ycetc  olbc 
fliau  fpcatscibiththetf  boytcs,  thcibo- 

uicn 


16. 

||  Or, from 
ihelrpn- 


1 1  Or,  cjrlli- 


I  Or  fcJli. 


Apocrypl 


II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


verf.^l. 


men  With  rbiibe  tljall  b:mgfoo2thbm 
timely chiibzen,  of  tb2ec  02  foure mo- 
neys oto :  anb  ttjev  Challliuc,  anbbce 
ralfeD  bp. 

2i  ^nDfuDbcnlyfliaithcfolbcnpla; 
ces  appeace  imfolbcn,  the  full  ftoicljou- 
fes  Hjaii  fuODcnly  be  foutib  empty. 

23  3no  the  trumpet  fbail  giuc  a 
founD.ibhtrh  ibhcn  cucry  man  heareth 
they  fhaibc  fuDDenly  afraiD. 

24.  3ittbat  tunc  (bail  frtetibes  fight 
one  agatnft  another  Iibc  enemies,  ano 
the  cacti)  than  fhmb  m  fcarc  ibith  tbofc 
that  bibcii  therein ,  the  fpnngs  of  trjc 
fountames  mail  (tens  frill ,  ano  in  rtnee 
houtcs  they  (ball  not  r  unnc. 

15  BDbofocttcr  rcmauicth  from  all 
tbcfcthatj  bauetoio  thccfbail  efcape, 
ant)  fee  my  faiuation ,  ano  the  enbe  of 
youtibo2io. 

26  3lno  the  men  that  are  rceetttco, 
mall  fire  it ,  lbho  rjaue  not  taftco  Death 
from  their  birth:  anb  the  heart  of  the 
inhabitants  fbaibc  thangeb ,  anb  tut 
neb  mto  another  meaning. 

17  5F  o.mnl  fhaibc  put  out,atibD«cit 
fhaibc  ciucnchcD. 

2s  3lsfo2fattl),  it(l)ailflouri(b,t02 
ruption  fhaibc  ouercomc,  5  the  trueth 
lbhichhath  bene  folonglbithoutfruit, 
fhaibc  bctlarcb. 

29  3(nD lbhcnhec  taikcD  ibith mec, 
bcholb ,  31  looucD  by  little  ano  littlcbp 
on  bun  beftne  Whom  31  Rood. 

30  ^nbthcfcUiojbsfaiohcbntome, 
3J  am  tome  to  (beib  tbec  the  tunc  of  the 
night  to  tome. 

31  3Jftbouibiltp2ayyctmo2e,ifaft 
feuen  Dates  againe,gi  (battel  thee  grc& 
teethings  |!bybay,tbcn  gibaucbcarb. 

31  ^02  thy  boitcishcarbbcfoKthe 
mo(t  i?igh :  fo2  the  mighty  hart)  fecue 
thy  righteous  Dealing,  he  hath  fecue  al 
fo  thy  chafhttc ,  lbbich  thou  baft  hao 
cucrfmce  thy  youth. 

33  3lnD  therefore  bath  be  fentmccto 
fbclb  thee  al  thefc  thmgs,anD  to  fay  bn 
to  tljcc ,  25e  of  gooo  comftnt,*  fcarc  not. 

3+  3nD  batten  not  lbitl)  the  nines 
rtjat  arc  pall,  to  tbinttc  bamc  things, 
that  thou  mayeft  not  haftcn  from  the 
latter  times. 

3<;  3luD  it  came  to  paffc  after  this, 
that  J\  \bcpt  agatne ,  ano  faftcD  feutn 
oayes  m  liltc  maner ,  that  gj  might  ful- 
fill the  tlwcibcchesibbicb  be  rolD  me. 

36  2ino  in  the  eight  night  lbas  my 
heart  bcreoibsthm  mec  agame ,  anD3J 
began  to  fpcalic  befiw  the  moft  J?iglj. 


37  5*02  my  fptnt  lbas  greatly  fct  on 
fire,ano  my  foulc  lbas  in  Diltrcffc. 

38  3nD  3  faio,  <0  IL02D ,  thou  fpa 
belt  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation, 
cuentbe  firft  bay,  9  faioclttbus,*  Hct 
heaucn  ano  earth  bee  maoe :  anb  tbv 
Vb02D  lbas  aperfect  ibo2hc. 

39  3lnD  tfjen  lbas  the  fpunt ,  anD 
oar&cncffc,  anD  filencc  lberc  on  cucry 
fiDMbcfounD  of  mans  boue  lbas  not 
yctfo2tucD. 

40  XhetuommanDcDfttbouafaitc 

light  to  tome  foozth  of  thy  treafurcs, 
that  thy  ibojfec  might  appcare. 

41  ^IponthcfctonbbaythoumaDcft 
the  fpint  of  the  firmament,  anD  com- 
manDebft  it  to  part  afunoer ,  ano  to 
mabc  a  Diuifion  bctlbtjrt  the  lbatcrs, 
that  the  one  part  might  go  c  bp ,  anb  the 
other  rcniainc  beneath. 

41  3Upon  the  tbtroc  Day  thou  DiDft 
tommaunb  that  the  lbatcrs  IhoulD  bee 
gatherco  in  the  fcucnth  part  of  the 
earth :  fire  parts  haft  thou  D21CD  bp  ano 
uept  them ,  to  the  intent  that  of  thefe 
fomc  being  plantcb  of  Gob  anb  tilleD, 
might  fcruc  thee. 

43  jf02asfoonc  as  thy  ib02D  lbcnt 
foo2th,thcibo2Kctbasmabc. 

44  f  0;  uumebiatly  there  lbas  great 
anb  innumerable  fruit,  ano  many  anD 
oiuer  s  plcafur  cs  fo2  the  tafte,  *  flolbers 
of  bnthattgcablc  colour ,  ano  ooouts  of 
lboubcrfull  fmell:  anb  this  lbas  bone 
thethirbbay. 

45  *  £lpon  the  fourth  bay  thou  com- 
manbeoft  that  the  S>unnc  fhoulD  flmic, 
ano  the  H0o one  giuc  her  light,  ano  the 
(tatrcs  fboulD  be  m  02bcr, 

46  3Cnb  gaurtt  them  a  charge  to  bo 
*fcruicebntoman,thatibastobcmabc 

47  31pontbefiftDay,tboufayDftbn 
to  thcfcucnrt)patt,*lbherc  thcibatcrs 
lbctc  gathcrcD  ,  that  tt  fboulD  b2ing 
foo2th  Uuutg  crcantrcs  ,  foulcs  anb 
fifljes :  ano  fo  it  came  to  paffc. 

4S  fo:  the  Dumbc  ibatcr ,ano  lbirtv 
out  life,  b2oughtfoo2thluung  things  at 
thecommanDcmcntof(5oo,thataipeO' 
pic  might  piaifc  thy  ibonD20usib02fes. 

49  Xhcn  Dibit  thou  02Deme  tibo  iv 
umg  cceaturcs,thc  one  thou  calicDft|!€< 
noch.ano  the  other  ILcuiathan, 

50  3ltiD  DiDft  feparate  the  one  from 
the  other :  fo2  the  fcucnth  part  ( namely 
lbhcrc  the  ibatcr  lbas  gathcrcb  togc 
thcr)nugl)t  not  ho!b  them  both. 

51  tlntoCnocb  thou  gauctt  one  part 
ibhtch  lbas  b2ub  bp  the  thirb  bay ,  that 
he 


Ccn. 


•Gen. 
"4- 


Cen.  1. 15. 

Jcut.  4. 19 


\\8themcrh. 


Apocrypha. 


ci 


ia 


p.vij. 


hefl)OulBautclmthcfaiucpart,iuhccc; 
marcathoufauahuics. 

51  z6ut  unto  ?Leuiathan  thou  5a. 
ucft  the  fcucntl)  part  ,uamcip  the  motft, 
ant)  haft  kept  hun  to  be  aeuourca  of 
ibhom  thou  mur,ana  lUDcn. 

53  tlpon  tlic  fvtt  Bay  thou  gaucft 
commatmacnicnt  bnto  the  earth ,  that 
bcfo2CthccitfbouiOb2uigfoo2thbcafts, 
cattell,anb  creeping  things: 

54  anD  after  thcfc,30amaifoU)hom 
thou  maacftkuBofaii  thy  creatures,  of 
hint  come  lBcc  all ,  ant)  the  people  alfo 
ibhomthouhaftchofcn. 

55  3UI  this  haue  31  fpokcnbcftnc  thee, 
£>  Ho;t),bccanfe  tljou  maacft  the  Uwia 
fo2  our  takes. 

56  3Csfouhe  other  people  Mitch  al 
fo  eomc  of  3aam ,  thou  haft  fata  that 
they  arc  nothing ,  but  be  like  bnto  fpit 
tie,  ana  haft  itkcnca  tlic  abun&ancc  of 
them  bnto  a  B2op  that  fallcth  frotn  a 
bcffclU 

57  3mBnom,£>ILo2B,bcholB,fhcfc 
heathenjbrnch  hauceucr  bccnrcputcB 
as  nothing ,  haue  begun  to  be  loiaes  0 
tier  bs,  ana  to  acuourc  as : 

5S  2Sutiacc  thy  people  (tbhomthou 
haft  cailea  thy  ftrft  borne,  thyoncly  be- 
gottcn,anBthyfcrucntloucr)aregiucn 
into  their  hanas. 

59  Uf  the  111021a  noia  be  maae  foz 
our  fakes,  lBhyBociBc  not  pottcuTc  an 
inheritance  tbith  the  lbo/ia  <  hoib  long 
(hail  this  cnautci 

CHAP.    VII. 

4  The  way  is  narrow,  u  When  it  wasmadc 
narrow.  18  All  (lull  die  and  rife  ag.iine.  3; 
Chrift  fhall  fit  in  iudgeraent.  46  God  hath 
not  madePaiadile  in  vaine,  62.  &  is  merciful. 


E£&Yb  to  tuec  the  ^ugcl  ibhtch 
&£&  tiao  becne  fent  bnto  nice 
thcmgl)tsafo2c. 

1  3ma  hefata  auto  me,  tip  efajas, 
ana  heare  thciaojacsthafj  am  come 
totciithcc 

3  3ina  3 lata, £>pcafce on,my  Coa. 
IChcn  fata  he  bnto  me,  XhcS>eais  fet 
in  a  Unac  plate,  that  it  might  be  aeepe 
ana  great. 

4-  zSMputthccafcthcentrautctbetc 
nar roia,  ana  like  a  nucr , 

5"  rcmo  then  couiagoe  into  the  £>ca 
to  look?  topon  it ,  ana  to  rultit  <  3Jfhcc 


Apocrypha. 


||  Or, ft  erf  e 


iliCiit  not  tinough  theuarcoib,  ijoili 
couia  he  come  into  the  bioaa ; 

6  Xhere  is  alfo  another  thing.  21 
cityisbiumca,auBfctbponab:oaBrtcia, 
aubtsfull  of  all  gooa  tilings. 

7  Xhccntranccthcrcofisnarrom, 
ana  is  fetmaijaangcrotts  place  to  fall, 
like  as  if  there  mere  a  fire  on  the  right 
hano.anaontheicftaaccpcttiatcr. 

s  3na  one  only  path  bctiaccn  them 
both,  ciicn  betibecnc  the  fire  ana  the 
water,  fo  fcaii  that  there  couia  but  one 
man  goc  there  at  once. 

9  31f this  city  noib  lacre guictt  bn 
to  a  man  fo2au  inheritance,  tfhencner 
Alan  pafTc  the  aangcr  fet  before  it ,  holb 
fliail  he  r rccmc  this  inheritance  < 

io  3mo<3JfaiB,3Jtisfo,?Lo2B.  SOjcn 
fata  he  bnto  me,  <£ucn  fo  alfo  ts  3f  fracis 
po2tion: 

1 1  2Secaufcfo2  their  fafccs^J  maae  the 
Vbo2ia :  anblBhcn  3iaam  tranfgrcffea 
my  Statutes ,  then  lbas  accreea  that 
nolbiSBonc. 

n  Xhcntt>crcthc  entrances  of  this 
luozia  maae  narroia,  full  offo2rotti 
ana  trauailc:  they  arc  but  fcra  ana  cum, 
full  ofpcriis.anabcry  paiurfull. 

13  5fo2  the  entrances  of  the  ||  ciatt  ||< 
ibo2ia  iberc  ibtac  ana  fure,ana  brought 
imni02tall  fruit. 

14.  3?f  then  they  that  luiciabout  not 
to  enter  thefc  ftrait  ana  bamc  things, 
they  can  ncuer  rcceute  tljofe  that  arc 
iaioebpfo2them. 

15  0o\M  therefore  limy  Bifguietcft 
thouthyfclfc ,  feeing  thou  art  butaco^ 
rupnblc  man  <  ana  ibhy  art  thou  moo; 
uea  ,iuhcteas thou  art  but  mo2tau  < 

i6  nahy  haft  thou  uot  confiacrca  in 
thy  mmae  this  thing  that  is  to  tomc.ra* 
thcr  then  that  iBhith  is  p2cfcnt< 

17  lLhenanftnercB3J,anBfayB,  & 
Ho2a,thatbcarcftruic,thonhafto2aap 
nca  m  thy  *  Itaia ,  that  the  righteous 
fhouia  tnhetitc  thefe  things,  but  that 
the  angoBly  fboulBpcrtfh : 

18  ^cucrthcleffcthe  righteous  fbai 
fuffcr  ftrait  thtngs,  ana  hope  fo?  unac : 
fo2  they  that  haue  aonc  Vbickeaip ,  haue 
fuffcrca  the  ftrait tljmgs ,  anapct  fhail 
notfecthcttnae. 

19  5tnahefaiabntome,Hhereisno 
tuoge  about  <Soa,  ana  none  that  Ijath 
bnaerftanamgaboucthchiglieft. 

20  5fo2  there  be  many  that  pcnfl)  m 
tntslifc,  becaufc  thcvacfpircthcllalbc 
of  C5oa  that  isfetbcfo2C  them. 

21  foi  <5oa  Ijath  gmen  ftrait  com- 

manae 


'Dcut.8.1 


Apocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


'Gen.  1 3. 
13. 

"Exod.jt. 
II. 


mat  tbement  to  fuel)  as  came,  ibbat  tljcp 
(boulbboc  to  lute,  turn  as  tbcp  tame, 
anD ibbat  they  (IjouiD  oblcrur  to auotb 
puiuflimciit. 

n  jfreuerfbelcflctbcylbcrcnotobej 
bienttontobun,  but  fpabeagamftfjtm, 
anb  lmagtncb  Dame  tljmss: 

i}  3lnbbecciucbtljemrclttcsbyfbctr 
lbitncbbccbs,anbfayb  of  tljc  module, 
tbatlje  is  not,  anb  tmeib  not  fits  lbatcs. 

24.  25ut  l)is  ?laib  baue  they  bcb> 
feb.anb  bctucb  Ijts  eoucnantS;  tn  bis  fta- 
rutes  Ijaue  they  not  beenc  faiujfuli,  anb 
Ijauc  not  pcrfo?meb  bisibo?Bcs. 

15  3lnbtbcrfo?e<£fb?as,fo?tbcemp< 
ttcare  emptic  tbings,anb  fo?  tt)eful,ace 
tbe  full  things. 

16  25cl)otb,tI)etime  iballcomctljat 
tl)cfc  toltcnsibbicb  3  bane  tolb  thee, 
(bail  tome  topaffc,  anb  tljcb?tbcfbali 
appcarc,  anb  fljt  tommmg  fo?tb  (bail 
be  fecne,  tljat  noib  ts  ibitbb?aibcn  from 
tbceartlj. 

17  3nb  ibbofoeucr  ts  bcliuereb 
From  tljc  fo?cfaib  cutis ,  (ban  tee  my 
ibonbcrs. 

18  5foi  my  fonnc  3Iffus  (ball  bcre^ 
ucaicb  lbttrj  trjofc  that  be  lbitb  bim,an& 
tDcvtljat  rcmatne  (ball  rctoycelbitbm 
four  cbunb?cby  ceres. 

19  after  tijefeyecrcs  (ball  my  tonne 
Cljjift  bte,anb  all  men  that  rjaue  life. 

30  3nbdjclbo?lb(baiibeturncbtn' 
to  the  olb  filcnccfcucnbaycs,  itBcasin 
tlje  ||  fo?mcr  tnbgtmcnts :  fo  tljat  no 
matt  (ball  rematne. 

31  3tnb  after  feucttbayes,  tbc  ibo?lb 
tbat  ret  aibaBctlj  not  (ball  be  ratfeb  bp, 
anb  til  at  (nail  bit,  tbat  ts  corrupt. 

31  3nb  tlje  cartljfball  reflo?ctbo(c 
tfjatarc  aflecpcmber,anb  tofballtbe 
buQtbofctbatblbclltn  fflence,  anbtl)e 
fecrct  places  (ban  bciiuer  thofc  toules 
tljat  lbcrccommittebbntotbcm. 

33  3ltib  the  mottbtgb  (ball  appcarc 
bpontl)efeateoftubgcment,anbmifC' 
ric  (bail  paflcaibay,  anb  tljc  long  fuffc; 
ring  (ball  baue  an  cnb. 

34.  But  tubgement  onely  (ball  re- 
matitc,trttctbfljallttanb,aub  faith  (ball 
ibatcftrong. 

35  anbthelboiBcfliallfollolb,  anb 
the  rcibarb  (nan  be  fbcibcb ,  anb  the 
goob  uctUB  (ball  be  of  fo?ce,  anb  ibtclteb 
beebs  (hall  bcarc  no  rule. 

36  Xbcn  faib3 ,  *3ib?abam  pM>>cb 
firft  fo:  tDc  £>obomttes,  anb*£0ofcs  foj 
tDc  fatljcrs  tljat  fmncb  tn  ttje  ttiilbcr- 
neffe: 


37  3tnb  Jems  after  ljunfo?3fracl 
mtljetimeot:!2cljan, 

38  3nb  Samuel  ;  anb  Dauib  fc>2 
trje  beftcuctton  :  anb  *  Solomon  fo? 
t ocm  that  flioulb  come  to  til c  fan tmary. 

39  anb*  deltas  fo?tbofe that  met 
ucb  tame ,  ?  fo?  tljc  bcab  that  hec  might 
itue. 

40  2nb  *  <£5ccbias  fo?  the  people  tn 
the  time  of  Sennacherib :  anb  many  fo? 
many. 

41  <f  uen  fo  noib  feeing  co2ruptton  is 
groiben  bp,  anbVbtcBCbncflc  tnereafeb, 
anb tbe  righteous  bane  p?aycb  fo?thc 
bngobly :  ibhercfo?c  (ball  it  not  befo 
noib  alio? 

41  $?eanfrocrcbmeanbfaib,Xbts 
p?cfent  life  is  not  the  cnb  lbbercmucb 
glo?y  both  abtbc  i  tijcrcfo?c  banc  tbey 
p?aycb  to?  the  lbca&e. 

43  26ut  the  bay  of  boomc  (ball  be 
tbc  cub  of  this  time,  anb  tljc  beginning 
oftbctmtno?tautyfo?tocomc,ibbccem 
to?rupttontspafr. 

44  3Jntcmpcranctc  is  at  an  cnb ,  tn 
fibeltty  is  tut  off  ,  nghteoufncfle  ts 
groiben, anb  tructb  tsfpzungbp. 

45  3Cbcn  tt)all  no  matt  be  able  to 
fauc  b(m  tljat  tsbefrroreb,  no?  to  op- 
p?effc  btm  that  Ijatb  gotten  the  bicto?? 

46  'Janfroercbthcnanbfaib,Xhts 
is  tup  ftrft  anb  laQ  fapmg ;  njat  it  bab 
beenc  better  not  to  baue  gtucn  the  ear  tb 
bnto3lbam  :  o?clfclbhcn it  lbas  gtucn 
btm ,  to  \)Mt  reftcaincb  bun  from  fin? 
tung. 

47  :fo?  Ibbat  p?oftt  is  it  fo?  men 
noib  m  this  pzcfcntnmc  to  liucmbca^ 
utneffe,  anb  after  beart)  to  Iookc  fo?pu? 
ntfljmctit  < 

48  £>  tbott  ^bam ,  rbbat  bad  rbou 
bone^fo? though  it  ibas'tboutbatfin-1 
neb,  thou  art  not  fallen  alone ,  but  ibe 
ailtbattomeoftbcc. 

49  Jf 0?  ibbat  p?ofit  ts  it  bnto  bs ,  tf 
there  be  pzomtfeb  bs  an  tmmo?taU 
nine,  ibbcras  ibe  ijauc  bone  tbc  ibo?BS 
tljat  b?tngbcatb< 

50  ^nbtbattbrtrisp:omifcbbsan 
eueriamngbope,  lbbcrcas  our  fclucs 
bctiigmoft  lbtcftcbarcmabc  bamc< 

5 1  Stub  tbat  there  are  lapb  bp  fo?  bs 
blbcllmgs  ofbcaitb  anbfafctp,lbljcro 
as  ibe  bane  Uueb  ibtchcbiv  i 

51  %nn  tbat  tbc  glo?p  of  tbc  mod 
btgb  ts  Sept  to  befenb  themibbtcb  banc 
Icb  1 1  a  ibar  j>  lifeibhcrcas  ibe  baue  lbai= 
BCbtntbcmolt  lbtcftebibaycsofall; 

53  ^nbtbattbere  fl)oulb  be  (berbcb 

a 


[Or^Archtr. 

■7-i.cfaro. 

6. 1 4. 

*  l.King.  17 
11.  and  iS. 
42.45. 


•j.Kin 


"Rom.j. 
IS. 


Orjcblft 

Ufi. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vuj. 


A 


\\OrJulm, 


|  Or,  totem 


'Dcut.30 
19. 


'Rom.2.4, 


\\Or,trt.i 
t,i. 

\Orjorr- 
tixipn. 


aparabifc  lbhofcfruite  cnbutcth  fozc 
uer,  wherein  is  !|fccurmc  ano  mcDtnuc, 
fitl)  lbc  fljall  not  enter  into  it  < 

5+  jTo:  ine  hauc  ibalttco  mbnplea 
fant  plates. 

55  3in&  that  the  fates  of  thcmibhich 
hauc  bfcbabftmcucc,  (hail  fl)meabouc 
tl)e  ftarces,U)hcrcas  one  fates  (hall  bee 
biacHccthcnbarttcneflc; 

56  f  oj  VDljilc  lbc  liucb  ano  commit 
tcmniciuine.ibcconfiDcrcbnotthatibc 
thoulo  begin  to  fuffcr  fo:  it  after  Death. 

57  Xhcnanfmercb  Heme  ant)  faibc, 
Xhis  is  the  SI  conbition  of  tl)c  batten, 
lbhich  man  that  ts  bonic  bpon  the 
earth  fhall  fight, 

53  Xhanfhcbc  oucrtoinc,  he  (hall 
fuffccasthouhaftfai&,biitif  he  get  the 
tnttojic,  he  (hall  retcutc  the  thing  that 

3}  far- 

59  jfo:  this  is  the  life  ibhcrcof  j#o 
fes  fpaftc  bnto  the  people  lbhtlc  hce  u 
uc&,fapiug,*Choofcthcclifcthatthou 
mapcttliuc. 

60  jiScucrthclcfTc  tliev  bcieeuco  not 
him,no2pctthcp2ophctsaftcrhim,  no 
1102  me  lbhich  hauefpofeen  bnto  them, 

^Xhatthcrcthouuniotbcfuehhea 
umefle  m  their  ocflrumon,  as  (hall  bee 
top  ouct  them  tljat  arc  pcrftuaocD  to 
faluation. 

6i  5J  anfruercD  then  ano  faioe,  3J 
auoib,1Lo2D,thatthcmoftt?ictscaiicD 
mcrtifuli,  in  that  he  hath  merry  bpon 
them,  lbhich  arc  not  vet  tome  into  the 
Uwlb, 

63  2inobponthofcalfothatturocto 
hisliaib, 

6+  3nb  that*  he  ispartcnt.anD  long 
fuffcrcth  thofethat  hauefmneb,  as  his 
creatures, 

6<,  3lu&  thathetsbountiftill,  fo: htc 
is  rcabp  to  giuc  llihcre  it  nccbeth, 

66  31iu>  that  is  of  great  mcrcic,  ftn 
he  multiplicth  mo2e  ano  mo2C  mercies 
to  them  that  arc  pjefent,  anD  that  are 
pad,  *alfo  to  them  ibhtch  ace  to  come. 

6n  foi  if  he  (hall  not  mulnplic  his 
mecctcs,  the  UwlD  lboulD  not  tontmuc 
tbiththcmthatinhctitthcrctn. 

6S  3inDhcparDoticth  foi  if  hectno 
notroofhisgooDncttc.thatthcpibhith 
hauetomnuttcoiniciiuticsmightbeea' 
febof  them,  the  ten  thoufano  part  of 
men  fhoulD  not  rcmamc  lining. 

69  3nDbeing'3hiogc,tfhcfl)OUlDnot 
fojgiue  them  that  are  ||  cureDibtth  his 
U)020,anD  put  out  the  multituDe  of  jton 
tenttous, 


pocrypha.] 


70  Xhcrc  (houlD  bee  bcrpfcibe  left 
pcraDueiitutcm  an  innumerable  nml 
tituDc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  Many  created,  but  few  laued.  6  Hee  asketh 
why  God  ddtroyeth  hisowne  worke,  l6  and 
prayeth  God  to  looke  vpon  the  people  which 
onelv  feme  htm.  41  God  anfwercth  [hat  all 
feedconimetllHottoGod,  51  andthatglor\ 
is  prepared  for  him  and  futh  like. 

#DhcanfiucrcDmc,fap 
ing,Xhemoflftia;hhath 
inabc  this  ibo:lo  fo:  ma 
np,  butthcibo2iDtocomc 
f02  fclbc. 

i  3  ttnli  tell  thee  a  fimtlituDc ,  <£f 
D2as,  3ls  lbhcn  thou  af  heft  the  carth.it 
(haiifap  bnto  thee,  that  it  gmcth  much 
niolDibhcrofcarthcnbciTcisarcmaDc, 
but  litlcDuft  that  goloc  commcth  of:  c 
ucu  fo  is  y  coucfe  of  this  p:efcnt  11102ID. 
3  *  Xhcrc  bcmanpcrcatcD,  butfeuj 
fljall  be  faucD. 

+  &oanftbcreD3JauDfaiD, Swal- 
low then  Doibne  Q  mp  fouic ,  btiDcr 
(taiiDing.anDDeuourcibifcDonic. 

<,  Jro2  thou  haft  agrcco  to  giuc  care, 
ano  art  tolling  to  pjophefic :  fo:  thou 
haft  no  longer  fpatc  then  onelp  to  hue. 

6  £)ILo2D,ifthoufuffcniotthi'fcr 
uant  that  lbe  map  p2ap  befo2e  thee,  anD 
thoulgmcbsfccDbnto  our  heart,  ano 
tulturc  to  our  biiOcrftanDing  ,  that 
there  map  come  fruit  of  it,  hoibcfhaii 
each  man  hue  that  isco2rupt,  ibho  bca 
rcth  the  place  of  a  man? 

7  Jfo2  thou  act  aionc,atiDibc  ail  one 
lb02&cman(hip  of  thine  hanbs,  liftc  as 
thou  haft  faiD. 

3  JF02  lbhcn  the  boDp  is  faflnoncD 
noVb  m  the  mothers  lliombc,  anb  thou 
giucft  it  members,  ||thp  creature  is  p2c 
feritct)  in  fire  ?  luatccano  nine  months 
flocth  thp  ll)02l3cnianfl)ip  enbure  tljp 
cr  eamr  e  inhich  is  crcateo  m  her. 

9  23ut  that  ruhich  uccpeth ,  anb  is 
Hcpt,fl)allbothbcp2cfcruc&:anbibhcn 
the  tunc  tommcth ,  the  lbombc  p2cfcr 
ucb.beliucrcth  bp  the  things  that  grcib 
m  it. 

10  ;Po2  thou  haft  comtnanbeb  outof 
the  partsof  the  bobp,  that  i5tofap,out 
of  thcb2caftsmillicto  bcguicn,  lbhich 
ts  the  fruit  of  the  b2eafts, 

1 1  Xhat  the  thing  lbhich  is  fafljio- 
ncb,  map  bee  nourifljcb  fo:  a  time ,  till 
thoubifpofeftitto  thp  mcrcp. 

ii  %i)tm  bjoughtcft  tt  bp  until  thp 

ngh 


vMjt.:o. 
16. 


1 1  Orr  to  {iuc 


\\0rt  borr  u 
ihebodyU- 

fiioncd. 


\ 


Apocrypha. 


ILEfd 


ras. 


Apocrypha. 


»  lob  IO.S 

pfil.130. 

14.6.C 


rtgbtcoufneffe ,  anb  nourturebft  tt  in 
tt)p  ILaiP ,  anb  refoitmebft  it  Hurt)  thp 
lubgemcnt. 

1  j  3lnb  thou  (bait  motfiftc  tt  as  tb? 
creature,anbcuttcKcnitastbi>tt)02Be. 

14  3jf  therefore  thou  fliait  beftrov 
bim  tbftict)  lbitb  fo  great  *  labour  tuas 
falbtoneb,tttsaneartetbingtobeo2bci- 
ncbbi'thpCommaunbement,  that  the 
thing  lPbicb  ttias  maoe  might  be  p?c= 
ferueb. 

15  i!5oU)  therefore ,  &02D ,  3J  ttiili 
fpea&e(toucbtuginaningenerali,tbou 
ImolPeft  beft )  but  touting  tbp  people, 
fojrbbofefattCJamfo:?, 

.  16  3lnb  fo2  thine  inheritance ,  fo: 
Vbbofe  taufc  3  mourncanb  fo:  gjfrael, 
fo?  lbhomSJ  am  bcaup ,  anbfo:  'Jacob, 
fo:  lbnofc  me3  amtcoubleo: 

17  Xhcrefojc  ttnll  3  begin  to  p:ap 
befinetbee,  foi  mpfclfc,  aim  fo2  them :  1 
fat  3  fee  the  falles  of  PS  that  DiDcll  tn 
thciano. 

18  But^baucbeatbtbefttiiftneffe 
of  the  ^ubge  tbhtth  is  to  tome. 

19  xherefoje  hcare  my  Popce  ,anD 
bnberftanb  mp  ttwbes ,  anb  3  (ball 
fpeatte  bcfo?c  thee:  this  is  the  beginning 
oftbcnwDsof  cftwas,  before  bcipas 
ta&enDp:anb3ifaiD; 

20  ^lLo:b,  ZboutbatbiPctlcftin 
eucciaftingncs,tbbicb  bebolbeftfrom  a- 
bouc,things  tn  the  bcauen,f  in  the  aire, 

21  aahofe  3Cb2onc  ts  mcfhmablc, 
llthofc  glojptnav  not  be  compjebenbeb, 
before  whom  the  bofts  of  3ngclsftanb 
Itoith  trembling, 

22  (nabofcferuice  is  conucrfanttn 
ttnnu  ano  fire,  )lbbofe  flwbis  ttuc,anb 
fapmgs  conttant ,  tt)bofc  Commanbc- 
ment  is  ftr  ong,  anb  ojbmancc  fear  efull, 

23  nabofcloo&etwietbbptbebcptbs, 
anb  mbignation  mafectb  the  momi* 
tames  to  melt  aiDap,  iDbtcbtbetruetb 

tbitneffctb: 

24  £>  heare  the  p:aper  of  tbp  fer= 
uant,anb  giue  earc  to  tlje  petition  of  thy 
creature. 

25  3Fo:  tt)b»ie  3  Hue ,  3  ihill  fpcafee, 
anbtblongas  3  baue  Pnberftanbmg, 
3JU)Uanfioere. 

26  £>  loofec  not  Ppon  the  Cnuesof 
tbp  people :  but  on  them  tt)l)icb  fetue 
tbcemtruetb. 

27  ficgarb  not  tbciPtcHebmuenh 
ons  of  the  heathen :  but  the  befire  of 
tboretbat  ftcepe  tbyZefhmomcsinaf* 
factions.  ,    , 

23  Xhmfec  not  Ppon  thofc  that 


bauciDaittcb  fauteblp  before  thee :  but 
remember  them ,  IPhtcb  acco:bmg  to 
tbp  Vbiil  hauc  RuoiPcn  tbp  fear  c. 

19  Hct  it  not  bee  tbpiDilltobcftroy 
tljcm,  lPbicb  hauc  liucb  U&e  beads :  but 
to  loofce  bponthem  that  baue  clcatcly 
taught  tbyJUuj. 

jo  Xabe  thou  no  tnbigttation  at 
them  ibhicb  are  beemeb  U)o;fe  then 
beafts:  butloue  them  that  alibay  put 
their  truft  tn  tt)p  righteoufncfCe ,  anb 
giojy. 

31  5?o:tPe  anb  our  fathers  ||  Doe  lan- 
guid) of  nub  btfeafes;  butberaufeofDs 
nnners,thou  (bait  be  taiieb  merctfutl. 

32  Jfoz  if  thou  I  haft  a  befire  to  baue 
mere?  topon  hs ,  thou  (bait  bee  callcb 
mernfull ,  to  Ps  namely ,  that  haueno 
Vboihes  of  rigbteoufneflc. 

?3  5fo.:  the  tuft  rbhtch  baue  many 
gooDttwacslaycDbp  rbitbtbcc,  (ball 
out  of  their  ottmc  DeeDcs  recciue  re- 
rbarb. 

34  foi  ibhat  is  man  that  thou 
(bouibeft  tafee  bifpleafure  at  bun*  02 
\Dbat  isacojrupnble  generation,  that 
thou  (bouibeft  be  fo  bitter  toiharb  it  < 

35  ^ojintruetbtberctsnomana; 
mongtbem  that  be  borne,  but  he  hath 
Dealt  lDicttebly ,  anb  among  the  fattb- 
fuii,thercis  none  tbljich  bath  not  bone 
amide. 

36  3f02intbiS,£>1Lo2D,  thy  rights 
oufneffe,  anb  thy  goobneffe  djalbebc 
clareb,  if  thou  be  mernfull  bnto  them 
which  banc  nottbe||tonfibenceofgoob 
»jo;hcs. 

37  XhcnanfroereDbemecanbfaib, 
Somethings  haft  tbou  fpobcnarigbt, 
anb  accojbmg  Pnto  i\yg  tt)o:bs  tt  (balb  e. 

38  $01  tnbteb  3  Unll  not  tbtn&e  on 
the  bifpofmon  of  them  ibhitb  hauc  (in* 
ncbbcfoie  bcath,  before  uibgement,  be* 
fo?ebcftruction. 

39  But  *  3  ttrtll  rciopce  oner  the  M 
pofinon  of  the  ngbtcons,  anb  3  rbii  re* 
member  alfo  their  pilgrunage ,  anb  the 
faiuation ,  anb  the  terbarb  tjat  tl^cv 
(ball  baue. 

40  ntfee  as  3  baue  fpoben  nouj,ro 
(bailittomctopafte. 

41  ifojastbebufbanbrnaurorbctb 
mutb  feeb  Ppou  the  grounb ,  anb  plan- 
tetb  manp  trees ,  anb  vet  the  thing  that 
isfolben  goob  mbisfcafon,  tonunetb 
not  bp,  neither  Doctb  all  that  tsplantcb 
taHc  root :  ctten  fo  is  it  of  them  that  arc 
foihen  in  the  UwlD  ,tbev  fl^ail  not  all 
befaucb. 

4*  3 


•f-'M'. 


!|  Be  wtiLng. 


*  1.  King.  $. 
46. and  z. 
chto.6.  j  6. 


"Gen. 4. 4. 


Apocrypha. 


\\0r,gr,u»c. 


"Pfal.14.1. 
and  j  j.t. 


4-z  3}anfaicteb  then ,  anbfaib,  3?f 
3J  haue  founb  grace,  let  me  rpcalte. 

4 j  %ikca$  thehufbanbmansfccbc 
penfheth,  tftt  tome  not  top ,  anb  recetuc 
not  the  ramcin  one  fcafon ,  o?  if  tljerc 
tome  too  much  rainc  anb  to?rupt  it : 

44  <£nen  fo  pertfbeth  man  alfo  rbhtth 
is  fo?meb  ibtth  tbp  hanbs,anb  is  taiieb 
thine  oibne  image,  betaufc  thou  art  uue 
bnto  him,  fo?  lbbofc  fane  tbou  haft 
mabcail  things,  anb  Ittteneb  him  bnto 
the  huf  banbmans  fcebe. 

45  25enotrb?othnjithbs,  but  fpare 
rrjp  people,  anb  haue  mercy  bpon  thine 
oibne  inhentantc :  fo?  thou  att  mcrri- 
full  bnto  tbptrcaturc. 

46  Xhenanfracrebhcme,anbfaib, 
Xfjmgs  p?cfent  ar  e  fo?  the  p?efent ,  anb 
things  to  tome,  fo?  fuel)  as  be  to  tome. 

47  3Fo?  thou  tommeft  facte  tbo?t, 
ti)at  thou  (boulbeft  be  able  to  lone  mp 
ttcatute  mo?ctl)en  3J :  but  31  haue  oft 
times  b?att>en  nigh  bnto  thee ,  anb  ton* 
to  it,  but  ncuet  to  the  bnrigbtcous. 

48  3Jnthisaifothouactmarueilous 
befo?e  the  moft  high; 

49  3n  that  thouhatt  humbleb  thp 
feifeasttbecommeththet,anbbaftnot 
mbgeb  th?  felfe  ibo?tbv  to  be  much  glo* 
tificb  amongthe  righteous. 

50  3fo?  man?  gtcat  mifcties  (ball  be 
bone  to  tbcm,that  in  the  latter  time  thai 
btbcll  in  the  ttwlb ,  betaufethep  bauc 
lbai&eb  in  great  p?ibc. 

51  But  bnberftanb  thou  fo?  thp  fclfc, 
anb  fceHc  out  the  glo?p  fo?  fucU  as  be 
line  thee. 

5x  jfo?  bnto  vou  is  0atabifc  ope* 
neb,  the  tree  of  lifcispiantcb,  trje  time 
to  tome  is  p?cpatcb,  plcntcoufncfTe  is 
mabctcabp,  atitieis  builbcb,  anb  tell 
is  allotbeb,  vea  perfect  goobneflcanb 
Unfebome. 

5$  Xhetootofcuilisfealcbbpfrom 
you ,  tbeaftenefle  anb  the  moth  is  htbbe 
from  von,  anb  to?tuption  is  flcb  into 
||heiltobefo?gotten. 

54  £>o?toibsarcpafreb,?intbecnb 
is  fbeibeb  trjc  treasure  of  tmmo?talitie. 

55  3tnbtrjetefo?cafBctl)ounomo?c 
quedtons  toncetning  the  multitubc  of 
them  that  perid). 

56  5fo?U)hen  they  babtafecn  liberty, 
they  befpifeb  the  moft  Jl?igh,  thought 
fto?ne  of  his&atbc,  anb  fo?fooftc  bis 
ruayes. 

57  $©o?eoucc ,  they  Dane  ttoben 
botbne  f)is  righteous, 

58  £nDtaiDintheirbeart)thatthere 


Chap.ix.  Apocrypha. 


isno  <Sob,  pea  anb  that  bnoibmg  tftev 
muftbte. 

59  f  0?  as  tb?  things  afo?tfaib  (ball 
recetuc  you,  fotbirft  anb  panic  are  p?e^ 
patebfo?  them,  fo?itXbasnotl)is)bill 
that  men  (boulb  tome  to  nought. 

60  25ut  the?  ibbich  be  tccatcb ,  bauc 
bcfilcb  tfje  jftamc  of  Dim  that  mabt 
them,  anb  ibece  bntoanftefull  bnto  him 
ibrjithp?cpaccbiifcfo?  them. 

6r  3lnb  tbcrefo?c  ismytubgement 
noibatbanb. 

6i  ShefethingsbanC3Jnot(bcibeb 
bnto  all  men,  but  bnto  thee,  anb  a  fcibc 
line  thee.  Xbcn  anftucrcb  %  anb  faib, 

6j  ?3cholb,<©jLo?b,noib  baft  thou 
(hctbcb  me  the  mulntubc  of  the  Vbon; 
bets  lbbtth  thou  Unit  begin  to  boc  m 
the  laft  times :  but  at  mhat  timc,thou 
hafrnotfbetbebmc. 

CHAP.    IX. 

V/ho  fhall  be  faued ,  and  who  not.  19  All 
the  world  is  now  corrupted :  z-l  Yet  God 
doeth  faueafew.  35  Heecomplaineththat 
thofepenfh  which  keepe  Gods  Law:  38  and 
feeth  a  woman  lamenting  in  a  field. 

Ceanfiocteb  mcthcn,anb 
fapbe,  S^cafute  thou  the 
time  biligentlp  in  it  fclfc : 
anb  lb  hen  thou  feed  part 
_  of  the  fignes  pad,  Uiljtct) 
3hauctolbcthccbefo?e, 

x  Xhena)aitthoubnbetftanb,that 
itts  the  beep  fame  time,  ibhcteintbc 
higheft  ibill  begin  to  brtite  the  ibo?lb 
ibhid)  hemabe. 

j  Xhctcfo?e  tbljcn  thctc  (hall  bee 
feene*catfhqua&es  anbbp?o?es  of  the 
people  in  the  ibo?lb: 

4  Xhenlbaitfhourbelbnbcrttanb, 
that  the  inott  h«gh  fpabe  of  rhofc  things 
from  the  bapes  that  ibere  befo?c  thee, 
euen  from  the  beginning. 

5  5fo?liHcasautbatismabcinthc 
ibo?lb  hath  a  beginning ,  anb  an  enbe, 
anbthccnbismanifcft: 

6  euen  fo  the  times  alfo  of  the  high- 
eft,  haue  plainc  beginnings  tn  lb  onoe  rs 
anb  poibcrfull  ibo?bcs,  anb  cnbingsm 
effctts  anb  fignes. 

7  3tnb  cuerv  one  that  (baibe  faueb, 
anb  fl)aibcablctocftapcbphiS  ttwus, 
anbbj>faith,Vbhercbpvfhaucbelcciico, 

s  j&hail  be  pzcfctueb  from  the  lapb 
perils,  anb  (ball fee  my  faluation,  tn  my 
lanb ,  anb  tbithtn  my  boinns :  fo?  3i 
haue  famtineb  them  fo?  mc,  from  the 


beginning. 


t^iiiinin       9  1Chcn 


.W4/.14  7 


(51 


Apocrypha. 


1 1.  Efdras.  Apocrypha.l 


||  And  nor* 
bccaufe  the 
rime  of  the 

Ivor  Id  was 
comt,whea 
I  war  prt- 
pirin^rhe 
world  &e- 
[  |  But  when 
the  world 
r?at  male, 
both  now 
andthe-i, 
the  m.iners 
ofeucnone 
crvattdwere 
ccrrnpttd  by 
aneutrfai 
ling  harueji, 
ittida  !*w 
vnfe&rch- 

Mt. 

Or,?r.iitie. 
Or  gfAine. 


9  Xhcn  (hail  they  ibe in p;t:full cafe  | 
Much  noil)  hauc  abufcD  nip  luayes :  I 
anD  thev  that  hauc  caft  them  avnayDef-! 
fpitefuliy ,  fhall  DiDcll  in  tonnenrs. 

10  f  ozfuth,  as  in  their  lifchaucrc  ■ 
teiueD  benefits,*  hauc  not  Rnoiucn  me:! 

ii  2tnD  they  that  haucloatheD  my  lam, 
luhUc  they  ban i  vet liberty  ,anD  Vbhcn  as 
vet  place  of  repentance  tuas  open  Unto 
them.UnDcrftooDnot,  btttDefptfcD  it : 

p.  Xhc  fame  nmttUnoU)  it  after 
Death  by  panic. 

13  3hiD  tljcrcfoK  be  thou  not  tun 
ous,  DolD  thcDngoDly  (naibepunifhcD 
ant)  When :  but  enquire  hott)  the  righ 
tcousfball  be  faueD,  mijofc  thcuwlD 
is,  anb  fo:  lDhomthctiwlDtscrcateD. 

14  Xhcnanfu)crcD3J,anDfatD, 

15  3  hane  faitj  befozc ,  anD  noil)  Doe 
fpcaKe ,  antjiDill  fpcafcc  tt  aifo  hecrcaf 
ter :  that  there  be  many  moc  of  them 
luhtchperifl) ,  tl)cn  of  ttjem  iDhiclj  tljall 
be  faueD, 

16  HiKcasanjaucisgreatcrthena 
C2oppc. 

17  3MD  He  anfuierct)  mcfayiitg :  ItUc 
asthefir-lDis,  fois  alfotl)cfcco:as  the 
flouws  be ,  fuel!  arc  the  colours  aifo : 
fuch  as  the  nwhcinan  is,  fuel)  aifo  is 
tl)eil)o:He :  ant)  as  tliclmfbantmian  is 
htmfclfc,  fo  is  htsnuf  bamwy  aifo :  fo;it 
ttias  tDc  ttme  of  thcuwlD. 

is  li^tnt) noil)  lDhcnJ  pjcparcD  the 
ID02ID ,  Which  was  not  vet  matte,  cucn 
fozthcinto  DJbell  m  that  now  uuc,  no 
manfpaKcagamftmc. 

19  jfo:  then  cucry  one  obcycD,  ||but 
noil)  the  mancrs  of  them  Which  arc  ere 
atcDmthisW02lD  that  tsmabc,  arc  t02 
ruptcD  bva  pcrpctuailfccD,5bya  lam 
\Drjicrj  is  Dnfcarchablc ,  tm  themfctucs. 

20  5>o  3!  conftDcrcD the  W02ID ,  anb 
bcholDthcrc  waspcnll,  becanfe  of  the 
Dcusces  that  iber c  come  into  it. 

2 1  3tuo  Jj  faw  anb  fpareD  it  grcatlv, 
aiiDhaucKeptmcasigrapeofthcclufter, 
aut>  a  plant  of  a  great  people. 

22  Hct  the  nuiinttiDc  penfl)  then,: 
Which  was  bozuctnuamc,  ant)  let  mv 
I  grape  be  hept  ant)  mv  plant :  fo:  With 
great  labour  hauc^ImaDcit  perfect. 

2?  j^euertheleffc  if  thou  wut  ceafe 
vet  feuen  Daves  moc  (but  thou  wait  not 
fair  m  them.) 

24  i3nt  goe  into  a  ficlti  of  floW2CS, 
Where  no  houfe;3bu;lDeD,  anb  catcou 
iythcfloW2esofthcnciD,Xarrnoflcfl), 
b;  inlie  no  wmebttt  cate  floW:cs  oncly. 

25  3tiD  pwv  Ditto  the  iiighcftconti-- 


nuailv.thcn  WU  3  come  anb  talUc  Wuh 
thee. 

26  ^oJWcntmyWavintothcnclD 
Which  is  caileD;arDath ,  tiaras  he  com 
maiiDeD  me ,  anD  trjcr  c  3J  fate  amongtt 
tl)cfloiU2cs,  ano  mo  catc  of  rhehcrbes 
ofthcfieuxauD  the  mcateofthe  fame  fit 
tilficbmc. 

27  Sifter  feuen  Daves  3i  fate  bpon 
the  graffc ,  ano  mv  heart  Was  DcrcD 
|U)ttl)in  me,  UUc  as  bcfo2c. 

28  3nD  J,  opencD  mv  mourn,  ano 
beganne  to  talac  befrncthe  moO  teujh 
anofaiD, 

29  £>  2L02D,  thou  tnat  fheweft  tl)v 
fclfcDnto  tos,  thou  waft 'fhcWcD  unto 
ourfathcrsuuhcWtlDerncfftstnapiacc 
ttil)crc  no  man  iitrcaDeth ,  in  a  barren 
place  tt)hentl)cvcamcoutofcgvpt. 

30  ^nD  thoufpaaeft,  faying,  i^eare 
me,  £)  ^tracl ,  anD  marhc  my  IU02DS, 
thou  fccD  of  Jacob. 

31  ifoibcholDjfonjmyiaibinyou. 
anDit  fliailb2ing  fruitcinyou,  anb  ycc 
(liaii  be  honourcD  initfo2  cucr. 

32  26ttt  our  fathers  lnhieh  rccciueD 
thciavb,  Uept  it  not,  anD  obfcrucD  not 
thy  o:Dinanccs,anD  though  thcftuitc  of 
thy  lam  did  not  penfh,  neither  couiDit, 
fo2ttinas  thine: 

35  l^et  they  that  rccciueD  it,  pcrifbeD, 
becaufc  they  Kept  not  the  thing  that 
lliasfomcnmthcm. 

3+  3nDloc,itisacuftomeibhcuthe 
groitnD  hath  rccciueD feeD,ojthc5)ea  a 
fhip,02auyucffel,mcatco2D2inHc,that, 
that  being  pcnn)CD  lnhctcm  it  «jas 
fomcii,02taftmto, 

3<;  Xhat  thtng  aifo  ibhicft  Vbas 
fo\ucno2caltrl)crctn,  o:rccciucb,  Doth 
penfl),anD  rcmamcth  not  lutth  bs :  but 
ttnthusithath  nothappcncDfo. 

36  jfo2iDcthat  IjauetccciucD  the  tail) 
pcrtfl)  by  fmnc ,  anD  our  heart  aifo 
lUhich  rccciueD  it. 

37  /I5otinithftanDing  the  laro  peri- 
fl)cth  not,but  rnnamcth  in  his  fo2cc. 

38  ^nD  \Dhcn  %  fpane  thefc  things 
in  my  heart,  J>  Ioorcd  bacUc  lDtth  mine 
eyes,  ?  upon  the  right  ftDc  3J  fauj  a  voo 
man,anDbcholD,flicmourncD,fmicpt 
lUith  alouDUoycc,  atiDUiasmuchgrie 
ucd  m  hcart,anD  her  clothes  ujerc  vm, 
anDfnchaDafhcsDpon  her  hcao. 

39  XhcnlcfJImythougfusgoctljat 
31  lbas  m,anD  turncD  me  unto  her, 

40  3nD  faiD  Unto  her ,  nahcrrfrnc 
lliccpcftthou  i  ibhvarttl;oufogricucD 
inthymmDc; 

41  3»nD 


'ExoJ.  19. 

g.ind  24. 

ti. 

||  Or  tcom. 
m:tb. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch 


ap.x. 


[\Orcoun- 

trey  men  ci- 
tizens. 


ehei. 


41  3lnu  fhc  faib  tonto  me,  §>ir  ,lct  me 
alone,  tftat  3  may  bclbaitc  my  fcifcanb 
abbe  Ditto  my  fo?oiD,  fo?  3  am  fo?c  toer* 
eu  m  my  mmoc,  anb  bzought  Dcty  loll). 

42  3tnb  3J  faib  tonto  her,  narjat  at 
lcththcc;Xcllme. 

45  3>t)e  faib  unto  mc,3J  thy  fcruant 
haue  bene  barren,  ana  hab  no  chtibc, 
though  3  Ijau  an  hufbanb  thtrty  yetcs. 

44  anb  thofe  thtrtic  yecres  3  bib 
nothing  clfc  bay  anb  night,  anbencry 
houre,butma&emyp?ayeetophighcft. 

4^  after  tlnrtic  yceres,  <5ob  hearb 
me  thine  hanbmatb,  loottcb  bponmy 
mifery,con6bercb  my  tcoublc,anb  gauc 
me  a  Tonne :  anb  3  iDas  tocry  glab  of 
him,  fo  ltoas  my  hufbanb  alfo,  anb  all 
my  neighbours,  anb  itoc  gaue  great  ho* 
nour tonto  theainugotie. 

46  3nto  31  nourifbcbhmiitoitl)  great 
trauaiic. 

+7  §0  ibhen  he  grcito  bp,anb  came 
to  the  time  tljat  hefhoulbhaueaitoife, 
3Jmabeafcatt. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Hee  comrorteth  the  woman  in  the  field.  17 
She  vanifheth  away,  and  a  citie  appeareth  iu 
her  place.  40  The  Angel  declareth  thefe 
vifions  in  the  field. 

Bbitfo  camctopafTe,tl)at 
itohen  my  tonne  ltoas  en* 
trcb  into  i)is  tbebbing 
thambcr,  \)i  fell  boitonc 
anbbicb. 

2  1E#mibcalloucrtt)?citotheugi)ts, 
ano  all  my  ||ncigI)bours  r  ofe  top  to  torn* 
fo?tme,fo3JtooBcmyrelt  tonto  tf)e  fe^ 
tonto  bay  at  night. 

j  3inb  it  tame  to  paffe  ltoljcn  tljev 
ftao  all  left  off  to  tomfo?t  me,  to  the  cnb 
3  might  be  quiet :  tijen  tofe  3  Dp  by 
ntgrjt  anb  tiOi,  anb  tame  htttjet  into 
thisftcttustfjoufeeft. 

4  3nb  3  boc  noil)  purpofc  not  to 
retucne  into  tacrine,  but  hete  to  Bay, 
anb  ucithet  to  cate  no?  b?inttc,  but  con* 
tinually  to  mourne,?  to  fall  Until  3  bic. 

i  %i>cn  left  3  tt)e  II  mctottations 
tbhetcm  3  iDas ,  anb  fpa&e  to  Dee  in 
angct,taymg, 

6  Xhou  foolifl)  ltooman  abotte  all 
otnctjcetttrjounotoutmoutning.attb 
itonathappcnctl)  tonto  tos; 

7  tyoito  that  Snon  our  mother  is  full 
of  all  tjeamneffe ,  anb  much  humbleb, 
mournmgtocryfo?c; 

3  3lnb  noil)  feeing  ibe  all  moutnc, 
anbarefab,fo?itoc  ate  allmljeamneffc, 


Apocrypha- 


art  thou  gcicueb  fo?  one  fonnc ; 

9  jfo?  af  be  the  earth,  anb  flic  Rjait 
telltlKe,  thatittsfhe,  lbhich  ought  to 
mourne,  fo?  tl)c  fan  of  fo  many  that 
grolbtoponhcr. 

io  5Fo?  out  of  her  tame  all  at  the  firft, 
anb  out  of  her  thai  all  others  tome:  anb 
bcholb  they  iballtc  auuoft  all  into  be- 
ftcuctton,anbamuitttubcoftj)cmistots 
tcriyllrootcbout. 

ufl9hothcnfhouibmafecmo?emout: 
mug,  then  fhc  that  hath  loft  fo  great  a 
mulntubc,  anbnotttjoumhithartfojy 
but  fo? one* 

12  25uttfrhoufaycttbntomc,$)yla; 
mentation  is  not  u&c  the  earths,  be* 
taufc  31  haue  loft  the  fruit  of  my  itoomb, 
lbhich  3  b?ougljt  foo?tfj  lbtth  pames, 
anb  bare  ltoitl)  fo?toibes. 

13 II  26ut  the  earth  not  io :  fo?  the  multe 
tuDepjcfcimn  it,acco?bmgto  thctourfc 
of  the  earth,  is  gone,as  it  tame. 

14  Xhen  fay  3  unto  tljcc ,  Hibeas 
thou  haft  brought  foo?th  ttnthlabour : 
euen  fo  the  earth  alfo  hath  giuen  her 
fruit,namtly  man,  cuer  fitljtnte  thebc* 
ginning,  tonto  fjun  that  mabc  her. 

15  /9oll)  therefore  Scepc  thy  fojrott) 
to  thy  felfc,  anb  bcarc  ltottl)  a  goob  tou* 
rage  that  lDhith  hath  befallen  thee. 

16  jfo? if  thou  fhaltacunoiblebgc  the 
beterminarton  of  ©ob  to  be  tuft,  thou 
flialt  both  rcteiue  thy  fonnc  in  timc,anb 
fhait  bctommenbeb  amongftiuomen. 

17  d5octhyiDaythcnmtothctitie,to 
thine  hufbanb. 

is  3tnb(hefatb  bnto  me,  Xhatrbrtl 
31  not  boe :  31  ltoill  notgoc  into  the  nty, 
buthcttmtll'Jbie. 

19  ^oUpjotccbebtofpcafcefurther 
bntoher,anbfaib, 

20  2Docnntfo,butbcccounfcllcbby 
me:  fo?  hoiD  many  arc  the  abuerGncs 
of  5>ion>  See  tomfojtcb  m  regarb  of 
thcfo?oib  of  3lctufalcm. 

21  ifoithoufecftthatour  Sanctuary 
islaib  lbaftc,  out  3ltat  b?ofecn  bolbne, 
ourHTemplcbcfttoyeb.  . 

22  Cut  ^faltety  is  laib  on  p  gt  ounb, 
outfongis  puttofilcntc,  out  tcioycmg 
tsatancnb,thclightof  out  taublcfticbc 
is  put  out,  the  3rhe  of  out  Coiienatu  is 
fpoilcb,outholytl)ingsatcbc{ilcb,anb 
the  4l5amethat  is  talleb  bponbs,  isab 
moft  pjophaneb:  out  cl)!lb?en  ate  put  to 
(name ,  out  pnefts  ate  burnt,  out  %v 
tutcs  ate  gone  into  taptuuttc,  out  toit^ 
gmes  ate  befilcb,  anb  out  lbtucs  taut- 
fhcb,  out  tightcous  mcncatitb  amay, 
CBmmmi         out 

in  2 


II  Or^aicli- 
Ihti. 


\\Buttht 
forth  afre 
the  mantraf 
the  ear tli : 
isheretnto 
theprefe/Jt 
multittttif  ii 
genie  a7.it/re, 
as  tt  came 


Apocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


■Cha? 


*Ch3p,^..i. 

Orjntothe 
tmtWituie  in 


our  Iitlc  onesbcftroyeb,  ourvongmcn 
ate  bjoughtm  bonbagcanb  our  ftrong 
men  are  become  intake, 

25  3lnb  which  is  thegrcateft  of  an, 
thefcaicofSxonhathuoib  loft  her  Do 
nout  :fo2  fl)C  is  bcluict  cb  uuo  the  hanbs 
oftticm  that  hate  bs. 

24  3nb  thecefo2c  fhafec  off  thy  great 
hcauuiefTc,aub  put  away  the  muinttibc 
of  ftnrolbes,  that  the  mighty  may  be 
mcmfull  bnto  tUcc  againc ,  anb  the 
fjigtieft  fhai  giuc  tfjee  rcft,anb  cafe  from 
thy  labour. 

25  3tnb  it  came  to  paffc  Whtlc3J  N>as 
taiiungwtth  her ,  bchoibhcrfaccbpon 
afubben  flnncb  creccbingiy,i?her  coun 
ttnanct  gliftcccb ,  fo  that  3  wasafcatb 
of  hcr,anb  mufeb  lbhat  tt  nught  be. 

26  3tib  bchoib  fuObcuiy,foc  mafic  a 
gtt at  trv  bcry  fearful :  fo  that  the  earth 
0)Oohc  at  the  ttoifc  of  the  woman. 

27  2nb  '3Jioolttb,anbbcholbf,tht 
woman  appcarcbbntomcnomo2c,but 
there  lbas  a  citv  builbcb ,  anb  a  large 
place  fhcwcb  it  fclfc  from  the fotmbatt- 
ous:  then  lbas  5  afraib,anbcncblbith 
aioibbboiccanbfaib, 

28  iohcrcis*Oriclthe3ngcl,Who 
camebntomtcattljefirfli  fo2  hechath 
caufeb  me  to  fall  into  many  ||traunccs, 
aub  mine  enb  is  tut  neb  into  co:tuption, 
anb  my  piaycr  to  t  cbulic. 

29  3nb  as  3  was  fpcalung  thefe 
Wo2bes,  bcholb,hc  camtbutomt,anb 
loobcbbponmc. 

30  2nb  loc,  3  lay  as  one  that hab 
benebeab,  <t  mine  bnbcrftanbtng  was 
tahenfrom  mt,  anbhetootsemeby  the 
right  hanb,  anb  comfoiteb  mee,  anb  fct 
me  bpon  mv  feet,  anb  faib  buto  mc, 

31  nDhat  atlcth  thee j.  anb  why  art 
thou  fo  bu"qiucteb,anb  Why  is  thine  bit 
berftanbiug  troublcb,  %  the  thoughts 
of thine  heart; 

32  2inb3i  faib,  becaufc  thou  haftfa 
fahenme,anbvet3Jb!bacco:bmgtotIn' 
*  W02bs,anb  3  ibent  into  the  fielD,  anb 
loc  3  hauc  fetne,  anb  yet  Cec.that  3  am 
notablctoerpjcffe. 

33  ^nbhccfatbbntome,  ;£>taub  bp 
maufully.anb  3  U'U  abiufc  thee. 

34  Hhcnfaib'Tl^peanconjnylort 
in  mc,  onely  fojfakc  mc  not,  left  3  Die 
fruftrateofmvhopr. 

35  :f  02  3  haue  fecne ,  that  31  Iuielb 
not,anbhcarethat3ibonotunoil>. 

36  £>j,  is  my  fcufc  bccciucb,  02  my 
foulcmab2camc; 

37  i2oW  thcrfo2c,3i  befeech  thecthat 


thou  wilt  flicw  thy  feraant  of  thisijbtfio. 
3Stycanuocrebmethen,*faib,$earc 
mc,  anb  J  (hail  cnfo2mc  thec,  anb  tell 
thcclbhcrcfo2c  thou  att  afraib :  fo2  the 
higheft  ibtll  rcueilcmany  fecret  things 
bntothec. 

39  Dec  hath  fecne  that  thy  1 1  Way  is 
right  :foi  that  thou  fcuroWcft  continue 
ally  fo:  thy  people,  anb  maacft  great  la- 
mentation  foi;3non. 

40  Xhis  thcrcf02c  is  the  meaning  of 
I  thcbifion  Which  thou  lately  faibeft. 

41  Xhott  faibeft  a  woman  mout? 
nmg,anbthoubcganfttoconrfo2thcr: 

42  2Sut  noibfceft  thou  the  imcnriTc 
ofthc  woman  no  mo2c,butthcrc appear 
rcb  bnto  theca  city  buiibeb. 

43  3inb  whereas  flic  toio  thec  of  the 
bcathofhcrfonne,thiststl)c;foluuon. 

44  Xhis  Woman  whom  thou  faib- 
cft.isSuon :  anb  lbhcrcas  flic  fatb  bnto 
thecCcucu  (hcWhomthou  fceftasacity 
builbcb.) 

45  HDhereas  1  fay,  flic  faib  bnto  thec, 
that  (be  hath  bene  thirty  ycrcs  barren: 
thofc  arc  the  thirty  yccres  ibhcrcm 
there  lbas  no  offering  mabe  m  her. 

46  z3ut  after  thirtic  yccres ,  Solo- 
mon builbcb  the  city  ,s  offcreb  offrmgs: 
anb  then  bare  the  barren  a  fonnc. 

47  3lnb  whereas flic  toio  thec  that 
fhec  nounftjeb  Dim  With  labour :  that 
wasthcbibcllmgui  l)icrufaicm. 

48  lout  Whereas  flic  faib  bntothec, 
mhat  my  fonnecommmg  into  his  mar- 
riage chamber,  happeneb  to  haucafall, 
aubbicb,  this  Was  the  beftructton that 
cametoDierufalem. 

49  31nb  beholb,thott  faweft  her lisc 
nclTe,  anb  becaufc  (he  mourncb  fo2her 
fonncthoubeganft  tocomfojthcr,  anb 
of  thefe  things  which  hauc  chauueeb, 
thefe  arc  to  be  opencb  buto  thec. 

50  f  02  now  the  moftfcighfccth.that 
thou  art  grieucbbnfaiucbly,tffuffcrcft 
from  thy  Whole  heart  fo2  her  ,fo  hath  he 
(heweb  thec  the  b2ightnes  of  her  glozy, 
anb  the  comelmcfle  of  her  bcautic. 

51  3hibthctfo2c3lbab  thcercmaute 
in  y  fielb ,  Where  no  houfe  lbas  builbcb. 

<,z  foi3  hnew  that  the  I?igheft 
Woulb  flicw  this  buto  thee. 

53  Xherefo2cgi  commanbeb  rhceto 
goc  into  thcficib ,  where  no  founbation 
ofanybiulbuigwas. 

54  .^02  in  the  place  Wherein  the 
ftigheft  begmneth  to  flicw  his  city  ,thcr 
can  no  mans  butlbmg  be  able  to  ftanb. 

55  3ttibthcrfo2cfcarcnot,lctPOtthy 
heart 


t>Aftice. 


\\Or,?urrfe. 


\\OrJntrr. 
CrrM-'iort. 


Apocrypha. 


Ck 


pja 


\\0r  art  cal- 
led to  be 
wi:h,c~e. 


\Or,hft 
thmgi. 


\Ul.p,e:. 


heart  be  afcigUtcD,  but  goe  thy  tbapiu, 

anb  fee  trje  bcaunc  anb  greatneffe  of 
the  builbing ,  as  much  as  thine  tycs  be 
able  to  fee: 

56  anb  then  fbalttboubeare  as  much 
as  thine  cares  map  couwebenb. 

57  5F02  thou  art  blcffcbabouc  many 
other ,  anb  act  ||  talieb  ttntb  rtjc  bigbctt, 
anofoarcbutfcib. 

58  2Sut  to  moztoib  at  nigljt  thou 
Qiaittcmaincl)crc. 

59  anbrofbaiitbebigbcftfbelbtbcc 
bifions  of  t!)c  llbigb  things,  Vbhid)  the 
tnoQ  high  ttnllbo  bnto  tbem,tbatbibcl 
bpon  earth  intljc  laft  bayes.  $>o3  flcpt 
that  mgt)t  anb  another,  like  as  be  torn- 
manbto  me. 

CHAP.    XI. 

i  Hte  fceth  in  his  drome  an  Eagle  comming 
outofdieSea:  57  And  a  Lion  out  01  a  wood 
talkinq  torhe  Eas^le. 

■  $?en  fatb  3  a  became ,  anb 


z*Sf<  bebolbc ,  there  tame  top 

%-m  from  the  Sea  an  eagle, 

fgj  rbOitl)  bab  ttbclucfcatbc^ 

rcb  Vbmgs,?  t!)2ce  Ijeabs. 

z   anb3Jfam,anbbcbolb,  Qjefpjeb 

bet  lbmgs  oucr  all  the  cartb.anb  all  the 

ttunbes  of  tfjc  ayjc  blclbeon  her ,  anb 

mere  gatbereb  together. 

3  anb  3  bcfjclb ,  anb  out  of  her  fe* 
tbers  there  grcibc  other  contrary  fea? 
thcrs,  anb  they  became  little  feathers, 
anbfmall. 

4-  25utbcr  hcabs  lbcrc  at  reft:  the 
hcabnt  the  mibbcft  lbas  greater  then 
the  other,  yet  rcftcbt  it  lbitb  the  rcftbuc. 

5  #o2coucr  31  bchelb ,  anb  loc,  the 
eagle  flcVb  JCbitrj  her  fcathers,anb  retg; 
neb  bpon  earth ,  anb  oucr  tljcm  that 
bibelt  therein. 

6  anb  3  fa\D  that  all  things  bnber 
hcauen  iberc  fubiett  bnto  her ,  ano  no 
man  fpauc  agamft  her ,  no  not  one  trea= 
mrc  bpon  earth- 

7  anb  31  bcbclb,anbloc,tbc  eagle 
rofe bpon  her  talents,  anbfpaUc  to  her 
feathers,  facing, 

8  i©atthnotaliatonte,flecpceuerv 
one  in  his  orbn  plate,  j  Vbatth  by  tourfe. 

9  But  let  the  heabsbe  pjcfcrucbfoi 
the  laft. 

10  anb  3  bchelb,  anb  loc,  the  boicc 
ibent  not  out  of  her  beabs,but  from  rtje 
mibbcft  ofbetboby. 

11  anb  31  mmftyeb  bet  contrary  fca* 

thers,  anb  bcholb ,  there  iberc  eight  of 
them. 


Apocrypha 


ii  anb  3Jloot$cb,anb  bcholb,  on  the 
right  fibc  there  arofc  one  feather ,  ano 
reigncb  oucr  all  the  earth- 

13  3nbfouibas,tbatibbenitreig; 
neb,  the  enbe  of  it  tame,  anb  the  place 
thereof  appcareb  no  mo?e :  fotbencrt 
following  ftoob  bp  anb  reigncb ,  ano 
hab  a  great  time. 

14  ano  it  bappeneb ,  that  lbbcu  it 
rcigncb,tbccnb  of  ittamcaifo ,  lihc  as 
the  firft,  fo  that  it  appcareb  no  mojc. 

15  3Eben  tame  tljere  a  boice  bnto  it, 
anbfayb, 

i6  locate, tbouthatbaftbome rule 0^ 
uer  the  earth  fo  long :  this  3  fay  bnto 
thee ,  before  thou  begmneft  to  appearc 
nomojc. 

17  Xherc  (ball  none  after  thee  at- 
tainc  bnto  thy  time,  neither  bnto  the 
baifc  thereof. 

18  Xbcn  arofc  the  tbirb,anb  reigncb 
as  the  other  before:  anb  appcareb  no 
mojealfo. 

19  5)0  Ibent  it  tbitb  all  the  rcfibuc 
one  after  another,  as  that  eucry  one 
retgncb,anb  then  appcareb  no  mo2C. 

20  Xbcn3!bebclb,$loc,inp20ccft*c 
ofnme,tbcfcatbetstbatfoloibcb,ftoob 
bp  bpon  tbertgbtfibe,  that  they  might 
rule  alfo ,  anbfome  of  tfjemrulcb,  but 
ttritbin  a  lbbtlc  tbey  appcareb  no  mo2e : 

ii  5Fo2fome  of  them  lucre  fetbp  ,but 
rulebnot. 

11  after  tins  3J  looses,  anb  bcholb, 
the  ttbclucfcatbcrsappcareb  no  mo2e, 
no?  the  tlbo  little  feathers : 

13  anb  there  lbas  no  mo2c  bpon  the 
eagles  bob?,  but  tb;ee  bcabs  that  xv 
ftco ,  anb  fire  little  ibmgs. 

24.  3Ebenfatb3J  alfo  that  tlbo  little 
feathers  biutbcb  themfelucs  from  the 
fire,  anb  remamebbnber  the  bcab,  that 
lbas  bpon  the  rtght  ftbe:fo2  the  fourc 
tontnuicbintbcir  plate. 

15  ano  3  bebclb,$  loc,  the  feathers 
tbattberc  bnbcrtheibuig,  thought  to 
fet  bp  tbemfclues,anb  to  banc  the  rule. 

26  anb  3  bchelb,?  loetberc  lbas  one 
fct  bp,  butlbo2tlyit  appcareb  no  mo2e. 

17  anb  the  feconb  lbas  fooucraibay 
then  the  arft. 

18  anb 5  bebclb,  anb  loc ,  the  tlbo 
that  reniamcb ,  thought  alfo  m  tbcnv 
felucs  tor  eigne. 

29  anb  lbben  tbey  fo  thought,  or 
bolb,  there  aibahco  one  of  the  heaos 
itbatlbcrc  at  reft,  namely  it  that  lbas  in 
itbc  mibbcft,  fo2tbatibasgtcatcrthen 
the  tlbo  other  heabs. 
I  iJ3mmm  3        3°  %*& 


Apocrypha. 


II.  Efdras. Apocrypha. 


30  3nD then  J> fail),  that  the  tWoo 
thcrheaDswerelopncDWithtt. 

31  3lnDbeholD,thehcaDWasturncD 
With  them  that  Were  with  it,  anD  Did 
catc  top  the  two  feathers  DnDer  the 
Wing  that  WottlD  haucretgneD. 

jx  25ut  this  hcao  put  the  Whole 
cacti)  in  fear  e,  anD  bacc  ruicmitoucr 
all  thofe  that  Dwelt  Dpon  the  cacti), 
VUitt)  ntuci)  opp2Cffion ,  anD  it  fjau  toe 
goucrnancc  of  tl)c  W02ID  mo2C  then  all 
the  wings  that  IjaD  bcene. 

33  3ltiD  aftcc  tljis  3  bchclD ,  anD  loc 
tlje  IjcaD  that  was  in  the  miDft,  fuDDni- 
Ip  appcaceD  no  mo2e,UUe  as  the  Wings. 

34  26ut  trjerc  rcniaincD  the  two 
hcaDS ,  Which  alfo  m  lifec  fo?t  cnleD  Dp? 
on  the  earth,  anD  ottcc  thofe  that  Dwelt 
therein. 

35  3inD  3  bcoclD,  anD  loc,  the  IjcaD 
bpon  the  right  fiDc,  dcuouccd  it,  that 
wasDponthcleftfiDc. 

36  Xljcn  3  DcacD  a  Doptc ,  Which 
faiD  tontomc,  JLooftc  before  tl)ee,  anD 
confiDcc  tlje  thing  that  thou  fecft. 

37  2mD33behclD,anDioc,asitWcrc 
a  coacmg  fLpon  ,  chafeD  out  of  the 
wood :  anD  3  fall?  that  heefentout  a 
mansbopec  tontothe  eagle,  anD  faiD, 

3S  i?eace  thou ,  3  MI  tame  With 
thee, anD  the  litcjlitftniaiirar  bnto  thee, 

39  3lrt  not  thou  tt  thatrcmaiucftof 
the  foucc  bcafts ,  whom  3  maoe  to 
ratgnemmpW02lD,thattheciiDof  their 
times  might  come  th2ough  them  < 

40  3lnD  thefoueth  came  anDoucr- 
came  all  tlje  bcafts  that  lucre  paft,  anD 
haDpoiDcc  oucc  the  W02ID  iDith  gecat 
fcacefulneffe ,  anD  oucc  the  whole  com- 
paffe  of  the  earth  Until  much  WichcD  op 
pjcffion.anDfolongtimcDWelthcbpon 
the  earth  With  Deceit. 

4>  Jfonhc  earth  haft  thou  not  uu> 
gcDlbithtructh. 

41  ifouhou  haft  afflttteD  the  meeftc, 
thou  haft  hurt  the  peaceable,  thou  haft 
loueDlpcrs  ,  anD  DeftroycD  the  DWcl^ 
lings  of  them  that  b2oughtfo2thfruttc, 
anD  haft  call  DoWne  tlje  wanes  offuch, 
asDiDthecnoharme. 

43  XhcrcfoJcisthPttuongniUDca' 
Itng  come  Dp  Imto  the  l?igheQ ,  anD  thp 
p:tDcbntotl)efll3tghtv. 

44  %u  J?ighcft  alfo  hath  loolicD 
Dpon  the  p20uD  times,  anD  behottuhep 
ace  enDeD ,  anD  his  abominations  are 
fulftUeD. 

4$  2tnD  thercfo;e  appeare  no  mo2e 
thou  eagie,no2  tljjp  h02ctble  wings.no; 


tt)p  WtcttcD  feathers ,  no2  trip  maiitious 
hcaos ,  no2  thp  hurtfuii  clawes,  no2  an 
thpbamcboDp: 

4<s  Xhat  all  the  earth  map  be  w 
fcrfhcD,anD  map  rctumc ,  bemg  Define- 
r  CD  ft  om  thp  biolcnce,  ano  that  fye  map 
hope  fo?  the  luDgement,  anD  mercpot* 
him  that  maoe  her. 

CHAP.    XII. 

3  The  Eagle  which  hee  fa  w,  is  destroyed,  ic 
Thevifion  is  interpreted.  37  He  is  bid  to 
write  his  vifions,  39  and  to  laft,  that  he  may 
feeniore.  46  He  doth  comlort  thofe ,  that 
were  grieued  tor  his  abfence. 

iBD  it  came  to  paffe  Whiles 
the  JLpon  fpauc  thefc 
wo?DsDntothccagle,3 
faw: 
1  3uiDbeholD,thchcaD 
that  rcmaincD,anD  the  foure  Wings  ap= 
pcaccD  no  mo;e,anD  the  two  Went  tonto 
it.anDfctthemfelucstop  to  ratgnc ,  anD 
their  btngDomc  was  unall  anD  full  of 

UP202C. 

5  3inD3Jfaw,anDbchoU),  thepap; 
pcarcD  no  mo;c,  anD  the  Whole  boDp  of 
the  eagle  was  burnt ,  fo  that  the  earth 
wasingrcatfeare  :thcnaWaRcD3I  out 
of  tlje  trouble  anD  trauntc  of  mp  minDc, 
anD  from  great  fcarc,  anD  fatD  unto  mp 
fpirit, 

4  Hoc ,  this  haft  thou  Done  bnto 
mc,in  that  thoufcarcheft out  the  wapes 
ofthcl^ighctt. 

5  JLocpct  am  31  Wcarp  in  mp  minb, 
anD  Dcrp  wcabein  mp  fpirit:  auDlitlc 
flrcngrh  is  there  in  me,  fo;  the  great 
fcare ,  wherewith  3  was  affnghtcD 
this  night. 

6  Xhercfo2eWil3JnoWbefcctl)thc 
$ighcO,  that  hce  Will  comfort  me  bnto 
tljcenD. 

7  ^nD  3  fail) ,  IL02D ,  thatbeareft 
rulc,5f  31  hauc  founD  grace  befojc  thp 
fight,  anDif  3J  am  uifrrficD  With  theebe? 
fo2cmanp  others ,  anD  if  mp  pjapcrin? 
DceD  be  t  omc  lip  bcfo2C  thp  face, 

8  €omfo2t  me  then ,  anD  fheW  me 
thp  fcruant  the  intcrp2Ctatlon  ,  anD 
piaincDiffercnccofthisfcarcfullMion, 
that  tljou  main  pccfectlp  comfo2t  mp 
foulc. 

o  iFo?  thou  haftiuDgcD  mcWojtljp, 
to  (l)cWmc  the  laQ  times. 

io  anDhcfaiDPntome.HhiSttthc 
mterp2ctanon  of  the  btfion. 

it  %hc  eagle  whom  thou  faWcft 
come  Dp  fcom  the  fea ,  is  the  KingDome 

which 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


.p.vj. 


A 


pocr 


ypha. 


•  Daniel 
7-7- 


tbbicb  Vbasfecnc ,  in  tljc  *  tttOon  of  tljy 

brother  SDantcl. 

12  ffiutttums  not  crpounbeD  bnto 
him,  therefore  nolb  3  Declare  tt  bnto 
thee. 

13  25ebolD,tbcDaycstbillcomc,tbat 
there  Cljall  rife  bp  a  tungbomc  Upon 
cactb.anDittbaiibcfcarcbaboueaiitbc 
utngDomcs  that  Ibcrc  before  it. 

14  3Jntbcfamc  (ball  tttjcluc  lungs 
rrignc,  one  after  another. 

15  ©hereof  the  feeonb  (ball  begin  to 
rcigne,  ano  (ball  tjaue  more  tunc  then 
anyoftbetrbciuc. 

1 6  3nD  this  doc  the  ttticluc  tbings 
agmfic  rbbicb  tbou  faibed. 

17  3sfortbcboiccibbicbtboubear; 
Ded  fpeanc,  anb  that  tl)ou  farbed  not  to 
goc  out  front  the  bcaos ,  but  from  the 
miDs  of  tbehoDy  thereof,  tbts  is  the  in< 
terpretatton: 

is  Xbat  after  the  time  of  tljat  king- 
Dome,  thcrcflialianfe  great  drtuings, 
anb  it  (ball  ftanb  in  pcrill  of  falling :  ne* 
ucrtrjcleffc  it  (ball  not  then  fall.but  (bal 
be  redoreD  againc  to  l)is  beginning. 

i9  2inb  lbbeccas  thou  favbed  tljc 
eight  fmall  toubcr  feathers  fticlnng  to 
fjer  U)tngs,tl)is  is  the  interpretation: 

lo  Xr)atini)imtl)crefl)aiaru*e eight 
Kings,  tbhofc  time  ftjail  bee  but  fmall, 
anD  their  ycercsfaiift. 

2i  3mbtlboof  tbcmfbailpcriflutbe 
nubble  tune  approcbmg.fourcfljall  bee 
Kcptbntill  tlieir  cnb  begin  toapprocb : 
but  tibo  (ball  be  Uept  bnto  the  cnb. 

22  3lnDilibcccas  thou  faVbcd  three 
bcaDsredmg,  this  is  the  interpretation 

2j  gin  his  lad  Daycs  fyall  tljc  moC 
$igh  raifc  bp  three  Rmgbomcs.anDrc; 
new  many  things  tbcrem,auD  they  fljal 
hauc  the  Dominion  of  the  earth, 

24  3lnD  of  tljofc  that  Dtticll  therein 
nntbmucb  opprcflion,  abouc  all  tljofc 
that  Vberc  before  them :  therefore  are 
the?  taiicb  the  hcabs  of  the  eagle. 

2  5  jFor  th  tfc  arc  they  that  (hai  attorn* 
pun)  his  rbiclicDncffe,  anb  that  (hail  fr 
nifl)  his  laft  cnb. 

26  3ltiD  tbbcrcas  thou  farbed  that 
the  great  heaD  appear eD  no  more,  it  fig- 
nifietb  that  one  of  them  (hall  Die  bpon 
his  bcb,anD  pet  ibifb  panic 

27  ifor  the  tibo  that  remainc,  (hall 
bedaincVbltbtbefroorD. 

28  iforthcfroorDofthconcnjallbe* 

uoucc  the  other :  but  at  the  latt  (ball  Ije 
fall  through  the  fiuorb  hmifeifc. 

29  3uid  tbheccas  tljou  farbed  ttbo 


feathers  bnber  thcrbmgs  paffsng  oucr 
the  hcab,  that  is  on  the  right  fibe : 

30  3Jt  figmfieth  that  thefc  are  the? 
tbhom  the  l?tgbcd  hath  fteptbnto  their 
cnb :  tbtsts  the  fmall  lungbom  anb  full 
oftroublcastboufaibcd. 

31  3lnb  tbcflyonrbhom  thou  farbed 
riQng  bp  out  of  the  Wood,  anb  roaring, 
anb  fpcaUtng  to  the  eagle,  anbrcbu- 

Ring  bcr  for  her  bnngbtcoiiuicfrc,Vbitb 
ailtberborbsrbhicbthouhadbcaro, 

32  Xhisis  the  3uiomtcb  ruhtcb  tljc 
tyigbed  hath  Sept  for  tljcm,ano  fo:  their 
rbtcttcbncffc  bnto  the  cub :  he  (ball  re* 
proouc  them,  anb  (ball  bpbraib  them 
ibith  their  crucitie. 

33  ifor  bee  (hall  fct  them  before  him 
ahuc  in  tubgement,  anb  (ball  rcbuttc 
them  anb  correct  them. 

34  jr  or  the  reft  of  my  people  (ball  he 
bcluicr  rbitb  mcrncthofc  that  hauc  bm 
prefcrucb  bpon  my  borbcrs,  anb  he  dial 
mahe  tbcinfoyfullbnnil  the  comming 
of  the  bap  of  uibgcmcnt ,  rbbereof  3 
bauefpoHcn  bnto  thec  from  the  begin? 
nmg. 

35  Xhisis  the  brcantc  that  thou  faib- 
eft,  anb  thefc  arc  the  interpretations. 

36  Xljou  oncly  haft  bene  mcctc  to 
tmorb  thts  fecret  of  the  fttghed. 

37  Xbcrcfore  ibrttc  all  thefe  things 
that  thou  haft  fccnc,in  a  booRc,aivo  bioe 
them. 

38  3ltiD  teach  tbcmto  Hie  rbtfc  of  the 
people,  ibbofe  hearts  tljou  UnoVbcft 
may  comprebcnb,?Rccpc  thefc  fcercts. 

39  26ut  rbait  n)ou  here  thy  fclfc  pet 
fcucn  oaves  moe,  that  it  mav  be  (bcttjcb 
tbccrbbatfocuccitpicafctbthctyigbcd 
to  oceiare  bnto  thee:  2lnD  untbtbatbe 
rbcntbisrbay. 

40  3nb  it  came  to  palTe  rbben  all  tljc 
people  farb  that  the  fcucn  bayes  rbcrc 
paft,  anb  3  not  tome  againc  into  the  et? 
tic,  they  gathcrco  them  all  together, 
from  the  lead  bnto  the  grcatcft ,  anb 
came  bnto  mc,anD  faib, 

41  tebatbaucttJCoffcnDcDtbcc  ?anD 
Vbbat  cuillhaue  rbc  Done  agauift  thee, 
that  thou  forfeited  bs,anD  fitted  here  in 
this  place* 

42  foi  of  all  the  H  prophets  thou  oiv 
ly  act  left  bs,  as  a  tluftcr  of  the  buitagc, 
anb  as  a  canble  m  a  baruc  place,  anb  as 
a  haucn  or  flnp  prefcrucb  from  the  tem- 
ped: 

43  3(r  c  not  the  cuiis  lUljicl)  arc  come 
tobs,fumcicnt< 

44  3f  tiiou  d^ait  forfauc  us,  botu 
^^  •*  much 


\\Or,}<r;U. 


Apocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


\'^4crrtiine 
man  ai  the 
mndt.  Ih- 


I  Clan  it. 


much  better  hab  it  bene  fin  bs,  inucal 
fo  Dab  bene  burnt  in  the  nubft  of  £>ton. 
4.5  JFoz  tbc  arc  not  better  then  thev 
thatbicb  there.  3nb  thev  tticpt  ibitlja 
ioubboicc:thenanfVocrcb3Jthcm,anb 
faib, 

46  25c  of  goob  comfojt ,  £>  gifracl , 
anb  be  not  hcauv  thou  houfc  of  'Jacob. 

47  Jfo?tl)cl?igl)cft  hath  vou  in  re; 
metnbzanccanb  the  might?  hath  not 
forgotten  vou  in  temptation. 

4$  asfoj  mee,  3  haue  not  fojfauen 
vou ,  neither  am  31  DepartcDfrom  vou: 
but  am  come  into  tins  place,  topiavfoi 
tlic  bcfoiation  of  Snon  ,  anb  that  31 
nugl)t  fecue  mercy  fo.:  the  loib  eQate  of 
your&anttuary. 

49  3nb  nolb  goc  vottr  Ibay  home 
euerv  man,aub  after  thefe  bayesibill3J 
come  bnto  you. 

50  £>o  the  people  went  their  lDayin^ 
to  the  citv,  Uftc  as  3  comnianbcb  them: 

11  26ut  3  cemaineB  (hil  in  the  ftcib 
fcucn  baves ,  as  the  3ngcl  commanbeb 
mc,anbbibcatconelvmthofcbavcs,of 
thcfloibers  of  the  fielbe ,  anb  hab  mv 
mcatofthchcrbcs. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Hee  feeth  inhisdreameaman  cornmni<»out 
ot  the  Tea.  15  The  declaration  of  hisdreamc. 
^  4    He  is  praifed  ,aud  ptomiled  to  lee  more. 

fcS<9gWK|8J  ii5b  it  came  to  pafTc  after 
Mi\%f  feuenbayes,  3Jb2camcba 
"AH  became  bv  night. 

2  2nb||ioc,thctcarofc 
ailnnbc  from  the  fca  that 
it  mooucbauthcibaucs  thereof. 

j  3lnb3J  bchelb,  anb  loe,  thatman 
lbarcb  ftrong  lbtth  the  ||thottfanbsof 
heanen  :anbibhen  hcturncbrjis  coun 
tcnancc  to  loonc ,  all  the  things  trcm= 
bleb  that  were  fecne  bnber  him. 

4  3lntoiuhcnfocucrthcboyccibcnt 
out  of  Ins  mouth,  all  thev  bunit,  that 
hearb  his  boycclihc  as  the  earth  failctlj 
ibhemtfccleththefirc. 

5  3tnb  after  tins '3!  bchelb,  anb  loe, 
there  ibas  gathereb  together  aniultt 
tube  of  men  out  of  number ,  from  the 
foure  llnnbes  of  thehcaucu,  to  fubbuc 
the  man  that  came  out  of  thefca. 

6  26ut  31  bchelb ,  anb  loe ,  hec  hab 
graueb  himfelfe  a  great  mountame, 
anbfleibbpbpomt. 

7  i3ut  3  ujouio  haue  fcenc  the  re- 
gion, 0;  place ,  rbhereout  the  hill  Ibas 
grauen.anoTltoulbnot. 

8  ^nb  after  this  3(behelb,  anb  loe, 


all  they  Ibhtch  iDerc  gathereb  together 
to  fubbuc  hun,  ibcrc  fo2e afraib,anb  vet 
burtt  fight. 

9  3nb locashtcfaiu thetotolcnce of 
tlje  multttubc  that  came.hcc  neither  lift 
bp  his  haub,  no2  helb  froojb.noj  any  in- 
fltumcntoflbartc. 

10  iButoncly  31  faib  thathefent  out 
of  his  mouth,  as  it  hab  bene  a  blaftof 
fire,  anb  out  of  his  lippes  a  flaming 
b2cath,anbout  of  his  tongue  he  caft  out 
fparttcsanbtempefts, 

11  3nb  thev tbcre all mirt together ; 
the  biaft  of  fire,  the  flaming  bjcath  ,anb 
the  great  temped,  anb  fclibtthbiolcntc 
bpon  the  multltubc ,  iblnth  ibas  pztpa 
rcbto  fight,  anb  burnt  them  top cucrv 
one,  fothatbponafubben,  of  an  mint; 
mcrablc multitubc,  nothtngibas  to  be 
pcrcciueb  ,  but  ouelv  bull  ano  fmcil  of 
miotic :  lDhc  3  faib  tljis,3J  ibas  afraib. 

it  aftctlbarb  faib^J  the  fame  man 
come  boibne  from  the  mountame,  anb 
call  unto  huii  an  other  peaceable  ntul- 
titube. 

ij  3utb  there  came  much  people  bnto 
him,  whereof  fomc  IDerc  glab  ,  fomc 
iberefiny .  fomc  of  them  ibcrc  bottnb, 
anb  other  fomc  brought  of  ||  them  that 
lbcccofrreb:  then  mas  gjficlictlnotigh 
great  fcarc,  anb  3  albaueb  anb  faib, 

14  Ihou  haft  fhcibcb  thv  fcruant 
Vbonbcrsfrom  the  beginning ,  anb  hall 
coutuebmcrbotthvthat  thou  fhoulbeft 
tecciucmypjaycr: 

15  S>heib  mcc  nolb  vet  the  interpzc 
tationofthisb2eame. 

i6  5Fo2asgjconccitieinm:ne  bnber^ 
ftanbmg,  lboc  bnto  them  that  than  be 
left  m  thofc  baves ;  anb  much  mojc  iboe 
bnto  them  that  arctiot  left  bclnubc. 

17  j?02  they  that  ibcrc  not  left,  mere 
tnhcaumefrc. 

is  iBoin  bnberftaub  3  the  things 
that  arc  lavbc  bp  in  the  latter  baves, 
lblnchfhaii  happenbntothem,  atibto 
thofc  that  arc  left  bchtnbe. 

19  1Ehcrcfo2c  arc  thev  tome  into 
great  penis,  anb  inanvncccffitics,  like 
asthefcb?canicsbeclarr. 

20  jaet  is  it  eaficr  fo:  him  that  is m 
banger ,to  come  into  |l  thefe  thuigs,thcn 
to  paffe  aibav  as  a  cloub  out  of  the 
iboilb ,  anb  not  to  fee  the  things  that 
happen  in  the  lafl  baves.  2tnb  he  anfiuc 
reb  bnto  me,anb  faib, 

21  ILhc  interpjetation  of  the  bifion 
fbai  3  fhcib  thec,  aub3)  nm  open  bnto 
thee,  tlje  thing  that  thou  haft  requireb. 

zi  ttJhere 


I  ImLhi.  Of 


theth 
th.,l 


•I' 

Trcre 
d. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xii). 


22  naftcrasthouftaftfpotmioftftem 
tftat  are  left  bchmDc,  tins  ts  tl)c  inter 
potation. 

23  $e  tftat  fliau  cnDure  trie  pcnll  in 
that  tunc,  ftatft  Hcpt  ftimfctfc :  tfjrp  tftat 
befallen  into  Danger ,  atcfucft  asftauc 
ltoojfecs,  anD  faitft  toitoarDs  roc  Zi 
migfttir. 

24  Bnolto  this  tftcrefcue,  tftat  they 
ltofticft  be  IcftbcftinDc ,  arcnuwblcCfcD 
tftcn  tftcy  tftat  be  DcaD. 

25  Xftis  istfte  meaning  of  tftc  bill 
on :  nahcreas  tftou  faitocft  a  man  torn 
mmg  top  from  tftc  miDDcft  of  the  &ca : 

26  %\)c  fame  is  ftcc  ltoftom  <5oD  the 
fttgftcft  ftatft  Hcpta  grcatfeafon,  ltofticft 
byftis  oltonc  fclfc  fftall  Dctiucrftis  crca 
turc: ant)  ftcc  fftall  o:Der  tftcm  tftat  are 
IcftbcftinDc. 

27  3lnD  itoftcrcas  tftou  faitocft,  that 
out  of  his  mouth  there  tame  as  a  blafl 
of  ltomDc,  ant  fircanD  ftomie : 

28  ;8nDtftatftcftclDcncufterfito02D, 
no; any  mftrunient  of  itoarre,  but  that 
the  ruffting  in  of  ftun  DcftroycD  the 
itoftolc  multitude  tftat  came  to  fubouc 
fttm,  tins  is  tftc  mtcrp:ctanon. 

29  iScftolD ,  the  Daves  tome ,  itoftcn 
tne  moft  ftigh  lbil  begin  to  Dcltucr  tftcm 
tftat  arctopontftccartft. 

30  3lnD  ftc  fljall  come  to  tftcartomfft: 
ment  of  tftcm  tftat  Dibcll  on  tftc  cartft. 

3 1  2nD  one  (ftail  touDcrtauctofigftt 
agamft  anotfter ,  one  city  agamft  ano^ 
tftcr ,  one  place  agamft  another,  *  one 
people  agamfrauothcr.anDoncceaimc 
agatnft  another. 

32  3inDthc  ttmcfftaibc,  itoftcn tftcfc 
tftings  fftall  tome  to  pafTc ,  auto  tftc 
figncs  mail  Happen  ltofticft  3  fftcitocD 
tftccbcfoic,  anD  then  fftall  my  fonnc  be 
DctiarcD ,  ltoftom  tftou  faitocft  as  aman 
afccnDmg. 

33  2nD  itoftcn  all  tftc  people  ftcareftis 
tooicc,  cucryman  fftall  m  their  oltonc 
lanD, leauc the  battailc they  ftauc  one  & 
gamft  anotfter. 

34  3iuD  an  innumerable  multituDc 
fftalbcgathcrcD  together,  as  thoufaito; 
eft  them  Hulling  to  come ,  auD  to  oucr- 
come  Dim  by  figft  ting. 

35  2Sut  ftcc  fftall  ftanD  topon  tftc  top 
of  tftc  mount  S>ion. 

36  2lnD  5non  fftall  come  ana  fftall  be 
fftcltoeDtoall  men ,  being  pjeparcD  anD 
builDcD ,  lihe  as  tftou  faitocft  tftc  ftill  gta- 
ucnitoitftoutftanDs. 

37  2nD  tftis  my  fonnc  CftaH  rcbuUc 
tftc  ltoicUcD  inucntions  of  tftofc  nations, 


Apocrypha.' 


"Mir. 14. 7. 


ltofticft  fo?  their  itoitbcD  life  arc  fallen  in- 
to tftetempeft, 

3S  3uD  fftall  lay  bcfoic  tftcm  tfteir 
emu  tftougft  ts,anD  tftc  tonncnts  inhere 
Until  tftcy  fftall  begm  to  be  tomuntcD, 
ltoftitft  are  lifce  tonto  a  flame :  anD  lice 
fftaubefrroy  tftemitoitftout  labour ,  by 
tfte  laito  ltoftitft  is  like  tonto  fire. 

39  3nD  itoftercas  tftou  faitoeft  tftat 
ftcegathctcD  anotfter  peaceable  multi 
tube  tonto  fttm , 

4.0  Xftofe  arc  tfte  ten  tribes,  ltoftitft 
lto  ere  cancD  aitoay  phfoncrs  out  of  tfteir 
oltonc  ianD,m  tftc  nmc  of  Ofea  tfte  lung, 
ltoftom  *  £>aimanafar  tftc  lung  of  3lu> 
naicDDc  aitoay  captute ,  anDhec  carieD 
them  oucr  thcitoatcrs,anD  fo  tame  tftey 
mto  anotfter  lanD. 

41  26ut  tftcv  toobc  tftts  tounfant  a 
mougft  tftcmfclues,  tftat  they  itooulD 
leauc  tftc  multituDc  oftftcftcatften,  anD 
goc  fooitft  into  a  furtfter  conutrey, 
ltoftcrcncucrmanlilnD  Ditoclt, 

42  SCftat  tftcy  migftt  tftcrc  titcpc 
tfteir  ftatutcs,  ltoftitft  tftcy  ncucr  hcpt  m 
their  oltonc  lanD 

43  2luD  they  entrcD  mto  ^upruates 
by  tftc  narroito  paflages  of  the  ftiucr. 

44  foztftc  moft  higft  tftcnfftcltocD 
•ftgncsfonftem.anDftclDlrilltfteflooD, 
till  tftcy  ltocrc  paCfcD  oucr. 

4$  $qi  tlnougft  tftat  countrey  tftcrc 
ltoas  a  great  may  to  goc  namely,  of  a 
ycerc  anD  a  ftaife:  anD  tftc  fame  region 
tscaucDilSrfarctft. 

46  XftcnDitoclttftcy tftcrc tontilltftc 
latter  nmc ,  anD  nolto  itoftcn  tftcy  fftall 
begin  to  come, 

47  Xftcftigftcftfftallftaytftcfpzings 
of  tftcftrcamc  againc,  tftat  tftcy  may  go 
ttnougft:  tftcr  efojc  faitocft  tftoutftc  mill 
titubcitoitft  peace. 

45  2Sut  tftofc  tftat  be  IcftbcftinDc  of 
tfty  people ,  arc  tftcy  tftat  are  founD 
itoitftmmybojDcrs. 

49  jHom  itoftcn  ftcc  Dcftroyetft  tftc 
muintuDc  of  tftc  nations  tftat  arc  ga 
tftcrcDtogctftcr,ftcfftalocrenDfttspco 
pic  tftat  rcmamc. 

50  3inD  tftcn  (ftall  ftce  QicVbc  tftcm 
great  itoonDcrs. 

51  XftcnfaiD  31,  OH02D,  tftat  bca 
rrftrulc,n)eitomctftis:3Uftcrcfo2cftauc 
5fccnetftemau  tommmgtop  fiomtftc 
nuDftoftftc&ca; 

51  3nDftcfaiD  tonto  mr&theaetftou 
cauft  tmtftcr  Ccelie  out ,  no:  Knolto  the 
tftmgs  tftat  arc  m  tftc  Dccpe  of  tftc  tea: 
cuenfo  can  no  man  topon  cartft  fee  my 
1  fonnc, 


*  2.Kmes 


•Exod.i.,. 
n.ioftuj. 

1  5,16. 


\\Or.Ar*. 
rath. 


Apocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


"fxoJ. 


fonuc,  ortbofctbatbcttnthhtm,  buttn 
the  bap  nine. 

53  Xbiststbcintcrprctactonoftbc 
brcamcil)btcbtbonfaibeft,anbibbece; 
bp  tljou  onelp  act  here  ligbtcneb. 

5+  if  or  thou  Ijaft  forfattcn  thine  ollmc 
ibap,  anb  applicb  thp  btligcnce  bnto  nip 
laib,anbfougbttt. 

55  Xhp  Ufe  baft  thou  orbcrcb  in  ibu/1 
borne,  anb  Ijaft  callcb  bnbcrftanbmg 
tbp  mother. 

56  3nb  therefore  hatte  3J  (hcibcb 
tlicc  tlic  trcafurcs  of  the  I^icjDcQ:  3ftcc 
other  three  bapes,  31  lUill  fpca&c  other 
tlimgs  bnto  tbec,  anb  bcclarcbnto  tljcc 
mtgbnc  anb  lbonbctous  things. 

57  Xlicn  lbcnt  3  forth  into  the  ficlb 
gming  praifc  anb  tbantts  grcatipbnto 
tbcmofttyigb,  becaufc  of  bis  Vbonbcrs 
lbbicb  be  bib  tn  nine, 

5S  3lnb  becaufc  bee  gotietnctl)  the 
fame,  anb  fuel)  things  as  fall  in  time 
fcafons.anb  there  3  fate  three  bapes. 

CHAP.   XIIII. 

i    A  voice  out  of  a  bufh.  caileth  Eldras,  10  and 

tcllcili  him  that  the  world  waxeth  old.  ti  He 
delireth,  becaule  the  Law  was  burnt,  to  write 
allarrjine,  14  and  is  bid  to  get  (wilt  writers. 
39  Hce  and  they  are  filled  with  vndet (lan- 
ding: 45  but  hce  is  charged  not  10  publifh 
all  that  is  written. 


^F/VS£e$  /3b  it  tame  to  paffc,bpon 

Cr~_<--0>7/  \v>-.„'*  +\i*  Miit-J-t  hAMO]  flit- 1*  IimKm 


the  tbttb  bap  31  fate  tonber 
an  o&e,  anb  bcbolb ,  there 


£  came  a  bopec  out  of  a  bufh. 


i^sissiv  ouct  agamftme,  anbfaib, 
<i=f  bras,  £f  bras. 

i  3nb3lfatb,$ercam3l?Lorb,anb 
3Jftoobbpbponmpfcct. 

3  Xhcn  faio  Dc  bnto  mc,*3nt  the  bull) 
31  otbmautfcftlprcueaic  inp  fclfc  bnto 
q3ofcs,  anb  talttcb  Mtb  him,  ibhcn  tnp 
people  fcrucDtticgppt. 

<\.  2Mb  3i  fent l)im,  anb  leb  ntp  pco 
pie  out  of  egypt,  anb  bzought  huubp 
to  tl)c  mount  of  Sinai,  lbhcrc  3J  Ijclb 
btmbpmcalongfcafon, 

5  3lnD  tolb  him  manp  lbonbcrous 
things ,  anb  flicibco  him  tbcfccrctsof 
the  times ,  anb  tlje  cub ,  anb  commanbeb 
him, faying, 

6  Xhcfc  lborbcs  (bait  thou  bcclarc, 
anb  thcfcfljalt  thou  hibc. 

7  2hiDno\b  31  fap  bnto  thee, 

8  "Chat  thou  lap  bp  in  thp  heart  the 
Qgnes  that  31  haue  (hcibcb,  anb  the 
oreames  that  thou  baft  fecue ,  anb  the 


intcrprctanonsibbichtbouhaftbcatb: 
9  if 02  thou  (bait  be  tattcn  aibap  fcom 
all,  anb  from  henceforth  thou  (halt  re- 
maiitc  lbttb  mp  fonnc,  anb  Ibith  fucb  as 
be  lihe  thee,  bntill  the  nmes  be  enbeb. 

10  ifonhcibojib  hath  loft  his  pouth, 
anb  the  tunes  begin  to  lbajce  olb. 

1 1  jfor  the  iborlb  is  bluibcb  mto 
tibcluc  parts,anb  the  ten  parts  of  it  are 
gone  aircabp,  anb  halfc  of  a  tenth  part. 

11  3lnb  there  rematnetb  that  lbbich 
fsaftcrthchaifcof  the  tenth  part. 

13  ii5olb  tbcrcforcfct  thmc  boufetn 
02bcr,  anb  rcprouc  thp  people,  comfort 
fuch  of  thnnas  bent  trouble,  anbnoib 
renounce  corruption. 

14  %ct  go  fro  thee  mortail  thoughts, 
caft  aibap  the  burbcnsofman,putoff 
noib  the  lbcaltc  nature, 

15  StnbfctaGbc  the  thoughts  that  are 
moft  hcaup  bnto  thee,  anb  hatte  thee 
to  flic  from  tbcfe  tunes. 

16  jfo2*pct  greater  cutis  then  thofc 
ibhich  thou  haft  feme  happen,  (hall  bee 
bone  hereafter. 

17  jfor  looHc  hbtt)  much  the  iborlb 
(hall  be  lbcabcr  through  age :  fo  much 
the  mo2c  (hall  cutis  mcreafc  bpon  them 
that  bibcll  therein. 

is  ifor  the  tructb  is  flebfarre  aibap, 
anb  leafing  is  harb  at  hanb :  ifomoib 
haftcth  the  totfion  to  come,  which  thou 
baftfeenc. 

19  Xhcnanfroerct)3I  before  thce,anb 
fatb, 

io  2Scboib,!Lo2b,3Jibmgoastbou 
hafttommanbebme,  anb  rcproouc  the 
people  lbbicb  arc  p2cfcnt,  bin  thep  that 
fl)allbcborncafteribarD,u>bofhallab= 
monifh  them  i  thus  the  iborlb  is  fct  in 
barhencs,  anb  tbcp  that  bibcll  therein, 
arc  rbttliout  light. 

z 1  if  02  thp  lalb  is  burnt,tbcrcfo2c  no 
man  huolbctb  the  things  thatarcbonc 
of  thee,02  the  \b02tts  that  fhal  begin. 

21  25ut  if  31  haue  founb  grace  before 
'•:  thee,  fenb  the  holy  C5boft  into  tnc ,  anb 
31  (hail  lbrttc  all  that  hath  bene  bone  in 
the  rb02lb ,  fmcc  the  beginning,  lbbicb 
mere  \D21ttcn  in  thp  Haibc,  that  men) 
map  hub  thppath,  anb  that  thep  lbbicb 
ibill  lute  m  the  latter  bapes,  map  Hue. 

ii  3lnD  be  aufiocrcb  mc,raping,C5oc 
tbp  map,  gather  the  people  together, 
anb  fap  bnto  them,  that  thep  fccHctbcc 
|ttotfo2fourticbapcs. 

1+  25utloohcthoup2tparcthtcma 
np|i bore  trees,  anbtahcibitbthcc  5>a 
rca, 2Dabria, S>eleinia, !  Ctanus anb 

3mcl, 


Mat.  14.7 


||0r>« 

lubUuo 
\»*\tf  on 
See  f  t.^4, 


Apocrypl 


la. 


Ch 


ap.xv. 


•Gene 
17  4- 


■Ai\7.  Si 


•Eiek. 


^Qtl,fl)cfcfiuc  tbhuh  ate  r  eabp  to  XbW 
faiftlp. 

15  3nb  tome  hither,  anb  31  (ball 
ughtacanbic  of  bnber  (tanning  in  thine 
heart,  tbtwh  than  not  be  put  out,  till 
the  things  be  pccfo2meb  ibhuh  thou 
fhaltbcgtuuctottmtc. 

26  anbluhcnthouhaftbone,  fomci 
thmgs  (halt  thou  pubitfl) ,  anb  foinc  i 
things  (halt  thou  fhen>  fecretlr  to  the  ] 
VUife:  to  mo:t  olbc  this  hourc  fhaltthou 
beginnetoiojitc. 

i7  Xhcn  ibcntgi  fooitl)  as  he eonv 
manbeb  ,anb  gather  cd  all  the  people  to= , 
gcthcr,anbfaiD, 

2S  $ear  c  thefc  ibo jos,  €>  giftarl. 

i?  *j£>ur  fathers  at  the  beginning 
ibcrcftrangcrsin€gppt,fromlbhcncc 
thcriotrebeliucrcD: 

jo  'anbrccciucbthciaifo  ofufeinhich 
thcr  Kept  not,  nu^ichrcaifohauctranf; 
greffeb  after  them. 

31  Xhenlbasthcianb,cucnthclanb 
of  S>ion,  patteD  among  vou  bp  lot ,  but 
rour  fathers,  aub  rcepour  fciucshaue 
bone  imnghtcoufnetfe,  anb  tjaue  not 
ucptthe  tbap.es  ibhuh  the  ^tghtft  torn- 
manbebrou. 

31 3lnb  faasmuehas  hetsartghte; 
ous  uibge ,  hec  tooKc  from  rou  m  nmc, 
the  thing  that  he  nab  giuen  pott. 

33  anbnoib  arc  pouhcerc,anb  pout 
bjctluenamongtrpon. 

34  Xhctcfojc  if  fo  be  that  von  Will 
fubbucpour  otbncbnberftanbmg ,  anb 
tcfojmepour  hearts ,  v«  0?a«  bcuept 
aimc,  anbaftct  beath  pccfhailobtame 
incrrp. 

3$  5F02  after  beath ,  (hall  the  uibgc- 
ment  tome,  Ibhcn  Vbc  (hall  Hue  agamc : 
anbthcnfhall  thenames  of  thetightc 
ous  bcmanifcft,  anbtheflwHcsofthc 
ungoblpfhailbcbcciarcb. 

36  fUtnoman  thcrcfo2t  tomebnto 
mcnoib.nojfccKcaftermcthcfcfourtp 

bares. 

37  5>o3Jtoofecthcftucmtuashcc 

tommanbeb  me ,  anb  ftc  vbent  into  the 
neio.anbrcmaincb  there. 

38  anbthenert  bar  bcholb  a  borcc 
taileb  mcc  faring ,  cltnas ,  *  open  thr 
mouth  anb  bjutttc  that  3  guicthcc  to 
bjmfec. 

39  Xhen  openeb  3  my  mouth ,  anb 
beholb,hercathebmeafiilinip,iDhitli 

lbas  full  as  it  ttctc  ttnth  ibatcc,  but  the 
toloutofittbasliKcfite. 

40  2uib'JtooRcit,anbbjanBc:anb 
Vbhm  3J  hab  bjunltc  of  tt ,  mp  heart  \>v 


Apocrypha.' 


lOr,  the 
Ug  fa  of  know- 


tcrcb  bnbcrftanbing  :  anb  Unfrbomc 
grcUi  mtnv  b:eft,  fo?  mr  fpint  ftrcng 

theucomrmemojv- 

41  3inbmp  mouth  lbas  openeb  anb 
fl)iitnomo;c. 

41  Xhchighcugaucnnbcrrtanbtng 
bnto  the  ftuc  men,  another  ibiotcthc 
Ibonbcrfull  bifions  of  tlic  mght ,  that 
Ibcrctolb,  tbhiththcp  tmcttmotrSmb 
thevfatcfourtv  bapes ,  anb  thcribiotc 
m  the  bar,  anb  at  night  they  ate  b2cab. 

43  3sfo2 me 3 fpauc in rijc bar ,aub 
hclb  not  mr  tongue  br  night : 

44  gin  fonttp  bares  thcr  tbjotc 
i|tibohunb2cbanbfoutcboobcs.  s°i- 

45  3lnb  it  came  to  paffc  ibhen  the 
fouttr  bares  \bctc  fulfilicb  ,  that  the 
highctt  fpasc, faring,  Xbcftrft  that 
thou  haft  tbnttcn,  publifbopenlr,  that 
thcttwthr  anb  bnlbozthrmartcabit. 

46  25uthcepctbefcucntriaft,tbat 
thou  mar  eft  bcliucr  tljcm  onelr  to  fuel; 
as  be  ibifcamong  the  people. 

47  jfojmtbcm  is  the  fp2ing  of  bn 
bcrftanbing,thcfountamsofnjifcbomc, 
anb  tlje  II  ftrcamc  of  Unolblebge. 

4S  ^nojbibfo. 

CHAP.   XV. 

This  prophccie  is  certaine.  5  God  will 
cake  vengeance  vpon  the  wicked,  n  Vpon 
Eeypt,  iS  Anhombleviiion.  43  Babslon 
and  Afiaaretlueatned. 

m  £boiD,fpcalic  thoum  the 

f«f  cares  of  mr  people  the 

i^yg  ibo2bsof  p:opl]efie,ibhith 

Sjf)  )|  Jibill  put  in  thr mouth, 

.^sS  faith  the  IL020. 

i   3liib  taufc  them  to  be  Unitten  in 

papct :  f02  thcr  ate  faittifull  anb  tt uc. 

3  Jfeatc  not  the  imaginations  a 
gatnft  thee ,  let  not  the  nut ebulitr  of 
thnn  trouble  tljcc ,  tljatfpcahc  agamft 
tnee.  ,    „ 

4  f  02  all  the  bnfaithfull  mail  bic  m 
their  bufatthfulucffc. 

5  ischoib, faith  the  fl-o.'b ,  31  null 
b2ing  plagues  bpou  the  \bo:lb  the 
fiuo?o,famine,bcath,anbbcftrnction. 

6  f 02  michtbneffe  hath  crcrrbinglr 
poliutco  the  iDholc  earth  ,  anb  thcit 
huttfull  \b02ftcs  arc  fulfilicb. 

7  Xhcrcfo2craiththc?Lo2D, 
%   gi  Uirtl  holb  mr  tongue  no  11102c 

as  touching  their  UMCucDticffc ,  ltoljim 
thcr  p2ophanelr  commit,ucithcr  urn  31 
fuffcr  them  m  thofc  things  ,  in  niliuli 
thcr  UncKcDlr  crernfe  the mftlucs :  be 
holb,the  'innocent  %  righteous  bioob 
J  crrcih 


•Roorl  t 
10.  and  i$>. 


z\pocrypha.  II.Efdras.  Apocrypha. 


ccycth  bnto  me.anD  the  foulcs  oftljc  uill 
tompiaine  continually. 

9  2iuDtbcrcfo2C  faith  the  ?Lo2D ,  3 
Vbil  fur  civ  auengc  them ,  aim  rctciuc  un- 
to mc ,  ail  the  innocent  bloob  fcom  a> 
mongtbem. 

10  iSeljoiue,  nip  people  is  lebbc  as  a 
flocactothcaatighten^iMnotfuffet 
tljcm  noU)  to  blbcl  in  the  lanD  ofegypt. 

ii  25ut  3  lbill  bnng  tbemlbub  a 
mighty  bano ,  ant)  a  fir  ctebcb  out  artnc, 
ann  finite  cgypt  ttnth  plagues  as  bc^ 
fo?e,anD  lbiibcftroy  al  the  lant)  thereof. 

1 1  Cgvpt  thai  moutnc,aut> the foun 
Danon  of  it  (ball  bee  fnuttcn  ttntb  the 
plague  ant)  putu(bment,tbat  <Sob  fl)all 
bungtoponit. 

i)  ICbey  that  nil  the  grounb  (hall 
mourne :  foi  their  fecbes  (ball  fane, 
ttyougb  the  blafrtng ,  anb  Ijaue ,  anb 
lbttb  ateatcfull  conftellation. 

14.  naoe  to  the  ib02ib,  anb  them  that 
Dibcll  therein. 

15  foi  the  froojbanb  their  bettrucfc 
onDjaibetb  nigh,  anb  one  people  fhall 
QattD  bp  to  fight  agamft  another ,  anb 
froojbsintbcitbattDs. 

i6  jfoj  there  fbalbc  fcbition  among 
men ,  anb  inuabmg  one  another,  they 
thai  no  t  rcgatb  tlieir  bings,noj  p;inecs, 
anD  the  courfc  of  tljctc  actions  fhall 
ttanD  in  their  polbcr. 

17  3t  man  (bail  Dcfirc  to  got  into  a  ci- 
ticanb  (ball  not  be  able. 

is  Jroz  becaufc  of  their  pjiDe ,  the  eu 
tics  (balbc  troublcb ,  the  houfes  fbalbc 
bcftrovcb,anb  mcnfbalbcafraib. 

19  21  man  fhall  haue  no  pine  bpon 
his  neighbour,  but  fhall  Dcftroy  their 
honfcsibiththefn)02b,ant)fpoilc  their 
goons,  becaufc  ofthc  lacUc  of  tycab.anb 
fo:  great  tribulation. 

20  26eboiD,fatfb<3oD/3JibtllealltO'- 
gcthcr  all  the  Things  of  the  earth  to  re; 
uercnccmc,  lbhicb  arc  from  tberiftng 
ofthc  3>tumr ,  from  the  £>outb,  from 
the  <eaft ,  anb  Hibanus :  to  turue  them 
fclucs one  agamft  another,  anb  repay 
the  things  tbattbeybaucDoucto  them. 

21  5.ihc  as  they  Doc  yet  this  oaybn 
to  my  chofen ,  fo  lbill 3  Doc  alfo  anb  re 
compenfem  their  bofomc,  Xbtis  faith 

tbCjLOJDOOD; 

2i  <.T9y  right  hanb  (hail  notfparc 
the  Rnners,anb  inv  ftuo2D  fljai  not  ccafe 
oner  them ,  that  (l)cb  innocent  bloob 
bpon  earth- 

2  5  Xhe  fire  ts  gone  foonb  from  his 
ibiatlj ,  anb  hath  confumeb  the  founba 


tions  ofthc  earth ,  anD  the  tinners  ubc 
the  ftraib  that  is  nmblcb. 

24  100  to  them  that  fume  anb  beepe 
notinyc6inanDcmcnts,faitbtbe1Lo2D. 

25  3  lbill  not  fparc  them :  goc  vouc 
lbay  ye  chilbjen  from  the  polbcr,  Defile 
not  my  Sanctuary: 

26  jfoitbc  H02D  Unolbcth  all  them 
that  fume  agamft  bint ,  anb  thercfo2C 
bciiucretb  he  them  bttto  Death  anbDc- 
ftcurtion. 

27  JF02  noib  arc  the  plagues  come 
bpon  the  lbbolc  earth,  anD  ye  (ball  re; 
matne  m  them,  to;  <3oD  fbal  not  Dciittct 
you , becaufc  y e  banc  fmneb  agamft  htm. 

28  25cbolb  an  horrible  bifton ,  anb 
the  appearance  thereof  from  tbc^aft. 

29  t©h  ere  the  nations  ofthc  b2agons 
of  Arabia  (ball  come  out  lbitb  man? 
charcts.anb  the  multitubc  of  them  fljat 
be  cartcb  as  the  ibitiDc  bpon  earth ,  that 
all  they  lbbict)  beare  them  ,map  fcarc 
anb  tremble. 

jo  aifo  the  Carmanians  raging  in 
ibjatb,  (ball  go  fo2th  as  tljc  lbilbc  bojes 
ofthc  lbooo  ,  anD  lbttb  great  polbcr 
(hall  they  come ,  anb  toync  battciiibttb 
them ,  anb  (hall  ibaftc  apojtion  ofthc 
ianbofthe^ffv2tans. 

31  2nb  then  (ball  the  bjagons  banc 
the  bpper  hanb,  rcmcmb2tng  their  na> 
ntrcanD  if  they  fhall  mrttc  thcmfelucs, 
confptrtng  together  in  great  polbcr  to 
pcrfecutcrbcm, 

32  Xbcn  thefc  fbalbc  troublcb,  anb 
feccpe  filence  through  their  polbcr,  anb 
(l)aliflce. 

33  ^ttDfrom  the  lanD  of  the  aflwfc 
ans,  (bail  the  enemy  beftege  them,  anb 
confumcfomcoftbcm.anbm  their  bolt 
fhall  be  fcare,  anD  DjeaD  anD  ftrtfc  ||  a-  \iovi»*ft. 
imongtbcirbtngs. 

34  28cboiDclouDsfromtbccau\anD 
i  from  the  ii5o2tb,  bnto  the  S>outb,  anD 
i  they  arc  bcry  h02rtblc  to  looHc  bpon 
full  ofilnatb  anb  ft02tnc. 

35  1-bcy  (ball  finite  one  bpon  an 
other ,  f  they  (ball  finite  Doibuc  a  great 
tutiltituDc  of  ftarrcs  bpon  the  earth, 
cucn  their  olbnc  ftarrc ;  anb  bloob  fljal 
be  from  the  (\u02Dbnt0  the  bcliv. 

36  3lnD  Doung  of  men  bnto  tbeca 
mclsl  hough.  v)r-F-- 

37  3nb  there  (l)albe  great  fcarcfttl  \%™'" 
ncfTc  anD  trembling  bpon  earth  :  atiD 

they  that  fee  the  lbiath,  (hall  be  afraib, 
anD  troubling  (ball  come  bpon  them. 
3S  3inD  then  (liaii  there  come  great 
;  ft02mcs,from  the  ;S>outb,atiD  from  the 

L fionb,\ 


Apocrypha.  Chap. 


XVj. 


A 


\\Or,Jrjlry 


|  Orjttj  vn- 


/iSotfh,*  another  pact  from  thcnacft. 

39  :anb  (hong  ttnnbsfhaiarife  front 
the  «aft,anb  (haiiopen  it  ,anb  the  cloub 
Ibhicb  \)tt  ratfcb  top  in  ttuatl)  ,anb  the 
ftarrc  fttrrcb  to  taufcfearc  toitoarb  the 
Caftanb  i©cfttt>inbe,(haibcbcftropcb. 

40  %\)t  great  anbmtghticcloubes 
fliail  beltftebtopfullof  ttwh ,  anb the 
ftarre,  that  tljep  map  matte  all  the  earth 
afratb,anbthemthattottielthercin,anb 
tijef  (hall  pottle  out  ouer  cuerp  high 
anb  eminent  place,  an  ti  0  mbie  ftatce. 

41  jfire  anb  hailc,anb  flreingftuojos, 
anbmanptt»atcrs,thataii&clbsmapbe 
mil,  anb  all  riucrs  ttnth  thcabunbante 
ofgreantoaters. 

41  ano  thep  (haibjeabcbottmc  the 
ernes,  ana  walls,  mountames  anb  t>us, 
trees  of  the  rbooto,anb  graflc  of  theme 
boibes,  anb  their  tozne. 

43  anb  thep  (bal  goe  ftebfaftlp  tonto 
©abplon,  anbj  ma&e  her  afratb. 

44  %\)cy  thall  come  to  her,  anb  be 
ftcge  her,  the  ftarrc  anb  all  ttuath  (hail 
ti)0>  pottwe  out  topon  her,  then  (hall  the 
butt  antofmohegoctop  tonto  thcheaucn: 
anballthepthatbcatoouthcr,  (hall  be- 

itoaiU;  her. 

45  "anb  thep  that  rcmatne  tonber 
her ,  (hall  boc  Ceruicc  tonto  them  that 
haueputhettnfeate. 

46  ^nb  thou  afia  that  art  Upatta 
bcr  ofthehopeofasabplon,  auoartrhc 
gloipofhctperfon: 

47  naoc  be  tonto  thee  thou  ttijctch 
becaufe  thou  haft  maoc  thp  fclfe  liRe  bn 
to  her,  anb  haft  bccRtthp  baugfjtcrs  in 
\toho:ebome,thatthepnught  plcafcanb 
glozp  m  thP  louers ,  ltohich  haueaimap 
befireb  to  commit  tbhozbonicttuth  thee. 

48  Xhouhaftfoiioitoebhccthatis 
hatcb  in  althctttiozRsanbinuentions : 
rhercfo2Cfapth(Sob, 

49  3)  vuill  tenb  plagues  topon  thee : 
ttnbottJhoob,  poucrttc,  famine,  ftnozo, 
anb  pcfttlente,to  tbaftc  thp  houfes  ttoith 
beftructionatibbeath. 

$0  anbthegiozpofthppoitoermall 
be  bzleb  top  as  flourc,  itohcn  the  hcatc 
Q)auartfethatisfcnt  once  thee. 

51  Xhou  thaJt  bCE  ltoeabeneb  as  a 
poojc  ttioman  ttnth  ftripes,anb  as  one 
chamfeo  ttnth  itoounbes,  fo  that  the 
mightic  anb  louers  (hail  not  be  able  to 

rcceiue  thee.  _  .      r 

<,\  aaoulD  3  ttnth  icaloufic  hauc  10 

pjoccettcb  aganift  thec,fatth  the  JLoft, 
53  gjf  thou  haobettnotantoap  (lame 

mpebofen,  eramngtheftioueof  thmc 


pocrypJ 


ia.i 


hanbs,?£apingouer  their  tocab.itohcn 
thouttjaftbzunRen, 

54  £>et  foozth  the  beautp  of  thp 
countenance. 

55  3CI)c  retbarb  of thp  tohozebotue 
(hall  be  in  thp  bofome ,  thecefozc  (halt 
tl)ou  rcceiue  recompenfe. 

56  Hine  as  thou  haft  bone  tonto  nip 
chofen ,  fapth  the  ?Lo;b  :  eucn  fo  (hall 
©ob  Doe  tonto  thee,  anb  (hailbeliucr 
thee  into  mtfchiefe. 

57  XhpchUbzenftjallbie  of  hunger, 
anb  thou  (halt  fall  thzough  the  fiuozb : 
thp  cities  (halbe  bzoben  bottmc ,  anb  all 
thine  (hallpcrifl)  ttnth  thcftoozbin  the 
fielb. 

5S  Xhep  that  be  in  the  mountatnes 
(hall  bic  ofhunger,anb  tatc  their  ottmc 
flenj ,  anb  DnnRe  their  ottmc  bioob,  fo; 
toerp  hunger  of  bzeab,  9  thirft  of  itoatcr. 

59  Xhou,as  tonhappp,  (halt  come 
through  the£>ca,  anb  rcceiue  plagues 
agatne. 

60  anb  m  the  paffagc,  thep  (hall  ru(h 
onthcibiectttc,  anb  (hall  bcttrop  fomc 
pomonof  chpianb,  anb  confumepart 
of  thp  glozp,anb  (tjallrcturne  to  23abp 
ion  that  itoas  beftropeb. 

61  anb  thou  (halt  be  caft  bottme  bp 
them,  as  ftnbblc,  anb  thep  fljallbc  tonto 
theeasflte, 

61  anb  (hail  confumc  thee  anb  thp 
cities,thp  lanb  anb  thp  mountatnes,  all 
thpttioobsanDchpfruitfull  trees  fl)all 
thep  burne  top  ttnth  fire. 

6j  XhP  chtlb?cn  (hall  thep  carp  & 
ltoap  capnue,  anb  loofee  ltohat  tliou  haft, 
thcpuiailfpoilcit^nbllmarrcthebea^ 
tp  of  thp  fate. 

CHAP.   XVI. 

Babylon  and  otherplacesarethieatned  with 
plaeues  that  cannot  be  auoided:  15  andwich 
defolation.  40  The  feruants  of  the  Lorde 
niuft  lookc  for  troubles :  51  and  not  hide 
their  dimes,  74  but  leaue  tbero  ,  and  they 
(hall  be  deliueied. 

^Dc  be  bnto  thec,25abplon 
anb  afta,itooc  be  tonto  thee 
egpptanb&pna. 
z  (5irb  top  pour  felucs 
.  J&,  ttnth  clothes  of  fatlieanb 
baite,  bcVbaiicpotn:chtlb:cn,  atibbcfo- 
rp,fo?pourbeftcucttouisathanb. 

3  a  fiuojb  is  fent  topon  pou ,  anb 
ttoho  map  turnc  it  bacbe; 

4  a  fire  is  fent  among  pou ,  anb 
ttho  map  quench  it; 

5  plagues  are  fent  tonto  pou  ,  anb 

flnnn         what 


t  Lttl.drah. 


\Or,tUmiJl. 


Apocrypha. 


II.Efdras. Apocrypha, 


\0't'*l* 


ibbat  is  be  that  map  bjtue  them  atbay  t 

6  0f)ay  any  man  Dnuc  albay  a  bun* 
gry  flion  tn  the  vboob  <  02  map  any  one 
gucntb  tbcfirem  ftubblc ,  lbbcn  it  bath 
begun  to  burner 

7  $)ayonetutneagainetbearrotb 
that  is  Cljot  of  a  ftrong  archer  < 

s  Xbe  migbfie  ILojb  fenbetb  the 
plagues,  anb ibbo  is  bee  that  cantyiuc 
fbematbay? 

9  31  fire  (ball  goe  foojtb  from  Ins 
voml) :  *  lbb o  ts  be  that  may  emend)  it  < 

io  $e  (bail  eaft  lightnings,  anb  ibbo 
mall  not  feace  i  be  (ball  tbtmber,  anb 
Vbbofballnotbeafraib* 

n  Xbe?Lo2b  (ball  tb,icatcn,anD  ibbo 
dun  not  be  bttetly  beaten  to  poibbcr 
atbisp2efence; 

1 1  Xbe  earth  quartet!)  anb  the  foun< 
cations  thereof,  the  fcaanfeth  top  tbith 
lbauesfrom  thebcepe,  anb  tbeibaues 
of  it  ate  ttoubleb,  anb  the  fifbes  thereof 
alfo  befoje  the  3Lo2b,  anb  before  the  glo- 
neofbispolber. 

ij  jF  oz  ftrong  ts  his  right  hanb  that 
benbeth  the  boib,  bis  arroibcs  that  bee 
(bootetb  are  tbarpe,anb  (ball  not  millc 
lbbcn  they  begin  to  bee  (hot  into  the 
enbsoftbcibojlD. 

14  2Sebolb,tbepiagucsarefent,anD 
(hall  not  returne  agamc ,  bntill  they 
tome  bpon  the  earth. 

15  Xhe  fire  isftinblcb,  anb  (hall  not 
be  put  out,  till  it  toufumc  tbefounbati 
on  of  the  earth. 

16  il  iu e  as  an  arrotb  winch  is  (hot 
of  a  migbtic  arthcr  retutnerb  not  back 
marb:encnfotheptaguesthat(hailbe 
fent  upon  earth,  (hall  not  returne  a* 
game. 

17  iboc  is  me,  tboe  is  me,  ibbo  tbill 
beltner  mc  in  thofc  bayes? 

is  Xhcbegmmngoffozroroes,  anb 
great  mournings,  the  beginning  of  fa- 
mine, anb  great  Death:  the  beginning 
of  ibarres,  anb  tbepoibcrs  (hall  ftanb 
mfcarc ,  the  beginning  of  etuis,  ibbat 
(hall  II  boc  lbbcn  thefc  euils  (hai  tome; 

19  25eholb,famine,  anb  plague,  tri- 
bulation anb  anguifi) ,  arc  (cut  as  fcour* 
gesfoiamenbment. 

20  25utfo:  all  thefe  things  they  (hall 
notturnefromtbciribicaebncs,  no?be 
alibay  nutibfull  of  tbefcoutcjes. 

ii  26ebolb,bictual3(hallbefogooo 
chcapc  bpon  earth,  that  they  (hal  tbtnb 
then  iff  luce  to  be  m  go  ob  caff,  anbeuen 
then  (ball  lleuiis  grottic  bpon  earth, 
fiuojb,  famine,  anb  great  confuGon. 


22  jfoi  many  of  them  that  DiDell  top; 
on  earth, (ball  pettfb  of  famme,anb  the 
other  that  eftape  the  hunger,  than  the 
frooJD  Dtftroy. 

23  3Cnb  the  DeaD  (hall  be  taft  out  as 
ooung,anb  there  (haibcno  man  to  torn- 
fo?tthem,fo2the  earth  (hall  bcttiaOeb, 
anb  the  nties  (hall  be  tall  bolbne. 

24  Xhere  (hail  be  no  man  left  to  till 
the  earth,  anb  to  foib  it. 

25  1the  trees  (hall  giue  fruite,  anb 
ibbo  (hall gather  them  < 

26  Che  grapes  (hall  ripe,  anb  tbho 
(hail  treabe  them  <  foz  all  plates  (hall  be 
befoiatcofmen. 

27  &otbatoncman(bailbcfireto 
fee  another,  anb  to  bcare  bisboyec. 

28  5P02  of  a  title  there  (halbetm  left, 
anb  ttbo  of  the  fielD  tbhith  (hall  h»be 
themfelues  m  the  fbicftc  groues ,  anb 
in  the  clefts  of  rocttes. 

29  ^s  in  an  02tharD  of  oliues,  bpon 
enery  tree  there  are  left  th2te  o.2foure 
oliues : 

jo  £)2,tbhenasabincyarbi£!gathe^ 
reb,  there  are  left  fome  clutters  of  them 
that  biligcntly  fees  rtttougb^bmeyarb: 

31  Cucnfom  thofc  bayes  there  (haibc 
tbjec  02  fourc  left  by  them  that  fearch 
thctr  houfestbith  the(h)02b. 

32  3nb  the  earth  (hall  be  laib  ibaftc, 
anb  the  fielbsthcrof  (hal  tbareolb,anb 
her  tbayes  anb  all  her  paths  (hall  grow 
full  of  tho2ncs,becaufe  no  man  tV>al  tea- 
uaiicthcrcth2ongl). 

33  3Ebe  btrginsvball  nionrnc  hailing 
nobnbcgromes,plbomen(baimournc 
haumgno  hnfbanbs,  their  baugbtets 
(hall  tuournc haulng no  helpers. 

34  'Jntheujarrcs  (hall  their  bjibe^ 
gromes  bee  bettroyeb ,  anb  their  buf 
banbs  (ball  pcrt(h  of  famine. 

i<,  ftcarc  noU)  thefc  things,  anb  tm 
oerftanbthcm,ycferuantsofthc5Lo2b. 

36  25cholbthcVbo2bofthc?Lo2b,rc' 
ceutcit,bclecuc  not  the  goosof  lbbom 
thc?lo2bfpahc. 

37  Beholb,  theplagucsbjarbnigh, 
anbarcnotflacBC. 

38  3(sibbenaibomanibifbcbtlbcin 
the  ninth  month  bangetbfiwtb  her  fon, 
rottbinuboo2th2CCbourcsofbcrbirtb 
great  panics  compafle  her  Vbombe, 
lbbicb  paincs,  lbbcn  the  chtlb  tommeth 
fo2tb,tbcy  (lactic  notamoment, 

39  Cucnfo  (hall  not  the  plagues  bec 
dacKc  to  come  bpon  the  earth,  anb  the 
jlb02lb  (hail  mourne,  anb  fojrolbesfbai 
,  come  bpon  it  on  cuery  fibe. 

40  ©my 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xvj. 


'Luke  1 6. 
'5- 

"Gciic.i.i. 


•Pfal.J4«. 
4- 


40  £)  my  people ,  Ifrcare  my  tbo?D 
ma&c  you  teat?  to  the  battell,  anb  in 
thofe  cutis ,  be  cuen  as  ptigcimcs  bpon 
ttjc  cattl). 

41  $e  tf)at  fellefhlctbunbeashec 
that  flectb  aibay  :attb  he  that  buyeth,as 
one  tbat  lbtuioofc. 

42  $e  that  occuptctb  mcrcbanbtec, 
as  he  that  bab  no  pjofit  bv  it :  anb  he 
that  builbetb ,  as  hec  that  Ojall  not 
blbell  therein. 

43  i^e  that  fotbctb,  as  if  He  fboulb 
notreape:fo  alfo  be  that  planteth  the 
buieyarb,  as  he  that  (bal  not  gather  the 
gcapes. 

44  Chcy  that  mart?,  as  they  that 
niau  get  no  thiuwtuanb  they  that  mar- 
ricnot,astheibibotbcrs. 

45  3inb  therefore the? that labour, 
labour  in  bame. 

4  6  foi  ftrangcrs  Ojail  rcape  their 
fruits,  anb  fpolle  their  goobs,  oner- 
thjoibe  tbetc  honfes  anb  tabc  their 
ctjilbjcn  capttues,fo2  m  taptiutty  anb  fa- 
mine (ball  they  get  chtUucn. 

47  2nb  they  that  occupy  their  mcr^ 
cbanbrse  ttitth  robbery,  tljc  mo?c  they 
oecse  tbett  titties,  then;  houfes,  their 
poffeffions  anb  tbeir  oronc  perfons : 

48  Xbcmo2cibtU31bcangryftith 
tbemfo2tbetrfmnc,fajtbtbe!Lo2b. 

49  fLiUc  as  an  mho2C  ctmtcth  a 
ngbt  honcft  anb  bcttuous  iboman : 

50  &o  (ball  ttgbteoufncffe  bate  ini- 
quity ,  lbbenuje  berhttl)  ber  fclfc ,  anb 
(bail  atcufe  ber ,  to  brr  face,  lbben  he 
tomtnetb  tbat  (baiiocfcnb  bun  tbat  at; 
ugently  tearcbetbout  cueryfinnebpon 

earth.  ,^  , 

51  3lnbtberfo2Cbcycc  notnfecthcr' 
unto,  no2  totrjc  Vb02bes  tbercof. 

52  5?02yet  a  little  iniqume  (ball  be 
taftcn  aibay  out  of  tbc  eartb,anb  rtgbtc 
oufneffe  fl)all  r  eigne  among  you. 

53  Hct  not  rt)c fmncr  fay  tbat  bebatb 
notCnneb  :fo2  dpobfbail  burnc  toaies 
offirc  bpon  rnsheab,ibhitb  faith  befcuc 
tbc  Ho2b  ©oD  anb  bis  gio?y ,  Uhauc 
notfmneb.  ,    „ 

54  25ebolb,tbctLo2btmotbcth  all 
the  Bw&cs  of  mot ,  'tbeir  imaginary 
ons,  tbeir  thoughts,  anb  their  hearts  t 

55  tt3bithfpabebuttbcib02b,iet  the 
earth  bcmabe;anbtnbasma&e:let  the 
heauen  be  mabe ,  anb  it  lbas  treatcb. 

56  3Jn  his  ibo2b  were  the  frarrcs 
mabe,  anb  he  bnometh  the  *  number  of 

J57  *!^c  fearchctfj  the  beepe ,  anb  tljc 


Apocrypha- 


tccafures  thereof,he  hath  meafureb  the 
&ca,anb  lbhat  it  eontametb. 

53  tycljatbfbuttbe&camtbcmibft 
of  the  tbatets ,  anb  ibith  his  rbo2b 
hath  he  bangeb  the  earth  bpon  the  lba- 
tcrs. 

59  $ctp2eabcthouttheheauensitite 
abauit,bpon  the  ibaters hath  he foun; 
bcbit. 

60  gin  the  befert  hath  bee  mabe 
fp2lngs  of  water ,  anb  pooles  bpon 
the  tops  of  the  mountames ,  that  the 
floobs  might  pottw  bolbne  from  tljc 
high  rotbes  to  tbater  the  earth. 

6i  ^emabeman,  anb  put  his  heart 
in  the  mibftof  tljcboby ,  anbgauchim 
b2eath,ltfc,anb  bnbcrOanbing. 

62,  jsca  ano  the  fpitit  of  almighty 
Oob,  Ibbtchmabc ail  things,  anb  fear; 
chetlj  out  ailljibbcn  tljmgs  tn  the  fcttcts 
of  the  earth. 

63  Purely  he  tmoibcth  your  tnuctv 
ttons  ,  anb  tbljat  you  tljmltc  tn  your 
hearts,cucnthemtbatfmnc,anbiboulb 
hibe  their  fmne. 

64  Xhcrefo2ehathtlje1L02bcract' 
ly  fcarcljcb  out  all  your  ibo?fecs,  anb  Ijc 
null  put  you  all  to  (bamc. 

65  3nb  Vbhcn  your  fumes  arc 
b2ougbt  foo2tlj  yce  fbaibc  afljameb  bc- 
fo2c  men.anb  your  oibne  fumes  (ball  be 
your  accufcrs  tn  tljatbay. 

66  iDhanbiiiyctboc^boibttHii 
yee  hibe  your  fmncs  before  ©ob  anb 
his  3ingels  < 

67  2Bcholb ,  <Sob  himfclfe  is  tljc 
tubgc ,  ftare  Ijim  :  leauc  off  from  your 
fmncs,anb  fo2get  your  iniquities  to  me< 
bleno  mo2eibith  tbcm  fo2  cuer,  foO>aii 
©ob  leab  you  fo?th ,  anb  ocltucr  you 
from  all  trouble. 

63  5foi  bcholb ,  the  bunting  vo;at\t 
of  a  great  muintube  is  binblcb  oner 
you,  anb  they  fbail  tabc  aibay  tertamc 
of  you ,  anb  fcebe  you  |!  being  tble  tbitlj 
things  offer cb  touto  tbolcs. 

69  Znn  they  that  confentbnto  them 
(hall  be  hab  tn  bcnGon ,  anb  tn  repjotb, 
anbrrobenbnbcrfoote. 

70  jfo2  there  fball  be  m  cuery  place, 
anb  tn  the  ncrtnttcs  a  great  utfur  reck- 
on bpon  tbofc  that  feare  the  ?lo2b. 

71  Xheyfballbclihemabmtn.fpa' 
ring  noncbutfhllfpotling  anb  bcOroy- 
mgthofe  that  feare  the  |Lo2b. 

71  5ro2  they  fliaimaffe  anbtahe  a 
lbay  their  gooos,  anbtafttljemout  of 
their  hottfes. 

73  -SEbeufbail theybelmoibenibho 
tfl  n  n  n  %  arc 


\Or}bein^ 

vr.tibletore- 

ffl. 


Apocrypha. 


Tobit. 


Apocrypha.! 


||0iyifl/. 


"i  .King,  17. 

\0r,  Redes 

ofNepbtba/i 
t  Guide, 
Iwig.^  6. 


are  mp  chofcn,  anb  thep  fhaUbetncb, 
asthegolbtntljefrcc: 

74.  $?earc ,  j©  peemp  beloucb,rattlj 
the  ?Lo2b :  bcijolb ,  the  bapes  of  trouble 
arc  at  haiib  ,  but  3  xo\\\  beltuct  you 
from  the  fame. 

75  25e  pee  not  arratb,ncifhcr  Doubt, 
fo;d5obispom;guibe, 

76  3uibtljegutbcofthem  WhoUecpc 
mp  commaunDcmcnts ,  ano  pzecepts, 
faith  the  ?Lo?D  ©ob  ,  2Let  not  pout 


Qnnes  Weigh  pou  bownc,  ano  let  not 
your  iniquities  lift  top  themfelues. 

77  naoe  bee  tonto  them  that  arc 
bouno  With  tl)cit  finncs,anb  touereb 
With  their  iniquities :  Uhc  as  aficlots 
touereb  ouer  with  bufljes,  anb  tl)c  path 
thereof  touereb  Witljthomes,  that  no 
tnanmaptraucll  through. 

78  3t  is  IlleftPnozeOeb,  anb  is  call 
into  the  fire ,  to  bee  tonfumcb  therfr 
With. 


1 


TOBIT. 


CHAP.    I. 

Tobithis  ftocke ,  and  deuotion  in  his  youth, 
o  His  marriage,  10  And  captiuitie,  13 
His  preferment,  16  Almes  and  chantiein 
bury  ing  the  dead,  1 5  For  which  he  is  accufed 
andflieth,  2.1  And  after  rcturneth  to  Niniuc. 

$  €    2500BC  Of 

the  ||  tbojDcs  of 
Xobit ,  fonnc  of 
Xobicl ,  the  fon 
of  ananicl ,  the 
fonne  of  3lDucl, 
tlje  fonne  of  <5& 
bad ,  of  the  feeb 
of  2Uacl ,  of  tlje 
Xnbc  of  jBephtljalt, 

z  naho  m  tlje  time  of  <£ncmcffar 
bins  of  the  2tffpjians ,  was leb  captiuc 
out  oPHDifbe  Which  is  at  tlje  rtgljt 
hanb  of  that  title ,  Which  is  tailcb  1 1  pjo* 
peelp  ji3epljthaiun<!5aiac  abouc^fer. 
$  3  Xobit  hauc  waiUcD  an  tlje 
bapes  of  mp  Ufe  m  trjc  wap  of  tructlj, 
ano  luthcc ,  anb  3  bib  man?  almes 
beebs  to  mpb2cfljjcn,anD  tup  nation, 
Who  came  With  me  to  4l3ineuc  into  tlje 
lanbofthc3uTp2ians. 

4  3inb  When  31  was  in  mine  otbne 
tountrcv ,  mtlje  lanb  of  Jfrael,  being 
but  pons,  all  tlje  tribe  of  jftcphthali  nip 
fatljer ,  fell  from  the  houfc  of  3Jcrtifa 
lem,  Which  Was  chofcn  out  ofail  tlje 
tribes  of  ^fracl ,  that  all  the  tribes 
uJoulbfatrtfitcthcreibljcrethcXcmplc 
ofthchabitattouofthcmofttjtghwas 
confetrateb,  ano  built  foz  all  ages. 
i   5   j2oW  all  the  tribes  Which  fose- 


trjee  rcuoltcb,  anb  thchoufe  of  mp  fa> 
thcr /rJcpljthali  facrtfieebbnto  the'hci; 
ferzBaal, 

6  2Sut  3  alone  Went  often  to  ^etu; 
falcm  at  the  JFeafls  ,as  it  was  ojbcmcb 
bnto  al  tlje  people  of  Jfracl  bp  an  cticc 
laftmg  bctrec,  *  haumg  tlje  firtt  fruits, 
anb  tenths  of  cncrcafc,Wtth  tljat  ibhitlj 
was  ftrft  (home,  ano  them  gaue3Jat 
tljeaitar  to  tlje  ^leftestljctljtibienof 
3arou. 

7  Xhefirft  tenth  part  of  alintrcafe, 
'Dgauctothc  fonucsof  ||3taron,  Who 
miniltrco  at3lerufalem:  another  tenth 
part  3  folb  awap,  anb  went,  anb  fpent 
ttcucrp  pecrc  at  "Jcrufaiem. 

8  anDthcthtrD^gaucimtorhem 
to  Whom  it  was  meet ,  as  sDcboja  nip 
fathers  mother  hao  tommanbebmee, 
bccaufc3l  was  left  an  ozphanc  bp  mp 
father. 

9  iFurthcrmojcWhcnjgwaseomc 
to  tlje  age  of  a  man,  3  marnco  3ltma 
of  nunc  *  ottme  ftinreb,  anb  of  her  3  be 
gateXobias. 

io  3inD  When  we  Were  caricb  awap 
taptiues  to  ^I5incue ,  all  mp  bmlj'tn, 
anb  thofe  that  Were  of  mp  bmreb ,  bib 
catc  of  the*  b:cab  of  the  Pennies. 

ii  23ut3J  Kept  tmpfclfc  from  eating 

1 1 2Sccaufc  3  remembzeb  c>ob  ibitlj 
all  mp  heart. 

u  5lnb  the  moll  tyigh  gauc  me  grace, 
anb  fauour  bcfozcCnemeffar ,  fo  tljat 
3  Was  his  tpurucpotir. 

14  3lnD  3  Went  into  t^cbia.anb  left 
in  trull  with  C5abacl,thc  toother  oi©iV 
totas  ||  at  Bagcs  a  citic  of  s-Pebia.tcn  ta- 
lents of  Qlucr. 

!">  iFlow 


\Or,(hHt 


"l.King.12. 
jO.Ortiolbc 
power  of 
B«*l,or  the 
JodTSaal. 


*  Exoil.  22 

19.deu.12. 
6. 


\Or.Lr, 


\Crnk, 
ijcr. 

\\Or.wibe 

litndorceun- 

trtyefMe* 


*  Num.  30. 
7- 

*  Gene.  45. 

3  2. 

f  Gteel^mj 

[oflc. 

Apocrypha. 


Cha 


p.ij. 


{  qr.  the 
Wilt.  c( 
wbem  trert 
vi/ciifd. 


\\Or,Mit 

the  iraUct. 


#2.Kin.l9 

3J,3«. ''■>' 

n-i6v- 
eccius.48. 

i,*t  1. 
macc.7.41 

1.11U.    fc. 

«s>. 


•  J.King. 

19.37-  »• 
chr.32.11. 
||Or,£/«- 

Huddon. 


U\Or,Efi, 

HaMm. 


15  ji5o\D  lDhctt<£ncmclTactt>asDcaD, 
:§>cnnachenb  bis  fonnc  rc.gncb  m  l)is 
ftcaD,  t  ibhofc  cftatc  ibas  trottblcD,  that 
3  coulo  not  goc  into  QDcDta. 

16  anDiutbctmteof<£nemelTar,3} 
gauemany  almcs  to  my  bzefbjctt,  anD 
gauc  my  b:cab  to  tf»c  hungry, 

17  anD  my  clothes  to  the  nattcD : 
anD  if  3  faU)  any  of  mp  nation  Dean ,  02 
ratt!|abouttbcUMllcsof>fMieue,3Jbu 
ricDbim. 

18  anD  tftbe  lung  Sennacherib  Uat> 
aaiiieany,tbben  bceibascome,  *  anD 
flcDDcfeom  ^JttDca,  5  buneDtbempji 
uily,(f02inbts  Vbjatb  bee  atllcDmany) 
but  the  boDles  lbere  not  fount),  tbben 
tbcylbcrc  fought  fo?  of  the  lung. 

19  anDlbhcnoncofthciiSincuitcs 
ibent,  ant)  complamcD  of  me  to  the  lung 
tbatlj  bunco  them ,  anD  ftiD ntp fclfc : 
DttDccQanDuig  that  3  tbas  fought  foi 
to  be  put  to  Death ,  3  UntbDjcib  my  fclfc 
fo?  fcarc. 

zc  Xhtuailmy gooDSVbetcfombly 
taftcn  aroay,  neither  ibas  there  any 
thing  left  me,bcfiDcs  my  unfeanna,anD 
my  fonnc  Zobias. 

ii  anD  there  paflcD  not  fiucanD  fir 
tteDaycs  befojenuo  ofhisfonncs'ftil- 
lett  hi'" » anD  they  AeD  into  the  moun- 
tainesof  ataratb,anD  ||  SarcbeDonus 
bis  fonnc  reigneD  in  btsfteaD ,  who  ap 
pointeuoucr  his  fathers  accounts,  anb 
oucr  all  his  affaires ,  acbiacbarusmy 
brother  attacls  fonnc. 

zz  anD  acbtacbarus  entreating  foi 
me,  3  rcturucb  to  tfmcuc :  ttott)  acbt^ 
acharus  ibas  Cup-  bearer,  anb  beeper 
of  the  £>tgnet,anD5>tCiDatD,anD  oucr- 
fcer  of  the  accountS:anD||£>arcbeDouus 
appointeD  hunncrt  Ditto  bun :  anb  bee 
ibasmy  brothers  fonnc. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Tobit  leaueth  his  meate  to  bury  the  dead, 
10  and  becommeth  blmdc.  n  Hisi-vifeta- 
keth  in  worke  to  gee  her  lining.  14  Herhul- 
band  and  (he  fall  out  about  a  kidde. 

&tt)  lDben  3  Uias  come 

home  agattte,  attDmy  lDtfe 

anna  ibas  reftojeb  Dnto 

mc ,  lDttb  my  fonnc  %& 

..bias,inthcfcaftof0ntte^ 

lDhuh  is  the  holy  fcaft  of  the  fc 

uenibecfecs,  there  ibas  a  goob  Dinner 

pjepar  co  mc,  m  the  lUljicl)  3  fate  bottm 

to  eatc. 

i   anD  lbhcn  3  falb  abunbancc  of 


Apocrypha. 


meate ,  3  fayb  to  my  fonne ,  ©oe  anb 
b;mg  Vbhat  pooje  man  focuec  thou 
fhaitfinbe  outof  our  tyetbien ,  who  is 
minbfullof  thcJLojD ,  anb  loe,3  tane 
fojthcc 

j  26ut  lie  tame  agamc  ant)  faio,  jfa 
thcr.oneofour  nation  is  ttranglcD,anb 
tscafr  out  in  the  market  place. 

4  %\)m  before  3  baD  tafteb  of  any 
tneatc ,  3  fact  bpanDtooUeljim  Dp  in- 
to a  ronmc ,  Dnttll  the  goingboiDnc  of 
tljc  £>unne. 

5  Xben'JfrctHrnebanDibalbeDmv 
felfc  ,anb  ate  my  meate  in  beauuteffe,  " 

6  ftemcmbnng  that  prophetic  *  of 
amos ,  ashec  fatb  i  J*our  fcafls  than  be 
tumcb  into  mourning,  anb  all  your 
mirth  into  lamentation. 

7  3£hercfo2c3llDcpt:anD  after  the 
going  DoiDnc  of  the  £>unne,  3  u»ent 
anD  maDc  a  grauc,  anD  buricD  him. 

8  25ut  my  neighbours  moc&eD  me, 
anb  faib,  %his  man  is  not  yet  aftaiDe 
to  be  put  to  Death  fo?  this  matter,*  lbho 
ficDDc  arbay,  anD  yet  loc,  he  bunco)  tlje 
DcaD  agatne. 

9  Xhc  fame  night  alfo  3  rctumeD 
from  the  bunail ,  anb  Qcpt  bv  the  ibau 
of  my  court  yarD ,  being  pollutcD ,  anD 
my  face  lbas  bncoucreD : 

io  anD  3!  fenclbe  not  that  there 
tbetc  ||  ^parroibes  m  tlje  mall ,  anD 
nunc  eyes  being  open,  the  &parroibes 
mutcD  roarme  Doung  into  mine  eyes, 
anD  a  II  rbhitcneffe  tame  tit  mine  t^es, 
anD  3  ibent  to  the  phyficians,  but 
they  helptD  ntc  not :  mozcoucc  art)ta? 
charusDtDtiourifhmcc,  Dnttll  3  ibcnt 
into  (Elymais. 

1 1  anD  my  Mc  anna  J  DiD  tabc  TEbo- 
mcnsU)02bcstoDoe. 

iz  anb  ibljcn  0)cc  hab  fcttt  ||  them 
home  to  the  owners,  they  payD  her 
ibagcs,  anD  gauc  her  alfo  befiDcs  a  UiD. 

i}  anDlbhcn  itibas  mmtnehoufe, 
ano  beganne  to  eric,  3  faiD  Ditto  her, 
JFtomlbhcnce  is  this  biDDc;  is  it  not 
Qollcn?  rcnbcrtt  tothcoiDncrs,*  fo;tt 
isnot  lavbfttll  to  eatc  any  thing  that  is 
ftollcn. 

14  *2Sittfuce  rcplycD  Dpon  mc,  'Jit 
lbas  guten  fon  a  gift  mojc  then  the  iba? 
ges:  ^oiDbeit  31  DiD  not  bclecuc  her, 
but  babe  her  rcnDer  it  to  thcolbttcts: 
anb'J  iDas  abaflicDathcr.  z3utfl)cre.' 
plyco  Dpott  me,  nahcrc  arc  thine  almes, 
anD  thy  righteous  dccdcs  t  II  bchoio, 
tljottanD all  thy  uwhcs  arc  imoiben. 

Nnnm        CHAP 


1  Amos 


•Cho-i.Ip. 


3 


\\0rtSwal- 

lorces. 


Qrjtiti 
fumes. 


Or,  rrjrf  A*- 
rediojptnne 
in  the  wo- 
meat  roQtns, 


\\Or,ho 
jrorl^. 


'Deu.ii.i 


ub  :.c. 


\\Qr,Ue*t! 
tntn?n*e 
ij-.OTren  to 

tbet. 


62 


Apocrypha. 


Tobit. 


Apocrypha. 


'Dcut.aS. 
'5>>7- 


\\Or,difm,f- 
(cd.tr  dill- 


CHAP.    III. 


Tobit  ^rieued  with  his  wiues  taunts,  prayeth. 
11  Sara  reprocbed  by  her  fathers  maides, 
praycth  alio.  17  An  Angel  is  fent  tohelpe 
them  both. 

!g=S  $en3Jbcmg  grieutb,  tin 
#^y  mccpcanbuimyfctfroibc 
p|^p?ayeb,faymg, 
%0&  t  2©fLo?b,tbouartiu{I 
3fe&  anb  all  thy  ttwftcs ,  ant)  | 
all  thy  ibayes  ate  merne  anb  tructb, 
ant)  thou  uiDgctt  trucly  ?  tuOlv  fo;  cucr. 
3  Remember  nic,  ant)  loofee  on  me, 
punilb  me  notfo?my  Gnncs  ann  igno 
ranccs^nt)  the  finnes  of  my  fatbcrs,U)bo 
baucrinncDbcfo?cthce. 

4.  5fo.2  tbey  obeyeb  not  tlTp  common* 
Demmts,lbhcrcfo?e  thou  baft  bclmcrcb 
bs*fo?afpoilc,anbbntoraptiumc,anb 
bnto  beatb,  anb  fo?  ap?ouctbc  of  re- 
p?ocb  to  all  the  nations  among  lbbont 
rbeatcbtfperfeb. 

$  anb  notb  thy  iubgmcntsarc  ma 
ny anb true:  Deale  ibirbmcacco?Ding 
to  myfinnes,  anu  my  fathers :  bctaufc 
tbe  Dane  not  hepttbytommanbements, 
neither  haue  ibaihcb  in  tructl)  bcfo?c 
tfjee. 

6  Mo\x>  tbctcfo?ebeaic  lbitb  nit  as 
fecmetb  belt  bnto  thee,  anb  comtnanb 
myfpirttto  be  taunt  front  me,  tbatgj 
may  be  llDtffolueb,  anb  become  eartl) : 
fo?  it  is  pjoQtable  fo?  me  to  Die,  rather 
then  to  but,  betaufejf  haue  hcarbfaifc 
rep:ocl)es,  anb  baucmueb  fo?otb :  com 
manbtbcrnwtbatSJmaynombeDeli 
uereDotitoftbiSbiftrcffc,  anb  goc  into 
the  eueclafting  place :  turnc  not  thy  fate 
atbay  from  me. 

7  git  came  to  paflc  the  fame  bay, 
that  m  (Etbatant a ciftc  of  s33cbta ,  -§>a. 
ratl)cbaug!)tcr  of  ftaguclAbasaifo  re 
p?ocbeb  by  her  fathers  maibcs, 

8  26ccaufc  that  flic  bab  bin  maricb 
to  fenen  bufbanbs,  lbl)om  afinobctts 
tbe  enill  fpirit  hab  lulicb,bcfo?c  tbey  bab 
lien  Until  her.  ©ocfttbou  notlutoibc, 
faib  tbey,  that  thou  halt  Itranglcb  thine 
huf  banbs  i  thou  halthab  aireabyfcucn 
burbanDsmeithcribafttboiinanicDaf 
ter  any  of  them. 

9  i»hcrcfo?eDoeftfhonbcatc  bsfo: 
them  ijif  they  beoeaD,goc  thy  lbaycs 
alter  tUenUetbsncucr  fee  of  tbcccitbcr 
fonnco:  Daughter. 

10  C9hpn  ii)c  heart)  thefc  things,  flic 
mas  bery  fo?oibful,fo  that  the  thought 
to  hauc  ItrangicD  her  felfc,ant)  fhcfaiD, 


gj  am  the  oncly  Daughter  of  my  father, 
anb  if  3  boc  this,  it  (hall  bee  a  repiocb 
bnto  him,  anb  3  AJ&U  bung  bis  olD  age 
Muth  fo  jou)  bnto  the  graue. 

1 1  Xhcn  flic  p?aycb  toibarb  the  lbm- 
Doib,  9  taib,  zsleflcD  art  thou ,  €>  Horn 
my  <3ob,  anb  thine  holy  anb  glorious 
/frame  tsblcffcb,  anb  honourable  fojc 
!  ueclct  aithy  lboilts  pwifcthec  fo?  euer. 

n  3inD  notb ,  £>  %o;D,  3  fet  mine 
eyes  anb  my  face  to ttmtb  thee, 

i  j  anb  fay,  tabemc  out  of  the  earth, 
that  3  may  hcare  no  mo?ctbetcp?ocb 

14.  XboubnotbcuMI^D.tbatgiam 
pure  from  all  untie  \bttb  man, 

i5  3inb  that  3  neuct  polluteb  my 
name,  no?  the  name  of  my  father  m  the 
lanb  of  my  capttitme:^  am  tbe  oncly 
Daughter  of  myfatber,  timber  bath  he 
any  tbtlb  to  bee  his'  Ijertc ,  neither  any 
llneete  buifcman,  no?  any  fbnne  of  his  j  n<^ 
aliuc,  to  ibbomc  gjntay  bccpcmyfcifc 
fo?  aibifcanyfeucn  hufbanbsatc  al 
rcaby  beab,anb  lbby  fbotilb  3  lute?  but 
if  it  plcafc  not  thee  that  3  Iboulb  bie, 
commanb  fomc  regarb  to  bchab  of  me, 
anb  pitic  taben  of  me,  tljat3J  hcare  no 
mo?crcp:och. 

i6  £>otbep?aycrsoftbcmbothU)erc 
hcarb  brfo?c  the  ^aielty  of  the  great 

(50b. 

17  ^nb  Raphael  tbas  fentto  heale 
them  both ,  that  is,  to  feale  aibay  the 
Ebhitcneffc  of  iobits  eyes,  anb  to  giuc 
3>ata  the  Daughter  of  Sagucl ,  fo?  a 
tuifctoirobiasthtfonncofXobicanb 
to  bint)  afmobeus  tljc  enill  fpirit,  be- 
canfcflic  bclongeth  to  Xobias  by  right 
of  mh critancc.Xhc  felfe  fame  tune  came 
Hobit  homcaub  cntreb  into  hishoufc, 
|  anb  £>ara,  the  batighter  of  Bagnci 
1  tame  Doibnc  from  her  bppcr  chamber. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

5  Tobit  giueth  inftru^tions  tohis  fbnneTobi- 
as,  10  and  tellcth  him  of  money  left  with 
G.ib.ie!  in  Media. 

*£l|^€ffll  ^th'ttbayXobitremem- 
J^  b?eb  the  money ,  lbhith  he 
|£tt  hab  committebtoc>abacl 
a  ,^  in  Bages  of epebia, 
%S$&£M  z  anbfaibibith  him 
felfe ,  3Jbauc  mifl)cbfo?beath,ibhcrt 
fo?c  Doc  3  not  callfo?myfonttc1Cobi 
as,  that  3  "W  ftgniflc  to  him  of  the 

money  btf0?C3l  DlC. 

j   3inb  ibhcn  he  habcailcbhim,  he 
faiD  npy  fonnc, lbhen  3  am  DeaD,bury  . Fsoj.  >o. 
me ,  anb  befpife  not  thy  mother ,  *  but  "  ccdu*.7 
honour 


(Apocrypha. 


Ch 


ap.v. 


*  Pcou. -.9. 
cccle-4-1. 
and  14-  13. 
Iu»t  14. 1  j- 


"Erclu.  35. 
10. 


*Ecclu.29- 


'i.Thcff.4- 
3- 


*  Lfuu.  19 
13.  dcur. 

24.14.1;. 


hottourhcrautheDayesofthyltfcanD 
doc  that  which  d)au  pieafc  her,  anD 
grciuchccnot. 

4  JRcmcmbcr ,  my  fonnc,  that  fbee 
fawmany  Dangers  fo?  thee ,  when  thou 
wart  m  her Wombc,  anD  when  fhee  is 
DcaD.buryherbymemonegraue. 

5  fi0i'fohne,bniunDfuUoftt)eHo2D 
our  (BoDall  thyDayes,  anD  let  not  thy 
will  befct  to  fume,  o?to  tranfgreffehts 
CounnanDcincnts :  Doe  bpnghtlp  all 
thy  life  long,  anD  follow  not  the wayes 
oftmrtghtcoufneffc. 

6  ;fonfthouOcalctrncly,thyDoings 
ftjau  p;ofpcroudy  futcccD  to  thcc,anD  to 
an  them  that  itucttiftiy. 

7  *  <5iut  amies  of  thy  fubftanccanD 
When  thou  gtuelt  alines,  let  notthtne 
eye  be  cnuious ,  neither  tutnc  til?  face 
from  any  pooic,  anb  tl)e  face  of  <3od 
fhallnot  be  tut ncD  away  from  thee. 

8  3tf  thou  haft  abunbanec ,  *  gmc 
almes  accowmgly :  if  thou  haue  but  a 
litlc,  benotafraiD  to  gtuc  actorting  to 
thatlitlc. 

9  ifozthoulaycfttopagooDtteafure 
fo?  thy  fclfc  agamftthcDay  of  neccfluie. 

10  *26ctaufe  that  aimcs  Doth  Dtlmcr 
fromDeatl) ,  anb  fttffcrcthnot  to  tome 
itttoDat&ncflc. 

11  Valines  isa  gooD  giftbnto  all 
that  gtuc  it,in  rt)c  fight  of  the  mofti^tgh. 

12  26ctbare  of  all  *  WhoKDomcmy  J 
fotmcanDchtcfcly  taltca  Wtfeof  thcieeD , 
of  thy  fathers,  anD take  not  aftrangci 
tbomanro  Wife ,  Which  isnot  of  thy  fa 
rhers  tribe :  fo:  wc  arc  the  cljilDicn  of  \ 
the  £:ophcts,  /3oc,  3lb2ahatn,3Jfaaft, ' 
anD^facob :  remember,  nip  fbnncthati 
our  fathers  from  the  beginning,  ruen! 
that  thev  all  mancD  wmes  of  their 
ottmc  kinvcD ,  anD  mete  blcffrD  in  their 
thilDjcn,  anD  their  CccDc  (hail  tnhcrttc 
trjcianD. 

13  /Bow  therefore  my  fonnclouc  thy 
bjethzen ,  anD  Dcfptfc  not  m  tl)p  heart 
thy  tocthKit,  the  fonnes  auD  Daughters 
of  thy  people ,  m  not  taking  a  Wife  of 
them  :  foz  in  p»Dc  is  Dcftruction  anD 
nmchtcoublc,anD  in  icWDttcflcts  Decay' 
anD  great  want  :fo?  IcibDncflc  is  the 
mother  of  famine. 

14  net  not  the*  wages  of  any  man,' 
Wfodj  hath  W;oughtfo:fhcc,tary  With 
thec ,  but  gmc  him  it  out  of  hano :  loi  if 
thou  fcruc  OOD  he  null  alio  repay  thee: 
be  rircumrpcttiny  fonnc  in  all  things 
thou  Doeft,  anDbc  Wife  mail  thy  con 
ucrfanon. 


Apocrypha. 


15  *2?oethat  to  no  man  which  thou 
hatcft :  Dnnhe  not  wmc  to  make  thee 
Omntten ;  neither  let  Dmnkcnnefic  goc 
with  thee  m  thyiourncy. 

16  *ducofthyb;jcaDtothchungry, 
anb  of  thy  garments  to  them  that  are 
ttaltcD,  *anD  accotfnngto  thine  abun^ 
Dante  giuc  amies,  anD  let  not  thine  eve 
bccnuious,Whcn  thou  gtucft  aunts/ 

17  ^oWjcoutthymcaDonthcburv 
all  of  the  iuu\  but  gtuc  nothing  to  the 
WtckcD. 

is  3lfkccounfcll  of  all  that  arc  Wile 
anD  Dcfptfc  not  any  counfcllthattspjO' 
fttablc. 

19  asicfft  the  Hojd  thy  (Son  aiway, 
anDDcftrc  of  htm  that  thy  wayesmay 
be  DircctcD,anDthatau  thy  pathcs.anD 
tounfeismay  pzofper  :fo;  cuery  nation 
hathnottounfeu.butthtfUiDlttmfcUe 
giucth  all  gooD  things ,  anD  her  hum- 
blctl)  Whom  he  Will,  as  he  Will > now 
therefore  my  fonnc,tcmembcr  my  com; 
matiDcmcnts,  neither  let  them  be  put 
outoffhynunbe. 

20  3inD  now  3  figntfic  thtstothce, 
that  31  tommitteDtcnnc  talents  to  ©a- 
bael  the  fonnc  of  oabjtas  at  JSagcs  tn 
i3J9cDia. 

21  3nD  fcarcnotmy  fonnc ,  that  We 
arc  maoc  pooje ,  fo?  thou  haft  much 
Wealth ,  tfthoufeare<!5oD ,  anD  Depart 
from  all  finnc ,  anD  Doc  that  Which  is 
plcafingtnhtsftght. 

CHAP.    V. 

4  Yon:;  Tobias  feeketh  a  guide  into  Media.  6 
The  Angel  willgoe  wich  him,  u  and  faith 
heishiikinieman.  16  Tobias  and  the  Angc! 
depart  together.    17  But 


lepart  toge 

ued  for  her  (bnnes  departing, 


11s  raoihcr  is  grie- 


xDbiasthcnatifuicreDanD 
TaiD,  5fathcr,^  Will  Doe 
all  things ,  which  thou 
haftcommanDcDmc. 
?.   i5ut  how  can  3J  re 
tciuc  the  money ,  feemg ,  3  know  him 
not; 

3  Xhm  he  gauc  hint  the  hanDWjv 
ting,  anD  faiDfcuco  htm,  ^cekcthct  a 
man  Which  may  goc  Withthcc  whiles 
3J  yet  Hue,  anDJJ  Will  gtuc  htm  Wages, 
anD  gocanD  reretttc  the  money. 

4.  XhcrcfoKWhcnhcwcuttoCccric 
amait,  hcfouttDivapljacl that  was  an 
3ngcll. 

s  23uthcUttcWnot,an0hcraiD  ton 
tohim.Canft  thou  gec  Withmcto  ISa 
ges  ;ilmoWcft  thou  tljofe  plates  Well  i 

6     HO 

f>2  ; 


'Match.  7. 

ll.luc.6. 
3'- 


r.uc.14. 
3- 
"Mmh  6  i 


Apocrypha. 


Tobit. 


Apocrypha. 


6  Xoibbomtbcangelfaio,3Jibtll 
goc  iDttb  thee ,  anb  3  bnoib  the  ibap 
Djcll-.forjbauclobgcD  rt»tt!)  out  b;o- 
tt)ct  <3abatl. 

7  XbcnXobiasfaibbntobimXa; 
rp  forme  nil  3J  tell  mp  father. 

8  Xben  be  fatb  Ditto  bim,  ©oeanb 
tary  not:  fobelbentm,  anb  faibtobis 
father ;  25cbolb ,  3  baue  founo  one, 
lDbicbibilgoeibrtbmc.  Xbenbcfato 
Call  him  bnto  tne,  that  3  map  bnoib  of 
ibbat  tribe  be  is,  anbibbctberbcc  be  a 
tcuttte  man  to  goc  tbitb  tbcc. 

9  5>obccalicDbtm,anbbccamcin, 
anb  ttjer  Caiutcu  one  another. 

io  Xben  Xobit  fatb  bnto  btm,26ro: 
tber,fbctt>  me  of  tbbat  tribe  anb  family 
tbouart. 

ii  Xo  ibbont  bee  fatb  ,  £>oea  thou 
fccfecfor  a  tribe  or  family  ,  oranbircb 
man  to  goc  lbttb  thy  fonne ;  Xben  Xo 
bit  faib  bnto  bint,  3tboulbUnoib,b;o' 
tbcr,tby  ftinrco  ,anb  name. 

n  XbcubcfaiD,3Jama5arias,tbc 
fonne  of  Ananias  the  great,  attDoftby 
brethren. 

i?  XbcuXobitfaib,X!)Ouartlbel* 
tome  brother,  be  not  nolb  angry  ibitb 
mee,  bctatife  3  baue  cnciuircb  to  bnott) 
tbp  tribe,  anb  tbp  family,  for  thou  art 
my  brother,  of  an  bonelt?  goob  ttocfee: 
fbi^UnbU)  Ananias ,  anb  3Jonatbas 
fonncs  of  that  great  Cantatas :  as  ibc 
ttjcnt  together  to  3Jerufalem  to  rboi^ 
fbtp,  anboffcreb  tbcftrftbomcanbtbc 
tenths  of  the  fruits,  anbtbepibece  not 
fcDttccDnntbtbcerrour  of  our  brethren: 
mp  brother  ,tbou  art  of  a  goob  Bocae. 

14  But  tell  mcibbatibages  (ball  3 
giuc  thee  <  wilt  thou  a  bracbmc  a  Dap; 
anb  things  ncccffarp  as  to  tup  olbne 
fonne; 

15  ^eamorcoucr,tfpcrcrurncfafe,3J 
rbiU  a&uc  fomc  thing  to  the  ibagcs. 

i6  5>otbepibcrciDcllplcafcD.Xbcn 
faibhcto  Xobias,-  prepare  tbpfelfe  for 
the  tourney,  attb  d5ob  fenbpouagoob 
tourney.  attb  ibhen  his  fonttc  bab  p;c- 
parcbau  thtngs  for  tbciournep ,  btsfa- 
thcrfaib ;  <3octbouibitbtbisman,anb 
<5ob  ibbtcb  bibclletb  m  bcaucu  profpet 
pour  lourncp,^  the  angel  of  <5ob  Hecpc 
you  company.  £>o  they  lbcnt  foorch 
both  >  anb  the  yong  mansboggelbttb 
them. 

17  26ut3tnnabismothccibept,anb 
faib  toXobit,B9bp  baft  thou  fentaibap 
our  fonne;  is  bee  not  the  flaffc  of  our 
hanb,  tit  going  in  anb  out  before  Ds ; 


is  25enotgrctby(toabbe)monepto| 
money :  but  let  it  bee  11  as  rcfufe  in  re*  e£«*«™ 
fpect  of  our  cbi.be.  "Ph^: 

i9  II m that  ttbtcb  the  Horb hath  g>  %fr,£ 
utnbs  to  lfucibtm,boctb  fuftuc  Ds.      «»*  »/««• 

io  Xben  fatb  Xobtt  to  bet ,  Xabe fimt- 
no  tare  my  fillet ,  he  fbal  rctutttc  in  Cafe* 
ty,anb  thine  eyes  (bail  fee  htm. 

21  5For  the  goob  angel  ibfll  feeepc 
him  company,  anbbtstoumepfbailbe 
profpcrous,anbbe  fballtetumefafe. 

xi  Xben  u>  mabe  an  enb  of  rbceptng. 


|  Orji  &rj 
tuCyod 
bath  gran- 
ted vi  to 
hue,  thuu 
fuffcient. 


CHAP.   VI. 

4  The  Anqel  biddeth  Tobias  to  take  the  liuer, 
heart  and  gall  out  of  a  fifh,  i  o  And  to  marry 
Sara  the  daughter  of  Raguel;  \6  Andtea- 
cheth  liow  to  driue  the  wicked  (pint  away. 

SSfi^M  X5basthey  lbcnt  on  their 
^W&S&t  tourney,  they  tame  in  the 
cucntng  to  the  riuer  %u 
grts,?  they  lobgeb  there, 
%  ^nb  ibbcn  the  yong 
manibcnt  boibne  to  Tbau)  himfeife,a 
fifblcapeb  out  of  the  riuer,  anbrboulb 
baucbeuourebbinu 

5  Xben  the  angel  faib  bnto  htm, 
XaKctbefifb;anb  the  pong  man  lapb 
bolDoftbcfifb.anb  flbrcibitto  lanb. 

4X0  ibhom  the  angel  (atb,j©pcti 
the  ftfb  ,anb  tafee  the  beart.anb  the  liuer 
anbthegall,anbputthnnbpfafclp. 

5  S>otbepongmanbtDastbcan; 
gelcotnniauttbcbhtm,  anb  ibhen  tbcp 
haD  rofteb  the  ftQ),th  cp  bib  eatctt :  then 
thepbothibent  onthnribap ,  till  they 
bretbneetetotfebatane. 

6  Xhen  the  yong  man  faibc  to  the 
angel;  Brother  aortas,  to  ibhatDfe 
is  the  heart,  anb  the  liner,  anb  the  gall 
oftheafb; 

7  anb  he  faib  Dnto  him ,  Xoucbtng 
the  heart  anb  the  litter,  if  abeuii,  or  an 
eutl  fpirit  trouble  any,  ibc  mult  mabe  a 
fmobe  thereof  before  the  man  0:  the 
lbontan,  attb  the  party  fljalbc  no  more 
Dcreb. 

s  as  for  the  gall  it  is  ?ood  to  an- 
oint a  man  that  batbttibtteneffe  mhls 
epts.anb  he  fliaibe  healeb. 

9  anb lbhcntbeyibcre  come  nccre 
tofiages, 

10  Xbe  angel  fatb  to  the  pong  man, 
Brother ,  to  bap  voce  (ball  lobgc  ibttb 
iKagncl ,  iDho  ts  tbp  touftn  ■  hee  alfo 
barb  one  onclybaugbtct,  tiameb5>af 
ra.gjiDti  fpeabefor  her,  that  (be  map 
lbcgutcntbeefo;attnfe. 

j 11  iro; 


I  C«fli 


thtUna. 


Apocrypha.  Cha 


Or>  inhtrt 
tance. 

•Num.  17. 
8.&36.S. 


}\Or,imbri 


\\Or,vekc- 

ment/j. 


11  f  m  to  thee  both  the  ||  *  right of  her 
appertainc.feemgthouonetyartofher 
bmreb. 

ii  3M)  rhcmai&e  ts  faircanb  ibifr, 
noibthcrrfozchearemcrjPiMfpcakc 
to  her  father,  anb  lbhm  ibec  retutne 
from  Sages ,  ibe  mil  ccicbzatc  the  ma> 
r  iage :  foz  3  Knoll)  tijat  &agucl  cannot 
marry  her  to  another  accozbiug  to  the 
lUib  of  fc^ofes,  but  he  n^albc  giultic  of 
Death ,  becaufe  the  right  of  inheritance 
Doeth  rather  appcrtautc  to  thee,  then 
to  any  other. 

13  XhcntheyongmananfiuereDthe 
3ngcl,3J  Dane  hearD.bzothcr^anas, 
tijattljis  maibc  hatljbccnc  giucnto  fc 
uen  men ,  lbhoailDiebinthc  marriage 
chamber: 

1+  %v&  noil)  3  am  the  ottely  fonnc 
of  myfather.an&JJamafraib,  left  if3 
goe  mtmto  her,  jbte,  as  tlje  other  be^ 
fozc  -,  foz  a  ibicfecb  fptrit  loucth  her, 
Which  hmteth  no  bob y  ,but  tDoft  tbptl) 
come  bnto  her ,  lbhcrcfozc  "5  alfo  fcarc, 
left  51  Die,  anb  bang  my  fathers  anb  my 
mothers  life(becaufe  of  mc)to  the  grauc 
ibitlj  fozroib ,  foz  tljcy  Ijauc  no  other 
fonnc  to  bury  them. 

15  Xhen  the  3ngcl  faiD  bnto  him, 
SDocft  thou  not  remember  the  pzecepts, 
il)hich  thy  father  gane  thee,  that  thou 
(houlDeft  matnc  a  ibifc  of  thine  olbnc 
kinreD;  ibherefozc  heare  me,  <sD  my  bjo 
thcr,foz(he  (hall  begtucntheeto  ibtfc, 
anb  mauc  thou  no  reckoning  of  the  etui 
fpirtt,foz  this  fame  nigfjt  (hall  (hec  be 
gruenthecm  manage. 

16  Zwh  when  thou  (halt  come  into 
the  manage  chamber,  thou  (halt  take 
thc||aft)e£ofpcTfamc,anDfl)altlaybp; 
onthnn,  fomc  of  the  heart,  anDliuer  of 
theft(h,anb  (halt  make  afmokc  With  it. 

17  3(nb  thebeutll fhallfmellit ,  anb 
flccaibay ,  anb  neuer  come  agamc  any 
moze:  but  When  thou  lhalt  come  to  her, 
rife  Dp  both  of  you,  anb  p:ay  to<5ob, 
Which  is  merctmil,Who  Willhaticptty 
onyou,anbfaucyou:fearcnot,fo2(hcc 
is  appotntcb  bnto  thee  from  the  begin- 
ning-, anbthou  fhaitpzctcruc  her,  anb 
Chee  (hall  goe  With  thee.  Q9ozeoucr  3 
fnppofe  that  fl)cc  (hall  bearc  thee  chil 
bjen.  iftolD  When  Xobtas  hab  hearb 
theft  thmgs.he  loncb  her , anb  his  heart 
Was||effecrually  loynebto  her. 

CHAP.    VII. 

11  Racuelcelleth  Tobias  whathadluppencdto 
his  daughter :   it  and  giueth  her  in  marriage 


p.vij. 


Apocryph 


a. 


vntohitn.  ^Shcisconueyei-dohei  chamber, 
and  weepet!).  i8  Hmiiothercofortethher. 

&£$&£&  /5b  ibhcn  they  ibere  come 
Jr  to  Ccbatane,  they  came  to 
rhchotifcofiSaguel  anb 
j,-^™,  S>arametthem:anbafter 
*^V3*^;  tl;at  they  hab  faiutrbone 
another,  thee  brought fijem  into  the 
houfe. 

I  Xhen  fayb  Bagnel  to  Cona  his 
ibife,if>ouj  like  is  tljis  y ong  man  to  Xo 
bitmycouftn? 

i  Znn  ftaguel  afacb  tliem ,  from 
ibheute  arc  yon.bzcthzeiti  Xowhom 
theyfaib,B9carcofthcfonucsofj?)eph 
thaii,  Which  are  capnuesmfhueue. 

4  Xhen  heefaiD  to  them,  Doeyee 
know  Xobtt  our  knifeman?  Snbtbcy 
faib,  toe  know  htm.  Xhcufaibhcc,  j/s 
hcmgoobheaithi 

5  3inb  they  faib ,  l?ee  ts  both  amie, 
anb  in  goob  health :  3UU)  Xobias  fayb, 
^cismyfathcr. 

6  Xhenilaguelleapcb bp,  anb ittf 
fcbhtm.anDilicpt, 

7  3(nD  blefteb  Ijim ,  anb  faib  bnto 
him,  Xhou  artthe  fonnc  of  anhoncft 
anb  goobman :  but  When  he  hab  hearb 
thatXobitwasblmbchcWasfozoW; 
full,  anb  wept. 

8  3inD  likcwtfe  Cbna  his  tbtfe,  anb 
iS>ata  his  battghtcr  Wept.  tTJozcouer, 
they  cntcrtatneb  them  chccrefitlly.aiib 
after  that  they  hab  ktllcb  a  ||rammc  of 
theftocke,  theyfctfto2eof  meat  on  the 
table.  Xhcn  faib Xobias  to  -Raphael, 
2320ther^5anas,fpcaU  of  thofc  things, 
oflbhuhthouDibbcfttalfee  m  the  lbay, 
anb  let  this  buuuefle  be  bifpatcljcb. 

9  5>o  he  communicateb  the  matter 
itoith  JRagurt ,  anb  Haguel  faib  to  Xo- 
btas,€ate  anb  bunk,  anb  make  merry: 

10  font  ismcct  that  thou  (hottibeft 
marry  my  baughter :  neuertheleftc  3 
:  ibill  Declare  bnto  tljee  the  true'th. 

I I  Ji  haue  giuen  my  battgluer  in  ma 
nagc  to  feticn  men,  lbho  DieD  that  night 
j  they  came  in  bnto  her :  ncuerthcleffc  foz 
!thep2cfcntbcmerry:i3utXobiasfaib, 
1 3  ibill  rate  nothing  here,  till  ibe  agree 
i  anb  ftuearc  one  to  another. 

n  Kaguelfaib,Xheu  take  her  from 
hcncefoo2th  aaojDtng  to  the  ||  manner, 
foz  thou  art  Her  coufm,  anb  (he  is  thine, 
anb  the  mcrctfull  Gob  gute  you  goob 
fucceffe  tu  all  things. 

13  Xhen  he  talieb  his  Daughter  5>a 
ra,  anb  fl)c  came  to  her  father,  anb  hee 
tooke  her  by  the  hanb,  anb  gaue  her  to 

be 


I)  Afrnki^i 
r&mmc  or 
lambe.Iu- 

'•CIS. 


\t'£i 


Apocrypha. 


Tobit. 


Apocrypha. 


*Num.5tf.6 


i|  Or,  foitJ. 


j  Or,  \mbcrs 


"Gen  j  7 


bcmife  to  Xobias,fayuig,2Seholb,tafce 
her  after*thc  TtaU)  of£Pofes,anb  leabc 
Ijcr  ai»ay  to  thy  father :  Znn  he  blcfleb 
them, 

14. 3nbcaileb£bnahtsVbtfe,?too&e 
paper,  anD  did  Vontc  an  tnllrumcnt  of 

couenants,  atlD  fCSlCD  it. 

15  Xhen  they  began  to  eatc. 

16  after  aaagucl  calico  his  tbtfc  £b*  ! 
na,anbfaibnntoher,S>ittcr,p2eparea*| 
nother  chamber,  $b2ing  her  in  thither.; 

17  nDhtchVbhcnfhehabboncashee 
habbibbmhcr,ll)eb20ughthcr  thither,1 
anb  Ihc  inept ,  $  the  ||  rccciucb  rt)e  tearcs 
of  her  Daughter , anb  faib  unto  her, 

is  25c  of  goob  comfo2t,my  baugtjtcr, 
rl)e  Hojo  of hcaucn  anb  cart!)  gtuc  thec 
ioyfo2thistbvfo2oTb:  bcof  goob  com* 
fo2t,niptsaugrjtct. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

;  Tobias  driuech  the  wicked  fpintaway,  ashee 
was  taught.  4  He  and  his  wife  file  vp  to  pray- 
10  P.aguel  thought  he  was  dead:  15  Butfin- 
dinghmialiue,  ptaifeth  God,  il  andmakedi 
a  wedding  teaft. 

^^%\^^  ^D  ^tjen  they  Dab  fop* 
?PmC^5  pcb.thcybjought  Eobias 
r^^V^mbntoUcr. 
&MSM  z  3lno as  Delimit,  be 
^Ti^rcincinbjcb  tbewortcsof 
Kapbacl,  anb  toobc  tl)c||  allies  of  the 
pcrfumcs,anb  put  the  Ijeart,  anb  trje  iv 
uer  of  trje  &fl)  thereupon,  anb  mabea 

finoUC 'herewith. 

*  3Ebc  Vbrjtcl)  fnicll,  U»l)cn  trje  euill 
fpirtf  bab  fmclicb,  rjee  fleb  into  the  out- 
moll  parts  of  Cgypt,  anb  tfjc  3lngcl 
botmolnm. 

4.  2nb  after  that  they  tbere  both 
(but  m  togcrl)cr,lLObias  rofc  out  oftfje 
beb  anb  faib,  lifter ,  anfc ,  anb  let  us 
pzay,  that  C5ob  lnoiilb  bauc  pmc  ou  us. 

5  Hlbcn  began  Hobias  to  fay,  26lcf- 
feb  art  tim,®  ©ob  of  our  fatrjcrs,anb 
bleffcb  is  thy  holy  anb  glonous  /Same 
fo;  cuer ,  let  the  heauens  blcffc  thee,  anb 
all  thy  creatures. 

6  %\m\  mabclt  3bam,  aubgauelt 
him  *  <Suc  his  wife  fo2  an  helper  ei  (lav : 
of  thcnicamcmanliuio :  thou  fiaflfaib, 
3tisnot  goob  that  man  (houlDbce  a- 
tonclcttos  malieunto  bun  an  aibelitte 
to  hunfclfc. 

7  anb  noU>,  <DILo2b,  3  t&kt  not 
tins  my  filler fo:  lull,  butbpughtly: 
therefore  mercifully  oibcmc,  that  Ujcc 
may  become  ageb  together. 

s  2lub  fl)c  faib  tbith  him, amen. 


9  5)0  they  lUpt  both  that  ntght,ano 
Eaguciarofcanbujcntfmabeagraue 

io  "feayuuxitea^icfthebcbcab. 

1 1  25ut  Vbhcn  fcagucl  Vbas  tome  in- 
to his  boufc, 

ii  $cfaiOtontohisMc<£bna,£>cnb 
one  of  themaibs,  anb  let  her  fee,  robe 
thet  be  be  almc :  if  he  be  not,that  Vbe  may 
bury  hini,anbno  man  tutomit. 

15  £>o  the  maibopcneb  the  booze  anb 
tbent  m,  anb  fonnb  them  both  aOccpe, 

i+  3nb  came  fojtb,  anb  tolbtbem, 
that  he  mas  almc. 

15  Xhen  Hagucl  p;au*eb  C5ob, anb 
faib,©(5ob,thouartuj02thytobcp2ai; 
feb  Unth  all  pure  anb  h  oly  piarfc :  there* 
foje  let  thy  faints  pjaifc  thee  ibith  all 
thy  creatures,  anb  let  all  thine  Angels 
anb  thmt  elect  p?atfe  thee  fo2  cuer. 

16  3Zbou  art  to  be  pzaifcb ,  fo?  thou 
hallmaoc  nice  ioyfull,  ant)  that  is  not 
tome  to  me ,  which  3  fufpcttcb :  but 
thou  hall  ocait  ibitbtos  acco?bmg  to  thy 
great  mcrrtc. 

17  Hhou  art  to  be  pzaifcb ,  beraufe 
thou  halt  hab  mercic  of  tvbo,  that  mere 
the  oncly  begotten  cbilbjen  of  their  fa- 
thers, grant  them  mercy ,  4DJLojO,anb 
fimfl)  their  lift  in  health,  Hurt)  toy  anb 
mcrne. 

18  Xhen  Sagnel  babe  his  fcruants 
tofillthcgrauc. 

19  3iub  hte  fecpt  the  tbebbmg  fcaO 
fourtcencoayes. 

20  5fo2bcfo2cthebayesofthcmart 
agcibcre  rmilheb,  iaagaelhabfaibbn-- 
to  him  by  an  othc,that  ije  fl)Oiilb  not  be- 
part,  nil  the  fourtcene  bayes  of  the  ma 
nagciberccrpircb, 

21  Sitiothcnheihoulbtabcthchalfe 
of  his  goobs,  anb  goe  in  fafenc  to  hts 
father ,  anb  (houlb  haut  the  refl  Vbhen 
Janbmymifcbebeab. 

CHAP.   IX. 

1  Tobi'ai  feudcdi  the  Angel  vnto  GabacI  (or 
the  money.  6  The  Angclbriugeth  it, and  Ga- 
badto  the  wedding. 

tyiii  Xobias  callcb  && 

phael.anb  tub  touto  h»n. 

%   i520thcr  Cartas, 

Calie  Ibith  thee  a  fcruaut , 

anb  tmo  camcls,anb  go  to 

Cages  of  ii}3cbia  to  (3abacl,rjb2mgme 

the  money,  sbunghim  to  thciuebbing. 

j   jfoz  Uagucl  hathfwonic  that  3 

lljallnotbcpart. 

4  23ut  my  father  coimtcrt)  the  bayes , 
aubifjtarielong.heibillbeberyfoiic. 

5  &o 


Apocrypha.  Chap.x.xj. 


t/efftd  Ta- 
buv  anil  bn 
rife. 


5  5>o  Raphael  Vbent  outano  loo- 
geb  Vbith  <2>abaei ,  ana  gauc  Dim  the 
5ant>VD;irtng,  «)Ijo  b;ougt)t  fonlJ  bags, 
Which  VbcrcTcaicD  bp  ,anD  gaue  them  to 
Dim. 

6  3nD  carely  in  the  morning  they 
ujc«t foirt) bortj together,  anb  tame  to 
the  VbeDDiug,  anD'lXobtas  blcffcb  hts 

VPlfC. 

CHAP.    X 

I  Tobit  and  his  wife  long  for  their  fonne.  7 
She  Will  not  be  comforted  by  her  husband. 
10  Raguel  (endeth  Tobias  and  his  wife 
away  ,  with  halle  their  goods,  n  and 
blefTeth  them. 

OVbc  Xobit  Ins  father1 
i  countcb  euery  cap ,  anb 
\  VDtKIt  the  Da^cs  of  the 
I  tourney  vbcrccrpircb,  anb 
<«^liIthcycamcnot: 
z  Xhcn  Xobtt  faib,  2ire  they  beta*; 
nebi  o;  is  ©abaci  oeab ;  anb  tf>ece  is  no 
manto  giue  him  the  money  < 

3  XhetefojehcVbastocryfojy. 

4  Xhen  his  Vbtfc  faib  to  him ,  £0? 
fonne  is  DeaD ,  feeing  hec  ftayeth  long, 
anb  (he  begannc  to  bevuailchim ,  anb 
faib, 

5  Now  I  care  for  nothing  ,  my  fonne, 
fince  1  haue  let  thee  goe,  fl)C  light  Of  mine! 

eyes. 

6  XovbhomXobitfaiD,$olDthy! 
pcacctakeuocatefojhcisfafc. 

7  2Sutfl)cfaib,$oiDthypeatc,atib 
beeeiue  me  not :  my  fonne  is  btab,  anb 
(he  Vbent  ont  euery  bay  into  the  Vbay 
tbhich  they  Vbent ,  anb  bib  eatcno  meat 
on  the  bay  time ,  anb  ccafcDnotVbholc 
nights,  to  bcVbailc  her  fonne  Xobtas, 
tmnil  the  fouretecne  Daycsof  thctbeb- 
DingVbcrecrpircD,  Which  Raguel  hab 
fioomc ,  that  he  fboulb  fpcnb  there : 
Xhen  Xobtas  faib  to  Raguel,  Hetme 
goc,fojmyfathcr,anDmymothcr  loots 
nomojetofecmc. 

8  2Sut  his  father  in  laVb  faib  bnto 
him,  Xary  Vbtth  incatibgi  ttnllfeuoto 
thy  father ,  anb  they  (hail  beciarebnto 
him.hoVb  things  goe  Vbtth  thee. 

9  2SutXobiasfaib,J3o:bntletmc 
goe  to  my  father. 

io  Xhen  Raguel  arofc  anb  gauc 
him  £>ara  his  vntfc ,  anb  haifc  his 
goobs,  feruants,  %  cattell ,  anb  money. 

ii  ZnD  hee  blcffcb  them  ,  anb  fent 
thcmaVbay,fayttig,Xhc<SoDofheaucn 
giue  you  a  pjofperous  iourncy ,  my 
chiltycn. 


Apocrypha. 


a  2nbhefaibto  hisbaughtcr,  ho- 
nour thy  father  anb  t!jy  mother  in  lain, 
Vbhith  are  noru  thy  parents ,  that  3 
may  heart  goob  report  of  thee:  anb  hrc 
tufJcb  her.  €bna  alfo  faib  to  Xobias, 
Xhe  Ho2b  of  hcauen  rcftoie  thte,my 
bearc  brother ,  anb  grant  that  jj  may 
fee  thy  chiKncn  of  my  Daughter  &ara 
befoic  31  Die ,  that  %  may  reioycc  befoze 

thelLozbibcholb^commitmybaugh 
tcr  bnto  thct  I!  of  fpetiail  trull ,  Where- 
fozeooc  not  entrcatchcr  cum. 

CHAP.    X  I. 

6  Tobits  mother  fpieth  her  fonne  comminc. 
io  His  father  meeteth  him  at  the  doore, 
and  reconeieth  his  fight.  14  Hce  nr.11- 
feth  God,  17  And  welcommeth  his 
daughter  in  La.ve. 

&81P&&  fterthtfc  things  Xobias 

ffltt*fflLVMMW*  WaV>  P?aifmg 
fc'^U^C50D  that  he  hab  giiicn 
3svw  hnnapjofperousiourncy, 
#Pfe£anb  bleffcb  Raguel ,  anb 

conahts  Wife,  anb  went  on  histbay 

till  they  bJcVDncerebutojEhncuc. 
i   Xhen  Raphael  faib  to  Xobias, 

XhoutmoVbc(tb,!other,hoVbrhonDibft 

leauc  thy  father, 
j   ILet  bs  hafte  bcfoie  thy  Vbtfe,  anb 

prepare  the  houfe. 

4  3lnb  tancm  thine  hanb  the  gall  of 
the  fifh :  fo  they  went  their  Vbay  ,anb  the 
Dog  Vbent  after  them. 

5  4i5oVb  3ttna  fatt  looking  about 
toVbarbs  the  Vbay  fo;  her  fonne. 

6  Znn  When  (he  efpieb  htm  torn- 
mmg ,  fljefaib  to  his  father ,  25cholb, 
thy  fonne  tommcth ,  anb  the  man  that 
ment  ttuth  hun. 

7  Xhen  faib  Raphael ,  3f  UnoW, 
Xobias,  that  thy  father  vinll  open  his 
eyes. 

8  Xhercfoje  annoint  thou  his  tits 
vutth  the  gall,  anb  being  pjicUcD  there- 
With  Ire  (hall  rub,  anb  the  Vbhitencffe 
than  fall  avbay,attb  he  mallfcc  tliec. 

9  Xhen^iiuaranfojth.anDfcUbp 
on  the  nccRc  of  her  fonne,  anb  faib  bnto 
him.fccing'J  haue  fee nc  thee  my  fonne, 
fcomhencefbjth,3)am  content  to  bie, 
anb  they  vbept  both. 

10  Xobit  alfo  Vbent  forth  tolbarb  the 
DoojcanD  (lunibleb :  but  his  fonne  ran 
bnto  him, 

11  3inDtoolicholDofhtsfathet,anb 
he  ftrahc  of  the  gall  on  his  fathers  eyes , 
faying,25eofgooDhopc,tny  father. 

u  3inb 


Ort  to  be 


Apocrypha. 


Tobit. 


Apocrypha. 


II  (nmiu ,19/10 
it  alfo  called 
N At  hat. 


11  2tnb  tbljmtys  cpes  bcgamic  to 
fmart,DerubbcbtDcm. 

15  3nb  tbe  vbbttcneffe  ptlleb  afoap 
fromtDctomcrsofDisepes.anbtbben 
DcfaibDisfonncDcfellbponDisnetbe. 

14  anbbe tbept,  anbfeib ,  aotcftcb 
art  tbou  >  £>  Gob ,  anb  blcfieb  ts  tbp 
43amcfo2eucr,anbblcu"cbarcalltDme 

Dolp  Angels: 

15  f  02  tljott  Daft  feourgeb,  anb  Daft 
tabcnpitte  on  me :  foz  bebolb,  3  fee  mp 
fonncXobtas.  2Cnb  bis  fomtclbentin 
rcioptmg,anb  tolbDis  fatber  tDc  great 
things  tljat  Dab  bappeneb  to  Dim  in 
Qf)cbta. 

16  £Ucn  Hobit  ibent  oat  to  mecte 
Dis  Daughter  m  lalb  at  tDe  gate  of /i5t- 
niuc,  reiopcing  anb  pjapGng  00b :  ant) 
tljcptbbicDfaro  Dim  got  .matucilcDbc- 
tanft  De  DaD  r  ctcineb  Dis  OgDt. 

17  23ut1i:obit  gaue  tbanbes  before 
tbctmbccaufccSob  Dab  mcrcponbim. 
3nD  lbbcn  bee  came  ncere  to  S>ara  Dts 
DaugDtcc  in  2latb,  Deeblcflebber ,  Cap 
ing,XnouartlbeltotncDaugDter:(i5ob 
beblcOto  lbtntb  DatD  bzougbt  tDee  bn- 
to bs>  anbblcffcb  be  rhp  father  anb  tDp 
motDcr  i  anb  tDcre  ibas  iov  amongft 
allDis  bjctD«nlbDttDlbcrcatil5incuc. 

is  anbacbiatDarus,!|anb/15afbas 
Disbzotbcrsfonne  tame. 

19  anb  Hobtas  ibebbing  tbas  bept 
feuen  oaves  ibitD  great  iop. 

CHAP.    XII. 

Tobic  offercth  halfc  to  the  Angel  for  his 
painesj  6  But  he  calleth  them  both  addend 
exhorteththem,  15  andtclleththemthaihe 
was  an  Angel,   x\  andwasfeeneno  more. 

^l)rnXobttcallebbis  ton 


$%  him  ,  £0p  fonnc,  fee  tDat 


13f  Hobias  ,  anb  faib  bnto 


tDcman  DaucDisibagcs, 
^SSIibDtcD  went  ibitD  rDce, 

anbtboumuftgutthimmme. 
x   3inb1!:obtasfatbbntobtm,£>fa 

tDec,  it  is  no  Darmc  to  mcto  giucbun 

balfc  of  tbofe  tDmgs  lbDitD  3  bauc 

b;ougDt. 
j  jFojbcbatbbzongbtmcagaincto 

tbcctnfafctp.anbmabeibbolcmptbifc, 

anb  brought  nice  the  monep,  anb  hbc; 

ttnfcbcaitbtbce. 

4  XDcu  tDe  olo man taib:3Jt  is bue 
bnto  Dmt. 

5  S>o  Dc  cailtD  tDc  angcll ,  anb  Dc 
fait)  bnto  bim,Habe  Dalfc  of  all  tDat  pec 
Dane  b2ought,anD  goc  aibap  m  fafctp . 

c    %\)tn  Dc  toobc  tljcm  botD  apart, 


ant)  tapb  bnto  tbcm.ffileffc  ©oD.pjaifc 
htm.  anb  magmfie  Dim .  ant)  pzailchim 
rozthetDingsibDirbbebathDoncbnto 
pou in  tDe  fight  of  all  tDat  lint.  3)t  ts 
goobto  pjaifc  eobanb  crait  Dis  name, 
I libonozabip  to  (herb  fojtb  tDe  ttwbs  of 
©obtbcrfojebenotu^cttetopjiaifebim. 

7  3Jt  ls  soob  to  beepe  ctofe  ttje  fe* 
cret  ofa  Bmg,but  it  is  bonojable  to  re- 
ueate tDe  ruojbs of  ©ob:  bo  tDat  tbbicD 
is  goob,anD  no  cuill  fhail  toutD  pou. 

8  pwtt  isgoobibitD  fafttng,  anb 
almcsanb  rigDtcoufncffc :  a  little  ibitb 
rtgbtcoufncs  is  better  tben  mutD  IbitD 
bnrtgDteoufntffc :  it  is  better  to  giue 
almcstDen  to  lap  bpgolb. 

9  5foz  amies  botf)  Dcliuer  from 
oeatfj,  anb  (ball  purge  atbap  all  finne. 
Xbofc  that  erraifcaimes,anb  righte^ 
oufneflMbail  be  filicb  with  life. 

io  mit  tDcp  tDat  finne  arc  enemies 
to  their  otbnc  life. 

ii  &urclp3Jibfllbcepclofenothing 
frompou.  jFoj  3Jfaib ,  tt  Ibas  goob  to 
beepe  clofctDcfccrctofa  Bing,buttDat 
tt  lbasljonojablc  torcuealc  tbcibojbs 
of<£»ob. 

ix  Mo\\)  therefore ,  ibDcn  thon  Dtbft 
pwp,anb5)aratDp  baugDtcrtn  Hatb, 
5  bib  bzing  tDc  rememwance  of  pour 
pjapcrs  before  tDc  Dolp  one ,  anb  mljcn 
tDoubibftbutptbc  btab ,  3J  ibas  IbitD 
theelibctbifc. 

ij  ^nbibDcntDouDibft  not bclap to 
rtfcbp,anblcaue  tDp  burner  t  to  go  anb 
toucr  tDc  bcab,  tDp  goob  btcbt  ibasnot 
Dibbc  from  mc :  but  3  Ibasibit!)  ttjec. 

14  anbnotb  <5ob  Dath  fent  mtcto 
hcalc  tDec,?  Sara  tDp  baugbter  m  laib. 

15  3  am  mapDacl  one  of  tDc  feuen 
Dolp  3ngels,tt)DicD  pzefent  tlje  papers 
of  the  faints ,  anb  VbbitD  go  in  anb  out 
before  the  glo^p  of  the  !?olp  one. 

16  XDen  tDcp  Vbcre  botD  troublcb, 
anb  fcl  bpon  tDetr  fates:  fo:  tDep  fearcb. 

17  usut  Ijc  CaiD  bnto  them,  feare  not, 
fo:  tt  ftjall  go  lbcll  tbith  pou^jattc  <30b 
tDercfme. 

18  if02notofanpfauourofmine,but 
bp  thcibiil  of  our  ©ob  3  tame ,  tbDcrc- 
fojc  pwifc  Dim  foz  eucr. 

19*  ^llrDcfcbatcs3}bibappearebm 
to  pou.but  J  bib  timber  cat  no;  bjtnbe, 
butpoubtbfrcabiuon. 

xo  /BoUjtDeTefozcgiucGobtDanfes: 
fo:  II  go  bp  to  Dim  p  fnu  me ,  but  ibntc 
all  thtngs  ibhtth  arc  boitctn  a  boofte. 

xt  ^nb  ibDcn  tDep  rofe,tDcpfau)  him 
nomoze. 

xxXhen 


||  Or,  -aiih 
hencur. 


fGrer^.rof9 

A\td  bury. 


■Gen  18.8. 

Iudg.lJ. 
\6 


•Dcuc.^J. 
;  9.1.1am. 
j.tf.uifd. 


.xnij.  Apocrypha. 


\\  Or,  hewn'! 
IdydfcoxrTf 
vpon the 
worses  of 
thy  chit- 
dren* 


lOr}tomukf- 


_i  %\)en  the?  confeflcb  the  great 
anb  tbonbcrfuii  Uwttes  of  <25ob ,  anb 
fjorb  t!ic  3lngei  of  the  }to/b  hab  appea- 
rcbbntothem. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

The  thankcfgiuing  vnto  God,  which  To- 
bit  wrote. 

§|Sf^^  l?en  Xobit  uwtc  a  pjapcr 

[ggf  ofrctopcmg,anbfaib,2Sicf; 

feti  be  <£ob  that  liucth  foz 

eucr,  aim  blctlcb  be  his 

Hiitgbomc: 

x  *if o?  be  boeth  fcourge ,  ana  hath 

mercp :  hee  leabetrj  bourne  to  hell ,  anb 

bzingeth  bp  agamc:  neither  is  there  a* 

up  that  can  auotb  his  hanb. 

3  Confcffc  liim  before  the  ©entiles, 
pc  chilbzcu  of  gjfrael :  fo:  he  hath  fcattc 
rebbsamongthem. 

4  Hhercbcclarchisgrcatncffcanb 
ertoll  him  before  all  the  luung,  foi  he  is 
our  JLojb,  anb  he  is  the  <sob  our  father 
foz  eucr: 

5  3nb  he  Unl  fcourge  bs  foz  our  int= 
qutttcs,  anbttnll  fjauc  mercp  agamc, 
anb  Unll  gather  bs  out  of  all  nations, 
among  lbhom  he  hath  fcattcrebbs. 

6  3Jf  pou  turnc  to  Inm  until  vour 
whole  heart ,  anb  until  pour  whole 
minbc,anbbealc  bpzightlp  bcfozclnm, 
then  Unll  hee  turnc  bnto  pou ,  anb  Vbill 
not  hibc  his  face  from  pou  :3£hercfozc 
fee  What  he  unll  boc  Unth  pou,  anb  con; 
feffc  hint  with  pour  Whole  mouth,  anb 
pzaifc  the  ?Lo:b  of  might,  anb  ertoll  the 
cucrlaftingBing:inthclanbofmpcap; 
timtic  bo  c  3}  pzaife  him,  anb  bcclarc  ins 
might  anb  matcftp  to  a  finucfull  nation : 
<D  pec  turners  turnc,  anbbociufticc  be= 
fozchun :  lbho  can  tell  tfhc  Will  accept 
pou,attb  hauc  mcrcv  on  pou  < 

7  3  Unl ertoll mp Gob, anb  mpfoulc 
fljaipiatfcthcBingofhcaucn.anbihal 
retopec  mhi5grcatuclTc. 

8  ?Lct  all  men  fpcaltc ,  anb  let  all 
pMifchunfojhis  rightcoufncffc. 

9  £)3JcrufalcmthcholpCitic,||he 
Will  fcourge  thee  foz  thp  chtlbzcns 
Wozkcs,  anb  Wtuhatiemcrcp  agamc  on 
the  fonncsof  the  righteous. 

io  e>utc  pzaifc  to  the  liozb,  foz  hects 
go  ob:  anb  pzaife  thceucriaftmg  Bing 
that  his;  tabernacle  map  bcebuilbcb 
mthec  agame  With  top :  anb||lct  him 
matte  topfull  there  m  thee,  thofc  that 
arc  taptiucs,  anb  loucm  thee  foz  eucr 
thofc  that  arc  mifcrablc. 

u  i^anp  nations  Ojall  come  from 


farrc  to  the  jftamc  of  the  Uojboob, 
With  gifts  m  their  hanbs.cucngiftcs  to 
the  Bing  of  hcaucn :  all  generations 
(hall  p^aifc  thee  With  great  top 

n  Curfcb  arc  all  thep  tbtjici)  hate 
thee,  anb  blcffcb  (hall  all  be,  tuijtct)  loue 
thee  foz  eucr. 

i3  Bciopccf  bcgiabfouhechilbicti  of 
the  ittft:  foz  thep  (hall  be  gathcrco  togc 
tljcr, «  fljaii  blcffc  the  Ho:b  of  the  mlt. 

14  ©blcflcb  arc  thep  Which  louc  thee, 
fojthep  thailrciopcc  in  thp  II  peace :  blcf- 
fcb arc  thep  which  hauc  been  fozowfuii 
foz  all  thpfcourges,foz  thep  thai  retopec 
foz  thee,  When  thep  hauc  fecne  all  thp 
glozp,  anb  (haibc  glab  foz  eucr. 

15  Hetmpfouleblcffc  00b  the  great 
Bing. 

16  jfoz  gjcrufalem  (hall  be  built  bp 
With  5>aphircs,  anb  Cmcraubs,  anb 
pzectotts  (tone:  thp  Wailcsanb  toWzes, 
anb  battlements  Unth  pure  golbc. 

17  3hibthcfttcctsof3Jcrtifaicm  thai 
bepaucb  With  25crtll,  anb  Carbuncle, 
anbftoncsof©phtr. 

is  3lnb  all  her  ftrccrs  (hall  fap,^aile; 
lutah,  anb  thep  fl)all  pzaife  him,  Taping, 
zsicfTcb  be  ©ob  ibhich  hath  ejctolleb  it 
fo?  eucr. 

CHAP.   XIIII. 

5  Tobit  giuerh  inftruclions  Co  his  fonne,  8  Spe- 
cially to  leaue  Nineue.  n  Hee  and  fas  wife 
die,  and  a  re  buried.  11  Tobias  remoueth  to 
Ecbatane,  14  and  there  died,  after  hee  had 
heard  of  the  deflrucl  ion  of  Nineue. 

£>Xobit  mabe  an  tune  of 

pjaiuugoob. 
z  ^nbhelbascightanb 

fiftp  pcercsolbcumenhec 

loft  his  fight ,  lbhulj  urns 
reftojeb  to  htm  after  cightpceres,  anb 
hegaue  almes,anb  he  llincreafcbin  the 
fcarc  of  the  ILozb  d5ob,  anb  p;aifcb  him. 

3  3mbU)hcnheibasbcrpageb,hce 
caiicb  Ins  fonnc,  anb  the  fire  fous  of  his 
fonnc,  anb  faib  to  him ,  ^)9p  fonnc,  tatce 
thpchilbjcmfoibeholb.'jfamagcb^nb 
am  rcabp  to  bepart  out  of  this  life. 

4  <3oe  into  ©cbia.mp  fonnc, foi^J 
fiirclp  belccuc  thofc  things  lbhtch  Jo 
nasthc  ^ophctfpanc  of il5iticuc,  that 
it  (hail  be  oucrthzotticn,  anb  thatfoja 
time  peace  fljai  rather  be  in  £0cbta,  anb 
that  our  b2Cth:cn  (hall  lie  fcattercb  m 
the  earth  from  that  gooblanb,  anb'3(c^ 
rnfalcmiljallbcbcfoiatcanbthchoufc 
of  (5ob  m  it  fljaibc  burueb ,  anb  (hall  be 
bcfolatcfojatunc: 

£)ooo       5  *3nb 


11*  ■?">}' 


mare  and 
mcrtfeart. 


Apocrypha. 


ludeth. 


Apocrypha. 


■Ezrij.S. 
and  6.  i.}. 


| For cuet 
is  not  ta.tbe 


5  *  3Jnb  tljat  agatnc  ©ob  lbill  Dane 
mcrcie  on  thcm.anb  tying  tljcm  agamc 
into  the  lanb  tbljerc  they  fhall  builb 
a  Xcmple,  but  not  lifec  to  the  firft.bntiU 
the  tune  of  that  age  be  fulftllcb,  anb  af 
tcrttmrb  they  fhatl  tcturne  f  rom  all  pla- 
tes of  their  taptiutrte,  anb  built  bp^e- 
rufalem  glonoully,attb  the  Ijouft  of 
©on  fbaii  be  bunt  in  tt  ||  fo?  cucr ,  untha 
glonotisbutlbtng,asthcp;!ophctBhaue 
fpoUcu  thereof. 

6  3nb  all  nations  fljau  turnc,  ant 
fcate  the  Hojb  ©on  truer? ,  ant  (ban 
burtethctniioles. 

7  £>o  Qjall  all  nations  maifc  the 
JLoft ,  anb  his  people  thai  confctTc  ©ob , 
anbthe!Lo;bn)ailejcaithisptoplc,ano 
all  thofc lbhitb  louc  thc&ojb  <5ob in 
tructh  anttufttce,  tl)aiircioyee,fl;ieUnug 
meccictoourbzctlucn. 

8  3lnb  noU) ,  my  tonne,  bepart  out 
of /Smeue,  becaufe  that  thofc  things 
ltohicb  trjc^opl)ct3Ionas  fpatie,  fbaii 
fuceiycometopaffe. 

9  25ut  beepc  thou  the  ILatb  anb  the 
Conimanbcments,  anb  (new  thy  feifc 
mcrrifullanbiuft,  tljatit  maygoe  lbell 
ttnth  thee. 

io  3lno  buric  me  bcceutly,  anb  thy 
mother  ibith  me,  but  tane  no  longer  at 
4!3lncue.  Bemcmbcr,  my  tonne,  bolt 
3manbanoieb:3crjiarbarus  fought 
him  Up ,  l)oib  out  of  light  he  brought 


bimintobarftcncs,anbbott)!)erett)ar; 
bet  him  agamc:  vet  SthiatharusiDas 
Hfaucb,  but  tlje  other  bat  his  reiuarb, 
foz  Ijcc  went  bourne  into  bacUenclTe. 
1 1  £0anafTcs  gauc  aimcs  ,aub  cfcapcb  the 
mares  of  bcath  ||  rbhict)  tljcy  hat  fct  to? 
htm :  but^man  fcllmto  tfjc  fnarc  anb 
pcnlhcb. 

1 1  i©l)crcfb2cnott),mp  fonnc,  confr 
bccibbat  almtsbocth,  anbbonjngb' 
tcoufucfTc  bod)  bciiucr.  nahen  he  hab 
faib  thefc  things,  l)c  gattebp  the  gboft 
m  the  beb,  being  an  hunbzeb ,  anb  cigbt 
aiibfifticyccresolb.anbilhcbiiriebljtm 
bonourably. 

ii  3lnoibbcn3lntia  bis  mother  Was 
beab,hc  buricb  her  tbtrrj  his  father :  but 
Tobias  bepartcb  unth  Ins  ixnfc  anb 
cbilb.:cnto€cbatanc,  to  3Kaguci  Ijis  fa- 
ther miaib: 

13  JDhcrc  ijcc  became  olo  ttittb  ho 
nour,  anb  hec  btinct  Ijts  father  anb 
mother  m  laibc  honourably ,  anb  hec 
llitthcrtteb  their  fubltancc ,  anb  Ijts  fa 
thcrlEobits. 

H  ^nbhcbicbat€cbatancin£I9c5 
bia,  being  an  huntycb  anb  feueti  anb 
ttbcnttcyccrcsolt. 

15  25ut  before  Ijc bicb.hchearb of  the 
tcltriittton  of  Emetic,  Uiljich  ruas  ta= 
Hen  by  iftabutbobonofoj  ?  3tmierus : 
anb  befoje  bis  bcatlj  Dtt  retoyeeb  oner 
jftumtc. 


||  Or.fr, 
femed. 

I J  lumiu  reA 
dnbN.tf- 

\Rom^\mh 
he  had  f*u 


[Or.tfa] 


fIVDETH. 


CHAP.    I. 

2.  Arphaxad  doech  fortifie  Lcbatane.  5  Nabu- 
chodono(or  uiaketh  warre  a^ainft  him,  7 
and  aaueth  aide,  n  Hec  threatneth  dioft 
that  would  not  aide  him,  15  and  killech  Ar- 
phaxad,  \6  and  returned)  to  Nincuc. 

0  the  nuclftb 
ycerc  of  y  rciguc 
of  ji3abucbobo 
nofoj ,  ibbo  reig 
nco  in  jBiucuc 
the  great  citic,(m 
the  Di\yts  of  3Jr- 
phajcab  ,  which 


*= "^ rcigncb  otter  the 

upebes  in  Ccbatanc, 


1  3nb  built  m  Ccbatane  lbailcs 
rouiib  about  of  (tones  hcibcn ,  thjee  tu 
bites  bjoab,  anb  fire  cubites  long,  anb 
mate  tlje  height  of  the  mail  feuenty  cu 
bites,  anb  tlje  bjcabth  tljcrcof  fiftictu 
bites: 

3  ^nb  fct  tlje  toibcrs  thereof  bpon 
tftc  gates  of  tt,  an  Ijunb^eb  mbitts  high, 
anb  the  b^cabth  thereof  in  the  foiuiba- 
nonthjccfcojctttbites. 

4  3lno  he  mate  tlje  gates  tljcrcof, 
cuen  gates  that  \bcrc  ratfeb  to  the 
hcigljt  of  feucntic  tubitcs,  $  the  tycab  tl) 
of  them  ibasfourtic  tubitcs,  fo?  the  go« 
mgfooith  of  his  nughrtc  annus,  anb 
io;  the  fcttiug  in  aray  of  hts  footmen. ) 

$  Cum  m  thofc  oayes,  bmg  i!5abu- 
I  thooo 


II"'. 


H'f- 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


l: 


cljoDouofbz  maoc  lbartc  lbith  lung  2Jc- 
phajcab  tn  tl)c  great  piaine ,  ibhich  is  the 
plame  in  the  bojbcrs  of  Kagau. 

6  3lnb  there  tame  buto  him ,  all 
they  that  blbcltm  the  hill countrey, anb 
all  that  oiDrlt  by  (Euphrates,  anb  Xi 
gris,anb  J>ybafpcs,anbthcplatnc  of3t- 
ctocl)  the  Ring  of  trjeGltmcans ,  aim 
bcry  many  nations  of  the  fonncs  of 
Chclob  ,  affcmblcb  tljemfclucs  to  the 
battcll. 

7  Xhcu  ^abuchobouofoj  Uing  of 
the  affynaus ,  fcut  buto  all  that  bibclt 
in  i&erfia ,  anb  to  all  that  ovbcit  ndctt 
ibarb,aub  to  thofc  that  bibclt  tn  Cilicia , 
anb  2>amafcus  anb  Hibanus,  anb  3ut 
ttltbanus,  anb  to  all  that  bibclt  bpon 
the  S>ca  coaft, 

s  3nb  to  thofc  amongfl  the  nattons 
thatiberc  of  £armcl,  anb  oaiaab,  anb 
the  higher  <5alilc ,  anb  the  great  plame 
ofefbielon, 

9  3nb  to  all  that  \bcrc  in  Samaria, 
anb  the  cities  thereof :  anb  bcyonb  3io; 
ban  unto  3)erufaicm,  anb  Bctant,  anb 
Chcllus,anb  Babcs,anb  the  niter  of  <£  ■■ 
gypt,anb  Xaphncs,anb  ffiamefle,  anb 
allthelanbof0cfcm, 

io  Jllntill  you  tome  bcyonb  Xanis, 
anb  Memphis ,  anb  to  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Cgypt,  bntill  you  cometo  the 
bojbccs  of  Ethiopia. 

ii  26ut  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
lanb  mabe  light  of  the  commaubement 
of  jHabuthoDouofoj  sing  ofthe^ffyji 
anB.neithctrbcnttheylDith  him  tot!;c 
battcll:fouheyil)crcnotafraibofhmi: 
yea  he  lbas  brfozc  them  as  one  man, 
anbthey  fentatbay  his  Smbaffabours 
from  them tbithout  effect , anb  \btth  bit 

grate* 
ix  Xhcrcfozc/Rabuchobonofojibas 

bcry  angry  Vbith  all  this  conntrcy ,  anb 
fwarc  by  his  tluone  anb  amgbomc.that 
rjee  lboulbfurely  be  aucngcb  bpon  all 
thofc  toads  of  Ctltcta ,  anb  £>amafcus, 
anb  &y2ia,anbthathcll'oulD  flay  lbith 
the  froojb  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  lanb 
of  i!|3oab ,  anb  the  tljilbzcn  of  Amnion, 
anball^jubca ,  anb  all  thatiberc  me» 
gypt.ttllyoutomctothcbojbcrsofthc 

tibo  S>cas. 

13  Xhcn  he  martheb  in  battcliaray 
lbtthhispoibetagatnftUiugStrpharao 
iu  the  fcucntccnth  ycerc ,  anb  he  pjc= 
uaileb  in  his  battcll :  fohcouerthKib 
all  the  poiber  of  3rpharab,  anb  all  his 
hojfcmen  anb  all  his  chariots, 

i+  3lnb  became  Iloib  of  his  cities, 


Apocrypha. 


anb  came  bnto  €cbatane,anb  toolic  the 
tolbcrs,  anb  fpoilcbthefheetes  there- 
of, anb  turneb  the  beauty  thereof  into 
J  Ihamc. 

H  ftcc  toolie  aifo  3trpha.cab  m  the 
imouutaincsofjRagau ,  anbfmotchim 
IthJough  lbith  his  bartcs ,  anb  beftcoy 
cbhimbtterlythatbay. 

i6  £>o  he  returucb  afteribaro  to 
/!5mctic,  both  he  anb  all  his  company 
of  funtyy  nations  :  bemga  bcry  great 
inultitubcof  men  of  ibarrc,  anbthcrc 
hctooUchiscafcanbbaiiKctteb,bothhc 
anb  his  arnuc  an  hunbzeb  anbtrbenty 
bayes. 

CHAP.    II. 

4  Oloternes  is  appointed  cenctall,  n  and 
charged  to  (pare  none,  that  will  not  yecld.  \<, 
Hisarmieandprouifion,  13  the  places  which 
he  wonne  and  wafted, as  he  went. 

««j£iI5b  in  the  eighteenth 
yeere ,  the  tlbo  anb  tibenti 
cth bay  of  thcfvrft month, 
there  tbas  tailtc  in  the 
houfc  of  jBabuchobonofo: 
lung  ofthc^lffynans ,  that  he  fljoulb  as 
he  fatb  aiieugc  himfcifc  on  all  the  earth. 
i  ^ohccaliebbntohtmallhiscffi 
ccrs^nb  all  his  nobles,  anb  communt 
catcb  lDiti)  them  his  fectet  counfcll  ,*ano 
tontlubcb  the  afflicting  of  the  tt>hole 
earth  out  ofhisoibne mouth. 

j  Xhen  they  bctreeb  to  bcfrroyail 
flefl)  that  bib  not  obey  the  commaunbc 
ment  of  his  moutlj. 

4.  3lnD  lbhen  he hab  enbeb his coun 
fell,  i^abuchobonofoiKing  of  thc^ffy- 
nans  cailcb  sDlofcrncs  the  chicfc  cap 
j  tame  oflns  army ,  lbhich  itoas  t  uejet  \m 
j  to  hn » ,aub  faib  bnto  him, 

5  Xhus  faith  the  great  mug,  the 
llLo2bofthcibholccarth :  brholb,thou 
(halt  goc  foul)  from  mypjcfcncc,  anb 
itaHe  lbith  thec  men  that  truft  mthctr 
oibncftrcngth.offootemcn  an  hunbjcb 
anb  twenty  thoufaub ,  anb  the  number 
of  hojfcs  lbith  their  ribcrs  tibcluc  thou 
fanb. 

6  3(nb  thou  (halt  goc  againft  ail 
the  nacft  countrcy.bccaufc  they  bifobcy- 
ebmy  cominanbcuicnt. 

7  3lno  thou  iliait  bcclarc  buto 
them  that  they  prepare  foj  me  ||  earth 
anblbatcr  :fo?  3)  lbill  goc  fouh  mmy 
lb2ath  againft  them ,  anbVbilltoucrthr 
ibholc  face  of  the  earth  lbith  the  fcetc  of 
nunc  armic,  aub^lujillgutc  them  foja 
fpoilc  buto  them. 

£)ooo  2         8  ^50 


*  i.^am.io 
7  and  25, 
«7- 


\\Orjtrr 
PerJSk,  to 


,ha  ,h,j 

were  Lor  Jt 
oftandAtut 
tea  Heredc- 


Apocrypha. 


Iudcth. 


Apocrypha. 


S  &0 that  their flame  fljallfillthett 
bailics,anb  bioofces.anb  the  rtucr  fljau 
be  fillcb  ibith  their  bcab ,  til  it  ouer  floib. 

9  3nb3Jtt>tlllcabthcmcapttucsto 
the  btmoft  parts  of  all  the  earth. 

io  £houtbcrcfozcfbait  goe  foozth, 
ano  tafec  befoze  hanb  foi  me  all  their 
.coafts,anbifthe?roillycclbtbeimelues 
bnto  thee,  thou  (bait  refcroe  them  foz 
me  till  thebay  of  ttjeir  pumfljment. 

1 1  2i6ut  contctning them  that rcbcll, 
let  not  ttjtnc  eye  fpare  them :  but  put 
themtotheflaugbter ,  ano  fpoilctbem 
ttihctefoeucrtbougoctt. 

u  ;tfozas3niuc,anbbythcpolbcr 
ofmyhmgbome,  ibbatfoeuet  jhaue 
fpoben,tfjatU)Ul3'  boe  by  mine  hanb. 

13  3inb  tafte  thou  hecoc  that  thou 
tranfgrcfTe  none  of  the  Commaunbe- 
ments  of  tbyfLozb,  but  atcompltfl) 
them  fully ,  as3J  hauc  tommaunbeb 
rhee,anbbcfcr  r  e  not  to  boe  them. 

14  HHjcn  jDlofcrncs  ibent  fooztb 
fromthcpzefcnceofbisiLozo,  anb  cab 
lebailthegouctnoutsanbCaptatncs, 
anb  the  officers  of  toe  army  of  3flur. 

15  ;anbbcmii(tcrcbtbetbofenmen 
foz  the  battel! ,  as  his  ILozb  hab  conv 
matihoco  hit" ,  bnto  an  httnbzcb  anb 
ttbenty  tboutaitb ,  J  ttbeluc  thoufano 
arthers  oh  ^ozrebartte. 

i6  3lnb  be  rangebthem  as  a  great 
arm?  is  ozbereb  foz  the  tbarre. 

17  3nbhctooBeCamels,anb2ffcs 
foz  their  tariagcs  a  bery  great  number, 
anb  Ojecpe ,  anb  £)rtn,  $  ©oates  tbith- 
out  number, foz  their  pzouiGon, 

iS  3no  plenty  of  toittaile  fo:  cucry 
manof  the  army,anbbcrymuebgolb, 
anb  filucr  ,out  of  the  l&ings  houfe. 

19  5Chcnhc  ibentfooztb  anb  an  his 
potberto  go  befoze  ixlng/ISabuthobo 
nofoz  in  the  boyage,anb  to  touer  al  the 
fate  of  the  earth  naefltbatb  Vbith  their 
ebarcts,anbb02fcmcn,anb  their  cbofen 
footmen. 

io  %  great  multitubc  alfo  of  funbzy 
countries  camcibitbthem,llbeIocu(rs, 
anb  line  the  fanb  of  the  earth  :  fo;  the 
muinruoc  ibas  without  number. 

ii  2lnb  they  ibnu  fooztb  of /Bmeue, 
tbzecbayes  tourney  toibarb  thcplainc 
of  Bctttlcth.anb  pitthcb  from2Bcttileth 
nccrc  the  mountainc ,  lbbicb  is  at  the 
left  hanb  of  the  bppcr  Ciliria. 

iz  XbcnhetooUcallhisarmie  ,his 
footmen,  anb  bozfnncn  anD  chariots, 
anb  ibent  from  thence  into  tlje  hill 
tountrey, 


2}  3lnb  befltoyeb  #bub,anb  ILub : 
anb  fpoileb  all  the  cbilozen  of  KafJcs, 
anb  the  cbilozen  of 3ffmaci,ibbicb  iberc 
toibarb  tlje  lbilbcrncffc  at  the  ;£>outb 
of  the  lanb  of  the  Cbcllians. 

24  Xbcnbeibcntoucreupbzatcs, 
ano  ibent  through  ^cfopotamia ,  anb 
beftroyeb  ail  the  high  ntics  that  ibere 
bpon  the  nuer  3(rbonai ,  till  you  come 
tothefea. 

25  3uibbcetooBetbebozbersofCi; 
llcia ,  ano  milcb  all  that  rcfifleb  him , anb 
cametothcbo2bcrsof3laphcth,tbhich 
ibere  toibarb  tbc£>outh,oucragaiiiQ 
Arabia. 

16  $c  tompatTeb  alfo  all  tlje  chtltycn 
ofQ?aoian ,  anb  burnt  bp their taber* 
nacles,  anb  fpoileb  their  fljeepcoats. 

17  Xhen  hce  ibent  botbnc  into  the 
piatue  of  SDamafcus  in  tlje  time  of 
ibbcat  barueft,  anb  burnt  bpall  their 
ftclbes,  ano  beftroyeb  their  floefces,  anb 
hcarbs,  alfo  he  fpoileb  their  ntics,  ano 
btterly  lbaftco  their  countreys ,  anb 
fmote  an  tljcir  yong  men  tbitlj  the  ebge 
oftbcfiuozb. 

13  Xbcrcfoze  tlje  fcare  anbbieab  of 
him,  fell  bpon  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  fca  coaftes ,  ibbtrh  vbcre  m5>ibon 
anb  Xyzus,  anb  them  that  blbelt  in 
Swr ,  anb  4Dnna ,  anb  all  that  blbelt  in 
■Jemnaan ,  anb  they  that  blbelt  m  %w 
tus,anb  afcbaion  featcb  him  greatly. 

CHAP.     III. 

1  They  of  the  Sea-coalls  entreat  for  peace.  7 
Olofernes is receiued  there:  8  Yet  lie de- 
ftroyeth  their  gods,  that  they  nnoht  wor- 
fhiponclyNabuchodonoror.  9  He  com- 
methneeretolildea. 

£)  thev  fent  (Smbafla^ 
oours  bnto  him,  to  treat 
of  peace,  fapmg, 
1  25choib,ibcthefcr5 
_  uants  of  /15abuchobonO' 
fo:  tlje  great  hmg  lie  befoze  thee  •.  bfebs 
as  (bail  be  goob  m  thv  fight. 

3  ascholb,  our  houfes,  ano  all  our 
piaccs.ano  ail  our  ficlbes  of  lbljcat.anb 
flocUcs,anb!jcarbs,anb  all  thelobges 
of  our  tents,  lie  before  thv  fate :  bfc 
thcmasttpleafctbthce. 

4  ffieljoio ,  cucn  our  cities  anb  tlje 
inhabitants  thereof  are  thy  feruants, 
come  anb  beale  ibith  rtjeni ,  as  fecmeth 
goob  bnto  thee. 

5  $>o  the  men  came  to  ^olofernes, 
$  bcclareb  bnto  him  after  this  man  er. 

6  Xhen  tame  hee  botbne  toibarb 
. Qi 


3»  I 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


.p.lll), 


Apocrypha. 


\\Or.Efdri. 
tarn. 

JOr,  Dolld, 
Dothar.  /u- 
mtu.Gtnef. 
37-  '7- 

\qr.grt* 

{km. 


\]Or,mtof 
Indea. 


the  Sea  coatt ,  both  hee  ano  bts  armie, 
anD  Tct  gartfonsm  the  btgl)  cities ,  anb 
tooKcoutofthemchofcnmenfojaioe. 

7  So  they  anb  all  the  counter 
routto about,  tceeiueb  themlbithgar< 
lanbs,  ibith  bantcs,  anb  ibith  ttmbjeis. 

8  jmhccbibcatrbotbnetheitftoiv 
tiers,  anb  cutbotbne  their  groues :  fo; 
hee  hab  bcecccbto  bcttcoyall  thegoos 
oftt)cianb,tl)atailnattons(boulbtbo^ 
Q)ip  4!?abitchobonofo2  oncly ,  ano  that 
all  tonguesanb  tribes  thoulbcaubpon 

htmas<£>ob. 

9  aifohecameouctagain(t||etb2a< 
elon  nccrc  bnto  II  liuoca ,  outt  agamC 
the  t  great  (trait  of Dubca. 

io  anb  hee  pttchcb  bctibecne  d3cba, 
anb  Scytbopolis ,  ano  there  hee  ta* 
rtcb  a  ibholc  moneth  ,tbat  he  might  & 
thcr  together  all  the  cartages  of  tots 
armie. 

CHAP.     IIII. 

The  lewes  arc  afraid  of  Holofernes,  5  ancI 
fortifie  the  hilles.  6  They  of  Bethulia  take 
charge  of  the  paflages.  9  All  Ifiael  fall  to 
falling  and  prayer. 

£»bthcthrtb2cnof3Jrta= 
el  that  bibclt  tu  3Jubea, 
hcarb  all  that  holofernes 
the  chicfc  taptainc  of  &<v 
r„  buchobouofojmng  of  the 
affyjians  hab  bone  to  the  nations,  ano 
after  lbhat  manner  heehab  fpoilco  all 
their  Xcmples ,  anb  brought  them  to 

nought. 

2  Xncrefo2Cthcyibere  erteebutgiy 
afratb  of  him,  anb  lbcrc  troublcb  foj 
"Jertifalcm ,  anbfozthe  Xemplc  of  the 
Co2b  their  C5ob. 

3  f-oi  they  lbcrc  ncibly  rertttneb 
from  the  captuutie ,  anb  all  the  people 
||  of  Uttbca  lbcre  lately  gathcrcb  toge- 
ther :  anbthebcffcls,anbthcaitar,aub 
thchoufc,lberc  fanctmcb  after  ti)ep?o> 
fanatton.  „  „ 

4.  Xhcrcfo2e  they  fent  into  all  the 
coafts  of  Samaria,  anb  the  Pillages, 
anb  to  i3ctho2on,anb2Sclmcn,  anb  Je- 
richo, anb  to  Choba.anb  t£fo?a,anbto 
theballcyof  Salem, 

5  ^nb  poffctTcb  thcmfclues  befoze- 
hanb  of  all  the  tops  of  the  high  moun* 
tames,  anb  fo2hftcb  the  Pillages  that 
lbcrc  m  them,  anb  laib  PpPietualsfo2 
the  p2oiufionofibarre:  fo?  their  tlelbes 
ibereof  latereapeb. 

6  aifo  "Joanm  the  hie  l&tcft  lbhich 
ibasintbofcbaicsmjecufalem.lbzotc 


to  them  that  burnt  in  asethulia,  anb 
26ctomeftr)am  lbhich  is  ouer  agauitt 
II  efbzaelon  tolbaro  the  ilopen  countrev 
ncereto3>otbaim, 

7  Charging  ttjem  to  feecpe  the  pat 
fages  of  the  hill  countrey :  foz  by  them 
there  ibasan  entrance  into  3ubca,anb 
itlbascafie  to  ftoppc  tbemtbat  iboulo 
comebp,  becaufc  thepatTageibasftraif 
llfojtlbomcnatthcmoft. 

8  anbthechilbjenofgifcacioibas 
3Joaeuiithehtc#?teft  habcommanocb 
them,  lbith  the||  ancients  of  all  the  pco; 
pie  of  Jfracl,  lbhich  otPclt  at  3Jerufait. 

9  Xhcn  cuer  y  man  of  3Jfraci  eryeb 
to  C5oo  lbith  great  feruentie ,  anb  ibith 
great  behemency  bib  they  humble  their 
fouies: 

to  280th  the?  anbfhetribiues,  anb 
thcirrhtlb2en,anb  their  cattcu,anb  cue* 
tyttranger  anb  hireling,  anb  their  fer- 
uants  bought  ibitb  money,  put  tarae- 
cloth  bpon  their  loynes. 

11  Xhus  cuer?  man  anb  lboman, 
ano  the  little  cbtlbzen,  9  the  inhabitants 
ofjcrufalcmfellbefoze  thctemplcanb 
caflathes  bpon  their  bcaos,  anbfp2eab 
out  their  facfidoth  bef  0:  c  the  face  of  the 
?io:b  :  alfo  they  put  faciucioth  about 
tljc  aitar, 

12  ^nb  crycb  to  the  ©00  of  3Kracl 
all ibith  one  confcntcarnefHy,  that  hee 
tboulb  not  giue  their  thiKucnfo;  a  pzap, 
anb  their  ibiucs  fo ;  a  fpoile ,  anb  the  tu 
tics  of  their  tnhentancc  to  ocftruction, 
ano  the  Sanctuary  to  p2ofananon  anb 
rep20th,f  fo?  the  nations  to  reioycc  at. 

13  So  ooo  hearb their  p2ayers,  anb 
ioolico  bpon  their  affticnous:  fo;  the 
pcoplefaftebmanybayesin  all^Jubea, 
anbUcrufalem,  befo2c  the  Sanctuary 
ofthcJLo2b  Almighty. 

14  anb3Joaeimthe  high^2icilt,anb 
all  the  02ieftes  that  ftoob  before  the 
?Lo2b,  anb  they  lbhich  mmtfrccb  bnto 
[the  ILo2b ,  hab  their  loincs  girt  lbith 
'facUccloth ,  anb  offcrebthe  oaily  burnt 
otTenngs,  lbtth  the  boibcs  anb  free 
gifts  of  the  people, 

15  ano  hab  afhes  on  their  nutcrs,ano 
ericb  bnto  the  Ho2b  ibith  all  their  poib- 
cr ,  that  hec  lbouio  looae  bpon  all  the 
houfe  of  jjfraclgcatiouOy. 

CHAP.   V. 

5  Achior  telleth  Holofernes  what  die  Icwcs  are, 
8  and  what  their  God  had  done  for  them  : 
11  and  aduifeth  not  to  meddle  with  them. 
-i  All  that  heard  him,  were  offended  at  hun. 

£>ooo  3       Xhen 


\\Or,EfJrt 
lorn. 


Ortrwa  J- 
\\Or,coi4cr- 


Apocrypha. 


Iiideth. 


Apocrypha. 


\Crr.nIllhc 
toopt. 


"Chap.  II 
7,9- 


"Gen.  ii. 


•>• 


I  Or^went 

oh*  of. 


*  Gen.  I  a. 


L 


I?  en  mastt  beclarcb  totyo 
lofcrnes  the  chief  captainc 
of  thcarmte  of  aflat  that 
the  rtjtltj^cn  of  3jftaet  bab 
pjcpareD  fo?  ibarre,anD 
two  (but  Dp  the  paffages  of  the  ntii 
countrcy ,  anD  baD  fojttficD  t  all  the  tops 
of  the  Inst)  billcs,  anD  baD  latDeimpcDt 
ments  tn  the  champion  countreys. 

i   BSbcrelbltb  be  lbas  bery  angry, 
ano  eaiicDailtbepnnces  of  #oab,  anD 
t  Ik  cap  tames  of  ammon,anD  all  the  go 
uc  rnours  of  the  £>ca  coafl. 

j  anDbefaiDbntotbem,Xclltnce 
notb,  ye  Comics  of  Canaan,  ibbo  this 
people  is  that  blbcllctft  in  tlicimicouti 
trey*  ano  ibbatarc  the  cities  that  fbey 
inhabited  anblbbat  is  the  multttuDe  of 
tljctcantttc;  attDtbbcteinistbeirpoib* 
cranDftrengfb,  ano  rbbatmng  is  ftto* 
uct  them,  ox  captamc  of  their  arnuc  < 

4-  ^no  ibby  bauc  they  bctcrmmeb 
not  to  come  ano  meet  me,  nt02c  then  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  nacft  t 

5  *  Xbcn  faib  acbto?,  the  captainc 
of  all  tlje  fonncs  of  amnion  :?Lct  my 
l02bnoibbcareaibo2Dfromtbcmoittb 
of  tin;  fcruant,  ano  3  ibtllbcciarc  bnto 
tbcethe  trttctb,  concerning  tins  people 
lbbicbDibcllctbnccrctbcc,  anDtnbabt 
tctb  the  bill  countreys:  anu  there  Chan 
no  lie  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  tbyfer* 
nam. 

6  Xbis  people  arc  DeftcnDcD  of  the 
Calbcans, 

7  *anD  tbcyfoiourncDbcretofojein 
$)cfopotamwi,  becaufc  they  iboulo  not 
follott)  the  gobs  of  their  fatbcrs.ibbicb 
mere  in  the  lanb  of  Caibca. 

8  jfo?  they  ||  left  tlKibay  of  their  an= 
tcftours,  ano  lbozfbippcb  the  <5ob  of 
hcaucn,  the  C5oD  luhoni  they  lmclb:fo 
thevcaftthem  out  fromthefaceof  their 
gobs,  ano  tbey  fleb  into  Q9cfopotanna , 
ano  fotourncD  there  many  Daycs. 

9  Xbcn  *  their  (Son  commaunDcD 
them  to  bepart  from  the  place  inhere 
they  foiourncb,  ano  to  goc  into  the  lanb 
ofChanaan,  inhere  thevDUicit,  ano 
mere  mcrcafcD  lbith  go  ID  anD  (iluer,anD 
lbitl)  bery  much  cattcll. 

io  25ut  lbbcn  a  famine  coucreb  all  the 
lanb  of  Cbanaan,  they  lbcnt  bourne  m 
to  cgypt ,  anb  foiourncb  there ,  ibbilc 
they  lbcrc  nounflieb,  anb  became  there 
a  great  inultitube, fo  that  one  couib  not 
number  their  nation. 

ii  Xbcrcfructbchmgof  egyptroft 
Dp  agamft  thnn,anb  beau  fubnily  lbith 


them,  anb  brought  them  lolb,  lbttbia^ 
bourutgmbnc&c,  sntabctbemflaucs. 

u  Xben  tbey  crtcD  bnto  their  <5od, 
anDbcunotealltbeianDofegyptibitb 
incurable  plagues ,  fo  the  *  Egyptians 
caft  them  out  of  their  fight. 

ij  anD  *  d50D  D?ieD  the  reD  &ca  be- 
fore them: 

14  anD  *  brought  them  to  mount 
t  £>tna,ano  Caocs  25arne,anD  call  fonb 
all  thatDlbelt  in  the  ibilDcrncffe. 

15  5>o  they  Dibelt  in  the  lanD  of  the 
amojites,  anD  they  DcftcoyeD  by  their 
Strength  all  them  of  Cfcbon,  anD  pafc 
fiitgoucr  3to?Dan  tljcy  pofleffeb  all  the 
hilicountrey. 

16  *anD  they  tad  fozth  bcfo;ctbem, 
tbeCbanaamtctbe  i&bercutc,  thc^c* 
bufitc,  anD  the  5>ychemitc,anD  all  the 
c5ergcfites,anD  theybibeltin  tbatcoun= 
trey  many  Day  es, 

17  anb  lbbileft  they  finneD  not  befoje 
their  <5ob,  they  pjofpereb,  becaufc  the 
©ob  that  batetb  ittiqutttc,  lbas  lbtth 
them. 

18  26ut  *  lbbcn  they  DepartcD  from 
thcibayibhich  hcappoitttcb  theni,fhey 
ibere  DcftroycD  in  many  battels  bcty 
fojc,  *  anD  lbcrc  Icd  captiucsmto  aianD 
that  lbas  not  theirs,  anb  tbcXcmplc 
of  their  ©oD  lbas  caft  to  the  grounD, 
anD  their  emes  lbcrc  taken  by  the  cue; 
mies. 

19  2Sut  *  notbe  arc  they  returncb 
to  their  <5ob ,  anb  arc  come  bp  from 
the  places,  ibherc  they  lberefcattcrcb, 
anb  bauc  pofleffeb  3fcrufalcm,  ibherc 
their  <S>anrntary  is,  anb  ||  arc  featcbm 
tbebtlleoutitrey.fojitibasbcfoiatc. 

zo  /i5oib  therefore,  my  lo:b  anb  go- 
ucrnour,  tf  there  be  any  errourtnthts 
people,  ?thcy  Gnne  agamft  their  d5ob, 
let  bs  confibcr  that  this  thai  be  their  rn- 
incanDlctbsgocbp^nDlbcfhalouers 
come  them. 

21  ffiuttf  there  benoitticiuittcmtheir 
nation,  let  my  io?D  nolb  paffe  by,  left 
their  %oin  DcfcnD  them,  anD  their  ©oD 
bcfo2thcm,  anb  lbcc  become  arepjotb 
befo;eauthcibo2lb. 

ii  anb  ibbcn  acljlo?  Ijab  finifljcD 
theft  dyings,  all  the  people  ftanDutg 
rounD  about  the  tent,  mummrcD ,  anD 
the  chtefc  men  of  l^oloferncs,  anD  all 
thatDlbelt  by  thc5>cafibc,  anDm09o« 
ab,fpatic  that  he  flioulb  bill  him. 

13  if 02, lis'  thev.ibcmui  not  bcafraib 
of  the  face  of  the  tljilbjen  of  3Jfracl,  fo? 
loc,  itisaptoplcthathauenoftrcngth, 
noj 


Exod.1.8. 


*Exod.  12. 
*Exod.i-j. 


*Exod.ip.i 

the  way  of 
the  wUdcr- 
net  of  StM. 


■Io(Kll.S 


*Iudg,i.i  1 
and  3.8. 


*  2.  Kings 


"Eznt.I, 


\\OrJ-a 


dtvel- 


Apocrypha. 


Chi 


tightj  or- 


no?  potter  t  fo?  a  ttrong  battril. 

24  4l5o to  therefore,  ?Lo?b$olofct* 
nes,  tberbillgocPp,anbthcvfl)allbea 
p?ap,to  be  bcuourcb  ofaii  thine  armir. 

CHAP.     VI. 

3  HolofernesdelpilethGod.  7  Hethreatnerh 
Achior  and  fendeth  him  away.  14  TheBe- 
thulians  receiue  and  heare  him.  18  They 
tall  to  prayer,  and  comfort  Achior. 

4Bb  VPhcn  the  ttttmilt  of 
men  that  ttere  about  tf)c 
counccllibasccafeD,^olQ; 
femes  the  chiefe  eaptamc 
ofthcarmicofatTur,  fatb 
pnto  aehuwanbailthe^oabitcs,  be* 
fo:calithecompaivpofofhcrnanons, 

z  anblPhoartthouachiozanDthc 
hirelings  of  ephzaun ,  that  thou  haft 
pzopheOeb  amongft  Ps  as  to  Dap ,  anb 
haft  faib ,  that  IPC  fljoaiu  not  mane 
lparre  Vbith  the  people  of  JJfcacl ,  be* 
caufc  their  C5ob  IPM  befenb  them  <  ano 
XPho  isdUoDbut/ftabucrjobonofM* 

j  $e  tbill  fenb  ins  poiPer ,  anb  mil 
beftcop  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth, 
ana  their  d5ob  thallnot  beliuer  them: 
but  ibe  hisfcruantsiPill  befttopthem 
as  one  man ,  fo?  they  arc  notable  to  fn= 
flatnethc  potPcrofourho2fcs. 

4.  j?o;r  tbith  them  iPe  ipm  tteab 
thftnPnPct  footcano  their  mountains 
(hailbcpjunBcn  ttiith  their  bloob,  anb 
their  ficlDS  (hall  be  fiillcb  lPtth  thett 
pcab  bobics,  anb  their  footcftcpsChail 
not  be  able  to  ftanb  befozr  PS ,  foz  they 
(halPttcrlp  pentt),faith  Btng  /f2abncho* 
bonofoz  ?Lo:b  of  all  the  earth  foztjee 
faib,nonc  of  nrp  uwds  Ojail  be  m  Patnc. 
<,  3fnDtfiou^Ccrjio? ,  an  Circling  of 
ammon  ,  Tbljtri)  haft  fpoBcn  rtjcfc 
ujozbsmthebapofthineimciuitp,  (halt 
fee  mv  face  no  mojcfcom  this  bay  Pntili 
gj  taftc  Pcngcancc  of  this  nation  that 
camcoutofegypt. 

6  anb  then  (hall  tlje fioozb  of  mine 
armic,  anb  the  mnltttubcofthem  that 
rente  me,  pafTc  tiuoughtltt'rtbcs,  anb 
thoufljaltfaiamongtheitflainCjlPhen 

gj  rcturnc. 

7  /3oiP  therefore  mpfcrnants  (hall 
bnng  thee  bacftc  into  the  hill  coimtre?, 
anb  (hall  fet  thec  m  one  of  the  titicsof 
thepaflages. 

8  5lnt)  thou  (halt  not  pcriflj  till  thou 
bcDcftcopcbttnththcm. 

9  ^nb  if  thou  pcrftuabc  thy  fclte  in 
thy  rninue,  that  the?  (hall  not  be  tahen, 


-Hi: 


Apocrypha. 


letnotthptountcnantefall:3  rjauefpo* 
nen it,  anb  none  of  mptbojos  than  be 
m  Panic. 

to  Xhen  $olofcrncs  tommanbeb 
hisfcruantsthatipaitcbinhistcnt,  to 
ta&cachiozanb  bjtnghimto  25cthulia, 
anb  beliuec  him  into  thchanbs  of  the 
ehtlbjenofgjfrael. 

11  £>o  h«s  fcruants  toofte  him ,  anb 
brought  him  out  of  the  campctnto  the 
piamc,anb  the?  rPentfcom  the  nubft  of 
the  plainc  into  the  hill  tountrey,  anb 
came  Pnto  the  fountames  that  iberc 
Pnbcrascthuiia. 

ix  anbtPnenthemcnofthectticfaiP 
thcm.theptooBe  bp  their  Weapons, 
anb  rbent  out  of  the  cmc  to  the  toppc  of 
the  hill,  anb  cuety  man  that  Pfcb  a  fling 
from  tomming  pp  Pp  catting  of  (tones 
agatnttthem. 

13  jRcucrthclcffc  hauing  gotten  p?t 
uflppnber  the  hill  ■,  tper  bouno  achto: 
anb  call  him  bourne,  anb  left  him  at  the 
forotc  of  the  hill ,  anb  ccturncb  to  tljnr 
1Lo;b. 

14  2Sut  tlie  gjfraelites  bcfccnbcb 
fromthcirntte,anb  came  Pnto  him,anb 
loofco  him,  anb  brought  him  into  25e* 
thulia ,  anb  pjcfcntcb  him  to  thegoucr- 
noursofthentie, 

15  naijich  iPctein thofe bapcs£>?ias 
khc  fonnc  of  fiPicha  of  the  tnbeof  S>t- 
"meon,anb€hab2isthefonneof<5orh05 

niel ,  anb  Cljarmis  the  fonnc  of  fiJ3cl- 
chicl. 

16  anb  ti)cv  calleb  together  all  the 
anncnts  of  the  otic ,  anb  all  their  pouth 
rannc  together,  anb  their  tbomen  to 
the  affcmblv ,  anb  rtjcv  fet  achio:  m  the 
nnDll  of  all  their  people.  Xhen£>5ias 
af  Heb  him  of  that  rbhith  ipas  bone. 

17  anb  he  anfmcreb  anb  bcciarefi 
Pnto  them  the  lPozbSofthccounfcllof 
^olofcnics ,  anb  all  the  lPozbsthathe 
hab  fpofecn  in  the  mibft  of  the  pmucs  of 
a(Tur,ano  iPhatfocuer  ftolofernes  hab 
fpottcn  pzoublv  agamft  the  houfc  of 
Jlfcatl. 

18  Xftcn  the  people  fell  boVPnc,  anb 
uwfhippcb  C5ob,  anp  crpcb  Pnto  <5ob, 
faying, 

19  ©ILoib  (5oP  of  hcaucn ,  bcholb 
thcirp,nbc,anr)pitvthcloiPrllateofour 
nation,  anb  looltePpon  the  face  oftljofe 
that  are  fanenfieb  Pnto  thee  tins  bap. 

20  SThcnthcv  comfojtcbatljtozaub 
pzaifcbhmigrcatlv. 

21  anb  £>Mas  toofec  himoutofthe 
alTcmblv  Pnto  his  Ijoufc ,  anb  mace  a 

fcaft 


Apocrypha. 


Iudeth. 


§FrcmT>o. 
thaim. 

bcmefUld. 


feaftto  theClbers ,  jtheycallebon  the! 
<3ob  of  3Jfracl  an  that  nightfo?  helpe. 

CHAP.    VII. 

i  Holofemes  befiegeth  Bcthulia,  7  andftop- 
peth  die  wacer  from  them,  ir  They  faint 
and  murmure  againft  the  gouernours,  30: 
Who  promKe  toyeeld  within  fiue  dayes. 

"  $c  nert  bay  holofemes 
Eg  commanbebailhisarmy, 
anb  all  his  people  tbrjtct) 
pibcte  come  to  take  his 
m  part,  that  thcyfhoulb  tv\ 
mooue  their  tanipe  againft  25ethulia,! 
to  take  afojchanb  the  afccnts  of  the  hill 
countrey,  anb  to  mafte  lbarrc  againft 
thechilb?enof3iftacl. 

z  1Ehcn  their  ftrongmen  rcmoucb 
their  campcs  to  that  bay,anb  the  armie 
of  the  men  of  lbarrc  ibas,an  hunb?cb 
ano  feuenty  thottfand  footmen ,  ano 
tlbcluc  thotifanb  hotfcmcit ,  bcft'be  thc| 
baggage,?  other  men  thatlbcrc  afoot, 
amongft  them,  a  bery  great  multttube. 

5  3lnb  they  campcb  to  the  bailey 
ncctebnto  ascthulia,  by  the  fountame, 
and  they  fpjcbthcmlclucsin  bjeabth  o- 
uer||  JDothaim  ,cucnto  Jficlmaim  ,anb 
tn  length  from  25ethulia  bnto  t  Cya> 
monibhich  is  ouct  againQ  efojacion. 

+  Jl5oib  thcchiUwcn  of  Jftacl  tbhen 
theyfalb  the  mnltttuoc  ofthem,  tbrtc 
greatly  troubled,  ano  faidcucryoncto 
his  neighbour :  jlSoib  null  tljcfe  men 
licfte  top  the  face  of  the  cacti) ,  fo;  ncttijcc 
the  high  mountatnes,  noj  the  baileys, 
no?  the  hils ,  are  able  to  bcarc  their 
lbaight. 

<,  1Chen  cucry  man  toottc  bp  his 
Weapons  ofibarrcanoibhcu  they  hab 
fetnbleb  fires  bpon  time  tolbcrs,  they 
remameb  anb  watched  all  that  night. 

6  zSutmthefcconoday  Dolofcrncs 
brought  footfh  all  his  honcmciun  the 
fight  of  the  children  of  3Kfraci  Which 
tbcreinBethulia, 

7  3lnb  bicibcb  the  paflages  bp  to 
the  city,  ano  came  to  the  fountame  of 
there  waters ,  ano  tooltc  them ,  anD  fet 
garrifonsof  men  ofwarrc  oner  them, 
anb  he  htmfclfc  r  emooueo  towarbs  his 
people. 

8  %\)tn  came  bnto  him  all  the  ehicfc 
of  the  cbiuucn  of<£fau,ano  ai  the  gouer  < 
nours  of  the  people  of  i29oab,  anb  the  i 
taptames  of  the  fea  coa(l,anb  faib, 

9  ftct  our  lojd  now  heare  a  wo?o, 
tbatibcrebenotatiouertluoW  m  thine ! 
armie. 


Apocrypha. 


10  5F02  this  people  of  tije  ebilbjen  of 
3lfraclbo  not  truft  in  their  fpearcs,  but 
mrtjchcightoffhcmountameslbhere' 
in  they  mum ,  becaufe  it  is  not  eafie  to 
comebp  to  the  tops  of  their  mountains. 

11  /Sorb  therefore  my  lojb, fight  not 
againft  themtnbattcll  aray,  ano  there 
(bail  not  fo  much  as  one  man  of  thy 
pcoplepenfh. 

ii  3Kcmatnc(nfbycampe,anbaecpe 
all  the  men  of  thine  army ,  ano  let  thy 
feruantsgettnto  their  bands  tbefoun; 
tame  of  water  Which  iffueth  foojth  of 
the  foot  of  themountame. 

15  Sm  all  the  inhabitants  of  25cthu< 
lia  hauc  their  water  thence :  fo  (hall 
thirft  mi  them,?  they  (baiigtuc  bp  their 
nne,anowcano our  people  (baigocbp 
totbetopsof  tbemountatnes  that  arc 
nee cc ,  anb  Will  campc  bpon  them,  to 
match  that  none  goe  out  of  the  ctty. 

1+  do  they  anb  their  tbiues ,  anb 
their  chilbicu  (haibc  confumcb  UutD  fa 
minc,anb  before  the  fuio?b  come  againft 
them .  they  ftjall  be  ouetthjotben  to  the 
ttreets  inhere  theybttjel. 

15  "Ehus  fhait thou  renber  them  an 
euilrelbarb :  betaufe  they  rcbelleb  anb 
met  not  thy  perfon  peaceably. 

\6  anbthcfcibojbsplcafc&^olofer'- 
nes,anb  alius  feruants.ano  he  appoint 
tcbtoboeasthcyhabfpoUcn. 

17  do  tlje  campc  of  the  chilbjen  of 
Amnion  bepartcb,  ano  ibifh  them  fiue 
thoufanb  of  the  3tffy?<ans  ,  anb  they 
pitchcb  to  the bailcy,anb  toofee the iba? 
tecs ,  aubtlje  fountames  of  the  xttaters 
ofthcchilb?enof31fcacl. 

is  %l)tn  tile  chilbjcn  of  €fauibent 
bp,U)ith  the  chilb?en  of  ^nunon  ,anb 
campcbtnthchilcountreyoueragamft 
SDorha  cm :  ano  they  fent  fome  of  them 
tovoarb  the  doutl),  *  tovbarb  the  €aft 
oucr  againft  €hrebcl ,  lbljich  is  ncerc 
bnto  Chufi ,  that  is  topon  the  bJooHe 
Q9oct)mnr,  anb  the  reft  of  the  army  of 
the  atTynans  camped  in  the  piauic,  anb 
coueredthefaceoftherbholcianb,anb 
their  tents  anb  cartages  iberc  pitchcb 
to  abery  great  multitubc. 

19  Xhcn  the  chilbzen  of IJfracl  cneb 
bnto  the  U020  their  (3ob,  becaufe  their 
heart  faiico ,  fo?  all  their  enemies  hab 
compaffeb  them  rotmb  about,  s  there 
lbas  no  Vbay  to  efcape  out  from  among 
them. 

20  1Chus  all  the  company  of  3ffur 
rematneb  about  them,  both  their  foot^ 
men,  charcts  anoho?femcn,fourcanb 
thtrtic 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vii). 


Apocrypha. 


\  Or, fit j. 


*Eio.5.ii 


Or,  ttji  he 
doe :  mea- 
ning,  Olo- 

fermt. 


thirtte  nans,  fo  that  ail  tljeir  befiels 
of  ibater  faiicD  all  the  inhabitants  of 
zsetbuua. 

ii  ^nDt!)e||rtftcttustterccmptico, 
ano  thep  baD  not  ibater  to  Dunne  tbcir 
fill,  fo?  one  Dap ;  fo?  thep  sane  tbem 
bunbebpmeatuee. 

ix  ?Cberefo?e  their  poung  tbilb?cn 
ibere  ont  of  Dean,  anD  their ttiomen 
anD  pong  men  famteDfo?tbtr(t,anDfcll 
Doibnc  m  the  Or  eetes  of  the  cup ,  anD  bp 
the  patTages  of  tbcgates,anD  tljctc  tbas 
no  longer  anp  ttrength  m  tbem. 

i j  £ben  all  the  people  atTembleD  to 
£>5ias,anDto  tbetbiefeof  tbecttp,botb 
poung  men,anD  tbomen.anb  cbiib?en, 
anD  ttpeD  lbitb  a  lonDe  bolte,  anD  faiDc 
befo?ealltbe«lDers; 

14  <BoD*bC3uDgebctrbecnebsanD 
pon :  fo?  pou  bauc  Done  bs  peat  tnturp 
in  that  pon  baue  not  requtreD  peace  of 
tbechflb?enof:aflur. 

i$  jfo?noiblbebaueno  helper:  but 
<5od  hathfolD  bs  into  their  banDS,  that 
rbce  fhoulD  be  tbjotben  Doibnc  before 
them  tWlhthirQ,anD  great  Delrruttion. 

z6  iBolb  therefore  tall  tbem  bnto 
ptra,  anD  DCliuer  the  ibbole  titie  fo?  a 
tpoile  to  the  people  of  £>lofetnes,  anD 
toallbisatmte. 

17  jfo?  it  ifi  better  fo?bs  to  be  mabe 
a  fpoile  bnto  them,then  to  Die  fo?  tblrft : 
fo?  ibeerbillbe  his  feruants,  that  onr 
forties  map  hue,  anD  not  fee  theoeath  of 
our  infants  bcfo?e  our  epes,no?our 
rbiucs  no?  our  tbilD?en  to  Die. 

i%  ©e  tafce  to  nntneffe  againlt  pou, 
the  beaucn  anD  the  carth,anD  onr  ©od, 
anD&o?D  of  our  fathers,  tbhtchpuni- 
(hcth  bs acco?Ding  to  our  finncs,  anD 
the  fmnes  of  our  fathers,  thatllheeooe 
not  acto?Dtngasibc  baue  CaiD  this  Dap. 
19  Ibcit there  ibas  great  dieepmg 
tbith  one  tonfent  in  the  miDDeft  of  the 
afTemblp,  anb  thep  trpcb  bnto  the  ?Lo?b 
(BobtbithaiouDeboice. 

30  Xhen  faib  £>3ias  to  them ,  2S?fc 
th?en,  be  of  goob  courage,  let  bspcten* 
Dure  fiue  Dapes,  mtbcibhtcb  fpacethc 
!Lo  jd  out  <5oD  map  tume  h«s  mer  cp  to 
ibarDbs,  fo?berbillnot  fb?fafee  bs  bfc 

tetlp.  „ 

31  3tnDiftbc&  Dapes  paffcanD  there 
tomenohelpebntobs/tiibilDoeacco^ 
Dtngtopoutlbo?D. 

3i  3lnDbc  DifpcrfcD  the  people  cue- 
rp  one  to  their  oibnc  charge,  ano  they 
ibent  bnto  the  lbailcs  anb  totb?es  of 
their  tttic,  anD  fent  the  ibomctt  anD 


cbilD?cn  into  tbeir  houfes ,  anD  thep 
ibere  berpiotb  b?ougt)t  m  the  cup. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

The  flatcanj  behauiourof  Iudcih  awi.low. 
!i  She  blameth  the  gouernors  for  their  pro- 
tnifetoyeeld :  17  andaduilcth  them  totruft 
in  God.  18  Thev  excule  their  promifc.  31 
Sbepromifcthtodoefomethingtor  them. 

£>ib  at  that  time  giuDrtb 
hearD  thereof,  ibhicbibas 
the  Daughter  of  U0crari 
the  fonne  of  £)r,  thefonne 
_  of5ofeph,thefonneof^)j 
5icl,the  lonnc  ot%lna,the  fonne  of  Ana- 
nias, the  fonne  of  Gcoeon, thefonne  of 
ftapbaim,  the  fon  of  3lntbo,  thefonne 
of  eiiu,tbe  fonne  of<£ltab,tbelbnne  of 
iBatbanacl.tbc  fonne  of  ||£>amael,  the 
fonne  ofj§>alafaDat,tbefon  of  llfrael. 

i  3nD^anau*csibasberbufbanb 
of  her  tribe  anb  BuireD,tbho  DieD  in  the 
bariepbarucft. 

3  ifo?  asbecQoob  oucrfeeing them 
that  bounblhcaucs  in  the  ficiD,  the  heat 
came  bpon  his  heab,  anD  hec  fell  on  his 
beb  ,anD  bieb  in  the  eitp  of  2Sethulia,anb 
thep  buneD  htm  tbitl)  his  fatbers,m  the 
6elD  betibcene  SDotbaim  anb  asaiamo. 
4.  5>o31nDcthtt)asaTbiDoibinher 
houfcth«epeeres,anDfonremoneths. 

5  ^no  Che  maDc  her  a  tent  bpon  the 
top  of  her  houfe ,  anbpnt  oufacbecloth 
on  her  lopnes,  anDibarehcribiDolbes 
apparcll. 

6  ^nDfi)cfaacDailtheDapesofher 
ibibotbhoob,  faue  the  eues  of  the  £>ab-- 
bath.anbthe  Sabbaths,  anb  the  cues 
of  the  netbc  fi0oones ,  anb  the  netbc 
^oones,anDthejfeafts,  anbfolcmne 
Dapes  of  the  houfe  of  3Ifrael. 

7  5>hee  Uias  alio  of  a  gooDlp  coun^ 
tcnance,  anD  bcrp  bcannfull  to  beholb : 
anb  her  huf  banb  fi0ana{res  IjaD  left  her 
golDc  anD  filucr ,  anD  men  feruants  anD 
maiDe  feruants,  anD  tattcll,anD  lanDs, 
||  anD  Oie  remamcDbpon  them. 

8  3lnD  there  lbas  none  that  gaue 
her  an  ill  lbo?Dc;  to?  fljee  fearcD  <PoD 
grcatlp. 

9  /Rott)  ibhcn  tt)cc  hearb  the  euill 
nwbes  of  tlic  people  agamOrt)cgouer< 
no? ,  that  thep  famteD  fo?  lacftc  of  ibater 
(foi  'JtiDcthhaD  hcarD  all  the  ttwDcs 
tl)at€)MashaD  fpohen bnto  them, ano 
that  behab'fajomcto  Dcitucttbe  nnc 
bnto  the  ^flpuans  after  fiue  Dapes) 

10  Xhen  nice  fent  beribamng  ibo- 
man  that  baD  the  gouetnment  of  all 

things 

63 


I  Or,Saxji- 


\\Or,andJ?,e 
l^cpt  them. 


•Cha,7.2(5. 


Apocrypha. 


ludeth. 


Apocrypha. 


\\1r,v<gtgc. 

•Numb.j? 
I?- 


jj  Orfovenc. 


and  4.  i. 
and  6. 1. 


\\°'J» 


things  that  (hchab,  to  tall  ^D?tas,  anb 
Chab  its,  anD  Chatmts ,  the  ancients  of 
thecttic. 

1 1  3ud  thcp  came  bnto  her ,  anD  (he 
fatDbnto  them,  $carc  menow,  £D  pee 
gouernours  of  the  inhabitants  of  26e* 
thulta:  fojpour  lbojDesthat  pou  hauc 
fpoacn  before  the  people  this  bap  arc 
notnght,  touching  thtsothc  Which  pe 
mabc,  ano  pjcnounceD  bettbecne  d5ob 
anbpou,  anb  haucp2omifcD  to  Dcituet 
the  citieto  out  enemies,  bnlcffc  ibithin 
thefc  bates  the  IL02D  turne  to  helpc  pou. 

ix  3nbnotbU)hoarcpou,  that  hauc 
temptebd5ob  this  Dap,  9  ftanbmfteab 
of  d5obamongftthcchilD2cn  of  men  < 

I  j  ^nbnolb  trie  the  fLojbSllmightp, 
but  pou  (hall  neucr  bnolb  anp  thing. 

14  if  02  pou  cannot  finb  the  Depth  of 
the  heart  of  man ,  neither  can  pc  per 
cctuc  the  things  that  he  thmfteth:  then 
hotb  canpou  fearch  out  ©ob,that  hath 
mabc  all  tnefc  things,  ano  fenoibe  his 
nunDc ,  0:  compjehenb  his  purpofc  < 
flay  mp  bjethzen  ,  pzouoUc  not  the 
H02D  our  (50D  to  anger. 

15  if  02  if  he  ttiill not  hclpc  bs  ibithin 
theft  fc  lb  bapes ,  he  hath  polbcr  to  be- 
feno  tos  lbhcn  he  Hull,  eucn  eucrp  Dap, 
02  to  beftrop  bs  bcfo2c  our  enemies. 

16  2>ocnot||binbefhecounfelsofthc 
|Lo2DourC5oD,fo2*(5oDisnotasman, 
thathcmapbcthjcatncb,  neither  is  he 
asthefonncof  manthathe  (houlb  bee 
ibauermg. 

17  Xhcrcfcuc  let  bs  ibattc  fo:  fai 
uation  of  him,  anb  call  bpon  him  to 
hclpcbs,ano  he  lbill  hcarc  our  bopecif 
ttplcafchim. 

18  ifo:  there  arofe  none  tn  our  age, 
neither  ts  there  anp  nobj  m  thefc  bates, 
neither mbe,  no2famtlic,  nojllproplc, 
no2  cup  among  bs,tbhsch  lbojflnp  gobs 
mabc  lbtfhhanbs,  as  hath  bene  aroze 
tune. 

19  ifo?  the  ibhtch  caufc  our  fathers 
*lbcregiucntothcfiuo2b,?fo2afpoilc, 
anb  Ijab  a  greatfallbcfoicour  enemies. 
■  io  2Sut  lbc  tmoib  none  other  gob 
therefo2eibc  trull  that  he  Hull  not  be 
fpifc  bs,no2  anp  of  our  nation. 

II  ifojif  lbc  be  taken  fo,  all  JJtibea 
fhallltciba(rc,anbout£>anctuane(hal 
be  fpoileb ,  anb  he  lbill  require  the  p.2o- 
phauation  thereof,  at  our  mouth. 

11  2lnbthc||(laugliter  of  our  b2Cth2Cn, 
anb  the  captuunc  of  the  countrrp ,  anb 
the  befoiation  of  our  inheritance,  lbill 
he  turne  bpon  our  heabs  among  the 


©entiles,  ibherefocuer  lbe  (ball  bee  in 
bonbagcanb  tbc  (hall  be  an  offence  anb 
a  tepioch  to  all  them  that  poffeffe  bs. 

13  ifojourfcruitube  (hall  not  be  Dfc 
r  ectcb  to  fauouc :  but  the  IL02D  our  <3oD 
(hall  turne  it  to  billion  our. 

24.  >15oib  therefore,  £>  brethren,  let 
bs  (herb  an  eramplc  to  our  brethren, 
becaufc  their  hearts  bepenb  bpon  bs, 
anD  the  £>anctuarp,  anD  the  houfe,  anD 
thc^ltarrettbponbs. 

15  s33oreouer,lctbsgiucthanfecsto 
thc?lo2D  our  Gob,  lbbich  trieth  bs,  c= 
uen  as  he  bib  our  fathers. 

26  Remember  tbhat  things  he  bib 
to  Abraham,  anb  boib  he  tneb  gjfaae, 
anb  lbbat  bappeneb  to  *  3<Kbbm  $9e- 
fopotamiaof  £>pna, lbhen  he  bept  the 
(beepe  of  Haban  his  mothers  brother. 

17  if  02,  hec  hath  not  trieb  bs  m  the 
fircashebtbthem,  fortbeeranunation 
of  their  hearts,  neither  hath  bectatten 
bengeancc  on  bs :  but  the  IL02D  Docth 
fcottrgc  them  that  come  nccrc  bnto  him 
toabmontfl)thcm. 

18  XhcufaibjalHias  to  her,  3m  that 
thouha(rfpoKcn,haltthoufpo6enlbith 
agoob  heart,  anb  there  is  none  that 
map  gatnefap  tljv  lborbs. 

19  iforfbisisnottbcfirlrbapibber; 
in  thp  lbifcbomc  is  manifeftcb,butfrom 
tbebcgmningof  tljp  bapes  all  thp  peo- 
ple hauc  ftnotben  thp  bnbcrftanbing, 
becaufc  tlje  bifpoQtton  of  thine  heart  is 
gooo. 

30  2i5ut  the  people  Ibcreberpthivlfp, 
anb  compcllcb  bs  to  boe  bnto  them  as 
lbe  hauc  fpoben ,  anb  to  bung  an  othe 
bpon  our  fclues,  rbhith  ibec  lbill  not 
breabc. 

31  Xbereforc  noib  prap  thou  for  bs, 
becaufc  thou  art  a  goblplboman,  anb 
tbeflorbibtll  fenb  bs  tame  to  fill  our 
ciftcmes,  anb  lbe  (ball  faint  no  mo2c. 

32  Xhcn  fatb  giubeth  bnto  them, 
$carcme,anb3Jibilboeatbing,lbbicb 
(ball  goe  throughout  all  generations, 
to  the  chilb2cn  of  our  nation. 

33  I'ou  (hall  Itanb  this  night  in  the 
gate,  anb  3J  lbill  got  foo2th  ttntb  mp 
lbaitingibomamanbibithmthcbapcs 
that  pou  hauc  pronufeb  to  bciiuer  the 
tme  to  our  enemies,  the  JLorb  lbill  bifit 
3)fratlbpminehanb. 

34  25ut  inquire  notpou  of  mine  act: 
fo2  "j  lbill  not bctiarcit bnto  pou,tilthc 
things  be  fiuitbcb  that  3  boe. 

35  Xbenfaib  £>?tas  anb  thep2tnces 
bnto  her,  <5oc  in  peace ,  anb  the  ?Lorb 

<£>ob 


Gen. i3. 
Cicn.28-7 


Apocrypha.  Chap.ix.x. 


•Gcn.34. 

:,»5. 


©00  be  before  thee,  to  taftcbcngeancc 
on  our  enemte s. 

36  «§>o  tljcp  retnrncb  from  the  tent, 
anb  Vbcnt  to  their  ibatbs. 

CHAP.   IX. 

1  Iudeth  humbleth  herlelte,  1  and  prayeth 
God  to  prolpei  her  purpole  againft  the  en  e- 
oiicsof  his  landtuarie. 

^enjubeth  fell  bpon  her 
fate,  ano  put  afbes  bpon 
her  heab ,  anb  bntoucreb 
the  fatttcioth  tbheteibtth 
fl)c  ibas  elothcb,anb  about 
the  time,  that  the  tncenfe  of  that  cue- 
ntng  ibas  offetcb  in  3f  crufalem ,  in  the 
houfc  oftije  ?Lo:b ,  Hubert)  etyebtbtth 
aloubboyccanbfaib, 

z  ®  !Lo2b  (Sob  of  my  father  *  £>i? 
ntcon,  torbbomthougaucftafroozb  to 
taftebengeancc  of  tl)c  Grangers,  lDt)o 
loofencbthc  gitbleof  a  maibc  to  bcfllc 
her,  anb  btfeoucreb  the  thigh  to  her 
fl)amc,anbpollutebhcrbirgitutytoher 
repzoch,  (fo;  tljow  fatbft  ttfhail  not  be 
fQ,anbycttheybtbfo.) 

3  nahetcfoire  tDou  gaueft  their  ru- 
lers to  be  flame,  fothat  they  bieb  their 
bebittbloob,bemgbctcmcb,anbfmoteft 
the  feruantsibith  their  fLo2bs,anbthe 
Hoibsbpon  their  tlnoncs : 

4  3lnb  haft  giuen  their  ttnues  foz  a 
p«y,  anb  their  baughtcrs  to  bee  cap; 
tiues ,  anballtheirfpotlestobcbmibcb 
amongftthybecrctbtlbzemibhichiberc 
mooueb  ibith  thy  scale,  anb  abhojreb 
the  pollution  of  theitbioob,  anbtaiico 
bpon  theefo2aibc:£>(E>ob,jDmy(15ob, 
hcaremeaifoaibiboib. 

5  fw  thou  haft  bought  not  oncly 
tboft  things,  butaifo  the  thingsibhteh 
fell  out  bcfo?c,anb  ibhirh  cnfclbeb  after, 
thou  haft  thought  bpon  the  things 
ibhich  arc  no\b  ,anb  ibhich  art  to  come. 

6  jaca  lbhat  things  thou  bibft  bcter^ 
mine  lber  c  r  coy  at  hanb,anb  fatb.loc  ibc 
atehecrc ;  fo?  au  thy  lbaycsarc  pjcpa^ 
rco,  anb  thy  iubgtmcnts  arc  m  thy  fo<t^ 
tmoiblcbgc. 

7  fox  beholb,  the  3lffy«ans  are 
multiplycb  in  their  poibcr :  they  are  cr 
altcb  ibith  hoifc  anb  man:  they  glojy  m 
the  ftrength  of  their  footemen :  the? 
truftin  fbtclbanbfpcarc,  anbboib,anb 
nmg ,  anb  ttnoib  not  that  thou  art  the 
%qih  that  bzeatteft  the  battels  :  the 
lUijoisthynamc. 

s  Xhzofti  botbnc  their  ftrength  in 
thy  poibcr ,  anb  tying  boibne  their 


Ap 


ocr 


fo?ccm  dw  ibiath  ■>  fo?  they  haue  purpo- 
feb  to  befilc  thy  Sanctuary ,  anb  to  pol- 
lute theXabernacle,  ibheretbygion; 
ous  name  rcfteth,  anb  to  call  boibne 
ibith  fawb  tl)c  home  of  thy  altar. 

9  25eholb  their  pjibe ,  anb  fenb  thy 
tbjath  bpon  their  heabs:gme  into  mine 
hanb  ibhich  am  a  ibiboru,  the  poibcr 
thatjflbaucconceutcb. 

10  "*;§>mttebythebeccitofmyupsfhe 
fcroant  ibith  tbepmtee,  anbthepnnte 
lbtth  the  fcruant :  bjeafecDoibne  their 
ftatclmeffe  by  the  hanb  of  a  iboman. 

n  *jfrv  thy  poibcr  ftanbeth  notm 


nd?.4. 
&5.II5. 


•Iudg.7. 


inultitubcnouhymightmftrongmen,^  chro  M.' 
fo?  thou  art  a  ©ob  of  the  affltcteb ,  ani  ''■*'* '*■ 
helper  oftheopp2effeb,  an  bpholbcr  of  ' 
the  lbeatte,  a  pjotccto:  of  the  foiclome,  a 
fauiour  of  them  that  are  tbtthout  hope. 
ii  51  pjay  thee,  "5  p.zay  thee,  £>  ©ob 
of  my  father,anb  00b  of  the  inheritance 
of  JJfracl,  &ojb  of  the  hcaticns,  anb 
earth,  rrcato:  of  the  lbaters,  ttingofc; 
ucry  creature :  heare  thou  my  pniycr: 

13  3lnb  matte  my  fpeech  anb  bcceitto 
be  their  ttiounb  $  ftnpe,  lbho  haue  pur; 
pofeb  crucll  things  againft  thy  coue; 
nant ,  anb  thy  haiiovbeb  houfc ,  anb  & 
gamftthetop  of^ion ,  anb  againft  the 
boufcofthepoffeflionoffhychUbJcn. 

14  3Uib  matte  cucrynatton  anb  tribe 
to  acttnotbltbgc  that  thou  art  the  cob 
of  ailpolber  anb  might,  anbthatthere 
is  none  other  that  pjotectethtljt  people 
ofSfraelbutthou. 

CHAP.    X 

3  Iudeih  doth  fet  forth  herfelfe.  10  She  and 
her  maidegoefordi  into  the  campe.  17  The 
watch  take  and  conduift  her  toOlo'ernes. 

£)ib  after  that  fli  c  hab  cca^ 
feb  to  cry  bnto  the  ©00  of 
3jfracl,anbhabmabean 
cnbofallthcfeibozbs, 
z  5>hcrofeibhereft)e 
hab  fallen  bovbncanb  calico  her  maioe, 
anblbentboibnemtothe  houfc,  m  the 
Uihtch  fl)c  abobctn  the  Sabbath  bay ts 
anb  m  her  feaft  bayes, 

3  ^nbpullcborTthcfacttclothlbhuh 
njchab  on,ano  put  off  thegarments  of 
hetibibolbhoob,  anbibaflieb  her  boDy 
alloucribithlbatcr,anbannointcbher 
fclfc  ibith  precious  ointment,  aubbzai^ 
Dcbthchairconicr  hcab,  anb  put  on  t  a  t?«.«» 
tirebpon  it,anb  put  on  her  garments  of 
giabncffc ,  lbhcrettnth  ftjcibasclaDbtv 
ring  the  life  of  ^attaffes  her  hufbanb. 

4  3nb  fl)e  toottc  fanbais  bpon  her 
^ fcetCi 


Apocrypha. 


Iudeth. 


Apocrypha. 


]  Wrapped, 
or  packed. 


i  fcctc,  anb  put  abouthct ,  her  bracelets 

|  anbhcrrhaines,anbherrmgs,  ant)  her 

earcnngs,anbailhcr  ornaments,  anb 

bct&cb  her  fcife  tyaucly  to  allure  the 

eyes  of  all  men  that  fljoulb  fee  l)tt. 

5  Xljen  flic  gauc  Dec  mayo  a  bottle 
ofunnc,  auoacruteof  oyle,  anbfilleba 
baggc  Until  parchcb  come,  anb  lumpes 
ofngs,anblbitl)fincb2cab,CbCbe||fol= 
beb  ailthrfc  rhingstogcthct ,  anblayb 
them  npon  her. 

6  Xhustbcytbcntfotfhtothegate 
of  tl)c  ntie  of  2Scthulta,  anb  founb  dart; 
otug there £>5tas,  anb  the  ancients  of 
the  ntv'^Dabzts.anb  C!)armts. 

7  3n& Vo\)t\\ they  fetb  ijcr,  thathet 
countenance  U)a5aitcccb,anbl)erappas 
eel  was  cbangcb,  they  ttionbcrcb  at  her 
bcauttcPcry  gccatly,anbfatbPnto  l)cr, 

8  Xliceob.thc  Gob  of  onr  fathers 
giuetheefauour ,  anb  accomplifli  thmc 
entcrpnfes  to  the  giozy  of  thccbilbjcu 
ofJfracl,anb  to  the  craltation  of  gjeru 
falcm :  tljcn  they  Utoulnppcb  oob. 

9  3nb  fljefaibtonto  tbem,Commanb 
the  gates  of  the  city  to  be  openeb  Dnto 
mcthat  3  may  goefojth  to  accomplifli 
the  things ,  Vbhcrcof  you  bauc  fpo&cn 
Untbmc;  fo  they  commattbebfbeyong 
men  to  open  unto  bet ,  as  flice  bab 
fpofcen. 

io  siuDUibcnfbcybabbonefo.gju; 
bctl)U)cnt  out,  flic  anb  bermayb  Untb 
her  ,anb  tl)c  men  of  toe  one  loobeo  after 
bcr ,  tonttll  flice  rbas  gone  bottmc  the 
mountamc ,  anb  ttllflic  babpaflcbtbc 
bailey  ,ano  coulb  fee  fjcr  no  moze. 

ii  lEbustbeylbcntftraigbtfoortb 
m  the  bailey:  anb  the  fitfl  watch  of  the 
3tflynansmctber; 

ii  3nb  toohe  her , anb  af fteu  ber,4Df 
\bbat  people  art  tbou  t  anb  Whence  co- 
rnel! thou*  anb  tbbithcr  gocfltboiK 
anbfl)Cfaib,3lamavbomanoftljc^e- 
bjcibcs,anb  am  flcb  from  tbcimfo?  they 
fliaibc  gutcn  you  to  be  confumcb : 

ij  Sinogj  am  camming  befojc  £)lo; 
femes  the  cljiefc  captamc  of  pour  army, 
to  bcciarc  Uwbs  of  truttl) ,  anb  gi  mill 
flictt)hiniaujay,Vbbctebybcfl)allgoc, 
anb  \lm:  tie  all  t  ii  r  In  i  to  tunr  rv ,  Until  out 
looting  the  boby  o;  life  of  an?  one  of 
his  men. 

14  0o\M  Uilien  tlic  men  bearb  fjee 
Uwbcs.  anb  belielb  tier  countenance, 
tbcyuionocrcb  greatly  at  her  bcaurtc, 
anbfatbbntobcr; 

n  Xbou  baft  faneb  thy  life ,  in  that 
tliou  baft  baftcb  to  tome  boumc  to  tlic 


pjefcnceofourlojbtnotbtbetfojecome 
to  l)istcnt,anb  fome  of  bs  fliall  tonbuct 
thee,  bnttll  they  haue  bcliutrcb  tbecto 
bisbanbs. 

i6  zm  when  thou  ftanbeft  befote 
bun  M  c  not  afraib  in  thine  Heart :  but 
fbcuibnto  him  atwbtng  to  thy  ibojb, 
anbheftiUlmtreatthee  well. 

17  5Chen  they  chofeout  of  them  an 
huuDJco  men,  to  1 1  accompany  her  anb 
bermayb ,  anb  they  brought  her  to  the 
tentcf£>lofcmes. 

is  Xben  tbas  there  a  tontourfe 
th^oughoutaiithccampc:  fo?  her  torn* 
mmg  was  noifeb  among  the  tents,  anb 
they  tame  about  her,  as  flic  floob  Untfc 
out  the  tent  of  £>lofernes,  till  fhey  tolb 
htmofhet. 

19  3lnb  tbeytbonberebat  her  beau* 
tie,  anb  abnur  cb  the  ehtfojen  of  gifrael 
becaufcofher,  anbeucry  onefaibtohis 
neighbour ;  nabo  lbouib  befpife  this 
people ,  that  haue  among  them  fueb 
Uiomcn,  furclyit  tsnot  goob  that  one 
man  of  them  be  left ,  rbho  bemglct  goc, 
might  bctciuc  tb  e  Whole  earth. 

io  2nb  they  that  lay  nccrc  ^Dlofer? 
ncs,U)entout,anbali  hisferuants,anb 
they  brought  her  into  the  tent. 

ii  iJ5ouj  )©lofernes  rcltebhponhts 
beb  bnber  a  tanopte  umi  ch  ibas  Uioucn 
ttiith  purple,  anb  golb,anb  emcraubes, 
anb  pjetious  (tones. 

22  &o  they  fticttieb  him  of  her ,  anb 
he  came  out  bcfo;e  his  tent,  mttb  ftlucr 
lampcs  going  before  him. 

2?  ^nbttihcn'JubcthUiastomcbe^ 
fo?c  him  anb  his  feruants,thcy  all  mar* 
ueileb  at  the  beautte  of  hee  counter 
nantc .  anb  flicfel  bottmebponhcr  face, 
anb  bib  reucrencc  bnto  Ijim;  anb  his 
feruantstootteherhp. 

CHAP.    X  r. 

5  Oloftrnes  asketh  Iudeth  the  eaufe  of  her 
comming.  6  She  telleth  him  how,and  when 
heemaypreuaiie.  io  Heeismuchpleafed 
with  her  wifedome  and  beautie. 

$en  faib  <©lofcrnts  bnto 
WS&  her,  i©oman,becofgoob 
Fm  tomfotf,  featc  not  m  thine 
K  heart :  fo?  31  ncuer  hurt 
any,  that  uias  milling  to 
fcruc  jBabucljobouofo?  the  hing  of  all 
the  earth. 

x  /3otbtherefojc  if  thy  people  that 
bmelleth  tn  the  mountames,hab  not  fct 
light  by  mc,3J  uiouib  not  haue  Ufteb  Dp 
my 


||  Or, aid 
thcyprcf^ 
reducharut 
for  her. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


||  Orjmfd. 
UQHT. 


\0r,£4te 

htm. 


myfpcare  agamft  them :  but  they  haue 
Done  there  things  tdthcmfclucs. 

3  23ut  nott)  teli  me  U)hcrefo:e  thou 
artrlcb  from  them  ,  anb  art  come  bnto 
us  :foj  thou  art  come  frn  fafeguarb,  be 
of  gooB  comfoit ,  tljou  fiialt  Hue  this 
ntgbt,ano  hereafter. 

4  iro2  none  (hall  hurt  thee ,  butitv 
trcat  thec  ttielUs  tliepDoc  the  fcruants 
of  &mg  |5abucboOonofo2  my  lo2b- 

5  then  3?uoeth  fain  unto  him ,  3Ke 
reiucthe  IU02DS  ofthyferuant,  anbfuf 
fer  thine  banbmaib  to  fpcahe  m  thy  p2c 
fence ,  anb  31  Will  Declare  no  lie  to  my 
1020  this  mght. 

6  %m  if  thou  Unit  foiloiu  the  nwbc 
of  thmc  banomaib,  (3ob  Mil  b2tng  the 
thing  perfectly  to  pafleby  thee,  anb  mv 
I02D  (hall  not  failc  ofbtc  purpofrs, 

7  3s  #abuchobonofo2  rung  of  all 
the  earth  liucto ,  anb  as  bispoibetti 
ucth,ibhohathfcntthecfo2thebphoi 
Ding  ofcueryliutng  thing:  fo2not  only 
men  (ball  fetue  mm  by  tbecbut  alfo  the 
bcafts  of  the  fielb ,  anb  the  catteiunb 
the  foulcs  of  the  aire  (hall  lute  by  thy 
poVber,bnber^abucl;obouofo2auball 
hishoufc. 

8  f  02  wee  haue  hearb  of  thy  ibifc 
borne,  anb  thy  policies,  anb  it  is  repo2- 
teb  m  all  the  earth,  that  thou  onely  art 
||  tttellent  tn  all  the  lungbomc,  anb 
mtghtiem  uuoiblebgc,anb  ttionbcrfull 
mfeatcsofuiarre. 

9  tfio\\)  as  concerning  the  matter 
Which  3cbto2DiD  fpcahe  in  thy  counfell, 
ibe  hauchcarb  his  ib02bs  fo2  the  men 
ofJSethulta  |ifauebhun,  aubhccbecia- 
teb  unto  them  all  that  bee  haD  fpotsen 
bnto  thec. 

10  •£hcrefo2c,£>lo2banbgouemo:, 
meet  not  his  \bo2b,but  lay  it  up  m  thmc 
heart,  fo2  it  is  true,  fo2  our  natron  (ball 
not  be  pumfbeb ,  neither  can  the  fuwD 
picnaiic  agamft  them,  crcept  they  fume 
agamft  their  c?ob. 

n  3mbiioMtbatmyl02bbc  notbc- 
fcatcb  ,  anb  fruftratc  of  his  purpofc, 
cucn  bcath  is  noiu  fallen  Upon  them, 
anb  their  fume  hath  oucrtaaen  them, 
lbbcrclbitb  rhey  null  p20uofcc  their 
<3ob  to  aimer ,  ttmenfocuer  tbey  (ball 
boetbatlbtnclusnotuttobebone. 

12,  f  02  their  uictualsfaiic  them, anb 
all  their  water  is  fcant ,  anbthey  haue 
betermmcbtoiaybaiiDsbpouthcircat 
tell,anbpurpofeb  to  confumeall  thole 
thmgs ,  that  <3<>D  hath  fo2btbben  them 
toeatebyhisiUVues, 


p.XJ. 


Apocrypha. 


13  Unbare refoluebtofpcnb  the  firft 
fruits  of  the  co2nc ,  *  the  tenths  ofmmc 
anbovle,ll)hichthcvhabfanctifieb,anb 
refcrueb  fo2  tbc^tefts  that  feme  mjc 
rufalem,bcfo2cthcfaccofourc>ob ,  the 
ibbic!)  things  it  is  not  laibfuii  fcany 
of  the  people  fo  much  as  to  touch  Vbtth 
their  hanbs. 

1+  jFo2tbeybaucfcntfomcto31cru 
faicm,becaufcthey  alfo  thatbiue)  there 
haue  bone  the  itue ,  to  bung  them  a  u 
cenfe  from  the  Senate. 

is  ^onnuben  they  (ball  bung  them 
IU020 ,  they  Will  fo2thlbith  Doc  it ,  anb 
they  (ban  be  gtucn  thee  to  bcbtftroycD 
tl;c  fame  bay. 

16  E0hercfo2c  5  thine  hanbinaibe 
Rnoujuigau  this,  am flebbc  from  their 
P2cfcucc,  it<5ob  batbfentmctoU)02fce 
things  llurhtbce, whereat  authc  earth 
(baibe  aftonifbeb,  anb  Wbofocuer  (ball 
hcarcit. 

17  f  02  thy  feruant  is  religious,  anb 
feructh  the  C5ob  of  beauenbay  1  mght  : 
now  tberefo2C,mylo2b,3i  Will  retnamc 
With  thee,  anb  thy  fcruant  Will  goc  out 
by  night  uito  the  bailey ,  anb  J>  will 

P2ay  unto  ©oD,  anb  be  Unite!  me  lbbcti 
they  haue  committeb  their  finncs. 

18  anbjwiiicomcanbfbewitbn: 
totbec  :tben  thou  (bait  gocfo;th  with 
all  thmc  army,  anb  there  (ball  be  none 
of  them  that  (ball  r  efift  thee. 

19  SUib^iWilllcabe thee  tbjougb  the 
mibft  of  ^ubea,  bntill  thou  come  before 
3(erufalem,  anb  31  Will  fct  thy  tbionc 
intheimbftthcrcof,anbthoit(baitb2iuC| 
them  as  (beep  that  haue  no  (bepbrarb,  | 
anb  a  boggc  (ball  not  fo  much  as  open 
his  mouth  at  tbec :  fo2  II  tlicfc  things  1 
Were  tolbc  nice ,  acco2bmg  to  my  fo:e-  \ 
nuowiebgcanbtbcyWcrcDeciarcbbu 
to  mc.anb  5  am  fent  to  tell  thee. 

io  %\ym  her  \b02bcs  plcafcb  Olo- 
femes ,  anb  all  his  fcruants,  anbthey 
marucilcbatbcrwifcDotucatiDfasb, 

21  Xbrreisnotfucb  a  woman  from 
one  cnbof  the  earth  to  the  other,  both 
fo2  bcantic  of  face ,  anb  Wtfcoonic  of 
W02bes. 

22  ?Li8Clbifc  £)lofcrnes  faib  Unto 
her.  Gob  hath  bone  well  to  fenb  thee 
bcfo2c  the  people ,  that  ftrcngth might 
bem  ourbanDs ,  anD  Deftriirtion  Upon 
them  that  hgbtlv  regarb  my  io:D : 

25  3Mb  now  thou  art  both  bcautt 
full  m  thy  countenance ,  anb  Witfie  in 
thy  iuo2bes ;  fureiyif  thou  doc  as  thou 
haft  fpo&en ,  thy  <soo  ftiau  be  tnr  cob 
flPPP  *"° 


||  Or  harks 


1  iff  hattt 


, 


Apocrypha. 


ludetr 


i. 


Apocrypha. 


7  2  din. i  J 
fob. i.l  l. 


aut)  thou  (halt  btticl  m  the  houfc  of  lung 
jniabitcbobonofiH,  anb  (halt  be  rcnolb* 
mcb  tbiougb  the  luholc  earth. 

CHAP.    XII. 

•_  ludeth  will  not  cate  of  Oloterncs  mcate.  7 
She  taried  th:  ce  dayes  111  the  campe.and  euc- 
neni^ht  went  forth  to  pray.  15  Bagoasdoth 
niouc  her  to  be  merry  with  Olotemes,  10 
who  for  ioy  ot  her  companic  drunke  much. 

t>cn  hec  commaunbeb  to 

bzmg  her  m  ,  lDbcrc  l)ts 

*•  plate  rbasfct,anbbab  that 

they  ftjoulD  prepare  foj 


_  JaE9 her' of  bis  ottne  meats,, 
anDtbatfbefboulD&.Jinttc  of  bis  olbnc; 
mine. 

i  3mb3JubctbfauV3Jiinlinotcat; 
tlicrcof ,  left  there  bee  an  offence:  but 
pjoiufion  fball  be  ntaoc  fo?  mtc  of  ttje 
tilings  that  "31  bauc  toougbt. 

3  Xbcn  £)iofcrucs  fatb  bnto  l)er, 
3jf  thy  pjotufion  fbouio  fatle,  bottie 
fboulD  Vbc  giuc  thee  the  liac;fo2  there  be 
none  mitb  bs  of  thy  nation. 

4.  3CbcnfaiD3)ubcthtontobini,:3s 
thyfotile  Ituctb,  my  102b,  thine  banDe- 
maiD  fl>ail  not  fpcnb  tbofc  things  that 
■j  bauc, befo2C  the  !Lo2btt)02RC  by  mute 
hanb,  the  thmgs  y  he  i)ath  betcrmmeb. 

5  Xhcn  the  fcrttants  of  £>lofcrncs 
b20iight  her  into  tlie  tent,  anb  (hec  flept 
nimi&nigbt.anbihcarofelbbcmtrbas 
tomarbs  the  mozmngmattr), 

6  3nb  fent  to  £>lofcrncs ,  faying, 
ILetmy  lo:b  nom  commanb,  that  thine 
haiiDmaibmavgocfo2tbbntop2aycr. 

7  Xhcn  jDlofcrucs  commaunbeb 
hts  guarb  that  they  fboulb  not  ftay  her: 
thus  flic  abobc  m  the  camp  tl)2te  bayes, 
anb  luent  out  m  the  night  into  the  bai 
ley  of  iSrtbulia.anDibathcb  herfctfem 
a  fountame  of  mater  by  the  campe. 

S  21nb  mben  (lie  came  out,  (bee  be- 
fought  the  1L02b  C3ob  of  ^Ifracl  tobi 
rrct  her  may,  to  the  ratting  Dp  of  the 
chiKHcn  of  her  people. 

9  5>o  fbecamcuulcane,  anbrcmai 
neb  in  the  tent,  buttltihcc  bib  rate  her 
meatateucning. 

D  3nbm  the  fourth  bay  Oloferncs 
mabcafeafttohtsomncferuantsonly, 
anb  taiicb  none  of  the  officers  to  the 
banquet. 

u  Xhett  fatb  he  to  isagoastbceu 
nuch ,  mho  hab  charge  oner  all  that 
he  hab:  (3oe  uom,  anb  pcrfroabc  this 
€b2cmr  moman  lbiwb  13  muh  thee , 


that  the  come  toutofcs,  anb  cat*  anb1 
Dnnfecmtthtos. 

u  jto2loc,itVb,.Ubeafl)ame  fo:  our 
pctfon,  if  me  (hall  let  fucfj  amonian  go, 
not  hauing  hab  her  company :  fo?  if  me 
b2am  her  not  bnto  bs,ihc  mill  langb  bs 

tOfC02UC. 

13  XhenmentiSagoas  from  the  p^' 
fence  of  jDlofcrncs ,  anb  came  to  her, 
anb  be  fatb,  ?lct  not  this  farce  bamofcll 
feare  to  conic  to  my  102b,  anb  to  bec  ho- 
nourcoinhts  p2eticncc,  anb  b2ins  untie, 
anb  be  merry  ibith  bs,anb  be  mabc  this 
bay  as  one  of  the  Daughters  of  the  3fc 
fy2tans,ibhtchfccucinthchoufcof/3a' 
bitchobonofoj. 

i4.Xhcnfaib'5lubcthbntohini,tiDho 
am  3!  uom,  that  31  (houlb  gamefaymy 
l02b;  furely  lbhatfocucr  plcaferh  htm, 
9mtllDoefpccbtly,anb  itfhallbcc  my 
ioy  unto  the  bay  of  my  bcatb. 

15  ^oftjearofe,  anbbecBcbbcrfclfc 
tbtth  her  apparell,  anb  all  her  ibomans 
attire,  anb  her  maibmcnt  anb  laibfoft 
f  auincs  on  the  grounb  fo2  her,  oner  a* 
gamft  jDlofcr  ties ,  mbtcb  (be  hab  rccev 
uco  of  26agoas  foj  her  baily  bfcthat  (he 
might  fit,  anb  catc  bpon  them. 

i6  jBommhcn'Jubcthcamein.anD 
fate  bomne ,  £>lofcrncsbts  heart  mas 
rauifhcbilutb  her,  anb  btsmtnbclbas 
moueb,  anb  he  befirco  greatly  her  com? 
pany,  fo2  hec  maitcb  a  tunc  to  becciuc 
her,  from  the  bay  that  he  hab  fcene  her. 

17  Xhen  fasb  £>lofcrncs  bnto  her, 
2>:tnfccnom,anbbcnicrrymith  bs. 

is  <§>o  3lubcth  faibc,  3J  mill  b2inae 
nommy  102b,  becaufc  my  life  ismagm* 
ficb  in  me  this  bay,  mo:e  then  all  the 
bayes  fince  3J  masbo2nc. 

19  XbrnfbctooBcanbatcanbbjanBe 
bcfo2c  l)im  mhat  hctmaibe  babpjcpa* 
rcb. 

zo  3nD  <Dlofcmes  toofte  great  be^ 
I  light  m  her ,  *  bjanac  much  moje  mine, 
thtnhchabb2imlicat  any  tunc  in  one 
bay.fiucchcibasbomc. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

•-  ludeth  is  left  alone  with  Oloterncs  in  his 
tent  4  She  prav  till  God  to  «iue  her  kSength 
S  She  cut  oti  hi,  head  while  hec  flept.  10 
And  returned  with  it  to  Bethulia-.  17  They 
,  jnd  commend  her. 

£>m  mhcu  the  cuemng 
i  mas  come ,  his  fcritauts 
j  mabc  hade  to  bepart ,  anb 

*$y>y  i  ^Sagoas  flmt  his  tent 

V^vJi  rbitbouunbbifmifTcD  the 

maucrs 


\mj 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xiij.xiii].  Apocrypha. 


Ecclefi. 


waiters  from  the  pzcfcncc  of  hisiozb, 
anb  they  ment  to  ttjctr  bcbS:  foz  tljep 
were  ail  weary,  becaufc  tlje  fcatt  hab 
bene  long. 

i  3lno  3fubeth  tbas  left  alone  in 
the  tent ,  anb  £)iofcrncs  lying  along 
topon  his  beb ,  foz  hec  ibas  nllcb  With 
*itotuc. 

3  /Row  3I«bctli  haa  totnmanbcb 
her  matbe  to  ftanb  without  her  beb- 
chambcr,  anb  to  Wane  foz  her  tonitmng 
fozth  as  (he  bib  baiiy :  foz  fhc  faio ,  (he 
woulb  goc  fozth  to  her  pzaycrs,auo  (he 
fpahe  to  isagoas,  arcozbmg  to  the  fame 
purpofc. 

4  5)0  ahWcntfozth,anbnoueWas 
left  m  the  bebchambcr  ,  neither  little, 
noz  great.  Xhcn  Tjubcth  ftanbmgby 
hisbcb,faib  in  her  heart :  3D  fLozb  Gob 
ofallpcWcr,looRcattbispzcfcntbpon 
the  Wozacs  of  mine  hanbs  foz  the  cral- 
ration  of  3Jcrafalcm. 

5  i?oz  notb  is  the  time  to  hclpe  thine 
inheritante,  anb  to  ercentcnune  enter; 
pzifes,tothetocftructton  of  the  enemies, 
Which  are  rifen  agamfl  tos. 

6  Chen  (he  tame  to  the  pillar  of  the 
beb,  Which  wasat£)lofcrncshcab,anb 
to  out  bo  Wne  his  fauthm  from  thence, 

7  3nb  appzochcb  to  his  beb ,  anb 
toosc  hoib  of  thehaire  ofhts  hcab,  anb 
fatb,  Strengthen  mec,  sD  Hozb  Gob  of 
Jfcacl,  this  bap. 

8  3tnb  fhc  fmote  twtfe  bpon  his 
ncrtteWith  all  her  might,  anb  fhctoouc 
away  his  hcab  fcom  htm, 

9  2nb  rumblcb  his  bob?  boWnc 
from  the  beb,  anbpullcbboibncthcca- 
nop?  from  the  pillars ,  anb  anon  after 
fhcWcntfozth,anbgauc£>lofccneshis 
hcabtohermaibc. 

10  3uWfheputttmhcr  bagofmeatc, 
fo  they  twainc  went  together  accozbing 
to  thetr  cuftomc  tonto  pjapcr,  anb  When 
they  paffeb  the  campe,  they  compaffeb 
the  bailey ,  anb  went  top  the  moun 
tatneof  zScthuua^nb  tame  to  thegates 
thereof. 

11  1~hcn  faib  IJnbcth  a  farrc  off  to 
the  watchmen  at  the  gate,  £>pcn, open 
now  the  gate:  Gob, enen  our  Gob  is 
With  bs,  to  fheW  h'.s  power  yet  in  3e- 
rufalem,  auto  his  fozccsagamftthccne 
micas  he  hath  cuenbone  thisbay. 

ii  floVo  When  the  men  of  her  cttie 
hearb  her  tooyce, the?  mabe  hafte  to  got 
boWncto  the  gate  ofthetrcittcanbthey 
caileb  the  fibers  of  thctitie. 

13  3nb  then  they  ranne  altogether 


both  fmail  ano  great,  font  was  (traugc 
tonto  them  that  fhc  was  tome :  to  they 
openebthe  gate,  anb  tccciuen  them,ano 
mabe  a  fire  foz  a  light,  anblioobrounb 
about  them. 

14  Xhen  fhc  faib  to  them  Witl)  a 
lonb  boyce,  pzaife ,  p?aife  Gob,  pzaife 
Gob,  (31  tap;  fozhechath  not  taUcna- 
Wap  his  mcccp  fcom  the  houfcof  jifra 
el,  but  hath  beftcopeb  our  enemies  by 
mine  hanbs  this  night. 

i<5  So  fl)c  toobc  the  hcab  out  of  the 
bag,anb  fhcWcb it,  anb  faib  tonto  them, 
zSeholb  the  heab  ofiaMofernes  the  thicfe 
captame  of  the  arnuc  of  3ffur ,  aub 
bcholb  the  canopy  whercm  he  mo  lie 
m  his  bzimhcnncffe  ,  anb  the  ILozo 
hath  fmittcn  him  by  the  haub  of  a  Wo- 
man. 

i6  3sthe1Lozbuucth,who hath  Kept 
mc  m  my  Way  that  3  Went,  my  counts 
nance  hath  bccctucb  him  to  his  beftruc; 
non ,  aub  yet  hath  hecnot  committcb 
fmuc  witi)  mccto  befile  anb  fhamc  mec. 

17  Then  all  the  people  were  Won 
bcrfully  aftomfheb ,  anb  boWeb  them 
felucs ,  anb  Wozfbippcb  Gob ,  aub  faib 
With  one  accozb:26lcu"cb  be  thou,£>  our 
Gob ,  Which  haft  this  bay  bzought  to 
nought  the  enemies  of  thy  people. 

18  Chen  faib  £)$ias  unto  her ,  £> 
baughtcr,  bleffeb  art  thou  of  the  mod 
high  Gob,  aboueali  the  Women  topon 
the  earth,  anb  blcffcb  be  the  ?Lozb  Gob, 
Which  hath  trcatcb  the  heauens ,  anb 
the  earth ,  whtch  hath  birccteb  thee  to 
the  cutting  off  of  the  heab  of  the  chicfc  of 
our  enemies. 

19  fo;  this  thp  coufibcncc  fball  not 
bepart  from  the  heart  of  men ,  Which 
remember  the  power  of  Gob  fozeucr. 

io  3inb  Gob  turnc  thefc  tilings  to 
thee  foz  a  pcrpctuall  pzaife,  to  toifitc  thee 
in  goob  things ,  becaufc  thon  haft  not 
fparcb  thy  life  foz  f-  affliction  of  our  nati- 
on ,  but  halt  reuengeb  our  nunc,  wal- 
Sing  a  ftratght  way  befoze  our  Gob : 
anballthcpcoplcfaib,Sobcit,fobctt. 

CHAP.   XIIII. 

8   Achior  licjrclh  lidcth  fhev.  c  what  (he  liad 
done,and  is  circumcifed,  u  the  head  of  Olo- 

Icrnes  is  hanged  vp,  15  heeistomiddijJ, 
and  much  lamented. 

<ften  faibe  Jubeth  tonto 
P^d  them,  ncaremc  now,  my 
)gm  bzethzen  italic  this'  hcab, 
^  anb  hanctit  topon  the  high- 
eft  piaceofyourwallrs. 
pppp  i ?  3"b 


'i.M* 


Apocrypha. 


Iudeth. 


Apocrypha. 


\\Orjifctnti 


i  3MDfofooneasthemomtng(han 
appearc  aiiDthcSmnncfbaicomefouh 
bpon  the  cacti) ,  tafcc  pou  cuerp  one  his 
ibeapons,anD  gocfozth  eucrpbaltant 
man  out  of  the  dtp ,  a  fct  pou  a  captaine 
oucr  tl)cm,as  though pou  iboulbgoc 
boibnc  into  tl)c  ficlb  toiDarb  the  mate!) 
of  the  3ffpnans,  but  go  c  not  boibnc. 

3  Xhen  thep  fhaitaRcfhctc  armour, 
anb  fbai  got  mto  their  tampc,  anb  raife 
Dp  the  captamcsofthcarmicof  3flur, 
ano  thep  fhall  runne  to  the  tent  of  £>lo 
femes ,  but  fhall  not  finoc  htm  ,  then 
fcarc  fbau  fall  bpon  them,  ano  thep 
fhall  flee  before  pour  face. 

4  £>a  pou,anD  all  that  tnhabtte  the 
coaft  of  35fracl ,  fhall  purfue  them ,  anb 
oucrthzoib  them  as  thep  goe. 

5  JSutbefoze  pou  Doe  fhefc  things, 
call  me^ichio?  thc:3mmotute,thathcc 
map  fee  anb  bnolb  httn  that  befptfeb 
thehoufcofjfcacl,  anb  that  fent  him 
toDsasitibcrctohisbeath. 

6  Xhen  thep  callcb  3chi02  out  of 
the  houfe  of  £>5tas ,  anb  iDhen  hec  rbas 
come,anb  faiD  the  heao  of  £>lofernes  in 
a  mans  hanD ,  in  the  affembip  of  the 
people,  he  fell  botbneon  his  face,  anb 
Ijisfpintfailcb. 

7  2Sut  ibhen  thep  hab  rccoucreb 
hmi.hcc  fell  at  3Jubcths  fcetc,  anb  reue- 
renceb  her ,  anb  faib :  Blcfleb  art  thou 
tn  all  the  tabernacle  of  3luba,  anb  in  all 
nations,  lbhuh  hcanngthpname  fhall 
be  aftomfbeo. 

8  4l5oib  therefore  tell  mcc  all  the 
things  that  thou  haft  Done  m  thefc 
Dapcs  :  Xhen  3!uDeth  DeciarcD  bnto 
him  m  thcmibft  of  the  people,  all  that 
fhec  hao  bone  from  the  Dap  that  fhec 
ibent  foo:th,bntill  that  hourc  (he  fpahe 
Dntothcm. 

9  3UtD  lbhcn  fhec  hab  left  off  fpea 
mng,  the  people  fboutcbttnthalottib 
botcc,  tmabcaiopfulnoifctti  their  citic. 

io  31nD  lbhcn  3Uhi02  hab  fecne  all 
that  the  cob  of  3Jfracl  hab  Done,  hee 
bclccucb  in  <3oD  greatlp  ano  nrntnu 
cifcDthcfo:cfKinneofhtsflcfli,anDtt>as 
toyneD  bnto  the  houfc  of  gUracl  bnto 
tins  bap. 

1 1  3luD  affoonc  as  the  morning  a 
rofc ,  thep  haugcb  the  heab  of  £>lofcr 
ncs  bponthc  ibaiunb  cucrp  man  toon 
hisibcapous ,  anb  thcpibentfoozth  bp 
banbes  bnto  the  |  ftraits  of  the  monn- 
tame. 

n  25ut  when  the  3ffpzians  faiDc 
them ,  thep  fent  to  their  lcaDcrs,ibhich 


I  came  to  thetr  Captamcs,  anb  tribunes, 
anb  to  cucrp  one  of  their  rulers. 

ij  5>o  thep  came  to  Olofcrncs  tent, 
;  anbfaibtohimthat  hab  the  charge  of 
all  his  things  >  aaa&cn  noib  our  io;D 
foj  the  Qaues  haue  bccnebolb  to  come 
i  borbneagamft  bs  to  battcll,  tljat  thep 
'<  map  be  bttcrlp  beftropeb. 

14.  Xhcn  rbent  m  25agoas,  anb 
tmocBcDattheDooje  of  the  tent:  foj  he 
thought  that  he  haD  flcpt  ibithJuDcth. 

15  25ut  becaufc  none  anftbercb ,  he 
openeb  it,  anb  ID  cm  into  the  bebcham- 
bcr,  anbfounbhim  raft  bpon  the  floozc 
bcao,s  InshcaD  ibas  tattcn  from  him. 

i6  llXiicrefoie  hccntDtbith  aloiDD 
DoicciDith  iDccpmg,  anD  ughtttg,anD  a 
nughtp  trp,anD  rent  his  garments. 

17  Sifter,  hec  ibent  into  the  tent, 
lbhcrcJfuDethloDgcD ,  anb  lbhen  hee 
:  founb  her  not,he  IcapcD  out  to  the  pco- 
plcanDcncD 

1  is  Xhcfc  ftaucs  hauc  Dealt  treaehc= 
rouflp ,  one  iboman  of  the  £?cb«ibcs 
hathbjoughtfhamcbpon  the  houfe  of 
Btng/i5abiKhoDonofo2:fojbcholb,£)lO'' 
femes  iicth  bpon  the  grounD  ttuthout 
a  heab. 

19  uahenthe  captamcs ofthcaflp^ 
ansarmichcarb  there  lbo2bs,thcp  rent 
their  coats,anb  their  mmDsiberciDon; 
bcrftillptroublcD  anbtherettiasacrp, 
anbaberp  great  noife  throughout  the 
campc. 

CHAP.    XV. 

I  The  Afivrians  are  chafed  and  flaine.  S  The 
hi^hPrieftcommeth  toleeludeih.  11  The 
HufleotOloternes  is  giuento  Iudeth.  13  The 
women  crowne  her  with  acadand. 

*%!&££*  P-b  lbhcn  thep  that  iberc 
Sjy&XiiJ  m  the  tents  hcarD ,  thep 
^^Whbcre  aftomfhcD  at  the 
0  thing  that  ibas  bone. 
l  3JnDfcarcanDtrcm- 
bling  fell  bpou  them,  fo  that  there  ibas 
no  man  that  burft  abibc  m  the  fight  of 
his  neighbour, but  milling  out  aitogc 
thcr ,  thep  flro  into  cucrp  map  of  the 
piamcauo  of  the  hill  rountrrp. 

1  Xhcp  alfo  that  hab  campcb  in  the 
motuitamcs ,  romiD  about  Bcthuha, 
flcDaibap.  Xhen  the  rhtlDzcn  ofgjfrarl 
cucrp  one  that  ibas  a  ibamour  among 
thcnuruflicD  out  bpon  them. 

4  Xhen  fent  <Dms  to  23ethoma' 
fthcm,anbtoScbai,anb€hobai,  anb 
Cola,  anD  to  all  the  coafts  of  "Jfracl, 
furh  as  ftioulb  tell  the  things  that  lbcre 
bone, 


\Then. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xv] .  Apocrypha. 


Oritur- 
eamt. 


Done,  anb  tljat  all  fboulD  r  u(li  fonlj  top 
on  their  enemies  to  bcdroy  them. 

5  ilSotbibbcutbccbtlOjcnofSfftael 
hearb  tt ,  tljcv  all  fell  bpontbcm  mth 
onctonfent,  anb  deibetbcm  bnto  Cbo 
batltftelbtfc  alfo  tljcrp  that  tame  from 
gjerufaiem ,  anb  from  all  the  lull  coun 
try  ,foj  men  hab  tolb  them  lbbat  things 
lbcre  Done  in  the  tampe  of  their  enc- 
mtcs,anb  they  that  mere  tn  ©aiaab  anb 
md5alile  ||  tbafeb  them  ibttb  a  great 
daughter,  bttttll  they  mere  pad  Da- 
mafctis,  ano  the  borers  thereof. 

6  2inb  the  redone  that  bibeit  at  25c- 
tbulta,fcll  bpon  the  tampe  of  3iffur,anb 
fpoileb  them,  $  mere  greatly  enrtcbeb. 

7  :3Utb  the  thiltoen  of  31fracl  that 
rcturneo  from  the  daughter,  hab that 
ibbtthrematneb,  anbthebiliagcs,  anb 
thentxesthat  lbcre  tntbemountatnes, 
anb  m  the  piaincgatc  many  fpotlcs :  foj 
the  multttubc  ibas  bery  great. 

8  Xhcn  3loanm  the  high  0wd, 
anb  the  Stnricnts  of  the  thilbjcnof  31 
rati  that  bibcltm^Jctufaian,  tame  to 
bebolb  the  goob  things  that  <sob  hab 
fheibeb  to  3frael ,  ano  to  fee  3Jubeth, 
anbtofamtcher. 

9  Xrto  tbhen  they  tame  bnto  her, 
they  bleffcb  bcr  ttiith  one  acwb ,  anb 
fatbbtttober,  Xbou  arttbecraltation 
of  3lcrufalcm:  thou  art  the  great  glojy 
of  gjfrael:  thou  art  the  great  rctoyttng 
of  our  nation. 

io  Xhou  had  bone  all  thtfc  things 
by  thmc  hanb:  thou  had  bone  much 
goob  to  '3Hcacl,anb  Gob  is  plcafcb 
therclbitl) :  bleffcb  bee  thou  of  the  20? 
mightielLojb  fo?  eucrmojc  :anballthc 
pcoplcfaib,5>obctt. 

ii  3inb  the  people  fpoilcb  the  tampe, 
tbefpatcof  thirty  bay  cs,  anb they  gauc 
bnto  3Jubeth  £>lofcrnes  his  tent,  anb 
all  his  platc,anb  bebs,  anb  bedels,  anb 
all  his duffc :  anb  d)C  toofec it,  anb laibc 
it  on  her  mule,  anb  mabc  rcaoy  her 
tarts,  anb  laib  them  thereon. 

ii  Xhcn  all  the  women  of  3f  fracl  tan 
together  to  fee  her ,  anb  blcdco  her ,  anb 
mabc  a  bantc  among  them  fiw  her :  anb 
dice  tooac  bombesin  her  hanb, *  gauc 
alfo  to  the  tbomen  that tbctetbtth  her. 

13  2nb  they  put  a  gariano  of  oimc 
bpon  her,  ano  her  maib  tbatibasuntb 
her ,  anb  fbeement  befoie  the  people  in 
the  bante,  leaotngalltbcibomcn:  anb 
all  the  men  of  3Jftael  fbllo\beb  tn  their 
armoii  tbtth  gar  lanbs ,  anb  ibttb  fongs 
in  their  mouthes. 


CHAP.   XVI. 

I  The  Tons; ol  ludech.  19  Shededicateththc 
ftuffeotOlotcmes.  13  Shcedicd  at  Bethu- 
lia  a  widow  ot  great  honour.  14  All  Ifrael 
did  lament  her  death. 

$?cn  3Jubctb  began  to  fmg 

this  tbanKcfgiuutg  tn  all 

l?m  3Jfrael,  anb  all  the  people 

3k fans  aftcr  hcr  11 W  fons 

r^&ofpjaifc. 

z  2utD3JubctbfatO,25cglnbntomy 
<£5ob  ibtth  tmtbjcls,  fmg  bnto  my  ILojo 
mttb  cymbals:  tunc  bnto  buna  Hncibc 
pfaintc:  cralt  htm,*  tai  bpon  hts  name. 

3  fot  (Bob  tocabetb  the  battels  :fo? 
antongfttbctampesintbctnibdoftbe 
people  Dec  hath  bcltucteb  me  out  of  the 
banbs  of  them  that  perfceutcb  me. 

4-  3Jffiircamcoutof  the  mountains 
from  tbc/flo;tb,hc  tamelbith  ten  thou 
fanbs  ofhts  army  ,tbc*tnultttube  lbber< 
of  doppcb  the  tojrcnts,  ano  their  bow- 
men bauetoucreb  the  hides. 

5  $e  bjaggcb  that  he  lboulb  burnt 
bpmy  borers,  anb  bill  myyoungmen 
ibitb  the  ftbojb,  anb  bath  the  fuelling 
cbtlDjen  agamd  the  grouno,  anb  mane 
mtnetnfantsasa  pjay,ano  my  btrgtns 
asafpotle. 

6  2i3uttbe:Slmigbty2Lo:bbathbtfap< 
pouucb  tljem  by  the  hanb  of  a  iboman. 

7  5fouhc  mighty  one  bio  not  fall  by 
theyongtnen,  netthcrbtbthefonnes  of 
the  Xttansfmttc  him,  no?  higt)  gyants 
fet  bpon  htm:  but  3)ubctb  the  battgl)ter 
ofUPcranibcaiuteD  him  lbith  the  bean? 
tie  of  ber  countenance. 

s  5fo?d)cputofftbcgarmentofbcr 
mtboibbooo,  fo?  the  exaltation  of  thofc 
thatibercopp^cdeo  m  'Jfracl,  anbatt^ 
otntcb  her  face  ibtth  oyntmcttt,*  bouttb 
her  hatrc  tn  a  t  ty^e ,  anb  toottc  a  Uttttcn 
garment  to  bccctuc  him- 

9  H?crfattbalsrauifl)cbbiscycs,ber 
beauttc  toobc  his  minbe  pnfoncr ,  anb 
the  fauchtnpaffeb  through  hisnecfee. 

10  n;hc0crftansciuaUebathcrbolO' 
neffcanbthe  fi0cbcsibcrc!|bauntcbat 
hetharbtneffe. 

11  %tyn  my  affltttcb  diotttcb  fo? 
toy,  anb  my  lbcabc  oncscryco  aloubc. 
but  lltheyibercadonidjcb :  thefc  liftcb 
bp  their  bottcs,but  they  ibece  otters 
thJOlbcn. 

ix  Xhefonncsofthebamofclshanc 
picrccb  them  through ,  anb  ibounbco 
them  as  fugitutcs  tihiHwen :  they  pen 
fheb  by  the  battcll  of  the  lLo;b. 
ffPPP3  '3  3 


\\0r4l,» 


\\0r,P[dnu 
unjpratje. 


*Chap.2. 
11,15. 


\(Jr.  err  mi- 
ter. 


\\Or,m:- 
fexiUtJ. 


ThcAfr- 


Apocrypha. 


Efther. 


Apocrypha. 


\\Or,afong 

efpraife. 


i j  ^ibttlGngbntofhefLoiballncU) 
fong,£>  fLojb  thou  art  great  anD  glotu 
ous,ibonDerfulm  ttrcngth  9  tnutnctbic. 

14  ILct  ail  creatures feruc  thee:  foj 
thou  fpaBcu\anD  they  tberc  mabc,  thou 
Dibit  fenb  foul)  thy  fpmt ,  anD  tt  ctcatcD 
them,  anD  there  is  nonethat  canreftu" 
thyboyec. 

H  jtfoJthemountamesfhallbemoos 
ueb  front  tljcir  founbattons  rtitttj  the 
tbaters,  therocftesthailmeitasibajcc 
at  thy  p2efcncc:yct  thou  art  merciful! 
to  them  that  fearc  thee. 

16  5F02  all  facrtfire  is  too  little  foz  a 
finccte  fattour  tonto  tfjee ,  anb  all  the  fat 
tsnotfumctcnt,  fojthy  burnt  offering: 
but  he  that  fcarcththc&ojDtsgtcatat 
all  times. 

17  a©oc  to  tfje  nations  that  rtfebpa^ 
gamll  my  tnnrcb :  the  !Lo2b  almighty 
ibilltaBC  bengcancc  of  them  in  the  bay 
of  tubgemettt  in  putting  fire  $tbo?mes 
mtheirflcfb,  anD  they  (hall  fcelcthctu 
anDtt)cepefo2Ctter. 

18  /i5oujau*bone  as  they  cntrcD  into 
3Ierufalem,they  nwfhtppcD  the  Ho2b, 
anD  atTooncas  the  people  tbecepurifi- 
eb ,  they  offeree  then:  burnt  offerings, 
anb  their  free  off erlngs,anb  their  gifts. 

19  gjubrthaifoDebtcatcb  all  the  (ruffe 
of  sDlofccncs ,  ibhich  the  people  hab  gi- 
uenhecanb  gaue  the  canopy  Vbhuh  flic 


rjabtabcnoutofhis  beb  chamber,  fo?  a 
gtftbntothcflotD. 

io  5>o  the  people  conrinuebfeaOingj 
in3ferufalem  before  the  <S>anctuane,' 
nwthefpaceofthjeemoneths,  anb3iu* 
bethrcmamcb  ibiththem. 

ii  after  this  time ,  euety  one  rrtur* 
neb  to  his  ottme  inheritance,  anD  3Ju- 
bcthibcnt  to25ethulia,  anb  remamcb 
mhetonmcpofTeffion,  anbibasinhcr 
time  honourable  in  all  the  tountrey. 

22  anbmanybeCrebhcr,butnonc 
fenett)  her  an  the  bayes  of  her  life .  after 
thatfipanaffes  her  huf  bano  ttias  bcab, 
anbibasgathetcbto  his  people. 

zj  ffiutlheencrcafebnuueanbmojc 
mhonour,anb  roajreb  olbe  m  her  hut 
banbs  houfe,  being  an  hunbjcbanb 
fine  yceces  olbe,  anb  mabc  her  matbc 
'fcccfoihcebteDtn  ©ethttua:  anb  they 
bur icb  her  m  the  1 1  cauc  of  her  huf banb 
fipanaffes. 

14-  ^nb  chc  houfe  of  3ifracliamen? 
tcbher'fcaucnbayes,  anb  Define  fhec 
bycb,fl)CbtDbtttributehcr  goobs  to  all 
them  that  are  necreft  of  Hinrcb  to  G&a.' 
nafles  her  hufbanb :  anD  to  them  that 
tticce  the  ncercft  of  her  ftmrcb. 

25  3lnb  there  lbas  none  that  mabe 
thcchtUwcn  of  ^ifraclany  mo2c  afcaibc, 
tnthcDaycs  of  3JuDcth,no2a  long  tunc 
after  her  Death. 


«[[  The  reft  of  the  Chapters  of  the  Booke  of 

Either, which  are  found  neither  in  the  Hebrew, 

nor  in  thcCaldc. 


Part  of  the  tenth  Chapter  atter  the  Grecke. 


Mardochcus  remembrcth  and  expounded)  [ 
his  dreame.ot  the  riuer  and  the  two  dragons.  ] 

$cn  €3arbochc- 
us  faibc ,  <5ob 
hath  bone  thefc 
things. 

5  ifoz'J  remem- 
ber a  bieamc, 
ibhich  3  faiDc 
toncerning  thefc 
matters  ,    anb 

nothing  thereof  hath  failcb. 
6   %  little  fountatnc  became  a  rtner, 

anb  there lbas  light,?  thefimnne ,  anb 


muchtt)ater:thisciueris  Cither ,  Vbljo 
the  BtngmarrtcD  anb  mabc  fijueeue. 

7  3lnb  the  tibo  Dragons  arc  3J, 
anb^man. 

8  anb  the  nations  lucre  thofe  that 
|lbcreau"cmblcb,tobcfrcoythe  name  of 
;thc3IciDcs. 

9  3no  my  nanon  is  this  ^ifrael, 
Itbhith  crycb  to  ©ob  ?.nb  lucre  (aucb : 
fo2the!Lo2bhathfaiicbhis  people,  anb 
thc?Lo2b  hart)  bcliucrco  bs  from  an 
thofe  cutis  ,  anb  CPob  hath  bought 
figncs,  anb  great  ibonbcrs  ,  ibhich 
hauc  not  bin  bone  among  the  ©entiles. 

10  Xhcrc- 


\\Orftfnl- 
ckre. 


*  Cen.  50. 


Apocrypha. Chap.x).xij.xii[.  Apocrypha. 


10  Xhcrefoic  Dart)  hee  maoe  ttbo 
lo t s  ,ou  t  fo:  t isc  people  of  (Sob, anb  ano- 
ther foz  all  the  ©cuttles, 

ii  3tnb  thefe  ttbo  lots  tame  at  ti)c 
houtc,  anbtimc,anbbapoftubgemcht 
befojc  (3  o  b  am  ongftau  nations. 

it  £>o  ©on  temembjeb  his  people, 
anb  iuftifieb  hts  tnheritantc. 

13  Xherefbje  rtjofe  napes  (hall  be 
bnto  tDcrn  in  the  monett)  abar ,  the 
fourteenth  anb  fifteenth  bap  of  the 
famcmonctl) ,  tbtth  an  affcmblp,  anb 
iop,ano  ibtrt)  giabncCfe,  befoic  C5oo,  ap 
coibmg  to  the  generations  fo?  cueta* 
monghts  people. 

CHAP.     XI. 

The  ftocke  and  qualiue  ot  Mardocheus.  6 
He  dreameth  of  two  dragons  comming  torth 
to  fight,  io  andofalictlefountaine,  which 
became  a  great  water. 

rf  /ft  the  fourth  pecrc  of  the 
ratgnc  of  £tolomcus,anb  j 
Clcopatta  ,  2DoCirt)cus,l 
tbho  faib  l)cc  tbas  a  pneft  \ 
_  anb1Lcutte,ano0tolomc<! 
us  his  fonnc  bzought  tins  epiftlc  of  j 
$hurim,tbhich  rticy  faib  ibas  tne  fame, 
anb  that  ILpfimaebus  the  fonnc  of  0to* 
lomciis,thattbasin3Jetu{alcm,habw; 
terpjetcbtt. 

z  3Jn  the  fetonb  peerc  of  the  raignc 
of  actarcrrcs  the  great  :tnthefirtt  cap 
of  the  moncth  iftnan,  £0arborbcus  the 
fonnc  of  Jatrus ,  the  fonnc  of  S>cmci, 
the  fonneofCifat  ofthe  tribe  omenta- 
muUjababieamc. 

j  nahotuasagjcibanbbttjcltmthc 
ritte  of  £>ufa,a  great  man,  being  a  feruu 
tour  in  the  Kings  court. 

4  $c  tbas  aifo  one  of  thetaptiues, 
ttihtch  iftabuchooonofoz  the  lung  of 
ffiabplon  caticb  frotnJjerufalcm,tbith 
'Jcchomas  Ring  of  3lubca  j  anb  this 
Tbas  his  became. 

5  25chotb  a  notfc  of  a  txumilt  tbith 
thunber  ,anb  earthcMaRes,anb  bpjtoate 
inthetanb. 

6  anb  bcholb ,  ttbo  gtcatmagons 
came  forth  rcabp  to  fight,  anb  thctrcrte 
ibas  great. 

7  anb  at  their  erp  all  nations  \bcrc 
picpareb  to  battel.rtiat  tljcp  might  fight 
agamft  the  righteous  people. 

s  anb  loe  a  bap  of  oatRncOc  anb 
obfcuritp :  tribulation,  anb  anguilh ,  af « 
fliction,  anb  great  bpioare  bponthe 
earth. 

9  anb  the  tbho  Je  righteous  nation 


tbastroubleb,feaclngthcitotbneeuils: 
anb  iberc  r  caop  to  perilh. 

io  Xhen  thep  ctpeb  bnto  <sob ,  anb 
bpon  their  crp,  as  it  Iberc  from  a  little 
fountame,  tbas  mabe  a  great  floob ,  e 
uenmucbtbatcr. 

ii  Xhclightanbthe&unnerofcbp, 
anb  rt)e  loiblp  iberc  eraitcb,  anb  beuou- 
rcbtheglonous. 

ir  /ftotb  ibhen  £0arbocheus ,  tbho 
hab  fecne  this  bieame ,  anoibhat  (Sob 
hab  beternuneb  to  boe,  vuas  atbabe :  he 
bare  this  ozeame  in  nunbe,  auobnttll 
night  bp  all  meanes  ibas  beficous  to 
Rnotbit. 

CHAP.    XII. 

i  The  confpiracie  of  the  two  Eunuchs  is  difco- 
uered  by  Mardocheus,  5  forwhichhe  is  en- 
tertained by  the  king  and  rewarded. 

iftb  <©atbocheus  toofte 
hts  reft  tn  the  court  tbith 
(Sabatha  ,  anb  Zhar* 
ra,  the  ttbo  <£umitbcs  of 
_  rtje  King  ,  anb  Keepers 
of  the  palate. 

z  *anb  he  hearb  rt)eir  beufees,  anb 
fcarcheb  out  their  purpofes,  anbleat* 
neo  that  thep  ibtre  about  to  laphanbs 
bpon  3lrtarcrres  the  King,anbfo  he  cer^ 
nfico  the  King  of  them. 

j  Xhen  the  King  eramtneb  the  ttbo 
Cunuchcs,  anb  after  that  thep  hab  con- 
fcfftb  tt,  thep  tberc  ftrangicb. 

4  2nb  nie  King  tnaoe  a  tetoib  of 
thefe  things  ,  anb  i$)arooeheus  aifo 
ibzotc  thereof. 

5  £>o  titc  King  commaunbeb  £0ar- 
bocheus  to  feruc  in  the  court,  anb  fo? 
thisherctbarbebhim. 

6  ^otbbeitamanthcfonncofama 
bartius  the  agagttc,  tbho  ibas  in  great 
honour  tbtth  tltc  King,  fought  to  molcft 
^atbocheusanbhispcoplc,becaufe  of 
the  ttbo  Cunuthes  of  rtje  King. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Thecopie  of  the  kings  letters  todeftroythe 
Iewes.  8  The  prayer  of  Mardocheus  for  them. 

feMse^S  tyt  copp  of  the  letters  tbas 
j  this.  3Che  great  Ringer* 
ktajecrres  ,  lbntcth  thefe 
5  things  to  thepnnecs,  anb 
-jgoucntours  that  are  biv 
bet  him  from  3lnota  bnto  €thtopia ,  in 
anhunbicb  anbfeuenanb  ttbcnticpzos 
umccs. 

z  after  that  3  became  H020  oner 
manp  nations ,  anb  hab  bomuuon  oner 


"E0crt.ii, 

and  6.1. 


hf.  antuj. 
!tb.\  ixap.6 


Apocrypha. 


Efth 


er. 


Apocrypha. 


[  Orjrtilic. 


\0, 

led. 


,iefel- 


\\OrJrcond 
pram  11. 


the  whole  Wo?lD,not  Uftcu  top  With  p?e* 
fumption  of mpautho?mc, but  earning 
mp  fctfe  aiwap  wtth  eqnitic  ano  milDc* 
neffc,  3  purpofcD  to  fettle  mp  fubiccts 
cotinttuallpmacwictltfe ,  ano  making 
mp  kmgDomc  Hpcatcablc,  anD  open  fo? 
paflageto  the  totmoftcoaftcs,  torcnue 
peace  Which  is  DctircD  of  all  men. 

j  flovo  When  3  afkcD  mp  toun- 
fellers  Dolto  this  might  bee  b:ougl)t  to 
paffc,  ^man  that  ertcllcDinwifcDonie 
among  bs,  ano  wasappiooucDfcuhts 
conftantgooDWill,anDftcDfaftfiDcline, 
ano  haD  the  honour  of  the  feconb  plate 
mthc  kmgDomc, 

4.  3>crtarcD  tonto  tos,thatm  annate 
ons  throughout  the  ibojlD,  there  was 
fcatterco  a  ccrtamc  maimous  people, 
that  haD  Hawcs  contrarp  to  all  natfc 
ons,  anb  contmuallp  bcfpifco  the  torn- 
maiiDcmcntsofBings ,  foasthc  torn- 
ting  of  our  kmgDomcs  honourablpui' 
tenbeb  bp  tos,  cannot  llgoc  fo?waro. 

->  Seeing  then  We  tonDcrftaiiD  that 
this  people  alone  is  continually  m  op; 
pofmon  tonto  all  men  ,  Differing  mthc 
ftrangc  mancr  of  their  Hawcs  ,  ano 
cutll affectcb to  our  ftatc,  Working  all 
the  mifthicfc  thep  can,  that  our  king- 
Dome  map  not  be  firmelp  ftablithcD: 

e  Xlyttcioic  hauc  We  commanDeD 
that  ai  thep  that  are  ugmficD  m  ibrmng 
tonto  pou  bp  3lman  ( who  is  orDamcD  o^ 
ucrthe  affaires,  anD  is  llttert  tonto  tos) 
than  all  itoith  their  WtucsanDchtlb2cn 
bee  tottcrlp  Dcftropco ,  bpthc  fiuo2D  of 
their  enemies ,  Without  all  mcrcte  anD 
pitic ,  the  fourteenth  bap  of  the  twelfth 
moncth^Watofthispzcfcntpccrc: 

7  Hhat  thep,  Who  ofolD,  anD  now 
aifo  are  malitious,mapm  one  Dap  Wirt) 
toiolcntc  goc  into  the  grauc,  anD  fo  cucr 
hereafter,  caufc  our  affaires  to  be  well 
fetrtcD,anD  Without  trouble. 

s  Xhen  C^arDocheus  thought  top 
on  all  the  W02ks  of  the  Ho2D,atW  maDc 
his  p?aper  tonto  him, 

9  ;S>aying,£>Ho2D,Ho2D,thcking 
3llmightic :  foi  the  Whole  W02ID  is  m 
thv  power  anD  if  thou  haft  appomtcD 
to  fauc  gjfracl,  there  is  no  man  that  can 
gamefapthec. 

io  jroz  thou  haft  maoe  heaucn  ano 
earth,  anD  all  the  wonDcrous  things 
tonber  the  heaucn. 

1 1  HhouartILo2Dofallthings,anD 
there  is  no  man  rrjat  can  rcfilt  thee, 
.which  art  the  H02D. 

ii  £hou  knoitocft  all  things ,  anD 


thou  knoweft  Ho?D,  that  it  was  net* 
therm  contempt  no?  pnDc,  norforanp 
Defite  of  gw?p,  that  3  did  not  bow 
Do  Wnc  to  proub  3man. 

13  Jfo?  3  touiD  haue  bene  content 
Wtth  gooD  Will  fo?  thcfaiuanon  of  31 
racl,to  kiffcthefolesofhisfcct. 

ia.  2Sut3JDiDthis,that3imightnot 
pjetcrrc  the  glo?p  of  man  aboue  the 
gloip  of  (Bob :  neither  Will  3  WoruYtp 
anp  but  thtc,©  (5oD,neirt)er  Wil  3  Doc 
ttmpnDc. 

1$  3lnD  now  ,  ®  Ho?n  (5oD ,  anD 
Bing,fparc  thp  people:  to?  their  epes 
arc  topon  tos,  to  hang  tos  to  nought,  pea 
thep  Dcfirc  to  Dcftrop  the  inheritance 
that  hath  becne  thine  from  the  begin* 
mug. 

i6  2>cfpife  not  the  portion  Which 
thou  haft  DcliucreD  out  of  Cgppt  fo? 
thine  0  Wnc  fclfc: 

17  i)earc  mp  p?apcr,  anD  be  mcrci* 
full  tonto  thme  inheritance:  runic  our 
fo?roW  into  top ,  that  wee  map  hue  ,£> 
How ,  anD  praifc  thp  /Bamc :  anD  ||  De 
ftrop  not  the  mouthes  of  them  that 
p?aifethce,sDHo?D. 

13  311  gjfracl  m  like  mancr  cricD 
mofttcarncftlp  tonto  the  H02D  becaufc 
their  Death  *bas  before  their  epes. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

1   The  prayer  of  Queene  Efther,  tor  herlelfe, 
and  her  people. 

Slccnc  eftfjet  aifo  being 
m  fear  e  of  Death ,  rcfortcD 
tonto  the  How, 

z  3nDiapDaWapher 
gl02iousapparei,anDput 
on  the  garments  of  an^ 
guift),f  mourning:  anD  in  fteaDofpjetfc 
ous  opntments,  fl)C  coucrcD  Ijcc  hcao 
Wirt)atl)cs,  9  Doung,  anD  (he  humblcD 
I  her  bobp  grcatlp ,  anD  all  the  places  of 
her  top  the  fillet)  With  he r  tome  hatrc. 

j  2uid  (hec  prapcD  tonto  rt)e  How 
GoD  of  3iftacl ,  fapmg ,  «D  mp  H02D, 
thou  ontlpart  our  king :  hclpc  me  Dcfo^ 
late  Woman ,  Which  hauc  no  helper  but 
thee: 
+  *  ^02  mp  banger  is  m  mine  hano. 
5  jFrommppoutl)top3J  hauchcarD 
m  the  tribe  of  mpfannlp,  rtiatthou,  £> 
H02D,  tookeft  gjfracl  from  among  all 
people,  ano  our  fathers  from  all  their 
P2cDcccu"ours,  fo?  a  perpctuail  mhen 
tanccatiD  thou  haft  pcrfo2mcD  Whatfo 


cucr  rljou  DiDft  p?onnfc  them. 


6  3Jiw 


\Or,p,ut 
rjlop  not. 


I  Greeks 

mightily. 


r.Sam.jS. 
1.10b  1; 
j.pia,  1 19 
09- 


Apocrypha. Chap.xv.  Apocrypha. 


f  (Jr.  v-unt 
things. 


j  Qr.be  not 


\\Or,LU.. 


\Gr.euery 

Jlrangtr. 


\Gr.  pride. 


\Gr.quttt, 

or  prutate. 


\Gr.  of  my 
change. 


6  3inD  novo  Vot  haue  fmncb  before 
tf)cc :  tl>eccf02C  ljatltt)OU  gmenbs  into 
the  hanos  of  ouc  enemies, 

7  aSecaufe  tbee  tD02fl)ippeD  their 
gobs :  D  Ho2D,tbou  art  righteous. 

s  ^euertbelesitfatifiictbrtjcmnot, 
that  ibe  arc  in  bitter  captunnc,  but  the? 
haue  ttrifccn  banbs  lbitb  their  iDols, 

9  Xbat  rbcpvbill  about!)  the  thing, 
that  thou  lbitb  thy  mouth  haft  ojbai- 
ncD,anDDeOroythtticinheritante,anb 
flop  the  mouth  of  them  that  pjaife  thee, 
anD  quenth  the  glow  of  d)p  boufc,  anD 
of  thmc  3tltar, 

io  anDopentbemoutbesoftbebe& 
rhentofetfoo;fh  thepjaifesofthe  t  <$> 
boles,  anDtomagnincaflefblpHingfoj. 
cuet. 

n  4PfLoiD,gtuenottbpfccptetbn'' 
to  tbemtbat  tbcnotbmg,anD  let  them 
not  laugh  at  our  fall,  but  turnc  their  dc 
uue  bpon  themfelues,  anb  mauc  htm 
an  eramplc  tbat  bad)  begunue  this  & 
gatnflbs. 

n  Bemembet,  1S>  S.02D ,  mafec  tbp 
fclfc  unolbcn  m  time  of  our  affliction, 
anD  glue mee bolDnetTc,  £>  Bmg of  the 
1 1  nanons,  anD  ILoto  of  all  potber. 

13  <5iue  me  elociuent  fpcetl)  in  mp 
mouth  before  the  Ipon :  turnc  his  heart 
to  hate  him  that  figbtctb  agauiQ  bs, 
that  there  map  be  an  enb  of  him,  anb  of 
all  that  are  like  minbcD  to  htm : 

14.  ffiut  tjcliuer bs  tbitb  thine hanb, 
anD  helpc  me  that  am  Dcfolate,  *  ttibicb 
ftaue  no  other  helper  butthec. 

15  Xhou  bnotbett  all  things ,  £> 
H02D ,  thou  tmoibett  that  3  hate  the 
glo?p  of  thetonrtghteous,  anbabhozre 
the  beo  of  the  bndrcumcile^anD  of  t  ail 
the  heathen. 

is  Xbou  unotbeft  mp  neteflitie :  foz 
3  abbojre  the  figne  of  mp  t  high  eftatc, 
tbbicbts  bpon  nunc  heao.m  the  bapes 
lbbcrcm  3  (bclbe  nip  felfe ,  anD  that  3 
abhozre  tt  asamenftruousraggcanb 
that  3  tbtare  it  not  tbben?  am  tpji? 
uatebpmp  felfe, 

17  3nD  that  thmc  hanbmato  hath 
not  eaten  atSmanstablc,  anb  that  3 
haue  not  greatlp  eftcemeD  the  lyings 
fcaO,no2  tHunuethe  tumeofthc  onnuc 
offerings : 

is  Neither  baD  thine  banbmaiDanp 
iop,Qnce  the  Dap  Uhat  3  ruasb2oiight 
hither  to  this  pjefent,  butintljcc,  €> 
!Lo2tj©otiof^b2aham. 

19  £>  tljou  migbtie  <5ob  aboue  all, 
hcarethctooiccoftb£fo2lo;nc,anDDcli 


uer  bs  out  of  the  hanDrsof  the  mifchie 
uous,  anb  bcliucr  me  out  of  mpfeare. 

CHAP.    XV. 

6  ElUier  commeth  into  the  Kings  ptefence. 
7  Hec  looketb  angcrly,  andfhe  famtcih.  S 
The  king  Joth  take  hei  vp.and  comfott  hct. 

|i3D  bpon  tbctbirD  Dap 
Uihen  (hee  hab  enbeb 
lhctp2aper,(helaiDea' 
ibap  her  mourning 
garments,  anb  put  on 
herglo2tousapparell. 
2  3nD  being  gl02i> 
ouflp  aoo2neb,aftcr  flic  baD  talleD  bpon 
<5ob,U)i)o  is  the  be holber  ,anDS>aiHour 
ofalithings,fl)ctooKCtlbomaiDsibitb 
her. 

3  Slnbbpon  the  one  fljee  leaneD  as 
tarpmghcr  fclfc  !l  oamnip. 

4  Znn  the  otljct  folloibcb  bearing 
topbertramc. 

5  3lnbfl)ett)as||rut)bpth20ugrjtfte 
perfection  of  her  bcautie ,  anb  her  coun- 
tenance ibas  cbecrcfuii,aiiD  beep  ||  ami- 
able: but  ftcr  heart  mas  manguifbfo? 
fearc. 

6  Xhen  hauing  paffcD  tb20ugb  all 
tbeboojes,  thee  ftoob  beftHctheBing, 
Vbbo  fate  bponbts  ropall  th2one,  ano 
ibas  do  th  to  lbttb  all  his  robes  of  mate 
fttcall  glittering  ibithgolDc  anDp2eci- 
ousftones.anD  bctbasbcrp  D2caDfull. 

7  Xhen  lifting  bp  his  countenance 
that  fhone  lbitb  maieftie ,  he  loohcD  be; 
rpficrtelp  bpon  her :  anDtbe  Jliueene 
fellDotbne  anoibas  pale ,  aiiDfamtcD, 
anD  boibcD  her  fclfc  bpon  the  bcab  of 
the  maibc  that  tbent  ||  bcfo?c  her. 

8  Xhen  (5ob  ebangeD  the  fpmt  of 
the  mng  into  mtlDncfTc,lbboina  t  fcarc 
leapcD  from  his  tbzonc,  anDtoobchcr 
in  his  armes  till  (he  came  to  her  fclfc  a- 
game ,  anD  comfo2tcD  her  ibith  lomng 
\b02DS,  anD  fapD  bnto  her : 

9  either ,  \bhat  is  the  matter  i  3 
amthpb20thcr,bcofgoob  dicere. 

10  xhou  malt  not  bie,  though  our 
c6manbementbc|lgenerall:comcncere 

1 1  3!nb  fo  he  belD  bp  his  goiocn  fcep 
tet,anD  laiD  it  bpon  her  ncche, 

[2  ^nDemb2acebher,?faiD,5)pcabc 

bnto  me.  „, 

i}  Xhen  faiDfhcc bnto hun , 3te\\) 

thce,mplo2D,asan^ngclofGori,atiD 

nip  heart  lbas  troublcbfo2  fcareof  thp 

maicftic. 
14.  foi  ibonDerfull  art  thou ,  I02D 

anD  thp  countenance  is  full  of  grace. 

h  Unto 


\\OtM- 
CAtely. 


Or,  roft 
coloured. 

:  OrtMam%. 
Me  orjmt. 


\\Or,mlh 
her  firby 
h.-r. 

\qr  mm 
ugome. 


||  Or,  Maell 
ihvte  M 
mine. 


Apocrypha. 


Either. 


Apocrypha. 


Infcph.  Am. 
Hi.  1 1  .c.6. 


J  Or,  mllaf. 
feSltJ  latthr 
SlMC. 


\^r.thetr 
t/:nrfatlvrt. 


\\or,MM\    i5  :&iDasu)CibasfpeaUtng,l|u)cfell 
„/™».  luonmcforfamtnefle. 

i6  XheuthcmngrbastroubleD,anD 
all  his  fcrnants  tomfo?rcu  her. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

The  Letter  of  Artaxerxes ,  10  wherein 
liee  taxed!  Aman ,  17  and  reuoketh  die  de- 
cree procured  by  Aman  to  deftroy  die  Iewes, 
11  and  conimandeth  tlieday  of  their  deliue- 
rance  to  be  kept  holy. 

^g^pgg  $c  great  iung:3rtarerrcs 
tonto  tt)c  pontes  anD  go^ 
uctnours  of  an  hunDjeth 
anu  fcuen  ant)  twenty  p?o- 
umces ,  from  3JnDta  tmto 

Ethiopia ,  anD  bnto  all  ||  out  faithfull 

Smbictts,  greeting, 
i  $)any,themo;ieoftcntheyarchO'' 

nonreD  With  tlje  gceat  bountte  of  ttjeic 

t  gracious  pnnces,  the  mo?e  p?ouD  they 

aretbaren, 

3  3CnD  enDeauour  to  hurt  not  our 
S^ubiects  onelv ,  but  not  being  able  to 
bcare  abunDante ,  Doctahe  in  hanD  to 
pjactue  alfo  agamd  thofc  that  Doc  them 
gooD: 

4  ShiDtafec not  only trjanbfulncue 
aibay  from  among  men,  but  alfo  UftcD 
Dp  ibiththcglonous  tbojDs  oflllcibDe 
pcrfons  ||  thatitoerc  ncucr  gooD,they 
thinbeto  efcapcfljciumcc  of  <5oD,  that 
fcertj  all  thmgs,anD  hatcth  euill. 

5  4Dften  times  alfo  fatre  fpcech  of 
lltrjofe  that  arc  put  in  tcud  to  manage 
their  fricnDs  affaires ,  hath  caufeDma^ 
ny  thatareinauthonty  to  bepartabcrs 
ofinnocent  blooD,anDfjatn  cnlbjappcD 
them  in  r  cmeDilcfle  calamities: 

6  beguiling  iDitli  the  falfnooD  anD 
Deceit  of  their  lctbDDifpofition,the  mno= 
ccnae  anD  gooDnefTe  of  pnnccs. 

7  iftoitoyecmayfecthisastbchauc 
DeciareD,  not  fomucfj  by  ancient  hido- 
ncs,asyecmay,ifycfcarchtbhathath 
beene  ibicUeDly  Done  of  late  through  tlje 
pethlcnt  bchauiout  of  the  in  Ui.u  arc 
btitbozthtly  piaccDinauthontie. 

8  3nDitoemndtaRCcarcfo2thctime 
to  come,  that  our  femgDome  may  bee 
quiet  anD  peaceable  foj  all  men, 

9  ffioth  by  changing  our  purpo* 
fes,anD  anbayes  ittDgmg  things  rt)at 
arc  euiDent,  tbith  moje  cquail  p?occe* 
Ding. 

10  foj  3lman  a  ^9accDonian  the  fon 
of  3maDatha,  being  inDccD  a  Granger 
from  the  0erfianblooD,  anD  far  DiQant 


|J  Or, ncedie, 
\\Or y hat  ne- 
uertafted 
profpenttt. 


Or,  of  our 
friends  put 
11  trmjl  to 
manage  the 
affitrej. 


from  our  gooDnefTe,  anDasadtanger 
wciucDoftos: 

1 1  ^aDfo  far  re  fojth  obtatnebthefa* 
uour  that  ibec  ftjeu)  toibarD  cue  ry  nan* 
on,asthathcVbascaiicDourfarher)anD 
ibas  continually  honoutcDofall  men, 
as  the  nert  pcrfon  bnto  the  Ring. 

1 i  25ut  he  not  bearing  his  great  Dig- 
nine ,  Xbcnt  about  to  Depnuc  bs  of  our 
lungDomc anD  life: 

13  $aumg  by  mamfolD  anD  cunning 
Deceits  fought  of  bs  the  Dcftructionas 
ibell  of  ££)arDocheus,  Ibho  faucD  our 
ufe.anD  contuiuallywoeurcD  our  gooD, 
as  alfo  of  biamclcflc  €dhctpartaber 
of  our  tungDome,  Iblth  their  Ibholc 
nation. 

14  JFojbythefemcaneshc  thought, 
fmDingtos  Dcmtutc  offricnDS ,  to  hauc 
tranflatcD  the  Htngoomc  of  the  $erfi* 
ans  to  the  ^accDonians. 

15  2i5ut  itoce  finDe  that  the  3Jctbes, 
Vbhom  thisttucfecD  ibjctchhathDeliue* 
rcD  to  totter  Dcdruction,  are  no  euill 
Doers  ,but  hue  by  mod  md  lalbes : 

i6  3nD  that  they  be  chilD?cn  of  the 
mod  high  anD  mod  mighty  Uuing  ©od, 
ttoho  hath  II  ojDereD  the  mngoomc  both 
tontotos,  anD  to  our  pjogentto?sin  ttjc 
modcrccllentmancr. 

17  ©hcrefo^e  ye  fljailDoe  Ibell  not 
to  put  in  crecutionthcHettersfentton* 
to  you  by  3(man  rtjc  lonnc  of  ^maDa' 
tha. 

18  M  hce  that  ibas  rtjcVbo^er  of 
thefc  things,  ishangcDatthegates  of 
Snifa  ttith  all  his  family :  d5oD,  ltoho 
ruleth  all  thmgs,fpceDily  renD,iing  toen? 
geancctohimareojDingtohisDeferts. 

19  Xhcrefojc  ye  (hall  publid)  the  cc 
py  of  this  Hctter  in  all  plates ,  that  tlje 
licwesmay  frettyliucafter  their  ottmc 
laibcs. 

^o  ^nDyc  (hall  aiDc  them,  that  cuen 
thcfanicDay ,  bnng  the  thirteenth  Day 
of  the  ttbclfth  moneth  ^Dar,  fljcy  may 
be  auengcD  on  them,  Vbho  in  the  time  of 
their  affnenon  fhallfettoponthem. 

ii  foi  ^Imightie  <5oD  hathturncD 
to  toy  bnto  them  the  Day,  ttohercm  the 
chofen  people  dioulD  haucpcnfl)CD. 

ii  J»ou  fljall  thcrefoje  among  your 

folcmncfcadsftccpeitanhighDaylbith 
allfeadtng, 

13  Xhat  both  noito  anD  he«aftct 
thcrcmaybcfafcnetotos,anD  the  ibell 
affcctcD  pcrfians :  but  to  thofe  Ibhith 
Doc  confpire  agamd  tos,  a  memo?iall  of 
Dedructton. 
14-  Xhcrc^ 


\Or,fTi$(,- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.i.ij 


Apocrypha. 


Z4  Xhcrefiwtucrpnneanbcomv 
ttcp  ibhatfoeuct,  tbt)utj  (ball  not  one 
aceo?bmg  to  thefe  things ,  ttjaii  bee 
bettcopeb  ruitbout  mctcp  ,  tbith  fire 


"i.Klng.  5. 
j.cfay.  jtf.i 
IJ.4. 


"Deue.4- 
t;.l.<hro. 


mam/']}, 


krc..(.s: 


|j  Or,  iirt- 

Cvktd,or 
Jbfwetb  it 
fitfe. 
•Gal.j.J2 

\\Or/'f po- 


ll Or,vpbal- 
deth. 


j  Orjeprty 


ant>  fiooiD  ,  ano  Qjau  be  mabc  not 
ouclp  bnpaflablefb?  men,  but  alio  mott 
hatcfuit  to  UnlDc  bcaftsanb  tonics  fo; 
cuer. 


M  TheWifcdomc  ofSolomon. 


CHAP.    I. 

1  To  whom  God  (heweth  himfelfe,  4  and 
Wifcdome  herfelfe.  6  Ancuillfpeakcrcan 
not  lie  hid.  li  We  procure  our  ownede- 
ftruftion:   ij   tor  God  created  not  death. 


£>ue*  rtgbteourneu'c, 
pee  that  be  luogcs  of 
fhccarfhithtnBcoftfte 
jiLojb  nnth  a  goob 
(Tjcart)  anbtnfimpu; 
ctneofhcartfecBehim. 
z  3r  o?  Dec  rtnU  bee 
founb  of  tftmi  that  tempt  him  not :  anb 
fljenjctj)  htmfclfcbnto  fucft  as  bocnot 
'blttruftftim. 

3  5fo?  fcotbarb  thoughts  fcparate 
from  <5tio :  anb  I)is  poibctibftemt  is 
trpcb,  II  rep?ooueth  tftc  bnttiifc. 

4.  $01  into  a  maimous  foulctbifc* 
borne  ftjall  not  enter :  no?  btbell  in  the 
bobp  tftat  is  fubtett  bnto  Gnnc. 

5  *3fo?  tfje  holp  fpirtt  of  DlfnpUne 
Vom  me  beceit,?  rcmoue  from  thoughts 
tftat  ate  lbitf)ont  bnberftanbtng:anb 
rblll  not  ||  abibe  tbften  bnrigft  tcoufneOc 
commetft  m. 

6  5Fo?ttHfebometsa*louingfptnt: 
anb  tbffl  not  acquiteablafphcmour  of 
ftts  ||  tbo?bs :  fo?  ©ob  is  ujitneffe  of  his 
reines.anb  a  true  bcholber  of  his  heart, 
anb  aftcatcr  of  his  tongue. 

7  jf 0?  the  fptnt  of  the  Ho?b  fflleth 
tftctbo?lb:anbtftatroftichlltontainerh 
alltftlngs  JjatD  tmotblebge  ofttjc  botte. 

8  Xfterefo?e  fte  tftat  fpcafectft  bn- 
tigftteous  tftmgs ,  tannot  be  fttb :  net 
tfter  fljal  bcngcanccAbftcn  it  puntfftctft. 

paCTebpfttm. 

9  5fo?inquifmon  (ball  be  mabe  into 
the  tounftls  of  the  bngoblp :  anb  tftc 
ronnbofftisIbo?bs,fbaUcomcbntotftc 
!Lo?b,fo?tfte||mamfcftattonofftisu)ip 

10  foi  tftc  earc  of  lealouuc  ftearetft 
al  tftings:anb  tftc  nolfe  of  murmurtngs 
is  not  fttb. 


11  Xfterefo?cbeibare  of  murmuring, 
ibfttcft  is  bnpzontablc ,  anb  reframc 
pour  tongue  from  bacnbtting:fo?  there 
is  no  tbo?b  fo  ferret  tftat  fftaii  goe  fo? 
nougftt :anb  tl)e  mouth  tftat  ||  beltctft, 
Qapetftthcfoulc. 

ii  £>eeftcnot  bcatftin  tftc  errour  of 
pour  life:  anb  pull  not  bpon  pour  fclucs 
I'bettructton ,  untft  tftc  ibo?ucs  of  pour 
ftanbs. 

13  5Fo?  <5oh  mabc  not  beatft:  neither 
ftath  Dc  pltafurc  m  tftc  beftrumon  of 
tftc  luting. 

14  jfo?  fte  crcatcb  all  things,  tftat 
tftcp  might  ftauc  tftetr  bemg  :anb  the 
generations  of  the  ibojlb  iberc  l)eaitl> 
rulP.anbtfterctsnopopfonofbcQructi' 
on  m  them :  no?  the  Utngbome  of  beatft 
bpontftceartft. 

15  ito?nghteoufncfleisimmo?taU. 
i6  25ut  bngoblp  men  ibttft  their 

ibo?Bes,  anb  ibo?bs  calico  « to  them: 
fo?ibhcn  thcpthougtjt  to  ftauctt  their 
jfrtcnb,  rtjep  tonfumcb  to  nought,  anb 
mabe  acouenantttith  it,  becaufc  ttjcp 
arc  tbo?thp  to  taue  part  ibul)  it. 

CHAP.    II. 

!  The  wicked  thinkc  this  life  (hor! ,  5  and  of 
no  other  after  this.  6  Therelore  they  will 
take  their  pleafure  in  this,  10  and  confpire  a- 
gainfl  the  iufh  2 1  What  that  is  which 
doth  blind  them. 

jD?  the  vn^odK  faib,  r  cafo^ 
nmg  ttntft  thcmfclues , 
but  not  aright:  *£>ur  life 
is  fto?tanb  tcbious,*  anb 
in  the  bcath  of  a  man 
there  is  no  rcmcbie :  net; 
tftcr  tbas  there  anp  man  bnotben  to 
haue  rcturneb  from  the  grauc. 

x  ;f  0?  ibec  arc  bo?nc  at  all  abunv 
turc:  ^ibcflialbchcercaftcrasthough 
lbchabncuctbene:fo?thcb?cathinoiir 
noOrils  is  as  fmonc ,  ants  a  title  fparhc 
in  the  mouing  of  our  heart. 

3  rohtch 


|l  Or,fijr.dt- 
tclh. 


'Dcut.4. 


Mob.7.1. 

•Mj1h.11, 
2).i.cor.i5 


Apocrypha.  Wifdome  or  Solomon.    Apocrypha. 


Or,cp- 
frejfrd. 
'  i. Chi.  :o 

\\Or,lx. 


•ir».M. 

iJ.audjS, 

li. 

||  Or,  Mr- 

neflly. 

"i.Cor.i  j 


^OrJctiiit. 


*Iohn7.  7 
ephcf.  5 
I3,H. 

•ir.i.53.3. 
Or,fi/fi 


PiUu.8, 

9.  match. 
743- 


5  usbkh  being  ernngmfheb,out  bo- 
Uvfliaiibe  tutneb  into  alhes,  ant)  our 
fptrttwaiibanifhasthellfoftaire: 

4  ^mbournamefbaibefrtfgottenttt 
timc,anb  no  man  (ball  haue  out  ttiortts 
m  rememb2ance,anb  out  life  CljallpafTc 
arbayas  the  trace  ofaetoub:an&fhall 
be  btfperfeb  as  a  mitt  that  is  bnucn  a- 
lbay  lbith  the  beames  of  the  £>unne, 
anb  ilouercometbitfj  the  heat  thereof. 

5  *  if  02  our  time  is  a  bery  (babo  lb 
tl)at  paffeth  aibay :  anb  after  our  enb 
there  is  no  returning :  fo2||itts  faflfca 
let),  fo  that  no  man  tommeth  agame. 

6  Come  on  therefoje ,  let  bs  cmov 
thegoobthmgs*that  arc  p2cfcnt:anb 
let  bs  ||  fpecbtly  bfe  the*  creatures  liUc 
as  in  youth. 

7  Hettosfill  our  felues  lbttb  tofHy 
tbine.anb  ointments:  anbletno  flolber 
of  the  S>p2ingpafTeby  bs. 

8  Hct  bs  crottmc  our  felues  tttith 
Sofe  bubs,  befoic  they  be  lbitheccb. 

9  JUt  none  of  bs  goe  lbtrhout  his 
part  of  our  ||  boluptuoufnefTc :  let  bs 
leaue  tokens  of  our  loyfulncCfc  m  cuery 
place :fo2  this  ts  our  portion,  anb  our 
lot  is  this. 

10  3Utbsopp2effethcpoo2crightc^ 
ousman  ,let  bsuotfpare  the  lbtboib, 
no2  reuerence  the  ancient  gray  haires 
oftl;eageb. 

1 1  ?let  our  ftrength  bee  the  fcaibc 
of  tttlhcc :  f02  that  lbljirh  is  feeble  is 
fount)  to  be  nothing  ibo2tfj. 

ii  Xbereftwe  let  bs  lye  in  ibatt  fo? 
the  rtgh  tcous :  betaufe  rjc  is  not  fo2  our 
mrne ,  anb  he  is  cleane  contrary  to  our 
botngs:  he  bpb2aibeth  bsttntbourof 
feubmg  the  Haib ,  anb  obiettcth  to  our 
infamy  the  tranfgremngs  of  our  cbu^ 
canon. 

13  fteep2ofe(Terhto  haucthc  knoilr 
leogeofd5ob :  anb  hee  callcthhtmfelfe 
thethtlbeofthe?Lo2b. 

14.  $ee  ibas  mace  to*rep?oouc  our 
thoughts. 

15  l^ee  is  gricuous  bnto  bseucn  to 
beholbe :  *  f02  his  life  is  not  liUe  other 
mens,his\baies  are  of  another  fafhion. 

i6  use  are  efteetneo  of  htm  as  ||  coun 
terfeits :  he  abftainetb  from  our  tbayes 
as  from  fiithntclTe :  he  p2onouiiteth  the 
enb  of  the  mftto  be  blefTco ,  anb  tnahctb 
his  boaft  that  <5ob  is  his  father. 

17  ?Letbsfcctfhis)bo2besbetrue: 
anb  let  bs  p;ouc  lbhat  fhail  happen  in 
the  enb  of  him. 

18  ifo:  if  the  tuft  man  be  the  *  tonne 


ofC5ob,  hetbill  helpc  htm  anbbcliucr 
him  from  the  hanb  of  his  enemies. 

19  Hct  bs  *  ejtaminc  him  Unth  be- 
fpttcfulncflc  ano  t02rturc,  that  vue  may 
knoib  h«s  mecuencfle ,  ano  p200ue  his 
panence. 

20  jict  bs  conbemne  h"n  rbith  a 
(bamefullbeath :  fo;  by  his  oibne  tay- 
tng,he(ballberefpccteb. 

21  <§>ucb  things  they  bib  imagine, 
anoiberc  becctueb:  to?  their  oibncunt; 
ttebneflehath  blmbcbthem. 

22  3lsfo2themyltecicsof0ob,they 
Kneib  them  not :  neither  hopco  they  to: 
the  mages  of  nghteoufneffe :  no?  tbif 
cerneb  areibarb  fo2blamelefletoulcs. 

2}  ifo?  00b  createb  man  to  bee  im> 
mo2taii,  anb  mabe  him  to  be  an  *  image 
of  his  oibne  eternttie. 

2+  *  Bcuertheleflc  though  enuic  of 
the  bcuill  came  beath  into  the  lbo?lb : 
anb  they  that  boc  holbe  of  his  fibc  Hoc 
fiubett. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  The  godly  are  happie  in  their  death,  5  and 
m  their  troubles;  10  The  wicked  are  nor.oor 
their  children:  15  But  they  that  are  pure, 
are  happie ,  though  they  haue  no  children  : 
1 6  For  the  adulterer  and  his  feed  fliall  penfh. 

fvl^^f  <Ht*thtfoulesofthcrigh- 
tf  M)J%, tcous  acc  m  tlJE  lJanD  of 
«$  P>TVre <50l) ' auD  tlKre  ^au  no 
H  lllPi-I  to'ment  touch them. 
ULAr^yJ&L  2  *3Jn  the  fight  of  the 
bnibifc  they  fecnieb  to  bit:  anb  their  be- 
parture  ts  taken  foitnifery, 

j  ^nb  their  going  from  bs  to  be  bfc 
tet  befiructton :  but  they  are  tn  peace. 

4  if 02  though  thep  bee  puntfheb  in 
the  fight  of  men :  yet  is  their '  hope  full 
ofimmo2taittir. 

.  5  3ttbhaumgbcnc  a  little  thailifcb, 
they  fliaibe  greatly  lireVbarbcb:fo2  d5ot> 
*  p2ouco  them,anb  founb  them|i\b02tl)y 
fo2  htmfelfe. 

6  %s  golb  tn  the  furnace  hath  hee 
trieb  them  ,  anb  rccetucb  them  as  a 
burnt  offering. 

7  3no  in  the  tunc  of  their  *  biftta- 
tton,  they  tnaiiflnne  anbrunnetoanb 
fro  .liaefparltesamongthe  (rubble. 

8  Xhcy  *  fliall  uibgc  tlje  nations, 
anb  haue  bonuniou  oucc  the  people, 
ano  there  ?Lo2b  fljaiiraigne  fo:  cucr. 

9  Xhcy  that  put  their  truft  m  hint, 
(hall  bnbcrlranb  the  trueth :  ||  anb  fuel) 
as  be  faithfuii  in  louc  ,(hail  abibe  Vbith 
htm :  fo:  grace  ?  mercy  is  to  his  faints, 
ano 


"Icre.ii. 

>9- 


preferred  or 
efleemedtlot 
reward, 

'Gen.i.itf. 
«7-and  j.i. 
ccclc.17. 3. 
*  Gen.  j. 
I}. 


'Dcuc  33. 


•Chip.j.+. 


'Rom  8. 
24. 1, cor.  j. 
1. 1  per.  1. 
■>• 

\Or,iene- 
frtd. 

"Exod.  itS. 
4-deut.8.l 
||  *.»««. 


*Matth.i;. 


'  Nfart.  19. 
x8. 1  xot.6. 
7- 

ttothfttll fiali 
rfm.nnt 
rttth  himttt 


Apocrypha.  Chap.iii) 


'Macij- 

4i. 


cr'jnchajic. 


'Efai.jtf-J. 


S«. 


•EG 

\qre.the 

rboftnjra 
mon^Utbe 
peoftc. 


\\Or,itf.v- 
tiktriofho- 
tubing. 


\\pr,bttm 


\\Or,af. 
yroHsd. 


anb  he  l)att)  tare  fo;  fas  elect. 

10  38utthe*tongobip(haibcpuni(heb 
acco:bmgto  their  ottmc  imaginations, 
tbbicH  Dane  neglcctco  tl)c  righteous, 
anb  fojfahtn  the  Ho;b. 

1 1  ifo;  tt»ho  fo  befptfeth  ltoifetoome, 
anb  nurture,  hcismtfcrablc,  anb  their 
hop  e  is  toatuc,thnr  labours  tonfruttfuli, 
ano  their  vuo:hs  tonp:ofitabic. 

it  Xheir  itoiucs  arc  ||  foolifh ,  ant) 
their  chUtHcnilntfeCD. 

ij  Xheir  of-fpnugiSeurfeto :tt)here- 
foKblcfleo  is  the  barren  that  is  tonbefi< 
leb,  itohtch  hath  not  bnoiben  the  finfull 
beb :  (he*  (hall  haue  fruit  m  the  toiGtate 
onoffoules. 

14.  3(nto  bicflid  is  the  eunuch  itohicfi 
itotth  his  hanbs  hath  ttwought  no  mi* 
quitic :  no:  imagmcb  nttcacb  things  a- 
gamft  eob :  f 0;  tonto  him  (hall  be  giuen 
the  *ffpeetall  gift  of  faith ,ano  an  inhere 
tanceintheXcmplc  of  the  &o;b  moje 
acceptable  to  fas  minbe. 

15  ifo;  gloitous  is  the  fruit  of  gooo 
labours:  anb  the  root  of  itoifctoomfhall 
ncucrfaliaitoap. 

is  3s  fo:  the  efalb :cn  of  abultcters, 
tljep  (hall  not  l|  conic  to  their  perfection, 
anb  the  feeb  of  an  tonnghtcous  beb  (hal 
berootcbout. 

17  ifo;  though  thep  liuc  long,  pet 
(hall  the?  bee  nothing  regarbeb :  anb 
their  laft  age  (hall  be  Without  honour. 

18  iDl  if  the?  btc  quicsfa ,  thep  haue 
no  hope ,  neither  comfort  in  the  bap  of 
llt"ail.  r^  - 

19  if 0;  hojtiblc  is  the  enD  of  tije  ton* 
righteous  generation. 

CHAP.   IIII. 

1  The  chaftemanfhall  be  crowned.  3  Baftard 
flips  fhallnot  thnue.  6  They  (hall  witneflc 
againft  their  parents.  7  The  iull  die  yong, 
and  are  happie.  19  The  miferable  endc  of 
the  wicked. 

€tter  it  (s  to  haue  no  efafc 

b;cn,anb  to  haue  toertuc :  fo? 

the  mcmo:iail  thereof  istnt= 

„  mortal  :bccaurert  IS  HanoU)* 

en  umh  C5ob  anD  ttnth  men. 

2  iBhemtispjcfent,mcntaBeerams 
pie  at  it,  anb  itohcn  it  is  gone  they  befire 
it  atrbcarcth  acrotbn,anbtrrampheth 
foz  eucr,hamng  gotten  the  toicto:te,ftrt* 
umgfo;tontocfilctoreitoaros. 

j  2SutthcmuinplpiugbjooDofthc 
tongoblpfbailnotth;ute,no;tattcbccpe 
roonngfrombaftarb  flips ,  no;iapanp 
faftfounbatiou. 


Apocrypha. 


[    +  Sot  though  thepftotirift)  in  b;an^ 

chesfiwa  time :  "pet  daubing  not  faft, 

ithep  (hall  be  (haacu  With  the  ttnnoe: 

ano  tfaough  the  fo;cc  ofitombcs  thep 

(hall  be  root cd  out. 

5  Xhc  Imperfect  benches  (ball  bee 
b;oUenoff,theirfruittonp;ofitable,not 
ripe  to  cate :  pea  meet  fo:  nothing. 

6  ifo;  chtlb;en  begotten  of  toniaib- 
fulltbebs,  arcibitnefles  of  fljicReones 
againtt  their  parents  in  their  trtaii. 

7  But  though  the  righteous  be  p:e- 
ucnteb  ttnth  beach:  pet  (hal  he  be  in  reft. 

8  jFor  honourable  age  is  not  that 
itofarh  ftanbeth  in  length  of  time,  no; 
thatts  mcafurcb  bp  number  of  pceres. 

9  But  ltotfcbomc  is  the  grap  haire 
bnto  men ,?  an  bnfpotteb  life  is  olb  age. 

10  *  $c  pieafeb  <eoto ,  anb  urns  bclo- 
uCb  of  fam :  fo  that  liumg  amongftfut; 
ners,hc  itoas  tranftatcb. 

11  }3ca,fpccbiip  was  he  taken  attiap, 
left  that  luichcbncs  (houlb  alter  his  ton? 
bcrftanbing,  02  Deceit  beguile  fasfoule. 

ii  if  0;  the  beltottcfang  of  naugljtincs 
both  obfeure  things  that  arc  honcft : 
anb  the  itoano;utg  of  toneupifccnce, 
both  t  tonber mine  the  Gmpie  minb . 

ij  $c  being  mabc  1 1  perfect  in  a  fho;t 
tunc,  fnifiiicn  a  long  time. 

1+  ifo;  his  foule  pieafeb  the  3Lo;d : 
therefore  hafteb  he  to  take  him  away,  from 
amongthcitotcBcb. 

15  Xfasthepcoplcfatt),anbtonber 
ftoob  it  not :  neither  latb  thep  top  this  in 
their  minbes,  Xhat  his  grace  anb  mer* 
nc  is  lit ith  h  is  ^>am  t  s  ,a  tiD  that  he  hath 
refpecttontofaschofen. 

16  Xhus  the  righteous  that  is  beab, 
(hall  conbemne  the  tongoblp,  ltorjtcli  are 
liumg,  anb  pouth  that  is  foottc  perfect 
teb,  the  manppeerrs  anb  olbagcof  the 
bnnghtcous. 

17  fo:  thep  (hall  fee  the  cno  of  the 
ltotfc,  ?  (hail  not  tonbcrftanbibhat(25ob 
in  his  counfell  hath  becreeb  of  him,  anb 
to  ibfatt  cnb  the  %m  hath  fct  him  ui 
fafetic. 

18  Xhcp  fhai  fee  film  anb  befpife  Ijun, 
bat  d5ob  (hail  laugh  them  to  fco:ne,ano 
thep  (hal  hereafter  be  a  toile  car Bcis,anb 
arep:ochamongthcbeabfo:cucrmo:c. 

19  ifo:  fie  (hail  rcnotUcin,  ano  caft 
them  boitonc  heabloug,tliat  thep  (baibc 
fpeechles:  anb  he  fljai  fl)abe  them  from 
the  fouutoation:  aub  thep  (hall  bee  tot- 
terlp  laibltoaftc ,  ano  be  m  fo:oil> :  anb 
their  mcmouall  (hall  perilh. 

zo  ^nb  ||  itohen  thep  caft  bp  theac 
laciqq       tounts 


"Mat-7.ip. 


f  Gre  jiff f  1 


hcb.  u.j. 


|  Grc.per- 

nertt 

\\Or,fA»£lt 

ptdorcors- 
jtimtnated. 


c  t/limf  ur 


lit 


Apocrypha.  YVifedome ofSolomon.  Apocrypha. 


•Chap.  j.J 


Or.  filled 

ourfelufs,  or 

rfcittd. 


*  i.Chron. 
39. 1 5. and 
2.5. 


•Pro  ^o  19 
Or,fyclh. 


counts  of  their  (nines ,  rtjtv  fhau  come 
mith  fcait :  anb  tlmr  omnc  iniquities 
(hall  contuhce  them  to  r?)  tir  face. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  The  wicked  fhai  wonder  at  the  godly,  4  and 
confefic  their  errour,  and  the  vanuie  of 
their  hues.  15  God  will  reward  theluft,  17 
and  warre  agamft  the  wicked. 

n?en  thai  tlje  righteous  man 
ftano  m  great  bolbneffc ,  be- 
fojethc  face  of  fuel)  as  hauc 
afflieteb  mm ,  tiuD  mafic  no 
account  of  his  labours. 
t  l©hentheyfeeit,thcyfhalbetrou- 
bleu  Ibitrj  terrible  fcare,  ?  fballbc  ama; 
5rt>  at  the  ftrangeneffe  of  hts  faluanon, 
fo  farrcbeyonb  all  that  theylooRebfo?. 
j  3lnb  they  repenting,  anfi  grontng 
fojangutfh  otfpirit,  mail  fay  mithui 
themfelucs ,  Xrjts  tbas  fje  mhomibcc 
tjab  fomcttmes  in  berifton,  anb  a  ||  pzo; 
ucrbcofrcpjoch. 

4  *  one  fooles  aeeounteb  his  life  mab* 
ucs,  anb  his  enb  to  be  roithout  honour. 

5  $om  ts  hee  numbzeb  among  tt)e 
chilbjen  of  d5ob ,  anb  hts  lot  ts  among 
tl)c5»amts; 

6  Xherefoje  haue  tttce  errcb  from 
the  may  of  tructlj ,  anb  the  light  of 
righteoufneffe  hath  not  flnncb  bnto  bs, 
anb  the  Sonne  of  righteoufneffe  rofe 
notbpontos. 

7  i©e||mcariebourfclucsinthcmay 
of  tbuaebneCfc,  anb  beftructton :  pea, 
we  haue  gone  ttuough  beferts,  inhere 
theretaynomay:  bntasfouhcmayof 
tt»e  ?io2b,tt>e  haue  not  Rtiomen  it 

8  tehat  hath  p:tbc  pzofitcb  bSf  o? 
mhatgoob  hath  riches  mith  our  pawn 
tingb2ottghtbs^ 

9  3llthofcthingsate*paiTebamay 
iffteafbabom,  anb  as  a^ofte  that  ha- 
deb  by. 

10  stub  as  a  ftyp  that  pafTcth  oner  the 
roaues  of  the  mater,  mnich  when  it  ts 
gone  by ,  the  trace  thereof  cannot  bee 
founb:  neither  the  path  may  of  the  aeelc 
mthettiaues. 

11  *£>jasmhenabirbilhathflomen 
thojolb  theaircthcre  ts  no  toftcn  of  her 
may  to  be  founb.but  the  light  air  e  bem  g 
beaten  mith  the  (trottc  of  her  ttnngs, 
anb  partcb  mitt)  the  biolent  noifeanb 
motion  of  them,  ispaffeb  thorom, 
anb  therinaftctmarbs  no  ftgncibhcrc 
fhcibent,tstobcfoutiD. 

ii  ^HiReasibhcnauarromisfhot 
at  a  marftc.it  parteth  the  atrc,mhich  un 


mebiatly  tommcth  together  againe :  fo 
that  a  man  cannot  bnom  mher  e  it  ibent 
tho?om : 

13  €uenfomcinIifecmaner;atToonc 
as  me  mere  bo:ne,bcgan  to  fizam  to  our 
cnb.anbhabnoGgneof  tocrtucto  fhem: 
but  mete  confumeb  in  our  omne  mtc- 
Rebncffc. 

14.  "foi  thehopeof  thebngobly  tsiiftc 
tbuftthattsbiomcnamayibtthyminb, 
URca  thume  froth  that  tsbjuicn  amay 
mill)  y  ftomic:  lifee  as  the  1 1  fmoftc  mhieh 
ts  *  btfperfeb  here  anb  there  mith  a  teim 
pett,  anb  paffeth  amay  as  the  remenv 
bjtanee  of  a  gucft  that  taricth  but  a  bay. 

15  25utynghtcousUnefo?euetmo2e, 
thcirrcmarbalfoi3mtththc!Lo2b,anb 
thecarc  of  them  is  mith  the  moll  J?tgh. 

16  Xherfoic  fhail  they  reteiuc  a  gio 
riousllatngbome,  *a  beautiful  tromne 
from  the  lLozos  hanbe:  fo?  ratth  his 
right  hanfi  n^au  he  touer  them, anb 
rbtth  his  armc  fliau  he  protect  them. 

17  $c  fbali  tane  to  him  his  ieloufie  fo2 
copletearmour,?  ma&ethe  creatutehis 
mcapon  fo2  the  reuenge  of  his  enemies. 

18  Verbal  put  on  *  rtghtcoufneffcas 
a  bjeftplatc  ,aub  true  uibgemcnt  m  fteab 
of  an  helmet. 

19  $c  (hall  ta&e  I!  holmeiTe  foz  an  in- 
utnctblcfbiclb. 

xo  i^isieucrcimarhfbailhefbarpen 
fo:  a  fmom,  anb  the  mo2ib  n>ui  fight 
mitt)  him  agamft  the  nnmife. 

ii  Xhcn  thai  the  right  -  aiming  thun 
bcr  bolts  goc  abzoab ,  anb  from  the 
cioubes,  as  from  aibeU-bjamcnbom, 
(hall  they  flic  to  the  marfec. 

2i  Zn\i  hatieftoncs  full  of  m2ath  fhai 
becaftasmitofafloncbom,anbthema 
tcrof  the ^eaOiail rage  agamft  them, 
?  the  flooos  njailcruelly  b:omne  them. 

25  IfeaamighnerombfbaUfranbbp 
agamft  them,  f  Ufeea fto2tne  mall blom 
tijem  amay :  thus  iniquity  fhai  lay  waft 
the  mhole  earth,  anb  ill  fieaimg  (hail  o 
nertl)2omtheth:oncsofthenttghne. 

chap.   vr. 

1  Kings  mufl  giue  eare.  3  They  haue  their  pow- 
er trom  God,  5  Who  will  not  fparc  them,  u 
Wil'edomeis  foone  found.  11  Princes  mult 
fecke  for  it:  14  For  a  wile  Prince  is  thefhv 
ot  his  people. 

\  Care  therefo2e,sD  yec  Rings, 
anb  bnberftanb ,  learnc  ytc 
a  j)  ttiat  be  iiiogcs  of  the  enfis  of 
as^sD  the  earth. 
2  <5iuc  care  you  that  rule  the  people, 
anfi 


"lob  8.9. 
t  grc  thlftle 
dawne 

\\Or,ch*p. 
ITal.J.4.8: 
IOJ.I  + 
pro.  10.  zy 
and  1 1.7. 
iam.1.10. 


\\Or,f*hce, 
tverd  be  1  a- 
prrly.jj  2. 


'Efa.y9. 11 


\  Or,  tyng. 


[Apocrypha. Chap.vij, 


Apocrypha. 


•Rom. i  3. 


l.Chro. 
19.17.deut. 
10.17. 10b. 

34-  •»• 

ceded.  J<. 
I  j.  16.  a<3. 

10.24.r0m. 

l.ll.gjJ.  2. 

tf.cphc.d.o 

col.3.25. 

I.pct.l.17. 


\\OrJHfH- 

||  Or,  a  de- 
fence. 


\\Or,n»ture 


anb  glo?p  in  ttje  niultttube  of  nations, 
j  5Fo?  *  potter  is  giucn  you  of  the 
3lo?b ,  9  foucraignttc  from  the  $igbeu\ 
tbbo  fbail  try  wit  tbo?bes,  ant>  fearcb 
out  your  coumels. 

4  ©ecaufc  being  t$)tmutts  of  bis 
Stngbome,youhauc  not  lubgeb  aright, 
no?  bepttbe  latt) ,  no?  Jbalbeb  after  the 
counfell  of  ©ob, 

5  §o?riblpanDfpctbilp  (ball  be  come 
bpon  you :  fo?  a  fbarpe  itibgement  (bail 
be  to  them  tb  at  be  in  high  plates. 

6  3F0?  meet?  ibfli  foonc  parbon  the 
meanett:bmmtgbtymmfyailtemigb 
tiiyto?mcntcb. 

7  5F0?  be  which  is  !lo?b  outran, 
(ball  feate  no  *  mans  pcrfon :  neither 
(ballbe  ttanb  m  aibc  of  any  mans  greats 
ncfTe :  fo?  be  bath  mabe  the  Qnall  anb 
gr  eat,anb  ear ctb  fo?  ail  abbe. 

8  zsiu  a  fo?e  tnall  (ball  tome  bpon 
tbeniigbty. 

9  finto  you  therefore ,  o kings, boe 
3  fpeabe ,  njat  yce  map  learne  ibifc 
borne,  anb  not  fan  atbay. 

10  5Po?thevthatbccpehoUneueboli' 
ly,tt)ailbcl|tubgcb  bob> :  anb  they  that 
bane  learncb  web  things,  (ball  finb 
iitbhattoanfitierc. 

11  i©berefo?efet  your  affection  bpon 

X"  o?bs,btliretbcm,anbyccfbaiibe 
cteb. 
u  natfebome  is  glo?ious  anb  ncucr 
fabetb  atbay :  yea  (lie  is  caGly  feene  of 
them  that  lone  ber,anb  founb  of futh  as 
fecbeher. 

ij  £>be  pjeucnteth  them  that  bcGre 
her ,  m  matting  bcrfclfe  fird  bnotben 
bnto  them. 

14  nahofo  feebeth  he*  eately ,  (ball 
haueno  great  trauatle:fo?bc(ballfmb 
her  attmgatbtsboojes. 

15  %o  thinae  therefore  bpon  her  is 
perfection  of  tbifebome :  anbtbbo  fo 
rbatebetb  fo?  her,  (hall  ouicaiy  beibm> 
out  care. 

i6  5Fo?fbegoethaboutfecWngfnch 
as  are  rbo?tby  ofher ,  (betbetbberfrife 
fauourably  bnto  them  m  the  tbayes, 
anb  mccteth  them  in  euery  thought. 

17  f  0?  the  bcry  true  beginning  of 
her ,  is  tbebcQre  of  ilbifcipline ,  anb  the 
care  of  bifciphne  is  loue : 

is  2nD  loue  is  the  beeping  of  her 
latbes;  anb  the  gluing  heeb  bnto  her 
iatbcs,ts  the  alTurance  of  mrozrupnon. 

19  anbinto?ruptionmabctbbsneete 

bnto  «5ob.  ,    , 

zo  %berefo?etbebcCrcofibUcbomc 


b?tngeth  to  a  Wngbome. 

xi  3ifyoutbcUgbtbetbenuirb?oncs 
anb  fcepters,  &>  ye  Rings  of  the  people, 
honour  ttucbome  that  yeemay  ratgne 
fo?cucrmo?c. 

xx  as  to?  tbtfebome  lbbat  (be  is, 
anb  hotb  (be  came  bp,  3  ibtliteupou, 
anb  tbill  notbibemyftcries  fromyou: 
but  tbill  feebe  her  out  from  the  begin 
ntng  ofher  uattuity ,  ?  b?uig  the  bnotb' 
lebge  ofher  into  light ,  anblbUl  not 
pafTeoucrtbetructb. 

xi  Neither  ibUl  3  goexbttbeonfo 
mmg  enuy :  fo?  (bch  a  man  (ball  banc 
no  fcllotblbip  ttiith  ibi(ebome. 

24  2Sut  the  multitnoc  of  the  Ibtic  is 
the  ibelfare  of  the  lbo?lb :  anb  a  unle 
Ring  is  the  bpholbing  of  the  people. 

25  &ctrtiietbetcfo?cm(rruetiontbos 
tongb  my  tt>o?os,  anbu  (bailboeyou 
goob. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  All  men  haue  their  beginning  and  end  alike. 
6  He  preferred  wifedome  before  all  things 
elfe.  8  God  gaue  him  all  the  knowledge, 
which  he  had.    zt  The  praife  of  wifedome. 

<$)y  (elfe  alio  am  a  moitall 
man,  bbe  to  au\anb  the  of* 
fp?mgof  him  that  Ibas 
firttmabeoftbeeattb, 
x  Slnbin  my  mothers 
lbombcibasfafl)ioncbtobcflefl)in  the 
timeoftennemoncths  *  being  compact 
tebinbloob,oftbefeebofman,  anb  the 
pleafure  that  came  ttitb  fleepe. 

5  3mbtbben3Jtbasbo?ne,3JB?clb 
in  the  common  aire ,  anb  fell  bpon  the 
earth  tbbtcb  is  of  lite  nature ,  anb  the 
firft  boice  ibhith  3  bttereb, ibas  crying 
as  all  others  boc. 

4  3  ibas  nurfeb  m  fwauiing 
clothes,anb  that  ttntb  cares. 

5  5ro?therctsnobmgthathabany 
other  beginning  of  birth. 

6  *  jf  0?  all  men  bane  one  entrance 
bnto  lifcanb  the  llbc  going  out. 

7  B@her cfo?c  3  p?ay eb ,  anb  bnber* 
(tanbtngibasgiucnmce:5taileb  vpon 
God ,  anb  the  fpirrt  of  ibifebome  came 
to  me.  .     , 

8  3  p?cferreb  bee  befo?e  fcepters, 
anb  tftones,  anb  eCecmeb  ntljcs  no- 
thing m  compartfon  ofher. 

9  iBnther  compareb  3  bnt0  "cc 
any  t  p?enous  (tone,  becaufc  all  goro 
tn  refpect  of  her  ts  asa  UttlclanD ,  anb 
aiucr(baibecounteoasciaybefo?e  her. 

10  "3  loueo  her  abouc  h^lrh  ano 

£laqa  x        benune, 


*  lob.  10. 
12. 


»fob.i.»i. 
i.Timo.tf.7 


cfimsjrtrmt- 
hit  price. 


lit  J 


Apocrypha.  WifdomeofSolomon.    Apocrypha. 


•t.King.;. 
i  i.matc.  6. 
35- 


without 
tttlile. 
\  Gr.tr tlh- 
ont  enntc. 


\  Or,cnter 
{ricndfhiv 
•with  God. 

|  Or,  God 
grant. 

Or, arc  to 

ielpoksncf- 


tOrcrkf, 

onelybeoot- 
•0". 


bcauticanb  tbofc  to  hauc  h  c  r  in  fleab  of 
light  :foztfjc  ltgt)t  that  tommcth  from 
herneuergoethout. 

1 1  ail*  goob  things  together  tame 
to  me  unth  hct,anb  innumerable  riches 
inherhanbs. 

ii  anb  3  reioyecb  m  them  aii,beeanfe 
lbifcbomc  goeth  btfoje  them :  anb  3 
itneib  not  ttjat  (hee  tt>as  the  mother  of 
them. 

ij  3  learncb  t  Diligently ,  anb  Doe 
tommumtatehcr  tubcraiiy :  j Doc  not 
hibe  her  riches. 

14.  foi  (bee  ts  a  trcalurc  bnto  men 
that  ncuetfatletb :  rbbicb  they  tbatbfe, 
llbctome  the  fricnbsof<15ob:bctng  com- 
menbeb  fo2  the  gtfts  that  tome  from 
learning. 

is  dob  bath  Hgranteb  me  tofpeatte 
as  3  rboulb ,  anb  to  tonteiuc  as  is  meet 
fo2  the  things  ||  that  ate  gutenmee :  be- 
taufc  it  is  bee  that  leaoetb  bnto  rbifc- 
DomcaiiDDirettctbtbctbife. 

16  5F 02m  his  banb  arc  both  ttic  anb 
our  n>02bcs  :  all  tbifebome  alfo  anb 
Rnolblcbge  of  lb02fecnianfl)ip. 

17  5fo?  hee  hath  gtuen  mceecrtaine 
Rnolblcbgc  of  the  things  that  arc, 
namely  to  tmoib  hoib  the  Vbojlb  tbas 
mabctthc  operation  of  the  elements: 

is  Xbe  bcginmng,cnbing,anb  mibft 
of  the  times :  the  alterations  of  the 
turning  of  the  Sunne,  anb  the  change  of 
fcafons: 

19  Xhenrcuitsofrcrcs.anbthepo' 
fitionsofftarrcs: 

20  Xhe  natures  of  liuing  creatures, 
anb  the  furies  of  lbilbe  beads :  the  bio- 
lence  of  unnbes ,  anb  the  rcafomngs  of 
men :  thebiucrQncs  of  plants,  anb  the 
bertufsofrootes: 

21  anb  all  fuch  things  as  are  cither 
ferret  02  mamfelt :  them  3  tmolb. 

22  jfoztbifcbomeibhicliisthcibot: 
Her  of  all  thmgs,tanght  mee :  foj  in  her 
is  an  bnbcrlranbuig  fpint  holy  .tone 
oncly,  mamfolb,  fubtile,  Imely,cleare, 
bubculcb,piaine,notfiibicettohurt,lo^ 
utng  the  thing  that  is  goob  ,  quitac, 
ilihich  cauot  be  lettcb,teaDy  to  00  goob: 

25  Bmbctoman.ltcDfalf,  furcfree 
fromtarc,  haumg  all  poiber,  ouerfec 
tug  all  t!)ings ,  anb  going  through  all 
uiiDcrttanouig,  pure,  ano  moll  fubMc 
fpints. 

24  .fonbiu-bometsmoicmooutng 
then  anv  motion:  (bepaffctb  ano  goctt) 
tlKough  all  things  by  rcafon  of  her 
purcnefTe. 


25  ifoi  Ibeis  tbellbxeatb  of  thepolbcr 
of  000  anb  a  pure  ||  influence  flolbing 
from  the  gio^pof  the  almighty :  there; 
fo;c  tan  no  bnbefilcb  thing  fall  into  her. 

26  jfo2fbceistbc*b2igbtnciTcoftbe 
euerlamng  light :  the  bnfpotttb  mir; 
rour  of  the  poiber  of  ©ob,  aub  tbcj; 
mage  of  his  goobneffe. 

27  anbbemgbutoncfliecanboeail 
things :  anb  rcmaynmgm  her  felft ,  flic 
UmaHcth  all  things  netb :  anb  in  all 
ages  cutting  into  holy  foults,  (he  ma* 
Beth  them  fnenbs  of  <5ob,$  j&ophcts. 

t%  5F02  @oo  loueth  none  but  him, 
that  bibeiieth  lbitb  Vbifebome. 

19  3f02fl)eismo2cbcauttfultbentbc 
Smnne ,  anb  aboue  all  the  oibet  of 
ftarrcsbemgeompareb  forth  the  light, 
Iheisfounbbefojcit. 

30  if  02  after  this  commefh  night:  but 
bice  (hall  not  pjeuaile  agamft  Uj ifttomc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

!.  Heisin  louewithwifcdome:  4  Forhcthat 
hath  it ,  hath  cucry  good  thing.  11  It  can- 
not be  had,but  IromGod. 

ifdome  reacl)cth  from  one 
cnoe  to  another  mightily: 
anb  liuoectlyboethuieD?* 
ber  all  things. 

1  3  loueD  her  anb 

fought  her  out ,  from  my  youth  3  be- 

Dcfircb  ||  to  mane  her  my  fpoufe,  ano  3 

Uiasa  loucr  of  her  bcautie. 
3   31"  that  flje  is  conuerfant  tbifb 

dob  .(hcmagmficthher  nobiline  :yea, 

the  JL02D  of  all  things  bimfclfc  lo* 

ticbher. 
Ar  JF02  (be  is  ||  pjiuy  to  the  myftcrics 

of  the  unoibiebge  of  dob ,  anb  a  ||  louet 

ofhis\bo2hcs. 

5  3t  fiches  be  a  pofTcffion  to  be  be- 
fircb  m  this  life :  lbbat  is  ruber  tljcn 
\bttcbome  that  ibojbeth  all  thmgs  i 

6  3nb  if  *  p:iiocncc  lb02be ;  ibljo  of 
all  that  are ,  is  a  mo2e  cunning  U)Oirc< 
man  then  (he; 

7  aiibifamanlouerightcoufncfle, 
her  labours  are  bertucs :  fo;  fl)etcatl> 
cth  temperance  anb  pmbence :  luflice 
anb  fomtube ,  ibhirh  are  furl)  thmgs  as 
men  can  hauc  nothing  mo2e  piofitable 
m  their  life. 

8  3ifa  man bcfirt much  crpcrience: 
flichtioibcth  things  of  olb,  ano  coiucc 
turcth  aright  vbhat  is  to  come :  flice 
ftnoibcth  the  fubtiltics  of  fpeaclics, 
anb  can  crpoimo  barRc  fentcnecs : 

flic 


Pour. 
/Jrjtrcime. 


'Heb; 


r.i.j. 


||  Or,  err  a- 
leth. 


[  OrfTcjL 


\\Or,tomar- 
ry  iir  to  my 


]GrJrdcbtr, 
\OrtchH/,r, 


ExoJ. 


Apocrypha. 


Chap.ix.  Apocrypha. 


\Gr.nilL 


*Iob  j?,8, 
9,io,u. 


\\Cr,goucr»c 


\\0r^peari 


!! 


Orating 
sntred  into 
mine  houfe. 


'Prou.7.3 


\\0r,fo»t. 

I  Or,  m^rry 
her. 


1 0r,wiit. 


(be  fojcfcctlj  fignes  anb  lbonbets,  anb 
the  eucnts  of  rcaTons  anb  times* 

9  Xt)crcfo?egipui:pofcDtotaktI)et 
to  me  to  line  lbith  nice,  Knotting  that 
(bee  t  Vboulb  be  a  counfellour  of goob 
things,  ano  a  comfb2t  in  tares  9  gttefc. 

10  5F02  her  faftegj  (bail  baue  cfttma' 
rion  among  the  multitubc,  anb  honour 
ttntb  tbe€lbets,tbougb3f  bepong. 

11  3  (ball  be  founo  ota  cwicfec  ton* 
teitin  uibgcmcnt,  ano  (ball  bcabmiteb 
tn  the  Gght  of  great  men. 

ii  *t@hcn  3  bolb  mp  tongue  tbcp 
(balbibe  mp  leifutcanb  ttrtjengj  fpcafce 
the?'  (bail  giuc  goob  care  bnto  me :  if  3J 
taiuc  iiiuth ,  tbcp  fljau  lap  their  hanbts 
bpon  their  mouth. 

11  £0o2coucr,bptbcmcancsofber, 
3  (ball  obtatneimmonalittcanb  leane 
brhinbme  an  cucriaftingmemo2(alIto 
them  that  tome  after  me. 

14  3  ttjall  II  fet  the  people  in  ojber, 
anb  the  nations  tbaibc  fubicct  tmto  me. 

1$  $02rlblc  tpzants  (hall  be  afcaibe 
ibhcn  the?  boc  but  hcare  of  me ,  3  (ball 
be  ||founb  goob  among  tljc  multitubc, 
anbbaltantuitbarre. 

16  ||  Sifter  3  am  tome  into  mine 
houfe,3J  ttnll  rcpofc  mp  fclfc  tbith  her : 
fo2  her  tonuerfation  Ijatl)  no  bittcrncs, 
anb  to  Hue  iDitl)  her,  hath  no  fojroib, 
but  mirth  anb  top. 

17  0oYo  ttmen  3  eonfibcrcb  thefc 
things  mmpfclfc,  anb*ponbercbthcm 
in  mine  bcart,bolb  that  to  be  allpcb  ton* 
to  rmfcbome,tsimmojtalitie, 

is  3bib  great  pleafnre  tt  is  to  banc 
her  fncnbn)ip,anbinthett)0?Besofl)ct 
hanbs  arc  infinite  riches,  anb  in  the  er 
cretfe  of  confer ence  \bttb  htr,  pwbente : 
anbintalftingUiithhcra||goobrcpo2t: 
3  went  about  fcctang  botb  to  II  ta&e 
her  to  me. 

19  if 0;  3  rbas  a  xbittie  thilb.anb  hab 
agoobfpint. 

20  pta  rather  being  goob ,  3  tame 
intoabobpbnbcfilcb. 

ii  ^ciicrti)clea"cil»l)cu3Jpcrcciutb 
tljat^  toitlb  not  othcribifc  obtamchcr, 
ctcept  <5ob  gauc  her  me  (anb  that  itoas 
apomtofibtfDomcalfotolmomibhoft 
gift  (be  lbas) 3  WviW* tmto  thclLozb, 
anb  befought  bun,  anb  lbitl)  mplbljolc 
hcartgifaib: 

CHAP.    IX. 

I  A  prayer  vnto  God  tor  his  wildome,  6  w  ilh- 
out  which  the  belt  man  is  nothing  worth, 
13  neither  can  he  tellhowtopIeal'eGod. 


•Cen.i.iS 


*i.Kin.3.5. 


•Pfal.uS. 
16. 


*i.C!iron. 


(Bob  of  mp  fathers,  anb 
?Lojbof  mcrcp,  lbho  hatt 
mabe  ail  things  ttntb  tbv 
tbojb, 
2  3nb  ojbaineb  man 
th?ougl)  tbp  Vbifcbomc,  that  he  (boulb 
hauc  *  bomimon  ouet  the  creatures, 
Vbljichthonhattmabe, 

3  2nbojbcrthcib02lbacco:bingto 
cciuitieanbrigljteoufnciTe,  anb  crccutc 
lubgcment  tbitb  an  bpnghtljcact : 

4  d5iue  *me  rbtfebomc  that  fitteth 
bp  tbp  Xbzone,  anb  reicctmc  not  from 
among  tbpcbtlbjen: 

5  5F02  3 '  tbp  feruant  anb  fonne  of 
thine  hanbmaibe,  am  a  feeble  pcrfon, 
anb  of  a  fbo:t  time,  anb  too  poung  foi 
the  bnberftanbing  of  iubgement  anb 
laibes. 

6  $o;  tbougb  a  man  be  ncuer  fo 
perfect  among  the  tbiltycnofmcn,  pet 
if  tbp  ibtfebomc  be  not  Uiith  bim ,  bee 
(ball  be  nothing  regarbeb. 

7  Xboubattcbofcnmetobeauing 
of tbp people,  anbagjnbgcoftbpfous  **£•*• 
aubbaugbters: 

s  1Cbou  haft  tommaunbeb  me  to 
builb  aXcmplc  bpon  tbpholvmount, 
anb  an  3ltar  m  the  ntp  ibbercm  thou 
btt)clicft,arcfcmblance  ofthebolplEai 
bemaele  mrjtth  thou  haft  pjepareb 
from  me  beginning: 

9  3nb  *  lbifcbomc ttiasibitb  tl)cc : 
itofticb  nnotbeth  tbpttwlics.aubibas 
p?efent  tbhen  thou  mabeft  the  Hwlb, 
anb  mtetb  aijat  ibas  acceptable  mthv 
fight,  anb rtght  tn  tb?  Commauttbc 
ments. 

10  d)  fenb  Ijcr  out  of  tbj>  bob'  hea 
nens,  anb  from  the  lEbzonc  of  tbv  gio 
rp,  that  being  pzefent  (bee  map  labour 
vbitb  mec ,  tbat  3  map  fniolb  ibljat  is 
plcafmgbntotbee. 

1 1  ifoz  (be  fenotbetb  anb  bnbctftaiv 
bctbailtbings,anb(bce  ftiau  icabc  me 
foberlp  in  mp  boings ,  anb  pjefcrue  me 

mberpoibcr. 

12  £>o  (l)aiimp«)02liesbeatccpta 
ble ,  anb  tben  (bail  li  tubgc  tbv  people 
tigbtconflp ,  anbbcU)o.2tbpto  fitui  mp 
fathers  feate. 

15  fot  u>bat  man  is  bee  tbat  tan 
ImoU)  the  tounfcll  of  <5ob  <  02  lbbo  can 
tbinnc  lbhattbc  Vbtli  of  t!ic?io:bis; 

14.  5Fo2tbetboughtsofmo2tall!ncn 
are||mifcrablc,anb  our  bcmccsarc  but 
bntertaine. 

15  JF02  the  co2rupnblc  bob)'  pzciTcth 

bolbnctbcfoulc,  anb  the  tarchp  taber 

£laaa  5 nacic 


'Pro.  S.:2 
ioh.i.:,;, 


tyha 


power  or 


I  ,C\  :   l.l6 


Apocrypha.  Wifedome  of  Solomon,  Apocrypha. 


t  Gn.at 
hand. 


'Gen. 1.20. 

•Ccn.^.8. 

*  Gen.  7. 21 
*Gcn.n.9 


*Gcn.  22. 

logcn-i^. 

16. 

t  Cjre.  Pcn- 
jpo/u. 


nacle  ibctgheth  boUmc  the  mmbetbat 
mulct!)  Upon  man?  tilings. 

16  ^nbharblvbocibegcfle  aright  at 
tilings  that  arc  topon  earth,  anbttnrh 
labourboctbcc  finb  the  things  thatare 
fbefinebs :  but  the  things  that  arc  tn 
beauen,tt)bo  bath  fearrtjeo  out  i 

17  3inb  tbv  tounfcli  tbho  bath  snotb* 
en ,  ercept  thou  gfue  lbtfebome,anb  fenb 
tbv  boiv  fpicit  from  aboue < 

18  if 0?  to  tlje  ibavcs  of them  tbhtcb 
liucbon  the  earth  ibcrercfinmeb,  anb 
men  iberc  taught  the  things  thatare 
pleating  bnto  thee ,  anD  ibere  faucb 
through  tbtfebome. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  V7hat  wifedome  did  for  Adam,  4  Noe,  5  A- 
braham,  6  Lot,  andagainft  the  fiue  cities, 
10  forlacob,  13  Iofcph,  16  Mofes,  17  and 
the  Ifraelites. 

f$e  pjcferucb  ttjc  firO  fin* 
■J  men  fartjee  of  the  mojio 
&h  that  ibas  crcatcb  alone, 
Jys  anD  bzougbt  Ijim  out  of 
?&  bis  fan, 
i  Znn  *  gaue  bun  poiber  to  rule  all 
things. 

j  'ffiuttbben  tbebnrighteousitoent 
aibavfrombcrinbisattger,bcpertft)eb 
alfo  in  the  fury  IbberlbttI,  benutrbcreb 
his  pother. 

4  5Fo?tt»hoIetaufcfhc*earthbeing 
b?ottmcb  tturt)  the  floob,  natfebome  a 
gamcpzcfcrucbit,  fbtrccteb  thetourfc 
of  the  righteous, in  a  piece  of  lboob,  of 
final!  lu  1  uc. 

5  $&oico\xtt,  *  the  nations  in  their 
iiucKcti  confpiraeic  being  confounbeb, 
(he  founb  out  the  rigbtcous,anb  pjefer* 
ucb  him  biainclcflc  bnto  <£>ob,  anb  bept 
htm  ttrong  ||  againft  bis  tenber  compafc 
fion  toibaros  his  fonne. 

6  'nabmtbebngoblvpctffbeb.fbce 
bcUucrcb  the  righteous  man,  ibbo  f[tn 
from  the  ftrc rbljtcl)  fcllborbne bpon  tlje 
t  fiuertttcs. 

7  £>f  ibhofc  ibieftebnefle  euen  to 
this  bap  the  ibatteianbtbatfmobctb,ts 
atclrtmotttc,  anb  plants  bearing  fruite 
that  ncucr  come  to  ripcticffc:  anb  a  flan? 
tm  ig  pillar  of  fait  is  a  monument  of  an 
bubeleeuingfoule. 

8  fax  rcgarbtngnot  tbtfebomcthep 
gate  not  only  this  hurt,  that  tbcpBnctb 
not  the  things  lbhuh  Vbere  goob :  but 
alfo  left  behtnb  them  to  the  \b02lb  a  me* 
mojtail  of  their  fooltfbncs :  fo  that  tn 


the  things  ibheretn  trjrp  offenbeb,  tbev 
coulb  not  fo  much  as  be  hib. 

9  But  lutfcDomc  bebueteb  from 
patne  thofe  thatattenbeb  bpon  her. 

10  i©bcn  the  righteous  deb  front  his 
bjotbcrsttnafb.fbe  gutbeb  him  tn  right 
paths :  fhetbeb  him  the  kingbomc  of 
00  l)  :  attb  gaue  him  bnolblebge  of  ho 
h>  things, mabe  him  rich  in  hts tea* 
uatles,  anb  multtplteb  the  fruit  ot  btsbv 
bottrs. 

1 1  3fn  the  couetoufnefTc  of  fuch  as 
oppzettcb  htm ,  the  ftoob  by  bim,  anb 
inaDcbintrtrb. 

\z  htyt  befenbeb  him  from  his  cne* 
mics,anb  bept  him  fafc  from  thofe  that 
lay  mibait.aub  m  a  lo:c  conflict  iljcgatie 
him  the  btetojv,  that  be  might  bnolbc 
that  goblutcffc  is  ftrongcr  then  ail. 

13  *  i©hen  ttic  righteous  ibas  folbe, 
mcftnfoo&ebunnot,butbehucrcbbim 
from  fmnc :  fl)c  ibcnt  boibnc  tbith  ijun 
into  the  pit, 

14  anDleftbimnotinbonbSttUfbc 
brought  htm  the  ftepter  of  the  bingbom 
anb  1 1  potter  againft  thofe  that  oppjef* 
feb  htm :  as  fo?  them  that  ba&aceufcb 
him  ,fhc  fbeibcb  them  to  be  iters,  anb 
gaue  them  pcrpctuaugiojv. 

15  *;£>bcbcltuercb fhc[[rtghteouSpeo* 
plc,anb  biamcleffc  fceb  from  the  nation 
tljat  oppjefleb  them. 

i6  £>be  entreb  into  tf)e  fonle  of  the 
fcrnant  of  the  Hojb ,  anb  *  rbtthftoob 
bjeabfttli  sings  in  tbonbers  anb  fignes, 

17  Benb^eb  to  the  righteous  a  re^ 
vbarb  of  their  labours,  gutbeb  them  in 
a  1  iiaruciioiis  lba  v  ^inb  ibas  bnto  them 
fo?  a  toner  by  ba?,anb  a  light  l|  of  ftarres 
mrbemghtfeafon: 
18  *26?ought  them  through  the  rcb  fea, 
anb  leb  them  thojotb  mttthlbater. 

19  But  ftjc  b^oibneb  rtjetr  enemies, 
anbcaftthcinbp  out  of  tlje  bottontc  of 
tbebcepc. 

20  iChcrcfo.ic  the  righteous  fpoileb 
tlictongoblp,?*p;au"ebthpholviI5ame, 
£>1Lo?b,  anb  magnifieb  ttnth  one  at* 
tojb  thine  hanb  that  fought  fo?  them. 

11  jFojtbifcbome  opencb  the  mouth 
of  the bumbc, anb  maoc  the  tongues  of 
themthat  cannot  fpeabe,  elociuent. 

CHAP.   XI. 

5  The  Egyptians  were  punifhed,  and  the  Ifrae- 
lites rcicrued  in  the  fame  thing.  15  They  were 
plagued  by  the  fame  things.wherein  they  fin- 
ned. 10  God  could  haue  drftroyed  them  o- 
therwife,  13   but  he  ismercifulltoall. 

fi>he 


•Gra.37. 

38&J9.  7- 
a(3s7.io. 


[Or,  lit 

penerof 

thrmtfuu 

rultdoHer 

him. 

*£xo.i.io. 
andu.42. 
l|  Or,  hclj. 


'  Exod.j.i 


\\Or,jUmt. 

*Eiod.  1  4. 
ii.H.pfal, 
78. ij. 


Eio. 


Ij.l 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xj.xij.  Apocrypha. 


'Exod. 
[6*. 1. exod 
7.10,1 1. 


•Exod  7. 
Jo. 


!  Or,  percei 
tci. 


«?cp20fpereD  their  Wojrs 
m  tlje  hano  of  tljc  holp 
£;ophct. 
x  *1Cfjep  Went  tf)o 
trough  the  WrtDerncfTc 
tljat  was  not  mijabitcD ,  anD  pttchcb 
tents  hi  plates  u»!jcrc  there  lap  no  map. 
j  XhcpffooDagainltthctrenemtes, 
ano  were  ancngco  of  their  abuerfaries. 

4  ©ben  tfjcr  were  tljrcCtv  thep  cai 
icd  Ppon  tbec ,  ano  water  was  giucn 
them  out  of  ttjc  fltntp  rotRC,  anD  tfjnr 
thirtt  was  qucwbcD  out  of  the  harD 
(tone. 

5  Jfo?  bp What thingsfbeir  enemies 
ttterc  putufbcD,bp  ttjc  fame  thep  in  tljctr 
neeDeWcrebcncfncb. 

6  5fo,i  in  Beau  of  a  fotmtame  of  a  pec* 
pctuail  running  nutr ,  troubled  With 
foulcbiooD, 

7  5roj  a  mamfeft  repjoofc  of  that 
tommanoement,  Wbcrebpthc  infants 
Were  flame,  tljou  gaucft  bnto  tljema- 
bunoantc  of  water  bp  a  ntcatics  which 
tljephopebnotfoj, 

s  Declaring  bp  that  tbirft  tfjen, 
*how  tljou  ijaoftputufbeDtljcitaDucr; 
fartcs. 

9  jfo?  When  thep  Were  trpcD, albeit 
but  in  iner  tp  chafhfcD,  tbcp&neWljoW 
the  PngoDIp  tticrc  lUDgcDmwjatijanD 
tomtcntcD  tbirftmg  m  another  maner 
then  the 'Juft. 

10  JF02  tbcfe  tbon  DtDft  aomomfl), 
anbtric  as  a  father:  but  tl)e  ofljct  as  a 
feuerc  King  tljou  Dibit  tonbemnc  anb 
punifl). 

11  nabctber  thep  were  abfcnt^pzc; 
fent.tbcp  werctocrcb  ait&e. 

a  ifo«s  a  bouble  gricfc  tame  bpon 
them ,  anD  a  groaning  to?  the  cement; 
bjance  of  things  paff. 

ij  foi  uilicn  tbcp  Heart  bp  time 
oWucpumfbmcnts  the  other  to  be  be 
nefitcD ,  tljcpll  IjaD  fomc  feeling  of  the 
ILojD. 

14  5roj  Whom  tlicp  rcicctcD  With 
ftomc  When  lice  was  long  bcfo?c 
rtnowcnoutattbecafting  fo?tlj °Fthc 
infa.us,  him  in  the  cnb.Wbcn  thep  faw 
What  came  to  paffctbcp  amnircD, 

15  25ut  fo;  the  foolifl)  Dcuifcs  of tfteir 
WicRebncffc ,  wbcreWitb  being  Deter 
ucd  ,  tbcp  woribtppcD  rerpents  bopD  of 
reafon,  anbtiile  beads  ttbottDiDltfcnb 
amultitubc  of  bttrcatonablc bcaftsPp 
ontl)tinfo:Dcngcantc, 

16  Xliat  tbcp  might  UnoVbc  that 
tbrjercibitljau  a  man  fmnctb ,  bp  tlje 


famealto  (ball  Ijcbc  pmufbcD. 

17  5Fo?  tljp  2Umigbtp  Ijanb  that 
mane  the  W02ID  of  matter  Without 
tonne,  wanteb  not  meancs  to  fenba 
mongtljcm  a  multituDcofffiearcs,  01 
fierce  jLpons, 

is  €)^bnhnotbentbflbbtaftsnillof 
rage  ncWlp  crcatco ,  bzcathmg  out  ci- 
ther a  ficrp  bapour  ■  0;  filtljp  fents  of 
fcattcreofhtoaRc,  oj  (booting  Ijojnblc 
fparUles  out  of  their  epes : 

19  naljcrcof  not  onelp  the  fiarme 
might  bifpatcl)  tDcm  at  once:  but  alto 
tljetctriblefigljtbttcrlpbcflToptlKm. 

zo  jsca  anb  Without  tljcfc  migl)  t  thtp 
Ijaue  faiicnboiPnc  ibith  one  blafl.bcmg 
perfccutcDofbnigcante,  anb  fcattcrcD 
abioab  thorough  tljc  b:cath  of  tljp 
po  iDcr,  but  thou  haft  ojbereb  all  things 
m  mcafurcanb  number , anb  vucight. 

ii  foi  tljou  canft  fljcU)  thp  great 
ftrcngtlj  at  all  times  when  tljou  lDiir, 
anb  UjIjo  mapUJitljftanDthepouJct  of 
thine  arme< 

it  ifoithc whole tbozlbbcfojcthcc 
isasa  litlt||gralncof  tlje  baiiancc,  pea 
asabjop  of  the  momrngbewtljat  fai 
leth  bowneppon  the  earth. 

2j  23ut  thou  Ijaft  mcrcp  Ppon  all : 
to:  tljou  canfl  doc  all  things,  anbttnn 
Heft  at  the  fumes  of  men :  becaufc  thep 
fl)Ottlb  amenb. 

14  jfo?  thou  loucft  all  the  things 
that  ate,  anb  abhorred  nothing  Wbicli 
thou  haft  maoe :  foz  ueuer  woulbcft 
tljou  h'auc  mabcanp  tljmg,  if  tljou  habft 
IjatcDit. 

15  ^nb  IjoW  coulb  anp  thing  hatic 
cnburcD  if  it  IjaD  notbccncthpwilko: 
bccncpicferucDjfnottailcDbpthcc; 

16  26ut  thou  fpar  eft  all :  fonhep  arc 
fljmc,  )©  JLo«!D,tljou  loner  of  tonics. 

CHAP.    XII. 

t    God  did  notdeftroy  tliofe  of  Caiuanallai 
once,    i!   If  lie  had  do;iefo,who  could  con- 
tioll  him?    19   but  by  /paring  them  hec 
taught  vs,    17    they  were  punifhed  with 
Gods. 

£)}  thine  bntojruptiblc 
fpint  ism  all  things. 
1  Xhcrcto2C  chalmcfl- 
^  thou  them  bp  little,  anb  lit; 
J&  tic  that  offcuD ,  anb  War 
iicfftljcmbp  putting  them  in  remem 
bMntc.Wherm  thep  hauc  off  cnoeb,  that 
leaning  their  WtchcDucflc  thepmapue 
lecucouthccsD?Lo;b. 
3   jfo;  it  was  thp  will  to  bcttrop  bp 

the 


Apocrypha.   WifdomeofSolomon.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,firct- 


|j  Or,  new  in- 
huhiunce. 

"Exod.  33. 


"Ccn.p. 


"  Rom.  9. 
:o. 


\Or,inlhj 

prefence. 

UOr^re- 


'I.Pct.57 


lob  10.  1. 


the  hanbes  of  our  fathers,  both  tbofc 
I!  010  inhabitants  of  tt)V  holy  lanb, 

4  nahom  tljou  hatcbft  for  Doing 
moft  obious  lborltes  of  ||  witchcrafts, 
anbibicucbfacnfices; 

5  3lnb  aifo  tbofc  mertilefle  mutbe* 
rcrs  of  chilbren  ,$  beuourersof  mans 
flcfb,anb  the  fcafts  of  bloob; 

6  iBith  their  0ricfts  out  of  the  mibtt 
of  their  iboiatrous  treib,anbthe pa- 
rents tljat  miicD  xtittf)  their  oflme 
hanos,  fbulcs  beftitute  of  hclpc : 

7  3Cbat the  lanb  ibhich  thou  crtcc- 
mebftabouc  all  other,  might  rcteutca 
ibortby  II  colonic  of  ©obs  cbtlbrcn. 

s  jftcucrtheleOe,  cuen  thore  thou 
fparebftas  men,  anb  bibft  fenb  *roafpcs 
forerunners  of  thine  hofte ,  to  beftroy 
them  by  little  anb  little. 

9  jiSotthattbouibaftbnable  to  bring 
the  bngobly  bnber  the  hanb  of  the  rtgl> 
tcous  m  batten,  or  to  beftroy  them  at 
once  ibith  trucl  bcaftcs,  or  ibith  one 
rough  lborb: 

10  nsut  executing  thy  inbgements 
bpon  them  belittle  anb  little,  thouga- 
tieft  them  place  of  rcpcntanccnot  being 
ignorant  that  they  ibere  anaugbttege^ 
ncratton ,  anb  that  their  malitc,  ibas 
brcb  in  them ,  anb  that  their  togttation 
Vboulb  ncucr  bethangeb. 

1 1  jforttlbasa'curfcbfccb.fcom  the 
beginning,  neither  bibft  thou  for  fcarc 
of  any  mangiuethemparbonforthofc 
things  ibherem  they  Gnneb. 

ii  jforibhofbaufay,  *nahathaft 
tboubone;  oribhotbauibifbftanb  thy 
lubgcmcnt ,  or  ibho  (ban  atrufc  thee  fo: 
the  nations  that  pcrtth  lbbom  thou 
haft  mabc  <  or  ibbo  fljail  come  to  1 1  ftanb 
againft  thcc,to  be  ||reucngebfor  tbebu- 
righteous  men; 

1  j  if  or  neither  is  there  any  <5ob  but 
thou,that  *careth  for  ail,to  lbhom  thou 
mightcft  fbcib  that  tfjp  uibgcmcnt  is 
notbnrtght. 

14  Neither  (ball  fting  or  tyrant  bee 
able  to  fct  his  fate  agamft  tbec,forany 
lbhom  thou  haft  pumfbeb. 

1$  ifor  fo  much  thnt  as  thou  art 
righteous  thy  fclfc,  thou  orbcreft  all 
things  rightcotiny  :*  thinking  it  not  a- 
grceablclbitb  thy  poibcrtoconbcmnc 
him  p  hath  not  befcrueb  to  be  pumfbeb. 

is  jfor  thy  polbcr  is  the  beginning 
of  righteoufucfrc ,  anb  becaufc  tljou  art 
the  Horb  of  all ,  it  maRcth  thee  to  be 
gracious  bnto  all. 

17  Jfor  ibhen  men  ibill  not  beleeuc, 


that  thou  art  of  a  II  full  polbcr,  thou 
(beibcft  tbyftrcngtb,  anbamongthem 
that  tmoibtt ,  thou  matted  their  bolD 
neffemamfeft. 

18  26ut  thou,  mattering  thy  polbcr, 
iubgeft  ibith  equine ,  anb  orbercft  bs 
ibitb  great  fauour :  for  thou  mayeft  bfe 
polbcr  Ibbcntbouibilt. 

19  2But  by  fuch  iborucs  haft  thou 
taught  thy  people,  that  the  tuft  man 
(boulbbe  mertifull,  anbbattmabctby 
cbtibrmtobcofagoobbopc,thattbou 
giueft  repentantefor  Gnncs. 

20  ifor  if  thou  bibft  punift)theenes 
mies  of  thy  thilbren,  anb  the  conbem- 
ncb  to  bcath  ibitb  filth  belibcrarton,  gf* 
uing  them  time  anb  piaee,ibbcrby  they 
might  be  bciiucrcb  from  their  malice. 

21  nauh  boib  great  circumfpeetton 
bibbeft  thou  iubge  thine  oibnc  fonnes, 
bnto  ibhofe  fathers  thou  haft  fmornc, 
anb  mabc  coucnants  of  goob  promifcSf 

25  Xbcrefore  lbbercas  thou  bocft 
chaftenbs,  thouftourgeft  our  enemies 
a  thoufanb  times  more,  to  the  intent 
that  lbhcntbcciubge,  lbcefboulbcarc 
fully  tbume  of  thy  go  obneffe,  anb  ibhen 
lbc  our  felucs  arc  uibgcb ,  ibec  fljoulb 
looftc  for  mercy. 

2 j  uabereforc,  lbbercas  men  baue 
Uucb  bifToluttly  anb  bnrightcoufly, 
thou  haft  tormentco  them  lbulj  their 
oumc  h  abominations. 

24  *Jfortheyibentaftraybetyfarrc 
in  the  lbaycs  of  crrour ,  ?  helb  them  for 
gobs(ibl)icb  eucu  amongft  the  bcatts  of 
their  enemies  lbcrc  bcfpifcb)  being  be; 
ceiucb  as  chilbrcn  of  no  bnbcrftanbmg. 

25  Xhercforc  bnto  them ,  as  to  ti)u> 
b:cn  ibithout  tl)c  bfe  of  rcafon,  thou 
btbft  fenb  a  iubgement  to  motac  them. 

26  26ut  tliey  that  Ibonlb  notbec  re* 
fourmeb  by  that  correction  ibherem  he 
bameb  ibith  them ,  (bail  feele  a  iubgc^ 
mentiborthyofoob. 

27  Jforlooacforibhattljingsthey 
gnibgcb  Ibhen  they  lbcrc  pumfbeb, 

i  (that  is)  for  them  lbhom  they  thought 
to  be  gobs ,  [nolb]  being  punilheb  m 
them ;  ibhen  they  faib  it,  they  atnnoib; 
lebgebhim  to  be  the  true  ©ob ,  ibhomc 
before  they  benyeb  to  bnolb :  anb  there* 
fore  tame  crtrcmc  bamnation  bpon 
them. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Theywcrcnotexcufcdtliatwoifhipped  any 
of  Gods  workes :  10  But  moft  wretched  arc 
they  that  worfhip  die  works  of  mens  hands. 

_ .        Purely 


\\Oricrf,a. 


\Orte}am':- 
notle  idaUs. 

*Ch.ip.  11. 
15.10m.  I. 
J3. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xnj.xiii  j .  Apocrypha. 


Rom.  l 
dcut.4.1 
and  17.3. 


"Rom.t.J 
||  Or,f«kt. 


"Tfai  44  » 3 
\\Or,timtc. 
vtrtght. 


\\Or,(hipt 


that  is 


Slrely  name  arc  all  men 
by  nature ,  lbho  are  igno 
rant  of  <3ob,aub  cottio  not 
_  out  of  the  goot)  things 
ysithat  are  fecne ,  tmoib  him 
neither  by  coufibcting  the 
itoo?fccs ,  bib  the?  acfcnoiblcbgc  the 
ibo?Kc-  matter. 

z  *a3uttocemcoctthcrrttt,o?n>inb, 
a:  theftmft  air  c,02  tlje  circle  of  the  (tars, 
02  the  lnoleut  lbatcr ,  02  the  lights  of 
ftcaiien  to  be  the  gobs  which  gonernc 
the  llioilb: 

j  oaitlj  Vbhofc  beautie ,  if  they  being 
beughtcb ,  toofce  them  to  be  gobs :  let 
them  twoiD  hoib  math  better  the  H020 
of  them  is  i  fo2  the  firft  2lutho?  of  beau- 
tie  hath  crcatco  them. 

4  26nt  if  they  lbcrc  afiouifhcb  at 
their  potbet  anb  bertuc ,  let  them  bn^ 
actfianb  by  them,  holfc  much  mightier 
hetsthatmabethem. 

5  foi  by  the  gccatncffc anb beautte 
of  the  creatures ,  p2opo?tionably  the 
tT9ahcrofthemtsfcenc. 

6  25ut  vet  fo2  this  they  arc  the  ictte 
to  bee  biamcb :  fo2  they  pcrabucnturc 
crrc  fecmngoob,  atibbefirous  tonnbe 

him. 

7  5*02  being  *  conucrfant  m  his 
lb02Bes,  theyiifearth  him  bHigcntty, 
auo  bcleeue  their  fight :  brcaufc  the 
things  arc  beannfull  that  arc  fecne. 

3  iaoWbcit ,  neither  are  they  to  bee 
parboncb.  ,    M  „ 

9  f  0?  if  they  Were  able  to  fenotb  fo 
much , that  they  coulb  atme  at  thcwwlb; 
hoiD  bib  they  not  foonec  tmbcout  the 
JLom  thereof  v 

to  25ut  mifcrablc  arc  they,  anb  m 
btab  things  is  their  hope,  lbhocaiicb 
them  gobs  which  are  the  wo?fecs  ot 
mens  hanbs,  goioc  anb  filucr,to  fhewe 
arte  in, anb  cefcmbianccs  of  bcaBs,o?  a 
Gone  go  ob  f  02  nothing,  the  Wo?fec  of  an 
ancicnthanb.  ,  „  _  ^ 

11  *  j3ow  a  i|  tacpentet  that  fclleth  run; 
bcr,  after  hec  hath  fatten  ooWne  a  tree 
mcctfo2thcpurpofc,  anb  talunott  all 
the  batue  fmifuuv  tonno  about ,  anb 
hath  thought  it  hatwfoincly ,  9  maoc 
a  heflctt  thereof  fit  fo?  the  ftruice  of 

"n^nb  afterfpciibingthellrcfnfcof 
histbo2Uctob:effeh'.smcat,hathftilcb 

iiutifctfc  '• 
13  anbtaHuigthctocry rcfufcamoiig 

thofc  which  feriico  to  no  bfc  (bemga 
ccooHcbpiccc  of  iboob,anb  nil  of  Knots) 


hath  carueb  it  bilignitly  lbhcn  hec  hab 
nothing  clfe  to  boc,  anb  fonncbu  by  the 
fftill  of  his  bnberttanbiug,  anbfaflr.o; 
ucb  it  to  the  tmagc  of  a  man : 

1+  j£>?  mabc  it  lifec  fomebilc  beaft, 
layuig  it  oner  with  bernv.'uon  ,  anb 
With  paint,  colounng  it  rcb,  anbeouc; 
nngcucryfpot  therein: 

15  3nb  lbhcn  he  hab  mabe  a  conuc^ 
tiicntronmcfo?it,  fctit  ma  ibau,  anb 
mabe  it  fail  With  y?on: 

is  iff  0?  he  p20iubcb  fo?  it,that  it  might 
notfaiwfenowmgthatitwasbnablcto 
hctpc  it  fclfc,(fa?  it  is  an  image  anb  hath 
nccbcofhclpe:) 

17  %i)tn  maficth  hee  p?avct  fo?  his 
goobs,  fo?  his  lbifc  anb  rhiioira ,  anb  is 
not  athamcb  to  fpcaae  to  rhat  Which 
hath  no  life. 

is  f 0?  hcaith,hcc  calicthbponfhat 
Which  is  Wcabe  .•fo?iifc,p?aycth  to  that 
ibhuh  is  beab:  rb?  aibchumbly  befce^ 
chctht  that  Which  hath  irattmeancsto 
hclpc:  aubfo?  a  goob  (ourney,  hee  at 
Hetb  of  ttjat  Which  caunotfet  afootfo?* 
warb: 

19  3liib  fo?  gaining  anb  getting,  anb 
fo?  goob  futteffe  of  his  Ijanbs,  affceth 
abilitittoboc,  ofhimthatismoftbna; 
ble  to  botany  thing. 

CHAP.    XI I II. 

i  Though  men  doe  not  pray  totheirfhippes, 
5  Yet  arc  they  (ailed  rather  bv  them  then 
by  their  Idoles.  8  Idoles  are  acoufed, 
and  fo  are  die  makers  oi  diem.  14  The 
beeinnino  ofldolatrie,  15  And  the  effects 
thereof.  30  God  wilpur.ilh  them  that  fwcare 
falfely  by  their  Idoles. 

'$$&,■&£*$  <3auic,oncp?cparinghini' 

il^via? fclfc  t0  fa,lt ' anD  about  t0 

&v^w|  paflt  th?ough  the  raging 
^M  ibaucs  ,  caucth  upon  a 
,  Jsd!s  piece  of  iboob  nio?c  rotten 

thenthe  1  bcffclltliatrarictl)  htm. 
x  jfo?  bcrely  befire  of  game  bcuifeb 
that,  anb  thcwo?fecman  builtit  by  his 

Hull: 
j  25ut  thy  p?onibcnte ,  O  .father, 

gouerncth  it :  fo?  thou  hafl  *  mabe  a 

may  in  the  3>ca ,  anoafafepath  m  the 

Humes : 

4  ^Dhtibiug  that  thou  tantt  fauc 
from  ail  banger :  yea  though  a  man 
lDcntto&caibithoutartc. 

5  jHcucrrhcicfTc  thou  mouibcft  not 
thatthett'o?nsofthytbifcoomcn)ouib 
be  ible,  anb  thcrcfo?c  oocmen  tomtntt 

their 


tgr.tba, 

hjrb  no  rx- 


\\Or,vrfiU 
irfiif. 

•Enod.14 


Apocrypha.  Wifedome  of  Solomon.  Apocrypha. 


"Gen.64. 

and  7. 10. 


•Pfal.ii  5. 

8.ba:uc.6.j 


'Pfslj-S. 


I  Or,  tier 
"J- 


•Icr.10.8. 
abac.  2 . 1 8, 
f  gre.  fiax. 
Atdtt. 
\[Or,lr*p. 


\Grt in  time 


\\Or,tjrentl 
J]  Orjnjigkl 


t  Dr  1  r  iiuc0  to  afmau  piece  of  tboob,  anb 
pairing  the  rough  fta  in  atbeabe  beffcU, 
arcfaucb. 

6  'jfforut  the  olb  time  aifotbDen  the 
pronb  gvant 0  pcnfljcD ,  the  Dope  of  t\)t 
tborlb  gouerneb  bp  trjp  Daub,  cfcapeb  in 
a  tbearte  toeffctl ,  anb  left  to  all  ages  a 
fceu  of  generation. 

7  jforbletTebtstbelboob.tbberfbp 
righteoufneCfc  commeth. 

8  ffiut  that  tbhtcb  is  mate  tbttb 
banbs,tscurfeb,afajcll'tt,  asbecthat 
mabe  it:  bc,bccaufcbemabeit,anbtt, 
bctaufe  being  corruptible  it  tbas  called 

C50b. 

9  'jfortbebngoblpanbhlsbngob 
lines  arc  both  antic  Datcfnii  bnto  e>  0  b. 

10  if 0*  tbat  tbbicb  is  mabe,  than  bee 
pumfbeb  together  tbitb  Dint  tDat 
mabe  it. 

11  lEberforecuenbpon  lithe  ibolcs  of 
the  ©entiles  (ball  tberc  be  a  bifitation : 
bccaufctntDetreature  of  @ob  tbep  arc 
become  an  abomination  anb  *tftnnu> 
hng  bloctts  to  the  fonles  of  men,  anb  a 
HfnaretotDcfeetoftDcbnibtfe. 

ii  f  or  the  bemung  of  ibolcs  tbas  tbe 
beginning  of<F'tuaifornication,anb  tbe 
inucntionoftDemtDc  corruption  of  life. 

13  5for  neitbtr  tberc  tDep  from  tbe 
begtnnmg,nettDcr  (ball  tDep  be  for  euer. 

14  ;tforbpfbebameglorpofmcntDcp 
entrtbinto  tDc  tborlb,  anb  therefore 
(ball  tDep  come  tbortlp  to  an  enb. 

15  ;#or  a  fatbec  afflictcb  tbttD  bn- 
timely  mourning ,  tbbtn  be  Datb  mabe 
an  image  of  Dis  chtloe  foone  tauen  a 
tbap ,  noib  bononreb  him  as  a  gob, 
ibbich  tbastbenabcab  man,  anb  belt- 
ncrebto  tbofe  tbat  tberc  bnber  bim,cc* 
rcmomesanofacn&tes. 

i6  XDustmprocetTeofrtmeanbn* 
goblp  cuftome  grotben  ftrong,  tbas 
fecpt  as  a  latb,anb  grancn  images  tbere 
ibo:fl)ippcb  bp  the  tommanbements of 

Rings, 

17  i©boni  "it"  toulb  not  honour  ||  m 
prefcucc ,  becaufe  tfjcv  btbtlt  farrc  off, 
tbcptooUctDc  counterfeit  of  bis  bifage 
from  farre,  anb  mabe  an  crpreffc  unagc 
of  a  femg  lbbom  tlirp  Donoureb ,  to  the 
enb  tDat  bptbts  there  fortbarbnes,  tDep 
might  flatter  htm  that  tbas  abfent,as  tf 
Dctbcrcprcfcnt. 

13  2lfo  tbcfingnlarbiligenteoftht 
artificer  bib  Dclpc  to  fttfortbarb  the  ig- 
norant to  morefupcrflition. 

19  foi  be  pcrabucnture  tbtllmg  to 
plcafe  one  in  aiuDorme,  forceb  all  Ins 


null  to  matte  the  refemblance  tof  the 
bcQfaflnon. 

20  ano  fo  tbcmultitubc  ailurcb  bp 
the  grace  of  tDetbor&e,  toobeDmmotb 
for  a  gob,  tbDitb  a  utie  before  tbas  but 
Donoureb  as  a  man. 

21  3nbtbis  tbas  an  octaDon  to  be- 
tetuetbetborlb:formenfermng  euber 
caiamitte  or  tpranme ,  btb  aftribc  bnto 
(tones,  anb  ftocbts,  tDctncommumta= 
ble[|4i5ame. 

22  £+9oreoncr  this  tbas  not  enough 
for  them ,  that  thep  errcb  in  the  imotb; 
lebgc  of  Oob.but  ibbereas  thep  Uueb  in 
the  great  tbarre  of  ignorance,  tbotc  fo 
great  plagues  ealieb  tDcp  peace. 

23  iror tbhrteft tDcp *Oetb  tljeir tDfc 
bren  iutacnfices,  or  bub  fecrct  tercmo* 
mcs,or  mabe  rcucllmgs  of  Orange  rites 

24.  lEDepReptneitDer  lines  nor  mfc 
riagesanp  longer  bnbcfileb :  but  cither 
oneOctt)  another  trattcrottflp,  or  grie- 
ucbbimbpabnltcnc: 

25  5>otbattbercretgncbtnaiimcu 
||  tbithonterteptiori,bloob,man(laugr> 
ter,  theft,  anb  biutmuiation,  corrupts 
on,bufattbfulnelTe,tumuits,pcriunc, 

26  2Difqutettngofgoobmtn,fo2get? 
rulnede  of  goob  turnes ,  bcfUtng  of 
foulcs,  tbangtngof  ||Binbc,  biforbcr  in 
mariages,  abultcric,  anb  (bamclcsbn= 
clcannefle. 

27  ifor  the  tborlbipping  of  ibolcs 
tnottobenameb,tstbebecnttmng,tbe 
caufc,  anb  the  enb  of  all  eutll. 

2S  5For  cither  tbcp  are  mab  Ibben 
tbcpbcmerrp,  orpropbeGc  lies,  or  line 
bntuQlp,  or  cue  lightlp  forftocarc  tljcnu 
fclucs. 

29  5formfomucb  as  their truft ism 
ibolcs  tbhttb  banc  no  life ,  tbougD  thep 
froeare  falOp,  pet  tbcp  looftc  not  to  bee 
Durt. 

30  Ifaibbeit  for  botbeanfcsfljal  thep 
be  luftlp  puinlbeb :  both  bctanfe  thep 
thought  not  tbcll  of  C5ob,  ||  caning  beeb 
bnto  ibols,anb  alfo  bninuipuuorc  in  bv 
ceu.bcfpiGngbolincflc. 

31  irortttsnottbepotberoftbembp 
tbbom  tbcp  fracarc :  but  it  is  the  ittQ 
bengeanee  of  tinners,  tDat  pumfljetb 
aitbapes  the  offence  of  the  bngoblp. 

CHAP.     XV. 

t  We  doc  acknowledge  the  true  God.  7  The 
follic  of  I  dole-makers,  14  and  of  che  ene- 
mies of  Gods  people:  15  becaufe  befidesthe 
idoles  ol  the  Gentiles ,  18  they  worfhipped 
vilebearts. 

25ut 


t  Ore.  te  lie 
letter. 


\\OfCel 


'Deut.  18 
10.  ier.7.9, 
and  19.4. 


Or,  Corfu- 
fed/}. 


\  Or.fexc. 


f  Crt.llz.  ie- 

Ufc. 


\\0r,deiu- 
ted. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xv.xv).  Apocrypha 


Qr%tttrncth 

areprochto 
thefoolifh 


*Rom.9.il 


"Luke  iz. 


or  die. 


tgn.Hfe. 

\\Or,fo. 


3iltthoii£><i5ob,artgra 
nous  auo  true :  long  fuf- 
fcrtttg,anb  m  ttitcc^  o^De- 
ring  all  things. 
z  foi  if  lDc  finne  ibe 
arc  thine,  tutolbtng  thr  poiber :  but  ibe 
Will  not  fume,  fenottisitg  that  U>c  arc 
counteb  thine. 

3  fo:  to  nnoibtbcc  is  perfect  rights 
oufneffe :  pea  to  unolb  tljp  polbcr  ts  the 
coote  of  immortality. 

4  f or  neither  Dto  the  tnifd)icuous 
muennott  of  men  becetue  bsuioj  an 
image  fpottcb  lbttb  btucrs  colours,  the 
painters  fcuttleffc  labour. 

5  Xhc  fight  WbctoflmtifrtDfooics 
to  lull  after  tt ,  anb  fo  they  beftre  the 
forme  of  a  ocab  unage  that  fiatft  no 
b:eath. 

6  i5otht!mubat  matte  them ,  they 
that  Dcftrc  them,  attD  tbey  tbatlbo:tt)ip 
tbem,arc  loiters  ofciulItbuigs,anbare 
worthy  to  Ijattc  fitch  things  to  trull 
bpon. 

7  ifo:  the  *  potter  tempering  foft 
earth  fefbionetrj ,  ettcry  bedell  With 
much  labour  fo:our  fcrutcc  :ycaoftbe 
fame  clay  hec  maucth  both  the  bcffcls 
that  feme  fo2  clcanc  bfcs:anbliBCWtfc 
alfo  all  fuch  as  fcruc  to  the  contrary: 
btuwbattsthcbfcofc;thcrfort,thcpQt; 
tcchtmfclfctsthctubgc. 

8  3nb  employing  his  labours  icwa 
ly,  he  maltcth  abaincoobofthcftimc 
clay ,  enen  he  which  a  little  before  was 
maocof  earth  bimfctfeano  lbttbm  a  m 
tic  While  after  returncth  to  tl)e  fante 
out  of  the  Which  he  wastaucn  :Wben 
his*  life  Which  Was  lent  htm  fhall  be  be* 
manbcD. 

9  /i3otWttbdanDitigbi£tarcis,not 
that  Dec  fliait  hauc  muth  labour ,  no: 
thatllhis  life  is  fl)o:t:butdrtuctb  to  creel 
golbfmitbs,  anbulucrfmitbs,  anb  en? 
benourctb  to  Doc  line  the  Worftcrs  in 
b:affc,anb  countcth  it  his  glory  to  matte 
counterfeit  things. 

io  $is  heart  is  afhts ,  his  hope  is 
morcbilctbencartD.anbhtslifcofleffc 

toaluc  then  clay: 

ii  ifozafmucb  as  hec  HnciD  not  his 
matter ,  anb  him  that  mfpirtbtnto  Dim 
an  acttuc  foulc,  anb  breatheb  m  a  liumg 
fptnt. 

iz  26ut  they  counteb  our  life  a 
padimc,  ftourttimchereamarftct  fo? 
game :  for ,  fay  they,  wc  mull  be  gettmg 
cucry  way,  though  it  be  by  curt  mcancs. 

13 1|  3Foz  this  man  that  of  earthly  mat 


tec  mabcth  brtcltic  bedels,  anb  graucn 
tmagcs.lmoWctb  hmifclfe  to  offenoa 
bone  all  others. 

14  3nb  alt  the  enemies  of  rhp  people, 
that  holb  them  in  fubicction  arc  motl 
foolifljanb  arc  morcmifcrablcthenbc 
rp  babes. 

15  3r  0:  they  counteb  all  the  tbolcs  of 
the  heathen  to  be  gobs :  which  neither 
hancthcbfeofcycstofee ,  no:  nofes  to 
b:atb||  breath,  nor  cares  toheare,  no: 
fingers  of  banbsto  bauble,  anb  asfo: 
tl;cir  feetc  they  arc  flow  to  got. 

16  jfo:  man  mabe  them,  anb  he  that 
borroWcb  his  ottmc  fptnt  fafbioncb 
them,  but  no  man  can  mahcagoblibe 
bntohimfclfc. 

17  3f  or  being  mojtatl  he  \b02KCth  a 
beab  thing  With  WictteD  hanbs :  fo:  hec 
Dtmfclfc  is  better  then  the  things  which 
he  lbo:fl)ippcth :  Whereas  he  Uueb  once, 
bntthcyncucr. 

18  #ca  they  \bo:d)ippebtbofc  beads 
alfo  that  arc  motl  hatefull :  fo:  bring 
compareb  together ,  fotne  arc  Worfc 
jthen  others. 

19  Neither  are  they  bcautifull ,  fo 
mud) ,  as  to  bee  befireb  in  refpect  of 
bea(ts,but  they  went  Without  the  pratfc 
ofGobanbhtsbicdsng. 

CHAP.   XVI. 

God  e;aue  ftrange  meare  to  bis  people ,  to 
ltnrevp  their  appetite,  and  vile  hearts  to  cheir 
enemies  to  take  it  fiom  them.  5  Hceitung; 
with  his  Terpen  ts,  11  but  (bone  healed  them 
by  his  word  onely.  17  The  creatures  alcred 
their  nature  to  pleafure  Gods  people,  and  to 
oilcnd  their  enemies. 

tocreforc  bp  the  Itttc  Were 
they  pumfbeD  worthily, 
anb  by  the  muituube  of 
beads*  tormentcb. 
z  3ju  drab  of  Which 
punid)mcnt,beanng  granoufly  With 
thine  oWnc  people  thou  p:epaccbdfo: 
them  meatc  of  a  drange  tadc :  cucn 
"  quailcsto  tltrre  Dp  their  appetite: 

3  ILothc  cub  thatthcybcftrmgfoob 
might  fo:  the  ougly  Oght  of  the  beads 
ftnt  among  them  ,  loath  eucn  that 
\bhuh  they  mud  neebs  beftre :  but  thefc 
fuffenngpenury  fora  woufpacemtght 
be  mabepartattcrsofa  drange  tadc. 

4  5fo:  tt  ibas  rccuufitc ,  that  bpon 
them  erccrctfing  tyzanny  fl)Otilb  come 
penury  Which  thtp  coulb  not  auoybc : 
but  to  thefeit  flioulD  oncly  be  dieibco 
holb  their  encmtcsibcrcto?mcntcb. 


||  Orjjrt. 


6.clnp. 
1 5,16. 


Num.  1 1. 


Apocrypha.    YVifdomeofSolomon.   Apocrypha.! 


■"} 


Crth; 

■oplc. 

Num.  5  i. 
6.  i.cor.io. 
9- 

Num.  2.1. 


•Exod.8. 
1+  and  10, 
4.  (did-?. 

7 


ftmg. 

Orprucr 
drzwenfrom. 


Tfal  105. 
1. fain.  2.6". 


•F10I9. 


'Iud.5.10. 


5  5ro;  lbhen  the  hoznblc  fierccncffc 
of beafts  tame  Upon  ||  thefcanb  tbcv  pc- 
rifbtMbith  the  *  flings  of  crooucb  ftr- 
pcnts,tbp)b;atI)enburcbuotfo2Cucr. 

6  zsuttbcp  lbetc  troublcbfo;afmal 
fcafonthat  the?  might  bcabmbmfbeb, 
bailing  a*Cigne  of faiuanon,to  put  tbcm 
in  r  cmemb;anee  ofttjc  commanbement 
oftbpHaib. 

7  iro;  bee  that  turneb  IjimCclfe  to- 
ibarbsit,  mas  not  fauco  bp  the  thing 
tbatbcfaib :  but  bp  thee  that  art  the  fa 
uiourofau. 

s  3tno  in  tftts  thon  mabeft  thine 
cnennesconfefTcthat  ttistljou  U)ho  fie- 
liuercftfromallcntll: 

9  5fo;*thcmthc  bittngs  of  graffo 
hoppers  anb  flies  btlicb ,  neither  ttias 
there  founb  any  remebp  fo:  thctr  life : 
fo;tbcp  mere  uwtbp  to  bee  putufbeb 
bpfurb. 

10  zsuttbpfonncs.notthcbctp  teeth 
ot  benemous  b;agons  oucrcamc :  fo: 
tbp  mcrcp  ibas  eu«  bp  thcm,anb  bcalcb 
them. 

11  fo;tbeptt)erctp;iriu:b,rbtittbep 
Q)OUlbremembertbpibo;bs,anbiberc 
qweblpfaueb  thatnot faiimgtuto beep 
fo;gctfulncftc ,  they  might  be  J  continue 
all?  mmbcfull  of  tbp  goobnefTc. 

iz  5Fo;itU)asncitberbcrbe,no;mol 
hfptng  plainer  that  refto;cb  tbcm  to 
health :  but  thp  Uio;b,  £>%o;b,  ibhicb 
heaicth  ail  things. 

1  j  5Fo:  thou  haft  pouicr  of  life  anb 
beat!):  thou  Icabcft  to  the  gates  of  hell, 
anb  bnngeft  bp  agame. 

14  %  man  tnbeeb  billetb  through 
his  malice :  anb  the  (pint  lbhen  it  is 
gonefoo;tl)tcturocthnotj  neither  the 
foulc  receiucb  bp,  tommeth  agatne. 

15  25ut  it  is  not  poffiblc  to  efcape 
thine  hanb. 

i6  *;tfo;tbc  bngobip  that  ncnitn  to 
tmoU)  thee ,  ibecc  feourgeb  bp  the 
ftrcngth  of  thine  armc :  lbithftrange 
raincs,  batlcs,  anb  fboibcrs  lbcrc  they 
perfecutcb ,  that  thcvcoulb  notauopb, 
anb  tbiougb fire  lucre  tbepconfumeb. 

17  5Fo;,  ibhichis  moft  to  bcibonbc; 
rcbat,tbcfircbabmo;cfo;tcintbciba: 
tec  that  quencheth  all  things  :  fo;  the 
*  ibo;lb  figbtcth  fo;  the  righteous. 

18  jFo;  fomctimes  the  flame  ibasnu* 
tigatcb ,  that  it  might  not  burnc  bp  the 
beafts  that  lbcrc  fent  agatnft  the  bn= 
gobip :  but  tbemfchtes  might  fee  anb 
pcrcctttc  that  thep  lbcrc  perfecutcb 
ibith  the  iubgcmtnt  of  Gob. 


19  3(no  at  another  time  it  burnetii 
cnen  in  the  nubft  of  ibatcr ,  about  the 
poibcr  of  fire ,  that  it  might  beftr  op  the 
fruits  of  anbnuift  lanb. 

20  *3fnttcabibbctcoftboi«feDbcft 
thine  oibnc  people ,  ibid)  Angels  foob, 
anb  bibft  fenb  tijemfrom  heauen  b;cab 
p:cparcb  lbitbout  their  labour,  able  to 
content  encrp  mans  bcugbt,  anb  agree* 
mgtocuerptaftt. 

21  *;ffo2thpl!fufltnanccoceiarebthp 
fiueetucffc  bnto  thp  cbilb;cn,  anb  fee- 
uing  to  the  appetite  of  the  eater  ||tempe* 
rebitfclfeto  euerpmanslilung. 

22  *25ut  fnotb  anb  pec  enburcbthe 
fire  anb  mcltcb  not ,  that  thep  might 
ttnoib  that  fire  burning  m  the  haiic,anb 
fpattmngin  theramc,  bib  beftrop  the 
fruits  of  the  enemies. 

23  25ut  this  againe  bib  euen  fo;gct 
his  oibne  ftr  engtl) ,  that  the  righteous 
might  be  nounfbcb, 

24  #o;tbctrearuretbatrerucd)  thee 
lbbo  art  the  matter ,  encrcafed)  his 
ftcength  agamft  the  btmgbtcous  fo; 
their  pumthment ,  anb  abateth  his 
ftrcngth  fo;  the  benefit  of  fuch  as  put 
their  ttufttn  thee. 

25  Xher efo2c  cuett  then  ibas  it  aitc- 
reb  into  all!  !fafl)ions,anb  ibas  obebf cut 
to  thp  grace  that  nourtOicth  all  things, 
acco;bmg  to  the  befire  [|  of  tljem  that 
habneeb: 

26  Xhat  thp  chilb;cn  ,  «©  Ho;b, 
ibbom  thou  loucft.might  ttnoib  that  *tt 
is  not  the  groibmg  of  fruits  that  nou- 
rifl)cth  man :  but  that  tt  is  tbplboib 
ibhich  p2cferueth  tbcm  that  put  their 
trufttntbee. 

27  5P0;  that  ibhich  ibas  not  bc= 
ftrotcbofthcfircbetngvuarmebibitha 
litlc^unnebeame/ooncmcltcbaibap, 

23  Xhat  it  might  bee  bttoiben,  that 
lbecmuftpieucnt  rhe&unnc ,  to  gtuc 
thee  thanbs,  anb  at  the  bap-fp;tng  p;ap 
bnto  thee. 

29  5Fo;  the  hope  of  the  bnfaithfull, 
fljal  melt  aibapasthc  CDtnters  hoarc 
froft,  anb  (hailrunnc  aibapasbnp;o- 
fitablc  ibatcr. 

C  H  A  p.  xvir. 

i  Why  the  Egyptians  wetc  punilhed  with 
djrkcncfle.  4  Thetcrroursofthatdaiknei. 
11    Thcterroursofamllconfcieiice. 

iD;  great  arc  thp  ^ubge- 
ments,  anb  cannot  be  cjrp;cfc 
ftD:thcrcfo;e  jibnuourtureb 
foules  Ijanc  erreo. 

2  5fo; 


'Exod.  16, 
14. num. 
1 1.7.  pl'al. 
78.25.  loh. 
6.:  1. 


•  Iudg.tf.4. 
||  Or,Ma- 

rta. 

\\Ot,tvm 

tempered. 

"Chap.  1 9. 
Jo. 


||0r,»%,. 

\pr,ofxhtm 
that  prajcj. 


'Dcur.8.j. 
match.  4.4. 


||  Or.fiulct 
thas  vtlintt 
fereftrmtJ,  I 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xvii). 


Apocrypha. 


Or  ,vndrr 
ibctrrjojei. 


tiHtl. 


WOr.Kihu. 


*"El£0.7.  12. 

jud8.7,iy 


to looks'!- '} "W- 


\Orjvheran 
they  could 
due  nothing. 


2  jfoz  Vbhcn  Unrighteous  men 
thought  to  opp2eu*e  the  Ijolp  nation: 
tiicy  b«ug  N)ut  Dp  II  m  their  houfes ,  the 
pztfoncrs  of  baruencfle ,  anb  fettcrcb 
With  the  bonbes  of  a  long  night,  lav 
[there]  Hcrtlcb  from  thcctcrnaiipjoui 
bencc.' 

j  jFoz  while  thev  fuppofeb  to  lie  Inn 
in  their  ferret  fumes  ,thcv  Were  fcattc 
rcb  II  bnber  a  barttc  toaile  of  forgetful 
neflc,  being  hcurtblv  adomn)Cb,anb 
troubleb  With  (ftrangc)  II  apparitions. 

4.  jf 02  nettrjer  might  trjc  comer  that 
hclbe  them  fceepe  them  from  fearc :  tmt 
noifcs  (as  of  waters)  failing  bownc, 
foiinbcb  about  thcm>anbfabbc  Difions 
appcarcb  tmto  them  With  hcawecoun 
tcnantcs. 

5  0o  power  of  tljc  fire  might  giue 
them  light :  neither  eouib  the  bngljt 
flames  of  thcttarrcs  enburc  to  lighten 
that  hoznbie  night. 

6  sDnclv  there  appcarcb  tmto  them 
afire  tunblcb  of  it  feifc,  toervbzcabfull: 
foi  being  much  tcrrtfieb ,  the?  thought 
the  thmgs  Which  the?  CawtobcWo2fc 
then  the  fight  thev  fain  not. 

7  *3ls  foz  the  illufions  of  arte  fl0a- 
gicfic ,  thev  were  putboibnc,  anbthctr 
Daunting  m  Wifcbomc  lbas  rcp20oucb 
Withbtfgracc. 

8  ifoz  thev  that  pzomifcb  to  bjiue 
awav  terrours,  ana  troubles  from  a 
fic&e  foulc,  lucre  Ccfec  thcmfclucs  of 
fearc  wozthv  to  be  laughebat. 

9  jfoz  though  no  terrible  thing  bib 
feare  them  :  vet  bctng  ffearcb  With 
beads  thatpaffebbv,  anb  hiding  offer 
pents, 

to  Xhcv bfcbfo2fcare,||bemnngthat 
thev  tail)  the  av?c,  Which  toulb  of  no  fibc 
be  auoibcD. 

1 1  jfoz  VbicBebncfTe  eonbemneb  bv 
her  oibnc  wtmeffe,  ts  toerv  ttmoious, 
anb  being  pzeffeb  Witt)  confncucc,  al 
waves  fojceadcthgricuoits  things. 

n  f  02  fearc  is  nothing  elfe,  but  a  be 
travingofthcfuccoucs  Which  teuton 

offcrcth. 

ij  3nb  the  expectation  from  Withm 
being  lefTccountcth  the  igno2ancc  mo2C 
then  the  caufc  which  bnngcth  the  toz 
ment. 

14  ffint  thev  flecping  the  fame  fleepe 
that  night  ||  Which  was  mbccb  mtolcra 
blcanb  which  came  upon  them  out  of 
thcbortomesofuieuitablchcU: 

15  nacre  partlv  hcrcb  lbith  mon 
arous  apparitions,  anb  pactivfamtcb, 


their  heart  failing  them :  fozafubbamc 
fearc  anb  not  looheb  fo2 ,  cajuc  Upon 
them. 

16  3>o  then,  whofocucc  there  fell 
boWnc.was  dcaitlv  Kept,  flmtbp  in  a 
pnfon  Without  v^on  barrcs. 

17  Jf02ibhcther  hedberchnfbanb- 
man,  02  fljephcarb,  02  a  labourer  in  the 
||fielb,hctt)as  oucrtahcn.anb  enbureb 
that  ncceditie,  Which  coulbnotbcauot 
oto :  foz  thev  were  all  bounb  wtth  one 
chameofbatftcncflc- 

18  naljcthec  it  lucre  a  Whiffling 
Wmbe,  02  a  melobious  noifc  of  btrbes  a 
mong  the  fpjcabmg  bzanehes,  02  a  plea? 
fing  fall  of  ibater  nmtung  btolentlv : 

19  £Dza||ternblcfounbofdoncscad 
bourne ,  02  a  rtmningthat  coulb  not  be 
fecne  of  f hipping  beads,  02  a  roaring 
boicc  of  mod  fauage  tbilbc  beads ,  02  a 
rcbounbing  Cccho  from  the  holloib 
mountatnes:  ttjcfc  things  mabc  them 
tofhiooncfozfeare. 

20  5Fo2fhcWholcW02lbfl)incbWith 
clcarc  light,  anb  none  Were  hmbcrcb  m 
their  labour. 

21  £>uct  them  onclv  lbas  fpjeaban 
hcauic  night ,  an  image  of  that  barfee 
neffe  which  flioulbaftcrwarbsreceiue 
them :  but  vet  Were  thev  tmto  thenv 
femes  mo2c  gneuous  then  the  barfee^ 
neffc. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

4  Why  Egypt  was  punifhed  with  darkenefle, 
5  and  with,  the  death  of  dieir  children,  lS 
They  themfclues  fawthe  caufe  thereof,  to 
God  alfo  plagued  his  owne  people,  n  By 
what  meanes  that  plague  wasftayed. 

Cuerthclcffc ,  thv  faints 
\Wifllg  hab  a  beev  great  *  light, 
j^Sm  i  lbhofc  boicc  thev  hearing 
/  i^V  ranbnotfccmgtljeirfljapc, 
%2&lmM  becaufc  thev  alfo  hab  not 
fuffcrcb  the  fame  things,  thev  cotmtcb 
tljcmhappv. 

2  25ut  foz  that  thev  bib  not  hurt 
them  now,  of  lhhom  rljcv  hab  becne 
ito2ongeb  before ,  thev  thanhcb  tljcm, 
anb  befought  them  parbon ,  foz  tljat 
tljcv  hab  becne  enemies. 

j  *3Jn  dcab  lbhcrcof  thou  gattcd 
them  a  burning  pillar  of  fire,  both  to  be 
a  guibc  of  the  bnunoiucn  lourncv » anb 
an  harmelcffc  Smnnc  to  entcrtaiuc 
thcmhonourablv. 

4   if02  thev  mere  ihoithv  to  be  be 
p.nucb  of  Uglit,  anb  imp2tfoucb  m  barn 
ncfTciDljo  hab  Kept  thv  tonnes  fljut  Dp, 
i  ttrrr  bv 


!|  Or.dtftrt. 


\OrfhuUoM. 


Eiod.  10. 


"Exo.13.21 
and  14*  24- 
pfal.7ii.14. 


Apocrypha.   Wifedome  of  Solomon.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or;  incor- 
ruptible, 

"  Exod  14. 


'Exod.  1 1. 


'Exod. 11. 


J I  Or ,  <•  cone- 
tant  of  (j9A, 
or  league  Jee 
P/J/.50.5. 


"Exo-  1 1.5 
and  1  j.  io. 


\\OrJmagi- 

rtJttCnj. 


bp  whom  the  ||  bnwrnpt  Ugl)t  of  t!)t 
laib  ibas  to  be  giucn  bnto  the  ruo?lb. 

5  *  3lnb  TCDfjctt  they  hab  betemuneb 
to  flap  tljc  babes  of  the  faints,  one 
chtlb  being  caQfo?th,  anofeueb :  to  w 
pzotie  tbcm.tljou  toobeft  atbap  ftje  mnfc 

titube  of  their  chilb;cn,  anb  bettropcbll 
them  altogether  in  a  mightie  ibatcr 

6  *  £>f  that  night  ibere  one  fathers 
tcrtificb  afo;e,  tl)at  aflurebly  Unoibing 
bnto  lbhat  oatljcs  they  hab  giuencte- 
bence,  they  might  afterlbarbs  bee  of 
gooochecre. 

7  5>o  of  thy  people  rbas  accepted 
bott)  the  faluatton  of  the  righteous, 
anb  bcflcnctf  on  of  the  enemies. 

8  if 0?  lDljccciCbttl)  tljou  DiDfl puntfli 
out  abuccfaries ,  bv  the  fame  thou  bibft 
glonfic  bs  vuhom  thou  habit  calico. 

9  *ifo?  the  righteous  cljiimen  of  goob 
menbibfamficefccretly,  anb  lbith  one 
tonfent  tnabc  a  ||  hoi?  larbe,  that  the 
faints  ujoulb  bee  alifec  partaacrs  of 
the  fame  goob  anb  cum,  the  fathers 
noib  tinging  out  the  fougs  of  pwifc. 

10  26uton  the  other  fibe  there  foun> 
beb  an  ill  -  accoutring  crie  of  the  enemies, 
anb  a  lamentable  noife  rbas  caneb  a* 
b;oab  fo?  thtlb;cn  that  rbere  bcibat^ 
leb. 

1 1  *  %\)t  mallet  anb  the  feruaunt 
ibere  punifljeb  after  one  maner,  anb 
UHe  as  the  tung,fo  fuffercb  the  common 
perfott. 

12.  S>o  they  altogether  hab  innume* 
rablcbcabttnth  one  Umbof  beath,  nei- 
ther Ibere  the  liumg  fufficicnt  to  bunc 
them :  fo:  in  one  moment  the  nobleQ  of 
fpjing  of  them  ibas  bcltroycb. 

13  fox  whereas  they  iboulb  notbe^ 
lecue  an?  thing  by  rcafon  of  the  cm 
chautments,  bpon  the  beftructton  of 
the  firtt  borne,  they  aclmoUilcbgeb  this 
people  to  be  the  tonnes  of  ©00. 

14  jfojibbiic  all  things  ibere  in  cmitt 
Olcnccanbthatmght  ibas  mthcmibtt 
ofhcrfiuiftcourfc, 

15  Xhtnc  almighty  nwb  leapt  bolbnc 
fromhcaucn,outof  thyroyail  thjone, 
as  a  fierce  man  of  lbarremto  the  nubft 
ofaianoofbcllructlon, 

us  3nb  brought  thine  bnfaincb  eom< 
manbcment  as  a  (liarpc  froojb ,  anb 
ftanbingbp  filleo  all  things  Until bcath. 
anbtttoucheb  the  Ijcaucn,  but  itftoob 
bpon  the  earth. 

17  IChenfubbeitlvPbifionsofhojrt 
ble  bjeames  troubleb  them  fo;e,ano  tct- 
rours  came  bpon  them  bnlooUcb  iot. 


18  2nb  one  thiotben  here,  another 
there  haifc  beab ,  (belbcb  the  caufc  of 
his  bcath. 

19  foi  the  blames  tiiat  troublto 
them.bib  fodefhetb  this,lctt  they  fl)oulo 
pcnQ),anb  not  imolb  Ibb?  they  ibere 
afflictcb. 

20  *ica,the  tatting  of  bcath  toucheb 
the  righteous  alio,  anb  there  ibas  a  be* 
ttruction  of  the  "multitubc  in  the  lbtfc 
bernes :  but  the  ibjath  cnbureb  not 
long. 

21  ifoj  then  the  biamelefTe  man  mabc 
hafte,  anb  ttoob  foouh  to  befenb  them, 
anb  bunging  the  fhielb  of  his  proper 
mimftcriceuen  player  anb  the  propitta; 
tion  of  inrenfe,  fet  himtcifc  agamttthe 
tbjafh,  anb  fo  brought  the  calamity  to 
anenb,  beclartng  that  hec  rbas  thy  fcr 
uant. 

22  3>o  Dec  ouertamc  the  beftroyer, 
notibith  fltength  of  boby,  no:  fo;ce  of 
armes,but  VUith  a  Ibozb  fubbueb  l)c  him 
thatpunttbcb.allcagingtbcoathcsanb 
coucnants  mabc  Vbith  the  fathers. 

23  irojibhcnthcbcabibcrenoibfal: 
len  borbneby heaps  one  bpon  another, 
(tanbmgbcnbecnche  ftatcb  the  rbzath, 
anb  11  par  ten  tliett»ap  to  the  liumg. 

24  *  ifozin  the  long  garment  rbas 
the  ibbole  rboilb ,  $  m  the  fourc  rotbes 
of  the  ftoncs  ibas  the  glozy  of  the  fa 
thcrs  grauen,  anb  thy  matctttc  bpon 
thcbiabemcofhisheab. 

25  Unto  thefc  the  Dcftroyct  gaue 
place,  anb  toas  afralb  of  them :  font 
ibas  enough  that  they  onclp  tatUb  of 
thcib?afh. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  Why  Godfhewedno  mcrcie  to  the  Egypti- 
ans. 5  And  liow  wonderfully  hce  dolt 
with  bis  people.  14  The  Egyptians  were 
worfe  then  the  Sodomites.  18  The  won. 
derfull  agreement  of  the  creatures  to  ferue 
Gods  people. 

&  fo!  the  bngobly ,  lbjath 
came  bpon  them  vmrhout 
merric  bnto  the  enb :  fo? 
he  micro  before  ibhat  they 
_  tboulbboe; 
2  fcoibe  that  haumg  giuen  them 
leauc to  bepart,  anb  fent  thcmljamly 
amay,  they  ttoulb  repent  anb  purfitc 
them. 

j  foi  rohilcft  they  ibere  yet  mour> 
ning,  anb  maumg  lamcntatton  at  the 
gtaucs  of  tljc  bcab ,  they  abbcb  another 

foolifli 


"Num.  16. 

4*. 


l\0r,mtf. 

"Exo.i8.«. 
ind  11  10. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xix. 


Apocrypha. 


i<y  etr.rer.tj. 


]  Or,  lice. 


Or,com- 
fart. 


foolifl)  bcuice,  aim  purfuebthemas  fit- 
gmues ,  ibhom  they  t>aD|!cntrcatct)to 
be  gone. 

4  Jfo?  the  bcftmy ,  roijcrcof  they 
mere  mozthy  >  bzelb  them  Unto  tins 
cub ,  anu  mabcthcm  fozget  the  things 
that  hao  aircaby  happeneb ,  that  they 
mtght  fulfill  the  pimithtnent  mint!) 
mas  Wanting  to  their  tozments, 

5  3nb  that  thy  people  might  pafTc  a 
ibonbcrftiu  map :  but  the?  might  fiub  a 
ttrangebcath. 

c  jfo?  tlie  tbljolc  creature  in  i)is  p?o- 
pcrbitib  mas  fafhtoneb  againe  anem, 
feruing  the  peculiar  cominatmements 
that  mere  giucn  bnto  them ,  that  thv 
chilbzen  might  be  Kept  mithout  hurt. 

7  Asnameiy.aclouDfhabomuigthc 
campc,  atm  mherc  mater  ftoob  before 
b:ic  lanb  appcareb ,  aim  out  of  thcrcb 
S>caamay  mithout  unpebiment,  anb 
out  of  the  iiolcut  flreame  a  grecne 
ficlb: 

8  naherc  thozough  all  the  people 
ment  that  mere  bcfcnbcb  mith  thy 
hanb ,  feeing  thy  marueilous  ftrangc 
tbonbers. 

9  jroztheymcntatiargcliKchozfes, 
ano  leapcb  hue  lambcs ,  pzaifing  thec 
©Hozb.mho  habflbcluicrcbthem. 

io  5foz  they  mere  yet  mtnbcfhll  of 
the  things  that  mere  bone  mhtlc  they 
foiourneb  m  the  Orange  lanb,  hom  the 
grotmo  bzought  fozthll  flics  in  ftcao  of 
cattcii,  anb  horn  thcriuer  caftbpamul' 
titubc  offrogs  in  ftcab  of  fiflics. 

ii  25utaftermatbs thev fam anem 
generation  of  foulcs,  Ibhcn  being  leb 
mith  their  appetite  thev  affecb  belicate 
mcates. 

12  ifoz  ciuailcs  came  bp  bnto  them 
fconithc£>ca,fozthcir  ||  contentment. 

13  3inb  punin)mcnts  came  upon  the 
finncrs  not  mithout  fozmer  figncs  by 
thefozee  of  thunbers  :fozthey  fuffcreb 
tufliy ,  accommg  to  their  omne  micftcbj 
neffe ,  mfomuch  as  the?  Dfeb  a  mozc 


hacoanb  hatcfuli  bchaiuour  tomarbs 
Grangers: 

14-  5Foz  the  Sodomits  bib  not  receiuc 
thofemhom  thcyfcnctb  not  mhen  they 
came :  but  thefe  brought  frienbs  into 
bonbagc ,  that  hab  mcll  befcrucb  of 
them. 

15  ^nb  not  oncly  fo :  but  pcrabuen? 
turc  fomc  rcfpcctfball  be  habof  ujofc, 
becaufc  they  bfeb  frrangcrs  not 
fneubly. 

16  25ut  tljcfe  bcry  grieuoufly  afrlic 
tcb  them,mhoiu  tljcv  hab  reccuieo  vbuh 
fealtmgs,  anbmerc  aircaby  mabc  par 
taftcrs  of  the  fame  lamcsmuh  them. 

17  IChcrcfozc  cucn  mith  blmoiicflc 
mere  thefe  ftrtcKcn,  as  thofc  mcr c  at  the 
boozes  of  the  righteous  man :  ibhen  be 
ing  compaffeb  about  mith  hoznblc 
great  barfmeffc,  cuery  one  fought  the 
paffage  of  his  omne  boozes. 

is  ifoz  the  elements  mere  changcb 
tin  themfclucs  by  a  lunb  of  harmonic, 
liKe  as  in  apfaltcry  notes  change  the 
name  of  the  tune,  anb  vet  are  annates 
founbS,mhich  map  mcll  be  pcrcciucb  by 
the  fight  of  the  things  that  haucbccnc 
bone. 

19  ifoz  earthly  things  mere  tunicb 
into  matry,  anb  the  things  thatbefo  2  c 
fmammc  in  the  mater ,nom  ment  bpon 
thtgrouno. 

20  Xhcfirchabpomcrinthematcr, 
fozgctttng  his  omne  bcrtuc :  anb  the 
mater  fozgat  his  omne  quenching  na^ 
turc. 

21  £)n  the  other  fibc ,  the  flames 
maftebnot  the  fleft)  of  the  eozruptiblc  Ii 
uing  things,  though  they  Vbalhcb  ther- 
m ,  neither  mcltcb  they  the  yctclunbof 
hcaucnlytncatc,that  mas  of  nature  apt 
to  melt. 

22  foi in  all  things, £>  ILozb,  thou 
bibft  magnific  thy  people,  anb  glonfie 
them,  neither  bibft  thou  lightly  rcgarb 
them :  but  bibft  affift  them  in  cucry  tunc 
anb  place. 


t  Cre.  kj 
themfellttt. 


Rrrr  2        ^T HE 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


Some  ref err  t 
thtsPrologne 
to  tAthatut- 
fiuifbecattfc 
it  u found  tn 
his  Sjnapfo. 


\\OryCoBe- 
tied. 


,THE  WISDOME   OF 

Iefus  the  fonneof  Sirach, 

OrEcclefiafticus. 


<^J  A  Prologue  made  by  an  vncertaine  Authour. 

TJ?is3Jcfus  XUas  tljc  fonneof  5>irath  ,attbgranb-chtlbcto  3Jefusof  the  fame 
name  tttth  him .  Xhts  man  therefore  luieb  in  the  latter  times,  after  the  pco 
pic  hab  bene  leoaibayeaptiue,  anb  caiieb  homcagamc,  anbaimott after  all 
the  prophets.  jlSoib  his  grandfather  gurus  ( as  he  htmfclfc  nmneffeth )  inas  a 
mauofgrcatbiugcncc  ano  iblfcbomc  among  the  lijcbzcrbcs.Vbho  bib  not  onclyga 
thcr  the  gtauc  ano  fl)0?t  Sentences  of  ibifcmcn,  thathab  bene  bcfo2c  him,  but 
hmifclfe  alfo  tottcrcb  fomc  of  his  ottnic,full  of  much  bnber  ftanbmg  anb  rbifebomc. 
nahen  as  therefore  the  firft  3lcfus  btcb ,  Icauuig  this  boolte  aimoft  fl  pcrfcctcb,  £>t 
rath  his  fonncrccctumg  tt  after  him,  left  it  to  his  oibncfotutegjcfus  ,ibho  hautng 
gotten  it  into  his  hanbs,  tompilcb  it  all  02bcrl  y  mto  one  <£lolumc,anb  calico  it  naif 
borne,  gjntttuUng  it ,  botb  by  his  oibnc  name,  his  fathcrsnamcanb  hts  granbfa 
thcrs ,  alluring  thchcarcc  bv  the bcrv name  of naifcbomc ,  to  hattc  a  greater  louc 
to  the  ftubie  of  thisffiootte.  3it contented)  thercfoje  ibtfc  Mayings ,  oarRC&cn 
tenccs,  anb  parables,  anb  ccrtame  particular  ancient  gobly  ftoncs  of  men  that 
plcafcb<5ob.  3Ufohis02aycraiib£>ong.  4!3o2coucc , vbhat benefits  asoo  hat 
bouchfafcbhispeoplc,anbU)hat  plagues  hehab  heapeb  bpon  their  cncmies.3Chis 
■Jcfusbib  mutate  Solomon,  anb  rbas  no  leffc  famous  nnnatfcbome,  anbiear- 
nmg.both  being  inbeeb  a  man  of  great  learning.anb  fo  rcputeb  alfo. 


\\Ortef.m 
cthtriuttoii. 


t  Grreif, 
prophtcicl. 
\\Or,rxctl- 
hncie. 

Or,  htlpc 
oflearr.ing. 


^  The  "Prologue  of  the  Wifdomc  off c fas  tbefonne  of  Siracb. 

Wficrcas  many  anb  great  things  hauc  bene  Dclutcrcb  bnto  bs  by  fhcS.aU) 
anb  the  02ophets,anbbpothcrsthathauefolloU)cb  their  ftcps,fonhe 
lbhich  things  3Ifracl  ought  to  be  tommcnbcDfoz  learning  anb  naifc 
boine,anbU)hcreofiiotoncivthcSeabersmuOnecbsbccomefliilfulthcmrflucs- 
but  alfo  they  that  befire  to  learne,  be  able  to  profit  them  Which  arc  I  i  Without , bo  th 
by  fpcaumg  anb  inciting :  s©y  granbfather  3Jefus,ibhcn  he  hab  much  giuen  hun 
fclfetothcrcabiitgofthc?Laib,anbthc$zophcts,  anb  other  ffioones  of  our  fa 
thcrs,  anb  hab  gotten  therein  goob  uibgcmcnt,  lbas  bzaibcn  onalfohnnfelfe,to 
Umtc  fomcthing  pcrtaymng  to  learning  anb  naifcbomcto  thcintcntthatthofe 
Which  arc  befirous  toleamc,  anb  arc  abbictcb  to  thefc  things,  might  profit  much 
11102c  in  luting  accozbmg  to  the ILaib.  lehcrcfojc,  let  me  mtreat  you  to  reaocit 
With  fauour  anb  attention, anb  topatbonSUs,  Wherein  wee  mayfeemctocotne 
fl)02tof  fomcUio2bs  lbhich  Vol  hauc  labourcbtomtcrp2Cte.  jf02  the  fame  things 
btterebmf)cb2eib,anDtranflatcb  into  an  other  tongue,haucnotthcfamcfo2ccm 
them  taubnotontlythcfcthiugs.btittheliaujitfelfcanothet^ophets.aiib  the 
reltoftht25ooliCS,haucuofmalli|mffcrcnce,\bheiitotyarcfpoKcnmtheiromue 
language.  5F02in  the  eight  anb  thirncthycerc  commtng  into  Cgvpt.  Wheneuer 
gctcs  was  Btug ,  anb  continuing  there  fomc  nme ,  gj  founb  a  |!  23ooUe  of  no  final! 
learning,  therefcue  3  thought  it  mod  ucccffaryfo2mce,  to  bcftowfonicmiigcnce 
anbtraua:lctomtcrp2Ctcit:  fifing  great  watthfulncfTc,  anb  f lull  mthatfpaccto 
b;iug  the  2!5ooUc  to  an  cub ,  anb  fct  it  foo2th  fo:  them  alfo ,  lbhich  m  a  ilrauqc  conn 
treyafcmiuugtolcarnc^cuigpjeparcbbe^cutntaners  to  Hue  after  the'lLaib. 

CHAP. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.j.ij 


Apocrypha. 


•  i.Kinjjs 
19- 


Rom.ii. 


CHAP.    I. 


"Prou.  1.7. 

ffll.I  I  C.I  1 


\\Or.flglie 
ttcfcd. 


*l.Chron. 
10.11. 


All  wifedome  i,  from  God. 
it  to  them  that  loue  him. 
God  is  full  of  many  bldsmgs 
God  without  hypocrifie. 


10    Hegiueth 

1   The  feare  of 
8   To  leave 


%% 


ttiifcoomc 

1  from  tlje 

1Lo20,anoisibitIj 

Ijimfojcuer. 

UKljocantuui^ 

becrtjefanooftlic 

fca,  ano  tlje  02ops 

ofratnc,  ano  tljc 

oaves  of  ctctntty* 

j    931)0  can  finoc  out  tlic  Deigljtof 

bcauen,  ano  tlje  bieatJtt)  of  tljc  carti), 

auo  tlic  ocepe,  anotbifeoomc  < 

4  xeifcoomcljatlj  beetle  trcatco  be* 
fojc  all  filings,  aiiotljc  bnoctftanouig 
of  p2uoctitcftom  eucriaftutg. 

5  %\)C  U)02D  of  (500  mottIjtgl),ls 
fljc  fouutauic  of  uJlfoomc,  f  tjee  ibayes 
are  euctiamng  commanoements. 

6  *  3GIo  W)I)om ijatlj  tljc  root  of  rbtf- 
oome  becne  reucaico '.  0?  ibljo  Ijatlj 
bnolbenDct  ttnfccounfclSi 

7  [Unto  tbljom  Ijatlj  tftc  bnotb- 
leoge  of  Vbtfcoomc  becne  maoe  mant- 
felt  <  ano  rui)o  Ijatlj  bnoccftooo  Ijer 
great  erpcricntc*] 

s  Xtjcre  is  one  Vbife  anb  greatly  to 
bee  feared;  tljc  %oft  fitting  upon  Ijis 
Xlj2one. 

9  $ceteatet)fjcr,  ano  fattier,  ano 
numb2cDlier,atiDpoilb2CDl)eroutDpon 
ailljisuwlics. 

io  <§>lice  [is]  Unffj  all  fled)  atco:bing 
to  Ijis  gift,  ano  fjee  ijatlj  giucn  ftcrto 
tljemttiatloucljim. 

11  Xbe  fcace  of  tljcHoio  isfjonour, 
ano  glo?p,  ano  giaoncffc,  auo  a  crottmc 
ofrciopcmg. 

12  *Xl)e  feare  of  tlie  3LojD  tnaftctij 
a  metric  Ijcart,  ano  giuetlj  lop  ano  giao 
nefle.anoalongitfe. 

13  i©l)ofofcarctIjtl)c?Lo2D,ttft)au" 
goettielltbitljljimat  ujelaft,?  De||  (nail 
finoe  fauour  m  tljc  oap  of  Ijis  oeatl). 

14  Xofcare  tljcHo?o ,  istljcbcgin; 
ning  of  Vuiftoomc:  anbttibas  trcatco 
toitl)  tlic  faitlifull  in  tl)c  tbombe. 

15  S>ljcc  liatl)  built  an  cuerlalhng 
founoation  ibttl)  men,  ano  ujc  ujai  con^ 
tuiuc*lDifl)fficirfccOe. 

16  Xo  feare  tljc  &02D,  is  fulncflc  of 
Vbifcoomc ,  ano  filletl)  men  ibttlj  ijcr 
fruits. 

17  £>ljec  filletl)  all  tljeiUjoufcUntlj 


Wings  ocfircablcauotliegartiersttnttj 
Ijcriticreafc. 

is  Xlie  feare  of  tlje  fUio  is  a  croiDne 
ofibifeoomcmauuigpeaceaiioperfett 
Ijcaitlj  to  flounfl) ,  botinuljiclj  are  tljc 
gifts  of  ©00 :  ano  itcnlargctljfljeic  re- 
loycingtiiatloueljim. 

19  naifeoome  rametl)  Ooilwc  fuill 
atiDUnoVblcogeofunoerfianoiiig.auD 
eraitetljttjcmtoljoitoutujatljoioeljer 
fall. 

20  Xficrootofroifeoomeistofeare 
tl)clLo20,anotl)Cb2aiul)cs  thereof  arc 
long  life. 

ai  XticfearcoftI)cfLo2D02iuctl)a; 
map  finncs:  anoutfjerc  ittspjefcnt,  it 
tutncfljaibaynwtl). 

22  £  furious  man  cannot  ||beiufh> 
fico,fo2  fljcfroay  of  tjis  fury  fliaibc  Ijis 
Ocftruttton. 

23  3  patient  man  tbill  beare  fo2  a 
ttmc,anoaftertoatOioyujallfp?uig))p 
bntoljun. 

24  J^cU)ill)iOcl)isB)o?osfo2atimc, 
ano  tljc  lippcs  of  manp  ftjall occiare  Ijis 
lDifcoome. 

25  Xfic  parables  of  ftnotblcogc  are 
in  tije  treafur es  of  ltoifeoomc :  but  goo 
liticsisanabominattonto  afinncr. 

26  3lf  tliou  oefire  ttnfcOome ,  heepe 
tl)c  commaunoements,  ano  «Je  JL020 
fiiailgiucljerlmtotljec. 

27  5ro2  tl)e  feat e  of  njc fLoio is tbif- 
oome ,  ano  tnttruetton :  ano  faitl)  auo 
mccacnc(rearel)isocligtjt. 

28  I!  snlrruft  not  tl)c  feare  of  tljc 
H02D  ibDcn  tl)ou  attpoo2c:anD  come 
not  tonto  Dim  Vbitl)  a  Double  Ijcart. 

29  25c  not  an  ftppocrttc  in  tDcfiglit  of 
men ,  ano  taae  gooo  fiecDetbljat  tljou 
fpeabefi. 

50  €ralt  not  tljv  fclfc ,  left  rtjou  fall, 
anob2itigOift)oiio2bpontfiplbulc,anO 
fo<Boo  oifcouet  tliv  fctrcts,auo  tail  tlice 
ooVbiiciutDc  mioftoftfjc  congecganon, 
becaufc  tliou  cameftnot  m  tructl),to  tlic 
feare  of  tlje  JX020 :  but  tlj?  Ijcart  is  full 
ofoeceit. 

CHAP.    II. 

1  Gods  (eruants  mult  looke  lor  trouble,  7  and 
be  patient,  and  truft  in  him.  iz  For  woe  to 
them  that  doe  not  fo.  15  But  they  that  feare 
the  L01  d,  will  doe  fo. 

s&P  fonnc,  tf*tl)ou  come 
§to  feruc  tUe  lLo20e,p2C 
I  pare  tljp  foulc  fo2  temp 
.  Station. 
W2m3&  1  5»cttljvljeartangl)t, 
jarrr  s        ano 

85 


Or,  efcapt 
punt(hmcnt. 


\\OrJiemt 

difabc&i- 

tntto. 


*Mjc,  4  1 
'nm.  ;  1 
l.pcr.4-11. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiaiticus.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,haJie 
not. 


«Wifd.;.6 
pro.  17.3  ■ 


•PfiI-37-JS 


*Ioh-i4.2o 


ant)  conftantly  eiiDure ,  anD  ||matte  not 
haftem  time  of  trouble. 

j  CElcauetonto  him,  anD  Depart  not 
aibay,  that  thou  mayefl  be  incceafcDat 
thyiaftcnD. 

4  iBhatfoeuet  is  brought  topon  thee, 
taue  chcerefully,  anDbcepancntiDhen 
thou  art  than  gr  d  to  a  lolbe  cftat c. 

5  *3toi  golD  istrieD  m  tlje  fire,  anD 
acceptable  men  m  the  furnace  of  aDucr* 
fine. 

6  35clecue  in  him,  anD  he  tbill  helpe 
thee,  02Det  thy  tbay  aright,  anD  truft  in 
htm. 

7  j9ethatfearcthe?Lo2D,lbaitcfo2 
his  mercte,  anD  goe  not  afiDe,  icflvc  fall. 

8  J'ee  that  fcarc  the  H02D,  bclccuc 
Ijim,  anD  four  rcttarD  (hall  not  faile. 

9  Pt  that  fcarc  thefL02D,  hopefoj 
gooD,anD  fo?  cuerlaftmg  top  anD  mercy. 

10  jLoofeeatthcgcnerationsofolD, 
anD  fee,  DiDeucranv  truft  tn  the  IL02D, 
anD  ibas  confounDcD  <  02  did  any  abiDe 
in  his  fcarc,  ^Ibasforta&en?  ozmhom 
did  Ijee  cuct  Defptfc,that  caileD  bpon 
hum 

11  if  0;  tljc  *  |Lo?D  ts  full  of  compaCCt* 
on,atiDmercic,longfuffcrtng,anDbcry 
pitifull,  anD  fojgiucth  finnes,  anD  fa« 
ucth  tntimc  of  affliction. 

u  looe  be  to  fearcfull  hearts,  anD 
faint  hanDS,  anD  the  tinner  that  gocth 
tibolbayes. 

13  J0oe  bnto  him thatts  fainthcar? 
teD,fo2  he  belccueth  not ,  therefore  (ball 
henotbcDcfcnDcD. 

14  iBoe  bnto  you  tbatbaue  loft  pa< 
tience:  anDVbhat  lbtllyc  Docibhenfhe 
JLo2D{balH)ifitcyou* 

\<,  Xhcy  *  that  fcarc  the  fLojD,ttnll 
not  Dtfobey  his  ID02D,  anD  the?  that 
loucbim.ttHllKcepebtsibayes. 

i6  Xhey  that  fcarc  the  U02D,  tbill 
fceUc  that  tbhicbts  Vbcll  pleating  bnto 
him,  anD  the?  that  lout bun,  Cbailbcc 
fillcDlbiththcHaU). 

17  Xhcy  that  fcarc  the  ILozD ,  ibill 
P2eparetbcirbcarts>anDbiimbletbcir 
foulcs  m  his  fight: 

18  Saying,  l©Ctt)lll  falllltO  tbcbatlDS 

of  thcUo2D,anDnotinto  the  hanDsof 
men:  fo:  as  his  maicfhc  is ,  fo  is  bis 
mercie. 

CHAP.    III. 

Children  muft  honour,  and  helpe  both  their 
parents.  11  Wc  may  notdefircto  knoweall 
things  i^Thc  incorrigible  muft  needespc- 
rifh.   -,o  Alines  arc  rewarded. 


care  mce  your  father,  <© 
cljUDzcn,  anD  Doe  tUcrcaf- 
tcr.tbatyemaybefafe. 

z  5fo:  the  H02D  hath 
giuctrthc  father  honour 
oucr  the  chUD2cn ,  anD  hath  conficmcD 
tbellautbonncof  the  mother  oucr  the 
fonnes. 

j  nabofobonouretbbisfathcr3ma? 
Beth  an  atonement  fo:  his  finnes. 

4  3tnD  he  that  honoureth  his  mo* 
ther ,  is  as  one  that  lay  cth  Dp  treafur  e. 

5  nabo  fo  honoureth  his  father, thai 
bauc  toy  of  his  0v\  ne  cbilDjcn ,  anD  lbben 
he  maueth  his  p?ayer ,  bee  Ojail  bee 
hcarD. 

6  $ethathononrcthhisfather,fhai 
haucaionglife,  anDhethat  tsobcDimt 
bnto  the  JL02D ,  fljail  bee  a  comfojtto 
his  mother. 

7  9etbatfcarethtbc1Lo2D,tbiubo> 
nout  his  father , anD  lhill  do  e  fcruite  bn* 
to  his  parents,  as  to  his  matters. 

8  *  honour  thy  father  anD  mother, 
both  inujo.zD  anD  DccD,  that  ablcffing 
may  come  bpon  thee  from  them, 

9  if  02  the  *  bleffing  of  the  father  c* 
ftabltthcth  the  houfes  of  chUD2en,  but 
tljc  curfc  of  the  mother  rooteth  out 
founbations. 

10  <£>io2ynotintbeDi(bononrofthy 
father,  fo2thy  fathers  Ditbonour  is  no 
glo:y  bnto  thee. 

n  :fo?thcglo2yofaman,isfromthe 
honour  of  his  father,  anD  a  mother  in 
Difl)onour,tsarcp20chtothcehilD2cn. 

ix  Spy  founc,  helpe  thy  father  in  his 
age,  anD  grienc  him  not  as  long  as  hee 
liucth. 

15  3tnD  if  his  bnDerftanDfng  faile, 
baucpaticnecibitbbim,anDDcfpifehun 
not,tbhcn  thou  art  ||  mtljy  ful  frrcngth. 

14  5*02  the  rclicutng  of  thy  father 
than  not  be  fojgotten :  anD  in  ftcaD  of, 
finnes  it  than  be  aDDcD  to  bmlD  thee  bp.  I 

15  3Jn  the  Day  of  thine  affliction  it! 
fl)aiibetememb2CD,thyfinnesairofhai 
melt  aibay,  as  the  yce  in  p  faire  ibarme 
lbcatbcr. 

i6  l?ethatfo2faHethhisfather,isas 
a  biafphcmcr,  anDhethat  angrcthhts 
motbcr,lstiirfcDof<5oD. 

17  39yfotme,  goconibitbtbybuG< 
ncffcinmccRencflc,  fo  fhaitthou  be  be- 
loucD  of  him  that  is  app2ottcD. 

18  *  Xbc  greater  thou  art,  the  11102c 
humble  thy  fclfc,  anD  thou  fhait  fitiD  fa* 
uourbcfo2cthe1Lo2D. 

19  Qtany  are  tn  high  Place  anD  of  r£ 
nottmc: 


"Exo.io.S. 
''ft.  5. 10. 

\\Or,Mge. 
inait. 


*Exod.20. 
I2.deuc  y. 


*  Gene.  17. 

a7.deu.33. 


\\Orjncll 
thinchebi' 
line. 


*Phii.2.3. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.iiij. 


9,14. 


♦Prou.lj. 
i7.rom.i: 

3. 


II  Or,  the 

srtmi  man  ij 
nelhcilecL 
bj  hitpti- 
nijbment. 


•PfiUo.i. 

daii.4.24. 

mjlLh.5.7. 


itorbne:but*mpQcries  are  rcuciicb  bnto 
tljcniccRc. 

10  jfo?  the  poiber  of  the  ?lo;D 
is  great,  anb  Ijcc  is  bonoureb  of  the 
loiblp. 

21  »5>tefec  not  out  the  tilings  that 
ate  too  barb  fo2  thee,  neither  fcarcb  ttje 
things  that  are  abouctbpftrcngtb.  " 

22  26utlbbatiscommaunbcbtbec, 
tbinRc  thereupon  tbitb  rcucrcncc,  foi  it 
is  not  nccbfullfoitbee,  to  fee  with  dime 
eves,  the  things  that  arc  in  fecrct. 

23  26e  not  curious  in  bnncccflaric 
mattcrs:fo?moetl)ingsarcfl)cK)CDUn' 
to  tbec,tben  men  bnbetQanb. 

24.  ifo?  many  arc  bceciucb  bp  tfjrtr 
olbne  Mine  opinion,  anb  an  cuillfufpt* 
tion  fjatl)  oucrtbjoibcn  their  tubgc- 
tnent. 

25  naitbout  eves  thou  (bait  ibant 
light :  pzofcfTc  not  the  ftnottlcbgc  ther* 
fojc  that  thou  bait  not. 

26  ^Ihtbbomc  heart  (ball  fare  cutll 
attbclau\anbbethat  louctf)  banger 
fyailpcrifl)  therein. 

27  anoblrinateUcartfbaUbciaben 
tbttb  fojroiucs,anb  tfjc  rbtrftebman 
(ball  rjeape  untie  bpon  fmnc. 

2$  ||3Jntbepumfbmentoffbcp?onb 
tfjere  is  no  remebic :  foz  the  plant  of 
ttHCRCbneflcbatb  tafeenrooteinrjim. 

29  Xhebcattoftbepwbentibillbn; 
bctftanb  a  parable ,  anb  an  attcntiuc 
earcistDebeGreofatbifeman. 

30  *D9atcr  tbill  quench  a  flaming 
fire,  anb  almcs  mafeetb  anattonentent 
fozfinnes. 

31  3(nb  Dee  tfjat  rcquftetb  goob 
turncs,ts  minbfulloftbattribtebmap 
eomcbeercaftcr:anbtbbcnbefailcrbbe 
(ballfiubattap. 

CHAP.  IIII. 

1  We  may  not  defpife  the  poore  or  tatberlcflt;, 
11  butfeekefbrWifedomc,  20  andnotbe 
afhamed  of  fome  things  ,  nor  g.iinfay  the 
trueth,   30   liorbeaslyonsiuourhoufes. 

$$&&&■  &  fonnc ,  befraube  nottbc 
xmgM  f|poo?c  of  hts  lining ,  anb 
v  a  fmaticnottbcnccbpclcsto 
fctfvvftl  ilbaitclong. 
£&3Ut  2  spabe  not  an  bun* 
grpfoule  fozrotufull,  neither  pzouo&ea 
manntbisbittrcffe. 

3  3Cbbc  not  moje  trouble  to  an  heart 
tfjat  is  bercb ,  anb  beferrc  not  to  gtnc 
tobimfbattsinncebc. 

4  Kciectnot  fbcfupplicatlon  of  fl;c 


Apocrypha. 


afflictcb,  neither  turnc  aibap  t!jp  face 
fromapoojcman. 

5  Hiirnc  not  aibap  thine  cpe  from 
il  the  neebp ,  anb  giuc  bun  none  occafion 
tocurfctbcc: 

6  iroz  if  lie  curfc  tl)cc  m  the  bitter- 
neffe  of  his  foulc,  bis  pjapcr  (bail  be 
hcaro  of  ijnii  that  mabc  him. 

7  ©ct  tbp fclfc  tbclouc  of  the con* 

gccgation,anoboibtbpbcabtoagccat 
man. 

8  JLct  it  not  gricuc  thee  to  boibc 
boibnctbtnccarctotrjcpoo2c)anD3uic 
Dim  a  fcienblp  anfrocrc  lbttb  mceftc- 
neCTc. 

9  SDcliucr  fjim  that  fnffrctb  ttaong, 
from  the  banb  of  the  oppjeObucanb  be 
not  faint  beartcb  ibben  thou  fitrcft  m 
mbgement. 

10  26c  as  a  father  bnto  the  father 
lefTc ,  anb  inftcab  of  a  hufbanb  bnto 
their  mother ,  fo  (bait  thou  be  as  the 
fonnc  of  tbemoft  high,  anb  he  than  louc 
thec  moze  then  tbp  mother  north. 

11  nsifebomc  craiteth  her  chilbjcn, 
anblapetbbolb  of  them  that  fccKeber. 

12  i?ctbatlouctb  bcr,iotietbhfc,anti 
ttjcv  that  feebc  to  her  carrlp,(ball  be  fil 
icbmubtop. 

13  $e  that  holbeth  her  fall  (ban  in^ 
hertt  glow ,  anb  rbbcrcfocticr  fhc  en- 
treth,thc?Lo?bibillbleu"c. 

14  Xhep  that  feme  her  (ball  mint 
flcr  ||  to  the  $oh>  one,  anb  them  that 
loue  her, the  %om  both  louc. 

15  naho  fo  giuetb  care  bnto  her, 
(ball  tubgetbenations,  anb  he  that  at- 
tenbeth  bnto  h^fballbrbellfcrurelp. 

16  3Jf  a  man  commit  btmfelfe  diuo 
hcr,hefl)aiimheritcher,  anbljisgaic- 
ration  (ball holb her  inpoffeffion. 

17  fot  at  the  firft  (he  ibill  ibaibc 
ibitbbtm  bp  troofeebibapcs,anbb;mg 
fearc  anb  bjcab  bpon  hun,anb  tojment 
himlbithhcrbifnpltne,  bnnil  (he  map 
trnft  his  foulc ,  anb  trp  him  bp  her 
Haibcs. 

18  Xhcnlbilfl)crcturnctheflraigl)t 
\bap  bnto  him ,  anb  comfo:t  him,  anb 
(beibbimhcrfcercts. 

19  26uttfhcgocrb?ong,  flicibiufo^ 
faftc  him ,  anb  giuc  him  oucr  to  his 
oujncruinc. 

20  £>bfcruc  tlje  oppojtunmc,  anb 
bclbarc  of  null ,  anb  be  not  afljamcb 
ibhcn  it  tontcrncth  thy  foulc 

21  ifo?  thercisafliamcthatbnngcth 
tinncanb  there  is  a  fljamc  ibljiclj  is  gio 
rlcatib  grace. 
22  Accept 


Or, hm  that 


[J  Or,  in  the 


65  2 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


\GrtekeJn 

timeof/a- 


\\Or,and 
{trine  rot  a- 
gatnfllhe 
jheAtne. 


0r<l'" 


•lukcu. 
>5- 


•Ecdus.ii 


■CI  jp.itf. 


ix  Accept  no  pctfon  agamft  tDy 
foule ,  anu  let  not  thetcuerence  of any . 
man  caufe  thee  to  fall: 

i3  anb  reframc  not  to  fpcane,  t  when ! 
there  is  occafion  to  doe  good ,  anb  htoc  not  I 
tt>V  lntfebome  in  tier  bcautic. 

14  ifo;  by  fpeach  lbitc Dome  (hall  be  1 
imotben,  anb  icarntngby  theuwbof 
the  tongue. 

15  3ln  no  lbife  fpcaKe  agamft  tlje 
truefh,  butbeabafheb  of  thcerrour  of 
thine  ignorance. 

16  26cc  not  afhameb  to  tonfefte  thy 
unties ,  ||anbforce  not  thecourfcof  the, 
nuer. 

17  £|9alie  not  thy  fclfe  an  bnbcrltng 
to  a  foouft)  man,  ucitDer  accept  the  pet- \ 
fon  of  the  mighty. 

is  £>tnuc  for  the  tructh  bnto  DeatD, ' 
ano  the  fLorb  (hall  fight  fo?  thee. 

19  isc  not  Daftie  in  thy  tongue,  anb. 
in  tDy  bcebs  HacHc  anb  r  cmuTc. 

36  26cc  not  as  a  ?Lion  m  tDy  Doufc, : 
norfrantictteamotigtDyfcruants. 

31  %tt  not  thmc  hanDbccftrctthcb 
out  to  rcceiuc ,  ano  (Dut  inljcn  tljou 
(houlbeft|j  repay. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Wee  mull  not  prelum:  of  our  wealth  and 
ftrength,  6  Nor  or  the  mcrcie  ot  God  to 
fume.  9  We  mull  not  be  double  tongued, 
it   Noi.infwcie  without  knowledge. 

€tnotthyDeart bpon  tDy 
goobs,anbfay  not,* 3 
hauc  ynough  for  my  life, 
ijfololb  not  thine  olbnc 
mmbc,anbthyftrcngfh, 
to  Vbaiitc  in  the  inay  es  of  tDy  heart : 

3  3tnb  fay  not ,  roho  (hall  controll 
nice  for  my^rhes;  fortDelLorblbtll 
furely  r  cucngc  thy  pnbe. 

+  £>ay  not ,  3  Dane  finncb ,  anb 
what  hartnc  hath  pppeneb  bnto  mee j. 
fonhelLoja  is  long  furTcringhcUM  in 
tioibifclcttheegoe. 

-5  Concerning  propitiation,  bee  not 
Vbithoutfcare  to  abbe  fume  bnto  finnc. 

6  anb  fay  not ,  ^is  *  mercy  is  great, 
heettnll  be  pacifieb  for  themultmibcof 
my  fumes:  for  mercy  anb  lbrath  tome 
from  him,  anb  Dismbiguacion  rcftcth 
bponfiimers. 

7  *£T)aUcnotaryingtoturnc  to  the 
ILozb,  anb  put  not  off  from  bay  to  bay: 
forfubbcnivfhai  the  wrath  ofthclloro 
1  come  foorfh ,  anb  m  thy  fecuntte  thou 
maitbcDeftrorcD,anbpenfl)  in  the  bay 
ofbengcance. 


s  *  £>ct  not  thy  heart  bpon  goobs 
tmiuftly  gotten :  fo?  they  (Dan  not  profit 
thee  (tithe  bay  of  calamine. 

9  namnoujnot  ibith  cucry  Vbinbe, 
anb  goc  not  into  cnery  may :  for  fo  both 
tljc  fmncr  that  hath  a  Double  tongue. 

io  aseftebfaftm  thynnberftaubtng, 
anb  let  thy  lborbbe  thefamc. 

n  *  25e  fiuift  to  Deare,  anb  let  thy  life 
be  finccrc,?  with  patience  giuc  auunerc. 

iilf  thou  haft  tmbcrftanbmg,  am 
finer  thy  ncighbour,ifnot,lay  thy  hanb 
bpon  thy  mouth. 

13  ^onouraubfliameisintaifeeanb 
tljc  tongue  of  man  is  his  fall. 

i426cnotcaiiebaWDtfpctcr,atibIyi 
not  tu  wait  vuttlj  thy  tongue:  fa*  a  foule 
(Dame  is  bpon  the  tljitfe,  anb  an  emu 
coubemnattonbpon  tlje  Double  tongue. 

K  13c  not  ignorant  of  any  tljmg.tn  a 
grcatmattcrorafmall. 

CHAP.    VI. 

2.  Doc  not  extoll  thy  owne  coDceit,  7  But 
nuke  choife  of  a  friend.  18  Seekewifedome 
betimes:  zo  Itisgrieuoustofome,  z8  yet 
the  Iruits  thereof  are  pleafant.  35  Be  ready 
to  hearc  wife  men. 

iU  fteab  of  a  fhenb ,  be- 
come not  an  enemie ,  fo? 
[thereby]  thou  (Daituu> 
rite  an  ill  name ,  (Dame, 
.  anb  reproth :  cuen  fo  fDall 

afmnet  that  hath  aboublc  tongue, 
i  crtoll  not  thy  fclfe  in  rfte  counfell 

of  thine  ownc  Dcart ,  that  thy  foule  bee 

not  tome  in  pieces  as  a  bull  [  Oraymg 

alone.] 

3  Xhou  (halt  eatbp  thy  lcancs,anb 
loofc  thy  fruit,  anb  leauc  thy  fclfe  asa 
biy tree. 

4  21  inicUeb  foule  fl^ail  beftroy  Dint 
tDathathit,  anb  fhau  matte  him  to  U 
I  laughcb  to  fcome  ofhis  enemies. 

!    5   t  S>lbeet  language  mill  multiply 
frieubs :  anb  a  faire  fpcaHmg  tongue 

I  Unll  mcreafc  lunoc  greenngs. 

6  26e  in  peace  njith  many :  iicucrtDc* 
leffc  hauc  but  one  counfcllcc  of  a  thou- 
fanb. 

7  3Jf  thou  iDoulbft  get  a  frienb, 

I I  pjoue  him  firft.anb  be  not  Daily  to  ere* 
bit  him. 

8  iforfomcmanisafncnDfiwDis 
:  onmc  otcaftotuttiD  milinotabibe  mtljc 
bay  of  thy  trouble. 

9  anb  there  is  a  fnenb ,  mho  being 
|turnfbtocnininc,anb&rifc,U)illbifco 
uerthyrcprocD. 

. 10  3tgame 


•Projio.!, 
and  1 1.4. 
ezck.7.19. 


'Iim.i.i^ 


f  Grtrit.a 
fvect  throat. 


Or-get  htm 
m the  tune ^ 
trtuttc. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vi). 


•cha.37.5- 


II  Orjieart. 
*2cch.« 1.4 


\\Otfollcr. 

Mat.11. 
■9- 


10  *;#game  Tonic  frtcttb  ts  a  compa 
nionattljetablc ,  anb  mill  not  continue 
m  tljc  Dap  of  tby  affliction. 

1 1  26nt  in  tl)p  p:ofperittcbeelbtll  be 
as  tbp  fclfc ,  attb  vuili  be  boulb  once  tl)p 
fcruants. 

12  3Jf tljon bebjougbtloib,  bcibtll 
be  agatnft  tljcc ,  anb  null  Ijtbc  Ijnnfelfc 
from  tljv  face. 

13  Separate  fljy  fclfe  front  ttjme  cnc< 
mics,anb  tadc  beeb  of  tty  fricttbs. 

14  3t  faitljfull  fncnb  is  a  ftcongbc^ 
fence:  anb  bee  tbat  ftatl)  fonnbfucljatt 
onc,rjatl)  fomib  a  tr  cafurc. 

15  iI2otl)ing  bottl)  tounteruaile  a 
faitbful  fncnb,  anb  Ijis  e^ccllcnnc  is  tut- 
ualuable. 

16  31  faitljfnll  fncnb  istljcntcbicinc 
of  Ufcanb  tljcp  tljat  fcarc  tfjc  %o;o  lba( 
finbcljim. 

17  nabo  fo  fcaretl)  tbc  Hojb  ttjaii  bi= 
r  cct  Ins  fncnbtbip  angl)t,fo?  astje  ts,fo 
fljau  Ijis  nctgbboue  be  alfo. 

18  t!0p  fonnc ,  gatber  mftruttton 
fcomtbypoufbbp:  fo  (bait  tbou  finbe 
ibtfebomc  till  tljmc  olb  age. 

19  Come  bnto  Ijcr  as  one  tbatplotb? 
etb,  anb  foibetb ,  anb  \batt  fo?  b  cr  goob 
fruits ,  fo:  tbou  (bait  not  toiletnucbm 
labounngaboutbcr,  but  tbou  fljalt  cat 
oftjer  fruits  rtgbt  foonc. 

zo  Sbe  is  bcry  bnplcafant  to  tlje  bn* 
learncb:  be  tbat  is  tbttbont  |  |bnbcrttan= 
bing.tbill  not  rcntamc  Xbitb  ber. 

zi  5>bctutlb>cbpoiibintasa*nugb 
tie  ttonc  of  triail,  anb  bee  ttnllcaflljcr 
from  bini  ere  it  be  long. 

zz  jfo?  ibtfebomc  is  acco?bing  to 
ber  name ,  anb  (be  is  not  mamfeft  bnto 
many. 

zj  <siuc  care,  mp  fonnc,  rccciuc  m? 
abutcc,  anb  refute  not  my  counfell, 

24  anb  put  tbv  fcctinto  ber  fetters, 
anb  tb?  ncefec  into  ber  ||  cbame. 

z$  ^oib*boibnctby(bouibcr,anb 
bcarc  ber ,  anb  be  not  grteueb  rbitb  bet 
bonbs. 

z6  Come  bnto  ber  ibitb  trjv  tbbolc 
beart, anb fceepe  l)ct  ibapes tbitb  all 
tbppoiber. 

Z7  Searcb  anb  fcclic,  anb  (bee  (ball 
bee  mabe  fcnorocn  bnto  tbec ,  anb 
tbbentboubaftgotbolbofber,lctbcr 

notgoc. 

z8  iFozattbciafttboufljaitfiiibcber 
reft,  anb  tbat  (baibe  turncb  to  tbP  iop. 

29 1Cbcn  (ball  ber  fetters  be  a  ftrong 
befence  fo:  tbec,  anb  Dec  ctjaincs  a  robe 
ofglo:p. 


Apocrypha. 


jo  fo;  tberc  is  a  golocn  ornament 
bponber ,  anbbcrbanbesare  |j  purple 
lace. 

j  1  5OJ0U  fl)alt  put  ber  on  as  a  robe 
ofbonour:anb(l;altputbcrabouttbce 
asacroibncofiop. 

3z  Q9pfonnc,iftboinbilt,tboun)ait 
bectaugbt :  anb  if  tbou  UKltapplv  tbp 
niuioe,  tbou  (bait  be  pjubent. 

33  3lf  tbou  lone  to  bcarc ,  tbou  (bait 
rccctuc  bnber  ftanbing :  anb  tf  tijou  bolb 
tbine  carctbou  (bait  be  ttiifc. 

34  Stanbin  tbc  multitubc  of  tbc*  el 
bcrs,  anb  tleauc  bnto  bun  tbat  is  lbtfe. 

35  25c  milling  to  beare  cttcry  gobip 
bifcourfe,ano  let  not  tlje  parables  of  bn= 
oerftanbingcfcape  tbce. 

36  3lnb  tf  tbou  fecfta  man  of  bnber- 
ftanbing,  get  tljce  betimes  bnto  bim, 
attb  let  tbpfootcibcarc  tbc  Oepsof  bis 

0002C. 

37  Hct  t\)y  minbe  be  bpon  tbc  am 
nances  of  tbe  2Lo:b ,  9  *  mcbitatc  contu 
nuailp  tn  bis  commanbements :  be  (bai 
eftablifb  tbine  beart.anb  ginc  tljcc  Unfe* 
borne  at  tljinc  oibnc  befirc 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  Wee  are  exhorted  from  finne,  4  from  ambi- 
tion, 8  preemption,  10  and  tainting  in 
prayer:  12.  from  lying  and  backebiiing ,  18 
and  how  to  efteeme  a  friend:  19  A  good 
wife:  10  aferuant:  12,  ourcattell:  i$  our 
children  and  parents:  31  theLord  and  his 
Priefts:  32.  the  poore  and  thofe  that  mourne. 

£>e  no  euill,fo  (ball  no 
barmc  come  bnto  tbec. 

z  Depart  from  tljcbti; 
iuft ,  anb  miquitic  fl)all 
ttttueatbay  from  tbec. 

3  £0v fonnc ,  foib  notbpon tbc  fur^ 
rotbes  of  bnrtgbtcoufiicffc ,  anotljou 
(l)aitnotreapctbcmfcuciifoloc. 

4  Sccftc  not  of  tbc  1Lo?b  p:cljcmt> 
nence ,  ncitbcr  of  tljc  Bing  tbe  fcatc  of 
bonour. 

5  *  Jufttfic  not  tbv  fclfc  befo:c  tbc 
lLo?b ,  anb  boaft  not  of  tbv  ibtfcbome 
before  tbe  Ring. 

6  SccUc  not  to  be  uibgc ,  being  not 
able  to  tattc  aibap  imciuitie ,  left  at  any 
tunc  tijou  fcarc  tbc  pcrfon  of  tbc  mtgb 
tic ,  anb  (ay  a  (tumbling  blocftc  m  tljc 
lbay  of  tby  bpjigbtneffc. 

7  iDftciibnotagauifttbemultitubc 
of  a  city,aub  tljcn  tbou  (Ijalt  not  caft  tbv 
fclfc  boibne  among  tbc  people. 

8  2Sinb  not  one  finite  bpon  auotber, 

fo: 


\Or,ar,l-- 
bitndofbln 

fitktjfwmb. 

5>s. 


"Ecdus.8.9 


•Pfall.s. 


'Pfal.14-.. 
i.ccdcs*7' 

1  7.  iobj, 

-.o.Iukc 

iS.ji. 


Apocrypha.  Eccleliafticus.  Apocrypha. 


tCJrc.pbttgh 


*Mat.<5.5,7 
\\  Or,  vain; 
repetition. 


t  (jre .  crea- 
ted. 


"Lejit.  I  J. 
'J 


"Dcu.2j.4 


\\0,/,Mrfi<l 


fo?  in  one  thou  (bait  not  be  bnpumtbeb. 

9  £>aynot,(25oblbillooKebpontbc 
tnultitube  of  my  oblations,  anb  ibben 
3}  offer  to  the  moft  $igb  <5ob,  bcibill 
acceptit. 

10  2Se  not  faint  beartcb  ibben  fbott 
mafceft  thy  pjaycr,  anb  neglect  not  to 
giucaimcs. 

1 1  fLaugb  no  man  to  fcome  in  the  bit? 
terncfle  of  bis  foulc :  foj  there  is  one 
lbbicbbutnblctb  anbcraitctb. 

ir  1 3Deuifc  not  a  lie  againtt  thy  b?o 
tber:  neither  boctbcliBCtothyfncnb. 

15  Wt  not  to  maUcany  maner  of  lie : 
fojtbeeuftome  thereof  is notgoob. 

14  Mt  not  many  ibojbs  in  a  multi? 

tUbe  Of  <ElbCtS,*anb  make  not  |J  much  bab- 

linsjibbentboupzayctt. 

i$  ^atcnotiab02iousib02RC,ncitbcr 
ljufbanb2ic,  lbbicb  the  mott^igl)  bath 
toibcincb. 

i6  dumber  not  thy  fclfc  among  the 
multttubc  of  finncrs ,  but  tcmcjnbct 
tbatibjatb  ibill  not  tary  long. 

17  $umbletbyfoulcgrcatly:fo2tbc 
bengcaueeof  tljc  bngobly  is  fire  anb 
lbonncs. 

is  Change  notafrtenbfojanygoob 
by  no  meanes:  neither  a  faitbnillbjo? 
thcr  fc>2  the  golb  of  sDphir. 

19  5F ojgoc not  a  lbifc  anb  goob  ibo? 
man :  fo?  her  graccisaboucgolb. 

20  *B9bcrcas  tljyfcruant  ibojftctb 
trucly,  entreatc hnn not  cuill,no2tbc 
hireling  that  bcftolbetbbinifelfcibb6i; 
lyfojtbec. 

21  fLctthp  foulc  louc  a  goob  fcrnant, 
anb  befraub  him  not  of  liberty. 

22  *$afttboueattcll*baucattcyeto 
thcm.anb  if  they  bcfoithppjont^ccpc 
them  ibitb  thee. 

23  ^attthouchilbjetu  inftrurttbem, 
anb  botb  boibnc  their  necac  from  their 
youth- 

24  $aft  thou  baugbtcrsf  hauc  care 
of  their  boby,  anb  fbcibenot  thy  fclfe 
cbccrcruiitoibarbtbcm. 

25  Carrie  thy  baugbtcr,anbfo  thait 
tljou  hauc  pcrftmucb  a  lbcigbttc  mat? 
tcr :  but  glue  her  to  a  man  of  bnber? 
ftanbmg. 

26  ^atttbouaibifcaftcrtbyminbc? 
foifafeehcrnot,  but  giucnot  tbyfclfco? 
ucrtoa||ligbtlboman. 

27  honour  thy  father  Ibitb  thy 
lbbolc  heart,  anb  foigct  not  the  Co? 
roibcs  of  thy  mother. 

28  Scmcmbcrthatthoulbattbcgot 
of  them,  anb  boib  tanft  tljou  rccom- 


penfe  them  the  things  that  they  bane 
bouefoztbee? 

29  ifcarc  the  3Lo;tb  ibitb  all  thy  foulc, 
anb  reucrencc  his  pnefts. 

30  ftouchim  that  mabe  thee  ibitb  all 
thy  ftrcngtb,  anbfotfaue  not  ljismttu? 
Iters. 

31  ifearerbe  Uo2b,  anb  honour  the 
p2iell:anbgiuehimhispo2tion,asitis 
commanbeb  tbee,fbe  firtt  fcuits,anb  the 
trefpaffe  offering,?  the  gift  of  the  fboul? 
bers,  anb  tbcfacrificc  of  fanctificanon, 
anb  the  firG  fruits  of  the  holy  things. 

32  *3tnbft retch  thine  hanbbnto  the 
poo2C,that  tljy  j|biefsinS  may  be  pcrfecteo 

33  3giftbatbgraccitttbcagbtofe? 
ucry  man  liuing ,  anb  fo?  the  bcab  be? 
tctneitnot. 

34  ifaile  not  to  bee  tbtth  them  that 
ibeepe,  anb  mournc  ibith  them  that 
mournc. 

35  25e not  Oolb  to  bifit  the  Gene  :fo? 
that  (hall  mabe  thee  to  be  beloueb. 

36  n&hatfbcucr thou  taheft  in hanb, 
remember  the  cnb,anbthou{haitncucr 
boeamuTc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  Whom  wc  may  not  rtriue  with,  S  nordefpife, 
10  norprouoke,  15  norhauetodoevvith. 

Xriuc  not  ibith  a  mighty 
man ,  left  thou  fall  into  his 
hanbs. 
2  26cc  not  at  bariance 
ibith  a  nth  man,lcft  h  c  oucr  ibcigb  tljee: 
fo2golb*hath  beftroyeb  many,anb  per? 
ucrteb  the  hearts  of  lungs. 

3  Rtriue  not  ibith  a  man  that  is  1 1  full 
of  tongue ,  anbheape  not  tboob  bpon 
IjisSre. 

4  3Jcftnotibitbarttbctnan,lcftthy 
anccftoursbc  bifgraceb. 

5  &cp2och  notamanthatturncth 
from  finne,  but  remember  tbatibcarc 
aillb02thy  *  of  punifbmcnt. 

6  *2Dt(honournotamaninhisolb 
age :  fo2  cuenfomc  of  bs  lbarc  olb. 

7  S&ciouenotoucttbygrcatcftene 
mic  being  bcab,  but  remember  that  ibc 
bicall. 

8   Defpifenotthe  difcouifeof thClbifC,bUt 

acquaint  thy  fclfe  ibith  thctr  p20uerbs  ■, 
f02of  them  thou  ftjatt  icarne  mftructi? 
on,$hoib  to  feme  great  men  ibith  cafe. 
9  ^iffenotthcoifcourfcofthc(£l> 
bers  :foi  they  aifo  learneb  of  there  fa- 
thers, anb  of  them  thou  (bait  learne 
bnbctftanbing,  anbtogme  anftuereas 
nccbrccuurcth. 
10  iambic 


*Dcut.  15 

10. 

J I  Or,  tiyL- 

beralitjt 


"Mjt.5.15. 
chap.  3 1.6 

\\Or,cfar, 
cmU  tcncH?, 


■Ga!.«.i. 
l.cor.l.tf. 
"Lcuitip. 
i2- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.ix.x. Apocrypha. 


\\Or,forthy 

mouth . 


'Gcnc.4.8. 


"Prou.  22, 
14. 


Or,pLtyeih 
vponinjtrM- 

menu. 


10  i&nblcnotthc  coales  of  afinncr, 
left  thou  be  burnt  lbtth  the  flame  of  tjis 
fire. 

11  &ifc  notbp  (in  anger)  at  the  pic* 
fence  ofanimuriouspcrfon ,  leaft  he  Ite 
inibaitc  to  ||  entrap  thee  in  thy  tbo;bs. 

ix  fLenb  not  bnto  him  that  is  migl> 
tier  then  thp  fclfc;fo:  if  thou  lenbett  him, 
count  it  but  loft. 

13  25e  not  furctp  abouc  thppotbcr : 
fo2tfthoubcfurctp,taBccaretopaptt. 

14  coe  no  t  to  law  voitl)  a  uibgc,  fo: 
th  cv  Vbii  l  lubgc  fo?  |)inn  acco?bmg  to  hts 
II  honour. 

15  *  ICranaflc  not  by  the  tbap  tbfth  a 
bolb  fellotb ,  lead  Dc  become  grtcuous 
bnto  thee  :fo?hc  tbtll  boe  acco?bing  to 
his  ottnc  tbill ,  anb  thou  (halt  pctifb 
tbtth  htm  through  hisfolhn 

i6  *  £>triuc  not  tbtth  an  angry  man, 
anb  goe  not  tbtth  him  into  a  foittaty 
place :  fo?  bloob  is  as  nothing  in  his 
fight,  anbtbherc  there  is  no  hclpe,  he 
tbtll  oucrfbzotb  thee. 

17  Confutt  not  tbtth  a  foolc ;  fo?  he 
cannot  Keep e  counfcll. 

18  SDoenofeccctthtngbefojeaftran^ 
ger,  fo?  thou  ftnottett  not  tbhat  he  tbtll 
b?tngfo?tft. 

19  £)pcn  not  thine  heart  to  cucrp 
man,lcaQhcreqaitetheetbtthaCb?etbb 
tumc. 

CHAP.  IX. 

1  We  are  aduifed  how  to  vfe  our  wiues.  3 
What  women  to  auoide.  10  And  not  to 
change  an  old  friend.  13  Not  to  be  familiar 
with  men  in  authority,  14  But  to  knowe 
our  neighbours,  15  And  to  conuerfe 
with  wife  men. 

£  not  ieaious  oner  the 
tbtfe  of  fhp  bofome ,  anb 
teachhcrnotancuillcfron 
againftthpfelfe. 
z  Giwc  not  thy  foule 
bntoatbbnian,  tofcthetfootbponthp 
fubftance. 

j  Qfrtttt  not  tbith  an  harlot,  lead 
thou  fail  into  her  fnares. 

4  tlfc  not  much  the  companie  of  a 
tbomanthatllisafinger.lcaftthoubeta: 
fern  tbith  her  attempts. 

5  <BSit  not  on  a  maibcthat  thou  fail 
notbp  thofctI)mgs,thatatep?ctiousm 
her. 

6  <&int  not  thy  foule  bnto  harlots, 
that  thou  loofc  not  thine  inheritance. 

7  fLooSc  not  tounb  about  thee ,  in 
thellrectsof  thectttc,  neither  tbanoee 


tljou  m  the  folitarp  places  thereof. 

8  *Xurne  atbap  thine  eye  from  a 
beautifull  tboman,  anb  loohe  not  bpon 
anothersbeautic :  fo2manj>hauebccne 
becetucb  bp  the  bcantic  of  a  tboman,  fo? 
hecretbifh  louc  is  utnblcb  as  a  fire. 

9  5>it  not  at  all  tbith  another  mans 
tbtfc,no?  fit  boibnc  tbith  her  in  thine 
armes,  anb  fpenb  not  thy  money  tbith 
heratthctbineJcaftthmchcattituimc 
bnto  hcr.ano  fo  thorough  thy  defire  thou 
fall  into  bed  ruction. 

10  ifojfaftcnotan  olb  fcieno ,  fo?the 
netb  is  not  comparable  to  him :  a  nctb 
fticnb  is  asnctblbtnc :  tbhen  it  is  olb, 
thou  (halt  bJinac  it  tbith  pleafure. 

11  enupnotthcglo?yofafinncr:fo? 
thoumtotbcflnottbhatfbalibehtscnb. 

n  S>elight  not  in  the  thing  that  the 
bngobl?  hauc  pleafure  in,  but  remeni* 
bet  they  fhall  not  goe  bnpunifhcb  bnto 
their  graue. 

13  Bccpc  thee  farre  from  the  man 
that  hath  potber  to  Rill,  fo  fbaltthou 
notboubtthcfcareofbeath:anbtfthou 
come  bnto  him,  mafec  no  fault ,  leafi  he 
tafee  atbay  thy  life  p?cfcntlp:rcmember 
that  thou  gocft  in  the  mibft  of  fnares, 
anb  that  thou  tbaitteft  bpon  thebaic 
mentsofthctitfe. 

14  318  ncercasthou  eanuNcjhcfTcat 
thy  neighbour ,  anb  confult  tbith  the 
tbtfe. 

15  fLmhytaiBebettnththctbifcatib 
all  thy  communitationin  the  lalb  of  the 
moft^igh. 

16  3utb  let  inft  men  catc  anb  b?inUc 
tbitb  thee,  anblctthyglo?ytngbctn  the 
feateofthcfU)?b. 

17  3f  o?  the  hanb  of  the  artificer,  the 
tboiac  (hall  be  commenbeb  :  anb  the 
tbife  ruler  of  the  people,  fo?  his  fpcech. 

18  3  man  of  an  ill  tongue  is  banger* 

ousinhiscitic,anbhcthatisraihtnhts 

talUclhallbehatcb. 

CHAP.  X. 

The  commodities  of  a  wife  ruler.  4  Godfet- 
tethhimvp.  7  The  inconueniences  of  pride, 
iniuftice.andcoueroufnefTe.  14  WhatGod 
hath  done  to  the  proud.  19  Who  fhall  be 
honored,   10  Andwhonot. 

totfc  iubgc  Uull  tnflruet 
his  people ,  $  the  goucrne- 
ment  of  a  p?ubcnt  mants 
tbcllo?bcrcb. 
x  *3lstbcuibgcofthc 
people  ts  himfclfc ,  fo  arc  hts  officers, 
anb  tbhat  maner  of  man  tlje  ruler  of 
the 


♦Gen.  34. 

1 1.  i.iudg. 
10.17. 


"Prou.ip. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,f.,cc. 


"Lcuir.  19. 
'7- 


tliectttc  is ,  fuel)  are  ail  tbcptljatbibell 
tljerein. 

j  3in  bnlbifc  King  bcttropetb  bis 
people ,  but  through  the  pmbence  of 
them  Vbijtct)  arc  m  autljo2itic,  the  citic 
flmlbcmljabiteb. 

4.  Xbc  poibcr  of  the  cart!)  is  in  the 
banb  of  tljc&ojb,  anb  in  Due  time  bee 
Mllfctoucrltoncthatispjofitable. 

5  3Jn  the  banb  of  Gob  is  tlie  p;of> 
peritic  of  man:  anb  bpon the  llpcrfon  of 
the  fenbe  (ball  be  lap  Ijis  honour. 

6  25eare  not  batrcb  to  tbp  neigh 
bour  foz  *  cucrp  ibjong,  anb  bo  nothing 
at  all  bp  ininrious  pzactifes. 

7  j&tbc  is  batcfull  before  Gob ,  anb 
man :  anb  by  both  boetb  one  commit 
imqumc. 

8  asctaufcofbnrtgljtcousbcalings, 
miuncs,  anb  riches  got  bp  Deceit,  tlje 
tungbomc  is  tranflatcb  from  one  pco 
plcto  another. 

9  nabp  is  earth  anb  afbes  pjoubc : 
Xbcrc  isnota  mozc  Tbicfecb  tbtng.thcn 
a  conctous  man :  fo?  fuclj  an  one  fcttcth 
bis  oibnc  fonlc  to  fale ,  becaufe  ibhtlc 
be  Iiueth,be  tartcth  aibap  bis  boibcls. 

10  xijc  ^hifition  euttctb  off  a  long 
bifcafc,  anb  he  that  is  to  bap  a  Bing,to 
mozroib  (ball  bie. 

11  f  0?  ibben  a  man  is  bcab,bcc  (ball 
tnljcritc  creeping  things ,  bcaftcs  anb 
Uwmes. 

ix  Xbcbeginningofp2iDeiS,tuhcn 
one  bepartctb  from  Gob  anb  his  Ijcart 
is  turncb  aibap  from  his  maiicr. 

13  if  0?  pnbe  is  tb  c  beginning  of finnc, 
anb  lire  that  hatb  it,  fliaii pottve  out 
abomination:  anb  therefore  tlie  %0}b 
bjougbt  bpon  them  ffrange  calamities, 
anb  oucrtl)2eib  tbcm  btterlp. 

14  3CficfLozDliatI)  caft  boibnc  the 
tlj2ones  of  pjoua  #2inccs,anb  fet  bp  the 
meebc  in  their  ftcab. 

15  %\\t  fLojb  bath  plutftcb  bp  tlje 
rootes  of  tbc  pjoub  nations :  anb  pian- 
tcbthcloiblp  in  their  place. 

i6  %\)t  floib  oucrtb2cib  tountreps 
of  tbc  heathen :  anbbcffropcbthcmto 
tbcfounDanonsoftbccartfj. 

17  l?ctooucfomcoftbcmalbap,anb 
Dcftroycb  tbcm,  anb  bath  mabctljetr 
memonallto  ceafefrom  tbc  earth. 

is  02ibcJbasnotmabcfo2mcn,noj 
furious  anger  fo?  them  that  are  borne 
ofaiboman. 

19  Xbcp  tbat  fearc  tlje  ?Lo2b area 
furefeeb,anbtbevtbatloucbim,anl)0' 
nourablc  plant :  tbcp  tljat  regarbnot 


tbcl^tt^atcabtfbononrablcfccbtljep 
ttjat  tranfgrcfTc  tbc  commanbements 
atca|]Dcccuiablefceb. 

20  Sunong  bzctbjenhctbatiscbicfc 
isbonourablc.fo  arc  thep  that  fear  c  tlje 
?Lo2binbiScpes. 

21  Xljcfcarcoftbc1Lo2bgoctf)bc 
fojc  ||  tlje  obtaining  of  autljojmc :  but 
rougljncflc  anb  pnbe ,  is  the  loofing 
tljctcof. 

22  nabcthet  bee  bee  rich,  noble,  02 
poo?c ,  tljcir  glozic  is  the  fcare  of  tlje 

?L02b. 

23  3Jtts  not  meet  to  bcfpife  tlje  pooje 
man  tljat  bath  bnbctftanbmg ,  ncitbcr 
is  it  conuenicnt  to  magntfic  a  finuefull 
man. 

24.  Great  men ,  anb  3Jubges ,  anb 
potentates  (bail  bee  bonourcb,  pet  is 
there  none  of  tbcm  greater  then  Ijc  tljat 
fcaretbtbclLojb. 

25  Unto  tbc  feruant  tljat  is  Jbifc, 
(ball  thep  tbat  arc  free  boe  feruicc :  anb 
bee  tbat  bath  bnoibieoge,  *mu  not 
grubgc  ibhen  he  is  rcfonncb. 

26  iScnotouerMeinbomgtbpbu: 
fines ,  anb  boatt  not  tbp  felfe  in  tlje  time 
oftljvbittrcffe. 

27  asetter  islje  tljat labouretb  anb 
abounbctlj  in  all  tbings ,  tben  bee  tljat 
boaQctlj  bimfclfcanb  ibantctb  *bjeab. 

28  ^p  fonne,  glo?ifie  tljp  Toule  in 
mccUcncfie ,  anb  giue  it  Honour  acco: 
bmg  to  tlje  btgnittc  tbercof. 

29  831)0  ibii  lufiifie  bim  tbat  Gnnctl) 
againll  Ijis  olbnc  fouler  anb  Ibbotbill 
bonour  bun  tljat  bifbononretb  ins 
oibnebfci 

30  Xljc  poojc  man  is  bonoureb  fo* 
Ijis  f  bill ,  anb  the  rich  man  is  Ijonourcb 
fo*  bis  riches. 

31  l?ec  that  is  Ijonourebmpouertie, 
hotb  mud)  mojc  in  richest  ^nbhc  that 
is  bifljonourablc  mrtchcSj  Doib  much 
mojcinpouertte* 

CHAP.    XL 

4  Wee  may  not  vaunt  or  fctfoorthourfelues, 
8  Nor  anfwere  rafhly,  10  Nor  meddle 
with  many  matters.  14  Wealth  and  all 
things  e!fc,arc  from  God.  14  Braggenotof 
thy  wealth,  19  Nor  bring  eueiy  man  in- 
to thy  houfc. 

J3!fcbomc  iiftctb  b/j  the 
jljcab  llofhimtba.  is  ufloib 
)begree,anb  *  tnaUctl)  him 
\  1 0  fit  among  great  men. 
2  Commenbnotaman 
foj 


\\Or.v,- 
ft.ible  emc- 


\\Or,pri»ct- 
pahtic. 


•Pro.  17  2. 
l.Sam.12. 


*  Pro.  1 2. 5?. 


\\Orfof(he 

torvty. 

*Cen.40. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xj, 


Apocrypha. 


Aft.IS.2I 


\Cr.tjrtviu. 


'i.Kin.i; 

26  hcR6. 
10. 

Dcur.12. 

24- 


•Pto.8.11, 


Or,  in  the 
ludgement 
of  firmer:. 


Or,  rfcape 
hurt. 

•Mat.  19. 
12.  i.citn. 
6.9.  prou. 
10.13. 


'Iobl.12. 
eick.  18.4. 


*Lultei2. 

'  si- 


ft)? bisbcautic  ,  neither  abbozrea  man  1 
foz  IJ10  outlbarb  appearance. 

3  Xhe  26ee  is  little  among  fnch  as ! 
flic,  but  her  fnuteis  the  cbiefe  of  fuieete  i 
things. 

4  *  Soaft  not  of  tbp  cloatbmg  anb 
raiment ,  ant)  trait  not  top  felfe  m  the 
Dap  of  honour :  foz  the  ujozUes  of  the  | 
Hozb  arc  ibonberfull,  anb  his  tbozHes : 
among  men  arc  bibben. 

5  ifjanp  t umgs hauc  fitbotimebp; 
on  the  gronnb,  ano  one  that  lbas  nener 
thought  of,  hath  lbozne  the  troibnc. 

6  **10aup  migbttc  men  hauc  beene 
gccatlpbifgraccb :  anb  the  honourable : 
Deliuereb  into  other  mens  bancs. 

7  *i5iamenot  befozctboubaftera'! 
mmcb  the  tructb :  bnberftanbfirft.anb 
tbenrcbuHe. 

8  *  3tafujcte  not ,  befoze  tljou  halt 
hcarb  the  taufc :  neither  interrupt  men 
m  the  niibft  of  their  taihc. 

9  5>ttiue  not  in  a  matter  that  ton; 
terncth  thee  not:  anb  fit  uot||iniuogc 
mcnnbitbfmners. 

10  :Q0f>  fonncmcbble  not  tbitb  manp 
matters  :fozifthoumcbblemuth,thou 
tbait  not  be  innocent :  anb  if  thou  fol- 
low after ,  thou  (bait  not  obtame,  net* 
tber  (bait  thou  ||  cfcapcbpflpmg. 

1 1  *Xhere  is  one  that  labour  ctb  anb 
tancfbpaitics,anbmabetbbafte,anblg 
fo  much  the  moze  bebmbc. 

ii  3lgainc ,  there  is  another  that  is 
flolb,anbbatbnccbeofhclpc,i1banting 
abilitic,  anb  full  of  pouertic,  *  pet  the  epc 
of  tbefLozb  looftcb  bpon  bun  foz  gooo, 
anb  fct  bun  bp  from  bis  loib  cftate, 

13  3nb  lifteb  bp btsbcab  from  mtfc< 
tie,  £0  that  many  that  fatb  it,  marueileb 
at  him. 

14  0zofpcrttic  anb  abuerfitic ,  life 
anbbeath,pouerty  anb  riches,  tomeof 
tbelLozb. 

15  naifebomcbnoiblebgcanbbn 
berftanbmg  of  the  flattie ,  arc  of  the 
ILozb :  louc,  9  the  ttmy  of  goob  lbozlies, 
arc  from  bun. 

16  errouranb  barRcnetTebab  their 
beginning  together  ttntb  finncrs:  anb 
cuill  fball  lbatc  olbibith  them  that  gio- 
ry  therein. 

17  Xbc  gift  of  the  ILozb  rcmainetb 
tbitb  the  gobly ,  anb  Ijisfauour  bzingctlj 
pzofperiticfozetter. 

is  Xbere  istbaubajectbrtebbybis 
tbatiiielTe,anb  pinching,  anb  this  is  the 
poztionofbisrcibarb: 

19  nabctcas  he  faytb>*3  hauc  founb 


reft,  anonolb  lbill  eatc  continually  of 
mp  gooos,  ano  vet  tjee  lmo\bctb  not 
lbhat  time  (ball  ||  conic  bpon  him ,  anb 
that  bci  mtift  icane  tbofc  things  to  0 
tbers,anDDtc. 

20  25c*ftebfaftinthptoncnant,  anb 
be  conucrfant  therein,  ano  ttiarc  olbc  in 
tbyttiozHe. 

21  sJQarucilc  not  at  the  ujozrcs  of 
finncrs,btittrtiftuttbcllo2b,anDabibc 
intbp  labour :  foz  it  is  aneafic  thing  in 
the  fight  of  the  Hozo,  ontbefubbento 
inakcapoozemanricb. 

22  Xbe  blcflingoftbc  ?Lozbis||in 
the  rettiarb  of  the  gooip ,  ano  fuobenly 
be  malieth  bis  blcffing  to  flounfl). 

23  £>aynot,*nDbatpzofitis  there  of 
my  feruicc  f  ano  vbljat  goob  things  flial 
3J  hauc  hereafter  < 

1+  3gamr,fay  not,U  banc  enough, 
anb  pofleftc  many  things  5  anb  lbhat 
cuillcan  come  to  me  hereafter  i 

25  gin  the  bap  of  pzofpcntic,  there  is 
a  fozgctfulueflre  of  affliction:  anb  m  the 
bay  of  affliction,  there  is  noremem 
bzancc  ofpzofpcntie. 

i6  iFozitis  an  cafic  thing  bnto  the 
ILozb  tn  the  bay  of  beath,  to  rcibarb  a 
man  accozbing  to  bis  ibayes. 

27  %t}t  affliction  of  an  Ijourc,  tna* 
ftcth  a  man  fozget  plcafure:  anb  in  bis 
cnb,bisbcebs  lljalbcbifcoucreb. 

28  3fobgc  none  blcflcb  befoze  bis 
bcatb :  foz  a  man  (ball  bcchnoiben  tn 
biscbtlbzen. 

29  26zmg  not  cucry  man  into  thine 
boufc ,  fo?  tljc  Dcceitfull  man  hath  ma* 
nytrames. 

30  hikc  as  a  ^artricb  taken  [anb 
bept]  m  a  tagc,  fo  is  the  heart  of  the 
pzouD;  aubliKc  asafpic,  ibatcbctb  bee 
foz  thy  fall. 

31  jfo2beclicthinttiait,anbturnetb 
goob  into  cuill ,  anbm  things  Mwtby 
pzatfc.ttnil  lay  blame  bpon  tbec. 

32  £>f  a  fparbe  of  fire,  a  bcapc  of 
coales  is  lunbicb:  anb  a  finnefullman 
lapctbibattcfozbloob. 

33  Xaue  becb  of  a  mifcbieuotts  man, 
(foz  bee  lbozuctb  ttiicRcbncfTc )  lefthec 
bung  bpon  thee  a  pcrpctuail  blot. 

34  Kccciiic  a  ftranger  into  thine 
boufc ,  anb  Ijcc  ttnll  bifturbc  tbec ,  anb 
tunic  tljee  out  of  thine  ovbite. 

CHAP.   XII. 

2.    Benotlibcialltotlicvnoodly.   10  Truilnoi 
thine  encmicj  nor  the  wicked. 


\Or,p*jfe. 


Matt. 10. 


\\Or.fir. 
r  error  d. 


Mai.  3.14. 


£>fff 


nmieni 


Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


||0r>#. 


\\Ortm'mg- 


'Icr.4l.i5 


$cntDouttnlt  doc  good, 
tmonj  to  tbDo  tDou  bocft 
M&  tt,fo  (bait  tDou  be  tDanueb 
^fojttDybcncntcs. 
'c£  z  2>ogoobtotDcgobly 
man,  anb  tDou  fbaittmbatccompcncc, 
anD  if  notfcomDun,  yet  from  tDcmoft 
$)igl> 

j  XDere  can  no  goob  tome  to  Dun 
tl)at  is  aiibaycs  oceupicb  in  euill :  no: 
to  Dim  tfjat  giuetD  no  amies. 

4-  ©uic  to  tljc  gobly  man,anb  Dclpc 
not  a  turner. 

5  2>oclDtlli)ntol)im  tDatiSlotbiy, 
but  giue  not  to  tDebngobly :  Dolb bacbe 
tljy  b?eab,anb  giueitnotPntoDun,  left 
lie  ouetmaftw  tljcc  tDetcby.  JFoz  [eife] 
tl)oufl)aitrcteiue  trbite  as  inuct)  cum, 
fo;  all  tlje  goobtDou  fljait  Daue  bone 
bntoDint. 

6  foi  tDc  mod  $igD  DatctD  fin 
nets,  anb  iblll  repay  Pcngcancc  Pnto 
tUePngobly.anbBcepctDtDcmagainft 
tljc  migDtic  oap  of  tDeir  puniQjment. 

7  <5inc  Pnto  tDc  goob ,  anb  Dclpc 
not  tDc  (inner. 

8  3lfricnb  cannot  be  feuotben  in  pjo 
fperitie,anb  an  enemy  cannot  be  tjibben 
in  abucrfitte. 

9  3n  tljc  piofpcrttie  of  a  man,  enc- 
mtesiPtUbcgnettcb,  butinljisabucrft 
tie,  cucn  a  fricnb  Vbtll  bepact 

io  /3euertrufttl)inecnemie:fo?libc 
as  ||  yjon  ruftctD ,  fo  is  Dis  tbicbebncflJr. 

1 1  XrjougD  De Dnmble Dimfelfc,anb 
goc  croucDtng,  pet  tafte  goob  Ijceb ,  anb 
betbareof  Dim,  anb  ftjoa  fljaltbecPtv 
to  Dim ,  as  if  fljou  Dabtt  ibipcb  a loo- 
Rtnggiaffc,anb  tDoufljait  miotbctDat 
Dis  tuft  Datlj  not  becne  aitogctDcr  lbi; 
peb  albay. 

iz  3>ctDtmnotby  tljec,  left  tbljen  lie 
IiatI)  oucrtl)20Vben  tijee,  lie  ftanbPptn 
tDy  place,  ncitDer  let  Dim  fit  at  tDytigDt 
Danb,  icftDcfccttc  to  tatte  tDy  feat,  anb 
tDou  at  tDc  laftrcmembet  mytt>o«tbes, 
anb  be pnefeeb  tDercibitb. 

13  nDDoiPillpiticatDarmcrtDatts 
bitten  iPitlj  a  ferpent,  o?  any  fuel)  as 
come  nig!)  ttiiibcbcafts; 

i+  ^>o  one  tDat  goctl)  to  a  (inner, 
.nib  is1  Difilcbllutl)  Dim  in  l;is  funics 
lPDolbillpitic? 

15  5F02  a  lbDilc  Dec  ibiii  abibe  ibitl) 
tl)ee,but  if  tDou  begin  to  faii.Dc  mil  not 
taric. 

i6  3ln  enemic fpeaftetl) ftucetly ttntl) 
*  Die  lippcs ,  but  m  Dis  Deart  Dc  image 
uetDDolbtotD^olb  tDee into  a  pit:  Ijce 


VbillPjccpeibitD  Diseycs,  but  if  Dcfinb 
joppoztunitte,  Dec  will  not  be  fatiffieb 
nmDbioob. 

17  gjf  amierfitie  come  Ppon  tDee, 
;tDoufl)altfinbDuntl)ercnrft,  fjtDougl) 
Dcp2ctcnbtoDelpetDce,yctfDalDc||Pn' 
bcrminctDee. 

is  i^c  mill  fljafee  DisDeab  anb  clap 
Dts  Danbcs,  anb  lbDifpct  mucD,  anb 
cljangc  Dis  countenance. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

Keepe  not  companie  with  thepioude,  or  a 
mightier  then  thyfell'e.  15  Like  will  to  like. 
11  The  difference  betweene  the  rich  and 
the  poore.  15  A  mans  heart  will  change 
lis  countenance. 

e  tDattoucDetDpitcD,0)ai 
bcbcfileb  tDcrettntD ,  anb 
'Dec  tDat  DatDfeilotbfDip 
tbuDapzoubcman,  fDaii 
bcltucPntoDmi. 
x  26nrtDennottDyfclfe 
abouetDypoVber,ibDiletDouuucft,anb 
Dane  no  fciioibflui)  Until  one  tDat  is 
migDncr,anbrieDcrtDcntDyfeIte.  JF02 
DoU)  agree  tDe  Settle  anb  tDc  earrDen 
pottogctljer  <  tfoi  tf  tDeoncbe  fmuten 
agamft  tDc  otDet,  it  Ojall  be  Soften. 

?  XDc  rul)  man  DatD  bone  tb?ong, 
anb  yet  De  tijicatnetD  ttntDaU:  tDcpooje 
is  tt>2ongcb,anb  De  muftintrcat  alfo. 

4  3f  tDoubefb?  Dispjofit,  De  Unll 
Pfc  tDee:  but  rf  tDou  Daue  notDmg,  De 
ibillfoifafectDce. 

5  3f  tDou  Daue  any  tDing,Dctt)ill 
Uue  urn!)  tDee,  yea  Dc  null  matte  tDee 
bare,  anb  null  not  be  foiie  fbiu. 

6  3lfDeDauenceboftDee,Dcett)tli 
bctciue  tDee,  anb  fmile  Ppon  tDee,  anb 
put  tljec  in  Dope,  Dc  Null  fpeabe  tDee 
fairc.anb  fay,  lODat  ibantcft  tDon  i 

7  3nb  Dec  rum  (Dame  tDee  by  Dis 
mcates,  PnhilDe  Daucb^aiPcntDecbjic 
tibice  oi  tDuce,  anb  at  tDclaftDceUnll 
laugD  tl)ce  to  fcomc :  afterrbarb  lPl)en 
Defect!)  tDee,  Dc  Hnll  fo^fabc  tljec,  anb 
fDancDisDeabattDcc. 

8  25ctbarc  tDat  tl)ou  bee  not  becei* 
ucb,  anb  taougDt  bovbnc  ||  m  tljy  iolitte. 

9  3f  tDou  be  tnuitcb  of  a  nugDty 
man,  lbitDbzaip  tDy  fclfc,  anbfo  mucD 
tDc  mozc  null  licuuutctDcc. 

10  02cfTc  tDou  not  Ppon  Dun,  left 
tDou  be  putbacue,  ftanb  notfarrc  off, 
lefteDoiibcfojgottcn. 

n  liaffcetnottobcmabccquailPnto 
DimintaiucllanbbclceuenotDismany 
iboibs :  foi  IbitD  muclj  conununuation 
null 


\\Or,f«l 
plant. 


Deu-7.1. 


t  Gre.this 
jbaffmite 
iigainjlit, 


Or \bj  thy 
fmphattc. 


\\Or.fir- 

heart  not, 
WOrtut. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xnij. 


Apocrypha. 


tbillljc  tempt  ttJcc ,  ano  milling  bpon 
thee  ibtll  get  out  thy  facets. 

ii  2Sttt  cruelly  he  tbill  lay  bp  tljp 
ibojos ,  ano  lbill  not  fpace  to  Docthec 
i)urt,  ano  to  putthecin  piifon. 

u  £>bfecuc  ano  taftc  gooo  Ijccb ,  fo? 
thou  tbamcfl  in  peril  of  tljy  ouertb?ou> 
ing :  tbljcn  thou  heated  thefe  thittgs,a' 
make  m  thy  flccpe. 

14  fLouctbe  ?Lo?oaii  thy  life,  ano 
call  bpon  him  to?  thy  Carnation. 

1$  eucry  bead  louctt)  fits  lifte ,  ano 
cucty  manlouethhisncigbbour. 

is  3iu  flcO)  tonfo?tettj  aceo?Ding 
to  fttno ,  ano  a  man  SUM  tlcauc  to  his 

1(1;  r  ♦ 

17  nahatfellomfliip  hath  the  tboifc 
ttnththc  lambe  i  fo  the  [inner  ibith  the 
gobly.  ,     , 

is  iebat  agreement  \s  there  bc< 
ttbeene  the  $ycna  ano  a  oogge  ;ano 
tbbat  peace  bcnbccnc  the  rich  ano  the 

P00?C< 

19  3sthctbnocadcistheiyonsp?ay 
in  tlje  tbtioetuede :  fo  tlje  ritl)  cate  bp 
thepoo?e. 

20  %s  the  p?oub  Date  Ijunnlitic :  fo 
Doth  tbcritljabho?rcthe  poo?e. 

21  7L  rich  man  beginning  to  fall,  is 
helD  bp  of  his  fricnos :  but  a  poo?c  man 
bcittgboibnc,isth?uflaUoaibaybyhis 
fcicnos.  r      „  _   _ 

12  naljen'a  rich  man  is  fallcn,hc  hath 
man?  Dclpcrs :  he  fpcafeeth  things  not 
to  be  fpofeen ,  ano  vet  men  uidific  Dim : 
the  poo?c  man  dipt ,  ano  yet  tbey  rcbtt- 
KCDljimtoo  :Dc  fpafcclbifely,anDcoulD 
haue  no  place. 

25  !©henariehmanrpea&cth,cucry 
man  hoioctlj  his  tongue ,  ano  loohc 
lbljat  Ijee  fayeth,  they  moll  it  to  tlje 
clouos:but  tf tlje  poo«  man  fpeabe,tljcv 
fa?,  iBljat  fcllotb  is  thiS'anb  if  he  dutn^ 
blc,tljcj>tt)illljelpe  to  DUcrtlj?oibe  Dim. 

14  ftiches  ace  gooo  bnto  hmitbat 
hath  no  Onncano  pouctty  is  euillm  tlje 
mouthofthcbitgoDly. 

25  XDeljcactofamancDangctljDis 
countenance ,  ibhethctitbcfo?goooo? 
eum  :  ano  a  merry  heart  ma&cth  a 
chcetcfull  countenance. 

26  %  cljcecefull  countenance  is  a  to- 
nen  of  a  Heart  trjat  is  in  p?ofpcnty,  ano 
toe  finoing  out  of  parables,  is  a  lbcari= 
fomc  labour  oftlje  mtnoe. 

CHAP.  XIIII. 

t    A  good  confeience  maketh  men  happie. 
5  The  niggard  dodi  good  to  none.   13  But 


doe  thou  jiood.    10    Men  are  happy  that 


draw  ncere  to  wifedome. 


ppy 


Chap,  tp 
.iam.j.2.  * 
[  Or,forro-*\ 


*  HcdcD  is  tlje  man  tljat 
Ijatlj  not  dipt  ibith  Ijis 
mouth,  ano  is  not  pjicfeeo 
untlj  tlje  II  multituoe  of 
finnes. 
2   26iclfco  is  Ijcc  Vbljofc  tonfrience 

hath  not  eonbenmebhim,  ano  Ibljois 

not  fallen  from  Ijis  hope  in  t!jclLo?D. 
j   HitDcs  arc  not  comely  fo?  a  nig; 

garo:ano  tbljat  fljouio  an  enuious  man 

00c  lbitlj  money; 

4  l^ethat  gatherctlj  by bcfcauoiug 
Ijis  orbnc  foule ,  gatljcreth  foz  otljcrs, 
that  fliali  fpeno  bis  gooos  tiotoufly. 

5  $ec  tljat  is  euill  to  bimfclfc,  to 
ibljom  rum  Ije  be  goob  t  be  djail  not 
tafec  plcafurc  m  bis  gooos. 

6  1Ebcteisnoncibo?fetbenbc  tljat 
cnnietlj  Ijimfelfc  -,  ano  this  is  arccom- 
pence  of  ms  tbicfteoneffe. 

7  ^noifDeDotljgooo.DeootljitbU' 
ibillingly,anoattf)elaflDerbiUOeciare 
DisVblcbcOnefle. 

s  1Elje  enuious  manljatlja  rbtcftco 
eye,  Ije  tucnctlj  arbay  Ijisface  ano  ocfpi^ 
fetljmen. 

9  ^"'couetousmanseycisnotfatiDr^"'? 
fico  lbitlj  ljispo«ton,ano  tbcmiciiuty  of 
tljcrbicbcDO?yctl)bp  Ijisfoule. 

10  ^U)icBeocycenuietl)[l)is]b2eao, 
anoDeisaniggarbatljis  table. 

11  S0y  fonncaccojotngtotljy  Ijabilii 
tie  Doe  gooo  to  tl)y  fclft,  ano  giuc  tlje 
JlojDDisDucoffeting. 

12  Uemcmbcc  tljat  ocatlj  ibill  not 
be  long  in  co  mining ,  ano  tnat  tl)c  roue 
nant  of  tlje  grauc  is  not  fljcibeo  bnto 
ttjec. 

u  *2Doc  gooo  bnto  tbyfcienb  before 
tljou  bic ,  ano  accojbmg  to  tljy  abi^ 
litie ,  fltctctj  out  tljy  IjanO  ano  giuc  to 
Dun. 

14  2DcfcauonottDyfelfeof|tl)cgooo 
Day,anoietnottDcpattofagoo00cficc 
ouecpalTctDee. 

15  dDait  tljou  not  leauc  tDy  tta^ 
uaties  bnto  anotljer  <  ano  tljy  labours 
tobebiuioeobylot; 

i6  ©tucanotaiie ,  ano  fanctific  thy 
foulcfbnDercisno  fccUing  of  Dainties 
uttljegcaue. 

17  *  31U  fled)  ibaretD  oio  as  a  gac= 
mcnt:fo?  tljctoucnant  from  the  begin- 
ning is !  tDou  fljalt  Die  tlje  Death. 

18  3lsoftbcgrccnclcaucsonatbicuc 
trcc,fomcfall,anD  fomcgcoib  fo  is  the 
generation  offleO)  ano  blooD ,  one  com 
3>fff  2 meth 


Tobic.4.7. 
iuc.14.15. 


\\Or.  the 
jcaftdy. 


Mfai.-io.j. 
iam.i.io. 

1  pec.i.  :^. 


Apocrypha.  Eccleliaihcus.  Apocrypha. 


•pfii.i.i. 


\\Or,flaks. 


ap*r^r 


\Or,h:vdi 

wtfentcfy 


mctb  to  an  cud  ,ano  another  is  bojnc. 

19  tfucrp  Vboifee  rottctlj  anb  confu 
mcth  aibap,anb  tfjc  Voofttt  rhetof  ftjai 
gocibithau. 

10  *  261c(Tcd  is  the  man  tliat  Doett) 
mcbitatc  goob  things  in  lbif  bome,anb 
that  rcafonctl)  of  Ijolp  things  bp  his 
bnbcrftanbmg. 

n  i^e  that  confibcreth  her  tbapesin 
his  heart ,  fljail  alfo  hauc  bnoerftan* 
mng  m  b«  ferrets. 

n  ©oe after hcrasonethattraeeth, 
anb  lie  in  wait  m  her  Voayts. 

i}  $ce  rtjat  pneth  m  at  her  tbtn 
botbes,fljai  alfo  |)earfecn  at  l)cr  boojes. 

24-  $«  that  bocth  lobgc  necrc  Ijcr 
Ijoufe ,  fljail  alfo  fatten  a||pm  ui  her 
lbailcs. 

15  i?c  (ball  pitch  f)i£  tent  nigl)  bnto 
her,  anb  fljail  lobgc  in  a  lobging  rbbere 
goobtbtngsare. 

16  ^efljaifcthisehiltyenbnbcrhtr 
Q)dtcr,  anb  fljail  lobgc  bnbet  her  tyan 
tljcs. 

27  ffipljer  he  fljail  be  eouereb  from 
hcat>aub  uihctglojpftjallhcb.bcll. 

CHAP.     XV. 

i  Wifedome  cmbraceth  thole  that  fcire  God. 
7  The  wicked  ("hall  not  get  her.  1 1  V/e  may 
not  charge  God  with  our  faults:  14  For  he 
made,  and  left  vs  toourfclucs. 

€  that  feareth  the  ILo;tb 
ibillboc  goob,  anb  l)c  rljat 
bath  the  knoiblebge  of 
tljeEaib  fljal  obtameber. 
i;3nbasamorbcrfljail 
flje  meet  ljun,anb  rcccnic  Ijim  as  a  tbtfc 
mancbofabirgin. 

j  naitlj  the  bjcab  of  bnberttaubing 
(ball  fljefeeb  btm.anb  guic  Ijitn  the  wa- 
ter of  Ibifcoomc  tobnnfee. 

4  l=>cc  (ball  be  ftapcD  bpon  her,  anb 
fljail  not  be  moncb ,  anb  fljail  relp  topon 
her,  anb  fljail  not  be  confonnbeb. 

5  5>bce  fljail  exalt  Ijim  abonc  his 
neighbours,  anb  in  tlje  nnbtt  of  tlje  con? 
grcgatiou  fljail  fljeopen  bismonth. 

6  hcfljailfmDcioy.anoarroibncof 
glabncffc,  anb  fljc fljail eaufebun  to  in- 
rjcrit  an  enerlatting  name. 

7  25utfooliflj  men  (ball  not  attame 
bnto  ber ,  anb  tinners  (bail  not  fee  Ijcr. 

s  So;  fljc  is  farrc  frompnbe,  anb 
men  that  are  Iters  cannot  remember 
her. 

9  IH&iaifc  is  not  fceinlp  in  the  tuoutl) 
of  a  unncr ,  fozllitibas  not  fcntbimof 
tljcJLoiD: 


10  if02||p?aifefljalbebtterebuiibu^ 
borne,  anb  tlje  fLojb  lbil  pjofper  it. 

11  ;Say  not  thou,  3t  is  though  the 
1Lojb,tJjat3Jfcllaibap,  fojtbouongfc 
tell  not  to  boe  tlje  things  that  be  batctb. 

n  5>apnottbou,$ebatbtaufeb  nice 
to  etr  e ,  fo?  bee  bath  no  neeb  of  n)e  fin 
full  man. 

13  %\yt  %w  ftatetf)  all  abominate 
on,anb  tljcptljatfeatc  <5ob  lone  ttnot. 

14  i?ccbnnfelfcmabemanfromtbe 
*  bcginnmg,anb  left  Ijim  m  the  Ijanbof 
Ijiscounfcll, 

15  3Jftboutbut,tOBcepethc€om; 
manbements,  anb  to  pcrfomie  accep* 
table  fattbfulneffe. 

i6  i^c  bath  fet  fire  anb  water  before 
thee:  ftrctclj  fo?tlj  tbpbanbbntorbbe 
tljcrfljouibilt. 

17  *26cfo?emanisiifeanbbcan),anb 
whether  htm  liRctbfljalbegiuenbim. 

is  fo;  tlje  Wtfcbome  of  tlje  |Lo?b  is 
great,  anb  be  ismtgbtvmpolber,  anb 
beboibrtlj  all  things, 

19  3nb*btsepesarebpon  them  that 
fcarc  him,  9  bee  ftnowcth  cucr?  Vbojbe 
ofman. 

10  $et  hath  eommanbeb  no  man  to 
bo  wicbeDh),  neither  hath  he  giuen  any 
man  licenfc  to  fmnr. 

CHAP.  xvr. 

1  It  is  better  to  haue  none  then  many  lewd  chil- 
dren. 6  The  wicked  are  not  fparcd  for  their 
number,  n  Both  the  wrath  and  the  mercy 
ofthe  Lord  are  great.  17  The  wicked  cannot 
be  hid.   10  Gods  workes  are  vnlejrchable. 

&&*£*$&  ffifirc  not  a  mulmubc  of 
bnpjofitabietljilbjen,  net 
tber  bclight  m  bngoblp 
fomies. 
&*»  2  Xhough  tljcv'inultu 
plp,reiovccnotmthcm,crccpttljc  fcarc 
ofthcUojbbcibrthtbcm. 

5  ICmftnot thou  m  their  lifcneitljcr 
wfpett their nroltttube :  fo;  oncthatis 
tuft,  is  better  then  a  rtjonlanb ,  anb  bet 
tcr  it  is  to  bic  Ujubont  chtltycn,  tljcn  to 
hauc  them  that  arc  tongobly. 

4  f  0?  bp  one  that  hath  bnberftan; 
btng, fljail  the  citr  bcrcplnufljcb,  but 
the  H&mbjcb  ofthe  ibtcueb.fljalifpeebilv 
become  bcfolate. 

5  ©any  fuel)  ffjtngs  hauc  gj  Uaxc 
ibith  mine  eves,  anb  mine  care  hath 
hcarb  greater  things  then  thefc. 

6  *3Jn  the  congregation  ofthe  bn 
gooij'fljaiiafirrbcbmblcb.anbinarC' 
bcllious  nation,ib;atIj  II  is  fet  on  fire. 
, 7  ^c 


\\Or,rAlht 


*Gcnc. 
JO. 


•Icic.ji.S 


•Phi.  33. 
16. 


I  Or,lnlt. 


'  Chap,  j  1. 

10. 

bene. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xvi 


Apocrypha. 


Gen.*  i- 


Gnn.19- 


Num. 24. 
I  5,  and  16. 
10.  and  20, 
5«. 


•Chip.?. 6. 


Or,ftrong 
partition. 


•l.King.8. 
27.  J.chron 
6.l8.z,pct. 
J  io. 


7  *i^ccti)asnot  pacificD  toibarDS 
the  olDc  giants,  ibho  fell  attmp  m  the 
ttrcngth  ofthctr  foolttl)nclTe. 

8  *>15cttI)tcfparcD f)t tlje place ttiljcrc ' 
JLot  fotourncD ,  but  abho?rcDthcmfo2 
their  p?iDc. 

9  ^ecpiticD  not  the  people  of  perDf; 
tton ,  tbho  Were  taacu  aibap  in  tijetc 
fumes. 

10  */Ro2the  fire  f)unD?cth  thoufanD 
footmen,ti)ho  tbercgathcrcD  together 
in  theharDncffc  of  their  hearts. 

11  ^nDifthrobeoncQiffc-necKCDa: 
mong  the  people,  it  is  marucile,  if  he  cf 
eapctonputufhcD  ;fo?*mcrepanD  tb?ath 
aretinthhim ,  ijteisnugljtvto  fozgtuc, 
ano  to  pottle  out  Difpicafure. 

ii  3s  I)i0  mcrcp  is  great ,  fo  is  his 
eo  ?r echon  aifo :  he  mDgcth  a  man  atco?- 
DingtohtstiwBes. 

ij  Xhe  finner  (hall  notefcapc  tint!) 
his  fpoiles,  ano  the  patience  of  the  goo- 
Ip  fhallnot  be  fruttratc. 

14  i$a&c  timp  fo?  cucrp  tuo?Bc  of 
meet? :  fo?  cucrp  man  than  nnbe  acco? 
Dlngtohistt>o?Bcs. 

15  Che  ?Lo?D  harDcncD  Pharaoh, 
thathec  fhouionot  unoib  htm,that  hts 
potijcrfull  Mjo?bcs  nnght  be  Bnotijcn 
tofheti)o?lD. 

is  i^is  mcrtp  is  manifeft  to  euetp 
trcaturc,  ano  Dee  hath  fcparatco  his 
light  from  rheDarUcnclTe  ibttt)  anp 
Damant. 

17  s>ap  not  thou,  3  tbill  Ijudc  mp 
felfc  from  the  !Lo?D :  fhaiianp  remem 
berme  from  abouc*  3  ft>»H  notbc " ; 
mcmb?CD  among  fo  man?  people :  fo: 
tt>hat  is  mp  foulc  among  futh  an  uifi 
mte  number  of  tr caturcs* 

18  *2SeholD,theheaucn,ana thefica; 
uen  of  heauens,the  Dccpc  ano  the  earth , 
ano  all  that  therein  is,  fhallbcmooueD 
lUhenhefhalibiOt 

19  Xhcmountaincsalfo,  anbfoun- 
cations  of  the  earth  fliall  bee  (l)alten 
tbirt)  trembling,  ti>j)en  the  2-o?D  loo- 
ueth  Upon  them. 

io  0o  heart  tan  rhtnnc  topon  thefc 
things  ttio?rhilp :  ano  tbho  is  able  to 
tontcutc  his  timpes; 

21  3t  is  a  tempeft,  Iblnrti  no  man 
tan  fee :  fo?  the  molt  part  of  histt)o?BCS 
archibDc. 

22  i©ho  tan  Declare  the  tiw&ts  of 
his  iufhec  <  0?  ti>ho  tan  cnDure  thenu 
fo?his  Concnant  is  afarrc  off,  anD  the 
triallof  all  things  is  in  the  enbe. 

23  ftethatlbanteth  buDcrftanDing, 


tinll  thmftc  Upon  bamc  things :  anD  a 
fooltfl)  man  erring ,  imagtneth  follies. 
24.  £0?  fonnc ,  hcarften  tonto  nice, 
ano  leamc  imotijicDgcanDmar&cmp 
tiwDsumhthp  heart. 

25  3  null  fheive  foo?th  Doctrine  in 
weight,  anD  Declare  his  un  ott>  I  eDgc  cr- 
amp. 

26  £hettJO?RSofthcILo?DarcDonc 
miuDgcmcntfromthc  beginning:  anD 
from  the nmc he  mabc  them, heeDifpo 
feD  the  parts  thereof. 

27  $ec  garmfljeD  his  ti)02hesfo2e; 
tier,  anD  mhtshauD  arc  the  ||  thtefc  of 
them  bnto  all  generations :  thep  nei^ 
thcr  labour,  no:  arc  ibearp,  no?  ccafc 
from  their  luo?Ucs. 

28  jRone  of  them  hmDzeth  another, 
ano  thep  (hall  neuer  Difobep  his  tbo?D. 

29  3ftctthis,thc!Lo2DlooBcDbpon 
thccarth.anDfiiieDittt)tthhisbleu*ings. 

30  naith  all  mancr  of  Uutng  things 
hath  hec  couereDthc  fate  thereof ,  ano 
thep  (hall  rerurne  into  it  againe. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1  How  God  treated  andlurnifhed  nun.  14  A- 
uoidallllnne:  10,  For  God  feeth  all  things. 
15 


II 0' 


Tunie  to  him  while  thou  liueft. 


-U^ff  $?c?Lo?D  *  creatcD  man  of; 
k3||  the  earth,  anDturncDhun 
gr'la  into  it  againe. 

2    *J?egauethemfctb 

Dapes ,  ano  a  fho?t  time, 

anD  poiucr  alfo  oner  the  things  therein. 

j  $e  cttDucD  them  tint!)  ftrcngth  bp 

themfelucs,  anD  maoe  them  acco?omg 

to  his  image, 

4  3noput  the  fcarc  ||  of  man  bpon 
allflefl),  anDgauc  him  Dominion  oner 
beaftsanofoules. 

5  [1Chcp  rcceiueD  the  tofcof  the  fine 
operations  of  the  ?Lo?D ,  anD  in  the  firt 
plate  he  impartcD  them  bnDrrOauDing, 
anD  in  the  fcucnth,  fpeech,anmtcrp?e' 
tcr  of  the  cogitations  tl)ereof.] 

6  Counfcll,  anD  a  tongue,  ano  efts, 
cares, anD  a  heart, gauche  them  to bn- 
Derttano. 

7  n3ithail,hccfilleD  them  tint!)  the 
BnoVbleDgc  of  bnDerCanDing,?  fljetiJCD 
them  gooD  anD  cuill. 

8  fcee  fcthts  w  bpon  their  hearts, 
that  he  might  theft  them  the  greatueffe 
ofhisttwUcs. 

9  lf>e  gauc  them  to  glo2p  lit  !)is  mar 
ucilousactesfo?  cuer,  tljatthev  might 
DctlarehistiJ02ltstt)ithbnDerilanDing. 

<S>fff  }  io  3nD 


•Gen.  1.17 
and  5.2. 
wild.l.2; 
and  7.1)6. 
I  cor.II.7. 
col.;. 10. 
'Gen,  1.  j6. 
I.coc.11.7. 


\Or,tfhh 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefialticus.  Apocrypha. 


*  EjoJ.  tr. 


Dcu.;i8. 
rom.l  j.l. 

Dm. 4.  :o 
andio.15. 


'Chi.29.13 


•Mic.15. 
JS- 

Mfts;.:? 


*Icre.3..  12 


\OrJtfn 

thj  offence. 

\Or,iHumi~ 

nattm. 

•Pfal.l5.tf. 

fa.  5  8.1  p. 

10  2nD  rtje  elect  fljail  p?aifc  Ijts  l)olp 

/3ame. 

1 1  25efibe  tDts  De  gaue  tDcm  Knott* 
icbge,anb  ttic  latt)  oflifc  to?  an  heritage. 

u  ue  maoe  an  cucrlamng  couenant 
ttitD  tDcm,anb  (Dcttcb  tDcm  Dt£  iubgc- 
merits. 

i}  Xrjctc  epes  fatt  trje  maieftle  of  fjis 
glo2p,anb  trjetc  cares  rjcato  l;is  glori* 
ousbopce. 

14  sutbDcfaib bnto  tDem,  ascttare 
of  an  bnrtgDtcoufncs,  anb  ljc*gaucc* 
ucrv  man  commanDemcnt  concernutg 
Ijis  neighbour, 

15  'SCDetrttapesarccucrbcfojeDun, 
anbtyailnotbe  tnbfromDiscpes. 

i6  <g ucrp  man  from  rjis  pontD  is  g> 
nen  to  emu ,  ncittjer  conlb  tljrp  mabc  to 
trjcmrelues  flcfljie  rjearts  foz  (Ionic. 

17  jfo?  in  tfjebliufion  of  tlje  nations 
of  tljettDole  cattrj ,  Dc  fct  a  *  ruler  oucr 
cuerp  people,  but  *  3Jfracl  is  tljc  JLofis 
portion. 

is  n9l)om  being  rjisfirft  borne,  rjee 
nouriujctD  ttitD  bifnplute,  anb  gluing 
Dim  tlje  ligDt  of  Ijisiouc ,  botD  not  fo£= 
faUcDim. 

19  1LDcrcfo2C  all  tljcic  ttojftcs  arc 
as  tDc  £>utme  before  Dint ,  anb  Dis  eves 
arc  continually  bpon  ttjctr  ttapes. 

20  ii5oncof  tDeirbnngDteousbcebs 
arc  Dib  from  Dim,but  all  tljcir  Onnes  arc 
before  tDc  1Lo?b: 

21  z5uttDc?Lojbbcuiggraeious,anb 
Knotting  Dis  ttwltemanfliip,  ncitDcr 
leftno:  fozfooUc  tDcm,but  fpareb  tDcm. 

22  iDe'almesofainanisasaOg' 
net  ttitD  Dim,anbDc  ttill  Keep  tDc  goob 
beebes  of  matt,  astDcappleof  tDecpc, 
anb  giuc  repentance  to  D«s  tonnes  anb 
oaugDters. 

23  *  3lftcrttatbDc  ttill  rtfc  bp  anb  w 
ttarb  tDcm,  anb  renber  tDcir  reamv 
pcnfebpontDeicDcabs. 

24  *  26ut  bnto  tDcm  tDat  repent,  Dei 
grantcb  tDcm  rewrite,  anb  comfojtcb1 
tDofc  tDat  failc  in  patience. 

25  *ftcrarnebntotDcILojb,anbfo,2; 
faKc  tDp  fumes,  maKctDppjayccbcfojc 
Disfatc,  anb  H  offenb  lelTe. 

26  Xurttcagaincto  tDc  moft  tyigD, 
anb  turnc  attap  front  iniquftie:  fo;Dc 
tttll  leabc  tDce  out  of  barHcncffc  Into 

tDe||ligDtofDcaltD,anbljatctDotiabo; 
minationPcDementlp. 

27  *i©Do  fliallpzaifc  tDc  moll  fyigD 
m  tDe  graucm  ttcab  of  tljcmttljicD  Uuc 
anbguietDanlts? 

28  XDauUcfgiumg  pcnfDctD  from 


tlje  bcab,  as  from  one  tDat  is  not :  tDc 
I  iiuutgano  founb  in  Dcart ,  ujall p?aife 
tlje  2,02b. 

29  n?ott  great  is  tDe  lotting  Kinbnes 
I  of  tDc  5.0,1b  our  Gob,  anb  Distompaf- 
fion  bnto  fuel)  as  turnc  bnto  Dun  in  Do- 
luteirei 

30  if  02  all  tDings  cannot  bee  in  men, 
becaufe  p  tonne  of  man  is  not  immojtal. 

31  *i©DattsbngDtertDentDe£>un< 
ret  tDc  ligDt  thereof  fatlctl) :  anb  flclD 
anb  bio  ob  ttill  imagine  cuill. 

32  $ce  UicttctD  tDc  potter  of  tDc 
DeigDt  of  Ijeauen,  anb  all  men  arc  but 
earrDanbafDes. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

Godsworkes  aretobewondred  at.  9  Mans 
life  is  fhorr.  n  God  is  merciful!.  15  Doe  not 
blcmifh  thy  good  deeds  with  ill  wordes.  n 
Defene  not  to  bee  luflified.  30  Followe 
not  thv  luftes. 

€e  tDat  liuctD  to*  eucr,*  erea* 
teb  all  tilings  m  gencraiu 

XDcHo^bonclptsrtgD' 
tcous,  anb  tDcrc  is  none  o 
tDcrbntDe. 

3  i©Do  gonentctD  tDc  tt02lo  ttitD 
tDcpaimc  of  Dis  Danb,  anb  all  tDings 
obcpDisttill,fo?DelstDcftingofail,bp 
■Dis  potter  *  btuibtng  Dolp  tDings  a* 
mong  tDcm  from  pjopDane. 

4  XottDomDatDDegtuenpottcr 
to  bcclare  Dis  ttojtts*  *anb  ttljo  (Dail 
futbc  out  Dis  noble  aetes  t 

5  i©Do  IDailnumbertDc  flrcngtDof 
Dismaieme;  anottDolDaiiaifo  telout 
Dis  mercies* 

6  ^sfonDettonbcrous  tto?ltesof 
tDe!Lo2b,  tDeremavnotDmgbectaBen 
from  tDem ,  ncitDcr  ma?  anp  tiling  bee 
put  bnto  tDcm,  ncttDcr  can  tDc  grounb 
of  tDcm  be  founb  out. 

7  o)DcnamanDatDbonc,tDenDe 
bcgtnnetD,  anb  ttDcn  Dec  IcauetD  off, 
tDcnDcfDallbcboubtfull. 

s  naDatisman.attbttDcretofcructD 
De?ttDattsDisgoob,tttDatisDiscuth 

9  *  XDe  number  of  a  mans  bayes  at 
tDcmollare  anDunb:cb  pecres. 

10  3lsab2opof  ttatcrbntotl)c4E>ca, 
anb  a  graucll  Hone  in  companfon  of  tDe 
fanb,  foarc  a  *  tDoufattbyccrcsto  tljc 
bapesofeternitie. 

11  XDerfozc  is  Gob  patient  ttirt)  tDem, 
?  pott2etD  fo;tD  Dismercp  bpon  tDem. 

11  tyt  fatt  anb  pcrcnucb  tDcir  cnb  to 
be  cum,  tljcrcfojc  Ijc  multiplieb  Dis  tonp 
paffiott. 

^____  13  %\)t 


'lob  J  j. 
4,S« 


'Gin.  1    I 


'Lcuicio. 


PfJ.  105, 


'PfiljO.lO 


'j.PcLj.8. 


Apocrypha. Chap.xix.  Apocrypha. 


»3- 


Cor.  1 1. 


•Chap.7. 
«7.3«- 


"Prou.»8. 
14- 


'  Rom.  6.6. 

:r.d  i ;.  14. 


13  SEbe  mercy  of  man  is  tolbarb  Ins 
neighbour ,  but  t!jc  mercy  of  the  Ho:b 
ts  topon  all  fled)  -.lit  tepjoouetb  anb  nur; 
niretl) ,  anb  tcachctb,  ?  biingetb  agamc 
as  a  fhcpbearb  bis  flotfee. 

14  J^e  Ijatrj  mercy  on  tbem  tftat  r v 
cetue  bifeipltne,anb  that  btltgcntly  feefte 
after  bisuibgements. 

1$  *^yfonnc,blemi(bnottbygoob 
bccbs,nettbet  bfebncomfonable  ibojbs 
tbben  thou  giucft  any  thing. 

16  <§>ballnottbebeamafltuagetbe 
heate  t  fo  is  a  ibojb  better  then  a  gift. 

17  Hoe  is  not  a  ibojb  better  then  a 
gift<but  both  are  ibitbagraciousman. 

is  :3foolerotllbpb2mDeeburlifbly, 
anb  agift  of  t  be  enmous  conuunetb  tlic 

VftS. 

19  fLearne  before  fbou  fpcafte ,  anb 
bfe  phifit  !te,  0;  euer  thou  be  tube. 

10  28cfo2eiubgement*eicaminetby 
fclfc,  anb  in  the  bay  of  biRtatton  tljou 
(baltfmb  mercy. 

21  fumble  thy  felfc  before  thou  be 
Ocfte ,  anb  in  tbetime  of  Qnncs  (herb  re* 
pentance. 

n  Hct  nothing  binber  thee  to  pay 
tbyborbetn  bne  time,  anb  beferrenot 
bntill  beat!)  to  be  iuflificb. 

x 3  26efi«e  thou  pjaycft ,  prepare  thy 
fclfe,  anb  be  not  as  one  thattemptetb 

U)C?L02b. 

14  *1Cbinftebpontbe  rbjatb  that 
(hail  be  at  the  cnb*  ana  the  time  of  ben* 
geance  ibhen  he  (bail  turne  atbay  bis 
Fate. 

15  nabcn  tbonbafl  enough  rcmem< 
bertbe  timeofhungcr,  anb  when  thou 
art  ricnttjtnfte  bpon  pouerty  anb  ncco. 

16  5From  the  morning  bntill  tlic 
euening  the  time  is  cljangeb  ,  anb  all 
things  are  foonc  bone  bcfae  the  JLojb. 

17  *  31  ibtfc  man  mill  fear e  in  cucry 
tiling ,  anb  in  tfjc  bay  of  fimtinghc fttll 
betbare  ofoffcnte:bnt  afoolcttutlnot 
obfeructime. 

18  Cucry  man  of  bnDcrftaubing 
totoibctb  mtfcbomc,anb  Ibil  gate  pjaife 
bnto  htm  that  founb  Ijer. 

19  H3)eytl)atTbereofbnbtr(lanbmg 
mfayings.bccamcalfolbifetbcmfclucs, 
anb  potbjebfojtb  crquifitc  parables. 

30  *  <5oc  not  after  tby  Utiles ,  but  rc- 
frainctbyfelfcfromtbtneappctttes. 

31  3Jfthougitiefttbyfoitlcthcbcfircs 
that  plcafc  her,  (be  Hull  malic  thee  a 
laughing  ttocbe  to  tbmc  enemies,  that 
malignc  thee. 

32  %attc  not  plcafurc  in  much  goob 


cbeere ,  neither  be  tyeb  to  the  crpenee 
thereof. 

33  25e  not  mabe  a  beggcr  by  ban 
n.uetnngbponb02roUnng,  lbbentbou 
battnotbmguttbypurfe,  fc»  thou  (bait 
lie  in  ibattc  fo?  thy  o)bnc  life :  anb  be 
talbeb  on. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

1  Wine  and  women  feduce  wife  men.  7  Say 
not  all  thou  hcarefr.  17  Reproue  thy  friend 
without  anger.  22  There  is  no  wiled omc 
in  wickednelTe. 

fUbottrtng  man  that  is 
giuen  to  bmnftenncfle  (bai 
not  be  rid) ,  anb  bee  that 
contemner!)  fmail  things 
(hall  fail  by  little  $  little, 

I  name  anb  Vbomen  rbiil  mabe  men 
of  bnberltanbmg  to  fallaibay,  anb  he 
that  cleauetb  to  harlots  tbtll  become 
impnbent. 

3  ^otljes  anb  ibozmes  (hail  hauc 
him  to  heritage ,  anb  a  bolb  man  (hall 
betahcnaibay. 

4  * ^e  that  is  hatty to  giuc  crcbitis 
light  mttibcb  ,  anb  be  that  Gnnctb  (ball 
offenb  agatnfl  bis  oibncfoule. 

5  i©hofotabcthpleafurctntbicbcb? 
neffc  (hail  be  conbemnca,  but  he  that  re- 
ftlteth  plea(ures,croibncth  bis  life. 

6  $c  that  canrulehistonguc  (ball 
lutcUntboutttrtfc,  anb  he  that  hatctb 
babbUng,fl)allhauc  lefrceuill. 

7  Bcbcarfe  not  bnto  another  that 
ttwtcb  is  tolb  bnto  thee ,  anb  thou  (halt 
fare  ncucr  the  Ibotfe.  < 

3  nabctber  tt  be  II  to  frienb  oj  foe, 
tallt  not  of  other  mens  lines,  anb  if  thou 
canftlbithout  offence  rencale  them  not. 

9  JFo.2  he  hcarb  anb  obferucbtbec, 
anb  ibljen  timecommeth  hcibillllhatc 
tbce. 

10  3lfthouhafthearbatt)o?b,ictit 
tic  lbith  thee,  anb  be  bolb  it  ibillnot 
burftthee. 

II  ?lfoolctrauailethU)itl)au»02b,as 
a  ibonian  m  labour  of  a  chub. 

ii  3s  an  arroibc  that  (hcaeth  m  a 
mansthigh,fotsaibojbibithiuafooles 
||  belly. 

13  *^bmonifl)afcicnb,  it  may  be  he 
hath  not  bone  it ,  auo  if  he  hauc  [bone  it] 
thathcboeituomoje. 

14.  nabmonifl)  tl)yfrtenb,itmay  bchc 
hath  not  faib  it ,  anb  if  he  bane ,  that  he 
fpeaheitnotagame. 

15  3lbmomfl)  a  frienb:fo2  many  times 
it  isa  nanber,  !i  bcieeucuot  cuery  tale. 
. i6  Xhcre 


•Iolklt 
11. 


Orfffnnd 
orfae. 


[\Or.Jhm 
LuhAtrcd, 


\\0,,hc.rrt. 

'Ltuic.io. 
1  7-inacih. 
18.15. 


,Or.  rtxrouc 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha 


||  Or.ml- 

U't'y. 

*bm.?.  J. 

\OrtTtfrout 


Or,sfrr- 
teim»1  bi/n. 


II      '       ^ 
lib. 


blacks. 


i6  Xhetc  ts  one  that  (Uppeth  in  his ; 
fpcath ,  but  not :  i  from  his  heart ,  ant 
u>ho  is  he  that  hath  not  ofifenbtb  With  i 
his' tongue; 

17  ||  aomomfl)  thy nctghbour  befoze 
thou  threaten  him  ,ano  not  being  angry 
gate  plate  to  the  JLaW  of  the  nioft  high- 

is  HhcfeatcofthcILoibtstbcfirft 
ftep  j  to  be  attcptcD  1  of  him,:  anb  Wife  j 
Dome  obtat'neth  his  lone. 

19  Xhc  Kno  Wicbgc  of  the  Commatv 
Dements  of  the  H02D,  is  the  Doctrine  of 
ufcanD  they  that  do  things  that  picafc 
him,  (hall  menu  tlje  fruit  of  the  tree  of 
(mmo?tautt'c.  i 

io  XhcfcarcofthC2.o?Dtsaiiwifc --; 
DomcatiD  in  ail  Wifebomc  is  the  perfo:^ 
tnanceofthcILaw,anbthcKnoWleDge 
othtsommpotenctc. 

11  31  f  a  fcruant  fay  to  his  matter  3 
Will  notbocasitplcafcth  thee,  though 
aftcriliarD  hccDocit,hccatigcrcth  him 
that  nounfbeth  him. 

zi  Xhc  tuioWlcDgc  ofWichcbncs  is ; 
not  Wifebomc ,  neither  at  an?  time  the 
tounfell  of  (tuners,  p:ttbcncc. 

23  Xhcrt  is  a  WitRCbneffe,  anb  the 
fame  an  abomination  ,  anb  there  is  a 
foolt  wanting  in  WifcDomc. 

1+  ik  that  hath  final  totiDcrttanDtng 
anbfeareth  <3ob,is  better  then  one  that 
hath  much  Wifebomc ,  anb  tranfgrct. 
feth  the  ILaw  of  the  moft  l?igh. 

15  XhcreisancTciut(itcfubtiIty,anb  ■ 
the  fame  is  bmutt.anb  there  is  one  that 
turnerh  afibc  to  malic  lubgcmcnt  ap* 
pcare :  anb  there  is  a  lbife  manthat  j|  iu- 
OiRethiniubgcment. 

2  6  Xherc  is  a  wtcUcb  man  that  han* 
gcth  boibne  his  hcabllfably  ;  but  in* 
warblyhctsfuilofbecett, 

1-7  CafttngboWne  Discountenance, 
anb  malting  as  if  he  hearb  not :  Where 
hetsnot&noWcn,hei\)tllbothceamif- 
thiefc  befo?c  thou  be  aware. 

2$  31nb  if  fo:  lbant  ofpoWcchccbc 
hmbereb  from  fuming,  vet  When  he  fat 
Deth  oppommttic  he  lbil  doc  euil. 

29  %  man  map  bee  tmowen  by  his 
loohe ,  anD  one  that  hath  tonbetftan 
Ding ,  by  hts  tountcnance,  tttljctt  thou 
meetcfrhtm. 

^o  31  mans  attire ,  anb  crcefliuc 
laughter , anb  gate  ,fbcw  What  he  ts. 

C  H  A  P.    XX. 

1    Of  filence and fpeaking.     10   Ot  gifts,  and ! 

<;ainc.  18  Ofllippingby  thetongne.    14  Of: 
lying.    17    Oidmersaducrtifemcnts. 


Nereis  a rcp;oofe  that ts| 
not  tomely:  agatnefomel 
manholbeth  tjis  tongue, i 
anb  he  ts  Wife. 
i  3Jt  is  much  better  to 
rcp:oouc,thcntobcatigrvfccrctlv,attb: 
he  that  couftffcth  his  fault ,  (hall  be  pie  I 
fcrucD  from  hurt. 

?  fcow  goob  is  :t  lbhen  thou  art  re  j 
p:oueD,to  (hew  repnitantc j.  fo:fo  (halt  I 
thoucfcapcwilfiillftntic. 

+  3s  is  the  luft  of  an'Cunuch  to  dc 
Ifloureabirgmc  fois  he  thatcrccuteth 
I  tuDgement  Until  btolcncc. 

5  Xhcrc  ts  one  that  feccpeth  filente 
1  ano  is  founD  ibtfc :  anD  another  by 
much  babltug  becomntcth  hatefull. 

6  *>ome  man  holbeth  hts  tongue, 
betaufc  hec  hath  not  to  anfmcrc,  anb 
fomc  uccpeth  filente ,  *  knotting  his 
!  nmc. 

7  3tibifc  matt  Wtlholb  his  'tongue 
i  till  he  fee  oppommttic:  but  a  babler  anb 
afoolc  Wtllrcgarbno  time. 

s  $?c  that  tofcth  many  W02bs(halbc 
|abho?rcb,  anb  hec  that  tattcth  to  hint; 
fclfc  authojitte  therein,  (haibc  hatcb. 

9  There  is  a  (inner  that  hart)  goob 
fttcceffe  in  etffll  things  ,  anb  there  is  a 
game  that  turucth  to  lofTc. 

10  Xheretsagirtthatfhailnotp?o< 
fit  tljcc;  anb  there  is  a  gift  Whofc  tecom^ 
pence  is  boublc. 

11  Xhereisanabafcmentbccaufeof 
glow ;  anb  there  ts  that  Ufteth  top  hts 

ihcabfromaloTtocflate. 

ix  Xhcre  ts  that  buyeth  muchfo?  a 
Ittflcanb  rcpaycth  it  fcucn  folb. 

13  *%  Wife  man  by  htsWo?bsmahcth 
hmtfclfc  beioueb  :  but  the  |i  grates  of 
foolcs  (haibe  l  poW?cb  out. 

1+  Xhcyftofafoolc  (hall  boc  thee 
no  goob  lbhen  thou  had  it  neither  yet 
of  the  cnuious  fo?  hts  ncccflinc  :  fo? 
I  hec  r  loo&cth  to  receuie  many  things 
fo?  one. 

15  i?ce  giueth  little  anb  topb2aibcth 
[much  hce  opencrt)  his  mouth  lifcc  a 
trier  to  bay  he  IcnDcth ,  anD  to  mo?r  otb 
Will  he  afae  ttagaute:  fuchanonctsto 
,  be  hatcb  of  Gob  anb  man. 
j  16  Xhcfoolefatth,3lhaucnofrtrnbs, 
35  hauc  no  thanKc  fo?  all  my  goob 
beebs  :  anD  tlicy  that  catc  my  b:cao 
fpcaUecmllofmc. 

17  $otb  oft,  anb  of  holb  many  Qjall 
hcbclattghcD  to  (come;  fo?  hecfenolto ; 
cth  not  aright  lbhat  it  ts  to  hauc  anD  tt 
is  all  one  bnto  him ,  as  if  he  haD  :t  not. 
18  Xo' 


[|o./,„> 

tuwie. 


'Chap.  "o. 


•Ecdc.3.7. 

*Cha.  3  2.^. 


•Chap.tf.?. 

[|  Or.p.'eJ- 
fant  concent. 


\Gr  for,hu 
net  are  ma- 
ny for  one  ta 
recent*-. 


[Apocrypha.  Chap.xx]. 


Apocrypha. 


olc*f(tnt 

tciloiv. 


f  Gr.  (h*U 
bepnc- 


Chi.i 


II  ^y 

mtidc. 


'Prou.I  J. 
I  andiS. 
19. 

"Exo.13.8. 
dcu.16.19. 
\\0rilUa 

the  month, 


»Pfal.4i.4' 
luk.  1  j.:  i 


18  Xo  flip  opon  a  paucmcnt ,  is  bet; 
tec  then  to  flip  until  the  tongue :  fo.tljc 
fall  of  the  unc&to  (ball  tome  fpccbily. 

19  ||  3ln  tonfcafonablc  tale  ttnll  ah 
uiaycs  be  in  the  mouth  of  the  tonunfe. 

io  31  ttnfe  rentcntc  (ball  be  reiccrtb 
ttibcnittommrthoutofafoolsmouth: 
fo2  be  mill  not  fpeabe  it  in  out  fcafon , 

2i  IZbctc  is  tbattsr)ino:tD  from  fin- 
ning tfnougbmant :  anbttihcnbcc  ta- 
Uttt)  reft,  He  t  (ball  not  be  troublco. 

zi  there  is  that  ocftcoyctb  bis 
otbne  foulc  tb20itgh  baibfuiucflc ,  ano 
by  accepting  of  pecfons  oucrtb20U>etb 
bimfctfe. 

i?  Xbcrcistbatfo2ba(bfulnesp20 
nufctb  to  bis  frrcnb ,  ano  maftetb  bun 
bis  enemy  foi  nothing. 

14.  "3i  lit  is  a  fouie  blot  ma  man, 
vet u  is  continual!?  in  the  mouth  of  the 
untaught. 

15  2  tbicfc  is  better  then  a  man  tbat 
tsaceuftomebtoltc :  but  they  botb  (ball 
baue  orftrwtion  to  heritage. 

16  ILbcbifyofinonofa liarisilbtfbo- 
noutablc ,  ant)  bis  fbame  is  cucc  ttntb 
bun. 

17  3J  ttiife  man  (ball  pymiotc  bun 
felfe  to  honour  untb  btS  mojbs  :  anb  bet 
tbat  bath  tnrocrftanbtng ,  unll  pleafe 
great  men. 

z8  *$?cthattillctb  his  lattb,  (balling 
trtafe  bis  bcape :  anb  be  tbat  pleaCerb  1 
gctat  men,  (baigctpacbon  fo2  iniquity,  j 

29  T&zcftnts  anb  gifts  blihb  the  eyes 
of  the  unfit ,  anb  1 1  ftoppe  bp  his  mouth  I 
tbat  be  cannot  rcp2oouc. 

30  DeifcDOtnc  tbat  is  bibbe,anb  trca^  1 
fure  that  tsboarbcbbp,  Vbhatpjofitisl 
mtbetnbotb? 

ji  25cttcr  is  be  that  hibetb  his  foliv , 
tbenamanthathibcth  hisunfcoonu. 

32  /Beccffarypattcutctn  fcetn'ng  the 
|Lo2b,is  btttet  then  \)C  that  leabetb  his 
ufcttntboutagmDe. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

l  Flee  from  finne  as  trom  a  ferpent  4  Hii  op- 
pression will  vndoe  the  rich,  y  Theendeof 
the  viiiuftfhall  be  naught.  ii  Thedifferen- 
ces  betweene  the foole  and  the  wife. 

i^^Pfonncbaftthoufmncb; 
*■  Doc  fo  no  mo2c ,  but  *  af  Kc 
pacbon  to}  thy  former 
fumes, 
i  flee  from  finne  as 
fcom  the  fate  of  a  feerpent :  fo2  if  thou 
tommeft  too  nccre  it ,  tt  unll  bite  thee : 
the  teeth  thereof,  are  as  the  teeth  of  a 


'Exod.i.g. 
and  2J.13. 


t  Gr.  I>tctn- 
uertcH. 


I  lyon,  (laymgthcfoulcs  ofmen. 

?  3(11  im'nuitic  is  as  a  tiDo  ebgcb 
;fmo2b ,  tbcttJounbs  lbfjcrcof  cannot  be 
heaieb. 

4-  Ho  ttrnfieanbDoc  m:ong,  mill 
maftc  nctit s :  thus  the  houfc  of  pzoube 
men  tbaibcmabcbtfoiatc. 

s  31  *  pjaycr  out  of  a  poozc  mans 
mouth  rcachetb  to  the  cares  of  <?ob, 
ano  rns  lubgcmcnt  comincth  fpccbily. 

6  Dctbatbatctbtobctcp2ooueb,is 
m  the  map  of  fuincrs :  but  bee  that  feau- 
rcth  the  JLom ,  mill  t  repent  from  Ijis 
heart. 

7  3wcIoquentmams&nott)cnfarrc 
anbnecrc,  butamanof  tonbcrfranbing 
Snoilicth  lbbcn  be  (lippctb. 

8  $e  that  btulbetb  hts  houfc  ttntb 
other  mens  money,  isiibe  one  that  ga^ 
thcrctb  htmfclfc  ftoncsfo?  the  tombe  of 
his  bunall. 

9  *Xbc  congregation  of  the  itncKeb  * 
is  ltfec  toll)  lwappcb  together  :anb  the 
cub  of  th  tin  is  a  flame  of  fire  to  beftroy 
them. 

10  Hhc  may  offiuncrs  ismabc  piaine 
until  ftoncs,  but  at  the  enbe  thereof  is 
tb  c  pit  of  bell. 

11  tecctbatttcepetbthcfLattiofthc 
&020,  gcttctb  the  tonbcrftanbing  there- 
of :anbtbc  perfection  of  the  fcareofthe 
5.020,  is  ibifcbomc. 

11  *  l?c  that  is  not  ||  ttnfe,  mill  not  be 
taught:  but  there  is  a  I  iliufcbomc  mljitb 
muinplictb  bitterneffe. 

i}  Xbc  itnottilcbgc  of  a  ttnfc  man 
(baliabounblitica  floob  :anb  Ins  coun 
Cell  is  lifee  a  pure  fountamc  of  Itfc. 

14.  *Xljc  inner  parts  of  a  foolc,  arc 
Ubc  ab2obcn  bcflcll ,  anb  be  unll  holbc 
no  fetiomicogc  as  long  as  be  liuctb. 

15  3)f  a  fbilfull  man  beare  a  unfc 
uiozb ,  bee  mill  commenb it ,  anb*  abbe  •  i 
j  unto  tt :  but  afloonc  as  one  of  no  tonber* 
I  ftanbuig  hearctb  it ,  itbifpieafctb  him, 
anb  be  caftctb  it  bebmbe  bis  bacftc. 

16  Xbe  taming  of  a  foolc  is  U&e  a 
bucben  in  tt\z  may:  but  grate  (ball be 
founo  in  the  lips  of  the  ttnfe. 
I  17  Xbcy  inquire  at  the  mouth  of  the 
mifc  man  in  the  tongregation,anb  they 
(ball  ponber  his  uwbs  in  their  heart. 

18  3t6isahoufetbattsbcftroycb,fo 
is  ttnfcbometo  a  foolc: anb  thcHnott* 
lebgc  of  the  Pnttnfe,  ts  as  talhcij  until 
outfenfe. 

19  SDocmne  bnto  foolcs.is  as  fetters 
on  the  feetc ,  anb  lihe  manacles  on  the 
right  hanb. 

I 10    3k 

66 


•Ecdcs.!. 
■  8. 

\\Or,vttTif. 
\\Or,Juittl- 


'Ch3.; 


II  0-, 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


np.ip. 


•Chap.  28. 
IS- 


Prou.  I  J. 

1  J. 

j  Onfbafhe 
the  heireof 


10  *2foolcuftcthbphts  bopcc  Yttitt) 
laughter,  but  aunfc  man  Dotrt)  ftartc 
fmile  a  utlc. 

11  learning  is  bnto  a  tbifc  man,  as 
an  ornament  of  golb,  anb  liftc  a  bracelet 
topon  his  tight  armr. 

11  ^foolttl)  mans  footcisfoonc  in 
his  [neighbours]  houfc:  but  a  man  of 
crpcticncc  isafbamcb  of  him. 

ij  %  foole  lMl  peepe  in  at  rt)c  boojc 
into  the  houfc,  but  he  that  tsibcllnur- 
turcb,  Hull  flanb  itoitfjout. 

24  3t  is  the  rubencfle  of  a  man  to 
lirac ucu  at  the  Bo 0 it :  but  a  Xbtfe  man 
Una  be  gtieueb  ant  h  the  Difgrate. 

15  1Lhe  lips  of  talfccrs  Jbill  bee  tefc 
ling  fuel)  things  as  pertatnc  not  bnto 
them :  butthe  lnojbs  of  fuel)  as  hane 
bnbcrftanbing,  are  ibcighcbm  thebaic 
lante. 

26  1Chc  heart  of  fooles  is  in  their 
moutl),  but  t!)c  moutl)  of  the  Ibifc  is  in 
ttjctrtJcact. 

17  nahen  the  bngoblp  curfcth  Sa- 
tan, hecurfcth  hisottmefoule. 

is  *  %  rbhifpercr  bcfileth  his  ollme 
fonie,  anb  is  liateb  mhcrcfocucr  Dee 
blbellcth. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  Ol  theflouthfull  man,  3  and  a  t'oolifh daugh- 
ter. 11  Weepe  rather  for  (ooles,  then  for  the 
dead.  13  Meddle  not  with  them.  \6  The 
wife  mans  hean  will  not  fhrinke.  10  What 
will  lofea  friend. 

£>louthfuI  man  is  compa^ 

rcbtoafiithpftonc,anbc; 

uerponcibillhtlTchimout 

toI)isbifgrate. 
1  %  aouthfull  man  is 
compareb  to  tl)e  filth  of  a  bunghiii :  cue 
rpmanthattahesit  bp,  lbtlllhauc  his 
hanb. 

3  3nculllnurturcb  Tonne  is  the  bit 
Ijonout  of  his  father  ttjat  begatchim : 
anb  a  [  foolifl)]  baughtcr  is  bo;nc  to  Ijis 
lofTc. 

4  *3i  ibifc  baughtcr  ajau  bnng  an 
Inheritance  to  her  Inifbanb:  but  fhee 
that  liucth  btOjoncftrp,  is  her  fatDers 
bcaumeflc. 

<,  S)l)cc  tDat  is  bolb ,  bimonouretl) 
both  her  father  anb  her  bufbanb,  but 
tljcv  boti)  (IjaiiDcfpife  tier. 

6  31  talc  out  of  fcafon  [isas]  mufitK 
in  mourning :  but  ftrtpes  anb  cojrecn- 
on  of  lbifcDomcarcncucr  out  of  mm. 

7  nDbofotcachcthafoolcisasonc 
thatglrtbcth  apotfbearb  togetljcr,anb 


I  as  l)cc  that  roa&cth  one  from  afounb 
Oecpc. 

s  $ee  tl)at  telletl)  a  talc  to  a  foole, 
fpcaftctb  to  one  m  a  aumber :  lbljen  bee 
;  Dath  tolb  bis  tale,  l)c  Vbill  fay,  oal)at  is 
the  matter; 

9  3)fchilb2mltucboncftlp,anbbauc 

I I  ibbcrrbitball,tbcp  mall  toucc  tl)c  bafc 
ncfTe  of  their  parents. 

10  26ut  cbilbjcn  being  baugbtic 
ttyougb  bif  batnc,anb  ltoant  of  nurrarc, 
boe  (lain e  1 1) c  nobilirte  of  their  tunc eb. 

11  'i©cepefo?rt)ebeab,fojt)ecl)atJ) 
loll  the  light:  anb  tbeepe  foj  tl)c  foole, 
fo*  he  ibanteth  bnbcrftanbing :  make 
litieibcepingfo?  the  beab ,  fo?  hec  tsat 
reft:  but  the  life  of  the  foole  is  Ibojfe 
thenbeart). 

u  ^cuenbayesboemenmournefo? 
him  that  is  bcab;  but  fod  a  foolc,anb  an 
bngoblp  man,  allthebapcsof  Ijisitfe. 

13  Xamcuotnuichibithafoolcanb 
goe  not  to  bun  that  hathnobnberftan* 
btng,  *  beftiare  of  htm  left  thou  haue 
trouble,  anb  tbou  (bait  ncucr  be  bcfilcb 
II lbitl)  hts  fooleries :  bepart  from  him, 
anb  thou  (halt  finb  reft,  anb  ncuer  bee 
Hbifquictcb  tbith  mabticffc. 

14  nabat  is  hcauicr  then  leab  <  anb 
ltohatisthe  name  thereof,  but  a  foole; 

15  *£>anb ,  anb  fait ,  anb  a  matte  of 
pjon  is  cafiec  to  bear  c  then  a  man  tbttj)' 
out  bnbcrftanbing. 

i6  3s  timber  girt  anb  bounb  toge^ 
thcr  in  a  builbmg.cannot  be  lo  ofeb  mitt) 
(baking:  fo  the  heart  that  isftabliftjcb 
bp  abtufeb  tonnfel,  (hal  fearc  at  no  tune. 

17  3  heart  fetlebbpona  tbougbtof 
bnbcrftanbing,  is  as  a  fair  c  piaittcnng 
illonthciballof  agailerlc. 

is  0aicsfct  on  an  high  place  rbfllnci 
iter  Oanb  agamft  the  rbmb:  fo  a  fcarcfhl 
heart  in  the  imagination  of  a  foolc,can 
not  ftanb  agamftanp  fcare. 

19  5>c  that  pjtcBctl)  the  cre,tbilmafte 
itcarcsto  fall:  anbhetJ)at  pnc&eth  the 
j  heart,  mabctlj  it  to  ftjeme  Ijcr  Rnouj; 
ilebgc. 

10  E9ho  fo  taftcth  a  ftone  at  the 
birbs,  frapeththcmaibav,  anbhethat 
bpbzaibctlj  Ijisfncnb,  bdcaUetljfrinib^ 
fl)tp. 

j  21  though  thou  bjcibeftafinojbat 
!  thp  fricnb ,  pet  befpaire  not ,  fo?  tljcre 
lbap  bca  rcmming(to  fauour.) 

ii  "Jfthon  haft  openeb  thp moutl) 
agamft  thp  fricnb,  fcarc  not,  fonhcrc 
map  be  a  rcconnlianon  :  crccpt  foibp 
b;aibmg;o?  pnbe^?  btfclofuig  of  ferrets, 
0? 


'  Or  tin  aft. 


•chap.38. 
16. 


"Cha.12.11 

||0,h4m 
htfiaktl  of 
hufikh. 


'Pro.»7.j, 


\\Or.oft 

[■-■.■  ■;■-.*  wj^' 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xxnj. 


Apocrypha. 


•pr»i  M  > 


or  a  treacherous  lbounD ,  for ,  fortbcfc 
things  cucrp  fnenD  \bill  Depart. 

13  2Se  faittifttll  to  thp  neighbour  m 
his  poucrtic,  that  thou  mapeft  retopec 
in  I)ts  profpentic :  abibc  ftcDfaft  Unto 
h iiit  in  the  tunc ofbts  rr oublc  ,tbat  tliou 
mapeft  bec  heire  ibtth  bun  tn  his  heri- 
tage :  for  a  meane  cftateisnot  aiibapcs 
tobecontemncD.nortberichthatisfoo 
lifl),to  bchab  inaDmtratson. 

14  3s  the  bapour  anD  fmouc  of  a 
furnace  gocth  before  theftre :  fo  milling 
before  biooD. 

15  3J  (bill  not  be  afbameD  to  DcfcnD 
a  fncnD :  neither  Hull  3  IjiDc  mp  fclfc 
from  htm. 

16  2uD  if  anpeuill  happen  bntomc 
bp  htm ,  cucrp  one  that  hearcthit  ibill 
belbarcofhun. 

17  *aahofl)ailfcta«jatthbefojemv 
mouth ,  ano  a  fcale  of  lbifcDomcbpon 
mp  Itppcs,  thatj  fall  not  fuDDcnlpbp 
them,  ?  that  mp  tongue  Dcftr  op  me  not; 

CHAP.  XXIII. 

A  praver  tor  ^race  to  flee  finoe.  <?  We  may 
notvfefweannr;:  14  But  remember  our  pa- 
rents. 16  Ot  three  forts  of  finne.  13  The 
adultreffe  wite  finneth  many  vvaies. 

!LorD,fatber  anD  goucr- 
nourof  all  mpibbolc  life, 
Icauc  mc  not  to  their  conn- 
fcls,anDlctmcnotfailbp 
„  them. 
1  lt)ho  ibill  fct  feourges  ouer  mp 
thoughts,  anD  the  Dtfciplincofibtu>; 
Dome  ouer  nunc  heart ;  that  tbepfparc 
mc  not  fo?  nunc  ignorances  anD  it  paffe 
notbpmpunncs: 

j  ILcaft  mine  ignorances  intrcafe, 
anD  mp  fmncs  abounD  tomyDcftructt; 
on,  anD  3  fall  bcfo?e  mine  aDucrfancs, 
anD  mine  encmic  rciopcc  ouer  mcc, 
ibhofc  hope  is  farr c  from  thp  mercp. 

4  €>  ILorD,  fatbet  ano  ©oD  of  mp 
lifcgmc  mc  not  a  proitD  looKcbttt  tutnc 
avbap  from  thp  fcruatus  aiibaics  a 
HhaughtpminDc: 

5  Xurne  atbap  from  mcc  tone 
hopes  ,  anD  concuptfccntr ,  anD  thou 
(bait  holD  htm  top  that  ts  Dcftrous  ai 
ibaiestofcructbcc. 

6  fLctnotthcgrccDtncffcofthcbeb 
lp,nor  lull  of  the  ftctbtaucbolDofme, 
anD  giue  not  ouer  me  thp  fcruant  into 
animpuDentmtiiDc. 

7  tocarc.iD  pec  cbtlDzcn ,  the  Dtfct 
plmcoftljc  mouth  :l?c  that  Hccpcthit, 


■Exod.  :o 
7.chjp.J7. 
i  j.imrh.f. 
Si- 


fljall  ncucr  be  tahen  tu  hts  Uppcs. 

S  Xhc  rtnncr  (liali  be  left  tn  tots  foo- 
lifhnetTc  :both  tljc  cum  fpeafter  anD  tljc 
prouD  (ball  fall  thereby. 

9  *  3ccuftomc  not  thp  mouth  to 
ftticartug  :  neither  bfc  thp  fclfe  to  the 
naming  of  the  holy  one. 

to  f  or  as  a  fcruant  that  is  tonnnu- 
ailp  bcaten,(ball  not  be  Without  a  blelb 
macKc :  fo  hec  that  frocaretb  anD  na 
mcthooDcoimnuallp^alnotbcfaul^ 
Icffc. 

ii  Titian  that  bfctb  much  fioearmg 
fhall  be  ftllcD  imtfi  intQiuty  ,  anD  the 
plague  fliail  ncticr  Depart  from  bts 
houfc :  35f  he  (hall  offenD,his  (nine  (hall 
be  bpon  hun  :  anD  if  he  acanoibleDge 
not  hts  ftnne ,  hec  maficth  a  Double  of; 
fence,  anD  if  he  fmcare  m  batnc,  he  (ball 
not  be  ftnnoccnt,  but  his  houfc  (hall  be  \\c,..i4, 
full  of  calamities.  fd- 

ir  XbercisaiborDtbatistlotbcDa- ' 
bout  uurh  Death :  ©od  graunt  that  it  be 
not  fount)  tn  the  heritage  of  "Jacob,  for 
all  fuel)  things  (ball  be  farre  from  the 
goDlp  ,  ano  thep  (bail  not  ibailoib  tn 
tljetr  finnes. 

i}  £lfe  not  thp  mouth  to  bntcmpc- 
rate  fmcanng,for  therein  is  tljc  lbo.'D  of 
fume. 

1 4.  ftcmembcr  thp  father  anD  thp 
motbcr,ibhcnrbou  fitted among  great 
mcn.Bcnotfozgctfull  before  thcm.anD 
fo  thou  bp  thy  cuftomc  become  a  foolc, 
anD  ibifb  that  thou  baDft  not  beenc 
borne,  anD  curfc  the  Dap  of  thp  natuutte. 

15  *Xhe  man  that  tsactuffomcD  to 
opprobrious  iborDS,  ibill  ncucc  be  r  cfor* 
mcD  all  tbcDatcs  of  his  life. 

1 6  xibo  forts  of  men  n  itilttplp  ftnne- 
anD  the  tbitDibtll  bnngibratbrabot 
mtnDc  is  as  a  burning  fire,  it  ibill  ncucr 
be  nuencbcDttllitbcconfumcD:  a  fornix 
catour  tn  the  boDp  ofhts  flefb  ,U»!l  tieucr 
cca(c  till  he  hath  StnDicD  a  arc. 

17  "  ail  brcaD  is  fmcctc  to  a  lbborc; 
inongccheibillnotlcaucoffttllhcDtC. 

is  a  man  that  breahcth  lbcDIocftc, 
fapmg  thus  tn  his  heart,  *  t©ho  ftcth 
me;3Iailieompa(fcDaboutlbithDarli; 
nclTc :  the  Ibailcs  cotter  mc  jno  boDp 
fecth  mc ,  WhatnccDc3J  to  fcarc  <  3Cbc 
mofthtghUJilnotrcmcmbcrmpfmnrs 

19  £>uch  atnanonlpfcarcthtbecics 
ofmnt,  auDknoVbcth  not  that  the  etcs 
of  the  !Lo2Darctcnnc  tboufanDtJines 
baghtcr  then  the  5>unnc,  bcholDtng  all 
thcibaiesof  men,  anD  conftoeringthr 
mofttccrct  pacts. 

66  a 


'i.Saln.ifi. 


'  P.ou.?. 


'  Ifii.lp. 
I  5.10b.  14. 
'J- 


• 


[Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.         Apocrypha. 


"Leuit.20. 
lo.dcu:. 

12. 22- 


\\Or,.lftrM- 

'  Exod.  .0. 
'4- 


\\  Or,  viola- 
tion. 

•VVifJ.^.3- 


The  pr 'aife  of 
vnfedome 


\0r,amtfle 
Mob.  K. 


io  n?e  Kimball  things  ere  cuerthcp 
mere  crcatcb ,  fo  alto  after  thcp  lucre 
pctfiteb,he  looKcb  Upon  them  all : 

ii  *  Xhis  man  (nail  bee  pumfljcb  in 
tljc  ftrccts  of  tl)c  fine ,  ano  iDl)cr  c  tjc  fu 
fpectcth  not ,  lie  fljall  be  taHen. 

2i  Xfjus  (bail  it  goc  alfo  iMb  the 
ibife ,  that  icauctlj  bet  bufbanb ,  anb 
bjingctljm  an  bcirebpll  another: 
»2j  3foj  'firftfljc  Oatlj  btfobepcb  the 
%<x\o  of  the  moil  tytgb:  anbfcconbip, 
fljc  bath  trefpaffcb  agatnft  her  orotic 
bufbanb,  anbtljirblp ,  fl)C  bath  plaprb 
the  lbljojc  m  abultcrp ,  anb  brought 
djilb2cnbp  another  man. 

24.  £>bce  fljall  be  brought  out  into 
the  congccgatton,anb  il  tttquifition  fljah 
bemabcofhcrcbilbjcn. 

H  ^ct'cbilbjen  fljall  tiot  taUc  root, 
anb  Ijcr  bJattdjcs  fljall  tying  foo?tb  no 
fruit. 

i6  g>\)t  (ball  icauc  bcr  memojic  to 
be  curfeb,  anb  tjcr  rcpzocb  fljailtiotbc 
blotttbout. 

17  3lnb  they  that  reniaittc ,  (ball 
Knoll)  that  there  is  nothing  better  then 
tljc  fcarc  of  tlje  JLojb,  anb  that  there  is 
nothing  ftuectct  then  to  tahebeeb  bnto 
ttje  Commanbcmcnt  of  tljc  ILojb. 

is  git  is  great  gio2p  to  folloro  the 
fLo?b,tjtobcrcccuicboftjtmtslottglifc. 

CHAP.    XXIIII. 

i  Wifdome  doeth  praife  herklte,fhew  her  be 
ginning,  4  Herdwelling,  13  Herglory,  17 
Her  fruit,  2.6  Her  increale,.ind  perfection. 

3Jfcboiuc  (ball  pzatfc  bcr 
fclfcanb  fljailglozpintbc 
ttubft  of  her  people. 
i  3Jn  tljc  Cougrcg& 
93&&&gtk  tion  oftDcmollhtgrj.fliali 
(be  open  her  mouth ,  anb  triumph  be 
fojcbtsporocr. 

3  3  came  out  of  tljc  moutl)  of  the 
moft  tyigb ,  anb  coucccb  tljc  cactlj  as 
ai|tioub 

4-  *  3  blbclt  m  high  places,  anb  my 
thzonc  is  m  a  cloubp  pillar 

5  11  alone  compalTco  the  circuit  of 
hcauen,  anb  roaiucbtu  tljc  bottoincof 
tljcocepc. 

6  gin  the  maucs  of  the  fca,anb  in  all 
the  earth,  anb  m  cucrp  people,  anb  na 
tion.llgotapolTclTioii. 

7  DDithalithcfc  3  fought  red :  anb 
in lbbofc  inheritance  fljali  3  abibc ; 

8  5>o  the  crcatour  of  all  things  gauc 
nice  a  commanbemcut ,  anb  hec  that 
i  mabc  me ,  caufeb  mp  tabernacle  to  reft : 


anb  faib,?Ut  thv  bVbcllmg  be  tnjacob, 
ano  thmeinhentancem3)fcacl. 

9  tocc*  crcatcb  nice  from  tljcbcgttp 
mng  befoic  tljc  roojlb ,  anb  3  fbaiinc- 
uerfailc. 

io  gin  the  *  bolp  Xabcrnaclc  3  ret* 
ucb  bcfo;c  him  :  anb  fo  roas  3  cfta= 
blifljcb  in  Suon. 

1 1  *  jLtltcibifc  in  tile  1 1  beloucb  cine  he 
gaucmcc  reft ,  anb  in  gjcrufaictn  roas 
myporocr. 

u  SmogjtooKcrootc  in  an  Ijonou^ 
rable  people ,  cucn  in  tbcpojtionoftbe 
j_.02b5utljcntance. 

i j  3  ibas  craitcb  Iibc  a  <£cbar  in  %i- 
banns ,  anb  as  a  CypictTc  tree  bpon  the 
mountames  of  Sermon. 

14  3  roas  craitcb  UKe  a  paimc  tree 
in||€ngabbi,anbasarofcplanttngicj 
ncho,  as  a  fairc  oltuctrccmapicafatit 
ficibcanb  grcibbp  asapianctrcc  ||bp 
tljc  mater. 

15  3  gauc  a  frocctc  fmell  line  cina 
mon .  anb  afpalatbus,  anb  3  p  eclbcb  a 
plcafantobour  line  the  beftnnrrhc,  as 
€>aibauum  anb  Onir ,  anb  fmcct  S>to 
tar,  anb  as  the  fume  of  fcancKinccnfc  in 
tljc*  Xabcrnaclc. 

i6  ^stheXurpentinctrccgifttct^ 
eheb  out  mpbjanches,anb  my  branches 
arc  tlje  bianchcs  of  honour  anb  grace. 

17  3!s  the  ©ine  toought  3  foojtr) 
plcafant  fauour ,  anb  my  floibcrs  are 
tljc  fnut  of  honour  anb  rtthes. 

18  3  am  the  mother  of  fairc  loue, 
anb  fearc,  anb  Hnoujicbgc ,  anb  holp 
hopc,3  thcrcfo2c  bemg  ctcrnau,am  gi= 
uctt  to  all  mp  cljilbzcn  Vbljirt)  arcana? 
mebofhim. 

19  Come bnto mean  pc  that  be  befv 
rous  of  mcc ,  anb  fill  pour  fclucs  ibittj 
nip  fruits. 

20  5*02  nip  memorial  is  fmcetet  then 
honp,  anb  nunc  inheritance  then  tljc 
honp  combe 

11  Xhcp  that  catc  nice  (hail  pet  be 
hungry ,  anb  tljcp  thatb2inUcmc  fljall 
pctbcthirftie. 

11  ^c  that  obepeth  inc.  fljall  ncucr 
bcconfoutibcb,anbthcpthatU)02Ucbp 
nicfljailnotbocamuTc. 

3  ^llthcfc  things  arc  the  booae  of 
the  Coucnant  of  the  moft  htgh  <Sob, 
cue.,  the  *  Ham  ibhich  Q3ofcs conmian 
beb  fo;  an  heritage  bnto  tlje  €ongre< 
gartonsofgiacob. 

i+  Jfaint  not  to  bee  ftrong  in  the 
H020  that  he  map  continue  pou.clcauc 
bnto  Ijun  :  foj  the  Ho2b  ^Imtghttc  is 
©ob 


Pro.8.j; 


"Exod.ji. 
i< 

*Pfal.  131 

8. 

\\Or,hf/j. 


I  Or,  C*iti 


\\Or,intht 


'Eiod.jo, 
34- 


•Ioh.  ij.i 


I  Ort  thofrti. 


'Pl'J.rp. 
10,11. 


*Exod.  20. 
1. and  24. 1. 
dcur.4. 1. 

Illd29.3. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xxv. 


Apocrypha. 


•Gen.  J.  it 


"lofli.  J.  I  5. 


|J  OrtJrM*u 
or  Jtrcb. 


'Chap.;  J. 
to. 


lOr.eli- 

■  J 
nd. 


'Gen. 15. 
2,5.  torn. 
12. 10. 


<SoD  alone ,  anti  befiots  him  there  is  no 
otlKi'  §>aiuoiir. 

15  $c  fillcth  all  things  tbitt)  his  tbtfc 
borne ,  as  *  £hpfon ,  anb  as  Zigris  in 
the  time  of  the  nelb  fruits. 

i6  $cmaBCththclntbcraanbingto 
abounb  nuc  cuph?atcs ,  anb  as  *  31o; 
t>m  in  the  time  of  tljc  haructt. 

17  $e  ma&cth  the  bocttinc  of  fenotb 
lebgc  appcarc  as  tljc  light,  anb  as  <seon 
tuthetimcofbmtagc. 

is  Xhefirttmantmetbhernotpcr; 
fectlp:  no  mo?c  (hall  ttjc  lattfinbe  t)cr 
out. 

19  jf  0?  her  thoughts  are  mo?c  then 
the  S>ea,  anb  her  counfcls  p?ofounber 
tt)cn  tt)c  great  bcepc. 

30  3  alfo  tame  out  as  a  |  |b?oofcc  from 
a  nucr,  anb  as  a  commit  into  a  garben. 

31  3Jfatb,3Jtbilltbatetmpbcftgar; 
ben,  anb  tbtll  tbater  abunbantlp  mp 
garben  bebbe :  anb  loe,  mp  orotic  be 
came  a  nucr  ,anb  mp  nucr  became  a  fca. 

31  3JttullpctmaRcboetrtnc  to  thine 
asthcmo?ning,  anb  tbillfenbfo?thhcr 
light  afar  re  off. 

33  3  tbtll  pet  potb?e  out  boctrmc  as 
p?opheeic ,  anb  leauc  it  to  all  ages  fo? 
euer. 

34.  *  25cholb  that  3  haue  notiabou 
reb  fo?  mp  felfe  onelp ,  but  fo?  all  them 
thatfecftclbtfcbome. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

1  What  things  are  beautifull,  and  what  hate- 
lull.  6  Whatisthecrowneof  ace.  7  What 
things  make  men  happy.  13  Nothing  worfe 
tlien  a  wicked  woman. 

0  fh?ec  things  3  ||tbas 
beautiftcb ,  anb  ttoobc  Dp 
beautiful,  both  before  ©ob 
anb  men  :  tljc  *  tontttc  of 
b?ctt»?cn,thc  louc  of  neigh- 
bours ,  a  man  anb  a  tbtfc  that  agree  to- 
gether. 

%  Xh?cc  fo?ts  of  men  mp  fouie  ha; 
teth,anb3J  amgrcatlp  offenbeb  at  their 
life :  a  poo?e  man  that  tsp?oub ,  and) 
man  that  is  a  ipar ,  anb  au  olbe  abultc 
rcrthatbotcth. 

3  3f  f  thou  had  gather  cb  nothing  m 
thp  poufh,  hotb  canft  thou  finbe  anp 
thing  in  thine  age  i 

+  iI>hhotbtomelpathtngiSiubgc; 
ment  fo?  grap  hatrcs,  anb  fo?  ancient 
men  totmott)  counfclW 

<,  £>h  horn  eomelpisthc  tbtfebomc 
of  olbe  men ,  anb  tonbcrflanbmg  anb 
counfell  to  men  of  honour  ? 


6  Q9uch  experience  is  the  croVDnc  of 
olbemcn,anbthcfearcof  ©ob  is  their 
glo?p. 

7  Xhccc  be  nine  things  tbhteh  3 
haueiubgebm  mine  hcarttobchappp, 
anb  the  tenth  3  rbtll  Utter  tbitrj  mp 
tongue :  a  man  that  hath  top  of  his  chtl 
b?cn,  anb  he  that  liucth  to  fee  the  fall  of 
his  enctme. 

8  naell  is  him  that  btbclicth  tbtth 
a  tbtfc  of  bnbcrflanbmg ,  anb  that  hath 
not*flippcb  tbithhts  tongue,  anb  that 
hath  not  ferueb  a  man  mo?e  bntbo?thp 
then  himfclfe. 

9  nacli  is  him  that  hath  founb|ip?u* 
bence,  anb  he  that  fpeafeeth  m  the  cares 
of  htm  that  tbtll  hearc. 

io  £>h  hotb  greatishcthat  finbeth 
Uutebomc!  pet  is  there  none  abouchsm 
thatfearcthrhcilo?b. 

1 1  28ut  the  louc  of  the  ?Lo?b  paffcth 
all  things  fo?  illumination :  he  that  hoi- 
bcth  it,  1 1  thereto  (hail  hebe  iiaencb  < 

ii  5Chcfearcofthc!Lo?bisthcbe; 
ginning  of  his  loue :  anb  faith  is  the  be 
ginning  of  rtcauing  bnto  him. 

13  [<5iuc  nice]  anp  plague,  but  the 
plague  of  the  heart :  anb  anp  ttrtcftete 
neffe,  but  the  tbtefcebnefle  of  a  tboman. 

i4  Tim  anp  affliction ,  but  the  affile 
tion  from  them  that  hate  me :  anb  anp 
rcucnge,  but  the  reucngc  of  enemies. 

\<i  Xhereisnohcababouethehcab 
of  a  ferpent,  anb  there  ts  no  ltyath  a^ 
boue  the  »>?athofan  cnemie. 

i6  *  3  hab  rather  btbell  rbith  a  ipon 
anb  a  b?agon,  then  to  Secpe  houfc  lbirlj 
aibtcfiebUjoman. 

17  Xhc  ttnrttcbnclTc  of  a  tboman 
thangeth her  face,  anb baracneth  her 
countenance  liac  1 1  facBccloth. 

18  $er  huf  banb  fljall  fit  among  his 
neighbours:  anb  mhcti  Dec  hcarcth  it, 
(hailfighbittcrlp. 

\9  ail  lDtcHebneflc  ts  but  little  to  the 
tbicscbncflc  of  a  iboman  :  let  the  po?; 
tion  of  a  finncr  fallbpon  her. 

10  as  the  climbing  bp  a  fanbic  tttap 
is  to  the  feete  of  the  ageb ,  To  is  a  imc 
||  full  of  rbo?bs  to  a  quiet  man. 

11  *5>tumblcnotatthebcauticofa 
Iboman,  ano  befire  her  not  fo?  plcafurc. 

11  3  tboman,  tHbecmauitamr  her 
htifbanb,  is  full  of  anger ,  impubenetc, 
anb  much  rcp?och. 

13  3t  VbtcRcb  tboman  abatcth  the 

couragc.maftcth  a  hcauic  countenance, 

anb  a  lPouubcb  heart :  a  tboman  that 

tbill  not  tomfo?t  her  Imfbanb  tit  bt , 

Xttt  ftrefTc, 


'Cha.14.1. 

and  19.  16. 
iam.3.1. 

\^0rt  afritnd 


\\Or,ra 
rvhom. 


'Pto.ii.i; 


I  Or.  l.ks  * 
Btare. 


\\Or,frt. 

'i.Sam.ti, 

1.  cliap. 
41.3. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafhcus.  Apocrypha. 


*Gen.  3.6 
i.tim.2.14 


\Cr.aneuiU 

'port* 


Or,  a  yoke 
of  oxen. 


Chi 


p.  44. 


ftreflematicth  ttieattchanbs.anb  feeble 
Hnees. 

24  &f*  the  iboman  came  thebeguv 
nmgoffmnc.jthJOughherlbeeallbic. 

15  <5iue  the  ibatcr  no  paffagc :  net 
ther  a  ibtcftcb  iboman  libcrtir  to  gab  a* 
bzoab. 

16  3Jf  fhc  goc  not  as  thou  Tbouibcft 
haue  her,  cut  her  off  from  thpflcfh, anb 
giuc!)crabiUofbmo?te,anblett)ctgoe. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  A  good  wife,  4  and  a  good  confcience  doe 
glad  men.  6  A  wicked  wife  is  a  (careful  thing. 
13  Ot  good  and  bad  wines.  18  Of'  three 
things  that  are  gneuous.  19  Merchants  and 
huckfrers  are  no:  without  finne. 

TLcffcb  is  the  man  that 
iiatb  a  tocrtnous  ttnfc ,  fo* 
tl)c  number  of  t)is  bapes 
fhatlbcboublc. 
i  3JtoertuousTboiuan 
rctopcctl)  her hnf banb,  arm  he  tbauful* 
fill  the  pecres  of  hts  life  tn  peace. 

3  31  goob  ttnfc  is  a  goob  portion, 
ttmtch  (hall  be  gtucn  m  the  pojtion  of 
tljcin  that  fcarc  the  ILom. 

4  i©hcthcr  a  man  bench  02  poozt, 
if  he  hauc  a  goob  heart  toibarbs  tl)c 
JLozb.hcfhaiiataiinmcsrciopccttnth 
a  chcercfull  countenance. 

5  Xhcr  c  bee  ttnee  things  that  nunc 
heart  fcarcth:anb  fo:  the  fonrth  3  ttias 
fozeafraib:  ttrjeflanber  of  atme,t!)c  ga. 
theruig  together  of  an  bnrtilp  multv 
tube,  anb  a  falfe  accufatton  :  all  thefc 
arc  ttwfc  then  beath. 

6  iButagncfeofhcartanbfojrotti, 
is  a  luonian  that  is  telousouer  another 
ujotnan ,  anb  a  fcourgc  of  the  tongue 
ttmich  communicatcth  ttuthail. 

7  3ncuiinnfcisa|lT>ofec(haRcttto 
anb  fro :  he  that  hathhoib  of  her,  is  as 
though  he  hcib  a  fcozpion. 

3  3i  bnmften  iboman  anb  a  gabber 
ab2oao,  caufcth  great  anger ,  anb  fhec 
null  not  touer  her  ottwe  fliame. 

9  Xhett>bo2bomcofa  iboman  map 
be  hnoibcn  in  her  haughne  loofecs,  anb 
eve  libs. 

10  *gjf  tln;baughtcrbcniameleffe, 
Bcepehertn  ftraitlp:  left  (he  abufe  her 
fclfe  tlKOUfih  oucrnmch  Ubcrttc. 

1 1  naatch  ouer  an  tmpubentepe :  anb 
marueilc  not,  if  fhec  trefpaflc  agamft 
thee. 

12  «S>hcc  lbtll  open  her  mouth  as  a 
thirfttctraucilct,ibhcnhc  hathfounb  a 
fountainc :  anb  bunUcof  cucrpttiatcr 


ncerc  her :  bp  roctp  llhcbge  lbtll  (he  fit 
boibnc,  anb  open  her  qutuer  agamft  t 
ucrparroib. 

13  Xhc  grace  of  a  lbrfe  bchghtcth 
her  huf  banb,anb  hetbtferction  ibtlifat 
hts  bones. 

14.  31  Client  anb  louing  iboman  is  a 
mftofthclLo2b,anbthcrcisnothingfo 
much  ibo2th,as  ammb  tbclimftructtb. 

15  3ifbamcfaftrmDfaithfuliiboman 
is  a  boublc  grate ,  anb  rjtt  continent 
mmb  cannot  be  batueb. 

16  31s  the  !§>unne  ibhcn  it  artfethm 
the  thigh  heauentfoisthcbcauticofa 
goobtbifcui  the  ||  ojbcrmg  of  her  houfc. 

17  3ts  the  clearc  light  is  bpontrjeiio- 
Ipcanblctticttc :  fo  is  the  bcauticof  the 
faced  in  ripe  age. 

is  3tsfhegolbenpiliarsarct>ponthc 
foefcetsof  filuer :  fo  arc  the  jfaite  fcete 
tbtthaconftantlhcart. 

19  fl0pfonnc7ttcepcthcflolb2cofthmc 
agefounb :  anbgmenotthpftrcngthto 
Grangers. 

20  nphen  thou  haft  gotten  afrutttnil 
poiTciTionrtKoughall  the  firlb :  foilie  it 
tbiththmc  ottmc  fcebc,  trnftmg  in  the 
goobncffcofthpftotRc. 

ii  £>o  thpracc  lbhich  thou  leaucft 
fhaibemagmficbJiaumgtheconfibcnce 
of  thetrgoobbefcent. 

22  3lnharlotfl)aiibccaccotmtcbas 
I  fpittle:but a  martcb  Uioman  :s  a  tolluc 
agamft  bcath  to  her  hufbanb. 

13  31  lbtrtteb  Iboman  is  guicn  as  a 
poition  to  a  ibicfccb  man :  buc  a  goblp 
iboman  tsgiucn  to  him  that  fcarcth  the 
ILoib. 

14.  3{  bifhoncfr  iboman  contemncth 
(hame,butanhoncft  woman  ttullreue 
rcuce  her  hufbanb. 

15  31  fhamclriTc iboman fhalberoun- 
tenasa  bog:  but  flic  that  isCbamcfaft 
ttnll  fear  c  the  H  02b. 

16  %  Iboman  that  honoured)  her 
hufbanb,  mall  bee  mbgeb  Wife  of  all : 
buc  (lie  that  bifhononreth  htm  m  her 
pjtbc ,  (halt  be  rounrcb  bn  goblp  of  alt 

17  31  loubc  crpuig  iboman ,  anb  a 
fcoioe ,  than  be  fought  out  to  banc  atbap 
thecnenues. 

18  Xhcrc  be  ttt»o  things  that  grtcue 
mp  heart :  anb  the  thirb  maBcth  me  an 
grp :  a  man  of  lbarrc  that  fuffcrrth  po 
ntrtp,  anb  men  of  bnbcrftanbmg  that 
arcnotfetby:  anb  one  that  retumeth 
froninghtcoirfncffc  to  fume:  tlieJLo2D 
p2cparcthfuchaoucfo2thefmo2b. 

29  3i  merchant  fliaii  hacblp  heepe 
L____ him 


'J"V 


f  (jrt .  ui  the 

hightftpU- 

cti  of  the 

Lard 

||  Or,  arm- 

ment. 

\[  Or t  t/icon- 

\\Orjamtt] 

\\Or,krrp. 


\\Or 


I  Apocrypha.        Chap.xxvij.xxvii).        Apocrypha. 


Prou.l8. 
ll. 
||  Or,  »  cAilj 

different. 

•Ptou.i;. 
4. 1.cim.6. 
9- 


\\Or,tl:snght 

'Prou. 17. 
II. 

"Mirth  7. 
'7- 


tjtmfclfc  from  bomg  ttuong  :  anti  an 
huebfter  (ball  not  be  frecb  from  (nine. 

CHAP.  XXVI I. 

1  Of  fumes  in  lellm?  and  buying.  7  Our 
fpeacb.  willtellwhatisinvs.  16  A  friend  is 
loft  by  dilcouenng  hisiecrets.  15  Heethat 
eth  .1  pitfhall  fall  into  ir. 

•any  bauc  Gnnco  fo;  II  a 
fmai  matter :  %  be  that  fee- 
bctb  to;  abunbance  null 
turnebtsetcsatbay. 
i  *3sa  nailcfttcbetb 
faft  betlbccnc  the  toyntngs  oftl)c  Cones : 
fobotb  Rnnc  thebe  tlofe  bctibeenebuy; 
ms  anb  felling. 

3  SUnieCTc  a  man  bolb  bimfelfe  Dili- 
gently  in  the  feare  of  tlie  Ho;b ,  bis 
boufc  fliallfoonc  be  oucrtrnoujen. 

4.  asTbhenoncfiftctbuJitbafieue, 
the  remfc  remainetb,  lb  tlje  filth  of  man 
inbtslltatbc. 

5  %\)c  furnace  p;oouetb  trie  pot^ 
tcrsbcffell:fo  the 'mail  of  man  is  in 
fusreafontng. 

6  *  Xbe  frutte  beciarctb  if  the  tree 
bane  beenc  b;c(Tcb :  fo  is  tlje  bttcrance 
of  a  conceit  m  the  heart  of  man. 

7  $;aifc  no  man  bcfo;c  thou  r)ca- 
red  bun  fpeabe,  fo;  this  ic  the  mail  of 
men. 

s  3lftrioufollottjeOrigl)teoufncfrc, 
thou  malt  obtamc  her ,  anb  put  her  on, 
asaglonouslongrobc. 

9  Xlje  birbs  lbill  rcfozt  bnto  their 
libc ,  fo  tbill  truth  rerumc  unto  them 
that  pzaenfem  bet. 

10  as  tlje  ILyon  lietl)  in  lbaitc  fo; 
the  p;ay  :fo  fmnc  fo;  them  that  lbo;be 
iniquity. 

11  ILbebifcourfcofagoblymanis 
alVbaics  luith  lbifcbomc :  but  a  foole 
crjangethastheiipoonc. 

11  3Jf  thou  be  among  the  tmbifrrect, 
obferue  the  time:  but  be  continually  a- 
mong  men  of  bnucrftanbmg. 

ij  Xbc  Diftourfc  of  fooles  is  trfr 
fome,anbtbctrfpo?t  is  in  tbctbanton; 
nevTcoffinnc. 

14.  Xbetalbeofbimtbatfujearetb 
much,  mahetb  the  baire  ftanb  bpngbt : 
anb  their  bjaules  mabe  one  (top  bis 
cares. 

15  Xbcftrifcof  tbepzoubisbloofr 
(bebbtng ,  anb  their  reiuimgs  arc  grie- 
uoustothecare. 

is  i©ho  fo  mfcouereth  fecrets ,  loo^ 
fetl)  his  cteoit :  anb  (hall  neuer  finb 
fcienbtohtsminbc 


17  JLouc  thy  fricnb ,  anb  be  faitbfull 
bnto  him :  but  if  thou  bc\u:aycft  his  fe; 
crcts,follorb  no  mozcafter  him. 

18  f  02  as  a  man  hath  beftroyeb  b»S 
encmie :  fo  haft  thou  loft  the  louc  of  thy 
neighbour. 

19  asonetbatlcttetbabttbgocout 
of  his  hanb ,  fo  haft  thou  let  thy  neigh- 
'  bour  goe,  anb  thalt  not  get  him  againe. 
I  io  ^olloiDafterbtmnomozcftuhc 
;  is  too  far  off ,  he  is  as  a  roc  cfcapcb  out 

of  the  mare. 

21  3ts  fo;  arbounbttmaybc  bounb 
top ,  anb  after  rcuilmg  there  may  be  re- 
'concilement :  but  he  that  belb;ayetb  fe- 
crets is  Without  hope. 

i  x  «=>e  *  that  Unnbctb  ttutb  the  eies 
tbojbctfj  cutl.anb  he  that  bnottictb  htm 
ttnllbcpart  from  bun. 

23  iBhcn  tljou  art  p;cfent  he  Hull 
fpeabe  fmectly  ,  anb  ttnll  abmtrc  thy 
i  Tbo;bs :  but  at  the  laft  he  null  l|  tt);ithc 
'  his  moutb,anb  flanber  thy  fayings. 
I  2+  3  hauchateb  many  things,  but 
nothing  line  bun,f  o;  the  %  o;b  Vbsllbate 
;h«m. 

15  nabo  fo  caftcth  a  ftone  on  high, 
cafteth  it  on  his  ottme  hcab.anb  a  Deceit 
full  ftrobe  (ball  mabe  Usounbs. 

26  nabo  fo  biggeth  a  *  pit  (hall  fall 
therein :  anb  he  that  fcttetb  a  trap  (hall 
be  taben  therein. 

27  !^c  that  rbo;bcth  nufchicfc ,  it 
(hall  fall  Upon  him ,  anb  he  (hall  not 
hnoiu  lbhence  it  commeth. 

18  £0ocbcry  anb  rcpzoarh  arc  from 
the  pjoub :  but  *  bengcance  as  a  ?Lyon 
(hall  lie  mibaitefo;  them. 

29  Xhey  that  reioyce  at  the  fall  of 
thcnghtcousthaibetabetitnthcfnare 
anb  anguith  fljall  confumc  them  bef o?c 
thcybtc. 

30  iTJaliceanbtbzath,  etienthefcare 
abhommattons  ,  anb  the  (infull  man 
(hall  haue  them  both. 

CHAP.   XXVIII. 

Agamlfreuenae.    8   Quairelliug,    10   An- 
And  backbiting. 

ri<£  that  rcucngcth  fliall 

j?fino  bengcante  from  the 

4  ILo;b ,  anb  he  ttnll  fucely 

I  beepe  his  ftnncs  (m  rc- 

memb;ancc.) 

2  >6;giuc  thy  nnghbour  the  hurt 
that  he  hath  bone  bnto  thee,  fo  (bail  thy 
(inncs  alfo  be  fozgiuen  Ibbcn  thou 
1 p;aycft. 

3  £)ncmanbcarethhatrcbagamft 
I  Xttt  2  another. 


•Prou.  10 


1 1  Or, niter 
httjpcacb. 


•Pfal.7.15. 

prou  26. 

27. ceded 

8.10. 

"D^ut.  11. 

5  5-rom.i  1. 

»9- 

Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


•Chap.  8. 1 


'Prou.jtf. 
21. 


'Chap.  11 
18. 


Or,:hrtt. 


another ,  anb  boctt)  he  fceue  patbon 
from  the  SLo?^ 

4  li?ceiheujcthnomercytoaman, 
Ibrnch  is  Iirc  himfelfe :  anb  Doctl)  hcc 
af  Re  fo?giucncfic  of  his  olbnc  Gnnes< 

5  SJfhcthatisbiitflcftjnourithhas 
t  rcb  ,111  ho  iDtll  nut  cat  fo?  par '0  011  of  rjis 
finnes* 

6  Jiemembcr  thy  enb.anb  let  mimi; 
tie  ceafe,  [remember]  co?ruprton  ana 
beath ,  anD  abibc  in  the  Commanbc* 
ments. 

7  Bcmcmber  the  Commaunbc; 
ments, $bearc no  malice  to  thy  neigh- 
bour :  [remember  ]  the  Coucnant  of  the 
IjiStiefr ,  anb  Unnuc  at  ignorance. 

8  *  3lbftame  from  ftnfc,  anb  thou 
fbaitbmumfh  thy  unites:  fo?  a  furious 
man  lb  ill  limbic  ftnfe. 

9  31  Cinfull  man  bifquietcth  fnenbs, 
anb  matteth  bebate  among  them  that 
be  at  peace. 

10  *3isthcmatteroftheru;e  is,  fo  it 
burnetii :  anb  as  a  mans  tttength  is,  fo 
is  fjis  ib?ath ,  anb  acco?btng  to  his  tv 
ches  his  anger  rifcth ,  anb  the  ftrongcr 
they  are  ttrjtchcontcnb,  tljcmo^cttjcp 
ibillbcinflameb. 

11  21n  Ijaftie  contention  uinbletfj  a 
fire ,  anb  an  hafty  fighting  fl)cbbcth 
bloob. 

ii  JJf  thou  blolb  the  fparUc, it  (hall 
burne :  if  thou  fpitbpon  it,  it  (hall  bee 
nuctuiicb ,  anb  both  thefc  come  out  of 
thy  mouth. 

13  *€uffe  the  lbhtfpcrcr.anb  boublc 
tongucb :  fo?fuch  hauebeftcoyebmany 
that  lDcrc  at  peace. 

14  31  bathbmng  tongue  hatlj&ifqtri; 
ctebmany ,  anb  b?iuen  them  from  n& 
tion  to  nation,  ftcotig  cities  hath  it  pin- 
lcbboibn,anboucrth?oil)mthchoufc3 
of  great  men. 

15  ailbacRbitlng  tongue  hath  caft  out 
tocrtuous  Women,  anb  bepnucb  them 
oftheir  labours. 

i6  ioliofohearRencfhbntoit,fl)aii 
ncucr  finbe  rcft,anb  ncucr  bibel  quietly. 

17  3Che  ftroke  of  the  tblitp  maRctb 
matlicsm  the  n"cth,butthc  ftroacof  ttje 
tongue  b?caRcth  the  bones. 

is  £0anyhauc  fallen  by  the  cage  of 
the  fiuo?b  :  but  not  fo  many  as  hauc 
fallen  by  the  tongue. 

19  nacllis  l)ec  that  isbcfcnbcbfrom 
it,  anb  hath  not  paflcb  tlnough  thebe- 
nunc  thereof:  lbho  hath  not  b?aibcn 
thcyoltethercof,  no? hat!)  bencbounb 
mherbanbs. 


20  jfo?theyoRCthercofisayoKeof 
y?on,  auo  t!je  banbs  thereof  are  banbes 
ofb?aflc. 

21  Xhcbeaththcrofisancuil  beath, 
the  gcauc  lbcre  better  then  it. 

22  3tlhau  not haue  rule  ouer  them 
that  fcarc  <3ob ,  neither  (hall  thep  be 
burntibtth  the  flame  thereof. 

23  £>uch  as  fo2lattr  the  !Lo?b  (hall 
fallinto  it ,  anb  it  (hall  bumc  m  them, 
anonot  bequencheb,it  tVjaibe  fent  bpon 
them  as  a  ?Lton ,  anb  bcuourcthem  as 
aUcoparb. 

24  jLooRethattrjouhcbgcthypok 
feffion  about  Vbith  tho?nes,  anbbmbc 
bpthyulueranbgolb: 

z-i  3lnb  ibeigh  thy  tbo?bs  in  a  bab 
lance,  anb  maftc  a  boo?c  anb  barrcfo? 
thy  mouth. 

26  2Selbarc  thou  Cube  not  by  it,  left 
thou  fan  before  him  that  licth  ui  lbait. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

1  Wee  muAfhew  mercy  and  lend  :  4  but  the 
borower  mult  not  defraud  the  lender.  9  Giue 
almes.  14  A  good  man  will  not  vndoe  his 
furetie.  1S  Tobefurctie  and  vndertakefor 
others  is  dangerous.  12.  It  is  better  to  line  at 
home,  then  tofoiourne. 

<£c  that  is  mernfiiU, 
Hull  lenbe  tonto  his 
neighbour  ,  anb  hee 
that  ftrcngthneth  his 
hanbe ,  becpert)  the 
Commanbcmcnts. 
2  JLcnb  to  thy  neigh- 
bour in  time  of  his  *  neeb,  anb  pay  thou 
thy  neighbour  agamc  m  bue  feafon. 

3  mccpcrt)yibo?bejbcaicfaithfully 
ibith  him.anb  thou  (halt alibaies finbe 
thethingthatisncccQarv  foithce. 

4  fl0anp  ibhen  a  thing  lbas  lent 
thcm,recSoncD  it  tobefounb,anbput 
them  to  trouble  that  hclpcb  them. 

5  Xillhchathrecciucb,heibiii  Rifle 
amans  hanb :  anb  fo?  his  neighbours 
money  he  rum  fpcafic  ftibmiflely :  but 
tt)henhcfl)oulb  repay,  he  Unllpjolong 
thttmie,  anb  rcfurnc  lbo?bs  of  gciefc. 
anbcomplameofthetimc. 

<s  ^f  hcpjcuaiie, Iw fljaiiharbly  re^ 
teiuetljc  halfe,  anb  he  ibill  count  as  if 
he  oao  founbit:  if  not;  he  hath  bepn 
ucbhimofhtsmoncy.anbhchar!)  got- 
ten him  an  enemy  ttnthout  tauft :  he 
paycth  him  tbith  curfings ,  anb  ray? 
lings :  anb  fo?  honour  he  Vbill  pay  htm 
bifgracc. 

7  fjgaw 


'Dtut.  15 
S.matth.j. 
42.1uke  6. 

a- 


Me. 


;ifte  it 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xxx. 


Apocrypha. 


"Dan.  4. 14 

mate.  6.20. 
luke  1 1-41. 
and  1  2.  5  J. 
jch  10.4. 
I  ttm  6, 
18,13. 
-lob 4  8, 
j, 10. 


[  Or,faiU. 


*Cll3p.3?. 

11S. 


7  t^attv  fbercfoze  bauc  rcfufeo  to 
lent)  foz  ottjee  mens  ill  Dealing ,  fearing 
tobcDcfcauDcD. 

8  #ct  bauc  thou  patience  \X>it\)  a 
man  in  poozc  cftatc,  anD  Delay  not  to 
Cbcibbim  mercy. 

9  $cipc  the  pooze  foz  the  command 
Dements  fabc,  anDtutnchimnot  aibay 
bccaufcofhispoucrric. 

10  Hofe  thy  money  foz  thy  bzofher 
anD  thy  frienD,  anD  let  it  not  ruft  bnDcc 
attonetobcloft. 

11  *Jlaybptbyttcafurca«ozDingto 
the  tommanDcmcnts  of  the  moft  high, 
anDitfbailbzingthccmozc  p?ofitc  tljcn 
golDt. 

12  *5>butbpaimesitttbyftozcbou* 
fes :  anD  tt  (ball  Dcltucr  thee  fcom  all  afc 
fliction. 

i}  ^Ftftjaificjbtfoztbecagainfttbinc 
enemies,  better  then  a  mighttc  fbicio 
anD  ftrong  fpcare. 

14.  3n  honcft  man  is  furetic  foz  bis 
neighbour :  butbec  tljat  is  impuDent, 
tbrtlllfozfaRcbtm. 

15  ifozget  not  the  fcicnDlbip  of  tby 
futetic:  foz  bee bath  giucn bis  life  foz 
thee. 

16  anttnctunlloucrfbzoVbthcgooD 
eftatc  of  Ins  fur  cue: 

17  ^nDbetbatisofanbutbanlmtil 
minDc,  UjiU  Icaucbimm  [Danger]  that 
DeliucrcDbtm. 

is  ^urmtbip  bath  bnDonc  many  of 
gooD  cftatc,anD  iba&eD  them  as  a  lbauc 
of  the  3>ca :  migbtic  men  bath  it  Dziuen 
fcom  their  boufcs,fo  that  tbey  ibanDzcD 
among  Orange  nations. 

19  %  rbicBCD  man  tranfgrcfling  the 
tommanDemcnts  of  the  ILozD,  (ball  fall 
into  furctifljip :  anD  hec  that  bnDcrta< 
feetb  anD  follotbctb  other  mens  bufr 
neuHoz  game,  ftjailfallinto  wits. 

io  $clpc  thy  neighbour  accozDtng  to 
thy  poibcc ,  anD  bevbarc  that  thou  thy 
fclfc  fail  not  mto  the  fame. 

21  Xbenbicfetbingfoznfcisrbatcr 
anD  bzeab.auD  clothing,anD  an  boufc  to 
coucrfbame. 

11  asettcrtstbcUfcofapoozcman 
in  a  meane  cottage,  then Delicate  far e  in 
another  mans  fjoufe. 

u  26c  it  little  oz  much ,  boIDc  fbec 
contentcD,  that  tbou  bcarc  not the  re- 
pzocbofthyhoufe. 

1+  ifoi  it  is  a  mifcrablc  life  to  goc 
fcom  boufe  to  boufc :  foz  lbbcre  thou 
art  a  ftr  anger,  thou  bar  eft  not  open  tby 
mouth. 


25  Xbou  (bait  cntertameanDfcaft, 
anD  bauc  no  tljanUcs :  mozcouer ,  thou 
fljait  Dear  c  bitter  VbozDs. 

26  Cometl)oufttangcr,auDfurnia) 
atablc ,  anD  fccbc  me  of  that  tbou  Ijaft 
rcaDy. 

17  ©iuc  place  tbou  ftrangcr  to  an 
honourablcman.mybzofhcrtommctb 
to  belobgcD ,  anDj  haucnccDc  of  mine 
fjoufe. 

18  Xbcfe  tfjings  arc  grieuous  to  a 
manofbiiDcrftanDing :  tbcbpbzaiDrng 
of  Ijoufc  -  roomc ,  anD  rcpzochiug  of  tlje 
lenDcr. 

CHAP.    XXX. 

1  It  is  good  to  correct  our  children,  7  and  not  to 
cocker  them.  14  Health  is  better  then  wealth. 
2.2.  Health  and  life  are  fhortened  by  ^riefe. 

"  £c*thatIouetbbisfonnc, 
caufctbbim  ofttofcclctbc 
roDDc,  that  Ijec  may  Ijauc 
toyofbimmtbccnD. 
1  $e  that  cbaftirctb  bis 
fonnc,  (bail  bauc  ||  toy  in  bun ,  anD  (ball 
teloyce  of  him  among  fjts  ||  accuiauv 
tancc. 

3  *^ctbatteacbetbbisibnne,gric< 
uctl)  the  encnue :  anD  befoze  bis  fricnDs 
hcfballrcioyccofbim. 

4-  Xbough  bis  father  Die ,  pet  be  is 
as  though  bee  were  not  Deab :  foz  hec 
batb  left  one  befjmoc  Ijtm  tljat  is  UUc 
Ijtmfclfe. 

5  nahiic  be  liucD,  be  *  fam  anD  rctoy 
ccd  in  him :  anD  lbbcn  Ije  dicd  Ijec  Vbas 
not  fozrolbfull. 

6  ^eleftbcbmDc  himan  aucngcra^ 
gamft  bis  enemies,  anD  one  tbat  fl^ail 
rcduitebinDneffctobis  frtcnDs. 

7  !t?e  tbat  maKctb  too  much  ofbis 
fonnc,  fljailbinbcbp  his  lbouuDS,  anD 
hisboUiclsujilbetroublcDatcucrptrv. 

8  ^n  hozfc  not  bzoUcn  becommeth 
hcaDftrong :  anD  a  djilDc  left  to  himfclfc 
Vbillbclbilfull. 

9  Cocttcc  thy  cbilDc,  ano  hec  fljau 
maftcthecllafraiDipiapttHtbbim ,  anD 
Ijc  Xbill  bzmg  tljcc  to  beaumeffc. 

10  jUugb  not  ibith  him ,  left  thou 
baue  fozroib  ibith  bun,  anD  left  thou 
gnadithy  teeth  in  the  cud. 

1 1  *<5iuc  him  no  liberty  in  Ijis  youth, 
anD  ujinKc  not  at  his  follies. 

12  2Bolb  Doluncbisnccrieibbilcbcc 
is  young,  anD  bcatc  bun  on  the  fiDes 
ibhilc  he  is  a  djilDc,  left  Ijec  ware  ftub- 
boznc,anbbcDifobcDicntbntotbcc,anD 
Co  bzing  fo^rolbtothinchcart. 

Xttt  3        13  <£ha 


Of  children. 

*Piou.i  j. 
14.^23. 
■J- 


Or.gcol 
by  him. 
\\Or,kitfi- 

"Dcut.iS.;. 


•Pfal.  I-.S. 


1'icd. 


'Qa.7.1 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiaiticus.  Apocrypha, 


Of  health. 


'\Or, ,:$■.- 

Std. 


"Pro.u. 
15.&15. 

i  .;.  .ui.i  I  7. 

\\Or,tx,il- 
Ution. 


\\OrpmbU, 


"l.Ttni.6. 
9,10. 


•dvj-'.s.t 


i  j  CDaftifctDpfonne,  anb  Dolb  Dun 
to  labour,  left  Ins  IeU)D  bclj.nuo  tir  be  an 
offence  bntotDec. 

14  zBctter  is  tDe  pooje  being  founb 
anb  (Icons  of  conftttution ,  tDcn  acitD 
man  ttiat  ts  afflictcb  m  Ijis  booy. 

15  iJjcaltD  anb  300b  ftatc  of  bob?  ace 
abouc  all  golb,  anb  a  ftrons  bobv  abouc 
infinite  ibcaltD. 

16  XDeceisnocicDesaboueafounb 
bobp,  anb  no  top  aboue  tDe  lopof  tljc 
Deact. 

17  2>catDisbettectDcn  abittcc  life, 
0?  tontuuiall  ficftencfle. 

is  2Delicates  polbjcb  bpon  amoutlj 
(l)utbp,  accas  mcffesofiucatfctbpon 
a  grauc. 

19  nsDatgoobbotDtDcoffccingtmto 
an  ibolc  <  fo?  ncitDcc  tan  it  eat  no?  fmcll : 
fotsDctDatis  Ipecfccuteb  of  tDcHo2b. 

zo  $ee  fcctD  UntD  Dis  cpes  anb  gco; 
netD ,  as  an  eunucD  tDat  cmbjacetD  a 
toitgmcanbfigDetD. 

ii  *  d5iue  not  oucc  tDp  minb  to  Dca= 
tuneflc,  anb  afflict  not  tDpfelfcin  ttjtne 
olbnccotinfcll. 

12  XDcslabneflcoftDcDeartistDe 
life  of  man,anb  tD  c  1 1  lo  pfitlnes  of  a  mar. 
pjolongetDDtsbaycs. 

23  Horn tljinc oVbne foule, anb  tom- 
fo  ml)v  Dcatt ,  tmioue  fo*cotb  fac  from 

tlicc :  fo2  foicott)  DatD  feilleb  man?,  anb 
tDcccisnopjofittDeccm, 

24  «nuic  anb  ifyatD  fl)02tcn  tDe  life, 
anb  catcfulncffc  bnngetD  asc  before  tDe 
time. 

25  II  %  cDctcfull  anb  soob  Deact  rbill 
Daue  a  cace  of  Dis  meat  anb  biet. 

CHAP.    XXXI. 

Of  the  defire  ot  riches.   11  Of  moderation 
and  exceffe  in  eating,  or  drinking  wine. 

3teDirig  fo2*ttcDcs,  conftu 
inetD  tDe  flcQ),  anb  tDe  cace 
tDecof  bnuctD  attiap  fleepc. 
x  saatcDins  cace  lbill 
not  let  a  man  (lumber,  as  a 
(bjebtfeafe  bzcanetD  flcepe. 

3  XDc  ncD  DatD  fittcat  labour  in 
satDcnng  clcDes  tosctDec ,  anb  tbben 
Dc  ccftctD.De  tsfillcb  TbitD  tnsbclicatcs. 

4  1LDcpoo2CiaboutcfDinDispoo2c 
cftate,  anb  VbDcnljc  leauetD  off,  Dec  is 
ftillncebic. 

<,  tyetDat  louctD  golb  (Dan  not  bee 
luftificb,  anb  De  tDat  folloibttDcoicuptb 
on,  (nail  Daue  cnougDtDctcof. 

6  *d5olb  DatD  bin  tDe  nunc  of  man?, 
anb  tD«t  beftcuenonrbas  pjtcfent. 


7  3ftis  a  (tumbling  blocnbntotDcm 
tDat  faccifice  bnto  it,  anb  cuctp  foolc 
(Dail  be  taken  tDereibttD. 

8  *  asicffcb  is  tlje  ncD  tDat  is  founb 
ibitDout  blemitD,  anb  DatD  not  goneaf- 
tec  golb: 

9  naDo  is  Ije  <  anb  Vbe  tbill  tall  Dun 
bleu"eb:fo2«JonbccfulltDings DatD  Dec 
bone  among  Dispeople. 

10  n9DoDatDbcnctttebtDeccbp,anb 
founb  pcefit  t  tljen  let  Dim  glozp.  narjo 
migDt  offenb  anb  DatD  not  offenbeb,  02 
bone  euill,  anb  DatD  not  bone  it  < 

1 1  l?ts  goobs  (Dan  be  cfiabli(Dcb,anb 
tDccongtcgatiofljailbcciaceDisaimes. 

12  3Jf  tt)ou  fit  at  a  bountiftill  table, 
*bccnotgcecbpbponu,  anb  t  fay  not, 
XDeceis  mucD  mcatc  on  tt. 

13  Bcmcmbcc  tDat  a  ibicfecb  eve  is  an 
null  tlnng :  anb  miiat  iscceateb  mo2c 
inuftcb  tDen  an  epe  <  tDccefojc  it  ibcc- 
pctD  II  Ppon  cuecy  occafion. 

14  5>tcctcDnottDineDanbtt)DltDccs 
foeuecitloobetD,anbtD2uftitnotrbitD 
Dim  into  tDe  bift). 

15  3nbge  of  trjr  ncigljbout  bp  tljy 
felfc :  anb  be  bifeceet  in  euccy  point. 

16  <£atc  as  it  bctommctD  a  man  ttjofc 
tDmgs  il»DicD  ate  fct  befo2e  tDee:  anb  bc^ 
uouce  not,  left  tDoube  Dateb. 

17  fUaue  off  ficft  fo?  manccs  fane, 
anb  be  not  bnfatiablc,  left  tDou  offenb. 

18  *t@Den  tDou  fittcftamong  many, 
ceacD  not  tDmt  Daub  out  ficft  of  all. 

19  3  becy  title  is  fufficient  fo2  a  man 
rbell  nuctuceb ,  1 1  anb  Dc  fettDetD  no  t  Dis 
tbinb  fbo2ttopon  Disbcb. 

20  5>ounbfleepetommetDofmobc 
rate  eanng:  Dc  rifctD  early  ,anb  Dis  lbits 
are  ibitD  Dim,  but  tDe  pame  of  njafr 
cDmg  anb  cDollcc,  anb  pangs  of  tDe  bcl 
lie  ace  nut  h  an  tonfanablc  man. 

2 1  3lnb  if  tDou  Daft  bin  fo2teb  to  eatc, 
acifc,  goc  foitt),  toomit,  anb  tDoufljalt 
Daucccft. 

22  €3pfonne,Dcace  me,  anb  befpu"c 
nicnot,  anb  at  tDe  lafttDott  (Daltfinbe 
as  3  tolb  tDcc :  m  all  tD?  rb02Bcs  bee 
dinette,  fo  (DalltDcre  no  ficttencfle  come 
bntotDec. 

23  'nsDo  fo  islibccail  of  Dis  meat, 
men  (DalifpcaitcujcllofDtm,  anb  tDe 
cepo2tofDtsgoobDoufcRCcputg  tbill  be 
belccucb. 

24  ffiut  agamft  Dim  tDat  is  a  nig 
gacb  of  Dismeate ,  tDe  UiDole  nnc  (Dail 
mucmucc  anb  tnc  teftimotues  of  Dis 
niggacbneffcfliailnotbcboubtcbof. 

25  £>l)t\\)  not  tDy'baliantncfTc  in 
lbtnc, 


'Pfa.  11 1.9 
pro.2;.l. 

\Gr.ocennot 
lh}  throat 
vpmt'r 


I J  Or,  btjare 
etttri  thin? 
th.it  tipre- 
fenicd. 


LuIitiS. 
:4- 


Chap. 
<9- 


||  Or,&\uth 
not  puffin  f 
and  blown*. 


Prou.22. 


*Ifli  5. 15. 
iudct.lj.8 


Apocrypha.        Chap.xxxi|.xxxuj.         Apocrypha. 


'Ecde.3 

:hap.»o. 


•lob.;  3.6 


i»mc,fo:  u>me  hath  beftroy cb  many. 

16  %\yt  furnace  piooucth  thecbgc 
bybtppmg :  fo  both  tome  the  hearts  of 
rtjc  pzoutj  by  DnmBcnncfle. 

17  name  is  as  goob  as  life  to  a  man 
if  it  be  Djun&e  mobcratly :  Vbljat  life  is 
trjen  to  a  man  that  ts  without  nnnctfo? 
itujasmabctomauc  mciigiab. 

28  tememcarurably  DjunUc,  anbm 
fcafon,  bnngeth  giabncflc  of  the  heart 
anb  eljccr  cfnlneffc  of  the  inmbc. 

19  25nt  ttmie  bumRcn  With  crccflc, 
maHcthbittcrncffc  of  rhemmbe ,  With 
taatbltng  anb  quarreling. 

jo  2D2imRcnnefl"cmcrcafcth  the rage 
of  a  fooicnil  hcoffcnb,  it  bimimfheth 
ftrcngth,anb  mafceth  Wounbs. 

31  BebuBc  not  thy  neighbour  at  the 
Wmc,  anb  befpife  him  not  m  his  mirth : 
gtuc  him  no  bcfpitefull  wojbs,  anb 
PKflcnot  bpon  htm  With  fyging  him 
(tobnnhc.) 

CHAP.    XXXII. 

1  Ofhisduty  thatischeefeormafterin  a  feaft. 
14  Of  the  feareofGod.  18  Of  counfell. 
2.0  Of  a  ragged  and  a  fmooth  way.  23 
Truft  not  to  any  but  to  thy  felfe  and  to  God. 

f  thou  be  mabc  the  matter 

(of  tt)c  feaft)  lift  not  thy 

,  fclfc  Dp,  but  bec  among 

*thcm  as  one  of  the  reft, 

...ss2ta&cbiligcnttarcfo2thcm, 

anbfdfttboWne. 

1  anb  When  thou  haftboncailthy 
office,  taftc  tljv  Pia«  that  thou  may  ett 
be  merry  With  them ,  anb  recetue  a 
crownc  fo?  thy  Well  ojbering  oftrjc 
feaft. 

3  S>pcanc  thou  that  art  the  elber, 
fo:  it  bctomcth  thee ,  but  With  founb 
luogement,anbhinbcrnotmuncfte. 

4  $oWze  not  out  rbojbs  Where 
*thereisamuatian,anb(hcWnotfo?th 
Wifcbomeoutoftime. 

5  %  tonfojt  of muficuc  in  a  banfect 
of  Wmcis  as  a  Ggnct  of  Carbuncle  fct  in 
golb. 

6  as  a  fignct  of  an  Cmcraub  fet  m 
a  Wo?Rc  of  golb,fo  is  the  mclobtc  of  mu 
ficftcwithplcafantwme. 

7  5>pcafee  yong  man,  if  there  be 
nccb  of  thee:  anb  yet  fcarfcly  When  thou 
arttWifcafftcb: 

s  !Lct  thy  fpeach  be  (ho?t ,  tomp2C> 
henbing  much  m  few  WD2bs ,  be  as  one 
that  hnoweth,  anb  yet  hoibtth  his 
tongue. 

9  *3Ifthou  be  among  great  men, 


mabc  not  thy  fclfc  ectuall  With  them, 
anb  When  ancient  men  are  m  place,  bfc 
not  many  W02bs. 

10  Befojc  the  dumber  gocth  lighte- 
ning :  anb  before  a  n)amcfaft  man  (hall 
goefauour. 

11  JMc  top  betimes,  anb  be  not  the 
latt :  but  get  thee  home  Without  belay. 

11  Xhcrctabc  thy  paftimc,<tbo  what 
thou  lbilt:  but  finnc  not  by  pjoub  fpeach 

13  3nb  foz  thefc  things  blcflc  him 
that  mabe  thee,  anb  hath  rcplcmfbcb 
thee  With  his  goob  things. 

14  !©hofofcarcththe?Lo2b,unllrfr 
tciuc  htsbifnplme ,  anb  they  that  fccRc 
him  early ,(hail  finb  fauoiir. 

15  $c  that  fccBcth  the  law,  (hall  be 
filleb  thcrclbith :  butfhc  hypocrite  Will 
be  ofFcnbcb  thereat. 

16  1Chcy  that  fearc  the  fLo?b  (hail 
finb  iubgcmcnt,anb  fhaiiBmblc  luftitc 
as  alight. 

17  a  finfull  man  Will  notbc  repjo- 
ueb ,  but  rmbcthan  crcufcacco?bingto 
his  Will. 

18  a  man  of  counfell  Will  be  confibc 
ratc,but  a  ftrange anb  pjoub  man  is n ot 
bauntcb  Vbith  fcarc,  cucn  When  ofhim- 
fclfc  he  hath  bone  Without  counfell. 

19  2>oc  nothing  Without  abtutcanb 
When  thou  haft  once boncrcpentnot. 

10  ©oenotinawaywheremthou 
maicftfall,  anb  ftumble  not  among  the 
(tones. 

11  25enot  confibcntinapiaincWay. 
11  anb  beware  of  thine  ottmc  chil? 

b;cn. 

13  *3Jn  enerygoobtbojfec  truft  thy 
oWne  (ouie:fo2  this  is  the  Beeping  of  the 
commanbements. 

14  $?cthatbclccucthinthc?Lo?b,ta: 
Beth  hecb  to  the  commanbement ,  anb 
hcthattraacbmhim,||(hallfarcncucr 

thcWo?fc. 

CHAP.   XXXIII. 

The  fafety  of  him  that  feareth  the  Lord.  1 
The  wife  and  the  foolifh.  7  Times  and 
feafons  are  of  God.  10  Men  are  in  his 
hands, as  clay  inthehandsoftheporter.  18 
Cheefely  regard  thy  felfe.    24  Of  feruants. 

sma*££ :  ^crefhadno  cuill  happen 


.,  tonto  htm  that  feareth  the 

f^ILo2b,but  in  temptation 

i^  cucn  agatnc  hcttnlbclmcr 

ws  him. 

1  aibifetnanhatethnotthclLaW), 

but  he  that  is  an  hypocrite  therein  ,is  as 
afhiputattonnc. 

3  a 


Rom.1^. 


Or,  P:\ll  net 
:hurt. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclcfiaiticus.  Apocrypha. 


j|  Or^u  tbf 
Z>'rim. 


hotrrli. 
•  Chap,  a  i . 
16. 


||0r,ani»- 
ncdforlhe 
number  of 
djjet. 

'Gen.  i. 
17  .and  1  7 


\\OrJlm- 

dmg,. 

rEfay459 
rom.p.10, 


\Or.gU*- 

tth. 


*  Chip.  14. 
39- 


j  3lman  of  tmtterttantting  truftcth 
mthclLatt) ,  antt  the  ILatb  is  fairtjftm 
irntohim  :;  as  an  oniric. 

4  prepare  i\)l)at  to  far,  ano  fornou 
Halt  be  heart)  ,ano  bintte  bp  tnftru  cnon 
ano  then  make  anfroerc. 

$  3C!)c t |)cact of tl)c*fooltfl)  is  U6c a 
cartmhcclc :  ant)  his  thoughts  arc  titir 
aroluugarcltrcr. 

6  2L  ftallion  Do:fc  is  as  a  1  no  dun  g 
fcientt,  ftcc  ncighctl)  tontter  cucry  otic 
tljatfittcthbponfiim. 

7  nabyttotrjonettaycrcelianothct* 
tt)!)tn  as:  all  tfje  light  of  cuery  Dap  in 
tlje  yecre  is  of  the  £>unne. 

8  28y  tlje  Bnoiblettgc  of  the  ILojd 
they  were  tttttinguiftjctt :  antt  be  aitctctt 
fcafons  autocalls. 

9  5>omc  of  them  hath  bee  matte 
bigb  oayes, antt  balloibcD  them  ,  antt 
fomcof  tbcm  bath  bec||mattco2ttmary 
ttayes. 

10  Znn  all  men  ate  from  tbcgrountt, 
antt  *  3ttam  rbas  tccatctt  of  earth- 

1 1  3"  »mcb  Bnoiblettgc  the  JLojtt 
hath  Diu.DcD  them  ,  antt  matte  their 
roayestttucrs. 

ii  S»omc  of  tbcm  Ijatlj  nee  bleffett, 
antt  craitctt ,  antt  fome  of  tbcm  batlj 
hec  fanctifictt  ,  antt  fet  mere  Ijimfclfc : 
but  fome  of  tljcm  bath  bee  turfctt,  antt 
bjougbt  loll) ,  antt  tucnett  out  of  tljetr 
II  places. 

ij  *3ls  the  clay  is  in  tbe  porters  banc 
to  faflnon  it  at  rjis  plcafur  c :  fo  man  is 
in  rbe  Ijantt  of  him  that  matte  him  ,  to 
rcnttcr  to  them  as  liaetrj  him  belt. 

14  ©oott  is  fet  agamfteutll,  antt  life 
agatnft  Death :  fo  is  the  gottly  agatnft 
rl;c  fmner ,  antt  the  Cnner  agamtt  the 
gottly. 

15  5>olooBebponalitbeibo2Besof 
tbcmoftl^igb,  antt  there  arc  tltto antt 
tibo,  otic  agatnft  another. 

i6  gjaibaKett  bp  laftof  all ,  as  one 
thatllgathcrcth  after  the  grape  gather 
rcrs :  bp  tl)e  blcffing  of  the  3L02D3  pw= 
fitctt ,  antt  fillett  my  Uunc-pjclTc,  UBe  a 
gatberet  of  grapes. 

i7*€onfittcrthatgjlabourcttnotfo2 
my  fclfe  onely  ,  but  fo;  all  rhem  that 
feebe  learning, 

is  $carc  me ,  $©  ye  great  men  of  tl)c 
pcoplcanttbcarbenrbitbyourcarcsyc 
rulers  of  tljc  Congregation: 

19  ©uicnottbyfonnc,  anttibifctrjy 
bzothcr  antt  frtentt  polbcr  ouer  tbec 
lbhilc  thou  laicft ,  antt  gtue  not  tby 
gootts  to  another, left  it  repent  tljcc: 


antt  th  0  u  intreat  f  0  2  the  fame  agatnr. 

20  %s  long  as  thou  hueftantt  haft 
bjcatb  in  tljce ,  llgiuc  not  tby  felfc  ouer 
to  any. 

ii  jfo;  better  it  is  that  thy  cfjiltt2en 
fhoultt  feeBc  to  thee ,  then  that  thou 
fhoulttft  1 1  ftantt  to  their  tourtefic. 

xx  3Jn  all  thy  mojfies  Becpe  to  tby 
fclfe  the  p2Chcmincnce  ,lcauc  not  a  flame 
tnthme  honour. 

2  j  2it  the  tunc  roben  tfjou  fbait  cntt 
thy  ttayes,  ano  fuufb  thy  life,  ttittnbute 
tbtnc  inheritance. 

24  jffotttter ,  a  tbantt  ,antt  burttens, 
are  foi trje  aflc :  antt  b2catt,  to;rcrtton, 
anttwo2Bcfo2  a  feruant. 

2s  3if  thou  fet  thy  feruant  to  la 
bour ,  tljou  fbalt  fmttc  refl :  but  if  thou 
letbtnigoctttlcbcfballfccRclibrrnr. 

16  Myotic  antt  a  collar  doc  bom  the 
nccBc  :foarct02tnrcs  antt  t02mcutsfo2 
an  cutu  feruant. 

17  &enttc  rjtm  to  labour  that  her 
be  not  ittlc :  fo2ittlenetTctcacbctbmucb 
cuili. 

28  S>ct  him  to  lb02Rc,  as  is  fit  foj 
him  j  if  he  be  notobetticnt,putonmo;c 
hcauy  fetters. 

29  Butbcnotcrceffinetoittarttany, 
antt  lbithout  ttifcr  cnon  ttoe  notljtng. 

jo  *  3Jf  thou  hauc  a  fcruant,lct  bun 
bee  bnto  thee  as  thy  fclfe,  becaufc  tbou 
haft  bouglit  him  t  rbitrj  a  pjice. 

31  3f  thou  fjauc  a  feruant ,  in^ 
rrcate  him  as  a  b20tl)er :  fo?  thou  haft 
nccttc  of  him ,  as  of  tijtnc  ottme  foule : 
if  thou  mtreate  nimeuill,  antt  he  runnc 
from  thec ,  Uiljich  may  Ibtlt  thougoe 
tofccRchimr 

CHAP.    XXXIIII. 

1  Ofdreamci  n  The  praife  and  bleflm^  of 
them  that  featc  the  Lord  18  The  offering  of 
the  ancienc,  and  praicr  ot  the  poore  innocent. 

fKMfxyg  v>  €  hopes  of  a  man 


^u  boytt  of  ttnttcrftantttng 
a^J  arc  bafne,  antt  faifc :  antt 
W%!%  tt2camesliftbp  fooics. 
J^  x  n3hofo||rcgaroctrj 
®^  tt2cames ,  is  lihe  ftim 
that  tattlictl)  at  a  fhattoib ,  ano  foliorb- 
cth  after  the  ittmttc. 

j  1Lhc  bifion  of  ttjtcamcs  is  tlic  re* 
fcmblancc  of  one  thing  to  another /ucn 
as  the  *  liBcncflc  of  a  fate  to  a  face. 

4  *£Dfanbnclcancrhing,tbhattan 
be  tlcanfctti  antt  from  tljat  tl)tng  rbfjtrt) 
is  faifc,  ibhat  tructlj  can  come  < 
5  2Dtuii 


\\Or,f,Bm<,l. 


\OrJ,.kf 
to  their 
hinds. 


Of  fcrtmnu. 


"Chap.7. 

20. 

\Crtekftim 

kloid. 


Of 'dreamt t. 


\,  Or, hath 
bu  minde 
Vfon. 


*Prcu.i7. 
*  lob  14.4. 


Apocrypha. Chap.xxxv.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,rcg.vd 


•FM.3». 
13.  andJi. 


"Prou.JI. 

\\Or,thc 
njockfrttj. 

*Pto.  I  5.8. 


5  2Diumanons,anD  footbfapings, 
anD  Dzeames  are  toame :  anD the  heart 
fanctctbas  a  Ybomans  heart  uuraucll. 

6  ^jf  tbcv  be  not  fcnt  from  the  molt 
high  in  tb?  toifitatton,  ||  fct  not  tbp  heart 
topontbcm. 

7  f  01  Dzeames  rjauc  DccetueD  ma? 
ny,  another  bauefaileo  that  put  their 
truftmtbem. 

8  Xbe  ILaU)  (nail  be  founo  perfect 
itoitbout  lies :  anD  ttnboome  is  perfect 
tionto  afaitrjnnitnoutl). 

9  3  man  that  hath  trauaileDBnottr 
ettj  man?  things  :  anD  bee  that  bath 
mucbeEpcrtence,n)ilDcciateitoifeDome. 

10  $e  that  bath  no  erpertencc,Bno\to; 
etn  little :  but  he  that  bath  trauaileo,  is 
fullofpzuoencc.  ^r 

1 1  nahen  5  trauaileo ,  3  fau>  many 
things:  ant)  j  tonOcrftanD  moze.tben 
J,  can  erpzeflx. 

12  3F  mas  oft  times  m  Danger  of 
Death ,  pet  3  tbas  DcUucrcD  becaufc  of 
tbcfc  things. 

u  Xbc  fpirit  of  thofc  that  fcarc  the 
3Lozo(ball  line,  foz  their  hope  ism  bun 
that  faueth  them. 

14  t©bo  fo  fearcth  the  flozo,  (ball 
not  feare  no:  be  aftaiD ,  foz  bee  is  his 
hope. 

15  251cffeD  is  the  foulc  of  him  that 
fearctb  the  2*020 :  to  ltobom  ooetb  \)tc 
loolic  i  anD  iDho  is  his  Orcngth  < 

16  jFoz*tbec?esoftbe!LozD  arc  Up- 
on them  that  lone  htm,he  ts  their  migfr 
ticpzotctnon.aiiDfrrongftav.a  Defence 
from  hcat.anD  a  touer  from  the  £>unne 
at  noone,  a  pzeferuanon  from  mim 
blmg,  anD  a  heipe  from  failing. 

17  fce  raifcth  top  the  foulc,  anD  ugh 
tencththe  eves:  bee  gtuetb  health,  life, 
anDbleffing. 

18  *$ce  that  famficeth  of  a  thing 
Ttozongfullv  gotten ,  ty.soffcringts  nOr- 
culous ,  anD  the  ||  giftcs  of  bntult  men 
arcnotaccepteD. 

19  *£bcmo&higbtsnotplcafeoilntb 
the  offerings  of  the  nnrBco,  neither  is 
bepacifieo  foz  finne  bp  the  multituDe  of 
facrificts. 

20  naho  fo  bzmgctb  an  offering  of 
the  gooos  of  the  pooze ,  Doeth  as  one 
that  tollctl)  the  fonnc  befoze  Ijss  fathers 
vets. 

21  Xbe  bzeao  of  the  neeDtc,  is  their 
life: he  that DefrauDctb him  thereof, is 
amanofblooD. 

22  $ec  that  taBctbatbav  bis  neigh^ 
boursliulng,  Qapetb  bun :  anD  bee  that 


*  DefrauDcth  the  labourer  of  his  hire,  is 
ablooDfbcDDcr. 

2j  nahen  one  butlDeth, anD  another 
pnllcth  Dottincitohatpzofitt  Jjaue  the? 
then  but  labour? 

14-  nahen  one  pzapetb.  anD  another 
curfeth,  ibbofe  tooice  mm  the  JLozDe 
hearer 

2$  *  $e  that  ltoalheth  himfclfe  after 
the  touching  of  a  DcaD  boDp,  if  he  touch 
it  againe,  itohat  auaiicth  b<s  {bathing  t 

26  5>oJsitU)ttbaniantbatfaQetb 
foz  his  (tones ,  anD  goeth  agatnc  anD 
Doeth  the  fame :  tbho  itoill  heare  bis 
pzaper,  oz  Vbtjat  Doeth  his  humbling 
pzofitbim? 

CHAP.    XXXV. 

1  Sacrifices  pleafing  God.  14  The  prayer  ol 
the  fathetlefle,ot  the  widow,  and  of  the  hum- 
ble mfpiru.    to    Acceptable  mercy. 

«£e*  that  Bccpcth  the  latt), 

bzmgctb  offcrtngs  enolto : 

^hethattaBethheeDtothe 

I  commanDement,offcretb 
K]|  a  peace  offering. 

2  J?etbatrcquitetba 
gooDturne,offereth  fincflotirctanobc 
that  gtueth  almcs,tacrificcth  pzaife. 

j  Xo  Depart  from tbirtteDneffc is  a 
thing  pleating  to  the  U02D:  anD  tofoz* 
faBe  tonrighteoufneffe ,  is  a  pzopitia* 
tion. 

4.  *  Xbou  (halt  not  appear eemptie 
befoze  the  JLozD: 

5  Jfoz  all  thefe  tl)mgs  [are  to  bee 
Doucl  becaufc  of  the  commauDemcnt. 

6  ihc  offering  of  the  ngbtcous 
maftctb  the  3lltar  fat,  anD  the  ftoectc 
tauour  thereof  is  befoze  the  molt  high. 

7  Xbe  fatnficc  of  a  uifl  man  is  ac 
ccptable ,  anD  the  mcmoziail  thereof 
fbaiincucrbcfozgottcn. 

8  (0iuctt)c1Lo2Dbi5  honour itottb  a 
gooD  cpe,  anD  Dtmmtfl)  not  the  firfl 
fruits  of  thine  hanDs. 

9  "JnallthvgiftstheTbathecreriiil 
countenance ,  anD  ||  DeDtcatc  thy  tithes 
ibttbgiaDneflc. 

10  *  <E>tuetonto  the  moft  high,  accoz? 
Dingas  hec  hath ennchcD  thee,  anD  as 
thou  haft  gotten ,  giue  ibith  a  cbecce; 
tulicpc. 

11  ifoztbc  JLozorecompcnfctb,  anD 
itoill  gmc  tbee  fcuen  tunes  as  much. 

12  ||2Doe  not  thtnBc  to  cozrupt  itotth 
gifts,*  foz  fuch  he  mill  not  receuic:  anD 
trnQnot  to  tonrigbtcous  faenfices ,  foz 

the 


"Dcuc.24. 
14,1  ;.cha. 
7-io. 


*  Mum.  19. 

11,12. 


"l-Sam,  1  5 
n.ierc.7. 
!,JA7- 


•Eiod.jj. 
15.  deut. 
lfl.iS. 


'1  Corp. 7. 

J  Or, Jit  «- 
part. 

•Tob.4.8. 


||  OrMmi. 
m{f>  no'.htno 

fit)   F 

•  Leuit.  12 
1 1,  il.dcu 
I  (.11. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.         Apocrypha. 


*  Dent.  10 
i  7,i.cht.i9 
7.10b  14.19 
wifd.6.7. 
ji5h  jo.  34. 
rom.2.1 1. 

oal.i  6. 

cph.6.9. 

colof.5.35. 

l.pcLi.17. 


'•VipreVouri, 


t  (jri.fM, 


fcr.lo.i; 

j  Or/i-pon. 


ttje  3Lo2b  is  mage,  anb  ttntij  him  is  *  no 
rcfpcctofpcrfons. 

15  ^ccilnll  not  accept  any  pcrfona 
gainft  apoojeman:  but  millljcarc  the 
p?aver  of  the  oppicfTcD. 

14.  lociinlluot  bcfpifcthcfupplicati; 
on  of  the  fatherlcfTc:  no?  tlje  llubolbc 
lbhcn  Che  poltycth  out  her  complaint. 

15  Doethnotthetcarcsrunboiimc 
tiic  Vbtboincs  thecrts  i  anb  is  not  her  trie 
agamQ  Dim  tliat  caufctlj  them  to  fall  < 

16  fcctl)atfeructl)tlK3LojD,  Ojailbc 
atteptcb  lbith  fauour ,  anb  Ijis  player 
fhail  reach  buto  the  cioubcs. 

17  %\\t  pzayet  of  the  humblepicr; 
ccth  tiic  cloubs  :  anb  till  it  come  tuglj  he 
Unlluotbc  comfo2tct):  anb  luillnotbc; 
part  till  tin  moft  J»igl)  ujallbcholbcto 
uibge  ngljteoufly,  aub  crccutc  mbgc* 
mnit. 

18  for  the  Hojb  ibtll  not  betlartte, 
neither  llnll  the  mtghtic  be  patient  to- 
ibarDS  them,  nil  he  hatlj  fmittcn  in  fun* 
ber  t!ic  lomcs  of  tlje  nnmcrcifull,  aub 
repaib  bcngcancc  to  the  heathen :  till  he 
Dane  taken  albay  njc  mnlntubc  of  the 

pjoub,  anb  taoncn  the  fceptcr  of  the 
bnnglitcous: 

19  XUl  he  hauc  renbjcb  to  cucry  man 
acco2btngtontsbccbs,anbtothcU)02li5 
of  men  actozbing  to  their  bcuifes,  till  lie 
hauc mbgeb  the caufc  of  Dispeople: anb 
ma&cthcmtorcioyccinhtsmerctc, 

io  s^ernc  is  tfcafonablc  in  trjc  time 
of  affliction,  as  cloubcsof  ramc  m  the 
tune  of  brought. 

CHAP.    XXXVI. 

I  A  prayer  for  the  Church  j^ainft  the  enemies 
thereof.  iS  A  good  heart  and  a  ft  ov>  arc!.  11 
O:  .t  unod  wile. 

3luc  mcrtic  topon  bs ,  O 


h 


I  ?Lo2b  0ob  of  ail,aub  bcljolb 
sjM  Jbs: 

W£l§    1   2lnbfcnbthyfearebp 
on  all  the  nations  that  feeUe 
notaftcrthee. 

5  *  ILift  bp  thy  hanb  I!  agaiulr  tiic 
rtrangc  nations ,  anb  let  tljcm  fee  thy 
politer. 

4  ^s thou  malt  fancttftcD  in bs  be- 
fo:cthcm :  fo  bcthoumagninebamoug 
tl)cmbefo2cns. 

"  5  3nb  let  tlicm  Unoib  thee,  asilie 
Dane  tmoibcn  thee,  that  there  is  no 
00b,  but  onely  thou,  Q  Gob. 

6  *>heiu  nclD  fignes ,  anb  malic  o; 
thcrftrangcnionbcrs:glo2ificthyhanb 
aub  thy  right  armc ,  that  they  may  fct 


fo2ththyibonbcrousib02hcs 

7  Baifcbp  mbtgnat!on,anbpoib2e' 
out  ibjath :  talic  aiuay  the  abucrfaric 
anbbclrroythecncmie. 

s  i©aUt  tlje  tunc  fho2t ,  remember 
thctcoucnant.anblctthcmbcciarerrjy 
U)onbcrfuUU)02BS. 

9  TLct  him  tljat  cfcapcnj,  be  tonfn- 
mcb  by  the  rage  of  the  fire,  anb  let  them 
per  ifl)  that  oppjcOc  the  people. 

10  finite  in  funber  the  heabs  of  the 
rulers  of  the  heathen,  that  fay,  Xhere 
isnoncotljcrbutibc. 

11  Gather  all  the  tribes  of  "Jacob  to* 
gethcr.anDinhmtthoutrjcm,  asfrom 
tlje  beginning. 

11  £>  JL02D  haue  merrit  npon  the 
people,  that  is  callcbbynjynamc,  anb 
bpongifracl,*ujhomtljouljaftnameb 
thyfirltbozne. 

1  j  £>  bee  mernfull  unto  3Icruraicrn 
thy  holy  citic,  the  place  of  ujy  reft 

14  jfillSuonunth  lltljiucbnfpcarias 
blc  ojatlcs,  anb  thy  people  ibinj  njy 
glo;y. 

15  C5iuc  tefhmonie  into  njofc  ttjat 
thou  halrpoffcfTeb  from  the  beginning, 
anb  raifc  bp  1 1  piopljcts  ttjat  Banc  bm  m 
njy  name. 

16  3KcrbarbtljcmtIjatlbaitfonrjce, 
anb  let  thy  p2opl)cts  be  founb  fatnjfwll, 

17  £DHo2bhcatethcp2aytrofnjy 
llfcruants,  acco2bmgtonje  "blcffingof 
3aron  oucr  thy  people,  that  all  they 
luhith  blbcl  bpon  the  cartl),  may  finoU) 
that  thou  art  the  Ho?b ,  tlje  etcrnail 

GOb. 

13  Xlje  belly  bcuouretl)  all  meatcs, 
yet  is  one  meat  better  then  another. 

19  *  3s  the  palate  tafrcth  bmcrs  InnDs 
of  bemfon :  fo  botl)  an  Ijcatt  of  tonber- 
ftanbingfalfcfpecthcs. 

20  3  frolbarb  heart  caufenj  heaui- 
ucflc:  but  a  man  ofcrpcnentclbuirp 
compenfehtm. 

ii31ii)onianibillreceiuceuctyman, 
yet  is  one  baughtcr  better  th  en  another 

2i  Xhcbcauttc  of  a  iDomanchca^ 
renj  thctountcnancc,anbaman  louenj 
nothing  better. 

23  3fthcrcbclunbncfle,mccftcncs, 
anbcomfo2tut  her  tongue,  then  is  not 
her hnf banb  lilic  I  otlier  men. 

24  Jxtljatgcttcnjaiiiifcbcgmnenj 
[lapoffefsion,  a  heipe  liUc  Dnto  Ijimfclfc, 
anb  a  pillar  of  reft. 

15  nahcrcno  hebge  is, there  the  poffef 
fiou  is  fpoiicb :  anb  he  that  hath  no  ibifc 
ibilllbaubcrbpanbbolbncmourning. 
26  naho 


t  Grcxhc. 


*  Exo.4.12 


yOr,  tbjttl 
mry  rruen:- 
he  thine  0' 

wcitr. 


\\Or.fT0fht 
dtt. 


pfuntt. 

•  Num.c5. 
25" 


*  lob  24*3« 


mon. 

\\Or%to 
ihnttc. 


Apocrypha. Chap.xxxvij.  Apocrypha. 


Or,i-iprf. 
\mceejihc 
cncmic. 


\\  Or, what 
vft  there  is 

of  htm. 


ze  naho  Uhlltrttft  athicfcibcllap 

1  potntcD,  that  fktppcth  fromcttte  to  a 

i  tic J.  fo  fibho  ttnll  bclceuc]  a  matt  that 

hath  no  boufe  <  ano  lotigctl)  itiftcrcfo= 

I  euer  the  night  taitctl)  him  < 

CHAP.    XXXVII. 

i  How  to  know  friends  and  counfcllcr;.  n 
The  discretion  and  wilcdome  ot  a  godly 
man  blelleth  him.  27  Leaine  to  reframe 
thine  appetite. 

f^^SM  vSaccp  frienD  fatctb,3J  am 
*l|  IllSftef  &,s  fncnD  alfo :  but  there 
®  RSJr? m ,£fl  fnniD  lbbtch  is  oncty 
£M  I^ATiafacnomnamc. 
^ >,$&*&&  ^  3isttnotagrtefcbn- 
to  Death , tbhen  a  companion  ano  frienD 
is  tunteo to  an  enemies 

3  Q  ttncfteD  imagmanon,  Whence 
cameft  thou  in  to  couet  the  earth  ttnth 
Deceit? 

4.  Xhcrcisatompanion,tbhuhtc^ 
toyccihinthcp:orpcrttyofaftictiD:but 
m  the  time  of  trouble  null  be  agamft 
htm. 

5  Xherets  a  companion  ibhtch  pel* 
pcth  his  fctctiDfo:  the  belly ,  aitDtaueth 
bp  the  bitchier  |!againQtlic  enctmc. 

6  ;f  o:get  not  thy  frtcttD  in  thy 
mmoc,  ano  be  not  tonmtnDftill  of  him  tn 
tljy  riches. 

7  eucry  tounfcllcr  crtollcth  conn- 
fell ;  bnt  there  is  fomc  thattounfelleth 
fo:himfclfc. 

s  25ciDarcofacounfcllcr,anDtntott) 
bcfo:c||ibhatnccDcbcbath(fo:hcibtii 
tonnfciifo:himulfe)  icftljcccaft  the  lot 
bpontbec: 

9  3tnu  far  unto  thee,  Xhyibay  ts 
gooD :  anD  aftcrVbarb  he  ftanb  on  the 
other  Itoc,  to  tee  ttmat  fhau  bcfailthcc. 

10  Confultnot  ttnth  one  that  fufpec^ 
tcth  thee  :  ano  IttDe  thy  touufcll  from 
futh  as  tnute  thee. 

11  Neither  confult  Until  a  woman 
touching  her  of  U)hom  (he  ts  icalous  ■, 
neither  ttnth  a  coibarD  in  matters  of 
ibarrc  no:  lb.tb  a  merchant  rower 
nmg  crchauge  ■,  no:  ibith  a  buyer  of  fcl 
Itttg  .  no:  U)tth  an  cmr.ous  man  of 
thanriftilnclTc ,  nonb-.th  an  bnmcrctfuu 
matt  touching  lunoneffe ;  no:tt)iththc 
nouthfull  fo:  any  tt)o:ttc  no:U)ithau 
hireling  fo:  a  veer  c,  of  fimfbingttw&c 
no:  ttr.th  an  tole  fcruant  of  muchbufi 
neffe :  iicarKcn  not  unto  rhefcin  any 
matter  of  counfcll. 

ii  iotttbc  continually  ttnth  a  goDly 
man,  ibhom  thou  titiotttcft  to  Kccpe  the 


coinmantjemcttts  of  the  3Lo:D,  Whofc 
mtttDc  is  accortnng  to  thy  mitiDe ,  anD 
tttill  f02roiD  luith  thee,  if  thou  (halt 
mifcarry. 

15  3inD  letthe  eomu~ell  of  thine  oumc 
heart  ItauD  :fo:  there  is  no  manmo:e 
faithfttii  unto  thee  then  tt. 

1+  foi  amaitsnnnbctsfomettine 
ttiont  to  tell  hint  mo:c  then  fcucn 
Uiatchmcn  ,  that  fit  about  in  an  high 
toU):c. 

k  3nb  abouc  all  this  piay  to  ti\t 
molt  high ,  that  Ije  U)iii  Direct  thy  ttiav 
mtrueth. 

i6  ilct  rcafon  goc  btfo:c  eucry  en 
tcrprlcf  counfcll  bcfo:ecucryactton. 

17  3Chc  countenance  ts  a  figtte  of 
changing  of  the  heart. 

18  j^ourc  manet  of  thmgsappcare : 
goob  ano  cum ,  life  anD  Death :  but  the 
tongue  rttlcth  otter  them  continually. 

19  Hhcrc  ts  one  that  is  ttiifc  anD 
tcachcthmany,  anD  ycttsbttpzofitablc 
tohunfelfc. 

20  Hherc  is  one  that  fbettjetb  ttnfc 
Dome  in  lno.'Ds ,  anD  is  hateD :  he  fhau 
bcDcfhtitteofalllfooDc. 

1  fo:  grace  is  notgtttcnhim  front 
the?Lo:D:bccaufe  he  is  DcpjutcD  of  all 
UitfcDomc. 

21  Another  tsttnfc  to  hunfclfc :  anD 
the  fruits  of  bnDcrftaitDing  are  com 
menDablein  hismouth. 

23  3  ttnfc  man  mftrnctctli  his  pco 
pie,  anD  the  fruits  of  his  buDerfranDutg 
fatlcnof. 

2+  %  ttnfc  man  (hall  be  fillets  unth 
bleffmg,  ano  all  they  that  fee  him ,  fhau 
count  htm  happy. 

25  Xhc  Daies  of  the  life  of  man  may 
be  nnmb:cD :  but  the  Dates  of  Jjfracl  arc 
innumerable. 

26  a  ttnfc  man  (hall  mhmtc  ||  glo:y 
among  his  pcoplc,anD  his  name  fbaibc 
pcrpctuail. 

27  £Byfonitcp:ooncthyfoulc;ntby 
itfcattD  fee  what  is  ciull  fo:  tt,  anD  guic 
notthatbntou. 

2S  f  0:  all  thtngs  are  not  p.'ofttablc 
fo:  all  men  ,  ncuhcr  hath  eucry  fonlc 
plcafurcitt  eucry  thing. 

29  25c  not  Dnfattablc  inanybatnty 
thmg :  no:  too  gcecDy  Dpon  mcatcs. 

30  fo:iiercciTc  of  mcatcs,  baugeth 
OtUncffc ,  anDfurfcttingibiUturncmto 
cholct. 

31  25y  furfettmg  hattc  many  per.fb 
cd,  but  hce  tljattaucth  hccD  ,  p:oiou 

gcth  his  lite. 

J  c  i  1  A  P. 


\\Or,Kift. 

dvme. 


Or,  ■  trie 

:<.'     mcntel 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


[  Or^gtft 


*Exod.  15 
*5- 


*Elay.  3  3. : 


\\OrtdiM 

deaAmtm, 


■,ennrtg. 


CHAP.  XXXVIII. 

Honour  due  to  the  Phifitian,  and  why.  \6 
How  to  weepe  and  mourne  for  the  dead. 
14  Thewifedome  of  the  learned  man,  and 
of  the  Labourer  and  Artificer:  with  the  vfe 
of  them  both. 

iDnour  a  0hifif  tan  tbith 
tijc  honour bue  unto  him, 
fo2  the  bfes  tbDicij  pou 
maphaucofhim:fo2thc 


iILo^d  Datlj  crcatcDhtm. 

1   i  5fo2ofthcmott$tgh 


commeth  Healing,  anb  hethailrcccinc 
||  honour  of  the  i&ing. 

3  %he  f Bill  of  the  0hiGttan  fyall 
lift  top  fits  hcab:  anb  in  the  fight  of  great 
men  he  (rjaibc  tn  abmiranon. 

4.  XhefLo2bhathercatcbmcbitincs 
outofthecarth-  anbhcthattsttiifcibill 
not  abhojrc  them. 

5  ©as  not  tfjc  mater  mabc  froect 
tbith  iboob ,  that  the  *  bertuc  thereof 
might  be  tmoibeui 

6  3nb  he  hath  giummmfaill,  that 
hee  might  be  fjonourcb  in  !jts  maruei* 
loustt)o?ftcs. 

7  ©ith  fitch  boeth  hehealc  [men, J 
anb  tafecth  atbap  their  pames. 

8  SX  fuel)  bocth  the  2lpothctarte 
make  a  confection;  anb  of  histbojaes 
there  is  no  cnb,  anb  from  him  is  peace 
oucr  all  the  earth. 

9  *Pp  fonne,m  thy  ficKcneffc  be  not 
ncgligcnttbut'pitapbntothelLozb.anb 
Dc  null  mauctliccmiioir. 

10  ?Uauc  off  from  fume,  anbojbet 
thp  Danbs  anght,  anb  clcanfc  thp  heart 
from  all  rbirttebneflc. 

11  €»iue  afrocct  fauour,anb  a  memo* 
nail  of  fine  floibze :  anb  matte  a  fat  ofc 
fcring,as||  not  being. 

ix  Xhcn  gitie  plate  to  tlic  phifitian,fo2 
the  2,02b  hath  crcatcb  htm :  let  him  not 
go  from  thccjfoj  thou  halt  ttceb  of  hint. 

ij  3Ehere  is  a  time  lObhen  m  their 
hanbs  there  is  goob  fttcccffc. 

14-  5fo?  thep  (hall  alfo  p2apbnto  the 
JLojb ,  that  hec  ftioulb  pjofpet  that, 
tbhich  thep  gmc,fo2  cafe  anb  ||rcmcDp  to 
prolong  life. 

1?  $c  thatfinncthbcfo2C  his  matter, 
let  htm  faltnto  thchano  of  thtphifitian. 

i6  Q9p  fonnt,  let  tearcs  fallbotbne 
ouctthebcab,anb  begm  to  lament,  asif 
thou  habit  fuffercb  great  harmc  top 
fclfc :  anb  then  coucr  hts  bob?  accozbiug 
to  tlje  cuftomes  neglect  not  his  burial!. 

17  nacepe  bittcrlp,  anb  malic  great 


moane,  anb  tofc  lamentatton,  asheeis 
tbo;tthp,  anb  that  abap  02  tmo,irit  thou 
be  euill  fpofecn  of:  anb  then  comfozt  tljv 
fclfefojthpheaumcirc. 

18  ;ffo2ofheauinelIr  commeth  beath, 
anb  thehtaumeffcof  the  "heart ,  bjcafr 
cthftrength. 

19  3ln  affliction  alfo  fo2toib  remain 
neth :  anb  the  life  of  the  pooze ,  is  the 
eurfe  of  the  heart. 

io  Xabe  no  heaumes to  heart :  bmie 
it  atbap,anb  remember  the  lalt  cnb. 

ii  5Fo;get  it  not,  fo?  there  is  no  tur 
tttng  againc:  thou  (halt  not  boc  him 
goob,but  hurt  thp  fclfe. 

22  Bemcmber  i|  nip  iubgement :  fo? 
thine  alfo  lhailbe  to  pclterbap  fo?  me, 
anb  to  bap  fo:  thee. 

ij  !©hcnthebcabtsat*re{t,lcthisrc; 
mnnbzance  r  cfM  be  comfojteb  fo:  him . 
Ibhen  his  fpirit  tsbcparteb  from  him. 

24  IChetbtfebomeofaiearncbman 
cometh  bpoppojtunitie  of  leafnre:  $hc 
that  hath  litle  buftnes  dial  bceomctttfe. 

15  !fH>mcanhegcttbifbomethathol* 
beth  the  plough,anb  that  gloneth  in  the 
goab  •,  that  bnueth  oren ,  anb  is  occw 
ptcb  in  their  labours,  anb  ibhofctaltic 
istofbulloths? 

26  tyegtucthhismtnbetomauefuts 
rotbes :  anb  is  biligent  to  giue  the  tune 
fobber. 

17  5»o  eucrp  carpenter,  anb  Vbojae* 
matter ,  that  labourer!)  night  anb  bap : 
anb  thep  that  cut  anb  gr  auc  fcaies ,  anb 
are  biligent  to  maftc  great  barittp,anb 
glue  thcmfclues  to  countcrfatt  image- 
ne,anb  match  to  fimfh  a  ibojke. 

18  Xhefmith  alfo  fitting  bp  the  an- 
uill,  $  confibering  the  iron  ibozKCithc 
bapout  of  the  fire  roaltcth  his  flefli  ,anb 
hefiglHctfiroiththchcatofthefurnatc: 
thenoifc  of  the  hammer  ej  thcamuliis 
cuer  in  his  cares,  anb  his  cics  loottc  ittli 
bpon  thepattcmr  of  the  thing  that  he 
ma&cth.hcfcttcthhisminbtofinilhhis 
mozlte,  fj  ibatchtthtopolilhitpcrfitlp. 

19  5>oboeth  the  potter  fitting  at  his 
ttjoiftc,  anb  turning  the  lbhcclc  about 
iblth  his  feet,  mho  is  alroap  cartfiillp 
fet  at  his  lbiBRe :  anb  mafteth  all  his 
lboiaebp  number. 

30  l?c  fanjioncth  the  clap  lbith  his 
anne,anb  ||  boibcth  bomnchts  ltrcngth 
before  his  feet :  he  applieth  himfclfcto 
leabitoucT;  anb  he  is  Diligent  to  maUc 
cleanc  the  furnace. 

3 1  3lii  thefc  milt  to  their  hanbSianb 
cuerponcisibifc  inhisibo&c. 

32  w.ih 


"Prou.iy- 

1  :.  Jiid  17. 


\\Ortthe 
[entcr.ci  %•>■ 
on  htm. 

*  2.  Sam.  ii. 


\Greckf, 

of  the  breed 
0ft>H£ocfy. 


[|  Or,  tcm»>. 
reth  a  mth 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xxxix.  Apocryph 


a. 


32  ttjitljouttftcfc  cannot  acme  be  tt^ 
habtteb:ano  the?  (hall  not  Mtocii  mijece 
the?  ltotll,  no?  goc  top  anb  boibne. 

33  3Ehep  fliail  not  be  fought  fo:  in 
pubUlt  c  t  ouufail  c  ,no :  fit  high  in  the  con 
grcgatton :  tljrp  (bainottit  on  thc^Jufr 
ges  ft  a  t  c  ,n  o :  tonber ttanb  the  (entente  of 
mogement :  tnevtannot  bcclareiuftiee, 
anb  tubgement,  anb  they  (hall  not  be 
fonnb  Uili  ere  parables  are  fpoheit. 

34.  25ut tljep tbill matntame the  ftatc 
of  tlje  ttoo?lb ,  anb  [all]  their  before  ts  m 
tljc  ttioiftcof  tijeic  ccafr. 

CHAP.    XXXIX. 

1  A  description ol "him  that  is  truely  wife.  11 
An  exhortation  to  praiie  God  for  his  wotkes, 
which  are  good  to  the  good  ,  and  euill  to 
them  that  are  euill. 

33X  hee  that  guieth  l)is 
mmbctothe3Laitoofthe 
molt  high ,  anb  is  occupieb 
in  the  mcbttatton  thereof, 
„  itotl  fcc&e  out  the  ltoitbomc 
of  all  the  anctent.anb  be  ottupicb  tn  p?o- 
pheeics. 

x  fyct  tbill  scepc  the  fayings  oftlje 
tenotbmebmen :  anb  tbhcrefttbtile  pa* 
rabies  are,  he  ttnll  be  there  alfo. 

j  $ec  itoill  fcefec  out  the  fetrets  of 
grauc  fcutentes,  anb  be  tonuerfantm 
bar  he  parables. 

4  i^efhallferue  among  great  men, 
anb  appeare  before  p?inces :  he  xt>ill  tra= 
uatle  th?ongh  ftrangc  tountrcys,fo? 
heehath  trteb  thegoob,anb  the  euill  a- 
mongmen. 

5  $ee  tt)ill  giuc  his  heart  to  tefo?t 
early  to  the  ?Lo?b  that  mabe  htm ,  anb 
tbill  p?ay  before  the  moll  high ,  anb  ltoiu 
open  his  mouth  in  p?aycr ,  anb  mabe 
fupplttation  fo?  hts  finnes. 

6  nahcnthcgrcat3Lo?bitoill,he(hall 
bee  nllcto  tbith  the  fpirtt  of  tontoctQan- 
Ding :  he  thai  potb?e  out  itoife  fentcntes, 
anb  giuc  thanfces  tontothc?Lo?b  mhis 
p?ayer. 

7  $ce  (hall  birctt  his  tounfell  anb 
Buotblebge,anbinhis  ferrets  (hall  hee 
mebttate. 

8  $ce  (hall  (hctto  foo?th  that  tbhich 
he  hath  leatneb ,  anb  fhallglo?y  tn  the 
Hatb  of  the  couenant  of  the  ?Lo?b. 

9  £0any  (hail  tommenbhts  tonber- 
Iranbing,  anb  fo  long  as  the  ttwlbcn 
buretl) ,  it  (hall  not  be  blotteb  out ,  his 
memojiall  (hall  not  bepart  atbay,  anb 
his  name  (hall  liue  from  generation  to 
generation. 


10  » Canons  (hail  fhcitoe  foonh  hts 
tutfebome  ,ano  the  congregation  (hall 
beclarchispjatfe. 

1 1  3)f  hec  me,hc  Qjau  leant  a  greater 
name  then  a  thoufano :  anb  if  he  Uue,  he 
(hall  i|mtr  cafe  it. 

ii  jact3I  haucmo2etofayn)hith3I 
haue  thought  topon,  fo?  3  am  fillto  as 
thcQJooneatthcfull. 

ij  ^earttentonto  mcycholy  chilb?en, 
anbbubbc  foo?th  as  arofegrounngby 
thc||b?oo&cofthcfielb: 

14  3lnb  gme  yec  a  froeete  fauour  as 
fran&mcenfc,anbflourilhasalilly,fcnb 
fo  o?th  a  fmcll ,  anb  Ong  a  fong  of  piaifc, 
blcffe  the  Ho?b  m  all  i)isibo?aes. 

15  #agnific  his  ii5ame ,  anb  fhelbc 
foo?th  hisp?aifcitoith  tijefongs  of  pour 
lips,  anb  tbith  harpes,  anb  tn  p?aifong 
him  you  (hail  fay  after  this  maner : 

i6  *3ltf)ctbo?ttsofthc?Lo?bare  ercee 
bing  goob,  fjtbhatfoeuer  hee  commas 
bcth,  ihaibc  accompiifhed  m  bue  fe  afon. 

17  3lnb  none  map  fay,D@hat  is  this  t 
tbhcrcfo?eisthat;  fo?at  nme  conttem* 
enttDey  (hall  all  be  fought  out :  at  hts 
tommaunbement  the  tbatcrs  floob  as 
anheape,?  at  thcYbo?besofhis  mouth 
the  retcptacles  of  tbatcrs. 

18  3(t  his  tommanbement  is  bone 
tbhatfocucr  pieafcth  him,  anb  none  tan 
hinber  ibhenhcibillfauc. 

19  1Lhetbo?Kesofailflefharebero?c 
him,? nothing  tan  bchib  from  his  epes. 

20  ^cfccthfromeucrlalhngtoeuer 
lafting,  anb  there  is  nothing  ltoonbcr* 
fall  bcfo?c  him. 

ai  3manneebenottofap,n3hatis 
this*  tbhcrcfo?c  is  that*  fo?  hee  hath 
mabe  all  things  fo?  thctrtofes. 

22  $isblefTingcoucrcbtheb?ylanb 
as  a  riuer,anb tbatcreb  it  as  a  floob. 

13  3ls  hee  hath  turneb  the  tbaters 
into  faitncflc :  fo  (hail  the  heathen  inhe' 
rtte  his  tb?ath. 

24  *3Cshistbayesarcpiatncbntothc 
holy ,  fo  are  the?  Rumbling  blotUes  ton 
totheibitUcb. 

25  jfo2  the  goob ,  arc  goob  things 
trcattb  from  the  beginning :  fo  null 
things  fo?  tinners. 

26  %\)c  p?mnpail  tilings  fo?  the 
tbholctofc  of  mans  life ,  arc  ttoatcr,  fire, 
V?on,  anb  fait,  flour  e  ohtoheatt,  honic, 
milue,  anb  the  bloob  of  the  grape,  anb 
oplc,  anb  clothing, 

27  31U  thefc  things  are  fo?  goob  to 
the  gobly :  fo  to  the  tinners  tlicy  arc  m* 
neb  into  euill. 

tlnun       isXhece 

67 


"Chap.  44. 


\\OrlSauu 

vr.la  it. 


J  Or-rtutrs 


■Gen.  1.3 1. 

inark.7.37. 


*Ofc  14.10. 


Apocrypha. 


Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


j  Or,  viftt 


Ectlcs.1.3 


\]Or,tethr 
forter. 


23  Xbetc  be  fpmts  that  arc  ctcatcD  I 
fozbengeattec,  tbbtcbtn  tfjetc  furte  lapj 
on  fo  jc  ftrottcs,  m  the  time  of  Dettruett; 
ontbep  pott»;c  out  their  fbjee,  anD  ap 
peafe  the  ityatbofbim  that  maDe  them. 

19  5Firc,  anb  banc,  anD  famine,  anD 
Death:  allthcfcVDetc  crcatcbfoibcngc' 
ante: 

30  Xcctb  of  vbtlD beads, anofcojpt' 
ons,  ||  ferpents, « the  frooitD ,  pumflnng 
the  UucUcD  to  Dcttrttttion. 

31  Xl)epft;ailrctotteinI)istommanj 
Dement,  anD  the?  (ball  bee  rcaDp  Dpon 
cart!)  lbben  necbe  ts,  anb  Vbbcn  their 
time  ts  tome ,  tljep  fljaii  not  tranfgreff  e 

hiSlbOjD. 

yt  lEberefojertomtbebegtnniug'J 
Vbasrcfolueb,  anb  thought  bpon  tlicfc 
things, anb  bauc  left  them  m  flntttng. 

j}  ail  the  tbojftcs  of  the  7L02D  arc 
goob :  anb  be  tbtll  gme  cuerp  ncebefnU 
thing  tnbuefcafon. 

5+  3>o  that  a  man  cannot  fay,  XIjis 
isib02fctbmtbat:f02mtimctbepfban 
ailbcibeliappjoueD. 

55  3luD  therefore  p;aifc  pc  the  2,02b 
ttntbtbciDbole  heart  anb  mouth,  anb 
bleu"e  the  /Bame  of  the  Ho2b. 

CHAP.    XL. 

1    Manvmiferies  in  amanslife.  ii  Tlie reward 
ol  vnrighreou(ncffe,andtheiruitoftruedc 
ling.  17  Avertuous  vvifc,&  anhoncftlricnd 
reioycethehcait,  butthefearcof  the  Lord  is 
aboueall.  i8  A  beggers  life  is  hateful). 

3Scat*trauaiiets  createb 
foj  cuerp  man,  anb  an  hca 
uv  poftc  ts  bpon  the  fons 
of  3lDam,  front  the  bap 
that  tbepgoe  out  of  their 
mothers  tbombc ,  till  the  bap  that  tfjep 
rcturnc  to  the  mother  of  all  things. 

x  Xheir  imagination  of  things  to 
come,  t  the  bap  of  Death  [trouble]  their 
thoughts,anb[taufclfcarc  of  heart: 

3  Jf  rom  him  that  fittcth  on  a  thjone 
of  glojp,  bnto  him  that  ts  humblcb  m 
earth  anb  atbes. 

4  iFrombmttbatVbcaretb  purple, 

anDQ  trottUt,  |  blltO  him  chat  is  clothed  with 
alinncnfrOCRC. 

5  i©tath,  anb  enuie,  trouble  anb 
bnauietnclTcfcarr  of  Dcath,anD  anger, 
anbftrtfc,  ano  in  the  nmc  of  reft  bpon 
bisbcD.bismghtflccpc  boc  change  bis 
lutotblcbgc. 

6  31  utlc  02  nothing  is  his  reft ,  anb 
afterU)arbhcismhisflecpc,asinabap 


ofBcepingibatch,troublcbtnthcbifion 
of  his  heart,  as  if  berbetc  efcapcb  out 
of  a  battell : 

7  n9bcnailisrafe,bcaiba&ctb,anD 
maruetletb  that  the  fear  c  ibas  nothing. 

8  [ £>uch  things  happen]  tmto  ail 
fie  (l) ,  both  man  anbbeaft,  anb  that  is  fc 
uen  folD  mo:e  bpon  tinners. 

9  *2DeathanDbloobfbeD,(tctfeanD 
fnwD,  calamities,  famine,  tribulation, 
anbtbefcourge: 

io  1ChefetbtngsarecrcateDfo:the 
nncftcD,  anD  fo?  their  fanes  came  the 
*flooD. 

11  *  ail  things  that  are  of  the  earth 
fbal  mrne  to  the  earth  agame:  anD  that 
lbbubisof  tbe*lbatcrs  Doetbreturne 
into  the  5>ca. 

\z  Z\V bnberic anb  iniufticc (ball  be 
blottcD  out :  but  true  Dealing  (ball  en 
Dttrcfbieucr. 

13  XbegooDSoftbebniuftfljallbee 
DzieD  bp  lute  a  rtuer,  anD  (ball  bantfl) 
lbith  noife,lttte  a  great  tbunDer  m  ratne. 

14  aahiie  he  openeth  bts  banb  be  (bai 
rciopec :  fo  (ball  tranfgreftburs  come  to 
nought 

15  Xbe  cbilDjen  of  the  bngoDlp  (ball 
not  bjing  fottb  manp  branches:  but  are 
as  bnclcanc  roots  bpon  a  barb  roctte. 

16  *£bemceDgtoibtng  bpon  cuerp 
ibater,  anb  battue  of  a  rfuer,  (ball  bee 
pull  tb  bp  befoze  all  graflc. 

17  Bounnfulncsisasamo(f||  fruit- 
full  gatDcn,anD  mcrctfulncfle  enDuretj) 
fo2cuer. 

is  Xo'iabour  f  to  be  content  tbttb 
tbatainanharlusauucctlifc:  but  bee 
that  nr.Dcth  atreafurc,  is  abottc  them 
both- 

19  Chtlb:cnanDtbebuaDfngof  acifte 
continue  a  mans  name :  but  a  blame 
leffe  ibifc  is  counteD  aboue  them  both. 

20  name  (j  muficberctopce  the  heart: 
but  the  louc  of  ibtfcDome  is  aboue  them 
both. 

21  Xbe  pipe  anb  the  pfaiteric  matte 
uneetmeloDic :  btttaplcafanttongueis 
aboue them both. 

22  Xhinc  epe  befircth  fauour  anD 
beauttc :  but  moje  then  both  ,  come 
lDhilettisgreenc. 

13  31  frtcnD  anD  companion  neucr 
meet  amine :  but  aboue  both  ts  a  Ibtfe 
lDttbberhttfbanD. 

1+  iSjerhmt  anb  bclpe  are  agamft 
tunc  of  trouble:  butalmes  (bailDcfr 
ucrmojc  then  them  both. 

15  Colbe  anb  filuer  matte  the  footc 

ftattD 


'Chip.;9. 


•Gcn7.11 

•Gen. 3.19 

ch3p.41.10 

"Ecclcs.1.7 


f  Grc.lribci 


*Iob.8.it. 

and  it  11. 
gen.^i.a. 

.  .  "  ■•■  1:  '■ 

tltf-4, 
•Phil.4.1,. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xlj. 


Ifai.4.15. 

0rt  ag*r- 
bUfltd. 


\0r, to  whom 
entry  thmg 
u  trouble 
fame. 


ttanb  face :  but  touttfcll  is  cftccmcba* 
bout  them  both. 

26  fttches  anb  flrcngth  lift  bp  the 
hcart:butthcfearcofthcflo2btsabouc 
tbcmboth:thcrcisnott)antinthcfcarc 
oftlje  %m ,  ana  it  necbeth  not  to  fcc&c 
helpe. 

27  *5Ci)c  fcacc  of tf)c  IL020  tg  ai.lfcuit^ 
full  garben,  anb  couereth  him  aboue  all 
glojy. 

28  £0y  fonnc.lcab  notabcggcrslife: 
fo  2  better  it  is  to  Die  then  to  beg. 

29  %ht  life  of  him  that  bepenbeth 
on  another  ntans  table ,  is  not  to  be 
countebfoz  a  life :  fo.i  he  polluter!)  him* 
felfe  Ibith  other  mens  meat c ,  but  a 
tbife  man  ibell  nurtureb  tbill  bcibare 
thereof. 

jo  2Scggtngisftncctmthemouthof 
ihe  fbamelcffc :  but  in  his  bell?  there 
fbaiiburncafire. 

CHAP.    XLI. 

i  The  remembrance  ofDeath.  3  Death  is  nor 
to  be  feared.  5  The  vngodly  fhall  be  ac- 
curfed.  11  Ofaneuillanda  good  name.  14 
Wifedome  is  to  be  vttered.  16  Of  what 
things  we  fhould  be  afhamed. 

2>cath,horb bitter  is  the 
remembrance  of  thee  to  a 
\  man  that  liueth  at  red  in 
his  po lemons ,  bnto  the 
man  that  hath  nothing  to 
bete  hun,anb  that  hath  pjofpertty  in  an 
things :  yea  bnto  him  that  is  vet  able  to 
rcceiuemeate; 

2  4E>  bcath,atteptable  is  thy  (entente 
bnto  the  neeby,  anb  bnto  him  rohofc 
fttength  faileth » that  is  novo  in  the  laft 
age,  ano  is  ||  bcrcb  ibith  all  things,  anb 
to  him  that  befpaireth  anb  hath  loll  p& 
tiente. 

j  5F  care  not  the  fentente  of  beath, 
remember  them  that  hauebecne  befoze 
thee,anb  that  tome  after ,  fo?  this  is  the 
(entente  of  the  JLoib  ouer  all  flefb. 

+  3mb  why  a«  thou  againft  the 
plcafurc  of  the  mod  $igh j.  there  is  no 
inquiGtion  in  thegrauc,  whether  thou 
hauc  liucb  ten ,  02  a  hunbzeb ,  0;  atii  0  it  ■ 
(anbyectcs. 

5  3Lhc  chilbjen  of  fmncrs ,  arc  ab; 
homtnablc  chtlbzcn:  anb  they  that  arc 
tonucrfant  in  the  bibcllmg  of  the  bit; 
gobly. 

6  Xhc  inheritance  of  tinners  chit 
bjen  fl>ai  pcnQj  ,anb  thctr  poltcrity  thai 
hauc  a  pcrpctuall  rcpioch. 


Apocrypha. 


7  %\)t  chilbjen  tbm  tomplame  of 
an  bngobly  fathtr,betaufc  they  (ball  be 
repjochcofcu  bis  fane. 

8  naoe  be  bnto  you  bngobly  men 
which  haue  fotfaften  the  law  of  the 
molt  high  <5ob  :  fo?  ifyott  encccafc ,  it 
fhall  be  to  your  beftruction. 

9  3lub  if  you  be  bo:nc ,  you  (ball  be 
bomcto  a  curie  s  anbtfyoubic,acurfc 
(ban  be  your  portion. 

10  *2Mthat  arc  of  the  earth  (bail 
tumc  to  earth  againc :  fo  the  bngobly 
(hall  goc  froma  turfc  to  beftruction. 

11  3Eljc  mourning  of  men  is  about 
their  bobies :  but  an  ill  name  of  fmncrs 
(ballbcblottcbout. 

12  $auc  rcgarbto  thy  name:  foz  that 
(ball  connnucttHththceabouca  thou; 
fanb  great  trcafures  of  golb. 

ij  31  goob  life  hath  but  fell)  bates : 
but  a  goob  name  cnbur  cth  f  0;  cucr. 

14-  40y  chtlb2cn,ltccpc  biftiplmcin 
peace  :fonblfcbome  that  is  hib  ,  auba 
trcafurc  thattsnotfcenc3ibbat  piofttis 
in  them  both  f 

15  3  man  thathibctbhtsfoouibncfrc 
is  better  then  a  man  that  hibetb  his 
lbifcbomc. 

i6  Xhcrcfoje  be  fbamefaft  acco?- 
bmg  to  my  ibo?b  :  fo.:  it  is  not  goob 
toretatnc  all  fbamefattnefle ,  neither 
is  it  altogether  appjooucb  m  cucry 
thing. 

17  25c  aibamcb  of  ibho2cbome  be- 
fiuefathcr  anb  mother,  anb  of  a  lie  be- 
fore a  p:(tuc  anb  a  mighty  man: 

18  £>f  an  offence  before  atubgeanb 
ruler,  of  miquitie  before  a  congregation 

anbpcoptc,ofbniuftbeaimgbefo2ctby 
parmcranbfricnb: 

19  3tnb  of  theft  m  rcgarb  of  the  plate 
wbetcthoufoiourncft,anbmregarbof 
the  trueth  of  ©ob  anb  his  untenant, 
anb  to  Icane  ibith  thine  elbott)  bpon 
the  meatc ,  anb  of  (coming  to  gmc  anb 
taae: 

20  Zixo  of  filencc  befoze  them  that 
falutcthccanbtolooRbponanharlot: 

2 1  3no  to  turne  albay  thy  fate  from 
thyRmfhian.ojtotaRcaibayapo.'tron 
02  a  gift,  02  to  gajc bpon  another  mans 
jlbifc, 

22  £Dj  to  bee  oucrbufic  with  hts 
maibe ,  anb  come  not  neere  her  beb ,  02 
of  bpbjaibtng  fpeaches  Ucfoic  fricubs , 
anb  after  thou  halt  guuu  bpb:aibf  not: 

2}  J0J8  of  iterating  anb  fpcahmg  a 
game  that  ibbtch  thou  baft  Ijcarb .  anb 
ofrcucalmgoffccrcts. 
31  nun  2 24. 


C!,,: 


P-  -j° 


^0 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.         Apocrypha. 


\\Orrf.hj 
partr.eri 

•cb. 
1 1  Or,  ca/r-pa- 
mom. 
\\Or,,f:kc 

j  Or,  with- 
out profit. 


Or.Atidtsi 
or. 
jOr,rciukr. 


Or, that  is 
accufedif 
fjrntc4tmn. 


23- 

*Gcne.-.tf, 

\\Or,wic- 

ks^jfc. 


14  <s>o  fliait  tljou  be  traclp  ft)amc= 
fau\anb  fmbcfauour  bcfo?e  all  men. 

CHAP.    XLII. 

Whereofwefhouldnotbeafhamed.  9  Be 
carclull  o( thy  daughter.  ii  Beware  of  a  wo- 
irun.    15  Theworkesand  greatnesotGod. 

f  ftjefc  tilings  be  not  tljou 
affjamcb ,  anb  accept  no 
perfon  to  finnc  thereby. 

2  j2Dftljc?LaiboftI)c 
moll  tytgh,  anD  his  Cone 
nant ,  anb  of  mbgcment  to  uifrine  the 
tongobly: 

j  £>f  II  recnoning  until  thv  part- 
ners, ano  Utraueilers :  o?  of  ttje  ||gift  of 
the  heritage  of  frienbs: 

4  s©f  cractneflc  of  baliance ,  ant) 
ibaigbts :  02  of  getting  mucfj  oj  little: 

5  3lnb  of mctchantsllinbirTercntfct 
ling,of  much  cojrecnon  ofcbtlbicn  ,ano 
to  mane  the  fibe  of  an  eiull  fernant  to 
bleetj. 

6  Snire  beeping  is  goob  lbherc  an 
euillttufeis,  anb  frjutbp  lbherc  many 
Ijanbsarc. 

7  2Dclutcr  all  things  in  number  anb 
Waigbt.anb  putal  in  Uniting  tijattljou 

guicftout,o?rccciucftm. 
s  25c  not  afbamcbto  llmfomie  the 
bnUufe  anb  fooufl) ,  anb  the  crttccmc 
ageb  I!  that  contcnbcth  Until  tI)ofc  that 
arc  yong ,  thus  fljalt  thou  bee  trucly 
leamebanb  app?oucb  of  all  men  lining, 

9  %\)t  father  lbaRctlj  foj  the  bangb- 
tec  ttiljen  no  man  imolbeth ,  anb  the 
earefo*  rjcrtabctn  aibay  Qccpe  rufjen 
fbec  ts  yong  uft  fljee  paffc  aibay  trje 
flottnc  of  her  age ,  anb  being  matrtcb, 
left  flic  flioulb  be  Ijatcb: 

10  3Jn  her  btrginttic left  flic  fljoulb  be 
Dcfileb.anb  gotten  Until  chtfbe  in  her  f& 
thcrsrjoufc-  anb  Ijaiungan  bufbanb, 
leftfbe  fboiilb  lmfbchauehcrfelfe  :anb 
lbbcn  (l)cc  is  marricb ,  left  (bee  fljoulb 
be  barren. 

n  Bccpeafureibatcb oucrafbame-- 
leffc  Daughter ,  left  fljee  mane  tljcc  a 
laughing  ftocuc  to  tljuiccncmtcs,atiba 
by-lboib  in  the  cute ,  anb  a  rcp20th  a 
mong  the  people ,  anb  malic  tljccafba- 
mcbbcfo2c  the  multt  tube. 

n  iScholb  not  encry  bobics*beauty, 
anb  fit  not  in  trje  nubft  of  lbomen. 

ij  5roj  from  garments  commeth  a 
moth,  anb  *  from  lbomen  uurticbncffc. 

14  zScttcr  is  the  ||  cburliflincffc  ofa 
man,  then  acoiirtcousibomati,aiiiO' 


man  i  uy ,  U)l)ich  bjingeth  fljantc  anb 
rcpjocli. 

15  ^ibillnoibremcmbcrtlictt)02fes 
of  tlic  Hojb,anb  Dcclarertjc  tilings  trjat 
3  haue  fcene :  in  the  rbo.ibs  of  the  JLojb 
arehtstt)02ftcs. 

16  Xbe  £>uunc  tfiat  giuctb  liglit, 
loofectb bpon all  tilings : anb  tlie  ibo :li c 
thereof  is  fnll  of  trje  gtojy  of  tfje  ?Lo?b. 

17  3CljclLo?b6atrjnotginenpoUiec 
to  tljc  faints  to  beclarc  all  bis  maruei* 
lous  UiojUes ,  tbrjirt)  tljc  ^Imigljtie 
JLofli  firmelp fttlcb,  tijat  ibljatfocncr 
is,  miglitbceftabliflieb  fojljis  glozp. 

13  ^c  fccaetli  out  tljc  beepe  anb  tlie 
Ijeart,  anb  conftberetrj  tljctr  traftp  be? 
uices :  fo: '  tlic  Tio:b  tmoibct!)  all  that 
mapbcRttolben,  anb  lie  bcfjolbetljtlic 
ftgncsoftliciboilb. 

19  i^ce  beclaretti  tfjc  tilings  tfjat  are 
paH,anbfo2  to  come,  anbrcucilctl)tl)c 
ftcps  of  Ijibbcn  tilings. 

20  jBo  *tfjouglit  cfcapetfj  liim,  nci- 
tljcr  anp  ibojb  is  fjibbcn  from  Ijim. 

21  ^ecliatlj  garniftjcb  tfjc  cjctcllent 
tbozfees  of  fjis  lbifcbomc ,  anb  lice  ts 
from  eucriaffing  to  cueriafhng ,  bnto 
film  map  notljmg  be  abbcb,  neither  can 
lie  be  binnniflicb  anb  lie  fjatfj  no  nteb  of 
any  counfcller. 

21  «©  rjotti  ocOrcable  are  all  ftis 
ibo2hcs:anb  that  a  man  mapfeceuen 
toafparUc. 

23  3JU  tlicfe  tilings  hue  anb  rcmainc 
fozeucr ,  fo?  all  tofes,  anb  tbey  are  all 
obebicnt. 

24  31U  tilings  arc  Double  one  agamft 
anotrjer :  anb  Dec  fjatlj  mabc  notljmg 
tonperftt. 

2$  jDne  tiling  eftabltflicth  tlicgoob 
of  anotfjer :  anb  ibljo  ftjaibe  fillcb  lbitlj 
bcfjolbtngliisgiojy^ 

CHAP.    XLIII. 

1  The  workes  ot  God  in  heauen,  and  in  earth, 
and  in  the  fca  ,  are  exceeding  glorious  and 
wonderfull.  19  Yet  God  himfclfe  in  his 
pwwer  and  wiledome  is  aboue  all. 

"  I^cpnbeof  tljerjcigljt,  tlic 
clcarc  firmament  ,  trje 
beautic  of  tjcauen ,  lbittj 
lltsglojtousflictt)-, 
2  %\)c  dnnnc  lblicn 
it  appcaretli,bcciarmgat  tns  nfing,  a 
marueilous  Hintirumcnt,  tljeibo2lie  of 
tl)cmoft?)igli. 

?  atnboncitparcrjctrjthctountry, 
anb  lblio  can  abibc  the  burning  Ijcate 
thereof; 
±_A 


\\Or.th 
htgheii. 


"fob  41.4. 
clay  Z 1 . 1  5 


||  Or  tvefa. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xiiuj. 


t.Gr.her 
ftajed  hit 
courfr. 
'Gen.1,16. 


"Exo.  1 1.1 


Apocrypha. 


"Gen.p.13- 


'Efaujo.i  2 


||OViCrm' 

At  t  VtOffMn 

her  tr&- 
uaile. 


Or>ituM 

the  point  of 
JbarpftaJkes 


4  a  man  bloilnng  a  furnace  is  in 
ttwfes  of  heat,  but  the  Smnne  burncth 
the  tnountames  tljjcc  times  mo?e ;  b?ea* 
thing  out  fiery  bapours, anb  fencing 
foojtb  bngljt  beames,  it  bimmeth  the 
eyes. 

5  d5ccat  is  the  fLojb  that  mabe  it, 
anb  at  his  commanbement  tit  runneth 
haCtly. 

6  *$Hmabethe£j3ooncalforofcrue 
in  l)er  feafon,  fo?  abeeiatation  of  tunes, 
anbafigncoftherbojlb. 

7  *5fromthe^oone<sthcfigncof 
jfcafts,  a  light  that  occrcafcth  in  her 
perfection. 

8  £he  moncfh  is  taileb  after  her 
name,  entreating  tbonoerfully  m  her 
changing,  being  an  mttrnment  of  tlje 
armies  aboue,a)iningin  the  firmament 
ofheauen, 

9  %\)t  beautic  of  heauen,  the  glozy 
of  tlje  ttarces,an  ornament  giutng  light 
in  tlje  UighcQ  plates  of  tlje  fLo?b. 

io  &tthetommanbcmcntoffhcho; 
ly  j©ne ,  they  tbill  ftanb  in  their  ojber, 
anb  neucr  faint  in  their  rbateljes. 

ii  *2rOOBCbpontl)craineboib)anb 
pjaifehim  tfjat  mabc  it,  bcry  bcaunfuil 
it  is  in  toe  bnghtneffe  thereof. 

ix  *3Jttompaaeth  the  heauen  about 
tbulj  a  glonous  circle,  anb  the  hanbs  of 
(Demon  Ijtgljljaucbcnbebit. 

ij  25y  his  tommanbement  hee  xm- 
fecth  tlje  fnotb  to  fall  apacc,anb  fenbett) 
ftmftlythelightnutgsofljisiuDgmcnt. 

14  ILhjough  tins  tljctrcafurcs  arc 
opencb ,  anb  tloubs  flie  fotfh  as  foules. 

15  26y  his  great  poitocthec  manetl) 
the  tloubes  firmc ,  anb  tlje  hailcfloncs 
arcbjoRcnfmall. 

16  at  his  GgDt  ttjc  mountames  arc 
(haaen,anb  at  his  rum  the&outh  Vbiub 

bloibeth. 

17  Xtjcnoifcoftrjetljunbcrmauetlj 

tlje  eartlj  to  ||  tremble :  fo  both  the  froy- 
th?cnftoime,anb  fhelbhirlclbinbc:  as 
birbsflyinghcfcAttercththefnorb,anb 
the  fallingbomne  ther  eof,lS  as  tlje  ligl> 
tingofgrafhoppcrs. 

18  Xlje  eye  mar  ueiletlj  at  tlje  beauty 
of  tUc  rbUitencffc  thereof,  anb  tlje  heart 
is  attomnjeb  at  tfje  raining  of  it. 

19  Xhe  fjoarc  froft  aifo  as  faltljcc 
potbmh  on  the  earth ,  anb  being  cenv 
gcalcb ,  ||  it  lieth  on  the  toppc  of  ftjarpe 

ftat*s'  ^ 

xo  naheu  the  tolbe  jRojth-ttmibe 

blorbcth ,  anb  the  tbatcr  is  congcaicb 

into  pec,  it  abibcth  bpon  entry  gathc* 


ring  together  of  ibatcr,  anb  tlothcfh 
tlje  rbatcr  as  ibitlj  atycftpiatc. 

xi  3it  beuotircth  tlje  mountaines, 
anb  burnctlj  tlje  UnlbcrncCfe ,  anb  ton-' 
fumcth  the  graffe  as  fire. 

ix  3tp?cfcntremcbyof  all  is  a  nude 
commiaS ipecdily :  abctt)  tommmg ' I  after 
hcatcrcfrcfljcth. 

X3  25p  his  counfeil  he  appcafeth  the 
bcepc,  anb  plantcth  3Hanos  therein. 

24  Xhey  that  faile  on  the  £>ca,  tell 
of  the  banger  thereof,  anb  lWjcn  rbce 
hcarcit  ibith  our  cares,  ibecmarucilc 
thereat. 

x5  3fo?  therein  be  Orange  anb  ibon; 
berous  ttjoz&cs ,  barictic  of  allnuibcs 
of  bcafts.anb  tbhalcs  creatcb. 

x6  25p  him  the  cube  of  them  hath 
pzofperous  fueeetfe,  anb  by  his  tt>o?b  all 
things  tonfifr. 

X7  tee  may  fpcatic  much,  $  yet  tome 
fl)0?t:mhcrcfojctnfumme,ljeisall. 

xs  tyotbfljailJtoeebeabletomagni' 
fie  Ijiuif  fo?  hec  is  great  abouc  all  his 
UiojUes. 

x?  "XhefLojb  is  terrible  anb  bcry 
great,  anb  maruetlousishispotber. 

30  naljen  you  glonficthe  ?Lojb  cralt 
him  as  mud)  as  you  can:fo;  cucn  yet 
Vbilhcfarrccjtcceb,  anbibhenyouocalt 
him.putfoonlj  all  your  ftrtngth ,  anb 
be  not  tbcary :  fo?  you  tan  ncuer  goc 
farrc  enough. 

31  *  B9ho  hath  fcenc  him,  rtjat  hec 
might  tell  \>s<  anb  Ibho  can  maguifie 
ijimashcis; 

3x  Xherc  areycthib greater  things 
tljcn  thefc  be ,  fiwibcc  haucfeencbut  a 
fclb  of  Disunites: 

33  5FouljeHojb  hath  mabc  all  things, 
anb  to  the  gobly  hath  hce  giuenibifc^ 
borne. 


1 1  Oryvpon 
ihcbtat. 


'Pfil,iC7. 


TfaI.91S.41 


•Pfi!.io(5.i 
10)1.1.18. 


CHAP.    XL11II. 


Tl 


raile  of  certaine  holy  men:    16  Of 
17    Noah 
Ifaac,  13  and  Iacob. 


Enoch,    17    Noah,    19    Abraha 


'vgsgtS  ct  bs  notb  pjaifc  famous 
*  jMmen ,  anb  our  jfathers 


x  Xlje  SLojbc  hath 
Sib?ougl)t  great  glo;y  by 
them ,  through  his  great  polbcr  from 
the  beginning. 

3  Smcij  as  bib  bearc  rule  in  their 
lungbomes,  men  rcnoibmcb  fo?  their 
poVbcr,  giuing  counfeil  by  their  bnber- 
ftanbing,anb  bcciariug  p^phencs : 

4  l^cabcrs  of  the  people  by  their 

3Uuuu  3  coun- 


Thtfrtufetf 
thtf Albert. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefialticus.  Apocrypha. 


\Or,ditlM. 


'Gen. 7. 11 


\Or,af:t 
them. 


"Chap.  39. 


Gen. 5 .  ;a 
hcb.11.5. 


•Gcntf.y. 
and  7.1 . 
hcb.11.7 


"Gen. 51. 1 1 


Gen. 11. 
and  155. 

JI1J17.  4. 


"Gen. 11. 4. 


"Ceii.il. 
1.5,17,18. 
gal.3.8. 


coiinfcls.auoiearningmcetfcntrjepeo; 
pic,  ibifcano  Eloquent  in  their  mtlcuc- 
ttons. 

5  £>uchasfounb  out  mttficai  tunes, 
ano  rcicctcbiincrfcstti  Uniting. 

6  £ichmenfurnifl)cbUnth  abilttic, 
liumg  peaceably  in  their  habitanous. 

7  2Ulthefe  Were  honourebut  their 
generanons,anbn)crethegio2yofthcu; 
times. 

s  Xhcre  be  of  them,  that  hauc  left 
a  name  belnnothem,  that  their  p.zaifcs 
might  be  repozteo. 

9  ;anofometherebc,U.ihichhaucno 
ntcmonal,*U)l)o  are  pcrifbcb  as  though 
they  hao  neuec  bene,  annate  become  as 
though  they  habneucr  bencbome,  ant) 
their  chtlb2tn  after  them. 

10  26ut  thefc  mere  mercifull  men, 
lbhofc  righteoufnefTc  hath  not  becne 
fozgottcn. 

1 1  naith  their  feeb  (hall  continually 
rcmainc  a  goob  inheritance,  anb  tljcir 
chilbtcnarcwithmthccoucnant. 

11  Xhcir  feebflanbs  faQ,  anb  their 
chiUnenllfonhcicfabes. 

13  Xhcirfccb  (hall  rcmainc  fozeucr, 
anb  tljcir  glo:y  (hall  not  bcblottcb  out. 

14.  Zhctrbobtcsareburtebmpcacc, 
but  their  name  lutcthfo2eucrmo2c. 

15  *  Xhe  people  mill  tell  of  tlmr  ttnf 
borne,  anb  the  congregation  mill  (hem 
fouhthctrpjaife. 

16  *  enoch  plcafcb  the  &02b,anb  mas 
trannateb,  being  an  cjcamplc  of  repen- 
tance, to  all  generations. 

17  *  iftoah  mas  fount)  perfect  anb 
nghtcous,utthctuncofn)jath,hett)as 
taft'en  in  crchangc  (fo  2  the  itoojlb)  there- 
fojemas  he  left  as  a  remnant  into  the 
earth  Abheu  the  floob  came. 

18  3iu  *euerlafting  Couenant  mas 
maoe  mtth  him,  that  all  flclhfboulbpc; 
rid)  no  tnozc  by  the  floob. 

19  2tb2aham  tbas  a  *  great  father  of 
many  people:  mglo2y  mas  there  none 
It&elmtohim: 

zo  lBho  Kept  the  Hail)  of  the  molt 
itngh,  anb  mas  m  coucnanttliithhim, 
hee  cflabUflieb  the  Coucnant  m  *  his 
flefb ,  ano  umen  he  lbas  pzoueb,  he  tbas 
fouub  fatthfull. 

21  Xhcrcfruc  he  afliirrb  him  by  an 
"othethathcniouib  blcffcthc  nations 
in  his  feeb,  anb  that  he  moulb  multiply 
him,  as  the  butt  of  the  earth,  anb  cralt 
his  fecb  as  the  flarrcs ,  anb  caufe  them 
to  inherit  from  3>ra  to  S>ca,*  from  the 
riuernutotheutmoflpartofthcianb. 


22  101th *3Jfaae bib  he cflablifl)  hue- 
ibifc  To;  3tb;aham  his  fathers  fane]  the 
blcfliug  of  all  menanb  the  untenant, 

23  3Jnomabcitrc(tbponthchcabof 
Jacob.  i?ce  acUnomicbgcbhtmmhis 
blefTtng,  ano  gauc  him  an  heritage,  anb 
biuibcb  Ins  po2tions,among  the  undue 
tribes  bib  he  part  them. 

CHAP.    XLV. 

1   The  praife  ot  Mofcs,  6  Ot  Aaron,  13  and 
ot  Phinees. 

W^/^B  i^bhebzoughtoutof  him 


sggf  a  mercifull  man  ,  mhtch 
$m  founb  fauour  m  the  fight 
ofaliflclh,  cucn*fi0ofcs 
„  bcioucb  of  Gob  anb  men, 
ibhofc  mcmonallis  blcfTcb : 

1  15c  mabc  him  Ufte  to  the  glo?ious 
Saints,  anb  magmficb  huu,  fo  that  his 
enemies  floob  m  fcare  of  him. 

3  By  his  vooihs  he  caufeb  the  inon* 
ocrs  to  ccafc,anb  he  mabc  him*glonous 
mthc fight  of  kings,  anb  gaue  hint  a 
conunaunbement  fo?  his  people ,  anb 
fhcibcb  him  part  of  his  glow. 

4.  * i^cfanttifieb  him  m  ijts  faithful 
ucflc ,  anb  mccttenefle,  anb  rhofe  him 
out  of  all  men. 

5  $emabe  hmt  to  hcarc  htshoyce, 
anb  bzought  him  into  thebarfee  tloub, 
ano  *  gaue  htm  comuianbcmcnts  before 
his  face,  cucn  the  lain  of  life  anb  bnott) 
lebgc,  that  hee  might  teach  3Jacobhis 
€oucnants,anb  gjfrael  histubgments. 

6  $c  *  ejcaiteb  aaron  an  holy  man 
line  bnto  htm,  cucn  his  brother,  oftifje 
tribe  of  Ucui. 

7  3ncucriafling  coucnant  he  mabe 
Ujithhun,  anbgauehimthepncfthoob 
among  the  people,  he  t  beaunficbhim 
Until  comely  otnaments,  anb  tlothcb 
himmitharobcofglojy. 

8  $ec  put  bpon  hmt  perfect  gIo:y : 
anb  QrcngthcucD  him  lbith  trier)  gar- 
mcnts,mithb2ccches,U)tthaiongrobe, 
anbtheCphob: 

9  ^ub he  tompaffeb htm Ujith  pomc^ 
grauates ,  anb  llnth  many  golbcn  bels 
rouno  about,  that  as  he  mcut,  there 
might  be  a*founb,anb  a  noifc  mabc  that 
mightbchcarbmthc5CcntpIc,fo2ame 
monail  to  the  chilbien  of  his  people. 

10  naith  an  holy  garment.Wnth  golb 
anb  blew  fiibe,  anb  purple  the  WojKe  of 
thccmbioiocrcr  ,mith  abzcflpiate  of 
ittbgcmcnt,  anb  IbrthUrim  $ XDuin- 
mmt. 

n  twith  tibiflcb  fcarlct,  the  lboj&e  of 
the 


*Gcn.i7. 
iS.andiS 


'  E»o.ii.3 


•Exod.tf. 
7,8,p.chap 


'Num.:,. 3 


'Exo.17.4. 


•  Eio-4.18, 


\Gr.htbUf. 


IGrttk,, 

'jefftls  or  \* 
ftrnmtnlt. 


"Enod.  2  9. 


Apocrypl 


aa.  Chap.xlvi. 


•Dcut.17. 

10.  and  11. 


•Num.  |<S, 
11. 


"Num.  17 
3. 


"Dent- u 
12.  and  1?. 
10. 


•Num  25. 

12,13.1 

Hiac.2.54. 


the  cunning  itoo?Kenian,  itosthp2enous 
(tones  graucn  hfcc  feaies,  anb  fct  in 
SOU),  thcuwKcofthcJcibellcr,  lbith 
attmtmg  cngraucb  foj  a  memonau,  af- 
ter the  number  of  the  tribes  of  Jfracl. 

12  tyt  fct  acrottmcof  golb  topon  the 
miterAtohecemitoas  cngraucb  holmcffe 
an  ojnament  of  honour,a  coftly  UwUc, 
the  bcfires  of  the  «cs  goobly  ?  beautiful. 

13  26efo?cl)im  thcreitoercnoncfuch, 
neither  bib  eucr  any  ftrangee  put  them 
on,  butonclyhisehilbjcn,  anbhischil- 
b?ens  chiltyen  perpetually. 

14  Xhcit  facrifites  (ball  be  ltoljoly 
tonfumeb  eucry  bay  tttoifc  continually. 

15  tTDotfcs  confccratcb  bun ,  ant)  an- 
nouueb  Dim  limb  holy  oile,  tbisibas 
appomtcb  tonto  Ijim  by  an  cueriaftmg 
eoticuant ,  anb  to  Ijisfccbfo  longastlje 
beauens  fhoulb  rcmaiuc ,  that  tljcy 
fhoulbmtntftcc  into  him,  anberccutc 
tnc  office  of  the  pjicftboob,  anb  bleffe 
the  people  mbis  name. 

i6  &e  tljofc  l)tm  out  of  all  men  lining 
to  offer  facrifices  to  the  !Lo?to ,  mcenfe 
anb  afracctfauour ,  fojamemonall,  to 
maftc  reconnltation  fo2  \)\s  people. 

17  *$cgaue  tonto  him  l)is  com= 
maubements ,  anbautbontym  thefts 
tutcsofiubgcmcnts,  that  Ijc  (boulb 
teach  31  atob  the  tefhmontcs ,  anb  m 
fonue  gifrael  in  bis  laitocs. 

18  Strangers  tonfpircb  together 
againft  him ,  anb  maltgncb  htm  in  the 
ttiilbccncffe,  cucn  the  men  that  Vbcrc  of 
2Dathans,  anb  3ibirons  fibe,  anb  the 
tongregation  of  Cort  ttrttb  fury  anb 

ityath. 

19  XhisthcfLoibfalljanbitbifplca- 

feb  him,  anb  tn  his  ltojatbfull  inbignatt 
on,  lucre  they  confumcb  :bcbtbitoot^ 
bcrstopon  thcm,to  coiifumcthcmitottb 
the  fiery  flame. 

20  *  2i5ut  he  mabe  3aron  mo2cbo; 
nourable ,  anb  gauc  bun  an  heritage, 
anb  bimbco  tonto  him  thefirft  fruits  of 
the  cncrcafc ,  cfpenaily  he  pjeparcto 
bjcabinabunbaucc: 

21  5F02tlKV  catc  of  the  facrifices  of 
the  ILozb,  lbhieh  he  gauc  tonto  him  anb 
bt'sfceb: 

22  **>ott)bcttin  theianb  of  thepco- 
plcbcbabno  inheritance,  neither  hab 
he  any  portion  among  the  people,  fo? 
the  Hort)  bimfelfe is  bisportion  anb  in* 
hentance. 

23*£bctbtrbingl02yispbinecsthc 
fonncof€lca*ac,becaufcbcbab3eaictn 
the  fcarc  of  the  3Urt>  ,aub  ttoob  Dp  limb 


Apocrypha. 


goob  courage  of  t»eavt,i\)rjen  the  people 
luercturnebbacUe,  anb  mabc  rcconcili 
anonfojjfracl. 

24  Xberfojeitoas  thereacoucnant 
of  peace  mabc  limb  him,  that  he  fljouib 
be  the  chccfc  of  the  fanctuary ,  anb  of 
bispeople.aiibtbatbc.anbbispofkn 
ticfl)ouibhauctbcbigiuticofthcv>mft 
hoob  fo:  cucr. 

25  3lcco2bmg  to  the  couenant  mabc 
lbithsDaiubfonncof  3Jeffc,ofthctribc 
of  gfluba ,  that  the  inheritance  of  the 
Ring  (boulb  be  to  his  pottcnty  alone :  fo 
the  inheritance  of  3aron  fhoulb  alfo  be 
tonto  bis  fecb. 

26  oob  giuc  you  lbifcbomcmyour 
heart  to  tubge  his  people  m  nghtcouf 
neffe ,  that  their  goobthmgsbc  not  a 
bolifbcb ,  anb  that  their  glojymay  m 
burc  fo?  eucr. 

CHAP.   XLVI. 

1    The  praife  of  Iolhu.1,    9    Ot  Caleb,    13 
Ot  Samuel. 

;*€fusthcfotmc  of  ilSauc 


:--j? 


Cs^ibas  toaliant  mthctttars, 
83§?anli  ltoas  the  fucccflo?  of 

i^|i©ofcsinpjophcftcs,Vbho 
?x&s£&'J&  acco?bing  to  his  name 
ltoas  mabc  great  fo?  the  failing  of  thee- 
lcctof<3ob,anbtalungtocngcanecoftbc 
encmicstbatrofctopagamfttbcm,tbat 
Ijc  might  fct  Jfracl  «t  their  inheritance. 

2  *ij?ott)gtcatglo2ygathen)hcnhe 
bib  lift  top  his  hanbs,  anb  ftrctcbcb  out 
his  fioo?to  againft  the  cities* 

3  i©ho  tocfo2e  him  fo  ftoob  to  it*  fo? 
the  ?Lo2b  htmfclfe  bjoughthis  enemtes 
tonto  him. 

4  3>ibnotthe^>unnegocbacttcby 
his  mcancs  i  anb  ltoas  not  one  bay  as 
longastitoo; 

5  V)t  calieb topon  the  moO high  &o?b, 
Uihcn  tlic  enemies  p?effcb  topon  him  on 
cucry  fibc,? the  great  Ho?b  hcarb  Duii. 

6  3ub  itoith  hatlcftoncs  of  mighty 
poitocr  he  mabc  the  battcll  to  fall  bio 
lently  topon  the  nations,  anb  m  the  bcf> 
cent  (ofBetljo2on)  hce  beftroyebthem 
that  rcfiftcb  ,  that  the  nations  might 
ttnolto  all  their  ftrcngth  ,  btcaufe  hce 
foughtinthc  fightofthc?lo?b,  anb  Ijc 
folloltocbthcmightieonc. 

7  gjnthctimcof^ofcsalCo.hcbib 
!  a  <to02hc  of  incrclc ,  hce  anb  Caleb  the 
founcof  35cphunne,  mthat  tlicyttuth^ 
ftoob  the  Cougrcganon ,  anb  ltoithheib 
I  the  people  from  fume,  anb  appcafeb  the 
ltoiclieb  murmuring. 

1  s  ^lub 


"Mum. 37. 
iS.dcuc.  ^4 
p.iolli.  1.  z 
and  12.7. 


lolTi.10. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafhcus.  Apocrypha. 


*  Num.  26. 
3*- 


'Chap.  49 
11. 


*  I.Sam,  r. 
10.  3nd  16 
»9- 


1   Sjni   I  ] 


"1  Sam.: 
18,19. 


'a  Sjm. 


8  *2ub  office  bunbjcbtljoufanb  pco 
pic  on  foot ,  tfjey  tlbo  ibcrc  pjcfcrucb  to 
bung  them  into  the  bcritagccucnbnto 
the  lanD  that  floibethibitb  miiK  ?bony. 

9  %\)i  2,02b  gauc  ftrcngtb  alfo  lnv 
toCalcb.ibijiclj  remamcb  ibitb  him  bit 
to  Iks  olb  age,  fo  that  he  cntrcb  bpon 
the  high  places  of  the  ianb,anb  l)isfcct> 
obtamcb  it  foz  an  heritage. 

10  Xhat  all  the  tljtibjcn  of  3Jfrael 
might  fee  that  it  is  goob  to  folloVb  tljc 
Hojd. 

1 1  3lnb  concerning  the  'Jubgcs,  cue; 
ry  one  byname ,  ibboft  heart  ibent  not 
a  ibbonng  .  no;  bepartcb  from  tljc 
2,o?b,lct  their  mctnozy  be  blcffcb. 

iz  2.ct  their  bones  "flourifl)  out  of 
thctr  plate ,  anb  let  the  name  of  them 
that  iberc  bouourcb,bccotmnucbbp 
oh  their  cljilbjen. 

13  "Samuel  the  0:ophct  of  tbc2.02b, 
bcloucb  of  bis  2.02b,  cftablifbcba  King 
bom,janointcbp2ttucsoiicrbispcoplc. 

i+  23p  the  2-aib  of  the  2.02b  hec 
mbgcb  tljc  Congrcgation,anb  tljcJUjb 
Ijabrcfpcct Unto  "Jacob. 

15  2Sy  bis  faithfuincs  he  ibas  fount 
attucp2ophct,atiDbyhisino2bhcrba3 
Knolbcn  to  be  faithfnll  m  bifion. 

16  tyecalleb  bpon  the  mighty  2.02b, 
lbben  his  enemies  p2cffcb  bpon  him  on 
cucry  fibc,lbhcn  he  offcrcb  the  'fuelling 
lambe. 

17  2lnb  the  2.02b  thnnbereb  from 
hcancn ,  anb  tbitb  a  meat  noifc  mabc 
hisboicetobchcarb. 

is  3nb  he  beftroyeb  the  rulers  of  the 
1_y2ians,aiiball  tljc  pjiuccs  of  the  p\)v 
liftiucs. 

19  3nb  bcfo2c  his  long  fleepe  hec 
mabc'pzotcftations  in  the  fight  of  the 
2.02b,  anb  his  anoyntcb ,  %  bauc  not 
taltcn  any  mans  goobs,  fomuch  asa 
fl)oe,anb  no  man  bib  acenfe  him. 

io  3lub  after  his  bcath  hc*p2ophc= 
ficb,aubflKilicbtlKBmgbtscnb,anb 
liftbp  hisboyce  from  the  earth  tnp20; 
phcOc,  to  blot  out  tljc  IbicUcbncffc  of 
tljc  people. 

C  HA  P.    XLVIl. 

The  piai/e  of  Nathan,  r  OfD.imd,  n  Of 
Solomon  his  glory ,  and  infirmities.  13  Of 
lm  end  and  punifhment. 

^RJSS^S  #b  after  him  rofc  bp  &a* 
^fe/\g?l^  than  to  "p.'opljcfic  in  the 
^/&A~$rimcofDaiiib. 

2  ^IsisthcfattaRtna 
•bay  from  tljc  peace  of 


;  feeing ,  fo  ibas  SDauib  ebofen  out  of  the 
cljilbicnofjrcael. 

$  $ec|tpiaycbibttb2.tonsasibitb 
tubs,  anb  lbith  'bcarcs  as  ibitb  lambs. 

4  *£>lclb  he  not  agyant  lbben  Ijce 
ibas  yet  but  yong  i  anb  bib  Ijcnottafee 
aibay  rcp2ocljfrom  the  people,  lbben 
he  liftcb  bp  his  Ijanblbitbtbe  ftoncm 
the  fling,  anb  beat  boibnc  tljcboaffing 
ofcsoliab; 

5  if  02  he  eallcb  bpon  tljc  mofi  Ijigrf) 
j  2,02b,  anb  he  ganc  him  flrcngtb  m  his 
right  hanb  to  bty  that  migljty  ibartt 
our,  anb  ftt  bp  the  ho2ne  of  bispcoplc : 

6  &otbcpcoplcbonourcbbimibitb 
*  ten  thoufanbs ,  anb  piaifcb  him  m  the 
bieffmgs  of  tljc  2.02b ,  m  ttjat  bee  gauc 
bimatroibncofglojy. 

7  fojljecbcftroycb  the  enemies  on 
eucry  ftbc ,  anb*  b2ougbt  to  nought  the 
0hilifhncshisiabucrfaries,anbbiaBe 
their  h02nemfunberbnto  this  bay. 

8  3Jnallbisibo2Kcsbcep2atfcbtbe 
holy  one  moft^igh,\buinbo;bs  of  glo- 
ry ,ibitljhisibholc  heart  he  fungfongs, 
ano  loueb  him  that  tnabt  htm. 

9  $e  fct  fingers  alfo  befoze  the  *%b 
tar,  that  by  tljctc  boyecs  they  might 
mane  fitjcetmcloby,  anb  bailyfingpjat^ 
fcs  m  their  fangs, 

10  i)c  bcaunfteb  thctr  fcafts,  anb  let 
mo2bcr  the  folemne  nmes  ,J|bnnilthc 
enbe ,  that  tljcy  might  pjaae  his  holy 
/Same, anb  that  the  Xemplc  might 
founbfrommo2nmg. 

n  Xbc  2,02b  toolteaibay  bis  ftnncs, 
anb  craitcb  his  'home  fo2  cucr :  he  gaue 
him  a  coucnant  of  Kings ,  anb  a  throne 
l!ofglo2ym3Jfracl. 

ii  Sifter  him  rofc  bp  a  ibift  fonnc, 
anb  foz  his  taHe  Ijc  blbclt  at  large. 

13  Salomon rcigncbmapeatcablc 
time,anb  ibas  honour  eb  fo:  cob  mabc 
all  quiet  rounb  about  him  ,  that  bee 
might  builb  an  bouft  in  bis  /*ame,  anb 
p?cparcbis£>anetuaryfo2eucT. 

14  *l?oib  lbtfc  ibaft  thou  in  tby  youtlj, 
$  as  afloob  filleb  ibitb  bnberftaubtng. 

islLtjyfouiccoucrcbtbcibbole  earth, 
anb  thou  fuicbft  it  lbitbbarlt  parables. 

16  Xby  name  ibent  farrc  bnto  tbe 
IJianbs ,  anb  fo?  thy  peace  tbou  Vbaft 
bcloucb. 

17  Xbceountreysmarucilebattbce 
fozthy'^ougs.anbpzoucTbs^nb^a? 
rablcs,anbiutcrp2ctations. 

18  25y  the  /3ame  of  the  2.02b  (5ob, 
lbhuh  is  caucb  the  2.02b  C5ob  of  31 
raei,tljou  bibft  *  gatljcr  golb  as  tumc, 
__^_^  anb 


II  Or.hr 
[mole  Lifn<. 
*  1  Sam.  17. 

'1. Sim  17. 
.59,50,51. 


'l.Sim.l8. 


*  S.Sam  5 

7- 

\\Or,cm~ 


i.Chr.itf 


f,atj. 


'1. Sam.  11 


\\Or.cfd 

•  I.  King.  4 
21,14. 


•l.King.4 


.King.4 


lAm.10. 
»7- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xlviij.  Apocrypha. 


'  I.King 
11. 1. 
[[0r,«. 


•  I. Kin.  1 2 

iS,'fi.»7- 


'2.Sam.7. 


•  i. Km.  1 1 
10,11,1 j, 
14- 

•  I. Kin. 12 
28,;o. 


•l.K.ng. 
17.1. 


beauento 
holde  vp. 
■l.Km.  lS 
38.  xjung, 
1.10,12. 


' i.  Kin.  17. 

21,22. 
||0r,frrfWf. 

"  2. Kings 
1.16. 

[\Or,ft.vc. 

*  I. Kings 
■  9-' 5- 

*  i.Kin.  19 
16. 

I 


anbbi&ftmultiplyfilucrasleab. 

19  'Hjoubibttboibtbylouiesbuto 
ibomen ,  anb  ||  by  tDy  boby  tljou  lbaft 
brought  into  fubicctton. 

20  XDoubiflftainctDyDonour,anb 
pollute  tDy  fceb,fo  tDattDou  b2ougDtc(t 
ib2atDbpontDycDilb2cn,atibibaftgric 
utn  foz  tljvfoiip. 

21  *£>o  tDctungbome  ibasbuubcb, 
ftffl)  outofCpDjaunrulcb  a  rebellious 
Ringbome. 

22  *  25ut  tljc  JLojb  lbiii  nctier  leauc 
off  Ijis  nicrrp ,  nettber  fball  anp  of  Ins 
ibo2bcs  per  id) ,  ueitDer  lbtll  fjec  aboltfb 
tDc  polterity  of  Dis  elect,  anb  tDc  fceb  of 
Dun  ttjat  louctli  Dim  Dc  null  nottaRe  a- 
ibay :  lbljercfoje  Dc  gauc  a  remnant  bn- 
to  3Jacob,anboutof  Ijunaroote  bnto 
SDauib. 

23  XDusrcftctj  Solomon  lbitD  bis 
fatDcrs,auboflnsfccbcDclcftbcDinbe 
Dim  Boboam ,  cucntl)cfooUtl)nc(Tc  of 
tDc  people ,  anbonetbatDab  nobnber; 
ftanbmg.  ibbo  'tutneb  aibay  rne  peo- 
ple tlnougl)  ins  tounfcll:  tfjere  ibas  alfo 
Hcroboam  the  fonnc  of/#abat,  ibbo 
*  caufcblJfracl  to  finite,  anrj  fbclbcb  <£- 
pbjaun  trjc  ibay  of  finne : 

24  3no  tfjeir  fumes  lucre  multiple 
eu  ertecbmgiy,  rftat  tljcy  ibcrcbnucu 
outoftbeianb. 

25  jfoz  tlicr  rougljt  out  all  iDitfecD  ^ 
ncs,till  tlje  bengcance  came  bpon  tljcm 

CHAP.    XLVIII. 

"""hepraife  of'Elias,    11   of  Elizcus,  17  and 
ot  Ezekias. 

Den  ftoob  bp  *  €lias  tfje 
pjopbetas  fire,  anb  l)is 
ibojDburtuiiReaiampc. 
2   l?cb;ougntafojcfa^ 
*,  mine  bpon  tbcm,  anb  by 
rjis  3eaie  Ijc  Dimmin)cb  tbeir  number. 

3  2Sy  tin  ibo;boftbc?Lo2b  Dell  (but 
bp  tljc  Dcaucn,  *attb  alfo  tl);ce  times 
bjottgbtboibncfire. 

4  i©€iias,ljoiblbaathounonou 
rcbmtl)yibonb2onsbccbcs'  anb  ibbo 
may  glojyUbe  bnto  tbcci 

5  *  nafjo  bibft  raifc  bp  a  bcab  man 
from  bcatl),  %  Ins  foule  from  tDc  II  place 
oftljebcab  by  tljeibozb  of  tbc  mottle. 

6  *i©Dob;ougDtc(tmng6tobcflruc= 
tion,  anb  honourable  men  from  tljcir 
llbebbe. 

7  nano  Dearbcrt  tbe  rcbunc  oftlic 
ILoitj  in  Snnai,  *  anb  in  J?ojeb  tljc  iubg; 
mcntofbcngcancc. 

8  *M)o  anomtcb  Rings  to  taftt  re- 


'  :  Kk 


Or1xmc- 
rnfff. 


bhjh. 


1 1  Or,vere 

aAorned 

aithloue. 

*r-Kuig  x. 
11, ij. 


||  OrtNe- 
lhm7. 
*  2.  King. 
13.21. 


":.Kin.i8, 
ll,l>. 


ucngc^pJopDcts  to  fuccccb  after  Dun: 

9  *t©Do  ibafl  taRcn  bp  m  a  limine 
lbtnbc  of  fire,  anb  m  a  cDarct  of  Bene 
ijojfes: 

10  nsDo  lbaft ! ;  ojbatneo4fo2  repjoofes 
m  tDtir  tunes ,  to  pacific  tDe  ib2atrj  of 
tDc  |Lo:brs  uibgcmcnt  beftm  it  bjatte 
fooztD  into  fury ,  anb  to  tunic  tin  Dean 
of  tDcfatDcrbtitotDcfoiuic,  anbto||rc; 
ftoictljc  tribes  of  3Jacob. 

11  asletTcb  arc  tDcy  tDat  faib  tDec, 
anb  ||  flept  m  louc,fo2  ibe  ujai  furely  liuc. 

12  *<£lias  it  ibas,  ibbo  ibas  coucrcb 
lbitD  aibbtricibuibc:  anb  eiwus  ibas 
fillcb  lbitl)  Dis  fpirit :  lbbilcft  Dc  Uucb  De 
ibas  not  niooiicb  [lbitD  tDc  pretence]  of 
any  p2iucc,  ncitljer  toulb  any  b2ing  Ijun 
into  fubicction. 

13  ||  ji5o  ibo?b  coulb  oucrcomc  hint, 
*  sj  after  DisbcatD  Ins  boby  p2opDeneb. 

14  5)c bib  iboubcrs  in  Dis  iifcnub  at 
IjisocatD  ibcrclns  ibo;Usmarucilous 

15  JF02  all  tins  tljc  people  repentcb 
not ,  ncitDcr  bepartcb  tDrj'  from  tDcvc 
finncs,*  till  tDcy  lb  ere  fpoilcb  anb  cahcb 
out  of  tljcir  lanb ,  anb  lberc  fcattcreb 
tDiougl)  all  tljc  cartD :  yet  tDerc  rcmats 
neb  a  fmaii  people ,  anb  a  ruler  in  tDc 
DoufcofDauib: 

16  £>f  lbDom ,  fomcbib  tljatibDiri) 
ibas  pleafmg  to  eob,  anbfomcmulti 
plieb  finncs. 

17  *  C5cUias  fo2tifieb  Dis  ritic,  aub 
b20ugbt  tuibater  into  tDcmioil  tljcrc 
of-.DcbiggcbtDcDarbrocUcibitDyjon, 
anb  mabc  lbcllcs  foi  ibaters. 

18  "JnDiS  tunc *^>cunacDcnb tame 
bp ,  anb  fent  Babfaces ,  anb  lift  Dp  Dis 
Danbagaiuft5)ion,iboaftcbp2oubly. 

19  XDcn  trcmblcb  rljctr  Dcarts  anb 
rjanbes,  anb  tDcyibcrciupautcas  lbo 
mcnintraucll. 

20  26ut  tDcy  callcb  bpon  tDc  Uo2b 
ibDtcD  ismcrcifull ,  anb  OrettDcb  out 
tDcirDanbS  tolbarbs  Dun,  anb  mime 
biatly  tDc  Doly  jDncDcarb  tDtm  out  of 
Deaucn.anb  DcltucrcbtDcmby  tljc  II  mu  i 
tuftcryof<£fay. 

2 1  *  J?c  fmo  tc  tin  lioQc  of  tDe  3lffy iv 
ans,  anb  Dis '^ngclbcnroycb  tDcm. 

22  f 02  C3CRWS  Dab  bouctDctDing 
tljat  plcafcb  fin  lto?b,  ano  ibas  ftrong 
m  tDc  ibaves  of  2>atuo  Ins  fatDcr ,  as 
(SfaytDc  v>2opDct,lbDo  masgreatnub 
faitDfiillm  Disbifiou,Dao  commaun 
bcbljuu. 

23  'giuDtStime  tin  Snuinc  incut 
bacltcibarb  ,  aub  Dec  icngtlnncb  tlje 

Rings  life. 

24  l)e 


'  2  Kin 
1 82. 


•King. 


'  2. Km.  19. 

M-iCi-37- 

;6.  tob.l. 
1  8.  i.mac. 

7  4i.2.1nac 

8  ij. 


1(1,10    ifj 

iti. 8. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafticus.  Apocrypha. 


i  .and  25.2. 
l.clu.3.34. 


\\Or,?r0f- 

pcred. 


l.Kin.jj. 


{ Or  horn. 


15.9. 

\\Or,bythc 
Uuti  of  If- 
remte. 
-Ier.38.lS 
•Ici.I.J. 


'Ezc  1 .  j, 
5- 


"Ezr.i;.!  I 
and  ,8.  11, 

16.8(415.1: 
hlg.1.14 
«Tr. ;.  2. 

\\Or,ild 
'00J. 

:£>ck.i; 
1  j.&iS.Ji 


•Z.ch  j  1 
ear.  (. : 

hag  I  1: 

«i\dl.  I 
•Nthc  7  I 


24.  Dec  fame  by  an  excellent  fptnt 
ltobat  fliouio  come  to  paffc  at  the  lad, 
antj  Dee  coinfozteb  them  that  moumcb 
m  §>ion. 

2$  i)c  fbclbcb  lbbat  0)01110  totneto 
paiTeftncucr,  aubfcccct  tljmgsoKiicr 
tbcycame. 

CHAP.    XLIX. 

1  Thepuife  oflofias,  4  Ot  Damd  and  Eze- 
kias,  6  Ot  Ieremie.SOf  Ezechiel,  11  Zoro- 
b.ibel,  11  Iefui  die  fonne  ot  lofedec.  13  Ol 
Nehemiah,  Enoch,  Seth,Sem,  and  Adam. 

§etememb?anceof*3ta& 

as  ts  Itfic  the  compoutton 

)gm  of  the  perfume  p  is  mabe 


carte :  itisftucctcas  bony 
in  all  thoutljcs,anD  as  niuficae  at  a  ban- 
quet of  nunc. 

r  $e  || bebaucb bimfclfc  bp2tgbtly in 
fbeeonucruon  of  the  people,  anb  tooae 
aibay  the  abominanons  of  imqmtie. 

3  *I^c  bircctcb  bis  heart  bnto  the 
?Lo2b,anbin  the  tunc  of  tDe  bngobly  Ijc 
cftablilbebtbe  ibo2fl)tp  of  <5ob. 

4  3lll,  crccpt  SDaiub  anb  c^cchias, 
anb  3Iofias,U)crc  bcfecttuc :  foj  they  fo;- 
fooHctbc!La.boftbcnioRl?igb,(cucn) 
the  lungs  of  TJubafj  faticb : 

5  Xbcrcfojc  Dc gauc  their llporbcr 
bnto  others ,  ?  their  gloip  to  a  ftrange 
nation. 

6  * 3C!)rp bttrtutlje el)ofcn  eittc  of  the 
S>anctuartc,  anbmabc  tbcfrrcctsbcfo; 
late  ||aeco2butg  to  the  pjopljccic  of  3Jc- 
remias: 

7  :ffo2  they  *  cntreatcb  bun  cuiUbbo 
ncucrtUclcffc  ttiasapjopliet'  fauctificb 
in  bis  mothers  lnombctbat  Ijc  might 
rootoutanb  afflict  ftbeftroy ,  anbtljat 
henught  builb  Dp  alfo  anb  plant. 

s  "3tt  ibas«£3tchlelibl)o  fame  the 
glonous  Uifion  ,  lbbicb  urns  fljeweb 
him  Upon  the  chariot  of  the  Cher  ubiius 

9  tfoi  he  *  mabe  mention  of  the  cue 
mics  bnber  [the  figure  of  |thcramc,anb 
1 1  btrectcb  them  that  lbcnt  right. 
10  *3liibofcbct.bciiicp2opbctslcttbc 
memorial  be  bicffcb,  anb  let  tbcir  bones 
flounfl)  agamc  out  of  their  place :  fo? 
they  comfoucb  Uacob ,  anb  bcliucreb 
thembyaffurcbhope. 

i 1  *  $olb  (ball  ibe  magnifie  rrojoba 
beli-eucn  he  lbas  as  afignet  on  tlje  right 
bano. 

1 i  *£>o  lbas  3WuE  the  founc  of  3Io 
i  frbec :  U>bo  111  their  time  builbcb  the 
jhoufe,aubfetl)panl)DlyXcmpletothe 


Hojb,  ibhich  lbas  pzepareb  fo2  eiierla= 
mngglojy. 

13  *3inb  among  the  elect  ibas/2ee 
mias  lbbofe  renoVbme  is  great,  lbbo 
raifcbbpfozbs,  the  lbaiies  that  iberc 
faiicn.aub  fet  Dp  the  gates  t?  the  barres, 
anb  raifcb  bp  our  mines  agamc. 

14  23ut  bpon  tlje  earth  lbas  no  man 
crcatcb  littc  Cnotlj,  fo?  he  lbas  taken 
from  the  earth. 

15  /^either  lbas  there  a  man  bome 
1  lute  bnto  *3Iofcpb,  a  gouernour  of  his 
oiethjen,  a  ftay  of  the  people,  njljofc 
bones  Vberc  regarbeb  of  the  JLojb. 

i6  *£>cm  anb  £>cth  iberc  in  great  ho- 
nour among  men,  anb  fo  tbas3(bam 
abouc  cucryliuiug  t  l.ung  m  the  cr  ratio  it . 

CHAP.    L. 

1  Of  Simon  the  fonne  of  Oni.is.  2.1  How  the 
people  were  taught  to  pr.ule  God,  and  pray. 
17    Theconclulion. 

5mon  *  the  higl)  ptfeft  the 
founeof  ^Dnias,  tbho  in 
his  life  rcpaircb  the  houfc 
agame,  anb  in  his  bayes 
„  fo2tificbtheXemple: 

I  3tnb  by  him  tbas  built  front  the 
founbatfonthebotiblehcight,  the  ht^) 
fo2trcfTeofthcteailaboutthc1!:cmple. 

3  3\\  his  bayes  the  "ttfterue  to  rccciue 
ibatcr  being  in  compafTc  as  the  fca.tbas 
coucrcb  tbith  plates  of  b2affc. 

4.  l?ctooBe  care  of  the  Xcmplc  that 
it  (l)ouib  not  fall,  anb  foztificb  tijerttic  a* 
gamftbeftegmg. 

5  ^oib  lbas  he  honoureb  in  tlje 
mtbfl  of  the  people,  in  bis  commmg  out 
ofthcf5>anttuane j. 

6  ^ciDasastljcmonungftarrein 
the  mibQof  atloub :  anbas  tlje  moonc 
atthcfull. 

7  3ts  the  Auntie  Ibiiung  bpon  the 
Xempie  of  the  mod  $>igb,  anb  as  die 
ramebotb  giuutg  light  m  tlje  bngbt 
doubts. 

s  3tnb  as  the  flott>2c  of  rofes  in  rt)c 
rpung  of  the  ycetc,  as  lillics  by  the  n= 
uers  of  ibatcrs,  anb  as  the  b;anthes  of 
the  frantiincenfc  tree  in  the  tune  of 
rummer. 

9  3ls  fire  anb  incenfc  m  the  tenfer, 
anbasabeffcllof  beaten  golb  fetlbith 
all  maiier  of  p2cnous  ffoncs, 

10  3lnb  as  a  fatrc  oliue  tree  bubbmg 

fo2thfruit,anbasa€yp2cf[ctreelbhich 
groibcthbptothtcloubes. 

I I  nahen  he  put  on  the  robe  of  bo 
none ,  anb  lbas  clotljcb  lbitb  tlje  perfee 

non 


•Gen  5  14 
licb.  1  i.j. 


'Ccn.4t. 

44.  and4Z 
6.8(45.8. 


Cc 


■5!- 


and  11.10. 


•i.Mac.3,4 


''•King- 7 
23- 


t  Cr  the 
houfe  ef  the 
vale. 


Apocrypha. 


Chap.lj, 


(i  Or,  trttm. 
Mi  beaten 

forth  with 
the  ham- 


ttonof  glory,  lbben  be  ibcutbp  to  the 
holy  altar ,  he  mabc  the  garment  ofbo^ 
lincffc  honourable. 

ii  naben  lie  tooUe  trie  portions  out 
oftbeprtcftsbanbs ,  lice  bimfclfcttoob 
by  the  hearth  of  the  altar ,  compaflcb 
Vbith  bis  brethren  rounb  about ,  as  a 
pong  ccbar  in  iLibanus ,  ant>  &z  palinc 
trees  compaflcb  they  bun  rounb  about. 

13  S>o\licrealltrjcfoimcs  of  3arou 
m  their  glory,  anb  the  oblattons  of  the 
ILorb  m  their  hanb  s,  before  all  rlje  con- 
gregation of  "jJfrarl. 

r+  anb  Buiflimg  the  fcruict  at  the  ai 
tar,  that  he  might  aoomc  the  offring  of 
the  moQbfgb  Almighty, 

is  $e(rrctcbcboutbisbanbtotbe 
cup  ,  anb  polbreb  of  the  bloob  of  the 
errape,bepotbzcboutatthcfooteofrhc 
altar ,  a  fmcct  (hulling  fattour  bnto  the 
moQbtgbliiutgofaU. 

16  Xben  fl)outcb  the  founts  of  3t& 
ron.anbfonnbcb  ||  the  filuer  trumpets, 
anb  mauc  a  great  notfc  to  be  bearb ,  for 
a  remembrance  before  the  mofl  fytgb- 

17  ICrjen ailtljc people  togethttha- 
Ceb ,  anb  fell  botbnc  to  the  earth  bpon 
their  fates  to  tboifliip  their  Ho?b  ©ob 
almigbtytbemofrtyigb. 

13  %X)t  Ongers  alfo  fang  praifes 
ttrttj  their  toiccs ,  Vbitb  great  bariety 
offormbstbas  there  mabe  fioecte  me* 
Iodic. 

19  anbtbepcoplcbcfougbttbclLozb 
tbemo(tli?igbbyprayetbefo?ebtmtbat 
is  mttcifuii ,  till  the  Solemnity  of  the 
ILorb  tbasen&eb,aubtbeybabfimfbeD 
histeruicc. 

20  aCbenbeftentbotbnc,  anblifteb 
top  his  hanbs  oner  the  lbboic  congr  cga 
ttonoftbccbilbzen  of3Jfcael,to  gtuctbc 
bleffmg  of  the  Horbibitb  btsiips ,  anb 
toretoytclnbisnamc. 

21  2n&  they  bovbeb  themfelncs 
borbnctorborfbiptbcfeeonbnme,tbat 
the?  might  reteiue  a  bleffmg  from  the 

mofr^igb. 

22  J9otb  therefore  blcfleycc  the  (Sob 

of  all ,  tbbicb  oncly  both  iboubcrous 
things  eucrytbberc,tbbubcraitctb  our 
bates  from  the  ibombc ,  anb  bcalctb 
Withes  accorbmg  to  his  mercy. 

23  l?e  grant  bs  loyfulncffe  ofheart, 
anb  that  peace  may  be  mour  bates  in 
3fraclfozcucr. 

24  Xbat  bee  ibonlb  tonfirmc  btS 
mercy  Untb  bs ,  anb  beluier  bs  at  his 
time. 

25  Xberc  be  ti\>o  mancr  of  nations 


Apocrypha. 


ttobieb  my  heart  abborretb ,  anb  the 
tbirbis  no  nation. 

26  1Lhey  that  fit  bpon  the  moun 
taineof&amana,  ano  they  that  oibeu 
amougfl  the  pbiliQiucs.  anb  that  foo^ 
lift)  people  that  bibcll  m  §>irbern. 

27  'jfefus  the  fonnc  of  S>tracb  of 
,  S?icrufalcmbatbibMtcn  in  tbisboohe, 
the  mfrructton  of  bubcrlranbutg  anb 
iUnonjlcbgciDbooutofbtsbeartpoil) 
rcb  forth  n'tfebotne. 

28  asicfleo  is  he  that  (ball  be  crcrci 
feb  in  thefe  thmgs ,  anb  bee  that  lay- 
eth  thembp  mbis heart,  (ball  become 

ilbife. 

I    29  5F 0:  if  he  boc  them ,  bee  (ball  be 

flrong  to  ail  things ,  fo:  the  light  of  the 

;  ILorb  leabcth  him,  tbbo  giueth  ibifc= 

!  oomc  to  the  gobly:  blcflebbctbclLojb 

forcuer.  3men.  3men. 

CHAP.    LI. 

C  31  grayer  ofjcfustlje  tonne  of 
£>iracb. 
natll  tbanfec  tbce.sD  Ho:b 
anbBtng ,  anb  praifetbcc 
£>  d5ob  my  5>auiotir ,  J 
boe  giue  praifc  bnto  thy 
name: 

2  JF01  n)ou  art  my  befcuber  ,anb  bel 
per.anb  bad  prefcruco  my  boby  from 
beftrucnon ,  anb  from  the  (hare  of  the 
(lanberoustonguc,anb from  the  Uppcs 
that  forge  lies.anb  had  becne  my  helper 
agaiuft  nunc  abucrfanes. 

3  31nb  had  beltucreb  me  accozbing 
to  the  multitube  of  thy  mercies ,  anb 
gtcatneflcoftbynamc.fromtbe  t teeth 
oftbcmthatibercreabytobcuourcmc, 
anboutofthebanbs  of  fuch  as  fought 
after  my  life,  anb  from  the  maiufolbaf 
flictionsibbicbJJbab: 

+    5fromtbecboUingofnreoueue 
ryiibe,  anb  from  the  nubs  of  the  fire, 
U)tjtril  31  HtnDlcD  not: 

5  jfromtbebeptboftbcbcllyofhcl, 
fromanbuaeanc  tongue,  anb  from  ly- 
ing lb  orbs. 

6  25y  an  accufation  to  the  lung 
from  an  bnrighteous  tongue,  my  foule 
brtlb  neere  eucn  bnto  bcatl) ,  my  life 
ibas  ucerc  to  the  bell  beneath : 

7  Hbcy  compaflcb  mc  on  euery 
fibe.anb  there  lbasno  man  to  hclpeme: 
3J  looftcb  for  the  fuccour  of  men,  but 
there  lbas  none: 

8  1then  thought  J  bpon  thy  mer 
cy,  £)?Lorb,  anb  bpon  thy  acts  of  olb, 
bott)  tljou  btttuereft  fuch  as  ibaite  for 
thee^ 


it  teak 


Apocrypha. 


Baruch. 


Apocrypha.| 


§  Orient 


thee ,  anb  faneft  them  out  of  fhebanbs 
of  the  enemies: 

9  Xhcn  ufteb  3J  bp  my  fupplteation 
from  the  card),  anb  prayeb  tor  beliue; 
ranee  from  beath. 

io  31  caiicb  upon theHorb  the father 
of  myHorb,that  he  woulb  not  leaueinc 
in  the  napes  of  my  trouble,  9  tn  the  time 
of  the  proub  When  there  was  no  hclpc. 

11  j  Will  piaifc  thy  /frame  tontine 
ally ,  ano  Hull  fmg  praifc  With  tbanbet 
gtumg.anb  fo  my  player  was  bearb: 

11  jf  or  thou  fauebfl  me  from  tcttru- 
etion,  ano  beluicccttmccfrom  thccuill 
time :  therefore  Will  3  giuc  tbanfecs 
ano  praifc  thee,  anb  blcffc  thy  /frame, 

£>3Lorb. 

ij  naben  3f*bas  yet  yong,  or  cuct3J 
II  went  abroad,  3  defireb  Wifebome  o- 
penlyin  my  prayer. 

14  3J  prayeb  for  her  before  the  Xcm- 
pie,  tWtllfccRC  her  outturn  to  the  cnb: 

15  €ucn  from  the  floWrc  till  the 
grape  was  ripe,  bath  my  heart  bcltgb' 
teb  tubcr,inyfootwenttbcrigbtWay, 
from  my  youth  bp  fought  31  after  her. 

i6  3JboWcbboWnemincearealitle 
anb  receiueb  her,  tj  gate  muth  learning. 

17  3  profiteb  therein ,  [therefore] 
njill '31  aftribe  tlje  glory  bnto  bun  that 
gtuetb me  Wifebome: 

18  jP  or3Jpurpofcbto  boc  after  htf, 
anb  earncfriy  31  followcb  that  Which 
is  goob,  fo  than  3  not  be  tonfounbeb : 


19  £0yfoulcbatbwrc(rlcbWitbbcr, 
anb  in  my  bomgs  3  Voas  exact,  3  Bret? 
cbcbfoorfb  my  bands  to  the  bcaucna* 
bouctj  bcwaiieb  my  ignorances  of  her. 

20  ||3Jbirectcb  my  foule  bnto  hcr,anb 
3  founb  Ijcr  in  pur cneffc ,  3  haue  bad 
my  heart  loyncb  Ibith  her  from  the  be* 
1  ginning,  therefore  (hail  3J  not  bee  fo;* 
fatten. 

ii  £0y  ||  heart  was  troublcb  to  fee* 
feing  her :  therefore  haue  3  gotten  a 
goobpoffcfTion. 

22  Xtyt  iLoin  hath  gtucn  mee  a 
tongue  for  my  rcwarb,anb3J  toil  praifc 
him  therewith. 

2 j  aDrawnccrebntomcyonbnlcar* 
neb,  anb  bWcll  in  the  boufc  of  learning. 

24  nahereforc  arc  you  flow  ,  anb 
what  fay  you  of  tbefc  things ,  feeing 
your  foulcs  archery  djirttiei 

25  *3J  openeb  my  mouth,  anb  faib, 
buy  her  for  your  fclues  Without  money. 

26  ^iityour  nctftebnber  the  yobc, 
anb  let  your  foule  reteluc  mftruction, 
(be  is  harb  at  band  to  findc. 

27  *26cholb  With  your  cies,hoW  that 
3?  haue  hab  but  little  labour ,  anb  haue 
gotten  bnto  me  much  reft. 

28  C5ccicarnmgwithagreatfumme 
of  money  ,anb  get  mud)  golb  by  her. 

29  fLctyouttoulercioyccmbismet? 
cy ,  anb  be  not  afhameb  of  his  praifc. 

30  nporaeyouc  worbc  betimes,  $  in 
his  time  he  Will  giuc  you  your  rcwarb. 


^BARVCH. 


CHAP.    I. 

Bavuchwiote  a  booke  in  Babylon.  5  The 
Icwcs  there  wept  at  the  reading  of  it.  7 
They  (ende  money  and  the  booke  ,  to  the 
brethren  at  Hictufalem. 

/frb  thefc  arc  the 
ib02bes  of  the 
booRc,Wrncbi6a! 
inch  the  fonuc  of 
/frcnas.tbc  tonne1 
of  trjaaftas ,  tl)e! 
tonne  of  £>coc^' 
cias,  the  tonne  of 
3fao;as,  the  ton 
of€bcicias,W:otein  Babylon, 


2  3Jn  the  fift  yetcanb  in  the  fcucntfi 
bay  ofthc  moucth ,  what  nme  as  the 
CaloeanstooRe3Jcrufaicm,  ano  burnt 
it  With  fire. 

3  311b  iBarucbbtO  reabc  the  Words 
of  this  boohc ,  in  the  hearing  of  3Jecbo* 
mas ,  the  tonne  of  ||  Joachim  lung  of 
3hioa,anbintbc  cares  of  all  the  people, 
that  came  to  rhcate  ]  the  boobc, 

4  3nb  m  the  hearing  ofthc  nobles, 
anb  ofthc  lungs  tonnes,  anb  tndje  hca* 
rttigofthc€ioccs,anbofallthcpcoplc 
from  the  lowclr  bnto  the bigbdt,  eucn 
of  all  them  thatbWelt  at  JBabylon ,  by 
the  nucr  Smb. 

5  ©hereupon  tljcy  Wept ,  faflcb, 
It  anb 


II  Or,  ft* 

undrrftan- 
dtne- 


J  Or,  hewek. 


•Efsyj;.!. 


•Crup.6. 
1 8. 


\\Qrjhatim. 


Apocrypha. 


ci 


la 


p-'jj 


Apocrypha. 


||  Or,  md 

vowtd 
vowel. 


\\OrJoiKim. 


\\Or,fnfi. 
rtert. 


\Cr.ctr 

rttptljfar 
Aiincha, 
ameatojf. 
raw. 


'Chap.i.S. 


'Din.p  5. 


anD  piapeb  btfozc  tbe  ?Lo2D. 

6  XbeymaDeaifo  a  collection  of  mo- 
ncy,acco2Dtng  to  cuery  mans  poiDcr. 

7  3nD  tbey  rent  it  to  gjcrufalcm 
Dnto  1 1  jjjoacbtm  tbe  Die  pnta  t be  tonne 
ofCl)cicias,fonncofS)aiom,anototl)c 
0jicQcs ,  anD  to  all  tbe  people  VPljicl) 
lDcre  fount)  tbitb  Dun  at '  Jcrufalcm, 

3  3U  tDc  fame  time ,  lDbcnbc  rccei= 
ueo  tbe  Deffeis  of  tDc  Doufc  of  tljelLojo 
tbatu>etc  cartel)  out  of  tbcXemplc,  to 
returne  tDcm  into  tbe  lanD  of  3wDa 
tDc  tcntD  Dap  of  tDe  monetD  5>man, 
[namely]  Glucr  DeCTelsADbicb  3>cDccias 
tbe  fonnc  of  3Jouas  Ring  of  JJuDaljaD 
maoc, 

9  ^Cfccc  tbat  fjabueboDonofo 2  Ring 
of  Babylon  Dao  cartel)  albay  3Jccljo* 
nias,anDtDeie»2inccs,anDtDc||capttucs, 
anutbcmigbtic  men,  ano  tbe  people  of 
tbe  lanD  from  Jcrufaicni,  ano  bjougbt 
tbem  Dnto  Babylon: 

10  3biD tbey  w»o > BcbolD,tDcbauc 
fent  you  money,  to  buy  you  burnt  offc 
tings,  anD  (tunc  offerings,  ano  incenfe, 
ano  p2cparcycet  £j)atma,anD  offer  Dp; 
ontbe  3lltarof  tbclLojDoureoD, 

11  3nDp2ayfo2  tDe  life  ofj!5abucbo 
Donofoj  bmg  of  Babylon ,  auD  foj  tljc 
life  of  Baltbafarbts  fonnc,  tDat  trjeic 
Daycs  may  be  Dponcartbas  tljc  Daycs 
ofbeaucn. 

12  3inD  tDc  IL02D  lDil  giuc  Ds  ftrcngtb, 
anD  ligbten  our  eyes,  anD  roe  fball  liuc 
DnDcr  tbefl)aDolD  of  i!2abucboDonofo2 
feing  of  Babylon ,  anD  DnDcr  tbe  fba- 
Doro  of  Baltbafac  bis  fonnc ,  anDtDcc 
Ojail  fcruc  tbem  many  Daycs,  anD  finoc 
fauourintbeirfigbt. 

ij  ^jay  fcu  DS  alfo  Ditto  tDc  &02D 
our  C5oD ,  (foziDccDaucfuincD  agatntt 
tDe  ?Lo2D  our  <15oD,  anD  Duto  tbtsoay 
tbe  fury  of  tbe  3GL02D ,  anD  Jjisrojatbis 
not  turucD  from  Ds) 

14  3ud  ycc  (ball  rcaDc  tljis  booftc, 
robicbroebauc  fent  Dnto  you ,  tomaftc 
confemon  in  tDc  Doufc  of  tDc  H02D ,  Dp 
on  tbe  fcafts  anDfolcmnc  Daycs. 

15  3nD  yce  (Dan  fay,  *Xo  tbe  H02D 
ourCoDbclongetbngbteoufncffcbut 
Dnto  DS  tbe  confufion  of  faces,  as  it  is 
come  to  paffctbiSDay  Dnto  tbem  of  Ju= 
Da,  $  to  tbe  inbabitants  of  Jcrufalcm, 

16  3uiDtoourRings,anDto  ourpnu- 
ccs,  ano  to  onr  $2tefts ,  anD  to  our  {tyo 
pbcts,anDtoourfatbers. 

17  5f  02  rocc  bauc  *  fmucD  before  tljc 

IL02D, 

18  ^nDDlfobcycDbim,auD  Dane  not 


bcarbcncD  Duto  tbe  Doice  of  tbe  H02D 
oureoD,  to  iDaiKcintbecommauuDc 
incuts  tbat  be  gauc  Ds  openly : 

19  ^>mce  tije  Day  tbat  tbe  3Lo2De 
b20tigbt  our  fo2cfatljers  out  of  tDe  lanD 
of  <£gypt,  Dnto  tl)is  p2efcnt  Day,  rocc 
Daue  becne  Difobcbicnt  Dnto  tDc  ?Lo2D 
our  <soD,anDiDc  bauebceiic  negligent 
in  not  bearing  bis  Doice. 

20  *  i©bercf02c  tbe  etuis  clcaucD  bxv 
toDS,anDtbccurfciDbicbtbcli.o2Dapj 
pointcD  by  <$ofcs  bis  fcruaut ,  at  tbe 
time  tbat  be  b2ougbt  our  fatbers  out  of 
tbe  lano  of  €gypt,to  giucDs  a  lano  tbat 
florocrbroitb  milbc anD  Dome,  Ituc  as 
ittstofcetbtsDay. 

21  /Bcucrtbcleffe  ttie  banc  not  bcar^ 
RcncD  Dnto  tbe  Doice  of  tbe  H020  our 
430D ,  atto2Dmg  Dnto  all  tbe  roo.'Dcs  of 
tljc^2opbcts,  lDljom  be  fent  Dnto  Ds. 

22  But  cucry  man  follorocD  tbe  una 
gination  of  bis  orotic  roiclieDbeart,  to 
fcruc  flrangc  goDS ,  anD  to  Doc  null  in 
tbe  figljt  of  tlje  %,oft  our  <5oD. 

CHAP.    II. 

The  prayer  and  confefsion  which  the  lewesat 
Babylon  made  ,  and  fent  in  chat  booke  vnto 
the  brethren  in  Ierufalem. 

^>crcfo2C  tbe  !Lo?D  batb 
maoc  gooD  b'S  ID02DC, 
robub  bee  p2onounccD  a- 
gainft  Ds,  anD  agamft  our 
3liiDgcs  tbat  luogcD  3fC 
racl,anDagain(toucRmgs,anD  agamft 
ourp2inces,  anD  agamft  tbe  men  of  3ft 
raclanD3JuDa, 

2  XobnngbponDS great  plagues, 
fucb  as  neuct  bappcncD  DnDcr  tbe 
\Dbolcbcaucn,asit  camcto  paffcm  3Jc 
rufalcm,  acco2Ding  to  tbe  tbmgs  tbat 
rocrcnwrtenm  tbe  flam  of  ©ofes, 

5  Xbat  a  man  fboulD  *  cat  tbe  fled) 
of  bis  orotic  fonnc ,  anD  tbe  flcCb  of  bis 
oroncDaugbter. 

4.  S0o2coucr,be  batb  DelmercD  tbem 
tobcmfubicctton  to  all  tbe  RutgDomcs 
tbat  are  rotttiD  about  ds  ,  to  be  as  a  re 
p20tbanDDcfolanonamongalltbcpco 
pic  rounD  about,  iDljcr  c  tbe  IL02D  Datb 
fcattcrcD  tbem. 

5  Xbus lbec t  iDerc caft Dottmc  anD 
not  eraitcD ,  becaufc  lDcebauefumcDa 
igamtt  tbe  H02D  our  <5oD,  anD  banc  not 
beenc  obcDicnt  Ditto  bis  Done. 

6  *5CotbclLo2Dour<3oDappertat 
nctb  rigbteoufneffe :  but  Ditto  Ds  anD 
to  our  fatbers  open  (bame ,  as  appea 
rctljtbtsDay. 

%%%% 7   ^02 


•Dcuc.:S 
•5- 


'Dcm  :8. 


\  (jr.  xrrrfi 
r.jt  jijue. 


'Cii.i  I.  I  f 


Apocrypha. 


Baruch. 


Apocrypha, 


'Dan  5.15 


\Cr.thf 

n.imc  u  caI- 

letivponlf- 

rael. 

*Dcut.!<\ 

Ij.cfi.tf3. 

'5- 

•PfaU-5. 
andu  5.17 
efa.;8.i8, 
19- 

rlifi. 


*Dan.£.:o 


'Icr.177,8 


7  5?02alltljefe  plagues  are  tome  top; 
outos,  lbhtch  ffjcfLojb  hath  pronoun 
ccbagamftbs, 

s  )3etljauclPcttotp2apcDbefo2Ctbc 
2.02b  ,pibe  might  turnc  etierp  one  from 
the  imaginations  of  his  tincttcb  heart. 

9  i©6icccfo?ctrjc1Lo;Diljatd)CD  otter 
Ps  fo;t  ctull,  anb  tljclLojb  hath  brought 
tt  Upon  PS :  foj  the  Ho?b  is  righteous m 
all  (ns  lbojKs,  lPhich  he  hath  commas 
bebps. 

10  pet  lDc  Ijaucnot  IjcarnencbPnto 
his  Poiccto  ibal&  m  the  comanbemetits 
of  the  3Lo2b,tljat  he  hath  fetbefiuc  bs. 

11  *3lnbno\bilI>?Lo2D<5obof3tfra. 
el,  that  Ijaft  tyonght  tljp  people  out  of 
tlje  lanb  of  Cgppt  lliitlj  a  mtgljtp  hanb, 
anb  higlj  arme,  anb  ibtth  fignes  9  With 
lbonbers,? tbttt)  great  poiPer ,  anb  Daft 
gotten  tljp  felfc  a  name,  as  appcareflj 
tljtsbap: 

12  £>jLo2bour<i5ob,n)chauc{mncb, 
Vbc  rjauc  bone  bngoblp ,  tbee  hauc  Dealt 
bnrtgincouflp  in  all  thine  ozbutances. 

13  lictthptt)2athturncfrombs:fo2 
lbc  arc  but  a  fevb  left  among  tlje  Ijea; 
then ,  lbhcrc  tljou  Ijaft  ftattercb  Ps. 

14  $?ear c  our  p2apcrs,£>  ILojb,  anb 
cmrpenttons,  anb  bclmcr  Ps  fo;  thine 
ottmc  fane,  anb  giuc  Ps  fauour  in  tlje 
ftgljt  of  them  iPljttlj  Ijanc  leb  Ps  avbap: 

1$  lEljat  all  the  earth  map  luioib  that 
thouart  pfLojb  our  d5ob,beraufe3fra^ 
cl?ljtspoftcntptstcalleb  bp  thp  name. 

i6  <©  H02D  *  loofec  boibnc  from  ttjp 
Ijolpljottfcfr  conQbct  Ps:  boibbottntc 
tljutc  care,  £>  Hojb,  to  Ijcarc  bs. 

17  *4Dpcn  thine  epes  anb  bcholb:fo2 
thebcab  tljat  are  mthegraues,  \bI)ofe 
tfoulcs  arc  taken  from  their  bobies.ibti 
giue  bnto  tlic  2Lo;b  neither  pjaifc  no; 
rtghtcoufneflc. 

is  zsttt  pfonlc  rrjat  tsgrcatlppercb, 
ibhtclj  gocth  ttoupmg<i  feeble,  anb  tlje 
eves  tljat  failcanb  the  huttgtp  fouic  ibii 
gtuc  thee  p2aifc  $  rightcoufnes  Q  %  02b. 

19  *Xtierfo2ciPecbocnotmaheour 
humble  fupplicatton  befiue  thee ,  & 
jBLojb  our  ©ob,  fo2  the  rtghtcoufttcsof 
our  fathcrs,anb  of  our  lungs. 

10  J* 02  tijou Ijaft  fent  out  thp  Uwtlj 
9  utbignanon  bpon  Ps,as  thou  haft  fpo- 
lien  bp  thp  fcruants  y  p2ophcts,  faputg, 

21  *3Ehus  faith  the  3Lo2b.boibDoibtt 
your  fl)  oulbers  to  feruc  tlje  ftutg  of  2Sa^ 
bplon :  fo  fljalipc  rcmamc  m  tlje  lattbc 
tljat  31  gaue  Pnto  pour  fathers. 

22  25ut  if  pc  lbtll  not  hcare  the  Poice 
of  tlje  %  02b  to  feme  p  Uuig  of  25abplon, 


23  3  tbtll  caufc  to  teafc  out  of  tlje  ci- 
ties of3fuba,anb  from  ibitbout  3Ieru< 
falcm  tlje  Poicc  of  mtrtlj,  anb  the  Potce 

I  ofiop:  thebotccof  thcb2ibegromr,anb 
tljcbotccofthc  bjtbc,  anb  tljctbholc 
lanb  fljaii  bcbcfoiatc  of  inljabitants. 

24  aoutVPeVboulbnotrjearhcnbnto 
I  thp  bopecto  ferue  the  t»ng  of  28abplon: 
thcrcfo2C  Ijaft  tljou  mabe  goob  the 
iP02bcs  that  tljou  fpabeft  bp  tljp  fcr- 
uants the  p2op^cts,namclp  that  the 
bones  of  our  kings,  anb  the  bones  of 
our  fathers  ftjoulb  be  taken  out  of  fhett 
places. 

25  3(nb  loe,  tljep  are  call  out  to  the 
hcatof  tljcbap,  anb  to  thefrottofthe 
night,  anb  thep  bteb  m  great  mifcries, 
bp  famine,  bp  fowD,  anb  bp  peftilcnct. 

26  3lnD  tlje  Ijoufe  ibhtcl)  is  cailcb  bp 
tljp  name  (Ijaft  thou  laib  ibaftc )  as  it  is 
to  bcfcenetljisbap,  fo2tljclbicncbncfle 
of  tijcljoufcof  3lfracl,  anbthchoufeof 
"Juba. 

27  2DHo2bourc5ob,thouhaftbeait 
tt)ith  bs  after  all  thp  goobnefle ,  anb  m 
co2bmg  to  all  that  great  metric  of  thine. 

23  3s  thou  fpabeft  bp  thp  fcruant 
CPofcstnfhcbapibhcn  thonbibftcom* 
manb  Ijim  to  lb^itc  tljp  ?laib,  bcfo2C  the 
chilb2cn  of  3Jftacl,faptng, 

29  *3If  vc  Vbillnot  hcare  mpbopce, 
furelpttljisbcrp  great  multitubc  ftjaibc 
turneb  into  a  una]  rnumbcrjamong  the 
nations.ibhere  3  lbtll  fcattcr  them. 

jo  5f02  3  fencib  tljat  thep  lPoulb  not 
ljcarcme:bccaufcitisamffcnccbcbpcoi 
pic :  but  m  the  lanb  of  their  capttumes, 
tljep  (hall  ||  remember  tljcmfclues, 

31  3lnb  ftjail  unoiP  that  3  am  the 
Ho2b  their  €>ob :  ^02  3  giuc  them  an 
heart,  anb  cares  to  hcare. 

32  anbthcpftmipjaifcmctn  the  lanb 
of  their  capnutfte,  anb  thm&e  bpon  nip 
name, 

3janbrcturncfromthctrftiffetnccft, 
anb  from  their  ibicttcb  bcebs :  fo2  thep 
ftjai  remember  the lbap  of  thnr  fathers 
\bljitlj  fiuncb  bcf02C  the  !Lo2b. 

34  Znn  3  tt»ll  b2ing  them  againc 
into  the  lanb  iblnch  3p2onufcb  lbith 
an  oatlj  bnto  their  fathers,  atyaham, 
■Jfaae ,  anb  ^atob ,  anb  thep  mail  bee 
I02bs  of  tt,  anb  3  lbfll  incrcafc  them, 
anb  thep  fl)ail  not  be  bimniiftjeb. 

35  3lnb  3  lbtll  maltc  an  cueriafting 
coucnant  iPtth  tljcm,  to  be  their  <5ob, 
anb  thep  (bail  be  nip  people:  anb  3  tPiil 
no  mo2Cb2tucmp people  of  3Jfracl  out 
of  tljc  lanbthat  3  Ijaucgnicn  them. 

CHAP. 


*Lcuir.  16. 
14.dcut.28 
if- 
fGr.thts 

great 
jwarroe. 


II  Or,  come 
to  them- 
felntf. 


\  (jr.  l>Mke. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.ii), 


Apocrypha. 


*Deut. 
jo.  I. 


CHAP.    III. 

5  The  reft  ot  their  prayer  &conrclsion  contai- 
ned in  thatbook.whidiBaruch  writ  andfenc 
toHicrufalem.  30  Wifdomewasfhevvcdfirft 
to  lacob,  and  was  fecne  vpon  the  earth. 

-  ?Lo?b  almighty ,  d50D  of 
3Jfcael,  the  foule  m  ang- 
ui(l) ,  the  troublcb  fpint 
encthtontothec. 
„  2  $earcja[>lL02b,anb 
haucnicrcy:fo2thoiiartmertifuli,anb 
hauc  pitty  upon  tos.bccaufc  ibe  hauc  On* 
ncbbcfojethcc. 

j  foi  thou  cnbtitcd  fo?  cuct ,  anb 
tticpctifl)tottcrly. 

4.  <©  JLo2b  almighty ,  thou  ©ob  of 
3Jfracl ,  t>carc  novb  ttjc  players  of  the 
bcab  gjfracutcs ,  anb  oftheit  ehtdnen, 
itohich  hauc  finncb  before  thee ,  anb  not 
heatltcneb  tonto  the  tooiceof  tljcc  tljcic 
C5ob :  foz  the  \bhich  caufe  thefc  plagues 
clcauc  tonto  tos. 

5  Remember  not  rtjc  iniQUittcs  of 
one  forefathers  :but  thmfee  topon  thy 
po  ttur  anb  thy  name,  nott>  at  this  time. 

6  foi  thou  art  the  ILojb  out  ©ob, 
anb  thccsD  fLo2b,ttnllttic  p^atfe. 

7  3nb  fo?  this  taufc  thou  had  put 
thyfearc  in  out  hearts,  to  the  intent 
thatlbcfljoulbcailtopon  thy  name,  anb 
p;aife  thee  in  out  captiuity  :  foj  *  tbc 
ijaue  tallct)  to  mmbeaii  the  iniquity  of 
out  forefathers  that  finncb  before  thee. 

S  26eholb,tt>catcyctthisbaymour 
eaptmity,ttihercthouhadrcattercbtos, 
for  a  reproeh  anb  a  entfe ,  anb  to  be  fufr 
ieet  to  payments,acco2bing  to  all  the  int 
quities  of  out  fathers  which  bepat teb 
from  the  ILojb  our  <Sob. 

9  $earc,  3Jftacl,  the  commanbe; 
ments  of  life,  gmc  cate  totontoerdanto 
mfebome. 

10  ^oitohappenethit,  3Jfraci  ,fhat 
tDou  att  in  thine  enemies  lanb ,  that 
tjjou  att  ttiaren  olb  m  a  dcangc  eoun 
trcy,thatthouartbcnlcbibiththcbeab; 

11  Xhat  thou  art  tountcbttjith  them 
that  goc  botbne  into  the  gtauc  < 

\x  lEhouhadforfaBCttthcfountaine 
ofttnfebomc. 

13  5To2  tf  thou  habd  tbalRCb  m  the 
ttiayof(5oto,thonfl)oulbcdhauctott>cl' 
lebtn  peace  forcucr. 

14  Heatne  Where  is  ttufebomc, 
itohcrctsdrcngth,  itohctcisbnbcrdan 
btng  ,  that  thou  mayed  unotti  alfo 
Vbhcte  is  length  of  baies,anb  itfctbhet  e 
is  the  light  of  the  eyes  anb  peace. 


15  naho  hath  founo  out  hct  *  place  t 
02  ttmo  hath  come  into  her  trcafures; 

16  nahercatcthc  minces  of  the  hca 
then  become ,  anb  fuel)  as  tuleb  the 
beads  topon  the  catth. 

17  Xhcy  that  hab  thcit  pafhmc  with 
thcfoulcsoftheaircano  they  that  hoo2 
tocb  bp  filuct  anb  golb  wherein  men 
trud,  anb  mabc  no  enb  of  then  getting  t 

18  ifor  they  that  wrought  mfiiuet, 
anowcrcfocarcftii,anbWhofcWorHes 
atcbnfcatchable, 

19  Xhey  ate  toamfljeb  ,  anb  gone 
bottmc  to  the  gtauc ,  anb  others  are 
come  top  m  thcit  tteabs. 

20  j3oungmenhauefccnclight,anb 
bltoclt  topon  the  earth :  but  the  way  of 
anoiblctoge  Ijauc  they  not  bnoitocn, 

xi  ilSortonbcrdooothcpathcsthcrc 
of,  no;  laib  holb  of  it :  their  chitbrcn 
Were  fat tc  off  from  that  way. 

xx  3Jt  hath  not  becne  hcarb  of  in 
Chanaan :  neither  hath  it  becne  fecne  m 
Xheman. 

23  Xhe3lgarcncs  that  fees  Wifbomc 
bponcarth.thcmarchants  overran, 
anb  ofXhcman,thc||authorsof  fables, 
anb  fcarthcrs  out  of  tonberftanbmg  : 
none  of  thefc  hane  bnoltoen  the  way  of 
Wifcbome,  02  remember  her  pathes. 

x+  £>3ftael,hoitogrcatisthchoufc 
of  ©ob  <anb  how  large  is  the  place  of 
hispoffeflion; 

2$  ©reat ,  anb  hath  none  enb :  high, 
anbtonmcafurable. 

26  1Ehcretbcrethegyants,famons 

from  the  beginning ,  that  ltocrc  of  fo 
great  ftature,anb  fo  erpcrt  in  itoarrc. 

27  Xhofe  Did  not  the  Ho2b  clnifc, 
neither  gaue  he  thctbay  of  Hnoltolcbgc 
tontothem. 

28  26utthcy \toctc  bcQtoyeb.bccaufc 
they  hab  no  tbifebome ,  anb  pcnfhcb 
thjough  thcit  ottmc  foolinmriTe. 

29  i©ho  hath  gone  top  into  heaucn 
anbtahenhet » anb  b2oughthct  bottmc 
from  the  clonbsi 

jo  naho  hath  gone  ouer  the  £>ea,anb 
founbhcr#ttnlb2ingherfo2puregolb; 

ji  /3o  man  fenotticthhctttiay ,  no; 
thlnbcthofhctpath. 

32  ffiuthcthatunotbcthallthings, 
nnoitocthhcr ,  anb  hathfounb  her  out 
itoithhtstonocrQanbtng:hcthatp2cpa 
rcbthc  earth  fo2  eucrmo2e,  Ijath  fillcb  it 
ttnth  fourcfooteb  beads. 

v,  ^ethatfenbeth  fo?th  light,  anb  rt 
goeth :  calletl)  it  again t,  anbitobcyctl) 
himitoithftare. 

. ? try  i 34  ^hc 


'Iot>.i8. 


||  Or,  ex- 

'OhhcUti. 


Apocrypha. 


Baruch. 


Apocrypha,' 


'Pro.  8.  j  I 
lolin  1. 14. 


J  CJreeke,  to 
the  (lunula, 
before  the 
li^htthere- 


*  1. Cor. 10 


34.  Xhc  ttarrcs  (hmcdtnthciriPat 
chcs,  and  rctoyccd  :  iPhcn  he  tailcth 
tl)ctii,tt)cyfav,  ^ccciucbcandfoUrith 
thcetefulnclTc  they  (helped  light  Unto 
htm  that  made  them. 

35  3CI)is  is  our  God ,  and  there  (ball 
none  oilier  Ik  accounted  of  in  compart 
fonoflnm. 

36  i)t  hath  found  out  all  ttjc  tbay  of 
ftnoiPlcdge,and  hath  giucmtPntogja 
cob  l)is  fcruant,?to3frael  his  bcloucd. 

37  ^ccttiarddidhctbettJbunrclfc 
bpon  eartb,and  conucrfed  ttiitb  men. 

CHAP.  IIII. 

1  The  booke  oi  Commandements,  is  that  Wit 
dome  which  was  commended  in  the  former 
chapter.  15  Thelewesaremooued  topati- 
ence,and  to  hope  for  the  deliuerance. 

sse^  ftts  is  the  23oo6c  of  the 

J£\  commandements  of  God: 

p^j  and  the  2LaU)  that  endu* 

,g§  r  ctb  for  euer :  all  they  that 

W&  fteepc  tt  (pall  come  to  life : 

but  fuel)  as  leaue  it,  (handle. 

z  Xumetl)ce,£>3Jacob,?taBeI)eed 
of  it :  lPalUc  t  in  tbcprcfencc  of  the  light 
tbcrof,tbat  tbou  mayctt  be  illummatcti. 

3  Giuc  not  thine  honour  to  another , 
nor the  things  that  arc  profitable  Pnto 
tbcc,to  a  Orange  nanon. 

4  £>  3Jfracl ,  happic  are  ttiet :  for 
things  that  arc  plcafing  to  God ,  are 
made  ImoUmt  Pnto  PS. 

5  JScofgoodebcatc.mypeoplctbc 
mcntoriailofgifracl, 

6  jacwcrcfold  to  the  nations,  not 
for  [  your  ]  deftruction :  but  bctaufc  you 
moiicdGod  to  iPratf^yc  lberc  dcltucred 
Pnto  tbc  enemies. 

7  if  or  pec  prouoftcd  him  that  made 
you,by  *facrirt.tingbnto  dcuils,and  not 
to  GOd. 

8  J^c  haue  forgotten  the  cucrtalhng 
God,  that  brought  you  Pp,  and  ye  banc 
gricucdgjcrufalcm  that  nourfed  you. 

9  for  lPbcn  fl)cc  falP  the  lPratb  of 
God  coming Ppon you  ,fl)cfaid  fycar^ 
ttcu  ,€)  y  c  that  dwell  about  S>ion:  God 
hath  brought  Ppo  me  great  mourning. 

10  jro:  3J  faib  the  capttumcofmy 
founcs  and  daughters,  luhuhthceticr^ 
lathngbrought  Ppon  them. 

1 1  roith  toy  did  gi  nourifl)  them:  but 
fent  them  a\Pay  Until  iPccpmg  and 
mourning. 

n  ?Lct  no  man  rcioyce  oner  me  a  VoU 
doiP,audfo:ral5cnofmany,\Phoforthc 
finucs  of  my  children, amlcftdcfolatc: 


becaufe  tljcy  departed  from  the  ?LaU) 

OfGOd. 

13  XbcylmeUj  not  htsttatutcs,  nor 
uiaiucd  in  the  Unites  of  bis  Commaudc 
ments,  nortrodc  uttbepatbesHofbif 
ciplme  m  h«s  r  tgbtcoufneflc. 

14  Jlct  them  that  dibeliaboutSnon 
tome,  and  remember  ye  the  taptiuity  of 
my  fonnes and  daughters,  Which  the 
cucriaftitigbatb  brought  bpon  them. 

H  ifor  he  hath  brouglit  a  nation  top* 
on  them  from  far :  a  ihamelcflc  nation , 
and  of  a  ftrangc  language.iPbo  neither 
reuerenced  old  man,  nor  pitted  chUde. 

16  Xhcfc  banc  cancdaiPay  the  dear r 
bcloucd  children  oftbenndolP,  and  left 
her  that  Idas  alone,  Dcfolate  Unthout 
daughters. 

17  26uttt)hattan3Jhelpeyouf 

18  jforhcthatbroughtthcfepiagucs 
Ppon  you,  unll  dciiucr  you  from  the 
hands  of  your  enemies. 

19  GocyourU)ay,<©myebilbrcn,goe 
your  n>ay :  for  3  am  left  defolate. 

20  3  baue  put  off  the  clothing  of 
!i peace,  and  put  Ppon  mcthefacliciorh 
of  my  prayer.  31  ttnll  cry  Pnto  the  euer* 
lamngirmmydayes. 

xi  26e  of  good  cbcarcjDmy  children, 
cry  Pnto  th  c  V.  o  :d :  *  he  (lial  deltucr  you 
from  tbc  pouier  ?  hand  of  the  enemies. 

it  iFormybopetsuitbcCueriafhng 
that  bee  Unll  taueyou,  anb  toy  is  come 
Pnto  me  from  the  ^oly  one ,  becaufe  of 
themeccy  iPhich  (ball  foonc  come  Pnto 
you  from  the  eucrlalhng  our  3>autour. 

23  ifor  3  lent  you  out  Ibith  mour* 
ning  andUiecptng:  but  God  tbUl  giue 
you  to  mee  agatne ,  lbttb  toy  and  glad 
ncfTc  for  euer. 

24  SLiheasnotti  the  neighbours  of 
S)ionhaucfceneyourcaptiuity:fothail 
they  fee  (portly  your  faluanon  from 
our  <sod ,  which  (hall  come  bpon  you 
unth  great  glory ,  and  brigbtnefle  of  the 
eucrlalrmg. 

11  *©y  children,  fuffer  patiently  the 
lPratb  that  is  come  bpon  you  from 
God :  for  thine  enemy  hath  pcrfccutcd 
thee :  but  (portly  thou  (halt  (ieehts  be- 
(truction,  ?  niait  tread  Ppon  his  ncclte. 

26  Q3y  ||  delicate  ones  haue  gone 
rough  ibaycs,and  mere  taben  attiay  as 
a  flocfic  caught  of  the  enemies. 

27  2Sc  of  good  comfort ,  ©my  chil- 
dren, and  cry  Pnto  God:  for  you  (hall  be 
remembred  of  him  that  brought  thefc 
things  Ppon  you. 

28  Jforasttipasyonrmiudctogoc 
aftray 


}Or,ofhu 
difcipline  in 
rt^hteoufnet 


\\Or,pro!}t 

ritie. 

|j  Or,m  the 

time  of  mtnc 

afflifiion, 

•Pfil  1(5.1. 

and  I )  7.7. 


\\Or,mj 


Apocrypha. 


Chap.v.vj.  Apocrypha. 


attray  fcom  <5ob  :  fo  being  ectutneb 
fecKc  him  ten  tunes  mo?c. 

29  JFo?  he  that  hath  b?ought  theft 
plagues  topon  you,thaii  bung  von  euet* 
lattmg  toy  againc  ibith  your  faluattott. 

30  Xatsc  a  goob  hcact,  -©^ccufa 
lent :  fo?  l)cc  that  gaue  thee  that  name, 
nMlcomfo?ttbce. 

31  £0ifttable  ace  they  that  afiuctcb 
thcc,anb  retoycebatthyfall. 

3z  £}9ifttablc  are  the  cities  ibljtcr) 
thy  cbtlb?cn  fttueb:  nnfcrabJc  is  the  that 
rccctuebthyftmncs. 

3 j  5fo?  asthccrctoyccbatthy  ruinc, 
anb  tt>as  giab  of  thy  fan :  fo  (hail  (he  be 
gnencb  fo?  fjcr  olhnc  bcfolatton. 

3+  5Fo?  *5  U)ill  tattc  arbay  the  r  ctoy 
ring  of  her  great  multttubc ,  anb  tjcr 
p?ibc  thalbc  turncb  into  mounting. 

35  JFoifire  thai  eomebponhec  fro  the 
cucriamng,longto  enbure:anb  fl)e  fl)al 
be  tnhabttcb  of  beuils  fo?  a  great  time. 

36  £>3Jecufalcm,loottc  about  thee 
toVbarb  tf)c  €a(t ,  anb  beholb  the  top 
that  eommcthbnto  thee  from  <sob. 

37  ?Loe,  thy  fonncs  tome  ttjhont 
tbou  ftntctt  amay :  they  come  gafhetcb 
together  from  the  caato  the  t©e(i,by 
thcttwbof  thcholysDnc,  retoycutgin 
theglo?yof(Sob. 

CHAP.    V. 

1   Iemfalemismouedtoreioyce,   5  amho  be- 
hold their  returne  out  of  captiuity  with  glory. 

"flit  off,  sDIJerufalcm,  the 

garmettt  of  thy  mourning 

anb  affltction,anb  put  on  the 

.  comcuncu"eofthcglo?ythat 

commcth  front  <3ob  fo?  cucr. 

z  Call  about  thee  a  boublc  garment 
of  the  rightcoufucfle  lbhtch  eomnteth 
from  ©od  ,  anb  fct  a  btabeme  on  thine 
rjcab  of  the  glo2v  of  the  cuctiamng. 

3  5Fo?<SobiMfl;)Ctt)thyb?ightnctIc 
bnto  citcry  countrey  bnbecheauen. 

4.  jf  02  thy  name  (hall  bee  calico  of 
©ob  fo?  cuer,  Xhc  peace  of  ttgbtconf; 
nefft,  anb  chc  glo?y  of  ©obSttwttnp. 

5  3irift,£>  3Jmifalcm,  anb  ftanb  on 
l)igl),anb  loottc  about  toibarb  the  eaft, 
anb  beholb  thy  cDilDicn  gathctcb  from 
tbeiecit  tonto  the  cad  by  tbcVbo?b  of 
the  holy  £Mtc,  ceioyemgm  the  cement 
b?anec  of  ©ob. 

6  5fo?  tljrp  bepartcb  from  thee  on 
footc,anbtt)ccclebbca\bay  of  their  enc^ 
mtcsibut  C5ob  b?mgeth  them  tonto  thee 
ccaltcb  ibitD  glo?y ,  as  c!)tlb?cn  of  tlje 
Bingbomc. 


7  if  o?  ©ob  hath  appomteb  that  t> 
;  ucty  high  Dill,  anb  banlts  of  long  tonte 
;  nuance  flioulb  be  caltbottmc ,  anb  bau 
,  leys  fillcbbp,to  matte  ettcn  the  grottnb, 
,  that  3lfracl  may  gocfafcly  in  tljcgio?y 
i  of  <5ob. 

I  8  #o?eoucr,cucnthcrboobs,*cucry 
fmcct  fmellingtrcc,  (hall  otter  (haooib 
Jfracl  by  the  commanbemcntof(i5ob. 

9  jfo?  ©ob  than  leabc  3 fcaci  unth 
toy,  m  toe  light  of  his  gio?y ,  ibith  the 
mercy  anb  nghtconfncs  tljattommcth 
fcom  htm. 

f  The  Epijlle  of  kremic. 

CHAP.   VI. 

i  The  caufeol  the  captiuiry  is  their  (Trine.  3  The 
place  whereto  they  were  caried,  is  Babylon: 
thevanitie  of  vvhofe  idols  and  idolatrv  are  fet 
foorth  at  large  in  this  Chapter. 

^SfM^^ow  of  an  CpiOleibhtch 

l^VJ%\^53'crcmic  ftnt  bnt0  them 
Msram^hftp  ibcrc  to  be  leb  cap; 
HM!  ttttes  into  ?6abylon,  by  the 
^^i^sr  Uuig  of  thc26abylonians, 
to  cccttfic  them  as  it  U)as  commattbtb 
jhtmof  (5ob. 

2  25ecaufc  of  p  fitmes  Vbhtth  yc  hauc 
tommittcb  bcfo?c  ©ob,  ye  fliail  be  leb  a* 
ibay  captiucsbnto  25abylonbyj3abu; 
chobonofo?  mng  of  the  Babylonians. 

3  £>o  ibhcn  ye  be  come  bnto  25aby; 
Ion,  ye  fhai  rematne  there  many  yecces, 
anb  to?  a  long  fcafon ,  namely  fetten  gc^ 
ncrattons :  anb  after  that^J  Vbtllb?mg 
you  away  peaceably  from  thence. 

4.  *i3ott)  thai  ye  fee  ttt25abylon  gobs 
of  ftlucr,anb  of  golb,anb  of  iboob,bo?nc 
bpon  (hottlbcrs ,  lbhtch  caufc  tlje  nati 
onstofeare. 

$  2i5elbarc  thcrcfo?c  that  yce  in  no 
iMc  be  liUc  to  Grangers,  neither  be  yce 
afcaib  of  them ,  ibhcn  yce  fee  the  multi- 
tube  bcfo?c  tljcm,  anb  bchutbe  them, 
Vb02fl)tpptugthcm. 

6  25ut  fay  yce  in  your  hearts,  £> 
|Lo?b,itocmuftB)02flnpthcc. 

7  jFo2mtne^ngcltsU)Uhyou,anb 
1 5  my  fclfc  canngftn  your  fouics. 

8  3sfo?  their  tongue,  it  ispolilhcb 
by  the  ibo?Ucnian,  anb  they  themfcltics 
arc  guilbcb  anb  laib  otter  lbtth  filuecyet 
ace  tljcy  but  faifc  anb  cannot  fpcaltc. 

9  3lnb  tafttng  golbc,as  it  lbcrcfo?  a 
btcgtnc  that  lottcs  to  go  gay ,  they  matte 
S  ccoiDncs  fo2  the  hcabs  of  their  goos. 

10  5>omcttmes  alfo  thepztcftscon 
ucy  from  their  gobs  gotoc  anb  fitucr, 
anb  bcttoU)  it  bpon  themfclttcs. 

I trrr  3        n  Vta 

68 


*  Efai.44.Pj 
9, to. and 

415'  5.7- 
plal.iij.^. 

Wif.i3.i0. 


Apocrypha.  Ecclefiafhcus.         Apocrypha. 


Orjvlnch 
praftitute 
themfeltte: 
openly. 


WOr^Bhrtt. 


tGr.lick.eJ. 


||  6r,any 

price. 

'  Elj.4(5.7, 


1 1  pea  thep  Unit  gtue  thereof  to  the 
||  common  Ijarlots,  ant)  bccUe  them  as 
men  lbitl)  garments  [being]  gobs  of 
uiucr,anbgobs  of  golb,  anb  tboob. 

ii  J9et  cannot  thefe  gobs  fauc  them 
femes  from  ruftanb  moths,  though 
thepbecoucrebttnth  purple  raiment. 

13  Xhcp  ttnpe  their  faces  becaufe  of 
thebuftof  the  Xemplc,  ttiljen  there  is 
much  bpon  them. 

14  3nb  he  that  cannot  put  to  bcath 
one that  offenbefhhim,  holbcthafccp; 
ter  as  though  hec  There  atuoge  of  the 
coutttr  cp. 

15  $ee  hath  alfo  in  his  right  hanb  a 
Dagger,  anb  an  are :  but  cannot  ocliucr 
himfclfc  from  lbarre  anb  theeues. 

16  aaherebp  trjcv  are  ftnolbcn  not  to 
bee  gobs,  tfjmfoje  fearc  tftem  not. 

17  jFo?lifteasabeflciithatamanhs 
fetl) ,  is  nothing  ibo?th  ibhen  it  is  b?o* 
Sen :  euenfo  it  is lbtth  their  gobs:  mhen 
ttjevbc  fctbpintheXemplc,  their  e^es 
be  full  of  bull,  tl)o?ott>  tlje  feet  of  them 
that  come  in. 

18  anbasthe|lboo?esarcmaberurc 
oneuerpubc,  bpon  him  that  offenoeth 
thefeing,  as  being  comnnttcb  to  fuffcr 
beatlj:  euen  fo  trjc  pneQs  mane  fait  thetr 
temples,  tbitl)  booses,  tbitr)  lotbes  anb 
barres,  leftthcie  gobs  bee  fpotlcb  lbtth 
robbers. 

19  Xftcp  light  them  ranbles ,  pea, 
mo?c  then  fo?  themfeuies,ibhcreof  tl)ep 
cannot  fee  one. 

io  Xhepareasoncof  thebeamesof 
the  temple,pct  fhepfap,their  hearts  arc 
tgnaroebbpon  bp  things  creeping  out 
of  the  earth,  f  lbhen  the?  cate  them  anb 
tljeic  clothes,  thepfeele  it  not. 

21  1£heir  fares  are  biacUcB,  tho:o\b 
the  miotic  that  comes  out  of  the  temple. 

22  tllpoil their  bobicsanbheabs,fit 
battcs,  nuailoiues,  anb  birbs,  anbtljc 
cats  alfo. 

2  3  23p  this pou  map  fenoib  that  thep 
are  no  gobs :  therefore  fcarc  them  not. 

z4/|iJottt)ithftanbingthc  golb  that  is 
about  them,  to  mafee  them  beautifull, 
erccpt  they  tt)tpe  off  the  rult  they  null 
not  thine:  fo?  neither  lhbcn  theplbcrc 
molten  bib  thep  fcelcu. 

25  %tye  things  lbbercin  there  is  no 
b?eatb ,  are  bought  fo?||amolthiep?ice. 

26  *  %\)tv  are  borne  bpon  thouiocrs, 
hauing  no  fecte,  lbberebp  thevbeclare 
bnto  men  that  tbcpbcnofbmghwth. 

27  Xhcp  alfo  that  feme  them, art  a 
fljameb :  fo?  if  tbepfail  to  tlie  grounb  at 


anp  time,  thep  cannot  rife  Dp  agameof 
themfelues:  ntttherif  onelctthcntbp- 
right  can  tb  ep  moue  of  themfelues:  net; 
ther  if  they  be  boibcb  bourne,  can  they 
mane  tbcmfelnes  Qreight:  but  thep  fet 
1 1  guts  before  them  as  bnto  beab  men. 

2s  7ls  fo?  the  things  that  are  faenfi- 
teb  bnto  them,  their  p?ieas  fell  anblla* 
bufe :  in  uue  mancr  their  ttnues  lap  bp 
part  thereof  in  fait:  butbnto  tbcpoo?e 
anb  impotent,  they  giue  nothing  of  it. 

29  U?)enftruoustt>onicn,atibibomen 
in  chilbbcb*eatetheir  farrifices :  bp  thefe 
things  pemap  fcnolb  that  thep  arc  no 
gobs  :fearc  them  not. 

30  ifoJhonjcanthepbecaiicbgobSf 
becaufe  ftomen  fet  meate  before  the 
gobs  of  fiiuer ,  golb,  anb  tboob. 

31  3lnb  the  pnelts  fit  in  their  temples, 
hatting  their  clothes  rent,  anb  their 
heabsanb  bearbsthaucn,  an&  nothing 
bpon  their  Ijeabs. 

32  Xljep  roarc  anb  eric  befo?etbeir 
gobs:  asmcnboeatthefeaftibhenone 
tsbcab. 

33  XhcpjieOes  alfo  tane  off  their 
garments,  anb  clothe  their  ibluesanb 
cbilb?cn. 

34  ashetherttbeeuillthatoneboth 
bnto  them,  oigoob :  thep  are  not  able 
to  rccompcnfc  it :  thep  can  neither  fct  bp 
a  lung,  no?  put  him  botbne. 

35  3Jn  ii'ae  htaner ,  thep  can  neither 
gtttc  riches  no?  moncp:  though  a  man 
mane  a  boibc  bnto  them  anb  feecpeu 
not,  thep  Hull  not  require  it. 

36  Xhepcaufaucno  manfrombeath, 
neither  ocliuer  the  xbcafce  from  the 
mightie. 

37  Xhcp  cannot  re(to?e  a  bunb  man 
to  his  fight.no?  helpeanp  man  mhisbi- 
Jtreflc. 

38  Xhep  can  fbclb  no  mercie  to  the 
Onbotti :  no? boc  goob  to  the  fatherleffc. 

39  Xbctrgobsoflbooo,anblbbub 
arcoueriaibibith  golb,  anbOluer ,  are 
Ube  the  (tones  that  be  beiben  out  of  the 
mountaute:thcp  that  lbo?fbip  them 
(baubeconfonnbeb. 

40  ^o\b  thoulb  a  man  then  thinfec 
anb  fap  that  thep  arc  gobs<  rbhm  euen 
the  Chaibcattsthcfeluesbifliono?  them. 

41  w\)o  if  thep  fljall  fee  one  bumbe 
that  cannot  fpealicthcp  1 1  b?ing  hun  anb 
mtrcatc  ?6el  that  he  map  fpeahe,  as 
though  he  lbcre  able  to  bnber  ftanb. 

41  Pet  thep  cannot  bnberlraub  this 
themfelues,  anb  leauc  them:  fo2  thep 
haucnolilmouncbge. 

43  Xhe 


\Or,ftcni. 
'Lcu.12.4. 


Or,liJhit. 
eaSvpea 
Bet. 


Or, 


Apocrypha. 


Ck 


ip.vj. 


Apocrypha 


*Pfal.u5. 
/j,wifdom. 

.10. 


43  %\)t  Bjomcnalfo  ibtth  to?besa; 
boutthem,  ftttmgm  the  waves,  burne 
bjanne  fo2  perfume :  but  tf  any  of  them 
ojaiben  bv  fome  that  paffcti)  bv,  tie 
ttntlj  him,  ftje  rcpjoaebcth  her  fcllolb 
that  fhcrbas  not  thought  as  lfcotfhv  as 
her  felfc,no2  her  cojb  bjoftctt. 

44  JEhatfocucriSboneamongfhcm 
istalfe  tholbmavitthen  be  tt)ougt)t  02 
fatD  that  they  are  gobs  i 

45  3Chcv  arc  mabc  of  tarpentcrs, 
ano  golbfmtths,  thev  tan  be  nothing 
elfe,  tl)en  the  nwftman  ibill  haue  them 
to  be. 

4  6  3nu  they  themfclues  that  mabe 
them ,  tan  neuec  tontinue  long ,  hott) 
fl)ou!b  then  the  tilings  that  arc  mabe  of 
them,begobs* 

47  5fo2tbcyleftlicsanbrep2oathcs 
to  them  that  tomcafter. 

48  5f02  fljhen  ttjerc  comrneth  anv 
tbarre  02  plague  topontljem,  thepnefts 
confult  ttuth  themfclues ,  tbhere  tfjep 
mav  be  hibben  tbitlj  them. 

49  ^oVb  then  cannot  men  percciuc, 
that  thev  be  no  gobs,  ltohtch  tan  neither 
faue  themfelues  from  ftarrenoz  from 
plague  t 

50  *$roi  feeing  thev  be  but  of  fooob, 
anb  oueriatbe  ttntft  ftluer  anb  golcttt 
(hallbcBnoibcn  hccreaftcc  that  tljcv 
arcfaife. 

51  Kan  itfhallmanifcftlvappeareto 
all  nattons  anb  Rings,  that  the?  arc  no 
gobs:  but  the  iuozrcs  of  tncnshanbs, 
anb  that  there  is  no  ibozlte  of  ©obttt 
than. 

51  i0l)o  then  map  not  tmorb  rtjat 
they  are  no  gobs* 

5  j  5Fo?  neither  can  tliev  fct  bp  a  Ring 
in  the  lanb ,  no:  gme  ramc  tmto  men. 

54  Neither  tan  they  tubge  their 
otbnecauft,  noirebzcfTearbzongbctng 
t>nable:fo2  they  arc  as  croibcs  between 
heauen  anb  earth. 

55  thereupon  tt>hctt  firefailcthbp; 
onthchottfeofgobsofn.iooo,o2iayoo; 
iter  with  golb  02  fiiuec,  time  P2icfts  nmi 
flv  arbay ,  ?  efcape :  but  they  themfclues 
(hall  be  burnt  afunbcr  liltc  beanies. 

56  4$o2conectheycaimotibithftano 
any  Ring  0;  enemies :  hoibcan  itthen 
be  thought  02  faib  that  thev  be  gobs  i 

57  ^cither  arc  tbofc  gobs  of  lbooo, 
anb  lavb  oucr  lbith  Glue r  02  golb  able  to 
efcape  either  from  thecucs  02  robbers. 

5S  tehofc  golb ,  anb  filucr ,  anb  gar- 
imnts  inberttntl)  they  arc  tlothcb,they 
that  are  ftrongboetalic ,  anb  gocaroay 


ibithau :  neither  are  they  able  to  Ijclpc 
themfclues. 

59  Xhctcfo2c  it  is  better  to  be  alting 
that  ftjcibeth  hispovber ,  02  clfe  ap2oft 

[  tabic  bcflcllm  an  hottfe ,  Mjich  the  ott) 
ncr  n>all  haue  Dfc  of , then  fuel)  faifc 
I  gobs :  02  to  be  a  0002c  m  an  houfc  to 
Rccpc  fitch  things  fafc  as  be  therein  ,tt)  en 
Tuchfaifcgobs :  02  a  pillar  of  iboobma 
palace,  then  fitch  faife  gobs. 

60  5Fo2S>unnc)^oonc,anbQarrcs, 
being  bzight  anb  Cent  to  ooe  their  offi 
ces,ateobcDtcnt. 

6i  3Jn  liue  manec  the  lightning 
tt)hcn  it  b2caRcth  fo?th  is  cafie  to  bee 
feene ,  anb  after  the  fame  mattery  the 
ttmtb  bloVbctl)  in  cucry  country. 

6i  2tnbibhen(5obtommanbcththc 
clonbs  to  goe  oucr  the  ibholc  «302l0 : 
the? bocas they  arc bibbcn: 

6j  3lnb  the  fire fent  from  aboucto 
tonfume  hillcs  anb  ttsoobs,  both  as  it  is 
commaubcb  :  but  thefc  arc  iiUc  buto 
thcmncitf)cr  m  n)eib,no2poVbcr. 

64  i©hcrcfo2c  tt  is  neither  to  befup= 
pofcbno2faib,  that  they  arc  gobs,fccmg 
they  arc  able,  neither  to  mbgc  taufes, 
no2toboegoobbntomen. 

65  Bnottmg  theccfo2c  that  the? 
arc  no  gobs,feare  them  not. 

66  5fo?  they  can  ncuhcr  curfc  1102 
blcflc  Rings. 

67  Jileither  can  they  ftctttugnes  in 
the  heauens  among  the  heathen :  1102 
flnnc  as  the  £>unuc ,  1102  gme  light  as 
thc£0oone. 

6S  %\)t  beads  arc  better  then  they : 
fo?  they  tan  get  tmbec  a  couett ,  anb 
hclpcthcmfchics. 

69  3Jt  is  then  bp  no  mcanes  maiufcft 
Unto  tos  that  they  arc  gobs  :thcrcfo2c 
fearc  them  not. 

70  j?o2  as  a  fcarcrolb  m  a  garbcu  of 
Cucumbers  necpeth  nothing  :  fo  arc 
thctc  gobs  of  iDoob ,  auo  laib  oucr  ibtth 
(inter  anb  golb. 

71  ^nbliRcVbtfctheirgobsofiDoob, 
anb  latb  otter  Ibtth  filucr  anb  golb ,  arc 
lihe  to  a  ibhttc  tho2ttc  m  an  02tharb  that 
cucrv  birb  firtcth  bpomas  alfo  to  a  bcab 
bobv,  that  is  tall  into  the  barnc. 

71  ^nbvou  fljallRttolb  them  to  be 
no  gobs,bythc||  b2tght  purple  that  rot* 
tcth  bpon  them  :ano  thev  themftlucs 
aftcruiarb  fljall  be  eaten,  atib  tljau  be 
arep2oachtnthecouutrp. 

73  23cttcr  thcrcfo2c  is  the  tuft  man 
that  hath  none  tboies :  fo?  he  fhau  be 
farrc  from  reproach. 

«r  The 
G 


\\Or,ihe 

f&nervmd. 


\\OrpurvL' 

*ndbrigkt- 


'Pfal.ir 


m  i  ne  oong  or  tne  tnree  noiy  cnnaren, 

which  followeth  in  the  third  Chapter  of  Daniel  after 

this  place,  [And  they  walked  in  the  midft  of  the  fire,  praifingGod, 
and  blefsing  the  Lord.]  That  which  followeth  isnot  in  the  Hebrew;  towit,  [Then  Azarias 
flood  vp  ]  vnto  thefe  wordes,  [And  N abuchodonofor.  ] 


Azai  us  his  praier  and  confeffion  ill  the  flame, 
14  wherewith  the  Chaldeans  about  thcouen 
were  confumed ,  but  the  three  children  with- 
in it  were  not  hurt, 
three  children  in  theouen 


18  The  Song  of  the 


$<gjB  Farias 
ftooD  top  9  PW- 
eD  on  rtjts  man* 
net,  anD  opening 
Ins  moutl)  in  tDc 
miDft  of  ttjc  fire, 
faiD, 

2  zsicffcD  art 
tDou  ,  £)  H02D 
d5oo  of  out  fatDcts :  tljp  0amt  isvow 
ttiv  to  dc  pjaifeD  ,anDglo2tficDfo2  encr* 
mm* 

3  foi  tljou  att  tigljtcous  in  all  flje 
tljtngstljat  tljou  Daft  Done  to  bs :  pea, 
ttuc  ate  all  tDp  iD02ftcs :  tljp  rbapes  ate 
ttgljt,anD  *ail  ttrp  iuDgements  ttuctlj. 

4  3fn  all  tDctDmgs  tljat  tDou  Daft 

twougDt  toponfcs ,  ano  Ppon  tDc  Doip  ci* 
tic  of  out  fatDcts ,  men  3lctufaicm, 
tDou  Daft  cjcccutcD  ttuc  tuDgcincnt :  fo2 
acco20ing  to  ttuttD  anD  inDgcment, 
DiDft  tDou  bzing  all  tDtfc  tljings  Dpon 
Ps,bccaufc  of  out  funics. 

5  if  02  Voce  Dauc  fmneo  anD  comnnt^ 
teDimquitie,Dcpatttngfcomtbec. 

6  ^JnautDuigsnaucibcttcrpaffcD, 
ano  not  obcpcD  tljy  CommanDcmcnts, 
noz  ucpt  tDent ,  ncttDet  Done  as  tljou 
Daft  commauDcD  Ps,  tljat  it  nugDtgoc 
pjeiiibitDDs. 

7  aaDctefozc  all  tDat  tDou  Daft 
bzougljt  topon  PS ,  ano  cuctp  thing  tDat 
tljou  Daft  Done  to  PS,  tDou  Daft  Done  in 
ttuc  iiiDgetucnt. 

8  3lnDtDouDiDftDcliuct bs' into  the 
DanDsof  laiDlcflc  enennes,  tnoft  Date* 
full  fcufaacts  [of  (5oD]  anD  to  an  biuttft 
Bmg,  anD  tljc  moft  iDicncD  m  all  tljc 
ID02ID. 

9  3(ud  nott)  ibec  cannot  open  out 


mouthes,  tbe  ate  become  a  tDame,  anD 
tcp2oel)  to  tiip  fctuants,  anD  to  tljcm 
tDat  lDcjrmp  tDce. 

10  pet  Deltucc  PS  not  Dp  *bholpfo2 
thp  JiSamcs  fane ,  neitDet  Difanull  tDou 
thpCouenant: 

11  ;HnDcaulenottDpmcfcptoDepatt 
from  PS :  fo2  tDp  bcloucD  SibzaDams 
fane:  fo?  tDpfctuant3Jfaacsfaue,anD 
fo?  tDpDoD>3!ftaclsfa&c. 

ii  %o  lbhom  tDou  Daft  fpofeen  anD 
pjonufcD,  XDattDoiupoulDettniultt* 
piT>  tDcit  fceoas  tDcftattesof  Deauen, 
anD  as  tljc  fanD  tDat  ipctD  PpontDe  fea 
flwe. 

13  5f02tbe,4D?l02D,  ate  become  lefle 
tDcn  anp  nation,  anD  bee  Kept  PnDet 
tl)is  Dap  in  all  the  tt)02lD,bccaufc  of  out 
fiuncs. 

14  iRcitDct  is  tDetc  at  tljis  tune, 
pimtc,  02  $2opljct,  02lcaDet,  ozbutnt 
offering,  02  factificc,  02  oblation,  02  in* 
ccnfe,o?plaec to  factificc bcfo?etljec,anD 
to  finDe  metric. 

15  il5euettDelcfle  in  a  tonttitc  Deatt, 
anD  an  humble  fpittt,  let  ps  be  acceptco. 

is  JLtfecas  in  tlje  bntnt  offeting  of 
tammes  anD  bullocKcs ,  anD  line  asm 
ten  tDoufanDs  of  fat  lambcs :  fo  let  out 
factificc  bee  in  tDp  ttgDt  tDis  Dap,  anD 
rgtantjtDatiDccmapiDDolygocaftet 
tDce :  fo?  tljep  fbail  not  bee  confonnDcD 
tDat  put  tDeit  ttuft  m  tDce. 

17  3lnDnottrtDccfolloibtDce,  lbitf) 
all  out  Deatt  ,rbcc  fcatc  tDce ,  anDfccnc 
tljpfaec. 

is  $ut  PS  not  to  (Dame :  but  Deaic 
lDttlj  bs  aftct  tl)p  louing  hmDencfJc, 
ano  accozDing  to  tDc  multituDc  of  thy 
metrics. 

19  £>eliuct  Ps  alfo  accojDing  to  tDp 
matuciiousiDozHcs ,  ano  gmc  glo2p  to 
tDp/15amc, £>JLojD,anD  letallthcm 
tljatDocfbpfcniantsDuttbcafbamcD. 

^o  3inD  let  tljcm  be  pconfounDeDin 

all 


\Ortby  thy 

wwerana 

•night. 


Apocrypha.        the  three  children.        Apocrypha. 


\\0r,  Nap- 
thdy  which  u 
a  certaine 
ktndof fat 
andchalkte 
cLiy.PUn. 
Al.X.r.105- 


\\OrtCootc. 


\\Or,high!y 
exjjt:  and 
fointhereTl. 
Pfal.  148.4 


all  their  power  anb  might,  ana  let  their 
ttreugthbcb?OBcn. 

11  anb  letthemtmorb  that thou art 
?Lo?b,theoncly  C3oa,anaglo?iousoucr 
thett>holctbo?ia. 

11  TLnxi  the  mugs  fcruants  rtjat  put 
them  m ,  ceafca  not  to  matte  the  ouen 
hotc  Uttrt)  ||  cofin,  pitch,  tott)c,ana  fmail 
Ibooa. 

13  £>o  that  the  flame  ftrcamea  fo?fh 
abouc  the  fo?nace,  foiuttc  ana  nine  cu^ 
bites: 

24.  £na  it  pa(Teath?ough,ana  burnt 
thofe  Calbcanstt  founa  about  the  fo?^ 
nace. 

15  25ut  tl)C  ^ngcl  of  tljc  ?Lo2D  came 
aoVbnc  into  the  ouen,  together  luith^ 
5arias  anahisfcllouKS,ana  fmotcthc 
flame  of  the  fire  out  of  the  ouen: 

16  3na  maae  the  nubs  of  the  fo?naee, 
astthaabenca  ||motft  Whittling  ibma, 
fo  that  tlje  firctouchca  themnotat  all, 
neither  hurt  no?  troublca  them. 

17  Chen  the  th?ce,  as  out  of  one 
mouth  >  p?aifca ,  gio?tfiea ,  ana  blcflca 
d&oa  in  the  fomatc,  faying ; 

28  25leflcD  art  thou,  <©  Ho?a  <5ob  j 
of  our  fathers :  anb  to  bcp?atfcb  anb  tp 
aitcb  aboue  all  fo?cuer. 

19  ana  blcffcb  is  thy  glo?ious  anb 
holv  jftamc :  anato  bep?aurbaitbcrai 
tea  aboue  all  fo?cuer. 

jo  isieHeb  art  thou  m  the  Xcmpie 
of  thine  holy  glo?y  :ana  to  be  p?atlea  anb 
glo?ifica  aboue  all  fb?  cucr. 

ji  asieffea  art  thou  that  bcholbcft 
thebepths,  ana  Gttcft  upon  the  Chctu- 
bints ,  anb  to  be  p?atfca  anb  craitea  a* 
boue  allfo?  cucr. 

ji  Blcflcb  art  thou  on  thcglo?ious 
Xhjouc  of  thy  feingoome :  anb  to  bee 
p?aifea  anb  glo?tfiea  abouc  all  fo;  cucr. 

35  25lcfTca  art  thou  m  the  firmament 
of  hcaucn :  anb  aboue  all  to  be  p?aifca 
ana  glo?ificafo?  cucr. 

34  £>ailyectt)o?HCSofthe!Lo?ac, 
bicfleyc  the  ?Lo?b :  piatfc  anb  cralt  him 
1 1  abouc  all  fo?  cucr. 

35  *j©ychcancns,blcircycthcS.o?b : 
p?aifcanacralthunabouc  allfo?  cucr. 

36  j©  ycc  Angels  of  the  ?Lo?a,  bicffc 
ye  the?Lo?a :  p?atfc  anb  cralt  him  abouc 
allfo?  cucr. 

37  ©allyeVbatcrsfhatbcabottcthe 
hcaucn,  bleflc  ycc  thcfLo?a:  p?atfcana 
cralt  him  abouc  all  fo?  cucr. 

3s  £>  ail  ycc  pollers  of  the  %oiii, 
bicfleyc  the|Lo?a :  p?atfe  aub  cralt  him 
abouc  all  fo?  cucr. 


I  39  £)yce3>unneanb0)oonc,bleu*c 
ye  the  Ho?b:  pzaifc  anb  cralt  him  abouc 
:  all  fo?  cucr. 

4°  J©  y c  ftarres  of  hcaucn ,  bicfTc  ye 
thcHo?o :  p?aife  anb  cralt  him  abouc 
[  all  fo?  cucr. 

41  J©  cucry  fhottwc  anb  beiu ,  bicfTc 
ye  the  Ho?b :  p?atfc  ano  cralt  him  aboue 
all  fo?  cucr. 

41  *D  all  yc  ttnnbes ,  bicfTc  vtc  the 
JLo?a:p?aife  ana  cralt  htm  abouc  allfo? 
cucr. 

4 J  £>  ycc  fire  anb  heate,  bicfTc  y c  the 
Eo?o :  p?atfc  anb  cralt  him  abouc  all 
fo?cucr. 

44  £>  ycc  natnter  anb  Summer, 
bicfTc  yc  the  2Lo?a :  p?aue  anb  cralt  him 
abouc  all  fo?  cucr. 

45  ©ycacibcsanairo?mcsoffnotb, 
blcffc  ycthc  !Lo?b :  p?aifc  anb  cralt  him 
abouc  all  fo?cuer. 

46  s©yc  nights  ana  aayes.blcOc  ye 
the  !Lo?a :  p?aifc  anb  cralt  him  abouc 
ail  fo?  cucr. 

47  ©yc  light  ana  aatHcneffcbicflc 
n  the  ?Lo?a :  p?atfe  anb  cralt  him  abouc 
ail  fo?  cucr. 

48  ©yeeyeeanatoiae,  bicfleyc  the 
?Lo?a:  p?aife  anb  cralt  him  abouc  ail 
fo?euer. 

49  £>ycfraftanafnott>,bleu"cycthc 
%oin :  p?aifc  anb  cralt  him  abouc  all 
fo?  cucr. 

50  ©  yc  lightnings  anb  clonbS,blcflc 
ycthc1Lo?b:p?aifeanb  cralt  him  abouc 
allfo?  cucr. 

51  !©  let  the  earth  bicfTc  the  flo?a : 
p?aife  anb  cralt  him  abouc  allfo?  cucr. 

52  JD  yc  mountaincs  anb  little  hils, 
blcfleyethe?Lo?a :  p?atfeanaeraithtm 
abouc  allfo?  cucr. 

53  ©all  yc  things  that  groia  on  the 
earth,  bicfleyc  thc|Lo?b:p?auc  anb  cr- 
alt hun  abouc  all  fo?  cucr. 

54  ©yecfountatttcs,blcflc  ycc  the 
3Lo?o :  p?ai(c  ana  cralt  him  abouc  all 
to?  cucr. 

55  £)ycfcasanbnucrs,blcflcycthc 
Ho?b :  p?aife  ana  cralt  htm  aboue  all 
fo?  cucr. 

56  <D  ycttihaies  ana  all  that  mooue 
in  the  lbatcrs,bleu*e  yc  the  2Lo?a :  p?atfe 
ana  cralthim  aboue  all  fo?  cucr. 

57  €>  all  yc  foulcs  of  the  taircblclfc 
ycthe?Lo?a:p?aife  ana  cralt  him  abouc 
allfo?  cucr. 

58  j©  ailycbeaflsanbcattcll,  blciTc 
yc  the  5Lo?b:p?atTc  anb  cralt  htm  abouc 
all  fo?  cucr. 

59  ©yc 


1Gr.hr. 


Apocrypha. 


Sllfc 


manna. 


Apocrypha. 


\\0r.  Saint  i 


59  )©  ye  chilb?en  of  men ,  blctfc  ycc 
the  3Lo?b :  p?aifc  anb  erait  him  abouc  all 
fo?cuer. 

«o  £>3fraclble(Tcvctl)c!Lo.2D:p?aifc 
anb  ejeatt  hun  about  all  fo?  cucr. 

6i  £)ycp?icftsofthcfU>?b,bleflcye 
the  %  o?b:  p?aifcanb  cjcalt  him  abouc  all 
footer. 

6i  j©ycfcruants;ofthe1Lo?b,blcflc 
ye  the  Ho?b :  p?aifc  anb  cralt  him  abouc 
all  fo?  cucr. 

63  £)pcfpmtsanbfoulcsoftf)cngl); 
teous.blclTc  ye  thc?Lo?b,  p?atfc  aub  w 
alt  him  abouc  all  fo?  cucr. 

64  4D  ye  ||  holy  anb  humble  men  of 
hcart,bieireyethc2Lo?b:  p?aifcanb  er> 


alt  him  abouc  all  fo?  cucr.  | 

65  £>3luanias,  Cartas,  anb££3t< 
fad,  blcOe  ye  the  !Lo?t),  p?au*canb 
cralt  Dim  abouc  all  fo?  cucr :  fo?  hce 
tjatrj  beliucr  eb  bs  from  ||  hell,  anb  taucb 
bs  from  the  hano  of  bear!) ,  anb  beltue- 
rcb  bs  out  of  the  mtos  of  the  furnace, 
[anb] burning  flame:  cuen  out  of  the 
nubs  of  the  fire  hath  he  beliucrcb  bs. 

66  jDgiuctl)anl$sbntofhc?Lo?b,be* 
taufchcts  gracious :  fo?  his  mcrcie  en- 
burcthfo?cucr. 

67  J© an ye  that  ttwflnp  the  ?Lo?b, 
bicflc  the  Gob  of  gobs,  p?aifc  him,  anb 
gtuc  htmthanKcs :  fo?  his  mcrcie  cnbu- 
rcthfb?eucr. 


at  The  hiftorie  of  Sufanna,  fct  apart  from 

the  beginning  of  Daniel,  becaufe  it  is  not  in  He- 
brew, as  neither  the  narration  of  t  Bel  and  the  Dragon. 


\6  Two  Iudges  hide  thetnfelues  in  the  garden 
of  Sufanna  tohaue  their pleafureot  her:  28 
which  when  they  could  not  obteine,  they  ac- 
cufe  and  caufe  her  to  be  condemned  for  adut- 
terie,  46  but  Daniel  examincih  the  matter  a- 
gaine,and  findeth  the  two  iudees  falfe. 

J^cre  blbelt  a  man  m 
Babylon ,  cailcb  3loa^ 
rim. 
z  3Jnb  hce  toouc  a 
,_„  (0  llnfe,  rbhofc  name  ibas 
35?^  Sufanna,  thtbaughtcr 
of  Chclcias,  abcry  fairc  iboman,  ano 
onethatfcaccbthe3Lo?b. 

j  l?er  parents  aifo  lucre  righteous, 
anb  taught  their  baughtcr  acco?bmg  to 
thdLa\bof03ofcs. 

4  floV)  3JJoaeim  luas  a  great  nth 
man ,  anb  hab  a  fairc  garben  iowing 
Unto  his  houfc ,  anb  to  him  rt fo?ttb 
the  Celtics :  becaufc  he  ibas  mo?c  ho- 
nourable then  all  others. 

5  1Lhc  fame  ycerc  llicre  appointcb 
tttio  of  the  Ancients  of  the  people  to  be 
uibgcs,futhasthcfLo?bfpaKcof,that 
ibicKcbncflc  came  from  Babylon  from 
aiuicntiubgcs.ibhofccmcbtogoucrnc 
the  people.- 

6  Xhcfc  Ucpt  much  at  3Joanms 
lioufc :  anb  ail  that  hab  any  fmts  m 
laibc,  tame  bnto  them. 


I  7  iBotbibhcn  the  people  beparteb 
aibay  at  noone,  £>ufanna  ibent  into 
her  huf  banbs  garben  to  IbalHe. 

8  2nb  the  nuo  fibers  farb  her  go- 
mgm  encry  bay  anb  rbaitnhg:  fo  that 
their  lufl  ibas  mflamco  toinarb  her. 

9  3nb  they  pcrucrtcb  their  orbne 
minb,anb  turncb  aibay  their  eyes,that 
j  they  might  not  looHcbnto  hcauen,  no? 
I  remember  mft  inbgcmcnts. 

10  3nbaibeit  they  both  lbcrelboun< 
ran  ibith  her  louc :  v^t  butft  not  one 
I  (hem  another  his  grtcfe. 

1 1  5Fo?  tljcy  ibcrc  afhamcb  to  bctiarc 
their  luft ,  that  they  befireb  to  haucto 
iboclbithher. 

u  J*ctthcy  inatthcb  btugently  from 
baytobaytofechcr. 

i}  3mb  the  one  faib  to  the  other,fUt 
. bsnott)  goc  home :  fo?  it  is  burner  time. 

14  S>o  ibhcn  they  ibcrc  gone  out, 
;  they  partco  the  one  froiti  the  othecanb 
turning  batltc  agamc  they  came  to  the 
fame  place,  anb  after  that  they  hab  a£ 
Ucb  one  another  the  caufc,  they  m 
Hnoiblcbgcb  their  luft :  then  appointcb 
they  a  tunc  both  together ,  ibljcn  they 
;  might  fiub  her  alone. 
j  15  Snbitfciioutasthcyinatchcba 
fit  nmc,  the  tticnt  in  t  asbefrne,  ibith 
tibo  maibs  oncly ,  anb  (he  ibas  beftrous 
to 


t  Gr,S.-h 
TiTdTpn. 


\  Gr.  4iye- 
flerdayand 
•he  day  be- 
fore. 


Apocrypha.  Sufanna. 


Apocrypha. 


OrfuU 
doorcs. 


to  ibatt)  Ijtc  fclfc  in  tlje  gatben :  fojit 
lbas  Dot. 

i6  3lnbtDereibasttobobytDercfaue 
tljc  tlbo  eiocts ,  tDat  Dab  Ijto  tDcnv 
felues,anb  u>atcf)c6  Der. 

17  Xljcn  fljcfaib  to  Ijet  matbS,2(52ing 
mcoilcanbibaftnngbals,  anb  Unit  tlje 
garbenboo2es,tDat  31  may  ibaftj  me. 

is  3inbtDeybtDasu)ebabtDcm,anb 
(Dut  tljc  garben  boosts ,  anb  went  out 
tDcmfelucs  at  ||  p2iuic  boosts  to  fctcD 
tDe  tDmgs  that  ftje  l)ab  comniaunbcb 
tDenr.but  tljcp  fatbnottDe€lbcrs,bc- 
canfetDeyibereDib. 

19  ifroibtbDcn  tDc  maibstberc  gone 
fo2tD,tDetibo  zibets  rofcbp,  anb  ran 
bnto  Dec,  faying, 

io  ascDoib ,  the  gatben  boojes  ate 
fl)ut,tt)atnomaneanfccbs,anbibeate 
in  loueibttD  tljcc :  therefore  tonfent  bn- 
to t»s,anb  lie  ibitDbs. 

21  3JftDou  unit  not,  ibclbtll bear c 
ibitncflc  agamft  tDce,tDat  a  y  oungman 
lbasibitD  tDec:  anb  tDcrcfiwc  tljoubibft 
fcnb  albay  tljy  matbes  frotn  tDce. 

11  XD?u  Sufanna  GgDcb  anb  faib, 
3  am  ftraiteb  on  encrv  Gbe :  foz  if  ^  doc 
tDts  tDing,it  is  beat!)  bnto  me :  anb  tf  % 
boe  it  not,  3  cannot  cfcape  pour  nanus. 

23  3Jt  is  better  fc>2  me  to  fall  tnto 
your  Danbs,anb  not  00c  tt.tljcn  to  fame 
mtl)c0g!)toftnc!Lo2b. 

24  ©it!)  tljat  Sufanna  cticbtbitt)  a 
loub  botce:anb  tt)e  tlbo  ClbcrS  eneb 
outagamfttjer. 

25  XDcntannetDconc,anbopcneb 
tDc  garben  D002C 

26  So  lbDen  iDc  fernants  of  tDe 
DoufeDearbthc  cncintDcgatDcn,  roe? 
rufljeb  m  at  a  pjiuie  0002c  to  fee  ibljat 
lbas  bone  bnto  ijcr. 

27  2Snt  ibften  tijc Clbcrs  tjabbccia- 
reb  tDcit  matter ,  tDc  (truants  were 
greatly  afl)ameb:fo2  there  lbas  neucr 
fucharcpo2tmabc  of  Sufanna. 

18  3mbitcametopalTctDcncrtbay, 
lbDentDc  people  lbctcaflcmblcb  to  bcr 
Duf  banb'Joactm.tDc  ttbo  Clbcrs  tame 
aifoftill  ofmifcnteuous  imagination  & 
gamtt  Sufanna  to  put  Der  to  bcatb, 

29  3mbfatbbcfo2C tlic people,  Scnb 
fo2  Sufanna,  tDe  Daughter  of  eijclcias, 
i  ijoanms  lbifc.  3lnD  fo  tbey  fent. 

jo  So  fbc  came  ttntD  Dec  fatDcr  anb 
motl)ec,l)cr  cl)ilb2cn  anb  all  Dec  ftmrcD. 

31  /i5otb  Sufanna  lbas  a  berybcii; 
catciboman  anb  beauteous  to  bcDolD. 

52  5lnb  tljcfe  VbicKeb  men  tomman- 
Debtobncouct  Ijcr  faccCfojweibastO' 


uereb)tl)at  tljcp  migljt  be  6Ucb  ibith  l;cr 
bcautie. 

33  XDercfo?e  Der  frienbs ,  anb  all 
tDat  faib  Der, ibept. 

34-  XDcntDc  nbo  eibcrsttoobbp 
in  tljc  nubs  of  the  people ,  anb  laib  tDcit 
Ijanbs  bpon  Ijcr  Oeab. 

35  3lnb  H)C  weeping  loottcb  bp  to 
ibarbsDcauen :  foj  Der  Deartttuftcbin 
tljc  JL02b. 

36  3inbt!)c£lDcrsfaib,:astbcibai< 
Rcbmtlje  garben  alone ,  tDts  Woman 
tame  m,witD  ttbo  maibcs,anb  fljut  tljc 
garben  boo2cs,  $  fent  ttjematbes  away. 

37  %\)t\\  a  young  man  WDo  there 
lbas  l)ib,  came  bnto  Der  9  lay  With  Der. 

38  XDenWctDatftoobinaco2nctof 
tDcgatbcn.fecmgtDiswicltebncflejran 
bntotDem. 

39  3nb  Wljen  We  faw  them  toge> 
tf)cr,  tljc  man  Wc  toulb  not  l)olb  :  fbz  Dc 
lbas  ftronger  then  ibe ,  anb  opencb  tl)c 
boo2C,anblcapcbout. 

40  25utl)auing  taucn  rtjis  iboman, 
tbcaffecblbHotDcyoungmanibasrbut 
fljeiboulbnot  tell  bs:  tljefetljmgsboc 
ttictcmfic. 

41  Xljctt  tftc  atTcmbly  belecucb 
tncm,as  tliofe  tDat  lberc  toe  fibers  anb 
3luogcs  of  tljc  people :  fotljey  tonbem- 
ncbljcrtobcatl). 

42  5Chcn  Sufanna  crieb  out  lbtrl)  a 
loub  boicc  anb  fatb :  jD  cucriaftmg  Goo 
tnatunoibcatljc  fctrcts,  anbftuoibclt 
alltljmpbtfo2ctheybc: 

43  Xnou  Unoibeft  ttjat  tihey  fianc 
b02nc  falfc  ttntneffe  agamft  me ,  anb  be- 
Dolb^l  muftbic :  ibDtrcas^ncucrbtb 
futntntngs ,  as  tDcfc  men  Ijauc  maliti 
ouOy  inucntcb  agamft  me. 

44  3nb  the  ILojb  Ijcarb  Dcr  boicc. 

45  Xl)crcfo2C\bl)cnft)Clbasicoto 
bt  put  to  ocatl) :  tlic  ?Lo2b  raifcb  bp  tbe 
Doly  fpint  of  a  young  youth,  ibljofc 
name  lbas  2>amcl,  ^ 

46  ©ho  crieb  ibitl)  a  loub  boicc  :3 
'amclcarefrotDc  bloob  oftliisiboman. 

47  Xhrn  all  tlic  people  mrncb 
tliem  toibarbs  Dim,?  faib :  lbDat  mcanc 
tijerc  ibo2bs  tDat  tliou  Daft  fpoheu  t 

48  So  De  daubing  in  tDc  mios  of 
tDem,tatb,QIre  ye  fucD  foolf  s  ye  fotmts 

:  of  3ifracl,tDatibitDout  crammatiou  02 

imolblcbgc  of  tDc  trurD,  ye  Dane  con 

bemncb  a  Daughter  of  Jfracl  < 

I    49  Kcmrnc  agamc  to  the  place  ot 

tiiDgcmmt :  fo:  thry  l>wc  bo:»c  lailc 

'lbitnclTeagainftDcr 

i    50  ©hcrcfojc  all  tDc  people  nirticc 

I  aciautc 


Apocrypha.      Bel  and  the  Dragon.      Apocrypha, 


ExoJ.  2: 


\Gr.Un- 
titketrec. 


with  the 
King. 


againc  m  baft.anb  tbc  €lDcrs  faiD  bnto 
bim ,  Come  Ot  Dottmc  among  bs,  anD 
fbeibit  ds  ,  fcemg  csod  batbgiuen  thee 
tbc  honour  of  an  ClDer. 

51  1CbcnfatD3>anielbntotbem(0ut 
tbcfc  tibo  atiDc  one  far  re  from  another,  I 
ant)  31  rbill  crammctbem. 

51  6>olbbcntbcyibcreputafunDcr 
one  from  another ,  bee  tallcD  one  of 
them,  anDfaiD  bnto  Dun,  £)tbon  that 
art  ibarcn  olD  tn  tbicbcDneffe :  noib  thy 
fmncs  tbbith  tbou  baft  committcD  a* 
fojenme,  are  tome  [to  light.  J 

53  foi  tbou  haft  pjonoutuco  faifc 
luDgcmcnt,  anD  baft  tonDcmneDthcuv 
notent,  ant)  Daft  let  tbeguiitte  got  free, 
albeit  tbc  Hotf)  faith ,  *  Xbe  tnnotent 
ano  ngbteotis  (l)alt  tbou  not  flap. 

54  jftolb  then tf  thou  haft  fecne her: 
tellmc^lnoct  lbbat  tree  farbeft  thou 
them  companymg  together j.  ibbo  an* 
finer  cd,  SLlnDcr  a  t  maftitbc  tree. 

55  2hiDS>anielfaiD,311erylbct;Xbon 
haft  Iiebagainft  thine  orbneheao.-fo? 
cttcn  noibtl)c3lngciof<©oD  batbretet* 
uetithc  fentenceof  <3oD ,  to  cut  thee  in 
Hbo. 

56  5>o  bee  put  himafiDe ,  ano  com? 
manbeDtobmigthe  other,  5  faiDbnto 
bun,  £>  thou  fccD  of  Cbanaan,  ano  not 
oHfuDa,  beauty  bath  DeceiueDtbce,auD 
luft  hath  peruccteo  thmc  heart. 

57  Xbus  haue  yec  beau  ibttb  the 


Daughters  of  gifracl,  anD  they  fc»  fear e 
compameD  ibith  you:  but  the  Daughter 
of  3iuDa  lboulD  not  abiDe  your  ttjic- 
HcDneffc. 

58  jlSoib  therefore  tell  mee,HnDer 
lbbat  tree  DiDft  thou  tafee  them  compa- 
nymg together*  ibbo  anftoereD,  ?tlnDer 
a  ||  holme  tree. 

59  1LhcnfaiDiDanieibntohim,i0cU: 
thou  haft  alfo  lien  againft  thine  otbne 
hcab  :  foj  the  3ngel  of  <E>od  ibaiteth 
ibith  the  froozD  to  cut  thee  in  nbo,  that 
bcmayDeftroyyou. 

60  naith  that  an  the  aflembly  crteb 
out  Ibith  a  lolbb  boicc,  anD  pjaifcD  <5oD 
ibbo  faueth  them  that  truft  m  him. 

6i  3lnD  thev  arofe  agamft  the  tlbo 
€lDcrs,  (f02  3Daniel  haD  conuictcD  them 
of  faifc  ibitncffe  by  their  oibne  mouth) 

61  3nb  actojDing  to  the  lLarb  of 
QSofes,  they  biD  bnto  tbeminrutbfotf 
as  thev  *malittouHy  mtcnDeb  to  Doe  to 
their  neighbour:  3lnD  they  put  them  to 
Death.  Xhus  the  innocent  blooD  ibas 
faucD  the  fame  bap. 

63  IberefozcChelciasanDbisttHfc 
p?aifcD(25oDfoj  their  Daughter  £mfan> 
na,ibith3Joatunber  bufbatiD,  anDall 
the  BinreD:  becaufc  there  Ibas  no  mfljo- 
ueftiefounDmher. 

64  from  that  bay  foonb  ibas  S>a; 
nicl  haD  in  great  reputation  m  the  fight 
of  the  people. 


«|The  hiftory  of  the  deftruclnon  of j  Bel 

and  che  Dragon,cut  off  from  the  end  of  Daniel . 


\\Or,kinit 

cfoxkt. 


j  The  fraud  ol  Bels  Priefts,is  difcoue red  by  Da- 
niel, 17  and  the  Di  agon  ilaine,  which  was 
woilhippcd.  33  Daniel  is  preferued  in  the 
Lions  denne.  41  The  King  doeth  acknow- 
ledge the  God  ot  Daniel  ,  and  cafteth  his 
enemies  into  the  fame  denne. 

43d  iamg  3lftvagcs 
ibas  gatbcrcD  to  bis 
fathers,  atiDCymsof 
pcrfta  receiucD  bis 
tungoomc. 

z  3tnD£>auicl||cou^ 
ucrfeb  ibith  tbc  bmg, 

anb  Ibas  bonojeo  about  all  bis  fnenos. 
3   jftoib  the  ffiaby  Ion  urns  hao  an 

3JDolcaileD25cl,anD  tljcreVberc  fpent 


"  Dcut.  19 
1  9-prou. 


\Gr."Bc!s 
Dragon. 


bpon  him  cucry  Day  tibelue  great 
meafurcs  of  fine  floibje ,  anD  fourtie 
fbeepe,  ano  fire  beffcls  of  ibmc. 

4.  3nD  the  lung  ibonlnppeD  it,  anD 
lbcnt  Daily  to  abojc  it :  but  S>antel  Uw- 
fliippcD  his  olDne  <5oD.  3lnD  the  lung 
faiD  bnto  bun ,tt)hy  Doett  not  thou  Ibo^ 
fbip25eu 

5  tt3bc  anfrocreb  anD  faiD,  26ccanfc 
3  may  not  lbonlnp  iDols  maDe  ibith 
banDs ,  but  tbc  liumgGot) ,  ibho  hath 
creattDtbc  bcauett,  auDthcearth,anD 
hatl)  fourraigntic  oucr  all  flefb. 

<5  Xhcn  faiDc  the  Binct  unto  bun, 
1EbmUc(t  tbou  not  that  26el  is  a  \v 
tunggoD^  fcctttljou  not  boib  much  be 

eateth 


Apocrypha.        Bel  and  the  Dragon.      Apocrypha. 


Eccius.30 


eatcth  anb  fijinUet!)  currpaapi 
7   XbenS>amelfmileD,anbfatb,£> 

Utug.be  not  DcccturD :  fo:  tins  is  but  da? 

lb  it  inn ,  ant>  b; arte  lDith  our ,  an 0  did  tie- 

uec  *  cate  0?  DjinKc  am;  thing. 
S    &o  the  femg  lbas  Uuotl),  ano  cat 

leb  ftw  his02iefts ,  anb  fato  Unto  them, 

3f  p ee  tell  me  not  lbhothtsis  that  be; 

uouceth  thtfeejcpenfcs.pefballDte. 

9  aSuttf  pe  tan  tecttflc  me  that  25el 
beuourcththctn,then  Daniel  (hall  Die : 
fojhechathfpoKen  biafphemie  agatnft 
25eL  anb  Daniel  Capo  bnto  the  Umg, 
?Let  it  be  aecojbf  ng  to  thp  ttwb. 

10  ( /Botbthe  $2icfts  of  Z5et  tbcte 
th2eefco2e  anb  tenne ,  bcQbe  that  lbiues 
anb  chtlbjen)  ano  the  King  ibent  ibuh 
Daniel  into  the  temple  of  asel. 

1 1  &tt  ffielfi  #jiefls  fail) ,  Hoe,  tbee 
goeottt:  but  thou,  £>King ,  fcton  the 
tneate,  ano  maKe  teabpthe  tbine ,  anb 
Chntthe  booje  faft,  anb  feale  it  tbirt) 
thine  oTbneOgnct: 

i%  anbtoniojrotb,ibhenthoucom* 
mefl  m,  if  thou  finbett  not  that  26el  hath 
eaten  top  all ,  Sbee  null  furtet  beath ;  0; 
elfe  Daniel,  that  fpca&eth  faifelp  a* 


ij  anb  thep  little  tegatbeb  it :  fo? 
bnbet  the  table  thep  hats  maue  a  pjutic 
enttame ,  tbhetcbp  thep  cntreb  in  ton- 
tmuaup,anbcmitomcDthofethtngs. 

14.  &o  tbhen  thep  tbere  gone  fo2fh, 
the  King  fct  meatcs  befoje  Set.  jftotb 
Darnel  has  tommanbcb  hts  fctuants 
to  bang  att)cs,  snbthofethep  fttetbeb 
throughout  all  the  temple ,  in  the  pie- 
feme  of  the  King  alone:  then  ibent  the? 
outanb  Omtthc  booie,  9  fealebittbith 
the  fttngsCtgnet,anbfobepattcb. 

1$  Sorbin  the  night  came  the  £2ictts 
mitt)  their  tbtues  anbchub2en(asthcp 
tbere  tboant  to  boe)  anb  bib  eate  anb 
omiftebpail. 

16  3n  the  moaning  betime  the  King 
arofe,  anb  Daniel  ibith  bun. 

17  anbtheKtngfaib,Damcl,arctbe 
feaiesibbolc*  anb  he  ratb,JJca,£>  King, 

rhepbetbhole. 

is  anbaiTooneashchabopencbthc 
boo?e,  the  King  lootecb  bpon  the  table, 
anberiebtttith aloubebtuce,  ©reatart 
thou,  £)26el,  anb  ttnth  thee  is  no  Deceit 

at  alt  .     fc__ 

19  XheniaughebDaniei,anbhcibc 

theKtngthatbc  fbouibnotgoein,anb 
tavb ,  scholDnotbtbepaucment,  anb 
marKeujenibhofcfootfrepsaretbefe. 
io  anb  the  King  raib,3Jfeerhefoot^ 


tteps  of  men,  lbomcn  anb  thiltyen :  anb 
tljen  the  King  ibasangcp, 

ii  ^nb  toofte  the  £2ieQs,  Tbtth  their 
lbiues  anb  cljilGzen ,  mho  fhetDeD  him 
the  p2iup  boo?es,  tbhere  thep  came  tn. 
ano  conmmcb  futh  things  as  ibere bp- 
on the  table. 

11  Xhercfoe  the  Ring  fleVbe  them, 
anb  belmcreb  ~&t\  into  Daniels  poibec, 
lbho  befrcopeb  him  anbhis  temple. 

2}  ||  ^nb  in  that  fame  plate  there 
tbas  a  great  D2agon ,  tbhtch  thep  of 
25abplonibo2fl)ippcb. 

14.  anb  the  King  faibbnto  Daniel, 
tout  thou  alfo  fap  that  this  is  of  b;afTc  ; 
loe ,  he  Uuetb,  he  eatcth  anb  DjtnKcth, 
ti)ou  cantt  not  fap ,  that  he  is  no  liuing 
d&oD :  therefcuc  lb02iT)tp  hurt. 

15  XhenfaiD  SDanicl  bnto  the  King, 
IJibill  njojfbipthc  iLoiDmp  ©ob:  fo2 
heigthehumg(5oo. 

16  25ut  gme  me  leaue ,  £>  hing,  anb 
5  0)311  nap  this  b2agon  ibithout  fraojb 
02  Qaffe.  Xrjc  King  fapbe,  3  gme  thee 
leaue. 

17  Chen  SDanicl  tooKc  pitth ,  fat, 
anb  hatre,  anb  tun  feethe  thcmtogt> 
ther,  anb  mabe  lumpes  thereof:  tl)is 
hecput  m  the  2>2agons  mouth,  anbfo 
the  £>2agon  butft  in  funber :  anb  £Da* 
nteltaib,  ||  ILoe.thcfcarethcgobs  pou 

tt)02(hip. 

2S  wtytn  thep  of  2Sabplon  fjcarb  I 
that,thcptooKegreatmbignauon,anb| 
tonfptrcbagamtttheKmg,£aping,  Xhc 
Kmgtsbetomc  a  ^tvo ,  anb  he  hath  be= 
Oropcb25cl,hehath  flame  the SDjagon, 
anbputthe$2icftstobeath. 

29  5>o  thep  tame  to  the  King,  anb 
faib,SDeliuerbs2Daniel,  02elfeibelbill 
beflrop  thee  anb  thme  houfc. 

jo  /Botb  lbhen  the  King  fatbe  that 
thep  p2Cffeb  him  fo2e,bcingtonflraineb, 
he  *  belmereb  Daniel  bnto  them : 

31  UDho  tafl  htm  into  tl;c  lions  ben, 
tbhrrehe  ibagfirebapes. 

31  anb  in  the  ben  there  ibere  feucn 
Ipons.anb  thep  hab  gmen  them  cucrp 
bap  ||  tibo  tarKeifes,  anb  nbo  (l)eepc: 
tbhich  tljen  Tbere  not  giuen  to  them, 
to  the  intent  thep  might  ocuoure  Da- 
niel. 

33  jBotb  there tbas  in  'Jurp  a\£»o= 
phct  calico  V)abacuc ,  ibho  hab  i|maoe 
pottage ,  «hab  b20Kcn  b;tao  m  a  boule, 
anb  Tbas  going  into  the  ficlb,  fo2  to 
b2ingtt  to  the  reapers. 

34.  ffiut  the  angel  of  the  H02bfaib 
bnto^abacut,  ©oerarnethc  Dinner 
Pppp  that 


1 1  Same  addc 
thn  title;  Of 


\Or,BtU'J 


tvetjbtp. 


•Dan.tf.itf. 


\Or,faddc. 


Apocrypha.      Manafles  his  prayer.      Apocrypha. 


•Eitfc.8.?. 


*  !  King. 
17.4. 


that  thou  Daft  into  iSabylon  bnto  Spa- 
niel, lbljo  ism  the  lionsbcnne. 

35  3tnt»  l?abacuc  faib ,  %aito ,  3  n& 
iter  lain  25abylon :  neither  60  3  6t»otd 
rbhcrcthcbcnncts. 

S6  iLnen  the  3lngcl  of  the  ILmn 
tooKehiinbythetrotbtt,atib*barchim 
by  the  ftatre  of  i)is  hcab,  anu  tliiougl) 
the  toehemencic  of  his  fpi  w ,  fct  him  in 
26abylott  otter  the  bctt. 

37  3itibfi?abatuccrycb,  faying,  3D 
Daniel,  Daniel,*  taUcthcbutnccibhuh 
(Sob  hath  fent  thee. 

38  3tnt>  Daniel  fatbe,  ITljon  haft 
remctntacb  nice,  £D  <Sf  5SD  £>:  ncttftcr 
haft  thou  fo?fahcn  them  that  fccUc 


thee ,  ant)  louc  thee. 

39  5>o  Daniel  atofc  anb  tub  eatc : 
ana  the  2mgclof  thcJLojbfct  ^abatuc 
m  his  oibne  plate  agatne  tmmcbiatly . 

40  51pon  tilt  fcucntl;  bap  the  lung 
Vbcnt  to  benmilc  Daniel:  anb  When  he 
tatnc  to  tl)e  ben,  he  loofccb  in ,  anu  be- 
holb,  Daniel  Urns  fitting. 

41  Xhcncciebthelung*bithalou& 
boyce .faying,  <5rcat  art  thou,  si)  H02D 
GobofDamcl.anbthcrets none  other 
befibesthec. 

41  *3tnbl)tb2clDhimont:anbtaft 
tliofc  that  lucre  tlje  taufc  of  Ijjts  beftrur 
ttontuto  the  ben:  anb  they  Were  bcuotr 
cebnta  moment  befoje  his  face. 


PfH 


mm 


€([  The  prayer  of  Manafles  King  of  Iuda 

whenhewas  holden  capciue  in  Babylon. 


\\Ortneither 
breath. 


ILojb ,  3iimiglmc  cob  of  one  fathers ,  Sltyaham,  JCaac, 
anb  Jacob,  anb  of  their  righteous  feeb :  itoho  haft  mabe  hca* 
uen  anb  earth,  ^»th  all  the  ornament  thereof :  mho  haft 
bounb  the  £>caby  the  ibojb  of  thy  Conuuanbemcnt :  tbho 
haft  flint  up  the  beepe ,  anb  fcaicb  it  by  thy  terrible  anb  glo- 
rious jftainc,  luhomc  all  men  fearc,  anbtrcmblc  before  thy 
poluer:  fo;  thes33atcftic  of  thy  giozytannot  bee  borne,  anb 
thine  angry  thzcatnutgtolbarbsfinncrs  is  importable:  but 
thyincrctfullp2omircts»nnicafurablcanbbnfcarchabIc:fo2 
thouart  the  moftftighlLoib,  of  great  compaffion,longfuffering,bcrymcrrifnll, 
anb  repented  of  the  cutis  of  men.  Xhou,  £>  %oft,  accozbmg  to  thy  great  goob- 
neffe  haft  pjonufeb  repentance,  anb  fozgnicncfle  to  them  that  hauc  fmucbagamft 
thee :  anb  of  thine  infinite  mercies  haft  appointtb  repentance  bnto  fmntrsthat 
theymaybefaucb.  Xhou  therefore,  4>  ?Lo?b,  that  art  the  <5obof  the  raft,  haft 
not  appointcb  repentance  to  the  mft,as  to  3tb;aham,anb  3?faac,anb  3Jacob,U>hich 
haucnotfinneb  againftthce :  butthotthaftappottttcb  repentance  bnto  me  that  am 
afinncr :  foj  3  haucfumcb  abouc  the  number  of  thefaubs  of  the  £>ca.  £J5y  tranf 
grefftons,  £)JLo2b,arcmnltiplicb:  my  tranfgrcflionsarcmultlpltcb,  anb  Jam 
not  toonhy  to  bcholb  anb  fee  the  height  of  hcaucn,foj  the  nuiltittibe  of  mute  mts 
quitic.  3  am  bolbcb  bomne  ibith  many  yjon  banbs,  that  3  cannot  lift  bp  mine 
heabjlncithcrhaucanyrclcafc:  fozj  hauc  pjouoftcb  thy  in?ath,  anbbonccmll 
bcfo:e  thee,  3  btb  not  thy  ttnll,  neither  uept  3  thy  Commaubcments :  3  bauc  fet 
bp  abominations,  anb  hauenutmplicb  offences.  4l3oiu  therefore  3  boib  the  fence 
of  mute  heart,  befecchmg  thee  of  grace:  3  haucfinttcb,$D1Lo2b,  3  haucfinneb, 
anb  3  ariutoiulcbgc  nunc  tmauittcs :  therefore  3,  humbly  befceth  thee,  fojgiue 
me,  i>  %o  jb,fo?gutc  itic,  anb  beftr  oy  me  not  ttnth  mine  iniquities.  28c  not  angry 
tbith  me  foz  eucr,  by  rcfcniiugcuill  forme,  neither  conbcmuc nice  into  tljelolbcr 
parts  of  the  earth.  5ro2thouartthc<5ob,eucnthe<5ooofthemthatrepent:anb 
m  me  thou  Unit  flitlli  all  thy  goobnefle :  for  thouttnlt  fane  me  thatam  bttlborthy, 
I  atcorbutg  to  thy  great  mcrcie.  ^therefore  3  will  pratfc  thee  fo?  eucr  all  the  bayes 
of  my  ufc :  fo;  all  the  poibers  of  tl)c  hcauens  bocpraifc  thec,  anb  thrae  is  tlje  glory 
foi  eucr  anb  titer,  bitten. 

«)Thc 


*Ier.  37.17 


Apocrypha. 


Chap. 


p.j. 


Apocrypha. 


g  Or,  Che 
tbum. 


^f  The  iirlcbooke  of  the  Maccabees. 


\\Or,h, 

heart  tf-tf 
exulted  and. 
Uftedxy. 

\\Or,hi»g- 
domes  which 
became  &c, 

X  Cjre  that 
he  dietb. 


CHAP.    I. 

4  Ar,ciochuse;aiicleaue  tofetvpthe  fjfhions 
ot  the  Gentiles  m  Hierufjlem,  ti  And  (pol- 
led ic,&  the  temple  in  it,  57  Andfctvpthenn 
the  abomination  otdelolation,  6>,  And  flew 
thofe  that  did  circumcife  theii  children. 

#D  it  happeneb, 
after  that  3Ucpi 
anbet  fonttc  of 
0biup,the£Pace* 
boman,\bhotamel 
out  of  the  lano  of 
il  Chettiim,  hao 
[mitten  2>attus| 
iungofthei&cru'i 

ansanb£Pcocs,thathccretgnebtnhts| 

ftcab,thcfirtr  ouct  Greece, 
1  3lnb  mabc  many  mars ,  anb  man  I 

many  ftrongholDs.anb  ftclb  thctungs 

of  the  earth, 
j  3nb  ibent  through  to  the  enbs  of 

the  earth  ,  ano  ioobc  fpoiles  of  many 

nations,infomuth,  that  thceatth  was 

quiet  befo:c  hint,  ibhcccttpon  ||  he  ibas 

cjraiteb,anbhtshcartibasliftebbp. 
4.  ^nbhcgathetcbaimghtyftcong 

hottc,anbtuleooucccountrics,anona; 

ttonsanb  ||  lungs,  lbho  became  tcibuta* 

ricsbntohun. 
5  ^noaftcrthercthmgshcfellficttc, 

anb  permucb  t  that  he  fhoitlb  me. 
e   tBhercfoKhccallcbhisfcruants, 

futh  as  mere  honontabic ,  ano  hab  but 

brought  bp  ibith  htm  from  his  youth, 

anbpartcbKistungbomcamottgthcm, 

tbhUchclbasyctauuc: 

7  &o  3lcranbcr  rcigneb  cruelwc 
yccrcs,anb(thcn)bicb. 

8  3tnb  his  feruants  bare  rule  cuerr 
one  m  his  plate. 

9  Ztto  after  his  beat!)  the?  all  put 
troibncs[bponthemfclnes]ro  bib  their 
fonncs  after  them,  manyyectcs,  anbe* 
ufls  Were  mnltiplieb  in  the  earth. 

10  3tnb  there  came  out  of  them  a  tbit- 
feebroote,  antiothus  rfurnanicb]€pt^ 
prjancs ,  fonne  of  3$nttochus  thching, 
ibho  hab  becne  an  hoftage  at  ftomc, 
anb  he  rcigneb  in  the  buntycth  anb  tin 


tp  attbfettcnth  ycetc  of  the  fctngbomc  of 
thc<3reckcs. 

11  3Jn  tljofe  baiesibcnt  there  out  of 
3Jfrael  ibtcKcb  men ,  idIjjo  perfroabcb 
many,  faving.llct  bsgoe,anbntaHca 
toucnant  ibttl)  the  heathen ,  that  arc 
rounb  about  bs  :  fojfincc  lbcbcuarteb 
from  thcm,nbchaue  hab  much  fojeoib. 

u  &o  this  bcmfcplcafeo  them  lbell. 

ij  IThcneertameofthepcopIclbcrc 
i  fo  fortbarb  heceem ,  that  they  ibent  to 
thebtng,  ibhogauc  themlicentctoboc 
after  thcojbmanccs  of  the  heathen. 

14.  ©hereupon  ||thcybmltapiateof 
crerctfe  at  gjcrufaicnt ,  accojbutg  to  the 
tuflomes  of  the  heathen, 

15  3lnbniabethcmfclucs,  bncirtum- 
tifeb,  anb  fojfooKc  the  holy  toucnant, 
anbioyneo  themfclucs  to  the  heathen, 
anb  iberefoibto  boc  mtfthicfe. 

i6  ji5oib  lbhcn  the  feingbome  Ibas 
cftablilhcb  ,  before  3ntiochus ,  hee 
thought  to  rctgne  otter  €gypt,  that  he 
might  hauc  p  bommion  ottibo  realms: 

17  ttMicrcfojehcentrcbtntoegypt 
ibith  a  great  multitube,  ibitlnhartots, 
anb  elephants,  anb  hotfemen ,  anb  a 
great  nauic, 

18  3nb  mabc  rbarrc  againft  $tolo> 
mec  hmg  of  €gj»pt,  but  ptolomcc  ibas 
afraibe  of  htm,aub  flcb:anb  many  ibetc 
jibouitbcotooeath. 

19  Xhusthcygotthcftrongetticsin 
the  lanb  of  egypt,  anb  hee  toofcc  the 
ifpoties  thereof. 

20  3lnb  after  that  3Jntiothus  hab 
ifimtten  <£gypt,  he  rcturncb  agatnc  in 
the  hunb  icth  fojtie  anb  thirb  ycerc,anb 
ibent  bp  againft  3Jfracl  anb  Jerufa^ 
lem  ibith  a  great  multitube, 

2i  3inbcntrcb  pjottbly  into  the  fanc< 
tuarie ,  anb  tooftc  aibay  the  golbcn  al- 
tar ,anbthc  tanblcftitHe  oflight,  anb  all 
the  bcflcls  thereof, 

21  sttibthc  table  of  the  fhelbtycab, 
anb  the  poibmig  bcflcls,  atib  the  biais, 
anb  the  tenfers  of  golb ,  ?  the  bailc,anb 
the  crottmes,  ?thc  golbcn  ornaments 
that  ibere  brfo.ic  the  temple,!; all  ibljich 
hepulleboff. 

I yyyy  2 n  ^e 


f  Gre.ma.xy 

ttuhhjuc 
found  vr, 


\\Or,fftvp 
An  open 
fchoole  tfh- 

tJiUta, 


\\OrJirpii. 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha.! 


\Gr.Jlfire- 

atle. 


23  l?cetoobealfo  the  filuet  anb  tlic 
golb,  anb  the*  pactions  bcftcis:  alfohc 
tooftc  the  hibbcn  trcafurcs  which  hee 
fount) : 

24  anb  When  Dec  hab  taum  all  a 
ibay ,  l)c  Went  into  his  0  wne  lanb ,  ha- 
umg  titanc  a  great  matTaetc ,  anbfpo- 
Ucnbcryp20ubly. 

25  Xhcrfo2Cthrrcwasgrcatmour' 
mug  m  Ifrimx ,  in  cucry  place  Where 
tljcyWcrc 

26  £>o  that  the  02inccsanb€lbcrs 
motirncb,  the  birgmes  anbyong  men 
Were  mabc  feeble,  anb  the  bcautie  of 
Women  was  thangeb. 

27  eucty  bjibcgromc  toouc  bp  la* 
mcntation.anb  (he  that  fate  m  tDc  mar 
rtage  chamber  .Wasinhcaumcfrc. 

28  Xljc lanb alfo  Was mouctj  foj the 
inhabitants  thereof ,  anb  ailthchoufc 
of  3facob  was  coucrcb  With  tonfufion. 

29  anb  after  two  ycercs  fully  crpi 
r cb,  the  Ring feutljtschicfccollcctoiir  of 
tribute  bnto  the  cities  of  3Juba ,  Who 
tame  bnto  "Jerufalcm  JWtj)  a  great 
multitubc, 

30  anbfpaucpcatcablcwojbcsbn 
to  them,  but  Tail  Was]  bctcu :  fo2  When 
they  hab  giucu  him  crcbcncchc  fell  fub- 
bcnlybpon  the  citte,  anb  fmote  itbcry 
fo2C,*bcfiroycb  much  people  of  ^jfracl. 

31  anb  when  hec  hab  taken  the 
fpoilesofthccmc,hcefetttonfire,anb 
puiieb  bownc  the  houfes,  anb  wanes 
thereof  on  cucry  fibe. 

32  asutthc  Women  *chtlb2cutooKc 
rtjcycapnuc.anbpofrcfrcbthccattell. 

33  Xhcnbuilbcb  they  the  ntie  of  Da 
tub  until  a  great  anb  ftrong  mall,  fanb  I 
With  nughttc  towers,  anb  mabc  it  a 
ftrong  holbfoj  them, 

34  anb  they  put  therein  afmfullna 
tion,Wicucb  men,  anb  fo2tificb  [them 
fclucs]  therein. 

35  Xhcy  fto2Cb  it  alfo  With  armour 
anb  bictuais,anb  When  thev  hab  gathc 
reb  together  thcfpoilcs  of  Jcrttfalcm, 
thev  layb  them  bp  there,  anb  fo  they  be 
camcafojcfnare: 

36  f  02  it  was  a  plate  to  item  wait  a 
gamftthc  Sanctuary ,  anb  an  cutliab 
ucrfaryto3ifracl. 

37  Xhus  rtin?  (heb  itmotent  bloob 
on  cucry  fibe  of  the  Sanctuary ,  anb  be 
filcbit. 

3s  3In  fo  much  that  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerufalcm  flcmc  becaufc  of  thnn, 
whereupon  [the  citte]  was  mabc  anha< 
bltation  of  ftrangcrs,?  became  Irrange 


to  thofc  that  mere  borne  m  her  ,anb  her 
oWncchUbzen  left  her: 

39  i?cr  !§>attctuary  was  laib  wafte 
liKcaWilberncffc,  her  feafts  Were  tur- 
neb  into  mourning,  her  Sabbaths  into 
rcp:och,her  honour  into  contempt. 

40  as  hab  bene  her  glozy ,  fo  was 
her  bifljonout  entrcafeb ,  anb  her  creel- 
lencic  was  tttrneb  into  mourning. 

41  :6£)o2couerlungantiochusW2ote 
to  his  whole  umgbomc ,  that  all  fhoulb 
be  one  people, 

42  anb  cucry  one  fljoulb  leaue  his 
lames :  fo  all  the  heathen  agrccb ,  accoj- 
bing  to  the  tommanbement  of  the  lung. 

43  J'ea  many  alfo  of  thcgjfraelitcs 
confeutcb  to  Ijis  religion ,  anb  faenfieeb 
bnto  ibols,  anb  ptopljancb  the  £>afr 
bath- 

44  iro:  the  Ring  hab  Cent  letters  by 
meCTcngers  bnto  3lcrufalcni,anb  then 
tics  of  3JtiDa,  that  they  fhoulb  foiiolb 
1 1  tljc  ftrange  laibes  of  the  lanb, 

45  anb  fozbtb  burnt  offerings, ana 
facrtfiec ,  anb  bjinlte  offerings  in  the 
temple  •  anb  that  they  fhoulb  piopljanc 
thcsabbathsanbfcfhualibayes : 

46  ^nb  pollute  the  5>aitrtttaric  anb 
Ijoly  people: 

47  £>ctbp  altars,  anb  grouts,  anb 
chappels  of  ibols ,  anb  facrtfiec  frames 
flefh.anbbncleane  bcafts: 

4S  Xhatthcyfhoulbalfo  leaue  their 
chtlb2cn  bnctrcumcifrb ,  anb  mabc  their 
foules  abominable  With  all  mancr  of 
bnclcannefre,anbp2ophanation : 

49  Xothecnb  they  might  fojgct  the 
?Laib,anb  thangc  all  the  omittances. 

5=>  anb  ibhofocucr  iboulb  not  boc 
acco2bmgto  the  tommanbement  of  the 
bing  [  hefaibl  he  fljoulbbie. 

51  "Jn  the  felfc  fame  manec  lb20tc  he 
to  Ijts  lbholc  Umgbomc,  anb  appomtcb 
oncrfecrs  oner  all  the  people,  tomman- 
bmg  the  cities  of  ]Juba  to  facnficc,cttie 
bp  citie. 

51  3Chcn  many  of  the  people  tberc 
gathereb  bnto  them,  to  Vbit.eucry  one 
that  fo2fooUe  tljc  Haibc ,  anb  fo  they 
commit  teb  euils  in  the  lanb : 

53  pnbbjouc  the  gifraciites  mto  fe- 
rret places ,  eucn  ibhcrctbeuec  tljcy 
couIbflicfo2htccour. 

5+  laoib  the  fifteenth  bay  of  the  mo* 
net!)  Caftctt ,  m  the  hunb2cth  fournc 
anb  fifty ecrc ,  they  fct  bp  thcabomma^ 
tion  of  bcfoiation  bpon  the  aitar,  anb 
builbrb  ibolc  altars  tluoughout  thcci? 
tics  of  Jluba,  on  eucrv  fibe: 

55  anb 


'fOr.lh 

IfXtS  AV.I 

rttei  of  the 
jrringrrl  ef 
the  Lr.l. 


|(  Or,  mi 
they  made 
IJrtul  lade 

thcmfelutl 
ir.  hotel  jn 
rHe*y  place 
vfJHCCCvr. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch 


a 


p.i], 


Apocrypha. 


\Gr.the 

fy'IJt   (3  71- 

mitdemtnt 
an:  him  to 

AeAtb. 


\  Cr.  that 
bad  circuit  - 
rtfed  their 

children. 


\Or,AfA!- 

ratbiaitbe 

fan  of  lob  "J, 
ifrC,  Arsfe 
from  Iertt- 
f.tltm.oroxt 
*f!ertt[alem. 
\\Or,Jvbo 
7vm  culled  : 
And  fo  After ■ 
tArdtnthe 

4-  , 


\\Or,Au.l- 
ron,  cr  *s£- 


55  3ltib  burnt  intenfc  at  the  boozes 
oftbcirboufcs,anbintbeftrcctes. 

56  3Juo  ttJbcn  they  baa  rent  in  pie 
cestbebooctcsofthcjUibclbbtcbtbey 
founo  ,  they  bucnttbemibitb  fire. 

57  anb  tt)beccfocucr  Vbas  founo 
\bitb  any,  tbeboo&e  of  the  Xcttament, 
02  tf  any  coufentcb  to  the  Havuc,  ttbc 
lungs  commanocment  tt)as,  that  tbey 
(bouioputbimtobcatb. 

58  Xbus  bio  trjcpbp  their  autbonry, 
Unto  the  "Jfcacutcs  cuccy  monetb,  to 
as  man?  as  Vber  e  founb  m  the  cities. 

59  /liotbtbefitteanbtrbcntietboay 
oftheinoncth,  tbcybib  fattificcbpon 
the  ibolc  attar  ,lbbich  toas  bpon  the  3f  l- 
tar  of  (5ob. 

60  at  tbbich  time ,  acwbingto  the 
comuiaiibement ,  tljrp  put  to  Death  tcr- 
tamc  Vbomen  t  that  hao  taufeb  their 
chtttwn  to  be  ctrcumcifco. 

6i  ano  tbey  hangcb  the  infants  a= 
bout  tbcitnccfccs ,  anbrifleb  their  Don- 
fes,  anodeinc  then;  that  habcirtumn^ 
feb  them, 

6i  ^otbbcit,  many  in  3Jfrael  Vbcrc 
fully  rcfolucb  anb  eonfirmeb  tn  them- 
femes,  not  to  cate  any  bnclcanc  thing. 

6j  n9bctfo2ctbcycboferatbcttoDic, 
that  tbey  might  not  be  Dcfilco  liutl) 
meats,  anb  that  the?  might  not  p:ofanc 
the  holy  Coucnant :  So  then  tbey  bicb. 

64  ano  there  was  bcry  great  ityatb 
bpon  3Jfcacl. 

CHAP."  II. 

6  Mattathias  lamenteth  the  cafe  of  Ierufalem. 
:+  He  flayeth a lewe  that  did  facrifice  to  I- 
dolesinhis  prefence,  andtheKincsmefTen- 
ecralfo.  34  Heandhisareaffailed  vpon  the 
Sabbath,  and  make  no  refinance.  5°  Hee 
dieih,andinftruclethhisfons:  66  andma- 
kcth  their  brother  ludas  Maccabeus  general!. 

/^thofcbaicsllarofc^at^ 
tathtast!jcfonof3iohn, 
the  foimc  of  Simeon,  a 
^ztc(toftliefonncsof3Jo= 
anb,from3icrufalem,anb 

orbclt  in  £0obm.  ^ 

i  anbbcbabfiuefonnes,3ioanuan 

UcailebiiCabbis: 
j   Sanon.taUcDXhaffi: 

4  giubas ,  n>bo  ibas  taileb  tpacca^ 

bcus :  _ 

5  cica^aaailcb'iauaran.anb^o; 
nathanAbhofcfiirnaincibas^ppfius. 

6  anb  mm  Dec  faro  the  blafpbc; 
mtcs  that  iberc  commttteb  m  Jtioa 
anb^Jcrufalcm, 


7  l?cfato,i©ocisme,U)herfo;cibas 
3  bometofccthisnufcryofmy  people, 
anb  of  the  boly  htie,ano  to  oibcli  there, 
iDbcn  mbas  bcliuereb  mtotheljanbof 
the  cncimcanb  the  Sanctuary  into  the 
banb  of  urangcrs; 

8  ^erXemplciSbecomcasaman 
Uutbout  glozy. 

9  i»?cc  glo;tous  tocfTcls  arc  cancb  a- 
ibay  into  captiuitic ,  her  infants  arc 
flaincittthefrceets,  bcryongmcnibitb 
thefttjozbofthcencmie. 

10  oahat  nation  hath  not  hab  a  part 
in  her  amgbome,  anb  gotten  of  her 
fpotlcs; 

11  ail  her  ornaments  arctaftcn  a- 
Uiay ,  of  a  free  -  Uiotnan  fl)cc  is  become 
abonbQaue. 

11  Tint)  bcholb,  our  ||  Sanctuane, 
euttt  oucbeatmc,  aub  our  glozy  is  laib 
Vbafte,  <i  the  ©ennics  hauc  pjofancb  it. 

ij  %o  rbhat  enbe  therefore  (ban  rbc 
liuc  any  longer; 

14  Xhen  £0attathias  anb  his  fons 
rent  their  clothes,  anb  put  on  facUclorb, 
anbmournebbcryfoje. 

15  3Jnthcmcanc  rbhilc the atngs of- 
ficers, fuch  as  compcllcb  the  people  to 
reuolt,  came  into  the  nty  93obm  to 
mane  them  faenfirc. 

i6  3lnb  lbhcn  many  of  Jfracl  came 
tonto  them,  tT3attath:as  alfo  anb  Ijts 
fonncs  came  together. 

17  Xbcn  aufiocreb  tlje  feings  offi- 
cers, anb  fatb  to  fiJ3attati)ias  on  tins 
rbife;  Xbou  art  a  ruler,  anb  an  honou- 
rable anb  great  man  in  this  ntic,  anb 
ftcengtbcticbibitbfonsanbbmhicn: 

18  floVo  therefore  come  thou  firft 
anb  fulfill  the  lungs  commanbcmmt, 
llBC  as  all  the  heathen  haue  bone  yea 
anbtlje  men  of  "Juoa  alfo,  ano  fuch  as 
rcmainc  at  ^crufalcm :  fo  (halt  thou 
ano  thmc  hotifc  be  m  the  number  of  the 
mugs  fcienbs,  anb  thou  anb  thy  thil 
bjcntbailbcbonourcbUntb  filucr,  anb 
golbc,  anb  many  ttlbaros. 

19  ^hen  ^attathiasanfiucrco, ano 
fpalicunthaiouoc  boice,  though  ail 
the  nations  that  arc  bnber  the  lungs 
Dominion  obey  htm,  anb  fall  aiuay  cue; 
ry  one  from  the  religion  of  their  fa 
thers,  anb  giuc  confent  to  his  conunan 
bements : 

20  pctttnll3J,  anomyfonnes,  ano 
my  bjcthzcn  iballsc  m  the  coucnant  of 
our  fathers.  ,  , 

it  (5oofo2bibthatmr niotiibfefaiic 
thc!Latb,aubtIico2buiauces: 


\0r,  ha: 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


"Num.  a  5. 
9- 


bldc, 

\CJr.cuitt 
\vcrcmnltt- 
vhcdzyon 
them. 


\qr.,l,c 

lent/. 


\gr.fi*fS 

CHIC. 


22  toe will »ot beac6cn to  the  tungs 
wo?bs,to  goe  from  out  religion,  cither 
on  the  right  hanb,02  the  left. 

15  j3oW  When  he  ftab  left  fpcaKing 
thefc  W02bs ,  there  came  one  of  the 
Jlcwes  m  the  fight  of  all,  to  farnficc  on 
the  altar,  which  was  at  i$obm,  atco: 
bmg  to  the  lungs  commanbement. 

24  sohich  thing  when  ^attathias 
faw,  he  Wasmflamcb  With  scale,  ant) 
his  rcmes  trcmblcb,  neither  toulD  Dec 
frubcarc  to  (hew  Ijis  anger  actojrtring  to 
utbgement: Wherefore he  ramie,  anb 
ncWhimfcponthcaitar. 

15  Mo thctungs tommifftoncr Who 
tompcllcb  men  to  faenfite,  he  aillcb  at 
that  time,  <\  the  altar  he  pullcb  bo  Wnc. 

26  Xhus  Dealt  he  3caiouflp  fc>2  the 
flaw  of  <3ob,  lilic  as  *pJ)incas  did  im 
to  zamb?i  the  tonne  of  Salom. 

27  3lnb  ^attatljias  crieb  tb?ougi> 
out  the  citicWifh  aloub  bovtc,  faying, 
nahotocucr  is  jealous  of  the  law,  ano 
mamtautcth  the  toucnant ,  lethimfol 
lott)  tne. 

28  So  fjc  anb  Ins  fonncs  flcb  into 
tlje  mountaincs,  anb  left  all  that  cuer 
thcybabtnthccitic. 

29  Xhen  many  that  fought  after  in 
(ftccanbiubgcmcnt ,  ibcnt  bowuc  into 
thcWilbcrncu"ctotbWtiithcrc. 

» jo  25otl) thep anb  their  ch'.lb:cn ,  anb 
thcirWuics,  anb  trjttr  tattell,  t  becaufc 
afftcttonsincreafcDfoicbponthem. 

3 1  0o\\)  When  it  was  tolb  tl)c  lungs 
fcruants,anb  the  hofrc  tliat  was  at  Jc 
rufalcm,  tnthcntie  of  £>auib,  that  rcr 
tame  men,  Who  habb20hcn  the  lungs 
commanbement,  Were  gone  bottmem 
tothefccrctpiaccsmthcibilbcrncffc. 

32  Xhcy  purfucb  after  tl)cm,a  great 
number,  anb  hatung  oucrtaftcn  them, 
they  campcb  agaiuft  them ,  anb  mabe 
War  agamftthemonthe  Sabbath  bay. 

33  :3uibthcyfaibbntofhcm,ILctthat 
Which  youhaucbonchifhcrto,  fufficc : 
Come  foo?th,  anb  boc  acco2b$ngto  the 
commanbement  of  the  lung,  anb  you 
(bauiiuc. 

34  ffiuttheyfaib,  nac  Wtllnotcouic 
fo2th,ncithcrWillWcbothclungscom 
manbcmcut  to  piofanc  tlje  Sabbath 
bay. 

y>  So  then*  they  gatic  them  the  bat 
tell  witl)  ail  fpeeb. 

36  $oWbc;t,rhcyanfmcrcb  them  not 
neither  cad  they  a  Hone  at  them ,  no? 
floppcb  tlje  plates  Where  they  lap  nib, 

37  z3utfaib,3Lctbsbieaihnouriitv 


1  f  Gr.fouUt 
of  men. 


nocenne :  hcaucn  anb  earth  than  tcfhfic 
fo:  us,  that  you  put  bs  to  bcath  Xbjong;  J 
full?. 

3s  5>o  they  rofcbp  agamfr  them  w 
battcllonthc  Sabbath,  anb  they  (lew 
them  Wttlj  their  wuics?  chittwn,  anb 
their  tattell,  to  the  number  of  a  thott- 
fanbt  people. 

39  fiovo  When  •Battatbias  anb  his 
frienbs  bnbertfoob  hereof,  they  mour^  I 
neb  fo2  them  right  fo2C. 

40  2Jnboucofthcmraibtoanothcr: \ 
3(f  we  all  bo  as  our  b?cth?cn  haucbone, 
anb  fight  not  fo2  our  lines,  anblawcs  a? 
gamfUhehcarhetuhcy  Wilnow  qutcft- 
ly  root  bs  out  of  the  earth. 

41 3it  that  time  thcrfruc  they  bccrccb, 
faying,  ashofocucr  tbaiitomcto  nmfee 
batttll  With  bsonthc  Sabbath  bap,Wt 
Will  fight  agatnft  hun,  neither  Will  Wee 
bieall,  asonrb?cth2cn  that  wcrcmur= 
bcrebm  the  fecret  places. 

42  Xhen  tame  there  bnto  him  a 
company  of  3Jffibcans  ,  Who  Were 
nugrjtic  men  of  ^fracl,  euen  all  fuclj  as 
Were  boluntanip  bcuoteb  bnto  the 
JUWc. 

43  3llfo  all  they  that  flcb  fo;  pcrfem* 
tionioyncbthemfclnesbnto  them,  anb 
Were  a  flap  bnto  them. 

44  So  they  lopneb  their  fozces,  anb 
fmotc  finfull  men  m  rheir  anger,  anb 
Wiclicb  men  m  their  W2ath :  but  the  reft 
fttb  to  the  heathen  fo;  fuccour. 

45  Xhen  43j)attathtas*htsfncnS5 
Went  rounb  about,  anb  pullcb  boWnc 
the  altars. 

46  3ttib  what  tljtlbjcn  foeuer  they 
founb  Within  the  toaft  of  3Jfracl  bnnr^ 
cumtifcb ,  tljofc  they  circumcifcb  ||baiiv 
autly. 

47  Xhcy purfueb  alfo  after  p p?oub 
mcn,?theWo2ltp-,ofpcrcbinthctrhanb.; 

48  So  tljep  rctoucrcb  the  Haw  out ! 
of  thcSjanb  of  the  Gentiles,  anb  out  of ' 

the  hanbe  of  Bings,  neitlicr  t  fuffereb  lh%;£"' 
thep  th  c  fmncr  to  triumph.  *<™  » <i* 

49  j]5oW  When  the  tunc  b2cW  ncerc,  ]fmer- 
that  oaattathias  fljouib  bic,  he  faib  bn=  i 
tohisfotmcs,iI5ow  hathp2ibe;trcbuUe 
gotten  ftrength.anb  the  tunc  of  Dcftrttc- 1 
non,  anbthew.2ath  of  inbignatton : 

5°  i3oWthcTcfo2c,mpfonnc 
jealous  fo?  thcjlaw ,  ?  gtuc  pour  itucs 
fo?  tlje  toucnant  of  pour  fathers. 

51  Callto  rcmcmb?ancc  Wbatattcs 
our  fathers  bib  in  their  ttuncfofliaiipe  7' 
receiuc  great  honour ,  ?  an  cueriamng 
name. 
51  *H3as' 


^Or^j  force 


iS,bcpc: 


Apocrypha. 


CI 


la 


p.nj. 


'Gene. 12 
9,  io. rom. 
43- 

«Gcnc.4'. 

40. 


"Num. 25- 
i?.ccdus. 
4513-J4- 
'lofli.i.l- 

*Num.i4- 
14.13. 


.Sam.  3. 


*  2. Kill.  2. 
1 1. 


•Din  ;.i«. 
17.18.a11d 
16. 

•Dan.C.22. 


» rial.  146. 


4- 


JJOr  figljtyee 
the&attiule 

of  the  people. 


51  *  nons  not  Abraham  fount)  faith 
full  iutcntation,anb  it  mas  tmputcb  ton  ■ 
to  bun  for  rigbtcoufncflc; 

53  *3Jofcpb  in  tlic  tunc  of  hts  bt- 
ftreffe  bept  the  conunauubement ,  anb 
lbas  mane  Horb  of  cgypt. 
-  54  *0btneas  out  father  in  being 
5caiousanbfcrucnt,  obtaincb  the  cone- 
nantofancucriafttngpricftboob. 

55*3efusfoifuifiiiuigtbciborb,n)as 
mabcautbgctngjfrael. 

56  *  Caleb  fo;  bearing  ttututfTc ,  be 
fore  the  congrcgation,rcteiucb  the  heri- 
tage of  the  lanb. 

si  *  Dauibfor  being  ntertifull ,  pof 
fcftcbtbc  tl^onc  of  ancucrlafting  King; 
Dome. 

5S  *€uas  fo2  being  jealous  anb fee- 
uent  fo:  tlje  lalb ,  lbas  tattcn  top  into 
hcaucn. 

59  *  Ananias,  ^^arias ,  anb  OMacl, 
bybclccutngtticrcfaucb  out  oftbeflame 

60  *  s>amcl  fo?  his  innotcncie  \toas 
bcltucrcb  from  the  mouth  of?Lyons. 

6i  3lubtbusconfibct  yc  throughout 
all  ages,  that  none  that  put  tljcir  tcuft 
Mbtmfballbcoucreomc. 

6i  5f  care  not  then  tbeiborbs  of  a  fin- 
full  man  :  fo;  bis  glory  (ball  bee  bung 
anbVbonncs. 

63  %o  bay  be  (ballbcliftcbtop,  anb 
to  morrow  Dec  (ball  notbefouno,  be- 
taufc  he  is  *  rcturneb  into  his  Mtt ,  anb 
bts  thought  is  tome  to  nothing. 

64  tt3bercfo2cpounn>  fonncsbeba- 
bant,  anb  fljcib  yourfclucs  men  in  the 
behalfc  of  tlje  lalb,  for  by  it  (ball  you  ob 
tainc  glory. 

65  3nb  bebotb ,  3  Rno\b  that  vour 
brother  Linton  is  a  man  of  couufcll, 
giuc  care  bnto  htm  alitoay :  be  (ball  be  a 
father  tonto  pott. 

66  3s  for  gjubas  Maccabeus  hec 
hath  bin  might?  anb  ftrong,  cucn  from 
btsyoutbtop,  let  bnnbcyourtaptainc, 
anb  1 1  fight  tlje  battailc  of  the  people. 

67  Xaftc  alfo  bnto  you ,  all  thofe 
that  obfertte  the  lalb,  anb  auengc  yc  the 
itorong  of  your  people. 

6%  Hctompence  fully  the  heathen, 
anbtabebeeb  to  the  conunanbements 
ofthcia\b. 

69  5)0 he  bicffeb tljem,  anb \toas  cjiv 
fbereb  to  bts  fathers. 

70  3mb  he  bitbin  tbchtutbrctbfo^ 
tie,  anb  firth  yeerc,  anb  his  ronncsbnr^ 
cbljim  in  the  <§>cpMcbrcofbis  fathers, 
at  £0obin,  anb  all  "Jfrael  mabegrcat 
lamentation  for  him. 


Apocrypha. 


CHAP.    III. 


1  The  valour  and  fame  of  ludas  Maccabeus,  io 
Heoueithioweth  the  forces  of  Samaria  and 
Syria.  2,7  Ajitiochus  fendech  a  great  power  a  - 
gainfehim.  44  He  and  his  fall  to  falling  and 
praver,  5S   and  are  encouraged. 

PrZ+Wis?  §m  nss  fonnejflubas.cai- 
I  J'kOT  f M  leb  il3aecabcus,  rofc top  m 
ggebisftcab. 

1  3inb  all  Dts  brethren 
hclpcbh'.m,anbfobibau 
they  tljat  hclb  lbith  bisfatbcr,  anb  they 
fougbtmttbtbccrcfitincffc,tbcbattaiic 
ofKfracl. 

3  S>ohcgatchispeoplcgreathonoz 
anb  put  on  a  brcftpiatcasagiant,  anb 
girt  his  ibarltnc  baencfle  about  him, 
anb  he  mabc  batteis,protccting  tlje  ljoft 
ibitblnsfttiorb. 

4  3Jn  his  atts  he  lbas  itfte  a  lyon.anb 
line  a  lyons  lbhclp  roaring  for  his  pray. 

5  iror  hec  purfucb  tbcnjicucb ,  anb 
fought  them  out ,  atib  burnt  top  thofe 
that  toerco  hts  people. 

6  BDbcrcfo.rcthcibitltcD  fbrunucfor 
fcarc  of  htm,  anb  all  the  iborhers  oftn^ 
quityvbcrctroublcb,  betanfe  faiuation 
profperebmbtsbanb. 

7  $)t  grietteb  alfo  many  lungs,  anb 
mabcjacobgiabibitbbtsacts,aubhts 
mcntortailisblefrcb  for  eucr. 

8  t^oreouct  be  ibent  through  the 
cttticsof3luba,bcftroytngtbctongobiy 
out  of  them,  anb  turning  a\toayitorarb 
from^fracl. 

9  ^otbatbcibasrcnoibncbbntotbc 
btmoftpartofthecarth,  $  hctrctetucb 
bnto  htmfuth  as  lbcrc  reaby  topcrtfb. 

10  Xbcn  3tpollontus  gathcrcb  the 
<3cntiics  together,  anb  a  great  boft  out 
of  5>amanato  fight  agatnft  3Jfracl. 

11  lBbtcb  thing  lbhenjubaspcrtci- 
ueb  he  ibcntfortbtomcctc  htm ,  anbfo 
befmotcbtm,  aubflcibbtm,  many  alfo 
fell  boibnc  name,  but  the  reft  flcb. 

n  therefore  3Jubas  tooltc  their 
fpoiles,anb  3lpollonius  fiuorb  alfo,  anb 
thcrcibithhc  fought,  all  bts  life  long. 

13  ilSolb  \bhen  Verona  prince  of  the 
armieof&yrta,  htarb  fay  tbatgSubas 
hab  gatbereb  tonto  him  a  multttubc 
anb  company  of  the  fattbfull ,  to  goe 
outibtthhimtoibarrc. 

14  fccfatb/3J  ibtilgctmeaname  anb 
honour  in  tbeUtngbomc,  for  3  ttnil  goe 
fight  \bttb  ilttbas,  anb  them  that  arc 
.btthhim,  lbfjo  bcfpifc  the  lungs  com  ■ 

manbement. 

15  5>o 


\CJrc.  ^atke- 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha, 


"i.Sam.14- 
6.  i.clirou. 
r4.II. 


']  Or,vn  to  v. 
\  Greeks  i-i 
mttliiiHile 

e/mie,  And 

tmamite. 


t  Grin  the 

f  mmp  dorene 


\  Cjr.cr  At 
euery  Meed. 

\  Gr. that 
the  cell ellor 
ofirikme  in 
the  (Oftrcy 
rrerefew. 


15  £>o  he  mabc him  rcaDy  to  got  tip, 
anD  there iDcnt  lDith  Dun  a  mighty  Doll 
ofthcbngoDlytohclpchim ,  anti  to  be 
anengeb  of  the  chilbjcn  of  35fracl. 

i6  anD  iDhcn  hec  tame  nterc  to  the 
going  Dp  of  z5ctho2on,  3hibas  Went 
f02th  to  meet  hiiMDith  a  final  company. 

17  nahoiDhcnthcyfaiD  the  holt  com; 
mmgto  meet  them,  faiD  Dnto^uDas; 
$oiD  fbail  wee  be  able,  being  to  fell)  to 
fight  agamltfo great  a  multitude,  anD 
fo  ftrong,  feeing  ince  ate  rcaDy  to  faun 
lDith  falling  all  this  Dap; 

is  Unto  lDljom  3JuDas  anfiuercb : 
*3Jtis  no  harD  matter  ftninanyto  bee 
fbut  Dp  m  the  hanDS  of  a  feiD;  anD  tbttb 
the  (Son  of  bcaucn  it  is  all  one ,  to  Deli- 
nee  runt)  a  great  muititubc,  0?  a  fmau 
tompatiy : 

19  jfo?tbcbitt02yofbattcllftanDctb 
not  in  t|)c  multitiibc  of  an  boltc,  but 
fttengtb  commctb  from  beauen. 

20  Xbcy  tome  1 1  agairill  Ds  t  in  mutl) 
pjibc  anb  uuqultic  to  bcltroy  ds,  anD 
our  ibiucs  $  cbiKncn  anb  to  fpoileDs: 

11  2Suttt)ec  fight  fo:  out  liucs,  anD 
outfLaibcs. 

22i©hcrcfojetbc?Lo?Dbimfclfclbill 
oucrttjioU)  them  befoje  our  face :  anb 
asfo2you,bcycnotafcaibofrbcm. 

23  iftoib  as  foonc  as  becbab  left  off 
fpcatung,  be  lept  fuDbcnlybpontbcm, 
anb  fo  £>cron  anb  bis  bolt  lbas  oucr- 
tb20lDcnbcfo2cbim. 

24.  3nb  tljcp  purfueb  them  tfrom 
the  gotng  bottme  of  asctljonm ,  Duto 
the  piainc,  lDbcte  ibetc  flatne  about 
eight  bunDjeD  men  of  tbcm  i  anb  the  re- 
fibue  flebbe  into  the  lanb  of  the  pbili 
tttnes. 

2-5  Xben  began  the  fearc  of^ubas 
anbhisbjethjen ,  ?  an  cjrtcebing  great 
b;cabtofallDpon  the  nations  rounDa^ 
bout  tbcm: 

26  3Ju  fo  much ,  as  his  fame  tame 
Dnto  the  King,  anb  all  nations  taiUcD  of 
the  battels  of  Jubas. 

27  /i5o\D  ttben  Bing  ^ntiochus 
htarb  thefc  things,  he  lDas  full  of  uv 
biguanon:lDherefojc  hec  fent  anDga- 
thcreb  together  all  the  foucs  of  his 
r  caime  [  enen]  a  bcry  ftrong  armie. 

2s  l?c  opencD  alfo  his  trcafurc ,  anD 
gauc  his  foulbters  pay  fo;  a  ycerc,  torn 
manbing  them  to  be  rcaDy ,  t  lbljcnfo 
cucr  he  fliOiilbnecD  them. 

29  jReuerthelcflUDhenhefaiDthat 
themonevof  his  trcafures  fatlcb,  anD 
Uljat  the  tributes m  the  countrcy  iDcrc 


fmail,  betaufc  of  die  Diffentton ,  anb 
plague  lDIjich  he  baD  brought  Dpon  the  I 
lanb,  ||  m  tatting  aibay  the  %mts\,0rfrthr 
lDhuh  hao  bene  of  olb  time,  i  1U4  ™*> 

30  i^cefcarebtthat  belboulDnot  bt'f^*™ 
able  to  beare  the  tharges  any  longer,  WJZ 
no.2  to  hatte  fuch  gifts  to  guie  10  liberal;  *,«. 
!ly,as  he  bib  bcfojc:fo2hcchababoun; 
'  Deb  abouc  the  Bmgs  that  lbcrc  befoje 
him. 

31  naherefoje ,  bring  greatly  per* 
plercb  m  his  minbe  ,hee  bctcrmmeb  to 
goc  into  ^crfia ,  there  to  tabc  the  tri^ 
butcs  of  the  tountrcys ,  anD  to  gather 
ninth  money. 

32  5>obce  left  Hpfias  a  noble  man, 
;anboncofthcbloob  royail ,  to  ouerfce 
the  affaires  of  the  Bmg,  from  the  rt« 
ucr  <£uph?atcs,Dnto  the  bobbers  of 
!<£gypt: 

33  3lnb  to  tying  Dp  hts  fonne  ^nno^ 
thus,bntill  he  tame  agame. 

34.  i39o2coiier  hcDcluicrcD  bntohim 
the  haifc  of  his  foztes ,  anb  the  €le* 
phants,  anb  gauc  him  charge  of  all 
things  that  he  iboulb  hauc  bone ,  as  al* 
fo  concerning  tljem  that  blDclt  in  3uba 
anD  3lcrufalem. 

35  Xoibit,thathcQ)OulbfenDana^ 
nueagamlt  them  ,to  beftroy  anb  root 
out  the  ftrcngth  of  Jfracl.anb  the  rcnu 
nant  of  3Jcrufaiem ,  anb  to  tabe  albay 
their  men  10  nan  from  that  place : 

36  3nb  that  he  fhoulb  place  ftran* 
gers  m  all  their  quarters ,  anb  biuibe 
their  lanb  by  lot. 

37  &othcKtngtoofecthehaifcofthc 
forces  that  remamcb ,  anb  bepartcb 
from  3(nrtoch  t  his  royail  city ,  the  hun* 
b:cth  fourtic  anb  fcucnth  yecre,  anb  ha* 
uing  paffeb  the  riuer  Cuphjatcs,  Ijce 
tbcnttlnough  the  high  tountrcys. 

38  3Com  HyQaschofe0tolemc,  the 
fon  ofSDojymenesanb  ^5itano2,^<502* 
gias,mightytnenofthcHingsfncnbs: 

39  3tnb  ibith  them  hec  fent  fourtic 
thoufanbfootmctt,anbfcucnthoufanb 
hojfcmcntogocuitothclanbof'lJuba, 
anb  to  bcltroy  it  as  the  lung  comanbeb. 

4.0  do  they  rbent  fo2th  iDitl)  all  their 
poiDcr ,  anb  tame  anD  pitchcD  by  €m- 
mans  m  the  plamc  countrcy. 

41  ^nb  the  merchants  of  thecomv- 
trey,heanngti)cfameofthcm,tooScCU 
ucr,?  golb  bcry  much ,  ttnth  1 1  ftruants, 
anb  came  into  the  campc  to  buy  the  thik 
bjcn  of  "Jfraelfo;  aaues  Spottier  alfo 
I  of  5>y2la ,  anb  ofthe  lanb  ||  of  tlje  phili' 
mncs.toyncD  thcmfclues  Dnto  tljcm. 
42  /15oid 


\  Gr  acute 

oftuki"i- 

dimc. 


I  Or,fnteri. 


Crofjlr.v:- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.iiij, 


\\0r,  Mm- 


I  Or,fhr 

vhichth 


the 
which  the 
heathen  bad 
madediU- 
gentfearch 
that  they 
might  faint 
therein  tbt 
kksnefle  of 
their liaUm 

•Num.15.;. 


"DtU.JO  J. 


Ar-x  iftorb  ibhcn  3!ubas  anD  his  toe* 
thzen  faibthatnufcricsibcrc  multiple- 
eb ,  $  that  the  fojcesDiD  encampc  t\yu\v 
felucs  tn  their  borers,  (fo?  they  luteibe 
hott)  the  Uing  haD  giuen  commaunDC' 
ment  to  Dcftroy  tljepcoplc,  anD  utterly 
abolilh  tl)cm.) 

45  Xhey  fatD  one  to  another ,  3Lct 
bsreftozetlic  DccaycDcftatt  of oucpeo; 
pie,  anD  let  bs  fight  fo:  out  people  anD 
ithc&anctuarie. 

44  XDcn  ibas  the  Congregation 
gathercD  together,  that  they  might  be 
teabyfoj  battcll,  anD  that  they  might 
pjay.anb  affcc  mercy  anDcotnpaffion. 

45  #oU>  'Jccufalem  lay  botbeasa 
ttiilDcrncffc,  there  ibas  none  of  rjee  cftfc 
Djen  thatibent  in  oj  out :  the  5>ancttta; 
neaifo  tbas  troben  boitoncanbaltens 
Kept  the  fttongholDc :  the  heathen  hab 
thetr  habitation  in  that  place,  anD  toy 
ibas  tafeen  from  3acob ,  anD  the  pipe 
Until  the  harpcteafcD. 

46  B3hercfo;ethc31ftaciitcsafi*eiiv 
bleb  themfrutes  together,  anD  came  to 
||  fl^afpha  ouer-agamft  3Jerufalcm ;  fo; 
in  $)afphaibas  the  plate  ibhcre  they 
pjaycD  aforetime  m  3tfracl. 

47  Xhcn  they  fafteD  that  Day,  anD 
puton  fathccloth,  anDtaQ  afbesbpon 
their  hcaDS,  anD  rent  their  clothes : 

48  3nDlaiDc  opcntlic  boofce  of  the 
lUib,||tt)hetein  y  heathen  haD  fought 
to  paint  the  uttcneffe  of  their  images. 

49  Xhey  brought  aifo  the  ^icftcs 
garmcnts,anbthe&rft  fruits,  anD  the 
ttthes ,  anD  the  *  jfta^antcs  they  fttrreb 
bp,  lbhohabaccompliflicD  their  Dayes.j 

50  IChencrtcD  they  lbitbaiouDbotce , 
totoarDhcaucn,  laying,  uahatfhali  ibe  1 
DoettHththefc,  aitD  ibhithct  (hall  tbee 
carythcmaibay* 

51  5fo?  thy  3>anctuaric  is  troben ; 
Dolbnc  anD  pjofaneD,  anD  thy  incites  > 
aremhcautncffcanD  biought  lolb. 

51  3tnb  loc ,  the  heathen  are  affcm 
bleb  together  agatnft  bs,  to  beftroy  bs : 
lbhat  things  they  imagine  agamft  bs, 
tbouftnorbeft. 

53  ^oibfhailibccbcabletoftanba' 
gainft  them,  ejecept  thou(£>  (3oD)bc  our 
helper 

54  Xhen  founDcD  they  ttftDtrum* 
pets,  anD  crycD  ibith  aloube  boicc. 

55  3mb  after  this ,  3J»&as  ojDamcD 
captains  oner  the  people,  eucn  captains 
ouer  thoufatiDS,  anD  oucr  hunDjcDS, 
anD  oucr  fifties,  anDouer  tenncs. 

5  e  26ut  as  f  o?  fitch  as  *  lb  cr  c  builbuuj 


Apocrypl 


houfts,o?  haD  bctrothcD  ibiucs.o;  iberc 
planting  bmcyatDs,or  iberc  fearcfull, 
thole  hce  tommanDcD  tljat  they  fhouiD 
retutne,  eucry  man  to  ijisottmc  Ijoufc, 
accojbingtothcftaib. 

57  £>othecamperemooucD,auDpit 
chebbpontbe;S>outl)fioc  of<£mmaus. 

58  3nD  3!uDas  fayDe,  acme  your 
felucs,  anD  be  baiiant  men,  anD  fee  that 
yc  be  m  rcaomeffc  agamft  the  morning, 
thatyce  may  fight  ibith  thefc  nations, 
tljat  are  affcmblcD  together  againft  bs, 
toDcftcoybsanDour  ^auctuaric. 

59  iront  is  better  f oj  bs  to  Die  m  bat 
tell.thcn  to  bcholD  the  eaiauuties  of  our 
people,  anD  our  £>anctuartc. 

60  iScuecthclcfrc,  as  the  lbtll  [of 
<5oD]  is  ui  heauen.fb  lethtm  Doc. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

6  ludas  defeateth  the  plot  14  and  foiccs  ot 
Gorgias,  2.3  and fpodeth  their tents,  34  and 
oueithroweihLvfias,  45  Hepullethdowne 
the  Altar  which  the  heathen  had  propha- 
ned,  andfetteihvpanewe,  60  aixi  maketh 
a  wall  about  Sion. 

I^£2*jg^5^en  toofec  ©odgias  fiue 
rafw?  thoufanD  footmni,  anD  a 
Jsk  thoufanD  of  the  belt  ho;fc= 
o  mcn,anDremooucDoutof 
the  eampe  by  night: 
z  1£o  the  cnD  he  might  tuff;  mbpon 
the  tamp  of  thc'JcttJcs.anD  fmitc  them 
fuDDcnly.  3nD  ttje  men  of  the  fojtrefic 
iberchisguiDes. 

j  jOoib  lbhcn  3uDas  hcarD  thcrc^ 
of,hee  himfelfc  remooucD ,  anD  the  ba^ 
liantmen  ttuth  him,  that  hce  might 
finite  the  Bmgs  armic  lbhirt)  ibas  at 
€inmaus, 

4  tt)htlc  as  yet  the  fojees  iberc  Di 
fpcrfcD  from  th  c  eampe. 

5  3Jn  the  tucanc  feafon  tame  Oo;- 
gias  by  night  into  the  eampe  of  3uDas: 
anD  lbhcn  hccfeunD  no  man  there,  hce 
fought  them  in  the  mountmnes:  fo;faiD 
hce,  thefc  fellotbcs  flee  from  bs. 

6  2Sut  affoonc  as  it  ibas  Day ,  3m 
Das  fhcmeD  himfelfc  m  thcplamc  Hum 
th?ce  thoufanD  men,  ibho  ncuerthcleffc 
haD  neither  || armour ,  no?  froo^Dcs  to 
their  minDts. 

7  anD  tliey  faibc  the  eampe  of  the 
heathen ,  that  it  lbasftrong,  anbibcll 
harncffcD.anD  tompaffcD  roiuiD  about 
ibith  Dotfcmctij  anD  thefc  iberc  trpcrt 
ofibarrc. 

8  IChenfatDSInDastothementhat 
mere 

69 


ia. 


MJ7J. 


[|(7r|Mrfr/A 


<\pocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


beeaufc  his  mcrcie  cnaurcti)  fo:  euer. 

i<>  %hus  3?fraei  haDagccatDchuc* 
ranee  that  bay. 

re  0ovo  an  the  ftrangcrs  that  hab 
efcapeb ,  came  anb  tolD  JLyfias  What 
habhappeneb. 

27  aaho  when  htc  heatb  thereof, 
was  confounbeb ,  anb  biftouragcb,  be* 
caufc  ncttljer  fuch  things  as  he  Woulb, 
wcrebonebnto  3Jfraci,no2fuch  things 
asthcuingcommanbcbhimWcrccome 
to  pafle. 

is  Xhcncrtyccrcthcrcfo2cfoHoW* 
ing ,  iLyfias  gathercb  together  thiec* 
fco2ethoiu~anbchoiccmenoffoote,anb 
fiucthoufanb  hotfemen,  that  he  might 
fubbuethem. 

i?  £»o  they  tame  into  Noumea,  anti 
pitches  their  tentsat25cthfura,anb3}u? 
sas  met  With  thetn  ten  thoufanb  men. 

jo  znn  when  he  faw  that  mighty 
atmic,hc  pjaycb ,  aim  faib,26ic{reb  art 
thou ,  £>  fautour  of 3Jfrael ,  *  Who  bu> 
Deft  quaile  tljc  t)iolcncc  of  the  mighty 
man  by  the  hanb  of  thy  feruant  £>auib, 
:  anb  gaucft ,  the  hoflofl  grangers  into 
,  tl)e  hanbs  of  "Jonathan  tljefonne  of 
;  &aul  ,anb  his  armour  bearer. 

31  £>hnt  bp  this  armic  in  theijanu  of 
thy  people  3Jfracl ,  anb  let  them  be  con 
founbeb  in  their  power  anb  hotfemen. 

32  flpanc  tf)em  to  be  of  no  courage, 

anbeaufethcbolbneffcofthcirflrength 
to  t  fail  away,  ?  let  them  quaac  at  their 
beftruttion. 

33  Caft  them  bowne  With  the  ftoo2b 
of  them  that  loue  thee,  anb  let  alithofc 
thattmow  thy  name,  pjaife  thee  With 
thanRfgiuing. 

j+  £>o  they  loyncbbattafle.anb  there! 
were  name  of  the  hoft  of  fLrfias  about 
Sue  thoufanb  men ,  euen  bcfoie  them 
Were  they  flaine. 

35  ^oib  when  fLyfias  faw  His  ar- 
mte  put  to  flight,  anbthcmanlincfle  of 
rjubas  fouibicrs,  anb  how  they  were 
rcaby,  cither  toliueo2btcbaitantly,hc 
went  into  3tmochta ,  anb  gathercb  to 
gethcr  a  company  of  ftrangers,  anb  ha 
uingmabc  his  armtc  greater  then  it 
was ,  lje  purpofeb  to  come  agame  into 
|3Iubea. 

36  IChcnfaibc  gjubasanbhistye* 
tmen,  bcholbour  cnemtcsarebifcomfl 
text :  letbs goc  Dp  to  cleanfe,anb ||bcbi 
catcthc&anetuaric. 

37  tlpon  this  all  the  hottaflcmblcb 
thmirelucstogcther,  anb  Went  bp  into 
'■  mount  S>ion. 

I 38  2hib 


were  ttrith  himifcarc  ye  not  their  multi 
tube,  neither  bcyeafcaib  of  their  aflautt 

9  Remember  how  out  fathers  Were 
bcuucrcbintheres&ea.when^harao 
purfiteb  them  With  an  armie. 

io  /Row  therfojelet  bs  crtebnto  hea< 
ucn.if  petabucnturethc  ?LojD  Wfl  haue 
mercte  bponbs ,  anb  remember  the  to* 
ucnant  of  our  fathers,  anb  beflroy  this 
hoflc  befo?c  our  face  this  bay. 

1 1  XhatfoailthchcathcnmaynnoW 
that  there  is  one,  Who  beliueccthauo 
faucthUfrael. 

ii  Xhen  the  Grangers  lift  bp  their 
eyes,*  fow  them  comming  oucr  agamft 
them. 

13  i&hercrbjc  they  Wtntoutofthe 
campt  to  battell,  but  they  thatibere 
i\)ith3Jubasfounbcbthcirtruinpets. 

14  £>o  they  ioyncb  battell ,  anb  the 
heathen  being  bifcomfitcb,  fleb  into  tljc 
piattte. 

15  $o«)bcit  all  the  himmiott  of  them 
lbcrc  flaine  Ibith  the  ftoojb :  foj  they 
purfucb  them  bnto  <Sa5cra,  anb  bnto 
the piaines  of  3)bumca,  anb  3l?otus, 
anb^Jatmua,  fo  that  there  rbereflviine 
of  tljem,  bpon  a  th?ee thoufanb  men. 

16  Shis  bone,  ^ubas  rcturneb  a^ 
gametbithhishoflefropurfuingthnii, 

17  ^nDCaibto  the  people,  JSee not 
greebie  of  the  fpotles,  in  as  much  as 
there  is  abattcllbefojebs, 

is  3lnD  ©ojgias  anb  his  hoflc  are 
here  by  bs  in  the  niountatne ,  but  flanb 
ye  nott)  againflyour  encmics,anb  ouer- 
come  them,  $  after  this  you  may  bolbly 
taUcthcfpoiles. 

19  ^slJubasnjasyetfpcaUingthtfe 
luoibs,  there  appcareb  apart  of  tljem 
looKmg  out  of  the  mouutamc. 

zo  iBho  When  they  pertemeb  that 
thc^leTbcshabputthctrhoftetoflight, 
anb  iDerc  burning  the  tents :  (foahe 
fmolic  that  ivas  fecue  beclareb  ibhat 
was  bone) 

zi  sahen  thcrefoic  thev  perceiueb 
thefc  things.th'ey  ibcrc  fozc  afraib ,  anb 
feeing  alfo  the  hoflc  of  3n»'oastn  the 
plaint  rcaby  to  fight: 

2i  ICheyflcbcncry  one  into  thelanb 
offlrangtrs. 

13  1Ehcn  3!ubas  rcturneb  to  fpotlc 
the  tents,  where  they  got  muchgolbc, 
ano  filucr ,  anb  blew  filke,  anb  purple  of 
the  fea,  anb  great  riches. 

24  Stftcrfhis.thcyWenthonie.anb 
fuug  a  fong  of  thanUefguiing,  <j  pjatfeb 
thcllojbin  heauen:  becaufe  itisgoob, 


*  iSitv.  17 


\\Or,fk:,. 

ftmrs, 

*  1.  Sam.  14 


tGr.rx/t. 


\Or,rr$me 


Apocrypha. Chap, 


v. 


Apocrypha. 


"  Exod.  20 
25.dcuc.27 
j,&iolh-8. 


\\Or,ffread 
abroad  the 
hangin&JyQr 
hanged  vp 
the  vai/es. 


3s  2nb  tUDtn  thep  fa\b  the  fanttua-' 
tiebefoiatc,  anb  the  altar  pjophaneb, 
ant)  the  gates  burnt  bp ,  anb  ftmibs 
growing  mttje  eourts,as  in  a  fojtreft,  0? 
in  one  of  the  mountaincs,  pea  ants  t!je 
pjttefts  chambers  pullcb  bo  wne, 

39  Xhcp  rent  their  clothcs,anb  mabe 
great  lamentation,  anb  caft  al^cs  bpon 
thctrhcabs, 

40  7L\\n  fell  boibne  flat  to  toe 
grounb  bpon  their  faces,  anb  blew  an 
alarme  With  tl)ctrumpets,anb  mebto- 
warbsheauen. 

41  Xhen  3Jubas  appointeb  tertainc 
men  to  fight  againft  thofc  that  ibere  in 
thefoztrcfTc,  bntillljcljab  tlcnfcb  the 
5>anctuarie. 

41  £>o  hcehofepncftsofbiamcleu'c 
conucrfation ,  fuel)  as  hab  pleafure  tn 
the  law. 

43  naijo  tlcanfcb  the  &>anetuartc, 
anb  bare  out  thcbefileb  (tones  into  an 
bntlcane  place. 

44  %\\ti  When  as  fhep  confulttb 
What  to  boe  With  the  altar  of  bumtof- 
frmgs  Which  was  pjophancb, 

4$  Xhep  thought  it  beft  to  pull  it 
bowne,  left  it  (honlb  be  a  rep?oeh  to 
them ,  becaufc  the  heathen  hab  befilcb 
itjWhetefozetheppullcb  it  bowne, 

46  3mbiatbebp  the  fto«es  in  the 
mountarne  of  the  temple  in  atonuent; 
ent  place ,  bntill  there  fljoulb  come  a 
020phet,tofheWWhatfhoulbbebonc 
With  them. 

47  Xhcntheptoofec  Whole  ftoncs 
*aeco;tbingtothciaw,  anb  builtanew 
attar,  aecojbing  to  the  fomier : 

43  Zm  mabe  bp  the&anctnaric, 
anb  the  things  that  Were  Within  the 
temple,anb  halloWcb  the  courts. 

49  Che?  mabe  alfo  ncib  holp  befc 
fels,  anb  into  the  temple  the?  brought 
thctanbleftitBe,  anb  the  altar  of  burnt 
offerings,anb  of  mcenfeanb  the  table. 

50  3nb  bpon  the  altar  the?  burnt 
tnccnfc,  anb  theiampsthatxbcrcbpou 
thecanblefticae  the?  lishteb,  that  thep 
might  Sine  light  in  the  temple. 

51  jfutthetmoje  they  fet  the  loaues 
bpon  the  table,  anb  ||  fpjeab  out  the 
betics ,  anb  fintflKb  all  the  W02KCS 
ibhicij  thep  hab  begunnc  to  make. 

51  iBoib  on  the  Sue  anb  twentieth 
bap  of  the  ninth  moneth,  (which  tscai- 
lebthemonethCaflcu)m  thehunbzeth 
fouttp  anb  eight  pecrc  thevtofebpbr- 
timesinthemommg, 

53  ^nborTerebfacnficcacco?bingto 


tl;c  law  bpon  the  new  altar  of  burnt  of 
fenngs.Which  thep  hab  mabe. 

54  fLooHc  at  What  ntne,  anb  What 
bap  the  heathen  hab  pjophancb  it,  cuen 
in  that  Was  it  bebicatcb  With  fongs, 
anbtittherns,  anbijarpes,  $cmibals. 

55  %l)tn  all  the  people  fell  bpon 
their  faces ,  Wozmipping  anb  pjaifmg 
the  (Sob  ofi)cauen,Who  hab  guien 
themgoobfurcelfe. 

-56  3inb  fo  thep  Uept  the  bebication 
of  the  altar  eight  bapes,  anb  offered 
burnt  offerings  With  glabncffe,  ano  fa- 
tnficcb  the  faenficeof  iibcliucranceanb 
P2aifc. 

57  Xhep  becut  alfo  the  fo;cfront  of 
the  temple  With  troWncs  of  golb;anb 
Witt)  fl)ielbs,  anb  tl)c  gates,  anb  the 
chambers  the?  1 1  rcncWeb  anb  1 1  hangcb 
boozes  bpon  them. 

5S  Xhuswas  there  bcrp  great  giafc 
neffc  among  the  people,  fo2  that  there; 
P20th  of  the  heathen  was  put  awap. 

59  £!9o2eouer  3mbas  anb  his  b;e* 
thicnWfth  the  Whole  congregation  of 
Ijftael  ojbamcb  that  the  bates  of  the  be- 
bication of  the  altar,  fljoulb  be  Kept  in 
their  fcafon  from  pcere  to  peerebpthc 
fpacc  of  eight  bapes,  from  the  fine  anb 
twentieth  bap  of  the  jnoncth<Cafleu, 
ttnffj  mirth  anb  glabncffe. 

60  3ttthat ttmealfothepbmlbcbbp 
themount£>ionwtfhhighWalies,anb 
ftrong  towjes  rounb  about,  left  the 
©entiles  fhoulb  tome  fjtrcabitboWne, 
asthephabboncbefoje. 

61  £nb  thev  fct  there  a  gartfon  to 
itecpe  it :  anbfo2tifieb26cthfuratop2c^ 
fcruc  it,rhat  the  people  might  hauc  a  be- 
fence  agamft3lbumca. 

CHAP.   V. 

5  Iudwfiniteth  the  children  of  Djn,  Bean,  and 
Ammon.  17  Simon  is  fent  incoGalile.  15 
The  exploits  of  IndasinGalaad.  51  Hede- 
ftroyeth  Ephron  ,  fordenyius;  him  to  paffe 
throughit.  56  Diuer(e,diatin  Iudasabfencc 
would  fight  with  their  enemies, are  Hm:k. 

€>lb  tbhen  the  nations 
rounb  about  hearb  that 
thc3lltaribasbtHit,*the 
S>anctuanc  rcneibcb  as 
before,  it  bifpleafeb  them 
bcrp  much. 

2  Bahcrfojc  thep  thought  to  beftrop 
the  generation  of  Jlacob  that  ibas  a 
mong  them,  ano  thereupon  thep  began 
to  (lapanbbcltropthepcople. 
3  Xhcn 

G9: 


offerings. 


WOr/tedii.i 
ted. 

Qrtmzd: 
dooresfsr 
them. 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apo 


crypha. 


Or,  tsfrj. 
or  Arobrt- 


|  Or, malice 

\\Orflaran, 
Gent.  $6. 

J  3-3,3* 


3  ILbcn'Jubas  fought  agaiufl  tlic 
tbittucn  of  et&u  tn  3Jbumca  at  ||  ZxtV 
batttne ,  betaufc  they  beficgeb  Jfftacl : 
anbheegauetbein  a  great  ouertb;oib, 
anb  abateb  their  courage ,  ant)  tooUr 
their  fpotles. 

4  :aUJDbercmcmb2Cbtbc|iiniutieof 
the  tbttbjcn  of  II  i5ean,  ibbo  bab  bene  a 
mate  anb  an  offence  tonto  tlje  people,  in 
tl)at  they  lap  m  ibattc  fo?  tbcm  in  tlje 
lbaycs. 

5  $>ce (but tbembpfbercfojcintbe 
tottnes,  anb  intampcb  agatnft  tbcm, 
anb  beftroyeb  tl)em  btterly ,  anb  burnt 
tbetolbcrsof  that  place  lbttbfirc,  anb 
all  that  tberc  therein. 

6  3ftctibarb  I)e  paffeb  oucr  to  tlje 
tbtUucuof  3mmon,  ibbcrc  be  founba 
mighty  polbet ,  anb  time!)  people,  Until 
©motrjeus  tbctctaptautc. 

7  &o  be  fought  many  battels  ibttb 
tbcm,till  at  length  ibcy  lbcrcbtfeomrV 
tcb  before  him ;  anb  befmote  tbcm. 

8  3nb  lbbcnbee  bab  tabni3Ia?ar, 
ibitbtbctoibncsbelongingtbcrcto,bc 
returnebmto'Jnbea. 

9  Chen  the  heathen  tfjat  lbcre  at 
<Saleab,affcmblcbtbcmlclucstogctber 
agatnll  tlje  3Jfraelltcs  that  lbcre  m 
tbetc  quartets  to  beftcoy  tl)em :  but 
tljcy  fleb  to  the  fojtreffe  of SDatbctna; 

io  3lnb  Cent  letters  bnto  3lubas  anb 
bts  b;ctlj;en  :  Hlbc  heathen  tl)at  are 
rounb  about  bs,are  affemblcb  together 
agatnft  bs  to  beftroybs 

ii  3nb  they  arc  pjcpartng  to  come 
anb  taftc  the  fojtrcffc  lbbcrcutuo  lbce 
arc  fleb.Xuuotbeus  being  captamc  of  I 
their  hoft. 

n  Comenoib  tbcrcfojcanbbeliuccj 
V3  from  their  banbes,  fo?  many  of  bsi 
are  flame. 

ij  pea  all  our  tyetlucntbat  lbcre  in 
the  places  of  Xobic,  arc  put  to  oeatl), ! 
time  Ibiucs  anb  their  cbilbmi  -,  3Ufo 
they  banc  caricb  aibay  capmtcs,  anb ! 
borne  aibay  their  (ruffe ,  anb  tliep  bauc  j 
beftrotcb  there  about  a  tboufanb  men.  I 

14  tDbtlctbcfc  letters lbecc  yet  rca  | 
bmg,  bcbolb  there  tame  otljer  meffen- 1 
gers  from  oaitlcc  ttntb  tbctr  tlotljes 
rcut.ibbo  rcpojtcb  on  tins  ibtfc, 

i<;  3lnb  faib  :  Xbcy  of  fttolemais, 
anb  of  Xyjus,  ano  £>tbon,anb  all  <sau- 
Ice  of  the  (Jcnttlcs  arc  affemblcb  togc- 
tbec  agatnft  bs  to  confumebs. 

16  |5o\b  lbbctfjubas  anb  the  peo- 
ple Hcarbtl)cfcibo;bes,ti)ere  affemblcb 
a  great  congregation  together,  to  con 


fultlbhat  they  fl)oulb  boe  fo?  their  \xc- 
tbjen,  that  lbcre  mtroublcanbaffaul- 
tcb  of  them. 

17  %\)tn  faib  3fubas  bnto  Swnon 
his  brother,  Cboofc  thee  out  men ,  anb 
goc,  anb  bchuec  tby  tyethjen  that  arc 
in  Galilee ,  foj  31  anb  "Jonathan  my 
b:othcr ,  Mil  goc  uito  the  count  rev  of 
<3aiaab. 

18  So  bee  left  "Jofcpb  the  fonuc  of 
zachartas,  ano  Farias  taptautes  of 
the  people,  ibtth  the  remnant  of  tlje 
hoflc  in  3Iubca  to  tteepe  it, 

19  »HntoibbombegaueconitnanbP 
ment,  faying,  Xabc  ycc  tlic  charge  of 
this  people,  anb  fee  that  you  matte  not 
ibatre  agatnft  the  heathen ,  bnttll  tljt 
tune  that  lbe  tome  again  e . 

zo  /from  bnto  pinion  lbcre  gtucu 
tbzee  thoufano  men  to  got  into  dsablce, 
anb  bnto  "Jubas  eight  thoufaub  men 
to*  the  countrey  of  ©aiaab. 

21  iThctt  ibeut Pinion  into  ©aitlee, 
lbberc  hec  fought  many  battels  lbith 
the  heathen ,  fo  that  the  heathen  Vbere 
btftomfitebbyhtm. 

ii  3nb  hee  purfucb  them  bnto  the 
gate  of  0tolemats ;  3inb  there  lbcre 
flame  of  tlje  hc<uhen  about  th.jce  thou- 
fanbntcn,VbhofefpoiKshetoofte. 

13  5tnb  ||  tljofc  that  iberc  in  eaitlec 
anb  m^lrbattis,  lbith  their  lbiues anb 
their  thilbien  ,  anb  all  that  they  Ijab, 
toobc  he  aibay  [ibulj  htm]  ano  brought 
them  into 'Jubca,ibtth  great  toy. 

14.  3}uoas^actabtus  alfo  anb  his 
bzothec  "Jonathan ,  tbent  oucr  3o;- 
ban ,  anb  trauaticb  tfjiee  bay  es  tourney 
mtheibilberneffe, 

15  ©here  they  met  lbith  the  iiSaba- 
thitts,  lbho  tame  bnto  them  mpeace* 
able  matter ,  anb  to  id  them  eucry  thing 
thathab  happentb  totljetr  fyetbjten  in 
thelanboftsaiaab, 

26  3lnb  Jjoib  that  many  of  tljent 
lbcre  fljttt  bp  tn  ||  ffiofo2a,atib  2Sofo?,m 
^icma,l|Cafpho,i,i0afceb  ?  Camaim 
C  all  tbcfe  nttcs  are  ftrong  ano  great. ) 

17  3inb  that  they  ibete  (hut  bp  m 
the  red  of  the  ttttes  of  the  rountrcy  of 
<3alaao ,  anb  that  agatnft  to  mojroib 
lltbeyhaoappotnttbtob^ingthctrhoft 
agatnft  the  fo:ts ,  anb  to  tabe  tljem,  anb 
to  beftroy  tljem  allm  one  bay. 

18  hereupon  5ubas  anb  his  hoft 
tuntcb  fttbbcnly  bytbcibay  oftbclbil- 
berneffe  bnto  ||  JBofojra,  anb  lbhcn 
hebablbonne  the  nttc,  hec  flelballUje 
males  lbith  the  fbgc  of  the  Roo;b,anb 
toobc 


j  j  Or,  captute 


\OrJBofer. 

rj. 
WOrfihcf- 


|  Or,  ihf 


j  OrJBofbr, 


Apocrypha. 


ci 


ia 


p.v. 


tgr.liftvp 
their  eja. 


\\Thehe*. 

then  Abut- 
ted the 
Icwes. 


toohcaii  their  fpotlcs,  anb  burnt  then; 
tic  rtnth  fire. 

%9  jfrom  luhencc  hcc  rcmooucb  by 
tught,anb  Ibent  tttlljc  tame  to  the  fo^ 
treiTc. 

30  3lnb  betimes  in  the  morning  tlicv 
tioottcbbp^bcholb ,  thcrcibasaiun; 
numerable  people  bearing  iaobcrs,anb 
other engines  of  ibarrc,  to  talic  thefts 
trcffe:fo2||  they  anattltcb  them. 

31  nahm^ibas  therefore  faib  that 
the  battatlc  Ibas  begun  ,aub  that  the  cry 
of  tl)e  titic  lbcnt  bp  to  hcattcn,  lbith 
trumpets,  anb  agreat  fount), 

31  l)cfaib  bnto  his  hofrc,  fight  this 
bayfo?  yourbjetiyen. 

33  5>o  t)c  lbcnt  foo2th  behinbe  them 
mthtfc  companies,  ibhofounbcbthctr 
trumpets,  anb  tryco  lbith  pzaycr. 

34  Xljcn  the  bout  of  Xtmotbcus 
bnoVbtng  that  it  ibas  upaccabcus  ,rlcb 
from  fomt :  lbbcrcfojc  lice  Quote  tlicm 
lbstb  a  great  (laughter :  fo  that  there 
iberc  lullcb  of  them  that  bay  about 
ctgbttboufanbmcu. 

35  Xbts  bone ,  JJubas  turncb  afibc 
to  ijtofpba ,  anb  after  be  babaflauitcb 
u,  bcctooKcit,attbflclbcail  the  males 
tfjerem,  anbrecnutbtljcfpotlcstljcrof, 
anb  burnt  it  lbith  fire. 

36  Jf  rom  thence  lbcnt  be,  anb  rooUc 
Cafphon,  tT9agcb,2i5ofo2,  anb  the  other 
ntics  of  the  t  ountrcy  of  <3alaab. 

37  3ftcc  tlicfc things,  garbcrcbXi^ 
motfjeus  another  boftc ,  anb  encampeb 
agamft  ftapbon  bcyottb  the  biootte. 

3s  5>o  3Jubas  fent  [men]  to  cfpic  the 
hour,  lbbo  b20ugbt  bimuwb,  faying -, 
3111  the  heathen  that  be  rounb  about  bs, 
arc  aflcmbleb bnto  them,  cucnabery 
great  boftc. 

39  i?cc  hath alfo  htreb  the  Arabians 
to  hrtpc  them ,  anb  they  hauc  pttchtb 
tljctr  tents  bcvonbtheb200BC,rcabic  to 
tome  anb  fight  agamft  tbtc:bpontbis 
3iubas  lbcnt  to  meet  them. 

40  Xbcn  Xtmotbcus  faibbnfo  the 
taptatnes  of  his  boltc,  naben  3mbas 
anb  Ins  boftc  come  ncccc  tbeb2oolte,tf 
hepatic  otter  firftbntobs,  ibe  (ball  not 
be  able  to  ttutbftanb  hmi,  fo?  beeibill 
mightily  pjcuaiie  agamft  bs. 

41  26ut  if  he  be  afcaiD,ano  tampc  be^ 
yonb  the  nucr,  ibe  (ball  goe  oner  bnto 
him ,  anb  p2  euatlc  againft  hun. 

41  /Boll)  ibhcn  gjuoas  came  ncere 
thcbzooHe.hctaufebthe  Scribes  ofthc 
people  to  rcmaincby  tbcbjoolte:  bnto 
ibbom  bee  gauc  commanbemcut,  fay; 


Apocrypha. 


tug ,  Sniffer  no  man  to  rematnc  mthc 
tampe,  but  let  all  tome  to  the  battcll. 

43  5>o  be  ibcntfirttoucr  bnto  them, 
anb  all  the  people  after  humthcnallthc 
heathen  being  bifcomfitcb  before  him, 
call  aibay  their  weapons,  anb  Mcd  bnto 
the  Xcmpte  that  ibasat  Carnaim. 

44  But  ||tbey  tootte  the  tittc,  anb 
burnt  the  Xemplc,  lbitbail  tbatibetc 
therein.  XbusibasCarnaimfubbucb, 
neither  couib  thcyftanb  any  longer  be* 
!fo2c3Iubas. 

45  Xbett3Hibasgatbcrcb  together 
!  all  thcK  fraehtcs  that  lbcrc  m  the  toun- 
jtrcy  of  oaiaab  from  the  lead  bnto  the 
!  grcatefl,cucn  their  lbiucs  anb  their  chil- 
!  b2cn,anb  their  ftuffcabcty  great  hofte, 
to  the  enbe  they  might  tome  into  the 
lanb  of  IJubca. 

46  4201b  ibhcn  they  tame  bnto  €- 
i  plnon  (this  ibas  a  great  city  m  the  lbay 
I  as  they  flioulD  goe ,  bcry  ibell  fojttficD; 
t!)tv  couib  not  turuc  from  it,  cither  on 
J  tilt  right  haub  02  the  left ,  but  mud 
nccbspafTc  through  the  nttbftoftt. 

47  Xhcn  they  of  the  tityflmt  them 
out,  anb  ftoppeb  bp  the  gates  Ibitb 
(tones. 

48  thereupon  SJubas  fctu  bnto 
them  in  peaceable  mancr,  faying  -,  %tt 
I  ns  paiTc  though  your  lanb  to  got  into 
our  orbnc  countrcy,  anbnouc  (bail  boc 
you  any  hurt,  lbcibrtloncly  paffctho; 
roll)  on  footc :  bolbbctttbey  lboulb  not 
open  bnto  him. 

49  D3hcrcfo2c5ubastommaunbcb 
ap2oclamationto'bc  maoe  tfuougrjout 
thchoflc,  tfiatcucrymau  flioulb  pitch 
his  tent  mthc  place  Vbhcre  he  ibas. 

50  g)o tlje  fonlbicrspitcfjeb ,  anb af 
faultcb  the  city  all  that  bay,  anb  all  that 
night,  til!  at  the  length  the  city  ibas  be 
liucrcb  into  his  haubs: 

51  naho  then  flcib  all  the  males  lbith 
ti)ecbgcofthcfnjo2b,anbrafcb  the  city, 
atibtooliethcfpotlesthcrof,  anfipafTcb 
tl)2ongh  tl;c  city  oucc  tljcm  that  ibere 
name. 

5i:Mcrthisiucntthcyovtfr'3JD2ban, 
into  the  great  plame  bcrbjciiocthfan. 

53  3lnb  3iubas  gathcrtb  together 
thofc  that  ||  tame  bchmb,  ami  ii  erho2teb 
the  people  all  the  il)ay  tlnough ,  till  they 
camctnto  theiaub  of  Jjubta. 

54  5)0  they  lbcnt  bp  to  mount  S)ton 
iDith  ioy  anb  giaburfle,  inhere  they  of 
fcrco  ||  burnt  offenngs,  becaufc  nor  one 
of  them  iberc  name,  bnttli  tljcy  Ijjd  ic 
tttrncb  in  peace. 

~w        <,<,  iBoib 


I  Iiuiti.vid 
bit  company. 


\\Or,vtnt 
hindmvj}) 
IVtlM  IO*lf 

\\Or,com'or- 
teJ,or  cucoh- 

\\r«seoff<- 
rt'iffjofeph. 
yh.nq.  1 1, 
I  1- 


Apocryp. 


ia. 


LMaccabees.  Apocrypha. 


them  inh<:- 

tcll. 


ten. 


f  Cr.  firm- 


55  &o\\)  lbljat  ttmeas^lubasanb 
31  onatljan  lberc  m  tl)c  lanb  of  eaiaab, 
anb  Sumou  Ijts  bzotljcr  m  Galilee  be- 
foze  0tolcmais, 

56  gjofcplj  trjc  tonne  of  zacoarias, 
aub  2t5ar  ias,captamcs  of  tlje  gartfons, 
Ijcarbof  tlje  uaiiatttactes  anblbarltUc 
beebs  luijtclj  tlicy  Ijab  Done. 

57  !8ljercfo2ctljcyfa!b,3LctUsairo 
getusanamc,anbgocfignt  agamft  tlje 
Ijcatljcn  tljat  arcrounbabout  us. 

58  5>o  lUljcn  tljcv  Ijab  guten  cljargc 
Unto  tlje  ganfontljat  mas  ttntlj  tljcin, 
tIjcyiucnttoiuatbs3Jainma. 

59  %ljcn  tame  <3o?gtas  anb  me 
men  out  of  tlje  cttietto  figtjt  agamft 
tDem. 

60  stub  fo  it  was ,  tljat  ^lofcpl) 
anb  Farias  lucre  put  to  fligfn,  anb 
purfueb  Unto  tlje  botbers  of  3Jubca, 
anb  trjete  lucre  flame  tljat  bay  of  tuc 
people  of  3fftael  about  tu>o  tljottfanb 
men. 

6i  Xljtts  lUas  tljcrc  a  great  otter 
tljjolU  among  tlje  cljUtycn  of  ^Trael, 
becaufc  tljey  lucre  itot  obebient  Unto 
gjubas,  anbljis  metijjen,  buttljougljt 
toboefomcuaiiantact. 

6%  ^ojeouce  trjefemen  tame  not  of 
tljcfccbof  tDofc,  byiunofc  Ijaubbcltuc- 
rantc  lUas  gtucn  Unto  31ftacl. 

6j  Doibbcit  tlje  man  3Jubasattb  l)ts 
bKtl)2cnibcce  greatly  rcnolUncbin  tlje 
figot  of  all  51fcacl ,  anb  of  all  tl)c  Ijca- 
tljcn  lUUcrcfocucr  tljctr  name  lUas 
DcarD  of, 

64.  gjttfoinuclj  as  tlje  people  aflcm= 
bleb  Unto  tljcmiDitl)  topfull  awiamatfc 
ons. 

65  3tftcriuarb  ibctu  3Jubas  foonl) 
Untljljtsbictmcu ,  aub  fouglu  agamft 
tljerijilbzcnofCfauintnclanbtolUarb 
tlje  5>outI) ,  lUljcrc  l)C  ftnotc  I?eb:ou, 
anb  tlje  t  rownes  tijereof ,  aub  pttlicb 
bolbttc  t!)cfo.2trcffcof  tt,  anb  burnt  tlje 
tolUncstljercofrounb  about. 

66  jprom  tljcntcljc  rcmoucb  to  goe 
into  tlic  lanb  of  tl)c  tplnitlhncs,  anb 
paffeb  tlnougo  Samaria. 

67  3lttljat  timcccrtatttcpucftsbcfi 
rousto  fliciu  ttmr  uaiour,  lberc  flame 
m  battcii,fot  tljat  tljcv  went  out  to  figlj  t 
Unabmfcbly. 

68  Sjo'jubas  turncb  to  3teotusm 
tl)cianboft!)evM)iUftntcs,aubiuIjeni)c 
Ijatj  pullcb  boibnc  tlictr  altars ,  anb 
burnt  tnctr  tarucb  uuages  Until  fire, 
anDfpoilcbri)cirnttcs,ljcrcturucbutto 
tlKiaubof^lubca. 


CHAP.    VI. 

Antiochus  dieth,  ii  and  contdleth  that 
he  is  plagued  tor  the  wrong  donetolerula- 
lem.  10  Iudas  bellegeththofein  the  towre 
at  Hierufalem.  iS  They  procure  Antic - 
chus  theyongcrtocomeintoludca.  51  He 
befiegeth  Sion,  60  and  maketh  peace 
with  Ifracl:  61  yet  ouerthrowetli  the 
wall  of  S1011. 

v<3$§  2Sout  tljat  time  King  31nti 
^\^ori)us  trauatlmgtljzougli 


V~^  tl)c  Ijtgl)  tountrcys,  Ijearb 
rs^fay  tljat  €ltmats  m  tlje 


i  couturcy  of  pcrfia,  lUas  a 
nttc  greatly  rcnolbncb  fo?  ntl)cs,filucr, 
anbgolb, 

z  31nb  tljat  tljcre  luas  in  it  a  ucry 
rtclj  temple,  lbDercmiuere  litoutrmgs 
of  golb ,  anb  btcftplates,  anb  |l  fluelbs 
ttiljtri)  ^leyanber  fonnc  of  pDtlippe 
tlje  ^accbontan  lamg,  ibljo  retgneb 
firft  among  tlje  <5rctuins ,  Ijab  left 
tljcre. 

3  tefjer cfo:c  Ije  came  anb  fougljt  to 
take  tlic  ttttc,  anb  to  fpoilc  tt,but  rjc  Vbas 
not  able,  bctaufc  ttiep  of  tlje  cme  Ijautng 
IjabiDarnmgtljcreof, 

4  -SRofc  Up  agamft  nun  in  battell : 
5)0  lie  flcb  anb  bepartcb  tljtnte  ibttl) 
great  ijeauineflc ,  anb  returncb  to  26* 
bplon. 

5  iT3o2Coucr  tiiere  came  one,  lUDo 
Utouglit  m  ttbingsintopcrrta,tl)attr)c 
armtrsUjlitcrjibcntagamfttljeiaubof 
^ubca,  lberc  put  to  fltght : 

6  3lnb  tljat  Hvfias  ibljo  ibctu  foul) 
firft  ibttl)  a  great  potucr ,  ibas  bnuen  a* 
rbav'  of  tDc  3jc\ucs,  anb  tljat  tljey  lberc 
mabeftrong  by  tlje  armour,  anb  poVb> 
cr,  anbftojc  of  fpotles,  ibljtrljtljcyljab 
gotten  of  tlje  armies,  iDljomt^cy  !pab 
beftroyeb. 

7  ^lfotftattl)cyI)ab  pnllcbbolUnc 
tDc  abomination  lUhtcl)  Dec  Ijab  fct  Up 
upon  fnc  altar  m  'Jtrufaicin ,  anb  tljat 
tljey  Dab  tompafTcb  about  tlic  Sanctu 
auc  ttntn  Ijtgljibals  as  bcfoie,  anbljis 
ntici5ctl)fura. 

8  jftotti  lUlirn  tlje  l$mg  Dearb  tlicfc 
lbo2bs,I)ciuasaftomn)cb,aubfo2cmo' 
ucb,  Ibljereupon  Ijcc  latbc  Inm  boUmc 
Upon  Ins  bebbe,  anb  fcllfttUcfojgncfc, 
bctaufc  tt  Ijab  not  befallen  Ijuu,  asljcc 

lOOUcDfo?. 

9  3itib  tDcrc  Ijcc  tonrmtteb  many 
bayes :  fo?  Ins  grtcfc  ibas  cucr  juojc 
anb  mote,  aub  Ije  mabc  account  tljat  lie 
fljoulbbic. 

to  iDDcrc 


\\OrjArmenr 


Apocrypha.  Chap.v), 


Apocrypha.j 


\0r,  bet 

jboHldtdkt. 

hu  [cans 

Ant%ochuili 

turn. 


10  Bahcrcfo2c  he  cailcb  foi  all  bis 
fricnbs,anbfatb  onto  them,Xhc  flccpc 
is  gone  from  nunc  eyes ,  aub  mp  heart 
failcthfozbctpcarc. 

n  3uid  3  thought  llnth  nip  fclfc : 
IJnto  ll?t)at  tribulation  am  3  c°mc> 
anbhott)  gecat  a  flcob[ofmttcctc]  is  it 
ttjhcrcm  no  lb  3J  ann  foz  5  was  boun? 
ttfull,  anb  beloueb  ut  nip  polber. 

it  26ut  notb  3  remember  the  cutis 
that  3  bib  at  ^jerufaiem ,  ano  that  3  \ 
tooUc  all  the  tocffcis  of  golb  aub  Bluet 
that  ibctc  therein,  anb  fetttto  beftrop 
tt»c  inhabitants  of  JJubea  ttnthout  a 
caufc. 

13  3  pcrtciuc  therefore  thatfojthts; 
taufe  tbcfc  troubles  arc  come  bpon  me,  j 
anb  beholb  3  pcritt)  thjough  great  1 
gticfcinaftcangcianb.  I 

14.  Xftcn  tallcb  ocfb20hilipone  of 
hisfnenbs  luhom  Ijc  mabc  ruler  ouct 
ailhisreaimc: 

is  anb  gauc  htm  the  croibnc  anb  rjus , 

robe ,  anb  rjis  fignct,  to  the  enb  ||  fjcej 

tftoulb  tying  fep  bis  fonnc  annochus, 

'anbnounfli  binibpfoztbcamgboinc.  | 

i6  S>o  Ring  antiothusbtcb  there  ut: 
thcbunbzctbftntp  anb  ninth  peer  c. 

17  0oVo  £bl)cn  Hpfias  bnclb  that, 
ttjemnglbas  bcab,I)e  fct  top  3Jntiocl)us  j 
hisfonne(ti)hombchabb2oughttopbe>: 
tng  pong)  to  reignc  m  bts  ftcab.anb  ftis 
namcbccaiicbeupato?. 

is  about  ttjis  time  trier  tbatiberc  in 
thetoHwefbutbp  trjc^Jfrarlitcstounb 
about  ti)t  <S>anrtnaric ,  anb  fought  ai* 
tbapes  their  hurt,  an&  ti)c  ftrctigtbc- 
ningoftbeheatben. 

19  naberefozc  3Jubas  purpofing  to 
beftrop  tbent, tallcb  all  tlje  people  togc- 
tftertobcficgctrjcm. 

20  5)0  thep  came  together,  anbbc- 
Gegcb  them  inthcbunbzcb  anb  fiftitrj 
peerc ,  anb  Ijc  mabemountsfoz  (hot  & 
gainftthcm,anb[orhcc]cngincs: 

ii  ^oiubett  ccrtamc  of  them  tftat 
tberc  beficgeb  got  fozrh,  tontb  inborn 
fomc  bngoblp  men  of  Jfcacl  iopneb 
tftemfclues. 

22  anbtbeptbcntbntothCRinganb 
faib,  $otb  long  tbilltt  be  ere  tl)ou  ere* 
cuteiubgement,  anb  aucnge  our  b;c- 
tbzem 

23  «Dc  banc  becne  Uniting  to  fcrue 
tfjpfatrjcr,anb  to  boc  asheibouibbauc 
tis,anbtoobcpliiscommaiibcmcuts. 

24  if  0?  ibrjttb  taufe  tbcp  of  our  nati- 
on beftege  toe  tolbzc,  anb  arc  alicnatcb  I 
fcomt>s:fl!9o?couct  as  manp  of  bsas 


thep  coulb  light  on,  thep  acU),auofpot 
leb  our  inheritance. 

25  Neither  banc  thep  Itrctchco  out 
their  Ijanb  agamft  us  oulp ,  but  alfo  a 
gatnft  all  their  bozocrs. 

26  Zwn  beholb  tins  bap  arc  tbcp  be- 
fiegmg  tl)c  toibze  at'JJccufaicm  to  taitc 
it :  the  5>anctuarp  alfo ,  anb  25ctl)fura 
fiauctbepfo2tificb. 

27  QDI)crefo2e  if  tfjott  becftnot  pze- 
ucnt  them  cHiirtrtp,  tbcp  ibtl  boc  greater 
things  then  thefe,  neither  (halt  thou  be 
able  to  rule  them. 

28  jBoiD  Utljcn  tlje  Ring  hcarb  this, 
hcibas  angrp ,  anb  gatbereb  together 
allhi5fncnbs,  anb  tbecaptames  of  his 
armtcanbthofctfjathabtljargeofthc 
bozfe. 

29  Xhcre  came  alfo  Unto  Ijim  from 
other  Kingbomcs ,  anb  from  Rifles  of 
tljc^ca  banbsof  hirebfouloicrs. 

jo  5>o  that  the  number  of  htsarmse 
ibas  an  huitfucb  thoufanb  footc  men, 
anb  tVbcutic  thoufanb  hozfemen,  anb 
ttboanb  thirtp  Elephants  crcrcifcb  in 
battell. 

31  Xhefc  Vbent  thjough  35bumea, 
anb  pitthcb  agamft  25cthf«ca  Whiefj 
tfjep  aflaultcbmanp  bates,  mautngeii^ 
gincs  of  tbarr  e :  but  thep  [of  ©ethfura] 
came  out,anb  burnt  tljeni  ibitl)  fire,anb 
fought  baltantlp. 

32  tBpon  this 3Iubasremoneb from 
the  torb2C,anb  pttcheb  in  2Bath3acljari> 
as.ottcragainftthcKingscampc. 

33  Xhcn  the  Ring  nfmg  berpcarelp 
marcljcb  ftcrcelp  ibithhishofttoibaro 
23ath3acharias ,  ruhcrc  his  armies 
mabc  themreabpto  battell,  anbfouii' 
beb  the  trumpets, 

34.  ^nb  to  the  cub  thep  might  pjo- 
uoUethcclephantstofight.thcpfljcrbeb 
them  the  bloob  of  grapes  9  mulbertcs. 

35  «J0o2coucr ,tljcp  biutbeb  the  bcafts 
among  the  armies,  anb  foz  cuerp  t\t> 
phant  thep  appotntcb  athoufanb  men, 
atmcb  Vbtth  coats  of  male,  anb  luith 
helmets  of  biaftc  on  their  hcabs,  anb 
bcftbes  this,  fo?  cuerp  bcaft  tticre  oibat- 
neb  ftuc  hunbzeb  h02icmen  of  tl)e  beft. 

36  Xhefc  iber  c  rcabp  at  cuerp  occafi- 
on:  rbherefoenec  the  bcaft  ibas,  anb 
Uthttherfocuerpbeaftibcnt,  thcplbcnt 
aifo,ncitherbepartcbtrjn'fromhun. 

37  anb  bpon  the  bcaftes  loerc 
there  ftrong  tolbjcs  of  iboob ,  Uiljirtj 
toucrcb  cuerp  one  of  them ,  aub  iberc 
girt  faft  bnto  them  Hntb  bcuttes  : 
there  mere  alfo  upon  cuerp  one 
z  53  52 nbo 


Apocrypha.  I. Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\\OFfftirruig 

bem^  com- 
pafpdmth 
the  rancher, 
ct  defended 
With  the 
vallcjj. 


herut  ihct 
incited. 


||  Orjm  7n- 

den. 


out  of  hfi'- 
phm,  and 
yccMcd 
chcmfclues. 


\\Or,mjJi 
tkfrrm  nif 

for  pot. 


tibo  anb  tliirnc  ftrong  men  thatfought 
bponthcm,bcfibesthe3Jnbianthatru; 
lebhim. 

38  3s  fo;  the  remnant  of  thcho;fc- 
men  they  fet  them  on  this  fibe,  anb  that 
fibe  ,at  the  tibo  parts  of  the  hoft  ilgiuing 
them  figncsibhattobo,  ano  bemghar 
neffeb  all  ouccamibftthc  ranKes. 

39  jiSoibibhcnthe&unncfhoncbp' 
onthefhtclbs  of  golbc,  ano  bzafTc,  tl)c 
moutttames  gltftctcb  thctcibtth ,  ano 
fljintb  liftc  lampes  of  fire. 

40  g>o  part  of  the  lungs  arnne  be 
tng  fp;cb  bpon  the  high  moumames, 
ano  part  on  the  ualieves  beloib ,  they 
marcheb  on  fafcly,anbm  o;ber. 

4.1  tphcrcfojc  all  that  hcarb  tlic 
uotfcofthctrmulticubcanb  the  march 
tng  of  thceompany,  ano  tlic  ratling  of 
the  l)arncfTr,lberc  mouco:  fo;  the  army 
lbasbcry  great  ano  mighty. 

4.1  Xhenlfiibasanbhishoftbttlb 
nccre,ant)  entreb  into  battcll,anbthcrc 
ibere  Oamc  of  thctungs  army ,  fire  hun- 
b;cb  men. 

43  C£lea5araifo(fpmameD)<g>a< 
uaran ,  pcrteiumg  that  one  of  the 
bcaQs ,  armeb  lbtth  royail  hameffe, 
tbas  higher  then  all  the  relt,ano  fuppo= 
fingthatthelungibasbponhim, 

44  ^uthimfcifcinteoparbie,  to  the 
etio  hec  might  beliuct  his  people ,  anb 
get  htm  a  pcrpctuail  name : 

45  i©hercfo;c  hce  rannc  bponhim 
couragcottfly  thzough  the  mtbft  of  the 
batten,  flaying  on  the  right  hatib,  anb 
ou  the  left,  II  fo  that  they  lbcrcbiutbeb 
from  him  on  both  fibes. 

46  nahich  bone ,  he  crept  bnber  the 
•Elephant,  anb  tfnuft  him  bnber  anb 
ttctb  htm :  lbhcreupon  the  elephant 
fellboibnebponhim.anothcrchcbtcb. 

47  fcoibbcitfthcrcftofthc^JeibesJ 
feeing  the  ftrength  of  the  mug ,  anb  the 
btolcncc  of  his  forces ,  turneb  albay 
from  them. 

4S  CXhcn  the  lungs  armte  Went 
top  to  3U rtifaicm  to  meet  them,  anb  the 
lung  pttchcb  his  tents  llagamftjjubea, 
anbagainftmount5>ion. 

49  But  lbtth  them  that  lbcrc  in 
25ethfura  \)tc  mabc  ||  peace :  fo;  they 
came  out  ofthectfic,  becanfe  tbcyhao 
nobictualsthcic,toenmtrcthcfiegc,tt 
being  a  veerc  of  rcfl  to  the  lanb. 

50  5>o  the  Bmg  toolte  zsethfura, 
anb  fcra  garifon  thereto  Uccpctt. 

51  Us.  fo2  the  Sniuctuartchec  befic- 
geb  it  many  bayes  :  ||  anb  fet  there  ar- 


tillenc  ibith  engins,  anb  intttumentsj 
to  cart  fire  anb  Hones,  anb  pieces  to  tad 
barts.anb  flings. 

51  thereupon  ||thcy  alfo  mabeensiiior.r*, 
gins,  againft  their  engins,  anb  helbe  '""■ 
them  batten  a  lougfeafon. 

53  i^ctat  the  laft  their  bcftclsbeing 
lbtthout  bictuais,(fo;  that  tt  ibas  the 
fcuenth  yeere,  anb  they  m  3Jubca  that 
mere  beltuereb  from  the  ©entiles,  Ijab 
eaten  top  the  refibue  of  thcfto;e) 

54  XhereVbcrebutafelbleftinthe 
Sanctuary ,  betaufc  the  famine  bib  fo 
pmtatlc  againfl  them,  that  they  lbcrc 
fame  to  btfpcrfe  thcinfclucs ,  cucry  man 
to  his  oibuc  place. 

55  3t  that  tune  ILyfias  hcarb  Cay, 
that  Philip  ( ibhom  ^ntiochus  the 
lung  ibhiics  lite  liueb  nab  appointee 
to  bzmg  bp  his  fonnc  ^ntiochus ,  that 
Ijc  might  be  King) 

56  naasrcturncboutof0crfia,anD 
fl^cbia,  anb  the  fsmgs  holt  alfo  that 
ibent  lbtth  him ,  anb  that  hec  fought 
to  taae  bnto  him  the  ruling  of  the 
affaires. 

57  BahertfojehccftentinaUhaQe, 
anb  fatb  to  the  Bmg,  anb  the  raptaines 
of  the  hoft,  anb  the  company,  iscebc* 
cay  bayly,  anb  our  bittnais  are  but 
fmali,  anb  the  plate  Vbec  layficge  bnto 
is  ftrong:  anb  the  affaires  of  the  King- 
bomeltebponbs. 

58  jOoibthercfo^Ietbstbefrienbs  v*f* 
ibith  thefc  men,  anb  matte  peace  ibith 
them.anb  lbtth  all  thetr  nation. 

59  3lnb  coucnant  ibith  them ,  that 
they  fhali  hue  after  their  fLatbes,  as 
they  bib  bcfo;e :  fo;  they  arc  therefore 
bifplcafeb.f  hancbonc  all  thefc  things 
bctanfcttjccaboltfhcb  their  SLaibes. 

<5o  S)o  the  using  anb  the  Ounces 
iberc  content :  lbhercfozchee  fent  bnto 
them  to  mahepcaccanb  they  acccpteb 
thereof. 

6i  3ilfo  the  Bing  anb  the  $;inccs 
mabean  oath  bnto  them  :ibhercupon 
they  ibcnt  out  of  the  ftrong  holb. 

6z  £hm  the  lung  cntrcb  into 
mount  £>ton ,  but  lbhen  hce  falb  the 
ftrength  of  the  place,  hccb;aKc  his  oath 
that  hec  hab  mabc,  anb  gauc  tomman* 
bementto  pull  boibnc  tljc  lball  rounb 
about. 

63  afteribarb  beparteb  hce  in  all 
hade,  anb  rcturncb  bnto  ^ntiochia, 
ibhcrc  hce  founb  Philip  to  bee  maffer 
of  the  citte  •  5>o  he  fought  agamft  him, 
anb  toolte  tljc  citic  by  fojec. 

CHAP. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vij. 


Apocrypha. 


Tripoli* : 
fafeph.  Ant 

lll.lQyll. 

\Gr.  boufe 

dome  ofbu 
father. 


\\Orpjficerf, 
foHtrTjJurj, 
chit fe  men, 
or  mev  m  an 
thoruie. 


CHAP.  VII. 

i  Anciochusisflaine,  andDemetiiusrcigncth 
in  his  ftead.  5  Alcimus  would  be  hie  Pncft, 
andcomplaineihofludastotheking.  \6  He 
flayeththreefcoreAfideans.  43  Nicanoi  is 
flaine,  and  the  kin^s  forces  are  defeated  by 
Iudas.  49  Theday  of  this  viclorieis  kept 
holy  euery  yeere. 

0  the  huntyeth  anu  one 
anb  fiftieth  yeere ,  Deme- 
trius the  fonnc  of  5>clcti; 
tus  beparteb  from  ftome, 
anu  tame  Dp  ttntha  feruc 

men&nto  a  Untie  of  thc.S>ca  toaft,  ano 

reigneb  there. 
1  ^CnD  as  he  cnttcb  into  the  t  palate 

ofhisautcftos,  fottluas,  that  his  for- 

tcs  hat)  taken  ^nttothus  ano  JLyfias  to 

bung  them  Dnto  him. 
j  iehcrefoze  lnhcnhc  Rnctbtt ,  hee 

faib;?Lctmeuotfccthcirfares. 
4.  5>o  his  hoftc  flelbc  them.  jRoib 

tbheu  SDemctrius  «?as  fet  Upon  the 

ttHoneofhtsfttngoome, 

5  ICherctame bntohimallthennt; 
RcbanDl)ngobIymcnof3Jfr3el,hautng 
3nnmus(tt)ho  ttiasbcuroustobchtgh 
Idncft)  foz  their  taptainc. 

6  ^no  they  attufeb  the  people  to  the 
Rmg,faymg;  "Jubas  anu  his  bzcthjen 
haue  name  all  thy  frienbs,  anbb.ziuen 
ds  out  of  our  ottme  lanb. 

7  0oVd  therefore  fenb  fomc  man 
ibhom  thou  trutteft,  anu  let  hmi  goe 
ano  fee  what  hauotRc  he  hathmabe  & 
mongftns,  ano  m  the  lungs  lano ,  ant) 
let  him  puntfh  tljcm  rbith  all  them  that 
aiDcthem. 

8  XhcuthcRutgthoreBatthtbesa 
frienu  of  the  Ring,  mho  ruleb  beyonb 
thefloob,  attbiDas  a  great  man  in  the 
BmgbomcanbfatthfulltotheRing. 

9  3nb  him  Dec  fent  nmh  that  ttuo 
Rcb  3lnmus,lbhom  hee  mabc  high 
$2tcft,anbtominanbeb  that  hefhoulb 
taRc  tocngcatuc  of  the  chiUwt  of  Jf 
racl. 

10  £>o  they  beparteb, anb  tamcujith 
a  great  potbet  into  the  lano  of  3Jubea, 
tbherc  the?  fent  meffcttgers  tojuoas 
ant)  his  b2eth:cnttnthpeatcab!e  mojos 
Dctcitfnlly. 

1 1  25ut  they  gauc  no  heebe  to  their 
rbo:t)S,  foz  they  fame  that  they  vuerc 
tome  ttrith  a  great  poujer. 

u  XhcnbtbthcrcafTemblc  Ditto  Til 
tunus  anb  25atthiocs ,  a  totnpany  of 
ji  ^tribes,  to  recimrc  tufhtc. 


i}  iftomhe  3fl"tbeans mere  the nrrt 
among  the  tlnibzcn  of  'Jfrael ,  that 
fougljtpcateofthcm: 

i+  jFo2,faibthey,oncthattsa02iett 
of  the  feebe  of  3aron,  is  tome  Unth  this 
armie,  anb  l)c  mill  boebsuo  lP:ong. 

15  So  he  fpaltc  unto  them  peatcably, 
anb  ftuarc  unto  them,  faying ;  teeiutU 
pjoture  the  harmc  neither  of  von  no? 
pour  friciibs. 

i6  thereupon  they  bclccucb  htm: 
hoibbeit  hec  tooRc  of  thnu  thzceuwc 
men,  anb  flcluc  them  in  one  bay,  acto? 
biugtothcU)020snjhithhcDj2ote: 

17  *Xhc  flcfh  of  thy  faints  [haue 
they  tart  out]  anb  their  bloob  haue  they 
Q)cb  rounb  about31erufalcm,auD  there 
lnas  none  to  burp  them. 

18  nahcrcfo;e  the  feareaub  b:eab  of 
them  fell  Ppon  all  the  people,  mho  faib, 
Xhcrc  isncithcrtructh,uo2  tnghtcouf 
neffe  inthcnt;  fojthcy  haue  tyoRcn  the 
I  toucnant  anb  othc  that  they  mabc. 

19  Sifter  this  rcmooucb  25atthibcs 
from^emfalcm.aubpitthcb  l)is  tents 
j  m  25e5eth,tt>hm  he  fent  anb  tooRe  ma* 
ny  of  the  men  that  hab  fozfaltcn  hint, 
I  anb  tertamc  of  the  people  alfo ,  anb 
!tt)hEnheha&aaittethnn,[hctartthciifl 
intothegrcatpit. 

zo  Hhen  tommittcb  he  the  tountrey 
to^ltimus,  anb  Icftinitlihunapolucr 
toatDc  him :  fo  isarthibes  ibent  tonto 
tljeRing. 

zi  25ut^lnmus]|tontcnbct)fo.i  tljc 
high  iDztefthoob. 

2x  ^nb  bnto  him  rcfo:tcballfuth 
as  troublcb  the  peoplMbho  after  they 
hab  gotten  the  lanb  of  'Jttoa  into  tljcir 
polbcr ,  bib  muth  hurt  m  ^Ifratl. 

13  iBorb  rbhen  ^ubas  farb  all  the 
mifthtefc  that  Alcimus  anb  his  tompa- 
!  ny  hab  bone  among  the3Jfraelttcs,cucn 
aboue the  heathen, 

14  l^c  lucttt  out  into  all  the  toaft  of 
3Jubta  rounb  about,  anb  tooltc  tocn 

i  gcaiuc  of  thcmtDat  hab  i|rcuolteb  front 
him,  fo  that  they  ourft  no  mo2C|[goe 
fo  02th  mto  the  tountrey. 

15  £>n  the  other  fibc.tbhcn  ^inmus 
faib  that^fubas  anb  histompany  llhab 
gotten  the  Upper  haitb,  anb  intern  that 
hciuasnotableto  tabibc  their fo2te,he 
UjcntagatnctothcRmg.anofaibailthc 
iP02ft  of  them  that  he  coulb. 

26  iEhenthcbmg  fent j3tcano2 one 
of  his  honourable  pjmccs ,  a  man  that 
barcbcablyhatcbnto'lTracMDitlKoiu 
manbement  to  befiroy  the  people. 

Z'l^'i  J  *7  §>0 


•  Pfal.7S». 


X  (jr.  tudge- 


\\0r, labou- 
red to  de- 
fend bu  htgh 
Pnejlhtod. 


\Or,feddc 
from  him  to 
tbeenemte, 
j  I  Or,  um-ide 
tbecountrej. 

orowen  very 

frronr. 

\Gr.tOA- 

pidelbent. 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


Me. 


iGr.fi, 


trfdcel. 


t  Gr.  Meet 
IhJLu  in  bit- 
teS. 

\\1r,C<a- 
fhjfiLema. 


\Gr.4efdei 
them. 


\Gr.wftace 


•  I.  Kings 

19.35.ciai. 

37.36.ee- 

clus.43.::. 

l.DUC.8.19 


27  £>o  ii2icano2  camcto3JenitaIcm 
tbttf)  a  great  fo?ce:  anb  fcuc  bnto3Jn- 
uas  ano  his  b2ctb?cn  Deceitfully  nnth 
t  frictiDlyttwDs,  faying, 

28  Hcttbcrebcnobattcllbcttbcene 
me  anD  you,  3jttJ.ll  tonic  ttnthafcibe 
men,  that  3  may f  fee  you  tn  peate. 

29  $ceamcfbcccfo2eto3Jubas, ant 
they  faiutcD  one  another  peaceably, 
^oibbetttbe  enemies  ibere  pjepaeeb  to 
tafcc  aibav  3Jubas  by  biolcucc. 

jo  nahteh  thing  after  it  ibas  Knotben 
to3mbas  (to  ttiit)  that  he  tame  bnto 
I)tin  ibith  Deceit,  he  ttias  fo?c  afraiD  of 
$int,  anD  tt)oulD  fee  hisface  no  moje. 

31  j53icano:alfo  tt)hcnhcfatt)thathis 
counfcll  ibas  DifcouereD ,  ibent  out  to 
t  fight  agamtt  JuDas  befibes  ||  Caphar  = 
falatna. 

32  ©hetcfherelbereflamcof  ji2ica; 
no?s  fiDc,  about  Sue  thoufanb  men,  anD 
[the  reftj  flcD  into  ttjc  citic  of  SDatUD. 

33  after  this  ibent  iBicano?  bp  to 
mount  £>ton,  anD  there  came  out  of  the 
£>anctnarte  ccrtame  of  the  pjieftcs, 
anD  ccrtame  of  the  elbers  of  toe  people 
to  faiutc  hint  peaceably ,  anD  to  Ihclbc 
him  the  burnt  faenfice  tljatibas  offrcD 
fo2  the  lung. 

34.  23ut hcmocacD tIicm,anD  laugh; 
CD  at  them,  anD  t  abufeb  them  lhamc* 
fully  ,anD  fpasc  pjonbly, 

35  ^nD  fujozc  in  his  ibjath ,  faying, 
bnlefTe^luDasflnDhishoflcbcnolbDc; 
liucrcDinto  my  hanDs ,  if  cuer  3J  come 
againctinfafctie,3  ibiiiburuc  bp  this 
houft:  anb  ttnfh  that  lje  ibctttoutma 
great  rage. 

36  Xhcn  the  pjicfls  entreb  in ,  anD 
ftooD  befojetbe  altar,  anD  the  Semplc, 
ibecpuig,aiiD  faying, 

37  Xhou  £>Uo?D  DtOft  choofc  this 
houfctobccallebby  thy  iSamc,  anD  to 
bca  houfc  of  pjayevaub  petition  fojthy 
people. 

38  25c  aucngcD  of  this  man  anD  his 
hofle,  anD  let  them  fall  by  the  froozD : 
aacmcmbcc  their  biafpbcmics,  anb  fufc 
fer  them  no  t  to  continue  any  longer. 

39  5)0  4?5tcano2  ibent  out  of  3Jetti; 
falem,spitchcDhistcutsin23etho2on, 
lbbcrc  an  hoftc  out  of  5>yua  met  him. 

40  2Sut  3Jubas  pitthcD  in  abafa 
ttnthtbicethoufatiDmen,  anD  there  he 
p2aycD,faping, 

41  '£>|Lo2b,Vbhentheythattt)crc 
fcut  fromthe  mngoftbe  aflyuans  blat 
?bcmcD,tl)iue  angel  ibent  out,  anb 
fmotc  a  huuD.zeD,  foucefco2c,  anD  fiue 


thoufatiDoftocm. 
!  42  cucnfoDcuToythouthishoftbc 
fo:c  bs  this  Day  ,that  the  reft  may  aitoib 
that  he  hath  fpoBcn  biafphcmoufly  a 
gamft  thy  Sanctuary,  anD  inbgc  thou 
him  acco^Dmgto  rjusiDichcDticCTc. 

43  5>o  the  thirteenth  bay  of  the 
moneth  aDar,thc  holies  ioy  neb  batten, 
buti!5icauo2ShotHbasbifccmfitcD,ijhe 
himfclfc  ibas  firft  flame  in  the  batten. 

44  jftoibibhcn  fheanozs  boflfalb 
tbatheibasflainc,thcycafl-aibaythcu; 
rbeapons,anbfleb. 

45  Xhcn  ||  they  purfucD  after  them 
aDayesiourncy  from  aoafa,  bnto  oa- 
fcra,  founDitig  an  alarme  after  them 
ttnththeir  trumpets. 

46  ©hereupon  they camefonh  out 
of  all  the  tottmes  of  jnbea  rounD  n- 
bout,  anb  clofcD  them  in,  fottjat  they 
tnnung  baeHcbponthcm  thatpurfneb 
them,  ibere  all  flame  ttrith  the  fraozD, 
anD  not  one  of  them  ibas  left. 

47  afterrbarDstheytooHcKpoiles, 
anD  the  pjay ,  anD  fmotc  off  inhcanojs 
heaD,  $  his  right  hatiD,  lbhteh  he  fleet 
chcD  outfopzotiDly,  anD  b:oughtthcm 
aibay,  aiibhangcbthcm  bp ,  toibaros 
3lerufalcm. 

4S  fo:  this  caufe  the  people  rcioyceb 
greatly,  anD  they  Sept  that  Day ,a  Day  of 
great  glaDnciTe. 

49  £0o!Coiicrthcyo2DcineD  tohcepe 
ycercly  this  Day,  bnngthcthirtcctith  o< 
aDar. 

50  XhustheianDof3iuDatt)asm 
rcflalitlcibljile. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

1  iudas  is  informed  of  die  power  audpolicieof 
the  Romanes,  10  and  makedi  a  league  widi 
diem.  14  The.irtides  of  that  league. 

g»  €>vo  3Juoas  habhearb  of 
"  5  tiicfamcof  thc&onianes, 
I  thattheyiberc  mighty  anb 
*rv?baiiant  men,  anD  fuel)  as 
.  $8&m  ibouib  loumgly  accept  all 
thattoyncDtljcmfc!ue5bntothcm,anD 
mafee  a  league  of  amine  lbith  all  that 
came  bnto  them, 

2  aim  that  thcylbere  men  of  great 
balour :  3it  ibastolDhmi  alfo  of  their 
ibarrcsanb  noble  acts tt)btch  they hab 
bone  amongft  the  il  C5aiatians,anb  hotti 
thcyhaDconancrcDthcm,anbb2ougI)t 
them  bnber  tribute. 

3  anbibhatthcyhabDonempcoun 
trcyof  5)pamc,  fo2  thcttunnmgof  the 
mines  ofthculucrjgoloibbicljistbcrc 

4  anb 


II  Or, lit 

Inset, 


j|  Orjrexi 
men. 


Apocrypha. 


|  Or  cutry 

fLtcc 


\OrtM*ct 

damans '. 


4  ^uDthatbythcicpolicicauDpfc 
tiencc ,  they  hao  conquercb  ||  all  that 
place  (though  tt  tbere  aery  fatrcfrom 
them)  anD  the  lungs  aifo  that  tame  a* 
gauift  them  frotn  the  tottcrmoft  pact  of 
the  earth  ,till  tljtv  hab  DtfcomfitcD  tticitt> 
d  rjiuen  tljcm  a  great  ouccttjdoU),  fo  tljat 
the  reft  bib  gtuc  them  tribute  cucty  ycrc . 

5  aseuDcsthts,  horo  they  hao  Difc 
comfitcD  ittbattcll01jilip,  anD^erfctts 
ning  of  ttic  i|  Cituusf ,  Xbitft  others  that 
lift  top  themfelncs  againft  thcni ,  anD 
baft  oucrcomc  them. 

6  fcotb  alfo  3lnttochus  the  great 
fting  of  3fia  that  tame  againft  them  in 
battaile ,  baumgan  bunDzebanb  trben- 
tie  elephants  Vbitb  bortemen  anbeba- 
riots,  anDabctygrcatatniic,  VbasDi£ 
comfitcDbytbem. 

7  3lnD  hotb  they  toobc  him  aliue, 
anD  couenantcD  that  Dec  anD  fuel)  as 
reigneb  after  him ,  fboulD  pap  a  great 
tribute ,  anD  giue  boftages ,  anD  that 
ibhicb  vuas  apeeb  bpon , 

8  3inD  the  country  of  fnDia ,  anD 
$$ma,  anD  fLibia,  anD  of  the  goobltcft 
tountries:  vblntl)  tljei»  toofee  of  Dim,anb 
gauetoliing<£umcnes. 

9  ^ojeouerboVbtbec&eeiattSbaD 
DctcrmincDtotomcanDbcftroytljem. 

io  3ltib tbattljcy  bauinglinorblcoge 
tljercof  fent  agamft  them  a  tcctainc  cap< 
taine,  anb  fighting  lbith  tfjem  ftcib  ma- 
ny of  them ,  anb  carieb  arbay  captntcs, 
tljcir  roiues.anb  their  cbilD2en,anD  fpoi- 
leb  tfjctn ,  anb  toofte  pofleflion  of  tljcir 
lanbs,  anb  pulleDDoibne  their  ftrong 
bolDS,anD  Drought  them  to  be  their  for; 
uantsbnto  this  Day. 

ii  [3Jtibas  tolb  him  befiDes]  Dotb 
they  DcfttoycD  anb  brought  tmbcr  tljcir 
bominion ,  all  other  Btngbomes  anb 
iOcs  that  atauy  time  tcfiftcD  them. 

ii  26ut  ibitb  their  fcictibs ,  anb  fuel) 
as  rclicb  Dpon  tl)tin  tijep  Kept  atnitie: 
anb  tljat  tbey  baD  conqucrcD  King; 
Domes  botbfarrc  anD  nigb,  infomucb 
as  ail  that  ijcarDofthcirnameruercas 

fraiD  of  tljcm. 
13  ^tbatVbijomtbcyiDoulDbclpe 

to  a  HmgDomcthofc  raigncanD  inboin 
againctbcyttroulD,  tljcyDifpiacc :  final-- 
IV  that  tbey  Vbcrc  greatly  craitcD. 

i4j3ctfo2ailthiS,noneoftbemrb02C 
accoMtcoz  roas  clotijcB  in  purple  to  be 
magnmcD  thereby. 

15  £l9oicouctljoi\)tbcyhaDmaDcfo? 
themfelues  afenatebourclbbcrin  tbjee 
IjunDjeD  anb  ttbentie  men  fate  utcoun- 


Chap.viij.  Apocrypha. 


fell  Daily,  confuitmgaUDap  fa?  tlje  peo- 
ples tljc  cnb  tbey  mightbe  Vbcl  oroereo 

16  3lnD  tljat  tbey  tommittcD  tljcir 
goncrnment  to  one  man  cucry  v«re, 
VbljortiieD  ouer  all  their  couutrie,  anD 
tljat  all  mere  obeDicnt  to  tljat  one ,  anD 
thattbcrcrbasnettbctcnuy.uoiemuia; 
tionamongft  tljcm. 

17  3n  ronfiDeration  of  tl)efc tilings 
giuoas  chofc  cttpolcmus  tljc  fonncof 
3Jo!m,  tDe  fonncof^lctas,  anD^afon 
tlicfonncof  <£lca5ar,  anbfcnttljcm  to 
Home  to  malic  a  league  of  amtticanb 
confeDcratie  lDitl)  tljcm, 

18  [^nD  to  intreatc  tljcm]  tljat  tocp 
VboulD  tafec  the  pone  fromtl)cm,fo? 
tljcvfaft  tljat  tile  femgDomc  of  tljc  Ore; 
tians  DiD  opp?effe  3Jfracl  ttntlj  fcruituDe 

19  XDep  ujent  tl)erefo?c  to  Kome 
(tbljiclj  Vbas  a  Dcry  great  iournep)  anb 
camcintotl)c^>cnatc,Vbl)crctl)cvfpaHc 
anbfatb, 

io  ^ubas  flpattabcus  Vbitlj  l)is  bzc- 
tljjen ,  anb  tljc  people  of  tDe  fellies, 
Ijauc  fent  t)S  Dnto  ?ou,  to  mane  a  confe- 
Dcratie, anb  peatc  Vbitlj  pou ,  anD  tljat 
tbcmigDtbctcgiflrcD^ourtonfeDcrats 
anbfrtcuDS. 

21  ^>o  tljat  matter  pleafcD  tije  3Ro* 
mantsibcll. 

xi  SwDtnis  is  tfte  topic  of  tljc  CpifHe 
tbljitli  (tljc  S>cnate)Vu?otc  bacbe  agaiuc,  I 
in  tables  of  bjaffc :  anb  fent  to  %rufa; 
lem ,  tljat  tljerc  tl)cv  migljt  Ifatie  bp 
tljcm  a  mcmonal  of  peace  %  conftberatv. 

z3  d5oob  fucceffc  be  to  tljc  Romans 
anbtott)cpcoplcoftljc31clbes,bv^)ea, 
anb  b?  lanD  fo?  cucr :  the  froo?D  alfo  anD 
encmicbefarrcfrom  tlicm, 

24  3!f  tljerc  come  firftanv  *bam 
Dpontljc3Komanso.janvoftljcirconfc- 
Dcrats  tliiougljout  all  tljeir  Dominion, 

25  Xljc  people  of  tljc  gieVbes  Ujail 
Ijelpctljem,  as  tljetimcfljallbt  appoint 
teD,tt)itlialltI)eirl)cart. 

26  iScifocr  fijaitljcvgiucanv  thing, 
Dnto  tljcm  that  mane  iDar  Dpontljem, 
ojaibc  tljcm  lbtth  Victuals,  Vbcapons, 
moncv,  ox  fljips,asit  hath  fecmeb  gooD 
Unto  tlje  Romans,  but  thcyujaiiftccpe 
their  couenant  Bjitljout  tailing  any 
thmgthcrcfojc. 

27  3Jntljefamemancr alfo,ifibarrc ! 
come  firlt  topon  tlje  nation  of  tljc 
3JcU)CS ,  tlje  Romans  fhall  hclpc  them 
toitlj  all  tljcir  heart,  actojDing  as  tljc 
tunc  ujall  be  appointeb  tljem. 
28iftcithcrfhalbictualsbcgtuentothc' 
tljat  talic  part  agauul  tljc,  0;  Uicapous, 

oj 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


^Gr.heaa- 
dederprc- 
ce tied to 
feU 

H  Or,  the 
rt^ht  mn%, 

\OrjG«!ile* 


Or.'Ber- 
nth o.  Jo  J! 


02  montv ,  02  fijips,  as  it  Ijaffj  fecmcb 
goob  to  the  Romanes-,  but  tfjey  (ball 
Hcepe  tDett  coucnants,  anb  tljatttntD- 

OUtbCCCtt. 

29  accojbiug  to  tljefe  artitlcsbib  tljc 
Romanes  mane  a  touenam  tbtth  nje 
people  of  tlje  3J«bcs. 

30  $olbbcit,ifbercafterfDconepar: 
tie  02  tijeotber ,  (ball  tljtnfteniccte  to 
abbeozbimintfb  any  tDing,  tbey  may 
boc  it  at  tDeir  plcafurcs,  anb  tbljatfo 
eucrtDcy  (bail  abbe  02tafteaibay,lbai 
beratifieb. 

31  %xfo  as  toucbing  tlje  eufts  tDat 
3Demetrius  boctlj  to  rtje  jetties,  lbec 
baue  nmttcn  bnto  Dim,  faying,i©be«' 
fojcDafttDoumabetljyyoBebeauiebp; 
on  our  fnenbs,anb  confebctats  tlje 
3Jetbcs; 

31  'JftbcccfojctDcyeompiaineany 
tnojc  againft  tDee:  Vbcc  null  boetbem 
iuftice,  anb  figUt  ttntlj  tbec  by  fea  anb 
bylanb. 

CHAP.    IX. 

Alcimus  and  Bacchides  come  againe  wirh 
new  forces  into  Iudea.  7  Thearmicoflu- 
das  flee  from  him,  17  andheisflaine.  30 
lonatharjismhisplace,  40  audreucngetli 
hisbrother  Iohns  quarrel!.  55  Alcimus  is 
plagued,  and  dieth.  70  Bacchides  makerh 
peace  with  Ionachan. 

SPJ^giS?  tHrtbermoje ,  lbljen  3De- 

a  mctciusDcarb  tljat  j!2ica 

J?  no?  anb  tys  l)o(le  lucre 

i*f»S?  flainc  {n  battell, f  becfent 

TfesiSa-&  aSaccbtbcs  anb  alcimus 
into  tlje  lanb  of  3Jubca  tlje  feconb  time, 
anb  Vbitlj  tljcm  tljc  Hcljicfc  ftrcngtlj  of 
Disbofte. 

z  i©l)o  tbetufojtl)  by  tbc  ibay  tbat 
leabertj  to  ||  ©algala ,  ant)  pitcbebtbetr 
tentsbefoje  fcWaloft)  ,U)bulj  isin  Zt 
beia,anbaftcrtbcyDabibonncit,tljcy 
(IclbmucD  people, 

3  airotbcfirftmouefljoftbcDun; 
ojet)  fifnt  anb  fcroub  ycccc ,  tlje?  encani- 
pcObcfozc^crufalctn. 

4.  5Fconnbbcuce  tbcyrcmoucbanb 
Tbcntto  ||  loccca,  ttutb  ttticntte  rtjou 
fanbfoonncn,anbabotl)oufanbl)ojfc- 
men. 

5  /ftoib  3fubas  !)ab  pitebco  bis 
tents  at€lcala,anb  tlj?ce  tDoufanb  cljo^ 
fenmcnibitDbim. 

6  ioIjo  feeing  tljc  multttube  of  t!)c 
otberarmy  to  be  fo  great,  lbcre  fojca* 
fraibc ,  lbljercupon  many  conueycb 
tljcmfclucs  out  of  tlje  boftc,  tnfomuclj 


as  tljere  abobe  of  tfjem  no  moe  but 
eigijtDunb?cbmen. 

7  m\)tn  3(ubas  tljerefoze  (am  tljat 
Dis  Doftc  flipt  atbay,anb  tDat  rtjc  battel! 
p?efTeb  bpon  Dim,  De  ibas  fo?e  ttoubleb 
m  mtnb,  anb  mud)  biftrcflcb  fo?  that  Dc 
Dab  no  time  to  gatber  fDem  together. 

s  iiScuertDcicffebntottjeinnjatre* 

maincb4)efatb;lLetbsanfeanbgoebp 
againft  our  enemies,  if  perabuenture 
ibe  map  be  able  to  figljt  rbittj  njem. 

9  25ut  tljep  DcDojtcD  Dim ,  faying, 
naee  fl^aii  ucucr  be  able :  ||  ?Letbs  noib 
ratDer  fauc  our  hues,  anb  Dereafter  Ibe 
ibill  rcturnc  ibitD  our  bjtenjjcn ,  anb 
ggDt  agamtt  tljcm :  foj  ibelare  but  fcib. 

10  XDen  3Jubas  faib ,  ©ob  fojbib 
tDat3)fDoulbboctl)istDiug,anbfleea:= 
ibapfromtDem  :^jf  ourtimc  become, 
let  bs  Hit  manfully  fo?  our  bjetDjen, 
anb  t  letbs  not  ftaine  our  Donour. 

11  !0itDtDattDeDoae[of25accDibes] 
remoucb  out  of  tDeir  tents,  anb  Boob  o* 
uer  againtt  ||  trjnn,  tDeir  Do?femcn  be* 
mgbiuibcbinto  tlbo  troupes,  anb  tDeir 
nmgers  anb  arcDcrs  going  befoze  tlje 
Do(te,anbtDcytDatniatcDtbintDefo2e* 
lbarb  lbcre  all  migDty  men. 

u  ^sfo225accDibes,DecibasintDe 
rigljt  ibtng,  fo  tDc  Dotte  b?cib  ncere  on 
tlje  tibo  parts,anbfounbeb  tDeir  trum* 
pets. 

13  ICDcyalfoof^ubasGbctuentDcy 
founbebtDeirtrumpetsalfoXotDattDc 
eactD  fl)oo&cattDenoifeoftDe  armies, 
anb  nje  battell  contmueb  from  mo^ 
nmgtilimgDt. 

14  ^5oVb  lbDcn  3fubas  perceiueb 
tDat26accDibcs  anb  nje  ftrcngtlj  of  bis 
armieibercontbe  rigljtfibc,  Dc  tooac 
ibitlj  Dim  all  tDe  tjarby  men, 

15  ©Do  bifcomfitcb  tDc  ngljt  ibing, 
anb  purfueb  tljcm  bnto  tlje  mount 

3(50tUS. 

16  23ut  tbljcn  tbey  of  tlje  Icftlbing, 
faib  tDat  tljey  of  tl)c  rigljt  ibingibcrc 
bifcomfitcb ,  tDcy  follolbcb  bpon  3lus 
basanb  tDofe  tDat  Vberc  ibltD  Dim  barb 
at  tljcDcclcs  from  bcljmbe : 

17  naljcrenpon  tDcre  ibas  a  fojc  bat- 
tell, infomucD  as  many  ttiercaatneon 
botD  parts. 

18  3Jubas  aifo  ibas  Wllcb,  anb  tfje 
remnant  flcb. 

19  XDcn  3fonat!jan  anb  Pinion 
toobc  3Iubas  tDctc  bjotDcr ,  anu  buricb 
him  in  tlje  fepulcljic  of  ijts  fathers  in! 
!59oDtn. 

ao  £0o2coucr  tljcy  berbailcb  fiunJ 
anb1 


hcrctke'Rg. 
mint  cope. 


\gr.lctvt 

"otlejue  an 
^vlicnufe 
bchm4cvtt 
^thj  our 

rjTjIhouli 

riinfi. 

';0',b, 

IeirtJ, 


Apocrypha.  Chap.ix. 


\\B4cckU-s 

and  hi;  co'n- 


\(ir,f»€t-i  "d 


||  Or,  Which 
when  Bac- 
(hidet  v*- 
derflood,o* 
the  SubtAih 
day  he  came 
neerc. 
\\hf.Antui 

\  (Jr.  that  he 
might  teaue 
tnth  them 
thtir canape 


M£< 


anb  all  Jfraei  maDc  great  lamentati* 
on  fojhim.anD  moutncDmanpDapes, 
(aping; 

21  $o\b  is  the  baliant  man  fallen, 
thatDcltuereojftael* 

22  %&  foj  the  other  things  conccr* 
ntng  JuDas  *nb  his  ibarrcs ,  anb  the 
noble  attefi  tbhich  he  bib,  anb  his  great* 
nefle >  thep  ate  not  Ibnttcn :  fojthep 
ibercbcrpmanp. 

u  C/!5orb  after  the  beath  of  Ju* 
Das,  the  tbtcfttb  began  to  put  fooitli 
their  heabs  in  ail  the  eoafts  of  3lfcaci, 
ant)  there  tofc  top  all  fuel)  asibjought 
fntquitie. 

24  Jnthorcbapcsalfoibasfherca 
bcrp  great  famine ,  bpreafon  ibhctcof 
the  counttcp  rcuoltcb ,  ano  ibent  ibith 
llthtm. 

25  1Chcn  zsacchtbes  thofe  the  ibtc* 
neb  men ,  anb  maoc  them  locoes  of  the 
eounttep. 

26  3nD thep  mabe  enquiric  $fcareh 
foj  JuDas  frtcnos,  aub  fought  them 
bnto  25acchibcs,\bhotoofcc  bengcancc 
ofthem.anDtbrebthemDcfpttefulip. 

17  5>o  tbas  there  a  great  affliction 
in  Jfracl,  the  line  ibhcreof  lbas  not 
Qntc  the  time  that  a  $?ophet  ibas  not 
feenc  amongft  them. 

28  5?oi  this  caufc  all  Jubasfrienbs 
tame  together ,  9  faib  bnto  Jonathan, 

29  &mce  thp  toother  JuDas  DieD, 
ibehauc  nomanli&chim  to  gocfoo.tth 
againtt  our  enemies,  anb  asacehibes, 
anDagainft  them  of  out  nation  that  arc 
abnerfanestobs. 

50  ^otb  therefore  tbtehauethofen 
thee  this  bap  to  be  out  pnnce,  anb  cap* 
taincmhis&eab,thatthoumapeafight 

out  battels. 

3  1  sapon  this ,  Jonathan  tooae  the 
gouernancebponhtmatthatttme,anb 
tofebpinttcab  of  his  toother  JuDas. 

32  ©utibhenffiacchtDesgatRnolb* 
lebge  thereof,  he  fought  foz  to  flap  him. 

33  XhenJonathananDS>imonhis 
brother,  anb  all  that  ibctc  ibith  him, 
pertctuing  that,  flcb  into  tbettnlberncs 
of  Xhceoc  ,'anb  piteheb  their  tents  bp 
the  ibatcr  of  the  poole  3fphar. 

34.  ||i©hich  lbhenffiaccbtbesbnbct 
ltooD,hc  tame  neerc  to  Jojban  ibith  all 
his  hoflebpon  the  Sabbath  bap. 

35  #oib  Jonathan hab  fent his too* 
thcr  HI  John]  acaptamc  of  the  people, 
to  pzap  his  fnenbes  the  #abbatbites 
t  that  thep  might  leaue  finth  them  their 
cariagctbhtchibasmuch. 


Apocrypha. 


36  23uttheehUtocnof  Jamtoi  came 
out  of  «S9cbaba ,  anb  toottc  John  ano 
all  that  hec  hab ,  anb  ibent  their  ibap 
ibith  it. 

37  3ftet  this  camcttwb  to  Jona- 
than anb  &>imon  hts  brother ,  that  the 
ebittwt  of  Jatntot  mabe  a  great  ma? 
nagcanbibcrebnugingthctoibcfrom 
||  /fraoabatha  ibith  a  great  tramc ,  as 
being  the  Daughter  of  one  of  tlje  great 
pnnces  of  Canaan. 

38  Xhcrftoc  thep  rememtoeb  John 
their  brother,  anb  ibcntbpanb  hibbc 
themfciues  bnbet  the  couert  of  the 
mountaine. 

39  nahetc  the?  lift  bp  their  epes,  anb 
looUeb,$bcholb,there  ibas  much  aboe 
anb  great  cartage:  anb  thetotbegrome 
came  foojtb,  anb  his  friehbs  9  toethjen 
tomcetrocmlbith|!DnmisaiiD||tnfrtu* 
ments  of  muDche,aub  manp  ibcapons. 

40  Xhen  Jonathan  anb  thep  that 
ibere  Ibith  him ,  rofe  bp  againfl  rtjem 
from  the  place  tbherc  thep  lap  in  am* 
bufl) ,  anb  mabe  a  flanghter  of  them  m 
fuch  fo?t,  as  manp  fell  bourne  bcab,  anb 
the  remnant  flebbe  into  tljemountame, 
anb  thep  toobe  all  their  fpoiles. 

41  Xhtis  ibas  the  manage  turneb 
into  mourning,  anb  thenotfeof  thctr 
melobp  into  lamentation. 

42  ;§oJbhenthcphaDauengeDfuiip 
the  bloob  of  their  brother ,  thep  tnrncb 
againc  to  the  marifb  of  3Io?oan 

43  &0V0  ibhen  25acchibes  hearb 
hereof,  hec  came  on  the  £>abbath  bap 
bnto  the  banhs  of  3f  o?ban  tbuh  a  great 
poiber. 

44  Chen  Jonathan  fapbc  to  his 
companp,  Hetbsgoebpnotb  anb  fight 
fo?  our  lines,  fio?  it  ftanbeth  not  ibith  bs 
to  bap,  as  in  time  pad: 

45  Sfo?  bcholb ,  the  battell  is  befoje 
bs  anb  bchlnbe  bs,  anb  tl)c  ibatcr  of 
Jojban  on  this  fibe  anb  that  fibc ,  the 
marifb  UBcibife  anb  iboob,  neither  is 
there  place  fo?  bs  to  turne  afibc. 

46  i©herefo?ecrppenoibbntohea* 
ucn,  thatpc  map  bebeliuerebfromthe 
hanb  of  pour  enemies. 

47  i©ithfhattheptopncDbartel,anb 
Jonathan  ftrctcheb  foozth  hishanbto 
finite  ffiacchiDcs,  bntljce  turneb  bacac 
from  htm. 

48  Xhen  Jonathan  anb  thep  that 
Ibcrc  ibith  hmi.leapt  mto  Jo:ban ,  anb 
!fmammeouerbnto  the  farther  banuc: 
hoibbctt  the  other  paffeb not  oucr  Jo: 

Dan  bnto  them. 

49  £>o 


II  Or,  Aft- 


\\Or,limlrell 
WJr.mtifri- 


I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\Ttto  then- 

landmen. 

lefcfb.axt. 


\\Iefefh.Tt- 
{ho*. 


fgr.  theel 
tutnBeth- 
furtt. 


49  :£>o  tljcrc  mere  Came  of  ffiacchi 
Dcs  fibc  tljat  Day  about  atthoufanto  men 

50  aftcrVbarb  returneb  fasatchtDcs] 
to  3>erufaiem  ,anb  ||  rcpaircb  the  ttrong 
cities  ttt  3Jubca:  the  fo?t  m  3Jcricho,anb 
cmmaus,  anb26ctho2on,  anb26cthcl, 
anb  Xhamnatha,  #harathoni,  anb 
||Xaphon(d)cfcbtbhcBrcngthcnitoith 
high  rbals,itoith  gates,  ?  ttnth  batres.) 

51  ^nbtnthcmhcfctagatuon,  that 
they  might  ibozbc  malice  bpon3!fracl. 

51  ^efomncoaifotthccitiezscfhfu' 
ca,  anb  <3a5ara,  anb  the  toitojc,  anb  put 
fo2tcsinthcin,anbpjouifionofbictuals. 

5$  26cfibes,DetooBcthccl)icftmcns 
fonncs  in  the  counter  fo?  h  oftages,  anb 
put  them  into  the  toibjc  at  3fetufalcm 
tobehept. 

54  ^o?eouct,  uithchunb,icb,fiftic 
anb  thirb  ycrcin  tUc  feconb  nionctb,3lfc 
ctniuscoinmatibcb  that  the  ttiaiiof  the 
inner  court  of  tl)e  jSanctuatic  ujottlb  be 
pulleDtoolbne,hcpullebborbncaifothc 
ttwbsofthepzophcts. 

55  2{nb  as  be  began  to  pull  bottme, 
euen  at  that  tunc  ibas  3lctmus  pia= 
gueb,  anb  Ins  enter pjifes  binbcrcb:  fo? 
his  month  Vbasftoppcb,anb  be  tbasta; 
ben  lbith  a  paltie ,  fo  that  bee  coulb  no 
mo.zc  fpeabe  any  thing,  no;  guic  ojber 
concerning  hishoufc. 

56  £>o  Glomus  bicb  at  tljat  time  lbitb 
great  tomicnt. 

57  /f2ouiibhen23acthtbesfaibthat 
3lnmns  lbasbcab,  he  returneb  to  the 
lung  ,  lbhernpon  the  lanb  of  3Jubca 
ibas  tn  reft  tlboyccrc. 

58  Hbcnalltbcbngoblymenbclba 
counfell, faying,  26cbolb,  ^Jonathan 
anb  hiscompanic  are  at  cafe,  anb  bvbell 
llntboutrarc :  notb  therefore  ibee  ttill 
bung  25acchlbes  hither,  lubo  (ball  tabc 
them  all  m  one  mght. 

<9  £>o  they mcut, anb  tonfultebttmh 
him. 

60  Xhen  r cmoucb  he.anb  tamcibitb 
a  great Ijoflc.anb  fent  letters  puuily  to 
his  abherents  in  gjnbea  ,  that  they 
Cbouibtabcjionatban,  anb  thofc  that 
iberc  Until  him :  lioibbcit  they  coulb 
not,bccaufc  their  counfell  mas  bnotbeu 
tonto  tb  em. 

6i  nabcrcfoKtbcytoobc  of  the  men 
of  thecountrcy  that  mere  authours  of 
that  mifchtcfc,  about  fifttc  pcrfons,  anb 
OcVbthcm. 

6z  Sifteiitoarb  Jonathan  anb  &v 
t non,  anb  they  that  iberclbith  hun,  got 
tbcma\bayto23ctbbafi,tt)bicbisintbe 


itoilbetttcffc ,  anb  they  rcpaireb  the  be 
caves  thereof,  anb  mabc  it  ftrong. 

63  nabitb  thing  ibben  iBaccbibcs 
hneito.hegatbeTebtogctbcraiibisboft, 
anb  fent  Hwb  |]  to  tl)ent  tljat  ibere  of 
3JuDca. 

64  3Eben  Ibent  he  anb  laito  fiege  as 
gaititt  zsctbbau",  9  they  fought  agatnft 
it  a  long  fcafon ,  anb  niabe  engines  of 
itoarre. 

65  asut  Jonathan  left  his  toother 
Smnon  in  the  citie,  anb  ibent  faith  him^ 
fclfemto  the  countrcy,  anb  itoitb  acers 
taine  number  rbcntbe  fo«b. 

66  3lnbbcfmctc||£>bonarbrsanto 
htstoet1)?en,anbtht  tbUtycn  ef  $bafr 
ron  in  their  tent, 

67  ^n&rbbenhebcgantoftmtetbem, 
anb  came  top  ttntb  his  fours,  &imon 
anb  his  company  ibent  out  of  the  nttc, 
anb  burnt  top  the  enguies  of  itoarre, 

6S  3inb  fought  agatnft  25accbibes, 
itooo  itoasbifcomfttcb  by  tbem,anb  they 
afflutcb  him  foje.  jfo?  bis  counfell  anb 
trauaiicitoasmbaine. 

69  JSbCTcfortbetbastoetyitootbat 
tbeitoicbcb  menthatgauc  him  counfell 
to  come  into  the  countrcy,  mfcmuth  as 
beOcibmany  of  tljem,  anbpurpofebto 
rcturneinto  bis  otbne  countrcy. 

7°  ©hereof  ibhen  Jonathan  bat) 
bnorblcbge,  bcfentambaflabDurs  ton? 
to  htm,  to  the  enb  he  Ojoulb  mabc  peace 
5totthh»!i>?beliucrrhmitijcp,jifoticrs. 

71  nahich  thing  hec  acccptcb,  anb 
bibaccojbingto  his  bemaunbs,  anb 
ftaare  tonto  him  that  hcciboulbneuet 
boe  htm  harmc  all  the  bayes  of  his  life. 

71  aohcnthcrcfiuchcchabrcfrojcb 
tonto  him  the  piifoncrs  tljat  Ijehabta? 
ben  afojetime  oiu  of  the  lanb  of  3Jubea, 
hercturneb  anbltocnt  his  itoay  into  hts 
oibneianb,  neither  tcamc he  anymore 
into  their  boibcrs. 

73  Xl)us  the  frootfeeareb  from  31 
racl :  but  Jonathan  btticlt  at  £0ach' 
mas,anb  began  to  t  goucrnc  the  people, 
anb  he  bcftroyebtijetongoblymcn  out 
ofjfraci. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Demetrius maketh  largeoffcrs  tohauepcacc 
with  Fonathan.  15  His  letters  to  the  Iewcs. 
47  Fonathan  maketh  peace  with  Alexander, 
50  V/ho  killcthD-metrius,  58  andmaricth 
the  djugluerol  Prolomeus.  62.  Ionatlian  is 
lent  lor  by  him.und  much  honoured,  75  and 
preuaileth  againA  the  forces  of  Demetrius  the 
yonger,  84  &  burnetii  the  temple  of  Dagon. 

. 3Jn 


i'  Or}  tofuch 
cftbecotm- 
srey  as  were 
lit  friends  to 
'  tkf  hu  parr. 


7r,0dj- 
.  rrrrf. 


I  Gr.  added 
hetaccmoe 


\gr.iudpt 


Apocrypha. 


ci 


lap.x. 


Apocrypha. 


jtrmc  of  "*■ 
tiacbut  £/><- 
phtwei. 


g?f3£l  thchutrtncfl)  9  fttttcth 
**  yetc;aicranbcr  the!  Tonne 
of  Slnttochus  furnamcb 
K  Cptphancs,  ibctit  Dp  anb 
y«*>>«^t6oBeiDtolcmais  :  fojdjc 
people  hao  reectucb  htm,  by  mcattcs 
lbhcrcof  he  rctgncb  there. 

i  51501D  lbhctt  Ring  2>emctruts 
hearb  thereof,  he  gathcrcb  together  an 
crcccbuiggrcathou\anbtt)cntfoo2tha' 
gamftlr.m  to  fight. 

3  Q5o2coucrS)cmctrius  feat  letters 
Pnto  -Jonathan  ttnth  lotting  ibojoes, 
foashcmagmncbhmi. 

4  f02,fatbhcc,  &ctbsftrftmaKc 
pcaccttnthhunbcfo^ehctoync  ibid)  % 
leiranbcragamrtps. 

5  €lfc  he  1M  remember  ailtlje  cutis 
that  IPC  hauc  none  agamQ  htm,  anb 
agamft  his  bzcthzen  anb  his  people. 

6  nahcrcfojehegauehunauthonty 
to  gather  together  an  holt,  anbtopio 
uibclbcapons  thathecmight  aibe  htm 
at  battel! :  he  rommaunbcbalfo  that  the 
hoftages  that  iberctn  the  tottwThoulb 
bcbclutcrcbhtm. 

7  Xhcncamcjonathantojcru' 
falem.anbrcab  the  letters  ttt  the  aubt 
ence  of  all  the  people,  anb  of  them  that 
lttercinthctottw. 

8  nahoiPcrcfozeaftatbttihcnrtjcy 
hearb  that  the  Ring  hab  guten  hint  an* 
thoittic  to  gather  together  anholt. 

9  ©hereupon  the?  of  the  tottnc  be- 
Uttcrcb  their  hoftages  nnto  Jonathan, 
thcbeliucrcbthem  Pnto  their  parents. 

io  Xhts  bonCJonathan  fctltb  htm 
felfcmgjcntfaicm,  anb  began  tobutlb 
anb  rcpairr  the  cttic. 

1 1  3lnb  he  commannbtb  thcttiodse^ 
men  to  butlb  the  ibais ,  anb  flic  mount 
!§>iou  rotmb  about  tbith  femare  Hones, 
foi  fo2tt&catton,anb  they  btb  fo. 

12  Xhenthcftrangcrs  that  lberem 
the  fo2treffcs  lPhtch  ffiacdjtocs  hab 
burtt,flebaipay: 

13  Jnfomuch  as  eticry  man  left  his 
place,  anb  ibent  into  his  oibnc  country. 

14.  £>nclp  at  35ctl)fitra  certainc  of 
tljofcthat  habfo2falunthc  latb,anb  the 
commaunbcments  rcmatneb  frill:  fo2 
ttUMS  thctr  place  of  refuge. 

15  /!5oitott)hcnfmtg3ileranbcthab 
hearb  u>hat  pjomtfes  SDemctritts  hab 
rent  bnto  Jonathan :  ibhcn  alfo  tt  ttms 
tolbhtmof  the  battels  anb  noble  acts 
ibhtch  he  % l)isi)zctn;cn  hab  bone,  anb 
of  the  pames  that  they  hab  tnburcb, 

i6  i?e  faib,&haiibcfmbuuh  another 


man  t  #oiP  thetenwe  ibc  lPill  maltc 
himottrfrtcnb,  anbconfcbcratc. 

17  clpott  this  he  ib,20te  a  letter  anb 
fent  tt  pnto  htm  accojotng  to  thefc 
lbojbsTaymg : 

is  Bing  3ilcraubcr  to  Ir.s  b2othcr 
JonathanTcubcth  greeting: 

19  naehauchcarbof  thee,  that  thou 
art  aman  of  great  polbcr ,  anb  mcctc 
tobcourfrtenb. 

20  nDhcrefo2c  notti  this  bap  tt>c  02 
bamc  thee  to  bee  the  high  p«cftof  thy 
natton,anb  to  be  cailcb  the  umgs  fncttb, 
(anb  thcrcttjsthail  hefent  himapurplc 
robcanbatrottmcofgolbyanbrcautrc 
thee]  to  taitc  our  part,  anb  Uccpe  frtcub 
fbipttnthbS. 

11  £>otnthc  fcucnthmonethofthc 
hunb:eth  anb  firtteth  yerc,  at  the  feaft  of 
the  Xabcrnatles,3Jonathau  put  on  the 
holy  robe,  anb  gathcrcb  together  fo:- 
ccs.anb  p2outbcb  mud)  armour. 

22  aDhcrof  iPhcnSDcmctritts  hearb, 
he  lbas  Pery  fey , anb  fatb, 

23  nahat  hauc  ibe bone  that^icran- 
bcr  hath  pmtcntcb  Ps,tn  matting  amity 
ttnth  the  Jetties  to  ftcengthcnhtmrclf* 

24  J  alfo  ttnll  lP2tte  Pnto  them 
ib02bs  of  encouragement  [anb  pjcimfc 
thcmlbtgmttes  anb  gtfts,  that  J  may 
haue  thctr  aybc. 

25  $c  Cent  Pnto  htm  d)erefo2C,to  this 
effect :  1&tng  Demetrius  Pnto  the  peo- 
ple of  the  Hetties,  fenbeth  greeting: 

26  BShercasyou haueltcpt coucnants 
ttnth  bs,  s  connnncb  m  our  fnctisfhtp , 
not  ioyntng  your  fclucsttnth  our  cue 
mtcs,tt)chattc  hearb  hereof,?  are  giao: 

27  nahercfojc  notti  continue  yec  mil 
to  be  faithful  bnto  bs,  anb  ibe  ttnll  lbcll 
recompcncc  you  fo?  the  things  you  boc 
tnourbehalfc, 

28  ^nb  ttnll  grant  you  many  tnmut' 
nlttcs,anb  gittc  you  reibarbs. 

29  3tnb uoiP  3  boc free  you,anb  fo? 
yourfaRe^telcafcailthCJeiPcsfcom 
tnbtttes,  ano  from  thecuftomes  of  fait, 
anb  from  rroibnc  tarts, 

30  ^nb  fro  that  lbhtch  appertained) 
Pnto  me  torccctttc  fo2thctlnro  part  of 
the  fecb ,  anb  the  halfc  of  thefrtut  of  the 
ttccs^  rclcafc  it  from  thtsbay  fo2th,fo 
that  they  (hall  not  bctalten  of  thclano 
onfubea.notofthctlKcegoucrimirnt!; 
ibntch  arc  abbcb  thereunto  out  of  the 
country  of  £>amariaanb  ©aide ,  from 
thisbay  fo?th  fo?  euermo2C. 

31  Hct  gjcrufaiem  alfo  bee  holy 
anb  free,  lbttlj  the  bobbers  thereof, 

both 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


t  Gr.wrf/^f. 


\\Qr,cfthe 
holy  things. 


both  from  tenths  ana  tributes. 

i%  3tnb  as  fo:  the  tovoit  ibtjith  is  at 
Jerufalem ,  3  ycclb  Dp  my  autho?itic 
oucr  u,  ant  giuc  tt  to  the  high  p?teft, 
thathemayfetmitfuchmenashefbaii 
choofetoUeepett. 

33  £0o?eouer  3  fccclv  fct  at  hbertic 
euery  oneof  the  J/elbcs  that  l&erecar 
rtcbtapnuesoutof  thelanbofjubea, 
into  any  part  of  my  Umgbomc,  anb^J 
lbtll  that  ail  my  officers  remit  the  tri 
butes,euen  of  their  cattell. 

34  5furthermQ?c,3J  mill  that  all  the 
3fcattsanb£>abbaths#j13cibmoones 
anb  foiemncbaycs,anb  theth?eebaycs 
bcfoje  toe  5f  call,  anb  t!)e  tfyeeoayes  af- 
ter toe  jfeaft,  than  be  all  bayes  of  im- 
munittc  anb  frcebomfo?  all  theUeujcs 
tn  my  rcalmc, 

35  3llfo  no  man  than  Ijauc  autho?i- 
ticto  mebblc  lbuh  them ,  o?  to  molctt 
any  of  them  in  any  matter. 

36  [3  null  further]  that  there  be  en^ 
rollcbamongft  the  Rings  fo:ccs  about 
tljtrttethoufanbmcuofrhejcibcs.tm ' 
to  ibrjom  pay  fljail  be  giucn  as  belong 
gcth  to  all  the  Kings  fo?ccs. 

37  ZWQ  of  tDcm  fomc  fljalbcplaceb1 
m  the  lungs  (Icons  i)olDs,  of  umom  ai ; 
fofomc  fljall  be  fet  oucr  the  affaires  of 
toe  luugbomc ,  tt»I)irh  are  of  truft :  anb 
gituilltgat  their  oucrfccrs  anbgcuer  i 
nours  beof  thcmfelues,  anb  tOat  they 
time  after  tlmr  oibnclaines ,  eucnas 
tlic  "Sing  hath  commanbcb  in  the  lanb 
ofjubea. 

38  3tnbconccmingtoctl)2ecgouem^ 
ments  that  arc  abbeb  to  3Iubeafrom 
thccountrcy  of  Samaria,  let  them  be 
loyncb  lDitogjubca,  that  they  may  be  i 
rccfeoncb  to  be  Dnbcr  one,  no?  boimb  to 
obeyotl)crautl)02Utct!)cnplugopjicflc 

39  3ts  fo?  ptolcmats  anb  the  lanb! 
pertaining  thereto ,  "Jsiue  it  as  a  free 
gift  to  tljc  Sanctuary  at  ^erufaicm, 
to:  tlic  ncteffary  crpcttccs II  of  tljc 5>an- 
cniary. 

40  tBo:eoucr ,gj  giuc  cucry  y ccr c  fif 
tccucthouianbfbcliclsof  ftlucr,  out  of 
toe  Bings  accompts  from  the  places 
appertaining. 

41  5iub  all  the  ouerplus  lbhtch  tl)e 
offtcerspayeb  not  in  asinfo?mcr  time, 
from  Ocncefo:tl)  fhaibc  giucn  torbarbs 
the  ftio:Ucs  of  toe  ICemplc. 

41  3tnb  befibcs  this,  the  fine  toou- 
fanb  (heliels  of  filurr ,  Which  they  tooUc 
feomthebfesof  thelTcmple  out  of  tlic 
accompts  yccre  by  ycerc ,  cuen  thofc 


things  fl)all  be  releafcb,betaufe  they  ap- 
pertamc  to  toe  i&ieftsthat  minitter. 

43  3tnb  lbhofocuer  they  be  tljat  flee 
bntotrjcXemplcat^jerufaiem ,  0:  be 
Withm  tljc  liberties  tljereof ,  being  in* 
bebtcb  unto  tljc  using,  o:fo:any  other 
matter ,  let  them  be  at  libertic ,  anb  all 
tfjat  tljey  Ijauc  in  my  rcalmc. 

44  iro?  toe  bntlbtngaifo  anb  repai 
ringoftlje  ibo?Ues  of  toe  Sanctuary, 
crpcnccs  fhaibeguten  of  tljc  Btngs  ac> 
compts. 

45  Pea,  anb  fo?  the  builbing  of  the 
ttiallcs  of  gicrufaicm ,  anb  tljc  fo?tu> 
mg  tOcrcof  rouub  about ,  erpenecs 
fljall  bee  gtnen  out  of  tlic  Bmgs  ae- 
tompts,  as  alfo  fo:  builbmg  of  the 
tballcsmgjubea. 

46  jftoiblbhen  Jonathan  anb  the 
people  oearb  thefe  Vbo?bs,thcy  gatie  no 
crebitc  into  them,  no?  rccctucb  them, 
becaufctljcyremcmb?eb  the  great  eutll 
thatheljabbonc  injfrael;  fo:  heehab 
afflictcb  thembcry  fo?e. 

47  i5utrbtth3Jlcranbcr  they  Ibcrc 
Ibcll  plcafcb ,  becaufchce  teas  the  firfl 
that  cntrcatcb  of  i  [peace  itotth  tljctn,anb 
they  ibcrc  confebcrate  Vbitlj  tjuu  at 
itoaycs. 

43  Xhcngatl)ereblting5lleranber 
great  fo?ccs,  anb  eampeb  oucr  agatnft 
Demetrius. 

49  3nb  after  tlje  rtbo  Sings  hab 
toyncb  battcll,  Demetrius  hofte  f\tt>: 
but^leraubetfolloibcbarterhim.anb 
pjcuailebagainftthcm. 

$0  3utb  he  contmueb  the  battcll  bcry 
fo?c  bntill  tljc  Sumuc  ibent  boibncanb 
rijat  bay  lbasaDcnicmus  name. 

51  3lftcribarb  aicranber  fent  €m- 
ba(Iab02S  to  £>tolcmc  lung  of  €gypt, 
Vbitlj  a  meffage  to  this  effect; 

51  5fo?romuchas3iamconicagamc 
to  my  rcalmc,  anb  am  fct  inthetlj?onc 
ofmyp:ogcntto?s,aubhauc  gotten  the 
bonumon ,  anb  ouerth?oiben  Dcme- 
tnus,  anb  retoucreb  our  countrej', 

53  (ifo?  after  3  hab  toyncb  batten 
ibitl)  him ,  both  he ,  anb  his  hoflc  ibas 
bifcomfitebby  bs,  fo  that  )be  fit  m  the 
th?one  of  his  Uingbomc ) 

54  il5oiD  therefo?c  let  ds  matte  a 
league  of  amine  together ,  anb  giuc  me 
nom  thybaugljtertovbifc:  ^^ibillbc 
thy  fon  m  larb.anbUnli  giuc  both  thec 
aim  her  ,giftsacco:bmgto  thy  bignity. 

55  1Chenv>tolemcthe  kinggauean- 
ftucre,  faying,  i^appy  be  the  bay  inhere 
mtljou  bibbcfl  rcturne  into  tlje  lanb  of 
thp_ 


I  True. 


Apocrypha. 


ci 


lap.x. 


thy  fathers ,  anD  feteft  in  tfje  throne  of 
tljctcfcmgtiomc. 

56  3lnDnolblbill3JDoctothee,as 
thou  haft  Written :  meet  mc  therefore  at ! 
l&tolemats,  that  wee  may  fee  oncano -\ 
thcr,  tor  3J  will  marry  my  Daughter  to 
thccatcorDingto  thyDcfire. 

57  &oitKoloiucWentoutof<£gypt 
With  hiSDaughtcr  Cleopatra,anD  tljev 
tame  tmto  ^tolemats  m  the  htuiDreD 
threefcore  anDfceonD  yecte. 

58  nahece  Ring  aieranDcr  meeting 
him,  gaue  Unto  him  his  Daughter  Cleo 
patra,  ano  tclcbratcD  her  marriage  at 
i2>tolemaiswithgreatgiory,asthema; 
ncroffetngsis. 

59  /9ow  Ring  3IeranDer  hat)  writ 
ten  tmto  Jonathan,  that  hee  fhoulD 
come  anD  mccte  him. 

60  asho  thereupon  Went  honoura- 
hip  topolcmais,Wherehc  met  the  two 
Rtngs,ano  gaue  them  ano  their  frtctiDs 
nmcr  anD  goiDe ,  anu  manp  prefents, 
ano  founD  fauouc  in  their  fight. 

6i  at  that  time  tertatnepettilentftl; 
lowes  of  jjjfracl ,  men  of  a  WitReD  life, 
affcmblcD  thcmrelttes  againa him,  to 
accufc  him :  but  the  feing  woulD  not 
hcacethem. 

6%  #ca  more  then  that,thc  Ring  tonv 
manDeD  totaReoff  ins  garments,  anD 
tlothe  him  in  purple :  anD  they  Did  fo. 

6j  atfohemaDehimfitbphhufelfc, 

anD  iaiD  tmto  his  pnnces ,  ©oe  Ibith 
htm  into  the  miDfl  of  the  city ,  anD  maae 
proclamation,  that  no  mancomplainc 
agamft  him  of  any  matter,  anD  that  no 
mantroblchimforanymancrofratifc. 

64  jBoW  When  his  attnfers  fawc 
that  he  was  bonoureDaecorDws  to  the 
proclamation ,  anD  tlofheD  m  purple, 
they  flcD  all  away. 

65  &o  the  Ring  honoureD  him ,  anD 
Wrote  him  amongfthls  thiefe  fnenDS, > 

Worker.  anD maDchimaDtiRe,anD||partaRetof ! 
MHr'ofrpro.  his  Dominion. 

66  siftcrwarD  Jonathan  rcturncD 
to  3Jcrutalem  With  pcaceano  giaoncs. ; 

67  furthermore,  m  the  hunDreth 
threeftore  anD  fifth y cere,  came  2>eiM' 
ttiusfonne  of2Demetrius,  out  of  Crete 
into  thcianD  ofhis  fathers. 

6%  ©hereof  Tbhen  Ring2tieranDer 
hearDtell,hewasrtghtfo;!y,anD  retire- 

neDinto3inttoch.  M    „ 

69  Xhen2DemetritiemaDe5lpoUo< 
niusthe  gouernourofCoclofytia  his 
generai,TbhogathcrcD  together  a  great 
boftc,  anD  campcD  in  3Jamnta,  anD  tent 


Apocrypha. 


unto  ^Jonathan  the  high  #ncft,faytng, 

70  Xhou  alone  ufteftbp  thy  feifea^ 
gautftbs,  aiiD^amiaugheoto  fcome 
for  thy  faRe ,  anD  rcprocheD,  anD  ibhy 
Docft  thou  Daunt  thp  power  agatnft  bs 
luthcmouutaines; 

71  &o\\)  therefore  If  thou  traft eftiu 
thine  ownc  ftrcugth,comc  DoWnc  to  Ds 
into  the  plaint  RclD,  anD  there  let  bs  trie 
the  matter  togcther,fozibitbme  is  the 
power  of  the  tittes. 

71  3ifftcattDlearnetbho3l3m,auD 
the  reft  that  taRe  our  part,auD  they  fhai 
tel  thee  that  thy  foot  is  not  able  to  ftanD 
before  our  faccfor  thy  fathers  haue  bene 
tibice  put  to  flight  in  their  oiDnelanD. 

7 J  nahercfore  now  thou  (halt  not  be 
able  to  abibc  the  hoifcmcnanD  fo  great 
a  potter  in  the  plame,  Where  is  neither 
ftouc  nor  flmt,nor  plate  to  flee  bnto. 

74  SoWbcn^onathanhearDthcfe 
WorDSof3Jpollonms,hcwasmoucDin 
bismtnD,$thoofingtcnthoufanDmen, 
hclbcntoutofJcruCaie.WhcreSmion 
bis  brother  met  him  for  to  belpebim. 

75  anDheepttchcDhistentsagamft 
3J oppe:  but  they  of  3Joppe  (but  him  out 
of  the  citic ,  becaufe  3ipollomus  tjao  a 
garifon  there. 

76  Xben 'Jonathan  laiDficgcbnto 
it :  thereupon  they  of  the  nty  let  him  in 
for  feare:?fo  "Jonathan  wan  3foppe. 

77t©berofWbcn3tpQllomushrar&, 
he  tooRe  tbiectboufanDhorfenien  with 
a  great  hoftcof  footmen,  anD  ibentto 
^otusiias  one  thattourncyeD,$  there 
Withal  |l  Drew  him  forth  into  the  plame, 
becaufe  he  haD  a  great  number  of  hojfc- 
men,  in  Whom  heputhistruft. 

78  Xbeu^JonatbanfolloWeD  after 
bun  to  3l50tiiS>  Where  the  armies  tov 
ticDbatttll. 

79  #oW3tpolloniusbaD left  a  thou* 
fanD  hozfemen  m  ambufb. 

So  3nD Jonathan  RneW  that  there 
ibas  an  anibitfbmcntbcbinDebmi;  for 
they  haD  tompaffcDmbtshoft,  anD  call 
Darts  at  the  people.fcom  morning  till 
euentng. 

81  25ttt  the  people  ftooDftill,as3Jo 
nathau  haD  commanDeD  thcin:  anD  fo 
the  ||  enemies  borfes  Were  tircD. 

82,  Xhen  brought  Simon  forth  his 
hofte,  anD  fet  them  agamft  the  footmen , 
(fortbeborfmenWcrefpcut)  Who  ibere 
DiftomfttcD  byhim,anDflcD. 

83  lEhehojfemeualfo  bnugfcattereD 

inthefielD,fleDtoa30tus.atiDttictitinto 

BethDagStlicir  tools  temple  fo;  fafeiy. 

aaaaa       s+asut 


would 
p.ilf:  iba- 
rewtt. 
\\Or,  Udhu 


tof.Antuf, 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


84  25ut3JonatDanfctfireon3l5o* 
tus,  anuttjc  cities  rounb  about  it,  anu 
tooRc  tDeit  fpotlcs,  ant>  tDc  temple  of 
3>agon,  lbitDtDemtDat  tbetc  flcbtnto 
it,  Dc  burnt  VbttD  fire. 

85  XDustDereYbcrc  burnt  anb  flaine 
tt)iti)  tDc  troo?b,  Ibell  ntfll)  cigDttbou- 
fanbmeti. 

86  2lnD  from  thence  gionatljan  re 
moueo  bis  Dofte ,  anb  campeb  agamft 
3fcalon,ibDerctDc  men  oftljc  city  tame 
fo?tb,aitbmetDun  IbitD  grcatpompc. 

87  sifter  tDis,  returneb  3lonatrjau 
anb  l)is  Dofte  bnto  3Jerufalem ,  fjaumg 
many  fpotlcs. 

88  /ftotblbbcitmngSacranberbcarb 
tbcfe  things,  De  bonourcb  3tonatban 
yetmoje, 

89  31nb  fent  bun  a  Dur&fc  of  golbe, 
astbcbfcistobegiuentofueDasareof 
tDc  Rings  bloob :  tjegaue  Dim  alfo  ^cca= 
ron  rbitf)  tbc  bojbers  tDcrcof  in  poflefc 
Con. 

CHAP.   XI. 

u  Ptolomeus  taketh  away  his  daughter  from 
Alexander,  and  entreth  vpon  his  kingdome. 
17  Alexander  is  ilaine,  and  Ptolemeusdieth 
within  three  dayes.  10  Ionathan  befiegeth 
the  towre  at  Ierufalem.  16  The  Ie wes  and  he 
aremuchhonoured  by  Demetrius,  48  Who 
isrefcued  bythelcwesfromhisownefubiec'rs 
in  Antioch.  57  Antiochustheyongerhonou- 
rcth  Ionathan.  6\  His  exploits  in  diuei  s  places 

/15b  tbc  Ring  of  £gypt  ga? 
tljereb  togctljet  a  great 
Doft  URe  tljc  fanb  tljat  Uetrj 
bpontDe^cafbojc,  anb 
many  fljips,  anb  ibentfr 
bouttiwougl)  Deceit  to  gct^lcranbers 
atngbome,  anb  toyncitto  rjis  olbtte. 

2  j©Detcupon  De  tooHc  tjisiournep 
into  £>yzia  in  peaceable  mancr ,  Co  as 
tDey  of  tl)e  nties  openeb  bnto  Dun ,  anb 
tnetbun:  foj  Ring3llcranber  Dab  com- 
manbeb  tljcm  fo  to  boc,  becaufe  tje  ibas 
DisfatDecinlattj. 

3  /ftoibasptolomcecntrcbtntotDe 
cities,  lie  fet  in  cucry  one  of  tljcm  a  gari- 
fon  of  foulbicrs  to  heepe  it. 

4  3mbibbcnbccamcneereto3i50; 
tus,tl)cyfl)cn)cbl)imtl)ctempleof2>a* 
gontbatibasburnt,  anb^otus,  anb 
tl)c  fuburbs  thereof  tDat  ftcrc  beftroy^ 
co,  anb  tbc  bobies  tbat  lbcre  taft  a 
bjoab ,  anb  rrjem  that  i)c  I)ab  burnt  in 
tbc  battci!,foj  trjcv  Dab  mabe  beapes  of 
tbcm  by  tDciuayiDrjerc  Dc  fljouio  paffc. 

5  alfo  tDcy  tolb  tDc  Sing  Vbljatfoc 


uec  ^onatljan  Dab  bone,  totbetntent 
DcmigDt  blame  Dim:  but  tDc  Ring  Delbe 
lj is  peace. 

6  %\)t\\  3JonatDan  met  tDc  Ring 
IbitD  great  pompe  at  3Joppa,  ibljcre 
tljepfaluteb  oneanotDer,anbt  lobgeb. 

7  3tftcttbarb  UonatDan  lDDen  \yt 
Dab  gone  itJitD  tDc  Ring  to  tDc  titter  eai; 
leb  cicutDtrus,  returneb  againe  to  31c? 
rufalem. 

8  ^ing  i&tolomeetDcrefojcbauing 
gotten  tDc  oomimon  of  tDc  nties  by  tDc 
fca,  bnto  5>cleueta  bpon  tDc  fca  coaft, 
:  unagincb  ibicRcb  counfcisagam&aicr. 
anber. 

9  rtaDcreuponDefcntcmbaOabours 
jbnto Ring 3>cmctrtus, faying,  Come, 
'  ictbs  make  a  league  bcttinrt  bs,  anb  3 
jibtllgiue  tDccmybaugDtcr  VbDomeSfc 
I  leranoer  IjatD,  anb  tDon  fljait  rcigne  in 
tDyfatDcrsUmgbomc: 

io  5Fo?3Jrcpcnt£3FgaucmybangD: 
ter  bnto  Dim,fo?  DcfongDt  to  flay  me. 

ii  1EbusDibDeflanberbfm,becaufr 
Dc  voas  befitous  of  Dis  Rmgbome. 

iz  MSDcrefo^DctooKeDisoaugDtcr 
fromDim,  anb gaueDer  to  Demetrius, 
anb  fojfoo&e  ^Jieranbcr,  fo  tDat  tbeir 
Datreb  tbas  openly  ftnolben. 

13 1CDcn  ptolomec  cntreb  into  ^nti- 
ocD,  ibDere  Dc  fct  tVbo  crolbncs  bpfi  Dis 
Deab  ,tDc  croibnc  of  3fia,anb  of  «gypt. 

14  ^n  tDc  mcanefeafonibas  Ring  21? 
leranbcr  in  €ilicia,bccaufe  tDofe  f  bibclt 
in  trjofc  parts,  Dab  reuoltcb  from  Dim. 

15  25ut  ibljen  ^leranber  Dcarb  of 
ttjts ,  Dee  came  to  tbarre  agamft  Dim, 
lbDcrcupon  Ring  ptolomte  b;ougDt 
foitl)  Ijis  Doftc ,  anb  met  Dim  IbitD  a 
migDtic  poujet,  anb  put  Dun  to  fligDt. 

16  5>o  ^leranbcr  flcb  into  Arabia, 
tDetc  to  be  bcfcnbcb,bnt  Ringptolomec 
Ibaseraltco. 

17  5roj  zabbicl  tDc  Arabian  toofic 
off  3lcranbcrs  Dcab ,  anb  fent  it  bnto 
£>tolomcc. 

18  Bing  ptolcmee  alfo  btcb  tDe  tljirb 
bayaftcr,t?tDcytDattt>cretntbcttrong 
Dolbs,ibcrcfla(nconc  of  anotDer. 

19  25ytDtsmcancs30cmetriusrcig* 
neb  in  tDc  bunbjctb,  tD?celto?c  anb  fo 
uentDyctre. 

to  %t  tDc  fame  time  3IonatDanga= 
tDetcb  togctDcr  tDcm  tDat  lbere  in  3n- 
bea,totaRc  tDctoibjc  tDat  ibas  m^le' 
rufalcm,  anb  Dc  mabe  many  engines  of 
ibarrcagainftit. 

ti  XDen  tcrtainc  bngobly  perfons 
tt)DoDatcbtDciroibncpeople,U)entbn' 

to 


f  Cr.jltft. 


thoftthas 
were  in  the 
holds  rrere 
jlanecfihcfi 
tbat  rrerc  w 
the1  ...is. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch 


ap.x 


££CJ. 


AP 


ocr 


[|  Iofym- 


to  the  Ring,  anb  tolb  htm  that  Fionas 
tljanbcGcgeDthe  to«j?e» 

n  lEhereofrbhenhc  hearb,hcibas 
angry ,  anb  immcbtatcly  tcntotimg,  he 
tan  to  ptolcmais ,  anu  ltyotc  unto  Jo- 
nathan ,  that  he  vhonlbttot  layuege  to 
thctolbic,  but  tome  anb  fpeaRc  lbtfh 
him  at  0tolct  nais  m  great  haftc. 

ij  iScucrtljelcffc  Jonathan  lbhcn 
be  hcarb  this ,  comtnanbcb  to  befiege  it 
[OiUlanu  he  chofc  cCttatnc  of  the  eibers 
of  llfrael,  anu  thepnefts ,  ano  put&inv 
fclfeinpertll, 

14  3nb  tooRe  filucr  anb  golb ,  anb 
tayment,  atib  Diucrs  pjtcfents  bcubes, 
attbibcntto^tolemais.bntothcRiiig, 
ibhetchcfoimbfauourmhts  fight. 

x5  3nb  though  ccrtaute  bngobly 
men  ofthcpcoplc,ljabniabc  complaints 
againfthtm, 

16  mt  the  umg  cntreatcb  him  as  his 
pzebeceflbzs  Ijab  boncbefoje,  (spzomo- 
tcb  htm  in  thcftgbt  of  ail  his  fttenbs, 

17  3fnb  confirmcb  him  in  the  high 
pncfrljoob,anbinallthcbonoursthat 
heehab  before,  anb  gatic  him  p;ccmi* 
nencc  among  his  chicfc  frtchbs. 

is  Chen  Jonathan  bcfircb  the 
Ring,  that  hce  lboulb  maRc  giubcafcee 
from  tribute,  as  alfo  thctlnccgouertfc 
ments  lbtth  the  tounfrcy  of£>amana, 
$l)cp?omifeDl)imtI)?cel)unb?cb  talents 

29  5>o  the  Ring  confentcb  anb  ibjotc 
letters  bnto  3Ionatha\t ,  of  an  thefc 
things  after  this  matter. 

jo  fstng  3Demetrius  bnto  his  bjo- 
fher  Jonathan,  anb  bnto  the  nation  of 
the  3jett)cs,fcnbcth  greeting. 

31  wt  fenb  you  heerc  atopic  of  the 
letter ,  lbhich  lbc  bib  lbntc  bnto  our 
eoufin?Larthcncs,concctutngyou,  that 
you  might  fee  it. 

31  Iking  SDcntctrutS  bnto  his  fa< 
tljct  jUffljcnes,fcnbcth  grectttig : 

33  naearcDctermtneb  to boc goob to 
the  people  of  thejeibcs,  tbljoarcour 
friettbs,  anb  Rccpecottcnants  lbtfh  bs, 
bctaufe  of  their  goob  mill  toibarbs  bs. 

34  ||  nahcrefojc  lbc  hauc  ranftebbtu 
to  them  the  bo?bccs  of  3Jubca,ibith  the 
thjeegouernments  of3lphcrctna,  anb 
1LtDba,attbftamatIjcin,tIjataccaDDcb 
bnto  Jubca,  from  thctoutttric  of  £>a< 
mum,  anb  all  things  appertaining  bm 
to  them ,  fo?  all  fitch ,  as  boc  facrtficcitt 
Ifccttfalcm ,  in  ftcab  of  the  paiments, 
lbhich  the  Ring  rccctttcb  of  them  yccrcly 
afo?ctimc  out  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth, 
anb  of  trees. 


35  3ltib  as  fo:  other  things  that  be 
long  bnto  bsoftbc  tithes  anb  cufromes 
per  taming  bnto  bs,  as  alfo  the  fait  pits, 
anb  tljc  trolbnc tares,  lbhich  arc  Due 
bnto  bs,  lbc  bifchargc  them  of  them  all 
fo:  their  rcltcfe. 

36  3utb  nothing  heereof  Qjail  be  rc- 
uoRcb  from  this  tunc  foozth  foz  cucr. 

37  ifroib  thcrcfozc  fee  that  thou 
maRc  a  coptc  of  thefc  thtngs,anb  let  it  be 
bcliucrcb  bnto  Jonathan,  anb  fctbpon 
the  holy  mount  in  a  confptcttotisplacc. 

38  3iftcrthis,lbljenRmg2>cmetrius 
faib  that  the  lattb  ibas  ouict  befoze  him, 
anb  that  no  rcftftanccibas  mabc  agatnft 
him,  he  fent  albay  all  his  forces  euerp 
one  to  Ijts  oibnc  place,  crecpt  tertaine 
banbs  of  Grangers,  ibhom  hehabga 
theeeb  from  the  lies  of  the  heathen, 
ibljercfoiic  all  the  fozecs  of  Ijts  fathers 
Ijatcbhim. 

39  ^ojeotter  there  mas  one  Xrp- 
Phon ,  that  hab  becne  of  2Ucranbcrs 
part  afo?c ,  ibho  feeing  tljat  all  the  hottc 
mucmurcb  agamtt  3Dcmctrtiis,ibcnt  to 
£>imaleticthcatabtan,tbatb:oughcbp 
3nnochuspyongfonncof;a!cranDcr, 

40  &nD  lap  fojcbponhmt,  to  belt-- 
ucrhim[thisyoutig3mttothus]thathe 
might  ratgncm  his  fathers  fteab  :  he 
tolb  hun  therefore  all  tljat  £>cmctrius 
Ijab  bone ,  anbljoib  ins  men  of  lbarrc 
acre  at  enmitte  ibtth  Jjtm,  anb  tljcre  Ijc 
rematttcba  longfcafon. 

41  3In  the  mcanc  time  Jonathan 
fent  bnto  Ring  2?cmctrius,  that  rjee 
lboulb  tad  thofc  of  tljc  toYo;c  out  of 
3lcrufalcm ,  anb  thofc  alfo  in  the  fo;; 
treffes.  foi  thev  fought  agatnft  3Jfracl. 

42  5>o  ©emctrutsfent  bnto  3Jon& 
tljan,favmg,  ^ttJill  not  onclvboetljts 
fo?  thee ,  anb  thy  people,  but  31  null 
grcatlp  honour  tljceanb  tljp  nation ,  if 
oppoituntticferttc. 

43  iBoltt  therefor  thou  fhaitbo  ibel 
tfthoufcnbmcnicntoljclpcmci  fo;  all 
mp  forces  arc  gone  from  me. 

44  tlpon  this  Jonathan  fent  htm 
rh;cc  thoufanb  ftrong  men  bnto  2m& 
och ,  anb  lbljcn  thev  tame  to  f  lung ,  the 
Rtitgibasberp  glab  of  their  tommtng. 

45  I^oibbcit ,  they  that  iberc  of  the 
title,  gathcrcb  thctitfclttcs  together  into 
thcmibftofthccittctotbcnuiiiberofan 
hunbzeth  anb  Ubcntie  thoufanb  men, 
anb  lboulb  hauc  flainc  the  lung. 

46  D9hcrefo;c  the  Ring  flcb  into  the 
court ,  but  the?  of  the  ctttc  Rept  the  pafc 
fages  of  tljc  nttc,anb  began  to  fight. 

^aaaa  i      47  Xhe» 


Apocrypl 


ia. 


LMaccabecs.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,foe 
friends  with 


\Gr.  foaXs. 


f  Gr.  ***  d 

fermcc. 
\\  Or, went 
btyondthe 

paficd 
through  tin 
Cities :  0r> 
rventjjtd 
pjfcdOc 
yondtheri- 
urr  ,  an  / 

cities. Gr- 


47  %\yt\\  the  mng  talleD  to  tljc 
gjcibesfo?  hclpe,  tbtjo  tame  bnto  him 
all  at  once,  anb  bifperfing  themfelucs 
thiough  the  city,  flcib  that  Dap  m  tlje  ci 
tic  to  tj)t  number  of  an  hunbjcb  thou- 
fanb. 

45  3flfo  they  fet  fire  on  the  tine ,  anb 
gat  many  fpotlcs  that bay,  anD  bcliuc^ 
rcb  the  King. 

49  So  ibhcn  they  of  the  city  fain, 
thatthc35cibcshabgottbe  city  as  they 
«joulD  ,  their  courage  mas  abatcb, 
Mjlicrcfojc  tbey  mabe  fupplicanon  to 
the  Utng,anb  eneb, facing  : 

50  ncraimt  bs  peace,  anb  let  the 
3Jcibcs  ccafc  from  affaultmg  bs  anb 
tljcntic. 

51  iiDitl)  that  they  call  away  their 
weapons  ,  anb  mabe  peace ,  anb  the 
3lcibcs  lbcrc  rjonoureb  m  the  fight  of 
thcUmg,aub  in  the  fight  ofall  thatwerc 
in  bis  rcalmc,  anb  tbey  rcturncb  to  3Jc 
rufalcm  bauing  great  fpoiles. 

52  So  lung  £>cmctrtus  fate  on  rtic 
tb?onc  of  bis  Hingbomc ,  anb  the  lanb 
lbasnuictbcfojcbtm. 

53  iftcucrtbcleflc  lice  biffcmblcb  in 
all  that  eucr  Ijec  fpafec,  anb  eftrangeb 
Dunrclfc  from  Jonathan,  neither  xt 
lbarbcb  he  him,  accozbmg  to  the  bene 
fits  lbbitb  bee  habrccciucDof  bun,  bur 
troublcbbimbcryfozc. 

54  3ftct  tins  rcturncb  Xrypbon, 
anb  lbitb  him  the  yong  chilbc  3lnno« 
thus,  ibbo  rcigncb  anb  was  croWncb. 

55  Xhcn  there  gathcrcb  bnto  him 
all  the  men  ofwarrcibbom  Dcmc< 
tcius  bab  put  away,  anb  tbcv  fought 
agamft  Demetrius ,  u>Ijo  tumcb  bis 
baefce  anb  fleb. 

56  ajozcouerlCriphontooUcthctC; 
lcpbants,anb  wonnc  3ntiocb. 

57  3U  that  time  yong  3tntiochus 
\b.20tcbnto3Jonathan,  facing;  3 con 
firmcthcc  m  the  high  l&ictthoob,  anb 
appoint  tl)cc  ruler  oner  the  fourc  go- 
ucrmncnts,  anbto  be  oncoftbemugs 
frienbs. 

58  ^Iponthishcfcuthimgolbcnbcfc 
fcls  t  to  be fcrucb  m,anb gauc him icattc 
tobmittciugolb,  anb  to  bccclotbcb  m 
purpicanbtoibcarcagolbcnbucKlc. 

59  l?isb2othcr  Simon  alfo  he  mabe 
captamc  from  the  place  caucb  the  lab- 
bcc  of  £yms,  bnto  the  bozbers  of  e- 
gypt. 

60  XbcnlfonafbanllWcntfoojtb 
ano  paftcb  tmottgb  the  cities  beyotib 
the  water,  anb  all  tbefoucs  of  Syna, 


gathcrcb  themfelucs  bnto  him  fo?  to 
hclpchmu  anb  When  be  came  to  3tfca- 
lon.thcy  of  the  city  met  him  honojably. 

6i  ifrom  Whence  be  Went  to  C5a?a, 
butthcy  of  (3a5a  (hut  him  out  1  Where- 
fojebeciayb  fiegc  bnto  it,  anb  burncb 
li  the  fuburbs  thereof  With  firc,anb  fpot- 
lebthem. 

ez  3ftcrwarb  When  they  of  (5a$a 
mabcfupplication  bnto  3ionathan,thc 
mabe  peace  tbith  them,  anb  toofcc  tlje 
fonncs  of  the  ehtcfc  men  foj  boftages, 
anb  fent  them  to3Jerufaltm,anb  paffeb 
though  tlje  eountrcv  bnto  Damafctts. 

63  i^otb  when  Jonathan  bcarb 
that  Demetrius  p2inccslbcrc  come  to 
Cabcsibhtch  ism  oalticcibith  a  great 
poibcr,purpofing  tollrcmouc  l;imout 
of  the  countrey, 

64  J?ccibcnttomtctt!)cm,  anb  left 
Simon  his  mother  m  the  countrey. 

65  Xhcu  Simon  cncampcb  agamft 
Scthfura,  anb  fought  agamftitaiong 
feafon,anofl)Utttbp: 

66  26ut  they  bcfircb  to  hauc  peace 
lbtth  him,ibhieh  he  grantcb  them,  anb 
then  put  them  out  from  thence ,  anb 
tooue  the  city,anb  fct  a  garnfon  m  it. 

67  3Js  fo2  3Jonathananb  hisljofte, 
thci'pitchcbat  the  ibatcc  of<3cnnefar, 
from  ibljcncc  bettmes  m  the  morning 
they  gatethemto  theplame  ofii^afo^ 

6S  ^nb  bcholb,thehofte  of  ftrangcrs 
met  them  m  the  piame,  lbho  haumg 
laycb  men  in  ambufl)  foz  hmi  in  the 
mouutames,  came  themfelucs  oucta? 
gamfthim. 

69  So  ibhcn  they  that  lay  in  ambufl) 
r ofc  out  of  thetr  plates ,  anb  toyncb  bat- 
tcui  that  lbcrc  of  Jonathans  fibc  fleb. 

70  3x1  fo  much  as  there  lbas  not 
oncof  them  left.crcept  ©attathiasthc 
fonncof3lbfolon,anb3Juba5thcfoiinc 
of  Caiphi  the  captames  ofthchoftc. 

71  Xhcn  "Jonathan  rent  his  do 
tljes  anb  call  earth  bpon  his  hcab,anb 
pzayeb. 

71  ^Iftcribarbs  turning  againc  to 
battcll,hcputthcmto  fligljt.anbfo  tljcy 
ramie  ainay. 

73  ii5oib  ibhcn  his  olbnc  men  that 
lbere  fleb  faib  this,  they  tumcb  agame 
bnto  him,  anblbithhimpurfucb  them 
to  Cabts ,  cucn  buto  their  olbnc  tents, 
anb  there  theycampeb. 

74  So  there  lbcrc  flautc  of  the  hca^ 
then  that  bay ,  about  thjee  thoufanb 
men,  but  Jonathan  rcturncb  to  3Jc- 
rufalcm. 

CHAP. 


Or,  the 
pUceubere- 
about. 

t  Cjr.  hevAHt 
them  the 
riaht  Ivid. 


\  Or  tore* 
TKvoucl:tm 
from  the  af- 
fctrctoftlic 

kpwkmt. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch 


a 


p.xij, 


Apocrypha. 


CHAP.  XII. 


\\tsfreui: 

lo*kf  fofeph. 
AnlM.\  \. 


I<f.Ant. 


Ionathan  renewed!  his  league  with  the  Ro- 
manes and  Lacedemonians.  i8  The  forces 
ot  Demetiius  dunking  to  furprifc  Ionarhan, 
flee  away  for  kare.  35  Ionathan  forcihedi  the 
c.rflJes  in  Iudea,  48  and  is  fhut  vp  by  the 
fraud  ot  TryphomnPtolemais. 

joDidc  When  3Jottartian 

fall)  that  the  tunc  ferueD 

%  him,hcchofcccrtamemcn 

^  anD  fcnt  them  to  £omc, 

„.  fo2  to  confirim  anD  r  cncW 

the  frictiDfbtp  that  they  haD  With  them. 

x   ^c  fcnt  letters  alfo  to  the  ilaccDc^ 

niontans,  anoto  other  plates, fo?  rt)c 

famepurpofc. 

3  £>o  they  lljcnt  bnto  Borne ,  anti 
cntrcD  into  the  S>enatc,anDfaiD,3Jona* 
than  the  high  $utfi ,  anD  the  people  of 
the3lcWcsfcntbs  bnto  you,  to  the  cud 
vou  IhoulD  renew  the  frtrtiDfbip  Which 
you  haD  With  them,  anD  icagnc ,  as  m 
Winer  tune. 

4  51pon  thts  the  Romanes  gauc 
thcmlettersbntothc  goucrnonrs  of  e- 
uery  plate,  that  they  fhouiD  bang  them 
into  the  lanD  of  IhiDca  peaceably. 

i  7M0  this  is  the  copy  oftlie  letters 
Which  ^Jonathan  wjotcto  rtjcJLaceDc^ 
montans: 

6  Jonathan  thehic0ncu\anD  the 
CIDers  of  the  nation ,  aim  the  ^ncrtes 
anDthcothcrpeopleofthCJcwcs,  btu 
to  ttje  iLaecDcmotuans  their  bjcthjcu, 
fenD  greeting. 

7  Xfjerc  Were  letters  fcnt  in  times 
patt  bnto  <aT>nias  tlie  high  £uc(t  from 
||2>atius,Who  rctgncD  then  among 
you,  to  fignific  that  von  are  our  toe* 
ti).2en,  as  the  copyhctcbttDcr-w.nttcn 
Docthfpcctfie. 

8  3it  which  time  £>nias  iutreatcD 
tfjeCmbaffaDo:  that  was  fent.honou; 
tably,anDrccctucDthclcttcrs,whcrctn 
Declaration  was  mane  of  the  ||  league 
anDfrieuDfhtp. 

9  XhcrcfcncWcalMlbcitWcnccD 
none  of  thefe  things,  fo?  that  wee  hattc 
tt)e  holy  booties  of  Scripture  in  our 
hanDstotomfojtbs, 

10  $auc  ncucrthcleffc  attemptcD  to 
fcnD  bnto  you,  fo:  the  renewing  of  b:o 
thcrhooDanDfrlcnDnHp,lc(lwcfl)OiilD 
become  ftrangcrsbnto  you  altogether: 
fo2  there  isalong  tunc  pafTcti  fmceyou 
fentbntobs. 

1 1  roe  therefore  at  all  times  Without 
ccaCtng.both  m  our  ircafls,  anD  otljcr 


conncntcnt  Daycs,Doc  remember  yon  in 
the  facttrTces  Which  We  offcr,anD  in  our 
pjay crs ,  as  r  cafou  is ,  anD  as  it  becom- 
nicthbstothmliebpotiourbzctlncn: 

it  3ltiD  Wee  arc  rtght  glau  of  your 
honour. 

1  j  3s  foj  our  fclucs;,  Wtc  hauchaD 
great  troubles  anD  warres  on  cucry 
hoc,  fozfomuch  as  the  lungs  that  are 
Irounb  about  bshauc  fought  againftbs. 

14  i^oWbcit  wee  woulD  not  be  tcou- 
bicfomc  bnto  you,  no:  to  others  of  our 
confcDcratcs  ft  fncnbsin  thefc  warres : 

1$  Jfo:  wee  hauc  hclpc  from  hcaueu 
that  fuccoutrtl)  bs ,  fo  as  we  arc  bcliuc> 
i  r cb  from  our  enemies,  anD  our  enemies 
arc  bioughtbtiDcrfootc. 

16  3:02  thts  taufc  we  chofciSnmcnius 
the  fon  of  3mtiochus,anD  3nttpater  the 
fonne  of  JJafon,  anD  fcnt  them  bnto  the 
i\omancs,to  renew  the  amitte  that  we 
haD  With  them,  anD  the  fo?mcr  league. 

17  naecomiuanDcDthcm  alfo  to  goe 
bnto  you,  atiD  to  falute  you,  anD  to  Deli- 
uer  you  our  letters ,  concerning  the  re> 
newmgof  our  b:othcrhooD. 

is  nahcrcftw  now  ye  (hall  doc  Well 
to  giuc bs  an  anfrocrc  thereto. 

19  3tnDthisisthccopyofthcletters 
Which  Herniates  fcnt: 

20  ^rcnsmngofthcHaccDcmon^ 
ans,to  £>nias  the  hie  pneft,  greeting. 

ii  3Jt  is  fouiiD  in  Wetting,  that  the 
JLaccDcmonians  anD  3JeWes  arc  bjc- 
tlncn,  ano  that  they  arc  of  the  ftocUc  of 
3lb:ahani : 

2i  3!5own)crefo.2C,Rtice  this  is  come 
tooutknoWlcDgcyoufhaUDocWcllto 
l  wntc  bnto  bs  of  your  t  p2ofpcntte. 

13  lOeDocWntcbacfecagainctoyou, 
that  your  cattcll  anD  goobs  arc  ours, 
anD  ours  arc  yours.  nacDoc  cotnmaiiD 
i  therefore  [our  CmbaffaDoursJto  mauc 
repoitbnto  you  on  this  Wife. 

24  43oW  When  Jonathan  hearD 
'that  SDcmctrius  pzinccs  Were  come  to 
fight  agamfl  htm  With  a  greater  hofte 
thenafoze, 

25  $ce  remooucD  froni3lcrtu"aiem, 
anDinctthcnun  thclanD  ofamathis: 
fo?hegaucthcmnorcfp!tc!itociucrhis 
countfey. 

26  !)c  fcnt  fpics  alfo  bnto  their  tents, 
Who  tameagatnc,  anDtolDelnm,  that 
tlicy  Were  appomtco  to  conic  bpon 
them  in  the  night  feafou. 

27  itMicrcfo.'cfofooiic  as the*>nnuc 
Was  Downc,  gjonathaiicommaiuiDfO 
his  men  to  watch ,  atiDto  be  in  antics, 

Staaaas        that 


\\-RlAdc., 

Arcus  fine 
to  O. lias. 


\$r.fc4ce. 


Orttofit 

footeinhu 

etmirty  \ ", 
ts  tKitdae  his 
cewttrrt. 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\\Icfefh.lii. 
tm,  15.9. 
they  spent 
away. 


br.thcttns,  or 
Z.t&atheanj. 


Orficeer. 
dttgtothe 
re\miHtrcd' 
ding,  and  he 
camtneere 

the  Killvf 
their  00k? 
tjrv^rjtite 
Eufl. 


that  ail  the  night  Ions  they  might  bet 
reaop  to  fight :  3Ufo  he  fent  foo?tlj  fento 
ncis  rouno  about  the  ho  ft  c. 

1%  ffiut  when  the  aoutrfarieshcaro 
that  Jonathan  ano  his  men  tbererca* 
op  fo?  battell,  tljtp  fcareo,ano  trembles 
m  thcirhcarts,  ano  ||thcpmnOlco  fires 
mthctrcampc. 

19  f?oitobeit3Jonathananu  h& com- 
pany hnelb  it  not  till  the  morning :  fo? 
thepfatt)  the  lights  btitnmg. 

jo  3Lhen  Jonathan  purfuco  after 
them,bntouertooKcthcmnot:fo?they 
tbcrcgone  ouer  the  riuer  £leutherus. 

ji  i©hercfo?e  Jonathan  tumeo  to 
the  3lrabians,ttihotbcre  calico  tzaba? 
ocans,  ano  fmotc  them,ano  toofee  their 
fpotlcs. 

31  3nO  remoning  theuce,hc  tame  to 
SDamafcus,  ano  fo  paffeo  th?ough  all 
thctountrcp. 

33  S>imon  alfo  Vbcntfoo?th,  ano  pafc 
feo  th?ough  the  countrcptmto  ^fcaion, 
ano  the  hoios  there  aoiopning,  from 
lbhcncc  he  turnco  afioc  to  Joppe,  ano 
lnannc  it. 

34  5fo2hchabheatothatthevi»ouio 
oeltncr  the  hoib  bnto  them  that  toohe 
2>emctriuspart,  inherence  he  fctaga* 
rifontheretofecepeit. 

35  after  fhiscame  Jonathanhomc 
againc,  ano  calling  the  €!Oers  of  the 
people  together,  hec  conmiteo  Hurt) 
them  about  buiioing  ftcong  holDcs  m 
Juoca, 

36  3MD  tnafting  the  wanes  of  Jcru* 
falem  higher ,ano  ratfinga  great  mount 
bettbecue  the  tottw  ano  the  cup ,  fo? 
to  feparatc  tt  from  the  titp,  thatfo  it 
mightbcaloncthatmenmightncufjcr 
fell  no?  bup  in  it. 

37  Upon  this  thep  came  together, 
tobuiio  Dp  the  cmc||fo?afmuchasfpart 
of  J  the  mall  tomato  thcb?oolte  on  the 
eaft  fioc  mas  fallen  oottm,*  thep  repaid 
r  co  that  tbhith  mas  tailco  Caphcnatha 

38  ^Diinon  alfo  fct  up  3ttnoa,  m £>v 
pheia ,  ano  maoe  it  ftrong  mith  gates 
anobarrcs. 

39  iBomiCtpphonibeutabouttoget 
the  Uingoomc  of  3lfia,  ano  to  hill  3(mt' 
othustheUing ,  that  hce  might  fct  the 
troVbnc  bponhisomnchcao. 

40  $ombtlt,  he  masafraib  that  Jo< 
nathanibouionotfuffcr  him,  ano  that 
he  mottib  fight  agautft  him ,  mncrcfo?e 
hefought  a  map,  home  to  tafte  Jona< 
than,  that  he  might  hill  him.  -Sphere- 
mouco,  ano  tame  to  25cthfan. 


41  Xhcn  Jonathan  ibentoutto  meet 
himibith  fourtiefhoufanomen,  thofen 
fo?  the  battel!,  ano  tame  to  25erhfan. 

41  i3ommhcn1Crpphon  ram  that 
Jonathan  tame  tttith  to  great  afo?ec, 
hce  ourft  not  (tretth  hishanoc  againtt 
him, 

43  26ut  receiueo  him  honourablp, 
anotomcnocohimbntoaiihisfrtenos, 
ano  gauchim  gifts,  ano  commaunoeo 
his  men  of  inarre  to  be  as  obcotent  ton- 
tohim,astohimfelfe. 

44-  ^nto  Jonathan  alfo  hec  fato, 
nahp  haft  thou  put  an  this  people  to  fo 
great  trouble,  feting  there  ts  no  ibarre 
betlbirtbs* 

45  3Cherefo?cfeno  them  nom  home 
agatuc,ariochufeaftibmentotbattcon 
tljec,  ano  tome  thou  mith  me  to  ^tolc* 
mais,fo?  J  rbillgtuc  it  thee  ano  the  reft 
of  the  ftrong  holbs  ano  forces,  ano  all 
that  haueanp  charge  :asfo?me,J  W® 
returnc  ano  ocpart :  fo?  this  ts  the  caufc 
ofmpcomming. 

46  S>o  Jonathan  belecuing  him, 
Oioas  hebaoc  htm,  ano  lent  amaphis 
hoft,rbho  ment  into  the  lano  of  Juoea. 

47  anomithhmuclfehcerctameo 
butth?ee  thoufanb  men,  of  mhomehc 
t  fenttmo  thoufano  into  ©aiilcano  one 
tljoufano  lbcntlblth  him. 

4S  f}o\\)  affbone  as  Jonathan  en- 
treo  into  $tolemats,thep  of  ptolcmais 
flmtthc  gates,  ano  toofee  him,  ano  all 
them  that  came  mith  him ,  thep  flclbc 
miththeft«o?o. 

49  Xhcn  fcntXrpphon  an  hofte  of 
footmcn,ano  ho?femen  into  ©altlcano 
into  the  great  plame,  to  Ocftropail  Jo* 
nathanscompaup. 

50  25ut  ibljen  thep  fenelb  that  Jona- 
than ano  thep  that  mere  lbtth  him  iberc 
taken  ano  flame,  thep  encouragco  one 
another,  anovbent  clofc  together,  p?c* 
parco  to  fight. 

51 1i:hcpthcrfo?cthatfoIlotbcObpon 
them ,  pcrcciumg  p  thep  mere  reaopto 
fight  fo?  their  Irucs,  turnco  barb  agame. 

5z  ©hereupon  they  all  came  into  the 
lano  of  Juoea  pcaceablp,ano  there  thep 
bematlco  Jonathan  *  them  that  mere 
ttitth  him,*  thep  tier  c  fo?c  afratO,mhcr 
fo?c  all  Jfracl  maoe  great  lamentanon. 

53  Xhen  all  the  heathen  that  mere 
rouno  about  them,  fought  to  oclrrop 
them.  3Fo?,  faio  thep,  thep  hauc  no  cap- 
tame,no?  anp  to  hclpe  thnn.iI5om  ther* 
fo?c  let  bs  mahe  mar  bpon  them,  *  tahc 
aibap  tljcir  inemo?iai  fro  amongft  men. 

CHAP. 


\Gr  liftmo 

then [and  lit 
Calih. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xiij, 


Apocrypha- 


CHAP.   XIII. 

Simon  is  made  captaine  m  his  brother  Iona- 
thans  roume.  19  Tryphon  gettetluwo  of 
Ionathans  fonnes  into  his hands,and  flay eth 
tlieir  father.  %-;  The  tombe  of  Ionathan. 
36  Simon  is  fauoured  by  Demetrius,  40  and 
winnethGaza,  andthetowreatHierufalem. 

s  £>ft  Vbbcn  Simon  hcarb 
'  thatXrppbon  bab  gather 
» tcb  together  a  great  bofte 
1  to  tnuabe  the  lanb  of  3Ju* 
„2bea,anbbeftropit, 
x  Znn  Tail)  t  hat  the  people  tbas  in 
grcattrcmblinganb  feare ,  be  rbentbp 
to  gjerufalcm ,  anbgathcrcbtbc  people 
together, 

3  3nb  gaue  them  crb02tation ,  rap* 
ing :  J^cc  pour  feluesRnotb.ibbat  great 
things  3  ant)  mpbjetbiten,  anb  mp  fa* 
there  ftoufe  hanc  Done  fo?  tl)e  laibcs, 
anu  the  Sancruaric,  the  battels  alfo, 
anb  troubles  ibhicbibcbaucfccnc, 

4  25p  reafon  ibhercof  all  nip  bje* 
tbjcn  arc  aaincfo?  3^^  fefte> anD  3 
am  left  alone. 

5  iBott)  therefore  be  it  farrc  from 
me.tbat  3  fboulbfpatcmineoibneufe 
in  anp  time  of  tronblc :  fo?  3  am  no  bet? 
terthcnmpb?ctb?cn. 

6  ©oubtieffe  3  ibill  auenge  mp  na* 
tionanDtbc&amtttarie,  $  onrtbmes, 
anb  onr  cbilbjcn:  to?  all  the  heathen  are 
gatheceb  to  Deftrop  bs,of  bcrp  nialitc. 

7  jfeoib  as  foonc  as  the  people 
hcarb  tbefeiDotf>s,tbcir  fpirit  rcuiueb. 

8  3lnb  thep  anuMcrco  Tbith  a  lout) 
boite,faping,  Xbou  (halt  bee  our  leaner 
in  fteab  of  ^ubas  anb  Jonathan  tbp 
brother. 

9  jfigbtfbouourbattcls.fVbbatfo? 

euerttjoucommanbeftbs,  tbatunlltbe 

Doe. 
io  Sotbenhegatbcrcbtogetbcraii 

tbemenofttmrre ,  anb  mabehafttott- 
nifb  thcibailcs  of5crufalcm,anbbe 
fo?ttfieb  it  rounb  about. 

1 1  alfo  befent  3Jonathan,the  fonne 
of3bfolom,  f  Vbithhunagrcatpoibcr 
to  ^oppc,  ibho  calling  out  them  that 
were  tber  cin,rcmaineb  there  in  it. 

12  So  Xrppbon  remoucb  from  £to- 
lemais,  Untb  a  great  potter  to  innabc 
the  lanb  of  3Jubea,  anb  Jonathan  Vbas 
tbithhtminibarbe. 

13  25ut  Simon  pitchcb  his  tents  at 
Sttnba,  ouer  againft  the  piainc. 

14  ji?oVbU)hcnXrpphonUncW)that 
SimoUjUjasrircnbptnftcaoofhiStyo 


ther  ^Jonathan ,  anb  meant  to  iopnc 
batten  unth  him,l)c  fent  mefTengcrs  bn* 
to  him,faping, 

15  B3bereasibcbaite3tonatbantbp 
brother  in  holb ,  itis  foi  monep  that  he 
is  orbing  bnto  the  Sings  treafur  e,  1 1  ton* 
ecrningthebnuneffe  tljatrbas  commit* 
tebbntohim. 

i6  jebcrcfojcnoibfenban hmibjcb 
talents  of  Bluer ,  anbttto  ofhisfonncs 
fojboftages,  that  lbhcnheisatlibertp 
he  map  not  reuolt  from  bs,  anb  lue  ibill 
lethimgoe. 

17  l^eercupon4>imon,aibeitheper? 
eeiueb  that  thep  fpabc  bctciptfullpbnto 
him,  pet  fent  he  the  monep,  anb  the  thil- 
b/cn ,  left  pcrabuenture  he  fboulb  pzo- 
cure  to  hiinfclfe  great  batrcb  of  the 
people: 

is  aaljo might hauc  faio,  2occaufc  3 
fent  him  not  the  monep,  anb  the  cbu* 
b?cn,thcrcfoje  ts  fSonathanlbcab. 

19  So  he  fent  them  the  thubjen,  anb 
the  hunbzeb  talents :  ^oibbcit  [Xrp* 
phonjmflcmbleb ,  neither  tboulb  he  let 
Jonathan  goe. 

20  3nD  after  tbis  came  ICrppbon  to 
innabe  the  lanb ,  anb  beftroptt ,  going 
rounb  about  bp  the  tbap  that  icaoctb 
bntoStDoza ,  but  Simon  anb  btsboft 
matcbeb  againft  him  m  euerp  place 
VbherefocucrheiDcnt. 

21  i!5oU)  thep  thatYbcrcm  the  totbzc, 
fentmeffcngcrsbntoXrppbon ,  to  the 
enb  tljathc  tboulb  batten  bis  commtng 
bntothem  bpthcibilbernefle,  anbfcnb 
trjcmbicmals. 

22  nabcrcfojc  Xrpphon  mabc  rca* 
bie  ailbishortemento  tome  that  night, 
buttbcrefciiabcrpgreatfnon),  bp  rca* 
fon  tbbcreof  be  tame  not :  So  be  bepar* 
teb?  tame  into  thetountrep  of€>aiaab. 

23  3lnD  ibhcn  he  came  ncerc  to  25at 
cama,he  ftrtb  Slonatban,  ibho  tbas  bu- 
ricb  there. 

24  3lftertbarb  Xrpphonreturneb, 
anb  ibent  into  his  onme  lanb. 

25  Xhcnfent  Pinion  anb  tooUe  the 
bones  of3lonatlianhis  brother,  anb 
bnrieb  them  m  t^obin  the  cute  of  his 
fathers. 

26  3lnD  all  gifrael  mabe  great  hv 
mentation fo? him,  anb bettaileb  hun 
manp  bates. 

27  S»imon  alfo  built  amoiutmcnt 
bponthc5>epulth2cofhis  father  anb 
his  tocthzen ,  anb  raifcb  it  aloft  to  the 
fight,  UntbbclbrnftoncbchiuD  anb  be- 

i%  CPoieouer 


uffoirrs,  or 
ojficcrttha: 
he  had,  for 
the  mcelftrjf 
vfel which 
he  hjol 


11  ■  llll  ,--■_■-  ■ -^— ^—       ^  , 

Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


"f  Gr.  in  the 
ftrong  holds. 


\Gr.AU 
Tryphons 
domgt  were 
robberies 


28  ^ojeoucthecfettopfeucnppja 
mibes  one  agamft  another,  fo?  his  fa 
ther  anb  his  mother ,  anb  his  foure  tyv 
thjen. 

29  anbinfhcfehcmabecunningbe' 
utces,  about  the  Vbhich  licfct  great  pifc 
lars,  anb  Upon  the  pillars  he  mabe  all 
their  armour  fo:  apcrpctuailmemojp, 
anb  bp  the  armour,fl)ips  carueb ,  that 
thep  might  be  fcene  of  all  that  faileon 
thefea. 

30  xtjtsts  the  Sepulchre  rbhiehhc 
mabcatflPobin,anbit  ftaiibethpetbtt* 
totals  bap. 

31  iftotbXrpphon  beau  beceitfullp 
With  the  pong  Ring  amtothus ,  ano 
flcibhim, 

31  3inb  he  raigneb  in  his  fteab ,  anb 
crottmeb  himfelfe  Ring  of  3tfia ,  anb 
brought  a  great  calamine  l>po  thcianb. 

33  Xhcn  5>imon  built  Dp  the  ftrong 
hoibsin9Jubea,anbfenfcbthcmabout 
voit\)  Dig!)  tottws,  anb  great  ftaiies 
anb  gates  anb  bancs,  anb  lapbbpbu 
ttuaist  therein. 

34.  ^ojcouer  £>imon  tfjofc  mm, 
anb  Cent  to  Ring  SDemctnus ,  to  the  enb 
he  fhoulb  giue  the  lanb  an  immunitte, 
becaufct  all  that  Xrpphon  bib.tbas  to 
fpople. 

35  Unto  tbhom  Wng  2>emetrlus 
anfrucrcb  anb  tt>?ote  after  this  maner. 

36  IRing  ©cmetrius  tonto  &imon 
the  high  ^neft,  anb  frirnbof  Rtngs,as 
alfobuto  toe  fibers  anb  nation  of  tfjc 
3Jctbes,  fenbeth  greeting. 

37  Xhegolbcncroitmcanbthefcar; 
let  robe  Which  pc  fent  bnto  bs.mr  hatic 
r  eceiucb ,  anb  lUec  arc  rcabp  to  maRe  a 
frebfaft  peace  tbith  pou,pea  anb  to  ttmtc 
bnto  out  officers  to  confirmc  the  im- 
munmes  which  Xbe  haucgrantcb. 

38  2lnb  mhatfocucr  couenants  ibe 
hauemabc  lbtthpoti,  (hall  ftanb,  anb 
the  ftrong  holbcsiDhich  pec  hauebuil; 
bebfbalbepourolbne. 

39  3tsfoz any oucrfightoj fault com; 
mtttcb  bnto  this  bap,  ibefcugiuett.anb 
toe  crotbnc  tare  alfo  Ibhich  vce  olbc 
bs,  if  there  ibere  anp  other  tribute 
paibc  in  3Jerufalem ,  it  fl)au  no  moic 
bcpaitie. 

40  anblooRcttwo  arcmcctamong 
pou  to  be  m  our  tourt,let  them  bemrol- 
leb.ano  let  there  be  peace  bctttnrt  bs. 

41  Xhus  the  poRc  of  the  heathen 
lbas  taitcn  atbap  from  gfrael,  m  the 
hufflwebanb  feucntieth  pecre. 

42  Xhcn  the  people  of  3Jfracl  be= 


gantottmtc  m  their  inttruments.anb 
contracts,  in  the  firft  pecre  ofS>tmon 
the  high  ^ncft,  the  gouernour,  anb  lea= 
bcrofthe3feibes. 

43  3iuthofc  bapes  £>imontampeb 
agamft  <5a5a,  anb  befiegcb  it  rounb  & 
bout  i  he  mabc  alfo  an  engine  of  Ibarre, 
anb  fct  it  by  the  cup,  anb  battereb  a  tcr- 
tainetotbjcanbtooftett. 

44  anb  the?  that  ibere  in  the  Cm 
gine  leapt  into  the  citie ,  thereupon 
there  ttiasa  gceatbpioarc  in  the  cine : 

45  3hifomuth  as  the  people  of  the 
citicrcnt  their  tlothcs,  anb  climeb  bpon 
the  wanes,  tbith  their  umicsanb  chil- 
bjen,  anb  cneb  Unth  a  lolbbboice,  be* 
fetching  £>imon  t  to  grant  them  peace; 

46  anb  thep  faib ,  2>eale  not  With 
bs  atw&mg  to  our  UJicfeebneffc,but  at- 
co?bingtothpmcrcp. 

47  £>o  5)tmon  Vbas  appeafeb  to« 
lharbs  them ,  anb  fought  no  mo?e  a* 
gamttfhem ,  but  put  them  out  of  the  ri* 
ticatib  clcanfeb  the  homes  ibherem  the 
tbolstticre :  anbfo  entreb(ntoit,lbtth 
fongs,  anb  thanttefguung. 

48  J^ea  ,he  put  all  tmclcarmcfTe  out 
of  it,  anb  plateb  fuch  men  there,  as 
rooulb  Reepe  the  ILatb ,  anb  mabe  it 
frronger  then  it  tbas  befoje,  anb  built 
therein  a blbelling  place  f 0?  himfelfe. 

49  Xheralfoofthetoib?cin3(eru; 
faiem  Vbere  bept  fo  (trait ,  that  the? 
coulb  neither  t  omefoo?th  ,uo:  goe  into 
the  countrcr,  no?bup,  no?  fell,  rbherc; 
fo;c  thev  mere  in  great  biftrcffe  fo? 
itiant  of  bictuais  anb  a  great  number 
of  them  pen  (heb  through  famine. 

50  Xhen  ericbthey  to£>imon,be* 
fetching  him  1 1  to  bee  at  one  Ibiththem, 
lbhich  thing  hec  graunteb  them ,  anb 
mhen  he  hab  put  them  out  from  thence, 
hccleanfcbthctoiftnc  frompollunons: 

51  3lnb  entrcb  into  it  the  th?ce  anb 
tiPcnneth  bap  of  the  feconb  moneth,m 
the  hunbzeb  fcucntic  anb  one  pere,  ibuh 
thaiiRcfguung ,  anb  branches  of  palmc 
trees,  anbiutth  harpes,  anb  tpmbais, 
anb  ibith  btols  anb  hpmnes,anb  fongs: 
becaufe  there  ibas  beftrovcb  a  great 
encmpoutofjfrael. 

51  ^eeojbamcb  alfo  that  that  bap 
flioulbbeRept  euer>>pccrcibith  glat^ 
ncs.  <Dojcouer,thehiHofthcXemplc 
that  was  bpthetotb?e  he  mabc  Qron* 
gcr  then  tt  rbas,  anb  there  hec  bttclt 
himfelfe  ibith  his  companp. 

53  ^nb  Ibhen  dimon  faine  that 
3IohnhisfonnelbasaJjaUantman,he 

mabe 


f  Gr.  to  giue 
thcTr,  his 
ngbt  hand. 


\\Ortto 
makepeace 
vetth  them. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xiiij.  Apocrypha. 


_  Or, the 
wealth  of 
the  lend. 


*  i. Kings 
4.25- 


mabe  him  captatne  of  all  the  holies  anb 
Mbeltin  ©ajara. 

CHAP.  XIIII. 

Demetrius  is  taken  bythcKingot  Perfia.  4 
The  good  deedesof  Simon  to  his  countrey. 
18  The  Lacedemonians  and  Romans  renew 
their  league  with  him.  16  A  memorial!  of  his 
acl.es  is  fetvp  in  Sion. 

£>lb  m  the  htnnwcb  tlucc; 
holt  ano  tttJClfttj  ycere, 
mngaDemetriusgathereb 
his  fojees  together ,  ano 
„  ibent  tnto  :SE)cbia,  to  get 
hmthclpc  to  fight  agatnft  Xryphon. 

i  asm  ibhen  defaces  ttic  king  of 
0erfia  ?  S0cbia,  hearb  thatS>cmcttius 
usascntrcblbtthtnlnsborbcrs,  hefent 
one  ofhts  pnnecs  to  tabe  him  aimc. 

3  naho  ibentanb  unotethchofteof 
2>emetrtus,anbtooRe  hun  anb  brought 
him  to  3lrfaccs ,  by  tbhom  hec  ibas  put 
tnibarbc. 

4  ^sfojtt)eianDof5nbea,tt)at 
ibas  cintct  allthc  bayes  of  Simon :  for 
he  fought  tlje  goob  of  his  nation,tnfuch 
tbife,  as  that  cucrmorc  hts  authojtttc 
anb  honour  pieafcb  them  tbeli. 

<,  3inb  as  he  ibas  honourable  (in  all 
hts  acts)  Co  m  this>that  he  toofte  3loppc 
for  an  haunt,  anbmabe  ancntrante  to 
theylcsofthcSea, 

6  SinbcniargcbtheboimocsofhiS 
nation,  anb  retoucrcb  the  countrcy, 

7  %nv>  gathercb  together  a  great 
number  of  taptiucs ,  anb  hab  the  bomi- 
ntonof  (5a5araanb25ethfura,  anb  the 
toibre,  out  of  the  Vbhieh  h  e  tooue  all  btv 
rtcanncu"e,  neither  ibas  there  any  that 
rculrcbhim. 

8  %hmbibthcyffllthcirgtottnbtn 
peace,  anb  the  card) gauc  her  tnereafe, 
anb  the  trees  of  the  fielb  their  fruit 

9  Xhe  ancient  men  fate  all  tn  the 
(trcctes.communing  together  of  I!  goob 
things,  anb  the  young  men  put  on  glo- 
rious anb  tbarreli&e  appar  ell. 

10  ^cpjouibcbbietttals  fin  the  cities, 
anb  fet  in  them  all  matter  of  munition, 
fo  that  his  honourable  name  ibas  tc; 
noibmcb  bnto  the  cub  of  the  ib02lb. 

11  $cmabepcacctnthcianb,anb  3Jf- 
raelreioycebibith  great  toy: 

\i  5P02  *  cuery  man  fate  bnber  his 
bine,  anb  hts  figgetrec ,  anb  there  ibas 
none  to  fray  them: 

13  Neither  ibas  there  any  left  in 
the  lanbc  to  fight  agamft  them :  yea, 
tlje  Bings  thcmfclucs  lbctc  oucr- 


throiben  m  thofe  bayes. 

14  20o2coucr  hee  ftrcngtheneb  all 
thofe  of  hts  people  that  tberc  brought 
loin :  tlje  %a\X>  he  fearcheb  otit,anb  eue^ 
ry  contemner  of  the  Haib,  ano  ibichcb 
perfon,hctooRcaibay. 

15  feebcauttfieb  theSanrtuary.anb 
multipart  the  bcfJcls  of  the  Xcmplc. 

16  /ftolb  lbhcn  it  ibas  hcarb  at 
Some,  $  as  far  as  Sparta,that  Jlona^ 
than  ibasbcab ,  they  lbere  bery  forte. 

17  2i5utaCToonc  as  they  hcarb  that 
his  brother  Linton  ibas  mabc  htgh 
pricft  m  hts  fteao,anb  rtileb  the  coutv- 
trey,  anb  the  cities  therein, 

18  3Ehcy  lbrotebnto  him  in  tables  of 
braffc,  to  rcnclb  the  frtcnbflitps  league 
Vbhich  they  hab  mabc  lbtth  3Jttbas  anb 
Jonathan  his  brethren : 

19  iidhichibrtnngsibcrcreabbcfiw 
tlje  Congregation  at  ^jcrufalcm. 

io  mm  this  is  the  copy  of  the  letters 
that  the  iLaccbcmontansfcnt :  1Lhe  ru- 
lers of  the  iLaccbemonians,  lbtth  the 
city,  bnto  Simon  the  high  l&tcft,  anb 
the  fibers  anb  ^:icftes,anbrcftbuc  of 
the  people  of  the^cibes,  our  brethren, 
fenb  greeting. 

ii  n:hc€mbau"abo2Sthatrbcrcfmt 
bnto  our  people,  cernficb bs  of  yonr 
glory  ano  honour ,  therefore  ibcibere 
glab  of  their  comming, 

22  3lnb  bto  regiftcr  the  thtngs  that 
they  fpauc,  tn  the  counfcll  of  the  people, 
tnthtsmaner-.iBumenuisfottttcof^tn' 
nothus,anb^tttipatcrfonticof5fafon, 
the  3Jcibcs€mbaiTabours,  came  bnto 
bs,to  renelb  tlje  fricnbfhtp  they  hab 
lbtth  bs. 

13  3inb  it  plcafcb  the  people  to  enter; 
tatne  the  men  honourably,  anb  to  put 
the  copy  of  thctt  cmbafjage  tn  pubitftc 
tccorbS,to  theeno  the  people  of  the  fLa^ 
ccbemomans  might  haue  amcmoriall 
thcrof :  furthermore  me  haue  ibrtttcn  a 
copy  thereof  bnto  Sutton  the  hicprtcft. 

14.  ^ftcrthis ,  Simon  fcnt/mmic* 
nius  to  Borne ,  lbtth  a  great  (hiclb  of 
golbc  of  a  thoufanb  ponnO  lbctght,  to 
tonfirmc  the  league  lbtth  them. 

t5  tt)hcrcofibhcnthcpcoplchcaro, 
they  fatb,  nahat  thatmes  (h<m  ibec  giuc 
to  Sutton  anb  lusfonncs  < 

26  iPoihecanbhts  b2etlMcn,anbthe 
houfebfhts  father,  haue  cftabnnjcojf 
racl,  anb  chafeb  aibay  in  fight  their  cite 
mtcs  from  them ,  anb  connrmcb  their 
hbcrtie.  r  „  ^M 

in  So  then  they  lbjotc  [tt]  in  tables 

of 


Apocrypha.  I. Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


||  Or,  lent- 

falem.perad- 
uentureby 
eorrkption 
and  tranfpo- 
Jition  of  let- 
ter 1 1  or  as 
fomethinke, 
the  common 
hall  where 
tbeymt  to 
confult  of 
matters  of 
ejtate. 


\\Orjhemas 
ofwarre. 


||0r,nwf- 
font. 


XOrjGaut. 


\\Or,'^Hto 

religion. 


of  b2au"c,  ibbich  they  fct  bpon  pillars  m 
mount  5>ion,anb  this  is  tljc  topic  of  the ; 
noting,  Xhc  eigljtcentl)  Dap  of  ttje 
moncth  €lul,  in  the  !nmD2cti  tl)?eeftojc 
anb  trbelft  ycerc,  bring  tbcfbirbyeerc 
of  ^mion  tbcbicp2icu\ 

28  at||S>aramclmtbegrcattongre' 
gation  of  the  pneCte  anb  peoplcanb  r  w  \ 
lets  of  the  nation,  $  elbers  of  tljccotm- 
trp,  ibere  tljcfc  things  nottficb  bnto  bs. 

29  if  02fomucbas  often  titnes  there 
hauc  bin  lbarrcs  in  the  tountrcy  ,u>ber* ! 
info;  the  maintenantcof  their  ^»anttu=  i 
arie,  ano  the  law,  £>unorithc  fonncof  j 
S0attatl)ias  of  tbcpoftcritic  of  3Iarib,  i 
together  lbitb  his  b?etl)zcn,  puttftem* 
femes  in  icopattoic,anb  refitting  the  cne^ 
mics  of  their  nation,  bib  their  nation 
great-honour. 

jo  (if 02  after  tljat  3f  onatban  bauing 
gatbereb  bis  nation  together,  anb  bene 
their  hie  p2tcft,tbas  abbeb  to  bis  people, 

31  Xbcir  enemies  purpofeo  to  muaoe 
tljeir  countrey  that  tbey  might  oeftroy 
it,anb  lap  banos  on  the  Sanctuary. 

ji  at  Vbbicbtime&imon  rofcbp,anb 
fougbtfo2bisuation,anofpcntmutbofi 
bisoibnfubttanee,?  armcb  ||  the  baliant 
men  of  bis  nation,  $  gauc  them  wages, . 

33  ano  fo2ttfico  the  cities  of  3Juoea, 
together  With  2iSctbfura  that  itetbbP' 
on  the  bobbers  of  3JuDca,  where  the 
||  armour  of  fb c  en cini es  bao  bin  befiw, 
but  be  fet  a  gaeifon  of  gieWcs  there. 

34  £0o2coucr,bec  fcutifico  3loppc 
Which  Uctb  bpon  tl)c£>ca,  anb||(5a5a- 
ratbatbo20cretbbpoua50tus,  Where 
the  enemies  bao  owclt  bcfo?c:  but  nee 
piateb  3telbcs  tljerc ,  anb  furmfbeo 
them  tbitf)  all  things  tonucnicnt  fo2  the 
reparanontbercof.) 

35  1Ebc  people  tljcccfoic  feeing  the 
acts  of  £umon,anb  bnto  Wljatgl02y  be 
thought  to  bmigbisnatton,  maoc  bun 
their  goucrtw  anb  cbiefc  pneft,  becaufc 
Ijc  bao  Done  all  thefc  things,  anb  fo?  the 
iuthte  anb  faitl)  Which  Ijcc  Kept  to  bis 
nation,  ano  foj  that  bee  fought  by  all 
mcancs  to  cralt  l)is  people. 

36  5F02inljistimc  tinngs  p2ofpcrco 
m  Dis  Ijanos ,  fo  that  the  heathen  were 
tahen  out  of  their  countrey,  anb  they 
aifo  that  were  m  the  cute  of  3>auib  m 
3enifalcm,WbobaDmaoctbemfclucs 
a  toib2C,  out  of  Which  tbey  ifluco,  ano 
poilutcoaii  abouttlic  £>ancniaric,auo 
bib  much  hurt  ||  in  the  holy  place. 

37  25ut  he  placet)  ^Jelbes  therein, 
anofo2tincb  itf02  tbcfafcticof  the  conn 


tr  ey,ano  the  city , anb  raifcb  bp  the  wais 
of  3Jcrufaiem. 

38  Bmg  Demetrius  alfo  conunneb 
him m  tlje  high  P2tcttbooo,  acco20mg  to 
tbofc  things, 

39  ano  mabe  him  one  of  his  f  rienos, 
anohonourco  him  with  great  honour. 

4°  foi  he  hab  ijearb  fay,  that  the 
Romanes  hab  tallcb  the  3elbcs  their 
frienbs.anb  tonfcocratcs,anb  b2eth2en, 
anb  that  they  hab  entertameb  the  €nv 
baffabours  of  Pinion  honourably. 

41  Zlto  thatthe3Iclbcs?p2iellstbcrc 
ibel  plcafeb  that  S>unon  flioulb  be  their 
goucrnour ,  anb  high  P2icllfo2  eucr  bn- 
til  there  fboulb  anfc  a  faithfull  p2ophct. 

41  ©02couer,tbat  he  fboulb  be  their 
captaine,  anb  (Ijouio  tabe  thargc  of  the 
Sanctuanc ,  to  fct  them  oucr  their 
ib02bes,  ano  ouerthecountrcy,  anbo- 
ucrthcarmonr,anboucrtl)cfo2trcu"es, 
thatC3Jfay)hcn)oulbtabcthargeofthc 
5>anctuarie. 

43  26cfibcs  this,  that  he  fboulb  be  & 
beyebofcueryman,anothatailthcib2i' 
tmgs  mthc  tountrcy  Qjoulb  be  maoc  m 
his  name,  ano  that  he  (bouio  be  clotheb 
in  purple,  anb  ibear  c  golb. 

44  aifo  that  it  fboulo  be  laibfull  fo? 
none  of  the  people  02P2icfts,  to  b2eabc 
any  of  tljcfe  things ,  02  to  gaincfay  his 
ib02bs,  02  to  gather  an  afTembly  mthc 
tountrcy  ibubout  him,  02  to  bee  clotheb 
m  purple,  02  Uicarc a  bucblc  of  golb. 

45  anbibhofocuer  fljoulb  Do  other- 
lbifc,  02b2cabeany  of  thefc things,  he 
ft)ouibbepunifl)Cb. 

46  Xhus  it  itbeb  all  p  people  to  beale 
ibith  ^imon ,  $  to  bo  as  hath  bene  faio. 

47  Xhen  5>imon  accepteo  hereof, 
ano  lbasibcll  pleafcb  to  be  high  $2icu\ 
anb  captaine ,  anb  goucrnour  of  the 
3ictbes  ,5  p;iclls,  1  to  Dcfeuo  them  ail. 

48  £>o  they  commaiiDco  that  this 
Vb2iting  flioulb  be  put  in  tables  of  b2au*c, 
anb  that  they  Iboulb  be  fet  bp  lbithm 
tljctompaffeofthe^anctuarymaton 
fptcuous  place. 

49  3llfo  £fbc  copies  tbcrof  flioulb  be 
lam  bp  m  the  trcafune,  to  the  cnoc  that 
S>imon  9  his  fonncs  might  hauc  tljcm. 

CHAP.    XV. 

4  Amiochus  dcfiredi lejuc to  pa/Fe tliroughlu- 
dea,&  grantetli  threat  honours  to  Simon  and 
the  lew  cs.  16  The  Romanes  write  to  diuerlc 
kings  &  nations  to  fauour  the  Iewes.  17  An- 
tioclius  qturrellcth  with  Simon,  38  andten- 
detli  fome  to  annoy  ludca. 

^?02C^ 


Apocrypha.  Chap.xv. 


Apocrypha. 


r  sD?eouct;autiocbusfonne 
§  of  Demetrius  the  tang, 
§  fcnt  Icttccs  from  tbcifles 
|  oftbe  Sea ,  Unto  Simon 
"  tbcp2ieQ,anopnnceoftbc 
3Jcibes,ano  to  all  the  people. 

t  lljc  contents  whereof  ibere 
tbcfe  :Bing3ititiocbus ,  to  Simon  the 
IjtQl)  idjicft,anb  pzince  ofbis  nation,ano 
totbcpeoplcofthe3Jcibes)gtecttng, 

5  Jf oj  as  much  as  cectamc  pcftilcnt  j 
men.hauebfurpeotbctangoomcofouti 
fathers,  anomypurpofc  is  to  eljalcnge 
itagamc,  that  31  may  rcfto?e  it  to  the  i 
olO  cftatc ,  ano  to  tl)at  cno  banc  gatbc-  j 
reo  a  muimuoc  of  fozrainc  fouiotcrs 
together  ,  ano  pzepareo  fl)ippes  of  j 
lbarre, 

4  i?9y  meaning  alfo  being  to  goe! 
through  the  countr  cy,  that  3  may  be  a- 
uengco  of  tbcm  that  banc  oeftroyco  it, 
anbmabe  many  cities  mtbetangoome 
befoiate : 

$  jfrolb  therefore  3  continue  bnto 
thee,  all  the  oblations  lbbicbtbctangs 
befo2cmcgcantcotbcc,ano«>bacfocucr 
gifts  befibcs  they  gtantcb. 

6  %  giuc  thee  leaneaifo  to  coine  mo- 
ney foj  thy  tountrey  ibuh  thine  oibnc 
ftampe. 

7  3no  as  concerning  ^crufalem, 
anb  the  Santtuatic ,  let  tbcm  be  free, 
anb  ai  the  armour  that  thon  baft  maoe, 
anb  foments  that  thou  haft  built ,  anb 
bcepcttintbybanos,  let  tbemtcmaine 
bnto  thee. 

8  3tnb  if  any  thing  bee ,  oz  (hall  be 
otbtng  to  the  tang,lct  a  be  fojgtucn  thee, 
ftomthisnmefojtbfoiJcuerniojc. 

9  5Furtbetmo:c,tbhcnibebaucot* 
tatneb  our  tangOomc ,  ibe  \btll  honour 
thee,  anb  thy  nanon ,  ano  thy  temple 
tbith  great  honour ,  fo  that  your  ho- 
nour (hall  bee  taioiben  throughout  the 
nwib. 

io  3Jn  the  bunozeb  tbzecfcoje  ano 
fourteenth  yecre,  ibcnt3mnocbustnto 
the  lano  of  his  fathers ,  at  ibbub  time 
all  the  foucs  came  together  bnto  him, 
fo  that  felblbcrc  left  with  Xrypbon. 

it  j©bc refoje  being  pnrfuco  by  tang 
2naocbus,be  fleo  bnto  S>o?a,Vbl)ieh  te 
ethbytbeScafioc. 

ii  iFo?  be  falb ,  tljat  troubles  came 
bpon  him  all  at  once,ano  that  bis  forces 
baofotfabenbim. 

i j  Xben  tampeo31utiocbus  agamft 
SDoza ,  haumg  tbith  him,  an  bunoico 
anb  tibentic  tboufano  men  of  lbarre, 


ano  eight  thoufanb  hojfemen. 

14.  ^noibbcn  he  bao  compaffeb  the 
rttte  rouno  about ,  ano  toyncb  fbtps  clofe 
to  the  toibnc  on  the  Sea  doc,  Dec  berco 
thecitiebylanb ,  ano  by  Sea,  neither 
fuff  cr  cO  he  any  to  got  out  02  m. 

15  3"  the  meanc  fcafon  came  0\x- 
mcnius,?  his  company  from  Borne  ba^ 
mug  letters  to  the  Kings  ano  countries, 
ibbcrciu  ibere  lbJittentbefe  things. 

i6  ILuctus.Conful  of  the  Romanes, 
bnto  tang  ^toiomcc  greenng. 

17  3Chc  ^eibcs  Cmbaftabozs  our 
frienosano  confcocratcs,tame  bnto  bs 
co  renew  the  oiofrtenofbipano  league, 
bcingfentfromSimontbcbigb02ieft, 
ano  from  thcpeople  of  the  llcrbes. 

is  ^notheybzoughtafbieioofgoio, 
ofathoufanopouno: 

19  D©c  thought  it  goob therefore,  to 
lbntc  bnto  the  tangs  ano  countries, 
that  they  (bouio  00c  them  no  barmc, 
1102  fight  agamft  them ,  their  cities ,  02 
countries,  no?  yet  aioc  their  enemies  a* 
gamftthem. 

20  ■Jtfcemcoaifogoootobs,  to  xv 
cetuetbefbleiooftbem. 

21  3)ftherefoietherebeanypeftilent 
fellotbes  ,  that  haue  flco  from  their 
countric  bnto  you ,  beliuer  them  bnto 
Simon  the  high  pjieft ,  that  bee  may 
punilh  them  accojomg  to  their  oibne 
lauie. 

22  Xbc  fame  thing  ibjote  hee  Ubc* 
tbife  bnto  SDcmetnus  the  tang,  anb  Zv 
talus.to  ||31narathes,anD^rfates, 

23  3lno  to  all  the  countries,  ano  to 
llSampfames,  9  tbefLaccocmontans, 
anb  to  2Dclus,  anb  ©ynous,  ano  Syci- 
on,auo  £atia,ano  Samos ,  anoi&am- 
pljylia,  anoHyna,  ano^aucamaflus, 
ano&hoous,ano!ft&bafctlts,  ano  Cos, 
anDSiOee,  ano^raous,  amxBomna, 
ano  Cnious,ano  Cypms,ano  Cyjenc. 

24  ^no  the  copy  heereof  they  lb?ote, 
to  Simon  the  high  £>nctt. 

25  So  ^nnochus  the  femg  campco 
agamft  S>oza ,  the  fecono  oay ,  t  affaul 
ting  it  continually,  ano  matang  cngms, 
byibhichmcancshefhutbp  Gryphon, 
thathccoulbneithergoeoutnonn. 

26  3lt  that  time  Simon  fcnt  him 
ttbo  thoufanb  cbofcnmcntoatbcbim: 
filuer  alfo ,  ano  goio ,  ano  much  ar^ 
mour. 

27  /15cuerthelcfle ,  he  tboulo  not  re 
ceiue  them ,  but  bzabe  all  the  coucnants 
ibbicb  he  hab  maoc  ibith  him  afoicauo 
became  ftrangc  bnto  him. 

iS  further 


\\Or,Ar». 
thes. 

\\OrJnn. 
pfiuei. 


||  Or,  Bjflu. 


\Grc.trrt 

g,*ghuf*- 
cejtott. 


Apocrypha.  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


}|  Or^xeept 
the  border  J* 


Or.futdue 
j <m tn  fight. 


28  jffutthcrmojc  bee  fent  tonto  Dim 
athcnobuts,oncofbisfricnDsto  com? 
mime  mitl)  bun  anD  fay :  yonlbithbolD 
3<oppe  anu  <5a?ara  tbitb  t!ic  toime 
tbatt5in3Jcriu"aicm,  ibhich  arc  atics 
ofmyreaimc. 

19  1-bc  bomcrs  thereof  ycc  Iiauc 
maftcD  ant)  Done  great  Hurt  in  the  lanD, 
ant)  got  tiir  Dominion  of  many  plates 
mithmmyHtngDomc. 

50  fiiovo  tbcrcfoje  Delwcr  tfjc  tines 
mbteb  yebauctaUcn,  anu  the  tributes 
of  the  places  lDbcrcof  yu  hanc  got- 
ten Dominion  l|U)ithout  the  bomcrs  of 
JuDca. 

31  <©jclfe  glue  me  fo?  them  fine  Ijmv 
d:cd  talents  of  filucr.anD  fo?  the  harme 
that  you  haue  Done,  anD  the  rnbutcs  of 
the  ernes  other  fine  hunDico  talents:  if 
not,UK  mil  conic  anD!  fight  agamfl  you. 

31  SoatbcnobiustbclungsfncnD 
came  to  3lerufaicm ,  ano  Vbhcn  bee  (alb 
the  glojy  of  Simon,  anD  thceupboarD 
of  golD,  anD  filuer  plate,  anD  hisgrcat 
attcnDancchcroasaftomfbcDanDtolD 
buntbcRtngsmcffagc. 

33  1DbcnanfrocreDSJmon,anDfaiD 
tonto  bun,i©cbauenetfbertaRen  other 
mcnsiaiiD,  nojbolDen  that  iDbicbap' 
pertemttrj  to  others,  but  the  inherit 
tanceofourfatbcrs,n)bicbourcncmtes 
haD  tbjongfuliy  m  pofleflion  a  ccrtaine 
time. 

34  i©hcrefoicU)cbauingoppo2tuni: 
tir.holDtheinhcntantcof  our  fathers. 

35  3lnD  Whereas  thou  DcmannDcfl 
JJoppc  anD  d?a^ara  albeit  they  did 
great  harmc  tonto  the  people  in  our 
tounttcy,  yet  mill  me  guicannunDicD 
talents  foj  them,  hereunto  atbeno- 
bius  anfiucr  cd  him  not  a  itoom, 

36  26ut  returned  in  a  rage  to  the 
Bing.anbmaDcrcpoittontobtmofthcfc 
fpcaches,  anD  of  the  glojy  of  Simon, 
ano  of  all  that  hec  haD  fecne :  Vbbcrc 
upon  the  lung  mas  crcccDing  ito:otb. 

37  '3m  the  mcanc  finic  flcD  %xy 
phonby  flnp  tonto  £>2thouas. 

38  Xhen  the  RingmaDc€enDcbcus 
captamcof  the  fca  toaft,  anD  gaucbun 
an  boftc  of  footmen  aim  ho:fcmcn, 

39  3UmcommanDcD  him  torcmouc 
bis  hofte  tomarD  JnDca :  alfo  hec  com- 
inanDcD  him  to  builD  Up  CcD2on,anD  to 
foznfic  the  gates,*  to  marre  agamft  the 
people,  but  as  fo:  the  King  [bitnfelfe]  he 
purfucDHryphon. 

+0  So  CetiDcbcus  came  to  Jam- 
ma ,  auD  began  to  piouolte  the  people. 


ano  to  muaDe  gjuoca,  aim  to  ta&ctbc 
people  pnfoncts,anD  flay  tbem. 

41  ano  mijen  bee  haD  built  top  Cc* 
Djon,  he  fet  ho?femen  tbercanDan  hod 
[of  fo  otuteu  i  to  the  cnD  that  iffumg  out, 
they  might  mafee  ourroaDes  topon  the 
mayes  of  3Umca,  as  tbclung  bab  torn- 
manDcDhun. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

3  Iudas  and  Iohn  preuaile  againfr  the  forces  fern 
byAntiochus.  n  The  captaine  oi  Hierico 
inuiteth  Simon  and  two  of  his  Tonnes  into  his 
caille,  and  there  treacheroufly  murdcreth 
them.  19  Iohn  is  fought  tor,  zi  andefca- 
peth,  andkilleththoTe  that  fought  lor  him. 

$cn  came  top  Slobn  from 
**>  <5a;ara,  anD  tolD  Simon 
&H  bis  father ,  mftat  CcnDc 
s^beus  hao  Done. 

z  vsfyvcttM  Stmon 
callcD  his  tmo  clDeft  fonncs>3mbas 
anD  3John,  aim  taiD  tonto  them,  5  anb 
my  bjcthjen ,  anD  my  fathers  honfe 
'haue euet  from  our  youth  tonto  this 
Day  fought  againft  the  enemies  of  3Jfc 
tael,atm  things  baucpjofpcrtD  fomcll 
in  our  hanDs,  that  mcchaueDrtiucteD 
i^fcacl  oftentimes. 

3  23ntnott)3JamolD,  ano  ycc  [by 
<3oDs  mercy]  art  of  a  fuffmcut  age:  ffie 
yc  m  ftcaD  of  mee,  anD  my  brother ,  ano 
got  anD  fight  fbz  out  nation ,  anD  the 
ihclpcfrombcauenbemithyoii. 

4  So  hec  cbofr  out  of  the  emmrrcy 
tmcntie  thoufanD  men  of  marre  mitt) 
hozfemen ,  mho  ment  out  agamfl  Cens 
;  Dcbeus,anD  reftcD  that  mgbt  at$©oDtru 

5  anDibbenastheyrofemtbemo^ 
i  mng,anD  ment  into  thcplamc,  bcholD, 
a  mighty  great  hofte  both  of  footmen, 
anD  hojfmen,camc  agamfl  tbcnu&ottjs 
beit  thetc mas  a  mater  b;ooftcbetmtrt 
them. 

6  So  hec  anD  his  people  pitcljeD  o-- 
uer  agamft  them,  anD  mhen  hec  fam 
i  that  the  people  mere  afram  to  goe  ouer 
I  the  mater  bjoofcc  ,  hce  ment  firft  oner 
;  himfclfc ,  anD  then  the  men  feeing  him, 
I  paflcD  through  after  him. 

(    7  '3ChatDonc]heDuiiDcDhismen, 

auDfetthehoifcmcn  m  themiDftofthe 

footcmen :  fo?  tljc  enemies  botfemen 

mere  bcry  many. 

8   HhrnfounDcD  they  miri)  the ho^ 

1  ly  Xrumpcts :  mhereupon  CcnDcbeus 
aim  his  hofte  mere  put  to  fltght,fo  that 
many  ofthem  mere  flaine,anDtbcrcm* 
nam  gat  them  to  the  ftrongbolD. 

9  at 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


.p.). 


Apocrypha. 


1 1  Or,  which 
when  he  had 
[etfircjhey 
fled  vntothe 
tffwret  in  the 
fUldsofA- 

ttOtM.and 

there  were 
(Ufnet&c, 


9  ^tthattmieinasjunasllohns 
brother  lUounncn :  iSnfJohn  mil  fol? 
lotben  after  them ,  bnttll  he  came  to  Ce= 
tyonmhieh  [Ccnnebeus]  hab  built. 

io  ||£>o  they  flco  cum  unto  the  toib2CS 
mthc&elbs  of  Mortis ,  ihhereftnehcei 
burnt  ttrmrh  fire:  £>o  that  there  ltocrc 
Oamc  of  them  about  two  thoufanb 
men.  3ftcrmam  hce  retutueb  tnto  the 
latin  of  ;juneampcate. 

ii  ^o2coucr,in  the  plaint  of  JJerlcho 
Xbas0toiomeus  the  fonue  of  3lbubus 
mane  taptatne ,  anbheehan  abunoancc 
of  Bluer  anogoioe. 

12  5f  02  he  mas  the  hie  ^acfts  fonnc 
tniatbe. 

13  aahcrefojc  his  heart  being  liften 
top ,  hce  thought  to  get  the  countrey  to 
hunfclfe,  ann  thereupon  tonfultcb  be* 
tettftiliy  agamft  £>unon  anb  his  fans, 
tonefrroyrhtm. 

14  iftoro  &imon  mas  htfitmg  the 
ctttcsthatrocrcinthceountrcy,  annta> 
bmg  tare  fo?  the  goon  oibrnng  of  them, 
at  mhith  time  hce  tame  bon.ni  c  htmfelfe 
to  3  ericho  Ibtth  hts  fons ,  ^attathtas 
ann'junas,  mththnntacth  thzecfcojc 
anb  Tcueuthycere ,  m  the  clcuenth  mo- 
ncthcaileb3>abat. 

15  nahcrcthc  fonncofabnbus  recci- 
umg  them  bcccttfully  into  a  little  holbc 
taiicb  ©ocus,tt)htch  he  habbutlt,  mabe 
tymi  a  great  briquet  sholbbeit  he  hab 

hibbc men  there. 
i6  &oinhcnS>unonannhi£fbnnes 


hantaunftc largely,  ptolome  anb  his 
men  rofc  bp,ano  too&c  their  weapons, 
anb  came  upon  5>imon  into  the  banliet- 
ttng  plate ,  anb  fierce  him  anb  his  two 
tonnes,  anb  rename  of  his  fcruants. 

17  3JnU)hichbomg,hccommittcoa 
great  treachery,  anb  retompenfeb  cuill 
foi  goob. 

isXhcn^tolomcrwotcthcfc  things, 
anb  fent  to  the  mng,  that  he  fhouib  feno 
him  an  hofte  to  amc  him,  anb  he  rbouio 
bcliuer  htm  the  countrey  anb  cities. 

19  Jk  fent  others  alfo  to  <5a5arato 
mll^ohn,  s  unto  the  t  tribunes  he  fent 
letters  to  come  Unto  him,that  he  might 
giuc  themfilucr,  anb  golbe,  <?  reibarbs. 

20  2nb  others  he  fent  to  taac'Jcrtt 
fainn,anb  the  moimtainc  of  the  temple. 

2t  jl5on)onehabrunneafo2etocas 
5ara,  anb  toibc  3John  that  his  father 
ano  bjcthjen  lucre  flame ,  anb  [quoth 
he]  #tolomc  hath  fent  to  flap  thee  alfo. 

22  hereof When he hcatb/hrcinas 
fojc  attomfheb:  5>o  he  lame  hanbson 
them  that  lucre  tome  to  ncQroy  him, 
ann  flew  them,  fcnhee  anew  that  the? 
fought  to  malic  him  alba?. 

ij  ascoutmiingthereftofthcactcs 
of^ohn,anb  his  roars  (?uio2thrbccbs 
Which  hce  bib ,  anb  the  builbmg  of  the 
wanes  Which  he  mancann  his  bomgs, 

14  23eholb,thcfcarctt)2ittcuinthc 
€h2omclcs of  hisitmclthooo , from  the 
time  he  was  mane  high  tfmeft  after  his 
father. 


f  CJr,  cap- 

I  All'S  of 

thottfands. 


cThefecondboo 


accabees. 


chap.  1. 

A  letter  of  thelewes  from  Ierufalem  to  them 
of  Egypt.to  thanke  God  for  the  death  of  A  n- 
tiochus.  19  Ofthefire  that  was  hiddemthe 
pir.  14  The  prayer  of  Nehemias. 

t&SMtssm  m  b2«h2en  the  Ueiues 
^B  FJ3}&  that  bee  at  "Jccufalrm, 
m  Wffi  anbinthe  lanbe  of  3«* 
%  MM  oca ,  Wtfh  bnto  the  b2e* 
Jl  WSS  th2ni  the  IJeiucs  that 

gS/^S*)^  arc  throughout  <£gypt, 

health  anb  peace. 
2   d5obbcgraciousnntoyou,aunrc= 

member  his  Cottcnant  that  hce  mane 
v»ith^b2aham,Hfaac,anb3Jacob,his 
faithfnll  fcruants: 

j  2lnb  giuc  you  all  an  heart  to  feme 
him ,  anb  to boehis  mil ,  voith agoob 
courage,  anb  a  willing  mmbc : 


4  3mbopenyour  hearts  in  his  lain 
anb  commanbements,  fj fenb  you  peace: 

5  3lnb  hcarc  your  players,  anb  be 
atoneibithyou,anbneuer  fojfattc  you 
in  time  of  trouble. 

6  Slnbnowwcc  be  here  playing  fo2 

you. 

7  nahat  time  as  SDcmemus  reig; 
neb,  in  the  htmb2eb  th2ccfco2c  anb  ninth 
ycere,Weethc  gjeWesttnotc  unto  you, 
in  the  crtrcmittc  of  trouble  ,that  came 
Upon  usmthofc  yeercs,  from  thermit 
that  ^afon  anb  his  company  reuoltcb 
fromrhcholyianb,anbliingbomr, 

8  ^nb  burnt  the  pojch,  anbflicbm 
uotent  bloob.XheniVic  p.:aycbUnto  the 
?L02b,  anb  lVtrc  hcarb :  iuc  offereb  alio 
faennces ,  anb  fine  floinzc ,  ano  lighten 
the  lampcs.aub  fct  fo:th  the  loaucG. 

9  ^nb  nolb  fee  that  yc  ucepc  the  fcafl 

2Sbbbb  ot 


Apocrypha.  I  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


*Lcuit.  tj. 
34- 


Teult.  15 
numb.jy. 


of  *£abcrnaclcstnthc  moncth  Caflcu. 

10  3Jn  the  hunbjeth ,  fourefcoje,  anD 
eight  peere,  the  people  that  tberc  at  3^ 
rufalem,anDin3luDca)anDtbetounfrt, 
anD  3JuDas,  tent  greeting  anD  health 
totito3ltiftobulus,mng$tolomeusma; 
(let,  ttiho  ibas  of  the  ftocfe  oftlje  anotn- 
teo  pnefts, ano  to  the  jetties  that  ibete 
in  tfgppt. 

1 1  3Infomuch  as  ©ob  bath  bcliuereb 
bsfrom  great  penis,  n>eetbanBebim 
tngblp,  asbautngbm  tnbattcliagamft 
a  king. 

\x  5Fo?  be  cattrbcm  ont  that  fought 
Within  the  holp  title. 

1  j  5fojtt)rjen  the  leabcr  Ibas  come  in* 
to  jkrfra,  anD  tlje  armte  ttntb  bun  that 
feemeD  inmnciblc ,  tbcp  tbcre  dame  in 
tlje  temple  of  jftanca,  bp  tlje  Deceit  of 
iftaneaspjtclls. 

14  iFojattttocbus,  as  though  Ijee 
Vo oulb  mar nc  her,  tame  into  trje  plate, 
anb  bis  frienostbat  iiitrc  uittft  lutn,  to 
rccciue  monep  in  name  of  a  Dottwe. 

1$  teljiclj  rbljen  trje  pnefts  of  jBanca 
baD  fct  fojtb,  anD  be  was  cntreD  Hurt)  a 
(mall  tompanptnto  the  tompafle  of  tlje 
temple,  tlje?  (but  tlje  temple  affbor.e  as 
3lnttotbus  ltoas  tome  in. 

16  #nb  opening  a  pjiuteDooje  of  the 
toofe,  tbcp  trjjetb  (tones  lifce  tbunDct: 
bolts ,  anD  ftcoBC  botbnc  tbecaptatne, 
rjrtbeb  them  in  pictcs ,  (mote  off  tDcit 
bcaDS,  anb  taQ  them  to  tbofe  tljat  lb  ere 
Without. 

17  asicflcD  be  out  <5ob  in  all  things, 
Who  hath  bclwcr  cb  Dp  the  lmgoblp. 

18  ILbcrcfojc  Whereas  Wc  arc  nowc 
pnrpofeb  to  Keep  the  purification  of  the 
Xcmplebpon  the  tutc$  twentieth  bap 
of  the  mottetlj*<£aacu,  we  thought  tt 
ncteflarpto  terrific  pott  thereof,  tbatpe 
alfo  might  hccpeit,  as  the  rfcaft]  of  the 
tabernacles,  anb  of  the  fir c  [iDbicb  was 
gtuen  Ds]  Wljctt  jftccmias  offcreD  factt? 
ficc,  after  that  be  baD  builbcb  t$e%tm> 
ple,anbtljt^ltar. 

19  ifojwbcnoucfatbcrsWcreleDin: 
to  #crua,  the  £nefts  that  Were  then  De* 
uout,  took  the  fire  of  the  aitar  p?tuflp,j 
tjiD  tt  in  a  hollott)  place  of  a  pit  Without 
water,  Where  tbepbept  tt  fine,  fo  that 
the  place  was  onbuowen  to  all  men. 

xo  ii5ott»aftcrmanppecrcs,W)hcnit 
pltafcb  <oob,  jRccmtas  being  fent  from 
the  sing  of  pctfia,  bib  fenb  0  f  the  police 
title  of  thoic  pnefts  tljat  habhib  it,  to 
the  fire :  but  when  thep  tolbc  bs  tjjep 
fount)  no  fire,  but  tblcbc  water, 


21  3Cbcne6manDeDhctbcmtoD?aw 
IttPp,  anbtobnngit:  anb  Wljeu  tljefas 
!  tnfices  were  laib  on ,  ^eennascoman* 
!  Deb  the  pnefts  to  fpmtblcp'  iboob,  anD 
!  the  things  laib  therupon  rbttfj  p  water 

22  i©hen  this  Was  bone ,  anb  the 
I  time  tame  that  the  £>un  (bone  Which  a- 
fiwniasmbinthetloubc,  there  was  a 
great  fire  btnDleD ,  fo  tljat  euetp  man 
:  maructleb. 

25  3lnD  the  piittts  maoe  a  pjapcr 
Wbtleft  the  (aenfite  ibas  tonfummg,  [% 
i  fap]  both  the  pnetts ,  anb  all  the  tell, 
Jonathan  beginning,  anb  the  tell  an* 
uoermgthereunto,  as  jScenuas  DtD. 

24  3(nb  the  pjaper  was  after  this 
maner,  £)|Lb;b,|Lo?b<i5ob,Crcatour 
of  all  things,  Who  art  fearefuii ,  ano 
(ttong,  anb  righteous, anb  mcrtifull, 
anbthe  onelp,  anb  gractousblng, 

i->  Xbc  onelp  gtuer  of  all  thmgs,ttjc 
onelp  tuft,  aimtghtte  9  cttcrlafttng,  tijon 
that  b  cltiter  eft  3Jfrael  from  ai  trouble,? 
bibft  choofc  the  fathers,?  fanttifie  them: 

26  Jktciuethefatrifieefojthpruhole 
people  'Jftael,  anb  p?efente  thine  olbnc 
portion,  anb  fanttifie  it. 

27  father  thofe  together  that  are 
ftattcrcb  fro  Ds;beliucr  them  tljat  (true 
among  the  heathen,  loobebpou  them 
thatarcbcfpifcbfabho?reb,anbletthe 
Ijeathcn  mioib  tljat  thou  art  our  ©ob. 

28  ^untft)  them  that  oppjefle  bs,anb 
rbtth  p:ibe  boe  PS  lb?ong. 

29  ^lant  thp  people  agatne  in  thp 
holp  place,  as  fi0otfes  hath  (poben. 

30  3htf>  the  ^jteOs  fungpfaimesof 
thanBcfgiuing. 

31  iRoJbiijhenthefatrificcHjaston; 
fumcb,  iBecmtas  tommanbeb  the  iba- 
tcr  that  ibas  left,  to  bccpollveboti  tlje 
great  (tones. 

32  nahen  this  Vbasbonc ,  there  ibas 
BinDleb  a  flame :  but  itttms  tonfumeo 
bp  tlje  light  that  (htticb  from  tlje  ^itar. 

33  &oibhcnthismattcrlPasBnott)s 
en,itnjastolb  the  mngof  ^crfia,  that 
(n  the  plate ,  ibherc  the  pnefts  that 
rbcre  leb  arbap,  tjab  Ijib  tlje  fire,  there 
appear cd  ttatcr,  anb  that  HiBccmtas 
hab  purtfiebtijcfacnficcsthercmith. 

34-Xhenthcbtnginclofingthepiate, 
mabe  tt  holp  after  he  hab  trieD  p  matter. 

35  3nD  the  ftmg  toofte  manp  gifts, 
anb  bcftoacD  thereof,  ontljofctbljom 
henioulbgranfie. 

36  anb  ,<I5eemias  caiieb  this  thing 
jfraphthar ,  iPhich  is  as  much  to  fap  as 
a  cleanfing:but  manp  men  call  it  /Rephi. 

CHAT. 


cowpjfty . 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


.p.ij, 


Apocrypha. 


CHAP.    II. 

I  What  Iciemie  the  Prophet  did.  ^  How  he 
hid  the  Tabernacle,  the  Arke,  and  the  Altar. 
13  What  Neemias,  and  ludas  wrote.  10 
What  Iafon  wrote  in  hue  bookes,  2.5 
And  how  thofe  were  abridged  bv  the  author 
ol  thisbooke. 

TB&SfigSQ  Xis  alfo  fount)  in  the  re- 
<^  f^co2bs,tbat  3Jeccnuc  the 
$2opbet  ,  tommaunbeb 
tljcm  that  lbetc  caricb  a 
.  vuap,to  tabe  of  tlje  fire  ae  it 
hathbecncrigniftcb, 

z  anb  boib  mat  the  p2opbct  ha^ 
uing  giucn  tbcm  the  lam,  char  gcb  tbcm 
not  to  fojgct  the  commaunbements 
of  the  fLojb,airt> that tbcptboulb not 
cere  in  their  minus,  mben  tbep  fee  una; 
ges  offtlucr,anbgolD,  ttntb  their  o?na> 
ments. 

j  anbroith  other  fuel)  fpecttjes  tp 
hojteb  he  them,tbat  the  larb  fbouib  not 
Depart  from  tbctr  Hearts. 

4  3Jt  mas  alfo  containeb  in  the 
fame  Umtmg,  that  tDe  0jopbrt  bring 
ibarneb  of  ©ob ,  eommanbeb  tijeXa 
bernatlc,anb  tf)e  atfee  to  goc  tbith  bun, 
as  he  went  fwtb  into  the  monntamc, 
ibbere  fl^oifcs  tluneb  bp ,  anb  faibe  the 
heritage  of  <£ob. 

5  anb  TbbcnUercnuc  came  thither, 
be  fbunb  an  bolloib  taut  ibnenn  be  laib 
tbeXabctnatlcanbtftcariicanbtbc 
altar  of  intenfe,  fjfo  ftoppeb  toe  boo  jc.  j 

6  ^nb  fome  of  ttiofe  that  foltorbeb : 
him,  tame  to  mamc  tbcibap ,  but  the? 
coulbnottmmt. 

7  nabicbibbcn  3JcrcmicpercciucD, 
bee  biamcb  them,  facing,  as  fo2tbat; 
plate,  it  (ball  be  bntmomen  tonnil  the 
time  that  <sob  gather  bis  people  agamc 
togetbecanbrccctuctbcm  bnto  mcrcp.  I 

8  Xhen  (ball  the  H02D  mem  tbcm 
tbefe  things ,  anb  the  gio2p  of  the  H.02D 
(hall  appeare ,  anb  the  tloub  alfo  as  it , 
tbasfhcibcD  bnbet  O^oifcs  ,  anb  as 
lbbcn  Solomon  befircb  that  the  place  j 
might  be  bououtablpfattcrrficD. 

9  3Jt  tbas  alfo  bctlarcb  that  he  being 
ibifc,  offcrcbthefacnftccof  bebication, 
anb  of  tbcfimfbmg  of  theXcmplc. 

10  anbasibbcn$$oife6pjapcbtonto 
the  2.02b,  the  fire  tame  boibn  from  hea 
uen,  anb  confumcb  the  facnficcs-.cuen  fo 
pzapeb  Solomon  alfo,anbtbcfitc  came 
boibuefrom  heauen,  anb  confumeb  the 
burnt  offerings.  r  .  ,. 

11  aim  fiPoifes  faiD,bccaufc  the  finnc 


oftcringibasnottobceaten.uuias  con- 
fumeb. 

11  So  Solomon  nept  thofe  eight 
capes. 

1  j  3Ehe  fame  things  alfo  mere  rcpo2 
rebut  the  ttwnugs ,  anbcoirmictitatics 
of/2ccimas,anDbovbbcfouuDiugau- 
bjacicgatbcrcDtogcthcrtbeactsoftbc 
lamgs,  anbthepiop'hets,  anbofDa^ 
nib,  anb  the  epiftlcsoftbeBiugs  con- 
cerning the  botp  gifts. 

1+  3J»  littc  nmnec  alfo ,  Ifrubiis  ga- 
thcreb  together  all  thofe  things  that 
lbcrcloft,  bp  reafon  of  the  marrc  ibe 
bab,  anb  thep  remameuntbbs. 

1$  tebetcfojetfpccbaucnccbctbcre; 
of,fcno  fometo  fetch  them  bnto  pott. 

i6  nsbctcasibc  then  are  about  to  cc- 
leb2atcthcpurttttanon,ibehaucU)2ittcn 
bnto  poti,  anb  ^ce  (ball  Doc  lbelltf  pec 
Ucepe  the  fame  Dapes. 

17  tnae  hope  alfo  that  the  Gob,  that 
beliuercb  all  his  people,  anb  gaue  them 
all  an  heritage,  anb  the  tungbomc,  anb 
tbcp2icftboob,aiiDtbcSanctuartc, 

18  asbep2onufcbin  the laibc ,  lbill 
fhojtlp  haue  mcrcp  topon  bs.anb  gather 
bs  together  out  of  eucrp  lanb  bnber 
beaueninto  the  bolp  place  :fo2  he  hath 
beliuercb  bs  out  of  great  troubles,  anb 
hathpurtfiebtbepiatc. 

19  /15oib  as  concerning  3iuDas£Pac; 
cabcus,anb  hisb2cth2en,  anb  the  purtfc 
canon  of  the  great  Hcmplc,  anb  the  be* 
bicatton  of  the  altar, 

zo  anb  the  ibarrcs  agamft  anno- 
ehus  Cpiphancs,  ?«f  upatoi  his  fonnc, 

11  anb  the  manifcft  figncs  that 
came  from  heauen ,  bnto  thofe  that  be 
hattebthcmfelucsmaiifullp  to  their  ho- 
nour foijubaifmc  :  fothatbeingbtita 
fetb,  thep  oucrcamc  the  rimole  tountrp, 
anb  chafeb  barbarous  multitubes, 

22  anb  rccoucreb  agamc  the  Xcm- 
!  pic  renoibncb  all  the  tbojitJ  ouer ,  anb 
frecbthe  citic ,  anb  bpheib  the  lames, 
tbhuinberegoingboibnc,thciaLo2bbc 
mg  gracious  bnto  tbcm  lbitb  ai  fauour : 

23  ail  thefc things (31  fap)bctngbc 
clareb  bp  IJafon  of  Cp2cnc  in  fine  boobs, 
Vbc  null  anav  to  ab2ibgc  m  one  bolnme. 

24  jffozconfiDcringtbetnfinttcmnm 
bcr,  anb  the  bifficultp,  lbhich  thepfmo 
'tbatbeftrcto  looUtinto  the  narrations 
:ofthcfto2p,fo2thebarictpof^mattcr, 

25  nac  haue  becue  carcfuii,  that thep 
!that  lbillreao  might  haue  Delight,  ano 
that  thep  that  arc  ocfirous  to  commit 
to  memone ,  might  haue  cafe,  anb  that 

Bbbbb  z  all. 


\  Crt.  nor* 
God  it  is 

.i/ileiipeop/f, 
and  rendrtd 
the  heritage, 
and  the  i^iBf- 
deme,  ancL 
theprttj}- 
hooJ,a'idthe 
S<uillt4.me, 
aj('(  front  • 
fed  in  the 
Une.Fcr 
tve  hope  in 
Cjod  that  he 
wtflfbartty, 


Apocrypha.  1 1. Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


Ortto  dt- 
ferue  ~ntft 


all,  into  Vbljofc haubs  it  comes  might 
hauc  profit. 

26  Xhcrefojc  to  bs  that  Dane  taunt 
bpon  bs  this  patucfui  labour  of  abubg- 
tng ,  tt  lbas  not  eaftc ,  but  a  matter  of 
ftocat,anb  matching. 

17  Cunt  as  it  is  no  cafebnto  him, 
thatp2cparetb  a  bancuttt ,  anb  fccUeth 
tbebencfitofothcrs:yct||fo2thcplcafir- 
ringofinattplbcibtllbtibertaUcgiably 
thtsgrcatpames: 

is  JLeaumg  to  the  authour  the  cu 
act  hatiblmg  of  cucry  particular ,  anb 
labouring  to  follolb  the  rules  of  an  a- 
bubgement. 

19  ifot  as  the  mailer  builbcr  of  a 
neib  hottfe ,  muft  tare  foi  the  lbholc 
builbing :  but  hec  that  bnbcrtaUcth  to 
fetitout,  anb  paint  tt,  muft  fecUc  outfit 
things  foz  the  aborning  thereof:  cunt 
fo3JthmUetttsibithbs. 

30X0  ftanb  bpon  cttcry  point ,  anb 
gocoucrthutgs  at  large,  anb  to  beau 
nous  m  particulars,  bclongcth  to  the 
firft  authour  of  the  ftojie. 

31  25ut  to  bfc  bjeuftte,  anb  auoybc 
much  labouring  of  thc\bo:Uc  ,is  tobce 
granteb  to  him  that  ibtll  mauc  an  a- 
bnbgemntt. 

31  $crcchnilbiUlbcbcginthcft02p: 
onclpabbutg  thus  much  to  thatibhtch 
hath  bene  faib,Xl)at  it  is  a  foolift)  thing 
tomaUcalongpiologtic^nbtobclhoit 
ititheftojpitfelfc. 

CHAP.     III. 

1  Of  the  honour  done  to  the  Temple  by  the 
Kings  ot  the  Gentiles.  4  Simon  vttereth 
whattrcafurcsareintheTemple.  7  Heliodo- 
rns  is  lent  to  take  them  away.  14  He  is  (trie- 
ken  of  God, and  healed  ar  thepraiet  ol  Onias. 

£DVb  ibhcn  the  holvCitte 
lbas  mhabttcb  With  all 
peace  ,  anD  the  ?Laibcs 
mere  licpt  bcrv  ibcll ,  be 
caufc  of  the  goDUucflc  of 

juntas  the  high  pwft,  anb  his  hatrcb 

oftbicHcbncfTc, 
1   3Jt  came  to  parte  that  cunt  the 

Bmgs  themfclucs  bibjiouour  the 

place ,  anb  magmfie  the  i-eniple  ibith 

their  bcftgtfts, 
3   ginfomuch  that  S)Clencus  lung  of 

3tfui,ofhtsoibitcrcucnttes,  bare  all  the 

coftes  belonging  to  the  feruicc  of  the  fa~ 

crtficcs. 
+  Sut  one  £>imon  of  the  tribe  of 

35  emamin.ibho  lbas  mabegoucruour 

oftheXcsnple,  fell  out  ibith  the  high 


02teft  about  bifojbet  m  the  cttie. 

5  3ltio  when  he  coulb  not  ottercome 
<£>mas,  he  gate  htm  to3ipoiloniusthe 
foimcofXb2afcas,ibho  then  lbas  go- 
uernour  of  €oclofpua,anb  phntice, 

6  3inb  tolb  hun  that  the  trcafuric  in 
Jcrufalem  lbas  full  of  infinite  fummes 
ofmoncv ,  fo  that  the  tmiltitubc  of  their 
riches  lbhich  bibttotpertatnc  totheac< 
count  of  the  faenfices,  lbas  innutnc 
cable,  anb  that  ttmaspofftbletobung 
all  into  the  lungs  hanb. 

7  iftoib  ibhen  apollonius  came  to 
the  lung,  anb  hab  fl)eibeb  htm  of  the 
money,  lbhetcof  he  lbas  tolb,  the  Uing 
chofc  out  tyclioboms  his  treafurer.anb 
fent  hun  ibith  a  commaunbement,  to 
b,2inghim  thcfo2efatb  money. 

s  ^>ofoo2thibithi?ciiobomstoouc 
hts  tourney  bnber  a  colour  of  biftttng 
the  cities  of  Coelofv2ta,anb0hntice,but 
tnbeeb  to  fnlfill  the  Umgs  purpofe. 

9  anbibhenheibascometogjeru; 
faiem,  j  hab  bnte  courteouflp  recnucb  of 
the  htgh  i^iicft  of  the  ctrie ,  hec  tolb  hun 
lbhat  intelligence  Vbas  gutcnofthemo* 
ney,  jbcclareb  ibhcrcfoje  hee  came,  anb 
anbafucbifthefe  things  rbercfombeeD. 

10  Xhett  the  htgh  0;ieft  toibc  htm 
that  there  lbas  fuch  money  lapbe  bp  fbi 
thcreltcfeofibiboibes,  anb  fathericrtr 
chtlbjen, 

1 1  3lnb  that  fome  of  it  bclongcb  to 
^ircanus ,  fonne  of  Xobias ,  a  man  of 
great  bignitte,anb  not  as  that  ibicUeb 
S»tmon  hab  mifinfotmeb  :  the  famine 
lbhcrcof  m  all  lbas  fonre  hunbicb  w 
icntsoffilucr,anbtibohunb2cbofgolb, 

ii  3lnb  that  it  lbas  altogether  inv 
poffiblc  that  fuch  lbjongfhoulb  be  bone 
bnto  thcm,that  hab  commttteb  tt  to  the 
holmciTeofthcpiaccanbtothcmaicftle 
attbinutoiable  fanctitie  of  thcXemple, 
honourcb  oner  all  the  ibojlb. 

iB  2Snt  l?cliobo2US  becaufe  of  the 
lungs  cotnmaitbcmcutgincn  hun,  faib, 
Xhat  m  any  lbtfe  it  muft  be  tyough  t  in 
tothcUuigstrcautry. 

1+  §>o  at  the  bay  ibhtchhce  appoint 
teb,hec  nitrebiu  to  ojber  this  matter, 
ibhcrefo2e ,  there  lbas  no  Dnail  agonic 
th2oughottt  the  lbholc  ntte. 

rt  iSutthcj&2ieftsp2oftratmgthem' 
frlucs  bcfo2e  the  3iltar  m  their  pnefts 
^llcftmeitts ,  caiicb  bnto  heatteu  bpon 
hint  that  mabc  a  Haibc  concerning 
tilings  giucn  to  bee  Uept ,  that  they 
(liouio  fafcly  bee  p;cferucb  fo2  fuel)  as 
hab  comnutteb  them  to  be  Uept. 
16  %tyn 


Apocrypha. 


Cha 


\\Or/om,tke 
generall  ftip- 
fixation. 


f  (jr.  expe 
fl ''At ion. 


|  Or,  Lord 
f  okt  fa- 


16  Xben  ruijofo  bab  loobcb  the  hie 
02ieftitttbcfacc,  ltibouibbauc  iboun* 
net)  bis  heart :  foj  bis  countenance,  anb 
the  changing  of  bis  colour,  bcciacebtbc 
itubarb  agonic  of  bis  minbc : 

17  JFo?  the  man  ibas  fo  compaffeb 
ibltb  fearc,  anb  b02ro2  of  the  boby,tbat 
it  mas  manifcQ  to  them  that  loobcb  bp; 
on  him ,  lbljat  fojrolb  bee  bab  noib  in 
rjts  Dcart. 

is  ©fhers  ran  flocRtngout  of  their 
Doufcsllto  the  generau  Supplication, 
becaufe  the  place  ibas  Use  to  come  into 
contempt. 

19  3tnb  the  ibomcn  girt  lbitb fatRe* 
cloth  bnber  their  b2cafrs,abounbcbin 
the  ftceetes  anb  the  btrguts  that  lbcrc 
ncpt  m,ran  fomc  to  the  gates,  ano  fomc 
to  the  ibailes,  anb  others  loobcb  out  of 
tbeibmbolbcs: 

20  2lnb  all  holbing  their banbes  to- 
ibatbs  heaucn,  mabc  fuppiication. 

21  Xhen  it  iboulb  hauc  pmcb  a  man 
to  fee  the  falling  boibnc  of  the  nuiltt; 
tube  of  all  fo2ts,anbtbct  fcare  of  the  hie 
pitieft,  being  in  fucfj  an agony. 

22  Xbcy  then  cailcb  upon  the  %v 
mighticlLo?b,toBcepethethingscom^ 
mittebof  mitt,  fate  anb  furc,  fonbofc 
thathab  comnuttebthem. 

13  /Beuertheleffe  Dciiobouis  erects 
teb  thattbhich  ibasbcerccb. 

14  jlSotbas  bee  *bas  there  pjefent 
hunfclf c  lbitb  bis  guarb  about  the  tr c& 
furtc,  rt)e  ||  fLojb  of  fpints ,  9  the  frnnce 
ofailpotbercaufcba  great  apparition, 
fo  that  all  that  piefumeb  to  come  in 
lbitb  him,  tbere  afionifbeb  attrjcpoU) 
er  of  Gob ,  anb  fainteb ,  anb  lbcrc  foje 
afraib. 

%•>  Jfo?  there  appearebbnto  tljem  a 
Do2fc ,  tbitl)  a  terrible  nber  bpon  him, 
anb  abomcb  lbitb  a  bery  faire  couenng, 
anb  he  ratine  fiercely,  anofmotcattye- 
liobo2USibithhisfo2efcet,anbitftemeb 
that  Dec  that  fate  bpon  thchorte,  Dab 
complete  barneffe  of  golbe. 

26  fi0o2coucrttbo  other  yongmenap- 
pcareb  before  him,  notable  in  Orcngth, 
crcellcnt  m  bcautie,  anb  comely  in  app* 
rcll,  ibbo  ftoobby  him  on  cither  fibc, 
anb  fcour  gcb  him  continually  ,anb  gauc 
him  many  fojeftripes. 

27  2(nD  ^elioboms  fell  uibbculy  bn^ 
tothcgrounb.anbmastompafrcbibith 
great  barbeneffe :  but  tljcy  that  lbcrc 
ibith  him ,  toobe  fjim  bp ,  anb  put  htm 
into  a  Utter.  ,         _  . 

28  Xhus  hmi  that  lately  came  u>ith 


p.llj, 


Apocrypha. 


!  a  great  trame ,  anb  ibitb  all  bis  guaib 
into  the  faib  trcafury,  they  carieo  out, 
being  bnabic  to  belpe  bimfelfe  ibitb  his 
,  ibeaponsraub  mamfcltlv  they  at&uoib; 
IcbgeDtbcpoibcrofGob. 

29  jf  02  hce  by  the  haub  of  god  mas 
taftboibncatib  lay  fpeecljleffe  lbithont 
all  hope  of  life. 

30  But  they  p.jaifeb  tlje  1L 02b  that 
Ijab  miraculoufly  honourcb  Ins  oibtte 
place  :foj  the  Xcmpic  ibbfcb  a  little  a 
fojc  ibas  full  of fcarc  anb  troublcibbcn 
thc^lmightie  ?Lo2b  appcarcb,  ibas  fil- 
leb  lbitb  toy  anb  glabueffe. 

31  Xhen  ftraigbtibaycs  ccrtaiue  of 
^cliobomsfriciibs,pMycb  SDmas  that 
hce  lbottlb  call  bpon  the  mod  nigh  to 
gcaunt  bim  his  life ,  ibbo  lay  rcaby  to 
giucbptbegboff. 

32  So  the  high  ^neftfufpectingicft 
the  Ring  fboulb  mifconccme  that  fomc 
treachery  hab  bcenebonc  to  Deliobouis 
by  the  3Tcibcs,  offer eb  a  facrificc  fo;  the 
health  of  the  man. 

33  JRoib  as  the  high  02ie(l  ibas  ma 
binganatonement,trjefameyongmen, 
m  the  fame  clotbmg.appcarcbaiiDftoob 
bcfibc  Oeliobo2us,  faying,  Gitic£Dnias 
thehigi)0ncrt  great  thanbcs.infomuth 
as  foz  hts  fane  the  2lo?D  hath  grautcb 
thee  life. 

3+  3mb  feeing  that  thou  haft  becne 
feoucgeb  from  bcaucn ,  bcclarebnto  all 
men  the  mighttc  poibcr  of  (3oo :  anb 
tbijen  they  hab  fpoben  tljcfe  iboibcs, 
they  appcarcb  no  moic. 

35  So  ^cliobouts after  be  ba&offc 
rcb  facrificc  bnto  tbcfLo2b ,  anb  mabc 
great  boibcs  bnto  him  that  hab  faucb 
his  life,  anb  falutcb  £>nias,  rcturncb 
ibith  bis  bode  to  the  lung. 

36  Xhen  telhficbbee  to  all  men,  the 
ibojlics  of  the  great  <5ob,  Vbhiclj  he  bab 
fecitcTbttb  his  eyes. 

37  3inb  lbben  the  King  aflicb  lf>nio 
boms,ibbo  might  bea  fit  man  to  be  fent 
yetonceagameto3Jerufaicm,hefaib, 

38  gjf  thou  haft  any  enemy  02  traito? 
fenbhun  thither /inb  thou  (bait  receiuc 
binHbellfconrgcb,ifhccfcapelbitbhis 
life  :fo2in  that  plate,  no  Doubt,  ttjerc  is 
an  cfpcnall  poibcr  of  Gob. 

39  JF02  bee  that  Mbcilctb  m  hcauen 
batl)  bis  eye  on  that  plate ,  anb  befni 

1  betb  it,  anb  bee  bcatetb  anb  beftroycth 
tbemtbatcomctohurtit. 

40  stub  the  things  concerning  lie 
liobojns,  anb  the  becputg  of  the  treafu 
ric,  fell  out  on  this  fo?t. 

Bbbbb  j  CHAP. 

71 


Apocrypha.  I  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha 


char  mi. 

Simon  flandercth  Onus.  7  Ialon  by  corrup- 
ting ticking,  obtemerh  the  office  of  die  hie 
Piicfr.  14  Menelausgcttcth  the  fame  from 
Iafon  by  the  like  corruption.  34  Andronicus 
traitcrouflymurdereihOnias.  36  The  King 
being  informed  thereof,  caufeth  Andronicus 
to  be  put  to  death.  39  Thewickednesof  Ly- 
fimachus,  by  the  infligation  of  Menelaus. 

&««i3|ye$Dis5>tmonnoW  ( of  Who 


p^\>wcc  fpatic  afo;c)  hauing 
~  bin  abcw;aycr  of  the  mo> 
ney ,  anb  of  his  couture?, 
^^J&(lanbcreb£>nias,  astf  Jjc 
hab  tctrtfiebDcltobo;us,  anb  bcnctljc 
Wo;Uer  of  tljcfe  cutis. 

x  Xhus  was  hec  boib  to  call  him  a 
traitour,  that  hab  befcrueo  well  of  tlje 
ntic,  anb  t  cud;  co  his  own  r  nation ,  anb 
u>as  fo  yalous  of  tlje  lawes. 

3  23ut  When  their  hatrcb  Went  fo 
farrc,  that  by  one  of  Simons  faction 
murthcrswcrccommttteb, 

4  £>ntas  feeing  the  banger  of  this 
contention,  anb  that  Jippoiiomus ,  as 
being  the  gouernonrof  CocIofy;iaano 
pljcm'te ,  btb  rage ,  anb  mcrcafe  &>v 
monstnaitce, 

5  i)t  went  to  thcUing,  not  to  be  an 
accufcrof  hiscouturcymcn.butfccfelng 
tljcgoobofall,bothpnbUUc,rjp;ttiatc. 

6  Jfo;hcfawthatttwastmpofltblc, 
that  the  (late  fbouib  continue  qutct,anb 
Pinion  leant  his  folly,  bnlcfle  the  bins 
bib  loottc  thereunto 

7  25ut  after  the  beach  of £>elcttras, 
lbhcn  antiochus  caiieb  €ptpljancs, 
toohc  the  Umgbom,  3fafon  the  toother 
of Cnias,  labonrcb  bnberhanb  to  bee 
htc  p2icft, 

I  p;omifingbnto  the  tringby  inter 
ceffton,  th;ccbunb2Cbanbth;ccfco;e  ta- 
lents of  filuer,ano  of  another  rcuencib, 
cightic  talents: 

9  23cftbesthis,hcp?onufcbtoafftgnc 
anl)unb;cbanb  fifncmo;c,  if  he  might 
hauc  licence  to  fct  him  bp  a  place  fo;  er 
cretfe,  anb  fo;  the  training  bp of youth 
in  the  faflnons  of  the  heathen,  anb  to 
w;ttctheinof3Jctufaicm[bytljcuamc 
of  l3lnttothians. 

10  tobith  When  the  lung  hab  grantcb, 
anb  hec  hab  gotten  into  his  hanb  the 
rule,  he  foo;thibith  nought  his  olbnc 
nation  to  the  Grcchid)  faflnon. 

I I  3uo  the  royal  pnuiicbgcsgrantcb 
of  fpenailfauour  tothc'lJcwcs,  by  the 
meatus  of  'Jolm  tlje  father  of  Cupolc 


mus,tbho  Went  embaffabo;  to  &omc, 
fo;  amiticanoatb,he  tooucaway,  anb 
putting  boibn  the  gouermncnts  Which 
were  acco;btngto  the  law,  he  b;ought 
bp  new  cultomesacjatnQthciaw. 

it  3fo;hcbuiitgtabh;apiaccofcrcr- 
tifc  bnbet  tlje  tolb;c  it  felfc,  anb  b;ought 
tlje  chiefcyong  menbnber  hts  fubtctti- 
on,  anb  mabc  them  lbcarca  hat. 

ij  ii5oWfuchwasthchctghtof<5rceft 
fafl)tons,anb  tnercafe  of  hcathcnifh  ma? 
ncrs,th;ough  the  crcccbingp;ofanencs 
of  3Jafon  tljatbngobly  W;ctch,anb  no 
highpnclt: 

14  Xhat  the  p;icftshab  notottrage 
to  feme  any  mo;c  at  the  altar,  but  be? 
fptftng  the  Xcmplc,  anb  ueglccttug  the 
facrtftccs,  haftcneb  to  be  partakers  of 
the  bniawfull  allowance  tn  the  place  of 
ejeertife,  after  the  game  of  ||2>tfcus  tal? 
lebthcmfo;th. 

15  jftotfctttng  by  the  honours  of  their 
fathcrs,butittnugthcglo;yofthe(i5rej 
ciansbcflof  all. 

i6  Z5y  rcatbn  whereof  fo;c  calamity 
tamebponthem :  fo;  they  hab  them  to 
be  thctr  enemies  anb  aucngers,  Whofc 
tultomc  they  folio Wtb  fo  carncftly ,  anb 
bn  to  Whom  they  befir  cb  to  be  line  in  an 
things, 

17  3fo;  it  is  not  alight  thing  toboe 
WtcHcbly  agatnft  tlje  lawes  of  (Sob,  but 
the  tunc  following  (hail  bcclare  ttjcfc 
things. 

18  i!5ow  when  the  game  that  Was 
bfebeucry  ftft  yctc  was  Kept  at  £y;us, 
thcBingbctngp;efent, 

19  %\)is  bugranous'Jafonfent^pe' 
tiailmcfrcngcrsfroin3lcrufalcm,Who 
were 3nttochians,  to  carte  th;cc ljun* 
b;cbb;achmcsof  ulucr  to  the  facrtficc  of 
1  Dermics,  Which  etten  the  bearers  thcr* 
!of  thought  fit  not  to  bcftoib  bpon  the 

!  faenfite ,  becaufc  it  Was  not  conuentent, 
,  but  to  be  refcrttcb  fo;  other  charges. 

ao  Xhtsmoncythcnmregarbofthe 
fenber,  wasappolntcb  to  Dermics  fa- 
;  crtficc ,  but  becaufc  of  the  bearers  there- 
of, it  was  tmploycb  to  the  mautng  of 
gallics. 

it  jftolb  When  3!polIoniu3  the  fonne 
of  upanafthcus  Was  fent  bnto  <£gypt, 
fo;  the  ||  coronation  of  tttncj  ptolomcus 
phtlomcto;,3ntiochusbnbcrrtanbtng 
him  not  to  bee  well  affectcb  to  his  af- 
faires, p;ombcb  fo;  hts  oWnc  fafcttc : 
whercupou  he  came  to  Joppc,  $from 
thence  to 'Jerufaicm. 

1 1  xohcr c  he  was  honourably  rceei- 

ucb 


\\Or,the 
'Difctu 
which  w.-u 
ajlone  wr.h 
an  hole  tn 
tbemiJJJ. 


were  reliei- 
Btliernhn  ~i- 
deurt. 


\\Orintlro- 


Apocrypha.  Chap.nij. 


Apocrypha. 


neb  of  3Jafon,ant>  of  tljc  ntic,  anb  was 
b.:ougl)t  m  ibitb  tojcljligbt,  anb  ibitb 
great  (bountigs  :  ano  fo  aftcribarb 
ibent  ibitb  l)ts  !)ottc  unto  £bcntcc. 

23  Xtyce  yccre  aftcribarb ,  %\to\\ 
fcnt  £0cnciaus  tljc  fojcfaib  *>imons 
btotljcr ,  to  bcarc  the  money  bnto  tbc 
Utng ,  ano  to  put  bim  mmmot  ofccr? 
taine  ncceffary  matters. 

24  2Sut l)c  being  tnougDt to  tljcp2C< 
fence  ofthentng,  lbljcn  Ijc  Dab  magtuft 
ebbun,  fo?  tlic  glouous  appearance  of 
his  poiber,  got  tljc  p2icftljooo  to  ttfm> 
fclfc,offcringmo?ctbcn3Jafonbytb2ce 
buttiucb  talents  of  filuer. 

25  £>o  be  came  ibitb  tbc  feings  £0att; 
bate ,  bunging  notl)mg  tboitljv  tbc 
bigbP2icltbooo,biubaumgtljcfuryofa 
crucliHyjant ,  anb  tljerage  of  afauagc 
beaft. 

26  %l)tn  3Iafon,U)fjo  Ijabbnbct-- 
mtnebfjis  olbnebjotljcr,  being  bnoer- 
minebbyanotber ,  ibas  copcllcbtoflcc 
into  tljecountrcy  of  tljc3lmmouitcs. 

27  ^do  ^cuciaas  gotrtic  p2mripa= 
Uttc :  but  as  fo.z  tljc  money  tbat  be  Dab 
pjonufeb  bnto  tljc  bmg ,  bee  tooftc  no 
goob  o?becfo?  it ,  albeit  £>oftratus  tljc 
ruler  of  tljc  caftlc  rcautrcb  it. 

2s  iro:  bnto  turn  appcrtainco  trje 
gatbermg  of  tbc  cuftomes.  ualjcrcfoje 
tljev  mere  bo  til  calico  before  tbc  lung. 

29  iftotb  a^cneiausieftbisbjotbcr 
flyfimacbus  nt  bis  ftcab  in  tljc  pnclb 
boob,aub  &oftratus  left  Crates,  ibbo 
vbas  goucrnonr  of  tljc  Cypaans. 

30  nabilc  thofe  tbmgs  iberc m boing, 
tbcyof  Sbarfusanb  iJ0aiiosmaoe  m 
furrection ,  becaufc  tbey  mcrcguicnto 
tbcluugsconcubuiccalleb2lnnocbis. 

31  ICfjencamc  tljctnngmallbaftcto 
appcafc  matters,  leatung^lnbjonicus  a 
man  in  autljo2ity,fo2  bis  ocputy. 

32  #oib  flftnclaus  fnppofmg  tbat 
bebab  gotten  a  conucnicnt  tunc,  ftolc 
certamcbcffclsofgoio,  out  of  tbctcim 
pie,  anb  ganefomcoftbemto  3tnb2oni 
cus,anbfomc  be  folb  into  Xvms,  anb 
tbc  cities  rounb  about. 

33  roljicb  ibben  £>mas  ftncib  of  a 
furcty,bcrcp200ucb  bun,  ano  ibitb 
bicib  btmfelfc  into  a  S>anctuane  at 
2Dapbnc,tbatltctb  bv  3ntiocbia. 

34  B@bcrcfo2C  £0cnciaus  ,  tafcing 
3tnb2omcus  apart,  p2aycb  bun  to  get 
jDmasintoljiSIjaubs,  ibljo  being  per 
fiuaocbtbcrcunto,  anocomnungtoi© 
niasmbcceit ,  gaueljim  bisngbt  banb 
ibitb  otbes,  anbtbouglj  bcciberefuf; 


pectcb  (by  bun)  yet  pcrfiuabcb  He  rjtm 
to  comcfo2tlj  of  ttjc£>anctuarie:ibljom 
fojtbibitb  be  ttjut  bp  lbitljout  regarb  of 
3(iifhcc. 

35  5fo,2  tbc  ibljiclj  caufe  not  oncly 
tljcjcibcs,  but  many  alfo  of  otljet  na- 
tions tooUe  great  inoignation ,  anb 
Vbcrc  muclj  grieuebfo2  tljebniultmur> 
bec  of  tljc  man. 

36  3tnbibl)cntJjc  lungibascomea; 
game  from  tljc  places  about  Cilicia,  tlje 
Jclbcs  tljat  ibere  m  tbc  cmc ,  ano  ccr* 
tatne  of  tljc  scenes ,  tbat  abbo2rcb  tljc 
fact  alio ,  compiamco  becaufc  £>ntas 
ibas  flame  ibitbout  caufe. 

37  H:ijercfo2C^ntiocljuStt)asbca^ 
tily  fo2ry ,  ano  mooucb  to  pity,  anb 
lbcpt,  becaufc  of  tljefobcr  aubmobeft 
beljauiour  ofljimtljatlbas  bcab. 

3S  3nb  being  hrnblcb  ibitb  anger, 
fo2tl)Vbitb  be  too&e  aibay  3lnD2oiucus 
Ijis  purple,  anbreutoffljisclotbcs,ano 
leabing  Ijim  tb2ougb  tljc  lbljolc  city  bn< 
to  tbat  bcry  place ,  tbbcrc  Ije  Ijab  com* 
mittcb  uupictic  agaiult  £>nias ,  tberc 
flclb  be  tbc  curfeb  murtljcrec.  Xljus 
tbc  5.02b  rclbarbco  bim  bts  puniu> 
ment,asbcbabbefcrucb. 

39  /Solbibbcnmanyfacrilcbgcsljab 
beenc  comnuttcb  in  tbc  ntic  by  %  yGma* 
cl)iis ,  ibitb  tbc  confent  of  i$enclaus, 
auotbcb2tiittberofibasfp2eaoab2oab, 
tbc  multitubc  gatbereb  tljcmfelucc  to 
gctljcragamltlLyfimacbuE.manybcD 
fclsof  goio  being  alrcaoy  cancb  aibay 

40  omereupon  tljc  common  people 
tifmg,anb  being  fillcbibitb  rage,  Jlyfi- 
macbus  arntcb  about  tb2ce  tboufano 
mcn,anbbcganncfirft  to  offer  biolcncc 
on||3Uiraiuig,bnugtbcicabcr,aman 
farrc  goncmyccrcs,i  no  leffc  m  folly. 

41  %ljey  tljcn  feeing  tbc  attempt  of 
ILyfimacbus  ,  fomc  of  tbem  taugbt 
ltoncs,f  omc  clubs,  otljcrs  talting  hanb- 
fuls  of  bull,  tbat  ibasnett  at  banb ,  call 
tbetn  all  togctber  bpon  Xlyfimaclnis, 
anb  tnofc  tbat  fct  bpon  tlicm. 

42  Xbusmanyoftbcmtljcylboiiu^ 
beb,  ffomctljcy  flroltc  to  tbc  grouuo, 
aiiDallroftbcmltbcyfo2ccoto  flee  :but 
as  fo2  tbe  €bnnb20bbcr  bunfclfc,  Ijun 
tljcyKUicbbcfiDcs  tbetrcafury. 

43  £>f  tberc  matters  tbcrcfo.'c  there 
ibasanaccuranon  laibc  againfttlBene- 
laus. 

44  530U1  lbbcn  tbc  hing  came  to 
Xy2us  ,  tlncc  men  tljat  iberc  Tent 
from  tbeS>cnatc,plcabcb  tljc  caufe  be 

fozebim: 

4<;  2i8nt 


\Or,T]- 


Apocrypha.  I  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\OrJlJits. 


45  25ut  £J3cnciaus  being  noibton 
uitteb,p2omifcb0tolomcctbe  fonnc  of 
2>o;tpmcnes,to  giuc  htm  much  mo- 
nep,  <f  Dee  iboulb  pacific  the  Bingto- 
ibarbsbim. 

4«  thereupon  tf>tolomcctaMng  the 
femgafibeintoaccrtainc  gaileric,  asit 
lbcrc  to  tabc  tfjeaircbjougbt  bun  to  be 
of  another  mtnbc; 

47  31nfomucl)  fftat  Dee  bifthargcb 
i]3cnclaus  from  tfte  atcufattons,  lbbo 
notibttbttanbtng  ibas  taufc  of  all  the 
mifcbtcfc:anbtbofepoo2C  men,  lbbo  if 
tbcp  Dab  tolD  tDctr  taufc,  pca,bcfo2c  t!)c 
©cptbians,  fljoulD  banc  bene  uibgcu 
mnotcnt,  them  l)c  tonbemneu  to  Death. 

48  Xbus  tl)cp  that  follolbcb  the 
matter  foj  tbccitic,  anb  foj  the  people, 
anb  fo2  the  bolp  bcffcls,bib  foonc  fuffer 
bitiuftptimfbiucnt. 

49  i©bercfo2C  etten  rbep  of  Xp2us 
mooueb  lbitb  batrcb  of  that  lbtcftcb 
beeb,  taufeb  them  to  bee  bonourablp 
burieb. 

50  3lnb fo  thiouglj the  touetoufnefle 
of  tbcm  that  lbcrc  utpoibcrS!3cnclaus 
r  emaineb  mil  in  antbo2itp,tncr cafing  in 
maitce,anb  being  a  great  traitour  to  t£>e 
tit^cns. 

CHAP.   V. 

1  Of  the  figncs  and  tokens  feenc  in  lerufalem. 
6  Of  the  end  and  wickedneffe  of  lalon.  1 1 
Thepurfuitot  Antiochus  agaiuft  the  [ewes. 
15  Thefpoilin<;ofthcTemple.  17  Macca- 
beus fleeth  into  the  wildernes. 

<$mi®@&  Sottt  the  fame  tunc  ^n- 
*%?  tiotbus  p:cpareb  bis  fe* 
toiu>bopagcmto€gppt: 
i3JnDtbcnitbappcncb, 
vgfcsfctbat  tbjoiigb  all  the  title, 
to:  tlje  fpace  almofl  of  fourtie  baves, 
there  rberc  fecne  rjozfemen  running  m 
the  aire,  i\\  tlofb  of  golbc,  anb  armeb 
ibitl)  iantcs,lmc  a  bant)  of  fouibicrs, 

3  3tnbtroupesofb02fcmcninarap, 
incoimtrtng,  anb  running  one  agamft 
another  ibithfl)al«ngof  (i)iclbes,  ano 
multitubc  of  ||  pines,  anb  bribing  of 
fit)02bs,ant>  rafhng  of  Darts,  anb  glitter 
ring  of  goibcn  02namcnts,anbbarucffc 
ofallfo2ts. 

4  H9heref02ecucry  man  p?aicb  that 
that  apparition  might  turncto  goob. 

5  il5oibibhenrhcrcibas50iiefo2tl) 
a falfc rumour,  as  though  3nttotbus 
habbcncbcab,3Jafontooltcatthclcaft 
atboufanDmcu  ,anDfuDDcnlp  mabean 
aflault  bpon  the  titie,  anb  tbcp  that 


mere  bpon  the  ibailcs,  being  put  bacne, 
anb  the  titie  at  length  taucn,  ipcnciaus 
fleb  into  the  taflic: 

6  25ut  gjafon  flew  his  olbnc  titi 
5cns  ibitbout  merep,  (not  tonfiberlng 
that  to  get  fbebap  of  them  of  his  ottmc 
nation,  iboulb  be  a  mod  bnbappp  bap 

f02  t>»n  :  bUtthinblng  they  had  bene  his 

enemies ,  anti  not  bts  countrcp  men 
ibhomhetonqucrcb.) 

7  tyoibbeit,  fo:  all  rtjis  Ijee  obtaineb 
not  thcp2intipalitic,  but  at  the  laflrc* 
tciueb  fljamcftythcrelbarb  ofbistrea- 
fon,anb  flcb  againc  into  the  countrcp  of 
tljc  Ammonites. 

s  3m  the  cim  therefor  bec  !jab  an 
bnbappp  rcttirnc,  being  attufebbefo?c 
Gretas  the  lung  of  the  Arabians ,  flco 
mg  from  cttp  to  titp,purfucb  of  all  men, 
hatcb  as  a  fotfancr  of  the  ?laibes ,  anb 
bemghabm  abomination,  as  an  open 
II  enemic  of  his  countrcp ,  anb  countrepf 
men,  he  lbas  tafl  out  tnto  €gppt. 

9  3Ebns  hec  that  hab  umtn  many 
out  of  their  countrcp ,  pcriCbcb  in  a 
ftrangc  lanb,rttiring  to  thejlacebcmo- 
mans,  anb  thinning  there  to  fmbc  fuc- 
tour  bp  rrafon  of  hiSRinbjeb. 

10  3inD  hec  that  hab  tall  out  manp 
bitbuncD,baD  none  to  mournc  foj  him, 
nojanyfolemne  funerals  at  all,  no?fe* 
pulthzcttnth  his  fartjers. 

1 1  &o\x>  lbhcn  this  that  ibasbone 
tame  to  the  lungs  care,hc  thought  that 
Jjubcahabrcuoltcb.ttihercuponremo' 
umg  out  of Cgppt  in  a  furtous  nunbc, 
hetoouethe  tine  bpfo2tcof  amies, 

ii  5lnb  tommauntieD  his  men  of 
ibarrc  not  to  fpare  futi)  as  tbcp  met, 
anb  to  flap  futi)  as  Vbetit  bp  bpon  the 
houfes. 

1  j  3Chns  there  ibas  hilling  of  pong 
anb  oib,maHuigaibapofmen,  Vbomcn 
anb  thilb2en ,  flapmg  of  birgtns  anb 
infants. 

14  3bib  tlicrc  mere  beflropeb  ibitlj- 
in  the  fpate  of  rbjeeibhole  baies,  fottre^ 
ftozc  tljoufanb,  Vbhcrcof  fourtp  thoit^ 
fanb  lbcrc  flame  in  the  conflict;  anb  no 
feibcrfolb.thcn  flame. 

15  Jflctibasbenotcontcntlbitbfhis, 
butpjefumeb to  goetnto  the moflholp 
Xcmplc  of  all  the  WjojIU  :  <35eneiaus 
that  traitour  to  the  lLarbes,aub  to  his 
o\bnetountrcp,beinghisguibe. 

i6  ^nbtaumgthcholpbeffeisibittj 
pollutcbljanbes,  anb  ibitl)  piophanc 
hanbes,  pullingDoibnethc  things  that 
lbcrc  bebtcateb  bp  other  Kings,  to  the 
augmen* 


\\Or,extcH- 
tts»trt 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


P-Vl 


Apocrypha. 


augmentation  anb  gioip  anb  honour  of 
tljcpiace,lje  gauetncmaibap. 

17  anbfohaugljticibas^mtiotljus 
innunbe,  tljathcc  confibcrcb  not  that 
tljc?Lo2brbasangrrfo2  aVofyOt  fojrhe 
fumes  of  tJiem  that  bibclt  in  the  nttc, 
anb  ttjcccfojc  his  ere  was  not  upon  the 
plate. 

is  iPod  hab  the?  not  becne  fojmcrrp 
ibjappcb  in  man?  finnes,  this  man  as 
fooneas  hechab  come ,  habfoo2tl»bttb 
btcne  feoutgeb ,  anu  put  bacuc  from 
hispjcfumption ,  as  $cuob02tis  ibas, 
ibljom  S>eleucus  the  lung  fent  tobiclb 
thctrcafiine. 

19  iftcucrthclcfrcGobbibnotchoofc 
the  people  fo2  ttjc  plates  faUc ,  but  tlje 
place  fo2  the  peoples fafte. 

10  3uin  therefore  the  plate  it  fclfc 
that  ibas  pattafect  ttritb  them  of  the 
abucrfirtcs  that  happeneb  to  tlje  natfc 
on,btb  aftetttiarb  communicate  in  tlje 
benefits  fent  fcom  tbe1Lo2b :  anb  as  it 
tbas  fojfabcn  in  the  ibjatb.  of  the  Zb 
might?,  foagamc  the  great  Hojb  being 
rcconcilcb,  it  lbas  fct  top  lbtth  all  gl02p. 

ii  &oibhcn:antioehushabcaricb 
ont  of  the  Xcmplc,  a  thoufanb  anb 
eight  hunbjcb  talents,  hec  bepattcb  ut 
all  baftcinto  3nttocljia,  tbeentng  in  fjis 
p«bc  to  niaac  tlje  lanb  nauigable,anb 
tf)c^>ea  paftablcbpfoot:  fuchlbastbc 
IjaugbtmctTc  of  his  minbe. 

11  :Snb  rje  left  goucrnours  to  bcre 

trjc  natton :  at  3Jcrufalcm  Philip,  foz 

mis  country  a  ph2pgian,anbfo:man< 

nersmozc  barbarous  ttjctiljcetDat  fct 

him  there: 

ij  3{nb  at  <5an5im,  3nb?ontcus; 
anb  befibes,C0encians,Vbfjo  ttwfcthen 
all  the  reft,  bare  an  hcauic  rjanb  oucr 
trjc  citizens,  Ijauing  a  malicious  mmbc 
agatnfthiscountrcimientbc'^clbcs. 

14  v>t  fent alfo  that  betcftablc  ring* 
leaber  apollonius,  Ibith  an  armic  of 
ttboanb  tVbcntie  thoufanb,  commauti; 
btng  Ijim  to  flap  all  tbofe  tbatlbcrctn 
thetr  beft  agc,anb  to  fell  the  lbomen  anb 
tlje  monger  fojt:         _     „ 

15  nafio  comming  to  3Jcrufalem,anb 
pjetenbing  peace,  bib  fojbcare  till  the 
holy  bap  of  thc;S>abbarh,n>hcn  ta&ing 
thC3|eU)cs  Bccpmgholvbav ,  hce  com-- 
manbcbfjismcnto  armctbcmfelucs. 

16  3tab  fo  hec  ficibc  all  them  that 
lbcrc  gone  to  the  rclcbjatmg  of  the 
£>abbatb ,  anb  running  tlnougl)  the 
eitp  tinth  rbcapons,  (leibc  great  ntui 
tuubes. 


\  Attach: 

nlerprctcrs. 


\\OHt<fhf. 

lib.  1  i.c.y. 


17  2Sut  3ubas  Maccabeus,  t  niith '  \c, *■;■„ 
nine  others,  02  thereabout,  ibitrjb2eib  •*«««* 
hnufclfc  into  tljcujiiocrueffe,  anb  liueb 
in  the  mountauics  after  tlje  mancc  of 
beafts.vbith  his  company,  ibhofcb  on 
hecbes  connnuaiip,  left  they  fbouio  be 
partakers  of  the  pollution. 

CHAP.   VI. 

1  Thclcwes  are  compelled  to  leauetheLawol 
God.  4  The  Temple  is  defiled.  8  Cruel- 
tie  vpon  die  people  and  the  women.  12.  An 
exhortation  to  bearc  affliction  ,  by  the  ex- 
ample of  the  valiant  courage  ot  Eleazarus, 
cruelly  tortured. 

'£%  £>  %  long  after  this,  the 
5  lung  fent  an  olbc  man  of 
e  Athens,  to  compcll  the 
■jcibcs  to  bepact  from 
the  laibcs  of  their  fathers, 
anb  notto  line  after  tbcfLaibcs  of  <3ob: 
1  3lnb  to  pollute  alfo  tbcXempicm 
3Jcrufalcm,anbto  call  it  the  Xcmplc  of 
Jupiter  Olympius :  anb  that  in  <3art- 
51m,  of  Jupiter  the  befenber  of  ftran^ 
gers,asthcy  ||  bib  befite  that  bVbcit  in 
tlje  place. 

j  Che  comming  in  of  thismifchicfc 
lbas  fo?e  anb  grlcuous  to  tlje  people: 

4.  $qi  the  Xemple  lbas  fillco  ibitb 
riot  anb  rcuelling.bp  the  ©entiics.ibijo 
ballicb  ibitlj  harlots ,  anb  hab  to  boe 
tbith  lbomen  lbithin  the  circuit  of  the 
holy  places ,  anb  bcfibes  that,  bzought 
in  tljmcjs  that  lbcrc  not  laibfull. 

5  %X\t  3ltar  alfo  ruas  filltb  Vbittj 
p2ofanc  things,  tbljicl)  tlje  HaVb  fozbib- 
berfj. 

6  /neither  Ibas  it  laibfullfo?  a  man 
to  ftccpe  Sabbath  bapes ,  o:  ancient 
J1  cafts,o;t  to  pjofefle  hunfclfc  at  all  to  be 
a3lcibe. 

7  3nb  in  thebapoftljeUings birth, 
cucrv  monctrj  the?  tberc  brought  by 
bitter  conftramt  to  catc  of  the  faenfiecs  -, 
anb  ibhcn  the  ifcaft  of  25acchus  Xbas 
Ucpt,thc3Jcibcsiberccompcllebtogoc 
inp20ceftionto25atcl)us,tarring3fuic. 

8  £J9o?coucrtljcrctbcntoutabccrcc 
to  the  neighbour  tines  of  the  trjeathen, 
bp  the  fuggcftion  of  0tolomec,agamft 
the  ilcibcs,  that  thcr  fljoulb  obferue 
the  fame  faft)tons ,  anb  be  partaacrs  of 
their  faenfiecs. 

9  3nb  Ibrjofo  \boulb  not  confomie 
themfelucs  to  the  mancrs  of  the  Ccn- 
tilcs,ft)oulbbeputtobeath:thcn  might 
a  man  banc  fecne  the  pjefent  mifcvv- 

10  foi  tljcrc  lbcrc  tibo  lbomen 

b!oiiglit 


tqr.grr 


Apocrypha.  II. Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


b?ought,tt)ho  habcirtumcifeb  tticir  thil 
t>2cn,  tbhom  ibhctt  they  hab  openly  leb 
tounb  about  thccitic ,  the  babes  Hang- 
ing at  tljetr  bjcaOs ,  they  tatt  tljcm 
boibnc  ficablong  tr  otn  the  lball. 

n  3lnbothcrsthathabruntogetber 
into  taucs  ncereby,  to  Ueepe  the  £>nb 
bath  bap  fccretly ,  being  btfeouceeb  to 
0hinp,ibcreailbttrnttogctbcr,bccaufc 
they  mabc  a  confcieucc  to  beipe  tficnv 
fclues.fo?  the  honour  of tfic  moft  fatreb 
bay. 

12  iftoib  3J  befecth  fhofc  that  rtabc 
this  booucthat  they  be  not  btfcouragcb 
fo?thcfe  taiamittcs,  but  that  they  uibgc 
thofcpumn)mcntsnottobcfo?be!truc- 
tion,but  fo?achaftcning  of  our  nation. 

13  5fo?itisatolmtofbisgrcatgoob' 
ncCfe,  \bhcn  rbic&cb  boers  arc  not  fuff c- 
reb  any  longtime ,  but  fo?thlbith  puni- 
fljeb. 

14  5F0?  not  as  lbith  other  nations 
ibbomtbe?Lo2Dpartentlyfo?bcarcthto 
putufl),  till  they  be  tome  to  the  fulucflc 
of  their  finncs,  fo  beaieth  he  lbith  bs, 

1$  fLcfl  that  being  tome  to  the  height 
of  fume,  afteribarbs  hec  thoulb  tafec 
bengeauceofbs. 

16  3iub  thcrfoic  he  ncucr  \bithb2att); 
eth  his mercicfrom  bs :  anb  though  he 
pnnifl)  Until  abuerfitic ,  vet  bocth  he  "c* 
ucrfojfaUc  his  people. 

17  25utlttthisthatibchaucrpolini 
befo2  aibarmng  bnto  bs:  3inb  noibe 
lbill  lbcc  tome  to  tiic  bcclaring  of  the 
matter  in  fciblbojbs. 

18  Clcayir  one  of  the  prtnripau 
Scribes,  an  ageb  man,  anb  of  a  ibell 
fauourcb  countenance,  ibas  ronftrai: 
neb  to  open  his  mouth,  anb  to  cate 
froincsflcfl). 

19  25ut  he  thufing  rather  to  bic  gl02t- 
oufly,  then  to  lute  ftamcb  lbith  futh  an 
abomination,  (pit  it  fouh  ,anb  came  of 
his  oibne  acco2b  to  the  tonncut , 

20  :3sitbchoucbt"hciutocomc,that 
arc  rcfolute  to  llanb  out  againtt  fuel) 
things,  as  arc  not  laibfull  foi  louc  of  life 
tobctaftcb. 

21  25ut  they  that  hab  the  thargc  of 
that  lbichcb  fcatt,  fojthc  olbcacguaim 
tantc  they  hab  lbith  the  man ,  tailing 
him  afibc,  befought  him  to  bnngflcfh 
ofbtsoibncp2ouifion,fiiehasibaslaib* 
full  fo  2  him  to  bfc,  anb  malic  as  if  he  bib 
catc  of  tbcfkn), taken  fromthcfacrincc 
commanbcbbythclung, 

21  "Chat  m  fo  Doing  hec  might  bee 
bcliucrcb  from  Death ,  anb  fo?  the  olbe 


fnenbfljtp  lbith  them,  nnbfauour. 

23  asuthcbcgantotonfiberbifcceet? 
ly ,  anb  as  became  his  age,  anb  the  creel- 
leutte  of  his  ancient  peer  cs ,  anb  the  ho- 
nour of  his  grayfieab,  ^hereunto  hec 
ibas  come,  anb  fits  molt  fioneft  cbucafr 
onfromachilD,o2rathcrtfieholylatbc 
mabc,anb  giucn  by  <J5ob :  therefore  hec 
anftocrcb  accojbutglp,  anbtbillcb  them 
ftraigbtibatcs  to  fenb  htm  to  the  graur. 

24  5fo?  it  becommcth  not  our  age, 

!  CaiD  fie,  m  any  ibifc  to  biOcmble,  ibfierc; ' 
|  by  many  pong  pcrfons  mighttbmfecl 
,  that  (Elcasar  being  fourefco2cyercs  olb 
anb  ten ,  iberc  noib  gone  to  a  ftrange ' 
religion, 

25  3lub  fo  they  th?ough  mine  hvpo-: 
crtfic,  anbbcfiretoliuc antic  time,  anb 
a  moment  longer,  fboulb  bccbccciueb 
by  me ,  anb  31  get  a  ttameto  nunc  olbc 
age,  anb  malic  u  abominable. 

26  jfo?  though  fo?  the  p?cfcnt  time 
31  (bomb  be  bcliucrcb  from  thcpumu> 
ment  of  men :  yet  thoulb  3  notefcapc 
thchaubofrtjcaimightic,uetthecaIiue 
no2bcab. 

27  D9hcrcfo2c  noib  manfully  than* 
gmg  this  life,  3  lbili  (bcib  my  felfe  fuel) 
an  one,  as  mine  age  rcquircrfi, 

28  3tnb  icauc  a  notable  cramplc  to 
futh  as  bee  yong,  to  bicibillmgiy,  anb 
couragioufly ,  fo2  the  honourable  anb 
holy  laibes:  anb  lbhcn  he  hab  fait)  t'hefc 
lb02bs,  immebiatly  hclbcnt  to  the  to?* 
ment, 

29  IChcythatlcbhun,  changing  tfie 
goob  lbill  they  bare  him  a  title  bcfo?c, 
into  hatrcb ,  bccaiifc  tfic  fiwfaib  fpea* 
tl)cs  p2occcbcb  as  they  thought,  from 
a|!bcfpcratcminbc. 

30  25ut  lbhcnbcc  ibas  rcabic  to  Die 
lbith  ftripes,  he  groncb,  anb  faib,  3t  is 
mamfcltbnto  the  H02D,  that  hart)  the 
holy  imolblcbgcthatibhcras  3  might 
l>iucbinbcl!iicrcbfrombrart),3B|noVb] 
enburc  fo2c  panics  m  boby ,  by  bcuig 
beaten:  butm  foulc  am  lbcll  content  to 
fuffcr  thefcthings^ctaufCJ  fear  chim. 

31  3inb  thus  this  manbicb,  icaumg 
his  bcath  fo?  an  example  of  a  noble  cou; 
ragcanb  a  mcmo2iau  of  btrtuc  not  on* 
lybnto  yong  men,  but  bnto  all  hisna* 
tion. 

CHAP.    VII. 

The  conftailcie  and  crucll  death  of  feuen  bre- 
thren and  tlieir  mother  in  one  day,  becaufe 
they  would  not  eate  fwines  ftdh  at  the  kings 
comnundement. 

__. Ht 


r  tn  Jr. 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vi] 


Apocrypha. 


"Dtut. 


IRS^rSffll  £  tam*  to  paffc  alfo  tljat 
f?%n  w&  fc«cn  bjctljjen  MtD  tbcic 
>%5j  ££p  motDcr  Vbcrctattnt,  anb 
&£ra  ssA  tompciicD  by  tt»c  King  a? 
^$^S^  gaitift  tljc  lawc  to  taftc 
frames  flea),  anb  Were  tomtcntcD  ttntb 
fcoutgcs,anbWDips: 

z  26ut  one  of  tljnn  that  fpaltc  firft 
faiD  tljus:  naljat  Vbouibtft  tbouafKe,  02 
learne  of  bs;  wcacc  rcaDy  to  Die,  ta= 
tljcr  tljen  to  tranfgreffc  tljc  lames  of 
onr  fathers. 

?  Xljen  tDe  lung  being  in  a  rage, 
tominanDcDpatmcs.anDcattnonstobc 
maDcibDot. 

4.  naljicb  fojtbtoitlj  being  tjeateb, 
DccommanDcD  to  cut  out  tljc  tongue  of 
ijim  tljat  fpanc  firft,anD  to  tut  off  tlje  tot- 
moftparts  of  Ijis  boby ,  tljc  rcftof  bis 
b«jctl):en,anb  his  tnotljcc  looWncj  on. 

5  isoibibDcnDcibastbusmatmeD 
in  ail  ty&  members,  be  commanbeD  Dim 
being  vet  aiiue,  to  be  bought  to  tbc  fire, 
anDtobefrict)  m the panne  :anoastl)c 
bapour  of  tljc  panne  was  fo?  a  goon 
fpaccbifperfcb,  tljcv  crljouco  one  ano- 
tDer,  Vbitljtlje  motbcc,to  Die  manfully, 

favmgtfjus: 

6  n:i)c?Lo20<50DlooBet!jl)pont>s, 

ano  m  truettj  Datlj  tomfon  tn  is,  as 
*d£oifcs  in  Ijis  fon g,Wbitlj  WttncffcD  to 
tbcirfacesDeciarcD,raying,3inDbeajaU 
be  comfimcD  m  Ijis  fecuants. 

7  <§>o  When  the  firft  was  DcaD  .after 
tljtsniancr,  they  bzougnttljcfctono  to 
maKcDunamocRingftocRctanbWDcn 
tljrp  Dab  pullcb  off  tl)C  f  Urn  offjis  fjcab 
WitD  tljcljairc,  tljcy affccD  Dim ,  rent 
tljou  catc  befoic  thou  bee  puntfrjcD 
throughout  cucry  member  oftljp  boby; 

8  25ut  Ijec  anfroercb  in  Ijis  oibne 
langnage,anbfaib,  /Bo.nabercforebcc 
alforeeciucD  the  ncrttonuentinojDcr, 
astljefoztncrbtb. 

9  3btD  when  hec  was  at  tljc  laft 
gafpe,  Ijee  faiD,  XbouUfteafatytaftefl 
bs  out  of  tl)isp2cfcnt  life ,  but  the  Hing 
of  the  W021D  ajall  raifc  tos  bp.wDo  Dattc 
Diet)  fo2l)lS  iawcs,bnto  cucriafltnglifc. 

10  lifter  Ijim  was  tDe  tbirD  mabea 
mocking  ftorUc,  anb  when  Dc  roast* 
craircD,  Dc  put  out  Dis  tongue ,  anDthat 
rigljt  foonc ,  Dolbtng  foztt)  bis  ljanus 
manfully,  £mn  ,  _ 

11  SnDfaiDeonragioufiy,  XbercgJ 
Dab  from  Deauen,  anb  fin  Dis  lawes  gi 
bcfpifctDcm,  anbfromDim3IDope  to 
receiuctbeniagamc. 

u  ^nfomucb  tljat  tDe  uing ,  anb 


they  tljat  Were  VbitD  Ijmi  mamciicbat 
tljc  pong  mans  courage ,  fojt&athcno* 
thing  regarbeb  the  pames. 

B  &o\b  When  this  man  was  DcaD 
alfo ,  tljcy  tozmcntcD  anDmangicDthe 
fourth  m  line  mancr. 

14.  S>owDenDe  was  rcaDy  to  Die,  Dc 
faibtljusStis  goob,bcmgputto  DtatD 
by  men ,  to  loose  fo2  Dope  front  ©on  to 
beraifeb  bp  again c  by  Dim  :asfo2tDec 
tDou  a)altDaucno  rcfurrcctiou  to  life. 

15  afretWarb  tDey  bJougDttije  fift 
alfo  ,anbtnanglcb  Dim. 

16  Xljen  looKCDIjccbnto  tl)c  king 
anb faib ,  XDou  Daft  power  oucc  men, 
tDou  art  tojrnpnblc,  tDon  bocftwbat 
tbouWilt,  yettblnUc  nottljat  ouruati* 
onisfojfaacnofGoo. 

17  25utabtbcaWDtle,anbbcDoibDis 
grcatpoWcr,DoWbcWtli  torment  thee 
anotbyfeeb. 

18  3lftcr  Dim  alfo  tljcv  b2ougDt  tDe 
firt,  ibljo  being  rcaby to  Die ,  faiD,  25c 
uotDctctucD  Without  taufc  :fo2  Uicfuf- 
fer  tljcfc  tljings  for  our  fclues,  Daumg 
finncD  againft  our  Gob.  Xbcrefozc 
marueilous  tljings  are  Done  (bnto  bs.) 

19  JSuttDinBcnottljoutljattaBefttn 
DanD  to  ftnuc  againft  (Sod  ,  tljat  tljou 
ftjait  efcape  bnpumft)CD. 

20  ButtDemotDcribasnianicilous 
aboticall,anDtbo2tljpoff)ono2ablcnic* 
mojie :  foi  tbljcn  Ojec  faibc  Ijcr  fount 
fonnes  flaittc  WitDin  tljc  fpatc  of  one 
bap,  Oje  bare  it  WitU  a  gooD  courage,  be* 
taufc  of  tDe  Dope  tData)cljabmplLo2D 

ii  J9catt)CcrDo2tcD  cuery  one  of  tDem 
in  Dec  olbne  language,  fillcb  WitDtou- 
ragiousfpirits.aubftirrmgbpDcrWO' 
manttt)  tljougljts  ,  WitD  a  manly  Oo 
niacBC  ajefaib  btuo  tljcni, 

ix  *3  cannot  tell  DoWyou  tame  into 
my  Vbombc  :fo2  3J  ncitljcr  gaue  you 
b?catl) ,  noz  life,  ncitljcr  Uias  it  31  tljat 
fonncb  tljc  mebers  of  cuery  one  of  y  ou. 

23  JSutDoubtlcffc  tDc€rcato2oftDc 
W02lb,  WDo  fo2inco  tljc  gmcration  of 
man,anD  founb  out  tDe  beginning  of  ail 
tljmgs,Unl  alfo  ofbisoiiuie  mercy  gtue 
you  b2tatD, anb  life  agamcasyotinom 
regarb  not  your  onmc  fclues  fo;  Ijis 
Hawcsfafte. 

24.  /5o\D^nnocDnstD«nBtugDim'- 
fclfeDcfpifcD.anD  ftifpcctiug  it  to  be  a  re^ 
P20cl)full  fpcacD ,  WDilrs  tDe  yongcft 
lbas  yet  aiiuc,  Did  not  oncly  crliou  Dun 
by  W02DCS ,  but  alfo  afiurcb  Dim  ibitli 
oathcs.tDatDcWoulomahcDiiubotDa 
rich,  anb  a  fjappy  man ,  if  Dec  wouib 

tunic 


Apocrypha.  I  I.Maccabecs.  Apocrypha. 


tunic  from  the  Rallies  of  his  fathers, 
anb  thatalfo  he  ibouio  taut  him  fo;  his 
fticnb,  anb  ttuft  him  ibtth  affaires. 

2$  28utlbhen  the pong  man  lboulb 
in  no  cafe  hearken  unto  him ,  tljjc  bfttg 
caiicb  his  mother,  ano  crho;tcb  her, 
tftatfbe  lboulb  tounfcll  the  pongman 
tofauehislife. 

26  3tnb  lbhen  hec  hao  crho;tebhcr 
U)ith  manp  ibo;bs,  (he  p;omifcb  him 
that  fbc  lboulb  tounfcll  her  fount. 

27  26ut  flicc  boibmg  her  fclfc  to 
lbaros  him ,  laughing  the  cruell  tp;ant 
to  ftome,  fpaUc  in  he*  countrcp  lam 
guage  on  this  mancr ;  $>  nip  fount, 
Dane  pine  upon  nice  that  bare  thee  nine 
moncths  m  nip  lbombc ,  anb  gaue  thet 
fucRcthiccpcctcs,  anb  nounfheb  thee, 
anb  bought  thee  bp  unto  this  age,  anb 
enburcb  the  troubles  of  cbucatlon. 

i%  3J  befceth  thcc,mp  fonnt,  looftt 
bpon  the  hcaucn,  anb  the  earth,anb  all 
that  is  therein,  anb  tonfibct  that  Cob 
mabc  them  of  things  that  lberc  not, 
anb  fo  urns  mantunbe  inabe  IiRClbifr 

29  Jfcarc  not  this  tomitntour,  but 
being  ibo2thpof thp  b;cth;en,  ta&ctbp 
bcath,  that  3J  map  tcccmc  thee  agaiiic 
m  mcrcp  ,lbith  thp  b2Cth2Cn. 

jonDhilcsfbeibasyctfpcaimigthefe 

ib02bs,  the  pongman  faib.nahom  lbait 
pc  ion  3  ibill  not  obep  the  Rings  torn 
manbement :  but 30  lbiii  obep  the  com  J 
manbement  of  the  ?Laib  that  lbasgi^j 
ucn  bnto  our  fathers,  bp  ©ofes. 

51  3no  thou  that  haft  bene  the  an- 
thour  of  all  nurthicfc  agamttthc  tyt>\ 
bjcibes ,  fl)alt  not  cfcapcthchanbcsof 
Coo. 

32  fo;  Vote  fuffct  becaufc  of  our; 
finnes. 

33  3Mb  though  the  lining  H,02b  bee 
angnc  lbith  bs  a  little  ibhilc  fo:  our 
chaftemng ano  to2rcctiou,yctfbauhce 
be  at  one  agame,  lbith  his  fcruants. 

3+  25ut  thou,  OgoblefTe  man,  anb 
of  all  other  moft  UncRCb,bc  not  Uftcls  bp 
lbtthoutataufc.noipuffcbtoplbithbn* 
ccrtamt  hopes,  lifting  bp  thp  hanb  a- 
gamft  the  fcruants  of  Cob: 

35  5f02  tl)ou  haft  not  pet  efrapeb  the 
mbgement  of  ainughfic  cob ,  lbho 
fteth  ail  things. 

36  f  oj  our  b2cth2tn  ttmo  no\b  hanc 
fuffereb  a(ho;t  painc,  are  oeab  bnber 
Cobs  Coucnant  of  eucrlafting  life :  but 
tliou  thiough  the  luogcmcnr  of  cob, 
(halt  rttciuc  uift  pumfhment  fo;  thp 
p:tbc. 


37  28ut3J,  as  mpb;etb;cn,  offer  bp 
mp  bobp ,  anb  life  fo;  the  Haibcs  of  our 
fathers ,  befceching  ebb  that  he  lboulb 
fpccbilp  bee  mcrctfuli  bnto  out  nation, 
anb  that  thou  bp  tonncnts  $  plagues 
niapeft  confeffe,  that  he  alone  is  Cob ; 

33  3lnbthatinme,anbmpb;cth;cn, 
the  ib;ath  of  the  aimtghtp ,  which  »s 
uiftlp  bjougbt  bpon  all  our  nation,map 
teafe. 

39  Xhen  tht  ^ing  being  in  a  rage, 
hanblcb  him  Vbo;fe  then  all  the  rcft,anb 
tooH  it  grttuoutlp  that  he  ibas  moclico. 

40  5>o  this  man  bicbbnbefiicb,  anb 
put  his  ibhole  truft  in  the  !Lo;b. 

41  lLaft  of  all  after  thefonncs,  the 
mother  mcb. 

41  fLcttbisbcpnoughnoibtohaue 
fpoftcn  tocemtug  the  iboiattous  fcafts, 
ano  the  cttrcme  tortures. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  ludasgathcrethanhofte.  9  Nicanorisfent 
agjiult  him :  who  piefumcth  to  make  much 
money  of  his  pnfoners.  16  ludasencoura- 
geth  his  men ,  and  putteth  Nicanor  to  flight, 
18  andjiuideth  the /poiles.  50  Other  ene- 
mies Jtc  alio  defeated,  35  And  Nicanor 
fleeth  v.  ith  griefc  to  Antioch. 

^*f^f  $cn  3fubas  Maccabeus 
TO  £Sf  anb  thep  that  mere  With 
Ml  5|fi  h<m,lbcntp;iuilp  into  the 
1  toibncs,  anb  eaiieb  their 
.,RtufcfolRcs  together,  ano 
tooUebnto  them  all  fuch  astontmueb 
m  the  3Jclbcs  religion ,  anb  affcmbleb 
about  fire  thoufanb  men. 

1  3lnb  thep  caiicb  bpon  the  !Lo;b, 
that  hec  lbonlb  ioolic  bpon  the  people 
thatibastrobcnboibncofau,anbaifo 
pitic  the  Xcmplc ,  p;ophancb  of  ton-- 
goblpmen, 

3  'Mo  that  he  lboulb  haue  tompafc 
fionbpon  thentp  fo;c  befatcb  anb  reabp 
to  be  mabc  cueu  UntH  the  grounb ,  anb 
hear c  the  bloob  that  tricb  bnto  him, 
4  2ltio  remember thettntucb  flaugh* 
terof  harmelelTc  infants,  anbtheblaf 
phcmicseominitttbagamfthiSiBame, 
anb  that  hec  lDoulbftKU)  his  hatrcba^ 
gamft  the  lbicftcb. 

5  i^otti  lbhen  Maccabeus hab  his 
tompanp  about  him,  hec  toulb  not  be 
ttnthftoobbpthchcathemfouhcibiath 
of  the  !Lo.2b  luasturncb  into  mcrcp. 

6  Xhcrcfo2chccamcat  bnaibares, 
ano  burnt  bp  tolbnes  anb  ntics,  anb 
got  into  his  haubstbc  moft  tommobi^ 

ons 


Apocrypha.  Chap.vii), 


Apocrypha. 


ousplaccs.auD  oucrcamc  $  put  to  flight 
no  fmali  number  of  his  enemies. 

7  aSutfpeciailytoo&chcaDuantagc 
of  the  night,  for  fuel)  prime  attempts, 
mfomuch  that  the  bruitc  of  his  manlt 
neflfc  tbas  fpicao  euery  ibhcrc. 

3  £>o  ibhcn  Philip  fame  that  this 
man  crtcreafcD  by  Uttle  ano  little,  9  that 
things  p2ofpcrcb  ttntl)  him  mil  mo;e 
ano  rnojc ,  hec  lbrotcbnto  VMolemcus, 
the  goucrnour  of  Coclofy2ia  *  phemec, 
to  ycclb  mo:c  aibc  to  the  Hings  affaires. 

9  £hcnfo2tlnbiththoofing/3icauo2 
the  fon  of  pattoclus ,  one  of  his  fpeciall 
rrmiDs,hefcnthimlbithnofcibccthcn 
tlbcnttc  thoufanb  of  all  nations  bnber 
him ,  to  root  out  trjc  VPrjole  gencrarton 
of  tlje  fellies  i  ano  lbith  him  he  wyncb 
alto  Go  2guis  a  captamc/ibho  in  matters 
of  lbarrc  hao  great  crpcncncc. 

10  S>o/fticanorbnDertooUc  to  matte 
fo  much  money  of  the  tapttuc  3Jcibes, 
as  fhoulD  Defray  the  tribute  of  ttbo 
thoufanb  talents,  lbhich  the  Ring  teas 
to  pay  to  the  Romanes. 

1 1  lerjcecfojc  tmmcbiatly  he  fent  to 
thcemesbponthcfcacoau\p20clauntng 
afale  of  trjc  taptiue  fellies,  ano  promi- 
fing  that  they  thoulb  hauc  fourefcore 
ant)  ten  bobics  for  one  talent,  notetpep 
ting  the  bengcaueethat  ibasto  folloU) 
bpon  hunfrom  tlje  almighty  ©ob. 

11  jRoib  ibhcn  lborb  ibas  brought 
bnto  ^JuDasof/ftttanorstomtng,  ano 
he  Dab  mtparteb  bnto  thofc  thattberc 
tbitr)  limi,trjat  tlje  army  Vbas  at  fjanb, 

1$  Xhcy that  lberc fcarcfull,  anb  bi- 
ftmltcb  thciutticc  ofGob,flcb,anbcom 
ueycbthcmfclucsaibay. 

14-  £>tl)crs  foID  all  tDat  they  Dab  left, 
anb  ttnthall  bcfougljt  the  fLorb  to  belt; 
tier  them, bemgfolbc  by  tljcibicfecb/I5u 

canor  before  tl)cy  met  together : 

i<3lnDifnotfojtl)ctrotbncfat$es,yet 
for  v  coucnants  he  hao  mabc  ibith  that 
fathers,  anb  for  his  holy  anb  glonotts 
Raines  faucby  lbljtch  they  lberc  ealleb 
i6  5>o  Maccabeus  callcb  his  men  to- 
gether bnto  the  number  of  fire  thoiu 
fanb ,  anbcjchortcbthcmnottobcftnc; 
ttcnibithtcrrourof  the  enemtc,  nor  to 
fearc  the  great  multttubc  of  the  heathen 
mho  tame  wrongfully  agamtt  them, 
but  to  fight  manfully, 

17  2Cnb  to  fet  before  their  eyes,  the 
tniury  that  tljcy  hab  bniuftly  bone  to 
the  holy  plate,  anb  the  crucll  hanblmg 
of  thccity,\bhercof  they  mabc  amocKc 
ry.anb  alforhc  tailing  aibay  of  the  go 
uctnmctu  of  their  forefathers: 


is  if 0:  thcy.faib  he.truft  m  their  l\m- 
pons  anb  bolDncffe,  but  our  coufibcncc 
is  m  the  3lnughtic  GoD.ibho  at  a  bccltc 
can  cart  boibnc  both  them  that  cornea^ 
gamft  bs.anb  alfo  all  the  iborlb. 

19  f0ojcouet ,  hec  recountcb  bnto 
themibhat  helps  their  forefathers  hab 
founb, anb  hoib  they  lbcre  bcliucrcb, 
ibhcn  bnDcr  S>crinachcnb  an  himDrcb 
fouccfco2c  anb  fuicthoufanb  pcrifhcb. 

10  ano  he  tolb  them  of  p  battel  that 
they  hab  m  Babylon  lbith  thcGalatt 
ans,holbthcycamebutcightthoufanb 
in  all  to  p  bufincs ,  ttiith  fourc  thoufanb 
s©accDontans,anb  that  the ©accbout- 
ansbcmgpcrplcjccb.thectght  thoufanb 
beftroyeb  an  hunbrcb  anb  tlbcnty  ttiou< 
fanb.bccaufeofthc  helpc  that  they  hab 
fromhcaucn,*forccciucb  a  great  booty. 

21  Xhusibhcnhcc  hab  mabc  them 
bolb  lbith  thefe  lb02bs,  anb  rcaby  to  Die 
for  the  ILams,  anb  the countr cy,  he  Di 
utbcbhisarmytntofourcparts: 

xx  3nb  ioyncb  ibtth  himfclfc  hts 
olbne  brethren,  leabers  of  each  banb,  to 

Vbtt)S>tmon,anD!Jofcph,fi  Jonathan, 
giumg  each  one  fiftccuc  hunb2cD  men. 

xi  aifo  (hccappointcb)eica}ar  to 
rcaoe  the  holy  boouc :  anb  ibhcn  he  haD 
gtuenthemtl)isujatthUi02b,  Xhchclp 
of  00b ;  himfclfc  leaDmg  the  firft  banb, 
heioyneDbattcll  Vbith  iHtcanor: 

24.  3tnDbythehclpeofthc3llmtgh 
tie ,  they  ttctti  abouc  nine  thoufanb  of 
their  enemies,  anDibounbcD  ano  mat 
mcD  the  moft  part  of  /i5ttanors  hoftc, 
anDfo  put  all  to  flight: 

25  3nDtoohcthcir money thatcamc 
to  buy  them ,  atiDpurfucb  tfjeni  farrc : 
but  latUtng  tunc,  rrjcp  rerumeb. 

26  jforttibasthcbavbcftncthc&ab 
bath,  anb  therefore  they  iboulb  no  ion 
gcrpurfuetheni. 

27  S»o  ibljcn  they  haD  gathcrcb  their 
llarmour  togcthcr,anDfpoilcD  their  enc 
mies ,  they  occupicD  thcmfclucs  about 
the  Sabbath,  ycclDingcrrccDmgp2aifr, 
9  thanbsto  thcJLorb,ibhohab  pirfcr 
ueb  them  bnto  p  Oay,lbhith  lbas  the  be 
gummg  of  mercy,  bimlling  bpon  them. 

28  3nb  after  the  Sabbath  ,  ibhcn 
they  hab  guicn  part  of  the  fpoiics  to 
thc||maimcb,  anbthcibiDboibcs,  ano 
£)2phanes  ,  the  rcribuc  thcvbiuibeDa- 
mongthcmfclucs,anb  their  fctuauts. 

29lBhctuhisibasDouc,anbtI)cyhaD 
maDc  a  common  fupplicatiou,  they  be 
fought  the  mcrnfull  IL02D  to  be  rccouci 
IcD  lbith  h'S  fcruants  for  cucr. 

Ccccc      30  i^o:eouer, 


||  That  UjltK 

RWM  . 


Apocrypha.  II.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,Umei, 


Or,J:fir- 
kr/j. 


jo  (H5o2Couer  of  tljofc tftat ttcre  W)ttl) 
Xuuothcus  f  ffiacchitcs,  tbljo  fought 
agamftthcm,  they  (lerbcabouetujcntic 
tl)oiifant> ,  ami  bcry  cafily  got  high  ant 
frroug  holts,  9 Diiutcu  amongft  them 
fducs  many  fpoiics  movant  mate  the 
||matmct,o,jphancs,ttntott)es,yca,?the 
aget  alfo.ccwal  in  fpoilestf)  fhcmfelttcs 

ji  ant  ibhcn  tljcv  hat  gathcrct  their 
armour  together,  theylait  them  tip  all 
carefully  tn  touentent  plates,  ant  the 
remnant  of  the  fpoiics  they  brought  to 
3Jerufaiem. 

iz  %l)ty  (left  alfo  phuarchcs  that 
tbicucb  perfi5  ibho  lbas  tf>  lEtmothcus, 
9  hat  annotet  thc3Jcft>cs  man?  lbaies. 

jj  jfurthcrnweatfuchmneasthcjj 
ttept  the  fcatt  fo:  the  totctonc  in  their  cou- 
try ,  tlj  cy  burnt  Caiifthcncs  ttjat  hat  fet 
fire  bpon  the  holy  gates,  Vbho  rtas  flet 
into  a  title  l)oufe,ant  fo  Ik  retcuict  a  re* 
itart  meet  fo;  l)is  UjitUctneue. 

34  %$  fo?  that  molt  tongratfous  jRfc 
tanoz ,  tt>ho  hat  brought  a  tljoufant 
mctthantsto  buy  thelites, 

35  $clbas  through  t!jc  helpc  of  the 
Hojb  brought  toibnc  by  them,  ofibljo 
hemateieaft  attount,  spttttmgoif  his 
glonousapparell ,  ant  tifchargmg  his 
company,hecamclilttafugitiucfcruant 
tlnough  the  nut  lant  bnto  3intioth,ha< 
umgbcry  great  tifl)onour  fojihat  his 
hoQeibastcflroyet. 

16  Xhns  he  that  toouc  l)pon  him  to 
maKe  goot  to  thcJJomanes,  their  tri^ 
butc  by  meanes  of  the  taptiues  indent 
falctn,  tolt  ab:oat,  that  the  jetties  hat 
C5ot  to  fight  fo;  thcm,ant  therfozc  they 
coult  not  be  hurt,  betaufc  the?  folloibct 
the  laibes  that  he  gauc  them. 

CHAP.  IX. 

1  Antiochus  is  chafed  from  Pcrfepolis.  5  Heeis 
ftriken  wkhaforedifcalc,  14  and  promifeih 
tnbecomca  lew.  28  Hediethmiferably. 

^^/^H  25outthat  time  tame  3n; 
^v-mW^tiothusitithllttfljono^out 
'l&^vM  of  thetountrcyof  |5erfia. 
1  ifozhehatentrctthe 
J^fite*  title  callct  pcrfepolis,  ant 
ibent  about  to  robtheiemplc,  ant  to 
holt  the  ct  ttcibhereupon  the  multitute 
running  to  tefent  thefelues  lbith  their 
tbcapons.putthem  to  fliglit,?  fo  ttftaps 
ptuct  p  Antiochus  being  put  to  flight  of 
tlje  inhabitauts,rcturnct  lbith  fhame. 

j  iftoib  lbhen  he  tame  to  <ff  cbatana, 
ncitcs  ibas  brought  him  lbhat  hat 
happenet  bnto  iBicanoz  ?  Ximotheus. 

4  Xhen  fiuciimg  lbith  anger ,  Dec 


thoughttoancngct>ponthc3Jett)csthc 
tifgracc  tone  bnto  him  by  thofc  that 
mate  him  flic.  Xhecfiw  tommantct  he 
his  chariot  man  to  tjiue  ibithout  tea; 
fmg,  ant  to  tifpatch  the  loutney,  the 
lubgement  of  (Bob  noib  following  him. 
5f  0.2  he  hat  fpofecn  pjoublp  m  this  fo;t,£ 
hciboultcomcto  Jerutalem,  $maBc 
it  a  common  burying  place  of  p  3Jetbes. 

5  28utthe!Lo,Jtaimightie,the<3ot 
of  3Jfrael  fmotc  him  rbith  an  incurable 
ant  tmufible  plague:  fojaflbone  as  bee 
hatfpobcnthefcitojts,  apaine  of  the 
bovbcis  that  ibas  remctilcs,came  bpon 
him  ,f  fo?e  torments  of  the  inner  parts. 

6  Slntthat  mod tuHtlp :  fo;  hechat 
tomientct  other  mens  bovbcis  Hrtth 
man?  ant  firange  tomicnts. 

7  ^oibbcit  hec  nothing  at  all  ceafct 
from  his  b;agging,  but  Ihlirbas  fillet 
ttjith  p?ttc,b;cathing  out  fire  tn  his  rage 
agatnft  the  3lei\)es,  ant  tommanttng 
tohaftethciournev:butittametopau"e 
that  he  fel  tottmc  fro  his  chariot,  carict 
fciolcntl?,fotf)athauingafotffal,althc 
mebersof  htsbotyttcrc  muchpamct. 

8  ^nt  thus  het  that  a  little  afo?c 
thought  he  mtght  tonunant  the  ibaucs 
of  the  fca  ( fo  pjout  ttas  hce  be?ont  the 
conomon  of  man)  ant  ibeigh  the  high 
mouutaincs  in  a  bauantc,  ibas  uoib 
call  on  the  grount ,  ant  carnet  in  an 

ho?fclitter,fhciuingfoo2rt)t»ntoall,thc 
manifcft  potber  of  (5ot. 

9  5>othatthevbo.2mesrofebpoutof 
thebotpof  this VbicKet man,  gttbljtles 
hcelittetin  fo;roU)  ant  patne,  hisflcfl) 
fcliaiba?,ant  the  filthinctfc  ofhts  fmell 
tbasnovfonie  to  all  his  army. 

10  ^nt  the  man  that  thought  a  little 
afo?c  he  toult  reach  to  the  Itarrcs  of 
heaucn,  no  man  coult  cnture  totarr? 
to?  his  intollcrable  ItinRe. 

11  ^ererhcrefojcbeingpiaguet,hcc 
began  to  leatte  off  his  great  pntc,  ant 
to  come  to  the  Ruottletge  [  of  himfclfe] 
b?  the  fcourge  of  (Sot,  his  painc  encrca- 
fmg  cuer?  moment. 

ii  ^ntlbhen  hce  himfclfe  coult  not 
abite  his  ottmc  fmell ,  hce  faite  thefe 
rbo;tcs:3Itismcctctobcefubiectbnto 
0ot,  ant  that  a  man  that  is  nwtail, 
(hoult  not  pjoutly  thmBe  of  himfclfe, 
asifhcitcreGot. 

ijXhisiticUctpcrfonbotbetalfobn 
to  the  lLozt.Obho  nolt  no  mozeilionlt 
hauc  mere?  tpon  him)  laying  thus : 

14  Chatrhcholyntte(totl)eibhith 
hee  itas  going  in  hafte  to  lay  it  turn! 
ibithi 


Apocrypha. 


Cha 


ap.x. 


\\OrnA,,. 
tiffch. 


j  |  Or  earn 


With  the  grounu  ,f  to  lua&cit  a  common 
burping  placc)hcWonlb  fctat  liberty. 

15  3nD  as  touching  the  3JcWcs, 
Whom  hec  hab  uiogcb  not  wo2thp  fo 
much  as  to  be  buncD ,  but  to  be  call  out 
With  their  chiUnen  to  bebcuoureb  of  the 
foules,anb  Wilb  beads,  he  Woulb  malic 
them  ai  equals  to  pcm?cns  of  ||  Athens, 

is  3nDtheholp£cmpIc,  VDijicIibe- 
fozc  hchatjfpoiicb,  Dee  XboulD  ganufl) 
lbith  gooblp  gifts ,  ant)  vtftoic  all  the 
holpbclTcls  With  manpmo2c ,  anb  out 
of  his  oWnc  rcuencW  befcap  the  char- 
ges  belonging  to  the  faerificcs: 

17  #ea,  anbthatalfohcewoulbbc; 
come  a  3JeW  himfclfc ,  anb  goc  tlnough 
all  the  W02lb  that  wasmhabiteb ,  antj 
beclate  the  power  of  CSotj. 

is  But  ft»  all  this  his  paines  Woulb 
not  ceafe :  fo:  the  mlt  uibgcmcnt  of  ©Ob 
mas  come  upo  him:thcrfo2ebcfpairmg 
ofh!Sheaith,heW20tctontothe3JcWes 
thclcttccbnbcrW2ittcn,tontauungthc 
fo2mc  of  a  fupplicatio,  after  this  matter. 

19  ^tntiochus  King  anb  gouctnouc, 
to  the  goob  Jcwcs  his  Citizens,  Wfc 
0)eth  much  tor,  health,anb  p2ofpcrttp. 

2o3Jfpe,anbpourchilD2cnfarewcil, 
anb  pour  affaires  be  to  pour  content- 
ment ,  3Jgiue  ncrp  great  ttjanUcs  to 
<5ob,hauingmphopc  inheauen. 

21  ^sftmncegjwasweaBcojcUc 
"5  Vboulb  hauc  rcmembjcb  tunblp  pour 
honour,anb  goob  Will.  Beturniugout 
of  ^erfia ,  anb  being  tancnWithagrte; 
uousbifeafc,3J  thought  tt  neceffarpto 
care  fruthecommonfafetp  ofail : 

22  jiiotbiftruftingminchcalth,  nut 
hautng  great  hope  to  efcapc  this  ficancs 

23  26ut  confibering  that  cuen  mp  fa- 
ther, at  What  time  he  leb  an  arnue  into 
tfje  hie  countrics,appointcb  a  fuccelTo  2, 

24  Xothecnb,  thatifanpthmgfcil 
out  contrary  to  crpectatton,  02  if  anptt? 
bmgs  were  b2ought  that  mete  gric; 
nous ,  thep  of  the  lanb  Knowing  to 
Vbljom  ||  the  (late  mas  left,  might  not  be 
troubleb. 

25  ^gaineconfibering.hoW  that  the 
P2inccs  thatarcbo2bcrcrs,  anb  uctgh 
b02S  tonto  nip  ningbomc ,  Vbaitc  fo:  op^ 
P02tunities  anb  crpect  il)hat  fhalbethc 
cuent,  3  haueappointcbrnpfonnc^n- 
tiocrjtistung,  Whom  J  often  comittcb, 
anb  comenbeb  tinto  manp  of  pou,Whcn 
3J  went  top  tnto  the  high  P20iiinces,  to 
Whom  3  haucWzittcn  as  folloWeth. 

26  Xhcrcfo2e 3  p2ap,  anb  rcquclt 
pou  to  remember  the  benefits  that  3 


Apocrypha. 


jaucbouennto  pou  generally ,  anbm 
"pcciail,  anb  that  cucrpman  tbill  be  Hill 
faithfullto  ine,anb  mpfonue. 

^7  f  02  3  am  pcrfiDnoeb  that  hee 
||  bnbcrttaiibmg  mp  muibe ,  Unit  fauou 
jrablpjgraciouflppeeiotopourbefires. 

28  Xhus  the  murthcrer ,  aub  biafc 
phemer  hailing  fuffercb  molt  gricuotif' 
Ip.ashccntrcatcb  other  men,  fo  bicbhc 
anufcrablc  bcath  ma  Orange  countrcp 
inthemountames. 

29  ^nbphihp  that  mas  b2oughtbp 
wtthhim,  caricbawaphisbobp, who 
alfo  fearing  the  fotiodStmochus.Wcnt 
into  Cgppt  to  ptolomcus  iDhilomcto.2. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Iudasrecouereth  the  Cine,  and  purified!  the 
Temple.  14  Gorgias  vexed)  the  Icwcs.  16 
Iudas  wmneth  their  holds,  ij  Timotheus 
and  his  men  are  difcomfited.  35  Gazara  is 
taken,  and  Timotheus  flaine. 

sDW  Maccabeus,  anb  his 
companp ,  the  H.020  gur- 
bmg  them,  recoucrcbthc 
Xemplc,anbthccitie. 
2  26utthcaltars,which 
thchcathcnhaD  biultmtheopcu  ttreet, 
^aifothcChappclsthcppullebboWnc. 
3  ^nb  hauing  cleanfcbthcXcmplc, 
thep  mabc  another  3Utar ,  anb  ftrtmng 
(tones,  thep  toonc  fire  out  of  them,  anb 
offer  cb  a  facrificc  after  ttbo  pecres,  tjTct 
fo2th  mcenfe,?  lights,  anb  &hewb2cab. 
4.  i©hcn  that  Was  bone ,  thep  fell 
flat  boWnc,anbbcfoughtthc?Lo2b  that 
thep  might  tome  no  mo2e  into  fuel) 
troubles :  but  if  tljcp  fmncb  anp  ni02e  a* 
gaintthim ,  that  he  himfclfc  Woulb  tha^ 
(ten  them  With  mcrcic,  anu  that  thep 
might  not  bee  beliucrcb  onto  the  biafc 
phcmous.anb  barbarous  nations. 

5  j!2oW  bpon  the  fame  bap  that  the 
(tcangers  p2ophaucb  the  Xcmplc ,  on 
the  bcrp  fame  bap  it  was  cleanfeb  a- 
game,  cuen  the  fiuc  anb  twentieth  bap 
ofthc  fame  moncth,  Which  is  Cafleu. 

6  3nb  thep  Sept  tight  bapes  With 
glabncs  as  in  the  feaft  ofthc  Xabcma- 
eles ,  rcmcmb2ing  that  not  long  afo2t 
thep  hab  hclbcthc  feaft  ofthc  Xabcr 
naclcs,whcn  as  thepwanbereb  in  the 
monntaincs,anb  betmes,  Ultc  bcalts. 

7  Xhcrcfo:c  thep  bare  b2anchec, 
anb  faircboughcs  anb  paimcs  alfo, anb 
fang  pfaimcs  Unto  him  that  hab  giucn 
them  goob  fucccfTc  m  dentins  his  place. 

8  Xhcp02bcmcbaifo  byacommon 
ftatutc,  anb  Decree,  Xhat  cucrp  peere 

Ccccc  2  thofe 


ng. 


Apocrypha.  I  I.Maccabccs.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,atidnot 
bearing  his 
a/ithorttw  At 
if  becem- 
meth  a  noble 

ah. 

Or }  ftrong 

placet. 


\\OrtStman. 


thofcDapes  thoulD  bcUcpt  of  the  whole 
nation  of  the3}ewcs. 

9  3lttD  this  Was  ttjc  cube  of  ^ntio- 
chuscallcDepiphancs. 

io  jBotb  Will  Wee  Declare  the  acts  of 
2ntiothus  <£upato? ,  Who  was  the 
fonne  of  this  WtcfccD  man ,  gathering 
bncfli?  tljjc  calamities  oftljjc  warres. 

ii  doWhcnhcWascometoptroWnc, 
he  fetoncllyfiasoucr  the  affaires  of  his 
3foalmc,anD  [appotntcD  l)im]  chtcfc  go; 
uernour  ofCbclofvnaanu^Dtnice. 

ii  5Fo?  j&toiomeus;  that  was  calico 
Macron,  cl)oGng  rather  to  Doc  tufhec 
Unto  the  3Jcwcs,  fo?  tl)c  Wjong  that 
haDbcuc  Done  unto  them  .cnbcuourcD 
to  continue  peace  Until  tticm. 

13  thereupon  being  accufcD  of  [the 
Kings]  frtcnDs,bcfo;c  eupato;,  $  callcD 
tcaitozatcucrpWojb.bctaufchchaDIcft 
Cypmsthat  0l)ilomctoj  haDtomtttcD 
bnto  l)im,f  DcpartcD  to  3nttochus  €pU 
pljancs ;  1 1  anD  feeing  that  hec  tbas  in  no 
honojablcplacchewasfoDifcouragcD, 
that  hcpoyfoncDhtmfclfcanDDieD, 

14  26ut  When  dsojgias  was  goner- 
nourofrrjc  HholDS,hcchu;cD  fouiDicrs, 
anDnourtfheD  warrc  continually  With 
the^ewes: 

15  3utD  thcrcWithall  thcUDumcans 
hauing  gotten  into  their  hattDcs  the 
uiofi  commoDtous  holDcs ,  Kept  the 
3JcWcs  occupicD ,  anD  receuiing  thofc 
that  mere  batufhcD  from  "JFcmfalcm, 
they  went  about  to  uounfl)  warrc. 

16  Xhen  they  that  Were  With  *©ae 
cabeus  mane  fupplicarton,  9  befought 
<25oD,thathcWoulDbcfheirhclpcr,anD 
fo  tfjcv  tanne  With  ntolcncc  toponthc 
ftrong  holDs  of  the  jDumcans, 

17  3ltiD  affaulting  tDcm  ftrongly, 
thepwannethe  l)olDS,  anD  Kept  off  all 
tl)at  fought  topon  t!)c  wail,attD  Hew  all 
that  fell  into  there  hanDs,  anDUillcDno 
fewer  then  twennc  thoufanD. 

is  3lnD  becaufc  ecrtatne  (Who  were 
no  Icffc  then  nittcthoufatiD)  were  flcD 
together  into  two  toery  ftrong  tattles, 
hauing  all  matter  of  things  cottucnient 
tofnftaincfhcucge, 

19  Maccabeus  left  S>imou,?3Jofcph, 
anDzacchcusalfo,anDthcmfhatWcrc 
With  him ,  Who  were  cnotb  to  befiege 
thnn.aiiDDcpartcDhimfclfebntothofc 
piaccs,Whtch  mo?c  nccDcD  hishelpe. 

10  ii5ott»  II  they  that  mere  With  Sn- 
mon,bcmglcD  With  couctoufnes,  Were 
perfiuabcD  foj  moncy(thzough  certamc 
of  thofc  that  Iberc  m  the  cattle )  anD 


tooticfcucnttc  thoufanD  Djathmcs.anD 
letfomeofthcinefcapc. 

ii  2Snt  When  it  was  tolD  Maccabeus 
what  \nas Done,  hce  calico  the  goucr* 
nours  of  the  people  together,  anD  ami- 
fcD  tljofe  men,  that  they  i>iD  folD  their 
tycthmtfojmoncp,  <$  fct  their  enemies 
free  to  fight  agamtt  them. 

11  <§>o  he  flew  thofc  that  were  founD 
traito?s,anD  imineDiativ  tooUe  the  tuio 
tallies. 

13  3(nD  hawing  gooD  fuccefTc  with 
his  weapons  m  all  things  hectookcin 
hanD ,  Ijce  Hew  m  the  two  holDc^mojc 
then  tWcn  tic  thoufanD. 

14  &ow  Xunothctis  Whom  the 
3Jcwes  IjaD  oucrcomc  before ,  when  he 
haD  gathcrcD  a  great  multtruDc  of  fo^ 
ramc forces,  anD  Ijo^fcs out  of 3ina not 
a  few ,  came  as  though  hec  woulDtattc 
3JcWne  bp  fouc  of  armes. 

25  26ut  When  hec  bmnnecrcll  they 
that  were  With  Maccabeus ,  tutncD 
themfclues  to  pjay  tonto  C5oD ,  anD 
fpnncuicD  earth  bpon  their  heaos ,  anD 
girDcD  their  loyncs  With  facfecloth, 

16  ^nDfellDonmcatthcfootofthc 
3ntar,auDbtfoughthimtobcmcrnftill 
to  them,  anD  to  be  an  *  enemtc  to  their  c 
neinics,  anD  an  abucrfaricto  their  ab* 
ucrfartes,asthc  flaw  Dctlarcth. 

17  &o  after  the  pjaycr ,  thev  tooac 
their  Weapons,?  Went  on  further  from 
fhecitp:  anD  When  they  Djcwncerc  to 
their  enemies,  trjcp  Ucpt  bp  themfclues. 

18  /Row  the  &unne  being  neWlp 
rifcn,thcp  topncD  both  togcthcr;thc  one 
part  hauing,  together  With  their  her- 
tuc,  their  refuge  alfobnto  the  ?Lo?D,fo? 
a||  plcDgc  of  their  fuccefTc  anD  bictojic : 
the  other  fiDc  matting  tljnrragc  leaDer 
of  their  battcll. 

29  26ut  when  the  battatle  warcb 
ftrong,  there  appear cd  bnto  the  ene- 
mies fromhcaucn.fiuccomclp  men  bp^ 
on  hojfes,  With  bnbiesof golDe,  anb 
two  of  them  Icddc  the  3Jewes, 

30  3lnD  toohc  Maccabeus  bctWijrt 
them ,  anb  coucrcD  him  on  etierp  fiDc 
With  their  weapons,  anD  sept  him  fafe, 
but  ihotarrowes  ^iightcnmgsagainfl 
n)c  enemies:  fo  that  being  confouttDcD 
With  blmDncffcaiiD  full  of  trouble,thcy 
WcccKilleD. 

31  ^nD  there  were  Haute  fof  footc- 
men]  twcntic  thoufanD  anD  ftuc  hun* 
D?cD,anD  fire  hunDjcD  ho^femen. 

31  ^s  fo?  Ximothcus  himfclfchee 
fleD  into  a  bcry  ftrong  holDc,  taileD^a^ 
5ara, 


||  Or,  Mm- 
cabetii,4nd 
they  that 

htm. 


'Dcut.i8. 


j'  OrtwaT' 
runt  torfurc 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


\Cr,tfttoKr. 


3ara,lbbcreCbcreasrbas  goucrnour. 

33  But  tljcp  ttjat  ibere  tbitb  £0acca* 
bens,  laib  fiege  agama  the  fojttcu*c  to* 
ragtouflpfourcbavcs. 

34  anbtbcy£lbcmbitbin,trufting 
to  the  Qrengtb  oftlie  place,  biafphcmeb 
qcceebingly ,  %  bttercb  lbicficb  tbojbs. 

35  Bmmbeieffcbpon  the  fifth  bap 
carlp,  ttbentic  pong  men  of  Maccabeus 
eompanp ,  mflamebibitb  anger  bccaufe 
of  the  biafpbcmtcs,  aflaultcb  the  ibau 
manly ,  anbibitb  a  fierce  touragefiilleb 
all  that  tbey  met  ttntbaii. 

36  iDtrjcrs  itficttnfc  afccnbtag  after 
tbcm,  ibbtlcs  they  ibere  bufieb  rbitb 
them  that  ibere  ibttbin ,  burnt  the 
totbtcs,  anb  ftinblmg  fires,  burnt  the 
biafpbcmcrs  altuc,  anb  others  btofec  o* 
pen  the  gates ,  anb  bauing  rccctnebtn 
the reft  of  the  army,  toobe  the  city, 

37  anbfeillcbXimotbeustbattbas 
bibbc  in  a  tertame  pit,  anb  €bcrcas  bis 
bjotber ,  lbttb  apoilopbanes. 

38  narjentfttstbasbonctrjevpjatfeb 
tfjc  %m  tbitb  0faimcs  anb  tbanficfgt' 
umg.ibbo  l)abbone  fo  great  things  fo? 
3lfrael,  anbgiucn  tbemtbebicto??. 

CHAP.    XI. 

3  Lyfias  thinking  to  get  lerufalem ,  8  Is  put  to 
flight.  \6  The  letters  ot  Lyfias  to  the  lewes : 
2.:.  Of  the  king  vnto  Lyfias :  17  and  to  the 
lewes:   34  Of  the  Romanes  to  the  lewes. 

S^S«$f  j©t  long  after  this,  flyfias 
I  N^i  t  ttjc  fitngs  t  p:otcctour  $  to* 
$|&*\™  %  fin ,  lbbo  alfo  manageb  ttjc 
2  affaires ,  toofic  fo?c  btfplca- 


.p.xj. 


\\OrtGrtci- 


btHtitndhii 
comjiAnj. 


(urc  fo?  the  tftmgs  that  ibercbone. 

i  anb  lbbcn  be  bab  gather cb  about 
fourcfco?e  tboufanb,  ibitb  all  the  ljo?fe- 
men,  tie  tame  againft  the  femes,  tDm* 
mug  to  mafic  the  ntic  an  habitation  of 
the  ||  (Pennies, 

3  ano  to  mafic  a  gainc  of  the  Xctm 
picas  of  the  other  Chappcis  of  tbebca< 
then,  anb  to  fettbc  high  Rneftboobto 
faiecueryyeere: 

4.  Botatailtonfioetingtbcpoibcr 
of^ob^bntpnffcbbp  tbitb  bistcntboii' 
faub  footmen ,  anb  bis  tboufanb  t)o?fc* 
men,  anbhtsfouccftoic  elephants. 

5  3>o  he  tame  to^luota,?  bzcib  nccr  c 
to25ethfuca,ibhichibasaftrongtoiim, 
but  Dtttant  from  3ienifalcm  about  fiuc 
furlongs,  anb  be  lam  foje  fiege  bnto  it. 

6  i&ott> when ||thcr thatmercibith 
Maccabeus  bearo  that  he  bcucgcb  the 
holtses,  tbev  ano  all  the  people  with  l* 
mentation  ano  tcares  befought  the 


Apocrypha. 


fLozb.tbatbeiboulbfetUjagoobangcl 
tobeliucr^fraeL 

7  Xfjcn  ^actabeus  himfelfc  firft 
ofalltooficibeapons,  erbomng  the  o- 
ther,  that  the?  Vbouib  ieopacD  thenu 
femes  together  ibitb  h»u,  to  htlpc  their 
b?ctb?cn :  fo  the?  ibent  fojtli  together 
Tbithavbillingmmbe. 

8  anbastbcyibcreatSfcriifaiem, 
there  appeareb  befozc  them  on  hotfe-- 
bacfie,  one  in  lbbite  clothing,  fljatung 
his  armour  of  golb. 

9  1Cbcn  the?  pjatfeb  the  mercifull 
(Bob  altogether,  atibtoofic  heart,  info- 
much  that  the?  met c  reaby  not  oncly  to 
fight  lbttb  men,  but  lbttb  moft  ccuell 
beafts,<*  to  pierce  tbJougblbais  ofy?on. 

io  Xhus  they  marcbeb  fo?tbarb  in 
tljcir  armour,  haumg  an  helper  from 
hcauen :  fo;  the  Jlo?b  rbasmcrnfull  bn- 
to them. 

11  ^nb  giuing  a  charge  bpo  their  enc 
miesiific  lions,  tbcyflclb  clcucntboit 
faub  footmen,  ?  firteene  buno?cb  ho?fCf 
mm , anb  put  all  the  other  to  flight. 

it  fi0anp  of  them  alfo  betngiboum 
beb.eftapcb  naftcb,  anb  fLpfias  htmfeife 
titti  albap  fbamcrulh>,anb  fo  cfcapeb 

13  nDhoashrcUiasamaiiofnnber 
ftanbmg,  tailing  Vbith  tytnMft  lbhat 
loffe  he  han  hao ,  anb  toufibcringtbat 
the  ^eb^cibes  toulb  not  be  oucrtomc, 
bccaufcthe^lmightv©ob  hclpeb  them, 
l;c  fent  bnto  them, 

14  anb  petftoabcb  them  to  agree  to 
ailrcafonablc  conbitions,  ?[p?omifcb] 
that  bec  ibouioperfroabe  the  fimg,  that 
he  muft  ncebs  be  a  fricno  biito  them 

15  Xhcn  Maccabeus  confenttb  to  all 
that  ?lyfiasbcuceb,bcing  carcfull  of  the 
common  goob  ;anb  ibliatfocucr  ^9ac 
cabms  Ib^otc  bnto  fLpfias  concerning 
the  3icrues,thc  fimggranteb  it. 

16  $01  there  iberc  letters  Umtten 
bnto  the  31cibcs  from  ILvfias,  to  this 
effect :  Hvfias  bnto  the  people  of  the 
3jeibes,fcnbetbgrccttng. 

17  gtoim  anb  abfalou,  Ibho  ibere 
fmtfrom  pou,  beliuercb  tnc  the  pennon 
fubfenbeb,  anb  mabcrcaucftfoz  thepcr- 
fonnancc  of  the  contents  thereof. 

18  Xhcrcfojc  lbhat  things  foeucr 
\berc  meet  to  be  rcpojttcb  to  the  fiing,3l 
haucbeciarebthetn,  anb  he  hath  Stan 
tebasmuchasmigljtbc. 

19  3?f  then  rouibilftcepevour  fclues 
lovall  to  theftate,  hereafter  alfo  \Uill  3 
enbetiour  to  be  a  mcaiies  of  vour  goob. 

20  25ut  of  the  particulars  3  hauc  gi 

Ccccc  j  utn 


Apocrypha.  II. Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\\0r,7)h- 
jeeros. 


\\Or,glnc 
themafa- 
rartcft 


\  Or ,4p.m. 


1  Or  cenfuU 


lien  ort)cr,botb  to  fljefc^tbe  other  that 
came  frommc,  to  commune  Until  you. 

2i  jfaccvcU)cl.XIicl)tmr»;cr)f  ctgl)t 
anb  fojtic  ycerc,  the  fourcanb  tibenttc 
Dap  of  tlje  mouctl)  Snofconntljms. 

22  iftolbtbcuings  letter  tontcincb 
tljcfclbojDs,  i£Ung2lntiocljus  unto  Ijts 
toother  JLyfiasfcubctb  greeting. 

13  £>inccouc  father  is  tranflateb  bit- 
to  }  gobs,  our  lbill  is,tbat  they  that  arc 
in  our  rcalmc  line  cuuctly,  that  euery 
one  may  attcnu  upon  bis  onm  affaires. 

14.  naee  bnberftaub  alfo  tljat  tlje 
3Fctt>es  iboulb not  confent  to  our  father 
fa?  to  bee  bjougljt  bnto  tlje  cuftomc  of 
tlje  ©entiles,  but  bab  rather  heepe  tfjctr 
oibnc  manner  of  lining:  foubelbbicb 
caufc  tljcy  require  of  bs  that  lbcfboulb 
fuffer  the  to  line  after  their  olbn  laibes. 

25  iBbcrcfoje  our  nunb  is,  that  tins 
nation  Cballbcmrcft,  aim  n>c  Daucbc- 
tcrmincb  to  rclhw  them  tljcic  Xcm- 
pic,  tljat  tljcy  may  hue  acco?Dmg  to  the 
cuftomes  of  tbctr  forefathers. 

26  Xboulbaitboeibclltbcrcfojeto 
fenb  bnto  tbcm,anb||  grant  them  peace, 
tbatnmc  they  arc  cmificbof  our  mmb, 
they  may  bcofgoobeomfo,!t,?cuctgoc 
cijccrcfnlly  about  their  oibnc  affaires. 

27  3nb  the  letter  of  y  Utng  bnto  the 
nation  of tbc3Icibes  lbas  after  this ma* 
ncr :  bing  3lntiocljus  fenbetb  greeting 
bnto  the  tounfel,*  the  reft  of  tbejlcibcs 

18  3lfycfareibcll,  lbcliauc  our  be- 
fire,  \be  arc  alfo  m  goob  health. 

19  fl0cnciausbcclaccbbnto  bs,  tbat 
yourbefire  lbasto  rctumc  Dome,  anb 
to  folloib  your  oibnc  bufineffe. 

30  naljercfojc  tbey  that  lbill  bepart 
(ball  bauc  fafc  conbuct ,  till  the  thirtieth 
bay  of  jCantbicusttntb  fc curmc. 

31 3tnb  tljcSfcibcs  thai  bfc  tl)ctr  oibnc 
Uinb  of  mcats,aub  iaibcs,as  bcfbjcanb 
none  of  them  any  manct  of  ibayesfbai 
be  molcftcb  fo?  things  tgnojantly  bone 

3x  3J  Ijaitc  fcntaifotipcnclauSjtljat 
be  may  comfort  you. 

33  fare  ye  tticl.  3Jn  the  lntnb;cb,fojty 
anb  eight  ycerc,  anb  the  fifteenth  bay  of 
ti)cmonctl)||Jtantnictis. 

34  %\)t  Romanes  alfo  fent  bnto 
them  a  letter  containing  tbcfciiwbes : 
<©mntus  £@cinmius , 9  Xitus  #anto 
uS||cmbaffaboursofj'3Romanes,fenb 
grcctmgbnto  the  people  of  the  3iclbcs. 

3^  n3l)atfocuer?Lyfiactbc  lungs  con 
fin  hath  grantcb,  thcreibith  ibe  alfo  are 
Mciipieafeb. 

36  i3ut  touching  fuch  things  as  Dec 


(ubgcbtobcrcfcrrcDto  thebing:  after 
you  Dane  abuifcb  ther of ,  fenb  one  fojtb' 
!  with ,  that  ibe  may  bedarc  as  it  is  con- 
uctuentfojyou:  fo?  lbcatc  uolb  going 
ito3lutioth. 

37  Xhcrcfojc  fenb  fome  lbith  fpeeb, 
that  lbc  may  unoib  lbljat  is  your  mmb. 

38  5Farcibcll,thishunb(!cb  anb  eight 
,  anbfojticyeere,  the  fifteenth  bay  of  tlje 
moucthjtaiuljtcus. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  The  Kings  lieutenants  vexe  the  Iewes.  3  They 
of  loppedrowne  two  hundred  lewes.  6  Iu- 
das  is  auenged  vpon  tliero.  11  Hee  maketh 
peace  with  the  Arabians,  16  andrakethCuf- 
pis.  ii  Timotheus  armies  ouerthrovven. 

g-^^en  thefe  Coucnantsiberc 
WA  mabcSLyfiasibcnt  bnto  the 
m  Ring,  anb  the  3Jcibesibcre 
bd  about  their  ljufbanb;ie. 

2  25utofthegoucrnoursoffcnerai 
placcs,Ximotheus,anb^polloniusthe 
tonne  of  Ocnueus,  alfo  ^icronymus, 
anb  SDcmophon,  anbbcfibcstbcm/^ 
canoj  pgoucrno:of  Cypms  lboulbnot 
fuffer  them  to  be  qmct,anb  line  in  peace. 

3  Xhc  men  of  joppc  alfo  bio  fuch  an 
bngobly  bceb :  they  pjayeb  the  3Jclbcs 
tljat  bibclt  among  tljcm,  to  goc  lbith 
their  \butcs,ano  cbiltycn  into  the  boats 
lbhtth  thcyhab  pjepareb,  as  tljouglj 
tljey  Ijab  meantthem  no  hurt. 

4  roho  acceptcb  of  it  acco?bmg  to 
tlje  common  becrec  of  the  citicas  being 
befirous  to  liuetn  peace,  anb  fufpcctmg 
nothing  :  but  mijcn  they  lbcrc  gone 
fottb  into  the  beepe,  they  bzoibncb  no 
leffcthcn  tibo  hunb;cb  of  them. 

5  ©hen  "JJuDashcarDof this  crucl^ 
tiebone  bnto  hiscottntrcpmcn,he  coin- 
manbeb  thofc  that  lberc  lbitlj  Ijim  [to 
maUcthcmreaby.] 

6  ^nb  calling  bpon  (jpob  the  righ- 
teous uibgc,  he  came againft  thofc  mur- 
tljercrsof  hisb:eth2cn,  ?burut  thcha'- 
ucu  by  night,  anbfet  tlje  boats  on  fire, 
anb  tljofc  that  flcb  thither ,  he  flclb. 

7  3lnb  lbhcn  the  toibnc  lbas  fl)Ut 
bp,hcibcnt  batlUbarb,  ||as  if  hclboulb 
rctunictorootoutailtljcmoftljcntie 
ofjoppc. 

8  2Sut  lbhcn  he  hearb  that f'SJam- 
mtcsiiicrc  minbcb  toboctnliHcmancr 
bnto  the  "Jclbcs  y  blbclt  among  them, 

9  l)c  tame  bpon  the  3lamnitcs  alfo 
by  iiiglu,  anbfet  fire  on  tlje  hauen.f  the 
nauy ,  fo  tljat  the  light  of  the  fire  lbas 
fcencat  gjerufaicm,  tlbo  ljunb;cbaiio 
fome  furlongs  off. 10  /5olb 


Or,  -a-irha 
purfofe  to 


Apocrypha.  Chap 


.xij. 


\\  Or, went 
from  place 
to  place  ,*■///; 
their  farrti~ 
lies  and  cm 
teJL 


\\Dofnhe>iS, 
avdSeJJpA- 
ter. 


io  jfroltoltohcnthcyitoere  gone  from 
thence  nine  furlongs  m  their  tourney 
toltoara  Xiinothcus ,  no  fcltocr  then 
fine  thoufana  men  on  footc ,  ?  fiuc  hun 
area  horfc  men  of  tlje  Arabians ,  fet  top- 
on  htm. 

ii  nahcrcttponfhercitoasabcry fine 
batteU  but^Juaas  fiac  by  tlic  hcipcof 
d5oa  got  tl)c  Dietoiv  >  fo  that  the  fio- 
maaes  of  Arabia  being  oncrcome,  be 
fought3Juaasforpeacc,p2oinifingboth 
togiuchimcattell,  ana  to  picafiirchuu 
otherlbife. 

ix  Xhen  3maas  thmfeiug  inbeebe 
that  they  ltoouia  be  profitable  in  man? 
things,grantcDthcmpeacc,itohcrupon 
they  fhooBehanas,anafo  they  11  acpar 
tea  to  their  tents. 

13  n?cc  itocnt  alfo  about  to  mafic  a 
bnagc  to  a  tcrtainc  ftrong  citic ,  ltohuh 
tbas  feucca  about  ibith  wanes ,  ana  m 
tjabitca  by  people  of  auicrs  countries, 
ana  the  name  of  it  tbas  Cafpis. 

14  But  they  that  itocrennthin  it  put 
fuel)  truft  inthcflrcngthofrhcitoaiics, 
anapiouifionoftoictuais ,  that  they  be- 
hauca  thcmfelucs  ruacly  toltoaras 
them  that  itoere  unthSuaas,  railing, 
ana  biafphcming,ana  tottering  fuel; 
itooras.as  lucre  not  to  be  fpoucn. 

15  n9hcrefojc3Iuaasujithhiscom; 
pany ,  calling  topon  the  great  SLora  of 
the  itooria  (itoho  Without  an?  rammes, 
0;  engines  of  tbarre  aia  call  aoitonc 
Jericho  m  the  time  of  3Jofua)  gaue  a 
fierce  affault  againlt  the  ltoailes, 

16  ana  toonc  thecitic  by  the  mill  of 
d5oa,  ana  maac  bnfpcaKcablcflaugh; 
ters.infomuch  that  a  lauctlbo  furlongs 
broaa,necrcaaioining  thereunto,  being 
filleafitl,ibasrcenruntungtoJithblooa. 

17  1Lhcn  acpartca  they  from  thence 
fcuenhunaica  ana  fifty  furlongs,  ana 
came  to  Characa  tonto  the  Jcitocsthat 
arc  cailca  Xubleni. 

is  But  as  for  Ximothcus  they  founa 
him  not  in  the  places,  fo?  before  hec  haa 
aifpatchca  any  thing,  he  acpartca  from 
thence,  haumg  left  a  tocry  ftrong  gam 
foninaccrtamchoia: 

19  ^oltobcit ,  2>ofitheus ,  ana  Soft 
pater  ,  itoho  ltocrc  of  Maccabeus  cap 
tames,  Went  fouh ,  ana  flew  thofe  that 
Xunothcus  haa  left  m  the  fortreflc,  a 
bouetctmcthoufanamen. 

io  ^na  93actabcus  rangca  his  armie 
\>V  banas ,  5  fet  ||  them  oucr  the  banas, 
ana  went  agaiuft  Xtmothcus ,  itoho 
haa  about  Dun  ^hunarca  ana  twcntic 


Apocrypha. 


thoufano  men  of  footc ,  ana  two  thou- 
fana,ana  fiuc  ljuna;ca  hojfcmeu. 

21  j3oWc  When  3Cimot!)ens  haa 
Unolblcagcof3iuaascommmg,hcfent 
tlje  Women  ana  chiiaren,  ana  the  other 
baggage  tonto  a  fortreffe  cailca  Carni; 
on  (fo:  the  toltoneltoasharatobefiege 
aiiDtoncafie  to  tome  tonto,  by  rcafon  of 
the  ftrauneffe  of  all  the  places.) 

22  But  When  3maas  his  firflbana 
came  m  fight ,  the  enemics(bemg  unit; 
ten  lbithfcarcanatcrrour  through  the 
appearing  of  him  that  feeth  all  things) 
flea  amainc,  one  running  this  itoay,  an^ 
other  that  way  ,fo  as  that  they  ltocrc  of; 
ten  hurt  of  their  orbnemen,  ana  Iboun* 
aea  with  p  points  of  their  oitoue  fmojas 

23  3Iiiaas  alfo  mas  tocry  earned  in 
purfuing  t!)cm ,  lulling  thofe  Wtchca 
W;ctchcs,  of  Whom  he  flew  about  thir* 
tic  thoufana  men. 

24  <53oicoucr,Xmiotheus  himfclfc 
fellmto  thchanasof  Dofithcus,  ?5>o- 
fipatcr,  whom  he  befought  With  much 
crafttolcthungocwithhislife.bccaufc 
hec  haa  many  of  the  3Jcitocs  parents, 
ana  the  brethren  offomcofthem,  itoho, 
if  they  puthimtoocath,  fhouia  not  be 
rcgaraca. 

15  5>o  When  hee  haa  alTurea  them 
With  many  Woras ,  that  hec  itoouiar^ 
(tore  them  Without  hurt  accoramg  to 
the  agreement,  they  let  him  goe  for  the 
failing  of  their  brethren. 

26  Xhcn  Maccabeus  marchca  forth 
to  Camion ,  ?tothc3Ecmplcof|iatar; 
gatis,ana  there  he  flew  fiuc  ana  twenty 
thoufanapcrfons. 

27  ana  after  he  haa  put  to  flight, ana 
acfrroycathem,  gjnaas  remoouca  tlje 
hoftc  towaras  «phron,  a  ftrong  cine, 
ibherm  Eyfias  abobe,  ana  a  great  tnnl- 
tittioc  of  Diucrs  nations,  ana  the  ftrong 
yongtnennepttheitoals.anaacfcnaea 
them  mightily  :itohcrut  alfo  wasgrcat 
proutfion  ofcngincs,anaaarts. 

23  But  itohen  31uaas  ana h»s com- 
pany haa  cailca  topon  almighty  <5oa 
( itoho  ltoith  his  poitocr  brcaltcth  tlic 
frrength  of  his  enemies)  they  itoannc 
the  citicana  flew  twcntic  ana  fiuc  thou 
fana  of  them  that  ltocrc  itoithm. 

29  irom  thence  they  acpartca  to 
Scythopoits.nilHchiicthfirchunarcth 
furlongs  from  Ijcrufalcm. 

30  BntwhcnthcJcWcsthatawcit 
there  haa  tefhfica  that  the  Scythopo- 
litans  Dealt  loumgly  With  them,  ana 
cntrcatca  them  lunaciy  in  the  tunc  of 
their aaucrfitie:  13  Xhey 


Apocrypha.  II.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\\  Putty  hi 

armie:wottx- 

dedbtmia 

tbef/on/Jrr 

orflroke  him 

in  the  (ban I- 

Jcr. 


\lOr,*tfud 


"Dtut 


31  Xhep  gaue  them  thanRes ,  bcft 
ring  them  to  be  fricnblp fttl  bnto  them, 
anb  fo  thep  tame  to  3Jcrufaicm,  the 
feaft  of  thetbeeResappjothing. 

32.  2tnb  after  the  feaft  tallcb#ente' 
toft,  tfjev  ttjent  foo«l)agatnft0o?s»as 
the  gouernour  of  3Ibumea, 

3 j  naljo  tame  out  to  th?ee  thoufanb 
men  of  foot,  9  fourc  hunb:cb  hojfemcn. 

34  2Mb  it  happeneb  that  in  t\)tit 
fighting  together ,  a  fctb  of  the^ctbes 
Tbcreflainc. 

35  3tt  Tbhith  time  2>oGtheus  one  of 
26ateno?s  tompaup,Tbho  Tbas  on  ho# 
bacRe,  anb  a  fttong  man,Tbas  ftiii  bpon 
(Fozgias,  anb  taRmg  holb  of  his  toate, 
bjetb  ijim  bp  fojte,  anb  rbJjcn  he  Ibonlb 
haur  taken  that  curfeb  man  aiiue,  a 
fjojfeman  of  Xtuacta  tomming  bpon 
him,  fmote  off  hts  [|  thoulber,  fothat 
©o?gias  fleb  bnto  flJJarifa. 

36  jpoTbTbhm  thep  that  Tbercibifh 
d5o?giashao  fought  long  9  rberetbea- 
tie,  fjtibas  taiicb  bpon  tJjc  fLato  that 
he  tboulb  ihetb  htmfelfc  to  be  their  hel< 
pecanb  leabcr  of  thebatteU. 

37  anbtbiththathcbcganneinhis 
oibne  language,?  fung  ^faimes  ibith 
a  loibbbopcc,?ruft)ingbnaibarcs  up* 
on  (Kozgias  men ,  he  put  them  to  flight. 

38  5>o3Jubasgathcrcbhtshoft,anb 
tame  into  the  dtp  of  flDboliam.  3tnb 
tbhenthe  feucnthbap  tame ,  thcppuri= 
ftcb  thcmfclues  ( as  the  tuftome  ibas) 
anb  Kept  theSabbath  in  the  fame  place. 

39  3htb  bpon  the  bap  following  ||  as 
the  tofehab  bene ,  3Uibas  anb  hts  torn* 
panp  tame  to  taRc  bp  the  bobtcsof  them 
thanber  c  flamc,anb  to  burp  them  tbtrt) 
their  Rtnfmcn  ,iu  then  fathers  graues. 

4ojl3olbbnbcrthccoatsofeucrpone 
that  ibas  flame,  thep  founb  things  ton- 
fetratcbtothctbolcsofthc^amnttes, 
lbhichisfojbibben  the  3Jctbcs  bp  *thc 
flaib.  Xhcn  cucrp  man  faro  that  this 
tbas  p  caufe  rohercfo.'c  thep  iberc  (lame. 

41  31H  men  therefore  pzaifing  the 
JL010  the  righteous  3Jubgc ,  Tbho  hao 
openco  the  thmgsthat  tberc  Ijib, 

41 25etooUethcmfelutsbntop?aier, 
anb  befought  him  that  the  funic  torn* 
mittcb ,  might  roholp  bee  put  out  of  re 
memb?ante.26efiDCS,thatnobie3Iubas 
crhoztcb  the  people  to  Rccp  thcmfclues 
from  fume ,  fojfomttch  as  thep  faro  be* 
fo?e  their  epes  the  thmgsthat  tame  to 
paflc,  fo:  thcOttnc  of  thofc  f  tbere  flame. 

43  3tnb  ibhen  he  hao  mabe  a  gathe- 
ring tljzoughout  the  companp ,  to  the 


fum  of  tibo  thoufanb  bjathmes  of  01 
uer,  hce  fent  it  to  3Jeru(aicm  to  offer  a 
fitmc  offering  ,bomgthcrcm  berp  Tbcll, 
anbhoneftlp,  in  that  he  roasmmbfull 
oftherefurrettion. 

44  (fo;  if  he  hab  not  hopcb  that  thep 
that  iberc  flame  (houlb  hauc  rtfen  a* 
gatne.it  hab  bin  fupcrfluous  anb  bainc, 
topjapfojthebcab.) 

45  ^nbaifomthathepetcciucbthat 
there  ibas  great  fauour  lapcb  bp  fo? 
thofe  that  bicb  goblp.(3lt  tbas  an  holp, 
anb  goob  thought)  ibherupon  he  mabe 
a  reconciliation  fo?  thebcab ,  that  thep 
might  be  bcliuereb  from  Onne. 

CHAP.   XIII. 

1  Eupator  inuadeth  Iudea.  15  Iudasbynight 
flaycth  many.  18  Eupatorspurpofeisdetea- 
ted.  2.3  He  maketh  peace  with  ludas. 

"  ^^^1  il5  the  hunbjeth  fo?tp  anb 
S^i  ntnthpercitubastolb  "Ju; 
~^bas  that  31nttothus  «u= 
I  pato?  tbas  coming  ibith  a 
.  great  potber  into  3tabea. 
x  3tnb  tbith  him  Hpflas  his  pjotec- 
toj,anb  ruler  of  hts  affaires,  hantngefc 
tijee  of  them  a  (Grecian  potber  offoott- 
men,  an  hunbjeb  anb  ten  thoufanb, 
anb  homncn  fiue  thoufanb,  9  th?ee  hun# 
b:cb,anb  Elephants  ttbo  9  ttbcntp,anb 
th?eehunbjeb  tharetsarmcbbDhooBS. 

3  #cnclausaifo(opnebhuufclf Tbith 
them,  anbibith  great  biflmtulation  en* 
touragcb  3tntiochus,  not  fo?  the  fafo 
garb  of  the  tountrep,  but  betaufe  hee 
thought  to  hauc  bin  mabe  gouernour. 

4  asut  the  Bmg  of  Rings  mooueb 
3Cntiochus  minbc  againft  this  tbitfteb 
ib?ctch,  anb  ?Lpflas  aifo?mcb  the  Ring, 
that  this  man  ibas  the  taufe  of  ail !  1 11C 
tl)icfc,fothat  the  Ring  tommanbeb  to 
bung  him  bnto  25crea ,  anb  to  put  htm 
to  beath,as  the  manct  is  in  that  plate. 

5  iSotb  there  Tbas  tn  that  place  a 
toTbicoffiftpcubitcs  high  full  of  afhes, 
ano  it  hab  arounomftrumctTbhtch  on 
cucrpfibe  hangcbboTbnintothcaflies. 

6  3(nb  Tbhofoeucr  Tbas  council  men 
of  fatrilcbgc,  0?  habcomnntteb  anp  o- 
thcr  gricuous  crime,  there  bib  all  men 
thnifthunbntobcath. 

7  &uchabcathithappmcbthatTDu> 
Rcbman  to  bic,  not  hatting  fo  much  as 
curtail  m  the  earth ,  *that  ntofttuftip. 
8  5f  0?  mafmuch  as  he  hab  commit 
tcb  manp  Onncs  about  the  altar  Tbhofc 
fire  anb  afljes  Tbcrc  holp ,  hec  rctctucb 
hisbcathmaajes, 

9  ;ff!otb 


[Apocrypha. 


Cha 


P 


ap.xui 


\0r,h.-J 
had  a  lit L 
reftitc. 


Mr, Lord 


9  iftoWi  p  Ring  caineibith  a  barbarous 
* rjaime muto,to  do  far  U)o;fc  to  i>  3icU)cs 
then  hab  bccneboncm  his  fathers  tunc. 

io  nahich  thmgstt)hcn'3Jubaspcrcct' 
ucD.hcc  commaubcb  the  mulntubcto  tail 
upon  the  ILojb  nights  bap,  that  if  cucr  at 
any  other  time,  he  rboulo  nolb  alfo  helpc 
them ,  being  at  the  point  to  be  put  from 
their  JLavo  ,from  their  countrp,  anb  from 
trjeliolpXcmple: 

ii  3lnb  that  hee  rboulb  not  futTcr  t^c 
people,  thatilhabeucnnorb  been  butaut- 
tlercfceu>b,tobeinuibiccttontothcbiaf= 
phemous  nations. 

ado  luheit  thep  hab  all  bone  this  to* 
gcther,  anbbefought  themertifull?L02b 
With  Weeping,  anb  fafhng,  ano  lying  flat 
uponthcgrounoth2ccbaieslong,3lubas 
haumg  cjthojtcbfhcm,  tommanbeb  thep 
fljoulb  be  tn  a  rcabincffe. 

15  3tnb  gjubas  being  apart  tbitf)  the 
fibers,  betcrmmeb  befojc  tfjebmgs  hoft 
Irjouio  enter  into  gjubcaanbgctthecitp, 
to  got  foojth  ano  try  tl)c matter  [m  fight] 
bp  the  helpc  of  the  ILo2b. 

14  doiuhcnhchao  commtttcb[aU]to 
tfje  |  Creator  of  the  ibojlb ,  9  cjrhortcb  his 
foulbicrs  to  fight  manfully,  cuen  rrnto 
bcath,fo2  the  %m cs,tl)e  Xcmplc,  the  a- 
tp,thc  counttp,anb  the  common  -  wealth, 
hccampebbpQ9obm. 

15  31ub  haumg  giuenthc  watch  W02b 
to  them  that  were  about  him ,  £luto2p  is 
of  C5ob ;  With  the  mod  uaiiaut  ano  choice 
pong  men ,  he  went  tn  into  the  Rings  tent 
bpntght,*flcwcut  the  campe  about  four  c 
thoufanbmcn,anbtheehicfc(toftheeiC5 

phants,  iVith  all  that  lucre  upon  him. 

16  anb  at  laft  thep  fillcb  the  campe  with 
fcare  anb  tumult ,  anb  bepartcb  With 
goobfutceffe. 

17  Xhiswasbotteintheb2caRcoffhc 
bap,  bccaufcthc  protection  of  the  Ho?b 
bib  helpc  hum 

18  0oVo  When  the  Ring  hab  taueu  a 
taOc  of  the  manlincfTc  of  the  3Jcwcs ,  hec 
Went  aboutto  take  thcholbsbppourte, 

19  3Cnb  marchcb  towarbs  zscthfura, 
tbhict)  was  aftrogholb  of  y  31cws,but  he 
was  put  to  flight,failtb,  5  lott  of  his  men. 

i°  fox  3Jubas  hab  conucpeb  unto  them 
p  Were  in  it,fuch  things  asWcrcncrciTarp. 

ii  2Sut£hoDomstt)ho!baS!np3lcUKS 
hofte, biftlofcb  the  fecretsto  the  enemies, 
therefore  he  was  fought  out,*  When  thep 
hab  gotten  him,  thep  put  him  in  p2ifon. 

22  Xhc  Ring  ttcatcb  With  thcut  in 
2Sethfurathcfcconbtuuc,gauchishanb, 
tooUc  theirs,  Dcpattcb,  fought  With^Ju 
bas,wasouercomc: 


Apocrypha. 


13  ttearb  thatphtUp  Who  Was  left  ouct  1 
thcaffaircs  iu2tunoch  h  mas  Defperatclp  1 1!^- 
bent ,  confoimbcb,  intrcatcbtlic  3leWcs,  •■*"* 
fubmittcb  himfelfcanb  fware  to  all  canal  \ 
conbinons,agrecb  With  them,  anb  offreb , 
fatnftcchonourebrhcXcmplcanbbcalt 
HmblpWith  the  place, 

24  anbatceptcb  Well  of  Maccabeus, 
mabchimpjuteipail  gouernorfroni  pto 
lemaisrmto  thc<3crrhetuans, 

25  Came  to  £toicmats,thc  people  there 
lucre  gricucb  to:  the  coucnants :  for  thep 
flormcb  becaufc  fhep  iboulb  make  that 
coucnants  boibc. 

26  UpOas  Went  up  to  theiubgement 
feat, fatb  as  much  as  coulb  be  m  befeme  of 
tt>eaufc,pctuoabeb,patificb,mabcthem 
Ibell  affectcb,  rcturneb  to  3intioch.  Xhus 
itwcnttoucljing  theiungs  tomminganb 
bcparting. 

CHAP.   XIII I. 

6  Alcimus  accufeth  Iudas.  18  Nicanor  makcth 
peace  with  Iudas.  59  He  feeketh  to  take  Rhafis, 
46  whoioefcapeliishands.killethhimlelfe. 

?&S5^!  jfter  thiec  peres  was  3Jubas 
enformeb  that  S>cmemus  the 
fonne  of  S>clcucus  haumg  en 
_  trcb  bp  the  hauen  of  Xnpoiie 

wutj  a  grcatpowct  anb  name, 

2  !^ab  tafecn  the  countcep ,  anb  Rilleb 
2iitiothus,anb1Lpu"a£hisp20tcctour. 

3  0oV)  oneaicimus  Who  hab  becne 
hie  pneft,  anb  hab  befflcb  himfelfc  luufui 
ip  m  tt)c  rimes  of  their  mingling(Vbitl)  the 
©entiles)  fcetngthat  bpno  mcancs  lice 
couiofauc  himfcifcnoz  Ijauc  anp  more  ac« 
tcffctotheholp^lltar, 

4  Came  to  Ring  Demetrius  in  the 
hunb^eth  anb  one  anb  fiftieth  peerc,  w- 
fentmg  bntoljim  acroibnc  of golbc,  anb 
apalmc,  anbaifo  of  the  boughes  Vbhtch 
rocte  ||  ufeb  folcmnlp  m  the  Xcmplc :  anb 
fo  that  bap  he  hclbc  his  peace. 

5  fcorbbcit  l)aumg  gotten  opportune ; 
tp  to  further  Ijisfoolifh  cnterpzifc,  fanb] 
bcmgcailcb  into  counfelbp  Demetrius,* 
af&cbhott)thc3JctbcsfloobarTcctcb,anb 
iDhatthtpintcbcb^canutjerebtfjcnmto, 

6  XhorcofthCjctticsthatbcc  caiitb 
3lfibcans(lDhofc  captainc  is  ^ubas  £0ac^ 
cabcus)nouun)  iuarre,anb  arc  feDitious, 
anb  \uill  not  let  the  rcaimc  be  m  peace. 

7  XhcrfoJCj  bcingbepmiebofminc 
anccfto?shono?  C5>"tanc  thchiepneir 
hoob)  amnoti)  come  hither. 

3  iFirftberilpfoj  the  unfauub  care  j) 
haucofthingspcrtainingtothclnug.auo 

fcconblp,  euen  foi  that  J  mtcnb  the  goob 


II  Or, 
thought 
to  be  of 
theTcm- 


Apocrypha.  I  I.Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


\\Or,were 
ioyned  to 
them. 


of  mine  oibne  counttey  men:  fo:  all  our 
nation  is  tn  no  fmail  mifcry,  th20iigh  the 
bnabuifeb  Dealing  of  them  afozcfaio. 

9  <t©hercfo2c ,  £)  Ring ,  feeing  thou 
ftnoibeftall  tljcfe  things ,  bee  caccfullfo? 
theeoimtrcy,  anb  out  nation,  ibbtch  is 
pzeflcboneuery  fibc,  acco2bing  to  the  ele- 
ment? tljat  thourcamiy  (bcibcft  bnto  all. 

io  5Fo?  as  long  as  3iubas  liuetli ,  itts 
not  poffiblc  that  thcftatclboulb  be  quiet. 

ii  Xbisibasnofoonerfpobcnofhim, 
but  others  of  the  Rings  fcienbs  being  ma- 
imoufly  fct  agatntt^Jubas,  bib  nio?ein* 
cenfeSDcmctrtus. 

ii  3nb  foojrhibith  tailing  /Bitanoz, 
tbho  hab  bene  matter  of  the  (Elephants, 
anb  matting  him  gouctnout  oucr^ubca, 
hcfenthimfoith, 

13  Comanbmg  him  to  flay  3Jut>as;,it  to 
fcattct  them  that  tticre  \t»  him ,  f  to  mabe 
3Unmus  high  pnefl  of  the  great  temple. 

1+  Xhcn  tlje  heathen  that  Ijabflcb  out 
of  jtibca  from  gjubas ,  eamc  to  ifttcanoj 
by  flbcbs,thinuingthcharmcanb  calami- 
nes of  the3Icibes,to  be  their  lbcii  fare. 

i$  /ISoib  lbhen  the  gjcibcs  hearb  of  0b 
eanojs  commtng,  anb  that  the  heathen 
||ibercbpagatnftthcm,thcycaft  earth  bp^ 
on  their  hcabs,  anb  mabcfupplicanonto 
him  that  hab  ttabliCbeb  his  people  fo2 
cucr.anb  ibho  aitbaycshclpcth  bispo2tt> 
on  lbith  mamfeftanon  ofhis  pjefenec. 

16  &o  at  the  commanbement  of  the 
eaptaine,  they  rcmooueb  ftratghttbayes 
from  thente,  anb  tame  nccrc  bnto  them, 
atthctolbncofSDcOTaro. 

17  Jl3oib£>imon,'5uDasb20ther,hab 
loyncb  batten  lbith  /Sicano* ,  but  ibas 
fomcibhat  biftomfiteb ,  through  thefub- 
bainc  filcnce  of  his  enemies. 

is  iBcuerthclcffc  /5icauoz  hearing  of 
the  manlincfle  of  them  that  ibere  lbith 
■jubas ,  anb  the  touragcoufnes  that  they 
hab  to  fight  foj  their  countrcy ,  burftnot 
try  the  matter  by  the  ftoojb. 

19  i©hcrefo:c  he  fent  pofibontus ,  anb 
Itbeobotus,?  £0attathias  to  mane  peace 

20  £>o  lbhen  they  hab  taucn  long  ab 
uifcment  thercupon,anb  the  eaptaine  hab 
mabe  pmulrttubcacciuainteb  thercibith, 
anb  it  appcarcb  that  they  ibere  all  of  one 
minbc,  they  confcntcb  to  the  couenants, 

2  1 3inb  appotntcb  a  bay  to  meet  m  togc< 
thct  by  thcmftlues,*  lbhen  the  bay  came, 
anbttoolcsibcrcfctfojcitberofthcm, 

22  3Jubas  platcb  armcb  men  rcabyin 
eonucnient  places ,  left  Come  treachery 
(houlbbcefubbcnlypjaccifcb  by  the  ene- 
mtes  1  fo  they  mabe  a  peaceable  coferente. 


23  iftoib  iI5icano?  abobc  in  3Jcrufa; 
lem,  anb  bib  no  hurt,  but  fent  aibay  the 
people  that  came  floebmg  bnto  him. 

24  3lnbheeU)oulbnotU)lllinglyhauc 
3Jubasotitofhisught:fo2becioucbtbe 
man  from  his  heart. 

25  $e  pjaicb  htm  aifo  to  tafee  a  ibife,anb 
to  beget  cbiUuen:  fo  he  maneb,ibas  Quiet, 
anb  ||toobe  part  of  tljis  life. 

26  i6ut  3lnmus  pereemmg  the  louc 
that  luasbctibirt  them,  anb  tonfibertng 
the  couenants  that  ibere  mabe,  tame  to 
Demetrius,  anb  tolbehtm  that/Bicano? 
Ibas  not  ibcll  affceteb  totbarbs  theftate, 
fo?  that  he  hab  ojbaincb3Jubas,a  traitor 
to  his  rcalme,  to  be  the  Rings  fucecflbur. 

27  Xhcn  the  Ring  being  ma  rage,  anb 
P2ouobcb  Unth  the  accufarions  of  the 
mod  ibicttcb  man ,  ibjote  to  ilStcanoz ,  fig- 
nifymg  that  he  ibas  much  bifpleafcb  lbith 
the  couenants,  anb  commaunbtng  him 
that  hec  fhoulb  fenb  Maccabeus  p?tfonct 
m  ail  hafte  bnto  ^ntioth. 

2s  ©hen  this  tame  to  jI5icano?s  he& 
ring,hc  ibas  much  tofonnbeb  in  bimfelfc, 
anb  tooftc  it  grieuoufly  ,that  hec  (horns 
mabe  boyb  the  arftrles  ibhiri)  ibere  a* 
greeb  bpon ,  the  man  being  in  no  fault. 

29  25ut  becaufc  there  ibas  no  beaimg 
againft  the  Ring ,  hce  ibatehebhtstlmero 
accomplifb  this  thing  by  pollinc. 

30  i5otibitbftabingibhen££)accabcus 
faib  that  jrhcano?  began  to  bee  churlifb 
bnto  l)im,anb  that  he  cntreateb  him  moje 
roughly  then  he  ibas  ibont,  percciuing  p" 
fuch  fotbze  bchauiour  came  not  of  goob, 
hec  gathereb  together  not  a  fclb  ofhis 
men,anbibithb2cibhimfelfcfr64l3ieanoj. 

31 2Sut  the  other  bnoibing  that  he  ibas 
notably  pjeucnteb  by  3lubas  policic,eame 
uitothcgtcatanbholy1Cemple,anbcom' 
manbeb  the  02ieftes  that  ibere  offering 
theitbfual  facrificcs,to  beliuer  him  p  man 

31  anbibbc*  they  ftuare  that  they  coulb 
not  tel  ibhcre  p  man  ibas.tbho  ht  fought, 

33  $ee  ttretcheb  out  his  right  hanb  to* 
ibarb  the  3Eemple,$  mabe  an  oath  in  this 
manen'Jfyouibilnotbeliuermc^Jubas 
as  a  tpzifoner  ,31  tbtll  lay  this  £cmple  of 
ti5ob  eucn  lbith  the  grounb ,  anb  3  ibill 
bjeabe  boibne  the  3ltar,  anb  erect  a  no* 
table  temple  bnto  Bacchus 

34  3ttrr  thefe  ibozbs  he  Departed  then 
fbcj&ictts  lift  bp  their  hanbestoibarbs 
bcauen,?  befought  him  p  ibas  euer  a  befe 
ber  of  their  nanon,  faying  in  this  mancr: 

35  Xhou,  ©5.02b  of  all  thtngs,ibho 
haft  neebe  of  nothing,  ibaft  pleafeb  that 
the  iLcmplcofthme  habitation  fhoulb  be 
among  bs.  36  %\)txt< 


\\or,n. 

Uti  togi 
therwtth 
htm- 


bonnd. 


Apocrypha. 


Ch; 


p.xv. 


j6  Xhcreforcnoib,$Dholp?Lorbofail 
Doltncflc,  ftcepc  tljts  ijoure  cucc  tonocfllcu, 
ibhich  lately  lbas  clcattfcb.anb  Hop  eucrp 
bur  tghtcous  mouth. 

37  &oibtt)astheteaccurcbbttto/i5ica 
nor,cncfta5is,oneof  the  Clbers  of  3*c= 
r  ttfalcm  ,a  Ioucr  of  Ins  countrcp  men,anb 
a  man  of  bcrp  goob  report,  ibho  for  his 
mnbtteffcibascaiiebafatherofp3Jeibcs. 

38  jf  or  in  the  former  times,  tbhen  thcp 
minglcb  not  thcmfclucs  ttnth  the  <5en 
tilcs,hc  has  bmaccufcD  of  3iubairme,attb 
bibboiblvueoparb  htsbobpanb  lifclbith 
aibehcntencpforthcreltgionofp31ctt>cs. 

39  5>o  jftieanoribillmgtobeclarcthc 
hatethathebarebntothe3Jetbcs,fenca; 
boucfiue  h  titocb  men  of  ibar  to  tattc  Dun. 

40  jForhcrtJoughtbptamnghitntobo 
[the  3Jetbes]  much  hurt. 

41  iftottj  when  the  inuitmibe  ibouib 
hauc  tabenthe  totbre,  anbbtolcntlpbro; 
hen  into  the  btter  boore,  anb  bate  that 
firefl)oulbbcbroughttobutneit,bebetng 
teabp  to  beta&cnoneuetpuDe,fellbpon 
rjisfroorb, 

42  Cbufing  rather  to  bic  manfullp, 
then  to  come  into  the  battbs  of  the  ibulteb 
tobeaburcbotbctlbiretbcnbcreemebbis 

noble  birth. 

4?  25ut  miffing  his  ttrotte  through 
baftc,  the  multitude  aifo  ruling rbitbin 
tbeboores,  beranbolbipbp  to  the  tbau, 
anb  tart  bimfeifcbottmemanfullp  among 
thethitfeeftofthem. 

44  26uttbepauiefclpgiutngbaclte,anb 

a  fpate  being  mate,  hefellbottme  into  the 
nnbft  of  the  boib  place. 

4$  /fteucttbeleffetbhilc  there tbas pet 
DjeathttJithin  him,  being  mnameb  ibitb 
anget,  bcrofebp,  anb  though  his  bloob 
gufheb  out  tifte  fpouts  of  Sbater,  anD  his 
tbounos  were  gricuous,petbee  tanne 
through  the  mibft  of  the  throng,  anb  (tan- 
Ding  bpon  a  (rcepc  roette, 

46  Babenasbisbioobtbas  notti  Quite 
gone.bee  plutftt  outbts  botbels,  9  tailing 
tbcnunbotbbisbanbS,bceca(ttbembp; 
on  the  tbrong,anb  tailing bpon  the  fLorb 
of  life  aim  fpitit  to  re&ore  Dim  tbore  & 
gamebetbusbieb. 

CHAP.   XV. 

5   Nicanoisblafphemie.  8  Iudas  incouragcthhis 
menbyhisdreame.  i8  Nicanorisflainc. 

m  Eleanor  bcaringtbat  31  u- 
basanb  h«S  companprocrcin 
■..the  Qrong  places  about  £>a- 
fs^matia,  tefolueb  ibitbout  an? 
batigcttofctbpontbcntonprabbatbbap. 


Apocrypha 


z  4l3euertbclcs,thc3JeibestbatU)cre 
compelieb  to  go  ibitl)  Dtm,ratb,£>bcltrop 
notfo  cruclipanb  barbarouilp,  but  gtuc 
honour  totbatbap,  ibhttb  he  tbatfrcth 
ail  tbtttgs.batb  bonourcb  Untb  Iiolmcffe 
aboucTotbcrbapes.] 

3  Xbcn  this  molt  bngractous  lbrctcb 
bemanbeb,  if  there  m  c  r  r  a  mightic  otic  m 
beaucn  that  hab  tommanbeb  the  £>ab 
batbbaptobe&cpt. 

4  3tiDU)bcntbepraib>Xberei$inbca 
ucn  a  luting  3Lorb,anb  » ugh tir , id b o  tom- 
manbeb the  fcucntb  bap  to  be  Kept, 

5  3Ebenratbtbeotbcr,3lnb3Jairoam 
tiuglmt  bpon  can  I) ,  $  31  comanbto  ta&c 
armes,atibtobotbclungsbuuhes:pctbc 
obtctneb  not  to  hauc  histtwlteD  ttnl  bone. 

6  j&o  0umo;  in  creccbing  puts e  anb 
Ijaughtmcffe,  betermineb  to  fet  bp  a  pub= 
Ufte  moument  of  his  bictoric  ouet  jubas, 
anb  tljem  that  Vbcrc  tt>itb  bun. 

7  25ut  Maccabeus  hab  cuet  furc  ton; 

&Dencethattl)eHo;tbtooulbhclpchun. 

s  M) ct fojc  he  rfhoneb  Dispeople  not 
to  feare  the  comnnng  of  the  heathen  a 
gamll  them,  but  to  remember  the  htlp? 
ibhicbin  fo?met  times  tljcphab  reteiueb 
fronihcauen.atibnoibtoerpettthcbjcto 
rp,  anb  aib  ibhtth  fhoulb  tome  bnto  them 
ftomthr^lmightle. 

9  3lnb  fb  comforting  them  out  of  the 
late,  anb  the  prophets,  anb  ibuhailput; 
ting  them  in  minb  of  the  battel 6  th at  thep 
U)onafore,hemabethemmorccheetcfuU. 

io  ^nb  tbhen  he  hab  Qirreb  bp  their 
minbs,hegauethem  their  charge,  Or.tVo- 
tngthentthereTbtthailthetaKhoobofthe 
heathen,anbthe  breach  of  othes. 

ii  lEhusheatmeocuerponcofthem 
notfo  much  tbith  befence  of  fhielbs  anb 
fpeares,  asttiith  comfortable  anb  goob 
iborbs:anbbeubesthat,hetolbethcma 
breame\borthptobebelecueb,asiftthab 
bttifoinbceb.tbhuh  bibnota  litle  reiopce 
them. 

12  3ittb  this Vbas  W  biQon:  that  4Dni 
as,  lbho  hab  but  high  0neft,  a  bertuous, 
anbagoob  man.reuerenbin  conucrfatt 
on,  gentle  mtonbitton,  ibrllfpofecnalfo, 
anberercdeb  from  atljilDtn  all  pomes  of 
bertue,  holbingbphishanbs,  prapebfor 
the  lbhole  bobte  of  the  3Ieibes. 

u  XhiSboncml&emanerthercappca 
reb  a  man  ibith  grap  hatrcs,  f  ejtccemng 
glorious,  lbho  ibas  of  a  ibonbcrfull  anb 
crtcllcntmaieflic. 

14  Xhen  4Dn«as  anrtucreb  ,  raping, 
Xljis  ts  a  louer  of  the  brethren  ,ibho  prap 
ethmuch  for  the  people ,  anofoz  the  holy 

cttte, 


■ 


ocrypha.  II. Maccabees.  Apocrypha. 


tttic  ,(to  ibit)3Jcremias  p  prophet  of  ©ob 

15  thereupon  ^eremtas  ,  boiomg 
foul)  l)ts  right  hanb ,  gaue  to  giuoas  a 
ftoorb  ofgolb,anmn  gmmgit  vpa&ctbus: 

is  Xafte  this  holp  ftoorb  a  gift  from 
<3od  ,  ibitb  the  lbhich  thou  (bait  ibounb 
tbcaoucrfattes. 

17  Xbus  being  Ibcllcomfortcbbp  the 
iborbs  of3Jubas>Vbbteb  rbcrebcrpgoob, 
aivoablcto  fttrrctbcmbptobaiour ,  anb 
to  encourage  the  hearts  of  the  pongmen, 
the?  betermmeb  not  topittl)tampe,  but 
touragtouflp  to  fct  bpon  them,  anb  man* 
tulip  to  trie  the  matter  bp  conflict,  becaufe 
tbecttie,  anb  the  Sanetuaric ,  anb  the 
Xcmple  lucre  m  banger. 

18  if  o?  the  care  that  the?  toofcc  for  fbeir 
ibtues,  anbfhcitcbilbren,  their  brethren, 
anb  tunftolaes,ibas  in  leaft  account  ibitb 
tl)cm :  but  the  greatcft ,  anb  principal! 
fcare,ibasfortbcbolpXcmplc. 

19  3ttfo  thep  trjat  Vber  c  in  tl)e  citie,toobe 
not  tbclcaft  care,  being troubleb  for  the 
conflict  abroab 

20  anbnotbibbenasaiUoolieblbbat 
ftjoulb  bee  p  tnall,  ?  the  enemies  tbetc afc 
reabpeome  neere,  anbtbcarmicibasfet 
in  arap ,  anb  the  beads  conucnicntlp  pl& 
ceo  ,anb  the  borfemen  fet  in  lbings 

ii  ^actabros  feeing  the  comming  of 
tbcmultitube,  anb  tlje  biucrs  preparati- 
ons of  acmouc ,  anb  the  fierccncfTe  ofrtjc 
bcafts,  ftrctcbcb  outbisbanbstoibarbs 
Deaucn,  anb  callcbbpontbclLorb,  that 
iborUctb  lbonocrs,  rniolbingtbat  bteto* 
tic  commetb  notbp  amies ,  but  eucnasit 
fccmctbgoobtohim,  begtnctb  it  to  fuel) 
asareibortbp: 

22  Xbercfore  m  btsprapetbcfaibaf; 
tcr  this  maner :  £>  Horb ,  tljou  bibbctt 
fenb  thine  angel  m  the  time  of  Csclnas 
Singof3Jubea,anbbibbcttflapintl)cl)oft 
!  of  Sennacherib,  anbunbreb,  fourefcorc, 
anbfiucthoufanb 

13  aahcrfoJcnoibaifosD  H-ozb  of hca* 
ucn,  fnib  a  goob  angel  before  bs ,  for  a 
fcare,  anb  brcab  bnto  them. 

24  anb  through  the  might  of  thine 
armc,  Ictthofc  bee  ftncRcn  ibitb  terror, 
tliatcomc  againft  thp  holp  people  to  blaD 
phemc.  anbbecnbcbtbns. 

it  Xhen  j%canor,anb  thep  that  ibcrc 
lbitbbim  camcforlbarb  ibitb  trumpets, 
anbfongs. 

16  zsutlfubas ,  anb  his  tompanpen 
coimtrro  the  enemies  ibitb  muocanon, 
anbpraper. 

17  So  that  fighting  lbith  their  hanbs, 


anb  prapmg  bnto  ©ob  lbith  their  hearts, 
thep  flett)  no  IcCTc  then  thirtp  anb  fiuc 
thoufanb  men  :  for  through  the  appca* 
tancc  of  C5ob,  thep  iberc  gteatip  cljecrcb. 

28  iftotbibben  thcbattcli  tbasbone, 
returning  agamc  lbith  top ,  thep  bneib 
that  ii-hcanor  lap  bcab  m  his  hat nefTc. 

29  Xhen  thep  mabe  a  great  fljout,anb 
a  noifc ,  praifing  the  ainugbtp  in  their 
olbnc  language: 

jo  anb  Uubas ,  ibho  ibas  euct  the 
chiefc  befenber  of  the  cogens  both  tn  bo- 
n^ ,  anb  mmbc ,  anbtbhocontmueb  b«s 
louc  tolbarbshis  countrpmen  all  his  life, 
commanbeb  to  ftrifee  off  jfttcanorsbcab, 
anb  hishanb ,  ibitb  bis  ujoulbcr,  ?  bring 
thcmto3Jcrufalcm. 

31  Soibbenbelbastbcrc,anbbabcai' 
leb  them  of  his  nation  together ,  anb  fet 
the  priefts  before  the  altar ,he  Tent  for  them 
thattbcreoftheXoibre, 

32  anb  fbctbcb  them  bile  iSicanors 
hcab ,  anb  the  hanb  of  thatblafphcmer, 
lbhich  lbith  proub  brags  he  bab  ftrctcbcb 
out  againft  the  holp  Xcmple  of  the  ai= 
nughtie. 

33  anb  )bbcn  be  bab  cut  out  the  tongue 
of  that  bngoblp  jfheanor,  he  commanbeb 
that  thep  (houlb  giuc  it  bp  pieces  bnto  the 
foules,  anb  hangbp  the  relbarb  of  bis 
mabnefle  before  the  Xcmplc. 

34-  Socucrp  matt  praifebtoibarbs  the 
heauenrtjc  glorious  lLorb,  faping,  asicfc 
feb  be  hee  that  hath  feept  b«s  olbne  place 
bnbcfileb. 

3$  $e  hangeb  alfo  /f5fcanorsbcabbp< 
onthcXoibre,  ancuibent ,  anb  manifeft 
Ggncbntoau.ofthchelpeofthclLorb. 

j  6  anb  thep  orbaineb  all  ibitb  a  com- 
mon becrce,  in  no  cafe  to  let  that  bap  paflc 
ibithout  folemnitie :  but  to  celebrate  the 
thirteenth  bap  of  the  tibclfth  moneth, 
lbbithin  the  Sprian  tongue  is  tailcba' 
bar, the  bap  before  £0arborbcusoap. 

37  Xhus  lbcnt  it  lbith  JiSuanor ,  anb 
fcom  that  time  forth,  tbefccbrclbcsbab 
the  citie  in  their  poiber :  anb  beete  lbill  3 
mabcauenb. 

38  anb tfjlhanc bone ibell,  anbasis 
fitting  the  ftorp.it  is  that  tbbtcb  3  befireb: 
but  if  flcnbcrlp,  anbmcanlp  ,  it  is  that 
lbhich  U  conlb  attatnc  bnto. 

39  5For  as  it  is  hurtful!  to  brmhcibine, 
or  lbater  alone ;?  as llunciningicb  lbith 
lbatcr  is  pleafant,anb  belightetl)  the  taft: 
fucn  fo  fpeech  finclpfranub ,  bclightcth 
t\)t  cares  of  them  that  rcab  the  ftorte. 
anb  hctrc  lljail  be  an  cnb. 


The  end  oFApocrypha. 


Thegeneration  Chap.). 


ofChrift. 


•Luke  3. 
»3- 


'Gen.  z  1.? 

•Gene. 25 

J<5. 

•Gen.t9. 

3e- 

•GeD.38. 

»7- 

•l.Chro.  1 

5.ruth-4. 
18. 


*I.Sam.l6. 
Land  17. 
13. 

*2.Sam.i:. 

*4- 

'l.Chro.  3 
10. 


Tjjr 

GOSPEL  ACCORDING 

to  S.  Matthew. 


*  i.King. 

20.lt.    J. 

chro.  j.i j. 


CHAP.    I. 

1  The  genealogie  of  Chrift  from  Abraham  to 
Iofeph.  18  Hee  wasconceiuedby  rhcholy 
Ghoft,and  borne  of  the  Virgin  Mary  when 
fhe  was  efpoufed  to  Iofeph.  19  The  Angel 
fauffieth  the  mifdeeming  thoughts  of  Iofeph, 
and  interpreteth  ihe  names  ofChrift. 

^Cboofecof 
the  "genera; 
tionofjcfus 
Cbnft  ,  ttjc 
fonneofSDa? 
mb,thcfonne 
ofiKtoaham. 
i   *2lb;a> 
ham  begate 
_  gjfaac ,  ana 
J  faat  begate  Jacob ,  anD  *  Jacob  W 
gate  Juoas  anu  his  bjctbjen. 

3  2lnD  *  Jubas  begate  Shares  anD 
zaraofXhamat,anD*0barcsbegatc 
efrom,anb  £fcom  begate  3lram. 

4  3Cnb  3ram  begate  ammabab, 
anb  3minabab  begate  iftaaflbn ,  anb 
jfraafTon  begate  Salmon. 

-5  3nb  Salmon  begat  2800s  of  £a- 
chab,anb  zSoosbcgatc  £>bcb  of£utb, 
anb  £>beD  begate  Jcffc. 

6  2nt>  *  JefTe  begate  £>amD  the 
Bmg,  s  *  SDautD  the  l*mg  begat  £>ouv 
monofherthathadb.nthcibifeof^lnas. 

7  3lnD*  Solomon  begat  Hoboam, 
anb&oboam  begate  abia ,  anD  3bta 

begate^fa. 

8  3nb3tfabea,atc  Jofapbat.anD 

Jofapbat  begate  jojain ,  anb  Jo;am 

begate  £>5tas. 

9  3inD<£>MasbcgatJoatbam,anb 

Joatbam  begate  3u-!jas,auD3Ubas  bc^ 
gatc€5cHtag. 

10  3lnb*€$ctnas  begate fipanaffes, 


anD  ^anafTcs  begate  anion,  anb  & 
mon  begate  Jofias. 

1 1  anb  U  Jofias  begate  Jccbonias 
ano  Ijts  bjcthicn ,  about  the  tunc  they 
Were  caricb  aibay  to  Babylon. 

ii  anD  after  they  tberc  brought  to 
Babylon,*  Jcrbotuas  begat  Saiatbicl, 
anb  Saiatbicl  begate  zojobabcl. 

ij  anD Zo:obabclbcgatabiuD,atiD 
abiuo  begat  eiiabun ,  anb  tEliatum  be- 
gate %W  Is 

14.  anba30jbcgatSaboc,?Saboc 
begat  actotm,  anD  acbim  begat  Chub. 

15  anb  eiuiD  begate  <£ica3ar,anD€* 
1  uavit  begate  i^attban ,  anb  fl3artban 
,  begate  Jacob. 

i6  anD  Jacob  begate  Jofcph  the 
hufoanb  of  iJ0aty,  ofibboin  lbasbomc 
jcfus,U)bo  is  caiicb  Chuff. 

17  So  all  the  generations  fronts 
biabamtoSDauiD,  arc  fourteenc  gene; 
rations :  anD  from  SDauiD  bntili  the  ca= 
rying  aibay  into  Babylon ,  are  route* 
tecne  generations :  anb  from  the  cary- 
mg  away  into  Babylon  bnto  Chuff , arc 
(fourteenc  generations. 

is  C  JSoib  thc*btrth  of  Jefus  Chuff 
ibas  on  thisibifc :  naben  as  bismothcr 
£0ary  ibas  efpoufcD  to  Jofcph  ( before 
they  came  togctlicr )  fbec  ibas  founb 
ibith  chiiDc  of  the  holy  <5boft 

19  Xbcti  Jofcph  her  hufbauD  being 
a  iuQ  man, anb  not  Uniting  to  malic  her 
a  publiauc  cramplc,lbasnunDcD  to  put 
bcraibavpntuly. 

zo  Butibbilcbcc  thought  on  thefc 
things,  beholD,  tbcaugclof  tbefloib 
appcarcDtmto  bun  tnaDxainc, faying, 
Jofcph  thou  founc  of  DaiuD ,  fcarc  not 
to  take  buto  tlicc  iBary  thy  Wife  ■,  fo: 
that  Which  is  coiuctucD  m  bcr ,  is  of  the 
holv  <5l)0ft. 

a  1  21  anD 


\\SomeTcaA, 
loft.u  bceale 
lakiir.,mi 
Ilk?**  ttgas 
Iechor.iM. 

*  I. Chi 0.3. 
16,17. 


'Lulicx. 
»7- 


ThcWifemen.     S.Matthew.      HerodscrueltieJ 


Luke . . 


■nn>i  7.14. 

H  Or.hu 

namefhai! 
becaUcd. 


'Luhi.6. 


11  3nb  (ftc  (hall  bnngfojth  a  fonne, 
*  ana  tftou  (halt  call  l)is  iftamc  3Jcfus : 
jfozftec  fftaiifauc  Dispeople  from  tfteir 
amies. 

22  (/3ott>  an  tins  tbas&onc ,  that  it 
might be  fulfillcb  Which  ibas  fpoben  of 
the  5.02b  by  tbcp2ophct,fayiug, 

23  *23cbolb ,  a^lirgmfballbctbitft 
ctiilDc ,  aim  than  bmig  foonh  a  fomtc, 
anb  1!  they  (hall  call  ins  name  Cmma 
nucl.ibhicft  being  mtcrpjeteb,  is,  Gob 
ibitftbs.) 

24.  Xftcn^Jofcph.bcingraifcbfrom 
neepcDiDastbc^ngclofthclLojbbab 
bibbcn  him,*  tooltc  bnto  Ijun  l)is  ttnfc : 

15  ^ub  unclbcftcr not.till  (lice  ftab 
brought  fcuthhec  tuft  boznc  fonnc,  anb 
ftecaliebbisnamc3Jcfus. 

CHAP.   II. 

The  Wife  men  out  of  the  Eaft.are  directed  to 
Chrift  by  a  Surre.  11  Theywotfhipbim.and 
offer  their  prelents.  14  lofephflcethinioE- 
gvpt,  with  Ielus  and  his  mother.  16  Herod 
llayeth  the  children :  10  Himfclte  dyeth. 
13  Chi  ill  is  brought  backeagaineinto  Ga- 
Iilee  to  Nazareth. 

4P1D  fthen  *  'Jcfus  ibas 
bome  m  aSctbicbcm  of 
3lubca,tntftebayesoftec; 
rob  tftc  feing,bcbolb,therc 
_  came  naifc  men  from  the 
calttoiitcrufalcm, 

z  S>aying,t©ftece  is  ftc  tftat  is  bo2nc 
lung  of  tftc  3icibcSffo2ibchaucfccne 
His  £>tarr  e  in  tftc  caff,  aub  arc  come  to 
iboifbtphim. 

3  ttMjcn  $crob  tl)c  lung  Dab  hearb 
theietinngs.Dclbastroubleb^nbaU^iC' 
rufalcmuntftftim. 

+  Stub  lbbcn  Dc  hab  gathcreb  all  tl)c 
chiefe  #2icfts  anb  £>cnbcs  of  the  people 
together,  iKcbcmanbcb  oftbcmibhcrc 
Oi2iftlltoulDbcbo2nc. 

5  3(nb they  faib buto  him/Jit  25cfft= 
lebem  of  gjubca :  Jfoj  thus  it  is  nmttcn 
bytftcjdiopftet; 

6  *;nnb  thou  Sctftleftcm  in  tftc  lanb 
>7-4>-  of  3luba ,  art  not  the  leaft  among  tlie 

02inccsof  3luba  :  fo2  out  of  thee  (hall 
cornea  eoucuiour,tftatfl)ail!irulcmy 
people  Hfracl. 

7  Xbcn  l>ctob,\blKnI)c  habp:iui 
lycaUcbtbcieifemciixnqmrcboftbcm 
Diligently  lbftat  tunc  tlje  5>tarrc  ap* 
pcaren : 

s  ^nbhefcutflKiuto  iSctftlcftem, 
atibfaib,  Goc.anbfcarcft  biligcntly  fo: 
thcyoug  thilb.aub  ibftcn  ye  ftauc  foimb 


him,b2iugmcibo2b  agame,tftat3  may 
come  anb  ib02fl)tp  ftim  alfo. 

9  nahett  they  hab  ftearb  rt)c  "Bung, 
t1ic\>  bepartcb,  anb  loc,  tftc  5>tarrc 
lbfttcft  tftey  faib  m  tftc  eafMncnt  before 
tl)cm,ttllit  came  anb  ftoob  otter  \bftcrc 
tftcvoungcftilbclbas. 

10  naften  tftc?  faib  tftc£>farrc,  they 
r  no  veeb  Untft  crcccbmg  great  toy. 

11  Otnbibhcnthcyibcrccomcinto 
tft  c  ftottfc,  tft  ey  faib  tftc  yong  cftilb  ibitft 
£0ary  ftis  motftcr ,  anb  fell  bourne,  anb 
lbojfbippcb Dim:  anb  lbftcn  tftey  ftab 
openeb  tfteir  trcafurcs,  tftey  ilpjcfcutcb 
bnto  him  gifts,  golb,anbfranmnccnfc, 
anomyjrfte. 

11  311b  being  lnarncb  of  Gob  in  a 
b2camc,  that  tftey  fftoulb  not  rcturnc  to 
Aerobe ,  tftey  beparteb  into  tfteir  oVbnc 
countrcy  another  tbay. 

13  3nb  lbhcn  they  Vberc  bepartcb, 
bcholb ,  the  3liigcl  of  tftc  ILozb  appca 
rcth  to  "Jofcpft  m  a  became,  faying,  %? 
nfc  anb  take  tftc  young  cfttlbc ,  anb  ftis 
motftcr,  anb  flee  into  <£gypt,  anb  bee 
thou  there  tonttll  31  bung  tftec  lbojb: 
fo; Aerobe lbill  fcefec  tftc  young  cftilbc, 
tobefrroyfttm. 

i+  teftenftearofe.ftetoo&ctheyong 
cftilbe  anb  ftis  motftcr  by  night,  anbbc; 
par  tcb  into  €gypt: 

i$  Unburns tfterc  tmtilltftebeatft  of 
Aerobe,  tftat  it  migftt  be  fulfillcbttifticft 
ibas  fpotten  of  tftc  Hozb  by  tftc  0:o< 
pftct,  faying,  *©ut  of  €gypt  ftauc  3! 
cailcb  my  fonnc. 

is  eXftcn  Aerobe ,  tbftcn  ftcc  fatb 
tftatftcevbas  mocHcb  of  tftc  teifcmcn, 
tbas  occcebmg  U)20tft,  anbfcntfoo?tft, 
anb  flcinc  all  tftc  chilb2cn  that  ibece  m 
25cthlcftcm,anbtnall  the  coartstherc^ 
of ,  fr  om  t\bo  yccres  olbc  anb  bnber,  ac= 
coibing  to  the  time,  ibhichheftabbtlp 
gently  enqmreb  of  tftc  nsifemcn. 

17  Xfteti  ibas  fulfilleb  that  ibhicft 
\basfpoltcnby*3Icremictftcp2opftct, 
faying, 

isgjnBamaibastftcreaboiccftcatb, 
lamentation ,  anb  ibccpmg ,  anb  great 
mourning,Kacftcnbccping  foi  ftcr  chil- 
biett,  anbiboulbnotbe  comfoitcb ,  be; 
caufc  they  arc  not. 

I  19  C25utibhcn  Aerobe  ibas  bcab, 
bcftolb ,  an  3lngcl  of  the  Ho2b  appear 
reth  m  a  bzcaiuc  to  'Jofcph  m  Cgi'pt, 

20  S>aying,^rifc,anbtabctfteyong 
cliilbe  anb  ftismotftcc ,  anb  goe  into  the 
lanb  of  3lfracl :  fo2  they  arc  bcab  Uifttcft 
fought  tftc  yougcftilbcs  life. 

2i  3nb 


'Ofe.u.t. 


Icr.;I. 


lohns  preaching.      Chap.iij  .iiij.      Chriftbaptized. 


'Market. 

4.lukc  j-? 


*  Efiy4o 
.matkc  j 


•1  CIia.M 

if- 


\\Or,  ixnf-.ve- 

r*blc  10  <t- 

mtndment 

cjt.fr. 

"lohniS. 

3S>- 


"Crup.7. 

9. 


'Marlc.i.S. 
iolin  1. 16. 
lukc  ;.  it5. 


11  3inb  he  arofcanb  tooHc the yong 
chilbe  anb  his  mother ,  anb  came  ituo 
tljcianfiof^fracl. 

11  25utU)l)enl)c!)cart>  that  ^trcljc- 
laus  bib  r  eigne  m  3Dibca  m  thctoome 
ofhisfathcrl&crob,  hcclbas  afcaib  to 
goe  thither :  notUnthuanbing,  beemg 
tbarncbofGobfnabzcanic,  he  turucb 
afibcmto  the  parts  of  caltlcc : 

13  3no  hec  came  ant)  mpcit  ftt  a  citv 
tailcb  iRasarcth,  that  it  might  be  fulfil- 
let)  tbhuh  \Pas  fpoucn  by  the  pzo- 
pljcts,  $e  Chaibc  callcb  a  ji^arcuc. 

CHAP.    III. 

1  lohn  preacheth  :  his  office  :  life,  and  Bap- 
tifme.  7  Hcrcprehendeththe  Pharifes,  13 
and  baptizeth  Quilt  in  Iordane. 

45  tl)ofc  bales  tamc*3John 
the  25apttu\  pzcachmg  m 
tljc  iPilbcrncffc  of  3Jubca, 
1   3tnbfavmg,lAcpcnt 
_  ,  ycc :  fo:  the  Ringbomc  of 
Dcaucntsathanb. 

3  jfoztlnstsDctDat  tbas  fpoften  of 
by  tl)e  pzophctefoias,  faying,  *Xhc 
Poycc  of  one  crying  m  tl)e  Uulbetncs, 
^zeparcycthcibay  of  the  ILozb,  malic 
his  paths  llraight. 

4.  3lnb  tlje  fame  3ol)n  Dab  wis  rat- 
ment  of  camels  haice,  anb  a  icatfjerne 
girblc  about  fjis  loyncs ,  anb  Ijismcatc 
urns  locultsanb  iPtlbe  hony. 

5  Xrjcn  ttmu  out  to  h«»  $tcrufa^ 
lent,  anb  all  3Jubca,  anb  all  tlje  region 
rounb  aboufjlozbanc, 

6  SwbiPcrebaptecbofhimiu^oz; 
banc, confemng  their  finncs. 

7  C25ut  Ibncn  he  fatti  many  of  the 
0l)attfccs  anbSabbucccs  tome  to  his 
2Sapttfmc,fjc  faib  Piuo  them,  *£>  gene- 
ration  of  bipcrs,Vb!jo  hath  ibamcb  you 
to  flee  from  the  iPzath  to  tome  i 

8  262ingfo«!tl)tl)crcfo;e  fruits ilmect 
fo?  repentance. 

9  3nb  tijinfte  not  to  fay  Unthm  your 
femes,*  usee  Dane  3bzaljam  to  our  fo< 
tfjcr :  jf  oz  3  fay  Pnto  yon,  tl)at  <5ob  is 
ablcoftlicfeftoncs  to  raifc  Pp  thilbzcn 
Pnto^b:al)am. 

10  3lnb  noiP  alfo  the  are  is  Iayb  Pnto 
the  root  of  the  trees  :*Xhcrcfo2Ccucry 
tree  Vbhtch  bzmgeth  not  foozth  goob 
fruite ,  is  Ijcibcn  oolbnc ,  anb  cafl  into 
the  fire. 

1 1  3  inbecb  baptne  yon  ftuth  water 
Pnto  repentance:  but  lie  that  commctl) 
after  mcc ,  is  miglitier  tlicn  3 .  Mjofc 
(hoocsj  aniuotiPoztljytobcarr,  Ijcc 


(hall  baptise  you  ibith  the  holy  oijofr, 
anb  ibitl)  fire. 

12.  nahofc  fannc  is  in  Ins  hanb,  anb 
Dc  Unll  thzougbly  purge  His  floozc,  anb 
gatDcr  hisibheat  into  the  garner: but 
iDilburucPptljccDaffciPithPufiucncl)' 
able  fire. 

13  €  *  XDcn  commctD  Jlcfus  from  -m^ .. 
Galilee  to  Jfozbane,  pnto  John ,  to  be  lukc3-: 
bapti3CbofDim: 

14. 2Sut3Joljn  fo2babchim,foymg,3J 
Daucnccb  to  bee  baptiscb  of  tljcc,  anb 
commclttDoutomci 

15  3lnb31efusanfiuering,  faiD  Pnto 
Dim,  buffer  it  tobefonott) :  foztlmsit 
becommetl)  Ps  to  fulfill  all  rigljtcouf- 
ncffe.XDenDe  fuffcrcbDim. 

is  ^nb3(crus,rPDcnDceibasbapi 
ti5cb,Vbent  Pp  flraigljtUiay  out  of  tlje 
lPatcrtanoioctDeDcaucnsibcreopC' 
neb  Pnto  Dint,  anbDcfaiPtDc5>pintof 
C5obbefcenbing  UUc  a  bone,  anb  ltgl> 
tmgpponlnm. 

17  3nb  loc,a  boicc from Dcaucn,fay< 
ing,  %\w  is  my  bcloucb  Sonne,  in 
iPl)om3JamUKllplcafeb. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

Q11  ilt  f.iftctb,  and  is  tempted,    n   TheAn. 
gelsmiuiftervotpliim.   13   Heedvsellethin 
Capernaum,   17   beginnetb  to  preach, 
callerh  Peter,  and  Andrew,    11   Fames,  and 
Iolin:   13  andhealethallthcdifeafed. 

^^  $cn  tbas  *  3Jefus  leb  Pp  of  \  *  M»^ « ■ 
MftlK  Spirit  into  the  m\?  ,.  * 
^3  btrncfle,  to  bee  tcniptcb  of 
^tDcbcuill. 
_^  1  ^nb  lPDcn  Dec  Dab 
fa(tcofo2tybaycsanbfo2ty  nights,  Dec 
ipas  af  tcrlparb  an  Dungr  cb. 

3  3tnb  Vbhcn  the  tempter  came  to 
him ,  Dec  faib,  3if  thou  be  the  Tonne  of 
C5ob ,  commanb  rtjat  tljcfc  floncs  bee 
mabc  bzcab. 

4.  25uthcanfiocreb,  aubfaib,gitis 
\pjittcn  ,*  t!3an  njail  not  lute  by  bzcab  a* 
loncbut  by  cucry  lPojb  that  pzoccebctl) 
out  of  the  mouth  of  <3ob. 

5  ILhcnthcbcutiltaltethhim  bp  in- 
to the  holy  One,  anb  fcttcth  h""ona 
pinaclcofthcXcmplc, 

6  3tm> forth Dntohim, Uftiioubcc 
thcSonucofoob.cartthvfclfcoonme: 
fozitisiPztttcn/Dcfljaligtuchis^n-  'paisi. 
gels  charge  coutcrnmg  thee,  ?  m  their 
,  hanbes  they  (hall  bcarc  thee  bp ,  lefl  at 
J  any  tunc  tljou  bafl)  thy  footc  agamltu 

lltouc.  _  r 

3  3         7  perils 


•Dcuc.8.j. 


Chnft  tempted.       S.Matthew.  Theblefled. 


'Deu.i5.iC' 


•Dcu.i.i; 
and  10.  20. 


Mar.  1. 14. 

I ukc  4. 14. 
iohn  4.4;. 
\\Or,dcliHc- 
redvp. 


Efai.0.1. 


1  Mar.  1. 14 


"Mar.i.itf. 


7  IJcfnsfatDbnfo  Dim,  gjtisumfc 
tenagamc'Xhoufbait  not  tempt  the 

?L0iDthpC50D. 

8  3igame  the  S>cutll  tattctf)  In'ni  Dp 

into  an  ercccDtng  high  moiintamc,  anD 
fhc.Deth  imn  ail  the  kmgDomes  of  tlje 
luojlD.anD  theglozp  of  them : 

9  3fnD  fattlj  tonto  him,  3111  thefc 
tilings  U11I151  guic  thee,  if  thou  lbilt 
fall  Dottmc  anD  uiojfmpmc. 

10  %\)tn faitl)  3Jcfns tonto him ,  <Sct 
thec  heme,  Satan :  foi  it  is  ttmttcn, 
*1Lrjou  fljait  ttwfhip  the  ?Lojd  tljv 
<50D,anD  Inm  onelp  (bait  thou  fernc. 

1 1  Xhcn  the  Deuill  leauctb  mm,  anD 
bcholD,  Angels  tame  anD  miniftrcD  \m? 
toijim. 

ii  C'/ftoibttmcngjefiishaDhcarD 
tfjat  5foi)n  lbas  ||  cart  into  pjifon ,  he  Dc? 
partcD  into  Galilee. 

13  £nD  icaumg  jiSa^arctn,  lie  tame 
anD  Dtbclt  m  Capernaum,  lbhuh  ts  bp« 
ontheScacoaft,  nunc  bojDersof  za< 
bulonanDiftephthait: 

14  %\m  it  might  be  fulfillcD  Ibnitf) 
lDasfpoken  bp  Cfaias  the  02ophct,faps 
mg, 

15  *  IThc  lanD  of  zabnlon ,  anD  trie 
lanD  of  /ftcphthalt ,  bp  the  map  of  tl)c 
Sea  bcpotiD  3}o:Danc,  Galilee  oftljc 
Gentiles: 

i6  iLne  people  tthteh  fate  in  Darae- 
neffe,  faib  great  light:  anD  to  them 
ibhich  fate  m  the  region  anD  fbaDott)  of 
Death,  light  is  fpnmgDp. 

17  C*Jrrom  that  time  3lefus  began 
to  pjcach ,  anD  to  fap,  Hepent ,  fo:  the 
BingDomc  of  hcaucn  is  at  hanD. 

13  <E*  31nD  3Jcfustt)ammg  bp  the  fea 
of  Galilee,  favb  tlbo  tactlncn ,  Simon, 
calico  0etcr ,  anD  SlnDzcib  his  brother, 
cafhng  a  netinto  the  Sca(fo,i  thep  ibcre 
fifhers) 

19  3tnD  he  faith  tmto  them ,  if  olloib 
nice:  anD  3  lDtli  maltc  pou  fifhers  of 
men. 

10  3lnD  thep  frraighttbap  left  tljcir 
nets,  anD  folloVbcD  him. 

21  3inD  going  on  from  thence,  hec 
falbe  other  niio  bjctlucn,  Barnes  the 
fonne  of  zcbcbcc,  anD  giohn  his  too 
thcr,  m  a  fhip  with  zcbcbcc  their  fa- 
ther, mcnDmg  their  nets:  anD  hccaiicD 
them. 

22  3lnD  thep  immcDiatlp  left  tile 
flnppc  anD  their  father ,  anD  folloiucD 
him. 

2}  CSnD^icftiSNJcnt  about  all  Ga= 
Iilec,  teaching  in  tljcir  Spnagogucs, 


anD  pjcathmg  trje  Gcfpcl  of  the  lung 
Dome,  anD  healing  all  maner  of  fichc 
neffe,  anD  all  maner  of  Difeafc  among 
the  people. 

24.  3inD  his  fame  tbent  thojottiout 
aiiSpna:  anD  thep  brought  tmto  htm 
all  ficfic  people  that  mere  taken  ibith 
Diucrfe  Difcafes  anD  tomients ,  anD 
thofc  itohich  mere  poffcffcD  .toitb  Dcuiis, 
anD  tljofc  in Inch  iberc  lunatittie,  anD 
thofc  thathaD  thepaific,  anD  he  hcaicD 
them. 

25  3tnD  tocrc  follotbcD  him  great 
great  miiltitiiDcs  of  people,  from  Gate 
lee,  anD  from  2>ecapolts,anD  from  itnc* 
rufalcm,  anD  from  3JuDca,  anD  from 
bcponDjoJDanc. 

CHAP.   V. 

Chrift  begiuneth  his  Sermon  in  the  Mount; 
3  declaring  who  arebleficd,  13  who  are  the 
faltof  theejnh,  14  the  light  of  the  world, 
the  citieon anhill,  15  thecandle:  17  thathe 
came  to  fulfill  the  Law:  11  what  it  is  to  Ml, 
17  to  commit  adulterie,  33  to  fweare  :  38 
Exhorteth  to  fuffcr  wrong  ,  44  to  loue 
euen  our  enemies,  38  and  to  labour  after 
perfectneffe. 

$&$&&&  $D  fceingthc  mnltituDes, 
?gf,  he  ibent  Dp  into  a  moon* 

ffljgsSsss  mne !  anl5  llJhcn  lie  ibas 
^'/fPm^f frt'  b&  Difripies  came  Dnto 
arltv^L^e  mm. 

2  ^hd  he  openeD  bis  mouth ,  anD 
taugotthem,fapmg, 

I    3  *26lefTeDa.ctl)cpoo2c  tnrptrit:  fo^  't«W-*° 
theirs  is  the  lungDomc  of  hcaucn. 

4  BlcffeD  jrc  thepthatmourne :  fo? 
tljcpflialibccomfoncD. 

5  *26lefTcD  ^e  the  inccuc :  foz  thtp  '^-n-" 
fl^ail  inherit  the  earth. 

6  25lCfTeD  are  thtp  \DI)itf)  DOC  fiun^ 

I ger anu tlUrft after tigf) teoufnefTc :  *fo;  -Efa.^.:, 
thcpniaiibcfillcD. 

7  2Sle(rcDnetheniercifuU:foHl)cp 
Ifljallobtaincmercic. 

s  *BiciTcDa.erhcpttrcinljcart:fo?  *pfau4.4. 
IthcvniaiifccooD. 

!    9   25icffcDjrethcpcacemaners:fo: 
tlicp  ttjali  bee  calico  the  chtlDjcu  of 

(J50D. 

10  *25lcu"cDarcthcp\bhitI)  arcperfc*  'i.p«m, 
nitcDfoznghtcoufncffcfaBc :  fo^tljeirs 
is  the  lungDomc  of  hcaucn. 

11  23lcflcDiicpc,tt)hcn  menfhallrc* 
uilc  pou ,  anD  pcrfccutc  pou ,  anD  dial  fap 
all  manner  of  *  cum  againft  pou  t  faittp 
fo2inp  taac. 
iiftciopte, 


•  i.Pct.4. 

14- 

t  <jr.lji*g. 


The  Law 


Chr 


ap.v. 


lsexpoun 


"MarkcjJ. 
50  lukc.  14 
34. 


\]  The  word 
ut  theorist- 
^l.f.gmfi. 

ah  HTHCA- 
fare  cental' 
ntnj  about  it 
ptnt  Ujfe 
thenttptckj- 
'  Marke  4 
u.lukcS. 
16.  and  II. 

a- 

1. Pet. J. 

12. 

■  lukci<5. 
"7- 


'  lames  2. 
10. 


\\0r,  Ststhtm 
"  Exod.20 
1  j.dcut.j 
'7- 


■"Luke  1  j. 
158. 


ii  Jleioyec ,  anb  be  crccebtng  giab : 
fo;  great  is  your  rciuarb  in  heauen:  jro2 
fo  pcrfccutct)  they  tt)c  £?ophcts  \Dljitl) 
Vbccc  before  vou. 

13  CPce  arc  the  fait  of  the  earth  : 
*25ut  if  tlic  fait  Dane  loft  tits  fauour, 
UihcreUnth  (hall  it  bee  falteb  t  Jt  is 
thcnccfo?th  goob  fo:  nothing,  but  to 
be  taft  out.anb  to  be  troben  Dnccr  footc 
of  men. 

14.  Pec  are  the  light  of  the  IU02ID.  3 
cittc  that  tsfct  on  an  hill,  cannot  be  Did. 

tf  Neither  Doe  menp  light  acanwc, 
anb  put  it  Unbcr  a  "buflicll :  but  on  a 
canblctttCKC,  anb  it  giucth  light  bnto  all 
thataremthchoufc. 

16  |Lct  your  light  fo  thine  beftue 
men  ,  *  that  they  may  fee  your  goob 
nwacs,  anb  glonfic  your  father  Which 
is  in  heauen. 

17  CXhmUc  not  that  3  am  come 
tobeftroy  the  lame  0?  thepzophcts.'J 
am  not  come  to  beftr  oy ,  but  to  fulfill. 

18  5Fo!  uenly  3  fay  unto  y  ou ,  *  Xill 
heauen  anb  earth  pafTc ,  one  tote  ozone 
titlcfhall  in  no  UnfcpaiTcfrom  the  lain, 
tuiaiibcfulfiilcb. 

19  *  BBhofocucr  trjtrfojc  fhail  tocauc 
one  of  thefc  leaft  commaunbements, 
anb  (hall  teach  men  fo ,  he  fhail  be  cailcb 
the  icaftiuthcRingbomc  ofheaucn :  but 
tbhofoencr  fliall  boc,  anb  teach  tii^.the 
fame  (hall  be  cailcb  great  in  the  Ring; 
borne  of  heauen. 

20  jfozilfaybntoyoiuXhatcrccpt 

your  nghtcoufnciTc  (hall  crcccbc  the 
rtgDtcoufnclTc  of  the  Verities  anb  £ha 
rtfees,  ycc  (hail  m  no  cafe  enter  into  the 
lungDomc  of  heauen. 

ii  <[  Pec  hauc  hearb  ,  that  it  was 
faibc  ||  by  them  of  olb  tunc ,  *  Xhou 
(halt  not  lull  :anb,  nahofoeucr  (hall 
hill,  fljalbc  in  banger  of  the  uibgemeut. 

22  But  3  fay  unto  von,  that  umo- 
focucr  is  angry  Unth his toother  Until 
out  a  caufc ,  (hall  be  in  banger  of  the 
TJubgcmcnt:anD  Vbhofocucr  (hall  fay 
to  his  toother,  Bacha,(hal  be  in  Danger 
of  the  counfell:  but  whofocucr  (hall  fay, 
Thoufoolcfbaibcm  Danger  of  hell  fire. 

23  Xhcrefo2c  if  thou  bung  thy  gift 
to  the  altar  ,  anb  there  retuemtoeft 
that  thy  toother  hath  ought  agamft 

24!  fLcauc  there  thy  gift  bcfo?c  the 
aitar,anbgocthy\bay,firflbcreconci 

leb  to  thy  toother ,  aub  then  come  anb 

offer  thy  gift.       ,    ,       „„..„,.,■,„.„. 
25  *  agree  unth  tljmc  atoicrfauc 


P< 


ided. 


qutcUly  ,  lbhilcs  thou  art  m  the  way 
Until  him :  leaft  at  any  time  theabuer 
fane  Deliuct  thec to  the  ttiDge,  anb  tlie 
uibge  bcliucr  thee  to  the  officer ,  anb 
tliou  be  taft  into  p2ifon. 

26  Uenly  3  fay  unto  thec ,  thou 
(halt  by  no  meaucs  come  out  tHencc, 
till  thou  haft  payb  the  uttcrmoft  far- 
thing. 

27  C  Pec  haue  hearb  that  it  was 
faib  by  them  of  olb  time,  *'£hou(hait 
not  commit  abultcne. 

18  But  II  fay bnto  you,  Hhat  ibho- 
focucr  looKcthonaWoniantoluft  after 
her,  hath  committcb  abultcne  With  her 
alreabym  his  heart. 

29  *3nbtfthyrightetc|!ofFcttbthee, 
plucHcitout,anbcaftitfromthee.iTo2it 
is  p2ofitablc  fo?  thee  that  one  of  thy 
members  (lioulb  perifti,  ano  not  that 
thy  Whole  boby  fti oulb  be  caft  into  hell. 

30  anDifthy  right  hanDoffuiD  thec, 
rat  it  off.aiiDcaftitfromthcc.  5*0? it  is 
p?ontablcfo?  thec  that  one  of  thy  mem* 
bcrs  (lioulb  perifti  ,  anb  not  that  thy 
wholcbooyfhouibbccaftttttohcil. 

31  3Jt  hath  bccncfaib ,  *B3hofocucr 
ftiall  put  away  his  Unfc,  let  him  giuc 
hccaW?ttuigofDiuo2cemcnt. 

3  2  But  3  fay  bnto  you ,  that  Whofo; 
cuer  (hall  put  away  his  Unfc,  fantng  fo? 
the  caufc  of  figuration,  caufethher  to 
tommitabultcry:  anb  lbhofocucrfti  all 
mane  her  that  is  Diuo?ccD,  commttteth 
abulteric. 

33  cagatne,  ycchauc  hearb  that  it 
hath  bcenc  faib  by  them  of  olb  tunc, 
*  Hhou  (halt  no  t  fo?utjcare  thy  felfcbut 
(halt  pcrfojmc  bnto  the  3Lo?b  tljiue 
othes. 

34.  But  3 fa?  twtb  vott ,  S>tt)carc 
not  at  all,  neither  by  heauen,  fo?  it  is 
Oobstli2onc: 

35  p.01  by  the  earth,  fo?  it  ts  his  foot; 
ftoolc: neither  by  S?ierufalcm,fo?itts 
tljc  nttc  of  the  great  lung. 

16  jRcithcr  (halt  thou  ftoeare  by  thy 
hcab,  becaufc  thou  canft  not  malic  one 
hairc  White  o?blacftc. 

37  *  But  let  your  communication 
beclJca,yca:/3ay,nay:;ffo?Wharfoeticr 
ts  11102c  theuthefc,  commeth  of  eiull. 

38  O'ce  hauc  hearb  that  it  hath 
bectic  faito'.an  etc  fo?  an  cie,atiD  a  toot!) 
fo?  a  tooth. 

39  But  3  fay  Unto  you,*  that  yecre* 
fift  not  mill :  but  Wbofoeuer  lhall  fmite 
thec  on  thy  right  checlic,  tunic  to  him 
the  other  alfo.  _ 

40  !SnD 


*  Exod.  jo. 
14. 


•Chap,  1? 
8.  maikco. 

47. 

1 1  Or,  he 

caufetbee  t» 

offend. 


"Dew.  14. 

I  lukc  I  6. 
i  U.i  .cor. 
7.10. 


"Exod.io. 
7-!cuit.i9* 
/l.dcut.j. 
II. 


Mam. 5. 1  j. 


•fiod.  II. 

:o.dcut,iy 
1 1 
'Lukttf. 

17  1  cor.  < 


Ofloue^almes,       S.Matthew.    prayer,and  falling. 


•Dcut. 
IJ.8. 

"Leuic-19- 
1 8. 

«  Luke  6. 
*7- 


•Luke  13. 
3 -Mils  7. 
60. 


"Luke  6. 
3>- 


\\Or,rrirb. 


•Rom.  1 3.8 
\\Or,can(i 
not  a  trum- 
pet to  fe 
founded. 


40  3lnD  tfanymanibillfucthccat 
tbciaib ,  anD  taltc  aibay  ttJvtoate ,  let 
him  hauc  thy  cloaftcalfo. 

41  3tnD  ibljofocucr  fliail  compell 
tljce  to  goc  anulcgocibith  huntibame. 

41  d5iuc  to  him  that  afftcrh  tlicc : 
anD  *  from  Ijim  that  iboulD  bo?roib  of 
thec,  tutnc  not  thou  aibay. 

43  C  Vet  hauc  hcarD ,  that  tt  hath 
becncfaib,*  3Cl)ou  fl^ait  louc  thy  neigh- 
bour,anb  hate  tftinc  enemtc : 

44  26ut  3  fa?  bnto  you  ,  *  2.  one 
your  enemies,  blcfft  them  that  cutft 
you,  boc  goob  to  them  that  hate  you, 
anb^ayfojthcmibhichbefpitefullybft 
you,anbpcrfccutcyou: 

45  Chat  ycc  may  bctlicclnRnenof 
your  father  ibhicl)  tsutheauen:  fo2he 
mafecth  l)ts  funne  to  nre  on  ttjc  etull 
anD  dn  &)t  goob ,  anb  ftnbcth  ramc  on 
tlje  uid,  anb  on  the  bntud. 

46  *  JF02  if  ycc  louc  them  Ibbich  loue 
you,  ibhat  reibarb  hauc  ycc;  Doe  not 
cucnthc^ublieancsthefamcf 

47  2lub  if  pec  falutc  pout  bjethzen 

OnlV,\bhatbO  VOUU102C  then  others  r  2>OC 

not  cuen  thc^ublicanesfo  i 

43  2i5cyccthcrcfo2cpcrfcrt,cucnas 
pour  father ,  ibhich  is  in  hcaucn,  is 
perfect. 

CHAP.    VI. 

t  Chriftcontinuethhis  Sermon  in  the  Mount, 
(peaking  of  almes,  5  prayer,  14  forgiumg 
our  brethren,  16  falling,  19  whete  our 
creature  is  to  be  layedvp,  14  offeruingGod, 
and  Mammon,  15  Exhorteth  not  to  bee 
carefull for  worldly  things:  55  butto  feeke 
Godskingdome. 

^■^^g  3llichecD  that  pec  boc  not 

"H  lP\b0Ur  am,es  bcfcuc  men' 
'%  >^  to  bee  fecue  of  them :  o^ 

sHs"  iisf*  thetibifc  ycc  hatic  no  vt- 

S&S-S^felbartJ  ||  of  roue  father 

lbhicbismheaucn. 

%  Xhcrefozc ,  *  lbhen  thou  Doed 
thine  almes,  ||boc  not  founb  a  trumpet 
befojcthcc,astbchypocntcsboc,mthe 
Synagogues,  anb  m  the  drcctes ,  that 
thcymayhaucglo2yofmcti.?!flcnly,'3f 
fay  bnto  you,  they  hauc  their  rcibarb. 

5  25ut  When  thou  bocdaimes ,  let 
not  thy  left  haub  Knoib,ibbat  thy  right 
bocth: 

4  Xhat  thine  almes  may  be  m  ft 
trct:3tnb  thy  father  ibhich  fceth  in  It- 
rjet,bimfclfcfl)ailrcibarbthccopcnly. 

5  C  3lno  lbhen  thou  pzayed ,  thou 
(halt  not  be  as  tl;e  hypocrites  arc:  foz 


they  louc  to  pzay  daubing  in  the  ^yna^ 
gogncs,aut)  in  the  comers  of  the  dceets- 
that  they  may  be  feenc  of  men.  Slerily 
3J  fay  bnto  you ,  they  haue  their  rc- 
ibarb. 

6  isutthou  lbhen  thou pzayed ,  en^ 
tec  into  thy  clofet ,  anb  lbhen  thou  had 
flnit  thy  booze,  pzay  to  thy  father  which 
ism  fecrct.ano  thy  father  ibhich  ftcth  m 
ftcret,fl)allrcibarD  thec  openly. 

7  Butlbhcnyccpzay.bftnotbamc 
*  repetitions,  as  the  heathen  boe.  3*oz 
they  thmftc  that  thcyfhail  be  hcarD  foz 
their  much  fpcatttng. 

8  25c  not  ycc  thcrcfoze  like  bnto 
them :  5f  02  your  father  imoibctb  ibhat 
things  ycc  haue  neebc  of,  befoze  yee 
af  fee  him. 

9  31ftcr  this  matter  thercfo:e  pzay 
yee :  *  £)ur  father  ibhicl)  art  m  Ijcauen, 
halloibeDbethynamc. 

10  Xhy&ingbome come. Xhy  Ibill 
be  boncm  carth,as  it  is  m  heattcn. 

11  <Btuc  bs  this  bay  our  Daily  bzcab. 
u  3nb  fojguicbs  our  bebts ,  as  ibe 

fozgiueourbcbtcrs. 

13  3lnblcab  bs  not  into  temptation, 
,  but  Dcluiec  bs  from  cuill :  Jf  02  thine  is 
the  luugbomc ,  anb  the  poibccanb  the 
gt02y,fo2euer,  3lmcn. 

14.  *  Jf  02,if  ycefozgiuc  men  their  tret 
paffes,  your  hcaticniy  father  lbiliaifo 
foigiucyou. 

k  ^Sitt ,  if  ycc  fozgiuc  not  men  their 
trefpafres,neithcnbillyourfathcrfo2 
glue  your  trefpaflcs. 

16  C^Pozcoucr ,  lbhen  yet  fad,  be 
not  as  the  hypocrites ,  of  afabcountc^ 
nance:  fo;  they  Dtmgtir  c  their  faccs,tl)at 
they  may  appcarc  bnto  men  to  fad:  tic- 
rily  3J  fay  bnto  you ,  they  hauc  their  re- 
ibacD. 

17  2Stttthou,  lbhen  thou  faded,  a- 
nomt  thine  hcab,anb  ibad)  thy  face : 

is  lharthouappcarcnotbntomen 
to  fad ,  but  bnto  thy  father  ibhich  ism 
fecret :  anb  thy  father  ibhtch  fceth  in  ft; 
tcct,di all  rcibarb  thec  openly. 

19  C.  Utay  not  bp  foi  your  ftlucs 
trearuresbponcarth,lbhcrc  moth  anb 
rud  Doth  to:rtipt ,  anD  ibhcrc  tljccucs 
bieartctho.'oib,auD  dcaic. 

io  *26nt  lay  bpfoiyourftlucstrca; 
furcs  m  hcaucn ,  ibhcrc  neither  moth 
InozrudDoth  corrupt,  sibhcrcthceues 
i  Doc  not  bicatic  thojoib,uo2  dcaic. 

21  5? 02  ibhcrc  your  treafurc  is,  tljcrc 
'lbill  your  heart  be  alfo. 

11  *1LhclightofthcbobyistI)cc>'c: 

J 21 


■Ecc!us.7. 
i«. 


Luke  1 1.1 


'MiikeM. 
:5- 


*  Luke  1;. 
;;.i.um.<5 
>9- 


Luken. 
14- 


Take  no  thought. 


Cb 


a 


p.vij, 


The  itrait  gate. 

o 


•3- 


Luke  il. 
x1.pfal.55. 
ii.i.pet. 
$-7- 


3if  therefore  thme  eve  be  Rnfllc ,  ti)v 
whole  bobp  flialbc  full  of  light. 

13  25iuifthineepcbeeuiu\tbpWbolc 
bobp  fbailbcfullof barBncffe.  'Jiftber 
fo2c  the  light  that  is  m  thee  be  barKc- 
neffe,  bow  great  is  that  barRencflc  < 

14-  C*ir2o  man  can  fcruc  two  ma 
ficts:fo2  cither  be  Will  hate  tnc  oncanb 
louc  tnc  other ,  02  elfc  bee  Will  rjolbc  to 
the  ohcanbbcfpife  the  otber.J^c  cannot 
fetueGob  anb  gammon. 

15  Xbcrfo2C'31fapbntopou,  £ahe 
no  thought  fo:  pour  life,  What  pec  (bail 
catt,  02  What  ye  (nail  b2itiRc,  no2  vet  fo? 
pout bobp,  What  pec  (ball  put  on:  3Js 
not  the  life  mo2c  then  nicatc  i  anb  the 
bobp  then  raiment; 

16  25ef)olb  tbcfoulcsoftbcairc-.fo? 
thep  fownot,ncitbctborbcprcapc,no2 
I  gather  into  barncs,  vet  pour  beaucnlp 
fattier  fccDttt)  tlicm.  arc  pec  not  mud) 
better  then  thep  t 

17  nsliirt)  of i>ou  bp  tafetng  tliougrjt, 
can  abbe  one  cubitc  bnto  his  ftamr e  < 

is  ^nbtttnuauepe thought fo2  rai- 
ments Confibcr  the  lillies  of  the  ficlb, 
hoVb  rbep  grow :  the?  toile  not,  neither 
oocthcpfpmnc. 

19  3nb  v«  3  fap  into  pou,that  men 
Solomon  m  all  his  glo:p,  wasuota- 
rapcbliRconcoftbcfe. 

jo  t©hcrefo2c,  if  ©ob  fo  clothe  the 
grafTc  of  the  fielb ,  which  to  bap  ts,  anb 
to  moiroW  tscaftinto  the  ouen:  (ballbc 
not  much  mo2C  clothe  pou,  £>  pec  of  lit; 
tlcfattb*  ,    , 

31  n:hcrcfo2Ctalicno  thought,  fap- 
ing,t©bat(baliwc  cate;  02,whatfbail 
Wc  b2inRc*  02  Wherewithal!  (ball  ll>ec 
bcclotbcb* 

31  (j?o2  after  all  thefc  things  boe  the 
©entiles  fceftc:)  fo2  pour  beaucnlp  fa 
tberunoWctbthatpe  baucueebe  of  ail 

til  eft  things. 

33  iSutfccKcpe  nrfttbcRtngbomcof 
(5ob,  anb  his  rigbteoufncfl'e ,  anb  all 
rbcfc  tilings  (baibc  abbcb  unto  pou. 

3+  Xahc  therefo2C  no  thought  fo: 
the  mo2roW  :fo2  tljcnwroW  fltfli  taftc 
thought  fm  the  things  of  it  felfe :  rum 
cicut  Unto  the  bap  is  the  euiil  thereof. 

CHAP.    VII. 

Chrift  ending  his  Sermon  in  die  Mounr,re- 
prooueih  ralh  uidgement ,  6  Forbiddeth 
to  caft  holy  things  to  dogges,  7  Lxhortem 
toprayer,  13  To  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate 
15  To  beware  of  lalfe  prophets,  11  Not  10 
be  hearers,  but  doers  ot"  die  word:    14   li« 


'Llllc.tf.37. 

rom.2.1. 


'Mar.  4.24. 
Iukc6.;8. 


'Lull. 6.^1. 


houles  builded  on  a  rucke  ,    16    And  not 
on  the  land. 

^8S£&  tlbgc *  not,  that  ^t  be  not 
r%iubgrb. 
_j?  z  j~02WitbWbatuibg 
i^fimentpe  mbgcpccfbailbc 
@&  tubgeb : *  anb  ibith  What 
mcauircpemcte,it(baiibcmcauttebto 
pouagamc. 

3  *  3tnb  Wbp  bcholbcft  thou  the 
mote  that  ts  iri  tljv  brothers  epc,  but 
confibercft  not  the  bcamc  that  is  in 
thine  owuc  epc* 

4  g>i  bow ibilt  thou fav to tbp b2o- 
theTjILctmeepnliout  the  mote  out  of 
thme  epc,  anb  bcbolbc,  a  bcamc  is  m 
thine  oWuc  epc  • 

5  Xboubppocrite,firfUafrDutthe 
bcamc  out  of  thine  oWuc  epc :  anb  then 
(halt  thou  fee  cleatelp  to  caft  out  the 
mote  out  of  thp  brothers  eve. 

6  C<Siue  not  that  which  is  holp  bn- 
to the  bogs,ncitbcrcaftpcpourpcarlcs 
bcfo2c  fimnc :  left  thep  trample  them 
1  bnber  their  fcetc,  anb  turne  agaiuc  anb 
I  rent  pou. 

7  C3fRC,anbttfbaibcguienpon: 
IfecRcanbpe  fljall  Rube :  RnocRc,  anb  it 
;(balbcopcncb  bnto  pou. 

8  if 02  cuerp  one  that  af  Rctb ,  rccci- 
ueth :  anb  he  that  fccReth,  fmbcth :  anb 
to  hmt  that  HuocRCtbat  fliaibc  opencb. 

9  £>i  What  man  is  there  of  pou, 
tbbomtf  b»sfonne  afRc  b:eab ,  ibillbcc 
giucbunaftone* 

10  ^ifbeafReaftfl;,  Will  bee gtuc 
hunafcrpents 

n  3fpctbeu being cuill,  UnoWbow 
to  cjiuc  goob  giftcs  bnto  pour  chilb2cu, 
hofti  much  mo;c  (hall  pour  father 
ibbtcbisinbcaucn,guiegoobtbingsto 
them  that  af  he  bun* 

11  therefore  all  things  *  ibhatfoc*  'i 
iter  pc  lboulb  that  men  thoulb  boe  to 
pou, boe  pc  euen  fo  to  them :  foj  tljisis 
.  the  Hani  anb  the  v>:opbets. 

13  4[*  enter  pe  m  at  the  ftrait  gate, 
fo:  lbibc  is  the  gate ,  aub  b:oab  is  the 
irbap  that  leabcth  to  bcftcuctiou  ,  anb 
manp  there  be  \bhich  goe  m  thereat : 

14  i|  Sccanfc  ftrait  is  the  gate,  anb 
I  itarroib  is  the  map  Which  icaoctii  bnto 
I  ufe,  anb  feib  there  be  that  fmbc  it. 

15  <r23cmarccffaircp:ophcts  Which 
come  to  pou  m  fliccpei,  clothing ,  but  m- 
warblp  thep  are  raucning  wolues. 

i6  Pet  (hall  imowe  them  bv  their  i 
fruits  :*Doc  men  gather  grapes  of  -ui^; 
thomts,  0.2  ftggcs  of  thirties  * 

17  <E\m\\ 


*Cll3|V2I. 

22,nurkc 

I  I  ,1.J  U:kc 

I I  9-iohn 
1.6. 


'Luk.  13. 


\\0> 


Falfe  prophets.         S.Matthew.     The  Centurion. 


•Cha^.ao 


'Rom.i  l; 
iam.l.il. 


'Litlc.   j  17 
•Plil.fi.S. 

"Luk.1S.47. 


•Mar.i. 

Iukc4-]J 


•Mar.  14c 
lukc  j.  12. 


17  €ncnfo,cucrygoobtrcfb:mgttb 
foul)  go  ob  fruit :  butacQjtuptttcc  bun 
getl)  foul)  cum  fruit. 

18  %  goob  tr cc  cannot  tiding  fo arj  cuil 
fruit,  neither  can  a  couupt  tree  bung 
foul)  go  oo  fruit. 

19  *€uccy  tree  that  bangctl)  not  foul) 
gooo  fruit,  is  hciben  botbne,anb  cattm- 
to  the  fire. 

10  nahcrcfou  by  their fruits pefyail 
fenoibthem. 

21  <Ei3ot  cucry  one  that  faith  bnto  me, 

*  &02D,  %0}X),  fliail  enter  into  the  fttng 
Dome  of bcaucn:  but  lie  tbat  Dot!)  tl)e 
mill  of  my  father  which  is  m  Dcauen. 

1 1  Qfrmy  lbM  fay  to  me  m  tbat  bap, 
3Lo2D,fi.02b,baue)bcnotp2opbecicbtn 
tbv  name  i  aiib  in  tby  name  rjaue  tad 
outbtmlSf  anb  m  tbv  name  bone  ma= 
nyibonbcrfullibouts* 

23  3iibtbetiibil3lp2ofcfrcbntotbcm, 

*  31  ncuer  imcib  you: *  Depart  from  me, 
ye  tbat  Uwkc  iniquity. 

24.  CXl)crcfou/ibI)ofoeucrl)eai 
rctlj  tbefc  faymgs  of  mine,  anb  boetb 
them  3  lbillihen  Ijtm  bnto  aibifc  man, 
Which  built  bis  boufebpon  arocfee : 

25  Stub tl)c  ralnc  bcfceubeb,  anb  tbc 
floobscamc,  anb  tbc  wmbes  blew,  anb 
beat  bpon  tbat  boufc :  anb  it  fell  not.foj 
It  was  founbebbponaroebc. 

16  Stub  cuery  one  tbat  bearctb  thefc 
ravings  of  mine,  anb  boetb  tbcm  not, 
(ball  bee  bbeneb  bnto  a  fooltd)  man, 
\bljicb  built  bis  Doufc  bpon  tbc  fanb: 

27  3liibtbcrainebeftetibcii,anbtbc 
floobscamc,  anbtbclbinbesblcib,  anb 
beat  bpon  tbat  boufc,  anb  it  fell,  anb 
great  was  the  fall  of  it. 

2s  3(nbit  came  to  paffcibbcn  3Jefus 
bab  enbcb  tbcfc  faymgs,  *  the  people 
lbcrc  aftoniflieb  at  bis  bottrme. 

29  if  02  be  taugbttbem  as  one  bailing 
authentic,  anb  not  as  the  Scribes. 

CHAP.   VIII. 

1  Chriftclcnfeth  thclcper,  5  healeththeCen.. 
tin  ions  feruant,  14  Peters  mother  in  lawe, 
16  and  many  other  difealed:  18  Shewcth 
how  he  is  to  be  followed:  2.3  ftilleduhetcm- 
peftontheSea,  18  driueth  the  deuilsoutot 
[women  polIeHed,  31  and  furrereth  them  to 
goe  into  the  (wine. 

^-^©fjg^en  be  ibas  come  boibnc 
^v^V^P^0111  tnc  ^ountaine , 
&\WW^  great  nmltttubcs  fololbeb 

£J^cjv/;c8  2  "Suibbcbolb,  there 
came  a  leper,  anb  Woutyppcb  bun,  fay; 


mg,  |Lo2b ,  3f  rbou  wilt,  tbou  tanft 
mabemecleane. 

5  3nb'3!cfusputfoul)l)isbanb,anb 
toucbeb  bim ,  faying ,  3  ibill,  bee  tbou 
clcane.  3lnb  unmebiatly  bis  lepjofie 
ibascleanfeb. 

4  3nb3Jefus  faith  bnto  bun ,  S>ee 
tbou  initio  man,  but  go  thy  way  ,Q)cW 
thy  feU'eto  tbc  pneft,  aub  offer  tbc  gift 
tbat*s$Mescommaiibeb,fb;  a  teftimo^ 
niebntotbem. 

5  C'&nblbben^lefusibasentrcb 
into  Capernaum,  tberc  came  bnto  bun 
a  Centurion,  befeecbing  bun, 

6  3nb taping,  % 02b,  my  feruant  li* 
etb  at  borne  ficbe  of  tbc  paifie,  gricuouC 
lytouncntcb. 

7  3nb3Jefiisfaitb  bnto  bim,3J  Will 
comcanbbcalcbim. 

s  3Ebc  Centurion  anfiucrcb,  anb 
fauXlLoU),^} am  not  Wouby  that  tbou 
(boulbeft  come  bnber  my  roofe :  but 
fpcauctbc  wowonely,  anb  my  feruant 
(baibcbcaieb. 

9  if  0231  am  a  man  bnber  autb02ity, 
bailing foulbiers bnber  me:  anb  31  fay 
to  this  man,  45oe,  anb  be  gocth :  anb  to 
anotl)cr,Comc,anb  be  tommctb:  anb  to 
nip  feruant,  Doc  tbts,  anb  be  both  it. 

10  i©bcn'3»efusl)carb  it,  be  mantel- 
leb,anbfaibto  tbcm  tbatfolioibcb.He^ 
rely,  31  fay  bnto  yon,  3  baucnotfounb 
fo  great  faitb,  no  not  in  3Jfracl. 

1 1  3lnb  9  fay  bnto  you ,  tbat  many 
(ball  come  from  tbc  eatt  anb  ©eft,  ano 
fbai  fit  boibnc  lbitl)  3b2abam,anb  5Jfa 
at,?  3lacob,m  tbetungbome  of  bcaucn: 

12  25uttbccbilbunof  tbc  Htngbomc 
(bail  be  call  out  into  outer  barHcncffc: 
tberc  (balbc  ibecpmg  anb  gnafljingof 
tcctb. 

13  3nb3Jefusfatb bnto  tbc  Cenruri- 
on,  Gotbylbay,anbastboubaftbelee' 
ucb.fo  be  it  bone  bnto  thee.  3lnb  bis  fcr^ 
uant  ibasbealcb  m  tbe  feif  fame  bourc. 

14.  C*3in&wbeu31cfus  was  come 
into  peters  boufc,  bec  falb  bis  lbiucs 
mother  laib ,  anb  ficftc  of  a  rcner : 

15  3tao  be  toucbeb  bcr  banb,  anb  tbc 
fcucr  left  bcr :  anb  (be  arofe,  anb  mmi 
ftrcb  bnto  tbcm. 

i6  C^bentbeeucnibascomctbcy 
bzougbtbnto  bun  many  tbat  mere  pof 
fcttcDWitb  beiuls:  ano  bec  caftouttbc 
fpints  lbitb  bis  ibo.Jbe,  aub  IjcaicD  all 
tbatiberefichc, 

17  %\wt  it  might  be  fulftlieb  ibhicb 
lbhich  ibas  fpohm  by  Cfaiastbc  pjo 
pljet,  faying,  *  liuufclfe  tooUc  our  innr 

mines, 


*LcuL  14.4 

'Luke  7.1. 


■Mir.i.19 

Iukc4.j8. 


■Mir.  1.3: 

luke  4.40. 


•Elii.5).4. 
I. pet. 1.14 


Swine  drowned.       Chap.ix.         Matthew  called. 


"Luke  p. 
57- 


•  Marke.  4 
57-lukc8. 


*  Marke  J. 

i.luk.8. 

16. 


mitics,anb  bare  our  {icfmciTcs.  I 

is  C#oib  lbben  Jems  fatb  great ! 
multitubes  about  Dim,  Dec  gauc  torn- 
maunbement  to  Depart  bnto  tljeotJjct 
ftDc. 

19  *  3Cnb  a  tcrtaine  5>trtbc  camcanb 
faib  bnto  Dim ,  fatter ,  3  ttjtll  follolb 
tDeelbDttDerfoeucr  tljou  gocft. 

io  Zwn 3Jefusfatti) bnto Dtnt,XDc 
iforcsDauc  Doles,  anbtDebtrDsoftbe 
apje  rjauc  nefts :  but  trje  fonnc  of  man 
DatDnottbDetctolapDisDcab. 

xi  3tnb  another  of  Dis  Difriplcs  faib 
bnto!)tnt,?Lo?b,fuffcrmc&rfttogoe, 
anb  burp  mv>fatDcr» 

xx  25ut3JcfusfaiDbntorjtm,irol' 
lolbmc,slcttDcbeab,butptbcitbeab. 

xi  C  3tnb  ibrjen  Dc  ibas  cntrcb  into 
a  ftjip  ,Dts  Dtfctplcs  folloibcb  inm. 

Z4  *3lnb  beDolb,tDcre  arofc  a  great 
tempeftintrjc  £>ca ,  infomucD  tDat  trje 
flnpibas  touercbibitljtrjc  ibaues:but 
Deibasaflecpc. 

x<,  3ittb  Ijis  2>ifciplcs  tame  to  Dim, 
anb  albouc ,  facing,  ?Lo?b,faucbs  :ibe 
pcrifD. 

z6  ^Cnbrje faitljbnto tDem,B3Dparc 
pecfcarefull,£>pccoflitlefaitD<1i:Dcn 
nee  arofc ,  anb  rcbufeeb  fljc  lbittbs  anb 
tDe  £>ca,  anb  tljcre  ibas  a  great  talme. 

17  25uttDcmcnmarueiIcD,  facing, 
narjat  matter  of  man  is  t\)\e ,  tfjatcuett 
tDeibinbsanbtDc&eaobcpDmK 

as  C*3inDtb!)cttl)ccibascomcto 
trje  otDcr  ftbe,  into  the  eountrcp  of  tlje 
(Bcrgefencs ,  tDcrcmctDuntibo  poffct 
fco  Vbitfj  bcuils ,  tomtning  out  of  tDe 
tombes,ercecDing  ficrccfo  tljat  no  man 
migDtpaCTcbptDatibap. 

i9  3nbbcDolb,tDcpcrpcbout,fap> 
(ng,i©I)at  rjauc  lbc  to  doc  lbttD  tljee, 
ijefus  tljou  fonnc  of  <sob  '.%xt  tljou 
tome  DitDer  to  tomicttt  bs  befiw  p  time; 

30  2lnb  tDcrcibasa  gooDibayoff 
from  tfjem ,  an  Ijcarb  of  man?  frame, 

31  s>otDcbcuilsbefoitsDtDim,  fap? 
mg,  31  tljou  tatt  bs  out,fuff cr  bs  to  goc 
amap  into  tljcUerD  of  tome. 

32  Z\\Q  l)c  faib  bnto  tUcm,  Goc.3nD 
tbUcn  tljcpiberc  tome  out,  tbcpibcttt 
into  tbelictb  offroutc:atiDbcUolD,tljc 
tbUolc  Herb  of  tome  raunc  btolcutlp 
Doibnc  a  ftecpe  place  into  tljc&ca,  anb 

pertnicb  in  the  waters.  flA„„M„ 

33  3nbtDcptDatBcpttDcm,flcb,at  b 
ibenttDeiribaicstntorticnttc,anptoiD 
ettetp  tlwng ,  ami  ibliat  ibas  befallen  to 
tl)cpoQ"effeboft!)cbeutls. 


34  3nb bcUolb,tbcibDole titic tame 
outtomcctc3lcfu5:anbibDentDepfalb 
Dim,  tfjep  befougljt  Dim  trjat  Dee  ibotUD 
Depart  out  of  tljcitcoafts. 

CHAP.    IX. 

Chi  id  curing  one  ficke  of  fhepalfey,  9  cal- 
leth  Matthew  from  the  receite  of  cultome, 
10  eateth  wiih  Publicanes ,  and  fmners,  14 
defendeth  his  Difciples  for  not  farting,  10 
cureth  the  bloody  nTue,  13  laifeth  from 
death  Iairus  daughter,  17  giueth  fight  to 
two  blind  men,  5:.  healeth  a  dumbe  maD 
poflefTedofadeuil,  36  and  hath  compafsion 
of  the  multitude. 

if5bDceenrrebintoafl)tp, 
anb  paffeb  oucr,  anb  tame 
tntoUisolbnectttc. 
x  *3inbbebolb,tDep 
,  btongDt  to  Dim  a  man  fitfec 
oftDcpaific,  ipmgonabcb  '.anbgicfus, 
feeing tDetr fattD,  fatb  bnto  tDe  ftcbe  of 
tDepalfie,S>otmc,bcofgoobcDeerc,tDp 
(inncsbefojgtttentDce. 

3  3lnb  bcDolb,tertatne  of  tDe  Scribes 
fatb  tbitljm  tDcmfelucs,1EDts  man  blat 
pDcmetD. 

4  3inD  Refits  fenoibtng  tDeir 
tDougDts,fatD,i©Dcrcfo?ctDtnBcrcces 
tullinvourDcartSf 

5  5ro?lbDctDcriscaftcrtofap,i:Dp 
fittnes  be  fojgtucn  tljcc :  oj  to  fav,  ^ctfe, 
anDibaiscf 

6  25ttt  tljatpcc  map  mtoib  tDattDe 
fonnc  of  manljatD  poibcr  oncartD  to 
fo:giuc  fitmes,  (XDcn  fattD  Dec  to  tDe 
ftcac  of  tlje  paiftc)artfc,taRc  bp  tljv  bto, 
aim  goc  bnto  tDmcDoufc. 

7  3(nDDearofc,anDDepartcDtoDis 
Doufe. 

8  2StitU>DcntDcmultituDcsfatbit, 
tljcv  marueileb,  ?  glonficb  cob,  ibljicD 
Dab  giucn  fuel)  poibcr  bnto  men. 

9  C*3tnb  as  Refits  paUeo  fonD 
from  tDcncc,Dc  faU)  a  man  namcD  s^at- 
tDclb  /fitting  at  tDe  receite  of  cuttomc : 
anb  Dc  fattD  bnto  rjim,5Folloibmc.  ^tiD 
he  arofc  anb  folloibcb  Dim. 

10  CSmbittamctopafTc,  as3)efus 
fate  at  mcatc  in  tDe  Dome,  bcDolD,maitp 
publicancs  anb  Tinners,  came  anb  fate 
DoibttcibitDDtmanbbisS>ifctples. 

it  3ltib  lbDcn  tDe  V>Dartfccs  faib  it, 
tDcvfatDbtttoDiSDtfnplcs,n9DvcatctD 
your  matter  lbitDpttblicancs^fttmcrs. 

u  25utibDcn3icfiisl)carbdut,  Dec 

fatb  bnto  tljcm,  Itltcp  tDat  Dc  lblioic 
nccbcnotapDpficion,buttDc\'tl>-ttarc 

m'  ij  2Sut 


'Mirici.3 

iukc  ;.i 


•Marke  1. 
i_|.lukc  5. 


The  blinde  and        S.Matdiew. 


dumbc^healed. 


•Ort.6  6. 
chap.  12.7. 

"i.Tim  !. 
■$• 

'  Mjt.s..8. 

lukc5.j;. 


vrwrohgbt 
cUlh. 


*Mar.;.li. 
lukcS.-H- 


||  Or,  this 


13  26ut  goc  vc anD learnc  ltoljat  that 
meancth,  *'3  mm  hauemcrcvanDnot 
famficc :  foz  SI  am  not  come  to  tall  the 
righteous,*btit  linnets  to  repentance. 

1+  CXhen  came  to  l)im  the  Difciples 
of  ^onn,faping,*  w\)y  Doc  ibe  anD  the 
jDharifccs  fait  oft ,  but  thv  Dtftiplcs 
faff  not; 

15  2tnD  3Jefus  fame  Dnto  them, 
Can  tije  ttJiUwen  of  the  bnoe  chamber 
moutne,  as  long  as  the  bjiDcgtomc  is 
luitD  tljetw  Sut  the  Daves  ibill  come 
lDhen  the  bnbegrome  fhall  bee  ta&cn 
from  them,anD  then  (hall  tljcp  faff. 

16  i3o  man  putteth  a  piece  of  ||  neib 
cloth  Dnto  an  olDe  garment:  fo?  that 
Ibljtcl)  is  put  m  to  fill  it  bp,  tattcth  from 
tlje  gar  mcnt,f  tlje  r  cnt  is  mabc  lbon*e. 

17  Neither  Doe  menpntnetb  tbine 
into  olD  bottcls :  clfc  thebottcis  bjeane, 
anDthcininc  runneth  out  ,anD  the  bot- 
telspertfl)  :but  thev  put  nclDiDinc  tnto 
nerbbottels,anD  both  are  pjcfcrucD. 

18  C  * i©hilc  hec fpaue  ttjcfc  things 
Dntothem,  beholDe,  there  tame  acct 
taine  ruler  anD  rbojttjippcD  mm,  fav* 
mg,  Q3v  Daughter  is  eucn  nott)  DcaD : 
butcome,  anD  lav  thv  hauonponljcr, 
auDfliefljallliue. 

19  3lnD  3Icfus  arofe,  anD  folloibcD 
Ijim,anD  fo  did  his  Difciples. 

20  ( C  3nD  bcholD,anjoman\iihti1) 
ibas  DifeafeD  ibtth  an  ifTuc  of  blooD 
trbcluevecres,  came  betjmDe  him,  anD 
toucheD  the  Dcmmc  of  ins  garment. 

ii  fai  flic  faiDttnthtuhcrfclfc ,  gjf 
3J  mav  but  toutl)  his  garment,  3  fhall 
bcujljolc. 

xi  23ut  gjefus  tumcD  htm  about, 
atiDibhcnhcfaiuher,  hcfatD,  Saugl)-^ 
ter,  bee  ofgooDcomfon,  thv  faith  hath 
maDc  thee  lDrjolc.  3lnD  the  iboman 
rbasmaDerbholcfromthathourc.) 

23  3nD  tt)ljcn  gicftis  came  tnto  the 
rulers  Ijoufe,  anD  fatb  tlje  mmflccls 
anDthepcoplcmatunganotfc, 

24  $craiDtontotl)cm,(3tucplacr,fo2 
the  mavD  is  not  DcaD,but  flccpcth.  3lnD 
thev  laughcD  nun  to  fcome. 

25  25ut  lbljcn  tDc  people  iUerc  put 
foonl),l)elDentm,anDfooUcljcrbvtlje 
hanD :  atiDthemavD  arofe. 

26  3iuD  I!  the  fame  hereof  lDcnt  as 
bjoaD  into  ail  that  lanD. 

27  C  3nD  luhcn  Refits  DcpartcD 
thtucc ,  tlbo  blmDc  men  folloibcD  inm, 
trvmg,  ano  faying,  Xhotifonttc  of3Da= 
luo.hauemercvonbs. 

28  3luD  Xbljcn  he  Uias  come  into  the 


houfe.thebimDemen  came  to  humano 
2efusfaithDntothem^5cleeuevethat 
gj  am  able  to  doc  this*  XhcvfatDbnto 
htm,J3ca,?Lo?D. 

29  Xhen  touchcDhc  their  eves,  fap« 
ing ,  ^cco2Dtng  to  vont  faith,  bee  it  ton* 
tovou. 

jo  3nD  their  eves  lDereopeneD:  anD 
gjefus  ftrattlv  thargco  them ,  Caving, 
£>ce  that  no  man  fenolb  it. 

31  2Sutthcv,ibhenthcviDcreDepar* 
tco,  fp?caD  abjoaD  his  fame  inauthat 
countrcv. 

?2  C  *3S  thev  Ibent  out ,  beholDe, 
tljcv  bjought  to  hunaDumbcmanpofc 
fcfrcDtbithaDcuill. 

3 j  ^nDrbhcnthcDeuiUbastaftout, 
the  Dnmbc  fpaue,  ano  the  multimDcs 
marunlcD ,  faving,  3lt  Ibas  neucr  fo 
feenem3JftacL 

34  2Butthe^hartfccsfaiD,*^eta* 
ftcth  out  the  Dcntls  through  tl;e  pnntc 
oftljeDnnls. 

35  *3tnD  gjefus  tbent  about  all  the 

ciricsanDbtllagcs^cathingmtljetr^v5 
nagogucs,  anD  paeachtng  the  <5ofpci 
of  the  mngDomc,  anD  healing  cucrv 
fickeneffe,  anD  cuervDifcafc  among  the 
people. 

36  C*  23ut  tbhen  he  faib  the multi* 
tnecs,  hcibasmoueDibttlj  tompaflion 
onthem,bctaufcthcvllfaintcD,atiDnjcrc 
fcattcr eD  ab:oaD ,  *  as  fh  cepc  hauing  no 
fhcphcarD. 

37  1-hcn  faith  he  nntohtSDifciples, 
*H:htl)arucrttriiclv  is  plenteous,  but 
the  labourers  arc  fell). 

38  0:avvc  therefore  the  ?Lo2D  of  the 
harucft,tl)atheciDiiifcnDfoo2thlabouj 
rcrs  into  his  haruefx. 

CHAP.   X. 

1  Chrift  fendeth  out  his  twelue  Apoftles ,  en- 
abling them  with  power  to  doe  miracles,  j 
giueth  them  their  charge,  teacheth  them, 
\6  comforteth  them  againft  perfecutions : 
.1 0  and  promiletli  a  bleliing  to  diofe  that 
receiue  them. 


£$\gjg  /5D*ibhen  hec  haD  calleD 


^Mm^^1 


plcs,hegauctI)empotticr 
||  ai;aii!fi  tmcicatte  fpints,  to 
;  ca'ft  them  out,anDto  heale 
all  mancr  of  ficUcncfTcanD  all  mancr  of 
Difeafe. 

2  iI5on.HhcnamcsofthcnDcluc^ 
pofrlts  arc  thefc :  Xhc  firft,  Pinion, 
U)ljo  is  calleD  ^Dctcr,  ano  ^iiDzcili  his 
b;othcr, 


"Luke  11. 
14, 


"Chap.it. 

;.i:.lukc 
u.i  5. 

•Mjr.tf.tf. 

lukc  13.11. 


*Mar.f.34. 

||  Cr,vere 
t^redttnA 
lay  ttranf. 
*  Num.17. 
17- 

"Luke  to. 
1. 


'Mar.}.*;. 

lukc  9. 1. 


||0r,Mtfr 


TlieApoftta         cE 


•Aflji.3. 

lukcio.p 


'Mark.tf.8. 
iuk?  p. 5. 
and  32.  5  j. 
II  <>,.£"• 

VTim.c. 
IB.  iukc 
10.7. 
'Luk.10.8. 


'Mar.tf.n 

•Atfsi3. 

5'- 


•1^.10.3. 
||Or,/OTf/f. 


•Ma»Icei3. 

I. Iukc 

Il.il. 


toother ,  IjamcsthTftmnc  of  zcbcbce, 
anu  3foljn  bis  b^otOer : 

3  PJtltp,anb2Sactholomew,Xhos 
mas,  anb  Matthew  the  fenbiicane 

bcus.Whofc  filename  WasXhabbcus  • 
„  +  *>imon  the  Catiaamtc,anbUu; 
Das3jreartot,Who  alfo  betrapeo  htm. 

5  Xljcfc  tttJduclfcrusfcnt  foonf), 
aim  contmanDeb  them,  raping,  Goc  not 
into  the  pap  of  tljc  Gcnnics,  anb  into 
ai,y  cup  of  the  Samaritans  enter  pc  not- 

6  *26utgoc  rather  to  thclottfhccpc 
ofrhchoufeof3Jfraei.  y 

7  3mh  as  pec  goc ,  p;each ,  raping, 
SChcutngDomcofhcaucntsathant): 

8  l?caicthcficKC,  tleanfc  the  lepers, 
raucthebeab,  caft  outbcuiis:  frcelppc 
haucrccetueD,frceIpgiue. 

9  *||p;ouiDc neither  golb,no2uiucr, 
nojtoafTctnpotirpurfes: 

io  P.01  fcrippe fo2  ponr  iourncp , nci; 
thec two  coats, neither  (hoocs,  no? pet 
amies :  ( *  foi  tljc  Xbo2beman  is  Wo2thp 
of  h»s  meat) 

1 1  *  3Cno  into  Whaffocuet  ritp  0; 
toWncpcfball  enter,  inquire  Who  in  it 
is  Uwthp ,  anb  there  abtbeMlpce  goc 
thentc. 

ir  SmbWhenpc  comcintoanhoufc, 
falutc  it. 

13  3mt>  if  the  hotife  be  tb02thp,  let 
pour  peace  come  bpon  it :  but  if  it  be 
not  W02tljp ,  let  pour  peace  remme 
to  pou. 

14  *3uibWhofoeucrfhallnotrccctuc 
pou ,  no?  hcarepottrWo2bs:  When  pec 
Depart  out  of  thathoufc,  02  citp,*  fhabc 
off  the  butt  of  pout  fectc. 

15  SilcrclplJfapbntopou,  itfbailbe 
mo':c  tolerable  fo2  the  lanu  of  5>obom 
anDGomo2rhatnthcDapofiuDgmcnt, 
then  fo2  that  ct  tic. 

16  C*2SeholD,3Jfcnbpoufoo2th  as 
fbeepe  in  the  mibbctt  of  lbolncs :  be  pec 
tbercfo2C  wifeasfcrpcnts,aub  i|  Ijarmc- 
IeffeasDoucs. 

17  26ut  beware  of  men :  fo2  thep 
WtUbeluicrpoubptothcCounctls.anb 
thep  Will  fconrge  pou  m  their  5>pna- 
gogucs, 

is  3hiD  pec  (hall  be  brought  bcfo2c 
Gouccnours  anb  itings  foi  mp  fahc, 
fc2  ateftimonicagainftthcm,  anb  the 
Gentiles. 

19  *  lout  When  thep  beliucr  pou  bp, 
taheno  thought,  howo2Whatpcfhau 
fpeafce,  fo2ttfhail  bee  giuenpou  mtljat 
fame  hourc  Wljatpc  (hail  fpcalic. 


p.x. 


!  15. 


Ma:k.  13 


r,cnJer 

*LuIc.6.^o. 
iohn  J3.16. 


1  Mar.4.13. 

Iukc  8. 17. 
ind  11.3. 


arefentout. 

JfJ?01  lt «  ™  P«  that  rpTalcTbutl 
S^npou!P°Ut^a*er'^,**e* 
.»  2Z  *?nii  the  brother  fbaii  beliucr  bo  U  1 

SSf^^"*"**  father  th?! 
chtlDc :  anb  the  chiuwi  mall  rife  Dp  a- 
gamft  their  patents,  anb  caufc  them  to 
beputtobcath.  • 

lfn,2.L^ntlpcc P,au tohatcbof  all  men 
rS  Sames  £bc :  * but  lJ£  tlJat  cnoii 
mhtotbccnb.fhaibctaucb. 

h,.^?1?  U)!)Cn  ^  Perforate  pouin 
this  nncflccpe into  another  :f02bcrclp 
3  fapbnro  pou,pefl)au  not  |j  haucgone 
otter  the  cities  of  3ffracl,  till  the  Sonne 
I  efman  become. 

M-  *£he  bifcipic  is  not  abouchis 
maftcr^no2thefcritantabouehisl02D. 
I  2J  ^its  enough fo;  the  bifciplethat 
he  be  as  his  matter ,  anb  the  feruant  as 
nis  Jlojb :  gjf  thep  haue  taiicb  the  £&& 

|ftcrofrhehonfc23ccl5cbub,ho..bmutb 
|mo2c  (hall  thep  call  them  of  his  hotife 
yOlb; 

I  26  jfcarc  them  not  thercfojc :  *  fo2 
there  is  nothing  coucrcb,  that  (hall  not 

,  be  reueiicb .,  anb  hibbc,  that  (bail  not  be 
mtowen. 

I  27  i©hat3F  tell  pouin  barrtencfle, 
that  fpcaftc  pee  m  light:  anb  what  pec 
hcarc  in  the  care,  that  p2cacb  pee  bpon 
the  houfc  tops. 

18  *3JnD  fcarc  not  them  Which  hill 
tljc  bobp,  but  arc  not  able  to  hill  tljc 
foule :  but  rather  fearc  him  ibljith  is 
able  to  bettrop  both  foulc  anb  bobp 
m  hell. 

29  3rc  not  two  Sparroibcs  folbc 
fo2  a  I!  farthing;  3ud  one  of  them  (hall 
not  fall  on  tljcgcouub  without  pour 
Jfathcr. 

30  *25utthcbcrphairesofpourhcab 
arcailnumb2cb. 

31  Jrcarcpcc  notthcrcfo2e,  pcareof 
mojebaiucthcnmanpSparrolbes. 

32  *B3hofocucc  thcrefo2c  fljail  rou 
fcfTc  nice  befo:c  men,  htm  null  3J con 
feffe  alfo  bcfo2cmp  jf atljcc  Which  <s  m 
Ijcaucn. 

33  *2i5utttihofocuer  (hall  oenpme 
befo2c  men,  him  ibill3f  alfo  Dcnpbcfo2C 
mp  father  which  ts  m  hcauen. 

34  *  Zhtnfte  not  that  31  am  come  to 
fenb  peace  on  earth  :3Jcaiuc  not  to  fenb 
pcacc,butafiuo2b. 

35  foi  5  am  come  to  fct  a  man  at  Da* 
nance  *againtt  his  father,  j  thebaugh 
teragainfthcr  mother,  anb  the  Daugh- 
ter in  law  agamtt  her  mother  m  law. 

25  36  2WD 


*Luk.  u.4. 


[|  //  u  in  V4 
hie  balfepny 
f*rtkinft  m 
the ongiHAB 
Atbetngihe 
tenth  r-irt  pf 
the  F^TJune 
fenj. 

'ft.Sam.i4. 
11  ii\a 
27.5-1. 


'Mar.8.;3, 
Infer  9.26. 

2. inn. 1. is. 

*Lukcj2a 


'UIC7.C 


TotakethecroiTe.   S.Matthew.     OflohnBaptift. 


•Luke  14 
:<S. 


'  Chap.  I 6. 
»4.lukc9. 
2>.mar.8. 

34- 

"Iobnu. 

'5- 


"Luk.io. 
16.  ioh.13 
10. 


"Mar.  9. 4 1 


'Luk.7.18 


•Erii.35.6 


•E&i.Si  1 


36  ;snuamansfoes  thaibef|jc?of  Dts| 
oibncijoufljoiD. 

37  *^e  tljat  louetlj  fattier  02tnotljct 
mo2efl)enmc,isnotib02fljyofme:anD 
Uc  tljat  louctl)  fonneoj  Daughter  mo;c 
tljcnmc,tsnot\bo2tljyofme. 

38  *3toi>  ljc  tljat  ta&ctlj  not  Ijis  crofTc, 
anD  followed)  after  me ,  is  not  ttio.2tljy 
of  me. 

39  *  $?c  tljat  fmDetlj  Ijis  life,  mall  lofc 
it:  ana  ljc  tljat  lofetlj  ijisitfc  foj  my  falte, 
maiifuiDtt. 

40  c  *^e  tljat  recciuctlj  you,  weefc 
uetl)  mc :  anD  ljc  tljat  rccciuetlj  nice,  r  v 
tcuietliljimtljatfcntmc. 

41  fyt  tljat  rccciuetlj  a  $2opliet  in  tlje 
name  of  aj&opljct,  fljaiirccciuca$2o< 
pljets  rctttarD :  anD  ljc  tljat  retctuetl)  a 
rigljtcous  man,  in  tijename  of  a  rtgljtc« 
ous  tnan,ftjal  rcteiue  a  rtglj  teous  mans 
rclbarD. 

41  *  3nD  tbljofoetter  ttjall  giuc  to! 
Djtnftcbnto  one  of  tbcfe litlc  ones.a  tup 
of  tolD  water  oncly  ,m  tfje  name  of  a  Difc 
cipic,ncnlv3  fay  bnto  you,  Ijcefljalltn 
no  Xbifelofcljis  rclbarD. 

CHAP.  XL 

2  IohnfendethhisdifeiplestoChnft.  7  Chrifls 
teftimonie  concerning  Fohii.  18  The  opinion  J 
of  the  people  ,  both  concerning  Iohn ,  and 
Chrift.  10  Chriftvpbraideththevnthankful- 
ncfle,  and  vnrepentance  of  Chorazin,  Beth- 1 
faid.i,  and  Capernaum:  2.5  and  praifinohis 
fathers  wifedome  in  reueiling  the  Golpel  ro 
the  limple,  iS  hee  calleth  to  him  aJl  fuch  as 
feele  the  burden  of  their  finnes. 

W&/W&  ^  it  tame  to  paffe,  Vuftcn 
f^W&x^i  Refits  Dab  tnauc  an  cud  of 
"sS^vK  tommaunDmgl)is  ttbcltte 
^  Dimples,  nee  DcpartcD 
wfKStljenee  to  teacl)  anD  to 
pjcatljintljcir  cities. 

2  *  /ftoib  ibljcn  3Joljn  ijab IjearD  in 
tljepnfon  tIjc\bo?Uesof  <Clj2ilt,  Ijcfent 
tiboofljisDifciples, 

3  3nD  faiD  unto  l)im ,  3lrt  tljou  hec 
tljat  fl)OulDtomcf£)2DoeU)CClooncfo2 
anotljctf 

4  gjcfns  attftucrcb  ano  faiDc  bnto 
them,  00  ano  fljeib  3(olju  agatnc  tljofc 
tljings  ibljtth  ye  Doc  DcarcatiD  fee: 

<,  "%\)t bltnD rccctuc tljcir figl)t,anD 
tIjciamcibalRc,tljcicpcrsarcclcatifcD, 
anDtljc  Dcafe  Ijcarc,  tlie  DcaDarcraifcD 
bp,anD*tIjc  pooje  Ijauc  tlje  ©ofpcl  pjca^ 
clicDtotUem. 

6  3inD  bietTeDislje,\b!)ofocucr  fljai 
notbcoffeuDcDmme. 


7  <U  3nD  as  tljcy  DcpartcD ,  5Jcfus 
began  to  fay  bnto  tlje  muitituDes  con- 
cerning 3Jot)n ,  nsljatlbcnt  ye  out  into 
tlje  VbtlDemcffc  to  fee  i  a  rccDc  fljaucn 
lbitljtljeibinDc* 

8  23ut  lbljatibent  veout  fin  to  fee* 
%  man  clotljcD  m  foft  raiment  i  2SeljolD, 
tljcy  tljat  ibearc  foft  tloatljmg,  arc  in 
Kings  Ijottfes. 

9  2Sut  lbtjat  Ibcnt  ye  out  fo?  to  fee  < 
302opt)ctiyca,  3  fa?  unto  you,  anD 
mo2ctijcita0;opljct. 

10  5f02tl)isisljc  of  tbljont  it  is  Vb?u> 
ten,  *  23cljoiD,  31  fcnD  my  meffengcr  be 
fojc  tny  face,  lbljiclj  Hjail  prepare  tljp 
ibavbcfojctijce. 

11  Merely  3}  fav  bnto  you,  ^mong 
tljcm  tljat  are  borne  of  tbomen,  tljcrc 
Ijatljnot  nfen  a  greater  tljcn^loljn  tlje 
asapttft:  notJbirtjftanDing,  Ijec  tljatis 
lead  in  tljcRingDomc  of  l)caucn,ts  grea- 
ter tljcnlje. 

ii  *3tnDfromtljcDayesof  Sfoljntljc 
25aptta ,  bntill  noib ,  tlje  ningDomc  of 
Ijcaucn  ||  fuffcrcfl)  btolettcc,  anD  tlje  bio* 
lenttatteitbyfiwc. 

uif02autlje^opljcts,anDtljc?la\b 
p:opljectcDbnnil3Jol)n. 

14  3nD  if  ycJbil  rcteiue  it,  tl)isis*€? 
lias  luljitl)  \bas  foz  to  come. 

15  $cc  tljat  Ijatl)  cares  to  Ijcarc ,  let 
Ijimljcarc. 

i6  €*Butlbl)ereuiitonjail3Iliften 
tljis  generation  i  3Jt  is  ItUc  bnto  cfjil* 
Djen,  fitting  tn  tlje  marlJCts,anD  tailing 
bntotl)eirfclloibes, 

17  ^nD  faying ,  mc  DattcpipcD  bnto 
you,  ano  yc  Ijauc  not  DanccD :  lbee  Ijaue 
mourncD  bnto  you,  anD  yeljaucnotla- 
mentcD. 

18  Jf  0}  3Ioljn  came  neittjer  eating  no: 
Dnnlung,  anD  tljcy  fay,  i^e  Ijatl)  a  octal!. 

19  %t)t  fonne  of  man  came  eating  anD 
Djinmng,  anDtljcyfay,  25rijolD  a  man 
gluttonous,  anD  aibmc  bibber,  a  frtcnD 
ofpublicancsanDfinncrsibutlbtfcDom 
isitimftcDoflicrcIjilDzcn. 

20  C*XDen  began  he  to  bpbjaiDtljc  cts 
ticsibljcrcminolfofhismigljtyibojhs 
JbcrcDoncbccaufctljcyrcpcnteDnot. 

21  nDocbntotljceCljojaMiUboebn; 
to  tljcc  ioctljfaiDa :  foz  if  tlje  migljtie 
\b02ltcs  lbljitl)  ibere  Done  m  you ,  Ijab 
bene  Done  in  %y:t  anD  5»iDon ,  tljcy 
lboulD  Dane  rcpcntcD  long  agoe  in  facK- 
clotljanD  allies. 

22  Biit3Ifaybiitoyou,3Itflialibec 
nioze  tolerable  foz  %yit  anb  £>iDouat 
tlje  Day  of  luDgcmntt,  tljen  fo;  you. 

23  ^ud 


'Mala.  3. 


'Luk.itf.if. 

||  Or,  is  rot. 
ten  bj  force, 
and  they 
tkut  thmjt 
met, 

"Mala.  4.5, 


•Luk.7.31 


*  Luke  10 
'J- 


Chriftsyokc.  Chap, 


XI], 


Ms 


any  are 


hcalcd.l 


'Lube  10. 
11. 


•Iohiu.35 

« lotm  6. 
4«. 


Mere.  6\6 

'l.Iohn;. 

3- 


*  i.Sim.ti. 


u  3lnb  thou  eapcrnaum,Which  art 
craltcbWitohcaucn,  fljnltbc  bzougbt 
DoWtie  to  hell:  foi  if  the  mighty  Wo  jks 
Which  haue  be ctic  tone  in  thee,  Ijat  bin 
boucmSobomc,  it  woulb  hatter  emai- 
ncbbntill  this  bay. 

14  25ut  31  fay  unto  yoitfhat it  (hall 
be  mo?c  tolerable  fo?  tlje  lano  of  So- . 
bom.in  p  bay  of  iubgmctu,thcn  fo;  thee. 

15  C*3lt  that  time  3Jcfns  anfiue* 
rcb,ant)faib,3ithannethce,<<lDJrathcr,l 
lloibofheauenanbcarth.bccaufcthou 
hafthibthefc  things  fro  the  Wife  %  p:u- 
benti*  haft  rcuciicb  them  tmto  babes. 

z6  £uenfo,  jfathtr,  foz  fo itfccmcb 
goob  in  thy  fight. 

27  *2Ul  things  arc  bciiuercb  bnto 
me  of  my  father :  anb  no  man  tutowcth 
the  fonnc  but  the  father  :*ncitherKnoUi^ 
cth  any  man  the  father ,  fane  the  fonne, 
anb  Ijee  to  Whomfocucr  the  fonne  null 
rencilchtm. 

is  CCome  into  me  all  pec  that  la^ 
bour.anbare  rjcauyiabcn,  anb3J  Will 
gtuc  you  reft, 

19  Xafec  my  yoaebpon  you,  anb 
learneofme.fozllammeeUeanoiowiy 
in  heart :  *anb  yce  fljall  6nb  reft  tonto 
your  foules. 

jo  »jfo?myyofeetsca(ie,anbmybur; 

bcnisiisht. 

CHAP.   XII. 

Chrift  reprooueththcblindnefleofthePha- 
rifces  concerning  the  breach  oi  the  Sabbath, 
3  by  Scriptures,  9  by  reafon,  13  and  by 
amiracle.  11  Hehealeththemanpoffcffed 
that  was  blind,  arid  dumbe.  31  Blalphemie 
againihhe  holy  Ghoft  {hall  nener  be  forgi- 
uen.  36"  Account  fhalbe  made  of  idle  words. 
38  Hercbuketh  thcvnfaithftill,who  fcekc af- 
ter a  done  :  49  andfhewethwhoishisbro- 
the,fifter, and  mother. 

*J&?h  Cthattime^cfuswent 
"-  on  the  Sabbath  bay  tho- 
•sffigg&s  roll)  the  come,  ft  his  £>iftr 
Sw§|ii^V|  pies  were  an  hnngrtb,anD 
I^J^&lbeganncto  plucU the  cares 
of  cojne,anb  to  catc. 

i  2Sut  When  the  j&lwnfes  faU)  it, 
they  faib  Unto  htm ,  fficholb ,  thy  SDifrt 
pies  boc  that  Which  is  not  lawfull  to 
boc  bpon  the  Sabbath  bay. 

3  2Sut  he  faib  tonto  them ,  fiaucyce 
not  rcab  *  what  SDauib  bib  when  hec 
was  an  hungceb ,  anb  they  that  were 
With  him, 

4  $oW  he  cntrct)  into  thchoufcof 
Gob.anb  bib  catc  the  fl)tw  b2eab,whtch 


wasnotlawrtiufo^himtoeatcneither 
fo?  them  Which  Were  With  him , *  but 
only  ftM  the  pziefts; 

5  0;  haue  y  ee  not  reab  m  the  *  law, 
how  that  on  the  Sabbath  bayes  the 
#.«cfts  in  the  ICcmplc  pzofane  the 
Sabbath  ,anb  arc  blamcicffc  i 

6  25ut3J  fay  tonto  you,  that  in  this 
place  is  one  greater  then  the  Xcmplc. 

7  aSutifyeehabtmoWen  What  this 
mcancth,  *  3  Willhauc  mercy ,  anb  not 
facrtftcc,yecwoulbnothaueconbemncb 
thcguiltltffe. 

8  foi  the  fount  of  man  is  H02D  t-> 
ucnofthe  Sabbath  bay. 

9  *3inb  when  hec  was  bepartcb 
thencchc  went  into  their  Synagogue. 

io  C3lnbbcholb,tbercWasaman 
Which  hab  his  hanb  Withcrcb,anb  they 
afHcbhim.fayuig/Jsitlawfulltoheaic 
on  the  Sabbath  bay  csitljat  they  might 
accufc  him. 

ii  anb  hec  faib  into  thcm,aahat 
niannjaithcrebeamongyou^hatfljail 
haue  one  fbeepe :  anb  if  it  fall  into  a  pit 
lonthcSabbath  bay,  will  hee  not  lay 
holt  on  it,anb  lift ttottt< 

ii  $oW  much  then  is  a  man  better 
then  a  fbeepe  frebcrcfoze  it  is  lawfull 
to  ooc  well  on  the  Sabbath  bayes. 

i  j  Xben  faith  be  to  the  man,  Stretch 
fojth  thine  hanb  :  anb  hec  ftrcttheb  it 
fo2tb,anbitwasrcrt02cbWbolc,littcas 
the  other. 

14  Clthen  the  0barifes  Went  out, 
anb  Hhclb  a  counfcll  agamft  bun ,  how 
they  might  beftroy  him. 

15  33ut  When  Ucfus  ftnew  it ,  hee 
WttbbzeW  himfclfc  from  thence :  anb 
great  multituDcs  followcb  him,  anb  he 
hcalcb  them  all, 

i6  ^nb  chargcb  them  that  they 
fl)Oiilb  not  maschim  KuoWcn : 

17  1Chat  it  might  be  fulfillcb  Which 
Was  fpoRctt  by  efaias  the  pzopbet, 
faying, 

18  *25eholb,my  fcruantwbom  3 
hanc  chofen,  my  beloucb  m  Whom  my 
foulc  is  well  plcafcb :  3}  Will  put  my  fpt 
rithponhim,  anb  hcthallihcWiubcjc 
ment  to  the  ©entiles. 

19  Ii?c  (hall  not  ftrmeno?  cry , neither 
(hall  any  man  hcarc  his  boicemthe 
ftrects. 

10  abnufebrccb  fhalhenotbjcahc, 
anb  fmolnng  flare  fhall  he  not  quench, 
nilhcfcnbfo.'thuibgiucntDntoDictojy 

11  anb  m  his  name  fljaii  the  ecu 
tiles  truft.  _ 
715  z        ii  C  Chen 

73 1 


"Exod.  ,9. 
];.lcuic.8. 
ji.and 24. 

9. 

•Num.  lS. 

9. 


chap.  J>.  I  3. 


"Martcc ,. 
i.lukctf.  6. 


Or,toclg 

COWtffH, 


Efji.43.1. 


Theft. 


rongman. 


S.Matthew. 


Lonasaii^ne 


fi 


"  Luke  1 1. 
'I- 


Cha.9.34 


•Mar.  3.18. 
luke  1  3.10 
1  .tohn  5. 
16. 


•Lukctf. 
45- 


22  CXhentbasbjougbtuntohim 
onepoflefTeb  ibitbabcuiii,  bluibe,  anD 
Dumbc :  ant)  Dec  bcalcb  Him,  tnfomucb 
that  the  bltnbc  ana  bumbcbotb  fpaue 
anb  fain. 

23  anb  all  the  people  Vbc re  amajcb, 
anbfaib.listbtstbcfonncofSDauibf 

24.  *  But  when  the  £banfccsbearb 
it,  they  faib,  %Dis  fellow  boctb  not  cad 
outbcutls,  bntbp25eel5tbub  tbepjince 
oftbebcutis. 

25  anb^cfusitnclb  their  thoughts, 
anb  faib  bnto  them,  cucry  lungbomc 
bluibeb  agaiult  it  fclfe ,  is  brought  to  be- 
foiation :  anb  cuety  titic  02  boufc  Diut- 
bebagatnttit  felfe,fliallnotltanb. 

26  anbif£>atancaftout£>atan,bc 
isbtttibeb  againft  btmfcifc  ■,  Ijoib  (ball 
ttjm  bis  feingbomc  ftanb  < 

27  TLnn  tfj  by  zBecljcbub  caft  out 
beutis,  bylbbom  bocyoutcbtlbjnuaft 
tbcm  out  i  XDctefo;c  they  (hall  be  your 
3Jubges. 

28  25ut  if  3  eatt  out  bcuils  by  the 
Spirit  of  (EoD,  then  the  lungbomc  of 
<5obiS  come  unto  you. 

29  D;clfc,!)ott)  can  one  enter  into  a 
Qcong  mans  boufc,  ?fpoilc  bisgoobs, 
ctcept  bee  firft  brnte  the  ftrong  man, 
anb  then  be  ttnll  fpotlc  I)is  boufc. 

30  fyetbattsnotn)itbmc,isagam(t 
me :  anb  bee  that  gatbemb  not  ibitb 
mc,fcatteretbah:oab. 

31  Cn3berefo;:c3J  fay  bnto  you,*3ll 
matter  of  (intieanb  biafpbemtcfliallbc 
fo  tgluen  bnto  mm :  but  the  blafpbcmie 
agautft  tl)e  holy  <sbo(t,  (ball  not  bee  fo?* 
gtuen  bnto  men. 

31  anbibbofoeuctfpcaitrtbaibojb 
againft  the  fonne  of  man,  it  fljail  be  foi- 
gutenbim :  but  lbbofocuer  fpeattetb  a-- 
gainft  the holy  d5l)oft, it  (ball  not  be  foi> 
giant  Him,  neither  in  this  lbojlb,  nn* 
ther  in  the  ttwlb  to  tome. 

33  Cither  matte  the  tree  goob ,  anb 
his  fruit  goob :  iDz  elfc  make  the  tree 
tozrupt ,  anb  his  fruit  corrupt :  fo;  the 
tree  is  tutoibcii  by  his  fruit. 

34  )3D  generation  of  Pipcrs,hoUi  tan 
yc,brtiigeuti,fpcaitc  goob  things ?*5foj 
out  of  the  abunbantc  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  fpcahcth. 

35  %  goob  man  out  of  the  goob 
treafure  of  the  heart,  bnngcth  foortb 
goob  tilings :  anb  an  cum  man  out  of 
the  null  treafure,  bungctb  foonh  cuill 
things. 

36  2Sut3ff<M,bntoyott,'£bateuery 
fljle  lbojb  that  men  (hall  fpcaUe,  tfjey 


Oiail  giuc  attompt  thereof  tit  the  bap  of 
'Jubgcment. 

37  Jfojbytbynwbestboufbaitbcc 
iufhficb,anb  bv  thy  Wojbs  thou  (halt  be 
tonbentneb. 

38  C*3Chentertaine  of  the  Scribes, 
anb  of  the  #barifces,attftuetcb,fayutg, 
Rafter  ,ibeiboulb  fee  a  fignc  front  thee. 

39  23ut  hee  antocreb ,  anb  faib  to 
tljent,  2n  cuill  anb  abultetous  genera- 
tion fccUcth  after  a  fignc,  anb  there 
(hall  no  fignc  bcgtucn  to  it,but  the  fignc 
ofthe^ophefjonas. 

4°  *5foias$onasibastbjeebaycs 
anb  tbjee  nights  in  the  ibbaies  belly  :fo 
dial  the  fonne  of  man  be  thjee  bates  anb 
thjee  nightsui  the  heart  of  the  cacti). 

41  3Chc  men  of  Minnie  (hall  rife  in 
tubgement  tbith  this  generation,  anb 
(ball  conbemne  it, 'becaufc  they  repen^ 
tcb  at  tlje  pleaching  of  Fionas,  anb  be* 
bolb,a  greater  tbcn3Jonas  is  here. 

41  *Xbc£>uceneoftbe£>outbfl)ail 

rife  up  in  the  tubgement  Ibltb  this  gc* 
ncratton,  anb  (hall  tottbnnneit :  fat  flic 
came  from  the  uttcrmofl  parts  of  the 
earth  to  heare  the  ibtfebomc  of  &0I0 
mon,anbbcbolb,agrcatcr  then  Solo- 
mon ts  here. 

4J  *fl9hcntbeuncleanefplritisgone 
out  of  a  man ,  hee  lbalttetb  tbojoib  b?y 
places,fcctungr  eft,  anb  finbeth  none. 

44  Xbenhefattb^rbMretarnein* 
to  my  houfc  from  tt)bcncc3J  came  out  ■> 
3lnb  tbben  he  is  come,  he  finbeth  it  emp* 
ttc,fmcpt,anb  garntftjeb. 

4^  1Cbcngoctbbe,anbtaitetb  thtth 
himfcifc  fcuen  orticr  fpirtts  mo^c  Ibie* 
itcb  then  btmfelfe,anb  they  enter  in  anb 
Uttjcll  there :  *  3Jnb  the  iaft  ftatc  of  that 
matt  is  ibojfc  then  the  firft.€uenfo(hai 
itbcalfo  unto  this  tbirtttb  generation. 

46  Ctsbtlcbcycttaifccbtotbepco* 
pie,  *  bebolb ,  his  mother  anb  his \nt-> 
tivtxi  ftoob  without,  befiring  to  (pease 
ibithhim. 

47  lEljen  one  faibc  unto  him ,  25c* 
holb , thy  mother  anb  thy  tyctb;cn  flanb 
lblthout,befiringto(pcaftcibtththcc. 

48  2Suthcanfuiereb ,  anb  faib  bnto 
him  that  tolbblm  ,oaho  'Snty  mother* 
3lnb  tbho  are  my  tyetfwen* 

49  3lnb  hee  (tretcheb  fonh  his  lianb 
tolbarb  his  btfciplcs,  anbfaib,  23el;olb, 
my  mother  anb  my  tortbjen. 

50  iro?ibhofocuerfl)allboe  the  tbill 
of  my  ifather  lbhich  is  m  beaucn,  tljc 
fame  ts  my  bjotber ,  anb  fi(ler,anb 
mother. 

CHAP. 


*Chap.i<5. 
i.lukeii. 

id.  1. cor. 
I.2Z« 


'Iona.I.17. 


lona. ;.  5. 


*  j.Kin.io. 


'Luke  II. 
14. 


•Hcb.(f.4. 
and  10.  16. 
2.p«.2.zo. 


•Mark.  J. 
3  i.lukcS. 
20. 


Parables  of  feed,         Chap.xiij 


an 


doffc" 


arcs. 


MiA.4.1. 


'Lute 8  5. 


"Chjp.ij. 
19. 


mark.  4.1  2. 
tuke  8.IO. 
ioh.i  3.40. 
aSs  28.26. 
rom.  1 1.8. 


CHAP.    XIIL. 

5  The  parable  of  the  Sower.anJ  the  feed:  iS  the 
expofition  of  it.  14  The  parable  ot  the  tares, 
31  ofthe  mufhrdlecd,  33  of  theleuen,44  ot 
the  hidden  treafure,  45  ofthepearle,  47  ot 
thedrawnct  cart  into  the  Sea,  53  And  how 
Chrift  is  contemned  ot  his  own  countrymen. 

$efamcbay  ibcnt^Iefus 
out  of  tl)t  Doufc,*  aub  fate 
bytDcfcafibc. 
1  anb  great  multttubes 
lbcre  gatDcreb  togctDer 
bnto  t)im,  lotijatljccrbcntmto  a  (Dtp, 
anofatc.anbtDcibDolcmultitubcfiOOC 
ontl)eri)0?c. 

j  anb  Dec  fpafec  many  tDtngsbnto 
tocm  in  parables ,  facing ,  *  zSeholb,  a 
fotber  lbentfoojtD  tofoib. 

4.  anb  U)l)cn he  forbeb,fotne  feedes 
fell  bp  the  ibayes  ftbc,  anb  the  foules 
tame,  aub  bcuoutcb  tljcm  bp. 

<,  S>omc  fell  bpon  Ron?  places, 
tbljcre  tDey  l)ao  not  mucD  eartD :  ano 
foojtDlbiththcyfpmngbp,bccaufctDcy 
hab  no  becpcnclTc  of earth. 

6  ^nb  lbhen  the  £>unnc  Ibas  bp, 
they  tberc  feojeheb  :  anb  becaufe  ttjcp 
hab  not  rooMhcytbithcrcbaibay. 

7  anb  fome  fell  among  thorns:  anb 
the  thomes  fpmng  bp ,  ?  cho&cb  them. 

3  25ut  other  fell  into goob  grotmb, 
anb  bzought  foorth  fruit ,  fomc  an  Dun* 
bicb  folbe,  fomc  firttc  folbe,  fomc  thirty 
folbe. 

9  ©Do  hath  carcsto  heatc,  letljtm 
Dearc. 

10  anb  the  btfciplcs  came ,  anb  fayb 
bnto  Dim ,  Wty  fpeattcft  thou  bnto 
them  in  parables  i 

11  ^canftucrcb.anbfatbbntothcm, 
nBeraufe  it  ts  giucn  bnto  you  to  ttnoU) 
tl)c  myttcries  of  tDc  tungbome  of  Ijca* 
ucn,buttotDcmitisnot  giucn. 

ii  *5FonbDofoeucr hatb,to Dim  tljall 
be  giucn,  anb  hcfhallhauc  moic  abun- 
bance :  but  lbDofoeuct  DatD  not,  from 
Dim  (hall  be  taltcn  aruay ,  cucn  that  Dec 

DatD. 

13  XDercfozc  fpeatte  3  to  tDem  in 
parables:  becaufe  tDcy  feeing,  fee  not : 
anb  Dcanng,  tDcy Dearc not,  ncitljcr 
boctDcybnbcrttanb. 

14  anb  in  tbemis  fnlfillcb  tDc  pzo- 
pDcnc  of  £fatas,ibhicD  faith,  *23yDca^ 
rmgyea,aUDcarc,anbfballnotbnbcr; 

(tans :  anb  feemg  y  cc  fljall  fee,  anb  u>iu 
notpeiceiue. 

15  Jfo:  tljis  peoples  heart  is  tbareb 


groffc,  anb  tDcir  cares  arcbuuof  Dca 
ring ,  anb  tljctr  eves  tDcy  Dane  clorcb, 
left  at  any  time  "tljcv  thottib  fee  ibitD 
their  eycs,anb  Dearc  Xbttij  tDeir  cares, 
anb  fljotilb  btibcrftanb  nml)  tDcir 
Heart,  anb  monlbbcconucrtcb ,  anb  3 
(DoulbDcaietDcm. 

16  isutblcflcb  are  your  cycs.fo:  tDey 
fee :  aub  your  carcs,fo2  tDcv  Dearc. 

17  Jf  0:  beccly  3  toy  bnto  you, *  tDat 
many  j&opDcts ,  anb  rtgbtcous  men 
Dane  befireb  to  fcctDofe  things  lbhub 
ycc fecanb  Daue  not  f cene  them :  anb  to 
DcaretDofctDmgsibDtcD  ychrare ,  anb 
hauenothcacbthem. 

is  C  tycarc  ye  therefore  the  parable 
oftDcfoibcr. 

19  B9hcn  any  otic  hcareth  the  ttwb 
of  thcBingbomcanb  bnbecftattbeth  it 
not,  tDctt  commctD  tDc  ibicUcb  one,  anb 
catcDeth  aibay  tDatibDicD  ibas  foibcn 
in  Dis  heart :  this  is  Dec  ibhtth  tccciueb 
fccbcbythclbaytioe. 

to  26ut he tljat  rccetucb tDc  fceb  into 
frony  placcs.the  fame  is  he  that  hcareth 
thclbo?b,$anonibtthtoyrcccutethit: 

ii  jscthathhee  notroot  mhimfclfe, 
bntburcth  fcna  lbDtle:fonbhctitribu 
lation  oi  pcrfccution  anfeth  becaufe  of 
the  ibojb,  bv  anb  by  he  is  offettbeb. 

22  $caifo  that  recciucbfecb  among 
the  thoms.isDc  tljat  hcareth  the  lboib, 
anb  tDccarcof  this  lboilb ,  anbthc  oc> 
ccitfulntffc  of  ricDes  choKc  tDc  lbozb, 
anb  he  beeommcth  bnfrtutfuu. 

i$  25ut  Dc  that  rccciucb  fceb  into  the 
goob  grotmb,  is  Dec  that  hcareth  the 
ib02b,anbbtibcrftanbctDtt,  ibDtcDaifo 
bcarcth  fruit,  anb  bjtngeth  foonh,fomc 
anDunb2Cbfolb,fomeGrrte,fotnetDtrty. 

Z4.  canotiicr parable  put  hefouh 
bnto  tDem,  faying-,  Xljc  Htngbomc  of 
Dcaucn  ts  ItHcncb  bnto  a  man  lbhwh 
folbeb  goob  fceb  m  Dts  ficlb: 

15  iSut  UtDtle  men  flcpt,  his  enemy 
came  9  folbeb  tares  among  tlje  ibDcat, 
aubibctttDisibay. 

26  asutrbhcnthcbiabcibasfpning 
bp,anbb:oughtfo:tDfcuit,tDcnappca 
rcbtljc  tares  alfo. 

17  5>o  tDc  fcruants  of  tDc  Dottfbol 
bertaincanofaib  bnto  Dun,  S)ir,bioft 
not  thou  fo\b  goob  kcoc  m  tl)y  ficlb  < 
fromibhcncctDcn  DatD  it  tares j. 

is  Irjefatbbnto  tDem,  3n  enemy  DatD 
bone  this.  Xhc  fcruants  faib  bnto  him , 
!nDiitthott  then  tljatibcgoc  anogatljcr 
tDeinbp; 

\   19  lorn  Ijc  fatb ,  tfay :  left  ibhtic  y  cc 
I     25  j gather 


"Luke  10. 
24. 


Mufhrdfeed,tares,  S.Matthew,      and  hid  treafure. 


gather  Up  the  tares ,  yc  toot  bp  alfo  tlje 
\bbcattt)itbtbcm. 

jo  ?ut  bo  tlj  gtoib  together  bnttl  tljc 
barueft :  anb  m  the  tunc  of  harucft ,  3 
Mil  fay  to  the  t capct s,  Gather  pc  toge; 
thee  firlt  the  tares,  anb  btttbc  tbcm  in 
butibcls  toburttctbetn:  butgatljcr  tbc 
ibljcatintomybarne. 

31  C another parable  put  Ijcfoojtb 
bnto  them,  faying,  *3Cljc  Bingbontcof 
I)caucn  is  liltc  to  a  gtame  of  muftarb 
feeb,u)bicIjaittantooltc,  anb  folbcb  m 
his  ficlb. 

31  nahiclj  ittbeeb  is  tljc  leaft  ofai  fcebs: 
but  ibbcn  it  is  groibcn,  tt  is  the  grcatcfr 
ainottgbcrbcs ,  ano  becommctb  a  tree : 
fo  that  the  blrbs  of  the  aire  couic  ano 
lobgeui  tbc  branches  thereof. 

33  Canotbcr parable fpaKcljcbtv 
to  them ,  Xhc  Ktngbome  of  bcaucn  is 
Hue  buto  icaucu ,  ibhich  a  tboman 
tooltc,  ant)  bio  m  tb?ec  tmcafurcs  of 
mealc ,  tm  thcibholc  ttias  icaiicttcb. 

34  *  ail  thefe  things  fpancjcfus  bn- 
to the  iiiuintube  m  parabies,attbibtrl> 
out  a  parable  fpaltc  bee  not  bnto  tbcm : 

35  Xhat  tt  might  bee  fulfiiicb  ibbicb 
lbas  fpoltcit  by  the  i&opljct,  faying,  *  5 
ibill  open  my  mouth  in  parables,  !fr  ibil 
totter  things  Vbbttb  haue  bin  Ucpt  fecret 
from  the  fottntanon  of  the  lbozlD. 

16  Hhcn  3Jcfus  fettt  the  muititttbc  & 
lbay,anblbcnt  into  thchoufe :  anbhis 
Difnplcscamcbntobtm,fayiug,Dcclarc 
bnto  bs  tl;c  parable  of  tlje  tares  of  the 
ficlb. 

37  $c  anftucrcb,  anb  faib  bnto  them, 
$ec  that  foibctlj  tlje  goob  fceb ,  is  the 
fomtcofinan. 

38  XhcRclbtstljcib02lb.  Xhegoob 
feeb,arcthc  cbtlb:cn  of  the  luttgbomc: 
but  the  tares  are  the  cljilb:ctt  of  the  n>tc 
Ueb  one. 

39  %\)t  encmic  that  folbcb  them ,  is 
thcbciull.  *Cbcbariicft,  tstbeeubeof 
the  ujoilb.  anb  tljc  reapers  arc  tljc  ait 
gels. 

40  as  therefore  fbc  tares  ar  r  gatbc^ 
tebanbbnrntittthc  fire :  fo  fbailitbctn 
tljc  cub  of  tins  lbozio. 

41  Xhc  5>onnc  of  man  fliall  feno 
fonh  his  Angels ,  ano  they  (bail  gather 
out  of  his  Hutgbomc  all  ||  things  that  of 
feitb,  anb  them  ibhtch  Doc  titiqmtic: 

41  anb  (ball  tad  them  into  a  furnatc 
of  fire:  there  fbailbcn>ayiitig  attbgua- 
filing  of  teeth. 

4?  *Xhenfi)aii  the  righteous  finite 
fooitlj  as  tljc  £>unuc ,  in  tljc  Hittgbome 


*Mar.4.3. 
lukc  J  3.1? 


'  Luke  j  j. 


t  The  rrcrdc 
in  the  Greci^ 
:s  a  mc.ifurc 
conleimng 
about  a  peck^ 
and  .in  ha/fe , 
TV.Wtin^hiU 
more  then 
a  pint  e. 
"Markc^. 

•Ffj.78.2. 


"lod.j.ij. 

rcuc.I.j.1  5 


\Or,fca„. 
i.tla. 


'Dl^.li., 


of  tljctt  father.  leijo  batlj  cares  to 
bcarclctbunbcarc. 

44  C  agatnetbefeingbome  of  be& 
ucn  ts  line  bnto  treafure  Ijib  in  a  ficlb : 
the  itobtcb  tbben  a  man  batlj  founb,  bee 
biDctb,atiD  fo?  loy  thereof  goetb  ano  fcf 
icth  all  tbat  bee  Ijatb.anb  buyctlj  tljat 
ficlb. 

45  CagattictbciungDoutc  of  bca 
ucn  is  UKc  bnto  a  martljant  man ,  fccK 
mggooblypcarlcs: 

46  rtaijo  lbljcn  bee  bab  founb  one 
pcarle  of  grcatpmc,  be  went  anb  folbc 
all  tljat  be  bab,  anb  bought  tt. 

47  Cagaine,tbc  luttgbomc  of  bca^ 
ucn  ts  liKe  bnto  a  net  that  lbas  caff  into 
tlje  fca,anb  gatbereb  of  cuecy  mnb, 

48  rohicb ,  lbljctt  tt  lbas  full,  thev 
bjcib  to  Owe,  anb  fatcboibttc,  anb  gfr 

tbercbtbcgoobtntobcffcls,butcaftthc 
babaibay. 

49  £>o  (bail  it  beat  tbeenbe  of  tlje 
tboilD :  tlje  angels  ujai  come  forth,  anb 
fcucr  tljc  ibic&cb  from  among  the  luff, 

50  ^nb  (balcafttbeni  into  tbc  furnace 
of  fire :  there  (ball  be  wailing,  anb  cmfc 
fltutgoftcctlj. 

51  Hefus  faith  bnto  tbem,^aue  ye  btv 
bcrftoob  all  tbcfc  things  i  Xljcy  fay  bn^ 
tol)inM^ca,lLo2D. 

51  %lJcnfaibbcbntotbcm,Xbere^ 
fo?c  cttcry  Scribe  ibbicb  is  utacuctcb 
bnto  the  Uingbom  of  bcauen,tsitlte  bn- 
to a  man  that  ts  anboufljolbcr,  ttilnch 
bungctb  fbonb  out  of  bis  treafure 
tljtttgsncibattbolb. 

53  CCanbitcamctopaffctbatibben 
1Jcfitshabfintfi)cb  tljcfe  parables ,  bee 
bcpartcb  thence. 

54  *  anb  tbben  bee  lbas  conic  into 
bisoUntctounttcy,  Ijc  taught  tbcm  in 
thctt  Synagogue,  uifomuth  tbattbey 

ibcreaftonifi)eb,attbfaib,tt)bnitel)atb 
this  man  tljls  lbtfcbomc,  anb  tbcfc 
migljtylbojKs?  J 

I    55  *3fs  not  tljls  tljc  Carpenters 
fouttc  ■:  3Js  not  bis  mother  caiicb  ma 
rtc?aubbtsb?ctlj?cn,  Uamcs,  attb'Uo 
fcs,anbS)imott,aub  3lubas; 

56  anb  Ins  fitters,  arc  tbey  not  all 
lbirh  bs  i  lbljcttcc  then  Ijatlj  tljisman 
aiitljerctbtngs? 

57  anb  they  mere  offenbeb  in  htm. 
2but  Slefus  faib  bnto  them,  *  a  £20- 
phctisnotibithoutboiiour,fattcmhts 
oibnc  tountrcy,attb  m  htsoibttc  botifc. 

58  anb  bee  bib  not  many  mighty 
lbo^testbcrc^ccaurcoftljctrbnbciicfc. 

CHAP. 


Marked  1 
Iukc.4.i5. 


"Ioh.^.42. 


"Mir.  6.4. 
toJin  4  44. 


Iohnbeheaded.  Cliap.xmj.      The  Sea  calmed. 


Marke  6. 
I4.1ukej>.7 


||  Or,  arc 
wrought  fj 
him. 

Luke  3. 
1?. 


Lcuit.  18, 
16.  and  20. 


•Chap.ai. 
i5. 


•Marked 
;a.lukcp. 


market". 
35- 


CHAP.   XI I II. 

Herods  opinion  of  Chrift.  3  Wherefore 
Iohn  Bapnfl  was  beheaded  13  Iefus  depar- 
ted) into  a  defert  place:  15  Where  hee  fee- 
deth  fine  thoufand  men  with  flue  Ioaues,  and 
tworifhes:  2.1  he  walfcethoncheSeatohis 
Difciples:  34  and  landing  at  Gennezaret, 
healeth  thefickebythe  touch  of  the  hemme 
or  his  garment. 

£€^X  that  time  *  i?crob  the 
^Xctrarcb  hcatb  of  the 
famcof3Jcfus, 
%  anb  faib  bnto  Ins 
_fcruants,  Xbts  is  3Jotm 
tl)c  asaptift,  Ijcc  is  ttfen  from  tl)c  Dcao, 
anb  therfoje  mighty  lbojbcslibocfbclb 
foojtb  thcmfclucs  m  htm. 

3  €  *  fot  Aerobe  bab  lapD  bolb  on 
3Jobn,  anb  bounb  Dim ,  anb  put  fnmm 
pztfon  foz  i^erobias  fauc ,  bis  bzotber 
philips  ttnfc. 

4.  iro?3loI)nfaiDi)ntol)im,*3Itis 
not  lattfull  fo2  thee  to  hauc  her. 

5  anblbbcnbcidoulbbaucputbim 
to  death, bccfcarcDtbemultttubc,*br; 
canfc  they  countcb  bun  asapjopbet. 

6  25ut  lbbcn  l^croos  birth  bap  Idas 
Kept,  tDc  baugbtcr  of  $?crodtasdaim= 
ccb  before  tbcm,and  pleafcb  Aerobe. 

7  thereupon  bcpjomtfcdibitljan 
oatb,togiuc  her  lbbatfocuer  fljcibouib 
affce. 

8  anbfl)C,bcingbcfo2einrtructcbof 
bcrmotber,  faiD,  ©luemebccre^obn 
26apti(ts  bead  in  a  charger. 

9  and  the  tnng  ibas  font :  neucr? 
tbclcfTe  fo?  tbeotbes  fattc ,  anb  tfjem 
lbbicbfatc  limb  Ijunatmcatc,  be  torn? 
mandcdittobcgtucnbcr: 

10  andbcfcnt,andbcbcadcd3Jobn 
intbepnfon. 

n  and  His  bead  Idas  wougbt  m  a 
cbargcr,and  giucn  to  the  Damfcll:  anb 
tbetyougbtitto  her  mother. 

12  anb  l)is  Difciples  camcanb  tooft 
top  the  booy,auo  buncb  it,and  itocnt  anb 
toldjjefiis. 

15  C*  tBDcnlicmshcarb  of  it,bc  be- 
par  teb  thence  by  ft)ip  ,mto  a  befert  place 
apart:  anb  idbcn  the  people  badbcard 
thereof,  they  followed  bun  on  footc, 
out  of  the  cities. 

14  and 3 cms  ident fortb.and fain  a 
great  multitudcand  was  mooucdiditb 
companion  toward  them ,  anb  i;e  \)t*< 
IcdtbcirficUc. 

15  C*and When  it was cuetnngjftis 
Difciplcs  tame  to  bim,faying,lLbis  is  a 


befert  place,  anb  tl)etunc  isnoWpaft; 
fend  the  muintubcaway,tbat  they  may 
goc  into  the  biliages ,  anb  buy  them- 
femes  bictuais. 

16  26ut3Jcfusfaibbnto tbcm/Ebcy 
neebe  not  dcpart.guic  pec  them  to  catc. 

17  and  tljcp  fay  tonto  him,  10c  bauc 
beerc  but  fine  loatics,andtwofifl)es. 

is  if)cfaib,  zsnngtbcm  hitherto  me. 

19  and  Ijcc  commanbcb  the  multi- 
tube  to  fit  doWne  on  the  gcaffc ,  %  toofec 
tbcfiucloaucs.andtbetworiihcs,  anb 
lootungbpto  beaucn,  hecblcflcb,  anb* 
bjaltc ,  anb  gauc  the  loaucs  to  his  Dim 
plcs,and  the  Dimples  to  the  multu ubc. 

20  and  they  didallcat,?Wcrcfillcd: 
anb  they  tooltc  Dp  of  the  fragments 
that  remained  tweluc  bat  nets  full. 

21  anb  they  that  has  eaten,  Were  a 
bout  ftuc  tboutand  men ,  befide  lbomcu 
audcbildmi. 

22  cand  ftraigbtway  Refits  con; 
(trained  bis  Difclplcsto  getmto  aflnp, 
anb  to  goc  befoje  him  bnto  the  other 
fibe,tbhfle  he  fent  the  multitubes  aibay. 

2}  *3Jnbibhcnhchabfentthcmuitt 
tubes  aiuap ,  he  lbcnt  bpinto  amoun 
tainc  apart  to  piap:*  anb  tt)hcn  the  cue 
mngVbas  comche  tbas  there  alone : 

24.  2Sut  the  fljip  Idas  noib  m  the 
mibftofthc  ;§>ea,  tofTcb  llutlj  ibaues : 
f02  the  umtbttias  contrary. 

2$  ^nb  m  the  fourth  watch  of  the 
night,  3efusU)cntbntothcin,U.iaimug 
onthc£>ca. 

26  anb  lbhcn  thcDifciples faib  him 
tbaluing  on  the  £>tz ,  thonncrc  trou 
bleb,fapmg,  gtisafpint  :anbthcpta- 
cboutfo?feare. 

27  26ut  ftraighttbay  Refits  fpaltc 
bntothem,  favmg,2Seofgoobcljeerc: 
itis3>bcnotafraib. 

23  anb  peter  anfmcrcb  him  ,  anb 
faib  JLo2b,ifit  be  thou,  bib  mc  come  bti* 
tothccoiuhcibattr. 

29  anb  he  faib ,  Come,  atib  voltm 
0ctcribas  comcbolbnc  out  of  the  (l)ip, 
hciValHcboutheiDatcctogoto'Iicfiis. 

jo  2Sut  lbhcn  he  faib  the  Unnd ;  bor 
Ocrons,  he  ttias  afcaib :  anb  beginning 
tofinl$e,bccricb,faynng,?Lo;bfaucme. 

ji  anb  nnmcdtatclp  ^cfusarctclieb 
foo:th  his  hanb ,  anb  caught  him ,  anb 
faib  bnto  him ,  <0  tliou  of  little  faith, 
ibhcrefojcbibftthoiiboubt; 

?2  anb  lbhcn  they  lbcrc  come  into 
tljcn)ip,thcibinbceafcb. 

?i  %\)t\\  thcf>  that  mere m the  fliip, 
tamcanbUJO!n;ippcDljuu)favmg,£)fa 

tnictb 


46. 

»Io! 
16. 


rkc6, 


||Or,y?rOTJ. 


_J 


MensTraditionsT    S.Matthew.       Whatdefilcth. 


•Mukcfi. 
53- 


'Muk.7.1. 


■Exod.  20. 
i  Ldcuc.5. 
16. 

*E*od.  *I. 
17  lcui.20 
o. pro. 20. 
20. 

•Mar.7.1 1, 
12. 


•  Efj.  j?. 
14- 


"Marke7. 
14. 


tructh  thou  art  tile  fount  of  ©on. 

34  C*3nbn>hcnthcplbcregonco< 
ucr ,  thcp  wnic  into  p  lanb  of  ©encfarct. 

35  21nb  lbhcn  the  men  of  that  place 
habtmoiblcbge  ofhtm,thcpfcnt  outm- 
to  all  that  tountrcp  rounb  about ,  anb 
nought  bnto  him  al  that  lbcr  c  bifcafeb 

36  3inb  befought  him ,  that  thcp 
might  onclp  touch  the  hemme  of  his 
garment;  anb  a0  manp  as  touehcb, 
ibetc  maDc  perfectly  ibhole. 

CHAP.    XV. 

Chrift  reprooueth  the Scribes  ,and  Phanlees, 
for  tranlgrelfing  Gods  Commaundemenrs 
throughtheirownctraditions;  11  teacheth 
how  that  which  gocth  into  themouth.doerh 
not  defile  a  man.  n  Hehealeduhedaueh* 
ter  ot  the  woman  of  Canaan,  30  and  other 
great  multitudes:  31.  and  with  feuen  loaues 
and  a  few  little  fifhes  leedeth  toure  thouland 
men,befide  women  and  children. 

tyefa  *came  to  'Jcfus 
Scribes  anb  tehanfecs, 
Jm$  which  lberc  of  $icroJa-- 
'  icm,faping, 

2  H9ij^  Do  tnv  DifcipICS 
tranfgrciTcthctrabitton  of  the  Clbcrs? 
fo?  thcp  ibalb  not  their  hanbes  ibhcn 
thcp  cat  b?cab. 

3  But  hec anfrocrcb,  anb  faib  bnto 
them^hpboepouairomwfgrciTcthc 
Conimanbcmcnt  of  <3ob  bp  pout  tra- 

OlttOtti 

4  jfoz  <5ob  commauubcb  ,  (aping, 
*  honour  thp  father  anb  mother :  3lnb 
"Ijcctljat  tutfeth  father  o:  mother,  let 
bimbicthebcath. 

5  Bntpce fap,  BDhofocucr  (ban fap 
to  Ijisfatlicr  oJljis  motl)cr,*gitts  agtft 
bpTbbatfocucr  thoumigbtcft  beepjofi' 
tcbbpmc, 

6  3lnb  honour  not  bis  father  02  bis 
mother,  heefhaiibcfree.  %])us  battcpee 
mabctbc  Commaunbcment  of  ©obof 
none  effect  bp  pour  trabttion. 

7  Pec  bppotritcs,  lbcll  bib  Cfaias 
pzopbccicofpou.fapmg, 

8  * Xtns people  bjaibctb  nigh  bnto 
mcelbitb  their  mouth,  anb  bouourctb 
mcelbitb  their  lips :  but  tb  curb  cart  is 
farrcfrommc. 

9  25uttnbainetbepbolboifbipme, 
teaching  foi  boctrutcs,  tbccommanbC' 
merits  of  men. 

10  C*3nbbccallcbtbemultitubc,anb 
faib  bnto  tliem  .fycarcanbbnbcrftanb. 

1 1  iI5ot  that  lbbicb  goetb  into  the 
mouth  befiletb  a  man :  but  that  lbbicb 


commctb  out  oftljcmoutb.tbis  befiletb 
a  man. 

11  Hbcn  tame  btebifciplcs,  anb  fatb 
l)ntol)im,Bnofti  eft  thou  tljat  ttje^lja^ 
rifecs  ibere  offenbeb  after  tljcp  bearb 
ttjis  faping; 

13  25ut  be  anfrocrcb  anb  faib,*£uerp 
plant  lbbicb  mp  bcauenlp  father  Ijatt) 
not  piantcb  ,fbalbc  ro  oteb  bp. 

14  ?Ut  tbcmaionc:  *tbcpbe  blinbe 
leabcts  of  the  blmbc.  3(nb  if  the  blinbe 
leab  the  blmbc,  both  (hall  fall  into  the 
bittb. 

15  *  Chen  anfroercb  0cter,  anb  faib 
bnto  bim ,  SDcciare  bnto  bs  this  pa* 
rable. 

i6  3nb3iefusfaib,3ltcpccalfopct 
ibithout  bnbttftanbmg  t 

17  2Docnotpcepctbnbcrfranb,tbat 
ibbatfocucr  cntrtth  in  at  the  mouth, 
gocth  into  the  bellp,  anb  is  taft  out  into 
the  bought* 

18  2Sut  thofc  things  lbbicb  pjocccb 
out  of  tljc  mouth,  comcfojth  from  the 
heart,  anb  thep  befile  the  man. 

19  *  5Fo:  out  of  the  heart  piotecb  euill 
thoughts,mutbcrs,ai)ultcrics,fo2nica' 
tions^hefts.falfclbitnts.blafphemics. 

20  Xhcfc  arc  the  things  lbljich  He 
file  a  man  :25ut  to  catc  ibith  bnlbafhcn 
hanbs,bcnlcth  not  a  man. 

ii  CXhenlFefuslbcntthcnccanb 
bepattcb  into  the  toaftcs  of  Xp:eanb 
&ibon. 

ix  3(nb  beholb  ,a  tboman  of  Cana- 
an came  out  of  the  fame  toads,  ?  crieb 
bnto  him,fapmg,  l?auc  mcrrp  on  me,  £> 
Uo?b,thoufonnc  of  Daiub.mpbaugh^ 
tcris  gneuouHp  \)txen  lbitl)  a  bcuill. 

i?  26utheanfracreb  Ijernotaibozb. 
^InbhiSbifctples  came,  anb  befought 
him,fapmg,!S)cnb  her  aibap^oj  the  trp« 
etlj  after  bs. 

24. 25ut  he  anfiuereb,anb  faib,*^  am 
notfent,  but  bnto  the  loftfhccpcofthc 
hourcofjfracl. 

25  Chen  tame  flic,  anb  ibojfhippcb 
him,faping,lLojb,helpc  me. 

26  23uthcanfroercb,anbfatb, 3Jtis 
not  meetc  to  taHc  the  thUbzcns  bicab, 
i  anb  to  taunt  to  bogs. 

27  ^nbflje  faib,  ILructhllozb:  pet 
the  bogs  cat  of  the  erummes  ibhtch  fall 
from  their  matters  table. 

28  IChengjcfusanutjcrcb,  anbfaib 
bnto  hcr,£> iboman, great  is  tlipfaitlj: 
be  it  bnto  thcccuenastliou  lbilt.  ^nb 
her  baughtcr  ibas  mabc  ibljolc  from 
tljatbcrphoure. 

29  *31nb 


"lah.  ij.:, 


'LukcS. 
19- 


'Mar.7.17 


-c 


■«-5 


Mirkc 


•Chap.io. 
6-    ■ 


A  multitude  fed.       Chap.xvj.         Phanfes  leauen 


"Maikc7. 


•E6-/3J.J 


•MhV.S.i. 


•Msr.S.M. 
lukc  13*54. 


29  *;3nb3fefusbcparttD  fro  thence, 
anb  came  nigh  bnto  tlic  tea  of  eaiiic, 
anblbcnttopmtoamountaine,anbfate 
bourne  there. 

30  "Ziib  great  multitubcs  came  into 
bun,hanmgtt)ith  them  thofc  that  were 
lame,  blmbc,bumbc,maimcb,anb  ma- 
ny others,  anb  caft  them  bolbncatjc^ 
fus  feet,  anb  hcheaicb  them : 

31  3JnfomucI)  tliat  the  multttubc 
lbonb;eb,  itohcn  they  faib  thebumbcto 
fpcaBe ,  the  maimeD  to  be  ibholc ,  the 
lame  to  IMIrc,  anb  tl)c  bllnb  to  fee :  anb 
they  glonfieb  the  ©ob  of3Ifracl. 

31  C*£hen3Jcfustailcbhisbifct< 
pies  bnto  lyim ,  anbfatb ,  3,  haue  com- 
panion onthemultttnbc,  becaufc  they 
continue  iDith  me  noil)  thjee  bayes,anb 
haue  nothing  to  eatc :  anb  5  mtll  not 
fenbthem  aiuay  fafttng,  left  they  faint 
mthcibay. 

33  3tnb  his  bifctples  lap  into  him, 
oahence  flioulb  rue  haue  fo  much  b2eab 
in  the  ibilberncffe ,  as  to  nil  fo  great  a 
multtrubc* 

34.  StnbUcfusfatthbnto  thcm,fcolb 
man?  loaueshauc  yee j.  3lnbthcy  faib, 
Scucn,  anb  a  fell)  little  fifhes. 

35  ^nb  !)ce  tommaunbeb  the  muttfc 
tube  to  fit  bourne  on  tl)c  gr  ounb. 

36  3uibttctooKethefcuenloaucsanb 
fhefifhcs.anbgauethanltes.anbbiaue 
them,anb  gauc  to  htsbifciplcs,  anb  the 
btfciplcstothcmultrtubc. 

37  3nb  they  bib  an  eatc ,  anb  ibcrc 
filleb :  anb  they  toosc  bp  of  the  bjoftcn 
meate  that  ibas  left,  feueubaffeets  full. 

38  3nb  they  that  bib  eat,lbcrc  four  c 
thoufanb  men ,  befibc  ibomcn  anb  chu 

b?cn. 

39  3inbhe  fent  aibay  thcmultitubc, 
aubtookc  flnp,  anbcamemtothccoafts 
of  ££)agbaia. 

CHAP.   XVI. 

■  The  Pharifc  require  a  figne.  6  Ielus  warned. 
his  difciples  of  the  leauen  of  the  Phanfes  and 
Sadduces.  ij  ThepeoplesopinionotChriff, 
\6  aud  Peters  contcfsion  of  him.  n  Icfus 
forefheweth  his  death,  15  Reproouir.g  Pe- 
ter for  dilTw.iding  him  itom  it :  14  And 
admonifheth  thoTethat  will  follow  him ,  to 
beare  the  Crofle. 

s»j>«*fe«a*»  tyc  *  pharifes  alfo,  ibith 

n  pit  the  Sabbuecs,  came,  anb 

A#&  tempttng.beficcbfjim  that 

J^j  hce  iboulb  (hell)  them  a 

&l  figne  from  heauen. 


r  i9canfracreb,  anb  faib  bnto  them, 
nahen  it  is  euenmg,  vee  fay ,  it  w.iibec 
faire  weather :  fo;  the  f  Uic  is  reb. 

3  2uibm  the  morning,  itwiiibcfouic 
lDcather  to  bay :  foj  the  f lucisrcb  anb 
toitymg.  £>  ye  bypocntes,  vee  can  bif- 
cerne  the  face  of  the  flttc ,  but  can  yc  not 
bifcerne  the  figncs  of  the  tunes* 

4-  3  ttncRcb  anb  abulterous  gcne> 
ration  fcefteth  after  a  figne,  anb  there 
fhall  no  figne  be  gtuen  bnto  tt ,  but  the 
figne  of  the  pjophet  3Jonas.  31nb  hec 
left  them,  anb  bepartcb. 

5  3nb  When  hisblfciplcsibcrc  tome 
to  the  other  fibe ,  they  hat)  forgotten  to 
tafcetycab. 

6  C  Xhen  3Iefus  faib  tmto  them, 
Xalte  heeb  anb  belbarc  of  the  leauen  of 
the  phanfes,  anb  of  the  Sabbuces. 

7  3inb  they  reafoneb  among  them 
fclues ,  faymg,  it  is  becaufe  ibe  haue  ta- 
uennobjeab. 

8  nahich  Vbhen3Jefusperceiueb,hc 
faib  bnto  them,  £>  ye  of  little  faith,tbhy 
reafonycamongyourfelucs,becaufeye 
hauebzoughtnobjeab^ 

9  *S>oeyenotyetbnberftanb,neii 
thcr  remember  the  fiuc  loaues  of  the 
fiuc  thoufanb,  anb  hom  many  baf  Hets 
yetooUebp; 

10  *  Neither  the  feuen  loaues  of  the 
foure  thoufanb ,  anb  horn  many  baf- 
Setsyctooltebp; 

1 1  f?oVbisit  that  ye  bo  c  not  bnber; 
ftanb.that^lfpafieitnottovouconcer' 
ningb;eab,thatyeil)oulbbcU)areofthe 
leauen  of  the  phanfes,  anb  of  the  ,£>afr 
buccs; 

n  %\ytn  bnberftoob  they  hom  that 
he  babe  them  not  belbarc  of  the  leauen 
of  bitab:  but  of  the  boctnnc  of  the  pha? 
nfees,  anb  of  the  5>abbuces. 

13  C  uahen  3Jcfus  came  into  the 
coaftsof€cfarcaphi!ippi,heafKebhis 
bifciples,  faying,  "nahomboemen  fay, 
that  %  the  fonnc  of  man, ami 

14  3lnbtheyfaib,^)omc  ijytlutthou 
an  3Johnthe25aptift,  fome€iias,  anb 
otliers  3)eremias,o?  one  of  p  pjophets. 

15  ^c  faith  bntothem,  25utlbhom 
fayycthat3)am< 

i6  3tnb  Simon  peter  anfibcreb, 
anb  faib,  *  Xhou  art  Clwft  the  fonnc  of 
thcliuing<5ob. 

17  3lnb  Jiefus  anfrocreb ,  anb  faib 
bnto  !)im ,  26lcffcb  art  thou  Simon 
25ar  Jlona :  fo:  flefi)  anb  bloob  hath 
not  rcuetlcb  it  bnto  thee ,  but  my  .father 
ibluchts  in  heauen, 

18  3nb 


•Chap.  1 4 
•7- 


"Chap.  15. 
5-t- 


•Mar.S.:7. 
lukc  9. 1 8. 


'Ioli.6.6f. 


Thekeves. 


S.Matthew.  Eliasiscome. 


*Ioh.  1.41. 


*Ioh.20.1J. 


'Chap.io. 

?8.imr.8. 

34. 


"Pfa.Sl.ls 
rom.  1.6. 

•M».9.l. 

lukcy.:7. 


*M«k.j).] 

luksj.18. 


is  3lnb  3  fap  alio  bnto  thee ,  that 
*tbou  art  peter ,  anb  bpon  thistocfec 
3  tbfll  builb  mp  Church :  anb  the  gates 
of  hell  (ball  not  pjcuaile  againft  it. 

19  *  anb  3J  ibill  glue  bnto  thee  the 
nepesof  the  bingbome  of hcaucn :  anb 
ibbattocuer  thou  fljait  blub  on  earth, 
(ball  be  bounb  in  beauen :  tbbatfocucr 
thoufyaitioofeoncartb,tt)aUbcloofeD 
in  beauen. 

io  %\)tn  ebargeb  hec  bis  bifetplcs 
that  thep  fboulbtclno  man  tbatbeibas 
3JcfustbeCbJtft. 

ii  €  ifrom  that  time  fooztb  began 
3Jefusto  fbcib  bnto  bisbifctples,  boib 
that  be  mult  goe  bnto  §ietufalcm,  anb 
fuffee  manp  things  of  the  (fibers  anb 
cbicfc  pnefts  %  Scribes,  anb  be  Istlleb, 
anb  be  raifeb  agame  the  tbtrb  bap. 

11  3Cben  peter  toofee  him,  anb  be; 
gaii  to  rebuse  him,  fapmg,  Be  it  facte 
from  thee  lLozb:  %l)ts  fhalnot  be  bnto 
thee. 

13  2Suthctutncb,anbfaibbnto^ 
tcr,  ©et  thee  behmb  nice,  Satan,  thou 
art  an  offence  bnto  me:  fo;thoufauou'- 
reft  not  the  things  that  be  of  ©ob,  but 
thofcthatbeofmen. 

24  C"£henfaib3Jcmsbnto  his 
blfciplcs,  31  anp  manibill  come  after 
me,  let  bunbcntcbnnfclfc ,  anb  taftebp 
bis  croffc,  anb  folloib  me. 

15  jtfojtbhofocucrvbillfauehfsufe, 
(bail  lofclt:anbibbofoeuccibiiiiofc  bis 
his  life  foj  nip  fafec,  (bail  finbeit. 

i6  5f  0?  tt)hat  10  a  man  pjofttcb,  if  hec 
fbai  gainc  the  ttjrjolcn>oHO  ,anb  loft  his 
oibncfoulc*  £)nbbatfbaiiamangtuc 
tn  ctchangc  fo?  his  foulc  < 

17  Jfo?  the  fonne  of  man  fljau  come 
in  the  glojp  of  bis  father,  ibitb  bis  an* 
gels :  *  anb  then  he  fljail  rclbarb  cucrp 
man  aecoibitig  to  his  VbojUs. 

is  iUcrclp'J  fap  bnto  pou,*Xbcrc 
befomc  (tanblngherc,  lbbub  fljailnot 
tafteofbcatb,tilltbcpfcctbeSonncof 
man  commingin  bis  Btngbome. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1   The  transfiguration  ot  Chi  ill.  14  Hehealeth 


ethbi 


:  pafsion, 


the  lunatikc,  11  forete 
14  and  payeth  tribute 

3Hk\§ifl?  f«s  tabcth  peter,  3James, 

^^Nganb  3fohn  his  toother, 

anb  bnngctb  them  bp  into 

an  high  niountamc  apart, 

i  anbujastranfngurcbbcfojctbcm, 


anb  his  face  bib  flnnc  as  the  £>utinc  ,anb 
his  raimentvbas  Ibhitc  as  the  light. 

j  3nb  bcholb,  there  appcareb  bnto 
them  £0ofcs>  anb  €lias,  taming  ibitb 
him. 

4.  Xbcn  anfractcb  peter,  anb  faibc 
bnto3cfus,1Lo?b,utsgoobfo?bstobe 
here:  gifrtjou  ibflt,  let  bs  mane  here 
tbjee  tabernacles  i  one  fo?  thec,  anb  one 
fo?  $3ofcs,  anb  one  fo?  c  lias. 

5  *t©hilebepctfpa&c,bebolb,abngbt 
cloub  ouerfhaboibeb  them :  anb  bcholb 
a  bopce  out  of  the  cloube,  lbhich  faibe, 
Xbis  is  mpbcloucb  fonne,  UUbhom3 
am  ibell  pleafeb :  heare  pe  him. 

6  Znn  tbhen  the  birciples  hearb  it, 
thep  fell  on  their  face,  anb  ibercfojc  a- 
fcaib. 

7  3lnb  3Jefus  tamt  anb  touchcb 
them,anb  faib,  ^rife,  anb  benot  afraib. 

8  3nb  lbhen  tljep  hab  lift  bp  their 
epes,thcp  favb  no  man,fauc  3Jefus  onlp. 

9  3nb  as  thep  came  bolbnc  from  the 
mountaine ,  5efus  chargeb  them ,  fap^ 
mg,  Xell  the  bifion  to  no  man,bnttl  the 
fonne  of  man  bee  rifen  againc  from  the 
bcab. 

10  ^nbhiSbtfripuisafBebhun.fap; 
ing,  *  i©hp  then  tap  the  Smbcs  that  c« 
lias  muft  firft  come  i 

1 1 3nb3cfusanut>CTCb,anbfaibbn; 
to  them ,  €lias  truelp  fhau  firft  come, 
anb  reftoje  all  things: 

11  25ut5fapbntopou,that€liasis 
come  alrcaop,  anb  thep  nneib  him  not, 
but  hauc  bone  bnto  him  lbhatfocuct 
tlicp  liftcb :  ?LineU)tfe  (hail  alfo  tljc  Son 
of  inanfuffcrofthem. 

13  Xhen  the  ©ifciplcs  bnberftoob 
that  he  fpa&e  bnto  them  of  3John  the 
26aptift. 

14  C'^nbibhcn  thep  rberc  come  to 
theinultitubc,  there  came  to  him  acer« 
tame  man,  mieclmg  botbnc  to  him,anb 
fapmg, 

15  fLojb ,  hauc  mercte  on  mp  fonne, 
foj  he  is  lunatiftc ,  anb  fo?e  bcreb :  fo2 
oft  nmes  he  fallcth  into  the  fire,  anb  oft 
into  the  lbatcr. 

16  ^nb  3  brought  hun  to  thpbifct 
pics,  anb  thep  eoulb  not  cure  him. 

17  lEhen^efusanfmcrcb,  anb  faib, 
€>  faithleffe  anb  pcrucrfc  generation, 
hoiblong  (ball  3  beclbithpou^  hoibe 
longfl)aig}fuffcrpomb?inghinihither 
tome. 

is  3(nb  3fcfus  rcbuftcb  the  bcnill, 

anb  hec  bepartcb  out  of  him :  anb  the 

chilbcibascurcb  from  tljat  berp  hour  c. 

19 1Ehcn 


*  i.Pct.i 
«7- 


•Chap.  It. 
t4-ro«!(.? 


•Mar.p.iy 

Iuke9.j8. 


Tribute  paid. 


Chap.xviij.       Auoide  offences. 


'Luke  1 7. 


'Mat.10. 
1 7.  mar. 
9.3l.Iukc 
9-44. 


||  CdUim 

t  h  -  art  lymall 
'Duir.icbm.-t, 
beinginv.x- 
Uw  fiftecne 
pince. 


\OryaJ}.ucr. 
It  is  halfe  an 
3nnce  offil- 
tttr^tnv.ilcw 
:va  p:;Hings 

(■pence, 
.tfit  rjiue 
(hilunrt  the 


19  Xhcn  came  tlje  SDifctplcs  to'SJc^ 
fus  apart,  attD  fato ,  nahy  coulDnotrbc 
tali  htm  out j. 

20  3tnD  Refits  faiD  Unto  them ,  JBc* 
taufc  of  pour  Dnbeliefe :  fcu  Dcrtly  3  fay 
Ditto  you,*  3lf  ycc  haucfaith  as  a  gratne 
ofmuftarb  fccD ,  ycc  (hall  fay  Dnto  this 
mountaine ;  Bemouc  hence  to  yonDcr 
plate :  anD  it  (hail  r  cmouc,  anD  nothing 
fljallbcDitpofliblcDnto  you. 

ii  $oiDbcit,thisRinD gocthnot out, 
but  by  pwycr  anD  fading. 

22  C*3MDiDhilcthcyaboDcmc5a; 
lilce,3JcutsfaiD  Ditto  them,  Xhcfonnc 
of  man  (hall  be  bctraicDmtothchauDs 
of  men: 

23  3lnD  they  (hall  lull  him,  anb  the 
tlntD  bap  he  than  be  raifcb  agatttc :  3inD 
they  Vbcrc  crcccDtng  tone. 

24  C^tubiDDcu  they  Vbcrc  come  to 
Capcrnaum,thcy  that  rctcuteb  ||  tribute 
money,  came  to  peter,  anD  fatD^octh 
no t  vour  matter  pay  tribute  t 

2$  $ccfatth,  Pes.  3inD  lDhcnljcc 
lDas  tome  into  the  Doufc,  3Jcfus  p;c= 
ucnttD  htm ,  faying ,  miynt  thtnRcft 
thou  -  Simon  <  of  tbhom  doc  the 
Kings' of  the  earth  taRc  cuftomco*  tri- 
bute i  of  their  oiDnc  cl)ilDjcn,o?  of  ftcan- 

gcrsi 
16  peter  faith  Dnto  him,  £>fftran^ 

gcrs.  3Jcfus  faith  Dnto  D1"1 1  ^m  ar  c 
the  thUDjen  free. 

27  /i5otttiithttauDing  ,  leatt  iDc 
(houlD  offcnD  them ,  goc  thou  to  the 
S>ca,anD  tatt  an  hoohc,  anD  tahc  Dp  the 
fi(h  that  fitft  tommcth  Dp :  auDtthcn 
thou  haft  openeb  his  mouth,thou  (halt 
finD  ||  apictc  of  money :  that taRc,  anD 
giuc  tnto  them  to?  mcattD  thee. 

CHAP.  XVIII. 

1  Chrift  warneth  his  Difciples  to  be  humbl 
and  harmeleffe :  7  To  auoide 
and  not  todefpife  the  tittle  ones: 
cheth  howe  we  are  to  deale  with  our  brc^ 
thren  ,  when  they  offend  vs :  2.1  And 
how  oft  to  forgtue  them :  13  Which  hee 
feiteth  forth  by  a  parable  of  the  King 
that  tooke  account  of  his  feruants,  31 
And  punifhedhim  ,  who  fhewed  no  mer- 
to  his 

*%  the  fame  time  tame  the 
£>ifciplcs  Ditto  licfus, 
faying,  aaho is  the  grca^ 
tcft  m  the  BmgDome  of 
..hcaucn*  ._ 

jefus  tailcD  a  little  thilD 


offences, 
15    Tea- 


Dnto  Ijun,  anD  fct  him  in  the  imDft  of 
tljcm, 

j  3utD  faiD ,  Eerily  J,  fay  Dnto  you, 
*<£rccptyccbc  tonucrtcD ,  anD  bctomc 
as  little  thtlDjeu,ycc  (hail  not  enter  into 
the  RmgDomc  of  heaueu. 

4-  DDhofocucr  therefore  (hall  hum 
blc  hmifclfc  as  this  little  thUDc ,  the 
fame  is  gtcatcft  m  the  Btngbomc  of 
heaueu. 

5  3tnD  \Dho  fo  (hall rctciuc  one  futh 
little  thilb  m  my  namc,retciueth  me. 

6  *25ut  lDIjo  fo  fljau  offcnD  one  of 
thefc  little  ones  lbhith  bclccucmmc,  it 
mere  better  fo:  him  that  a  milttone 
llicr c  hangeD  about  his  iictRc,  anD  that 
hec  lDcrc  DjolDncD  m  the  Depth  of  the 
Sea. 

7  Cnaoc  Ditto  theiDojlbbceaufc  of 
offences:  foz  itmuttnccDsbcthat  offen 
tcs  comc:but  iDo  to  that  man  by  lDhom 
the  offence  tommcth. 

8  *t©hcrefo?c  if  t\)y  IjanD  oj  thy 
footc  offcnD  thee,  tut  tljcm  off,  aiiDtaft 
them  from  thee:  it  is  better  fo2  thecto 
enter  into  life  halt  o?  maimcD ,  rather 
then  hauing  tiDo  hattDs  o?  tiho  fcctc,to 
be  caft  utto  cucrlafhng  fire. 

9  3MD  if  thine  etc  offcnD  thccplutRc 
it  out ,  anD  caft  it  from  thec :  it  is  better 
fotthectonitcrmtoltfcibithoncctc,ra' 
thcr  then  fjauing  tvbo  cies,to  be  caft  into 
hell  fire. 

10  XaRchccD  that  yccDcfptfc  not  one 
ofthefc  little  ones  :fo?  3lfaybntoyou, 
that  tn  heaueu  their  Angels  do  aliDaics 
bcholD  the  face  of  my  father  Vbhich  ts  m 
hcaucn. 

11  *5fo?  the  fonne  of  man  is  come  to 
faucthauvhiehttjasioft. 

12  *^om  tljinRc  ycc  i  if  a  man  hauc 
anhunDjcDnjccpc,  anD  one  of  them  be 
gone  aftray ,  Doth  he  not  icaue  the  tunc 
tic  anD  nine ,  anD  gocth  utto  the  moun 
tames ,  anD  fccReth  thattbljra)  is  gone 
aftray  < 

1  j  3inD  if  fo  be  that  he  finD  it ,  tl  crtly 
gjfay  Vmto  you,  hec  rcioyccthmojcof 
that  fheepe,  then  of  the  tunetic  anD  tunc 
Which  tt>cnt  not  aftray. 

14  <£ucu  fo ,  tt  ts  not  the  ID  ill  of  your 
father  iDhitl)  is  in  hcaucn ,  that  one  of 
thefc  little  ones  (hotilD  pcrifli. 

is  trq^ojeoucr,  *  if  thy  Mother  (hail 
trcfpaffc'agamft  thee,  gocaub  tciihim 
his  fault  bcttDccnc  thee  anD  him  alone: 
!  if  he  (hall  hcatc  tljec ,  thou  pad  gaiticD 

1  thy  brother. 
16  25utifhciDillnothcarethee,thcn 

tattc 


'Chap.  ip. 
14  I. cor, 
14.20. 


fcMarkc9< 
4  i.Jukc  1 7. 


'Chap.y. 
;o.mar.(?, 
45- 


•Luke  19. 

10. 

M-Ur.C  ly. 

4- 


•  Leuir.  19 

I7.1uKc  17 


Offorgiuenefle.      S.Matthew.        Diuorccment. 


"Deur  19 
1  j.iolinS. 
1  7.  l-cor. 
1 3.1.  hcbr. 


"i.Cor.y. 

9.s-chc(3- 
14. 

*  lohn  :o. 
z  5 . 1  .cor. 


5-4- 


"Lul(ci7. 
1- 


«  "JfO.OMH- 

a.ffilmr, 

which  after 
futtptitlingt 
the  ounce, u 
I  87,/l.lO.i 

II  Or,  bt- 
foHfht him 


mane  pente 
is  the  eighth 
p.trt  of  an 
ounce  yVphteh 

fteryjhil- 

linii  1  he 
ounce  it  -j.d. 


tattcibith  thee  one  02  nbo  11102c,  that 
m*thc  mouth  of  ttbo  0:  tlnecibttncfrcs, 
eucryttwD  maybccfrablifhcD. 

17  2tnDif  Dec  n)all  neglect  to  hcacc 
them,tcll  it  bnto  the  Church :  25ut  if  he 
neglcctto  hcarcthc  Church,  let  him  be 
bnto  thee  as  an  "heathen  man,  anD  a 
publicane. 

is  Ocrily3J  fay  bnto  you,*  rehatfo; 
cucr  ye  (hall  buiDc  on  earth ,  (hall  bee 
bouuDmheauen:  anD  lbhatfocucr  ycc 
(l)all  loofe  on  earth,  (hall  bee  loofcD  in 
hcaucu. 

19  3(gaiuc  3  fay  Imto  you ,  that  tf 
two  ofyou  (hall agree  on  earth  astoir 
thing  anything  that  thcvlhail  affcc,  it 
(hail  bee  Done  foz  them  of  my  father 
which  is  in  hcaucu. 

20  jfo?  Where  two  02  thzee  are  ga-- 
thcreD  together  in  my  jBanic,  there  am 
3ImthcmiD(tofthem. 

21  C  Xhcn  came  ^cter  to  him ,  anD 
faiD ,  1L02D,  how  oft  (hall  my  bzothcr 
finncagainftmcc ,  anD  31  foigiuehmw 
*  till  fcuen  times  i 

iz  'JJcfus faith  bnto  him ,  3  f*iv  not 
bnto  thee,  <Hnttllfcucn  tunes  :but,3fln; 
till  feucntic  tunes  feucn. 

23  C  Xhcrefoic  is  thclungDomcof 
hcaucu  liHcneD  bnto  a  tcrtamc  lung, 
Which  WoulD  taltc  accompt  of  his  fee 
uants. 

24  SftiDWhenhce  haD  begun  to  ret 
Uon,  one  was  b:ought  bnto  him Which 
ought  him  ten  thoufanD  I!  talents. 

25  But  fojafmuch  as  hee  haD  not  to 
pay,hislo2D  tommanbeD  himtobec 
(blD,  anD  his  Wife, aiiDchtlDJcn, anD  all 
thathchaD.auDpaymenttobcmaDc. 

26  Xhcfcruaiitthcrfo2efcllDoWnc, 
anD  ||W02(hippcD  him ,  faying,  ?Lo2D, 
haucpanenccUnthmec,aiiD3J  mill  pay 
thee  all. 

27  Xhcn  t()c  IL02D  of  that  fcruant 
luas  moucD  ibith  companion,  anD  loo= 
fcDhtm.anDfozgauchimtheDcbr. 

28  2i5ntthc  fame  fcruant  \bcnt  our, 
anD  fount)  one  of  his  fclloW-fcruatits, 
Which  ought hun an  hutiDicD  ||  pence: 
aiiDheeiayDhatiDcsonhim,  atiDtooUe 
him  by  the  th:otc,  fayiug.pay  nice  that 
thou  oweft. 

29  3nD  his  fellow  fcruant  fell  Dottme 
athisfeetc'.auD  befoughthuu,  faying, ! 
nauc  patience  With  me,  auD  3  Will  pay 
tljee  all. 

30  :3iiiDhcWouiDtiot:buttticntauD 
calf  him  into  p.'ifon ,  till  rjee  fhoulD  pay 
the  Debt.  : 


31  £>o  When  h»s  fellow  fcrtiants 
fail)  What  Ibas  Doncthcy  tbere  bcry  fo- 
!  ne,  anD  came,  anD  tolD  bnto  their  I02D 
all  that  was  Done. 

32  Xhen hislo2D,after that hee hao 
calico  hun,  faiD  bnto  him,  £>  thou  wic- 
;ucd  fcruant,  3  fo2gauc  thee  all  that 
Debt  betatife  thou  DcurcDft  me : 
I  35  £>houiDclt  not  thou  alfohaue  haD 
1  companion  on  thy  fciloib  feruant,eucn 
as'JhaDpiticonthcei 

34  2inD  histo2DWasW2oth,  anDDc 
liucrcDhunto  thct02tnent02S ,  till  hec 
(h  oulD  pay  all  that  Ibas  Due  bnto  hun. 

35  £>o  liueWifc  (hall  my  heaucnly 
jfathcr  Doe  alfo  bnto  you ,  if  ycc  from 
your  hearts  foigiuc  not  cucry  one  his 
brother  their  trcfpafTcs. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

2.  Chnft.  bcilcth  the  fickc  :  3  anfwercththe 
Phanfees  concerning  diuorcement:  io  (hew- 
er.!! when  manage  is  neceflary:  13  recciucrh 
htlc children:  \6  inftruclctluhe  yongman 
howtoattaineetemalllifc,  10  and  how  to 
be  perfect:  13  tclleth  his difciplcs  how  h.ird 
it  is  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God,  2.7  and  promifech  reward  to  thofe 
that  forfake  any  thing,  to  follow  him. 

&£$W5  /3D  it  tame  to  paffc, "  that 
£&/l$Mfi ru?)cn  ^efus  haD  fmifhcD 
**>\  >&  thcfcfayiiigs.heDeparteD 
%£  from  <5alilee,aub  tame  m? 
*.-***&  to  the  toafles  of  3JuDca, 
bcyouD3Io.2Danc: 

I    2   3tnD  great  mnltittJoes  follolheD 
I  him, anD  he  hcaleD  them  there. 

3  C  Xhc  phanfees  alfo  came  bnto 
him,  tempting  him,  auD  faying  bnto 
him,  Js  it  laibfuu  fo2  a  man  to  puta* 
lbay  his  ibife  fo;  euery  caufc  t 

4  3tuDhceaufroereD,anDfatDbnto 
thcui,  J?auc  ye  not  reaD,*  that  he  lbliich 
mane  them  at  the  beginning .  maDc 
them  male  anD  female  < 

1  3(uD  faiD ,  *  ^02  this  caufc  (hall  a 
;  manleaue  father  anD  mother, auD  (hail 
ticauc  to  his  lbtfc :  anb  *  they  ttoame 
|n)aibconefleil). 

6    DDhcrcfoic  they  are  no  mo2e 
ttbame,  but  one  fled),  rohat  therefore 
;  god  ham  ioyncD  together,  let  not  man 
putafunDer. 

!  7  Xhey  fay  bnto  him ,  *  ttMjy  Did 
fPofcsthciicommaiiDtogiueatbuting 
of  D:uo2cemcnt,anD  to  put  her  aibay  i 

8  V)(c  faith  bnto  them,  UBofcs,  bc> 

caufc  of  tljc  haronefle  of  your  hearts, 

1  fuffcrcD 


'  Mjt.  ie. 


JW.I.17. 


fphc 
\6. 


.Cor.6. 


Jcut.  14. 


Little  children.  Chap.xx.  The  firft,  lall. 


mar.  I  o.l  i. 
ukci«.l8. 
l.cor.  7. 11 


"Mirk.  10. 
H.lukc  iS 
'5- 


"  Mirkc  10 

■  7.lukc 
18.18. 


'Exod.10. 


furTcrcb  vou  to  put  aibayyour  Unites: 
but  from  the  beginning  it  mas  not  fo. 

9  'anbj  fay  bnto  you,tt3hofocucr 
(bail  put  a\bay  his  vuifc,  cjcccpt  it  be  fo2 
fonucation ,  anb  (nail  marry  another, 
committcth  abultcry :  anb  \bl)ofo  mat 
ricthhcribhirijisputa.bay.bothtoni 
mitaoulteey. 

10  c  ^is  Difciplcs  fay  bnto  Dun ,  3i 
tl)c  cafe  of  the  man  be  fo  Hurt)  his  Wife, 
ttisnotgoobtoniarric. 

11  2i5uthcc  faib  bnto  them,  ail  men 
cannot  retciue  this  faying,  fauc they  to 
ibhomttisgiucn. 

u  jfoj  there  arc  fomc  eunucbes, 
lbhuh  tticrc  fo  borne  fcotn  their  1110 
thers  ibombc :  anb  there  arc  fomc  <£u 
nuches ,  ibhuh  \bcre  mabc  <eunuches 
ofmcn:anbthercbe£ututchcs,  ibhuh 
hauc  mabc  themfclucs  €unuchcs  fo: 
thcHingbomcofheaucnsfaUe.  tycthat 
is  able  to  rcccuie  it,  let  him  reccmc  ir. 

13  ITXhctUbcre  there  brought  Dit- 
to him  little  chUDJcn,  that  he  fhoulb  put 
his  hanbs  on  them ,  anb  pjap :  anb  the 
btfciplcsrcbURCbthcm. 

14  26ut3lcfusfaib,S>uft"erlittlc cbtl 
bjen,  anbfo2btb  them  not  to  come  bnto 
me:  ftuoffuthtspBingbomc  ofheaucn. 

15  anb  he  laiochtshaubsonthcm, 
anb  beparttb  thence. 

16  <L*anbbchoU),onccamcanDfaiD 
bnto  htm,  000b  matter ,  lbhat  goob 
thing  fhall  3  bo ,  that  J  may  ham  etc* 
nail  life  t 

17  anb  he  fait)  Ditto  him ,  mwM 
left  thou  me  goob  t  there  is  none  goob 
but  one,  that  is  C3oD:  but  if  thou  Unit  en 
tcr  into  ItfcRcep  the  commanbements. 

is  l?c  faith  bnto  him>D3hich^1lerus 
faiD,*Xhou(haltbonottuu-ocr,Xhou 
(halt  not  tommtt  amiltccy ,  Xhott  (halt 
not  ftcalc ,  Xhou  (halt  not  bearc  falfc 
ttntnefle, 

19  honour  thy  father  anb  thy  mo- 
ther :  anb,  Xhou  (halt  loue  thy  neigh- 
bour as  thy  fclfc. 

20  Xhc  young  man  faith  bnto  him, 
ail  thefc  things  haucH  sept  front  my 
youth  bp :  tbhat  lacftc  3  pet *  u     ■  ,t 

n  jefusfaib  bnto  himjf thou ibilt 

be  perfect,  goe  anb  fell  that  thou  haft, 
anb  giuc  to  the  poo2C,  anb  thou  (bait 
haue  ttcafure  mheauen :  anb  tome  anb 

folloibmc.  u  %  . 

ii  35uttbhcntheyoungmanhcarb 

that  faying,  he  lbcntattmy  fojro.brull : 
foHKhabgrcatpoffeffions. 
13  CXhcufaib  Jefus  bnto IjtcBif 


ciplcs ,  Merely  3J  fay  bnto  you ,  that  a 
rich  man  (bail  harbly  enter  into  the 
hmgbomcof  heauen. 

24  anbagaiuc  5  fay  bnto  you,  3it 
iseaftcrfoj  a  camel  to  goe  tho:oib  the 
cycofanccblcthcnfozanchiiiantoeii 
tcr  into  the  tungbome  of  <5oU. 

25  nahcnhisbifctplcshcarb  it ,  they 
iberc  crcccotuglyama5cb, faying,  uaho 
thencanbefaucbi 

26  25ut3fcfusbchcU>them,  anbfaib 
bnto  them ,  naith  men  this  isbnpolTi 

:  blcbut  ttnth  C5ob  ai  tilings  ate  pouible. 

17  C'Xhcnanfiucreb peter,  anb 
faib  bnto  him ,  ZBcholb.ttic  hauc  fo2fa 
Ucnail,anb  folloibcb  thee ,  what  (hall 
[ibe  haue  therefore j. 

18  anb  3lefuB  faib  bnto  tbem,lte 
!  rily  31  fay  bnto  you,that  yc  ibhich  hauc 
;folloibebme,tn  the  regeneration  tt>hcn 
the  Sonne  of  man  thai  fit  in  the  tlbonc 
ofhtsg!o;y,*ycairo(l)ai  fit  upon  nbcluc 
tlHones ,  uiogmg  the  tibelitc  tribes  of 
'Jfracl. 

19  anb  cucry  one  that  hath  fozfaUcn 
houfcs,02b2eth2cii,02Gftcrs,o2  father, 
02  mothers  ttnfe,  02  chflb2cn,02  lanbs, 
fo2  my  Raines  fabc,  fhall  rccciuc  an 
hunb2eb  folb,  anofball  mheritc  cueria= 
(hug  life. 

jo  *  26ut  many  that  are  firft,  (hall  be 
laft,  anb  the  laft  fljail  be  firft. 

CHAP.   XX 

Chnft  by  thefinnlitnde  ot  tlielabouters  ID  the 
vineyard,!  lieweth  that  God  is  debtor  vnto  no 
man  :  17  ForeU'lIcthhispafsion:  20  By  an- 
f\\ erinc,  the  mother  of  Zcbedeus  children,  tea. 
chethhisdilciplestobc  lowly:  30  jndgiucih 
two  blmdr  men  then  light. 

j£>2the  umgbomcofhea- 
uen  is  liltc  bnto  a  man  that 
is  an  houfholbcr,  ibhuh 
lbcntottt  early  in  the  11102 


§Bu£#)  nutgto  hire  labourers  in 
to  Ins  bmeyarb. 

2  anb  ibhcn  hee  hab  agrccb  ttnth 
the  labourers  fo.z  a  |!pntyabay,hcfcnt 
them  into  his  bmcyarb. 

3  anb  he  lbcut  out  about  the  thirb 
hourcanb  faib  others  llanbiug  iblc  m 
the  mar  net  place, 

4  anb  fatb  bnto  thcm,<£o  ycaifo  into 
tbebmcyarb,  »tt)hatfocuer  is  right.U 
ttnlgutcyou.aiibthcyujcntthciriiiay. 

<,  agamchcttmit  out  about  the  firth 
annnmthhourcauODioiilicibife. 

6    anb  about  the  clciifiuhhourc, he 

\beut  out,  anb  founb  others  daubing 

C  ibie 


'  Mark. 10 

iS.Iukc 

18.28. 


Luke  >2. 


'Cliap  10. 
16. mark. 

10  |i.  luk. 
1330. 


m-inc  peny 

p.irl  cf  .ti 
euf.it  whicb 
tfter  '  nt 

ii  ■ , 

,  r.  ■  . 


Labourers  hired.      S.Matthew.     Two  blind  men. 


||  Or,  hue 
contim.cH 
enchoure 
onel}. 


"Chip.  I?. 


'Mar.io. 
ii.lukci8. 
Si- 


•Ioh.i8.ji 


•Mjr.io. 


ible.atib  faith  bnto  them,  BSljp  ftauD  pe 
!)ecc  all  tljc  Dap  ioic  ^ 

7  Xhcp  fapbnto  ljtm ,  Uceatife  no 
man  Dath  hire  b  bs.  UcCattlj  bnto  them, 
ii5opeaifoititothebuuparb:anbttiljat 
foeucrisright.tijatwallpcrcenuc. 

s  5>o  tohen  men Vbas  come, tlje  loft 
of  the  bineparb  faith  bnto  his  5>tctti 
aro,  Call  the  labourers,  and  gtuc  them 
their  hircbegmtutig  from  tlje  ia(t,bnto 
rhcftrlr. 

9  3ltib  lbhni  thep  came  that  were  hi- 
red about  tlje  elcuntth  hour  c,  thep  r  mu 
ucbcucrpmanapnuc. 

10  26ut ttiljen tlje  firft tame,  thep Cup- 
pofeb  that  thep  fboulb  bauc  rccciueb 
moje,  anb  thepUKeibifc  rcccuico  cucrp 
man  a  petite. 

11  anbtbhett  thep  hab  rccciueb  it,thcp 
murtnurebagatnftthegoobtuanofthc 
houfe, 

n  ^apuuxXDcfclaltilDancttijought 
but  one  bourc,anb  thou  haft  mabcthnn 
equail  bnto  bs,  ttihteh  hattc  borne  the 
burben,  anb  heat  of  tlje  bap. 

13  25ut  he  anfrocrcb  one  of  them  anb 
faib,5Fncnb,3fbotljcenoVb2ong:bibtt 
not  thouagrcc  ttntlj  me  fo?  a  pcnie  < 

1+  1EaHc  that  thine  ts,  anb  goc  thp 
tt>ap,3J  ttnilgiuc  bnto  this  latt,  euenas 
bnto  thee. 

15  gis  it  not  Iaibfuli  foi  mce  to  boc 
tbhat  3  ttnittnth  mine  ottmc  <  3fs  tljmc 
epc  null,  becaufc  3  am  goob  i 

i6  *&otheiaftfl)ailbcurft,anbthc 
firftiaft:  foimattpbcc  callcb,  butfclbc 
ctjofen. 

17  C  *3lnb  3Jcfus  going  bp  to  tyiv 
rufalcm,  tooue  tlje  tlbeluc  btfctplcs  & 
parttnthcttiap, anb  fatb  bnto  them, 

is  28efiolb,U)egoebpto$icrulalcm, 
anb  tlje  donne  of  man  (bail  be  bcrraicb 
bnto  tlje  cljtefe  ^ncfls ,  anb  bnto  tlje 
Scribes,  anb  thep  (ball  conbemnc  Dim 
to  Death, 

19  '^nbtljaibeliucr  Ijimto  tljedScn- 
tiles  to  moclte,  anb  to  fcourge ,  anb  to 
crunfie  Ijtm :  anb  tlje  tbtrb  bap  Ijc  (ball 
rifcagame. 

io  C*3Ebcneamcto  Dim  the  mother 
of  zebebeescl)ilb«n,  Jbirbnec  fonnes, 
ibo2fl)ippmgl)im,anbbcfinngafcrtain 
tiling  of  him. 

2 1  anb  be  fatb  bnto  her ,  narjat  lbilt 
thou  1 5>bc  faith  bnto  Ijuu,  tSrant,tbat 
theft  mp  tibo  fonnes  map  (it,  tlje  one  on 
thy  right  hanb,anb  the  other  on  tlje  left 
inthptutigbonir. 

ix  25ut  3Jcfus  anfiuercb,  anb faib, 


#e  Knoib  not  ibhat  pc  attic.  %x e  pc  a- 
ble  to  butiuc  of  the  cup  that  3  (ball 
DnnUeof ,  anb  to  be  baptijeb  Vbith  the 
bapnfme  that  3  am  bapti5eb  ttnth' 
Xljcpfapbnto  him,  nacarcable. 

23  anbhefaitb  bnto  them,  #ee  (ball 
tmnUe  mbceb  of  mp  cup,  anb  be  bapti- 
3CD  lbitlj  tlje  bapttftnc  that  3  am  bapte 
5cb  ibith :  but  to  fit  on  mp  right  hanb, 
anb  on  mp  left,  isnotmmetogiue,  but 

it  lhall  begmen  tO  thCm  fO«l  tt»hOU1  it  IS  P«!C' 

parcb  of  mp  father. 

2+  2utbtbhcnthetcn  heard  it,  the? 
lbcre  moucb  lbith  mbignation  agautft 
tljet\bob;eth?en. 

25  asufjefus  callcb  them  bnto  him, 
anb  faib,  *jac  Knotti  tljat  tlje  pzmccsof 
the  (Bentilcs  crercifc  bonunion  oucr 
tljcm,  anb  tljcp  that  arc  great ,  crcrcife 
autljoiitiebponrhem. 

26  25ut  it  frjall  not  be  Co  among  pou: 
25ntibhofocucr  ttull  bee  great  among 
pou,  let  him  be  pour  mimlrcr. 

27  3inb  ttihofoeuer  rbill  be  ehicfe  a? 
mongpou,lcthtmbepourferuam. 

28  Cucn  as  the  *  5>onnc  of  man 
came  not  to  be  mf  tttttrcD  bnto,but  to  mu 
niftcr,  anb  to  gtuc  hts  hfe  a  ranfomc  fo? 
manp. 

29  'anbasthepbepartebfrom^ie 
ncljo ,  agrcatmultitubcfolioibcDhtm. 

jo  C3nbbe!)olb,ttt)oblinbmcnfit' 
rtngupthetbap  fibe,  ibhen  thep  hears 
that  3Jefus  pafleb  bp,  crtcb  out ,  fapmg, 
feaue  mcrcic  on  bs,£D  jXo^b^ljou  lonue 
ofDauib. 

31  3nb  the  multttubc  rebuaeb  them, 
becaufc  thep  fbouib  holbc  their  peace: 
but  tljep  eneb  the  mo;e,  (aping ,  ^aue 
mercie  on  bs,  €)  jXo^b ,  thou  fonne  of 
SDauib. 

31  ^nb^cfusQoob  dill ,  anb  callcb 
them,  anb  faibe,  nahat  mm  pecthat3J 
fljau  boc  bnto  pou? 

33  1Chcp  tap  bnto  Dim ,  ?Loib ,  that 
ourepesmapbeopeneb. 

3+  5>o  Scfus  hab  companion  on 
thcm,anb  touchebthnr  tyes:  anb  un* 
mcbiatlp  thnr  tyes  rccnueb  Oght,  anb 
tDcpfollotticbljim. 

CHAP.    XXT. 

Chrift  ridethinto  Hicrufalcm  vpon  anafle 
11  driueth  die  buyers  and  fellers  out  of  the 
Temple,  17  curferh  the  fig-tree,  1,3  put- 
teth  to  filence  the  Priefts  and  Elders,  18  and 
rebuketh  them  by  the  (imilitude  of  the  two 
fonnes,  35  and  the  husbandmen,  who  flew 
fuch  as  were  rent  vnto  them. 

3lnb 


•Luk.12 


•PhiUj. 


"Mario. 

-i.-UukciS 


Houfe  of prayer.        Chap.xxj.       Afigtreecurfed.J 


"Efai.iJi. 
it . 7  ji  h  9. 
9.10)10  1  a. 
'5 

*  Marke  1  1 


'  Markcn. 
1  jjuke  19. 

45-iohu  1. 


•Eki.56.7 

•Jcrc7.11. 
mar.  1 1.17. 
luke  1  ■)  Y' 


')mV^lmSb  tonto  $ietufaient, 
S^anb  mere  tome  to  Beth- 
phage ,  t»nto  the  mount  of 
_  £>liucs ,  then  fent  31efus 
tiboSnfciples, 

2.  laying  bnto  tbent ,  <5ocmtotbc 
\nliagcoucragamft  you ,  anbftratgbt; 
ibay  ycc  (ball  finb  an  3KTe  ticb ,  ansa 
tolt  lbttb  \)tx :  loofe  them ,  ant)  bang 
them  Ditto  inc. 

$  3nb  if  any  man  fay  oug!)t  unto 
you, ycc  (ban fay,Xbc?Lojb  bath  nccb 
of  tbcm,  anb  ttraigbtibay  Ijce  Vbtil  fenb 
tbem. 

4.  Silltbis  Ibasbone,  that  it  might 
be  fulfillcb  tt)bicb  ibas  fpofecn  by  tlje 
^opbct,faytng, 

5  *%t\\  pec  tbeoaugbtet  of£>ton, 
25eholb ,  tbyRtngcominethbntotbec, 
medic,  anoutttngtoponan^trc,  anb  a 
colt,tbcfoaieofan3UTc. 

6  *3nbtbc3>ifciplestbcnt,anbbib 
as  Jefus  tommanbeb  them, 

7  3inb  brought  the  SlfTc ,  anb  the 
colt.anb  put  on  tbcnitbeir  clothes,  anb 
they  fct  bun  thereon. 

s  3nbaiwygreattimltitubcfpjcab 
their  garments  in  the  ibay,  others  tut 
boibnc  branches  from  the  trees ,  anb 
ftraujcb  them  tn  the  inay. 

9  3nb  the  multitubcs  that  rbent 
bcfozc,anb  that  follolbcb,  ertcb,  faying, 
foofanna  to  the  fonneof  3Dauib :  26lef= 
Ceo  is  he  that  commeth  in  the  /Ramc  of 
the  ?Lo2b,l?ofaimaitt  the  btgbctt. 

10  *3in&  lbben  bee  ibas  conic  into 
l^ierufalcm ,  ail  the  citic  tbas  mooucb, 
faymg,t©boistbts* 

11  anbtbcmultitubefaib,XbiSis 
gjefus  the  gwpbet  of  ifta5atctb  of 
Galilee. 

11  C  3bib  3f  cuts  Ibcnt  into  the  tcm^ 
pic  of  ©ob ,  anb  cad  out  all  them  that 
folb  anb  bought  m  the  Xcinplc,  anb  o- 
ucrthjctt)  the  tables  of  the  money  than 
gers ,  anb  the  feats  of  them  tbatfolbe 
bouts, 

1?  3bib faib Ditto  them,3Jt  is iftnttcn, 
*fl0y  houfc  (hall  be  tallcb  the  houfe  of 
pjayer.'butyeebaucma&eitabenncof 

theeucs. 

14  anbtbeblinbanDtbeiametame 
to  him  inthc  Xcmpie,?  hchealeb  them. 

1$  3inb  ttoben  the  thiefe  0;iefts  anb 
Scribes  fatb  the  itoonberfull  things 
thathebib,  $  tbctbiftueu  trying  mthe 
temple,  *  faying,  $ofannato  thefonnc 
of  3Dautb,  th  ey  ibere  fo?c  bifpleaftb , 


is  Suibfaibbnto  him,  Reared  thou 
lPhatthefefay  v  3nb  Jefns  faith  Unto 
thcm,*iea,  baucyeeneuerreab,*<rDut 
of  the  mouth  of  babes  anb  fucKlmgs 
thou  haft  perfectcbpjatfe* 

17  CHnbbclefttbem,anbtbentout 
01  the  titieutto  zSetbany.aim  he  lobgcb 
there. 

18  /I3ottntt  the  morning,  asheere- 
turneb  into  the  citic,  he  butigrcb. 

i  19  *3mbU)henhefarbafiggctreein 
tbetbay ,  bcetametoit,anbfounbno 
thing  thereon  but  leaues  only ,  ano  faib 
bitto  it ,  Het  no  fruite  groibc  on  thee 
hctuefonnaro  fouuer.  3lnb  pzefeutly 
the  figge  tree  umbcrcb  albay. 

20  3Uibrbben  the  SMctplcs  faib  it, 
they  marueileb ,  faying ,  ^ott)  foonc  is 
ithenggctcccunthcrcbaibay; 

21  3lefus  anfroereb ,  anb  faib  bnto 
them,llettlygiraybiitoyou,tfyechauc 
faitb,anbboubtnot,yce(baiinotoncly 
bocthiswhichisdoneto  the  figge  tree,biit 
I  alfo,  if  ye  (ball  fay  onto  tbtsmountame, 
i  Be  thou  remoueb,  anb  be  thou  taft  into 
;  the  £>ca,tt  (ball  be  bone. 

22  3Inb  all  things  rbbatfocuer  yce 
(baiiaf&einpjayer,  belectung,  ye  Chan 
rcteuie. 

2$  C^tibtbbcnbetbascomcinto 
the  temple ,  the  cbicfepnefts  ano  the 
Clbtrs  of  the  people  came  bnto  hint  as 
herbastcathmg,anbfaib,2SyiPhatau 
thontic  boeft  thou  thefc  things  ?anb 
ibho  gauetbecthis  autbontie* 

24  3lnb  Jefus  anfmcreb ,  anb  faib 
bnto  them ,  3  alfo  thill  afftc  you  otic 
thing,  ibhub  ifyctcll  mCJ  inlibc  Ibife 
rutu tell  you  by  rbbat  autijontic  3  boc 
thefc  things. 

25  Xhebaptifme  of^lohn ,  Vbhcntc 
tbas  it  i  fromheauen ,  0?  of  men;  anb 
tbcyrcafonebrbitb  thcmfclucs  faying, 
3fU)cfbaliray,  jfcombeaucn,beettnll 
fay  tonto  t)S,03hy  bib  ye  not  then  belccuc 
bum 

26  2Sutiflbc (ball fay, jSDfmcn.tbc 
|fcaretbepcoplc,*fo?ailholb3ohnasa 
^jopljet. 

27  3mbtbeyanfu)ereb3fcfiis,attb 

fait) ,  nac  cannot  tell.  3ub  he  faib  bnto 
them,  ^either  tell  3  youby  Uihatau- 
thojitie  31  boc  thefc  things. 

2s  C25ut  ibhatthinlicyou  ;^ccr> 
tame  man  hab  tibo  founts  anb  he  tame 
to  tbefirft,anbfaiD,  S>omtc,goeVbo?lic 
tobayinmytiineyatb. 

29  I^canfujcrcb,  ? faib, ^Itblll not: 
butaftcrrbarbhcrcpcntcb.anbtcent. 
€  2  30  ^ub 


'P&L8.J. 


•Mar!.:  i 


.hrkc  1 1. 
'.iukeio. 


'  Chap. 


Of  the  Vineyard.    S.Matthew.        The  marriage. 


•Chap.;.: 


•EG. 5  i. 
crc.2.  li 
mark.  I  z.l. 


•Chap,  j  6. 
S.iohn.i i. 
53- 


•Pfal.ll8 


30  &nbhce  tame  to  the  feconb,  anb 
fatb  itbetbife :  anb  hec  anftocrcb ,  anb 
fatb  ,5  §oe  fir  >  anb  tbent  not. 

31  nahcthcr  of  tbem  tibaine  Uto  ttjc 
itull  of  his  father  i  Xhep  fapbnto  him, 
Xhc  ftrft.  3Jcfns  fairt)  Unto  them,311e' 
relp  31  fap  bnto  pou ,  that  the  $ubli> 
canes  ano  the  harlots  go  into  the  Ring- 
Dome  of  d5ob  before  pou. 

3i  5Fo? *3lohn tame bnto pott  m the 
tbap  of  nghtcoufneffcanb  pe  bclceucb 
htm  not :  but  the  |&ublicancs  anb  the 
harlots  btleeueb  him.  3inb  perbhenpe 
hab  fecne  it,  repentcb  not  aftcribarb, 
that  vc  might  bclecue  him. 

33  C^eare  another  parable,  inhere 
ibas  a  ccrtatne  hottfc-hoiocr ,  *  ibhteh 
pianteb  a  fllitteparb  ,  anb  hebgcb  it 
tounb  about ,  anb  btggeb  a  rbinc-puffc 
in  it,  anb  built  a  totber ,  anb  let  it  out  to 
hufbanbmen,  anb  ibent  mto  a  farrc 
countrep. 

34  ano  tbhen  the  time  of  thcfrttitc 
butbneere,  he  fent  bis  feruants  to  the 
hufbanbmen,  that  the?  might  rccciue 
tlje  fruits  of  tt. 

35  3ttb  the  hufbanbmen  toofec  his 
feruants,  anb  beat  one,  anb  mllcban^ 
otber,anbfroncbanotber. 

16  3lgamc  hec  fent  other  feruants, 
moe  then  the  firfl,  anb  tjjep  bib  bnto 
riiciu  Wicunfc. 

37  25utlaft  of  all,  be  fent  bnto  them 
htsfonne,  faptng,  %bcp  ibill  reuerente 
mpfonne. 

38  25ut  tbhen  the  hufbanbmen  fatb 
the  fonne.tbcpfatb  among  themfelues, 
*Xhis  ts  the  hctre,tomc,letbsHil!  him, 
anbletbsfeafc  onhismhcrttante. 

39  3lno  tbep  taught  htm,  anb  caQ 
him  out  of  tbeUmeparb.anb  flctt)  him. 

40  ashen  the  %o;n  therefore  of  the 
^tneparbconunctb,tbbatlbillbcboc 
bnto  thofc  hufbanbmen  i 

41  Xbep  fapbnto  bim,$c  rbill  mtfc; 
rablp  beftrop  thofe  tbicfteb  men ,  anb 
tbtll  let  out  hts  tlineparb  bnto  other 
hufbanbmen,  tbbicb  fljali  renber  bun 
thefrtttts  in  their  fcafous. 

41  gjefus  faith  bnto  them,  *£)ibpc 
ncuer  rcabc  in  the  Scriptures  ,  Xhc 
(tone  lbbtcl)  the  butiocrs  rcicctcb, the 
fame  is  become  the  hcao  ofthc  comer  < 
Xbts  ts  the  lLojbs  botng,anb  it  is  mar- 
uetlousm  our  eyes. 

43  Xbcrefou  fap3l  bnto  pou,  the 
Wngbome  of  e>ob  (hail  be  tattenfrom 
pott ,  attb  gmen  to  a  nation  tytngmg 
fouh  the  fruits  thereof. 


44  3nD  *  tbljofocucr  fhail  fall  on 
thisftone,fhalbcb?often:but  onibhom 
foeuer  tt  (hall  fall ,  it  tbtllgrinbc  htm  to 
poibbcr. 

45  3inb  tbhen  the  thicfe  #uefrs  anb 
l&bartfccs  hab  hearb  hts  parables.tbep 
pereeiucb  that  he  fpaftc  of  them. 

46  But  tbfoen  tljcp  fought  to  lap 
Daubs  on  him,  thep  fearcb  the  mum- 
tube ,  becaufethep  tooBcbtm  fo?  a  ^o* 
Phct. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  The  parable  ot  the  marriage  of  the  Kings 
fonne.  9  The  vocation  ofthc  Gen  tiles.  11 
The  puuifhment  of  him  that  wanted  the 
weddmg  garment.  15  Tribute  ought  to  be 
payed  to  Carfar.  13  Chiift  confuteih  the 
SadduceesfortheRefurrcclion:  54  anfue- 
reth  the  Lawyer,  which  is  the  fiiftand  great 
Commandement:  41  andpofcththcPha- 
nlecs  about  thcMeffias. 

*J  ii5b3lefusanfrocreb,*anb 

&/£&m  [VAkt  mo  tl)tm  asatne 
sp^V?  bpparablcs,anbfaib, 

ra@?S»  z  %{K  1fi»»Sbomc  of 
agjSs&Nfc  hcauen  ts  liacbnto  a  cer* 
taine  lung,ibbtcb  mabca  marriage  fo; 
htsfonne, 

3  ^no  fent  fouh  his  feruants  to  tall 
them  that  rberc  btbben  to  the  tbcbbing, 
anb  tbepibouio  not  come. 

4  agatne,  Ijee  fent  fooufj  other  fer> 
uants,  taping ,  %t\\  them  ibhieh  are 
btbben,  Bcholbc,  3  haue  pupateb  mp 
burner,  mp  oren ,  anb  mp  fatlmgsare 
btlleb,  anb  all  things  arc  reabp :  come 
bnto  the  marriage. 

5  26ut  thep  mabe  light  of  it ,  anb 
tbent  their  lbapes,  one  to  hts  farme,an* 
other  to  his  mcrchanbi3e: 

6  %r\n  the  remnant  toofte  his  fee* 
uants,  anb  intreatcb  them  fpttcfullp, 
anb  (leib  tljcm. 

7  But  tbhen  the  fetng  hearb  thereof, 
he  tbas  ttyotb ,  anb  hec  fent  foouh  hts 
armies,  anb  belfropcb  thofc  murbc' 
rers,anb  burntbp  tljetr  titie. 

8  %\)t\\  faith  D«  to  his  feruants, 
Xhc  ftebbing  is  rcabp ,  but  thep  lbhicb 
Ibcrc  btbbcn.iberc  not  ibouhp. 

9  d5oc  pec  therefore  into  the  high 
tbapes ,  anb  as  manp  as  pec  fballfinbe, 
btb  to  the  marriage. 

io  5>o  thofe  feruants  ibent  out  into 
the  high  ibapcs,anbgatl)ercb  together 
all  as  manp  as  thep  founb,  both  bab 
anb  goob ,  anb  the  ibebbtng  ibas  fur^ 
ntfljcbibithghefts. 
ii  €3nb 


•Rom.9. 
Ij.i.pet-J. 

/.cla.B.14 


•LuU  14. 

i6.tcucl. 

'9-9 


Of  Ccfars  tribute.    Chap.xxij.       Therefurreclion. 


■Clnp.so 
id. 

*M.irkcl  I. 
1  J.lukc 


fcHt'n  Oi'nf  t 

hxp.io  z 
\\Or^crif- 
lion. 

'Rom.  I).; 


"  Marke  i : 
18.  luke 
10.27. 
•Aftsjj.8. 
Dcu.25.5. 


11  C  3ub  ibDen  tljc  Bmg  came  m  to 
fee  tDe  guefts,  Dec  farbe  tUcrc  a  man, 
Vbljttl)  Dab  not  on  a  rbebbmg  garment, 

11  ^nbhec  faytlj  bnto Dun,  ifrtcnb, 
DoUnainclr  tDoiiiu  Intlicr,  not  Dauing 
a  lbcbbmg  garment  i  3lnb  Dee  Ibas 
fpeecDlcffc. 

I  j  il)cn  fain  tlje  King  to  tDe  feruants, 
Btnbe  Dim Daub  anb  foot,anb  ta&eDim 
atbay,  anb  tad  Dim  into  outer  barse> 
neffctlier  e  Cljall  be  ttieeping  ano  gnau> 
mg  of  teetl). 

1+  *  foi  many  are  calleb  ,but  fctb  arc 
tljofcn. 

15  C*XDcn\uemtfiepDatifcs,anb 
toonc  tounfeli ,  Dott)  tljey  mtgt)t  tntan- 
glcDiminDistaUte. 

16  Sue  tDcr  fcnt  out  bnto  Dim  t!)«r 
bifctplcs ,  Until  tlic  aerobians,  fapmg, 
Rafter,  lbec  tmottJtliat  tliouart  true, 
anbtcacDcft  tDc  uiay  of  ©obtn  tructli, 
neither  tarefl  tDou  foz  any  man .  foj 
tDourcgacbcttuottDcpcrfonofmcn. 

17  XellbstDercfojc.UMjattDmfeclr 
tljou?  31s  it  latbfull  to  gu»c  tribute  bt^ 
to€cfar,02not; 

18  Z5ut  3Jcfus  pcrectucb  tljctr  Une- 
HCbncffc,  anb  faib,  ©Dr  tempt  ve  me,re 
Dypocrites* 

19  £>Dett)  mc  tDc  tribute  money.  3nb 
tDcy  bzougljt  bnto  liun  a  ||  peny. 

io  3nb  6c  favtl)  bnto  tDcm ,  naljofe 
is  trjts  image  anb  ||  fupcrftription  < 

ii  SDey  fay  bnto  Dim.Ccfars.XDen 
faytDDe  bnto  tDcm,  *  Kenbcr  tDeccfojc 
bnto  Ctfar ,  tljc  tilings  tbliirf)  are  Cc< 
fars-.anb  bnto  (5ob,tl)c  tilings  rtiat  are 

450DS. 

II  a@l)cn  tDcy  Dab  Dcarb  thefe  wordes, 
tDey  marucileb,anb  lcftDim,anbibent 
tlicituiay. 

13  C*£Dcfamebay tame toljim tljc 
;S>abbuces,*lbDicDfay  tDat  tljcre  isno 
rcfurcectton,anb  afftcbliim, 

14  taping,  Rafter,  *£0ofes  faib, 
31f  a  man  Die ,  Ijauutg  no  clnibjen,  Ijis 
bjotDcr  diallmarric  Ijis  tbifc,  anb  raife 
bpfcebbntoDiStyotljer. 

15  /]5otb  tljcre  Vottt  VbitD  bsfeuen 
bictljjcn,  anb  tljc  firft  iblicn  He  Dab  ma< 
rieb  a  unfc,  beccafeb,  anb  Dauing  no  if 
fue,  left  Dis  Unfc  bnto  DistyotDer. 

16  fLiacUjife tDc fctottb alfo, anb tDc 
tDirb,bntotDefcucntti. 

i7^nbla(tofaitDeu)omanbicbaifo. 

18  3D)crefojc,  in  tDc  refurrection, 
tbDofe  unfc  (Dall  flicbe  of  tlje  fcuen  t  foj 
tljeyaiiDabDcr. 

29  3Jefus  anfroercb ,  anb  faib  bnto 


tDcm ,  Pee  boc  crrc ,  not  tmounng  tljc 
S>trlpturcs,no2  tDcpotticrof  00b. 

jo  ifo:  m  tDc  refurrection  tljep  nci< 
tljcr  marr  y,  no?  arcgiucn  in  marriage, 
but  are  as  tDe^ngcls  of  ©ob  in  Deaucn . 

31  28utas  toucljmg  tDe  refurrection 
of  tDc  bcab,Daue  yenot  ceab  trjat  uiliitli 
itoas  fpoaett  bnto  you  by  Ceob, faying, 

31  *31amtDeC5obof3tb2aDam,anb 
tDed5obof  3lfaac,  anb  tDcdsobofJla- 
tob  t  ©ob  is  not  tDc  <Kob  of  tDe  bcab, 
but  of  tDe  lining. 

33  3nb  lbDcu  tflc  mttln'tubc  Dcarb 
tDis,  tDcp  ttjerc  aflonifDeb  at  Dis  boc- 
trine. 

34.  C*2BntibDeutDe0Danfcsliab 
DearbtDatlicDabput  tlje  Sabbuces  to 
filencc,  tDev  ibere  gatljereb  togctDcr. 

35  Xljeu  one  of  tDcm ,  ttiliicl)  ttasa 
ILaibpcr ,  af  beb  him  a  queflion ,  temp- 
ting  Dim, anb  faying, 

36  :6©after,ibDtcDi6tDegreatCom; 
manbemcntin  tDcHatt)  i 

37  'Jeftis  favb  bnto  Dim,  *XDou 
(Dait  louc  tDe  llozb  tDp  ©oblbittj  all 
tfjrp  Deart,  anbibitlj  ailtljpfoulc,  anb 
until  all  tliymtnbc. 

38  XDis  is  tDc  firO  anb  great  Com 
manbement. 

39  3Jnb  tljc  fctonb  is  line  bnto  it, 
*  XDou  CDalt  louc  tDp  ncigDbour  as  tljp 
fclfc. 

40  ^Dntljcfctujo  Commanbcmcnts 
Dangaii  tDc  fLaui  anb  tDc  jDjopDets. 

41  C*n9DilctDc0Daru"csU)ercg* 
tlicreb  togctlicr,31cfusafBcbtDem, 

41  laying,  iBljat  tljinKc  yee  of 
Cijzift  i  lbliofc  fonnc  is  Dec  i  Xljcy  fay 
bnto  Dim,  itlje  fonnc  of  SPaiub. 
43  $cfattDbntotDcin,l?oU)  tDcnbotl) 
3)auib  in  fpirit  call  Dim  IL02D,  faying, 

44  Xljc  ?Lo.:b  faib  bnto  my  %oib, 
*5>it  tpou  on  my  rigljt  Danb,  till  Ji 
maKetfiine  enemies  tDyfootttoolCi 

45  gjf  S?auib  tljcn  call  Dim  fLozb, 
IjoU)  is  De  Dis  fonnc  i 

46  3nb  no  man  tbasablc  to  anfrocrc 
Dim  a  ibozb ,  ncitljcr  buril  any  man 
(from  tDat  bay  fooztlj)  afac  Dun  any 
mocquefhons. 

CHAP.   XXIII. 

1  Chnrt  admoniflieth  the  people  to  follow  the 
good  doftrine,  not  the  cuill  examples  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharifes.  5  Hisdit'iplesmullbc- 
ware  oftheir.iinbition.  13  Hecdcnounccrh 
ei^ht  woes  ae;aiaft  their  hypocrilic  and  blmd- 
nefTe:  34  andpropheciethofthedcllruclion 
of  Hici  u/aleni. 


'£»od.;.S. 


'Marks  ll 
[8. 


!ukc  10.17. 


€3 


HDfii 


'Lcuit.  1  p. 
18. 


•Mlrkc1:. 
5  5-Iukc 

20.^t. 


'PijIjio.i 


74 


Againffc  ambition,    S.Matthcw.       and  hypocrifie. 


*Luk.  1 1.46 


*Num  15. 
;8.dcut.  21 
12. 

•Mirk.  11. 

^S.lukc.i  1 
4?- 


'Iamfs  3.1 


"Ma]i.I.<5. 


'Luk 14  1  1 

and  18.  14. 


'Luk.  11. 


•M.ir.ij. 
40.  luk.  20. 
47- 


$cn  fpa'se  Ijtfws  to  the 
multttuDc,  mm  to  his  Difc 
ctplcs, 

z  <g>aying/£heS>eribe6 
anD  the  i&liarifcs  fit  in 
£J3ofcs  fcatc : 

3  3111  therefore tbhatfocucr  they  btb 
you  obfcruc,  that  obfcruc  anb  Dot,  but 
Doc  not  ye  after  their  ttwhes :  fo?  they 
fay,  anD  Doe  not. 

4  *  ifo?  they  binDchcautcburDens, 
ant)  grtetiousto  be  bo?nc,  auo  lay  them 

On  inCnS  (rjOUlDCCS,  bUt  they  thcmlelues 

lbill  not  moouc  them  ibith  one  of  their 
fingers. 

5  2i5utaiithciribo?licsthcyDoc,fo? 
to  be  fecne  of  inen:  *t!)cp  mafte  bzoab 
their  phylacteries,  anb  enlarge  the  bo?; 
bets  of  their  garments, 

6  *3nD  lone  the  bppcrmoftroomes 
at  fcafrs,  anb  the  chiefe  feats  in  the  £>t- 
nagogues, 

7  3lnD  greetings  in  the  markets, 
ana  to  be  tallcb  of  men,&abbi,  aRabbt, 

8  *23utbcnotyetailcD33abbi:fo? 
onets  voire  Rafter,  eucnChnO,  anb  all 
ycareb2cfh?cii. 

9  3nb  call  no  man  your  father  bpon 
the  earth  •  *  to?  one  is  your  father  lbhtch 
isinheancn. 

10  ^either  beyecaileD  mailers:  fo? 
one  is  pour  Rafter,  euen  Ch?itt. 

1 1  zsut  hee  that  is  greatcG  among 
you,  (hall  be  your  fcrtiant. 

ii  *3n&iDhoforoera)aileraitliim' 
fclfc,  than  beabafco :  anb  he  that  than 
humble  himfclfe,  fhail  be  craitcD. 

13  C  But  *iboe  bnto  you ,  5>tribcs 
anb  pharifees,  hypocrites .  fo?  yee  fl)ut 
bpthcBingDomofheancnagatnftmcn: 
f  0?  yee  neither  goc  in  your  fellies,  net- 
tbet  fuffctr  ye  them  that  arccntring,  to 
goein. 

14  *i©ocl)ntoyou5>cribcsanb0ha' 
nfees,  hypocrites  >fo?  yee  Deuourciu^ 
Dotbcshoufcs,  anDfo?  ap?ctcneemat$e 
long  pjayer  1  therefore  ye  Chan  rcceiuc 
the  greater  Damnation. 

i<,  BDoe  bnto  you  5>tribcsanD#ha; 
rtfes,hypotritcs  fo?ycc  compaffc£>ea 
anb  lanb  to  malic  one  $?ofclyte,  anb 
ibhcn  hec  is  mabc,  yee  mafte  hlnitibo 
folb  mo?c  the  chilbe  of  hell  then  your 
felues. 

i6  nsoc  bnto  you,  yee  blinb  guibcs, 
lbhichfay,  nshofocuer  fhail  frocare  by 
thc1Tciiiplc,ttlstiothing:btitibbofoc< 
tier  dial  frocare  by  the  golb  of  the  3Cem- 
plcheisabebtcr. 


17  J3e  fooles  anb  blinD  :fo?lbhcthcr 
is  greater,  the  golD,  02  the  temple  that 
fanenfieth  the  golb  j- 

13  3nD  ibhofocuet  fhail  frocare  by 
the  3lltar,  it  is  nothing :  but  ibbofocucr 
froearethbythegiftthatisbpontt,hcis 
1  guilttc. 

19  J9e  fooles anbblinD:f02tbhcther 
ts  greater , the  gift,o?  theaitar  thatfan* 
cnfictbfhegift* 

20  nahofo  thereftnc  fhail  frocare  by 
the  3lltar ,  froearcth  by  it,  anb  by  all 
things  thereon. 

ai  3lnb  tbho  fo  fball  frocare  by  the 
Xemplc,  froearcth  by  it,  anb  by  him 
that  blbellcth  therein. 

22  3tnD  he  that  mall  ftoeare  by  hea^ 
ucn,frocarcth  by  the  throne  of  €>oD,anD 
by  him  that  Gttcth  thereon. 

23  naoebntoyou^enbesanb^ha- 
rifecs,  hypocrites  ■,  *  fo?  yee  pay  tithe  of 
mint,  anb  anntfe,  anb  cummtne ,  anD 
haucomitteD  the  ibcightier  matters  of 
the  Haib ,  tubgement,  mercic  anb  faith : 
thefcoughtycto  hanc  bone,  anb  not  to 
leauc  the  other  bnbonc. 

24  jae  blmb  guiDcs,ibhich  ftrainc  at 
a  gnat,  anb  froaiiotb  a  camel. 

25  mot  bnto  you  S>crtbcs  anb  pha- 
rifces,  hypocrites  i  *  fo?  yee  mafte  elcane 
the  outfibe  of  the  cup,anb  of  the  platter, 
but  lbtthtn  they  are  full  of  erto?tton  anD 
erreffe. 

26  XhoubllnD^hartfeccleanfcfirO 
that  lbhtch  ts  lbithin  the  cup  anb  plat 
tct,  that  the  outfibe  of  them  may  bee 
tieaneaifo. 

27  naoebnto  you  Scribes anD^h^ 
rifces,  hypocrites,  fo?yee  arcliftebnto 
lbhitcD  fepultb2cs ,  ibhich  uiDecD  ap; 
pcare  beautifull  outibarb,btit  arc  rbith- 
tn  full  of  beab  mens  bones,  anD  of  all 
bnclcanneffc. 

28  euen  fo ,  yee  alfo  outibarbly  ap* 
pcarcnghtcous  bnto  men ,  but  lbithm 
ye  arc  full  of  hypocrifie  anD  iniquttie. 

19  naoebntoyou&cribesattbiDha: 
rifces,  hypocrites,  becaufeye  builD  the 
tombes  of  the  0?ophets,  anD  garnifl) 
tljc  fcpulclncs  of  the  rtghteous, 

30  3nDfay,3JfibeehaDbccncinthe 
Daycs  of  our  fathers,  ibec  iboulD  not 
hauc  boic  partaftcrs  ibiththcmiti  the 
blooDofthcpjophets. 

31  nohcrefoje  ye  bee  lbitncfles  buto 
yonrfelucs,  that  yee  arcthecbtltycn  of 
them  lbhich  Urtlcb  the  02ophcts. 

31  if  ilycbptbcn  themeafurcofyour 
fathers. 
33  Pec 


tcr  cr  bound 


'JLuk.II.42 


'Luk.II-39 


ll 


Ofperfecution,       Chap.xx'iii).  and  afflidtions. 


Gen. 4.  8. 


*  Luke  1  j 

34 

•i.Cluc. 

24.21. 

*4.Ei"d.i 

50 


"Mar. 1  ».I. 
lukcil  5 


"Lukei?. 
41 


3}  #ee  ferpents ,  ycc  generation  of 
bipcrs,  £?on)canyccefcapcrhcbamna 
tionofhelU 

34  Cnahctcfojcbcholb,  35fcnbbn; 
to  you  pzophcts,  ano  lbifcmcn,  anb 
Scribes,  anb  fome  of  them  ycc  (hall  Ktll 
anbccttcme,anbfomcofthcm(ballyrc 
feourgemyourfynagogucs,  atiDperre 
cute  them  from  citic  to  citic: 

35  Xhatbpon  you  may  come  all  the 
righteous  bloob  fbcb  bpou  tl)c  cartfj, 
*  from  the  Mood  of  righteous  3ibcl ,  biv 
to  the  bloob  of  zachartas,fonne  of  25^ 
rachias ,  ibhom  pec  flelb  bctu>ccnc  tlje 
temple  ano  the  altar. 

36  aertly<5faybnto  you,  2(11  thefe 
things  (hal  come  bpon  this  genctanon. 

37  *  :0$icrufalcm,$tcrtifalem,thou 
thatmilcft  the  ftzophcts,  *anoftone(t 
them  ibhieh  arc  fent  bnto  thee,  hoib  of- 
ten iboulD*3Jhauc  gathcreb  thy  ttjil 
b;en  together,  cuenasahmgathereth 
l)cr  chicRcnsbnbcr  henbtngs,  anD  pec 
tbottlbnot* 

38  fficholb,  your  houfc  is  left  bnto 
youbefoiate. 

39  -fo23!favbntoyou,yecfhallnot 

feemer)cncefo?rD,tillvcQ)ailfav,  25lct 
feD  is  he  tijat  commcth  m  ttje  0amt  of 

the?L02D. 

CHAP.   XXIIII. 

Chi  ill  foreidlerh  the  dcftruclion  of  the  tem- 

Ele:  5  what,  and  how  great  calamines  (hall 
c  bcloieit:  19  the  iignes  ofhiscomming 
toiud^ement.  36  And  becaufe  that  day  and 
home  is  vnknowen  ,  41  weoughttowatch 
like  good  feruants  expecting  cuery  moment 
our  mailers  comming. 

£  msgssa  5150  *  Jems  rbent  out,anb 
Ij/A^j  Dcpartco  from  tljc  temple, 
$B&\§&  nnh  fns  Dimples  came  io| 
im ,  fo:  to  fl)C\b  him  the 
^bttiimngs  of  thr  temple. 
i  2lnD 'Jl  cms  fait)  unto  tl)cm,  S>cc 
vce  not  all  thefc  things  t  Ulcnlv^  fay 
bnto  you,*  there  (hall  uotbclcfthccrc 
onettonebpon  another,  that  (hall  not 
bctluoibcnboibnc. 

3  canbashcfatcbponthcmount 
ofOltucs,thc2Difciplcs  came  bnto  him 
pnuatrtp,  taping,  Xcll  bs ,  ibhcn  (hall 
rhefe  thmgs  be  i  anD  ibhat  fhaii  be-  tljc 
figne  of  thy  commmg,  anD  of  the  cnD  of 

thcibozlD*  ,  . 

4  3inD  3iefus  anftocrcb ,  anb  raib 
bnto  them,  £aUc  heeb  that  no  man  be 
cctucyott. 

5  if 0?  man?  (hall  tome  m  my  name, 


faying,  3  am  Chjift:  anb  than  dccciuc 
many. 

6  anb  yce  than  hcarc  of  ibarrcc, 
anb  rnmozs  of  ibarces:  £>u  that  ycc  be 
not  tronblcb :  fo:  all  diefe  tilings  mutt 
comctopafTcbiirthccnDisnotyct. 

7  5Fo«t nation  djalt  rife  agamft nati- 
on ,  anb  aingboinc  againft  ftmgbomc, 
anD  there  (hall  be  famines,  anDpcmicn 
ccs,anD  earthquakes  in  Diners  places. 

3  2111  tljcfc  arc  the  beginning  of  fo; 
rottics. 

9  *  Xhcn  (hall  the?  beluter  yon  bp 
to  be  afflictco,anb  thall  lull  yon :  anb  ycc 
(hall  bee  hatcD  of  all  nattonsfo:my 
names  falic. 

io  ^nb  then  fl)all  many  be  ofFenbcb, 
anDfhallbctray  one  another,  anDfijail 
hate  one  another. 

i!  3lnD  many  falfc  gophers  fliail 
nfcanblhallbcccme  many. 

ii^MDbccauleiniqtiinefbalabonnD, 
the  lone  of  many  (hail  ibarc  coin. 

13  23ut  he  that  (hail  enbure  bnto  tljc 
cnb,thc  fame  (hall  be  faueb. 

14  3lnb  this  Gofpcll  of  the  Sing- 
borne  (ball  bcpjcachcDtnallthcttwlD, 
foMibitneUebnto  ainattons,anb  then 
(hall  the  ctib  tome. 

15  *i»henyecrhcrcfo2e  (bail  fee  the 
abomination  of  bcfbianon ,  fpoitcn  of 
by  *  £>atuel  the  |&opbct,(ranb  tn  the  ho; 
lyplacc,(ibhofb  tcaoeth,lcthim  bnocr- 
Oanb.) 

16  Xhcn  let  them  rbhich  bcin^Ju; 
bea,fltcmto  themonntatnes. 

17  fLct  him  Xbbith  is  on  the  houfc 
top,not  tome  bolbne,  to  tafec  any  tl;mg 
outofilislioure: 

18  Neither  let  him  tbhtch  ism  the 
ficlD  ,returnc  batfec  to  tahc  ins  clothes. 

19  2lnDiboebntotbcmtbatarettnrb 
chitb ,  anb  to  them  tljatgiuc  (lube  in 
tbofebayes. 

io  2Sutpjayycetbatyourfligbtbcc 
nottntheibmtcr ,  neither  on  tljc  £>a\y 
bath  bay: 

21  fo;  thcnfljall  be  great  tnbniati 
on.fnchasibasnotllntcthcbcgmntng 
of  the  ttwlb  to  this  time ,  no ,  no;  eucr 
(hall  be. 

ii  2lnb  er ccpt  tDofc  cay es  (lioiilb  be 
fl)omieb,thctcfl}onlD!ioficfl)bcfancD: 
but  fo;  the  elects  faue,  tljofc  bayes  fljall 
bcfl)02tncb. 

13  *  %\)tn  if  any  man  (l)ail  fay  bnto 
you,  fLoe,hcctcis€h;ift:  0:  there:  be 
lecucitnot. 

14  5fonhcrcn)aiiarifcfaircChJius, 
anb; 

74; 


•Cfup.jc. 
17-lukc  II. 
I  ]  lohn  16 


•Mir. I  J. 
'4. 

'Diny. 
>7- 


'Mat  15. 
H.lukc  17 


Of  the  end 


S.Matthew.  of  the  world. 


'Luke  17. 
57- 


"Matkc  i  j. 
jj.cfayia, 

lO.iOcl  2. 
53.7. 


"RCUCI.1.7. 


"1.COM5. 

52.  i.thef. 
4.16. 

||0r,7r,rA.i 
Trump  c: 
and  agrcut 
Vokt. 


'  Maik.i  3. 
3"- 


"Gene.  7. 
lukci?-;^ 


anb  faifc  pyopfittsf,  anb  dial  (beib  great 
ftgues  anbibonbcrs :  mfomucl)ttjat(if 
tttberepoflible,)  they  (ball  bccctuc  the 
bery  elect. 

25  2Sel)olo,3J  bauc  tolb  you  before. 

26  ©bercfoje,  iftbcyfball  fay  unto 
you.sBcbolb.bciSintbcbcfcr^gocnot 
toojtb :  20cbolb,bc  is  in  the  fecret  eftam* 
bcrs,bclccucttnot. 

27  5F02  as  the  lightening  cotntneti) 
out  of  tDc  eaft ,  anb  fbmctb  euen  bnto 
tDcioeft :  fo  fljall  alfo  the  commtng  of 
the  Sonne  of  man  be. 

28  'jfojibbcrcroeucrtbctatftcircis, 
there  Vbill  the  eagles  bee  gatbereb  to- 
gether. 

19  C  3f  nuncbiatly  after  the  tabula- 
tionofthofebaycs,*{balltbcSunncbc 
Darbneb,anb  the  ajoonc  (bail  not  giuc 
her  ltgbt,anb  the  ftarr  cs  (ball  fall  from 
bcaueii.anbtbcpoibcrsofthchcaucns 
fballbcfbabcn. 

30  3lnb  then  (ball  appearc  the  fignc 
oftbeSonnc  of  man  m  hcaucn :  anb 
then  (ball  all  tbcXriucs  of  the  cartrj 
mottrnc,*  anb  they  (bauTectbc  Sonne 
of  man  commtng  in  the  cloubs  of  ijca-- 
uctt,MtbpoUjcr  anb  great glojy. 

31  *  3lnbbcc  (ball  fenb  Ijts  Angels 
tbttbllagrcat  founb  of  atrumpct,  anb 
they  (ban  gather  together  bis  elect 
from  the  four c  ibmbcs.froin  one  cud  of 
beaucn  to  the  other. 

31  iI5oib  learnc  a  parable  of  tljc  fig- 
tree:  lbbcn  bis  branch  tsyct  tcnbcr,anb 
puttetb  foonb  leaucs,  yec  nnolb  tljat 
Summer  is  nigh: 

33  Soltbcibifcycc,lbbcnye(bailfcc 
alltljcfc  tbmgs,  Hnovu  that  it  is  mere, 

euenattrjCb002CS. 

34  Herely  3  fav  bnto  you,  this  gc^ 
ncranon  niaii  not  paffc ,  nil  all  theft 
things  be  fulfillcb. 

35  *  i)eaurn  anb  earth  fbailpanea- 
ibay ,  but  my  ibo:bcs  (ball  not  paffc 
aibay. 

36  C  25ut  of  that  \mv  anb  hourc 
imolbctbno  man,  no,  not  the  Angels 
ofbcaucn,butmyjfatbcroncly. 

37  25utasthebayesofji5oc\bcrc,fo 
(baliaifotbecommiugoftbcSonncof 
man  be. 

3S  *  fat  as  in  the  bayes  that  tberc 
btfojctheiflooD,  they  mere  eatmg,anb 
bnntung,marryiitg  ,anb  giutug  inma^ 
riage ,  bntill  the  bay  that  il5oe  entreb 
into  the  3lrUc, 

39  Wto  Uncib  not  bnrtll  the  JHoob 
tame ,  anb  toouc  them  all  aibay :  fo 


(hall  alfo  tl;e  commtng  of  the  Sonne  of 
man  be. 

40  » Xhen  (ball  tvbo  be  in  the  ficlb, 
the  one  fbaibc  taittn  ,anb  the  other  left. 

41  Xujo  Women  (ball  be  grmbing 
at  the  null :  the  one  (ball  be  taken,  anb 
the  other  left. 

41  C*i©atrhtbcrfojc,fojyeBnoib 
not  tt>bat  boure  your  Hojb  both  tome. 

43  *26utmtoibthis,thattfthcgoob 
man  of  the  boufcbabftnoibcn  nubbat 
ujatcbtbctbicfciboulbeomc,belboulb 
baueibatebcb,  anb  lboulb  not  bauc  fufc 
fercb  his  houfe  to  be  bjoncn  bp. 

44  Xbcrcfozcbe  yccalforeaby :  fo? 
in  fuel)  an  hourc  as  you  tbmlse  not,  the 
fonnc  of  man  tommcth. 

45  *  nabo  then  is  a  faithfull  anb  ibtfc 
fcruant,  ibbom  bis  ILoitt  hath  mabc 
ruler  ouer  his  boufbolb ,  to  giuc  them 
mcatinbucfeafotu 

46  2Sicffcbistbatferuant,lbhome 
his?Lojbibhcnljc  commcth,  (bailfinbc 
foboing. 

47  Clcrely3J  fay  bnto  you,  that  bee 
(bai  mabc  htm  ruler  ouer  all  bisgoobs. 

4S  ffint  anb  if  that  cuill  fer  uant  (bal 
ray  th  bisbeart,  fl$y?Lo;bbciayctbbts 
commtng, 

49  anbfyall  begin  to  unite htsfcl 
loib  fcruants,  anb  to  catc  anb  on'tittc 
ttntbtbebmnben: 

50  iCbc  ILoft  of  that  fernant  (hall 
content  a  bay  lbhen  becloobetb  notfoj 
htm,  anb  m  an  hourc  that  bee  is  not 
lbarcof: 

51  3lnb  (bail  tuthiinllafimber,  anb 
appoint  himhisponionvbith  the  hypo- 
crites: there  (ball  be  ibcepmganbgnas 
fl)ingoftccth. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

i  The  pa  table  of  the  tennc  Virgins,  14  andof 
the  talents.  31  Alfo  the  dcfcrtption  of  the 
lail  Iudgement. 

I?)  en  fljall  the  bmgbomc 
of  bcaucn  be  libencb  bnto 
tcnfltrgins,tbbicbtooftc 

their  lamps,  fibentfonh 
.tomcetthebnbegrome. 

2  ^inbfiuc  of  tljcm  iberc  ibifc,  anb 
fiuclbcrcfoohfb, 

3  Xhcy  that  ibere  foolifu  toobc 
their  lampcs,  anb  toobc  no  oylcibitb 
tljcm : 

4  2Sut  the  ibifc  toobc  oyle  in  their 
bcrrclstbith  their  lampes. 

5  nahilctl)cb.«bcgrometaricb,they 
aiinumbjcbanbaept. 

6   3tlD 


•Luke  17. 


*Matk.  1 5. 
3  5- 

'Luke  1  J. 
39. i.thef. 
5.2.rcucl. 
16.15. 


•Lute 
4J- 


\\1r,cutl>j 


le  talents. 


Chap.xxv.    The  laft  judgment. 


\\Or,loi»£ 
cut. 


•Chap.  34 
43.markc 

•33- 

"Luke  1 o. 
It. 


\\Ataltnl  is 
187.  pound 
10.  fyilbngs, 


6  ;&iDatmiDuigl)ttbcreibasatry:  \ 
matte ,  25cbolD,  the  biiDcgromc  torn* 
met!),  sot  ye  out  to  meet  htm. 
.  7   XhcnailtbofcbirgmsarofcanD 
trimmebtbetrlampcs. 

8  3nD  th  c  fooltfb  fait)  bnto  t!)c  ibtfe, 
<©iue  bs  of  your  oyle ,  fo2  out  lampcs 
ace  ||  gone  out. 

9  28ut  toe  ttrife  anftucreD ,  faying, 
Norfo,  left  there  be  not  ynough  fo2  bs 
anD  you,  Out  goc  ye  rather  to  them  that 
fell,  aitD  buy  fo2  y  out  felucs. 

10  3nDlbbilcthcylbcuttobuy,tbc 
b2ibcgromc  tame,  anD  they  tbatiberc 
rcaby,lbcntmibith  him  to  tljjc  mattt- 
agc,anbtbcDoo2cibas(but. 

11  aftctibarb  came  alfo  the  other  bir* 
gmes,faying,1Lo2D,?U2D,opentobs. 

ii  2SutheanfrocteD.anDfaiD,3flerc; 
ly  3  fay  bnto  yon,  3  knoib  you  not. 

13  *ieatcbthcrcfo2e,fo2yclmoibncts 
thcrthcDay,no2rtjchourc,ibbereintbc 
Pontic  of  man  commeth. 

1+   C*5r02  the  kingdomeof  heauen  is  aS 

amantrauailtngmtoafarrccountrcy, 
ibho  calleD  his  oibnc  feraants,anD  Deli= 
uereD  bnto  them  bis  goobs : 
15  2Mb  bnto  one  be  gane  fute  1 1  talents, 
to  another  tlbo,  anb  to  another  one,  to 
cucrymanatccobingtobisfcueraliabis 
lity,  ?ftraigl)tibay  tooac  bis  tourney. 

16  Xbcn  nee  that  hab  recnueb  the 
due  talents,  ibcnt  anD  trabcb  \bitl)  tl)c 
famcanbinacc then  otherfluc talents. 

17  3MD iiucibifcbe  that  nab  rccciucb 
tlbo,  he  alio  gamcb  otbcttibo. 

is  25ut  Dec  that  Dab  rctctueb  one, 
Tbcntanb  biggcb  in  the  earth ,  anb  bib 
bis  l02Des  money. 

19  ^fteralongtune,thelo2bofthofc 
feruantecommctb,anD  recttonetb  Jtottn 

them.  .     - 

xo  2nD  fo  hee  that  baD  rctctueb  fiuc 
talcnts,tame  anb  brought  other  fiuc  ta- 
lents ,  faying ,  ?Lo2D ,  thou  bcuuercbft 
bnto  me  fiuc  talents ,  bcholb ,  3  Dauc 
gamcb  bcCbcs  them,  fiuc  talents  moe. 

zi  $islo2DfaiD  bnto  bim,i@cU  Done, 
thou  goob  anb  faithfull  feruant,  thou 
haft  been  faithful!  oucr  a  fclb  things,  3 
tbil  make  thee  ruler  oucr  many  things : 
enter  thou  into  the  toy  of  thy  I02D. 

x!  i&t  alfo  that  hab  recnueb  tiuo  w 
lents,tamcanbfaib,Ho?b,thoubciiu^ 
rebft  bnto  me  tlbo  talents :  bcholb,  3 
hauc  gamcb  tlbo  other  talcntsbcitDcs 

x?  $islo2DfaiDbntobtm,i0cUDonc, 
goob  anb  faithfull  feruant ,  thou  halt 


bcene  faithfull  oucr  a  fclb  things  ,3$  vo\\ 
maHc  tljcc  ruler  ouer  many  things :  en; 
tct  thou  mto  the  toy  of  thy  102b. 

X4-  3Cbcn  he  ibbicb  hab  rccciucb  the 
one  talent,  came  $  faib,  Uo2b,3!  ttneib 
thee  that  thou  art  an  barb  man ,  rca= 
pmg  ibberc  thou  haft  not  folben,  9  ga- 
thering lbhcrcthou  battnotftraibcD : 

x$  3mD3iibasaftaiD,anDibentanD 
hibbc  thy  talent  m  the  earth  :loe,thcrc 
tljou  haft  that  is  thine. 

x6  $islo2banfroeteb,  anb  faib  bnto 
him ,  Xhou  ibicftcb  anb  flouthfull  fer= 
uant,tbouuncibefttbat3Jteapcibbcre 
3  foibcb  not.anb  gather  ibbercj  hauc 
notftraibcb: 

X7  1Tbouougbtcfttbercfo2etobauc 
put  my  money  to  the  exchangers,  anb 
then  at  my  commmglJ  fboulDbauctc; 
ceiucb  mine  oibne  tbith  bfurie. 

x8  %&U  therefore  the  talent  from 
him,  anb  giuc  it  bnto  himibbttb  bath 
tcntalents. 

X9  *5Fo2  bnto  eucry  one  that  hath 
(bailbcgiucu ,  anbhc  (hall  baueabutt 
bancc :  but  from  htm  that  hath  not  ,(bal 
be  taacn  aibay  ,cucn  tljatlbhirh  he  hart). 

30  3uib  caft  ycc  the  bnp20fitabie  fee* 
uantmtooutct;  barbeneffe ,  there  (hall 
be  ibccpmg  anb  gnaftjtng  of  teeth. 

31  C  naben  the  Pontic  of  man  (ball 
come m his gl02y ,  anb  all  thcholy^m 
gels  lbtth  him ,  then  (hall  bee  fit  bpon 
thetl)2oncofl)isglo2y: 

3x  ^nbbcfojchim  (hall  begatbereb 
all  nations ,  anb  hcfhall  feparate  them 
one  fcomanotbcr,as  a  fbcpbcarD  bmu 
Dctl)  btsfbccpcfromtbcgoats. 

33  2mDbc(l)allfettbc(becpeonbis 
right  haub,but  the  goats  onthelcft. 

34  %\)tn  ft)ail  the  lung  fay  bnto 
them  on  his  right  banD,  Comcyeblct 
feb  of  my  5fatbcr,itiberittbctungDome 
P2cparcb  fo?  you  from  the  founbatton 

Oftl)Clb02lD. 

35  *5Fo?3flbasanl)ungreD,anDyee 
gaucmcmcatc:  ;flibastbirftte,anDye 
gauc  me  tyintte :  3  ibas  a  ftrangcr,anb 
yetooRcmein: 

36  iftaBCb,artbyeclothebmc:3Jibas 
fictic ,  anb  ycc  bifitcb  me :  3  ibas  in  p;i^ 
fon,  anb  ye  came  bnto  me. 

37  Xbenfbaltbc righteous anfmcrc 
him ,  faying ,  Ho2b,  ibbcn  faib  ibe  thee 
an  hungrcb,  anD  fence  thee  <  0;  teethe, 
anb  gauc  thee b2inUef 

38  ©hen  faib  ibec  thee  a  ftrangcr, 
anb  toone  thec  in;  02 nautb,  anb  do* 
tD*thee<  '  ?9  ^ 


"Chap.  1  j 
1 1.  marke 

8.18. 


exec  18.7. 


Laft  judgement.       S.Matthew.       The  Pafleouer. 


«Pl'al.<5.8. 
dup.7.25. 


"Din.i;.: 
iohn5.2^. 


•Mar  14,1 
lukeii.i. 
iohn  1  j.i. 


*Ioh.IM7 


■Mar.14.; 
iohn  11. 1. 


39  £>j  lbljcn  fam  a>c  tljcc  GcHc,  0?  to 
pufon,  anD  came  bnto  tbee  < 

40  sjnotlje  lauugtbaiianuucrcanD 
fa?  bnto  tbem,  <llercly  J  fay  bnto  you. 
inasmucljas  ye banc  Done  it  bnto  out 
of  tlje  leaftof  tljefemy  b:ctb2en,ycbaue 
Done  it  bnto  me. 

41  Xljen  (ball  be  fay  alfo  bnto  tljcm 
on  the  left  banc, '  depart  from  me,  yc 
ttirfcD,mtoeuerlaftmgnre,p2cparcDfo.2 
tbcDcuiliauDljis  angels. 

41  5ror3)ibasanl)ungreo,anDyec 
gauc  me  no  meat :  3  ibas  tljirfrie ,  anD 
ycgaucmcnoDnn&e: 

43  gjVbasaftrangcr, anDycctooUe 
menot  in :  nalscD,  anD  ye  clotfjcD  mee 
not :  fictte,  anD  tn  pnton,  anD  ycc  bifiteD 
menot. 

44  Xljcn  fljau  tljcy  alfo  anfroere 
bun,  faying,  H02D,  lbbcn  faibibctljee 
anljtmgccD,  o,2atljirft,ojaftranger,  0? 
nancD,02ftettc,  oanpnfon ,  aiiDDiDnot 
muuftcr  bnto  tbee; 

45  Xben  (ball Ije anftoerc  tljcm,  fay 
ing,<l1  eccly ,  3  fay  bnto  y  on ,  in  as  mudj 
as  ye  Did  it  not  to  one  of  tlje  leaft  of 
trjcfcyeDiDitnottome. 

46  3nD  *  tbefc  (ball  goe  avbay  into 
cticriafhng  pumfbmew :  but  ttje  ngf> 
teous  into  life  ctccnau. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

1  The  rulers  conlpire  againf!  Chrift.  6Thewo- 

mananointeth  his  feet.  14  Iudas  fellethhim. 
17  Chrill  earcth  the  Pafleouer :  16  inftitu- 
teth  his  holy  Supper:  36  prayeth  in  the  gar 
den  :  47  and  being  betrayed  with  .1  kifle,  57 
is caried  to  Caijphas,^  and  denied  ot  Peter. 

/f5D  it  tame  to  paffc,  U)l)cn 
^•^StW^  Jcfns  IjaD  fmifbcD  al  thefe 
fsllg^Bg  fayings,  Ijcc  faiD  bnto  Ijis 
"  Diftipies, 
mt&i  2  'Fcunolbtljataftcr 
tlbo  Dayes  is  tl)c  fcaft  of  tbe  paffcouer, 
anD  tfjc  £>onnc  of  man  is  bctrayeD  to  be 
crucificD. 

3  *  Zbcn  affcmblcD  together  tbc 
cbtefe  p2tcfts,anD  tlje  Scribes,  anD  tlje 
€locrs  of  tlic  people,  bnto  t\)t  palace  of 
tUt  Digljpnca,  ibljo  ibas  calicb  Caia 
pbas, 

4  3nD  confnltcD  tbat  rbcy  migljt 
taftc  3Icfns  by  fubtiincaiiD  kiilbun. 

5  JSuttljq'faiD^otontrjcfcaltdav, 
led  fbcre  bee  an  bpjoarc  among  tbc 
people. 

6  C*/2o.blbbcn3Jcfitsibasin25c' 
tljaiuc^u  tlje  Ijoufc  of  5>imon  the  leper, 


7  Xljeretamcbntoljunaiboman, 
Ijatung  an  aiabaftcr  bore  of  berypjeci 
ous  ointment,  anD  ponucD  it  on  fjis 
IjeaD.asljcfatcatnieat. 

8  26iitrbbcnbisDifc!plesfaUiit,tbcy 
IjaDuiDtgnation,  faying,  3Co  Wjljatpur 
pofc'stljisibaftcf 

9  ifomjisotntmenttmgljt  banc  bin 
folD  fo2  mucli,anD  giuen  to  tbc  poo2e. 

10  lebcn  3lcfus  bnDcrftooD  it,  be  faiD 
bnto  tbem,naby  trouble  ye  tbe\bomatu 
fo.:  (l)c  Ijatij  \b2ougljt  a  gooD  ib02«cbp; 
on  me. 

n  *jfo2  ye  bant  tbc  poo2C  anbayes 
ibitb  you,  but  me  ye  banc  not  alibay  cs. 

ii  5F02  m  tbat  (be  barb  pobweD  this 
ointment  on  my  uoDy,  lljcc  did  it  f02  my 
burial!. 

13  Merely  51  fay  bnto  you,  naberefo 
cucr  tbis  oofpcl  (ball  be  p2cacrjcD  to  tlje 
ibbolc  \bojiD,  there  Ojau  alfo  tbis,  tljat 
tins  iboman  batb  Doue,be  tolD  fo.2  a  me- 
monaiiofbcr. 

14  C  *  £beu  one  of  tbe  ttbelue,  tal 
Icd  3iuDas  "Jfcanot ,  lbcnt  bnto  tbe 
tbtefc^2iefts, 

15  3lnD  faiD  bnto  them,  nabat  mill  ye 
guie  me,  anD  3  ibiil  Deliuer  btm  bnto 
you  i  anD  tljey  coueuanteD  Ibitij  bun  foj 
tbirtie  pieces  of  filucr. 

i6  31nD  from  tbat  time  be  fougfjt  op^ 
pominiric  to  betray  bun. 

17  C  *  >I5o\b  tbe  ftrft  Day  of  tlje  tail 
of  bnlcaucneDb2caD ,  tbc  Difciplcs  came 
to  3Jcfus,  faying  bnto  bim,  nabere  lbilt 
tbou  tljat  \bc  p;cparc  fo;  tl;cc  to  cat  tlje 
^affecueri 

18  31nD  Ijc  faiD,  (5oc  into  tbc  otic  to 
fucb  a  inan,anD  fay  bnto  btm.Xbc  ^a^ 
ftcr faitb,  03y  nine  :s  at  bauD ,  Jl  ibill 
ucepc  tlje  ^affcoucr  at  tljy  Ijoufc  lbitfj 
my  Difciplcs. 

19  3ltiD  tbc  Difnplcs  DiD ,  as  SJcfus 
bao  appomtcD  tbcm ,  anD  tljcy  maDc 
rcaDy  tbc  paffcouer. 

ao  *  /ftotb  lbbcn  tbe  eueu  \bas come, 
befateDoibticibitbtbctibclue. 

21  3lnDastbcyDiDcatc,bcfaiD,  CJe 
rclyj}  fay  bnto  you,tIjatotieofyoufbai 
betray  me. 

2i  3tnD  tbcylbcrc  creccDmg  fo.'o\b 
fttll.anDbcganeueryoncoftbcmtofay 
bntobiuMLo.'D^sitlli 

23  3nD  be  autocreD  anD  faib,  *  tocc 
tbat  Dippctlj  bis  banD  ibitb  mee  in  tlje 
Dift),tljcfamcfl)aiibctrayine. 

24  Xbc  tonne  of  man  goetbasitis 
Unitten  of  bun :  but  iboc  bnto  tbat  man 
by  ibbom  tlje  tonne  of  man  is  bctrayeD: 

21 


'Dcu  1  5.11 


'Marlcf  1. 
10  lukc 
U.J. 


"Mir.  14. 

1  2. lukc 
227. 


■MarL  14. 
iS.luke  2; 
14  ioh.  I  j. 


Pi.il.41  9- 


The  lail  fupper.       Chap.xxvj.        Ch rill  betrayed. 


*  I. Cor.  I  I 
||  Ma*) 

Greek*  O- 
pteshxMc, 


||Or,£/*W 

'Market^ 
27.  iohru 

itf.}i. 

"ZacklJ. 

7- 

•  Mar.  1 4. 
28. and  16. 

7- 


'  Iohu  1 


Muke  1 4 
jj.lllkc  21. 
19- 


3J  t  hab  bin  goob  fo?  that  man.if  bee  bab 
not  bene  bo mc. 

25  Xhcn  3Jnuas ,  lbbicb  betray  c& 
him,anfincrcb, anb  faib,  garter,  Jsit 
3j;*3?e  faib  bnto  bun, Xboubaft  faib. 

%6  caubastbcylbcrccating,*^ 
fustoo&b:cab,aiib|lblcffcDit,anbbzalic 
it,atit) gatte it  to  tlje 3Difciplcs,  anD TaiD, 
Xauccatc ,  tins  is  nip  boby. 

17  anb  be  toolic  the  nip ,  anb  ganc 
tbanbes,  anb  ganc  ittotljcm,  faying, 
2>nnUcycaiiofit: 

is  Sfoi  tins  is  nip  bloob  of  the  ncib 
Xcftatnent ,  Winch  is  fyeb  foj  many  fo? 
the  rcnuffion  of  fmncs. 

2  9  25tit  3  far  bnto  von ,  3  tbtll  not 
bMiftc  henceforth  of  tins  fruttc  of  the 
btnc ,  bntill  that  bay  lbbcn  3  Mttbc  it 
nctb  Vbitl)  vott  m  my  fathers  Wngbom. 

jo  anb  WJljcn  tbey  fiau  fung  an 
II  bymnc,  the?  tbent  outmto  tfjtmount 
ofiDliucs.  ^ 

31  XbenfaitbUcfusbnto  tbem,*au 
ycfball  beoffenbeb  bctanft  of  me  tilts 
night ,  5^0^  it  ts  Uvtttctt ,  *  31  VbtU  finite 
the  Abcpbcarb,  anb  the  fbecpe  of  the 
flocUc  (nail  be  fcattcrcb  afcoab. 

31  26ut  after  3  ant  nfett  agamc,  3 
Ybill  50c  bcfoKyouiuto  ©alilcc. 

33  $ctcr  anltoercb ,  anb  faib  bnto 
bmi.Xbougballmcnmaiibcorrcnbcb 
becaufc  of  tljec,  yet  unii^l  tienerbeofc 
fenbeb.  »„    ,  _ 

34  3Jcfusfaibbnto!)un,*51etavJI 
lay  bnto  tbce,tbattbismigbtbcfo;etbc 

cocBCcroMoumaltbcmcmctbnfe. 

35  &ctcc  faib  bnto  Dim ,  Xbougb  3 
fhoulbbicUntbthec,  yctibillll  notbCf 
nte  tfjec.  fciacttnfc  alfo  faib  ailthcSDifc 

miles 

36  C'XbcncommcthlJcfus  lbitb 

them  bnto  a  plate  tallcb  ©etbfcmanc, 
anb  faith  bnto  the  Dtfciplcs ,  Att  ycc 

heece,tbhile  3  W  ant3  W  W"*!^ 

37  anb  hce  tooltc  1Mb  Dim  tf>ctcr, 
anbthetibo  fonnesof  zebcbec.anbbfc 
gannctobcfoztoiijfuUnbbcrybeautc. 

38  Xftm  faith  be  lmto  them,  m 
foule  is  crcccbmgfozcottmilUucn  bnto 
bcath :  tary  ye  heerc ,  *  watch  »«»  me. 

39  WheVbtntalittlc further ,  anb 
feilonbtsface,anbpwycbJaynig,£>my 
father,ifttbepoffiblc,letthiscuppafrc 

frommc-.ncitccthcleffe ,  not  a*3  Unit, 

but  as  thou  unit.  ,  _ .. , 

40  anb  he  commcthbnto  thc^ifrt- 
plcs.anbftnbctb thcmaOeepe.anjCat  b 
bnto^cter ,  tobat,  coulbycnotlbatcb 

mrttb  me  one  hourc* 


+1  naatch  anb  pzay,  tbat  ycc  enter 
not  into  temptation  :Xhc  fptut  mbceb, 
isrbilling.buttbc  flcfl)  ibeaUe. 

42  l)c  lbctit  aibav  again  tijefecono 
time,  anb  pzaycb,  faying,  £>  my  fatljcr, 
if  tins  tup  may  not  paffe  albay  from 
me.crecptjontiuctt,  tnyumibebotie. 

4.3  anb  he  came  anb  fouiib  them  a 
Occp  agamcifo!  their  etes  ibcrc  beanie. 

44  ^tib  he  left  them ,  anb  lbent  a- 
jlbay  agamc ,  anb  pjaycb  the  tljirb 
i  timc,fayuig  tbc  fame  lUOibs. 

45  IDen  commcth  he  to  bis  2>tfn- 
pics,  anb  faith  bnto  them ,  Alcepcon 
|noih ,  anb  take  your  reft,  bcholb,  the 
bourc  is  at  hanb,  anb  the  fonnc  of  man 
isbctraycb  into  the  banbs  of  fmncrs. 

46  Sifclctbsbc  going  :bcbolb,  Ijc 
15  at  banb  that  boctb  betray  me. 

47  canb*n)hiicbcyctrpattc,ioc, 
gjubasi  one  of  the  ttbcluc  came ,  anb 
lbitb  bun  a  great  multirubc  ibith 
fmozbs  anb  ftaucs  from  the  chtcfc 
l&nefts  anb  eibers  of  the  people. 

48  ji5oU)bctbatbctrayeb  him,gauc 
them  a  fignc,  faying,  n0bomfoctier  J 
njail  mffe,rhat  fame  is  hc,bolb  bun  fait. 

49  anb  fojtblbttb  bee  came  to  3t 
fus ,  anb  faib,  ^ailemafter ,  aubhiffcb 

bint. 

5oanb3IcfusfaiDbntohim,3fricnb, 
H3bcrcfo?c  art  thou  tome  f  ILbcncamc 
they,  anb  laib  Ijanbes  on  3Jefus,  anb 
tooUebim. 

51  anb  bebolb,  one  of  them  lobicb 
tbere  lbitb  ^efus,  ftretcbcb  out  bis 
hanb,  anbbitib  bisfroojb ,  anb  frcottc 
a  fcr uant  of  the  rjiejtj  pw  lis,  anb  fmotc 
off  his  care. 

51  Xben  faib  3Jefus  bnto  bun,  0ttt 
bp  agamc  thy  6002b  into  bis  plate  :*  fo? 
all  they  that  tattc  the  fowb,  thaiipcrifb 
lbithtbermoib. 

53  XbiiitteQ  tboutbat  5  cannot  notb 
pjay  to  my  father , anb  he  fljall  p;cfcntly 
giuc  me  mo?e  then  ttbcluc  lemons  of  1 
angels  < 

54  ffiut  botb  then  fball  the  Acnp> 
turcsberulfillcb/tbatthusitmuftbc^ 

55  gintbatfainebourcfaib 3)cfusto 
tbcmtiltitubts ,  arc  yc  come  out  as  a- 
gamtt  a  tbicfcVbUh  froozbs  anb  ftaucs 
foztotaltc  mcc<Jl  fate  baily lbitb  you 
teaching  m  thcXempIe,  atib  ye  laibc  no 

bolbonmc. 

56  25ut  all  this  lbas  bone ,  that  the 
*  Acrtptures  of  tbei&ophcts  nughtbc 
fulmleb.  Xbcn  all  the  ©ifciplcs  lo.i 
fooUehm,,anbfleb:  ^^ 


'Mir.  14. 

4  j.luke  i,. 
47.lohnlS 


Gcn.9.6. 

rcutLij. 


■-"  5i- 


Lima).  4 


Peters  denial!,         S.Matthew.       and  repentance 


'Marls.  14. 
5  3.  !uke 
2j.54.iohn 
18.IJ. 


'John  2. 


Chap.  1 6. 
27. 1  .theff. 
4.l6.rom. 
■  4.10. 


'Efay.  50. 
6. 

\\Or,radi. 


*MarV.l4. 
£6.luliC21. 
55.iohni8. 
*5- 


57  <[*3mD  thep  that  hab  latbholb 
on  3Jefus ,  leb  htm  albap  to  Caiaphas 
the  high  i&teft,  inhere  t\)t£>  tribes  anb 
the  Ciocrs  nitrcalTciiilJlcD. 

58  25ut  $etcr  follolueb  Dim  afarrc 
off,  bnto  the  Dtst)  $ncfts  palate,  anb 
ibenttn,  ano  late  Ibith  thefcruantsto 
fee  the  cub. 

59  iI5oru  the  thicfe  piitQs  anb  Cfc 
bers,  ano  all  the  councell,  fought  faifc 
rbitncfft  agamQ  "Jcfus  to  put  pirn  to 
oeath, 

60  2SutfounDnonc:pea,thoughnia* 
np  faiftiMncfles  tame,  pet  founb  thep 
none.  3it  the  laft  tame  ttbo  faife  Brit* 
ueffes 

6i  3tnb  fail), %\)is  fellow faiD,*  3 am 
ablctobeuTopthc2:cmplcof<Sob,anD 
tobiulbitintltteebapcs. 

6i3uibthehtghI&iettarore,anbfaib 
bnto  htm ,  Stnfrocrcft  thou  nothings 
tbhat  is  tt,tt>hich  theft  ibitnefftagatnrt 
thee  i 

63  *25ut  3Jcfas  helb  his  peate.  Znn 
the  high  l&tctt  anfuicr  eb,  ano  faib  tonto 
htm,  3  abiure  thee  op  theliutngcsob, 
that  thou  tell  bs ,  tbhethcrthoubeethe 
Chnft  the  3>onne  of  d5ob. 

64  3Jefusfaithbntohim,Xhouhaft 
faibe :  iftcucrthelctle  3  &P  bnto  pou, 
hereafter  (hall  pee  fee  the  5>onnc  of; 
man  fitting  on  the  rtghthanb  of  potber, ' 
ano  commingin  the  tlonbs  of  hcancn. 

65  Chen  the  high  l&ieft  rent  his 
tlothes,fapmg,!i?chathfpoBcnblafphc; 
mic :  mhat  further  nceo  haue  luce  of 
rbitncfftSi2i5eholD,notb  pe  haue  hcatb 
hisbiafphemie. 

66  nahatthinBepciXhcpanttoerei) 
ano  fatb,$eis  guilttc  ofbeatt). 

67  *Xhen  did  thep  fpit  m  his  fate, 
ant)  buffeteb  htm ,  ano  others  fmotc 
him  tbith  II  thepaimesof  their  hanbs, 

68  £>aping,£jophenenntoDs,thon 
ChnftAbho  is  he  that  fmote  thee* 

69  C  * /ftolb  $eter  fate  luithoutin 
the  palate :  ano  a  bamoftll  tame  unto 
him ,  fapmg,  3Ehou  alfo  inatt  tbtth  3v 
fusof<5alilee. 

70  26ut  hee  benieb  befojc  them  ail, 
faping,  3  fcnoibnottbhatthou  faieft. 

71  3lnD\bhenhcibasgoncoutinto 
the  pouh  >  another  maibc  fain  him,anb 
faibe  into  them  that  mere  there,  HThis 
ftllotb  was  alfo  With  Uefus  of  /pa* 
5arcth. 

72  3uid  agame  hee  benieb  With  an 
oath,3l  Doe  not  ftnoW  the  man. 

75  3lnb  after  a  While  tame  bnto  him 


thep  that  ftoob  bp ,  ano  faibe  to  #cter, 
durelp  thou  alfo  art  one  of  them ,  foj 
thpfpeeth  bewjapeth  thee. 

74  Xhenbegannc  hee  to  turfe  anb 
to  ftocare,  faying,  3  know  not  the  man. 
3lnD  immcbiatlp  the  tottte  crew. 

75  3nD  peter  rememtyeb  the  Worts 
ofjefus,  Which  faib  nnto  htm,  26efo;e 
the  coebe  crow ,  thou  fljait  Heme  mcc 

thncc.3mbhceWentout,anb  Wept  bit 
terlp. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

1  Chrirt  is  deliuei  ed  bound  to  Pilate.  5  Iudas  han- 
geth  hiniielfe.  i<?  Pilate  admonifhed  of  his 
wife,  14  wafheth  his  hands:  16  andloofeth 
Barabbas.  i^  Chrirt  is  crowned  with  thornes, 
34  crucified,  40  reuiled,  50  dicth,and  is  bu- 
ried: 66  his  Sepulchre  is  fealed,and  watched 

$cn  the  morning  was 

tome.\iUthethiefci92iefts 

anb  fibers  of  the  people, 

tooftctounfcliagainft^jc; 

fustoputhnntobcath. 

z  ana  ibhcn  tljep  hab  bounb  htm, 

thcplcb  htmawap,  anb  bclmercb  him 

to  Pontius  dilate  the  gouernour. 

3  C  %l)tn  3Jubas ,  which  hab  be* 
traicb  htm ,  when  he  fam  that  heelbas 
tonbemncb  ,  rcpentcb  htmfclfe ,  anb 
brought  agamethc  thtrtie  pietes  of  CI- 
tier  to  the  thiefc  duetts  anb  <&  ibers, 

4  ^apmg,3lhaucfinneb,inthat3l 
haue  bctrateb  the  innotcntbloob.  ^nb 
thepfaib,  nahat  is  tljattobs*  fectljou 
to  that 

5  3inb  hee  cad  boibne  the  pietes  of 
filucr  in  tl)c  Xemple,  *anb  beparteb, 
anb  ibent  anb  hangeb  himfelfe. 

6  ^iiib  the  thicfe  0ncQs  tooftc  the 
filuer  pictcs,anbfaib,  Jtisnot  laibftili 
fo?  to  put  them  into  the  trcafuric,  be- 
taufe  it  is  the  pnte  of  bloob. 

7  3lnD  tljep  toone  tounfell ,  anb 
boughtrbith  them  the  potters  nciD,  to 
buncftrangersin. 

8  naherefojc  that  fielb  teas  taucb, 
*  Xhcficlb  of  bloob  bnto  this  bap. 

9  ( Xhcn  rbas  fulfiiicb  that  vbljith 
lVas  fponcn  bp  ^crenucthc  ^opijet, 
faping,  *3lnb  thep  ioobc  the  thirtic  ptc* 
tcs  of  filuer,  the  pnte  of  him  that  leas 
baiueb,  ||  luhom  thep  of  the  thtlb;sen  of 
3Jfraelbibbalue: 

10  3nb  gaue  them  fo?  the  potters 
fielD ,  as  the  2.02b  appotnteb  me. ) 

1 1  3lnD  llcfus  Ooob  before  the  go- 
uernour,anb  the  gouernour  af&eb  him, 
faping  -,  3{rt  thou  tljc  $ung  of  the 

3tV0tSi 


•Marlcij. 
1  !ukc22. 
66.ioh.it. 
28. 


■Aa.1.18, 


•A&S.L 

19. 

'Zach.11. 
1  2. 

\\Or,vhom 
tie  j  bought 
cfihtM- 
drtn  eflf- 
rael. 


Barabbasreleafed.    Chap.xxvij.      Chrift  crucified. 


•Luke  J  j. 
«7- 


*Iohm8. 
40.  aiftcs 
3.14. 


'Ioh.iJ.i. 

ttoHrincttfe. 


tVotsj.  3lnn  3Jtfus  fapn  bnto  Dim, 

houfapett. 

ii  3nMbbenbectbasaceufenofthe 
chtefe  j&iefts  anb  *  inert; ,  j)e  anftucrcn 
noticing. 

1  j  Xften  raid)  dilate  bnto  him,$ca* 
reft  thou  not  boib  manp  things  tl>ep 
tbicnefTe  asautd  tljce  * 

1+  ^tmbeanftoerenhimtoneucra 
ttwD :  mfomuch  ttjat  tlje  ©outworn: 
maruetlcngceatlp. 

15  */3otb  at  that  feaftthe  (Pouernoj 
urns  iboont  to  rclcafe  nut  0  tt)t  ptoplc  a 
pjtfoncr,  inborn  thep  lbouin. 

16  3fnb  thep  han  then  a  notable  p?i* 
foncr,  calico  isarabbas. 

17  Xheccfoje  tbhen  tftcv  tbcre  ga< 
ther  en  together,  innate  fatt)  buto  them, 
nahom  lbtll  pc  that  3  relcafc  bnto  pom 
zBarabbas,  0?  3jcfus ,  tbhich  is  caiicb 

Cltttfti 

18  jFo?  bee  ftntttj  that  fo?  enuie  thep 
ftanneiiuctcnbim. 

19  Cnabenheibasfetnotbneonthc 
IJubgcment  fcate,  his  Unfc  fent  bnto 
htm,  Taping,  ^auctbounotbingtoboc 
ibith  thattuft  man :  foj  3  bauc  fuffcreb 
manp  things  this  bapinanjeame,  be* 
taufcofhim. 

20  *2i5nt  the  chicfc  j&n'cftcs  ann  ei 
netspcrfroancn  the  multttunc  that  thep 
fljouinafttcffiarabbas^beftrop^cftts. 

xi  Xbe  (Bouctnour  anftocrcb,  ann 
fain  bnto  them,  nahctber  of  thctmainc 
tbtll  pe  that  3J rclcafe  bnto pou  *  Xbep 
fatn,  26arabbas. 

22  dilate  fam  bnto  thcm,tBbatfbail 
ginoethenlbith  3feuis,tt)htchiseallcb 
Chnfli  Xbep  all  fapbc  bnto  htm ,  %tt 
htmbeetuctrtcn. 

23  3nn the Goucrnottr fatn, nsbp, 
tbhat  cntl  hath  he  none  <  But  thep  trtcn 
out  p"  mo jc,  faptng,  ?Let  him  be  cructficn. 

24  Cn9hcn0iiatefaU)  that  be  cottin 
pjeuaile  nothing,  but  that  rather  a  tu- 
mult ibas  mane ,  bee  toobe  ibatcr ,  ann 
ibafben  his  hanns  before  the  multttune, 
faptng,  3J  am  innocent  of  thebloob  of 
thisiuftpcrfon:  fee  pec  to  it. 

25  Xbcn  anfmercb  all  the  people, 
ann  fain,  J^is  bloon  be  on  bs,anb  on  our 
thtiwen. 

26  C  Xbcn  releafcu  hec  23arabbas 
bnto  them,  ann  Ibhcnhc  hanftourgcb 
3!cfits,hcnclutercnhtmtobcerunficD. 

27  *Xhenthcfottlbtcrsofthe(Sor 
uernour  tooKc  Refits  into  the  ||  com- 
mon hall,anb  gatbercn  bnto  l)im  tljc 
rbholcbanbofiouidicrs. 


28  3ttin  thep  ftrippeo  him ,  anb  put 
onhimafcarlctrobe. 

29  C  3tnn  Xbben  thep  hab  platteb  a 
crowtte  of  tbomes,  thep  put  it  bpon  his 
hean,  ann  a  r  ccb  in  his  right  hann  :ann 
thep  boibcb  the  htiec  befoje  hint ,  ann 
motUcn  hunjapmg,  Ranching  of  tlic 
3ieibes. 

30  3mn  thep  fpit  bpon  rjim,ann  tooue 
the  teen,  aim  fmote  htm  on  the  hean. 

31  3ittn  after  that  thep  ban  mocscn 
htm ,  thep  toohctbc  robe  off  from  him, 
ann  put  his  otbnc  raiment  on  him ,  ann 
len  him  aibap  to  ccunfie  him. 

32  *3utn  as  thep  came  otit,tbcpfounn 
a  man  of  CpzencSmnon  bp  name :  him 
thcpcompellcntobcarc  hisCroffe. 

33  *^nnibhen  thep  mere  tome  bnto 
apiacccaiicn  <5olgotba,tbattsto  fap, 
a  place  of  a  f  bull, 

3+  €  Xbep  gauc  him  bineger  to 
b?tnbc,  mmglcn  Ibith  gall :  ann  Ibhcn 
bee  ban  taftcn  thereof,  hec  mouin  not 
nnnfte. 

35  3nn  thep  tructfienbtm,  ana  par 
ten  his  garments,  cafhng  lots:  that  it 
mtghtbc  fulftllcn  ibljtcb  mas  fpofecn  bp 
the  0«tophct,  *  Xbep  partcn  mp  gar= 
ments  among  them,  ann  bpon  mp  be- 
Qurcbtnthcpcaftiots. 

36  annfittingnoibnc,thcpibattbcn 
him  there: 

37  3lnn  fet  bp  ouer  his  hean,  his  ae-- 
cufation  Vb?ittten,  this  is  iesvs 

THE  KING  OF  THE  IEWES. 

38  Chen  mere  there  tibo  thceues 
crueiftcb  ibith  htm  :  one  on  the  tight 
hann,  ann  another  on  the  left. 

39  C^lnn  tljcp thatpaffen bp,reutlcn 
him.ibagptgtheirhcaDS, 

40  3mnfaptng,Xboutbatncfrropcft 
tbeXeniple,$buiinctttttntb?cct)apcs, 
faue  tbpfclfe:3Jftboiibcthc£>onnc  of 
<!5on,contcnolbttc  from  the  Croffc. 

4.1  fltbcibifc  alfo  the  thitfc  pztctts 
mocUing  htm ,  ibith  the  5>cnbes  arm 
€iners,fam, 

42  l>e  fauen  others,  himfelfe  he  can- 
notfattc:  gifhcbcthcButg  of  3ifracl, 
let  him  noib  come  boibne  from  tlje 
Croffc,  anb  Ibc  lbtll  bclceue  him. 

43  *tyc  trttfrcb  tn  C5ob,lcthunbcl^ 
ttcr  himnotbtf  hec  lbtll  hattchim :  foj 
he  faib ,  31  am  the  Pontic  of  <5ob. 

44Xhc  thtcucsalfo  lbhtch  lbcrctrtt; 
cificb  Ibith  him ,  caft  p  fame  m  his  teeth. 

45  0oYo  from  the  firth  houcc  there 
ibas  narhencfrc  oucr  all  the  latin  bnto 
the  ninth  hourc. 

S>  46  ^fnb 


"Marke  1 5. 

n.lukc 

23.16. 

•John  1?. 
'7- 


•Pfalu.18 


P  .1! 


1.8. 

U.i.ij. 


_J 


Chrifts  death,         S.Matthew*.      and  refurrecftion. 


»Pra!.2J.s. 


*?d.6/.2l 


•Mar.  15. 
42.!uk.z;. 
50.10h.19. 
38. 


4.6  3lnb  about  tftc  nintfj  noure,  3Jc- 
fas  crieD  ibitlj  a  lonb  boyce ,  faying,  eh, 

Eli,  Lamafabacluhani,  tljat  IStOfay,  *G&\> 

(Sob.my  d5oD,  ibljy  rjaft  tljotttWfakcn 
nice; 

47  ^omcoftljcmtljatltoobfljere, 
wljcntoeyljcatbtljat,  faib,  ICijisman 
tallctl)fo2€lias. 

4.3  3ut&  ftraigljtway  one  of  tljent 
ran,  anb  tookc  a  fpungc,  *ant>  fMebtt 
ttntljbtncgcr,anbputttonarccbc,anb 
gaucijimtob2tnke. 

49  1Elje  reft  faib,  fLetbcc,  let  bsfee 
tbljctljcc  ciias  tbill  come  to  (auc  Ijim. 

50  €  gjefus,  wncn  Ijce  «ab  crten  a< 
game  ibitlj  a  loub  bout ,  y  cclbcb  bp  tlje 
gooft. 

5 1  3nb  bc!)oID,tnebaile  of  tlje  %tm 
pic  was  rcnttntwame,  fromt'Uctopto 
tljcbottomc,  anD  tlje  cartlj  bib  quake, 
anb  tnc  rocks  rent. 

5i:anbfl)egraucswereopcncb,anb 
many  bobies  of  5>aints  wl)itt)  tlcpt, 
arofc, 

5  j  :Snb  taint  out  of  tlje  grant*  after 
t)ts  r  efurrcttton.anb  rbtnt  into  tlje  tjoly 
titic,  anb  appear  eb  bnto  many. 

54  4Bow  wljcn  tlje  Centurion ,  anb 
tucy  t6at  Were  Witlj  Ijun.watcljuig  ^v 
fus,  faVb  tlje  carttjquakc,?  tljofe  tilings 
tljatwcrcbonctljcyfcarcb  greatly  pay- 
ing, Xraclytljiswastfjc  £>ottof(5ob. 

55  3lnD  many  Women  Were  there 
Cbcliolbmg  afarre  off)whitl)folloiucb 
gicfus  from  Galilee ,  mutiftrutg  bnto 
nun. 

56  3mongwijiclJ  was£0ary£@ag* 
calcnc ,  9  £0ary  tlje  mother  of  panics 
anb  gjofes,  anb  tlje  mother  of  zebc- 
bceschiKucn. 

57  *D9Dtntl)cCuenrbastomc,tl)cre 
tame  a  rid)  man  of  3rimathca,  namcb 
giofcph,  iDl)o  alfo  Ijnnfclfc  wasgjefus 
bifctple : 

5S  dement  to  piiatcanb  beggebthe 
boby  of  gjefus :  then  pilatc  tomman- 
beb  tl)e  boby  to  bcbeltucrcb. 

59  3tnbWhciigjofcph  hab taken  the 
boby,  hec  Ityappcb  it  in  a  clcanc  lumen 
cloth, 

60  3nb  laibc  it  in  I)is  ownc  ncWc 
tombc,  mind)  lie  nab  hclbcn  out  in  tl)c 
r  ockc  :  anb  lie  r  ollcb  a  great  ftonc  to  the 
boo2cofthcfepulclne,anbbeparteb. 

6i  3ub  there  was  Q3ary  s©agba 
lcnc,anb  the  othcr99ary,  fitting  oner 
agamftthcfcpulclKc. 

6i  Ctfowthcncrtbay  that  follow 
ebthebay  of  thcp2cparatioit,thcchicfc 


02iefts  ano  i&harirees  tame  together 
buto^iiate, 

63  ^aymg^i^werememberthat 
tljatbeceiucr  faib,  While  he  wasyctfr 
liue,3lftcr  th2cc  baies  gj  mil  nfcagamc. 

64  Commanb  tljcrnw  that  the  fepul 
tine  be  mabefure,  bntillthc  thirb  bay, 
left  his  bifciplcs  come  by  night ,  9  fteale 
Ijunavbay,  anb  fay  bnto  tl)e  people,^ 
is  nfen  from  tlje  bcab :  fo  the  laft  errour 
fhalbc  ilwfc  then  tlje  firtt. 

65  ^uatc  faib  bnto  thcm.^ceftauea 
wattlj.gocyourway.niakcttasfureas 
you  tan. 

66  5>o  they  went,  anb  mabcthefc; 
pultljjefurc,  fcaiing  tlje  done,  anb  fet* 
tmgawatth. 

CHAP.    XXVIIL 

Chrifts  refurreftion  is  declared  by  an  Ansel, 
to  the  women.  9  He  himfelfe  appeared!  vnto 
them,  n  The  high  Pneftsgiuethefouldiers 
money  to  fay  that  he  was  ftollen  out  of  his  fe- 
pulchre.  16  Chriftappcarethtohis  difciples, 
19  and  fendeth  them  to  baptize  and  teach 
all  Nations. 

&  tlje  *  enbe  of  the  £>afc 
bath,  as  it  began  to  bawnc 
towarbs  tlje  firft  bay  of 
the  weeke,  tame  <39ary 
sJ0agbaienc,anbtheother 
I  CJBarp,  to  fee  tlje  fcpultlfjze. 

1  3lnbbcholb,  there ||was  a  great 
earthquake,  fo?  tljc3ngcl  of  tJjcfLojD 
bcfccnbcb  from  Ijcauen,  anb  tame  anb 
Irolleb  baclie  tDc  done  from  tl)e  boo;e, 
;anbfatcbponit. 

j  i^is  tountenantc  tbas  l*c  ligljt* 
ning,  anb  \)is  raiment  ibljitc  as  fnoibc. 

4  ^nb  fo2fearc  of  ljim,tl)c  Beepers 
bib  fljauc,  anb  betame  as  beab  men. 

5  3liibtue  ^ngcl  anfiucrcb,anbfaib 
bnto  toe  women,  f  care  not  ye:  fo?3} 
knott)  tljatye  feckejefus,  ib&irfjlbas 
trunficb. 

6  i?)ctsnotljtrc :  foiljcts nfen,  as 
l)ccfaib:  Come,  fee  tlje  place  ibljcrctljc 
%  02b  lay. 

7  3inbgoc  quickly,  anb  tcllljisbifci- 
plcstliatljcisrifcnfromtljcbcab.  31nD 
bcDolb ,  X\zi  goctl)  before  you  into  <5&lv 
\  lee,  tl)crc  njall  yc  fee  Ijim :  loc ,  3  Dane 
tolbyou. 

8  Stub  tl)cy  bepartcb  quickly  from 
I  tlic  fcpulcl)2C,Uiitl)  fcarc  anb  great  toy, 
anb  bib  rim  to  b2ing  Ins  bifnplts  lb  02b. 

9  CE  2lnb  as  tljcy  lbmt  to  tell  Insbif 
itiplcs,bcljolb,gicfusmcttl)cm,faymg, 
31U  Ijaiic,  ^nb  tljcy  came,  anb  Ijclb  Ijim 
I      bj? 


"Mar.  lfi.: 
iohn  20.1. 


\\OrfioJiin 


lohnBaptift 


Chap.j.        baptizethChnft. 


by  t\)t  feet ,  am  uwflnppcb  bim. 

io  z\)t\\ faio  3efus bnto tbcm ,  25e 
not  afraib :  <5oc  tell  my  b2Ctb2en  tbat 
tbe?  goe  mto  ©alilec,  anb  tljere  (ban 
tljeyfccmc. 

n  CI5oiblbbentbcylberc  going, 
bcbolb,  fomcof  tt»c  ibatcb  tame  into  tlic 
ctticanb  Q)ctbcb  bnto  tbccbicfe^nefts 
ailtbc  tbingstbatibercbone. 

ii  3lnb  lbljcn  tTjcv  lbere  affcmblcb 
U)ttl)tl)c  €lbets,  anb  bab  taucn  coum 
fell ,  tljcy  gauc  large  money  bnto  tbe 
foulDiecs, 

i  j  &aying,&ay  ye,$iSDifciples  tame 
by  nigt)t ,  anb  ftalc  bunalbay  Ibbtlcibc 
aept. 

14  3nb  if  tbis  tome  to  tbe  gouct= 
nouts  cares,  ibccibill  pcrfroabc  bun, 
anbfeturcyou. 

15  jS>otbcytooBctbemoncy,anb  bib 


"Mala.  3.1. 


'Efa.  40.3. 

Iukej.-j. 

ioh.n1.25. 

•Matt  3. 1. 

I  Ortvnl°. 
"Mace. J. 5, 


as  tljev  tbetc  taugljt  3lno  tljie  favutg 
is  commonly  tcpojtcD  among  tlie 
3Jcibcsbntilltbisbay. 

\6  CXbeutbeeieueubifciplesibent 
aibay  into  (Saiilec,  into  a  mountaine 
lbfjere  3ieuis  Dab  appointeb  tlicm. 

17  3lnb  lbben  tljcp  faib  bun ,  tbey 
ttwflnppcb I)im :  but  fome  DoubtcD. 

18  SlnDjefuscame,  anbfpabebnto 
tl)cm,  faying,  SUlpolberisgtucubnto 
metttbeaucnanb  m  eartb. 

19  C *  ®oc ye tbcrcfo2c,anb tead) all 
nations,  baptising  tbemui  tl)e  jRame 
oftbeifatber,anb  oftijc5>onne,anb  of 
tljcljolydpDoft: 

10  Xcacbmg  tbcm  to  obfetue  ail 
tilings,  lbbatfocucr  31  Ijauc  toinman- 
beb  von :  anb  loe,  3J  am  lbitb  vou  al 
ibay,  cuenbnto  tljc  cub  of  tbe  ibotfo. 
3tmen. 


•Mark  IS- 


ajTheGofp 


CHAP.    I. 

The  office  of  lohn  the  Baptift.  9  Iefus  is  bap- 
tized, it  tempted,  14  hepreacheth:  16 
called)  Peter ,  Andrew,  lames  and  lohn :  2.3 
healeth  one  that  had  a  deuill,  2.9  Peters 
mother  in  law,  32.  manydileafedperfons, 
41   and  cleanfeth  the  Leper. 

-  $c  beginning  of 
tbcOofpclofJc 
fus  CbJift  .  tt)c 
5>onncofC5ob, 

%  3tsitis«bm> 
ten  in  the  #20; 

p!)CtS,*26cl)0lb, 

^  fenb  my  met 
.  fciigcr  befcue  tby 

fate, lbljicl)  a;au  prepare tby may be 

f02Ctl)CC.   '  . 

3  *  Xbc  boitc  of  one  crying  in  tbe 
ibilocrncffc,p2cparcyctbc.bayoftbc 
|Lo2b,maRC  bis  paths  ftcaigbt. 

4.  "  ijobu  bto  bapmem  tlic  milDcr 
ttciTc,auDp2cacb  tbe  baptifmcof  repem 
tancc,  !lf02  the  rcnuffion  of  fumes. 

<  ' *3tnbtl)ercVbcntoutbntolnmall 
the  fanb  of  5uDca ,  anb  tbey  of  Ucru&v 
lem,  anb  mere  all  bap  web  of  Dim  m  tlic 
tiucr  of3Jo2oattc,tofciTiugtl)ctr  tones. 


Match.;. 


6  anb^obnibas'clotbcb  umb ta-  •  Matt. H 
meisljaircanb  ibitbagirblc  of  a  ruin 
about  l)is  lomcs :  anb  be  bib  cat  locufts , 
anblbilbc  bonie, 

7  ^nbp:catl)cb,faymg,1i:ijeretom'l 
mctl)  one  nugbttettben  31  after  me,  tlic; 
lattljct  of  ibljofc  (booes  3i  am  not  lbo:= 
tbytoQonpcbolbncanbbnloofe. 

s  3  inoceb  bauebaptiscbyouibitb 
lbater:  but  bee  fbau  baptise  youibitb 
tbebolyd5boft. 

9  *3nb  it  tame  to  paflc  m  tbofc  Dates, 
tbat  3Jcfus  tame  from  #avirctb  of 
Galilee,  anb  ibas  baptrjcD  of  jjobnm 
'Jo2bane. 

1  10  Stub  ItraigljUbay  tommmg  bp 
out  of  tbe  lbatcr,  bccfamtbcbcaticns 
||  openeb,  aub  tbc5>pittt  liUeaboiic  be 
fccnbingbponbun. 

11  3lttD  tljerc  came  aboiccfrombca 
ucn  ,  faying,  Xljou  art  my  brioueb 
S>onne,inibl)om3lamibciiplcafcD. 

it  *  %wo  immcDiatcly  tbe  Spirit  o;i 
uctb  bun  into  tbe  ttniocrncffc. 

13  3lnb  be  ibas  tberc  uitbeUniber 
neffe  fourtic  oates  temptco  of  S>atan, 
anDibasibttb  tbcibiibbeafts,  anDtljc 
Angels  inmiftrcD  bnto  lum. 

14.  toolb  after  tbat  Jolm  ibas  put 
2D  1  m 


or  rent. 


Mat:..}.  I. 


Simon  called.  S.Marke.  Aleperclenfed. 


♦Math.* 
1 j. 


Matili-) 


'Matth  q. 
'I- 


•Math.7. 
18 


*Iultc4. 


•Mjltb.8. 
M 


in  pufon ,  *  Jjcfus  came  into  oauicc, 
poaching  the  oofpell  of  thefeingbome 
of<3ob, 

15  3nbfaying,Xhetimci£fulfillcb, 
anb  the  mngbome  of  <3od  isattjanb: 
repent  ycanb  bclccuc  the  (oofpcll. 

i6  *  j;3oib  as  he  ibaitteo  by  the  Sea 
ofC5aiilcc,bcfaibSimon,aiib3lnb2cib 
hisb2Qthcr ,  cafhnganct  into  the  Sea 
(foj  they  lbcrc  fifhers.) 

17  3inb3cfttsfaibbntotbcm,€onic 
yc  aftermc ;  ano  3J  lbill  matte  you  to  be 
comefifbersofmen. 

13  3no  ftcaightibay  they  fo?foobc 
their  tie  ts,ano  foUotbco  him. 

19  3nb  ibhen  lice  hab  gone  a  little 
further  tlientc,  Dec  fam  giames  the 
foiuic  of  n ebebec ,  anb  3obn  his  b,20> 
tIjcr,\bhoalfoU)ercuttDcfl)ipmcnbing 
their  nets. 

20  3nb  flraigbtibayhctailcbthem: 
anb  they  left  their  father  zcbcbccmthe 
fbip  Kbit!)  the  Ijireb  feruants,  anb  ibent 
after  htm. 

21  *3lnb  they  ibent  into  Capcrna- 
tun ,  anbflraigtttibay  on  the  Sabbath 
bay  becntrcb  into  thcSynagoguc,aub 
taught. 

22  '^nbtncylbcrcaffonifbcbathis 
boctmic :  foz  bee  taught  them  as  one 
that  hab  autljonty ,  anb  not  as  the 
Scribes. 

iB  *3inb  there  lbasm  their  Syna^ 
gogue  a  man  lblth  an  bnclcane  fpirtt, 
anohctuebout, 

24  Saying  ,  ?Let  bs alone,  ibhar 
haueibeto  boc  ibttbthcc,  thoujjcfns 
of  jfta^aretn  ^rt  thou  come  to  bcflroy 
bs^hnom  thee  ibljo  thou  art,thcbo: 
lyOncofdFob. 

k,  3inb  Jefus  rebubeb  bumfaying, 
8?olbtl)ppeacc,anb  tome  out  ofhim. 

26  3nb  ibhen  the  bncleane  fptrlt 
hab  tome  him ,  anb  cricblbithaioibb 
boitc.hccamcoutofhim. 

27  3liib  they  lbcrc  all  amafeb ,  info 
much  that  they  qucfttoncb  among 
thcmfcliies.faying.iiDhatthingtsthis* 
DDhat  ncinboctrmeis  this;  ifo?  ibitl) 
authontic  commanbeth  he  cucn  the  bn 
clcane  fpints.anb  they  boc  obey  him. 

28  anbtmmcbiatlyhis  fame  fpjcab 
ab2oao  tb.'oughout  al  the  region  ronnb 
about  Galilee. 

1 9  *  3nb  fo2thibitb,ibhcn  they  iberc 
tome  out  of  rlje  synagogue,  they  cute 
rcb into  thehoufc  of  Simon ,  anb 3n 
bjcm.uiithllamcsanb'jlohn. 

30  iSut Simons  Unties  mother  lay 


fitUc  of  a  feuer :  anb  anone  they  tell  him 
ofher. 

31  3(tibhccamcanbtooRcherbytbe 
l;anb,anb  lift  her  bp,  anoimmebiatcly 
the  feuer  left  her,  anb  ft,c  miniftreb  bn- 
to  them. 

32  3ltib  at  cucn ,  ibhen  the  sunne 
bib  fct,  they  bought  bnto  him  an  that 
lbcrc  bsfcafeb ,  anb  them  that  lbcrc  pof 
fcffcblbith  biuels: 

3}  ^nb  all  the  nticlbas  gather  cb  to- 
gether at  thebooje. 

34-  31nb  he  healcb  many  that  lbcrc 
ficfee  of  biucrs  bifcafes,  anb  caff  out  ma> 
ny  beuils,  anb  fuffereb  not  thcbciuls 
1  to  fpeaftc ,  becaufc  they  hneib  him. 

35  3tnb  m  the  morning  ,  rifing  bpa 
great  ibljilc  befoje  bay,  hccibcntout, 
anb  bepar tcb  into  a  folitanc  plate ,  anb 
there  pzay  cb. 

36  ^nb  Simon,  anb  they  that  mere 
lbul)  hun,follolbcb  after  him : 

37  3mb  lbljen  they  bab  fonnbhun, 
theyfaibbntohun,3MmcnfceBfo2t!)cc. 

38  3lnb he faib bnto  them,?Lct bs goe 
into  f'ttert  tolbnes,  that  3J  may  mcart) 
there  aifo  :  foj  therefore  earned  foojtf). 

39  3tnb  Ijc  pjcachcb  m  their  Syna* 
gogucs  throughout  all  ©aiiiccanb  call 
outbcuiis. 

40  *31nb  there  tame  a  leper  to  him. 
befecthtng  him,  anb  tmcclmg  boibnc  to 
bim,anb  faying  bnto  him/Jfthoulbilt, 
tboueanft  matte  mctlcane. 

41  3lnb  3lcfus  moouco  ibith  com 
paffton,  put  foozthhishanb,  atiotou- 
theb  him,anbfaith  bnto  him, 3  ibill,be 
thoutlcanc. 

42  3lnb  affoonc  as  he  hab  fpoben, 
immcbiately  the  lepiofic  bepar tcb  from 
hun,anb  he  lbas  clcanfcb. 

43  3lnb  he  ftraitlychargcblji'm,anb 
fotfhlbitb  fent  bun  albay , 

44  ^nbfaitl)bntohim,ScctIiou 
fay  nothing  to  any  man :  butgoc  thy 
ibay  ,fl)eib  thy  fcifc  to  the  pneft,  anb  of* 
fer  fo:  thy  clcnfmgthofc  things  lbhicl) 
C0ofcstommanbcb,fo2atcfhmonybn^ 
to  them. 

45  *2Suthcibcntout,  anbbeganne 
to  pnblifl)  it  muth ,  anb  to  blafcabzoab 
the  matter  anfomuch  that  Jcfuscoulb 
no  mo.'c  openly  enter  into  tncntle,  but 
lbasibithout  in  befcrt  places:  anb  they 
fame  to  him  from  curry  quarter. 

CHAP.    II. 

1    ChnTllicaletlionenckeoftlicpalfie,  14  cal- 

lcih  Mjttlicvv  from  the  receit  of  Cuftomc, 

i?    catetli 


\\Or,„f«j 
that  thry 
knew  htm. 


Marth.8.3 


Luke  5 
'5- 


iSinnes  forgiuen.         Ch; 

o 


p.lj. 


When  to  fad- 


'Matt.  9.1. 


•  lob  144. 
cfcy  43.15. 


*  Milt  9  9. 
\\Or,M:hc 
phcr  ™hrr: 
the  Cttftom: 
rr.vrecet- 
Me  J. 


\\  eateth  with  Publicities  ,  and  huners, 
18  rxculech  his  difciplcs  for  not  falling, 
2,3  ami  foi  plucking  the  cares  ot  corns  on 
the  Sabbath  day. 

|gj&ys§g  $&  agamc*  Dec  enttebuv 
$&m  V :*f t0  Capernaum  aftw  Dome 
£3jwjlN£f  bayes ,  atm  it  lbas  noyfeb 
wi^^A^  that  he  ibasmtbchoufc. 
l@$&8Sz&S  2  3tnDftrai'Bl)tll)av ma- 
ny Ujcre  gathcrcb  togctlicc ,  mfomutli 
that  there  lbas  no  roomc  to  rccemc 
tiicniuonotfoiiuichasaboutthcuooK: 
ano  he  p:cathco  the  mojo  bnto  them. 

j  ant)  they  come  unto  hun,bungmg 
one  ficbe  of  the  palQc.ibhich  lbas  borne 
offouce. 

4.  ^no  lbhen  they  eoulo  not  tome 
nujhbntohnu  fojpjcaflc,  theybneouc 
ecu  the  roofe  inhere  he  lbas :  ano  lbhen 
tl)cy  hab  moUen  it  bp,  they  letboibnci 
the  beb  lbhctm  the  fieh  of  the  paiOc  lay.  J 

5  lehm  3(cfus  faro  their  faith ,  hec 
faib  bnto  thcficfte  of  the  paifie,  Sonne, 
thy  fmnes  be  fojgiucn  thee. 

6  25ut  there  iberc  tertamc  of  the 
Smbes  fitting  there,  ano  rcafoningm 
their  hearts, 

7  i©hy  north  this  man  thus  fpcauc 
blafphcriues*  *30l)o  can  fojgwc  fmnes 
butd5obonelyi 

8  anb  unmebiatly ,  lbhen  TJcfus 
pertemcb  tn  his  Spirit ,  that  tljey  fo 
rcafoncbibithmthcmfclues,hcfaibbn 
to  them,  tt)hyrcafonycthcfe  thmgsm 
your  hearts* 

9  sehcthcr  is  it  caftcr  to  fay  to  the 
Gene  of  the  paific,  Xhy  fmnes  be  fo:gv! 
ucnthec :  02  to  ray ,  artfc ,  anb  taHe  bp 
thybcbanbibalfcc;  | 

10  23ut  that  y  cc  may  Unoib  that  the 
Sonne  of  man  hath  poiber  on  earth  to 
fojgiuc  fmnes,  (ii?cc  faith  to  the  fuueof, 
tljcpaifie,)  ^  r 

1 1  3  fay  bnto  thee ,  attfe,  9  talte  bp : 
thybcb^gocthyibaymtotljmchoufc.! 

\z  anb  unmebiatly  he  arofe ,  tooUe  j 
bpthebeb.anbibcntfootfhbcfoietbcm 
all,  mfomuth that  they  iberc  all  ama 
5cb, ano glonftcb oob.faymg,  naee m 
ncrfaibitontl)i6fafl)ion. 

i}  anbhclbcntfooithagame  by  the 
fea  ftoc,  anb  all  the  multitube  rcfo;tcb 
bnto  hun,  anb  he  taught  them. 

14.  'anuashcpaflcDby.hefaiblLciii 
the  fon  of  aipbcuc  fitting]!  at  the  rcccit 
ofCuftome,  anu  faio  bnto  hnn.jrplloib 
me.  anb  he  arofe ,  anb  folloibcbhim. 

15  anb  it  came  to  paffe ,  that  as  3Jc 
fus  fate  at  meatc  in  his  Ijoufe ,  many 


publitancs  ano  fumers  fate  aifo  togc 
tber  With  Jcfus  ano  his  bifciples  :  foi 
there  iberc  many ,?  they  folloibeo  him. 

16  anb  lbhen  the  Scribes  ano  pha 
rifecs  faib  him  eatc  lbith  pubiicanes 
anbfmncrs,thtyfaibbntohi6Difnples, 
l-)oib  is  it  that  hec  eatctl)  ano  Dimfeetb 
ibtth  pubiicanes  ano  tinners  t 

17  B3hcn  jJcuis  hcaro  it , he  faith  bu 
to  them,  Xheytbatarc  whole, haue  no 
ucebofthcphyfition,  butthey  that  are 
fickerjjeamenotto  tall  the  righteous, 
but  tinners  to  repentance. 

18  *anbthcbiftiplcsoflJohu,  anb 
of  the  phanfees  bfeo  to  faft ,  anb  they 
come,  anb  fay  bnto  hnn,  lBhy  ooe  the 
bifnplcs  of  'John.anb  of  the  phanfees 
faft , but  thy  Difciples  fatl  not; 

19  auD'Jefus  faib  bnto  them,  Can 

ithcchtibjeu  of  the  bnoe-chamber  faft, 

llbhilc  the z5;ibegrome  is  lbith  them; 

:  as  long  as  they  hauc  the  BuDegromc 

lbith  them,  they  cannot  faft. 

20  25ut  the  Daycs  ibilltome,  when 
the  26ubegromc  (hall  bee  taken  aibay 
from  them,  anb  then  (hall  they  faft  in 
thofcoayes. 

21  tflo  man  aifo  foibcth  a  piece  of 
llnelbclothonanolb  garment:  elfethe 
nelb  piece  that  fillcbit  bp,  taftctbaway 
from  the  olb.ftljc  rent  is  mabeibojfe. 

22  anb  no  man  puttcth  new  ibme 
into  olb  bottles,clfc  the  nelb  ibme  ooeth 
burft  the  bottles,  anb  the  ibme  is  fpti 
leb ,  anb  the  bottles  lbill  bee  marrcb : 
25ut  nelb  ibinc  muft  bee  put  mto  nelb 
bottles. 

23*anbittametopaffe,thathcibcnt 
thouw  the  come  fieius  on  the  Sab 
bath  bay,  1  his  mfctples  began  as  they 
lbent,to  pluctte  the  earesof  come. 

24  anb  the  phanfees  faibe  bnto 
him,i3choib,ibbybothcyoutbc§>ab 
bath  Mf  that  ibhich  is  n  0 1  laibrull  s 

i5  anb  he  fatb  bnto  them,  naueyc 
neucrreabibhat  DauiDbib,  lbhen  liee 
l)abnccb,anbibasanljungrcb,ije,anb 
rtjc)'  that  lbcrc  lbith  him  i 

16  i)olb  hccibent  mto  the  houfe  of 
(5obmthebayes  of  abiathar  the  high 
pneft ,  anb  bib  eatc  the  «S>neib-bjeab, 
lbhichisnotiaibfullto  eatc  ,butfo:the 
pnefts,  anb  gauc  aifo  to  them  ibhich 
ibere  lbith  him  <  mmt 

27  anb  hce  faib  bnto  them  ,  Che 
Sabbath  ibasmaocfoj  man,  anb  not 
man  fo:  the  Sabbath: 

28  2:herefo:c  the  Sonne  of  nun  is 
1Lo;Dairo  of  the  Sabbath. 

?)  3  C  H  A 1 


■Macili.9. 

14  lukc  5. 


I|0- 


,  M*,  or 
rjvpit. 


Matt  11. 


Many  healed.  S.Marke.    Chnfts  mother,&c. 


Mac.i  z-9 


\OrJ,li* 

■4<- 


\n,,rH?,iti 


'Mitr.io. 


CHAP.    III. 

i  Chrifthcalctluhe  withered  hand,  10  and  ma- 
ny other  infirmities:  a  Rebuketh  the  vn- 
cleane  fpirits:  13  Chooleth  his  twelue  Apo- 
ftJes :  11  Conmnceth  the  blafphemie  ot  ci-l 
iting  out  dcuils  by  Beelzebub:  51  andftiew- 
cthvvho  are  liis  brother,  fifter  and  mother. 

WM>^H  &*  %lJc  entrcl)  asatnc  into ! 
jPHrcgl  tDe  SynagogucanD  tljere 
'  '^Mibasa  man  tDere  tbljirt) 
%  DaD  a  lbttljcreD  DanD : 
2  3mD  tDcy  Wjatttjco; 
Dim,  luDctljer  Dec  iboulD  Dealt  Dim  on 
tDc  Sabbatlj  Dap,  tljat  tDcy  mtgDt  ac- 
cufcDim. 

3  2iiiD Dc  TaitD unto  tDc  man  lbDicD 
Dab  tDc  lbttljercD  DanD,StanD  fojtD. 

4  3nD  Dec  fattlj  bnto  tDem,  Js  it 
lavbfull  to  Doc  goob  on  tDc  Sabbatlj 
Daves,  o.j  to  Doc  cuill  t  to  fane  life,  o  i  to 
MU  but  tDcyDclDtpetr  peace. 

5  anDibDcnDeDabloofeeDrounD& 
bout  on  tDem  ttntD  anger,  being  grit- 
ueD  foz  tDe  HDarDncflc  of  tDcirDcarts, 
i?cfaitu  bnto  tDc  man,  StrcttDfoojtD 
tDtnc  DanD.  2lnD  Dc  ftretcDcD  it  out:  anD 
DtsljanD  was  rcftojeD  lbDoleastDeo- 
t\)tt. 

6  ^nDtDe0DattfecsU)entfo2tD,anD 
ftraigDtibay  tooftc  cotmfrl  lbttlj  tDe  fyo 
roDtans  agamftDim,  Dow  tDcy  migljt 
bcftroyDun. 

7  Z5ut  %rus  ttntDDjclb  Ijimfelfe 
tbttD  Dis  Difctplcs  to  tDc  Sea :  anD  a 
great  mnltttuDcfcom  Galilee  follorbcD 
Dim,anDfrom3}uDea, 

8  anD  from  l)icrufalcm ,  anD  from 
jDiunca ,  anD  from  bcyonb  Jojoane, 
anD  tDcy  aboutXyjc^Sybon,  agreat 
multtfuDcibDcn  tDcy  DaD  DcarD  lbDat 
great  tilings  D c  Did ,  tame bnto  Dim. 

9  anDDefpaUcto  Dts  Difnplcs  tDat 
a  fmau  fbip  fboulD  ibait  on  Dtm,becaufc 
of  tDc  multituDc,lcft  tDcy  fhotilD  tljjoiig 
Dun. 

10  if  oj  Dc  DaD  DcaieD  many,infomucD 
tDat  tDcy  ||  pjeaffeD  bpon  Dun ,  fo;  to 
toutD  Dim,  as  many  as  Dab  plagues. 

1 1  3luD  bnclcanc  fptrtts,  WDcn  tDcy 
faiDDim,fellDoibncbefojeDim,anDeri 
eD.faving/iEDou  art  tDc  Sonne  of  Gob. 

ii  anDDcftraitly  cDargcDtDem,  tDat 
tDcy  fliouiD  not  make  Dim  Unotticn. 
i3*anDDcgoctDbpintoamountaiuc, 
anD  eallctD  bnto  Dim  lUDom  IjciboulD : 
anD  tDcy  came  bnto  Dun. 

1+  anb  Dc  ojbcincti  tibeluctDat  tliey 
(lioulb  be  Until  Dun,  anD  tljat  Dec  nugljt 


fetiD  tDem  fooitD  to  pjeacD : 

15  anD  to  Daue  power  to  Deale  fitae 
neffes,anD  to  caft  out  Dcuils. 

i6  anD  Simon  DcfurnameD^eter. 

17  2tnD3Jamcstheionneof  ZebcDcc, 
anDjoDn  tDc  bjotDer  of  James  ( anD 
DcfurnamcD  tDem  aSoancrgcs,  VbljicD 
is,  XDc  fonncs  of  tDunDcr.) 

i8anDanD2c.b,anDV>DUip,anD28ar< 
tDolomelb,  anD  *J!9attDclb,  anD  %\]0' 
mas,  anD  James  the  fonne  of  aipDciis, 
anD  XfjaDDcus,  anD  Simon  tDe  Ca* 
naamte, 

19  anD  JuDasJfcariot,  itoijicli  alfo 
betraycb  Dim:  anD  tljeyiDcnt  ||  into  an 
Doufc. 

io  3inD  tDc  multinibe  commetDro; 
gctDeragamcfotDattDeycoulo  not  fo 
mucDascatcbJcaD. 

21  anD  iMhen  Dis  HfricnDS  DcarDoi 
it.tDcy  Ibent  outto'layDolD  on  ljun,fo? 
tDcy  tatD,  l?c  is  befibc  Dimfclfc. 

n  C  anD  tDc  Scribes  tbDteD  tame 

Dott)nefrom^ierufalcm,faiD,*i?cDatD 
25ccl5Cbub,anD  by  tDc  puncc  of  tDe  be- 
uils,taftetDDeoutDcuiis. 

23  anD  pe  callcD  tDem  bnto  Dim,  anD 
faiD  bnto  tDem  m  parables,  tyoibe  tan 
Satan  caft  out  Satan  < 

24  anD  if  a  tungDome  be  biuibeb  & 
gatuft  it  fclfc ,  tDat  kmgDome  tannot 
ftauD. 

25  ^nD  if  a  Doufc  be  DiuiDcD  agauift 
it  felfe,  tDat  Doufc  tannot  ftanD. 

16  anD  if  Satan  rife  bp  agamftDim^ 
felfe,  anDbc  diuidcd,  Dee  cannot OanD, 
butDatDanenD. 

27  0o  man  can  enter  into  a  ftrong 
mansDonre,aiiDfpoilcDisgooDS,erxcpt 
De  Vbill  firlt  buiD  tDc  ftrong  man,  anD 
tDcn  Dc  ibill  fpoile  Dis  Doufc. 

28  Merely  J  fay  bnto  you,ailfinnes 
fbaibc  fojgiucn  bnto  tDe  fonncs  of  men, 
anD  blafpDemics  ,  lbDcrclbttD  foeucr 
tDcyfDailbiafpDcme: 

29  25ut  Dc  tDat  fDal blafpDcmc againft 
tDcDolyC5Doft,Dari)nciicrfojgiuctieffc, 
but  is  in  Danger  of  etemail  Damnation. 

30  26ecaufctDcyfaiD,  JjcDatDanbn- 
cltancfpint. 

31  C'SDcrecamctDcnDisbjctDJcn, 
anD  Dis  motDcr ,  anD  ftanomg  ibltDout, 
fcut  bnto  Dim,  calling  Dun. 

32  3inD  tDc  muUttubc  fate  about  Dim 
anDtDeyfaiDbntoDini,25cDolD,tDynio 
tDerauDtDybJCtDjen  lbttfjout  fecftcfo; 
tljee. 

33  anD  Dc  anfiuereD  tDem ,  faying, 
iflDoismyinotDcr,ojmybJrtDjciK 
!____ 34  3DtD 


l  Or,  be 


\\Or.kinfi- 

met. 


•Mat.y  ;4 


i  i. 


•Mat. I  j. 

4f. 


Tl 


1C 


'  Mmli  i  i 


•Matth.i 


parable  Ch; 

54  anb  be  loolicb  rotutb  about  on 
tbcnubbicb  fate  about  him,  anb  faioc, 
25cbolb  my  mother  anb  my  b2ctb;cn. 

?5  foiibbofocuerlbaiiooctbcunll 
ofeob.thefameismytyothc^anbmy 
filter  ,anb  mother. 

CHAP.    I1II. 

i  The  parahlcofthc  lower,  14  andthemca- 
mn^theieof.  11  V/c  mult  communicate 
die  liolu  ot  our  knowledge  to  others.  2.6 
The  parable  of  the  feede  growing  lecicily. 
30  and  of  the  Muftard  feede.  3^  Chnrt 
Ihlleth  the  tempeft  on  the  Sea. 

^vjrs^l^  /5b*bcbcganncagamcto 
%£&m&^  teach  by  the  Sea  fibc :  anb 
$|f^gp  there  Ibas  gatbereb  buto 
WM$$&  himagrcatmultituoe,  fo 
sSj&3^  that  he  cntrebtntoafhip, 
anb  fate  in  the  S>ca:anb  the  inbolc  mul 
tttubc  ibas  by  the  Sea  on  the  lanb. 

x  anb  be  taught  them  many  things 
by  parables ,  anb  fatb  tonto  them  m  bis 
boctnne, 

j  $car&cn,23ebolb,tbctcibentout 
afoVbcttofoVb: 

4.  anb  it  tame  to  paffe  as  be  foil) 
cb,  fomc  fell  by  the  lbay  fibc,anb  the 
foulcsofthc  aire  came,?  bcuourcbtfbp. 

5  anb  fomc  fell  on  Oontc  grounb, 
ibhcrcitbab  not  much  earth:  anb  mv 
mcbiatcly  it  fp:ang  bp,bccaufc  it  hab  no 

bepth  of  earth- 

6  25utn)bcntbeS>unncn>astop,tt 
was  fco2cheb ,  anb  bctaufe  it  hab  no 
rootc,itH)itbcrcbatbay. 

7  anb  fomc  fell  among  rhomes, 
anb  the  thojnes  grew  bp ,  anb  cho&cb 
it,anbityeelbebnofrmtc. 

8  anb  other  fell  on  goob  grounb, 
anb  bib  ycclb  fnutc  that  fpjang  bp ,  anb 
tncrcafeb  ,  anb  bjougtjt  foo2tb  fomc 
rtnrtte,f*fomcfirttc,*fomcanhunb2eb. 

9  anb  he  faib  bnto  them  ,  Ijt  that 
hath  tares  to  hear  c,lct  him  hcare. 

10  anb  When  hec  urns  alone ,  they 
that  mere  about  him ,  tbttb  the  nbetue, 
af  Uco  of  him  the  parable. 

1 1  attbhcfatobntotbcn^tlntoyou 
it  is  gmen  tohnoil)  the  myltcry  of  the 
Utngbomc  of  <3ob :  butbnto  them  that 
arc  without  ,ail  thefe  things  arc  bone  in 
parables: 

12  *  Xhat  feeing  they  may  frc ,  anb 
uotpcrceiuc,  anb  hearing  they  may 
hcare,  anbnot  bnbcrftanb,  left  at  any 
tunc  they  niouio  be  tonucrtcb;anb  their 

nnncs  niouibbefojgtucn  them. 

13  anb  be  fatb  bnto  them,  Bnoibye 


Lp.IllJ, 


O 


f  the  Iced.. 


not  this  parable  <  anbboib  then  null 
you  Huo\b  all  parables; 
1+  CXhe  dottier  fotiicth  the  ibo2b. 

15  anb  thefcarc  thrv  by  thetbay  fibc, 
Vbhere  the  Ib02b  is  fotben ,  butibhcn 
tbeybauebcarb,  Satan  tommcthim 
mcbiatcly ,  anb  tahcthaibay  the  ttwb 
that  ibas  foibcn  mrneir  hearts. 

16  anb  thefe  arc  they  iiltcibifc  Which 
arcfoibcnonftotiicgroniib,ibbottibcii 
they  baucbearo  the  wo>b,immcbiatciy 
rctciuc  ittbith  glabncdc : 

17  anb  hauc  noroote In  thcmfclucs, 
anb  fo  enbure  but  foj  a  time:  afterlbaro 
When  affliction  02  perfecutton  arifeth 
foube  ibo2bs  fane ,  immcotatcly  they 
areoffenbeb. 

is  anb  thefc  arc  they  Which  arc  foWen 
amongtbojnsifucbasbcaretbcWojb, 

19  atibtbccaresoftbisWo?Ib,*anb 
the  betcitfulncffe  of  tichcs,anbthc  lufts 
of  other  things  cutting  in ,  thoftc  the 
wojb,  anb  it  becommcth  bnfriittfull. 

20  anb  thefe  arc  rhty  lbhich  arc  I 
foibcn  on  goob  grounb ,  fucb  as  hcare  i 
thctoojb ,  anbtccciuctt,ff  bnngfoo.'thl 
fruit, fomc  thirty  folb,  fomcfirtic,  anb 
fomeanhmUHcb. 

1 1  C*anb  he  fatb  bnto  thent/Js  a  can  ■■ 
blcbjought  to  be  put  bnbcrafbuftjcil, 
ojbnbcc  a  beb  <  ?  not  to  befet  on  a  can- 1 
blcfhehc* 

ii  *jFo?ti)cre  is  nothing  htb,  Which  j 
fbailnotbcmantfcftcbmcitbcrwasany 
thing  nept  fctret ,  but  that  it  flioulb 
conic  abioao. 

25  gifany  man  haue  cares  to  hcare,  J 
let  him  hcare. 

14  anb  he  faib  bnto  them  /Eahc  heeb 
What  you  hcare :  *  tenth  What  mearurc 
ye  mctc.it  fbalbe  mcafur  cb  to  you :  anb 
bnto  you  that  bcarcthai  mojc  be  gntcn. 

25  *  JF02  he  that  hath,to  him  (hall  be 
giucn :  anb  he  that  hath  not,  from  him 
than  be  tanen.  eucn  that  Which  he  hath. 

26  4tanbhcfaib,S>oisthctungbomc 
of(3ob,asifamanfl)Ouibeaftfccbcinto 
the grounb, 

27  anb fhoulbflccpcanbnfc night 
anb  bay  ,anb  the  fecb  flioulb  fpnng,  anb 
groWbp,hclinoWetbnothoW. 

2s  i;oi  the  earth  bnngcth  fooith 
fruitcofhcrfcifcftrftthcbiabcthcnthc 
carc,after  that  the  fulltontcmthccarc. 

29  28nt  when  the  fruitctsHb.'ougbt 

foo2th ,  tmmcbiatcly  he  puttcth  m  the 

ftchlcbccaufe  the  barucft  is  come. 

jo  canbbefaib^ttWmtnto  flnilibc 

lilicn  the  Itmgbomc  of  Gob  <  £>2  with 

ibhat 


*  1.  Tun.  6. 
>7- 


■5 

:ntkt  cn%i- 

^  .(  \  n-.i- 
fitrtet  M-i'-. 

S  '5 

'MauS.10. 

10. 


J>- 


The  fca  calmed.         S.Mark 


e. 


Ofthefi 


leiwine. 


"Matttvi 

34. 


•Maith.8. 


•Matth.S 
18. 


lbhat  tompanfon  fhail  ibc  compare  it  < 
31  3fttsliKcagratncofmu(tarbfccb:j 
Mitel)  lbhcn  tt  is  foU)crt  m  tl)c  earth ,  is  1 
Uffethcn  all  thefeebes  that  be  in  the 
earth. 

31  ffiutlbhcnittsfoibcn.itgroibcth! 
top ,  ant)  becommcrh  greater  then  all 
herbes,  f  fl)ootctt>  out  great branches, 
fo  that  the  foibles  of  the  atrcmap  lobge 
bnbcrtbcfiiabolboftt. 

33  *  anb  lbith  man?  fuel)  parables 
fpafcc  bee  tt)c  lbojb  bnto  them ,  as  thep ' 
lbereablctol)carctt. 

34  25ut  lbithout  a  parable  fpalte  he 
not  unto  tlieni,  aim  ibhen  thcpibcre  a  j 
lone ,  hec  crpounbcb  all  things  to  his 
bifciples. 

35  *  anb  the  fame  bap,  ibhcnthce- 
ttcn  ibas  tome,  he  Haiti)  bnto  them,  JLct 
bs  pafTc  oucr  bnto  the  other  fibc. 

36  Stub  lbhcn  thep  hab  fent  aibap 
flje  multitubcthcp  toouc  him,  cuenas 
bcibasmthcflnp,  anb  there  lbercalfo  I 
tbirtj  bun  other  litleflnps. 

37  anb  there  arofc  a  great  ftomie  of 
ibmb.anb  t£»c ibaucs  beat  into  the  (hip, 
fotljatittbasnolbfull. 

3S  aubhcibasinthe  limber  part  of 
tl)cft)ip  aflccpconaptllolb  :anbthepa; 
lbabchtm ,  anb  Tap  bnto  htm ,  fatter, 
tarcft  thou  not,  thanbcpcrifl)  < 
.  39  anb liec arofc,  anb  rebubeb the 
lbmbc,  anbfatb  bnto  the  fca,  0cate,bc 
mil:  anb  the  ibtn&c  tcafeb,  anb  there 
ibas  a  great  caime. 

40  anbbefaib  bnto  them,  nahparc 
pc  to  fcarefull  <  i)oib  is  it  that  pott  ijauc 
no  faith; 

41  anb  thep  feareb  ercecbtnglp,  anb 
faibconc  to  another,  nahat  mauer  of 
man  is  this,  that  etieu  the  lbtttbe  anb 
thcfeaobephitiK 

CHAP.    V. 

1  Chriftdcliucrin^  thepofleflcd  of  the  Legion 
ofdeuils,  1  j  They  enter  into  thefvvine,  25 
Hee  healed)  the  woman  of  the  bloody  iflue, 
^  and  raifeth  from  death  Iauus  his  daughter. 

1 /2b*  the?' tame  oucr  bnto 
1  the  other  fibc  of  the  fca.w; 


|N|S  to  the  couutrcp  of  the  ©a* 


Wow 

$fiW-$&  barencs. 
%§$$&$=&  %  aub  lbhcn  bee  ibas 
come  out  of  thcflnp ,  immcbiatlp  there 
met  him  out  of  the  tombes,  a  man  lbtth 
aubnclcauefpirit, 

3  tt)Iio  hab  his  blbclling  among  the 
tombs,anbuomancoulbbutochim,no 
not  tbttb  chaines: 


4  asecaufc  that  bee  hab  bene  often 
bottnb  lbtth  fetters  anb  chaines,  anb 
the  chaines  hab  bene  plucUeb  afunber 
bp  him ,  anb  the  tetters  bioftcnm  pie- 
ces :  neither  toulb  anp  matt  tamehun. 

5  anb  aiibapes  night  anb  bap,  hee 
ibas  in  the  mountaincs ,  anb  in  the 
tombes ,  ccptng ,  anb  cutting  htmfclfc 
Unto  (loues. 

6  26ut  lbhcn  hee  faib  Kefus  afar  re 
off,hc  came  anb  Uwlrjippeb  htm, 

7  anb  crtcb  lbtth  a  loibb  botcc,  anb 
faib,tt>bathauc3i  to  bocibttbtbccjic 
ftts,thou  Pontic  of  the  mod  high  Gob; 
JIabture  thec  bp  ©ob ,  rtjat  thou  tor 
mentmenot. 

8  ( jfo?  he  fatb  bnto  htm,  Come  out 
of  the  inan,thou  bucleanc  fptrit.) 

9  anb  he  afucb  him ,  nabatts  thp 
name  ;  aubbccanftucrcb,  taping,  *J}3p 
name  ts  fLegton :  fo?  Ibc  arc  manp. 

10  anbbcebcfoughthimmueb,rtjat 
he  iboulb  not  fenb  them  aibap  out  of 
the  totmtrep. 

11  i!2oib  there  ibas  there  nigh  bnto 
the  mountaincs  a  great  ijerb  of  frame, 
feebmg. 

u  anb  all  tlje  beiulsbcfought  him 
faping,£>enb  bs  into  the  fratne,that  ibe 
map  enter  into  them. 

13  anb  fiwthibith  Uefus  gauc  them 
leaue.  anb  the  bnclcane  fpirtts  ibent 
out,  anb  cntrcb  into  the  frame,  anb  the 
herb  rannc  biolcntlp  boibnc  a  ftecpe 
place  into  thcfca(thcpibcrcabouttibo 
thoufanb  )anb  iberc  thoftcb  tn  the  fca. 

14  anb  thepthat  feb  the  frame  flcb, 
anb  tolbc  it  in  the  cttic,  anb  m  the  coun= 
trcp.  ^nb  thep  ibent  out  to  fceibljat  tt 
ibas  that  rbas  bone. 

15  ^nb  thep  come  to  3Icfus ,  anb  fee 
hlmthatlbaspoffeffcb  lbtth  thcbctull, 
anb  hab  the  fUgton,  fitting,  anb  do 
theb,  anb  in  his  right  mtnbc :  anb  thep 
lbcrcafraib. 

i6  anb  thep  that  falb  it,  tolbe  them 
hoib  tt  bcfellto  htm  that  lbaspofTcfrcb 
lbtth  the  dc  mil ,  anb  alfo  concerning  tlje 
frame. 

17  anb  thep  began  to  p?ap  him  to  nc 
part  out  of  their  coafts. 

is  anb  lbhcn  hec  ibas  come  into  the 
fl)ip,hc  that  hab  bote  pofTcffcb  lbtth  the 
bcuiil  pzapcb  him  that  hec  might  bee 
lbtth  him. 

19  l?oibbctt3fcfusfurTcrcb  himnot, 
but  faith  bnto  him ,  <5oc  home  to  thp 
fricnbs,anbtcl  them  hoib  great  things 
the  ?Lo,2b  hath  bone  fo;  thec,  anb  hart) 

hab 


Ilairus  daughter  Cha 


p.vj. 


rcftoredtolifc, 


i  Dab  companion  on  tDce. 

20  2tnD  Dec  bepartcb ,  anb  began  to 
publifl*  m£>ccapolis,Doib  great  things 
i  Jems  Dab  bone  fo^  Dun :  anb  all  men 
bibtnantcilc. 

21  anbibbctfjcfusibaspafrcboucr 
agautc  by  (Dtp  bnto  tDc  otljcc  fibcmucD 
people  gatDercb  bnto  Ijtm,  anb  Dc  ibas 
ntgD  bnto  tDc  Sea. 

m«9.i8.  zi  *3tnbbcDolo,tDctctominetDonc 
of  tDc  ftulctsof  tDc  Synagoguc,3Jai 
rus  by  name,  anb  ibDcu  De  faib  Dun,  Ijc 
fcliatDtsfccte, 

23  31nb  bcfougDt  Dim  greatly ,  fay 
tag,  ti^y  litlc  baugDtcr  uctD  at  tDc  pouu 
of  bead) ,  i  prav  thee  tome  anb  lay  tDy 
DanbsonDet ,  tDatfDccmaybcDcaicb, 
anb  n)cfDall  line. 

24  anb3icfusibcntibitDDun,anb 
mucD  people  follouxb  Dun ,  anb  t\)ion 
geDfoim. 

25  3lnb  a  ccrtaine  iboman  VbljuD 
Dabaniffuc  of  bloob  tlb  clue  y  ceres, 

26  StnbDabfuffetcbtnanytDmgsof 
many  0Dyficians ,  anb  Dab  fpent  all 
tDatthcDab,anbibasnotD»ngbcttcrcb, 

butratDcrgrcibibon"e, 

27  naDcntbceDabDcarbofJcfus, 
tamcmtDepicafe  bcDmbe,  anbtoucDcb 
Dis  garment. 

28  if  ojflicfaibjfj may toutlj but 
DtsclotDcs,3!fDalbcibDole. 

29  2nb  ftraigDtlbay  tDc  fountamc 
of  Der  bloob  Vbas  micb  bp :  anb  flic  felt 
m  Dec  boby  tDat  fl;  e  \bas  Dcalcb  of  tljat 

plague. 

jo  anb3Jcfusimtncbiatly&noiblng 

in  Dtmfclfe  tDat  bcrtue  Dab  gone  out  of 
Dim ,  tutneb  Dmt  about  in  tDc  pzeaffe, 
anbfaib.ieDotoucDcbmytlotDeSi 

j  1  anb  Dis  bifrtplcs  faib  buto  Dim, 
XDon  feeft  tDc  muttitttfje  tlwongtng 
tDce,anbfaycfttDou,i©DotoucDcbmc^ 

32  anb  Deloofeebrounb  about  to  fee 
Der  tDat  Dab  bone  tljts  tDing. 

33  26ut  tDc  iboman  fearing  anb  trcm< 
bimg,  Knotting  lbDat  mas  bone  m  Der, 
tame  anb  fell  bottme  befoje  Dun,  anb 
tolbcDmtalltDctnietD. 

34  anb  Dcfaib  bnto  Der,  Daugltter, 

tDy  faitD  DatD  mabc  tDce  lbDolc ,  goc  in 
peat  e,  anb  be  lbDolc  of  tDy  plague. 

35  leDtlc  Dee  yet  fpauc,  tDcrc  came 
from  tDc  ftulcr  of  tDe  Synagogues 
houfe,  tcrtaineibbicDfaib,  XDybaugD 
tcr  is  bcab  ,ibDy  tr  onblcfl  tijou  tDc  tT5a 
tteranyfurtDcr? 

36  3m"boncas3JcfusDcarbtDc\bo2b 

tljat  ibas  fpoftcn,  Ijc  fattlj  buto  tDc  Kit* 


ice  of  tDc  Synagogue ,  15c  notafraib, 
oncly  bclecuc. 

37  anoDcfuffcrcbnomantofolloib 
Dim,  fauc^ctcr,  shames,  anb  3Jofin 
tDc  bjotDcr  of  panics. 

38  anb  Dec  commctl)  to  tDc  Doufc  of 
tl)c  ftulcr  of  tDe  Synagogucanb  fcctD 
tDc  tumult ,  anb  tDcm  tljat  lbcpt  anb 
ibailcb  greatly. 

39  anb  IbDcu  Dc  ibas;  tome  in ,  Dee 
faitD  bnto  tDcm ,  D@by  mane  ycc  this 
aboc,  anb  lbccpc  <  tljc  bamofcll  is  not 
bcab,  but  OccpetD. 

40  anb  tDcy  laugDcb  Dim  to  feozne : 
butibDcn  Dc  Dab  put  tDcm  all  out,  Dec 
taltctD  tDcfatljcr  anb  tDc  motDcr  of  tDc 
bamofcll ,  anb  tDcm  tDat  lbcrc  lbitD 
Dim,anb  cntrctDmlbDctc  tDcbamofcll 
ibas  lying. 

41  aubDctooUctDcbamofcllbytDc 
Daub,  anb  faib  bnto  Der,  Taikha  cumi, 
ibbtcDts,  being  intcrpjctcb,  Daniofcll 
(3  fay  bnto  tDce)  atifc. 

42  anb  ftraigDtlbay  tDc  bamofcll 
arofc,  anb  VbalUcb,  ioi  fljee  ibas  of  tDc 
age  of  tibcluc  yccrcs :  anb  tljey  lbcrc  a 
ftoniflicbibttDagrcatattoniflimcnt. 

43  anb  Dec  cDargeb  tDcm  ftraitly, 
tDat  no  manfboulbUnoibit :  anbtom^ 
manbeb  tDat  fomc  tDmg  fliouio  be  gfc 
ucnDcttocatc. 

CHAP.    VI. 

Chriil  is  contemned  of  his  countreymen. 
7  Hegiucththe  rweluepowerouervncleane 
fpirits.  14  Diners  opinions  ol  Chi  ilh  18  Iolin 
Baptift  is  beheaded,  19  and  buried.  30  The 
Apoftles  returne  from  preaching.  S4  The 
miracle  ol  fiue  loaues  and  two  fifties.  4^ 
ChiiftwalkethontheSea:  53  Andhe.ilcth 
all  that  touch  him. 


..  touutrcy  ,  anb  ijis 
bifnplcsfolloibDim. 
2  anbibDcntDcSab 
batD  bay  ibas  tome ,  Dc  began  to  tcatD 
in  tDc  Synagogue :  anb  ntanpljcanng 
Dun,  lbcrc  aftouiflicb,  faying,  from 
lbDcntc  DatD  tins  man  tDcfc  tilings; 
anb  ibDat  lbifcbomc  is  tDts  ibDitD  is 
giuenbnto  Dim,  tDat  cucnfucD  uugDtic 
lbojhcsarc  ltyougDt  by  Dis  Danos  * 

3  gis  not  tDis  tDc  carpenter,  tDc 
fonncof  Q9arp ,  tDc  bzotDcr  of  'James 
anb  3Iofcs,  anb  ofjfuba,  anb  Simon  < 
anb  arc  not  Dis  filters  Dccrc  lbitD  bs  t 
^nb  tDcy  lbcrc  offcubcb  at  Dim. 

4.   25ut  3lcfus  faybc  bnto  tDcm, 


'M1M3. 


Difci  pies  fen  tour.       S.Marke.         Iohn  beheaded. 


'Iohn 


4  44 


•Mat.9-35 
lukc  13.12. 

'Mjt.10.1 


\\Tneward 
fignifeth  a 
piece  of 
fo.tj[e  mo- 
ney, tn  va- 
in f  fome- 
■tthat  lefle 
then  afar- 
tinng^ntAt. 
10. 9  t>Ht 
here  it  ts  ta- 
t'jntn  ?tne- 
rati  for  many. 
''Mat.  10.14 
*Acli35i 


"lam.  $.14. 
*Mat.l4i 


*Luk.j-!9 


•tt. 
16. 

ir.18 

\\o-. 

trjrd 

anin- 
'rudg 

*a£jopheti6notWithouthonour,but 
in  his  owne  coutttrcy ,  anbamong  his 
o  wnc  tunne,  anb  in  his  owne  houfc. 

5  anb  he coulb there  bocno nughtic 
tt)02ke ,  faue  that  he  laiD  his  hanbsbp^ 
on  a  few  ficlic  folftc,  anb  hcalcb  them. 

6  anb  he  marttctlcb  becaufc  of  their 
bnbelicfc.  *  anb  he  Went  rounb  about 
the  btllagcs,  teaching. 

7  C  *  anb  he  callcth  bnto  Dim  the 
tWcluc,  anb  began  to  fcub  them  footfh, 
by  two  anb  two, anb  gaue  them  potter 
oucrbncleancfpirits, 

s  anb  commanbeb  thein  that  they 
fhoulD  tattc  nothing  foj  their  tourney, 
fattcaltaffconcly :  noftnp,no  tycab,no 
||  money  m  their  purfe: 

9  23ut  be  (hob  ruttl)  fanbaics :  anb 
not  put  on  two  coats. 

10  anbhefatbbntothem,  3JnWhat 
place  focuer  ycc  enter  tnto  an  home, 
there  abtbc  til  y  c  bepart  from  that  place. 

1 1  *  anb  Whofocttcr  (hall  not  rccctuc 
you ,  noj  hcarc  you ,  When  \ytt  bepart 
thence,  *  (haftc  off  the  bull  bnber  your 
feet,fo:  a  tcmmonicagamft  them :  tk= 
rely  3  fay  bnto  you,  it  lhaibc  mojc  tolc? 
table  foj&obom  anb  Gomoirha  tnthe 
bay  ofiubgentcnt,  then  fo?  that  citie. 

ii  anb they Went out,  anbpjcachcb 
that  men  (houlb  repent. 

13  anb  they  tad  out  many  bcutls, 
*  anb  anointcb  With  oyle  many ,  that 
Were  ficfte,  ano  hcalcb  them. 

14  tubbing  ^crobhearboniirn(foj 
his  name  was  fpjcab  atyoab : )  anb  hec 
faib  that  Holm  the  25aptiQ  was  nfen 
from  the  bcab,  anb  therefore  mightic 
Woztscsboclhcw  foo?th  thcmfclucsm 
him. 

15  Others  faib,Xhat  xt  is  eitas.  anb 
othctsfaib.Xhatitisa^ophct.oMS 
oncofthcj&ophcts. 

16  *  26ut  When  lt>erob  hcarb  thereof, 
he  faib,  gjt  is  3lohn,  ibhomc  J  bcljea^ 
beb,  he  is  r  ifcn  from  the  bcab. 

17  iFoztycrobhtmfclfchabfcntfotfh 
anb  laib  hoio  bpon  3John,  anb  bounb 
htm  in  pztfon  fo*  Dcrobias  fabc,hts  bro- 
ther philips  ibifc,  fo?  hee  hab  maricb 
her. 

18  f 02  3John  hab  faib  bnto  fccrob, 
"Jttsuot  lawfullfo?  thec  to  hattcthy 
toothers  Wife. 

19  Xhcrfcuc  tycrobtashabla  quarrel 
agamlr  him,  etWoulb  hauc  Itilicbhim, 
but  flic  coulb  not. 

zo  jfojfycrobfcarcb^Joht^UnoW 
mg  tljat  he  was  a  tuQ  man,aub  an  holy, 


anb  i|  obferucb  him :  anb  When  he  hcarb 
him,  hec  bib  many  things ,  anb  hcarb 
himgiably. 

21  aubWhenaconucuscntbaywas 
eome,that  $crob  on  hts  birth  bay  mabc 
a  fuppcr  to  hislozbs,  high  captames, 
anb  chicft  cllatcs  of  oaliice : 

22  ^nb  When  the  battghtcr  of  the 
faib  fccrobias  came  m,  anb  banccb,  anb 
plcafcbftcrob,  anb  them  that  fate  With 
him ,  the  Uing  faib  bnto  the  bamofcll, 
afftc  of  me  Whatfocuer  thou  Wilt ,  anb 
3J  Will  giuc  it  thee. 

23  anbhcfmarcbntohcr,i0hatfoc' 
iter  thou  (halt  attic  of  me ,  3  Wtli  giuc 
it  thee,  bnto  the  haifc  of  my  Kingbomc. 

24  anb  u>  went  fonh.anb  faib  bnto 
her  mother,  nahat  (hall  3  affect  anb 
(he  faib ,  %\)t  heab  of  35ohn  y  Bapna. 

25  anb  (hecamcinftraightway  with 
haflcbnto  the  lung,  anb  afbcb,  faying, 
3  Will  that  thou  glue  me  by  anb  by  m  a 
charger,  the  heab  of  3John  the  2Sapnft. 

26  anb  the  lung  was  erceebingfozy, 
vet  fojhis  othes  faftc,  anbfo:  their  fabes 
which  fate  With  htm,  hee  woulb  not  rc= 
lecthet. 

27  anb  nnmebiatly  the  feing  fent 
||  anerccuttoner ,  anb  tommaunbeb  his 
heab  to  be  b2ought,anb  he  Went,anb  bc^ 
heabcb  hint  m  the  p?tfon, 

18  anbb?oughthishcabinaehar< 
gcr,  anb  gaue  it  to  the  bamofcll,anb  the 
bamofcll  gaue  it  to  her  mother. 

29  anbWhcnhisbtfctplcshearbof  it, 

they  came  anb  toone  bp  his  co^pfc ,  anb 
latbtttnatombe. 

30  'anbtheapoQlcsgatherebtheni' 
fcltics  together  bnto  3efus,  anb  tolbe 
htm  all  things ,  both  What  they  hab 
bone,  anb  what  they  hab  taught. 

31  anb  hefatb  bnto  them,  Come  ycc 
your  fcittcs  apart  tnto  a  befert  place, 
aitbrcQaWhtle.  if  02  there  were  many 
commtnganb  going,  anb  they  hab  no 
leifur  c  fo  much  as  to  cat  c . 

32  *anb  they  bepattcb  into  a  befert 
place  by  (hip  pnuately. 

33  anb  the  people  faw  them  bepar« 
ting,  anb  many  ftncW  him,  anb  ranne 
afootc  thither  out  of  all  tines,  anb  out- 
went them ,  anb  came  together  bnto 
him. 

34  *anb  3Jcfus  When  he  came  out, 
faw  much  pcoplcanb  was  moucb  With 
compa(ftontowarbthcni,  becaufc  they 
Were  as  fliccpc  not  hautttga  fhepherb : 
anb  hec  beganne  to  teach  them  many 
things. 

35  *anb 


li  Or,  kipt 
him. 


\\0r,crtrcf 
hit  ittard. 


Luk.J.io  J 


'  Mac.14. 


'Mm.  6,59. 


Miraculous  feeding. 


■Mit[h.i4. 
'5- 


||  Thi  Km. 

peme  u/tHin 
pence  hdfe 
ptme  as 


|  Orjtv.er  a- 
gtunft  Heth- 
faida. 


•Much.. 


35  *3nbTbl)enthebayibasnoU)fac 
fpcnt,hts  SDifnples  came  bnto  him,anb 
faib ,  Xtjisis  a  befert  place ,  anD  noib 
ti)c  time  is  farre  pafTco. 

36  Sienbthemaibay,  thatfheymay 
goe  into  tlje  tountrrv  roum)  about,anb 
into  the  btllages,  anb  buy  thcmfclucs 
bzeao :  fo.z  they  hauc  nothing  to  catc. 

37  ^canfitjcrcbanbfaibbntothem, 
<5iue  pec  them  to  eatc.  3$nb  thev  fay  bn; 
to  htm,£>hall  rue  gocaub  buy  t  ttio  Ijun- 
bjcb  ||  pcnniVbojtl) of  bjcab,  anb  giuc 
them  rotate; 

38  $e  faith  bnto  them ,  ^orb  man? 
loauCiS  hauc  yrc  <  goe ,  anb  fee.  Znh 
Vbhen  they  ftuelb ,  they  lav ,  JFiuc,  anb 
tibofifhcs. 

39  3iub  he  comntanbeb  them  to  maftc 
allfitbottntcby  companies  bpon  the 
geecne  graffc. 

40  3inb  they  fate  boibncinrauRcs 
byhuub2ebs,anb  by  fifties. 

41  3nbttihen  he  hab  taKcnthcfiue 
,oaucs,anbthctujofi(hcs,helooRcbbp 
to  hcaucn ,  anb  bleffeb ,  anb  bjatse  the 
loaues ,  anb  gauc  them  to  his  bifnplcs 
tofetbcfmetUcm  anbtne tVbofifljcsbt' 
uibcb  he  among  them  all. 

41  3inb  they  bib  all  cate ,  anb  Iberc 
filleo. 

43  3mb  they  tooac  bp  tlbelue  bafc 
Sets  full  of  the  fragments,  anb  of  the 
fifhes. 

44  3nb  they  that  bib  eatc  of  the 
loaues,  iberc  about  fiuc  thoufanb  men. 

45  :3no  Gcaightlbay  hecouftrameb 
his  bifnplcs  to  get  into  thefhip,  anb  to 
goe  to  the  other  fibc  before  ||  bnto  25ert> 
faiba,ibt)Uc  he  fent  atbay  tlje  people. 

46  3nb  Tbhen  hee  rjab  fent  them  a- 
tbay ,  lie  bepattcb  tntoamountaincto 

pjay. 

47  *3nbtt)hett<£ucnibascome,thc 

aiip  was  in  the  mibQ  of  the&ca,  anb 
l)c  alone  on  the  lanb. 

4S  3tno  he  faibtrjcm  toiling  in  totb^ 
ing(fo:  the  tbinb  ttias  contrary  bnto 
them:)  anb  about  the  fourth  watch  of 
the  night,hccommetfjbnto  them,  tbal< 
mng  bpon  the  £>ea ,  anb  Vboulb  hauc 
paffebbythem. 

49  iSuttbhcn  they  fail)  him  ibalRing 
bpon  thcSca,thcyfuppofebuhab  bene 
afpirit,anbcriebout. 

50  (5f 0?  they  all  fatt)  him ,  anb  lucre 
troublcb)  anb  immcbiatcly  hec  taiUcb 
tbtththem ,  anbfaithbntothcm,25cof 
goobcheerc,3Jtisl2J>ucnotafraib. 

51  3nb  \)tt  limit  bp  bnto  them  into 


Chap.vi  j.      Mens  traditions. 


i  the  (hip,  anbtrjctinnbceafcb :  anb  they 
iberc  fo.'c  ama3eb  in  themfelucs  beyonb 
mcafurc,anbibonbcrcb. 

52-  jroz  they  confiocrcb  not  the  miracle 
of  the  loaues,  foz  their  heart  lbashar- 
oencb. 

53  *3nbU)fjcn  they  hab  pafrcboucr, 
thcycamc  into  thelaubof  Gencfarcth, 
anbojcVbtotheihoje. 

54  Smbfthcn  they  lucre  tome  out  of 
the  Ityp,  ftraightibay  the?  Rtieib  Ijim, 

55  3Uib  ran  through  that  ibholcrc 
gionrouno  about,  anb  began  nc  to  car 
tie  about  m  bebs,  thofc  that  iber c  ficRc, 
rbhcrcthcyhcarbhctbas. 

56  3nb  ibhuhcrfoucr  hcentreb,  to 
tobiliagcs,  02  cities,  02  countrle,  thev 
laibc  the  ficUc  in  the  ftrcetes,  1  brfougljt 
him  tljat  they  might  touch  if  it  iberc  but 
ithc  bobber  of  his  garment  :anbasma5 
n?  as  toucljcb  ||  him,tbcrc  mabc  ttljolc. 

CHAP.  VII. 

1  The  Pharifes  find  faulc  .it  the  difciples  for  ea- 
ting with  vnwafhen  hands.  8  They  breake 
the  con'.mandenientorGod.by  the  traditions 
of  men.  4  Meate  defileth  not  the  man.  24 
Hec  healeth  the  Syropheniaan  womans 
daughter  of  an  vndeanefpirit,  31  and  one 
that  was  deafe,  and  ftammered  in  his  (peach. 

fiJMyag*$en  came  together  bnto 
M3  himthcphanfcs,anbccr' 
?|  cam  of  the  Scribes,  lbhich 
^  came  from  fticrufaiem. 
S3&    1   ^nblbhetuhcvfaib 
fome  of  his  bifnplcs  catc  b:eab  muh 

||bcfilcb(thatistofaj>,ibithbnibanKn) 
ljanbs,thcvfounb  fault. 

3  fo;  the  Pharifes  anb  all  the 
3Jcibcs ,  creeptthep  iban>  their hanbs 
Ifoft ,  eatenot ,  holbtngthctrabinon  of 
the  rtbers. 

4  31nb  tbhen  thep  tome  from  the 
marhcurccpt  the?  ibafli,thc>'  catc  not. 
3nb  many  other  things  there  bcinhuh 
tlicp  hauc  rcceuicb  to  holb ,  as  the  iba 
(hingofnipsanbllpots,b;afnibcfIcls, 
anboflltables. 

5  Xhen  the  ^harrfesanb  Scribes 
afftebhim,n9hvlbainc  not  tlir  bifnplcs 
accojbmg  to  the  trabition  of  tbc  €i 
bcrs,  but  eatc  b«:cab  Uuth  bnibaihcn 
IjanbSi 

6  $?e  aufujereb  anb faib bnto  them, 
naell  hath  cfatas  piophefieo  of  you 
l?ppomtcs ,  as  it  10  ibnttcn ,  *  £his 
people  honourcth  mcc  lbith  their  lip©, 
but  their  heart  is  farre  from  me. 

7  tooibbcit  in  bamc  boc  they  lbo: 

' (fei£ 


■Matth  14. 


\Or,it. 


♦Matth. i  j 


■mn. 


\\0rth!i- 
gently,  mlhe 

■ 

vptothttl- 
bowe. 
Orjseis. 

i.-l.'.rrr-c, 
a  ah  oh:  a 
ptnttanAtti 

bstff, 


I  J.IIUt.I  j 


iWhatdefileth.         S.Markc.      The  deafe  healed. 


ft  Or,  ft* 
jtrare. 


'Matth.lf. 


"Matt.  15 
10. 


'Gfn.6-5 
and  8.21. 


■Matth.lj. 
•9- 


Matt-  1  \ 


n)ipmc,tcacDingfozDoctnncs,tDcconv 
manDcmentsofmen. 

s  ifoz  laying  afiDc  the  CommanDc- 
mentof  ©od,  ycc  IjolD  tDc  traDittonof 
mcn,astDclbafDmgofpots,  ant)  tups: 
aiiDmanyotDcrfumliKctDingsycDoc. 

9  SCnDDefaiDbntotDcm,  ifulIVbcll 
ye  ||  rcicct  tDc  CommanDcmcnt  of  ©oD, 
tDatycma^fcccpcyoutoibnetraDition. 

10  Sf oz  £0ofes  fait) ,  honour  tDy  fa< 
tDct  9  tljv  mottjer :  anu  lbDo  fo  turrctl) 
fatljcr  oz  motDcr,let  Dim  DtctDcDeatD. 

1 1  2But  ye  fay ,  3K a  man  n>aii  fay  to 
Dis  fatDct  oz  motDcc ,  31 1  is  *  Cozban, 
tDat  is  to  fay,a  gift,bytt)Danocucr  tijou 

migljttft  UC  PZOfitCD  b?  mt :  he  fhalbe  tree. 

ii  3lnt)  yc  fuffec  Dim  no  mozc  to  Doc 
ougDtfozDisfatDet,ozDismotDcr: 

i}  {pitting  tDcibozD  of  <3oD  of  none 
effect  tJjzougj)  yout  traDitton,  lbDtcD  yc 
Dane  DclutcreD  :  3nD  man?  fucD  lifec 
tDmgsDocye. 

14  c*3mD\bDcnDcDaDeailcDailtDc 
people  bnto  l)im ,  Dee  faiD  unto  tl)cm, 
heathen  bnto  me  cucry  one  of you,anD 
buDcrftanD. 

15  XDetc  is  nothing  from  lbttDont 
a  man  t^at  cutting  tnto  Dim ,  tan  Defile 
Dun:  but  tl)c  tilings  lbDicDcomcoutof 
of  Dim ,  tDofc  arc  tijev  tljat  Defile  tljc 
man. 

i6  3if  anymanDauc  cares  to  Dcarc, 
ictDunDcarc. 

17  2lnD  lbDcn  Dec  ibas  entrct)  into 
tDc  Donfc  from  tDc  people ,  l)is  Difnplcs 
af  Set)  Dim  concerning  ti)c  parable. 

is  2nti Dc  faitD bnto  tDcm,31rc yc fo 
VbitDout  btiDcrftanDtng  alfo*  Docycc 
not  pcrceiuc  tDat  lbDatfocuct  tDmg 
fromtbitDout  cntrctlj  into  tDc  man,  it 
cannot  Defile  Dun, 

19  fficcaufc  it  cntrttD  not  into  Dis 
Dcart,  but  into  tDc  belly,  auD  goctD  out 
into  tDc  DzaugDt,  purging  all  meats; 

10  anD  De  faiD/3CDat  ibDuD  commctD 
outoftDcman.tDatDcfilctDtlicman. 

2 1  *  foi  from  untDin.out  of  tDc  Dcart 
of  men,  pzocccD  cuilltDougl)ts,aDultc- 
ncs,foziucations,murDcrs, 

21  'XDcfts,  touctoufticfrcttnclicD- 
ncfrc,Dcccit,iafciiuoufncffc,ancuillcye, 
biafpDemic,pziDc,foolifl)ncffc: 

23  3111  tDcfc  euill  tDmgs  come  from 
lnitDmanD  Defile  tDc  man. 

14.  C*3lnD  from  tDcnce  Dc  arofcanD 
went  into  tDc  bozDcrs  of  Xyje  anD  &v 
Don,  ant)  cntreD  into  an  Doufc,  anD 
ttiouiD  Dane  no  man  Imolb  it,  but  Dec 
coulDiiotbeDiD. 


25  jfoz  a  ccrtamc  lboman,  lbDofc 
youg  DangDtcr  DaD  an  bnclcancfpicit, 
DcarDof  Ijun,  anD  came  anD  fell  at  Dis 
fectc. 

26  (5TDcrbomantt)asa||(5rccftt,a 
£>yzopDcmcian  by  nation : )  anD  ify  be? 
fougDt  Dim  tDat  Dc  IboulD  caQ  foztt)  tl;c 
DcuilioutofDcrDaugDtcr. 

27  2Sut3JcfusfaiDtontoDcr,HcttDc 
cDUDzcn  firu  be  fillcD  :fozitisnot  meet 
to  ta&c  tDc  tDUDzens  bzcaD,ant)  to  cart  it 
bnto  tDc  Dogges. 

a3  3tnD  fl)C  anfrocrcD  anD  faiD  bnto 
Dim,  jacs  Hozd,  yet  tDc  Dogges bnber 
tljc  table  eat  of  tDc  cDilDzcns  crummes. 

29  3nD  Dec  faiD  bnto  Dcr,  jfoztljis 
faying,  goctDy  may,  tDcDciull  is  gone 
outoftDyDaugDtcr. 

30  2inD  U)Dcn  (Dec  tbas  come  to  Dcr 
Doufe,fl)CfounDtDcDeuillgoncout,anD 
Dcr  DangDtcr  laicD  Upon  tljc  bcD. 

31  OnDagaincDcparttng  from  tDc 
coaftcs  of  Xyzc  anD  £>iDon,Dc  cam  e  bm 
to  tDc  fea  of  Galilee,  tljozoib  tDc  nuDft 
oftljc  coalrsof2>ccapolis. 

32  3tnDtDcybzingbntoDtmonctDat 
ttasDcafc ,  anD  DaD  animpcDimentin 
Dis fpcccD :  anD  tl)ty  bcftccD  Dun  to  put 
DisDanDbponDim. 

33  31ud  Dc  toohe  Dim  afiDc  from  tDc 
multttuDe,  anD  put  Ins  fingers  into 
Dis  cares,  anD  Dc  fpit,anD  toucljcb  Dis 
tongue, 

34  3lnD  looking  bp  to  Deauen,  Dec 
UglKD^nDfaltD  bnto  Dun,€pDpDatDa, 
tDatis,26copcncD. 

3  5  3CnD  frraigDttbay  Dis  cares  tber  e 
opcncD ,  anD  tDc  firing  of  Dis  tongue 
ibas  loofcD,anD  Dcfpaacplainc. 

36  3inD  Dec  cDargcD  tDcm  tDat  tftrp 
ftioulD  tell  no  man  :  but  tljc  mozc  Dee 
cDargcD  tDcm,fo  mutD  tljc  moze  a  great 
DcaictDeypublifDcDit, 

37  3lnD  Were  bcyonD  meafurc  afto- 
mnicD.faying^cc  Dam  Done  all  tljings 
lbcll :  Dec  tualutD  botD  tDc  Dcafc  to 
Dcarc,anD  tljc  Dumbc  to  fpcaftc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  ClirilHeedcthtlie  people  iniiaculoully  :  10 
rcfufeth  to  t;iue  a  llenc  to  the  Phanfees :  1 4 
admonifheth  his  difciples  to  beware  of  the 
leuen  of  thePhanfees,  and  of  the  leuen  ot  He- 
rode:  ir  giuethablindemanhbfight:  17 
acknowledgeththat  hee  is  the  Chrifi,  who 
fhould  fuffer  and  rife  agaiiie :  34  andexhor- 
teth  to  patience  in  perfection  for  die  profef- 
fionof  theGofpel, 

31  n 


I  Or,  G01- 
itc. 


The  multitude  fed.    Chap.viij.      Peters  con  fefsion. 


Mads. 
2»- 


•Mat  i<S.i 


Mat.i5.5 


'Mat  ltf.7, 


5  jBtDofcbaycs'tDcmuinM 

\  tube  bcmg  bery  great,  anD ! 

hauing  noticing  to  cat  3Jc*j 

i%rf  fus  cailcD  tjis  bifciplcs  biv ! 

^KfaetMS  to  Dim,*  faitD  bnto  tDem,  | 

x   3  Dane  tompaffton  ontljcmulti- 

tube, bccaufctDcy  Dane  note  bene ftntD 

me  t\)ltt  bates,anti iDauc  notDing  to  cat: 

3  anb  if  'J  fenb  tDem  away  farting 
totDciroibncDoufcs.tDcyibillfaintby 
tl)c  ibay :  to?  biutrs  of  tDem  came  from 
farrc. 

4  anb  Dts bifciplcs  anfiucreb  Dim, 
if  com  ibDcncc  can  a  man  fatiffic  tncfc 
men  Vbtth  bicab  Der  c  in  trjc  Tbilbcrncs  i 

5  anb  Dec  afftcb  tDem,Doib  many 
loaucsDauc  yc*  anb  tbey  faib,  S>cucn. 

6  anb  De  coiumanbeb  tDe  people  to 
fitbolbnc  ontrjc  grounb:  anbDctoo&c 
tDcfcuculoaucs,anbgauetDaubs,anb 
biaucanb  gane  to  Dis  bifciplcs  to  fet  be- 
fore tDem:  anb  tDcy  bib  fet  tDem  before 
tlje  people. 

7  anb  tDcy  Dab  a  fern  fmail  fitDcs : 
anbljc  blcffcb,  anb  commaunbeb  to  fet 
tftemalfo  befee  tDem. 

8  *>o  tDcy  btbeate,  anb  lbctcfillcb: 
anbtDcytooKCbp,oftDcb2o«cnmcatc 
tljatibasieftjeucnbafsets. 

9  anb  tDcy  tl)at  Dab  eaten  Vbcre  fc 
boutfoiuc  tljoufanb,  anb  be  fenttfjem 
albay. 

10  canbfttaigDttbayDcentrcbtn; 
to  a  fbip  ibitD  Ins  bifciplcs,anb  came  nv 
to  tlje  parts  of  SDaimanutDa. 

11  *  anb  tDcpDaru"ccs  came  foortD, 
anb  began  to  quefhon  TbitD  Inm ,  fecfe- 
mg  of  Dim  a  Ciguc  from  Deauen,  temp*  1 
ting  Dim.  , 

1 1  anb  Dc  GgDcb  beeped  in  Disfptnt, : 
anb  faitD ,  t©DP  boeth  tljis  gctieration 
fctlte  after  a  Cignc;  Merely  3  fay  bnto 
you,  XDcrc  fbaiino  fignc  be  gmen  bnto 
tljis  generation. 

ij  31nb  Dc  left  tDcm,?  entnngfnto  tlje 

(hip  agatncbcpartcb  to  tDe  otDcr  fibc. 
14-  C*  /Roll)  tl)c  bifciplcsDab  forgot- 
ten  to  tahc  b2cab,ncitDcr  Dab  tDepin  trjc 
flitp  VbitD  them  moje  tDcn  one  loafe. 

15  anb  Dec  cDargcb  tDem ,  fay* 
mg,  Hafte  Dccb,  bctbarc  of  tDclcaucn 
of  tDe  pDanfccs,  anb  of  flje  icancn  of 
fccrobe.  _ 

16  anb  tDcy  rcafontb  among  tDem- 
felues)faving,ins,,,bccaurcibcDancno 

'17  anb  mDen  llefus  fcnctb  it,  De  faitD 
bnto  them,  tt)Dy  reafon  ye,  betaufc  yec 
I)aucnob2cab*pcrcciueyenr>tyct,nci 


tDcr  bnbcr&anb  *  l?aue  ycc  your  Dcart 
yctDarbcncb; 

is  J?autngcycs,  fee  ye  not  <  anb  Da 
uing  cares  Dcarcyc  not;  anb  bocyc  not 
remember  < 

19  naDcn^Jb.'aBe  the  fiucloaucs  a 
mong  Rue  tDoufanb ,  Doib  man?  baf 
nets  full  of  fragments  toofte  pec  tip; 
ICIjcy  fay  bnto  Dun,  Xibcluc. 

zo  anb  ibDcntDcfcucn  among  foure 
tDoufanb :  rjoib  man?  baftscts  full  of 
fragments  tooKe  ye  bp  *  anb  tDcy  faib, 
£>cucn. 

21  Public Taib  bnto  tDem,  l?oibisit 
tDatycboenotbnbcrltanb; 

2i  C anb Ijc tommctl) to 2SttDfaiba, 
anb  tf)cv  bung  a  bimb  man  bnto  Dim, 
anb  bcfougDt  Dim  to  touri)  Dim : 

23  anb  He  tooUe  trjc  blinb  man  by  tDe 
Danb,anblcbDimoutoftDctottmc,anb 
lbDcn  Dc  Dab  fpit  on  Dis  eyes,  9  put  Dis 
Danbs  bponDun  ,ljc  afucb  ftun,  if  Dec 
fa\bougt)t. 

14  anbDclooBcbbp,anb  faibc ,  31 
fee  men  as  trees,  tbaltting. 

25  after  tDat  Dee  put  DisD«nbcsa< 
game  bpon  Dis  cics,  anb  mabe  Dun  loob 
bp :  anb  Dc  mas  rettozcb.anb  faib  euerp 
manclcarcly. 

26  anb  Dec  fent  Dim  atbay  to  Dis 
Doufe,  faying,  iBnttjcr  goe  mto  tDe 
toibnc,  no?  tell  it  to  any  in  tDe  totbne. 

17  C  *  anb  Jlcfus  lbent  out,anb  Dis 
bifciplcs ,  into  tDe  totbnes  of  Ccfarca 
^Dilippi  -.anbbytDc  lbay  Dc  afbcbDis 
bifciplcs,faying  bnto  tDem,  naljoin  boe 
menfaytDat^ami 

28  anb  tDcy  antoercb  ,  3JoDn  tDe 
ffiapntt :  but  fomt  fay ,  €,  lias :  ?  otljcrs, 
oneoftDe02opDcts. 

19  anb  Dec  faitD  bnto  tDem  ,  ffiut 
\bDomfay  yce  tDat  3  am* anb  peter 
aimocretD  anb  faitl;  bnto  Dim ,  %X>q\\ 
arttDcCDnff. 

30  anb  De  cDargcb  tljctn  tDat  tDcy 
(DoulbtcllnomanofDim. 

31  anb  Dec  beganne  to  tcadi  tDem, 
tDat  tlje  S>onnc  of  man  mutt  fuff  cr  ma 
ny  tilings,  anb  be  retcctcb  of  rlic  €  ibers, 
anb  oftDccDicfc^neQs,  9  Scribes,  anb 
bcRillcb,9aftcctD2tcbaycsrifcagainc. 

32  aubDc  fpakc  tDat  faying  openly, 
anb  peter  tooKcljim ,  aub  beganue  to 
rcbubc  Dim. 

33  26ut\bDcuDeDabmrncbabout,9 
looUcb  on  Dis  bifciplcs ,  He  rcbulicb  pc 
tcr,faymg,C5ettDecbcbinbme,S)atan: 
fo:  tliou  fanoureft  not  tlic  tlimgstbat 
be  of  C5ob,but  tDe  tbmgs  tDat  be  of  men 

c  34  canb 


Mat.l«. 


Thetransfiguration.S.Marke.  Elias  is  come. 


•Matt.ie. 
38. 


•Mat.  10. 
33- 


"Mir.  1 6. 

aS 


Mat. 17. 1. 


3+  c  3Jnb  tbhen  lit  hab  cailcb  the 
pcoplcUntohim,iUithhisbifciplcsaifo, 
Dc  ratD  unto  them,  *  nahorocucr  ttnil 
come  after  me ,  let  htm  brine  himfclfe, 
anb  take  Up  his  crofTc  aim  folio  iu  nice. 

3<>  ifoj  lUhofocucr  mill  faue  his  life, 
fhall  lofc  tt,but  lUhofocucr  than  iofc  his 
life  foi mi?  faue  anb  the  eofpcls,  the, 
fame  than  fane  it. 

36  5fo2iUhatfhallitp2ofitaman,  if 
he  (hall  game  the  ibholttt)02ib,anb  lofc 
htsoiuntfotilc; 

37  £>2  what  (hall  a  man  giuc  in  ex- 
change fo2  his  foulc; 

3s  *  naliofocuer  thcrcfojcfhalibea: 
fhameb  of  me,  anr>  of  my  flwbs  ,m  this  I 
abulterous  ana  fmfull generation,  of 
himaifofhallthc  Sonne  of  man  bee  a< 
ihamcbauhenhccommeth  in  the  glojy 
of  his  father,  ttuth  the  holy  Angels. 

CHAP.   IX. 

:  Iefus  is  transfigured,  n  Hee  inftructethhis 
difciplcs,  concerning  the  commingof  Elias : 
14  cafteth  forthadumbe,anddeafelpirit:  50 
foretelleth  his  death  and  refnrreftion:  35  ex- 
hortethhisdifciplestohumilitie:  38  bidding 
thcm,nottoproliibitc  inch  as  benota^ainft 
the/ior  to  tnue  offence  to  any  of  the  laithfull.  i 

*$&??,<&&$  Ji2&  hec  faib  Unto  them,1 
^mx^f  *  Merely  3  fay  Unto  you, 
'- :<r  'i^-^M  that  there  befomeof  them 
i  thatftanb  hcrciuhich  thai 
j  not  tafte  of  btath,  till  they 
hauefcene  thctnngbomc  of  ©ob  come; 
ttuth  power. 

2  C  *  3nb  after  fire  bayes ,  3}cfns 
tattcth  with  hmi  peter ,  anb  panics, 
anb  5ohn,  anb  leabcth  them  Up  into  an 
hig!)  monntamc  apart  by  thcmfclucs: 
anb  he  was  tranffigurebbefoje  them. 

3  3inb  his  raiment  became  (tuning, 
crcccbmg  White  as  fnolU :  fo  as  no  .ful- 
ler on  earth  can  White  them. 

4-  3lnb  there  appcarcbUnto  them  <E« 
lias  ttuth  i]3ofcs:anb  they  Were  talking 
wtthlftfus. 

5  3lnb peter  anftucrcb, anb faibe to 
3Jcfiis,t'Baftcr,  it  is  goob  fo?us  to  bee 
here,  anb  let  us  malic  th:cc  Habcrna 
ciesoncfozthcc,auboncfo2i33ofcs,anb 
one  fo:C  lias. 

6  f  02  he  ttuft  not  lUljat  to  fay,  foj 
they  lucre  fozcafraib. 

7  3lnb  there  was  a clonb  that  oucr 
fliaboUicbtliem:  anbauoyce  came  out 
ofthccloublaymg/Chisismybeloucb 
Sonne:  heart  him. 

S   anbfubbenly  When  they  hab  loo 


neb  rounb  about,thcy  faiu  no  man  any 
mo2c,fauc3Jcfus  only  With  thcmfcliics. 

9  3nb  asthcycamcbowncfromthe 
mountaine,  he  thargcb  them  that  they 
fl)oulb  tell  no  man,  what  things  they 
hab  fcenc ,  till  the  Sonne  of  man  were 
nfen  from  the  bcab. 

io  3nb  they  fttpt  that  faying  lbith 
thcmfcliics,  qutfhomng  one  Withano- 
tljtr ,  what  tlje  rifing  from  the  btab 
(houlbmcane. 

1 1  €C  3lnb  they  afticb  him ,  faying, 
H9hy  fay  the  Scribes  that  Clias  muft 
firftcomc? 

ii  3iibhe anfrocreb, anbtolbthcm, 
Cliasuercly  commcth  firft ,  ant>  rtfto 
rcth  ai  thmgs,aub  *  holU  it  is  rujitten  of 
thcSonncof  man,  that  he  muftfuffcr 
many  things,  anb  be  fet  at  nought. 

13  23ut3JfayUntoyou,that<£liasis 
inbccbcomc,  anb  they  hauc  bone  unto 
him  whatfocucr  they  UOeb,as  tt  is  Wnt 
ten  of  him. 

14  c  *  31  nb  when  he  tame  to  his  bif- 
ciples,  hf  fath  a  great  multttubt  about 
tlxm.anbtheSmbcsattelhomngwith 
thtm. 

15  2nb  ftraightway  ail  the  people, 
Vbhcn  they  bchclb  him,  Were  greatly  & 
ma3Cb,  %  running  to  him,  faluteb  him. 

16  3utbheafUcb  the  Smuts,  i©hat 
queftton  ye  ||  With  them  < 

17  3lnb  one  of  the  multitubc  anftoe< 
rcb,  anbfaib,  fatter,  3  hautbzought 
unto  thtnny  fon ,  Whuhhath  abumbc 
fpirtt  : 

is  anbWhcrtfocuer  hctafecthhim, 
ht||ttartth  him,  f  he  fometh,nnbgna' 
n)cth  ttuth  his  tectfj,  anb  pmeth  albay : 
anb  3  fpaUc  to  thy  bifciplcs,  that  they 
(houlb  caft  him  out,  anb  they  coulb  not. 

19  Jtjcanftocrcthhim,  anb  faith,  sf> 
faithlcffcgcncration.hoWlongfhaliJ 
be  ttuth  you,  how  long  (hall  3J  fuffcr 
you  i  252ing  him  Unto  me. 

20  3inb  tljcy  bought  him  Unto  him: 
anbiuhcn  he  faiu  him,  ftraightway  tlje 
fptrittarchin^anbhcfclonthcgroimb, 
aubiuailolbcb,foming. 

ii  3inb  he  alTicb  his  father,  ^oiuc 
long  (sttagocfinccthis  came  Unto  him? 
^nbhcfaib,«Dfachilb. 

22  ^nb  oft  times  it  hath  caft  him  into 
the  fire,  anb  into  the  lbatcrs  to  beffroy 
him  :  but  tf  thou  canft  boc  any  thing, 
hauc  compaffion  on  us,anb  hclpc  us. 

23  giefus  faib  unto  him,  3lfthou 
canft  belccuc,  all  things  arc  pofflblc  to 
him  that  btittutth. 

__^ 24  Stub 


•Efai.53.13 


*Msc.  1 7. 

14- 


\\0r,  amon 


\\0r,iijiab 
hurt. 


ra 


ycr 


and  fading. 

o 


Chap.x.  Auoidoflfences. 


'MK.17. 


'Mji.iS.i 


•Lukcj. 
IP- 


*I.Cor.I2. 
3- 


24  3utb  ftratgbtibay  tUc  father  of 
the  cljtio  cneb  out  anb  faib  lbitb  tcarcs, 
ILo2b,  gi  bclceue,  hclpe  thou  mute  bit; 
bclicfc. 

i<;  <t©hcn3Jcfusfatb  that  the  people 
came  runnmg  together,  he  rebuUcb  the 
fonle  fpint ,  fapmg  Ditto  Dim,  Xbott 
bumbcanb  beafc  fpint,  3  charge  thee 
tonic  out  of  hint ,  anb  enter  no  mo;c  in 
to  Dim. 

26  3utDtl)cf'pi"'tcrieD,  anbrcttthun 
fote,  anb  tame  out  of  him ,  ant)  Ik  mas 
asoncbeab ,  tnfomuth  that  many  faib, 
l^etsbcab. 

27  25ut  gjefus  toolte  him  by  the 
hanb.anb  Iifteb  bimbp,anb  he  arofc. 

28  21nb  Vbhen  he  lbas  come  into  the 
houfe ,  his  bifctples  aflicb  him  pnuatc= 
ly,  t©hy toulb  not  ibt  caft  Dun  out  < 

29  3lub  hec  faib  buto  them ,  %\)is 
tunb  tan  tome  fo2tb  by  nothing ,  but  by 
pjayccanbfaftmg. 

30  C*3lnb  they  bepartcb  thence, 
anb  paffeb  tlwough  Galilee ,  anb  he 
iboulb  not?"  anymanlbouibHnoib  it. 

31  jfo?  he  taught  h*.s  btfciplcs,  anb 
faib  bnto  them ,  Xhc  fonnc  of  man  is 
beliucrcb  into  the  hanbs  of  men ,  anb 
they  fball  toll  htm ,  anb  after  that  he  is 
tollcb.hc  (hall  rifcthc  thirb  bay. 

32  25ut  they  bnbtrftoob  not  that 
faymg,anb  rber  c  afraib  to  afae  htm. 

33  C  3lnb  he  tame  to  Capernaum ; 
anbbctngin  the  houfe,  hcafbeb  them, 
©hat  lbas  it  that  yecbtfputcb  among 
y  out  felucs  by  the  ibay  ? 

34.  2Sut  they  hclb  their  peace :  J^o? 
by  the  ibay  they  hab  bifputcb  among 
themfclucs,lbho  ftouid  be  the  greatcft. 

35  3ttb  he  fate  bollmc,  anb  tallcb  the 
tibeluc,  anb  faith  bnto  them,  gjfany 
manbeQretobeftrft,  the  fame  fljaiibc 
laft  of  all,  anb  fetuant  of  all. 

36  ^nbhctooKcachtib,  anbfcthtm 
in  the  ntibft  of  them :  9  lbhcn  he  hab  ta- 
torn  him  in  his  acms,hc  faib  buto  them , 

37  nabofoeucr  fhail  rccciuc  one  of 
fuch  thilbjcn  in  my  /Bame ,  rctt  iitetb 
me:anblbbofocucr  (ball  receiuc  me, 
tetetucth  not  me ,  but  hint  that  fent  me. 

38  C  *  3lnb  giobn  attftocrcb  him, 
faying,  £Baftcr,  me  faU)  one  caftntg  out 
bcutls  in  thy  jBantc,  anbbcfolloibcth 
notb£,aiibibcfo2babchuu>bccaufcbc 
follottocthnotbs. 

39  2Sut3Icfusfaib,  5ro:bibhim  not, 
*fo2  there  isno  man ,  ibbicbfbaiiboca 
mitaclcinmy  43amc ,  that  tan  lightly 
fpeatteeuillofine. 


40  Jro2hethatisnotagamObs,  is 
on  our  part. 

4'  *  if  02  lbbofoeucr  fballgiucyoua 
cup  oflbatcr  tobnnlteuimy/3ame,bc^ 
cauLeycc  bclongto  Cb2ift:$llcrtly3j  fay 
bnto  you,  he  than  not  lofe  his  rcibarb. 

42  *3tno  lbbofoeucr  (ball  offenb 
oncofthcfclitlcouesthatbcleeueutme, 
tt  is  better  fo2  bun,  that  a  mtiftoneiberc 
haugeo  about  his  necuc,  aubhcibere 
caft  into  the  §>ta. 

45  *3mbiftbyhanb||  offenb  tbee, 
cut  it  off:  3ft  is  better  fo2  thee  to  enter 
into  life  maimeb  ,  then  h'auing  tlbo 
baubs,to  goc  into  hell,  into"  the  fire  that 
nettcrfbailbcauenchcD: 

4+  *nahcrcthcic  lbojmcbictb  not, 
anb  the  fire  is  not  quencheb. 

45  Stab  if  thy  foo  tc  offenb  theccttt  it 
off  :ttisbettetfo,2thccto  enter  haltmto 
life,  then  hatting  tlbo  fecte,  to  be  call  to 
to  hell ,  into  the  fire  tljatneuer  (ball  be 
quencheb: 

4-6  nahcrc  their  vooimt  bicth  not, 
anb  the  fire  is  not  quencheb. 
47  3fno  if thmc  cyc;!offenbthce,plucR 
it  out :  it  is  better  fo?  thee  to  enter  into 
the  tongbom  of  <5ob  lbtth  one  eye,  then 
hautug  tlbo  eycs,to  be  caft  mto  helfirc : 

43  nabcre  their  u>02inc  btcth  not, 
anb  the  fire  is  not  quencheb. 

49  if  02  eucry  one  (ball  be  faitcbibitlj 
fire ,  *anb  eucry  faenfice  Ojall  befaitcb 
ibttbfait. 

50  *3>altisgoob:butifthcfalthaue 
loft  his  faltntffcibhercujith  lbill  you 
fcafomt?$aue  fait  myourfclues,  anb 
hatte  peace  one  ibttb  another. 

CHAP.     X. 

v  Chrifl  dil'puteth  with  the  Pharilees,touchins; 
diuorcement:  13  bleflcth  the  children  that 
are  brought  vnto  him :  17  refolueth  a  rich 
man  how  he  may  inhcrite  life  euerlafting :  13 
telleth  his  difciples  of  the  danger  of  riches  : 
18  promifeth  rewards  to  them  that  forfake  a- 
ny  thing  for  the  Gofpell:  51  Foretellethhij 
death1&refurreclion:35Biddeth  the  two  am- 
bitious fuiters  to  thinke  rather  of  fufTring  with 
him:4^  And  reftoreth  to  Bartimeus  his  fight. 

^m^H  *^bhe  rofefrom  thence, 
t«Wi  9  commethinto  tlje  toafts 
Mp^3  of  Jtibea  bv  the  farther 

sssiV^aa  people  rcfojt  bnto  him  a^ 
game ,  anb  as  he  lbas  ibotit,  he  taught 
themagaiue. 

2  C3tnbthc^harifeStametohim, 
anb  af  ueo  him,  js  it  laibfull  fo:  a  man 

«  2  to 


'Mario. 


Mat.18. 


*Mar.j.jj 

and  18.8. 
\\Or,cMfe 
thee  10  of- 
fend. 


•Efii.tftf. 
:4- 


thee  to  of~ 


fend. 


'  Leuit.2. 
■3- 

"Mit  5.1;. 


"Mat.Ip.t. 


Ofdiuorcemcnt.      S.Markc.  ThefirftJafL 


"Mjtth  5. 
;  j.  and  19 


'March.  1  s? 


'Mi(ih.l(l 
16. 


to  put  atbay  Ijts  tt>tfc<  tempting him. 

3  3lnD  he  anftocrcD ,  ant)  fatDe  tonto 
them,nahat  did  93ofcs  commaiiD  you  ^ 

4.  3lnD  they  faiD,  ^ofcsfuffcrcDto 
lbntcabillof  Diuo:ccmcut,  anD  to  put 
heraibay. 

5  3tnD  3Jcfus  anfraereu ,  anD  faro 
Unto  them ,  $01  the  haroneffe  of  your 
hcart,hcib:otc  you  this  p:cccpt. 

6  2Sut  from  the  beginning  of  the 
creation,  <£oD  inaDc  them  male,  anD 
female. 

7  foi  this  caufe  (ball  amanleauc 
his  father  anD  mother,  anD  cicaue  to 
hisibifc, 

3  2lnD  they  tlbamc  fljalbc  one  fleff) : 
fo  then  they  are  no  mo:e  tVbainc ,  but 
oucflelh. 

9  ttMjat  therefore  <3oD  hath  loyncD 
together, let  notmauputafunDcr. 

10  2tnD  m  the  houfe  his  Difciplcs 
af  rcd  him  agamc  of  the  fame  matter. 

1 1  3lnD  he  faith  tonto  them,  *i©hofo 
encr  (hail  put  avtoay  his  lbifcanD  mar 
ry  another ,  committeth  aDultcry  a 
gamlrhrr. 

1 1  3nD  if  a  tboman  fhall  put  aitoay 
her  hufbanD,  ant)  becmarricDtoano; 
ther,  (he  committeth  aoultcne. 

13  C  *3hiD  they  biought  yong  chn 
D:cn  to  htm,  that  he  (houlD  touch  them, 
anD  his  Difciplcs  rcbnticD  thofe  that 
b:oughtthcm. 

14  23iititohcn3JcfusfAibit,hccibas 
man)  DifplcafcD ,  anD  faiD  tonto  them, 
buffer  the  little  chUDien  to  come  tonto 
nice,  anD  fo:biD  them  not:  fo:  of  fuel)  is 
thcHiugDonicofGoD. 

15  Clcrily  31  fay  tonto  you ,  tohofoe 
ucr  (hall  not  rcccuic  the  UingDome  of 
GoD  as  a  little  clnlDc ,  he  (hall  not  cuter 
therein. 

16  ?inD  hee  toohc  them  bp  in  his 
acmes ,  put  his  hauDcs  topon  them ,anD 
blcfTcDthem. 

17  <T3inDtt)henheniasgoncfiMh 
into  the  may,  there  came  one  running, 
anD  imcelcD  to  him  ■  anD  afticD  him, 
000D  matter,  llili.it  fliall  J  Doe  that  j 
may  inherit  etcrnall  life; 

13  ^nD  Jlcfus  faiD  bnco  hi'm  ,  tony 
called  thou  me  gooD  t  £l)crc  is  no  man 
gooD,biitonc,'!>'t^GoD. 

19  1-hou  hnoitocft  the  CommatiDe 
ments,  Doe  not  commit  aDultcric,  Doc 
notlull,  Docnotttcalr,  Docnotbcarc 
falfe  ltoitncffe,  DcfranD  not,  l?onour 
thrfather,auD  mother. 

20  :^hd  hee aufiucrcD , anD faiDc  ton- 


to htm,  Rafter, all thefc  hauc  5  obfer- 
ucd  from  my  youth. 

2 1  %l)tn  3lcfus  beholDiug  him ,  lo- 
ucd  h<m,  anD  faiD  tonto  him,  €>ne  thing 
thoulacBett;(5oethymay,fciiU)hatfo 
cuer  thou  haft,  anD  gtucto  the  poo:e, 
anD  thou  (halt  hauc  treafur  e  in  hcatien, 
anDcomc,tat$ctopthccroffc*foloU)mc. 

%l  3tnD  hee  ltoas  faD  at  that  faying, 
anD  itocnt  aitoay  gncucD  :  fo:  hee  haD 
great  poffcffions. 

23  C  3nD  3(cfus  Ioobcd  rounto  su- 
born, anD  faith  ton  to  htsDifctpies,  fcoib 
harDly  than  they  that  hauc  riches  en- 
ter into  the  HingDome  of  <3oD  < 

24.  3lnD  theDifnples  ibere  attoniffr 
cD  at  his  itoo:Ds.  26ut  3Jcfus  anfroereth 
agamcatiD  faith  tonto  them,  Chiitncn, 
hoito  IjarD  is  it  fo:  them  thattruttmrt 
chcs,to  cuter  into  the  lungDom  of  <5oD? 

25  git  is  cafter  fo:  a  camel  to  goc  rrjo 
roito  the  eye  of  anecDlc,  then  foi  a  nth 
man  to  enter  into  the  lungDom  of  ©oD. 

26  3inD  they  ltoereattontfljeD  out  of 
meafure ,  faying  among  thcmfclues, 
nahothentanbcfaucD; 

27  3inD3fcfus  loosing  topon  them, 
faith,  ©ith  men  tt  is  tmpolTtble,but  not 
ibith  (Sod  :  fo;  lbith  (3oo  all  things  arc 
polTiblc. 

28  C*£henV>ctcrbcgantofavton 
to  him,  floe,  ltoe  hauc  left  all.auD  Ijaue 
folloltocD  thee. 

29  3lnD  'Jcfus  anfmcrcD ,  anD  faiD, 
3Ucnly  31  fay  tonto  you ,  %i)ctt  is  no 
man  that  hath  left  houfe,  0:  b:cth:en,o; 
fitters,  0; father,  0:  mother,  0;  Unfit,  01 
chtlDjen ,  0:  lanDs ,  fo:  my  faae,  anD  the 
C5ofpcls, 

30  26ut  hee  ft)  all  rcccuic  an  hunD:cD 
folDnoUt  in  this  tune,  houfes,  aitDb;e- 
th:cn ,  anD  lifters,  anD  mothers,  anD 
chUD:ni,auD  lanDs,  ltoith  perferuhons , 
anD  in  the  ibo:lD  to  come  etcrnail  life : 

3 1  *  zsut  many  chat  arc  firft,  (hall  be 
laft:anDthclaft,firft. 

32  canDthcyitoercinthcibaygo- 
tng  bp  to  fticrufaicm :  anD  3Jcfus  itoent 
bcfo:c  tliem ,  anD  they  ltoere  ama5CD, 
anD  as  they  folloitocD.thcYltoere  afratD: 
anDhetoolicagamcthctitoelue,attDbc 
gan  to  tell  them  lbhat  things  ft;oulD 
happen  tonto  him, 

33  &ayiug,25cholD,itocgo  top  to  feie- 
rufalem,  anD  the  Sonne  ofmanfrjau  be 
DcltucreD  tonto  the  chicfc  ^ncfts,  anD 
tonto  the  Scribes:  anD  they  (hall  con- 
Demue  him  to  Death ,  anD  fliall  DeUuer 
hnutotheonmies. 

_____^ 3+  3mD 


'MitJ».iy. 


NOcih.lJ. 

;0. 

'  Mstth  10. 
7- 


Chriftscup^&c.  Chap.xj.  Sight  reftored. 


'Macrll.io. 

10. 


"Luke  n. 
IT. 
\\Or,,hl»kf 

good. 


'Miuh 
'9- 


34.  3tnDtl)cpn)aii  mocHe  him  ,  anD  i 
ajallfcourge  him ,  ana  (ball  rpit  Dpon 
btnuttD  fl)ali  Hti  htm,auD  t!jc  thtrD  Day ; 
He  mall  rife  agatne. 

35  C  *  anD  gjames,  anD  3lohn  the  < 
fonnesof  zcbcDce  tome  Dnto  him, fay= 
mg,  fatter, lDciDoulD  p  thou  fbottlDeft 
Dofo-'DsiDbatfocucrrbcfbaiiDefire. 

36  anD  hec  faiDc  Dnto  them ,  ©hat 
tt)ouiDyethat3i(r)OulDDocfo2yoiu 

37  XbcyfatD  Dnto  htm,  ©rant  Dnto 
Ds  that  lDcc  may  fit,  one  on  thy  right  i 
banD,anDthcothctontbylcfthatiD,in 
thy  giozy. 

38  26ut  J  cfus  fatD  Dnto  them ,  Pec 
tmott)  nottDbat  ye  af  be :  Can  ye  tmnfcc 
of  the  cup  that  3  D2in&c  of  <  anD  be  bap; 
twDiDitb  tljc  baptifmethat  3  am  bap- 
mcDibtth? 

39  auDthcyfatDDntohtm.fficccan. 
anD  'Jcfus  fait)  Dnto  them,  Pc  Q)au  tn- 
DeeD  DJinlic  of  the  tup  that  3  Djtnlte  of: 
atiDiDttb  thebaptifme  that  3  am  bap 
tt?eD  iDitball,tbaii  ye  be  DaptwD : 

40  23ut  to  fit  onmyrtgbtbatiDatiD 
on  my  left  banD.ts  not  nunc  to  giucbut 
tt  than  be  giuen  to  themfojlDbomitts 
p:cparcD. 

41  ^no  lbhcn  the  ten  hearD  it ,  they 
Degannc  to  bee  much  DifplcaftD  lDttb 
James  anD  John. 

42.  26ut  JcfuscallcD  them  to  him, 
anD  faith  Dnto  them,  'PeelmoiD  that 
they  ttihtch  Hare  accomptcD  to  rule  oucr 
the  (©entiles  ,  cjccrctfe  HozDflnp  oucr 
them:  anD  their  great  ones  crerctle  an- 
ti)02itic  Dpon  them. 

43  iSutfofbailitnotbcamongyou: 
but  lbbofocucr  tbillbcc  great  among 
yott.fball  be  your  mintftcr : 

44  anDiDbofoeucr  of  you  ibtllbcc 
thccbicfc&.fbaibefcruantofail. 

45  5*02  cum  the&onnc  of  man  tame 
not  to  bee  nuniftreD  Dnto ,  but  to  nit 
nifter,  anD  to  giue  Ijis  life  a  ranfomc  foi 
many. 

46  C*anD  they  tame  to  "Jericho : 
anD  as  he  ibent  out  of  Jericho  nnth  his 
Difciplcs,anD  a  great  number  of  people 
blinDc  Joactimcus,  the  fon  of  dmcus, 
fate  by  the  high  lDaycs  fiDc,bcggmg. 

47  anDVbben  he  hearD  that  it  ibas 
Jefus  of /5a5ateth,hc  began  to  try  out, 
anDfay,  Jcfus  thou&otmc  of  SDattiD, 
hauemcrnconmc. 

j-S  anD  many  chargcD  him,  that  be 
fboulD  holD  his  peace :  But  he  cncD  the 
mole  a  great  Dcalc ,  Xhou  £>onnc  of 
3DauiD,hauc  mercy  on  me. 


49  anD  Jcfus  frooD  mil ,  anD  com 
i  utanDcD  htm  to  bee  calico :  anD  they  call 
j  the  blinDc man,faymg  Ditto  him,  25c  of 

gooD  tomfo2t,  rife  ,hc  caiicth  thee. 

50  ^fnD  hee  cafrmg  aibay  his  gar 
jimnt.rofcanDcameto  Jcftis. 

51  anD  Jefus  anftocrcD  ,  anD  fatD 
Ditto  htm  ,  nahat  unit  thou  that  3 
fboulDDocDntothee?  Xhc  biuiDcman 
faiDDntohim,  JLo2D,that  3  might  re 
cctttc  my  fight. 

5i  anD  Jcfas  faiDcbnto  htm,  Got 
ithy  may,  thy  faith  hathlltnaDe  thec;;i^ 
lbholc :  anD  immcDiatly  hec  recciueD 
his  fight,*folloU)cD  Jefus  m  tljc  iDay. 

CHAP.   XL 

Chnft  ridrth  with  triumph  into  Hiei  ufalem  : 
11  curleth  the  htutlelTe  lejfie  tree:  15  pur- 
geth  the  Temple:  10  exhorteih his  difci- 
p!es  to  ftedtalhiefle  ot  faith,  and  to  forgiue 
their  enemies:  17  and  defendeth  thelaw- 
fulncs  of  his  actions,  by  the  wimeile  ot  Iohn , 
who  was  a  man  fent  ofGod. 

£$£*#©  iDhcn  they  came  •> 
nigh  to  tytcrttfaicm ,  Dnto ' 
26cthphagc ,  anD  isetha 
ntc,  at  the  mount  of£) 
lines ,  hee  fenDeth  fooitl) 
tlbo  of  his  Dimples, 

i  anD  faith  Dnto  them  ,  csoc  y  our 

I  IDay  into  the  Diliagc  oucr  agatutt  you, 

:anDaffooncasycbeecntrcD  into  it,  yec 

(ball  finDe  a  tolt  ttcD ,  lDhercon  ncuct 

!  man  fatcioofe  Ijtm.anD  b2ing  htm. 

3  auDifany  man  fay  Dnto  yotuteby 
Docycc  this;  3>ayycc,  that  the  H02D 
hath  uecD  of  htm:  anDftratghtiDayhc 
iDtlifcttD  him  hither. 

4  anD  they  tocnt  their  may,  anD 
fotiuD  the  colt  ttcD  by  the  doojc  ibttl> 
out,  in  a  plate  lDhcrc  tlbolbaycsmct: 
anD  they  loofe  htm. 

5  anD  ccrtamc  of  them  that  ttooD 
thcrcfaiD  Dnto  tljcm,  ttMjat  Doc  ye  loo 
ifing  the  colt  < 

6  anD  they  tatD  Dnto  them  cucn  as 
\  3Jcfus  IjaD  commanDeD :  anD  ttjey  let 
them  got. 

7  attDthcyb20ught  the  colt  to  3c 
fits,  anD  tall  their  garments  on  hurt 
anD  he  late  Dpon  htm. 

8  anD  many  fp;cao  their  garments 
tn  the  IDay :  anD  others  cut  doiduc  b;an- 
chesof the  trees,  anD  QraibcD  them  111 
the  IDay. 

9  anD  they  that  lbcnt  befo:e ,  anD 
they  that  folloiDcD,  crvcD,  faying,  Ho- 
finna,  bleffcD  is  hee  that  commctlj  III 
e  3      the 


Afigtreecurfed.         S.Marke.       Of  forgiueneffe. 


'Matt.ji. 


'Matc.ii. 


"Matt.ii. 
19. 


1 1  Or,  hMr 

gcd. 


*Mit:.7.7. 


the  /3amc  of  the  ?Lo?D. 

io  asicffcb  be  the  Rtngbomc  of  our  fa- 
tiler  3>auib,that  commctrj  m  the  /2ame 
ofthello^Hofannamthchighclf. 

n  3Inb  ^cfus  cntrcb  into  i^tmifa 
lent,  anb  mto  the  Xcmpic,  anb  When 
hce  Iiao  looKcb  rounb  about  bpon  all 
things ,  $  now  the  cucntibe  was  come, 
he  Went  out  bnto  2Sethanie  With  tfjc 
twclue. 

12  C3mbonthcmo;toW  When  they 
mere  come  from  asetljante ,  hee  was 
hungry. 

i  j  *  3lnb  feeing  a  figtrce  a  facet  off, 
hatungicaues,  hce  tame,  if  haply  rjee 
might  fiub  any  thing  thereon ,  9  when 
l)e  tame  to  it ,  hce  founb  nothing  but 
Icaucs :  fo  ?  the  time  of  figs  was  not  yet 

14  anb^cfusanfrocretun&faibbn* 
to  it,  0o  man  catc  fruitc  of  tl)te  hcrcak 
tcr  fo.z  cucr.  3nb  his  biftiplcs  hcarb  it. 

15  C*3lnb  they  come  to  l?icrulalcm, 
anb 'Jcfuswctu  into  the  temple,  anb 
beganncto  tad  out  them  tljatfolb  anb 
boucjhtmthclCcmplc,  anb  oucttrj^etb 
tfjctablcs  of  ttjc  moneychangers,  anb 
the  feats  of  them  that  folb  hones, 

!6  3Cnb  Woulb  not  fuffcr  that  any 
mattfooulbtaricanyixu'eUthoiioWthe 
Xcmplc. 

17  3lnb  he  taught,  faying  bnto  them, 
31s  it  not  written,  £0y  Ijoufc  fhaibc  eal- 
leb  of  all  nations  the  houfcof  player* 
but  ye  Ijaue  mabe  it  a  ben  of  thecttcs. 

18  2nb  the  Scribes  anb  chtcfc02tcas 
hcarb  it.  anb  fougfjt  how  they  might  be= 
ftroy  him :  foj  they  fcartb  him,  bctaufc 
an  t Ik  people  was  aftouifo cb  at  his  bo 
ttnne. 

19  3mb  when  eucn  tbas  tome ,  $cc 
Wentoutofthecttic. 

xo  c  *  3lnb  m  tl)e  morning,  as  they 
paffebby,  they  faw  the  fig  tree  b;icbbp 
from  the  roots. 

zi  Stnbi&ctcr  calling  to  rememtoante 
fatthbnto  htm,  Rafter,  bcholb,  the  fig 
tree  Which  thoiuurfebft,  is  Wither  cb& 
way. 

1 1  3(nb  U  cfus  anftucring,faith  bnto 
them,  ||  l?auc  faith  m  C5ob. 

13  fai  bcrcly  3  fay  bnto  you ,  that 
whofocucr  fliau  fay  bnto  this  rnomv 
tame,  fficcthourctnoucb,  anb  bee  thou 
cad  into  the  fca,  anb  than  not  boubt  m 
Ins  Heart ,  but  than  bciecuc  that  thofc 
tilings  which  l)cc  faith ,  fhail  come  to 
paffc:hcfl)ail>iucwhatfocucrhcfaith. 

14  3Ihcrfo2C'5l  faybnto  vou,*i0hat 
things  focucr  ye  before  When  ye  p?ay,be< 


lecnctljat  ye  rcteute  them ,  anb  ye  than 
hauechem. 

25  ^nbVbhenyeOanb,p?aying,*fo^ 
giuc,  if  ycljauc  ought  agamft  any:  that 
your  father  alfo  which  is  in  Jjeaucn, 
may  fojgtne  you  your  trefpaffes. 

26  25utifyouboenotfo?gtue,net 
thcr  rum  your  jfarhcr  Which  is  in  hea> 
ucn,  fojgitte  your  trefpaffes. 

27  €  3lnb  they  come  againt  to  tyte 
rutaient,*anbashcwaswaltunginthe 
Xcmple,  there  come  to  hint  the  chiefe 
l&tefts,  anb  the  Scribes,  9  the  cibcrs, 

28  3tnb  fay  bnto  him ,  25y  ibfjat  au* 
tljontic  bocft  thou  thefe  things j.  anb 
who  gauc  tljee  tljis  authority  to  boc 
thefe  things  i 

29  3Jnb 3cfus  anfioercb ,  anb  faibc 
bnto  them,  3i  wtli  alfo  affic  of  youone 
||ciucmon,anbanfrocreme,  anb  3  Will 
tellyon  by  What  autho?tttc  3bocthefe 
thmgs. 

jo  Xheoaptifmcof3fohn,wasit 
from  heaucn,o?  of  men^  ^nfraerc  me. 

31  3tnb  they  reafoneb  With  them- 
felues,  faying,  3Jf  we  (hall  fay ,  5ftom 
hcanen,  he  wiiifay,aahy  then  bib  ycuot 
belccuchitiK 

32  25utifWefhailfay,«cDfmcn,they 
fcarcb  the  people :  fo?  all  men  countcb 
^ohiuhathewasaj&ophctittbccb. 

33  ^nb they anfroercb  anb  faibbnto 
3Jefus,  mi  cannot  tell,  ^nb^efusan- 
fiocrmg,faithbntothcm,il?eitl)erbo3i 
tell  you  by  What  authouty  3  boc  there 
tilings. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  In  a  parable  of  the  vineyard  let  our.  to  vnthank- 
ful  husbandmen.Chiift  foretelleth  the  repro- 
bation of  the  Iewes,  and  the  calling  ot  the 
Gentiles:  13  Hee  auoidcth  the  fnareof  the 
Pharifecs  and  Herodians  about  paying  tii- 
bute  to  Cefar:  18  conuinccth  the  crrouroi 
the  Sadducees,  who  denied  the  refurreclion  : 
18  refohieth  the  Scribe  who  queflioned  ol 
thefirflcommandement:  35  rcfuteth  the  opi- 
nion that  the  Scribes  held  of  Chrift:  38  Bid- 
ding the  people  to  beware  of  their  ambition, 
and  hypoenfic :  41  and  commendeth  the 
poorewidowforhertwomitcs,aboueal]. 

^axf^»  i!5b  *  hec  began  to  fpeafee 
t^jlA^I  bnto  them  by  parables.  3 
«£i^M^certaine  man  plantcba 
&  /  W  ^5  tomcyarb,  anb  fct  an  hebgc 
S^SPs^aS  aboutit,  anb  btggcb  a  place 
ioi  the  Wmc  fat ,  anb  built  a  towje ,  anb 
let  it  out  to  hufbanbmen,  anb  Went  in- 
to a  far  re  cotmtrcy. 

2  3ltib 


*Mat.6. 14 


*Matt.:i. 
»3- 


\\Orffmg. 


"Mat.Jl.33 


The  corner  ftone.       Chap.xi).    TheRefurrection. 


♦PfaLnS. 
10. 


-'Mitth.jj 


cfottr  money 

[eltenptncc 

lulfepenie, 

i8. 


2  3btD  at  tDe  feafon ,  Dc  fent  to  tDc 
DitfbaiiDmenafctuant ,  t'batbcmigbt 
receiuc  from  tlje  DufbattDmcn  of  tbc 
fcuiteoftDebincparD. 

3  ana  tljcy  caugbt  Dim ,  ana  beat 
Dim.anb  Cent  Dim  aibap  cinptic. 

4  anD  againc ,  Dec Cent  into  tftcm 
anotljcc  fcruant  ■>  anD  at  Dim  tDep  tad 
ttones ,  anD  VboutiDeDDimintDcDeaD, 
ano  tent  Dim  aibap  (bamefuup  DanDlcD . 

5  anD  agamc,De  fent  another ,  attD 
DimtDepmllcD  :anD  manpotDcrs,  bca> 
tmgfomcanD  mllmgfome. 

6  waiting  vet  therefore  one  Comic 
Dis  tbetbcloueb,  l)c  fent  Dim  alfo  laft  btu 
totljem,  faying,  XDep  ibill  teucccnce 
nip  tonne. 

7  26ut  tbofe  DufbanDmen  faiD  a* 
mongft  tDcmftlucs ,  Xbists  tDc  Deirc, 
comciet  bs  bill  btm,anb  ttjc  mljcntantc 
(ball  be  ours. 

3  3InD  tDcp  toofec  Dim,  anb  MlcD 
Dmi.anDcaftbimoutoftDebincparD. 

9  naljat  (bait  tDccefoje  tDe  fLojD  of 
tDe  bmcyaro  Doc  <  $e  tbill  tontc  ano  dc* 
ftcoy  tbc  Ijttf  banDmen,  anD  itotu  giuc 
tbc  bmeyarD  bnto  otDers. 

io  *znh  Ijauc  ye  not  reaD  ti)ts  $crip; 
turcfXlje  ftone  ibDtcb  tDcbmlDetsrc< 
icctcD.is  become  tbc  Dcab  of  ttje  comer : 

1 1  %l)vs  vbas  ttje  fLojbs  Doing ,  anb 
it  is  matuellous  m  out  tits, 

u  3inD  tijep  tougDt  to  lap  Dolbon 
Dim ,  but  fcatcD  tDe  people ,  foj  tDcy 
bncibtDatDcDabfpobcntbcparablea' 
gainft  tbem :  anb  tDcy  left  Dim  ,  anb 
VbenttDett  ibay. 

is  C*3InD  tDeyfenD  bnto  Dim  ccr* 
tameof  tDe^bartfcs ,  anDoftDc^cro- 
btans,to  catel)  Dim  m  bis  lbojbs. 

14  3tnDibbcntbcyibctecome,tbey 
fa?  bnto  Dim,  Rafter,  ibe  totott)  tbat 
thouartttue,anbtateftfo?noman:fo2 
tDou  regarbeft  not  tfje  pcrfon  of  men, 
but  teacbeft  tDc  sua?  of  (Sob  m  mttD. 
3s  it  laibfull  to  gmc  tribute  to  Ccfat, 
ojnot* 

15  S>bail  B»  giuc,  02  fbail  tbc  not 
giuc  i  But  be  unoming  ttjeir  Dypoenftc, 
fatb  bnto  rt)cm ,  ml)?  tempt  ycemec< 
aSjing  me  a  ||  penny  tbat  3  map  fee  it. 

16  3nbtbeytoougbtu:anbbcfaitb 
bnto  tbcm.nabofcistDtsmiagc  anb  fu- 
pcrfeription*  3utD  tljep  faib  bnto  Dim, 
Ccfars. 

17  anD  gjefus  anfroering ,  faib  bnto 
tbem ,  BcnDcr  to  Ccfac  tDc  tbmgs  tDat 
arc  Ccfars :  anb  to  <Sod  tbc  tbmgs  tbat 
arc  ©obs.Slnb  tDcy  maruatlcb  at  Dim. 


is  C*£bcn  come  bnto  Dun  tbeS>aD- 
Dutces,  ttHjicD  fap  tDcrc  is  no  rcfur  recti 
on,anb  tfjcv  af  Hcb  Dtm,faptng, 

19  Rafter,  S^ofes  lbjotc  bnto  bs, 
3Jf  a  mans  bjotljcr  bic ,  anb  leauc  D«s 
mtfcbcDmbDim.aublcaucnocDUbJcn, 
tDat  Dts  bjotljcr  (Doulb  tauc  Dts  ibifc, 
anb  ratfc  bp  feeb  bnto  D  is  bjotD  cr . 

20  /RoibtDccerbcrefcucnbictDzcn: 
anb  tlicftrfttooHc  a  ibifc,  anb  Dying  left 
nofcebc. 

21  3(nDtDcfcconbtoobcDer ,  anDDi 
cD,ncitDcr  icftDcanp  feeD,anb  tlje  tDirb 
liHcrmfc. 

22  ^nb  tDc  fcucn  Dab  Dcr,  anb  left 
no  feebe :  laft  of  all  tDc  lboman  bico  alfo . 

23  3D1  tDc  rcfurrcttion  tDercfoje, 
ibDcn  tDep  fl)allrifc,  tbDofc  \blfcn)all 
flje  be  of  tljtnu  fo?tDefeuenDabDerto 
ibifc. 

24  ^nD  gjcfusanfmerittg,  fait)  bn< 
totDcm,2DocvcnottDercfo?cerrc,  bc- 
caufc  vccmioib  nottDefcripturcs ,  nci 
tljtr  tl)e  potber  of  <KoD  < 

25  ifoiibDentbcyfDallrtrefromtDc 
DcaD,  tDcvneitDermarrp,no:are  giucn 
in  marriage :  but  arc  as  tDc  Angels 
rbDuDatcmDcauen. 

26  ^nD  as  tombing  tDc  Dcab,  tljai 
tDcp  rife :  Ijauc  vc  not  rcaD  in  tljc  boohc 
of  fi^ofes,  Dob)  in  tDebulb  <5obfpakc 
bnto  Dun,  favmg ,  31  am  tDe  ©oD  of^t- 
bzaDam ,  anD  tDe  <5od  of  3)fabac ,  anD 
tDccSoDof^atobf 

27  fc)ee  ts  not  tDc  (J5oDof  tDebeaD, 
but  tDc  ©oD  of  tDe  lining :  vec  tDercfiw 
Doegrcativctrc. 

2s  C^nD  one  of  tDc  ^tribes  tame, 
anD  Daumg  DcarD  tDcm  reafoning  toge 
tljcr,  anD  pcrceitung  tDat  De  Dao  anfiuc 
rcDtDnn  \bcll ,  afbcD  punibDtcDistDc 
firft  commanDcmcnt  of  all. 

29  ^nb  gjefus  anfraercDDim ,  XDc 
firft  of  ai  tDc  commanDementsis.^rare, 
0  3Jfracl ,  tljc  ?Lo?D  our  e>oD  is  one 
ILo^D: 

jo  3inD  tDou  fbait  lottc  tDe  %m  tDv 
©oDlbitD  all  tDv  Deart ,  anD  lbitD  all 
fbvfoulc,  anDibitDalltDvmmDc,  anD 
lbitD  all  tl)i>  ftrcngtlj :  %\)\s  is  tbc  firft 
tommanDeinent. 

ji  ^InDtDefetonDisiiSc^amciytDis, 
XDou  fljait  louc  ttyg  ncigDbour  astbp 
felfc :  tDcre  is  none  otljcc  eommatiDc 
ment  greater  fDen  tbefc. 

32  3lnD  tDc  Scribe  faib  bnto  Dim, 
naellmafter ,  tDouDaftfatDtbetrutb : 
fo?  tDcrc  is  one  C50D ,  anD  tljerc  ts  none 
otDcrbutDe. 

33  anb 


*Mauh.22. 
'J- 


•Mitth.u. 
55" 


Chrift  Dauids  Lord.  S.Marke.      Hated  for  Chrift. 


"Matth.n. 


"Matth.ij. 


'Mitth.13. 


:  Lultc  2  I  . 
I. 

ntyt  See 
A  faith.  io. 
9- 

\\Jtuthe 

jenenth  part 
»f  one  piece 
ofthtt  lirajfe 
mentj. 


55  anb  to  louc  Dim  ttntD  all  tDc 
Ijcart,  anb  ibitlj  ail  tljc  bnbcrftantnng, 
ano  lbttD  all  tlje  foule ,  ant)  Until  all  tlje 
ftrcngtD,  anb  to  iouebtsncigDboueas 
Ijimfclfe,  is  moze  toenail  lbljolcburnt 
offerings  anb  faertficcs. 

54  anb  VbljcngjefusfalbtDat  Dean* 
frucrcb  bifcrcctly,  bee  faibe  bnto  Ijtm, 
Xljou  art  not  far  from  tDclnngbome 
of  ©ob.  anb  no  man  after  tljat  burft 
afuebimanyquefhon. 

35  C*anb3jcfnsanftuetcb,anb 
faro,  \bljile  Dec  taugDt  m  tDclEemplc, 
ftoibfay  tlje  Scribes  tljat  CDztftis  tDc 
fount  of  SDamo* 

56  f  oj  SDauiD  bimfclfc  faibby  tbc  Ijo- 
ly  <Z5ljoft ,  %\)t  JLozb  faib  to  my  fLozb, 
Sit  tbou  on  my  rigDt  ftanD,  ttl  3  maUe 
tDinecncmicstDyfootftooic. 

37  Damn  tfjcrcfoic  Dunfclfc  tailed) 
Dim  3Lo2b ,  anD  Hjljcncc  is  Dec  tijen  Ijts 
fonnc;  anb  tljc  common  people  Dcarb 
Dim  giably. 

5SCanDbcfaibbntotljeminbisbo- 
ttrmc,  *  26cttiarc  of  tDc  5>tribes,  ttljicD 
louc  to  goc  in  long  clotDing,  ant)  louc  fa- 
lutations  in  tDc  marketplaces, 

59  ^nt)  tDc  cDicfc  fcatcs  m  tDc  &?nfe 
gogucs.anb  fljcbppcrmoft  roomes  at 
fcafts: 

40  ^naDitDbenonrcUjiboVbcsDoti' 
fes,  ant)  foz  a  pzetence  mane  long  pzay- 
ers:  Xljcfc  (bail  receiue  greater  Dam* 
nation. 

41  C  *  ^nb  3Jcfus  fate  otter  againft 
tDcttcafunc,  anb  bcbclb  Doll)  tDc  peo 
pleeafty  money  tnto  tDctrcafttnc:ant) 
many  tDat  lb  ere  ricb,caftinmtttD. 

41  anbtbcrecamcaccrtatncpoozc 
UnboVD ,  ant)  (be  tbzcib  m  tU>o  ||  mites, 
U)DitDmaue  a  farming. 

45  3tnt)  De  taileb  bnto  Dim  Dis  biftfc 
pIcs,anbfattl)bnto  tDcm,  tHcriiy  31  fay 
bnto  you,  tljat  tDis  poozcibiboibbatlj 
caftmozem,  tDen  all  tljcy  ibljitlj  Dauc 
caftintotDctrcafuric. 

44  jfozalltDcybibtatttnoftDcita- 
bounbantc:butfbcofDertbant,btbcaft 
in  all  tljat  (be  ljab,cucn  au  ijet  liumg. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

i  Chrift  torctcllcththedeftruc'tion  of  the  Tem- 
ple: 9  thcperleciuionsionhcGofpcI:  io 
that  the  Gofpcl  mull  bee  preached  to  all  na- 
tions: 14  that  great  calamities  fhall  happen 
tothclewes:  2.4  and  thcmanerothisconi. 
mingtoludgeinent:  32.  The houre  where- 
of jbceine  knowento  none,  eueryman  is  to 
watch,  an  J  pray ,  that  we  be  not  found  vnpro- 


cided,  when  he  commethtoeachone  parti- 
cularly t*y  death. 

f^W^B  J5b  *  as  Dc  lbcut  out  of  tDc 
esl8fcrcS§  Xemplc,  one  of  Dis  biftt 
g^^i  pics  faitDbntoDim,  Ra- 
fter ,  fee  Wbat  maner  of 
(tones ,  anb  XbDat  bun 

bmgS  we  here. 

z  anb  gicfus  anfrocring,  faib  bnto 
Dim,  Sceft  tboutbcfcgrcatbuilbings^ 
there  fbail  not  be  left  one  ftonebpon  au 
otDcr.tDat  fl)ai  not  be  tDzoibcn  boibnc. 

3  anb  as  Dc  fate  topon  tDc  mount  of 
flutes,  oner  againft  tbc  Xcmple,  0e 
tcr,  anb  giames,  anb  3Joljn ,  anb  an; 
b:elb  afftcb  bmipziuately, 

4  *Xcllbs,ibDenn)alltDcfctDings 
be?  anb  ibDat  fbalbe  tDc  figne  ibDen  all 
tljcfe  tDmgs  fbalbe  fulfillcb  < 

5  anb  3f efus  anfroenng  tDem ,  be- 
gan to  fay,1taHc  Ijceb  led  any  man  be 
teiucyou. 

6  jrozmany  (balcomcin  my/i?ame, 
faying,  3I  am  chrift :  anb  Ojall  bcceiuci 
many.  ( 

7  anb  IbDen  yee  (Dall  Ijcarc  of 
ibarrcs,  anb  rumois  of  tbarrcs,  beyce  i 
not  troubleb:  f  02  fart)  things  nuifr  neebs ) 
be,  but  tDc  cnb  (hall  not  be  yet. 

8  jfoz  nation  fljali  rife  againft  na 
rion,anbbmgbomcagainltrungboine: 
anb  tDcr  c  (Dalbc  cartDnuaUes  m  bmcrs 
places,  anb  tDcrc  fljail  be  famines,  ano 
troubles :  tDcfc  arc  tlje  beginnings  of 
llfojroltoes. 

9  <C  ©ut  taftc  Dccb  to  your  fclucs : 
foz  tDey  (Dall  bcliucr  you  Dp  to  coun- 
cils, anb  in  tlje  Synagogues  y  c  (ball  be 
beatcn,anbyc  (Dalbc  b20ugDtbefo?e  ru- 
lers anb  lungs  foz  my  fabc,  foz  atcflv 
mony  againft  tDcm. 

10  anb  tDc  (5ofpcl  muft  fitft  be  pub 
hfbet)  aitiongailnanous. 

1 1  *  zsut  ibDen  tDey  ftjatl  leab  you, 
ant)beliuccyoubp,taUenotDougDtbc- 
fo2eDant)ibDatye  (ballfpeattc,  ucitDcr 
boc  yee  pznnebitate :  but  lbDatfocucr 
fljail  bee  giuen  you  m  tDat  Dourc,  that 
fpcabe  yee :  foz  it  is  not  yee  tljat  fpeaue, 
bnttDcDolytSDoft. 

ii  iI5oro  tDc  bzotDcr  fljail  betray 
tDc  bzotDct  to  beatD,  anb  tDc  father 
tDcfonnc :  anb  eDtlbzen  (Dall  rife  topa- 
gamft  tDeir  parents,  anb  (bail  canfc 
tDcmtobcputtobcatD. 

15  ant)  ye  (Dall  bee  batcb  of  all  men 
foz  my  /Barnes  fabc :  but  Dee  tDat  (bail 
tnburc  bnto  tlje  cube  ,tDc  fame  ftjall  Dc 
faucb. 
14  C"25ut 


"Match. :^} 


"Match.  14. 


\\The  rsord 
in  the  ori- 
gtttall  ,trrs- 
pntetk.the 
p.iines  of  a 
veozoAn  it 

trttuailf. 


"Matth.io 
19. 


FalfeChnfts.  Chap.xinj.      Watch  and  pray.' 


'Matt.  J4- 
'5- 


Ma:t.:4. 


'NUtt.s^j. 
»9- 


14  C*23unbhcnpc  fljallfeetljeabo* 
mutation  of  befoiation  fpolten  of  bp 
Daniel  the  $.2ophct,ftanbtng  inhere  it 
ought  nbt(lethmt  tl)at  rcauctii  tmoct- 
ftanb)  then  let  them  that  bcin3[ubca, 
flectothcmoiuitatnes: 

15  Znn  let  him  that  is  on  tlje  houfc 
top,  not  gotbottmc  into  thchoufe,  net- 
thct  enter  thcrin,  to  tanc  an?  thing  out 
of  Ins  houfc. 

i6  3{nb  let  him  that  is  in  the  ficlb.not 
tnrne  bacftc  againc  fo?  to  take  Up  hfs 
garment. 

17  But  Uiocto  them  that  atetbith 
chilb,anb  to  them  that  giucfuclt  in  thofc 
bapes. 

18  £nb  pjap  pe  that  pour  flight  bee 
notinthcibmter. 

19  ifojinthofcbapesfhailbc  afflicti- 
on, fuel)  as  ibas  not  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  creation  Vbhich  <3ob  creatcb, 
Unto  tins  time,  neither  (hall  be. 

20  anb  crcept  tljat  the  lLojb  hab 
flwtencb  thofc  bayes,no  flcfl)  fhoulb  be 
faucb :  but  ten  the  elects  fattc  ahomche 
hath  cljofcn,  he  hath  tho;tneb  thebatcs. 

21  *  2Lnn  tnen ,  if  an?  man  fhail  fa? 
to  ?ou ,  Hoe,  here  is  Chnft >  0?  loc ,  hce 
is  there  tbclccuc  him  not. 

zz  5foj  falfc  Chntts  anb  falfe  p?o= 
phets  (hall  rife,  anb  thai!  fhetbc  fignes 
anb  lUonbcts,  tofebuce,  if  it  rberc  pot- 
Able,  cucn  the  elect. 

23  2SnttaKcpeheeb:beholb,3hauc 
fojetolbrou  all  things. 

24  c*25ut  in  thofebapes,  after  that 
tribulatiot^thcSiinncfhalbcbarfeneb, 
anb  the  99oonc  than  not  gfnc  her  light. 

15  2nbthc£>tarrcsofhcauenfl)all 
fall,  anb  thepotbers  that  are  mheaucn 
fhailbcthaRCtt. 

26  3tnb  then  thai  the?  fee  the  Sonne 
of  man  eomming  m  the  cloubes,  tbtth 
great  pomcr  anb  glojp. 

27  3tnb  then  thai  he  fenb  his  Angels, 
anb  fljall  gather  together  his  clcctfrom 
the  foutc  ibinbs,  from  the  bttcrmoft 
part  of  the  earth,  to  the  tottcrmot!  part 
of  hcaucn. 

18  ifJoiD  learnc  a  parable  of  the  fig 
trcc.nahcn  her  bjanth  is  ret  tenber  ,anb 
puttcthfo?th  lcaucs,vc  feiiovb  rhatfum; 
merisneere: 

29  SoyeinltUcmancr,n>hcnvcthai 
fee  ttjcfc  things  come  to  paOc,  itnotbc 
thatittsnigh,cucnatthcboo?cs. 

30  tHcrcly3ffaptontoj>ou,  that  this 
generation  (hall  not  paue,  till  all  thefe 
things  be  bone. 


ji^eaucnaiiDearthfliaipafleaibap: 
but  mp tto?bs  (hall  not  paffc  amap. 

31  C25ut  ofthatbayanothathoutc 
ftnovbeth  no  man,  no  not  the  Angels 
lUhich  are  mheaucn,  neither  the  Son, 
but  the  father. 

33  *  Xane  pc  heeb,  ttiatch  anb  pjap : 
fo?  pc  KnoVb  not  lbhen  tlje  tiine  is. 

34   For  the  Sonne  of  man  is  aS  a  titan  t3' 

King  a  far  rciourttcp,ll)ho  left  ins  houfc, 
anb  gauc  authority  to  hisfcruants,anb 
to  eucty  man  his  ino;tfte,  anb  commas 
beb  the  poster  to  ibatch: 

35  i©atchycthercfo2c(fo;ipclmotbe 
notifbhcnthe  matter  of  the  houfe  com; 
mcth,  at  «£uen,  0:  at  mibnight,  0;  at  the 
cocKc  croVbing,  02  in  the  morning.) 

36  Hell  eomming  fubbenlp,  hcfinbc 
vou  flceptng. 

37  3nbn)hat3Jfapbntoi?cm,3Jfar 
bntoall,i©atch. 

CHAP.   XIII1. 

A  confpiracicagainftChrifr.  j  Preciousoint- 
mentispowredonhis  head  by  a  woman.  10 
Iudasftllethhismaftcr  formoney.  ix.  Chrift 
himfclfc  foretelleth  how  he  fhail  be  betrayed 
of  one  of  his  difciples :  n  after  the  Paffeouer 
prepared,&eaten,inftitureth  his  Supper  :z6 
declareth  aforchand  the  flight  of  allnis  difci- 
ples, and  Peters  denial).  43  ludas  betrayeth 
him  with  a  kiffe.  46  Hec  is  apprehended  in 
the  garden,  53  Falfly  accufed ,  and  impi- 
oufly  condemned  of  the  Iewes  counfell :  6', 
(hamefully  abufed  by  them:  66  and  thrife 
denied  ot  Peter. 

ftcr'trbobapestbasthe 
leaflet  the  paffeouer,  anb 
of  bnicaucncb  b^eab :  anb 
theehicfeianefls,  anb  the 
Scribes  fought  hotb  the? 

might  tafec  him  bj>  craft,  anb  put  him  to 

bcath. 
z  25utthevfaib,il5otonthefcaQbap, 

leQ  there  be  an  bpjojc  of  the  people, 

3  C*2inbbcingm2i5ethantc,mthe 
houfe  of  Simon  the  leper,  as  he  fatcat 
meat,  there  tame  a  lboiuan,  hautttgan 
^labaflcr  bore  of  ointment  of  Hfpifcc* 
narb  berppjecious,  anb  flicc  b;afec  tt)c 
bote,  anb  poibjcb  it  on  his  hcab. 

4  anb  there  Uicrefomc  that  habin- 
bignarionVbithinthctufelucs,  anb  faib, 
D9hV  Was  this  Vbaftc  of  the  opntmcut 
mabc? 

5  5f02  it  might  haue  bene  folbc  fo? 
mo?c  then  tlwe  hunb?cb  ||  pence,  anb 
haue  bene  gtucu  to  thepooje:  anb  they 
murmurcb  agamft  her. 

6    %\\D 


'Mat  24.41 


Mi:,  zl.t 


■M«.t5.6 


[  I  Or,  pure 
nard  :  or  It- 
qnulntfr^ 


'Sri  Matt. 
[8. ,3. 


The  PafTeouer.        S.Marke.    Chrifts  laft Supper. 


•  Mat.  j«. 


■Mat.iS. 

7. 

|  Or,fjcr,p. 
rj. 


•  Mit.j«. 
10. 


6  anb  _9efus  faib ,  tXet  Der  alone, 
»l)p  trouble  you  &«  •  &>W  \Wfo 
ibzongl)t  a  goob  lbojbe  on  me. 

7  jfo?  yc  rjaue  trie  poo?c  ibitt)  you 
altbaycs,  anb  lUrjenfotuec  yc  lbillyec 
mayboctljcmgoobibutmeyeljaueuot 
aUbaycs. 

8  £>\)t ijatrj  Done lbljat  fyc  tottib : flje , 
is  tome  afozeljaub  to  anoint  my  boby  to 
ttictjucvittcj. 

9  tlcceiyJfaybntoyou,_»I)crcro' 
eucr  tl)is  ©ofpcl  (l)aibe  picact)cD  trjo^ 
romouttljcibj)olcmo2lo,thisaifotl)at 
fl)C  rjatl)  Done,  fljall  be  fpottcn  of  fo?  a 
memonailofrjer. 

io  *[*anb3Jubas  _0fcariot,  one  of 
tljetlbelucabentbntotnecljiefeiimcfts, 
to  betray  Ijtmbnto  trjem. 

ii  anb  ibljen  tl)cy  Ijearb  ic.tlicv  *bere 
glab,  anb  pzomifeb  to  gtuc  nun  money, 
anb  fjc  fougDt  f)ott>  \)t  mtgljt  tonuette 
etitly  betray  Ijitu. 

u  C  *  anb  tl)c  firft  bay  of  bnlcauc; 
nebb:cab,  ibrjcn  tncy  ||  milcb  tDc0avTc* 
oucr,ljisbifciplcsfaiDbntomm,niJl)ctc 
\bilt  trjou  tuatibc  gocanb  p2cpare,tl)at 
tl)oumaycftcatenjc32>afleoiicr; 

13  anb  fjc  fenbctl)  foul)  two  ofnts 
bifclplcs,  anb  faitfj  bnto  tljem,  Goeyee 
tntotrjetitte,  anbtrjcrefrjaiimectyoua 
man  bearing  a  pitcljer  of  ibatcr :  fol- 
low) !)tm. 

14  aub)bl)crcfociterl)e fnallgoein, 
fay  yce  to  t!ic  goob  man  of  tlic  rjoufe, 
_»e  Rafter  faitD ,  ttancrc  is  tl)c  gucft 
chamber,  ftmcrcj  Cbaileate  tljcpaffe* 
ouctibitfjmybifciplcs* 

15  anb  l)c  will  ftjcibyoualargc  tip* 
per  roomc  funuflieb,  anb  p:epareb : 
tlKtemaucrcabyfozbs. 

16  anbDlsDifciplcsibentfoztl),  anb 
tame  mto  tlic  ctttc,anb  founb  as  l)cc  rjab 
faib  bnto  tl)cm :  anb  tljcy  mabc  reabic 
tl)c  paffcoucr. 

17  anbuttrjc  cucntngheccommctl) 

tt)ttI)tnCt.bClUC. 

is  *  3nb  as  tlicy  fate,anb  bib  eat,3te 
fusfaib,  <Ilcrily_l  fay  bnto  you,  oncof 
you  Vbtjtcl)  catctl)  Vbttl)  me ,  fl)ail  betray 
mcc. 

19  ^nb  they  began  to  be  fojolbfull, 
anb  to  fay  bnto  nun,  one  by  one,  33s  it 
3lf  anbanotljer  i:.Kj,3Jsit3J^ 

20  anbheanfmcreb, anbfaibcbnto 
ilicmjri  oncoftlienbeluc.trjatbtppctl) 
With  mctu  the  bid). 

21  Xncfonnc  of  mamnbeeb  goetf), 
as  it  is  ttmtten  of  l)im :  but  tboc  to  that 
man  by  Vbl)om  the  £>ounc  of  man  is  be- 


trayeb :  <5oob  iberc  it  fo:  that  man ,  if 
he  hab  neuer  bene  bomc. 

u€'  anb  as  they  bib  cate, 3fefus 
tooftc  bjeab ,  anb  blefTeb,  anbbzaueit, 
anb  ganc  to  thcm,aub  fatb^auc,  cate : 
this  is  my  boby. 

25  anbl)ctoofeetfjcmp,anbmI)en 
hchab  giuen  thantts.hc  gaueu  to  tfjem: 
anbthcyaiityatiBcofit. 

24  anb  he  faib  bnto  tfjem,  SCfjis  is 
my  bloob  of  the  nclb  %eftamcnt,lbhich 
islhebfojmany. 

25  Clctcly  3  fay  bnto  yon ,  _0  mill 
bzinlic  no  inojc  of  ttje  fruit  of  tfje  time, 
bntni  that  u^  tl)at3Jb,!inKc  it  netbm 
theUmgbomeofCtob. 

26  canb  ibfjcn  tncy  hab  fung  an 
[Inyninc,  trjey  ibent  out  mto  tljemount 
ofiDliucs. 

27  "anb^cfus  fait!) bnto  tl)em,ail 
ye  mall  be  offenbeb  becaufe  of  mcc  tins 
nigl)t :  fojitisnmttcn.'J  milifnute  tlje 
fl)cpl)earb,anbtl)en)ecpc  u)aiibc  feat 
tercb. 

28  2Sutaftcrtljat3lamru'cn)3Jlbill 
goebefouyoumto  (Saltlcc. 

29  *  23ut  ^ctcr  faib  bnto  Ijun ,  ai 
tljougl)  al  Rialbc  offenbcb,yct  *  w  not  3J. 

30  anb3Jefusfaitn  bnto  fjim.tlcniy 
31  fay  bnto  tfjec ,  tfjat  tfjis  bay,  cuen  m 
tljis  nigfjt  before  tlje  cotbe  troiu  ttt»ife, 
toon  fliaitbcmc  mc  tfjnfe. 

31  25ut  he  fpahc  tl)c  mo;c  befjement' 
ly,  gjf  3  fl)oulb  Die  ibitl)  tljce ,  3  mill 
not  beme  tfjee  in  any  ibifc.  JLincibife  al- 
fofatb  tncy  all. 

32  *anb  tncy  tame  to  a  plate  ibljitl) 
vbasnameb0etl)fcmant,  anb  Decfaitl) 
to  l)ts  bifnplcs,  5>it  ycc  tjere ,  ibljtlc  3 
fljailpiay. 

33  anb  Ijec  taKeth  lbitl)  ftim^ctcr, 
anb  3Jamcs,anb3Jorjn,anb  began  to  be 
fojeama^cb^nb  to  bebery  l)caw, 

34  anbfaitl)bntotl)cm,©yfoulcis 
ertcebmg  fojoibful  bnto  bcatl) :  taric  ye 
fjerc.anbmatrl). 

35  anb  Ije  ibent  fortbarb  a  ittlc ,  anb 
fell  on  tl)e  grounb,anb  pjaycb,  tDat  if  it 
mere  poffiblc ,  tl)c  Ijourc  migfjt  paffe 
fromnim. 

36  anb  l)c  faib,abba,fatl)er,ail  tljtngc 
arcpoiTiblc  bnto  tl)cc,  taftcaibay  tins 
ciipfrommc:/!5eiicrtl)elcfrc;nottl)at3l 
mill,  but  mhattUoumtlt. 

37  anb  lice  conunetn ,  anb  Bnbctl) 
tl)cmflccpmg,aiib  faith  bnto  0ctcr,S>i; 
mon,  flccpcft  tfjOUi  Coulbcanottfjou 
lbattl)oncliourci 

3S  ioatcl)  ye  anb  pzay ,  left  yee  enter 
into 


*M«.i5. 
:<S. 


\OrtnfaJme 

'Mat.2«. 
J'- 


Mit^iS. 
ii- 


•MaiO,.s«. 


Chrift  betrayed.       Chap.xiiij,  Peters  deniall.j 


•Mat.i6. 

47- 


•M«.j5. 

!7- 


"Mw.itf. 

5?. 


into  temptation  :  Xhe  (pint  ttulp  is 
rcabp,butthcfle(l)lsibcaae. 

19  3(tibagame  hcibentaibap ,  anb 
P2apcb,anb  fpaue  the  fame  uwbs. 

40  3Hiblbhen he  retucneb,bc fouub  I 
them  aflecpeagaine,(fo2  their  eics  lb  ere! 
beamc)  neither  ibtft  thep  ibhat  to  an* 
fro  ere  him. 

41  3nb  hecommcrhthethrrbtimc, 
ano  fait!)  unto  them,  s>leepe  onnotb, 
anb  taue  pour  red :  it  is  enough,  the 
hour  e  is  comcbcholb,  the  ,S>on  of  man 
isbetrapcbuito  the hanbs  of  tinners. 

41  aatfcbp.ictbsgoc,  iLocbctbat 
bctrapcth  me,  is  at  hanb. 

43  C^nbimmebiatelp,  ibhilehcc 
pctlpaac,commcth3tobas ,  one  of  the 
tvbeiue,anb  lbith  him  a  great  mnltituoc 
\bith  fraojbs,anb  ftaucs,fcom  the  chiefe 
$2iefts,anb  the  S>mbcs,f  the  fibers. 

44  3nb  he  that  bettapcb  him ,  hab 
giucnthcmatoRcn,  fapmg,  nabomfoe; 
uer  J  (hail  tmTc,  that  fame  is  hc;taac 
htm.aiibleabhlmaibap  fafclp. 

45  2moa(Tooncashclbaseome,he 
gocth  ftraigbtibap  to  him ,  anb  lapetb, 
£0atter,<©after,anbKtflcb  him. 

46  C3nb  the?  lapeb  their  hanbs 
onbim,anbtoohebim. 

47  3nb  one  of  them  that  ftoob  bp, 
bzcib  a  fnwo  ,anb  fmotc  a  feruant  of  the 
high  0neft\anbcutoffhisearc. 

43  3tnb3Jcfusanuocrcb,f  faib  bnto 
tbc^repccomeoutasagainftatbecfe, 
tbith  fraojbs,  ?  lbtrh  ftaues  to  tafec  me  i 

49  3J  vbas  baiip  ibith  pou  m  the 
lEemplc,  teaching,  anb  pec  toofte  me 
notbitttbc^crtptutcsmuttbcfulttllcb. 

50  3tib  they  all  foifooUe  him ,  %fcft, 

5 1  3tnb  there  folloibeo  him  a  certauie 
pong  man,  hautng  a  lumen  cloth  tafta^ 
bout  his  naaeb  bobp,  anb  the  pong  men 
laibholbonhim. 

51  3in0he  left  the  Imncn  cloth ,  anb 
fleb  from  them  nafeeb. 

5 j  C*3inb  they  leb  Refits  atbap  to 
the  high  iMcft ,  anbibithbtmtbercafc 
fcmbleb  all  the  chiefe  $?ietts ,  anb  the 
€ibers,anb  the  Scribes. 

54  2nb$eterfolloU)Cbi)imafarrc 
off,  cuen  into  the  paliacc  of  the  high 
j&lethano  he  fate  lbuh  the  feruants, 
anblbarmeb  bimfelfe  at  the  fire. 

5  5  *  3lno  the  chiefe  i&nefts,anb  all  the 
couufcll  fought  fo2  lbitnefTe  agamlfjc- 
fus,  to  put  him  to  beath  ,*  founb  none. 

56  ;fo2manp  bare  falfc  lbitnefTe  a 
gainft  him,  but  their  Vbitneffe  agrecb 
not  together. 


57  2hib  there  arofe  certauie ,  anb 
bate  falfc  lbitnefTe  agaiuft  Dun  .(aping, 

5S  mc  hcacb  bun  fap,gi  ibiu  beftrop 
this  Xcmplc  that  is  mabcibitbbanbs, 
anb  Vbithtn  thzee  bapes  31  ibiu  builb  an- 
other mabc  without  hanbs. 

59  26ut  neither  fo  bib  their  ibitneftc 
agree  together. 

60  ainb  the  high  $2teft  floob  bp  m 
tbemibg,anbafueb'3fcuis,fapmg,3iti- 
fmerett  thou  nothing  *  tobat  is  it 
ibhtch  thefc  lbitnefTe  agamft  tbec  t 

6i  26uthchelbhtspcacc,anb  anfroc 
rcb  nothing.  3gainc,  the  high  02ieftaf 
bcbhim ,  anb  faib  bnto  bun ,  3rtthou 
the  CbJift,  the  tonne  of  the  SlefTcb; 

6i  3lub3JeuisfaiD,3Jam :  "anbpec 
(hall  fee  the  fonnc  of  man  fitting  on  the 
rigbtbano  ofpolber ,  anbeommmgin 
thccloubsofhcaucn, 

63  Xbcn  the  high  #2ieft  rent  his 
clothes,  anb  faith,  ntfbatuecbcibeanp 
further  lbitncfTcs* 

64  jaeehaue  hcarb  tbcblafphemp: 
ibhat  tbtnac  pee  <  3tnb  tljcp  all  conbem 
neo  him  to  be  guiltp  of  beath. 

65  3nb  fomebeganne  to  fpit  on  him, 
ano  to  coucr  his  face,  anb  to  buffet  him, 
ano  to  fap  bnto  him,  |&opbccic  :3no 
the  feruants  bib  ftricac  him  Vbith  the 
paimcs  of  their  hanbs. 

66  *[*3mo  as  peter  ibas  beneath 
in  the  palace,  there  commctb  one  of  the 
maiocs  of  the  high  teiieft. 

67  3lnb  ibhcn  (he  faib  peter  lbar- 
nmgbuufelfe,fbelooacbbponbim,anb 
fatb,3(nb  thou  alto  ibaft  jbtth  ^cfusof 
iI5a^arcrt). 

68  26ut  hee  benieb,  (aping,  3?  anon) 
not ,  neither  totibcrftanb  3  rbbat  thou 
fapeft.  ^nbhclbcnt  out  into  the  pozcb, 
anbthecocHecrcib. 

69  ^nb  a  maibc  faib  Ijmt  againe, 
anb  beganne  to  fap  to  them  that  ftoob 
bp,1Chisisoneofthem, 

70  ^nb  he  benieb  it  againe.  3uib  a 
little  after ,  thep  that  ftoob  bp  faib  a 
game  to  petct ,  Smrclp  thou  art  one  of 
thetmfojthouarta  ©aiilcan,  anbthp 
fpcachagrceth  thereto. 

71  ffiut  he  beganne  to  turfc  anb  to 
fmtare,  favm-.'jKnoibnotthismanof 
tbhompcefpeabe. 

71  "^no  the  feconb  time  the  cocbc 
crelb :  anb  0eter  caueb  to  minbethe 
iboib  that  3f  ems  faib  bnto  him ,  Kcfojc 
the  cochc  croib  tunfc ,  thou  (halt  bctuc 
mcth2u"c.  3Inb  ibhcn  he  thought  tl)tw 
on,f|hcibcpt. 

CHAP. 


'Mat.14. 


Mit.16. 
69. 


75- 

\\Or,h,jrr'. 
abttndaxziy, 
or  be  htaan 

tO  1F,pt. 


Barabbas  releafed.      S.Marke.       Chriilcrucified. 


"Manh.2-- 


'M111I1.17 
'5- 


CHAP.    XV. 

lefus  brought  bound,  and  accufed  before  Pi- 
late.  15  Vpon  the  clamour  of  the  common 
people,the  murderer  Barabbas  is  loofed,  and 
leiusdeliueredvp  to  be  crucified:  17  heeis 
crowned  with  thornes,  19  fpiton,  and  moc- 
ked :  2.1  fainteth  in  bearing  h<s  erode:  17 
han'Jethbetweenerwotheeues,  19  fuffretn 
the  triumphing  reproches  of  the  Iewes :  39 
but  confeiled  by  the  Centurion,  to  bee  die 
Stinneof  God:  43  and  is  honourably  bu- 
ried by  Iofeph. 

i?5D  *  ftraighttuap  in  tljc 
ttWJ/A\$$}  mowing  the  chttfe  pncGs 


hcioc  a  confultation  rbttlj 
">\\s  tl)c  €lbtrs  anb  £>tribcs, 

_^#^4^  anD  the  lbholc  Countell, 
anb  bound  "Jems,  anb  carteb  Dim  a* 
ibap,anbbcitucrcbhuntopiiatc. 

i  3tnb  piiatc  afltcb  Ijim,  3mtljou 
thcBmg  of  the  3Jcibcs;  3Cno  Dcean* 
uuccing,faib  bnto  ijim,  Xljou  fapcrt  it. 

j  3lno  the  cDiefepnerts  accufto  Dun 
of  man?  ti)tngs :  but  hccaufacrcb  no- 
thing- 

4-  *  3inb  pilatc  af bcO  Ijim  againc, 
faying,  3iniVoctcft  thounotijuig*  be 
Ijolb  lioil)  man?  things  tljcv  tbitnefTc  fc 
gamrtthce. 

5  ©indents  pet  anfujetcb  nothing, 
rotljatpiiatematuctleb. 

6  jBoib  at  that  5Fcart  Dc  rcieafcb  bn- 
to  them  one  pnfoticr,U)ljomfQcuer  tDcp 
btfirco. 

7  3(ttb  tDcrc  tbas  one  namcb  2Ba< 
rabbas ,  which  lap  bounb  UntD  them 
that  Dab  mabc  infurrcttiou  ttnth  Dim, 
who  Dab  committeb  murbcr  in  tljcm- 
furrrction. 

8  3tnbtht  multitubc  ctpingaiolbb, 
began  to  ocurc  him  to  doe  as  Dc  ljaD  eucr 
bouclmtothcm. 

9  i3ut  piiatc  anfiuercb  tDcm,  fav 
ing.ieitl  pc  that  31  rclcafcbutopou  the 
BmgoftDCJcibcsf 

10  ( tfoi  Dec  uncito  that  tDc  tDicfe 
pjicrts  Dab  bclincrcb  htm  fo:  emuc.) 

1 1  iSutthcchicfcpiicusniooucbthc 
people,  that  Dec  ihouib  rather  relearc 
loarabbas  bnto  them. 

1 i  3tub  pilatcanfiucrcb ,  anb  Tatb  a 
game  bnto  them ,  nahat  Will  pec  tDen 
tDat  3i  Ihall  bo  bnto  him  tt>ljom  pc  tall 
thcBingofthc3Jcmc5^ 

15  3iuo  thep  tnco  out  againt ,  Cruel 
fie  him. 

1+  Chen  piiatc  fame  bnto  them. 


t©hp,  tbhat  null  DatD  Dec  bone  i  3lnb 
thep  tritb  ont  the  mo?c  crtecblngip, 
CtutiflcDun. 

15  C  3Inb  fo  piiatc,  willing  to  tow 
ttnt  the  pcoplt,  rcltafto  asarabbas  nti* 
totljcm,  anb  ocliucrcb  3Jcfns,  when  Dc 
Dab  feourgeb  him,to  be  trutificb. 

i6  3tno  the  fottlbiers  leb  Dim  atbap 
into  tDcljail,eallcb}&ct02ium,anbtD  cp 
tail  together  the  whole  banb. 

17  3lno  theptlotDebDim  Witlj  pur* 
pic,  anb  piattcb  a  erowne  of  tljomcs, 
anb  put  it  about  Difihead, 

18  3lnb bcgannetofaiutcDim,J?ailc 
BingoftDeJcibes. 

19  3tnb  thcpfmoteDtm  on  tDc  Dcao 
Witharccb.anb  bib  fpitbponDun,anb 
bowing  tDcir  Kttccs.Wojfhippcb  him. 

io  3inb  When  tDep  Dab  mocltebDun, 
tfjcv  toohc  offtljc  purple  fromDim,anb 
puthisownc  tlotDcs  on  Dim,  anb  leb 
DimouttocrutificDim. 

ii  *  3(nb  tDep  compcll  one  &imon 
aCpjcntan,  Who  paffeb  bp ,  commtng 
out  of  tDc  countrp,thc  father  of^ldtan- 
bcranbftufus,to  bcarcDisCrofle. 

12  3inb  thep  tying  Dim  bnto  the 
place  <PolgotDa,rbD"D  ts,  being  inters 
p;cttb,tDcpiattofafRuli. 

13  3no  tDcp  gauc  D»n  to  bjinac, 
iDinc  mmglcbibitD  mp?rljc :  but  Dc  re- 
ttuttbitnot. 

14.  3utb  ttiDcn  Ujep  Dab  trunfitb 
Dim,  thep  par tto  his  garments,  tafting 
lots  topon  tijem ,  VbDat  tucrp  man 
fljoulbtanc. 

%<,  3lnbtt  inas  the  tljirb  Dourc ,  anb 
tDcptrutifitODmi. 

26  3tnb  tljc  fupcrftriptionof  Dtsat> 
tufation inas  ibnttcn  oucr,TH  e  king 

OF  THE    IEWES. 

17  3nb  i\)«D  Dmi  tljcpcrunSc  two 
thecues,  the  one  on  Ijis  right  Daub,  anb 
tljc  otDcr  on  Dis  left. 

18  anbtDc&mpturewasfulfillcb, 
TODitDfapctD,*3lnD  Dtc  Ibasnumb^cb 
initij  tDc  tranfgrcrtburs. 

19  ^nb  tljcp  that  paffco  bp ,  raiieb 
on  Dim,  lbaggmgtDctcDcabs,  anbfap^ 
tng,  311)  tDott  tDat  bcrtropert  tDcXcm- 
plcanb  buiibcrt  it  in  tlwcbapcs, 

jo  Sauc  tDp  fclfc,  aubcomtooilmt 
from  tDc  CrofTc. 

31  HtUctttifc  alfo  tDc  tDicfe  pnefts 
mottling,  fatb  among  tDtniftlutsUntl) 
tDc  Scribes ,  Qcfaucb  otljcrs,Dunfelfc 
Dc  cannot  fane. 

31  ILa  CDnrt  tDc  73iing  of  U fracl 
befcenb  notb  from  tljc  Croflc,  tljat  me 
__^ map 


•Matth.; 


•Efiyjj- 


Ch rifts  death,  Chap.xv).        and  refurrefrion. 


Mit.  17. 
*6. 


Luke  8. 


Mac. 17. 
57- 


map  fee  anb  belcctic :  3ttb  tljey  tDat 
ibecccntnficbibitDDim,tetttlcoDim. 

33  3nb  ibljcn  tlje  Gjctf)  lioutc  VOAS 
tome,  tDetc  ibas  batfteneffe  ottcctlje 
lbDolc  lanb,  bntill  tlje  nintD  Douce. 

54  3tnb  at  tDe  nintD  Douce ,  gjeftts 
etpcb  lbttD  a  lottoc  Dolce,  faying,*  Clot, 
€lot,  lamafabaeDtDant  <  rbftitft  t0,bctng 
tntetp?cteb ,  $&$  C5ob,  my  ©ob ,  ibljp 
DarttDoufo?faltcnme< 

35  3nbfomcoftDcmtDatftoobbp, 
TbDcn  trjcp  Ijcaco  it,fatD,25el)olD,l)e  cai; 
lctD«ltas. 

36  5ttto  one  tanne.anb  fillcD  a fptmgc 
full  of  bineget,anbputlt  onatccb,  anb 
gauc  fjtm  to  onnfee ,  faving ,  Hct  alone, 
letbs  fee  lbDetDcc  Cltas  ibtll  tome  to 
tafeeftlmoorbnc. 

37  3tnb  gjefus  ecyeb  voitl)  a  lottoc 
boite,  ano  gaue  bp  tDe  gnoft. 

38  3Dtb  tl)e  batlc  of  tl)c  Xemple 
tbas  tent  tntttjame,fcomtl)c  top  to  tlje 
bottome. 

39  CHnb  Vbrjen  tlje  CentutionibDicD 
ftoob  ouec  agatnftfjtm,  faib  tDat  Dec  fo 
tcyeb  out ,  anb  gaue  bp  trje  gDoft,  Dee 
fatb.Xtucly  tljis  man  ibas  tlje  Pontic 
of  ©ob. 

40  XDcce  ibece  alfo  ibomcn  loo- 
king on  afacce  off,  among  tbljom  ibas 
iipacp  fiI9agbalcnc,  ano  i30acy  tDe  mo- 1 
tDcc  of  panics  tlje  leffe,  ano  of  3Jofcs, 
ano  S>aiomc: 

41  uarjo  alfo  ibDcn  Dec  mas  in  <5a* 
Ule,*folloibcbDtm,anbmintftccb  bnto  I 
rjim,  anb  many  otrjec  lbomcn  lbDicl)  j 
tame  bp  lbttD  Dim  bnto  ^icctifaicm. 

4t  C  *3utb  noVbibDcn  tDe  cuen 
ibas  tome ,  (becaufc  it  ibas  tlje  $?cpa* ! 
cation,  tDatis,tljcbay  bcfo?c  tljc^ab'' 
batD)  ,    1 

43  UofepD  of  3rtmatt)Cci,anf)o* 
noucablc  tottnfcllcc,  tbDitD  alfo  ibaitcb 
fo?  tDe  tnngbome  of  <25ob ,  tame,  anb 
lbent  m  bolbly  bnto  pilatc,  anb  tcaucb 
tDebobp  of  Refits. 

44  3tnb  ptiatcmacuetlcbifbcibctc 
aiceabybcab ,  anb  calling  bnto  Dim  tDe 
Centttcion,  Dec  afUcb  Dint  ibljctDec  Dec 
I  hab  becne  any  VbVjilc  bcab. 

j    45  3{nblbDcnDclmcibitoftDcCcn; 
cuclon ,  Dc  gaue  tDe  boby  to  IJofcplj. 

46  ^nb Dec bottgDt fine liuncn, anb 
toofeeDimboibnc,  anbibzappcbbim  in 
tDelinnen,anb  latbe  Dim  in  a  fepttlclne, 
tt»l)tcrj  ibas  Dcibcn  out  of  a  coclte,  anb 
colleba  ftottc  bnto  tlje  ooo:cof  tDe  fc- 
pttlcDic. 

47  3itib  £|9acy  ^agbalenc,  anb 


£19acy  tlje  motbec  of  3ofcs  bctjcioc 
lbDeccDeibasiaibe. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  An  Angel  dedai  eth  the  lefurreftion  of Chrift 
to  three  women.  <?  Chrill  himfelt'c  appea- 
red) toMary  Magdalene:  11  totwogoing 
into  the  countrey :  14  then,  to  the  Apo- 
Ales,  15  whom  heicndethfoonhtopreach 
theGofpeh  19  and  afcendeth  into  heaucn. 

$&K>^i§?!$  ^D  n,,Jcu  tft*  3>abbatD 
a  ibaspatt,  £J9acy  £13agba* 
lene,anb  *J0acy  tDe  mo- 
tDccof3Jamcs,ano«§>a* 
lomc,  Dab  bottgDt  ftbeetc 

fpitcs,  tDat  tDcy  mtgljt  tome  anb  an< 

ointljim. 
x   *  3no  beep  catly  in  tDe  morning, 

tDcfttltbay  oftljc  ibccu  tDcy  tame  bnto 

tlje  fcpulcD?e,at  tDe  rifing  of  tDe  funnc : 

3  3inb  tDcp  fatb  among  tDemfcllies, 
10DO  fDau  toll  bs  arbaytljc  ftonc  fcom 
tDeboo2coftDcfcpttitD?e; 

4  (^noibDcntDepiooRco.tDcpfarb 
tDat  tDe  ftone  ibas  tollcb  avbap)  fo?  it 
lbasbctpgccac. 

5  *3lnb  cntting  into  tlje  fepulcD?c, 
tDep  fatbc  a  poung  man  Otnng  on  tDe 
ctgljt  fibc ,  tlotDeb  in  along  ibDitcgar 
ntcnt,  anb  tljcp  ibece  aff rtgDtcD. 

6  ^nb  D«favtD  bnto  them,  25c  not 

affrigDtcbvcfeetic3Jcfusofjfra5atctD, 
lbljitD  ibas  tcuttficb :  Dctsctfcn,  Dcets 

not  Dece :  bcljolb  tlje  piatcrbljccc  tljcp 

latbcDim. 

7  25ut  goe  pouc  ibap,tcllDis  bifci= 
pies,  anb  ^ctcc,  tljat  DcegoctD  before 
vouinto  ©aitit,  tljetc  njallpc  fee  Dim, 
*  as  Dc  fatb  bnto  vott. 

«  ^nb  tDep  lbent  out  qutcttclp,  anb 
flebbe  fcom  tlje  fcpulclj?c,  fo?  tljcv  teem- 
bleb ,  anb  ibece  anta5eb,  ncitDcc  fapb 
tDcv  any  tljing  to  anp  man ,  fo?  tDep 
Vbctcafcaib. 

9  C  il^oib  tbDen  refus  ibas  ctfen  cac- 
ly.tDcfitftoayoftDcibecBc/Dcappca; 
ccb  ncft  to  fi^acp  ^9agbalcnc ,  *  out  of 
ibDom  Dc  Dab  caft  fetten  bettils. 

10  ^nbn)c  lbent  anb  tolbtDemtljat 
Dab  bcenc  lbitlj  Dim ,  as  tDe?  moucneb 
anbibept. 

11  3lnbtDcp ,  ibljctt  t\)tv  Dab  Deatb 
tDat  Dc-  ibas altttc ,  anb  Ijab  bcenc  fcettc 
ofDccbclecuconot. 

\z  CSftettDat,  DcappcacebinattO' 
tDecfo?mc*bnto  tibo  oftDcm.as  tDcp 
ibaUtco.anoibcnttutotDctountccp. 

1 3  3nb  tljcp  lbent  anb  tolbc  tt  bnto 
tDcccfibuCjUcitDccbclccucbtUcytlicni. 

f       .  14  <T  3tt| 


•Luk.14 1 


*  Iohn  :o. 
11. 


•Mit.15. 


'Iohn 20. 
■4. 

"Luke  8.1. 


'Luke  24. 


Vnbelicfe  reproued.   S.Luke.        Ch rifts  afcenfion 


"i.uk.14. 

•6  iclm  :c 
19- 

II  Or,fge- 
■her. 


•Mk.j8. 
'9- 


•Ioh.U.48 


■Afl.16.18 


14.  C*3JfterU)art)  He  appcarcb unto 
tl) e elcucn,as tliev fate  atmcat.anbbp 
maiDcothem  ibith  their  bnbcliefc ,  anb 
harbnclTc  of  heart ,  becaufc  tljcp  belce- 
ucd  not  them,  Which  habfeeuc  Dim  afc 
terhciDasnfcn. 

15  *anbhefiub  bnto  them,  0oe pec 
mto  all  tt)c«30?lD,anDpjcac!)  tlje  oofpei 
to  eucrp  creature. 

16  $cthatbelccucthanoi6bapti3Cb, 
Ojalbc  TaueD ,'  but  De  ttjat  bcleettctlj  not, 
fbailbcbamncb. 

17  anb  thcrcfigncsfliaifollorb  them 
tljatbtlecue,*3ln  mp/i5amc  Ojalltfjcp 


call  out  beuils,*  the?  (hall  fpeatte  ibirh  <Aa!H 
nctb  tongues, 

i8*Xhe?(hailtaBebpfttpents,anb 'AaiS* 
if  the?  tymfce  anp  beabrp  thing ,  it  (hail ! 
nothurtthem/thcpfhalllaphanbson  *Aa-»s.8. 
the  GcUcanb  the?  Q)allrecouer. 

19  C  5)0  tljen after  trje?Lo?tjrjao  fpo- 
Hen  bnto  them,  he  was  teeeiucb  bp  into 
hcauen,*anb  fate  on  tfje  right  hanb  of  *Luk -m- 

(50X3. 

20  anD  thep  rbent  foojth,  anb  pzea- 
cheb  cucrp  itoherc ,  tfte  ?Lo2D  ibojlnng 
ibltfj  them,  *  anb  confirming  the  Vbo;be ' 
ttithfigncs  following,  amen. 


^[The  Gofpcl  according  to  S.Luke. 


CHAP.    I. 

1  The  Preface  of  Luke  to  his  whole  Gofpcl. 
5  The  conception  of  lohn  the  Baptiff,  16  and 
ofChnft.  39  The  prophecie  of  Elizabeth, 
and  of  Mary,concerningChrift.  5  7  The  nan- 
uitu-  &  circumciiion  of  lohn.  c^The  prophe- 
fieotZachaty  both  ofChii(l,7i$  and  of  lohn. 

sDjafmuch  as  man? 
haue  taHcu  in  hanbe 
to  fctfoojthmojbera 
Declaration  of  tljofc 
things  which  arc  molt 
furcipbclccucb  among 
bs, 

i  Cucn  as  tl)cvbcltucrcb  them  bn- 
to bs,  Which  from  the  beginning  were 
epe  -  Witncflcs,*  mmiftcrs  of  the  W02b : 
j  3Jtfccmcbgoobtomcalfo,haumg 
hab  perfect  tonbcrftanbuig  of  tilings 
from  thebcrpfirft,  to  lbntc  bnto  thecm 
oibcr ,  molt  crccllcnt  Xljcopljilus, 

4.  1i:iiat  thou  mightclt  anow  tl;c  cer- 

tainctic  of  thofc  things  Wherein  thou 

hall  bene mltructcb. 

5  c  '-T-,t?crc  was  m  the  Daves  of 

_1  f)crobcthcluugof3!ubca, 

a  ccrtamc  p2tcft ,  namcb 

zachanas,  of  thecourfc  of  abta,  anb 

his  Wife  was  of  the  baughtcrs  of  aa* 

r  on,  anb  her  name  was  Cl^abcth. 

6  3inb  thep  Were  both  righteous  be 
fojc 00b,  Waihing mall  the Conunan 
bements  anb  oibmantcs  of  the  JLojb, 
biamclcffc. 


7  anD  thep  haD  no  ehilbc,  becanfe 
that  eii^abcth  was  barren ,  anb  the? 
both  were  now  well  ttriBenmpcercs. 

8  ^nb  it  came  to  pafi"e,that  While  he 
ctccutcb  the  0ucfts  office  befoje  00b  m 
theojbctofhiseourfe, 

9  acco?Dmg  to  the  culfome  of  the 
pnefts  office ,  his  lot  was  to  burne  tn= 
cenfe  When  he ibent into  the  Xemple  of 
the  IL  02b. 

10  "anb  the  Whole  multituDc  of  the 
people  were  pjapmg  ltottljout ,  at  the 
timcofinccnfe. 

11  anb  there  appcarcb  bnto  him  an 
angel  of  the  &02D ,  ftanbmg  on  the 
right  fibc  of  the  aitar  of  mcenfe. 

11  atiDWhenzachanasfaWc  him, 
hce  was  troubleb,  anb  fcare  fell  bpon 
him. 

13  ffiut  the  angel  faib  bnto  him. 
j'ear  c  not,  zachanas,  fo:  thp  p2aper  is 
hcarb,  anb  tl)p  lbifc  tfli?abetrj  (hall 
bearethec  a  fonne,  anb  thou  (halt  call 
his  name  3fohn. 

14-  anb  thou  (halt  hauc  iop  anb  giab- 
nctTe,  anb  manp  (hall  rctopce  at  his 
birth : 

15  ifojhe  (hail  be  great  m  the  fight  of 
the  ILoib,  anb  fljai  bnnbe  neither  Wine, 
1102  ItrongDnii&c,  anb  he  (hall  bee  fillcb 
iDtththchoh>0hoft,cucnfromhisniO'- 
tljcrs  lbombc. 

i6  *  anb  man?  of  the  chilDjen  ofgjC= 
racl  (hall  hec  tunie  to  tlje  ?Lo2b  tljeir 
0ob. 
1 7  anb 


"Exo.  30.7. 
Icuit. 10.17 


Malic^.lS 


An  Angel  is  fen t  to      Cha 


p.j, 


the  virgin 


Mj 


ary. 


Orfy. 


\\Orgrui. 
«ujl]  accep- 
ted, crmHch 
£rAceJ,fee 
rfijO. 


"Efai.7. » 4 
Tilt.  I . :  t . 


17  anb  hec  fljall  soc  bcfojc  hnn  in 
tljcfpintanuporberofeuas ,  toturnc 
the  hearts  of  tl)c  fathers  to  the  chilbjen, 
anbthebifobebicntlltothcibtfcbomcof 
tlje  iufl,to  utaHc  rcatip  a  people  p:cpareb 
f02tI)C?L020. 

is  anb  zacljanas  fatb  unto  the 
angel,  rohercby  fhallj  tmoib  tl)ts  < 
5f02  3  am  an  olb  man ,  anb  in;  ibife( 
lbellftriHeninyccrcs. 

19  anb  the  angel  aufrocring ,  fatb 
bnto  him ,  j  am  (Sabncithatftanbin 
the  p;efcnte  of  <5ob  ,  ano  am  fent  to 
fpeafee  bnto  thecanb  to  fhclbthec  thefc 
giabtibmgs. 

20  anbbehorb,thoufhaltbcbumbc, 
anb  not  able  to  fpcauc,  tmttll  the  bay 
that  thefe  tfjmgs  fhail  bee  pcrfoz< 
mcD ,  betaufc  thou  belecueft  not  my 
lboibs ,  U)t)wi)  fljail  bec  fulftlUU  tn  their 
feafon. 

11  anb  the  people  ibaitcb  fo;  za= 
chartas,  anb  mar  ucllcb  that  hectartcb 
fo  long  in  the  temple. 

22  anb  lbhc'n  he  tame  out,  he  toulb 
notfpeaKebntothemranD  they  pcrccf 
ucb  that  he  hab  fecne  a  bifion  in  the  tem- 
ple : fo;  he  beckeneb  bnto  them ,  anb  re- 
matucbfpecchlcffc. 

23  anb  it  tame  to  pafTc,  that  as  foonc 
as  tlje  bayes  of  his  mtnittranon  lucre 
accomplifhcb ,  hebepartcb  to  his  oibnc 
houfe. 

24  anb  after  thofe  bayes;  his  ibifc 
(Elizabeth  concciucb,  anb  bib  her  fclfc 
fiuc  moncths,faymg, 

25  %\)\xs  hath  tbc!Lo;bbcaitibitb 
mem  the  bayes  lbbcrcm  he  loottcb  on 
me ,  to  taltcaibay  my  rep;ocb  among 
men. 

26  anb  in  the  firt  moneth,thc  angel 
(Sabjiclinas  fent  from  ©00 ,  bnto  a n^ 
tie  of  <3alilee,nameb/!2a5arerh, 

27  %o  a  birgmc  cfpoufeb  to  a  man 
ibhofc  name  lbas^Jofepb.oftbcboufe 
of  2>autb ,  anb  the  birgms  name  rbas 
£0aric. 

28  ^nb  the  angel  tame  inbuto  Ijcr, 
ano  faib,  $aiie  thou  that  an  ||  highly  fa- 
uour  eb,  the  ILo  jb  is  tbttl)  fbec :  25lcffcb 
art  thou  among  Uiomcn. 

29  anbibhenaiefaibbim.fhcibas 
troublrb  at  his  faying,  anb  caftm  her 
mmbc  lbhat  mancr  of  falutation  this 
fhouibbe. 

50  anb  the  angel  faib  bnto  her, 
if  care  not,  £I3anc ,  fo;  thou  haft  founb 
fauouribitboob. 

31  *anbbeholb,  tljou njalt concciue 


1  1 


m  thy  ibombc ,  anb  bang  fo:th  atomic, 
anb  (halt  call  his  name  Jefus. 

3  2  l?c  (ball  be  great,  anb  (ball  be  cai 
leb  the  founc  of  the  l?ighe(t ,  anb  the 
V-01H  C5ob  (ball  giuc  Dnto  t)im  the 
th.:onc  of  his  father  Dattib. 

33  "anb  hec  fhaii  reignc  oner  the 
houfe  of  Jacob  fo:  cucr,  anb  of  bis 
lungbomc  there  (ball  be  no  cub. 

34  1^hen  faib  ©arte  bnto  the  an 
gel ,  i>oib  (hall  this  be ,  feeing  3  Huoib 
not  a  man  i 

35  anb  the  angel  anfrocreb  anb  faib 
bnto  her ,  %ln  holy  ohoft  (hall  come 
bpontbecanbtbcpoibcroftbcttigbcfr 
(ball  ouerfljaboib  thee.  Hbcrcfcw  alfo 
that  holy  thing  lbhich  (bail  bccboine 
of  thee,  (hail  bec  calleb  tlje  fonnc  of 
C5ob. 

36  anbbcholb,thy coufin Cii^abeth, 
(be  hath  alfo  conceuieb  a  fonnc  in  her 
olb  agcanb  this  is  the  Qrt  monctlj  ibitb 
her,  lbbo  rbas  calleb  barren. 

37  3fo;  ibitb  Gob  no  thing  (hall  be 
bnpoffible. 

3S  anb  Q5aric  faib  ,  fficbolb  the 
banbmaibc  of  the  Ho;b,  bcitbntomc 
aceo;bmg  to  thy  ibo;b :  anb  the  angel 
bepartcb  from  her. 

39  anb^anearofe  mthofebayes, 
anb  ibent  into  the  hill  couutrcy  Vbith 
baftc,intoacincof3Juba, 

40  anbentrcb  into  the  houfe  of  za 
thanas.anbfaluteb  citvibcth. 

41  anb  it  came  to  pafTc  that  ibbcn 
Elisabeth  htatbthe  falutation  of  aga- 
ric, the  babe  leapcb  m  her  ibombc,  anb 
€H5abcth  ibas  fillcb  With  the  holy 
Ohoft 

41  anb  flic  fpaUc  out  ibitb  a  loub 
boyce,  anb  faibe,  25leffeb  art  thou  a 
mongibomcn ,  anbblcffcbisthcfruitc 
of  thy  ibombc. 

43  anb  ibhcucc  is  this  to  me ,  that 
themother  of  my?lo;b  fhoulbcomcto 
nice; 

44  f-o;  loc ,  affoonc  as  the  boicc  of 
thy  falutation  founbeb  mnune  cares, 
tlje  babe  leapcb  tn  my  ibombc  fo;  toy. 

45  anbblcfTcbtsfhclthatbclccucb, 
fojthcrcfbalbca  performance  of  thofe 
things,  lbljith  ibere  tolbhcr  from  the 
%oin. 

46  anb  agaric  faib,  fl^yfoulc  both 
magiuficthclLo2b. 

47  anb  my  fpint  hath  reioytcb  m 
;C5obmyfauiour. 

48  5fo;  hechath  regarbrb  the  loib 
IcOatr  of  his  hanbmaibcu  :  fojbcholb, 

f  1  from 


'Dan. 7. 14 
nidi.  4.7. 


\\Cr.vhuh 
beletnti, 

thtU  there. 


76? 


Maries  long. 


S.Luke.  Zacharias  fo 


5fr 


"Efayp.j. 

10. 

•  I.Sim.:. 


•P61.54. 
10. 


Vere.  31. 
3*  so. 
•P&I.13J. 

10  gen. 17 
19- 


\\Ortthi'i£> 


fromfienccfoortfi  all  generations  (fiall 
caiimeblcffcD. 

49  ifor  fie  tfiat  is  mfe&tj?  Ijatl)  Done 
to  mee great  tfiings,  anD  Ijolp is fits 
jftame. 

50  £nD  his  meet?  is  on  tficm  tfiat 
fcatctjtui,  from  generation  to  genera^ 
tion. 

51  *  $ec  fiatl)  fficlbcD  ftrcngtfi  Ibitfi 
fitsatmc/ficfiatfiftattcrcDtficprouD, 
in  tfic  imagination  oftficit  ficarts. 

5i  *  tyt  fiatfi  pnt  DoWnc  tfic  mtgfity 
from  tficirfcates,  anD  ejcaiteD  tficm  of 
low  Degree. 

53  *  ^ec  fiat!)  filleD  tfie  fiungry  With 
gooD  things,  anD  tfie  rtcfi  ficc  fiatfi  fent 
empticaway. 

54  tytc  fiat!)  fiolpcn  fiisfcruant^jt 
rael,*  in  remembrance  of  fils  mercy, 

55  *3is  ficfpaUc  to  our  fatficrs,to  %- 
brafiam,auDtofilsfccDforcucr. 

5<s  3inDQ9aryaboDcWitfi  ficr  about 
tfircc  monctfis,  anD  retumcD  to  ficr 
oWnefioufc. 

57  J8oW€!i5abetl)S  full  time  tame, 
tfiatflicenjoulD  bcDcliucrcD ,  aiiDfficc 
brougfitfoortfiafonnc. 

53  2inDficrucigfiboursanDfier  coti; 
fms  fiearDfioW  tfic  HorD  fiab  ffieWcD 
great  mercy  bpon  ficr,  anD  tficy  rciov- 
ccD  lbitfi  ficr. 

59  Shunt  tame  to  paffc  tfiat  on  tfie 
eight  Dap  tficy  tame  to  tircumcife  tfic 
clniDc,  anD  tficy  railcD  film  Zacfiarias, 
after  tfic  name  of  fit's  fatficr. 

60  3nD  fils  motficr  anfmcrcD,  anD 
faiD  /3otfo,butficmaibctailcD3Jofin. 

6i  ^nDtficyfaiDbntoficr.Xficrcts 
none  of  tfiy  UinrcD  tfiat  is  callcD  by tfiis 
name. 

61  SmDtficymaDcfigncstofiisfa* 
tficr,fiow  fie  woulD  fiauc  film  callcb. 

6  j  3ud  fie  affteD  for  a  Writing  table, 
anD  Wrotcfaying ,  tyls  name  is  31  ofin : 
anD  tficy  marucilcD  all. 

6+  3inD  fits  moutfi  wasopcncDim- 
meDiatly ,  anD  fits  tongue  I  Mfed ,  anD  fice 
fpaiic,anDpzaifeD<E>oD. 

65  2ltiDfcarccamconaii  tfiatDWclt 
roimD  about  tficm ,  anD  all  tfiefc  ||  fay 
mgs  mere  uoircb  abioaD  tfio:oWout  all 
tficfiillcountrcyofJIuDca. 

66  ^nDaii  tficy  tfiatfiaDficarD  tficm, 
layDe  tficm  Dp  m  their  Hearts  ,  faymg, 
©fiat  maner  of  chilbe  flial  this  bc^nD 
the  fiauD  of  the  ?Lo:D  mas  Wttfi  fiim. 

67  3itiD  his  father  zacharias  mas 
fillet)  wufi  the  holy  Gfioft ,  anD  pjopfic^ 
ficD,  faymg, 


•pfj.,3,. 
18. 


Tcrc.23  5 

and  jo.p. 


•Gene.  11. 
16. 


6S  25lcffcD  bee  tfic  HorD  C50D  ofgjf^ 
raci,  forfice  fiatfi  DmtcoanD  rcDecmcD 
fils  people, 

69  *3tnDfiatfi  raifcD  bp  an  fiomc  of 
faiuationfor  bs,  in  tficfionfeof  fiisfer- 
uantDauft, 

70  *^sficfpabcbytficmoutfioffiis 
fioly^ropficts,  ibfiicfi  fiaue  bencfinte 
tfic  worib  began: 

71  Xfiat  Wee  ffioulD  be  faueDfrom 
our  enemies,  anD  from  tfiefianDofail 
tfiat  fiatebs, 

72  Xopcrformc  tfic  mercy  pronufcD 
to  our  fatficrs,  anD  to  remember  fits 
fiolyCouenant, 

73  'Xfic  oatfi  wfitcfi  fie  froarc  to  our 
fatfict^brafiam, 

74  Xfiat  ficc  WoulD  grantbntobs, 
tfiat  mec  bcelng  DcliuercD  out  of  tfie 
fiauDs  of  our  enemies ,  nugfit  feme  fiim 
Witfioutfeare, 

75  Uu  fiolmcffc  anD  rigfiteoufnclTc 
before  fiuu,all  tfie  Dayes  of  our  life. 

76  3uiDtfiou  tfillbc  tfialt  bee  tailcD 
ttjc  i&opfict  of  tfie  fyigficft  :  for  tfiou 
(fialtgoc  before  tfic  fate  of  tfie  ILo;D  to 
prepare  fits  wayes, 

77  XogiuclmoWIcDgcoffaluatton 
bnto  fiis  people,  ||  by  tfic  rcmiffion  of  ill0'/"-- 
tficirfinncs, 

78  Xfirougfi  tfie  ||  tcnDcr  mercy  of 
our  €>od  ,  Wficrcby  tfic  ||  Day-fprtng 
from  on  filgfi  fiatfi  btfttcD  bs, 

79  %q  giuc  ligfit  to  tficm  tfiat  fit  in 
Darfmes.anD  in  tfie  ffiaDoW  of  Dcatfi,to 
guiDc  our  feet  into  tfie  ttay  of  peace. 

80  3inD  tfie  tfitlDc  grew,  anD  warcD 
ftrongm  fpirit,  ano  was  in  tfic  Defer ts, 
ttlltficDayoffiisn)cWmgbnto3Jfrael. 

C  HAP.    II. 

1  Atiguftus  taxeth  all  the  Romanc  Empire  :  6 
ThenatiuirieofChrirt:  S  one  Angel  related; 
it  to  the  Ihephcrds :  13  nianvfing  praifesto 
God  tor  it.  iiChriftiscircumcifed.  11  Mary 
puuficd:  ib'  Simeon  and  Anna  prophecie 
of  Chrill :  40  who  incrcafeth  in  wifdome, 
46  cjueftioncth  in  the  Temple  withthedo- 
(ftours,   s,  1   and  is  obedient  to  his  parents. 

S^&ffij^ffl  /I32D  it  came  to  paffc  tn 
5^Ng^  tfiofc  Daycs  ,  tfiat  tficrc 
W£i£$*$  Went  out  a  Decree  from 
fPI\?  Ccfi^  Sugulhis.  tfiatail 
!  sg£ffi&3t  tficiDorlD  flioulD  bc||tarcD.  UOr 

z  ( 3inD  tins  taring  was  firft  maDc  u- 
WficCvrcniusmasgoucruo.'of^yria) 

3  ^nD  all  utciit  to  bee  ta,rcD ,  cuerv 
oncintofiisoibncriae. 

4^nD3ofcpfiaifometbpfr5(5alilce, 

out 


\\Ort&nnlt 

of  the  merer. 
'  Or^urnC' 

branch  2* 
i.S.efkj  II. 

i  malaeh.q. 
z .  numb.  3  4  ■ 


Chrift  is  borne. 


Ch; 


m 


'imeons  ion 


ft 


'John  7.43 


\)Or,the 

m*ht  KAI' 
chct. 


•Ctn.17 


outoftfjc  cine  of  jftasacetfj,  into  ^w 
Dea,tmtotl)c*  citic  of  2>auio ,  iDUicrj  is 
calico  asctljlcrjem ,  (becaufe  tjc  tbas  of 
tlje  rjoufe  ano  image  of  sDauio,) 

5  %o  be  tarco  tbitlj  s©arp  Ijis  cfc 
poufco  ttnfe,  being  great  irntfj  cljilt>. 

6  3inD  fo  it  tbas ,  trjat  Ibrjile  tfjrp 
iberctljerc,ttjcoapesibcrcaccompUfi) 
co  tfjat  fl)C  fliouio  be  ocliuereo. 

7  3ino  ft)e  bzougljt  fooztf)  fjcr  firir 
borne  fonnc,  ano  ibjappeD  rjimin  froaD; 
imgclotljcs ,  ano  laiDfjim  in  a  manger, 
becaufctrjcecibasnoroomcfojtfjemm 
tljejnnc. 

8  3Cno  tijere  tberc  in  ffjc  fame  conn* 
trep  fl)cpl)earosabiOing  in  pfielD.ncep^ 
ing  lllbatcrj  oucr  trmr  flocftc  bpnigltf. 

9  3no  loe,  tlje  2ngcl  of  trje  fLojo 
came  Upon  tnern,  ano  tfteglojp  of  ttje 
!Lo2Dil)Ouerounoabouttl)cm,anDtljcv 
tbctcfojcafraio. 

10  3tno  tfjc  3ngcl  faio  bntotrjem, 
jFeace  not :  Stoi  berjoio,  3J  bnng  yon 
goootiomgs  of  great  ioy,tt»!)icj)  ujailbe 
to  all  people. 

1 1  jf  0:  bnto  pou  is  borne  tfjis  oap,  in 
tneaftcof3DauiO,a£>auionr,tbl)ic!)  is 
CljnftttjefLojD. 

12  ^notrjisujailbeafignebntoyott; 
vec  fh  all  fino  tl)c  babe  Ibzappco  in  ftoao- 
ling  clotrjes  Ipmg  in  a  manger. 

13  anouiDDenlptfjecetbasibtffjtnc 
3ingcl  a  multinioc  of  tlje  rjcanenlp 
fjottc  pzaifing  d5oo,ano  faping, 

14  <5lo:p  to  <5oo  in  tUe  higljcfl ,  ano 
on  eartl)  peace,  gooo  Vbil  toVbaros  men. 

if  3Cno  it  came  to  paffc,  as  tljc^tv 
gels  lberc  gone  albap  fromtrjem  into 
rjeauen,trjcfl)cprjcarDsfaiDonctoano^ 
trjer,  ?Lctbsnotbgocciicnbnto25etlv 
leljcm,  ano  fee  tfjis  tl)ing  Vbhicft  is  come 
to  paffc,  vbtycrj  tlje  JLo;0  Jjatlj  uiaoc 
unorbenbntobs. 

16  3Jno  rney  came  \Dttf)  naftc ,  ano 
founo  fil^arp  ano  Jofcptj.ano  tlje  babe 
iptnginamatigcr. 

17  3tnoibI)cnthcp!iaofcrncit,tlKV 
maoc  Kiiotbcn  abioao  tuc  fapingADlntlj 
ttjastolDtrjcm.concccumgtlHscmiD. 

is  3lno all  tncp  trjat  Ucaro itAbonoe- 
rcoat  tboic  tilings ,  tt)l)iclj  lberc  roioe 
tjjcmbptocfbepncarDS. 

19  25ut  39acpftcpt  all  tl)cfc  things, 
ano  ponberco  tftem  m  lice  l)eart. 

20  ^nOtHcfl)cpl)catDs  rccunico.glo 
rifping  *  piaifmg  <BoO  foi  all  tlic  tilings 
ttjattbey  hao  hcaro  anofcencasitttias 
toiootitotbem. 

21  *  3MD  lDrjcn  cigljt  Dapcs  Vbccc  ac 


eompliuJcD  foj  tlje  circumciftng  of  tl)c 
clnioe ,  bis  name  vbas  calico  *  llcfus, 
Vbtjierj  ttias  fo  uamco  of  tlje  3ngel  be* 
fo?eIjett)asconccuieDmcrjett>ombe. 

22  SworbbcntbeDaycsofncrpuri: 
fication  accojOing  to  t!)e  lalb  of  £0ofes, 
tberc  accompiifl)eD ,  they  brought  mm 
to  l?ierufalcm ,  to  pjcfcntljim  to  tlje 
3Lo?b, 

23  ( 3Csit  is  ttoittcn  in  tnc  la\o  of  the 
3Lo.:D ,  "Cucrp  male  tljat  openert)  tl)c 
Vbombe,  Qjaibe  calico  tjoly  to  tfjeHoio) 

24.  ^notooffcrafacnnccaccoiOing 
to*  tljat  tbljirt)  is taiO  in  tlje  ?latti  of  tlje 
JL020,  a  paire  of  turtle  Ooues,  0?  tvbo 
^ong  pigeons. 

25  3no  bcljoio,  tljere  ttiasamanin 
l^icrufaicm,  iDJjofc  name  loas  5>imc^ 
on,  ano  tlje  fame  man  Vbas  lull  ano  oe* 
uoiit.ioattingfojtfjeconfolanouofjf' 
racl :  ano  rtjc  ijolp  <E>I)oft  Vbas  Upon 
Ijim. 

26  ^noitrbasreueaicotontoljimbp 
tl)C  Ijolp  ©Ijoft,  tljat  Dc  fhonionotfee 
ocatlj,  before  Ije  Ijaofeene  tlje  H02OS 
CIjjill. 

27  ^noijcccamebptljcfpirit  into 
frje  Xemple :  ano  ibncn  tlje  parents 
bjongln  m  fl)crUUD3lcuis,  toooc  fo: 
l)im  after  tlje  cuttomc  of  tl)t  ?Lamc, 

23  Xljcn  toofte  Ikc  Ijun  Dp  in  l)is 
armcs,anoblcu"co  C5oO,anofaio, 

29  H020  novb  lettca  tvjou  tl)p  fcr- 
uant  Depart  m  peace,  accozOing  to  tiiv 

U)02D. 

30  jfo?  mine  eves  Ijaue  fcenefnpfal 
nation. 

31  m\)it\)  tljou  fjafl  pzcparcobefoje 
tl)c  face  of  all  people. 

32  a  ugljt  to  lighten  tlic  ©entiles, 
anotl)cgl02v  of  tl)p  people  ^frael. 

33  2tno3}ofcpl)anoi)ismotl)crmar 
ueilco  at  tljofc  tljmgsibljiclj  ibererpo 
bcnofljim. 

34.  ^no  Simeon  blclTcD  tljem ,  ano 
faiDbnto  fl!3anc  Jjis  mother ,  25cliolo, 
tfjis  cfjilO  is  fet  fo?  tl)c  *  fall  ano  rifmg  a 
game  of  many  in  3)fracl :  ano  to:  a  figne 
Vbl)icli  Qiall  be  fpourn  agauift, 

31  C^caafnjojo  fljail  pcarcctl)o;o\n 
thponmcfoulcalfo)tl)at  trie  tDougljts 
of  many  hearts  map  be  rcucalco. 

36  ^iiio  trjeretbas  one  Snnaa  pzo- 
plKtclTc ,  thcoaugbter  of  0liauuel ,  of 
tl)c  tribe  of  3tfcr  flic  ibas  of  a  great  age, 
ano  liao  luicD  ibitl)  an  liuf bauo  fcucn 
pecres  from  l)cr  birguutie. 

37  ^liio  flic  ibas  a  VbiOoib  of  about 
fourefwe  auD  fourc  pecres ,  ibDicliOc 

Jf  3  partco 


Mat.1. 


'Exod.  1  j. 
2  numb.  18 
i<5. 

M  euic.i  z. 
i,6. 


"Efai  8.14. 
roni  9.3  J. 


Chrin:  obedient,         S.Luke.  Iohnspreaching,and 


\\Or,JfrMt. 


•Dcu.lti 


\\Or,'i'. 


partcDnotfromtlje1-emple,butfcrucD 
God  nmb  tattings  ano  payers  mgljt 
anD  uap. 

38  3lnD  tl)C  commmg  in that  inttant, 
gaue  thanKcs  liHcibifc  bnto  the!Lo2D, 
ano  fpaltc  of  Dim  to  al  them  that  loofeeD 
fo:  rcocmptionm||i}icrufalem. 

39  3ttiD  ibhcn  they  haD  per fomuD  all 
things  acco2Diug  to  the  Hamc  of  the 
fLojD ,  they  returnee  into  c&alilee,  to 
their  olbnc  ntic  j&tt&xztt). 

40  3tnDthcthilDgrcib ,  anD  VbarcD 
arong  tn  fpint  fillcD  iDith  ttufcDomc, 
anD  the  grate  of  <5od  lbas  bpon  him. 

41  iiotthts  parents  ibent  to  ftierti; 
falcm  *  cucry  ycerc,  at  the  featt  of  the 
paiTcoucr. 

4z3uiDttthcnhctt)asttticlitcyccrcs 
olD,  they  lbcnt  lip  to  i)icrufalcm,  after 
the  cu'ttomc  of  the  featt. 

43  3nDibhcnthcyhaD  fulfillcD  the 
Daycs,  asthcyrcturneD,thc  chtlDCJC' 
fus  tatitD  behmD  m  ifnerufaiem,  anD 
■Jofcph  anD  his  mother  itucib  not  of  it. 

44  25utthey  uippofmghim  to  haue 
bene  tn  the  tompany.ftcnt  a  Dales  iour? 
ncy,anD  they  fought  him  among  their 
Hmfcfolltc  anD  acquaintance. 

45  3lnD  Vbbcn  they  fouuD  him  not, 
they  turncD  baclte  agauic  to  $ierufa< 
lent,  fcefting  him. 

46  3lnD  it  tame  to  paffc,  that  after 
thicc  Dates  they  fouuD  him  tn  the  %t\\v- 
plcfittitigm  the  miDtt  of  thcS>octours, 
both  hearing  them,  anD  afamg  them 
qucttions. 

47  3tnD  all  that  hcarb  him  iberc  a- 
ttontfhcD at  his bnDcrftatiDtttg, anDan- 
fwcres. 

4$  3ltiD  lbhen  they faiDc  him ,  they 
tber  c  amascD :  anD  his  mother  faiD  \m- 
to  him ,  S>onnc,  Vbhy  haft  thou  thus 
Dealt  ibith  bs  *  BeholD,  thy  father  anD 
3  haue  fought  thecfojrounng. 

49  3liiD  he  faiD  bnto  thtm,ftoib  is  it 
that  ye  fought  me;  natft  ycenotthafj 
muft  bee  about  my  fathers  buRncttc? 

50  3mDthcybnDcrftooD  not  tljc  fay- 
ing lbhuh  he  fpaltc  bnto  them. 

51  3(nDhc  lbcnt  Dolbncibith  them, 
anD  tame  to  jftasarcth ,  anD  \bas  fub- 
icct  bnto  them :  lout  his  mother  bept 
all  thtfc  layings  in  her  heart. 

51  3liiD  3)cfus  increafcD  in  lbifeDom 
anD |i nature ,  anD  in  fauoittibitb  ©oD 
anD  man. 

CHAP.    III. 

1   The  preaching  anJbjpciliiieot  Iolin:  15  His 


ijciiealogie 


teltimonieofChrift.  loHcrodc  iniptifoneili 
John.  2 1  Chnft  bapiized,recc iuetli  ceftiniony 
from  heauen.  13  The  age,  and 
of  Chrilt,  from  lofeph  vpwards 

"  iDrb  m  the  fifteenth  ycerc 

^NhIS  Ccfar,  0ontius  puate  be" 
^#*k!  l»ns<5oucrnoucof3luDea, 
^e^il  ejl)croDe  being  Xctrarth 
of  ©alilee,  anD  his  bjothcr  philips 
trarth  of  3Irurca,  anD  of  the  region  of 
Xratbonitis ,  anD  fLyfamas  the  Xe- 
trarth  of  Abilene, 

z  3innas  anD  Cataphas  being  the 
high  pnttts,  the  ibo2D  of  0od  tame  bu= 
to  3John  the  fonnc  of  zatharias.tn  tljc 
lbtiDcrncflc. 

3  *  3luD  he  tame  into  all  the  tountrey 
about  3lo2Dane,pjcaching  the  baptifme 
of  repentance,  foj  the  rcmtffto  of  finncs, 

4  3isitislb2ittcninthcbooUof  the 
ttwDs  of  Cfaias  the  pzophct,  faying, 
*£hcboytcofonccryuigmthelbilDer' 
neffe,  p2cparepctfjc  iDay  of  the  JL02D, 
matte  his  paths  ttratghf. 

5  Cucry  bailey  fhall  be  filleD,  anD c? 
uery  mountaine  anD  hill  fhaibe  brought 
loVb ,  anD  the  trooucD  fhall  bee  maDc 
ttratght ,  anD  tljc  rough  ibaycs  (hall  be 
maDcfmooth. 

6  3lnD  all  fltfl)  Ojai  fee  tljc  faluation 
ofd5oD. 

7  Xhcn  fatD  Ijcc  to  the  multttuDe 
tijat  came  font)  to  bee  baptwDof  htm, 
"jD  generation  of  bipcrs,  tbho  hath 
lDarneD  you  to  flee  from  tlje  lb2atlj  to 

COItlCf 

8  BjingfoJth  therfozc  fruits  11  lbo:^ 
thy  of  repentance,  anD  begm  not  to  fay 
iDithtn  your  felucs,  tec  hauc^lbjaham 
to  ourfathcr :  5F02  5  fay  bnto  youahat 
(Pod  ts  able  of  thefe  ttones  to  raifc  bp 
cljaD2cn  bnto  3lb2aham. 

9  ^nD  notb  alfo  the  arc  is  laiD  bnto 
the  root  of  the  trees :  Cucry  tree  there? 
foje  ibhuh  tytngeth  not  fbo2th  gooD 
frutt^ishcUJcnDolbne^tiD  can  into  tljc 
fire. 

10  3fnD  the  people  afhcDljim,faymg, 
nahatOjaiiibcDoethcn? 

11  $catinucrcth,anD  faith  bnto  them, 
*$?c  that  hath  tlbo  toats,let  him  impart 
to  htm  thathatb  none,  anD  Ijc  tljat  Ijatlj 
mtat.lct  him  Doe  liKelDife. 

it  Xhen  came  alfo  publicanestobc 
bapti^cD ,  ano  faiD  bnto  him ,  t^ancr, 
ibhatajaiiibcDoc; 

13  3lnDhcfaiD  Dnto  them ,  €ract  no 
mojetljentljatlbhithisappomteDyou. 

i-t.  ?inD 


•Mn.3.1. 


'Efii.40.3 


'M«.3.7. 


|!  Or,  mtel 
for. 


i.ioh.3.17. 


Orvt!ltm- 
ance, 

Or.wfuf. 
tencc. 

Or,rejfa- 
ntdor  deba- 
ted. 


Mat. 3.  II 


baptifme.  Chrift         Chap.ii].  hisgcneal 


cneaiogie- 


•Mat.14. 


•  Mat.j 

'3. 


14-  3nD  the  foulDicrs  UKcitoife  W 

'  manDcD  of  tiim,  facing,  3no  mhat  fbau 

\\or,futn.  xoi ooe?3ltU)lK faro  unto them,  ||2>oe 

tnolence  to  no  man ,  neither  accufe  any 

falfclp,?  be  content  umhvour  1 1  mages. 

15  3mD  as  the  people  mere  Umejrpec- 
tattoo  ,  anD  all  men  ||  nuifeD  in  their 
hearts  of  3John ,  whether  he  mere  the 
ChJittoznot: 

i6  giohn  anfroercD  ,  facing  tonto 
them  all ,  *  35  tnustut  baptise  you  Untlj 
mater ,  but  one  imglincc  then  31  com- 
meth.thc  latchct  oftbljofc  flioocs^  am 
not ibouhy to  Dnioofc ,  l)c  fljall  baptise 
youlDtth  the  holy  Ghoft,  anD  mith  fire. 

17  nahofc  fanne  is  m  Ins  DanD  >  anD 
hemillthojomiy  purge  his  floo?e,  anD 
mm  gather  the  wheat  into  his  garner, 
but  the  chaffc  he  mill  burnt  lbtth  fire 
Duqucnchcablc. 

is  3nD  many  other  things  in  his  tf.-- 
ho;tation  p:cachcD  he  unto  the  people. 

19  *26ut^croDethcXctrarcfj  being 
repjooueD  by  him  fox  DcroDias  his  bjo- 
ther  philips  mtfe ,  anDfojtalltficcuils 
mhich  l?croDel)aD  Done, 

io  3tDDeD  yet  this  aboue  all,  that  he 
n)utbp3loh«i"P<!tfon. 

21  jftotb  mhen  au  the  people  tbcre 
bapmeD,*  anDtteametopaflc  that  git* 
fus  alfo  being  bapti5eD,anD  p?aymg,thc 
heaueniDasopcneD: 

n  3nDtbel)oly<l5f)ouDcfcenDcDitt 
a  boDilv  fhapc  bite  a  SDouebponbim, 
anD  a  tootcc  came  frombcaucn ,  mhicl) 
faiD ,  Xbou  art  my  bcloucD  fonne,  m 
thcc3IamtbcllplcafcD. 

13  3lnD  jflcfus  btmfclfc  began  to  be 
about  thirty  yccrcs  of  age ,  being  (as 
mas  fuppofcD)  the  fonne  of  3Jofeph, 

ttJhiCh  U)aS  the  fonne  Ofi^Clt, 

14.  nahich  mas  the  fonne  of  ©attftat, 
tbfjtch  mas  the  fonne  of  !Lcui,tbhitl)  mas 

the  fonne  offi^ClCrjt ,  IDhlth  VO&S  the  fonne 

of  3f  anna,  lbbicb  mas  the  fonne  of  3Jo> 
Ceph, 

15    !©hith  maS  the  fonne  of  fl3attTja= 

trnas ,  mbirb  mas  the  fonne  of  2nios, 
mhich  mas  the  fonne  of  0mm ,  mhich 

U)aS  the  fonne  of  £Ht  ,  U)l)lCl)  maS  the 

fonne  of  iBaggc, 

i6  ishich  mas  the  fonne  of  $)aatb, 
mhicl)  mas  the  fonne  of  t©attbatbtas, 
mhich  mas  the  fonne  of  £>cmci,  mhicl) 

IDaS  the  fonne  of^Ofcpl) ,  IDljlCl)  m3S  the 
fonne  Of  gillDa, 

17  iiDhtch  mas  the  fonne  ofUoauna, 
mhtd)  mas  the  fonne  of  Bhcfa ,  mhich 
Vbas  the  fonne  of  sojobabel,  mhich  mas 


the  fonne  of  S>alatlj)lCl ,  \X)l)irl)  IDaS  the 
fonne  Of /5cri, 

28  ieh'.Ch  maS  the  fonne  of  s^eiclji, 

mhich  mas  the  fonne  of  ^ddi,  mhich 
mas  the  fonne  ofCofam,  mhich  mas  the 

fonne  Of  CltUODani,  \\)l)\t\)  0)88  the  fonne 

ofcr, 

19  BBhlCl)  maS  the  fonne  of  ^OfC, 

mijich  mas  the  fonne  of  €  liefer ,  iDhtth 

maS  the  fonne  of  3J0jim  ,  U)bStl)  maS  the 
fonne  of  tTBnttljflt,  IbtjlCl)  maS  the  fonne  of 

JLeut, 

30  naijicl)  mas  the  fonne  of  -Simeon 
mhicl)  mas  the  fonne  of  3Juoa ,  mbith 

maS  the  fonne  Of  Jofcpl),  UmiCl)  )Da5  the 
fonne  of  ^lOnatl ,  U)l)lCl)  maS  the  (onne  of 

cuaUim, 

31  nahtel)  mas  the  fonne  of  Q3elea, 
mhich  mas  the  fonne  of  ii}3cnam ,  whirl) 
mas  the  fonne  of$)attatba,  mhich  mas 

the  fonne  Of  J15at!)an,U)bltl)  IMS  the  fonne 

ofSPautD, 
31  mahichmasthe  fonne  of gfcffc.mijich 

WaS  the  fonne  of  ©bCD  ,  U»l)lCl)  maS  the 
fonne  of  B005  ,  Wl)lCl)  WaS  the  fo™>e  of 

•Salmon ,  wbtcf)  mas  the  fonne  of  jRa= 
laffon, 

33  nalucl)  mas  the  fonne  of  ^mma- 
1  Dab  ,  which  mas  the  fonne  of  :3tam, 
■  mhich  mas  the  fonne  of€from ,  which 
;  mas  the  fonne  of  i&bareSjibbicl)  mas  the 

fonne  Of  3(UDa, 

34   D9hlCl)  maS  the  fonne  of  JaCOb, 

mhicl)  mas  the  fonne  of  5Ffaac ,  ttjluclj 
mas  the  fonne  of  ^bzaham,  mijicrj  mas 

!  the  fonne  of  XtyHW,  mljltl)  maS  the  fonm 

ofil5act)o?, 

35  nahicl)  mas  the  fonne  of  5>aruch, 
I  mhich  mas  the  fonne  of  3Ragau ,  mhich 

VUa5  the  fonne  of  tfmalcg,  IbhlCl)  maS  rh. 
fonne  Of  ^CbCt ,  Vanity  VOte  the  fonne  of 

£>aia, 

36  B0l)iCh  maS  the  fonne  of  Catnan 

mhicl)  mas  the  fonne  of.Slrplw aD,mi)ich 
tbas  the  fonncof  S>em,  mrjicl)mas  the 

fonne  Of /BOC  ,  lDhlCl)  maS  the  fonne  of 

HamecD, 

37  D0l)icl)VbaS  the  fonne  of  ©athU- 

faia ,  mhith  mas  the  fonne  of  cnoch, 
mhich iDas  the  fonne  of  giarcD ,  mhicD 
mas  the  fonne  of  fi0aieitei ,  mhich  mas 
the  fonne  of  Cainan, 

38  DDDiCl)  maS  the  fonne  Of  €UOS, 

mhicl)  mas  the  fonne  of  5>ttl) ,  mhich 
mas  the  fonne  of  ^oam ,  mhitijmasthe 

fonne  Of  (50D. 

CHAP.  MIL 

1    The  temptation  and  failing  otChrift:  ij  He 


is  tempted,       SJLuke.  Hepreacheth. 


downetc- 
fortmt. 


ouercommeth  the  deuill :  14  Beginneth  to 
preach:  16  The  people  ofNazareth  admire 
his  gr.itious words:  35  he  cureth  one  pol- 
fefledof  adeuill,  38  Peters  mother  in  law, 
40  anddmcrsothei  fickc  perfons.  41  The 
deuils  acknowledge  Chril>,  and  are  reproued 
for  it:    4;   he  preacheth  through  the  cities. 

ii2D  *3icrus  being  full  of 
tljcfioiy<3fio(t,rcturncb 
from  3JojDsnc ,  anb  lbas 
icd  by  tfic  fpint  into  tfie 
iDUDcrncfTt, 
x  isctng  fourtic  Daves  temptcb  of 
tficbciul,  anD  m  tfiofebayes  fie  bib  cat 
nothing:  anb  lDljctt  they  iberc  enbcb, 
fie  after lbatbfiungreb. 

j  anb  tfie  bcml  fame  bnto  fiim ,  3Jf 
tfiott  be  tfic  Sonne  of  00b ,  commanb 
tins  ftonc  that  it  be  inabe  bjcab. 

4  anb  3Jcfusanfrocreb  fiim,  fay* 
mg,3Jt  is  umttcn ,  tfiat  man  fl)allnot 
lute  by  tycab  alone,  butbycuerylbo;b 
of  ©ob. 

<,  anbtficbcuiltamng  film bp  Into 
anfiigfimountamc ,  tficibcb  bnto  fiim 
alltfielungbomcsoftficlbozioinamo; 
mentoftune. 

6  anb  tfic  bctul  fatb  bnto  film ,  3111 
tfiis  poibcr  Unll  31  giuc  tficc ,  anb  tfie 
glojy  of  tfiemj  fcu  that  is  bcliuereb  bnto 
me,?toibhomfocucc3JUjill,31giucit. 

7  ^ftfoontficrefojcibiltilUwflnp 
me,aillfialbc  thine, 

8  anb  31cfus  anfrocrcb  anb  falb  bn- 
to fiun,C3ct  tfiec  befimbe  mcSatatr.foj 
itis  lbnttcn,  Xfiott  ffiatt  uwlfiip  tfie 
Hojbtfiy  ©00,  anb  fiim  oncly  tfialt 
tboufernc. 

9  ^nb  hce  b:ougfit  film  to  tyicrufa* 
lent,  anb  fct  film  on  a  piuacie  of  the 
Xemple.anb  faib  bnto  fiim,3Jf  tfiou  be 
tficSonncofGobjCafttbyfelfcboibnc 
ftomfiente. 

to  jf  o j  it  is  lbnttcn ,  l^e  (ball  guie  fiis 
angels  charge  oucrtficctouccpe  tficc. 

1 1  anb  m  tficic  fianbes  tficy  (fiali 
bcarc  tficc  bp.lclt  atany  timctfioubafl) 
tfiy  foot  agamfta  ftonc. 

ii  anD3lcfusanfnicring,  faibbnto 
Dim,  3Jt  isfaio ,  Xhou  (bait  not  tempt 
tbclLoibtbycsoo. 

13  anbUibcntbcbciiil  fiabcnbeball 
tfic  temptation,  Ijccbcparteb  from  fiim 
fozafcafon. 

i+  <r  anb  3Jcfus  rcturncb  in  tfic 
poibcr  of  the  Spirit  into  Oalilcc ,  ano 
there  Went  out  a  fame  of  fiim  through 
all  the  region  ronnoabout. 

J5  anb  ficc  taught  in  tficic  Synfc 


gogncs,  being  glonficb  of  ail. 

i6  c  anb  ficc  tame  to  *  jftasarctfi, 
ibfierc  fie  fiab  bene  toougfit  bp ,  anb  as 
fiis  cuftomc  lbas,  fie  ibent  into  tfie  Sy= 
nagoguc  on  tfie  Sabbatfi  bay ,  anb 
ftoobbpfojtorcabe. 

17  anb  tficte  lbas  bcliuereb  bnto 
film  tfie  boouc  of  tfic  p:opHrt  t  faias, 
anb  ibfien  fie  fiab  openeb  tfic  26oonc,fic 
founb  tfic  place  ibfierc  tt  lbas  ttwttcn, 

18  *Xfie  Spirit  oftficlLojb  is  bpon 
mee,  becaufe  fiee  fiatfianointcbmec,to 
mcatfi  tfic  C5ofpcl  to  tfic  poojc,  fie  fiatfi 
fent  mcc  to  ficale  the  b:ol»enficartcb,to 
pzeacfibcliucrance  to  tfic  capttues, anb 
recoueringof  figfit  to  tfiebmibe,  tofrt 
at  libcrtic  tfitm  tfiat  arc  bmifcb, 

19  Xo  pjcacfi  tfie  acceptable  ycerc  of 
tficJLojb. 

20  anb  fie  rtofeb  tfie  boofec,  anb  ficc 
ganelt  agatnc  to  tficuunifter,  anb  fate 
bourne :  anb  tfie  eyes  of  all  tfiem  tfiat 
iberc  m  tfie  Synagogue  tberc  fallen cd 
on  film. 

21  anbficc  began  to  fay  bnto  tfiem, 
Xblsbay  ts  tfiis  Scripture  fulfilleb  in 
yourearcs. 

22  anb  all  bare  fiim  ibitncffc ,  anb 
lbonbcrcb  at  tfic  gracious  ibojbcs, 
lbfiicfi  pjoceebcb  out  of  fiis  moutfi.anb 
tficy  faib,3Js  not  tfiis  3lofcpfis  fonnc i 

2j  anbficc  faibbnto  tfiem, jacdbill 
furcly  fay  bnto  mc  tfitspjoucrbe,  0fiy- 
fition,  ficalcrfiy  fclfc:  BDfiatfoeucclbce 
fiauc  ficarbbonc  in  £apcrnaum,boe  afc 
foficcemtfiytountrcy. 

24  anbfieefalb,  Merely  31  fay  bnto 
you,  no  *  i&opftct  is  acceptcb  in  fiis 
olbnceountrcy. 

25  25ut3I tcllyon ofatructfi,*many 
Unboibcs  mere  in  3Ifracl  in  tficbayes 
of  ciias,  U)fien  tfic  ficaucn  lbas  Ifiut 
bp  tfi2cc  ycrcs  anb  fire  monetfis :  U)ficn 
great  famine  lbas  tn.-onghout  all  tfie 
lanb: 

26  2Sut  bnto  none  of  tfiem  lbas  & 
liasfetu.faucbntoSarcptaacitieofSi^ 
bon.bntoaibomantfiatibasaibtboib. 

27  *  anb  many  lepers  lbcrc  in  3Jf- 
raclm  tfic  time  of  €li?cus  tfic  p;opfict: 
anb  none  of  tfiem  lbasclcanfcb,  failing 
/SaamantfieSynan. 

28  anb  all  tficy  m  tfic  Synagogue, 
lbficntficyficatbtficrctfiingSjlbercnl* 
icbibltfiityatfi, 

29  anb  rofc  bp.anb  tfijuff  fiim  out  of 
tfic  citic,?  leb  fiim  bnto  tfic  ||b;olb  of  the 
fiill(ibficreontficirtityU)asbuilt)tfiat 
tfiq.'  migfit  caQ  fiim  boibnc  ficablong. 
30  25ut 


"Matr.  15. 
54- 


'Efayii.i 


*Matth.I3. 
57- 

*  I.King 
17.?. 


*:.King.j. 
14. 


j  Or, edit. 


Peucr  healed.        Chap.v.  Fifliersofmen. 


*Mat.7.ip. 
"Mjr.t.zj 

\\Or,  ska}. 


♦Mlt.8.14 


*M«.i  J4 


chat  they 
fytewtiimto 
it  Chnft. 


30  26utDe  patting  tDojotbtljemibs 
oftbcm,tbcntljistbay: 

31  3lnb  came  boibue  to  Capernaum, 
a  titic  of  ©able ,  anb  taugbt  tljcm  on 
tljcSabbatDDapes. 

3z  Znn  tDey  tbete  afionmjcb  at  Dis 
Doctrine :  *  fo?  Dis  tbo;tDe  ibas  ibttD 
potber. 

33  C*3nbintbcSynagogucfDete 
ibas  a  man  tbljicD  !jao  a  fptttt  of  an  ton* 
rtcane  Deuill,  anD  ecycD  out  tbitlj  a  Ioub 
boiee, 

34  taping,  II ?Lctbs alone , VbDat 
DaucibeetobocibitljtDcc,  tl)ou3kfus 
of  iiia^arctl)  *  art  tDou  come  to  befttoy 
bs<  3  fenoib  tDee  lbljo  tljou  art,  tDc 
^oiyjDncof  ©ob. 

35  3nD  35cfus  tebubeb  Dim ,  Taping, 
Qolbe  tljy  peace,  anb  come  out  of  Dim. 
Znn  tbDcn  tljc  bcuill  Dab  tbjoiben  Dim 
m  tDc  mibbes,  Dee  tame  out  of  Dim,  anD 
Duct  Dim  not. 

36  ^nb  tljev  tbcte  all  amaseb,  anb 
fpabe  among  tDcmfelues,raymg,i©Dat 
atbojb  is  tDis*  fojibitDautljonttcanb 
potber  Dec  ccmmaunbctDtDcbnclcane 
fpittts,  anb  tljcy  come  out. 

37  3uio  tl)c  fame  of  Dim  ibcnt  out 
into  euety  place  of  tlje  countteycouno 
about. 

38  <C*3mbDcarofcoutoftDeSyna' 
goguc,anbcutrcbmto  Simonsljotifc : 
anb  Simons  unties  motDct ibas  taben 
ibitb  a  great  fcucr ,  anb  tDey  befougDt 
DimfozDer. 

39  2mblje  ftoob  oucrDecanbrebu- 
neb  tDc  fcuer ,  ejtt  leftDer.  2lnb  inline- 
Diatly  die  arofc ,  9  mimttrcD  bnto  tljcm. 

40  C  /l5otb  lbljcn  tDe  Sunnc  ibas 
fctting,  all  tDev  tljat  Dab  any  fic&cibitlj 
biucrs  bifcafes ,  tyougljt  tDcm  bnto 
Dim:  ano  Dec  laibDtsDanbcson  euery 
one  oftDcm,  anb  Dcalcb  tDcm. 

41  *^nb  bctuis  alfo  came  out  of  ma* 
ny,  crying  out ,  anb  faring,  XDon  art 
CDnfttDc  Pontic  of  <3ob.  Stub  Decree 
buhtng  tDcm,  fuffercb  tDcm  not  ||  to 
fpeabe :  fo?  tljcy  bnclbc  tljat  Dec  ibas 
CDntt.  ,  w 

41  anb  tbDcn  it  ibas  bap,  Dc  bepar- 
tcb ,  anb  tbent  into  a  Defect  place :  anb 
tlie  people  fougDt  Dim ,  anb  came  bnto 
Dim,anbttayebDun,  tljatDcfljoulb  not 
Depart  from  tDcm. 

43  anb Dec  faib  bnto  tDem,  3 mutt 
pjcacD  tDc  bmgbomc  of  <5ob  to  otljer 
citicsaifo :  fouDcrcfojc  am3Jfcnt. 

44  atnblicc  pzcacDcD  intljcSyna; 
gogucsofoalilc. 


CHAP.   V. 

Chrifl  teacheth  the  people  out  of  Peters  fhip 
4  In  a  miraculous  taking  of  fifheSjfheweth 
how  he  wil  make  him  and  his  partners  fifhers 
or  men:  n  Clcanfeth  the  leper:  16  Pray- 
ediinthewilderneiie:  18  Healeth  onefickc 
ofthepalfie:  17  Calleth Matthew  tliePub- 
licane:  19  Eateth  with  finners,  asbeingthe 
Phyfician  of  foules:  54  Foretclleth  the  fa- 
ftingsand  afflictions  of  the  Apoftles  after  his 
afcenfion  :  36  And  likeneth  taint  hearted 
and  weake  difciples,  to  olde  bottels  and 

il2D*tt  came  to  paAc,  tDat 

as  the  people  piJcaflcD  bp- 

on  Dim  to  Ijcarc  tljc  ttwb 

of  C5od  ,  Dec  ftooD  by  tlje 

labcof<5cncfarctD> 

z  3tnb  latbe  tlbo  (Dips  ftanbmg  by 

tljc  labc :  but  tljc  fiujermen  lberegonc 

out  of  tljcm,  anb  tbere  ibafljmg  tljcir 

nets. 

3  2inb  Dc  cntrcb  into  one  of  tDc  flnps, 
ibljicDibas  Simons,  anbpjaycbbim, 
tDat  Dc  iboulb  tDmtt  out  a  little  from 
tDc  lanbranb  Dc  fate  bottmc,aub  taugDt 
tljc  people  out  of  tljc  flnp. 

4  Jl5oiblDDenDc  Dab  left  fpcaUing, 
IjefaiD  bnto  Simon ,  flanclj  out  into 
tbcbcepcanblctbotbnc  your  nets  fo? 
aojaugDt. 

5  3uid  Simon  anfibering,faib  bnto 
Dun ,  £0aftet ,  tbec  Dauc  totlcbali  tDc 
nigDt, anD  Dauc  tafecn notlnng :  ncuct- 
tDclcffeat  tljv  ibo^D  31  lbill  let  boibnc 
tljc  net. 

6  3tnb  tbDcn  tljep  Dab  tljis  bone, 
tljcv  mclofcb  a  gceat  multuubc  of  tV 
(Ijcs.anbtljcit  nctb;abc: 

7  3lub  tDep  becbcncD  bnto  tDeir 
partncrs,TbDicDtbcccmtDeotljcrfl)ip, 
tliat  tDev  (l)oulb  come  anb  Delpc  tDcm. 
3Uib  tljcv  came ,  f  fillcb  botlj  tljc  fljips, 
fo  tDat  tDev  began  to  finUc. 

8  nsljcii  Simon  peter  fatb  it,  Dcfcll 
Doibncat3lefusUnccs,favirfg,  2Dcpart 
from  mc ,  fo?  3  am  a  unfull  man ,  j© 
JL02D. 

9  jrojDctbasaaonin)eb,anbaltljat 
tbcrcibitDDim,attDcb?augDtoftDcn 
(Dcs  tbljiclj  tDev  Dab  taben. 

io  3lub  To  ibas  alfo  panics ,  anb 
■JoDntDcfouncs  of  zebebec ,  ibbitD 
Ibcrc partners lbitD Simon.  3lnb3IC' 
fusfaib  bnto  Simon,  irearc  not,from 
IjencefoitD  tDou  (lialt  catcD  men. 

ii  ^nbtbljcutDc}' Dab  b;ougljt  tDeir 
(Dips 


•Mat.  4.18. 


|Ak 


•MmS.i. 


leper  cleanled.         S.Luke.         Matthew  called. 


Mat.?.!. 


(liips  to  lanb,  djcy  forfoonc  all,  anb  fol- 
io web  him. 

iz  c*3lnti»£  tatnc  to  paffe,tt>t)en  he 
wasinaecrtainccitie,bcholbamanfull 
of  lep2ofic :  Who  feeing  "Jefus ,  fell  on 
his  face,?  befought  him,  faying,  fLorb, 
if  tliou  Wilt,  tDon  canft  inane  me  tleanc. 

i3:anbhcputfo2thhishanb,atibtou= 
chebhimjaytng^  Wii :  be  tljou  tleanc. 
3inb  unmcbiatly  the  leprofic  beparteb 
from  him. 

14  3lnb  hec  tljargcD  Dim  to  tell  no 
man:  bin,  <5oc,  anb  (hcWcthyrclfcto 
the^ncft,  anb  offer  for  thy  denting,  ac- 
co2bingas^ofcstoinmanbcb,fo?atC' 
mmonicimtothcm. 

15  But  fo  mud)  tDe more  went there 
a  fame  abroab  of  Dim,  anb  great  muttfc 
tubes  came  together  to  hcarc,  anb  to  be 
heaieb  by  Dim  of  tl)cir  infirmities. 

16  C  3nb  he  WtthbrcW  htmfclfc  into 
the  Wilbcrucffe,  anb  pray  eb. 

17  3nb  it  tame  to  paffc  on  a  tcrtainc 
bay,  as  hec  was  teaching,  dwt  there 
mere  0hanfccs  anb  ©odours  of  the 
?Law  fitting  by ,  Which  were  tome  out 
of  eucry  townc  of  <5altlcc,anb3Jubea, 
anb  tytcrufalcm :  anb  ri)e  power  of  the 
fLorbWas  prefencto  hcalcthcm. 

18  <[*2inbbcholb,mcn  brought  in  a 
b eb  a  man  Which  was  fatten  With  a  pafc 
fie :  anb  they  fought  mcancs  to  bring 
him  m.  anb  to  lay  him  before  him. 

19  3nb  When  d)cy  coulb  not  finb  by 
What  way  they  imght  bung  htm  in,  to- 
mtit of  the  multitubc,  they  Went  bpon 
the  houfctop,{tIcthimbownc  through 
thcnimg  Withhiscouch,  into  themibft 
bcfojcDcfus. 

io  anowhenhefaw  their  faith  ,hec 
fiiibbntohim,  $)an,thy  fmncsarcfo^ 
giucnthcc. 

1 1  3lnb  the  Scribes  anb  the  $hari* 
fees  began  to  rcafon ,  faying ,  naho  is 
this  which  fpraucth  blafphemies 
naho  can  forgiuc  finncs,  but  €>ob  a= 
lone; 

11  rsutwhcn^cfuspcrcctucb  their 
thoughts,  he  anfrucrmg ,  faibc  bnto 
them,  nDhat  rcafon  ye  myour  hearts? 

15  DDhcthcr  is  caficr  to  fay ,  Xhy 
finnesbcforgiucn  thec:  02  to  fay,  £ifc 
bpanbWalUc? 

14  i3ut  that  ye  mayluiow  that  the 
S>onnc  of  man  had)  power  bpon  card) 
to  fozguic  finncs  (he  faib  bnto  thcfichc 
of  the  paific)  3  fay  bnto  thee ,  3tru"c, 
anb  t auc  bp  thy  couth  ,anb  go  into  djmc 
houfc. 


15  anb  unmcbiatly  he  rofc  bp before 
tljcm,  anb  tooftc  bp  that  Whereon  hec 
lay,  anb  beparteb  to  his  owne  houfe, 
glorifying  €»ob. 

16  3iub  they  Were  all  ama?eb,  anb 
they  glorificb  ©ob,  anb  were  fillcb  Wid) 
fcarc ,  faying,  j@ee  hauc  feene  ftrangc 
things  to  bay. 

17  <C  *  3lnb  after  thefe  things  hce 
Went  foo2th ,  anb  fame  a  0ubhcane, 
namcb  JUut,  fitting  at  d)e  rcceit  of 
tuftomc:  anb  hce  faib  bnto  him ,  fol- 
low me. 

18  3inb  he  left  all,  rofc  bp ,  anb  fol* 
to  Web  him, 

19  3lnb  ?Lcui  mabc  him  a  great 
feaft  in  his  oWnc  houfc :  anb  there 
lbas  a  great  company  of  ^nblitanes, 
anb  of  others  that  fate  boibnc  With 
them. 

jo  26nt  their  Scribes  anb  0haru"ccs 
murmurcb  againft  his  biftiples,faying, 
i©hy  bo  e  y  e  catc  anb  brinae  with  publt 
canes  anb  tinners; 

31  2nb  3Jcfus  anfajcring,  faib  bnto 
them,  Xhcy  that  arc  whole  nccb  not  a 
phyfirian :  but  they  that  arc  ficae. 

31  3  came  not  to  tall  the  righteous , 
but  tinners  to  repentantc. 

33  C3nbthcyfatbrmtohim,*!©hy 
boc  the  bifriplcs  of  3John  faft  often,  anb 
mabc  prayers,  anb  liuclbife  the  bifri* 
pics  of  dje  |&hanucs:  but  thine  catanb 
bnnfte* 

3+  3mb  he  faib  bnto  them ,  Can  y  ce 
mabc  the  thilbrcn  of  the  25ribe-chanv 
bcr  faft,  while  the  asribcgromc  is  With 
d)em* 

35  25uttr)ebaycs  Will  come,  when 
the  ffiribegcome  fhall  bee  taficn  away 
from  them,  anb  ttjen  fbail  they  raft  in 
thofe  bayes. 

36  C3utbhefpaReaUbaparaolcbn< 
to  them,  /i2o  man  putted)  a  piece  of  a 
newe  garment  bpon  an  olbe :  if  other 
Wife ,  then  bod)  d)c  ncWe  mascd)  a 
rent,  anb  the  piece  that  was  taken  out 
of  the  new,  agreed)  not  With  the  olbe. 

37  3!nb  no  man  putted)  new  Wine 
into  olb  bottles :  clfe  the  new  Wine  Will 
burftthebottlcs,anbbcfpillcb,anbthe 
bottles  wail  pend). 

38  Z8ut  ncWe  Wine  muft  be  put  in- 
to newe  bottles,  anb  both  arc  prefer 
ucb. 

39  Mo  man  aifo  hauing  b2unftc  olbe 
Wine,  flraightway  befir ctlj  new :  for  he 
raith.Xhcolbtsbcttcr. 

CHAP 


•Mit.p.j). 


Mat  9.14. 


[OftheSabbath.         Chap.vj.       Who  arc  blefled- 


•Mukei: 


•Man  2. 
9- 


CHAP.    VI. 

Chrifl  rcproueth  the  Phan/es  blmdneflc  a- 
bout  the  obferuation  oi  the  Sabbath  ,  by 
Scripture,  rcalon,  and  miracle:  15  Choo- 
feth  twelue  Apoftles :  17  Healeththedif- 
eafed:  10  Preacheth  to  his  dilciplcs  before 
thepeopleof  blefsings, and  curies :  17  How 
wemuft  loue  out  enemies  :  46  Andioyne 
the  obedience  ofgoodworkes,  to  the  hea- 
ring of  the  word  :  leaft  in  the  euill  day  of 
temptation  ,  we  fall  like  an  houfe  built  vpon 
the  face  of  the  earth.without  any  foundation. 

* /12b  ft  tame  to  palTe  on  the 
feconb  Sabbath  after  the 
fitu\tbathcrbcnttbo;oib 
the  come  ficibs :  ana  bis 
bifciplesplncfteb  the  cares 

of  tome,  anb  bib  catc,  tubbing  them  in 

their  banbs. 
z  Znn  ccrtainc  of  tfjc  0barifccs 

lM>bntotbcm,t0hpbocpeetbatibhtcb 

is  not  laibfull  to  Doe  onthe  Sabbath 

bapes* 

3  3nb  3fefus  anftocrfng  tbem, 
faib,$auepcenot  rcab  fo  much  as  this 
rbhat3>auibbib,ibhenbimfelfctt)asan 
butigteb ,  anb  tbep  rbbicb  ibcce  XbltD 
him : 

4  $otb  he  tbent  into  the  houfe  of 
©ob ,  anb  bib  tafte  anb  catc  the  Shcib 
b;cab,  anb  gauc  alfo  to  them  that  tticrc 
\bith  bim,ibbtcb  itisnot  laMilto  cate 
but  fo?  the  tenctts  alone  i 

5  3nb  he  tub  bnto  them,  "Chat  the 
fonnc  of  man  is  |Lo;b  alfo  of  tlK 
Sabbath. 

6  *  anb  it  came  to  pallc  alfo  on  an* 
other  Sabbath,  that  be  entreb  into  ttjc 
Spnagoguc ,  anb  taught :  anb  there 
tbas  a  man  tbhofe  right  hanb  tbas  Vou 
tbeccb. 

7  3lnb  the  Scribes  anb  pbarifecs 
lbatchcbhtm,  ibbctberhetttouiobcaic 
on  the  Sabbath  bap :  that  the?  might 
finb  an  actufation  agamQ  him. 

s  asut  he  unelb  their  thought  s,anb 
faib  to  the  man  tbbicb  hab  the  ttnthcreb 
hanb ,  Htfebp ,  anb  ftanb  foouh  in  the 
mios.  3nobcarofc,attDftoobfoo;th. 

9  Xhenfaib  3Jefus  Unto  them ,  3J 
VbiU  af  Kcpou  one  thing ,  3s  tt  laibfull 
ontbc  Sabbath  bapes  to  oocgoob,  o; 
to  boe  euill  i  to  faue  life,  02  to  beftcop  it  i 

10  %tfo  loosing  rounb  about  bpon 
themall,bcfaiDbntotbcman,Strcteb 
foo;tb  tbp  hanb.  3lnb  he  bib  fo :  anb  his 
hanb  rbas  rcfto;cb  whole  as  the  other. 

11  3Inb  tbep  mere  fillcb  lbith  mab- 


nctTcanb  tommuncb  oueibitlj  another 
ibbat  tbep  might  boe  to  Jems. 

11  3nb  it  tame  to  pafTc  in  tljofc 
bapes ,  that  hec  went  out  into  a  mouiv 
tame  to  p;ap,atib  tontmucb  all  night  in 
p;aperto<5ob. 

13  C2lnbtt)benitibasbap,bccallcb 
bnto  him  bisbtfciplcs :  *  anb  of  them  he 
thofc  tibcluc  ■,  ttibom  alfo  hec  nameb 
apoftles: 

14  Simon,  (rbhom  he  alfo  nameb 
&ctcr,)  anb  3lnb;eib  hts  toother  : 
jjamcsano^lohn,  philipanb  25ar- 
tholomeib, 

15  ^attbevb  anb  IChomas,  Barnes 
the  fonnc  of  aiphcus,  anb  Pinion,  cat* 
leo  zeiotcs, 

i6  ^nb3ubas*the  brother  of  Raines, 
anb^ubas3h~cariot,  ibbtch  alto  ibas 
thetraitour. 

17  C  3nb  hec  tame  bourne  tbitb 
them ,  anb  ftoob  tnthepiame ,  anb  the 
company  of  his  bifciplcs,  anb  a  great 
muintube  of  people,  ont  of  all  3Jubca 
anb  l^icrufaiem ,  anb  from  the  Sea 
eoatt  of  Xp;eanb  Sibon,  lbhiehcamc 
tohearehrni,anbtobehcaicbofthcir 
bifcafcs, 

18  TLnn  the?  that  tbere  bereb  tbith 
bntleancfpirits :  anb  the?  tberebeaieb. 

19  aubtbcibboicmumtuDcfourjin 
to  touch  hit ii :  fo  1  there  lbcn t  bertue out 
of  Dun , anb  hcaicb  them  all. 

ao  c^nb  hee  Kfteb  bp  bis  cpes  on 
his  bifciplcs ,  anb  faib ,  *  25lefTeb  be  pee 
pooje :  fo?  pours  is  the  bingbome  of 
(50b. 

ii  Blcflcb  arc  pec  that  hunger  notb: 
fo?  pee  (bail  be  filleb.  BicfTcb  are  pee 
that  rbcepe  novb.fozpce  (hall  laugh. 

zz  2Slcflcb  are  pee  tbhen  men  ujail 
hate  poo,  anb  Vbhouhep  fhail  feparatc 

POU  from  their  company ,flnb  8)31  reload) 

pou,anbtaftout  pour  nameas  euill,  fo; 
the  &onnc  of  mans  fafee. 

13  Kctoiecpeelnthatbap,anbleape 
fo:  iop:fo;  beholb,pout  r elbarb  is  great 
inheaucn  fo;  in  tljelihemancr  bib  their 
fathers  bnto  the  0;opbcts. 

Z4r  *28utiboe  bnto  pou  that  arc 
rich  :fo?  pee  haue  retnucb  pout  confo- 
lation. 

15  *n9oc  bnto  pou  that  are  full  :fo; 
pec  (hail  hunger,  naoc  bnto  pou  that 
laugh  nott) :  fo;  pee  (hall  mourncanb 
ibecpe. 

z6  n9ocbntopoulbhcnallmenfl)ail 
fpcaftc  men  of  pou :  fo;  fo  bib  their  fib 
therstothcfalfc  p;ophcts. 

il  C*23ut 


Mat.  to. 


'Iirdt.i. 


Mit.j.; 


'Amos. 6.1 


■Efii.tf5. 


iRalh  iudgement. 


S.Luk 


e. 


A  good  tree. 


'Matth  5 
44- 


'Matth.;. 

l.Cor.tf. 
7- 


•  Matth.  7. 

12.tob.4- 

16. 


'  Matth.  5 
4<f. 


"  Matth.  5. 

4J- 


'Man.  7.1. 


'Matth. 1 5 
14 

'Matth.io. 

\\OrJhM, 
ftrfttttdM 

l-u  mailer. 

'  Matth,  7. 


27  C  *25ut  3  fa?  bnto  you  lbhich 
Ijear  e,  Houc  your  cnemtcs,Doc  goon  to 
tljem  lbhich  hate  you, 

18  26letfctljemthatcurfcyou,cjp2ay 
fo?  them  mhiclj  Defpitefully  bfc  you. 

29  *  3inD  bnto  Ijtm  that  fnutcth  thee 
on  the  one  djeebe ,  offer  alfo  tljc  other : 
*  anD  him  tfjat  taftctlj  aibay  thy  tloabc, 
f  o;bit)  not  to  take  rliv  coat  alfo. 

30  omc  to  eucry  man  tljat  affect!)  of 
thee ,  anD  of  him  that  taheth  aibay  thy 
gooDs,afhe  them  not  againe. 

j  1  *  %\xb  as  pec  lboulD  that  men 
uJoulDDoctoyou,  Docyccaifotothem 
Ifecibifc. 

31  *ifo?  if  vec  louc  them  lbhich  louc 
you,  lbhat  thanttc  Jjauc  yc  *  foz  tinners 
alfo  louc  thofe  tljat  louc  them. 

33  3nDifyeDocgooDtothcmibhtclj 
00c  gooD  to  you,i©hat  thanUe  Ijaue  ye; 
fo?  tinners alfo  Doc  eucn  the  fame. 

34.  »3lnDifyclcnDtothemoflbhom 
yc  hope  to  rccciue ,  aahat  than&c  Ijaue 
yc*fo?  tinners  alfo  leuD  to  tinners ,to  re* 
cciuc  as  much  againe. 

35  26ut  louc vec  your enemies,  anD 
DoegooD,anDlcnD,hopingf02nothtng 
agamc :  anD  your  rcibarb  (hall  bee 
great,  anD  yc  Ibaibc  thccljUDjen  of  the 
i?ighcft :  fo^  hce  is  BtnDe  unto  the  bn* 
tljanUfuli,anDto  tljecuill. 

36  26c yc therefore nicrcifull,as  y our 
jFatheralfotsmcrcifull. 

37  *3JuDgetiot,anDycfbalinotbcc 
mDgcD :  conDcnmcnot,anD  ye  (hall  not 
be  tonDcmncD :  fo?gme ,  anD  ye  than  be 
fojglucn. 

38  ©iue,  anD  it  (bail  bee  giucn  bn^ 
to  you,  gooD  mcafure,  p;catfcDDolbnc, 
anD  fbaftcn  together,  anD  running  o-- 
ucr ,  fball  men  gme  into  your  bofomc : 
foi  unth  the  fame  meafutc  tljat  ye  mete 
lbitball,  it  ft)ail  bee  mcafurcD  to  you 
agatne. 

39  3tnD  Ijcc  fpaHc  a  parable  bnto 
them,*  Can  tljcblmDclcaDctljcblinDe? 
S>ljau  they  not  both  fail  into  the  Ditch  < 

40  *  Xhe  Difcipic  is  not  abouc  his 
matter :  but  cuery  one  p  tljat  is  perfect 
OJalbc  as  his  matter. 

41  *  3tnD  lbljy  bcholDctt  thou  tlje 
mote  that  is  m  thy  toothers  eye ,  but 
per  cciucft  no  t  the  bcamc  tljat  is  in  tljmc 
olbnc  eye j. 

41  <£itljcc  hoib  tanfi  thou  fay  to 
thy  toother,  Mother,  let  nice  pull  out 
tlje  mote  that  is  m  thine  eye :  lbhcn 
thou  thy  fclfc  bcljolDcft  not  tlje  bcamc 
that  ib  m  tljmc  olbnc  eye  <  Xhou  hypo- 


crite, call  out  firft  tlje  beame  out  of  tljine 
olbnc  eye  ,anD  ttjen  fljau  tljon  fee  clear- 
ly  to  pul  out  tlje  mote  that  is  m  tljy  too- 
thers eye. 

43  *  5F02  a  gooD  tree  totngeth  not 
footfh  corrupt  fruit  :  ncitljcr  Doctlj  a 
corrupt  tree  tomg  footfh  gooD  fruit. 

44  irozcucrytreciSBnolbcnbyhis 
oibnefcutt:fo«!oftho1mesmcnDocnot 
gattjer  figs,  no?  of  a  toamblc  bufbg& 
thertbey  grapes. 

45  2gooDmanoutoftbegooDtrca; 
furc  of  his  Ueart,  bnngctlj  foonrj  that 
ibljichisgooD :  anDancmllman  out  of 
tljccuilltrcafurc  ofljishcart,  bnngctlj 
fooztb  that  lbhich  is  cum :  5Fo?  of  the 
abunDancc  of  tlje  heart ,  Ijis  mouth 
fpcaucth. 

46  C*3nDibhytailyemce?LojD, 
U02D,  anD  Doc  not  the  things  ibhitlj 
5fay< 

47  i©hofoeuctcommcthtomc,anD 
hcarcthmy  faymgs,  anD  Doctlj  them, 
^  lbill  ujett)  you  to  Hjljom  Ije  is  libe. 

48  $e  is  IiKc  a  man  lbhich  built  an 
houfc,  anD  DiggcD  Deepe ,  anD  layD  the 
founDationonarotuc.  ^nDibhcnthc 
flooDarofc.thcfrccamcbcatbcljcmcnt' 
ly  bpon  that  houfc,  anD  conlD  not  ujaue 
it :  to?  it  lbas  founDcD  bpon  a  roefce. 

49  2Sut Ijc  thathearcth ,  anDDoetlj 
not,  is  Uftc  a  man  that  ibithout  a  founs 
Dation  built  an  Ijoiifc  bpon  the  earth: 
agamfl lbhich  tlje ffreame  did  bcatebc- 
Ijcmently ,  anD  immcDiatly  it  fell,  anD 
the  nunc  of  that  houfc  lbas  great. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  Chtiftfindctli  a  greater  faith  in  the  Centuri- 
on a  Gentile ,  then  in  any  of  the  Iewes :  10 
Healeth  his  feruant  being  abfem  :  11  Rai- 
ieth  from  death  the  widowes  fonne  at  Nairn  : 
19  Anfwereth  Iohns  mefTengers  with  the 
declaration  ofhis  mirades :  1 4  Tcftineth  to 
thepcople  what  opinion hee  heldotlohn: 
50  Inueigheth  againft  the  Icwes,vvho  with 
neither  the  maners  of  Iohn  ,  nor  of  Iefus 
could  be  wonne:  3^  andfhewcthbyoccafi- 
on  of  Mane  Magdalene,  how  he  is  a  friend  to 
finners ,  not  to  maintaine  them  in  flnnes,  but 
to  forgiue  them  rhcir  Cnnes ,  vpon  their  faith 
and  repentance. 

SkSiSN!  ^^  totyn  Dec  haDcnDcD 
I  ^^^i  a  all  his  faymgs  mthcauDi^ 
d  s^^  a  encc  of  the  people,  *Ijcccn 
t  ?^Riv  ittcD  into  Capernaum. 
WB&rMl  z  ^uDaccrtaineCen 
tunotis  feruant ,  lbljo  luasDcarc  bnto 
ljim,ibas  ficUe  anD  reaoy  to  Die. 
_____^  3  3lnD 


"  Matth  7. 
1(5. 


'  Matth.  7. 
Hi 


1  Matth.l 


The  Centurions  faith.  Chap.vij.       Of  IohnBaptift 


\\Or,ccJfin 


3  anbtbbcn  be  bcarbof  3Jcftis,I)c 
rent  bnto  bun  tbe  @  Ibcrs  of  t\)C$mis, ' 
befeccbingbim  tbat  \)t  iboulb  come  anb 
beale  bis  feruant. 

4  anb  lbbcn  tbey  came  to  3Icfus, 
tbey  befougbt  bun  inftantly,faying,tbat 
bee  itoasfto2tbyf02ibbomebccfboulb 

boetbis. 

*  iroz  be  louetb  out  nation,  anb  bee 
batb  built  bs  a  Synagogue. 

6  Xben  3Jcfus  tbent  ibitb  them, 
anb  ibbenbe  Vbas  noib  not  fatre  from 
tbe  boufe,  tbe  Centnrion  fent  fnenbs  to 
bim,  faymg  bnto  btm ,  Hojd,  trouble 
hot  tby  felft :  fo?  3  atn  not  tb02tby  tbat 
tljou  fboulbeft  enter  Dnbcr  my  roofe. 

7  nabercfo2cncitbcttbougbt3Imy 
felfe  tbo2tby  to  come  bnto  tbee :  but  Cap 
m  a  tbozbc ,  anb  my  feruant  Cbail  bee 
bealeo. 

8  ifoj^falfoamamanfetbnbcrau^ 
tbonne,  bailing  bnDcr  mcc  foulbiers : 
anb3Jfaybntoone,(!3oc,anbbcgoctb: 
ano  to  anotber ,  Come ,  ant)  bee  com*  \ 
metl):  anbtomyferuant,3>oetbis,anb 
beboetbit. 

9  re>ben  3f  efus  bcarti  tbefc  tbmgs, ! 
Ijee  marueilcb  at  bun,  ano  turnebbmt 
about,  ant)  faibe  nnto  tbe  people  tbat 
follorbebbim,  31  fay  bnto  you,  3Jbauc 
not founb  fo  great faitb,  no,  not  m3lf* 
rael. 

io  anb  tbey  tbat  tberc  fcnt,returmng 
to  tbe  boufe,  founb  tbe  feruant  ibbole 
tbat  bat)  bene  ftcfec. 

1 1  C  anb  it  came  to  paffe  tbe  bay  af- 
ter, tbat  be  ibent  into  acme  cailetj  j!3a* 
tm :  anb  man?  of  bis  Difciplcs  tbent 
ttitb  bim, anb  tnuttj  people. 

\z  Jftolb  ttbett  be  came  nigb  to  tbe  \ 
gate  oftbecttic,  bcbolb,tbcreU)asa 
Dean  man  cartcbout,tbc  onclyfonne 
of  bts  motber ,  ana  fljec  ftas  attn^ 
boU) :  anb  muclj  people  of  tljc  ntic  mas 
tbitbber. 

u  anb  lbbcn  tbe  ILojb  fan)  bcr,  be 
babtompaffion  onber,  ant)  faibc  bnto 
bcr,tDecpcnot. 

14  ^nb  bee  came  anb  toncbeb  tbe 
||  bcerc  ( anb  tbey  tbat  bare  btm ,  ftoob 
fhll.)anb  be  fotb.Pong  man/3  fay  bn- 
to tbee,  anfr. 

15  anbbetbatn)asbeab,fatcbp,anb 
began  to  fpeaftc:  anb  be  bcliucrcbbim 
to  bis  motber. 

i6  ^nb  tberc  came  a  feare  on  all,anb 
tbey  glonftcb  ©ob,  faying,  tbat  a  great 
02opbet  is  nfen  Dp  among  bs,anb  tbat 
<Sob  batb  bifitcb  bis  people. 


I  ! 


17  anb  trjts  tumour  of  him  went 
fooztb  tbzougbout  an  ^Jubea ,  anb 
tbJougbout  all  tlje  region  rounb  a; 
bout. 

is  'anbtbcbtfciplesofjobnfbeib; 
S  eb  bim  of  all  tbefc  tbmgs. 

19  €  anb  Jobn  calling  bnto  bim 
tlbo  of  bis  oifctples,  fent  tbein  to  3Je 
fus,  faying,  act  tbon  bee  tbat  fljouib 
come,  ojlooKeibefo;  anotljcc  < 

20  nabcu  tbe  men  vberc  come  bnto 
bim,  tbey  faib,  Jobn  zsaptifl  batb  fent 
bs  bnto  tbee,  faying  ,  art  tbon  bee 
tbat  fboulbtome ,  02  loo&c  Ibefoz  ano- 
tber < 

21  anb  in  tbat  fame boure  bee  curcb 
manyof  tljcir  infirmities  ano  plagues, 
anb  of  cuiiifptnts,anbi)nto  many  tbat 
rbcrebiinb.bcgaucOgbt. 

rt  Xben3Jcfusanfrocring,  faiobn 
to  tbem,  ©0  your  may ,  anb  tell  3Jobn 
tt)bat  tfnngs  yc  baue  fecne  anb  bearb, 
bom  tbat  tbe  blmb  fee,  tbe  lame  tbaibe, 
tbe  lepers  arc  elenfeb,  rtjc  bcafe  bearc, 
tbe  beab  arc  raifcb,to  tbe  poo?c  tbe  (So- 
fpeltspzeatbeb. 

23  anbbleffcbtsbcibbofocuerfbail 
notbeoffenbebtnme. 

24-  Canblbbentbemeffengcrsof 
'John  tbere  bepartcb ,  bee  beganne  to 
fpeabc  bnto  y  people  concerning  3Jobn : 
tebatincntyc  out  into  tbeibilberneffe 
fo:  to  fee?  a  reebc  Qjaheii  ibitb  tljc 
tbtnbc; 

25  aSutlbbatlbcntycoutfojtofcc; 
a  man  clotbeb  in  Coft  rauncnt<26ebo!b, 
tbey  ibbicb  arc  goigcoufiyapparelleb, 
anb  line  bclicatcly,  arc  tn  lungs  courts. 

26  aSutrbbatibentyeoutfojtofec* 
ap2opbct?  Pea,  31  fay  bnto  you,  anb 
mucb  11102c  tben  a  j&opljet. 

xi  Hlbis  is  be  of  tbbome  it  iSttyifc 
tcn,25cbolb,  5  fenb  my  meffengee  be* 
fo2e  tby  face,  rbbub  fbau  pzepare  tby 
ibay  before  tbee. 

28  JFoj^faybntoyou.amongtbofc 
tbatare borne  of  n)omen,tbereisnota 
greater  jtyopbet  tben  3JoljntJ)c  zsap- 
tift  -.but  be  tbat  is  leaftm  tbe  bntgbome 
of  d5ob, is  greater  tben  be. 

29  anb  all  tbe  people  tbat  bearb  him, 
anb  tbe  pubiteancs,  iulbficb  ©ob,  be 
mg  baptt5Cb  Vbitlj  tbe  baptifme  of 
Uobti. 

30  25ut  tbe  pbanfees  anb  Eatb^ 
ycrs  ||  reicctcb  tbe  counfcll  of  ©ob  ||a? 
gaintt  tbcmfelucs ,  being  not  bapti- 
3cb  of  bim. 

31  canb  tljc  JLojb  faib/  JBbercun 

<5  to 


led. 

themftUlei. 

*M«.n..5 


Wifcd 


omeiu 


ftificd.  S.Luke. 


The  parable  of 


•Mat.  14.3 


i8.»8. 


to  then  fJbau^J  litten  the  men  of  tbisgc; 
titration  i  ano  to  what  ace  they  line  * 

3i  Xhcy  ate  Itbe  bnto  chtlDjcnGtttng 
in  tlje  marftet  plate,?  tailing  ottc  to  an? 
other,  anD  faying,  naehaucpipcDbnto 
you,  ano  ye  hauc  not  DanccD :  ibee  haue 
mourncb  to  you,  ano  yec  haue  not 
lbcpt. 

33  iro:  gjohn  the  JSapttQ  tame,  nei- 
ther canng  bjcao ,  no?  omitting  lbtne, 
ano  ye  fay ,  fl?e  hath  a  Dentil. 

34  XhefonncofmaniStomceas 
ring,  ano  Danfeing,  anD  ye  fay,  aScfjolD 
a  gluttonous  man,auD  a  ibme  bibber,a 
frtcnb  of  ^ubltcancs  anD  tinners. 

35  23ut  ibtfcbome  is  iuGiGcb  of  all 
herchilDjen. 

36  C"3mDoncoftr)c0!)artfcesDe; 
GrcD  him  that  he  ttoulD  eat  lbtthhim. 
anD  be  lbcnt  into  thc0barifccshoufc, 
anD  fate  Doibne  to  meat. 

37  2nDbcholD,aibomanittthetuie 
lbbith  tbas  aGnner ,  lbhcn  mce  fencib 
thatWus  fate  at  meat  tn  the  ^banfecs 
houft ,  brought  an  3llabaGec  bore  of 
ointment, 

3S  3lnD  Good  at  hts  feet  bchinDbim, 
lbceping,  anD  began  to  tbaG)  bis  fcete 
ibltb  tcares,  anD  DtD  ibipe  them  tbith 
the  haircs  of  her  heaD ,  anD  feuTeb  his 
feet,  anD  anotntcD  thcmlbttb  the  oynt? 
ment. 

39  /Boib  lbhcn  the  j&barifec  lbbicb 
habbtDDcnhim,  faVbit,  hcfpaBcibttbm 
himfclfc,faying,Xhis  man,  if  hciberc 
a#jopbct,iboulDbauc  bnoibcn  rbbo, 
anD  ibhat  mancr  of  lboman  this  is  that 
touthetb  him :  fo?  (he  is  afinncr. 

40  ^itD3lcfusanfn)cnng,faiDbnto 
bim,5>imon,  3J  hancfomcibhat  to  fay 
bnto  thee.  3inD  he  faith,  £t3aGcr,fay  on. 

41  XbercibasaccrtaincttcDitour, 
lbbicb  haD  tibo  Debtors:  the  one  ought 
GuchunDicD  ||  penre,  anD  the  other  fifttc. 

41  3lnD  lbhcn  they  haD  nothing  to 
pay,hcfranblyfo2gattcthcmboth.Xcll 
me  therefore  ,ibhich  of  them  lbtll  louc 
himmoG; 

43  £>unon  anfrocrcD,  anD  TaiDc ,  3J 
fuppofc,  that  hec  toibbomcbcfojgauc 
moG.  3lnD  hcfaiD  bnto  him.Xhou  haft 
rightly  ttiDgcD. 

44-  3lnDbce  tnmcD  to  the  lboman, 
anD  faib  bnto  Sumon,  S>ccG  thou  this 
lboman  i  3  cntrcD  into  thine  houfr, 
thou  gaitcGtncno  ibater  foj  my  fcttc  • 
but  flicc  hath  ibaGjeD  my  feetc  lbith 
tcarcs,anD  lbipcb  tljcm  ibit  h  the  haircs 
ofherheaD. 


45  1£hougaucftmctu)mu*e:buttbts 
lboman,  Gntc  the  time  3  tame  m,  hath 
not  teafeD  to  anTc  my  feet. 

46  flPinc  heabibttb  otle  thou  DiDG 
notanotnt:  but  this  lboman  hath  an 
otntcD  my  feet  lbith  oyntment. 

47  i©herefo2e,3J  fay  bnto  thee,  her 
Gnncs,  lbhtth  are  many,  arefonjiucn, 
fat  the  loueb  much :  but  to  tbhom  litle  is 
fojgiuen,  the  fame  loucth  Utle. 

4S  3inDhcfaiD  bnto  ber,%hyfinnes 
arefojgiuen. 

49  3lnD  they  that  fate  at  meat  lbith 
him,  began  to  fay  rbitbm  thcmfclues, 
©ho  is  this  that  fojgtuetb  Gnncs  alfo  < 

50  3nbhe  fatDto  the  lboman ,  Xhy 
faith  &atb  faueD  thee,  goc  in  peace. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

5  Women  minifter  vnto  Chrift  of  their  fubftance 
4  Chrift  after  he  had  preached  from  place  to 
place ,  attended  with  his  Apoftles,  propoun- 
ded the  parable  of  the  fower,  16  and  of  the 
candle:  n  declareth  who  are  his  mother,and 
brethren:  za  rebuketh  the  winds :  i6cafteth 
the  Legion  of  deuils  out  of  the  man,  into  the 
heard  of  fwine :  37  is  rcieftedof  the  Gada- 
renes:  43  healeth  the  woman  ol  her  bloodie 
i(rue,49  ar>d  raifeth  fro  death  Iairus  daughter 

4I2D  it  tame  to  pafft  after? 

VbarD,£  he  lbcnt  through? 

outcuetyntieanDbiliage 

pleaching ,  anD  iheibtng 
_  the  giaD  tiDings  of  the 
lungoomcof  <SoD :  anD  the  tlbcluc  were 
ibttbbim, 

1  3lnD  tcrtame  lbomen  ibhich  haD 
bencheaieb  of  cutil  fpirtts  anD  mfirmfc 
ties,  il^ary  taiicD  ^agDaicnc  *  out  of 
lbhom  lbcnt  fcucn  beutis, 

3  3InD  Joanna  thcibife  of  Chuja, 
$croDs  ftcibarb,  anD  Sufanua,  anD 
many  others  lbhith  mmiOrcD  bnto 
htm  of  their  fubGantc. 

4  C*3lnD  lbhcn  much  people lbcrc 
gathcrcb  together,  anD  lbcrc  come  to 
him  out  of  eitcry  citic,  he  fpattc  by  a  pa? 
rablc : 

5  3  5>olbcr  lbcnt  out  to  folbc  his 
feeb :  anD  as  he  foibcD ,  fome  fell  by  the 
lbayesGDe.anD  ttibas  trobtn  Dolbnc, 
anD  the  fouics  0 f  the  aire bcuourcD  it. 

6  31nD  fome  fell  bpon  a  rotbc,  anb 
affoonc  as  it  lbas  fpnmg  bp,  it  ibtthe? 
rcb  aibay,becatifc  it  lacUcb  moiGurc. 

7  3InD  fome  fell  among  thomes,anb 
the  thomes  Ipjang  bp  ibtth  it,  anb  tljo- 

ItCDtt. 

3  3InD  other  fell  on  gooD  grotuiD, 
anD 


'Mar  i6.p 


'Mar.  1 3. 


thefeed5expounded.  Chap.viij.  The  fca Hilled. 


Mit.l). 
1 8. 


'Mat. j. I  j 


Mttio. 
16. 


Mat 


M- 


Or,tlii*- 
kth  that  b, 
b.th. 
•M1c.11. 
4<S. 


M«8.; 


anb  fp;ang  bp ,  aim  bare  fcuite  an  tiuti 
bjcb  folb.  ana  ttrfjenhec  faibc  thefe 
things,  heerycb,  $c  that  hath  cares  to 
bear  e,  let  himhcacc. 

9  ^nt)  his  birnplesafKcbhim ,  fay* 
ins,  &foa&  might  this  parable  be  < 

10  anb  he  faro ,  Silnto  you  tt  is  ginen 
to  tmolb  the  my  ftcrics  of  the  lungbome 
of  <25ob :  bnt  to  othersiu  parables,  tljat 
fecmg.they  might  not  fee,  ant)  hearing, 
theymightnottmbcrftanb. 

1 1  *  0oVo  the  parable  is  this :  Xhc 
feet)  is  tijctbojD  of  <Sob. 

11  Xhofe  by  the  ibay  fibc ,  arc  they 
that  heacerthcncommcth  the  bcuil,  anb 
tafeeth  away  the  nwb  but  of  their 
hearts,  leaft  they  fboulb  belccuc,  anb  be 
faneb. 

ij  XI)evontfteroehe,aretI)cptbl)icr) 
Vbhen  they  rjcare,retctuctl)ctbo?b  tbith 
toy;anbthefehauenoroote,U)hichfoja 
tbhilebelecue ,  anb  mtimeoftcmptarts 
onfallatbay. 

i+  anb  that  tbhfch  fell  among 
thonies,  are  they,  Which  ibhen  the? 
hancheacb ,  goc  forth,  anbarechofceb 
rbtth  tares  anb  riches ,  anb  plcafurcs 
ofthislife ,  anb  tying  nofruite  to  pcrfee 
tton. 

15  zSutthatonthcgoobgrounb.arc 
thcy,tbhlehinanhoncltanbgoobheart 
jjauing  hcarb  the  flwb ,  ncepcit,  anb 
tying  foorth  fcuttctbith  patience. 

i6  C*  0o  mantbhen  he  hath  hgh< 
tcb  a  canble,  coueccthitrbifhabcrTell, 
0?  puttefh  tt  bnbec  abeb  :  butfetteth  it 
on  a  canblcfhcBC,  that  they  tbbich  enter 
in,  may  fee  the  light. 

17  *jroj  nothing. sfceret,  that  (hall 
not  be  mabc  mamfcfhncither  any  thing 
hib,that(hallnotbcUnolbcn,anbcomc 
atyoao. 

18  XaUe  heebe  therefore  holb  yce 
hearc :  *  fiw  lbhofoeuer  hath ,  to  him 
fljall  bee  giucn-.  anb  lbhofoeuer  hath 
not,  from  him  fballbctnhcn ,  euenthat 
tbhichheilfccmethtohauc. 

19  C'Xhcncamc  to  him  his  mo- 
ther anb  his  tyethjen ,  anb  coulb  not 
eomcathimfojthcpjcafc. 

10  anb  It  VbaS  tOlb  him  by  ceruine 

tbjjich  faibc ,  Xhy  mother  anb  thy 
tycttyen  ftanb  Unthout ,  bcfinng  to  fee 
thee. 

zi  anb  hce  anfracrcb  anb  faibbnto 
them,  €&v  mother  anb  my  brethren  are 
thcfcmhich  hearc  the  ibojb  of  ti5ob,anb 
boeit. 

11  C  *  iftotb  it  tame  to  pafTc  on  a 


certatnc  bay ,  that  he  Vbcnt  into  a  Hup, 
Ruth  his  bifeiplcs :  anb  lice  fatb  bnto 
them ,  ?Lct  bs  goc  ouce  bnto  the  0 
tljer  Qbc  of  the  lafte ,  anb  they  lanchcb 
foouh. 

23  ffiutasfhcyfailcb,  hcfcllaflccpc, 
anb  there  came  bourne  a  fhmne  of  ttnnb 
on  the  la&canb  they  lbcrc  fillcb  with  wa 
tcr,anbU)crcinicoparbic. 

24.  anb  they  came  to  him,  anb  & 
iboRehim,  faying,  Rafter,  matter,  ibe 
penfl).  IChenhcrofc,  anb  rebnacbthe 
Vbinb,  anb  the  raging  of  the  tbater :  anb 
they  ccafeb.anb  there  ibas  a  calme. 

25  anb  he  fatbc  bnto  them,  nahere 
is  your  faith  <  anb  they  being  afraibe 
VbotibKbXayingoncto  another ,  nahat 
maner  of  man  is  this  <  if  oi  he  commas 
beth  cuen  the  ttnnbs  anb  water ,  anb 
they  obey  him. 

26  C*anb  they  arrineb at  thecoma 
trey  of  the  <£>abarencs,lbhich  is  ouer  a- 
gamtt  ©aitlee. 

27  anDtt)henhetbcntfo?thtolanb, 

there  met  him  out  of  the  cittc  a  certatnc 
man  ibhich  hab  ocutls  longtime,  anb 
ibateno  clothes,  neither  abobe in  any 
houfe,  but  in  the  tombes. 

18  i©henhefaib3fefus,hccrtcbout, 
anb  fell  bolbnebcfozc  him ,  anblbirha 
loub  boyce  fatb ,  nahathauc  3}  toboe 
Unth  tljcc,3Iefits,  thou  fotme  of  <Sox> 
molt  high  <  3  bcfccch  thcetojmentmc 
not. 

29  (jFojhehabeommaubcbthebn* 
clcanc  fpirit  to  tome  out  of  the  man : 
5fo?  oftentimes  it  hab  caught  him,  anb 
hctbasBcpt  bonnb  ibuh  chames ,  anb 
in  fetters :  anb  he  toafte  the  banbs ,  anb 
ibasbmtcn  of  tljcbcuilintothcVbilbcr' 
nefTc.) 

30  anb  "Jefus  afbcb  him  ,  faying, 
nahat  is  thy  name ^anb  he  faib,?lcgt^ 
on:bctaufc  many  beuils  lbcrc  entreb 
into  him. 

31  anb  they  befought  him,  thathc 
ibouib  not  commanb  them  to  goc  out 
into  the  beepe. 

32  anb  there  njas  there  an  herb  of 
many  frame  feebmg  on  the  mountainc: 
anb  they  befought  him  that  hciboulb 
fnffcr  them  to  enter  into  them :  anb  he 
fuffcrcbthem. 

33  IChcniDent  the  beuils  out  of  the 
man,anb  cntrcb  into  the  frame:  anb  the 
herb  ran  biolently  tjoibnc  a  ftcepc  place 
into  the  laue.anb  lbcrc  chobeb. 

3+  nahen  they  that  feb  them  falb 
lWjat  ibas  bone,  they  f[tD ,  anb  Vbcnt, 
o  2  anb 


Mit.8.28. 


[aims  daughter  S.Luke.         is  reftored  to  life. 


"Mattli  9. 
18. 


ano  to  10c  it  m  tf) c  ntir,  anD in  the  coim 
trcp. 

35  %\ytn  tljcp  ttient  out  tofeclbhat 
nias  Done ,  anD  came  to  3Fefus ,  anD 
founD  the  man,  out  of  lbhom  the  Dcuils 
tbere  DeparteD,frtting  at  the  feete  of  3& 
fas,  clotrjcD,  anD  in  his  right  minoe: 
anDthcpibcteafraiD. 

3<?  Xhep aifo ibhtch  fail)  it.tolD them 
bpibhat  mcanes  he  that  VbaspoffcflcD 
of  tfjc  Deutls,ibas  IjcaicD. 

37  CXhen  tfte  tbholemultituDeof 
tljc  countrep  of  the  ©aDarcncs  rounD 
about ,  bcfought  Dun  to  Depart  from 
tljem,  foj  thep  lbere  taaen  ttrith  great 
feare :  anD  rjetbent  bp  into  the  toip.anD 
returneDbacfeagaine. 

33  il5orbtheman,outofibhomthc 
Dtuiis  rbere  DepartcD ,  befought  him 
that  he  might  be  ttitth  htm :  but  Jews 
fenthimatbap,{aping, 

39  ftcturne  to  thine  otbnc  houfe, 
anD  fl)cib  holb  great  things  ©obhath 
Done  bnto  thee.  3nDhett)cnthisiDap, 
anD  publifheD  throughout  the  lbholc 
cittc  holb  great  things  3fcfus  hao  Done 
bnto  hint. 

40  3inD  it  came  to  patte,  that  tbijen 
3JcCusU)asrcturncD,rt)c  people  giaDlp 
rcceuteD  hun :  fo?  thep  Ibcrc  all  waiting 
fojhun. 

41  C*3uiDbeholD,thcrecameaman 
namcDgjairus,  ano  hec  ibasaruler  of 
the  Synagogue,  anD  hce  fcllDotbneat 
gjcmsfeetcanD  befoughthim  that  hec 
iboulD  comemto  his  houfe : 

41  ifojhechaD  one  onelp  Daughter 
about  nbclue  yeeres  of  age ,  anD  the  lap 
a  Dying.  ( 26ut  as  hee  ibent  tr»c  people 
thzongcDhim. 

43  C^uDaibomanhauinganiflue 
of  bio  od  tibclne  y  er  cs ,  ibhieh  hao  fpctit 
all  her  luiing  bpon  phifitions ,  neither 
couiDbehcalcDofanp, 

44  Came  bchinDe  him,  anDtouthcD 
thcboiocr  of  his  garment:  auDimmc; 
Diatly  her  itTuc  of  bioob  ftancheb. 

45  ^nD3IcrusfaiDe,n9hotouchcD 
met;  BDhenaiiDcnieD,  $ctcranDthep 
that  lbcrettnth  him,  fata ,  fatter,  the 
multituDe  tlnong  thcc,anD  pjeafle  tljtc, 
ano  fayctt  thou,uaho  touchcD  me ; 

46  3lnD  3Btfus  faioc ,  £>omc  boDy 
hath  touthcDmte:  foz  3Jpctcciuc  that 
bcctucisgoncoutofmc. 

47  2CnD  lDhen  the  iboman  faVb  that 
flic  nias  not  hiD,  dice  tame  trcmblmg, 
ano  falling  Donme  befojc  him,  fljecDc- 
ciar  co  bnto  him  bcfo;c  all  the  pcoplc,fo; 


what  caufe  thee  haD  toutheD  him,  anD 
holb  fbe  ruas  healeD  immcDiatlp. 

48  3lnD  he  faiD  bnto  her, daughter, 
be  ofgooD  comfojt.thp  fattl)  hath  mafic 
thee  ibhole.goe  in  peace.) 

49  C  ©hue  Dee  vet  fpafec ,  there 
commefh  one  from  the  ruler  of  the  £>y = 
nagogues  houfe,  faying  to  him ,  Xhp 
Daughter  is  DcaD  ,  trouble  not  the 
spatter. 

50  2Sutibhen3fcfashearD  it,  heart* 
Guercbhim,  taping,  JFearcnot,  Ueleeuc 
onelp,anD  fhe  fljaibe  maDctbrjole. 

51  anD  When  hce  tame  into  the 
houfe ,  hce  fatTercD  no  man  to  goe  m, 
faue  0eter,anD  3James,  anD  John, 
anD  the  father  anD  the  mother  of  the 
mapDen. 

51  ;8nDaHtt>cpt,anDberbaflcDrjer: 
buthefaiD,  naeepe  not,  fbetsnot  DcaD, 
butflcepeth. 

53  3toD  thep  laughcD  him  to  Rome, 
Knotting  that  fteibasDeaD. 

54  3nD  Dee  put  them  all  out,  anD 
tooRchctbp  the  hanD,  anD  tallcD,  fa^ 
mg,$)ayD,arifc. 

55  3inD  her  fpirit  came  againe,  anD 
(hee  arofc  ttraighttbap :  anD  hec  com 
manDeD  to  giue  her  meat. 

56  3nD  her  parents  tberc  aftoniths 
CD :  but  hec  thargcD  them  that  thep 
fl)  oulD  tell  no  man  Vbhat  ibas  Done. 

CHAP.   IX. 

1  ChriftfcnJethhisApoftlesto  workemiracles, 
and  to  preach.  7  Herod  defired  to  fee  Chrift. 
duiftfcedethfiuethouiand:  38  in<juireth 
what  opinion  the  world  had  of  him :  loretel- 
lethhispaffion:  2.3  propofethtoall.thepa- 
terne  of  his  patience.  18  The  transfigura- 
tion. 37  Heehealeththelunaricke:  43  A- 
gaine  forewarneih  his  diiciplesof  hisPaffion: 
4^commeiidethhumilitie:  51  biddeththem 
to  (hew  nuldnefTc  towards  all,  without  de- 
fire  of  rcucnge.  57  Diuers  would  follow  him, 
but  vpon  conditions. 

jSfrfccn  *hc  talleDhiS  tlbclue 
i»e-?Difciples  together  ,  anD 
W&  gauc  thempoibcr  anDau^ 
v®k  nWWttP  oucr  allDcuils,anD 
.  _^  to  cureDifcafcs. 
x  ^nD  hee  fent  them  to  pjcath  the 
Bftigbome  of  <5od  ,  anD  to  heale  the 
fiebc. 

3  3tnD  he  faiD  bnto  thcm,1CaBC  no^ 
thingfojyouc  iourncp,  neither  Qaucs, 
no;  fenp,  netthcr  bjcaD  ,neithcr  monep, 
nnther  hauc  tibo  coatcs  apeecc. 
4  3nD 


'Macih.10. 


Fiuethoufandfed.      Chap.ix.    Chrift transfigured. 


Mu.14.1. 


•Mar.  1 4. 
>3- 


"Mat.  14. 


4.  anDiDhatfocuerhouft?ee  enter 
into,  there  abiDc,  anD  rtjentcDcpact. 

5  Tints  iDhofocuer  tbill  not  rccctue 
Vou,tbhen?cgoeoutof  that  eit?,fl)aKc 
off  the  Dec?  Duft  from  ?our  feetc ,  fo?  a 
tctttmomc  agatntt  them. 

6  3lnD  the?  DepartcD  ,  anD  ibcm 
ttjiough  the  tottmes.ptfartjingttjcdStofc 
pel,  anD  healing  cucr?  ttrfjerc. 

7  C*iBoib$eroDcthc1Cttratch 
bcarD  of  all  that  tbas  Done  b?  i)un :  anD 
tjecrbaspcrplereD ,  becauftttjat  itlbas 
taiD  of  Conic,  that  Joint  iDas  rtftn  from 
theDeaD: 

8  3no  of  fotne,  ttjatcilasDaD  ap- 
pearcD :  anD  of  others ,  tl)at  one  of  the 
olDe  pioplicts  tbas  nfen  a  game. 

9  3nD  $ctoDcfaiD ,  Jotm  Ijauc  3 
beljeaoeb:  buttbho  isthisofrbhom  J 
heare  fuel)  things*  3nD  !jce  DefircDto 
fee  him. 

10  c^nD  the  3t"pofflcs  tbOcn  the? 
tbercreturneD ,  tolDchim  allttjat  tprp 
IjaD  Done.  *3(nD  Ijce tooae  them ,  anD 
M)entafiDcpnuatcl?intoaDcftrt  plate, 
belonging  to  the  title  talleb  26eti)= 
faiDa. 

1 1  3tnD  tlje  people  ttnjm  the?  bnett) 
ttJollottJCD  him,  anDDereteiucDttjem, 
anD  fpatte  Unto  them  of  the  aingDomc 
of  ©od,  anD  DealcD  them  that  DaD  netD 
of  healing. 

12  *3mD»)l}ent!)eDapbcganncto 
lDcarcatDa?,  tljcn  tame  the  ttbelucanD 
faiD  into  him ,  ScnD  tnc  muitituDea- 
jDa?,tljatthc?ma?gointotljctottmes 
ano  counttc?  rounD  about,  anD  loDge, 
anDgetDittuals:fojtt>catcIjcrcinaDe^ 

fert  plate. 

ij  2SutfjefaiDDntothcm,<i5iuc?ee 
tljemtoeatc.  3mDthc?faiD,naccnauc 
nomojebutfiucloaucs  anDttbofiuJcs, 
ertcpt  rbe  ChouiD  goe  anD  bu?  meate  fo? 
all  this  people. 

14  $o;  the?  tberc  about  fiuc  thou- 
fanD  men.  3nD  he  faiD  to  His  Difciplcs, 
^aac  them  fit  Doibnc  D?  fifties  m  a 
compan?. 

15  3tnD  the?  did  fo ,  anD maoe  them 
aiifitDoume. 

is  XhenhetooHctijcfiucloaucsanD 
tljctiDofiChes,  anDlootung  Dp  to  hca< 
ucn,  Dee  blcfleD  them,  atiDbjabc,  anD 
gauc  to  the  Difnplcs  to  fct  before  the 
mumtuDe. 

17  3lttD  tnepDiD  eatc,  anD  iDcrc  an 
fillcD.  2lnD  there  \Das  tafetn  Dp  of  frag 
mentsthat  remaincD  to  them ,  tiDelue 
baC&cts. 


18  C*  3nD  it  tame  to  patTcas  he  ibas 
alone  pjaving ,  Ijis  Difnplcs  ibere  Untlj 
him :  anD  he  alfccD  thcm,fa?mg,n9hom 
fa?  tlje  people  that  3  am  < 

19  1tljc?  anfroermg,  faiD ,  John  tlje 
ffiaptift:  but  fomc  fa? ,  eitas :  anD  o- 
tljcrs  fa?,  that  one  of  the  olD  ^opljets 
isrifenagamc. 

20  $efatD  Dntottjem,  25ut  tbfjom 
fa?  ?ce  that  3  aim  $etcr  anfiucrmg, 
ratD,3Et)cCt)nftof<i5oD, 

21  :3nDhcftcattl?thargcDthem,anD 
tommanDeD  them  to  tell  no  man  ttjat 
thing, 

22  taping ,  *  Xljc  Sonne  of  man 
muff  fuffer man? things,  anD  be  relet- 
teb  of  the  eiDers ,  anD  thiefe  knells, 
anD  Scribes ,  anD  be  dame ,  anD  be  cafe 
feDtljcthirDDap. 

23  C*^nDl)cfaiDtothemall,3}fan? 
man  tbill  tome  after  me ,  let  him  Deme 
hunfcifc,  anD  tafte  Dp  his  etoffcDail?, 
anDfollotbme. 

24  jFo?  tbhofoeuer  tbill  fauc  tjis 
life,  Cball  loft  it :  but  tbhofoeuer  tbill 
loft  fjisufefo?  m?  faac,  the  fame  ujall 
faue  it 

25  "jFoitbhatisamanaDuantageD, 
if  tjee  game  the  tbholc  rbojlD,  anD  lofc 
hmifeife,  ojbetattatbapi 

26  *  ifo?  ibljofoeuer  (hall  bee  afl)a^ 
meD  of  me ,  anD  of  m?  ibojDcs,  ofijtm 
(hall  the  Sonne  of  man  be  afhamcb, 
iDhen  tie  fljail  tome  tn  his  otbne  glozp, 
anD  m  i)is  fathers,  anD  of  the  hoi? 
Angels. 

27  *  2Sut  3  tell  ?ou  of  a  trueth, 
there  be  fomc  UanDing  hcrcibhtch  fhail 
nottafte  ofDcath,till  ti)e?fccthching 
Dome  of  (5oD. 

28  <C*  3lnD  it  tame  to  paffcabout  an 
eight  Da?cs  after  theft  ||  fa?mgs,  ftec 
toonc  0cter,  anD  John,  ano  James, 
anD  ibcnt  Dp  mto  a  mountamc  to 
p?a?: 

29  3lnDashcep?a?cD,tftcfau)ionof 
his  countenance  Vbas  aitcrcD ,  anD  his 
raiment  ibasiDhitcanD  glittering. 

30  ^nD  beholD,  there  taiitcD  iDith 
him  HDD  men,  iDhith  Ujcc c  H^ofcs  ano 
<£lias, 

3 1  i©ho  appeateD  in  gtoj?,anD  fpaiie 
of  hisDcccafciDhith  he  thoulD  attorn- 
pua)atl?ienifalcm. 

32  26ut  £cter ,  anD  the?  that  idcic 
ibith  htm ,  iDere  heatiic  Uuth  fleepe : 
anD  U)hciuhe?iDcrca\Dattc,  the?  faib 
his  gloj? ,  anDthctiDo  men  that  ftooD 
ibithhim. 

<5  3  33  3fiU> 


"Mat.  16. 
13- 


'Mat.  1 7. 
za. 


'Mac. 10. 
jS. 


'Mat. 16. 
26.  marke 

8.36. 

'Matt.  10. 
33- 


•Matt.lfi. 


'Mit.17.1. 
Orjthm'- 


The  lunatike healed.    S.Luke.  The  lea(l,great. 


•Mit.17.14 


*M«ih.  .7 


•Mjm8.i 
mark.?. 54. 


33  anb  it  tame  to  paffc ,  as  tDev  be- 
parrcb  from  Dim,  peter  fate  bnto  3v 
fas, Rafter,  it  is  goob  fo;  bs  to  be  Dere, 
anb  let  bs  maltctDuc  tabernacles,  one 
foztljccano  onefo.2^)ofcs,  anbonefo; 
<£lias:  not  Knotting  ibDatDe  faib. 

34  jBijUeljctlws  fpatte,tDere  tame  a 
clout),  ario  oucrfDaboibcbtDem,?tDev 
fearcb,  astDev  entrcb  into  ttje  tloube. 

$5  ano  tljerc  came  a  boicc  out  of  tDc 
cloub,faving,£Dis  is  mv  bcloueb  S>on, 
DeatcDim. 

36  ano  lbrjcn  tDc  bovce  ibas  patt, 
3Jcrus  Ibas  fount)  alone,  anb  tDcv  fecpt 
it  clofc,f  tola  no  mantn  tDofeuaycsanp 
of  tljofc  tilings  ibrjtel)  tfjcp  Dab  feene. 

37  C  *  ano  it  camcto  paOc,  tljat  on 
tDe  ncjctbav,  lbDcn  tDcv.  ibere  come 
boibncfrom  tDe  bill,  mucb  people  met 
Dim. 

3s  anbbcDoib,amanoftDccompa< 
nieericbout,faving,  Rafter,  "J  bcfcccrj 
ttjee  looUc  Upon  mp  fonuc,fo?  l)c  is  mine 
onclv  cDilb. 

39  anbloe,afptrtttaftctf)I)im,  anb 
Dec  fubocnlv  crietl)  out,  anb  it  tcarctb 
Dim  tDat  rjc  fomctD  agame,anb  bunting 
Dun ,  Datblv  bepar tctD  from  Dim. 

40  anb  31  bcfougDt  tDv  btfctplcs  to 
cad  Dim  out,  anb  tDev  coulb  not. 

41  anb gicfiisanfruerlng, faib,  4D 
faitDleffcanb  pcruerfc  generation  ,Doib 
longfDallJbcibitDvoi^anbfaffcrvou? 
tying  tDv  tonne  DitDcr. 

4z  anb  as  Dc  ruas  vet  a  comnung, 
tDcbtuill  tlncib  Dun  bolbne,  anb  tare 
Dun :  anb  3Jcfus  rebuheb  tDebntleanc 
fpirtt,  anbDcalcbtDccDUb,  anb  bcliuc= 
reb  Dim  againc  to  Dis  fatDcr. 

43  C  anb  tDcv  vuer e  ai  ama^eb  at  tDc 
m(gbttcpoibcrof<5ob:25iitIbDilctDcv 
ibonb:cb  cucrvonc  atailtDiugsibDicD 
3JefustiiD,  DefaibbntoDtsbifnplcs, 

44  *  iLettDcfc  favings  finite  bolbne 
into  vour  cares :  fo:  tDe  £>onnc  of  man 
(ball  bee  bcliucrcb  into  tDc  banbes  of 
men. 

45  25ut  tD e\>  bnberftoob not tDis fav> 
ing,aiiOinbasDibfromtDcm>tbattbrv 
pcrcciuco  it  not :  anb  tDev  fcareb  to  af  he 
DimoftDatfavtng. 

46  ir'j.hcnttirrcarofeareafoning 
amongtDcm,  ibljicl)  of  tDcmfboulbbc 
grcatcft. 

+7  anbJcruoptrcciuingptDougDt 
of  tDcir  Ijcart,  toolic  a  cljilb,anD  fct  Dun 
bvDim, 

4s  anb faib  bnto  tDcm, naDofocucr 
fl}aii  r  cccmc  t  l)is  cljilD  m  nip  ^5ame,  re* 


ceiuetD  me :  anb  lbDofoeuer  fbal  rcccinc 
me,  rccciuetD  Dim  tljat  fent  me :  jfoz  Dee 
tDat  is  lean  among  vou  ail ,  tljc  fame 
(Daibcgrcat. 

49  C  *  anb  3loDn  anfroereb,  anb 
faib,£I9a(ter,Ybeiaib  one  calling  out  be 
mis  in  tljv  ii5ame,  anb  ibe  fojbabc  Dim, 
becaufc  DcfolloibctDnotibitD  bs. 

50  anb  3iefu6  faib  bnto  Dim ,  fop 
bib  Dim  not:  fo;  Dc  tDat  15  not  agamft 
bs,tsfo?bs. 

51  canbitcamctopaffctbDentDe 
time  tbas  come  tbat  be  fbouib  beetccei? 
ucb  bp,  De  ftebfaftiv  fet  Dts  face  to  goc  to 
^terufaiem, 

51  anb  fent  meffengets  before  Dis 
fate,  anb  tDcv  ibent  anb  entrcb  into  a 
biliage  of  tbc  £>aniantanes  to  maftc 
reabvfo?Dim. 

53  anbtljevbib  not  reteine  Dim,  be* 
canfe  Dis  face  ibas  as  tDougD  De  iboulb 
gocto^terufaiem. 

54  anbVUDen  Dis  bifciples,  panics 
anbjoljn  faibetbis,  tDevfaib  ,•  fLojb, 
Unit  tDou  tbat  Ibce  tommanb  fire  to 
comebolbncfrombcaucn.aiioconfume 
tljem,  cucn  as  *  ciiasbib? 

55  2SutDeturneb,anbrcbuUebtDem, 
anb  fatb,  Pt  nnoib  not  tt»ljat  maner  fpi? 
ritveareof. 

56  ifojtDc&onncofmanisnottomc 
tobeftrov  mens  liucs,  but  to  fauc  tljem. 
anb  tDev  lbent  to  anotDer  biliage. 

57  C*anbittametopaffctDatas 
tDcv  Vbcntm  tDe  lbav, a  ccrtamc  man 
faib  bnto  Dmi,1Lo20,3  lbilfolloib  ttjee 
lbDuDerfocucr  tDou  gocft. 

58  ano  3Jefus  faib  bnto  Dim,  jfores 
DaucDolcs,  anb  birbs  of  tDc  aire  Dauc 
ncfis,  but  tDc  S>onnc  of  man  Datlj  not 
lbDcrctolavDisDeab. 

59  *  ano  De  fato  bnto  anotDer,  jfol- 
loib  me  :25utDe  faib,  !Lo;b,  Differ  mec 
firltto  gocanb  burv  mvfatDer. 

60  gjefus  faib  bnto  DunJLcttDcbcab 
burv  tDcir  beab :  but  go  tDou  anb  pjcacD 
tDcftmgbomcof  ©ob. 

61  anb  anotDer  alfo  faib,  JLotn,  5 

tt)illfoilo\btDce:bntlct  me  firftgoe  bib 

tDemfareVbel.lbDtcDarcatDomcatmv 
Doufc. 

6i  anbllefus  faib  bnto  Dim,/Roman 
DautngputDisDanoto  tDcplougD,  anb 
looking  bacae,  is  fit  fo;  tDc  Bingbomc  of 
C5ob. 

CHAP.   X. 

1     Chrift  fendeth  out  at  once  ,  feucntv  difci- 
plcsto  woi'ke miracles ,  and  to  preach:   17 

Admoni- 


*Mir.y.38 


"  J  Kings  t. 

IOi 


Mjt.8.iji. 


Mil. S. 11 


The  harucft  great.       Chap.x. 


Satansfall. 


'Mk.10.  i, 


Mat.9.37. 


Mat.io. 
\6. 


•Mat. 10. 
11. 


"Mat.u. 


Admonilheth  them  to  be  humble, and  wher- 
in  to  reioyce:  11  Thanketh  his  lather  for 
his  grace :  2.3  Magnified)  the  happy  eftate 
of  his  Church:  2.5  Teacheth  the  Lawyer.how 
to  attaine  eternal!  life,  and  to  take  euery  one 
for  his  neijhbour,thatneedeth  his  mercy:  41 
Reprehendeth  Martha  ,  and  commendeth 
Marv  her  lifter. 

8gf  tcr  *thcfc  things  ,  the 
JLojb  appointcD  other 
fcucutv  aifo,anb  fctu  them 
ttbo  anD  tibo  btfait  his 
face ,  into  cucty  tttic  anb 
place ,  ibhithcr  hce  himfelfe  tboulb 
conic. 

z  3Crjercfo?e  faib  fjee  bnto  them, 
*  Xhc  harucft  truly  is  great,  but  rfjc  la- 
bourers  are  felb.p?ay  ye  therefore  the 
ILojb  of  the  hanictt,thathciboulbfenb 
foo:th  labourers  into  hislHmtcft. 

3  <soyour\baycs:*28cholb,3Jfenb 
you  forth  as  lambcs  among  tbolues. 

4  Carp  neither  purfenojferip ,  no? 
fl)oes,ano  falnte  no  man  by  the  umy. 

5  *3nb  into  lbhatfocuer  houfe 
pec  enter,  firC  fay,  peace  bee  to  this 
houfe. 

6  ^nbifthefomicofpcaccbethere, 
pour  peace  (hall  reft  bpomt:if  not,  it 
ihailturnctoyouagamc. 

7  3lno  in  the  fame  houfe  rcmaine, 
eating  anb  bnnaing  fuch  things  as 
the?  giuc :  Jfo?  the  labourer  is  lbo;- 
thyofhishirc.  d5oc  not  from  houfe  to 
houfe. 

s  3nb  into  lbhatfocuer  cine  pee 
enter ,  anb  the?  rccciuc  you,  eatcfuch 
things  as  arefctbefoicyou : 

9  TLnn  healc  the  Qtftc  that  arc  there* 
in,  anb  fay  bnto  them,  Xhcaingbome 
of  <£ob  is  come  nigh  bnto  you. 

10  25ut  into  lbhatfocuer  citie  yee 
entcr,anb  they  tceciuc  you  not,gocyour 
ibaics  out  into  thcftrcctcsofthefame, 
anb  fay, 

1 1  €ucn  the  bcry  buft  of  your  tttie 
lbhich  clcaucthonbs,  lbcbocttnpeoff 
agamftyou  :nDtrbithftanbing ,  be  ycc 
furc  of  this ,  that  the  mngbome  ofd&ob 
is  come  nigh  bnto  you. 

ii  25ut3U  fay  bnto  you,-£hat  it  (hail 

be  mojc  tolerable  in  that  bay  fo?5>o= 
bomcthcti  fo?  that  citie. 

ij  *i©ocbntothec€h02a5in,tbobn; 
to  thee  25cthfaioa :  foi  if  the  mighty 
lboiftcs  hab  becne  bone  in  ICyjc  anb 
3>ibon ,  which  hauc  becne  bone  in  you, 
they  hab  a  great  ibhilc  agoe  repenteb, 
Gtnug  infacucloth  anb  afbes. 


14.  25uttt(haUbcmo?c  tolerable  fo? 
Xyjc  anb  &ibonattheiubgmcnt,  then 
fiwyou. 

15  3nb thou  Capcrnaum,tbbuh  art 
ejralteb  to  hcaucn,fbait  be  thmft  bourne 
to  hell. 

i6  *$?ee  that hcareth you,  hearcth 
mc:anbhethatbcfpifethyou,bcfptfeth 
me :  anb  he  that  befpifeth  me ,  befpifeth 
himthatfcntme. 

17  €  3nb  the  fcuenty  returoeb  a? 
gaincibifhioy.faying,  ILojb,  cueuthe 
beuilsare  fubiect  bnto  bs  through  thy 
name. 

is  3lnb  he  faib  bnto  them,  3J  behclb 
5>atan  as  lightning  fall  from  ijeaucn. 

19  Ueholb,  31  g»ue  bnto  youpotber 
to  tteao  on  ferpents  anb  fco:pions, 
anb  ouer  all  the  polber  of  the  cnemtc: 
anb  nothing  (hall  by  any  meaneshurt 
you. 

io  iRotlbfthftanbtng  in  this  reioyce 
not ,  that  the  fptnts  are  fubtcct  bnto 
you: but  rather  reioyce,  becanfe  your 
names  are  tbntten  in  h  eaucn. 

21  €3»thathourc3Jefusreioyccb 
infpint,  anbfaib,  3ithanBethcc,£>fa 
ther,  Ho?b  of  heaucn  anb  earth  >  that 
thou  haft  hib  thefe  thmgs  from  the 
tbtfe  anb  pmbent ,  anb  haft  rcucaleb 
them  bnto  babes  :euen  fo  father ,  fojfo 
it  fecmeb  goob  in  thy  fight. 

xx  nail  things  arc  bcliuereb  to  me 
of  my  father :  anb  no  man  bnoibcth 
tbho  the  fonncis ,  but  the  father : anb 
Vbho  the  father  is,  but  thefonnc,  anb  he 
to  ibh  om  the  fonnc  tbill  r  eucale  htm. 

13  C  3nb  he  turneb  htm  bnto  hts 
btfttplcs ,  anbfaib  pjtuately,  *25leffeb 
are  the  cycsiohfth  fee  the  things  that 
vec  fee 

2+  5fo?3J  tell  you ,  that  many  $to 
phets ,  anb  Kings  hattc  befireb  to  fee 
thofc  things  n>htch  yec  fee ,  anb  hattc 
not  fecne  them  :?  to  heart  thofc  things 
lbhith  yce  hcarc ,  anb  hauc  nothearb 
tljcm. 

x<>  C3Mbbcholb,atcrtaine?Laibycr 
ftoob  bp  ,  anb  temptcb  him ,  faying, 
*  Sj9aGet ,  lbhat  Ujallll  boe  toiuhcnte 
eternall  life  <  J?e  faib  bnto  him, 

x  6  ©h  at  is  lbnttcn  in  the  lalb  i  hoib 
reabeftthou< 

17  ^nb hcanfroering, faib,  Xhou 
fljalt  lone  the  lLoib  thy  <3ob  ibith  all 
thy  heart ,  anb  tbithailtby  foule ,  anb 
tbith  all  thy  ftrcngth  ,  anb  ibtth  all 
thy  mttibc ,  anb  thy  neighbour  as  thy 
ftlfe. 

x%  ^nb 


♦Mat.  10. 
40. 


Many  un- 
arm coptcs 
aJJetbefe 
rpcrtit ,  AnA 
turning  t, 
htiTliftifla 
beftud. 

'Mat.  13. 
16. 


'Mac.  2  J. 
3J- 


77  2 


Whois  a  neighbour.  S.Lukc.    Afke/eeke,knocke. 


Sec  Matt, 
10.:. 


is  anbhefaibbutohim.llhouhatt 
anfrocrcb  right :  this  bo,anb  thou  fljait 
Kite. 

19  26ut  I)c  lbilling  to  tutttfic  hlmfclfc, 
fatb  bnto  3Jcfus,3lnb  ibbo  is  nip  neigh- 
bour* 

30  3nD3}cfusanfttJcrmg,ratD,3Cect' 
tatne  man  ibent  botbnc  from  ^terufa= 
lem  to  3Jcritho,anb  fcl  amongthceues, 
lbhicbttripp"cbbtmofhisratment,anb 
lbounbeb  Dim ,  anb  bepartcb,  leauing 
himhaifc  beab. 

31  3nbbythauntetheretamebolbnc 
a  tcrtatne  i&teft  thattbay,anb  ibhcn  be 
fail)  bim,hcpaffebby  on  the  other  Cue. 

31  £nbltBcibifca!Lcuttc,ibbcnhce 
ibas  at  the  plate,  tame  anD  Iqpueb  on 
him,  anb  paffeb  by  on  the  other  fibe. 

33  23ut  a  tcrtatne  £>amaritanc  as 
hciourtteycb,camerbbcrcbcibas;  anb 
ibhcn  hcefalb  him,hce  hab  compaflton 
on  htm, 

34  3nb  tbent  to  htm ,  anb  bonnb  bp 
hiSlbounbs,  porbjingin  otic  anb  lbinc, 
anb  fet  htm  on  hts  ottine  bead ,  anb 
bjought  htm  to  an  3Jnne,  anb  toofec 
tare  of  htm. 

35  3nb  on  the  mojroib  ibhen  he  be- 
parteb,  hee  toobeouttiboll  pence,  anb 
gaue  them  to  the  bottc ,  ano  fatbebnto 
htm,Xabctarc  ofhtm,anbibhatfoeucr 
thou  fpenbett  moie ,  tbhen  3J  tome  a> 
game  iJHnll  repay  thee. 

36  oabichnoib  ofthcfcthjccthinbcft 
tljou  ,tbas  neighbour  bnto  hmu  hat  fell 
among  the  thecuesf 

37  ^nbhefatb,^cthat(heibebmcr< 
tie  on  htm.  Xbcn  fatb  3Jcfus  bnto  him, 
d5oe,aribboethoulifteibtfe. 

38  C  iBolb  it  tame  to  paffe ,  as  they 
ibent ,  that  he  entrcb  into  a  tcttatnebu> 
lage :  anb  a  tcrtaine  iboman  namcb 
$9artba,rctctueDbimlntobcrboufc. 

39  ^nDnjcehabaftftcrtaHeD^arv, 
lbhtcb  alto  fateat3Jefusfeet,aub  hcarb 
hisibojD: 

40  25ut  Martha  ibas  tttmbzcb  a- 
bout  much  fcruing ,  anb  tame  to  him, 
anDfaib,!Lo2D,Docftthouuot  tare  that 
my  fitter  hath  left  mec  to  fcrue  alone  i 
astb  her  thcrcfozc  that  (he  hclpc  me. 

41  3uib3Jcfitsanfn)creD,anbfatbc 
bnto  her, Martha  ,  Martha,  thou 
art  carcfttll ,  anb  tr oublcb  about  many 
things: 

41  ffittt  one  thing  is  nccbcfull,  anb 
£|9ary  hath  thofen  that  goot>  part, 
Vbhttlj  fl)ailuot  bee  taittn  aibay  from 
her. 


CHAP.    XI. 

Chrift  teacheth  to  pray  ,  and  that  inflantly  : 
1 1  aiTui  ing  that  God  lo  will  giue  vs  good 
things.  14  He  cafting  out  a  dumbedcinl,re- 
buketh  the  blafphemous  Pharifecs :  18  and 
fhewedi  who  are  blefied :  2.9  preacheth  to 
the  people,  37  and  reprehended]  the  out- 
ward (View  ot  holinefle  in  the  Pharifees, 
Scribes  and  Lawyers. 

iftbtt  came  to  paffc,  that 
as  he  tbas  pjaying  in  a  ter- 
tatne plate ,  ibhcn  hee  tea* 
feb ,  one  of  his  biftiples 
fatbbnto  btm,?Lo2b,tcacb 

bs  to  p?ay  ,as  3fobn  alfo  taught  his 

biftiples. 

I  Swbhecfaib bnto  them, oahen ye 
pjay ,  fay ,  *  4Dur  3f  atber  ibhith  art  in 
heauen,^aloibebbc  tbyilSamc,  3Eby 
btngbomc  tome,  Xhylbtll  be  bone  as 
tnhcauen,fo  in  earth. 

3  d5iue  bs  ||  bay  by  bay  our  bayly 
bjcab. 

4  3nb  fojgiue  bs  our  finncs :  fo?  Vbc 
alfo  fojgttie  euery  one  that  is  tubebtcb 
to  bs.3tnb  icab  bsnotinto  temptation, 
but  beliucr  bs  from  cutil. 

5  3lnb  he  fatb  bnto  them ,  nabtcb  of 
you  (ban  h'aue  a  fricnb,  anb  (hall  goe 
bnto  him  at  mibntgbt ,  anb  (ay  bnto 
him,  jf  riettb,lcnb  me  th?cc  loattes. 

6  5Fo2afrienbofminc||mbtsiour* 
ney  ts  tome  to  me,  anb  3  haue  nothing 
tofetbcfo2Chim, 

7  ^ntJhefromibithtnfljaianfraerc 
anb  fay,  Xrouble  mce  not,  the  booze  ts 
noib  (but,  anb  my  thtlbicn  are  lbtth  ntc 
m  beb :  5  tannot  rtfcanb  gtue  thee. 

8  3  fay  bnto  you  ,Xbougb  he  toill 
notrife,  anb  giuebtm,becaufct)eisbis 
fnenb:yet  bctaufe  ofhistmpojtunitte; 
hccibtllnfe  anbgtue  hun  as  many  as 
heneebeth. 

9  *3tnb  3  fay  bnto  you,3lf&c,anb  it 
fbaibc  ginen  you:  feeUe,attb  ye  fbal  finb : 
SnotBcanbttfljaibeopenebbntoyou. 

io  jfojcucryonc  that  affecth,  reect< 
uctb :  anbbetbatfcchctb,tmbttb :  anb 
to  him  that  fenocRetb.tt  fhalbc  openeb. 

I I  *3Jf  a  fonne  (bail  afac  bieab  of 
any  of  you  that  is  a  father,  lbtll  hee  giuc 
himaftonc;  £D2tf  heafftcafift),  ibtUbe 
jrb2  a  fiflj  gtue  him  a  fcrpent  < 

ii  £>2ifhcQ)aiiafKcancggc,lbtUhc 
offer  him  afcojptou; 

13  Ufyc  tben.bciugcuilUuolbbotb 
togiucgooo  gifts  bnto  yourtbilbmt: 
holb  much  nto2e  fljail  your  Ijeauenly 
father 


Matth  6. 


||  Or.  forth, 
day. 


\\OrouTcf 
his  way. 


'Matth.7. 


MaeiS.7. 


VVhoarebleiTcd.      Chap.xj, 


lonasaligne 


fi 


•Mac.9.3^. 

and  i 2.34. 


"Mat.  1 2. 

41- 


'Mm.  11. 

38. 


jfatljcr  giue  the  bolp  Spirit  to  them 
tbatariicbitu? 

14  cSnDbcibaseaftmgoutaDcuii, 
ant)  it  was  Dumbc.3nb  tt  tame  to  patfc, 
ibbcn  the  Deuili  lbas  gone  out ,  the 
Dnmbc  fpaae :  anb  tljc  people  U) oudzcd. 

1$  25ut  fome  of  them  faiD ,  *  $ec  ca> 
act!)  out  Dciuls  ttoouglj  Jocerjebub  tl)e 
cbicfcoftbcDcuils. 

16  3nD  other  tempting  him,  fought 
of  bimafigncfcombeaucn. 

17  25ut  be  anoibing  their  thoughts, 
fail)  bnto  the  m ,  Cuerp  BtngDome  Dim 
DcDagatnftitfclfe,  is  bjougbttobefola; 
tiomauD  aboufe  diuided  againft  a  houfc, 
falletb. 

is  3JfS>atan  alto  be  DiuibeD  againft 
bmuelfcbott)  than  bts  Ringbom  ftanD  < 
asecattfe  pee  fap  that  3J  tall  out  Deuils 
tb:ougb25ecl5Cbub. 

19  3nb  if  31  bp  25ecl3ebub  taft  out 
Deuils,  bp  tbbom  Doe  pour  fonnes  caft 
tbemout?  therefore  ujalltbep  be  pour 
iuDges. 

xo  ffiutif  Utbitbtlje  finger  of€>oo 
tad  out  0  cutis,  no  boubt  tbcamgDomc 
of  ©obis  come  bpon  you. 

a  1  BSfycn  a  fttong  man  armcD  nee- 
pctb  bispaiacchis  goobs  arc  in  peace : 

xx  JSutrbbtnafttongertljcnbeibal 
tome  upon  him,  anb  oucrcomc  huu , hec 
taaeth  from  htm  ail  his  armour  lbbere 
inhetruQeb,  anDDiuiDetbbisfpoilcs. 

xj  tyetbat  is  not  Ibitb  me,  tsagamfl 
mc :  anb  bee  that  gatberetb  not  ttntb 

mcftattcreth. 

X4  *  naben  the  imtleanc  fpirit  is 
gone  out  of  a  man,  he  rbaiactb  through 
b?tc  places ,  fecftmg  reft :  anb  finbing 
noncbefaptb,  U  ibill  returne  onto  mp 
ftoufc  tbbente  3f  tame  out. 

x$  ^nbiohenhcecommeth,h«fin' 
Detb  itfnjcptanb  garniujeD. 

x6  Xbcngoctbbc,anDtaaetbtohtm 
fcucn  other  fpirits  mo?e  Vbicbcb  then 
himfelfe ,  anb  tbcp  enter  in ,  anb  Dibell 
there ,  anb  the  laft  ftate  of  that  man  is 
tbojfe  then  the  firft. 

X7  C  3nb  it  tame  to  patTc  as  hec 
fpanc  thefe  things,  atcttatne  rboman 
of  the  tompanp  lift  Dp  her  Doice,  anD 
faiD  Dnto  h»m ,  zslcfleD  is  the  lDombc 
that  bare  thee ,  anb  the  pappes  Ibbicb 
tboubaftTucltcD. 

x8  aButbeefaiD^ea.ratbceblcacD 
are  thep  that  hwte  the  tbo;D  of ©ob, 
anDRccpcit. 

x9  C*3nD  tbhen  the  people  iberc 
gatheteD  tbicftc  together,  bee  began  to 


fap,  Xhts  is  an  euill  generation,  thep 
fcekeafigne,  anb  there  ujall  no  figne  be 
giuenit,  but  the  figne  of  3louas  the 
l&opbet: 

30  5n»as  Fionas  lbas  a  figne  bnto 
the  /5meuttes ,  fo  ujall  alfo  the  £>onnt 
of  man  be  to  this  generation. 

31  1Cbe4Eluccne  of  the  S>oufb  (ball 
rife  bp  in  the  mbgementlbitb  the  men 
of  this  generation ,  j  tonbemnc  them : 
fo?  (hec  came  from  the  Dtmoft  parts  of 
the  earth,  to  he  arc  the  tbtfcDomc  of  S>  0 
lomon :  anD  bebolD,  a  greater  then  &o 
lomonlsherc. 

3x  %\)t  men  of  jftineuc  ujall  rife  bp 
in  the  iuDgcmcnt  rbith  this  generation, 
anb  (ball  conbetnne  it:  fo;  thep  r epenteD 
at  the  poaching  of  3Jonas,anb  bebolD, 
a  greater  then 3Jonas  is  here. 

33  */i3omanrbbcnbebatbiigbtcDa 
canble ,  puttetb  it  in  a  fetret  plate ,  net 
tbetbttDcra  ||  buftjell,  butonatanble= 
IhcUe,  that  tljep  ibbicb  tome  in  map  fee 
the  light. 

34  *1Cbeligbtoftbebobpistbeepe: 
therefore  tbhen  thine  cpe  is  tingle,  thp 
ibbole  bobp  alfo  is  full  of  light :  but 
lbhcn  thine  cpe  is  cutll ,  tljp  bobp  auo  is 
fullofDaracncfle. 

35  ICanc  beebe  therefore,  that  the 
ltgbnubicbismtbce,bcnotbat&ncirc. 

36  JJf  thp  ttnjolc  bobp  therefore  be 
fullofltgbt,  hautngnopartoarac,  the 
Vbbolcfbaiuefu.lof  light,  asibbctitbc 
bngbt  finning  of  a  tanblc  Doetb  giue 
tljce  light. 

37  CSnb  as  he  fpaae,a  ccrtaine  pl)& 
rife  befought  him  to  bine  Untb  btm:anD 
beibcntin,anDfatcDotbneto  mcate. 

38  3inD  ibben the  pbanfe favb  it,  Ije 

marueilcbtbatbcbaDnot  firft  ibafl;cD 
before  Dinner. 

39  *  3nD  the  ILojD  faiD  bnto  him, 
/Roib  Doe  pe^bartfes  matte  ticanc  the 
outGDe  of  the  cup  anD  the  platter :  but 
pour  mlbarD  partis  full  of  raucmng 
anDtbicUeDnefle. 

4°  Pecfooics^iDuotbcfbatmaDe 
that  Vbljitb  is  ibttbout ,  maHe  that 
lDhitljiSttjithtnalfo; 

41  2Sut  ratlicr  giue  aimes  of  fucb 
things  ||  as  pou  Ijauc :  anb  bcholb ,  all 
things  are  ticanc  bnto  pou. 

4x  2iSut  idoc  Dnto  pou  pharu"cs : 
fo?  pc  tptbc  $& tut  auo  £uc,  anb  all  ma 
ncr  of  berbes,  anD  paflc  oner  lubgc 
ment,  anb  the  louc  of  ©ob :  thefc  ought 
pectobaue  Done,  anD  not  to  leauc  the 
other  buDonc. 
43  *5©OC 


"M«.5.tj 
[\StcM«t 

«M«.«.»! 


»5- 


fire  able. 


Key  of  knowledge.  S.Luke.  Whomtofeare. 


*M«.ij.6 


Mir. 


M 


'Mntth.13 
19- 


Gen. 4  8 


'Math.  13 

■3- 


43  *D3oe  bnto  pou  l&hatifecsifojpc! 
loucthcbppcrmofi  feats  inthc  Spna*. 
gogucs,  anD  greetings  mthcmarUcts. 

44  teocbntopou&cribcsanDpha; 
rifecs,  hypocrites:  fo;pc  areas  grauesi 
which  appcare  not ,  anD  the  men  that, 
tbalb  oucr  them,are  not  aware  of  th  cm. 

45  C  Xhcn  anfocrcD  one  of  tl>c 
Hampers,  anD  faiD  bnto  bun,  Rafter, 
thus  faying,  thou  repjocheft  bs  alfo. 

46  *  3inD He faiD.naoe  bnto  pou alfo 
pe  lawyers:  to  pc  lafte  men  tbttljUur-i 
Dens  gnenous  to  be  borne ,  anD  pc  pour i 
femes  touch  not  ttjc  burDens  With  one ; 
of  pour  fingers. 

47  *j@ocbntopou:ft>;tpcbuilDthc' 
fcpulchjcs  of  the  #jophcts ,  anD  pour 
fathers  UtlleD  them. 

48  XrucippebcareWitnefrcthatpe 
ailoWc  tl)e  DeeDS  of  pout  fathers:  fo? 
tftep  inDceD  BflleD  them ,  anD  pec  builD 
their  fcpulchKS. 

49 Itherefozc  alfo  faiD  the  WifcDomc 
of  <SoD ,  3  Wil  fenD  them  02ophcts  anD 
3poftles,ai.D  <°™  of  them  they  fljal  aap 
anDpcrfeeutc: 

5olLhattheblooDofarirhe}r>2ophcts, 
Which  was  fljcD  f rom  the  founDation  of 
the  W02ID,  map  be  reciuireD  of  this  go 
neratton, 

51  *  from  the  Mood  of  3fbel  bnto  the 
Wood  of  zaehanas,Whtch  pcrtfhcD  bc^ 
twecne  the  3ltar  anD  the  Xcmple :  <He< 
relp  3J  fap  bnto  pou,it  fhall  be  tcciutr  CD 
of  this  generation. 

51  *D8ocbntopou!Laibpets:fo?pc 
hauc  taftcn  awap  the  Rep  of  ruoU)- 
ltDgc :  pe  cntreD  not  m  pour  feiues ,  anD 
them  that  were  cntringin.pelihinDjcD. 

53  QmDashcfaiDthcfc  things  bnto 
them ,  the  Scribes  anD  the  iDhartfces 
began  to  bjgc  him  behcmcutlp,  anD  to 
piouoUe  nun  to  fpeafec  of  manp  things: 

54  Having  Vbaitfo;l)mi,anDfcching 
to  catch  fotncthmg  out  of  his  moutlj, 
that  they  might  attufe  hum 

CHAP.   XII. 

Chrift  prcachctli  to  hisdifciplcs  tojuoidhy- 
pocrifie  ,  and  IcarcfuIncTc  in  publifhing  his 
dofttine:  i}  V/arncth  the  people  to  beware 
01  couetoufnes.by  the  parable  ol  the  rich  msn 
who  fct  vp  greater  bai  ncs.  la  Wcniurt  not  be 
oucr  carclullot  earthly  things,  31  but  fecke| 
thckmgdonicolGod,  33  giucalmes,  \6  bee 
ready  at  a  knockc  to  open  to  our  Lord  w  hen- 
focucrhecommeth.  41  Chrilbminiltcrsare 
tofeeto  their  charge,  49  andlookc  torper-l 
(ecution.  54  The  people  muft  take  this  time  j 


of  grace  ,  58  becaufe  it  is  a  fearefull  thing  co 
die  without  reconciliation. 

[Gfi  /15  *  the  meane  time,  when 
i£s\$  there  were  gathercDtogc 


'Mn.16.6. 


w  thcran  innumerable  mul- 
j^tituDcof  pcoplc.mfomuch 
J&SJtbat  they  troDe  one  bpon 
another,  he  began  to  fap  bnto  htsDifct< 
plcsfuft  of  all,  26cJbare  ytt  of  the  lca> 
uen  of  the  ^banfecs ,  which  is  hypo* 
cnfic. 

i  *  3Fo?  there  is  nothing  toucreD, 
that  fhall  not  be  reueaicD,  neither  biD, 
that  fball  no  t  be  tmoWcn. 

3  ICbeccfojc,  Wbatfoeucr  pee  baue 
fpoucn  m  Darbcncffe ,  (hall  bee  hearD  in 
the  light:  anD  that  Wbitb  peehauefpo-' 
ben  in  the  eare,  in  clofcts,fhai  be  pjociau 
meD  bpon  the  houfc  tops. 

4  *3nD3J  fap  bnto  pou  mpftienDS, 
2Se  not  afraiD  of  them  that  Bill  the  bo- 
Dp,  ano  after  that ,  baue  no  mo?e  that 
thep  tan  Doe. 

5  ffiutlJWillfiwwatnc  you  Whom 
pou  fhau  fcare :  5Fcare  btm,wbirb  after 
bebatbmlleD,  bath  power  to  caft  into 
hell,  pea,  3J  fay  bnto  pou,  jfeare  him. 

6  3lre  not  fiue  fpatrolbes  folDc  fo? 
tlbo  llfatthings.anD  not  one  of  them  is 
forgotten  before  (EoDf 

7  25utcuentheberpbaircsofpont 
hcabareallnumbjeD :  5Fearcnotthcte5 
fo^e,  vt  are  of  mo?e  balue  then  manp 
fparroibcs. 

s  *3tifo'3Ifapbntopou)n9hofocaer 
njailconfeffeme  before  men,  him  wall 
the  Sonne  of  man  alfo  tonfeffe  before 
the  Angels  of  ©oD. 

9  zButhethatDemethmcbefojemen, 
a)aibc  DenieD  before  the  Angels  of  ©oD. 

10  3md  ibhofoeucr  ftjail  fpeaee  a 
rbo:D  againQ  the  Sonne  of  man,it  wall 
be  fojgtuen  him :  but  bnto  him  that  bia* 
fphemeth  agamathcholp  d5hott,tt  Q;al 
notbcfojgiuen. 

1 1  *  2lnD  rbhen  thep  b^ing  pou  bnto 
the  Spnagogues ,  anD  bnto  fi^agv 
Urates,  ?poibcrs,tafte  pec  no  thougl)t 
hoibonbhat  thing  pc  fhailanfrocrc,  o; 
lbhatpcfl)ailfap: 

11  5Fonhchoipd5hofrfha!  teach  pou 
inthefamehourc,ibhatpcoughttofap. 

13  <C3lnD  one  of  the  tompanp  faiDc 
bntohim,a3artcT,fpcaKctompb?other, 
tljatljc  DiuiDc  thcmhcntanceibith  me. 

14  ^nD  he  faiD  bnto  him,fll9an,U)ho 
mabc  nice  a  lUDgc ,  o.j  a  DiuiDct  oucr 
pou* 

15  3nDhcfaiDbntothem,XaftchccD 
anD 


'Matth.io 
16. 


*M«th.  10 


\SttMxii. 
10:9. 


•Matth.io 

3  2.2.UIB.1. 

■  1. 


•Matdi.io. 
1?. 


jTake  no  thought.       Chap.xij.         Awifefteward. 


f  Cjre.  doe 
they  require 
thy  joule. 


*Mat.6.25 


\\OrJtutnot 
tn  care  full 
fuficnce. 


anb  beibatc  of  couetouftics :  foj  a  mans 
life  confiftetb  not  in  tlic  abunoancc  of 
the  things  tbhicb  be  poffeffctb. 

i6  3no  be  fpafte  a  parable  bnto  them, 
faping ,  Xije  grounb  of  a  certamc  rub 
man  bzougDt  foo?tl)  plcnttfullv. 

17  3ino be  thought  ttntbln bimrclfc, 
faping,  naljat  (ball  gj  boe ,  becaufc  3 
baue  no  roomc  ibljcre  to  beftoib  nip 
fruits* 

is  2nbbcfaib,Xbisibill3fboc,3J 
Ibillpullbolbnc  mp  barnes ,  anb  bmlb 
greater  ,ano  trjere  tbill  3  befiorb  all  mp 
fruits,anbmpgoobs. 

19  anb  3  mill  fap  to  mp  foule, 
Motile ,  thou  baft  much  gooos  lapb  bp 
fo2  manp  pecres ,  tabe  tbuic  cafe ,  eatc, 
bjinacanobemcrrp. 

20  25nt  (Sob  faib  bnto  Dim ,  Xbou 
foolc,  tIjisnigDtttljp  fonle  fbal  be  rccinb 
r  eb  of  tbee:tbcn  tbljofc  fljai  tbofc  things 
be  tbbittj  thou  baft  pjouibcb  < 

21  5>o  is  be  tljat  laietb  bp  trcafurc 
fo?  himfeife ,  anb  is  not  rich  totbarbs 

C50b. 

2i  C  3nb  he  faib  bnto  bis  bifciples, 
Xbercfojc  3  fap  bnto  pou ,  *  Xabe  no 
thought  fo?  pour  life  tbbat  pec  (hail 
eate,ncitbcr  fo?tbcbobptt)batpcc  (ball 

pnt  on. 

23  XbclifciSttuwtbenmeat^anb 
tlic  bobp  is  mo?e  then  raiment. 

24  ConGbcrtl)eraucns,fb2tf)cpnri; 
thee  foib  no?  rcapc ,  tbbicb  nettbet 
baue  fto?cboufe  no?  bame ,  anb  (Sob 
feebctb  them :  $otb  mart)  mo?c  are  pee 
better  then  tbefoules* 

25  2inb  tbhich  of  poa  tbitt)  tafting 
thought  tan  abbe  to  bis  ftaturc  one 
cubite* 

26  3lfpcc  then  bee  not  able  to  boe 
that  thing  ibbirtj  is  Icaft,  ibbp  taacpee 
thought  fo?  the  reft* 

17  ConribcrtbclLtlltcshott)  tbep 
gtotbe,  tbep  toile  not ;  tbep  fpinnc  not : 
anbpctgi  fap  bnto  pou,  tljat  Solomon 
in  all  Dis  glo?p ,  tbas  not  arapeb  lute 
oneoftbefe. 

28  ^f  tben(SoDfo  clothe  tbegcafTc, 
tbbicb  ts  to  bap  in  tl)cfielb ,  anb  to  mo^ 
rotb  ts  taft  into  tfjc  oucn :  DoVb  much 

mO?e  will  he  clothepOU,©  pc  of  litle faith* 

29  3nb  fecftc  not  pee  Vbbat  pec  (ball 
eatc,  02ibbatpefballb?ume,  Hncttber 
be  pe  ofboubtfuli  minbc. 

*  30  f  0:  all  tbefc  thingsboetbenate 
ons  of  rtjc  ibojlb  feche  after:  anb  pour 
father  tmoibeth  that  pec  fjauc  neebe 
of  tbcfc  things. 


31  Cffiut  tatber  fce&epce  the  lung; 
borne  of  C5ob,  ano  all  theft  things  (ball 
beabbebbntopou. 

32  ifcarcnot,litlcflocfte,fo2itisponr 
fathers  goob  plcafurc  to  giuc  pou  the 
Ktngbomc, 

33  Sell  that  pec  bane ,  anb  giue 
aimes :  *  p?ouibe  pour  fellies  bagges 
lbbicb  lbare  not  olb  ,  a  trcafurc  tn 
tbebcauens  that  failctb  not,  Ibbcreno 
theefc  app?ochcth ,  neither  moth  to?= 
ruptctb. 

34  3Fo?  tbfttre  pour  treafure  is, 
there  tbill  vour  heart  be  alfo. 

35  *!Ut  pout  loincs  be  gicbcb  about, 
anb  pour  lights  burning, 

36  anbpepouc  fclucsliftc  bnto  men 
tljat  lbatte  fo?  tljcir  ILojb  ,\bl)cn  be  ibill 
r  cturne  from  tljc  ibcbbmg ,  tljat  tt»l)cn 
bctommetl)anbHnorRctb,tl)cpmapO' 
penbnto  l)im  mnnebiatelp. 

37  25lfffEbaretl)ofcferuants,ib!)om 
tljefLo^btbbcnljctommetf),  fbailfinb 
ibattljlng :  ©etilp ,  3  ty  l>nto  pou, 
Xljat  l)c  Cbail  girbc  ijlmfelfc,  anb  maUe 
them  to  fit  boibnc  to  mcate,  anblbill 
come  foo:t|)  anb  feme  them. 

38  anb  if  be  (ball  come  in  tljcfcconb 
Vbatth ,  02  tome  in  tbc  tbirb  ttatcl), 
anb  finbtbem  fo ,  blcffcbarc  tbofefer- 
uants. 

39  *anbtfiisbnotb,tftatiftbegoob 
man  of  tlje  rjoufc  bab  ftnoiben  tbljat 
bourctbetbccfciboulbtomcbcVbouio 
baue  tbatebeb,  anb  not  Ijaue  fuffreb  bis 
rjoufcto  bebzobcntOoioU). 

40  25e  pec  tljcrcfoic rcabp  alfo  :foj 
tbefonne  of  mancommctljatanljourc 
tt)bcnpectl)inhcnot. 

41  C  Xbcn  i^ctcr  faib  bnto  bim, 
fLoib,  fpeabeft  tl)ou  this  parable  bnto 
bs.ozcucntoaiif 

42  ^nb  the  H02b  faib,  nabo  tften  is 
rtiat  faitbfull  anb  ibifc  ftevbarb,  vubom 
bis  Ho2b  (ball  mafte  ruler  oucr  l)ls 
Ijoufljolb,  to  giuc  them  tbcic  portion  of 
mcate  in  miefcafon* 

43  26lcffeb  is  tljat  fcruant,  tbbom 
bisHo2bibbenbctommctb,  fbailfinb 
fo  bomg. 

44  )3Df  a  trttctb,  3  fap  bnto  pou, 
that  bee  tbill  mafte  him  ruler  ouer  all 
tljat  he  hatlj. 

4-5  25ut  anb  if  tljat  fcruant  fap  tn  his 
heart ,  fi0p  ILojb  bclapcth  his  com; 
ming  anb  Qjall  begmnc  to  beat  the  men 
fcruants.anb  maibcns,  anb  to  eatc  anb 
bzinbcanbtobebmnlicn: 

46  j:ije  5,02b  of  rtjat  fcruant  Vbill 

come 


•Mat.fi.  20. 


i.Pet.i. 


'Mat.  24. 
43- 


The  euill  feruant.        S.Luke.  Pilates  crueltie 


\\Or,ptdx(J. 

•Matt.lo. 
J4- 


Matt.  \C. 


'Matth  j. 


comcmabapibhcnbcc  looBcthnotfoj 
hint,  anb  at  an  houtr  lDiiru  Herts  not 
ibarc  ,anbttnll  ||cnthtmm  funber,anb 
ttnllappoint  Dim  f)is  portion  ttnth  the 
bnbelccuers. 

47  3nb  that  feruant  ttibtcb  imclb 
his  H02DS  Unit,  ant)  pjepareb  not  bim- 
fdfc,  neither  Did  arcozbing  to  his  lbill, 
(baibc  beaten  ttntb  man?  ftrtpes. 

48  But  Ijce  tbatlmcib  not ,  anD  DtD 
tonnntt  things  ttiojtbp  of  ftripes,  fl)all 
btt  beaten  lbtth  fclb  ftrtpes.  fox  bnto 
ibbomfocucr  nuieh  is  gtuen,of  hint  fljal 
bccmucbrcquircb:  anD  totbhommen 
bauccommtmbmuch,ofhtmti)cpttnU 
afttc  tbemoje. 

49  C  3  am  tome  to  fenb  fire  on  the 
cartl),  anD  ibhat  lbill  3,  if  it  be  alrcabp 

BltlDiCD^ 

50  2Sut3Jhaucabaptifmetobebap* 
tecb  ttnth,  anD  boib  amJUftraitneb 
ttllitbcaccompltfbcb* 

51  *5>uppofc  pec  that  3Jamtomcto 
giucpcatc  on  earth?  3  tell  pou,/12ap, 
bnt  rather  biutGon. 

5t  5fo:  from  henceforth  there  (balbe 
Bucm  one  houfc  DiuiDcb,  rtj^ec  agamft 
ttbo,anD  tibo  agamft  tbzee. 

53  %\)t  father  (ball  bee  DiuiDeD  a* 
gamfttbefonne,  anD  the  tonne  agamft 
the  father  :  tlje  mother  agamft  the 
Daughter ,  anD  the  Daughter  agamft 
the  mother  :  toe  mother  in  laibc  n-\ 
gamft  her  Daughter  in  laibc ,  anD  the 
Daughter  in  lain  agamft  her  mother  in 
lame. 

54  C3(nDbcfaiDaitototbcpeoplc, 
*B9bmpcfccaclouDrtfcoutoftbcB9cft, 
ftratgbtibap  ytt  (ap,  Xhcrccommctb 
a  fliottnc,atiD  ton  is. 

55  anDibbcnpcrcetbc&outblbinb1 
blott),pcfop,  i:ncrcibillbchcat,attbtt 
tommeth  to  pafle. 

56  $*chppoentcs,pecanbifccrnetbe 
fate  of  the  fftic,  anD  of  the  earth :  but 
boiutsitthat  pee  doc  not  Difccructhis 
tunc? 

57  J^ea.atiDibbpeuenofpoutfclucs 
tuDgc  pc  not  lbbat  is  right? 

58  C  ■  naben  thou  gocft  lbitb  thine 
aDuerforp  to  the  magiftrate ,  as  thou 
artinthemav ,  giuc  Diligence  that  thou 
mapeft  be  DcliucrcD  from  him,  lefthec 
Dale  thec  to  the  KuDgc ,  anD  thc^iiiDgc 
Dcliuerthcc  to  the  officer,  anD  the  offv 
ccrcaft  thec  into  pnfon. 

59  3  tell  thec,  "Ebon  (bait  not  be* 
pact  thente,  till  thou  haft  papb  the  berp 
laftjmitc. 


CHAP.    XIII. 

Chrift  preacheth  repentance  vpon  the  pu- 
nishment of  the  Galileans,and  others.  6  The 
fruitlefle  figge  tree  may  not  ftanrl.  11  Hec 
healeth  the  crooked  Woman  :  18  fheweth 
the  powerfull  working  of  the  word  in  the 
hearts  of  his  chofen,  by  the  parable  ofrhe 
graiae  of  muftard  feed,  and  of  leuen:  14 
cxhorteth  to  enter  in  at  the  ftraite  gate,  31 
and  reproueth  Herode,and  Hierufalem. 

£^*2S»  $crc  tbere  pjefent  at  that 
fll^fcaton,tomctbattolbbtm 
of  the  ©anicans ,  tbljoft 
bloobptlatc  haD  mingleD 
ttnth  there  focrtfices. 
z  3nD3cfusanfmering,foiDbnto 
them,  S>uppofc  pc  that  thefc  (Paiflcans 
tbercfinners  abouc  all  the  (Balileans, 
becaufc  tbcp  fuffercD  fuel)  things  t 

3  3  tell  pou,ii3ap:  but  except  pee  re- 
pent, yc  (hail  all  itbcttiifeperift). 

4  J5Dnhofectgbtccnc,bponibbom 
the tottw in &iloc fell,  anb flctti them, 
tbmBepetbat  tbep  mere  ||(tnners  abouc 
all  men  that  btbelt  in  $ierufolcm  < 

5  3tellpou,*Bap  but  except  pee  re* 
pent,  vc  (hail  all  Itbcttnfc  perifh. 

6  C"  $cc  fpaue  alfo  this  parable ,  % 
certaine  man  hab  a  figtrcc  plantcb  in 
his  tHineparD ,  anD  he  came  anD  fought 
fruit  thereon,anD  founD  none. 

7  Xhcn  faiD  hce  bnto  the  toeffer  of 
bis  ^Eltncparb  ,  aSebolDc,  rrjcfe  rtnec 
pecres  3  come  feelting  fruit  on  this  fig 
trecanD  fume  none :  tut  it  Dottme,  tt>hp 
nimb2cthitthegrounD< 

8  2nD  he  anfraeriug.faiD  tnto  him, 
Uojd,  let  it  alone  this pcere alfo, mi 3 
(hail  Diggc  about  f  t,anD  Doung  it : 

9  3nD  if  it  beare  fruit ,  Well :  ano  if 
not, then  after  that,  thou  (halt  rut  it 
Dottme. 

io  TLnn  he  ttias  teaching  in  one  of  the 
S>pnago  gues  on  the  Sabbath. 

ii  C^nDbeholDe,  there  ftrasatbo* 
man  rbhich  haD  a  fpirit  of  infirmitte 
eightcenc  pcercs,  anD  ttias  boibcb  to- 
gcthcr ,  anD  coulD  in  no  ttjtfe  hft  bp 
herfelfe. 

ix  ^nDtt)hen3(cfusfattiher,hccai'' 
IcD  her  to  him ,  anD  faiD  bnto  her ,  nao; 
man,  thou  art  loofcD  fro  tbp  mfirmme. 

0  ^nD  hec  lapD  his  hanDes  on  her, 
anD  immcDiatlp  flje  ttias  maDc  ttraight, 
anDglonfi'cD(5oD. 

14  ^nD  the  ruler  of  the  Spnagoguc 
anfrocrcD  ttuth  mbignation  ,  bttaufr 
tljat  3cfus  hab  IjealcD  on  iljedabbarl; 
bap, 


\\Or,Jd- 


The  ftrait  gate.         Chap.xiiij.         Dropfie  healed, 


3'- 


\\SaMM. 

■Mat.p.jy. 


1121.7.13. 


"Mat.7.13. 


bap ,  anb  Caibbnto  thepeopie,  Xljerc 
arc  fire  Daves  in  tt»l)icD  men  ought  to 
rbozKc  :m  them  thcccfozcrome  anb  be 
rjcalcb.anb  notonthcS>abbathbap. 

i<,  Xt)c  DLojb  then  anfraetcb  him, 
anb  fatb ,  Xhou  hppoecite,  bocth  not 
each  one  of  pou  on  the  Sabbath  loofe 
his  ore  0?  his  affe  from  ttjc  flail ,  anb 
(caoc  him  alba?  to  ibatcting  < 

16  ^nb  ought  not  this  Vboman  be- 
mg  a  Daughter  of  abjaham,  tbhorn 
ftatanhatt)  bounb,  loetbcfccightecne 
peeres,beloofebfcom  this  bono  on  the 
Sabbath  bap  < 

17  anb  ibhen  hec  Dab  faib  tUcfc 
things,  all  hisaDuerfartesibereavha 
mcb :  %  all  the people  rctopceb fo?  all  the 
glonous  things  that rbecebonebphim. 

is  C*£bcnfaibhc,lJntoibhattsthc 
Kingbotnc  of  <3ob  line  ?  anb  tbhercunto 
fbaiilJrcfcmblcit* 

19  fit  is  line  a  gcamc  of  muftarb  fceb, 
tbhich  a  man  toofee ,  anb  tall  into  Ins 
garben,anb  it  grctb,anb  ibarcb  agrcat 
tree:  anb  the  fonlcs  of  theatre  lobgeb 
inthebzanchesoftt. 

io  anbagatnehecfaib,sahcreunto 
(ball  31  liken  thcltingbomeof  <5tia 

11  5tisl*eleaucn,tbbtehaiboman 
tooneanD  l)ibbe  in  tbzee  ||  mcafuresof 
meale,  till  the  ibholc  ibas  leaueneb. 

11  *  anb  be  ibcnt  tbojotb  the  ones 
anb  biliages ,  teaming  anb  iourneptng 
totbacDsCjicrufalcm. 

13  XbcnfaiD  one  bnto  bun ,  ILojD, 
ate  there  feib  that  be  faueb  *anbbefaiD 

bntotbcm,  ,  „ 

14  tc'Striuetocntcrinattbcftrait 

gate :  fo?  manp,  3  &V  bnto pou ,  tbill 
feeRe  to  enter  in,  anb  (ball  not  be  able. 

i$  naben  once  the  matter  of  tbeboufc 
is  rifen  bp,  9  bath  mut  to  the  booze,anb 
pe begin  to  ttanbibitbout,  9  tonnotbt 
at  the  boo2e,faping,?Lozb,1lozD,open 
bnto  bs,anbbc  fbal  anftuerc,?  fap  bnto 
von,  giBnoibpounotibbcnccpouare: 

i6  lEben  (ball  pc  begin  to  Tap,  tecc 
bauc  eaten  anb  biunKcin  tbppzcfcnce, 
anb  tbou  baft  taught  m  our  ttreets. 

17  *2Sut  be  (bailfap,  3  tell  pou,  3 
ftnoropounottbbcnccpou  arc;  bepart 
from  me  all  pc  tbozftcrs  ofmiguitie. 

is  1tl)tte  (ball  bcibecpinganb  gna^ 
tying  of  teeth ,  .bbcnpcefball  fttWv 
rjam.anb'jraac,  anb^acob.anb  an  the 
l&opbctsin  thcbmgbomc  of  ©ob.anb 

VOUyoJifcluestrjHlttOUt. 

19  anb  tbcp  mall  tome  from  toe 
eatt ,  anb  from  the  naett,  anb  from  the 


jfroztb,  anb  from  the  South,  anb  (ball 
Qt  boibnc  in  the  Bingbome  of  <3ob. 

50  *anb  bebolb,tber e  arc  laft.ibbieb 
(baiibc  firtt;  anb  there  arc  Brtt,  ibbicb 
fbaiibclatt. 

31  CXbe  fame  bap  there  came  ccr* 
tainc  of  the  0banfes,  facing  bnto  l)im, 
<©cttl)tcont,  anb  bepart  Ijente ,  fo;^e= 
robe  .bill  mil  trjee. 

31  anbrjcfaibbntotrjcm,C5opcanb 
tell  that  f  ore,  behoib,3l  call  out  ocuiis, 
anb  3  boc  cures  to  bap  anb  to  mojroib, 
anb  tnc  tftirbbap  3  fliail  be  pcrfcttcb. 

jj  ilBcucrtrjclcfl'c ,  3  mutt  ibalftc  to 
bap  anb  to  mozrotb ,  anb  tftc  bap  fol« 
lolbing:fo?ittannotbct!)ata^opl)ct 
pcrtfl)  out  of  J?tcrufalcm. 

34  *  fl)  i^icrufalcm ,  ^icnifalcm, 
rbrjid)  bilictttDe^jophcts,  anbttonctt 
tftcm  that  arc  fent  bnto  thee;  ftoib  often 
tboulb  3  haue  gatftereb  thp  chilbjcn 
together ,  as  a  henne  uoeth  gather  her 
b!ODbbnDcrhcribings,spciboulbnofc 

3525cholb,pourhoufetsleftbntopou 
befoiatc.  anb  berelp  3J  fap  bnto  pou,  pc 
fhall  not  fee  me,  bntui  the  time  tome 
ibhen  pec  (hailfap,  25iefl"cD  isljecthat 
tommeth  in  the  il5ame  of  the  |Lo?b. 

CHAP.  XIIII. 

Clirift  healcth  the  dropfie  on  the  Sabbath : 
7  teacheth  humilitie :  12  tofeaftthepoore: 
15  Vnder  the  parable  of  the  great  (upper, 
fheweth  how  worldly  minded  men ,  who 
contemne  thewordotGod,  fhalbefhut  out 
ofheauen.  15  Thofe  whowilbehisdifciples, 
to  beare  their  crofie  mull  make  their  accounts 
aforehand  ,  leftwidi  fhame  they  reuolt  from 
him  afterward,  34  and  become  altogether 
vnprofitabIe,like  fait  that  hath  loft  his  uuour. 

iftbittametopaffcashe 
Ibcnt  into  the  houfc  of  one 
of  the  chief  0hanfes  to  eat 
bjeab  on  p  Sabbath  bap, 
_  that  thcpibatchcb  him. 
1   anbbcholb,thcreibasaccrta<ne 

manbefo2chim,ibhtthhabthcDJopGe. 

3  anb3Jcfusanuncring,rpanebnto 
thclLaubpcrs  anb^harifcs,(aping,5ls 
it  latbfull  to  heaic  on  the  Sabbath  bap^ 

4  anb  thcphclb  their  peacc.anb  he 
tookchim,anbhcalebhtm,jlcthimgo, 

5  anbanfnjcrcbthrm.faplug^hith 
of  pou  (haiihaueanaflc  oi  an  ore  fallen 
intoapit.anbroillnotftraightttuippull 
him  out  on  the  Sabbath  bap ; 

6  anb  thep  toulb  not  anfmcrcljim 
againc  to  thefc  things. 

7  canbhcputfoozthaparableto 
J?  thofc 


"Mac.IJ. 


"Mat.13. 
57- 


rri 


ic  great 


fu 


P£ 


er. 


S.Luk 


e. 


Vnfauonefalt. 


•Pcou  J  5 


•Mat.!! 


'Tob i  7. 


"Macu.i. 


thofeibhtch  vbcrc  bibDcu,Vbhcnhcmat' 
BcD  home  they  chofc  out  tt)c  chtefc 
rountes,  faying  bnto  them, 

s  BDhen  thouart  btbDcn  of  any  man 
toaVbcDbmgfttnotbolbnctnthehtgh; 
tft  roume :  left  a  mojc  honourable  man 
then  thou  be  bibDcn  of  him, 

9  2titD  hec  that  babe  thee  anb him, 
come,  ant)  fay  to  thee,  <5tuc  tl)is  man 
plate :  anD  thou  begin  Vbith  fhamc  to 
tanc  the  lou> eft  roume. 

10  *2Sutibhen  thouart  btbbcn,goc 
anb  fit  boilme  in  the  loibcft  roume,  that 
when  Iictbat  babe  thee  tommetfj,  Ijcc 
inay  fay  bnto  thec,  f  nenb,  goc  top  htgl> 
cr :  then  (halt  thou  haue  itoojflnp  in  the 
ptcfence  of  tfjem  that  (it  at  mcatc  Ibid) 
thee. 

n  'jfonbhofocucrcraitcthhimfclfe, 
fhatbc  abafeb :  anb  hec  that  humbleth 
himfclfe.fhaibccraitcb. 

it  CXhcnfaiDhce  alfo  to  him  that 
bane  him,  ashen  thou  malicft  a  burner 
ojafuppcr.callnotthy  fcicnbs,no2thy 
btethjen,  neither  ttjpftinfemen.noi  thy 
rich  neighbours ,  left  they  alfo  bib  thee 
agame,anb  a  recompentc  be  mabe  thee. 

13  25util)henthoumaftcfrafeaa,tall 
•thepooze ,  thcmaimcb,  the  lame,  the 
bluibe, 

14-  3nb  thou  fl)ait  be  blcffcb.foi  they 
cannot  rrcompcnfc  thee :  fin  thou  (halt 
be  recompenfeb  at  the  rcfurrcction  of 
thcluft. 

15  C  ^Jnb  ttihen  one  of  them  that  fate 
atmcateibirh  him,hearbthcfe  things, 
he  faib  tonto  him,  *25leffcDi5  hcethat 
fbau  catc  b:cab  in  the  Umgbom  of  <5ob. 

16  *  Xhcn  faib  hec  tonto  him,  3lccr= 
tame  man  mabe  a  great  fupper ,  anb 
babe  many: 

17  3inb  fent  his  feruant  at  fuppet 
time,  to  fay  to  them  that  mere  bibben, 
€ome,foj  all  things  arc  noili  rcaby. 

is  3lttb  they  all  mith  one  eonfent  be* 
gan  to  matte  crmfc :  Xhe  nrft  faib  tonto 
humUhauc  bought  a  piece  of  grounb, 
anb  %  muQ  neebs  goc  anb  fee  it:  3  piay 
thec  haue  me  crcurcb. 

19  3lnb  another  faib,  3  hauc  bought 
fuic  yohc  oforen,  anb3lgocto  moouc 
them :  3  Piay  thec  hauc  mc  crnifeb. 

20  Jmbauothcr  Caib/J  haucmaritb 
a  Drift :  anb  therefor  II  cannot  come. 

:i  £>o  thatftruant  came,  anb  (hew- 
fD!)isio:btl)cfc  things.  Illicit  the  ma 
tier  of  the  hotifc  being  angry  ,  faybc  to 
his  feruant,  C3oe  out  ouuUcly  into  the 
(treetcs  anb  lanes  of  the  nty,  anb  bmig 


,inrjithct  the  poo:c,  anb  the  matmcD, 
anb  the  halt,  anb  the  blmbc. 

22  3Utf)thc  feruant  faib, Ho:b,ttis 
bone  as  thou  haft  commanbeb,  anb  yet 
there  is  roume. 

23  3lnD  thclLojD  faib  tonto  the  fcr< 
uant,  Goe  out  into  the  high  itoaycsaitD 
: hebges ,  anb  compel!  them  to  content, 
1  tljat  my  hottfc  may  be  fillcb. 

]  14-  Jfo?3f  fay  tonto  you,  that  none  of 
thofc  men  lbhich  Utcrc  bibben ,  (hail 
tafre  of  my  fupper. 

25  C  3nb  there  went  great  tmflte 
tubes  ttnth  htm :  anb  hec  turttcb ,  ant) 
faib  bnto  them, 

26  *3Jf  any  man  come  to  me,  anb 

;  hate  not  his  rather,  anb  mother,  anbi 
:  ltoife,  anb  rhilDten,  anD  bicthzen ,  anb 
(titers ,  yea  anb  his  otbnc  life  alfo ,  hec 
:  cannot  be  my  bifnple. 
I  27  Sinbibhofoeucrboethnotbcare 
!  his  croffc,  anb  tome  after  mc,  cannot  be 
j  my  bifnple. 

2S  foi  itohtch  of  you  intenbing  to 
buiib  a  toltoze,  (ittcth  not  boitonc  firft, 
anu  conntcth  the  toft ,  whether  he  haue 
uirTtticnttottnifhit* 
j  29  %ta  haply  after  hec  hath  laibe 
thcfounbanon,anbtsnot  able  to  finifh 

«,aii  that  beljolb  it,  begm  to  mocb  h««. 
3°  laying ,  Xbis  man  beganne  to 
1  butib,  anb  Vbas  not  able  to  fintfh. 

31  €>JU)hatlttnggoingtomaltett)ar 
agatnft  another  tungXttteth  not  boibtte 
fir(t,aub  eonfultcth  whether  he  be  able 
nuth  ten  thoufanb,  to  mectchim  that 
;  commeth  agatnft  him  ttntb  tttocntie 
thoufantif 

32  $>t  eift ,  rohfle  the  other  is  yet  a 
great  may  off,  hee  fenbeth  an  ambafc 
Cage,  anb  beftr  eth  conbittons  of  peace. 

3  3  5)0  ItKcUnfc ,  lbhofocucr  he  be  of 
you,  that  foifaKcthnotauthathchath, 
hecannotbemybifciple. 
I  34  C*5>aUtsgooU:butifthcfaU 
Dane  loft  his  fauour,  mhcrcVbitlj  fl^au 
itbcfcafoncb; 

i  35  Tit  tsneither  fit foz  the  Mnt»,not yet 
fouhe  Dunghill:  but  men  caft  it  out.  fte 
^  tljat  hath  cares  to  hcare,  let  him  hcarc. 

CHAP.    XV. 

ji    The  parable- of  rlic  loft  fticcp:  8  Ol  the  piece 
olfiluer:  n  Ofthcprodigall Tonne. 

~*f^?  tycnDtcm  neerc  bnto  him 

9$£  all  the  publicancs  anb  fitv 

?Tl3ncrs,fo:  to  hcare  him. 

2   %m  the  0hanfes 

1  anD  5>mbes  muriuurcb, 

faying, 


"Match.  io. 
J7- 


•Mat.j.ij. 


The  loft  fheepc,      Chap.xv 


and  pro 


digallfonne. 

o __ 


Mttth.  1 8 


Tf'acbma 
heere  lr*»f~ 
U'ci  apiece 
offi/iter,  is 

heet^bc 
ptrl  of  an 
ounce  nbtcb 
comtteihto 
tine*' fence 
batfepenie, 
and  tt  etjKill 
tutbeRo- 
mane  pente, 


murmurcD  ,  faying,  Xlnsman  recti 
uctb  Onncrs,anD  catcth  roitb  tlicm. 

3  C  anD  lie  fpanc  t\)is  parable  unto 
tbcm.faymg, 

4  *n3bat  man  of  you  bauing  an 
DuriDjcDiljecpe,  if  he  loofconcoftbcm, 
Dotl)  not  leane  tlic  ninety  anD  nine  m 
the  njilDtrnelTe  ,  anD  goc  after  that 
IDlncb  ts  loft.Dntill  iic  finD  it? 

i  anD  when  be  batbfouiiD  it ,  \)tt 
layctbitonbisa)OiilDcrs,reioytmg. 

6  auDiDbcn  becommetbbomebe 
cailctb  together  his  fcicuDs,  atiD  nctgb 
boucs,layingtoiitotbcm,BeioycciDitb 
tnc,  foz  3  Dauc  founD  my  fbeepe  Vol)\t\) 
lbas  loft. 

7  31  fay  Unto  you,  that  liitcttufe  toy 
(ball  be  mbeaucn  oucr one  finncr  that 
repentctb ,  mote  then  oucr  ninety  anD 
nmetuftpcrfons,tt>btcbnccDnorepctt' 
tantr. 

8  C  Either  Vbljat  tbonian  bauing 
ten  ||  pieces  of  Cilucr ,  if  ftje  lofc  one  piece, 
Doth  not  light  a  tanDlc ,  anD  ftucepc  the 
boufc ,  anD  feeUe  Diligently  till  frjee 
finD  it; 

9  anD  tbben  (be  bath  founD  it,  (be 
cailctb  bet  friciiDs  anD  ber  neighbours 
together,  faying,  ftctoycenHtb  me,  fo? 
3  bauc  founD  j>  pictc  tt»l)ttfj  31  bao  loft. 

io  HtUclDue'J  faytmtoyou  ,  rtjere 
is  toy  in  tljc  pjcfcncc  of  the  Angels  of 
<SoD,ouer  one  finncr  that  repentctb. 

ii  canDbccfaiD,  acertameman 
baDttbofonnes: 

n  anD  the  yongct  of  trjem  taiD  to 
tjisfattjec,  jfatbet,  giucmctbepoMon 
of  gooDS  that  failed)  to  tnc.  anD  Ijc  Di- 
uiDcd  unto  tbcm  tjis  Ituittg. 

13  ^nD  not  many  Dayes  after ,  the 
yongec  fonnc  gatbercD  altogether,  anD 
toohc  bis  tourney  into  a  farrc  cotttv 
trey  ,  anD  there  VbaftcD  bis  fubftantc 
tbttrjriotousiuung. 

!4  anDtt>benbchaDfpcntati,tberc 
arofc  a  mighty  famine  in  that  lanD,anD 
be  bcgannetobcmiDant. 

i<,  ^nD  t)c  lDentatiDioyntDljimfclfc 
to  a  cmsen  of  that  totmtrcy ,  anD  be  fent 
f)im  into  Ins  fieiDs  to  fccD  frame. 

16  anD  he  wonlO  faiuc  banc  fillet* 
his  belly  lDitU  tl)c  htifHcs  that  the 
frotnc  Did  eaten  no  man  gaue  Ditto  Dim. 

17  anD  ibbcu  he  tame  to  btmfelfc, 
be  faiD ,  $)oiD  many  bircD  fcrttants  of 
my  fathers  banc  b:caD  tuough  anD  to 
rpare,anD  3  penfl)  with  hunger  i 

18  3  lDUl  anfc  ano  goc  to  my  fa- 
ther, anD  ibtllfav Unto  bun,  ifatljer,  3 


banc  finttcD  agamft  beaucnanD  before 
tbec. 

19  anD  am  no  mote  lbojfby  to  be 
tallcD  thy  fotinc :  malic  me  as  one  of  thy 
hircD  fcruants. 

io  anD  he  arofc  anD  tame  to  bisfa^ 
ther.  26nt  njhen  be  was  yet  a  great 
ibay  off ,  bis  father  fam  htm ,  anD  baD 
compaftion,  anDtannc,  anDfcllonljis 
nccctc,anDluu"cDbtm. 

x  i  anD  the  fonnc  faiD  tmto  bun,  5ra 
fbcr,3J  bauc  rmncDagamftbcaucn,anD 
in  thy  fight,  anD  am  no  mojc  tbo?tby  to 
be  talleD  thy  fonnc. 

22  26uttbc  father  faiDcto  bisfcr 
uants,ffinngfoo2tb the beft robe,  anD 
put  it  on  him,  ano  put  a  ring  on  bis 
hanD,anDft)Ooesonbisfectc. 

23  auDbJing  hither  tljcfattcD  caifc, 
anD  (till  it , anD  let  bs  catc  anD  be  mcrrie . 

14.  jfoi  this  my  fonnc  was  DeaD,anD 
is  alutc  agame  s  bee  ttias  loft,$  is  founD. 
3nD  they  began  to  bcmcric. 

25  jiftott)  bis  clDcr  fonnctbasmtbc 
ficlD ,  anDasbccanic  anDD;ctt)mgbto 
tbchoufcbcbearDmufitKcsDatmcmg, 

26  anD  be  talleD  one  of  the  fcruants, 
anD  af  neD  robat  tljcfc  things  meant. 

27  anD  be  faiD  unto  bun ,  Xby  bzo-- 
ther  is  tome,  ano  thy  father  bath  RilicD 
tbcfattcDtaifcbccaufcbcbatbtetciucD 
bint  fafc  ano  founD. 

28  anD  be  was  angry,  attDVboulD 
not  goc  m :  tbcrefoje  tame  bis  father 
out,anDmtrcatcDbun. 

29  anD  be  anfinccmg  faiD  to  bis  fa 
ther , Hoc,  thefc many  yccres  Doc  3 
feme  tbec ,  ueitbec  tranfgreffcD  3  at 
any  time  thy  tommanDcmcnt ,  anD  yet 
thou  ncuer  ganeft  nice  a  UiD ,  that  3 
might  matte  merry  iDifb  my  frictiDs : 

30  But  as  foonc  as  this  tby  fonnc 
ttias  tome ,  rbbitb  bath  DcuoureD  tby 
luting  rait!)  barlots,tboitbaORiUcDfoj 
hint  the  fattcDcalfc. 

31  anD  he  faiD  unto  htm ,  &onne, 
thou  art  cttcr  ttiitb  mc ,  anD  all  that  3 
baucisthmc. 

31  3Jt  tbas  mcctc  that  lDc  flioulD 
malic  merry,  anD  be  giaD  :fo;  this  thy 
b2otbcrmasDcaD,anDisauucagamc : 
anDU)asloft;anDisfounD. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

1  Thepar.iblcot  [lievniuftrtcw.ud.  14  Chrift 
rcprooueth  the  livpocnlie  ot  the  couetous 
Pharifces.     19    The  rich  glutton  .JodLazn- 


rus  the  beggcr. 


^1 


ano 


An  vniuft  fteward.     S.Luke.       The  rich  glutton. 


||  Thevtord 
Emu  in  the 
crigiiallcon- 
tctneth  nine 
fallow  3 . 
aa.irtSt 


||  The  wcrd 
here  inter- 
preted a 
medfttrtjn 
the  orieinaH 
contetmlh 
ahoHt  fgitre- 
teen:  bn^ielt 
and  a  pettle. 


\\Or,riche 


\'Jr,riihe 


Matlli  6. 


/3D  Dec  fort)  aifotmtoljts 
bifcipIcs/Shcrclbas  a  eer* 
taint  rich  man  ibhich  hab 
a  Stclbarb ,  anb  the  fame 
lbas  aecufeb  bnto  !)im 
thathc  hab  lbafltb  hisgoobs. 

x  anb  Dec  ealleb  him ,  ana  faib  bnto 
him ,  tyolb  is  it  that  31  hcate  this  of 
thee;  (Siueanaeeomptof  thyftcibarb* 
(hip :  fo?  thou  mayeft  bee  no  longer 
•§>tcibarb. 

3  Xhcn  the  Steibarb  faib  ibithtn 
himfclfe,  nabat  Ojail  3j  doc  ,  foj  my  102b 
talietb  aibay  from  nice  the  £>telbarfr 
(hip;  3  cannot  biggc,  tobegge  31am 
afbameb. 

4  31  ant  tcfolucb  ibbat  to  boe ,  that 
ibhtn3Jamputoutofthcftelbarbfbip, 
they  may  rcccutcmc  into  their  houfes. 

5  £>o  hec  ealleb  encry  one  of  his 
loios  betters  bnto  ftim ,  anb  fatbbnto 
the  firft,  $ott)  much  oibcft  thou  bnto 
mylo2b* 

6  anbbccfatb ,  an  hunbjcb ||mca* 
furcsof  oylc.  anb  hec  fatbc  bnto  htm, 
Xaftc  thy  btii ,  anb  fit  boibne  quicfely, 
anbttmtcfiftie. 

7  lEbcn  faib  hec  to  another,  anb 
hoib  much  oibcft  thou  t  anbheeCaib, 
an  hunbjeb  1 1  meafurcs  of lbheat.  anb 
hecfaibe  bnto  him  ,  SCanc  tjjy  bill  anb 
ilmtcfouccfcoje. 

8  ^nb  the  102b  commenbeb  the  btv 
uift&tcibarb.bccaufchchabDoncibtfc* 
ly :  io;  the  chflbjen  of  tljisuwlb  are  in 
their  generation  ibifcr  then  the  cfjtl- 
bjen  of  light. 

9  ^nb  3  fay  bnto  y  ou,30aKc  to  your 
fclucs  fnenbs  of  the  ||fl0ammon  of  bn 
rfghtcoumeirc.thatfohcnyefaile.thcy 
may  rccctuc  you  into  cuerlatttng  ha* 
buations. 

10  $ec  that  is  faithfull  in  that  rbh(cl) 
islcaft,  ts  faithfull  alfo  m  much :  anb 
he  that  is  bmuQ  m  the  Icaft, is  btitnft  al- 
fo in  much. 

1 1  gjf  tbctcfo?c  ycc  hatte  not  bene 
faithfull  m  the  bunghtcous  ||  <£&nm< 
mon ,  ibbo  lbill  commit  to  your  trufl 
the  true  riches* 

ii  anbtfycbauenotbmcfatthfulin 
that  lbhich  is  another  mans.ibho  (ball 
guic  y ou  that  lbhich  is  your  oibne* 

ij  C/fto fcruant can fcruc tibo  ma- 
ftcrs,  fo:  either  he  lbill  hate  the  one.anb 
louc  the  other  :o2circhclbillholb  to  the 
one ,  anb  bcrpifc  the  other :  ycecannot 
fcruc  GooauDtBammon. 

14  ano  the  pbanfees  alfo  ibho 


ibcrceouctous,hcarD  all  theft  things: 
anb  they  bcrtbcb  him. 

15  anb  he  faib  bnto  them ,  pt  are 
they  lbhich  tufrtfic  your  felues  befo;e 
men,  but  <E>ob  tmoibcth  your  hearts : 
foj  that  lbhich  is  highly  cfteemeb  a* 
mongft  men  ,  is  abomination  in  the 
fight  of  Gob. 

16  *1EheiaU)  anb  the  0?ophets  were 
bntfll3lohn:  finccthat  tune  the  Ring- 
borne  of  d5ob  ts  pzcachcb ,  anb  euery 
manp2eaffcthintoit. 

17  *  anb  ft  is  cafier  fo2hcaucn  anb 
earth  to  patTe,  then  one  title  of  the  law 
tofatie. 

is  *i©hofocucr  puttttlj  aibay  ^is 
Ibife,  $  marricth  another,  committcth 
abultery :  anb  ibhofocucr  marricth  htr 
that  is  put  atbay  from  her  hufbanb, 
committcth  abultery. 

19  C  %\)txt  mas  a  ccrtaine  rich 
man,  lbhich  ibasciothcb  in  purple  anb 
fine  Itnnen ,  anb  farcb  fumptuoufly  cue* 
rybay. 

zo  anb  there  tbas  a  ccrtaine  begger 
nameb  ?la3arus,  lbhich  ibas  taybcat 
his  gate  full  of  fo:es, 

21  anbbcficmg  to  bee  feb  lbith  the 
crummes  lbhich  fcl  from  the  rich  mans 
table :  mo2Couer  the  bogges  came  anb 
Itc&ebhtsfo2cs. 

rr  anbftcametopaflcthatfhcbeg* 
gee  btcb,  anb  lbas  carteb  by  the  angels 
into  ab2ahams  bofomc :  the  rich  man 
alfo  btcb,anb  lbas  burtcb. 

2j  anbtnhellhc  lift bp  his  eyes  be* 
tngmtomicnts,  anb  fecthab2ahama* 
farrc  off,anofLa5arusmhisbofome: 

Z4-  anbhccricb,anbfaib,5fathcra= 
b2aham,  hauc  mercy  on  mcc,  anbfcnb 
!La5arus,  that  he  may  btp  the  tip  of  his 
finger  m  ibater ,  anb  coolc  my  tongue, 
fo?  3J  am  tomientcb  in  this  flame. 

25  25utab«ham  faibe,  Sonne,  re* 
member  that  thou  in  thy  life  time  rccev 
uebftthy  goob  things,anb  ituclbtfcfLa* 
sartiscuill  things,  but  noibhciscom 
fo2teb,anbthouartt02menteb. 

26  anb  bcfibesall  this, bctibccncbs 
anb  you  there  is  a  great  gulfc  fircb ,  fo 
that  they  lbhich  lboulbpaffcfromhencc 
to  you,cannot,netther  can  thcypaiTeto 
bs,  that  ibonlb  come  from  thence. 

27  Xhcnhc  faib,  3J  pjay  thee  there 
fo2c  father,  that  thon  lboulbcft  fenb 
htm  to  my  fathers  houfc: 

28  5fo2Hhancfiucb?eth2en,thathc 
may  tefhfic  bnto  them ,  left  they  alfo 
come  into  this  place  of  tomtent. 

. 29  abiaham 


'Mittb.ii. 


•  Matth.5. 
18. 


'MajA.5. 


Offorgiuenefle.       Chap.xvij.    Ten  lepers  clenfed. 


!Mat.tS.7. 


'Mae.iS. 


Mat.  1 7. 


29  3tbjaham  faitli  Dnto  rjfm ,  Xrjcy  i 
haue  illjMesano  the  £2oplicts,lct  them 
hearethem. 

30  3nb  hcefaiu ,  j|3ay,  father  3ib?a 
ham  :butffonc  Went  Dnto  them  from 
rljc  Dcan.tljcv  ttjiil  cepent. 

31  2ino  Dec  faio  Dnto  htm,  3Jf  they 
hcarc  not  i$ofcs  anb  the  ^opJ)cts, 
ncitimDiilthcybcpcrnuabcb,tl)ough 
one  rofc  from  the  bcab. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

1  Chrirt  teachcth  to  auoid  occafions  otoffence, 
3  One  to  forgiue  another.  6  The  power 
offjith.  7  How  wc  arc  bound  to  God,  and 
not  he  to  vs.  11  Hecht-alcih  ten  lepers,  n 
Of  the  kingdomc  ol  God ,  and  the  co  naming 
of  the  Sonne  ot  man. 

jjenfaiDheDtvtothcbifci 
x  plcs,*3Jttsimpoflit)tcbut 
38  that  offences  Will  totnc, 
§5  but  Wo  Dnto  l)tm  through  I 
as  Whom  they  tonic. 
i   3H  were  better  fo?  him  fhatamil 
(tone  were  hangct)  about  his  nccuc,  anb 
he  call  into  thcSea.thcn  thathc  fhoult) 
offciw  one  of  thefc  little  ones. 

3  CXaHe  liecD  to  pour  fclucs :  *3if 
thy  toother  trefpafle  againtt  thee,  re- 
buuc  him,  ano  if  he  repent,  fojgiuehim. 

4  3inb  if  Dec  tr  efpaut  acjamfl  thee 
feucn  times  in  aoay ,  ant)  feucn  times 
iu  abay  turnc  acjaine  totrjcc,faying,3J 
repent,  thou  malt  fozgmehun. 

5  3mu  tl)c  3Jpottles  faiu  Dnto  the 
?Lo«!D,  'Jntrcafc  out  faith. 

6  "Znn  the  ?Lo2Dfait) ,  ^fvee  hab 
faith  as  a  gralncof  muftarb  ftcbe,  yee 
might  fay  Dnto  trjis&ytamtnc  trec,26c 
thou  piucRco  Dpby  the  root,anb  be  thou 
piantcb  m  the  tea,  ft  it  fhoult)  obey  you. 

7  But  Which  of  vou  hauing  a  fcr- 
uautploWing,o2fecbingcattell,Willf<ty 
Unto  him  bv  t  by  lbhett  he  is  tome  from 
thcficlb,(5ocanDutt)oWnetomcatc< 

8  3tnt>  \lnll  not  rather  fay  Dnto  him, 
<3|9afec  rcaoy  WhercWtth  3  mayfuppc, 
ant  girt)  tl)v  felfc ,  anb  feme  me ,  till  31 
haue  eaten  anb  DutnUcn :  anb  after- 
warn  thou  fhalt  cateanb  biuinc. 

9  2Docthhethanftcthatfcrtiatu\bc; 
caufc  Dec  tub  the  things  that  Were  torn 
maubcbhim^troujuot. 

io  £>o  liKcwifc  yciDhcn  ye  fhalhauc 
bone  all  thofc  things  Which  are  tom- 
manbcbyou,fay,  naccarc  unpiofitable 
fcruants :  luce  hatic  bone  that  Which 
Wasourbuetytoboe. 

ii  C3nMtcamctopaflc,ashctt)cnt 


to  l|itru£alem ,  that  hec  paffeb  ttwo  w 
the  mibs  of  Samaria  anb  ©able. 

12  3nb  as  he  entreb  into  a  ccrtaine 
tillage ,  there  met  him  tenne  men  that 
Vbcre  lepers,  which  ftoot)  afarrc  off. 

13  3nb  they  itftcb  Dp  their  Dottcs,anb 
faio,  ^Jcfusmaltcr  haue  merry  on  Ds. 

14  3tnb  When  hefaw  them ,  Dec  fart) 
Dnto  thcm,*<!5oefbeW  your  fclucs  Dnto  -lcu.i^. 
the&zielts.  3nbtt  came  to  paffc,  that 
asthey  went,  tljcv  were  tleanfeb. 

15  Stub  one  of  tljem  When  hee  faWe 
thatheiDashcaieb,  turnco  bacfec ,  anb 
With  a  loub  Doieeglojifict)  ®ob, 

i6  5tnb  fell  boWnc  on  his  face  at  his 
feet,  guung  him  thaufes :  anb  he  was  a 
Samatitaue. 

17  3lnb  3Jcfus  anfromng,faiD,H9cre 
there  not  ten  cleanfcb,bnt  Where  arc  the 
nine* 

is  inhere  are  not  founbthat  return 
neb  to  giuc  gio:y  to  ©00 ,  fane  this 
Granger. 

19  3mb  he  fatb  Dnto  him,3trife,go  thy 
Way,thyfaith  hath  mabcthec  Whole. 

20  C^nn  When  hec  wasDemanbeb 
of  the  ^harifcs,whciithc  Htugbomc  of 
©obfljoulb  come,  hee  anvVoctct)  them, 
ant)  faib,  Xhc  bingbomc  of  ©ob  com^ 
mcth  not  With  !l  obferuation. 

21  Neither  n)authevfap,|Loehere, 
ozloc  there:  foz  beholb.the  hlngbome  of 
<i50b  is  ||  Witrjin  you.  II  0r>  """•£ 

22  5tno  hee  fatu  Dnto  the  bifciplcs, 
XhcDayeswillcome^hcnyeniaiibe 
firctofeconcofthcDaycsoftljc5)Oune 
of  man ,  anb  y c  fljail  not  fee  it. 

23  *3nb  they  (hallfay  to  you ,  £>ee 
here,  02  fee  there:  00c  not  after  them, 
no:  follow  tljem. 

24  iFozasthehghtningthat lighten 
ncth  outof  theonc  part  Dnber  heauen, 
fl)incth  Dnto  the  other  part  Dnbcr  hea- 
uen: foQ)a»aifothc  Sonne  ofmanbe 
in  his  oay. 

25  2But  firO  mufthee  fuffcr  many 
things,  6t  be  rcicctco  of  this  generation. 

26  ^nb  as  it  was  m  the  bayes  of  *c.« 
ii5oc:fo  fliautbcalfo  intljcbaycsofthe 
Sonne  of  man. 

27  Xhcybibcate,theyb;anuc,  they 
marrieb  Wiucs,  they  Were  giucn  m  ma 
riagc,  Dntill  the  bay  that  iRoe  entreb 
into  the  arhe:  anb  the  floob  came,  ant) 
bcflroycbthcmail. 

2s  *  Uiftcwifc  aifo  as  it  was  mthe  *gc,...?. 
bayes  of  Uot,thcy  bib  eat,  they  bjanfte, 
they  bought,  they  folb ,  tljcy  piantcb, 
trjeybiulbeb: 

ty  3        29  But 


\\Or,wilb 

oulvard 

fievr. 


}°> 


"Mat.  24. 

J3- 


Anvniuftiudge.        S.Luke.         Of  litle  children. 


Ctn.19. 

6. 


"Mat  J4.40 


\\Tlm.l6. 

Vtrfeu  van 
ttngtimtf} 
of  tht  Gretk. 
CWel. 
•Maci.)  IS 


i."nicf< 


19  isutthc  fame  Day  tljatlLotttcnt 
out  of  £>oDomc,  tt  rameD  6rc  atrt>  tyim- 
ftoncfromhcauen,$DcOroycDthemalI: 

30  eucn  thus  (ball  tt  Dec  m  the  cap 
ibhcn  the  Sonne  of  mamsteuealeD. 

31  3uthatDayheu)htch(hallbcbp' 
on  the  Moufe  top ,  anD  ijts  ttuffc  in  the 
lioufr ,  let  inm  not  conic  Dotbnc  to  take 
itatbay :  anu  he  that  is  in  the  fielb,  let 
htm  liRetbife  not  tcturne  baefce. 

31  *3Semeinber!Lotsnnfc. 

33  *  nahofocuer  ft^au  fceReto  fauchis 
life,  (hall  lofe tt,  anD  Vbhofocucr  (hall 
lofc  tjis  life,  (haiipicfcrtte  it. 

34  *  3  tell  pott ,  tn  that  night  there 
mallbctibomcnittoncbcbjtheoncfhal 
be  taKcu.the  other  fl)all  be  left. 

35  Tlbo  ttjomen  (ball  bee  grfnblng 
together  the  one  ft) all  be  taRcn.atiD  the 
other  left. 

36  iiTibomcnfljallbetnthcfielD  the 
one  fh  all  be  taRcn,  ant)  the  other  left. 

37  3nD  tljcv  anttocreD,  anD  fatD  bn< 
to  him,  *  tBhere.lLnjD  <2inD  he  fatb  bn= 
to  them,  ushcrcfocucrtheboDyts,  tl)i= 
thet  Vbill  the  eagles  be  gathereD  togc< 
tljer. 

CHAP.    XVIII. 

3  Of  the  importunate  widow.  9  OrthePhari- 
feeand  the  Publicane.  15  Children  brought 
toChrift.  18  A  ruler  that  would  folowChrift 
but  is  hindred  by  his  riches.  2  8  The  reward  ot 
them,  thatleuue  all  tor  his  (ake.  31  Hee  fore- 
fhewethhis  death,  35  and  reflorcth  a  blinde 
man  to  his  fight. 

$?S?/^?S  /BD  he  fpa&e  a  parable  bn? 

fP^SftSlflf  t0  ^tm  '  co  th,s  ende'  ^at 

^\m  men  ought  *  aiibaycs  to ; 
<|p;ay,attD  not  to  faint, 

%iW&^r,  1  Saying/There  tbas 
in  a  city  a  gjuDgciblnch  fcarcb  not  Gob 
neither  regarDcD  man. 

3  3toD  there  urns  a  ltntiotDc  tn  that 
cmc.aiiD  (be  came  bnto  him,  faying,  %A 
utngc  mc  of  mine  abucifane : 

+  3no  lice  mouiD  not  foj  a  lbhlle. 
But  aftenuarb  he  faib  toithin  himfclfc, 
Though  3  fcarc  tiotGoD ,  notrcgatb 
man, 

<  net  becaufc  this ibiDotti troublcth 
me  Jlibtll  aucngc  her,  left  by  her  conn 
miail  coinmmg,  (he  lbcaric  mc. 

6  3lnD  the  lLo:b  faib,  l^carc  lbhat 
the  bniuftuiDgc  faith. 

-  3ttib  (bail  not  (3ob  aucngc  his 
cmneclccubbith  trie  Day  anD  night  bn- 
to  him.tliogh  lie  bcarr  long  lbith  thcim 

s  3  tt  11  you  that  he  lini  aucngc  them 


fpccDily. /!3ciicrtbeleffc,ibbentbc;&on 
of  man  tommeth,  (hall  hee  finD  faith  on 
the  earth* 

9  ^nDhefpanethisparablebntoter- 
tatnc  rbhith  truftcD  tn  thcmfclues  1 1  that 
they  Ibcrc  righteous,  ?  DefpifeD  other : 

10  Tibomentbcntbptnto  the  Tem- 
ple to  pjay,  tbconeapharifec,  atiDtbe 
other  a  publicane. 

1 1  The  pbarifec  ftooD  anD  p2ayeD 
tbusmtthbtmfclfc,<3oD,3JtbanRtbee, 
that  5  am  not  as  other  men  arc,  erto^ 
turners,  bniuu\aDultercrs,  o?euenas 
ithtsi&ublitanc. 

11  3Jfaftcttnfcmtbc  mccae ,  3Jgiue 
tithes  of  all  that  3  poffefle. 

13  3nD  the  publicane  ftaiiDingafarre 
off,  iboulD  not  lift  Dp  fo  much  as  his 
eyes  Ditto  heauen :  but  fmote  bpon  his 
bzcaft,  faymg,  <5oD  me  mcrcifull  to  mee 
altnncr. 

14  3ltellyou,thisntanrbentDotbne 
to  his  houfe  tnfhficD  rather  then  the  o> 
tbet:*  #02  cuccy  one  that  craitetb  bun* 
felfc,  (hall  be  abafeb :  anb  hee  that  hum; 
bletb  himfelfe,(hall  be  ejcaltcD. 

15  3lnD  they  bzought  bnto  htm  alfo 
tnfants,that  he  tboulD  touch  them :  but 
ibhenhtsDtfnplcsfalbit ,  they  rebuUcb 
them. 

i6  23ttt3IefustaHcD tbembnto  him, 
anD  taiD,  suffer  litle  cbilDjen  to  tome 
bnto  mc ,  anD  fo.'bib  them  not :  fo?  of 
fuch  is  the  RtngDome  of  <5oD. 

17  tUcrely3!faybntoyou,i0hofo^ 
tier  (hall  not  rctcute  the  RtngDome  of 
d5oD  as  a  Ittle  chtlD,  thai  in  no  Ibifc  enter 
therein. 

is  3nD  a  certame  ruler  afbeD  him, 
faying,  good  matter,  ibhat  (hail3J  Doc 
to  inherit  ctcr  nail  life? 

19  *  3nD3JcfusfatD bnto  him,  xohy 
tailed  thou  nice  goob?  i5onc  is  gooD 

failC0nC,thans(30D. 

20  Thou  tmoVbcft  the  tommaunDc^ 
:  ments,  T>ot  not  tommtt  aDultcrte  JDoe 
I  not  bill,  S?ocnotfttaie,  2>oe  notbeare 
1  faife  lintncffc ,  honour  thv  father  anD 
'thy  mother. 

11  3nDhcraiD,3nifhefchauc3lRept 
from  my  youth  bp. 

xi  ii5oib  ibhcn  ^Jcfiis  hcarD  thefe 
things ,  hccfaiDbnto  him,  Pet latbcft 
thou  one  thing  :S>cll  all  that  thou  haft, 
anD  Diftributc  bnto  the  poo:c ,  anD 
thonmarthaitctrcafurcinhcauenjanD 
tomcfolloromc. 

13  ^nDibhenht  hcarb  this, he  tbas 
bcry  fojomfull,  fo.z  he  lbas  bcry  rich. 
1 24  3nD 


I  Or,  JJ  fo. 
c grighrt ciu 


'  Ma  1  ib.  13 


'Miith.  15. 
16. 


Theblind 


rcccmet 


h  Ch 


ap.xix. 


fight. 


Zacl 


acneus. 


'  Mat.  I 
»7- 


•Mat.: 
'7- 


*  Mat.  l 


24  anb  ibbcn'Jefus  Tarn  that  bee 
ibas  bcry  foiroibfull,  be  faib  ,  $oib 
barbly  tl)al  tljey  tljat  bauc  riches,  enter 
into  the  Uingbomc  of  <5oo  < 

2.5  5Fo*  it  ts  carter  foj  a  eamel  to  goe 
tbo;olb  a  nceblcs  eye ,  tl)enfo,:  a  run 
man  to  enter  mto  tlic  bmgbom  of  <3ob. 

z6  anb tbey that  bcarbit.fau^ttJDo 
tbcntanberaueb* 

27  anb  be  Taib,  nothings  lbbitb 
are  bnpoffible  ibitb  men ,  arc  poffiblc 
tbitb  ©Ob. 

is  *3Eben  peter  raib,!Loc,ibcbaue 
leftail,anbfolloibcbtbcc. 

2  9  anb  tie  faib  bnto  trjem ,  Alertly, 
5  ray  bnto  you ,  there  is  no  man  that 
rjatrj  lcftboufe,02  parents,  o:  bxt\)itn, 
oi  \bifc,o;  cI)ilDzcn,fo2  the  Bingbome  of 
©obsfafee, 

30  i©bo  than  not  rcceluc  mamfolb 
mo;c  m  this  p;cfent  time ,  anb  m  the 
ibojlb  to  tome  life  eucriafting. 

ji  C*Xbcnbce  toohe  bnto  him  the 
ttbelue ,  anb  fatb  bnto  them,  iScDolD, 
tbc  goe  bp  to  ^lernfaicm,  anb  ai  trjmgs 
that  are  lbiitten  bptfjc  $2opbcts  ton 
tenting  the  fonnc  of  man ,  mall  be  at 
complifbeb. 

32  jFo?l)e  mall  be  beliucteb  bnto  trjc 
<Sentucs,anb  a)allbemorHeb,anbfpitt= 
full?  inttcateb  nub  fpittcb  on : 

33  anb  they  fljail  fcourgebtm ,  anb 
put him  to  bcarb ,  anbtbetbirbbaybe 
(ball  rife  agatne. 

34  3nb  they  bnberttoob  none  of 
ttjefe  things :  anb  tfjts  facing  mas  bib 
from  them  ,  neither  nncib  they  the 
things  ibDitfjTberefpoben. 

3?  C*anbittametopa(rc,tbatasbc 
tbas  come  nigl)  bnto  "Jericho  ,  a  tcr- 
tame  blinbe  man  fate  by  the  ibayGbc, 
begging, 

36  anb  bearing  the  multftubepafrc 
by  ,be  afbcb  rbrjat  it  meant. 

37  anb  they  tolbc  bun  that  3JcuiS  of 
jBa?aretbpaffctbby. 

38  anb  be  crieb,  faying,  "Jems  thai 
fonne  of  S>auib,rjaue  mcrnc  on  me. 

39  anb  tbey  tbbtcbibcnt  beftucre 
bulteb  him ,  trjat  nee  (boulb  rjolbc  fjis 
pcate:  bnt  lice  trieb  fomucb  tbcmojc, 
Xr)ou  £>onnc  of  2>auib,  Ijauc  mcrnc 
on  nice. 

40  ^nb  Refits  ttoob  anb  comman- 
beb  Dim  to  be  brought  bnto  him  :anb 
rblicn  rje  ibas  tomcnccre,l)e  afKcb  Ijun, 

41  -Saying,  nabat.btit  thou  that  3J 
tt)ailbocbutothcc?anbhcfaib,2lo?b, 
that  3J  map  recciue  my  fight. 


42  anb'JJcfus  faio  bnto  \)\m ,  He? 
tciuc  thy  figbuby  fattrj  bath  fattcb  thee 

43  anb  untncbtately  he  receuieb  his 
figtjt ,  anb  folloibco  him  ,  glo2ifytng 
Gob :  anballthe  people  ibljcn  they  falb 
it,ganc  p?aifebnto  <3ob. 

CHAP.     XIX. 

1  OfZacheusaPublicane.  11  The  ten  pieces 
ofmouey.  18  Chrift  ndelhinto  Hiemfaleiu 
with  triumph:  41  weepethouei  it:  45  driueth 
thebuiersandlelleisourot  the  Temple:  47 
teaching dayly  in  it.  The  rulets  wouldhaue 
dellroyed  him,but  for  feare  of  the  people. 

S$i#Y3£^ -tf20  '^entrcb,  aub  paf 


_  Sg    2   anb  beholb  ,  there 
s^Vfibasa  man  nameb  za 


>  cheus  ,  ibhith  Vbas  the 
chcefc  among  tlje  publtcancs,  anb  he 
Vbas  nth. 

3  anb  he  fought  to  fee  3Jefus  tbho 
hctbas,anbtoulbnotfoHhcp:cafe,  be- 
caufc  he  tbas  litlc  of  Qatur  c. 

4  anbhcranncbefoie.anbclimcb 
bp  into  a  fvcomoze  tree  to  fee  him,fo;  he 
ibastopaffcthatibay. 

5  anb  tbhen  ^cfus  came  to  the 
plate,  he  loolicb  bp  anb  falb  him ,  anb 
faib  bnto  him,  zathcus ,  ma'be  haftc.f 
comcbotunc,fo2tobay3Fmuttabibcat 
thyhowfe. 

6  anb  be  mabc  hatte ,  anb  came 
botbncanbcctnuebhimioyfully. 

7  anb  ibhen  they  falb  it ,  rhey  all 
murmureb,  faying,  %\m  he  lbas  gone 
tobegucftrbtthamanthat  tsafinncr. 

8  anbZachcttsftoob.anbfaibbnto 
the!Lo2b,26cholb,!Lojb,thchalfeofmy 
goobs3J  gmctothepoo^c,  jif3Jhauc 
taken  any  thing  front  any  man  by  faifc 
accufation3  reftojchimfourcfoio. 

9  anb^lcfus  faib  bnto  him ,  Xhis 
bay  is  faluation  tome  to  this  houfe,  fo2= 
fomuth  as  hcaifois  the  fonnc  of  ab^v 
ham. 

10  *J?02  the  fonne  of  man  is  tome  to 
fccltcanb  to  fauc  that  tbbtcb  mas  loft. 

n  anb  as  they  hcarb  thefc  things, 
heabbeb  anb  fpattc  a  parable,  becaufc 
he  lbas  nigh  to  fiicrufaimi,aub  becaufc 
they  thought  that  the  umgbomc  of 
Cob  fhouib  immebiatcly  appeare. 

12  * ^cfaibthcrefozc,  atcrtamcuo 
blcmanibcntmtoafarrccountrcy ,  to 
rcccuiefo^  himfelfe  a  uingbomc,  auo  to 
rcturnc. 

13  anb  hec  calico  his  ten  remains, 
auo 


"Matt.  18. 


'Mact.15. 

'4- 


Money  2iuen  our.      S.Luke.      Stones  would 


,eyg 


cry 


1 1  mzi'».i 

here  t  ran  Jin 
ted  A  pound* 
is  twefue 
vnncerand 
an  halfty 
w':tch  accor- 
ding tcfi'it 
p>UU.igi  the 
cimeeff  3. 
ptttndttwo 
puttings  fixe 


"Matth.13 


'Ma1th.11 


anDDeliuerco  them  ten  jipotttiDs,  anD 
faiD  bnto  them,  &)ccup?  till  _0  tome. 

14  26tit  his  rumens  IjatcD  him ,  anD 
fentamelTagc  after  bim.faying.naeltotl 
not  bane  this  man  to  reignc  ouer  bs. 

15  3tot>  it  came  to  pafre,tbatibbenbc 
lbas  returncD ,  bailing  rcectucD  the 
UUigDome,  then  bee  tontmaunDcDtbcfe 
fer  uants  to  be  caiicDbnto  bim.to  itobom 
bcbaDgtuctttbemoney,tbatbcemigbt 
nnoib  boiu  much  euery  man  baD  gat* 
neDbytrabing. 

16  Xbcn  came  the  firlUaytngJUiD, 
thy  pouno  hatb  gaincD  ten  pounDs. 

17  3nDbcfaiD bnto  bint,  <03cll,tbou 
gooo  feruant :  becaufe  thou  haft  bene 
faithfullm  a  bcry  little,  bane  thou  au^ 
tbontie  ouer  ten  cities. 

is  3ttD  the  feconD  tame ,  faying, 
H02D  ,  thy  pounD  bath  gamcD  fiue 
pounos. 

19  3nDbccfaiDliHCibifetobtm,2iSee 
thou  alfo  our  r  fine  nncs. 

20  3tnD another tame,faving,ILo;D, 
bcholD,bercistbvpounDn)f)irb3baue 
feept  layD  top  in  a  napUm : 

ii  5To^  3  feareD  thee ,  betaufe  thou 
art  an  auftcrc  man :  thou  tatted  bp  that 
thou  lavcDfl  not  Doibne, anD  reaped 
tbattbouDiDflnotfolb. 

11  2inD bee  faith  bnto  him ,  £)ut  of 
tbmeolbnc  mouth  tbiir?  uiogc  thee, 
thou  BjickcD  feruant :  HHjou  knetbett 
that  3  was  an  auftete  man,  tailing  bp 
that DlayDc not Dolbnc,  anD  reaping 
that  3  did  not  foil). 

13  sel)ctcfb;e  then  gattcft  not  thou 
my  money  into  the  battcne,  that  at  my 
committg  31  might  bauc  rcquircD  mine 
olbncibitbbfury; 

24  3nD  be faiD unto tbcm  that ftooD 
by/Eattc  from  bun  the  pounD.attDgiuc 
itto  him  that  hatb  ten  pounDs. 

25  3lnD  they  faiD  bnto  ljini,fLojD,hc 
hath  ten  pounDs. 

26  fm3 fay  bnto you, * Xhat bnto 
cucry  one  ibbtcb  bath  ,fbaibegiucn,anD 
from  bun  that  bath  not,  cuen  that  bee 
bath  fbalbc  talicn  aibay  from  bun. 

17  25ut  thofe  mine  enemies  ibbicb 
ibouiD  not  that  3  fboulD  reignc  ouer 
tbcm.bnugbttber.atiD  flay  tbcm  before 
mcc. 

is  canDibbcnhcbaDtbusfpoftcn, 
hcibent  before ,  afcenDutgbptotyieru- 
faicm. 

29  *  3(nD  it  tame  to  palTc  ibbcn  he 
luascouie  nigh  to  lictbphageanDaBe- 
tbanie ,  at  tljc  mount  callcb  the  mount 


ofjDiiucs.befctutwoofbisDifcipies, 

30  laying,  ©ocye  into  the  billage 
ouer  agamfl  you ,  tn  the  ibbicb  at  your 
entrtng  ye  (ball  finD  a  Colt  tlcD,  lbherc^ 
on  yet  neucr  man  fate :  loofc  bun,  anD 
bung  him  hither. 

31  3lnD  if  any  man  af„e  you ,  t©hy 
Doyeloofebinu  Xbusfballye  fay  bnto 
bim,  zseeaufe  the  JLojd  bath  neeDc  of 
btm. 

32  2nD  they  that  tbere  fent ,  ibent 
their  ibay,  anDfoutiD  cuen  as  bee  baD 
faiD  bnto  them. 

33  3tnD  as  they  tbere  looting  the  tolt, 
the  oltottcrs  thereof  fatD  bnto  tbcm, 
nabPloofcyctbcColt* 

34  3tnD  they  faiD ,  Xbe  JLojD  bath 
necDofbim. 

35  ^uDtbcy  brought  bun  to  _Jcfus: 
anD  they  taft  their  garmentsbponthe 
Colt.anD  they  fet  Refits  thereon. 

36  3inDashcibettt,tbeyfp2caDtben; 
clothes  in  the  tbay. 

37  3lnD  lbben  be  lbas  tome  nig!) 
euen  noib  at  the  Deftent  of  the  mount  of 
£>uues,  tbeibbolemultmiDcoftbe  Difc 
tiplesbeganto  rcioyte  anD  pzatfe  ©oD 
lbttb  a  louD  boitc ,  (0;  all  ttjc  mighty 
uwacs  that  tbey  baD  feene, 

38  Saying  ,  26leffcD  bee  the  Using 
that  tommen)  in  the  /3ame  of  the 
Hojd ,  peace  tn  bcaucn,  anD  glojy  m  the 
^tgheft. 

39  3nD  Tome  of  the  tebarifces  from 
among  the  muintube  faiDe  bnto  hint, 
Rafter  ,rebubc  thy  Difnples. 

40  3uiDbeanfaiereD,anDfaiD  bnto 
tbcm,  3  tell  you,  that  if  tbcfe  fboulD 
bolDc  their  peace,  the  ftonesiboulDtnv 
meDiatlycryout. 

41  C3  nD  lbben  he  lbas  come  necre, 
he  bchclD  the  city  anb  ibept  ouer  it, 

42  Saymg,_3f  tboubaoft  bnoibcn, 
cuen  thou ,  at  lead  in  this  thy  Day,n)c 
things  ibbicb  belong  bnto  thy  peace! 
but  notb  tbey  are  bib  froiii  thine  eyes. 

45  ifo;  the  Daycs  fljail  tome  bpou 
thee ,  that  tbme  enemies  fl)aii  tall  a 
trench  about  thee ,  anD  compaffe  thee 
rounD ,  ano  Hccpe  thee  m  on  eticry  QDc, 

44  3lnD  (ball  lay  thee  cuen  ibith  the 
groimD,  anD  thy  chilD^en  ttntbm  thee : 
ano  tbey  (bail  not  icauc  tn  thee  one 
(tone  bpou  another  ,  became  rtiou 
Huc\bcftnottbctimeofthybifitation. 

4^  *^uD  hcibent  into  the  ICcmplc, 
anb  began  to  taft  out  tbcm  that  folDc 
thcrem,anD  them  that  bought, 

46  Saying  bnto  them ,  3Jtisibnt; 
ten 


'Match.  ;i. 


The  parable  oftlie     Chap.xx.        Vineyard  let  our. 


edoahtm. 


Matt.  21. 
'J- 


•Mat.ii. 

J5- 


ten ,  ££p  houfc  ts  the  houfc  of  piaper: 
but  pc  baue  mabc  tt  a  benne  of  theeues. 

4.7  anbbetaughtDailpmthcXcuv 
pic.  23ut  the  chiefc  piieflcs  aub  the 
g>tnbes ,  anb  the  tbiefc  of  the  people 
fought  to  Dcllrov  Ijim, 

48  ^nD  toulti  not  finbe  ibhat  thep 
might  boe:fo2  all  the  people  lbcte||  be- 
rp  attentate  to  ijcacc  ijtm. 

CHAP.    X  X. 

1  Chrifl  auouchetn  his  authoritie  by  a  cjueftion 
of  Iohus  Baptifnie.  9  The  parable  of  the 
Vineyard.  19  Of  giuing  tribute  to  Ccfar. 
17  He  conuinccth  the  Sadduces  that  denied 
inerehirreclion.  41  HowChrifhs  thefonne 
ofDauid.  45  Hee  warneth  his  difciples  to 
beware  of  the  Scribes. 

il3b*itcamctopacre,that 
ononeofthofebapes,  as 
he  taught  the  people  in  the 
Xcmple,anb  pjeachcb  the 
©ofpcl ,  the  chiefe  j&fcfts 

ant)  the  Scribes  tame  topon  htm .  tblth 

the  fibers, 
i   3mbfpa&cbntohim,fapmg,i:ell 

bs,bpibhatautho2iticbocft  thouthefe 

thmgs;  02  lbho  is  hee  that  gatie  thee 

this  authojttlc; 

3  anb  hee  anfroeteb ,  anb  faib  bnto 
them ,  3Jtbill  alfo  afacpou  one  thing, 
anbanuuereme. 

4  Xhci5aptifmeof3Johtt,iuasit 
fcomheaucn,o2ofmen; 

5  3nb  thep  rcafoncb  tblth  them* 
feiues,fap(ng,3Jf  ibccfhallfap,  jFrom 
heaucn,hc  ibill  fap,  ©hp  then  beleeneb 
pec  him  not; 

6  25m anb  iftbc far , £>f men.all  the 
people  null  ftonc  bs :  fo?  thev  be  per* 
fmabcb  that  35ohn  ibas  a  02ophet. 

7  3no  thev  anfrocrcb ,  that  tijep 
tottlb  not  tell  lbhence »  was. 

3  anbUefusfaibbntothcm,  0fr 
ther  tell  3  pott  op  ttljat  authonne  3 
boethefc  thmgs. 

9  Xhcn  began  hee  to  fpeanc  to  the 
people  this  parable:  *X  certafne  man 
pianteb  a  bincpacb ,  anbletttfoojthto 
hufbanbmen,  anb  tbent  mtoafarrc 
countrcpfo?  a  longtime. 

io  anD  at  the  Feafon ,  hee  fent  afcr- 
nant  to  the  hufbanbmen,  that  thep 
fhottlb  giue  him  of  the  fcutt  of  the  bine- 
parb ,  buttheh  uf  banbmen  beat  him, 
anbfenthimaibapcmptte. 

1 1  3nb  againehee  fent  another  fee- 
uant ,  anb  thep  beat  him  alfo ,  anb  en* 


treateb  him  fbamefullp,  anb  fent  him  a 
tbap  emptie. 

n  anbagainehcfcnttbcthlrb,  anb 
thep  mounbeb  him  alfo ,  9  caft  bim  out. 

oXhcufaibthelojbofthebiueparo, 
nahat  (hall  3JDoe?  9  mill  fenbmpbe- 
loucb  fonne :  it  map  be  thep  ibui  reue- 
rence  him  ibhen  thep  fee  him. 

14.  ffiunbhenthc  hufbanbmen  fatb 
him,  thepreafoneb  among  tbemfelttes, 
faplng,"£hisisphcire,come,letbsb.ill 
him,  that  the  inheritance  map  be  ours. 

h  £>o  thep  taft  him  out  of  the  bine* 
parb ,  anb  tulleb  him.  t©hat  tf)erefo« 
(hall  thclo:b  of  tfjc  btneparb  boebnto 
them; 

i6  l?ee  ftjan  tome  anb  beftrop  thefe 
hufbanbmen,  anb  (hail  giue  the  bine- 
parb  to  others.  3lnb  ibhen  thephcarb 
tt,thcpfatb,<5obfo2biD. 

17  3tnb  hee  bchelb  them,  anb  faib, 
tshat  is  this  then  that  tslb2tttcn,f2:hc 
ftonc  ibhich  the  builbers  reietteb ,  the 
fameis  become  the  hcab  of  the  comer  ; 

18  nahofocuer  (hail  fall  bpott  that 
done,  (haibc  broken :  birt  on  ibhomfoc* 
uer  it  (hall fall,  it  ibill  grtnbc  hmi  to 
potbbet. 

19  *E3mb  the  chtcfe  02<cfts  anb  the 
&crtbcs  the  fame  hourc  fought  to  lap 
hanbs  on  him,  anb  thep  fcareb  the  peo- 
ple :  foj  thep  pcrtetuebrhathchabfpo; 
hen  this  parable  agamft  them. 

20  anb  thep  ibatcheb  him,  anb  fent 
fooitth  fpies ,  ibhith  (houib  fame  them 
femes  mft  men ,  that  thep  might  tabe 
hoibc  of  his  ibozbs ,  that  fo  thep  might 
bcliutr  hun  bnto  the  potber  anb  author 
title  of  the  goucrnour. 

11  anbthepafbcbhim,fapmg,*^a* 
fter ,  ibe  fendm  that  thou  fapeft  anb  tea- 
cheftnghtlp ,  nctthcr  acceptcft  thou  the 
pcrfon  of  any,  but  teacljcft  the  lbap  of 
<Sob||truelp. 

iz  3e  it  laibfull  fo?  bs  to  glue  trt= 
butcbntoCefar,o?no; 

23  26ut  he  percciueb  their  craftmes, 
anb  faib  bnto  them,  nahP  tempt  pe  me; 

24  S>heibmca||pcnp:ibbofetmage 
anb  fuperfmptton  hath  it;  1Lhcp  an* 
fmcreb,  anbfaib,  Cefars. 

25  3lnbbcfatb  bnto  them ,  USenba 
therefore  bnto  Ccfar  the  things  lbhlch 
be  Cefars,  anb  bnto  Gob  the  things 
«)huhbe(!5obs. 

26  3lnb  thep  coulb  not  tabc  holbe  of 
his  rb02besbefo2C  the  people ,  anb  thep 
marucileb  at  hts  anftbere,  anbheibc 
thctt  peace. 
27  C*Xhen 


•PM  118 


'Mji.ij. 
1(5. 


trnelh. 


\SaMatt. 

S.18. 


Ofthe  refurredtion.    S.Luke.    The poore widow.) 


•Mat  .31 
»3- 


Exod.j.6. 


•Mat  ji. 

41- 


Mjm  ;.j 


17  C*  Jlben  came  to  bun  tertamc 
of  the  SaDbuces  abbicb  bente  that 
tbe«  ts  any  refurrection)  anD  they  af- 
bcDbttn, 

is  laying ,  Rafter,  t$ofcs  tbzote 
tonto  tos,  3Jf  any  mans  bzotbec  Die ,  ba< 
umg  a  ltotfc,  anD  bee  Die  lbltbout  cljil* 
ozen ,  tljat  bis  toother  fboulD  tabe  bis 
ltoifc ,  ano  raifc  top  fecDe  tonto  ijtsbzo* 
tber.  _     , 

i9  Xberelbccc  therefor  feuen  bzc- 
tbzen,  anD  the  rtrft  toobc  aitoife,  anD 
DicDitottboutrtjilDzcn. 

30  3lnD tftc fcconD  toofec Ijcr  to  rblfe, 
anDbeDicDcbilDictfc. 

31  3uid  the  tbirD  toobc  her ,  anD  in 
nuc  matter  the  feuen  alfo.  3nbthcy  left 
nothilD2cn,anDDieD. 

31  Hattofail  the  lbomanDicD  alfo. 

33  lEbcrcfoze  in  the  refurrection, 
ltohofc  ltoifc  of  them  is  Cher  foz  feuen  baD 
bcrtoitolfe. 

34  3ltiD3icfusanfrucrtng,faiDbnto 
them,  XbccbilDzen  oftbisibozlD,mar< 
ricanb  are  gmtn  in  mar nagc : 

35  But  tbey  \bbtcbfbalibcaccomp- 
tcDYboztby  to  obtautcfhatibozio,  anD 
the  refurrettion  from  the  DcaD,  neither 
macricuoz  arc  giucn  m  marriage. 

36  jftcither  tan  they  Die  anymore, 
foz  they  arc  cquall  tonto  the  Angels, 
ano  arc  the  cbUDzcn  of  <3oD ,  being  the 
cbUDzcn  of  the  refurrection. 

37  iftoib  that  thcDcab  arcraifcD, 
*  cucn  t^ores  fbctbcb  at  the  buO),tbben 
becaiictbtbclLozD ,  tbcGoDofabza; 
bam ,  anb  the  Gob  of  Jfabat ,  anD  the 
<3oDof3Jacob. 

3s  foz  he  is  not  a  god  of  tbcocaD, 
but  ofthe  liumg  foz  all  hue  bnto  him. 

39  CXhcn  ccrtamc  ofthe  Scribes 
anfiucrmg ,  fatb ,  t^aftcr ,  "Xbou  haft 
tbcllfatb. 

40  3lnD  after  that ,  they  Durft  not 
afiic  him  any  quefhou  At  all. 

41  ^tubhefaiD  tonto  them,*  l)oib  fay 
they  that  Chzift  is  Dauibsfonnc* 

41  3inD  DauiD  himfclfe  faith  m  the 
boobc  of  Vtfalmcs,  Che  H02D  faioto 
mylLozD.SitthouonmynghtoatU), 

43  xm  33  nv&t  thine  enemies  thy 
footcftoolc. 

44  DautD  thcrcfo2C  tailcth  hmt, 
!LozD,boib  is  he  then  his  fontic ; 

45  CXhen  m  the  auDtcncc  of  all 
the  pcopichc  faiD  tonto  Ins  Diftiplcs, 

46  'zScibarc  ofthe  Scnbcs.lbhtrb 
Dcfircto  UialUcuilongrobes,  anDlouc 
greetings  m  the  markets  ,  ano  the 


bigbcftfcates  in  the  Synagogues,  anD 
the  cbicfc  r  oumes  at  fcafts : 

47  uabicb  Dcuourc  ibiDolbcs  Ijou- 
fesanb  fozafbcib  mabelongpzaycrs: 
the  fame  (ball  rccciue  greater  Damna- 
tion. 

CHAP    XXI. 

1  Chriftcom:iiendeth  the  poore  widow.  5  Hee 
foretelletlithedeftruc~tionohheTeniple,and 
of  tlie  citie  Hierufalem:  25  The  fignes  alio 
which  fhall  be  before  the  laft  day.  34  Heex- 
horteth  them  to  be  watchfull. 

_P$/\^S  -^  ^  &c  !ootuT)  tp>* anl) 
"3ffi&#  faib  the  rich  men  cafhng 
_j__\>it  their  giftes  into  the  trea* 
furtc. 
1  3inD  Ijee  fatt)  alfo  a 
certamc  poozc  IbiDolto ,  cafhng  m  thu 
tbcctlboSlmitcs. 

3  3itiD  he  faiD  ,£>f  a  truth,  _3  fay  bn- 
to you,that  this  poozc  ibiDolto  hath  caft 
m  11102c  then  they  all. 

4  Jf  oz  all  thefc  hauc  of  their  abun- 
Dance  caft  m  tonto  the  offerings  of  <5oD, 
but  (bee  of  her  pcnuric  bath  caft  in  all 
the  lining  that  flic  haD. 

5  C^nDasfomcfpaHeoftbclCettv 
pie ,  botb  it  ibas  aDozncb  ltoitb  goobly 
ftoncs.anD  gtfts,bcfatD, 

6  As  for  rbefe  tbtngs  tbbith  yre  be= 
bolD,fbcDaycsttiillcome,mtheu>hicb 
there  thai  not  be  left  one  ftonctopon  an- 
other, that  thai  not  be  tbzoitocn  Doibne. 

7  3lnD  they  afbeb  bimXaying^a 
iftcr,  but  ltoben  (bail  tbcfe  things  bev 
I  anD  tbbat  fignc  ibil  there  bc,ttohcn  thefc 
I  things  fhall  come  to  paffc  < 

8  aiiDhefaiD ,  XahehecDc  thatyce 
bcnotbctciueb:  foz  many  (hall  come  in 
my  ii5amc,  faying,  3J  am  chnii,  anb  the 
time  Dzaibctbnccrc:  goeyecnot  thcre- 
fozc  after  them. 

9  2Sutitobcnyefuallheareoftbars, 
anb  commotions ,  be  not  tcmfieD:  foz 
thefc  things  muQ  ftrttcomc  to  paffc,  but 
the  cud  is  not  by  anD  by. 

io  *  Chen  fatb  he  tonto  them,  JBatv 
on  (ball  rife  agatnfl  nation ,  anb  bmg 
bomcagamft  Utngbomc : 

ii  3lnD  great  carthquaftcs  fljall  be 
in  bmers places,  anb  famines,  anbpc 
fhlcnccs:  anb  fearcful  I  fights  anb  great 
fignes  (ball  there  be  from  hcaucn. 

u  2Sutbcfozcall  thefc,  rheyfljall  lay 
their  hanbs on  you,  anb perfemtc  you, 
bcliucrmgyou  top  to  the  Synagogues, 
anDinto  pzifons,  being  bzougljt  befoze 
Bmgs  anb  rulers  foz  my  flames  fa&c. 
13  3ltiD 


'Malta  1 1- 

4'- 


1142. 


'  Ms',14- 1 


"M«t.:4- 
7- 


The  worlds  end.     Chap.xxij.        Watch  and  pray. 


:h  10 


•Matih.  jo 


'Matth. 


*Muih.i<t. 


i}  3lnD  it  (hall  tunic  to  poufojatc- 
fhmonp. 

14.  *^>cttlcit  thecfoje  mpour  Reacts, 
not  to  meDitatc  bcfo?ctt)hat  pc  (hall  an; 
ftucrc. 

15  5Foj3Jtt>illgiucpouamouthanD 
ttufebome,  iDhich  all  pour  abucrfartcs 
(haiiuotbeabletogamfap,nozrcuu\ 

16  ;3mDpcefbaiibe  betrapebbothbp 
parents  anD  bjcthzcn ,  anD  KinfcfolHcs 
anbfncnbs,  anb  fome  of  pou  fhall  thep 
fiufc  to  be  put  to  Death. 

17  3lnD  vc  fhaibc  hateD  of  all  men  fo; 
mp /Barnes  fattr. 

is  *  23ut  there  (hall  not  a  haire  of 
pourhcaDpcrift). 
19  jjn  pour  pattern c  poCTeCTc  pe  pour 

routes. 

10  *  3nbtt)hm  pee  (hall  fee  iT?icrufa; 
lem  compaffcDttnth  armies,tt)cn  fenott) 
that  the  Defoliation  thereof  ts  nigh. 

ii  Xhenletthemtt)htcharetn3Ju 
bca.flccto  the  mountaincs,anb  let  them 
rbhtch  are  in  the  mioft  of  it ,  Depart  out, 
ano  let  not  them  that  are  m  the  conn 
treps,cuter  thereinto. 

xx  foi  thefc  be  the  Dapes  of  Dcngc; 
ante,  that  all  things  ttrijicharcttrnttcn 
mapbcfulfillcb. 

zj  2i5ut  tboc  bnto  them  that  are 
ttnth  chilDe,  anb  to  thent  that  ginc  futfee 
m  thofe  Dapes,  fo  t  there  fhaibe  great  w 
ft  reffe  m  the  lanb,  ano  tt>?ath  Dpon  this 
people. 

1+  ^nDthcpdjaii  fall  bpthecbgeof 
thefroort),  anD  fhall  bee  leb  aibapcap- 
tiuc  into  all  nations ,  ano  JJncrufalem 
(hall  be  troben  bottmc  of  the  Gentiles, 
bnttll  the  times  of  the  ©entiles  bee ful 
fillcb. 

x<,  C  *3nD  there  fhaibc figncsm  the 
Auntie,  anb  in  the  ©oone ,  anD  in  the 
§>tarres,anDDpon  the  earth  Dtftreffc  of 
nations,  ttnth  pcrpicritp,  the  £>ca  anD 
tlje  iDaues  roaring, 

16  i$cns  hearts  failing  them  fo? 
fcare, anb  fojlooumg after  thofe  things 
ttihich  are  tomming  on  the  earth,  5Fo? 
the  poibccs  of  heaucn  (hall  be  (haftcn. 

17  2tnD  then  fljaii  thep  fee  the  tonne 
of  man  commtngm  a  tlouD  ttntfj  poiber 
anD  great  glozp. 

18  3lnD  \bhen  thefc  fhingsbeginto 
comctopaffc,thcnlooKcbp,anDuftDp 
pour  Ijcabs.foj  pour  rcbcmpttouDjatt); 
ethnigh. 

29  3(nD  he  fpa&eto  them  a  parable, 

2SeholD  the  figgc  tree,  anb  all  the  trees, 

jo  nahcnthcpnoU)  (hoot  foozfh,  pee 


fccanbtutoibofpoucotbnefelucs,  that 
fummet  is  noib  nig!)  at  hanD. 

ji  £>o  liucftnfc  pee,  ibhen  pec  fee  thefc 
things  come  to  paffe,  ftnotDpc  that  ttje 
BingDo  me  of  <5ob  is  nigh  at  haub. 

31  Ucrtlp  3  fapbntopou,  thisge- 
ncrattonfljailnotpaffcaiDap.uuaiibc 
fulfiucb. 

33  heaucn  anb  earth  (hail  paffe  a= 
tbap ,  but  mp  tt>o?DS  fhall  not  paffe  a- 
ttiap. 

34  C^nDtahcheebtopourfcittcs, 
lead  at  anp  nine  pour  hearts  beoucr* 
chargcb  ttnth  furfcttmg,  anD  bmnftcn^ 
uclTc,  anb  tares  of  this  life,  anb  fo  that 
Dap  tome  Dpon  pou  tonatbar  cs. 

3$  ifojasa  fnare  Chan  it  tome  on  all 
them  that  DiDcll  on  the  face  of  the 
ttrtjolc  earth. 

36  naatctipc  fhercfoze ,  anb  p?ap  au 
tbapes,  that  pc  map  bcactomptcbiDo^ 
thp  to  cfeapc  ail  thefe  things  that  ttjail 
tome  to  paffe,  anD  to  ftanobefoze  the 
fonneofman. 

37  ^nbmthcbapttmchcttiastca; 
thing  inthcXemple ,  anD  at  night  hec 
ibcnt  out,  anD  aboDcmthc  mount  tljat 
is  calico  the  mount  of  Oliucs. 

35  3nD  all  the  people  came  carelp  m 
the  morning  to  him  m  th  c  Scmplc ,  fo? 
tohearchim. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

1  The  Icvves  confpire  againft  Chrift.  3  Satan 
prepareth  Iudas  to  betray  him.  7  The  A- 
poftles  prepare  the  Pafieouer.  19  Chi  iff 
inftituteth  his  holy  fupper,  2.1  couertly  fore- 
telleth  of  the  trakour,  14  dehorteth  the 
reft  of  his  Apoftles  from  ambition,  31  affu- 
rethPetethisfaithfhouldnotfaile:  34  and 
yethefhoulddeniehimthrifr.  39  Hepray- 
ethinthe  mount ,  and  fweateth  blood,  47 
is  belrayed  with  a  kifle  :  yo  hee  healeth 
Malchus  care,  54  he  is  thriie  denied  of  Peter, 
65  fhamefully  abufed,  66  andconfefleth 
himlelte  to  be  tire  fonne  of  God 

^3f  *  €)tti  p  featt  of  DnleucncD 
fi  |b2cabD2elbmgl),iDhitl)ts 
cailcDtnclOaffcoucr. 
x  ^ub  the  thicfc0ncfls 
anb  Scribes  fought  hoib 
tljcp  might  lull  Ijim ;  fo?  tljepfcarcotljc 
people. 

3  C*£hen  entrcD  ^atanintojiu 
Das  fumamcD  Jfcanot ,  being ofthc 
number  of  the  nbclue. 

4  ^nDhclbcnthisiDap, anDcom 
muneD  ttnth  tlje  cljicfc  p.nefts  ano  cap 
tames, 


Matth.!*. 


^  r\Tati  I1 
■4- 


16, 


The  laft  Supper.         S.Luke.      Againfli  ambition. 


\\0r,wiib- 
cut  tumult. 

'Match. 16. 
'7- 


'Maub.if. 


\Or,lhauc 
bejrtth  de- 

frid. 


26. 


■Muih.ie. 


tames,  hoib  he  might  betray  him  bnto 
them. 

5  3lnbthcytt)crcglab,anbtoucnan'' 
tcb  to  giue  htm  money. 

6  3Jno  he  pjomtfeb ,  anb  fought  op* 
poitumttcto  betray  him  bnto  rtjemllm 
tt)cat>fcncc  ofthcmuintubc. 

7  C*  30jch  tame  thebay  of  bnlca< 
uencbtycab  ,ibljcnthe  paiTeoucrmuft 
be  Uilleb. 

s  2lnb  he  fent  peter  anb  3(ohn,fay* 
ms,<3ocanDp;cparebstljepafleouer, 
rtiatiDcmaycatr. 

9  Tint*  they  fatb  bnto  him ,  lBhcrc 
ibtlt  thou  that  ibe  prepare  i 

10  3tnD  hcfaib  bnto  them ,  23cholb, 
ttihcnyearecntrco  mtotlje  cttie,  there 
fbail  a  man  meet  you,  bearing  a  pitthcr 
ofvbatcr,  folloU)  him  into  thchoufe 
ibhcrchccntrcthin. 

1 1  3inb  yce  than  fay  bnto  the  goob; 
man  of  the  houfcXhc  Rafter  fattljpn? 
to  tljcc ,  nahcrc  is  the  gheft-chamber 
ibhcccj  (hall  cate  tljc  paffcoucr  iDitt) 
mybifctplesr 

ii  3Cttbhe  fljallfbcnjyouaiargcbp; 
pcrroumcturntihcb.thcrcmaUcrcaby. 

1 3  2Jnb  they  Vbcnt,  anb  founb  as hee 
hab  faib  bnto  thcm,anb  tl)cv  mabc  tea- 
btcthcpaffcoucr. 

1+  *3lnblbhcn  the  hourc  lbas  tome, 
he  fate  Dotbne,anb  the  nbciiic3(poftics 
unthhuu. 

15  3lnb  he  Cart)  bnto  them,  1 1  naith  be- 
fire 3  hatic  bcfireb  to  cate  this  paffco- 
uer  ibitb  you  before  3  fuffer. 

is  5ro?  3J  fay  bnto  you,  3J  Hull  not  a= 
nymo2e  cate  thereof,  bntilltt  be  fulfil 
leb  in  the  Inngbomc  of  Gob. 

17  31nbhcctooUcthc  tup,  anbgauc 
thantts.anb  fatb.ZaUc  thts,anb  biuibc 
it  among  your  fclucs. 

18  f  02  31  fay  bnto  you ,  3}  ibill  not 
b2initcofthcfruitofthcOmc,bntillrtje 
itingoomc  of  ©ob  fbail  come. 

19  C'S.nbhcctooitcbzcab.attbgauc 
thauUcs ,  anb  b.MHc  ii ,  anb  gauc  bnto  I 
them ,  faying,  XhiStsmy  bobylbhich ! 
is  gmen  foz  you ,  this  boc  m  rcmem- 
bjance  of  me. 

20  Htucibtfc  alfo  the  tup  after  flip 
per,  faying,  XbtscuptsthctficlblLC; 
Iranian  m  my  bloob  ,  lbljich  is  fhcb 
fo2you. 

ii  €  *  But  bcholbe,  the  Iianb  of  him 
that  bctraycth  nice,  is  With  mee  on  the 
tabic. 

'  21  3(iib  trucly  the  Sonne  of  man 
sort!)  as  it  lbas  betcrmmeb,  butlboc 


bntothatnianbyrbhomficisbctraicb. 

23  3nb  they  began  to  enquire  a^ 
mong  thcmfeiues ,  lbljich  of  them  it 
lbas  that  fhouibboe  this  thing. 

24  C  ^nb  there  lbas  alfo  a  If  rife  a-- 
mong  them ,  ibhtrt)  of  them  fhoulb  bee 
ateomptcb  the  grcatcft. 

25  *  3inb  hee  faibc  bnto  them,  %\yt 
Bings  of  the  ©entiles  e,r  crcife  lorbflnp 
otter  them,  $  they  that  erercifcautho* 
rule  bpon  them,  are  taucb  benefactors. 

26  25utyefl)allnotbefo;buthcthat 
is  grcatcft  among  you,lct  htm  be  as  the 
yongcr,anbbetljattschicfc,ashcrtjat 
bocthferue. 

27  ifojibbetber  is  greater,  bee  that 
fittcrtjatmcat,oz  ijee  tljat  ferucrt)  ^  jjs 
not  he  that  fittetb  at  meat;  25ut3lam 
among  you  as  he  that  fcructb. 

28  Pearcthcymhichh'ttictontmucb 
ibitb  me  in  my  temptations. 

29  3lnb  3  appotnt  bnto  you  a  rung 
borne,  as  my  father  bath  appointeb 
bnto  me, 

jo  Xhatycc  maycatcanbbnnricat 
my  table  in  my  hingbomc,  *  anb  fit  on 
th2oncsiubging  tljc  tlbcluc  Xnbesof 
Ufracl. 

31  C^nbthc!Lo?bfaib,S»imon,Su 
mon,  bebolbe,  *3>atan  ijatb  bcfireb  to 
haueyou,thathemayftftyouasrbhcat: 

32  2Sutgijaucp2ayebfoHhee,  that 
thy  faith  fatlcnot;  anb  HjIjcu  tljou  art 
conuerteb,  ttrengthen  thy  bzethjen. 

33  ^nbhccfaibbntohim.lLoib,^ 
am  rcaby  to  goc  Ibith  thee  both  into 
pnfoiuubtobcath. 

34-  *  3mb  hce  faib,  3  tell  thee  0ctcr, 
the  cocUc  fhall  not  crolb  this  bay  ,befo2C 
that  tljou  fljait  thJffe  bciuc  that  thou 
buoVbeft  me. 

35  *^nb  Ijc  faib  bnto  t|jetnjBl)en  3 
fcntyouibfthout  purfc,  anbfenn,  anb 
Qiooes,  lacHcbyc  any  thing j.  Zwn  they 
faib,/Bothmg. 

36  Xhtu  faibc  hee  bnto  them,  25ut 
noib  he  that  hath  a  purfc ,  let  him  taltc 
tt,  anb  lifteibife  his  fenp:  anb  hec  that 
hart)  no  ftaojb,  let  him  fcl  his  garment, 
anb  buy  one. 

37  iFoi^i  fay  bnto  y  ou,that  this  that 
isib2itten ,  muft  yet  be  accomplifljcb  in 
me,  *3lnb  he  lbas  rcchouco  among  the 
tranfgrcfTo.2S :  5fo?  tljc  things  tonccr* 
tungmehaucanenb. 

38  anbthcytai^lLoJb.bcholb.herc 
arc  tlbo  froo^bs.  Znb  hee  faibc  bnto 
thcm,3(tisynough. 

39  C'^Jitb  Ijc  tame  out,  anb  tbent,as 
hce 


'Matth.io. 
'5- 


28. 


•i.Petj.S. 


•Mattkiff. 

34- 


*Matrh.  To 
9. 


Efiy  jj. 


'Mattli.atf. 
jtf. 


Chrift is  betrayed.    Chap.xxij 


etersdenia 


ii. 


•Mac.ltf. 
4«- 


47. 


"Mat.i6. 
57- 


"Mat  1 6. 
69. 


Dee  ttias  ibout,  to  ttjc  mount  of  £>liues, 
and  l)is  Diftipics  alfo  follouicb  in  m. 

40  *anb  Kbfjen  De lbas  at  tljcpiaee, 
Dciatbbnto  tDem,  0?ap,that  pec  enter 
not  into  temptation. 

41  anb  be  lbas  ttntbdjatben  from 
them about  a  (tones  tad,  ant)  hnccieb 
doibncanbpjapcD, 

41  Sarins,  jFatDer,tf  tDou  be  tbil* 
ltng,rcmoouc  tine  tup  from  me :  ncucr  ■ 
tDcleflc,  not  mp  lbill,  but  tljine  be  bone. 

4$  anb  tljcre  appcateb  an  angel 
bnto  Ijim  fromDcaucn,  ftcengtDenmg 
Dtm. 

44  anbbeinginanagonicDepjap; 
cb  rnojc  earneftlp,anb  bis  frocat  lbas  as 
it  iberc  great  b?ops  of  bloob  falling 
oovbne  to  tDe  grounb. 

45  and  TbbcnDcrofcbp  from  pjap; 
er ,  and lbas  come  to  I)is  bifttples ,  l)te 
founbtDemfleepingfo?  fojrolb, 

46  ami  faid  bnto  tDem,  i©DP  flecpe 
pee*  -Rife,  and  p?ap,  left  pee  enter  into 
temptation. 

47  canbtbljncljcvetfpaBc'bdDolb, 
a  multttubc,  anb  nee  that  lbas  calleb 
3Judas,DneoftDetibeluc,  tbent  before 
them,  anb  djrtbc  necrctmto  3Jcfus,  to 
tmTebim. 

48  26utgjefusfaibbnto!)im,3}ubas, 
betrapeft  tljou  t!)c  fonnc  of  man  ttrttlj 
auuTc* 

49  naftcn  fDcp  tbhtcb  acre  about 
Dim,  fatt)  tbftat  iboulb  folloil>,tDcp  faib 
Unto  Dim,  1Lo?b,  fbaillbec  unite  ibith 
rbefrooib* 

50  cand  one  of  tlicm  fmotc  tl)c  fer^ 
uant  of  the  tjtgt)  $neft ,  anb  tut  oft"  his 
right  care. 

51  ^nb  3Jcfus  anftucred ,  anb  faid, 
buffer  pc  thus  farre.  and  he  touch cb 
Diseare,  and  healed  him. 

<i%  Xben3Jefusfaid  bnto  the  ebicfe 
pnefts ,  anb  captaines  of  the  Xemple, 
anb  the  ciders  lbbicb  ito«  tome  to 
Dim,  25c  ye  come  out  as  agamft  a  thtcfe, 
ibith  fmo?ds  anb  ftaues* 

53  sehen  5  lbas  datlp  ibith  pou  in 
the  Xcmple ,  pec  ftrctcljcd  footfD  no 
bands  agamft  nice :  but  this  is  pour 
Doure,  anb  the  polbcr  of  barftcueffe. 

54  c*1Chcn  tooac  tbcp  him ,  anb 
led  him,anb  brought  him  into  the  high 
tejicfts  houfc,  anb  peter  followed  a- 
facrc  off. 

55  *anbtt>henthcphaDKinDlcbafire 
inthemibbcs  of  the  hall,  anb  lucre  fet 
doidne  together ,  peter  fatcdoibtic  a* 
mongthem. 


56  25uta  certainc  maibe  behelb  him 
as  he  fate  by  the  fire ,  anb  earneftip  loo- 
Heb  bpon  l)im,anb  fald.Xhts  man  lbas 
alfo  ibith  Dim. 

57  3lnb  hebenieb  him ,  taping,  nso - 
man,3J&noibbiiunor. 

53  anb  after  a  little  lDbile  another 
farbhim,?raib,3Chouactaifoofthcm. 
anb  peter  faib,  Qftan,  3?  am  not. 

59  anbabout  the fpaccofonr Doure 
after,anothcrconftbcnt!paffinneb,fap^ 
mg,  Df  a  trueth  this  felloid  alfo  lbas 
ibith  htm;  fozheisa  <RUiican. 

60  anb  peter  faid,  £0an,  'Jfftnolb 
not  lbhat  thou  fapeft.  anb  muncbiatlp 
ibhile  he  pet  fpabc ,  the  totftc  trcrb. 

6i  anb  thcHoib  turncb,anb  looftcb 
bpon  peter ,  anb  peter  rcmcmbjcb  the 
tbo^bofthefLozb.hoibhehacfaibbnto 
Dim ,  asefojc  the  cocHc  crott),  tbou  (halt 
benprncthnfe. 

6z  anb  peter  ibent  out,  anb  tbeut 
bittcrip. 

63  canb  the  men  that  helbc3Jefus, 
mocUeb  him,  anb  fmotc  Dun. 

64  andidDcntDcp  Dad  blindfolded 
Dim,thcp  Qrolic  Dim  on  the  fate,  anb  afc 
ncbhim,  faping,  prophetic,  tbho istt 
that  fmotc  tbee: 

65  anb  manp  otDer  things  biafpbc; 
monflp  fpaltc  tDcp  agamft  him. 

66  C'aubaftooncasitrbasbap.the 
ciders  of  the  people,?  the  chtefc  pjtefts 
anb  the  Scribes  came  together ,  anb  leb 
Dim  into  their  Counccll,faptng, 

67  art  tDou  tDe  €bnft;  Xell  bs. 
anb  hec  faib  bnto  them,  3Jf  3  tell  pou, 
poutbtllnotbclccuc. 

68  anb  if  31  alfo  af  ae  pou,  pou  tbill 
not  anfrocre  me,  no?  let  mc  goe. 

69  hereafter  thai  the  fonne  of  man  fit 
on  the  right  hanb  of  the  potber  of  <i5ob. 

70  Xhcnfaib thep all,art tl)ou then 
the  Sonne  of  <sob;  anb  Dec  faib  bnto 
them,*  J^efap  that  3J  am. 

71  anb  thep  faib,  oshatnccbrbcanp 
further  ibitncffc  <  foi  mt  our  felues 
Dattc  Dcarb  of  Dis  olbue  moutlj. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

Iefus  is accufed before  Pilate,  andfentto  Hc- 
rode.  8  Herodeniockethhim.  it  Hcrode 
and  Pilate  are  made  friends.  13  Barabb.is  is 
detiied  of  the  people,  and  is  loofed  by  Pilate, 
and  Iefus  is  giuen  to  be  crucified.  17  Hetcl- 
leth  the  women  that  lament  hiir> ,  the  dedu- 
ction of  Hierufalcm:  34  Prayethfoi  his  ene- 
mies. 39  Two  cnill  doers  are  crucified  with 
him.   46  His  death.    50   Hisburiall 

J  anb 


"MatJ?.!. 


*M3rk.l4. 


■  ■  i  ■■        ■  ■■■■■».  —  ii  ■  mi«i    ■■      ■    ii     ■ ■     ■  ,  ,. i  .  ii-.i       .         ■■      ■  i  ■■    —  .         — ■■    ■      -  9     — 

Barabbasreleafed.       S.Luke.  Chrift  crucified. 


Malttl.  17 


"  Mitth.:7 


^^/5d  tljc  lbbolc  multitubcj 
pH  of  tbcm  arofc,anblcD  Dun 
=, wc  unto  dilate* 
Sf^SitoSs  2  2tnD  tbey  began  to  ae^i 
cufc  l)im  Xajuns,  ipc  founo 
tfjis  fcllott)  pcrucrtmgtbc  nation ,  anD 
foibiDDtng  to  gitie  tribute  to  Ccfar,  fay; 
tng,tbatbchinifclfcis<Cf)MftaUuig. 

3  *  3lnb  piiate  afHeb  turn ,  faying, 
3rttbou  thctuug  of  tljc3lclt>cs^  3inD 
bcanfiucrcDhim,?fato,1!:boitfaycftit. 

4  Xben  fatoc  dilate  to  the  cbicfc 
tfnefts,  anb  to  tljr  people,  3  fiuDcno 
fault  in  tilts  man, 

5  3inDtbcy  lucre tbemojc  fierce, fay; 
tug,  J)cftirrcth  up  tbc  people,  tearlitng 
tlwoiuotitau  3Iiinc,  beginning  from 
oalilcc  to  this  place. 

c  nahcntfMlatc  bcarb  of  d5alilcc,  be 
afitcb  Whether  the  man  lucre  a  oali- 
lean. 

7  3nD  afToonc  as  lie  UucYU  tliat  lice 
beiongeb  Unto  tycrobsuirifbtctton,  lice 
fent  linn  to  Aerobe,  U1I10  bimfclfealfo 
was  at  fticrufaicm  at  that  time. 

8  t;3nb  When  Aerobe  faiugicfiis, 
lie  ibas  erccebing  glab,  fo:  bee was  bcfi- 
rous  to  fee  Dim  of  a  longfcafon,becatife 
lie  Dab  bcarb  many  tilings  of  bun,  anb 
bee  bopeo  to  Ijauc  feenc  fomc  miracle 
bone  bv  bun. 

9  Xben  be  nncfttoneb  With  bim  in 
many  lbo;Ds,  but  beaufnjereb  him  no; 
tbing. 

10  311b tbecbtcfepneftsaub Scribes 
ftoob,  anb  ucbcmcntly  accufeb  Dim. 

1 1  Znn  liicrob  Until  bismcnofibarrc 
fet  bun  at  naught,  anb  mocltebbun,anb 
aray cb  bun  in  a  gojgcous  r  obc,anb  fent 
btmagaincto0iiatc. 

ix  c  3nb  tbc  fame  bap  dilate  anb 
$crobn>crcmabcfriciibstogttber;foj 
befoje,  they  Ibcre  atennutie  bctVbccnc 
tbemfelucs. 

13  C  *  3tnb  pnate, When  bee bab  cal 
leb  together  tbc  tlncfe  pnefts,  anb  the 
rulers,  anb  the  people, 

1+  £>aib  unto  tbcm,  Pcbauc  brought 
tins  man  unto  me ,  as  one  that  pettier 
tctb  tbc  people, anb  bebolb,  3  bailing 
eramintb  bun  befoje  y  ou,bauc  foutib  no 
fauitinthistnan, touching  tDofc  tilings 
whereof  ycactufc  bun. 

i<;  flo , no: vet  tycrob :  fo2 3  fent yon 
to  bun,  anb  loc,  nothing  Woztby  of 
Death  ib  Done  butohun. 

i6  ^JuuiitlurcfoictljafhficIiui^anD 
rcleafcbun. 

17  f  0;  of  ncccfTittc  lite  muft  rcleafe 


one  Unto  tbcm  at  the  if  caft. 

is  3utbtbcy crtcboutaiiatoncc,  fay; 
mg,  3tway  with  tljis  man ,  anb  relcafe 
uiuousaoarabbas, 

19  t©bo  fo;  atcrtaine  fcbition  mabc 
in  tbe  citic,anbfo;murber,  was  caft  in 
piifon. 

io  piiatc  therefore  Willing  to  retcafc 
3Jcfus,fpaftcagaiite  to  them : 

21  28uttbcy  crieb,  faying,  Crucifie 
bini,trucific  bun. 

22  3itib  hec  fatb  unto  them  the  tbirb 
time,  naljy , what  euiil  bath  he  bone  <  3 
batic  founo  no  caufc  of  bcatb  m  bun,  3 
Will  therefore  cbafhfc  bun,?  let  bini  go  c. 

23  2MbtbeyWcrcmftantwitbioub 
boyecs,  r  cguirmg  that  be  might  be  cru< 
tifieb  :anb  the  boytcs  of  them,  anb  of 
the  cbicfcpncftspmiaileb. 

24  3inD  dilate  1 1  gauc  fentencc  that  it 
flioulb  be  as  they  requtreb. 

25  31nb  he  rcleafcb  Unto  tbcm ,  bim 
tljat  fo;  fcbition  anb  murbcr  ibas  caft 
into  p.nfon  ,  Whom  they  bab  bcfireb,but 
he  bcltuereb  ^cfus  to  tbetc  Will. 

26  *:3nD  as  tbey  icb  bun  away,  tbey 
laib  bolb  Upon  one  Snmon  a  Cyjcman, 
coinming  out  of  tbc  countrey,  anb  on 
bmitbey  latb  tbc  croODr,  tljat  hec  might 
bcarcitaftet^fcfus. 

j  27  canbttjerefolloibebbimagrcat 
company  of  people ,  anb  of  Women, 
Which  alfo  bcwailcb  ?  lamcnteb  htm. 

28  25ut  3lefus  turning  bnto  tbcm, 
fatb,  Slaughters  of  J?icrti(alcm,  Wccpe 
notfozmc ,  but  weepe  fo?  your  fclucs, 
anb  foi  your  cbtiomi. 

29  foi  bcboioc ,  tbc  bayes  are  torn 
mtng,in  tbcwbichtbcy  fliall  fay,Blcf 
feb  arc  the  barren,  anb  the  Wombs  that 
ncucr  bare,  anb  the  paps  tbbicb  neucr 
gaueftickc. 

30  *  Xben  (ball  they  begin  to  fay  to 
tbc  mountames,  ifall  on  Us,  anb  to  the 
btls.Coucrus. 

31  *foi  if  tbey  boc  thefc  things  in  a 
green  trcciubatflialbc  Done  m  the  one* 

32  *3lnb  there  mere  alfo  nbo  other 
malcfacto2S  leb  ttntbbim>  to  bee  put  to 
Death. 

33  ^nbibhen  tbey  lUcrccometotbc 
plate  nmitb  is  taiieb  |,  Caluanc ,  there 
tbey  trucificDhiin.anD  the  inaicfaeto?s, 
one  on  the  right  banD,  anb  the  other  on 
the  left. 

34  CE  Xben  faib ^lefus,  father,  for 
ginc  tbcm ,  fo:  they  fenotb  not  ibhat 
tbey  Doc :  3nD  tljcy  parteD  bis  raiment, 
anb  caft  lots. 
3^  3nb 


led. 


'Ma:th.i7 


"Iia.i.iJ. 
hof.io.8. 
rcucl.6.  IS. 

•  1. Pet.* 

<7- 

'  Mitch.  17 

J8. 


1 1  Or,  tbi 

yUce  of  a 


Chrifts  death,  Chap.xxnij.     andrefurreftion. 


Or.UnJ. 


Pfal.JI.S 


•Mtt.17 


35  31ivbthc  people  ftooobehoiomg,? 
the  rulers  alfo  with  them  benbeb  him, 
facing,  fyce  faucb  others,  let  him  fauci 
himfcifc,ifhcbeCh2ift,£chofcnof(3ob.j 

36  3nb  the  fouimcrs  alfo  mocKcb 
him.commmgto  hun,anb  offering  bun 
bmeger, 

37  Sinbfavmg,  gjftboubc  the  lung 
oftbejewes.fauctbvfclfc. 

38  ^ud  a  fuperfcnption  alfo  was 
Wnttcn  oner  him  in  letters  ofd5rccBe, 
anb!Latm,*??eb2cw,THis  is  the 

KING  OF  THE  IEWES. 

59  C3lnb  oncof  pmalcfact02S,Whtch 
wcrcbangeb,railebonhun,favmg,3if 
thou  be  £h;ift,{auc  tbv  feife  anb  bs. 

40  26ut the  other  anfmenng,rebU' 
act)  him  y  faying,  JDocft  not  thou  fear  c 
(5ob ,  feeing  thou  art  m  tbefame  ton* 
bemnatton? 

41  3Jno  we  inbeeb  iuftlv ,  fo? We xt> 
tetue  the  cue  rcWarbofourDccos,but 
this  man  bath  bone  nothing  amiffc. 

41  3nbbc  faio  bnto  3Jefus ,  ?Lo?b, 
remember  me  When  thou  commeftuuo 
tbv&nigbome. 

43  2md Jcfus faib unto l)im ,  3Ucrt= 
lp,5  ftp  bnto  thee,  to  oav  (halt  thou  be 
WitbmcmiMrabifc. 

44  :8nbitwasabonttbefirtboure, 
anb  there  mas  a  DarKrucfTc  ouer  all  the 
1 1  earth,  butill  the  ninth  hour e. 

45  SlnotbcSunncwastiarBcneb, 
anD  the  uaile  of  the  temple  was  return 
themtbs. 

46  C  3wb  When  "Jcfas  has  trtcb 
With  a  loubboiccbc  faib,*  j?atbcr,mto 
thy  banbs  J  commenb  mv  fpirit :  3nb 
bailing  Cub  thus,hc  gauc  top  the  gboft. 

47  Jftow  When  the  Centurion  falb 
What  was&onc,  bcgio2ificb<5ob,fav 
tng ,  €crtaurtp  this  was  a  righteous 
man. 

48  3(nft  all  the  people  that  tame  to- 
gethcr  to  that  fight ,  bcbolbing  the 
things  Which  were  bone,  fmotc  their 
b2eafts,anbrcttirncb. 

49  ana  all  his  atquamtantcanb  the 
Women  that  folloWcb  him  from  <5<i\v 
lee,  ttoob  a  farrc  off ,  bcbolbing  thefc 
things. 

50  C  *3fnb  bcbolb,tbcrc  wasaman 
namcb  Jofcpb ,  a  tounfcllcr,  anb  bee 
Tbas  a  goob  man,anb  a  mil. 

51  (3CI1C  fame  ban  not  confenteb  to 
the  tounfcll  ant>beebcoftbcm)bcWas 
of  3rimatbca,a  city  of  the  Jcwes'wbo 
alfo  bimfclfewaitcbfoj  the  Rmgbomc 
of  <5ob.) 


5i3CbtsmanWentbnroptiatc)anb 
beggcb  the  bobv  ofjefus. 

53  3lnbbctooiicitDownc,atibW2ap 
pebitinltnnctt,  aub  lavDit  in  a  Sepul 
crjie  that was hcibcn m Rone,  Wherein 
neuer  man  befojc  was  lavb. 

54  3nb  that  bav  rbas  the  v\2cpara 
tion,anb  the  Sabbath  bzcib  on. 

55  3nb  the  Women  alfo  which  came 
With  him  from  ©aiilccfoiiowcb  after, 
anb  bchclb  the  Scpulcb2c,anb  IjoW  his 
bobp  was  lavb. 

56  3lubtbcv  rcturncb,anbp:epareb 
fpices  anb  ointments ,  anb  reftco  the 
Sabbath  cay,  atcojomg  to  the  com- 
manbement. 

CHAP.    XXIII r. 

Chrifts  Relurredion  is  declared  by  two  An- 
gels ,  to  the  women  that  come  to  the  Sepul- 
chre. 9  Thefe  report  it  toothers.  13  Chrift 
himfelfe  appeaicth  to  the  twodifciples  that 
went  to  Emmaus :  56  Afterwards  he  appea- 
rethtothe  Apoflles,  and  reproueth  their  vn- 
beleefe  :  47  Giuetb.  them  a  charge :  49 
Promifeth  the  holy  Ghoft :  51  Andfoaf- 
cendeth  into  heauen. 

£>w*  bponthe  firftbavof 
tbeWccftcberv  rarely  in 
the  ntommg ,  they  tame 
bnto  the Scpukb2e,b2in< 
^m^H  gmgthcfpiccs  winch  tbey 

babpjeparcb.anbccrtamc  others  Witl) 
them. 

z  3lnb  they  founb  the  ttone  rollcb  a? 
Way  from  the  Sepulchre. 

3  Smbtbcyentrcbm,  anb  founb  not 
the  bobyoftbelLojD  Jems. 

4  3nb  tt  came  to  palTc.as  the?  ibe  re 
much  pcrpicrcb  thereabout ,  behoib, 
two  men  ftoob  by  them  in  thming 
garments. 

5  3lnb  as  thev  were  afraib ,  anb 
boWcb  boWnc  toctr  faces  to  the  earth, 
they  faib  bnto  them ,  i©bv  fecByclitbe 
lining  among  the  beab? 

6  l^cisnothcere,  but  is  rifctu  Re- 
member how  he  fpatte  bnto  you  When 
hcwasv'cttnoalilcc, 

7  Saving  ,  %\)t  Sonne  of  man 
mull  bcbcliucrcb  into  the  hanbsoffm< 
full  men,  anb  becrutificb,  anbtljcthirb 
bavnfeagaine. 

8  21nb  thev  remembzeb  his  WozbS, 

9  3fnb  rcturneb  from  the  Septtl 
ch:c,  anbtolb  all  thefe  things  bnto  tlje 
clcucn,  anb  to  all  the  reft. 

10  ^JtWas^arici^agbalene,?^ 
anna.s  f]3arv  the  mother  of  James,  anb 
1 3  i other 


Mit.iS.i. 


lllMllHClh. 

•Mat.  1 7. 
'3- 


Chrift  talketh  with      S.Luke.  two  difciples. 


fc  Iohn  20. 
6. 


Mule  if 


otDer  ibomcu  tliat  lucre  ttntD  tDcm, 
tbhuh  tolbe  tljcfe  ttjmgs  bnto  tl;e  &= 
pottles. 

1 1  3Dib  tDeir  lbo:Ds  fectneb  to  tDem 
as  iblc  talcs,  anb  tDcy  belctucD  tDem 
not. 

ii  *  %\)t\\  arofc  peter ,  anb  ratmt 
unto  tDc  S>epultt)?e ,  anb  ttoVbpmg 
boibne,Dcc  t>cl)clDc  tl)c  imncn  clotDcs 
layb  by  tDcmfelucs,anb  beparteb,tt)on< 
bcrmg  in  tjimftlfc  at  tljat  Ibljirt)  lbas 
come  to  parte. 

15  C*3lnbbeDolb,ttbooftDcmVbent 
tljat  fame  bay  to  a  tttliagc  caiieb  <£tna 
us,  lblitcD  \bas  from  ^icrufalcm  about 
tlnecfcojefurlongs. 

14  ^t»u  tDey  taiftcb  togctDer  of  all 
tDefe  tilings  ibijicl)  rjab  Dappeucb. 

15  2Mb  it  came  to  paffe ,  tljat  lbDilc 
tljcv  communcb  togctDer,  anb  tcafo- 
neb,  3lcfus  Dunfclfe  bzcib neecc, anb 
tbentlbitljtrjem, 

is  asuttDctrcycsibcrcDolbcn.tDat 
tDey  flioulb  not  mioibDun. 

17  3lnbDcfaibbntotDcm,t©Datma< 
tier  of  communications  are  tDefe  tliat 
vce  Dauc  one  to  anotDerasyeelbaiue, 
anb  are  fab  < 

is  3lnb  the  one  of  tfjem  .tbDofc  name 
lbasClcopDas,  annucring,  faibc  bnto 
Dim,  3rt  tljou  oncly  a  flranger  in  l?ic- 
rufalcm ,  anb  Daft  not  tmoibcn  tDc 
tilings  lbliiclj  arc  come  to  paffe  tljete  in 
tDcfcbaycs< 

19  3inb  Dee  faibc  bnto  tDcm,  aeDat 
tilings  i  3tnb  tDev  faib  bnto  Dim ,  Con^ 
corning  "Jcfus  of  i^a^arttli ,  VDljtcl)  I 
tbas  a  pjopDct ,  migDty  m  oecbc  anb 
U)0?bbefojcci5ob,anbailtl]cpcople. 

20  3nb  Doib  tDc  cDicfc  pnefts  anb 
our  rulers  bcltucrcb  Dim  to  be  eonbem- , 
neb  to  bcatD,anb  Dane  crunncb  Dim. 

ii  ffiut  lbcc  truftcb  tljatu  Dab  bene  i 
Dec,  ttiDicD  flioulb Dane  rebectneb  3J£, 
racl :  anb  befibe  an  tine ,  to  bap  is  tljc 
tlnrb  bay  fmcctDcfc  tilings  were  bone.  I 

ii  Pea, anb  certaine  lbomenalfo 
of  our  company  inabc  bs  aftoniflieb, 
toDicD  mere  early  at  tDc  S>cpultlnc : 

13  ^nbiblicu  tDcy  founb  not  Disbo^ 
bic,tDcycamc,fayiug,tliattDcyDabalfo 
fecne  a  bifion  of  2mgcis,  IbljtcD  faibc 
tDatDcUiasaiuic. 

14  3ub  certaine  of  tDcm  lbDitD 
lucre  Until  bs ,  Went  to  rlic  £>cpulelnc, ! 
anb  founb  it  euen  fo  as  tfic  lbomcn  Dab 
faib,but  Dim  tDcy  faib  not. 

15  XDen  Dee  faibc  buto  tDcm ,  £> 
foolcs,  anb  floib  of  Heart  to  bclccuc 


autljatrDc  p?opDctsDaucfpofcen : 

26  €>uglit  not  CDnft  to  Dane  fuf- 
fcreb  tDefe  tljings,  anb  to  enter  into  Dis 
glo?te< 

27  3(nb  beginning  at  £0ofcs ,  anb 
all  tDcpzopDcts,  Dec  erpounbebbnto 
tDcm  in  ailtDc5)criptures,tDctDmgs 
concerning  Dunfclfe. 

is  3no  tDey  nitVo  nigD  bnto  tDe 
biliage ,  lbDitlicr  tliey  Vbent ,  anb  Dee 
mabcas  tDouglj  Dec  ibouib  Dane  gone 
furtDcr. 

19  2SuttDcp  conftraincb  Dim,  fay- 
ing, ^bibc  lbitD  bs,  fo?  it  is  toibarbs 
cucning,  anb  tDc  bay  is  farre  fpent : 
3(nb  Ije  ibent  in,  to  tarric  lbitD  tDcm. 

30  3Jnb  it  came  to  paffe,  as  Dee  fate 
atmeate  rbitD  tDem,  Dec  tootse  toeab, 
anb  blcflcb  it,  anb  bmfte ,  anb  gaue  to 
tDcm. 

31  3{nb  tDeir  eyes  ibercopeneb,  anb 
tDcy  mictb  Dim,  anb  Ije  |]  banifycb  out 
oftDcirfigDt. 

32  3nb  tDey  faib  one  bnto  anotDcr, 
2Dib  not  our  Deart  burnc  lbitDtn  bs, 
ibDilc  liee  talbeb  lbitD  bs  by  tDe  lbay, 
anb  iblnie  Dee  openeb  to  bs  tDc&crtp'- 
tures* 

33  3nbtDeyrofebp  tDe  fame  Dourc, 
anb  rcnimcb  to  feierufaiem ,  anb  founb 
tDc  cleuen  gatDercb  togetDcr,anb  tDem 
tDatibcccibttDtDcm, 

34  laying,  XDe  &o?b  is  nfen  in^ 
bccb,anbDatDappcarcbto  §>imon. 

3$  ^InbtljcytolbibDattDingsibcre 
bone  in  tDe  lbay,  sDotbDcibastmolbcn 
of  tDcm  tn  bjcafemg  of  bjeab. 

36  C *3tnb  as  tDcy  tints  fpafte,  "Je- 
ms Dunfclfc  ftoob  mtDcmibft  of  tDcm, 
ano  fayctlj  bnto  tDem,  peace  bee  bn- 
to  you. 

37  25ut  tDey  lberc  terrificb ,  anb  a* 
fngDttb ,  anb  fuppofeb  tljat  tDey  Dab 
fceneafpmt. 

38  ^nb  Dcfaib  bnto  tDcm ,  i©Dy  are 
ycetrottbleb,  anbibDyboctDougDtsa^ 
rife  m  your  Dearts^ 

39  2SeDolbc  my  Daubs  anbtnyfectc, 
tDat  it  is3  my  ftlfe :  Danblc  me,  anb  fee  I 
fojafptrttDatD  notflcfl;  anbboncs,as 
yc  fee  mc  Dane. 

40  3lnbtt)DenDecDabtDusfpofccn, 
Dec  (Dcibcb  tljcm  Ijis  Ijanbcs  anb  Ijts 
fectc. 

41  3mb  lbDilc  tDcy  yet  bclecueb  not 
foj  toy ,  anb  lbonbcrcb,  Dec  faibcbnto 
tDcm,ir)auc  yc  Here  any  meat; 

42  3lnb  tDey  gaue  Dim  a  piece  of  a 
bjoylcb  hfD,aiib  of  an  Douy  combe. 
43  3fnb 


to  it  fine 

cfthem 


•Millet  I  tf 


The  true  light.  Chap.j. 


Ioh 


nswitne 


lTe.1 


'Gen. 1. 1. 


'Col.i.16. 


'Mat.  3.  i. 


"Heb.11.3- 


43  anb  he  too&eic,anbblbeatc  be- 
fore them. 

44  anb  Dee  fatb  Imto  them,  %\)tlt 
ace  the  ttwbs  Vbhich  "5  fpatie  bnto  you, 
Vbhtie  3  Vbas  yet  ttnth  you,  p  all  things 
muftbemimieD,Vbhtchtt)trcv»2ittenm 
the  ILavb  of  ©ofes ,  9  in  thc&tophets, 
anb  m  the  0falmes  concerning  me. 

4$  %hettopcneDhcthcirtonbeclran< 
Ding,  tljatthcy  might  Vmbcrttanb  the 
£>ctipcurcs, 

46  anDfaibtmtothem,1EhusitiS 
Vbntten,  $  thus  it  bchoucb  Crjnfl  to  fufc 
fee,?  to  rife  ftom  the  beab  tlje  thirb  cap: 

4.7  anb  that  repentance  anb  remits 
fion  of  fmnes  (honlb  be  pjcaehcb  in  h»s 
ittamc,  among  all  nations,  beginning 


atl^iecufaiem. 

4$  anb  vee  arc  tbitnefles  of  thefc 
things. 

49  C*  anb  beholb,  3  fenb  tfje  p?o= 
mite  of  mp  ifatljcr  bpon  von :  but  taric 
ye  in  the  citic  of  ^icrufalem,  untill  ye  be 
mbtteb  vbith  povbec  from  on  high. 

50  canb  he  leb  them  out  as  farce 
as  to  2Scthanie ,  anb  hce  lift  bp  his 
hanbs,anb  blcflcb  them. 

5 1  *  anb  it  came  to  paffc ,  VbhUc  hec 
blcfTcb  them ,  hee  viias  pattcb  fcom 
tfjem,  anb  caneb  bp  into  heaucn. 

52,  anb  they  ibo?fl)ippcb  him ,  anb 
rcturncb  to$?ietufalcm,ttHth  gtcat  iov: 

53  anb  Vbcre  continually  m  the  Xcm- 
plcpiaidng  anb  blcfTing  <5ob.  amen. 


m  The  Gofpcl  according  to  S.Iohn. 


chap.  1. 

1  The  Diuinitie ,  Humanitie,  and  Office  ofle- 
fus  Chrift.  15  The  teftimonic  ot  Iohn,  j<}' 
The  calling  ot  Andrew,  Peter,  Sic. 

J  iI5  the  beginning  Vbas 

tl)Cl©02D,5tl)Cl©02b; 

Uias  ttnt!)  <3od  ,  anb 

tl)CD9Q2blbaS(2i0b. 

x  *£he  fame  Vbas 
in  the  beginning  Vbith 
45ob. 

i  *  ail  things  Vbccc  mabe  bv  him, 
anb  Vbithout  him  Vbas  not  an?  thing 
mabe  that  Vbas  mabe. 

4  Sflnhun Vbas  lifcanb tljclifc Vbas 
the  light  of  men. 

5  anb  the  light  fljmetn  in  bactmcOe, 
anDthcbatunrtrccoinpjchcnbcbitnot. 

6  C*  Xhere  Vbas  a  man  fent  fcom 
<Sob,Vbhofcnamevbas;3lohn. 

7  Xhe  fame  camefo? a  Vbitncflc, to 
bcare  vintnetTe  of  the  light,  that  all  men 
through  jnm  might  bcleeuc. 

8  $ee  Vbas  not  tliat  ligl)t ,  but  was 
fnu  to  bearcvbitiicflcofthat  light. 

9  %\)M  Vbas  the  true  light ,  vbhich 
lighteth  cucryman  that  conimcthmto 
tlje  Vbojlb. 

10  $ecvbasinthevb02ib,anb*thc 
Vbo?lb  vbas  mabe  by  him ,  anb  tlje 
VboUb  Uncvb  Dim  not. 


"John  1  5. 
26aaiS 


"Mar.itf. 
19.  ades 
1.9. 


11  $ec  came  bnto  fjis  ovbnc,  anb  his 
ovbnereceiucbhunnot. 

1 2,  But  as  many  as  r  ecemeb  him ,  to 
tljem  gaue  hce  ||  povbec  to  become  tlje 
fonncs  of  d5ob,euen  to  tljem  that  bclecue 
onfjis/ftamc: 

13  t©hich  Vbcre  borne,  not  of  bloob, 
no?  of  tfje  tbill  of  the  flcfl),no2  of  the  Vbill 
of  man,  bnt  of  06b. 

14  *anbtljc  tt9o;b  rbas  mabe  firth, 
anb  bVbelt  among  tos  ($  u>e  beljeib  his 
glon\the  glojy  as  ofthc  onely  begotten 
of  tfje  iPathcr)  full  of  grace  anb  ttucth. 

15  C3ohnbaccnHcneu*eofhim,aub 
ccicb,faving,Xhis  ibashc  of  ibhom  5 
fpanc^c  that  commcth  after  mcispje- 
fecreb  befoze  me,fo2 he  tbas  before  mc. 

i6  anb  of  his  *  fuincOe  haue  all  Vbtc 
rccciucb,anb  grace  fo;  grace. 

17  5f 02  the  Havb  Vbas  giuen  by  fi©o* 
fcs,but  grace  anb  tructb  tame  by  3Je- 
fusCljJifi. 

is  *  Bo  man  hath  feenc  <5ob  at  any 
time:  the  oncly  begotten  £>onnc,vbhich 
ism  the  bofomc  of  the  Jfatljcc ,  he  hath 
bcciarebhim. 

19  canbthiSisthfrcco2bofgiohn, 
Vbhen  the  3JfVbes  fent^tefis  anb  He; 
uitcs  fcom  fticrufaicm,to  afhe  l;im, 
soho  art  thou  < 

io  anb  he  confrtTcb,anb  benieb  not: 
but  coufefleb,3J  am  not  the  €l)«fr. 
3  ?         11  anb 


\Or,lhe 

ighlor  prt- 
uledgc. 


'Mat.l.iS. 


*Co!.i.ij. 


*i.Iohn4. 
1  2. 1.tim. 
6.1 6. 


TheLambcofGod.  S.Iohn. 


Atruclfracli 


racnte. 


fhct. 


'Mat.: 


•M2c3.11 
afis  if. 4 


\\Orj.-csrttk, 


Mat  7.16. 


21  3inb  they  affecb  him,  t©hat  then  * 
3trt  thou  €lias  <  2lnD  he  faith ,  3  am 
not.  artthou  Hrhatpzophct^nbhee 
anfnjcrcb,/15o. 

22  ILhcn  fatD  they  bnto  htm ,  t©ho 
art  thou,  that  We  map  gtuc  an  anfroerc 
to  them  that  fent  bs  <  ©hat  fayett  thou 
oftljyfelte* 

23  *$cfatb,3Jamthcboiccofonetry< 
tng  tn  the  WUbcmeffe  :fi0aBCttraight 
the  way  of  the  IL02D ,  as  faib  the  p?o* 
phetefaias. 

24  anbthcy  Which  Wmtcnt,  Were 
ofthephartfes. 

25  anb  they  atttcb  him,  ano  faib  bn* 
to  him,  ©hy  baptt$cft  thou  thcn,if  thou 
be  not  that  Chnft,  no?  Clias ,  neither, 
thatpzophct* 

26  3John  anfroetcb  them,  faying,  3f 
baptise  With  water ,  but  there  franbetb 
one  among  you,Whom  ye  Know  not, 

27  *  $c  it  is  ,  mho  tomming  after . 
mc,tsprcfcrrci)  before  me,  whofefhocs 
latchet3J  am  not  Worthy  to  bnloofe. 

28  Xhefc  things  Vberc  bone  in  TSv 
thabara  bcyoub  3Jo?bane  ,  Where 
3Johnwasbapn5tng. 

29  C£hcnertbay,3Johnfecfh3Jc* 
fas  tomming  bnto  him,  ant>  faith,  26c; 
hoiodKfLambcofcob.Whtchlltalicth 
away  the  finnc  of  the  ID02ID. 

30  XhisisheofWhom3Jfaib,aftcr 
me  rommcrh  a  man,  Which  is  prefcrrcb 
before  mc :  for  he  was  before  mc. 

31  anb  3J  Bticwhimnot:butthathc 
fhoulb  be  mabe  manifeftto  3Jfracl>tberj 
fore  am  31  come  baptising  With  water. ' 

31  *  anb  3Jobn  bare  rccorb  faying, ! 
3)  faw  the  Spirit  befcenbmg  from  bca<  j 
ucn,liftc  a  Dotte.anb  it  abobe  bpon  him. 

33  atib3ltmcWbtmnot:butbctbat 
fent  mc  to  bapmc  With  Water  ,tbc  fame  j 
faib  bnto  mc ,  £lpon  ibhom  thou  (halt 
fee  the  Spirit  befcenbmg ,  9  remaining 
on  him ,  the  fame  is  he  Which  baptvjeth 
with  the  holy  ©bolt 

34  3foD  31  faw,aub bare  rccorb,tbat ' 
tbisisthcfonncof©ob. 

?s  {[agamc  the  ncrt  bay  aftcr,3Jobn 
ftoob.anb  trbo  ofbisbtfnplcs. 

36  anb  loosing  upon  3jcfus  as  be 
waikcb,bcfaitb,23cbolbtbciLambeof 

(50b. 

37  anb  the  two  bifciplcshcarbhim ' 
fpcaUeaubthcyfolloWcb  3Jcfus. 

38  Xhen  3Jefus  turneb  ,  anb  faib 
them  following ,  anb  faith  bnto  them, 
what  fccitc  ye  t  IZbcy  faib  bnto  him, 
ttabbi ,  Winch  is  to  fay  being  mtcrprc- 


teb,^aftet)  Where  llowclleft  thou; 

3  9  l?efaith  bnto  tbcm,Comc  anb  fee. 
Xbcy  tame  anb  faw  Where  he  bWelt, 
anb  abobe  With  him  that  bay  :  for  it 
was  ||  about  the  tenth  boure. 

40  £)nc  of  the  two  which  heart) 
5(ohnfpcanc,  anbfoliowebbim,  was 
anbreW,£>tmon  peters  brother. 

41  $e&rQfuibctbbtsoWne  brother 
Simon ,  ant)  faith  bnto  him ,  aae  hauc 
founbtbc  s$cfnas,  Which  is,  being  fn- 
terpretcb,||tbeCbriu\ 

42  anb  he  brought  him  to  3Jcuis. 
anb  When  "Jems  bebclbbim,  befatb, 
Xhou  art  Stmon  the  fonnc  of  3Jona , 
tboufhaltbc  caiicb  Cephas ,  Which  is 
by  interpretation,!!  a  flonc. 

43  C  £bc  bay  following ,  gjefus 
Woulbgoefoortb  into  ©aUlcc^finbctb 
Philips  faith  bnto  him,  5f  olloW  me. 

44  /Bow  pbilipwasofasctbfaiba, 
the  rittc  of  anbrcW  anb  peter. 

45  Philip  finbetb  iBathancel ,  anb 
faith  bnto  him  1  use  haucfounbhmtof 
Whom  *  #ofcs  in  the  Haw  ,  anuthc 
*  prophets  bib  Write,  jlemsofiBaja* 
rcth  the  tonne  of  3}oftpb. 

46  anb  iBathancci  faib  into  hnn, 
Can  there  any  goob  thing  come  out  of 
/Ba5arcth  ?  PbihP  faith  bnto  him, 
Come  anb  fee. 

47  37efusfaWiftathancei  comming 
tohim,anbfaithofbun,25cholban3Jt: 
raelitc  inbeeb  tn  Whom  is  no  guile. 

48  iBathauecl  fayeth  bnto  him, 
©hence  snowed  thou  metritis  arc 
tu)ercb,anblaib  bntobtm,25cfore  that 
PhHtp  talleb  tbec,  When  rtjou  waQbn= 
ber  the  figgc  tree,3l  taw  thee. 

49  IBathancci  anfmercb ,  anb  faith 
bnto  him,  Babbi,  thou  art  the  Sonne 
ofGob^houartthebmgofllfracl. 

50  3lcfusanftoereD ,  anb  faib  bnto 
him,  26ccaufe 31  faib  bnto  thee,  3} faw 
thee  bnber  the  figgc  tree,bclccucQ  thotu 
thou  thalt fee  greater  tl)mgs  then  thefc. 

51  3nb  hte  faith  bnto  him,  <mcnly, 
bcnly  "5  fay  bnto  you  ,  hcereaftcryec 
fbaiifxchcaucn open,  anb  the  Angels 
of  <5ob  afcenbing,  anb  bcfecnbingbpon 
tljc  tonne  of  man. 

CHAP.    II. 

:  Chrirt  turncth  w^ter  into  wine,  n  Dcpjrtcth 
intoCapern.iura,andtoIeiufaIeii))i4  V/here 
hcepurgeth  the  temple  ot  buyers  and  fellets. 
19  He  foretcllcth  his  death  and  tefurrc<ftion. 
i)  ManybelceuedbecaureofhismiraclfS.but 
he  would  not  ttuft  lumfelfc  w  ith  them. 

31nb 


\\Orj*tuUfi. 


\\Thatvaj 
tvohcKrrt 
before  mgkt 


\\0r,thc4' 

notntcd. 


j  Or,  Peter, 


*Cen.49- 
io.lcuit.  18 
18. 
'El  21.4.1. 


ater  made  wine. 


Cha 


p.ij.ii). 


Of 


regeneration. 


.-  j12b  the  thirb  oay  there 
Iffm  \Slf tbas  a  manage  m  Cana  of 
JtSs&S  ©aiilcc,  anb  the  mother  of 
^M#5^3Jcfus1*astt)cte. 
t^^^  z  SnbbothlJcrusrbas 
caucb,anD!)js  Dimples,  to  the  manage. 

j  3tt«)  when  thcyibantcovbine,  the 
mother  of  3Jefustaith  bnto  htm,  Xbcy 
haucnoVbmc. 

4-  3}efus  faith  bnto  her,  naoman, 
lnhat  haue  3  to  doc  tbttb  thee*  mine 
bourctsnotyctcomc. 

5  $is  mother  faith  bnto  pfcruants, 
nahatfocuer  he  faith  bnto  you,  Doc  it. 

6  3nD  there  acre  Crt  there  fire  rba; 
tcr  pots  of  (tone,  after  the  maner  of  the 
purifying  of  the  3cVms  ,  eontcining 
ubo  oj  rb:cc  firttms  apecte. 

7  "Jews  faith  bnto  them,  tfill  the 
water  pots  ibitb  ibatcc.  Znn  the?  nllcb 
tbcmDptctbebnmme. 

8  3nb  bee  faith  bnto  them,  S>jatbe 
out  norn ,  ano  beare  bnto  the  gonerno? 
of  tbefcaft.  3notbcybareit. 

9  naben  the  ruler  of  the  fcaft  bao 
taftcothe  rbatct  that  rbasmaoc  ibtne, 
anDttnctbnot  lnbencett  rbas,(buctbc 
fcruants  ttibicb  toett)  the  ibater  ftneib) 
the  goutmo?  of  the  fratt  taiicb  the  bjtibe* 
gromc, 

io  ^nb  faith  bnto  htm,  entry  man 
at  the  beginning  both  fct  foctfh  goob 
iDmcanb  ibhcn  men  haue  ibcll  bjunttc, 
then  that  ibbteb  is  tbotfe:  but  thou  haft 
ftept  the  goob  ibine  bntill  noib. 

1 1  Xhis  beginning  of  miracles  bib 
3Jefusm  Cana  of  Galilee,  anb  mantfe;  I 
ttebfojtbbisglojy,  anbbisDifciplcsbc 
IccucDonbtm. 

iz  C^ftecthishteibcntbotbncto, 
Capernaum,  hceatib  his  mother,  anb 
hisbjetltfcn,  anbhisbifrtples,  anb they 
rontinueb  thcrcnot  many  Daycs. 

n  IC^nbthcJevbes^affeoucribas 

at  banb,*  3Jcfus  b>cnt  Dp  toi?icrufalcm 

14.  ^nbfounb  in  the  Xemplethofc 

tbatfolD  orcn,  anb  fbcepe,  ano  bones, 

anb  the  changers  of  moncy,fitting. 

15  3lnb  tbhen  he  hab  matte  a  fcourge 
of  final!  cojDcs,be  Dzouc  them  all  out  of 
:  theXeinplc,  anb  the  fl)ccpc«  the  orcn, 
j  anb  poibzcD  out  the  changers  money, 
:  ano  oucrth:eib  the  tables, 
1  i6 :8nbfaibtmto  them  that  foibboues 
i  lake  thefc  things  hence,  matte  not  my 
j  fathers  houfc  an  houfc  of  mcr  chanDisc. 
17  ^nb  btsDifciplcs  rcmcmbjcD  that 
•pfai.(5?.p.  it  tbas  nntttcn ,  *  Xhc  5eaie  of  tljinc 
j  Ijoufc  hath  eaten  mc  Pp. 


is  C  Xbcn  anfmcrcb  the  3lcibcs, 
anb  faib  bnto  him ,  naijat  fignc  fyclbcft 
thou  bnto  bs ,  feeing  that  thou  bocft 
thefc  things; 

19  Ifcfus  anfiocrcb,  anb  faib  bnto 
them,*3?eftropthistcmple,anbinth?cc 
Daycs  3Jibfllraifc  it  bp. 

zo  %\)tn  faib  the  3Jeibcs,5f  our ty  anb 
fir  ycrcsibas  this  Xemplem  buiibtng, 
anb  ttiilt  thou  r  care  it  bp  in  th?cc  Daycs; 

21  asutbcfpatteoftbctcmpicofbis 
boby. 

zz  nahen  therefore  rjee  tbas  rifen 
from  thebcab,  hiSbifciplcsrcmcmbjeb 
that  bee  hab  faib  this  onto  them :  anb 
they  belecucb  the  ^>cnptutc3  anb  the 
I  ttwb  ibbt'cb  3Jefus  hao  fatb. 

zj  C/BoibVbhcnhccujasin^ierU' 
Xaicnj  at  the  paffcouer ,  in  the  fcaft  bay, 
!  many  belecucb  in  his  4i5amc,tbhcn  they 
fatb  the  miracles  ttihtch  he  bib. 

24.  zsut  3Jefusbtb  not  commit  him; 
:  fclfePnto  rhcm,bccaufehc  ttitciP  ai  men, 

z5  ^nbnccbcb  not  that  any  fljoulb 
tcftific  of  man :  fo?  bee  fencib  ibhat  ibas 


in  man. 


CHAP.    III. 


Chrift  tcacheth  Nicodemus  the  necefsitie  ol 
regeneration.  1 4  Of  faith  in  his  death.  16  The 
great  loue  of  God  towards  the  world.  IS  Con- 
demnation for  vnbeliefe.  13  The  baptifme. 
wicnes  &  dodrineoflohn  concerning  Chrift. 

$cre  tbas  a  man  of  the 
0hanfces,nameb  iI5ttobe 
mus,a  ruler  of  pJjciPcs: 
z  Xhcfamccamcto^jc^ 
fus  by  night,  anb  faib  bnto 
htm,£abbi,  lbccttnoib  that  thou  art  a 
teacher  come  from  C5ob :  fo?  no  man 
canboc  thefc  miracles  that  thouDocQ, 
crccpt  c5ob  be  rbith  him. 

j  JJeCus  anfiucrcb ,  anb  faib  bnto 
him,<Slcnly,  bcnly^  fay  bnto  thec,  cr- 
ccpt a  man  be  bomejagaute ,  he  cannot 
fee  thettmgDomeof<5ob. 

4  /i5tcoocmttsfatthbntohim,^otb 
tan  a  man  be  borne  ibhcn  he  is  olb  <  can 
he  enter  the  feconb  time  into  his  mo 
thcrs  vbombc ,anb  be  borne  i 

5  3Jefusanfrocrcb,5Llcnly,bcrily 3J 
fay  bnto  thee ,  crccpt  a  man  be  borne  of 
tbatcr  anb  of  the  fpint ,  he  cannot  enter 
into  the  ttmgbomc  of  ©ob. 

6  Xhat lbhtchts  bomcof thcflcfli, 
isflcfh ,  anbthatmhithisbonicoftljc 
fpirtt,lsfpirit. 

7  ^9arucac  not  that  31  faibe  bnto 
thcc,Pcinuftbcbomc||againe. 

s    Hhc 


"Mat.ztf. 
6l. 


\[Or,[rc 


\\Or,f,o 

AVOHC. 


The  force  of  faitl: 


a. 


S.Iohn.       Iohnsteftimonie. 


Num.21. 


t .  Iohn  t 


•Chap.  12. 
■17- 


'CIu.  1.4. 


\\Or/tifca. 

utrei. 


"  Clup  4. 


8  Xbc  ttunbc  blovuetfi  tbbcre  ttlfc 
ftctb,  anbtbou  beared  the  fouttb  there; 
of,but  cantt  not  tel  Vbbcnce  it  commetb, 
atiMbbttbcritgoctb :  Soiscueryonc 
that  is  bo?ne  of  the  Spirit. 

9  jStcobcmus  anuoctcb ,  anb  faib 
unto  hun,i}oU)  can  trjcfc  things  be* 

10  Jefusanfuicrcb,  anb  faibc  Dnto 
linn,  3<rttbouamaOctof  Jftael,  anb 
knotted  not  tljcfc  things  i 

n  Merely ,  Dercly  3  fay  t>nto  tljcc, 
©cfpeal$cthatn)CbocBnoiD,anbtcdi; 
fictbatibeebaucfccnc;  anb  ycc  rccctuc 
notourlbitttcffc. 

ix  Jf  3  Ijauc  tolbc  you  earthly 
tbtngs,ano  ye  belccuc  not:  bow  fljail  vc 
bclccttctfjl  tell  you  of  bcaucnly  things? 

15  2lnb  no  man  bath  afccnbcb  Dp  to 
hcancn,  but  bee  that  tame  bottmc  from 
Ijcaucn,  euen  the  Sonne  of  man  ibbitb 
isinbeauen. 

14.  C  *3(nb  as  ©ofes  lifteb  Dp  the 
ferpent  in  tl)c  ttnlbcrncffc :  euen  fo  mud 
the  Pontic  of  man  be  UftcD  Dp : 

15  Xbat  lbbofocuet  bclecuetb  in 
bun,  fljoulb  not  pcrilb,  but  banc  etc* 
nauufc. 

16  CJFoiGobfoIoucbpmozib.tbat 
be  gauc  bis  only  begotten  Pontic :  that 
ibbofocuer  bclecuetb  in  htm ,  flioults 
not  pcrifl),butbauccucriading  life. 

17  *Jfoj  Gob  fent  not  bts  Sonne  in 
to  the  lboilb  to  conbemne  the  Vbozlb : 
but  that  the  Uwlb  though  bun  might 
befaucb. 

is  Cfcc  that  bclecuetb  on  bim,is  not 
tonbcmticb:butbcctbatbclecnetbnot, 
is  conbcmncb  alrcaby,  bctaufc  lice  bath 
not  bclcettet)  in  the  jframcof  fbconcly 
begotten  Pontic  of  Gob. 

19  2lnb  this  is  the  tonbcmnation, 
'that  hgbttscomcmtothciuonb,  anb 
mcuioucb  barUttcfrc  rather  then  light, 
bctaufc  their  bccbcsuicrccuill. 

20  fomicry  one  that  boctbcuilI,ha 
ttth  the  light,  neither  tommcth  to  the 
ligbt.icd  his  beebs  fboulb  bclircpzoucb. 

21  isutbcc  that  boctb  tructh ,  com- 
met!)  to  the  itgbttbat  his  ocebs  ma?  be 
mabcmamfcd,  that  they  arc  Uvougbt 
in  Gob. 

22  |[3ftcrtberctbiugs,camcjefue 
ano  his  Difcipics  into  the  laub  of  3JU- 
htA ,  ano  there  hec  tancbibitb  them, 
'anbbapmeb. 

2 j  C  3nb  John  alfo  Was  baptising 
111  "?.nion,nctrc  to  Saiun,bccaufe  there 
inasmuch  ibatertbere:  anb  tbey  came, 
anbibcrebapmcb. 


24  5fo2  John  ruas  not  vet cad into 
pnfon. 

25  CXfien  tbcrearofcacnicdionbc; 
nbeen  fome  of  Johns  bifciplcs  anb  the 
JclbC6,about  purifying. 

26  2lub  they  tame  Dnto  John ,  anb 
faib  Dnto  bim,ftabbi,bc  tbatibasttutb 
thee  bcyonb  Jojbanc,  "toibbomtbou 
bared  lbitncffe,  bcholb ,  the  fame  bap* 
ti5Ctb,anb  all  men  come  to  him. 

27  jobnanftt)crcD,anbfatb,*;8mau 
tan  1 1  rccciuc  tiothmg ,  except  it  be  gtucn 
him  from  hcattcn. 

28  Pcyourfcluesbcarcmc mitnefle, 
that  J  faib,  *  J  am  not  the  Cbnd ,  but 
that  J  amfentbcftnebnn. 

29  i^c  that  hath  the  bubcis  tljc  bnbc= 
gromc :  but  the  fnenb  of  tljc  bnbe- 
gromc ,  tbbitb  ftanbeth  anb  hearcth 
him,  rcioyectb  greatly  bctaufc  of  the 
bjibegromes  Done :  %tys  my  top  there- 
fo?cisfulfillcb. 

50  $cc  mutt  tntrcafe ,  but  J  mud  be- 
crtafe. 

31  $cetbat  tommcth  from  abouc,  is 
abouc  all :  bee  that  is  of  the  earth,  is 
earthly,  anb  fpcaaetb  of  the  earth :  bee 
tbattomctb  from  bcaucn  is  abouc  all: 

32  2lnb  what  bee  bath  fecne  anb 
bcarb,tbatbctc(fifictb,aubuomanrc' 
cciuctbhistcmmony: 

33  5>e  that  hath  rctetucb  histcmmo- 
me,*  hatlj  fet  to  his  feale,  that  Gob  is 
true. 

34  foi  bevbhom  d5ob  hath  fent.fpca 
bcth  the  lDozbs  of  C5ob:jf  oioob  giuetb 
not  the  Spirit  by  nicafttre  vnto  him. 

35  *  Xbe  father  louctb  the  ^>onne, 
anb  hath  gtucn  ai  things  tnto  his  banb. 

36  *5>c  that  bclccucth  on  the  Sonne, 
hathcttcriamng  life:  anb  hctbatbclcc 
ucthnot  til c Sonne,  (ball  not  fee  life: 
but  the  tbjatb  of  Gob  abtbeth  onbun. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  Chrifhalketh  with  a  wom.inot Samaria,  and 
reueilethhimfelfe  vnto  her.  17  Hisdi/ciples 
marucilc.  31  Hedcdarethtothemhiszcalc 
to  Gods  glory.  3^  Many  Samaritancs  bc- 
leeueonhim.  43  Hcdcp.irtethintoGalil*, 
and  licileththe  Rulers  (bnnc  that  lay  Hcke 
at  Capernaum. 

l?cn  thercfoje  the  ILojb 
UneiDhom  the  j&barifecs 
bab  hearb  tltat  Jcfus 
<\v^iyM^mabc  anb  bapt^cb  moc 
Jsi^WsU  btftipics  then  John, 
2  (Xhough  Jeftis  hmtfclfc  baptt 
3CD  not,btit  Ijis  Cifciplcs:  ^ 

3  tye 


a. 


p.  1. 


•Heb.T.4. 

vnro  him- 

{<<{'■ 

"  Chap.  1 


Rora.  3.4 


"Match. 1 1. 


•Habic.5. 
4. 1. iohn  5. 


Jacobs  well. 


Chap.ui).     Trueworfhippers. 


19.  and  48 
.iolk 


j  ^elcr^uDea.anDbepartebagatne 
into  <Z>altle. 

4  ^iid  hee  mud  neebs  goe  thozotb 
Samaria. 

5  Xljeu  tommeth  he  to  a  tttp  of  Sa- 
maria, rtohich  is  caileb  Sychar  ,ucere 
to  the  pattcll  of grounb  *  that  Jacob 
gaue  to  I)i0  fount  Jofeph. 

6  iftott)  Jacobs  nacil  rbas  there. 
3Jcfus  therefore  bemg  rbearteb  rmth 
htstourney,fatcthuson  the  naell:  ano 
it  rbas  about  tlie  firth  houre. 

7  Xhcre  tommeth  a  rboman  of 
Samaria  to  ojarbrtoatcr:  3lefusfapth 
bnto  her,  (Etttcmc  to  biuiKC. 

s  fo;  his  bifctplcsrtoerc  gone  arbap 
tonto  the  city  to  buy  mcate. 

9  Xhen  faith  the  rboman  of  Sama- 
ria tonto  him ,  ^orbtsit  tljat  thou.be^ 
mga3Jertoe,arBeftDanBeofme,rbhich 
am  a  rboman  ofSamana^jfoHhc 
3Jertoes haue no  Dealings rbtth  the Sa^ 
marttancs. 

10  3Jefus  anfniereb ,  anb  faib  bnto 
her,  3Jf  thou  Rttcmefl  tDe  gift  of  <sob, 
anb  rbho  it  is  thatfapth  to  thee,  etue 
me  to  mmfec  1  thou  rtoouibel!  haue  at 
feeb  of  Dim ,  anb  l)ce  lboulb  haue  giucn 
thee  luting  rtoatcr. 

it  Xhe  rboman  faith  bnto  htm.Slr, 
thou  haft  nothing  to  bjarbe  rbith,  anb 
the  nacll  is  beepe :  from  whence  then 
halt  thou  that  luiing  rbatec  i 

1 1  2(rt  thon  greater  then  our  father 
3Jacob ,  rtohteh  gaue us  the naeii ,  anb 
DjaiiBc  thereof  htmfrtfc,  anb  his  chil; 
bjen,anbhiscattelli 

13  3Icfns  anfmereb ,  anb  faib  tonto 
l)cr,n£hofocucrtonnKcthofrhtsrbater, 
fljailthirltagatne: 

14.  26ut  rbhofoeuer  bnnftcth  of  the 
rbatcr  that  37  mai  gme  htm,  (bail  ncuer 
ttjitfr :  but'tlje  rbatcr  that  3J  (ball  gme 
bim,(baibe  m  htm  a  rtocll  of  rbatcr  fp;m< 
gmgbu  into  eucriafhttg  life. 

1$  Xbe  rboman faith tonto  btm,Str, 
giuc  me  this  mater,  thatjthtrftnot, 
neither  tome  hither  to  b:aib . 

is  3Jefus  faith  ton  to  her,  ©oe,  tall 
tbp  hufbanb,  anb  come  hither. 

17  Xhertoomanannoctcb, anb  faib, 
31  bane  no  hufbanb.  ^cfus  faib  intto 
fier ,  Xbou  halt  rbcll  fatb ,  3  banc  no 
Jjtlfbanb: 

18  fai  thouhafthabfiuehufbanbs, 
anb  be  Whom  thou  noib  bau\ls  not  thy 
hufbanb :  3ln  that  fatbeft  thou  truer?. 

19  Xbe  Woman faith tonto  btm,Sir , 
37  perceuic  that  thou  art  a  p.uphet. 


io  £)ur  fathers  Woilbippe&mtbiS 
mountaute,anDyefay,  that*  in  toteru- 
faiem  isthe  place  Wljetc  men  ought  to 
Wojlbtp. 

%\  Jefus  faith  tonto  her,  naomau, 
bciceuc me,  the  houre  tommeth  ©hen 
ye  fhaiineitherinthtsmountatne,  noj 
vet  at  tticriifalem.Wojlbip  the  father. 

22  J3cwo2fl)ipyelmoWnotWbat: 
We  ftnovi)  iDhat  we  Woilbtp :  fo?  faiua= 
tiontsoftbc3JcWcs. 

13  26ut  the  houre  tommeth  ,  anb 
now  is,  when  the  true  Woztbippers 
(ball  Woifbip  the  JF  atber  in  fpirtt ,  anb 
in  tructh :  fo:  the  jFatber  fectteth  futh 
toWoifbipbtm. 

24  *  (Sob  is  a  Spirit ,  anb  they  that 
1  W02(btp  htm ,  multwojityp  htmtnfpi^ 
rtt,anbtntrueth. 

15  Xhe  rboman  faith  tonto  him,  31 
Rnoito  thatcpeffiastommtth.ibhtchts 
caiicb  Chnlt :  rbhen  he  is  come ,hee  rinu 
tclltosai!  things. 

16  'Jeftis  fapth  tonto  her,  9J  that 
fpeatte  tonto  thee,  am  hee. 

17  C  ^nb  topon  this  tame  his  btfo 
plcs,anb  maructicb  that  he  taiucb  ltotth 
the  rboman :  ret  no  man  fatb,  oahat  fee- 
Reft  thou,  0;,  n9hr  MlReft  thou  rbitlj 
her  i  J 

18  Xhc  rboman  then  left  her  rbatcr; 
pot ,  anb  ltocttt  her  rtoap  into  the  citv, 
anbfapthtothemen, 

19  Come, fee aman,  rbhich  tolbcmc 
all  things  tljat  euer  3J  bib :  3Js  not  this 
the  €\)jidi 

jo  Xhen  the?  rbent  out  of  the  cittc, 
anb  came  tonto  htm. 

31  C  Jn  the  meane  rbhile  his  btfci^ 
pies  pia?  eb  htm,  faying,  falter,  eate. 

31  25ut  hee  fatb  tonto  them ,  j  hauc 
mcate  to  eate  that  re  Rtiorb  not  of. 

33  Xhcrrfojc  fatb  the  bifctpies  one 
to  another,  l^ath  anp  man  brought  him 
ought  to  eate? 

34  3 ffus  faith  tonto  them^mcat 
is,  tobocthcrbiiiof  htm  thatfent  nice, 
anbtonmmhisrtoojhe. 

35  SaynotpcXhcrearcvetfotirc 
moneths.anb  then  tommeth  Ijaruclt; 
26cholb,3J  faytontopou,  !Lifttopj>our 
c>'es,anblooReonthefielbs:'fo2they 
arc  rtohitc  alrcaby  to  haruclt. 

36  ^nb  hee  that  rcaucth  recctucth 
rbages,  anb  gathereth  fruite  tonto  lift 
eternau :  that  both  he  that  rortocth,  ano 
he  that  reapcth,  maj>  rcioyce  together. 

37  3ub  herein  «s  that  faying  true : 
£>nclbrbcth,  anb  another  rcapeth. 

^8  'JfciU 


'Dm.  1 1.5. 


*i.Cc>3. 
'7- 


'Mat.  9- 37- 


The  dead  raifed.  S.Iohn.        The  llcke  healed. 


*Mauh.  i ; 
57- 


*  C!up.  1.1 


Or,  Qou* ti- 
er, or  ruler. 


38  3Jfcntpou  torcapcthat,ltohereon| 
yc  bettoitoeb  no  labour :  other  men  uv 
bourcb,  auto  pee  arc  entreb  into  their  W 

bours. 

39  canbmanpofthc&amaritancs 
of  that  ntic  bclecucto  on  Dun  ,fo;  the  fap; 
mgof  thcitooman,  ltohichtcfhfieb,  i^ce 
tolbmcallthatcucrgibtb. 

40  &o  lbhcn  the  <§>amaritancs  ltocrc 
come  tonto  hun,  thep  bctought  him  that 
I)c  ttioulD  taric  ltoith  thcm,anto  he  abobc 
there  tibo  napes. 

41  anb  manpmocbclceucb.becaufe 
ofhtsoibneitoojb: 

41 anb  faib  tonto  the  itooman,$i3olto 
tbc  bclccue ,  not  becaufc  of  tliv  faping, 
foz  ltoc  hauc  I)carb  him  our  fclues ,  anb 
Uuoitothatthisismbccto  thc€h;m\  the 
Mainour  of  thcitoojlb. 

43  C  *  #oito  after  tltoo  napes  lie  be* 
parteb  thence,  anb  ltocnt  into  Galilee : 

44  jfoj'Jcfus  hmifclfctcmr1eb,that 
a  \5?opi)et  hath  no  Ijonour  in  his  otbne 
countrcp. 

4$  Xhcnitohcn  hee  ltoas  conic  into 
Galilee,  the  Galileans  r  ccciucu  him.ha; 
uingfecne  alUUc  tljmcjs  that  hec  bib  at 
^icrufalctn  at  tl)c  5fcaQ :  to?  they  aifo 
itoent  tonto  the  5feau\ 

46  S>o  gicfus tame  againc  intoCa^ 
na  of  Galilee,  *  ltohccchcc  mabethc  itofc 
tcr  lbme.  anb  tlicrc  ibas  a  ccrtame 

nobleman,  ltohofc  tonne  ltoas  (idtc  at 
Capernaum. 

4  7  ashen  lie hearb  that licfus  ltoas 
come  out  of  ^ubca  into  Galilee ,  lice 
Went  tonto  Him,  anb  befouglu  l)im  that 
he  itooulb  come  boltone,  anb  heale  his 
tonne  :fo:hc  ltoas  atthepomtofbeath. 

48  Xhcn  faib  Refits  bnto  him ,  €r< 
ccptycfcctigncsanbltoonbccs,  yccibill 
notbelccuc. 

49  Xhe  noble  man  faith  bnto  him, 
§>y:,  tome  boltone  etc  my  chilb  bic. 

50  "licfus  faith  bnto  h*.m,Go  thy  ltoav, 
thy  tonne  liucth.  anb  the  man  bclecucb 
the  itoo:b  that  3Jcfushab  fpofecn  tonto 
him,anb  he  ltocnt  his  ltoay. 

5 1  anb  as  he  ibas  noil)  goingboibn, 
h!sfcniautsmcthun,aubtolbhmi,fap- 
ing,Xhptoimcliucth. 

51  Xhcn  mautrcb  hec  of  them  the 
hourc  ii)hcn  he  began  to  amenb :  aub 
they  faib  tonto  him ,  Pcftcrbay  at  thefc^ 
ucnth  houre  the  fcucr  left  him. 

53  £>o  the  father  lmcibcth.it  it  ltoas 
at  the  fame  hourc,  m  the  lbhich  Wus 
fail)  tonto  him,  Xhp  totmcltueth,anb 
himfclfc  bclecucb,  aub  hislbholc  houfc. 


54  Xhis  isagamc  the  fceonbmira* 
clc  that^jefus  bib ,  lDhcii  hce  ibas  come 
out  of  3lubea  into  Galilee. 

CHAP.   V. 

Iefus  on  the  Sabbath  day  cureth  him  that  was 
difealed  eight  &  thinic  yecres.  10  Thelewes 
therefore  cauill ,  andperlecutehimforir.  17 
He  anf^ercth  tor  himfelfe,  and  reprooueth 
them,  ("hewing  by  the  refhmonie  of  his  Fa- 
ther, ?l  of  Iohn,  }6  ot  hisworkes,  39  and 
of  the  Scriptures,  who  he  is. 

this  there  ttias  a 
the  Jcitoes ,  anb 


^3!cfus  lbent  top  to  l?icru= 
*fal 


i.dcut.  16. 


alcm. 

2  iftotbtliemsatlrjic' 
rulaicm  bp  the  flieepcjl market, apoolc,  \l0r <£""■ 
itohich  is  cailcb  m  the  ^ebjelto  tongue  Be- 
thel, haumgfTucpo?ches. 

3  3Jn  thefc  lap  a  great  multitubc  of 
impotent  folsc.ot  blmb,halt,ibithcreb, 
itoaitmg  fo;  tlic  ntoutng  of  the  ltoatcr. 

4  fox  an  ^ngel  ltocnt  boitonc  at  a 
ccrtame  feafon  into  the  poole ,  anb  trou- 
bleb  the  ltoatcr :  ltohofoeuer  then  firft  af= 
tcr  tljc  troubling  of  the  ltoatcr  ftcppcb 
m,itoasmabeitoholcofltohatfocuerbi£ 
cafchchab. 

5  anb  a  ccrtame  man  ltoas  there, 
ltohich  hab  an  tnfirmittc  thirttc  anb 
eight  peercs. 

6  i©hm3erusfaibhmilic,jBneito 
thathechab  becnenoib  along timcm 
that  cafe,  he  fapth  tontohmi,  teiltthou 
bemabcitohole 

7  %\)t  impotent  man  anfrocreb 
him,  &it ,  5  hauc  no  man  ltohcn  tlic 
ltoatcr  is  troublcto,  toputmcc  into  the 
poole :  butltohilc^J  amcommmg,  ano* 
thctftcppcthboUmcbcfojcmc. 

8  gicfusfapthtontohtm.lSifejtalJC 
topthpbcb.anbltoalHe. 

9  3inb  immcbiatlj*  the  man  ltoas 
mab c  ltoholc,  anb  toouc  top  his  beb,  anb 
itoaibcb:  ^nb  on  the  fame  bap  ltoas  the 
Sabbath. 

10  CXhe  3ldtocs  therefore  faib  ton- 
to  him  that  ltoas  turcto,  3itts  the  Sab- 
bath bap, *  itisnot  laitoftm  fo?  theeto  'Ur.x7. 
carpthpbeb. 

n  l^c  anfujereb  them,  l?e  that mabe 
me  ltoholcthcfamc  faib  tonto  mc,XaKc 
topthpbcb,anbitoalltc. 

12  Xhenaritcbthcphim,liDhatman 
is  that  itohith  faib  tonto  tljcc ,  Xaftctop 
thpbcb.anbitoaihe? 

u  3(nbhc  thatitoashcalcb,  ltoiltnot 
,ltoho  it  ibas:  to;  35cfus  hab  conuc^'cb 
1      himfclfc 


Ofthe  refurreclion.    Chap.v.  Search  the  Scriptures. 


\\Or,frm 
them*tlt- 
luJelhul 
vol. 


Matth.  15. 


bimfclfc  atbap,  ||a  multttubc  being  in 
tljat  plate. 

14  3ftcr tbarb  3}cfus  nnbetb  b»n  m 
ttjc  Xetnplc,  $  fatb  Ditto  Ijini ,  23cl)olD, 
tljou  art  maoe  lbbole:  fmne  no  moje, 
left  attwfc  thing  tome  bnto  thee. 

15  Xbematibcpartcb,  anbtolbe  the 
Jems  ttjat  it  ibas  3Jcfus tbljtcl)  DaD 
mabc  him  lbbole. 

16  anbtlicreftncbibrbcgjcibcsper; 
fctutc Jjcfus ,  anb  fouglit  to  day  Dun, 
bctaufcbcbaD  bouctbefc  things  on  the 
Sabbath  Day. 

17  <L2i5ut3leuisanriuctebtbcni,£0p 
father  ibo2&ctbbitberto,f3Jibo2Ue. 

18  Xbcrcfo2etbc3Jeibcs  fought  tbc 
nto?c  to  bill  bint,  not  onclpbccaufc  ijee 
bao  Soften  the  Sabbath ,  but  fain  alfo, 
tbat  e»ob  ibas  bts  father,  matting  ijiin- 
felfe  cquallibitboob. 

19  Xbcnanfroercb3Jtfns,anbfatbc 
bntotbent,  3Ilcnlp,bcrtlp3ifap  bnto 
vouXbc  fonne  tan  Doe  nothing  ofbmv 
felfe,  but  ibljat  befectb  tl)e  jfatber  boc : 
fo:  lbbat  things  focttcr  be  Doeth ,  tbcfe 
alfo  botl)  the  fonne  lifcclbtfc. 

io  5roz  the  fatijer  louetl)  tlic fonne, 
anb  flicibetb  bun  ail  tilings  tljatliuu- 
felfe  botl) :  |  bclbtU  flicib  nun  greater 
tbo:bs  then  tbcfe  ,tbatpc  map  tnaructie 

21  ifo:  as  the  father  ratferbbp  the 
beab,anb  qutrttcnctb  tljcni :  enenfo  tlie 
Sonne  qiucKcnetb  Vbliont  rje  ibtll. 

2z  ifoz  tbc  father  inbgetb  no  man: 
but  bath  committeb  alliubgenicnt  bn- 
to  tfjc  Sonne: 

23  Xbat  all  mcnflioulbbonourtbe 
Son,  euenastbepbonour  the  father, 
^c  tbat  bonouretb  not  p  Sonne,  bono* 
retb  not  p  father  lbbitb  Iiatlj  fent  bim. 

2+  Slertlp ,  bcrtlp  3  fap  bnto  pott, 
$ce  tliat  beatctb  nip  ibozb,  9  belccuctlj 
on  bim  tbat  fent  nice ,  batb  cucrlafhng 
life,  anb  niallnot  come  into  tonbtmua 
tion :  but  is  pau"cb  from  Death  bnto  life. 

25  31cttlp,bcrtlp3ifapbntopott,Xbc 
boute  ts  tomnung,  5  noib  is,lbbcn  tlic 
beab  fliall  bcare  tlic  boitc  of  tlic  Sonne 
of  <5ob :  anb  tlicp  tbat  bear  cfbail  lute. 

26  f  02  as  the  father  batb  life  in 
bimfclfe:fo  batb  be  giuen  to  the  Sonne 
to  banc  life  tit  btntfclfc: 

27  3lnb  batb  giuen  bim  autbojtrp  to 
erecutcuibgenicntaifo,bccaufcbcistbc 
Sonne  of  man. 

28  t^aructlc  not  at  tins  :  fo:  tbc 
bour c  is  totnmiugan  the  lbbitb  all  tbat 
arc  in  tbc  grains  fliall  licarc  bis  boitc, 

29  3lttD  fliall  come  fooztb/tljep  that 


battc  bone  goob,  bnto  tberefurrection 
oflifcano  tbcp  tbat  tiaue  bone  euill,bn 
to  tbcrcfttrrrction  of  Damnation. 

jo  3  tan  of  mmcoibnc  felfe  boc  no- 
thing :  as  3  bcare ,  3  mbgc  :attbmp 
uiDgcment  ts  tnfl ,  bctaufe^Jfccbenot 
mine  oibnc  rbtll ,  but  tbc  Unit  of  tbe  fa 
tbcr,ibbicb  bath  fent  me. 

31  *3lf3l  bcare  lbitncffe  of  mp  felfe, 
mpibttueficts  not  true. 

32  C*Xbcrc isattotber tbatbtarctb 
ibimefle  of  mc,i  3  nnotb  tbat  the  ibit= 
neffelbbtcli  be  rbttttcffctb  of  mc,is  true. 

33  Pcfcntbnro3Jobn,*anDbcbarc 
lbttneflc  bnto  tbc  mtctb. 

34  2Sut  3  rccetue  not  teftimonic 
from  man :  but  tbefc  things  3  Cap,  tbat 
pemtgbtberaucb. 

3$  tyt  ibas  a  burning  anb  a  fbining 
light:  anb  pcibcrc  milling  fojafeafon 
to  rctopcem  bis  light. 

36  CBut  3  bauc  greater  ibtttieffc 
then  tbat  of  'John :  fo?  the  lb02bcs 
lbbitb  tbe  father  batb  giuen  mctofv 

I  ntfli  ,tbe  fame  lbozttcs  tbat  3  boe,bcare 
lbitncffcof  nice ,  tljat  tbcf  atberbatb 
fent  me. 

37  3nb  t))t  father  bimfclfc  lbhirti 
ibatb  fent  me,  *i)atl)  borne  rbttneffcof 
jine.  jae  bauencitbcrbcarbbtsbopccat 
anp  time,*  no;  feene  bisfbape. 

38  3nOpel)auenotbisibo2DabtDing 
m  pou :  fo?  lbbom  I;c  bath  fent ,  bimpe 
bclccucnot. 

39  C  Search  the  Scriptures,  fo>  in 
them  pc  tlnnSe  pe  battc  ctcrnau  nfc,anb 
tbcp  are  tbcp  lbbitli  tefhfic  ofmc. 

40  3nbpcibilinotcomctomc,tbat 
pcmtgbtbaucltfc. 

41  3Jretciue  not  honour  from  men. 

42  2Sut5  &»ott>  row  >  tbatpcbauc 
not  the  lottc  of  C5ob  m  pou. 

43  31am  tomemmp fathers  name, 
attbpe  rccciuc  me  not:  if  another  fliall 
come  in  bis  olbnejftamc,  bunpclbill 
recctne. 

44-  *  $>oib  tan  pe  bclccue ,  lbbitb  re 
rente  honour  one  of  another  ,*fccUc  not 
the  honour  tbat  commctlj  from  000 
onclpr 

45  3?oc  not  thittUc  that  3  lbill  at 
cufe  pou  to  tljc  5ratlicr:thcrc  is  otic  that 
accuictb  pou,  cuen  s^ofes,  in  ibljom  pc 
truft; 

46  foi  bab  yt  bclccucb  *59ofcs,  pe 
lboulbbauebclccucbme  :*  fo,:bclb:otc 
ofmc. 

j    47  2Suttf  pc  bclecttc  not  his  lb:i 
;ttngs,boib  fballpc  bclcencmpibo^bs; 

CHA  V. 


"Chap. 8. 
14. 

•Mjtth.;. 
'7- 


"Chap- 1. 7 


•Matth. 5. 
17.  and  17. 
f. 
'Deut-f. 


•Ch 
4a- 


pis 


Jcut.lS.15 


Fiue  thoufand  fed.       S.Iohn.    Meat  that  perifheth. 


•  Lfun  2; 
j  dcut  16. 
1 . 

*  Man.  14 
l5- 


CHAP.    VI. 

Chrift  fccdeth  fiue  thoufand  men  with  fiue 
loaues  and  two  tithes.  15  Thereupon  the 
people  would  haue  made  htm  King.  16  But 
withdrawing  himfelfc,  he  walked  on  thefea 
tohis  difciples  :  16  Reprooueth  the  people 
flocking  alter  him,  and  all  the  flefhly  hea- 
rers oi  his  word:  31  Declareihhimfelfe  to 
be  the  Bread  of  life  tobelecuers.  66  Many 
difciples  depart  from  him.  68  Peter  conkl- 
feihnim,  70  Iudasisa  deuil. 

5Ftcr  thefe  things  Jefus 
ibent  oucr  tt>c  fca  of  ©a* 
nice ,  tbljtcl)  ts  the  fca  of 

Xtbcrtas: 
i  3lnD  a  great  multe 
tube  follottico  htn^bccaufc  they  fall)  hts 
miracles  ibhich  hec  did  on  them  tijat 
Vberebtfcafcb. 

3  3tno3Icfustt)cnt  bp  into  amount 
tame ,  anb  there  hec  fate  Ibith  his  bit 
nplcs. 

4  *3nDthci&affcoucr,afcaQofthe 
3JcVbcG,YDasntgh. 

<>  C  *  nsnen  gjefus  then  lift  bp  his 
eyes ,  anb  faib  a  great  company  come 
bnto  Inm  ,hc  faith  bnto  0htltp,  ©hence 
(hail  ibc  buy  b:eao,that  thefe  map  eate  #1 

6  cano  this  hefaib  top;ottehtm :  foj 
he  htmfclfc  bncib  Vbhat  he  ibouib  Doe) 

7  i&hiltp  anfujereb  htm,  Xlbo hun- 
DKbpeny-tbojih  of  bjcab  ts  notfumct- 
cnt  foj  tljcm,  that  eucry  one  of  them 
maytaBcaiitic. 

8  iSDnc  of  his  Difclples.^ntyeU),^ 
mon  peters  b20thcc,faith  bnto  him, 

9  Xhcte  is  a  lab  hew ,  Vbhteh  hath 
fine  barley  loaues ,  anb  ttno  fmail 
fifties :  but  lbhat  arc  they  among  fb 
many* 

io  3hiD3JcuisfatD,^aKcthcmcnftt 
botbne.  fioVo  there  ibasmttchgralTc 
in  the  plate.  fi>o  the  men  fate  botbnc.ln 
number  about  fine  thoufanb. 

1 1  3inb  3jefus  tooUc  the  loaues ,  anb 
ibhen  he  hab  giucn  thanhes ,  hec  bulrt; 
butcb  to  the  bifnples,  anb  the  bifnples 
to  them  that  Vbcte  fctboibnc,  anbltftc^ 
Vbife  of  the  ftihcs ,  as  much  as  they 
ibouib. 

iin9hctuheyibercfiHeb,hcfaibbnto 
his  bifnples ,  Gather  bp  the  fragments 
that  rcmamcthatnothtngbc  loft. 

13  1-hcrcfozc  they  gathereb  them 
together  .anbftllebtilielucbafRctsttnth 
the  fragments  of  the  fine  barley  loaues, 
ibhich  remameb  oucranbabouc,  bnto 
them  that  hab  eaten. 


i+  Xhcn  thofc  men,  When  they  hab 
feeue  the  miracle  that  3Jcfus  otb,  fatu, 
Xhistsof  a  trueth  that  #<!ophet  that 
thoulb  come  into  the  Vbonb. 

15  C  nahen  3cfus  therefore  pcrcel- 
neb  that  they  tboulb  come  anb  taHc 
htmbyfiwe,  to  iuauehimai&ng,hce 
beparteb  againe  into  a  mountainc, 
Ijimfelfe  alone. 

i6  "Sutbibheucucntbasnolbconte,  'M«th.M. 
his  bifnples  ibent  boYbtte  bnto  the  fea, 

17  ^nbcntrebuttoafbtp,  anbrbent 
oucc  the  fca  to Vbarbs  Capernaum :  anb 
it  ibas  noib  bar  kc,  anb  3Jcfus  rbas  not 
come  to  them. 

18  3inb  the  fea  arofe,  by  reafon  of  a 
great  rbinbe  that  bletb. 

19  do  when  they  hab  roibeb  about 
fiue  anb  tibcntle,  01  thittte  furlongs, 
they  fecjefus  wanting  onthefca ,  anb 
tyaWlng  nigh  bnto  the  (hip :  anb  they 
Weteafraib. 

20  25ut  he  faith  bnto  them,3Jt  is  3J, 
benotafratb. 

2 1  Xhen  they  tbfllingly  rccciueb  him 
into  the  fhip ,  anb  inimcbiatly  the  fl)ip 
rbas  at  theianb  vbhuher  they  went. 

12  CXhe  bay  following,  When  the 
people  Which  ftoob  on  the  other  fibc  of 
thefea,  fawthat  there  was none  other 
boattheccfaue  that  one  Whcrctnto  his 
'bifnples  were  entrcb,  anb  that  3)  cms 
Went  not  With  his  bifciples  into  the 
boat,  but  that  hts  bifnples  Were  gone 
arbay  alone: 

13  feoibbcit  there  tame  other  boats 
from  Xtbcrias,  nigh  bnto  the  place 
inhere  they  bib  eate  b2eab,aftcc  that  the 
% 02D  hab  giucn thannes  : 

24  oahen  the  people  therefore  fatb 
that  3fcfus  Was  not  there ,  neither 
his  bifnples,  they alfo  toolte  (hipping, 
anb  came  to  Capernaum ,  fceUtng  foj 
3fefus. 

25  3nb  Ibhen  they  hab  founb  htm 
on  the  other  ftbe  of  the  fca ,  they  fatbc 
bnto  htm ,  £abbi ,  when  tameft  thou 
hither? 

26  ^Jcfusattftoerebthcm,  anb  fatb, 
Merely ,berclygi  fay  bnto  you,PcfecHe 
nie,notbcraufcyefaWthcmtraclcs,but 
bccaufcycc  bib  eate  of  the  loaues,  anb 
Vbcrcftllcb. 

27  ||?LaboucnotfouhemcatYbhich 
ptrtnieth,  but  fo:  that  meat  Vbhith  en 
bttrcth  bnto  cueriafhtig  life ,  tbhtch  the 
§>ottncofmanfl)ailgtuebtitoyoit;*foj 
htm  hath  <5ob  the  father  feaieb. 

28  Xljett  fatb  they  bnto  fjitu ,  nahat 
'  fljaii 


I  Ortwsrkf 


*  MatlKj. 

■7- 


Ghnllisthc 


Ch; 


.p.vj. 


bread  oflife. 


•i.Ioh.3 
-5- 


*E«od.  1 6. 
1 5.  numb. 
11.7. 

'Plains. 

»5- 


•Mat.13. 
55- 


'E(ii  j4- 
1  j.iac. 


fl)all  rocDoe ,  that  tbc  might  lDojtfee  the 

ttM»RCS0f<50D? 

i9  3Jefus  anftucreD ,  anD  fatb  Dnto 
them,*XhisiSthciDo;!fteof<5oD,  that 
yebetceue  on  himVbhomhehath  rent. 

30  Xhey  faiD  thercfo:e  bnto  him, 
nahatfignefhctDcftthou  then,  that  Vbe 
ma?  fee,  anD  belccucthcc?  ©hat  ooeft 
thouibojBe? 

31  * £>ur fathers DtDcatc£0amta in 
the  Defect,  as  it  is  flatten ,  *  J?e  gaue 
trjem  bjeaD  from  fjeaucn  to  cate. 

31  Xhen3JcaisfatDbntothcm,ile; 
rely,Dercly3J  fay  bnto  T>ou,fl3ofcsgaue 
you  not  that  DzcaD  from  heauen, but 
my  ifathcr  giucth  you  tt)c  true  b;eaD 
from  heauen. 

33  3FonhcbjcaDof<soDisheelDhich 
tommethDotbne  from  heauen,  anD  gfc 
ueth  life  bnto  the  tbojlb. 

34.  XhcnfatDtheyDntohim,?Lo;tD, 
euennojc  giue  Ds  tfjis  bieab. 

35  ^nD^lcfusfaiDbntothcn^gjam 
the  b2eab  of  Irfe :  hee  that  commeth  to 
me,  (hall  neutr  hunger :  anD  he  that  be- 
leeueth  on  me  (hall  neuec  thirfi. 

36  2Sut3ifaiD  Dnto  you,  that  ye  alfo 
haucfeene  me,anDbeieeuenot. 

37  M  that  the  f  ather  giucth  mce, 
(hall  tome  to  mec;  anD  him  that  torn- 
meth  to  me,  3  Vbill  in  no  lbtfe  tail  out. 

38  fm3 tame Dotbnef com heauen, 
notto  Dot  mine  ottntctinU,  butthc  lDill 
of  him  that  fent  me. 

39  3tnD  this  ts  the  fathers  tbil  tbljicl) 
Ijath  fent  me ,  that  of  all  Vbhich  he  hath 
giuen  met ,  5  fhoulD  lofe  nothing ,  but 
fhoulD  raifc  it  Dp  agame  at  the  laft  Day, 

40  3lnD  this  is  theibtllof  him  that 
fentmcthatcucryonciDhtch  fctth  the 
§>onne,anD  belecucth  on  him,  may 
haue  cuerlafhng  life :  anD  3  lDMraire 
him  Dp  at  the  laft  Day. 

41  Xhe  3Jetbes  then  murmutcD  at 
him,  becaufe  heefaiD ,  3!  am  the  b;caD 
iDhuh  came  DoiDne  from  heauen. 

41  3CnDthcyfaiD,*UsnotthisUe; 
fus  thefonneofjofeph ,  ibhofc  father 
anD  mother  \Dc  Knott)*  ^oiDisttthcn 
that  Dec  fayth ,  3  tame  Dotbnc  fcom 
jjcauen '. 

43  3Jcfus  thcrefoic  anftutrcD ,  anD 
faiD  bnto  them,  ^urmurc  not  among 
yourfclucs. 

-  44  /]5oman  tan  tome  to  me,  except 
the  father  tbhich  hath  fent  me,  Djatb 
him  t  anD  3  Will  raifc  him  Dp  at  the 

laft  Day.  .„.»,. 

45  'gjtisibnttcnmthc&iophcts, 


3lnD  theyfhaiibeaiitaughtofc&oo.  <tz- 
uery  man  therefore  that  hath  hcarD, 
ano  hath  learnco  of  the  /father,  com 
mcthbntomc, 

46  jftot  that  any  man  hath  feene  the 
father  ;*faue  hee  ibbich  is  of  dtoD,  hee 
hath  fcent  the  father. 

47  Merely,  bcrclyf  fay  bnto  you, 
tytc  that  belecucth  on  me ,  hath  eucrla* 
mug  life. 

48  3amthatb;caDofnfc. 

49  J^our  fathers  Did  eate  £0anna  in 
thettnlDcrnetTe.anD  arebeao. 

5oXhisisthcbjcaDibhich  tommeth 
Dolbne  from  heauen ,  that  a  man  may 
eate  thereof,  anD  not  Die. 

51  3amthcliumgtoeaD,ibhirhtame 
DoiDne  from  heauen.  gjfany  man  eate 
of  this  DwraD,  he  (hail  nue  fo?  cuer :  anD 
the  bjeao  that  3  lDtli  giue ,  is  my  flefl) , 
TDljich  3  Will  giue  foj  the  life  of  the 
UwlD. 

51  Xhc  3tVoes  thetefojc  ftroue  a- 
mongft  themfclues,  faying,  $?ott>  can 
this  man  gme  Ds  his  flefl)  to  eate  < 

53  Xhen  3Jefns  fayD  Dnto  them, 
tUcrcIy,Dercly31fay  bntoyou,  tfjtcept 
yec  eate  the  flefl)  of  the  Tonne  of  man, 
anD  Dnnfee  his  bloob ,  yec  haue  no  life 
in  you. 

54  *©hofo  catcth  my  flefl),  anD  Dnn- 
Ueth  my  blooD ,  hath  eternail  life ,  anD 
3  ttnll  raifc  him  Dp  at  the  laft  Day . 

55  fojmy  flefl)  ismcatemDccD,anD 
my  bloob  isDnnfec  inDceD. 

56  $c  that  catcth  my  flefl),  anDDjm 
BcthmyblooD  ,Dttoclleth  mine ,  anD'J 
in  him. 

57  31s  the  litrtng  father  hath  fent 
me,anD3Jliucby  thef  ather:fo,he  that 
catcth  me,  cuen  he  (hall  liue  by  me. 

58  Xhis  is  that  bzeaD  tbhich  cami 
Dottwe  from  heauen :  not  as  your  fa- 
thetsDiD  eate flQanna,  anD  are  DeaD : he 
that  catcth  of  this  bjcaD,  (ban  ituefoj 
euer. 

59  Xhcfe  things  faiD  hec  in  the  *y 
nagogue,ashetaughtin  Capernaum. 

60  epany  therefore  of  his  Difciples 
iDhen  thcyhab  hcarD  this,  faiD,  Xhisis 
an  IjarD  faying,  tbho  tan  heareit  < 

6i  tehen  5efus  uncU)  in  himfrtfc, 
that  hiSDifnplcs  murmurcD  at  it,  hec 
faiD  Dnto  them,  Docth  this  offcnD  you? 

6i  *  what  anD  if  yec  (hall  fee  the 
fonne  of  man  afccnD  Dp  tbhro  t)cc itoa* 
befoie  < 

63  3ft  is  the  Spirit  that  qtuthctietl) , 

the  flefl)  pjoBtcth  nothing :  the  iDo^Des 

B  that 


'Ma:ir. 
>7- 


'Chi.  3.1 3. 


TO 


Iudasadeuill. 


S.Iohn.  Chnftsdoftrine. 


"  Mjitii  .16 
16. 


•Lei 


Ul!    13. 


that  J  fpcafce  bnto  pou,  thcp  arc  Spi- 
rit, anb  thcp  a«  Ufe. 

64.  Z5ut  there  arc  fonic  of pou that 
bclccue not.  ifoz 3f  cms  mtetti  from  tijc 
beginning,  ibho  thcp  ibere  that  belec* 
ucb  not,  anb  ibho  (bouio  betray  him. 

65  anb  he  raib,Xl)crcfo?c  faib  3  bip 
to  vou,  that  no  man  tan  tome  bnto  me, 
ercept  it  iberc  giuen  bnto  him  of  mp 
ifather. 

66  Cirrom  that  time  manp  of  his 
biraplcs  went  bacbe ,  anb  ibaiacb  no 
mojeflrithhim. 

67  £hcn{aib3Fefusbntbthettbclue, 
nmilpcalfogoealbap* 

6%  %\)cn  Simon  £ctcr  anfmereb 
Dim,  flojb,  to  ttmom  (baillbc  goe; 
Xhouhatt  theuwos  of  cternalllife. 

69  '^nbibcbelecueanbarcfurctftat 
thou  art  tnat  Chnft,  the  Sonne  of  the 
limng  ©ob. 

70  3Jefusanfwcrcbthcm,f?aucnot 
3  chofen  pouttbeluc,  anb  one  of  vou  is 

abeuM*  ^F    .     „ 

7 1  $e  fpaite  of  3Iubas  3Jfcanot  the 
fonnc  of  Simon  :  fo?  hec  it  ibas  that 
fboulb  bctrap  him,  being  one  of  the 
ttbeluc. 

CHAP.    VII. 

Icfus  reprooueth  the  ambition  and  boldneffe  ot 
his  kinfemen:  10  gocth  vp  Irom  Galilee  to 
the  feaft  of  Tabernacles  ,  14  teacheth  in 
the  Temple.  40  Diuers  opinions  of  him  a- 
monz  the  people.  45  The  Pharifees  are  an- 
gry that  their  officers  tookc  him  nor,  &  chide 
with  Nicodemus  for  taking  his  parr. 

M&A23S  ^tcc  rtJtft  things,  llcfus 
^VS  lbaiacb  in  ©altlec :  to:  t) . . 
&*  iboulbnot\balRin3Jurtc, 
mffia  «s\)l  becaufe  the  3Jcibes  fought 
^Sl>:^itoBillhim. 

2  */i3oib  the  3jcu>cs  feaft  of  SCaber; 
naticsibasathanb. 

3  $is  b;cth;nt  therefore  faibc  bnto 
him,  Depart  hence,  anb  go  into  3mbca, 
that  thp  3>ifciplcs  alfo  map  fee  the 
uwks  that  thou  bocft. 

4-  fot  there  is  no  man  that  both  a- 
ny  thing  mfecrer,  anb  hec  htmfctfe  fec^ 
Ucth to  be  Unoibcu  openly  :3lfthouboc 
tlufc  things,  n>cib  thv  fclfc  to  p  lboUb. 

5  foi  neither  bib  his  Dictfjjtnbclccuc 
in  him. 

6  Xhen3Jcfus  Taibbnto  them,  <$p 
time  is  not  pet  tome :  but  pour  tunc  ts 
aubayrcaby. 

7  Xbcibortbcannothateyou.bnt 
me  it  hatctD, becaufe  3  tcftific  of  it,  that 


the  ibojuts  thereof  are  eurtU 

8  <Soc  pc  bp  bnto  tins  feaft :  3»  goc 
notbp  pet  bnto  this  feaft,  'ro?  tup  time 
isnotpctfullcome. 

9  nahcnhchabfaibthcfciboibsbn; 
to  them,  he  abobe  fttli  m  ealilee. 

io  c  26ut  ibhen  his  b;efhjen  ibere 
gonebp,  then  lbentheaifobp  bnto  the 
fcaft,not  opcnlp,but  as  tt  tbcre  in  fccret. 

1 1  Xhen  the  Jetbes  fought  him  at 

thefcatt,anbfaio,nahcrci5he* 

u  3lnb  there  ibas  much  murmuring 
among  tl)cpeople,tonecrnmghim:5fo? 
fome  faib,  i>ee  tsagoobman :  fathers 
faib,/Bap,buthcbecciucfbthcpcoplc. 

13  $oibbctt,  no  man  fpaue  opcnlp  of 
him,  fo*  fear e  of  the  3Jcibes. 

14  €43orbaboutfhcmtbbeftofthc 
feaft,  3frfusibcnt  bp  into  the  Xcmplc, 
anb  taught. 

15  anbfhegjeibesmarueileb.raping, 
$otb  hnoibcth  this  man  ||  letters,  ha; 
uingneucrlcarncbi 

i6  3Jefus  anfioercb  them,  ®)y  bo- 
ttrine  is  not  mutcbut  his  that  fent  me. 

17  3f f  anp  man  ttnll  boc  his  ibtll,  he 
(hall  Hnovb  of  the  boetrtnc,  whether  it 
be  of  Cob,  0;  lbljctljet  3  fpcaae  of  mp 
fclfc. 

is  $cthatfpcaftethofhtmrclfe,  fees 

herhhtsolbneglojp:buthcthatfcefeeth 
his  glo?p  that  fent  him,  the  fame  is  true, 
anb  no  biinghteonuicffe  is  in  him. 
19  *2>ibnot£0ofcsgiuepouthc2.alb, 
anb  y«  none  of  pou  becpcththclLarb* 
*fl9hpgocpeabouttoBillme; 

20  3Che  people  anfmereb,  anb  fapb, 
Xliou  had  a  bcuill :  i©fto  goctl;  about 
to  hilt  thee  i 

21  3Jefus  anfroereb ,  anb  faibe  bnto 
them ,  3J  haue  bone  one  ibo?Rc,  anb  pec 
ailmaruciie. 

2i  *^ofcstherefo,ic  gauc  bnto  pou 
€trcumrtfion  (not  becaufe  it  is  of  j©o* 
fcs,*butof  the  fathers)  anb  pee  onthc 
Sabbath  bap  cir  mmeifc  a  man. 

23  3lf  a  man  onthc  Sabbath  bap  re- 
rciue  nmmmfion,  ||  that  the  ?lalbc  of 
£0ofcs  fljonib  not  be  bzoach  .arc  pc  an* 
grpat  me,  becaufe  3  haucmabca  man 
cuecp  lbhit  lbholc  on  the  Sabbath  bap? 

24.  "Jubgcnotatcojbtngtothcaps 
pearancc ,  but  mbge  righteous  tnbge- 
ment. 

15  Xhen  faib  fome  of  them  of  ^tc- 
rufaiem,  31s  not  this  Ijcc,  ibhometljep 
fcclictoUilu 

26  25ttt  loc,  he  fpcaueth  bolblp,  anb 
thep  fap  notljmg  bnto  him  :  2>oe  the 

rulers 


■Cha.8.: 


a    \\0r,ltttr- 


'Exo.14.3. 
«Cha.5.i8 


'Leui.u.j 
'Gcaiy.io 

||  Or,  vhh- 
the  Ljw  ef 

'Dcu.t.itf 


Liuingwaccr.  Chap.vnj.  Nicodemuscounfcll. 


'Chap.  13. 
5J- 


\\Or,gr,tk,. 


'Leuit. 


Dcut.18. 
J- 


•Ioc!.:.:S 
efii.44.3. 


"Mat.  3.5. 


rulers  mtoib  iriDctUc  that  this  is  tfjc 
bcry  Chaff? 

17  tyoibbeit  lbcc  fenott)  tins  man 
ibhcnce  he  iS :  but  ibhcn  Chnft  com 
meth,  no  manfenoibeth  lbljcncc  ijc  is. 

tS  Xhcnccieb31cfusmthc3Ccmplc 
ashetaugl)t,fayiug,t3ebothunou)mc, 
anb  ye  bnoib  lbhcncc  3J  am ,  anb  5  am 
not  tome  ofmyfelfe,buthcthatfentmc, 
is  true,  Whom  yefeno  lb  not. 

19  2Sut3l  UnoVb  l)im,fo:  3  am  from 
him,  ant)  he  hath  fent  me. 

jo  Xljen  the?  fought  to  tafee  him : 
;  but  no  man  laibhanbs  on  him ,  betaufe 
i  his  hour  e  lbasnot  yet  tome. 

31  ^nbmany  of  the  people  bclccueb 
]  on  him,  %  faib ,  nahcnChnffcommcth, 
ibitl  hee  boc  moe  miracles  then  thefc 
•  tbhuh  this  man  hath  Done  ? 

31  CXhc^hanfeeshcarb  that  the 
people  murmurcb  filth  things  concern 
ninghim :  3tnb  the  ^hartfees  anb  the 
chiefc  tencfts  fent  officers  to  tafte  him. 

33  xhen  fatb  3cfus  bnto  them,  Ptt 
a  ittlc  ibhileam  %  ibtth  you ,  anb  then 
3J  go  e  bnto  him  that  fent  me. 

34  *j9cu)allfccfeeme,  anb  (hailnot 
Sou  me:  anb  \bhere  5  am,  thither  yec 
cannot  tome. 

35  Xhen  faibc  the  Seines  among 
thcmfelues,  rehitherunll  hee  goe,  that 
rbefhallnot  finbhmt?  tbilihegoebnto 
the  btfpcrfeb  among  the  ||  ©entiles,  anb 
teach  the  ©entiles? 

3<5  sehatmancr  of  faying  is  this  that 
he  faib,  jtu  thaiifeeiie  me,anb  (hall not 
ttnb  me  ?  anb  inhere  gj  am ,  thither  ye 
cannot  tome? 

37  *3Jn  the  laft  bay , that  great  tey  of 
thefwtr^efusQoob^nbcrirb, faying, 
3Jf  any  man  thirft,  let  hint  come  tmto 
me.anbbnnBC. 

38  *  $c  that  bcieeueth  on  me,  as  the 
Scripture  hath  faibe,  out  of  his  belly 
(hall  floib  riuers  of  lining  ibatcr. 

39  *(i6titthisfpaUcheof  the  Spirit 
Vbhith  they  that  bclccue  on  him,  fhoulb 
recciuc.foJthcholydShoftibasnotyct 
§iuen,  becaufc  that  gjefus  ibas  not  yet 
glonfteb.) 

40  C  flJ3any  of  the  people  therefore, 
ibhcn  they  hearb  this  faying,  faibc,  £»f 
a  tructh  this  is  the  ^zophct. 

41  £>thtrsfaib,'£histsthc€h2irr. 
But  fomt  faib,  Shall  Chjift  tome  out 
ofc5aIilcc? 

41  *  tyath  not  the  Scripture  faibc, 
that  ChJilt  commcth  of  the  fcebc  of 
ibamb,  anb  out  of  the  toilmc  of  £3cn> 


Iehem,rbhcre£>anlb  ibas? 

43  So  there  ibasabuufionamong 
the  people  becaufc  of  him. 

44  ^nbfomeofthcmiboulbhauc 
taBcn  huu,  but  no  man  lay  eb  hanbs  on 
htm. 

4?  C  Xhen  tame  the  officers  to  the 
chtcfc  pjtefrs  anbjdhanfcs ,  anb  they 
faib  bnto  them ,  nahy  hauc  ye  not 
tyougbthmu 

46  IChc  omters  anftocrcb ,  belter 
man  fpa&eli&e  this  man. 

47  ^hen  anQucrcb  tfiemtfie^h* 
rifecs,  Zxt  ye  alfo  beccroeb? 

48  i^auc  any  of  tljc  rulers,  02  of  the 
j&hartfes  beleeueb  on  him? 

4.9  26ut  this  people  ibholmoibcth 
notthcUaib,arecurfcb. 

50  /fhcobemus  faith  bnto  them, 
(*^e  that  came  to  3Jcfus  by  ntght,btmg 
one  of  them,) 

51  *£>oth  our  ILaUn'ubgeany  man  be; 
foie  ithearc  him,$Bttolbibhtit  he  both? 

52  Xhcy  anfmercb ,  anb  fatb  bnto 
him,^rt  thou  alfo  of  (Saiiiec^Scarrh, 
anb  loofee :  fo?  out  of  <5ahlcc  arifcth  no 
gopher. 

53  3m&  eucry  man  ibent  bnto  his 
oibtteboufc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1  Chriit  deliuercth  the  woman  taken  in  adul- 
tery. 12  He  preacheth  himfelfe  the  liqhtot 
the  world  ,  and  wftiheth  his  Doctrine  :  33 
Aniwcrcth  thelewes  that  boalted  of  Abra- 
ham, jy  And  conueigheth  himlclre  from 
their  cruelne. 

^f£$2$  <£fuslbcnt  bnto  p  fipount 
l&ofjDliucs: 

%  %vb  earely  in  the 
_  mommg  hee  camcagatne 
SgaBSSas  into  thcXcmple ,  anb  all 
tl;c  people  came  bnto  him,  aubljc  fate 
bolbncanb  taught  them 

3  3nb  the  Scrtbcs  anb  £har ifccs 
b:ougl)t  bnto  him  aiboman  taken  m 
abultcry ,  anb  lbhcn  tljcy  Ijab  fct  her  in 
the  nubs, 

4  Xhcyfaybntohtm$3afrcr,this 
lbomanibastaucn  in  abultcry ,  m  the 
bcryact. 

5  *  ^5om  CPofcs  in  the  %m  com 
maubebbs,  thatfuchffjoulbbcfloncb: 
but  ibhat  fay  eft  thou; 

6  Xhis  they  faib ,  tempting  him, 
that  they  might  hauc  to  acctifchim.asut 
3fcfueftotipcbboibne,anbnJithhisfin 
genbiote  onthegrounb  as  though  he 
hearb  them  not. 

1s_i 7_  So 


•Cb»p3.i. 

"Dfut.17. 
10.  mdip. 
■5- 


Lcuit.10. 


Tflj 


True  teftimonic.         S.Iohn. 


True 


freedo 


me. 


•Chap.t. 


7  $>o  lbbcn  tbep  conttnucb  af lung 

bun ,  Ijce  lift  bp  btmfclfe ,  anb  faiDc  bti 

•Dcot.  i7.  to  tbcm ,  *  $tc  that  is  ttntbout  Cinne 

among  pou,  let  him  firft  tad  a  (tone 

atber. 

s  2nb  againc,  t)cc  ftottpeb  boibnc, 
anb  Ib?otc  on  rt)c  grounb. 

9  3nb  ttjcv  UjIiicIi  bcarb  it,  being 
conuictcb  bp  their  oibne  tonfetente,! 
ibcntout  one  by  one ,  beginning  at  the  j 
clbcft ,  citen  bnto  the  laft  :  anb  3Jefus ! 
tbas  left  alone,  anb  the  iboman  (tan; 
oingintlicmibtt. 

10  naljen  3Jcfus  liab  lift  bp  rjimfclfe, 
anb  faw  none  but  the  lbotnan ,  bee  faib  1 
bnto  her,  u9oman,ibbcre  are  tbofc 
thine  aecufecs  <  n?ath  no  man  tonbem- 
neb  thee; 

11  ;S>bc(aibe,fJoman,1Lo2b.  3(nb 
■JJefus  fatbc  bnto  her,  /I5cttber  boe  3 
tonbemne  thee :  <Boc ,  anb  finne  no 
imoie. 

ii  c  Xfttn  fpakc  3Jcfus  agatne  fan* 
to  tbcm,  faping,  *  3  am  the  light  of  the  j 
ibozib :  bethatfoliovbetb  mccfbail  not ! 
roal&cmbarBrocfrc,  but  (ball  bauetbc 
light  of  life. 

1  j  %t)c  pbarifecs  tbercfo2c  faib  ton* 
to  bim.Xbou  beared  rcto:b  of  tbpfclfe, 
tbprcco2bisnottruc. 

14.  3Icfus  anfmereb ,  anb  faib  bnto ! 
'  a»p.  s.  !  tfiem ,  *  Xbougb  3  bcarc  r eco2b  of mp  \ 
:  felfe,  vet  mp  reto2b  is  true :  foj  "J  ftnotb 
;  Whence  3J  came,  anb  number  gigoc: 
ibntpc  cannot  tell  Whence  3J  come,  anb 
jlbhither^goe. 

15  I'ecnibgc  after  tl)cfleO),3fiubgc 
no  man. 

16  3(nbpcttf3hubge,mpiubgement 
istme:fo2'Jainnot  alone,  but  31  anb 
the  father  that  rent  me. 

17  *3tisalfoib;ittcnmpour!Laib, 
tbat  the  tefhmonie  of  ttbo  men  is  true. 

13  3  am  one  that  bcare  WitncfTe  of 
mprelfe,  anb  the  father  that  (rot  nice, 
bearcthibmieffcofmr. 

19  Xbcn  faib  tbep  bnto  bim,  ©here 
isthv  .father;  gjefus  anfmereb,  vt  nei- 
ther (mow  me,no2tnpf  ather.ifpcbab 
bnotbenmee,  vec  ajotiio  haitcbnoiben 
my  father  alfo. 

20  Xbcfc  ttwbs  fpabc  3Jefus  in  the 
trcadirp,  as  hce  taught  m  tbcXempic : 
anb  no  manlayb  banbsonhim.fojbis 
hourcibas  not  vet  come. 

ii  Xhcn  faioc  Refits  againc  bnto 
tbem,3I  goe  mv  map,  ano  yt  fballfcctte 
mr,  *  (bail  bit in your  fumes:  ©hither 
3?  goc,  re  cannot  come. 


T>rut.  17 
6. matt,  ii 
l<5. 


22  1H)cnfaibthe3Jettics,  ©ill  btc 
tollbimfelfe  <  becaufe  he  faith,  ©hither 
3  goc,pc  cannot  come. 

23  3nbbccfatbbntotbem,J*eeare 
frombencarh,  3  am  from  about :  Ptt 
are  of  this  W0210 ,  3J  am  not  of  this 
lbojlb. 

2+  3J  faib  tbcrcfojc  bnto  pou,tbatpc 
(hall  bit  in  your  fumes,  f  02  if  pee  b& 
leeuc  not  that  3  am  hce,  pet  (ball  bit  in 
pour  (tones. 

25  Xben  faib  thep  bntofiim,  ©ho 
arttbou*  ano  3fefusfaitb  bnto  tbcm, 
euro  tile  fame  that  3  faibe  bnto  pou 
from  the  bcgmning. 

26  3  hauc  manp tbingsto fap ,  anb 
to  tubgt  of  pou :  2Sut  hce  that  (rot  nice 
is  true ,  anb  3  fptabe  to  the  tt)02lb, 
tbofc  things  ibhicb  3  Dane  hearb  of 
htm. 

27  Xbep  bnberdoob  not  that  bee 
fpafec  to  them  of  the  father. 

2s  Xben  faibe  ^eftis  bnto  rhem. 
©hen  pec  hane  lift  bp  the  £>onne  of 
man,  then  (hall  pe  bnoib  that  3  am  he, 
anb  that  3  boe  nothing  ofmp  fclfe :  but 
as  mp  father  barb  taught  mcc,  3 
fpeafte  tbcfc  things. 

29  ^ubhethatfrotme,is\bitr)mc: 
the  father  hath  not  left  met  alont :  foi 
3  boe  aiibapcs  tbofe  things  that 
pleafe  him. 

jo  2sbecrpabc  thofc  tbojbs,  manp 
bclceucoonhim. 

31  Xhen  faib  Refits  to  thofc'JcTbcs 
lbbtcbbclccucb  onljun,  3)fpccont(nuc 
in  mp  tb02b,  then  are  ytc  mpbtfciplcs 
tnbecb. 

32  ^nbpefbailbnolb  tbcXtuetl), 
anb  the  Xruetf)  (hall  mafte  pou  fret. 

3 J  CXhepanfroerebft(m,!0tbe3t' 
b2aham  fceb,  anb  lbere  neucr  in  bon^ 
bagcto  anp  man :  holb  fapeft  trjou,|9ce 
(ban  be  mabc  free; 

3+  3Iefus  anfmereb  rbem ,  taerilp, 
benlp  3  fap  bnto  pou,  *  nabofoeucr 
committctfj  (tunc ,  is  the  (truant  of 
finnr. 

3<)  3(nb  the  ferttant  abibeth  not  in 
thehoufc  fo2  cuer :  but  the  3>onncabi= 
betheucr. 

36  gifthe§)onnethcrfo2c(hallmabe 
pou  free,  pe  (ball  be  free  inbeeb. 

37  3  bnoib  that  pee  arc  3fl»anams 
fteb ,  but  pc  feebe  to  bill  nice,  becaufe  nip 
ib02b  hath  no  place  in  pou. 

38  3  fpcahcthatuihich^bauefccne 
lbirb  mv  father :  anb  pe  bo  that  lbhicl) 
pc  baucfeeneibttb  pour  father. 

39  Xhep 


Rom.  6. 
o.  j. pet. 


Th 


c  true  c 


hiia 


ren 


ci 


lap.ix. 


of  Abraham. 


"i.Ioh.;.8 


"i.Ioh.46, 


39  Xhep  anftocrco,  ano  faib  unto 
Dun,  :ab;aham  is  oucfatlier.  Jlcfus 
tapth  unto  tl)etn ,  3tf  pee  lUetc  ^bza* 
hams  ehtlbitcn.pc  lUoulb  doc  tl)c  Wjo^us 
ofSlbjaham. 

40  aSutnoiUpcc  fccfte  to  bill  me ,  a 
man  tljat  hath  totbe  pou  the  trueth, 
iuhtch35  hauchcarb  of  Oob:  thisotb 
uot3lb:aham. 

41  j*cboe  the  bceos  of  pour  father. 
£h  en  faib  fhep  to  him ,  nac  be  not  bom  c 
of  fornication,  vuee  hauc  one  jfatrjer, 
euen  000. 

41  3fcfus  faib  Dnto  them,  gjf  Gob 
were  pour  iFather,  peciDouloioucmc, 
fo?3I  p?oceebcbfoo;rh,  ana  tame  from 
d5ob :  neither  tame  3  of  mp  felfc,  but 
hefentme. 

43  nahpbocpeenotUnbcrftanbmp 
fpecch?  euen  becaufc  pee  cannot  heart 
mptbort). 

44  *Pt  are  ofpour  father  the  bcuill, 
anothciuttsofpourfathcrpetbtllboc: 
hee  xoas  a  mnrttjerer  from  the  begin* 
nmg ,  ano  abobe  norm  the  truetf),  be 
caufc  thcrcis  no  rruthtnhtm.  uMunhc 
fpeascth  a  ltc.hr  fpraHcth  of  his  ollmc : 
fo?  he  is  a  liar,  ano  the  father  of  it. 

45  anbbecaufc3JteUpouti)etn»trj, 
pebeleeuemcnot. 

46  nahuhofpoucouumccthmccof 
Grate*  ^nbif3Jtaptt)ctructr),tbl)pt)oc 
peuotbeleeuemci 

47  *«?ethattsof(5oo,hearcth(Soos 
iuo;bs :  pc  therefore  hear c  them  tior.be 
taufepcarcnotofGob. 

4S  1£hmanftoctcbthe3Jeibcs,anb 
faib  Dnto  him ,  S>ap  tbee  not  iDel!  that 
thouart  a&amaritanc,  1  hatta  bcniii  t 

49  ^cfusanfrocreD,  3  haue  not  a 
oeuill :  but  3  honour  mp  5fathcr,anb 
pc  bo c  Dinjoiiou r  me. 

50  anb'J  fceUcnot  mine  oronc  glo 
rp.thctcis  one  that  fecfteth  f  lubgcth. 

51  tacrcip.ncrclp  3  fap  tntto  pott,3Jf 
amanuecpcmpfapiiig,  Ijec  (hall  ncucr 
feeoeath. 

51  Xhcnfaiothc  3JciucsDnto  htm, 
^oiutbctmoiu  that  thou  haftabctull. 
^IbzahamisDeab ,  anb  the  ^ophets 
anbfhoufapcft,  3Jf a  man  Uccpc  mpfap* 
ing.hc  (liall  nciter  tattc  of  bead). 

53  3trt  thou  greater  then  our  father 
3lbzahain,tuhich  is  beau  <  anb  the  ®w 
phcts  arc  ocao  :  tbhom  ma&eft  thou 
thpfclfc* 

5+  UcfusanuncrcD,  5f  3  honour 
mpfelfc.mp  honour  is  nothing :  It  is  mp 
ifathcr  that honoured)  me,  of  tuhom 


pcfap,thatljcispour  ©00 : 

55  JUetpchancnotrittoiDenhm^but 
3  Unolb  htm :  anb  if  3Jft)outbfap,  3 
KnoVb  him  not,  3  (haibc  a  ipar  (the  un> 
topou:  butji  ritioiu  him>ano&cepchis 
taping. 

56  jDout  father  3lb;aham  reiopeeb  to 
fccmpoap:anDhcfaiDit,$iuasglao. 

57  Xhenfato  the  3Jciues  Unto  him, 
Xhouartnotpetfifticpccresolbcanb 
haft  thoufecne  3b,taham  t 

58  3lefus  faib  Unto  them ,  flerelp, 
ucrclp  3  fap  Dnto  pou ,  26efo?c  3ib;ta-' 
ham  was,  3}  am. 

59  ZhcntooticthcpUp  ftonesto  caft 
at  him :  but  3Jcfus  htbbc  himfelfe ,  anb 
tt)cntoutofthe1i:cmplc,goiitgtho;ott) 
the  nnbft  of  them,  anb  fo  paffeb  bp, 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  The  man  that  was  borne  blinde  rcftored  to 
fighr.  8  Hee  is  brought  to  the  Pharifes.  15 
They  are  oftended  at  it,  and  excommunicate 
him:  35  But  hee  is  receiued  oflcfus,  and 
confefleth  him.  59  Who  they  are  whomc 
Chrift  enJi^htcneth, 

il?b  as  31  etus  patTcb  bp, 
hcfaiu  a  man  lb  hid)  Ibas 
bUnbe  from  his  birth. 
1  ^nbhiSDifttplesaf 
_ftet>hun,  faping,  Rafter, 
rbljo  bib  ututctljis  man,o?  his  parents, 
that  he  inas  borne  bhuDc  * 

3  Sefus  anftuctcb,  Neither  hath! 
this  man  finneb ,  no?  his  parents :  but 
that  the  Vbozttcs  of  Gob  (homo  be  maoc 
manifcftinhtm. 

4  3niufti\)on"tethetbo?ftcsofhitn 
thatfentme,  lUhilcttisbap :  thcutght 
commcth  ttmen  no  man  can  Vbo?ftc. 

5  3s  long  as  3  am  m  the  uwlo, 
*  3  am  the  light  of  the  ID0210. 

6  ©hmhchabthusrpoftcn,hc tpat 
on  the  gcounb,  ano  mabc  clap  of  the 
fpcttlc,  anb  he  ||  anotnteb  tlje  cpes  oftljc 
blinbe  man  ibith  the  clap, 

7  3uio  faib  unto  him,  Goctbatt)  in 
the  poolc  of  Siloam  (lUIjich  is  bp  inter* 
p?ctattou,5)cnt.)^cibcnthistt)apthcr- 
foie,  anb  lbadjco,  anb  came  feeing. 

8  tCXfjc  neighbours  thcrcfo?c,anb 
thep  mijich  befoze  Ijao  fecne  htm ,  that 
he  luas  blmbc,  faib,  3Js  not  tljis  he  tljat 
fate  anb  beggeo; 

9  S>omc  fato,Xhis  is  hee:  others 
fatb ,  l?cc  is  liltc  h»n :  but  hee  fapb ,  3 
am  hee. 

io  Xhcrcfiw  faib  t\)ty  unto  hint, 
OolU  lUerc  thmc  cpes  opcttcb  < 
B  3  it  I?c 


'Chapl.p. 


\\0r,fJ7rcai 
tkeciajVpoH 

the  eyes  of 
thebiindc 


The  blind,hcaled,      S.Iohn.      beleeueth  in  ChriflJ 


27  fccanfaKrcbthcnn'Jhauetolb 
pou  air  eabp,anb  pc  bib  not  hear eitbhct* 
fo:c  tbouib  pou  Ijeate  itagatne*  main 
aifobebtsbifctples* 

28  %hcnttjcprcuacbhim,anbfatb, 
Xhouarthtsbifciplc,  butlbcarc  #0= 
fcsbifeiplcs. 

29  nace  nnoib  thatGob  fpanebnto 
<3Pofcs  s  as  fo?  this  fcllott) ,  tbc  ftnoibc 
not  from  Whence  he  is. 

30  %hc  man  anfrocrcb,  anb  faib  \>w 
to  them ,  i©hp  herein  is  a  maruetious 
thing,  thatpe  fenorb  not  from  whence 
he  is,anb  pet  he  Ijatt)  opcncb  mine  epes. 

31 i&ow  We  imow  that  <5ob  bc<rrcth 
not  turners :  but  tf  any  man  bee  a  wo^ 
fbtppcr  of  <5ob,  anb  both  his  ami ,  him 
bchcareth. 

32  <§>mce  the  wo?!b  began  was  ft  not 
hcarbtbatanp  manopeneb  the  epesof 
one  that  was  borne  bltnbc: 

33  3tf  this  man  mere  not  of  <Sob,  he 
coulbDoe  nothing. 

3+  3EhcpanlrucreD ,  anb  faibe  bnto 
him,  Xbou  Waft  altogether  bojne  m 
unties,  anb  boeft  thou  tcacb MSi  3(nb 
tbepllcaQhimout. 

35  Uefus  hearb  that  thepftab  call 
Km  out;  anb  When  hec  babfounbbtm, 

jc  fatb  bnto  bfm,2>ocft  thou  belcene  on 
tbe£>ouneof<i5ob< 

36  $e anftoereb anb faib, nabo  isbc, 
ILojb,  tbafjnugbt  bclccuconbinii 

37  anb  jjefus  fatb  bnto  fitm,  Xbon 
baft  both  fecne  htm,  anb  it  is  he  that  tal 
Bert)  ibith  thee. 

38  3mbbcfaib,?Lo2b,3f  bclccuc:anb 
hciboiflnppebhim. 

39  C^nb^efusfatb.ifojiubgment 
3J  am  tome  into  this  Wojlb,  that  tbcp 
Which  fee  not,  might  fee,  anb  that  the? 
which  fee,  might  be  mabe  blinb. 

40  3lnb  fome  of  the  #bartfees| 
which  tt»etc  With  him ,  bcarb  thefc! 
woibs ,  anb  faibe  bnto  him ,  Zu  Wee 
blinbealfo; 

41  3lefus  faioc  bnto  them ,  3!f  pec 
Were  bltnb.pe  fhoulb  hauc  no  finnc :  but 
noib  pc  fap,  m  fee ,  tljctfb^c  pout  fittnc 
remainetb. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Chriftis  the  doore  and  the  good  Shepheard. 
19  Diuers  opinions  of  him.  14  He  proucch 
by  his  workes ,  diat  he  is  Chrill  the  Sonne  ol 
God,  39  Efcapeththe  Iewes,  40  and  went 
3gaine beyond  Iordane ,  whete many  belee- 
uedonhim. 


1 1  fce  anfujereb  anb  fatb,3l  man  that 
is  caiieb3Jcfits,mabcciap,anb  anomteb 
mine  cpes,  attD  fatb  bnto  me,  ©oe  to  the 
poolc  of  £>tloam ,  anb  tbafb :  anb  3 
Went  anb  waQ)eD,anD3J  rccciiieD  ftght. 

12  XbcnfaiDtbcpbnto him ,  leijerc 
is  he?  §efatb,3>BnoWnot. 

13  CXhcp  brought  to  the  0hartfccs 
him  that  afiwettmc  Vbas  bltnb. 

14  ^nb  it  was  the  Sabbath  bap 
When  3Jcfusmabetbeclap,anb  opcncb 
rjtscpes. 

15  Xbcnagatncthci&hacifcesaifoaf' 
Ucb  him  boWbc  bao  rccctueb  bis  fight. 
t?c  fatb  bnto  them ,  tyct  put  clapbpon 
mine  t^ts ,  anb  3  wafbeb,  anb  boe  fee. 

16  Xbcrcftncfatbfomcof  the#harfc 
fees,  Xfjts  man  is  not  of  00b,  becaufc 
hec  fecepetb  not  the  Sabbath  bap,  j©* 
tljcrs  fatD ,  i)  oil)  can  a  man  that  ts  a  fin- 
necboc  fuch  miracles*  anb  there  mas  a 
Diutfion  among  them. 

17  Xhep  fap  bnto  the  bitttb  man  a* 
game,  tebatfapeft  thou  of  htm,  thathe 
hathopencbthmcepes?  i^efaib,  ^cets 
aj&ophct. 

18  25ut  thCJObcsbib  not  beleeue 
contenting  him,  thathcehabbinblinb, 
anb  recciucb  his  fight,  bnttU  th  cp  caiicb 
the  parents  of  htm  that  hab  rccctueb 
his  fight. 

19  SCttbthcpar&ebthcm.rapmg^s 
thispouc  fottttc,  lbho  pe  fap  ibas  borne 
blinb;  hoib  then  both  he  noib  fee; 

20  tyis  parents  anfmereb  thcm,anb 
fatb,  toe  Unolb  that  this  is  our  fonne, 
anb  that  he  ibas  borne  blinb : 

21  JSutbprbhatmcancshcnotbfeeth, 
ibchnoibnot,  0:  ibho  hath  opettcb  his 
epes  Vbc  bttoib  not :  hec  is  of  age,  affcc 
hitn,he  fhail  fpcaftc  fo:  htmfclfc. 

22  Ihcrcttwbsfpa&cbtsparcnts, 
titcattfc  thep  fcarcb  the  3JeU)cs :  foz  the 
Jcibcshaoagrcebaircabp,  that  if  anp 
manrnbeottfefle  that  he  ibas  CDnft,  he 
(homo  be  put  out  of  tbc&pnagoguc. 

23  XhcrcfotcftUbhtsparcnts,  i^cis 
ofagcafuchtm. 

24  Xhenagatuc  cailcbthevthcman 
thatibasbltnb,anbfatbbntohim,Giue 
god  the  pjaifcibc  Unoib  that  tljts  man 
tsafinncr. 

25  J)canfu)crcb ,  anb  fatb,  nahethcr 
hcbcafiuncc  o;no,  3JUttoibnot:  £)m 
tlmtg  3  mtoib ,  that  lbhcreas  5  uias 
blitUMioibllfcc. 

26  Xhcn  fatDc  thep  to  him  agaitte, 
toliat  did  he  to  tljcc  .■  lioib  opcncD  ljcc 
thmeepes; 


S 


I  j  Or.exeem- 

munuateci 

him. 


dShepheard.  Chap.x. Chrifts  flieepe. 


•Era.40. 

1 1. czech. 
34'J. 


Efai.37. 


pou,  li?e  that  cntreth  not 
bp  p  booze  into  the  (hcepe- 
folb ,  but  cltmctt)  top  Tome 
other  wap,  the  fame  is  a 
thcefcanb  a  robber. 
z  25uthec  that  cntreth  in  bp  tJjc 
booze,is  tljc  djepfjctD  of tfjc  Cljcepc. 

3  £0  mm  ttjc  pozter  opencrb ,  anb 
theChccpehearc  histoopee,  ami  he  cal- 
leth  his  oibnc  (hccpe  bp  name,  anb  le& 
beth  them  out 

4.  2nb  when  heputtcthfoozthh<s 
ownefljcepchegoethbefozethem,  anb 
the  (hecpe  follow  him :  foz  thep  RnoW 
histoopee. 

5  3no  a  Granger  Will  the?  not  fol- 
low ,  but  Will  flee  from  him ,  foz  thep 
Rnow  nottrje  toopcc  offtcangers. 

6  %lyis  parable  fpaRe  3Jefus  tonto 
them :  but  thep  tonbcrftooto  not  What 
things  thep  xtoccc  «jl)tet)  l)e  fpabe  tonto 
them. 

7  Xhen  faib  3f elus  tonto  them  & 
game,?IJerilp,tocrilp3f  fep  tonto  pou,3J 
amtheboozeofthefljccpc. 

S  311  that  eucr  tame  befoze  me ,  are 
theeuesanbrobbers-.butthefljeepebib 
not  hcare  them. 

9  gjamthcboozebpmeifattpman 
enter  m,he  (hall  be  feucb,  anb  (hall  goc 
(n  anb  ont,anb  finb  paflure. 

10  Xhcthecfceommcth  not,  but  foz 
to  ftcalc  anb  to  bill ,  anb  to  toeftrop :  3 
am  to  me  that  thep  might  h  anc  life,  anb 
that  thep  might  haue  it  moze  abun- 
bantip. 

11  ♦'Jam  tDc  goob  fljephcarb  :the 
goob  fljicphearb  giueth  his  life  foz  rtjc 
fljccpe. 

ix  25ut  hcethat  t0  an  hireling  anb 
not  the  (hephearu ,  Whole  owne  the 
flieepe  are  not ,  feeth  the  woolfc  com- 
mmg,anb  leaueth  the  fljeep,  anb  fleeth : 
anb  tDc  woolfc  catchcth  them,  anb  Teat? 
tercththefljeepe. 

15  %[)e  hireling  fleeth ,  bctaufe  he  is 
an  hireling,?  carcth  not  foz  the  flieepe. 

14.  3  am  the  goob  (hephearb ,  anb 
RnoW  my  (hcepe ,  anb  am  RnoWcn  of 
mine. 

is  asthefathcrRnoWethme ,  eucn 
fo  RnoW  3  the  father :? 3  laptooWnc 
mpltfcfoz  the  (hcepe. 

16  3lnb  other  (hecpe  3  haue ,  Which 
are  not  of  this  folb :  them  alfo  3  mutt 
bjing ,  anbthep  than  hcaremptoopce; 
*  anb  there  (hall  be  one  folb,  ™d  one 
ttjephearb. 


17  Xhcrcfoze  both  my  father  lone 
me ,  *  becaufc  3  lay  toowne  mp  life  chat 
3J  might  taRe  it  agatne. 

18  4BomantaRcthftrrommc,but'3J 
lapitboWne  of  mpfelfe :  3  hane  power 
to  lap  it  bowne ,  anb  3  haue  power  to 
taRcitagatne.  *Xhiseommantocment 
haue3J  rccetueb  of  nip  father. 

19  CXherc  was  a  btutfton  there* 
fozeagamcamongthe  3Jewesfozthefc 
fapings. 

10  3nbmanpofthcmfeib,$e!)ath 
a  bcuili,  anb  is  mab,  whp  hearepc  him  < 

11  Others  faib ,  Xhefe  are  not  the 
Wozbs  of  him  that  hath  a  bcutll.  Can  a 
bcuili  open  the  epes  of  the  blmb  < 

n  C3nbttwasatlNcrufelrmthc 
*feattofthcbebicatton,$itwasWmter. 

13  ^nb3(ernswaiKcbinthetemplc 
m  Solomons  pouli. 

14  iChcncamcthclfeWesrottnbfc 
bout  him.anb  Caib  Unto  him,i?oW  long 
bocflthoullmaRclJStoboubt?  JJfthou 
be  the  Chnft,tell  bs  plainclp. 

15  3Jcfus  anfroercb  them  ,  3  tofo 
pou ,  anb  pe  bclccueb  not  :the  wo?rcs 
that  3  boe  in  mp  iFathers  name ,  thep 
bcareWitncfle  of  me. 

16  26utpebelccucnot,betaufepcare 
not  of  mp  fljeepcas  3  faib  Dnto  pou. 

17  £0pfl)eepehcarempt>opte,anb 
3  ftnow  thcm,anb  thep  follow  me. 

is  3lnb  3  glue  unto  them  etcrnall 
Ufe.anb  thep  fljall  neucr  penflj,  neither 
fljall  anp  man  plutfte  them  out  of  mp 
hanb. 

19  %y  father  which  gaue  them  me, 
is  greater  then  all :  anb  no  man  is  able 
to  plucfee  them  out  of  mp  fathers  hanti. 

jo  3  anb  mp  father  are  one. 

31  Xhcn  the  3leWestooRct>p  (tones 
agamctoftonehim. 

31  3Jefus  antoereb  them  ,  fl^anp 
goob  wojftcshaue  ^fljcWeb  poufrom 
mp  Jfathcr ;  fo?  Which  of  tljofe  WodRcs 
boepcttoncmc* 

33  Xhe  giewes  antoereb  him ,  &p-- 
ing ,  5fo?  a  goob  W02RC  We  (lone  thec 
not,  but  foz  biafphemp^nb  becanfc  that 
thou,  being  a  man,  maReft  thpftlfc 
dE>ob. 

34  gjefusantocrcbthem^sttnot 
written  in  pour  law,  3  faf>>  vc  m* 
gobs< 

35  3f  hec  cailcb  them  gobs ,  lmto 
whom  the  wo?b  of  d5ob  tame ,  anb  the 
Scripture  cannot  bcbjoRcn : 

36  S>appe  of  Dun,  Whom  the  father 
hathfauctiRcb  anb  fent  into  the  wozlb, 

Xhou 


■Efay.jj. 

7.»- 


Acts  1.14. 


■  1. Mace.  4. 
59- 


\\Or,hMl,t 
tnJn[p€TUt. 


•Pfal8j.i5. 


Lazarus  dieth,and       S.Iohn. 


israifed  tolifc 


Mm.  iS. 


Xbou  biafpbemcu\  becaufe  3JCaib,  3 
am  the  Pontic  of  ©ob; 

J7  3tf3  boe  not  tt)c  ttwncs  ofmp 
jfatbccbclecucmcnot. 

38  aSutif^iaoc,  tljougt) v« bclcctw 
not  me,  belecuc  the  lbojlis :  that  pc  map 
miorb  anb  beleeue  that  tbejf  atberism 
mc,anb3iittbim. 

39  Xbctcfozcthcp  fought  agamc  to 
tutu  I) mi :  but  IjcecfcapcD  out  of  their 
Ijanb, 

40  anb  tbent  arbap  agamc  brponb 
3Jo?banc,  into  the  plate  n>berc  'John 
at  (ml  baptwb  :anb  their  lie  abobc. 

41  anb  manp  rcfoncb  bnto  bint, 
anbfaib ,  John  did  no  miracle :  but  all 
things  that  3tohn  fpanc  of  this  man, 
iberctrue. 

4i3lnb  manp  bclccucb  on  him  there. 

CHAP.    XL 

1  Chrift  raifeth  Lazarus,  fourc  dayes  buried. 
45  Many  Iewes  belccue.  47  The  high 
Pricfts  and  Pharifees  gather  a  counfel  againft 
Chrift.  49  Caiaphas  prophecieth.  54  Iefus 
hid  himfclte.  55  At  die  PalTeoucr  they  en- 
quire after  him.and  lay  wait  lor  him. 

Oui  a  tcttaine  man  Jims 
fitfte ,  namcb  ?La5arus  of 
ascrbanie ,  the  tottme  of 
*©arp,  anb  bee  filter  iJ0ars 
tl)a. 

lbas  that  £!jarp  ibljici)  an> 
opnteot&e  JLoib  rbitb  oputment,  anb 
ltiipcD  l)is  fecte  lbitb  berbatre,  ibbofe 
tyotber  ILa^arus  lbas  Gchc.) 

3  Xbercfae  bis  filter  fait  bnto  bitn, 
taping,  TLoft,  bebolb,  bee  lbbom  thou 
louc(t,u?ficBe. 

4  tebcnjlcfus  hcarb that, lice fart>, 
Xlns  ficunrife  is  not  buto  Death,  but  foj 
theglojp  of  (5ob,  tfjat  the  Pontic  of 
(Sob  might  be  glonfieb  therebp. 

5  ii5oU)  3Jcfns  loucb  Martha ,  anb 
hcrfidcr.anblLayirus. 

6  often  he  hab  hcarb  therefore  that 
he  lbas  fitUc.hc  abobc  ttbo  bapes  QUI  in 
the  fame  placcibhcrc  he  lbas. 

7  Xhni  after  tljat ,  faith  hec  to  his 
Difciplcs,lLct  bs  go  into  Jubea  agamc. 

s  91s  bifcipics  fap  buto  nun ,  Ra- 
fter, crjc  denies  of  late  fought  to  Qonc 
thcc,anDgocflthou  thither  agamc; 

9  lIcfuB  anfiucrcb,  2rc  there  not 
tibeUie  hourcs  m  the  bap  <  3Jf  anpiuan 
lbaiUcmtbcbap,  he  llumblctl)  not,  be- 
tauft  he  Teeth  the  light  ofthis  uwlb. 

10  23unf  a  man  lbai&e  in  the  night, 


becltumblctb ,  bctaufc  there  is  no  light 
tnhim. 

1 1  Xhcfe  tbtngsfaio  hec,  anbafter 
that,  hec  faith  bnto  them,  jSDut  frtcnb 
lUsarus  aetpeth,  but  31  goe,  that  3 
map  aibaac  him  out  of  deepe. 

ii  Xbcn  faib  his  btfciples ,  ILojb,  if 
be  deepe,  be  Ihaii  boe  ibcll. 

13  $orbbeit  3Icfu0  fpafcc  of  hie 
bcath :  but  thep  thought  that  fjee  hab 
fponen  of  ta&mg  of  refltn  deepe. 

14  Xben  faibe  3Jefus  bnto  them 
piamlp,  ILa^arus  is  bcab : 

15  3nb  3  am  giab  fo?  pour  fanes, 
that 3  H>as  not  there  ( to  themtcntpec 
mapbclecuc:)ii5euctthclcae,ietbsgoe 
bnto  him. 

16  XbcnfaibXbomas,lbbichiseafc 
leb  SDibpmus,  bnto  his  feiloib  bifcv 
pics,  fLet  bs  alfo  goc,  thatvbe  mapbic 
lbitb  bun. 

17  Xben  ibhen  3Jcfus  came ,  hec 
founb  that  hec  hab  lien  in  the  graue 
fburcbapcsalrcabp. 

18  ($olb  25cthamc  lbas  nigh  bn> 
to  tyietufalem  ,  ||  about  fiftccne  fur- 
longs  off:) 

i9  3momanpoftbe3Jeibcscameto 
Martha,  anb  fi^arp,  to  comfort  them 
(onccrnmgthnr  brother. 

20  Xben  Q9artba,asfoonca8tbee 
hcarb  that  llcfus  lbas  tommmg,  lbcnt 
anb  met  him:  but  fl^arpfatc  dill  m  the 
boufc. 

11  Xben  fame  Hl9artba  bnto 3Jefus, 
?Lo;b,  if  thou  habit  bene  here,  mptyo 
thcrbabuotbtcb. 

22  25ut  3  nnotb,  that  cuen  notb, 
lbbatfocuct  thou  lbilt  afttc  of  d5ob, 
(Soblbillgmeitthcc. 

23  gjcuis  faith  bnto  bet ,  Xbp  too- 
ther (hail  rife  agatne. 

24  Martha  fapcth  bnto  him , '  3 
tmoib  that  he  Cbail  rife  agamc  tntbc  re* 
furrectionatthc  laltoap. 

25  3Jefus  faib  bnto  her ,  3  am  the 
tefurrcction,  ano  the  *  life :  lice  that  be- 
lecuctb  m  me,  though  be  lbcrcbeab,  pet 
fljaiihcltuc. 

26  ^nbibhofocnccliucth,anbbclec' 
uctb  m  mee,  than  ncucr  Die.  25  clccuctt 
tljou  this; 

27  <S>bc  faith  bnto  him,  &ta%w, 
3  bclccuc  that  thou  art  tbeCbnft  the 
:§>oimc  of  C3ob,Tbhtth  fboulb  come  into 
tbcib02lb. 

28  3lnb  ibbcn  (bee  hab  Co  Cam ,  fljee 
lbcnt  her  lbap ,  anb  caileb  fi^arp  her 
fillet  fctrctlp ,  fapmg ,  %\>c  falter 

is 


\\Thalu. 
about  lug 
milt. 


Luke  14. 
1 4.  chap.  j. 


•Chap.d 


Iefus weepeth. Chap.xj.    Caiaphas  prophccie. 


troubled 

himfclfe. 


"Chap-9-6. 


is  come,  ano  caiicth  fo;  thee, 

29  ^frooncasO)Cl)tarDtl)at,Q)ca^ 
rofe  auicfeclp,  ano  came  bnto  Dim. 

30  $oib3lJcfusrbasnotpcttomern> 
to  the  totimc ,  but  tbas  m  that  plate 
ibhere  40artba  met  mm. 

31  Xhe  "Jetbes  then  rbhtch  Ibere 
lbith  her  m  the  houfe ,  ano  comfoiteo 
her,rohen  tbep  faib  s$arp  that  Q)t  toft 
bphaftilp,anoibcntout,  folloVbcoher, 
faptng,  5>httgocthbnto  the  graue,  to 
ibccpe  there. 

32  Xhcn  lbhen  i©arp  Ibas  tome 
tbbcre  3efus  ibas,  ano  faib  bun,  thee 
ftliooibncatbisfectcfapuigbntobim, 
3Lo;o,  if  thou  baDQ  bcene  here ,  mp  b;o> 
tberbaonotDpeD. 

»  B9hcn  3Icws  therefore  faibc  bcr 
lbceping,  ano  the  3Jcibesalfo  lbceping 
ibbirhcamcibiibbcr,bcegroneDintbc 
S>pttit,  ano  t  ibas  troublco, 

34  3lnDraiD,nahcrcbaucpciaiDbim; 
Xbcp  fap  bnto  him,  12,020,  tome,  9  fee. 

35  ^cfusibcpt. 

36  XbcnfaiDtbcgjctbcs.aebolD, 
boibbeloucohim. 

37  3nD  fome  of  them  faio,  CoulD 
not  this  man,  *tbhich  opcncDtbccpcs 
of  the  biniD  c ,  hauc  taufeo  that  earn  this 
man  thonlb  not  haue  Oieo  t 

3S  3Jcfus  therefore  againe  gronfng 
m  hunfclfc ,  tommcth  to  the  graue.  3Jt 
tbasa  cauc,  ano  a  Cone  lapbpon  it. 

39  3lcfusfaiD,  Xane  pec  aibap  the 
ttone.  sJ0artba,  the  fitter  of  him  that 
tbas  DeaD ,  faptb  bnto  him ,  fLojD ,  bp 
this  time  he  ttmbcrh :  fo;  he  hath  beene 
Deaofoureoapes. 

40  31  cms  Caith  bnto  her  ,£>aib  U  not 
bnto  thee,  that  if  thou  lbouiott  beleeue, 
thou  ftiouioctt  fee  the  glo;p  of  <5oD  t 

41  Xbcntbcptookcaibap  the  (tone 
from  the  plate  ibhcrc  the  Dcaoibas  lato. 
ano  3}cfus  lift  bp  his  cpes ,  ano  faio, 
5fathct ,  3J  rhanfcc  thee ,  that  thou  hall 
hearomc. 

42  ^no3l  feneibc  that  thou  hcarctt 
mcaiibapcs:  butbetaufc  of  the  people 
tbhich  ftanb  bp ,  5  faio  u,  that  tfjcp  map 
beleeue  that  thou  haft  fent  me. 

43  3ino  lbhen  bee  thus  hao  fpohen, 
he  crpco  lbith  a  louoc  boice ,  Hajarus, 
tomcfoo;th. 

44  3nD  he  that  ibas  DcaD  ,tamc  foith, ' 
bouno  hatio  %  foot  lbith  graue  clothes: 
ano  his  facc\bas  bouuD  about  ibitb  a 
napmn.  3Iefus  faith  bnto  tbcm,lLoofe 
him,  ano  lethimgoc. 

45  Xbcnmatipoftbe3kuusibbicb 


tame  to  ^arp,ano  haofcene  the  things 
I  Xbhich  3JcfusDiD,belecueDonbim. 

46  26ut  fome  of  them  ibent  their 
!  ibapes  to  the  jDhanfes,  ano  totbe  them 
j  ibhat  things  Jcfas  hao  bone. 

47  CXhen  gatherco  p  chtcfe  piiefts 
,  ano  the  pbanfes  a  tounccll ,  ano  faio, 
nahat  Ooc  ibcc  <  fo;  this  man  Doctb  ma 
np  miracles. 

4S  3fibclctbtmtbusaionc,alimctt 
ibtii  beleeue  on  him,  ano  the  Romanes 
(ball  tome ,  ano  take  aibap  both  our 
1  place  ano  nation. 

I  49^nOoncofthemnameOCaiaphas, 
being  the  high  l&ictt  that  fame  pecre, 
faio  bnto  thcm,Fe  auoib  nothing  at  all, 
I  50  *i9o2confiOtrthat  itis  erpebtent 
,fo;  bs,  that  one  man  frjoulDDie  fo;tbe 
j  people ,  ano  that  the  lbbole  nation  pe- 
Infhnot. 

51  ^nothisfpa&chcnotofhunfelfc: 
but  being  high  0;icft  that  pcerc ,  he  p;o- 
pheneo  that  'Jems  fbouio  Die  fo;  that 
Inatton: 

52  ^110  not  fo;  that  nation  onlp,  but 
I  that  alfo  hee  fbouio  gather  together  in 
;  one,  the  cbilDjcn  of  @oo  ttjattucrc  ftat> 
.tcceoabjoao. 

53  Xben  from  that  Dap  foo;tb,  rt)ep 
itoobe  counrell  together  fo;  to  put  htm 
to  Death. 

54  'Jefus  therefore  ibal&cD  no  mo;e 
j  opcnlp  among  the  3Jcibcs :  but  Vbent 
1  thence  bnto  a  countccp  nccrc  to  the  tbti 

I  Dcrncfle,tnto  a  citp  calico  Cphwm^anO 
there  contmucD  lbith  his  Dimples. 

55  €E3uD  thc'Jcibcs  i&affeouet  ibas 

,  nigh  at  hanD ,  ano  manp  ibent  out  of 

I  the  couutrtp  bp  to  I?icriifalcm  befoje 

j  the  pafTcour  r  to  purine  tlicmlclues. 

I    56  Xhen  fought thepfor^efus, ano 

fpahe  among  themfelucs,  as  tbepttooD 

m  the  Xemplc,  nabat  thmbe  pe,  that  he 

lbillnotcomctothcfcalt; 

57  /^oib  both  the  cbiefc  pncQs  ano 
the  pljartfes  hao  giucn  a  commatioc 
ment ,  that  if  aup  man  Knclb  ibhcrc  hee 
ibcre,hen;oulDa)Cibit,thatthep  might 
take  him. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  IcfuscxcufcthMjiy  anointing  his  feet,  j  The 
people  flockc  to  fee  Lazarus.  10  The  high 
Pnellsconfulttokillhim.  u  Chrill  ridcih  in- 
to lerufalem.  10  Gieckcs  dclirc  to  lee  Icfus. 
ij  Mcfotcic!leth  his  death.  57  Thelevvcsare 
generally  blinded  ■  41  yet  many  chicle  rulets 
oelccuc,butdonotconfcnehim:  44  therforc 
Icfus  calletheaincitly  for  confefsion  of  faith. 

Xhcn 


•Chap 
'4. 


Iudas,a 


thicfe. 


S.Iohn.       The  wheat  corne.1 


•Cha.i  j.19 


•Clu.n.3. 


'Zach.y  y, 


'^^^^fnUcfus,  fircbaycsbcfozc 
yM  -pSgtbeiDaffoucr,  camcto26ctl> 
iH  'Manic,  where  ?La?iarus  ibas, 
3®sLkS*  which  hab  bene  bcab,ibhom 
Dec  raifcb  from  tDc  DeaD. 

,x  Xherc  they  mabc  bun  a  fuppcr, 
anb  09artba  fcr  ueb :  but  fLa^arus  ibas 
one  of  them  Kate  at  the  table  tbitfi  him. 

3  Xbcntoofcc  flpary  a  pounb  of  otm> 
incut,  of  ;S>pit»cnarb,  bcry  codly,anb 
anomtcb  the  feet  of  3Jcfus,  9  lbipeb  his 
feet  forth  bcrbaire:  anb  the  boufe  ibas 
fillcbibitbtbc  obottr  of  the  ointment. 

4  Xben  farth  one  of  his  bifctplcs, 
3lubas1flfcariot,&imonstQnne,lbbicb 
tboulb  betray  him, 

5  teby  ibas  not  this  ointment  folb 
fo?  tbzee  hunbjea  pentcanb  gmen  to  the 
pooze* 

6  *  Xbis  he  faib,  not  that  he  tareb 
foz  the  poozc :  but  betaufc  hec  ibas  a 
tlitcfc,anbhab  the  bag,  anb  bate  ibbat 
ibas  put  therein. 

7  Xben  faib  IJcuts.fLct  her  alone, 
agamdtbebay  of  my  burying  hathfhc 
Sept  this. 

s  5f 0:  the  poozc  alibayes  ycc  haue 
lbitb  rou :  but  me  ye  haue  not  alibayes. 

9  <99ucb  people  of  tbCjeibcstbcrc; 
fozckneibtbat  he  Vbas  there :  anbtbey 
came,not  foz'Jcfus  fake  onely,but  that 
they  might  (cc  Ha^arus  alfo ,  ibbom  he 
Ijab  taifcb  from  the  bcab. 

ioC55utthethiefc^neasconfulteb,j'' 
they  might  put  ILa^arus  alfo  tobcath, 

1 1  Sccattfctbatby  tcafon  of  him  ma 
ny  of  tbc3Jcibcsibcntaibay  anb  belec 
uco  on  3Jcflis. 

u  <£*  £)n  the  ncrtbay.mucb  people 
tbatibcrc  come  to  the  fcad,  lbhen  they 
hcarb  that'll  cfus  Vbas  tomnung  to  fcic 
rufalcm, 

1$  Xooltc  bzanches  of  0almc  trees, 
anb  went  fooztb  to  meet  him,  anb  cneo , 
ftofanna ,  blcflcb  is  theSmgof  3Ifraci 
that  toinrth  m  the  flame  of  the  H  ozb. 

14  ^tnb'^lcfus,  lbbcnbcbabfounba 
yongaflcXatctbcrcon.aeitisibztttcn, 

15  "i'carc  not ,  baughtcr  of  £>ton, 
bcholb,  tbr  Bmg  tommcth,  fitnng  on 
an  a  Acs  colt. 

,  i6  Xbefe  things  bnberftoob  nothis 
bifnplcs  at  the  firft :  but  lbhcn  gjefus 
ibas  glozi&cb,  then  rcmebzeb  they  that 
thefc  things  lbcrc  lbztttcn  of  him,  anb 
that  tbey  hab  bone  thefc  things  bnto 
him. 

17  Xhe  people  thercfozc  that  ibas 
with  bini.ibbm  he  callcbJLa  wits  out 


of  his  graue,  anb  ratfeb  htm  from  the 
bcab,  bare  rccozb. 

is  if  0?  this  caufe  the  people  alfo  met 
htm ,  fo?  that  they  heat b  that  hee  hab 
bone  this  miracle. 

19  Xbe  ^hanfees  therefozc  tafbe  a? 
mong  tbemfelues,$ctcctue  yc  holb  yee 
P  z  mail  c  nothing  i  aScbolb,  the  Xbozlb  ts 
gone  after  htm. 

20  Onb  there  tberetcrtatnc<ErecRS 
amongthem ,  that  camcbptoibo;(bip 
attbefead: 

11  Xhe  Came  tame  therefore  to  pMip 
tbhtchwas  of2Sctbfaibaof<0aulcc,anb 
befirebbim,  faying,  Snr,ibciboulbfcc 
3Jcfus. 

22  Philip  commeth  anb  tclleth^n^ 
bzeib :  anb  agame  3nbzclb  anbjEhihp 
tolo  Refits. 

23  C3lnb3Jefosanfa}erebthem,{ay 
ing,Xl)c  hourc  is  comctbattbc  £>onnc 
of  man  fljouio  be  giozi&cb. 

24  tlercly,  bercly,  31  faybntoyou, 
€rcept  a  tome  of  ibheat  fall  into  the 
grouno,  anb  bic,  it  abibeth  alone :  but  if 
u  bic ,  it  bzingcth  fozth  much  frtttt. 

25  *  i>c  that  loucth  his  life,  (hall  lofe 
it :  anb  hec  that  batetb  hts  life  in  this 
lbozlb,  (haiiftccpc  it  bnto  life  cternall. 

26  3lf  any  man  feme  me,lct  him  fol- 
low me,  anb  lbbcre  31  am,  there  (hall 
alfo  my  fctuant  be :  gif  any  man  fcrue 
me,  him  lbill  my  fatl)cr  honour. 

27  ii5oiD  is  myfoulctroublcb ,  anb 
ibbat  Oiali  31  faydfatber,  fauc  mefrom 
this  houre  ,but  foz  this  caufe  earned  bm 
tothishoure. 

2s  5father,glozificthy/t5anie.Xhcn 
tame  there  aboiccfromhcaucn,  fayms, 
3  haue  both  gloztficb  it,  anb  um  glozttte 
itagatne. 

29  Xhe  people  thercfozc  that  ttoob 
by,anbhcarbit,faib,thatitthunbcrcb: 
others  faib,3ln3lngclfpaHe  to  him. 

30  3Iefus  anfmcrrb,  anb  faib,  Xhis 
botcc  came  not  becaufc  of  nice,  but  foz 
your  fa&cs. 

31  /ftoib  is  the  iubgement  of  this 
lbozlb :  noib  fljall  the  pzincc  of  this 
lbozlb  be  cad  out. 

32  3nb%tf  gjbcliftcbbpfromtbc 
earth ,  lbtll  b?aib  all  men  bnto  me. 

J3  ( Xhts  hec  faib ,  figuifymg  ibhat 
bcatbhclboulbbic) 

3+  Xhe  people anfrocrcb him,  *nac 
haue  hcaro  out  of  the  ?Laib,that  Chztft 
abibeth  fozcucr:  anb  holb  fayed  thou, 
Xhe  <S>onne  of  man  mud  bee  lift  bp 
aobo  is  this  S>onnc  of  man  t 
3jXheu 


"Maich.io 

39- 


•Prj.110.4 


Chriffca  light.  Chap.xii).  Hishumihtic. 


Edi.jj.t. 
rom.io.i6. 


Mat  i  j 
14. 


■Ctep.j. 
44- 


•Chap.; 
■  9- 

•Chap.; 
■7- 


•Male  1 « 


3$  Xhcn'JcfustatbDnto  them,  Pet 
a  little  tbhrtc  is  the  light  ibtth  you : 
rbalhctbhilepehauc  ttic  itght,leftbarR< 
ucffc  tome  bponyou:f  ozhetftatlbab 
Ktth  inDat&enctTc,  Unoltoeth  not  ibhfc 
thethegoeth. 

j«s  r©hile  ye  hauc  light,belccue  in  the 
light ,  that  ye  map  bee  the  thtlbjenof 
light.  %fytb  things  fpat$c3Jcfhs,  anb 
BcpattcD,  ano  Dto  IjiDc  himfelfc  from 
them. 

37  C*8nt  though  he  hab  bone  fo 
many  miracles  before  thcm,yet  thepbe* 
leeuebnotonhim: 

38  Xhat  the  taping  of  efatas  the 
0zophet  might  befulfillcb ,  iDhich  hee 
fpaftc ,  *  fLozt)  ,  tbho  hath  beleeneb  our 
report  <anb  totbhomhaththeatmcof 
thelLozbbeenercuealeb j. 

39  XherefozethcptoulDnotbeleeue, 
betaufc  that  cfaias  faiu  agame, 

40  ^ehathblinbcDthcirepes.anb 
harbneo  their  heart ,  that  the?  thoulb 
notfecttJith  their  tycs,  noz&noerftano 
ibith  their  hcart,atu>  be  tonuerteb,  ano 
3Jtt)oulD  Dealt  them. 

4.1  Xhefc  things  faib  €fatas ,  tbhen 
Ijefavb  his  glozp,ano  fpaftc  of  him. 

+i  C  JfreuerthclclTe  ,  among  the 
thiefe  rulers  alfo  ,  man?  bclccucb  on 
him  ibut  betaufc  of  thejiMtartfecsthcy 
nib  not  tonfeffe  htm ,  left  the?  ChoulO  be 
put  out  of  tljt  Synagogue. 

43  *5F  oz  they  loucb  the  pzatfc  of  men, 
moze  then  the  pzatfc  of  <soo. 

44  C3JefuscncD,anbfatb,$cthat 
bclccucth  on  me ,  belceuerh  not  on  me, 
butonhunthatfentme. 

45  3int>  he  that  fteth  me ,  feeth  hint 
that  lent  me. 

46  *3  am  tome  a  light  into  the 
tbozio.thatrbhofocucrbclcciiethonmc, 
Ihottio  not  abioc  in  DarncncfCr. 

47  *  3no  if  any  man  heart  my 
Ujo?os  ,  ano  bclceuenot ,  3  tubgthmt 
not,foz3Jcamcnottotiibgethcrbozlo, 
buttofaucthetbozio. 

4S  §c  that  retectcth  me ,  anurctet' 
uethnotmy  tbozbs ,  Datli  one  that  mo; 
gethhim:*  p  Vbozo  that  3  hauc  fpoften, 
the  lame  than  iubge htm  in  the  laftoay. 

49  f  oz  3  hauc  not  fpottcn  of  mp 
felft ;  but  the  father  tbhtch  fent  me,  he 
gatic  me  a  tonimaunoement  .uhat  3 
ujouio  fay,ano  inhat  3  QioulD  fpcaftc. 

50  3tto  3  ftnoib  that  his  tomman- 
ocment  is  life  ettcciaftfng :  lnharfocuct 
H  fpcaftc  thcrefozc ,  citen  as  the  father 
faibbntomcfoH  fpcaftc. 


CHAP.   XIII. 

Iefus  wafheth  the  diiciples  feete  :  exhorteth 
themco  humilitieand  charitie.  18  Hefore- 
tellech  ,  aod  dilcouereth  to  Iohn  by  a  token 
that  Iudas  fhould  betray  him  :  31  Com- 
mandeth  them  to  loue  one  another,  56  And 
(orewameth  Peter  o(  his  deniall. 

*£*  £>0)  *bcfozc  the  feaft  of 
g  5the0a(Teoucr,  ibhcn3Je; 
■  |fus  ftucib  that  his  hourc 
J  ftbascome,  thathefboulb 
^1  Depart  out  of  this  tbozlb 
into  the  father ,  hautng  loucb  h«s 
otbne  Vbhith  Votte  tn  the  ltoozlb ,  he  lo- 
ucb them  tonto  the  enb. 

x  Znn  fuppcr  being  cnbeb  (the  t>e* 
mil  hauing  noin  put  into  the  heart  of 
JJuoas  Jftartot  5>tmonsfonneto  be* 
tray  him.) 

3  3Jefus  Knotting  that  the  father 
hao  gmen  ail  thmgs  into  his  hanos, 
anothatheibas  tome  from  <25oo,  anb 
U)enttO(5ob: 

4  $e  nfeth  from  fupper ,  anb  lapefc 
aftoc  his  garments,  anb  toofte  a  toitoetl, 
anogirbebhtmfclfe. 

5  ^fter  that,  he  poiDzethtbatcr  into 
a  bafon,  anbbeganncto  ibath  thcoifci 
pics  ftttt ,  anb  to  tbtpcthem  ttnththe 
totbcll  ibhercrbtth  he  ibas  girbeb. 

6  XhencommcthhetoS>tmonj0c- 
ter  :anb  t&cter  faith  tonto  htm ,  Hozb, 
boeft  thou  tbalh  my  feete  t 

7  3Jefus  anfujcrcb ,  anb  faio  bnto 
him ,  i©hat  ^boe ,  thou  bnouicQ  not 
noin : but  thou  fhaltbnolbhceccaftcr. 

8  ^ctcrfaithDntohtm.Xhouflialt 
ncuctibafh  my  feete.  3Iefusanfrocrcb 
him,  UflJlbalh  thee  not,  thou  haft  no 
part  ttitg  me. 

9  5>imon  0etcr  faith  bnto  him, 
ILozD ,  not  my  feetc  only ,  but  alfo  my 
hanos.anomyhcao. 

10  3Jcfus  faith  to  him ,  J?e  that  is 
loaftjecneebcthnot,  fane  totbafhhts 
feet,  but  is  tleane  cucry  tbhtt :  ano  ye 
arc  clean  c,  but  no  tali. 

11  f  oz  he  Knetb  inho  ftjoulb  betray 
him ,  tijercfoze  faib  he,  &c  arc  not  an 
tleane. 

it  £>o  after  hchab  rban)cD  their  feet, 
ano  hab  taucn  ljuef  garments,  anb  ft>as 
fet  boibntagatnc,  he  faib  untotlicni, 
Bnoiu  ye  XbDat  3  haueoouc  to  you  t 

i?  ^e  tall  me  Rafter  atiDHozD,  anb 
yefay»cll:fozfo3Jam. 

14  gjfj  then  youtHozb  anbC|3a 
ftcc  hauc  Vbaftjcb  your  feetc ,  ycc  alfo 
I  ought 


'Mar.aS. 


Iudas,thetraitour.        S.Iohn. 


Mutual!  louc. 


"Mar[h.ia 
:4.chap. 
I  5- 10. 


•Pfjl.41 

10. 


\\Or.frem 
bcncer*rih. 


'Macth.lo 
•JO. 


'MhiIi.}6 


^\Qrpis.jeU 


ought  to  iMfboncanotbersfccte. 

i")  foi3 baucgiuenyouancjramplc, 
tbatycc  fljoulD  ooc,  as  JJbaueooncto 
you. 

i6  *  «Elcrtlp ,  betily  Jf  fa?  bnto  you, 
the  fcr  uaut  is  no  t  greater  then  Die  1o:d, 
nettbeebctbat  is  fcnt.greatcr  then  bee 
that  fent  bun. 

17  3Jfycctmott>tbcre  things,  happy 
aceycifycboctbcm. 

is  CH  fpcaitc  not  of  you  all,  31 
unoibibbom  31  baue  ebofen :  but  tDat 
tlje  Scripture  may  bcfulfiilcb  *  l?c  that 
eatctb  tycab  nntb  mec,  bath  lift  Dp  bis 
bcclcagainfhnc. 

19  ||  Bo\\)  3  tell  you  before  it  come, 
that  lbbcn  it  is  come  to  pafTc ,  ycc  may 
bclccuctbat3Jambc. 

zo  *5ilctnly,tocrilp3J  fay  bnto  you, 
be  that  rctciuetl)  ttmomfoence  3Jfeno, 
recetuctbmc:anD  lie  tbattccciuctbme, 
ccceiuctb  I)im  that  fent  me. 

21  *  naben  Jcfusbab  thus  fayb.bcc 
ibas  trcublcb  in  fputt,ano  tcfhficb.anb 
faiD.Slcrily  Eerily  3J  fay  bnto  you,tbat 
one  of  you  (ball  betray  nit. 

22  1Lbcn  the  Dimples  looHcb  one  on 
another,  ooubtmgofibbom  bee  fpatic. 

2?  /ftolb  there  ibas  leaning  on^c^ 
fus  bofomc  one  of  Ijis  btfnplcs,  U>bom 
3Jefus  loueb. 

24  5)imon  peter  tbcrefoze  becltc- 
ncbtobinubathcfboulb  afuc  Ibbo  it 
fljoulD  be  of  ibbom  be  fpa&c. 

25  tyce  then  lying  on  3Jcfus  b;cau\ 
faith  bnto  bun,  $Lo2b,Vbbo  is  it* 

26  5Je fus  anfiucreo ,  $ec  it  is  to 
ibbom  31  Qiall  giuc  a  Hfoppc,ibbcn3J 
haucOippcb  it.  3nbUjhcn  be  Ijao  Dtp- 
pcDtbcfop,bcgaucitto3moas3Jfcart 
ot  the  fonnc  of  Simon. 

27  2(nD  after  the  foppe,  Satan  en 
tteb  into  bun,  Xbcn  ratb  3Jcfus  Unto 
Ijim.lEDattljouDocft.bocauitUly. 

2s  jiioibnomanattbctablclmctb, 
fo?  toljat  intent  befpaactbts  bnto  Ijtm. 

29  foi  fomcoftbem  thought,  be- 
taufc3Juoasl)abtljcbaggc,tl)at3efus 
baofayo  bnto  htm,  ffiuy  tbofc things 
thatibcc  bane  ucco  of  agamft  tbefcaft : 
oubatbcfboulbgtuc  fomctljmgto  tlic 
pooje. 

30  $?c  then  bailing  rccctiicb  the  Top, 
tbent  immcDiatly  out:  anb  it  ibas  night. 

31  C IChcrefojcVbhcnheciDacgour 
out,  3Jcfusfayb,/Boibistbc  Sonne  of 
man  giouficb :  anb  Gob  is  gioji&cb  in 
him. 

31  3Jf<3oDbcgKm&cDinbini,GoD 


fbauauo  gloztfie  btmm  bimfclfc ,  anb 
fbautttaigbttbay  gioufic  bun. 

33  |LitlctbilDjen,yetaiiticKbbtlf5 
amibtthyou.  jncfballftcftc mec, "anu 
as  3J  fatb  bnto  the  3Jclbcs,  lbbuljer  31 
go,yctannottome:fo  no\b3J  fay  to  you. 

34  *  3C  neib  commanbement  3  giuc 
bnto  you,  Xbat  ycc  louc  one  another 
as  3Jbauc  loueb  you,  tbatyee  alfo  louc 
one  another. 

35  23p  this  (bail  all  men  imoibtbat 
yearc  myDtfctplcs,ifycc  bauciouc  one 
to  another. 

36  C  Simon  peter  fayb  bnto  birti, 
ILom  ibbitbcr  gocfr  thou;  3)cfus  an 
f)bercDhtm)tt9htthcr3)goc,thoucanlt 
not  folloib  me  nolb :  but  thou  fbalt  fol 
lottmicaftcribarbs. 

37  petcrfatbbntobim.ILortUbby 
can  not  3  follow  tbec  nolb;3J  ibili  *iay 
boibnc  mylifcfonbyfaftc. 

3S  5cutsanfibcrcb  bim ,  nailt  tljou 
lay  boibnc  thy  life  foz  my  fahe  <  Sllcrily, 
bertly  3Ifay  bnto  tbec,  the  CocUe  fliau 
not  crolb,  ttltbou  baft  ocmcb  me  tljiifc. 


CHAP.   X 1 1 1 1. 


el 


i\ 


mil comforted) his  Difcfples  with  the  hope 
of  heJUen:  &  profefleth  himklfc  the  Way 
the  Tructh.aud  the  Life,  jndonewiih  the 
Fjthcr:  13  AdurethdieirpraieriinhiiNam1 
tobeeflccluall:  15  Rcquelleih  loueandobe- 
dience,i  6  promiferh  tlieho!)  Ghoft  the  com 
fortcr,  17  and  lea-ucdi  Iiis  peace  with  them. 

Tigf&S  «tuotyour  heart  be  trou 
L ';m  bleb:  ycc  bclccucm  oob, 
5&belecucalfoinme. 
ml  2  3mmyiratbcrsbourc 
7*s?kM%  arc  many  manfions.  if  it 
iberc  not  fo,3  luoulbbauc  tolb  you :  3 
goc  to  prepare  apiatc  foj  you. 

3  3tnb  if  l3J  goc  anb  prepare  a  plate 
foz  you.J  lbill  come  agamcano  retcuir 
you  bnto  my  fclfc.tljat  lbljcrc  3J  am, 
there  ye  may  be  alfo. 

4  3nb  iiihithcr  3  goc  ycc  bnotb, 
anbtbcibayycRnoib. 

5  Xbomas  faith  bnto  bim ,  HojD, 
ibe  Unoibuotrbbitbcr  tbougocft:  anb 
hoib  can  ibe  lutoib  the  may  t 

6  3lcfus  faith  bnto  bun,  3J  am  tbc 
naay ,  the  %xna\),  aub  the  Hifc :  no 
mattcommctli  bnto  the  father  but  by 
mec- 

7  3If yc bab ttnotben  me,  yc flioulb 
banc  imoibcn  my  father  alfo  :  anb 
frombcnccf02tl;ycUnoiuhim,anbhauc 
fccncbim. 

8  pljiiip  favtb  bnto  htm ,  %oib, 
nieib 


•  Clup.7 

"  Chap,  i  5 
17.lcu1.19 
'8.1  iohn 
4.JI. 


Mau-.:l5. 


jWliolouethChriit.  Chap.xv.         The  true  Vine. 


*M«77. 


\Or,or 


fbctb  bs  the  father,  anb  it  fttffucth  bs. 

9  3icfus  faitl)  unto  him,  l?aue  3  bin 
fo  long  tuneibith  you,ano  ret  Haft  thou 
notmtoibenme,  philtp/he  tftat  Ijatlj 
feme  me  ,hath  fecne  tl)e  father ,anb  hotb 
fayeft  tftou  then,  5>heib  bs  tDe  father  t 

10  25clceuc(t  thou  not  that  3  am  to 
the  father,  anbthefatbcrintnrc*  Xhc 
ib02bs  that  31  fpcalic  bnto  you,  3Jfpcak 
not  of  nip  fclfc :  but  the  father  that 
btt)Cllcthmmc,hcboththc\b02&s. 

1 1  25clccuc  me  that  31  am  in  the  far- 
ther, anb  tbef  athcrtn  nice:  ojclfcbc- 
lecue  mc  fin  the  bcry  tt»02fccs  faUc. 

ii  3flcreiy,bcrcly3Jfaybntoyou,hc 
thatbclccuethonme,thcib02Usthat3I 
boc,  (ball  hec  boc  alfo,  anb  greater 
tbojBcs  then  tbcfc  (hall  he  boc,  bceaufc 
31  goc  bnto  my  father. 

13  *3nbibhatfomcrycfhaiiafltctn 
my  #amc,tbatibill3J  bocthattbc  fa 
thcr  map  be glon&cb  mttic  3>onnc. 

14.  3jfvcfl)aiiaffteanv  thing  mm? 
Darnell  lbiuuoc  it. 

15  C  3f  ye  lone  me,  Uecpe  my  torn* 
manbements.  „  . 

i6  3nb3J\biUp2aytbe  father,  anb 
b«  fl)all  gtuc  von  another  Comforter, 
that  he  ma?  abibc  lbtth  vou  foz  cuer, 

17  Euenthe  Spirit  of  tructh,tt)hom 
thcVbo2lbcannotrccciuc,bctaufcufccth 
him  not,  neither  Unoibctb  htm :  but  ve 
imo\bbim,  foz  hec  bibcllcth  lbtth  von, 
anb  than  be  tn  you.  .      _ 

is  3  luilnotlcaucyou  l|comfo2tletft, 
3Jlbtllcometovou. 

19  Pet  a  utic  while,  anb  the  wojib 
(ccih  mc  no  11102c :  but  ye  fee  mc,  bceaufc 
3Jltue,yefliallimcaifo. 

io  2lt  that  bay  ye  fljall  Uttoib,that  3 
am  in  my  father,  anb  you  in  mc ,  anb  3 
in  you. 

2 1  $c  that  hath  my  eommanbements, 
anb  becpeth  them,  bee  it  ts  that  loucth 
mc:  anbhc  that  loucth  mc  fl)ailbc  loueb 
of  mv  5Fathcr,anb3J  U)illIouchim,anb 
null  manifefl  mv  fclfc  to  him. 

2 2  gjubasfaith  bnto  htm , not  jlfca 
not,?Lo20,hoibi6ttthatthoutbiltma^ 
mfeft  thv  fclfc  bnto  bs,  anb  not  bnto  the 

U)02lb* 

23  gicftts  anfracreb,  anb  faibcbnto 
him,  3ff  amanlouc  mce,  he  tbiilhcepe 
mv  tt)02bcs:  anb  mv  father  \bill  lone 
htm,  anb  \bcc  bull  come  bnto  htm,  anb 
malic  our  abobcibith  htm. 

24.  tictnat  loucth  nice  not,  hecpeth 
not  mv  fayings ,  auo  the  11102b  \bhich 
you  hcarc ,  is  not  mine  ,  but  the  Jfa= 


rbers  ibhtch  fent  nice. 

25  Xhcfc  things  haue^fpolienbtv 
to  vou,  being  vet  pzefent  Vbith  vou. 

16  2Sut  the  Comfoztcr,  which  is  the 
holy  <3hofl,\bbom  the  fathcrttnlfcnb 
tn  mv  namche  thai  teach  vou  ai  things, 
8  bengal  things  to  vour  rcinemb2ancc, 
ibbatfocucr3)  haucfaibbntoyou. 

27  $eatc3neaucibitbyou,my  peace 
3  gtuc  bnto  vou,  not  as  the  ibojio  gi 
ueth,  gtuc  3  touto  vou :  let  not  vour 
heart  bee  tronbleb,  neither  let  it  beca^ 
fraib. 

28  &t  haue  hearb  hoxb  3  fatbc  bnto 
vou,  3Jgocaibay,  anb  tome agatnc  bn- 
to vou.  3if  ye  loueb  mccvccibonlbrc- 
tovee,  bceaufc  3  faib ,  3  go  bnto  the  5te 
thcr :  foz  mv  if  athcr  ts  greater  thcn% 

19  ^nbuo\b3Ihauctolbvoubcfo2c 
it  tome  to  paOc,  that  Vbhen  it  ts  tome  to 
ipafT^vcmtghtbclceue. 

3°  |?eereaftcr3J  Mil  not  talftc much 
cwtbpou:  Cbz  the  wince  of  this  ibozlb 
commcth,anbhath  uothinginmc. 

31  25ut  that  the  lbozlb  mav  hnolb 
,  that  3  loucthc  father :  anb  as  the  fa 
Itbcrgaucmc  rommaubcmctit,  cuenfo 
3  boe:3infc,lctbsgoc  hence. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  TheConfolation  .indmutuall  louebetwecne 
Chrifland  his  members,  vnder  the  parable  of 
thevine.  18  A  comfort  in  the  hatred  and 
perfecution  of  the  world.  16  The  office  of 
theholyGhofl,andofthe  Apofllcs 

Wr:" 


*  3m  the  true  bine ,  anb  mv 
father  is  pbufbaubman. 


z  *£ucry  branch  mtm 
that  bcarcth  not  fruit,  hce 
taacth  albav  :  anb  cuerv 
bjanth  that  bcarcth  frutt,hc  purgetlj  it, 
thatitmavb2ingfoo2tl)mo2e  fruit, 

3  *  iHoib  vc  are  tlcanc  th2otigh  the 
\b02b  Vbhicl)  3  haue  fpoken  bnto  vou. 
4.  3lbtbe mine, anb  inyou:2&thc 
b?anch  cannot  bcarc  fnutof  itfclfe,  cr 
ccpt  it  abibc  in  the  btue :  no  11102c  can  ve , 
crtcptycabibc  m  111c. 

5  3  am  the  bine ,  yc  arc  the  blan- 
ches :  l>c  that  abibeth  in  me ,  anb  3!  in 
hun,thcfamcb2ingcthfo2thmuchfrutt: 
fo2||ibithoutiiicvccanbociiothmg. 

6  3lfamanabibenDttnntc,hctscafl 
fo2th  asab2anch,anbisvbithcrcb,  anb 
men  gather  them  ,  anb  call  them  into 
the fircanb they arc burncb. 

7  •jfvcabibcttime,aiiDmvlb02bs 
abtbcmyou.ycfhallafltcibhatvclbill, 
anb  it  flj  all  be  bone  bnto  you. 

!L  S    ticre 


fohn  r ! 


\iOrfcutrrJ 


Ofinutuallloue. 


S.Iohn.  ThcComforter. 


'  Chap. 13. 

;4.1.thd". 
4.9.  i.iohn 
J.<I. 


•M3r.18.19 


Chap.  13. 
i^.mac.10. 


||0Vx.-»/,. 


s  Ijtxan  is mp f  attjcr glo?tftci>,tl)at 

pcbcatcmuch  fruit,  fo  (hall  pc  bee  nip 
Difciplcs. 

9  as  the  father  hath  loueb  me,  fo 
haue  31  louebpou :  continue  pe  in  mp 
loue. 

io3IfpcRccpcmpContmanbcmcnts, 

pc  fl)aiabibcmmpiouc,eucnas3J  Dane 
Kept  nip  f  arrets  Commanocments, 
anb  abibemhis  loue. 

11  Xhcfcthingshauc3JfpoRenbnto 
von,  that  nip  top  might  tcmainc  ut  pou, 
anb  that  pout  top  might  be  full. 

u  *  %\y&  is  nip  Conunaunbement, 
that  pc  lone  one another,  as  3  haue  lo- 
uebpou. 

13  Greater  loue  hath  no  man  then 
this,  that  a  man  lap  boVbneljis  lifefoj 
Ijisftienbs. 

14  jacarcmpfricnbs.tfpcboWhat* 
focuct  3  commanb  pou. 

15  ijcnccfonljU  taiipounotfcruants, 
fo?  the  fcruant  &not»cth  not  What  bis 
lo?b  botb,but  3  haue  tailcb  pou  frienbs: 
foz  all  things  that  3!  bane  bc^-bof  mp 
father ,  3  bauc  mabc  tmoucn  bnto 
pou. 

i6  Pc  haue  not  chofen  mc,but  3!  bauc 
chofcnpou,anb  *  owemebpomtbatpou 
fljouibgoe  anD  bnng  fcoitlj  ftmt,  anb 
that  pout  fcuitc  ftjoulb  tetnamc :  that 
WbatfoeuctpefljaiiafRcoftbciFarbct 
minp  /I5ame,  he  mapginc  itpou. 

17  ithefethingsSconunaunbpou, 
tljat  pc  loue  one  anothct. 

18  3Jf  the  Wojlb  hate  pou,  pec  imotb 
that  it  hatcb  mc  befoje  it  hatcb  pou. 

19  3if  vc  Wctc  of  the  wojlb,  the  Wozib 
wouio  loue  bis  oWnc:  25ut  becaufcpcc 
arc  not  of  the  Wozlb.but  3  haue  tljofcn 
yououtoftbeWojlbjbctfozctbcWoMb 
hatcthvou. 

2o*3&cuicmbcttbeWowtbat3Jfatb 
bnto  pou ,  Xhc  fcruant  is  not  gtcatct 
then  the  ?Lojb:  if  thep  haucpctfccutcb 

mc,  thep  Will  alfo  pcrfccutc  pou:  if  tbcp 
haue  Kept  mp  Taping,  thep  Will  Uccpc 
pours  alfo. 

ii  But  all thcfething5 null  thepboe 
buto  pou  foj  nip  panics  faUc,  becaufc 
thep  ImoUi  not  himthatfent  inc. 

ix  3Jf  31habnot  come,  ant  fpoucn 
bnto  tbcm,tbcpbaonotbaofinnc:  but 
uoU)  thep  haue  no  ciohc  fo:  their  finnc. 

11  foe  thathatcthmc,hatcthmp#fc 
tbcraifo. 

14-  3!f  3  hab  not  bone  among  the"  the 
Wo:liswhichnonc  other  man  bib,  thep 
Dab  not  ijab  funic:  but  now  haue  thep 


both  feene,? hatcb  both  me  %  mp  father. 

1$   28Ut  this  commethtopafle,  tl)at  tf)C 

ttwb  might  be  fulrtllcbtbat  iswnttcn 
in  their  lam/  £bep  hatcb  mc  Without 
a  taufe. 

i6  *  25ut  When  the  Comforter  is 
comcWbom  31  Wilfcnb  bnto  pou  from 
the  father,  euen  the  S>ptttt  of  tructh, 
lbhich  pzoceebeth  fromtbc  father,  hce 
fbailtelhfieofme. 

17  ^nb  pe  alfo  (hall  bear c  Witncflc, 
becaufc  pc  bane  bene  With  mc  from  the 
beginning. 

CHAP.  XVI. 

1  ChriftcomfortethhisDifciples  againft  tribula- 
tion by  thepromifeoi  the  holy  Ghoft,  and 
bylibRefurrcc"tionand  Afcenfion:  rj  Aflu- 
reth  their  prayers  made  in  his  Name  to  be  ac- 
ceptable to  his  Father.  33  Peace  in  Chriit,and 
in  the  world  affliction. 

*££***£&  mk  things  bauc  3jfp0; 
fas  Ren  bnto  pou ,  that  pec 
SSI  fljoulb  not  be  offenbeb. 
sK  x  3Lbcp  fbail  put  pou 
^<§  out  of  the  £>pnagogucs: 
pca,t!je  time  tommeth,  that  mhofoenet 
luiicth  pou,  Will  thmftc  thathecbocth 
<50bfccnite. 

j  anb  thefc  things  null  thep  boc  bm 
topou,  beeaure  thep  haue  not  RnoWcn 
the  father,  noj  me. 

4  25ut thefc things Ijauc3ftolbpou, 
thattbhenthe  tunc  (bail  come,  pc  map 
temembet  tbat3J  tolb  pou  of  tbcm.anb 
thefc  things  3  faib  not  bnto  pou  at  the 
beginning,  becaufc  3  mas  With  pou. 

5  zfiut  now  3  go  e  mp  ibap  to  him 
that  fent  nice,  anb  none  of  pou  af&ctb 
mc.iemfhet  gocftthou; 

6  25ut  becaufc  31  haue  fatbc  thefe 
thmgsbnto  pou,  fojo  w  hath  nllcb  pout 
heart. 

7  fJcucrfbclclTc ,  3  tell  pou  the 
1  tructh ,it  is  erpcbicnt  fo?  pou  that  3  got 
awap:fo2if3gocnotawap,thc€om 
fojtcr  Will  not  come  bnto  pou :  but  if  3 
bcpatt,3J  will  fenb  him  bnto  pou. 

3  anowhcnhciseomc,hcwtll!|rc' 
pjotictf)cWo2lbof  finnc,  anb  of  rtghtc; 
oufueflc ,  anb  of  lubgcmcnt. 

9  £)f  finnc,  becaufc  tljep  bclccuc  not 
onmc. 

io  Of ttghtcoufiicffc,  bccaufe3Igoe 
to  mp  jrather.anb  pc  fee  mc  no  moje. 

n  £)f  lubgcmcnt,  becaufc  the  pjintc 
oftbiswozibisiubgcb. 

m  3  haue  pet  manp  things  to  fapbm 
to  pou,  but  pc  cannot  beat c  them  now : 
ij  J?oW- 


"Pfl: 


J19 


'Chap.  14 
"5-lukcj4 


OrcciiHmc. 


/\ske,a 


db 


iaue. 


ci 


1a 


p.xvij, 


PeacemChnft. 


•Mn.7.7. 


II  Or  ,p*r.i. 
bUs. 

\\Orjiirtt- 
Ua. 


13  $oibbctt ,  Kbften  ftec  tfte  fpirtt  of 
ttuctft  is  eomcftc  Vbtl  giubc  you  into  all 
tcuctft:^  l)c  Cftaliuot  fpcaucofljim- 
felfe :  buttbnatfocuct  ftc  fljail  ftearc, 
tftatfftali  ftc  fpcafec,  anb  fte  ibillfftcib 
youtftingstocomc. 

14  i)c  Cftaii  glonfic  me ,  fo?  Defljall 
rccciuc  of  mine,  anbfftailfftexbitbnto 
you, 

15  3«l  tftings tftattfteifatfterftafft, 
at  c  mine :  tft  er cfo?e  faib  3  tftat  ftc  (ball 
ta&cofminc,anbfl)aifftcibitbntoyou. 

16  autleibfttlc,anbye(ftailnotfec 
me :  anb  againc  aliticVbftilc ,  ?yc  fl)ail 
fee  me :  betanfe  3  goe  to  tfte  5f  atftcr.- 

17  mftcn  fatbe  fomc  of  ftis  bifeiplcs 
among  tftcmfclues,  naftat  istftis  tftat 
Dc  fattft  bnto  bs ,  51  litlc  ibftiie ,  anb  ye 
{ftainotfecme:anbagainc,autlcibftiic, 
anb  ye  fi)all  fee  me :  anb,  betanfe  3  go  c 
totftciFatftct* 

13  Xftcyfaibtftctcfojc,  aaijattstliis 
tftat  fte  faitft ,  a  litle  ibftiie  ;ibc  cannot 
tell  ibftat  ftc  faitft. 

19  jl3ott>3!cfuslmcib  tftat  tftcytticrc 
befirousto  af  ttcftim ,  $  faib  bnto  tftem, 
E>oc  ye  enquire  among  your  felucfi  of 
tftat  3  raibc,  a  litle  lbftile ,  anb  ye  fftall 
not  fee  nice :  anb  againc ■,  a  little  ibftiie 
anbycfliailfccmcf 

zo  Pertly ,  bcrily  3  fay  bnto  you, 
tftatycfftallibccpeanMamcnt,  buttl)c 
ib02lb  (ftall  r  cioycc :  anb  ye  fftall  be  fo;* 
roibfull ,  but  your  fojrolbfftallbctur; 
neb  into  toy. 

xi  a  lboman ,  tblicn  (ftc  i£  in  tea- 
uailc,ftatftfo2rotb,bccaufcftccftourets 
tome:but  affooncasfftcisbcliucrcb  of 
tftccftilb,  (fte  remembjetft  no  nwctftc 
anguifl),fo2ioytt)atamautsbomeinto 
tftcib02lb. 

11  ^nb  ye  nolb  fftcrefiwe  ftauc  foj* 
rotb :  but  3  ttiill  fee  you  agatne ,  anb 
your  fteart  fftall  reioyce,  anb  your  ioy 
no  man  tanctft  from  you. 

13  3(nb  in  tftat  bay  yc  fftall  aflic  me 
nothing:  Eerily,  benly  31  fay  bnto 
you,ii9ftatfocucrycefl)auai&etftejFa' 
tftcc  in  my  jBamcftc  lbill  gtuc  it  you. 

14  fcttftcrto  ftauc  ye  afttcb  notfting 
in  my  jBame :  afncanb  ye  (ball  rccciuc, 
tftat  your  ioy  may  be  full. 

15  XDefctDingsbauc^fpoRcnbn. 
to  you  tn||p20uerbs :  tfte  tune  tommetft 
ibftcn  3  {ftallnomo2cfpcaucbntoyon 
in  ||  p2oncrbes  ,  but  3  (ftallfftcib  you 
plainly  of  tfte  if  atftcr. 

16  at  tftat  bay  ye  (ball  af  rc  in  my 
/panic :  anb  3  fay  not  bnto  y  on  tljat  31 


ttnll  p?ay  tfte  if  atnee  fo?  you : 

17  foi  tfte  if atftcr  ftimfelfc  louctft 
you, bccanfcyc ftaue  loucb me  anb  ftaue 
bcleeucb  tftat  31  tame  out  from  C5ob. 

18  3  tame  foojtft  from tftcifatfter, 
anb  am  come  into  tfte  ibojib :  againe,3l 
leauc  tfte  ttwlb,  anb  goe  to  the  if  atftcr. 

29  ^isbifriplcs  faib  bnto  ftim,  ?Loe, 
notb  fpeattcft  tftou  platnly.anb  fpcafcett 
uo!;p;oucrbc. 

jo  /Roib  arc  ibe  fure  tftat  tftou 
mtoibcft al  tftmgs,  anb  neebeft  not  tftat 
any  man  (ft  oulb  afftc  tftee :  23y  tftis  Ibe 
bclccuc  tftat  tftou  earned  foo.2tft  from 
©ob. 

31  3Wus  anfmereb  tftem ,  2>oeycc 
noibbelceue? 

31  *  23cholb ,  toe  ftoure  commctft, 
ycaisnoibcome,tftatye(ftaiibcu-attC' 
rcb,euerymanto  ftis||orbne,  anbfftail 
leauc  me  aione:anb  yet  31  am  not  alone, 
becaufe  tfte  ifatftcc  isttntft  >ne. 

33  Xftcfe  tilings  SJftaucfpoltenbn! 
to  you,  tftat  in  me  ye  nugftt  ftauc  peace, 
mtftcuwlb  ye  fftail  ftauc  tribulation : 
butbeofgoobtftcare,  3  ftauc  ouer^ 
comctftclb02lb. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

1  Chnft  praycth  to  his  Father  to  glorifie  hin, 
6  To  preferue  his  Apoftles  n  In  vnitis, 
17  Andtrueth,  20  To  glorifie  them ,  and 
al!  other  beleeuers  with  him  in  heauen. 

l^cfc  tbojbs  fpafte  3Jefus, 
anb  lift  bp  ftis  eyes  to  ftca^ 
ucn,anbfatb,  i'atftcr,  tfte 
ftoure  is  come,  glonfic  tfty 
5>onne,  tftat  tfty  5>onne 


ICrpjrl- 


«Mat.:6. 


\\Or,bu 

ott  nc  home. 


» 


alfomaygio2ifietftce. 

1  *  as  tftou  ftaft  giuen  ftim  polbcr '  -M«.a8. 
oucr  all  flefft ,  tftat  ftcfboulbgiucetcrj  l8- 
nail  ufeto  as  many  as  tftou  ftaft  gtucn 
ftim. 

3  anbtftisislifc  ctcrnail,  tftattl)cy 
nugftt  Unolb  tftcc  tfte  onely  truc(E>ob, 
anb  3icfus  Cftjift  ibftom  tftou  ftaft 
fent. 

4  3  ftauc  gl02ifieb  tftee  on  the 
cartft:^  ftauc  fintfftcb  tfte  ibojUelbfttcft 
tftougaucftmctoboc. 

5  anb  noVb!©5fatftcr,glo2rfie  tftou 
me,lbitfttftincolbnefclfc,ibit!)tftcglo- 
ry  lbftttft  3  ftab  tbttft  tftcc  before  tfte 
ibo2lou»as. 

6  3  ftauc  manifeftcb  tfty  i^amc  bn^ 
to  tfte  men  ibhtcft  tftou  gaucft  me  out  of 
tfte  lbojlb :  tfttnetftcyincrc^anb  tftou 
gaucft  tftem  me  i  anb  tftey  ftaue  liept 
tftyibojb. 

1L  1  7  -0o\X) 


Chnftprayeth  S.Iohn.  forhisdifciples. 


•CI.; 

17. 


'P[i!.ios> 


\\Or  Truth 


7  #oib  thep  hauefenottwnthatall 

things  Vbijatrocucr  thou  haft  gtuen  mr, 
are  of  thee. 

3  5Fo  1 3  hauc  giucn  bnto  them  the 
nwos  ibhich  thou  gaucft  me ,  anb  thep 
hauercccuiebthcm,*anbhauelinoiben 
furelp  that  3  tame  outftom  thee,  ano 
the?  hauc  bcleeucb  that  thou  bibft 
fenb  me. 

9  3  pjap  fo?  them ,  3  PW  not  fo? 
tlje  tbojlb :  but  foj  them  IDljiclj  thou 
haft  gtucn  mcfiw  the?  ace  thine. 

10  3hio  all  mine  arc  thine,  anb  thine 
arc  mine :  anb  3  am  glojifieb  in  them. 

1 1  anb  nolb  3  am  no  mo?c  in  the 
U)o;lb,  but  theft  arc  m  the  ibortb,anb  3 
cometo  thec  fcolp  jfathcrttccp  though 
thutcoibne/Eiame,  thoft  ibhomthou 
haft  giucn  mcc,  that  the?  map  bee  one, 
asVbcarc. 

11  nahile  3  ibas  ibith  them  in  the 
tbortb ,  3  bept  them  m  thp  /2amc: 
thoft  that  thou  gaucft  me/J  hanc  fecpt, 
anb  none  of  thcui  15  loft,  but  the  fonnc 
of  pcrbitiou-.  'that  the  &>tnpture  might 
beftilfiUcb. 

13  3lnb  noib  conic  3  to  thec,  anb 
theft  thmge  3)  fpcaHemthcii)o:ib,that 
they  might  hauc  mp  lop  fulfillcb  m 
thcmfclues. 

14  3  hauc  gutcn  them  thp  ibozb, 
ano  tlje  ibojlb  hath  hatcb  them  becaufc 
thep  arc  not  of  the  itwlb,  eticn  as  3 
amnotofthclboiib. 

15  3  WV  not  that  thou  fhottlbcfi 
ta&e  them  out  of  the  ibortb  ,  but  that 
thou  fhoulbcft  Hecpc  them  from  the 
null. 

16  £hep  arc  not  of  the  iboHb,  cucn 
as  "Jam  not  of  the  ibojlb. 

17  S>anctiftc  them  thjough  thp 
trueth :  thvluojb  is  tructh- 

is  3ts  thou  haft  fent  mcc  into  the 
ttwio  :  cueu  fo  hauc  3  aifo  fent  them 
into  the  lboilb. 

19  ^nbfonhcitfaHes33fanrttfiemp 
ftifc,  that  thep  alto  might  be  !l  ranctificb 
through  the  tmcth. 

20  ^either  map  3  foj  thefc  alone; 
but  fo;  them  alfo  ibhtch  fhail bclceue on 
mcthiough  their  ibozb: 

ii  Xhat  thep  all  map  be  onc,ae  thou 
$  athcr  art  m  nice,  anb_hn  thee,  that 
thcpaifo  map  bee  one  m  bs:  that  the 
ibo2ib map  bclceue  that  thou  haft  Cent 
mee. 

22  3lub  the  gtozp  ibhtch  thou  gaucft ! 
methane  giucn  them :  that  thep  tnapl 
be  one,  cucn  as  ibe  arc  one: 


25  3  «n  them,  anb  thou  in  mcc,  that 
thep  map  bee  mabc  perfect  mone,  anb 
that  the  ibojlb  map  unoib  that  thou 
haft  fent  me ,  anb  haft  loucb  them,  as 
thou  haft  loutb  me. 

z+  •$ athcr ,  3  ibill  that  thep  aifo 
ibhomthouhaftgiiienme,  be  ibith  me 
ibhcre  3Jam,  that  thep  map  beholb  mp 
gloiplbhich  thou  haft  guicn  nice :  foj 
thou  loucbft  mcc  before  the  founbation 
of  the  Iboilb. 

25  £>  righteous  if  ather ,  the  ibojib 
hath  not  buoiben  thee ,  but  3  hauc 
Imotbcn  thee ,  anb  theft  hauc  buoibcn 
that  thou  haft  fent  inc. 

26  anb'Jhauebcclarcb  bnto  them 
thp  0m\t,  anb  ibill  Declare  it :  that  the 
lone  ibhercibith  thou  haft  loucb  mcc, 
map  be  m  thcm,anb  3  m  them, 

CHAP.    XVIIJ. 

1  ludis  betrayeih  Iefus.6  The  Officers  fall  to 
the  ground.  io  Peter  (mitedr  ofi  Malchus 
care,  n  lefus  is  taken,  and  led  vnio  Annas 
and  Caiaphas.  i^  Peters  denial).  19  lefus 
examined  beloreCaiaphas.  z8  His  arraign- 
ment before  Pilate.  36  His  Kingdome.  40 
The  lewes  aske  Bir.ibbas  to  be  let  loi-fe. 

tycn  3lcfus  hab  fpofecu 
theft  ttwbcs,  *  hce  ibent 
foozth  ibith  his  bifctples  o; 
ucr  the  25:oobc  Ccbjon, 
ibhc  re  ibas  a  garben,  into 
the  ibhtch  hcccntrcb  anb  hts  bifciples. 
2  anb  3  ubas  alfo  lbhich  betrapeb 
him ,  imeib  the  place :  fo?  3Jefus  oft 
times  rcfouco  thtthcrlbith  his  btftiplcs 
j  *  3nbas  thcu  hautng  reccmeb  a 
banb  of  men ,  anb  officers  from  the 
chicfc  ^2(efts;ano  phartfecs ,  commeth 
tlnther  ibith  lautcrurs  anb  toshes, 
anbibcapons. 

+  Ifefus  therefore  Uttoibing  all 
things  that  fboulb  come  bpon  hun, 
Ibent  foo2th ,  anb  fapbc  bnto  them, 
nahomftckepe; 

5  Xhcp  anflbcrcb  htm,  Jlcftis  of 
iftasarcth.  gicfus  faith  bnto  tljem,  3 
am  hec.  3nb3lubasairoibhichbctrap 
cb  htm,  ftooDibith  them. 

6  affboncthcnashchabfaibbnto 
them,  31  am  hcthcpibcutbacUeibarb, 
anbfclltothcgrouub. 

7  Xhcn  aflicb  hec  them  agame, 
EJihomftcUcpcr  3lub  thep faib/Jlcfus 
of  /3a^arcrl). 

8  Jcfus  anflbcrcb ,  3  hauc  tolbc 
pou  that  3  am  he :  Jf  therefore pc  fecac 
mc,  let  theft  gocthctrlbap: 
9  Xljat 


•Clu 


;6. 


'Mitth.i6. 
•f7- 


Pecers  denial!.         Chap.xvii).     Chnilskin^dome, 


'Clu 


!|  And  An- 

nafenc 

Clmfl 

bottnivntQ 

Catapbj4 

the  hi^h 

Frufificr. 

M- 

'Chap,  i  i 
<o. 

"MlLlS 

j8 


||  Or.  *:ih 
Ami 


'Mit.id. 

57- 


9  Xbat  tDc  (aping  uugbt  be  fulfil 
lebiblwb  fjefpaae,  *<©ftljcm  lbljtclj 
t Ijou  gauctt  mc,  baue  31  loll  none. 

io  Xbcu  Pinion  peter  Ijauing  a 
fiuozb,  bzcibc  it,  anb  fmote  tl)e  Ijtgl) 
l&iclrs  fcrnant ,  %  cut  off  |)i5  rigljt  care : 
Xljc  feruants  name  was  ipalcljus. 

n  Xbctifatbjcfusbntopcter.put 
Up  tby  fiuo2D  into  tlic  fljcatlj :  tlje  cup 
lbljicbmpfatfjcrljatrj  giucn  mc,  ujall 
3fnotD2inUciti 

u  Xljcn  tlje  bano  anb  tlje  captainc, 
anb  officers  of  tlje  3feibcs,  tootle- 
fu0,anbbounbl)im, 

i j  3nblcbbimalbapio3iunasritu\ 
(foz  bdbasfatljer  in  laib  to  Caiapbas) 
ibfjicl)  lbas  tlje  btgl)  pztcft  tbat  fame 
pccrcll 

i+  *ji2oib  Caiapbas  lbas  be  lbljiclji 
gauccounleiltotlJcjEtt'CS.tljatitibas 
erpcbicnt  tljat  one  man  (VjoulD  Die  foz 
t^e  people. 

H  C*3nb  ^ttnon  peter  folloibco 
5  cfus,  ano  fo  bib  anotljcr  biftiplc :  that 
bifnplc  lbas  Rtioibcn  bnto  tljc  Ijiglj 
pncU.ano  ibent  m  lbitb  "3Jcfus into  tlje 
paiaeeoftljcl)ig!)tfmc(r. 

16  23nt  peter  ftoob  at  tDc  booze 
tbttl)out.  Xbcn  Vbcnt  out  tljat  ottjer 
bifciplc,  Vbljicl)  VDas  fcnoibcn  bntotlje 
tjigl)  pnclt,  anbfpabc  bnto  t)cc  tfjat 
sept  the  booze,  anb  bzougbt  in  peter. 

17  Xtjen  faitl)  tljcbamofclltbat  Kept 
tbeboo2cbntopetcr,3trtnottboualfo 
one  of  tljis  mans  biftiplcs  <^t  faptlj  ,3J 
am  not. 

is  3nb  ttjc  feruants  anb  officers 
Ooob  tljerc,  ibbo  !)ab  mabe  a  arc  of 
coaies,  (foz  it  ttias  eolbe)  anb  tljcv  tt»ac; 
meb  tbemfelucs :  anb  peter  ftoob  mitl) 
tljcm,anbibarmeb  himfclfc. 

19  CXljc Dmb  Pnrt  then  af bco 3e 
fos  ofbisbifciplcs,  ano  of  Disboctrmc. 

zo  5efusanfrocrebI)im,3JfpaUco; 
pcnlp  to  tlje  tbozlb,3i  euer  taugbt  in  tbc 
£>pnagoguc,ano  mtbcXcmplc ,  lbln 
tbec  tljcjcibes  aiibapcs  rcfozt,  anb  in 
fecret  baue  3J  f^to  notljing : 

it  nabp  af  heft  tbou  mc ;  2lfBerbcm 
ttnjicb  bcarb  mc,ibbat3J  baue  faib  bnto 
tljcm :  bebolb.tbep  fcnoib  ibbat3J  faib. 

22  3tib  ibbcubccbabtbnsfpottcu, 
oncoftbeoffitersibbicbftoobbp.ftrolic 
3fcfus  II  lbitb  tlje  paimc  of  l)ls  banb, 
fapmg,  3nfiucccft  tbou  tbc  Ijtcpzicftfo;' 

2$  ■Jeftis  atif«3erebljun,3Jf3J  banc 
fpolicn  cutll, brarc UntnctTc  of  tfjc cuill : 
but  ifibclUbnpfmitcft  tbou  mc< 

24  *jftoib  Minnas  Ijabfctuijimbouuo 


unto  Caiapbas  tlje  Ijiglj  pzicft. 

25  3nb  Pinion  peter  ftooo  anb 
lbarmcobmifclfc :  *  Xbcpfaib  tljccc 
fo:c  bnto  ijim ,  3rt  not  tijou  alfo  one  of 
l)is  btfciples ;  l>?cc  bcnicb  it , anb tatb/J 
am  not. 

26  £>nc  of  the  feruants  of  tlje  Ijiglj 
pzicfts  (being  bis  tunfmanibbofe  care 
peter  cutoff)  faitl) ,  2Dib  not  J  fcetljcc 
mtljcgacbcnVbitijIjmK 

27  peter  tbcn&cnicbagalticanbim 
mcbiatlvtbccocttecrcib. 

28  C  "Xljcn  leb  tljep  gicfus  from 
CaiapDas  tmto  lltfjc  Ijau  of  3ubgo 
ment :  ^nb  it  voas  eacely ,  *  anb  tbcp 
rftcmfelucsibcnt  not  into  tlje  3fubgc- 
ment  tjalUeft  tlje?  ujoulb  be  bctiicb:  but 
tfjat  tbev  mtgijt  cat  tfje  {Saffcoucr. 

29  piiatctijcnftjcntoiubtuonjcm, 
anb  faib ,  narjat  accufation  bzmg  pou  a 
gamlttbisman; 

30  Xfjepantoercb,ffaibl)nto|)im, 
3if  he  rbcre  not  a  malefactor toe  lijoulb 
not  Ijauc  bcliucrcb  fjim  bp  bnto  tljcc. 

}i  Xfjcu  faibc  dilate  bnto  rrjcm, 
XaHcpebim ,  anbiubgcljimaccozbing 
to  vour  larb.  Xfjc  Jellies  tljcrcfozc  faib 
bnto  ljun ,  3Jt  is  not  laibfull  fo:  bs  to 
put  any  man  to  bcatf) : 

32  *Zljattbcraymgof3Jcfusmig[jt 
bcfnlfillcb,  ibrjitbrjccfpaBc,  fignifymg 
ibljatbeatrjbeflioulbbte. 

33  *  Xljen  {Dilate  cntreb  into  tDc 
^uogcincntfjallagaiiicanbcalleb'^ 
fus,  anb  faibe  bnto  !jlm ,  3lrt  tljou  tl)e 
1e»ngoftl)e3eibcs< 

34-  IJcfus  anrracrcb  Ijim  ,  feaycO 
tbou  tfjlS  tijing  of  ti)p  fclfc;  0;  bib  o^ 
tljecstcUrttfjccofmc^ 

35  piiatcanfrocreD^ti^aliettK 
Xlimc  olbnc  nation ,  ano  tnc  cljicfe 
pzicflstjaucbclincrcb  tljcc  bnto  nice : 
oaliathatt  tbou  bone  < 

16  IFcfusanfracrcn,  s^pBingbomc 
is  not  of  tbts  lbozlb  :  if  my  tungbomc 
ibcreoftbisibozlb.tbmiboulbmvfcr' 
nauts  figlit,  tiiat  3J  Qjonlb  not  bcbclr 
ucrcb  to  tbc  Jcibcs :  but  noib  is  mp 
Inngbomc  not  from  bcucc. 

37  tfilatc  tberefoze  faibc  bnto  him, 
3rt  tbou  a  laingtlicn  t  3Jcfus  anfmes 
rcD.XIjou  faicfi  rtjat  3J  am  a  Bmg.Xo 
tbis  cm  ibas  3  borne ,  ano  fo;  tbis 
caufc  came  31  into  tbe  ibozio  ,  tljat  31 
fljotilb  bcarctbttnclTcbnto  tbc  tructb : 
cucrpouetljat  is  of  tljctructlj  rjMrctlj 
mpboicc. 

3s  piiate  faitl)  bnto  bun  ,  nobat  is 
tructl;  i  3lno  lbljcn  Ijcc  Ijao  faib  tljis, 

%  3  be 


*Mi: 
69. 


MIL27.1 

\\Or,Fiht> 

"Aits  io. 

j  8. 


19- 


'Mac.  17. 


XO 


Barabbas  pre 


ferred.      S.Iohn.  Chnftcrucificd. 


Matth.  17 
5- 


Aft.j.M 


•Msnh.17. 
»<S. 


he  incut  out  agauu  bnto  tljc  gicmcs, 
ano  faith  bnto  them,  3  finO  in  him  no 
fault  at  an. 

39  *  25ut  vcc  haut  a  cuftomc  that  3 
fhouio  rclcafc  unto  you  one  at  the 
pafTeoucr :  iDiIl  yc  therefore  that  3  rc= 
learc  bnto  you  tlic  king  of  the  gjemes  i 

40  'Xhcncrteo  they  all  agamc,  fay; 
mg ,  j3ot  this  man,  but  26arabbas. 
53oio  isarabbas  mas  arobbec. 

C  HA  P.    XIX. 

1  Guilt  is  fcourged,  crovvDcd  with  dioines,and 
beaten.  4  Pilate  is  defirous  to  relcafehim.but 
being  ouercome  with  die  outrage  of  the 
lewes,  he  dcliuered  him  to  bee  crucified,  rj 
They  caft  lots  for  his  garments.  z6  He  com- 
mendeth  his  mother  to  Iohn.  iS  Hee  dieth. 
31  His  fide  is  pierced.  3S  He  is  buried  by  Io- 
fephand  Nicodemus. 

*^t^^r  $cn*piiatcthcrrojctoofcc 
%0  M$  3dm,  anoftourgcohun. 
gill  WSk  z  2no  the  fouioters  plat* 
IM\\  fiM. ttQ  a  troibnc  of  thomes, 
k£±^ri&  anoputitonhishcao,ano 
the  v  put  on  tjtm  a  purple  robe, 

3  3nb  fatO,l?ailc  lung  of  the  3cvots: 
ano  they  fmotc  Dim  lluth  their  hanbs. 

4  pilatc  therefore  lbcnt  fiwth  a- 
game, anofatthbnto  them,  25eholD,3J 
bang  him  foouh  to  you, that  pet  map 
tmoro  that  3  fino  no  fault  m  him. 

5  iLhentame 3Jefusfo2tr),ibcarmg 
the  ccolbnc  of  tho2ncs,ano  the  purple 
robe:  ano  Pilate  faith  bnto  them,25choro 
the  man. 

6  sohen  the  thicfe  pnefts  therefore 
ano  officers  fain  him,thev  tneo  out,fay? 
mg,  Calcific  him ,  rructfie  him.  dilate 
faith  bnto  them,  Xatuychtm,  anoint- 
cine  him :  for^J  finO  no  fault  in  him. 

7  Xhcjeiocsanftocrco  him,  i©c 
haue  a  lam,  ano  by  our  lam  he  ought  to 
Die,  bccaufchecinaDchimfclfcthc&on 
ofc&oo. 

s  <[  nahen  pilatc  therrfo2c  hearo 
that  raving,  he  mas  the  11102c  afraio, 

9   3luo  lOcnt  againc  into  the  tuDgc; 
ment  hall ,  i  faith  Onto  3Jcfus ,  nahence 
arttrjoui  isutjcuis  gauchtmnoan  A 
fiucre. 

to  Xhcn  faith  pilatc  bnto  htm,£>pca 
tteftthou  not  bnto  me?  Bnoibcfttbou 
not,  that  3  haue  pomcr  to  cructfic  thec, l 
ano  haue  polbcr  to  rcicafe  thee  * 

ii  ^cfus  anfiurreb,  rhoucouiocft 
haue  no  potOcr  at  all  againftmc ,  erccpt 
it  mc  tc  giucn  tl)cc  froinaboue :  tberfrue 


he  that  oeliucrro  me  bnto  thechath  the 
greater  fmnc. 

iz  Smofrom  thcnccfo2Cpilate  fought 
to  rcleafe  htm:  but  thc^clbestneo  out, 
raying,  g)f  thou  let  this  man  goe,  thou 
1  art  not  Ccfars  frieno :  luhofocuer  ma< 
Ucth  himrclfc  a  King,  fpeahcth  agamfi 
r  Cefac. 

»  C  ©hen  ptiatc  therefore  hearo 
that  faying,  he  bzought  gjefus  foo2th, 
1  ano  fate  DoiOue  in  the  uiogemcnt  fcatc, 
tit  a  place  that  is  caileo  the  pattcment, 
i  but  in  the  $cb?cU) ,  cabbarha. 

14  3nDitlbasthcp2cparat!on  of  the 
pafrcoucr,  anD  about  the  firt  houre : 
ano  he  faith  bnto  thc3JclOcs,  2Scholoe 
your  Bmg. 

1$  25ut  they  crico  out ,  3ibay  rbith 
him,  aioay  mtth  him,  tructfichtm.  pi; 
late  faith  onto  them,  -Shall  3  crunfte 
J  your  Bmg?  £he  chtcfe  pneftsaufroe 
reo.usec  haucno  Umg  but  Cefar. 

16  *Xhcn  oehucreo  hrhimtherfojc 
;  bnto  them  to  be  crunficb:  ano  they  tooli 
3cfns,  ano  leo  him  aioay. 

17  3in0  he  bearing  his  trofTc,  lbcnt 
foozth  into  a  place  calico  the  place  of  a 
fbull,  lbhich  is  calico  m  the  tycbicibc, 
,<3olgotlja: 

1 8  naherc  tlicy  crucifico  htm,  ano  tibo 
other  rotth  htm,  on  cither  fioc  one,  ano 
,3IcfusinthcnuDDefr. 

19  C  51no  ptiatcibiotc  a  ntlc ,  ano 
put  it  on  the  croQc.  3ltio  the  ttmnng 

1MS,IESVS  OF  NAZARETH, THE 
KING  OF  THE  IEV/ES. 

zo  Xhts  title  then  reao  many  of  the 
3Jcmcs:  foz  the  place  inhere  "Jems  mas 
crunficO,  mas  ntgh  to  the  cine ,  ano  it 
masttmttenm  l)cb2cine,  ano  ©recite, 
anoilattne. 

ii  Xhenfaiothc  chtcfe  02icfrs  or  the 
3Iemes  to  pilatc,  n\'ttc  not,  Xhc  lung 
of  the^lcmcs:  but  that  he  rato ,  31am 
Bmgofthcjcines. 

zz  pilatc  anfiucrco ,  ©hat  3  haue 
lbnttcn,'3IhauclU2ittcn. 

i3€*Xhcnthcrouloiers,inheiuhey 
hao  trucifico  3lcrus ,  toohc  his  gar^ 
mcnts,(auDmaoefotireparts,tocticry 
rouioicrapart)anoairohiscoat:^oin 
the  coatc  masmithoitt  frame ,  |]  mottcn 
from  the  top  tho.'oinotit. 

z4llhcyfatothcrcfo2eamougrI)ciu 
fclucs,  Hct  not  bs  rent  it,  but  caft  lots 
fo2  it,  mhorc  it  fhall  bee :  *  that  the 
Scripture  might  bee  fulfillcD ,  ibbith 
raith,  3Chey  partes  my  ratment  among 
them,  ano  fo2  my  bemire  tljey  Dio  caft 

lots. 


'  Matih-»7 


'Maeih  :■; 


Plil.Jl.l8 


Hisdeath,and  Chap.xx.     honourable  buriall 


PQ6-; 


*  Num.9. 

1  j.ciod.  1 ; 

*<■■ 
•pfi.  34.11 

*Zach.i  1. 

10. 


'Mat.  17. 

5  7- 


lots.  £bcfc  things  therefore  the  foul 
bicrsbib. 

2 'J  IE  Jftolb  there  (toot)  bp  t!)c  crofTc 
ofjefus.his  mother,  anb  his  mothers 
niter,  ©acp  che  wife  of  ||  Cicophas ,  anb 
!fi0arp93agbaicne. 

i6  nahen  Jcuts  therefore  faib  bis 
mother,  anD  the  bifciplc  ftanoing  bp, 
lbrjombc  loucD ,  l)c  faith  bntoljis  mo- 
thec,iJ0oman,bcholothpfonnc. 

17  "Chen faith  iK  to  tl)cDtfciplc,25fc 
flolD  thp  mother,  3nb  fcom  that  hourc 
that  bifciplc  toofec  her  bnto  his  oibnc 
home. 

is  4t3fwthis,3Jcws  fenolbtng 
that  all  things  mere  noibaccomplifh 
cb ,  *that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfil- 
leb,fatth,"5thtrlr. 

19  ^oibthcrctbasfetabcffelUfuU 
of  bincger  :  ^nbthep  filleb  afpnngc 
ibithbinegcc ,  anbputit  bpotihpffope, 
anb  put  it  to  hts  mouth. 

30  nohen  gjefus  therefore  hab  rcctf= 
ucb  the  bincger,  he  faib,  litis  fimfbeb, 
anb  he  boVbcb  hts  heab,aub  gauc  bp  the 
ghoft. 

31  1Chc  'Jcibcs  therefore ,  betaufc  tt 
Tbas  the  preparation ,  that  the  bobics 
fboulb  not  remamebpon  the  CrofTc  on 
the  Sabbath  bap  (for  that  Sabbath 
bap  lbas  an  high  bap)  befought  ptiatc 
that  their  legs  might  be  broftcn  ,  anb 
that  tbep  might  be  fatten  aibap. 

31  Xhentamc  the  foulbicrs,  anb 
bra&ctbclcgsof  the  firft,  anb  of  the  0 
thcrAbbichlbascrunficb  lbith  him. 

33  23ut  lbhcn  thep  came  to  ^jefus, : 
anb faio  that  lie  lbas beab  aircabp,thep 
braac  not  his  legs. 

34.  26ut  one  of  the  foulbicrs  lbith  a  i 
fpeace  pierccb  his  fibc ,  anb  forthwith 
tame  there  out  bloob  anb  Tbater. 

3$  3nb  he  that  faib  tt,  bare  rctorb, 
anb  his  rccorb  is  true,  anb  he  ImoUicth 
that  hec  faith  true,  that  ycc  might  bc^ 
lecue. 

36  jf 02  thefc  things  lbcrc  bone ,' that 
the  Scripture  ffjoulb  be  fulftllcb ,  *  31 
bone  of  htm  (ball  not  be  brotten. 

37  *  3inD  agatnc  another  Scripture 
faith .  Eficy  fljail looUc  on himlbhom 
thcvpicrfcD.  ,     I 

3s  C  *  3ub  after  this,  giofcph  of  a  I 
nmathea(bcmgabifnpleoflicfus,but; 
fccrctlp  for  fcarc  of  the  ^jclbcs)  be- 
fought piiatc  that  he  might  taftc  aibap 
the  bobp  of  llcfiis.anb  piiatc  gauc  him ; 
leauc:  he  came  therefore,  anbtooacthc 
bobpofjefus. 


39  3md  there  came  alfo  j^icobcnuis,  1 
ibljichat  the  firft  came  to  "Jcfus  bp! 
mght.anb  brought  a  tnirttirc  of  mprrhe  I 
anb  aloes  .about  an  hunbrcb  pounb! 

weight 

+0  Xhcn  toobc  thep  the  bobp  of  Jc  I 
fus,  tUbounbitmluineutiothes,  lbith 
tliefpiccs ,  astlje  mancrofthc3lcibes 
istoburtc: 

+1  /3oibtn  theplaccibhcrcheibas 
crucificb,  there  tbas  a  garben ,  anb  m 
the  garben  atierb  Sepulchre,  Wherein 
lbas  neucr  man  pet  lapb. 

41  Xhcrc  laib  thep  ^cfus  there 
fwcbccaufcofthcjcibcs  preparation 
bap  ,  for  the  Sepulchre  lbas  nigh  at 
hanb. 

CHAP.   XX. 

1  Marvcommeth  to  the  Sepulchre.  5  So  doe 
Peter  and  Iohn  ignorant  ot  the  Relurreilion. 
11  Iefusappcareth  to  Marv  Magdalene,  19 
And  to  hisDifciples.  14  The  increduli'tie, 
and  conlelsionol  Thomas.  30  TheScripture 
ufufficient  to  falnation 

*§t  firft  bap  of  the  tbecfee, 


.}£)$  commcth  £0arp  t]9agoa 
$m  lene  carelp  lbhcn  it  lbas 
Sv  pctbarUcbntotbeSepul 
1  «*-,^&z%%  chrc ,  anb  fceth  the  Qonc 
tab  en  aibap  from  the  Sepulchre. 

i  Xhcn  fljc  runneth  anb  commcth 
to  Simon  peter,  anb  to  the  *  other  bif 
ciplc  lbhom  Ikfus  loucb ,  anbfairt)  bn 
to  them ,  Xhcp  hauc  tafeen  aibap  the 
ILorb  out  of  the  Sepulchre ,  anb  ibe 
HnoUinotibhcrc  thep  hauc  laib  him. 

3  peter  therefore  lbcnt  forth ,  anb 
that  other  blfciplc,  anb  came  to  the  Se- 
pulchre. 

4  So  thep  rannc  both  together, 
anbthcothcrbtfnplcbib  outrun  peter, 
anb  tame  firft  to  the  Scpulcb it. 

5  ^nbhcftoupmgboibncaubloo- 
liing  in  ,faib  the  Unncn  clothes  lpiug,pct 
lbcnt  he  not  in. 

6  Xhen  commcth  Simon  peter 
folloibutg  him,  anb  lbcnt  into  thcSc 
pulchrcanbfccthtbc  linnai  tlothcslic, 

7  3tib  the  napbmthat  lbas  about 
his  hcab,  not  hung  lbith  the  Unncn  clo- 
thes; ,  but  ibrappeb  together  in  a  place 
bpttfclfc. 

3  Xhcn  lbcnt  in  alfo  that  other  bif 
uplctbhichcamcfirfttothcSepulchJc, 
anb  hcfaib,anb  bclecucb. 

9  if 02  as  pet  thep  uncib  not  the 
Stcipturc  T  that  hec  inuft  rife  agaiuc 
from  the  beab. 

to  then 


•  idjiL   16. 


■Chap.!  ; 
:  X  and  11- 


802 


Chrift  and  Mary.        S.Iohn.     Thomas  beleeueth. 


•Made  I  6 
14. 


"Much.  18. 
18. 


10  Zhciuljc  bifciples  tticntatbap  a; 
gatuc  unto  time  oibuc  home. 

11  C  isut  fc^arv  floou  without  at 
thcfcpulcljjcAbccpmg :  ^as  fliceibept, 
fljcftoiipcbboumc,  anb  loouco  into  tl)c 
Scpnlcljjc, 

1 1  3CtiD  fceth  two  3ngels  in  white, 
fitting,  the  one  at  thcljcab,  anb  the  0; 
thcr  at  ttjc  feetc,  Where  tlje  bobp  of  3 1- 
fushabiapcn: 

ij  Slnbtljcp  fap  bnto  her,  aaoman, 
i\)IJV  Wccpctt  thou  <  5>hcc  faitl)  bnto 
them ,  zoccaufc  tljcp  Ijauc  taken  awap 
mp  Ho2b,anb  J  know  not  Where  tljcp 
Ijauciaictiliiiu. 

14.  anb  When  flic  Dab thus tart) ,  (be 
turocb  hcrfclft  bacUc ,  atfi)  fail)  3Icfus 
franbtng ,  anb  anew  not  tljat  it  was 
Ucfus. 

1$  3Jcftts  faith  bnto  her ,  naotnan, 
WhpWccpcftthou;Whomfcc&cfttl)ou? 
She  fuppoftng  him  to  be  the  garbmec, 
faith  bnto  l)im,  Sir,if  tljou  haue  bojnc 
himlicncc.tcllmewhcrctljouljaftiaicb 
him.anbJWilitaucljimaWap. 

16  JefiiB faitl)  bnto  hcr,iT3arp.  S>Ijc 
turncb  hcrftlfcanb  faitl)  bnto  him, 
&abboni,Which  is  to  fap,  fatter. 

17  IJcfus  faitl)  bnto  her,  Xouthmc 
not:  foz  35  am  not  vet  aftenbeb  to  nip 
5fatl)cr :  but  goc  to  nip  b:ctl):en,anbfap 
bntotljcm,  3Jafccnb  bnto  mpifatljcr,! 
anb  pour  jfatljcr,  anbtompGob,  anb 
pout  ©00. 

18  £0arp  Q3agbaicnc  tame  anb  tolb 
tl)c  bifciples  tljat  ftjee  Ijab  fcene  tl)e 
ILoib ,  anb  tljat  Ijcc  hab  fpoacn  theft 
things  bnto  her. 

19  tt'Xhcnthefamcbap  atencning, 
being  tlje  firftbapof  the  lbccfec,  When 
tl)cooo2esibere  fljut,  Where  the  bifti 
pics  \bcrc  affcmblcb  foz  fearc  of  tlic! 
3ftwcs,  tame  Jcftis,  anb  ftoobm  the1 
nuba,anb  faitl)  bnto  them,  peace  bee 
bnto  pou. 

20  anb  when  Dee  nab  fo  Jaibc,  Dec 
flicwcb  bnto  tlicni  fits  hanbs  anb  his 
fibc.  Zhcn  were  tlic  bifciples  glab, 
When  thepfaw  the  ?Lo2b. 

21  XDcnfatbgjefustotlicniagainc, 
peace  bebnto  pou:  3s  nip  father  Ijatlj 
fent  mcenen  fo  fenb  3*  you. 

21  3tnb  When  Jjc  liab  fa:b  tins,  Dec 
b:catlKD  on  tl)cin,  anb  faitl)  bnto  them, 
llccciuc  pc  tDcDolp  ODoft. 

25  *  nohofc  focucr  funics  pec  remit, 
tlicr  arc  rcnuttcbbnto  tlicm.anb  Whofc 
focucr  fmncs  pec  manic ,  thep  arc  re 
tameb. 


2+  C  23ut  XDomas  one  of  the 
tibcluc,  caiicb  SDibpmus,  Was  not  With 
tljcin  when  3Jcfus  came. 

5  %\)t otDcrbifciplestljerefojefaib 
bnto  hun.nae  haue  fccncthc?Lo2b.2i3tit 
hcfaib  bnto  them,  ercept^  than  feem 
tjishanbs  the  pztnt  of  the  nailcs,  anb 
put  nip  finger  into  the  pjint  of  the 
naiics.anb  thuifi  nip  bant)  into  fjis  tibe, 
3Jlbilinotbclccuc. 

26  C3nb after cigl)tbapes,againc 
his  bifnplcs  lbcrc  ibitljm ,  anb  Xho- 
mas  With  tljcm  :Theneamc3Jefus,  tl)e 
booses  being  fbut ,  anb  ftoob  in  tlje 
mibft  ,anb  faib,pcace  be  bnto  pon. 

27  Zhcn  faith  he  toXhomas  Beach 
hither  thp  finger ,  anb  beholbe  mp 
hanbs,  anb  reach  hither  thp  hanb.ano 
tl)2uftitituomp  fibe,  anb  bee  not  faith} 
lcffe,butbtlcciimg. 

28  3tnb  Xhomas  anftoercb  ,  anb 
faib  bnto  him,  £0p  Ho?b,anb  mp  Gob. 

29  3ftfusfatthbntohim,Xhbmas, 
becaufe  tljou  haft  fecne  nice ,  thou  haft 
bclccucb:  blcfTcb  arc the?  that  haue  not 
fecne,  anb  pet  haue  bclccucb 

jo  CC*^nbmanp other  fignestruc* 
Ip  bib  'Jftfus  m  the  pjefeneeof  hisbifc 
cipics ,  Vbljich  are  not  wntten  in  this 
boo He: 

3 1  2Sut  tljcfc  arc  ttnitten  ,  that  pee 
might  bclccue  that  Refits  is  theChntt 
thcS>onne  of  Gob,  anb  that  bcleeumg 
pc  might  haue  life  though  IjisiBame. 

CHAP.    XXI. 

1  Chrift  appealing  againe  to  his  difciples  was 
knowen  oi  ihem  by  the  threat  draught  ot 
fifties,  it  Hccdineth  with  them:  15  ear- 
neftly  commaudeth  Peter  to  teed  his  Lambes 

.  andfheepe:  18  Foretelleth  him  of  his  death: 
il  Rebuketh  his  curiofitie  touching  tohn. 
1^    Thcconclnfion. 

f£Z$ffl&&t$ttt  theft  things  3Jcfiis 

>j"  ujcibcb  himfclfc  agame  to 

'i^thc  bifciples  at  the  fca  of 


Xibcnas,anbontljisibifc 
&&&&*  fljclbcb  he  himfclfe. 

2  Xhcrc  mere  together  Simon  pc^ 
tcr,anb  Xhomascallcb  Dibpmus,anb 
/^athancclofCana  m  Galilee,  anb  the 
fonncs  of  zcbcbcc,  anb  tlbo  otljcc  of 
his  bifciples. 

3  Simon  peter  faith  bnto  them  ,31 
gocafifljmg.  Xhepfapbnto  him,rocc 
aifo  goc  Until  thec.  Xher  \bc11tf002th 
anbcntrcbuitoafliipimmcbiatUsaitb 
that  night  thep  caught  notliing. 

+  2Sut  lbljcn  tlje  inomuig  ibas 
noib 


•Chip.  J 1 
-5- 


Draught  offifhcs.     Chap.xxj.        Feedmyfheepe 


||  Or,  Sir:. 


nolb  come,  3cfus  ftoob  on  the  thojc: 
but  the  bifciples  Kneibe  notttjat  itVottt 
Jcfus. 

<>  Xhcn  3Jcfus  fcith  bnto  them, 
U  Chtlbjen,hauc  yc  an?  mcat^Xhcy  an* 
uocrcbhim,  j$o. 

6  3inbhe  faiD  bnto  them,  €aft  the 
net  on  the  ngl)t  Got  of  the  Chip ,  anb  pet 
(hailfinbc.  Xhcyraft  therfo;!e,anbnolb 
they  were  not  able  to  bjaib  it ,  fot  the 
mulutubeofftfbcs. 

7  Xhetcfo;te  that  Difciplc  tbhome 
3Jcliisloueb,  faith  bnto  peter,  "Jtis 
ttjc  1Lo?o.  jfrolb  ibhen  Sumon  peter 
hcatbthatitibasthc  ILozb,  he  girt  his 
fifhers  toate  bnto  htm ,  (fo?  hee  ibas 
naKeb)  $  did  tad  htmfclfcmto  thefca. 

8  3lnb  the  other  bifaples  tame  ma 
Utlefhlp  (fo?  rtjcpxbctrc  notfarrc  from 
lanb,  but  as  tt  lbctc  ttbo  hunbjcb  cu* 
bites)  bagging  the  net  tbtth  fifties. 

9  affbouc  then  as  they  lbctc  tome 
toiatib,  they  fatb  afire  of  coalcs  there, 
anbfifb  latD  thereon,  anb  b?eab. 

io  Refits  faith  bnto  them,  2S?mg  of 
ttie  fift,  tbhich  yc  banc  notb  caught. 

1 1  &imon  peter  Went  top ,  9  bjclbc 
the  net  to  lanb  full  of  great  tithes,  an 
huntycb  anbfiftteanb  tt)?ec:  anb  fo?  all 
thcreibctcfomany,yctlbasnotthcnct 
btotten. 

u  3Jcfusfaithbntothcm,€omc,anb 
bine.  3inb  none  of  tlje  bifciples  burft 
afftc  htm,i©ho  art  thoiw  tmolbmg  that 
utbasthe?Lo?o. 

i j  3Jcfus  thencommeth,  anb  taftetb 
bjcab ,  anb  giucth  them ,  anb  fi(h  iittc; 
tbifc. 

i4  Xhis  is  no\bc  the  thtrb  time 
that  3Jcfus  (hrtbcb  himfelfc  to  his  bit 
aples,aftcr  that  h  cc  ibas  rtfen  from  the 
bcab.  _  , 

15  c&otuhcntheyhabbtncb^cfus 
faith  to  Pinion  peter,  £>imon,  fonnc 
of  Uonas,  loitcft  thou  nice  moje  then 
thefc?  ^c  faith  bnto  hun,  Pea,  1Lo2b, 
thou  fenoTbctt  rhat3J  louc  thce.^c  faith 
bnto  him,  ftrt  my  lambes. 

K  Dr  faith  to  him  agame  the  frconb 


tunc,  Sumon  fonne  of  Jionas,  loueQ 
thoume^efaithbtuohim^calLo^o, 
thou  hnolbeQ  that  31  lone  thee,  J?e  faith 
bnto  him,  jf  ecb  my  ftjeepe. 

17  $efaib  bnto  him  the  thirbtime, 
Pinion  fonne  of  Fionas ,  louclt  thou 
mee;  peter  rbas  gncucb ,  beeaufe  hec 
faibc  bnto  him  the  thirb  nmc ,  Jlouett 
thou  me  <  3nb  he  feib  bnto  him,  JLozb, 
thou  bnolbcfl  all  things,  thou  fcnoibett 
that  3  loue  thee.  3)cfus  fayth  bnto 
htm,  jfecb  my  fheepc. 

is  taenia,  bcnly  3  lay  bnto  thee, 
ibhc"  thou  lbaft  yong,  thou  girbebft  thy 
felfc.anb  lbalfccbltibhither  thoulboul- 
beft :  but  ibhen  thou  lhaitbc  olb,  thou 
fbaitftretch  fotfh  thy  hanbs,  anb  ano- 
ther (hall  girb  thee,  anb  cane  thec  Whi- 
ther thou  ttjoulbettnot. 

19  Xhis  fpafcc  hce ,  figmfytng  by 
lblwt  bcath  l)c  fhouib  glojtfic  Gob.^nb 
lbhen  he  hab  fpoben  this,  he  fay th  bnto 
him,ifolloibmc 

20  Xhcnpctcrtnrningabout,fceth 
the  2Difciple*tt)hom  Sfefusloueb,  fol- 
lowing, lb  Inch  airo  icancb  on  his  b2eaft 
atfiippcr ,  anb  faib,Ho?b,ibIjiichishce 
that  betraicth  thee; 

ii  peter  fccinghim,faithto3cfus, 
fLo;!b,anbibhatfl)all  this  man  doe? 

2i  giefus  faith  bnto  hmi,3lf  3  ibill 
that  h  e  tary  till  3  tome,  Ibhat  is  tljat  to 
thecifollovbtlioumc. 

13  iLhcnibcntthisfaymrjabjoaba; 
mong  the  b?eth2cn ,  that  thatDifciplc 
(houlbnot  bie:  yefjcfusfayb  notbn^ 
tohtm,^cfl)ail  notbic:  but.gjfj  lbill 
thathctarytill^comcibhatisrhatto 
thee; 

24  %W  is  the  ©ifcipic  ibhith  tern- 
ficth  of  thefc  things ,  anb  mjotc  thefe 
things,  anb  ibclmoib  that  his  tclhmo> 
ntcistrtic. 

25  *^nb  there  arc  alfo  many  other 
things  lbhich  'Jcfus  bib ,  the  lbhich  if 
thcvlhoulbbcibnttcncucryoncjfup- 
pofc  that  cucn  tl)c  ttio?lb  tt  fclfc  coulb 
not  tontetne  the  booties  that  fljoulb  be 
lbiitten,  amen.  


fTHE 


lohn.  i), 
3  &  JO.  a 


'  CKjp,  io 

1°- 


ofChrifl 


I  Or,  rating 
of  ether 

ruhthem 


'  Luke  14. 
49- 


8«THE  ACTES   OF 


n 


rheApoftles. 


CHAP.    I. 

Chriftpicpaiingliis  Apoflles  to  die  beholding 
of  his  afcenfion,  gatlieretli  diem  togerlier  in- 
to the  mount  Oliuer,  commandcth  them  to 
expert  ia  Hierufalem  the  fending  downeof 
the  holy  Ghoft,  promifeth  after  tewe  dayes 
to  fend  it :  by  vertue  whereof  they  fhoula  be 
wimefles  vnto  him  euen  to  the  vtmofc  parts 
of  the  earth.  9  After  his  afcenfion  they  arc 
warned  by  two  Angels  to  depart,  and  tofet 
their  mindes  vpon  his  fecond  comming. 
ir  They  accordingly  returne,  and  gining 
themfelues  to  prayer,  chufe Matthias  Apo- 
flle  inthe  place  of  Iudas. 

^c  fojnicr  ttcatire 

haue3Jmabc,£> 
£bcophtius,ofal 
that3Jcfus  began 
both  to  doc  anb 
teach, 

a  ^Intilltlieoap 
utibbicbhccibas 
taben  Up,  after 
that  he  through  the  holy  Ghoft  hab  gt 
ucn  tommaunbctncnts  bnto  the  3po; 
fties,tt)hont  he  ban  chofen. 

j  To  ibhomalfo  he  Ihclbcb  bimfclfc 
aluie  after  hispaffiott,  by  many  infant- 
bic  pzoofes,  being  feme  of  them  fourty 
oaves,  anb  fpeaiung  of  the  things  pec* 
tctnmgto  the  lungbonic  of  Gob: 

4  3nb  II  being  affcmblcb  together 
ttnth  them ,  tonnnanb  to  them  that  they 
fyoulb  not  bepatt  from  l)icrufaicm, 
but  lbait  fo;  the  pjonufc  of  the  father, 
nbhicb/-uthhe,yehauchearbofme. 

5  *  f oj  3iohn  trucly  baptt?co  ib(rti 
lbatcr ,  but  y  c  (ball  be  bapti;cb  lbttb  the 
ljoiv>  Gbolt,  not  man?  oaves  hence. 

6  lohcn  they  therefor  lbcrc  conic 
together ,  they  afUcb  of  hint,  faying, 
IL020,  tbilt  thoit  at  this  time  vcOojsc  a* 
game  the  Umnoonic  to  3Jftacl  • 

7  31nb  lie  tttb  bnto  them,  git  is  not 
foz  yon  to  uuoibc  tlje  times  oi  the  fca 


fons,  ibhichthc  father  batbputinbts 
oibnepoiber. 

3  *  25ut  yc  fhall  rccciue  Hpolbcraf; 
tcr  that  the  holy  Ghoft  is  come  bpon 
you,anbycfl)alibc  lbitncffcs  bntomc, 
bothtn^tetufalcm,  anb  in  all  3mbca, 
attbin  Samaria,  anb  bnto  the  totter- 
moftpart  of  the  earth. 

9  *3utb  ibben  bee hab  fpoben  thefc 
things,  ibbile  they  behclb,  hec  ibasta* 
ben  bp,  anb  a  cloub  r  emu  cb  him  out  of 
their  fight. 

10  3tnb  lbhilc  they  loobeb  Ocbfaffly 
toibatbbeaucn,asbcibcntbp,bebQlb, 
tvbo  men  ftoob  by  them  in  vbhitc  ap< 
parcll, 

1 1  nahieh  alfo  faib,  Pet  men  of  Gate 
Itlcc,  ibhy  ftanbyec  gajtngbp  intobca* 
ucn  i  Xhts  fame  3Jcfus,ibhich  is  taben 
bp  from  you  into  hcauen,  fljall  fo  come, 
inbbemaner  asyechauc  fecne  bungoc 
into  hcauen. 

ir  Xbcnrcturncb  they  bnto  Jjicru^ 
falcm,  from  the  mount  cailcb  £>liuct, 
vbhich  is  from  l)fcrufalcm  a  Sabbath 
bayes  iourncy. 

13  3lnb  ibbcntbcytbcre  comcin.tbey 
\beiit  bp  into  an bppcr  roomc,  lbherc  fr 
boDc  both  peter  panics,  ?  3iohn,anb 
atrtucib ,  Philip ,  anb  Xhomas,  zsar* 
tbolomerb,  anb  spattbcito ,  Raines  che 
fonncof3liphctts,attb5>tmonz:clotts, 
atio^lubas  the  brother  of  3lames. 

14  Xhefcailcontiuttcb  ibitboneac 
cojb  in  pjaycr  anb  fupplication ,  ibith 
the  lbomctt,  anb  £0ary  the  mother  of 
3Jefus,  anb  lbifh  his  tyctben. 

15  C  Snbitt  thofc  bayes  peter  ftoob 
bp  tn  the  nubs  of  the  bifctplcs,  anb  faib, 
(Xhcttumber  of  names  together  ibcrc 
about  an  bunbtcb  anb  tlbctttic) 

is  £0tn  anb  tyetbjcn ,  %\)is£>mp 
tttrc  mult  neebs  hatte  bectte  fulftllcb, 
'ibbicbthcboly  Ghoft  by  the  mouth  of 
Datub  fpabc  bcfo;c  concerning  3Iubas, 

U)bichibasguibctothcm£toob3Jtf«5 
17  fw 


*Ch3p.2.I. 

\\Or,rhe 
pawer  of  the 
hot]  glnjl 
eommmv 

vponych. 


'  Lute  24. 
5'- 


•Plal.41.s1. 


Matthias  chofen.         Chap.ij 


M1M77. 


•PfJ.(S>. 
6. 


"P&I.IOJ. 

7- 

j  Or, office : 

orfbargt. 


17  5F02  hce  ruas  nunuweb  tttitfi  bs, 
anb  Dad  obiaincb  part  of  tins  mutt 
ftcric. 

\%  *i^3\t>ttjis  manpurehafcbaficlb 
ttnfh  the  rcibarb  of  iniquity , anb  falling 
heat>long,he  burft  afunber  in  the  nubs, 
anb  all  his  botbclsguthcb  out. 

19  anb  ttibas  Bttoibcnbnto all  the 
mbcilers  at  ^ierufalem,  infomuch  as 
that  ftclb  is  calico  in  their  piopcr 
tongue,  accioama,that  is  to  fay,  %\)z 
ficlb  of  Wood. 

20  *$qi  itistiwittcn  in  theboosc  of 
i&faimcs ,  %tt  his  habitation  be  be? 
folate ,  anb  let  no  man  btticll  therein: 
*  anb  his  I!  26tn;op?ttlte  let  another 
tafce. 

21  j©nerefo?c  of  tjbcfc  men  tbhich 
hauc  tompanteb  ttnth  bs  all  tijc  time 
that  tt)c  SL02D  3Jcfus  tbentin  anb  out 
among  bs, 

22  beginning  from  tht  baptdme  of 
3Tohn,  bntothatfamebaythathcibas 
taken  bp  from  bs.mult  one  be  ojbautcb 
tobeaibitneffeXbithbSofhisrefurret; 

tion.  M 

23  anbthcyappotutcbtujoSofeph 
eailcb^Satfabas,  lbho  roas  furnameb 
3Julms,anbs33attrjias. 

14  anb  they  p2aycb,anbfaib,irhou 
fLojb,  lbhtth  Ktioibcfr  tlje  hearts  of  all 
men ,  fbeib  ibhethet  of  thcfctibo  thou 
Ijattrbofen, 

25  Xfjat  hccniay  tanc  part  of  this 
mttitftetteanbapomcmipjromibhich 
JJubas  by  ttanfgrcmon  fell ,  tljat  hce 
migtjt  goe  to  his  oronc  plate. 

16  anb  they  gaucfootfh  their  lots, 
anb  the  lot  fell  bpon  upatthias ,  anb 
tjee  mas  numbjeb  Xbith  tlje  eleuen  a- 
potties. 

CHAP.   II. 

The  Apoftles  filled  wich  the  holy  Ghoft,  and 
fpeaking  diuers  languages ,  are  admired  by 
fbme.and  derided  by  others.  14  Whom  Pe- 
ter diforouing.and  (hewing  that  the  Apoftles 
fpake  t>y  the  power  or  the  holy  Ghoft ,  that 
Iefuswas  rifen  from  the  dead,  afcendedinto 
heauen  ,  had  pow  red  downe  the  fame  holy 
Ghoft,and  was  the  Mefsias,a  man  knowen  to 
them  to  be  approued  ofGod  by  his  miracles, 
wonders,  and  iigncs,  and  not  crucified  with- 
outhis  determinate  counfcll ,  and  foreknow- 
ledge: 37  H'.' baptizeth  a  great  number  that 
were  conucrted.  41  Who  afterwards  dc- 
uoutlv,  and  charitably  conuerfe  together  : 
the  Apoftles  working  many  miracles,  and 
God  daily  increafinghis  Church. 


The  fiery  tongues. 


^rW<^b  iI5D  lDljm  tbcbayofpetP 
l^Mxm  tccottxuas  fully  comc,tbey 
K£ug  iberc  ail  rutth  one  accojo 
^inoneplace. 

2  anb  fubbenly  there 
tame  a  fotmbfrom  hcaucnasofaruOy 
ing  mighty  lbutb ,  anb  it  fiilcb  all  the 
houfe  lbhcrc  they  iberc  ntttng. 

3  anb  there  appcarcb  bnto  them  do- 
tun  tongues,  liBcasoffirc,  anb  it  fate 
bpon  each  of  them. 

4  anb  they  mere  all  fllleb  With  the 
holy  ehoft,  anb  began  torpcaEtcibith 
other  tongues,  as  tljcfptrttgattc  them 
bttcrante. 

5  anb  there  were  bibelltng  at  m- 
rufalcm'5cibcs,bcuoutmctt,  out  ofe 
ucry  uatton  bnber  hcaucn. 

6  il5oru  t  ibhcn  this  wasnotfeb  a* 
bjoab,thcmultituDccametogethcr,auD 
Iberclltonfounbeb ,  becaufc  that  cuery 
man  hcarb  them  fpcaKc  tn  his  oibne 
language. 

7  anb  they  ibere  all  ama5Cb ,  anb 
maructlcb,faymg  one  to  another ,  2Sc- 
holb.arc  notau  thefexbhtch  fpcauc,c5a= 
means ; 

8  anb  Ijolb  hearc  lbc  cuery  man  in 
our  oibne  tongue,  Xbhercm roe  iberc 
bonier 

9  0arthians,anD40ebcs,  anb€la^ 
mites ,  anb  the  blbcllers  in  i^cfopota 
inta,anb  inUubea,  anb  Cappabona,  in 
0ontus,anbafia, 

10  0h;ygta ,  anb  ^ampljyha ,  tn  & 
gypt,anbm  the  parts  of  ftibya,  about 
Cy«!enc,  ?  Grangers  of  Kome,  3teibes 
anb^jofelttcs, 

11  Crctcs  ,anb  arabians ,  lbcboc 
hcare  them  fpeaae  in  our  tongues  the 
Vbonberfull  lbojftcsof  (3ob. 

12  anb  they  tbere  all  amaseb ,  anb 
Vbcrcin  boubt ,  faping  one  to  another, 
©hatmcancthtbis* 

13  ©thcrsmotbingfatb.lEljerc men 
arcfullofncibibine. 

1+  C25nt  ^tter  ftanbing  bp  tbith 
tbecleucn,itftbphisboyte,anbfatbbn'' 
to  ti)tm,Pc  men  of  3Jubca,  ?  all  ye  that 
bibeli  at  D?terufalem ,  be  thts  ituoibcn 
bnto  yott,aub  hear  ben  to  my  lbo?bs : 

15  5^02  thefe  arcnotbzunltcn ,  as  ye 
fnppofcfcctngttisbutthctDtrbljoure 
of  the  bay. 

16  *25ut  tljiSiSthatlbljttljlbttsfpo 
Itcnbythcpiophctjocl, 

17  anb  it  than  tome  to  pafTc  in  the 
laft  bayes  (faith  <2>oD)  3  null  poibjc 
out  of  my  Spirit  bpon  all  fled) :  anb 

your 


his  voice 

yvjj  made* 
\\Or,trou- 

bUiinmmi. 


ToeI.*.i8 


The  day  of  the  Lord.  The  A&s.   Theheartpricked 


Mod  J. 31 


Rom. 10. 
'3- 


•PfaJ.io-.o 


■i.Kii 

10. 


'i;  - 


•rn.li  3  > 
11. 


Tui.  i«. 


your  founts  anb  yonr  saughtcrs  than 
p2ophefic,  ansyouryong  nicnfhallfce 
mfions,  ano  pout  ol&  men  (hall  S2camc 
sjeames: 

18  3tns  on  my  fcruants ,  ans  on  my 
hansmaibcns,  gj  mill  poibjc  out  tn 
thofebaicsofmy  Spirit,  ano  theylhail 
piophefie: 

19  3tuD 3  mil CticYli  \DonUtrsin ijca* 
ueti  aboue,  ano  figncs  in  the  earth  be* 
neatf):  biooo,  auonrc,  anosapour  of 
fmoRC. 

20  *%\)t  <§>iumc  (hall  be  turoco  into 
barfccncflc,  ano  the  £0oone  into  blooo, 
befoje  tliat  greatano  notable  bay  oftlje 
JLojbcome. 

21  *3lnb  it  fhall  tome  topafTcrhat 
lShofocucr  fliau  tail  on  the  0mxt  of 
thcILo2S,fl)albcfaufb. 

2i  pec  men  of  ^fracl,  heart  thefc 
rbo?bfi,3lcfus  ofifta^arcth,  amanap* 
p20uebof©oOamongyou,by  miracles, 
Vbonoets,anb  fignc5,tt)hich  ©ob  bib  by 
Him  in  the  rnibft  of  you ,  as  yce  your 
fclucsalfolmotb: 

2}  $im,bcmgbe1iuctcObj>  thcOcter*! 
mmatc  counfcll  ano  fo2ctmolblcSge  of 
(5ob,  yce  hauc  ta&en,  anb  by  HwttcSj 
hanosJhauc  cmeificb,ano  flame : 

24.  tohom  C5ob  hath  raifeb  top ,  ha*  I 
umg  loofeb  thepamesofocath :  bctaule 
it  tbas  not  pomblc  that  hce  fhouio  be; 
hoioenofit. 

25  ifo:  SDauib  fpcabctl)  concerning  • 
mm,  *  3  fojefalb  the  %  02b  airbaycs  be*  j 
fo2cmvfacc,  ftuheisoninyrighthano, 
tliat  li  fliouio  not  be  mouco. 

26  Xhcrefozc  tub  my htart  reioyte, 
anb  my  tongue  ibasglao  :  £0o2couct 
aifo.myflefl)  fliailrclhnhope, 

27  asecaufc  thou  iMt  not  leant  my 
foulc  in  hell ,  neither  wilt  thou  fuffcr 
tmne5)olponetofceco?rnption. 

28  Xhou  haft  mabc  tmoltoen  to  nice 
the  rbaytsof  lift ,  thou  (halt  maKtmtc 
full  of  toy  Until  thy  toutitt  uantt. 

29  }$)en  anb  bzetmen,  ||  Ittmc  freely 
Tpcauc  tonto  you  *  of  the  patriarch  2Da* 
nib,  that  he  isbothocab  «  burieo ,  anb 
his  fcpuichK  tsibith  t)s tonto  this  nay : 

30  Xhcrcfojcbcuigap20phet,*ano 
Unottmig  that  <5ob  hab  fiuozuc  liuth 
an  oath  to  him,  that  of  the  fruit  of  his 
lomes,  attoibiug  to  the  fltfli ,  htt  lboulb 
raifc  top  Ch2ift,to  fit  on  his  twonc : 

31  li)tfttmgthisbtfojtXpaRt  of  the 
refurrcction  of  CImft,  *  that  his  foulc 
ttjas  not  It  ft  m  h  ell,  neither  his  flcflj  bib 
fttco:rupnon. 


32  Xhis3Jcfushath<!5ooratfcbtop, 
thereof  \bc  all  arc  Vbitneffcs. 

33  Hhcrcfojc  bemgby  the  righthano 
of  <15oo  craiteo,  ano  haumgrccciuebof 
the  JFatljcr  the  p:omifc  of  the  holy 
<3hou\hc  hath  meb  forth  thiS,U)hich  ye 
notb  fee  ano  heart. 

34  JFo?  a>auto  is  not  afcenoeo  into 
the  hcaucns.buthe  taith  hunfclfc,*50)t 
Hojofaio  tonto  my  H020,  £>uthouon 
my  right  hanb, 

35  ?Hntiil3} mautthy  foes  thyfoot* 
floolc. 

36  Xhercfojc  let  all  thchoufe  of  3Jf* 
racl  Imoito  afTurebly ,  that  ©00  hath 
maoe  that  fame  gjefus,rbhomychaue 
erunficb,both?Lo2t>anoCh2iu\ 

37  €  /ftoito  ibhen  they  hears  this, 
they  mere  pjicftco  m  their  heart,  anD 
faio  tonto  tectcr.ano  to  thcrcttofthe;a* 
potties,  fijDcn  anb  b?cth2cn ,  naljat  H;all 
tbeboe; 

38  5Chcn#ctcrfaib  tonto  them,  Be* 
pent,  anb  be  baptises  cueryoncofyou 
m  the  /flame  of 3Jefus  Ch2ift,fo2  tht  rt* 
mifTton  of  Gtmts,aiH)  ^t  frjal  rcceuic  the 
gift  of  the  holy  ©hoft. 

39  iFo2thcp20inifc tstontoyou,  ano 
to  your  thilb2cn ,  anb  to  all  that  are  a* 
farrc  off,cucn  as  many  astheJLojb  our 
<Sob  (hall  call. 

40  ^nbttntl)  many  other  roo2bs bib 
hec  tefhfie  anb  crh02t,  faying,  &aue 
your  fclucs  from  this  bntotbats  gc* 
neratlou. 

41  CXhen  they  that  glably  r  ccciucb 
his  ibojb ,  tberc  bapti?cb :  anb  the  fame 
say  there  iscrc  abbcb  vnto  them  about 
th2cethoufau&foulc£. 

4  2  3inb  they  tontumcb  ffebfaflly  in 
the  ^poftlcs  bottnuc  anb  ft llollifljip, 
anbiiib2ta!ungofb2tab)anbmp2aitrc. 

43  3ns  feart  came  bpon  eticry  foulc: 
anb  many  lSonbcrs  anb  figncs  mere 
souebythc^lpofllcs. 

44  3ln0  all  that  bclccucb  iscr  e  togc* 
thcr, anb  hab  all  things  common, 

45  ZttD  folbc  their  pofTcflions  ano 
goobs,  anb  partcb  them  toailmcn,  as 
cucrymanhabuccb. 

46  3ns  they  continuing  baily\sith 
one  atco2b  m  the  Xtmplt  ,anb  b2taKing 
b2tab  llfrom  houft  to  houft ,bib  tat  their 
mcatunth  glabucOc  anbfitigltntfl"eof 
htart, 

47  failing  dt>ob ,  anb  Ijamng  fa- 
uour  ttnth  all  th  c  pc  oplc.Slnb  the  1Lo?s 
Amn  to  the  Church  bayly  futh  as 
fljouiobcfaucb. 

CHAP. 


•Pril.no. 


il  Or,  1 
home 


The  lame  healed.       Chap.iij.         Peter  preacheth. 


CHAP.   III. 

Peter  preaching  to  the  people  that  came  to  fee  a 
lame  nun  rellored  to  his  feetc,  12  profei- 
feth  the  cure  not  to  hauebeene  wrought  by 
his,or  Iohns  owne  power  jor  holinefTe,but  by 
God ,  and  his  fonne  Iefus,  and  through  faith 
in  his  Name:  13  Withall  reprehending  them 
for  crucifying  Iefus.  17  Which  becauic  they 
did  it  through  ignorance,  and  that  thereby 
were  fulfilled  Gods  determinate  counfell,  and 
the  Scriptures  :  19  He  exhorteth  them  by 
repentance  and  faith  to  leeke  remiifion  of 
their  finnes,  and  faluation  in  the  fame  Iefus. 

3fS|£>rbe  0ctct  ano  3fobn 

®  ttcntbp  togctber  into  tpe 

Xcmplc  at  tbc  bourc  of 

P?apcr,  beeing  t$C  WWti) 
l)0UtC. 

x  anb  a  certamc  matt  lame  from 
bismofbcrsiibombibastaricbjibbom 
tbey  laibe  oatlv  at  trjc  gate  of  tfjc  Xem- 
plcibbicb  is  tallcD  fficautifull ,  to  afuc 
almcs  of  tbcm  tbat  cntrcb  into  tbe 
Xemple. 

3  ©Do  feting  #cter  9  3Jobn  about 
to  go  tnto  trje  Xemplcaf  bcd  an  almcs. 

4  anb  $cter  fattening bis  cyesbp? 
onl)im,U)itl)3ol)n,faib,!Loofeconb5. 

5  anDbcgaucbccbebntotbem,ep 
petttngto  recctuefometbing  oftfjem. 

6  Xbcn$cterfaiO,S>ilucranbgolb 
nauc^lnone,  but  fuel)  asJJbauc,  gmc 
gjtbec:  ^mtbcjftamcofjJcfnsCbjitt 
of  ji5a5aretb,rtfcbp  anbibaiBc. 

7  anb  6«  tooftc  bun  by  tbe  rigbt 
banb,s  lift  Dim  bp :  aub  immctnatly  rjis 
fcctcaiib  ancle  bones  rccciuco  Qrcngtb. 

8  anb  Dec  leaping  bp ,  ttoob ,  anb 
ibaifeco,  anb  cntceb  tbitli  tbcm  into  trje 
Xcmpic,  ibaiRing,  anb  leapmg,  anb 
p?aiung<Sob. 

9  anb  ail  tbc  people  faib  Dim  *bal; 
bing,  anb  pjaifing  <5ob. 

10  anb  tbey  bnclb  tbat  itltoas  hee 
ibljtcl)  fate  foz  almcs  at  tbc  bcautifull 
gate  of  tbc  Xcmplc :  anb  tbey  lbcrc 
fillcbibitb  lbonbcr  anb  amazement  at 
tljatlbbitrjljabbappcncobntolnm. 

1 1  ano  as  tbe  lame  man  lbbicb  ibas 
Ijcaicb.bcioc  0ctcranb3Jobn,  all  tbe 
people  rannctogctber  unto  tbcm  m  tl)c 
pojcb,tbatistailcb  Solomons,  great- 
lyrbonbnng. 

-n  canoibbcu  v>ctcrfaibc it,  bee 
anfrocrcb  bntotbc  people,  Pec  men  of 
3Jfracl,ttiby  maruetlc  yc  at  tbis^o  1  ibby 
looBcycc  fo  carocftly  on  us ,  astliong!) 
bp  onr  oibnc  poiber  0:  bolmcffe  ibe  ban 


maoc  tbis  man  to  ibalbc* 

13  H:bc<3Dbof3tb?abam,aiU)of3l 
faac,ano  of  3lacob,tbc<5oD  of  our  fa- 
tbers  Ijatlj  glonficD  bis  fonne  3Jefus, 
ibbomyebcitucrcbbp,  anbbcnicbljim 
mtl)cp;cfcnccofpilatc,U)rjcnl)ccU)as 
octcrmmcbtolctbimgoc. 

14  *25utvcbcntcbtrjc$orponc,anb 
ti)t3Juft,  anbbcfircb  amurbercrto  be 
grantebbnto  you, 

15  anb  milcb  ||  tbc  i&incc  of  life, 
n>bom<5obbatb  ratfeb  from  the  bcab, 
Vbbcrcof  lbearc  ibitneffes. 

16  anb  fjis  /ftamc  though  faitb  in 
rjis  iI5amc  barb  mabc  trjis  man  ftrong, 
lbbomyc  fee  anb  nnotb  :yca,  tfjc  faitlj 
ibljtcfj  is  bp  l)im,  rjatfj  gtuenbimtbis 
perfect  fotmbneffe  in  tbe  pjefence  of 
you  all. 

17  ano  notb  b?efb*en,  3f  tbote  tbat 
trjjougb  ignozance  ycc  bib  it,  as  bib  alfo 
your  rulers. 

18  ZBut  trjofc  things  tbrjicfi  <£ob  be* 
fo?c  bab  fbeibcb  by  tbc  moutb  of  all  bis 
^opbets^batCfmttfboulbuiffrrJjcc 
batljfo  fulfiilco. 

19  C  5Rcpcnt  ycc  therefore,  anb  bee 
conucrtcb,  tbat  your  finsmaybcblot' 
tcb  out ,  ibben  tl)c  times  of  rcfrcfljing 
fbai  come  from  trjc  p?e&ncc  of  tbe?LojO. 

20  ^nb bee  OjauTenbgicfus  C&itt, 
)bbirt)bcfo;scibasp?cacbcbbntoyou. 

xi  oabom  tbc  beaucn  muft  rcccute, 
bnnll  tbe  times  of  refhtution  of  all 
tbmgs,tbbicb  Gobbatb  fpoben  by  tbe 
moutb  of  alibis  Ijoly  $?opbets  fmcc 
tbe  ibojlb  began. 

iz  *ifo?^ofestruclyfaibbntotlje 
fatbers,ajD2opbct  fball  tbc  fLojb  your 
<5ob  raifcbp  bnto  you  of  your  bjctljjcn, 
ltbcbntomc;bimfballyccbearcinail 
thmgsibbatfo  tucr  be  fbal  fay  bnto  you. 

23  anb  it  (ball  come  to  paffc,  tbat 
euery  foulc  tbljicf)  ibillnot  bearc  tbat 
$2opbet,fbalbcocftroyebfromaniong 
tbc  people. 

24.  pea  anb  all  tbe  0:opbcts  from 
S>amucl,anb  tljofctrjatfolloib  aftcr,as 
many  as  bauc  fpoben,l)auc  bbetttifc 
foictoiooftbcfcbayes. 

25  Pet  arc  tbc  cbiUuen  of  tbe  0jo^ 
pbcts,  anb  of  tbc  coucnanttbbitb  c5ob 
niaoc  ibitb  our  fatbers,  *  faying  unto 
abjabam ,  anb  in  tby  feco  Qjail  an  tbc 
ftinrcos  of  tljc  cartlj  be  blcffcb. 

26  ?tluto  you  ftrfr ,  (5ob  baumg  tav 
ftb  bp  bis  domte  ^cfus,  fent  bimto 
blcfTc  you ,  in  turning  aibay  cucry  one 
of  you  from  htsmiquincs. 

M  CHAP. 


Matt.17 


\Or  AHthor. 


•Dcut.lS. 
15. chip. 
7-J7- 


Gcn.11. 


The  examination     The  Acftes .        ofthe  Apoftles. 


\\Or,ru,'ci 


•PW.118. 
*  J  jr. it  :  1 


CHAP.    1III. 

The  rulers  of  the  Iewes  offended  with  Peters 
Sermon,  4  ( though  tlioufands  of  the  people 
were  conuerted  that  heard  the  word  )  lmpri- 
fon  him,  and  Iohn.  5  After,  vpon  examinati- 
on Peter  boldly  auouching  the  lame  man  to 
be  healed  by  the  Name  of  Iefus ,  and  that  by 
the  lame  Iefus  oncly  we  muff  bee  eternally  ta- 
iled, 13  They  command  him  and  lohn  to 
preach  no  more  in  that  Name,  adding  alio 
threatning,  13  Whereupon  the  Church  flee- 
eth  to  prayer.  31  And  God  bymouing  the 
place  where  they  were  affembled,  tcftificd 
that  he  heard  their  prayer :  confirming  the 
Church  widi  the  gift  of  the  holy  Ghoft,  and 
with  mutualllouc  and  charitie. 

0n  as  tDcpfpauc  bnto  the 
pcoplc,t!)cp2icBsantitt)e 
llcaptamc  of  the  3Ecmpic, 
ana  the  £>aaauccs  came 
bpottthem, 
1  iscttig  grtcuea  that  they  taught 
rhcpcoplcanapuacbearlwoughljcfus 
tl)e  refttrrcttion  front  tfje  acaa. 

5  anafbcyiaiabanasotttbem,ana 
put  them  m  hoiaimto  tlje  ncrtaay :  fo; 
itVbasnoibeucnttac. 

4.  $o\bbett ,  man?  of  them  rbturtj 
l)eacBtf)cttio?a,belccuca,anatt)c  num- 
ber of  the  mm  tbas  about  fiuc  fbotu 
fana. 

<,  C  ana  it  came  to  paffe  on  the  mo< 
roib,  that  tbctr  rulers,  ana  «iacrs,ana 
5>crtbcs, 

6  ana  3tnnas  the  high  &ueu\  ana 
Caipbas ,  ana  3Jobn,  ana  aicranacr, 
ana  as  many  as  ibcrc  of  the  atnrca  of 
the  high  $ueu\tbeccgatbcrca  together 
atl^tcrufaicm. 

7  ^na  lbben  trjcv  baa  fet  tijem  in 
tbcmtaacu^beyafftca.ffiyibbatpoib; 
er ,  0?  by  ibbat  name  bauc  ye  aonc  this  t 

s  %\yan  peter  fuica  lbttb  the  holy 
(5I)o(l,  faia  bnto  tbcnijie  rulers  of  tlje 
people,  ana  ciaers  of  Jfrael, 

9  3Jftt>ctbtsoaybccramincaoftbc 
gooo  acca  aonc  to  tlje  impotent  man, 
by  ibbat  meatus  be  ts  tnaae  ibbole, 

10  25e  it  luioibctt  bnto  you  all,  ana  to 
all  the  people  of  Jfracl ,  that  by  tlje 
iriame  of  Jcftts  <£l)2t[r  of  /Sasamb, 
\btiom  yt  cractfica,  ibbotnc  <2>oa  ratfea 
front  the  acao,  cucn  by  bun,  aoctbtbts 
man  ttana  here  befou  you,  lbbolc. 

n  *1Ebiststbc  (tone  ibbtcbibas  fet 
atnougbtofyoubutlbcrs,  Ibbicbtsbe; 
tonic  tbebcaa  of  tUc  comer. 

12  fit\tt)tv  is  there  faluattou  many 


other :  fo?  there  is  none  other  name  bn= 
aer  bcauen  giucn  among  men  lbbereby 
rbemuubefauea. 

i}  C  iBott  lbben  they  faibc  tlje 
boianefleof  0cterana3lobit,  anapcr 
cctuca  rtjat  tpey  Ibere  bnleantca  ana 
ignojatit  mett,tt)eymarueilca,anat!)cy 
toone  hnoibleage  of  them,  that  tbey 
baa  bene  ibitb3lcrus. 

14.  ana  beboiamg  tlje  man  tbbtcb 
luasbeaiea,  ttanamg  lbttb  tbcm,  tbey 
couiofaynofbtngagaiulttt. 

15  zSut  rbben  tbey  baa  commanaea 
them  to  go  afiac  out  of  the  £ounctl,tbey 
conferrca  among  tbcmfelues, 

16  &aying,i©batfl)alllbeaototbcfe 
men*  fo?  tbatinacea  a  notable  miracle 
bath  bene  aonc  by  tbcm,  is  manifeft  to 
aiitbemtbataibeli  in  $tcrufalem,  ana 
ibe  cannot  antic  it. 

17  2£ut  that tt  fpuaa  no  farther  a= 
mongtbepcople,lctbsltraitiyfb?eaten 
tijcm,tbattbeyfpeaBcbtntcfo;ttbtono 
man  m  this  JRame. 

is  ana  they  cailea  tbcm,  ana  com; 
manaea  tbcm,  nottofpeai$cataH,no? 
teacl)tntl)ci5amcof  Jcfus. 

19  26nt  0ctcr  ana  35obn  anfrocrea, 
ana  fata  bnto  tbetn,  l©bctbcr  it  be  right 
mttlcftgtJt  of<5oo,to  fjcarucit  bnto  you 
mo?c  then  bnto  ©oa,iuagc  ye. 

20  jjfoj  ibec  cannot  but  fpeafee  tftc 
things  rbtjtct)  ibe  ftaue  fcettc  ana  bcara. 

21  &otbbett  tbey  baa  further  tbuat; 
ncO  them,  tiiey  let  tbcm  goe,  finamg  no- 
tbtngboib  they  might  pumtt)  tbcm,  bc^ 
taufc  of  the  people :  fo?  all  mcnglonft' 
ca  <5oa  fo?  that  ibbicb  \aas  aonc. 

i2  fontyt  man  tbasabouc  fourfie 
yecrcs  oloe,  on  ibhomctftis  miracle  of 
healing  ibasfluibea. 

2j  canabctttgletgocthcyrbcntto 
their  oVbne  tontpany,  ana  rcpo?tcaall 
that  the  chtcfc  ^?ielts  ana  ciaers  haa 
fata  bnto  them. 

24.  ana  rbhen  they  iKara  that,  they 
lift  bp  their  boyce  to  <Koo  lbith  oneac 
co?a,  9  fata,  fLo?a,thouartC5ooibhith 
haa maac heatten  ana  earth,  ana  the 
fca.anaail  that  tn  them  ts, 

25  *i©ho  by  themouthofthyferuant 
iDauiahaftfatOe,  ishyaia  the  heathen 
rage ,  ana  the  people  imagine  bainc 
tbtitgs  i 

26  XheHsmgsof  the  cart!)  ftooabp, 
ana  the  rulers  lb  ere  gather  ca  together 
agatntt  the  !Lo?a,$againu  Ins  Chnft. 

27  jfo?  of  atrueth  agaittlt  thy  holy 
chiia3cfus,tt)hotitthouhaftanointca, 
both 


Tnl.1.1. 


All  things  common.     Ch 


ap.v. 


L 


> 


nngr  to 


God. 


both  l?croa,  ana  Pontius  pilatc,  ibith  I 
the  ©cuttles ,  ana  the  people  of  jfracl , 
iDcregathcrea  together, 

is  .fono  aocibhatfocucrthphaiiB 
ana  thp  counfcll  BctetmmtB  before  to 
be  Done. 

19  Slna  nott)  Hozb ,  behoia  tf)ctc 
fhzeatnutgs ,  ana  graunt  bnto  thp  fcr 
uants,  that  ibith  all  boiancfle  ttjcv  mar 
fpcaKethpiboza, 

jo  zsp  ftcetchmg  foouh  thine  hana 
to  hcaie :  ana  that  agues  ana  ibonacrs 
map  be  aone  bp  the  /ftame  of  thp  holp 
ehiia  3Jcfus. 

ji  C3uaibhettthephaBpzapcB,thc 
plate  tt>as  fbaKcn  ttiljcrc  tl)tp  ibcrc  af- 
fcniblca  togctljcc ,  ana  thep  acre  all  fil- 
lea  Hurt)  the  holp  <5hoft,ana  thep  fpafcc 
theibDiBof^oBifcitbbolBueu'c. 

ji  ana  ti)c  multitude  of  them  that 
bclecuea,lbcceof  oneheart,  ana  ofonc 
foule:  ^either  fata  anp  of  them,  that 
ought  of  the  ttiings  tbfttel)  hcpoflcffeB, 
ibas  his  olbne ,  but  thephaa  all  things 
common. 

3 j  3ma  ibith  great  poibcr  gauc  tlje 
^pottles  toitneffe  of  the  rcfurtechon  of 
thefLoza  Refits,  ana  great  grace  ibas 
bpon  them  all. 

34.  JScithcclbas  there  anp  among 
them  that  lacKea:  jfoz  as  many  as  Ibcre 
poffeffozs  of  lanas ,  oz  houfes ,  foia 
them  ,  ana  brought  the  pztecs  of  the 
things  that  ibercfoiae, 

35  3lna  latae  themaotbne  at  the  a- 
potties  fcetc  :  3na  aittribution  ibas 
maaebnto  eucrp  manaeeozBtngashce 
haanceac. 

36  3nB3Jofcs,iDhobp  the  ^potties 
Ibas  furnamea  Sarnabas  (ibhich  is, 
being  Intcrpzetca ,  Xhcfonnc  of  eonfo; 
larion^llciutc.anBofthcCountrcpof 
Cppzus, 

37  feauingiana,Toiau\anabiou3ht 
the  moncp,?  laia  it  at  the  ^pottles  feet. 

CHAP.    V. 

After  that  Ananias  and  Sapphira  liis  wife  for 
their  hypoenfie  at  Peters  rebuke  had  fallen 
downedead,  ir  and  that  the  reft  of  the  A- 
poflles  had  wrought  many  miracles,  14  to 
the  incrcafe  of  the  faith:  17  The  Apoltles 
are  ai;aine  imprifoned,  ly  But  deliuered 
byanAn^el  bidding  them  to  preach  openly 
to  all:  n  When,  after  their  teaching  ac- 
cordingly in  the  temple,  19  and  before  the 
Council!,  *3  they  arc  in  dangerto  be  killed, 
through  the  aduiie  of  Gamaliels  great  conn- 
cellour  among  the  tewes,  they  bekeptaliuc, 


40  and  arc  but  beaten:  for  which  they  glori- 
rieGod,andcea!e  no  dayrronipieaching. 

Clt  accrtatnc  man  namcB 
Ananias,  lbith  Sapphtra 
his  luifcfolDc  a  poflclTum, 
x  ^nbucpt  bacbe  put 
ofthepzicchtsibifcalfo 
being  pztup  to  it,  ana  bzought  a  tcrtaine 
part,ana  lava  ttattbcSipoftiesfcctc. 

3  23ut  peter  faia ,  Ananias ,  nyhp 
hathS>atan  fillea  thinebcart||tolicto 
the  holp  <3hott,  ana  toBccpcbatfeepart 
oftbcpziceoftbcianB; 

4  ©bites  it  remainea ,  ibas  it  not 
thine  0 Vbnc <  ana  after  tt  mas  foia ,  ibas 
it  not  m  thmc  oibncpoibccf  lubp  halt 
thou  coucciuca  this  thing  m  thine 
beamtboubaftnotuca  bnto  men,  but 
bnto  <3oa. 

5  3lna  Ananias  hearing  tbcfc 
ilwas ,  fell  Bourne ,  ana  gaue  bp  the 
gboft :  aua  great  fcarc  came  on  all  them 
tljat  hcara  there  things. 

6  Snathe  pong  men  arofe,lbouna 
him  bp,  ana  canea  htm  out,  ana  buriea 
him. 

7  3na  tt  Ibas  about  the  fpacc  of 
tbzeebouresaftet,  lbbenbtsioife,  not 
unolbing  Ibbat  ibas  Bonccanic  m. 

8  ^na  peter  anttocrca  bnto  her, 
Xcll  me  whether  pc  foia  tbcianafozfo 
much-  3nBfbefaiBe,Pca,fo;  fo  much. 

9  1£hcnpctcrfaiBetontohcr,$ott) 
is  it  that  pc  hauc  agreea  together,  to 
tempt  the  Spirit  of  tbcILozB;bebolB, 
the  fccteofthemlbhich  hauc  bnneathp 
bufbana,are  at  rbcBQ02*,ana  (ball  carp 
thee  out. 

10  XbenfclirbeBoiBncttraigbtlbap 
at  his  feetc,  anapcciaca  bp  theghott : 
Snathe  pong  men  came  m,  ana  founa 
her  acaa,  ana  carping  her  fozfb,  bunea 
hccbphcrhufbaiiB. 

1 1  3tna  great  fcare  came  bpon  all  the 
Church ,  ana  bpon  as  manpasljeara 
tbcfc  things. 

ii  C3nB  bp  the  hanbs  of  the  7k 
pottles  ,  Were  manpftgncs  ana  tbou 
acts  Ibzought  among  the  pcoplc-O^no 
thtplbecc  all  lbitboncaccozBm5>olo 
monspozch. 

13  ^naofthcrettaurttnonianiopnc 
bfmfcifetotbcm  :  25ut  the  people  mag 
utfieathem. 

14.  ^nabclceucrs  Ibcre  the  mozc  aa- 
aca  to  the  ?Lozb ,  nmintuaes  both  of 
men  aua  Women.*) 

15  3Jnfomuc!j  f  tijep  bjought  foozth 

the  Gcue  ||  into  the  ttrcctcs ,  ana  lapca 

W  1  them 


'Or/ode- 


\'Or,utcu:ry 
ffrtetr. 


JTo  obey  God,         The  Aftes.       rather  then  men. 


\\Or,tr:tiit, 


i  8, 


them  on  bcbs  anb  touches,  that  at  the 
leafttbe  fyaDoVb  of  pettr  patting  by, 
might  oucrfbabolbfomc  of  tljcm. 

i6  Xbcre  tame  alfo  a  multitubeout 
oftlje  ernes  rounb  about  bnto  ^tcruliv 
lem ,  bunging  Iickc  follies ,  aub  tljcm 
lbljiclj  \bcrc  bcrcb  lbitb  bnticanc  fpi- 
nts:  anb  they  tticrcbcalebcuery  one. 

17  CXbciitbchigbpneftrofebp, 
aubaithcythanbercibithbun,(lbljich 
is  the  feet  of  the  £>abbuccs)  anb  Ibcrc 
fiiicDiintblliubiguation, 

18  3lnb  laib  tiicic  hanbs  on  the  Slpo* 
(tle£,?puttbemtutbetommonp2ifon. 

19  iout  tljc  3tngcl  of  the  %oft  by 
night  opencb  the  pnfou  boozes ,  anb 
biougbt  tljcm  foojtb.anbfaib, 

20  (Bot ,  ftanb  anb  fpcabc  in  the 
Zcmpleto  tljc  people  all  the  Ibojbsof 
this  life. 

21  3nb  ttmen  they  hcarb  that,  they 
cnttcb  tnto  tljc  Itcmplc  early  tn  tljc 
morning ,  5  taught :  but  the  high  0?icft 
camc,anb  the  y  that  mere  Vbitlj  ljim,anb 
taileb  tljc  Councill  togctljcr,anb  all  tljc 
Senate  of  tl)c  cljittncn  of  31fracl,anb 
fent  to  tljc  pnfon  to  Ijauc  them  bjougljt. 

22  2Sutibl)cntljcoffucrstantc,anb 
founbtljem  not  in  ttjc  pnfon ,  they  re- 
turneb,aubtolb, 

2j  taping,  Xhcpjlfoutrucly  founb 
ibeflnitlbitbailfafety,anbthc6cepcrs 
ftanbtngibithout  before  tbeboojes,  but 
\bbcn  ibe  hab  opcneb,tt>c  founb  no  man 
lbitljtn. 

24  0oVo  lbbcn  tljc  high  pneff ,  anb 
tlje  taptainc  of  thclCemple,  anb  tljc 
cbtcfc  &tic(tsbcarb  thefc  things ,  they 
boubtcb  of  tljemlbljcninto  ttjis  iboulb 
grolb. 

25  Xbcn  tame  one,  anb  tolb  them, 
toying ,  26cbolb,  the  men  ibhom  ye  put 
inpzifon ,  ate  ftanbing  m  tljc  Xcmple, 
anb  teaching  tbcpcople. 

26  Xljenibenttlje  captamcibiththe 
officers,  anb  biougbt  them  vmtljout 
btoicuce :  (ifo2  theyfeareb  tl)c  people, 
left  thev  flioulb  baue  bene  ftoneb.) 

27  31nb  lbben  they  fjab  b20ught 
them,  tbey  fct  them  befcuc  the  Counnll, 
anb  tljc  high  puert  af  itcb  them, 

28  having,  * 2>iD not  lbcc  ftraitly 
tommanb  von  ,  that  you  njoulD  not 
teach  m  this  0me  i  3tnb  bcbolD,ycc 
banc  fillcb  l)icrufalcm  Unt!)  your  boc- 
ttmc ,  anb  inttnb  to  bung  this  mans 
blooobponbs. 

29  €  £bcn  peter ,  anb  the  other 
3poHics  aimucreo ,  aub  faibe ,  nacc 


ougljt  to  obey  (Sob  rather  then  men. 

I    30  Xbe  d5ob  of  our  fatljers  raifcb 

bp  Refits ,  lbljom  ycc  flcib  anb  Ijangcb 

on  a  tree. 

31  $tm  Ijatlj  (Sob  eraltcb  ibittj  rjis 
jngljt  banb  to  bee  a  punte  anb  a  5>a- 
\  moiir,  fo?  to  gtuc  repentance  tojlfrael, 
anb  fojguieneffc  of  fumes. 

,32  3lnb tt>e  arc  his rbitneffes of  tbefe 

1  things ,  anb  fo  ts  alfo  tljc  Ijoly  oljoflr, 

lbbom  00b  batlj  giucn  to  tljcm  that 

obey  bun. 

33  C  seljcn  they  hearb  tljat ,  they 
ibercnuto  ttjc  gcart,  anbtooltctoum 
fell  to  flay  tljcm. 

34-  SEljcn  floob  tfjerc  bp  one  in  tfjc 
Counnll,  apfjanftctwmeb  Gamaliel, 
a  boctour  of  Haib,  Ijab  m  reputation  a 
mong  all  tljc  people,  anb  tommanbeb 
toputtl)c3tpoflIcsfo;tljalitlcfpafc, 

35  3nb  faib  bnto  tljcm ,  %Hc  men  of 
3fracl,  taHcljccbtoyourfelucs,  Wljat 
yemtenbtoboeas  tonclnng  tljcfemcn. 

36  ifo?  befozc  tljcfc  bayes  rofc  bp 
Xheubas ,  boafhtig  Ijmifelfc  to  befome 
boby ,  to  ibbom  a  number  of  men,  a- 
boutfoureljunb;cb,ioynebtljemlcluefl 
n>l)o  \bas  flainc,  anb  all, as  many  as 
||  obneb  turn ,  ibcre  fcattcrcb,  f  b?ougljt 
tonougbt. 

37  ^ftcr  tfjis  man  r ofc  bp  3Iubas  of 
©alilce,  tn  tnebaycsof  tt)ctanng,anb 
bieib  aibay  mutlj  people  after  Dim :  fjec 
alfo  penujeb ,  anb  all,  cucn  as  manp  as 
obeyeb  ljim,fticrc  bifpetfeb. 

38  ^nb  noVb  3}  fay  bnto  you ,  re* 
fraine  from  tljcfc  men,  anb  let  thmia 
lone:  fo:  if  tois  tounfcll  02  rljis  VbOJlte  be 
of  men,Mbilltome  to  nongtjt. 

39  z8uttfitbcof(3ob,yecaunotouer; 
tljzoib  it,  lefl  haply  ycc  be  founb  cucn 
tofigljtagatnftaob. 

4°  3lub  to  fjim  tfjey  agrceb  :  anb 
lbhcn  ttjey  Ijab  taileb  tljc  ^poftlcs,  anb 
beaten  them ,  they  tommanbeb  tljat 
tncyujoulb  not  fpeaacmttjc  /Rarncof 
3Jefus,anblcttl)cmgoc. 

41  C  3lnb  they  bepartcb  from  the 
picrnitcoftJjcCountill,  reioyemg  that 
they  lbcrc  tountcb  iboithy  to  fuffcr 
ujamcfo2hiSii5amc. 

41  3tnbbaylyinthe1Ccmplc,anb 
tn  cucry  houfe ,  they  teafeb  not  to  teach 
anbp2cach3IcnisClj.aft. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1   The  ApoAles  defirous  cohjuc  tliepoorere- 

garded  for  their  bodily  fuftenance ,  as  alfo 

careful] 


\\Or,i,liC- 


D 


euenueacons. 


ci 


wp-yi-yj- 


S 


tcucn  accu 


fed. 


carefull  chcmfelues  to  difpenfe  die  word  of 
God.thcfoodeofthclbulc:  3    Appoint  the  ■ 
office  of  Deaconfhip  to  leuen  cholen  men.   5 1 
Of  whom,Stcuen  a  man  full  of  faith,  &  of  the  1 
holy  Ghoft,is  one.  i-  Who  is  taken  of  thofe, 
whom  he  confounded  in  difputmg,    1;    and 
afcet  falfelv  accufed  of  blalphemie  againf!  t!ie 
law  and  the  temple. 

l@JW8f|£Jf5t> m  thofe  bayes  When 
AV»tDt  number  of  the  Difcfc 
&#  pics  wa£muiupltcb,thcrc 
ssgVra  arofe  a  murmuring  ofttjc 
.  J^M  (Grecians  againfl  the  !^c- 
bjcWes ,  becaufe  their  wibowcs  iberc 
ncglcctcbinthebailymintltration. 

1  Hrjen  tlic  tweluc  calico  the  main 
tube  of  thcbifciplcs  bnto  them.anb  faib. 
3Jtis  not  reafon  that  We  fbotilb  Icauc 
the  W02b  of  <3ob,anb  fcruc  tables. 
'  j  i©hcrcfo2e  b2ctl)2cn ,  loolicyeout 
among  you  fcucn  men  of  hotultrcpo2t, 
\  full  of  the  tjolp  Ghofr ,  anb  wifebomc, 
Whom  We  may  appoint  oucr  rrjtsbufr 
ueffc. 

4  25ntWe  Wiligmeoucfclucscon 
tinually  top.zaycr,  anb  to  the  nuuiltcric 

0ftl)CW02b. 

5  C  3hib  the  faying  plcafcb  tl)c 
Whole  mulntubc :  anb  they  cl)ofc  £>W 
um ,  a  man  full  of  faith  anb  of  the  holy 
<35rjoft  ,anb  phtiip,  anb  02ocho2iis,anb 
#icano2,anb  Xttnon,  anb0crmenas, 
anb  Nicolas  a  p2ofclytc  of  ^ntiocfj, 

6  aahom  they  fet  befo?e  the  Z- 
pofflcs:anb  When  they  habpzaicb.thevj 
layb  their  hanbs  on  them. 

7  2inbthcwo2bof0obcncrcafcb, 
anb the  number  of  tljcDifciplesmultt^ 
plicb  in  tyicrufaiem  greatly , anb  a  great 
company  of  the  0:ic(tsWcre  obcbicut, 
tothcfaitl).  rr 

8  2Inb  £>tcucn  full  of  fait!)  anbi 
power ,  bib  great  Wonoers  antJ  mira-j 
cles  among  trjc  people.  I 

9  C  ^fjen  there  arofe  ccrtaine  of 
the  Synagogue ,  which  is  cailcb  the  Sv-I 
nagogue  of  tl)c  JLibcrtincs ,  anbCyjcnt- 
ans,anb  3lcranb2tans ,  anb  of  them  of 
Ciltna ,  anb  of  Ma ,  bifputing  With 
Ateuen. 

10  3(nb  they  Were  not  able  to  refiQ 
toe  ibifebome  anb  the  fpirit  by  tbtjiclj  he 
fpaae. 

1 1  "Chen  they  fubojneb  men  Which 
faib  ,03c  hauc  hcarb  htm  fpeatte  blafphc- 
mous  U)02bs  agatuft  i$)ofcs ,  anb  a 
gamflcpob. 

ii  3nb  they  fftrrcb  bp  the  people, 
anb  the  fibers,  anb  the  Scribes ,  anb 


came  upon  him,  anb  caught  him,  anb 
b;ought  him  to  the  Coimccil, 

ij  Stub  fet  bp  falfc  Witucflcs,  Which 
faib ,  Xhts  man  tcafcth  not  to  fpcaue 
blafphcmou5  \b02bs  agamft  this  holy 
place,  anb  the  fLaib. 

14  jfo2Wchauc  hcarb  htntfay,  that 
this  3Jcfus  of  iBayireti)  (hall  beftroy 
tbtspiatc,*  (hall  change  the  ||  CuOoiucs 
Which  33ofc5  bcliucr  eb  bs. 

15  3nb  all  that  fate  m  the Countcll, 
loosing  ftcbfaltiy  on  him,  faib  his  face 
asuhab  bene  the  face  of  anSlngcl. 

CHAP.    VII. 

Steucn  permitted  toanfwere  to  theaceufati 
on  of  blalphemie,  i  Shewcth  that  Abraham 
woifhippcd  God  rightly  and  how  Godcholc 
the' Fathers  10  before  Moles  was  borne,,  and 
before  iheTabernacle  and  Temple  were  built: 
.37  [hat  Moles  himlclfe  witnclled  ol  Chriff : 
44  and  that  all  outward  Ceremonies  were 
ordcincdaccoidingto  ihe  lieauenlypaterne, 
tolalf  but  for  a  time  :  ^i  reprehending  theii 
rebellion,  and  munhering  of  ChriA ,  the  lull 
One,  whome  the  Prophets  toietold  fhould 
come  into  die  woild.  54  '7/heicupon  they 
Hone  him  to  death,  who  commendeth  his 
loule  to  Iefus,  and  humbly  prayeth  tor  them. 

r^^tyen  faib  the  high  02ie(t, 
.^rethefe  things  foi 
*M$  2.  3lnbljecfaib,fl{5en, 
fgs  bjethzen  ,  anb  fathers  , 
^hearften  :  Xhc  <5ob  of 
gl02y  appeareb  bnto  our  father  3b2a 
ham ,  ibhen  he  was  in  £0cfopotaruia, 
befo.2c  he  btbclt  in  Chatran , 

3  3lnb  faiobnto  htm,  "Get  thee  out 
of  thy  countrcy ,  anb  from  thy  bmrcb, 
anb  come  mto  the  lanb  Whirl)  3J  fl;ail 
ftjcwthce. 

4.  Xhen  came  he  out  of  the  lanb  of 
the  Chaibcans,  anb  bWclt  m  Char  ran: 
anb  from  thence,  When  his  father  was 
bcab ,  he  rcmoucb  him  into  this  lanbc 
Wherein  ye  now  bWell. 

5  3nbhcgauchimnonemhcntancc 
lnit,nonotfomuchastofcthtsfooteou: 
ycthep2onufcbthathcWoulbgiucttto 
Dun  fo?  a  pofTefTion  ,anb  to  his  fecb  after 
Ijim,  when  as  yet  he  hao  no  chilb. 

6  ^nb  <Sob  fpabc  on  tljis wife, that 
his  fcebc  (hotiib  foioumc  m  a  irrangc 
lanb,  anb  that  they  fhoulb  biiug  them 
(into  bonbagc,  anb  uitreatc  them  rum 
ifourchuub2etl)ytcrcs. 

I    7  3lno  the  nation  to  whom  they  dial 

bee  m  bonoage ,  will  $  uibgc ,  faibe 

<P  ?  cob: 


Q 


Ccn 


Stcuenrepeateth       The  A&es.  thehiftoneof  Ifraei, 


'Gen. 17  9 
"Gen.  I1 1 

'Gene.  25. 

16. 

v  Gen. 39. 

;  1. 

•Gen.  37. 


*Ccn.4l- 
57- 


•Gen.  42.1 


'Gcn.15  4 


Gen. 46. 5 

Geu.49. 
53" 


\\Or,f«r. 

to  goii. 


'  .  1      Ml, 


god  :  3tno  after  that  (ball  tbtp  come 
foitlj,  anb  fecue  me  in  tins  place. 

s  *3lnbbcgauebimtbccoucttantof 
Circuntcifion :  *  anD  fo  Abraham  legate 
Jfaac ,  ant)  circuincifcb  bun  the  eight 
Day:*  anD  Jfaacbe^te  Jacob,*  anD  Ja 
cob  begaw  the  utocluc  patriarchs. 

9  * 3ltib  the  patriarcbsmoucDitoitb 
cnuicfolD  Jofcpb  into  Cgypt:  but  Gob 
iDastbuhliiiH, 

10  3lnD  DclntercD  bun  out  of  alibis 
afflictions,  *  anb  gaue  bun  fauour  aub 
litotfcboinc  in  the  fight  of  pbaraolung 
of  cgypt :  anb  he  mabe  him  goucrnour 
oucr  €gy  pt  aub  all  his  boufc. 

11  /Hoitotbcrc  tame  a  Dearth  oner  all 
theianb  of  egypt,anb  Chanaan,  anb 
great  affliction,  anb  our  fathers  founb 
nofurtcnancc. 

u*z3utitobenJacobbearD  that  there 
ltoasco2ncmegypr,  he  fent  outourfa 
tbcrsftrft. 

13  *3lub  at  the  feconbume  jofcpb  ibas 
mabc&noibcntobisb2etb2cn,anbJO' 
fcphs  tunrcb  ibas  mabcUnoiben  bnto 
pharao. 

1+  mhenfeut  Jofcpb,  anbcaiitbhis 
father  Jatobtobumanb  all  bismnrcb, 
trnccftojc  anbfiftcccnc  foulcs. 

15  *£>o  Jacob  ibent  boibnctnto€: 
gyt ,  *  anb  DicD ,  be  anb  our  fathers, 

16  2fnb  Vbcrc  carieb  oner  into  5>icbcm, 
aubiaibm  the  Cepulcbzc  that  3lb2abam 
bought  foi  a  fummc  of  money  of  the 
tonnes  of  €11102  the  father  of  Suchcm. 

17  23ut  ibhcn  the  tunc  of  the  p:onufe 
b2Clto  nigh ,  lbbicb  Gob  habfruomcto 
^b:aham,  the  people  greib  anb  multt 
plicbtnCgypt, 

is  Xiii  another  lung  arofc ,  lbbicb 
Uncib  not  Jofcpb. 

19  %\)c  fame  beau  fubtilly  lbifh  our 
UmrcD,  anbcuiUintreatcD  out  fathers, 
fo  that  they  cart  out  their  y  ong  cbilD'en, 
to  the  enb  thev  might  not  lute. 

io  *  gin  which  tunc  $)ofcs  ltoas 
bo:ne,  anb*  ibas  Hcrcccbtngfairc,  anb 
nourifbcbtopinbis  fathers  boufc  th;cc 
moncths : 

11  Stabitobcnbcitoas  cartout,  v>ba 
raohs  Dauahtcr  tooiu  him  bp,anDnou 
riflicD  him  fo:  her  oilmc  fount. 
!  21  3uD  i^ofcs  Haas  leartuD  m  all  the 
lbtfrDomc  of  the  Egyptians,  anb  ibas 
mightic  m  wo;Dg  anb  m  Dccbs. 

15  3(tiD  When  he  ibas  full  fonv  ycrcs 
olD,  it  came  into  his  heart  to  bifit  bis  b'c 
th2cn  the  rlnlD'cii  of  Jfcacl. 

1+  •  3nD  feeing  one  of  them  fnffcr 


Tb2ong,hcbefcnbebhun,  anb  aucngeb 

him  that  mas  oppjeffeb,  anb  fmote  ttje 

Egyptian : 

15  jf 02 hefuppofeb his bzctfrien vboulb 

bauetonDcrftooD,  boitotbatGobbybiS 

baiiD  lboulb  Dcluter  them,  but  the?  ton- 

Dcrftoobnot. 

16  *  3tiD  the  nert  bap  he  fbetbeb  Dmv 
fclfc  tonto  them  as  tbey  ffcoue ,  anb 
lboulb  hauefctthem  at  one  agamefap- 
ing,S>irs,yeareb2Ctb2cn,  nabyboeyce 
ib2ongoneto  another? 

17  2Sut  bee  that  bibbisncigbbour 
tt)2ong,th2ufl  bimaitoay,faymg,  nabo 
mabe  thee  a  ruler  anDaJubge  oucr  tos* 

18  nDiltthoutnllme,astbonDiDDeft 
the  Cgypnan  ycftcrbay  < 

19  Hbcn  ftcb  £0ofcs  at  this  faying, 
aiiDtbasaftrangcr  tnthc  lanb  of  Fa- 
bian, lbhcrc  he  begatc  tVbo  fonncs. 

30  *  3nb  lbhen  fourtte  yccrcs  iberc 
crpireb ,  there  appeartb  to  him  in  the 
lbilDcrncs  of  mount  Snna,  an  3liigcl  of 
the  U.02D  in  a  flame  of  fire  m  a  bufh. 

31  nahcnil9ofcsfaibit,hcibonb2eb 
at  the  figi)t :  anb  as  h  c  D2Clb  ncere  to  be- 
!boibit,tbctooyccoftbc?,02b  came  tonto 
bnn, 

31  Savior;,  gj  am  the  00b  of  thy  f& 
thets ,  the  Gob  of  3tb:abam ,  anb  the 
Gob  of  Jfaae,  anb  the  Gob  of  Jacob. 
Xhcn  Q9ofcs  trcmblcb,  anb  burrt  not 
bchoib. 

33  XbmfaibtheILo2btobtm,0utoff 
thy  fbooes  from  thy  feet :  fo:  the  place 
lbbcrc  thou  ftanbcftis  holy  grounb. 

3+ Jbaucfccncjhaucfccnctbcar 
fliction  of  my  people  lbbicb  is  in  Cgypt, 
anb  JhauchcarD  their  gronuig,  ^am 
comcDoibnctoDeluierthcni:3liiDnou) 
totne.U  null  fenb  thee  into  egvpt. 

3<»  XhisCOofesibhomthcvtefufcb, 
favmg ,  nabo  mabe  thec  a  ruler  anb  a 
JuDgc  i  the  fame  Did  Gob  fenD  to  bee  a 
ruler  anb  a  beliuerer,  bytbebanbesof 
the  ^IngcUbhich  appcarcD  to  bimin  the 
buO). 

36  *5)cb2onglit  them  out,  after  that 
hchab  fljcnieb  ibonbers  anb  fignrs  m 
theianb  of  cgvpt,  anD  in  tbcrcDS>ca, 
*anDinthcibilDernclTcfo2ticvccres. 

37  C  £hi s  is  that  CBofcsibhich  faib 
tonto  the  chilD2cn  of  Jfracl,*  %  pjophct 
fliali  thc?lo2Dvour  god  raifc  top  tonto 
von  of  your  fyetfrten,  |[lil?e  tonto  nice: 
himfliailychearc. 

38  *  3Ebis  is  he  that  Xbas  m  f  €hnrcl) 
in  the  nnlDcrnefTc  lbith  the  3(ngel, 
lbhich  fpaltc  to  him  m  the  mount  5>ina, 
I anD 


"Exo.  1. 


'Exod. 


Exodus) 


*Exo.  16.1 

•Dcut.18. 
'S- 

\\  Or,  tu  ml 

!<>!<■ 

Exo.iy.j 


rcproueth them,  and  Chap.vnj.      isftonedtodeath. 


E10J.51 


'  Amos  5. 
:5- 


'  Exod.  :j 
40. 


"  l.Chro. 
1 7. 1  J. 

"Chap.  iy 
*4- 


anb  lbitlj  our  fathers:lbho  rccctucb  the 
uucly  ojaclcs,to  giue  Unto  Us. 

39  %o  ruhom  our  fathers  tuoulb 
not  obey,  but  thwfth>'n  from  tljcm, anD! 
m  thctr  hearts  turncb  bacfec  agamc  in- 
to tfgypt, 

4.0  *;S>aymguuto3aron,g5aHcUs| 
gobs  to  goc  before  us.  5*02  as  fc»  this  1 
UiBofcs,  tbhtthbJought  ds  out  of  tljc 
lanb  of  €gypt,  lbc  ibotc  not  ltotjat  is  be 
tonic  of  Dim. 

41  3lnb  they  mabc  a  talfc  in  thofc 
bayes ,  anb  oftercb  faenfice  Unto  the 
ibolc ,  ano  tetoyceb  m  the  U)o;Hcs  of 
their  oiunchanbs. 

41  Xhcn  <3ob  turncb ,  anb  gauc 
tljcm  Up  to  luonlnp  the  Ijoftc  ofljeauen , 
*  as  it  is  ttmttcn  in  tljc  boonc  of  tljc  £;o 
pfjets,  Q  yc  hottfc  of  Jfracl.hauc  yc  of 
fcrcb  to  mc  name  beans ,  anb  facrifices, 
by  the  fpacc  of  fottrty  yccres  m  tiic  lUil 
ocrncflci 

43  *>ea,yc  tooKCbpthcXabcrnaclc 
of  Moloch,  anbtheftarre  of  your  d5ob 
Jlcmphan ,  figures  urhichyc  mabc,  to 
tbotftnpthem  :  anb^Ybillcaricyoua 
VUaybcyono26abylon. 

44  £>ttr  fathers  hab  the  Habcroa 
tleof  mitnclTcin  the  .bilberncflc,  ashce 
hahappomteb ,  fpeatangbntoi^ofes, 

that  hcfliou.bmaRcitactojbingto  the 
faihionthathchabfcenc. 

45  S0l)icrjaifo  out  fathers  that  tame 
after ,  brought  m  rbith  Jdus  into  the 
poflcflionofthc  Gentiles,  tbhomoob 
DjaueoutbcftHethcfatcofourfathcrs, 
bnto  the  bayes  of  £>auib, 

46  nohorbuub  fauour  before  C5o b, 
anb  befir  cb  to  finb  a  Xabcruacle  fo?  the 
©obofjacob. 

47  *26ut  Solomon  built  Dim  an 
rjonfe. 

4S  *  lf>oTDbcit  the  moft  high  bfticl 
leth  notm  temples  mabc  ttnth  hanbs, 
as  faith  tftepjophet, 

49  Ucauentsmytlttoncanbcarth 
is  my  footeftoolc  *.  nahat  houfciutll  yc 
builb  mefatththe  ILotfa  £>nuhat  is 
the  plate  of  my  reft  < 

50  i?ath  not  my  hanb  mabc  all  theft 
things* 

5 1  C  Pt  ftifhecftcb  anb  Uncireumci 
feb  in  heart,  anb  cares,  ycboeairbaycs 
refill  the  holy  <25hoft  *  as  your  fathers 
bib,fobocyc. 

51  ©hich  of  tljc  ^ophcts  haue  not 
pour  fathers  pcrfccutcb  e  2Mb  they 
hauc  flame  them  ttiljtch  fhcrocb  before 
of  tljc  tomming  of  tljc  3Juft  one,  of 


Vbhom  yt  haue  bene  uoiu  tljc  betrayers 
anbmurbcrcrs: 

53  nahoh<mcrctciucbthc?Latt)cby 
tljcbifpofition  of21ngels,  anbhauc  not 
Kept  it. 

54  C  ttMjcn  tljcy  hcarb  theft  thuigs, 
they  lucre  tut  to  the  heart ,  anb  tljcy 
gnafljeb  on  htrn  lUith  their  teeth. 

55  2Sttf  Ijcc  being  full  of  the  holy 
<5hoft,looUcbUpftcbfafllyintohcaucii, 
anofaibthe  glo?y  of  Gob,  anb  3Jcfus 
ftanbmg  on  the  right  hanb  of  <5ob, 

56  3litb  faib,  25cljoib,  3J  fee  the  Ijca- 
uens  opencb ,  anb  the  S>onnc  of  man 
ftanbmg  on  the  right  hanb  of  <5ob. 

57  Xhentljcycricboutvuitljaioub 
boicc,  anb  ftopptb  tljcir  cares,  anb  ran 
Upon  htm  lUitlj  one  accojo, 

58  3nbtafthimoiitofthecittc,anb 
ftoneb  him  :  anb  tljc  Vbitnefles  layb 
borbnc  thctr  clothes  at  a  yongmans 
fcctciuhofc  name  mas  S>atrt. 

59  3nb  they  ftonco  £>teucn ,  calling 
vpon  God ,  anb  faymg ,  JLoft  3Jcfusrc: 
teiucmyfptrtt. 

60  ^nb  he  ftncclcb  borbnc,  anb  crieb 
tbith  a  loub  Uoice ,  fLojb  lay  not  this 
finncto  thctr  tharge.  3nb  lbhcn  hehab 
faibthts,hefellaflccpc. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

By  occafion  of  the  peifecution  in  Hierufalem, 
the  Church  being  planted  in  Samaria,  5  By 
Philip  the  Deacon  who  preached ,  did  inira- 
rades,and  baptized  many,aniong  the  reft  Si- 
mon the  forcerer  a  great  feducer  of thepeo- 
ple:  14  Peter  and  Iohn  come  to  con- 
fiime  ,  and  inlarge  the  Church  :  where  by- 
prayer,  and  impofition  of  hands  giuing  the 
holyGhoft,  18  When  Simon  would  haue 
bought  the  like  power  of  them,  10  Teier 
fharpelyrepiouinghis  hypocrifie,  andcone- 
touCiefTe,  and  exhorting  hun  to  repentance: 
together  with  Iohn  preaching  the  word  ot 
the  Lord,  returne  toHierufalem.  z6  But 
the  Angel  fcndetli  Philip  to  teach,  &  baptize 
the  Ethiopian  Eunuch. 

^f»^gM  .flb  5>aul  teas  conrentuig 
^Unto  his  bcath.  ^nb  at 
that  time  there  ibas  a 
great  perfecutton  agamft 
thcoinirthiuhithvuasat 
fticrufalcm,  anb  they  lUcrcallftattcrcb 
abjoab  th20ughout  the  regions  of  3Ju 
bca,  anb  £>amana,cjcccpt  the  3poftics. 
x  ^nb  bcuout  men  carncb  ^teucn 
to  ins  buiiaii,anbinaDcgrcat  lamentation 
oucrhtm. 

3  ^sfo:5>atil,hcmabehauotUeof 
t\n_ 


Simon  the  forcerer.  TheAftes.      Of  the  Eunuch, 


tbeCljurtb ,  cntrmg  into  cuerpboufc, 
anD  bailing  men  atm  momen,  commit* 
tcDtbrmtopafou. 

4  Itbercfojetbcp  tbat  Vottt  fcattc* 
rcDabjoaD,  went  cucrp  mtjerc  p;cacl)- 
mgtbcttwD. 

5  Xben  $bilip  tbent  Dolbne  to  tbc 
title  of  Samaria,  anD  pjcacbco  Cbart 
bnto  ttjem. 

6  anD  tlic  people  Until  one  accojb 
gauc  l)ecD  bnto  tbofe  tbings  mbitb 
pbtbp  fpatie.bcar  tag  anD  feeing  tlje  mfc 
cartes  lbbicb  be  did. 

7  iFojumtleancfpirits,  ceding  mitb 
IotbD  Dover ,  tame  out  of  man?  tbat 
ibere  poflefTcD  ttntlj  tljem:  anD  manp 
ta&en  lbitb  paifics>anD  tbatmere  lame, 
lbercbcalcD. 

s  ana  tbere  mas  gecat  top  in  tbat 
ritte. 

9  25ut  tfberc  teas  a  ecttaine  man 
taileD  Simon,  mbicb  before  time  in  rije 
fame  citle  bfeb  fojeerp,  anD  bemitcbcb 
the  people  of  Samaria,  gimng  out  tfjat 
btmfclfe  tbas  fomc  great  one. 

10  %o  mbom  tbcp  all  gaue  DecD  from 
trje  leaft  to  tfje  grcatelt ,  fapmg ,  Xbis 
man  is  tbc  great  poiber  of  e?0D. 

1 1  aim  to  Ijim  tljcp  rjaD  rcgarD ,  be? 
caufctbat  of  long  time  be  IjaD  bemtttb; 
cDtbcmmubfoKcttcs. 

11  23ut  mijcn  tlicp  belceueb  VMitlip 
pjeacbtng  tbc  tbings  concerning  tl)e 
RingDomc  of  <5oD,  anD  tt)c  4i5amc  of 
3iefusCb»u\tbcprbercbapn3eD,  both, 
men  anD  momen. 

13  XHcn  Simon  bimfclfe  beleeueb 
alfo :  anD  \bbtn  Dec  mas  baptrjeD,  lice 
continticDmttft^f)iiip,anD  monDercD, 
beboiDtng  trjc  miracles  anb  fignes 
mbicb  mere  Done. 

14  /Bom  lbbcntbc apoOics mijicb 
mere  at  I?icritralcm,bcarD  tbat  Sama- 
ria bab  r  ccetucD  tbc  mojD  of  00D ,  thep 
fent  bnto  tljcm  0cter  anD  Jlorjn. 

15  nabo  mben  tbcp  mere  come 
DomncpiaicD  foj  tbcm  tljat  tbcp  nugfjt 
rctctuc  the  bolp  ©bolt. 

16  ( foi  as  vctfjec  mas  fallen  bpon 
none  of  tbcm :  onelp  tbcp  mere  baptijeb 
in  tlic  &Bmt  of  tl)c  ILojd  35cuis) 

17  Xben  lapbc  tbcp  tbcirbanDson 
tlicni.atiDtbcvrctciucDtljeljolviSboft. 

18  anD  U>ben  Pinion  fam  tbat 
tfyotigb  lading  on  of  tbc  apoftics 
tjanbs  tbcnoip<5boft  masgiucn,  ijcc 
offcrcD  tbcm  money, 

19  Sapmg.Gutc  mc  alfo  tbispolbcr, 
tbat  on  mijomfocticr  3J  lay  banbes, 


r)ce  map  retciue  tbe  bolp  Oljott. 

io  zstit  j&cter  ratD  bnto  Dim ,  Xbp 
money  pcriili  mitb  tbec ,  becaufc  ti)ou 
liaft  tiimiglit  tfjat  tt)c  gift  of  cod  map 
be  purcfyafcD  mitrj  montp. 

11  Xboubatt  neither  part  no?  lot  in 
tljis  mattcr,fo?  tbp  bean  ts  not  rigljt  in 
tbcGgbtof<5oD. 

n  Scpent  therefor  of  tbisthpibte 
UcDnrtTc,  anD  pjap  <3oD,  ifpccfjaps  tlic 
trjoucjljt  ofthtaebcattmapbc  fojgiucn 
tf)ec. 

13  $01 3  percciue  that  ttjou  art  in 
tbcgallof  bitterneffc,  anD  m  tbc  bono 
ofintcuittic. 

14  Xben  anfmercD  Simon ,  anD 
faiD,  i&appcto  trje?Lo;Dfo?mce,  tljat 
none  of  tljcfc  things  lbbtcl)  pc  bane  tpo^ 
Uen,  come  bpon  me. 

15  ^nD  tfjep,mi)en  trjcp  IjaD  tcfhfieD 
anD  pjeacUeD  tl)e  mo^D  of  tfje  ?Lo;D,  re- 
tnrncD  to  toier  ufakm ,  anD  p^actjcD  tbc 
oofpci  in  manp  biliages  of  tbe  Sarna  ■ 
ritancs. 

16  anb  tfje  angel  of  tfte?Lo?DlpaBe 
bnto^bilip,  Taping,  artfe,  anDgoeto- 
marD  tlic  5>otu!) ,  bnto  rfie  map  tliat 
goctl)  Domne  from  9icrufaiem  bnto 
©a^a.mbicrjisDefert. 

17  anDl)ccarofc,anblbcnt:anDbC5 
i)olb  ,a  man  of  Ctbiopia,  an  Cnnuctj  of 
great  autbo;itp  bnDet€anDace  ciucenc 
oftbc(Strjioptans,mrjof)aDtbe  charge 
of  all  her  trcafnre,anD  rjaD  cometo  $fe 
rufalemfo?tomo;tl)ip, 

18  !Easrcturnuig,anD  fitting  in  l)is 
cbarctreaD  €tatas  ttje  0?opbct. 

19  Xljcn  tbc  Spirit  faibe  bnto  $fy 
lip,<5oe  ncercanb  iopne  tbp  fclfe  to  tbis 
cbarct. 

30  anD  0bilip  ran  tbitbcr  to  bim, 
anD  IjeatD  bim  reaoe  tlic  0;opbet  C? 
faias,  anD  faiD ,  SanDertfanDcft  tbou 
miiattbonnatjclt; 

31  anD  bee  faiD,  l^om  can^,  ctcept 
fomc  man  fljoulD  gtuDc  mc;  anD  be  De^ 
fircD  0bfltp ,  tbat  bee  moulD  come  bp, 
anDfitmitbbmi. 

3iXbeplaccoftbcS)cripturc,mbiri) 
DeerraD ,  mastbis,  *^ccmaslcDasa 
(beepetotbeflaugbtcr ,?  iflteafUtmbe 
Diimbe  before  tlje  fljearer ,  fo  opcncD  be 
notbtsmoutb: 

33  *Jn  bis  bumiUation,  bis'3'«Dgc^ 
ment  mas  taftcn  amap :  anD  mbo  fliail 
Declare  bts  gcticration;  5fo?  bts  Itfcls 
taben  from  tbc  cart!). 

3+  SnD  tbc  Citnutb  anfnjctcDpbi' 
lip.ano  faiD;3l  piaptbcc^fmbomrpea' 

nctb 


7- 


Th 


econueruon 


f« 


Ch; 


ap.ix. 


ofSaul. 


|  netb  tljc  pjopbet  t\)\sj.  of  t)imrclfc,o?  of 
i  tome  other  man  < 

35  XlKnphinpopencbbismoutb, 
anb  began  at  tbc  fame  Scripture,  anb 
pjcacljcb  unto  him^cfus. 

j5  anbastijcytbcntontbciriuay, 
tlicp  tame  bnto  a  cecraine  water :  anD 
tbc€unucbfatb ,  Sec,  ijccc  is  water, 
VDljat  boetjj  buibcr  me  to  be  baptiscb  < 

37  anb  pbiltp  faib,  3Jftboubelec* 
ucftttntb  all  tljmebeact,  tljou  maycft. 
anb  l)c  anftuer  eb ,  anb  faib ,  3  beleeue 
tbat^efusCljnftisflje&onneofCctob. 

38  anbbetommanbcbtljecbarctto 
ftanbtttll:  anbtbey  Went  DoWncbotb 
into  tljc  Ujatec,  botlj  phtlip,  anb  tlje 
€unucb,anb  I)c  bapttseb  bim. 

39  anbtbljentbcywcretomebpout 
of  tne  water,  tfie  Spirit  of  tlje  fLojo 
eaucjljtawayjMjiUp ,  tbat  tlje  eunutlj 
faw  ^ini  no  mo?e :  ano  ijee  Went  on  ins 
waytctoytmg. 

4.0  25ut  pljflip  was  fonnb  at  7Lw 
tus :aub  palling  tboioW  he  pKv«hcmn 
aUtfjctlttcs,nU  Qttmxt  to  Cellar  ca. 

CHAP.    IX. 

Saul  going  towards  Damafcus,  4  isfhiken 
dowue  to  the  earth,  10  iscalledtothe  Apo- 
ftlefhip,  18  and  is  baptized  by  Ananias.  10 
HepieachethChriTtbuldly.  13  The  tewes 
Uy  wait  to  kil  him :  19  So  doc  the  Grecians, 
but  heeefcapeth  both.  51  The  Church  ha- 
uing  rell ,  Peter  healeth  i£neas  ot  the  pallie, 

36  and  reftorethTabitha  to  life. 

*«v>m*m  0n  j§>aiU  ftt  bjeatljing 
out  learnings  f  Uauglj 
tcr  agatnft  rtie  Dimples  of 
tlje  lLojb ,  Went  bnto  tlje 
„bigb£neft, 

2  anbbefrrcb  of  bun  letters  to  £>& 
mafcus.to  tlje  Synagogues,  tbatif  hec 
founb  any  of  tbis  map,  wbetbec  tljcy 
were  men  01  Women ,  Dee  migtjt  bung 
tljctn  bounb  Unto  $ur  ublctn. 

3  anb  as  Ijeiourneycb  became  mere 
Damalcus,  anb  fubbenly  tfterc  fljincb 
rounb  about  Ijima  ligbt  from  bcaucn. 

4  anb  Ijefclto  tlje  eartb,anb  Ijcarb 
a  tooicc  laying  bnto  ftim,  Saul,  Saul, 
Wby  perfemteft  tljou  me  < 

5  anbbcfaib,i@boartfbou?Uwo< 
anb  tbefcwb  fart  3  am  3Jefus  Wbom 
tfjou  perfetuteft:  3ltisljaeofo.z  tljce  to 
KUfteagauifttbcpricttes. 

6  anb  be  trembling  anb  aftontfljeb, 
faibjlozb,  Wbat  wilt  tljou  bauc  mee  to 
boe<  an&  tlje  jLcjb  faib  bnto  bun  ,  a- 
rife, anb goe into  tlje  titic,  ano  it  (ball 


be  tolb  tljeeWljat  tfjou  muft  boe. 

7  anb  tlje  men  Wljicb  iourneycb 
Witb  Ijim,  ftoob  fpeccbleflc,  bearing  a 
botcejnit  feeing  no  man. 

8  anb  Saul  arofc  from  tlje  cartlj , 
anb  wben  jjis  cpes  mere  opeueb,ljc  faw 
no  man:  but  tljcy  leb  bimbytbebanb, 
anb bjougljt  fjtm into  Damafcus. 

9  ^nb  be  ibas  tlj:cc  bayes  rbitljout 
figljt,anbneitljtrbibcate,no;b;(nbe. 

io  c  anb  there  was  a  certaincbif- 
ciple  at  Damafcus ,  namcb  ananias, 
anb  to  IjnnfaibfljelLoabinabiuon,  a* 
nautas.anbbefaib/ascljolD,3Jamhete, 
ILojb. 

ii  anb  tljcJlo;b  faib  bntolnm,  a- 
nfe,anb  goe  into  the  ftrcct,Wljtclj  is  cai- 
leb  Straight,  anb  inquire  m  tbc  botifc 
of  ^ubas,  foj  one  caueb  ^>aul  of  Xar* 
fus  :fo?beljolb,l)e  pzapetlj, 

\i  anb  Ijatlj  feene  in  a  Difion  a  man 
uameb  anauias,  tomming  m,anb  put- 
ting ins  banb  on  Ijim,  tljat  fjc  migljt  re- 
ceiucDisfigljt. 

13  Xtjenananiasanfmcreb,?Lo?b, 
3  tjaue  Ijcarb  by  manp  of  trjts  man, 
Ijott)  imicli  euill  ijee  Ijatlj  bone  to  tljy 
£>amtsat$icrufaiem: 

14  anbljercbcljatljautljontitfrom 
tljctljicfc  pnefts,  to  buibe  an  tljatcali 
onttjpiiame. 

15  26uttljcHo2bfaibbnto»im,<3oe 
tljp  ibay :  foj  Ijee  is  a  tljofen  bcflell  bnto 
me,  to  bcarc  my  ii5ame  befoze  tlje  <5nt 
tucs ,  anb  Bings,  anb  tlje  cljiitycn  of 
^frael. 

16  foi  31  ttnll  (bcrb  Ijtm  Ijolb  great 
tljmgs  Ijee  muft  fuffer  fo?  my  /Barnes 
fake. 

17  anbanamas  \bentljisibay,anb 
entrcb  into  tlje  Ijoufc ,  anb  putnng  Ins 
ljanbsonljun,faib,  262otljcr^aul,tl)c 
Ho  tf>  ( eucn  3*cfus  tbat  appear  cb  bnto 
tljce  mtljc  lbay  as  tljou  tamrft )  Ijatlj 
fentme,  tljat  tljou  nugljtcft  rcceiuctljy 
figljt,anb  befilleb  lbitlj  tlje  IJoiy  0ljoft. 

is  anb  unmcbiatly  tucrc  fell  from 
ins  eyes  as  it  Ijab  bene  fcales,  anb  Ijc  re 
tctucb  figbt  fo?rljU)ttl),  anb  arofc,  anb 
U)asbapti3cb. 

19  anb  U)ljen  bee  bab  recctucb  meat, 
bcwasftrencjtbcneb.'£bcnU)as-§>aui 
tertaine  bayes  ftitlj  tlje  bifnplcs  ibljitlj 
rbereats>ainafcus. 

zo  anb  ftraigljtlbay  Ijee  p^eacljcb 
Cbnftm  tlje  Synagogues,  tljat  Ijee  is 
tbe  Sonne  of  <5ob. 

ii  But  all  tljat  Ijcarb  bun ,  lbere  a 
ma5eb,anb  faib,  3s  not  tljis  be  tbat  be 
\ ftcoyeb 


81 


Aeneas  healed.        TheAcfles.  Tabitha railed. 


*  i.Cor.  i 


firopeb  tbem  ttibttb  taileb  on  tilts 
^ainc  (n  liuerufalem,  anb  tame  btttjet 
fo;  that  intent  that  be  might  b2ing  them 
bounbbnto  thctbicfep.ncfts? 

22  23utSauluurcafcb  the  mojc  m 
ftrcngtb ,  ant)  coufounbeb  tbe  "Jetties 
ibbich  muelt  at  3>amafcus,  pjoouing' 
that  this  tsbcrpCluifr. 

23  C  anb  aftcc  that  manp  bapes 
iucrcnilfillcb,tbe3Jett)CStooRccounfcl 
to  Hill  bint. 

24  *  23wt  tlKtc  laying  attiaitettias 
imowcnofSaubaubtbcpttiatcbcbtbc 
gatesbapanbntgbttoRillbun. 

r<,  %\)c\\  tbeturciplcstooUc  bun  bp 
nigbt,aubIetbtmbottincbptbettiailm 
abafHet. 

2 6  anb  ttiben  Saul  ttias  come  to  i?ic- 
rufalcm,  be  afTapcb  to  iopnc  himfelfc  to 
the  btfnples,  but  tbey  rberc  all  afraib  of 
him,anb  beleeueb  not  that  Ijc  ttias  a  btf 
ciple. 

27  25ut25arnabas  tooUc  Him ,  anb 
b20ttgl)tnimtotl)c3lpoftles,anobetKv 
rcb  unto  them  bott)  bee  bab  fecne  ti)t 
5,020  mtbcttiap,  ano  tbat  bccbabfpo 
Ren  to  bim,  anb  botti  bee  babp^eacljcb 
boibip  at  Damafeus  m  tl)c  jUame  of 
"Jems. 

28  anb  be  ttias  ttutb  tbem comming 
in,anb  going  out  at  l)icrttfalcm. 

29  anbbefpaRcbolblpmtbc/3ame 
of  tbe  V.  o;b^Jcfns,ano  bifpnteb  againfl 
i\^c  ©rccfans :  but  tbep  ttient  about  to 
flap  him. 

jo  nahfeb  ttiben  tbetocrtnen  Rnetbe, 
tbep  toougbt  bim  bottmc  to  Ccfarca, 
anD  fent  b<m  fooitb  to  Xarfus. 

51  Chen  bab  the  Churches  reft  tho< 
rottioutall  "5lubca,anb  Galilee,  anb 
Samaria,  anb  Were  cbificb,  anb  Vo&b 
ftinguuhefrartof  tbe&oib.anbintbc 
comfon  of  the  bolp  Ghoft ,  tticrc  multi 
plieb. 

3 1  i'  anb  it  tame  to  paCTc,  as  peter 
pafTcb  tho:ott)out  all  quarters,  be  came 
bottmc  alfo  to  tbe  Saints,  ttiljtcb  bttjelt 
at  ILpbba. 

33  anb  there  he  founb  a  ccrtamc  titan 
namcb  Aeneas,  ttilncb  hab  Kept  his  beb 
eight  vecrcs,  anb  ttiasfichc  of  thcpalfie. 

34- anb  peter  faiblmtohim,acucas, 
5lefus€hnftmaUet!)thcctt)ho1e:arife, 
aub  maUe  tbp  beb.  anb  he  arofc  tmmc 
biatclv. 

3<  aub  all  that  blbclt  at  ILpbba,  anb 
Sarou,  fa\b  him,  anb  turucb  to  tbe 
ILoJb. 

36  €  P.o\\)  there  ttias  at  "Joppa  a 


certain  biftiplcnameb  3Cabitba,tt)blcb 
bp  interpretation  ts  callcb  Dorcas : 
lthtsttiomaniPasfullofgoobU3o;&s, 
ano  amies  nuns,  ftibicb  (be  bib. 

37  anbitcamctopafreinthofebapes 
that  fl)c  ttias  ficac,  anb  bieb :  ttihomc 
Ibbeu  tbep  liab  ttiafbcb,  thep  laib  j)cr  tn 
an  upper  chamber. 

38  anb  fojafmucl)  as  UpbDa  ttias 
I  nigh  to  "Joppa,  anb  the  bifnplcs  bab 
bearo  that  peter  ttws  there ,  tbep  fent 
unto  bun  tttio  men,befirmg  bun  tbat  Ijc 
ttioulb  not  j)  bclap  to  come  to  tbem. 

39  3tften  peter  arofc  ano  tticnt  ttntb 
tbem:  ttiben  be  ttias  comctbev  bought 
bim  into  tbe  Upper  chamber :  anb  all 
the  ttiiDottics  ftoob  bp  him  ibeeptng, 
anb  fbcttnng  the  coats  anb  garments 
ttmicb  3>02cas  mabe,  ttiljiie  fbee  ibas 
ttJitbtbem. 

40  25m  peter  put  them  all  fo2tb,anb 
:  ancelco  bottmc ,  anb  piapeb ,  anb  rur* 
ningbimtothcbobp,faib,  Xabittw,  & 
rifc.anb  (be  openeb  her  cpes,anb  ttiben 
tbcfatti  peter,  ibcfatcup. 

+i  anbbcgaueberhisbanb,anblift 
her  Pp  :  anb  ttmeii  bee  bab  callcb  the 
feamts  <$  tt)ibottits,piefcnteb  bet  aline. 

42  anbitrbas  Unotticn  thojottiout 
all  Joppa,  anb  manp  beleeueb  in  tbe 
?Loib. 

43  anb  it  came  to  pafTctbatbctaricD 
manp  bapes  tn  "Joppa ,  ttutb  one  St 
monaXanncr. 

CHAP.    X. 

1  Cornelius  adcuoutman,  5  being  commaun- 
ded  by  au  Anpel,  fendeth  for  Peter:  1 1  Who 
by  avilion,  15. 2.0  is  taught  nor  to  de/pifc  the 
Gentiles.  34  Ashepreacheth  Chniho  Cor- 
nelius and  his  companie,  44TheholyGhoft 
on  them,  48  and  they  are  baptized. 

'"  l>cre  tbas  a  ccrtamc  man 
inCefarea,  caiieoComeli' 
us,  a  Centnnon  of  ^banb 
callcb  the  Jtalianbanb, 
2  abcuontman,anb 
one  tbat  fearcb  (5ob  lPitb  all  his  bonfe, 
ttibtcHgauc  muchalmes  to  tljc  people, 
anb  piapeb  Co  Gob  alttiap. 

3  l?cfattimaDifioncuiOcntlp,about 
the  ninth  boure  of  tbe  bap,  an  angel  of 
Gob  tommtng tn  to bmi,anb Taping bn 
to  bun  Cornelius. 

4  anbtt)hcnhclooRCDonb<m,bec 
ttiasafraib,anbfaib,n3hatisit,1Lo2b^ 
anb  he  faib  tonto  him ,  Clip  p2atcrs  anb 
thine  aimes  arc  come  Pp  fo;  a  memonal 
bcfo;c(5ob. 

5    anb 


\\0,,t, 


grit- 


Peters  vifion.  He        Chap.x.    goeth  to  Cornelius. 


5  anbnoU)fcnbmento3loppa,anb 
cailfo:  one  bunion ,  ibljofc  firuamcts 
peter. 

6  fycc  lobgctb  Untb  one  Million  a 
Xanucr ,  lbbofc  houfe  ts  bp  the  £>ca 
fibc  he  ujau  tell  thee  uujat  tljou  ougb 
tcfttoboc. 

7  anb  tt)I)cn the  3tuscl ibbiclj  fpaltc 
bnto  Comclius,U)as  ocpartcb,bc  callcb 
nbo  oftjisboumolbferuants,  anbabe^ 
uout  foulbier  of  tljcm  that  umitcb  on 
him  continually. 

8  anb  Vbbcn  be  bab  bcclarcb  all 
tljcfe  things  bnto  them,  befenttbemto 
3Joppa. 

9  C  £>n  the  mojrolb  as  tbey  ibent 
ontbctriourncy ,  anb  bjcib  nigh  Unto 
the  citie,  peter  Uicnt  Dp  Upon  tlje  Doufe 
to  p:ap,about  the  firth  bourc. 

io  anb  be  became  bcry  bungtjsanb 
lboulb  Dane  eaten  :  aBtit  lbbtlc  they 
mabc  rcabp,  he  fell  into  a  traunce, 

1 1  anb  faib  bcattcn  opencb ,  ana  a 
ccrtamc  bcfTcll  befcenbtng  bnto  !)im,as  I 
ttljao  becne  a  great  fljeete ,  Unit  at  the 
foure  comers ,  anb  let  bolbne  to  tlje 
earth : 

ii  ©herein  ibcrc  all  mancr  of  foure 
footeb  bcafts  of  the  cartl),  anb  lbilbc 
bcafts,anb  creeping  things,  anb  foules 
ofthcayjc. 

13  anb  there  came  a  boyce  to  hint, 
3ft{c,petcr :  bill, anb  catc. 

14-  28ut  peter  faib,  jftotfo,  Hojb ;  I 
foj  J}  hane  ncucr  eaten  any  thing  that 
is  common  ozbnclcanc. 

15  anb  tljc  boicc  fpafee  bnto  htm  a*  | 
game  thefeconb  tune ,  nabat  Gob  hath 
clcanfeb.rbatcaiinottboucommon. 

16  Xbts  ttias  bone  tbnfc:*  the  beflel 
ibas  r  ccciucb  top  agamc  into  hcauen. 

17  /Boib  ibhile  peter  boubtcbui: 
hunfeifc  lbljat  this  bifion  uibitb  he  bab 
fccne,(houlo  meant:  bchoib ,  the  men 
lbhich  lbcrcfcnt  from  Cornelius,  bab 
mabc  mqulrfc  foz&unons  houfe,  anb 
ftoobbefoze  the  gate, 

18  anb  callcb ,  anb  afKcb  Vbhcthcr 
Sntnon ,  lbhich  Uias  ficnamcb  peter, 
lbcrclobgcb  there. 

19  C  nainle  peter  thought  on  the  bv 
fion ,  the  fptrit  faib  bnto  him ,  2i5cholb, 
tlj:ee  men  fcclte  thee. 

20  anfc  therefore,  anb  get  thee 
bourne ,  anb  goe  Until  them ,  boubting 
nothing :  foz  Jj  hane  fent  them. 

ii  Xhen  peter  Went  bourne  to  the 
men ,  lbhicb  lberc  fcut  bnto  him  from 
Co2nelius,atibfaib,iScbolo,3Jamhcc, 


lbhom  yc  fctftc  :  lbbat  is  tljc  tatifc 
lbhcrcfojc  ye  arc  come  < 

22  anb  they  faibc ,  Comcliustbc 
€cntunon,a  tufl  man,anb  one  that  fca 
rctbGob,anbofgooorepottamongall 
thcuanonofthcjeibes ,  lbasibarueb 
from  (5ob  by  an  fyolp3fngel,to  feub  foj 
thee  into  his  houfe,  anb  to  Ijcarc  ttio  Jbs 
ofthce. 

2j  Xbcn  callcb  he  them  in ,  anb  lob 
gcb  them:  anb  on  tljc  mojroibc  peter 
tbent  aibay  lbitb  tljcm ,  anb  tcrtainc 
bjctljzen  from  ^Joppaaccopantco  him. 

2+  anb  thcmozroib  after  they  civ 
trcb  into  Ccfarea:anb  Cornelius  Ibai 
tcbfojtbcm,aubbabcai!cbtogctbccbis 
Binfmen  anb  nccre  fncnbs. 

k,  anb  as  peter  ibas  comnungm, 
Cornelius  met  bun,  anb  fell  bourne  at 
bisfcctcanbibojlbippcb  btm. 

26  But  peter  tooftc  bun  bp,  faying, 
S>tanb  bp ,  5  my  felfc  alfo  am  a  man. 

27  anb  as  bctaiKcbUntbbim ,  bec 
lbcnt  in  ,  anb  fotmb  many  tljat  Uierc 
come  together. 

28  anb  he  faib  bnto  tbcm, Pt  Unoib 
hoib  that  it  is  an  bniaibfuii  thing  fo:  a 
manthat  isa/Jcibc,  to  neepe  company 
o;  come  bnto  one  of  another  nation  : 
but©obIjatbfl)tU)cbutc,tbat3lfl)Oulb 
not  call  any  man  common  oj  bnclcanc. 

29  Xbcrfo2ccamc3J  bnto  von  lbitb- 
ont  gamefaymg ,  as  foonc  as  3J  ibas 
fentfo;.  31  afKctbcrcfo^fozuujattu; 
tent  vchauc  fent  fbjmc. 

jo  anb  Cornelius  faib,  ifonrc  bates 
agoe^  ibas  famng  bntiii  this  boure, 
anb  at  tljc  ninth  hourc3Jp2areb  in  mv 
houfe ,  anbfacholb ,  amanaoobbcfoic 
me  m  bzight  clothing, 

j i  anb&ib,Comclius,thpp2avcns 
hcarb ,  anb  tbmc  almcsarcljabiu  re 
mcmbMiucinthcughtofeob. 

32  ^cnbrhcrfojcto  3Ioppa,anbtail 
hitljcr  Smnon ,  U)hofe  ftmamc  ispc 
ter;  be  islobgcb  intbchoufcofoncAi. 
monaXanncr,  bptbc  §>eafibc,  lbbo 
Uibcn  he  c6mctb,(l)ali  fpeahebnto  tljcc. 

33  3mmcbiatciv  tbercfoze  3J  fcut  to 
thccaiio  thou  haft  men  bone,  that  thou 
art  come.  Boiii  therefore  are  me  all 
hecre  pjefent  befoje  C5ob ,  to  hcarc  all 
thmgs  that  are  tomanocb  thee  of  Gob. 

3+  C  Xhen  peter  opencb  bis 
mouth ,  anb  faib ,  *  £>f  a  trurth  If  per 
ccuie  f'  Gob  is  no  refpecter  of  prifous : 

3<>  25ut  m  ciicry  nation ,  be  that  fca 
iretbhim,  anbUiozhctlj  nghtcoufucfrc, 
isacceptcbUntljljim. 
36  Xhc 


"Deut-io. 
1 7. torn  2. 
1 1,  i.pec.i, 
17. 


SI2 


Peters  Sermon.  The  Ads. 


Peters  viiion. 


•ier.31.34- 

micli.7.iS. 


36  Tl)C  Wojb  U)I)ld)  Gob  fctUPUtO 

tDccl)ilD:cnof  3lftacl,  p2caeDmg  peace 
by  JJcfus  <C\)nft  G)t  ts  H020  of  all. ) 

37  %l)M  nwo  ( 3  fay )  you  mtoVbe 
nmicD  uias  publidicD  tljojoibout  an 
3Juoea,  anb began  from  Galilee,  after 
tfjc  bapttfincVbljitl)  3f  oDn  p2cacDcb : 

33  tyoiDGob  auotntcbjcfusbf  /3a- 
5arctDU)itl)  tDc  Doly  GijoQ,  anb  lbttl) 
power,  iDI)o  tticnt  about  bomg  goob, 
ano  Dealing  all  tDat  lbere  oppjeffeb  of 
tlje  Dctull :  fru  <5ob  lbas  Uritlj  Dun. 

39  ^nblbearcibitncfrcs  of  all  tilings 
ttilwn  Dee  bib  botD  in  tDc  lanb  of  tlje 
3!ctt)cs,anbutt?tcrufalcm,ibDomtDey 
flew  ana  hangcb  on  a  tree, 

40  ^intGobraifcbbptDetDirbbay, 
anb  flicibcb  Dim  openly, 

41  /Rot  to  all  ti)t  people ,  but  l>nto 
ibituc0rcs,cl)ofen  befo?c  of  Cob.euento 
bs  U)i)o  bib  cate  anb  bnntte  ibitl)  Dim 
after  Dc  rofe  from  tDc bcab. 

4 1  3lnb  Dc  commaubcb  bs  to  pjcactj 
bnto  tlic  people,  anb  to  telhfic  tDat  it  ts 
Dcil)DicDU>aso2bcincbofGobtobctDc 
3Hibgc  of  qutcRc  anb  bcab. 

43  *  %o  Dim  giuc  all  tDe  pzopDets 
i\3itne(Tc,tDattD?ougDDi5i5amcrbDo- 
foeuerbclceuetDtnDun,fl)ailrccciucre; 
million  of  fumes. 

44  C  n&Dtle  peter  yet  fpafec  tDcfc 
lbozbs,  tlje  Doly  Gljoft  fell  on  autljem 
lbDttliDearbtDtibojb. 

45  3Dtb  tDey  of  tDc  nrcumnfioniDDitD 
bclecucb,  mere  attonifDcb,  asmanyas 
came  lbitD  peter,  bceaufe  tDat  on  tDc 
Gentiles  alio  lbaspoibjeb  out  tDc  gift 
oftDeDolyGDoft. 

46  jFojtDcyDcarofDemfpeaactbttD 
tongues,  ano  magtuncGob.  XDcnait 
frocrcb  peter, 

47  Can  any  man  fojbib  lbatcr ,  tDat 
tDcfe  fhoulb  not  bee  baptwb ,  mDuI) 
Dane  rccctucb  tlje  Doly  Oljoft ,  as  Vbcli 
asvotu 

48  ^lub  Dec  commaubcb  tDcm  to  be 
baptneo  m  tDc  /Same  of  tDc  fLojb. 
XDcnpzaycb  tDcyDimtotanc  tcrtamc 
bayes. 

CHAP.    XI. 

1  Peter,  being  acaifcd  forgoing  in  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, j  makedi  his  defence,  18  which  is  ac- 
cepted. 19  The  Gofpel  being  fprcad  into 
Phenice  and  Cyprus,and  Amiuch.Barnabas 
is  lent  to  confiinic  them.  16  The  difciples 
there  are  firft  called  Chriftians.  1.7  Thcv  lend 
rclictc  to  the  brethren  in  Iuilca  in  tunc  ot 
famine. 


W£WW£  ^  tDe^poftles,  anb  bzt^ 
1^  w-tftDzentDatibrrcin  3ubca, 
iM>  Dcarb  tDat  tDc  Gentiles 
DabalforctciucbtDcibojb 
'*§fefe&  of  Gob. 
%  3lnbibDcnpctCTttiaseomebpto 
l}tcruCaicm ,  tDey  tfjat  lbere  of  tlje  en 
nimnDoncontcnbcbibitDDim, 

3  laying,  XDoulbenteft  in  to  men 
bncircumnftb,fbibfteatcrbttDtDem. 

4  26ut  peter  reljcarfcb  tDc  matter 
from  tDe  beginning ,  anb  erpounbcb  it 
by  ozber  bnto  tDcm,faymg, 

5  3  was  tn  tDcnticofSoppapjay; 
mg,  ano  m  a  trance  3Jfamabifion ,  a 
tcrtamc  bcffeli  befcenb,as  it  Dab  bcene  a 
great  fljecte,  let  bolbne  from  Deauen  by 
foure  cozncrs.anb  it  came  cucn  to  me. 

6  mpon  tfjc  ibDuD  U)Dcn  3  Dab 
faacnebnuue  eyes,  3  tonfibcrcb ,  anb 
faib  foure  footeb  beads  of  tlje  cartD, 
anb  ibilb  beaQs,  anb  creeping  tljings, 
anbfouicsoftDcairc 

7  3nb  3J  D  tarb  a  boy  ce,  ray  mg  bn= 
to  mc,  2irtfe  pctcc,  flay,anb  eate. 

8  25ut3faiD,^5otfo,!Lo2b:fo2no5 
tDmg  common  02  bntleane  IjatD  at  any 
tune  cntrcb  mto  my  moutD. 

9  26uttDrboyceanfnjercbmeagaine 
from  Deaucn,i@Dat  Gob  DatDclcanfcb, 
tDat  tall  not  tDott  common. 

10  3lnbtDis  was  bone  tDzee  times : 
anb  an  ibro  bzaibcn  bp  againc  into 
Dcaucu. 

1 1  3nb  bcDolb ,  umnebiately  tDerc 
ttjerc  tDzcc  men  aircaby  come  bnto  tDc 
Doufe  ibljtrc  $  ibas/ent  from  Ccfarea 
i  bnto  me. 

iz  3nb  tDe  fpmt  bab  me  goc  UntD 
tDcm,  notlnug  bonbtmg :  Q9o2courr, 
tDcfcnreb2CtD2enacconipatucbmc,anb 
ibceuttcb  into  tDc  mans  Doufe : 

13  %i\n  De  fbcibco  bs  Doib  D«Dab 
fecne  an  3ngcll  m  Dis  Doufe ,  lbDirD 
ftoob  anb  faib  bnto  Dim ,  £>cub  men  to 
3loppa,anb cailfoz&imon ,  lbDofcfir; 
name  is  peter: 

14  naDofliautcHtDcclbozbs.ibDcr- 
by  tDou.anb  all  tDy  Doufe  fl)al  be  faucb. 

15  ^nb  as  3  began  to  fpcalictDc  Do- 
ly  GDoft  fell  on  tDcm ,  *  as  on  bs  at  tDe 
beginning. 

i6  XDcn  rciticmb2cb3JtDcU)o;oof 
;tDc1Lo20,  DoiPtDatDcfaib ,  *3IoDnm 
ocebe  bapmcbttutl)  lbattr :  but  ye  fliall 
be  bapmcb  lDitD  tDc  Doly  GDoft. 

17  JFozafmucD  tDcti  as  Gob  gauc 

tDcm  tDc  liltc  gift  as  Dec  bib  bnto  bs, 

lblio  bclecucb  on  tDc  Ho:b  Jffus 

ClmQ: 


•Chap.i. 

•lohiit. 
16. 


Dearth prophccicd.    Chap.xij.      Peter imprifoned. 


•Chip. 8.1. 


Chltrcti . 


€D;iOQiJjatU)as3l  tDat'JcoulbibitD 
(laun  <3oDi 

is  r@Dcn  tfjep  l)catD  ttJefe  tDings, 
tDcpljelb  tljctr  peatcanb  glonucb  <Eob, 
fa?nng,XDcn  DatD  <SoD  alfo  to  tDc©civ 
tiics  grantcb  repentance  bnto  life. . 

19  C*iBon>rt)cplM)tct)tt)erefcatte- 
rcb  afyoab  bpon  tDe  perfecution  tDat 
arofc  about  £>tcuen ,  trauatlco  as  fartc 
as  iSDcnicc,  anb  Cyprus ,  anb  annocD, 
pjeacDmg  tDe  ibojbto  none ,  but  bnto 
tlje3Jeibcs  onel?. 

zo  anb  fomeoftDcmlbcremcnof 
€ppms,aiibCy;cnc,lbljicDlbDen  ^t^ 
ibetc  tome  to  antioeD,  fpauc  bnto  tDe 
(Grecians,  pjcacljing  tDe  fLoib^cfus. 

ii  anb  ti)e  Dano  of  tlje  ?Lo;b  ibas 
lbttl)  tDem:  anba  great  number  belce* 
neb,  ano  tumcb  bnto  tDe  ILozb. 

n  IE  Xtjcn  tibings  oftrjcfctfjtnss 
tame  bnto  tibe  cares  of  ttjc  CDurcD, 
ttljicD  ibas  in  $ierufalem :  anb  rDep 
fentfoortlj  Barnabas,  tDat  Dec  ujoulb 
goc  as  farrc  as  3tnttort). 

13  !©l)o  IbDcn  Dee  tame,  anb  Ijab 
feenctDe  grate  of  <Sob,  tbasgiao ,  anb 
crDojtcb  tnem  all,  tDat  ttutD  purpofe 
of  Deait  tlje?  lboulb  tleauc  bnto  m 
ILojD.  i 

i4  if  ox  Ije  ibas  a  goob  man,anb  full 
of  tlje  Dolp  ©Doft,  anb  of  fattD:  anb ; 
mneD  people  ibas  abbeb  bnto  tlje 
?Lojb. 

15  XDcn  bepartcb  Barnabas  to) 
Xarfus,  fbi  to  feeUc  £>aul. 

1 6  anb  \bDcn  Ije  Dab  foimb  Dim ,  \)t  j 
IwougDt  Dun  bnto  annotD.anb  tt  raine  I 
topaffctData  rbDolevccretDe^  affenv  i 
blebtDcmfclucs  ||  untDtDc  <£DurtD,anb  j 
taugtjt  mutD  people,  anbtDebifciplcS; 
Vbere  eaiicb  CDnlhans  firft  in  annoclj.  j 

t7  canbintDcfebaycs.camc^O' 
pDets  from  ^terufaiem  bnto  anttocD.  '< 

i%  anbtDercfloobbponcoftDcm, 
namcb  agabus,  anbOgnifieb  bp  tbe 
fpttiMDattDereflioulb  bcgrcatbeartD 
tlnougDout  all  tljeibozlb :  lbDtcD  came 
to  pafTc  in  tlje  oapes  of  Claubius  Ce? 
far. 

19  Xljen  tlje  bifciplcs ,  cuerp  man 
accojbmg  toljis  abiime,  betermuicb  to 
fenb  rciiefe  bnto  tlje  bmfjjcn  ibDitD 
btbeltmlJubca. 

jo  i©DicDaifotDcybib,anbfcntitto 
tDe  €iocrs  bp  tlje Ijanos  of  Barnabas 
anb&anl. 

CHAP.   XII. 

i    King  Hcrode  perfecutedi  the  ChnAians,  kil- 


leth  lames ,  and  inipriloncth  Peter;  whome 
an  Angel  dcliuereth  vpon  the  prayers  of  the 
Church,  io  la  his  pride  taking  to  himlelfe 
the  honour  due  to  God  ,  he  is  fiiickcii  by  an 
Angel;  and  diethmilerably.  2.4  After  his 
death,  the  word  of  God  piofpercth. 

iDlb  aboutttjat  time,  Ae- 
robe tDe  i&lng  ||  ftrctcDcb 
foonD  Dts  Daubs ,  to  bcrc  I 
ccrtaincoftljc  CDurcD. 
z  anbljctuliebgtames 

tljctyotDec  of  3JoDnibitDtDcutiOib. 
j  anb  becaufe  Dc  faib  it  plcafcb  tDe 

3JciDcs,  Dcepzoeecbeb  furtDer,  totaSe 

peter  alfo.  (SCljcn  mere  tDe  bayes  of 

bttlcaucncbbieab.) 

4  ano  ibDcn  Dee  Dab  appicDcnbcb 
Dim,  D«  put  Dunm  pufon,  anbbcliuc> 
reb  Dun  to  foure  quaternions  of  foul; 
biers  to  Ueepc  Dim ,  intcnbing  after 
«aQerto  bmigDunfojtD  to  tlje  people. 

5  peter  tDercfiw  Ibas  Kept  in  pji> 
fon,  but  pjaper  ibas  mabc  ||  ibitDout 
ccaung  of  tDe  CDurdj  bnto  <25ob  foj 
Dim. 

6  anb  tbDcn  Aerobe  tboulb  Dauc 
b?ougljt  Dim  foonD,  tDe  fame  nigljt  pe- 
ter ibas  Ocepingberibcene  tvbo  &quv 
biers,  bounb  tbttn  tibo  tljaiucs ,  anb 
tDclweptrs  before  tDe  boojc  Kept  tlje 
pjifort, 

7  »nb  beDolbe,  tlje  ^ngcl  of  tDe 
ILojb  came  bpon  Dmi ,  anb  a  itgDt  IDi^ 
neb  in  tDepnfon:  anbDecfmote^ctcr 
on  tDe  fibe ,  anb  raifcb  Dim  bp ,  faying, 
anfebpouicfeciy.  anb  Dis  cDmncs  fell 
off  from  DisDanbs. 

8  ^nb  tDe  angel  faib  bnto  Dim, 
<5trbe  tDvfclfc, anb bmbc  on  tljpfam 
bales :  anb  fo  Dcbib.  anb  Ije  faprt)  bn? 
to  Dim ,  «Catt  tfjp  garment  about  t|)cc, 
anbfolioibme. 

9  anb  Dee  Vbcnt  out ,  anb  follolbeb 
Dim ,  ano  ibift  not  tDat  it  mas  true 
ibDicD  ibas  Done  bp  tlje  angel :  but 
tljougDtDcCaibabifion. 

10  iDDcntDcpibcrepafttDcfirtranb 
tDe  feconb  lbarb ,  tDev  came  bnto  tlje 
pjon  gate  tDat  IcabctD  bnto  tDe  ntte, 
lbDtcD  opnicbto  tDem  of  Ijisoibnc  ac* 
cojb:  anbtlupibcnt  outanbpafTcb  on 
tDozoibonc  Qrccte,  anbfoo;tl)lbttljtDe 
angel  bepartcb  from  Dim. 

n  anb  ibDcn  peter  Ibas  come  to 
Dimfclfe,  Dec  faib,  ^oiDlT  ftnoib  of  a 
furenctDattDc  ?Lo2b  DatD  fcntDis  an- 
gel, ano  DatD  bclmcrcbmccoutof  tlK 
Daub  of  Aerobe,  anb  from  all  tDe  crncc 
tanon  of  tDcpcoplcof  tlje3le\bcs. 

fi  ii  anb 


'P'-l'S* 


andexrn'tj} 
prayer  was 


Herodes  death.        TheAftes.  Elymas  blind. 


{|  Or,  toaske 
who  BUI 
there. 


\\OrJtjrean 
hoilde  mind 
intending 
warre. 

\Gr.thlt 
WAi  oner  the 
Itftigi  bed- 
chamber. 


\\Or,ehir? 
thtlf  1 1  19, 

to- 


il anb  ibben  be  bab  confibcreb  the 
tbmg,bt  tame  to  tDcDoufe  of  iiparptbe 
mother  of  3Jol)n  ibbofe  ftrname  ibas 
jJgtarRclbbercnianpitocrcgatbcrcbto; 
getberpiapmg. 

i}  anb  as  peter  imocBebattbeoooje 
of  the  gate ,  a  bamofell  tame  ||  to  bcar< 
hcu,uamcol\booa. 
i+  anb  ibben  fl)t  tmcib  peters  botce, 
Qje  opencb  not  the  gate  foj  glaoncs,  but 
tan  in,  anb  tolb  bolb peter  ftoob  before 
the  gate. 

15  anotbepfaibbntobcr.Xbouart 
mao.  ButmceonQantlpamrmcbtbat 
it  ibas  euenro.  Xtjcn  fatb  tbep,3Jt  it  bis 
angel. 

i6  But  peter  eontinucb  tmocmng: 
ano  ibben  tbep  Dab  openeo  the  doore, 
anb  faib  him,  tbcp  mere  aftomfbeb. 

17  But  be  bccfccnmgbntotbcm  ibitb 
tDc  hanb,  to  bolb  their  peate,  bctiarcb 
bnto  tbcmboib  the  fLozo  bab  bzougbt 
Dun  out  of  tDc  pnfon  •  anb  Defaib.dSoc 
fbcib  tDcfc  things  bnto  panics,  anb  to 
tDe  tyetbjcn.anb  bebcpartcb.anb  ibent 
mto  another  plate. 

is  ji3oibarfooncasititoasbap,tberc 
tbas  no  final  fhrr  c  among  tbefouiotcrs, 
ibbat  mas  betomc  of  peter. 

19  anb  ibben  Aerobe  bab  fought  fw 
Dim,  anb  founo  Dtm  not,  Dec  ocamtneb 
tDc  Keepers,  anb  commanbeb  tljat  tbcp 
(Doulb  be  put  to  beafb.  anbbcclbcnt 
boibne  from  3Juoea  to  Ccfarea,  $  there 
abobe. 

io  C  anb  Aerobe  llibasbigblptoit 
plcafcb  ibitb  tDcm  of  %yit  anb  Subon : 
but  tbcp  eamcibitb  one  aecozbto  Dim, 
anb  bauing  mabc  Blaftus  ttDc  Rings 
ebamberiainctbctrfricnb,bcuccbpcace, 
becaufc  tDcit  countrep  ibas  nounfbeb 
by  the  lungs  countrep. 

u  anbbponafctbaptycrobatapcb 
mropailapparcll,  fate  bpon  his  throne, 
anb  mabe  an  Nation  tonto  them. 

n  ano  the  people  gauca  (bout,  fay- 
ing ,  Jt  is  the  boicc  of  a  <sob  ,anb  not  of 
a  man. 

13  anbimmcbtatlp  the  angel  of  the 
!Lo;b  fmotc  him ,  becaufc  bee  gaue  not 
Gob  the  glo;p,  anb  hec  ibas  eaten  of 
lbonnes.anb  gauc  bp  the  gbofr. 

14  C25uttbcVbojbof€>obgrcU)e, 
anb  multipiicb. 

15  anb  Barnabas  anb  S>aulretur- 
urb  from  fticrufalcm,  lbbcn  tbcp  hab 
fuifiiicb  their  i|  munOcric,  anb  tooRc 
miththem  3Jobn,lbbofc  fpmamcibas 
t]9atue. 


CHAP.    XIII. 

Paul  and  Barnabas  are  chofen  togoe  to  the 
Gentiles.  7  OfSergiusPaulus,and  Elymas 
theforccrer.  14  Paulpieachcth  at  Antioch, 
that  Iefus  is  Chrift.  41  The  Gentiles  be- 
leeuc:  45  but  the  lewes  s;ainefay  and  blal- 
phenic:  46  whereupon  they  tume  to  the 
Gentiles.  48  As  many  as  were  ordained  to 
life,bcleeued. 

j£>itoc  there  ibere  in  the 
Church  that  ibas  at  ante 
oth.ccrtamcpjopbetsant) 
teachers :  as  Barnabas, 
anbS>imcon  that  ibas  cat 
leb  i!3iger,  anb  ^Lucius  of  Cpjcne,  anb 
fiJDanaen,  ibbicbbao  bene  il  brought  bp 
Vbitb  ^crob  the  lEettar  th  ,anb  £>anl. 

z  astbepminiftrcbtotbc?Lo2b,anb 
fafteb,tbebolp<5boftfaio,£>cparatcmc 
Barnabas  anb  S>aul,  for  the  tijor&c 
ibbcrcunto  3  bauc  callcb  them. 

j  anb  tbben  the?  Dab  faftcb  anb 
prapeb,anb laib  tbetr  banbes on  them, 
tbepfcnttbcmalbap. 

4  <CS>o  tbcp  being  fent  forth  bp  the 
boip  0boft,  bepartcb  tonto  £>clcuna, 
anb  from  tbente  tbcp  failcb  to  Cpprus. 

5  anb  lbbcn  they  mere  at  j§>aiamis, 
tbcp  pjcatbeb  the  mo?b  of  <5ob  m  the 
^pnagogucs  of  the  ^ctbes:  anbtljcp 
Dab  alfo  31ohn  to  their  ^miller. 

6  anMbbcntbcpbabgonctbojotb 
the  3Ile  bnto  paphos,tbep  founb  a  cer? 
tame  fosterer,  a  faifc  pjopoct,  ajeibe, 
mDofc  name  ibas  asancfus : 

7  ©Dicb  ibas  ibitb  the  beputie  of 
the  tountrep  S>ergtus  paulus,  apju 
bent  man:  ibbo  tallcb  fo?  Barnabas 
anb£>aul,anbbefitcb  to  btatctbcibojb 
of<5ob. 

8  But cipmas tbefo2terer(foj  fo  is 
his  name  bp  interpretation)  lbitbftoob 
tbcm,fcelungto  turneaibap  tbcbeputp 
from  the  faith. 

9  Xhen  5»aul  ( ibho  alfo  is  «iied 
paul)  filicb  ibitb  the  holp  (PDoQ,  fct  bis 
cpcsonDim, 

io  anb  faib,©  full  ofalifubtiltp  anb 
ailmifcDicfe,tDoucDilboftDcbenil,tDou 
cnemic  of  all  ugDtcoufncffc,  ibilttDou 
nottcafc  to  pcrucrt  the  right  ibapes  of 
tbcILozb? 

ii  anbnoibbebolb,thcbanboftbe 
floib  is  bpon  thee,?  thou  fbatt  be  blmb, 
not  feeing  the  5>unnc  fo?a  fcafon.  anb 
immebiatlp  tticrc  fell  on  him  a  mift  anb 
abarKcncs,anbbcibentabout,feclung 
fome  to  icabbun  bp  tlje  banb. 


Or,Herodl 

bre- 


the. 


Pauls  f< 


ermon 


Ch; 


to 


"Exod.i.i. 
"  EtoJ.r;. 

'Eiod.i  j. 
1 6. 

I  Or  rJrTB^flt  . 

4  nttrft  hurtth 
r  /M«i  W 
(A.W<,  Dtut.l. 
i  I .  i  ma«  7. 
I 7,4*forrf«»f  /. 
Sept.    tnd 

Modi. 14. 1 
•iudg.3.9. 


•i.SiTi.8. 
J- 


■  i-Sim.16 
•Pral.89. 


«Elli.Il. 
I. 


•Mitj.i. 


"lohni.i 


thepeopJ( 


u  3Cfjcu  tl)c2Dcputiett»I)cnljefaU)C 
tbDattbastoonc.beleettcb.betngaQoni' 
CDcb  at  tDebottrme  of  tDe  iLojb. 

13  /!5otbVdl)cn0auianDl)istompa^ 
nploefeb  from  £apDos,  tDeptamc  to 
$crga  m  VtampDplia :  anD  jtoft"  DCi 
parting  from  tljeni,  rcturncb  to  $tcru- 
falcm. 

14.  CButibDentDcpbcpartebfrom 
0erga,tDep  tame  to  3ntiotD  m  $ifibta, 
atiD  \bcnt  into  tDe  fpnagoguc  on  tlje 
dabbatD  bap,anb  fate  boitone. 

15  3tnb  after  tDercaomg  of tfjc  ?Latb 
anbtlic^iopljcts,  tDe  rulers  oftDcfp* 
nagoguc  feut  tonto  tDcm ,  faping ,  &t 
mcnanbb:ctl)2cn,  if  yc  Ijaueanplbo^b 
of  erl)02tatioii  foj  tDe  pcoplcfap  on. 

i6  Xt)cn  0aul  Goob  bp ,  anb  bectt- 
mng  ltoitlj  Uis  Danb,  faio,i»j5cn  of  3Jfra; 
cl.anb  pc  tljatfcarc  ©ob,  gme  aubiente. 

17  XDe  C5ob  of  tins  people  of  -^fract 
tnofe  out  fathers,  anb  craitcbtDepco; 
ple*\bDcn  tDep  bibeit  as  Grangers  in 
tDeianD"Df  £gppt ,  *  anb  lbitD  anljigl) 
armcb20ugl)tl)ctl)cmoutofit. 

18  *3Dib  about  tt>c  time  of  fourtlc 
pecrcs  t  fuffcrcbljctljeir  maners  mtDc 
Unlberneuc. 

19  3mbtt)l)cnnc!)abbeuToyebfcucn 

nations  in  tDe  lanb  of  Ctjanaan,  *  Ije  fH> 
uibeb  tDeir  lanb  to  tDcnibp  lot : 

io  3(nb  after  trjat  *  he  gauebnto 
t|)em  iubges ,  about  tlje  fpatc  of  fourc 
Duntozcto  anb  fiftp  pecres  bntill  5>amucl 
tDei&opDet. 

ii  3inD  aftcrtbarb  tDcp  befirtb  a 
Bmg,*  anb  <5ob  gauebnto  tDem  Saul 
tDe  fonne  of  Cis,  a  man  of  tlje  tribe  of 
25eniamin,bptDcfpateoffourtppercs. 

11  anbtbljcnljeljabrcmoucbljitn, 
*Dcc  raifeb  bp  tonto  tDem  Dautb  to  be 
tljeirftmg ,  toitoDomalfoDegauetefiv 
mome,anbfatb,*  3IDaucfounb2>autb 
ti)e  fonne  of  3leue ,  a  man  after  mine 
oibn  Dcart,v«DicD  flial  fulfill  all  mp  Ml. 

13  *  j£>f  tins  mans  fceb  DatD<5ob, 
atwbing  to  l)is  pjomifc ,  raueb  bnto 
gjfrael  a  £>auiour,  gjefus: 

14  *j©l)cn3lol)nl)aofirapjcatneb 
befoze  l)is  tomnung,  tlje  baptifmc  of re* 
pentante  to  aiitljcpcopic  of  3ircael. 

15  anb  as  "Jolm  fulfilleb  Distourfc, 
l)eraib,*naDomtl)mlievetl)at3Ianu3J 
amnotDe.  ffiutbeDolb,  tDeretommetD 
one  after  me,  tbDofe  (Doocs  of  Dis  feete 
3J  am  not  tboztDp  to  loofc. 

16  flPcn  anb  bzetDzen  ,  tDilbzen  of 
tDeflotBcofSbzaDam ,  anbibDofoeucr 
among  poufearctD  ©ob,  topouistDe 


•Mat.  1S.6 


•X"J- 

j  Ibozb  of  tDisfaiuation  fent. 

17  :ffoz  tDep  tDat  oibcn  at  tyicrufd 
ton ,  9  tfteir  rulers,  betaurc  tDep  Unclb 
Dim  not ,  no?  pet  tlje  toottcs  of  tlje  pio-- 
pDcts  ltoDitD  arcrcao  ctterp  £>abbatD 
bap,tDcp  Dauc  fulfilleb  tljem  in  tonbem- 
mngDim. 

is  *  Snb  tljougn  tDcp  founb  no  taure  •  Mat 
ofocatl)ml)im,  pctbefireb  tl)ev0iiate 
tDatljcnjoulbbtaainc. 
'  19  3inb  ibDcn  thep  Dab  fulfilleb  all 
tliat  tuas  lbntten  ofljftn,  t^ty  toohe 
Dun  boitone  from  tlje  tree,  anb  lapb  Dim 
ina^>cpultD;e. 

30  *25ut  00b  raifeb  DimfrotDebeab: 

31  3nbpcitoasfccnemant>baj>esof 
tDcm  UiDttD  tame  bp  ltoitlj  Dim  from 
(Saniec  to  ^lerutaicm.VbDo  are  ijis  rbit- 
ncu*es  bnto  tDe  people. 

31  3tibtbebctiarebntovouglabti' 
Dings  ,  Doito  tDat  tDe  p^omife  itoDttlj 
ibasmabe  tonto  tDe  farDers, 

33  <5ob  DatD  fulfilleb  tDe  fame  tonto 
tos  tDcir  tDtlbzcn,  m  tljat  Dc  DatD  raifeb 
top  3Jcfus  agame,  as  it  is  aifo  itontten  in 
tDe  *  fctonb  #DUme :  3CDou  art  mp 
S>onne,  tDis  bap  Daue  3  begotten  tDee. 

I  3+  3nDastonterningtDatDeraifcD 
Dim  bp  from  tDe  bcab ,  nolto  no  moje  to 
rcturnctoto?ruptton, Ijcfaib  on  tDis 
rbifc,  *3JitotllguiepoutDcfurctmcr' 
tiesofS>auib. 

35  JeDerfozcDefattDalfoinanotDer 
0faime,  *Xljou  fhait  not  fuffer  tljine 
Dolp  one  to  fee  tojruption. 

36  5fo?2>auib  after  De  Dab  fcruebDis 

II  otbne  gcttcrattonbptDcltoili  of  <5ob, 
*fell  on  Oeepe,  anb  ttiasiaibc  tonto  Dis 
fatDets,anb  faito  tojruption : 

37  ®ut  Dee  VbDom  ©ob  raifeb  a» 
gaine,farb  no  to?ruption. 

3S  C25eitUnoibcnbntopoutDcrc^ 
foje,  menanbbzctDzcn,  tDattDwuglj 
tijisman  is  p?eatDtb  tonto  poutDcfo?- 
giueneu*e  of  fmnes. 

39  3lnbbpDimail?be!ceuc,arciumfi; 
eb  from  an  tDmgs,f r om  itoljitD  pc  toulb 
uotbciufttfiebbptDc?Laito  of^ofts. 

40  25cibare  tDcrcfoze  ,  lead  tDat 
tomebponpou  ltoDitD  is-fpoftenof  *  in  'Hab«...5 
tlje^opDets, 

41  aSeDolb.pccbefpifers,  anbltoon- 
bcr,anb  pcrifl) :  foz  3J  ttio^fte  a  ibozRc  m 
pour  bapes,  a  ltoojbc  ltoDttD  pou  (Dan  in 
no  ltotfe  beleeuc,tDougD  amanbetiarc  it 
tonto  pou. 

41  ^nb  tbDen  tDe  'Jcltoes  ttocrc 

gone  out  of  tlje  5)pnagoguc ,  tDe  <©ctf 

tiles  bcfougDt  tljat  tljcfc  Vtoojbs  nugbt 

M  2.  be 


hcb.i.j. 


*Efai.j5.j. 

■  Gre,  tb  ieitj 
illy  «r  iu/1 
lh,ngl,W,i.h 
XtorJtbtSept. 

■  -."l-.-j ;!  ,■  r.„.,- 

■  ktTI,-rftfor 
that  whuh  u 
in  the  Htbrrxe, 
Mtrats. 

'Pfal.itf. 

II. 

\\Ortfter 
he  had  m  his 
oxeneave 
jcruedthe 
wi/io/God. 
*  1. Kings 
1. 10. 


Ordeined  to  life.        The  A&s.      The  lame  healed. 


\\Or,mthe 
week?  ke- 
rne tne,  er  tn 
be  Slhkalh 
bttvreerte. 


*Efy'4S>- 
6. 


'Matth.io. 
14- 


bcp2cachcbtothcm||thencrt£>abbath. 

4}  iBott)  ibhen  the  Congregation 
lbas  bjofecn  Dp ,  man?  ofttjc  3Jctbcs, 
anb  religious  #2ofelytcs  folloibcb 
^auianb  Barnabas,  ibho  fpcahingto 
them,  perftoabcb  them  to  tonttnuc  in 
tlje  grate  of  ©ob. 

44  C  3tnb  the  nert  £>abbath  bap 
tamcaimoft  the  ibholc  titie  together  to 
hcatcthctti02bof(Sob. 

4$  26ttt  tbijen  the  Jlctbcs  fatb  the 
muintubcs,theyttieremicbftiithcnuie, 
anb  fpatte  againft  thofe  things  itoijict) 
tticrc  fpoften  by  £aul,  contrabttting, 
anbbiafphemtng. 

46  Xoen  jdaul  anb  26arnabas 
Vbareb  bolb,anb  faib,  3Jt  ttjasneccOaty 
that  the  ttwb  of  ©ob  (houlb  urfthauc 
bene  fpofecn  to  you :  but  fcctngycc  put  it 
from  you,  anb  (ubgc  your  fclucs  ton- 
tt)02thyofcucrlafttngltfc,loc,tticturnc 
to  the  ©entiles. 

47  #o2fohafhthc!Lo2bcomanbeb 
bs,  iayin?,  *  3  hattc  fct  thee  to  bee  a  light 
of  the  ©cutties,  that  tboulhottlbeftbc 
fo:  faiuation  bnto  the  tnbs  of  the  cart!). 

43  3Jnb  lbhcn  the  ©entiles  hcarb 
tins ,  they  tticrc  glab,  anbglo2tficbthe 
ttwb  of  the  Uo2b  :  anb  as  many  as 
lberc  02bemcb  to  ctcrnaliufcbclccttcb. 

49  3nbthc  ibo2b  of  the  ?Lo2b  lbas 
publtlheb  throughout  all  the  region. 

50  isut  the  3lctticsftirrcbbp  the  bc^ 
uout  anb  honourable  lbotncn,  anb  the 
thicfc  men  of  the  title ,  anb  raifcb  perfc- 
tutton  againft  0aul  anb  ffiatnabas, 
anb  crpcllcb  them  out  of  their  toafts. 

51  *23ut  the?  fljooKc  off  the  bull  of 
their  feetc  agamft  them,  anb  tame  bnto 
3fcomum. 

5z  2lnb thcbtfciplesttierc  fillcb  ttnth 
iop,anb  ttnth  thchoiy  ©hoft. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

1  Paul  and  Barnabas  are  perlecuted  fromlco- 
nium.  7  At  Lyftra  Paul  hcaleth  a  creeple, 
wheruponthey  are  reputed  as  gods.  19  Paul 
is  ftoncd.  11  They  pjfle  through  diuers 
Churches,  confirming  the  dilciplcs  in  faith 
and  patience.  16  Returning  to  Antioch,they 
report  what  God  had  done  with  them. 

•5?  $;X#5*»  iHb  it  tame  to  pafTc  in  3J- 
AWjtomwm,  that  they  ibcnt 


tiitp 

*£both  together  into  the 

t  fynagogttc  of  the  gjcibcs, 

£  anb  fo  fpahc ,  that  a  great 

imtintubc  both  oftficgicibcs,  anb  alfo 

oftbcGrcckes,bclccucti. 

i  23ut the  bubcltcumg jetties ftir^ 


«b  top  the  ©entiles ,  anb  mabc  their 
mmbes  euill  affecteb  againft  the  bre- 
thren. 

j  Hong  time  therefore  abobc  they 
(peaiting  bolbly  m  the  JLorb ,  lbhich 
gaue  tcftimonie  bnto  the  tt)02b  of  his 
graccanb  granteb  figncs  anb  ibonbers 
to  be  bone  by  their  hanbs. 

4  zSutthemuintubcofthe  city  lbas 
biuibcb:anb  part  hclb  ttnth  thc3/cibcs, 
anb  part  ttnth  thcapoftlcs. 

5  3lnb  ibhen  there  lbas  an  attaint 
mabc  both  of  thc©cnttles,  anb  alfo  of 
the  gjclbcs,  ttnth  their  rulers ,  to  bfc 
them  bcfpttcfully,anb  to  ftonc  them, 

6  Xhcy  lberc  ttiacc  of  it,anbflcbbn 
to  ?Lyftraanb2Dcrbc ,  ntics  of  fLycao-- 
nta ,  anb  bnto  the  region  that  lycth 
rounb  about. 

7  3lnb  there  they  preatheb  the  ©0 
fpcll. 

8  C3na  there  fate  a  tcrtaine  titan  at 
Hyftra,  impotent  in  hisfcetc,  betnga 
trccplc  from  his  mothers  lbombc,ibho 
ncucrhabttjalKcb. 

9  %\)t  fame  hcarb  $aul  fpeaUe: 
ttihoftcbfaftlybcholbtnghim,anbper= 
tenting  that  he  hab  faith  to  be  hcaicb, 

10  S>atb  ttnth  a  loibb  botcc ,  ;§tanb 
bprtght  onthy  feetc;  3mb  he  icapebanb 
ibaiaeb. 

1 1  2nbibhen  the  people  fatb  lbljat 
0anihab  bonctljcy  lift  bp  their  boy  tcs, 
faying m  the  fpcctl)  oflLytaoma,  Xljc 
gobsarccomcbottmctobs  tn  the  liltc- 
nclTcofmcit. 

n  %i\b  they  caiicb  iSarnabas  gjttpi- 
ter,  anb  paul  fil3crturtus,  bctaufchcc 
Xbasthcthtcfefpeaitcr. 

13  Xhcn  the  pttcft  of 3hipitcr,tt)htch 
lbas  bcf02c  their  ttty,b20ttghtorctt, anb 
gananbs  bnto  the  gates ,  anb  lbottlb 
Ijauc  boncfaenfice  ibith  the  people. 

14  nahtch  tbhcnthc^ipoftics,  isar- 
nabas  anb  $aul  hcarb  of ,  they  rcttt 
thctr  clothes,  anb  ratine  in  among  the 
peoplcrrytngout, 

15  ^nb  faymg ,  ^trs ,  !©hy  boc  ft e 
thefcthtngsi  lece  atfo  aicmcnofltltc 
pafltons  ttnth  you ,  anb  pjcach  bnto 
yott,that  yc  (l)Ottlb  turnc  from  tl)cfc  ba< 
nines,  bnto  the  ittttng  d5ob,  *lbhtch 
mabc  hcattcn  anb  earth,  anb  the  fca, 
anb  all  things  that  are  therein. 

i«  *  naho  tn  nines  paft,funreb  all  na= 
ttonsto  ttiaibc  in  thctr  ottmclbaycs. 

17  /15cuerthclcflc,hc icftnothunfelfc 
Ibtthonttttttncirc,  in  thathebtbgoob, 
anb  gaue  bs  tame  from  heaucn ,  anb 
frutt^ 


*Gcn.  it, 
pfjl.l4*.J, 
icud.  14.7. 

•Pf«1.8i. 


Paul  Honed. The       Chap.xv.     Apoftles  Council!. 


* 2. Cor. 1 1. 
»J.i 


Galar.5.1. 


frmtfal  fcafons,  filling  our  hearts  with 
foobanbgiabneffe. 

18  3tnD  With  tbcfe fayingsfcarfc  re- 
ttratnebtbey  the  people,  tbattbeyhab 
not  Done  famficc  tonto  them. 

19  Il3ud  there  tame  thither  tertaine 
3Jewcs  from  antiocb  anb  gjconlum, 
Who petftaabco  the  people,  *anb ha* 
utngftoncb  paul ,  b:cw  bmi  out  of  the 
tine,  fuppofing  he  hao  beenc  Dean. 

zo  ii?oWbcu,astbebiftipics  ftoob 
rounb  about  bun,  be  rofc  top,  anb  tame 
intofbccme,anbtbcncrtbaybcbcpar 
ten  With  asarnabas  to  iDerbc. 

ii  3inb  When  they  hab  pjcacbcb  the 
Cofpel  to  that  nty,anb  hab  taught  ma- 
ny,  ttjtp  rcturncb  agame  to  Hyttra,anb 
toiJcontutn,anb;&nnocb, 

2i  Confirmtngtbcfoulcsoftbebifc 
ttples,anb  ethomng  them  to  continue 
in  the  faith,  aub  that  we  mutt  through 
rauth  tribulation  enter  into  the  bmg- 
borne  of  cob, 

ij  anb  When  the?  hab  oweineb  them 
€ltocrstncuery  Church,  anbbabpzay^ 
eblbtth  fatting,  tbeycommcnbeb  them 
to  the  ILoJb,  on  Whom  the?  bclceueb. 
a4  anb  after  the?  hab  paffeb  through- 
out  £tfibia,  they  tame  to  ftampbylta. 

15  anb  when  they  hab  p:eaebebtbe 
ttwbin  l&crg'a ,  they  Went  boWne  into 
attaba, 

16  anb  thence  fatleb  to  antiorb, 
from  Wbcncethcy  hab  been  ret ommetv 
btb  to  the  grace  of  cob ,  fonbe  wojbe 
which  they  fulfiiieb. 

27  anb  When  tbey  were  tome ,  anb 
hab  gather eb  tbcCbureh  togctber.tbcy 
rebcarftball  that  cob  hab  bone  With 
fbcm,anbbowbcbabopencbtbebooje 
of  faith  bnto  the  cennles. 

18  anb  there  the?  abobe  long  time 
With  the  bithples- 

CHAP.  XV. 

Great  diffention  arifeth  touching  Circumcifion. 
6  The  Apoillesconfulc  about  it,  2.1  and  lend 
theit  determination  by  letters  to  the  Chur- 
ches. 36  Paul  and  Barnabas  thinking  to  viGt 
the  brethren  together,  fall  at  ftufe,  andde. 
t  alundcr. 

«5«g  0n  tertaine  men  Which 
"  tame  bowne  from  3iubea, 
taught  the  tyetluen ,  and 
faid ,  *  crrept  ye  be  rircunv 
_  ttfeb  after  the  manner  of 
$ll3ofes,yecannotbefaucb. 

i  ©hen  therefore  £aui  anb  asarna* 
bashabuo  fmau  biffention  anb  mfpu 


tanon  With  tbcm,tbey  bctermmeb  that 
0airt  anbBarnabas,anb  certcme  other 
of  them,  fhoulb  goe  top  to  tycrufalem 
bnto  the  apoftlcs  anb  fibers  about 
thisquettion. 

3  anb  being  brought  on  their  Way 
by  the  Cbnnb.tbcy  paffeb  tbojowphc* 
nice  anb  5>amana,  Declaring  the  con* 
uerfion  of  the  cennles:  anb  thev  tau^ 
feb  great  10?  tonto  ailtbebjctlnen. 

4.  anb  When  they  were  tome  to  fct^ 
rufaicm ,  the?  were  reteiucb  of  the 
Church ,  anb  of  the  apoftles,  anb  €b 
bers,  anb  the?  bcclareb  all  things  that 
cob  hab  bone  With  them. 

5  25ut  there  rofc  top  tertaine  of  the 
fett  of  the  pbanfecs  which  belccuct), 
facing,  that  it  was  neebfuli  to  nrcunv 
nfe  them,  anb  to  tomanb  them  to  ftcepe 
theiuwof^orcs. 

6  canb  the  apottlcs  s  c  ibers  tame 
together  foj  to  conftber  of  this  matter. 

7  anb  When  there  hab  bene  much 
bu"putmg,$ctcrrofebp,  anb  faib  tonto 
tbcm,*£0cn  anb  b!etb?cn,yc  ftnow  how 
that  agoob  while  agoc,  cob  mabc 
cboife among  tos,  that  the  ccntilcsby 
my  moiuh  fbouib  Ijeare  the  Wojbeof 
the  Cofpel,  anb  belccue. 

8  anb  Cob  Which  knoweth  the 
hearts,  bare  them  Witncs,  gtumg  them 
the  holy  Chott,  euen  ashe bib  bnto  tos, 

9  *anbputnooifFcrcnce  between  tos 
$  them,  purifying  their  hearts  by  faith. 

10  /BoW  ttjerfoic  Why  tempt  ye  cob, 
*toputayohetopontbenccfeeoffbebifc 
ctplcs,  Which  neither  our  fathers  noj 
WeWercabletobearei 

11  But  We  belccue  that  though  the 
grace  of  the  Hoib  3Jcfus  Cbntt,  We  thai 
befaucbeucnastbey. 

u  €  Xhen  ail  the  multitubc  bept  G- 
lence,  anb  gaucaubicncc  to  usarnabas 
anb  |Saul,  beclarmg  what  miracles  anb 
wonbers  Cob  hab  Wrought  among 
the  Cennles  by  them. 

ij  C  anb after  they  hab bclbetbeir 
peate,  panics  anfrocrcb,  faying,  ©en 
anb  bjethzen,  hearacn  bnto  me. 

14.  Simeon  hath  bcclareb  how  cob 
atthefirftbibtotfitcthecentiiestotabe 
out  of  them  a  people  fo?  his  iriainc. 

15  3mbtothisagrcctbcWo;!OSoftbe 
0«iophcts,  as  it  is  wjitten, 

i6  *  after  this  3  will  returne ,  anb 
Wit  bniib  agame  the  Xabcmacle  of  2)a« 
uib,ltohtch  is  fallnt  boWnc :  anb  31  will 
buiibagaine  the  mines  thereof,  anb  3! 
Will  let  it  top: 
0  i         17  3Chat 


'Chap.  io 
jo.  and  1 1. 
'3- 


Chap.io. 
4;. I. cor. 


'Matzj.^. 


'Amosp.il 


The  Apollles  epiltle.  The  Aftes.  Paul  and  Barnabas. 


17  Xhat  the  retinue  of  men  might 
fecKc  after  tl)e  H020,  anb  all  the  ©en* 
tiles,  bponibhom  my  jftatnets  calico, 
fayth  the  JLo?d,i\)!jo  bocth  all  thefe 
things. 

is  innorocn  bnto  ©ob  arc  all  his 
iD02fecs  fro  the  beginning  of  the  mo?lb. 

19  n3l)crcfo?emvfeitteiucis,t|)atlbe 
troublcnot  them ,  mhichfrom  among 
the  ©entiles  are  turncb  to  ©00 : 

20  2i6utthat  mcc  nmtc  bnto  them, 
that  they  abftame  from  pollutions  of 
3JDolcs,anbfromfonntation,anDfrom 
tilings  ftranglcb,anb  from bloob. 

2 1  jpo:  tTMcs  of  olbc  time  bath  in  v 
ttcry  tine  tJjem  that  pzcatl)  bitu ,  being 
rcao  in  the  Synagogues  eucry  Sab- 
bath bay. 

22  XbcnpicafcbittbcSlpoftiesanb 
eibcrs  Uutl)  the  lbrjolc  Church, to  fenb 
ebofenmenof  their  oibnc  company  to 
antioch ,  mttb  |&aul  anb  Barnabas: 
n-imeiv,  "Julias  furnatneu  Barfabas,  91 
Silas ,  cbicfc  men  among  the  bzethjen, 

23  3nbib20tc  letters  by  them  after 
tins  inanccXbe^poftles  anb  Clbcrs, 
anD  bicthzen ,  feno  greeting  bnto  the 
bzethzen ,  lbbiclj  arc  of  the  ©entiles  in 
3lntioch,anDS>yjta,anb€ilma. 

2+  j?o?afmuth  as  Uic  bane  hcarb, 
that  ccrtainc  which  mentors  fronibs, 
hauctroublebyou  ihithibozbs,  fubucr- i 
ting vour  foulcs.faytng,  Pt  muftbc  cir  l 
cumcifcb.anottecpctbcfLaw.to  Whom 
me  gaue  no  fuch  conmiaubcincnt : 

25  3Jt  fccmtD  goob  bnto  bs ,  bemg 
aftcinbico  Untrj  one  atcozb,  to  fctib  cho- 
fen  men  bnto  you,  with  our  btlottcb ' 
Barnabas  anb  $aul, 

16  «39ru  that  banc  havubcb  their 
hues  foz  the  .Oamc of  our  ?Lo20 3kfus 
CImft. 

2-7  nacc  hauc  fcut  thcrcfozc  3uoas 
ano  Silas ,  mho  fliall  alfo  tcllyouthc 
fame  things  by  nioutl). 

2S  foi  it  fcciueb  goob  to  die  holy 
©boft ,  anb  to  bs ,  to  lay  bpon  you  no 
greater  burben  then  tljcfe  ncceflanc 
things : 

29  Xhatycabftaincfrommcatcsof 
fcrcb  to  ibolcs,  auofrom  bloob, « from 
tilings  ftraugitb , anb  from  fornication: 
from  lbbtcb  ifyeucepcyour  felucs,yce 
fliall  boeibell.  fare  ye  Well. 

30  So  \bbcu  they  mere  Otfmiflcb, 
they  tame  to  Qlntioct) :  ano  Uihcn  they 
1Mb  gathcrcb  the  inultitubc  together, 
thevDciuicrcbthe<£ptftic. 

31  nanicb  mijcn  they  ban  rcab ,  they 


moycebfo?  the  II  confolanon. 

32  3lnD  3Jubas  ano  Silas,  being 
\320phetsalT0  themfclues,  ertjonettttjc 
b2cthzen  With  many  lbojos,  anb  confix 
mcb  them : 

33  ^nbaftectfteyftaotarteDtherea 
fpacc ,  they  mere  let  goein  peace  from 
the  b2ceh2en  bnto  the  3poftles. 

3+  /iSotmitbftanbing  tt  pieafcb  Sfc 
las  to  abibc  there  Ihll. 

35  0aul  alfo  anb  Barnabas  eontfc 
nueo  in  3nttocb,  teaching  ano  p?eacb< 
mg  the  W02D  of  the  ILojb ,  with  many 
others  alfo. 

36  C2nbfome  oayes  after  ,#aulfaib 
onto  Barnabas,  ?Let  bs  go  agame  anb 
btftt  our  tyethjen ,  in  cucry  city  inhere 
roehauepjeachcbthcinoiboftheliojb, 

andleehOlbthcybOC. 

37  3nb  Barnabas  betermineb  to 
taucmirh  them3ohn,«Jhorefurnanie 
ujasfl9arBC. 

38  But  #aul  thought  not  goob  to 
take  hun  unth  them  ■,  who  beparteb 
frointbemfrom0ampbyha,anbibcnt 
not  With  them  to  the  ino2ftc. 

39  3no  the  contention  was  fofbarpc 
betwecne  them ,  that  they  beparteb  a 
funber  one  from  the  other :  9  fo  Baraa* 
bas  tooUc  !i]3arUe,f  failcb  bnto  Cypzns. 

4.0  3hio#aultbofcSiias,anobcpars 
!  tcb,bcmg  recommenbeb  by  ttjc  tyctbjen 
'bnto  the  grace  of  ©ob. 

+1  Snb  be  went  tbozoW  Sy;ia  anD 
;  Cilina,  confirming  the  Churches. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

Paul  hauingcircumcifed  Timothy,  7  audbe- 
irig  called  by  the  Spirit  Irom  onecountrey  to 
another,  14  conuerteth  Lydia,  1^  cafteth 
outalpintotdiuination.  19  For  which  cau/e 
he  and  Silas  arc  whipped  and  impri/oned.  z6 
The  prilondoores  are  opened.  31  Thelay- 
lerisconuertcd,  ,7  and  they  aredeliueied. 

t  l^en  came  he  to  SOerbcanb 


^  liyftra  :anbbcholb,accr 
&S|  tame  bifnpic  mas  there, 
{£?]  fS&L  'iianieb  ICimotheus,  the 
is&akrg'A  fon  of  a  ecrtatne  ttjoman 
ujhich  mas  a  "Jcmcflc ,  anb  bclecueb : 
but  his  father  mas  a  ©rceae : 

2  ttmich  mas  men  rcportcb  of  by 
the  b2cth2en  that  tbere  at  fLyftra  anb 
jtomunr. 

3  $>un  moulb  0aul  haue  to  go  fonh 
with  him ,  anotoohe ,  anb  nrcumcifcD 
hitu.bccaufcofthcgicmesmhichibere 
tit  tliofc  quarters :  foz  they  fmelb  all, 
that  his  father  mas  a  ©rceae. 

I 4  3no 


\Or,txbcr- 


*Rom.l6. 
II. 


Lydiaconucrtcd.       Chap.xvj.  Prifoners  fing 


"ChapM- 


Or, the 
firft. 


\\Or,„fP,- 


4  anoas  they  Wcntthzough  then; 
ties,  they  ocliuerco  them  the  Decrees 
foj  to  feccpe,*  that  were  ozocmeo  of  ttjc 
apofties  ano  eioers,  Which  were  at 
§ierufalem. 

5  ano  Co  were  the  Churches  citable 
fhcotnthe  faith,  anoiutrcattDiu  num< 
beroayly. 

6  /ftoW  When  they  hao  gone  tho- 
roWout0hzygia,ano  tfjeregionof  <5A- 
latta,  ano  were  fojbiooen  of  the  t>olp 
©hoft  to  pjcaeh  the  Wozo  in  afta, 

7  after  they  were  tonic  to  #yua, 
they  affayeo  to  goe  into  aStthynta:  but 
the  s>pmt  fuffcreb  them  not. 

8  ano  they  palling  by  ©yfia,  canic 
oowne  to  Xroas. 

9  ano  a  biGon  appcacco  to  0aul  in 
rt)c  mgl)t :  Xhcr  e  ftooo  a  man  of  ©aee^ 
noma,  anopzayco  i)im,  faymg,  Come 
ouec  into  ©aceooma,  ant)  helpe  bs. 

ro  anoaftechehaotiecnerhetoiaon, 
tmmcoiatly  We  cnoeuourcD  to  goe  tnto 
©aceoonta,  affurcoiy  gathering,  that 
the  iLozo  hao  calico  bs  foz  to  pzcaeb  the 
<25ofpcl  bnto  them. 

ii  XhcrfozeloorutgfromXroas,Wc 
came  With  a  ttratght  courfcto&amo 
thzacia,  ant)  the  ncrt  Day  to  /fteapous : 

it  ano  from  thence  to  0hilippi,whtch 
is  ||  the  chief e  cine  of  that  part  of  ©ate* 
ooma,  ann  a  Colonic :  anb  We  were  in 
that  cute  abibing  cer  tame  oayes 

i j  anoonthc&abbothwcwentout 
of  thecmcbyanuerObe,  where  pzayer 
was  wont  to  be  maoe,?  we  fate  bowne, 
anb  fpabe  bnto  the  women  Xto^td)  refc^ 
teb  thither. 

14  canbatertainetbomannameb 
ILyota,  a  feuer  of  purple,  of  tl)c  ntie  of 
Xhyatira ,  which  wozftnppco  <soo, 
hcaro  bs:  Wbofe  heart  the  Hozd  ope* 
neb,  that  fhc  attenbeb  bmo  the  thmgs 
Which  were  fpoftcn  of  0SW. 

i<;  ano  Whcnfhewasbapnyo ,  anb 
her  houfbolb,  the  befought  bs ,  fapmg, 
3Jf  vc  bane  tubgeb  me  to  bee  faithfuii  to 
thc3LozD,comeintomyhoufe,anoabibc 
there,  aiiDfbcconftrameDbs. 

i6  canDttcamctopafle,asWcWettt 
to  pzayer , a  ccrtainc  2>amofell  pofTcfTcb 
With  a  fpirit  of  II  btntnation, met  bs : 
Vbhich  bzought  her  matters  much  game 
bvfoothfaymg. 

17  Xh«  fame  followcopaut  anb  bs, 
anbcricDXayitigXhcfemcnarcrhcfer* 
uants  of  the  mod  hie  <3oo,  Which  iheW 
bnto  bs  the  way  of  faiuation. 

is  ano  this  bib  (he  many  oayes :  but 


paul  being  grieueD,turneb anb  faib  to 
thcfpint.Jkommatiothecinthejftame 
of  3lefus  Chzift,to  come  out  of  hcr.ant) 
he  came  out  the  fame  houre. 

19  Cano  when  her  ©afters  faib 
that  the  hope  of  there  games  Was  gone, 
the?  caught  0aul  ano  S>ilas,  anb  DzeW 
them  into  the  ||  marketplace ,  bnto  the 
rulers, 

20  anb  brought  them  to  the  fl0agi; 
Urates  ,  faying  ,  Xhcfe  nun  being 
3Jclbcs,bo  ereeeOmgly  trouble  our  city, 

n  anb  teach  cuftomes  Which  are 
notiawfullfozbstorctciuc ,  neither  to 
obferucbemg  Bomanes. 

22  ano  the  multttnbc  role  bp  toge^ 
thctagamftthem.anb  the^agiftrates 
rent  oflF  their  clothes,'  anb  commanoco 
tobeatcthem. 

23  ano  lbhen  they  hao  laycb  many 
ftnpes  bpon  them ,  they  cafit  them  into 
pztfon ,  charging  the  3Jaylout  to  fteepe 
themfafcly. 

24.  i©ho  hatnng  rereiueb  fnch  a 
charge ,  thzutt  them  into  the  inner  pzt- 
fon, ?maoe  their  feet  fatttntheftoefies. 

25  C  ano  at  miotught ,  #aul  ano 
iSuias  pzayco ,  ano  fang  pzaifcs  bnto 
<£>oD :  anb  the  pztfoncrs  hcarD  them. 

26  anb  fuooenly  there  Vbas  a  great 
earthcroafee,  fo  that  the  founoanons  of 
thepafonttetefhabcmanOimmebiate* 
ly  all  the  boozes  tbere  openeo,  ano  cue- 
ry  ones  banostbere  loofco. 

27  ano  tlje  beeper  of  the  pnfon  a^ 
tbafting  out  of  his  ftccpe,  anb  feeing  the 
pnfon  boozes  open  ,  he  02eib  out  his 
tmo:b,  anblbouio  hauemllcD  hunfelfc, 
fuppoOng  that  tljcpzifoncrs  haobecne 
fleo. 

2s  25utpaultrteoU)ithaiouDboicc, 
faying,  2>oethyfclfenoharmc,  fojVbc 
arcalihcerc. 

29  1Chen  hce  calleo  foz  a  tight ,  ano 
fpzaugm.ano  came  trembling,  anb  fell 
boibne  befoze  paul  anb  Snias, 

30  ano  bzought  them  out,anofa(0, 
£>trs,rbhat  muft'J  doc  to  befauco  j 

31  anb  they  fatbc ,  Bclccue  on  the 
ILozD^lcfusChzift ,  ano  thou  (halt  be 
fauco,anothyhoufe. 

32  ano  they  fpahc  bnto  him  the 
lDozDoftheHozo ,  anotoallthatibcrc 
m  his  ho ttfe. 

33  anb  hec  toofec  them  the  fame 
houre  of  the  mght,  anb  ibafhcb  their 
ftnpes ,  anb  was  bapn5CD ,  hce  ano  all 
his.ftraightway. 

34.  ano  when  he  hao  bzought  them 

into 


I  Orjmri 


'  2. Cor.  1 1 

25,i.chcf. 

1.1. 


Paul  p  reacheth.        The  Aftcs.  Scriptures  fearched. 


"CIi.Tf.l6. 


uuo  His  boufebec  frt  meat  befoje  rbcm, 
anb  rcioyceb,  bclecumg  m  <3ob  Wttlj  all 
bisboufe. 

35  attDWbcmtWasDay,tl)e£0ap> 
Urates  fctu  ttic  Scrgcants,faying,1Lct 
tbofc  men  goe. 

36  ^tntittic  fertpcr  of  thepiifontolD 
this  faying  to  paul ,  Xbc  iJPagiftrates 
bauc  fcut  to  ictvou  goe :  jftow  tljccc- 
fo:cbcpart,anb  goempcate. 

37  Z5ut  paul  faib  unto  them ,  Xhcy 
Dane  beaten  bs  openly  bneonbemneb, 
being  -Romanes ,  anb  bane  tatt  bs  into 
pnfon,  anb  now  boc  they  tbmftbs  out 
pumlv  <  ftxt  bcrily  ,but  let  njem  tonic 
tbcinfciucs,anb  fetel)  bs  out. 

38  3lnb  the  Sergeants  tolbc  tbcfc 
Woibs  bnto  the  i#agiftrates :  anb  tbey  j 
fcarcb  When  tljcy  licarb  fljat  they  Were 
Romanes, 

39  2nb  tiitrp  tame  anb  befougbt 
them,  anbbjougbttbem  out,  anbbcfi- 
r cb  them  to  Depart  out  of  tlic  nnc. 

4.0  anbtbeywewoutoftbepnfon, 
*  anb  entr  cb  into  the  houfe  offLybia,  anb 
Wbentbey  Iiab  fecne  the  toctlncn,  t|jcv 
comfoztcbtrjemjanbbcpartcb. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

Paul  preachcth  at  Thcllalonica,  4  where 
fome  beleeuc ,  and  others  persecute  hmi.  10  I 
Hee  is  lent  to  Berea,  and  preaehcth  there.  13 
Being  pcrfecuted  at  ThefTalonica,  i^  hee 
commeth  to  Athens, .md  difputeth.and  prea- 
cheth  thelnungGod  to  thenivnknowcD,  34 
whereby  many  are  jonuerted  vnto  Chrift. 

<DW  When  tljcv  bab  paffeb 
tbojoW  3lmpbtpolis,  anb 
j3lpolloma,  tbeycame  to 
^&K  fXbcffaiomca,  Where  was 
&8&L  arynagogucof  tbc3icwes. 
i  3inb  paul ,  as  bis  mancr  ibas, 
Went  m  bnto  them ,  anb  tb:cc  Sabbath : 
baves  rcafoncb  With  them  out  of  the 
Scriptures,  | 

3  sDpeumg  anb  allcabgiug ,  that ; 
Chnftmultnccbs  haucfuffcrcb  anb  rt-i 
feu  agamc  from  the  bcab :  anb  that  this 
Jefus  whom  3  pjcacb  bnto  you,  is 
Cbnft. 

4  :3lnb  fome  of  them  bclccucb.anb 
confottrb  lbitl)  paul  anb  Silas :  anb  of 
the  beuout  orceKcs  agrcatiiiultiiube, 
anb  of  tlic  chicfc  Women  not  a  few. 

5  Cdittl)c3fcU)Cslbrjichbclccucb 
not,  mooucb  With  cnuic,  tooltc  bnto 
them  rename  icWD  fcllolbes  of  the  pa? 
ferfojt,  anb  gatbereb  a  company,  anb 


fct  authentic  on  anbpjojc,  anb  affaul 
tcbtbcbonfr  of  'Jafon ,  anb  fougbt  to 
b?ing  them  out  to  the  people. 

6  anb  When  they  founb  them  not, 
tljcy  bzcW  3Jafon,aub  certainebzctbzen 
bnto  the  rulers  of  the  citte ,  trying, 
Hbcfc  that  bauc  tunieb  the  wo;ib  bp- 
llbc  bo  wnc,ar  c  come  hither  alfo, 

7  n9hom3lafon  hath  rctciiub:  anb 
thefenil  boe  contrary  to  tl)c  bettcesof 
Cefar,  faying,  tljat  there  is  another 
1&ing,one'3cfus. 

8  3nbthcytronbfebtIjcpcople,anb 
the  rulers  oftfje  ntie,  lbhentheyhcarb 
tbrfc  things. 

9  3lnb when  they hab  tattcn  fecuci< 
ticof  Jafon,  anb  of  the  otfjcr,  they  let 
them  goe. 

io  C  3nb  the  tyethjen  immcbiatly 
fent  away  paulanb  Silas  by  night  tut 
to  25crca:  lbbo  comnung  thitbcr,Went 
uuo  tlic  Synagogue  of  tbCJcWcs. 

ii  Xbcfcwcccmojcnbblefbcuthofc 
mXbcffalonica,  m  that  they  rcccuieb 
the  wo2b  with  ail  rcabmeffc  of  minbe, 
anb  feartheb  the  Scrtpntrcs  bayly, 
Whether  tbofc  things  Were  fo. 

ii  Xhcrcfojc  many  of  them  belce- 
ucb:  alfo  of  honourable  Women  Whirl) 
Were  <5rccfecs,anb  of  men  nota  few. 

13  JSutWrjcnthCJcWcsofHLhciTa; 
lontcahabfenoWlcbge  that  the  Wozbof 
<5ob  was  pjcactjeb  of  paul  at  JSerca, 
tiicycamc  tljithcr  alfo,  anb  fhrr eb  bp 
the  people. 

14.  3inb  thm  tmmebiatly  the  toe- 
thzen  fent  away^aul ,  to  goe  as  it  were 
to  tlic  fca :  but  Silas  anb  ICtmorheus 
abobcthcrcfhll 

15  3lnb  they  tljat  tonbutteb  paul, 
bought  htm  bnto  Athens,  anb  met* 
umg  a  commaunbemettt  bnto  Silas 
anb  Xiniotheus,  fo;  to  tome  to  htm 
With  alifpccb,thcybepartcb. 

i6  c  /5ow  While  paul  waiteb  fo? 
tljcm  at  Athens,  his  fpint  wasfhtreb 
m  htm ,  When  hec  faw  tljc  trty  I!  Wholy 
giuentoiboiatrte. 

17  Xhcrcfo2Cbifputcbl)cmti)eSy'' 
nagogue  With  the  3cWcs ,  anb  With 
thebcuont  perfons ,  anb  in  the  marfeet 
bayly  With  them  that  met  With  l)»m. 

18  Xhcn  tertamc  philofophcrs  of 
thc€puiircans,anbofthcStoittes,etu 
tountreb  him  :  anb  fome  faib  ,  K3bat 
Willthisllbabblerfavf  b>thcrfomc,^c 
fecmeth  to  be  a  fetter  fooith  offfrangc 
gobs:  bctaufc  hec  p:cacbcb  bnto  tljcm 
' jcfus.anb  n)e  refurrcttion. 

19  3nb 


\\OrJ*!!cf 
Mi. 


\\OrM> 

tt&nr. 


Paul  preacheth,      Chap.xvii).  anddifputeth. 


\\0r  M*n. 
hili-ltwn 
tbehgheH 
court  tn  ±/4- 
thcnl. 


ofthe  Area 
pufittj. 


Or,£ffJt 
thai  jo* 

■J>»P.  I- 
Thtfl.d,. 


•Cha.7.48 


TW.50.8. 


'Efti43.i8 


frith. 


19  am>  tbeptoofee  bim,anbb2ongbt 
bimlmto  ||  3Jrcopagus,faptng,G0ap  rue 
anoitolbbattbtsnelbboctrine,  Vbljcrc* 
oftboufpcaBcu\is* 

xo  jfo?  thou  bjingcltecrtaine  Grange 
things  to  out  cares :  iPeiboulb  tmotti 
tljcrefo:e  tbrjat  rtjefc  things  meane. 

11  (fojalltbe:Stbcmansanbirrans 
gcrs  nirjitt)  mere  tbcre.fpent  their  time 
m  nothing  eife,  but  eitticr  to  tell  02  to 
beatcfomenctti  trjtng.) 

11  |[1Lbcn£aulttoobtntbenuDs 
of  ||  s$ars  -  bill,  anbfatb,  Pee  men  of  7b 
tbcns,3I  percemc  tbatm  all  tbutgspcc 
arctooTiipcrftttious. 

25  5?ozas3Jpau"eDbp,attDbcnclt) 
your  IJbcuotions,  3J  founb  an  aitar 
until  tljts mfcription ,tothe  vn- 

KNOWEN    GOD.    StaDOUl  tt)Crcf02C 

vectgnozantlv  tbojfbip ,  him  Declared 
bnto you. 

14.  *  <3ob  that  mabe  the  ttwlb,  anb 
all  things  therein,  feeing  that  lice  is 
ILoib  of  hcaucn  anb  earth ,  bu/clletb 
not  in  Xcmplcs  mabc  ttutb  banbs : 

15  ^cither  is  mozfrjippcb  rbitrj  mens 
Ijanbs *  as  though  be  nccbeb  atip  tl)ing, 
feeing  rjee  gtuetl)  to  all,  life  anb  b;catl), 
anD  an  things, 

26  3lnD  bath  mabc  of  one  bloob  all 
nations  of  men,  foj  to  bibcll  on  all  roc 
fate  oftlK  earth,  anb  bath  bctcrmtncb 
the  times  before  appomtcb,  anb  the 
boimbs  of  their  habitanon : 

17  Xbattbeprt)oiiiDfceftctbc?Lo2b, 
if  baph?  thep  might  feele  after  him  anb 
finbe  bun, though  he  be  not  farrc  from 
cucrponeof  tos. 

is  5Foz  in  htm  lbcline,  anbmoottc, 
anbhane  onr  being,  ascertains  alfoof 
pour  oumc$octsbauefaib,5fo2tt)e  arc 
aifohisorTfpjmg. 

19  jfo:afmuch  then  as  ttite  arc  the 
offfpzing  of  <5ob,  *  wee  ought  not  to 
thmnc  that  the  ©obbcab  is  hue  bnto 
golbe,02filucr,  02ftoncgraucnbpartc, 
anb  mans  beuicc. 

30  3lnb  the  times  of  this  tgnozancc 
<Sobttnnacbat,  butuoVb  comntanbetb 
all  men  eucrv  rbbcre  to  repent : 

31  ffietaufc  bee  bath  appomtcbabap 
in  the  \ubichhc  lbilliubgetbettwlbm 
nghteoufnetrc,  bp  that  man  ttiboin  hce 
bath  oibcmcb ,  lbhcrcof  he  llhath  Burnt 
affireancc  bnto  all  men ,  in  that  he  hath 
raiftb  him  from  the  beab. 

51  CHnDtbbcntheybeatb  ofthe  w 
furrcttton  ofthe  beab.fomemotUcb: 
anb  others  fatD,  nace  \bili  heare  tljce  a 


gatneofthts  matter. 

35  $>o  £aul  beparteb  front  among 
them. 

34.  $ottJbeit,certafncmcntiauetnv 
to  bim,anbbelecueb:  among  the  Vbljich 
rbassnonpfius  thc^teopagite,  anba 
iboman  nameb  SDamans ,  anb  others 
Untbtbcm. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

3  Paul  laboureth  with  his  hands,and  preacheth 
at  Corinth  to  the  Gentiles.  9  The  Lord  en- 
courageth  him  in  a  vifion.  u  Heeisaccufed 
before  Gallio  the  deputie  ,  but  is  difmiiled. 
18  Afterwards  pafsmg  from  citie  to  cine,  he 
ftrengthencth  the  dikiples.  Z4  Apollos, 
being  more  perfectly  mftruCred  by  Aquila 
and  Prifcilla  ,  18  preacheth  Chrift  with 
great  elficacie. 

iF&i&z&S  jFtcr  thefc  thmgs,  $aul 
s  beparteb  from  3ttljcns, 
aubtametoCozinth, 

1  anbfonnbatcrtatnc 
gjelbe  nameb  *  3Jcunia, 
b02nein^ontus,iatcly  tome  from  3}ta* 
ip,  Vbith  his  ibtfc  ^nfnlla,  (btcaufc  that 
Ciattbius  hab  commanbeb  all  ^leibes 
tobepart  from  Bome)anb  came  bnto 
them. 

3  3nb  btcaufe  hedbas  of  the  fame 
craft,hc  abobe  ttutb  thcm,anb  ttnougbt 
(fojbp  their  oceupanon  tbcpttierc  tent 
matters.) 

4  3lnD  bee  reafoncb  m  the  ^vna- 
goguc  eucrv  Sabbath,  anb  pcrfiuabeb 
thc3!crbes,anbthe(l5rceRcs 

5  3nbtt>bcn£>iiasaub1-irnotbcus 
tticrccomefrom  ^atcbonia.0aul  ttias 
pzefleb  m  fpirit ,  anb  temfieb  to  ttje 
35evbes ,  that  giefns  rbas  Chnft. 

6  3Cnb  Ibhcn  thev  oppofeb  them- 
fclues,anb  Wafphemcb,*  he  CljooUc  bis 
ratment,  anb  faib  bnto  them  ,  Pour 
bloobbebponvouroibncbeabs,3Jam 
clcane :  from  Ijcnccfimb  31  lbin  goc  bu-^ 
tothc<scnnies. 

7  C  3nb  bee  beparteb  thence,  anb 
cntrcbtnto  atertaineniansboufc,  na^ 
mcb3umis,ouetbattbo2fl)ippcb(5ob, 
tbboft  houfe  iopneb  harb  to  the  S>pttfc 
gogue. 

8  '^nbCcifpus,  the  cbtcfcrulcr of 
tbeS>i>nagognc,bclcciicbontbcll02b,i 
luitl)  all  his  boufc :  anb  many  of  the  j 
Co2intbians, hearing,  belecucb,  anbj 
lbcrcbapti5tb. 

9  Xben  fpalte  tbelLoJb  to  paul  tn 
the  night  bp  a  biHon ,  25e  not  afraib, 
but  fpeabe,  anb  bolbc  not  thv  peace : 

io   f02 


'Rom. \6  3 


'Mat. 10. 


"l.Cor.I. 


AauilaandPrifcilla    TheA&cs.     inftrudApollos. 


\Gr.futc 

then. 


'r.Cor4. 
19  um.4. 
'5. 


•  iCot.i 


10  f  01 3  am  tbtth  tl)ec,  anb  no  man  i 
tt)aifctotttt)cc,tDljuttt!)tc:fo?3JI)auc 

much  people  tn  tins  city. 

1 1  3MD  hec  t  cotmnueD  tljctc  a  ycerc  i 
anb  fijee  moncthcs,tcachutgthc  tbojo  of  1 
<5oD  among  them. 

iz  4U3ltiD  lbhcn  ©auto  mas  the  SDc-  j 
putic  of  3lchaia,  tlie  3Jnbcs  maoc  in* 
furrccnon  lbtth  one  accojD  agamltj 
patii ,  anD  brought  him  to  the  uibge* 
ntent  feat, 

13  SayingXhtsfclloibpcrrtoaDcth 
men  to  lbo?fi)ip  <3ob  contrary  to  the 
JLaiu. 

14  anblbhen^aultbasnoitoabout 
to  open  l)i5  mouth ,  oallio  faiD  Duto  the 
gjciDes,  3f  it  mere  a  matter  of  lwong, 
oi  lDieftco  icibDnctTc ,  £>  ycc  3Jciucs, 
reafoninoulb  thatgj  Choulb  bearc  lbtth 
you. 

15  2But  if  it  be  a  qucftion  of  tbojDs, 
anb  namcs,anD  of your  iaib,looi»c  ye  to 
it:fo?3l  fttil  be  no  uibgc  of  fuel)  matters. 

i6  2inD  he  Djauc  than  from  the  iubg* 
mentfeate. 

17  Xhcn  all  the  (Srccfers  toone 
Sofrhcncs  the  chicfe  ruler  of  the  Syna* 
gogucanb  beat  himbcfiwc  tlic  3Jubgc^ 
mentfeat :  anD  ©aiho  carcb  foj  none  of 
thofc  things. 

18  C3nb  £aul  after  this  tarteb  there 
yet  a  gooDtbhilc,  anb  then  tooae  his 
leaue  of  the  b;cthmt ,  anb  faileb  thence 
tnto  Syna ,  anb  lbith  him  p;imlia  anb 
2(qiuia:  haumg  (home  his  hcab  m  Cen- 
chjeaifojhchaDaboU). 

19  ^nbljc  came  to  <£phefus,  anb  left 
them  there :  but  he  himfclfe  cntrcb  into 
the  Synagogue,  aub  rcafoncb  lbith 
thcjcibcs.  I 

zo  i©hcn  they  befireb  him  to  tary 
longer  time  lbith them,  hcccoufcuteb 
not: 

z  1  25ut  babe  them  far  ctticll,  faying, 
3Jmu(t  by  ailmeancs  neepe  this  fcaft 
that  commeth,  m  5?icrnfalcm;but  gi 
VbiU  returne  agamebntoyou,  "if  <i5ob 
mill :  anb  he  faiiebfrom  ephefus. 

zz  2uiDtt>hcnhchaDlanDcDat€c* 
farea,  anb  gone  top ,  anb  faiutcb  the 
<£hurch,hciucntDoibneto  annoch. 

zj  3UtD  after  he  habfpentfome  tunc 
there,  hrcbepartcb,  anb  ibent  oucrail 
the  countrcy  of  (Baiatiaanb^bjygia  m 
ojbcr,(rrcngthcmngailthebiltipics. 

Z4  C*  3nb  a  ccrtamc  gjclb,namcb  3- 
polios,bomc  at  3icranbna,an  eloquent 
man,  anb mightie  m  the  Scriptures, 
camctocphcfus. 


z5  XhtsmannjasmfrructcDutthe 
may  of  tl)c3Lo?D,  anb  being  ferucnt  in 
the  fpint,hcfpabc  anb  taught  Diligently 
the  things  of  the  H02D,  Unolbmg  onely 
thebapnfmcof^ohn. 

z6  3iub  he  began  to  fpcaue  bolbly  in 
the  Synagogue :  whom  lbhcn  31quila 
anb  i&ifcilia  haD  hearD,  they  toout  him 
bnto  them ,  anb  crpounbcb  bnto  him 
tlje  may  of  45oD  nwe  perfectly. 

Z7  3nD  ibhcn  hec  ibas  bifpofeb  to 
paffc  into  3ehata,  the  bjcth;en  Vbjotc, 
erhomng  the  bifciplcs  to  rcccutc him: 
Vbho,ibhcnhcttias  tome,  helpcbthcm 
much  ibhich  hao  bclccueb  th?ogh  grace 

zs  foi  hec  mightily  conumceb  the 
3lcibcs,anb  that  publitsely ,  (hclbmg  by 
the  fenptur  cs,  that  3ictus  vuas  ©bull. 

CHAP.    XIX. 

6  The  holy  Ghoft  is  giuen  bv  PjuIs  hands.  9 
Thclevsesblafphemehis  do^iinc,  Vvhichis 
confirmed  by  miracles-  13  The  Jewifh  exor- 
cifts  16  arcbeatenby  die  deuill.  1^  Coniu- 
ring  books  are  burnt.  14  Demetrius, tor  loue 
ot  game,  taifeth  anvprorc  againft  Paul,  35 
which  is  appeafed  by  theTowne-clerke. 

iBDitcamctopafTcthat 
mhilc3lpollosil)asat€0' 
v  111  tli ,  pan  1  hauiug  paffcD 
tho?otti  the  bppec  toafls, 
cameto  ^phefus^nDfinD 
ing  ccrtamc  Difnplcs, 
z  tyefaiDbntothcm.^aucycrccciucD 
j  the  holy  ©hoft  fmccycc  bciccucb^nb 
they  faibc  bnto  him,  xscc  hauc  not  fo 
much  as  hearb  ibhcther  tljcre  be  any 
holy  dShott. 

3  ^nb  he  faiD  bnto  thcm,tSlmo  Mftt 
then  inert  ye  bapti3tD  i  SinDthcyfaiDc, 
5Unto  gjohns  25apttuue. 

4  *XhcnfaiDc}&aul ,  gjohnberely 
baptftcb  mith  the  bapnfmc  of  repen 
tancc,  faying  bnto  the  pcoplc,that  they 
fljoulb  bclceuc  on  hun  lbhich  Qiotilb 
come  after  hun.that  is,on  ChnO  5  efus. 

<,  nahen  they  hearb  this,  they  iberc 
baptiyD  m  the  /13atuc  of  tlje  JLozb 
■Jcfus. 

6  3InD  ttiheu  0aul  haD  laiDc  Ins 
hanDSbpon  them,  thcholy  <3hoft  came 
on  thcm,anD  they  fpafccnmh  tongues, 
anDpjophecicb. 

7  3luD  an  y  men  \bcrc  about  tUi clue. 

8  3itiD  hec  ibent  into  the  &yna< 
goguc,  anDfpaBC  bolblyfo;thcfpaccof 
thzce  moncths ,  Difputmg  anb  pcrfrua- 
Ding  the  things  tonccrmng  the  Bmg 
Domcof(5oD. 

9  ffiut 


"Mar 


Exorciils  beaten.        Chap.xix.  Idolaters  rage 


9  JButlbhenbiucrsibcrcharbcncD, 
anb  bclccueb  not,  but  fpauc  cuill  of that 
tbay  before  thcmultitube,  hebepartcb 
from  them,  ant  fcparatcb  the  btfrlplcs, 
bifputing  batly  m  ttjc  fcljoolc  of  one 
Xyzannus. 

10  anb  this  eontinucb  by  the  fpacc 
of  tvbo  vectes, fo  that  all  tDcv  which 
blbelt  tn  alia  ,  hcarb  thcibo:b  of  the 
Hozb  31  cfus,  both  Uclbcs  anb  orcefts. 

1 1  ana  <5ob  wrought  fpcciail  intra* 
ties  by  the  hanbs  of  paul: 

11  do  that  from  his  boby  lucre 
bzoughtbnto  thcficRchanbRetchicfs  0; 
apzons,  anb  thcbifcafcsbcpartcb  from 
them, ano  thccutli  fpitits  went  out  of 

them. 

i}  CChcnccrtaincoffhcbagabonb 
3lcVbcs,  cjco2cittcs,tooKcbponthcmto 
tall  once  them  Which  hab  etull  fpirtts, 
the  iiSamcof  the  fLozb^jcfus,  faying, 
tee  abiurc  you  by  3lcfusibhom  jdaul 

pzcachcth. 

14.  anb  there  Were  fcuenfonnes  of 
one  S>ceua  a  3!cuk  ,  anb  chicfcof  the 
pzietts.tbhichbibfo. 

1$  anDthccuiUfpiritanft»creb,anb 
fatb,3fcfus  J  ftno\bc,anb  £aui  3 
lmoti),buttt>hoarcyc» 

i6  anb  the  man  m  Whom  the  cum 
fpirlt  was ,  leapt  on  them ,  anb  otter* 
came  thcm,anb  pzeuaiicb  agamtt  them, 
fothatthcy  flcboutofthathoufenabeb 
anbWounbcb. 

17  anbthtswasunoWentoallthe 
33ctbcs  anb  ©recites  aifobWelltngat 
€phcnis,anb  fearcfcllon  them  all,  anb 
the  jRamc  of  the  ?Lo?b  3Jcfus  ibas 
magntficb. 

18  anD  many  that  bclccueb  tame, 
anbeonfcu"cD,anD  IhcWcD  their  dccdcs. 

19  £!9any  alfo  of  them  ibhtch  bfcD  cu* 
nous  arts ,  bzought  their  booaestoge* 
thcr  anb  butneb  them  befoze  all  men: 
anb  they  countcb  the  pzicc  of  them,  anb 
founb  tt  fifty  thoufanb  pieces  of  filucr. 

20  <t>o  mightily  grew  the  Wo?b  of 
<Sob,anbpzcuatlcb. 

ii  caftcrthefe  things  were  cnbco, 
0aul  purpofeb  in  the  fpirit ,  Whcnhcc 
hab  paffeb  thozoW  tpaccbonta  anb  a 
chaia,to  go  to  fctcrufalcm,faymg,aftcr 
^  haue  bin  thcr  c,3J  mutt  alfo  fee  Some, 

n  S>o  hee  fent  into  ^atebonta  tibo 
of  them  that  muuftccb  unto  rjfoi ,  %v 
mothcus  anb  tfraftus,  but  I)cl)Unfclfc 
ttavebmauafozafeafon. 

23  anb  the  fame  time  there  arofc  no 
ftnautttrtc  about  that  way. 


24.  JP02  a  ccrtame  man  namcbDc 
mctrius,a  ftluer  fnuth,  Which  mabe  fil 
uec  fhztnes  fo:  Diana  brought  no  fmail 
game  bnto  the  traf  tfmen : 

15  nahomhc  caiicb  together,  with 
the  wozltcmcn  of  line  occupanon ,  anb 
faib ,  &ite ,  ye  bnoW  that  by  this  craft 
wr  haue  our  wealth. 

x6  flpo:couer,y  c  fee  ft  hear  c  .that  not 
alone  at  €phcfus ,  but  aimoft  thzough 
out  all  afia,  thisjdaul  hathperfraabeb 
anb turneb away  ninth  people  faying, 
that  they  bee  no  gobs,  Which  arc  mabe 
With  hanbs. 

27  S>o  that  not  only  this  our  craft  is 
in  banger  to  be  fet  at  nought :  but  alfo 
that  the  Xcmplc  of  the  great  gobbeffe 
Diana  fboulb  be  bcfpifcb,anb  her  mag 
mficcncc  ftjoulb  be  beftroveb,  whom  all 
afia,anb  the  Wozlb  wozfhtppctl). 

18  anb  When  they  heatbthefefay* 
mgs,they  Were  fnl  ofW;ath,i  cricb  out, 
faying,  ©rcatisDiana  ofpCphcfians. 

19  anb  the  whole  citic  Was  filleb 
With  confufton  ,  anb  batting  caught 
©aius  anb  acittarchus  men  of  ©ate* 
bonia  0auis  companions  in  trauaiic, 
they  rulheb  With  one  actozb  into  the 
Xhcatrc. 

jo  anb  When  ^auiwoulb  haue  en* 
trcb  in  bnto  the  people,  tljc  bifctplesfuf* 
fcrebhimnot. 

Si  anb  certainc  ofthcthicfc  of atia, 
Whtth  Were  his  frtenbs,  fent  bnto  htm, 
beftcing  him  that  he  wonlbnotabuen* 
ture  hunfclfc  into  the  Xhcatrc. 

31  5>ome  therefore  cricb  one  thing, 
anb  fomeanothcr:fo:  theaffembly  ibas 
ronfufeb ,  anb  the  mo:r  part  Uncw  not 
whercfozc  they  Were  come  together. 

33  anb  they  bzcwaicranbcr  out  of 
thcmultitube,  the  3IcWcs  putting  him 
fozWarb.  anb  aicranbcr  bccRcncb 
with  the  hanb ,  anb  Woulb  haue  mabe 
his  befence  bnto  the  people. 

34.  mxt  rbhen  they  uncib  that  he 
Ibasa3}crbe,  ail  ibith  one  boyce  about 
the  fpacc  oftttio  hourcs  eneb  out,<l5reat 
is  Diana  of  the  ephefians. 

35  anb  ibhen  the  toibncclarbe  hab 
appcafebthe  people,  hefaib,  J'cmcnof 
ephems ,  ibhat  man  is  there /•bnoib^ 
cthnothorbthatthtnneofthc^phefi' 
ansis  t  a  ibozftjippcrofthc  great  gob; 
Deffe  Diana,  anb  of  the  image  ibhtch  fell 
botbncfcom'Jnpttcr^ 

36  Seeing  then  tljat  thefc  things 
cannot  befpoRcnagainft.yc  ought  to  be 
quiet,anb  to  boc  nothing  rafhly. 

37  fai 


f  (}re.  tho 
temple  kfc~ 

fir. 


The  Lords  Supper.  TheActes.      Eutychusraifed. 


\\Orjhc 
Court  Jurfi 
arikef'* 


\\Or,frdf- 


'Chip.' 
4(5. 


37  Jfoi  vc  baucbymght  Dtfljer  tbcfe 
men ,  n>l)icij  ate  neither  robbers  of 
Cbmcbes.nojpttwafpbcmcrsofpout, 

gobDefle:  | 

3S  n0bcrefij7Cff£>cmetTtus,anDtbc 
eraftelmcn  ibttftt)  are  tbitt)  him,  bant  a 
matter  agamft  aup  man,  |j  the  laid  ts  o* 
pm.anOtbctcarcDeputtesAettbcmmv 
pieab  one  another. 

39  ffimifpecenqntteanptyingctnv 
ccrntng  other matters,  it  fbalbc  Deter* 
mrneb  m  a||iaibrnU  aflemblp. 

40  5Fo;ribe  are  tn  banger  to  be  tallcb 
tnQUCftiontojtbtSbapcsbpzoje,  there 
being  no  eaofe  tbbcrcbp  ibe  ma?  gme  an 
attempt  of  this  tontourle. 

41  ^btbbtn  bee  bab  thus  fpottcn, 
bebtfmifleD  tbtaflemblp. 

CHAP.    XX. 

Paul  gocth  to  Macedonia.  7  Hecelebrareth 
the  Lords  Supper,  and  preacheth.  9  Euty- 
chushauingfallendowne  dead,  10  israifed 
to  lite.  17  AtMiletum  he  calleth  the  Elders 
together ,  telleth  {hem  what  (hall  befall  to 
himfelfe,  18  committeth  Gods  flocke  to 
them,  2.9  waroeth  them  of  falfe  teachers, 
ji  commendeththemtoGod,  3^  prayeth 
with  them.and  goeth  his  way. 

/I5b  after  ti)c  bpwe  vbas 
teafeb ,  0aul  callcD  bnto 
btm  the  Difttplcs ,  anb  tm< 
b;ateb  them,  *  bepartcb, 
ioi  to  go  into  fl©aceDoma. 
%  2nDtt>bcnbcbaDgoneouertbofc 

parts ,  anb  bao  giucn  tljeni  mad)  crfto^ 

tatiombe  came  into  Greece, 

3  3nD  there  abobc  tbzee  monctbs : 
anD  ibbcn  tlic  ;jeibc6  laptD  tbaite  foj 
btm,  as  bee  was  about  to  taiie  into  £>r- 
tia,  bee  purpofeb  to  retunie  tbojotb 
Q5atcoonta. 

4  3bio  there  accompanicD  bun  into 
3tfta,  £>opatcr  of  ffitrca  :  anb  of  the 
XbctTaiontans,  3rtftarcbus,  anb  £>v 
cuntms,  anb<pamsof  SDetbe,  wnto%i? 
motbeus :  ano  of  3Cia  Xpcbicns  anb 
Xropbimus. 

<,  Cbcfc  going  before, tartcbfoibs 
atXroas: 

6  3lnD  U)tc  farteD  aibap  from  #bi- 
tippi ,  after  tbc  oaves  of  tmlcaucncD 
b2cab,aubcametmto  tbcmtoXroastn 
fiucDapcsAbbcrc  ibe  abooe  feucn  Dates. 

7  3lnD  bpon  tbe  firft  Da?  of  tbe 
lbtebctbbcn  tbc  Dimples  tame  toge- 
tber  *  to  b2caUc  bjcao ,  £aul  pieatljcD 
Dnto  them,  rcabp  to  Depart  on  the  mo;- 


roU),  anb  tonttnucb  bis  fpeatft  bnnll 
nubtugrjt. 

8  anD  there  ibete  mam;  lights  m 
the  bpper  chamber  tbhtrt  the?  ibere 
gather  cb  together. 

9  ^no  there  fate  in  a  tbinboib  a  cer 
tame  pong  man  nameb  «utpchus ,  be 
tng  fallen  mto  a  beepe  flcepe,  anb  as 
paui  teas  long  preaching,  bee  funae 
botbnc  ttHth  Qecpe,anb  frt  Dotbnc  front 
tbc  tin rD  loft,anb  ibas  taken bp bcao. 

10  3nD  #aul  ibentbotbne,  anb  fell 
on  him  ,  anD  cmbranng  bun ,  faibc, 
XrouWe  not  your  femes,  for  bts  life  is 
mhun. 

11  ashen  bee  therefore  tbas  come  bp 
agatticf  hab  broaenbreaD,  anb  eaten, 
ano  tatbeo  a  long  tbhflc^ncn  till  br eat; c 
ofbap,fbbebepartcD. 

u  anD  rbepbrongbttbc  pong  man 
abucanbibcrenotaltttlc  comfortcD. 

13  C  £nb  ibee  ibent  before  to  flnp, 
anb  farlcD  bnto  ados,  there  mtcnbing 
to  tabe  m  #anl :  fo;  fo  hao  bee  appotm 
teD.mmDtnghimfclft  to  goc  afoote. 

14  ^nbibhenhcmetibithbsatcaf= 
Cos,  wet  toobe  him  in,  anb  tame  to  £01* 
tplene. 

15  3nb  ibcefatlcD  thence ,  anb  tame 
the  next  bap  oner  agamft  Chios,  anb 
the  ncrt  bap  tbe  arriutb  at  3>amos,anb 
taneb  at  Xrogptiium:  anD  the  ntrtDap 
njc  tame  to  Miletus. 

16  iFo2$aulbaDDctcrmineDtofaae 
bp<£pbefus,beeaufe  he  TboulD  not  tprnD 
the  time  tn  3fia :  for  he  haftcD ,  if  it  acre 
pofTiblcfo2  hmi,to  be  at  $ierufalcmtbe 
Dapof^cntccott. 

17  C  3nD  from  ductus  hec  tent  to 
«pbcfus,  anb  cailtD  the  eibers  of  the 
Church. 

18  3nD  lbhen  the?  tbere  tome  to 
him,  he  fatbbnto  them ,  Pc  tmoib  from 
thefir  ft  bap  that  3  tame  into  afia  .after 
tbbatmaner  3!fjatu  bene  ibith  pou  at 
ailfcafons, 

19  5>crumgthe|LojbtbUhallhumi- 
litic  of  mlnoe,  anD  tDithmanp  tearcs, 
anbtemptatfons,tbbicbbcfcllmebptbe 
iping  m  tuatt  of  the  "jclbes : 

ao  ^nb  hotb  3  Kept  bathe  nothing 
that  ibas  profitable  bnto  pou.but  hane 
fbetbebyon,  anbhaue  taught  pon  pnb- 
libelv,anofcomhoufcto  houfc, 

xi  tcftifptng  both  to  the  3Jcibcs 
anoalfotothc  ©recbes,  repentance  to? 
lDarb  god,  anD  faith  totbarbour  JloiD 
■JcfusCbntt. 

21  ^notion) bcholb,  3  goc  bormb 

m 


¥ml 


aulsintegrine. 


forme* 


'i.Cor.4. 

ii.  I. theft. 
1.9.  i.thff. 
J.8. 


Chap.xxj.    His  bonds  foretold. 


inthcfpiritt)ntoi?icrufalcm,tiotl$nolb: 
mg  thcthmgs  that  thai  befallmc  there: 

23  &auc  that  the  holy  <3hofttbitncfi 
feth  in  en  cry  city , faying  that  bonbs  anb 
afflictions  !|  abtDc  inc. 

14.  JSutnoncofthcfcthmgsniooucj 
mc,  neither  count  3  my  hfc  bearebnto ' 
mv  fclf3fo  trjat  J  might  rutin")  nip  courfc 
Ibtthtoy,?  the  mtmftcry  ibhich'J  hauc 
rccciucb  of  the  Horn  Jcfus ,  to  tcftific 
the  ©ofpclofthc  grace  of  (5ob. 

1$  anb  notti  bchoio ,  3f  Kuolb  that 
ycall,amongnihoni3lhaucgoncp2ea> 
ehtng  the  uutgbom  ofGob,  (hall  fee  my 
face  no  mo  2c. 

ze  nahcrcfojc  3  take  you  corccojb! 
this  oar  .that  3  am  pnrc  from  the! 
bloobofailmcn. 

17  foi  3  hauc  not  (bmincb  to  bfc; 
dare  bnto  you  all  the  counfell  of  <5ob.  I 

is  C£aKChccbtbcrcfo2c  bnto  your' 
femes, s  to  all  the  flochcoucr  the  which 
trje  holy  <3hoft  hath  maoe  von  oner; 
fecrs,to  feeD  the  Church  of  <3ob,ibhich! 
he  hart)  purthafeb  lbith  his  oibn  bloob. 

19  foi  3  ftnotb  this,  that  after  mv 
Departing  (hall  gticiiousibolues  enter 
in  among  you, not  fparutg  the  floe&e. 

30  aifo  of  vour  oibnc  fclucs  thai  men 
anfcfpeabing  perncrfc  thmgs.to  Diavo 
atbay  biftiples  after  them. 

31  Xhcrcfo2Cibatch,  anb  remember; 
thatbythefpate  oftlizcc  yccrcs,  31  cca= 
feb  not  to  ibarnc  cuerv  one  night  anb 
bayibtthtearcs. 

31  anb  no\b  b2ethjen ,  3  tommenb 
vou  to  d5ob,  anb  to  thenwb  of  his 
gracc,\bhich  is  able  to  builb  vou  bp.anb , 
to  giuc  vou  an  inheritance  among  all 
ttjem  tbhtch  arc  fanttifieb. 

33  3  haue  couctcb  no  mansfilucr,  02 
golbe,ojapparell. 

34  j3ea,rouvourfeUtesmiotb,*trjat 
thefc  hanbes  hauc  tumtfrreb  bnto  mv 
necefltties ,  anb  to  them  that  ibere 
tbtthme. 

35  3  hauc  (hemeb  you  all  thmgs.hott) 
thatfo  labouring,  vee  ought  to  fuppo2t 
the  lbealtcanb  to  remember  the  \b02bs 
of  the  IL02D  Refits,  hott)  l)c  faib ,  Jt  is 
moze  bleffeb  to  giue ,  then  to  rccciuc. 

36  tranb  Uihen  he  hab  thus  fpoftcn,hc 
ftneeleb  bolbnc,  9  p2avcb  ibtth  them  all. 

37  anb  they  alltbcptfoje.anb  fell  on 
#auls  neebe,  anb  tmTcb  htm, 

38  ^)02ro\bmg  mod  of  all  fo2  the 
ibojosibhich  hefpaRcthatthcy  fhoulb 
fee  his  face  no  moje.  anb  they  accompas 
ntcb  him  bnto  the  fl)ip» 


CHAP.   XXI. 

Paul  will  not  by  anymeanes  be  diffwaded  from 
going  to  Ierufalem,  j  Philips  daughters  Pro- 
pheteffa.  17  Paul  commeth  to  Ierufalem : 
17  where  he  is  apprehended,  &  in  great  dan- 
ger, 31  bur  by  die  chicle  captame  is  refcued, 
and  permitted  to  fpeake  to  the  people. 

^^^^  &* lt  ta,1,c  topafTe ,  that 
If^M  after  ibceibcre  gotten  fro 


them  ,  anb  hab  lancheo , 
^i\Y*  lbcc  came  mirhaftraight 
kvmsi  conrfc  bnto  Choos ,  anb 
thctiap  folloibmg  bnto  JRhobcs,  anD 
from  thence  bnto  0atara. 

i  anomtbmg  a  ftjip  failing  otter  bn 
to^henicca,  ibeeU)cntab2oab,  anbfet 
fooitl). 

3  ii5o\b  ttiljen  ibee  hao  Difcouercb 
Cyp2us,  rue  left  it  on  the  left  fjanb ,  anb 
fatlcb  into  £>wia,  ano  lanbeD  at  %yn : 
foz  there  the  fljippe  ibasto  bniabe  her 
burocu. 

4-  anb  finbingbifciples ,  ibee  taricb 
there  feuen  bayes  :  ibho  faib  to  pattl 
tlwougrj  the  Spirit,  that  hetfboulb  not 
goebptotoicrufalem. 

5  anbibhcnttichabaccompiifbcb 
thofebaycs^toebepartrb.anb  went  our 
ibay ,  anb  they  all  b20ught  bs  on  our 
ibay ,  ibith  lbiuesanb  clniDzcn,  till  ibee 
mere  out  of  thrtitic:  ana  ibee  (ineclcD 
bolbnc  ottthefl)02e, anb  p2ayeb. 

6  anb  lbheu  tbc  hab  raften  our  leauc 
one  of  another ,  \be  toolte  ffjip,  anb  they 
rerurncbhomcagamc. 

7  anb  ibhen  ibee  hab  fuuft>cD  our 
courfe  from Xy^c, ibee  came  to  jDtole= 
mais,  anbfalutcbthe  b:crt)2en ,  anba- 
bobcruith  them  one  bay. 

8  anbthcnertbaytttctfjatibcreof 
0auls  company,  bepartcb ,  anb  came 
bnto  Ccfarea,  anb  Vbce  cntreb  into  the 
houfe  of0hiiip  the  euanqcliOC  *  mhtch 
mas  one  ofthc  feuen)  *  abbbetbitb  him. 

9  anb  p  fame  man  hao  fourcbaugh 
ters,  btrgtns,  lbhlch  bib  p2ophcfte. 

10  anb  as  ibee  taricb  there  many 
bayes ,  there  tame  bottmc  from  'jubca 
atertaiuep2ophct,uamcbagabus. 

11  anb  Ibhcnhc  rbascomc  bntobs, 
he  tooKc^atiis  girblc ,  anbbounb  his 
onmchanbsatiDfcctc,  anb  faib ,  Xhus 
fayth  the  holy  <5Uott ,  fi>o  fljau  the 
lleibes  at  Jwrufalcm  binbe  the  man 
that  oibeth  this  girblcanb  niail  bciiuer 
him  into  the  hanbs  of  the  Gentiles. 

xi  anb  ibhen  lbchcarbrhcfc  things, 
bothVbcanbthcvofthatpiace.bcfought 
€)  him 


'Ck 


Po  J. 


82 


^Paulsconftancic.He  The  Aftcs.  is  taken  and  bound. 


i'Num.tf. 
I  i8.chap. 
I1S.18. 


"  Oup. 

ZO. 


1  'Num.^.i 


bimnotto  goe  bp  to  $icrufalcm> 
ij  Xbcnpaulanfroerebjabatmeane 
ye  toibccpc  anb  to  bzcanc  imnr  hearts 
W  31  am  reaby  ,not  to  bee  bounb  oncly, 
but  alfo  to  Die  at  toicrufaiem  fo?  tbc 
#amcof  ttsc  ILoib  3Jefus. 

14  3nblbbcnbeiboulbnotbccpct 
froabcb,  ibcccafcb,  faying,  %\)i  lbillof 
tbefLozobcbonc. 

15  anbaftcrtbofcbayesiuetoofeebp 
our  catiagcs,s  ibent  bp  to  Uicrufaleni. 

16  Xbcreibentibitbbsaifocertatne 
of  tbe  mfciplcs  of  Cefarea,anb  bjougbt 
ttnth  tbem  one  $)nafon  of  Cypjus,  an 
olb  bifciple,ibttb  tbbo  lbc  fboulb  looge. 

17  anbibbenibeiberecometDJnej 
rufalcm.tbe  bjctbjcn  r  cceiueb  bs  giably 

18  3mo  tDc  bay  foiioibmg  $aui 
lbcntmibitb  bs  bnto  panics,  anb  all 
tbc^'lbcrsibcrepjefcnt. 

19  3lnb  ibben  bee  bab  folutcb  tbctn, 
bee  Declares  particularly  ibbat  tbmgs 
(Sob  bao  ib2ougbt  amongtljc  ©entiles 
bybismintffcric. 

io  3inbibbentbcybcatbit,tbeyglo; 
rificb  tbc  %aia, «  faib  bnto  b»n ,  Xbou 
fecftbzotber,  boib  many  tboufanbsof 
jjetbes  tbere  are  tblnctj  beleeue,  anb 
tbey  arc  all  *caious  of  tbe  Haib. 

11  2lub  tbey  arc  mfomicb  of  tbee, 
tbat  tbou  teacbeft  all  tbe  J  erbes  tblncb 
arc  among  tbc  <5cntilcs,to  fojfaHc  Q$oi 
fts,  fayutg ,  tbat  tbey  ougbt  not  to  ttt* 
tumtifc  tbcirtb!lOKn,nntbcr  to  ibaihc 
after  tbc  cuitomes. 

ii  aabat  is  it  tberefoie j.  tbe  multe 
tube  muftneebs  come  togctbtr:fo:tbcy 
ibillbcarc  tbat  tbou  art  tome. 

13  2>oe  tbcref  02c  tbis  tbat  lbc  fay  to 
tbee :  B3cc  baue  fourc  men  lbbitb  banc 
atooibontbem, 

14  Xbcm  tabc,  anb  purine  tby  fclfc 
lbitb  tbcm ,  s  bee  at  tbarges  lbitb  tbcm, 
that  tbey  may  *  fbauc  tbeir  beabs :  anb 
all  may  Hnoib  tbat  tbofetbmgs  lbbcrof 
tbeyiuercinfo2nicbconccrntugtbcc,arc 
notbiug ,  but  tljat  tbou  tby  fclfc  alfo 
lbauicft  ojbcrly ,  anb  ftcepefl  tbc  ?Laib. 

15  3s  tombing  tbc  ©etmlcs  lbbitb 
belceuc, '  luce  banc  nmttcn  anb  conchi* 
beb ,  tbat  tbey  obferue  no  fucb  thing, 
fane  oncly  tbat  tbey  Uccpc  tbemuiucs 
from  things  offcrcb  to  ibolcs,anb  from 
bloob  ,  anb  from  ftraiiglcb,  anb  from 
fomttatton. 

16  Xbcii^aultooUctbcmctt,  anb 
tbc  nett  bay  purifying  ImnCclfc  Untb 
them,  rntreb  into  the  Xcmplc/ to  fig? 
nine  tbc  atcompliflmient  of  tbc  bayes 


■>• 


of  purification ,  bnrtU  tbat  an  offering 
fboulb  be  offcrcb  fo:  cucry  one  of  tbem: 

17  ^nbibben  tbe  feucn  bayes  ttierc 
aimottcnbeb,  tbc  jerbes  lbbitb  ibete 
of  3Ga,ibbcn  tbey  ua>  bmt  m  tbcXcm* 
pic,  fur  r cd  bpau  tbc  people,  anb  lame 
banbsonbim, 

is  Crying  out,^cn  of  3frael,brtpc: 
tbis  is  p  man  tbat  tcatbetb  ai  men  cucry 
ibbcreagainff  tbe  people,  anb  tbe  lalb, 
anb  tbis  plate :  anb  farther  tyougbt 

©recas  alfo  imo  tbe  Xemple,anb  batb 
pollatcb  tbis  boly  plate. 

19  (fot  ttjcy  bab  fecne  befo?c  lbttb 
bun  m  tbc  cttie,  Xropbimus  an  epbe* 
fian,  tbbome  tbey  tuppofeb  tbat^aul 
bab  bjought  into  tbe  Xemple.) 

30  3nb  all  the  eulc  ibas  inoucb,  anb 
tbc  people  ran  togctber :  anb  tbey  toofec 
paul^inbbjclb  bun  out  of  tbeXcmplc: 
anb  foztblbitb  tbe  boo2eslbcre  fbut. 

31  ^inbastbeytbcntabouttoBtlbtm, 
nbmgs  came  bnto  tbc  cbufe  taptame  of 
tbe  baub  ,tbat  all  fticrufair  m  Ibas  m  an 
bpjoje. 

31  toho  immcbiatly  toolu  foulbicrs, 
anb  Criminous,  anb  ran  oolbnc  bnto 
tbemtanb  tbben  tbey  faib  tbe  tbtcfc  tap? 
tame  anb  tbe  foulbiers.tbey  left  bcanng 
of^aui. 

33  Xbcn  tbe  tbtcfc  captain  tame  mere, 
attbtoobe  btm,  9  commanbeb  bun  to  be 
bounb  lbitb  tibo  cl  wins , anb  bcmanbcD 
ibbobevbas,  anb  lbbat  bee  bab  bone. 

34.  ^nbfomccncbonc  tbmg,  fomc 
anotber ,  among  tbc  multitube :  anb 
tbbfn  be  coulb  not  tmoib  tbc  tcrtamtie 
foi  tbe  tumult  ,bc  tommanbeb  bun  to  be 
cancbtntotbctaftle. 

35  3nb  ibbcn  be  tame  bpon  y  ffaites, 
fo  it  Vbas  tbat  be  ibas  borne  of  tbe  foul- 
bicrs,fb2tbc  bioUncc  oftljcpcoplc. 

36  jFoz  tbc  multitube  of  tbc  people 
follotbcb  after  ,crying3ibay  ujitb  bun. 

37  ^Inb  as  iDaui  ibas  to  bee  leb  into 
tbccafHc,  bcciaibc  bnto  tbctblefc  tap^ 
tatnt,fcl3ay  3J  fpcahc  bnto  tbtcr  i©bo 
faibe,€anft  ttion  fpcauc  ©rcebe  < 

38*3trtnottboutbat€gyptianibbttb 
befoje  tbcfc  baies  mabeft  an  bpjojcanb 
lebbeft  out  into  tbe  ttnlbcrneffe  foure 
tboufanbmentbattticrcmurtbertrsf 

39  But  0aul  faib ,  "J!  am  a  man  lbbitb 
atna^cib  of  Xarfus,  antic  in  Ciltrta, 
a  nri^cn  of  no  meane  cttie:  j  3J  befcert) 
tbec  fuffcr  me  to  fptabc  bnto  tbc  people. 

40  3uibibben  be  bab  giuenbim  U- 
tencc,  ^aul  (loob  on  tbc  ftaircs,  anb 
betheneb  lbitb  tljc  banb  bnto  tbepeo- 

1 pie: 


*Ch=p.j. 


Paulanfwereth         Chap.xxij, 


forhimfclfe. 


"Chap.  J I 


Chap. 8. 3 


pic :  anb  rbhcn  tljccc  tuas  mabe  a  great 
Glencc ,  he  fpabc  bnto  them  in  the  $c* 
bjeibtongucfayiug. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

i  Paul  dedareth  at  large  ,  how  he  wasconuer- 
ted  to  the  faith,  17  and  called  to  his  Apoftle- 
fhip.  11  At  the  very  mentioning  of  the 
Gentiles  ,  the  people  exclaime  on  him.  14 
Hefhouldhauebenefcourged,  15  but  elay- 
mingthepriuilegeofa  Romane,he  efcapeth. 

^^^  €n,  bzctb?cn,anD  fathers, 
?§/i  fheareyemy  Defence  ibhicb 
8  3}  matte  noro  unto  yom 
§  i(3inDibhcntheyhcarD 
^Strjat  hec  fpabc  in  tl)c  ^c- 
b?ett»  tongue  to  them,  tbey  ftept  the 
motf  Gicnce:  anb  be  faith,) 

3  *  3  am  bcrely  a  man  ibbich  am  a  j 
3Jeib,  borne  in  Cartas  acihemCflfclaJ 
yet  bzougbt  bp  m  this  eitte  at  the  fecte  of 
Gamaliel,  anb  taught  atcozDtng  to  the 
perfect  maner  of  the  laib  of  tbefatbers,  I 
ano  mas  ?caious  toibarbs  ©ob,  as  ye ' 
aiiarctbisbay. 

4  *  3nD  3  pcrfcuitcb  this  ibay  bn^ 
to  the  Death,  binbtnganDDeliuenngm^ 
to  pjtfonsboth  men  anb  tbomen, 

5  ^saifothehigh^neftbothbeare! 
me  ibitneflc ,  ano  all  the  cftatc  of  the  z\< \ 
bers :  from  ibbom  aifo  3  recetueoiet* 
ters  bnto  the  b?cth?cn,aub  ibent  to  3D& ; 
mafcus  ,  to  bung  them  tbhtcb  iberc 
there,  bounbbnto  $?ierufaiem,ro?tobc 
pumfbcD. 

6  3nD  it  came  to  pafTe ,  that  as  3 
niaocmy  tourney,*  ibas  come  nigh  bn- 
to Damafcus  about  nooncfuDDenly 
there  (bone  from  heaucn  a  great  light 
rounD  about  me. 

7  3nb  3J  fell  bnto  the  grottnb,  anD 
hcatb  aboite  faymgbnto  nice,  Saul,1 
£>aul,  lbby  pcrfccurcft  tboume* 

S  ^nbg?anfmcrcD,  BDhoartthou, 
ILoiD^nbhcfaiDbntomt,  3  am^- 
fus  of  jfta^aretb  ibho  thou  pcrfeeutcft. 

9  3nt>  tbey  that  iberc  ibitb  me  lam 
tabeebc  the  light ,  anb  ibcrc  afraiD ;  but 
they  hcarb  not  the  boice  of  bun  that 
fpabc  to  me. 

io  3tnb  3  (aioc ,  aabat  (bail  3  Doe,  j 
fLo2b<3lnDtbc?Lo2Dfaiobntome,  %\ 
ttfcanD  goc  into  3>amafcus,  anD  there ' 
it  (hall  be  toiD  thee  of  all  things  which 
arcappomtcDfonbccto  doc. 

ii  5lnDibhcngicoulDnotfccfouhct 
cjlojp  cif  that  ltgbt,bcing  icd  bvtbc  hanD 
of  tbcmtbatibcrcibitb  me,  3  tame  in* 
to  Damaftus. 


iz  ^Snb  one  Ananias,  a  benout  man 
accojbmgto  the  laib ,  hawing  a  goob  re^ 
pojt  of  al  the  3  etbes  Vblneb  Dibcit  the  re 

13  Came  bnto  ine,anDftooD,sfatbbn 
to  me,  pother  ^auUrecctnctby  fight. 
3nD  the  fame  boure  ^loobcbbpbp 
on  him. 

14  3mbhcfatb,  H3be  d5obof  our  fa- 
thers hath  chofen  tbec,£  thou  (boulDcft 
tmorb  bisibill,  &  lie  that  3fuft  one,anb 
(boulDcft  hcarc  the  boice  of  his  mouth. 

15  if  oj  thou  (halt  be  his  ibitnes  bnto 
1  al  men  ,of  lbhat  thou  haft  fecne  $  hcarb. 

is  3nD  no  lb  ,tbby  taricft  thou?  3irifc, 
lano  be  baptisco ,  anb  Vbalb  arbay  tby 
finnes,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  ?to?D. 

17  3nb  it  came  to  paffe ,  that  ibhcn 
3  *bas  come  againe  to  J?icrufalcm, 
eucn  ibhslc  3  p?ay  cb  in  the  temple,  3 
Jbas  ma  trance, 

is  3nb  fatt)  him  faying  bnto  mcc, 
^abchaftc,  anD  get  thee  quickly  out  of 
fcierufalcm :  foz  they  tbill  not  rccetuc 
thy  teftunony  concerning  me. 

19  3nb3ffaiD,?Lo2D,tbcyBnottithat 
3  impzuoneb,  anD  beat  in  cucry  fyna^ 
gogucthemtbatbelecucD  on  thee. 

20  *  ^nb  lbhenp  bloob  of  thy  marry? 
5>teucn  ibasfl)cb,3l  aifo  tuas  ftanbmg 
by,  anb  conlentmg  unto  his  Death ,  anb 
Kept  the  raiment  of  them  tliat  fletbhim. 
1  ii  ^nbhcfaibbntome,S>cpart:fo2 
31  ibiiifcnb  thee  farre  hence ,  bnto  tl;c 
(Sen  tiles. 

12  canb  theygauchimaubiencebm 
to  thtstbozb,  ano  then  lift  bp  thesrbot- 
ces,anufaiD,  aibay  ibithtachafclloib 
from  the  earth :  fo?  it  is  not  fit  that  he 
fhoulb  line. 

23  3nD  as  they  crieD  out,  anb  call  off 
their  clothes,  fthjclbDufrmto  the  aire, 

24  XhechiefccaptametommanDeD 
him  to  be  brought  into  the  caftle ,  anD 
banc  that  hec  (houlb  be  erammcb  by 
fcourgtng:  that  he  might  hnoiblbhers 
(ate  they  eneb  fo  agamft  him. 

25  ^nD  as  they  bounb  him  tbith 
thongs ,  $aul  Caib  bnto  t\)t  Centurion 
that  ftoob  by ,  3Jsitlaibftillfo2yoti  to 
fcourgc  a  mantbatlsa&omane ,  anb 
bnconDrmneb? 

26  nahen  the  Centunonhearb  that, 
hec  lbent  ano  toio  the  chiefe  captamc, 
faying,  Catteberoc  lbhat tljouDocft, 
fo?  this  man  is  a  Bomane. 

27  Xhen  tlic  cliicfc  captaine  came^ 
ano  faib  bnto  him,  Xcllmc,  arttljoua 
Bomanc^  $cfaio,  Pea. 

28  ^no  the  chiefe  captaine  anfrucrcb  ,1 
®j. oaithj 


*Chap7. 
58. 


J 


Paulf. 


mitten. 


TheAftes. 


Arafh 


vow. 


||0r,  tortu- 
red him. 


"Eiod.u. 
»7- 


"Phil.J.J. 

*  Chap.  24. 
Hi 


•Miti.ss. 


t©itf)  a  great  lumme  obtctneb  %  this 
frecbome.  anb^autfaib,  25ut3Hbas 
frcebo?ne. 

^9  ^enfrtaigbtrbaptbcpbeparteb 
from  Dim  ibbtcb  Iboulb  baue  |  cranio 
neb  ^tni :  anb  the  cbtefe  taptame  alfo 
tbas  aftaib  after  be  tmcib  tt»at  be  ttias  a 
3Romane ,  $  becauft  be  hab  bouno  Dim. 

jo  £©ntbcmo?roib,becaurcbcn)oulo 
baue  fcnolbcn  the  certamtic  ibberefo?c 
bcfoasaceufcboftbc3Jctt)es,beloofcb 
bun f com  Ins  banbS,anbeommanbeb 
the  cbtcfc  0?tetts  anb  all  their  Councfll 
to  appearc,  anbb?ougbt  Paul  botbnc, 
anbCrthimbcfo?etbcm, 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

As  Paul  pleadeth  his  cau/e,  x  Ananias  com- 
mandeth  them  to  iniite  him.  7  Diflenfion 
among  his  accufers.  n  Godencourageth 
hitn.  14  The  lewes  layingwaitet'orPaul, 
zo  is  declared  vnro  the  chietecjptaiiie.  17 
He  fendech  him  to  Felix  the  gouemour. 

ii5b  $aul  earncftlp  bebofc 

bingtbceounetl,fatb,  H0tn 

I  anb  b?ctb?cn,3J  baueliucb 

in  all  goob  confidence  be 

fo?e  d5ob  bnrill  this  bap. 

i  anb  tljc  high  0?ieft  anamas  torn- 

manbeb  them  that  ftoob  bp  him,  to 

unite  htm  on  the  mouth. 

j  %\ytx\  faith  0atil  bnto  him ,  d5ob 
ttiall  finite  thec,thoutt)httebibaii :  fo? 
fittcft  thou  to  mbgc  nice  after  the  Haib, 
anb  tommanbeft  mce  to  be  fnuttcn  ton- 
ttarptotbefLaUK 

4.  anb  tbcp  that  ftoob  bp,faib,  Be* 
uiicft  thou  <5obs  high  0?tcft  t 

<,  Xhcnfaio0aul,'3Jibiftnot,b2C; 
tb?en,  that  bee  lbas  tljc  high  0nft :  5Fo? 
it  is  nwttcn ,  *  1Tbou  fl)alt  not  fpeafee 
cuill  of  the  ruler  of  tbp  people. 

6  25ut  when  $aul  pcrteiucb  that 
the  one  partibctc&abbucccs,  anb  the 
other  i^bartfccs,  bee  crpcb  out  m  the 
Coutmll,  i^en  ano  b2ctb?cn,  "Jama 
^harifcc,  the  fonne  of  atfwanfcc  :*of 
the  hope  anb  rcfurrcttion  oftbcbeab,3J 
am  calico  mqucttion. 

7  anb  \bben  hec  hab  fo  fatb ,  there 
arofca  biffcnfton  bcttticcne  the  ^hart- 
fees  anb  the  5>abbutces :  anb  tbemulti; 
tubcuiasbiuibeb. 

3  'jfoztbc&abbucccsfaptbattberc 
is  no  rcfurrcttion,  neither  angel,  no? 
fptnt :  but  the  phanfecs  confeffe  both. 

9  anb  there  arofe  a  great  crp :  anb 
the  S>crtbcs  that  ibcr  c  of  the  ^hanfecs 
partarofe,anbttrotic,faping,D3ecfinbe 


no  curtlintbis  man  Jbuttfafpirito^an 
3ngcl  hath  fpoben  to  Dun,  let  bs  not 
fight  agama  ©ob. 

10  anb  mben  thcrcarofe  a  great  bib 
fenfion ,  the  thiefc  taptaine  fearing  left 
0aui  fljoulb  ijauc  bene  pulicb  mpieccs 
of  them ,  commanbeb  the  foulbicrs  to 
got  boibne ,  anb  to  ta&e  him  bp  fozce 
from  among  them,  anb  to  bjmgbim  m* 
to  the  tafilc. 

1 1  ^nb  the  night  foloVbing,tbe1Lo?b 
ftoob  bp  bun,  anb  faibe,  ®ee  of  goob 
cbeere$aul :  fo?  as  thou  baft  tcfttficb  of 
mecin  i^terufaicm ,  fo  muff  thou  beare 
toitncffcaifoatftomc. 

ii  anbibbcnttibasbap,tcrcauieof 
thcgieibcs  banbeb  together , anb  bounb 
thcmfeluesbnber  ||  a  curfe,  facing,  that 
tbcp  iboulb  neither  catc  no?  b?inuc  till 
tbcpbabtnllcb^aul. 

0  anb  tbep  ibere  mo?c  then  fourtie 
tbbteb  hab  mabe  thistonfpiratie. 

14  anb  the?  tame  to  the  tbicfe 
&!tettsanb£lbcrs,anbfatb,  naccbauc 
bounb  ourfclucs  bnber  a  great  curfe, 
that  ibec  mill  eate  nothing  bntilUbcc 
banc  fkune  pan!. 

15  il2ott>tbcrcfo?epetbitbtbe€oun; 
till,  figntfie  to  the  tbicfe  taptaine  that  he 
b?ingbtm  bourne  bnto  pou  to  mo?rolb, 
as  though  pec  iboulb  enquire  fomes 
thing  mo?c  perfectly  concerning  him: 
anoibco?  cucr  he  come  ncere,are  reabp 
to  bill  him. 

16  anb  tbben  $auls  fitters  fonne 
bcarboftbetr  laving  in  Vbait,  heeibent 
anb  entrcb  into  the  cattle,?  tolbi&aul. 

17  Chen  0aui  callcb  one  of  tlje  €cn^ 
turions  bnto  bim,anbfaib,  ffi?mgtliis 
pong  man  bnto  the  ebicfe  captame :  fo? 
he  batli  a  certamc  thing  to  tell  him. 

is  &obctooBbim,anbb?ougbtbim 
to  the  tbicfe  captame,  anb  faib,j5aul  the 
pjtfoner  calleb  me  bnto  him,anb  p?aicb 
nice  to  b?mg  this  pong  man  bnto  thee, 
tbbo  bath  fometbmg  to  fap  bnto  thee. 

19  'Chen  the  cbtcfe  captainc  toottc 
him  bp  the  banb,  anb  tt^ent  Vbitb  bmi  a- 
fibep?iuatclp,  anb  afUrobim,  tabans 
that  thou  hattto  tell  mc^ 

io  anbbefaib,Xbc3Iemesbanca^ 
greebtobefire  tbcc,that  thouiboulbctt 
bnng  boibne  0aul  to  mozroib  into  tljc 
CounnUs  though  thep  lboulb  enquire 
fomcibbat  ofhun  mo?c  pcrfcctlp. 

ii  25utbo  not  tboupcclb  bnto  them: 

fo?  thcrclic  mibattfo:  bmi  of  tljnn  moc 

then  fourtie  men ,  Vbbicb  bauc  bounb 

|themfclucsibithanothc,thatthcptt)ill 

neither 


I  Or,  with 
\noAih  of 


Paul  fent  to  Felix.     Chap.xxiiij.  OfTertullus. 


neither  eatc  noz  bunae,  till  the?  bauc 
tullcb  him  :  anb  notb  ate  they  reao?, 
looRingfoz  apzomifefcomthee. 

ai  &o  the  tbicfe  eaptatne  then  let 
thcpongmanbcpatt,anbcbatgebhim, 
S>ee  thou  tell  no  man ,  that  thou  haft 
fl)eU>co  thcfethingstome. 

23  :3mb  he  eailcb  Unto  him  ttbo  Cm* 
turions,  facing ,  $)a&c  reabp  ttbo  hun< 
D?cn  foulbtcrs  to  got  to  Cefarea ,  anb 
hotfcmcn  fhzcefcozcanb  tcn,anb  fpeare* 
men  ttbo  hunbzcb,  at  the  thitb  houte  of 
the  night. 

24  3inb  pjtouibe  them  beads,  that 
the?  ma?  fet  0aul  on,  anb  tying  him 
fafc  bnto  jfclir  the  gouernour. 

25  3tnbheeibzotea  letter after  this 
mannet: 

26  Claubius  fLpfias ,  bnto  the  mod 
ertcllcnt  ©oucrnour  jFclir ,  fenbcth 
greeting. 

27  Xhis  man  tbas  taben  of  fbe 
3Jett)es  anbfboulbhaucbetnemllebof 
them :  Chen  came  3J  ibith  an  atmie, 
anb  refeneb  him,  hauing  bnberftoob 
thathetbasaKomane. 

x  8  3nb  ibhen  %  iboulb  hane  fenoibcn 

the  tanfc  ibhetefoje  the?  acniftb  him,5 
brought  himfootfh  into  their  Council. 

29  nshom  3i  per ceiucb  to  be  aecufeb 
of  qucftions  of  their  laibc ,  but  to  haue 
nothing  laibe  to  his  charge  ibozthp  of 
bcafhojofbonbs. 

jo  3nb  when  it  ibas  tolbcmc,hotb 
that  thcjcttjcsiaibtbaitefo?  the  man, 
3J  fent  ftratghttbap  to  thee ,  anb  gauc 
commanbcmentto  hisaecufets  aifo,to 
fa?  before  thee  ibhat  the?  hab  agatnft 
him.  iFatctbell. 

ji  Xhen  the  fouloiers,  as  it  ibas 
commaunbeb  them,  too&c  #aui,  anb 
brought  him  bp  night  to  3lntipatris. 

31  £>n  the  moioib,rbey  left  the  bort> 
men  to  goevbith  him ,  ano  returnee  to 
the  tattle. 

33  naho  Ibhen  the?  came  to  Ccfatca, 
anb  beliucrcb  the  epiftletothe  goucr- 
nour,  prefcnteb  i&aui  aifo  before  him. 

34  3nb  Ibhen  the  goucrnour  hab 
rcab  the  letter  he  af  fecboftbhatprouinte 
he  ibas.  3nbibhcnbebnbcrftoobtbat 
heibasofCilicia: 

35  3  tbtll  hcarc  thec,faib  Dec ,  ibhen 
thine  acenfers  arc  aifo  come.  3nb  hec 
commanbeb  him  to  be  Reptm  n?ccobs 
inbgementhall. 

CHA  P.  XXIIII. 

i    PaulbeingaccufedbyTertuUustheOratour, 


10  aniwerethforhis  lite  and  doctrine.  14  He 
preacheth  ChriA  to  the  gouernour  and  his 
wife.  16  The  gouernour  Eopeth  for  a  bribe, 
butinvaine.  2.7  Atlaft,  going  out  of  his  of- 
fice, hee  leaueth  Paul  in  prifon. 

il2b  after  fiucbapes,  ana? 
niastbchici&icttDefcen* 
beb  ttnth  the  eibcrs,  anb 
Ibitlj  a  ccrtamc  £>ratout 
_,nameb  Xertullus,  ibho 
cnfomicb  the  gouernonr  agamft^aui. 

2  Znn  ibhen  he  ibas  calico  tborth, 
Xcrtullus  began  to  aceufe  him ,  (aping, 
Seeing  that  bp  thee  UK  cniop  great  qub 
etneffcanb  thatberp  Iborthpbecbsare 
Don e bnto  this  natlo  bp  thp  prouibcncc : 

3  usee  accept  it  aiibapes ,  anb  m  all 

piaccs,mottuoblcifelir,ibitbauthanfc 
fulnefle. 

4  il3otibtthttanbmg,that  31  be  not 
farther  tcbions  bnto  thee,  5  prapthec, 
that  thou  iboulbctt  hcarc  bs  of  th?  tie* 
meneieafeiblborbs. 

5  ifozlbchaucfounb  this  man  ape- 
fttlcnt  fcllolb,  anb  a  mooucr  of  febmon 
among  ail  the  gjeibcs  throughout  the 
iborlb,anb  a  rtngleaocr  of  the  feet  of  the 
/Basarencs. 

6  naho  aifo  hath  gone  about  to  pro- 
;fanethcXemplc:ibhomibetooRc,anb 
iboulb  haue  lubgcb  accozbing  to  our 
laibc. 

7  2Sut  the  thicfc  captainc  3Lpftas 
camebponbs,  anb  ibith  great  bsoicncc 
tooRebunaibapoutofourhanDs: 

8  Commanding  his  accufers  to  come 
bnto  thee,  bycrammuigof  ibhomth? 
felfc  mayeft  take  Rnoiblcbgc  of  an  thefc 
thmgs,ibhcrcofibc  aceufe  him. 

9  3inb the  3Jcibes aifo  aOentccfays 
mg  that  thefc  things  ibercfo. 

io  £hcn0aul,aftcrthat  thegouer^ 
nour  hao  becUcncD  bnto  him  to  fpcaftc, 
i  anfrocrcb,  iFoiafnuich  as  3J  Unolb  that 
thou  haft  been  ofmanypecresa  31ubge 
bnto  thtsnanon,3J  no  the  mo?cchccre= 
:  full?  anficcrefo?  m?  fclfe : 

ii  26ccaufe  that  thou  ma?cftbnoer^ 
;  ftanb ,  that  there  arc  pet  but  tibeluc 
!  oa?cs ,  time  3  ibent  bp  to  l^tcrufalcm 
'fouolbo?ni:p. 

n  5lnb the? neither  founb  mcinthe 
j  Xcmplcbifpnttng  ibith  an?  man ,  nei= 
thcr  raiOngbp  thcpcople,  neither  m  the 
Synagogues,  noj  m  the  cmc : 

13  Neither  can  the?  pjouc  the  things 
Ibbcrcoftbey  norb  acnifemc. 

14  28ut  this  31  confefle  bnto  thec, 
that  after  tljc  iba?  lbhith  the?  call 
1D  3  htreRe,] 


Fd 


lxtrem 


blcth.        TheAds. 


Paul 


auisappcaic. 


PP, 


•Chip. 
=7- 


'  Chip 


Dcrcfic,  fo  lPozfljtp  3  tDc  (Bob  of  my  fa; 
tDcrs ,  bclccumg  all  tljtngs  ibDtcD  arc 
ttmttcn  tn  tDc  Haft)  anb  tDc  j&opDets, 

i5  3lnb  Dauc  Ijope  totbarbs  ©ob, 
Vblnrl)  tDcy  tDcmfclucsaifo  ailoft),  tfjat 
tDcre  (Dan  be  arcfuraction  of  tl)c  beau, 
botDof  tDciuttanbtomnft. 

i6  ^nbDcrmiboe^ttttrifcmyfcife 
to  Dauc  alivaycs  a  cotucicnec  tooib  of  of* 
fence  toibarb  Gob.anbtoftiarbmcn. 

17  jRott)  after  many  yccrcs,3l  came 
tobnngalmestomynanon^offcings: 

is  * ©DcruponcertatuCJctticsfrom 
3lGafouno  nte  purtftrb  m  tne  Xcmplc, 
neither  tbttj)  multttubc ,  no?  Untlj  tu* 
mult: 

i9  narjo  ougljt  to  Dane  bcenc  Dcrc  be 
foje  tljcc,  ano  obittt,  if  rtjcv  t)au  ougljt 
agamOmc. 

20  £>;  elfc  let tDcfefamc  Dcrc  fay ,  if 
tDcy  Dauc  founbanyeutUbomginmee, 
lbDilCJ  ftoobbcfojetDcCouncill, 

ii  €rtcptitbefo2trjisoncboKc,tf)at 
3Jtnebftanbmg  among  tljcm,  *%m 
clung  the  rcfurrcction  of  tfjc  bcab  3  am 
caiicbm  quettton  by  youths  bay. 

22  3mb  lPDen  jfclic  l)earb  tDcfe 
tDmgs,Dauingmo2cpcrfcct  ftnottilebgc 
of  trjat  tt>ay,  De  befcrrt b  tljcm  anb  faro, 
naDen  Hyitas  rt)c  eDicfe  taptamc  Ojall 
come  boftjne,  3  iwil  fenorb  tDc  totter- 
mod  of  your  matter. 

2$  3lnoDccommanbcbaCentimott 
to  fecepe  #aul,atro  to  let  htm  Dauc  liber? 
rtc,anbtrjatrjc  fDoulb  fo:btbnone  ofDts 
acquaintance  to  nuntftcr,  02  come  Dnto 

l)»U. 

24  3nb  after  ccrtainc  bayes,  tbDcn 
f  cltr  came  iPitl)  Dis  vbtfc  snufilla , 
ftiljtcl)  ibas  a  gjcroJK  feut  ftu  £aul,anb 
Ijcarb  Dun  coccrntng  trjcfaitrjm  CDnft. 

25  3nb  as  l)c  teafoneb  of  rigljtcouC- 
ncftc ,  temperance ,  anb  mbgement  to 
tome,fcltrtrcmblcbanbanfiDcrcb,(l5o 
trjy  way  foi  trjis  rune,  Vbljcn  3  Dauc  a 
conuctucntfeafon,3J  VbUlcallfoi  thee. 

26  irjeDopcbaifo  tDat  money  (Doulb 
Dauc  bene  gutcn  Dun  of  tf>aul,  tDat  hec 
mtgDtloofcDtm:U)Derrfo2cDccfcntfo2 
liun  tDe  oftner  ,ano  contuncb  ttntD  Dim. 

27  2Sut  after  niio  yccrcs,  pozttus 
f  efhis  came  into  if  clir  r  oomc :  aub  ft 
itr  willing  to  fhrtii  tlic  3lcft'cs  a  pica< 
fare,  left  paulbounb. 

CHAP.    XXV. 

The  lewes  accufc  Paul  bctori/  Feftus.  8  He  an- 
Iwerethfor  himlelfe,  n  and  appealeth  vnto 
Cciar.  14  Afterwards  ,  Feftus  opencth  his 


matter  to  king  Agryppa,  2.3  and  he  is  brought 
forth.  15  Feltus  clearedi  him  to  haue  done 
nothing  worthv  of  death. 

4Dlbc  tt»Dcn  .fcftus  ttoas 
come  into  tf)c  p20ttmce,  afc 
tcr  tDjee  bayes  Dc  afcenbcb 
fro  Ccfarca  to  Dtcrufaiem. 
2-  £DentDcDigDp2icttJ 
anb  tDc  cDicfc  of  tfjc  Jjctbcs  tnfomtcb 
Dim  agamft  ^aul,  anb  bcrougDt  Dim, 

3  3lnb  benreb  fauour  agamft  I)im, 
tDatDcujouib  fenbfoz  Dim  to  ^ictufa* 
lcm,iaymg  matt  m  tDc  lnay  to  Sill  Dim 

4  26ut  f  cftns  anftuereb ,  tljat  $aul 
fDoulb  be  Kept  at  Ceferea,  anb  tDat  Dee 
Dtmfclfclboulb  bepart  IgoHly  thither. 

5  1LcttDcmtDcrcfo:e,faibDc,U)DtcD 
amongyouarcablcgoboiUnciPitDmc, 

anb  accufc  trjis  man,tf  tljcrc  be  any  rbtc= 

fcebncffctnDim. 

6  3inb  UiDen  Dec  Dab  taricb  among 
tDcmllmoie  tDcn  ten  bayes,  Dec  tbent 
bolbnc  bnto  Ccfarca,  anb  tDcuertbay 
fitting  tn  tDc  mbgement  feat,  comman- 
ocbfr>aultobcb2ougl)t. 

7  ^nb  U)Den  Dec  tbas  come ,  tDc 
Jeiucs  luDtcD  came  bolbnc  from  t?tc? 
rufalem,  ftoob  rounb  about,  anD  latbc 
many  anb  gncuous  complaints  agamft 
$aul,  ibDitD  tDey  couib  notp^oue, 

8  naDile  Ote  anftuereb  fo?  Duufclfc,  I 
iScitDcr  agamft  tfjc  laftj  of  tDc  3cttcsJ 
ncuDer  agamft  tDc  ILcmplc,  noz  yet  a* 
gamft  Ccfar ,  Dauc  3  offenbeb  any] 
tDtugataii. 

9  25ut  feftasi  tbtlltng  to  boc  tDc 
3lcujcs  apieafure,an&uereb  |Dnul,  anb 
faib ,  nsilt  tDou  goePpto  l?tcrttfaicm, 
anb  tDcre  betubgcb  of  tljcfe  tljutgs  bv 
fojcmcf 

io  CDcnfatb  0atil,5  ftanb  at  £cfars 
tubgementfeat,  ibDerc  'Jlotiglit  to  bee 
tubgcb,  totDt  3left)csDaue  3  bone  no 
rbzong.astDoubcrvibcllliuoUicft. 

n  ifozifj  bcatioffcubcr,o2l)auccont; 
mtttcb  any  tDmg  ftiojtDy  of  beat!) ,  3  \ 
refufenottobic:  but  if  tDcre  be  none  of 
tDefetDingstbDcrcoftDcfc  accufc  rncno 
manmapbcltuer  me  PtttotDcm.  Sap; 
pealcbntoCefar. 

i2  1EDcn  feftus  ibDcnDe  Dab  confer 
rcb  HMD  tDc  Couunll ,  anfrocrco ,  Daft 
tDouappcalcb  bnto  Ccfar ;  Pnto  Ccfar 
(DalttDougot. 

13  3lnb  after  certatttcbayes,  6ing3fc 
grtppa  aub  2Scrmcc,  came  bnto  Ccfa- 
rca, to  faiutc. fcftus. 

14  Zub  iDDcn  tDcvDab  becne  tDcre 
many  bayes  ,  fcftus  bcciarcb  pau\s 

cattfc 


\\Or/ufimt 

copicjreadt, 
no  m*reth«n 
eight  crttn 


KingAgnppa  Chap.xxvj 


learet 


KP^d] 


OrJwAl 
datthtftiil 
onv  to  tit- 
cjuirg  hetre- 


Or,  ittd<r< 
mcnt* 


taufc  tmto  the  ntng,  taping,  %\ytxt  is  a 
ccrtamcmaulcftinbonbsby  ifcliic:     j 

15  3lbout  Vbhotn  When  3  IMS  at 
t?icrttfaicm ,  the  chicfc&,:tcltsanbthcl 
eibcrs  of  the  ^cities  cnfomicb  mc ,  be  j 
firing  to  hattc  tubgement  agamC  him.  \ 

i6  XoMiomJanfHjercD/Jtisuot 
the  matter,  of  the  Romanes  to  bcltucr 
an?  man  to  Die,  before  that  he  Which  is 
accufeb  ,  hauc  the  actufcrs  fate  to  face, 
ant)  Dane  uccncc  to  anfroccc  foi  htmfclfc 
concerning  the  mine  laib  agatnft  bint. 

17  Xhercfozcibhcn  they  lbcrc  come 
hither,  without  any  belay ,  onthemo^ 
row  3  fate  o»  tlic  uibgcmcnt  fcate,anb 
ton  lanocb  the  man  to  be  brought  forth. 

18  3igamft  whom  When  the  aceufers 
ftoob  Dp,  they  brought  none  accufattoti 
of  fuel)  things  as  3  fuppofeb : 

19  25ut  Dab  tcrtamc  qucfttons  & 
gamlt  Dun  of  thctt  oWnc  fupcrmtion, 
aim  of  one  3(cfus ,  Which  was  beab, 
whotiMDaulamrmcbtobcaliue. 

20  ;3tnbbccaufc  ||3}boubtcboffuch 
matter  ofqueftions,  3  af  Ucb  hint  Whc- 
ther  he  Woulb  goeto  ^icrufaicm  ,  anb 
there  be  uibgcb  of  thefc  matters. 

2i  But  When  jdaul  Ijao  appeaieb  to 
bee  refer ucb  Ditto  tDe  1 1  tieartng  of  3ln^ 
gufhts ,  31  commanbeb  him  to  be  Utpt, 
till  3i  miglu  fcttb  l)im  to  Cefar. 

22  Chen  :3igrippa  faib  bnto5?c(tus, 
3  Woulb  alfo  hearcthc  man  myfcife. 
XomozroW,  faib  he,  thoutbalthcarc 
l)tm. 

23  3tnb on tl)c  mozroW  When  ^grip; 
pa  Was  come  anb  26crmcc ,  With  great 
pompcanb  was  cntreb  tnto  the  place  of 
hearmg,wtth  the  thicfc  captames,  anb 
pmtcipail  men  of  the  cine ■  at  5FctTus 
tommaimbcmcut  paul  was  brought 
foonh. 

24  3tnbf  cfhts  faib,  using  3Jgrip^ 
pa,  anb  all  men  Which  arc  heer  c  pzefent 
With  X>s, ye  fee  tins  man,  about  Whom 
all  tl)c  ninintube  ofthc3JeWeshauc 
bcalt  With  mcboth  at  iiicrufaiem,  anb 
alfohcerc,  crying  that  he  ought  not  to 
Hue  any  longer. 

25  25ut  When  3J  fottnb  thathc  hab 
comnuttcb  nothing  wonhy  of  bcath, 
anb  that  l)c  htmfclfc  Hatli  appeaieb  to 
3mgultus ,  3  tjaitc  bctcrmmebto  fenb 
bun. 

16  £>f  whom  3  banc  no  eertame 
thing  to  tbntc  tmto  my  H020 :  ttJbcrc 
fine  3  hauc  brought  Dim  footfb  before 
you ,  anbfpedallv  beftuctbec ,  ©  King 
3igrippa ,  that  after  ctammation  Ijab, 


3  might  baue  fomewbatto  Wnte. 

27  jfo?  it  fccmctl)  to  mc  tonrcafon 
ablcto  fcuba  p:tfoncr,ano  not  wuball 
to  figuific  tljc  crimes  laibagamttrjim. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

Paul,  in theprel'enceofAgrippa  ,  declareth 
his  life  from  his  childhood,  a,  and  how  mira- 
culously he  was  couuerced,  and  called  to  his 
Apoftlefhip.  14  Feftuschargethhimtobe 
mad,  whereuntoheanfwerethmodefHy.  z8 
Agnppa  is  almort  perlwaded  to  be  a  chrilti- 
an.  31  The  whole  company  pronounce 
him  innocent. 

^en  Agrippa  faib  bnto 
iV0aul,  Xhou  art  permit 


tcoto  fpca&e  foj  thy  felfe. 
%\)cn    0aul    Orctcficb 
_foonl)tl)cl)anb,anbatv 
ftncrcbfoiljimfclfe, 

2  3JtftraScmpfclfcIjappp,Kmg^ 
gnppa,  bccauTeJI  njailantocrc  fo«r  m? 
fclf e  ttjis  bay  before  tljec  touclilng all  the 
things  thereof  3  am  accufeb  of  the 
Jellies: 

3  €fpcnanp,bccaufe3Jftnoibthccto 
be  crpcrt  m  ailcuftomesanbquefttons 
Vbhich  arc  among  tljc  3Jeibcs :  Vbhcrc- 
foie  3  befeeth  thee  to  hearc  mccpati 
cntlp. 

4  i0p  matter  of  life  from  my  youth, 
which  ibas  at  tljc  firft  among  mine 
oiimc  nation  at  ^tcrufaicm ,  fenovb  all 
thc3lctt)cs, 

5  nahich  fenclb  mc  from  the  begin 
ntng ,  (tf  thep  moulb  tethfic)  that  after 
themoftaraitcafectofour  religion ,  31 
liucbajdharu'ec. 

6  ^nbnoih3IQanb,anbamtubgeb 
fo?  the  hope  oftljc  pjonnfe  mabc  of  ©ob 
bnto  our  fathers: 

7  ?llnto  tornchPKmiifcournijciuc 
tnbes  mftantlv  fcrutng  <5ob  bay  anb 
night,  hope  to  come:  ifozibhtchhopcs 
fafec ,  Btng  2tgrtppa ,  3  am  accufeb  of  I 
thc3Jcil)cs. 

s  iPhyflioulbttbcthoughtartnng 
ittcrcbiblc  ibith  you,  that  <Sob  fhouio 
ratfethebeab; 

9  3  bcnly  thought  tbith  my  felfc, 
that  3  ought  to  boc  many  things  com 
trary  to  the  name  of  3Jcf«s  of  jf|3fc 
sarcth : 

10  *t©hich  thing  3J  alfo  btb  in  J?tcrtt 
faicm ,  anb  many  ofthc  5>amts  bib  3 
(hutbp  m  pzifon ,  hauutg  rccctuco  an 
thonttc  from  the  thtcfc  ^nclfs  ,  anb 
ibhcn  they  lherc  put  to  beath ,  3  S'Wc 
mynoyccagaiuflthcm. 

11  3fnb 


'Ch.ip.8-  *. 


■  '  '  -■         -     ■■  ■  —   — ■-         ■  -  *■  ■  .    ■    I.  —  I  .1  .^  .  _ 

Pauls  vifion.  He      TheAdtes.         is  counted  mad. 


"Chap.p.; 


ii  anb  Jpunifbcb  them  oftineuerp 
Spnagaguc,  anb  compcllcb  them  to] 
blitfplicmc,  anb  being  creecbinglp  mat)  \ 
agamftthem,  3  pcrfccutcb  them  men 
bntoftrangecttics. 

ii  thereupon,  as  3  lbcnt  to  2>a< 
mafcus ,  ibith  authontte  anb  commit 
fion  from  the  chicfe  Clefts: 

1 3  at  mibbap,  £>  blng,  J  fatb  in  the 
ttwp  a  light  from  heaucn,  abouc  the 
b2tghtncs  of  the  Suunc,  fbimng  rounb 
about  nice,  anb  thcmujhicDionrncpcb 
UHthmc. 

i+  anb  lbhen  ibee  ibere  all  fallen  to 
the  earth  ,3  hearbaboiccfpcabingbn^ 
to  mc,anbfapingmtbcl?cb2cib  tongue, 
Saul,  Saul,  ibbp  pcrfcctitcftthou  me  i 
31 1  is  harb  foz  tbcctouicBcagamltthc 
pjiclics. 

i$  3mb3Jfatb,t©hoartthou,?Lojbi 
anb  hee  faib,  3i  am  3jefus  lbhom  thou 
perfecutcft. 

i6  25utrtfc,anbftanbbponfhpfectc, 
fol3  hauc  appeatco  bntofhec  fouhis 
purpofc,  to  matte  thee  a  mmiflct  anb  a 
lbitucfTc ,  both  of  thefe  things  lbbicD! 
thou  halt  fecne, »  of  thofe  things  inthe 
lbbich  5  Vbillappearcbnto  thee, 

17  JDcliucring  thee  from  the  people, 
anb  from  the  Gentiles,  buto  lbhom! 
noibj/fcttbthce, 

is  Xo  open  their  epes,  anb  to  tunic 
them  from  barkneffe  to  light,  aub  from 
the  polbct  of  Satan  buto  <5ob,  that 
thev  map  rccciucfojgtucucffe  of  ftnncs, 
anb  inheritance  among  them  ibhtch 
arc  fanctificb  bp  faith  that  is  in  mc. 

19  ii3hcrcupon,£)Umgagrtppa,3J 
was  not  bifobcbtcntbntotbehcaucnlp 
bifton: 

20  2But  fbctbeb  firft  buto  them  of 
Damafcus,  anb  at  $icrufaicm ,  anb ; 
th020ibout  all  the  coafts  of  3Jubca,  anb  j 
then  to  the<5cntilcs,  that  thev  fbottlb 
repent  anb  tumc  to  ©ob.anb  bo  Vbozlts 
mcctcftn  repentance. 

xi  5Fo?  thefe  caufes  the  3Jctbcs 
caught  nice  m  the  Xcmpic,  anb  ibent a- 
bout  to  mil  mc. 

22  fyaumg  therefore  obtcincb  hclpc 
of(5ob,3l  continue  bntothisoar,  ibit- 
ncflitigbothtofmauanb  great,  faying 
none  other  things  then  thofe  ibhith  the 
prophets  anb  i^ofes  bib  fa?  fboulb 
come : 

13  Xhat  Clnift  fboulb  fnffcr ,  anb 
thathec  iliouio  be  the  firft  that  (bouib 
nfc  from  thcocab ,  *  fl)oulb  flicUi  light 
buto  the  pcbplcanb  to  the  Pennies. 


24.  anb  as  hec  thus  fpanc  fo*  Dim* 
,  fclfe ,  if  effus  faibe  ibith  a  loibb  bopte, 
:  paul ,  thou  art  befibe  thp  fclfe ,  much 
Icarnuigboethmabe  thcemab. 

25  2SutDcfaib,3lamnotmab,moft 
noble  ifeflus  ,  but  fpeaHc  fooztb  tl)t 
ibozbs  of  tructh  anb  foberneffe. 

26  ifojthc  iswng  totoibeth  of  thefe 
thmgs.bcfoje  lbhom  alfo  3  fptauc  free* 
Ip :  fo?  3  am  pettiuaDcb,  that  none  of 
thefe  things  arc  hibben  from  him,  fo? 
tljts  thing  ibas  not  bone  m  a  comer. 

27  Bmg  agnppa ,  bciccucft  thon 
the  pzophctSi  3J  imolb  that  thou  be* 
lecucfl. 

28  XDenagrippafaibcbntopanl, 
aimoQ  thou  pcrtroabclt  nice  to  bee  a 
Chnfhan. 

29  anb  paul  faib,  3J  lboulbto  ©ob, 
that  not  oner?  thou ,  but  alfo  all  that 
hcare  mcc  this  bap ,  mere  both  aimoft, 
anb  altogether  fuel;  as  3  am ,  crcept 
tljcfc  bonbs. 

30  anb  When  Dec  hab  thusfpoBcn, 
the  Blngrofc  bp,  anb  tht  goucrnour, 
anb25crnitc,$tf)ep  thatlate  With  them. 

31  anb  When  thep  Were  gone  aftbc, 
thep  taiBCb  betwecne  thcmfciucs ,  fap= 
mg ,  Xhis manbocthnothingwo2tDp 
ofbcath,o2ofbonbs. 

32  Xhmfaioacjrtppabntoireftus, 
Xhis  man  might  haue  bene  fct  at  liber? 
tit,  if  he  Dab  not  appcalcb  buto  Cefar. 


CHAP.    XXVII. 


Paul  fail 


rdRo 


1  faullhtpprng  toward  Korac,  10  roretcllcth 
of  the  danger  ot  the  voyage,  n  butisnot 
bcleeued.  14  Thev  arc  tolled  to  and  fro 
withtempeft,  41  aiidfufterfaipwracke,  ii 
34.  44  vetallcomefafetoland. 

(g9£  il5b  lbhm  it  ttias  betermt' 
'  neb ,  that  ibec  Qjouio  failc 
into  3ltalr ,  thep  oeliucrcb 
0aul,f  tcrtainc  otljctp^ 
^  toners,  bnto  one  namcb 
Julius,  a  centurion  of  3Jugufhis  banb. 

2  anb  cntrmg  into  a  (hip  of  3tb?a^ 
nipttium,ibcclanchcb,nicaningtofailc 
bp  the  coatts  of  ^fta ,  one  ^riftarthus  a 
1 435accDoman ,  of  Xhcfraloutca,beeing 
ninth  bs. 

3  ^nb  the  ncrt  baptticc  toucheb  at 
j  Sibon  :  Znn  Julius  courtcouflp  ot* 
treatebpaul,  anb  gauc  him  libertteto 
gocbntohisfricnbstorcfrcflihimfclfc. 

4.  anb  Uihcn  ibc  hab  lanchcb from 
ithcncc,ibcfaiicbbnber£rp2us,bcraufc 
the  lbtnbs  mere  contrary. 

5    anbibhcn  ibehabfaiicb  outttfte 

fta 


Pauls  d 


angerous 


Ch 


ap.xxvij. 


voya 


,r 


etoivome. 


rca  of  Cilicia  anb$anipbylia,tece  came 
to££)y2aacittcof?Lyfia. 

6  anb  tljctc  the  Centurion  founo  a 
Ibip  of  aicranbna  failing  into  "Jtaly 
atib  be  put  bs  therein. 

7  anbibbcnibccbabfatlcbHott/Iy 
many  Daycs.anb  fear  fc  lbcre  come  ouet 
agamft  C5nibtis,  tbcibmb  notfuffenng 
bs,  lbcc  fatlcb  btiDcc  ||  Crcetc ,  oner  a- 
gamft  S>almonc, 

8  anb  Ijarbly  paffmg  ft ,  came  bnto 
a  place  lbbteb  ts  calico  the  iFatce  rja- 
uens ,  mgl)  lbbcr  cunto  teas  the  title  of 
Hafca. 

s>  jBotetebcn  mud)  time  teas  fpent, 
anD  teben  failing  teas  note  Dangc- 
rous.becanfe  ttje  jfaft  teas  note  airea; 
bicpaft,pauiabmonifl)cDtbem, 

io  anb  taib  bnto  tbem,£>irs,3l  per; 
cenie  that  this  boyage  teill  be  teitb 
||  Hurt  anb  mud)  Damage ,  not  oncly  of 
tlje  labing  $  ftnp,  but  alfo  of  our  Itues. 

1 1  jScucttbclcffc,  the  Centurion  be* 
Iceucb  the  matter  anb  the  otener  of  toe 
fl)ippc ,  mo2e  tl)en  tbofe  things  tebieb 
tectcfpokcnbypaul. 

ii  anb  becaufc  tl)c  bauen  teas  not 
eommobious  to  lbtntcr  in,  the  moje 
partamufcDtobcparttbcnccaifo,tfby 
any  mcancs  they  might  attaint  to  0be^ 
nice,  anb  there  to  lbtntcr  i  tebieb  is  an 
fjancn  of  Crcetc ,  anb  Uctb  totearb  the 
£>outbtecft,anb  #o2tbtecft. 

ib  anb  teben  the  £>oud)teinbblete 
foftlv,fuppofmg  that  they  Ijab  obtamtb 
tbcirpurpofc,lDormgtbcncc,tbcyfailcb 
tlofc  by  Crcetc. 

14.  iButnot  long  after,  there  II  arofc 
agamft  it  a  tctnpcttuousteiuDe,  calico 
Curoclybon. 

15  anb  teben  the  fbtp  teas  caught, 
aiibcoulbnot  bearc  bp  into  the  tetnbe, 
ibe  let  her  bnue. 

i6  anb  runnmg  bnber  a  certainc 
ylanb,  tebieb  is calIcbClaitba,ibccbab 
mud)  teo2ketotomcby  die  boate: 

17  ©Did)  teben  they  bab  taken  bp, 
they  bfeb  l)clps,bnbcr  girbmg  the  nnp; 
anb  fearing  left  tbey  (boulb  fall  into  the 
qutcke  -  fanDs,  ttrakc  faile ,  aubfo  lbcre 
buuen. 

is  anb  being  ercccbftiglytolJcD  ibid) 
a  tempeft  the  ncrt  bay,  they  itgljteneb 
tbcftjip: 

19  anb  the  tbtrb  bay  tee  caft  out  teid) 
our  otene  banbes  the  tackling  of  the 
ftnppc. 

20  anb  teben  neither  Smnnc  no2 
ftarrcs  tn  many  bayes  appearcb,  anb 


no  fmail  tempeft  lay  on  bs  ■,  all  hope 
tbattecc  fl)ouiu  be  faticb,teasd)en  ta- 
ken ateay. 

21  asm  after  longabftmcntt ,  panl 
ftoobfoo2thlntr)cnuDbcsoftl)cm,anb 
fatb ,  ;S>trs,  yccfboulbbauc  hearftencb 
bnto  nice ,  anb  not  bauc  loofeb  from 
Crcetc,  anb  tohaucgatneb  this  barmc 
anblolTc. 

22  anb  note  3J  ctl)02t  you  to  be  of 
goob  cbccrc :  fc>2  there  (hall  be  no  loffc 
of  any  mans  life  among  you,  but  of  the 
(l)ippc. 

23  foi  there  ftoob  by  me  this  night 
the  3lngci  of  C3ob ,  tehofc  3  am ,  anb 
teboni^fcrac, 

24.  Saying,  5Fcarc  not  $aul,  thou 
muft  be  b:ougbtbcfo2C  Cefar ,  anb  loe, 
©ob  hath  gitiett  thee  all  d)cm  that  failc 
teitb  thee. 

25  D0hcrcfo2e,firs,be  of goobebeere: 
fo2  3  bclccuc  «5ob ,  that  it  (ball  be  euen 
asitteastolbeme. 

26  tyotebctt,teemuftbeeaftbpona 
ccrtamc'JianD. 

27  Butibhcntbc  fourteenth  night 
ibas  come, astecctecrcbiiucnbp  anb 
bolbne  in  aojia  about  mtbnigbt,  the 
fhipmcn  becmeb  djat  they  b2db  neere 
tofotnecountrcy: 

28  atibfotinDeD,anDfotinbittteen' 
tic  fathoms:  anb  Ibhcn  they  hab  gone 
a  little  further,  they  founbeb  again*, 
anb  foutiD  it  ftftcenc  fathoms. 

29  Xbcn  fearing  left  tee  (boulb  bant 
fallen  bponrockes,  they  caft  foure  an* 
cres  out  of  the  fteme,  anb  tetfbcb  fb? 
tbebav. 

30  anb  as  ri)c  fbipmcn  tberc  about 
to  flee  out  of  the  (hip,  Ybhcnthcy  bab  let 
bolbne  the  boat  into  thcfca,bnber  to* 
lour  as  though  they  iboulb  hauc  caft 
antrcs  out  of  the  fo2c-ft)tp, 

31  paulfaibtothcCcnturion,anbto 
the  foulbtcrs,  Crtept  tbcfeabtbemtbe 
ftjlp, ye  cannot  be  faueb. 

31  1Ebcn  the  foulbicrs  tut  off  the 
ropes  of  the  boat,  anb  let  her  fall  off. 

?3  anb  lbhile  the  bay  teas  comming 
on ,  iDaui  befought  them  all  to  take 
meat ,  faying,  %\)\&  bay  is  the  four- 
tecnth  bay  that  ye  haue  tarteb,  anb  con* 
ttnucb  fafting,  hautng  taken  nothing. 

34  nabcrcfo2e,3i  p2ay  you  to  take 
fomc  meat ,  fo2  this  is  fo2  your  health : 
f02  there  fliaii  not  an  batrc  fall  from 
the  bcab  of  any  of  you. 

35  anb  tehcu  hec  hab  thus  fpoken, 
hectookc  b?eab,  anbgauc  tljankcs  to 

<3ob 


Shipwra 


ke.  TheAftes.  TheVjper. 


H"r,  ml 

tht)  left 

thfm  tnlhe 
fr*,CC. 


<5ob  mpzcfencc  of  them  all,  anbibhcn 
hchabbioBcnit.bebeganto  catc. 

j<5  Xben  were  they  all  of  goobebcerc, 
anb  they  alfo  toobc  tonic  meat. 

57  3inDibc  iberc  mail,  m  the  (hip, 
tibo  bunojeb,  tb;:ccfcozc  anb  firtcenc 
foulcs. 

ss  3inb  ibbett  they  Iiati  eaten  enough, 
they  itgbteneb  the  fbip ,  ant  caft  out  the 
lbbeat  into  the fea. 

39  3inb  ibbcn  it  lbas  bay,  they  Rticib 
not  the  lanD:  buttbcyDifcoucrcbaccC' 
tame  crcctt ,  With  a  fbozcmto  the  ibhieb 
they  lbcrcmmbcb,  ifitibctcpoffiblc,to 
thmfttn  the  Chip. 

40  3nb  ibbett  they  hab  ||  taken  bp  i 

tI)C  atlUCCB  ,  tlKV  COinmittCb  themfelues ! 

bntothc  fca,*loofcb  the  rubber  banbs, 
ano  botfeb  bp  the  mamc  failc  to  the 
ibinDcanbmaDctoibarDfbozc. 

41  31iid  failing  tnto  a  plate  lbbcrci 
tlbo  fcas  met,  they  ratine  the  fbtppca  I 
grounb ,  ano  the  fojepart  QutHc  faff,  | 
ano  rcmaineb  btimoucablcbut  the  htm  i 
Dec  part  lbas  bzolicn  ibitb  tbcbtolcnce 
oftheibaucs. 

41 3htD  the  foulbtcrs  counfel  lbas  to 
Htlthcp2ifoncrs,lcltauvofthemfl)oulb 
fiuimtnc  out,  ant)  cfcapc. 

43  i5ut  the  Centurion ,  Hulling  to 
fauc  0aul,  fcept  tlicm  front  their  pur- 
pofcanbtotmnanbcb  that  theyibbub 
couid  fuittnmc ,  (IjoulD  caft  thcmfelues 
firft  into  the  fea,  anb  get  to  lattb : 

44  3Jnb  the  reft,  tome  on  boo2DS,anb 
tonic  on  bioben  pieces  of  the  flnp :  ant) 
to  it  tame  to  paffc  that  tbey  deapeb  all 
fafc  to  lanD. 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

Paul.afterhislhipwrackeis  kindly  entertained 
ofthe  Barbarians.  s,  The  viper  on  his  hand 
hurtethhimnot.  S  He  healcthmany  difea- 
fesin  the  Hand.  11  They  depart  towards 
Rome.  17  Hee  declared)  tc  the  Iewes  the 
caufe  of  his  commine.  14  Alter  his  preaching 
ibme  were  peifwaded,  and  fome  beleeued 
not.  jo  Yet  ho  prcacheth  there  two  veercs. 

§0^88  i^b  ibljcn  tbey  iberc  ctov 
~pcD,  then  they  totem  that 
the  'SJMtiD  lbas  taiicb 
Q9clita. 
wsfe*  1  3nt>  the  barbarous 
people  fluibeD  ustio  little  Umbncflcrfoz 
tbey  lunoicD  a  fire  ,ant>  tccnucD  tos  cuc- 
ry  one  betaufc  of  the  pzefrnt  rame ,  anb 
brtaufeoftlictolt). 

3   Una  mrjen  paui  hao  gatbcrcD  a 
bunbicofftuUcs.anoiayDcthenionthc: 


Tfirc ,  there  tameatmtper  out  of  thereat, 
ano  faftcneb  on  hts  hanb. 

4  3lnb  ibben  the  asarbarfans  farb 
thebcuomous  bcafthang  onbtsbanb, 
the?  fatbc  amotig  thcmfclues ,  jfto 
boubt  tbtsmatttsamurrbcrcr.ibbom 
though  hee  hath  efcapeb  tbcSea,  pet 
Uengcancc  fuffcreth  not  to  hue. 

5  3tttb  hee  fbooBc  off  tlje  beaft  into 
rbcnrcanbfcltnobarmc. 

6  tyolbbctt,  the?  loobcb  ibhcn  ftcc 
fboulb  haue  froollcn ,  02  fallen  botbnc 
bcab  fubbctily :  but  after  tbeybab  too 
Ucb  a  great  lbbilc,  anb  faibnobarmc 
conic  to  bim,tbcy  cbangcb  their  tntnbs, 
anb  fatb  that  he  Vbas  a  d5ob. 

7  3Jn  the  fame  Quarters  lbcrc  pofc 
fcffiotis  of  the  thtcfc  man  ofthe  3JlanD, 
ibbofc  name  lbas  Cubitus,  Uiho  recce 
ucb  bs ,  anb  lobgcb  bs  tb2ee  bayes  tour^ 
tcoufiy. 

s  3lnb  it  came  to  pafle  that  the  fa- 
ther  of  0ublms  lay  ficttc  of  a  fcucr ,  anb 
ofabloobp-flircto  lbbom  $aul  entrcb 
in,anbpjaycb,  anu  laycbbisbanbson 
him,  ano  hcaicb  htm. 

9  £>oibbcn  thts  lbas  bone,  others 
alto  Vbhtth  hab  btfeafes  m  the  3Hanb, 
came,  anb  ibcrchealcb: 

to  nabo  alto  honoureb  bs  lbtth  nia* 
np  honours,  anb  lbhenlbcc  bepartcb, 
thep  labcb  bs  rbith  fuel)  things  as  iberc 
neceffarp. 

n  3nb  after  thzcemoncthsvbec  be- 
partcb in  a  n>tp  of  31lcratvtma,  lbhtch 
hab  lumtcreb  tn  the  3Jlc,  lbljofe  ftgnc 
lbas  Cafloz  anb  0ollur. 

1 1  3nb  lanbtng  at  £>y:atufc  Vbcc  ta- 
neb  there  tlnecbapcs. 

13  3nb  from  thence  lbec  fct  a  com- 
paffe,  anb  came  to  IShegium,  anb  after 
one  Day  the  South  lbinDcblclb.anblbe 
tame  the  ucrt  Day  to  putcolt : 

14  nDhcrc  hjcc  foitttb  bjcthzen ,  anb 
lbcrc  befireb  to  tary  lbtth  them  fcucn 
bayes:  anb  to  lbc  lbcnt  toibarb  ftomc. 

I-5  ^nb  from  thence,  When  the  \nv 
th?cn  hearb  of  bs,  they  came  to  meet  bs 
asfarrcas  ^ppufontm,  anb  thcthJce 
Xaucrncs :  lbhom  lbhoi  pattl  faib,  he 
tbanftcD  GoD,attD  toobc  courage. 

i6  3iiiD  lbhcn  lbc  came  to  ft  ontctbe 
Cenninon  Dcliucrcb  the  pntoncrs  to 
the  Captamc  ofthe  guarb :  but  pattl 
was  fuffcr  eD  to  Dlbcll  by  Inmfclfc,  lbtth 
afouiDierthatUepthim. 

17  3uD  it  came  to  paffe ,  that  after 
thzce  Dayes,V>aul  taiicbthechiefc  ofthe 
3Icibcs  together.  3lub  ibhen  they  iberc 

come 


Ifraels  hoi 


>e. 


Ck 


comctogcthcr,  he  fail)  Ditto  them.^cn 
anbtoethjen,  though  3  haue  commit; 
teb  nothing  agamft  the  people ,  01  cu 
(tomes  of  our  fathers ,  vet  itoas  3J  belt* 
uercb  pflToner  from  $?tecufalem  into 
thchanbs  of  the  Romanes. 

18  naborobentbeybaberaminebmc, 
tbottlb  haue  Ictme  goe,  becaufc  there 
tbas  no  caufc  of bcatb  in  me. 

19  25ut  inhen  the  3Jctbes  fpabe  a 
gaittfttt,3Jtbasconftrainebtoappealc 
unto  Ccfacttot  that  3J  hab  ought  to  at- 
cufeiny  nation  of. 

20  foi  this  caufc  therefore  haue  31 
eaiicbfbjyou ,  to  fee  you,  anbtofpea&e 
Vbith  you :  becaufe  thatfoz  the hope of 
31  fracl  "J  am  bounb  umb  t\)is  ehatne. 

ii  3nb  they  fame  t>ntobtm,t©cencfr 
ther  weetueb  letters  out  of  Juoea  eon* 
cecmng  ttjee ,  neither  any  of  the  b:e* 
thien  ttjat  came ,  (betbeb  o?  fpattc  any 
barmeofthee. 

ii  25ut  Ibe  befire  to  heare  of  tfjee 
tbhatthourbin&eft  :foz  as  concerning 
rt>('s  feet ,  Mot  ftnouj  that  euery  ttrtjerc  it 
isfpohcn  agamft. 

ij  3nb  tbrjen  they  hab  appotntcb 
htm  a  bay , there  came  many  to  Dim  into 
bts  lobging ,  to  ibhom  be  erpounbcb 
anbteftiRebtDehingbomeof®ob,  per* 
froablngtbem  concerning  "Jefus,  both 
orrtofthelaibof£)9ofcs,  anboutofthe 
p?ophets,from  morning  till  euening. 


.XXVI 1J. 


Obfhnatelewes. 


14  3nb  fome  bclecucb  the  things 
lbbKbtt>ercfpoHcn,aubfomcbclccucb 
not. 

15  Zntt  tbhen  they  agreeb  not  a 
mong  tbemrelues,tbeybepactcb,  after 
that  pain  bab  fpofcett  one  ttwb,  nacll 
fpaite  the  holy  <3hoft  by  tfffaias  the 
pjopbet,  bnto  onr  fathers, 

26  laying,  *<Boebntothispcopte, 
anbfay ,  gearing  ye  (ball  heare,  anb 
(ban  not  tonberttanb.anb  feemgye  (ball 
fee,anbnotpercciue. 

17  fot  the  heart  of  this  people  is 
ibareb  groffc ,  anb  their  cares  are  bull 
of  hearing,  anb  their  eyes  bauc  they 
clofeb,  left  they  (houlb  fee  ttnth  their 
eyes.anb  heare  Unth  fhctr  cares,  anb 
bnbcrftanb  rbith  fhctr  heart ,  anb 
(houlb  bee  conuerteb ,  anb  31  (houlb 
heaiethcm. 

28  Be  it  &notbcittherfo2cbnto  you, 
that  fhefaluation  of  Odd  is  fent  Unto 
th«  d5enttles,anb  that  they  toil  heare  it 

29  3nb  ttihen  hee  hats  faibc  tbcfe 
rbo;bs,  fhe3Ietbesbeparteb ,  anb  hab 
great  reafontng  among  themfclues. 

jo  3inb  paul  bibcit  ttuo  rbhole 
yeetes  in  his  otbtte  htrcb  houfc,  anb  re* 
cciueb  all  that  came  in  tmto  him, 

31  poaching  the  ftingbome  of  d5ob, 
anb  teaching  rhofe  things  lbbtch  con* 
cerne  the  %oft  31efus  Chnft,  rbith  all 
confibeuccno  man  fozbibbmghim. 


^  The  end  of  the  Ms  of  the  &fpofi!et. 


<THE 


"  Efai.  6,  9. 
mat.  1  J. 14. 
mar.  4  1  2. 
lukc  8.4. 
ioh.i  J.40. 
com. 1  1.8. 


Pauls  zeale         To  the  Romanes.    fortheGofpel. 


*Ai)s.l3. 


\Qr.dittr- 
mimtl. 


abtditnceef 
faith. 


Jfa-u. 


np  it  r 

EPISTLE  OF  PAVL  THE 

ApoiTJe  to  the  Romanes. 


CHAP.     I. 

i  Paul  commendeth  his  calling  to  the  Romanes, 
o  andhisdellre  to  come  to  them.  16  What 
hisGofpel  is ,  and  the  tighteoiifncfle  which  it 
fhewcth  18  God  is  angry  with  all  maner  of 
fin.  11  What  were  the  finnes  of  the  Gentiles. 

uant  of  3Je* 
fusCl)^0,tai' 
leo  to  bee  an 
3pofrle ,  *  fc* 
paratcb  bnto 
tbc  <5ofpcl  of 

GOO, 

%  (leinch 
bebabpjomi? 
feb  afo.ic  by  I)i5  pjopbets  in  tbc  Ijolv 
Scriptures,) 

3  Concerning  Ins  Sonne  3Jcfus 
Q).2i(touc1Lo:D ,  \Dlncl)  njas  maoe  of 
tljcfecb  of  2>auib  atcojmng  to  fbc  flefb, 

4  3lubtoeclarcbtobctbcSonncof 
Gob.Untl)  pottm\acco2bmgto  tbcSpi< 
rtt  of  bolmcffc.by  tbc  refurrcction  from 
trjc  bcab. 

<>  isy lbbom ibe baucrccciucb grace 
anb  3}pofUcfl)ip  ||  foz  obcbicncc  to  trjc 
faitli  amongallnationsfozbts  /Same, 

6  3tmongwmom  are ye  alfo  trjc  cai< 
lebofWusCtatt. 

7  Ho  all  that  be  m  llomc,  beloueb 
of  oob.^iiedtobc  Saints:  Gracctoyou 
anb  peace  from  <3ob  our  iMtljcr  ,anb  '■ 
thc?Lo:b1lcfusCli2i(l. 

s    tfirft  J  tbanbe  my  Gob  tfuongb ; 
^cfus  Clwft  fo2  you  all,  tbat  your  fattrj 
is  fpolicn  of  tfjjongUont  tlje  lliljolc1 
IU02ID. 

9    .f  02  Goo  is  my  ttntnclTe ,  nmom , 
31  feme  inutbmy  fpintmtbcGofpclof 
bts  Sonne ,  tbat  nntbout  teafing  gi 
malic  mention  of  you,  ailbaycsmmy 
p:avers, 

ioj^alungrequcn/ifbj'anvmeanes 


noU)  atlengfb3lmigbtbauc  apjofpes 
rous  iourncy  by  tbc  rbiU  of  Gob )  to 
come  bnto  yon. 

11  5?o:3llongtofeeyou,ff)at3Jmay 
impart  bnto  you  fomc  tpttttuall  gift,  to 
tfjc  cub  you  may  be  cflablifbcb, 

11  ILfjat  is,tbat3  may  be  eomfo rteb 
togctber  lirbitf)  you.by  tbc  mutual  faitb 
botbofyouanbme. 

ij  iftoibgHbonlbnotrjaueyouigno? 
tant,b2Ctb2en,  tl)at  oftentimes  3  put 
pofeb  to  tome  bnto  you ,  ( but  ibas  let 
bitbcrto)fbat  31  migbtbauefomc  fruit 
||arhongyouaub,cucnas  among  otibct 
Gentiles. 

14  3f  am  bebtet  botl)  to  trjc  Greens, 
anb  to  tbe  barbarians,  botl)  to  tlje 
flnfc,anbtotbcbnibifc. 

15  So,  as  mnrt)  asm  mce  is,  3J  am 
teaby  top2caclj  tlje  Gofpcl  to  you  tbat 
arc  at  Borne  alfo. 

is  5^0231  amnotafbameboftrjeGo* 
pclof€b?ilt:foz  it  tstljepolber  ofGoD 
bnto  faiuation  ,to  eucry  one  tbat  bclee* 
uctfj  ,to  tlje  3Jctbfirft ,  anb  alfo  to  tbe 
Greene. 

17  5T02  tbcrein  is  tbc  ngbtcoufnefTe 
of  Gob  reucilcb  from  faitb  to  faitbras  it 
is  ibnttcn,  *  3Ebc  mft  fliaii  hue  by  faitt). 

is  fai  tbc  Wjatb  of  Gob  is  reucilcb 
from  Ijcaucn  againft  all  bngobltncflc, 
anbbntigbteoumcucofmetUlibobolb 
tbctruetbmbnrtgbtcoufncffc. 

19  fficcaufc  tljat  ibbttl)  may  bee 
kno\bcnofGob,ismanifeOm||t|)cm, 
fo2  Gob  batb  (rjcibcb  it  bnto  tbem. 

20  j?02  tbc  uwtGblc  tbings  of  l)tm 
from  tbc  Creation  of  tbc  ttwlb ,  arc 
clcarclyfeenc ,  being  bnberftoob  by  tbc 
tbings  tbat  arc  maoc ,  men  tjis  ctcrnall 
dottier  anb  Gobbcab,  ||  fo  tljat  tbc? arc 
ttnfbout  crcufe : 

21  fficcaufc  tbat  lbbcn  tVjty  imcib 
Gob,tbcvgio2ificbbimnotasGob,ncfc 
tbcribcretbanlttrull.but  became  bamc 

tn 


\\Or,».}m. 


\\Of,injn 


"Abacas 


I!  Or., 
ihtm. 


]]  Orjhtt 

they  may 
it. 


Codsiudgement.       Chap.ij.      WhoareiuChfied 


'Pfal.  io5. 


lactone- 

]Or,a  mm  U 
vyjde  of 
judgement- 


\\Or,vn{»- 


\\Or,coftfent 

•with  them. 


in  their  imaginations,  anb  their  fooufh 
heart  Wasoarttcneb: 

a  z.  tezofcffmg  themfclucs  to  be  Wife, 
fljcp  became  fooles: 

23  ^CuD  cljangcb  theglozpofthcbtv 
coztuptible*<l3ob ,  into  an  image  mabc 
liltc  to  cou'uptiblc  man ,  ant>  to  bttbes, 
ano  fourc  footcb  beads ,  anb  creeping 
things: 

24  naljcrefozc  (Sob  alfo  ganc  them 
bp  to  bnclcanncffc,  thzough  tlje  lulls  of 
their  oWne  hearts ,  to  btujonour  tijetr 
oWne  bobics  bctwccnc  themfclucs : 

25  naijo  cljangcb  the  tcticth  of  (Sob 
into  aipe,  ano  Wozfh:ppco  anb  femeb 
the  creature  mozc  then  the  Cceatour, 
Who  is  blcffcb  foz  cucr.  amen. 

26  jfo2  this  taufc  ©00  gauc  them 
Up  bntobile  affections :  foz  cucu  tljcir 
Women  bib  change  the  naturaii  bfc  in- 
to that  Which  is  agatnft  nature : 

27  3nb  liuevbifc  alfo  the  men ,  Ica< 
umg  the  naturaii  tofe  of  the  Woman, 
burneb  in  their  lull  one  toWarbs  an- 
other ,  men  With  men  woztung  tfjat 
Which  is  bnfeemelp  ,  anb  rcccuung  tn 
themfelues  that  retompenfe  of  their  cc- 
rottrwljich  was  meet. 

28  ^ub  cuen  as  thep  bib  not  liUe  to 
Hrctalnecsob  in  their  knowicogc,  00b 
gaue  them  oucr to  || arcpzobate tutnbe, 
to  boe  thofc  things  Which  arenotcon 
uenicnt: 

29  25eing  filleb  With  all  tmrightc* 
ou  fncs,  foznieation,  Wicftconeffe ,  cone? 
toufnes ,  maitciourucs  ,  full  of  enuic, 
murthcr ,  otbate ,  Deceit ,  malignmc, 
whifperers, 

30  23acUbiters,  haters  of  <5ob,  be* 
fpitefull,  pzoubcboaQccs,  uuicntcrs  of 
cuill trjings, bifobcbicnt to  parents; 

31  oaithout  bubctftanbuig  ,  couc- 
nant  bzeahers ,  Without  l|  naturaii  at 
ftction,iinplacable,bnmcrciftilli 

32  nai)o  KnoWingthciuDgcincutof 
d5ob ,  ( that  thep  Which  commit  fuel) 
things,  are  wozthp  of  Death )  not  onelp 
bo  the  fame,  but  ||  haue  pleaturc  in  them 
that  boe  them. 

CHAP.    H. 

They  that  fuine,  though  they  con  Jemne  it  in 
others.canuotexcufe  thcmfeluei,<)  and  much 
lelTe  efcape  the  rudgement  or  God,  9  whe- 
ther they  be  Ievves  or  Gentiles.  14  The  Gen- 
tiles cannot  efcape,  17  nor  yet  the  Iewci, 
z$  whom  their  Circumcision  fhall  not  pro- 
fit^ they  keepe  not  the  Law. 


tycrcfoze,  thou  art  mer^, 
tillable, iD man,  Whofoe?i 
uer  thou  art  that  iubgeft:! 
foz  Wherein  thouiubgcltj 
_  another,thouconbcmneQ 

thpfclfe.foz  tljou  tljat  uibgcltbocltthc 

fame  things. 

2  2Sut  Wee  are  fure  that  the  luogc^ 
ment  of<Sobisaccozbmg  to  trueth ,  a- 
gamttthem  which  rommttfuch  things. 

3  ^nb  thm&ctt  thou  this ,  £>  man, 
that  iubgcO  them  Which  boe  fuch 
things, anb  boeft  the  fame ,  that  tljou 
(halt  efcape  the  uibgcmcut  of  (Sob  t 

4  £>z  befpifcfl  tljou  tlje  ricljcs  of  his 
goobneffe,  anb  fozbearance ,  anb  long 
fuffertng,  not  anotbing  that  rhegoofr 
nes  of  ©ob  leabeth  thee  to  repentance* 

5  ®utaftcrthphatbueffc,anbim; 
penttent  heart ,  *trcafutcObpt>ntothp 
fclfe  Wzatlj,  againft  the  bap  of  Wzath, 
anbrcuciation  of  trie  rtghtcousiubgc; 
ment  of  (Sob: 

6  *r@ho  Will  renbet  to  cucrp  man 
aceozomgtohtsbeebes: 

7  %q  them.Whobp  patient  continue 
ante  tn  rbell  bomg ,  fecfec  foz  glozic ,  anb 
honour,anb  itnmoztalitte,etccnail  life : 

8  ffiutbnto  them  that  arc  contents 
ous,?boenotobcpthctrneth,butobep 
bnnghteoufnes,inbignatton,jujzatrj, 

9  Xnbuiarion ,  ano  anguith  bpon 
cuerv  foulc  of  man  that  boctheuill,  of 
.  tlje  3Jetli  fir(t,ano  alfo  of  the  t0enttle. 

10  2Sutglozp,  honour,  anb  peace,  to 
eucrp  man  that  tbozhetlj  goob,  to  the 
igjetti  firit,anb  alfo  to  the  f  ©entile. 

I    11  3fojtljcreisuorefpcrtofpcrfons 
iVblth<i500. 

12  $ oz  as  manp  as  Jjauc  finneb  ttjith* 
out  ILalD  ,  ujall  alfo  penaj  Without 
Uaib:  ano  as  manp  as  haue  Gnncbm 
the  ?Latb,(halbe  iubgcO  bp  the  fLaru. 

13  (j?oz  not  tlje  hearers  of  the  |Latt> 
arciuftbefozcd5ob,butt1jcbocrsofthc 
jtavbfhaibcium&cb. 

14  5Foz  when  the  Gentiles  which 
haue  not  the  ILaVb,  boe  bp  nature  the 
things  contatneb  in  the  Haw :  tljefe  tja 
mug  not  the  2UW ,  art  a  Haw  bnto 
thetnfclues, 

\s  nahtch  fljew  the  Wozfee  of  the 
ILaw  Wzittcn  in  their  heacts,tl)eir||conf 
fnencc  alfo  bearing  Wttncffe,  anb  their 
thoughts  !l  tlje  meanc  while  accufing, 
0?  clfe  crniOng  oncanotljcc : 

\6  3fn  the  bap  When  (Sob  than  uiogc 
thefecrets  of  men  bp  3Jefus<£hziu\ac 
coibingtompiSofpel. 
J> 17  3Sc^ 


lames  y. 


•Pfj!.tfi. 
I  2.matth 
16.  ij.rc- 
utl.  zz.lt 


Tc7r.  Crttkf 


^(jr,(jrcekf 


confdtm(e 
mtntftin? 
with  tvem. 
\{Ortie. 

trtetn  thtm 
feints. 


The  true  I  ewe. 


To  the 


R, 


N 


omans.  in  one  righteous. 


\\Or,mtfl 
lb.it  dif<r. 


ay   I  J 


•  Efiy 

j.cicch 

jtf.aci; 


17  36cDolD,tl)on  art  callcb  a  3Jcw, 
anD  rcftcft  111  the  JLaiD,  anD  maluft  thy 
boaftofoob: 

is  311b imoiDcfti^nmi.anDilappJo 
tuft  the  things  that  ate  mozc  crccllcnt, 
being  tnftcncteb  dutoftlje  3Laib, 

19  3tnD  art  confiDcnt  that  thou  thy 
fcifcartaguiDcoftheblinDc,  a  light  of 
them  viiich=rciuDarUenciTe: 

zo  3tn  tnftructour  of  the  foolifl),  a 
leather  of  babes :  ibhtch  haft  the  fomie 
ofltnolDlcDgc  ant)  of  the  tructh  mthe 
i  iLalU : 

21  Xhou  therefore  Which  teacheft 
another,  teatheft  thou  not  thy  fclfc; 
thou  that  pjcatheft  a  man  ChoulD  not 
ftealcboeftthouftcaJc^ 

zi  2-hou  that  fapeft  a  man  fhoulb 
not  commit  abultcncboeft  thou  torn 
mit  abultcrie  <  thou  that  abhorrcft  v 
bols,  bocft  thou  commit  fatrilcbgc  i 

i5  Xhou  that  maucft  thy  boaft  of 
the  Hail),  thjough  brcaiung  the?Laib 
bifJ)onourcftthoii(3obr- 

14.  f or  the  ^I5amc of (5ob  is  blafphc; 
mcb  among  the  <3ctuilcs,through  you, 
as  it  is*  written: 

15  jforCircuincifionbcriiyprofiteth 
if  thou  UccpcthclLa.li :  butifthoubea 
b:caHcrofthc?Laib,  thyCtrcumcifion 
ismabcbncircunmfion. 

16  Xhcrcforcif  the  bntircumcifion 
lieepc  the  rightcoufnclTc  of  the  ILaib, 
fhaiiuothisi'iutrcumcifiou  be  cottnteD 
fo:Circumtiftoni 

17  3tno  (nail  not  bncircumcifiou 
Which  is  by  uatuicif  it  fulfill  the  JLaVd, 
uibgcthecibho  by  the  letter,  aub  Cir^ 
cuiiicifion,boefttranfgren"ethc!i.ail»; 

18  fo:  hec  is  not  a  ^IcUi,  Which  is 
one  outibarmy, neither  is  that  Circuits 
nfion,\bhuh  us  outWarD  m  the  flefli : 

19  rsuthcisajc.b  Much  is  one  uv 
iDarbly,anDCirciimnrioni£,rhatoftIjc 
hcart.m  the  (pint,  anD  not  in  the  letter, 
ibhofr  p:aifc  12  not  of  men  ,but  of  <5oD. 

CHAP.     III. 

1  The  U-wcs  prerogamie  :  ,  which  they  haue 
not  loll :  9  Howbcit  the  Law  eonuineerf) 
themjllooffinnc:  i0  Therefore  no  flcfh 
isiuftificdbytheLaw,  ;s  but  all, without 
diffetence.byfaithonely:  }i  Andyetthe 
Law  is  not  abolifhal. 

SS^at  abuantagc  then  hath 

?Athe  ilclbfo:  lbhat  profit 

isthcrcofCircumcifion; 

i    v^iicl)  cuery  ibay: 

^>Vfe£  chiefly ,  becaufe  that  bnto 


Pf>: 


\Cr. 


them  mere  tommitteb  the  €>ratlcs  of 

0OD. 

3  _f o:Vbhat  iffomcb.Dtiotbclccuc? 
than  their  tonbeiicfe  mane  tljc  faith  of 
G50D  liuthout  effect  < 

4.  C>oDforb.D:yca,,ct(3oDbetrue, 
but  cucry  man  a  lier ,  as  it  is  Written, 
*Xhat  thou  mightcft  bcitifttftcD  m  thy 
fayings ,  anD  mightcft  oucrtome  When 
thou  art  uiDgcb. 

5  25utifourl)nrightroufncfrccom 
nienbthertghttoufncffc  of  ©on,  what 
(hall  Vbcfay  its  ©ob  bnnghteons  Woo 
tatteth  bcngeanccrCIJ  fpeaite  as  a  man) 

6  (500  forbib  :  fo:  then  how  flj»all 

<50DlUDgcthCtt)02UK 

7  5*  or  tf  the  tructh  of  (5od  hath 
more  abounbeb  through  my  lye  tonto 
his  glory  j  why  yet  am  3  alfo  mDgcD  as 
a  (inner  * 

8  3lnD  not  farhet  as  Wee  be  flanbe 
roufiy  rcportcD ,  aub  as  fomc  afftrmc 
thatweray,!LetbsDoecuiu\thatgooD 
may  tome :  Whofe  Damnation  istuft. 

9  ©hat  then  i  are  wee  better  then 
they;  0o  in  no  Wife:  for  we  hauc  before 
t  p2oucb  both  3Je*bes,  anb  ©entiles, 
that  they  arc  all  bnDcrfinnc, 

10  %s  it  is  Uwtten,  Xhcrcisnonc 
rightcous,nonotone: 

11  Xhcre  is  none  that  Imbcrftan 
bcth ,  there  is  none  that  fcehcrh  after 
eob. 

n  Eheyarcallgoneoutofthelbay, 
they  arc  together  become  Unprofitable, 
there  is  none  that  Doetlj  goob  ,  no 
not  one. 

13  Xheirth2oatlsanopeufepuith2c, 
ibith  their  tongues  they  hauctofeb  be 
ccit,  the  poyfou  of  Hfpcsisl)nbcr  their 
lippcs: 

14  t®l)ok  mouth  i£  full  of  turfing 
aubbittcrncffc: 

15  £hcir  feet  are  fmif  t  to  lljcb  bloob. 
i6  ©cftruction  jnufery  arc  in  their 

luaycs : 

17  3nb  the  ibay  of  peace  hauc  they 
nothnolbcn. 

18  Hherr  is  no  fcarc  of  (SOD  before 
tljcir  eyejg. 

19  /Bolb  ibe  Uuolb  that  lbhat  thmge 
focucr the ?La\b faith,  it  faith  to  them 
ttiho  arc  bnber  the  Haib :  that  cucry 
mouth  may  bee  ftoppeb  ,  anD  all  the 
ujojlD  map  betome  ||  guilty  before  C?oD.  \:°'S*n<a 

20  therefore  by  the  Dccdcs  of  the  Z«'*1' 
HaiD ,  there  fljau  no  fleflj  be  uiftifieD  m  g.i. ' 
his  fight :  for  by  tlje  %m  is  the  UnoU)^ , 
lebgc  offmnc. 

. 21  2Sutl 


Iuitification 


Ch 


ap.ini 


by  faith. 


\\Or,prt- 

or  At  wed. 


I  Or,  f  iff  Kg 


n  But  noVbc  the  rtgbtcoufneffe  of  i 
God  lPitbout  the  flame  is  mamfcftcD, 
being  mitttclTeD  bp  the  JLaibe  anDthe 
0zophets. 

ii  euett  tl)c  rightcoufncfTc  of  Goo, 
mbtchtsbr  faith  of  Jcfus  Chziffr  bnto 
all.aitD  ppon  ail  them  that  bclceue:  fo<2 
tljetc  ts  no  Difference: 

13  jf 02  all  banc  finncD ,  ann  come 
fljonof  tljcglozyofGoD, 

14  25cingiufttficD  freely  by  Disgrace, 
though  tlje  rcDcmptton  that  ts  inte- 
rns £b2iQ: 

15  i©bom  ©od  bath  ||  fct  foul)  to  bee : 
a  propitiation  ,  tbzougb  faith  in  his 
blooo,to  Declare  bis  rtgbtcoufneffe  fo? 
thcilremifftou  of  ftnttcs,that  are  part, 
tbzougb  the  fozbeatance  of  GoD. 

16  Xo  Declare,  3Jfay,  at  tbtsttmc 
bisrighteoufneffc :  tliat  bee  might  bee  ( 
lult.aiiD  tDcutftiftctof  bim  Vbfjlcijbclce! 
uetrjutUcfus. 

17  t©l)cre  is  boafting  tbett  t  ft  ts 
crcluDcD.  26yibbat?Latt> ;  £>fmo2Bs;; 
/ftay :  but  by  the  %m  of  faitl). 

18  Xberefozc  ibcc  concIttDe,  tfjat  a 
man  ts  lUtrtftcD  by  faitl) ,  mttbout  the 
DccDsofthcftatP. 

19  3JsJ)ctl)C(3oDoftl)c5ca)eson^ 
ly;3Js  be  not  alfo  oftbc  Gentiles;  Pes, 
oftbc  Gentiles  alfo: 

30  Seeing  it  is  one  god  rbrjich  fljal 
mfhSc  the  etrcumctfion  by  faitf),anD  Ptv 
rirtumciCion  tljzougl)  faith. 

31  2>oc  ttic  then  matte  tooiD  the  lame 
though  faith;  GoDfozbiD:  yca,tDc  rila^ 
Mitt)  the  ?LaU). 

CHAP.     IIII. 

I  Abraham-,  faith  was  imputed  to  him  for  righ- 
teoufneffe,  10  before  hce  was  circumcifed. 
13  Bv  faith  only  he  and  his  feed  recemed  the 
proinife.  16  Abraham  is  the  father  of  all 
thatbeleeue.  14  Our  faith  alio  fhallbeim- 
puted  to  vs  for  righteoumes. 

&&&$££&  feat  (hail  tbr  fay  then  ,tljat 
4v§S^a  ^bzabant  our  father ,  as 
IkWYiO  pcrtcming  to  the  ftcfh, 
^Wfe  hath  foimD  ; 
&£&&&   1  5fozif3bzabaiiitt)ctc 

tUttlfiCDbymOZKCS,  hCC  Ijatl)  whereof  ft) 

glozy  ,but  not  befoze  god. 

3  jFoz  Vbhat  faitl)  the  Scripture;  %< 
bzabam  bciccucD  GoD.anDtt  mas  toun- 
tcDbnto  bmifoz  nghtcoufnes. 

4.  ^oiotobimtbatmozkctb.tstbc 
rcmacD  not  rechoncD  of  grace,  but  of 
Debt. 


5  2Sut  to  hmt  that  ibozltctl)  not,but 
bcieeuethonhimthattuftificth  the  ton- 
goDly,f)ts  faith  iscounteD  foz  riglj- 
teoufnefle. 

6  cucn  as  aDattiD  alfo  Dcfcribert) 
|  the  bleffcDnefle  of  the  matt,bnto  mboin 

GoDimputetb  ngbtcouftteffe  lbttbout 

tt)02RS: 

7  saving,  25icfleD  are  the?  tbhofe  ttt= 
!ciuiticsarcfo2giuen,anDlbl)ofeOnncs 
arctoticreD. 

s  iSlcffeD  is  the  man  to  tbhomc  the 
3Lo:D  mill  not  impute  fume. 

9     Commeth  tl)XS  blCffCDUCS  thClt  Pp^ 

on  the  rirtunmfion  oneiy,  02  bpon  the 
Pnctrcumctfiou  alfo;  foz  mcc  fay  that 
faith  mas  rcrttoncD  to  3bzaharn  foz 
righttouftteffc. 

10  $otD  mas  it  then  tccUoneD;  rPbcn 
he  mas  in ctreumciGon,  0.2  tit  pneirennv 
nfion;  nottn  tircumnfion,buttttbnnrj 
cumcifion. 

1 1  3inD  hce  rcceiucD  the  fignc  of  tir^ 
mmcifton,a  fcaieof  the  rightcoufttcffc 
of  thcfatth,TP!)ich  hee  had  yet  being  bn= 
nrcumctfeD :  that  he  might  be  the  father 
of  all  them  that  bdecue,though  thev  be 
not  tirtumnfcD  >  that  righteoufneffc 
might  be  imputeD  Pnto  them  alfo : 

11  3no  the  father  of  ttrtumnfton.to 
them  mho  arc  not  of  the  ctrramctGon 
oncly,but  alfo  maifce  in  theffeppesof 
that  faith  of  our  father  3b2aham,which 
he  had  being  pet  PnctrcumctfcD. 

13  5F02  the  pzomifc  tljatlje fhoulD  be 
the  hetrc  of  thetbozUVvasnottaSibzas 
ham,  ozto  his  fccbtbzougb  the  HaiPe, 
buttl)20ughtherigi)tcoufneffcoffatth. 

14  jf  oz  tf  tljcp  Uiljich  arc  of  the  lam 
bchcircs,  faith  tsmaDeboiDc,  auDthc 
pzomtfc  maDe  of  none  effect. 

15  2Secattfethciatbtt!0jRcthtt>zath: 
foz  mherc  no  JUtpc  ts,there  is  tto  tranfc 
grcffion. 

16  Xhcrcfozc  it  is  of  faith,  that  it 
might  bee  bp  grace  >  to  the  cttDc  the  pzo> 
mifc  might  be  furc  to  all  the  fceDc,ttot  to 
that  oneiv  mhich  is  of  the  !Cam, but  to 
that  alfo  minth  tsof  the  faitl)  of  3lb2a* 
ham,mho  ts  the  father  of  Ps  all, 

17  (3lsitismzitten,*3}  haucmaDe 
thee  a  father  of  manp  nations)  Ibcfoze 
Dun  mhom  he  bciccucD,  euen  god  mho 
quicftcncth  the  DcaD,  aim  caiicth  thofc 
things  mijicl;  bee  not ,  as  though  they 
mere, 

is  naho  agamft  hope ,  bciccucD  m 
hope,  that  hce  might  become  the  father 
of  many  nations:  atcozDutg  to  that 
^1 mjiich 


'Gen. 17. 5 


iuftification.        To  the  Romanes.         Gods  loue. 


Gen  I  J.J 


time. 


Which  mas  fpoRcn ,  *  5>o  than  thy 
fecbebce. 

19  3lub  being  not  WitaUc  in  faith,!)" 
tonfibcrcb  not  his  oume  bobynoW 
bcab,  when  hec  was  about  an  hunbjcb 
ycrcoro,neithctyctthcDcabncsof3>a* 
racswombc. 

20  tyce  flnggcrct)  uotatthcp:omife 
of  Gob  though  bnbcltcfc:  but  was 
ftronginfattl),giuingglo2ytoGob: 

n  3lnb  being  fully  pcrfwabcb,that 
Whathchabp2omifcb,hewasablcaifo 
to  perfomic. 

22  3nb  therefore  it  Wjas  itnputcb  to 
himfoirightcoufnefTc. 

23  flow*  it  )bas  not  Vbnttcn  fo:  l)is 
fa&c  alone ,  that  it  was  unputeb  to 
him: 

24  2iSut  fo;  bs  alfo  ,  to  Wljome  it 
fbau  bec  imputcb,  ifwcc  bclccue  on 
Dim  that  raiftb  bp  Jitfus  our  JLojb 
from  the  bean, 

25  nahowasbeliucrcbfojouroffcn; 
tts,anb  rbas  raifcu  againe  fo?  our  luttt* 
fitanon. 

CHAP.    V. 

I  Being  iufhfied  by  frith,  wee  haue  peace  with 
God,  1  and  ioy  in  our  hope,  8  tnatfirhwe 
were  reconciled  by  his  blood,wlien  wee  were 
enemies,  10  wee  fliall  much  more  be  faued 
being  reconciled.  11  As  finne  and  death 
camebyAdam,  17  lo  much  more  nghte> 
oufnelTe  and  life  by  Iefus  Chnft.  10  '//here 
finne  abounded, grace  did  fuperabound. 

$^£3?  T?ercfo2f  being  luuiftcb  bp 
TSSi  W&B  fauh.wcc  haue  peace  lbith 
Sgs|  Gob,  thjouglj  our  H02D 

i^J  2  iSy  Whom  alto  wee 
haue  atteffc  by  faith ,  into  this  grate 
wherein  wccftanb.anbrcioyccin  hope 
ofthcglojyofGob. 

3  2Mb  not  oncly  fo,  but  We  gl02y  m 
tribulations  alfo,  tmo  Wing  tljat  tnbu 
lationwozlicth  patience: 

4  3nb  patientc,erpcricuce:  anb  cr 
prricncchopc: 

•>  3WD  hope  malteth  not  afhamcb, 
becaufc  the  loue  of  Gob  is  fhco  abjoab 
m  our  hcarts,by  theholv  Ghoft.Whsch 
isguicnbntobs. 

6  f  02  When  Wee  Were  vet  Without 
ftrcngth ,  m  Due  tiiiic,<CI)2ifHstct>fo; tlic 
bngobly. 

7  f  0:  fcarcelv  fo:  a  righteous  man 
Hull  one  Die:  vet  pcraburuturc  fo?  a 
goob  man,  fomc  wouib  eucu  bare  to 
bye. 


8  z6ut  Gob  toinnicnbeth  h«s  loue 
towarbsbs.in  that,  While  we  wcrcyet 
fiuncrs,Ch:iftbicbfo2bs. 

9  t^uth  inozc  then  being  noib  uifti- 
ficb bv  his  bio  ob,  we  (haibcfaucb  from 
lbjath  through  him. 

10  ifoz  if  When  Wee  Were  enemies, 

wcwcrcrcconciiebtoGob,bvthcbeath 
of  his  fonne :  much  mo2C  being  icconct- 
lco,wc  fhaibc  faueb  bv  his  life. 

1 1  3lnb  not  onclv  fo,  but  Wccalfo  iov 
m  Gob ,  th;ough  our  Ho2bc  "Jems 
Cl)2ift,bv  Whom  We  haue  now  retciueb 
the  atonement. 

12  iohercfo2e,  as  bv  one  man  finne 
entrcb  into  the  W02lb,anb  beath  by  fin: 
anb  fo  beath  paffcD  bpon  all  mcn,|]fo2 
that  all  haue  finneb. 

13  5F02  bntui  the  ILaw  finne  was  m 
the  W02lb :  but  fin  is  not  unputcb  When 
there  is  no  Haw. 

i4/f5cuerthclcs,beathrctgnebfrom 
3lDam  to  epofes ,  cuen  ouer  them  that 
hab  not  finneb  after  the  fimilitubc  of  H 
bamstranfgreffton,  Who  tstljc  figure 
of  him  that  was  to  tonic: 

15  ffiutnotasthe  offrnte,  fo  alfo  is 
the  free  gift:  fojif  tr^ough  the  offente 
ofonc,manvbecbeab:  tnuthino2Ctl)t 
grace  of  Gob,anb  the  gift  bv  srate,which 
»bvoncmaii3JcfttsCh2tft,hathaboun 
bcbtontomany. 

i6  3tnonotas  'twas  bv  one  that  fin 
neb,  fo  is  the  gift:  fo2  the  lubgctncnt 
Was  bv  one  to  conbcmnatiou :  but  the 
free  gift  is  of  many  offences  bntotufti 
Ification. 

17  5Fo2ifiibvoucmansoffcucc,Dcath 
raigncb  by  one,  much  nunc  they  Whtth 
rccciuc  abuiibancc  of  grace  anb  of  the 
gift  of  rightcoufncs.fhaii  rcigne  mlife 
byonCJcfusClmft. 

18 1£f)crfo2C  as  I  by  the  offence  of  one, 
iudgment  came  bpon  all  men  to  conbem 
nation  :cucnfo  by  the  rightcoufncs  of 
one,the  free  gift  came  bpon  aiiiuenbuto 
;  uifhfication  of  life. 

19  ifojasbyone  mans bifobcDicuce 
many  were  mabc  fmncis:  fo  by  the 
obcbicnccof  one,  fljall  many  bee  mabc 
righteous. 

20  £}5o2eouer ,  the  ?Lawe  entrcb, 
that  the  offence  might  abouub:  but 
1  Where finncabouubeb, grace  bib  much 
:mo2C  abouub. 

21  Chat  as  finne  hath  reigiicbbuto 
beath  i  cuen  fo  might  grace  rcignctho 

1  row  rightcoufncs  Ditto  ctcrnalllifr,  by 
3JcfU5Ch:iftour?Lo2b. 

c  H  a  p. 


\0r  jmvham 


pr.ly  0 


\0t  i)  t 

ojfenc  e. 

•  t 


Dead  to  finnc.         Chap.vj  .vij.      Wages  offinne. 


WOr^rt. 


XCfrjqftijicd 


1 Cr  nrmesi 
or  xreapo/ts. 


CHAP.     VI. 

i  Wee  may  not  liue  infinne,  i  for  wee  are 
dead  vnto  it,  3  as  appeareth  by  ourbap- 
tilmc.  ir  Let  not  finne  raigue  any  more, 
18  becaufe  wee  haue  yeelded  our  feluesto 
the  feruice  of  nghteoumefle ,  13  and  tor 
that  death  is  the  wages  offinne. 

$at  (ban  lDc  fay  tbcwfhall 
Voce  continue  tn  funic :  that 
grate  may  abounD* 

z  ood  fo2btO:  UoiD  mail 
iDec  that arc  DcaD  to  fume, 
lute  any  longer  therein-. 

j  lsnoiDyenot,thatfomanyofbs 
as  ||  mere  baptrjeb  into  3icfus  Ch2tft, 
mere  bapti3CD  into  his  Death i 

4  Xhcccfojc  Vote  arc  burycb  iDith 
bint  by  baptifmc  into  Death ,  that  lihe 
asClmft  was  raiftDDp  from  the  DcaD 
by  thegumcoftheifathcr :  ettenfo  Wee 
alfo  fhoulb  walbc  in  ncWncfft  of  life. 

5  if 02  if we  hauc  bene  planteD  togc; 
therm  the  lifccncfTc  of  his  bcath:wcc 
fbalbc  alfo  in  the  Itfceucffc  of  his  refur- 
rection : 

6  Bnotbmgthis,  that  our  olbntan 
is  crurtfieb  With  htm ,  that  toe  bobtc  of 
finne  might  bee  DcftroycD,  that  hence* 
fooith  We  fhoulD  not  feme  fume. 

7  ifojhc thatiSDcaD.ts  tfeeeb from 
Cnnc. 

8  iBoWtfwcbcDcaDWithClmlUDc 
belecuc  that  We  (bal  alfo  line  wtth  him: 

9  lamoWing  that  Ctwft  being  ray; 
feb  from  the  bcab ,  Dietb  no  mojc ,  Death 
hath  no  mo  jc  Dominion  oucr  Ijim. 

10  if 02  m  that  he  DycD ,  Dc  DycD  bnto 
finnc  once :  but  in  that  rjee  liucth,  hceli* 
uethbntoooD. 

11  fUKeWift  rccRon  ycc  alfo  your 
feluesto  be  bcabmbccb  bnto  finnc :  but 
aline  bnto  <5oD,  thjcmgh  3jcfus  Chutr 
our|Lo2b. 

ii  iLet  not  finnc  rcignc  therfojetn 
your  moitall  boDy ,  that  ye  fhoulb  obey 
it  in  the  lulls  thereof. 

13  jftctthcr  yccib  ycc  your  members 
as  tmftruments  of  bnnghtcoufncsbn; 
to  finnc :  bnt  ycclbc  your  fclucs  bnto 
Gob,  asthofc  that  arc  aiiuc  from  the 
bcab,  anb  your  members  as  mlrtu* 
ments  of  nghtcoufneffe  bnto  «5ob. 

14  if 02  fume  fl)ail  not  hauc  Domini- 
on oucr  you,  foi  ycc  arc  not  tonbcrtljc 
3UW,btttbnDcr(5race. 

15  D3hat them  thai  we finite,  bctaufc 
Wee  arc  not  bnocr  the  ILaw,  but  bnber 
<Sracc<(5oDfo2biD. 


f  Gr.  where- 
te ye  were 
delivered. 


16  liiioib  yc  not ,  that  to  iDhom  y ec 
ycclb  your  fclucs  fcruants  to  obey,  his 

fetuantsyearctomhomyeobeyitbhC' 
tl)cr  of  finne  bnto  Death ,  02  of  obcbi= 
cure  Dnto  righteouftteffti 

17  2Sttt  ood  bee  thanftcD ,  that  ycc 
Were  the  fcr  uants  offinne :  but  yc  haue 
!  obeyeb  from  the  heart  that  fourmc 
i  of  Dotmnc ,  t  which  was  DcliucrcD 
you. 

18  fficing  then  tnaDc  free  from  finne, 
ycc  became  the  fcruatus  of  rightconk 
|ncfft. 

I  19  •Jfpcaftcafterthcmancrofmeti, 
becauftof  the  infirmmc  of  your  flctb: 
fo2as  ycc  hauc  ycclbcb  your  members 
|feruants  to  DnclcanncucanDtotntqut? 
j  tic,  bnto  iniquttte :  cucnfonoWyetlDe 
your  members  fcruants  to  rtghtcou£ 
ncfTcbnto  holincffc. 

20  if  02  When  ycc  Were  the  fcruants 
offinne  yc  Were  free  tfrom  rightcoufc  \Crt"$> 
neffc. 

21  aahat  fruit  hab  ycc  then  in  thore 
things,  whereof  yc  arc  now  afhamcD; 
fo2  the  cud  of  thole  things  is  Death. 

zz  2Sut  now  being  mabc  free  from 
finnc,anb  become  fcruants  to  <3oD  ,ycc 
hauc  your  fruit  Dnto  hoUnefift ,  anbtbe 
cnDcucriaffingUfc. 

zj  ifo2  the  wages  of  finnc iSDcath : 
but  the  gift  of  (5oD  is  ctcrnau  lift, 
through  3Jcftts  Chnft  our  JI02D. 

CHAP.    VII. 

1  No  law  hath  power  ouer  a  man ,  longer  then 
heeliueth.  4  But  wee  are  dead  to  the  law. 
7  Yet  is  not  the  law  finne,  11  but  holy,  iuft, 
good,  \6  as  I  acknowledge,  who  am  grie. 
ued  becauie  I  cinnot  keepe  it. 

f£4~^^  Bo\D  yc  not,b2Cth2rn  (fo2 
'^m3  fpeafee  to  them  that 
M?m  knottic  the  TLaiDc )  hoiD 
^]  H>>il  that  the  ?La\bc  hath  bo^ 
otS^Jo£ minion  oner  a  man,  as 
longashchucthi 

z  ifo2  the  rbotnan  tbljicl)  hath  an 
hnfbauD ,  ts  bounb  by  the  laib  to  her 
hufbanb,  fo  long  as  \)t  liucth :  but  if  the 
hufbanb  bcbcaD,  fl)C  is  looftDfcom  tfje 
laiDoftnchufbatiD. 

3  S»o  then  if  iDhilc  her  hufbanD  li^ 
ucth ,  fl)cc  be  marricb  to  another  man, 
Ihecfhalbc  caileban  abulttrcffc :  but  if 
her  hufbanb  bcbcaD,  Oicc  is  free  from 
thatlaiD ,  fo  that  (he  is  no  aDuitcrcflc, 
though  (he  be  marncD  to  another  man . 
^  3  4  iBhere 


83 


Manswcakcnes.  To  the  Romanes.  FJcfh  and  fpint. 


f  Grpajj/ant 


\\Or,t.,»g 

cUadtothat, 


Or,  eonCH- 
ftfeence. 


\  Cr.lfno 


4  a)Dcrefo«!cmy b2cth2cn,yccaifo! 
ace  become  bcaD  to  the  lattt  by  the  boDy 
ofCttfift,  that  ye  fhoulD  be  macrtcD  to! 
another ,  cuett  to  him  ibho  ts  caifcD 
from  the  ocao,  that  ibccChottlD  tying 
fotth  fruit  bnto  (Sob, 

5  jfoiibhcn  ibee  iberc  in  the  fled), 
the t  motions  of  funics  ibtnch  iberc  by 
the  laib,  mo  ibojfcc  m  our  members,  to , 
bzingfoojth  fruit  bnto  Death.  | 

6  iSutnolbibcc  arc  DcltuercD  from 
tlje  laib ,  II  that  being  DeaD  vutjerem  ibe 
lbcrc  rjcltj,cf>attt)e  fhoulD  feme  in  ncVb- 
ncCfc  of  fpint,  anD  not  m  tlje  olDncfic  of 
tljc  letter. 

7  nshat  (hall  ibee  fav  tfjen  <  is  the 
laib  finne  <  (SoD  fo?btD.  /|5ay,  ^  tjabl 
not  Imolbcu  finne  ,but  bythciaibc  :foj 
3  fjao  not  Unoti)cn||  luft,  crcept  the 
ILatb  i)ab  foib.Xhou  (halt  not  couct.  ! 

s  25ut  finne  tatting  oceafiou  by  tfjc ; 
commaunDcment,  ibjought  in  me  all 
mancr  of  concupifcence .  JFo?  ruetljout 
thc&aib  finne  was  DeaD.' 

9  ifo?  3  ibas  aliuc  tbttfjout  the' 
?Larb  once,  but  ibhen  the  commanDc-; 
mcnteamc,fiuiicrciuucb,anD3lDicD. 

io  3nD  tlje  commanbement  ibljtch 
ibas  ordamed  to  life ,  3  founD  to  be  bnto 
Death. 

ii  5ro:  finne  tatting  occafion  by  tlje 
commanocment,bccctucb  mc,anb  by  it 
(Icibme. 

1 1  aahcrcfozc  the  !Laib  is  holy ,  anD 
thc€ommanDctncntholy,anDiuft,auD 
goob. 

i}  cDas  that  then  lbhich  is  goob, 
mabe  Death  bnto  nic?  <5ob  fozbib.  2Sut 
finne ,  that  it  might  appearc  finne,  ibo; 
tting  Death  in  nice  by  that  lbhuh  is 
goob :  that  finne  by  the  CommaunDc* 
ment  might  become  cjccccDing  finfuli. 

i+  iFojibec  Unoib  that  the  ?Uib  is 
fpintuall :  but  3  am  carnail,  folb  buDcr 
finne. 

1 5  if oi  that  lbhich 3  do,  3  t  aiioib 
not:  fonbhat3JibouiD,thatDo31  not, 
but  lbhat^JhatcthatDoCj. 

i6  3Jf  tljcn  3  doc  that  lbhich  3 
VboulD  not,  3  content  bnto  the  JLalb, 
that  itisgooD. 

1 7  iftoib  then ,  it  isno  niozc  3  that 
Doc  it :  but  fume  that  Dibclleth  in  me. 

is  jfo^Bnoiluhatm mc(trjat  is, 
in  my  flefh)  Dibclleth  no  gooD  thing. 
Jf  oj  to  ibill  is  pjefent  lbith  me :  but  how 
to  perfozmettjat  lbhich  isgooD,  3  fino 
not. 

I?  Jfo;  the  gooD  that  3  iboulD,3f  do 


not:butthecuillibhicl)  3  rboulD  not, 
that  3  Doe. 

io  iBoibtf3Iboethat33ibouiDnot, 
it  is  no  moje  3  that  bo  it,  but  finne  that 
Dtbellethmmc. 

ii  3finDthena?Laib,thatlbhen3 
iboulbbogoob,cuiltsp2cfent  lbith  me. 

22  5fo?  3  Delight  in  the  JLatbe  of 
(Sob,  after  the  intbarD  man. 

2  j  25ut  3  fee  another  ?Laibe  in  my 
members  ,ibarring  agamft  thclLaibe 
of  my  nunDe,anDb?ingingmeintotap; 
ttuity  to  the  ?Larb  of  finne ,  ibijieh  is  m 
my  members. 

i+  £D  ibjctcheb  man  that  3  am 
ibho  (halioeuuer  mc  from  ||  the  boby  of 
thisbcath* 

25  3  tfoanfee  (Sob  tlnough  3cfus 
Chitft  our  ILojd.  5>o  then ,  lbith  the 
mint)  3  my  felf  feme  the  Hatb  of  (Sob: 
but  lbith  tlje  flefh ,  the  laib  of  finne. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

i  They  that  are  in  Chriff,  and  hue  accoi  ding 
to  the  Spirit,  are  free  from  condemnation. 
5.  13  What  harme  commeth  of  the  flefh 
6. 14  and  what  good  of  the  Spirit :  17  and 
whatof  being  Gods  childe,  19  whofeglon 
ous  deliuerance  all  things  long  for,  ij  was 
before  hand  decreed  from  God.  38  7/ha 
can  feuer  vs  from  his  loue? 

I>crc  is  therefore  noib  no 
conDemnarton  to   them 


\Or,thub>- 
A)  of  death. 


^m  lbhich  are  m  ChnftJJcRis, 


lbho  ibaibe  not  after  the 
&&£*«%  flcfl),but after  the  fpint 
2    irozthtiaib  of  thcfpintof  lifcm 
Ch?ifi3Ieftts ,  hath  mabe  mc  free  from 
tlje  laib  of  finne  aub  Death . 

5  if  oj  ttihat  the  ia\b  coulD  not  doc, 
m  that  it  ibas  ibcaHe  though  tljeflcfi), 
©ob  fcnbmghisoibne  £>onnc ,  in  the 
lihencfle  of  finuefttll  fled) ,  at  id  "  fo:  finite 
conDcmneD  finne  in  theflcfl): 

4  3Chat  the  nghteoufncirc  of  the 
laib  might  be  fulfillcb  m  bs,ibho  ibaiftc 
not  after  the  flcQ) ,  but  after  the  fpint. 

<,  Jfo;  they  that  are  after  the  flc(h, 
boe  minDc  the  thmgsof  the  flefh :  but 
they  that  are  after  tljcfpirlt,  the  things 
ofthcfpirit. 

6  5F02  totbe  carnally  mtnbeD.is  Death: 
but  t  to  be  fptntuaily  mmDeD,  is  life  atiD 
peace  s 

7  25ccaufet  the  car  nail  minDc  is  tw 
mitie  agatnft  <3oD:foi  ttis  not  fubiect  to 
thclaibof<5oD ,  neither  tnDccbtan  be. 

8  ^othentheytljatacemtljcflcflj, 
cannot  plcafc  ©oD. 

9  26ut 


Orjby  aft- 
cr$fitefffrfin. 


tgr.  the 
rttnJtrtf  of 
hefit/b. 
f  Cr.  ike 
frnnamv  of 
thejptnt. 
\Gr.  the 
•tiinJtnv  of 
shefrjh. 


Saued  by  hope.        Chap.vnj.  Predefhnation. 


\prjcauifi 

efhisjpirit. 


\\Or,t»rrj 

crcalttre. 


Luke  21. 
iS. 


9  25ut  pe  ace  not  in  tlyt  flc(o ,  but  m 
thefpiett,  if  fobcthattDefpiritof  (Sob 
bibclltnpou.  BoU)  tf  an?  man  haue 
notthefptcitofCliHft^etsnoneofhiS. 

io  3rtOtfChtiftbeinpou,thcbobpts 
beabbecaufe  of  finite :  but  tl)e  fpicit  ls 
ufe,becaufe  of  rightcournctTe. 

ii  25  itt  ifthc  fpint  of  hint  that  taifeb 
bpUefusfcomthebeab.bibcllinpou: 
hethat  ratfeb  bp  Chad  from  the  bcao, 
11)311  alfo  quicken  yourmoitall  bobics, 
||b?  h»s  fpirtt  that  blbellcth  in  pou. 

i2Xhctfo:eb:cth:en,tbcarcbetters, 
not  to  the  fled) ,  to  lute  after  the  fled). 

u  5Fo:tfpeliucaftcctheflcd),pcfl)ail 
bic :  but  if  pe  through  the  fpicit  boe  mo:= 
tifiethebeebs  of  the  bobp,pc  than  line. 

i+  5Fo:asmanpasarc  lebbpthcfpt 
rttofcSob.thcparctftefonnes  of  (Sob. 

i5  ifarpcijancnotrecciucb  the  fpicit 
of  bonbage  a  gam  c  to  fear  c :  but  pe  Ijaue 
rcceiuebthcfpititofaboption,tbhcrcbp 
tbecr?3)ba,father. 

16  %tyt  fpirit  it  felfc  beared)  ibitncs 
tbtth  our  fptrtt,that  ibe  arc  the  tljtlbjcn 
of<Sob. 

17  3lnb  if chtlb:en,then  Dciccs,l)eites 
of(Sob,anb  iopnthctccsibith  Cb:id  :lf 
fo  be  tljat  ibefuffec  ibtth  him ,  that  tbee 
ma?  be  alfo  glou&cb  together. 

18  jFo:^rccbon,tha«thefuftt tings 
offhisp:cfentttmc,  are  not  tbo:thp  to 
be  tomparcb  Vbith  the  glo:p  tbhtch  (hall 
bereuealtbinbs. 

19  3Po:  the  earned  erpectatJon  of  the 
creature ,  lbaitcthfo:thcmantfcdation 
ofthcfonncsof<Sob. 

20  5fo:  the  tceaturc  ibasmabcfub- 
(cct  to  banitic,notrmllinglp,but  bp  rca< 
ton  of  himibho  hatl)  fnbtctteb  the  fame 
tnt)ope: 

21  25etautcthc  tceaturc  it  felfe  alfo 
fbail  bee  beliucccb  from  the  bonbagc  of 
corruption ,  into  the  glonous  Ubcrttc  of 
thcchuo:cnof  (Sob. 

xi  foi  vote  bnorb  that  Htocrbhole 
creation  gtoaneth ,  anb  ttauailcth  in 
pame  together  bnttilnotb. 

23  3nb  not  onlp  they  >  but  our  femes 
alfotbhith  Dane  the  firtt  fntttcs  of  the 
fpicit,  eucnibcoucfclucs  gcoandbitl) 
in  one  felucs,  waiting  fo?  the  aboption, 
to  wit,  tbe*rcbcmpttonofouc  bob?. 

24  if 02  ibee  are  faucb  bp  hope :  but 
Dope  that  tsfcencts  not  hope  :fo?lbhat 
a  manfcetD.ibhpboth  hepct  hope  fo;  t 

25  asntif  Vbccnopc  fo:  thatVbec  fee 
not,  thcnboeibccibith  patience  tbaitc 
font. 


z6  ilt&ctbife  the  fptcit  alfo  belpeth 
our  mfirmittcs:  fo:  Vbc  Hnolb  not  rbbat 
tbee  fnoulb  p:ap  fo:  as  ibee  ought :  but 
the  fpirititftlfc  mauctbttttccceflton  fo: 
Ms  vbith  gtoanmgs,ibhich  cannot  bee 
btteceb. 

27  3nb  be  that  fcatcftctlj  the  hearts, 
bnorbcthrbhatis  theminbe  of  thefpt* 
rit  ||  becaufe  hemabcthintcrcedtonfo: 
the  faints  ,acco:bing  to  the  will  ot  <n>ob. 

28  3nb  ibee  tmotb  tljat  all  tljings 
rbo:feetogetbetfo:  goob,  to  them  that 
loue  (Sob ,  to  them  lbbo  ace  the  caileb 
acto:btngto  his  purpofc. 

29  f  o:  ibhom  he  bib  fo:cUuotb ,  ftc 
alfo  bib  p:ebcdinatc  to  be  tonfomtcbto 
the  image  of  his  fonne ,  that  hce  might 
bee  the  tied  bo:nc  amongdtnanp  b:e> 
th:en. 

30  fl0o:eouer,lbhomb-Cbibp:cbcftt 
natcthcmheaifotallcbtanbibhomhc 
tallco,thcm  he  alfo  iumfieb:  anb  tbbom 
he  iudificb,tbem  he  alfo  glo:ifieb. 

31  i©bat  djailibcetbcnfap  to  tncfc 
things*  3ff<Sobbcfo:bs,Vbho  can  bee 
agatttdbs** 

32  hethat  fparcbnotljisovrntcfon, 
but  beliuereb  him  bp  fo:  bs  all :  botb 
djau  hee  not  rbitD  him  alfo  fecelp  gate 
bs  all  things  i 

33  J©ho  ftjan  la?  an?  thing  to  the 
charge  of  (Sobs  elect  <  jt  is  (Sob  that 
tuQifieth: 

34.  nDhoiSbcthat  tonbcnutctb;  *Jt 
is  Ch:ifttl)atbicb,?ca  ratl)cc  tbatisci< 
fen  againc,  tbho  is  cucn  at  the  right 
hattb  of  (Sob ,  lbho  alfo  maftctl)  tntet; 
tcffionfo:bs. 

35  i©bo  fljall  fcparate  be  from  rtje 
loue  of  Ch:ttti  ibaii  tribulation,  0:  bt- 
flreffe,  o;pcrfccutton,  0:  famine,  0:  na? 
beoneffe,  0:  pccill,  0 :  fiuo:b  t 

16  ( 3ls  it  is  lbuttcn,*  fo:  th?  fabc  ibe 
arctullcbailthe  ba?  long ,  ibec  are  at 
t ountcb  as  a^cepe  fo:  the  daughter.) 

37  /15a?  in  authefe  things  ibee  are 
mo:c  then  conqucrours,  though  huu 
thatlonebbs. 

38  5Fo:  3  am  pecftbabeb,  that  nci 
thee  beath,no:  life,no:  angcls,tto:  \>i\\v 
ctpautics,no:poibcrs,  no:  thingspjc- 
fcnt.no:  things  to  tome, 

39  /I5o:hetght,no:bcpto,no:an?o 
ther  creaturc,d)albe  able  to  fcparate  bs 
from  tficloue  of  C5ob,Vbljich  is  in  €h,:td 
3lcfusouc|Lo:b. 


I  Or,  tint 


CHAP.    IX. 


1   Paulisfovyforthejewes.    7 


All  the  feed  of 
Abraham 

83  2 


•Pf.1.44- 
11. 


Pauls  zealc.       TotheRomanes. 


Godswill. 


Or,ftf,t. 
Ated. 


||  Or,lllU- 


Gcn.tt. 


'Gtn.tS 
10. 


•Gene. 15. 

=  1 

\\0ryrC4- 
t' 
■ 

Mila.  i.i 


'Enod.  3  j 
<9- 


Abraham  were  not  the  children  of  the  pro. 
mife.  18  God  hath  mercy  vpon  whom  hee 
will.  11  The  potter  may  doe  with  his  clay 
what  he  lift.  15  The  callingof the  Gentiles, 
and  meeting  of  the  Iewes  were  foretold.  32. 
The  caufe  why  fo  tew  Iewcs  embraced  the 
righteoufneffe  of  faith. 

^S^^f  5>ap  the  trucfh  in  &0t, 
11  lie  not,  nip  confcicncc  ab 
io  bearing  nice  ibttncffcut 
thcholpGhoft, 
2  Xhat  3}  hattc  great 
IjcanmciTcanD  contmuall  forroib  m 
mp  heart. 

3  foi  3  touID  tblfl)  that  nip  felfe 
ilicre  1 1  attiirfeb  from  Clmft,  for  mp  b:c- 
tlncn  nip  kuifcincn  accoiDing  to  the 
flefb: 

4.  roho  arc  3JfracUtcs :  to  lbhom; 
pertctnet!)  tlje  aboptton  ,anb  tl)e  glojy, ! 
aub the  icoucnants,  aub  tlje  gluing  of] 
thcJLam,  aub  tljcfcruiccoiGod,ano  tlje  - 
p2omtfcs: 

5  tohofc  arc  the  fathers ,  ant  of 
iblioin  as  concerning  tl)c  firth  Cimft1 
came ,  mho  is  once  all ,  ©oo  blcffct)  fo?  \ 
ciicc^mcn. 

6  irJotas  though  the  lbojbof  god 
Ijatt)  taken  none  effect,  foz  thep  arc  not 
all  IKracl  \bhtch  arc  ofjfracl : 

7  Neither  becaufc  thep  arc  the  feco  | 
of  3b>al)ain  are  they  all  chrtb2cn :  but 
*  in  3ifaac  fliau  thpfeeb  be  calico. 

s  Xhat is,Xhcp lbhtch arc  tl)e chil 
ojcit  of  the  firth ,  thefc  arc  not  the  chil 
d:cu  of  Gob :  but  the  chUDzen  of  the  pjo* ! 
nnfc  arc  couutcDfo2  the  fecb. 

9  f  02  this  is  the  nwD  of  pionufc, 
'3t  this  time rbfligj  conic,  aub  data 
mall  Dane  a  Tonne. 

10  auDnotonelp  tlm.butlbhcuftc;' 
bcccaaifo  hao  concciucDbpouc,  cuenbp 
our  father  3Jfaac, 

1 1  (  fax  the  children  being  not  vn 
bo?ne  .neither  hauing  Done  an^goobo? 
cuil ,  that  the  purpofc  of  Gob  acco2Dtng 
to  election  might  QatiD ,  not  of  n>02kcs, 
but  oflnm  that  cancel).) 

u  Jltmas faibbntohcr , Xhc *i  cl 
bcr  (hall  fmic  the  [pongcr. 

13  5tstt is  umttcn , '  Jacob hauc 31 
louct),Uut€faiihaur  31  hatcb. 

i+  iDhat  fhau  tbc  fav  then  t  3Js  there 
bnrtgl)tcoufncsmtthGob?Gobfo2biD. 

is  f  02  Dec  faith  to  i-Bofcs,  *  3)  mm 
hauc  mcrcv  on  lbhom  3)  mil  hauc  nicr- 
nc ,  aub  31  Hull  hauc  compiilTion  on 
lbhom  J  mill  hauc  companion. 

is  S)o  then  it  is  not  ofhim  that  nm 


icth ,  no?  of  him  that  runneth ,  but  of 
Gob  that  fhcibeth  mcccp. 

17  foi  the  Scripture  faith  into 
Pharaoh,  *  <£ucn  for  this  fame  purpofc 
hauc  3J  raifcD  thee  Dp ,  that  Ji  might 
fljcU)  nip  poibcr  in  thee ,  aub  that  mp 
i  ji5amc  might  bee  Dcclarcb  throughout 
all  tlje  earth. 

is  ILhcrcfinc  hath  hec  mercle  on 
i  ibhom  he:  Vbill  hauc  ntcrcp,anD  lbhom 
heibtlUjcharbcncth. 

19  Xhou  lbtlt  fap  then  bnto  tnce 
nahpDoeth  he  pet  fuiD fault*  j?o:u>ho 
Ijath  rcfiftcD  his  Vbill; 

io  i5ap  but  £>  man ,  lbho  art  thon 
that  ||  rcplicft  againft  GoD  i  S>hail  the 
thing  ftnmcb  fap  to  him  that  fonucD  it, 
*  aahP  haft  thou  tnaDc  me  thus ; 

21  J?ath  not  the*  potter  poibcr  oner 
thctiap,ofthcfaincliinipc,toniaticone 
;  befTcll  bnto  honour ,  aub  another  bnto 
bifljonouri 

11  n3hatifGoD,ibfllingto(l)Cibhis 
tteath  ,9  to  make  his  poibcr  knoibcn, 
uiDurcD  ibith  much  long  fuffermg  the 
bcfJcls  of  tt)2ath  ||  fittcb  to  Dcftrucnon : 

13  3nb  that  he  might  make  tmoibcn 
the  riches  of  his  giozp  on  the  beffclsof 
niercp ,  ibhich  Dec  haD  afore  p,tcpareD 
bnto  gl02ic; 

14  Climbs  lbhom  hee  hathcaiicb, 
not  of  the  3Jcibes  oncip ,  but  alfo  of  tl;e 
Gentiles. 

25  2s  he  faith  alfo  in  jDfce ,  *  31  ibill 
call  them  nip  people,  mtv.ch  mere  not 
mp  people  :  aub  her,  bcloucb ,  ibhtch 
\biisnotbcloucb. 

16  *  ^nb  it  (hail  tonic  to  paffc ,  that 
m  the  plate  ibherc  it  lbas  faiDc  bnto 
thcimPcarcnotmp  people,  thcrcfljail 
thep  bee  callcb  the  tljilDJcn  of  the  li- 
ning GoD. 

17  €faiasalfo  eneth  conccrmng3(f 
racl/1Lhough  the  number  of  the  chit 
D2cn  of  3!fracl  be  as  the  fanD  of  thefca, 
a  remnant  QiaibcfaucD. 

is  5F02  he  mill  fimfl)  the  (libozhc^nD 
cut  it  (ho2t  tu  rtghtroufneffe :  becaufc  a 

mo2tHb02iic\biiithclLo2btnahcbpon 
the  cartl). 

29  3md  as  Cfatas  fatb  before ,  *  €r- 
ccpt  the  V. 02D  of  5>abboth  haD  left bs a 
fccD,me  hao  bene  as  £>oboma,anb  bene 
mabc  like  bnto  Gomozrha. 

30  nahat  (ball  ibec  fap  then*  xiwt 
the  Gentiles  ibhich  follolbcb  not  after 
rtghtcoufnclTchaucattaincD  to  rightc 
oiirncffceucn  the  righteoufneffe  lbljich 
is  of  faith: 

31  25llt 


*  Exod  p. 
16. 


\\Orta*fnt- 
refi  A^*tntl 

r.il    :/.,'(•(/ 

mthGnif 
"Efay4j. 

9- 

"lcrc.18.6 
wifd.i  5.7. 


\Or,mAie 


•Off.2.»3. 

I. pet.!. to 


'Ofe.l.to. 


*  Efay  10. 
22,2;. 


\\Or,lht«c- 
count. 


'ElJV  1.0. 


Ignorant  zeale.        Chap.x.xj.       Faith  by  hearing 


Efay  S.I 4 
and  iS.  16. 
i.pec.x.tf. 

||  Or,  cm- 
founded. 


*Lcu.i8.5 
ezeb.2c.i  l 

.1.12. 


"Dcut.  30. 
11. 


'Dcut. 30. 


31  Kut'WracliLbbtcbfolloibeb  after 
ttie  Havb  of  rigbteonmeffebatb  not  at* 
tameb  to  tbc  JLatb  of  rigbtcoufnes. 

$x  j@fiercfo?c?  becaufe  they  fought  it, 
not  bp  faifb,  bnt  as  tt  tberc  bp  tbe 
ibojfes  of  tbefUrtb:  fojfbepftumblcb 
attbatmimbimgttonc, 

33  ;^itisnmttcn,*:2iSebolbe,3Jiap 
in  :Snon  a  (tumbling  ttoncanb  rorfce  of 
offence:  anb  ibbofocucr  bclccuetbon 
bim,(bail  not  be  ||  afbameb. 

CHAP.    X. 

5  The  Scripture  fheweth  the  difference  betwLxt 
the  righteoufnes  of  the  Law, and  this  01  faith, 
11  and  that  all  both  lew  and  Gentile  that  be- 
leeue.fhalnotbecofounded,  1S  and  that  the 
Gentiles  fhall  receiue  the  word  and  belecue. 
19  Ifrael  was  not  ignotantofthefe  things. 

mctbiten,  mp  bcartsbefitc 
anb  pzaper  to  C5ob  fo:3f- 
racl  is,  tljat  tbep  nugbt  be 
faucb. 
x  jfo?  3  bcare  tbctn 
retojb,  tbat  tfjcv  Ijauc  a  3calcof  ©ob, 
but  not  aceojtbtng  to  tmoiblcbgc. 

3  ifo?  tljep  being  ignorant  of  ©obs 
ngbtcoufneffe,  anb  going  about  to  e tta- 
blifl)  tijetc  olbnc  rtgljtcoufncCrc,  l)aue 
not  fubinittcb  tbemfelues  bnto  tt)c 
rigbteoufnefleofCEtob. 

4  3F02  Cbnft  is  tl)c  cnb  of tbc  ILaib 
fo?  rigbtcoufnes  to  cucrp  one  tbat  be? 

lecuert). 

5  jfoj  ^ofes  bcftribetlj  tlje  tigbte- 
oufncfTe  ibbicl)  is  of  tbc  Hatb,tl)at  *  tbe 
man  rbbieb  boetb  tbofe  things  fl)au 
uuebptbem. 

6  2But  tbe  rtgljtcoufncffc  vbbitb  is 
of  faitb,fpcattetb  on  tbisttnft :  *£>ap 
not  in  tbine  Dean,  t@!)o  (ball  afcenb  tan 
to  beauen  <  Xbat  is  to  biting  Ct)?ifl 
botbnfcomaboue. 

7  &>i ,  naijo  (ball  befcenb  into  tbe 
beeper  Xtjat  is  to  bung  bp  <ti%iift  a* 
game  from  tljebeab. 

8  asut tbljatfaitfj it  ;*3E:i)c\bojb  is 
nigt)  ft)ee,  euen  in  tbp  moutb,  anb  in  tbp 
bcart,  tbatis  tbe  ibo?b  of  fairt)  ibDittt 
tbepjeatb,  e  „ 

9  Xnat  if  tbou  (bait  confeffe  Until 
tbpmoutbtbe?Lo?o  3Icfus,  anb  (bait 
belceue  in  tbtnc  beart ,  tbat  <5ob  batb 
ratfebbtmfcomtbebcab,  tljou  (bait  be 
faucb. 

10  ifojttritu  tfte  beart  man  bclcc< 
uefbbnto  rigbteoufneffcanb  lbitbtbc 
moutl)  coufeffton  is  mabc  bnto  falua> 
non. 


11  5Foube&cripturefaub,*n9bofo 
eucrbeleeuetb  on  fjtm,  (bail  not  bcca= 
(bameb. 

ix  $qi  tbere  is  no  btfferencc  be; 
ttbeene  tbc  3Jeib  anb  tbe  ereeue :  fo? 
tl)efamefLo;boucrau,is  rttbbnto  all, 
Mat  tall  bponlnm. 

13  *  jfoj  tbbofocucr  (ball  tailbpon 
tbeiBamcoftbc&o^njallbcfaucD. 

14  $olb  tben  (ball  tljcp  tail  on  Ijim 
mtt>bomtbcp  bauenot  belccticb;  anb 
boib  fbaitljcp  belceue  in  bim,  of  ibbom 
tbepbaue  not  beatbj-anb  botti  ftjail 
tbc?  bcare  ibitbout  a  $md)tt  < 

15  3tnb  boib  fljail  tbcv  pzearb ,  er- 
tcpt  tbep  be  fenuas  it  is  ibnttcn :  *i)orb 
bcautuui!  arc  tlje  fecte  of  tbcm  tbat 
p:eatbtbe*  oofpelof  peatc,  anbbnng 
glab  tibings  of  goob  tbtngs! 

1 6  26ut  tbey  banc  not  all  obepeb  tbc 
©ofpcl.  ifo?  Cfaiasfaitb,* ft02b,ibljo 
Ijatb  bclccucb  our  1 1 1  report ; 

1 7  £>o  tben ,  fattb  commeth  bp  bea- 
ring, anb  bearing  bp  tlje  Jbojbof(5ob. 

1 3  23ut3f  fap,baue  tljcp  not  bcarb«r 
pes  berel^'tbeirfounbibent  into  ail 
tbc  eartb,  anb  tbeiclbojbs bnto  tbe 
enbsoftbcibojlb. 

19  25ut^fap,3Dibnot5IfracIlmorb? 
5Pira  ©ofes  feitb.*  3  tt»m  p?ouoBc  pou 
to  ieaioufie  bp  tbem  tbat  are  no  people, 
f  bp  a  foolifl)  nation  3JJbili  anger  pou. 

zo  Mat  €faias  is  berp  bolb,  anb 
faitb ,  *  3  tbas  founb  of  tbcm  tbat 
fougbt  mc  not :  3  *&as  ntabc  mantfeft 
bnto  tbcnubatafKcbnotafter  me. 

xi  ^uttoKfraelbcfaptb^^nibap 
long3J  bauc  ftretcbcb  foo?tb  mpbanbs 
bnto  a  bifobebient  anb  gaincfaping 
people. 

CHAP.    XI. 

i  God  hath  not  cart  off  all  Ifrael.  7  Some 
were  elected  .though  therert  were  hardened. 
16  There  is  hope  of  their  conuerfion.  1 S  The 
Gentiles  may  not  infultvpon  them  :  16  For 
there  is  a  promife  of  theirfaluation.  33  Gods 
iudgemeius  arevnfearchable. 

m$*%^  £>ap  tben,$atb  ©ob  caft 
v!3i  I?^*afijap  l)\s  people  <  d5ob 
fo^bibbe.  5fo?  II  aifo  am 
an  "Jftaclttc  of  tbc  fceoc 
.of^aljam,  of  tbe  tribe 
of  25cniamm. 

x  C5ob  batb  not  tad  avbap  bis  peo- 
ple ibljitb  bee  fojeftncib.  naotepecnot 
ibbat  tbe  ^>tripturc  faictb  of  €lias* 
botb  bee  mafeetb  mtcrtcflion  to  (5ob  a* 
gama3fracl,faping, 
3  *!Lojb, 


'Efa.28.i6 


'iodi.32 

ids  2.21. 


'Efa.51.7. 
njuni.i.  J  5 


iohn  1 2,  j  8 

ching. 

\Gr,t  be  bea- 
ring ofvt. 

'ptal.i?.*. 


*Deut.  32. 
21. 


*E&65.i 


*&z.65.: 


The  true,  and       To  the  Romanes,     wilde  Oliue. 


Rcgi? 


Rcg"°- 


Or,  harde- 
ned. 

'{.(3.19  10 

\Or,rernor[e 
Efa.6.0. 


'Pfl  t9.ll 


'Pll.69.lj 


\\0r  drey, 


\Or,fir 


1  *!Lo?d,  they  haucmucb  thyjDjo; 
Phcts.anbbiggeb  bourne  thmeSlltars, 
ano  3  am  left  alone,  anbthcyfeefeemy 

hfe- 
4.  2i5ut  lbhat  faicttJ  the  anftbere  of 

<Sob  bnto  him*  *3  hauc  rcferucbto 

my  fcifcfcuciuboufanbmcn  ttibo  Dane 

nOtbOl\)CDt])CUntttOthemiageot2l5aal. 

5  €ucn  fo  then  at  this  pjefent  time 
aifo  there  is  a  remnant  atcojbmg  to  the 
election  of  grate. 

6  anbifbygtace,fheniSitnomo;te 
of  tt)0?be5 :  othcrtbifc  grace  isno  moje 
grace,  ffint  if  it  bee  ofibo2bes,thcn  is  it 
no 111025 grace,  otberibife  ibojUcisno 
11102c  ttwlic. 

7  nahat  then  <  gifracl  hath  not  0 \y 
tamctj  that  lbbith  he  fccUett)  fc>2,but  the 
election  hath  obtatneb  it,  anb  the  reft 
ibcrcllblinbcb, 

8  3(ceo2bing  as  it  isttmtten,'  ©ob 
hath  giucn  them  the  fpint  of  1 1  (lumber : 
'eyes  that  they  fhoulb  not  fce,ano  cares 
that  they  fhoulb  not  Ijcare  bnto  this 
bay. 

9  ^iib&ambfaytb^ILct  their table 
be  mabe  a  fnar  e,anb  a  trap,  anb  a  ftum- 
blmg  bloruc ,  anb  a  recompenfe  bnto 
them. 

10  *|Lct  their  eyes  be  barbcncb,that 
they  may  not  fee,  anb  botb  bottme  their 
bacttcaivbay. 

1  3  fay  then ,  $aue  til  ey  ftomblcb 
that  they  fhoulb  fail;  <sob  fozbib. 
2tsut  rather  thjough  ttjcic  fall,faluarion 
is  come  bnto  tlK  C5cntHcs,fo2  to  pjouofec 
them  to  icloufic. 

u  0oVo  if  the  fall  of  them  be  tocti? 
chcsofthcibo2io,anbthc||bimttiifbing 
of  thcm.thc  riches  of  the  ©entiles:  holb 
much  nunc  their  fulneffc  i 

15  f 02  3  fpcabe  toyou<j5cnttlcs,in 
as  much  as  3  am  the  3pofHe  of  the 
©entiles,^  niagmfienunc  office: 

14.  Jfbyany  means II  may  pjouohe 
to  emulation  them  Vbhicharcmyflefb, 
anb  might  faucfome  of  them. 

15  if  02  if  the  calling  attmy  of  them  be 
the  r cconnlmg  of  the  ibojlb :  \bhat  dial 
tlitetcelumgoi  them  bt,b»t  life  fromtbc 
oeab; 

i6  JF02  if  the  firft  fnutc  bee  holy ,  the 
lumpt  is  aifo  i  >oiv .  anb  if  the  root  be  ho^ 
ly,foarcthcb2ancbcs. 

17  2lub  if  fomcof  the  b2ancbcs  bee 
b2oUcn  off.anb  thou  being  a  ttnlbe  oliue 
tree  \bcrt  graffeb  tnllamougft  them, 
anbUnthtbcmpartattcftof  the  rootc 
anb  fatneffe  oftljc  £>liuc  tree : 


18  25oaftnot  agauitt  the  branches: 
buttf  thouboafl,  thou  beared  not  the 
toot,butthc  root  thee. 
I  19  3Ehou  unit  Cay  then,  1Ehe  b:an* 
thes  Vberc  bjoltcn  off , that  3  might  bee 
graffeb  in. 

I  20  uacll :  becaufe  of  bnbeliefe  they 
irbetetyo&enoff,  anb  thou  ftanbefl  by 
fayth.  25c  not  high  mmbeb.butfcare. 

x\  3Fo?if<DObfpatcb  not  the  natural 
branches,  ukc  heede  leaflheeaifofpare 
i  not  thee. 

22  fficholbe  therefore  the  goobneffe 

:  anb  fcucrme  of  ©ob:  on  them  Ibhich 

fcll,fcueritie ,  but  tovbarbs  thre,goob- 

i  ncffe.if  thou  continue  mhisgoobncfTe: 

othcriutfe  thou  alfo  fliait  be  tut  off. 

2}  2nb  they  alfo ,if  they  bibc  not  fttll 
inbiibcllcfe,fbail  be  graffeb  m :  fo2  ©ob 
is  able  to  graft  c  them  in  agamc. 
I  24  $  02  if  thou  \bcrt  tut  out  of  the  £>? 
line  tree  ibhich  is  Unlbe  by  nature,  anb 
j  \bert  graffeb  contrary  to  nature  into  a 
goob  sDime  tree :  how  mud;  mo2c  (hall 
thcfcibhich  be  the  nanirall  branches,  bec 
graffeb  into  their  otbnc€>liuc  tree; 

25  5fo?3Jibotilbiiot,b2Cth2cn,that 
ye  fhoulb  bee  ignorant  of  this  myftcrie 
( leaft  ycc  fhoulb  bec  Vbifc  m  your  ottmc 
tonteits)that||bltnbncu*eitipart  is  hap? 
peneb  to  Jfrael.bntill  tlje  fulncs  oftljc 
(pennies  be  come  in. 

26  anbfoaiigjfraclfhailbcfancb, 
lasitisumtttn,  *3EbcteCbaii  come  out 
of  &ion  the  ©eliucrcr,  anb  Qjall  turne 
j  attiay  bngoblincffc  from  3Jacob. 

27  5F02  this  is  my  toucnant  bnto 
!them,  tbhen  3  djall  tabe  aibay  their 
finnes. 

28  ^s  concerning  the  ©ofpcl,  they 
arc  enemies  foi  your  fattc:  butastou- 
'thing  the  election,  they  arc  bclouebfo? 

tlje  fathCrS  fakes. 

29  jfo:  the  gifts  anb  tailing  of  <5ob 
aretttithoutrepentancc. 

30  jfo;  as  ycc  m  times  pafthauc  not 
llbclccucboob.ycthauc  noib  obtamcb 
mercy  tljjough  their  bnbclicfc : 

ji  € ucn  fo  hauc  thefe  alfo  nolb  not 
(lbelceueb.that  though  your  mercy 
they  alfo  may  obtamc  mercy. 

32  5*02  <5ob  hath  llconclubcb  them  all 
in  bubclicfe,tbathc  might  hauc  mercy 
bpon  all. 

33  ©  the  bepth  of  the  riches  both  of 
thcibifcoomc  anb  imomlcbgc  of  <5ob  i 
hoibbnfcarchablcarehisiubgcments, 
anb  hisibaycspaft  finbmgouti 

3+  *  jfo2  ibljo  hath  tiuoibcn  the  mmb 

of 


\\Or,ha"l- 
nrfr. 


Eh,  J9.10 


'Ortebc)cd. 


\\Or,il-ejed. 

\'.0r,fi*l 

:herHallvB 

together. 


'Ef,.40.i ! 
uifd.  p.  13. 
1.  cor.  1.  it. 


Exhortations  to       Chap.xij.xiij.      feueralldueties. 


f  Gr.  tofo- 
brUtic. 


terh. 

\\QrJibe- 

reilj. 


\\Or,mthe 
lone  of  the 
brethren^ 


oftijc  5Lo:b,o:  lbbo  ijatl)  bene  bis  coutv 
fellers 

J-;  £>:  ibljo  ijatl)  fittt  giuen  to  bim, 
ant>  it  (ball  bee  rccompcnfcb  bnto  bun 
agame* 

?6  $ 01  of bim,anb  tb:ongb  bim,anb 
tobtmarcalltbtugs:  to  rbbombcglo- 
ryfo:cucr.  3mcn. 

CHAP.    XII. 

I  Gods  mercies  mull  mooue  vs  to  pleafe  God 
3  No  manmuft  thinketoowellofhimfclfe, 
6  But  attend  euene  one  ,  on  that  calling, 
wherein  he  is  placed,  9  Loue,  and  many  o- 
ther  dueties  are  recjusred  of  vs.  19  Reuenge 
forbidden. 

25cfeet!j  you  tbcrefo:eb:c= 
tb:cn ,  by  tftc  mercies  of 
<5oD,tbatyecp?cfcntyour 
boDics  a  luting  fatnfitc , 
boly , acceptable  imto<25ob, 
which  isponr  rcafonablc  feruice. 

z  3nb  bee  not  confiumcb  to  tbis 
ibo:lb :  but  be  ye  tranffomicb  by  t\)t  tt> 
nutngofyonrminbe,tbatycniayp:ouc 
ibbat  is  tl)at  goob ,  tfjat  acceptable  anb 
perfect  ibill  of  0ob. 

j  ifo?  3  fay ,  tbzougb  tbe  grace  gt* 
ucn  bnto  mccto  eucry  man  tbat  is  a 
utong  you ,  not  to  ttjmfee  of  btmfclfc 
mo:e  Ijigbly  tbenbec  ougbt  to  ttjtnftc, 
but  to  tbmbc  t  foberly ,  accozbtng  as 
©ob  bat!)  Dealt  to  eucryntan  trjemea; 
furcoffaitl). 

4  $ o:  as  vbe  banc  many  members 
in  one  boby.anb  all  members  tjauc  not 
tlje  fame  office: 

5  5>o  ttie  being  many  arc  one  bobte 
inCbaft,  anb  cueryone  members  one 
ofanotbet. 

6  patting  tljen  gifts,biffcring  acco^ 
bing  to  tJ)c  grace  trjat  is  giuen  to  bs, 
iblxtbcrpjopbcctc.lctbspjoplKcic  ac- 
ceding to  trjc  pjopomon  of  faitrj. 

7  £):  miniftccy,  i«  vs  wait,on  our  mi- 
mftctng  :  on  bee  tbat  teaebctb,  on  tea* 
tbtng: 

s  iDJbctbatcrbo;tctb,onerbo:tafr 
on:  be  tbat  |!gtuetb,  iethimdoeu||ibitrj 
Qmplicttic :  bee  that  ruletb,  ibtttj  bili> 
gence :  bectbat  fbcrbctlj  mercy,  ibitfj 
cbecrefulncffc. 

9  Hct  loue  bee  vbitbout  buTmiulati; 
on:abbo2retbatibl)icb  ts  cuill,  tlcaue 
totbatibbicbtsgoot). 

io  iScc  binbly  affecnoneb  one  to  ano- 
tber  I)  tbitb  bjotberly  loue ,  in  Ijonour 
picfer  ring  one  anotber. 

n  iJ53t  doutQfuu  in  buGucs :  fcrucnt 


m  fptrtt/crumg  ti)t%o;t). 

\z  Keioynnginrjope,  patient  in  trv 
bulatiou,  ronnnuuig  mftanttn  player. 

13  2>tftnbunng  to  tbe  neccffitie  of 
saints  i  giuen  to  bofpttaimc. 

14-  Biefretbcmibbicbperfecuteyou, 
blcffe,anbcurfcnot. 

15  Scioyce  ibitb  tbcm  tbat  boe  re* 
ioicc,anbtt)ecpcibitl)tbcmtf)atibcepe. 

i6  2Bc  of  tbe  fame  minb  one  tolbarbs 
auotber.  0)mbc  not  btgb  tbings,but 
llconbefecnb  to  men  of  loib  cltate.  zscc 
notibtfetnyouroibne  conceits. 

17  £eeompcnce  to  no  man  euili  fo: 

cuill.#:out&etbtngsljonetttuthefigbt 
of  all  men. 

is  3f»bcpoffibie,asmucrjaslyetb 
tn  you,  Hue  peaceably  ibttb  all  men. 

19  2Dcarclybeloueb,aucngcnotyout 
felucs ,  but  ratljcr  giuc  place  bnto 
nwatb :  fo:  it  is  uwtcn,*  Vengeance  is 
mine,  3  tbiil  repay ,  fattb  tljc  %m> 

20  *3Cbcrefo:c  if  tbincenctuie  bug- 
ger ,fecbbim:if  be  tbtru\giue  bun  D;inft. 
foi  in  fo  bomg  tbou  iljait  beape  coaics 
offirconbisbcao. 

zi  Be  not  oucrcome  of  cuill ,  but  o- 
uercomccuiliuntbgoob. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

Subie&ion,  and  many  other  dueties  wee  owe 
to  the  Magistrates.  8  Loue  is  the  fulfilling  of 
theLaw.  n  Gluttoiiieanddrunkennes,and 
the  workes  of  darkened:,  are  out  of  feafon  in 
the  time  of  the  Golpel. 

<£teueryfoulcbeefubicct 

bnto  tbe  btgbcrporbers: 

fonbcretsnopoiberbut 

of(5ob.Xl)cpoibcrstbat 

bc,are||o:DemcDof<soD. 

z   tetjofocuer  tbcrcfo:c  refiOctb  tljc 

polbcr ,  reGttctb  tbe  ojtmtanceofdsob : 

ann  tbey  tbat  rcfift,  (bail  recciuc  to 

tbemfclues  bamnation. 

j  ifo?  rulers  arc  not  a  tcrrour  to 
goob  Uwbs,  but  to  tbe  eutli.  i@iit  tbou 
tben  not  bee  afcaibc  of  tbe  poiber  <  boe 
tbat  rbbtcb  is  goob,anb  tbou  fijait  baue 
Pdaifcoftbcfamc. 

4  5fo?ljceistbeminiQerof<5obto 
tbee  fo;  gooo :  but  if  tbou  bo  tbat  tbljicb 
is  cuill,be  afraib :  fiw  fa  bcarctb  not  tbe 
fiuozD  m  bamc :  fo?  be  is  tbe  mmtlter  of 
d5ob ,  a  reucngcr  w  execut.  vb?att)  bpon 

1)1111  tlWtDOCti)  cuill. 

5  nabcrfojcycmultneebSbe fubicct, 
notoncly  fo.:  lb:atl),  but  aifo  fojeon* 
fcictucfaiic. 

6  ^o:,fo:tbiscaufe  pay  you  tribute 

aifo: 


tented  with 

meane 

things. 


*  Dcuc.  5 :. 
3  5- 

*Pro.:5-:i 


\  Or ,  or  it. 
•cd. 


Ofloue.  To  the  Romanes.  Godsiudgment. 


\OrJeCfint- 


\\0ry»ttt9 
Mufovhis 

doubifuS, 
thoughts. 


aifo:foj  tbcyareCobs  mmtOers,attctv 
ottigcotitinually  bponthis  bcry  ttjitts*! 

7  ftcnbcrtbcrfojctoalltbnrbucs,; 
tribute  to  tbbom  tribute  is  due ,  tuftomc 
to  lbhomc  cuOome ,  fcarc  to  lbhomc 
fcarchonour  to  lbhom  honour. 

8  £>iuc  no  man  any  thing ,  but  to 
lout  one another :  fojhec  that  louctb  a- 
nother  harhfuifiilebthe2.au). 

9  #02  this ,  Xhou  fljalt  not  torn* 
mit  abuttenc ,  Xhou  fbalt  not  Hill, 
Xhou  (bait  not  (teale,  Xhou  (halt  not 
bcarc  falfc  ibitneflc,  Xhou  (bait  not  to-- 
uct :  anb  if  there  be  any  other  command 
Dement ,  it  is  bzicfly  compjebenbrt)  in 
tins  laying,  namely,  Xhoufbaitloue 
thv  neighbour  as  thy  fclfc. 

io  Houcii>o:&ctl)  no  ill  torus  neigh-! 
bour ,  thcrcfo:c  lone  is  ttje  fulfilling  of 
thclLaiii. 

n  3nb  that ,  bnottiing  the  time,  that 
noil)  it  is  high  nine  to  aibattc  ont  of 
neepe:  fo2  noiD  is  our  faluanon  necrcr 
thcniDhcnibcbclceutb. 

ii  Xhc  night  isfarrefpent,  the  bay 
is  at  hanb :  let  bs  therefore  caQ  off  the 
U)02bcsofbarBcncfrc,anblctbsputon 
the  armour  of  light. 

13  !LcttoSttiaiUe|ihone(rlyasintht 
bay,  not  in  noting  anb  b2un&cnnetYe, 
notuuhamb2inganblDantonncs,not 
utftnfcanbcnuymg. 

14  iSut  put  yrc  on  the?Lo2D  llcfas 
Clmft,  anb  matte  not  pjouidon  fojtfjt 

flefl) ,  tO  fulfill  tljelUflS  ihercol". 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

;  Men  may  not  contemne  nor  condemne  one 
the  other  for  things  indifferent:  13  Buttake 
heed  that  theygiueno  oftencein  them:  15 
For  that  the  Apoftle  prooueth  vnlawfull  by 
many  rcafons. 

^^t  tlm  that  is  lbcattc  in  the 
^%]  y  faith rctciuc  you,  but  not 
ah  §to!!Doubtfulloifputatiotis. 

$3ra!r$    z    $01  ont  belcnictl) 


-i^X^4thathemavcataiithings: 
'another  lbho  is  ibcaticcatcth  herbes. 

3  Uct  not  him  that  catcth  ,  befptfc 
him  that  catcth  not :  anb  let  not  him 
lbinch  catcth  not,  uibgc  Dun  that  ca^ 
tcth.^o:  Gob  hath  rccciueb  him. 

4  Mho  art  thou  that  uibgclr  an  o 

,  thcr  mans  fecuanfc  to  his  olbuc  mailer 
lie  rtanbctb  02  fallcth :  Pea  he  (ball  bee 
lioiocn  bp  :  fo2  Cob  is  able  to  malic 
himftanD. 

$  One  man  cftccmctb  one  bay  a 
bouc  another:  another  cftccmcth  cucry 


I  Or,fuUy 
aSi/rtJ. 


ntch. 


•E(iy4J. 
II. 


Day  alike.  ILct  cucry  man  bee  i|  tally  per* 
1  froabcb  fti  his  oibne  minbe. 

6  $cthat  tcgarbcth  a  bay,  rcgar? 
bcth  it  Ditto  the  JL02D  anb  rjee  that  re* 
,garbcth  "ot  the  na^,  to  the  %oio  bee 
t  boeth  not  r cgarb  it.  V)t  that  catcth ,  ea? 
tetb  to  the  IL020,  fo;  Ijcc  guietb  Cob 
thanHes :  anb  hec  that  catcth  not,to  the 
ILojb  bee  catcth  not ,  anb  gtuetbCob 
thanbes. 

7  ^02  none  of  bs  liueth  to  tjtmfclfe, 
anb  no  man  bieth  to  rjtrufelfc. 

s  i^2ibhctbcribcituc,ibchuebtv 
to  the  5Lo2b :  ano  ibhcrhcr  lbcebte ,  *be 
bie  btito  the  !Lo2b :  lbhctbctibeeliue 
thcrcfo2c  02  bie,iDearc  the  fLo2bs. 

9  S 02  to  this  enbe  Cbnft  both  tttcn, 
anbrofcanbrctuucb, that  hee  nugljt  be 
Ho2b  both  of  the  beab  anb  liumg. 

10  25ut  lbb?  boett*  tljou  uibgc  tbyi  'iCo'  *• 
b2othcri  onDtjy  bolt  thou  ftt  at  nougljtl'0 
thyb2otljcr  t  rbee  (hail  all  ftanb  before 
the  3Jitbgcmcnt  feat  of  Ch2ift. 

11  J?02ttistt)2ittcn,*^s<5liue,faitt) 
the  2.02b,  euery  fmce  (ball  boib  to  met, 
anb  curry  tongue  (ball  confefle  to  Cob. 

12,  £>o  then  euery  one  of  bs  (ball 
gtueattompt  ofhimfelfeto  cob. 

13  ?Utbs  not  therefore  uibgc  one  an< 
other  any  mo2e :  butinbge  this  rather, 
that  no  man  put  a  (tumbling  bloche ,  o; 
an  octafion  to  fall  in  his  bzottjers  ibay. 

14  35  bnoiD  ,  anb  am  perfitrabeb 
by  tbe  1Lo2b  Refits,  that  there  is  no* 
thing  tbnclcane  of  it  fclfc :  but  to  bun 
that  cftccmctb  any  thing  to  bee  t  bn- 
clcancto  tjim  itis  bncicanc. 

15  25utifthyb20therbegneneblbitt) 
thy  mcate :  noil)  malttcft  tljou  not  t  tb& 
ntablv.  SDcfttoy  not  huu  ttnth  thy 
mcat,fo2  lbhom  CI121G  bicb. 

16  Uct  not  then  your  goob  be  euill 
fpobenof. 

17  fo2tbe  lungbomc  ofcobtsnot 
meat  anb  bnnHe  butnghteoufnes.anb 
pcaccanbioym  the  holy  chott. 

is  3fQ2  hec  that  in  thefc  things  fer- 
ucth€lma,  is  atccptablctocob  ,  anb 
app2oittbofmcn. 

19  ?Lct  bs  thcrcfo2e  folloib  after 
the  things  ibinth  mane  fo2  peace,  anb 
things  lDhcrcibith  one  may  cbtfic  an 
[other. 

10  ifo2mcat,bcitroynottrjett)02bc 
!  of  Cob:  all  'thmgsinbccb  arepnrc,  but 
it  is  cuiii  foj  ttjatmanibho  catcth  lbith 
offcutc. 

21  3Jt  is  goob  netthcrto  catc'flcfb, 
no;  to  ojmHe  ibinc,  no2  am  diinzibjiete* 

bt 


tgr.c 

met. 

tgr.c 


\Cr.accor- 

r:fr.  l.CA. 
3.1 1. 


•T". 1  15 


■  1. Cor  8. 
13. 


Brotherly  loue.  Chap.xv. 


auis 


glory. 


Orjifcer- 
tth,&pu:~ 
tctha  diffe- 
rence be- 
live  in  me  At  J 


PfaUp.o. 


*  1  .Com 

10. 

\\Or*ftn 
tht  exxm- 


•pfj.18.50 


"Deut.31. 
"Pfal.117  1 
'  Ef.i  j.  10. 


by  tbyb?otber  ftumblctb,  0?  is  offen 
beb,  02  is  mabelbcalte. 

xi  $(ift  tb ou  fettte  haue  it  to  thy  felfc 
before  ©ob.  ^appie  fs  be  that  conbenv 
netbnothimfelfemthat  thing  which  t)cc 
alloVbctb. 

23  anb  Dec  that  ||  uonbtetl) ,  f  s  mw 

ttCDtfl)CC  tatC  ,  bttaufC  heeeaterhtlOt  of 

faitb :  5fo?  Uiljatfotuct  is  not  of  faitb, 
is  finne. 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  The  ftronginuftbeare  with  the  weak?,  i  We 
may  notpleafeour  lelucs,  3  lor  Chrift  did 
noc  fo,  7  but  receiue  one  the  other,  as 
Chiiftdidvs  all,  8  bothlewes  9  and  Gen- 
tiles. 15  Paul  exaifeth  his  writing,  1$  and 
promifeth  to  fee  them,  30  and  recjueftcth 
their  prayers. 

€t  then  that  arc  ftrong, 
ought  to  bcarc  the  infir; 
uuticsoftbcibcauc,  anb 
jiiottoplcafcourfclucs. 
&&§£!€&  %  fLctcueryoncofbs 
plcafc  bis  neighbour  fo?  his  goon  to  ebi 
ficatiou. 

3  f  02  encn  Chair  plcafcb  not  bun 
ftifc,  but  as  it  is  llmttcn,  *  %\)c  Hoo- 
ches of  tbcm  that  rcp?ochcb  thee,  fell 
on  nice. 

4  jfo?  rbhatfoeuer  things  tberc 
tbzitten  afo2etimc,ibcrc  u>?ittcn  fo?  our 
learning,  that  Vbc  tb20tigb  patience  anb 
comfo?t  of  the  Scriptures  might  haue 
hope. 

$  *  i!5otb  the  <Sob  of  patience  anb 
confoiation  grauntyou  tobcli&c  mitt; 
beb  onetoibarbsanotbcr>||acco?butgto 
Ch2i8Uefus: 

6  Xbat  ye  map  U>itb  one  minb  anb 
one  mouth gionfic  ©ob,  cucn tlje 5Fa 
therofour?Lo2b'3!criisCh?tu\ 

7  t©herfo?crcceiucvcc  one  another, 
asChzifr  alforccciucb  bs,  totbcgio?y 
of  ©ob .  _ 

8  0oVo  3  tap ,  that  IJcfus  €h2iQ 
tbasa  ££)tni{tcr  of  the  eircunmfion  fo? 
thcttucth  of  ©ob,  to  continue  tljcpio- 
mifcsmadebnto  the  fathers: 

9  3(nbtbattbe©cnttlesmigbtglo; 
nfic  ©ob  fo?  bis  mcr  etc  ,as  tt  is  ib?ittcn , 
*  jfo?thiS  caufCj  1MB  confeffc  to  thec 
among  the  ©cuttles,  anb  ting  bnto  thy 
43ame.  _ 

I  o  anb  againe  he  faith,"  metopec  yee 
©entiles  Vbtrt)  bis  people. 

I I  3mb  againe ,  *  0?aife  the  &o?b  all 
ye©entiles>anbiaubbimaiiycpcople. 

1 1  3inb  againe c-fatas  faith ,*£hcrc 


I  (hal  be  a  roote  of  3Je(Te,anb  ije  rljat  (hal 
rife  to  ratgnc  oner  the  ©cuttles,  in  htm 
(ball  the  ©entiles  truft. 

13  |3oibc  the  ©00  of  hope  fill  you 
ibttb  all  toy  anb  peace  m  bciceuing,  that 
pee  map  abounb  in  hope  tbjough  the 
potticroftbc  holy  ©Doll. 
i  1+  3tnb3J  my  felfc  alfo  ampcrfiuabeb 
ofyou,myb?cth2en,thatycaifoarcfull 
ofgoobnciTc,fiilcb\bithaiutno\i)icbgc, 
able  alfo  to  abiuottifh  one  another. 

1 5  ^cucrtbclcffe ,  b2Cth?cn,  3  haue 
Unittcn  the  mo?c  bolbly  bnto  you ,  in 
fomc  fo?t ,  as  puttmgyou  m  minb,  be= 
caufcof  the  grace  that  is  giucn  to  nice 
of  ©ob, 

i6  Xhat^flioulbbethcminifler  of 
3!cfiis  Chzift  to  the  ©ciitucs ,  mint* 
Qrmg  tbc©ofpcl  of<5oD,tl)attt>c|ioffc^ 
ring  bp  of  the  ©entiles  might  be  accept 
table,bcingfaiutificbbythcholy©ho(l. 

17  3  haucthcrfo2C  mhereof 3  may 
gl02y  th20tigb  3Wus  Ctnitt ,  m  tbofc 
things  ibhicb  pertatne  to  ©ob. 

is  foi3  lbill  not  bare  to  fpcaftc  of 
any  of thofc  things ,  ibhicb  Ch2ift  hart) 
notVb?ougbt  bymc,  to  matte  the  ©en*  I 
tilcsobcbicnt,bylDo2banbbccbc, 

19  Xh?ough  mighty  figncs  anb 
\Donbcrs,by  the  poibcr  of  the  Spirit 
of  ©ob ,  fo  that  from  J)icrufalcm  anb 
rounb  about  bnto  3Hly?ltum,  31  haue 
fully  p2cacljcb  rtjc  ©ofpclof€h?ift. 

zo  j9ea,fohauc3lfrnucbtop2cach 
thc©ofpel ,  not  ibhcre  Ch2iftibas  tuv 
mcb ,  lctt3f  flioulb  builb  bpon  another 
nuinsfotinbatton: 

ii  iButasittsibiittcii,  *  irolbhom 
Dec  Vbas  not  fpoltcnof,  theyfhaufee: 
anbthcy  that  haue  not  Ijcarb,  fl^allbiv 
bcrftanb. 

iz  f  02  nmich  caufcaifo  J  haue  been 
||  much  bmbcrco  from  comming  to  you. 

13  26ut  noib  hauliig  no  mo?c  place 
inthcfcparts.anbhauingagreatbcfirc 
tljefc  many  yccrcs  to  come  bnto  you : 

14.  nahcnfocucrjtaue  my  lourncy 
Into  :S>pauic.3i  lbill  conic  to  you :  fb2  3 
tend  to  fee  you  m  my  tourney ,  anb  to  be 
b2ought  on  my  \\>&y  tbithcrttiarb  by 
you,  iffirft^  be  fomcibhat  fillcb  ibith 

T  J'OUr  company. 

i5  23iitnolb3J50CbittoT?lerufalcm, 
to  mtniftcr  bnto  the  faints. 

i6  jf  0?  it  hath  plcafcb  them  of  ipa- 
ceboniaanb^lchaia  ,to  maftc  a  certain  c 
contribution  fo?  the  poo?c  faints 
Vbhicljare  at  l^icrufalcm. 

17  3lt Ijath  plcafcb  tljcm  vc. ely,  anb 
^ their 


\\Or,  fieri- 
Jiang. 


\\Or 


\qr. 

you. 
Vet. 


Salutations.        To  the  Romanes.        Salutations. 


Or, Ore  dtf- 
obeditnt* 


tljcir  betters  tljcv  ace.  5Fo?tf  trie  ©en- 
tUC5l)auct»cneniaUepat:tafectsofrf3cic 

fpinttiau  tilings,  tljcttbucrie  isalfoto 
immure  bnto  tljcm  in  tacnafl  things. 

28  aaljcn  trjerefcue  3  baue  pcrfo2* 
into  tins ,  ano  banc  feaicb  to  tljem  this 
ft  utt,  3  lbfll  come  bp  pou  into  Spame. 

29  3mb  3  am  fore  tljat  tbljcn  3 
come  bnto  pou,  3J  fbail  cotneuitbeful* 
ncs  oftlic  blcffing  of  p  ©ofpel  of  Cljjilt. 

30  iJ5olflb  5*  bcfcccl)  vou,  bictD?cn, fo^ 
tlje  |Lo2b1Jcfos  Cljnfts  fabc,  ano  fo2 
tljcloue  oftljeSptrtt,  tljat^efttrmeto- 
gctbec  ibitlj  me,  m  pout  pjaicrs  to  ©ob 
foz  me, 

31  Xljat  3  map  bee  bcliucccbftom 
tl)mUljati!Donotbclccucm3mbca,atib 
tfjat  mp  ferutcc  lbljicb  3  hauc  fin 
$ierulalem,  map  bee  acccptco  of  tijc 
Saints: 

3i  Xbat  3  map  tome  bnto  pon  tbttli 
iopbptljclbillofcSob,  an&  maptbito 
poubercfrcflKb. 

33  Ji3on>tl)c  ©Ob  of  peace  bee  ttntl) 
pou  all.  ^men. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

Paul  vvilleth  the  brethren  togrcetemany,  17 
and  aduileth  them  to  take  hecde  of  thofe 
which  caufedilFention  and  offences,  n  and 
after  fundry  falutations  endeth  with  praife 
and  thankes  to  God, 


3^5^$  Commcnb  bnto  pott  JM)C< 
<igk  bcourfifrer.iblncbisafcr* 
&&  uattt  of  tbc  Cljutclj  lbljiclj 
,,  pptsatCcncinea: 
eAesa^wS  i  Xljat  pc  retcitic  ncr 
m  tlje  JLojb  as  becommctb  faints, 
anb  toat  pc  aflift  Ijct  in  ibbatfocuct  bu- 
finrfTc  (be  batl)  nceb  of  pou:  fin  (be  hart) 
btcne  afiiccourcrof  manp,  anbof  mp 
fclfcaifo. 

3  Grccte  $2tfctlla  anb  2tquila ,  mp 
IjclpcrsinCltttftJcfus: 

4  (naijo  Ijauc  T02  mp  life  laib  bolbne 
tbeir  oibne  nccUes :  bnto  ibbome  not ! 
onelp  3  gntc  tljanucs ,  but  aifo  all  tlje  i 
Clwrcbcs  of  tbc  ©entiles.) 

5  'jLtUcUnfc  trect  tbc  Cburrl)  that  is ' 
intljctrboufe.  Salute  mpibclbcloucb! 
Cpcnctus ,  ttmo  is  tlje  firC  fruits  of  %-- ' 
cbaiabntoClyitt. 

6  orcetc  £)9aric,  Ibljo  bcfloibeb 
mncl)  labour  on  bs. 

7  Salute  Siuojonicus  anb  ■Junta 
mp  Uinfmen,  anb  mp  fellolb  pzifoners, 
Who  arc  of  note  among  tbc  Slpouics, 
lbrjoaUo  lbercm€l)2iltbefo2Cmc. 


8  <Sccet:3mpuasrnp  beloueb  m  tbc 
!Lo2b. 

9  Salute  ^Lltbane  our  helper  in 
Cl)2ift,anb  Startjps  mp  beloueb. 

10  Salute  3ppcllcs  app?ooucb  in 
<£rj2ift.  Salute  tfjem  ttiljiclj  are  of  3ri- 
froLmius  ;lioufi)olD. 

h  Salute  ^etobion  mp  feinfman. 
©reetthemtbatbeoftljcjljouibolbof 
iiSarnCfos  ,lbniclj  arcin  tlje  JL02D. 

12  Salute  Xrppljcna  anb  SErppbo- 
;  fa.rbrjo  labour  in  f  Ijc  ILojb.  Salute  tbc 
beloueb  ^crfis,  ibrjtrrj  labonrcb  muclj 
uubc3Lo2b. 

13  Salute  ftnfustrjofen  intftellojb, 
I  anbtjismotljcranb  mine. 

14  Salute  3lfpnctitus,  0blcgon, 
Retinas,  teattobas,5?crmcs,anb  tlje 
b2etrj2cnibrjtcrj  are  ibitlj  trjem. 

15  Salute  |g»f)ii  ologus?3!ulia,iI5^ 
reus,  anbrjis  fitter,  anb  £>ipmpas, 
anb  all  tlje  Saints  ibfttclj  arc  ibitfj 
tljcm. 

l  is  Saintconcanotljcrvbttrjanbolp 
buTc.  %\)t  Ctjutcljes  of  Cbnft  feiutc 
pou. 

17  *3oib  3  befeccrj  ptm,b2etl)2tn, 
maructrjemtttljitt)  tautc  Diuifionsanb 
offcnccs,contrarptotrjeboctrmeU)l)teij 
pc  Ijauc  lcarncb,anb  auotbc  tt)cm. 

is  5fo2  tfjcp  tfjat  arc  fuel),  fcrue  not 
our  Ho2b  Jcfus  Cl)?ift,  but  tljcir  olbnc 
bciip ,  anb  bp  goob  ifoo2bcs  anb  fatre 
fpcect)csbetetuc  tlje  fjcarts  of  rtjc  fim^ 
pic. 

19  5fo2poutobcbtcncetscomcab2oab 
bnto  all  men.  3Jam  glab  tUcrcfoje  on 
pour  bcbaifc :  but  pet  3  lboulb  Ijauc 
pouibtfc  bnto  tljat)bf)iclj  is  goob ,  anb 
1 1  fimplc  concerning  eutil. 

io  ^nb  tlje  <5ob  of  peace  Q)ai  |lb2utfe 
Satan  bnber  pour  fecte  fliojttp.  ICljc 
graceofouc?Lo2b3JcfusCtj2iabcibttl) 
pou.  3lmcn. 

21  XmtotOcus  mp  )b02bc-fellolb, 
anb  fLuttus,anb3Jafon,  anb  Sofipa 
tcr  mp  butfemen  falntc  pou. 

21  •JXcrtiusuwoityotcttjJSCpt: 
file,  falntc  pou  intDefL  02b. 

23  tiaras  nunc  Ijollc,  anb  of  tbc 
ibbolc  €l)urcl),falutctb  pou.  Craftus 
tlje  Cbambcriainc  of  tlje  citic  falutctlj 
pou,anti£Juartusab20tftcr. 

24  Xbe  grace  of  our  Ho2b  3fcfus 
Cb2UlbcW)itDpouall.  ^mcn. 

25  /i5ott)  to  rjim  tftattsofpolberto 
ftabltfli  pou  acco2bing  to  mp  <5ofptl, 
anbtl)ep2cart)tngof'|lefus  Cljnft,  at* 
co2btng  to  tbc  rcuelatton  of  trjc  themp? 
ftcne, 


\Or,fri.-xJ;. 
[  Or friendi. 


\Or,hmut- 
\OrJrui. 


RichinChrifL  Chap.).  A  gain  ft  contentions. 


"Afls.lj. 

9. 

'Rom.  1.7. 


UttiCH. 


Gene ,  ibbtch  ibas  Kept  fccrct  fmtctbc 
rbojlb  began: 

16  aSutnoib  ismabe  mamfcft ,  ants , 
bpttic  Scriptures  of  tlje  $2ophcts  at 
cojbtng  to  the  tommanuement  of  the 
cucriairtng  00b,  ma&e  unoibcnto  alt 
nations  foj  the  obebicncc  of  faith, 


17  %o  00b,  onelp  lbife,  bee  glonc 
tb2ougb  Jtfus  €tnm,fO}  cucr.  2lmcn. 

C  tentten  to  the  Romanes  from 
Cozmthus,  and  fembp^hebe 
fcruant  of  tlje  Church  at  ten 
ebjea. 


^THE   FIRST  EPISTLE 

or.  Paul  the  Apoftle  to  the 

Corinthians. 


CHAP.     I. 

After  his  falucation,  and  thankefgiuing,  10  he 
exhotteth  them  to  vnitie,  and  il  reproo- 
ueth  tlieir  difTentions.  1S  Goddcftroyeth 
thevvifedomeof  thewife,  11  bythefoolifh- 
neffe  of  preaching,  and  16  caljethnotthe 
wife,mighty,and  noble, but  17.  zSthefoo- 
]ifh,\veake,and  men  ofno  accompt. 

3tulcaUebtobean 
Apoftle  of  3JrfiiB 
Cbaft  ,  tlnough 
the  Vbttl  of  0od, 
anb   Softhcucs 

oi:rl)20tl)er, 

z  £lnto  the 
Church  of  0ob 
lbhicb  is  at  Co 
rinth  ,  to  tbetn 
that*  arc  fanctiftcbmClwft  5icfus,cab 
lebto  ^  Saints,*ibttb  autliat  in  eticrp 
place  can  bpon  tbc  /flame  of  Jlefus 
Cbnft  our  3Lo2b,  both  tbeirs  anb  ours. 
j  ©race  be  bnto  pou,anb  peace  from 
(Sob  our  father, anb  from  the  JLo;b  Je- 
fusCbna. 

4.  3  thanltc  mp  0ob  aiibapes  on ; 
pour  bcljaifc,  fo:  tbc  grace  of  00b  i 
tbbtcb  is  gmen  y  ou  bp  3  tfus  <£\)}\tt, 

5  Xhat  in  cttcrp  thing  vec  arc  enn 
ebcbbpbim,  m  ailbttcraucc,  anb  in  all  I 
Hiiolblcbgc : 

6  euenas  tbeXcltimonpof €\)ffl\ 
Tbasconfirmcbinpou. 

7  So  tfjat  ycc  contc  bebiubc  in  no 
gift,-  toayting  fo:  tbctcommmgofour 
Tlozb^cfusCbnft, 

s   i©bo  fbalialfo  confiemc  you  bnto 


tbcenb,  that  vec  map  be  blamclcffc  m 
thebapof  our  TLoitj  3JcfusCb2iu\ 

9  "C5ob  is faithful  bp  ibbom  yc  mere 
caiieb  bnto  tbc  fcloiblhtp  of  hte  Sonne 
3JcrusCb2tftourfl02b. 

io  /3olb  3  bcfcccb  pott  b2ctl)2cn  bp 
tbeiftame  of  our  ?Lo2b  Jems  Cbnlr, 
that  pec  alifpcabc  tbe  fame  thing,  anb 
tijat  there  be  no  t  bimfions  among  pou : 
but  that  pc  be  perfcctlp  lopncb  together 
m  the  fame  minbe ,  anb  in  the  fame 
uibgemcnt. 

1 1  f  02  it  hath  bene  beclareb  bnto  me 
of  pou,  mp  b2ctbjcit  ,bp  them  lbhich  arc 
oftlKboufcofCloc,tbattbcrearccon< 
tcntions  among  pou. 

i i  /3ovb  this  3  fay,  that  euerp  one 
of  pou  faith,  3  am  of  paul,  anb  3  of 
Apollo,  anb  3  of  Cephas,  anb  jof 
Ch2ilt. 

13  3e  Ctyitt  biuibeb;  ibas  paul  cru 
rificbfo2  pou  i  02  lbcrc  pee  baptiscb  m 
tbcnamcof}Daul* 

i+  II  thannc  00b  that  3  bapnseb 
none  ofpou,  but  *  Crifpusanb  0aius : 

15  JUOanpthoulbfap,  tljat  gj  Ijao 
bapti5cb  in  mine  ottmcuame. 

i6  3inb  3  baptiseb  alfo  the  boufe 
hoib  of  Stephanas :  befibes,  3  Imoib 
notibhcthcr3Jbapt^cbanp  other. 

17  f  02Ch2ittfentmenot  tobapme, 
but  to  pleach  the  0ofpcl :  *  not  Untb 
lbifcbome  of  !!\b02bs,  IclttbcCrofleof 
Cimfr  fl)Oiilb  be  mabe  of  none  effect. 

18  fo:  the  picachmg  of thcCroffe  is 
to  them  that  pcrifb,  fooltmucflc :  but 
btito  bs  ibbtcn  arc  faueb,  it  is  the*  potb 
crof0ob. 

^tt  i  19  f  02 


"i.Thefl's 
!4- 


1 9r"kr? 

ibifmu. 


*Afls.i8. 
*4- 


'Afls.iS. 


•iPtt.i. 

16. 

\Or$t«b. 


"Rtm  1. 
16 


Whcnn  to  glory.    I.Corinthians.    Godswifdome. 


'Efa.19.14 


'Ed. 


'Rom.i.io 


•Matc.i  1. 


*Icrc  9.13 


19  f  02  it  is  rbJttten,  3  UmU  bcftcop 
the  Vbtfcbomc  of  thetbifeT  anD  Vbil  bnng 
to  nothing  tljc  *  bnbetftanbmg  of  the 
puiDcnt. 

10  *o0licre  is  the  tlufe*  inhere  is  the 
Scribe;  lbljcrcis  tljc  bifputcrof  this 
iiwio j.  8?ath  not  ©ob  mabe  fooltfb  tljc 
Wifcboinc  of  tljis  U)oHo i 

21  "iFoi  after  that,  in  the  ttnfebom  of 
©ob,  tljc  \b02lb  by  lbifcbomc  fencVb  not 
(5ob,  it  plcafcb  ©00  op  tljc  fboliujncfle 
ofp2cacljing,to  faue  them  that  belceuc. 

ii  5fonl)c*3)c\Dcsreauirea0gnc, 
anD  the  ©rcc&cs  feche  after  tbtfebome. 

1  j  23ut  ibec  pjcath  Ctjnft  crunfieb, 
bntothcgjciiicsafhimbltngblocMnb 
unto  tljc©rccRcs,foolif4)neu"e: 

1+  i6utbnto  them  ibljteh  arc  eaileb, 
both  "Jetties  anb  ©recites,  CljJiQ,  tljc 
poibccof©ob,t?  tIjett)tfcbonieof©ob. 

15  aseeaufe  tljc  fooiiflwcffe  of  ©ob 
isttHfcrtljcnmen:  anb  tljcrbcafecneffc 
of  Ooo  is  ftrongcr  then  men. 

i6  ifo: yc  fee  your  calling,  tyethjen, 
Iiouj  that  not  many  ttnfc  men  aftectfje 
flefh ,  not  many  mighty ,  not  many 

UObIC  ire  called. 

17  2Sut  ©ob  hath  cljofen  the  foolith 
things  of  tfje  ttiojlb,  to  confounb  tljc 
ttnfc :  anD  ©ob  hath  cljofcntljctbcafee 
tilings  of  tiie  ibozl'o,  to  confounb  tljc 
tilings  rbljtcli  ate  mighty: 

is  3hibbafc  things  of  the  lb02lb,anD 
tilings  mijiclj  ate  bcfpifcb  ,  hath©oD 
cliofcn,  yea  anb  things  Vbhith  are  not,to 
bang  to  nouglittljings  tljat  arc, 

X9  Xljat  no  Heft)  ftioulb  glo?y in  ftis 
pjcfcntc. 

3°  25utof  htmareyeinCb2i&3Je' 
fus,tt)lio  of  ©ob  is  mabc  bnto  bs  ttnfc< 
bontc,anbrigljtcoufncffc,  anb  fanctifi* 
cation,  anb  r  coemption: 

31  Xljatarco2bingasttistb!ittcn,*$e 
tljat  glo2tctlj,lct  Ijim  glozy  in  the  H02D, 


•W1L1.17. 


H 


A  P.   II. 

lispreachbe,  1 


c 

Hee  dedareth  that  his  preaching,  i  though  it 
biiug  not  excellency  oflpeecli,  or  of  4  hu- 
mane wifedome :  yetconfiftethinthe  4.  5 
power  ot  God  :  and  fo  farre  exccllcth  6  the 
wifedomc  of  diis  world  ,  and  9  humane 
fenle,  as  that  14  the  natural!  man  can- 
not vndcrlland  it. 

432)  3J>bKtwcn,U)ljen 
3  came  to  you,  *eame 
not  lbith  crccilcncie  of 
fpccclj ,  02  of  lbifcbomc, 
I  occianng  bnto  vou  tlicto 
fhmony  of  Gob. 


i  if  02  3  bctecimneb  not  to  tmoib  a- 
ny  tiling  amog  you,  faue  3ltfns  €h2itt, 
anoijimcrunfieb. 

3  2tnb  3  ibas  Jbitlj  you  m  mcafee* 
iicffc,  anbinfeare,  anb  in  muchtrem* 
blmg. 

4-  ^nbmyfpcerh.anDtnypjeachttig 
'ibasnotibuhllctuiBngttwbsofmans 
ujifcoomc,butmbcmonftcation  of  tljc 
Spirmanbofpotber: 

5  Xhat  your  faith  IhoulD  not  ftanD 
inthettnTbomeof  mcn,but  tntljcpoVb- 
erof©ob. 

6  $ottbctt*beefpea&eiDifebomea; 
mongtljcm  tljat  are  perfect :  pet  nottljc 
lbifcbomc  of  tljis  tt)02lbc ,  no?  of  tljc 
#?mccs  of  tljis  ttjozlbe,  tfjat  com*  to 
nougljt : 

7  2But  iDec  fpcafce  the  rbifebome  of 
©ob  in  a  myfterie,  euen  tljc  fjibbcn  wife- 
dome  ibrjtclj  ©ob  02bcineb  befojethe 
tbo2lb , bnto  our  gio2p. 

s  i©tjitlj  none  of  the  pjinces  of  tfjts 
tb02lb  ftnelbc :  fo2  Ijab  they  tmolben  it, 
they  tboulb  not  hauc  crurtfieb  tftejlojb 
ofgio?y. 

9  T6ut  as  it  is  ibnttcn ,  *  eye  hath 
not  feenc,  no?  care  Ijearb  >  nettljcr 
Ijauc  cntrcb  into  tljc  heartof  man,  the 
things  Vbhich  ©ob  Ijath  p2cpareb  to? 
them  that  loue  him. 

10  25ut<l5oDhathreunJeo  them  tnto 
bs  bp  h^  5>pittt :  fo;  the  Spirit  fear ch* 
cth  all  things,  pea,  the  beepe  things  of 
<2»ob. 

n  if  02  ttihat  man  fenotbeth  the  things 
of  a  man,  faue  thefptritof  manmhtth 
is  in  him*  Cuen  fo  the  things  of  (£ob 
bnotbeth  no  man ,  but  the  Spirit  of 
©00. 

ii  /i5oVbVbcchaucrctciueb,notthc 
fptritofthctb02lb,butthc5)pintVbljirt) 
is  of  ©ob,  that  mc  might  uuoib  the 
things  that  arc  freely  gtuen  to  bs  of 
©ob. 

13  *t©hich  things  alfo  «ic  fpcaftc,not 
in  the  lbo?bs  ltohich  mans  Vbifcbome 
tcathcth,but  Vbljith  tljcholp  ©hoft  tea- 
cljcth ,  compartng  fpirimal  things  tbtth 
fpirituail. 

14  25uttljcnaturall  manrcccmcth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  ©oo,fo2 
they  arc  fooliflincffcbnto  him:  neither 
canhclmoVb  them,  becaufe  theyarefpt' 
rituallybiftcrncb. 

15  *  25ut  he  that  is  fpirituall,|  liubgcth 
all  thmgs,yct  Ijchimfclfc  is||iubgcb  of 
no  man. 

i6  'fojWhohathHnotticnthemino 

of 


"  a.Pec.i. 
10. 

WOrferfwa- 

file. 

tCr.tr. 


•Ela.«4.4. 


"s^eu-itf 


•Pro. 27.19 

\OrJifcrr- 
nrlh. 

\\Or,<Lftrr- 
rui. 

•Hom.ll. 
54  cfa.40. 
>3- 


jPaul  plantcth.  Chap.ii].iiij.     Gods  Minifters. 


|  qnjball. 


lOr,f<%ttu>ns 
\Gr.  accor- 
ding to  m*n. 


gai.O.j. 


OrfxlUgc 


oftl»c  JLw  that  he  t  map  tnltcuct  him  * 
asuttoehauetheminb  ofCbztft. 

CHAP.    III. 

Milkc  is  fit  for  children.  3  Strife  and  diuili- 
on,  arguments  of  a  flefhly  minde.  7  Hee 
that  planteth,  and  hee  that  watereth,isno- 
thing.  9  The  minifters  are  Gods  tellowe 
workemen.  11  Chuft  the  only  foundation. 
\6  Men  die  temples  of  God,which  lymuft 
bee  kept  holy  10  The  wifedome  of  this 
World  is  foolifhnefle  with  God. 

$b&$/&gm  4i3b  3J,b?eti)?tti,conID  not 
$$ffl$2^j  fpcabc  unto  pou  as  tonto 
fpirituail,butasbntotar 
rtail,euen  asbntobabcsm 

■l  31  Ijaue  fcb  von  ttnth  nulftc ,  anb 
nottbtthmeatc:  foi  hitherto  pec  tbcre 
notable  m  beare  it,  neither  pet  notb  arc 
vc  able. 

j  ifo?  pc  arc  vet  tatnall :  fo:  Votycw 
as  there  is  among  von  cnupmg,  anb 
ftrifcanb  1 1  biuiGons,ar  c  ve  not  carnall, 
anblbaittetasmcn* 

4  5Fo,2Vbl)tle  onefaicth,  31  am  of 
0aul ,  anb  another,  i  am  of  3tpollo, ate  | 
pcnoteacnaiu 

5  I©hothcnis0aulianbrbhois:& 
polio  t  but  minifters  bv  inborn  pc  belec; 
neb ,  cuen  as  the  JLoin  gane  to  cuerv 
man. 

6  3J  ijaueplantcb  Apollo  tbatcreb: 
but  C5ob  gane  the  cncrcafc. 

7  5>o  then,  neither  is  I) etljat  plan- 
teth an  vtl)tng,  neither  hee  tl)at  ibatc- 
retrj :  but<Sob  that  gtuetft  the  mcrcafc. 

8  ii5oU)  bec  that  planteth ,  anb  hee 
that  ltoatcrctb,are  one  :*anb  cuerv  man 
fhalrecciuchts  oum  renjaroaccozbing 
to  his  ottme  labour. 

9  #o?  Vtocc  arc  labourers  together 
lnith  ©ob,ve  arc  d5obs  ||  hnfbanb?v,vce 
aretisobsbmlbing. 

io  3icco2bmg  to  the  grate  of  d5oo 
tbhuh  is  giuen  unto  mcc,  as  a  ttnfc  ma< 
ftcr  builbcr  3  hauc  latb  the  founbation, 
anb  another  buiibcth  thereon.  2i5ut  let 
cuerv  man  tanc  beebe  hoVb  bee  bnilbctlj 
thereupon. 

ii  jfozotberfounbationeannoman 

lav,  then  tljat  isiatbc,  tbbtcbis^Icfus 

ChnO. 
ii  ilioibifanv man bnilbbpon  this 

founbation,golb,filuer,p?ctiousftones, 
tboob,bap,ftubblc: 

13  encrp  mans  ibotBe  (ball  be  mabc 
manifcO.f  ojthcbav  Ojaii  bcclace  it,be^ 


taufcittajailbcc  rencaicbbp  fire,  anb 
the  fire  (bail  trie  cncrpmaustbojUeof 
tbljatfonitis. 

14  3JfanvmansrbojBcabibctt)hich 
he  hath  built  thereupon,  he  fljai  rcteiue 
arcBjarb. 

15  3tf  anp  mans  lbojUc  (bail  bec 
bumt,hc  (ball  differ  loflc :  but be bun- 
felfc  mail  be  faucb :  vet  fo,as  bv  fire. 

is  *  mnoibcycc  not  that  pec  arc  tlje 
Xcmple  of  ©00,  anb  that  the  5>pint  of 
©obbttjclicthmvou* 

17  ^fanvmanllbcfilcthclCcmple 
of  <50b,him  ft)aild5obbcltrov:  fo;  the 
Xcmplcof<J5ob  isbolp,  ibbicb  Temple 
vearc. 

is  %tt  no  man  bcteiue  bimfclfc :  3lf 
anv  man  among  pou  fecmcth  to  bee 
Vbife  m  this  ttwlb ,  let  t)tnt  betomc  a 
foole,that  he  map  be  ibife. 

19  jFojtbe  lnifebomeoftbisitbozlb 
is  foolifbncfle  tbith  <5ob :  fo?  it  is  Hint- 
ten,  *  $cc  tattetb  the  ibife  in  tljcit  oibne 
craftineffe. 

20  ^nbagatnc'Xhc  ILozb  fcnoifr 
cth  the  thoughts  of  tbclbtfc,  that  thev 
are  name. 

21  1tbcrefo2C  let  no  man  glojp  in 
men,fo2ail  things  are  pours. 

22  lebctber  0aul,  02 Apollo,  02  Ce< 
phas,  02  the  ib02ib,  02  life,  02  bcath,  02 
things  p2cfcnt,o?  things  to  tomc,au  arc 
pours. 

23  2Cnb  pec  arc  Chills,  anb  Chad's 
(Sobs. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  In  what  account  the  Minifters  ought  to  bee 
had.  7  We  haue  nothing  which  wee  haue 
notreceiued.  9  The  Apoft les  (peclaclcs  to 
the  world,  Angels  and  men,  13  The  filth 
and  off-fcouring  of  theworlde:  15  Yet 
our  fathers  in  thrift,  16  Whome  wee 
ought  to  followe. 

et  a  man  fo  account  of 
bs,as  of  the  mimOers  of 
Cfmft ,  ano  ftcibatbs  of 
thcmpftcriesofC5ob. 

2   £0o2coucr,  it  is  rc^ 
quircb  in  (rcujarbs,that  a 

man  be  fonnb  faithful!. 
5    26ut  ibith  mce  it  is  a  bctp  fmali 

thing  that  "J  thoulbbce  mbgcb  ofpou, 

02  of  mans  tiubgement :  pea,  ^iubge 

not  mine  otbnefclfc. 

4  5P02  3  bnolb  nothing  bpmpfelfc, 
pet  am  5  not  hercbp  iumficb :  but  hee 
thatiubgeth  me  tsthc1L02b. 

5  *3Cherefo.2etubgc  nothing  bef02c 

&l   3  the 


tGr.n, 
Hta  led. 


•l.Cor.  6 
'9- 

{[OrJrJIrcj. 


'lob. J. 13, 

*PriI.?4. 
II. 


\qr.i«]. 


"Matt. 7.1 
rom.i.  1. 


iFooles  for  Chnft.    I.Connthi 


lans. 


Oldl 


caucn. 


t  Gr.  d,fllr, 


fGr.thtmer. 


"Atf.  10.34 
1  ihctT.1.9. 
irhctT.3.8. 
'  Mac  5.44 


the  time ,  butill  the  ?Lo2Dcomc ,  mbo 
both  Unit  b2ing  to  light  the  bibben 
things  of  barhcncffc,  aim  Unll  mane 
manifcft  the  toimfcls  of  the  hearts: 
at.D  then  (bail  cucry  man  hauc  pjayfc 

OfGoD. 

6  3tno  tbcfc tbtiigs,b2Ctb2cn,3bauc 
in  a  figure  tranffecreb  to  my  fclfe,  anb 
to  3pollo,fo2  roue  fa&cs:  that  yc  might 
icarnciubsnotto  thuiKe  ofmen,abouc 
that  which  «s  Witttcn ,  that  no  one  of 
you  bee  puffcb  Dp  fo:  oneagauift  ano- 
ther. 

7  j?o;s  Who  t  mauetl)  tbec  to  Differ 

from  another?  JJnb  What  baft  tl)OH  that 

thoubibft  not  reteuic;  jftoWiftbou 
btbft  receiuc  it,  Why  bocft  thou  glojy  as 
if  tljou  habft  not  rcceiueu  it  < 

s  /Row  ycarc  full,  now  ycarc  rich, 
ycbauc  rcigncb  as  lungs  Without  tos 
anb  3  Woulb  to  Gob yc  bib  rctgnctbat 
llit  alfo  might  rcigne  With  you. 

9  f  0: 3  tfttnfte  that  Gob  bath  fet 
fo  :tb  bs  the  3poftlcs  laft,as  it  Were  ap- 
p:oucb  to  bcatl).  f  02  wee  arc  mabca 
tfpcctaclc  bnto  tl)c  Wo?lb,  anbto  ^n- 
gcls.aubtomcn. 

10  nac^cfoolcsfo2Ci)2iftsfabc,bnt 

yC areWlfCtil  ClWft.   IBC  areWcaKC,  but 

ycareftrong:  yec  arc  honourable ,  but 
vuc  arc  DcfpifcD. 

1 1  eucntonto  this  pjefcut  Ijourc  We 
both  hunger  anb  tl)irft ,  anb  arc  naucb, 
anb  arebuffetcb  ,anb  hauc  no  ccrtamc 
bWclling  place, 

1 1  *  3ud  labour ,  Wo2Uitig  Wtfb  our 
ownc  hanbs:  being  rcuilcb,wccbleffc  : 
bcmgpcrfctutcb,l\)c  fuffent : 

ij  *25cuigbcfamcb,Wctntrcatc:Wc 
arcmabcas  the  filth  of  the  W02U) ,  anb 
ire  the  off  flouring  of  all  things  bnto 
this  bay. 

1  +  5  iP2itc  not  thefe  things  to  (hamc 
you ,  but  as  my  bcloucb  fonucs  3 
ibarnc  you. 

15  f  02  though  you  hauc  ten  thou* 
fanb  mftruct02S  m  Cb2ift,  yet  hauc  yec 
no  t  many  fathers :  JF02  in  Chnft  gjcfns 
3  hauc  begotten  yon  thjougf)  the 
Gofpcl. 

1 6  nahcrcfo2c  3  bctccth  vou ,  be  yec 
followers  of  me. 

17  f  02  this  taufc  hauc 3  fent  bnto 
vou  Xitnotheus ,  lbho  is  my  bcloncb 
fonne ,  aubfaithfuil  mtbellojD,  lbho 
n)aib2ingyou  into  rcmcmb2antcofmy 
waves  ibhtcl)  be  m  Clvift,  as  3  teach 
cucrv  Where  m  cucry  Church. 

1  s  j^oWe  Conic  arc  puffcb  Dp  as 


though  3  woulb  not  come  to  you. 

19  *  35ut  3  mil  come  to  you  fboztly , 
if  the  JLo2b  mill,  anb  WiiiiuioWe ,  not 
tbefpeath  ofthem  Which  are  puffcb  bp, 
but  the  power. 

zo  jf  02  the  feingbomc  of  Gob  is  not 
iniD02b,butinpoibcr. 

it  nabat  Will  ye  ?S>ball3J  come  bn 
to  you  With  a  rob ,  02  in  louc,  anb  in  the 
fpintofmecftcncfTe; 

CHAP.    V. 

The  inceftuous  perfon  6  is  caufc  rather 
of  fhame  vntothem,  then  of  rcioycing.  7 
Theoldeleauenis  to  be  pursed  out.  10  Hei- 
nous offenders  are  to  be  fhamed  &  auoided. 

Xis  rcp02teb  commonly, 
that  there  is  fornication  a- 
mongyou,  anbfucbfomi 
cation ,  as  is  not  fo  much 
as  namcb  amongft  the 

I  Gcnttlcs ,  that  one  (houlb  hauchtsfa 

libers  Wife. 
1   3lnb  m  Arc  puffcb  bp ,  anb  hauc 

not  rather  mourncb ,  that  he  that  hath 

bone  this  beeb ,  might  bec  taken  away 

from  among  you. 

3  *  f  02  3  bcnly  as  abfent  in  boby, 
but  pjcfcntm  fptnt,bauc  ||iubgcb  airca 
btc,  as  though  3  Were  pjefent,  cower 
mng  him  that  hath  fo  bone  this  netn, 

4  gjn  the  Jftamc  of  our  2Lo2b  3c 
ftis  Ch2ift<  ibhcn  yec  arc  gathercb  togc 
jthcr,aubmyfpint,  mith  tijepolbcrof 
ourUo2b3JcfusCh2ril, 

5  *  Xo  bcltucr  fuch  a  one  imto  S^a= 
tan  foj  the  bcftruction  of  the  fleft) ,  that 
the  fpirit  may  be  faueb  m  thebay  of  the 
Hojb'Jcfus. 

6  J3onrglo2yiiigtsnotgoob:*tmom 
yc  not  that  a  little  Icauen  icaucnctlj  the 
mholclumpe; 

7  0urgc  out  therefore  thcolbc  lea* 
unt ,  that  y  c  may  be  a  ncm  lumpc ,  as  yc 
arc  hnlcauencb.  JFo?  euen  ci)2ift  our 
j&affcouer  ||is  faenficebfozbs. 

8  XbcrcfcuclcttoSBCcpcllthefcaft, 
notmitholb  leaucn,  neither  lbith  the 
leancn  of  malice  anb  tbitRcbncfl"c:but 
Jbiththe  bnlcauencb  b2cabof  finccritic 
anbtructh. 

9  3  mjote  hnto  you  m  anCpifHe, 
not  to  company  lhtthfo2incato;s. 

io  jictnotaltogcthcrmith  the  fornix 
catours  of  this  U»02lb,02  mith  the  cone? 
tous,02ert02tioncrs,02«)tthibolaters 
fo2  then  mud  yec  neebs  goc  out  of  the 

U»02lb. 

u  25ut  noito  3  hauc  Vbjtttcn  bnto 

l_ youJ 


"  Aijtsi^. 
zi.iam  4. 
'S- 


•Col. J  j. 

||  O,  dclcr- 
mtntit. 


■  Tim 


'Ca!.5.9. 


\\OrtulLun 
\\Or,boli- 


IG 


oinstolaw. 


Ch; 


p.vj.vij. 


Oui 


r  price. 


p 


you,  not  to  ucepe  company,  if  any  man 
tljat  is  calico  a  b?otljcr  bee  afo?nteato?, 
ozcouctous,  o^aniDolatcr,  o?arailer, 
o?aD?tmrtarD,o?anerto?tioncr:  ruttt) 
fuel)  a  oncno,  not  to  eatc. 

ir  5Fo?U)Ijatljauc3JtoooctoiuDgc 
tlicmalfo  that  art  lUitnout?  oocuotyc 
tuDgc  tnciu  that  arc  tbithut  t 

13  2Buttl)tnitt)atarcU.nt!)out,<5oD 
tubgcth.  XhercfcwputaiDayfroma; 
raongyour  femes  rhatibicfceo  perfon. 

CHAP.     VI. 

i  The  Corinthians  muft  not  vexe  their  bre- 
thren, in  going  to  law  with  them  :  6  Qpe- 
cially  vnder  Infidels.  9  The  vnrighteoas 
lhall  not  iuherite  thekingdomeof  God.  15 
Our  bodies  are  the  members  of  Chrilr,  15 
And  Temples  of  the  holy  Ghoft.  16.17  They 
mult  not  therefore  be  dchled. 

Ztt  any  of  you,ljaumg  a 
matter  againft  another, 
goc  to  lattf  befo?c  tlje  ton- 
tuft ,  anD  not  bcfo?e  the 
5>amts  i 

I  ^yc  notation)  that  the  £>atnts 
ttjalliuDgc  thettwlbi  3nbifthcU)o?iD 
maibciuDgco  by  you ,  are  ye  tmu)o?thy 
to  tuogc  tl)t  fmalleft  matters  t 

3  BnoVb  yc  not  that  ujc  mall  iubge 
Angels  <  $?oib  much  mo?c  things  that 
pertcme  to  tins  life* 

4.  3Jf  then  yec  hauc  raDgcmcnts  of 
tl)ings  pertcitung  to  tins  ufc,  fct  them 
to  tuogc  Vbljo  arc  leaft  cftccmeb  in  the 
Cfnittb. 

5  3  fpeanc  to  your  ftjame.  "jsttfo, 
tljat  there  tfl  not  a  lbifemanatnongft 
you*  no  not  one  that  ujallbce  able  to 
iubgc  bettbecne  his  b?etli?cn  < 

6  But  b?othct  gocth  to  latb  rottij 
b?otfter, * tt)at  bcfoK  thcDnbciceucrs; 

7  H5ott)thccefo?e,  therctsPttcrlya 
fault  among  you,bctaufc  yec  goc  to  lam 
oncttnthanotljec  :  naljy  Doeyenotra? 
thectaue  ib?ong  t  amy  doc  yee  not  ra- 
ther fufifcr  your  fclucs  to  be  DcfrauDcb; 

8  /5ay,youDon>?onganDbefraub, 
anD  that  your  b2Cth?cn. 

9  mnott)  yec  not  tljnt  toe  Pnrfghtc; 
ousujail  not  mhertte  the  fetngnomcof 
d5ob  i  25enotbccetucD  :  neither  fomica- 
tours,  no2  tDoiatcrs,  no?  aDttitcrers, 
no?  effeminate, no?  abufers  of  them* 
fclttcs4bithmanKtnDc, 

10  0oi  thecucs,  no?  tonctons,  no: 
D?unltatDs,  ho?  rcuilcrs,  no?  erto?tio 
ners,Q)ail  inhcrttthcKmgDom  of  (Sod. 

II  StaDfuchujete  tonic  of  you :  but 


[  ycareroan)cb,biityearcfatunfieD,  but 
ye  arciufttncbtnthcji2a»ncofthelLo?D 
3Jcms,anD  by  tin  Spirit  of  our  <3ob. 

n  3ll  things  arc  lattmiubnto  mee, 
but  all  tilings  arc  not  llejrpcmnit :  all 
things  are  lattrfull  fo?  mcc  ,but  3  mill 
not  bee  bjougljt  bnbet  tlic  power  of 
any. 

15  G&ms  fo?  the  belly ,  ano  th  e  belly 
fo?  meatcs :  but  ©on  (hall  Dcftroy  both 
it  anD  them.  &0V0  the  boby  is  not  fo? 
fo?nication,  btttfo?  the?Lo?b  :  anbthe 
?Lo?Dfo?  the  boby. 

14.  3taD<5oDhath  both  raifco  top  the 
JLtsib ,  anbunliaifo  raifcbptosbyhts 
oVbncpotber. 

15  Buoito  yec  not  that  your  bobtes 
arc  tlje  members  of  Ch?tft  <  «§>hau  3 
thentaac  ttjc  members  of  €l)?ift,  anb 
malte  them  the  members  of  an  harlot  i 
«5obfo?bib. 

16  i©hat,lmoitoyenotthathcUjljich 
istoyncDtoanharlot,  is  one  boby  <  fo? 
, two  (faith  he)  lhaibc  oncflefh. 

17  aSnthecthattstoyncb  tonto  the 
|Lo?b,isoneCptrit. 

I  is  iflec  fo?ntcatiott  :  Cttcry  ftnnc 
itl)atamanboctl),lstt)itDouttl)cboby: 
!  but  i)c  tftat  tommtttetl)  fornication,  0n« 
!  nctljagainftijis  orbneboby. 

19  naijat,  unotbyc  not  tljat  your  bo- 
by is  tlje  Xentplc  of  tDc  Ijoly  ©Doft 
which  is  in  yon ,  tt)l)lti)  yec  i)auc  of  god, 
anb  yc  arc  notyour  otbne* 

20  iFo?  yce  arc  bought  ttiiti)  a  p?ite : 
tljcrcfo?c  glo?ifie  (5ob  in  your  boby , anb 
in  your  fptrit,  tbinclj  ar e  ©obs. 

CHAP.    VII. 

i  Hetreatethof  mariage,  4  fhewing  it  to  be 
a  remedy  againft  fornication :  10  And  that 
the  bond  diereof  ought  not  lightly  to  be  dif- 
folued.  18.  to  Euery  man  muft  be  content 
with  his  vocation.  15  Virginitie  wherefore 
to  be  imbraced.  35  And  for  what  refpeds  we 
may  either  marry , or  abftaine  from  mary  ing. 

£>rb  t5cerntngti)c  tilings 
itoljcrof  yc  tb?otc  onto  mc, 
gjt  is  goob  fo?  a  man  not 
totourDatboman. 
x  iI5cuerti)cieffc,  to  0- 
uo>d  fo?nitation,ict  cucry  man  l)auc  Ins 
otbne  tbtfc ,  anb  let  cucry  woman  bauc 
t)erottmeljufbanb. 

j  JLct  tlje  ljufbanb  renber  Pnto  tin 
rbtfe  Due  beneuolcnte :  anDlftteUrtfe  alfo 
tlje  ttnfc  Dnto  tl)e  DufbanD. 

4  10)cU)ifcnatnnotpotbcrofl)er 
oibne  boby.but  tlje  ljufbanb :  atiD  ituc 

toiTc 


\fh-,pnp 
ai/e.< 


Of 


manage 


I.Corinthians. 


id 


and  vir 


ginity. 


]CrJn  peace 


ibifcalfo  tljcbufbanb  Ijatft  not  polbcr 
of  bis  oibne  boop,but  tlje  ibifc. 

5  2>efraub  pou  not  one  tlje  otber, 
crecpt  u  bee  umlj  tonftnt  fo;  a  time,tbat 
pee  map  giuc  pour  fclucs  to  falling  ano 
p;apcr,  ano  conic  together  agame,  tbat 
S>atan  tcinpt  pou  not  fo;  pout  mcon* 
hneneic. 

6  ®ut3!fpcaftctbisbppcrmiu"ion, 
anb  not  of  commatiocmcnt. 

7  3fo*3i  lbouio  tbat  all  men  mere 
cucn  as  3  nip  felfc:bnt  cuerp  man  batlj 
bis  p;oper  gift  ofeoo,  one  after  tl)(s 
maner,anD  anotljcr  after  tljat. 

8  3  fap  tbcrcfo;c  to  tbe  bnmaricb 
anbibibotbcs,  3It  is  goou  fo;  tljem  if 
tbcpabtbceucnas'J. 

9  26ut  if  fbcp  cannot  contcinc ,  let' 
tljem  marrp :  fo;  it  ts  better  to  marrte  I 
tbentoburne. 

io  anb bnto  tl)i  marricD,3J  com*; 
mano,veinot3l,butthc2Lo;b,ILctnot 
tbettnfcoepattfTombcrbufbanb : 

1 1  25ut anbif  fl)cebcpart,lct  bcr  re* 
maincbnmarieb,o;bercconctlco  toiler 
Ijufbaub :  anbletnot  tlje  Ijufbanoput 
aibaplnsibife. 

iz  26uttotl)ercafpeaBc3J,nott&e 
iLoiu,  3i  anp  bjotljer  Ijatt)  a  ibife  tljat 
bclccuetlj  not,  ano  (bee  bee  plcafeb  to 
bibcllibttb  |)ftn,  let  Ijim  uotputljera* 
ttiap. 

13  anb  tbc  tboman  ibbub  batb  an 
Dufbano  tljat  beleeuetb  not,  ano  if  Dec 
bcpleafcoto  blbcllibitbljcr,letbcr  not 
leauc  Innt. 

14.  tfoi  tbebnbelccutngbufbanb  (s 
fanctificbbp  t!jclbifc,anb  tlje  bnbelce* 
mng  Wife  ts  fanctificbbp  tbe  Ijufbaub 
elfeiberepourcbtUueubnclcauc,  but 
noib  arc  tbep  bolp. 

15  28uttftbcbnbclccuingDepart,let 
himbepart.  a  b;otber  0?  aOftcrisnot 
bnocr  bonbagc  in  fuel)  cafes,  but  <5ob 
bafljcauebbst  to  peace. 

i6  5fo; VbljatUttoiueft  rl)ou,^>  tdife, 
ibbctbcr  toon  (bait  fauc  tljp  ljuf  bano  < 
oil)oiDtmoii)cQtoou,£>  man,tt)betljet 
tbouflmitfauctbpibtfci 

17  2Kut  as  d5ob  barb  otfrrfouteb  to 
cuerp man,as  fbc  TLo;b  Ijatt)  calico  cue* 
rp  oncfo  let  Ijitn  rbaiac ,  anb  fo  o;Dctne 
'JmauCijurcljes. 

is  3Js  anp  man  calico  bemgetreum* 
ctfcbdctljtmnotbccomebnctreunulfcb: 
Us  anp  calico  m  bnctrrumcifion*  let 
himnotbccircumcifeo. 

19  Cir cumcifion  12  nothing,  anb  bn; 
nrcumcu'ion  is  nothing,  but  the  Bee* 


pmg  of  the  Commanocmcnts  of  <3oo. 

20  ILcteuerpmanabibemtljcfamc 
calling  ibbcrem  be  ibas  calico. 

21  art  thou  calico  be.n?a  fcruanti 
carcnotfoiit:  butiftboumaittbcmaoe 
frce,bfc  it  rather. 

22  5Fo;betbatiscaUeDuttbc?[,o;b, 
being  a  reruant,is  tbe  Ho;os  t  foe  man: 
UKCibife  alfo  bee  tljat  is  calico  being  free, 
isCljn&sfcruant. 

2j  M  arc  bought  tbirt)  a  p;ice,bc  not 
pctljcfcruantsofmen. 

24  2S;etb;cn,lct  cuerp  man  ibberin 
be  is  cauco,tf)crein  abibe  tbirtj  d5oo. 

25  iSoibe  toncerning  btrgins,  31 
baue  no  eonnnaunoement  of  tljc  flo;D : 
pet  3J  giue  mp  iuogemem  as one that 
batb  obtaincbmcrcp  of  tfjtJLoiu  to  be 
faithfuii. 

26  3fuppofe  thcrefo;c  tt)at  this  is 
gooo to; toe p;cfent  || o>ilreu"c,i  fay,  that 
it  is  goob  fo;  a  man  fo  to  be. 

27  art  tboubounb  bnto  a  ibife; 
fecftcnottobeeloofeb.  art  tbouloofco 
from  a  ibife  i  fceuc  not  a  ibife. 

28  2Butanbtftl)oumarrp,tDonf)aft 
notfinneo ,  ano  if  abirginmatrp.ujee 
natb  not  ftnncb:  ncuertrjclcfTe ,  fuctj 
(bail  Ijauc  trouble  in  tlje  flcfl) :  but  3 
fparcpou. 

29  26ut  tl)ts 3J rap,b2ctl)2at,tJ)c  time 
isfljort.  3ltrcmainctn,tl)atbotr)tDcp 
tftat  Ijaue  tbincs,bc  as  tljougl)  tljcp  f)ao 
none: 

30  anb  tljep  tljatibcepe,asti)ougl) 
tljcp  meptnot:  anb  tljep  rljat  reiopce, 
as  tI)ouglj  tljep  retopceo  not :  ano  tljep 
tftat  bup,  as  tljougl)  tljep  poflefleb  not : 

31  anb  tljcpthatbfe  this  lbojlb ,  as 
not  abufing  it :  fo;  tlje  fatyion  of  tftis 
iboilopatTctliaibap. 

32  26ut3Jrooulol)auepouil)itl)out 
carcrulnelle.  ^etbatisbnmarricb.ra; 
rctl)foz  thetrjmgstl)atbcl6Betl)totl)c 
Ho2b,hoib  ne  map  plcafe  t!)c  fLoib: 

33  25utl)eetl)atismarieb,caretJjfo? 
tljetljings  that  arc  of  ffjcitoojio,  ftotti 
l)e  map  plcafe  bis  ibife. 

34  XDcrc  is  Difference  alfo  betlbcctt 
albifc  ano  atoirgm :  tbcbmnaricb  ttjo* 
man  carctlj  fo;  tDe  tljmgs  of  tlje  ILojb, 
tnat  n)ce  mapbc  bolp,  botlj  mboop  anb 
tnfpirit:  butnjetbattsmarrieo^arctb 
fo;  tbe  tbittgsof  tbc  iboiioe,  bolblbce 
map  pieafe  bcr  Ijufbanb. 

35  anb  tbis  31  fpeabc  fo;  pour 
ottmc  p;otlte,  not  tbat  3  map  call  a 
mart  bpon  pou,  but  fo;  tbat  Jbbicb  is 
comelp,  anb  tbat  pou  mar  attenb  bp* 
on 


■f  Qr  m*de 
fr„. 


Or,necif 
fitic. 


Ofoffending  Chap.viij.ix.  our  brethren. 


\\Or,forbim, 

R.em.Ii. 

!«• 


on  tlje  Hotf)  Xbithout  biOraetion. 

36  ffiut  if  any  man  thinHc  tl)at  he  be* 
fjauctl)  Ijiiitfelfe  bnconiclp  toroatb  his 
toicgin,tf  fl)t  paffctlKflourc  of  lierast, 
anbnecoefo  ccqulrclct  himbocttihat 
bee  tbfli ,  ljec  CinnctD  not :  let  them 
marry. 

37  /frcuerfheleffchce that  ttanoeth 
(tcDfaft  in  bis  heart,  baumg  nouctcffi* 
ticbut  Ijach  po  ibcr  oucc  bis  olbne  Mil, 
anD  bath  fo  Dcerccbinhis  heart  thathe 
ttitllbccpc  bisbirgin,boctblbell. 

3  s  £>o  then  he  that  giucth  her  tn  ma* 
nage  boetb  tbel :  butljttljat  giueth  her 
not  in  mariage,bocfh  better. 

39  XbcibifctsbounDbytbcfUibe 
as  long  as  her  bufbanDliucth :  but  if 
her  hufbano  bee  bcab,fbce  is  at  liberty 
to  bee  marten  to  tbhom  (bee  lbfll,  onely 
intbeHojo. 

40  But  (bee  is  happier  if  (bee  fo  * 
bibcaftcrinyiubgmcnt :  atiD^rhmBc 
aifothafj  baue  tbc^pintofOoD. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1T0  abfhine  from  meates  offered  to  Idoles : 
8.  9  Wemuftnot  abufe our  Chrifhan liber- 
tie,  tothe  offence  of  our  brethren :  11  but 
muff  bridle  our  knowledge  with  Charitie. 

<©ib  as  touching  things 

offeree  bnto  ibolcs ,  Wee 

fcnoib  that  tbee  all  bane 

hnoftleoge.  ismoiblcogc 

puffeth  top  :  but  Cha* 

ritie  ebtfieth.  ^  ^ 

%  anb  if  any  man  thtnae  that  bee 

mtotbeth any  tying,  hcetmoibethno* 
tbtngyetas  I3e  ought  toanott). 

5  aBut  if  any  man  loue  45ob ,  the 
fame  is  bnoibcn  of  htm. 

a.  %s  tonterntng  tljcrefo?c  ttjc  ca* 
tingof  thofc  things  tbat  are  offcreD  in 
racnficebntotboles.wceRnolbthatan 
toole  tsnothtng  in  tl)e  Vbojlb ,  anb  that 
there  is  none  other  ©obbut  one. 
\  5Fo?tbougb  there  bee  that  ate  cal* 
let>gobs,ibbcthct  inhcaucnonn  earth 
(asthctebegobsmany,anblo?os  ma* 

nv:) 

V  But  to  bs  there  ts but  one^ob, 
the  father ,  of  Whom  are  all  things, 
XttiRn,  ano  one  WJ& 
<£bntt,by  Whom  arc  all  things,  anb  ibe 

^T^feotbbctt  there  is  not  in  eucric 
man  that  anoibleDgc :  fo?  tome  with 
confcientcofthciooicbntothishoute, 
catenas  a  thing  offtcb  buto  an  mole, 


||0r,i  due  ve 
the  more. 
||  Or,  ham 
Tfe  the  tejfe. 

j|  Or,  power. 


\qr.cttifi-l 


anbtheitconfttcucebemgibeaac, isbe* 
bleb. 

8  2Sut  mcate  contmenbeth  bsnot 
to  O'ob  :fo:  neither  if  uk  rate  ■.  J  arc  ibe 
n)c better :  neither  if  Vbcceatenot,  ||are 
ibetbeTbojfe. 

9  JSuttafteheeblcftbyanymeancs, 
thisllltbertie  of  yours  become  a  Bum* 
bling  blocfec  to  them  that  are  ibeaue. 

10  foi  if  any  man  fee  tbee  tbhich  haft 
tmottflcbge,  (it  at  meat  in  the  ibols  tern* 
pie :  (ball  not  the  confncncc  of  him 
Which  is  Wcafec ,  be  t  embolbcneb  to  eat 
thofc  things  Which  are  offer cb  to  iDols; 

11  3nb  though  thy  ftnowicbgefbal 
the  Wca&c  brother  pctiftj ,  fo?  Whom? 
Chnflbicb; 

ii  26utvbbenycrinnefoagainfrthc 
b:eth?cn ,  anDWonno  their  wcabe  con 
fcicnce,  ye  Gnnc  againC  <£hnO. 

13  nahcrcfozciftneatcmaBcmybjo* 
tbet  to  offenD^  Will  cat  no  fled)  Whflt 
the  Wo?lo  Oanbcth^cft^  mauc  my  too- 
ther to  offeno. 

CHAP.   IX. 

He  fheweth  his  libertie,  7  and  that  the  mr 
nifter  ought  to  liue  by  the  Gofpel:  15  ye1 
thathimfelfe  hath  of  his  owne  accord  abftai-  j 
ned,  18  to  be  either  chargeable  vnto  them : ' 
11  oroffenfiuevntoany ,  in  matters  indiffe- 
rent.  14   Ourlileislike  vntoarace. 

*S !  £0  3  not  an  ^pottle;  am 
"3  not  free;  baue  3  not 
feme  3lefus  ChtftT  out 
fLo?b ;  3lre  not  you  my 
ibo?6e(nthe|lo?br 
31 3  bee  notan^poftlebnto  c* 
thcts,yetboubtleu"e3l  am  to  you :  fo? 
the  feale  of  mine  3po(tle(bip  are  y  ee  in 
njeTLojb. 

3  fl@ine  anftbete  to  them  that boe 
ejcaminemctsthts: 

4  l^auc  ibee  not  potber  to  eatcanb 
tob?(nftei 

<,  $auc  Vbc  not  potber  to  leab  about 
afiftcra ||ibifeaubciasother^po(Hes,  ii£ 
ant)  as  the  bjethjen  of  the  !Lo?b ,  anb 
Cephas i 

6  ^SJonclyanbBarnabas.haue 
not  ibe  poiber  to  fojbeare  ibo?fting  t 

7  i©ho  gocth  a  Ybarfare  any  time 
at  his  otbne  charges  i  lbho  piantcth  a 
bmcyarb ,  anb  catcth  not  of  the  fruite 
thereof;  0?  \bho  feebcth  aflortte ,  anb 
cateth  not  of  the  milttc  of  the  florttc  i 

8  -Sayllthefcthingsasamanroz 
faitl)  nottbc  ?taru  thetamc  alfo  * 
9  fai 

84 


TrueMinilliers.    I.Corinthians.  Runne  toobtcine. 


•  Dcui.js 


•Rom.i  y 
7- 


•Dcut.i8. 
\\Or,f«i. 


9  tfo?  it  12  ttijttten  m  the  flaib  of 
sjpoyfcs,  *  Xljou  (halt  not  mu35Cll  the 
inourt)  of  tl)c  ore  that  trcauctf)  out  ttjc 
co2iic :  both  <3oD  take  tare  fo?  orcn  i 

io  £>:  faith  bee  it  altogether  fo?  out 
faKes;  fo;  out  fal»cs,no  Doubt,  this  is 
tbnttcit :  that  bee  tbatplolbcth,tt)OulD 
pioib  in  hope :  ant)  that  \)tc  that  tb?eu> 
cthmbope ,  (bouibbcepartaBerof  his 
hope. 

ii  *  3Jf  *be  hauc  foibcnbnto  you  fpu 
ntuall  things,  is  it  a  great  thing  tf  lbee 
(bail  rcapt  pout  tarnau  things  * 

ii  3Jf  others  bee  partanets  of  this 
poibcr  oucr  yon,are  not  ibe  rathcr</f5c* 
ucctbelcfrc,lbcbancnotbfebtbispoib; 
cr :  butfuffct  all  things,  led  lbee  tboulb 
btnbct  the  <5ofpcl  of  Cb?ift. 

13  *Do  ye  not  mtom  that  they  ibbicb 
mimftcraboutbolytijingsjliueofthe 
things  of  the  Xcmplc  i  anb  they  lbhich 
tbait  at  the  altar ,  arc  partakers  ibith 
the  altars 

14.  €ucu  fo  hath  the  3Lo?b  o?bctncb, 
that  they  ibbleb  P?cath  the  ©ofpcl, 
fl)oiii&iuieofthc(Bofpci. 

15  asm  3  hauc  bfeb  none  of  thefc 
things,  ^cither  hauc  3Jib?itten  there 
things.thatitfbotilDbce  fo  bone  bnto 
mc:  fo?  it  iberc  better  fo?  me  to  bictbcn 
that  any  man  vhoulD  mafte  my  glob- 
ing boyb. 

16  tfo?though3JP*eacbthc<sofpei, 
3  hauc  nothing  to  glow  of :  fo?neccfc 
fair  is  laib  upon  mec ,  ?ca ,  tboc  is  bnto 
me,if  31  pleach  notthe<5ofpcl. 

17  tf  0?  if  3  boe  this  thing  nulling* 
ly ,  3  baucarcroarb :  butifagamftmy 
lbill ,  a  Difpcufation  of  the  Gofpei  is  torn- 
mittebbutomc. 

is  nabatismyrclbarbtben^bcrily 
that  lbbcnll  Pleach  the  <3ofpcl,3I  may 
ntaKc  the  oofpcl  of  Ch?ift  lbithout 
charge,  that  31  abufc  not  my  poibcr  m 
tbcGofpci. 

19  tfoz  though  3  bee  free  from  all 
mcu,yctbauc3l  mabemy  felfcfcruant 
bnto  all,  that'll  might  game  the  11102c. 

20  anb  bnto  the  3lcibcs,3J  became 
as  a  Jcib ,  that  3  might  game  the 
3kibcs :  to  them  that  are  bnber  the 
}LAib,asbuDrrtbcXUib,tbat3J  might 
game  them  that  arc  bubcr  the  ILaib : 

1 1  %o  them  that  arc  lbithout  ILaib, 
as  lbithout  ILaib  (being  not  lbithout 
ILaib  to  d5ob ,  but  bnber  the  2,aib  to 
€bnlr,)  thatll  might  game  them  that 
art  lbithout  ILaib. 

i:Xo  tljc  lbcabc  became  3  as 


lbeaucthat  3  nnght  game  thelbeabe : 
31  am  mabc  all  things  to  all  men ,  that! 
3  might  by  an  tncancs  faue  fome. 

23  anb  this  31  boc  fonhc  ©ofpels 
fafecthat  31  might  bcpartaner  thereof 
ibith  vou. 

24  Bnolb  yec  not  that  they  tbbtrb 
runne  in  a  race,  runne  all,  but  one  re- 
cciucth  the p?ice*  3>o  runne,  that  yee 
mayobtame. 

25  ^nb  cucry  man  that  ftrtuethfo? 
the  maftcrte,is  temperate  in  all  things: 
iftoibthcy  doe  k  to  obtainc  acojrupti* 
blc  crottme,but  tbe  an  inro?rupttble. 

26  3  therefore  fo  runne,  not  as  bn« 
ccrtamcly :  fo  fight  31 ,  not  as  one  that 
beat  cth  the  ay?c: 

27  zSut3JKecpcbnbermyboby,anD 
b?lngttintofubicction:  icftthatbyany 
mcancs  lbhcn  3  haue  p?eacbeb  to  0* 
thcrs,  3  my  fclfe  (boulb  be  a  cattaibay . 

CHAP.     X. 

1  The  Sacraments  of  the  lewes,  6  are  types  of 
ours,  7  and  their  punifhments,  n  exam- 
ples for  vs.  14  We  muil  flie  from  idolatrie. 
it  We  muft  not  make  the  Lords  Table  the 
table  of  deuils :  14  And  in  things  indiffe- 
rcnt,we  muft  hauc  regard  of  our  brethren. 

j©?coucr  J>?erh?en  ,  3 
iboulbnotthat  yec  fhouio 
bcigno?ant,  hoib  that  all 
our  fathers  iberc  bnber 
the  cloub.anbail  pafTcb 
tbo?o\b  the  S>ea : 

2  anb  iberc  all  baptiKb  bnto  $&ap 
fcsintbccloub.anbintbefea: 

3  anb  bib  ail  cat  the  famefpirituail 
meat: 

+  anb  bib  all  b?inbe  the  famefpiri* 
tuall  b2tnbe :  (fo?  they  bjanbe  of  that 
fpirituali  Borne  that  I!  folloibcb  them: 
anb  that  Bocftc  ibas  Cb?itt) 

5  ffiut  ibith  many  of  them  (Bob 
ibas  not  lbcllplcafeb :  fo?tbeyibcreo- 
ucrth?olbcn  m  the  ibilbcrnclTe. 

6  /]5oib  thefc  things  iberc  t  our  tr 
amplcs,  to  the  intent  lbcc  fljoulb  not 
lull  after  curt  thmgs.as  they  alfo  lufleb. 

7  ^either  be  ye  iboiatcrs ,  as  were 
fome  of  them ,  as  it  is  ibjitten,  *  %\yt 
people  fate  bolbnc  to  catc  anb  b2inbe, 
anbrofebptopiay. 

8  ^either  let  bs  commit  fo;tuca 
tion.as  fome  of  them  tomnuttcb,  anb 
'fell  m  one  bay  th?ce  anb  tlbcnticthou* 
fanb.  | 

9  iTtitljcr  let  bs  tempt  Gj2iu\  as 
fome 


|J  Or,  UV7K 
wtth  them. 


t6V 


•  Exod.  31 
6.pfal.lo6 
M 


*  Num.  ly 


Onebread,one  body.  Chap.xj.    Women  coucrcd. 


Num.i  r. 


"  Num.  14. 
37- 

\\Or,T}f- 


||0/-,w»Jf 


•Dcut.;t. 
.7.  pfjl. 
io«.j7. 


•Dcut.lo 
t4.pfal.34. 


fomc  of  them  alto  teinptcb ,  *anD  lucre 
beftropcb  offcrpcnts. 

10  ii5c«tl)cr  mur  mure  ye ,  as  fomc  of 
them  alfo  murnutrcb ,  anD  lUerc  *  De- 
ftropcDoftbcDcftropcr. 

1 1  iSoiU  all  thefc  things  happeueb 
Unto  them  foz  |  ciifainpicB  :  anb  tbep 
ace  um'ttcn  foz  our  admonition ,  upon 
lUhom  the  cubs  of  the  luozlbarc  come. 

11  rebcrcfoze,  let  him  that  tbmBerb 
bcitauoctb,takcbrcb  left  Detail. 

15  Xbcre  bath  no  temptation  fatten 
pou,  but  fuel)  as  ib  ii common  toman: 
butoobisfaitbfulMUhottuiuotfuffcr 
von  to  bee  temptcb  abouc  that  pou  arc 
able :  but  Unit  \Uith  the  temptation  alfo 
niabeaiuap  to  cfcape,  that  pc  map  bee 
ablctobcareit. 

14  nahcrcfozc  mp  Dcarelp  beloucb, 
flee  from  iboiatr ir 

15  5*  fpealicas  to  ttnfc  men:  uibgc 
peiuhsr3Jfap. 

i6  Xbc  cup  of  blcffms  lUbicb  lUce 
bteffc ,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the 
Wood  of  e&nfti  Xbe  bzeab  lubttb  tbe 
bzcaue,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the 
boDvof<£i)?iftr 

17  /oz  lDe  being  manp  arc  one  bzeab, 
anb  one  bobp :  fo;  rbc  arc  allpartattcrs 
oftbatonebzeao. 

is  a5et)olD3fcaciaftcrtheflcQ):are 
notrhepUJhichcatofthefacrtfices,par; 
tatters  of  the  SUtar; 

19  rehat  fap  3  then  t  that  the  ibolc 
is anv  thing;  02  tbatiubicb  isoffcrcb 
infacrtficc  to  ibols  is  anp  thing  * 

ao  :sut  1  lay  that  the  things  Which 
tbecSetuilcs'facrificc,  tbep  faenftec  to 
beuits,  anb  not  to  <5ob :  anb  3  lUoulb 
not  that  pec  fbouib  tjauc  fctloiufbip 
tbitbbcutls. 

ii  }9ce  cannot  bnnhe  the  cup  of  the 
Ho2b,  anb  the  enp  of  beuits :  pc  cannot 
bepartauets  of  the  Hozos  Xablc ,  ano 
oftbetabtcofbeutls. 

xx  ©ocnjcpzouottctbcILozbtoica*! 
toufic '.  arc  tbe  ftronger  then  he  < 

xi  3W  things  ace  laurfull  foz  mcbut 
alt  thmgs  arc  not  erpebient :  3111  things 
arc  laiufuil  foi  mcc ,  but  all  things  f 
:oincnot. 

2.4  fLctnomanfecncbisoUjnc:but 
eucrp  man  another  s  wealth. 

25  nabatfocucr  is  foibeintbcfbam 
blcs,  that  cate ,  aftntig  no  oucthon  foz 
conference  fafce. 

26  5ro2*  the  earth  is  the  JLozbs,anb 
thcfutncffctticreof. 

17  31f  anp  of  them  that  belccuc  not, 


bib  pou  to  a  fe.iit,  anb  pec  be  bifpofeb  to 
goe ,  lUhatfocucr  is  fet  before  pou,  e ate, 
af  king  no  quefhon  foz  confciencc  faUe . 
18  iSut  if  anp  man  fap  unto  pou, 
Xbis  is  offcrcb  m  faccificc  unto  ibolcs, 
cate  not  foz  his  false  that  flicvucbit  ,anb 
foz  confciencc  fake.  *  Xhc  earth  is  the 
?Lozbs,ano  tbcfulneffe  thereof. 

29  €onfctcncc3Jfap,notthmeottmc, 
but  of  the  others:  fozlUhptsmplibcr; 
tic  mbgcb  of  another  mans  conference; 

30  ;foz,if3fbp||graccbeaparta&er, 
rbhp  am  3  emit  fpottcn  of,  foz  that  foz 
lUbicblJgiuctbanHcs? 

31  flahetbcrtbcrfozepeeatozbztnltc, 
oz  ruhatfocucr  pc  Doe,  Doe  an  to  the  gio- 
rp  of  C50D. 

32  <5iuc  none  offence,  neither  to  the 
3lcUjes,noz  to  the  1 0cnnles,noz  to  the 
1  Church  of  ©ob: 

33  <£uen  as  3J  pleafc  all  men  in  all 
things,  not  fceamg  nuncolUnc  pzofit, 
but  the  pzofit  of  manp ,  that  tbep  map 
befaucb. 

CHAP.  XI. 

1  Hereprooueth  them,becaufe  in  holyaflem- 
blies,  4  their  men  prayed  with  their  heads 
couered,and  6  women widi theirheadsvn= 
couercd,  17  and  becaufe  generally  their  mee- 
tings were  not  for  die  better  but  for  the  worfe, 
as  11  namely  in  profaning  with  their  owne 
feafts  the  Lords  Supper.  15  Laftly.hccalleth 
them  to  the  firftinftitution  thereof. 

|<£  pec  followers  of  mcc, 
«cucn  as  3  alf°  am  of 
CbzuT 

x  /15ott)3lpzapfcpou, 
bzcthzcn,thatpou  remem- 
bcrmc  matt  things,  anb 
feeepe  the  ||  ozbmances ,  as  Jl  bcliucrcb 
them  to  pou. 

3  25ut  3  iUoulb  bauc  pou  Unottic, 
that  the  beab  of  eucrp  man  is  Chzift: 
anb  the  hcab  of  the  luoman  tstbc  man, 
anDthchcabofChziftis  <5ob. 

4  eucrp  man  pzapmg  oz  pzophecp- 
mg,baumg  his  hcab  coucrcb,bi(bonou; 
rethhtsheab. 

5  But  eucrp  Yboman  that  pzapctb 
02  pzopheficth  lUith  her  hcab  uncouc 

I  rcb,bifl)onourcth  her  hcab :  foz  that  is 
cum  all  one  as  if  fbc  lucre  fbaucn. 

6  jfozifthclbomanbcnotcouercb, 
let  her  atfo  bee  fljoznc :  but  if  it  bee  a 
fbamc  foz  a ujoman  to  be  fboznc  oz  ftja 
ucn,ictherbccouercb. 

7  ^oz  a  man  in  ocebe  ought  not  to 
toucr  his  hcab,  fozafmuch  as  hec  is  the 

J imaae 

84  2 


Dcur.  10. 
4.pfal.>4. 


\Or-fhmkif- 


fGr.Grrekj 


I  Or^rtulitt- 


Chrifts  Supper.    I.Corinthians.        Spiritual!  gift 


ires  j 


That  if.  ,j 

f ;«■•'•■•' 

fie  it  :■>■■  ier 

thepower  of 
her  hm'cand 


\Or%vAiU. 


Or, 

fclnfmti. 
\OrJctl,. 


\\Or,rrcji- 
noteMe. 


||  Or.ih.-n 
th.1r.7re 

: 


"Mat.j6.liS 
ITMI  IJ.ll. 
Iuk.12.19. 

- 


image  anb  qIojv  of  ©ob  t  but  the  Wo 
man  is  the  glojv  oftljt  man. 

s  jfozthemauisnotoftheWoman: 
but  the  woman  of  tijc  man. 

9  iRctttjcr  was  the  man  cceateb  foz 
the  woman :  but  tljc  woman  fo?  tt»e 
man. 

10  5Foz  this  caufc  ought  the  Woman 
to  hauc  power  ||  on  her  hcab,bccaufeof 
the  Angels. 

11  ii3eucrthciciTc,neithcris  the  man 
Without  the  woman,  neither  the  Wo; 
manlbithoutthc  man  m  the  Hozb. 

1 1  jFozastheiiiomantsoftheman: 
cucn  fo  ts  the  man  alfo  by  tljc  Woman ; 
but  all  tlnngs  of  oob. 

ij  3Jubgc  m  your  fclucs,isit  tome; 
ly  that  a  Woman  pzay  buto  (Bob  bnto- 
uercb  i 

14  SDoetl)  not  cucn  nature  it  fclfe 
teach  you,that  if  aman  hauc  longhatre, 
itisafhamebntohttm 

15  2Sutifawomanhauclonghaite, 
it  is  a  glozy  to  her  :foz  her  hatrc is giucn 
hcrfozallcoucrtng. 

1 6  But  if  any  man  fecme  to  be  eon; 
tenuous,  we  hauc  no  fitch  cuftomc,  net- 
thcr  the  Churches  of  Gob. 

17  /Bow  tn  this  that  3J  Declare  vn- 
ro  you,  31  pzaife  you  not,  that  you  come 
together  not  foz  the  better ,  but  fo?  tljc 
wozfe. 

1 8  if  oz  firlt  of  all  When  pec  come  to- 
gefhec  m  the  Church ,  31  hcarc  tl)at 
there  bcllbtuillonsamongyou,  anb3i 
parti?  belccue  it. 

19  jffoz  there  muGbecalfollhcreties 
among  you,  that  they  winch  arc  appzo; 
ucb  may  be  mabe  mamfclt  among  you. 

20  nahen  vec  come  together  there; 
fozc  into  oneplacc,tiiisis||notto  catc  the 
Hozbs  Supper. 

1 1  .foz  in  catmg,cuery  one  taftetlj  be; 

fOIC  ither ,  t)tS  OWltC  flippCT  I  ailb OltC  IS 

hungry , anb  an  other  is  bzuuben, 

1 2  uahat,  hauc  ye  not  houfes  to  catc 
anb  to  bzmlic  in  <  £)}  bcfpifc  ycc  the 
Cluirri)  of  <5ob,anD  (name  l|  them  that 
hauc  not  i  tt)hat  fhail  31  fay  to  you* 
foail  3J  pzaifc  you  m  this  t  3J  pzayfc 
von  not. 

13  .foz3n.aiicrccctiicbofthc?LozD 
that  Which  alfo  3ibciuicrcb  buto you, 
that  the  ?Lozb3Kfus,thc  fame  night  in 
which  he  was  bctraycb,tooHc  bzcab : 

24  *  3no  When  he  hao  giuen  thanHs, 
he  bzattcit,aubfayb,  Sialic,  catc,  tine  is 
myboDp,WhichisbzoUcnfozyou:this 
Doe||m  rcmcmbzancc  of  niee. 


25  after  the  fame  manner  alfo  hce 
woke  tljc  cup  When  he  Dab  fuppcb ,  fay; 
ing,  Xhis  cup  ts  the  new  ICcOamcnt  in 
mybloobtthisboycasoftasyebzmUe 
it,iuremembzancc  of  me. 

26  ifozasoftcnasyccatcthisbzeab, 
anb  Dztnne  this  nip,  llyeeboefhcwthe 
fLozDSDcathtillhccome. 

27  i©hcrcfozc,Whofocucrfhaiieatc 
this  bzcab,  anb  Dzmfte  tljis  cup  of  the 
fLozb  bnWozthtly,thailbe  guilty  of  the 
boby  anb  bloob  of  the  Hozb. 

28  26utlctaman  craminehimfclfc, 
anb  fo  let  him  catc  of  that  bzcab ,  anb 
bzinbc  of  that  cup. 

29  5Poz  hce  thateatcth  anb  bziniteth 
bnWozthily,catcth  anb  bziniteth  flbam; 
nation  to  himfclfc,  not  bifccrnmg  the 
ILozbsboby. 

3  o  f  oz  this  taufe  many  are  Wcafte 
anb  fichly  among  y  ou,anb  many  flcepc. 

3 1  ifazifwc  Woulb  inbgcour  femes, 
We  fhoulb  not  be  uibgcb. 

32  2SutWhcnwcareiubgcb,weare 
chaftencbof  thcfLojD,  thatwee  fhoulb 
not  be  tonbemncD  With  the  Wozlb. 

3  3  naherefoze  my  bzethzen,  When  ye 
come  together  to  eate ,  tary  one  fo:  an; 
other. 

34  ^nb  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him 
eate  at  homcthat  ye  come  not  together 
bntollconbemnation.  3nb  the  reft  Wil 
31  fct  m  ozbcr,Whcn'5  come. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  Spiritual!  gilts  4  arediuers,  7  yet  all  to  pro- 
fit withall.  8  And  to  that  code,  are  diucrflv 
bellowed:  12.  Thatbvthelikeproportion,.is 
themembersofa  naturall  body,  tend  all  to 
the  16  mutuall  decency,  12.  feruice,  and 
16  (uccour  of  the  lame  body;  17  fo  wee 
(hould  doe  one  tor  another ,  ro  make  vp  the 
myfh'call  body  of  Chiilf. 

jDW  concerning  fpirituail 
-Htes.bzcthzctt,  3  woulb 
nothaucyouignozant. 

2   J9ce  Know  that  ^te 
Were  (pennies,  carycb  a 

way  bnto  tljcfe  bumbc  iboles ,  cucn  as 

ycwcrcleb. 

3  nahcrcfozc  3J  gu«c  you  to  bnber; 
daub,  that  no  man  fpcahmg  by  thcfpi 
ntof(5ob,callcth3icfus||accucfcb:anD 
that  no  man  can  fay  that  3!cfus  is  tljc 
Hozb,butbythcholyd5holl. 

4  /?oWc  there  arc  biiicrGttcs  of 
gifts,but  the  fame  fpirit. 

5  3hib  there  arc  biffcrcnccs  of  ab 
uuniftrations,  but  the  fame  Hozb. 

6  ^tub! 


\Or.f,c> 


I  Or,  wJgt- 
ment. 


'I  Or.iuAgt- 
m:nt. 


\Or,Aij- 


SP 


irituall  gifts. 


Ch 


ap.xnj, 


ci 


lantie  prai 


p1 


tiled. 


\Gr.Cjrctki- 


|9r.f«r«». 


6  3tnb  there  arc  biucrfiUcs  of  ope* 
rations,  but  it  is  the  fame  ©on ,  ibljich 
ttwltcthallinail. 

7  iSiit  the  ntanifcftation  of  tljcfpt- 
ttt,is  giuen  to  euery  man  to  profit  ibith- 
all. 

8  iFoj  to  one  is  gtucn  by  trje  fpirlt, 
the  tbozbof  ibifebome ,  to  another  the 
too2bofRtion)lcbgc,bythefamcfptrit. 

9  %o  anotocrfaitlj,  by  trje  fame  fpt- 
tit:  to  another  the  gifts  of  healing,  by 
tDefamefptnt: 

io  Xo  another  thettwlringofmira; 
cles,  to  another  pzophcetc,  to  another 
bifccrnmg  of  fpirits ,  to  another  dmers 
tunbcs of  tongues,  to  another  trje  in= 
terpzetatton  oftongucs. 

1 1  25ut  all  thefc  ibozacfh  that  one 
anb  the  felfc  fame  fpint,muibmgto  cue* 
ryman  fcucrailyashcnjlll. 

ti  5Fozasthcbobyisone,anbhath 
manymembers,anbailthcmembrsof 
that  one  boby ,  being  many ,  ate  one  bo* 
Dicifoalfo'sCrmfr. 

u  jFozbyonefpititarelbcaUbapti: 

1CD  mtO  OtlC  bODIC  ,    IbllCtUCt  wee  bee 

3Jcu)CS02 1  ©entiles,  lDljcthee  wee  bee 
bonboz free:  anbljauc bccneallmabc 
to  Dnnhe  into  one  fpirit. 

14.  if  02  the  boby  is  not  one  member, 
but  many. 

15  3Jf  tl)e  foot  Qiaii  fa? ,  asecaufc  3 
am  not  tl)c  hanb,3J  am  not  of  the  boby: 
isit  thercfozc  not  of  trje  boby ; 

i6  3nD  tf  the  care  (hall  far,  2i5ecaufe 
3  am  not  the  eye ,  3  am  not  of  trje  bo* 
by:  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  boby* 

17  3Jf  tljc  Whole  boby  lucre  an  eye, 
tbrjece  tbere  tljc  hcaruig^f  the  ibhole 
ftcrc  hearing ,  Where  Vbcre  tljc  hurt- 
ling; 

is  25utnoiD  Ijatlj  (Sob  fct  trje  niem- 
bcrs,  cuccy  one  of  them  in  tljc  boby,  as 
ithathpleafebljim. 

19  3int>  if  they  iberc  all  one  member, 
tbljerc  lucre  the  boby; 

10  25ut  now  are  they  man?  mem* 
bers,yct  but  one  bobp. 

21  3nb  tDc  eve  cannot  fay  bnto  toe 
hanb,  'Jljaueno  nceo  of  tl)cc :  no?  a. 
gaine,tljcl)cabtotljefcete,3  Ijauc  no 
neebeofyou. 

21  /Bay,  much  mo2C  thofc  members 
of  trje  bobte,  loljiclj  fecme  to  bccmoic 
feeblcaceneceflary. 

u  3nb  thofc  members  of  tl)e  bobic, 
Vbljicfj  tttcc  thm&e  to  bee  leffe  honours 
We ,  upon  thefc  Ujc  1 1  bcftoii)  moze  abutt* 
bant  honour,  anb  our  uncomely  parts 


haucmozeabunbant  tomclmcffc. 
!    14-  jFoz  our  cornel?  pans  hauc  no 
nceb :  but  (5ob  Ijatlj  tempcreb  tljc  bobic 
togetljcr,  hailing  giuen  mozc  abunbant 
honour  to  that  part  Ibhich  lac&cb: 
15  Xljat there  ujoulb  be  no'jfchiutie m  I !  or,** 
the  boby :  but  that  tljc  members  fhonib  f:'"- 
fjauc  tljc  fame  care  one  foz  another. 

16  3lnb  tbhethet  one  member  fuf 
fer ,  all  the  members  fuffcr  ibith  it :  oz 
one  member  be  honoureb,  all  the  mem 
bcrsreioyccibitrjtt. 

17  /QotbyccarctrjcboopofChJifl, 
anb  members  m  particular. 

28  3lnb  ©00  Ijath  fct  fomc  in  the 
Church,  Gctt  3lpoftles,  feconbarfly 
02opljets,  thirbly  Xcachcrs,after  that 
miracles,tl)cn  gifts  of  healings,  hclpcs  \\or&*. 
ingoiicrnmcts.ilbtucrfiticsoftongucs.l 

29  3Jre  all  3pofties;are  all  ^zopljcts; 

are  all  Xeacljers*  areailHibozBcrsof ;ior,fn,m. 
miracles  i 

30  $auc  all  the  gifts  of  healing;  boc 
all fpcaBeibith  tongues*  boc  all  inter* 
pjet* 

j  1 2SutcouctcacncfHy  the  bctt  gifts: 
3uibyct  thcuj'Jbntoyouamo.iecrccl; 
icntibay. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Allgifces,  2.  3  how  excellent  l'oeuer,aie  no- 
thing word)  without  charitie.  4  Thepraifes 
thero;,and  13  prelation  before  hope  &  faith. 

^ough^fpeaBcrbitljthc 
tongues  of  men  $  of  %n* 
gcls,anb  haue  not  charity, 
3  am  become  as  founbmg 
_  bzafreozatuiHlingcymbal 
1  ^nb  though  3  hauc  the  gift  of 
pzopljcficanb  biuicrOatib  ailmyftcncs 
anb  all  tmoiblcbge:  anb  though  3 
Ijauc  all  faith,  fo  tljat  3  coulb  rcmoouc 
mountames,  anb  Ijauc  no  charme,  3 
am  nothing. 

3  2nb  though  3  bcftotPc  all  my 
goobs  to  feebe  the  poozcanb  though  3 
giucmy  boby  to  bee  burncb ,  anb  Ijauc 
not  chariticitpzofttcth  me  nothing. 

4-  Charttic  fuffcreth  long ,  anb  is 
iiinoc:  charitie  cnuictlj  not:chartttc 
||  baimteth  not  it  fclfcie  not  puff  cb  bp, 
<>  SDocth  notbehaucit  fclfcbnfccm 
ly,  fceKCtljnotherolbnr,  15  not  cafily 
pzouoRcb.thinRcthno  cuill, 

6  Bcioyccth  not  in  iniquiticbutrc* 
loycctljllmthctrticth: 

7  Bearcthallthmgs,bclecucthail 
things,ljopcth  all  things ,  enbureth  all 
tljmgs. 

3K  8  £ha 


\<prj)not 


TTHttk. 


Of  prophecying,    I.Corinthians.    Arrange  tongues 


\Or,rtdfo- 


\Gt.  in  a 
rMU. 


\r,r.hr*rrth 


8  CDarittc  ncucr  failcth  t  but  idik- 
thct  there  be  p:opl)cuts,they  (ball  fatle; 
rbbetber  there  bec  tongues,  they  (bail 
ccafe,  Whether  there  bcclmolblcbge,  it 
tbaiiuamfbaibap. 

9  5FonbcUnoibinpart,anD»)cp?o^ 
pbcGcinpart. 

io  26ttt  when  that  Which  is  perfect  t« 
comctrjen  tbanbbicb  isinpatt,  (balbc 
ooucaifoap. 

1 1  nahen  3 ibasa  tftflDe,3l  fpaue as 
a  cbtlbc,  3J  imbcrftoob  as  a  ebilbc  ,5 
||  thought  as  a  ebilbc :  but  When  gi  be; 
came  a  man  ,  3  put  albap  cbtlbtlb 
things. 

ii  5Fo:nott)U)efcefb:ougbaglau"c, 
t  aarfcclp :  but  then  fate  to  fate :  nott>  3 
Bttott)  tn  pact,  but  then  (ball  3  Bnotb  c- 
uenasaifogjamltnotben. 

13  3lnb  noil) abtbetb  fa(tb,bope,cba; 
rmctbcfc  tb2cc,butfbe  greatcft  of  thefc 
iscbactnc. 

CHAP.    XIIII. 

i  Prophecie is  commended,  2.  J.  4  and  pre- 
ferred betoiefpeaking  with  tongues,  6  by  a 
comparifon  drawen  from  muiicall  inftru« 
merits.  12.  Both  mull  bee  referred  to  edifi- 
cation, ii  as  to  their  true  and  proper  end. 
%6  The  true  vie  or  each  is  taught,  17  and 
theabuie  taxed.  34  Women  are  forbidden 
to/peake  in  the  Church. 

<%  £>llotb  after  ebarltle,  anb 
..$jpj  before  fpirttuaHgiftcs,  but 
sJJE  rather  that  pre  map  p:o- 
t-Jtf  PDeRe. 

■>fc  i  5fo:betbatfpeaBetb 
man  vnknowen  tongucfpeaftcibnot  ton* 
to  men.but  tonto  <5ob :  fo:  no  man  tbtv 
bcrttanoctb  Dun :  bolbbcitintbc  fpirit 
bcfpcaucthmyltcrics. 

3  2Sutbctbatp2opbcfictb,fpcaBctb 
unto  men  to  cbtneatton,  anberbo:tati' 
on,ant)comfo:t. 

4-  l)ctbat  fpeaftctl)  in  an  vnknowen 
tongue,  cbificth  bimfclfc :  but  Dec  that 
p2ophcfietb,cbifictb  the  Church. 

5  31  Uiouid  that  rcc  an  fpaitc  uiittj 
tongtics,butratbcrtbatpcp2opbcficb: 
fo:gccatcns  bee  that  p2opbcfictb,tbcn 
hec  that  fpcahctb  ltoitb  tongucs,crccpt 
Dec  tutccpjctctnat  the  Church  map  re 
cciuc  cbifping. 

6  /5oUi  bictfnen ,  if  3  come  tmto 
von  fpeaumg  With  tongucs.itobat  (ball 
^pjoftt  pott ,  crcept  31  (bail  fpcaftc  to 
von  cither  by  rcuciatton,  02  bp  tmoifr 
lcDgc,02bpp2opncfpmg,02bvboctrtnc< 


7  3nb  cuen  things  Without  lifegt- 
uing  founb,  Whether  pipe  0:  barpe,  cr* 
cept  thep  guic  a  biftinction  in  the 

foutiDs,  fjott)  (ball  it  be  anowen  what 
ispiprDoJharpcn^ 

s  5fo:  tf  the  trumpet giuc  an tonccr* 
tame  founb,  wb  0  (bail  pjepar  e  Ijimfelfe 
totbcbattclU 

9  S>o  ItUeWifc  pott ,  crcept  pt  titter 
bp  the  tongue  wo:bs  t  cafie  to  be  tonber* 
ftoob,  bow  (bail  tt  be  bnowen  Whatis 
fpoRcwfo:pe  (bailfpeauc  into  theatre. 

10  Xhere  are,it  map  ber.fo  manp 
Btnbcs  of  tooiccsm  the  Wo:lb ,  anb  none 
of  them  are  ibithout  (ignificatton. 

n  Xhctcfo:e  if  3  know  not  the 
meaning  of  the  toopce,  31  (ball  bee  tonto 
him  that  fpea&etb,a2Sacbarian,anb  he 
that  fpcafteth  fl)au  be  a  barbarian  ton* 
tomce, 

it  Cuen  fo  pe ,  fo:afmueb  as  pee  are 
sealonstoffpirttuaUgifts^eeKctrjatpee 
map  trcell  to  the  ebifping  of  tbeCburtb. 

13  n9berefo:e  let  him  that  fpca&ctt) 
in  an  vnknowen  tongue,p:ap  that  he  map 
intcrpjete. 

14.    $0}  if  3  pzap  in  an  vnknowen 

tongue ,  mp  fpitit  pzapeth,  hutrnptn- 
becftanbing  is  tmfruitrull. 

15  i©hatiSitthen?3W)fllp?apiiilth 
the  fpirit,  anb  ttiil  p;ap  ibtth  bnberllatu 
bingalfo :  3  Vbill  Ong  Vbiti)  the  fpirit, 
anb  3  tbfli  ting  tbith  the  bnberftani 
bingalfo. 

i6  eife,tbhcn  thou  (halt  blefferbtth 
tbcfpirit,  hoinfhalihec  thatoempieth 
thcroomeof  the  bnlcarneb,fap  ^men 
atthp  guiing  of  thanftes ,  feeing  he  ton- 
berftanbeth  not  ibhat  thou  fapeft  < 

17  foi  thou  toettlp  gtuefl  thanftes 
lt)ell:butthcothcrisnotcblficb. 

is  3Jthanucmp(50D,35fpcaKettrith 
tongucsmojc  then  pou  all. 

19  Pet  m  the  Church  3  hab  rather 
fpeahcfiuc  ibozbs  iPtth  mpPnberflan 
bing ,  that  by  my  voyce  3  might  teach  o 
thcrs  alfo ,  then  ten  tboufaub  llio?bs  m 
an  vnknowen  tongue. 

20  2B;ctljjcn ,  bee  not  chrtbKtt  in  \m> 
bcrflanbing :  holP  be  it ,  in  malice  be  pee 
chtlbicn,but  in  tjnbcrOanbtng  be  t  men. 

z\  3Jnthc1Laib  it  ts'umttct^nDith 
men  oi  other  tongues,  anbothcr  lippcs 
\M\  3  fpeahe  Pnto  this  people :  anb  pet 
fo:  ail  that  ibillthcp  not  hcarcmc,faith' 
tljcHojb. 

ii  !i9hcrfo2etongucsarcfo:atigne, 
not  to  them  that  bclecuc ,  but  to  them 
tbatbclceuc  not  1 2Sutp:opljcrpingrer- 

ueih 


[Or^unei. 


\Gr.fimfi- 
cant. 


t  £'.«/#•■ 


\grftrftR 

or  t>{  *  rip? 

■>&'■ 

I  la  :8  11. 


and  interpretation.     Chap.xv.  Chriftis  rifen. 


\Gr. tumult  ■ 
rrxmamti- 


"Gen.y  1 6. 


uethnot  fc>2  them  that  bclccttenot,  but 
foitljctuttitjtct)  bclctuc. 

13  3Jf  therefore  the  \\)l)a\t  Church 
be  come  together  uito  foinc  place,  anb 
all  fpeaitc  With  tongues,  s  there  come 
mthofc  tHat  arcPnlcarncb,02Pnbelcc; 
tiers,  VPill  tljtrp  not  fay  that  ye  arc  mab; 

14  2Sut  if  all  p2opbcftc,  anb  there 
come  in  one  that  bclccitetb  not,  02  one 
tonlearnctKhctscottumcebof  all,  be  is 
iubgebofau. 

15  3tnb  thus  arc  the  fecrcts  of  bis 
fjcart  tnabe  mamfeft ,  anb  fo  falling 
boVbne  on  his  face ,  hec  ibtll  rboiflnp 
00b,  anb  report  that  00b  is  in  you  of  a 
tructb. 

z6  i)ott)  is  it  then  b2ctb2cn  i  Vblicn  ye 
come  together,  cucry  one  of you hath  a 
#faime,bath  aboctnnchath  a  tongue, 
Hath  a  rcuclatio,  hath  an  uuerpzetatio : 
Hct  all  things  be  b  one  unto  cbifying. 

17  3if  any  man  fpcaue  in  an  vnknowen 
tongue,  let  it  be  bytlbo,  ozatthcmoll 
by  three,  anb  tljat  by  courfc ,  anb  let  one 
intcrpzetc. 

18  28ut  if  there  be  no  interpreter,  let 
him  heepe  filcncc  in  the  Church ,  anu  let 
Ijim  fpeaitc  to  htmfclfcanb  to  00b. 

19  fLet  the  prophets  fpcaue  tino  0? 
th:ce,anb  let  the  other  lubgc. 

jo  3lf any thm^bemieilcbto another 
tbatftttctbbylcftbcfirftbolbbispcacc. 

j  1  JF02  yce  may  all  prophetic  one  by 
one.thatailmay  learnc,  anb  allmay  be 
tomfoztcb. 

31  2ltib  the  fpirits  of  the  02ophets 
arefubiectto  the  prophets. 

33    5f02 00b  iSnOt  the  authour  of  '  COtt- 

fufion,  but  of  peace,  as  mall  Churches 
of  the  Saints. 

34  fLetyourroomcnticepc  filence  in 
the  Churcfjcs ,  for  it  is  not  pcrmittcb 

PUtO  thCm  tO  fptabC  bllt  they  are  com- 
manded tO  beetonber  obcDictuc:  asaifo 
faith  the*  ILaib. 

35  3mbifthcyttiilllcarne  any  thing, 
let  them  afKe  their  bufbaiiDs  at  home : 
foritisafbamcfonbomcu  to  fpcaUcm 

the  Church- 

36  nahat  <  came  the  11102b  of  00b  out 
from yom  02 camcit  Ditto  yon  oncly i 

37  gjfatty  man  thutltcbtmrclfcto  be 
a$ropbct,orfptrttnaUct  him  aclmonv 
lebge,  that  the  things  that  31  write  ttK 
to  you,  arc  the  commanbemcuts  of  the 
JL02b. 

38  2Sutifany  man  bee  igno2ant,  let 
l)im  be  ignorant. 

39  BSbctcforc  breth2cn ,  couct  to  pro- 


phetic ,  anb  forbib  not  to  fpeaitc  With 
tongues. 

40  3Lctauthingsbebonebccently, 
attbmojbcr. 

CHAP.    XV. 

3  ByCluiftesrefurre<fh'on,  il.  heproueththe 
neceffitie  of  our  refurrection ,  againft  all  fuch 
asdeny  the  refurrection  of  the  body,  n  The 
fruit,  35  and  maner thereof,  51  Andof 
the  changing  or  them  ,  that  (hall  bee  found 
aline  at  the  laftdav. 

<aD2couerb2Ctl)2en,  "Jbc- 
tiarcbutoyou  tbc0ofpel 
Which  3  p2cacheb  unto 
you,  Which  aifo  you  hauc 
rccctucb,anb  inherent  yce 
ttanb. 
1  25y  Which  aifo  yce  arc  faueb ,  tf 
yce  ||bccpcutmemo2ic  tipbatgiprca- 
cheb  unto  you ,  tmleflc  yce  hauc  bclec- 
ucbmPamc. 

3  if  or  3J  belntcretj  bnto  you  firft  of 
all ,  that  which  3J  aifo  rccciucb ,  bow 
that  Ch2iftbiebfo2  our  finncsacco2buig 
to  the  Scriptures: 

4  3nbtbatbc WasbuncD,ant)tbat 
he  rofeagatne  the  thirb  bay  acco2tmig 
to  the  Scriptures. 

5  anbtbatbcWasfccneofCcphas, 
tl)cnofthctiPcluc. 

5  3lnbtbatbccWasfecneofaboue 
fine  buitb2CDbretb2Cti  at  once:  of  Whom 
the  gecater  partremainc  tonto  this  pre* 
fcnt,but  fomc  arc  fallen  aflccpe. 

7  3ftcr tbat,bcwas  feen ofjames, 
tbcnofalltbc^pofrics. 

s  31tro  laft  of  all  he  mas  fcenc  of  me 
aifo  .asoftonc  borne  out  of  buc  time. 

9  iFor'JatutbclcaltoftbcSpoftlcs, 
that  am  not  meet  to  be  caiieb  an3tpoftle 
becaufc  gj  petfecutcb  p  Church  of  00b. 

I  o  23ut  by  the  grace  of  00b  3  am 
What  3  am :  ano  his  grace  which  mas 
bellowed  pp6mc,ttiasiiotin  Paint:  2Sut 
3J  iabourebmo2e  abunbantly  then  they 
all,  yet  not  3J,  but  the  grate  of  00b 
VbbtchttJasUHtbmc: 

I I  Xherefo2c, lbhethcr  it  lucre  3J  02 
they ,fo  Vbc  p2cach ,  anb  fo  ye  belceucb. 

11  /l?on)ifCh2iftbcp2eachebthathc 
tofe  from  the  bcab ,  hoib  fay  fomc  a- 
mongyou,thattljcre  is  no  refurrection 
ofthebeab? 

13  28utifthcrcbe  no  refurrection  of 
tijcDeab.thcntsClmftitotrifen. 

1 4  3lnb  if  Cl)2i(t  be  not  rifen,  then  (s 
our  p2catbmgtoaiuc ,  anb  your  faitl)  is 
aifo  baine : 

B  z  i<  Pea, 


[|  Or  l,iU 

/in. 

\Gr.l/ywhdt 
fpeccb. 


Or  ,  4* 


1_L 


The  refurrettion     I.Corinthians. 


||  Some 

rcailc.owr. 


\Y>r,tofpe*^ 
•fter  the 
mtner  cf 
men. 


i  <>  Pea,  anb  ibe  arc  founb  falfc  Vott< 
ncfrcsofetob,bccaufcUJcbauetcm&cb 
of<15oD,tbatljcraircbbpCb?ilt:ttmom 
Ijcctaifcb  notbp,iffobectl)attbe  beab 
rife  not. 

1 6  f  o?  if  tljc  bcab  rife  not,  tljcn  is  not 
Cb?i(traifeb. 

17  anbifCb?iftbcnotraifeb,your 
fait!)  is  baincyc  arc  vet  in  your  Bnnes. 

18  Xljen  tbey  alfo  Vubitlj  arc  fallen 
aOcepe  in  Cb?ift  ,arc  pcrifbeb. 

1 9  gjf  in  tljls  life  only  ibe  Ijauebopc 
in  Cb?ift ,  lbee  arc  of  all  men  moft  mife? 
table. 

20  ffiutnoib  is  Cb?ittrifcn  from  tljc 
beao,  and  become  tljc  firfl  fruits  of  tbcm 
tbatflcpt. 

I  1  f  0?  fintc  by  man  came  Deaf!) ,  by 
man  came  alfo  tbc  rcfurrcttion  of  the 
bcab. 

II  ifo?  as  in  abam  all  bie,cucn  fo  in 
Clj?tft  fbail  an  be  mace  aliuc. 

13  26ut  cucry  man  in  bis  olbnc  o?- 
ber.  Cb?ifttlje  firtl  fruits,  afterttmrb 
tbey  tljat  arc  Clj?tfts,at  Ijis  conmung. 

14  Xbcn  commetii  tljc  enb,lbljcn  Ije 
fliaii  bauc  bcliuercb  tip  far  Klngbomc 
to  (Sob  cucn  tbc  jFatbet ,  lbljcn  be  (bail 
banc  put  bourne  all  rule,  anb  an  ant  li  0 
tityanbpoibcr. 

15  5fo?ljc  mult  r  eigne,  tillljecbatb 
put  all  enemies  bnber  Ijisfeetc. 

16  Xlje  lafl  encmic  that  (bail  bebe^ 
flroyeb,'sbcatl> 

17  5Fo?rjcbatI)putailtblnosbnbet 
bis  feetc;  butlbbcnbcefaitb  all  trnngs 
atcput  bnbet  bim,  it  ismanifcfttbat 
be  is  crecptco  ibbtcbbibputall  tbings 
bnber  him. 

18  anb  lbljen  all  tftings  (ball  bee 
fUbbucD  bnto  binutben  fliai  tbc  &onne 
alfo  Ijlmfclfc  bee  fubicrt  bnto  fjmt  tbat 
putalltblngs  bnber  bim,  tljat  d5ob 
may  be  all  in  all. 

29  €lfc  Vbbat Q)al  tbey bo, ibljitb arc 
baptwb  fo?  tbc  bcab,(f  tljc  bcao  rife  not 
at  all ,  lbljy  arc  tljcy  tben  bapti3Cb  fo? 
tbc  bcab* 

jo  anbibljyttaiunbcinicoparby  v 
ucrybourc* 

3  1 31  pjotcft  byllyout  rcloytingn>ljicb 
U  bauc  in  Clj?ift  Jefus  our  Ho?b ,  3 
oicbayly. 

31 3Jf|laftcrtbcmancrofmcn3I  bauc 
fougbt  until  bcafts  at  €pljefus .  lbijat 
ibuantagetb  it  mc ,  if  tljc  bcab  rife  not* 
1  let  bs  catc  anb  bniibc ,  fo?  to  mojroibc 

ttJCCblC. 

33  23cc  not  beccitub :  cuill  comma* 


isprooued. 


nications  corrupt  gooo  manners. 

34  anjabctorigbteoumcae,  anb 
Gnnenot:  fo?fomcbaue  nottbctmoU> 
leogc  of  d5oo,  31  fpeabe  tbis  to  your 
ujame. 

35  2Sutfomemanibillfay,ls?oib  arc 
tbc  bcab  rayfeb  bp  i  anb  lbttb  ibljat  bo- 
by  boetbey  come* 

36  Xljou  foolc ,  tbat  ibbicf)  tbou 
folbcft,isnot(ituefecncbcrttpt  itbic. 

37  anb  tljat  ibljitb  tbou  fovbeft, 
tljoufonjcttnot  tljat  boby  tljat  (bail  be 
but  bare  grainc ,  it  may  cbancc  of 
lbljcatco?  of  fomc  otljer  graine. 

38  26ut  ©00  giuctlj  it  a  boby  as  it 
Ijatlj  plcafcb  Ijim ,  anb  to  cucry  feeb  Ijls 
oibne  boby. 

39  ail  flea)  is  not  tljc  fame  flcfl) ,  but 
tberc  is  one  kind  of  flea)  of  men,  anotber 
fleuj  of  beads,  anotljcr  offU1jes,anb  a* 
notljcrofbirbs. 

40  Xberc  arc  alfo  cclcfhaii  bobics, 
anbbobicstcrrcQnall:  2Suttbc  glo?ie 
of  tbc  tcieftlaliisonc,  anb  tbc  glo?ic  of 
tljc  tcrrcflriall  is  anotljer. 

41  3Cbcrci6oncglo?yofnjcnnme, 
anotber  of  tbe  moone ,  anb  anotber 
glo?tc  of  tfjc  Carres :  fo?  one  ftarrc  biff es 
rctljfcomanothc.  darrein  glo?ie. 

41  £>o  alfo  is  tljc  rcfurrcttion  of  tljc 
beab,it  is  folbcn  in  co?ruption, it  is  rat 
fcOlnlneozriiption. 

43  3It  is  foibcn  in  blfbonout,  it  is 
rayfeb m glo?ic :  it  is  foibenmlbcaite* 
neffe,  it  is  rayftb  in  poiber : 

44  3(tisfoibcn  anaturail  boby,  it 
israifcb  a  fpintuall  boblc.  ICbcreisa 
natural!  bobie ,  anb  tljerc  is  a  fptr ituall 
borne. 

45  ^nb  fo  it  is  tb?ittcn :  HTDc  ftrfr 
man  aoam  vbas  mabc  a  lining  foulc, 
tbc  latt  abam  lbas  mabc  a  ciuicbcnmg 
fpirit 

46  ^ottibcittbatlbasnotfirCujljictj 
isfptrmtaii:  but  tbat  which  is  naturail, 
anb  aftcribarb  tbat  which  is  fpirituali. 

47  %\)t  am  man  is  of  tbc  cartb, 
cartljy :  1Cljc  feconb  man  >s  tbc  |Lo?b 
fcomljcaucn. 

48  as  is  tbc  cartljy,  fiitb  arc  tbey 
tbat  are  cartby,  anbasistbcbcaucn; 
ly ,  futb  are  tbey  alio  tljat  arc  Ijcaticnly. 

49  anb  as  ibe  banc  bo?nc  tbc  image 
oftbeeartby,  ibec  tbail  alfo  bcarc  tljc 
tmagcoftbcbcaucnly. 

50  i!5ott)tljis  31  fay, b?ctlj?cu,  tbat 
flcfl)  $  bioob  tannot  mbmtctbc  lung 
borne  of  Gob:  ucitbcrbotl)to?ruptiou 
inbcrucinco?rupnon. 

51  26C' 


Ourviftory.  Chap.xvj.  Stand  in  faith. 


Ofe.1j.J4 


\Cr.,J,. 


51  Bebolb ,  3  (herb  potia  mpfrerte : 
tdc  (ball  not  all  flcepe,  but  ibce  11) all  all 
be  cbangeb, 

52  3Jnamomcnt,  intbctlbmeKIing 
ofanepe,  at  the  laft  ttutnpc,  (for  the 
trumpet  (ball  founb,anbtbcbcab  (bail 
be  ratfeb  incorruptible,  anb  lbe  (ball  be 
cbangeb.) 

53  5For  tbiS  corruptible  muft  put  on 
incorruption,  ano  this  mortali  muft 
putonimtuortauttc. 

54  So  ibbctt  this  corruptible  (ball 
bane  put  on  interruption,  $  tins  mo: 
tall  (ball  bauc  put  on :  i  nn  10:  taut  p ,  then 
fyailbebrougbttopaffctbcfapingtbat 
is  l&rittcn  ,*3>eatb  ts  fibaiiolbcb  Dp  in 
bictorlc. 

55  €>  bcatb.ibberc  is tbp  (ting <  £> 
||  grauc,  lDbcrc  is  tl)p  btctorle< 

56  Xljc  ftmgof  Death  is  [tunc,  anb 
tbeftccngtbof  fume  is  the  laU). 

57  25ut  tbanKcs  bee  to  ©ob ,  lbbt'cb 
gtttetb  bs  tbc  bictoric ,  through  our 
SLorbUcfus  Cbrift. 

5S  Xberefore  nip  beloucb  brethren, 
be  pec  ftebfaft,  bnmoueablcaiiDapcs  & 
bouuoing  m  the  lborttc  of  tlje  ILorb, 
foraruiucb  as  pott  Knoll)  that  pour  la- 
bonr  isnot  in  baine  in  the  llorb. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

i  Hee  exhortcdi  them  to  rclicue  the  want  of 
the  brethren  at  laufaltnn.  10  Commeli- 
deth  Timothy,  1 3  And  after  friendly  ad- 
monitions,  \6  Shuttethvp  his Epiltle with 
diuers  .falut.itions. 

£l>U»  toncerning  the  tollec- 
tion  fortbeSatnts ,  as  3 
banc  giuen  orbcr  to  the 
Cburcbes  of  <5alatia,cucn 
foboepe. 
x  "Upon  tbe  fir  ft  dav  of  tbc  Vbccfee, 
letcucrp  one  ofpou  lap  bp  bint  mftore, 
as^od  natb  profpereb  him,  that  there 
be  no  gatherings  ibben  3  cotnt. 

3  Suibfoben^Jcome,  lbbomfoeuet 
pou  (bail  approuc  bp  your  utters,  tben  i 
ttiil  3  fenb  to  b.ting  pour  t  iibcrautp  tin- 
to  jcrufalcm. 

4  3nbif  it  bcmccttbatjgoeaifo, 
tbep(bailgoeib!tbnirk 

5  /Eiotb  3  lbil  conic  bnto  pottAbljcn 
3  (ball  parte  through  SJ3accbonta :  for 
3  boc  parte  through  t©acebonia. 

6  3nbitmapbcctbat3luiiliabioe, 
pea,anb  mutter  Vbitb  pou,toat  peemap 
briugmeonmptournp,ibbitbet'foeucc 
jgoc. 

7  5For  3  ibill  not  fee  pou  noil)  bp 


the  map,  but  3  trutt  to  tarrp  a  ibbilc 
ttHtb  pou,tf  tbc  Horb  permit. 

8  2Sut3tt»iitarrpatepbtfustm* 
till^cntecoft. 

9  iForagccatboorcanbeffcctuailis 
openebbnto  mcc,  anb  there  arctnanp 
abuerfarics. 

io  /i5oib  if  Xiinotbcus  tome ,  fee 
tbatbeuiapbcrbitbpouibitboittfcarc: 
for  bee  iborfcctb  the  iboruc  of  the  ?Lorb , 
as^Jaifoboe. 

1 1  &et  no  man  therefore befptfe  bun: 
but  ronbuctbmt  forth  in  pcace,tbat  bee 
map  come  bnto  mc:  for  3  looKc  for  Ijim 
lbitbtbcbrctbrcn. 

\x  3str<ebmgourbrotbcr3lpollos, 
3  grcatlpbkficcbbtm  to  comebnto  pon 
ibitbp  brethren,  but  btsibilibas  not  at 
all  to  tome  at  this  tune:but  be  ibil  come 
ibbcn  bee  (ball  bauc  cottucnient  tune. 

13  naatcb  pec,  Oanb  fad  in  tljc  faith, 
guitpou  line  men :  bcttrong. 

14  !Lct  all  pour  things  be  bone  ttiifb 
cbarttie. 

15  3  befcccbpou,bretbrcn,(peKnotb 
tbc  boufc  of  Stephanas,  that  it  is  the 
firftfruits  of  3cbaia,anb  tbatthcpljauc 
aooictebthcmfclucsto  the  mtmltcrp  of 
tljc  Saints,) 

i6  3Ebatpc  fubmitpourfclucs  bnto 

fatb,anDtocucrpone4batbclpctbibitb 

bs  anb  labour cth. 

17  3  am  giab  of  the  comming  of 
Stephanas,  anb  jfortuuatus,  anb  3t= 
cljaicus:  for  that  u>bicb  mas  lacKtug  on 
ponr  patt.tbcp  bauc  fupplicb. 

18  iror tbep haue refectbeb  mp fpirit 
anb  pours:  therefore  acKnoiblcbgcpcc 
them  that  ace  fuel). 

19  1Cbe  Churches  of  2ifiafalute  pou 
3quila  anb  prtfcilia  falutc  pou  much  m 
tbc  JLorb ,  tbitb  the  Church  that  is  in 
their  honfe. 

20  311  the tirctt)2tn greet  pou:  greet 
pc  one  another  ibith  an  bolp  Kiffe. 

21  Xhcfalutationof  mc  £aul,tt>ifb 
nuncoibncbanb. 

xx  gif  anv  man  loue  not  the  2,orb 
TJefus  Cbrift,  let  htm  bee  anathema 
flSarnnntba. 

23  Xhc  grace  of  our  ?Corb  3fefus 
ChriftbciiJitbpou. 

24  £0P  loue  beiDith  pou  all  in  Cbrift 
3Jcfus,3lmen. 

CXhc  firltCpiaictothcCorinthianfi 
tbas  IDntten  from^hilippi  bpSte- 
pbanas,anb.iFortiinatn8,aiib3lcbai5 
rus,anb30motheus. 

R  1  the 


The  profit 


I  I.Corinthians.        ofaffli&ions. 


||  Or, i, 

wrott}>-\ 


,THE  SECOND  EPISTLE 

of  Paul  the  Apoftle  to  the 

Corinthians. 


CHAP.    I. 

;  The  Apoftle  incourageth  them  againft  trou- 
bles, by  the  comforts  and  deliuerances  which 
God  had  gwenhim,  as  in  all  his  afflictions, 
8  (o  pai  ticularly  in  his  late  danger  in  Ada. 
it  And  calling  both  his  owne  confcience, 
and  theiis  to  witnefle,  of  his  fincere  maner 
oi  preaching;  the  immutable  truech  of  the 
Gofpcl,  15  Hee  excufeth  his  not  comming 
to  them  ,  as  proceeding  not  of  lightnefle,  but 
of  his  lenitie  towards  them. 

2ul  an  apoftle  I 
of  3Jefus  Cb2ift 
bp  the  ttnll  of  i 

GoD,anD3~tmo= 
thte  our  bzotbcr, 
bnto  the  Church 

Of  d50D,  «Jl)tCl)  IS 

atConnth.ibith 
all  the  faints, 

tbhicbareinauacbaia: 
2   d5racebeetopouanDpeacc,from 

(Son  our  5Fatber,anb  from  t^efLojogje- 

fusCfmO. 

5  ffiieflcb  uc  C50D ,  turn  the  5f  ather 
of  our  IL020  3Jefus€b2itt,  the  5Fatbcr 
of  mercies,  anb  the  god  of  all  comfort, 

4.  n3ljo  comfbztcth  bs  In  all  our  trfc 
buiation,  that  ibe  map  be  able  to  torn- 
fozt  them  lbbitb  ate  In  anp  trouble,  bp 
tbccomfozt ,  wbcrerbithtbc  our  femes 
arccomfonebofdsiob. 

<,  iroz  as  the  fuffcnngs  of Cfytfta* 
bounoinbs,  fo  our  confoiatlonalfoa; 
boutibctbbp€h2ift. 

6  3lnb  ibbctbcr  ttic  be  afflictcb,  it  is 
foz  pour  tonfolation  anb  faluation, 
lUhitlns  ||  cffcttuail  in  fhcentmringof 
the  fame  fuffcnngs ,  Which  ibce  alfo 
fuffcr :  02  lbhctbcr  tbc  be  comfcutcb,  >r  .s 
foz  pour  toufolation,anb  faluation. 

7  3inD  our  Dope  of  pou  is  ftcbfaft, 
Knotting,  that  aspon  arc  partakers  of 
the  fuffcnngs ,  fo  ftiaiiyeebe  alfo  of  the 
coufolatiou. 


8  JFo:tbciboulbnot,b2ert)2en,hauc 
pou  ignorant  of  our  trouble  tbbtrh 
taincto  bsmafia.thatlbcibcrcpzcflcb 
out  of  mcafurcaboue  ftrcngtb ,  in  fo 
much  that  ibe  bifpatrcb  eucn  of  life. 

9  2Sutibcbabtbe||fcntenteofDcath 
m  our  fcitics,  that  ibe  thoulbnottruft 
mourfelucs,  but  in  €»ob  which  ratfetb 
tbebeab. 

10  nabo  bcliucrcb  bs  from  fo  great  a 
bcathanb  bocth  bcliucr:  tnlbbomrbc 
trnft  that  he  \bill  ret  bcluier  vs : 

11  jaou  alfo  helping  together  bp 
p2aperfoi  bs,  tbatfoj  the  gift  beftowed 
bpon  bs  by  the  mcanes  of  man?  per* 
fons,  thanbes  map  beegtnenbpmanp 
onoutbcbaife. 

ix  if  02  our  rciopring  is  this ,  the  te* 
ftimonp  of  our  confetenectbat  in  ftmpli 
title  anbgooip  ftnecr  ttic ,  not  tbitSi  flefb' 
lpibtfcbome,but  bp  tftc  grace  of  <Sob, 
tbee  hauc  Dan  our  conuctfation  in  the 
tbozlb,  anb  11102c  abounbantlp  topou- 
roarbs. 

ij  5f02  Vot  ib2ite  none  other  things 
bnto  pou ,  then  ibbat  pou  reabe  02  ae= 
bnoiblcbgc ,  anb  3J  tnift  pou  (ball  at* 
bnoiblcugc  eucn  to  the  enb. 

14  3(s  alfo  pou  haue  atbnoiblcbgcb 
bs  in  part ,  that  rbc  arc  pour  rciopring, 
eucn  as  vt  alfo  are  ours ,  in  the  bap  of 
tl)c?Lo2D'3Jcfus. 

1$  3tnb  in  this  confibcncc  3  ibas 
mmbcb  to  tome  bnto  pou  bcfo2C ,  that 
pou  might  hauc  a  fecottb  1 1  benefit: 

is  3lnb  to  paffc  bp  pou  into  fi^accDo^ 
nia,  anb  to  come  agamc  out  of  ^accbo- 
nia  bnto  pou ,  anb  of  pou  to  bee  btougbt 
onmpUiaptoibarD  ijubca. 

17  tohcnll  thcrtfo2c  ibas  thus  min- 
bcD,  bib  31  bit  lightnefle  i  02  the  things 
that  3J  purpofc,  boc  3J  purpofc  accoz- 
Oirigtotbcflcfl) ,  that  uuthmec  there 
fl)OiiiDbcpcapea,anbnapnap; 

18  26uta^<5obistntc,our||ibo2bto< 
ibarbpou.ibasnotpcaanbnap. 

19  JF02 


/were. 


\\0r, grace. 


r,fre4. 


Notyeaand 


nay. 


Ch; 


p.ii.nj, 


Afwectfc 


weetiauour. 


\\Or,et*fn 


19  5fo?  tljc  Sonne  of  ©ob  3Jtf«s: 
CDtfft,  tt'Do  lbaspzcacf)cD  among  you 
by  Ms ,  euen  op  ntc ,  anb  Spiuanus  anb  j 
1LimotDcus,ibas  not  Pea,  anb  /13ap,l 
but  m  Dun,  mas  pea. 

io  Jf02  all  tDe  pzomifes  of  €>ob  in 
Dim  ate  J^ca,  anb  in  Dim  amen ,  Unto 
tDeglon>of<i5obbpbs. 

ii  /Sow  DccibDitl)  ftablifDefD  bs 
VbitD  pou,  in  CDntt,  anb  IjatD  anopntcb 

bS,'s(!50b, 

n  ©Do  DatD  alfo  fcaicb bs ,  anb  gfc  i 
uen  tDc  carnclt  of  tDe  Spirit  m  our 
Dcarts.  » 

i?  fl^oicoucr ,31  call  C5ot»  foi  a  r ceo?D 
bpo  mpfouictDat  to  fparc  pou3J  tame 
notaspctbntoCotouD. 

14.  )Bot  fonDat  tbc  Dane  bominton 
oucr  pout  faitD , but  arc  Dclpcts  of  pour 
top :  fo;  bp  fattlj  pe  ftanb. 

CHAP.    II. 

Hailing  (Viewed  thereafon  why  he  camenot 
to  them,  6  Hee  requireth  them  to  (orgiue 
and  to  comfort  that  excommunicated  per- 
fon,  10  Euen  ashimfelfe  alfo  vponhisttue 
repentance  had  forgiuen  him,  11  declaring 
withal!  whv  hee  departed  from  Troas  to  Ma- 
cedonia, 14  and  the  happy  fuccefle  which 
God  gaue  to  his  preaching  in  all  places. 

33t  3  betcrmtneb  tDis 
untD  mp  fclfc ,  tljat  3 
lboulbnot  comeagatneto 
pouinDcautoefTe. 
„^s^3t  ^  foi  if  3  mase  pon 
fone,  tbDo  is  Dee  tljen  trjat  mafeetD  mec 
giab,but  tDe  fame  lbDicD  tsmabe  fone 
bpme. 

j  ana  ^Jifyotc  tins  fame  bnto  pou, 
leaflVbDcn  3  tame,  3  fDoulbDauefo^ 
roibfromtDcmof  lbDomcllougDt  to 
retopec,  Daumg  tonfibence  tnpouail, 
tljatmpiopisthe  ioy  ofpouaii. 

4  jfoj  out  ofmntD  affliction  anb  an< 
guifD  of  Dcart,  3  tbitotc  bnto  pou  rbitD 
manptcatcs,  not  tl)at  pou  (DoulD  bee 
gricucb,  but  tDat  pee  mtgDt  tmoibc  tDc 
louc  tbDtcD  3  Daue  tno:c  abunoantip 
bnto  pou. 

5  25utifanpDauecauCeogtiefc,Dcc 
DatD  not  gricucb  mccbut  in  part :  tDat 
3  map  not  oucccDargc  pou  all. 

6  Sufficient  to  fuel)  a  mams  tDiSjIpu* 
nitDmcnt ,  ujljicD  was  ltlfMed  bf  manp. 

7  SotDateonttarpnnfc,pccougDt 
ratljcr  to  ftugtuc  Dtm,anb  comfoit  Dim, 
left  pctljaps,  fuel)  a  one  fljoulb  be  fHjai- 
lolbcbbpibitD  ouccmutD  (bzroU). 


8  i©Dctefo<Jc3JbcfcetDpou,rDatpou 
iboulb  tonfirmc  your  ioue  toibarbs 
Dim. 

9  Sfoi  to  tDis  cnb  alfo  bib  3  voatt, 
tDat  3  migDt  hnotb  tDe  pjoofc  of  pou, 
ujljetDcr  pc  be  obcbtcnt  m  an  tl)mgs. 

io  XotbDompeefojgiue  anptDing, 
3  fc'g'^  aifo:for  tf  3  fojgauc  anp  tDtog, 
torbljojnjlfo^gauc  it,  fo?  pour  Cafecs 

fo?ganc3flit,m||tDcperfonofCDnfl, 

1 1  fLeft Satan  fl)ouib  get  an  abuan- 
tagc  of  bs :  foj  ibee  are  not  ignorant  of 
Ins  bcuiccs. 

u  ifurtDcrmoje  rbDcn  3  came  to 
Xroas,  to  preach  CDnfls  ©ofpcl ,  anb  a 
boojc  ibas  opencb  bnto  nice  of  tDe 
%oft, 

13  3JDabnorcatompfpirit,beeaufe 
3  founb  not  Xitus  mp  bjotljcr,  but  t& 
btog  mp  leaue  of  tDem ,  3  ibent  from 
tDtncemtoflpaceboma.  "" 

14.  if2onj  tDanttes  bee  bnto  (Boo, 
lbDicD  alibapcseaufctDbs  totnumpD 
m  CDnft ,  anb  maitctD  mamfeO  tDc  w 
uour  of  I)i0  Httotblebge  bpbs  m  euerp 
place. 

15  jfo?rbeearebntod5oD,aftbeetfai 
uour  of  €&M,  intDemtDatate  faucb, 
ana  tntDcm  tDat  pcrifl). 

16  %o  tDe  one  wee  are  tDe  fauour  of 
bcatD  bnto  bcatD  i  anb  to  flje  orticr,  tDe 
fanour  of  life  bnto  life:  anb  n>D  0  is  fum 
cicntfoztDcfetDingSf 

17  foi  rbec  are  not  as  manp  lbDicD 
co 2 nipt  tDc  U1D2D  of  Gob  :  but  as  of 

Gnccntte ,  but  as  of  <0ob ,  in  tlje  Ogljt  of 
©ob  fpea&e  ibe  in  Cljntt . 

CHAP.   III. 

1  Left  their  falfe  teachers  fhould  charge  him 
with  vaineglory,hcefheweth  the  faith  and 
graces  of  the  Corinthians,  to  bee  a  fufficient 
commendation  of  his  miniftene.  6  Where- 
upon entring  a  comparifon  betweene  the 
mmiftersof  the  Law&oftheGofpel,  ir  he 
proueth  that  his  miniftei  ic  is  fo  far  the  more 
excellent,  astheGofpel  of  lite  and  libertie  is 
more  glorious  then  the  lawof  condemnation. 

£>c  lbec  begin  againc  to 
commenb  our  fclucs  <  o; 
nccoibec,  as  fome  others, 
cpiftics  of  commenbatt 
on  to  pou,  o?  inters  of  com 
menbanon  from  pou j. 

i  jaearcourCpifllcnmtteninour 
Dcatts.luioibcnanDrcabofailmcn. 

3  Foiafmuch  as  vec  arc  inanifcllip  be 
clarcb  to  be  tDe  Cpiftlc  of  CDnfl  mini 
ttccbbpbs^nttcn  uotibitDmltc,  but 
lbitD 


fight.  - 


\\0r4e*ls 
deceitfully 
mth. 


Letter  and  fpirit.    I  I.Corinthians. Earthen  veifels. 


\\Or quick: 
nob. 


prJeUrta. 


\\Cr,,f,h 
Lard  ll.t 


tbitlj  tlje  fpirtt  of  tljc  liuing  €>ob,not  in 
tables  of  ftonc,  but  mflefljp  tables  of 
tbebeart, 

4.  anbfucbttuftbauciLbeetbJougJb 
Cb?tftto<l5obibarb: 

5  ii5ot tljat VDccarc fufficitntof  our 
felucs  to  fbinfee  an?  rtjing  as  of  out 
Celtics :  but  out  fumciencte  is  of  (£>ob : 

6  D@l)o  alfo  tjatl)  mabc  bs  able  mu 
nifters  of  tljc  /I5cVb  ICeftamcnt ,  not  of 
tbe  letter ,  but  of  tbe  fpirit:  fo?  tljc  letter 
fctlletlj,  but  tDe  fpirit  1 1  giuetb  life. 

7  asuttf tbc  mimftratton  of  bean) 
tontten,  anb  mgrauen  in  (tones,vbas 
glo?ious ,  fo  tbattbctlJilb?ctt  of  3Jfrael 
coulD  not  ftcofaftlpbeboIDe  tijc  fate  of 
£0ofes  ,  fo?  tbe  glo?p  of  bis  counte* 
nante,  tbljicl)  gior.e  juas  to  be  bone  a- 
ibap: 

8  $oib  ftjail  not  tbe  mlmttcation 
oftbcfpirit,bcrafberglo?ious< 

9  if 0;  if tljc  miniftration  of tonDcnt^ 
nation  beeglo?p ,  mueb  mo?ebotlj  tbe 
miniftration  ofrigljtcoufncffe  ejccccbtn 
glo?tc. 

10  ifo?  euen  njat  ttrtjitl)  tbasmane 
glo?ious,bab  no  glo?ictn  this  refpert  bp 
reafon  of  tbc  gione  tljat  crcelletf). 

1 1  ifo?  tf  tljat  lbljitl)  iSDone  atbap, 
tbas  glojtous ,  muclj  mo?c  tljat  ttiljicb 
ccmainetljisglo?ious. 

n  Seeing  tljcn  that  lbec  baucfucb 
bopc,lbebfe  grcatllpiaiimcfTc  of  fpcett). 

1  j  3?nD  not  as  fiJ3ofcs,tbl)icI)  put  a 
banc  ouccljisfacc ,  tljat  tljc  tljilD?enof 
gjfraclcoulbnot  Ocufaftlp  loobctotljc 
enb  of  tljat  Jfoljicl)  &  aboliujco  •. 

14.  But  tljeir  tmnbes  tberc  blinbcb  t 
fo?  tonnu  tljis  Dap  remainetb  tljcfame 
toailc  bntafcen  aibap ,  m  tljc  rcaDing  of 
tljr  olDtcttament  :1bbiclj  bailcisbonc 
attiaplnCljjift. 

15  25ut  euen  bnto  tljis  Day ,  tbljcn 
fi0ofrs  is  rcat) ,  tljebailcis  bpon  tljcit 
Ijeart. 

i6  /I5euertbelefrc,lbljcnit  fbailturnc 
totlje  ?Lo;D,tl)c  toailc  (ball  be  tafecn  a* 
ltoap. 

17  0o\\)  tljc  %  02D 18  tljat  rpirit,anD 
ibljcrctljc  Spirit  of  t!jc1Lo?ti:s,  tljcre 
is  libcrtie. 

is  26uttbcall  ,itoitl)  open  fate  bcljofc 
C  mg  asm  a  glaffe  tljc  glo?p  of  tljc  !Lo?t>, 
etc  cljangcD  into  tljc  fame  image,  from 
£lo?tctoglo?ic)euena8||bp  tljc  fpmt  of 

fl)ClLO?l). 

CHAP.    IIII. 

i   He  declarcthhow  lice luthvfed  all  fyuceritic 


and  faithfull  diligence  iu  preaching  the  Go 
fpel,  7  and  how  the  troubles  and  perfec- 
tions which  he  daylyindured  for  the  fame, 
did  redound  to  the  praile  of  Gods  power, 
n  to  the  benefit  of  ihe  Church,  16  and  to 
the  Apoftles  owne  eternal!  glory. 

~§erefo?e,  feeing  ibe  banc 
ttjlsminiOerp.asibcfjauc 
reteiucb  nicrcie  Ibee  faint 
not  : 
i  BntljauerenountcD 
tljc  IjitiDcn  tljings  of  t  biujoncftp ,  not 
maltnngtn  craftmes,  no?banbungtbc 
ttoo?bof  <J5oDDeccitfuIlp,but  bp  manife- 
ftattonoftbetruetb,  commenbing  oue! 
fclucsto  cuerpmans  tonfeiente,  mtb€ 
figl)tof(5ob. 

j  25  ut  if  our  (£ofpel  be  bib,  it  is  Uib 
to  tfjem  tljat  arc  loft: 

4  Smujijomt&ed&oboftDistbojia 
batbblmbcbtbcminbsoftbemlfobicb 
belccuc  not,left  tljc  ligljt  of  the  glo?ioui: 
©ofpelof  Cfjjift,  rbho  is  tbc  image  of 
<Bob,fljoulDfl)ine  bntotijcm. 

5  5Fo?tbcp?cacbuotourfelucs,but 
CUjiifJefus  tlje!lo?b,anbour  felucs 
pour  feruantsfojIJefus  fabe. 

6  ^0?  d?ob  tbbo  tommaunbeb  tbc 
bgbtto  ftjincoutofDarbcnes,  bartJfti^ 
neb  in  our  Jjcarts,  to  giue  tbe  ligbt  of  trje 
bnoibicbgc  of  njegbwp  of  (Son,  in  tbc 
fateofUefus  Cbnft. 

7  25uttt)cbauctljistreafureinear* 
tben  beu"cis,tbat  tbe  ertcllcnne  of  tbe 
polber  map  be  of  <Sob,anb  not  of  bs. 

8  usee  are  troubleb  on  euerp  fibe, 
pet  not  DiftrcfliD  ibe are  pcrplereb ,  but 
llnotinDcfpaire, 

9  0erfecutcD ,  but  not  fo?faftenj 
taft  boibne,  but  not  beftropeo. 

10  ^iibapcs  bearing  about  in  tbe  bo* 
bp.tljc  oping  of  tbe  iLo^D^efus,  rtjat 
tbc  life  alfo  of  3fcfus  migbt  bee  mane 
maniftfttnourbobp. 

11  fomt  ttib«eb  Uue ,  arc  alibap  be- , 
liucrcobnto  Deatb  fo?  3Jcfusfabe ,  tljat ' 
tbc  life  alfo  of  3cfus  migbt  bee  mane 
tnantfeft  m  our  mojtau  flcflj. 

1 1  5>o  tben  Dcatlj  tbo?bctlj  in  bs,bnf 
lifcinpou. 

1  j  tec  bauing  tljc  fame  fpirit  of  faitb, 
accojDmg  asu  is  tnnttcn,  *  3  bclecuct), 
anDtljerefo;ebaue3J  fpoben:  uieeaifb 
bclecuc,anDtbcrcfo?c  fpeabe. 

14-  Bnoibing  tljat  Ijecitobttbraifct) 
top  rfjc  ?Lo;o  3Jcfus,  ftjall  raife  bp  us  al^ 
fobp3icfiis,  aimfljaii  p?cfcnt  bs  inulj 
pou. 

15  #oz  an  ujtngs  arc  fo?  pour  fahes,1 

that 


f  Gr- flame. 


r?g:tber 
Kid-out  hetf 

0 ' .  fflMf/ 


^r.ntf.io 


Th 


e  inward  man. 


Ch; 


ap.v. 


New 


creatures. 


\Or,ind;. 

umr. 


that  toe  abunbat  grace  mtgljt,  tl)?o«gIi 
t6c  ttjanttefgiuing  of  manp ,  rebounb  to 

t$C  gl02p  of  430b. 

i6  ^ozrbbictjcaufetbcfaintnot.but 
tftougb  out  outtbarbman  pcrifl) ,  pet 
ttje  inibarb  man  is  rencibcb  nap  bp 
Dap, 

17  3Fo: our ligtlt affliction, lbt)iet)is 
but  foz  amomct.rbozRCfb  foz  bs  a  farrc 
mozc  crccebitig  and  etcrnall  tbaigbt  of 

giozp, 

13  DDbilclbclooKenotattljefmngs 
ibbiel)  ate  fcencbut  at  p  tljings  ibbicl) 
ate  not  fecne :  foz  tlje  things  tbljitl) 
atefccncarctcmpozall,  butttK  things 
Vbfticb  aw  not  fcenc,  are  etcrnall. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  That  in  his  allured  hope  of  immortall  glo- 
rie,  9  and  in  expeftance  of  it.and  of  the  ge- 
neral! iud2;ement ,  hee  laboureth  to  keepe  a 
good  conscience,  lr  not  that  he  may  here 
in  boaft  of  himfelfe,  14  but  as  one  that  ha 
uing  receiued  life  from  Chrift ,  indeuoureth 
to  Hue  as  a  new  creature  to  Chrift  onely, 
18  and  by  his  miniftery  of  reconciliation  to 
reconcile  others  alfo  in  Chrift  toGod. 

jBciagqi  &>i  lDcbnotb ,  tfiat  if  our 
eartbip  boufc  of  tftts 
Xabcmaclc  tbere  tJifTol= 
ucb,Vbect)aucabuilbittg 
„,  of  d50D ,  an  tjoufc  not 
mabe  ibitlj  Ijanb ,  etcrnall  in  tlje  t)ca- 
uens. 

z  5FozintI)isibc  gronecarneftlp,bC' 
Qcingto  be  clotbeb  bpo  ibitl)  our  boufc, 
tt)I)icl)i£fronil)caucn. 

3  3fffo  be  ttjat  being  clotrjcbtbcfyal 
notbefounbnabeb. 

4-  5Foz,lbc  that  arc  m  tiyis  taberna- 
cle, Doe  gronc,bcing  burbeneb,  not  foz 
tj)at  ibceiboulbbce  bnclotbcb,butcto 
tt)eb  bpon ,  tljat  moztalttic  migbt  bec 
fiuaiioibcbbpofltfe.  ,    , 

5  iBoibbc£t)att)ibzougl)tbsfoztt)c 
felfcfametftmg,<sd5oD,  wmoaifo  hatlj 
giucn  bnto  bs  tljc  earned  of  tt)c  fptnt. 

6  Xtjcrcfozc  ibe  ar  c  aiibapes  confix 
bent,  tmolbtngtbatibtnlcinbccarcat 
ljomemtt)cbobp,ibecarc  abfent  from 

tficlLozb.  c   , 

7  ( 5fo?lberbaUicbp fait!), not bp 

figUt) 

8  mt  arc  conftbent,^  fap ,  anb  Wil- 
ling ratner  to  be  abfent  from  tl)cbobp, 
anb  to  be  pzefcntlbitb  tbciLozb. 

9  nabcrcfozeibclllabour.tbatMmc; 
tfter  pzefent  o?  abfent,  ibe  map  be  accept 
tebofbim. 


10  5Foztt>e  mult  an  appcare  befozc  tlje 
utbgement  feat  of  Cbztft,  ttjat  eucrp  one 
map  receiue  tbctfiings  bene  in  ftts  bo- 
Dp,  aceozbing  to  ttjat  ftee  tjatl)  bone, 
ibbctbct  it  be  goob  oz  bao. 

11  Bnotbmg  therefore  tbeterrour 
of  tbe  JLoto,  ibe  pcrfroabe men  but rbc 
are  mabe  mantfeft  bnto  d50D ,  9  3  trutt 
alfo ,  are  mabe  manifeft  in  pour  con* 
frienccs. 

1  x  5Foz  Vbe  tommenb  not  onr  fclucs 
againebntopou,  butgiucpou  octafion 
toglozponoutbebalfe,  tbatpoumap 
nauc  fomctbbat  to  anfwere  tt)em ,  ibbiel) 
glozp  tin  appearance  ,anb  not  in  bcart. 

1  j  5Foz  Vbftcfbct  ibec  bee  beftbes  our 
felucs.itisto  <5ob:  oztbrjcftKcibc  bee 
fober,itisfo?pourcaufc. 

14  Jpo?  tbe  louc  of  €t)?i(t  conlrrcfc 
nett)  bs,bccaufc  ibec  tbus  uibgc :  tbat  if 
onebicb  foz  all,tt)enibcrcallbeab: 

15  3lnD  that  be  bieb  foz  all,  tfiat  tt)ep 
lbljich  liuc ,  fljoulb  not  tjcnccfooztl)  hut 
bnto  fbemfclncs,  but  bnto  bimtobtcl) 
bieb  foz  tl)cm,anb  rofe  agatne. 

i6  i@Ijerefozenmccfoo?tl)Knotbibe 
no  man,after  the  fled) :  pea,  tftougt)  ibe 
baue  ftnorben  Ctoift  after  tlje  flcfl),  pet 
notb  ljcnccfoo?t^  bnolbe  ibec  Ijim  no 
mozc. 

17  Xl)erfo2eifanpmanbcmCl)2itt, 
||heeis  a  netbcrcatnrc:*olbtl)itigsare 
pad  aibap,bcl)olb,al  tbtngs  arc  become 
nett. 

18  3lnb  ail  things  arc  of  d5ob ,  lbho 
fiattj  rcconcileb  bsto  tjimfclft  bp  'Jefus 
Cbztfl,  anbbatl)  giucn  tobstlje  mini> 
ftcrp  of  reconciliation, 

19  Xo  ibit,  that  (5ob  tbas  in  Cl)?t(t, 
rcconctlmgtt)crbozlobntol)imfelfe,not 
imputing  ttjeir  trefpaffes  bnto  tbctn, 
anb  batbtcommittcb  bnto  bs  tlje  ibozb 
ofrcconciliation. 

io  jl5oibtl)cntbcare3lmbau*afio;s 
fozCbnft,  as  fyottgl)  <5ob  mn  bcfcccl) 
poubpbS;ibcp2appouinCl)?ilts(tcab, 
tftatbcpercconnlcDto  d5ob. 

ii  foi  ht  tjatl)  mabe  Dim  to  be  fume 
fozbs,ibl)olmcibc  no  ftiine,  tfiat  ibec 
mtgl)t  bee  mabe  tl)c  rigbtcoufueffc  of 
<E>obml)im. 

CHAP.     VI. 

That  heehath approued  himfelfea  faithful! mi- 
nifter  of  Chrift,  both  by  his  exhortations, 
3  andbyintegritieoflife,  4  andbypalient 
enduringallkindsof  affliction  and  difgracc5 
for  the  Gofpcl.  10  Of  which  hee  fpeaketh 
themore boldly amongft them,  becaufe  his 

heart 


fgr.insht 

face. 


\\Or,tclkim 
I". 

*Efa.4;.i$i 
rcucl.21.5- 


j"  (jr. put  1/ 


/ 


TrucMinifters.    Il.Corinthians.       Ofgodiy^and 


Efa.-}?.6. 


\Gr.fom- 
mending. 


prjntof- 
fingjtOAnd 


heart  is  open  to  them,  15  And  he  expefteth 
the  like  affection  from  them  againe,  14  Ex- 
hoi  ting  to  flee  the  focietie  and  pollutions  of 
Idolaters,  as  being  themfelues  Temples  of 
the  hums  God. 

lectljcn.asttiojBetstogc^ 

ttjCt  with  him ,  DcfCCtl)  poll 

aifo,t!)atpcrecciuenot  the 
graccofd5oDinbaine. 
i  (5Fo2hcfaith,*3Jhaue 
hears  thec  in  a  time  acccptcs.ans  in  the 
sap  of  faiuation  hauc  3  fuccoutcs  thec: 
bchoibe,  noil)  is  the  acccptcs  time,  be- 
hois,nott>  is  the  sap  of  faluation) 

j  ©iumg  no  offence  in  anp  thing, 
that  the  minlftetp  be  not  blames : 

4  25ut  in  all  things  1 1  appzoutng  out 
fcutcs,asthc£0iuiftcr3Df(£os,inmucl) 
patience,  mafflicnons,  mncceffitics,in 
bitttcffes, 

5  3»»  tttipes,  in  impnTonmentS,  in 
lltunuius,  in  iabouts,intt)atchtngs,ui 
fatttngs, 

6  2iSp  putcneffe ,  fcp  nnotblcbgc,  bp 
longfuffcring,bp  feinDneffc^p  the  holp 
<5hoft,bp  louc  siifamcb, 

7  25p  the  toojtbc  of  trqctl) ,  bp  the 
patticr  of  <Sob,  bp  tl)c  attnout  of  tig!); 
tcoufneffe,  on  the  right  hans,  anson 
thelcft, 

8  25p  !)onout  anb  sifhonout,  bp  v 
uiltcportanogoostcpofoasscccuiers 
anbpetttue: 

9  3sPnknoVbctt,?pctlDclRnolbcn: 
as  bpmg,ans  bcholb,ibc  line:  asehafto 
ncb,anbnotlullcb: 

io  %%  fozroibfull,  pet  aliPap  rciop; 
ting:  as  poojcpctmahnignianptul):  l 
ashauingnothing,  anb  pet  poffefli'ng ' 
all  things. 

ii  if>pcc€onnthians,out  mouth  is 
open  Putopou.out  heart  is  enlarges. 

u  r»cc  ate  not  fteaitcnes  in  tos, 
but  pec  arc  ftraitncb  m  pout  oisnc 
botbcis. 

n  ifroisc  foj  a  retompenfe  m  tDc 
famc/-3lfpealtcasUnto»ivcl)ilb?en)bc 
pcaifomiatgcb. 

14  2J5cpcnotPncquailv  poltcbtogc^ 
thcr  Until  bnbclccucrs :  to:  lDhat  fcl- 
lomfl)ip  hath  nghtcoufnefle  Mth  ton 
righteoufncffc  t  anb  u>hat  toniuuunon 
hath  light  ttiithbatttnctrc* 

15  31mj  lbljat  contoib  hath  Clmtt 
ttnth  iScliai  ^02  lPhat  pact  hath  !)c  that 
bciecucth,Uiith  aninnbek 

16  3his  U>hat  agreement  hath  the 
ZcmpicofGoSUntlusolcs^fojpcarc 
thc^Ecmplc  of  thcltutngoos,  asd5ob 


hathfaiSe,  "3  UnllsU)ellinthcm,anB 
rbalncin  them.anb  3  Unll  be  t!)cit  <E»ob, 
anb  thep  fljall  be  mp  people. 

17  *  nahctcfojse  come  out  fcom  a- 
mong  thcm,ans  bee  pee  fepatatc,  fatctl) 
thcfLotf) ,  anb  touch  not  thcPnclcane 
t{)mg,ans  3  Mnll  tccciuc  pou, 

18  *3nSttitllbcea5Fat!)erPntopou, 
anbpcfUalibecmp  fonncs  anb  baugl) 
tets,faith  thclLozb  ainughtic. 

CHAP.    VII. 

Hee  proceedeth  in  exhorting  them  to  pinkie 
of  life,  t  and  to  beare  him  like  affeclionas 
hee  doethtothem.  3  Whereof,  left  hee 
might  feeme  to  doubt ,  hee  declareth  what 
comfort  he  tooke  in  his  afflictions,  by  the  re- 
port which  Titus  gaue  of  their  godly  forrow, 
which  his  former  Epiftle  had  wrought  in 
them,  13  and  of  their  louing  kindncs  and 
obedience  towards  Titus ,  aniwerable  to  his 
former  boaftinc;s  of  them. 

Sluing  therefore  thefc  pjo* 
m(fcs(bcatclp  bcloucb)  let 
bs  tlcanfc  out  ftlucs  f  torn 
ailfiltljincsoftfjcflcfl)  anb 
„  fpirit,  perfecting  holuuffc 
inthefcatcofoos. 

z  5RccciucV»s,»)c!)auctt)?ongcbno 
man,  ibec  haucco2tuptcbtioman,tt)ec 
hauescftaubesno  man. 

3  3  fpcafcc  not  this  to  tonbemnc 
you:fo?3j  haucfaib  bcfo2c,tfjatpouate 
in  out  hearts  to  sic  anb  Hue  u>trt)  you. 

4  <5tcat  is  mp  bolbncffc  of  fpeaeh 
toisats pou,  gteat  is  mp  glowing  of 
pou,  3  am  fillet)  unth  tomfo2t,3»  am  tp 
cccbing  iopftill  in  allour  tribulation. 

JT oz  tbhen  lbee  iPctc  come  into 
siBaccbonia,  out  flcnjrjab  no  reft,  but 
ibcrbcrc  ttoublcboncuctp  fibc^  ttnrt) 

Olltwerefagl)nngS,tUltl)inwerefcatCS. 

6  ii5cuctthclcffc,(5obtI)atcomfo^ 
■  tcrt)  t!)ofc  tljat  arc  call  bourne ,  comfo^ 
tcb  bs  bp  tl)c  comnnng  of  Ittms. 

7  ^nb  not  bp  Dis  comming  onelp, 
butbptfje  confolationtt»l)Cfctt)itli  Ijce 
i  Vbas  comfoztcb  in  pou,U)ljen  Dc  tolb  Ps 
pout  catncll  befite ,  pout  mourning, 
pour  fcrucnt  minbe  tomarb  me,  fo  tljat 
3Jtciopccbtl)cmozc. 

8  3Foz  tDougl)  3  mabc  pou  fozp  ttilil) 
a  lettct,  31  boc  not  repent,  tljough  3 
bib  tepent :  5?oz  3  pcttciuc  tljat  the 
fame  Cpiftic  ijath  mabc  pou  fo?p,t!)ogh 
itrbctcbutfozafcafon. 

9  ii5otti'3Jtciopcc,nottl)atpcU)etc 
mabcfone,butt!)atpe  fon-otticb  to  tc^ 
pentantc:fo?  pe  ibete  mabc  fonc  Ijaftet  a 

.!_ gobli 


"LtUlt.  26 


Era52.Il 


'lete.  3 1. 1 


Aitig  to  (jod. 


wor 


ldlvfc 


Y 


lorow. 


Ch 


ap.vnj. 


Chrifti 


s  poucrtic. 


t  Gr.  bm- 
eti. 


I 


!  gobly  maner ,  that  ye  mtght  rcceinc  Da- 
\  mage  by  be  in  nothing. 

io  ^02  gobly  foiroiD  tt»o?ftctlj  repen- 
tance to  faiuatton  not  to  be  tepentcb  of, 
but  the  fo?roU)  of  the  mo?lb  Vbo?l$eth 
Death. 

1 1  .tfo?  bcholb  fhisfclfc  fame  tiling 
tl)at  yee  fo2rorocb  after  a  gobly  fo2t, 
tbhat  earefulncflc  it  Uuought  in  you, 
yea,  what  clearing  of  four  fclucs,  yea, 
what  tnbtgnation ,  pea  what  fcarc,  yea 
what  behement  befirc,  yea  what  3calc, 
yea  what  ceucngc  ■  31  n  all  things  pec 
haue  app20ucbyour  fclucs  to  bcclcare 
in  this  matter. 

a  nahcrcuwthoughllmjotcimto 
yon ,  i  did  it  not  fo?  hts  taufc  that  hab 
bone  the  imong,  no?  fo?htscaufcthat 
fuffctcb  ttnong,  but  that  our  tare  fo? 
you m the  fight  of  <£»ob  might  appearc 
bntoyou. 

ij  Xherefojc  luc  mere  comfojteb  in 
your  comfo2t,  yea anb  crcccbmgly  the 
mo2eioycbibcefo2thetoy  of  Situs,  be* 
caufchtsfptrtttbasrcfrcmebbyyouaii. 

14.  5f 02  if  3  haue  boafieb  any  thtng 
to  htm  of  you,  3Jamnotathamcb;but 
as  lbc  fpaltc  all  things  to  you  in  ttueth, 
cuenfo  our  boamnglnhich^niabcbe- 
fo2c  Xttus,is  founb  a  tr  ucth. 

15  3lnb  his  t  mroarb  affection  is 
mo2t  abotmbant  tomarbyou,  tbhtleft 
he  rcmcmb2cth  the  obebtence  ofyou  all, 
holb  tbith  fearc  anb  trembling  you  re- 
ectucbhim. 

16  3  rcioycc  thcrcfo?c  that  3  haue 
tonflbetuc  in  you  in  all  things. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

1    He  ftirreth  them  vp  to  a  liberall  contribution 
for  the  poore  Saints  at  Ierufalem  ,  by  the  ex- 
ample ot  the  Macedonians,   7   by  commen- 
dation of  their  former  forwardnefle,     9    by 
the  example  of  Chnft,   14  and  bv  the  fpiri- 
tuall  profit  that  fhall  redound  tothemfelues  i 
thereby:    \6    Commending  to  them  the  in-  ■ 
tejzrilie  and  willingnefle  ot  Titus ,  and  thole  I 
other  brethren,  whovpon  his  requeft,  exhor- 
tation and  commendation  ,  were  purpofcly 
come  to  them  for  this  bufincfle. 

■$$/££.  £>2coucr ,  b2cth2tn  ,  mec 
/  §  bo  you  to  mtt  of  the  grace , 
m  t&M  I  of  Goo  bcflolbcb  on  tl)e 
BknT^  1  Churches  of  i^accbonia,  ' 
&®&m,    2  i)oib  that  ma  great 
trial  of  affliction  ,tl)c  abunbancc  of  their 
toy,  anb  their  bcepe  poucrtic, abounocb 
bnto  tl)e  riches  of  their  libcralitit. 
3  3fo2totheirpoujct(3Jbearcreco?b) 


yea ,  anb  beyonb  their  povber  they  were 
lbillmgofthcmfelucs: 

4-  paying  bsrbith  much  entreatic, 
that  lbc  ttioulb  recenic  the  gift  ,anb  take 
bpon  bs  the  fclloiblhtp  of  the  rnfnfe 
j  firing  to  the  faints. 

5  3luD thisthevd,d,notasmchopcb, 
but  ficlr  gaue  their  ottmc  fclucs  to  the 
Ho2b,anb  bnto  bs,by  the  ibill  of  Gob. 

6  3ln  fo  much  that  ibec  befircb  %\ 
tus,  that  as  he  hab  begun,  fo  hceibouib 
alfo  finifl)  inyou,the  fame  grace  alfo. 

7  1Chercfo2c(asycabounDtncuery 
thing,  in  faith,  anb  bttcrancc,  t  tutors 
lebgc,anbtn  all  btligcncc,  anb tn your 
loue  to  bs)  fee  that  yce  abounb  tn  rtjis 
grace  alfo. 

I  3Ifpeabenotbycommanbentent, 
but  by  occafion  of  the  fiwmarbncfle  of 
others ,  anb  to  p?ooue  the  finccrmc  of 
your  loue. 

9  f  0?  yee  Hnom  the  grace  of  our 
?Lo?b3Jefus  eh?ifi\thatthough  he  rbas 
nch,yctfo2  your  taftcs  he  became  poo2e, 
that  yee  through  his  poucrtie  might 
bench. 

10  3inb  herein  3Jgtuc  my  abuice,fo? 
this  is  crpcbient  fo?  you ,  mho  haue  be- 
gun befo?c,  not  oncly  to  boe,  but  alfo  to 
be  t  ftumarb  ayeerc  agoe. 

I I  /!5oVb  thcrcfo2e  pcrfojmc  the  bo- 
mg  of  it,  that  as  therewasareabtnefletc 
ibill,fo  there  may  be  a  perfo?mancc  alfo 
out  of  that  ibhich  you  haue. 

ix  foi  if  there  bee  firft  a  milling 
minbe,  it  is  acccpteb  acco2bmg  to  that  a 
man  hath,  anb  not  acco?btng  to  that  he 
hath  not. 

ij  5F02  imeane notthatothcrmcnbcc 
cafcb,anb  y  ou  burtljcncb : 

14  25utbyancciualitic:thatnorbat 
this  time  your  abunbancc  may  be  a  fuP- 
piv  fo2  their  ttiant,  that  their  abunbancc 
alfo  may  be  ^  fuppiv  fo?  y  our  tbant,  that 
there  may  be  equalttic, 

15  31s  it  is  ttmttcn,  *  J?ce  that  hab  ga- 
thered much,  hab  nothing  oucr,  anb  Ijec 
that  hab  gathered  uttlc,hab  no  lacftc. 

16  asiit  thanfics  bee  to  <3ob  lbhich 
put  the  fame  ear  nefl  care  mto  tlje  heart 
ofXitusfo2you. 

17  Jf02  motcb  he  acccpteb  the  crho2 
tation,  but  being mo?efo?U)arb,  ofhis 
1  oibncacco2b  he  rbentbnto  you. 

18  31nbibcchaucfentmtth  htmtlic 
;  bjothcr ,  lbhofe  p2atfctsm  the  oofpel, 
th20ttghout  all  the  Churches. 

19  31nb  not  that  oncly  ,bnt  mho  mas 
alfo  chofcu  of  the  Churches  to  trauaile 

mith 


I  gr.tnl- 


*n\od.  16. 

iS. 


Bountie  towards    I  I.Corinthians. 


:heS 


amts. 


\\Or.i-f'- 


\\Or,ha 

hah. 


\qrMcSfmg 
\\Or,rrliub 
tiAth  itntfo 

ofbHgr:, 


ibltb  bsttritb  this  Hgrace  Ibbicb  i&  m 
miniftr  eb  by  bs  to  tljc  glojic  of  toe  fame 

%0lb  ,  atlO  declaration  flf  yOUr  tCabiC 

minbe. 

20  Sutoybittg  tin*  ,  that  no  man 
Cboulb  blame  bs  tn  this  abounbancc 
tbbicbts  abmimftrcb  by  bs. 

21  ^tombing  fbz  fjonctl  rtjinsfi,  not 
oncly  m  the  fight  of  the  ?Lo2b,but  in  the 
fight  of  men. 

2i  anovbcbauefcntibitbtbcmout 
brother,  ibbom  vott  baue  oftentimes 
p?oueb  biltgcnt  tn  many  things ,  but 
notb  much  mo:c  miigent ,  bpon  the 
great  tonfibente  tbhttb  1131  Daue  mvou. 

2?   naftCtbCCanvdoeencjuireOfXttUS; 

befs  my  partner  anbfcllotb  helper  Con- 
cerning yOU:  02  OUr  bZCtbZCn  bee  enqui- 
red of,  they  are  the  meflcngers  of  the 
Churches ,  and  the  gloneof  Ctmfh 

24  i©bcr  efiw  fberb  ye  to  them,  anb 
befojetbe  Cburtbes,tbcp200fc  of  pour 
lotte,?  ofour  boaftmgonyour  bebalfc. 

CHAP.    IX. 

Hee  yeeldeth  the  reafon  why ,  though  hee 
knewe  their  forwardnefle,  yet  hee  feiu Titus 
and  his  brethren  beforehand.  6  And  hee 
proceedeth  in  ftirring  them  vp  to  a  bountifull 
almes.as  beingbut  a  kind  of  fowing  of  feed, 
10  which  fhall  returne  a  great  increaleto 
them,  13  and  occalion  a  great  facrifice  of 
thankfgiuings  vnto  God. 

£>2as  tombing  tljcminfc 
fttingtotbc£>aints,ttis 
fuperfluons  fo?  mee  to 
umtetoyou. 

2  ifoijjlmotbtbefo?* 
ibarbncffcofyour  minb, 
foz  lbbtcl)  3  boaft  of  you  to  them  of 
^9atcbonia,tbat  atbaia  tuas  rcaby  a 
yccce  agoe,  anb  your  3calc  battj  pjtouo- 
ftebbcrymany. 

j  Pet  bauc3fentnjcbjetl)?eu,leaft 
outboamngofyoufboulD  bee  inbame 
in  th»s  bebaifc,tbat  as  3!  fatbc,  y  ec  map 
bercabie. 

4  ?Uft  happily  if  they  of #accbonia 
come  ibitb  nice,  $  finb  you  bnpjcpatcb 
ibcc(thati[bccfaynot,you)n)oulbbeefc 
fl)amcb  in  this  fame  conflbent  boafling. 

5  Xhcrefo2c3!thougl)titncccaarv 
to  crboit  the  b.'ctmcn, that  tbey  ibouib 
gobefojebntovou,atiDmabcbpbcfo2c 
hanb  your  tbounttc,  II  whereof  yec  hab 
nottccbefo2c,  that  the  fame  might  bee 
reabicasa  matter  of  bountie ,not  of  to- 
uctoufncfTc. 


I 

1 

21- 

e  zsut  this  i  %,$ee  tbbtcl)  fotbctb 
fparingly  ,fbail  rcapc  fparingly :  anb  he 
lbbfeljfoibctlj  bountifully,  (ban  rcapc 
bountifully. 

7  cutrie  man  accozbingas  he  pur< 

pOfCth  Ut  IJiS  IjCatt,  fo  let  him  giuej  not 

grubgmgly,02  of ncteffttie:  fo?*d5oi3  lo- 
ucthathcercfullgiucr. 

8  ^nbd5ob  is  able  to  mabcall  grate 
abounb  toibaros  you,  that  ye  altbayes 
bautng  ail  fumtiencie  in  all  thtngs,may 
abounb  to  eucry  goob  ib02ac, 

9  (3te  it  is  rbjittcn :  *  $ec  hath  bit- 
perfeb  abjoab:  $ee  hath  giucn  to  the 
poojc :  his  rigbtcou'fnctte  remainetb 
fozeuer. 

io  ^otbbetbat*mmittrenjfccbeto 
the  foiber, both  minuter  bieabfozyonr 
foobc.anb  multiply  your  fccbcfotbcn, 
anb  enercafctbefruites  ofy our  tighten 
oufncCTe) 

1 1  26eing  enritheb  in  cucry  thing  to 
albounttfuines.lbbicb  taufeth  through 
bstbanbcfguungto  <5ob. 

12  ifoz  the  abmtniftratfon  of  flits 
fcrutte,not  oncly  fuppltctbtbetbantof 
the  fi>a(nts ,  but  is  abunbant  alio  by 
many  thanbfgiuings  bnto  <5ob, 

13  ©biles  by  tljc  experiment  of  tbis 
rnimacation,thcyglojtttc<15ob  fozyout 
p2ofcffcb  fubiccnon  bnto  tljc  ©ofpciof 
Cbnft,  anb  fo,j  your  libetall  btftribu* 
tion  bnto  them  ,atio  bnto  all  men : 

14  ^nb  bv  their  maycr  fo?  yon, 
Vbbub  long  after  yon  fo?  tbcertecbing 
grate  of  (Sob  m  yon. 

15  Xhaubs  be  bnto  <5ob  fo:  b<s  bn^ 
fpeafteablegift. 

CHAP.  X. 

Againft  the  falfe  Apofties ,  who  difgraced  the 
weakneffeof  liis  per  (on  and  bodily  prefence, 
he  fettcth  out  the  fpirituall  might  and  autho- 
ri  tie,  with  which  hee  is  armed  againft  all  ad- 
uerfary  powers ,  7  adunng  them  that  at 
hiscomminghee  will  bee  found  as  mightie 
in  word, as  hee  is  now  in  writing  beeingab 
fent,  11  Andwiihall  taxing  them  for  reach' 
ing  out  themfelues  beyond  their  compafle, 
and  vantingthefelues  into  other  mens  labors. 

£)lb3J0aulmyrclfcbc 
feech  you,by  the  meebencs 
anb  gcntlencflc  of  Cl)2ift, 
Vbho||inp2cfentcambafe 
among  you,  but  being  ab? 
fent,  am  bolb  toibaro  you : 

2  2i5ut  3J  befceeb  you ,  tljat  3J  may 
notbccboio  ibhcnlJam  p2cfcnt,lbith 
tljat  confibcncc  utljcrclbith  J  tljmUe  to 
be 


Pro.1i.3j 

rom.i  a.8. 

lu.jy  9. 


'Pfa.in.9 


"Efa.55,10 


J]  Or,  in  ctU - 

7 1  *rf. 


Pauls  weapons,  Chap.xj.    His  godly  icloufie. 


\QrtretkffH. 


\\OrttoGod, 

Ortrcafb- 

■mtiqs. 


^\yr,vncter- 

ft&td  iz  not. 


\Or,U*t. 


1 1 0r1m4gm- 
IfifdtnjoB. 


be  bolD  agamft  Tome ,  Which  i  thinhc  of 
bs  as  it  wee  WaUteb  accozbmg  to  the 
flefb. 

3  :#oz  though  Wewaifcc  in  the  flc(h, 
Webocnotwatreaftcrthcflefl): 

4  (5foz  the  weapons  of  our  warfare 
are  not  carnal,  but  mtghtp  II  through 
(Sod  to  the  pulling  Dowtic  of  ftrong 
hows.) 

5  €afhngDdWn||imagtnatfons,ano 
euecp  high  thing  that  eraitcth  u  fcife  a- 
gainttthe  hnowlcDgc  of  ©oD,  anb  ban* 
ging  into  taptinittc  cucrp  thought  to 
thcobebicnceofChztft: 

6  2nD hauingtn  a  rcabineffe  to  re* 
uenge  ailDifobcbience,  When  youcobc^ 
DienccistuinllcD. 

7  Doe  peloohe  on  things  after  the 
omwaro  appearance;  if  anp  man  truft 
to  htmfclfe ,  that  he  ts  <£hzifts ,  let  him 
ofhimfclfe  thinhc  thtsagaine,  that  as 
he  tsCh2i(ts,cucnfoaceWe€hntts. 

8  5foz  though  3  Cljouio  boafifomc* 
WhatmozeofoucauthOMtp(Whieh  the 
fLozb  hathgiucn  usfoj  cDificatton.anD 
not  foz  pour  beftruction)  31  (boulb  not 
beafbameD: 

9  Xhat  3  map  not  feenie  as  if  31 
WoulD  terrific  pon  bp  letters. 

io  fax  his  letters  (fap  thep)  are 
watghtpanDpowecfiill,  but  WsboDUp 
pretence  ts  wcahe ,  anb  hisfpeath  con* 
temptible. 

ii  Het  fitch  a  one  thinhc  this  i  that 
fuch  as  Wc  arc  tnwozBbp  letters,  when 
Wcareabfcnt,fuch  wiiiwebdio  mdccdc 
When  wc  are  pzefent. 

ia  iFozWeoarenotmahcouc  felues 
of  the  number,  ox  tompare  our  fclucs 
With  fome  that  commcnD  thcmtelucs: 
but  thep  meafurtng  thcmfelues  bp 
themfclues,  ant)  comparing  theinfelucs 
amongftthemfclucs,||are  not  Wife. 

13  zsut  We  Will  not  boatt  of  things 
Without  our  meafurc,  butaccozDing  to 
the  meafurc  of  the  |  rule,  Which  <15ob 
hath  mftributcD  to  &s,  a  meafurc  to 
reach  euentmto  pou. 

i+  5foz  we  (tcetch  not  our  fclucs  be* 
pono  our  mcafure  as  though  wee  rca* 
cftcanot  into  pou,  foz  wee  arc  come  as 
farreas  to  pouaifo,  in  poaching  the  (So* 

fpclofChzift. 

15  iFlot  boaOing  ofthings  Without 
our  meafurc ,  that  is ,  of  other  mens  la* 
bours, but  hauing  hope.  When  pour 
faith  ts  tncrea(et>,  that  Wee  (hall  bee 

enlarge!)  bp  pou.accozbing  to  our  rule 
abuuuantlp. 


i6  %o  pzeaeh  the  d5ofpel  in  the  re 
gionsbeponb  pou,  anb  notto  boaft  m 
another  mans  ||  line  of  things  mabe 
reabptoouchanb. 

17  ^uthethatgiojicth.iethuitglo- 
rpmthefLozb. 

18  jfoz.not  he  that  commenbeth  him- 
felfetsappzoueD,  but  Whom  the  iLox> 
commenbeth. 

CHAP.    XI. 

Out  of  his  icloufie  ouer  the  Corinthians,who 
feemed  to  make  more  account  olthefalfea- 
poftles,thenot  him,  he  entreth  into  a  forced 
commendation  ot  himfelfe,  5  or'his  equali- 
se with  the  chiefe  Apoftles,  7  of  his  prea- 
ching the  Gofpel  to  them  treely,  and  without 
any  their  charge,  13  (hewing  that  heetf  as 
not  inferiour  to  thole  deceitfull  workers,in  a- 
nylegallprerogatiue,  13  and  in  theferuiceot 
Chrift.and  in  all  kind  offuffenngs  for  his  mi- 
tt iftery,farre  fupenour. 

£>ulb  to  d50D  pon  toulb 
bcarc  with  nice  a  little  in 
nip  folip,  9  m  beebc  j|  bcarc 
With  me. 
i  5Fo?3f«»«  icalouso- 
uec  pou  with  goDlpicaioutic,fo23Jhauc 
efpoufeb  pou  to  one  hufbanb ,  that  31 
map  pzefcnt  pon  asachafic  Dirgin  to 
Chnft. 

3  25ut  31  fearc  led  bp  anp  mcancs, 
asthe  Serpent  begutleD  €uc  though 
hisfubtiltp ,  fo  pour  mtnbcs  (bouiD  bee 
cozruptcb  fcom  the  (implicate  that  is  in 
€hzt(t. 

4  ifonfhethatcommeth  pzcacheth 
another  3lcfus  Whome  wee  haue  not 
pzeacheD,ozifpccreeeiuc  another  (punt, 
WhtcfjpehauenotrecctucD,  oz  another 
d3ofpcl,Whithpe  haue  not  acteptcb,  pec 
might  Well  bcarc  with  him. 

5  :foz,3ifuppofe,3!wasnotawhtt 
bchinoc  the  bcrp  chtcfeft  2lpoftics 

e  2Sut  though  3  be  rube  in  fpeach, 
pet  notut  utio  Wlcbgcibut  wc  hatic  bene 
thzoughlp  mabe  mantfeft  among  pou 
in  all  things. 

7  l&auc  3J  committct)  an  offence  in 
abafing  mplelfc,  that  pou  might  beer* 
altcb ,  becaufe  3J  hauc  pzcachcbtopou 
thc€>ofpcl  of  d5obfccelp< 

8  3  robbeb  other  Churchcs.tahing 
wages  of  them  to  Doc  pou  fcruitc. 

9  3n&  When  3  was  pzefeut  With 
pou,  anb  wanteb,3I  was  chargeable  to 
no  man:  fox  that  which  was  lathing 
to  mee ,  the  bzethzen  which  came  from 
iDaccBouia  (uppltcD.anD  m  all  things 
_& 3?  hauc 


\\Or,ruU. 
i. cot.  1. 31 


\\0r. 
be  ire 
me. 


you  lit 

b 


Angel  of  light.       I  I.Corinthians.  Pauls  afflictions. 


3J  Ijauc  fecpt  my  fclfc  from  being  bur 
tncnfomc  to  you,  anb  fo  ami  3  scepe 
myfclfe. 

10  as  tljc  truer!)  of  Clmft  is  fn  nice, 
t  cr.,us  no  man  (Ijali  t  flop  niec  of  tljisboafting 
htmyjM  ni  tljc  regions  of3icljaia. 

TmII     1 1  nalKtcfozc  <  bctaufc  3J  lone  you 
notiOoblmolbctl). 

ix  25titibljat3fboc,tIjat3in)ilboc, 
tljafjmay  tut  off  occafionfcomtljcin 
iDliicn  Dcftrc  ottaOon,  tljat  mucrcin 
tlKV  Slo?V » t!)cP  "iaV  bee  fount)  cucn 
asmc. 

I  j  5fojfurt) arc falfe3lpofrlcs,bccctt' 
full  ib02lJcrs,tranrfojmtng  ttjcmfclucs 
into  tlic  apoftlcsofClmfr. 

14  anb  uo  marucfle ,  fo?  £>atnan 
Ijtmfclfcts  tranffomicb  into  an  arigcl 
ofligUt. 

\<,  Zfjcrefojc  It  is  no  great  tljing  tf 
5)ls  intnifrcrs  alfo  bec  tranfftmttcb  as 
|tl)cmmifrcrsof  rtglucottfncffc ,  lbfjofc 
1  cm)  fbau  be  atto.zutng  to  tljctr  lbojbcs. 

i6  3Jfayagamc,lLctuoinatttl)initc 
mccaFoole;tfotljcrmifc,yctasafoolc 
\or,pftr.  \\  reteiuc  me ,  tljat  3  may  boaft my  fclfe 
a  little. 

17  xiwnbntcn  3  fpeauc,  31  fpeauc 
it  notaftcr  tljc  32.02b, but  as  ttmcrefoo* 
Iiflilv m  tins  con&btncc  of  boafhng. 

18  S>ccutgtljatmany  gl02y aftcrtlje 
m\\3  will  glo2y  alfo. 

19  Jf02 ycftiffcr foolcs glably, fceutg 
ycyourfclucsarcibifc. 

zo  Sjqi  ye  fuffcr  tf  a  man  tying  von 
tutobotttjagc,tfamantjcuonrcyoti,ifa 
niatttaltcot  you,  tfainancraitljtmfclfc, 
if  a  man  finite  vou  on  tlic  fate. 

11  3  fpeauc  as  toncernmg  rcp2oel), 
as  tnonginbcbab  bcttcibcaftfinorbbc-- 
it,ml)crctu  focucr  any  is  bolb,3l  fpeahc 
foolifl)iy,3Janibolbaifo. 

II  3lrctl)cyJ?cb2cmcs<roam3J:are 
t»ty 3Ifraelitcs  *  fo  >m  31 :  arcthcy  the 
fccbofabtalwnwfoamgj: 

t}  3rc  they  mtnifrcrs  of  Cljjlfl  i  3 
fpeauc  as  a  foole,  3J  am  11102c:  m  labojs 
11102c  abiinbant :  m  (tripes aboucmca- 
furc :  m  pnfons  11102c  frequent  :  tit 
beams  oft. 

14.  fff  tlic  Heroes  fiuc  times  rcttt 
iicD^rfoityitiip^fauconc. 

25  3Clmcc  mas  3  beaten  ibttf) robs 
ontc  mas  J  froncb  :  tlmcc  3  fufferco 
0)ipro;tac6e:a  nigi)tanbaoay3Jijaiit 
bencmtljcbecpe. 

is  3Jn  tourneying  often,  in  perils  of 
maters  ,in  ptrUs  of  robbers,  m  perils 
by  my  orotic  countrcymen,  m  perils  by. 


tijcljcatpcn,  in  perils  in  tljc  cute,  in  pc* 
nls  in  trjc  roilberncflc,  in  perils  in  tljc 
fea,  mpcrilsamongfaifcbjctljjcn, 

27  3n  rocarineffe anb painfulneffc, 
in  roatcljtngs  often ,  in  Ijungcr  9  tljtrff, 
in  fadings  oftcn,m  tolo  anb  nabebnes. 

18  25eGbes  ttjofc  tljmgs  tljat  are 
( roittjout  .that  robicl)  tommctl)  bpon  me 
bayly,tfjc  tare  ofalittjc€l)urd)es. 

29  naljo  is  rocafte,  arib  gf  am  not 
mcahef  roljoisoffcnbeb,  anb^burne 

tlOtf 

30  31f  gjmuft  neebes  gloiy,  3  roill 
glo?y  of  tljc  things  rotjich  tonterne 
minemfirmtties. 

31  Xl)C(5obanbiratl)trofour?Lo?b 
Jcfus  eijjift,  robtelj  tsbicffcbfoz  cue* 
mo2C,lmoroctlj  that  3  lie  not. 

31  3fn  3Damaftus  the  goucrnour 
bnber  Gretas  tljcmtng,  bept  tljc  title 
roithagartfon,  bcGrous  to  app2cljcnb 
nice. 

33  3nb  tDjbugi)  a  tbinbott)  m  a  ba£ 
6ettt)as3llctbomne,bytl)cU)all}anb 
eftapcbljisljanbs. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  For  commending  of  his  Apoftlefhip,  though 
he  might  glory  ofhis  wonderfull  reuetarious, 
9  Yet  hce  rather  chufeth  to  glory  of  his  in- 
firmities, 11  blaming  theni  tor  rorcinghim 
to  thisvaine  boafting.  14  Heepromifethto 
come  to  them  againe  :  but  yet  altogether  in 
theaffedionofa  father,  10  although  hee 
feareth  hefhall  to  hisgriefe  fmde  many  of- 
fenders,and  publike  dilorders  there. 

%  is  not  cjcpcbicnt  fo?  me, 
boubticiTcto  gio?y,  3  mil 
tome  to  bifions  anb  rcuc^ 
lationsoftDelLojb. 
i  3  tmclbe  a  man  in 
Ctmtt  abouc  fourctecne  yccres  agoc, 
mnctftcr  m  tfjc  boby,  3  cannot  tell,  o? 
tt)l)ctl)croutoftl)eboOy,3tatmottcll, 
<5ob  ftnoibctl) :  fuel)  a  one,  taugljt  bp 
totrjctl)irbl)caucn. 

3  ^nb  3  fencm  fuel)  a  man  ( lbnc 
tDcrmtfjc  boby,  02  out  of  tljc  boby,  3 
cannottcll,(Sob  Imolbetl).) 

4  l^oib  tijat  Dc  mas caugjht  bp  into 
^arabife ,  anb  Jjearb  bnfpcalirable 
mo2bes ,  mijitlj  it  is  not  H  lamfull  fo;a  \\or#>m. 
mantobttcr. 

5     €>f  fUtl)  a  one  lblll  3  Q\0^,  ytt  Of 

my  fclfe  3J  mill  not  glo?y,  but  m  mine 
tnfirmtttcs. 

6  3F02  tDougl)  31  lboulb  Defirc  to 
gl02y,3lfl)allnot  beafoole:  fo2  3imill 
fay  tlic  trurtlj.  23ut  nolb  3  f02bcare, 
ten 


Pauls  zeaie. 


ci 


*5ccEzck, 

1S.14. 


M*r.  yottr 
(an  Us, 


left  an?  man  fb  ouid  tbiuhe  ofmc  about 

that  iblKCh.  Iiee  fcCtb  1UC  co  bee,  02  chat  f)CC 

bcarctbofmc: 

7  3ub  lead  ^!  fljouiu  bee  trait eD  a- 
|boue  meafutc  tlKougb  the  abuubancc 
of  the  reflations,  there  Ibasgiuento 
mca*tbo2ncfutbeflefb,tbcmcfFcngcr 
of  Satban  to  buffet  mc,lcft  3  IboulD  be 
IccaitcDabouemcafurc. 

8  foi  this  tiling  5  befougbt  the 
iLo:Dtri:itc,t!jm  tt  might  Depart  from 
mee. 

9  3lnD  he  faib  bnto  me ,  Q3y  grate  ts 
fum'cicnt  fo:  thec :  fo:  my  ftrrngtli  ts 
mabeprrfett  itnbcalincs.  S3oftslaDlp 
therefore  ibill  31  rather  gio:y  mmyin- 
firmtttcs.tbat  tbcpoibcr  of  €h?(ftmap 
reft  upon  me. 

10  Xhcrefo2e  31  tane  picafurcinm- 
firrmttC8)ump2ocbcs,inncccffittcs,tn 
pcrfcctiftons,  inDtftreffcs  fo2  Cb2iftcs 
fabc:  fo:  ttitjcn  3J  am  ibca&c,tbeu  am 
31  ftrong. 

1 1  3  am  become  a  foolc  tn  gl02ying, 
vc  hauccompcllco  me.  foi3  ought  to 
banc  becne  commenbcb  of  you:  fonn 
nothing  am  3  bchmbc  the  bcry  cbiefcfl 
3Jpoftlcs,tbougb  II  be  nothing. 

u  Xruely  the  figntgofan^poftlt 
mere  ttuougbt  among  you  in  all  patf- 
cntcin  figncs  aub  ibonDcrs,anD  mtgl> 
ticDccDs. 

13  foi  \bbat  is  it  tbbcrcm  vce  Vberc 
mfcrio:  to  other  Churches,  crttpt  >tbee 
that  3  mvfclfc  lbas  notburthcufomc 
to  pott  <  fo:giuc  me  this  lbionq. 

14  2ScbolD,tbcthuDtimc3lamrca- 
Die  to  come  to  you,  anD  3  Mil  not  bee 
burthtnfomc  to  you;  fo-  3  feefee  not 
youcs,but  you:  fo:  the  chilbicn  ought 
1  not  to  lav  bp  fo:  the  parcnts,but  the  pa 

,  rents  fo:  the  chilDicn. 

15  3tuD  3  )bil  ucry  glably  fpenD  anD 
beefpentftntyou,  though  the  11102c a- 
bunDantlylHoucyou,  the  leffc  3  bee 
loueD. 

16  I3ut  be  it  fo :  3  DiD  not  burthen 
you:  ncucrthelcfTc  beeing  craftie, 3 
caught  you  tbith  guile. 

17  2Mb  3  malic  a  game  of  rou  by 
,flnyofthem,Tbhomgifeutbntovoiw 

is  JbefircDHmiB,  anD  lbtth  him 
3  fent  a  biotbcr :  DiD  Xitus  mane  a 
gainc  of  you*  naalhcD  met  not  tn  tbt 
famtfpirit;  walked  wee  uot  mtbefamc 
ftcps; 

19  3lgauie,tbtnkc  you  that  ibccrcufc 
our  feints  bnto  von  fi\)ttfptaiicbcfo2C 
<5ob  in  Cb2ift:  but  wee  doe  all  things, 


lap.xnj. 


Trie  vourfai 


hi 


Dearcly  bcloutD,fo2your  cDifying, 
j    20  5Fo23Jfcartleftibhen]}jcome,3 
(ball  not  finD  you  fuel)  as  3  lboulD,anD 
that 3  (ball  bee  fotmo  unto  you  fuch  as 
ye  rboulbnot,left  there  bee  Debates,  en- 
uyings,lb2aths,  arifes ,  bacltcbitings, 
IbhtfptrfngsXiuclliugs.tumults, 
j    21  3uiD  lead  ibbcn3J  come  agamc, 
i  my  ©oDlbill  bumble  mee  amongyou, 
anDthat  3  (ball  bclbafle  many  ibhicb 
hauc  finneb  aircabic ,  aub  hauc  uot  rt- 
:pcntcDof  the  bntlcannefTc,  anD  ftmn 
canon,  anD  lafciuioufneffc  lbbicbtbcy 
bauccommittcD. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Hethreatnedi(eueiitie,and  the  power  of  his 
Apofllefhip  againft  obftinate  finners.  5 
And  adiiiiuig  them  to  atrial]  of  their  faith, 
7  and  tori  reformation  of  then  flnnes  before 
his  comming,  11  He  concludethhisEpiftlc 
with  a  generall  exhortation  and  a  praver. 

gggftgjgg  feisistbctbirbh'mc3lam 
mi  wcotnming  to  you:  in  the 


^4|  fP&  mouth  of  tibo  02  tb?ccl 
fogj  fi^ibftucflcsfbaicucryttwDi 
SrSssSSgi  bccttablifbcb. 

2  3)toloyoubcfo2c,anDfo2Ctcllyou 
as  if  3  iberc  p2cfcnt  the  fcconD  time, 
anDbc(ngabfeut,noib'5  Uw'tcto  them 
ibhtch  heretofore  hauc  (fnncD,auD  to  all  | 
I  other  ,that  if  3  comcagainc  3  ibill  not 
fpare: 

i  §>incc  yc  feche  a  pioofcof Clnitt, ! 
'  fpcahi'ng  m  me,  ibbfcb  to  you-lbarb  ts 
not  tbeafcebut  is  mightic  in  you. 

4   fo:  though  hec  ibas  crucificb 
th2oughibcaUucffc,ycthc!iucthbythe! 
i  poibcr  of  <3od  :  fo2  ibee alfo  arclbeattc ! 
||  in  him,  but  mee  fbailltucujirb  him  by  \° 
the  politer  of  <Sod  tolbarb  you. 

s    eramincyourfclucs,n)hcthcryc 
be  in  the  faith :  p20uc  your  oibttc  felucs. 
(Uuoib  yce  not  your  oibuc  fclncs,hoVb 
that  3IcfusCh2ilt  is  inyou,r,rccptye  be! 
repjobatrs* 

6  isut 3  truft  that  ycc  (hail  bnolbc  \ 
that  )bc  arc  not  rcp20batcs. 

7  i^o)b3p2ayto(l5ob,thatyeDoc 
no  cuiiuiot  that  ibe  flioulD  appcareap; 
p2oucD,  but  thatyenioulDDocf  ibhich 
ishoncft,thouginbcbeastcp:obates. 

8  f  02  )ucc  can  Doc  nothing  agatnft 
thctrurth,butfo2thctructh. 

9  fax  lbcc  arc  glao  ibhcn  Yott  arc  | 
Uicnuc, anD  yc  arc  ftrong:  ano  tljis  alfo 
ibe  iDifli.euen  your  perfection. 

io  Hhcrcfo2c  3  ftvitc  thefc  things  i 
bcingabfcnt,lcftbn'ngp2cfent3(honID 
j ^>  2 bf^ 


'r.with 

him. 


85 . 


ift 


nconltancie. 


TotheGalatians.     Pauls  do&n 


ne. 


bfemarpncffMecozbingto  ttjc  poiber 
tt»l)icl)  the  lLojb  hath  giuen  me  to  ebifr 
tation,anD  not  to  bc&tuction. 

ii  5Finaitt>,b:cth2eii,farcibell:  2Scc 
perfect,  beeof  goobtomfozt,  bee  of  one 
minbcliue  m  pcaccanb  the  <5ob  of  louc 
anb  peace  fhaibe  Vbtth  pou. 

it  d&rectoncatiotberibitbanholp 
trifle. 


13  3lil  the  5>atutsfaiute you. . 

1+  %\)c  grate  of  the  fLozb  ^efiis 
Chn'tt,  anb  tl)c  lone  of  ©ob,  anb  the 
communion  of  the  Ijolp  <J5t)ott^>e  tuttl) 
pouail.  3mcn. 

Xhe  feconb  Cpiffle  to  the  Corinthians, 
t&as  Written  from  0l)ii(ppos  a  eWe  of 
fl^acebonta,  by  £itusanb?Lucas 


,THE    EPISTLE    OF 

Paul  totheGalatians. 


L 


CHAP.     I 

Hee  wondereth  ihar  they  hauefofoonelcft 
him,aiidtheGofpel,  8  And  accurfeth  thofe 
that  preach  any  other  Golpel  then  hee  did. 
1 1  He  learned  the  Gofpel  not  of  men,  but  ot 
God:  1 4  And  fheweth  what  he  was  before  his 
,  17  and  what  he  did  prelently  after  it. 

3lul  an  ^pottle, 
not  of  men,  net* 
tiler  by  man,  but 
by  Jews  Chrift, 
anb<5obthe#a< 
ther,tt>horaifeb 
hunfrothebcab, 
i  anoallthc 
bzethzen  tbhicb 

arc  ttrith  mcc,  bnto  the  Cljutthes  of 

©alatia: 
j    ©race  becto  you  anb  peace,  from 

(SobtlK  father ,  anb  from  our  jLoin 

3kutsChztft, 
4-  naljo  gaue  In'mfrifc  foz  our  fumes, 

thathemigbt&cltuetbs  from  thispze* 

fent  cutu  ibozlb,  accozbing  to  the  ttrill  of 

<5ob,anb  our  father, 
<,    Xo  tbtjom  bee  giozicfoz  cueranb 

cucr,3micn. 

6  ?l  marucilc.fhatyouatcfofoonc 
rcmoueb  from  Dim,  that  cailcbpou in- 
to tl)c  gcacc  of  Ctjn'ft ,  buto  an  other 
©ofpcl: 

7  uallicf)  is  not  another  ■,  but  there 
bee  fome  that  trouble  you.  anb  lboulb 
pcrucrtthe<5ofpcl  ofChn'tt. 

8  25ut  though  lbc,oz  an  3lngel  from 

l)CaUCn,pjCatl)  my  other  Golpel  ptttO  yOU, 

then  that  ibljul)  ibec  hauc  pzcacljcb  ton- 


to  you,  let  In  n  i  be  accurfeb. 

9  3sU)efaibbefoze,fofay3Jnotba 
game,  3Jf  any  man  pzeaclj  any  other 
©ofpclbnto  you,  then  that ycebaue re* 
tciucb.lctbunbcaccurfcb. 

10  jfozboc'3lnolbpcrftbabcmcn,oz 
<H5oo*  ozbocgi  fecfeeto  plcafemetu  jpoz 
if  5  pet  plcalcb  men ,  3J  lboulb  not  bee 
tbefcruantofCbziB. 

11  2Sut35ccTttaej»ou,  b;et!)?en,tl)at 
ttje  <Bofpcl  VbDttljttias  pzcacbeb  of  me, 
is  not  after  man. 

iz  foi  31  neither  ccceiucb  it  of  man, 
neither  Vbas  31  taught « ,  but  by  the  re 
uclatton  of  JcuisCbzift. 

1  j  iFozycc  bauebcarbofmytouuer 
fatlonin  tunc  pall ,  m  the  3f  eibes  &eli 
gioti,lww  that  bcvonbmcafurc3J  pttfc* 
cutcb  the  Churrl)  of  <E>ob,anb  lbaOcb  it: 

14.  3lnbpzontcbuitbe3JetbesBelfc 
gion,  abouc  many  my  f  equals  m  mine 
olbne nation,  being  moze  ertcebingly 
5eaiousoftbctrabriiousofmy  fathers. 

15  26utlbl)enitpleafcb€»ob,tbhofe 
paratcb  me  from my  mofbcrslbombc, 
anb  caucb  me  by  his  grace, 

16  Xo  reucalehisfonncin  mcctljat 
3  might  pzcacb  him  among  tlje  hea* 
then,  unmebtatly  31  conferreb  not  lbitb 
flcfyanbbloob: 

17  ^cither  Vbcnt  3f  bp  to  3Jcrufa- 
lein,totlicmlbhichw^apoftlcsbcfo?e 
me^ufJibentrntoJlrabfa^nbrttur' 
neb  agatne  bnto  2>amafais. 

18  Xbcn  after  tbzceyccrcs,3J||Vbcnt 
bp  to  3»crufalem  to  fee  peter ,  anb  a- 
bobcibitbbtmfiftectiebaycs. 

19  26utothcrofthcapolrlcsfaU)3J 

none, 


f  </r.  fjwi 
injure. . 


||  Or/tint- 

Ktd. 


Pauls  courage.  Chap.ij.       Peter  reprooued. 


Orjeue- 
rail j. 


none,  fane  -James  the  Horns  bmthcr. 

10  ^oU)  tDc  thmgsmhtch  3  VU^itc 
unto  you,  beholD.bcfojc  god  3  ivc  not. 

ii  3ftcrmaros  3  tame  into  the  re* 
gcons  of  £»yna  aim  Cilieia, 

ii  ;3tm  mas  nnhnomen  by  fate  tar- 
to  the  Churches  of3Hmca,U)hich  mere 
inChn'fl. 

i3  But they  haDhcarD oncly,thathc 
mhuhpcrfccutcD  us  in  times  paft  ,nott 
p:rachcth  the  faith,  mht'ehonte  IjecDC- 
ftroycD. 

14-  3nD  they  glou&cDGoD  mine. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  He  (Tieweth  when  he  went  vp  againe  to  Hie- 
rufj.lem,and  tor  what  purpoie:  5  And  that 
Titus  was  not  circumcifed  :  n  And  that  he 
refilled  Peter,  and  told  him  theieafon,  14 
why  heeand  other  being  lewes ,  doe  beleeue 
in  Chrift  to  bee  Iultified  by  faith ,  and  not  by 
workes:  10  And  that  they  liue  not  in  finne, 
whoareloiuftirlcd. 

$cnfouttecncyccrcsafi 
tcr,3i  mentupagatneto 
Jcrufalcm  tinth  Bar* 
tiabas,  ano  toofec  Xitus 
mithmcaifo. 
i  SlnD'jmcntupby 
rcucianon  ,  anb  comntutucatcD  unto 
them  that  Gofpcl,  mhich  3  pjcaeh  a< 
mong  the  ©entiles,  but  ilpnuatcly  to 
themmhich  mere  of  reputation,  left  by 
any  mcancs  3  fhouiD  runnc ,  02  hao 
runncinuainc. 

j  But  neither  Xitus,  mho  mas 
mithmc,  being  aGrccBc,mastompcl 
icDtobccircumcifcD: 

4  3no that  becaufe  of faifc b.icthjen 
tmamarcs  b20ught  m,mho  tame  in  pn- 
tttly  to  fpt'eoutour  libcrtlc,  mhichmce 
hauctnClw'ltllcfus,  tljat  they  might 
bung  us  into  boimagc. 

5  %o  mhom  mce  gauc  plate  by  Tub 
tcttion,  no  not  fo2  an  hourc ,  that  the 
rructh  of  the  Gofpcl  might  continue 
ttrithyott. 

6  But  of  thefc ,  mho  fcemcD  to  bee 
fomemhat,  ( mhatfocucr  they  mcrcit 
mattcth  no  matter  to  mce ,  GoD  acrep 
tcth  no  mans  pcrfon,)  fo2  they  mho  fee 
met)  tobefomewhat,  in  conference  aODcD 
nothing  to  me. 

7  But  contrarimifc,  tun  en  they  fail) 
that  the  Gofpcl  of  the  uncircumcition 
ttmscommittcD  unto  mcas  the  Gofpel 
of  thecircumcifion  mas  unto  peter : 

s  (# o2hcthatU)2ought  effectually 
in  pctcc  to  the  3pottlcfhip  ofthe  tir- 


cuinciGon,  the  fame  mas  mightiemmc 
tomatus  the  Gentiles.) 

9  3hm  rbhen  James,  Cephas  anD 
3John ,  mho  ftcmcD  to  bee  pillars, per^ 
ccmcD  the  grace  that  mas  gtunt  unto 
mctljcy  gauc  to  me  ano  Barnabas  the 
right  hatms  of  fciiomflnp,  that  mce 
fhouid  goe  unto  the  heathen,  ano  they 
Unto  the  ctrcumtiD'on. 

io  £>ncly  they  would  that  mce  fhouiD 
remember  the  poozc,  thefame  BJhich  3 
alfo  mas  fo:maro  to  Hoc. 

ii  26ut  mhen  peter  mas  tome  to 
3mtfoch,3Jmithftooti  him  to  the  fate, 
becaufchemasto  be  blamed. 

ii  fai  before  that  tcrtaute  came 
from  3James,  he  Din  eatc  m«h  the  ©citJ 
riles :  but  mhen  they  mere  tome,  hec 
unthDjcm,  ariDfcparateDhtmfclfc,  fca< 
ring  them  which  were  of  the  Ctccumcifio. 

i  j  3nD  the  other  JemesDiOemblct) 
Uhemife  mith  him,trifomuch  tljat  Bar* 
nabasalfo  lhascaricDaibayttnth  their 
DitTmuriation. 

14  Bntmhcngjfamtliatthcymai' 
KcDtiotup2ightlyacco2Ditigto  the  truth  I 
ofthe  Gofpel,  J  fa(D  unto  peter  before 
thcmal,3fthou,bcinga^em,liucttaf^ 
terthemaner  of  Gentiles,  ano  not  asi 
Doc  the  3Jemes,  mhy  compelled  thou! 
the  Genttlcs  to  lute  as do  the 3icmcs < 

i<>  i©c  who  are  gjemes  by  nature,  aim 
notfinntrsof  the  Gentiles, 

i6  Bnomutg  that  a  man  is  not  in- 
ffirleD  by  the  mo:Hs  ofthe  Ham ,  but  by 
thefaithof3JefusChuit,cucnmchauc 
bclccucDingkfusChJiffthat  me  might 
be  lumftct)  by  the  faith  of  ClmffatiD  not 
by  the  mozhes  of  the  ?LaiU :  fo:  by  the 
mozlies  ofthe  Ham  (hall  no  flclh  be  to* 
ftifieb. 

17  Butifmhilemefeehctobciulri^ 
fict)by€h2ilt,mcc  our  fclues  alfo  arc 
fotum  (Tuners ,  is  therefozc  Clj:iQ:  tljc 
minifter  of  Rune  <  Got)  fomm> 

is  f onf 3lbmlD  againcthc  things 
mhich5  tieltroyeD,  3mancmyfelfca 
tranfgrcflbur. 

19  foz^JthzougliplLam^imtieatito 
the  Ham,that  3  might  line  unto  Gob. 

io  'JamcrucifictimithChJift.  jl^c- 
ucrthcles,3}  lutcyctnofj,  but  ChMft 
Uiicth  m  me,  aim  the  life  mhuh  3 110lw 
lute  m  the  flcfl) ,  3  hue  by  the  faith  of 
thcfoitncofGot),  mholouet)  nice,  aim 
gauehimfcifcfojme. 

ii  J  doc  not  frultrate  the  grace  of 
GOD :  fo2  if  nghtcoitfues  come  by  the 
Ttamc,  then  Clwrttis  DeaDtn  baittc. 


S  3 


C  H  A  P. 


The  feed 


TotheGalatians.       of  Abraham 


\OrJogrcAt 


\]0r  imp** 

ted. 


•Ccili:.} 


•Dcu.ij. 


'Abac. 2.4. 
rotT).  1.17. 

•Lcui.lS.; 


•Dcut.: 
*3- 


Wr,r,JJj- 


C  H  A  P.   1 1 1. 

He  asketh  what  moued  diem  toleauethefaith, 
and  hang  vpon  the  Law?  6  They  that  be- 
leeue  are  iuftihed,  3  &blefled  with  Abraham. 
10  And  this  he  (hewech  by  many  reafoos. 

foolifl)(35aiattang,U)l)o 
hath  bclbttcijcDvou,  tljat 

you  fliottlD  not  obey  the 
rruttlj ,  bcu^eitohofceyes 
3cfus  Chjift  hath  been  c* 
uitochtly  fct  fo:th,  crunflci)  among  you  * 

I  %\)is  oncly  lboulb  3J  learnc  of 
you,rccciucDyetr)cfptrit,bytheuj02t$s 
of  the  ILaib,  02  by  tlic  Hearing  of  fait?) j. 

i  ^tcyefofooliuVhauingbcgunin 
the  Spirit ,  arc  ycnoibmabc  perfect  by 
theflcuV 

4.  ^auc  ye  fuffcrcb  |  |fo  many  things 
m  toainc  t  if  it  be  yet  in  baine. 

5  ^cthctfoitthatmmittrcthtoyou 
tlje  Spirit,  anb  uwttctl)  miracles a= 
mongyou,Doethhettbythcmo2&csof 
fftclLatb,  02  by  thcncatfng  of  fait!)  < 

6  €ucnas3lb2ahambclccuc&<5oD, 
anbitibas||aaounteD  to  Ijim  fo?rigl> 
teoufneffc. 

7  Buoibcy^cfhmfojc,  fhatfhey 
lbhich  arc  of  fait  J),tlje  fame  arc  the  chfb 
D2cnof3ib2aham. 

8  3MDtl)c  Scripture  fojcfcctngtrjat 
(BobVboum  iuftific  the  heathen  thjough 
fatfh,pzeathcb  before  the  ©ofpcl  tonto 
^bzal)am,faYing,*3}ntl)ccfl)all  all  nati- 
ons be  blcffco. 

9  £>o  then,  they  ibhich  bee  of  faitl), 
are  blcffcb  ibith  faithfull  2lb2aham. 

10  jFo:  as  many  as  arc  of  the  nwfts 
of  tDe  lavbeare  bnber  tlje  curfc :  ftn  it  is 
tbjittcn, *  CurfcD  is euccy  one  tDat  com 
tinuctl)  not  m  all  tljings  itohich  arc 
ltonttcnmthcbooUcofthc&aibtoDoc 
them. 

II  2Sut  that  no  man  is  iufhficb  by  tlje 
ILaWc  m  ttK  Ogl)t  of  (5oD,it  fs  cuiDcnt: 
foj,*  2Zt)cutrt  fltfii  line  by  faitl). 

ii  3lnt>  tlje  ILaib  is  not  of  faitl) :  but 
*  tDe  man  tfjat  bocth  them,  fyall  Kuc  in 
them. 

13  Clm'ft  hath  rcDcctneo  bs  from  the 
curfc  of  tl)dLa\i),bcmgmaDca  curfc  fo2 
tos:  foi  it  is  llnittcn  ,*Curfcbiscucry 
one  that  hangctft  on  tree: 

14  that  tDe  blcfflng  of  3b2aham 
i  might  come  on  the  C5cntilcs,th20ugh 

Jefus  Ctmft:  thatibcc  might  rcccuic 
thep2omifcofthcS)pintth2ougl)fattl). 

15  232ctlnen,3Jfpcauc  after  them* 
ucrofmcmthouglwbcbutamansllco* 


tienaut,vettf  it  bccconSrmcb.no  man 
bifanullctl),02  abbeth  thereto. 

i6  jBoib  to  Sbzaham  anb  his  feeoc 
itocrcthc  p2omifesmabc.  ^>c  faith  not, 
3no  to  fccbs.as  of  many,but  as  of  one, 
3tnb  to  thy  fecD,)bl)icl)  is  Crmft. 

1 7  3tab  this  3  fay,  that  the  Couc^ 
naut  that  ltoas  confirmcb  befoje  of  <5oD 
in  ei)2iu\  tl)c?LaU)c  ibhtttjibasfourc 
himD2cbanbthirtieycrcsaftcr,cannot 
bifanul,that  it  (houlb  matte  tlje  pionufe 
of  none  effect. 

is  fox  if  the  inrjeritante  bee  of  ttjc 
!LaU),itisnomo2cofp2onufc:buteiob 
gauc  it  to  ^b2aham  by  p2omifc. 

19  B9hcrcfo2c  then  (erueththefLatbf 
it  urns  abo  cd  becaufc  of  tranfgrcflTons, 
j  tilltlKfeeb  fuoulbcome,  toibhomc  the 
i  p2omtfeibas  mane ,  and  it  was  o;bcyncD 
by  Angels  in  the  i)anb  of  a  £0ctna^ 
tour. 

20  il5olb  a  mcbiatour  is  not  i  Media- 
tour  of  one,  but©obisone. 

21  3Js  the  Haibc  then  againfl  the 
P2omifes  of  <5ob;  <Sob  fo2btb  :  fo?  if 
there  hab  bcene  a  Haibc  giuen  ttrtjich 
coulD  haue  giuen  life ,  tocrfly  rigl)tcou^ 
neffe  fhoulb  hauc  bene  by  the  Hart). 

21  But  the  Scripture  hath  concur 
beb  all  bnber  Cunc ,  that  tl)c  pjomifc  by 
faith  of  3lcfns  ehjiQnugtit  begiucn  to 
them  that  belccue. 

23  28utbcfo2cfaithcamc,Vbeemcre 
bept  bnber  the  ?LaU) ,  fljut  bp  buto  the 
faith,  mhtch  njoulbaftcrrbarbs  bcerc- 
ucaleb. 

24.  n9hcrcfo2c  tlje  Haib  lbas  our 
^»choolcmaftcr  to  brm^  v.  bnto  Cl)2tft, 
that  lbc  might  be  iufhficb  by  JFaith. 

2-5  But  after  that  iFatth  iB  comcibc 
arcno  longer  bnocra&choolemaftet. 

26  5ro2ycarcailthc  cl)ilb2en  of  <5ob 
byfaithinCh2ift3lcfus. 

27  jro?  as  many  of  you  as  haue  bene 
bapti5cb  into  Ch2ift,hauc  put  on  Ctmft. 

28  Xherc  is  neither  'Jcltoc,  no? 
(Srccfec  ,  there  is  neither  bonb  1102  free, 
there  is  neither  mate  noj  female :  fo2yc 
are  all  one  tn  CljjiQ  gjefus. 

29  3nb  if  yee  be  Clefts ,  then  are  ye 
Sttwahams  feeb ,  anb  IjcircsaccojDing 
torhcpjomife. 

CHAP.    HII. 

1  We  were  vnder  the  LawtillChriftcame,  as 
the  heire  is  vnder  his  gardian  till  he  be  ot  age. 
5  But  Chrift  freed  vs  from  the  Law:  7  there- 
fore we  are  feruants  no  longer  to  it.  14  He 
remembreth  their  good  will  to  him,andhis 

to 


j—,.  -       -u—    ■-  ■-■-,,.  ,,.—  ■,..  ,    .  .■■■■■-, 

Beggerly  rudiments.  Chap.inj.v.       Free  and  bond. 


menu. 


\\0r,lxkt. 

\\OrfnM- 
macs. 


\\Or,rv),*l 
was  then? 


\\Or,vt. 


to  them,   12.    and  fheweth  that  wee  are  the 
fonnes  of  Abraham  by  the  free  woman. 

"  £)W3ffay,tDattDeDcicc, 
asiongasDecfsacDilb, 
^k\»i  s  oiffcrctb  nothing  from  a 
-v^v  a  ftniant,  tDougD  fjcc  bec 
W^»SaJlto?i>ofaK, 

2  26ut  is  tonbcc  tutojs  anb  goucr; 
nours  tonttll  tljcttmc  appointee  of  tljc 
father. 

3  <£ucnfoWe,WDcuWccwcrccDil 
bien,  were  inbottDagcbiWcc  tDe  ||  ele- 
ments of  tDe  Wojlb: 

4  asuttbftcntDe  funics  of  tDctunc 
was  come,  d5ob  fcntfoojtt)  l)is  Sonne 
mabe  of  a  woman ,  mane  btwee  tlje 
%m, 

5  %q  rcbccmc  tDcm  tDat  were  bn; 
bmDefLaw.tDatwcmigDtrccciuctDe 
aboption  of  Tonnes. 

6  2Cnb  becaufc  vec  ace  fonnes ,  <£>ob 
rjat!)  rent  fbojtft  tlje  fpirit  of  Dis  Sonne 
into  pour  Dcarts,cryiug  3bba,  jf  at!)cr. 

7  i©Dcrefo.2Ctl)ouart  nomozeafcr^ 
uant,butafonncjanDifafonttc,ti)cnan 
De»reof<5obtD.20uglj  €Dnft 

8  $oWbett ,  trjen  WDcn  ye  Itnctb 
not  (Bob ,  ycc  Did  fcruttc  into  tljem 
WDtcD  bynaturearcno  d5oos. 

9  23ut  notb  after  trjat  yte  Dane 
fenowen  <5od,  o?  ratDcr  are  fenoWen  of 
©ottfjo  w  runic  ye  Hagamc  to  tDc  Weaft 
anb  beggerly  || elements,  Wijcrcunto 
yebeftrc  againc  to  be  in  bonbagc J. 

io  pee  obferuc  baycs.anbmonctDs, 
anb  timcs.anby  ceres. 

n  gjamafcatbeofyou,  IcftUDaue 

bcftoWcD  bpon  you  labour  in  toainc. 

ii  »ctl)?cn,5bcfecti)pou,beas3J 
am;fo?ilamasyeatc,yc!)aucnottmu= 

rcDmcatall 

13  pc  nnowl)oWtl)20ugntufiruutic 

oftrjeflcfu ,  3  pzcacDcu  tDe  €>ofpelbn< 
toyouattDcfitft. 

14  3mb  my  temptation  wind)  was 
in  my  rtefb  ye  bcfpifcD  not ,  no2  rctceteu, 
but  recciucb  mccas  an^ngcl  of  <5ob, 
euenas€rjnQ3Jcfus. 

15  ||a3Dccei6tncntDcblc(IcDncsyou 
fpafee  of  <  to:  3  bcareyou  rccojb.tDatu 
ttDabbuip&fublc ,  yewoulb  Dane  pine* 
&eb  out  your  own  cycs,anb  Dane  giucn 
tftemtome. 

16  Zm  3  tftercfoic  become  your  c* 
nemic,becaufc3l  tell  you  tDe  tcuctD  * 

17  lErjcy*clouflyaffcctyou,  butuot 
welUyca,tncy  woutb  crttaoe  |tyou,tDat 
you  mtgDt  affect  tDcm. 

18  25uttttsgoobtobce5calounya^ 


fectcb  aiwaycs  in  a  gooo  tljing,  anb  not 
onely  WDcn  3J  ant  p2cfmt  WitD  you. 

19  <$y  litle  cljiibzcn.of WDoin  3  tra* 
uaflcin birtD  againe,  bntfll CDjtift  bec 
fozmebtnyou: 

20  3  beft're  to  bec  pjefent  Wit!)  you 
now ,  anb  to  change  my  tooyce ,  fo?  3 

iraiiDt'nboubtofyou. 

21  Xell  mc,  y  e  tljat  befire  to  be  tmuer 
tl)c|Law,bocvcnotrjcarctI)c|Law? 

22  fai  it  is  written,  tljat  Stbzatjam 
Dab  two  fonnes,  tDc  one  by  abonb- 
maib,ti)e  otljcr  by  a  fcecwoman. 

23  25utl)cwl)owasoftl)cbonbWo? 
man,  was  borne  after  tljeflcfb :  but  tice 
of  thefrccwoman,  was  by  pjomifc. 

24  ©Oict)  tDfngsarcan^lllegotfC; 
foztDefcarc  tljctwo  ||  Coucnants;  tDe 
oiicfcomtftcmount  Sinai,  Wfiitfigen* 
bcretf)  to  bonbage,WDicD  ts3igar. 

15  JF02  tDis 3gar  is  mount  Smaiin 
3trabia,anb  llanfmcrctl)  to  ^Jcrufalem, 
Wijirt)  now  is,  anbiSinbonbagcWitl) 
fter  crjtlbien. 

26  aSut  ^crufaicm  Wljicl)  is  aboue 
is  free,  Wljicl)  is  tfte  motljcr  of  bs  all. 

17  ;ffozitisw?itten,*&cioycetl)ou 
barren  tljatbcarcft  not ,  bjcafeefoojti) 
anb  cry  tgoutljattraucilcft  not ;  foitfte 
bcfoiatc  rjatbmany  moc  cftiib^en  tftcn 
flje  Wl)icD  ftato  an  Duf  banb. 

28  ii5oW  Wee,  tyctftjen ,  as  33toc 
Was,  ar  c  tfjc  cljflbicn  of  pjonrife, 

29  26ut  as  tljcn  Dec  rDat  was  bonic 
after  tDe  flefl) ,  perfecuteb  Dim  tljat  was 
bome  after  tDc  Spirit,eucn  fo  it  is  now. 

30  jfreuertDclcffe ,  WDat  faitlj  tDc 
Scripture*  *€aft  out  tDc  bonbWomau 
anb  Dcrfonnc :  foitijc  fon  of  tlje  bona* 
Woman  Q>all  not  bee  Deirc  witD  tDe  fon 
oftDcfrccwoman. 

3 1  So  tDcn,  b2ctD?en,we  arc  not  cDfl> 
b?cnoftDcbonbWoman,butoftDefrec. 

CHAP.    V. 

Hee  mooueth  them  to  fland  in  their  libertie; 
3  and  not  to  obferue  circumcifion :  13  but 
rather  loue,  which  is  the  fumme  ot  the  Law. 
1  j  He  reckonedi  vp  the  workes  of  the  flefh, 
12.  andtheiruitsofthcfpirit,  15  andexhor- 
tethto  walke  in  the  fpint. 

ICanDfatttDercnweintDc 
libertfeWDercWitDCDiifl 
DatDniabebsfrccanbbcc 
not  mtanglcb  againe  WitD 
tDcyoftcofbonbage. 
i  ffieDolbe ,  3  paul  fay  bnto  you 
tDat  if  ye  be  circuntcifco ,  Cljjift  fljai  p:o^ 

fiteyou  nothing. 

3  iro? 


\\Or,!.w,i 
perplexed 
foryoit. 


\\Or,teff 
mentt. 


CJrJsinlbt 
fame  ranks 

'  itb. 


•■Efsy54.i 


eS^LI 


Gen. ;i. 


Fruites 


offlefh, 


To  the 


Gal 


atians. 


id  r 


ana  lpint. 


\\0r,  who 
did  arm? 
you  tacks  ? 


Ttu.19.l8 


Orju/fi 
riot. 


j  JFoj  3  tcftific  agamc  to  cuery  man 
tbat  is  ctrntmcifeo,tDat  Deis  a  bcbto?  to 
Doett)ciDI)olc?Latb. 

4.  €D2iftts  become  of  no  effect  bnto 
you,  tbljofocucr  of  pott  ate  tuftmeb  by 
tbcfLatt)  :yeatc  fallen  ftomgtacc. 

5  5f 02  idc  ttyougt)  tlje  fpirit  lfcaite 
fo?  tDe  Dope  of  rigl)teottfnriTe  by  fatttj. 

6  ifojm^cfusClinft.natbctttr' 
tumciuon  auaiietD  any  tbtng,no2  mint* 
cumnOon,but  faui)lbI)tcl)lboHtctl)  by 
louc. 

7  Uebib  run  rocll ;  || tbljo bib  Dinner 
yon,tDat  ye  (boulb  not  obey  tlje  tructb; 

8  Xbispcrftbafion  tommetftnotof 
Dun  tDat  calletD  you. 

9  2  little  leaucn icauenctbtDcmDole 
lumpe. 

10  5  D^ue  confidence  in  yon  tD?ougD 
tDe  ?Lo2b ,  tDat  you  tbtll  be  none  ottyct 
lbife  mmbeb;butDc  tDat  ttoubletD  you, 
(ball  bcarc  his  uibgcmcnt,  ibbofocucr 
bee  be. 

1 1 3nb3J,b2ctb?eu,tf3Jyctp2cacbcit* 
cunmfton ,  iDijp  boc  3  pet  fuffcr  pcrfc- 
tution;  tben  is  tbc  offence  of  tbc  erode 
ecafeb. 

ii  ^JmoulbtDcyfterccucncutoff 
rbljicl)  trouble  you. 

ij  5fo2b2ctb2en,ycbaucbccnceallcb 
bnto  liberty,  onely  vfenot  libettiefojan 
occaftonto  tlje  flefl),  but  by  louc  feruc 
one  another. 

14.  3fo?alltl)c!LaU)isfulfnicbmone 
tbo:D,«uen  m  tbts:*  Xbou  Hjait  louc  tbp 
nctgDbourastDyfclfc. 

15  28ut  tf  ycc  bite  anbbcuourc  one 
anotDct,  tafecDecbycbcnot  confnmeb 
one  of  another. 

1 6  Xbis  3  fay  tben ,  aaainc  m  tbc 
fpirtt,anb  II  yclball  not  fulfill  tlje  lull  of 
tlje  flefl). 

17  if02  tDe  flefl)  luftett)  againft  the 
Spirit,  anbtDcfpint  againft  tbc  flefl) : 
anb  tljcfc  arc  contrary  tl)c  one  to  tDe  0- 
tDer:fotDatycc  cannot  boe  tl;e  tDmgs 
tbatycetbouU). 

1  s  2But  if  y  ce  be  leav  of  tlje  fpir  ft,y  cc 
arcnotbnbcrtDcJUnj. 

19  j3orbc  tl)c  nwftcs  of  tl)c  flefl) 
arcmaiufcft,  lbDicD  arc  thefc ,  abultc- 
nc ,  frmucation,  bncleamieffc ,  lafcuu 
oufncfTc, 

io  '^boiatric, lbitcDcraft,Datrcb, 
Variance,  emulations,  lbzatb,  ftcifc,  ft- 
binons,l)crcfies, 

21  €nuymgs ,  murtDcrs,  tmmftciv 
ncflc,  rcucllmgs,anbfucl)liKc :  of  tDe 
ibljicl)  3  tell  you  before,  a«  3  Ijauc 


alio  tolbcyou  m  tunc  paft ,  tDat  tDcy 
tbbiebbo  fucD  tbtngs  (bail  not  tnbertte 
tbefemgbomeofdDOb. 

22  ^uttbcfruitoftbefpiritisiouc, 
ioy,  peace,  longfuffermg ,  gentlcneffe, 
goobneffcfaitD, 

25  fl^ceUencffctcmpcranee:  againft 
fuel)  tbctcts  no  lain. 

24  ^nbtljcy  tDat  are  Cl)2ifts;,Daue 
eructfieb  tlje  flefl)  Hiitlj  tlje  ]  affections; 
anbiuftes. 

25  gjf  tbc  lute  in  tlje  S>ptrit,lct  t>s  ai 
fottjamemtbc  Spirit. 

2  6  Het  bs  not  be  Dcfirous  of  bame 
glojy,p?ouoRingoncanotDcc,cnuying 
oncanotDer. 

'     CHAP.  VI. 

1  He  moueth  them  to  deate  mildly  with  a  bro 
ther  that  hath  flipped,  i  andtobeareonea 
nothers  burden.  6  To  bee  libera!!  to  their 
teachers,  9  and  not  wearie  ot  well  doing. 
11  He  (he  wcth  what  they  intend  that  preach 
.  circumcifion.  14  He  glorieth  in  nothing, 
fane  in  the  Crofle  ofChriit. 

Betb2cn,||ifainanoceo* 
ucrtatten  m  a  fault :  ycc 
^lbDtcD  arc  fprrttuan,  re* 
v  fto2cfucbaonetntbcfpirit 
wsmd&t,  ofmccBnefle,tonfibcnng 
tDyfclfcicafttDouaifo  betemptcb- 

2  aScarcyconcanotbcrsburtbcns, 
anbfo  fulfill  tbc  ?Laib  ofCDnft. 

?  if 02  tf  a  man  tDinttc  Dmifclfe  to  be 
tome  tDmg,  tbDcn  Ijc  is  notbmg,  Dee  be* 
eciuctD  Dmifclfe. 

4-  iSttt  let  cucry  man  p:oouc  DiS 
olbncib02&c,an&tDcn  (bail  Dc  Dane  re* 
ioycingm  Dun  fclfc  alone,anb  not  m  an 
otDcr. 

5  if02  eucry  man  fljall  bcare  bis; 
ottmcburtDcti. 

6  %a  Dun  tDat  is  taugbt  in  tlje 
iuo2b,commtmicatc  buto  Dun  tljat  tea* 
cDetD,  in  all  goob  tDmgs. 

7  Bcnotbecciucb.CDObisnotmoti 
rtco:foni'DatfocucramanfoujctD,tDat 
fljailDcalforcapc. 

s  jf  02  Dec  tDat  forbctD  to  fas  flefl), 
fljailoftDc  flefl)  rcapc  to2rupnon:  but 
Dc  tDatfomctbto  tDe  fpint  ,fl)allof  tbe 
fpitit  rcapc  life  cucriaftmg. 

9  3lnb  let  bs  not  bec  mcary  m  itoell 
bomg :  fo2  m  buc  fcafon  ibe  fl^ail  rcapc, 
if  tbc  famt  not. 

10  ^sU)cDauetDcrrfo2C  oppo2tuni* 
tic,  let  Ijs;  boc  goob  bnto  all  men,  cfpert' 
ally  bnto  tDcm  U)ljo  arc  of  tDe  Iiotifc* 
bolboffaitij. 

11  J'cc 


\\Or,ftfio< 


||  Or,al- 
though. 


The  election 


Ch; 


\\Or,  where 


\  Or,  things 


1 1  Pc  fee  hotb  large  a  lettet  3!  haue 
imfttcn  Ditto  you  ttrith  nunc  o'lbnt 

DfltlD. 

1 1  3lsmanyasbcGcctonialicafairc 
fl)c«)  in  the  flefl) ,  they  conftraine  you  to 
bcCirctimctfcb:  onclyicaft  trjcyflioulb 
fttffcr  pcrfccution  fo?  ttjc  Croffc  of 
Clmft. 

i  j  ;ff02ncitfKr  tftcy  thcmrclucsttJho 
are  circumcifco,ftccpc  the  !Uit>,butDC; 
fire  to  haue  yon  tircuincifcb ,  that  they 
mapgl02yinyourflcfl). 

i  +  26nt  0od  fozbfa  that  3  flioulb 
glow ,  fauc  m  the  Croffc  of  our  Ho?b 
Jlefus  C!)u'lt,i|  by  lDhomthe  ino?lb  is 


p.J, 


O 


fthcS 


aints. 


crucifies  tontomc,$3JPnto  thcttwlb. 

15  5fo?  in  Clnift  $efus  neither  tlr? 
tumttfi'on  auatlcth  any  thUig.  no?  buttr- 
cutncifion,  butanelb  creature 

i6  2nb  as  many  as  imirc  aeco?- 
Ding  to  tills  rule,  peace  be  on  trjem,  anb 
mcrcic,attb  Upon  thc3ifraclof  ©ob. 

«7  .from  henccfo?th  let  no  man  trou* 
Mc  nice,  fo?  3  bearc  in  nip  boby  the 
niarBcsofffjeJlozb^cfus. 

is  z5?cth?cn,  the grace  ofour?Lo2b 
3JcfusCJ)?itt  ^  lbith  pour  fpi'rt't.SUnen* 

C  ^Unto  tile  ©aiatians,  tbu'ttcn 
feomftotne. 


.THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAVL 

n 

the  ApoftletotheEphefic 


tans. 


CHAP.     I. 

i  After  the  falutation,  3  and  thankefgiuingfor 
theEphcfuns,  4  hetreatethofour  Election, 
6  and  Adoption  by  grace,  11  which  is  the 
true  and  proper  fountaine  ol  mans  faluation. 
13  And  beiaufe  the  height  of  this  myfrerie 
cannot  eafily  be arteined  vnto,  11$  hepraieth 
that  they  may  come  18  to  the  full  know- 
ledge,and   10    poflefsion  thereof  in  Chiift. 

3iulan3ipoftlcof 
3lcfus  CrmQ  by 
the  ttnll  of  ©on, 
to  the  £>aincts 
ibhich  arc  at  €- 
phefus ,  anb  to 
the  faithfull  in 
£h?ift3Jrfus. 

i    ©race  be  to 
pou  ,  anb  peace 

from  ©ob  our  father ,  anb  from  the 

Ho2b3icfus  Clmft. 
1   23lcffcb  be  the  ©ob  anb  father  of 

our  ILort  jflcfufi  CrjJift,  Who  hath  blcf 

feb  Ps  lbith  all  fpirttuail  blcffmge  in 

hcattcnly  |piaccsitiCh2ltt: 
+  accozbiiigashehathchofcntosin 

him,bcfo2c  the  founbation  of  thciPojlb, 

that  Vbec  fliouib  bee  holy,  anb  ttmhout 

blame  bcfo?e  him  in  louc: 
5    ii>auingp2cbcftinatcbPSbntothe 

aboptiou  of  chiUuen  by  Refits  Ch?tttto 


himfclfc,acco2bingto  thegoob  plcafurc 
ofhisUnll : 

6  Xo  the  p?atfe  of  the  glo?te  of  his 
grace,  rbhereinhc  hathmabcDs  accept 
tcbinthcbcloucb: 

7  3Jn  lDhom  lncchaucrcbemption 
fh?ough  h»s  bloob ,  the  fo?guicncffe  of 
finncs,  acco?bing  to  the  riches  of  his 
grace, 

8  nahcrein  hec  hath  abounbeb  to* 
warb  bsinailVbifcbomcanopzubcntc : 

9  Ratling  maoe  imoibcn  bnto  tos 
the  myftcric  of  his  iblu,acco?ouig  to  his 
goob  plcafurc ,  ibhich  he Ijab  purpofeb 
inhfmfclfc, 

10  icijat  in  the  bifpcnfation  of  the 
falncffcofn'mcs,hcnughtgathcrtogc5 
thcr  (n  one  all  things  ui  Chiift  ,  both 
which  arcin  t  hcaucn,anb  which  arc  on 
carth,cuctimhim: 

1 1  3m  whom  alfo  Tl»e  hauc  obtcuicb 
an  inheritance,  being  p2Cbcftinatcbac> 

I  co2bing  to  the  purpofc  of  him  Who 
W02ltcth  all  things  after  the  counfcll  of 
hisoilmeibfll: 

11  Hhanncfliouibbctothcpzaifcof 
his  gl02ic ,  Who  ftrft  ||  truftrb  m  Ch?ift. 

1?  3Jntbrjonipealfotrufted  aftcrthat 
ychcarbthcWo?boftructh,thc©ofpcl 
of your  faluation :  in  Whom  alfo  after 
thatyccbciccucb,  rcc  were  fcaicb  with 
thatholy  Spirit  ofp2omife, 
i-ftsmich 


\Cr.lhc 
heaueni. 


|  Or  licked 


Chrifts  power.  To  trie  Ephefians.  Chnil our  peace. 


1 


||  Or,  fori 

AetttiimleoiQ- 


\Gr.oi the 
might  efhit 


t  Cr  lit 


14  naDicD  is ttjc  earncft of onr itUjttl* 
tantc,  Pnttll  the  tcbcmptton  of  the  pur- 
tljafcu  poflcflton ,  tmto  the  pjatfe  of 
litsglojie.  ,.    _ 

15  iBhcrcfozc  J  alto,  after  3  Ijeacu 
of  your  faith  m  the  fLojb  3Jcuis,  anD 
lottc  bnto  all  the  S>atttts, 

i6  Ceafcnottogiuethanftesfo;tpoit, 
ma&iiig  mention  of  pou  m  mp  pjapcrs, 

17  1Chat  the  ©oD  of  out  !Lo2b  3v 
fits  Chnftthe  father  ofglozicmap  gutc 
bnto  pou  the  Spirit  of  ibtfcbomc  atib 
rtueiation  |lm  the  Imolblebge  ofhmt : 

18  xiKcpcsofpoutbnberftanbutg 
being  inltghtttcb :  that  pee  map  imorb 
iDljat  is  the  hope  of  his  tailing ,  anb 
what  the  nthes  of  the  glonc  of  bis  in- 
hentancemthe  faints: 

19  anbrbbattstbecjteeebing  great- 
neffe  of  h«s  poll>ct  to  bs-ttarb  Who  be? 
iccne,  actojbtng  to>tt)cttio?&ms  t  of  Ijis 
mightie  potter: 

io  jehtth  hcrb?oughtinCh,uQ  Ibfien 
bcratfcbbimfcomtbebeab,anbfctbmt 
at  his  ottme  right  banb  in  tbebcaucn; 

lp  places, 

ii  jffatrc  abonc all pzincipaiitie,  anb 
poibcr ,  anb  might,  anb  bommion,  anb 
cucrp  name  that  is  nameb ,  not  onelp  m 
this  ibojlb ,  but  alfo  m  that  ibbtcb  is 
to  come: 

11  3tnb  hath  put  all  things  bnberi 
hisfcete,anbgauchimtobethchcabO' 
ucr  all  things  to  the  Church, 

15  nahicbishtsbobp,  thefulnctfcof 
hint  that  fillcth  all  mall. 

CHAP.     II. 

By  comparing  what  wc  were  by  5  nature, 
with  what  wc  are  5  bv  grace:  10  Hede- 
clareth,  that  wee  are  made  for  good  workes ; 
and  15  bceing  brought  neere  by  Chrift, 
fhouldnotliue  as  11  Gentiles, and  ir  for- 
reinemn  timepaft.but  as  19  citizens  vt  ith 
theSamts,andthe  family  of  God. 

*2%&3?Jh  $b  V°n  bath  hee  quickned 

'm>A  vfeff  Hiho  \tocrc  bcab  in  trefc 
&^W  paflcs.anb  fumes, 

1  nahcrcin  m  time  palt 


aas&iTCS  re  lbaihcb  acco:btng  to  the  I 
tourfc  of  this  U102I0 ,  acco:biug  to  the 
pnncc  of  the  potter  ofthcatrctbcfpirtt 
that  nott  tto.'ltctb  m  the  djilbten  of 
bilbbebieiuc, 

3  ^mong ibhom  alfo  ttc  all  hab  our 
coiiuerfattou  tu  tunes  pad,  in  the  lufts 
of  otic  flcfl) ,  fulfilling  t  the  befirrs  of  the 
flcfli ,  ano  of  the  luutbc,  anb  ttcrc  by 


nature  the  chtlbjcn  of  tt2atb ,  cuen  as 
others: 

4.  23ut  d5ob  ttho  is  rich  in  mercie, 
foz  his  great  lone  ttbcteibttb  bee  lo- 
ttebbs, 

5  «£ucn  ttbett  ttce  Ibere  bcab  in 
[tunes,  hath  quicUncbbs  together  ttttb 
C&Hft,  (op  grace  pc  ar  e  faucb ) 

6  %nn  hath  raifeb  vs  pp  together, 
anb  mabe  vs  fit  together  tn  heaucnly 
piaccsin  Confluents: 

7  Xhat  tit  the  ages  to  come,  hee 
might  fbett  the  ertcebutg  riches  of  his 
grace ,  tn  his  mnbeneffe  tottarbs  bs, 
tbJougbCbnflScfus. 

8  iFojbp  grace  arc  ycfaueb, through 
faitb.anb  that  not  of  pour  fclucs: « «'s  the 
glftofoob: 

9  iftot  of  ttojacs  ,  left  anp  man 
fhoulbboaft. 

10  f 02  ttce  arc  Ijts  ttojbcmanfbtp, 
crcatcb  m  Chztft  3Jcfus  bnto  goob 
ttojHes,  ttbicb  Gob  hath  bcfo2e  ||  ojbet; 
neb,tljat  ttc  fhouib  iballte  m  them. 

11  D9hercfo2C  remember  that  pc  be 
ine  tn  time  paflcb  C5cntiles  tn  the  flcfl), 
Vbho  arc  cailcb  bttttrcumcifion  bp  that 
rbhtchiscallcbthc  Ctrtnmtifion  in  the 
flefhmabcbphanbs, 

11  Xhat  at  that  time  pec  \bcrc  ttitb' 
outChnft,  being  aiicns  from  the  com- 
mon ttcaltb  of  gjfracl ,  anb  ftrangers 
from  the  toucnants  of  p ; on tifc,  hatting 
nohopc,fiPtthout(3obtutherbO(2lb. 

ij  But  nott  in  Cb2tft3kfus,pe  ttho 
fomcttmesttcre  far  off,  arc  mabe  nigh 
bpthcbloobofCh2tft. 

14  JF02  bee  15  our  peace,  lbho  hath 
mabe  both  one  ,  ano  hath  biotten 
oorbttc  the  tnibblcttaii  of  partition  be 
tujecnebs: 

15  J^autng  aboli'flicb  in  Ins  flefl)  the 
cnmittc,euenthc?laU)cof€ommanbe 

ntCtttS  conteined  Ut  <aD20lUattCCS  ,  f02  tO 

maftcmhimfclfcof  tVbamconcncibc 
matt  ,fo  matting  peace. 

16  3mb  that  he  might  reconcile  both 
bnto  (5ob  in  otic  bobp  bp  the  croffc,  ha 
tttttg  flame  the  enmitte  llthrrebp, 

17  ^nb  tame,  anb  p2eaclico  peace  to 
pou,  winch  were  afar  re  off,  anb  to  them 
that  iberc  nigh. 

is  5to2th2oughh,.mibcc  both  hauc 
an  ateeffe  bp  one  Spirit  bnto  the  5fa 
ther. 

19  /5olb  thcrtfo2e  \kc  are  no  11102c 
flrangciB anb terctners  but fcllolb ct 
twtisibiththcS^t'nts.anbofthehouf 
Ijolb  of  eob, 

20  3(nb 


red.  ' 


Graccgiuen Chap.iij.iiij,        to  the  Gentiles, 


\\Or,c! 

before. 


10  #nb  arc  bruit  bpon  trjc  founba^ 
ttouoftrjc:3{po(tiesanb?£:oprjcts,3Jcs 
fnsCtjriQ  tjimfclfc  being  trje  ttjicfe  top 
netftone, 

ii  3Jn  Ibtjom  all  ttjc  buflbing  fitlp 
frameb  togctfjcr ,  gr  onjctlj  Ditto  an  tjo; 
tp3Cemplcinttjc?Lo.tb: 

ii  3J»  ttrfjom  pou  alfo  aw  builbeb 
together  ft»  an  habitation  of  Gob  tljQ< 
rotbttjc&pirtt. 

CHAP.    III. 

5  The  hidden  myfterie,  6  that  the  Gentiles 
(Tiould  be  faued,  j  was  made  knowen  to 
Paulbyreudation:  8  And  to  him  was  that 
grace  giuen, that  <?  he  fhould  preach  it.  13 
Hedefireththemnot  to  faint  for  his  tribula- 
tion, 14  andpraieth,  19  that  they  may  per- 
ceiue  thegreat  loue  or  Chrift  toward  them. 

•^trjis  taufe  3  0anl,  tf)c 
wfonct  of  35efus  €h:tC 
:o?pou<0entues, 
1  3ifpetjaucrjcarbof 
ttjc  bifpenfatton  of  ttjc 
grate  of  <Sob,u>tjicfj  is  giuen  ntc  to  pot* 
rbatb: 

5  ^oibtfjatbpteuelationtjccmabc 
fenotbenbnto  me  ttje  mpttcrlc ,  (asjl 
tbzotc  ||  afo?e  m  fell)  ttwbs, 

4  uatjerebp  rbtjen  pe  rcabe,  pc  map 
bnberttanb  mp  fenolblcbge  m  ttje  mp 
actteofChnuv) 

5  natjirtj  in  ottjer  ages  lbas  not 
mabefenolben  bntotljefonnesofmen, 
as  it  is  nolbrcucilcb  bnto  tjis  tjolp;& 
poftlcsanb0?optjetsbpttje5>pirit. 

6  HCtjat  tl)e  pennies  ujoulb  be  fcl* 
loU)  tjcires ,  anb  of  ttjc  fame  bobp,  anb 
pactafeers  of  ins  pjomifein  Ctjaft,  bp 
ttjc©otpel: 

7  i©tjcreof  3  tbas  mabe  a  $&vxv 
ftcr,  actojbtng  to  trje  gift  of  tire  grate  of 
<£>ob  giuen  into  mee,  bp  trje  effectuall 
Uwfeutgoftjispotbet. 

s  ^antomectbDoamlefletrjentrje 
I  cafl  of  all  faints,  is  ttjisgrate  giuen, 
ttjat3Ffl)oulb  pjcaetj  among  the  <5tn-> 
tiles  thebnfcarchablc  rrrtjes  of  CtjriC, 

9  anbtomaftcailtncnfec.tbtjatrs 
ttje  fellottoujtp  of  trjc  mpflenc,  lbtjirh 
fcomttje  beginning  of  ttjcuwlb,  tjattj 
benctjibincSob.ibrjocreatcb  all  trjmgs 

bp3IeuisCljritt: 

io  Xo  ttje  intent  tljat  noib  bnto  ttje 
principalities  anb  potbers  inhcaucnlp 
places,  nright  be  fenotben  bp  the  ctjuttj), 
trjc  mantfolb  ttnfebomc  of  ooo . 

ii  atccozmng  to  ttjc  ctcroail  pur 


I  pofe  Which  hepurpofeb  m€r)?ift3Jefus 
our?Lozb: 

ix J3m  tbfjom  lberjauc  boibneiTc  anb 
acceile^  until  tonnbrncc,  bpthcfattlj  of 
tjim. 

13  natjercfoje  37  bcrlre  ttjatpec  faint 
not  at  mp  tribulations  fo:  pou,  lnhtcij 
tspourguwp. 

H  Jty  ttjis  taufe  3J  bottnnp  fences 
bnto  tljc  iPatrjet  of  our  %m  Ucfus 
Ctjrirl 

15  4Df  Ibtjom  trje  mtjolc  familp  in 
rjcauen  anb  cartlj  is  nameb, 

k  Xtjat  tjc  tboulb  grant  pouaceo^ 
bing  to  trje  tfctjts  of  Ins  giozp,  to  bec 
Qrcngttjencblbitijniigijt ,  bptjis&pi; 
rit  in  ttje  inner  man, 

17  Xtjat  Crjrift  map  btbcll  in  pour 
hearts  bp  fattr),  tljat  pee  bctngrootcb 
anb  grounbebtn  loue, 

is  i!0apbeabletotonrp?crjcnbibitl) 
all  3>atnts,  ibrjat  is  ttje  iweabtrj,  anb 
lcngtD,anb  beptt),anb  Ijcigljt : 

19  3mb  to  fenorb  tDc  loueofClnift, 
IbDicij  parTetlj  fenolblcogc,  tljat  ^tt 
tmgDt  bee  fillcb  U)itrj  all  tljc  fulneiTe  of 
d5ob. 

io  jRott)  bnto  ijim  tljat  is  able  to  bo 
erceebmg  abunbautlp  abouc  all  tljat 
tbec  affec  qi  trjmfec,  acto^brng  to  tljc 
poibct  tljat  ibojfectrj  m  bs, 

ii  Unto  Ijim  be  glozp  in  tljc  CUurdj 
bp€Dnft  Ucfus,  trj20ugl)outau  ages, 
£bo?lb  ibitrjout  cnb.  ^mcn. 

CHAP.     IIII. 

t  Heexhortethtovnitie,  7  and  declaretluhat 
Ood  therefore  giueth  diuers  1 1  gifts  vnto 
men,  that  his  Church  might  be  13  edified, 
and  \6  growenvp  in  Chrift.  18  Hecalleth 
them  from  the  impuritie  of  the  Gentiles.  14 
Toputonthenewman.  25  Tocaftofly- 
ing.and   19   corrupt  communication. 

Xljerefo?e  trjc  pjifoncr 
||oftrjc!Lo?b,bcfcccrjpou 
tljatpcctbaifee  ibonijp  of 
ttjc  tootatfon  tbrjcrcunttj 
pearecaiicb, 
1  naittj  ail  lovblmcffc  aub  mccfec 

neffe,  ttJtttj  long  futfenng,  fo?bcanng 

one  another  m  lour. 
j   €nbcuounngto  fecepe  ttje  bmtic 

of  ttje  Aptritmttjc  bono  of  peace. 

4  There  is  one  bobp ,  anboucfpiat, 
cuen  as  pec  arc  caitcb  in  one  tjopc  of 
pour  tailing. 

5  £>ncllojb ,  one  jfaitlj,  one  Bap^ 
tifme, 

6  ]©tu; 


_  Orjntht 
Lord. 


Chriftes  gifts. 


TothcEphcfians.  Thenewman. 


*PfJ.<58. 
18. 

i|Or,  4 mul- 
titude cf 
CAittna. 


\\Or,fn!pL 
.Cor.  1 2. 


j8. 


\\Or,intotbe 


[Or^e. 


||  Or  i«»j 
fine  ere. 

•Col.s.lo. 


*Rom  l.n 
[|(        .    . 


6  jCmtGobanbjfatbfrofall.ibbo 
is  about  all,  <j  tlnougb  all,  ?  tn  pou all. 

7  *5ut  bnto  cucrv  one  of  bs  is  gi- 
uen  grate,  atcozotng  to  tbcmcafnrcof 
tbcgiftofeb2iu\ 

8  lBbercfojc be  faith  :*i©bcn heat 
cenbeb  top  on  Dist>,t»c  leb  jlcaptiuittc  tap- 
tiue,anb  gauc  giftsbnto  men. 

9  (iiSott)  that bcafccnbeb,ibbatis 
it  but  that  hec  alfo  beftenbeb  firlt  mto 
tl)C  lovber  parts  offbc  earth  < 

io  $e  that  beftenbeb, is  the  fame  alfo 
tbatafctnbcb  bpfar  aboucaii  beauens, 
that  be  might  ||  fill  all  things.) 

ii  *^nbl)cgauefomc,^po(tlcs:am) 
Come,  £2opbcts:  anb  fbme,  Cuange^ 
litts:  anbfome,0afro2S,anb  teachers : 

n  5fo2tbe  perfecting  of  the  faints, 
fo?  the  uwbc  of  the  mmtUene ,  fo?  the 
ebtfpingoftbc  bobp  of  Cb?i(r: 

ij  %i[l  IDC  all  tome  |  in  the  bnitic  of 
tl)c  faith ,  anb  of  thetmoiblcbge  of  the 
Pontic  of  d5ob,  bnto  a  perfect  man, Xm> 
to  the  mcafurc  of  the  II  ftaturc  of  the  ml 
neffcofClmft: 

14-  Xhatibehcntcfoo2thbcnomo2c 
cbilb2tn,  toffeb  to  anb  fro ,  anb  cancb & 
bout  lbith  cucrp  ttrinbeof  boctrtne,  bp 
the  flctght  of  men ,  and  cunning  crate 
neffe,  ibbcrcbp  tbcp  ipe  tnibaitetobe 
ccitie: 

15  25ut||fpcamngtbetructb  tnlone, 
map  grolb  top  into  him  in  all  things 
winch  ts  the  hcab,euen  Chjilt: 

16  *  jprom  ibbom  the  ibholc  bobp 
fi'tlpiopncbtogetbcr,anbeompaetcbbp 
that  lbhich  cucrp  lopnt  fupplpetb ,  at 
tojbing  totbccffectuaiinwtungm  the 
meafurc  of  cuerppart,ma&ctb  intrcafe 
of  the  bobp ,  bnto  the  ebifping  of  it  f  clfc 
mloue. 

17  Xms3Jfaptbercfo2canbtcfhfic 
m  the  Hojb ,  that  pec  benctftmb  lbai&c 
not  as  other  ©entiles  ibaihe  mtbeba; 
nine  of  their  minbe, 

18  tyaumgtbcbnbcrftaubmg  barfte 
ntb ,  being  alicnatcb  from  the  life  of 
Gob  ,th2ough  the  icmo:anrc  that  is  in 
them^rcaufc  of  tbc*||  blinbneffe  oftbeir 
heart : 

19  naho  being  pad  feeling,  haue  gi- 
uen  thciiifciucs  oner  bnto  lafnuiouf 
ucfTc,  to  \b02Uc  all  biuicanntiTc  lbith 
greebmeffc. 

;o  iSutvc  haue  not  fo  learncb  Chnft: 
z  1  3Jf  fo  be  that  ye  banc  hcarb  hun, 

anb  haue  bene  taught  bp  him,  as  tlje 

ttuctnie  interns, 
22  Xbatpccput  off  concerning  the 


fojtner  tonucrfation ,  the  olbc  man, 
lbhich  is  corrupt  accozbing  to  tbebettit* 
full  mas: 

it  3lnb  bet  rtnttbtb  in  the  fpirit  of 
pouumnbe: 

14  ami  thatpce  put  on  that  netb 
man,  lbhitb  after  ©ob  is  trtateo  ml 
,  rtgbtcoufncu*e,ano||  trot  houneflc. 

2$  nsherefoie  putting aibap  iping, 
fptafet  cuerp  man  truth  lbith  his  neigh* 
bour  :fo;  ibearc  membcrsonc  ofano, 
tbcr. 

i6  25c pcangrp  anb  (time  not,lct  not 
the  £>mme  go  boibn  bpon  pour  ibiarb: 

27  Neither  ginc  plate  to  the  Dcuill. 

28  lLetbimthatfJtolc,flealcnomo2e: 
but  rather  let  him  labour, ibojBtng 
luith  his  hanbes  the  thing  lbhitb  ts 
goob,thathcmaphauc||togtuctohim 
that  ncebeth. 

29  Hct  no  corrupt  tommunitatton 
p?ocecbe  out  of  pour  mouth,  but  that 
lbhitb  isgoob||to  thebfeof  ebifpmg, 
that  it  map  mimfler  grace  bnto  the  hea? 
rers. 

30  3lnbgrienenotthcholpS»r(ritof 
Gob ,  Vbbercbp  pee  arefcaieb  bnto  the 
bap  of  rebemption. 

31  fLctaiH)itternes,anbib2ath,anD 
angcr,anbciamour,anbeuiIlfpeab<ng, 
be  put  atbap  from  pou ,  lbith  all  mancc, 

32  *anb  bee  pemnbe  one  to  another, 
tenber  heartcb,foignungone  another, 
cucn  as  ©ob  fo?  Cbnfts  fane  hath  fo^gt? 
uen  pou. 

CHAP.    V. 

2.  After generall  exhortations,  to  loue,  3  to 
flie  fornication,  4  and  all  vndeannefTe,  7 
not  to  conuerfe  with  the  wicked,  15  towalke 
warily,andtobe  18  filled  with  the  fpirit,  xi 
he  defcendeth  to  the  particular  dueties,  how 
wiues  ought  to  obey  their  hufbands,  15  and 
hufbands  ought  to  loue  their  wiues,  31  euen 
as  Chrift  doth  his  Church. 

€pc  therefore  follolb* 
ers  of  ©ob ,  as  bcate 
tbiib;en. 

2  3nbibaihcinlouc, 
asChnQ  alfo  bath  Io* 
uebbs.anbharhgiucn 
hfmfelfcfoibs,  an  of- 
fering anb  afarrifice  to  ©obfo:  a  Qncet 
duelling  fauour ; 

3  25ut  fornication  anb  all  bntlcan^ 
ncfTc,02  cotictoufncni ,  let  it  trot  btontc 
namtb  amougft  pou,  as  btcommttb 
faints : 

4  0t\i\)tt  fiithtntfft ,  no?  foolifl) 
taiitmg. 


J  Orybelinti 
oftTuctk, 


lOr,lcJ>Jlr, 
hue. 


I]  Or,  »ft£ 

peprofitAhly. 


"j.Cor.j. 

10. 


A  wake  from  fleepe.  Chap.v.vj.        Scucrall  duties. 


Or ,  vr.ht* 
tuft. 


\]Or,difct- 
utrtd. 


'E6i.6o.i. 


■CoUf. 


taming  ,uoj  tcding,  ibhich  are  not  com 
ucnicntJbutrathergiuingofthantos. 

5  5Fo2thtsveBnolb,thatnolbh02c= 
monger,  no2bntleaneperfon,nc#  cone* 
tousman  ibho  is  antbolatet ,  hatb  an? 
inheritance  ftt  the  tungbomeof  Chnft, 
anbofdsob. 

6  fLtt  no  man  Detente  von  ibith 
baine  lbo;bs:fo?  bttaufe  of  thefc  things 
eommetb  the  Ibzatb  of  God  Upon  the 
cf)ilD?cn  of  II  bilbbebtence. 

7  2See  not  vee  therefore  partakers 
ibttbtbem. 

8  f  o?  v«  tow e  fomctimes  barto* 
neffe  ,but  notb  are  yee  iigijt  m  the  ?Lo?b: 
Ibaito  as  cbilbjcn  of  light, 

9  (ifoitbefruiteoftbefptritisinail 
goobnefTc  anb  ngbtcoufneffe  9  truetb.) 

10  |&ooutng  lbbat  is  acceptable  bm 
totbe?Lo?b: 

1 1  2nb  batte  no  fellotbfbtp  tbttb  the 
bnfrnttfnllibo2ltcsof  barucncfTe,  bnt 
rather  rep2onetbem. 

11  JFo:  tt  is  a  (bame  ettcn  to  fpeato 
oftbofe  things  Ibbicb  arc  bone  of  them 
mfetm. 

i}  25utaHtfjtngsti)atate||cep;oo'' 
ueb,  ace  mabe  manifeft  bv  the  light :  fo? 
ibbatjfoeucr  Doth  malic  mantteft ,  is 
light. 

14.  jeberfoze  bee  faith :  *  aibato 
thou  that  deeped,  anb  atifc  from  the 
beab,  anbCbnBftiailgmetbeeltgbt. 

15  *  Sec  then  that  vecsbaltoetreum! 
fpectIv,notasfoolcs,butasibtfe, 

16  ftebcmtng  the  time,  becaufe  the 
bavesarc  cmll. 

17  nabcrcfojebcvenotbnibtfc,  bnt 
bnberdanblng  lbbat  the  lbill  of  the 
5,02b  ts. 

18  anbbccnotbmntolbitbibitte, 
ibhetein  ts  erceffe :  but  bee  fillcbibttb 
the  Spirit: 

19  Spealmtg  to  vour  fclttcs ,  In 
l&falmcs,anb  $vmncs,anb  Spirituall 
fongs  Xtngmg  anb  mailing  mclobtctn 
vour  heart  to  the  IL02D, 

io  ©ining  tbanltcs  aiftiavcs  fo:  all 
things  bnto  Gob ,  anb  the  if athtt ,  in 
the  /frame  of  our  ?Lojb  3Jcfas  Gb2td,. 

11  Submitting  vout  felues  one  to 
another  in  the  feare  of  000. 

xi  names,  fubmitvour  felues  bnto 
poor  ott>nbulbanbs,as  bnto  tbclLo?o. 

13  ifoz  the  hufbanb  is  the  hcao  of 
tberbtfe,  cttenasGb2id  ts  the  bcao  of 
the  Church :  anb  Ijc  is  the  fauiour  of  the 
bobv. 

z+  3Cf)trefo?c  as  the  Church  isfub^ 


(cct  bntoCtyid,  fo  let  tbelbiucs  bee  to 
their  oibnc  bttfbanbs  m  cuerv  thing. 

15  ^ufbanbs,  lone  vout  rtnucs.cueu 
as  ChnQ  aifo  loucb  the  Church ,  anb 
gauehimfclfefozit: 

is  1Chat  he  might  fanmec^cleanre 
■t  ibith  the  ttafbing  of  mater ,  bv  the 
tiwb, 

x7Xhatheemightp2Cfentittohim< 
fclfe  a  gionous  Church ,  not  haumg 
fpo  1 0  x  ibnncBic ,  0;  anv  fuch  thing :  but 
that  it  Choulb  bee  holv  anb  lbttbout  blc- 
mtu). 

ts  So  ought  men  to  louc  their 
ttnnes,  as  their  olbnebobtes:bee  that 
loueth  his  Xbife,  loneth  himfelfe. 

19  Jfoz  no  man  euet  vet  hatcb  his 
olbne  flefh. :  but  nouritheth  anb  chert* 
fbethit,cucnasthefU»b  the  Church: 

jo  jfojrbearemembersofhisbobv, 
ofhis  flefh,  anb  of  his  bones. 

31  f  02  this  caufc  (hall  a  man  leaue 
hts  father  anb  mother,  anb  (hall  be  tov- 
neb  bnto  his  ibtfc ,  anb  the?  tibo  (haibc 
one  flefh. 

31  Xbts  is  a  great  mvderie :  but 
3  fpeato  concerning  Cb;itt  anb  the 
Church. 

33  /BcuertbcUfle,  let  euerv  one  of 
Voum  parncuiar,  fo  lone  his  tbife  euen 
as  himfelfe,  ano  the  Vbrfe  fee  that  (he  re- 
ucrence  her  hufbanb. 

CHAP.  VI. 

1  The  duetie  of  children  towards  their  parents, 
<,  Ot  (eruants  towards  their  mafters.  10  Our 
life  is  a  warfare,  12.  Not  onely  againft  flefh 
and  blood, but  alfoipiritual  enemies,  ij  The 
complete  armorotaChriftian,  18  and  how  it 
oughttobevfed.  11  Tychicus  is  comended. 

$?tlb2cn ,  obev  vour  pa* 
rents  in  the  2Lo?b:  fo?  this 
ts  right. 

z  honour  thv  father 
ano  mother,  (tbhich  is  the 
ftrft  commanbement  Ibith  P2omtfc,) 

3  Xhat  tt  map  bee  tbcli  murj  thee, 
ano  thon  mated  Ituc  long  on  the  eart I). 

4  anb  yee  fathers,  pjouoltc  not 
vour  thtlbzen  to  lb  tath :  but  bmtg  them 
bp  in  the  nourturc  anb  abntomtion  of 
thelLojb. 

5  Scruants,  bee  obebient  to  them 
that  are  vour  matters  acco2bing  to  the 
fled),  ibith  feare  anb  trembling,infin; 
glencfle  of  vour  hear  t ,  as  bnto  Clj2ift : 

6  i!5ot  ibith  eve  feruice  as  men 
plcafers ,  but  as  t he  fcruants  of  Chart, 
Doing  the  lbtll  of  ©Ob  from  the  heart:  f 
ac  7  natt&i 


The  armour        TotheEphefians.    ofChnftians. 


\\OrjnoJe- 

rating. 

yonryand 

their HtAJler 


\\0r, wicked 

fpirtts. 

[  Or  beatten- 

\Or,haHt»g 
otiercomcafl. 


7  i@ith  sood  UJili  DomgCetuicc, as 
to  the  fLo?b,anb  no  t  to  men, 

3  Bnotbingtbatibhatfoeuergoob 
thing  anp  man  ooctb,  the  fame  fbail  be 
rcceiuc  of  the  Ho?D,UJl)ctl)cc  be  be  bono 
01  free. 

9  3inDpema!lcrs,botbcfamctbings 
bnto  tbcm,  i|  forbearing  tb?catning 
bnoibing  that  j|  pour  matter  alfo  is  in 
beauen,  neither  is  tljcrc  cefpettof  per 
fonsibitbbtm. 

io  ifinallp,  mptyctb,ien,befirongin 
tiic  JLoib,?  in  the  poibet  oftJts  might. 

n  $ut  on  the  lbbolc  armour  of  <3ob, 
that  pe  may  be  able  to  ftanb  agamft  the 
Unlcsoftbcbeuill. 

n  ifonbccibjcOlcnotagainftflen) 
anb  bloob,  butagainft  pnnnpaimes,a- 
gamB  poVbcts,againtt  the  rulers  oftfjc 
barbnes  of this  tt>o?lb,agamft  ||  fptntu- 
all  Vbicbcbncs  m !  1  ngti  plates. 

13  nDlKrfoictahcbutopoutnelbhnlc 
armour  of  <5ob,tbat  pee  map  be  able  to 
ttntbGanbin  tbeeutllbap,anb||bauing 
bone  all,to  ftanb. 

14  5>tanb  therefore,  baaing  pour 
lopnes  girt  about  n)itbtructb,anb  ha? 
uing  on  the  tyeaft-piate  of  rlgbteoufc 
ntffe : 

15  3nb  pour  feete  (bob tt)<tb  the  p?e* 
parationof  the  ©ofpel  of  peate. 

i6  3boue  all,  rafting  the  fbiclbe  of 
jf  aitb ,  ibbcrctbltb  pee  fbail  bee  able  to 


quemlj  all  the  fierte  cartes  of  the  Vbfe 

BCD. 

17  3inb  taftc  the  helmet  of  faluation, 
anb  the  fuwti  of  the  Spirit,  tbbicb  is 
thcibojbofOoD: 

is  Raping  aiibapes  ibith  all  pjapcr 
anb  fuppiitation  in  the  fptrit,  anbibat- 
thing  thereunto  ibith  aiiperfcuerante, 
anb  fuppbeanon  f  0?  all  jfeatnts, 

19  3nb  f 0?  mee,  that  btterante  map 
be  giucn  bntome,tbat'Jmapopcnmp 
mouth  boiblp,to  mabe  ftnoxben  the  mp* 
ftcrieoftbc©ofpcl:   • 

zo  fo}  tbrjicl)  3  am  an  ambaffabo? 

in  bonbs,  that  ||  therein  3  map  fpeabe 
bolblp,as3l  ought  to  fpcafte. 

xi  25ut  that  pec  alfo  mapftnotbmp 
affaires,and  boib  3  boe/Eptbiras  a  be* 
loucb  brother,  anb  faithfull  nnnifter  m 
the?Lo?b,fbail  mabe  bnoiben  to  pou  all 
things. 

ix  tehom  3  haucfent  bnto  poufo: 
the  fame  purpofcrbat  pec  might  ftnotb 
our  affair cs , anb  that  he  might  cemfo: t 
pour  hearts. 

13  j&catcbetothcb;eth^en,anbloue, 
ibith  faith  from  <5ob  the  5Fatbcr,anb 
tbcfLotfjgiefusGbHtt. 

14  orate  bcttxth  anthem  that louc 
our  JUjjB  3Jefus  CbnQ  1 1  in  Ontentie. 

Ca&itten  from  Some  bnto  the  €■ 
pbebansbplCpcbtrus. 


\\0r*»» 
thaine. 
|0r,  thereof 


corny;  ten. 


^THE 


ran 


oue. 


Chap.j. 


His  bonds. 


^THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAVL 

the  Apoftle  to  thePhilippians. 


Or.mtnti- 


||  Or,  viUfl- 
nijh  it. 


||  Or,yt»t 
hauemein 
ymr  heart. 

(  Or ,  part a- 
kersTvithmc 
of  grace. 


\\\  Or,  fence. 
Ij0iy«>. 


CHAP.    I. 

3  He  ttftifiethhis  thankefulneffe  to  God,  and 
his  loue  toward  them,  tor  the  fruits  of  their 
faith  and  fellow  (hip  ,  in  his  liifferings, 
q  davly  praving  to  him  tor  their  mcteale 
in  grace:  11  Hee  fheweth  what  good 
the  faith  of  Chiift  had  receiued  by  his 
troubles  at  Rome,  2.1  and  how  ready  he  is 
to  gloririeChrift  either  by  his  life  or  death, 
2.7  exhorting  them  to  vnitie,  28  and  to 
fortitude  in  perlecution. 

8nl  anb  %tom 

tlKUS   the   ftr 

uants  of  Jlcfus 
Chuu\  to  all  the 
faints  in  Chnft 
3jcrus,tthiehare 
at  #bmppi,  ttith 
thcffiilhopsanb 
Dcatons: 
i  (Sracebeintto  you,anopeatc,from 
<3ob  out  if athtr,ano  «°™  tljc  %ofr  3v 

fus  Chnft.  „ 

?  3JthanKemy(30bbpottcucryl!rc; 

membjatueofyou, 

4  2ilttaycstn  euery  pjayer  of  mine 
fojyouaumaKmgrequca.tttthtoy 

5  fojyourfelottftoptothewel 

from  the  firtt  bay  bnttll  nottj 

6  ffietogtonfibentofthtsbctythtog, 
thathctthich  hart)  begun  agoobttozu 
in  ponJIttJfll  pcrfonnc  itDntil  thebay  of 

ifcfusChnft: 

7  <2uen  as  it  is  mcetc  fojtncc  to 
thinKc  tins  of  you  all ,  betaufc  311  hauc 
vou  to  my  heart ,  m  as  math  as  both  m 
my  bonos ,  anb  in  the  befente  anb  ton* 
firmation  of  the  d5ofpcl,yc  aliare  ||  par* 
taKers  of  my  state. 

8  5Foz  <H?ob  is  my  rcwb,hott  great 
ly  II  long  after  you  all,  to  the  bottcis 
of  ijefus  Chnft.  „        Ml#>rt, 

9  anb  this  Upjay ,  that  your :  louc 
tnayaboiuroyct  mo?cfjmo?e  mKnott* 
lebgcanb  to  all  !lt«^gmcnt. 

io  Xjjat  ye  may|iapp?onc  thmgs  that 


||arc  crtellent,that  ye  map  be  nntcre,anb 
tttthout  offente  nil  the  bap  of  Chnft. 

ii  iscing  fillcb  ttith  the  fruuts  of 
rightcoufneffe ,  tdtjirtj  are  by  3Jefus 
Chuff  bnto  the  glojy  anb  pzaifc  ot  <£»ob. 

12  2Sut3J  ttoulbyee  fl)oulb  bnber* 
ftanb  brethren,  that  the  things  ttljith 
happencb  bnto  mee,  hauc  fallen  out  ra* 
thcr  bnto  the  fuctherantc  of  thedsofpel. 

15  s>othatmybonbs||toChnft,atc 
mantfeftin  all  the  ||  palate,  anb  to  ||ail  o* 

thCt  places. 

1 4  ^nb  many  of  the  b?eth?en  to  the 
?Lojb,  ttarmg  tonfibent,  by  my  bonbs, 
'  are  ninth  mo;tc  bolb  to  fpeaKc  the  tto?b 
ttithoutfeatc. 

1 5  5>omeinbecbp?eath Chuff, eucn 
of  cuuic  anb  ftrife,  anb  foinc  alfo  of 
goobibill. 

i6  Xhe  one  pjeach  Chnft  of  tonttnti; 
on,not  fynterely ,  fuppofmg  to  abbcafc 
flicttontomybonbs: 

17  25ut  the  other  of  lone,  Knotting 
that  3  am  fct  foj  the  befente  of  the 
Oofpel. 

is  !©hatthcn;J!3otttithftanbtogc< 
ucry  ttay ,  tthcthct  m  pjetente,  o?  tn 
trueth :  Chuff  is  pjeatheb,anb  3  there- 
to boe  reioytc,yea,anb  ibill  reioyce. 

19  jfo?3J  Knott  that  this  (hall  turne 
to  my  Eauiatunt  through  your  pjaycr, 
anb  the  fupplte  of  the  fptnt  of  3Jcfus 

io  attojbtng  to  my  earned  erpeeta- 
tton,  anb  my  hope,  that  to  nothing^ 
Ihalbe  afhameb :  butthat  ttith  all  bolfr 
ncs,as  aittayes,  (°  nott  alfo  Chnft  dial 
be  magnifies  to  my  boby  ,tthether  it  be 
by  life  oi  by  bead). 

ii  if  o?to  me  to  line  is  Chnft,  anb  to 

bieisgainc. 

ii  iSutifJ  liueto  thefleO) ,  thiois 
the  fruit  of  my  labour :  yet  tttjat  3  fbal 
thufcUttotcnot. 

23  ifo^amtoaflraitbttttirtttto, 
haumg  a  beftre  to  bepart ,  $  to  bet  ttith 
Ctmft,tthiehtsfaeeebcttcr. 


\OrJ,fcr. 


\\Orfcr 

Cbnff. 

\\OrC*[*rl 

Court. 

\\Or,lo«ll 

other:. 


Chrifthumblcd^TothePhilippians. 


and  exalted. 


14  #eucrthcles,toabtDcuithefle(b, 
ismojenecDfullfojpou. 

%*,  anb  hauing  this  confibence,  3 
Uuoib  tljat 3f  (ball  abiftc  ano  continue 
XDttt)  ^ouaii ,  fo?  pour  furtherance  anb 
topoffatth, 

16  Xhat  pour  rciopnng  map  bee 
moje  abunbant  in  3Jcrus€h2iQfo;t  me, 
bpmp  commttigto  pou  agame. 

17  £>nelp  let  pour  conucrfation  bee 
as  it  becommeth  the  ©ofprt  of  Chjift, 
ti)at  rbhether  3  come  anb  Tec  you ,  oi 
eifebcabfent,  _]  maphearcof  pourafc 
faires,  that  pee  (lanb  faft  in  one  fpiru, 
ttJith  one  mtnbe ,  arming  together  foj 
the  faith  of  the  ©ofpcl, 

i8  TLtiO  in  nothing  terrifieb  bp  pour 
abuerfartes,  Vbhich  ts  to  them  an  cut; 
bent  toften  of  perbitton:  but  tor  on  of 
faiuatton,anb  tljat  o  f  ood. 

19  $0}  bnto  pou  tt  is  giuen  in  the 
behaifcof  Chnfisnotonelp  tobcieeue  on 
htm,  butaifo  to  tuffer  fo?  his  fafee, 

jo  $aumg  tl)e  fame  conflict  tbhtch  pe 
fatti  in  me,anb  noib  heare  to  be  m  inc. 

CHAP.    II. 

He  exhorteth  them  to  vnitie,  and  to  all  humble- 
nefle  of  minde ,  by  the  example  of  Chrifts 
humilitie  and  exaltation:    il    Toacarelull 

Eroceeding  in  the  way  of  faluatioD,chat  they 
ee  as  lights  to  the  wicked  world,  16  and 
comforts  to  him  their  Apoftle ,  who  is  now 
ready  to  bee  offered  vp  to  God.  ip  Heho- 
pethto  fcndTimothie  to  them,  whom  hee 
greatly  commendedi,  15  as  Epaphroditus 
alfo,  whom  he  prefently  fendeth  ro  them. 

5f  there  bee  ttjeWfbiJC  3np 

confoiattoninChjitt,  if  a* 
np  comfort  of  loue,  rfanp 
fciioibfbtp  of  tlje  3>ptrtt, 
if  anp  bolbels ,  9  mercies ; 
fulfill  pe  nip  iop,  that  pee  belme 

nunbeb,  hauing  tycfanietoue,betngof 

onearcojb,  of  oncnunbe. 

3  JLtt  nothing  bee  done  through 
ftrtfe,  at  baincglo?p,  but  in  loibuncflc 
of  minbe  let  eatt)  ettccme  other  better 
thcnrhemfelues. 

4  fLooue  not  eucrp  man  on  his 
oibne  thtngs,but  cuerp manaifo  on  the 
things  of  others. 

5  ?Ut  this  miiibc  bee  in  pou,  Which 
rbas  aiTo  in  Chnft  3Jcfus : 

6  nabo  being  m  tlje  fojmc  of  <5ob, 
thought  tt  not  robbcrp  to  bee  equail 
ibuixBOb: 

7  25ut  mabe  himfclfe  of  no  repute 
tton,  ana  toohebpon  him  the  fomieof 


aferuant.anb  ibas mabe  ut  the  \\mt'-\v>-**» 
nefTeofmen. 

8  Znb  bemg  founb  m  fattnon  as  a 
man,  he  humblcb  hunfelfe ,  ano  became! 
obebicnt  bntobcarh,  cucn  tlje  Death  of 
theCroCTe. 

9  mhcrcfoze  00b  alfo  hath  htghlp 
craitcb  htm ,  anb  giucn  htm  a  jl3ame 
Which  ts  abouc  cuerp  name : 

10  Xrjatatthe/ftamcofgjeuiscuc- 
rpfenee  (houlbbolb ,  of  th.nSs  m  hcauen, 
anb  thmgs  ut  earth,  anb  things  bnber  the 
earth: 

1 1  3(nD  that  cuerp  tongue  fboulb 
confeffcrhat  3Jefus  ChtfQ  is?Lo;tb3to 
the  glozp  of  ©Ob  the  father. 

11  sabercfoje ,  nip  bcloucD ,  as  pee 
haue  alibapes  obepcb.not  as  in  nip  p?e= 
fence  onelp,  but  notb  much  moje  inmp 
abfence  Uwnc  out  pour  ottmc  falua? 
tion  Xbttlj  fearc,ano  tr  tmbltng. 

u  fo;  it  is  ©ob  which  uwftcth  in 
pou,both  to  ibiU.anb  to  boe,  of  his  gooo 
pleafnre. 

14  2Doe  all  things  Without  murmtt* 
nngSySubbifpunngs : 

15  HrhatpeemapbeebiamelelTcanb 
llharmeleffe,  thefonnesof<i5oD,  with*  f(7r^WOT 
out  rebuke,  tti  rhemibbesofacrooHcb 
anDperuer£enarion,amongtt)hom||pei|or./^«r' 
tytne  as  lights  in  the  W02ID : 

i6  $olotng  foojth  the  ftoiib  of  life, 
that  3  map  retopce  m  the  bap  of  Chnfi, 
that  j  haue  not  runne  m  baincnnttjet 
labourcbinbaine. 

17  *>ea ,  ano  if  3  bee  t  offeceb  bpon 
the  faenfice  anb  fcruice  of  pour  faith ,  3 
iop,anD  rciopce  rbitlj  pou  all. 

18  5Po;tl)c  fame  caufc  alfo  boe  pe  iop, 
anbreiopecibithme. 

19  ||26ut3trufttnthc?LojD3Jcfug, 
to  fenb  Ximothcus  tho^tlp  bnto  pou, 
that  31  alfo  map  bee  of  goob  comtbjt, 
rbljen  3  anoib  pour  (late. 

io  foz'JhauenomanllliBeminbeD,  v- 
tbho  ibtll  naturaiip  care  fo?  ponr  ftate. 

ii  $01  all  feefeejhetr  oibne ,  not  the 
things  ibhich  are  3fcfus  Chnfts. 

ii  25ut  pe  nnoU)  thepjoofe  of  him, 
Xhat  as  a  fonne  Xbith  the  father,  hee 
hathferucDnitth  mctntheoofpel. 

ij  $im  therefore  j  hope  to  fenb  pjc- 
Ccntlp,fo  foonc  as  3  (hall  fee  hotb  it  ton" 
goeibitlime. 

14  25ut3}tru(linthe1Lo2b,that3J 
alfo  mp  felfc  (hall  come  (ho?tlp. 

15  J9ct  3  fuppofeb  it  neceffarp  ,  to 
fenb  to  pou  Cpaplwobitus  mp  bzother 
anb  companion  ui  labour ,  anb  feiloiD  i 
fouiDiour, ! 


foertb. 


ThcCircumcifion.    Chap.iij 

frttilliintir  hiifwfturniplTpnrfiT.  anfihpp    'fcnnfti 


Belly-gods. 


prjicr.. 


foulDiour ,  but  pour  incffenget,  anD  hee 
tl)at  mimltccD  to  nip  Ibants. 

i6  5Fo;  l)cc  longcD  after  pou  all,  anD 
tbas  full  of  hcauincflc  ,be caufc  that  pee 
haD  tjcaru  tljat  he  haD  bene  (Tcfce. 

27  f  or  ttiDccD  he  lbae  ftcfte nigh  tin* 
to  Death,  but  ©od  haD  mere?  on  him: 
anD  not  on  him  onelp ,  but  on  ntcc  alfo, 
left  3  (houlD  haue  foroilt  bpon  forotb. 

28  5  fent  Dim  therefore  ttjc  more 
carcfullp ,  that  rohen  pe  fee  htm  againe, 
pcmaprciopcc,  anD  that  3  map  bee  the 
leffcforroibruli. 

i9  fteccfuchimthcrforcmrhelLorD 
tbith  ail  glaoncffcanD  ||  holD  furh  »n  tv 
putatton: 

jo  zsceaufe  for  the  ibor&e  of  Chrlft 
he  £bas  nigh  bnto  oeatb,not  rcgarDing 
his  lift,  to  fupplp  pout  lacaeof  feruitc 
toibarbmr. 

CHAP.    III. 

I  Hee  warneth  them  to  beware  of  the  falfe  tea- 
chers of  the  Circumcifion,  4  fhewingthat 
himfelf  hath  greater  caufe  then  they,  to  trull 
incherighteoufnefTeof  the  Law:  7  which 
notwithfhnding  hee  counteth  as  doung  and 
lofle,togaineChrift  and  his  righteoufnefle, 
12.  thetcin  acknowledging  his  owne  imper- 
fection. 15  Hee  exhorteth  them  to  be  thus 
minded,  17  and  to  imitate  him,  18  and 
to  decline  the  waiesof  carnal!  Chrifhans. 

3fnailp,  mp  brethren,  rc= 
topee  in  the  HorDe.  Xo 
voittz  the  famcthtnesto 
pou ,  to  me  tnbeeD  isnot 
grteuous:butforponuiS 
Jafe. 
z  rseibare  of  Dogs ,  bctbare  of  euiil 
tbor&ers :  beibarc  of  the  eounGon. 

3  iffortbearethenrcumctfion.lbhich 
Iborfoip©oDinthcfpirtt,  anDreioptc 
in  ChnO  JJcfus}anD  hant  no  tonfibentc 
mthcflcO). 

4  3Q)ough  3  might  alfo  haue  con* 
fioencetn  the  flea),  gifanpothcr  man 
thinfeeth  that  hce  hath  tbhereof  hee 
mighttruftinthefle(h,3Jmorc: 

i  CireumnfcD  the  eight  Dap ,  of  the 
Cocke  of  ijftacl,  of  the  tribe  of  Bciv 
iamnt,an  fccbrctb  of  the  ^ebrelbcs ,  as 
touching  thefLaib.a  i&harifc: 

6  €ontcming5eale,perfecutingthe 
Church :  touching  the  rtghteoumeflc 
lbhich  is  in  the  fLan>,  biamclcffc. 

7  25ut  ibhat  things  Vbere  gamcto 
me.thofc  3  countcD  lofTcfor  ChrtB. 

8  J*ca  Doubtlcffc ,  anD  3  count  all 
things  butloflc.forthc  ercellencie  of  the 


fenoflbkbgcof  Chrittgicfus  mp  JLorD 
for  rbljom  3  haiie  futTercb  the  lofle  of 
all  things ,  anD  Doe  count  them  but 
Doung,  that  3  map  torn  ChrfQ, 

9  3lnD  befounb  in  him  .nothautng 
mineoibne  righteoufneflc,  ibbichisof 
the  flarb ,  but  that  lbbtch  ts  through 
the  faith  of  Cbrt'ft,  the  righteoufneffc 
lbhich  ts  of  ©Ob  bp  faith: 

io  XhafJ  map  snoib  him,  anD  the 
potber  ofhiErcfurrection ,  anD  the  fcl* 
lotbfyipof  btsfufFermgs ,  being  maDe 
conformable  bnto  btsoeath, 

n  3(  ty  anp  mcanes  3  might  at 
taine  unto  the  rcfurrcction  of  the  Dcao. 

u  /Botasthough'JhaDaireaDpatJ 
taineD.ettbettberealrcaDp  perfect:  but 
3  follorb  after,  if  that  3  map  appre* 
heno  that  for  lbhich  alfo  3  antapprc* 
hcnDcDofChnQJJeftis. 

13  25?eth?en,3tonntnotmpfclfeto 
haue  apprcbmbcD :  Iwt  this  one  thing  i 
doe,fo?gettmg  fhofethings  lbhich  are 
bchinDe,  anD  reaching  forth  bnto  thofe 
things  lbhich  are  before, 

14.  3  prcflc  toibarD  themarire,  for 
the  price  of  the  high  calling  of  ©od  in 
CbrtftJIefus. 

15  lutbs  therefore,  as  manp  as  bee 
perfect,  beethusminDtD:  atiDifinanp 
thlngpc  be  othctibife  mtnDeD,<soD  ttjal 
reucale  euen  trjis  bnto  pou. 

16  i12cucTtheleu*c,  ttrjerctotbechauc 
aireaDteattaUicD ,  let  bs  rbaiue  bp  the 
fame  rule ,  let  bs  mtnDe  the  fame  thing . 

1 7  Brethren ,  be  follotbers  together 
of  me,  anD  marfec  them  lbhich  Xbalue 
fo,as  pchauc  bsfor  an  cmample. 

18  ( 5fo?  manpibalUc ,  of  ttihomc  3 
haue  tolD  pou  often,  anD  notb  tellpon 
cucniDecping ,  that  they  are  theencmtes 
ofthccroflcofChrift: 

19  I0hofe  cnb  isDeflntction, tthofc 
d5oD  is  thefr  bellp,  anD  ibhofe  giorie  is 
in  their  fljame ,  ibho  minoc  earths 
things.) 

to  3?or  our  conucrfation  \8  in  hea; 
ucn,  from  whence  alfo  Vbclooue  for tl)c 
5>auiour  ,thc  JLorD  'JcfusChrttt : 

zi  naho  fhall  change  our  bile  boble, 
that  it  map  bee  faflnoncb  UU  bnto  his 
glorious  boDp ,  atcorDing  to  the  lnor* 
uing  tbhcrebp  he  is  able  cucn  to  fubDuc 
all  things  bnto  htmfelfc. 

CHAP.    I1H. 

1    From  particular  admonitions   4   hee  pro- 

ceedeth  to gcncrall  exhortations,   10  fhew- 

ing  how  hee  reioyced  at  their  liberalise  to- 

T   J  wards 


Bookc  of  life.     To  thePhiiippians.    Contentation. 


\\0r,vi*tr* 
bit. 


\Or,u  reui- 
mi. 


wards  him  lying  in  prifon ,  not  fo  much  for 
the  fupply  of  his  owne  wants.as  for  the  grace 
ofGodinthem.  19  Andfoheconcludeth 
with  prayer  and  falutations. 

toeccfo:c,  my  bitttytn, 
bcarely  bcloueb  anb  long; 
cbn^myioyanbcroUnic* 
To  ftanu  fall  m  the  ILojb, 
my  bcarely  bcloueb. 
1   3  bcfeecli  €uobias ,  anb  befeeeb 

;§>ynttchc  ,tbat  tt)cp  be  of  the  fame  intnb 

mtt)e1lo:i). 
j  3MD'3i  entreat  thee  alfo, true  yoke* 

fellott),  bclpc  thofc  women  U)l)tci)  la- 

boureb  Haiti)  mem  thcGofpcl,Untb  Clt; 

ment  aifo,anb  With  other  my  fellow  la; 

bourcrs,Wbofc  names  arc  in  the  bookc 

of  life. 

4  £icioyccuithc?Lo2baiway:aub 
agamcjfay.&cioyce. 

5  jLct  pout  mobcration  be  knoWcn 
bnto  all  mcn.Chc  ILoib  is  at  banb. 

6  23cccarefullfo2  nothing:  but  in 
cucry  thing  by  piaycr  anb  amplication 
With  thankcfgiuing,  let  your  rcquctt  be 
mabc  knoWcn  bnto  Gob. 

7  anb  the  peace  of  Gob  Which  paf 
fctb  all  bnbcrflanbing,n)altkccpc  your 
hearts  i  minostlKougbChzift  Refits. 

8  finally ,  bzctbjcn ,  Wbatfocucr 
things  are  true,  Wbatfocucr  things  are 
Hboncfr,  Wbatfocucr  things  are  utft, 
Wbatfocucr  things  are  pure,  whatfo- 
ener  things  are  lonely,  Whatfocucr 
thnigsjtLof  goob  rcpoit:  if  tlicrc  bee 
any  bcrtuc,  aho  if  there  bee  any  pjaifc, 
thinUc  on  thefc  things: 

9  %l)ok  tilings  which ye  Ijauc  both 
icameb  anb  rccctncb,  anb  hcarD ,  anb 
fecne  mmccboc :  anb  the  Gob  of  peace 
(ball  be  With  you; 

10  25m  gi  retoyeeb  ui  the  ILoioc 
greatly, that  notb  at  the laftyour care 
of  me  hath  flourifneb  agamc,  Whcrcm 
vec  mcreaifo  carcfnll,  but  ye  laclicb  op 
poitimitic. 


1 1  iftot  that  3  fpeafee  m  refpert  of 
Want:  ftn  gjhaue  IcarnebinibhatCoc 
ucr  ftatc  3  am ,  therewith  tobcccon< 
tent. 

11  3J  know  both  bow  to  betabafeb, 
anb  5(  knoWc  bowtoabounb:  encrie 
lbher c,  aub  in  ail  things  3  am  inftcuc- 
tcb,both  to  bee  fnii,anb  to  bcehungrtr, 
both  to  abonnb,  anb  to  fuffcr  nceb. . 

13  31  can  bo  all  things  tbioughCbufl, 
Which  flrrngthencth  me. 

1+  /3otwithftaubmg,ycc  banc  well 
boticthatyc  bib  communicate  With  my 
affliction. 

15  /floWyc^hilippianGknowalfo, 
that  in  the  beginning  of  the  Goipel, 
When  Jjbcpartcb  from  <$accboma,no 
Church  communicatcb  With  met,  as 
concerning  ghiing  anb  tccctuing,but  ye 
oncly. 

i6  ;fo2cucninirbefralontca,ycfcnt 
oncc,atibagamcbntomyncccu"itic. 

17  /5ot  becanfe  31  befirc  a  gift :  but 
Ji  befirc  fruit  that  may  abounb  to  your 
account. 

18  26ut  ligi  banc  an, anb  abounb.-^  [N*!7^™: 
am  full,  haumg  r ccciucb  of  Cpapbjobi-  " 
tus  the  things  winch  were  ft  in  from  you, 
an  obour  of  a  fmcct  fmell,  a  facrificeati 
tcptablc,weii  piraftng  to  Gob. 

19  25ut  my  Gob  (hall  fupply  all  your 
nccb,acto2buigtobisricbcsmglojy,by 
Chuft^cfus. 

zo  jftow  bnto  Gob  anb  out  father 
be  gioiy  fo:  cucr  anb  cuer.  3lmcn. 

ii  Salute  eucry  £>atnt  m  Clwtft 
gicfus :  the  b2cth2cn  rbljiclj  are  Untb 
me,  greet  you. 

ii  blithe  faints  falute  you,cbicfly 
they  that  arc  of  (ffcfarsheufliolb. 

2?  Wat  grace  of  our  5.02b  3Jefus 
Cb2ift  be  With  you  all.  amen. 

CJt  Was  Umttcn  to  the  #htlip; 
pians  from  £\omc,by  €papb20- 
bitus. 


<THE 


Hope  laidevp 


Chap.].        Chnft  the  Head, 


,THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAVL 

the  Apollle  to  theColoffians. 


CHAP.     I. 

After  faluution  hec  thanketh  God  for  their 
faith,  7  conhrmeth  the  dotftrine  ot  Epa- 
phras,  y  Praieth  further  tor  their  incrcafe  in 
grace,  14  defcribeth  the  true  Chnft,  n  en- 
couraseth  them  toreceiuelelus  Chnft,  arid 
commeiidethhisownemimftery. 

3tul  an  3tpoftle 
of3cfus  Clmft, 
byfitoiUofoob, 
anb  Xtmotljcus 
ourb20trjcr, 
i  Xo  the  faints 
anDfaittjfuUb^ 
tljjten  in  Clutft, 
£brjtcrjatcat€o< 
lofTc,  grate  be  tonto  you.anb  peace  from 
eoti  out  ifatljec ,  anb  tljc  3Lo2b  3lcfus 
Ct)2itt. 

j  tec  giuc  tljanus  to  <3ob ,  anb  the 
jratljerofour?Lo2b3kfusClj2iu\p2ay« 
tttgantoaycsfojyou,  e   , 

4  <§>tnce  tbe  rjearb  of  pour  faitrj  in 
€l)?ift  U ems,  anb  of  tljc  louc  tbljtttj  y  cc 
rjauc  to  all  trjc  faints, 

5  5F02  ttjc  Dope  rbliul)  ts  lavb  top  for 
you  in  I)caum,Vbrjcreof  ye  Ijearto  befoze 
in  tljc  ltoojb  of  tljc  tructlj  of  tljc  ©ofpcl, 

6  naljulj  is  conic  bnto  you  as  «  « in 
all  the  itoojlb ,  anb  bnngetl)  foortlj  fruit, 
as  it  botlj  alfoin  you,  fincc  tljc  bap  P« 
Ijcarb  out ,  anb  bncib  tljc  grace  of  <15ob 
iu  truetl), 

7  3s  yet  alfo  leameb  of epaptyas 
our  bcare  fcloito0cruant,U)l)oisfo2you 
a  faitbfull  sJpmfter  of  CljnC : 

8  nDl)o  alfo  bcclareb  tonto  tos  your 
loucintljcfptrit. 

9  #02  tljts  taufe  ltoee  alfo,fuuc  tljc 
bay  tbc  Dcarto  it,boe  not  ccafc  to  p;ay  fo2 
you, anb  to  bcGre  tljat  ycnugUt  be  ftlicb 
ttoitU  tljc  bnoitolcbgcof  DiStbtll,  in  all 
\totfcbome  anb  fpirituall  tonbetttan- 
bing : 

10  xijat  ye  might  tbalbc  ttwtljy  of 
tljc  SLojb  tonto  all  pleating,  being  fruit 


full  tn  cucry  goob  ib02t$e,$  tntrcafingin 
tljctuioltolcbgcofCSob: 

1 1  <§>trcngtljcneb  lbitl)  all  migrjtac* 
cobbing  to  Ijts  glonous  poitocr ,  tonto  all 
patience  anb  long  fuffering  lbitl)  ioy* 
fulncffc : 

1 1  ©iuing  tljanlts  tonto  tlje  jfafljcr, 
ibljicrj  rjatlj  mabe  tosmeete  to  be  parta* 
Hers  of  tl)e  inheritance  of  tljc  faints  in 
light: 

1 3  naho  hath  bcliuercb  tos  front  tlje 
poitocr  ofbarftcncu"c,anb  hath  tranfla* 
tcbvs  into  tljc  mngbomcofthisbcare 
£>ontte, 

14  gjtt  itoljom  tbe  hauc  rebemption 
through  Ijts  bloob,cuen  tljc  fojgiueneffe 
of  funics: 

1 5  naho  ts  tlje  image  of  tlje  inuiftblc 
©ob  ,tl)c  firO  borne  of  cucry  creature. 

i6  ifojbyhtmitocreailthtugscrca* 
tcbtljat  arc  inljeaucn ,  anb  tljat  arc  in 
cartIj,totOblcanbinuifible,tt)t)ctt)crthey 
be  thrones ,  orbomituons ,  0?  principal^ 
tics,  02  powers:  ailtljingsitocrccrca; 
tctobyhim,antofo2him. 

17  *  anb  Ijc  is  before  all  things,  anb 
by  Dim  all  things  conGft. 

1  s  3nto  Ijcc  ts  tljc  hcab  of  tlje  boby , 
t  he  Church :  Vtorjo  is  tljc  beginning,  tljc 
firft  borne  from  tlje  beab,  tljat  ||  in  all 
tljings  Ije  nngljt  haue  tljc  preeminence : 

1 9  if  0:  it  pleafcb  the  Fadier  tljat  in  Ijim 
njoulballfuincfrebrbcll, 
10  3uuXJ|hauutgmabcpcacethrough 
tljc  bloob  of  his  croffc )  by  him  to  rccon- 
cilc  all  tljings  tonto  ijttnfclf,  by  him,i  %, 
itoDctljer  they  bee  things  m  earth ,  02 
tljings  mheauen. 

2 1  3inb  you  that  lucre  fomctimcsa> 
licnatcb.anb  enemics||in  your  mtubc  by 
tbtclicb  itoo2bes ,  yet  noito  Ijatlj  Ijcc  re 
concilcb, 

2x  3m  tljc  boby  of  IjisflcOi  tlwouglj 
beath,  top2efcntyouljolyjtonbiamea; 
blcanbtonreprooucablcinnisngrjt, 

1 3  'Jf  y  c  continue  in  tljc  faith  grottn- 
beb  anb  fctlcb ,  anb  be  not  moucb  aitoay 
from 

80  2 


t  <7r-  '*« 

Sonne  cfbis 
hue. 


"i.Cor.8.6 
oh.X.3. 


I  Orjonc>-g 


jj  Orjnakin^ 
peace. 


\Or,byyonr 
mtrtdinieic- 


Howtowalke     TotheColofsians.  inChriftlefus. 


\\0r,  f»Uj  to 
or  each  the 
xvordofGody 
Hem.  1. 19. 


mongHjOH* 


or  care. 


from  tljetiope  of  tfte  ©ofprt,  Mitel)  pee 
Dane  Ijcato,  and  rbtjict)  Vbas  pjcacneb 
to  eucrp  creature  ifclnci)  is  bnbet  Ilea; 
uen,  tutjercof  3J  ^aulammaoe  aip* 
niftcc. 

24  na!)o  nott)  rciopee  in  mp  fuffc; 
rings  foj  pou,  anb  fill  uptljatMjtctiis 
beljmo  of  tt)e  afflictions  of  Cl)nlt  in  mv 
flefl),  fojliisbobics  faKc ,  BJpt)  is  tlic 
Cliurcl), 

25  naDereofgianiniatiea^inirtcr, 
aeeo2bing  to  ttje  bifpcnfation  of  <3oD, 
lDtjitD  is  giucn  to  tnee  foi  vow-  II  to  fulfill 
tI)eU)02bof<5ob: 

x6  EuentDeinpftcrp  indict)  Ijatl)  been 
l)ib  from  ages,  anb  from  generations, 
butnotb  is  mabe  mamfeftto  Ijtsfamts, 

27  %o  ibliom  <5oo  tt)oulD  ma&e 
ftnoibcn  ttrtiat  is  toe  ricljes  of  tlje  gl02P 
of  tins  mpftcrie  among  tfie  ©entiles, 
Vbljitl)  isCl),2iftl|in  pou,tl)t  fjopcof  glo  jv  : 

28  naljomttjcpjeatlj.vbarmng  cue* 
rpman  ,anb  teaching  eucrp  man  m  all 
rbifebomc ,  tnat  ibemap  piefent  eucrp 
man  perfect  m  Cljnft  5Jcfus. 

29  hereunto  31  alfo  labour ,  On- 
uing  aerojbing  to  l)istb02Uing,  ibljict) 
ruojKettjmmcmiglitilp. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  Hee  ftill  exhorteth  them  to  bee  confhnt  in 
Chiilt,  8  To  beware  of  Philofophie,  and 
vaine  traditions,  18  worfhipping  ot  An- 
gels, 10  and  Legall  Ceremonies,  which  are 
ended  inChnft. 


]  Or,  wbtrt- 


t**ggj%  £>iift  niouio  tnat  pc  unett) 
^Murtjat  great  ' 


conflict  31 
p-  Dane  foi  pou, anb  fo2  tlicm 
3  at  JLaobtrca ,  anb  fo2  as 
many  as  l)auc  not  fecne 
nip  face  intljeflcfl): 

2  Xnat  tlicir  Ijcarts  nugl)t  be  torn*  \ 
fo2tcb,  being  Unit  togetI)crmlouc,anb| 
tontoau  ricljes  of  tl)c  full  aflurancc  of 
tonbcrttanbing  ,  to  tlic  atlmon>lcbgc= : 
ment  ofttie  mpltcrtc  of  (Bob,  anb  of  tlic 
5ratljer,anbotCI)2ift, 

3  H3Jn  inljom  arc  nib  all  tlic  tcca* ' 
furcs  ofibifrbotnc,  anb  UnottJlcogc. 

4  3nbthis3lfap<le{ranpmann)oulo 
beguile  pou  Until  cntirmgibo2bs. 

5  foi  though  3  bee  abfent  m  tl)C 
flcfl),  pet  am  31  Until  pou  m  tlic  fpirit, 
iopmganb  brliolbiug  pour  02bcr,  anb 
tlic  fltbfaltncllc  of  pour  faitnm  Clnifr. 

6  3is  pec  nauc  tlictcfo2C  rcccUieb 
€lmu  3icfus  the  IL02D,  fo  uialuc  pec 
mljiir,: 


7  &ooteb anb  built  bp  in  Inm,  anb 
Oablifljcu  m  tlic  fattt) ,  as  pee  Ijaue  bene 
taugl)t  ,  abounbmg  therein  until 
tljan&cfgiuiug. 

s  25c\narc  left  anp  man  fpoile  pou 
ti)20uglj  $litiofopl)ic  anb  toaine  beteit, 
after  thettabitionofmen,aftcrtlie!lru; 
bimtnts  of  tijc  lbojlb ,  anb  not  after 
€l)2ilt: 

9  5F02  in  rjim  btticllctlj  all  tlje  tut* 
ueffe  of  tl)c  ©obhcabbobilp. 

io  !8nbpcarccomplctcinf)im,rbl)icl) 
is  the  ncab  ofall  p2incipalttte,  j  pottier. 

ii  ^n  whom  alfope  arc  ctrcumetfeb 
Until  tlje  Cireunmfion  mabe  ttnthout 
hanbes,  in  putting  off  the  bobp  of  tlje 
finnes  of  trje  fled),  bp  ttje  Ctrcumnfion 
of€f)2ift: 

12  iBuricb  ttutlj  Jjim  m  iBaptifine 
rbljcrem  alfo  pou  are  rifen  tbitt)  him 
tlnougl)  tl)e  faitlj  of  tl)c  operation  of 
©ob,  Vbfjo  Datl)  raifco  fjnn  from  tlje 
ocab. 

ij  3lnb  pou  being  bcab  m  pour  Cmnes, 
anb  tlje  untircumnfion  of  pour  flcfl), 
Datl)  Dec  qutcbeneb  togetner  ibitf)  fjim, 
nauing  fo;giuen  pou  all  trcfpafTcs, 

14  3Slotnngont  tl)cDanblD2itingof 
02binances,tljat  ibas  againft  bs,ibl)icl) 
Ibas  contrarp  to  Ds,  anb  toobc  it  out  of 
tlje  tbap.napimg  it  to  ins  CrofTc : 

1^  ^nb  nauing  fpoplcb  p2incipalities 
anbpoibers ,  nc  mabe  a  mevboftfjem 
openlp,tnumpl)mg  oucr  tDcm  fim  it. 

i6  ?Lct  no  man  tl)crcfo2c  mbge  pou 
miimeat,  02tnb2inhe,02in|ircfpettofan 
iiolpbap,  02  oftlje/FJcilimoone,  02  of 
tbeS>abbatl)daves: 

17  i©l)tcnarcafl)at)o«)oftI)mgsto 
come,  but  tnc  bobp  is  of  dnift. 

is  ?Lct  no  man  ||  beguile  pou  of  pour 
remarb,  tui  a  tooluntarp  Inimiimcanb 
Ujoiflnppmg  of  Angels,  intrubmg  into 
tliofc  tftmgs  iblncl)  lice  Dati)  not  fecne, 
baiuelp  puft  Up  bp  Ins  flcQ)lp  mmbc : 

19  Stub  not  Holbiug  tlieljcab,  from 
ttjllicli  all  tlic  bobp  bp  lopnts  anb  bancs 
iiaumg  uouri(limcnt  miuiflreb  ,  anb 
Unit  together  ,  mtreafetlj  ibitl;  tlic  tn- 
trcafcof(Sob. 

20  nai)crcf02C  if  pee  bee  bcab  Until 
€i)2ift  fro  tlje  ||  rubimrms  of  tlic  lbo?lb : 
tbIip,astliough  litung  m  tl)cU)02lD,  are 
pefubiccttoo20manccss: 

21  (Xouclinot,taftenot,!ianblcnot: 
x%  fflliitli  all  arc  to  perifl)  mitlitlie 

bfing)  after  tlje  tommanbnncntsanb 
boctrmesofmen: 
2}  nDincljtliingsliauehibeebaflieU) 

of 


\\Or,,U. 


\\Or,inhim 
P/c. 

\\Or,[irtc 


\\Or,~»Jg. 
atatnfl  j on . 

a  vcluntxry 
tnkumhtie. 


\Or,eU- 


Ofmortification.     Chap.iij.inj.      Seueralldueties 


oftbifcbomc  m  ibill  ttwftnp  anb  bu- 
orpmib-  mtlttte,  anDIi  neglecting  of  the  bobp,not 
w«"    m  anp  honour  to  the  fatiffping  of  the 

flett). 

CHAP.    III. 

Hee  fheweth  where  wee  fhould  feeke  Chrift. 
5  Hee  exhorteth  to  mortification,  10  to  put 
oft"  the  oldeman,  and  to  put  on  Chrift, 
exhorting  to  charitie,  humilitie,  and  other 
feuerall  dueties. 

_  $  pec  then  bee  rifenibitb 
§j  <£t)2ift,  fecfee  tbofc  things 
lbbicb  ate  abouc,  inhere 
Chirtft  fittctb  on  the  tight! 
jsss^Bsj^  Ijanb  of  ©oD : 
wor^inie.     z  g)ct  pout  ||  affection  on fbingsa 
boue.noton  things  on  the  cart!). 

j  3Fo?pce  arc beab,anb pout  life  is 
bjDlbitb€b2tftin©oD. 

4.  3©!jen  Ct)2tft,tbl)o  is  out  lifcfball  j 
appcacc,  then  fljail  pee  alfo  appeatc 
\bitbbimtnglo?ic. 

5  #ojtific  tbetcfiw  pour  members 
lbbich  arc  bpon  the  earth :  fojmtatton , 
bntlcanncffctnozomatc  affection,  cutll 
concupifccncc.anbcouetoufncffcAbbtcb 
istboiattie: 

6  5?o2lbbicbtl)mgsrafce,tbcib2aib 
of  ©ob  tommethontbccbilbjcn  of  btfc 
obebicnte, 

7  3n  the  ibljicD  pec  alfo  njalacb 
fomcnmclbbcn  pc  liucb  m  tfttm. 

8  26utnott3poualCoputoffalltl)cfe, 
anget.tbzatf)  ,malice,biatpbcmic,  filtbp 
communication  out  of  pour  mouth. 

9  ?Lie  not  one  to  anotber,fecing  that 
pec  baue  put  off  the  olb  man  ibitb  Ijis 
becoes: 

io  3nD  baue  put  on  the  nctb  man, 
Vbljtel)  is  cenucD  m  tmotioicDgc ,  after 
tfje  image  of  btm  tbattrcateb  him, 

ii  nabcte  there  is  ncitbct  ©tcebc, 
no:  3Jelb ,  citcumnfion  ,no2bneircunv 
cifion,2Barbartan,£>cptbian,bonb,no2 
free:  but  Cfytlt  is  all,ano  mall. 

n  0utottti)etcfo«(as  tfje  elect  of 
©ob.bolp  anb  bcloueb)  botbcls  of  mcr= 
ctes,mnDncffc  ,bumblcnc(Ic  of  mtnbc, 
mcebeneffclongfuffermg, 

ij  5Fo2bearingoncanotbcr,anbfo2' 
giuing  one  another ,  if  anp  man  baue  a 
or,  am.  ||  quattell  agamft  anp :  eucn  as  Cb?ifl 
fojgaue  pou,  fo  alfo  doe  pee. 

14.  3lnD  aboue  all  tbefe  things  put  on 
charitie,  ibbfcb  is  the  bonb  of  perfect 

15  3inD  let  the  peace  of  ©ob  rulem 
pout  hearts ,  totbetbhurj  alfo  pee  ate 


calico  m  one  bobp :  atib  be  pec  tbanbe- 
full 

i6  |Let  tlje  Vbo?b  of  ©j)?ifr  btbeii  in 
pou  rttblp  m  all  ibu"Dome,tcacbinganb 
abmonifbittgone  another  m  pfa  lines, 
anb  Spumes,  am>  s>pitttiiail  fongs, 
fmgtng  ibttb  gtacc  in  pour  hearts  to 
tl)e  fLojo. 

17  3lnDtt)batfoeuetpceDocinlbo2D 
ojDcco.doc  ail  m  tfje  /Bamc  of  tbe?Lo2D 
Jcfits,  giumg  tbanbes  to  ©oD  anb  tlje 
jfatbcr.bpbim. 

is  names, fubmit  pour  feluesbnto 
pour  oibnc  buf  bancs ,  as  it  is  fit  in  tlje 
V-oft. 

19  i?ufbattbs,loucpourib!ues>  anb 
be  not  bitter  agamlt  tljem. 

20  CDUbJcn ,  obep  pour  parents  in 
all  tI)mgs,fo2  this  is  lbcll  plcafing  bnto 
tbejlozb. 

21  fathers,  piouobc  not  pour  cljil- 
D?cn  to  an^er,  left  tbcp  be  DtfcourageD. 

22  S)eruants,obcp  mall  things  pour 
matters  arcozbing  to  the  flcflKnottbitb 
epe  fcttucc  as  men  plcafccs  ,  but  m 
finglcncCTc  of  heart  ,fcattng  ©ob : 

23  3tvt)  ibhatfocttcr  \^tc  Doc ,  boc  it 
|hcartslp,asto  tbclLojb ,  anb  not  bnto 
Imcn: 

24  Bnoibing,  thatofthc1Lo2D  pec 
(hall  tccciue  the  reibarb  of  thcmheri 
tattcc :  fozpefecue  the  ILozb  Chnft. 

25  25ut  hcthatboeth  tbzong ,  ftjall 
tccciue  fo?  the  ib^ong  tbhiclj  bee  hath 
Done :  anb  there  is  no  refpect  of  pet 
fons. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

Hee  exhorteth  them  to  bee  feruent  in  pray- 
er, ^  to  walke  wifely  toward  them  that  are 
not  yet  come  to  the  true  knowledge  of 
Chrift.  10  Hee  l'al  uteth  them ,  and  w  ifheth 
them  all  profperitie. 

^&*8/^  ^fters,gtue  bnto  pour  fer^ 

jg$M  I  uantsthat  tbhich  is  mft 
j  |anbcciuail,linoibmgthat 

^%g  1  pee  alfo  Ijanc  a  Rafter  in 
Jss^&?febcaucn. 

1  Connnucinp2aper,anblbatchin 
tljcfame  ibttb  thanbcfglumg : 

j  natthail,  pjaping  alfo  fo?  bs,  that 
©ob  lbotiib  open  bnto  bs  a  0002c  of  bt 
terancc,to  fpeabe  the  mpftet  p  of  Cbjttt, 
fo?  Ibljich  31  am  alfo  in  bonbs  : 

4  1Chat1JmapmaKcitmamfeft,as 
^oughttofpeabe. 

5  naaiuc  m  lbifoome  toibarb  them 
thatareibithout,rebeemingthetime. 

6  %tt  pour  fpcedj  bee  alibap  ibith 

grace, 


Sal 


u  tat  ions. 


I.Theflalomans.    Effe&uall  faith. 


\\OrJlrininr 


grace,  rcafoncb  ibitrj  fait,tt)at  voumav 
ftnott  IjoU)  vec  ougljt  to  anfrocrc  cucrv 
man. 

7  3fll  mv  ftatc  fyail  Xventcus  uc- 
tiarebnto  pou,who  is  a  bclouco  biofocr, 
aubafattftfnllmmiftcr,anb  fclloib  fcr- 
uantmtljcJLojD: 

3  naijom  5  Ijattcfent  bnto  vow  foz 
tbcfamepurpofc.tljatnccmigotanoib 
vour  eftatc ,  anb  comfozt  vonr  Ijcarts. 

9  n9itl)  jDncfimus  a  faitrjfull  auD 
bclouco  bzotrjcr  ,  lbtto  is  one  of  von. 
Xljcv  fl)aii  malic  tmottcn  bnto  von 
all  tljutgstbftie!)  are  Done  Oerc. 

io  ariftarchus  mv  felloU)  pzifoner 
falutctt)  von,  anb  Marcus  filters  fonne 
to25arnabaB,(tonrt)ingU)bomeveerc' 
tciucb  tommanbcmcnts ;  if  he  come  Dm 
tovou,rcteiucfnm:) 

1 1  3inb  Jefus,  tbfjftrj  is  caiicDTFu^ 
(his,Vbfjo  arc  of  tlje  cirramctfion/lificfc 
onclv  arc  mvfclloftitbortjcrsbntotfje 
Utngbontcof  C5ob,rb!)itl)  ijauc  becne  a 
comftut  bnto  inc. 

ii  <£papmas,tDooisoneofvou,a 
fcruatuof€lnifi,faintctrjvon,antoaicB 
lliabouringferucntlvfoz  vouin  platers, 


tfoat  vcmav  ftanb  pcrfect,anb!|touipictc 
inautbeiDiiiof<i5ob. 

15  5fo?3bcarcf)tmret02b,tI)atrjcc 
fjatOagrcatscalcfozvou.anbtfjcmthjt 
jre  tn  jLaobtcca ,  anb  tljcm  m  $?icra- 
pons. 

i+  !Luftc  tfjc  bcloncb  pfivfirian,  anb 
2>cmas  greet  vou. 

15  £>atute  trjc  bjctbzen  rbljicli  are  m 
?Laobttca,anb/l5vmprjas,s  the  rtjurelj 
Ibbicnisinoisrjonfc. 

i6  3lnD  lDfocn  tnis  epiltle  is  reab  a* 
mongftvou,taufctfjatit  be  rcabalfoln 
tftecrjurcnoftocfLaotuceangtanDtrjat 
ve  libcttiifc  r  cabe  the  epifiic  from  Hao- 
bicca, 

17  2no  fav  to  3rtU(ppus ,  Xalte 
fjeebcto  tfjc  mmiftcr<c,tt>hirtj  tfjou  had 
rccctueb  in  tlje  JLoJb  ,  tljat  t6on  ful* 
fill  it. 

is  %\)t  famtation  by  trjc  rjanb  of 
me  0aul.  Scmrtnbcc  mv  bonbs.  ©rate 
bcrbitrjvou.^mcru 

€  written  from  Borne  fotocCo* 
lofRans.bv  %yi\)it\xs  anb  ©* 
ncfimus. 


\\Orfilid. 


^THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF 

Paul  the  Apoftle  to  the  ThefTalonians. 


CHAP.     I. 

The  ThefTalonians  arc  giuen  to  vndcrftand 
both  how  mindtullof  them  S.  Paul  was  at  all 
times  in  thankf-giuing ,  &  prayer :  5  and  alio 
howwellhewasperlw3ded  of  the  truth, and 
linceruieot  their  faich,&  conucrlion  to  God. 

3lul  anb  £>tiua< 
uus,anb1umo; 
tbcus,  bnto  tfjc 
Church  of  the 
XhcfTaiomans, 

which  is  m  ©ob 

the  5fatljcr ,  anb 
mthc?Lo2b3Je- 
fusCtyitt:  grace 
hebntovon,anb 

peace  from  Gob  one  father,  anb  the 

!lo2b3lcfiifi€I);ifl. 
x   tt)cg(netl)anhc£to  Cob  annates 


foz  vou  all ,  malting  mention  of  von  in 
our  pavers, 

5  &cmcmb»ngiDitboutccafingvour 
Uiozbc  of  fattl) ,  anb  labour  of  lone, 
anb  patience  of  hope  utour1Lo:b3(c^ 
fus  €t);tft,  in  the  fight  of(5ob  anb  our 
jfathcr : 

4-  lutolDing ,  tacthmi  ||  bcloncb, 
Vour  election  of  C5ob. 

5  foi  our  Gofpcl  came  not  bnto 
VOUiniDojb  onclv  :  but  alfo  mpolbcr, 
anb  m  tljc  bolvGhoft,  anbmmticfjaf 
furancc ,  as  vec  UnoibiDhatmancr  of 
mcnibciPcrc  among  voufcuvourfahr. 

6  ^nb  vec  became  followers  of  bs, 
anb  of  tlje  1Lo:b,  natuiig  rcccutcb  tlic 
lbojb  in  muclj  affiictioit,  lbitfj  iov  of  tl)c 
bolv  (500ft: 

7  5>o  tDat  vc  iberc  cufamplcs  to  all 
tljatbciccuc  in  ^accbomaaubacijata.j 

. 3    foil 


\\Or,hh- 
HtctofGod: 


Men  plcafers.  Chap.ij.iij. 


Paul: 


loy. 


\\Or,vf*J 

dMthcrttj. 


8  #02  from  pou  fouubeb  out  toe 
t©o?b  of  tlje  IU?b,  notonelptnfif)aces 
boniajJlchaia,  butaUbm  etterp  place 
pour  faurj  to  ©obrbarbtsfp?ebab?oab, 
fo  that  Vot  necb  not  to  fpcau  anp  thing. 

9  5Fo?  thep  thcmfclucs  ujclb  of  bs, 
tbhat  matter  of  cutting  ttt  ibe  hab  bnto 
pou,  aitbhoibpccturnebto<5ob  from 
ibols,to  feme  the  Uuutg,  anb  true  <sob, 

io  3nb  to  \baitcfo?  his  fonne  front 
Ijcaucnibhomhetaifebfromtljebcab, 
suen  gjeuis  lbhtch  bcliueceb  bs  front 
the  ib?ath  to  tome. 

CHAP.    II. 

In  wh.it  manner  the  Gofpel  was  brought  and 
preached  to  the  ThefTalonians,  and  in  what 
fort  alfo  they  receiued  it.  18  A  realon  is 
rendred  both  why  Saint  Paul  was  fo  long  ab- 
ient  from  them,and  alfo  why  hee  was  fo  defi- 
rous  to  fee  them. 

&>}  pour  fclucs ,  b«!C' 
th?cn,  Bnotbcoutcn; 
trance  tn  bnto  pou, 
that  it  ibas  not  tn 
bamc. 

i  23ut  cttcn  after 
that  ibec  hao  fuffcreb 
befo?c,anb  mete  ftjamcfullp  cntrcatcb, 
aspcftnoib,at  fthtltppubec  ibere  bolb 
in  our  d5ob,tofpcascbuto  pou  the  <sofc 
pelofd5ob  untbmuch  contention. 

?  5fo?our  cjcrjoitatton  lbasnotof 
beccite,  no?  of  bnclcatmcfle ,  no?  in 
gutle: 

4  2Eutasibctt>crcalloibcbof<J5ob 
to  bee  put  in  truft  Ibttb  the  ©ofpei.cttcn 
fo  tbec  fpcaac,  not  as  plcafing  men ,but 
<t5ob,lbbtcb  trictb  out  hearts. 

5  3Fo?  neither  at  anp  time  bfeb  ibec 
flattering  tt>o?bcj&,aspec  ttnoujcnoz  a 
close  of  couctoufncflc,<l5ob  » ibitucfTe : 

6  /l2o2ofmenfougrjtlbeglo2ie,nct* 
tber  of  pou.no?  pet  of  others,  Uibcuibc 
migl)t  bauc  becne  ||  burbenfome,  as  the 
3poftlesofCb?tu\ 

7  2But  ibec  Jbcrc  gentle  among 
pou,euen  asanurfecbccilbetbbcr  tbil- 
b?en: 

8  5>o  being  affccttonatelpbeQcous 
ofpou.tbeibcrctbillingtoliauctmpar' 
tebbntopou,uottl)c<5ofpelofC5obon- 
ip.but  alfo  out  oumc  foules.bccaufc  pc 
tbew  bear e  bnto  bs. 

9  5fo?  vw  remember, b?etb?cn,  our 
labour  anb  trauaile :  fo?  labottcng 
ntgbtanb  bap,  bccaufcibcciboulbnot 
bee  chargeable  bnto  anp  of  pou,tbee 
p?eatbeb  bnto  pou  the  csofpcl  of  d5ob. 


io  pee  are  lbitncffcs,  anb  <25ob  alfo, 
bolb  bolilp  ,anbiuftlp,anb  bnbiamea* 
blp  tt»cc  betjaucb  out  fcluesamong  pou 
tbatbeleeuc. 

ii  :Hspou&norb,l)oibibcccrl)ozteb 
anb  tomfo«!tcb,anb  cbargcb  cuerpone 
of  pou,(asa  father  boctbtnschtlb?ctt,) 

12.  Xbat  vc  Iboulb  lbalUe  \b02thp  of 
©ob.ibbo  bath  taileb  pou  bnto  bis 
lungbomeanbglo?p. 

13  JFo?  this  taufe  alfo  tbanfte  ibec 
d5ob  ibitJ)outceafing,bccaufe\bl)cn  pec 
recciucb  tJjc  n»o?b  of  d5oo,  lbljiclj  pee 
oeacb  of  bs ,  pec  recetucb  tt  not  as  the 
tbo?bofmen,but(astttsintruetb)tbc 
uwbofdSob,  ibljicb  cffcctuaiip  ibo?H- 
ctlj  alfo  in  pou  tbatbeleeuc. 

14-  5F02  pce,b?etb?cn,bccamc  follolb- 
ersof  the  Churches  of  <Sob,  tt>biclj  tn 
■Jubcaare  in  Cfjztft^fcfus:  fo?  pcaifo 
baucfuffceebltric  tilings  of  pour  oibne 
countrepmen,  eucn  as  tbep  bauc  of  the 
Uetbes: 

15  nafjobotljKiucbtbcl^bSJefus, 
anb  tljcir  oibne  ^loptjets ,  anb  baue 
I  Iperfccuteb  bs:anb  tlje?  pieafe  not<Bob , 
anb  are  tontrarp  to  all  men : 

i6  jFojbibbmg  bs  to  fpeanc  to  the 
©entiles,  that  tbcp  might  bee  faueb,to 
fill  bp  there  fittnes  alibap:  fo?  toe  ib?atb 
is  tome  bpon  tbcm  to  the  bttetmofl. 

17  25utibcc,b?cth?cn,becingtaBen 
frontpoufo?a(l)o?t  tunc,  tnp?cfencc, 
notint)cart,cnbcuo?cbtl)e  mo?c  abun- 
oantlpto  fee  pour  fate  ibitl) great  beOcc. 

is  J0ocrcfo2etbctbouiooauc  conic 
bnto  pou(cueu  3  0aul)  once  $  agauic : 
but&atanbmbcrcbbs. 

19  5F02  lbljat  is  our  Ijopco?  iop,o? 
croUincof||rciopcing^rcnotcucttpe 
in  tDc  p?cfcncc  of  our|lo?b  Ucfus  Cl)?itt 
atljistomming< 

10  5Fo?,peareourgio?panbiop. 

CHAP.   III. 

1  S.  Paul  tcftifieth  his  great  loue  to  theThefla- 
lonians,  partly  by  lending  Timothie  vnto 
them  to  ftrengthen  and  comfort  them  :  part- 
ly by  rcioycing  in  their  weldoing  :  io  and 
partly  by  praying  lor  them,  ana  defiring  a 
(tic  comming  vnto  them. 

!0crefo2e  lboen  ibec  toulb 

no  longer  fo?bcarc,  ibee 

tbougntttgoobtobeeieft 

at ^tb ens  alone: 

x  ^nDfentXtmotrjeus 

out  b?otbet  anb  mintrter  of <5ob ,  anb 

our  felloib  labourer  in  tlje  <5ofpel  of 

CDnfl, 


[\0r,clMfe4 

VIOHt. 


lOr&lorjmg 


Ofaffli&ions.     I.Theflalonians.  Therefurre&ion. 


Rom. 7.  9 


r^itiit. 


\fir  r/tjrtrjl 

\Or,ir/ecd 


Chrift ,  to  cftabltfh  pou ,  ant  to  comfort 
pou  concerning  pour  faith : 

3  Xljat  no  man  fhoulb  be  mooucb 
bp  thefc  afflictions  :  for  pour  fclucs 
Unolb  that  wc  arc  appomtcb  thcrunto. 

+  for  bcrilp  ibhctt  vott  iberc  ibith 
vou, ibe  tolb  pou  bcfo2c,thatibc  fhoulb 
fuffcr  tribulation  ,  men  as  it  came  to 
paffc  anb  pe  Unolb. 

5  f  02  tilts  caufcibhcnj  coulb  no  Ion- 
gcr  fo2bcacc,3Jfent  to  Imoib  roue  faitlj, 
left  by  fomc  meatus  tl)e  tempter  haue 
tcmptcD  pou,anb  our  labor  be  mbainc. 

6  25utnoib  ibhcnUamothcuseamc 
from  von  bnto  bs  ,  anb  brought  bs 
goob  nbtngsof  your  faith  anb  charittc, 
anb  that  pe  haue  gooo  remembrance  of 
bs  aiifcapcs ,  befirmg  grcatlp  to  fee  bs, 
asibcairotoiec^ou: 

7  lEhercforc  brethren,  act  tbere 
comfortcb  oner  pou  tn  all  our  affliction 
anb  biftreffebp  pout  faith: 

8  for  nolfc  ibe  *  line,  if  pe  ftanb  fatt 
inthcfLorb. 

9  foribhatthanttcscanibercnbct 
to  ©ob  agame  foz  you ,  for  all  the  top 
lDhcrctbith  lbee  top  for  pourfafcesbc* 
fore  our  ©ob, 

10  fJight  9  bapprapingcrccebinglp 
thatiDe  might  fee  pour  face,ano  might 
perfect  that  rbhuh  is  lacbing  in  pour 
faith* 

11  jftott)  Gob  htmfelfc  anb  our  f  & 
tljecanb  our  Horb  3efus  Chrift  lioiccrt 
our  lbap  bnto  pou. 

11  anb  the  ILorbe  maUe  pou  to  in? 
:r  cafe ,  *  abottnb  in  louc  one  t  omarbs  a 
uothcr ,  anb  torbaros  all  mm ,  mm  as 
Vbc  doetolbarbspott: 

13  Xo  the  cub  hec  map  ftablifh  pout 
hearts  bnbiameablc  in  holineffc  before  I 
00b  cucn  our  father ,  at  the  commmg 
of  oitriLorb^cfus  Chrift  uuth  all  his : 
£>amts. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

Hce  exhotteth  ilicm  to  t>oion  forward  in  all 
manner  of  godlmeffe,  6  to  liuc  holily  and 
iuftly,  9  to  lone  one  another,  n  and  quiet- 
ly to  followc  their  owne  nufinefle :  1}  and 
Lift  ot  all  tolorrow  moderately  tor  the  dead. 
17  And  vnto  this  laft  exhortation  is  annexed  I 
abnefcdefcription  ot  theicfurrc<ftion,andfe- 
condcommingol  Chrift  to  iudc;cmcnt. 

qtfggSg  wlrthcrtuorc  then  ibe  ||be- 


feed)  pon,b?eth;en,anb||et; 


m 


'■3$(stx  JJMi  von  bpthcILo;03}e- 
9  fus,  that  as  pec  hauc  recm ! 
tiebofbsjjoibpcougljtto 


lbalUcanbtoplcafc  ©ob,  fopec  iboulb 
abounb  more  anb  more. 

x  for  pee  tmoib  ibhat  commanbe 
ments  ibec  gauc  pou ,  bp  the  %om 
3lcfus. 

3  far  this  is  the  lbill  of  ©ob  ,  cucn 
pour  fanctification ,  that  pec  (houioab 
ftcine  from  fornication : 

4  Xhat  cucrp  one  of  pou  fboulb 
fenolb  holb  to  poffeffe  his  bcfTcll  in  fan 
etification  anb  honour: 

5  i5ot  in  the  luff  of  concupifccnce, 
cucn  as  the  ©entiles  ibhich  fenorbnot 
©ob: 

6  1Dbat  no  man  goe  beyonbaub|lbe< 
fraubhisbrothcrli'i'njnvinatter^ccaufc 
that  the  1L02b  is  the  aucngcr  of  all  fuch ; 
as  ibe  alfohauc  foreibarnebpou,  anb 
tcttifieb: 

7  for  ©ob  hath  not  callcbbs  bnto 
bnclcanncfTcbut  bnto  holmcffc. 

8  t?e thercfoze  that  | befpifeth,bcfpi< 
fethnotman,  but©ob,  ibhohathaifo 
giucn  bnto  bs  his  holp  Spirit, 

9  25ut  as  touching  brotherlp  loue, 
pe  nccb  not  that  3  ltoritc  bnto  pou :  for 
pee  pour  felues  are  taught  of  ©ob  to 
loue  one  an  other. 

io  3nbinbccbpcbocittotbarbsail 
the  brethren,  ibhich  are  tnau&3accbo< 
ma  -.but  ibe  befceeh  pou,  brethren,  that 
petnercafc  more  anb  more : 

1 1  anbthatpe  fhtbtcto  be  quiet,  anb 
to  boc  pour  oibnc  luifmrfTc ,  anb  to 
iborfee  ibith  pour  oibne  hanbs,(as  lbce 
commanbebpon:) 

u  1Lhatpemapttial&chonctrlptO'> 
tbarb  them  that  arc  ttnthont ,  anb  that 
^e  map  haue  laebe  of  ||  nothing. 

13  26ut3Jiboulbnothanepoutobe 
ignorant ,  brethren ,  concerning  them 
ibhich  arc  afleepe,  that  pe  forroibnot, 
men  as  others  ibhich  haue  no  hope. 

14  for  if  ibe  bcleeuc  that  3Jefus  bicb, 
anb  tofc  againc :  cuen  fo  them  alfo 
ibhich  flcepc  fti  3Icfus,  Vbin  ©ob  bring 
*bith  hint. 

15  if  or  this  ujc  fap  bnto  pou  bp  the 
Vborb  of  the  JLorb ,  lljat  ibe  ttJhich  are 
aimc  anb  rcmaitte  bnto  the  comming 
of  the  ?Lorb ,  (hall  not  preucnt  them 
which  arc  aflccpe. 

i6  for  the  lLoro  himfclfc  fljali  nrf- 
ccnbfrotu  hcaucn  Vbith  a  fljottt,  ibith 
thebopec  of  the  Archangel,  anb  tbith 
the  trumpc  of  ©ob :  anb  the  bcab  in 
ChriftfliallrifeSrll. 

17  Xhcn  rbc  ibhich  are  aliucaub  re- 
matnc,  fljalbe  caught  bp  together  rbtth 
them 


\\0rt  uttht 

rruurcr. 


10c,  ft*- 
8eth, 


\0r,  of*o 


Day  of  the  Lord.  Ch 


ap.v. 


B. 


ear  peace 


\Or, exhort. 


Or.  exhort. 


them  in  the  cioubs ,  to  meet  rtic  1L  o:D  in 
the  aire:  ano  fo  Hiiiti  ltsr c  rucr  Ucc  lbul) 
thcfLozb. 

i s  tBhcrcfozcllcomfojtonean  other 
ibtthtbcfcaiojbs. 

CHAP.    V. 

i  Hee  proccedeth  in  the  former  defcription  ot 
Charts  camming  to  iudeemenr,  16  and 
ghieth  diuers  precepts ,  23  and  (o  con- 
cludeth  the  Epiftle. 

<!Ht  of  the  times  ano  the  fea- 
fons,  bjethzen,  pcehaueno 
ncco  that  3  umte  unto  pou. 
2  5fo2  pour  felues  anoibe 
perfcctlp  that  the  bap  of  the  ILojb  fo 
to  mmeth  as  a  thicfc  m  th c night. 

?  Jf 02  iDhcit  thep  fbai  fap,0caeeanb 
fafetp :  then  fiiDDcn  bcfrructio  commeth 
bponthem.astrauaticbponatt/oman 
lbith  chilbcanb  thev  fhail  notefcape. 

4.  zSut  pe  ,b2cth2cn  ,arc  not  m  barnc* 
neffcthat  that  nap  fljoiuo  oucrta&e  pou 
asathtefc. 

<,  Pee  arc  all  the  chilojen  of  light, 
ano  the  chtitucn  ofthc  Dap :  ibearenot 
of  the  night,no2ofDatUencffe. 

6  Xhcrcfo2elettosnotaecpe,asdoe 
others :  but  let  bs  ibatch  anb  be  fober. 

7  Jfo2ti)cvtl)atfleepc,aecpetntf)c 
night,  anb  thep  that  bee  bztmben,  are 
D2unrten  m  the  night. 

8  25utictbsvbhoarcofthebap,bee 
fober  .putting  on  the  bjeftpiatc  of  faith 
anb  loue  ,anb  fo;  an  helmet,  the  hope  of 
faiuation. 

9  JF02  <£ob  Ijatf)  not  appotnteb  tos 
to  Unath :  but  to  obtame  faiuation  bp 
ourlLo2b3JcfusCh2tu\ 

10  i©ho  bieb  fo2 bs,  that  ibhcther 
ibetbabeo2fleepe,  ibefhoulbltuctoge* 
tbetUMfttjim. 

1  naheterme,  l|  eomfo2tpout  femes 
together  ,anb  ebifie  one  another  ,cucn  as 
alfopeboe. 


P 


ii  anbibe  befeech  pou,b2crl)2eu,to 
Rnoibtbcmibhith  labour  among  pou, 
anbarcouer  pou  m  thcflojb ,  anb  ab- 
momuipou: 

,  13  anotocltcrmcthcmberphtghlp 
m  loue  fo2  their  ibozhesfalte,  anb  be  at 
peace  among  pour  felues. 

14  ii2oibU)e|lcrho2tpou,b2ctf)2en, 
ibar  ne  them  thatare||  bnrulp,  comfort 
the  feeble  nunbeb,  fuppo2t  the  ibeafee, 
be  patient  toitoarb  all  men. 

1 5  £>ec  that  none  renber  cum  fo?  fc 
mil  bnto  anp  man:  butcuer  follolb  that 
ibhul)  is  goob.both  among  pout  felues 
anb  to  all  men. 

i6  Hciopcc  euermo2e : 

17  j^apttnthouttcafmg: 

is  3Jneucrp thing giucthanKts:fo2 
this  is  the  ttnll  of  ©ob  mChjift  3efus 
contenting  poa. 

19  £Hueneb  not  ttjefprrit: 

20  2>efpifenotp2ophetpings: 

2  1  #zouc  all  things :  holb  faff  that 
ibhichisgoob. 

ii  ^bOamcfrom  all  appearance  of 
cuill. 

23  anbttjcberptisobofpcacetancti* 
fie  pou  tbhollp  :  anb  1  pray  God  pout 
tbholc  fpirit,anb  foulc,anb  bobp  be  p;e? 
ferucb  biamclcffe  bnto  the  comnung 
of  our  Ho2b  3lefus  Ch2ilt. 

24.  tfauhruilisheethatcaiiethpou, 
ibhoalfolbillboeit. 

25  262etl)2en,p?apro2bs. 

16  astmt  all  the  bjcthzen  U)ith  an 
ftolptttffe. 

27  3||thargepoubpthcfLo2b,tt)at 
this  epittic  bee  reab  bnto  an  the  hoip 
b?ett)jen. 

28  Xhc  grace  of  our  3L02D  3Jcfus 
Cljjiftbe  rbith  pou,;ameu. 

€  Xhe  firftCpittle  bnto  the  %\)& 
falonians,  ibas  lb?ittcnfrom:3> 
thens. 


V 


^THE 


\\OrJ,cf„ch 

\OrJifir. 
Jcrij. 


1 0r,4tJiMrt, 


Chrift glorified   I  I.Theflalonians.        inhisSaints. 


,THE  SECOND  EPISTLE 

of  Paul  the  Apoftle  to  the 

ThelTalonians. 


gets  of  hid 

power. 

\\pr,]«l- 


CHAP.    I. 

S.  Paul  certifieth  them  of  the  good  opinion 
which hee  had  of  their  faith,  loue,  and  pati- 
ence: n  And  therewithal!  vfeth  diners  rea- 
fons  for  the  comfortmg  of  them  in  perfec- 
tion ,  whereof  the  chiefefl  is  taken  from  the 
righteous  judgement  ot  God. 

3ui  ano  £>titta= 
nus,anb'£imo' 
thcus  bnto  the 
Church  of  the 
Xbcflaiontas,in 
Gooourjfatbcr, 
.mDrt)e!lojD3Ie? 
fitsChzut: 

2.  ti5cacc  bnto 
pou ,  ant)  peace 
front  Gob  our  father ,  anD  the  JLoibt 
jjJcutsCbzift. 

?  D9cc  arc  bottnb  to  tbanltc  Gob  al- 
ibapcs  foz  pou,  bzctbzcn,as  tt  is  mccte, 
becaufcthat  your  faith  grotbetb  crcce* 
UtnglV .  anotbecbaritic  of  cuerp  one  of 
poualtoibarbs  cart)  other  abouubctb: 
4  <§>o  tbatibccourfclucsglozfem 
vou  in  tbc  Churches  of  Gob ,  foz  your 
patience  anb  faith  mall  pour  perfecute 
ons  ano  tribulations  that  pec  cnbnre. 
<,  which  is  a  inamfcfl  toUeti  of  the 
righteous  utbgement  of  Gob,  that  pee 
map  bee  countcb  lboztbp  of  the  lungs 
borne  of  Gob,  fozibbieb  pec  aifofnffcr; 

6  5>ccmg  ic  is  a  righteous  thing 
ibitb  Gob  to  rtcompetue  tabulation  to 
them  that  trouble  pott: 

7  attbto  pouttmo  arctroublcb.rcft 
Vbitbbs.ibbcnfbcTLozbgfefusfbaibc; 
ccuealebfrombcaucn,tnjitbbfsmtgb<! 
tie  Angels, 

s  3»  flaming  fire,  ||  tatting  benge* 
ance  on  them  that  bno  Vb  not  Gob ,  anb 
thatobcpttotthcGofpclofourHoibc 
Refits  Chuff, 

9  tt>bo  fliaibe  pttniibeb  ttottl)  eucr* 
lafhngbcltruction  fiomtbcpzefcnccof 


the  ?Lozo ,  anb  front  the  giozp  of  his 
polbcr : 

ii  usbenbee  (ban  come  to  bee  gloat- 
fiebtnbts  Saints,  anb  to  bee  abmireb 
in  all  them  that  belceue  (bctaufc  our  te- 
ftimonp  among  poulbas  belceueb)  tn 
thatbap. 

ii  uabcrefoze  alfo  rbe  pjap  aiibapcsfoz 
pou,  that  our  Gobtbonlb  ||  count  pou 
ttioztbp  of  this  taiimg,anb  fulfill  all  the 
goob  pleafnrc  of  his  goobneflc ,  anbrtje 
Ibozfee  of  faith  lbtth  potber : 

n  Xhatthc^amcofourfLozb^Ie. 
fits  Cbztft  map  bee  glozificb  in  pou ,  anb 
pent  htm  ,accozbing  to  the  grace  of  our 
Gob,ano  the  Jlozo  3Jcfus  Cbzitt. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  Hee  Willeth  them  to  continue  fuedfart  in  the 
trueth  receiued,  3  Shew  eth  that  there  fhal! 
bee  a  departure  ftom  the  taith,  9  andadil- 
couery  of  Antichrift,  before  the  day  of  the 
Lord  come.  15  And  thereupon  repeateth 
his  former  exhortation,  &  prayeth  (or  them. 

"  ©tb  ibecbefeetb  pou,b;c* 

thzen,bp  thecomnungof 

our  ?Lozb  3Jcftts  Chzift, 

anb  bp  our  gathering  to* 

Ulgctbcrbiuobtm, 

x   %fyat  pee  bee  not  foonc  fbafcen  in 

mmoc,ozbeerroubleb,ncithcrbpfp(rit, 

noz  bp  tbozb,noz  bp  letter, as  frombs, 

as  that  the  bap  of  Cbzifl  is  at  hanb, 

3  Het  no  man  bcceiuc  pou  bp  anp 
meancs,foz  that  day  (hail  not  come,  except 
there  cornea  falling  aibap  firftanb  that 
man  of  finite  bccrcucaieb,tbc  fonucof 
pcrbtnon, 

4.  t©ho  oppofcth  anb  craltcth  him 
fclfcaboue  all  thatiscallcbGoo,02  that 
Is  tboztbtppcb:  fo  that  he  asGob  .flttctb 
m  the  Xemple  of  Gob,  (bclbing  bim- 
fclfetbatbetsGob. 

5  Remember  pee  not.tbatlbben  31 
vans  ya  rbttb  rou,  3  tolbe  pou  thcTc 
things? 

6  3nb 


[J  Or,iewb' 
14'- 


Strong  delulion.         Cha 


lOrWeiki  6  2nbnomveclmoU)*bbat!l*bttl> 
bolbetb,  that  bee  might  bee  reuealcb  in 
Distune. 

7  f 01  the myftcrfc of  inicroiticbotb 
alreabtettwKctonely  be  tbijo  noiblefc 
tetl),  will  let,  DntfU  be  be  taben  out  of  the 
Nay. 

3  3lnb  then  (ball  that  tblcUcb  bee 
reuealcb,  tbbome  the  %qih  (ball  ton- 
fame  Vbttl)  the  fpint  of  bis  mouth, anb 
fhall  befttoy  ttnth  tlje  bngbtnelTe  of  his 
tommmg: 

9  Euen  him  ibbofc  comming  is  after 
the  UWRing  of  5>atan,  ibtth  all  potber 
anb  (tgnes,anb  lymgibonbers, 

io  ^norbtth  an  bceciueablenefle  of 
DnrigbtcoufnciTcm  them  thatperifh : 
betaufe  tbey  rcceiuco  not  thclouc  of  the 
tructh.that  tbey  might  be  faueo. 

1 1  3lnb  foj  tins  taufe  ©ob  Cball  fenb 
tbcm  OrongbeluGon, that  tbey  tyoulb 
belccucaiye: 

ii  Chat  tfjtf  an mtgbtbcebamncb 
ibho  bciccueb  not  the  trtictb,  but  tyfo 
plcafure  m  bnngbtcoufnes. 

ij  25uttbearcbounbtogiuethanfes 
airbay  to  <5ob  fo?  you,b2Ctb2cn,bcloucb 
of  the  %oin ,  betaufe  <5ob  hath  from 
the  beginning  thofcu  you  to  fatuation, 
through  fanctifieation  of  the  fpint,  anb 
bclcefcofthctructh, 

14.  ©hereunto  he  taileb  you  by  our 
©ofpel,to  the  obtetmng  of  the  glojlc  of 
the?Lo2b3lefusChnu\ 

15  Xherefo:e,bjethjen,flanb  fall, 
anb  holb  the  trabttions  tt)hith  yee  baue 
becnctaugbt,Vbbetbcrbytb02b  02  our 
Cpiftle. 

i6  /BoU)  our  fLoubc  Ucfus  Chnft 
Ijimfclfc ,  anb  ©ob  euen  our  father, 
rbhith  bath  loucb  bs,  anb  hathgiuen 
bs  eucriafting  tonfolafton ,  anb  goob 
hope  through  grate, 

17  Comfo2tyourbearts,anbttabli(b 
you  in  euccy  goob  tt)02b  anb  tboifte. 

CHAP.    III. 

He  craueth  their  prayers  tor  himlelfe,  }  tefti- 
fieth  what  confidence  hee  hathimhem,  5 
makcthrequellto  Godiiuheirbehjlfe,^  °i- 
ucth  them  diners  precepts ,  efpecially  to  fhun 
idlenefle  ,  and  ill  company ,  16  Andlaftof 
all  concludeth  with  praver  and  falutation. 

IJnaliy,  bjethzen,  p2ay 

fo2bB,thatthctuo2bof 

the?L020tmavhauefree 

t  cr.  mV    m»  PTjn^S  courfe ,  anb  be  gl02ifi'cb, 

^cucnaB'tLstbithPOu: 

z   2tnb  that  tt>e  map 


££)• 


Of  the  idle  J 


Or,  the  pa- 
tience ef 
ChnH. 


bee  bcliucrcb  from  tbnrcafouable  anb' f; 
tticfteb  men :  foz  all  men  baue  not  faith. 
j   25ut  the  Ho2b  is  fatthfuii ,  mho 
(ball  Oabliflj  vou ,  anb  feeepc  vou  from 
cuitl. 

4  3lnb  ibec  baue  tonfibentc  in  the 
II020  tombing  you,  that  vec  botbboc, 
anb  tbill  boc  the  things  Vbhtclj  Vbc  torn 
manbvou. 

5  3nb  the  ILojb  bircct  vour  hearts 
mto  the  louc  of  ©ob ,  anb  into  ||  tljc  pa- 
tient ibaitingfoiCbn'ft. 

6  /15oU)  vot  tommanb  you,b2Ctb2Ctt, 
in  tljc  if5amc  of  our  JL020  3efus  Cl^ill, 
that  vctbithbjavb  vour  felucs  from  cue* 
rv  bzotber  that  ibalactb  bifo2berly,anb 
not  after  the  trabition  ibljith  bee  rctct? 
ueb  of  bs. 

7  Jfo?  vour  fclues  ftnotb  boib  vee 
ought  to  follorb  bs :  foz  u>cc  behaueb 
not  our  fclues  bifojbcrly  among  vou, 

8  Neither  bib  Ibec  cate  anvmans 
b2cabfoz  nought :  but  Ibjougbt  ftitb  la* 
boutanbtrauailenigbtanbbay,  that 
tbee  might  not  bee  chargeable  to  anv 
ofvou. 

9  il5ot  betaufe  tbebaue  not  potber, 
but  to  mabe  our  fclues  an  enfample  tin* 
toyoutofollotbbs. 

10  5fo2  euen  tbhen  Jbcc  Ibere  rbltb 
vou,  this  ibectommanbebyou,  that  if 
anv  tboulb  not  tbojtBC,  neither  fboulb 
hceatc. 

11  5Fo2lbebcarcthattberearcfome 
tbhttb  Vbaifte  among  vou  bifojberl^, 
U)  0  2uing  not  at  all,  but  are  buG-bobits. 

ii  /Boib  them  that  arefucb,tbcconv 
manb,  anb  erbozt  bv  our  ILo2b3}efus 
Ch.nO>that  lbitb  guietneu"ethev  rb02fte, 
anb  eat  their  otbne  b2eab. 

ij  2Sutvc,b2eth2en,||benottt)earie 
inibellboing. 

14  ^nb  if  anv  ntan  obev  not  our 
U)02b,  bv  this  epiftle  ||  note  that  man, 
anb  baue  no  companv  ibith  him ,  that 
bemavbeatbameb, 

15  pet  coimt  him  not  as  an  enemte, 
but  abmonifb  rjim  as  a  b20tbcr. 

16  jBotb  the  Uo2b  of  peace  bimfelfc, 
giuc  vou  peace  aitbaves,  bv  all  meanes. 
ChefLo2bbcrbithvouail. 

17  Xhe  ralutatton  of  ^aul ,  tbitb 
mine  ottine  hanb ,  tt)b«ch  is  the  tohen  in 
euerv  €piftle:  fo  3  Witt. 

18  Xbc  grace  of  our  2.02b  3lcfus 
Chnft  be  ttntb  vou  all^men, 

C^bcfeconb  EpiftietotbeXbeflaJo* 
niaus  ibas  tbzitten  from  atbens, 

V   1  tTHE 


Or.fiuxl 
not. 


that  man  by 
EfilUc 


lnitcame. 


(THE  FIRST  EPISTLE 

of  Paul  the  Apoitle  to  1  imothie. 


CHAP.     1. 


Timothieisputin  mind  of  the  charge  which 
w.is(yucn  vnto  him  by  Paul  at  his  going  to 
Macedonia.  <,  Ol"  the  right  vfe  and  end  or 
the  Law.    ii  Of  SaintPauLcallingto  bean 


I   I 


of  Hvnieiieus  &  Alexander. 

SiulanSpomcoflJCM 
fas  Chuff  by  tfhe  com;  | 
maunbement  of  d50D 
our;S>auiour,$?Lo20 

3JCfUS  CtjHtt  which  is 

ourhope, 
i  Unto  Xunothic 
myoWnfonncmthcjMith:<3race,mcr: 
cte,and  peace  from  ©ob  out  5fattjcr,ano 
g}cfasCh:iftour|Lo:b. 

j  XsJ  befought  thee  to  abibe  fall 
at  ephefas  When  3  Went  into  £0m 
boma,  that  thou  mightcft  charge  fomc 
that  tljcp  tcath  no  other  Doctrine, 

4  Neither  gmc  hecbto  fables ,  anb 
enbteffe  genealogies ,  Which  miuiftcr 
quefhons,  rather  then  coifying  Which 
is  m  faith  :fo  Doc. 

5  jftoW  the  cnb  of  the  commanbe 
mcntischaritv,outofapurchcart,anb 
of  a  goob  confcicncc ,  anb  of  faittj  bn- 
fatneb. 

6  3?rotn  Which fomciihautngfroar , 
neb,  Dane  turncb  afibcbnto  bamciang  j 
lmg, 

7  £>cfiring  to  bee  teacijers  of  the 
Haw,  bnbcrftaDiug  neither  Whatrhry! 
fay,no:  Whereof  they  affirme. 

8  26ut  wctmow  that  the  Haw  is 
goob  ,if  a  man  bfc  it  lawfully. 

9  BnoWuigthts ,  that  tin  JLaWis 
not  mabc  fo:  a  righteous  man ,  bntfoz! 
the  lawicfJTcanD  bifobcbient,  fo:  the 
bngoblv ,  anb  fo;  fmnrrs ,  fo:  bnholy.j 
anb  p:ofanc,  fo  :  nuirbercrs  of  fathers, 
anb  MuirDetcrs  of  mothers ,  fo;  man* 
Havers, 

io  fo:  Who:cmongcrs  ,  fo?  them 
thatbrftlc  thcmfelucs  WithmanUuiDc, 
fo:  meii-ft eaters  fo:  liars ,  fo:  pcrlurrb 
prrfoii5,anD  if  there  be  an?  other  thing 


that  is  contrary  to  founo  Doctrine, 

ii  ^Ictozbtng  to  the  glorious  ©ofpel 
of  the  blcffeb  cf>oD,wl)fcf)  was  commit* 
tcDtomytruft. 

1 1  5lnb  3J  thanUc  Cfjult  3icfus  our 
!Lo:D,whohath  cnablcb  nice:  fo;  that 
rjecountebme  faithfull,  putting  me  m 
tothcsJISimftertc, 

1 3  naho  was  before  a  biafphemcr, 
aub  a  pcrfccutcr ,  anb  nuurious.  2But 
31  obtaincb  mercte ,  becaufc  3  bib  utg- 
no;antly,inbnbcliefe. 

i+  21nb  the  grace  of  ourHojb  was 
crcccomg  abunbant,  With  faith,  ?  lone, 
Which  ism  €h:ift3icfas. 

15  Xhis  isafaithfull  faying,  anb 
wo;thy  of  an  acceptation,  that  €h;ift 
;gjcfus  tame  into  the  Wo;lbto  faucfim 
ncrs.of  Whom  3f  am  chtefc. 

1 6  i?oWbcit ,  fo;  this  caufc 3J  obtau 
!  neb  mercy , that  mmcftrfr/Jefas  Chuff 
!  might  fhew  foo;th  all  long  fufFcnng, 
:fo;  a  pattrnc  to  them  Which  fhouio 
J  hereafter  belccucon  htm  to  life  cuerla- 
fling. 

1 7  iBoWbntopUing eternal,  minion 
tail.inuiGblc,  the  oncly  Wife  C5ob,bc  ho; 
nour  anb  glo;y  fo:  cucr  $  cucr.3lmcn. 

is  Xhis  charge  5  commit  tonto  thee, 
fonnc  Ximothic-,  acco:bmg  tothcp:o> 
phefies  Which  Wcntbcfo;c  onthce,that 
thou  by  them  mightcft  warrc  a  goob 
warfare, 

19  ^olbmg  faith,  anb  a  goob  confer 
cnccWhich  fomc  haumgput  away  .con- 
cerning faith.hauc  mabc  fl)ipw;acftc. 

10  <Df  whom  is  fcymeneus  anb  3llcr 
anber ,  wtiomc3i  hauc  bcliucrcb  bnto 
Satan ,  that  they  may  learnc  not  to 
biafphcmc.  * 

CHAP.    II. 

1  That  it  is  meete  to  pray  and  giuc  thanks  tor  all' 
men,  and  the  realon  why.  9  How  women 
fhould  be  attired,  11  They  are  not  permit- 
ted to  teach.  15  Theyfhalbcfaticd,notwith- 
Itandins;  the  testimonies  of  Gods  wrath  ,  in 
childbirth,  if  tbev  continue  in  faith. 


Prayers  for  all  men,  Chap.ij.iij.  OfBifliops. 


\\Or,defre. 


\\  Or, emi- 
nent place. 


OrataP.t- 


\0r 


||  erhojt  tl)crcfo?e ,  tljat 

firft  of  all ,  [applications , 
pjaycrs.mterceflions  anb 
giuing  of  thanks  be  mabe 
fb?  all  men: 
a  jfojBiitgs,anbfo2aiithataretn 
||aiitho?itie ,  that  vat  may  icabeaguiet 
ano  peaceable  life  in  all  gobiineffe  ano 
boneftte. 

3  .f  oj  this  is  goob  ano  acceptable  in 
the  fight  of  Gob  our  S>auiour , 

4  <t©bo  mill  bane  all  men  to  bee  fa< 
ucb,  anD  to  conic  bnto  tbe anottrtebgc 
oftbc  truetb. 

5  ifo?  tkrc  is  one  (Bob,  anb  one  $$t- 
biatour  bctibccnc  Gob  anb  men,  the 
man€lj?ift3lcfus, 

6  tt)H o  gauc  linnfelfe  a  ranfbmc  f o : 
all,  l|  to  be  tcCificb in buc  time. 

7  ©hereunto  3  am  02bamcb  a  p^ea- 
cl)cc  ,  anb  an  apoftle  ( 3  fpeaitc  tlje 
truetb  tn  €l)2ift,anb  lie  not)  a  teacher  of 
tlje  Geimics  in  faith  anb  bentic. 

8  3  Hull  tbcrcfcne  that  men  pjay 
eucry  lbbcrc ,  lifting  top  holy  Ijanbcs 
without  ito;atb,antoboubring. 

9  3\\  UKc  manet  alio ,  that  women 
aoo2uctbcmfclucs  in  mobcltapparctl, 
With  fbamefaftnefle  anb  fobnene ,  not 
with  ||  b20ibcbl)atrc,o?golb,ozpcatles, 
02co(tlyaray, 

io  But  (Which  beconimctftttjomen 
pzofcffmg  gobimcs)  With  goob  W02US. 

n  fLct  the  woman  leartic  tn  filence 
With  all  fubicction: 

12  But  3  fuffce  not  a  tboman  to 
teach ,  noz  to  bfucpe  autbozmc  ouce  the 
man,buttobcmfilence. 

i5  jfoi2U>am was firltfonncb, tljen 

die ' 

i+*  3inD3lbamwasnottoceetueo,but 

the  tboman  being  bcccntcb  was  in  the 
tranfgrelTioti : 

15  /ftotmtbftanotng  flicfballbc  f& 
ucbmtbilb  bearing,  if  they  connnnetn 
faith  ano  cbantie,  anbholmcffe ,  with 
fobnetie. 

CHAP.    III. 

How  Bifhops,  and  Deacons,  and  their  wiues 
fhould  be  qualified,  14  and  to  what  end  S. 
Paulwrote  roTimothie  of  thefe things.  15 
OfiheChurch,andtheblefTedtrueduherein 
taught  and  protefled. 

•gy-^^  j?is  is  a  true  faying :  3iA 
t51  |1§x  man  acute  tilt  office  of  a 
'  25ifl)op,l)cbcTiretl)agoob 

W02UC. 
z  aBifboptbcn  inuft 


be  biameieffe,  the  bufbanb  of  one  Wife, 
bigiiant.fobcr,  ||  ofgoobbtljauionr.gi- 
uen  to  bofpitahfie,aptto  teatlj , 

j  /!5ot  ||  giucn  to  Wine ,  no  ttriUcr, 
not  grccby  of  filthy  lucre,  but  patient, 
not  a  b2aU)ler,not  couctous ; 

4  £>ne  tljat  rulctb  wen  his  otbne 
boufc,  baiting  histbilbjeu  mfubiettton 
With  all  granitic. 

5  (j?02tfamantmownotbowto 
rule  his  owne  boufc ,  how  fljailhc  tafcc 
care  of  the  Church  of  Gob  t ) 

6  43ota||nouicc,lcftbctngliftcbbp 
lbith  P2ibc ,  hec  fall  tnto  the  tonbemna 
nonofthcbcttill. 

7  Q9o2coucr ,  hce  muff  hattc  a  goob 
|repo2tofthcmthhithare  Without,  left 
1  he  fall  into  repjoth,  anb  thefnarc  oftljc 
bcuill. 

s  iLiactbifc  muft  the  SDeatons  bee 
graue,not  boublc  tongncb,not  giucn  to 
much  wine,  not  grccby  of  filthy  lutrc, 

9  $?olbtng  the  myfterie  of  the  faith 
inapurctonfciencc. 

10  3tnb  let  thefe  alfo  firll  bep20iicb , 
!  then  let  th  em  bfe  the  office  of  aDeacon, 
being  found  biamclefTc. 

11  €ucn  fo  muftthetrlbiucsbegrauc, 
not  oanberers,  (iobcr ,  faithfull  m  all 
things. 

I  11  jLctthc2Deaeonsbcthebnfbanbs 
of  onelbtfe,  ruling  their  chilb2cn,anb 
their  oibnehoitfcstbcll. 

15  5F02  they  that  ||  hauc  bfeb  the  of- 
fice of  aSDeacon  tbelt,purehafcto  them> 
fclucs  a  goob  begrec,  anb  great  bolb 
neffc  in  the  faith ,  which  n  m  c^2ifi 
3)cfus. 

14.  Xhefc  things  rb2iteJJbntothcc 
hoping  to  tome  bnto  thee  mostly. 

15  But  if  3  tary  long,  that  thou 
maycftfenoibhotb  thououghteftto  be 
hauc  thy  fclfe  in  the  J)oufe  of  <5ob, 
HMith  is  the  Church  of  theliuing  ©ob, 
the  pillar  anb  |l  grounb  of  the  truett). 

16  ^nb  Vblthout  contronerfic,  grcar 
is  the  myftcrie  of  goblincffc:  ©obibat 
manifcllin  the  fleS)  ,ittffificb  tn  the  £>pt 
rit,fecnc  of  Angels,  p^cachcb  bnto  tlji 
©entiles,  bclccucb  on  inthcvbojlb,  re- 
teiucbbpmtoglo?y. 

CHAP.   Ill  I. 

He  foretelleth  that  in  the  latter  times  there  (ha!: 
be  a  departure  from  the  faith.  6  Andtotht 
end  that  Timothie  might  not  faile  in  doing 
hisduetie,heiuuiifheth  him  with diuers pre. 
cepts  belonging  thereto. 

ttl  ?  /15olb 


\\Ortmt 
reaJylocjuA- 
rcll  attd  offer 

\9T9n9,M0ne 


I  Or,  one 

tfTvly  corns 
0  ihefuith. 


ftrod. 


'.Jf-7- 


lrits. 


I.Timothie.  Ofwidowes 


\\Or,fcrd 
t'.uU  limt. 


[\Or.iadlt 
•*"■£'■ 


j©ib  the  Spirit  fpcaBcth 
erpjcup,  that  in  the  latter 
tunes  fome  fl)all  Depart 
from  the  faith ,  giuaig 
beeb  to  fcDuriiig  fpirus, 

anDboctrtncsofbcutls: 
z  Speaking  lies  m  bppocriGc,  ha< 

utng  their  toufctcntc  fearcD  ttntb  a  ijote 

iron, 

J  5f0;blDDing  tO  marr^,  and  comman- 
ding to  abttcine  from  mcates ,  tbtjiclj 
<t50D  bath  crcatcb  to  beetccciHeDuJitb 
tbanBcfguung  of  them  tbbtcbbclcrae, 
anblmoibtbetraeth. 

4  jfo2tucrp  creature  of(Bob'<  goob, 
ann  noting  to  be  refufeb,  if  it  be  retei- ! 
ucDttiitbtbanRcfgiulng: 

5  $0}  it  is  i anctifieb  by  the  tbojb  of , 
©obanop2apet. 

6  5f  thou  put  the  bjetiucn  (n  rc*j 
membranceof  tbcfe  things,  thou  fbaitj 
beagoobinimftcr  ofJcfuBCUuft.nous  1 
rifbeb  top  m  rt)c  uwbes  of  faith  ano  of, 
goob  bottnnc ,  rbbeceunto  tbon  haft ; 
attatneb. 

7  But  tcfufe  propbane  anb  olbe 
lbiucs  fables,  anb  ejeernfe  tljp  fclfc  rather 
bnto  goblincffe. 

8  #02boDflpcrernrep20fiteth!llitle, 
but  goDlincfle  is  profitable  bnto  all 
tDings,  bauing  pronnfc  of  tlje  life  that 
no  lb  is,  anb  of  that  lbbicb  is  to  come. 

9  Xbisrs  a  faithful  fapmg,  anb  ibo?* 
tbpofaiiacceptanon: 

10  jFo2thcrfo2cibcbotbiabout,anD 
fuff et  tepjocl)  .becaufc  Vbe  truft  in  the  li 
tnng  <sob,  lbbo  is  toe  Sautout  of  ail 
men.fpenallyoftbofctbatbelceue. 

11  Xbcfe  things  commanb  9  teach, 
u  ILetnomanbefpifctbppoutb.but 

be  thou  an  crample  of  tl)e  belecucrs,  in 
lbo2b,inconucrfatton,meharuic,infpv 
rit,infaitb,inpuvitic. 

15  Xill  3  come,  giuc  attenbantt  to 
reaoing,to  erb02tanon)toboctrinc. 

14  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in 
thee ,  ibbieb  ibas  giuen  thee  bp  p2opbe* 
fie,  ibitb  the  laving  on  of  tbcbanbsof 
tbe$2efbpteric. 

15  ©ebitatcbpon  tbcfc  things,  giue 
tbpfelfcibbollptotbcm,  thatthpprofV 
nng  may  appcarc  ||  to  all. 

16  Xaac  hecb  bnto  tbp  felfc,  anb  bn* 
to  the  Doctrine :  continue  m  thcni :  fo2  in 
Doing  this,  thou  (halt  bod)  fauc  tbp 
fclfc.anb  them  that  bearc  thee. 

CHAP.     V. 

1    Rules  to  be  obferued  in  rcproouing.     j    Ol 


\\Or,k_mds 
neffi. 


||  Or  Jell- 

uttclj. 


widowes.    17  OrElders.    13   Apreceptfor 
Timothies  health.    14  Some  mens  fumes 
goe  before  vnto  judgement ,  and  fome  mens! 
doe  follow  after. 

€bubenotan<£lber,but: 
itureate  him  as  a  father, 
anb  the  pongcr  men  as 
brethren: 
i  1Che  eioer  tbomeni 

asmothers,  the  ponger  as  fitters  ibttb 

all  purine. 

3  honour  ibfootbcs  that  are  xnv 
boibesinbeeb. 

4  25ut  if  an?  ibibolb  haue  cbtlbjen 
02  ntphelbes,  let  them  learne  firft  to 
fheib  ||  ptetic  at  home,  anb  to  requite 
their  parents :  for  that  is  goob  anb  ap 
tcptablebefojcGob. 

5  jftototyetbatisannDorbinDceD, 
anb  befolate,  truftctb  m  <5oD,  anb  con< 
tmuetb  m  fupplicanons  anb  prapers 
night  ano  bay. 

I    6   But  fye  that  liuctb|lmpicafure.(s 
Dcabibbilcmeiiuetb. 

7  anDtbefetbingsgfucintbatgc, 
that  thep  map  be  blamcleffe. 

s   25ut  if  any  prouibe  not  foj  bis 
olbne,  j  fpcciaitp  £02  tborcofblsoibnci 
||  houfe,  hee  hathbcnieb  thefaitb.anbts  !***« 
iborfetbcnamnfiDel. 

9  ILetnotaibiboibbcelltafeeninto 
the  number  ,  bnDcr  tbreefcore  pettes 
j  olb,batring  bene  the  tbife  of  one  man, 

10  ©ciireportcDofforgooDibo&s, 
if  fhec  haue  brought  bpcbitDren,  tf  fbee 
bauelobgeDftrangcrs,  if  (he  haue  lb* 
fheb  the  Samts  feet ,  if  fhee  haue  relce* 
ucb  the  afflieteb,  if  fhec  haue  Dtltgentlp 
follotbeb  cuerp  goob  tborBe. 

1 1  25ut  the  pongee  lbtboibes  rcfufc : 
for  tbhen  thep  haue  begunnc  to  marc 
ibanton  againft  Ch?tft  ,  thep  Ibfll 
marrp, 

ii  Waning  Damnation,  becaufc  thep 
hauttatt  off  their  firft  faith. 

13  3nb  ibithall  thep  learne  to  bee 
iblc ,  Vbanbering  about  from  houfe  to 
houfe ;  anb  not  onelp  ible,  but  tatlers  al 
Co ,  anb  bnfibobies ,  (peaking  things 
lbhich  thep  ought  not. 

14  3  ibill  therefore  that  the  ponger 
ibonicn  marrp,  bearc  thilb2en,guib  the 
houfe,  giue  noueoccafionto  tficaouer 
farp  tto  tpeaac  reproehfullp. 

15  5fo;  fome  are  alrcabp  turneb  a^ 
Gbc  after  Satan. 

16  5)f  anp  man  02  iboman  that  be- 
leeucth  haue  ibibolbes,  let  them  rcliene 
them,  anb  let  not  the  Church  be  char* 

geD. 


\0rfhtfin. 


f  Gr.ftr 
iketrrji' 


(OfEId 


crs. 


Chap.v).     GodlinefTe,  gaine. 


'Dcuc.25. 

4- 
•Mjtth.io. 

10. 


i|  Or,vinicr. 


BreHtdtcc. 


\\0rJ,<l„. 


gcD,  tljattt  map  cciicue  them  that  ace 
iDtDoibcsmbecD. 

17  *lct  the  clDcrstbatrulctbcll.be 
eouutebibortbp  of  Double  l)onour,cfpcs 
nallp  tbcp  ttiljo  labour  tn  the  iborb  aub 
Doctrine 

18  5for  the  Scripture  faith ,  *Xbou 
(halt  not  moufcll  the  ore  tbattrcaoetb 
out  the  eorne :  ano ,  *  Xbc  tabourcr  is 
iiuortbpofbisrcibarb. 

19  3tgamft  an  <£ibcr  recetue  not  an 
accufation,but  il  before  tibo  0?  three  rbit- 
neffee. 

20  Cbem  that  finite  rcbufec  before 
all,tbat  others  alfo  map  fcare. 

21  31cnargctl)ccbcfo2CC5oD,anbtl)c 
fLorb  Jcfus  Cbntt,  ano  tljcclcct^n^ 
gels,  tl)at  thou  obferue  tbtfe  tl)mgs 
,||  ttrittjout  preferring  one  before  ano- 
I  thee,  Doing  nothing  bp  parttaline. 

xi  HapbanbsfuDDcnlponnoman, 
neither  bee  partahcr  of  other  mens 
fumes.  "Stcepe  tbp  fclfe  pure. 

13  SDrmftc  no  longer  ibatcr ,  butbfc 
a  little  lbinc  fox  tbp  Qomacucs  fafce,anb 
thine  often  tnfirmmes. 

24  Some  mens  (nines  arc  open  be* 
fore  bant) ,  going  before  toiuogement: 
ano  fomc  men  tbcp  folloib  after. 

25  fLiucibifc  alfo  the  goob  lborfcs  of 
fomc  arc  mamfeft  before  l)anb ,  anb  tbep 
that  arc  otbcribifc,caunot  be  btb. 

CHAP.    VI. 

i  Of  the  duetie  of  feruants.  3  Nottohauefel- 
lowfhip  with  newfangled  teachers.  6  God- 
linefle  is  great  gaine ,  10  and  loue  of  mo- 
ney the  roote  ot  all  euill.  11  WhatTimo- 
thie  is  to  flie ,  and  what  to  follow,  17  and 
whereoftoadmonifh  the  rich.  10  Tokcepe 
the  puvitie  ot  true  docfrine  ,  and  to  auoyd 
prophane  landings. 

fflg3£f£$E  *t  as  many  feruants  as 
^\M  arebnber  the  poftc,  count 

i*$3$  tl)cir  ottnc  matters  mor* 
^  »%  tbp  of  all  honour,  that  the 
Sgcs^Ef  0amt  of  <soo ,  anb  bis 
Doctrine  be  not  biafphcmeo. 

2  anD  tbcp  that  bauebclccuingma; 
ftcrs,  let  them  not  befpifc  thtmbeeaufc 
tbep  are  brethren :  but  rather  boe  them 
fcruice ,  becaufc  tbep  arc  ||  faitbfull  anb 
bcloueD  ,  partabcrs  of  the  benefite: 
Xt)cfc  tilings  teach  anb  ejebort. 

j  gjf  anp  man  teacb  otbcrtbde,  anb 
confent  not  to  ibboiefomeiborDS,  euen 
tljevborbes  ofouclLorbUcfus  Cbrttt, 
anoto  the  Doctrine  ibbfcb  is  accorotng 
togoDUnclTe: 


4(  $?ec  is  ||protiD,tmoibing  nothing, 
but  1  boting  about  qucftions.anD  ftrifes 
of  loorDcs ,  lwbcrcof  commctb  cnuie, 
ttrifc,railmgs,cuill  furmifmgs, 

5  11  iSerucrfe  bifpttnngs  of  men  of 
corrupt  tninDes,  ano  Dcftitute  of  the 
truetl) ,  fuppofing  that  gaine  is  gobli; 
ncHc :  Jf  com  fuel)  ibitljbraiDtbp  fclfe. 

6  But  goblincffc  ibitb  conten&nent 
is  great  game. 

7  5f  or  tbe  brought  notbingmto  this 
lborlD,  anditisccrtamcibccan  carpno* 
thing  out. 

s  3nb  bauing  foob  anb  raiment  let 
bs  be  tberctbttb  content. 

9  2SuttbeptbatibUbericb,faHmto 
temptation  anb  afnare,anbmto  manp 
foolifb?!)urtfulUufts,ib!)icl)  Droibnc 
men  tn  Dcftcuction  anb  pcrbition. 

10  if  or  the  loue  of  moncp  ts  tbc  root 
of  all  euill,  ibbicb  lbbile  fome  toueteb 
after,  tbep  bane  ||  errcb  from  the  fattl), 
anb  pierccb  tbemfclncs  through  Vbitlj 
manpforroibes. 

11  26nt  tbon ,  £>  man  of  (Sod ,  flic 
tbcfc  things;  anb  folloib  after  ngbtc; 
oufneu"c,gobltnefre,faitf),lonc,pattcncc, 
mccRcnefle. 

12  jftgbttbcgooDfigbt  of  faith,  lap 
bolDon  cternail  life,  ibbcreunto tljou 
art  aifo  calico ,  anb  linn  profefTcb  a  go  o  d 
profeffton  before  manp  VbitncfTcs. 

ij  3  giue  n)ce  cljargc  in  tljc  figljt  of 
©on,  iblio  qutcanetl)  all  things,  ano  be- 
fore Cbnft  3Jefus,  ibbo  before  pontius 
l&ilate  IbitneffcD  a  goob||  Confeffiou, 

14.  Xftat  tbouftcepctbts  commas 
Dement  ttitbout  fpot ,  bnrcbubcablc, 
bntui  the  appearing  of  our  Jlorb  3Jc^ 
fusCftritt. 

15  rebieb  in  bis  times  be  ftall  fbctb, 

iDi)o  is  the  blcffcb,  anb  onelp  poten- 
tate, thcBing  of  Kings,  anb  3Lorb  of 
lorbs: 

i6  naljo  onelp  hath  immortaiitie, 
Dlbclling  in  the  light ,  lbhtcl)  no  man 
can  approch  bnto ,  ibhoi u  no  man  hath 
feencuo;  can  fee:  to  voboni  be  honour 
anb  poibcr  eueriafring.^men. 

17  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this 
tborlb,  that  thep  beenothigl)  nunbeo, 
nor  truft  tn  t  uncertain e  riches,  but  in 
the  lining  d5oD,  tbbo  giuctb  bs  richlp 
all  things  to  eniop, 

18  3CbattbcpDocgoob,tbattbepbc 
rich  in  goob  iborbs,  rcabp  to  oiftributr , 
||  ibilUngto  communicate, 

19  ?lapingbp in ftorc for  thcmfelues 
agoobfounoabon  agalnft  tljc  time  to 

come, 


lOr,* 
foole. 


one  of  ano- 
ther. 


\]Ortfone 

/educed. 


W^rf'f 


t  (Jr.  vticer- 
titintu  of 


||  Or,p>ci- 
Mr. 


Vnfained  faith.       I  I.Timothie.  Holy  calling. 


come,  that  thep  map  lap  holbcotutct* 
nail  life.  ,       ._ 

io  £>  Ximofyie ,  feeepc  that  lbhuh 
is  committcD  to  thP  trott,  auopbtng 
pzophane  a«d  baine  babltngs,  anb  op 
portions  of  fcience.faflv  fo  calico: 

21  i©htchfomep?ofcfftng,haaeer< 


teDcotuxrntngthctatth.  d&racebeipith 
thee,  amen. 

CXhe  fictl  toXimothte  tbas  tbiit^ 
ten  from  lLaoDicca ,  lbhtch  is 
ttjc  rtjicfea  citie  of  $h?pgia  0a* 
cariana. 


,THE  SECOND  EPISTLE 

of  Paul  the  Apoftle  to  Timothie. 


CHAP.     I. 

Pauls  loue  to  Timothie,  and  the  vnfaincd  faith 
which  was  in  Timothie  himfelfe,  his  mother, 
and  grandmother.  6  Hce  is  exhorted  to 
ftirrevp  die  gift  o(  God  which  was  in  him, 
8  to  be  ftedtaft  and  pauent  in  perfecution, 
]}  and  to  pcrfilt  in  the  fourmc  and  trueth 
of  that  doctrine  which  dec  had  learned  ol 
him.  15  Phygellus  and  Hermoocnes,  and 
fuch  like  are  noted  ,  and  Onehphorus  is 
highly  commended. 

3uian21poftleof3Je; 
fus  Chnft  bp  the  rum 
of  <5oD .  accojbmg  to 
the  pzomtfe  of  life, 
ibhut)  ts  m  €hntt 
Dcfus, 
z  IColtitnotrjtemy 
ucareiv  bfloueb  fonne :  grace,  mertte, 
and  peace  from  000  tlje  ifather ,  anb 
Crmft  gicfus  one  IL02D. 

3  3  thantte  csoo ,  lbhom  3  ferae 
from  my  forefathers  ibutj  pure  confer- 
ence, that  ibtthout  ccafing  3  haue  re; 
mcmbiatucofthcc  in  mppzapcrs  night 
ant)  Dap, 

4  (3rcatlpocfirtngtofccthce,bclng 
nitnbfuu  of  tli-p  tcares ,  that  3  map  bee 
fillet)  lbithtop, 

•>  HDl)cn3J  call  to  rcmcmbjancctfic 
bnfattub  fait!)  that  ts  tu  thee ,  lbhtch 
blbclt  firtt  in  thp  granbmothcr  Hois, 
anb  thp  mother  cuntcc:  anb  3  am  per- 
ftuabctrthatmthecalfo. 

6  iiDherefoic  3  puc  thee  in  rcmenr 
bjancc ,  that  thou  ftirrc  Dp  the  gift  of 
Gob  which  is  m  tljcc ,  bv  the  putting  on 
ofmphauDs. 


7  foi  <E»od  hath  not  giuen  us  the 
fptrttoffeatc,butofpoibcr,ofloue,anD 
ofafounbminbe. 

8  25ee  not  thou  therefozeafhamcb 
of  the  tefhmonp  of  our  fLojb ,  no;  of  me 
htspzifoner,  but  bee  thou  partattcr  of 
tlje  afflictions  of  the  <sofpel  accozbmg 
tothcpoiberofcsob, 

9  a@ho hath fauebbs, anb callebbs 
Vbith  an  holp  calling ,  not  accozbuig  to 
our  ttwKcs ,  but  aecozDmg  to  his  oibne 
purpofe  anb  grace,  lbhtch  mas  giuen 
PS  in  Chzift  3Jcfus ,  befozc  tlje  lboiio 
began, 

io  aButisnolbmabemawfcftbpthc 
appearing  of  our  Mainour  giefus 
Chnft,  lbhohathaboltfhcb  Death,  anb 
hath  brought  life  anb  immoztaiitte  to 
light,th;oughthe(5ofpel: 

ii  ©hereunto  3  am  appomtcb  a 
$2cacher,anD  an  ^poffle.anD  a  teacher 
ofrhcdScnttles. 

n  if oz  the  ibhich  catife  3  alfo  uiffer 
thefc  things ;  ncncrthclcffc ,  3  am  not 
afhamcD:  foz  3  Imoib  lbhom  gj  haue 
!|bclceucb,anDgjampcruuaDcDthathe 
is  able  to  neepc  that  ibhich  3  hauc 
eommittebbnto  hmiagamft  that  bap. 

ij  f^oiDc  faff  the  fourmc  of  fomiD 
tbozDs,  lDhlch  thou  haft  hcarD  of  mrc, 
m  faith  anb  loue ,  lbhtch  ts  m  Chnft 
•Jefus. 

14  nn)at  goob  thing  lbhtch  ibas 
comnuttcDbnto  thee  ,kccpc,bp  the  holp 
Ghoft  lbhtch  bibtllcth  m  bs. 

15  Xhis  thou  Hnoibeft,  that  all  thep 
lbhtch  arc  in  2fta  be  turneb  albap  from 
me,  ofibhom  arc  phpgcllus  anD$?cr^ 
tnogenes. 
i6  Xhc 


\Or,trul>rd. 


Strong  in  grace.  Chap.ij.        OffundryvclTcls 


Orfr. 


\\Or,theh,if 
ba*dm*n  U- 
bo$o-mgfirftf 
tvnfl  be  par- 
taker  «f the 
frmtes. 


i6  %i)tJLoix>  guic  mercietonto  the 
boufc  of  £>neftph02iis,  fo2  hee  oft  re* 
frefheo  nice,  anD  iDas  tiotafljanicoof 
mpcbainc. 

17  But  tbljenhclbasin  Koine,  bee 
fought  nice  ont  bcrp  Diligently  ,* anD 

fOUilDmc. 

13  3Ebe  IL02D  grant  Ditto  bun,  that 
be  map  finDc  mcrcic  of  the  ?Lo:D  m  t|)at 
Dap:  3inDiu  bottnnanp  things  beenu 
niftrcD  Dnto  nice  at  ^pbefus,  tljon 
Kuottieftbcrpibcll. 

C  H  A  P.    II. 

1  He  is  exhorted  againe  to  conftancie  and  per- 
feuerance.andtodoe  theduetieot  a  faithful  I 
feruantof  the  Loid  in  diuiding  the  word  a- 
right,and  flaying  prophaneand  vainebab- 
Imgs.  17  Of  H>meneus  and  Philetus.  19 
The  foundation  of  the  Lord  is  lure.  n  Hee 
is  taught  whereot  to  beware ,  and  what  to 
follow  after,  and  in  what  lort  the  leruant  ot 
the  Lord  ou^ht  to  behauehimfelfe. 

D 

ii>outbcrcfo2C,mp  fonnc, 
be  ftcong  in  the  grace  tljat 
i5inCb2ift3Jcfus. 

2  JUiDtbetbingstbat 
thou  baftbcarD  of  mec  \\& 
mong  nwnptDttncffcs,  the  fame  com- 
nut  thou  tofaitbfullmenlbhofbailbc 
abletoteatbotbcrsalfo. 

?  Xbou  therefore  tuDttrebarDncffc, 
as  a  gooD  foulDicr  ofJcfusCOnft. 

4.  /i5o  man  tljat  iDarretl),  intang- 
letlj  himfclfc  tint!)  tfjc  affaires  of  th.s 
life,  rtjat  lice  map  pleafe  bun  tbbo  bath 
tljofcn  Him  to  De  a  fottlDicr. 

1  3lnD  if  a  man  alfo  ftruie  fo;  matte- 
rics,  yet  is  bccnottrottnicDcrccptbcc 
ttriuelatbfullp. 

6  \\%\)t  uufbanoinan  that  labour 
rctb ,  mutt  bee  firtt  partaker  of  tlje 
frmtes. 

7  ConDoer  Vbbat  %  fap,  anD  the 
IL02D  gine  thee  DnDerftanDing  in  all 
things. 

3  ficmcinbct  that  3Jcfns  Cbntt  of 
thcfccDe  ofS)aniD,tDas  raifcDfrom  the 
DcaD,acco2Dmg  to  mp  oofpcl : 

9  ©herein  35  fnrTer  trouble  as  an 
euillDocT,  euen  bnto  bonDs:  but  the 
1D02D  of  C5oD  is  not  bounD. 

io  Xhetcfojc  3  inDttrc  all  things  fo2 
the  elects  fanes,  that  thep  mapaifo  ob 
tame  the  faluation  iDhith  is  in  Cf)?ift 
3lefus,TDith  eternal!  glo:p. 

n  it  is  a  faithful!  faring:  fonfrbebec! 
DeaD  with  him,  u»cc  Ojaii  alfo  Uuc  wuh 

him. 


ii  3f\Dcfuffcr,U)cn)aiiaiforeignc 
wuh  him:  if  idcc  Dcmc hun, hec alfo tDUl 
DcnieDs. 

13  3)f  iDc  belceiic  not,  yctheabiDctlj 
faith?ull,hc  cannot  Done  himfclfc. 

i+  Of  thefc  things  put  then,  m  re, 
membjance ,  charging  them  befrue  tljc 
Ho2D,thattt)epQruic  not  about  ID02DS 
to  no  pjofite.bm  to  tljc  fubucrting  of  the 
hearers. 

15  SmtDie  to  fhevbe  thp  feifc  app:o 
ucd  bnto  <5od  ,  a  iDoifeman  that  nccD 
cth  not  to  be  augaincD,  rightlp  DutiDuig 
theiDo2Doftructh. 

16  25ut  ftnm  pjofane  anD  bame  bab 
lings ,  fo:  thep  ibill  intreafc  bnto  mo:c 
DngoDlinciTe. 

17  3nD tbetr tD02D  ibill  rate asboth 
a  'Icanher:  oflbbotms^vmcncitsanD 
^Ductus. 

18  naho  contenting  the  tructb  bane 
crrcD,  faping  that  the  rcfurrection  is 
patt  aireaotc ,  auo  oucrtbjoiD  tljc  faith 
offotne. 

1 9  ifJcucrthcicfle  the  fotiuDatioit  of 
C5oD  ftanDcth  ;|(lire,bauingtbefcale,tbe 
lU2DKnolbethtbemtbatarcbts.:anD, 
leteucrponetbatnametbtbctfJameof 
Cbntt.Depart  from  mtcitiitte. 

10  26uttn  a  great  boufc,  there  arc 
not  onelp  beflels  of  golD ,  anD  of  ftlucr, 
but  alfo  of  rbooD,f  of  earth :  anD  fomc 
to  honour, anD  fomc  to  Dtfljonour. 

21  gjf  a  man  therefore  purge  hint* 
fclfefrom  thefc,  he  fl;ai  be  a  befJell  bnto 
honour ,  fanrnficD ,  anD  mcetc  fo:  the 
Rafters  bfc,  anopjcparcDbuto  euerp 
gooDttwfec. 

2z  f lieaifo pouthfull lulls : butfol 
loiDrightcoufncffc,faith,charitie,pcacc 
mtb  them  that  call  on  tbc&ojDoutof 
a  pure  heart. 

23  ButfoolifbanDbnicarncDquctti 
onsauoiD,lmott)ing  that  thep  Doegctv 
Dcr  ttnfcs. 

2+ 3lnDthtfcruantofthe!Lo2Dmufl 
not  ttriuc :  but  bee  gentle  bnto  ail  men, 
apt  to  teach,1!  patient, 

25  3!u  mccKcncflc  tnftriutingthofc 
thatoppofc  thcmfclucs,  if(5oD  perao- 
ucnturc  null  guie  tljcm  repentance  to 
the  aclmoiDlcDgmg  of  the  tructh. 

26  ^nD  that  thep  maptrccoucr  thcm- 
fclucs out  of  the  fuare  of  the  Dcutll.Uiho 
arc  flatten  taptme  bp  bun  at  Ijis  Ibill. 

CHAP.    III. 

I    Hee  aduertifeth  him  of  the  times  to  come, 
6   defcribetluhc  enemies  oi  the  tructh,    10 

pro- 


prett;. 


\\Or,ji,,vly. 


\\Or,farha- 


\Gr.  *w*^/. 


4hnt, 


87 


iPenll 


ous  times. 


II.Timothie. 


Itchi 


inpeares. 


j  Orjnakf' 


\\OrM" 


\\Or,thsH 
haft  bt tux 
iilirattfU- 

bwcrof. 


propoundeth  vDto  him  his  owne  example, 
1 6    andcommendcththe  holy  Scriptures. 

^ishnoibaifo,  that  m  the 
laflbapes  petitions  times 
sh  fballcomc. 
el*    2  ^fa*"1"1  wall  bee  lo 


ucrs  of  tbetrottmcfclues, 
touctous,  boafters,  p;oube,biafpbc; 
mcrs,btfobcDicnt  to  parents,bntbanfe; 
lntll,bnboU', 

5  ii9itl)outnaturauaffcttton,ttutes 
b2eabers,  llfaifc  accufers,  incontinent, 
fierce ,  befptfers  of  tbofe  that  are 
goob, 

4  Xraitoiirs,l)caDp,l)iglj  minuet), 
!loucrsofplcafuresmo;etbenlouersof 

l<30b, 

5  Waning  a  fo;me  of  goblutctTe ,  but 
j  Denying  the  poiber  thereof :  from  (neb 
turneamay. 

6  jro;  of  this  ton  are  fl)cs>  mbtcl) 
creep  into  boufes,  anb  leabe  captiue  fill? 
\bomen  laDcn  ttitl)  fumes,  leD  aibap 
lbitbbiuers  lulls, 

7  Cucrlcarntng,anbneuetabIeto 
come  to  the  ftnoiblcbge  of  the  trueti). 

3  Mono  as  pannes  anb  3amb;cs 
TbitrjQoob  iSPofes ,  fo  bo  tbcfe  alfo  refill 
tfjc  truetb :  men  of  cozrupt  nunbes,  1  xc 
pzobatc  concerning  the  fatct). 

9  2Sntt!)epmaip2ocecbenofurtl)er: 
fo;  their  folly  fbaiibe  manifell  bnto  all 
meti,astbcirsaifoibas. 

io  aSutj!  thou  baQ  full?  ftnotbcnmp 
boctrmc ,  matter  of  life,  purpofc,  faub, 
long  fuffcrtng,cl)antie,jpatlcnce, 

ii  ^erfecunons,  afflictions  lbbtcb 
came  bnto  me  at  ^ntiotrj  ,at  3  tontum, 
at  fLyftra ,  mbat  pcrfecutionsj  mbru 
reb :  but  out  of  them  all  the  |Lo;b  belts 
ucrcDinc. 

w,  tJca,anb  an  that  will  Imc  goblp  in 
€\)u(t  Jttus,  aiaUfuff  er  petfecutton. 

15  But  cttill  men  anb  fcDucers  (ball 
marc  \b02fc  anb  ibo;fe ,  beceimng ,  anb 
being  bctcuicb. 

1+  But  continue  thou  in  the  things 
mincb  thou  ball  learncb ,  anb  ball  been 
afTurcb  of ,  hno\btngoftt)bi)mctbou 
Daft  learncb  them. 

15  3nD  that  from  a  crjtlbc  tl)ou  bad 
lutoibcti  tljc  boh?  Scriptures,  tbbub 
are  able  to  maitc  thec  lbtfe  bnto  faiuan 
on  tbjougb  fatfl)  Ibbul)  is  in  Cluift 

gicfus. 

i6  3iii  £>ertpnire  is  giuen by  mfpfra 
fton  of  Gob, « is  piofitablcfo;  boctnne, 
fo;  rtpzoofc  ,fo2  correction ,  fo;  mflrutt- 
oninrighteoufuclTe, 


17  ^Dattrjemanof©oDmapbcpcr^ 
fett,||tb?ougblpfumi(hcbbnto  aligoob 
tbotbes. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  Hee  exhortech him  todoc  hisduety  vsithall 
care  and  diligence,  6  certifieth  himofthe 
neerenefle  of  his  death,  o.  vvilleth  him  to 
come  Ipeedily  vnto  him,  and  to  bring  Marcus 
with  him,andcertaine  other  things  which  he 
wrotetor,  14  warnethhimtobewareofA- 
lexanderthei'mith,  \6  informeth  him  what 
had  befallen  him  at  his  full  anl  vvering,  10  and 
foone  atter  hee  concluded). 

Charge  thee  therefore  bv 
fo2Cd5ob,anb  tbefLozb 
JJefus  €hnll,  tbfjo  fyau 
mbge  the  qtttcfee  anb  the 
beab  at  his  appearing, 
anblnsblngbome: 

i  #;eacbrbelbo;D,beinflantin{ea? 
fon.outof  fcafon,rep2ooue,rebube,  tx- 
hoitUritlj  all  longfuffenng  fjbottrtne. 
j  $ 02  thetlme roil  come  lbben tljcy 
Ibillnotcnburefounbboctrine,  butaf 
ter  tbert  olbnc  lulls  {bail  they  be  ape  to 
thenuTelues  teachers,  bautng  itchmg 
cares: 

4  3nD  they  fljall  turne  atbap  their 
caresfrom  the  truetb,  anD  (hall  be  tur- 
neb  bnto  fables. 

5  zBut ibatrn  thou in  all  tfjtngs ,  in- 
bure  affliction  s ,  Doe  the  ttwfee  of  an  € 
uangelift,  ||maUe  full  p;oofe  of  tbp  nu-- 
mQcry. 

«  yoi^amnotb  reabietobeeoffe-' 
«b,  anb  tfjc  time  of  m?  Departure  isat 
rjanb. 

7  gj  bane  fought  a  goob  fight,  3 
bauettnifbeb  mptourfe,  3  Daue  bept 
the  faitft. 

8  $enccfoo2t})  tfjtre  is  lavbe  bp  fo; 
me  a  rrolbneofrighteouliieue,  Tbhich 
the  Ho2b  the  righteous  utbgc  (ball  giue 
mr  at  that  bar  :anbnot  to  me  oubvbut 
bnto  them  alfo  that  loue  hie  appr a 
ring. 

9  2)oe  thv  bOf genre  to  come  ujouip 
bnto  me: 

io  5Po22Demashatl)fo2fabcnme,l)a 
utng  loueb  this  pjcftnt  ib02lb,  anb  is 
Dcparteb  bnto  Xbeflalonica :  Ctcfccns 
to  oalarta  Xitus  bnto  D  aimatia. 

n  £)nelp?LuHeisibithme.  SCabe 
fl^arbc  anb  b2ing  htm  ibitb  ttjet :  fo;  be 
is  p2ofitablcto  mefo;tbe  niiniftctic. 

ir  :snDXpcbicns!)aiK3jrrntto€; 

phefus. 

1 3  Xlje  clobe  tbat  3  left  at  %xo&s 

tbltb 


\\orri- 

tUi. 


\\Orjutyl. 


1 ■  '    -    - — ■ — "■■   ■ — . —    -...-    — 

Pauls  chantie.  Chap.j.  Bilhopsdueties.j 


\\Or,  our 
yrcachitgt- 


\Or,fir 


tbttt)  Carpus ,  ihhcn  thtm  tommcft, 
b:(ng  with  thee,butcfpcrially  the  parch- 
ments. 

i+  3tlrranber  the  Copperftnith  bib 
tnecmuct)  cutil ,  tljc  JLo;D  rctbacD  him 
acco2bingtohis*bo2fts. 

15  DftDhom  bee  thou  mare  alto ,  fo2 
he  hath  greatly  ihithftoob||ourrb02bs. 

16  at  myfirftanftbercnomanttoob 
ttiith  nice,  but  all  men  fojfoobc  mce:i 
pay  God  that  it  may  not  bee  laiU  to  their 
charge. 

17  /3otlbithftanbingthe!Lo?b  Hood 
iblth  me,  anb  ftrcngthenco  me,  tljat  by 
me  the  pjcachmg  might  be  fully  tmott); 
en,  anb  that  all  tl)c  ocntilcs  might 
hearc :  anb  J  mag  bcltucrcb  out  of  the 
mouth  ofthcflyon. 

18  ant)  the  ?Lo2b  (hall  bcliuer  mec 
from  eucrycuillttw&e,  anb  tbtll  p:c- 


fcrueme  tontohtsheaucnlyhingbomc 
to  rohom  beegioiyfozener ,  anb  euer. 
^men. 

19  Salute  pitha  anb  aciuila,  anb  the 
houfholb  of  £)ncGph02ue. 

20  craCu8abooeat€o:int!):buti:ro 
phfmushauc^j  left  at  dictum  fitSe. 

21  2Doc  thy  biligente  to  tome  before 
tbt'ntcr.  Cubulus  greeted  rhec ,  anb 
0ubens,anb  Hums ,  anb  Claubta,  ana 
autheb2cth2en. 

22  ICrjc  Ho?b  Jems Ctytft  t^  tbitlj 
thy  fpint.  ©rate  £  tttth  you.  amen. 

CXljc  fctonb  Spittle  imto  Xtrno 
thcus,  02beincbthcfirft  25ifoopof 
theChurch  of  thc<£phenans,ibas 
ttmtten  from  Home ,  luhcn  £aul 
lnas  bjought  befoze  j3cro  the  fe^ 
conbtune. 


1THE  EPISTLE  OF 

Paul  to  Titus. 


CHAP.    I. 

For  what  end  Titus  was  left  in  Crete.  6  How 
they  that  are  to  bee  chofen  minifters,  ought 
to  bee  qualified.  11  The  mouthes  of  euill 
teachers  to  bee  flopped  :  12.  and  wnat 
manner  of  men  they  bee. 

am  a  feruattt 
of  d5ob ,  ant)  an 
apoftlc  of  3Je- 
fus  Cl)2ift,  acco;- 
btngtothcjfat'th 
of  <3obs  <£lcet, 
anbthcacknouj- 
lebging  of  the 
tructh  ttJljtrft  is 
after  goblinefle, 
z  ||  3Jn  fjopc  of  eternal!  life,  vbhich 

<£oDthatcannotlie,p2omifebbcfo2cthc 

lbo2lb  began: 

3  ffiut  hath  in  buc  rimes  manifefteb 
l)istbo2Dtl)2ougfjp2eacl)ing,  ibftttlj  is 
committcD  tonto  mec  acco2btng  to  tl)c 
eommanDemcntof<lSobour5>au!Our: 

4  Xo  Xttus  mine  oibnc  Pontic  af- 
ter tDetommonfairrj,  ©rate,  merrie, 
ant)  peace  from  d5ot)  the  jfathcr ,  anb 
the  5,02b  3}efus  Cimft  our  Mainour. 


5  5r02tI)iscaufeleft3ltrjecmCCrete- 
that  thou  (houlbcft  fct  in  02bcr  the 
tinngs  that  ||  are  wanting ,  anb  02bamc 
eiucrsineuery  cutcas  3  hab  appoint 
tcb  thee. 

6  3Jfanvbcblamcitirc,t})ehufbani5 
of  oncHnfe,  haumg  raithfuii  chftb:cn. 
not  attufeb  of  not,  o?  Unruly. 

7  5Fo2  a  2Bitt)op  mutt  be  blamcles, 
as  t()c  GeWatb  of  <5ob  :  not  felfrtbil* 
leb ,  not  foone  angry ,  not  *  gmen  to 
ibine ,  no  ftriucr ,  not  gmen  to  filrrnc 
lucre, 

8  ffiutaiouerofhofpltaiify,alouer 
of  ||  gooD  men,  fober,  tuft,  holy,  tempc; 
rate, 

9  l>?olbingfaftthefaithtullwo.'b,iias 
Ikc  hath  becne  taught,  that  he  may  bee 
ablebyfounb  boctnnc ,  both  to  erhoit 
anbtoconuincc  the  gamfavers. 

io  5fo2  there  arc  manvtonrulv  anb 
bainc  talkers  auo  becciuers,  fpcnallv 
thcyoftherircumcHlon: 

u  nahofe  mouthes  niuft  be  Goppeb, 
Who  fabucrt  whole  honfes ,  teaching 
things which  they  ought  not,fo2  filthit 
lucres  fafce. 

ii  £>nc 


\Or.pfivn* 


i .Tim.  >. 


thtnrt. 


\\9rj*tc4. 


Old  mens  duetics. 


To  Tims. 


Foolifhqucftions. 


of  moment. 


lOr,vigifa»r 


\Or,htljm- 

\OrtmJte' 

hotel* 

\\Or,*ife. 


i  R£mcofthemfclues,euena#jophct 
of  their  otbncfeib:  ILhcCrcnansarc 
airoay  ly  ere,  curil  bca8s,Qoib  bclltes. 
i  ?  XhisrotmeuleistructibhcrcfoK 
r  cbufce  them  fhatpcly  that  tt)n?  map  be 
founb  in  the  faith;  —      n 

i+  iBot  giuing  heebe  to  Heroim 
fables,  anb  commanbements  of  men 
that  tutnc  from  the  ttueth. 

15  Unto  the  pure  all  things  arc  pure, 
but  bnto  tl)cin  that  are  beftteb ,  anb  ton* 
brlccutng,  is  nothing  pure :  but  cucn 
Hint  mmb  anb  confnente  isbeftlcb. 

16  Xhcy  pzofcfTe  tliat  they  twoib 
d5ob ;  but  in  ibomcs  they  beny  htm ,  be^ 
ing  abominable,  anb  btfobebtent ,  anb 
bnto  cucry  goob  ttwee  ||  tepjobatc. 

CHAP.   II. 

1  Dircclions  gmenvnto  Titus  both  tor  his  do- 
clrine  and  life.  9  Of  theduetieotferuants, 
and  in  general!  of  all  Chriftians. 

Siltfpeaitcthouthcthutgs 
r|r  ibhich  become  founb  boc^ 
as  trine: 

Xhat  toe  ageb  men 

be  lifobecgraue,  temper 


\Ort  difcrtc. 


\Or,£*uu 


ratcfounbin  faith ,  incharitie ,  in  pati- 
ence. 

3  Xhc  ageb  women  liucmtfc  that 
the>  be  mbcbauiour  asbecommctbllhO' 
uneffcnot'lfaifcaccufers,  not  gtucnto 
much  mine,  teachers  of  goob  thmgs, 

4  Xhat  they  map  teach  the  young 
lbomen  to  bee  yfobcr,  to  loue  their  huf 
banos,toiouc  their  chUbjcn, 

5  To  be  bifcrcct ,  cl)aOe ,  beepers  at 
liomcgoob,  obcbient  to  their  otbn  rjut 
bancs ,  that  tl)e  Vooin  of  000  bee  not 
biafphentcb. 

6  Pong  men  UHcibifc  erhojt,  to  bee 
Hfober  minbeb. 

7  3nailtlimgsaicibingthyfclfca 
pattcrnc  of  goob  iborttcs :  m  boctrinc 
fhewingbncozniptncffc ,  grauity ,  fmcc- 
rune, 

s  Swinbfpccchthat  cannot  be  con; 
btmncb,  trjat  Dec  tliat  is  of  tlie  contra 
nc  part.may  bee  afbamcb.hauittg  no  e 
mil  thing  to  fay  of  you. 

9  Exhon  feruants  to  be  obcbient  bn 
to  tDeir  oibn  mallets,  anb  to  plcafc  them 
lbcll  m  ail  tilings ,  not  II  anftbermg  a 
game: 

io  fist  purioymng,  but  fljeibmgail 
gooofibclitie,  tliat  they  map  abomctlic 
boctrme  of  Gob  out  5>autour  m  all 


Or ,  that 
brinttlh  [*l. 

\"""<"  tilings 


1 1  fo;  the  grace  of  <30b  ||  that  b:tn 


gctbfaiuano.hathappcarebtoallmen, 

1  z  Xeathmg  bs  that  benying  bngob- 
imcffc  anb  nwibly  lulls  lbe  fhoulb  Hue 
fobcriy ,  nghtcoufly  anb  gobly  in  this 
p?cfcntibo?ib, 

15  fLooning  fo?  tliat  blcffcb  rjope.anb 
the  glonous  appearing  of  the  great 
©00,  anb  our  5>atuour3efusCrjjift, 

14.  l©lio  gauc  himfelfc  (oi  bs ,  tfjat  he 
might  rcbecme  bs  from  all  mtqutne, 
anb  purt6c  bnto  hmifcifc  a  peculiar 
pcoplc,5caious  of  goob  ibo?Hes. 

15  IChcfc  things  fpca&e  anb  ejerjojt, 
anbrcbuue  ibttljaliauttwttic.  JLetno 
man  befpifc  thee. 

CHAP.    III. 

Titus  is  yet  futther  directed  by  Paul ,  both 
concerning  the  things  he  fhould  teach ,  and 
not  teach.  i  o  He  is  willed  alfo  to  reieft  ob- 
ftinate  Heretikes:  ir  which  done  ,  hee  ap- 
pomtethhim  both  time  and  place  ,  wherein 
hee  fhould  come  vnto  him)&  fo  concluded). 

tat  them  in  mmbe  to  bee 

fubicct  to^nnctpaltnes? 

teolbcrs ,  to  obey  magv 

urates,  to  be  reaoy  to  cue* 

^rygoobtoojuc, 

%o  fpeattc  euill  of  no  man ,  to  bee 

no  tyatblers,  but  gentle,  fhcibmg  all 

mecBcncffc  bnto  all  men. 

5  5fo?  rue  our  fclues  alfo  tberefome* 
tunes  fooltfb,bu'obcbtcnt,beteiueb,fet-' 
umgbiucrs  lufts  anb  pleafures ,  liuing 
in  malice  anb  cnuy,  hatefull,  ^d  hating 
one  another. 

4.  ffiutafter  that  the  Btnbncffe  anb 
1  loue  of  <sob  our  5>amour  tovuarb 
manappearcb, 

5  /Rot  by  tbojaes  of rtghteoufneffe 
ibhicl)  ibec  haue  bone ,  but  acco  jbtng  to 
his  mercy  he  faucb  bs ,  by  the  ibaCbing 
of  regeneration ,  anb  rencttnng  of  the 
holy  (Short, 

6  nDhichhceflicbonbstabunbant; 
ly,th?ough3Jefus€hnflourS)autour: 

7  Xhat  being  uimficb  by  his  grace, 
ibcft)oulbbccmabchcircsacco2bmgto 
tljc  hope  of  eteruail  life. 

8  This  is  afattbfullfaymg,anbthefc 
things  3  ibili  that  thou  affirmc  con- 
ftantly ,  that  they  iblnch  haucbclccurb 
ind5ob,mightbe  carcfull  to  maintamc 
goob  rooms:  theft  things  arc  goob  anb 
pjofttablc bnto  men. 

9  25utauoyofoolifl)qutfhonfi,anb 
genealogies ,  anb  contennotts,anbtrri? 
mugs  about  the  laibe.  foj  they  arc  torn 
p:ofuablcanbbame. 

10  a 


\\Or.pM. 


\  (jr.  ntilj. 


auisre 


g 


ueft 


Cha 


p.|, 


for  Onelimus. 


i  o  31  man  toat  is  an  fjccettftc ,  a£ 
tec  t\)t  firfl  anD  feconD  admonition ,  w 
ictt: 

1 1  Bnoitomg  tftat l)ec tnat is futn,is 
Cabucrtcm  ant)  fmnetrj,  bcmgcouDcnv 
ncDofrmnfelfe. 

ix  nalien  3  foaii  feno  Srtcmas  \m 
to  tl)cc,02  Xycl)icus,be  Diligent  to  come 
Dntomecto  jftlcopolis:  foz^ljaucDc* 
tcrmmeo  tljere  to  Vbmter. 

13  26nngzcnastl)c!Laibvct,  ano 
^polios,  on  tljctr  tonmep  Diligently, 


tljat  no  thing  be  wanting  bnto  them. 

14  3ud  let  outs  aifo  learnc  to 
llmaintamc  goooiiiozkesfo?  ncccflanc 
bfcs,tl)at  thep  be  nottonfruttfull. 

15  311  that  arcvbitlj  mecCalntc  thee. 
Occctc  them  that  louc  ds  in  the  faith. 
<5ratcbcn)ithyouail.  3mcn. 

ft$t  toas  Mitten  to  %ttas  ojoet; 
nco  the  nr025ifhop  of  the  Church 
of  the  Ccetians,ftom  ^ieopous 
of^ateDonia. 


hanejt  trtuics 


«|THE   EPISTLE   OF 

Paul  to  Philemon. 


4  Hee  reiovceth  to  heareof  thefaithaudloue 
of  Philemon,  9  Whomhe  deliretluofor- 
giue  his  letuant  Oucfimus,  and  louingly 
to  receiuehimagaine. 

3ul  a  pnfbnec 
of  JJefus  Chjift, 
f  Ximothie  out 
toother  bnto^hi; 
lemon  out  Dcare^ 
ip  beloueD ,  anD 
fcllott)  labourer, 
z  Znn  to  our 
bcloueD  3pphia, 
anD  ^rtfjippusout  fcllott)  5>outt>tcr, 
anD  to  tfje  Churth  in  thp  houfe. 

3  ©rate  to  pou  >  anD  Peatc  fcom 
dSoDour  jf  ather,  anD  thc?Lo?D3Jefus 
ChjiQ. 

4  31  thanbe  mp  d3oD,maumg  men? 
tion  of  thee  aittmpcsm  mppjapcrs, 

5  gearing  of  fhp  loue,  anD  fait!), 
Which  thou  halt  tottjarb  trjc  JLojD^ 
fus,ano  tottmrD  all  faints : 

6  Xhat  the  communication  of  thp 
faith  map  betomc  cffcctuall  bp  theac* 
unotblcoging  of  cucrp  gooD  tying, 
tt)htch  is  m  pou  m  CmiO :  3Jcfus. 

7  5Fo?  Wee  hauc  great  top  anD  con- 
{biationmthploucbeeaufcthcbottjels 
of  the  faints  are  rcfrcfycD  bp  thee, 
bjother. 

s  i©hcrcfi«e,though  J  nusDt  bee 
much  boioe  in  Chzift  to  eniopne  thee 
that  Which  is  eonuenicnt ; 

9  jact  fo?  loues  fattc  3  rather  be* 


fceehthee,bctugfueha  one  as^&aulthe 
ageD,aitD  nowalfo  a  pzifoner  of  3cfus  i 
Chzift. 

io  -jf  befcech  tfjte  fo?  mp  fonnc  &M 
ncfimus,  Whome  3  hauc  begotten  m 
mpbonbs 

1 1  narjid)  in  time  paft  was  to  tl)ee 
Dnpzontable:butnoW  profitable  to  ttjee 
anD  to  me: 

u  i©hont3Jhaucfentagainc:thon 
thcrfozerecciue  i)im,thatis  nunc  ownc ' 
bowels. 

I?  ©home  3J  tbonlD  rjaue  rctcineD ; 
Wicb  nice,  that  in  thp  fteao  hee  mtgftt 
rjaueminlftreDbntome  infljebonDsof  j 
tbeoofpel.  I 

14  2Snt  tbitftout  t!)p  mutDc  IDonlD 
5  Doe  notl)tng,tl)at  tl)p  bencfitc  OiouiD 
not  bee  as  it  Ibcre  of  neceflitic,  but  rbfl- ! 
Itnglp. 

15  jFoz  perhaps  Dec  tDcrefojeoepar* 
tcDfo2ateafon,tbat  t^ou  fljoulDtft  W 
cetuerjimfoieuer: 

i6  il5ot  noib  as  a  fetuant,but  aboue 
a  fcrnant,  a  toother  beloueD,fpcnailv 
to  nice,  but  Dorb  mutt)  mm  fentottjee, 
botrjintlie  flefl),anDint!)C?Lo?D  < 

17  3Jftoou  count  mce  t&crcfojt  a 
partnct,rcccnic  Dim  as  trrp  fclfe. 

18  3ff  rjee  ftatl)  iD?ongeD  tl)cc ,  0? 
otbetl)  thee  ought ,  pnt  tljat  on  mine  ac= 
count. 

19  3J0anll)auett3?ittenitWitrimine 
oumnanD,3IttJiiltcpavit  :albcit3JDoe 
not  fap  to  tljee  tjoiD  trjou  oiDcft  imto 

f >ne, 


Chrift  aboue       To  the  Hebrewes.        the  An 


■wir.i.ie. 


mc.eucnthtne  olbnefclfcbeGbcs: 
to  pta,  toother,  let  mcc  Ijaue  fop  of 

thcetttthc&ojb:  rcfrefljmpbotblcstn 

thc^Lotb. 
n  $amng  tonfibcnte  in  tl)p  obebu 

ence,  3  tttjote  Ditto  thec,6nott>utg  ttjat 

thou  unit  alfo  bocmo:cthcn'2Jfap. 
n  25ut  nnthail  prepare  mec  alfo  a 

lobglng :  fo23J  tcuO  that  thtougf)  pour 

pjapcrs  3  fljall  be  giucn  bnto  pou. 


i$  XDerefaiutetheetfpaphm^mp 
fcllolbpufonerm  CftziUJefus: 

i4  partus,  ^rittarchus.&emas,. 
?Lutas,mp  felloib  labourers. 

15  %\)t  grate  of  our  flozb  3Jefus 
Cbnftbcibithpout  fpirtt.  2tmen. 

C  v&fltttn  from  Borne  to  $ty 
lemon,  bp £>nefimus a  fer* 
uanr. 


gels. 


^THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAVL 

the  Apoftie  to  the  Hebrewes. 


CHAP.     I. 

i  Chrift  in  thefe  lad  times  comming  to  vs  from 
the  Father,  4  is  preferred  aboue  the  Angels, 
both  in  Perfon  and  Olfice. 

4Db  ttrfjo  at  funs 
b2pttmes,anbtn 
bitters  manners, 
ipalicin  time  paQ 
bnto  the  fathers 
bptyc&iophcts, 
1  ^athtntljcfc 
lafl  bapes  fpottcn 
tonto  bs  bp  his 
&omte,tt)homhc 
hath  appotuteb  Detre  of  ail  things,  bp 
tbhom  alto  he  mabe  the  ttiwlbs, 

3  'nahobctngthebnghtneffcofhts 
glozp.anb  tlte  crp«ffc  image  ofhis  pet* 
fen ,  ano  bphoibtng  all  things  bp  the 
lbojb  of  hts  potber ,  tthen  bee  habbp 
himfclfe  purgeb  our  finncs ,  fate  bottm 
on  p  right  hano  of  the  ^aicthe  on  high, 

4  25cmg  mabe  fo  muth  better  then 
the  Angels ,  as  Ijcc  hath  bp  mhcritantc 
obtamcb  a  mo;c  crtcllcnt  iSamc  then 
thep. 

%  fot  buto  \bhitl)  of  the  Angels  faro 
he  at  anp  nme,Xhou  art  mp fonne,thts 
bap  haue  J  begotten  thee :  3lnb  again, 
3  null  be  to  hun  a  father,  anb  lie  Hjaii 
be  to  inc  a&omtc. 

6  3nbagainc,rohcnheb2tngcthtn 
the  firlt  begotten  into  the  lbojlb,  hec 
faith ,  3lnb  let  all  tlje  Angels  of  Gob 
tbozflnp  him. 

7  3nboftl)c3mgclsI)clattf):i©ho 


mafecrt)  hts  Angels  fptrtts,  anb  Dis  ml* 
nifters  aflame  of  fire. 

s  25atbntoti)e5>onne,hefaith,3Cl)p 
thitone ,  j©  <sob ,  is  fo?  euer  anb  ener :  a 

fteptcroftng!)tcoufueireisrt)euxpterof 
thpatngbome. 

9  XhouDattloucbngfjtcoofneffe, 
anoftatcb  iniauttte,ti)mfo;e<i5ob,euen 
ti)p  d5ob  ljath  anomteb  thee  ttntt)  the 
opleofgiabncfrcabonctOpfclloibes. 

10  35nb/tt)oullo?omthebegmnuig 
hattiapeb  the  founbation  of  the  earth : 
anb  the  heautns  are  the  ibotfts  of  thuie 
Ijanbs. 

11  Xljepfhailpcriuj,  but  thou  remain 

nctt :  anb  tljep  ail  Chai  ibaw  olb  as  both 
a  garment. 

11  anbasabetturctfialttljoufoib 
them  bp,anb  thep  (tyill  bcrhangcb,bnt 
thou  art  the  fame ,  anb  thppccresfball 
not  failed 

1  j  25ut  to  tthith  of  the  Angels  fafo 
hee  at  anp  tunc ,  *  5>it  on  mp  right 
hanb ,  bntui  3  mane  thine  enemies  thp 
footfloolc; 

14  3re  tljep  not  all  miniflnng  fpt- 
nts,  fent  foojtg  to  mtttiQer  foz  them, 
tbho  Ojail  be  heites  of  faiuanon  < 
CfHAP.      II. 

1  Wee  ought  to  bee  obedient  to  Chrift  leftis, 
%  and  that  becaufe  hevouch/afed  to  take  our 
nature  vpon  him,   1 4  as  it  was  necefl'arie. 

fcerefojeibc  ought  to  glue 
the  mote  earned  bcebe  to 
jh  the  things  nibtch  tt»c  haue 
K  hearb ,  lettat  anp  nme  ibe 
fljottlbt  let  them  flip. 
1  ifo? 


\Gr.rigbt- 

nef[ftcr 
JrroightTicr. 


"Pfa.io?.!. 
tli.54.4. 


'PfaLlIO 
1  mact-xa 
■H- 


veffeis. 


Chriftmadi 


Ch; 


\fOr,Ji/lru 
buttons. 


•Pfal.8.4. 


\\Or%a  little 
voile  infer t 

OHTtO. 


\P'h- 


•Pf»l.i8.». 
*Ef»y8i8. 


i  SfonftheWojbfpoBmbpiSngcis 
wasftcbfaft,  anb  eucrp  tranfgrcflton 
anb  bifobeoience  rccciueba  tuft  mom* 
penfeofrewarb: 

3  J?ow(hallwecfcape,  if  we  neglect 
fo  grcatfaluation,  rtoliirli  at  thefirft  be- 
gan to  be  fpoftcn  bp  the  fLojb ,  and  was 
confirmeb  bnto  bsbp  them  that  hcacb 

him, 

4-  ©ob  aifo  bearing  themWltncflc, 
both  with  ftgnes  $  wonbers ,  anb  with 
Diners  miracles,  ||anb  gifts  of  thcholp 
©hoft,atco2bing  to  his  ottine  wtlW 

5  Sfoi  bnto  the  Angels  ijatf)  he  not 
put  in  fubtcction  the  wojlb  to  tome, 
Whereof  We  fpeattc. 

6  2Sut  one  m  a  ccrtafne  place  tcftifi 
eb,faptng :  'n9hat  is  man,  that  thou  art 
minbfull  of  Dim :  o?  rt)c  £>onnc  of  man 
that  thou  bifttcft  him* 

7  Xhott  maoefthima  ||  little  lower 
then  the  Angels,  thou  crownebft  him 
With  glojp  anb  Ijonot,  anb  Dibft  fet  him 
ouer  the  wojbcs  of  thp  fjanbs. 

8  Xhou  Daft  put  all  things  tnfubtc* 
ctton  bnber  his  fccte.  jfo?  in  that  he  put 
ailtnfubiectionbnber  him,  hce  left  no- 
ttjing  that  is  not  put  bnberrjim.  2Sttt 
now  Wee  fee  not  pet  all  things  put  bn; 
ber  him. 

9  2Butwcc£cc3kfus,  Who  was 
mabe  a  little  lower  then  the  Angels, 
||fo?  rrje  fnffcnng  of  beat!) ,  crottmcb 
with  gl02p  anb  honour,  thathcebprhc 
grace  of  ©ob  fhotUbtattc  beach  foicuc 
rp  man. 

10  jfo?  it  became  him,  fojWhomare 
all  thtngs,anb  bp  whom  are  all  thtttgs, 
m  bringing  ntanv  fonncs  bnto  glojp,to 
maac  the  Captaiuc  of  their  famatton 
perfctt  though  fuffcrmgs. 

1  r  tfoi  both  hec  that  fanctificth ,  anb 
thepwhoarc  fauenfieb,  arc  ail  of  one: 
foi  which  taufc  he  is  not  alhamcb  to  cat 
themtycrtttcn, 

ii  taping,  gj  ttitll  bctlarc  thp 
/15antc  bnto  mp  tocthJcn ,  tn  the  mibft 
of  the  Church  will  3  fmg  pjaifebnto 
thee. 

13  3tnbagainc,*3J  Will  put  mptruft 
inhim:anbagainc,*2i5cholb,3J,anbthe 
chtlb^cn  tbhich  ©ob  hart)  gtticn  me. 

14  jFozafmttchthcn  as  the  chilbten 
arepartafecrs  officii,  anb  bloob,hc  alio 
htmfeifc  UBcwifc  took  part  of  thefame, 
that  through  beath  hec  might  beftrop 
htm  that  habthe  power  of  bcath,that 
ts.thebcuill: 

1 5  3mb  bcliucr  them,  who  though 


P-'H'l- 


Iik 


ctovs. 


\Gr.  he  era. 
kfth  not  hold 
oftsfngels, 
hut  of  the 
feedeofA- 
Cntham  he 
takttbhold. 


\Qr.mAde, 
\,Sam.u,6 


fearc  of  beath  mere  all  their  life  ttmc 
ifubiccttobonbage. 
I    k  jfatbcrclphettoofccnotonhim 

I  the  nature  of  ^ligclS :  but  1)C  tOOBC  Oil  him 

thefccborab2aham. 

17  naherfoje  m  all  things;  it  bchooucb 
him  to  bee  mabe  Itbcbnto  htsbjethjen, 
that  he  might  be  a  merctfull  anb  fatrt> 
full  high  $Hcft,m  things  pertaining  to 
©ob ,  to  mafte  reconciliation  fo?  the 
finncs  of  the  people. 

18  5Po,t  in  that  he  htmfcifc  hath  fufte= 
reb,beiug  tempteb,  he  ts  ableto  futcour 
them  that  arc  tempteb. 

CHAP.     IH. 

1  Chiift  is  more  worthy  then  Mofes,  7  there- 
fore  it  we  beleeue  not  in  him,we  fhalbe  more 
worthy  punifhmet  then  hard  hearted  Ifrael. 

^ctfojeholpbjeth&par* 

takers  of  the  heaucnlp  cat 

ung,  confibertheSipoftlc 

anb  high  l&ncft  ofourpjo* 

&fcu"ioitClwft3Jcfns, 

t  ©no  was  faithful  to  htm  that  tap* 

potntcD  htm ,  as  aifo  S^ofcs  was  fatrt> 

full  mall  his  hottfe. 

3  3fo?thismanttiasco«ntebajo?thp 
ofmozeglojpthen  ££ofcs,  inasmuch 
as  he  Who  hath  builbcb  the  houfc,  hath 
ntojc  honour  then  the  houfe. 

4-  5?o?euerp  houfe  is  butlbcb  bpfome 
man,  but  hee  that  built  all  things  is 
©ob. 

5  3inb  fi©ofcs  berelp  Vbas  fatthfuil 
mail  his  houfe  as  a  ferttant,fo?atclfr 
monicofthofe  things  which  mere  to  be 
fpofe  en  after. 

6  asutChnftasa&onneouerhis 
ott)iiehoufe,Vbhofchoufcarelbcc,ifrbe 
holb  faft  thcconfibencc,  anb  thcrciop* 
ctng  of  the  hope  firme  bnto  the  cnb. 

7  ©hcrfo2casthcholp©hoftfaith, 
*3Co  bapifpc  Will  hear  c  his  bopre,       pu.95.7. 

8  0arbcnnotpourhcarts,astnthc 
p;ouocation,inthcbapoftemptattontn 
thcwtlbernenc: 

9  ndhen  pour  fathers  tempteb  me, 
pioouebmc,  anofaw  mp  WojRsfourtp 
pceres. 

I  o  nahercfojc  gj  was  grieucb  \biti) 
thatgcncration,anbfapb,Xhcpbocafc 
Wap  cr  re  m  their  hearts,  anb  rtjep  hauc 
notRitoWcn  mpwapes. 

I I  5>o  3  f ttiarc  in  mp  wjath :  t  rtjep 
fljail  not  enter  into  mp  reft. 

n  Xafeehecb,toeth:en,  left  there  be 
tn  anp  of  pou  an  cmll  heart  of  bnbclcefe, 
in  beparnngfrom  the  Uuing  ©ob. 
£  i  13  25ut 


\Crifthtj 
[battcnler. 


IViSd 


eeucrs. 


TothcHcbrewcs.       Gods  word. 


|    i  j  25ut  crDojt  one  another  Dayly, 

tt»Dilc  it  is  taiicD  Xo  Day ,  leaft  any  \ 

!  of you  be  DarbticD  th20ugh  tlje  Deceitful- 

incflcoffmtie.  ! 

1 4.  foi  rbee  ace  maDc  partalicrs  of 

€l)ii(i,  »fujc  holD  tl)t  beginning  of  one 

confidence  OcDfafl  bnto  the  cud. 

1 5  nahilcft  it  is  fayD ,  %o  oar  if  pec 
mill  heart  l)is  bout,  DarDcn  not  your 
hcarts,asinthcp2ouotation. 

1 6  ifo?  foinc  Vbbcn  they  Dab  bcarD,  | 
bib  p:ouoKe :  hoibbcit  not  ail  that  tame 
outofcgyptbysBofcs. 

17  zisutttntinbbom  ibasbcgnctieD 
fourtyyecrcs;  was  it  not  lbitlj  them  that! 
Dab  fmncb ,  ibhofc  tartafc0  fell  in  the 
iDUberneffci 

is  ^nbtoibhom  fiuarchcthattDcy 
flioulb  not  enter  into  his  tcO  ,  but  to 
them  that  bclccucb  not; 

19  £>o  lbc  fee  that  they  toulb  not  en- 
ter in,  bctaufc  of  bnbclccfe. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  The  reft  of  Chriflians  is  attained  by  faith, 
n  The  power  ot  Gods  word.  14  By  our 
High  Prieft  lefus  thefonneof  God,fubie<ft 
to  infirmities,  but  not  finnc,  16  wee  mull 
and  may  go  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace. 

fjSt  €t  bs  therefore  fearclcft 

m$  a  pzomtfe  being  left  vs , 

M>  of  entntig  into  bis  reft, 

,m£  any  of  you  fboulb  fecinc 

Sggrggf  to  toim  fijojt  of  it 


\qr.tht 

wrdofhea- 

\Or,bcCAu{c 
tbey  n-tre 
not  vnited 
bjfuth  to. 


\\Or,lboCo- 

[jirlvjifir/l 
srtAchtd. 


z  _fo2 bnto  bs  lbas the  ©ofpcl p2ca< 
cbcb  ,as  lbcii  as  bnto  tbc:but  t  the  \b02D 
p2cacbeD  bib  not  profit  tbctn,i|  not  being 
mircbibitb  faith  in  tljein  tljat  Dcaro  «. 

3  5f  02  lbc  lbbitb  Ijaue  bclecucb  bo  en 
ter  into  reft,  asljccfaib,  Zs3  Ijaue 
ftuojne  111  my  tbjatl) ,  if  tljcy  (ball  enter 
uuo  my  reft,  although  the  lbo2t»sn>cre 
futifbcD  from  the  founbation  of  tlje 
ttiozib. 

4  foi  He  fpauc  in  a  certaine  plate  of 
tl)c  fcucntb  bap  on  tl)is  ibife :  3lnD  <5ob 
bib  reft  the  fcucntb  rrnp  from  all  bis 
lbojiis. 

-5  3tnb  m  tl)is  place  agamc :  ._0f  tbey 
(ball  enter  mto  my  reft. 

6  Seeing  tbcrfiw  it  remained)  that 
fome  muft  enter  therein ,  anb  tbey  to 
i\)I)oin;jitn)('isfirftp2eacl)cb)cutrcbnot 
mbccaufc  of  bnbclccfe: 

7  Slgainc ,  Dec  imutetD  a  certaine 
bay, faying m  3>amb,  Xobay.aftcrfo 
longatimc :  as  it  isfaibc ,  ICobayif  ye 
Hull  Dearc  Ijis  boyce  ,Darbennotyour 
hearts. 


8  5f 02  if  |j  Jcfits  Dab  giuen  them  reft, 
then  lboulb  tje  not  aftcribarb  ijaue  fpo- 
ucn  of  another  Day. 

9  Xbcrercmattictb tbcrefojca ||reft 
to  tlje  people  of  ©ob. 

10  $ 02DC  that  is  eutrcb  into  Dis  reft, 
Dec  alfo  bath  tcafcD  from  his  ottmc 
lbo2Ks,as  ©oD  did  from  his. 

1 1  ?Lct  bs  labour  thercfoje  to  entec 
into  that  reft ,  left  any  man  fall  after  the 
fame  crample  of  i|  imbclccfc. 

12, 5fo?thcVbo2Dof©oDisciuicUeanD 
poibcrfull,  anb  fharper  then  any  tibo 
cbgebfroojb,  pcartmg  cucn  to  the  bun- 
DmgafunDcrof  fouleanDfpmt,  anD  of 
the  loynts  anD  marrotbc,anD  isaDif- 
ccrner  of  the  thoughts  anb  intents  of 
the  heart. 

13  jftcitDet  is  there  any  trcaturethat 
is  not  mamfeft  in  Dis  fight :  but  all 
thmgs  are  naucb ,  anb  openeb  bnto  the 
eyes  of  him  Uuth  lbbomeibecbaueto 
boe. 

1+  Seeing  then  that  lbec  Dane  a 
great  high  $2icft,  that  is  paffeb  into  the 
beauens,  IJcfus  the  Sonne  of  (5oo,lct 
bsholbfaft  our  pjofcfTion. 

is  jfoj  tbec  Ijaue  not  anhigD  ptitfi 
ibDicD  cannot  btctouchcb  ibtth 1  tfjtfecs 
tag  of  our  infirmities:  but  tbasinall 
points  temptcD  use  as  U»c  arc,) «  ttsttb* 
outfmnc. 

i6  ?Letbsthctefo2ecomebolDlybn« 
to  tDc  tluone  of  gratcthat  ibeemay  ob> 
tame  mercy,  anD  finoe  grace  to  Delpein 
timcofneeb. 

CHAP.    V. 

1  The  authoritie  and  honour  of  our  Sauiours 
Priefthood.  il  Negligence  in  the  knowledge 
thereof  is  reprooued. 

£>2  eucry  DigD  02ieft  ta- 
ben  from  among  men, 
is  ojbcmcb  t'02  men  in 

tDmgs  pertaining  to  (50D, 

that  hec  may  offer  both 
gtftcs?  facnficcsfo2fins. 

%  nabo lean  hauc  companion  on  the 
ignojant,  anD  on  them  that  arc  out  of 
the  lbay,  fo2  that  he  hunfclfe  alfo  is 
compaffcD  lbith  infirmitic. 

3  ^nbby  rcafon  hcercof  hec  ought 
asfo2thcpcoplc,fo  alfo  fo2  hunfclfe,  to 
offer  fo2  fumes. 

+  3inD  no  man  tabctb  this  honour 
butohimfelfe,  but  Dec  that  tstallcb  of 
(5oD,aswas^aron. 

5  So  alfo,Cb2tftglo2i6cDnotbtm' 
fclfc,  to  bee  mabe  an  i)ighl9ueft:  but 
Dec 


\\Or-k<P>»l 
9/ a  Srtfodtb 


I    r- 


\0r4;[*bt. 
Me  nee. 


fonnbly 
benrerrnh. 


Chriftespriefthood.   Chap.vj.         God 


spromife. 


\\OrJorhtJ 
pirtif. 


\GrJ>athm 

expenence. 


]pr  of  in 
habirt,  or 
<-fcElion, 


\\0r,  ,h, 
word  ofth 
befiHxtn?  of 
Chrift. 


hee  that  fatbc  tonto  hun.Xhonart  my 
Sonucto  Da?  Iiauc  3  begotten  thee. 

6  3lshc  faith  alfo in another  place, 
-Ehou  a«  a  02icft  fo?  cucr  after  the  02= 
Dcrof£13clchifcDcc. 

7  133110  in  the  Dayes  of  Ins  ficfl), 
ltohen  Dec  hao  offcrco  top  pjapcrs  anD 
fuppltcattons,  ltotth  ftrong  crying  anD 
teatcs,  tonto  htm  that  ltoas  able  to  fauc 
him  from  Death,  ant)  ltoas  hearD,||in 
thathefcarcD. 

8  Xhough  hce  \berc  a  -Sotmcyct 
icarncD  hee  obeDicncc ,  by  the  things 
rbhichhefuffcTctK 

9  3n&bcin«maDcpcrfceU)c became 
tlie  attthout  of  ctcrnailfamation  tonto 
all  them  that  obey  him, 

to  Calico  of  <3od  an  high  WW  after 
the  02Der  of  £0cichifcDcc: 

n  £>f  ltohom  ltoc  hane  many  things 
tofay,anD  haro  to  be  bttcrcD,feeingyc 
are  DMlof  hearing. 

n  $oi  iDhcnfo:the  time  yee  ought 
to  bee  teachers,  vec  hauc  nt tot  that  one 
teach  you  agamc  Which  be  the  ftrftpjm 
riples  of  the  partes  of  ©Ob,  anD  are 
becomefuth  ashauc  neto  of  mil&c.anD 
not  of  ftrong  meat. 

ij  $ai  eucry  one  that  tofefh  mfftte,is 
tbnf  ftiiful  m  the  tt>o?D  of  righteoumes: 
ftn  he  is  a  babe. 

14  25ut  ftrong  mcate  belongeth  to 
them  that  arc II of  full  age,  euen  toofc 
\toho  by  rcafou  ||  of  tore  hauc  their  fenfes 
crercifcD  to  bifctrne  both  goob  anb  cml. 

CHAP.  VI. 

1  Hee  exliorteth  not  to  fall  backe  from  the 
faith,  11  Bat  to  bee  iledfeft ,  iz.  diligent, 
and  patieut  to  waitevponGod,  13  becaufe 
God  is  moft  lure  in  his  proniife. 

$ctefo2Clcauittgt!)c||p2iti; 
ciplcs  of  the  Doctrine  of 
Chiift,  icttosgocontonto 
perfection ,  not  laying  a^ 
„  game  the  fonnDation  of 
repentance  from  DcaD  ltoojKes,  anDof 
faith  touiarbs  ason, 

z  £>f  the  Doctrine  of  2Saptirmes,anb 

of  laying  on  of  hanDS ,  atlD  of  reform* 

tton  of  tlje  bcab ,  anb  of  ctcrnaUiitDge^ 

tncnt. 

5  3inD  this  Mil  Vbc  Doc,  if  (Sod  per- 

m&  ,    .  ,    , 

4.   5fo?tti3impofriblefo2thofcn)ho 

lucre  once  (nlightticb.anb  hauc  taftcb  of 
the hcanciily gift,  anb  mere maDc par; 
tatters  of  the  holy  (Shoft, 


5  3nb  haue  taftcb  the  gooD*bo2D  of 
(Sod,  atiDthe  powers  oftljciDoiiDto 
come; 

{  6  3tf  tfcey  (hall  fall  attoay,  to  rcnue 
them  agamc  tonto  repentance:  fecuig 
they  crunftc  to  thrmfelucs  the  Sonne 
of  (SoDafrefh ,  anD  put  him  to  an  open 
I  Chame. 

7  JF02  the  earth  which  Djmueth  m 
!  the  rainc  that  commcth  oft  bpon  it,ano 
bnngcthfoith  fterbesmcetfouhem  i|by 
Whomc  it  is  D;cffeD ,  rcccsutth  Wetting 
from  (Sod, 

8  23utthat which  bcarctl)  thorncs 
anb  briers,  is  rciectcD.anb  is  nigh  tonto 
curung,Whofe  cnD  is  to  be  burneb. 

9  25ut  bcloucb,  Wee  areperftuaDeD 
better  thtngsof  you,  anD  things  that 
accompany  faiuation,  though  we  thus 
fpcatsc. 

10  jf  02  (Sod  is  not  bnrightcous,  to 
fo2grt  your  Woritcanb  labour  of  loue, 
Which  vtt  hauc  IhcWeD  toWarD  his 
^ame,itt  that  yce  hauc  miniftrcD  to  the 
S)atnts,anDDocmmifter. 

1 1  3lnD  wecDcfire,  that  eucry  one  of 
you  Doc  (bewe  the  fame  Diltgcnce.to  the 
full  aflitraucc  of  hope  tonto  the  citDc: 

iz  Xhatyce be  not  flothfull,  but  fol< 
lowcrsofthcm,Wboth2ongbfaithattD 
patience  tnhcrite  the  promifcs. 

13  fo;  When  (SoD  mabe  p2omire  to 
3tb2aham ,  becaufe  hee  conlD  fmeare  by 
no  greater , he  fioarc  by  himfelfe, 

1+  Saymg,&urcly,blcflmg  3J  tbtn 
blefJcthccanDuuiltiplyingjrbilmul; 
tiply  thee. 

15  3hiDfo  after  he  haD  patiently  inou- 
teD,heobtaincDtl)cp2omiu\ 

16  5Po«t  men  Dcrily  fiocarc  by  the 
greater ,  anD  an  oath  fo2  conficmatiou 
is  to  thctn  an  cnD  of  all  ftnfc. 

17  naherein  OoD ttnlling  11102c  abun^ 
Dantly  to  theibe  tonto  thehcy2CSofp205 
mife  the  mimutabilitic  of  Ijis  totrnfell, 
tconfirmcDitbyanoath: 

is  Xhat  by  titoo  immutable  things, 
m  ibhith  it  ltoas  unpofltblc  fo«r  ©od  to 
lycitoee  might  hauc  a  ftrong  confolati? 
on,tt)hohaucflcDfo2  refuge  to  lay  ijolD 
topou  the  hope  fct  befoze  tos. 

i9  nahieh  hope  ipc  hauc  as  an  anuer 
of  the  foulc  both  futc  anb  ftcDfaft,  anD 
ltohtch  cntrcth  into  that  ibithm  tljc 
toaile, 

ao  ©hither  the  forerunner  is  fojtos 
cntrrbi  euen  ,5cfus,maDcan  high  lD2icO 
foi  cucr  after  tljc  o.2Der  of  iJPclcljtCe- 
Dec. 

X  ^  CHAP. 


\\Or,f,r 


fiyr.iHterpo- 
fed  himfelfe 
bj  an  eAth. 


Melchifedec,      To  the  Hebrewes.        and  Ch  rift. 


CHAP.    VII. 

Chart  Iefus  is  a  Priert  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chifedec, i]  And  fo,  farre  more  excellent 
then  the  Priefts  ot  Aarons  order. 

<©&  this  fipelehifebcc 
femgof  _»alcm,02icftof 
tljc  mod  tjtgD  C50D  ,  ttiho 
met  3lb2aham  returning 
from  the  (laughter  of  the 
ltungs,atiD  bleflcb  him : 

x  _  o  lvhont  alfo  ^bzaftam  gaue  a 
tent!)  part  of  all :  utft  being  by  tnterpie* 
tation  Sing  of  rightcouuieffe,  anb  after 
thataifo  lung  of  3>alcm,tDhtch  ts,&ing 
ofpeatc. 

3  H9ithoutfafhcr,irblthouttnother, 
fffr.mi*-  1 1  muhout  t>cftcnt,  rjaumg  neither  be* 
««?'Hr"- 1  ginning  of  bayes  1102  cub  of  life :  but 

mane  u&e  unto  the  Sonne  of  <£>oo ,  abu 
oeth  a  0ncft  tonttnuaily. 

4  if5otD  tonuDcr  hotb  great  this 
manroas,tmto  tbhocuen  the  patriarch 
3tfeaham  gaue  ttjc  tenth  of  the  fpotlcs. 

5  2nb  renly  they  that  ate  of  tlic 
founts  of  fLcui ,  ibho  tctctuc  tljc  office 
of  the  ^ztefthooo ,  ljaue  a  command 
menttotahe  Xtthcs  of  the  people  at? 
tozbtng  to  tl)e  Hatb ,  tfjat  ts  of  their 
bzetlycn,  though  they  tonic  out  of  the 
lomesof^bjaham: 

lor.feji.  6  25nt Ijctbljofc tlDcftctttis not coun* 
tcb  front  them,rccetueD  tithes  of^bzas 
ham ,  anfi  btcflcb  htm  that  hab  the  pjo- 
nufes. 

7  3tnb  iwthont  all  tontrabictlon, 
the  icffe  ts  blcflcb  of  the  better. 

s   3nb  here  men  that  Die  rcteiue 

ttthCS  :  bUt  there  l)Ce  receiueth  them ,  of 

tbhom  ttistbitncffco  that  he  itueth. 

9  3lnb  as  3  may  fo  tap ,  iLcut  altb 
nmo  receiueth  tuhes,  payeb  nthes  m 
^bzaham. 

to  f  02  hec  tbas  yet  (n  the  loynesof 
his  father  mhcni$)clchtfeocc  met  him. 

n  3)f  therefore  pcrfctnon  mete  by 
thc?LciimcaUi9ncfrhoob  (fo?  tonbent 
thcpeopicrctnucbthe?LaiP)U)hatfuri 
thct  nrebe  tbas  there,  that  another 
#ucfr  fbonlo  rife  after  the  oiocr  of 
-Bcithucbcc ,  ano  not  bee  calico  after 
theozbcrofXarotH 

ii  5foz  the  0ncfthoob  being  chaun* 
get) ,  there  ts  mate  of  neceffmc  a  change 
alto  of  the  Ham. 

u  foi  hct  of  whom  thefc  things  arc 
fpohcn,pcrtaincth  to  another  tribe,  of 
moirh  no  man  gaue  attcubanccatthc 
3Utar. 


\\Or,btuit 
wat  the 


*Pfa.iio.^ 


i+  jfojit  is  eulbent  that  onr  ?Eo?bc 
fp2ang  out  of  3uba,  of  Ibhich  tribe 
holies  fpafee  nothing  coccrnmg §ntfc 
hoob. 

15  3mbitfsyetfarremo?eeu<oent:fo;i 
that  after  the  fttmiitubc  of  SBclthife; 
Dec  there  anfeth  another  teneft, 

i6  nahoismabenotaftctthelLatt) 
ofatarnalicommanoemcnt,  but  after 
tbeporoerofan  cnblesltfc. 

17  foj  h«  tcfhSeth;  Xhou  art  a 
^ncflfozeaer ,  after  the  ojocrof  ©ek 
thifcbcc 

18  jfo?  there  ts  bcrily  a  btfanulling 
ofthecommanbement  going  before, foz 
the  ttieaucneffe  anb  Dnp2outabiencffe 
thereof. 

i9  foi  the  fUtb  mabc  nothing  per- 
fcct,||but  the  bitngmg  m  of  a  better  hope 
did :  by  the  itohich  U)cc  DjaibmghDuto 
<5ob. 

zo  3nbtnasmuchasnotttrithout 

an  Otlje  he  was  made  Priel  t, 

n (jfoj  thofe  Pnefts  Vberemabc||tt):n>  [*.«*«« 
out  an  oath :  but  this  Vbith  an  oath ,  by  \f"'"%  °f 
hwiKai0Pmohtm,*Xhc1Lo2bfibare  " 
am>  tbtlnot  repent,  thon  arta  pmR  fo: 
eucr  after  the  ojbtr  of  i^clchifcbcc ) 

x%  25y  fo  much  u>as  3Jcfus  mabc  a 
fucrneof  a  better  XeBament. 

xi  ^nb  they  truely  mere  many 
#2tctts ,  becaufc  they  tt?cre  notfuffctcb 
to  continue  by  reafon  of  beath. 

Z4-  ffiuttljis  man  becaufc  hie  tonte 
nncth  eucr,  hath  an  ||  bnthangcable 
|&2tcflhoob. 

i5  rohcrcfec  he  is  ab'.raifo  tofauc  \{Zi, 
them  ||  to  the  Dttermoft\that  come  bnto 
©ob  by  him ,  feeing  hce  eucr  liucrhto 
mase  mtcrccffion  fo2  them. 

is  Jfo2  futh  an  high  piictt  bctamc 
Ps,who.sholy,harmclcirc,tonbcftScb,fc^ 
paratcfromfmners.anD  mace  higher 
then  the  heauens. 

27  teho  nccbetl)  not  batly.as  thofe 
high  Clefts,  to  offer  pp  lacrtficcfirff  foi 
hts  olbnc  Ons  anb  then  fo:  the  peoples : 
fo2  this  he  bib  once ,  mijen  he  offcreb  bp 
htmfclfc. 

is  fo:  the  fLatbrnaaeth  men  high 
^jtcftsiDlnch  hatic  mfirminc,  but  the 
uiojb  of  the  othe  ibhich  tbas  Entcthe 
Ham ,  makcth  the  £>otmc ,  rbljo  is f  ton- 
fecratebfo2cucrmo2C. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

i  By  the  etemall  Prielf  hood  of  Chrift,  the  Leui- 
ticall  Priefthood  of  Aaron  is  abolifhed.  j 
And  the  temporal!  Couenant  with  the  Fa- 
thers.by  the  eternal  Couenant  of  the  Gofpel. 

i!5otb 


\\0r, winch 

p&{feth  tut 


\\Or,euer. 

met*. 


t  gr.pirf.- 

(1U 


The  old,and  Chap.vii  j.ix.      new  Couenant. 


Or,cfhclj 
tbtngt. 


\Ortthejarc 
•Trtrjli. 


\\Or,TeJlA 
mcnt. 


*In-.;r.?3 
ttfr.gmc. 

\\Or,vpon. 


^  jDVbof  the  things  rbbicb 

™  g mcl)auclpo6cn,thisis  ttjc 

|  fumme:  tt>cchaucfuehan 

gbtgh  ^jtcft,  ibho  is  ftt 

*Jtt  on  tljjc  right  hanb  of  the 

tbwnc  of  the  ijpatctttc  mtbc  bcancns : 

2  3lminiftcr!!oftbc:§>anctuatp,anb 

of  the  true  Xaberaaclc ,  ibbich  the 

fLozb  pitcbeb,anb  not  man. 

5  5^o:  cucrpbtgb  j&tcft  ts  ozbeineb 
to  offer  gifts  anb  faenfiecs :  lbbcrcfo:c 
tt  ts  of  neceflittc  rtiat  this  man  haue 
fomrtbbataifo  to  offer. 

4  fan  if  be  ftere  on  cartb,bc  fbottlb 
not  bee  a  02tcft,  feeing  that  1 1  there  arc 
$2tcfts tl;at  offer  gifts  accojbmg  to  the 
?Latt): 

5  j©I)o  feme  buto  the  trample  anb 
fbaboU)  of  heaucnlp  things,  as  Q9ofcs 
VbasaDmonin)tbofdr>obU)henhcrbas 
about  to  make  the  Xabcrnacic.  ifoj 
fee  (faith  bc)tbattbottmake  all  things 
accojbtngtothcpatcrnelbeibcbtothcc 
m  the  mount. 

6  25ut  notti  hath  he  obtatneb  amo2C 
excellent  nttmftctte,  bp  hoibmutbaifo 
he  ts  the  epebtatout  of  abetter  |j  Cone* 
naut ,  ibhich  tt;as  cftabltOjcD  bpon  bet- 
terpzonufes. 

7  fox  if  that  firft  Couenam  hab  bene  | 
faultlcs,tbcn  ffooulb  no  plate  haue  bene  j 
fought  fojthcfcconb. 

8  jfoj  &nbmg  fault  Untb  tbcm.fcce 
faith,2Scbolb,tbc  oapes  comc(faitb  the 
fLozb)  Vbhcn  31  mill  make  a  nett)  touc* 
nant  Untb  the  houfe  of  $itat\ ,  anb  the 

houfeoflmcab. 

9  ^5ot  actojbtng  to  the  Couenant 
that  31  mabc  until  their  fathers ,  in  the 
bap  U)ben3itooketbcmbptbchanbto 
leabtbemoutof  theianb  ofegppt,  be- 
caufc  the?  conttnucb  not  in  mp  Couc* 
nant,  anb  3  regatbeb  them  not ,  faith 
tbefLozb. 

io  5fo?  this  »s  the  Couenant  that  3J 
ttrtll  make  Untb  the  houfe  of  Ijfracl 
aftcttho&bapcsJaitbtbelLozbt'juni 
t  put  mp  flatties  into  their  mmbc ,  anb 
ttmtctbcm  !|tn  their  hcarts:anb3J  Vbtll 
be  to  them  a  ©oo.anb  the?  (balbc  to  me 
apeoplc. 

ii  anbthev  fljail  not  teach  cucrp 
man  his  n«ghbour,anb  cucrp  man  his 
b20tber,tapmg ,  Bnott)  the  fLozb :  if  o? 
all  (hall  knoib  me ,  from  the  leatt  to  the 
greatcft. 

iz  5Foz  3  VbiU  be  mcrcifnll  to  thcic 
bnnghteoufnes ,  anb  their  fins  f  their 
iniquities  mill  3  remember  no  mozc. 


U  3Jntbatbcfatth,3ncibCouenant, 
hchath  mabc  the  aril  oioc.  /15oUt  that 
tbbtcb  becapctb  anb  ibarcth  olb,isrea 
bietobamfbaibap. 

CHAP.    IX. 

i  The  defcription  of  the  rites  and  bloody  (a- 
crificesof  theLaw,  n  farre  infenour  tothe 
digmtie  and  pcrleclion  of  the  blood  and  fa- 
crificeof  Chrift. 

ffg^iggg  %W  Ucrilr  the  firft  Coue- 
« nant  habalfo  liozbmantes 
of  bmmcS>cnucc ,  anb  a 
|>$Ui02ioip£>anctuarp. 
z  foi there  *bas a  %*■ 
bcrnaclc mabc,  the  firft, ibhcrcm  ttias 
the  Canblcftickc,  ano  the  Xable,  anb 
the  ^bcttityeab,  lbbtch  «s  callcb  ||  the 
^>anctuarie. 

j  3inbaftcrtbcfcconbbaflc,tbeXa< 
bernaele  lbbtch  is  callcb  p  $?ofteft  of  all : 

4  nabicb  bab  the  golbcn  Ccnfo:  anb 
the  Slrkc  of  the  Couenant  oucrlapcb 
rounb  about  ibith  gclb ,  ibhcrcm  Ibas 
thed5oloen  pot  that  bab  patina, anb 
barons  rob  that  bubbcb ,  anb  the  %& 
bles  of  the  Couenant. 

5  ^nbouer  it  the  Chetubims  of  glo- 
ry fbabotbmg  the  fi{9ccrpfcat  ■,  of  rubKb 
ibe  cannot  notbfpcakeparticuiarip. 

6  /5oVb  lbljcn  tbefe  thuigs  ibere 
thus  ojbamcb ,  the  ^2icftcs  Vbent  ai 
ttjapes  into  the  firft  Xaberaaclcaccom 
pliujing  thcferuicc  ofe>ob. 

7  25ut  into  the  feconb  went  the  high 
0Ucft  alone  once  cucrp  pccrc,not  Until- 
outblooo.UJhithheoffcrebfozhimfcifc, 
anbfonhccrrozs  ofthepeople. 

8  %Dt  holp  <5hoft  this  fignifping, 
that  the  njap  into  thci^olicft  of  all,tt)as 
not  pctmaocmantfeft.Uihtic  asthefitft 
Xabcrnatlc  ibas  pet  ftanbmg: 

9  nahith  was  a  figure  fo:  the  time 
then  pzefent,  m  ibhitb  lbcr  c  offrcb  both 
gifts  anb  fatrifltes,that  coulb  not  make 
htm  that  bib  the  feruicc  perfect,  asper- 
tapmngtothcconfctcntc, 

io  which  flood  onclp  in  meates  anb 
b?inkes,anbbtuersU)afl}ings,anb||car^ 
nail  ozbtnances  impofeb  on  them  bnnil 
the  time  of  r  cfomtatton. 

ii  2SutClmft  being  come  an  high 
^ncft  of  goob  things  to  come ,  bp  a 
greater  anb  mo2e  perfect  Xabernacle, 
not  mabcttittb  banbs.tbat  is  to  fap,not 
oftbisbuiibing: 

ir  iBcithcr  bp  the  bloob  of  (Soats 
anb  Caiues :  but  by  bis  oVbne  bloob  Dec 
cntreb  in  onte  into  the  $?olp  plate ,  ha- 
lting 


[Or^ertmo- 


I  OrMh 


\  Or.ritftyor 
ceremonitt. 


Theforceof      TothcHebrewes.  Chriftes  death. 


AOr,f«*lt- 


J  Or,  he 
brought  m. 


Ot.^htU 
fitd. 


!|  Or,f*rfl, 


uung  obtaineb  eternal!  rcbemption 

for  vs. 

13  5fo2tftheblooDof2Sttns,anbof 
goats.anbthcafhesofanheiferfpztnB-- 
img  the  towleanc ,  fanctificth  to  the  pu> 
nfping  of  the  firth: 

14  ^ottunuch  mo2c fbail  the bloob 
of  ctmTt.tttjo  tbzougb  the  eternal  j&pt; 
rtt,  offereD  tjimfclfe  Ibrthout  ||  fpot  to 
<Sob , purge  your  ronfcicntc  from  beab 
lbo2&cs,to  feme  the  liutng  ©ob; 

15  2(nD  fo:  tins  caufc  Dec  is  the  Q&v 
Diatour  of  tlie  /Rett)  Xeftam  cut,  that 
bv  mcaucs  of  Death,  foz  ftjc  rcbemption 
ofthetranfgreffionsthat  were  imbcr  the 
firftXcQament,thcyU)hicharccaiieD, 
might  r  ccetue  the  pzoimfc  of  eternal!  in- 
heritance. 

16  5Fo2tbhcrca1Ccftamcntis,  there 
mud  alfo  of  neceffitic  ||  bee  the  Dead)  of 
thclCcftatour. 

17  ifozaXeftamcntts  of  fo2te  after 
nun  are  beat) :  othcrtbife  tt  is  of  no 
ftrcngth  at  all  lbhilcft  the  Xcftatour 
liucrt). 

18  ©hereupon  ,nettfter  ope  fitft  Te- 
stament was  ||  Debicatcb  Without  bloob. 

19  5roz«)hcn$)orcshabfpofecncuc; 
rp  pzecept  to  all  ti)c  people  attozbtngto 
the  ILait) ,  he  toobc  the  bloob  of  Calucs 
anb  of  CJoatcsADith  water  ano||ftarlet 
lbooll.anD  hpfopc ,  anb  fpzinelUcb  both 
the  boouc  anb  all  the  people, 

20  ^aving^hifl  is  the  bloob  of  the 
Xcttatncnt  Which  (5ob  hatheniopneb 
Ditto  you. 

ii  iBozcoucr ,  hec  fpztnltlcb  With 
bioobbofhthcXabcrnaclcanbailfhe 
bcffclsofthcJpnifterp. 

22  3inD  altnoft  all  things  arc  by  the 
!Law  pnrgcD  With  bloob  :  anb  With- 
out fl)cb3r.i«  of  bloob  is  no  semtffion. 

2  j  gt  was  thcccfozc  neteffarv  that 
the  patterns  of  things  m  the  heauens 
ihoulb  bee  puriftcbWtth  thefc,  but  the 
hcaucnlv  things  thcnifclues  With  befc 
tec  facrifices  then  thefc. 

24  5Fo?  Chad  is  not  cntccb  into  the 
tyoly  plates  nwbciuith  haubes,  Which 
arc  the  figures  of  the  true,  but  into  hea- 
ucn  it  frifc,  noU)  to  appcacc  mthepzes 
fence  of  <5ob  foz  bs. 

2$  jftozyetthathefhoulb  offer  him 
fclfc  oftcn,asthc  high  pzicftcntrcthin; 
to  the  i>oh>  place ,  cucrp  ycerc  with 
bloob  of  others: 

26  foi  thciimufthcc  often haucfuf- 
fcrcofituc  the  founbanon  of  the  Wozlb : 
but  now  once  m  the  cnb  of  the  Wozlb, 


hathheappeareb  to  put  awapfinnebp 
tbefatrtficeofhtmfelfc. 

27  3tnoasit  is  appointcb  Dttto  men 
once  to  bie,  but  after  this  thc3IuDgc* 
merit: 

28  5>o  Chuff  was  once  offercbto 
Dearethefinnesofmanp,  9  bntothem 
that  looiic  foz  him  than  hec  appeare 
the  fetonb  time  Without  finne ,  trnto  fal- 
nation. 

CHAP.    X. 

i  The  weakenefle  of  theLaw  sacrifices.  10  The 
facrifice  ofChrifts  body  once  offered,  14  tor 
eucr,hath  taken  away  linncs.  19  An  exhor- 
tation to  hold  faft  the  faith  ,  with  patience 
and  thankefgiuins;. 

■>«^^sa  DzthclLawhauingattm* 
bow  of  goob  things  to 
come ,  anb  not  the  bery  J5 
mage  of  the  things.can  nc* 
tier  With  thofc  facrifices 
Which  thep  offereb  ycerc  bpyecrc  conti- 
nually, maftc  the  ccmmcr>  thereunto 
perfect: 

r  jf 02  then  Vboulb  the?  not  hauceca=> 
febto  bCDffereb ,  becaufc  that  the  Woz* 
fbippers  oncepurgeb,  (l)ouib  hauehab 
no  mo?c  confcicnce  of finnes  i 

3  25ut  in  thofc  facrifices  there  ;sare- 
membzance  agamc  made  of  finnes  eucry 
yccrc. 

4  5F02  it  is  not  poffiblc  that  the  bloob 
of  26uiics  anb  of  €>oats ,  (ljoulb  tattc  * 
ibapfinnes. 

5  n9hcrefo2etbhenhcecommcth  in- 
to the  Tbo2lb,hcfaith,  Sacrifice  anb  of- 
fering thou  tboulbcft  not,  but  a  bob? 
I  haft  thou !  I  p2cpar  eb  n  ice : 

6  gjn  burnt  offmngs.anbtaerificcs 
I  fo2  finnc  thou  haft  hab  no  pleafurc: 

7  1Ehcnfaib3,tLoe,3fcome.(g}n 
the  bolumc  of  the  boofee  it  is  ibutten  of 
mc)tobocthp«)m,tlD  (5ob. 

8  3Cbouc  tbhen  hce  fatb ,  Sacrifice, 
anb  offering ,  anb  burnt  offerings,  anb 
offering  foz  finnc  thou  iboulbcft  not, 
neither  habit  pleafure  therein,  Vbhich 
arc  offereb  bp  thc?Latb: 

9  Xhenfaibhc,?Loe,3JcomctoDoc 
thv  U)Ul(^[)  ®ob : )  $?e  tafictl)  aujay  the 
firft,thathcmap  cftablifl)  thefeconb. 

10  25vthciPhichU)illVbccarcfanctti 
ficb,  th20iigh  the  offering  of  theboby  of 
JcfusChzift  once  foz  all. 

1 1  3lnb  cuerv  pzicft  ftanbeth  barlv 
miuutcuiganb  offering  oftentimes  the 
fame  facrifices  tthich  tan  nracrtaftca- 


\\Or,lhau 
hulfrltd 


Ujapfinncs. 


u  JBttt 


Th. 


luingway. 


Ch 


ap.x). 


ofKiSj 


"Ieie.31. 


\\0rj6* 


||i9r,ww 
made. 


u  25ut  this  man  after  he  hab  offer  cb 
one  facrificc  fc>2  finnes  foi  cucr ,  fate 
boWtteon  the  right  hand  of  Gob, 

u  #romhcntcfo2thcTpecnngttHhts 
enemies  be  made  ftfe  footftoolc. 

14  5fo2  bp  one  offering  Dec  rjatli  per= 
fectcb  toz  cucr  them  that  are  fatunficb. 

15  nahercofrhchoipcshotraifotsa 
WttnclTc  to  tos:  fo;  after  that  he  hab  faib 
before, 

16  XhisisthcCoucnantthat3iWtl 
maUc  With  them  after  thofc  bapes, 
tuth  rhe?Lo2d :  J  ujili  "put  mf  Tlawes 
into  their  hearts ,  anb  in  their  mmdes 
Will  3lW2itc  them: 

17  3hid  their  fumes  anb  miciuities 
Will  3  remember  no  11102c. 

13  4B0W,  ibhcre  rcntiflton  ofthefe 
ls,thcrcis  no  mo2c  offering  fo2  finnc. 

19  failing thcrcfo2C,b2cth2en,||bolb 
nciTc  to  enter  into  the  Solicit  bp  the 
bloob  ofjefus, 

20  25p  a  new  anb  lining  wap  Which 
heehath  l|confceratcdfo2  bs ,  through 
the  baile,  that  is  to  fap,fcts  flcfli : 

ii  ^nDhaumeanhigh^iieff  oner  the 
houfcofood: 

11  Hct  bs  diawcnccre  With  a  true 
heart  iu  full  affurancc  of  faith ,  haumg 
burhearts  fprnialcb  from  an  etullcon; 
fticnec,  anb  our  bodies  wafhcD  Wtth 
purcibatcr. 

13  ILctbsholb  fair  the  piofCiTion  of 
our  faith  Without  waucrmg(fo2hc  is 
faithfullthatp2onufcD) 

14  3htb  let  bs  confiber  one  another 
to  pzouoRc  bnto  lone ,  anb  to  goob 
Woittes : 

2$  /I5ot  ftufarung  the  aiTcmbling  of 
ourfclucs  together,  as  the  manner  of 
fomeis:  but  crhomng  one  anothcr,anb 
fomuch  themoje,  aspc  fee  the  Dap  ap; 
pjochtng. 

16  #02 if  me  fmncwilfullp  after  that 
VtochaucrecciucbthcfcuoVbicbgcofthc; 
trueth ,  there  remamefh  no  11102c  facrv; 
ncefo2fmncs, 

17  26utacertamc  fcarcfull  looking 
fo2ofiubgcnient,anbficrpuibignation, 
ibhich  mall  bcuourc  the  abucrfanes. 

18  lF)ce  that  bcfpifcb  ftMcsILaibc, 
bleb  without  merer  ,bnbcr  Wb°  °2  tl)icc : 
njitneffes. 

29  €>f  how  much  fojer  pumfhmctit 
rupPoreve,n)ailhccbc  thought  wo2thp, 
Who  hath  trobcnbnbec  footcp  -Swine 
of  (Bob,  anb  hath  counted  the  bloob  of 
thccouenautWherWith  he  was  fanett  ; 
fied,  an  bnholp  thmg,and  hath  bone  be 


'Dcur 
Rom. 


fpitc  tonto  the  fpint  of  grace; 

30  #02  we  Know  htm  that  hath  faib, 
Vengeance  belonged)  bnto  me,3J  Wil 
rccompcnccfalrh  the  ILo2b :  anb  again, 
Xhe  Il02b  (hall  itibgc  his  people. 

3 1  3Jtisa  fcarcftill  thing  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  luung  <5od. 

31  26ut  call  to  rcmemb2ancc  the  fc>2; 
mcr  dapes,tn  which  after  pec  Were  iliu^ 
mutated,  pe  inburebagrcat  fight  of  af 
fltctions: 

3 1  |&artlp  Whilcftpc  Were  mabc  a  ga 
3<ngffocBc  bofhbp  rep20thes  $  afflicti; 
ons,  anb  partlp  whilcft  pc  became  com- 
panionsof  them  that  Wcrcfobfeb. 

34  5?02  pee  hab  tompaffion  of  me  in 
mp  bonds,  and  toonciopfullp  the  fpop; 
ling  of  pour  goobs,  tmoWingm  pour 
fclues  that  pee  haucm  hcauen  a  better 
anb  an  mburmgfublranee. 

35  Caftnotawap  thcrfiwpourrom 
fibencc  which  hath  great  rccompenfe  of 
rcwarb. 

3  6  JF02  pehauc  necb  of  pattcnccfhat 
(halt  after  pchanedonc  the  Will  of  C5od 
pc  might  rceciue  the  pjomifc. 

37  jf02petaUtleWhUe,andhcthat 
(hall  tome  Will  come,anb  Will  not  tarp. 

38  /Bow  the uittfhall  lute bp  faith: 
but  if  anp  manb2awc  bacftc,  mpfotile 
(hailhaueno  pleafureinhim. 

39  ffiut  Wee  arc  not  of  them  Who 
b2aWbacKcbntopcrbition:butofthcm 
that  beIecuc,to  the  failing  of  the  foule. 

CHAP.   XI. 

1  What  faith  is.  6  Without  faith  we  cannot 
pleafe  God.  7  The  worthy  fruits  thereof  in 
the  Fathers  ot  old  time. 

*&&  £>W  faith  is  the  lifubftatuc 

^  of  things  hopeb  fo2 ,  the  e 

uiDcnce  of  things  not  fecn. 

1   5f02bpitthe<£lbcrs 

obtamebagoobrcpo2t. 

3  Xhioughiaith  We  bnberftanb  that 
the  Woilds  were  framed  bp  the  W02D  of 
©ob ,  fo  that  things  Which  are  fecne 
iberc  not  mabc  ofthmgs  Which  boc  ap 
peace. 

4  25p  faith  3brt  offcrcb  bnto  (Sob 
a  11102c  crccllcnt  faenfice  then  uatn ,  bp 
Which  he  obtamcb  WituesthathcWas 
righteous,  d5ob  ttftifpmg  of  his  gifts: 
auobpithcbcmgbcab,iipctfpcaRcth. 

<,  ispfaith  dfnoch  was  tranflatcb, :M— >■ 
that  he  fljouibnotfec  Death ,  anD  was 
not  found,  becauft  ©oohab  tranflatcD 
j  him :  f  02  bcfo2chis  trannatiou  he  had 
this  tcfrinionie, that  t)eplca(cD<i3oo. 

6     23utl 


\Or  t  J  rout 
or  co"':dr> 


\\o,,.,,« 


nra 


orce 


TothcHebrcwes. 


o 


ffaitl 


i. 


|  Or,  irtrg 
~7- 


ff7r.  accor- 
ding to  faith, 


\\Or,Tc. 


6  ButibitDoutfattDitistmpoffiblc 
to  plcafc  Dim :  fot  bee  tbat  eommctb  to 
©ob  ,  niuO  bclecue  tDat  be  is ,  anb  tbat 
lie  is  a  rciDarocc  of  ttjctn  tbat  biitgcntly 
fcenc  Dim. 

7  36yfattl)ii3oal)  being  lbarncb  of 
<T5od  of  tinngs  not  fcenc  as  yct,||moueb 
ttMtD  fcare ,  pjcparcb  an  Arnc  to  tfje  fa 
iumgof  Dis  Doufc,  bytDclDDicDDeton: 
bcnmcb  tDe  iuo2lt),  anb  became  betr  e  of 
tbe  tiglitcoufnciTc  mDtcD  is  by  faitb. 

8  JByfaitbAtyabamtbDcnbcUias 
calico  to  goe  out  into  a  place  UibicD  bee 
(noitlb  after  rcceiuefo:  an  mberitantc, 
obcyeb,  anb  lie  iDent  out ,  not  HnolDtng 
UilwDcr  De  went. 

9  ByfaitDDeefoiourncbintDcianb 
ofpjomife,  asm  aftrange  countrcy, 
bibclling  m  tabernacles  ttntl)  3ifaac 
anb3lacob,tl)etjeires  Untb  rjim  of  tfje 
famepzomife. 

io  fm  Dec  loobcb  foi  a  eitte  Vbbub 
fjatl)  founbanons,  ltoljofc  builber  anb 
maker  is  45ob. 

1 1  Xtoougl)  faitft  alfo  5>ara  Dcr  felfc 
rccciueb  ftrcngcb  to  concciuefccbc ,  anb 
ibas  bclmercb  of  a  cljilb  lDDcn  flic  luas 
paft  agcbccaufc  flic  uibgcb  Dun  faittjfttl 
lDDohabpjomifcb. 

1 1 1LDcrfo2C  fjnang  tl)cr  c  euen  of  one , 
anbDuu  as  goob  asbcab,  fo  many  as  tDc 
frarrcsoftlic  ftncmmtiltitube,  anb  as 
tDcfanblMjicD  isbytljc  fcafbojcmnu; 
mcrablc. 

15  XDcfc  ailbtebttn  faitb.notbaumg 
rccciueb  tDc  p2omifcs,  but  banmg 
fcenc  tbcm  a  farrc  off,  anb  lberc  pet* 
uuabcb  of  them ,  anb  cmb2aecb  them,  anb 

coufeffeb  tliat  tbey  were  frrangcrs  anb 
pilgrims  on  tDc  cartD- 

i+  5f 02  tDev  that  fa?  futft  tDmgs.bc; 
dare  plainly  tDat  tDcy  fecHc  a  countrcy. 

1 5  Anb  truly  if  tDcy  Dab  been  minte 
fuiloftDatcountiey,  from  \DDencc  tDcy 
came  out ,  tDcy  migDt  Dane  Dab  oppo2= 
tumtictoDaiicrctumcb: 

16  i6ut  noib  tDcy  bcfirc  a  better  conn 
trey,  tDat  is,  an  Dcaucnly  :  lblicrcfoic 
Gob  is  not  afbamebtobec  callcbtDcir 
C5ob-.fo2licDatDp2cparcbfo2tDfanty. 

17  isyfaitli  Ab2aDamii>DcnDeiDas 
trieo  .offcrcb  bp  'Jjfaac:  anb  Dc  tDat  Dao 
rccciueb  tDc  p2omifes,  orTcrcb  up  ins 
otulybcaottcufoune, 

i  s  |!  £>f  ttmom it  mas  faib.HDat.m 
JfaacllialltDyfcebbccailcb: 

i9  Accounting  tDat  t3ob  lbas  able  to 
rairchnn  bp.  cucufronuDcbeabifrom; 
,  ibDcncc  alfo  lie  rccciueb  Dim  m  a  figure. ; 


||  Or  for 
CM]!. 


20  By  faitlj  3Jfaac  blcfTeb'Jacob  ano 
<ZEfau  tonccrnmg  tilings  to  comt. 

n  28yfaitD31acobU)DenDceUiasa 
bymg ,  blcffcbbotli  tDe  fonncs  of  3Jo« 
fepD,aubU)02fl)ippeb  icanmg  bpon  tlje 
topofDtsftaffc. 

n  2Sy  faitlj ,3iofcpD  tbDen  Dec bteb , ;  (J 
II  mabc  mention  of  tDc  beparnng  of  tDc 
cljilb2cn  of  3)frael :  anb  gaue  comman- 
bement  concerning  Dis  bones. 

23  25yfaitD,  ^ofcsibDen  Dee  ttias 
bo2iic  ibas  Dib  tl)2ce  monetDs  of  Dis  pa 
rcnts,bccaufetDtyfaib  Dcmasa  pjopet 
cDtlbc,atiotDcynotattaiboftbelBtmgs 
commaubrmcut. 

14  2Sy  faitlj  ^3ofestt)Dcn Dee tbas 
comctoyeercs,refufcbtobcccailebrDe 
fonnc  of  0DaraoDs  baugDtcr, 

z5  CDufingratDcr  to  fuffer  affliction 
IDitD  tDe  people  of  ©ob,  tDen  to  enioy 
tDcplcafurcsoffmucfo2afcafon: 

i6  eitccnung  tDc  rcp20tl)  II  of  CDjift 
greater  ricDcs  tDen  tDc  treafurcs  m  £; 
gypt:  fo2  Dc  Dab  r  efpect  Ditto  tDe  recom- 
pcnfeoftDcrcibarb. 

17  2SyfaitDDccfo2foohet£gypt,not 
fearing  tDc  ltyatD  of  tDc  fimg:  foj  Dc  in* 
burcb,as  feeing  Dim  tDDo  is  tnuifiolc. 

is  XD20iigDfaitDDf  bept  tDe ^aflcj 

oucr,anbtDcfp2inRltngofblooD,lcftDe 
tDat  beftroyeb  tDc  firfl  bo;ne,  fboulb 
toucD  tDcm. 

29  2Sy  faitlj  tDcy  paffcbtDJougp  tDe 
rcb  fca ,  as  by  b2ie  lanb :  ibnirD  the  €« 
gy  ptians  affaymg  to  bo  Vbcre  b20tb neb. 

30  26y  faun  tDc  ruaiics  of  3JcncDo 
fell  boiDne,  after  tDeyrbfrecompaffeb 
about  Ccuen  bay  cs. 

31  2Sy  faitD  tDe  Darlot  iRaDabperi 
fhtu  not  IDitD  tljcm  ||  tDat  bclceucb  not, 
ttmen  fl)ee  D«ib  retetucb  tDcfpiesmrtb 
[peace. 

31  Anb  lbDat  wall  31  mo2efay^fo2 
tDc  time  lboulb  faile  mcc  to  tell  of  <5ibc< 
on,anbof26arau,anbofS)ampfon,anb 
of3IcpDtDaD,of2)auibaifoanb5>amn- 
cI,auboftDc^2opDets: 

33  UDDotlnougD  faitDfubbucbfemg^ 
bomcs,ll)20iigDt  ngDtcoufncu'c ,  obtei- 
neb  pzonufes,  ftoppcb  tlje  moutDcs  of 
ILiotis, 

34.  £iuencDc&  tDc  biolcnce  of  fire, 
cfcapcb  tDc  cbgt  of  tDc  fiuo2b,  out  of 
lDcahcncffc  lbcrc  mabc  Brong,UiarcO 
baiiant  m  figlit ,  turncb  to  fligljt  tlje  ar- 
mies of  tDc  aliens. 

3";  H3omcn  rccciueb  tDcir  bcab  rat- 
feb  to  life agamc :  anb  otDers  i^crc*toi- 
turcb,  not  accepting  beliucrance,  tDat  7 
tDey_ 


flr,r,wgm- 
rcd, 


\\Orfhat 
»ere  difbhs* 
dieni* 


Godschaftening.      Chap.xij.  Follow  peace. 


\Or,forc- 
fane. 


ner 


tljey  mtflljt  obtame  a  better  refurrec 
tton. 

36  3iub  ottjtts  tiab  trtaii  of  crncll 
mocnmgs  anb  fcourgings,yca  mo:co 
uer  ,of  bonbs  anb  imp:ifonmcnt. 

37  IChcy  ibere  ftoneb ,  they  lberc 
fatten  afunber ,  lbcre  tempteb,  lbcre 
aainc  ibitb  tl)e  u»o:b :  they  lbanbcrcb 
about  m  fbcepf  munes,  anb  goat  f  bins, 
being  beftttute,  afflieteb,to:mcnteb. 

33  £>f  lbbome  the  ibo:lD  ibas  not 
Ibojtby:  tbey  lbanbcrcb  mbefcrts,anb 
inmontttains,anb  inoennes  anbtaues 
of  tlje  cacti). 

39  anb  tbcfe  all  haiung  obtameb  a 
goobrcpon  tmougb  faith,  mcuicb  not 
tl)cp:onufc: 

40  <5ob  bauntg  ||  p:ottibcb  fome  bet- 
tcr  thing  fo:bs,  that  tbeyibtfbout  bs, 
fboulb  not  be  mabe  perfect. 

CHAP.    XII. 

1  An  exhortation  to  contain  faith,  patience, 
and  godlineffe.  ii  A  commendation  of  the 
New  Teftament  aboue  the  Old. 


JB  foerefo:e,  fcemg  tbec  alfo 
Wm  arc  compafTcb  about  lbttb 
mm  fo  great  a  eloubc  of  ibitncf 
MM  fes ,  let  bs  lav  rttix  cuery 
"i  ibctgbt,*  tbeunnc  lbbicb 


both  focafilv  befctbs,  anbletbsrunne 
Untb  patience  bnto  tljcracc  that  is  fct 
bcfo:c  bs, 

2  iLoomngbuto  ^cfus  t&eian* 
tljouranbfimfbcrof  our  faitrj,tt»rjo  fo: 
tbeioytbatibasfctbcfo:cbtm,cnbuceb 
tbecroffe,  bcfpifmgtbc  (name, anb  is 
fet  botbn  at  tlje  ngl)t  Ijanb  of  tl)e  tl)?onc 
of  d5ob. 

3  jfo:  confibcr  him  that  mburcb  fuel) 
contrabiction  of  fttmecs  agamft  hmv 
felfcleft  ye  be  ibeartcb  anb  faint  m  yonr 
minbes. 

4  jacc  Ijauc  uot  yet  rcftfteb  bnto 
bloob,ftriuingagalnftfinne. 

5  anb  ye  hauc  fozgotten  the  tffyop 
tanon  lbbicb  fpcaftctb  bnto  you  as  bn- 
to ttmmen,  i#y  fonncbefptrenottbou 
the  cbaftcnmg  of  the  %oin,  no?  faint 
ibben  thou  art  rebubcb  of  hint. 

6  fo:  ibbome  the  Ho:b  loucth  htt 
cbaftenetb ,  anb  fcourgctb  eueryfonne 
ibbombcrctetuctb. 

7  3lf  ycc  enbnre  cbaftcning,  <5on 
oealctblbttb  you  as  ibitb  fonncs :  fo: 
ibbatfonnctsbcibbom  tbefatbec  clja^ 
ttencrhnot*  .  „, 

8  26utifvebett)itDoutd)a(hXemcnt, 


ibDereof  all  arc  partabers,  then  are  yc 
baftarbs,anb  not  fonncs . 

9  5furtbermo:e ,  ibee  bauc  l)ab  fa- 
tbersof our  flefb,  tbljiclj  co:cccteb  bs, 
anb  lbegattc  them  reucrencc:  (ball  Ibe 
not  mucf)  rafter  bee  in  fubicctionbnto 
tlje  father  of  £>pints,anblme? 

10  foi  tber  bertly  fo:  a  feibebayes 
cbaftcneb  bs  after  tbetr  oibne  plcafur  c, 
but  bee  fo:  our  profit ,that  lbe  mtgbt  bee 
partakers  of  bis  bolmcflr. 

1 1  i!5oib  no  cbaftcning  fo:  the  pjefent 
fccmctl)  to  bctoyoiis,butgneuous :  tie* 
ucrtbclcfle,  afteribarb  it  ycelbetb  the 
,  peaceable  fcuitc  of  rtgbteoumcu'e.bnto 
tbcmrobtcbarcercrrifeb  thereby. 

ii  !©bercfo:c  lift  bp  the  banbes 
lbbicb  Ijang  bottmc ,  anb  the  feeble 
fences. 

I  13  3nb  mane  llGratght  paths  fo:  pour 
fectc,  led  tDat  lbhicl)  is  lame  bee  turncb 
ontoftIjeU)ap,butlctitratl)erbecl)ea 
leb. 

14  jFolloibc  peace  ibitf)  all  men,  anb 
ftolincflc,  lbitljoutlbljitljnoman  fibali 
fcctl)c?Lo:b: 

15  nooning  biligentlp, left anp man 
UfailcoftDc  grace  of(25ob,lcftanproote 
of  bltternefle  fpnngmg  bp.troubleyou, 
anb  tbcrcbp  manp  bebcfiicb: 

I  i6  Heft  tbcrcbccanpfo:uicatour,o: 
pzofanc  perfon,  us  €fan,  ibljo  fo:  one 
mo:fcllofmeatfolbt)isbirtl):igl)t. 

17  5Fo:  pec  hnolb  holb  tljat  after; 
ibarbibljen  nee  lboulb  Ijauc  inDcritcb 
tl)c  blefting,  »cc ibas  rciccteb:  fo:  hec 
1  founb  no  1 1  place  of  repentance ,  tbougl) 
l)e  fougljt  it  carcfullp  lbitl)  tearcs. 

is  5Po:  pee  are  not  come  bnto  the 
,  inoiuit  tbat  imgbt  be  tone!) rb,  anb  that 
jburnebibitl)  fire,  no:  bnto  blacbneflc, 
anb  bar  nnes,anb  tempeft, 

19  ^nb  the  founb  of  a  trumpet,  anb 
ti)e  bopce  of  ibo:bcs,  lbmctjvoycetftev 
that  hearb,  cntreateb  that  the  ibo:b 
fboulb  not  bee  fpottcn  to  tl.icm  .my 
mo:c. 

io  foi  tbey  coulb  not  tnburc  tljat 
lblncb  ibastommaunbcb:  ^nbif  fo 
nrati)  as  abeaft  tonrt)tbcQ9ountame, 
(tfbaUbeftoneb,o:tDmftrbo:oibibiti) 
a  oart. 

21  21nb  fo  tcrrmle  ibas  tnc  figbt, 
tbat  fi^ofes  faybc,  31  erccebmgly  fcarc, 
anb  quake. 

iz  But  pe  are  tome  bnto  mount  £>i; 
on,anb  bnto  tbe  title  of  tljc  liumg  C5od 
tbe  bcauenlp  'Jerufalcm,anbtoan  m 
numerable  company  of  angels: 

23  Xo 


!!*,« 


\Orfdlfrom 


\OrtiTtiy  to 
change  his 
mir.de. 


J 


Of 


nariage.       TothcHcbrewes.       Fruitoflips. 


|]  Or  twreH 

ud. 


mcnt. 


\  Or,  may  hi 


\\0r  .!,:■, 
koldftft. 


'lof.l.J. 


aj  %o  the  gcnctaii  aflembly,  ano 
Church  of  the  firft  borne  tbljtclj  arc 
[|  tbntccn  in  hcauctt,  ano  to  <5od  the 
gjuogc  of  all,  ano  to  the  fpirtts  of  UiO 
men  niaoc  perfect: 

14. 2no  to^Jefusthc  mcofatour  of 
theneffl  ||  Coucnant.ano  to  tDc  blooo  of 
fpnncBling,tbat  fpeabcth  better  things 
tijcnthatofabcl. 

25  £>ce  that  pec  rcfhfc  not  him  that 
fpeafteth :  fo?  if  they  cfcapeD  not  who 
rcfnfeo  him  that  fpafee  on  earth ,  much 
ni02efhallnotwc  efcape  if  wee  turnc  a> 
way  from  hun  that  ip"kcthfroml)ca; 
ucn. 

a6ii9hofctooiccthcnfl)ooUcthe  earth 
but  now  he  hath  piomtfcD,  faying,  Pet 
once  mojc  31  fhatie  not  the  earth  oncly , 
butaifohcaucn. 

17  ano  this  word  J3ct  once  mojcfig- 
mfieth  the  rcmoumg  of  thofe  things 
that  ||arcfl)a&cn,asof  things  that  arc 
maoc ,  that  thofe  things  Which  cannot 
befhafeenmaytematne. 

zs  liDhcreftucWccrccctutng  a  Ring 
borne  Which  cannot  bee  mouco,  lllctbs 
hauc  grace ,  Whereby  wee  map  feme 
<5oo  acceptably ,  With  rcucrcncc  ano 
goDlyfcarc. 

19  ifojour  (5oo  is  a  confumingfirc. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

1  Diuets  admonitions,  as  to  Ch.irinc,  4  To 
honcrt  life,  5  Toauoidecouetoufnes,  7  To 
tcgardc  Gods  preachers,  c>  To  take  heed  ol 
ftrange  doctrines,  10  ToconfeilcChnft,  iti 
Togiue  alDics,iyToobey  gouernors,i8To 
prav  tor  the  Apoftle.  10  ThcCondulion. 

M^°h% €t  biothcrly  loue  contt- 
Vt,sri  nuc. 


W& 


25ecnotfojgctfullto 
1  %  entcrtainc  ftrangcrs ,  fo2 


_?«^^n3<^  thereby  fomc  Ijauc  enter- 
taynco  Angels  unawares. 

5  Remember  them  that  arc  in  bonos, 
as  bouno  with  them  ■.  and  them  which 
fuffcr  aoucrfmc,  as  being  your fc lues 
alfo  m  tlic  boDy. 

+  Manage  is  honozablc  m  all ,  ano 
tnc  bco  bnocfticD :  but  ttthozemongers, 
ano  aomtcrcrs  ©od  Will  tuogc. 

5  iLctyour  tonuorfation  bec  With- 
out couetoufiicflctauD  be  content  nnth 
fitch  things  as  ycc  Hauc.  Jfoj  Dec  hath 
faio  ,*3JWilincucrlcaucthcc,  1102  foj 
faftcthec. 

6  So  that  Wee  may  bolbly  fay  ,1Ehc 
2.02D  is  my  helper ,  ano  3  Will  not 


feare  what  man  fhaiiooc  bnto  me. 

7  JRemcnibet  them  Which  jhanc  the 
rulcouer  you  ,Who  hauc  fpoftcnbnto 
youthcwo20of(5oo,  whofc  faith  fob 
lo  w.eonftDermg  the  ctto  of  tljetc  conucr 
fatton. 

s  gjefus  €h2ift  the  fame  ycftcroay , 
ano  to  oay,anofo2cucr. 

9  Be  not  cartco  about  With  Oiucrs 
ano  ftrangc  Doctrines  r  fo2  it  is  a  gooo 
thmgthat  the  heart  be  cftabltthcD  With 
grace,  not  With  mcatcs,  Which  hauc 
not  p2ofitco  them  tljat  hauc  becne  occu 
ptco  therein. 

io  ibcc  hauc  an  altar  Whereof  they 
hauc  no  right  to  catc,  wijtch  fcrue  the 
Xabcrnaclc. 

1 1  ^02  the  bobies  of  thofe  beafts , 
Whofc  blooo  is  bjoughttnto  tlje  5>att; 
ctuary  by  the  high  |02tcltfo2  fume,  are 
burnt  Without  tlje  campc. 

u  nahcrcfojc  3kfus  alfo,  that  hec 
might  fanctiftc  the  people  With  h«s  own 
bio oo, fuffcr co  Without  the  gate. 

15  ILct  bs  gocfoo2th  therefore  bnto 
him  Without  tlje  campc,  bcaruig  his  re- 
P20th. 

i+  "jtoherc  hauc  We  no  continuing 
ctttcbut  Wcfcebconctocomc. 

is  i5y  him  thercf02c  letbsoffcrthc 
facrificc  of  p:aifc  to  C5oD  continually, 
thatis ,  thcfcuitof  ou. iippcsr ,  tgiumg 
thanbes  to  hts  Ji3amc. 

i6  25utto  Doc  gooo,  ano  to  commit 
uicatc  fo2gct  not,  fo2  wulj  fuel)  facnficcs 
©ooiswcllplcafco. 

17  £>bcy  them  that  il  hauc  the  rulco 
ucryou ,  ano  fubmit  yonr  fclucs  :  fo; 
tljcy  watch  fo2  your  foulcs.as  they  that 
ntuQguic  account,  that  they  may  Doc  tt 
With  toy ,  ano  not  With  gncfe :  fo?  that 
isbnp20fuablcfo2you. 

is  jD2ayfo2bs:fo2Wctrufltwcchauc 
a  gooo  confcicucc  mall  things ,  Willing 
tolutchonclrly. 

19  z5ut  3J  befcech  you  the  rather  to 
Docthis,that3Jmaybcrcfto2cotoyou 
thefooncr. 

io  /Row  the  Goo  of  peace ,  that 
ibiought  agaiuc  from  the  DcaD  our 
H02D  3Jcfus ,  that  great  fljephcaro  of 
[tliclhcepc,  thjough  tlje  blooo  oftljc  c 
jUcrlaflingJCoucnant, 

ii  tDahc  you  perfect  in  eticry  gooo 

i  Wojlir  to  Doc  his  Will,  1 1  Woihmg  in  you 

that  Winch  is  well  picafing  m  his  fight, 

th2ough3Icfu5i£h2tu\towhombcg!o 

rie  f02  etier  ano  cucr .  3lmcn. 

a  ^no3i  befccchyoub2eth2cn,fuf. 
fcr 


,*tre  the 


"Mich.2.10 


\Gr.corsfrf. 


\Or,l*ult. 


pr.T'f*- 


II*. 


Afkeirifaitl 


aim. 


Ck 


p.j. 


God 


\\Or,ihr,. 


Lpt 


temptetnnot. 


h. 


fee  the  u»o:b  ofcchoitation,  foi  3  Dane 
Written  a  letter  unto  pou in  fctt)  uwbs. 

13  BnolD  pec ,  that  our  toother  %i 
mothtc  is  frt  at  libcrtic,  with  ibhom 
tfhetomcftwtlp.'Jttnllfeepou. 

24  «§>alute  all  them  that  hauc  the 


rule  ouer  pou,anb  at  ttje  Saints.  Xhcp 
ofjtalpfalutepou. 
25  d&racebctbithpouall.  3lmcn. 

C  narittcn  to  the  ^etyelbes/com 
gitaiv,  bp  £tmothie. 


^THE   GENERALL 

Epiftle  of  lames. 


CHAP.    I 

Wceare  to  reioyce  vndertheCrofle,  5  To 
aske  patience  of  God,  13  And  in  out  tri- 
als not  to  impute  our  Weakcnefle,  01  finnes 
vntohim,  19  but  rather  to  hearken  to  the 
word  ,  to  meditate  in  it,  and  to  doe  there, 
after.  16  Otherwile  men  may  kerne,  but 
neuer  be  truely  leligious. 

3mcs  a  fcruant 
of  ©on  ,  anb  of 
the  ?Lo2U  3Jefus 
Chzift  ,  to  rhc| 
ttbeluc  Xrtbes 
^  Which  arefcattcji 
rcoab?oab,grces! 
tmg. 

2  ^|9pb2Ctl)2cn, 
touut  it  alliopiDhcn  pc  fall  into  mucrs| 
temptations,  ! 

3  i&noUnng  this,  that  tljc trping  of 
pour  faith  rbo2Ucth  patience, 

4  26ut  let  patience  haiic  her  perfect 
tbojftc,  thatpc  map  be  perfect,  anben-i 
tier,U)antmg  nothing. 

5  3Jf  anpofpou lacucttHfebomclet 
him  attic  of  <Sob ,  that  giucth  to  all  men 
Itocrailp,  anb  fcpbiaibeth  not :  anb  it 
(baibeguicnhtm. 

6  25utlcthimafncinfatth,nofhing 
mattering :  fo:  he  thatiDauercthisliKC 
amaucofthcfca,D2iucntt)tththcn)inb, 
anbtoffeb. 

7  5fo2  let  not  that  man  thinttc  that 
he  (hall  rcceuic  anp  thing  of  the  H02D. 

8  %  bouble  mmbcb  man  is  unliable 
inailhisVbapcs. 

9  |Let  the  brother  of  lorbDcgrccllr^ 
topcetnthathetseralteb: 

10  Butthc  rich,  in  that hceis mabc 
lott> :  becaufc  as  the  flourcof  thegraffc 
hethaiipalTcaibap. 


1 1  Jfo2  the  Smunc  is  no  fooncr  rifen 
Unth  a  burning hcatc ,  but  itnrithcrcth 
the  graffe^  anb  the  flottuc  thereof  fab 
icth,anb  the  grace  of  thefafhton  of  it  pe- 
rtfljeth :  fo  alfo  than  the  rich  mau  fabc 
aibapmhisujapcs. 

1 1  ffilcflcb  is  the  man  that  enbureth 

:  temptation  :fo?lbht"hcc  is  tneb,  Jjcc 

!  rtiall  rccciuc  the  troumc  of  life ,  Which 

!  the  H02O  Ijath  pjomircb  to  them  that 

loue  huu. 

13  Het  no  mau  fapiDhenhcistcmp; 
tt\i,3  am  tempteo  of  C3ob  :  fru  Gob 
cannot  be  temptcb  ttuthllcuill,  neither 
temptethheanpman. 

14  25utcucrpman  tstcmptcb,*bhen 
I  hec  is  bzatoen  attiap  of  Ijis  oibnc  luu\ 
1  anb  ennfeb. 

15  Chen  ruhen  lufl  hath  concciucb, 
j  it  bnngcth  fojthCnne :  anb  finnciDhcn 
it  is  finiflicb ,  bzmgeth  fo:th  bcath. 

i6  2Doe  not  crre ,  mp  bclouco  bzc 
ithjen. 

17  cuerp  goob  gifcanb  euerp  perfect 
1  gift  is  from  abouc,  %  commcth  bourne 
j  from  the  father  of  ughts,ttnth  u>hom 
iisnobariablcnefle ,  neither  lhabolbof 
turning. 

is  iaDf  his  otimc  mil  begate  hec  bs, 
Until  the  mo2b  of  Xructh ,  that  nice 
fhoulb  bee  a  fembc  of  urtt  fruitcs  of  his 
j creatures. 

19  nshercfoK  mp  bclouco  bicthmt, 
ilctcucrpmanbccfiuifttoheaccflorbto 
fpcattcfloilitoitaath. 

20  foi  the  ttuath  of  mannwRefh 
not  the  rightcoufnclTc  of  <5ob. 

21  ttJhcrcfozc  lap  apart  all  filtht 
ucfTe,  anb  fupcrfluitic  ofuaughtmeffc, 
9  rcceuic  nnth  nicctmcflc  the  cttgraftco 
\bozo,nmtch  ts  able  to  fane  pour  foulcs. 

22  26utbcpcbocrsofthcrboib,anb 
P no£ 

88 


I  Or,tmls. 


1 

J 


Pure  religion. 


lames.        Faith  and  workes. 


\\Or,do,ng. 


notDcarcrsoncly.bcccuungyonroume 

fclucs. 

13  tfoilfanybeaDcareroftDettwb 
anB  not  a  bocr  ,De  ts  UHe  bnto  a  man  W 
11 0  unit  g  Dis  naturau  face  in  a  giaffe : 

24  if o?  D«  bcljolDctl)  Dimfelfe ,  anb 
goctDDisftay.anbfltaigDtibayfojget' 
tctl)  lDDat  mancr  of  man  De  was. 

15  25nt tbDo fo  loouctD into tlje  per; 
feet  ILaib  of  Uberttc ,  ana  contmuctD 
therein ,  Dc  being  not  a  fojtgctfull  Dearer, 
but  a  bocr  of  tlje  llwftc ,  ttjis  man  (Dan 
beblcffcbuiDis||beeb. 

26  ^jfanymanamongyoufecmcto 
be  religious,?  tyiblctDnot  Dis  tongue, 
but  bceciuetl)  Jjis  otbne  Dcart ,  tDts 
mans  religion  is  toatne. 

27  $ure  religion  ano  bnbcfilcb  be- 
fore d5oD  anb  tDc  jfacDet ,  is  tfjis ,  to  W 
fit  tDc  fafDcrlcffc  anb  lbibotbcs  in  tljcir 
affliction ,  and  to  fecepe  Dimfelfe  fcnfpofc 
tebfromtljcibojlD. 

CHAP.     II. 

Icis  not  agreeable  to  Chrifhanprofefsionto  re- 
gard the  rich,  and  to  defpife  the  poore  bre- 
thren :  13  rather  wee  are  to  be  Louing ,  and 
merciful]:  14  And  not  to  boaft  or  taith 
where  no  deedes  are ,     17    which  is  but  a 


t  (}'■  Sjn, 
g'.V"- 


\\Or,»t!l,tr 
jttmelj. 


dead  faith,    19 
of  Abraham,  15 


17 
the  taith  of  deuih 
andRahab. 


11   not 


\Orfhtl. 


Crmft  the  Lord  of  glojie, 
ibitD  refpect  of  pcrfons. 
i  jfojiftDcrctomebfr 
to  your  taltcmbly  a  man  tbitfj  a  golb 
tmg.tngoobly  apparel,  anb  tDctc  come! 
in  alfo  a  poojc  man,m  bile  raimcut : 

5  3lnb  ycc  Dane  refpect  to  Dim  tDat 
lDcarctD  tDc  gay  clotDmg,anb  fay  bnto  j 
Dim  ,Sut  tDou  Dcrc||  in  a  goob  place  :anb  i 
fay  to  tDcpoojc  ,fi>tanotDoutDcrc,  02 
fitDcccPnber  myfootftoolc : 

4  Tin  ycc  not  tDcn  parttail  m  your 
fclucs ,  anb  arc  become  mbges  of  cuill 
tljougDts; 

5  ipcarlicn ,  my  bcloucb  bmDjcn, 
iiatl)  not  Gob  cDofcn  tDc  P002C  oftDts 
ib02lb,  ricD  m  faitD,  anbDcircsof  ||tDc< 
lungbomc,  iDDicDDcc  Datljpzonufcbto 
tDcm  tDat  louc  Dim; 

6  i5ut  ycc  Daue  bcfpifcb  tDc  pooje. 
Doc  not  ricD  men  oppicfTc  yon  ,  ano 
02am  voubcfoK  tDc  S'tibgemcnt  feats; 

7  Doc  not  iDcybiafpDcmc  tDat  ibo;  • 
tDy/5aiuc,bytDcU)DicDyearccaHeb; 

8  3fyc  fulfil  tDc  royalHUUMccoi 


bmg  to  tlje  5>cnpture,XDou  (Dalt  loue 
tDy  neighbour  as  tDy  fclfc ,y  c  boc  ibcii. 

9  25ut  if  ye  Daue  refpect  to  pcrfons, 
ye  commit  finne ,  and  arc  tonuinccb  of 
tDc  Jlaib.as  tranfgreffours. 

10  JF02  Ojljofocucr  fljaii  ttcepe  tDc 
U)Doic!larb,jyetoffcnbiu  one  point, 
Deis  guilty  of  all. 

1 1  ifoiDc  t  tDat  faib,Doc  not  commit 
aoultcry;fayb  alfo,  Do  not  toll,  ftovo 
if  tDou  tommit  no  abultcty ,  yet  if  tljou 
Hill,  tDou  art  become  a  tranfgreffour  of 
tDcHavb. 

12  £>ofpcattcyc,anbfoboe,astlKy 
tDat  CDail  bee  uibgcb  by  tDe  Haib  of  It- 
bcrtie. 

13  f02Dcniaiihaueiubgciuent  Vbitl> 
outmcrtie,tDatDatDfl)cibcb  no  mercy, 
f  mercic  ll  rcioycetD  agamft  luogement. 

1 4  B@Dat  botD  it  profit,  my  b;etD;cn, 
tDougD  a  man  fay  Dee  DatD  faitD ,  anb 
Daue  notlbo2lies;  tan  faitDfaucDim; 

1 5  3f  a  b2otDcr  02  fiftcr  be  naUeb,anb 
bcftitute  of  bayiyfoobc, 

i6  2nb  one  of  you  fay  bnto  tDcm, 
Depart  in  peace ,  be  you  ibarmcb  $ffr 
leb :  notVbitl)ftanbingycginctDcmnot 
tDofctDmgs  VbDtcD  arc  nccbfulltotlje 
boby:  VbDatbotDttp2ofit; 

17  euenfo  faitD,if  it  DatD  notUwKs, 
isbeabbcingt  alone. 

18  jaca, amanmayfay, XljouDaft 
faitD ,  anb  3J  Daue  lbojfccs :  flietb  nice 
tDy  faitD  II  ibitDouttDyiPojKes,  anb  31 
tbillfljctt)  tDecmy  faitD  by  my  Hwttcs. 

19  %\)o\\  bclccucft  tDat  there  is  one 
<5ob,  tDou  bocft  lbcll:  tDc  bcuils  alfo 
bclecuc,  anb  tremble. 

20  23ut  lliilt  tljou  fmovbe ,  $>  bamc 
man ,  tljat  faitD  Untljout  lbojltcs  is 
bcab ; 

2 1  teasnotSlbjaDamourfatDeriu; 
fhfiebby  ibojHs,  ibDcu  Dec  Daboffcreb 
■JfaacDisfonucbpou  tDc  altar; 

22  ||5>ccft  tDou  Doll)  faitD  ltootigDt 
ilntDljis  il)02hs ,  anb  by  iboifes  lbas 
faitD  mabc  perfect; 

2  3  3inb  tDc  £>tripturc  lbas  fullfiicb 
\bDicD  faitD  ,*  ^IbjaDam  bclccucb  00b, 
anombasimputcb  buto  DimfoingD- 
tcoufnes:  anb  De  lbas  calico  tDcfncnb 
ofevob. 

24  ji'efcctDcn,DoU)tDatbyU)0,2Ucs 
a  man  is  iuftificb,anb  not  by  faitD  only. 

25  iUUcibifc  alfo ,  lbas  not  JtaDab 
tDc  Darlot  infhficb  by  tt)02HS,  ililjcn  H)t 
Dab  recemeb  tDcmcfrengcrs,  aubl;ab 
fcnttDcm  outanotlicrlbay ; 

26  Jfo2astDcbobyU)itDout  tlje  |[fpi 

ntis 


\Or,tllAl 
Lav\  which 


\Or,glorictb 


\Cr.h],l 
ftlfc. 


[J  Some  zj~ 
piesrcade, 
by    ihj 


Or,itm 


"Gen. i  5.6 

113111,4.3, 

gal.3.d. 


\\9>,lrtMh 


Dfth 


etongue 


e 


Ch: 


■p-")-mi 


fed. 


urewiiedome. 


[Or  woo  J. 


([Or,  hole. 


^Gr. nature. 


\Gr. nature 
of  man. 


tit  isbcao ,  fo  fattf)  ttnthout  ibo?bcs  is 
Dca&alfo. 

CHAP.   III. 

I  We  are  not  rafhly  or  arrogantly  to  reprooue 
others :  5  but  rather  to  bridle  the  tongue, 
a  little  member,  butapowerfull  mftrument  ot 
much  good,and  great  harme.  13  They  who 
be  truely  wife,be  milde,  andpeaceable,  with- 
out enuying,  and  ftrife. 

SF&t&tyJg;  p  b2ett»en ,  bee  not  many 
ra  malices ,  bnoibmg  that 
not  (nan  rcceiuc  the  gcea= 
tcr  couDrmuanon. 
i  f  0}  in  many  things 
Vo  t  offenb  all.  3lfany  man  offenb  not  m 
UjojD,  the  fame  is  a  perfect  man ,  anb  a? 
blc  alfo  to  b;iDie  trjc  rbtjolcboDp. 

3  aBchoUMbeputbtttcStntbchoj' 
fes  mouthes,  that  they  map  obey  bs, 
',  anb  ibe  tumc  about  their  lbhole  boby. 
4.  25cholb  alfo  the  Chips,  lbhtch 
I  though  they  be  fo  great ,  anb  arc  tmucn 
of  fierce  lbinoes ,  yet  are  they  turncba^ 
boat  tbith  a  bery  fmail  hclmcibhither* 
focuerthe  gouctnour  liftcth. 

5  Cucnfo  the  tongue  is  a  little  mem* 
ber,anb  boaftcth  great  things :  bcholb, 
hoib  gceatija  matter  a  ittle  fire  binbieth. 

6  3nDthctonguctsafitc,aibo2lb! 
of  imquittc:  fo  is  tl)c  tongue  amongft 
our  mcmbcrs,tyat  it  bcfilcth  the  lbhole 
boby,  anb  fettcrh  on  fire  the  courfe  of 
nature ,  ano  it  ts  fct  on  fir e  of  hell. 

7  tfoi  cucry  t  bmb  of  beads,  anb  of 
birbS,anboffcrpcuts,anb  things  nunc 
fea ,  is  tamen ,  anb  hath  been  tamcb  of 
t  manbmb. 

s  2Sut  the  tongue  can  no  man  tame, 
it  is  an  bnruly  cuill,ful  of  DeaDly  poyfon. 

9  Xheccttnth  bieffc  Vbec  <5oti ,  eucn 
the  jfathcr :  anb  therettnth  curfc  Ibce 
men ,  lbhich  arc  mabc  after  the  tttmli^ 

tUDCOf<5DD.  I 

I  o  ^Dutof  the  fame  mouth  piotccbcth 
blcffmg  anb  turfing :  my  b2Ctt)zen,thcfe 
things  ought  not  fo  to  be. 

11  Doeth  afountamefenb  foojth  at1 
tljc  fame  ||  place  frocct  ibatcr  anu  bitter; 

II  Can  Hgtrec,mpb2eth2cn,bcarco«l 
hue  berries;  cither  a  bmefigs;  fo  can  no  ■ 
fouutaine  both  yeelD  fait  NjatctfjtrcuV 

1 3  D9ho  is  a  ibifc  man  ant)  mbueb 
mtthfenottJlctigc  amongft  you;  let  him 
fbclb  out  of  a  goot>  conucrfatton  his 
tbojUcs  Until  mccltcncs  of  lMeoomc.  | 

14.  iSutlfyehauc  bitter  cnuymg  anb 
ftrtfetnyour  hearts  glo2ynot,  atiDlic 
notagainrttbetrtictb. 


1  $  %i)\s  ibifebome  Dcfccnbcth  not 
from  abouc,  but  is  earthly,  ||fenfuail, 
bcuiltfb. 

1 6  ftoi  lbbcrc  cnuving  anb  Qcife  is, 
there  ts  t  confufion  ,  anb  eucry  cuill 
vootitt. 

17  25ut  the  Mcbomc  that  is  from 
abouc,  is  firft  pure ,  then  peaceable, 
gentle,  anb  caOctobeintrcatcb ,  full  of 
mercy,  anb  goobfeuits,  Utbitboutpar* 
tiaiitlcanb  lbtthout  hypoenfic. 

is  3lnbtbefrnttof  nghtcoufneffcis 
foiben  tn  peace ,  of  them  that  mabe 
peace. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

1  Wee  are  to  ftnue  againftcouetoufneffe,  4 
intemperance,  5  pride,  11  detraction  ,  and 
rafhiudgementot  others:  13  and  not  to  bee 
confident  in  the  good  fuccefle  of  worldly 
bufineffe ,  but  mmdfull  euer  of  the  vncer- 
taintie  of  this  life,  to  commit  our  felues,  and 
all  oui  affaires  to  Gods  prouidence. 

ftom  nihcucc  come 
ibarresano  H  fightings 
among  you  t  come 
they  not  hence,  cuen  of 
youcMufts.thatibarrc 
in  your  members; 
%  J9eluu\anbbauenot:yccbtll,anb 

befire to baue,atu» cannot obtatne :  yee 

fight  anb  rbarre ,  yet  yee  hauc  not ,  bc= 

caufeycafbenot. 
3   i-c  afftc  anb receiuenot ,  becaufe 

ye  af  be  amiffc,  that  yee  may  tonfuu  ic  it 

bponyonr||lufts. 
4.  jac  aoultcrcrs ,  anb  abultcr effes, 

bno  lb  y  cc  not  that  the  fctenbfhip  of  the 

tbo2lDisenmttyibtthC5ob;ibhofoeuer 

thctefojcrbillbca  frienb  of  the  ibozlb, 

is  the  enemy  of  <5ob. 
<,    2>oe  ye  tbinbe  that  the  Scripture 

faith  in  batne ,  the  fpirtt  that  bibclleti) 

inbsiuftethlltocnuy; 

6  2Butbegiucthmo2cgrace,tt)htre; 

fo2chc  faith/  ©00  refitteth  the  pzoube, 
but  giucth  grace  bnto  the  bumble. 

7  Submit  your  felues  thcrcfo2C  to 
<I5od  :  refill  the  beuill ,  anb  hee  lbill  flee 
from  you. 

8  3>2aib  nigh  to  €>ob ,  anb  hee  lbill 
b2atb  nigh  to  you :  clcaufc  your  hanos 
yefmners,  anupunfie  your  hearts  yee 
boublcminbco. 

9  25ce  afflictcb ,  anb  moumc ,  anb 
ttccpe:  let  your  laughter  be  turncoto 
mourning ,  anb  your  toy  to  heaumeffc. 

10  fumble  your  fclucsin the  fight  of 
thc?Lo2b,auDbc  fl)all  liftyoubp. 
p_z 11  ^pcabe 


fr   znamtt- 


\OrjuithcHt 


\Orjrraw. 
lines. 


'{Or,  flic- 
fitra. 


Or,  flea- 
furet. 


|{Or,r«t'f- 
'-f'h 

•Pro.  3.;  4. 
1 .pet. 5.5. 


Eriil 


reioycing. 


Lames. 


Of 


•Pro.17 1 

\\Orforitil. 


1 1  5>peafec  not  mill  one  of  another 
(toetljjen:)  ljc  t&at  fpcafcctl)  cuill  oflns 
bzothcr  ,ano  wogctl)  tjts  bzothec ,  fpca* 
bcth  cmll  of  the  lLavb ,  anb  uiogcth  the 
?Law:  but  if  thou  uiogc  the  flaw.thou 
artnoraoocroftheiUW,bittaiuDgc. 

a  Xhcrc  is  one  fLawgiucr,  Who  is 
able  to  faue ,  ano  to  ocftroy :  Who  art 
thou  that  uibgcft  another  i 

15  dFoetoiioWycthatfay,XoDayoz 
tomozroWWccWillgocintofuchacityi 
anD  tontinuc  there  ayere,  ano  buy,  ano  | 
fell, ano  get  game: 

14.  nahereas  ycc  know  not  What 
fhaibe  on  tljc  mozow :  *  foz  What  is  pout 
life  i  II  -Jt is  euen  a bapottr  that  appea- 
rctl)fo?alitle  time.ano  thennamfheth 
away. 

15  f  01  that  vet  ought  to  fay ,  if  the 
!Lozo  rbill ,  we  Qjail  Hue ,  ano  Doe  this, 
02  that. 

16  26utnoWyecrciovcetnyourboa; 
(hugs :  all  fuch  ccioy  cing  ts  euill. 

17  ChcrcfozctohimthatknoWcth 
tobocgoob,anDDothitnot,toh»nitts 
finne. 

CHAP.    V. 

Wicked  rich  men  are  to  fcare  Gods  venge- 
ance. 7  We  ought  to  be  patient  in  afflicti- 
ons ,  alter  the  example  of  the  Prophets ,  and 
lob:  1 2  to  forbeare  twearing,  1 3  to  pray  in  ad- 
iK'rhrie,to  lingtnprolperirie:  16  to  acknow- 
ledge mutually  our  (eueral  faults, to  prav  one 
for  another,  19 
ther  to  the  trueth. 

"  wccpcanohowic  Go?  pout 
mifencs  that  (hall  tonic 
upon you. 
i  Pour  riches  arc  toi- 
rupteo ,  ano  your  garments  inotljca^ 
ten : 

5  Pour goioano  filucr is  tankerco, 
ano  the  r  uft  of  them  (halt  bee  a  WitnciTc 
agamftyou,anD(hailcateyourflc(oas 
itWcrcfirc:ychauchcapcDtrcafuretos 
gcthcrfoztheiaftoaycs. 

4  zBcholoc ,  the  hire  of  the  labou- 
rers Which  hauc  reapeb  oewne  your 
ficiocs ,  Which  is  of  you  kept  baclic  by 
frauD ,  crvcth  :  anb  the  cryes  of  them 
Which  hauc  rcapco ,  arc  cntrco  into  the 
cares  ofthclLozb  of  5>abaotl). 

<,  Fee  hauc  liuco  m  plcafure  on  the 
carth,anb  bene  wanton:  ye  hauc  noun; 
flico  your  hearts ,  as  ma  bay  of  (laugh- 
ter: 

6  j'cc  hauc  conbcniiicb ,  and  killco 


P. 


atience. 


and  to  reduce  J  ftraying  bro- 


%$|  £>c  to  now,  ycc  rich  men, 


theiuft,  and  he  both  not  refill  you. 

7  ||25e  patient  therefore,  bzcthzen, 
onto  the  commingofthciLo2D:bchoib, 
the  huf  banomanwaitethfozthc  pject; 
ous  fruit  of  the  earth,ano  hath  long  pa; 
neneefozit ,  tmtill  hce  tcteiue  the  early 
ano  latter  ramc. 

8  25eyeealfo patient. ftabUfl) your 
hearts :  foz  the  tomtumg  of  the  ILozoc 
ojawethnigh. 

9  ||d5ruDgenotoneagamftanothcr, 
bzcthzen,  left  ye  be  conDcmneO :  bcholO, 
the^uogeftanoeth  befoze  the  booze. 

10  Xakcmy  bzcthzcn,the  j&zophcts, 
Who  hauefpoken  in  the  ii5ame  of  tHe 
I JLozo ,  foz  an  eramplc  of  fuffermg  afflic- 
tion.anoofpatiente. 

11  aschoioe ,  wee  count  them  happie 
Which  cnoure.  Pc  hauc  hcaro  of  the  pa- 
ncnceofJob,aiibhauclfcuetheenDof 
the  fLo2b:that  the  JLozo  is  bcry  pmfull 
anooftcnocrmcrctc. 

ii  26ut  about  all  things,inyb?rth>en, 
fwearc  not ,  neither  by  heaucn.net' 
ther  by  the  earth,  neither  by  any  other 
othc :  but  let  your  yea,  be  yea ,  ano  y our 
nay, nay:  left  yeefail  into  tonoemna 
tion. 

13  36  any  among  you  afmcteDi  let 
himpzay.  3s  any  merry  i  let  hlniOng 
$falmes. 

14.  3s  any  Gckc  among  you  dct  him 
tall  foz  tlje  eiocrs  of  the  Churth,  ano 
let  them  pzay  ouer  him,  anointing  him 
With  oylem  the  >|3amc  of  the  JLozO:- 

15  anothepzayerof  jfaith  (hall  faue 
thcQcHc,  anb  the  fLozb  (hall  raifc  him 
Dp  :  anb  if  hce  hauc  comnutteb  fumes, 
they  (hall  be  fozgtuen  him. 

i6  Confeflc  your  faults  one  to  ano 
ther , ano  pzay  one  foz  another ,  that  ycc 
may  bee  heaicb :  the  cffcctuali  fcruent 
pzaycr  of  a  righteous  man  anailetl) 
muth- 

17  eiias  was  a  man  fubicct  to  like 
pafTions  as  we  arc,  ano  he  pzayco '  ear* 
ncftiy  that  it  might  not  came :  ano  it 
ramco  not  on  the  earth  by  the  fpacc  of 
thzee  y  ceres  ano  fir  emottcthes. 

is  3nb  hce  pzayco  agame ,  ano  the 
hcaticn  gauc  ramc ,  ano  tljc  earth 
bzoughtfoozth  her  fruit. 

19  zszcthzen,  if  any  of  you  bocerrc 
from  the  tructh,anb  one  conucrt  him, 

io  iLethmi  know,  that  hce  Which 
conuertcth  the  (inner  from  the  crrour 
of  his  Way,  (hall  faue  a  foulc  from 
oeath,  ano  (hall  htoc  a  muintuoe  of 
fumes. 

THE 


~\\Or£,!tmg 
pa-'irnt ,  or 
intftr  jvtffy 


\\0,.«rc,Mt, 
orgrtcHC 

net. 


\\Or,inhu 

erjJrr> 


Tnall  of  faith. 


Ch; 


:p.|. 


o, 


ur  price. 


p. 


\ty.mHch 


|  Or,  for  vs. 


^THE  FIRST  EPISTLE 

generall  of  Peter. 


CHAP.     I. 

Hee  blefleth  God  for  his  manitold  Ipirituall  gra- 
ces: 10  (hewing  that  the  laluation  in  Chnlt 
is  nonewes,  but  a  thing  prophefiedol  olde: 
15  And  exhortedi  them  accordingly  to  a 
godly  conuerfanon ,  forafiiiuch  as  they  are 
now  borne  anew  by  the  word  ot  God. 

^Tjieter  an  3tpoftic 

to  ttjc  ftrangcrs 
fcattreb  tftojotb* 
outpontus,<sa; 
latia ,  Cappaoo* 
tta3Ca,anD26^ 
thpnta, 
i  elect,  atcoz* 
Ding  to  the  fo:tftnoH)lcDgc  of  con  the 
irathcr,  thzough  fauctificanon  of  the 
Spirit  Ditto  obcbicnce,anbfpztnrUing 
of  the  Wood  ofjcfusefjzilr:  ©racebn; 
to  you  ant)  peace  be  tnulttpncD. 

3  28ttlTcbbcthc<!5obanb5fatherof 
out  flozb  3tt\xs  Chzitt,  which  accoz* 
btng  to  his  tabunbantmcrep,  hath  be- 
gotten bs  agatne  bnto  aliuciphope,bp 
the  refurrcttion  of  3JefusChzu1  from 
thebeab, 

4  %q  an  inheritance  mcozwpttblc, 
anb  bnbeBlcb ,  anb  that  fabcth  not  a- 
ibap ,  tefcrucb  m  hcaucn  ||  foz  von, 

1  naho  arc  bept  bp  the  polbcr  of 
d5ob  though  faith  bnto  faluatton,  r  c& 
Dp  to  be  reucalcb  m  the  lad  tunc. 

6  iBhcnn  vc  grcatlp  rciopccthougb 
noib  foz  afeafon(if  neebe  bee)  pec  arc  m 
heautncCTc  through  mamfolbc  tempts 
ttons: 

7  1CHat  the  tnall  of  pour  faith,bc; 
ing  much  »wc  pzenous  then  of  goibc 
thatpcria)cth,thoughttbcetrpcbUnth 
fircnughtbefounbbnto  pzaifcanb  ho 
noz.anb  glozp.at  the  appearing  of  Jc- 
fasChzul: 

s  nahom  hauing  not  fccncpcc  lone, 
intohomtboughnorbrcfcchirnnot,yct 
bclccuing,pc  rciopcc  tbith  lopbnfpca&c 
able>anbfuliofglozp> 


9  JSccciuingtheenbeofpourfaith, 
eucn  th  c  faiuation  of  pour  foules : 

io  £>f  lbhithraluationthc^zophcts 
hauetnquireb,  anb  fearcheb  Diligently, 
ibho  pzophefiebof  the  grate  thatthouid 
come  bnto  poti, 

ii  Searching  what,  oz  what  mancr 
of  time  the  Spirit  of  Chzittmhtchibas 
in  tljcm  bib  fignifie,  when  it  teftiBcb  bc« 
fozchanbthcfuffrmgsofChziu\anbfhe 
glozpthatlhoulbfoiloib. 

ii  Unto  ibhomc  it  ibas  reueaicb, 
that  not  bnto  thcnu"c  lues  ,but  bnto  bs, 
thep  bib  minttter  the  things  lbhftD  arc 
notb  rcpojtcb  bntopou,  bp  them  that 
haue  pzeatheb  the  ©ofpel  bnto  pou, 
ttitfh  the  holp  <shoft  fentboibncfrom 
heauen,tbhith  things  thc^ngclsbeftre 
toloobeinto. 

13  H9herefo?c  girb  bp  the  lopnes  of 
pour  mtnbcbcc  fobcr,  anb  hope  t  to  the 
enb,  foz  the  grace  that  is  to  bee  bzought 
bnto  pou  at  the  rcuclation  of  3Iefus 
Cljnft: 

M-  3S  obebient  thilbzen,  not  faflno* 
nmg  pour  fclucs  actozoing  to  the  foz- 
mer  lufts.in  pour  ignozancc : 

15  2isut  as  hee  which  hath  talleb  pou 
is  ho  ly  ,fo  be  vc  holy  mall  matter  of  con- 
uerfation; 

i6  asctanfeitisibntten^epcholp, 
foz*3Iamholp. 

17  2UtbifpetaUonthe:#athcr,ibho 
Without  refpect  of  pcrfonsiubgcthac; 
coding  to  cuerp  mans  lbo :Ue ,paflc  the 
time  of  pour  fotourning  here  in  fcare 

is  jfoz  as  much  as  pc  fenow  that  pee 
Were  not  rcbccmcb  ibith  cozruptiblc 
things,  as  timer  anb  golbc,  from  pour 
bainc  conuerfanon  ceceiued  bp  trabinon 
from  pour  fathers. 

19  aSnt  With  the  pzccious  bloob  of 
Chzilt,as  of  a  ?Lambe  Without  blcmilh 
anb  without  fpot, 

20  i©hobcrtipWasfozeozbeincbbe= 
fozc  the  founbanon  of  the  wozlb ,  but 
was  mamfcQmthcfcialt  times  foz  pou: 

21  aahobphimbo  belccuciu(!5obthat 

J*  3  raifeb 


\Gr.JCTfcR. 


"Ltuit.ii. 

44- 

and  19.2- 

and  20.7 


fTh 


e  cornerstone. 


LP 


eter. 


Chnft 


es  example. 


\\Or, fir  that 


\\Or,bcje 

built. 


"ECi.iS.iS 
pfa.  Il8.li 
nut.  if.41 
j  '.   4. 1 1. 


\\Orfhtuitn 
hrnihr 


•Efi.8.14. 


raifeb  hun  top  front  the  beab ,  anb  gauc 
him  gio?tc,  that  your  fattlj  ano  hope 
nughtbeindSob. 

22  Seeing  yec  Oauc  pnrtfieb  pour 
foules  tn  obcytngthe  truth  through  tJjc 
Spirit,  bnto  bnfameb  lone  of  thcb?e> 
t  h:cn :  fee  tlMt  vc  louc  one  auotljcv  lluth 
a  pure  heart  fcrnently, 

2$  Being  borne  agatnc,  not  of  co?; 
rtipnblefecb,butoftnco?ruptible,bythc 
tt>o?b  of  d5ob  lbhtch  Iiuctlj  anb  abibcth 
fo?  cucr. 

24.  ||jFo?aiiflefh'sasgraffe,anbaii 
rt)c  glo?y  of  manas  the  flouw  of  graffc: 
tlje  grafTe  ibithcretrj,  ano  the  flolb?e 
thereof  fatletf)  atuap. 

25  25ut  the  rbo?b  of  the  ?Lo2D  cnbu* 
rcthfo?cucr:  ?  this  ts  the  lbo?bibhich 
b  v  t  he  cofpti  is  picactjcD  b  ti  1 0  yon. 

C  HAP.   II. 

He  dehorteth  them  from  the  breach  of  charitie: 
4  fhewingthatChriftis  thefoudation  wher- 
upon  they  are  built,  n  Hebefeecheththem 
•  alio  to  abftaine  from  flefhly  luftes,  13  To 
bee  obedient  tomagiftrar.es,  18  andteach- 
eth  feruants  how  toobey  theirmafters,  2.0 
patiently  fuffenng  for  well  doing  after  the 
example  ot  Chnft. 

$crcfo?e  laying  atfoe  an 
maliee,ano  all  guile,  anb 
hypoenfics,  ano  enutes, 
anbeuiiifpcaumgs, 
_  2  %%  ncibbo?nc  babes 
befirethcGnccrcmilBeofthcrbo?b,that 
ye  may  groib  thereby, 

j  3Jf  fo  bee  pee  hauc  tattcb  that  the 
Ho?b  is  gracious. 

4  Xottinomcommuigastontoate 
mngStoiicbifaiioibcbmbccboftnen, 
but  chofen  of  Gob,anb  precious, 

5  Pt  alfo  as  uuely  Oones,[|  are  built 
top  a  fptntuall  houfc,  an  holy  $?icffc 
hoob  to  offer  Dp  fpintuau  fatrincc,  at* 
teptable  to  <5ob  by  3Jcfas  Ch?ift. 

6  tDbercfore  it  is  tontcmcb  In  the 
Scripnitc,  'aschoibCJ  laying 
on  a  chicfc  corner  ftone,cicet,p?ccious, 
anb  he  that  bciccucth  on  him,  Chan  not 
be  confounbeb. 

7  !3nto  you  thcrforc  Which  belccuc 
Decisllpzccious,  but  bnto  them  Which 
be  btfobcbicnt,thc  ftonc  which  the  butl- 
bcrs  bifaiioWcb ,  the  famelsmabcthe 
hcab  of  the  comer, 

8  *^nb  aptotic  of  Rutnbling,anb  a 

&OCtiC  Of  OffcnCC  ,  cuen  to  them  tt»I)tCl) 

(nimble  at  the  Wow,  being  bifobebicnt,  j 
Wheceunto  alfo  they  Were  appotnteb. 


E1 


9  26utyce  are  a  chofen  generation, 
a  royall  $?icfthoob,  an  holy  nanon.a 
II  peculiar  people,  that  vee fhotilb  fhewe 
fo?th  the  ||p?alfcs  of  him,  Who  hath  tai 
leb  you  out  of  barbnes  into  hts  maruci- 
lous  light: 

10  i©hich  in  tune  pafl  Vbcrc  not  a 
people,  but  arc  noib  the  people  of 
©ob:  *Whtchhab  notobteuiebniercie, 
butttoW  hauebbtemcb  mercy. 

1 1  2>earcly  beloueb,  3  befeech  you 
as  Grangers  anb  ptlgrunes,  abftaine 
from  flefhly  luffs,  ttr|)tc!j  Warreagamfi 
thcfouie, 

1 2  waning  your  tontterfation  ho- 
nefr  among  the  ©entiles,  that  [|  Where 
as  they  fpeattc  againft  you  as  eutllbo- 
ers,  ttjcy  may  by  your  goob  wo?tis 
which  they  fljallbeholb,glo?ifie<l5obm 
thebayofbiGtation. 

13  Submit  your  felues  to  cucry  op 
blnance  of  man  fo:  the  fLozbes  fane, 
Whether  it  be  to  theBmg,as  fup?eme, 

14-  <Di  bnto  gouemours,asbnto 
them  that  arc  fent  by  him,  fo?  the  pit* 
mfhment  of  cuil  bocrs,anb  fo?  the  pjaife 
ofthem  that  boc  well. 

15  5Fo?fo  is  the  Will  of  C5ob,that  With 
tbell  boingyccmay  put  to  ftlente  the  ig- 
norance of fbolifl)  men. 

16  3sfree,anb  not tbfing your ubcr< 
ticfo?acloafte  of  mallttouftieffe,but  as 
the  feruants  of  (Sob. 

17  ||$onourallmcn.3Louetheb?o« 
tfjerhooo.  iFcarc  <5ob.  honour  the 
Bing. 

is  5>eruants,bcfubiccttoyourma- 
fters  tbith  al  feare,not  only  to  the  goob 
anb  gcntlc,but  alfo  to  the  froibato. 

19  5Foj  this  is  thanae  ibojthie,  tf  a 
man  fo2  confncncctoVbarb  ©ob  cnbure 
grtefcfuffcrmg  ibjongfully. 

ao  ifoz  lbhat  glo?y  is  it,if  fthen  yee 
bebuffctebfozyourfaults.ye  fljail  taae 
it  patiently:  but  if  Vbhcn  yceboetbcll, 
anb  fuff cr  fo  nt,y  e  tabe  it  patiently^hts 
tsllscccptablelbitlxsob. 

2 1  jFoz  cuen  hereunto  lbere  ye  calico: 
becaufc  Ch.nfl  alfo  fuffcrcb  fo?  ||  bs,  lea* 
umgbs  an  cpamplcthatyce  fl;oulb  fol- 
low his  flcps. 

22  teijo  bib  no  finne,  neither  ttias 
guiiefouubm  his  mouth. 

25  naho  ibljcn  hec  ibas  r cuilcb  ,reui- 
leb  notagaittCi  ibhcn  hec  fuffcrcb,  hec 
th?eatncb  not,  but  ||committcb  himfelfe 
to  hunthatuibgcth  rightcoufly. 

24.  nDho  his  oibnc  fclfe  bare  our 
fmncs  m  his  oVbuc  boby  [ion  tlje  tree, 
that 


\[Ortapttr- 
Chaftd  pea- 

)rtv«TlHtl 


Ofc.J.lJ. 


\\Or,irbcrin 


\0r~ejleme. 


\{Ortt  hailte. 
j|  Some 


ted  his 
caufc. 


11  >>  ••' 


Wiuesbehauiour.  Chap.nj.iiij.  Howtofuffer. 


\Qr.cUl- 


7r 


\\Or,hi 
tethe  h 
thrfn. 


•Pftl.34. 

»3- 


tljat  Vote  being  bcab  to  finnes ,  (boulD 
liuc  bnto  ngbtcoufnette ,  bp  VbijoCe 
ftripespcVbcrcbealeD. 

15  jFojpee  tberc  as  flncpe  gotng  a- 
(trap,  but  are  nott)  rcturncb  bnto  the 
ftjephearD  anb  asifyop  of  your  fonies. 

H 


CHAP.    III. 


and  huf- 


Heeteacheth  the  duetie  of  v.iues 
bands  to  each  other,  X  exhorting  all  men  to 
vnitie,and  loue,  14  and  to  fuffer  perlccution. 
19  Heedeclareth  alfo  the  benefits  of  Chnft 
toward  the  old  world. 

3Jhcibifc,pettnucs,bc 
in  fubicction  to  pour 
ottntebufbanDs.tbat 
tf  any  obey  not  the 
tb02D,  tljcv  alfo  map 
Without  trjt  ib02D  be 
Ibonncbptbcconuct 
fattonoftlje  tbiucs: 

I  ©bile  tbep  bcbolDc  pout  cbafte 
conuerfatton  coupled  untl)  fcare: 

3  nabofc  abommg,ict  tt  not  bee that 
outttiarD  adornmcof  plaiting  the  liairc, 
anD  ofU)caringofgolD,02  of  putting  on 
ofapparcll. 

4.    25Ut  let  it  bee  tl)C  l)tDbM  tliail  Of 

tbcbcart.m  that  ibbicb  is  not  wrupte 

blC,euen  the  ornament  of  a  tllCCBC  ailb  qut= 

ettpirtt,lbbicb  is  in  ttjc  Ogljt  of  C5od  of 
great  p2ice. 

5  jtfo;  after  this  manner  tn  tl)colbc 
time, the holp lbomeii alfo  inbo  truftcb 
in  (Sob  abo:neb  tbcmfclues,  bectngm 
fubiettton  bnto  their  ottmc  Inifbanbs. 

6  <£ncnas§>araobcvcDab2abam, 
tailing  Dun  IL02D ,  lbbofc  t Daughters 
pe  arc  as  long  as  pe  doc  lbcli ,  anD  arc 
not  afraib  ibitb  an  p  amazement. 

7  HtfccttJifcpcDufbanDs^Vbcmntb 
them  aetozDuig  to  UnoiblcDge ,  giuing 
fjonour  bnto  the  lbife  as  bnto  tin  Uica- 
fterbctTcl,anbas  being  Imrestogctlicr 
oftbc  grate  of  life,  that  pour  pzaprrs  be 
notbinbercD. 

S  iFinailp  be  ye  all  of  one  nunbe,  ha 
uing  companion  one  of  another,  ||  loue 
as  bzctlncn.bcpitifulUbc  courteous, 

9  /Bot  renbzmg  cuill  fo2  cutll,  02  rai 
ling  fo2  railing :  but  contrarpttufc  blcf 
fmg,  tntoUnng  that  pee  arc  thereunto 
calico,  that  pcaioulDtnbcrttc  abutting. 

10  jfoj  bee  that  lbill  loue  life,  anbfee 
gooDOapcs,  let  Dim  rcframe  his  tongue 
from  cuil.atiD  his'lips  that  tljcp  fpcaftc 
no  guile: 

I I  Hct  him  efchctt)  cuil  ant)  bo  goob, 
let  htm  fecKc  peace  anb  enfue  it. 


ii  jf02theepesofthc?Lo2Dareouer 
the  righteous  ,  anb  his  cares  are  open 
bnto  their  pzapccs:but  the  face  of  the 
flozo  's  tagainft  them  that  Doe  cuill. 

13  3lnD  Vbho  is  hec  that  lbill  harmc 
pou.if  pe  bee  followers  of  tljat  Vbhitlj  is 
gooDr 

1+  But  anb  if  pe  fuller  foz  rigbteoufc 
ncs  fa&chappp  are  ve,anD  be  not  *afraib 
of  their  tcrrour,ncithcr  be  troublcb : 

15  25ut  fanctific  the  ?Lozd  ©00  in 
pour  hearts,?  be  teaop  aiibapcs  to  giue 
an  anfiocrc  to  euerpman  that  aftjctlj 
pou  a  reafon  of  the  hope  that  is  in  pou, 
ibithmecUcncu*canD||fcarc: 

i6  i^aumg  a  goob  confefenee ,  that 
lbhcrcas  tljcp  fpealtc  cuill  of  pou ,  as  of 
euiii  Doers,  tljcp  map  bee  aCbamcD  that 
faiQpactufepour  gooD  conuerfationm 

Cl)Zlft. 

1 7  tf 02  it  ts  bcttcr,if  the  lbill  of  d5ob 
be fo, that  pec  fuffer  fo?  ibellbouig,then 
fo2  cuill  Doing. 

is  fo}  Cbzift  alfo  hath  once  fuffercb 
foz  finnes,  the  tuft  foz  the  bninft,  that  be 
might  bang  bs  to  0oD ,  being  put  to 
Death  m  the  flefb,  but  quicBcnco  bpthc 
Spirit. 

19  2Sp  tbhuh  alfo  he  ttjcntanopzea- 
cheb  bnto  the  fpirits  in  pnfon , 

20  nahich  fomctunc  ibere  bifobebt^ 
cnt ,  ibhen  once  the  long-fuffering  of 
©od  rbaitcb  in  the  bapes  of  Jftoab, 
Vbhilc  the  3rfee  Vbas  a  pzcpartng : 
ibbcrcm  fcib,  tljat  is,  eight  foulcsifccrc 
faucbbpibater. 

11  Xhciifec  figure  ibhcreunto,etien 
25aptifmc,  both  alfo  noib  fauc  bs , (not 
the  putting  amap  of  the  filth  of  tl)c 
fled),  but  the  anfraereof  agoob  confer 
cncctoibarb<5ob,)bp  the  refurrcttion 
of  3Icfus  Cbzift. 

n  naho  is  gone  into  heauen,  anbts 
on  the  right  Ijanb  oftiSoD,  angels ,  anD 
autho2ittc5 ,  anD  poibcrs  being  mabc 
fubicctbnto  him. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

Hec  cxhortcth  them  ro  ceafe  from  finne  by  the 
example  of  Chrift,  and  the  confideration  of 
the  generall  end, that  now  approcheth:  n 
and  comforteth  them  agamic  peilecution. 

^^^3?  €)2afmuch  then  as  Chnft 
»^^|  hathfuffcreD  fozbs  mtht 
g  flcfl) ,  armc  pour  fclues 
AkJf  Ubcibifc  ibith  the  fame 
_  :§£•-&  muiDc :  f02  hec  that  hath 
fuffcrcD  in  tlje  flcft) ,  ijatl)  ceafTeD  from 
fmne: 

t  Xhat 


\  (jr.vpoi 


a  'in, 


Watch  in 


p 


rayer. 


I  .Peter.         Feede  the  fl  ock 


e. 


I0r,vill. 


i  %X)*t hcuo longer  (IjouiD Ituc tl)c 
reft  ofhistimctn  the  fleflMo  the  lulls  of 
men,but  to  the  nnii  of  Gob. 

j  jf  o?  tfjc  time  pafl  of  out  life  map 
fuffuc  bs  to  hauc  tbjought  the  tbill  of 
the  Gentiles,  lbljen  vot  XDamcDiuiafct^ 
utoufnes,  lufts,  erectTeof  U>mc,  rcuefc 
lings  ,banquctings,  anb  abljommablc 
tboiatries. 

4  aaljercin  thep  thinbe  it  ftrangc, 
that  pou  runnc  not  ibith  tljcm  to  the 
fame  crccfTc  of  rtot.fpeabmg  cutl  of pou: 

5  raho  thai  gmcactompt  to  htm  that 
isrcabpto  tnbgethe  qutebctHrje  bcab. 

e  if o2,fo?  tl)ts  caufe  mas  tl)e  ts-ofpcl 
pjteacljcb  alfo  to  them  tttat  are  bcab, 
thatfbcp  might  bee  tubgcb  acco2bing  to 
men  tn  tl)c  flc(h ,  but  lute  accojbmg  to 
GoDintljefpirit. 

7  25ut  the  enbe  of  all  things  is  at  | 
hanb:  be  pc  therefore  fobcr  anb  rbatch 
bntopjaper. 

8  3lnbaboue  all  things  haueferucnt 
ebaritie  among  pour  femes :  foj  charttp 
1 1  (hall  concr  tl)c  multitube  of  finnes. 

9  life  hofpttaiitic  one  to  another 
Without  grubgtng. 

io  %s  cuerp  man  hath  receiueb  the 
gift,  euen  fominiftcrtlje  famconeto  an- 
other, as  goob  ftetbatbs  ofttjc  manu 
folb  grace  of  <5ob. 

ii  3jfanpmanfpcakc,!ethimfpeake 
as  tl)c  o  jaclcs  of  Gob :  (fan?  man  mini* 
tterjctljimboett  as  of  the  ability  lb htclj 
Gob  gmcth,that  Gob  tn  an  things  map 
bee  gloji&eb  tlnouglj  gicfus  Chnft,  to 
Whom  be  piaifcano  bommtonfojeuer 
anbeuer.  3lmcn. 

ix  2i5cloueb ,  tbmbc  it  not  Orange 
concerning  tlje  ficrptrtaii ,  Wljich  is  to 
trp  vou,as  though  fome  flrangc  thing 
bappenebbntopou. 

u  isut  r  ciopec  in  as  much  as  pec  are 
partahers  of  Cbnftcs  fuftcringS;  tljat 
tt)l)cn  bis  glojp  Qjaibc  rcuctlcb ,  pc  map 
beglab  alfo  With  crecebmg  top. 

14  31fpcbcrcp2ochcbfo2tbc4i3amc 
ofCr):tfr,  bapptc  arc  ye ,  foz  the  fptnt  of 
glo2p,anD  of  Gob  rcflctb  bpon  pou :  on 
their  part  beets  cuillfpobcn  of,  but  on 
pour  part  Dc  is  gloztfico. 

15  25ut  let  none  of  pou  fuffer  as  a 
murfberer  ,02  as  a  tbccfc ,  0;  as  an  cum 
bocr ,  02  as  a  buftbobp  m  other  mens 
matters. 

16  jictifanp  man  fuffer  asa  Clmftian, 
let  l)tm  no  t  be  afliamcb,  but  let  bun  gio; 
rifle  Goo  on  this  bcbalfc. 

17  Jfo2  the  tune  is  come  tbatmbgc- 


ment  mult  begin  attbeboufc  of  Gob: 
anb  if  tt  firft  begin  at  bs,  What  than  tlje 
cube  bee  of  them  tljat  obep  not  the  Go- 
fpelofGob* 

18  anbiftbc  righteous  fear telp  be  fa* 
ucb,  Where  than  the  bngoblp  anb  tlje 
(inner  appears 

19  «9ljctfo2e,  let  tljcmtljat  fuffer  ap 
t02bingto  the  Will  of  Gob ,  commit  the 
beeping  of  tljetr  foulcs  to  htm  m  Well 
bomg ,  as  bntoa  faitfjfull  Creator 

CHAP.    V. 

1  He  exhorteth  the  Elders  to  feede  their  flocks, 
5  theyonger  to  obey,  8  and  all  to  bee  fo- 
ber,watchfull,andconftant  in  the  faith:  9  to 
refill  the  cruell  adnerfatie  the  deuill. 

V)t  tfiuers  wbtclj  are  a* 
mong  pou  3  fJtbojt ,  Ibljo 
am  alfo  an  mutt ,  anb  a 
UutncfTc  of  tlje  fufferings 
of  Cljnft,  anb  alfo  a  parta* 

Her  of  tlj c  giojp  tljat  fball  be  r cuealcb. 
x  ifeebetbeflocbeof  Gob||Wbirtjts 

among  pou.tabing  tlje  oucrftgljt  thereof, 

notbpcon(rraint,but  wuimglp :  notfo? 

filtljp  lucre,  but  of  a  r  cabp  minbe : 
j  iI5citljcr as  ||  being  lo2bsouct Gods 

heritage :  but  being  enfamples  to  the 

floebc. 

4  anb When  the  tljicfe  Chrpbearb 
(bail appcarc , pc  dial!  rrcciur  a  croWue 
of  glojp  that  fabefb  notaibap. 

5  iL'.bcibifepcponger.fubmttpour 
felucsbntorhcclber:  pea,  all  of  you  bee 
fubtctt  oncto  another,  anb  bee  tlotheb 
tbith  humibtie :  fo?  Gob  rcOQcth  the 
p ;  out),  anb  giueth  grace  to  the  humble. 

6  fumble  pourfelucs  therefore bn? 
bcr  tlje  migljtp  hanb  of  Gob ,  rhathec 
map  crait  pou  in  nuc  time, 

7  Catling  all  pour  tare  bpon  him, 
fo2bccarcthfo2pou. 

8  26c  fobcr  ,bc  bigiiant :  becaufc  pour 
abucrfarp  the  beuill,as  a  roaring  fLion 
waiii rrh  about,  fcclutig  Whom  he  may 
beuoure. 

9  Whom  rcfifl  flcbfau"  in  the  faith, 
bnolbing  tljat  the  fame  afflictions  are 
accomplifbcb  in  pour  bjcttncn  that  are 
tntljcibo2lb. 

io  26ut  tlje  Gob  of  ail  grace  tbho 
hath  caiicu  bs  into  hisjctcrnail  glojp  bp 
Ch2ia  3(cfus,  after  tljat pchauc  fuffe^ 
rcbaibljilc,  mabe  poiipcrfctt,  Oabltfl;, 
flrcugthcn,fettlcpou. 

1 1  %o  ljtmbccglo2p  anb  Dominion 
f02cucranb  eucr.  ^mcn. 

n  26p5>piuanusafaitljfullb20thcr 

bnto 


\\0rt&  rmtch 
at  tnjot  u. 


l\Or,ovtr- 

ruling. 


Precious  faith. Chap.j.        Who  are  bli ride. 


|  Or,*/. 


bnto  pou,  ( as  3  mppofc )  31  hauc  tt>rit 
tcnbricflp,  crborting,  $tcmfpmg,that 
tbis  is  the  true  grace  of  ©on  ibher  cin  pc 
ftanb. 
1 1  %\)t  Church  tljat  is  at  asabplon 


j  cleeteb.togctbec  lbirb  pou,falutetb  pou, 
anb  (o  doth  partus  mp  tonne. 

i+  dSrcete  pec  one  another  rbitb  a 
buTc  of  chantp:  ^cacebcevbtth  pou  an 
(that  arcinCbrift  Jems.  3uncn. 


,THE  SECOND  EPISTLE 

:enerall  of  Peter. 


CHAP.    I. 

Confirming  them  in  hope  of  the  increafe  of 
Gods  graces,.  5  he  exhorteth  them  by  faith, 
and  ^ood  workes,to  make  their  calling  fure: 
12.  Whereot  hee  is  carefull  to  remember 
them,knowing  that  his  death  is  at  hand :  1 6 
And  warneth  them  to  be  conftant  in  the  faith 
of  Chrrft  ,  who  is  the  true  Sonne  of  God,  by 
the  eve  witnefTe  of  the  Apoftles  beholding 
hisMaieftie,  and  by  theteffimonieof  the  Fa- 
ther ,  and  the  Prophets. 

3Jmon  $ctet ,  a 

x  (truant  f  an  &= 

;pottlc  of  3Jefus 

"  Cbrttt ,  to  tljcm 

that  hauc  obtat= 

neb  like  precious 

ifaith  rbttb  bs, 

through  the  rigl> 

tcoufnes  of  <£>ob, 

anb  out  S>auiout  3Jefus  Cbnft. 

x  derate  anb  peace  bcmultipliebbn* 
to  pou  through  the  mtorblcbge  of  C5ob, 
anbof3Jcfusour!Lorb, 

j  2tcco?bmg  as  his  btutne  potber 
hath  gtucn  bnto  bs  all  things  that  per- 
tainebnto  life  anb  goblmcs,  through  the 
fmotblcbge  of  him  that  hatb  tallcb  bs 
l|toglorpanbbcrtuc. 

4  3D©l)ercbp  arc  giuen  bnto  1os  tp 
eeeotng  great  anb  prcctons  promites, 
that  bp  thefc  pou  might  bee  partakers 
oftheDiuincnaturcbauingcfcapeotbe 
corruption  that  is  in  the  lborlb  though 
lutt. 

5  3lnb  bcfibcs  tl)is ,  giuingailbil^ 
gence,aDDetopoutfaitb,bcrtuc;anbto 
bertucunoiblcbge, 

6  anb  to  bnoiblcbge ,  temperance ; 
anb  to  temperance,  panence  ■>  anb  to  pa? 
ticncc,goblinc{rcj 


7  3Jnb  to  goblinclTcbrotbcrlp  Kinfr 
nctrc;anb  tobrothctlp  Binoncffc,  cfja? 
ritic. 

s  if  0?  if  thefe  things  be  in  pott ,  anb 
abonnb,  thep  mane  pou  that  pec  (ball 
neither  be  barren,  no?  bnfratfull  m  the 
tmorolebge  of  our&orbllcrusCbrift. 

9  2SntbcctbatiacRctbtbcfctbings, 
isblmb ,  anb  cannot  fee  farrc  off,  ano 
hath  forgotten  that  hce  ibas  purgcb 
from  his  olbfinnes. 

10  rehcrcfiw,  the  rather,  brethren, 
giuc  Diligence  to  mabc  pour  calling  anb 
election  furc:  for  ifpcbocthefc  things, 
pc  (hall  nener  fall. 

1 1  ifor  fo  an  entrance  (hail  be  mini- 
Qrcbbnto  pou  abunoantlp ,  into  the  e* 
tictlamng  mngbomc  of  our  jiorb  anb 
Sauiour'jcuisCbritt. 

ii  nahereforc  3  ibil  not  be  negligent 
to  put  pou  aiibapesin  remembrance  of 
thefc  tilings,  though  pceunoib  them, 
anb  be  ftablilhcb  in  theprefent  trncth. 

13  J9ea,3,tbinfecitmeete,aslongas 
3  am  in  this  tabernacle ,  to  (litre  pou 
bp ,  bp  putting  pou  m  remembrance: 

H  l&notbmg  that  (bortlp  3  mnQ 
put  off  this  mp  Xabernaclc ,  eucn  as 
*our  ilorb  31cfus  Cbrift  hath(bcibcb 
mcc. 

15  #orcoucr,3Ftt>nienbcuour,tbat 
pou  map  bee  able  after  mp  beccafe,  to 
hauc  thefc  things  allbapcs  in  remem* 
brance. 

16  if  or  tbec  hauc  not  foiioibcb  tun* 
nmglp  bcuifeb  fables,  lbbcnibccmabc 
(mo  Vocn  bnto  pou  the  pom  c  r  anb  com 
ming  of  our  fLorb  gjefas  Cljrift,  but 
tberc  cpe  ttntneflcs  of  his  £J3aicfhe. 

17  if  or  Ijcc  recctucb  from  ©ob  the 
jfathechonouranb  giorp,ibbcn  there 
came  fuch  a  boice  to  him  from  the  creel* 

lent 


*Ioh.  21.17 


Falfe  teachers. 


up 


eter. 


Bal 


aamswav. 


\\0r,aariy 

lime. 


\0r ,  Ufcutt- 
omwayei, 
as  Come  co- 
pici  rcadc 


lent  glow .  £his  tsmp  bcloueD  3>onne 
mibhomjam  tbellplcafeb. 

is  anb  this  boice  Vbhirt)  came  from 
heauenibcehcarD,ibhen  tbc  Ibere  lbith 
htm  m  the  holp  mount. 

19  Wc  t)au c  alfo  a mozc  fur r  lb  020  o  f 
p2ophectc,ibhcteunto  pee  Doeib ell  that 
pe  tafec  hctDe ,  as  unto  a  light  that  u> 
ncth  m  a  DarUc  plate,  bntill  the  Dap 
Datbne.anD  tlje  Dap  ftaereanfetnpour 
hearts: 

10  nnotbtngthisfirfl,thatnop?o< 
pheep  of  the  Scripture  is  of  anp  pnuate 
■Jnrcrpjctation: 

ii  5F02  the  pjopherie  tame  not  [|in 
olbe  time  bp  the  null  of  man :  but  holp 
men  of  ©on  fpatteastheptberemoucD 
bp  the  holp  <5ho&. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  He  (oretellerh  them  of  falfc  teachers,  (View- 
ing the  impietie  ,  and  punifhment  both  of 
them  and  their  followers  :  7  from  which 
the  godly  fhall  bee  deliucred,as  Lot  was  out 
ofSodom  :  io  and  more  fully  defcribeth  the 
manners  of  thofe  prophane,  and  blafphe- 
mous  feducers,  whereby  they  may  be  the  b*t- 
terknowen.and  auoided. 

5Ut  there  Ibcre  falfc  p?o- 
«£  phcts  alfo  among  the  pco- 1 
iccucn  as  there  (hall  bee  I 
alfc  teachers  amongpou, 
•sme&a.  ibho  pjtutlp  (hall  bung  in 
Damnable  heretics ,  cucn  Denying  the 
UozDthat  bought  them,  anD  bung  bp< 
on  themfclucs  ftbtft  beftrucnon. 

i  anDmanp  (hall  follotb  their]!  per 
nlrious  lbapcs,  bp  rcafon  of  ibhom  the 
lbapofmieth  (ball  be  cutll  fpoltcn  of: 

3  anD  through  couctoufncffc  (l)all 
the?  lbith  fameb  Uwds ,  matte  mar* 
chanbifc  of  pou,  Ibhofc  tubgement  notb 
of  a  long  nmc  linger  cth  not ,  anb  their 
banmation  flumhzcth  not. 

4  5Foz  if  ©ob  fparcb  not  the  an- 
gels that  fitincb ,  but  tad  thcmbotbne 
to  hell ,  j;»d  DcluicrcD  them  into  chames 
of  DarhcncfTc,  to  be  refcrucb  bnto  uibg- 
tnent  : 

5  3lnb  fparcb  not  the  olblbozlb,  but 
faueb  /5oahthc  ctght  perfon  a  pzeacher 
of  righteoufncffc ,  bringing  in  the  ftoob 
bpon  the  ib02lD  of  tbc  bngoDlp : 

6  anD  turning  the  emes  of  S>oDom 
anb  (5omo2rhamto  afbes,  conbcinncb 
them  mtb  an  oucrtb20lbc ,  malting 
them  an  cnfamplcbnto  tljofc  that  after 
(boulbltucbngoblp: 

7  ^nb  bcUiicrcb  luft  lLot ,  bcrto 


|  men. 

IliJc  8.  8 


J]  Some 
read  Agtanji 
shtmfcluts. 


toiththcfuthptonuerfationof  the  tblt* 
Ucb: 

8  (jFoz  that  righteousman  Duelling 
amongthcnt,infccingf  hcanng,bercb 
his  righteous  foulc  from  bap  to  bap, 
ttnth  dieuuniaibfuil  beebs.) 

9  Xhc  H02D  bnotticth  hotb  to  bell? 
ucrthe  goblpout  of  temptanons,  anb 
to  refcrue  the  bntuft  bnto  the  bap  of 
luogcmentto  bcpunifljcb: 

io  25utthicflp  them  that  ibarbcaf 
terthe  flefhinthc  luft  of  bncleanncffe, 
anbDefpifcllgoucrnment.  $teutmptu#|  ior>««- 
ons  are  they;  Ccifc  ibillcb :  thep  are  not  a; 
fraib  to  fpeauc  cutll  of  Dignities : 

ii  nahcreas  angels  ibhuh  arc  grca; 
ter  in polber anb  might,  bnngnotrau 
lingaccufation  Hagamtt  tljcin  bcfo:c  the 
IL02D. 

n  25utthefe,as  natural  bmitbeafts 
mabc  to  bee  tafecn  anD  bcftropeD fpcatie 
cutll  of  the  things  that  thep  buDcr 
ftanD  not>  and  Ojall  btterlp  penth  in 
their  oibncco;rttpnou, 

ij  And  Qjau  reteiue  the  retbarb  of 
bnrighteoufneffe ,  as  thep  that  count tt 
pleafure  to  not  in  the  Dap  time :  S>pots 
thev  are  anD  blenufbes,  fp02tmg  them* 
fclues  tt)Uh  their  otbne  Dctctutngs, 
Ibhfle  thep  fcaft  ibtth  pou: 

14  l^autng  eves  ful  of  taDitltectc  anD  to-"-* 
that  tannot  ceafc  from  Onnc ,  begutung  ■ 
bnftablefouies :  an  heart  thep  haueer-' 
crcifeDibith  touctous  pjatnfcs:  turfeb 
chilbzen: 

15  nahuU  haue  fotfa&en  the  right 
tbap,anbaregoneaftrap,foiioibingthe 
vbap  of  25aiaam  the  fonne  of  25ofo2,ibbo 
loucb  the  lbages  of  bnrighteoufneffe, 

i6  But tbas r cbubcD  foz  his tntqttttp : 
the  bumbc  affe  fpcaiung  lbith  mans 
boice,fo2babethcmaDnc(Tcofthc$20; 

&*<       , 
17  XhcfearcibellcsibtthontYbater, 

cloubcs  that  arc  tancDibtthatcmpcft, 

to  ibhom  the  milt  of  baraeueffe  ts  to 

fcrucDfo2Cticr. 

is  jfo2ibhcnthepfpca6cgccatilbcl: 

ling  ID02DS  of  bantttc,  thep  allure 

th2ottghthclutts  of  the  flefb ,  through 

much  ibantonneffc,  thofe  that  ibetc 

lltlcanc  efcapcD  from  them  n»ho  liucin 

crrour. 

19  nahflc  thep  p2omifethcm  Itbertie, 
thep  themfclucs  ar  c  the  feruants  of  top 
ruptton :  fo2  of  ibhom  a  man  is  oner* 
tome ,  of  the  fame  is  he  brought  in  bon* 
bagc. 

20  JTo;  if  after  thep  haueeftapcb  the 
polite 


. 


\\Ortfjra 
HtUy  or  a 

fame  read. 


Reuolters.    The       Chap.iij.         day ofthe  Lord. 


fGr.  con- 
),hng. 


pollutions  of  the  Uwlb  through  the 
tmoUrtcbgc  of  fhefLoib  anb  <S>auiour 
Jcttis  Chuft,  toepare  agamc  twang* 
leb  therein  ,™d  ouereomcthe  latter  enb 
is  tbotfe  tbittj  ttjem  ttjctt  the  begins 
ntng. 

ii  ifoi  it  hab  bin  better  fojthem  not 
tohaueRnomcnthcitoap  ofrtgljteoufc 
neffc ,  then  after  thep  haue  mtolbcnit, 
to  tunic  from  thcholpcouiinanbcincnt 
beiiuereb  bnto  them. 

iz  26ut  it  ishappeneb  bnto  them  at? 
eozbtng  to  the  trucpzoucrbc :  Xhebog 
is  tneneb  to  his  ottm  nomit  agatne,aub 
the  folic  that  ibasibaft)eb,to  hcctbai* 
lotbinginthcmire. 

CHAP.    III. 

Hee  afliireth  them  ofthe  certaintie  of  Chriftes 
comming  to  Iudgement,  againft  thofe  fcor- 
ners  who  difpute  againft  it:  8  warning 
the  godly  for  the  long  patience  of  God,  to  ha» 
ffcen  their  repentance.  10  He  defenbeth  al- 
io die  manner  how  the  world  fhall  bee  de- 
fhoyed :  1 1  exhorting  them  from  the  ex- 
pectation thereof,  toallholineffeof  life:  15 
And  againe ,  to  thinks  the  patience  of  God 
to  tend  to  their  faluation,as  Paul  wrote  to 
theminhisEpiftles. 

g^ft!g£&  ^»s  fetonti  Cpiftlc  ( belo* 
8w  neb )  3  norb  tbnte  bnto 
pou,tnbothlbhich3Jftir 
bp  four  pure  minbes  bp 
ibapofrcmcmbjattce: 
1  %hat"pee  map  be  minbfull  of tl)c 
ibozbcs  ibhtch  iberc  fpoften  before  bp 
the  holp  #2ophcts,  anb  of  the  Conv 
manbement  of bs  the  3tpoftles  ofthe 
2Lo2banb£>auiour:  . 

j  imoibing  this  firtt  ,  that  there 
(hail  tonic  in  the  lad  bapes  fcoffers, 
rbai&ing  after  their  olbnc  lulls, 

4  :&tbfaptng,U9hcreisthcp2onufc 
of  his  comming?  j*02  fincc  the  fathers 
fcllaaeepe,  all  things  continue  as  thep 
tberc  fro  the  beginning  ofthe  creation. 

5  5F0J  this  thep  tbtllinglp  arc  igno- 
rant of,  that  bp  the  ujojd  of  d5ob  the 
heauens  tberc  of  olbc,  ano  the  earth 
tttanbing  out  ofthe  tbater ,  anb  in  the 
tbater, 

6  iBhcrcbp  the  ilwlb  that  then 
itas,  being  oucrfloVbco  ibith  tbater, 
pertlheb. 

7  25ut  the  heauens  anb  the  earth 
tbhfch  are  notb  ,bp  the  fame  tbojb  are 


KeptiufJro?c,  refemeb  bnto  fitcagainfl 
the  bap  of  3mbgemcnt,  anb  perbition 
ofbngoblpmcn. 

8  25ut(bcloucb)beenotigno2antof 
this  one  thing,  that  one  bap  is  ibith  the 
?Lo2basathoiu"anbpccrcs,anbathou 
faubpeeresasoncbap. 

9  XhclLozb  isnotflatKccoccrmng 
his  p2omife(  as  fomc  men  count  (lata 
neffc)  but  is  long  fuffrmgtobs-ibaib, 
not  milling  that  anp  (houibpcrilh,  but 
that  all  (houlb  come  to  repentance. 

10  25utthcbap ofthe U,02btbil come 
asathtcfcinthcnigOt.tnthelbhichthe 
heauens  Q)allpaffcaibap  ibith  a  great 
noife,anb  the  Clements  (hall  melt  ibith 
ferucnt  hcatc ,  the  earth  aifo  anb  the 
ttojbs  that  arc  therm  (haibc  burntbp. 

1 1  Scctngthcnthatauthefe  things 
(IjailbcbilTolucb,  ©hat  mancr  of  per? 
:  fons  ought  pe  to  be  in  all  holp  conucrfa? 
turn,  anb  goblineffe, 

\i  ||!Looftiug  foz  anb  hatting  bnto 
the  comming  of  the  bap  of  csob,  tbljcre^ 
mfheheauens  being  on  6re  fljaibc  bit 
folucb ,  anb  the  Clements  (hail  melt 
tbithferuenthcat. 

13  /I5cuerthclcaeibce,acco2bingto 
hisp2omifc,looRefo2nelbhcauens,anb 
a  ncU)  earth,  ibhcrctn  blbclieth  rightc* 
oufttcfTe. 

14  nahercfoze  (beloucb)  feeing  that 
pe  loonc  foz  fitch  things,bc  biligcnt  that 
pe  map  be  fouttb  of  him  in  pcatc,Vbitl> 
out  fpot.anb  blamclcffe. 

1 5  3lnb  account  that  the  long  fuffc; 
ring  of  the?Lo2b  is  faiuation ,  cucnas 
oiir  beloucb  brother  paul  alfo ,  accoj^ 
bmg  to  the  tbifebomc  giucn  bnto  htm, 
hath  ttmttcn  bnto  pott. 

16  :3s  alfo  mail  his Cpittics,  fpca- 
King  in  them  of  thefe  things ,  m  which 
arc  Tome  things  harb  to  be  bnberttoob, 
tbhich  thep  that  are  bnicarncb  anb 
bnftablc  rbjeft ,  as  thepboc  alfo  the  o 
thcr  Scriptures, bnto thctr  olbnc  be 
ttruction. 

17  jaetljcrcfojc, beloucb,  fccingpcc 
bnotb  theic  thmgs  befiw ,  bclbarc  leftpec 
alfo  being  leb  atbap  ibith  the  er rour  of 
the  lbicucb,fall  from  pour  olbnc  ttcb 
fattneflc. 

18  2Sut  groVbctn  grace,  anb  in  the 
tmoiblcbgcof  our  H020  anb  £>atuour 
gjefus  Ch2ift:to  him  be  glozp  both  nott) 
anbf02cucr.  3lmcn. 

i^THE 


the  com- 
mtng. 


God  is  light. 


I.Iohn.  OurAd 


uocate. 


^THE  FIRST  EPISTLE 


generallof  Iohn. 


C  H  A  P.     I. 

He  defenbeth  the  perfon  of  Chrift,in  whome 
v.  chaue  eternal  life,by  acomunion  with  God: 
^  to  which  we  mult  adioiue  holincfTe  ol  life, to 
tefhfiethe  truethotthat  out  communion  and 
prorelsionof  taith,  asalfoto  allure  vs  of  the 
forgmeneffeotourlinnesby  Chrifts  death. 

feat  lbbicli  ibas 


from  v  beginning, 
lbbicbUiec  hauc 
hearb.ibhicbibec 
hauc  fecne  lbttft 
our  c^cs,  lbbicb 
tbec  tjatic  laobcD 
Upon ,  anb  our 
haubs  hauc  Ijam 
DIcd  of  the  lbozb  of  life. 

i   f;fo2tbclifcibasntamfcftcb,anD 
lbe  banc  fccncit,anD  bcare  ibitncs,anb; 
ft)rni  bnto  row  that  ctcrnail  life  lbbicb  i 
mas  ttutb  toe  father , anD  ibas  manife* ! 
QeDbntobS.) 

5  Xljat  lbbicb  tbec banc  fecne  anb ; 
bcarD,Declarc  lbe  bnto  row,  that  re  aifo; 
tnar  hauc  feloibfbip  ibith  bs  anb  true- 
lr  our  fciioibft)ip  is  lbttb  the  father, 
anD  limb  bis  Sonne  ^icfusClnilt. 

4  3lnD  thefc  things ttmtc  lbe  bnto 
rou,that  rowr  tor  mar  be  full. 

5  Xhis  then  is  the  meflage  lbbicb 
lbe  hauc  bcarbofbmi^nD  Declare  bnto' 
rou, that  Cnob  is  light ,  anb  m  hint  is  no 
DarUeucffeatail. 

6  ^Jfibc  far  that  lbe  baticfcioibibip 
\bith  Inm,  ano  ibalttc  m  Darlicncffc,  lbc 
licanD  Doc  not  the  trueth. 

7  2Sutifibccibaifteintbcligbt,as 
he  is  in  the  light,  Tbec  hauc  fclioiblbip 
one  limb  another ,  anD  the  biooD  ofjjc 
fusCbnfrbis  Sonne  clenfctbbs  from 
all  fume. 

S  3Iflbc  fay  that  lbe  baucnofmnc, 
Tbe  Df  ceme  our  femes ,  anD  the  tructh  is 
notinbs. 

*  3)f 'be  confeffe  our  rmncs ,  hec  is 
faitbmil,  9  tuft  to  fo;guicbs  our  fumes, 


anb  to  cleaufc  bs  from  all  bnnghte; 
oufneffc. 

io^fibcfarthatrbcljauejujtfinncD, 
ibec  matte  htm  a  uar,  anb  bis  lbozbts 
notinbs. 

CHAP.    II. 

i  Hccomlorteth  them  againltdie  linnesofin- 
hrmine.  j  Ri^htlytoknowGod,is  to  keepe 
his  commaundements,  j  to  loue  our  bre- 
thren, 15  and  not  to  loue  the  world.  |8  We 
muft  beware  ot  leduccrs:  10  from  whofe 
deceits  the  godly  are  late  preleruedbyperfe< 
uenmcein  fauh,<(ndholinelieotlife. 

u  little  cbilbmt,  tbefe 
things  lbmc  31  bnto  row, 


?l^;$i  I  tbatrefmncnot.  anD  if  a 
353  3  nr  man  fume,  lbe  hauc  an 
^i^Duotate  lbittj  the  fn 
tljcr,  3dm  Ctmft  tljc  righteous : 

i  anD  he  is  the  pjopmation  foz  owe 
fumes :  anb  not  foz  ours  onclr .  butaifo 
fo;  the  fumes  of  the  lbbolc  ibo;ID. 

3  anD  hereby  lbcc  Doe  fenoibc  that 
lbe  imolb  bnn,tfibr  tuepe  I)  is  commati* 
1  Dements. 

+  fee  thatfaith,3i  ftnoibr  bim,  anb 
Uecpcthnothiscommanbcmcnts,  isa 
Irer ,  anb  the  tructhis  not  in  hmi. 

5  But  lbho  fo  fcecpeth  his  lbozb ,  in 
him  berclr  is  the  lone  of  Gob  perfecteb: 
hcrebv  tmolb  lbe  that  lbe  arc  m  him. 

6  fee  that  faycth  he  abibctb  m  htm, 
ought  hmifcifc  alfo  fo  to  ibaifcc,cucn  as 
hcmaikcD. 

7  23zethzen  3  lbntc  no  nclb  com; 
;  manbement  bnto  rou,  but  an  olbc  com-- 

manDcmcntibhitl)  rehab  from  the  be- 
ginning :  the  olD  commanDcmcnt  is  the 
,  lbozD  lbhith  re  l)awe  be arb  from  tljc  bc> 
i  ginning, 

8  againc ,  a  nclb  commanbement 
3  lb  wc  bnto  rou ,  lbbicb  tbmg is  true 
m  him  anD  in  rou :  becaufe  the  barUc^ 
neffe  is  pad  ,  anb  the  true  light  noib 
fbutctl). 

9  fee  that  faith  be  ts  ui  the  light,  anb 

hateth 


The  1  aft  time. 


Ch; 


.p.nj, 


God 


s^reatloue. 


\g,-.(cAndiii 


batetlj  l)t0  b:otl)cr,  is  m  batacncfJc 
cuenbntiUnoib. 

10  fycc  tbat  louctb  !)»0  b20tbec,abi> 
bctlj  m  tbe  Ugbt,anb  theceis  none  occa- 
[ion  oft  (tumbling  in  Dun. 

n  2Sut  be  tljat  batctbbisbjotber,is 
in  barltnr  dcano  ibaincrb  in  Dartnicfre, 
atio  bnoibetb  not  lbljitbct  l)cc  goctb, 
becanfc  tbat  DarBtieffeljatljblmbco  bis 
epcs. 

ir  3J  lbntc  bnto  pou,  uttle efjilbicn, 
bttaufc  pout  fumes  arc  fojgiucn  pou 
fo2l)i0iI5amc0fabc. 

13  31  *bntePntopou,fatbers,bccaufe 
pec  rjaucbnoibcn  l)tm  tljat  is  from  tl)c 
beginning.  3f  Vbiitc  bnto  vou,poung 
men,  bciaufc  von  Dauc  oucccomc  tljc 
unclteb  one.  3f  lbntc  bnto  pou,  little 
tbilbjen,  bctaufe  pec bauc  fenovbentljc 
jfatber. 

14  3  Ijaue  ttmtteu  bnto  pou,  fa 
tbetg.becaufcpebaueRtioibcn  bun  that 
is  from  tbc  beginning,  3njaueumttcn 
bnto  pou ,  poung  men,  bctaufe  pecare 
flcong,  anb  tbc  tbozti  of  ©00  abibctlj 
in  pou,  anb  pec  bauc  oucccomc  tbettut* 
ttcbonc. 

15  2,ouenottl)cttJ02lb,neitl)ectl)c 
tilings  that  ace  in  tbcuwlb.  31f  anp 
man  louc  tljc  uwid,  tljc  lone  of  tljc  fa- 
tberisnotmljtm. 

16  if 02  all  tljat  is  m  the  lb02lo,tbe 
luftof  tl)c  flcfb,tbc luftof  tbc epcs,ano 
tl)t  piioe  of  life  ,is  not  of  tlje  5Fatl)  cr,but 
isotrtjcuwib. 

17  3tno  tlje  Vbo2lb  paffetb  atbap, 
anb  tbc  lufi  tbercof ,  but  bee  tbat  ooctlj 
tbe  lbill  of  d3ob,abiDetb  fo2  cucr. 

is  fLittlecbtU»cn,it  istbclattnme : 
ano  as  pee  baue  Ijearo  tbat  3ntitljnft 
(ball come,  cucn  noib  are  tl)crc  many 
^nticl)2itts,  ttJljetcbp  tbec  nnorb  tbat  tt 
is  tljc  latt  time. 

19  Xfjeplbentout  ftombs,buttbcp 
mere  not  of  bs :  foz  if  tbcp  ban  becne  of 
bs,  tbcp  iboulb  no  Doubt  bauc  contfc 
nuco  lbltb  bs:  but  they  went  out  tbattbey 
mlgbtbcmaocmamfcfUbattbcpiberc 
not  all  of  bs. 

io  But  ye  banc  anbnetton  from  tljc 
bolp  £>ne,ano  pc  tmotb  all  tilings. 

ii  31  banc  not  Written  unto  pou.be* 
caufe  ycc  bnoiu  not  tbc  tructb:  butbe^ 
caufc  peknou)  it.auo  tbat  no  uc  is  oftlje 

tenet  b. 

22  uabo  is  a  lice  ,but  bee  tbat  ociuctb 
tbat  3Jcfusis  tbeCbjift;  bee  is  3ntt; 
cbzlft.tbat  bcnpetlj  tljc  5fatljcr,atu>  tlje 
Sonne. 


13  nabofocuer  Dcmctb  tbc  Sonne, 
tljc  fame  batb  not  tbc  jFatljer :  but  he  that 

acknowledged}  the  Sonne,  hath  the  Father  a  lib, 

2+  iLct  tbat  tI)crcfo2c  abioc  in  you 
tbbnb  pee  bauc  beam  from  tbc  begin- 
ning :tftljanbbicbpc  bauc  bearo  from 
tbe  beginning  (ball  remame  m  pou,  pec 
alfo  (l)ail  continue  in  tljc  Sonne  ,anb  m 
tbc5Fatbcr. 

25  3inD  tbis  is  tbe  p2onufc  tbatljcc 
batl)  P20inlfc0  bS.euen  ctcrnall  life. 

i6  Xljcfc  tljuigs  bauc  3  wnttcn 
bnto  you,  concerning  tljcm  tljat  febuce 
you. 

27  But  tbe  anointing  ibbiclj  pc  bauc 
rcceiucb  of  bim.abibctlj  in  you :  anb  pec 
tieet)  nottbatanpman  tcacb  you:  2i5ut, 
as  tbc  fame  anomnng  teaebctb  you  of 
ailtblngs,  antiis  tructb  ,ano  is  no  Ivc: 
ano  cucn  as  it  batlj  taugljt  pou,pc  fljau 
abiDcmllbim. 

28  3tnbnoib,Iittle  tbilb2cn,abibcin 
bun.tbatibbcn  bee  (bail  appcacc,  luec 
map  bauc  coufiocticc,  ano  not  becauja- 
mcb  before  bun  at  bis  comnung. 

29  3)f  pc  IntoVb  tljat  be  is  ngbtcous, 
||  pc  ImoU)  tbat  cuerp  oncibbiclj  boctlj 
ngljtcoufncffc,isbo?nc  of  Dim. 

CHAP.    HI. 

Hee  declareth  the  fmgular  lone  of  God  towards 
vs.inmakingvshis  formes:  5  Who  there- 
fore ought  obediently  to  kcepe  his  cora- 
maundements ,  1 1  As  alio  brotherly  to 
loue  one  another. 

£  cbolbc,  tbbat  manner  of 

W.  lone  tljc  ifatbec  batlj  bc^ 

j§J  ftoujco  bpon  ps,  tljat  uxc 

(l)ouio  becaiicP  tbc  fomics 

OfC50D:tlJCrf02CtbClb02lD 

anoibcti)  bs  no  t ,  becaufc  it  buclbe  Ijim 
not. 

2  Bclouciuiolb  arc  ibe  tbc  tonnes 
of  d5oo,  ano  it  ooctb  not  pet  appcarc, 
robatibcc  n>aii  be :  but  lbcc  bnoib.tbat 
lbben  be  (liali  appcarcibc  (l)ail  bee  UUc 
bun :  fo2  )bc  Qiailfce  Ijim  as  be  is. 

3  3uio  cucrp  man  tbat  batb  tbis 
Dope  in  Dim,  punfictb  Ijimfclfc,  cucn  as 
be  is  pure. 

+  nabofocucc  committctb  finne, 
tranfgrcffctb  alto  tbc  ia)bc:to2  funic  is 
tbc  traufgrcfTion  of  tbc  laiP. 

5  ^no  ft  Biiotti  tbat  bec  lbas  mani= 
fcftetj  to  tahc  avbap  our  fumes,  ano  in 
Ijitmsnoftnnc. 

6  nabotoeucrabibctbinbimXumctb 
not :  lbbotocucr  fmnctb,batlj  not  fecne 


I  Or,  if. 


||0r^.i3W// 


bim.ncitbcr  Kiiolbcn  Ijim. 


7  H* 


Oftrueloue. 


I.Iohn. 


Trie  the  fi 


pints. 


|  Or,  com - 
wandement, 


t  O.pir- 

fve.\dt 


7  ?Littlccljilb?cn,letnomanoccciuc 
pou :  He  tljatboth  tigHteoufncs>is  rtgh* 
tcous,euen  as  he  ts  righteous. 

8  «?ctHatcontmittetH Cinncisof  the 
beufll,  fo?  ttjcDcuill  GnnctH  from  tlje  bc< 
ginning :  fo?  this  purpofc  tljc  5>onnc  of 
©ob  ibas  mantfcfleb,tHat  He  might  be* 
Or  op  tl)C  lbojfcs  of  the  bCUfll. 

9  i©Horocucri6b02ncof©ob,both 
not  tonmut  finne:fojhisCccbercmai* 
net!)  in  Him,anb  he  cannot  Gnne,bccaufe 
he  is  borne  of  ©ob. 

io  %w  this  ttjc  ci)tu»cn  of  ©ob  ace 
manifell,  anb  the  thilbjen  of  the  bcutll : 
lbhofocucr  bocth  not  rigHtcoufncffc,  is 
not  of  ©ob,ncithcr  H«  tljatloucthnot 
hisbzotljer. 

1 1  5Fo?  this  ts  the  HmcffagctHat  pec 
Hcatbfrom  tlje  bcgtnnutg,that  ibec 
CHoiUbioiicoHC  another. 

ir  /3otasCatn,whorbasoftl)atrbit5 
kto  one,  anb  acibc  hisbjotljct :  anb 
itoDercfojc  fletbe  Hce  Ijinw  bcranfe  tyis 
oibnc  rbo?bcs  tberc  cutll,  anbljistyo* 
tljcts  righteous. 

i  j  gametic  not,  mp  bjcttttcn,  if  tlje 
ttwlbljatepou. 

14  naccmioib  that  Utce  haue  paffeb 
fcotn  be  atli  bnto  life,  bttaufe  tbec  lone 
the  tycthnn :  He  that  loucth  not  His  b;o- 
tljcr,abibctljinbcatlj. 

15  naijofocucr  ijatcth  His  bjotrjet,is 
a  murthctcr ,  ant>  pectmotbe  tljat  no 
murthcrcr  IjatH  eternal!  life  abibtng  in 
Htm. 

i6  hereby  pctccittc  Kbce  the  louc  of 
©ob,  becattfc  Ijc  lapb  bourne  his  life  fo? 
bs,  anb  mcc  ouglu  to  lap  bourne  our 
lutes  fonhcb,jcth2cn. 

17  2Sut  lbho  fo  ijatf)  this  Uwlbs 
goob,  anb  feetHHts  toother  hath  neeb, 
anb  (l)uttctl)  bp  l)ts  boUicls  of  compaf- 
Ron  from  Him;hottj  blbcllctljtnc  loue 
of©obtnhlm; 

18  99p  itttlc  chiRwen ,  let  bs  not  louc 
m  lbojb,  neither  in  tongue,  but  inbeebe 
atibintructh. 

19  3Htb  Hereby  Ujcc  Itnoib  that  tbte 
arc  of  the  tructh ,  anb  (Hall t affiirc our 
Hearts  befoK  Htm. 

20  ifo;  if  our  Heart  conbcnmc  bs, 
(5oo  is  greater  then  our  Heart,  ano 
Imotbcth  all  things. 

z\  Gcioucb,  if  our  Heart  conbemne 
bs  not ,  then  banc  Ujcc  coufiocncc  to- 
ttjarbs©ob. 

ii  ^noUiHatrocueribcarhcAbccre 
tctue  of  l)im ,  bctaufe  frc  Uccpc  His  torn 
manbement,  anb  boetljofc  things  that 


arc  pleating  m  hts  figljt. 

Z3  3nbtljisishtscommanbemcnt, 
tHatU)cfl)OulbbclccucontHc/15amcof 
His&onnc^cfusChnlt,  anb  louc  one 
another,  as  ijcc  gauc  bs  commanbe* 
ment. 

14  3fnb  Hct  tHat  fecepctH  His  torn* 
manbemcntsbttjcllctlj  in  Hun  ,anbHee 
in  Him :  anb  Hereby  Xbcemiolb  tljat  hee 
abibctHin  bs,  bp  tlje  fptrit  ibHtelj  H« 
HatHgiucnbs. 

CHAP.     IIII. 

He  wameththem  nottobeleeueall  teachers, 
who  boaft  of  the  fpirit,but  to  try  them  by  the 
rules  ofthe  Catholike  faith:  7  and  by  many 
reafons  exhorteth  to  biotherly  loue. 

€loucb,bclceue  not  cuer  V 

fptrtt,  but  trie  tHe  fpirits, 

u>ljcthcrtheparcof©ob: 

bctaufe  manp  falfc  p:o 

pHcts  are  gone  out  into 

tHcibojlb. 

%  $eTcbpRnottipctHefpirttof©ob: 

cuerp  fpirtt  that  tonfefTcth  tHat  3Je- 

fus  CHuft  is  tome  in  the  ficfl),is  of  (Bob. 

3  3nbcuerp  Spirit  that  ronfcffctlj 
not  tljat  35cfus  Ctjnft  is  tome  in  the 
flefH,isnotof(i5ob:  anb  this  is  that  £■- 
nt  of  3nticH?(& ,  ibHcrcof  pou  Haue 
Hearb,  tHat  it  (Houib  come,  anb  men 
notb  aireabp  ts  it  in  tHc  Vbojlb. 

4  Pcarcof(5ob,iitticcHilb?cn,anb 
Haue  oucrcotnc  tHcm:  becaufe  greater 
isHc  tHat  ts  m  pou,ti)cn  He  tljat  ism  tlje 

IbOJlD. 

5  XHcp  arc  of  tlje  ttto?lb  :  tHercfojc 
fpeabc  thev  of  tHctbo;tlb,  anb  tHe  Uio;lb 
HcarctHtHem. 

6  i©earcof©ob:HcetHatmtoibctlj 
d5ob,HcarctHbs:Hc  tljat  tsnot  of  d5ob 
HearctH  notbs,  HcrcbpUnott)  Uicctljc 
fptrit  oftructH,anbtHcfptritoferrour. 

7  23eloucb,  let  bs  loue  one  ano- 
tHcr  ,fo?Iouctsof  ©oo :  anb  cuerv  one 
tHat  louctlj.is  borne  of  ©ob  anb  ftnou> 
ctH©ob. 

8  ^cc  tljat lottctH  not,  UnottictH  not 
©ob  :foi  ©ob  is  loue. 

9  3Jn  tHts  ibas  manifeOcb  tHc  lone 
of©ootolbarbs  bs,  bctaufe  tHat©ob 
fent  His  onlp  begotten  ^>onnc  into  tlje 
U)ojlb,tljattt)c  nttgljt  line  tljzougH  Him. 

10  herein  is  louc, not  tHattticcloucb 
©ob,buttHatHclouebbs,  anbfcntHis 
Sonne  to  be  p  propitiation  fo?  our  Gns. 

1 1  26cl0UCb,tf©0Dfol0UCD  PS,  IbCC 

ongljt  alfo  to  louc  one  another, 
u  JI5o  man  Ijatlj  fectic  ©ob  at  anp 

tune. 


Godsl 


oue. 


Ch; 


ap.v. 


P 


Th 


reewitncllcs. 


ire 


j  Gr.  hue 
vnth  vs. 


time.  3Jf  £dcc  ioue  one  another ,  <Sob 
ttbcUett)int>0,attB!)l5louetsperfcctcti 
inbs. 

13  ^ctcbptmotbibeetDatrbebrbell 
in  Dim  anb  De  in  bs,becaufcDce  DatD  gt 
uenbs  of  Dis  Spirit. 

14  anbtbeljauefecne,anbboctc(fc 
Be,  tDat  tDe  jf atfjer  fcnt  tl)c  Sonne  to  be 
tDc  Sauiour  oftf)c  ibojlb. 

15  jBljofoeuerfliautotifcffctljat'J^ 
fus  is  tDe  Sonne  of  d5ob,C5obbM)cUctD 
inDim,anbDeln<15ob. 

16  anb  toe  lwnc  nnolbcn  anb  bclce* 
ucb  tDe  louc  tljat  <Eod  DatD  to  bs.  €>ob 
tsione,  anb  Dee  tDat  bibeiictD  mioue, 
bru  clletD  in  <0ob,anb  450b  in  Dim. 

17  ^crcinistourloucmabcperfeet, 
tiiat  tfbce  map  Daue  bolbncCTc  in  tDe  oap 
cf3JuDgcmcnt,  becaufe  as  Dee  is,  fo  are 
rue  m  tDis  tt>o?lb. 

18  %Decetsnofearemioue,butper? 
fectlouc  cattctlj  out  fearc :  bccaufefcare 
DatD  tojmcnt :  Dee  tljat  fcaretD,  is  not 
maoc  perfect  in  lone. 

19  D3c  lotte  ijim :  bccaufc  Dec  fira  lo- 
uebbs.  _ 

zo  gjf  a  man  rap ,  3  loue  ©o& >  anb 
DatctDD«sb?otDcr,Dcisaipar.5Fo?D« 
tDat  loueflj  not  D«s  bjotljcr  tt>Dom  Dee 
DatD  fecnc,Doib  can  De  louc  d5ob  n>Dom 
JicDatDnotfccnci 

zi  anb  tD»s  eommanbcment  Dane 
tbetcomDim,tDatlje  tbDo  louctD  ©00, 
lone  Dts  bjotDeraifo. 

CHAP.    V. 

Hee  that loueth God,  loueth his children,and 
keepethhisCommandements:  3  which  to 
the  faithful  are  Hght,and  not  grieuous.  9  Ie- 
fusis  the  Sonne  of  God ,  able  tofaue  vs,  14 
and  toheare  our  prayers,  which  wc  make  for 
our  felues,and  for  others. 

Dofomct-  belccnctD  tDat 
Refits  is  tDe  CD?ift\  <s 
borne  of<Sob:  anb  eucrp 
one  tDat  louctD  Dim  tDat 
begate ,  louctD  Dun  alfo 
tDat  is  begotten  of  Dim. 

z  26p  tDts  ibec  Unotb  tDat  *bec  louc 
tDc  eljilbjen  of  <5ob,u>Dcn  tbcloue  <25ob 
anb  BcepeDis  cotninanbcments. 

3  5Fo?  tl;ts  is  tljc  louc  of  d5ob ,  tDat 
sbc  necpe  DiS  commanbcmcnts,anb  Dis 
;ommanbcment5  arcnot  grieuous. 

4  5Po?  VbDatfocucc  is  borne  of  <sob, 
cuercommetD  tDc  tbo?lb ,  anb  tDis  is 
tDe  bictozic  tDat  ouercommetl)  tljc 
«j02lb,cucn  our  fait!). 

5  s@DotsDctDatoucccommctDtDc 


tbo?lb,but  Dc  tDat  beieeuetD  tljat  3Jefas 
is  tDc  Sonne  of  <5oHi 

6  %tys  is  Dec  tDat  came  by  Vbater 
anb  btoob ,  euen  Refits  Cijjift ,  not  bp 
tbater  onelp ,  but  bp  Tbater  anb  bloob : 
anb  it  is  tlje  Spirit  tDat  bcaretD  Vbit- 
ncOe,  becaufe  tDe  Spirit  is  truetD. 

7  5Fo?  tljcre  arc  tftzce  tDat  bearc  w 
eojbtnDeauen,  tlje  5FatDer  ,tDcmojb, 
anb  tDc  hoi?  tiSIjoft  :  anb  tljefc  ttjjee 
ace  one. 

8  anb  tDcre  arc  tD;ee  tDat  bcarc 
ibitnefle  m  eartD,  tDe  Spirit,  anb  tDe 
neater,  anbtDezSloob,  anb  tDcfctD?cc 
agree  in  one. 

9  3JfibcrecciuetDetbitncu"eofnien, 
tDc  ibitnefle of  @ob is  greater  :foj  tljts 
is  tDc  Xbitncffe  of  C500 ,  ibDicD  Dec  IjatD 
tetttfieb  of  Dis  Sonne. 

10  $ce  tDat  beieeuetD  on  tDc  Sonne 
of  <5ob ,  DatD  tDe  xbitneffe  in  Dimfelfe : 
De  tDat  beieeuetD  not  <Bon ,  DatD  mabe 
Dim  a  liar,  becaufe  De  beieeuetD  not  tDc 
rcco:b  tDat  (5ob  gsue  ofDisSonne. 

1 1  anb  tDis  is  tDe  recojb ,  tDat  (Sob 
DatD  gfucn  to  bs  eternall  life ,  anb  tljts 
life  is  in  Dis  Sonne. 

\z  §tt  tDat  DatD  tDe  SotmcDatD 
life;  anb  Dee  tDat  IjatDnot  tljc  Sonne, 
DatD  not  life. 

13  XDcfc  tDings  Dauc  3J  tbntten  bn« 
to  pou  tDat  bclceuc  on  tDe  fi  ante  of  tDc 
^>onne  of  (Sob,tDat  pemap  mtoib,tDat 
veDaue  cternallitfe,  anb  tDat  pec  map 
bclccue  on  tDe  jftamc  of  tljc  Sonne 
ofdsob. 

14  anb  tDis  is  tDe  confidence  tDat 
tbcDaucllinDim,  tDat  if  tbec  afne  aup 
tljing  acco?bing  to  D<s  ttJill ,  Dec  Dea* 
rctljbs. 

15  anbifrbcbnouJtDatDcDtatcbs, 
rbDatfocuer  ibec  affee ,  lbceunoib  tljat 
tbeDaue  tDe  petitions  tDat  tt>ce  befireb 
ofDtm. 

16  ^fanpmanfccDisbjotDcrrmnca 
finnc  which  is  not  bnto  beatD ,  DccfDall 
afbc,  anb  DcfDallgiue  Dim  life  fouDcm 
tDat  finnc  not  bnto  beatD.  ^Dcrc  is  a 
finnc  bnto  beatD :  3Jboc  not  rap  tDat 
DefDalipjapfozit. 

17  SlllbnrigDtcoufncsis finnc,  anb 
tDcreis  a  finnc  not  bnto  Dcatlt . 

18  nacftnoib  tljat  tbDofocucr  is  borne 
ofd5ob,  finnctD  nottbutDcctDatisbcs 
gotten  of  <sob,BccpctD  Dunfclfe ,  anb 
tljat  ibicfecb  one  toucljctlj  Dbn  not. 

19  ^nb  the  anotti  tDat  ibe  arc  of  <©ob, 
ano  tlje  ibljole  ibonb  UetD  in  VbicUcb' 
nefle. 

Z  z         10  anb 


\\Or,cer.- 

cer/iifighim. 


Walking  in  II.Iohn.III.Iohn.   truethandloue. 


20  3tno  ibc  {mora*  that  the  Sonne  of 
Oo d  is  tome ,  ant)  hatl)  gmen  us  an  ton- 
berttanbing  that  tbee  map  Unotbhun 
tUatistruc:  ana  Ibecaceinhtm  that's 


true,  «ien  m  his  Sonne  Jefus  Chnft. 
%tys  is  tl)e  true  <SoD,  anb  etetnatl  life, 
ii  fLtttle  cht.b.cn,Kccpc  pour  felues 
fcom'jDolcs.  ^mcn. 


1  hefecondEpiitle  oflohn. 


Hee  exhorceth  a  cercaine  honourable  matronc, 
with  her  children  ,  to  perfeuere  in  Chriftian 
loue, and  beliefe,  8  left  they  lofe  the  reward 
o(  their  former  profefl  ion:  io  Andtohaue 
nothing  to  doe  with  thofe  feducers  that  bring 
not  the  true  dodtrine  of  Chnft  Iefus. 

$c  eibcr  into  the  elect 
iLabp.anbherchi.bjcn, 
rbhomc  3  loot  in  the 
tructh-anbnot^l  onelp, 
but  alio  all  tlicy  that 
haucftnofbenp  trueth: 
i  ;ffoJthetrucths<aBcU)hichbibcls 
let!)  in  bs,anb  fhaibc  ttnth  t>s  foz  euer : 
3  ©rate  bee  tbitlj  pou,  mcrtic,  anb 
peace  from  C5ob  the  father,  anb  from 
the  fLota  3fefus  Chnlr,  the  Sonne  of 
trjc  father  in  trueth  anb  loue. 

4.  3retoptebgtcatlp,that3Jfounb 
of  thp  chilbjen  ttiaiumg  m  trueth ,  as 
tbee  hauc  rccciueb  a  commaunbement 
from  die  father. 

5  3lnb  now ,  3  befcech  thee  lLabp, 
not  as  though  3  Vbjote  a  neib  coins 
manoementbnto  thee :  but  thatlbhieh 
ibechabfrom  the  beginning,  thatibcc 
loue  one  another. 

6  3lnb  this  is  loue,  that  rucerbaifce 
after  his  Commanocments.  Xhis  is 


theCommanbcment,  that  as  pee  hauc 
hcarb  from  the  beginning,  pec  thoulb 
ibaiHcinit. 

7  5Foz  man? bccciucrsarc cntrcb in- 
to  the  ibozlb ,  lbho  confciTe  not  that 
JcnisChnaiseomcuttheflcfh.  Xhis 
isabecciucr,  anbanSlntichnft. 

8  JLoofee  to  pour  felues ,  that  tbee 
lore  not  thole  things  tbhieh  ibee  hauc 
||  nwougnt ,  butthat  tbe  ceceiuc  afull  rc^ 
ibarb. 

9  nahofoeucr  tranfgretTcth  anb  a- 
bibcth  not  in  the  boctnne  of  Chntt, 
hath  not  uoo :  hee  that  abibcth  In  the 
boctrincofChnft,  he  hath  both  incite 
ther  anb  the  Sonne. 

io  3f  there  tome  anptontopon,  anb 
bjtng  not  this  boctrine ,  retciuc  him  not 
into  pout  houfe ,  neither  bib  him,  <Sob 
fpecb. 

n  jfo:  hee  that  bibbcrh  him  <£>ob 
fpeeb,  is  partafecr  oflnscuiii  beens. 

ii  ^autngmanpthingstotbntebn= 
to  pou  ,31  ibouib  not  uwcruith  paper 
anb  infee ,  but  3  ttttft  to  come  bnto  pon, 
anb  fpeafee  tfacc  to  face ,  that  out  top 
map  be  full. 

13  %l}t  ehilb-cn  of  thp  elect  uller 
grectthec.     3lmcn. 


Some  co- 
pics  rsndtt 
which  jee 
hxtte  gai- 
netLfbw  t')M 
ye  rectinc, 


f  (jr  matah 
: a  mouth. 


^[ThethirdEpiltleof  lohn. 


Hee  commendeth  Gams  tor  his  pietie  <,  and 
hofpitaline  7  to  true  preacners :  y  Com- 
plaining oi  thevnkind  dealing ot  ambitious 
Diotrcphcs  on  tire  contraiy  fide:  11  Whofe 
euill  example  is  not  ro  bee  followed:  11  And 
giucth  fpeciall  tcltimome  to  the  good  re- 
port ot  Demetrius. 

tyceiberbntothctbclbe' 
loucb  <0aius,tbhom3l 
loue  ||  m  the  trueth: 
z  Bcloucb,3i||tt)itha' 
bouc  all  things  that  thou 


mapeft  pjofper  anb  be  in  health ,  enen 
asthpfouiep:ofpcrcth. 

3  jfoz 3  reiopecb  greatlp ibhen  the 
b-crhjcn  came  anb  tettificb  of  the  tenth 
that  is  in  thee,  cuenasthou  njaiacam 
the  trueth. 

4  3  hauc  no  greater  lop ,  then  to 
hcare  that  mp  ehtlbjen  tbaifec  m  trnth. 

5  Bcloueb ,  thon  boett  faithfulip 
nmatfocucr  thou  bocB to  thcffijethicn, 
anb  to  Grangers : 

6  •©hichhaucbozntttimeflcofthp 
charttlc  befo-c  the  Church :  tbhomctf 

thon 


li 


Called  in  Chrift.        Ch; 


P-i 


EuillAngcls. 


tljou  bung  fojibatb  on  tljeie  lourncp 
aftcta  gompfon ,  tnau  fljait  doc  vbcii: 

7  zseeaufctoatfojflis /Barnes  faRe 
the?  Vbtnt  foonD,  taRing  nottjing  of 
tlje  ©entiles. 

8  naettjertfojcougbttorecciucfuclj, 
tbatibemigljt  befeUoU)  fjelperstotlje 
tructlj. 

9  3  ibjote  bnto  tlje  Churtl) ,  but 
2>iotrepljes,  Jbijo  louetlj  to  Dane  ttjc 
pzeemmenceamongtljem,rcccuictDbs 
not. 

io  BaDerefoje  if  ^  tome,  3  tbill  re* 
member  Dts  btebs  tbDtcD  ljcboctD,pja* 
nngagamftbstbttD  malicious  tbojbs : 
anb  not  tontent  tDcretbitD ,  neither 
botD  fjee  Dimfclft  rcttine  tlje  b?etD?cn, 


anb  uwbibbctlj  tDcm  tDattbonlb,  anb 
tafletD  tDem  out  of  tDe  CDutclj. 

1 1  ZBeloueb ,  folloib  not  ttjut  mind) 
is  euill.but  tDat  tbljicD  is  goob.  ??e  tDat 
bofD  goob.ts  of  ©ob:  but  Dee  tljat  DotD 
cuill,tjatD  notfecne  ©oD. 

ir  Demetrius  Ijatlj  goob  rcpojt  of 
all  men,  anb  of  tDettuetD  it  felfe:?ea, 
anb  tbe  alio  beare  rccozb ,  anb  pe  Rnorb 
tl)atourrcto?otstruc. 

13  3  Dab  man?  things  to  tbjite ,  but 
3  tbilinotlbitl)mtteanb  pen  tt»;ite  bn- 
to tljec. 

14  25ut  3  truftjl  fjh.au  Owtlp  fee 
tDce,anb  voce  fljalifpcabc  t  fate  to  fate. 
0cacc  bee  to  tDcc.  4Dur  feienbs  faiutc 
tDcc.  ©rect  tDe  frienDS  bp  name. 


THE     GENERALL 

Epiftleoflude. 


Hee  exhoneth  therutobeeconrtantin  thepro- 
fefsion  of  the  faith.  14  Falfe  teachers  are 
crept  in  to  feduce  them:  for  whole  damna- 
ble doctrine  and  manners  horrible  punifh- 
ment  is  prepared:  xo  Whereas  the  godly, 
by  theafsiftanceof  the  holy  Spiiit.and  pray- 
ers to  God.may  perfeuere,and  grow  in  grace, 
and  keepe  themfelues,and  recouer  others  out 
of  the  fnares  of  thofe  deceiuers. 

©be  tlie  feruant 
of3JefusCh?itt, 
anb  b2otljcc  of 
panics,  to  them 
tDat  are  fantttfc 
eb  bp  ©ob  tDe 
5ratl)er,anbp^ 
ferueb  in  3Jefus 
C|)«ft,rjtaileb: 
-i  Gertie  bnto  pou,anb  peate,anb 
lonebemultiplteb. 

j  ascioueb ,  tbDen  3  gaue  all  bflt* 
gtnte  to  tbjite  bnto  pou  of  tlje  tommon 
faluation :  it  tbas  ncebfull  fiw  mee  to 
Sbnte  bnto  pou ,  anb  erDojt  pou  ctjat 
ve  fljoulb  earneftlp  contenb  fo?  tDe  fattlj 
rbfjtcti  tuas  onte  Deiuiecco  bnto  tlje 
faints. 
4  iFo?  tljeec  arc  ter tainc  men  crept  in 


\Gr  mouth 
to  month. 


bnatbarcs,tbDo  tberc  before  of  oibe  o?> 
bainebto  tbis  tonbemnatton,bngobip 
men,turning  tlje  grace  of  our  ©od  into 
lafnuioufneffc  ,anb  Denping  tljconclp 
Ho?b  ©od ,  %  our  Ho?D  3icfus  Cljjilh 

5  3  tbill  tfjcrcfoje  put  pou  in  re* 
membjanectljougD  ve  once  fenctb  tl)is, 
Dotb  tDat  tlje  ?Lo?b  Daumg  faucb  tfjc 
people  out  of  tlje  lanb  of  €gppt  aftcr^ 
tbarbOeltcoicD  tDcm  tDat  bciceucb  not. 

6  anb  tDe  3ngcls  tbDtclj  Rept  not 
tflcir  II  Brft  cftate,  but  left  tljcir  otbn  Da-- 
bitation,Dc  IjatD  refecuebin  cucrlattmg 
eDaincs  bnber  batRencflc ,  bnto  tlje 
iubgementoffDcgreatbap. 

7  cuen  as  s>obom  anb  oomo^ 
rfta ,  anb  tlje  titics  about  tDcm.tn  liHc 
mancr  giuing  tljemfclues  oucr  to  fornt* 
cation ,  anb  going  after  tttrange  flcfl), 
arefetfo?tl)  fo?  anerample,  fuffctngtlje 
bengeance  of  etcrnail  fire. 

8  Hinerbtfe  aifo  tl)cfe  filtljp  b?ca* 
mersbtfile  tlje  flcfl) ,  befpife Dominion, 
ano  fpeatte  cuill  of  Dignities. 

9  Ptt ^©tcljael  tDe^lrcbaugcMbljen 
tontenbing  ibitlj  toe  beuill ,  l)e  Dtfputeb 
about  tlje  boDp  of^ofes,  Durftnot 
tying  agamlt  Dim  a  railing  actufation, 
butfaib,*%lje|Lo?brebuHe  t^ce. 

2j ioasut 

89 


§0r,prirtcU 
paltiis. 


\Gr. other. 


•Zac.j.2. 


Balaams  reward. 


lud 


e. 


The  laft  time. 


10  asut  theft  fpeafee  cuill  of  tbofc 
things ,  ibbteb  thep  fenom  not :  but 
what  they  tmotbc  naturally,  asbuttej 
bcaftcs ,  in  tbofx  things  ti>n?  corrupt ; 
thcmfelucs. 

ii  100  utito  tl)cni,fo2  tljcp  Ijauc  gone 
in  the  vuap  of  Bain,  anb  rannc  gcecoilp ; 
after  the  crrour  of  JBalaam ,  fo?  tv ' 
ibaro ,  anD  peritheb  in  the  gamfapmg 
ofCozc. 

1 1  Xbefe  arc  fpottes  in  pour  fcafls 
ofcbact'tic,  lbhcn  tljcp  fcaQVbith  pou,j 
fecDing  thcmfelucs  Ibitljout  fcare : 
cloubcs  thep  arc  Without  ibatcr.caricb1 
about  of  lbinbs,  trees  Vubofc  fruit  ttrf* 
tbcrctb,  Without  fruit.tibu'cbcab.plufc 
Bco  up  bp  the  rootcs. 

i  ?  Haging  lbaucs  of  the  fca,foming 
out  their  oibnc  fljamcibanbnngfiars, 
to  tbbom  12  rcfcrueD  the  blac&ucffc  of 
barBcneCTefomicr. 

14.  2nbenochaifo,tbcfcucnthfTom 
2bam,p2opbc{icboftbcfe,  faping,  28c- 
boib,tbc  ?Lo?b  coimmtb  tbith  ten  thou- 
fanos  of  Ins  faints, 

1 5  %o  crccute  iubgement  bpon  all, 
anb  to  conuinte  all  that  are  bngoblp  a- 
mong  them,  of  all  their  bngoblp  beebs 
ibhith  tbcp  bauc bngoblp  toninuttcb, 
anb  of  all  their  fjcarb  fpeache ,  ibbicb 
bngoblp  Cnners  bauc  fpofecn  agamft 
Dim. 


i6  Xbefe  aremurmurers  complain 
1  nets,  lbaltung after  their  ottme  luftes, 
anb  their  mouth  fpeafcctb  great  fuui 
jltngibojbes,  bautng  mens  pecfons  in 
abmirarton  betaufc  of  abuantage. 
I  17  2Sutbcloueb,  remember  pee  the 
ibodbs.ibhicb  VbctcfpoBcn  betide  of  the 
^poOlcs  of  our  !Lo?b  Jefus  ChJift: 

1 8  How  that  the?  tolbc  pou  there 
(houlb  be  moeftcrs  m  the  laQ  ttmcibbo 
fboulbtbalBc  after  their  oibnbngoblp 
lufles. 

I  19  Xbefe  be  they  ftbofeparaterbenv 
felues,fcnfual,hauingnotthefpirit. 

10  25utyecbcloueb,builDmg  top  your 
fclucs  on  pour  mod  holy  faith,  p?apmg 
tn  the  holy  Gbott, 

1 1  Beepc  pour  femes  in  the  loueof 
Gob  ,loo  (uug  fo:  the  mercp  of  our  H,o?b 
3Jefus€hnflbnto  cternauiife. 

n  3no  of  fome  Ijauc  companion, 
maftuigabitrercncc: 

1  j  anb  others  faue  tbith  fearc,pul 
ling  them  ont  of  the  fire :  bating  euen 
the  garment  fpottcb  by  the  flefl). 

z^r  iftotb  bnto  him  that  is  able  to 
Bccpepoufrom  falling,  anb  topjefent 
pou  faultleffc  befoje  the  pjtefenceof  his 
glojpXbitb  crcccbingioy, 

15  Xotbconciyitoitt(E>obouT5>a* 
uiour,bc  gloip  anbniaicftie,bominton 
anbpotbcr,noibanbcuer.  amen. 


^THE 


•Exo.3.,4. 
"  I. Cor.  if. 

21.  coiuir. 
1.18. 

•Hcb.9.14 

"i.Pet.j.j 


•Matt.  14. 
30. 


fTHE    REVELATION 

of  S.  Iohn  the  Diuinc. 


chap.  1. 

4  Iohn  writerh  his  reuelation  to  the  feuenChur- 
ches  ot  Alia,  Signified  by  the  fcucn  golden 
Candleilickes.  7  The  commmg  of  Chnih 
14  His  glouous  power  and  maieihe. 

i^sfe^r!?^-^  $e  Seuoatt- 
''  on  of  3Jcfus 
Chnu\ttihieh 
c  g>  t>  gaue 
bnto  him,  to 
(heme  bnto 
his  fcraants 
things  mhtth 
itntS  (bojtty 
^tomctopalTe, 
anohefentanbfigmfieb  »bp  his  angel 
bnto  his  feruant  John, 

i  seljo  bare  tetow  of  the  ibozb  of 
(Poo ,  anb  of  the  tettimonic  of  3rtus 
Chnft,ano  ofailtrjingstljatftcCaaj. 

3  ffileflcb is  hee  tt)at  rcabcth ,  anb 
the?  that  rjeate  the  lbo^bsof  thispjo* 
phefic ,  anb  itcepe  thofe  things  Which 
are  Wnttcn  therein :  fo?  the  rime  is  at 
hanb. 

+  3Fohn  to  the  feucn  Churches  in 
afia .  ©rate  be  bnto  pou,  *  peace ,  from 
him  'Which  is,  anb  which  was,  anb 
Which  ts  to  tome,  anb  from  trje  fenen 
fpirits  tbftttft  are  before  bis  throne : 

5  anb  from  Jews  Chjtft,  who  is  the 
faithful  Witncffcanb  the  *firfl  begotten 
of  the  beab,  anb  the  ^?mte  of  the  lungs 
of  the  earth :  bnto  htm  that  toueb  bs, 
*anb  tbatheb  bs  from  our  finnes  in  his 
oWnebloob, 

6  anb  hath  *  mabc  bs  mfngs  anb 
0ziefts  bnto  <Kob  ano  his  if ather :  to 
htm  be  glojpanb  bomtnionfoj  euer  ano 
euer,amcu. 

7  *J5eholbbceommcth  wttbclonbs, 
anb  cueep  eye  thai  fcehim,anb  they  alfo 
which  pearccb  him:  anbailbinrcbsof 
the  earth  fliau  wafle  betaufe  of  btm : 
euenfo.  amen. 


8  3  am  alpha  anb  £>mcga,  the  be 
gtnninganb  the  cubing,  faith  the  ?Lo?D, 
Which  ts.ano  lbhifh  was,  anb  Which  is 
to  tomc,thc  Almighty. 

9  3  John,  mho  alfo  am  pour  bjo; 
thcr.anb  companion  in  tribnlation,aub 
mthcbingbomc  anb  patience  of  Refits 
Chtfft,  was  in  the  3Wc  that  is  cailcb 
latinos,  fojtbewowof<i5oo,  anbfoj 
the  teftimome  of  3efus  Cbjitt. 

10  3J  was  mrhefpirtt  on  the  !Lo  jbs 
oa >■•  ,auo  heart  behtnb  me  a  great  boiee, 
as  of  a  trumpet, 

1 1  -Saying,^  am  alpha  anb  fl>me* 
ga,tbefirQanbtheiatt:  anb  What  thou 
fccuMbutetnabooKe,  aub  fenb  it  bnto 
the  fcucn  Churches  Which  are  mafia, 
bnto  cphcftis  .anb  bnto  jSmiyma,  ano 
tonto  per  gamos ,  anb  bnto  Xhyattta, 
anb  bnto  fi>arbis ,  auu  phuabclphia, 
anb  bnto  Eaobicca. 

11  anb  3  turnco  to  fee  the  boicc  that 
fpabc  Tbtth  nice,  anb  being  turaeb ,  3 
fatb  fcucn  goioen  Canblefticfts, 

i  j  anb  in  the  mibft  of  the  fenen  can- 
blcftiches ,  one  use  bnto  the  £>onne  of 
man.  rtotbeb  ibtth  a  garment  boibne 
to  the  foot,  anb  girt  about  the  paps 
Withagolbcngirbic. 

14.  $ts  hcab,  anb  his  haires  Were 
tbhitc  like  iboo  11  as  White  as  fnolb  ,anb 
his  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire, 

15  ^nb  his  feet  libe  bnto  fine  teafle, 
as  if  they  bnrneb  in  a  furnace :  anb  his 
botce  as  the  founo  of  man?  maters. 

i6  ^nb  hee  hab  in  his  right  hanb  fe= 
ucn  flarres :  anb  out  of  his  mouth  Went 
albarpe  two  cbgco  froo;b:  anb  his 
countenance  mas  as  thcSmnnc  tbmeth 
inhtsitcength. 

17  ano  when  3  fame  him,  3  fell  at 
htsfccteasbeab :  anb  hcciaib  his  right 
hanb  topon  me,  faying  bnto  nice,  JFcarc 
not,*3Famthefitu,ano  the  lafl. 

1  s  3  am  hee  that  liueth ,  anb  mas 
beab:  anbbehoib,3Jamaliucfbjcuet; 
mo;e, 

Si)  2 


*  Efay.  4'- 
4.  and  44*6 


ISeuencandlefticks.  Reuelation.    Balaams  dottrine 


moH^mcn,anbhaaetheBevesof  hell 
anoofbeath. 

19  ngructhcthmc^lbhiehthounaft 
feencanb  the  things  rbhtth  atcanb  the 
things  lbhith  than  be  hetcaftct, 

io  Xhe  mpfterie  of  the  feuenftarres 
Ibhich  thou  falbeft  m  mp  right  hanb, 
ana  the  fcucn  golbcn  Canblcfticftcs. 
Xhc  ftnen  S>tarrrs  are  the  Angels  of 
the  fcucn  Churches:  anb  the  feuen  can* 
blcfticftes  ibhtth  thou  farbctt,arc  the  fe* 
ocn  Churches. 

C  H  A  P.   1 1. 

What  is  commaunded  to  bee  written  to  the  An- 
gels,thatis,theMiniftersof  the  Churches  of 
i  Ephefus,  8  Smyrna,  12.  Pergamus,  18 
Thyatira:  and  what  is  commended,oi  found 
wanting  in  them. 

iBto  the  3ngel  of  the 
church  of  £phcfus,ib2tte, 
Xhefe  thmgs  faith  he  that 
holbeth  the  fcucn  ftarres 
_  m  his  right  hanb  ,  ibho 

ttmlBcth  in  the  miDQ  of  the  fenen  gol* 

oenCanblcftiefes: 

2  3  Bnotb  thp  lbo&cs,  ant)  thp  la- 
bonr ,  anb  thppancnce,  anDhoibthou 
eanft  not  bcarc  them  lbhitftatc  cuiianD 
thou  haft  tneo  theni  which  far  thep  arc 
Spofties,  ano  are  not,  auD  hatttoutiD 
themlpcrs: 

3  :SnD  haft bomcanb  haft  patience , 
anDfiwmp  jHames  fade  haftlaboutctj, 
ano  haft  not  faintcb. 

4     4!5CUCrthClCffC,  gi  haUC  fomewhat 

agatnft  thee,  becaufc  thou  haft  left  thp 
firftloue. 

5  &emembcrtherfozcfromibhcnce 
thouart  fallen ,  ani>  repent,anb  Doe  the 
ftrftrboj&es,  oj  clfe  3  ibillcomcbnto 
tl)te  quieftlp,anblbtll  rcmouethp  Can? 
bicfticltc  out  of  hispiaccctceptthoure* 
pent. 

6  ffiutthtsthouhaftthatthouhas 
teft  the  beebs  of  the  /Bicoiattans,lbhich 
gjaifohate. 

7  $cc  that  hath  an  care,  let  him 
hcare  ibhat  the  Spirit  faith  bnto  the 
Churches :  Xohim  thatoucrcommrth 
rbiil  3  guie  to  catc  of  the  tree  of  life, 
ibhich  is  in  the  miDDcft  of  the  $arabife 
of  Coo. 

8  2mbbntothc3ingcI  of  the  ©lurch 
m  Smipjna,n»itc ,  1-hcfe  things  faith 
the  ftrft  ano  the  laft,  rbhich  rbasbeab, 
anbisaiiuc, 

9  5 Imotb  thp  VboiBs.anb  tribute* 
non ,  aub  pouernc,  but  thou  art  rich, 


anb  3  knoll)  the  blafphcmie  of  them 
ibhich  tap  thep  are  ^jetties  anb  are  not, 
but  arc  the  <§>pnagoguc  of  <§>atan. 

io  ifcare  none  of  thofe  things  tbhichi 
thou  (halt  fuffer :  beholtuhc  Dcmll  ftjal 
caftfome  of  pou  into  pnfon.thatpc  map 
betrteb,  anb  pee  thallhauetribulanon 
tenne  Daves:  bee  thou  faithful!  Unto 
beath ,  anb  3  ibill  gtue  thee  a  croibne 
of  life. 

n  $c  that  hath  an  earclet  him  hcare 
ibhat  the  fptrtt  faith  bnto  the  churches. 
J?e  that  ouercommeth,fhailnotbt  hurt 
ofthefecono  Death. 

ii  3tnb  to  tlje  angel  of  the  Church 
in^crgamos,  ttmte,  Xhefe  things 
faith  hcc,ibhich  hath  thefbarpefawb 
nuthtrbocDgcs: 

1 3  3  HnoU)  thp  tbojfees,  anb  tbhere 
thouDu)cllcft,euen  \bhcre  Satansfcat 
is,anb  thouholbcftfaftmp  jf5ame,anb 
haft  not  Denteb  mp  faith,  euen  mthofc 
bates,  Wherein  antipas  was  mp  faithful 
£0artp2,  Ibho  tbas  flame  among  pou, 
lbhcrc&atanbibciieth. 

14-  2Sut  3  hauc  a  feme  thmgs  a- 
gamft  thee ,  becaufc  thou  haft  there 
them  that  holoe  the  boctrme  of  *  25a; 
laam.ibho  taught  25aiac  to  caftaftum 
blmgblocBe  before  the  chiUncn  of  Hfra- 
el,  to  eate  things  farrtficcbbntoibolcs, 
anb  to  commit  fornication. 

15  5>o  haft  thou  alfo  them  that  holb 
thcDoctrmc  of  tlje  /5tcolaitans,  ibhich 
thing  3  hate. 

16  aacpcnt.oi  clfe 31  lbrtl  come  bnto 
thccquichlp,anbibil  fight  agatnft  them 
Unci)  the  ftuojD  of  mp  mouth. 

17  i)cc  that  hath  an  tare,  let  him 
hcare  What  the  Spirit  faith  bnto  the 
Churches.  Xo  him  that  oucreommcth 
ibtligjcaueto  eate  of  thchtDDcntipan- 
na,anb  ibill  giue  him  a  lbhttc  ftone,  anb 
in  the  ftone  a  ncib  name  ib;tttcn,ibhtch 
no  man  Bnoibcthjaumg  hec  that  rccte 
ucth  it. 

is  3nbbntothc:Sngrtofthechurch 
mXhpatira,ib«tc,  Xhefe  things  faith 
the  3>onne  of  <sob,  lbho  hath  his  t^ts 
use  bnto  a  flame  of  fire,anb  his  fcete  are 
UBCtlnebtfuTe: 

19  3ftuioibthplbojBS,anDcharitic, 
anb  fctulce,  anb fatth.anb  thp  patience, 
anb  thp  rbojhcs,  anb  the  laft  to  bee  mo?c 
then  the  firft. 

%o  i!5otibithftanbtng,f  haucaftib 
things  againft  thee ,  becaufc  thou  fuffes 
reft  that  iboman*3e5Cbcl,lbhtch  tai- 
icth  hcrftlfc  a  ^ophetcfTc,  to  teach  ano 
to 


'Num.i  j 


•|.Kin.l«. 
It- 


To  hold  fad.  Chap'.iij.     ThekeyofDauid. 


*Irrc.  II. 

ic-andi7. 

10. 


♦Pfal.J.o. 


tofebuccmy  fcruants  to  commit  fo;m* 
tanon.aub  to  eat  things  facrificeb  tonto 
tboles. 

21  :3nb3Jgaucberfpaee  to  repent  of 
Ijer  fomttation,anti  (be  rcpenteb  not. 

ii  aScbolto^  ibiU  call  her  into  a  beb, 
ant)  them  that  commit  abultcry  ltoitb 
her,  mto  great  tribulation,  erecpt  the? 
repent  of  their  tecDs. 

23  3nb  3  ltoill  Bill  her  cbilbzcn  tbitft 
tocatkanb  all  the  Churches  (ball  Bnotb 
that  *  3  am  bee  itobtcb  fcarttjett)  the 
reinesanto  hearts :  anb  3  Will  giuc  ton- 
to  cucry  one  of  you  accojbing  to  pour 
ibojBes, 

Z4  26ut  tonto  you  3  fo?>  anb  tonto 
the  reft  mlEbyattra,  as  manyasbaue 
not  this  Doctrine,  anb  Which  haue  not 
hnoitoen  the  beptbes  of  5>atan,as  the? 
fpeaftc,3i  ltoill  put  topon  yon  none  other 
bucben: 

25  26uttbatwbiebytbaucaireaby, 
bolbfafttilljlcome. 

26  3nD  hee  that  oncrcommctb,anb 
Kcepctbmyltooi&cs  tonto  the  enbe,  to 
him  will  3  giuc  poltoct  oner  the  na* 
tions: 

Z7  C^nohethailrulcthemitoltha 
rot)  of  won:  as  the  tocflcls  of  a  potter 
than  tbcp  be  moBcnto  fl)iuers:)euenas 
3  r  ccciucb  of  my  if  atber . 

23  3tiu>3l  will  giue  bun  the  morning 
ftarrc. 

29  i?e  that  hath  an  carclct  him  hear  c 
What  the  Spirit  faith  tonto  the  Chut- 

t,JCS*       CHAP.    III. 

i  The  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Sardisis  repro- 
ued,  3  exhorted  to  repent,and  threamed  it 
hee  doe  not  repent.  8  The  Angel  of  the 
Church  of  Philadelphia  to  is  approoued 
for  his  diligence  and  patience,  is  The  An- 
gel of  Laodrcea  rebuked  ,  for  being  neither 
hote  nor  colde,  19  and  admonifhed  to  be 
more  zealous.  20  Chrift  flandeth  at  the 
doore ,  and  knocketh. 

jBto  tonto  the  3tngel  of  the 
£  Church  in  Partus  Wntcj 
Xhcfetbuigsfettbbctbat 
s  hath  the  fcutn  5>pirusof ! 
©ob,  9  the  fxtun  Qarrcs; , 
3  Know  tby  wojfics ,  that  thou  baft  a ; 
name  that  tbouliucft,  anto  art  bcab. 

1  2BcltoatthfuU,anbfttcugthcnrhei 
things  which  rcmamc ,  that  arc  tcaby 
to  bic  :fo;  3  haue  not  founbtby  woias 
perfect  befojetsob. 

3  Remember  therefore ,  bow  thou 
haftrecetueb  anbbcarb,  anbhotb  fall 


anb  repent.  *  3if  therefore  thou  malt 
not  watch ,  3  Mil  conic  on  thee  as  a 
tbicfe,  anb  thon  (bait  not  know  What! 
bonce  3[Willcomctopon  thee. 

+  xhou  haft  a  feru  names  eucn  in 
j.£>arbis,  Which  haue  not  befileb  their 
! garments, anb  the?  (ball  walBe  with 
me  in  White :  fo?  tbey  ace  Worthy. 

5  tecetbat  ouercommcth,  tbefaine 
fbalbeclotheb  in  ltobite  raiment,  anb-5 
Will  not  blot  out  h«s  name  out  of  the 
*  booBc  of  life ,  but  3  ltoill  confeffe  bis 
name  befojc  my  father,  anb  before  his 
Angels. 

6  j?ec  that  hath  an  care ,  let  him 
heare  ltobat  the  Spirit  (attf)  tonto  the 
Churches. 

7  3nb  to  the  3Jngcl  of  the  Church 
in  ^bilabelpbia  w;ite ,  1Ebcfe  things 
fattbbctbatis$oly,betbatistrne,be 
that  hath  the  Bey  of  2>auib,be  that  ope* 
neth ,  anb  no  man  (butter!) ,  anb  (but- 
tcth,anb  no  man  opencth, 

8  3JBnowtbyW02Bcs:bcbolb,3J 
banc  fetbefoje  thee  an  open  booze, anb 
no  man  can  (but  it :  foj  tj)ou  haft  a  little 
ftrength,  anb  haft  Bcpt  my  Wort),  anb 
haft  not  b  cnicb  my  /Same. 

9  23eholb,5itoiUmaBethemofthe 
fynagoguc  of  featan,  which  fay  the? 
arc3Jcujes,anoarenot,butDoeIie:be5 
boib ,  3  mm  matjc  them  to  come  anb 
itoo:flnpbcfojc  thy  feete,  anb  to  bnotb 
that  3J  haue  loueb  thee. 

io  asccaufc  thou  haft  Bept  the  Wort) 
of  tm>  patience,  3  fllfo  WtllBcepc  tljcc 
fcom  the  noure  of  temptation ,  itohich 
(ball  come  topon  all  the  Mojito,  to  try 
them  that  Dwelt  topon  the  earn). 

1 1  Bcbolbc ,  3  come  quickly ,  bolb 
thatfaft  itohich  thou  haft,  that  no  man 
taBctbycroWnc. 

iz  ^tm  that  ouercommcth ,  ltoill  3 
malic  a  pillar  m  the  Xc tuple  of  my 
Gob , anb  he  fljail  goc  no  mo?e  ont :  anb 
3  tbil  ltoiite  topon  htm  the  /Qarne  of  my 
<5ob ,  anb  the  name  of  the  Cttte  of  my 
(5ob,  winch  isncito  ^tcrufaiem ,  itohich 
comnuth  boitone  out  of  beaucn  from 
my  (Sob  :  3lnb  i  will  wnte  vpon  him  my 
iiclbnamc. 

1 5  $cc  that  bath  an  care ,  let  bun 
heare  ltobat  the  Spirit  fattb  tonto  the 
Cbuttbcs. 

14.  ^nb  tonto  the  2ngel  of  the 
Church  I!  of  the  Haobiceans,  ttmte, 
Xhefc  things  faith  the  3nun,t&c  faittj> 
full  anb  true  itoitneftc,  the  begmnmg  of 
the  creation  of  (5ob: 

15  3 


*i.ThcR-j. 

2.1.pCt.J. 

10. 


'Chap,  io, 

12  phjl.4. 

3- 


II  Orjn  Lis 
dice*. 


J 


ES 


ewarme 


.  The  Rcuelation. 


foure  beafts. 


*Prou.3.1 
hcbi.  1 1. 


15  3  fenotb  thy  tbojfees ,  that  thou 
artnetthcteolDnozhot  ,3J  moulDthou 
meet  tolDoz  hot. 

i6  $>o  tl)cn  becaufc  thou  art  lube- 
marine,  anD  neither  coin  no?  hot,3i  mil 
fpcU)  thee  out  of  my  mouth : 

17  fficcaufethou  fayeft,  3  am  rid), 
anD  mercafeb  mith  goobs ,  ano  hauc 
nccD  of  nothing:  anD  itnotbctt  not  that 
thou  art  mzetcheo ,  anD  mtferable ,  anD 
poo?c,anDblmDe,anDnaucD. 

is  3  tounfrtl  thee  to  buy  of  me  golD 
tricD  in  the  fire ,  that  thou  mayeft  bec 
rich ,  anD  mbtte  raiment,  that  thou 
mayeft  be  tlothcD,  anD  that  the  fbasne 
ofthy  nafecDnefic  Docnotappearc,  anD 
anoint  thine  eyes  ibtth  eye  fa!ue ,  that 
thou  mayeft  fee. 

19  *  as  many  as  3  loue ,  3  rebtittc 
anD  chaftcn ,  be  5ealous  therefore ,  anD 
repent. 

20  iseholb/JftanDattheooozcanD 
bnotfec:  if  any  man  hear  e  my  boy  ccanD 
open  theDoojc,  3  mm  tome  into  htm, 
anD  mill  fup  mith  him,anb  he  tbith  me. 

ii  Xo  bun  that  oucrcommcth,lbill 
3  gtauntto  fitttnth  mec  in  my  thzone, 
euenas  3  alfo  ouertamc,  anD  am  fet 
Doibne  mith  my  father  tn  histbzonc. 

it  l?ec  that  hath  an  earc ,  let  htm 
heare  ibjjat  the  S>ptrtt  fatth  bnto  the 
Churches. 

CHAP.    IIII. 

2.  John  feeth  die  throne  of  God  in  heauen. 
4  The  foure  and  twentie  Elders.  6  The 
foure  beafts  full  of  eyes  before  and  behinde. 
i  o  The  Elders  lay  downe  their  crownes,  arid 
vjorfhiphim  that  (ateon  theThrone. 

iftcrthts^looBeD.anb 
bcholDcaDoojetbasope; 
neb  in  hcaucmanb  the  firft 
bouemhich'JhcacD.ibas 
as  tt  ibere  of  a  trumpet, 
taunngmtthmcmhich  faiD ,  Comcbp 
hither ,  ano  3  vbiU  fbetb  thee  things 
Ibhich  mull  be  hereafter. 

r  anDimnicDtatly3J lbasintbcfpi- 
rit:  anDbcholDc ,  aXwotte  masfct  tn 
heaucn,anDone  fatconthc  Xfeone. 

3  anDhcfhatfaterbastoloottcbps 
on  lifcc  a  Jafpcr ,  ano  a  S>arDmc  (tone : 
anD  there  ibas  a  ratnebotti  rounb  a 
bonttbcXhzonc,  tn  fight  It&c  bnto  an 
©mcraiDc. 

4-  ano  rounD  about  the  Xlwonc 
mere  foure  anD  tibcntte  featcs  ,anD  bp^ 
on  the  featcs  3  faib  foure  anD  tvbentie 
ClDcrs  fitting,  clotheD  in  ibhtte  ray- 


ment,  anD  they  haD  on  their  heabes 
ctoibnesofgolDe. 

5  anDoutofthcXhjoncpzocccDcD 
lightnings ,  anD  thunbnngs ,  anD  boy- 
ces :  ano  there  mere  feucn  lampes  of 
fire  burntngbcfozethcXhzone,  rbfjidj 
arc  thefeuen  Spirits  of©oD. 

6  ano  befoze  the  Xhzone  there  mas 
afea  of  glaffc  u&e  bntoCbzyftaii :  anD 
tnthennDDcftofthethzone,  anDrounD 
about  the  Xhzonc ,  mere  foure  bcaftes 
full  of  eyes  befoze  anD  bchtnDe. 

7  ano  the  firft  bcaftmasiiijeafLt- 
on,anD  the  fctonD  bead  line  a  Calf c , anD 
the  thtrD  beaft  IjaD  a  face  as  a  man ,  anD 
the  fourth  beaft  mas  lifcc  a  flying  cgic. 

8  anD  the  foure  beafts  haD  each  of 
themfijcc  mtngs about  him,  anD  they 
mere  full  of  eyes  mtfhin ,  anD  they  t  reft 
not  Day  anD  night,  faying,*  ^oly,  holy , 
holy,  JLozD  C5oD  Almighty  ,  mhtch 
mas,anDis,anDisto  come. 

9  anDlbhcnthofebeaftsgiueglozy, 
anD  honour ,  anD  thanftcs  to  him  that 
fate  on  the  Xhzonc ,  mho  liueth  foz  t- 
ucranbeaer, 

10  Xhc  foure  anD  tmentte  <£lDers 
fail  Domnc  before  htm  that  fate  on 
the  Xhzonc,  anD  Ibozfhip  htm  thatli 
uethfoz  euer  anb  euer,  anD  raft  their 
cromncs  befoze  theXhzoncfayutg. 

11  *Xhouattmozthy,4>lLozD,to 
recetue  glozie,anb  honour,  anD  potber : 
fozthouhatttreatebauthings,  anbfoj 
thy  plcafurcthey  are,anbmeretrcateb. 

CHAP.    V. 

The  bookefealed  with  feuenfeales:  9  which 
only  the  lamb  that  was  flain  is  worthy  to  ope. 
1 2.  Therfore  the  Elders  praifc  him,  9  and  con- 
tend that  he  redeemed  them  with  his  blood. 

iBDSJfammprighthanb 
of  htm  that  fate  on  the 
Xhzone ,  abootsc  Umttcn 
U)ithm,?onthc  bacBcflbc, 
fcaicD  muh  feuen  fcaies. 
%  anD  3  fam  a  llrong  angel  pzo* 

claiming  mith  a  Ioudc  boitt .  naho  is 

mozthytoopentheboo8e,  auDtotooft 

thcfcaics  thereof; 
j   3lnD  no  man  in  heauen ,  no?  In 

earth ,  neither  bnber  tfjc  earth ,  mas 

able  to  open  the  boofte,  neither  to  loose 

thereon. 
4-  ^nD  3  mept  much ,  becaufc  no 

man  mas  founD  monhy  to  open,  anb 

to  rcaoe  the  booHc,  neither  to  loofec 

thereon, 

5  31nb 


\gr.thiy 

btmnorefl. 
'ECli.tf.3. 


'Cbp.j. 
■a. 


Anewfong. 


Ch 


ap.v 


P-VJ- 


Sea! 


esopenc 


Jl 


"Gen. 49. 9 


Or,  incenft. 


*«.Pct.3.J. 


5  ^ud  oneof  tlic  eiDcrsfaitljtonto 

me,i©ccpenot:  bcholbe,  *the-?Uon  of 
the  tribe  of  3jttba,  thcrootc  of  2>auio, 
hathprntflileo  to  open  thcboolie ,  anb 
to  loofc  the  feumfcaies  thereof. 

6  3(nb  31  bchelb,anb  loean  the  nun 
bett  of  the  Xhjone ,  ano  of  the  fontc 
beattes, anb  m  thcmtbft  of  thecibcrs 
ttoobalUmbe  as  tt  hab  becttc  flainc, 
hautngfeuen  homes  anb  fcucn  eyes, 
ibhteh  are  the  feuen  Spirits  of  d5ob, 
fentfoonh  uito  all  the  earth. 

7  3tnobecamc,anbtooftcthcboobc 
out  of  the  right  hanb  of  him  that  fate 
bponthcXhJonc. 

3  Znn  ibhcn  he hab taftcn  theboofte, 
the  foure  26cafts,anb  four  e  anb  tibenty 
fibers  fcl  bolbn  before  the  ?Lambe,ha= 
uing  cuery  one  of  them  harps,  anb  gol 
ben  totals  full  of  1 1  obours,  ibhtcharc 
thcpjaycrsof&aittts. 

9  3lnb  they  fung  a  nelb  fong ,  fay; 
ing,  Xbou  art  Ib02thy  to  tatsc  the 
25ooUe,anb  to  open  tljc  feales  thereof: 
fo;  thou  ibatt  flame,  anb  haft  rcbccmeb 
bs  to  d5ob  by  thy  bloob ,  out  of  eucry 
btnreb,  anb  tongut.anb  pcoplc,anb  na= 
tton: 

I  o  *3nb  haft  ntabc  bs  bnto  our  (Bob 
isungs  anb  i&tcfts,anb  ibe  (hall  r  ctgnc 
on  the  earth. 

I I  3ln&3J  bchelb ,  anb  3  hcarb  the 
boyec  of  man?  Angels,  rounb  about 
tbeXtnone,  anDthcbcaftsanbthc<gfc 
nets,  anb  the  number  of  them  ibas  ten 
thoufanb  times  tenne  thoufanb ,  anb 
thoufanbs  of  thoufanbs, 

ix  laying  ibtth  a  ioibbboicc,nflo;!; 
thy  is  thcHambc  that  tbas  flatneto  re- 
cctuc  poiber  ,anb  nehesanb  lbtfcbomc, 
anb  ttcength,  anb  honour,  anbglojty, 
anb  Wetting. 

1  j  3lnb  cuery  trcaturc  ibhich  is  in 
hcauen ,  anb  on  the  earth ,  anb  bnber 
the  earth,  anb  fuel)  as  are  in  the  fea,anb 
all  that  arc  in  them ,  hcarb  3,  faying, 
25lcfftng,  honour,  glow, anb  poiber 
bet  tmto  htm  that  ftttcth  bpon  the 
Xhjone ,  anb  Ditto  the  JUmbc  fo?  cucr 
anbener. 

14  3inbthcfourcbeattsfaib,3lmcn. 
3nb  the  foure  anb  ttbenty  fibers  fell 
DOtbne  anb  flroflnppcb  Ijtm  thatuueth 
fo?  cucr  anb  euer. 

CHAP.    VI. 

1  The  opening  of  the  feales  in  order,  and  what 
followed  thereupon ,  conteinine;  a  prophc- 
fieto  the  end  of  the  world. 


m  3  faibc  ibhcn  the 
Hambc  opencb  one  of  the 
feales,  anb  3  hearb  as  it 

pflf4w Itlcre  thtno"c  of  thunber, 
*iw$k££,  one  of  the  foure  beaftcs, 
faying,  Come  anb  fee. 

2  3lnb  3  faiii,  anb  bcholb,  a  ibhif  e 
hotfc,  anb  hec  that  fate  on  him  hab  a 
boibc ,  anb  a  croibne  ibas  gtnen  bnto 
htm, anb  hccibent  foouh  conquering, 
anbtoconqucrc. 

3  3lnb  ibhcn  hce  hab  opencb  the  k- 
conbfcaicll  hcarb  thelcconb  bcaftfay, 
Come  anb  ice. 

4-  3lnb  there  ibent  out  another 
hotfc  that  ibas  reb :  anb  poiber  urns 
gtuento  htm  that  fate  thereon  to  tattc 
peace  from  the  earth,  anb  that  they 
fhoulb  Hill  one  another:  ano  there  Ibas 
gtuen  bnto  htm  a  great  froojb. 

5  3lnb  ibhcn  hce  hab  opencb  tljc 
thtrbfealc,  31  hcarb  the  thirb  bcaftfay, 
Comcattbfcc.  3nb3J  bchelb,  anbloe, 
a  biacBcho?fe :  anb  hce  that  fate  on  him 
hab  a  patre  of  balances  in  his  hattb. 

6  3tnb  3  hcarb  a  boice  in  the  mibft 
of  the  foure  beaftcs  fay ,  ||  31  meafurc  of 
Hihc at c  to:  a  pen t c ,  anb  th.'ce  meafur es 
ofbarleyfojapcnic,  anb  fee  thou  hurt 
nottheoyleanbtheibmc. 

7  3nb  ibhcn  hce  Ijab  opencb  the 
fourth  fealc ,  3  hcarb  the  botcc  of  tljc 
fourth  beaft  fay,  Come  anb  fee. 

8  3uib3JlooBcb,anbbcholb,apalc 
hojfc*  his  name  that  fate  on  him  ibas 
a>eath,  anb  hell  folloibeb  ibitlj  him : 
anbpoibcrlbasgiuen||bntothem,oner 
the  fourth  part  of  the  earth  to  Bill  ibith 
ftoort»,«ibtth  hunger, anb  ibith  bcath, 
anb  ibith  the  beattes  of  the  earth. 

9  3lnbibhcnhcchabopencbthcfift 
fealc,  3  faib  bnber  the  altar,  the  foulcs 
of  them  that  iberc  flame  fo?  thcibojb  of 
<5on ,  anDfonbctcftimonyitohtcb  they 
hclb. 

10  ^nb  they  crteb  ibith  a  Iolbb  boice, 
faying,  ^oiblong,  ^flodb,  holy  anb 
true  ,boeft  tliou  not  iubge  anb  aucngc 
our  bloob  on  them  that  mbcii  on  the 
earths 

1 1  ^nb  ibhite  robes  ibere  giucn  btv 
toeucry  oneof them,  anb  tt  ibas  fayb 
bnto  them ,  that  they  fhoulb  rctt  yet  foj 
a  little  fcafon,  bnttll  thetr  fclloib  fer? 
uants  aifo,  anb  their  b;cthien  that 
fhoulbbc  luilcb  astljcy  tt>erc,fhoulbbc 
fulftllcb. 

1 1  zm3  bchelb  ibhcn  he  hab  ope; 
neb  the  Ort  fealc,  anbloc ,  there  ibas  a 

great 


\TheveM 
cbinix  Jigni- 
fierb  a  mta* 
fttrt  cortaU 

quart  .and 
tbetirtlftfj 
part  of  a 
quart. 


Orttohirr 


Th 


e  number 


Reuelation. 


ofthefealed. 


\\Or.p(cxe 

ft?' 

*  Efa.34-4 


"Luk.23- 
30. 


great  carfbcuia&c,  anb the  Sunne  be- 
tame  biaefcc  as  facftcclotlj  of  Ijairc ,  ana 
tbc  iBoone  became  as  bloob. 

1  3  3nD  the  ftarrcs  of  tjcaticn  fell  \m 
to  tlje  earth,  euen  as  a  figgc  tree  caftctij 
bet  llbntimclp  figsibljcn  (be  is  (baton 
ofamigljtyibtnDc. 

14.  *3uid  the  ijcaucn  bepartcb  as  a 
fcro  lble  ibljen  it  is  rollcD  together,  anD 
cucty  mountatne  anD  3itlanb  lberc 
moucD  out  of  tljcir  places. 

1 5  3mDtbe  Kings  of  tlje  cartlj,  anb 
the  great  men ,  anDtljcritbmen ,  anD 
the  cljicfc  captaincs,  anb  the  might? 
men ,  anb  eucry  bonDman,  anb  cuery 
free  man.ljib  tljcmfclucsm  tbebenncs, 
anb  in  tlje  rocftes  of  the  mountaines, 

16  Znn  faiD  to  the  mountames  anb 
rotbes,*  jfailonbs,  anD  biDebsftom 
tl)e  face  of  mm  tfjat  fittctl)  ontlje  trj?onc, 
anb  feomtbe  lbzatb  oftljcflambc : 

17  5Fo?  tt>c  great  bap  ofbisibzatlj  is 
tomc,aitD  lbbo  (ball  be  able  to  ftanb  < 

CHAP.   VII. 

3  An  Angel  fealeth  the  feruants  of  God  in  their 
foreheads.  4  The  number  ot  them  that 
werefealed:  of  the  tribes  of  ifracl  a  certaine 
number.  9  Of  all  other  nations  an  innu- 
merable multitude ,  which  ft  and  before  the 
Throne,  clad  in  white  robes,  and  palmes  in 
their  hands.  14  Their  robes  were  wafhed 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lambe. 

£§$^ll^b  after  thefc  tljings,  3 
WSw^  fottrc  Angels  (tanDuig 
&/^\v|ontbc  fourc  comers  of  tbc 
Wm§&&M%  ,  bolDtng  tlje  fonrc 
lbinDcs  of  tlje  cart!) ,  that  the  ibmDc 
n)oulD  not  bloib  on  tlje  earth,  no?  on 
tlje  fea.noj  on  any  tree. 

z  2inD  3  fail)  anotljcr  Jtngcl  afcen* 
Ding  from  tljc<£a(i,  bautng  tljcfeaicof 
tlje liuing  00b: anD  ijc  tncD  ibitlj  a  lout) 
tooicc  to  tbc  fourc  Angels  to  inborn  it 
mas  giucn  toijurt  tlje  cartlj  anD  tlje 
£>ca, 

3  having,  Ijucttiot  tlje  cartl) ,  nci< 
tlicr  tlje  fca,  no?  tlje  trees,  nil  ibee  Ijauc 
fcaico  tbc  feruants  of  our  <5ob  in  tljcir 
foKljeaos. 

4  2mt)  31  beatDtbc  number  of  tnem 
ibbtcb  lbcre  fcaico :  anD  tijerc  mere  fca 
ico  an  bunojetb  anb  foutty  anb  fourc 
tboufanD,  of  au  tDc  tribes  of  tlje  crjil^ 
DzcnofUfracl. 

5  £>f  tbc  tribe  of  Jluoa  were  feaicD 
tiDcluc  tboufanD.  <uDf  tbc  tribe  of  Su 
ben  mere  feaicD  tiDcluc  tboufanD.  «J)f 


tlje  tribe  of  ®ab  lucre  fealeb  tibclue 
tljoufanu. 

6  £>f  tlje  tribe  of  Zkt  lberc  feaicu 
tlbcluctboufanD.  £>ftbetribc  of i13cp 
tljan  lberc  fcaicDtibcluc  tboufanD.  m 
the  tribe  of  iT3ana(Tts  lberc  fealeb 
tibeuic  tboufanD. 

7  £>ftljc  tribe  of  Simeon  lberc  fca 
lett  tibclue  tboufanD.  £>f  tlje  tribe  of 
jLcm  lberc  fealeb  tiueluc  tboufanD.  s$>f 
the  tribe  of  3ifacljar  lucre  fealeb  tibclue 
tboufanD. 

8  sDf  tlje  tribe  of  zabttlon  lberc 
fcaicDtibcluc  tboufanD.  il)ftbctttbcof 
^ofepljiuerc  lealeD  tibclue  tboufanD. 
jDf  the  tribe  of  ffientamm  lberc  feaicD 
tlbcluctboufanD. 

9  3ftcr  tills  3  beIjelD,anb  lo,a  great 
multitube,U)ijicrj  no  man  coulb  nftber, 
of  all  nations,  anb  tmuyebs,  anb  pco 
plc,f  tongues,  ftoobbcftuetljc  tbjone, 
i  before  tljjc  ?Umb,clotbcD  limb  ibljite 
robes,  ano  palmes  in  their  banbs : 

10  5lnDtrvcblbitljalouDeboice,fa^ 
ing,  Valuation  to  our  d5ob,ibl)iclj0t= 
tetlj  bpon  fbc  %l);ont,  anb  bnto  tlje 
?Lambc. 

1 1  2mb  all  tbc  3mgcls  Itoob  rounb 
about  tbc  Xluonc,  anD  about  the  €l 
bers ,  anb  tlje  fourc  bcafts ,  anb  fell  be? 
fmt  tlje  tbjonc  on  tljeir  faces ,  anb  ibo;* 
fljippcb  dSfob, 

u  taping, ^men :  2Blcfling,  anD 
glone,  anb  inifcbomc ,  anD  tljanbcfgi? 
uing,anDrjonour,fpoibcc,anDmigljt 
be  bnto  our  <5ob  fo?  cucr  f  euer  3nni. 

13  3nDoticoftl)c<£iDcrsam*mfrcD, 
favingbnto  mccnabat  art  tljtfc  ibbulj 
arcarapebinlbljiterobcsranDibljentc 
cametbevf 

14  anD  3JfaiDbntol)im  ,S)ir,ttjou 
bnoibeft.  ^ud  befatbto  mc,  Xhcfcarc 
tljep  Ibljitlj  tame  out  of  great  tribulati- 
on, anb  Ijaue  lbafl)eD  tbeir  robes ,  anD 
maDc  tljcm  ibljite  in  tlje  bloob  of  tlje 
ILambe. 

15  XDercfojc  arc  tbcp  befoze  tbc 
tbzoncof  ©ob ,  anb  ferae  bun  Day  anb 
tugljtmbis  Xcmplc:  atiDbcc  tljat  fit 
tctl)  on  tlje  %lj2onc  ftjal  *  Diiiell  among 
tljcm. 

16  *  Xbcy  fljail  hunger  no  mo:c,  nci^ 
tbet  tljirftanymozc,  neither  fliail  the 
5>unnc  light  on  thcm.no:  anp  heatc. 

17  5^oz  the  ?Lambe,iblnch  is  m  the 
miDDelt  of  the  thzonc,  (ball  feeDe  them, 
anD  fljail  lcaDr  them  i)iuo  liuing  foim 
tames  of  iliatcrs :  *  anD  ©oD  fljai  )D:pc 
aiuap  all  tearcs  from  their  eyes. 

CHAP. 


'Cha.n.j 

*Efa.49. 10 


"Efa.25.8. 

:hap. 21 .4- 


Seuen  Angels         Chap.viij.ix.       found  trumpets. 


rm< 


+t,~*G-&l 


\\Or,  aUe  it 

rotbtpra; 

ert. 


CHAP.    VIII. 

At  the  opening  of  the  feuenth  feale ,  i  fe- 
uen  Angels  had  feuen  Trumpets  giuen 
theru.  6  Foure  ot  them  found  their  trum- 
pets, and  great  plagues  follow.  3  Another 
Angel  putteth  incenfe  to  the  prayers  of  the 
Saints  on  the  golden  altar. 

>/R  Jftb  lbhen  hee  Ijan  openeb 
$thc  fcucntlj  feale,  there 
«  ibas  ftiencc  in  hcaucn  a* 
boutthefpatcofhalfean 
„  hourc. 
x  aub  31  faibe  the  fetten  angels 
lbhich  ftoob  before  <Sob,  ano  to  them 
Were  gittenfeuen  trumpets. 

j  ano  another  angel  ramc  $  ftooo 
at  the  altar  ,hauing  a  goiocn  cenfer  ,anb 
rtjere  mas  giueti  unto  him  mart)  in* 
tenfe ,  that  Dee  fhoulb  ||  offer  tt  ttnth  the 
pjapcrs  of  all  £>atnts  Upon  the  golben 
altar  lbhich  ibas  before  the  throne. 

4  anb  trjc  fmolte  of  the  mcenfe 
lbhich  tame  ttntrj  the  papers  of  the 
S>atnts,afccnoco  Dp  befoje  €>oo,  oat  of 
the  Angels  hano. 

5  ano  the  angel  toofee  the  tenfer, 
ano  fiiieo  tt  lbith  fire  of  the  altar ,  ants 
tail  it  mto  the  earth :  ano  there  mere 
bopecs,  anothunberings,ano  light* 
ntngs,ano  an  eartl)  quaue : 

6  ano  the  fcucn  Angels  ibhtth  hao 
the  fctten  trumpets,  pjepareO  them= 
femes  to  fount!. 

7  Xhc  firft  angel  founoeo ,  ano 
there  follotbeohailc,  ano  fire  mtngleb 
Vbttlj  blooo,ano  the?  mere  caft  bpon  tt>e 
cartfj ,  anb  the  tljiropart  of  trees  ibas 
burnt  Dp ,  anb  all  grecne  graffc  ibas 
burnt  top. 

8  ano  the  fetonb  angel  founbeb, 
anb  as  it  ibere  a  great  tnountatnc  bur* 
mug  lbith  fire  ibas  caft  into  the  fea,ano 
tlje  thirb  part  of  tlje  fea  betame  bloob. 

9  anb  tlje  thtrbe  part  of  the  crca* 
tures  lbhich  iberc  tn  the  S>ca ,  anb  nab 
life,  bicb  ,anb  the  thtrb  part  of  the  vhtps 
ibcrcoettropeo. 

10  ano  the  thito  angel  founoeo,ano 
there  fell  a  great  ftarre  from  hcauen, 
burtUng  as  it  ibere  a  lampc ,  anb  tt  fell 
bponthe  thirb  part  of  theriuers ,  anb 
bpon  the  fonntaines  of  ibatcrs: 

11  anb  the  name  of  the  ftarre  is  eal* 
icb  naomtetboob ,  anb  tlje  thirb  part  of 
tlje  ibatets  became  ibonnctboob,anb 
man?  menopco  oftt)e  waters,  becaufc 
theytueremaoe  bitter. 

a  aub  the  fourttj  angel  founbeb , 


anb  tlje  tljicbc  part  of  tlje  &imne  ibas 
fmittcn^tfjetbtrbpartoftfjcflpoone, 
anb  tlje  ttjirb  part  of  ttjettarres,  fo  as 
tlje  tljtrb  part  of  tljem  ibas  barlteneb: 
anb  tlje  Dap  (none  not  fo?  a  thiro  part  of 
it,ano  the  night  Itttclbife. 

1 3  ^nb  3  beljelb,aub  hcaro  an  angel 
fhnngttoough  tlje  nubft  of  tjeauen,  toy. 
tngibithaiouoebotce,i©oc,iboc,iboe, 
to  thcmhabitcrsofthe  eartlj,bv  reafon 
of  tlje  other  boyecs  of  the  trumpet  of 
the  thjeeangeis  lbhich  areyctto  founb 

CHAP.    IX. 

1  At  the  foundingof  the  fife  Angel,  a  ftarre  fal- 
leth  from  heauen ,  to  whome  is  giuen  the  key 
ofthebottomlespit.  1  Heeopeneththepit, 
and  there  come  foorth  Locufh  like  Scorpi-- 
ons.  ij.  The  firft  woe  pail,  ij  The  fixt 
Trumpet  foundeth.  14  Foure  Angels- arc  let 
look,  that  were  bound. 

m  tlje  fift  angel  foun; 
oeb ,  anb  3  faib  a  ftatre 
fall  from  hcauen  bnto  the 
earth:  anb  to  rjtm  ibas  gt 
ueu  tlje  uep  of  tlje  bottom; 
leffeptt. 

z  anb  !jec  openeb  tfie  bottomclcffe 
pit,  anb  tljcte  arofe  afmoltcoutofthe 
ptt.as  tfje  fmolte  of  a  great  fomatc,  anb 
tfje  funneanbttjc  avjeJberebarUencb, 
bv  reafon  of  tlje  fmolte  of  tijc  ptt. 

3  anb  there  cameuutof  tfje  fmolte 
loeufts  Upon  tlje  earth,  anb  tonto  them 
rbas  giuen  poruer,as  the  S>to;pions  of 
the  earth  Ijauepolbcr. 

4  anb  it  tbas  tommannbeb  them 
that  the?  ujoulb  not  hurt  thegraffe  of 
the  carth.nctthcr  an?  grecne  tljtng,neu 
ther  amj  tree:but  ov\v  tfjofc  men  lbhiclj 
haucnot  the  feale  of  dpobintljeirfo?e' 
ijcabs. 

$  anb  to  them  it  ibas  giuen  that 
the?  fhoulb  not  Bill  thcm,but  that  the? 
fhoulb be  to zmcntcb  fine  moncths, anb 
their  tonnent  mas  as  the  tomicutofa 
5>co?p(on,fi)henhcftciUeth  aman. 

6  anb  in  tljofc  baics  ujal  men  fecfee 
bcath,  anbfljail  notfmbc  it,  anb  than 
befite  to  bic,  anbbcatlj  (hall  flee  from 
tljem. 

7  anb  the  fljapes  of  the  HotuOs 
Vbcrc  liae  bnto  ho?fcs  pzepareb  tonto 
battell,  anb  on  their  heabes were  as  it 
iberc  trotbucs  liltc  golbc ,  ano  their  fa^ 
ccs  mere  as  the  faces  of  men. 

8  ano  the?  hao  hairc  as  the  haire 
ofmomen,  ano  their  teeth  ibere  as  tlje 
teeth  of  JLions. 

a  a  9  anb 


Onewoeispaft.       Reuelation.   The  booke  eaten 


\\Thatiito 
fay.  cAdt- 
ftrojir. 


Or,  at. 


•Pfal.  1 1  v 
A-tt  135. 
■J- 


9  %\\n  they  hab  tyeftpiatcs,  as  it] 
mere  bzcltpiatcsoffron,  anbthefounb 
ofthcirnmtgstbasastbcfoimbofcba' 
rets  of  many  hozfes  tunning  to  batten. 

10  2inD  they  hab  taylcs  UKc  Dnto 
S>co:pions,  anD  there  tberc  flings  in 
their  tables:  anD  their  poibcr  ttias  to 
hurt  men  fwemoncths. 

1 1  31nD  they  hab  a  mug  oucr  them, 
Which  is  the  3tngcl  of  the  bottomlcffc 
pit,  uihofc  name  m  the  ^cbjeib  tongue 
is^babbon,  but  mrhc^rccKC  tongue 
hath  ins  name  |  ^pollyon. 

ii  £>iicibocispaft,aubbcholbthcTC 
come  Oboiboesmoze  hereafter. 

13  2lnb  the  firt  angel  founbeb,  aub 
3  hcarb  a  boyce  from  the  fourc  homes 
of  pgolben  altar,  Vbljich  ts  before  <Sob, 

14  having  to  t\)t  firt  3lngci  which 
hab  the  trumpet,  HLoofe  the  fourc  An- 
gels which  arc  bounb  m  thegrcat  riucr 
euphjates. 

15  3MDthcfoufc3CngclsWereloofcb, 
winch  Vbere  picparebljfo?  an  hourcanb 
abay.anb  atnoncth,anbayceec,  fojtto 
flay  the  fhirb  part  of  men. 

is  3(nb  the  number  ofthearmic  of 
the  hozfemem  Were  two  hunbjebtbou^ 
fanb  thoufanb :  anb  3  hearb  the  num* 
bet  of  them. 

17  Zwn  thus  3  fawc  the  hojfcs  in 
tbcbifton  anb  them  that  fate  on  them, 
hauing  bjctt-platcs  of  fire  anb  of  3& 
cmct,anbbnmflone,fj  theheabes  ofthc 
hozfes  iberc  as  the  heabs  of  ?Lions,anb 
out  of  their  mourhes  tffueb  fire,  anb 
fmoBcanbbnmflonc. 

18  26y  tljcfc  thjee  was  the  thirb  part 
of  men  uillcb,  by  the  fire,  anb  by  the 
fmoucanb  by  the  bnmftone  tUIjtrij)  iflu 
cboutofthctrmouthes. 

19  jfoztbcirpoWcrisinthctr  mouth, 
aub  m  their  tatlcs :  foj  their  tailes  Uicrc 
lihe  bnto  ferpents,  anb  hab  hcabs,anb 
With  them  tbeyboe  hurt. 

20  3tnb  the  reft  of  the  mm  which 
Were  not  tulicb  by  tljcfc  plagues,  yet  re- 
pcutcb  not  of  the  Wojks  of  their  banbs, 
that  they  (bonib  not  Wozfhip  beuils,| 
"  anb  iboics  of  golbc,  anb  fiiucr ,  anb 
b:aflc,  anb  ftonc,  anb  of  lboob,  Which 
neither  can  fecuoz  bcarc.nojwailic: 

ii  Neither  repentcb  they  of  their 
miirbcrs,  noz  of  their  fozcencs,  1102  of 
their  fornication  ,no:  of  their  thefts. 

CHAP.    X. 

A  mighticfhong  Angel. ippcarcth  with  ibookc 
open  in  his  hand.  6  I  Ice  (weareth  by  him 


that  liucth  for  cuer ,  that  there  fhall  bee  no 
more  time.    9   lohn  is  commanded  to  take] 
and  eate  the  booke. 

M&wgeg  0n  31  faib  another  migh- 
fkv#\*-f  ty  3lngcl  come  bo  wn  from 
m^SM  beauen ,  clotbcb  With  a 
0  cloub^nbarameboibwis 
bpon  his  ijeab ,  anb  his 
face  was  as  ftwcrcthc&unuc ,  aub  Ijts 
feet  as  pillars  of  fire. 

z  3m  Dee  hab  in  his  hanb  a  little 
bookeopen:  anbhee  fct  his  right  foote 
bpon  the  fca,  anb  his  left  foote  on  the 
earth, 

3  3mb  cryeb  With  a  loube  botee ,  as 
When  aHion  roarctlj:  anb  Wbenhec 
habccicb,feuen  thunbersbttereb  their 
boiccs. 

4  3mb  Ibhen  the  fcucn  thunbers 
hab  bttcrcb  their  boiccs,  3  ibas about 
to  wnte :  anb 3  hcarb  a  boicc  from  hea- 
ucn,  faying  bnto  mcc,  ^calc  bp  tbofe 
things  Which  the  fcucn  thunbers  bttc> 
rcb,anb  Unite  them  not. 

5  anbtbe^ngclWbichJCaWflanb 
bpon  the  fca,anb  bpoii  the  earth  ,liftcb 
bphishanbtoheaticn, 

6  ^tub  fuiarc  by  him  that  liueth  foi 
euer  anb  euer,U)ho  crcateb  heauen,anb 
the  things  that  therein  arc,  anb  the 
earth,  anb  the  things  that  therein  are, 
anb  the  fca,  anb  the  things  Whtch  are 
therein,  that  there  fboulb  bee  time  no 
longer. 

7  iSut  in  the  bayes  of  the  botcc  of 
the  fcucnth  3ngcl,  when  he  (hall  begin 
tofounb,thcmyftcricof(5obfl)oulbbe 
finiQ)Cb,as  Ijcc  bafbbcciarcbtohisfcr" 
uantsthc02ophcts. 

8  3mb  the  boicc  Which  3J  hearb 
from  hcauen  fpah  cbuto  me  againcanb 
faib,  ©o,anb  takctbc  litic  booke  which 
is  open  m  the  hanb  of  the  angel  Which 
ftanbeth  bpon  the  fca,  anb  bpon  the 
earth. 

9  3uiD3JU)cntbntothc3uigcl,anb 
faib  bnto  him,  <3tuc  me  the  little  booUe. 
5lnb  he  fayb  bnto  mc*  Xabc  it,anb  eat 
ttbp,  anb  ;t  (hail  make  thy  belly  bitter, 
but  itd^allbcc  m  thy  mouth  frocctc  as 
bony. 

io  ^nb^itoouc  the  little  boobc  out 
of  the  3mgclsbatiD,aub  ate  it  bp,anb  it 
urns  m  my  mouth  fiucct  as  home :  anb 
as  foouc  as  gj  Ijab  eaten  it,  my  belly 
ibas  bitter. 

1 1  3md hefavbbnto me.lLhoumutt 
p:ophcfic  againc  befoze  manypeoplcs, 
anb  uatiou8,anb  tongue  s,anb  Sings. 

CHAP. 


•Ezck.: 
and  3.  j 


Thetwowitnefles.  Chap.xj.xij.       Anearthcjuake. 


\Gr.caflml 


\\Or,Iw,ll 
fine  Vrtlo 
myrwevnt- 
ncfiei  lhat 

'•J  mJJ 
orophefe. 
"iach.4.;. 


CHAP.    XI. 

The  two  witnefles  prophefie.  6  They  haue 
power  to  (hut  heauen ,  that  it  raine  not.  7 
The  bead  (hall  fight  agamft  them,  and  kill 
them.  8  They  lie  vnburied,  i  1  and  aker 
three  dayes  and  a  halte  rife  againe.  14 
The  fecond  woe  is  pair.  15  The  feueuth 
trumpet  foundeth. 

CAttAC  jr*D  there  tbas  gtuenmea 
S&vfe  S  wdc  u&ebnto  a  rob,  anD 
ttje  ^ngcl  ftooD,  faying, 
Hi£c,  anD  meafure  rtje 
Xcmplc  of  <5od  ,  anD  tbc 
aitar,anDtbemtbatUioj(btp  therein. 
z  25ut  the  Court  tui)tc!i  is  rbltbout 
the  Xcmplc  t  icauc  out ,  ano  meafure  it 
not:  fo?  it  is  guicn  bntotbcdSemtlcs, 
ano  the  holy  cmc  (ball  they  ttcao  bnber 
footc  fourty  ano  tibo  monctbs. 

j  ^no  || JJ  null  gtue  power  tjnto  my 
ttbo  H)ttnctffes,anu  ttje?  Ojall  p?opftcQc 
a  tboufanD  tibo  hunozco  ano  tbjecfcojc 
oaves  clotbcD  m  facbclotb. 

4  Xbcfe  arc  ttjc"  trbo  olinetrccs, 
anD  the  tibo  canDlefttcKCS,8anDing  be- 
fo?e  tbc  (Sod  of  the  earth. 

5  ^no  if  an?  man  ttMl  hurt  them, 
fire  pzocecDeth  out  of  their  moutb,anb 
oeuouretb  tfjctr  enemies :  anD  if  any 
man  rum  burttbem,  bee  mull  in  fbts 
mancrbcfeiHcD. 

6  Xbcfe  bauc  polbcr  to  ttjut  bca* 
ucn,  that  it  raine  not  in  tbc  oayes  of 
I  their  pjopbefic :  anD  banc  potter  oucr 

tbatcrs  to  turnc  tlicm  to  blooD.anDto 
finite  the  earth  tbith  all  plagues,  as  of- 
ten as  tbcyibtii. 

7  ^nD  tttficn  they  (ball  bauc  fini- 
fi)CD  their  tefttmonic ,  ttjc  bead  tljat  at 
ecnDetb  out  of  the  bottomlcffc  pit,  (ball 
mafcetbarre  agamft  them,  anD  (ball  o- 
ucrcome  tbcm,anD  Hill  them. 

s  ano  their  DeaD  boDies  (ball  He  m 
the  fircet  of  the  great  cttte ,  tbbttb  fptrt= 
tuaily  is  talleD  £>obomc  anD  €gypt, 
Where  alfo  our  JLojd  tbascructfieD. 

9  anD  they  of  the  people,  anD  bin*  i 
r  eDS.anD  tongues,ano  nations,  (bal  fee 
their  DeaD  bodies  tbjee  Daycs  anD  an 
balfe,anD  (bail  not  fuff ct  ttjeic  DeaD  bo= 
Diestobcputingraues. 

10  ano  they  that  Dibcil  bpon  tfic 
cattfj  (ball  tetoyce  oucr  tbcm,anD  maKe 
merry  ,anD  fbailfcnD  gifts  one  to  ano* 
tbet,  betaufc  tbcfe  trbo  $2opbcts  tor- 
mentcDtbem  tbatDtbeltontbc  earth. 

1 1  anD  after  fbzec  Dares  anD  an  half? 
the  Spirit  of  life  from  <Sod,  cntceD  in* 


to  them:  anD  they  Hood  upon  tb«c 
feetc,  anD  great  fearc  fell  bpon  them 
tttbtcbfaibtbcin. 

iz  anD  they  bcatb  a  great  boyee 
fcombeaucn.fayingbntotbem,  Come 
bp  hither.  anD  they  afccnocD  bp  to 
bcauenmaclotiD,anDtbetrenemtesbo 
bclDtbem. 

ij  anD  the fameftourc  Vbastfjerea 
great  eartbauaBe,anD  the  tenth  part  of 
rt)e  city  feil,anD  tit  the  earthquaBC  lb  ere 
fiamc  t  of  men  feueu  UjoufanD :  anD  tbc 
remnant  tberc  aftrtgbteD ,  anD  gauc 
glojy  to  tfic  C5oD  of  beauen. 

14.  Xbe  fctonD  rboe  is  pad,  anD  be- 
bolD,tbetbrcDmoecommetbQuteRiy. 

15  anDtbefcucntb  angel  founDeD, 
anD  there  tberc  great  boyees  in  fieauen, 
fapmg,  XftefeingDomes  of  tbisibo2iD 
are  become  the  kmgdomesof  onr  ILojd, 
anD  of  bis  Cfi?ift,anD  be  (ball  rcigne  fo: 
eueranDcuer. 

16  anD  tfic  fourc  anD  ttbentic<£lDers 
rbfitcb  fate  before  <SoD  on  tfictr  featcs, 
fell  bpon  tbeir  faces ,  anb  Xbo;(bippeD 

d50D, 

17  <g>aving,n9eegiuctbcctrjanbcs, 
<©  5Lo?D<BoDaimigbtie,  ibbtrbart, 
anb  Vbaft,anD  art  to  come  ■,  betaufc  tbou 
baQ  taben  to  tbcctbp  great  poibcr,  ano 
bafirctgncD. 

is  anDtbcnationSKbet;cangry,anD 
tDv tbiatb  is  come,  anb  tbc  timeof  tlje 
Dcab  tbattbcp  djoulD  bee  tuDgeo  ,anD 
that  thou  (fioulDeft  giuc  rctbarD  bnto 
thp  fcruants  the  i&jopbets ,  anb  to  rfic 
S»amts,  f  them  that  feare  tbp/ftame, 
finail  anD  great ,  anD  ffiouiDcft  Deftrop 
them  ruhich  II  Dcttroy  the  earth. 

19  anDtrjeXempleof<l5oDtbasope; 
ncDtn  rjcaucn,ano  there  ibas  fcenctn 
his  Xcmple  the  arbe  of  bts  Xcfta* 
ment,  anD  there  tbece  lightnings,  anb 
bovccs.anDthunDjings,  anD  an  earth- 
quabe,anD  great  hatle. 

CHAP.  XII. 

A  woman  clothed  with  the  Sunne  trauaileth. 
4  The  great  red  dragon  ftandeth  before  her, 
ready  to  deuoure  her  child.  6  when  (he  was 
deliueredfhefleechimothewildemes.  7  Mi- 
chael and  his  Angels  fight  with  the  dragon, 
and  preuaile.  13  The  dragon  being  cart 
down  into  the  earth.perfecuteth  the  woman. 

ji5S>  there  appcareo  a 
great  ||  lbonDcr  in  heauen, 
a  iboman  clothcD  ibttlj 
thcS>unnc,  1  tljc^0oonc 
bnoerhec  feetc,  anb  bpon 
aa  z  ijer 


f§r  Mmts 
of  met:. 


\\Or,cerrUft\ 


\°r>te»'- 


>atan  ca 


ft  out. 


Reuel 


euelation. 


>atans  rage. 


lOr.fffl, 


hetbeab  aCtotbnc  of  ttbelue  flattest 
x  anb  fyce  being  ibitbtbtlbe,ctieb, 
ttauailing  tn  bittb ,  anD  paineb  to  be  be* 
liucteo. 

?  anb  tljerc  appeareb  anotbet 
||  tbonbetmbeauen,anbbebolbagtcat 
rcbbiagon ,  bantu  g  fciicti  bcabs,  anb 
ten  bonus*  anb  fcuen  troibnes  bpon 
bisbeaos. 

+  anb  Ijis  taile  butt)  tt>c  tbirb  patt 
of  tbe  ftatt es  of  beaucn ,  anb  bib  taft 
tbcm  to  tf)t  cartb  :  anb  tbc  bzagon 
ftoob  befou  ti)e  lboman  lbt)UI)  lbas 
tcaby  to  be oeliucteb, fo?  to  bcuoute  bet 
tl)  tibc  as  foonc  as  tt  lbas  borne. 

5  anb  (bee  bjougljt  foo:tb  a  man 
ct)ilo,tt>rjo  ttias  to  tuleallnations  lbttlj 
a  too  ofyjomanbbct  cbilblbas  caught 
bp  bnto  45ob,anb  to  f)ts  Xbjone. 

6  anb  tbe  lboman  fleb  into  tljc  Ms 
betneffe.ibbcrclbeebatbaplacepupa' 
tcD  of  (5ob ,  tliat  tbey  (l)oulb  fcebbcr 
tbetc  a  tftoufanb ,  tibo  ljunbub ,  anb 
tbuefcoubaycs. 

7  anb  tbcrc  lbas  ibarrc  in  beaucn, 
Q3icbacl  anb  Ijis  Angels  fougbt  a= 
gamfttbcb:agon,$  tbe  bjagon  fought 
anb  bis  angels, 

8  anb  puuatleb  not ,  ncitlur  lbas 
tljcit  plate  founb  any  mou  m  beaucn. 

9  anb  tbe  great  bjagon  lbas  taft 
out,  tljat  olb  fcrpcnt,  tailcb  tbebcutll! 
anb  S>atan,  ibbitbbccciuctb  tbcibbole  | 
tbojlb:  bcc  lbas  taft  out  into  tbeeattb, 
anb  l)is  angels  lbcrc  taft  out  ttntb  Ijitn. 

to  anb 3  Ijeatb  a lotob  boyte  fay;, 
inginbcauen ,  /froibts  tome  faiuation, 
anb  ftrcngtb ,  anb  tljc  btngbome  of  out 
©ob,  anb  tbc  polbct  of  hisClmft :  fo: 
tbc  amulet  of  out  butbun  tscaftbottm, 
ibbicb  accufeb  tbcm  bcfou  out  ©ob 
bayanbnigbt. 

ii  anb  tbey  oucttamc  btm  by  tbe 
bloob  of  tbc  ILauibe ,  anb  by  tbc  10020 
oftbcirXcfttmony,  anb  tbey  loucb  not 
tljctt  lines  bnto  tbe  bcatl). 

ii  Xbcrcfourctoycc ,  yccbcaucns, 
anbycctbatoibcll  tntbcm,  naoctotbe 
mljabitcts  of  tljc  cattl)  ,anb  of  tl)e  fca : 
fojtbc  ocuill  is  come  bolbnc bnto  you, 
bautng  great  ibjatb ,  bctaufc  be  tmott> 
ctl)  trjat  be  batl)  but  a  fliozt  tunc. 

13  ano  ibbcn  tbc  bjagon  farb  tfjat 
bcibascaftbntotbccartb, bee  perfects 
tcb  tbe  lboman  ibljicl)  tyougbt  foouj) 
tbcmancbtlbc. 

14  anb  to  tbc  tbotnan  tbctc  giucn 
trbo  lbmgs  of  a  great  eagle ,  tbat  (bee 
nugbt  flee  into  tlje  ttinbctncftc  into  bet 


plate,  tbftetc  (be  is  nouttfljeb  fo?  a  time, 
anb  times,  anbtjaifc  a  time,  from  tbc 
fate  of  tfje  fcrpcnt. 

15  anb  tbe  fctpcnt  taft  out  of  bis 
mouttjtbatetas  a  floob,  aftcttbeibo; 
man :  tbat  be  migbt  taufc  bet  to  bee  ta? 
tub  aibay  of  tlje  floob. 

i6  anbtbeeattbbcipcbtbetboman, 
anb  tbc  eattt)  opencb  Ijet  moutfj ,  anb 
ftoallotbeb  bp  tfie  floob  ibijict)  tljcbM 
gon  taft  out  0  f  bis  mo  u  tb. 

17  ^nbtl)eb?agonibasib?otl)lbitl) 
tbeiboman,  anb  Ujenttomafteibarfc 
tbitfj  tbe  temnant  of  bet  feeb ,  lbbitb 
bccpc  tfje  Commaunbcmcnts  of  ©oo, 
anb  bane  tlje  teftimony  0  f  if  cf  us  Cljnft. 

CHAP.   XIII. 

Abeaft  rileth  out  of  the  fea  with  feuen  heads 
and  ten  homes ,  to  whom  the  dragon  giueth 
his  power,  n  An  other  beaft  commethvp 
out  of  the  earth :  1 4  caufeth  an  image  to  be 
made  of  the  former  beaft,  15  and  that  men 
fhouldworfhipit,  16  andreceiuehismarke. 

iBb  3  ftoob  bpon  tbe 
agK.  fanb  of  tbe  fea :  anb 
Jfaibabeafttifebpout 
oftbcfca,bauingfeucn 
beaos,  anb  ten  bomes, 
anb  bpon  Ijis  bomes 
tcntroibnes,anObp: 
on  bisbeabs,tbc||  name  of  biafpljemic. 
x  3mb  tbe  bcaftibbicb3Jfaib,  lbas 
bfec  bnto  a  licopatb,  anb  Ijis  feet  tbctc 
as  the  feet  of  a  26carc,  anb  bis  moutb  as 
tljcmoutb  of  a  Hion:  anbtbcb;agon 
gaucbtm  bis  polbct ,  anb  Ijis  feat,  anb 
gtcatautbontie. 

3  ^nb  3  faib  one  of  bis  beabs  as  it 
tbcte  t  aounbeb  to  bcatb,  anb  bis  beab- 
ly  ibounb  lbas  beaicb:  anb  ai  tbe  ibojlb 
ibonbcteb  aftct  tbc  bcaft. 

4.  ^nb  tbey  lbojflnppcb  tbebjagon 
lbljicbgauc  polbct  bnto  tbc  bcaft,  anb 
tbey  ibo2flnppcb  tbc  bcaft,  faviug,i©bo 
isbbe  bnto  tbe  bcaft  t  mUo  is  able  to 
maftt  ibarrcibitb  l)inu 

5  ^nb  tberc  lbas  giucn  bnto  b«m  a 
moutb,fpcabtnggrcattbings,anbblafj 
pbcmics,  anb  polbct  lbas  giucn  bnto 
bim  to  ||  continue  fo;tic  ano  ttbo  mo* 
nctbs. 

6  anb  be  opencb  Ijismoutb  tn  blaf- 
pbenue  againft  <5ob ,  to  biafpbemcbis 
iBamc.anb  bts  Xabcrnaclc ,  anb  tbcm 
tbatblbcltmbcaucn. 

7  anb  it  lbas  giucn  bnto  Dim  to 
mabc  matte  tbitbtljc&aints,  anb  to 

ouct< 


£ 


I  \0r,  nam;}. 


f  CjT.jUinc. 


|l  Or  Jo  mak* 


The  Lambe  flame.  Chap.xmj. 


A 


new 


*Maeth.i«. 


\5r.breath. 


tG'Jiginc. 


oucr  conic  rbcm  :  Urn  potbec  ujas  gi- 
uen  Dim  o  tic  i-  all  tonr  eDS,  ano  tongues, 
ano  nations. 

8  ano  ail  that  mbclhpon  the  earth, 
(bail  nwfbtp  Dim ,  whole  names  ace 
not  Wzttten  in  the  boonc  of  life  of  tbe 
Hambe ,  name  from  tlje  founoanon  of 

tbettWlD. 

9  31  anp  man  baue  an  car  c,  let  bun 
beare  1 

io  feee  that  leaDctb  into  captiuitie, 
(hall  got  into  capttuttie:  *  tycetbat  ail 
left)  lhitb  tbe  uoozD,muft  be  fcilleD  tbttb 
tfjefroozD.  $ece  is  the  patience  anD  the 
faith  of  the  faints. 

11  anD3!bebeloanotberbeaftcom; 
mingbpoutoftbe  earth,  anD  bee  bat) 
ftt) 0  Domes  I; lit  a  iambe,anD  lice  fpalu 
asaDzagon. 

ii  anDbccrmtfctbailtbepoifcerof 
tbe  firft  bead  befozc  bun ,  atrataufeth 
the  earth  anD  tbetnibbtcb  Dihcll  there* 
in,  to  ttsozttnp  tbe  firft  beaft ,  ibDofe 
DeaDlp  tbounD  was  hcalcD. 

ij  anD  bee  Docfb  great  tbonDcrs,fo 
that  bee  maUctD  fire  come  Dovbne  from 
beauen  on  tbe  cartb  in  the  fight  of  men, 

14.  anDDeenuetbtbcmthatDttielon 
tlje  cartb .  bp  tlje  mcancs  of  tbofe  mi- 
raclcsiubitb  Dc  ban  power  to  do  in  tbe 
figDt  of  tDc  bcaft ,  faying  to  them  tbat 
Dttiell  on  tbe  cartb » tbat  the?  (bouiD 
matte  anjmagc  to  tDc  bcaft  ttbicb  ban 
tbe  VboutiD  bp  aftuozD ,  ano  did  liue. 

15  anDbcbaDpotbcrtogtucHifebn* 
totDc^mageof  tDc  bcaft,  tDat  tt)e  H« 
mageof  tDe  bcaft  (boulD  botD  fpcafcc, 
anDcaufc  tDat  as  mam>  as  ihoulD  not 
tbozibiptbejmage  offfje  beaft,(houib 
be  billed. 

i6  anDbceaufctball.botbfmaianb 
great  rlcl)  anD  pooze,  free  anD  bono,  t  to 
recetueamarttcin  their  rigljtbanD,  0? 
m  their  fozebcabs: 

17  anD  that  no  man  might  buy  oz 
fell, fane  Dc  tDat  Dab  tbcmarftc ,  02  the 
name  of  the  bcaft ,  oz  the  number  of  i)\s 
name. 

18  ^crcisihireDomc.  !Let  Dim  that 
bath  tonocrftanbing,  count  the  number 
of  the  bcaft :  fin  it  is  the  number  of  a 
man ,  anD  bis  number  is ,  fire  bttnDzcD 
tbzeefcoze  anD  fire. 

CHAP.    XII II. 

1  ThtLambeftandingonmount  Sionwithhis 
company.  6  an  Angel  preacheth  the  Go- 
fpel.  8  The  fall  of  Babylon.  15  The  ha  r- 
uefr.  ot  the  worlde ,  and  putting  in  of  the 


fickle.   10  The  vintage  and  wineprefle  of 
f  he  wrath  of  God. 

/BD3J  loofecD,  ano  loc,  a 
?Latube  ftoob  on  the  mount 
S>ion,anD  Bjttb  Dim  an  Dun- 
_  DzctbfourtpanD  foure  thou* 
fano ,  Dauing  bis  if  atDers  4l3amc  Vtyit* 
tenmtbctrfozcDcaDS. 

z  anD3JDearDaboicefrombcauen, 
as  tDc  boue  of  man?  rbatcrs,anD  as  tDe 
boyceofagreatthunDet:  anD3JDcarD 
the  tooyce  of  harpers,  harping  umb 
their  barpes. 

j  anD  they  fungas  it  There  a  nett) 
fong  befoze  the  tbzone ,  anD  befoze  the 
foure  bcafts,  ano  the  eiocrs ,  anD  no 
man  toulb  learne  that  fong,  but  the 
hunDzeth  anD  fourrie  anD  foure  thou* 
latiD,  tbhub  tticre  reDecmeo  from  the 
earth. 

4  3Thcfe  are  the?  ibbtcb  ihcrc  not 
DtfiicDibttb  ibomcn:  foz  they  are  bit* 
gincs :  Xbefe  arc  they  ujljicb  follotb 
the  flambe  tbbitbcrfocucr  bee  goctb : 
ICDcfc  t  ibere  reDccmcD  from  among 
men ,  being  tDe  firft  fruits  Unto  d50D, 
anDtotbcflambc. 

5  3nb  in  their  mouth  tbasfounD  no 
guile :  fojtrjcv  are  tbitbout  fault  befoze 
tbctbzoncofc^oD. 

6  anD  3  faib  another  angel  flic  in 
thcmiDft  of  beauen,  haumg  the  cuccla* 
ftmgoofpel.to  pzcacb  Unto  tbcm  that 
Dibcl  on  the  earth,  anD  to  cucry  nation, 
anD  ttinreo,anD  tongue , ano  people, 

7  taping  tbith  a  louD  Dotce,5f  care 
(Sod,  anDgiuegiozyto  him,  foz  the 
Dourc  of  bis  iuDgcment  is  come:*  anD 
tbozfbippeDtni  that  mabc  beauen  anD 
earth,  anD  the  fca,anD  the  fountains  of 
waters. 

8  anD  there  follotbeD  another  an* 
getfaying,*  zsaby  Ion  is  fallen,is  fallen, 
tDat  great  titie,bccaufe  the  maoe  ail  na- 
tions Dzintte  of  the  nunc  of  the  lb :a t  h  of 
bcrfozmcation. 

9  ^nD  the  tbirD  ^ngel  foiloifceb 
them,fapmg  Vbttb  alolbD  Doitc,3Jf  anp 
mantbozft)ip  the  bcaft  ano  bis  image, 
anD  rccetuc  bismarUcm  bis  fozebcao, 
ozinbisbanb, 

10  iChefamefbailDzinfteoftbeanne 
of  the  nizatb  of  <£>oD ,  ihbith  is  poVbzcD 
out  nntbout  nurture  into  the  cup  of  bis 
itiDignanon,anD  hec  (hall  be  tozmenttD 
initbfircanDbzimftone.inthepzcfcnte 
oftt)eboiv angels,  atiDinthepzcfnue 
oftbcfLambe: 

11  anD  the  fmolte  of  their  tozment 
a  a  j        afccnbctb 


fCr.  were 
bought. 


*Pfa.l4<5.f 

jcU  14.15. 


icrc.  51,8. 
chap. j  8.2. 


The  earth  reaped.    Reuelation.        Vialsof  wrath 


\\Or,frcm 
brn.  AorlU 
faith  iht 
Sar'itljea 


•loch  13. 


Vhjrjtl 


afcenbeth  top  foj  euer  anb  cue c.  anb 
they  Dane  noted  nay  no:  night,  ltoho 
ltooMlnp  tilt  bcaft  ant)  his  image ,  anb 
mtiofocucc rcccpuctl) tOeinarHc  of  his 
name. 
1 1  tycrc  is  the  patience  of  the  faints: 
l?cre  are  they  that  ttcepe  the  Conunan- 
be ments  of<J5oD  anb  the  faith  of  'Jcfus. 

1 3  anb  31  heart)  a  tooyce  from  hca 
ticii,faytng  buto  me,  n92ttc,:!Slcu*cbarc 
the  Dcao  lbhich  Die  in  the  iLojD  ,!|  from 
hcnccfoojth,  yea,  faith  the  S>ptrtt,  that  j 
theymay  reft  from  their  labours,  anb, 
their  lbozUes  boc  follolto  them. 

14  anb  '31  loobcb,  anb  bcholbc,  a, 
White  clouti ,  aim  Upon  the  cloubc  one  | 
fate  lifec  buto  the  fonnc  of  man,  haumg  1 
011  his  heat)  a  goibcu  croitonc ,  anb  m 
hishaiiDafharpcftcMc. 

i<;  3nb  another  angel  came  out  of 
the  Xcmplc  crying  lbith  a  loubcboice 
to  him  that  fate  on  the  clout) :  *  Zhmft 
m  thy  fictile  anb  rcapc,  foz  the  time  is 
come  foz  thee  to  reapefo:  the  haructt  of  I 
the  earth  is  ||  ripe. 

i6  3ud  her  that  (ate  on  the  cloube 
thJUfhn  l)is  fickle  on  the  earth ,  anb  the 
earth  lbasrcapcb. 

17  anb  another  angel  tame  out  of 
the  Ulcmplc  itohicb  is  m  hcauen,hc  alfo 
hautng  a  fliarpcficBie. 

is  anb  another  angel  tame  out 
from  the  attar  ,ibhich  hab potter  ouct 
fit e ,  anb  ct yco  ltoith  a  loub  try  to  him 
that  nan  the  fhatpe  fictile ,  faying, 
Xh2uttin  thy  fbarpc  fickle ,  anb  gather 
the  duffers  of  the  bine  of  the  earth  >  to? 
her  grapes  arc  fully  ripe. 

19  anb  the  angel  tlmifr  in  his  GtbU 
into  the  earth,  anb  gathcrcb  thebmc  of 
the  earth ,  *  call  it  into  thegrcattbinfc 
P2cffc  of  the  \to2ath  of  (Sob. 

o  anbthcibuicpjclTeUjastrobcn 
ttHthouttheciticanobloobcaincoutof 
the  Vbmepjcffc ,  cucti  tonto  the  hoife 
b2ibics ,  by  the  fpace  of  a  thoufanb  anb 
Ore  hunbjcb  fur  longs, 

CHAP.    XV. 

1  The  feuen  Angels  withthc  feuen  laft  plagues. 
3  The  fong  ol  the  that  ouercome  inc  beaii 
7  The  feuen  vialsrull  of  ihc  wrath  of  God. 

jH3D  31  faib  another 
[igne  in  hcaueu  great 

I  anb  marurilous,  feuen 
angels  haumg  the fc? 

II  uttiiaft  plagues,  fo?m 
them  is  fillcb  bp  the 
U>;athof©ob. 


z  anb  31  faito  as  it  mere  a  «§>ea  of 
j  glaffcmmgicb  ibithfite,anb  themthat 
Dab  gotten  the  bict02tc  ouct  the  bcaft, 
anb  ouct  his  image ,  anb  ouct  his 
mar  be,  anb  oucr  the  number  of  his 
name,  (tana  on  the  fca  of  giaffe,hamng 
theharpcsof<5ob. 

3  *anb  they  Qug  the  fong  of  £0ofcs 
the  fcruant  of  ©00 ,  anb  the  fong  of  the 
1L  ambc , faying ,  CBt cat  anb  maructlous 
arcthyibo2hes,Ho2bd5oDainitghne, 
'  iuQ  anb  true  are  thy  lbayes.thou  lung 
of  faints. 

+  *K)ho  (hall  not  fcarc  thee,  C> 
Vl  02b ,  anb  glojific  thy  /Rame  i  ioi  thou 
onety  art  hbly  :  fo2  all  nations  (bail 
come  anb  ibozfbtp  before  thee ,  fozthy 
lubgements  aremabe  mantfeft. 

5  anb  after  that  3flooBcb,  anb  be- 
holb ,  tbeluniplcofthc  tabernacle  of 
the  tcftimony  in  heanen  ltoas  openeb: 

6  3nb  the  feucn  angels  came  out  of 
the  ITcmplc,  haumg  the  feuen  plagues, 
clothcb  in  pure  anb  ibhitc  linncn ,  anb 
haumg  their  b.zeafts  girbcb  ltoith  gol- 
ben  girbles. 

7  anb  one  of  the  foure  bcaQs  gauc 
bnto  the  feuen  angels,  feuen  golbcn  tot- 
als ,full  of  the  itojath  of  ©ob  ,  ltoho  \\> 
ucthfo;  euer  anb  euer. 

8  anb  the  Xmiple  mas  fillcb  ltoith 
tmoBc  from  the  glozy  of  c>ob,anb  from 
Ins  poibct,  aub  no  man  ltoas  able  to  en 
tcr  into  the  lEemple ,  till  the  feuen 
plagues  of  the  feuen  angels  itoere  fui- 
fillcb. 

CHAP.    XVI. 

l  The  Angels  powrc  out  their  Vials  full  at 
wrath.  6  The  plagues  that  follow  thereup- 
on, is.  Clirift  cornmeth  as  a  thiefc.  BlefTed 
are  they  that  watch. 

ji3b  J  hearb  a  gteat 
tooyce  out  of  the  3E cm- 
pie,  faymg  to  tlje  feuen 
angels  ,  Ooe  your 
itoayes,anbpoito2cout 
the  Dials  of  the  Uwath 
of  (5ob  topo  the  earth, 
i  anb  the  firft  ltocnt,  anbpoitojeb 
out  his  toiau  topon  the  earth,  anb  there 
fell  a  noyfome  anb  gticuous  fo:c  upon 
the  men  ltohtch  hab  the  mathe  of  the 
bcaft ,  anb  topon  thenilbhichitoozfbip; 
peb  his  image. 

3  anb  tlKfcconb  angel  potbjeto  out 
his  biail  topon  the  fea,  anb  it  became  as 
the  bio  ob  of  a  bcab  man:  anb  euerylts 


'Exo.15  1 


Tfal  mj 

•Icimo.7 


mug  loulcbicb  m  the  fca. 


4  anb 


! 


Blood  to  dnnke.       Chap.xvij.         GreatBabylon, 


Prj* 


'Mat.  34 
44. 


4  anb  tl)c  tljtcD  3tngcl  potbreb  out 

his  Dial!  upon  the  niters  anb  fouti 
tames  of  ibaters,*  they  became  bloob. 

5  anb  3  heart)  the  angel  of  the 
ibaters  fay ,  Xhou  art  righteous,  © 
TLozb.ttihichart,  aub  ibaft,  anb  (halt 
be.bccaufe  thou  haftiubgeb  thus : 

6  ifor  they  haueCbcObc  the  bloob  of 
faints  anb  prophets ,  anb  thou  haft 
giucnfhcm  bloob  to  brmlic:  for  they  ate 
lborthy. 

7  3no  3J  hcarb  another  out  of  the 
altacfay.euen  fo,Horb©obarmtgh 
tie,  true  anb  rightcons  are  thy  tuogc; 
ments. 

8  anb  the  fourth  angel  poibreb  out 
his  biall  bpon  theSmnuc,  anb  poibcr 
tbasgiuen  bnto  him  to  fco?cl)  men  ttnth 
fire. 

9  anb  men  iberc  ||  fco2chcH  ttnth 
great  heat,  anb  blafphcmeb  the  iBame 
of  <Kob ,  lbhtch  hath  poibctouerthefe 
plagues :  anb  the?  repentcb  not,to  giue 
htm  glory. 

10  anb  the  fift  angel  poibreb  out  l)ts 
biali  bpou  the  feat  of  the  bcaft,anbbts 
Utngbomc  lbas  full  of  barttcneffe ,  anb 
they  gnaibeb  their  tongues  for  pame, 

11  anb  blafphcmeb  the  ©00  of  hea? 
uen,  becaufc  of  their  pames,  anb  their 
fores,anbrcpcnteb  not  of  their  bcebs. 

1 1  anb  the  fir  t  ^ngcl  poibreb  out  his  I 
biall  bpon  the  great  rturr  (Euphrates,! 
anb  the  lbatcr  thereof  lbas  brteb  bp,i 
tbattbcttniyof  the  Bmgs  of  the  eaft1 
might  be  picparcb. 

15  anb  3Haft>  three  bnclcanc  fpirits 
line  frogs  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
oragon,  1  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  bcaft, 
*  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  falfe  piopbct. 

14.  jfortbcyaretbefptritsofocutls 
ttiorHtng  miracles,  ttibich  goc  fojth  bn? 
to  the  l&mgs  of  the  earth,  anb  of  the 
Vbholcib02lb,to  gather  them  to  the  bat- 
tel! of  that  great  bay  of  ©ob  almighty. 

15  'aBcholb/Jcomeasathicfe.iBlef  I 
feb  ishcthat  ibatchcth,anb  neepetb  his 
garments,  leaft  IjccibaUtcnaficb,aub 
they  fee  his  fbame. 

16  anb  hee  gathereb  them  together 
into  a  place ,  calico  m  the  t?cb:cibe 
tongue,armagebbon. 

17  anb  the  feucnth  angel  pottucb 
out  h»s  biall  into  tbcay2c,  ano  there 
came  a  great  boyce  out  of  the  Hemplc 
of  heauen;ftom  the  throne,  faying,  3)t 
is  bone. 

13  anb  there  iberc  boices  anb  tbun> 
bcrs,anb  lightnings:  anb  there  lbas  a 


grcatearthqua&e,fuchasibasnotfincc 
men  iberc  bpon  the  earth,ro  mighfv  an 
cartbquaKcanbfo  great, 

19  anb  the  great  Citie  tbasbuubeb 
into  three  parts ,  anb  the  Cities  of  the 
nations  fell:  anb  great  26abyioncamc 
in  remembrance  before  (Bob ,  *  to  giue 
bnto  her  the  cup  of  the  urnic  of  the 
fierceneffeofhislbrath. 

20  anb  euery  ylanb  fleb  aibay,anb 
the  mountaines  ibcr  e  not  founb. 

21  anb  there  fell  bpon  men  a  great 
hatle  out  of  hcaucn,  euery  ftonc  about 
the  ibeight  of  a  talent,  anb  men  biaf 
phcmcbOob,  becaufc  of  the  plague  of 
the  hayle :  for  the  plague  thereof  lbas 
crceebtng  great. 

CHAP.    XVII. 

3.  4  A  woman  arayed  in  purple  and  fcarlet, 
with  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand ,  ficteth  vpon 
iheBeaft,  5  which  is  great  Babylon  the  mo- 
ther  of  all  abominations.  9  The  interpre- 
tation of  the  feuen  heads,  12  and  the  tenne 
homes.  8  Tlie  punifhmeiit  of  the  whore. 
14  The  victory  ot  theLambe. 

/Bb  there  tame  one  of  the 
feuen  angels,  ibbich  hab 
the  feuen  bials,  anb  taltteb 
ttnth  me,faymg bnto  nice, 
_  Conw  hither , 3  ttuimjett) 
buto  thee  the  mbgement  of  the  great 
nahore,tbat  fitteth  bpon  many  maters: 
2  naithttihomthCBingsofthccatth 
hauc  committcb  formcatton,  anb  the  m* 
habiters  of  the  earth  haue  bcene  mabc 
brunltttntb  the  ttnne  of  her  fornication, 
j  5>ot)ccartcbmeattiaymrhc£>pt- 
nt  into  the  ttnlbcrncfle :  anb  JJ  falb  a 
ttioman  fit  bpo  a  fcarlet  colourcb  bcaft, 
full  of  names  of  biafphemy,  haumg  fe- 
uen heabs,anb  ten  homes. 

4  anb  the  tboman  lbas  araycb  in 
purple  anb  fcarlet  colour,  anb  tbccUcb 
ibith  golb,anb  precious  ftoncjpcarles, 
haumga  golbcn  cup  in  her  hauo,  full  of 
abommations  anb  nlthiueflc  of  fjcr  for- 
nication. 
<,   anb  bpon  her  fozcbeab  lbas  a 

tiamC  ttmttCU,  Mystery,  Babylon 

JTh  E  G  RE  A  T,  The  M  O  T  H  E  R  Of  ||H  AR- 

iots,  And  Abominations  Of 
The   Earth. 

6  aub  51  falb  the  lboman  bmnUen 
lbfth  the  bloob  of  the  §>amts,anb  ibith 
the  bloob  ofthe  Martyrs  of  3Jefus:  aub 
lbhcn  3J  falb  her,  31  lbonbrcb  ibith 
great  aomiranon. 

7  anb  the  angel  faibe  bnto  mee, 

j©hc-re- 


■Icr. 


j. 15. 


\Gr.pUU 


\\OrJornic4' 
Uoni. 


Of  the  Beaft.  Reuelation.     Babylon  is  fallen. 


*  i. Tim  6. 
1 5  chap. 
19.16, 


B0bccefo2c  bibft  tbou  marueile  <3  null 
tell  tljte  tbcmyftccy  of  tbe  tboman,anb 
of  the  beaft  tbat  carter!)  bcr  ,u)btch  batb 
tbc  ftucn  brabs,anb  ten  Ijozncs. 

8  ltf)c  beaft  tbat  tbou  fau)eft,tbas, 
anb  is  not  ano  (ball  aftenb  out  of  tbc 
bottotmcfrcpit,anbgoemtopcroitton, 
ano  tbey  tJjat  oibcll  ontbecartblbail 
ibonbcr,(ibbofcnamestt)crcnotn):u> 
ten  ni  tbe  booftc  of  ufeftom  tl)e  founba; 
tion  of  tbc  n)02lb)u)ben  tbey  bebolb  tlje 
bead  tbat  tbas,anb  isnot.anb  pet  is. 

9  3lnb  bete  is  tbc  minb  Vbtjitl)  bath 
lbifcbomc.  %\yt  ftucn  bcabsare  fcuen 
mountaincs,  on  Vbfjtcl)  tljc  ibonian  Ct< 
tctl). 

10  3tnb  tberc  ate  fcucn  Bings,ftuc 
ate  fallen,  anbonc  ts,  anb  tbcotbcris 
notyct  tome:  anb  tbben  becommctb, 
lje  muft  continue  a  fbojt  fpacc, 

11  2{nbrbcbcafttbatibas,anbisnot, 
cucnbcistbectgbtb,  9  is  of  the  fcucn, 
ano  aoctb  into  permtion. 

1  z  3tnD  tbc  tenne  bc2ncs  lbbtd)  tbou 
famcft.acc  ten  Rings,  Vbbicl)  baue  recr  v 
utb  no  tungbom  as  vet :  but  rccctncpo* 
Ibct  as  kings  one  boute  tout)  tbc  bcaft. 

1 3  Xbclc  bauc  one  mntt>e ,  anb  (bail 
giuc  tbcit  pottict  anb  ftrcngtb  bnto  tbc 
beaft. 

14  XbcfcfbaimaKdbarrctbifbtfje 
3Lambe,anb  tbc  Hainbc  flial  ouer  tome 
rbem:  *jro;beis!Lo2bof  Ho2bs,  anb 
Bins  of  Rings,  anb  tbey  tbat  ate  ibirt) 
bun,  are  cailcb,  %  cbofcn,anbfaitl)full. 

is  3mo be faitbbnto mc,Xbcibatcrs 
Mud)  tbon  faVbeft,  Vbljcre  tbcibljojc 
fittctb  ,arc  pcopics,ano  niuintubes,anb 
nations,aub  tongues. 

1 6  ano  tbc  ten  bonus  lbbicb  tbou 
faibcft  Dpon  tbc  bcaft ,  tbcfc  (ball  bate 
tbc  ttobo:c,anb  (ball  maUc  bet  bcfolate, 
anbuabeb,  ano  (ball  catc  bet  fleO),  anb 
burnc  bcr  ttntb  fire. 

1 7  5Foj  god  batb  put  in  tbeitbeatts 
to  fulfill  bis\bill,anbtoagt cc,anb  giuc 
tbcit  lungbomc  bnto  tbc  bcaft,bnni  tbe 
Vb02bs  of  <5ob  fliallbc  fulfiucb. 

1 8  anb  tbc  lboman  lbbicl)  tbou 
fauicft ,  is  tbat  gtcat  Ctttc  lbbict)  rctg* 
ncth  ouct  tbc  lungs  of  tbc  cartb. 

CHAP.   XVIII. 

■l  Babylon  is  fallen.  4.ThepcoplcofGodcom. 
manded  to  depart  out  of  her.  9  TheKwes 
of  the  earth,  n  with  the  Merchants  and 
Mariners.lamcm  ouer  her.  10  The  Saints  rc- 
ioyce  for  the  judgements  of  God  vpon  her. 


/Rbaftctfl)cfctl)ings,3l 
farb  anotber  3ingel  tome 
botbnefcombcauen,t)a^ 
umg  gceat  pomer,  anb 
tbe  earth  tt>as  lightened 
untb  bis  glow. 

x  3Inb  be  crpeti  niigljtflp  tbttt)  a  ttrfig 
tooyce,  faving,  *  Babylon  tbe  great  is 
fallen ,  is  fallen,  anb  is  become  tbe  fiabi? 
tation  of  beutls ,  anb  tbe  bolbofeuerp 
fouic  fpirit,anb  a  tagc  of  euery  bncleane 
anbbatcfullbitb: 

j  iFojalinationsbaucbzunRCofthc 
rbtne  oftbetb/atb  of  Dec  fimiteation, 
anb  tbe  lungs  of  tbc  cattb  bauc  torn- 
mitttb  fornication  rbitljber,ftl)c  #cr- 
tbants  of  tbc  cart!)  arc  ibarcb  net)  tljo* 
rotb  tbc  1 1  abnnbance  of  bet  bclitacics. 

4  3(nb3Jbcarb  another  botce  from 
bcauen ,  faying  Come  out  of  ber,  my 
people,  tbat  pec  be  not  par  rafters  ofber 
fumes,  anb  tbat  pee  retctuc  not  of  bet 
plagues: 

5  f  02  bcr  finncs  bauc  reatfjeb  bnto 
bcauen,  anb  dsobljatfj  remembzebber 
iniquities. 

6  ascvuarbbcreuenasfliccretbar: 
beb  y  ou,anb  bouble  bnto  ber  boublc  at* 
c Oibing  to  bcr  ibozfts  *.  in  the  tup  ibbttb 
fl)  c  batb  fillet),  fill  to  ber  bouble. 

7  $oU)  mutbmee  bath  giouficb  bet 
frtfe,  anb  liucboclictoufly,  fomutbto^ 
ment  anb  fozroib  giuc  bcr :  fojfljefaub 
in  bcr  beart ,  3  fit  a*  jUucene ,  anb  am 
noibtbotb,anbfbailfcenofo;!roU). 

8  Xbcrcfojc  than  ber  plagues  come 
in  one  bay ,  beatb,  anb  mourning,  anb 
famine ,  anb  flic  fbalibee  bttctlybutnt 
rbttb  fire ,  fo2  ftrong  is  tbc3L02b  (Sob, 
Ibbotubgetbbcr. 

9  ano tbcixmgsof tbccartb,Vbbo 
bauc tommitteb fornication ,  anb  unco 
bcliciouny  lbitb  bcr,fl)ail  bcibaiicbcr 
anb  lament  fo2  bcr ,  ibbcn  tljep  fbaii  fee 
tbc  fntofec  ofl)cr  but  mug : 

io  &tanbtngafarrcofffo2tbcfcarc 
of  bcr  tonncnt,  faying,  aias,aias,  tbat 
great  erne  Babylon,  tbatnugbtycttic: 
fojinoncbourcistbyiubgcnictittomc. 

ii  3lnotbc  ^0ct tbants  of  tbc  eartb 
fliail  mcepe  anb  mourne  ouer  bcr,  fo,2 
no  man  buyetb  rljcir  mcrtbanbu"c  any 
mo2c 

ii  Xbemcrtbanbifcofgolb,  anb  til- 
ucr,anbp2ctious  ftoncs,anb  ofpcarlcs, 
anb  fine  linncn,  anb  purple,  anb  blue, 
anbfcatlct ,  anb  all  ||  SClune  tboob  ,anb 
aliniancrbcffcisof^tto2ic,anballma> 
tier  bcffclsof  moftp2cnousiboob  ,anb 

of 


•Chap.  1^ 


\\Ot,pmer. 


Efay.47- 


\\Or,fsilt. 


Babylon  dcftroyed.   Chap  xix.  Thelambemaried 


Or,  boMa 


of  bjaffc.anb  iron.anb  marble, 

i}  anb€ynamome,anbobours,anb 
ointments ,  anb  fraiiKintcnfe,$  U)tnc, 
ant)  oile,ant»  fine  floute,ano  Whcat,anb 
bcafts.anb  (Vjecpc,  ant)  l)02fes,anb  tlja- 
nots,ano!(laucs,anbfoulc5ofmcn. 

14.  ano  the  fruits  that  tljyfoulc  to 
ftcb  after,  arc  beparteo  from  thee,  ano 
all  things  Whith  Were  oaintic ,  ano 
goobly,  arc  oepartcb  from  thee,  ant) 
th  on  (halt  finoe  them  no  in  02c  at  all. 

15  Xhe  Merchants  of  tljefe  things 
winch  Were  maoc  cichc  by  her,  (hall 
ftano  afarre  off  fin  the  fcare  of  her  m- 
mcnt,Wcepmg  ano  wailmg. 

16  ano  taymg,aias,alas,that great 
city.that  Was  clothco  in  fine  lumcn.ano 
purple  ano  fcarlet ,  ano  occfeeo  With 
golb,aiio  pictious  ftoncs,anb  pcarles : 

17  fojm one hourefo great ruhes 
is  come  to  nought.  ano  cucry  fhipma 
ftcr ,  ano  all  the  company  m  fhtps ,  ano 
failcrs,  ano  as  many  as  ttaoe  by  Tea, 
Qoob  afarre  off, 

18  ^no  tryeD  When  they  faW  the 
fmoftc  of  her  butnuig,faying,nahat  city 
is  hue  bnto  this  great  citic  < 

19  anb  thcycaftbuft  on  their  heaos, 
anb  crieb,  Weeping ,  ano  wailmg, fay- 
ing, aias  aias,that  great  citic,whcrcm 
were  maoe  rich  all  that  hao  (hips  in  the 
rea,byrcaronofhercoltlincffc,fojmonc 
houreisfhe  maoebcfolatc. 

20  Hcioyce  oucr  her  thou  heaucn , 
anoyeholyapoltlesano£2ophcts,fo2 
d5ob  hath  aucngcb  you  on  her. 

21  ano  a  mightie  angel  toottc  bpa 
done  UHe  a  great  nulftonc ,  ano  caft  it 
into  the  fea ,  faying,  Xhus  With  bio^ 
lente  (hall  that  gecat  citic  Babylon  bee 
ttnowen  oowne ,  anb  (hall  bee  founb 
nonweatail. 

2i  anb  the  boyce  of  harpers  anb 
mufmons ,  anb  of  pipers,ano  trumpet 
tcrs,  fhallbcc  hearo  no  11102c  at  all  in 
thee :  ano  no  craftfman,  of  Whatfocuer 
craftheebc,  wall  be  founb  anymozem 
thee :  anb  the  founb  of  a  milfronc  0?al= 
be  hcarb  no  mo:c  at  all  in  thee : 

2j  ^nb  the  light  of  a  canblc  (hall 
(htne  no  mozc  at  all  m  thee :  anb  the 
tooice  of  the  bnbegromc  ano  of  the  bnbe 
(halbe  hcarb  no  mo2c  at  all  in  thee  :fo2 
thy  flPcrehants  were  the  great  men  of 
the  earth :  fo;  by  thy  fojeenes  Were  all 
nanonsoccciucb. 

24.  aub  in  her  was  founb  the  bloob 
of  0zophtts ,  anb  of  Saints ,  anb  of  all 
trjat  were  name  bpon  the  earth. 


CHAP.    XIX. 

1  God  is  praifed  in  heaucn  for  judging  the 
great  whore ,  and  auenging  the  blood  of  his 
Saints.  7  The  marriage  of  the  Lambc.  10 
The  Angel  will  notbe  worfhipped.  17  The 
toules  called  to  the  greac  (laughter. 

/I5ffi>  after  theft  things  3J 
hearo  a  great  boyte  of  much 
people  in  heauen^aymg,  al- 
leluia :faiuanon,  anb  glo;ie, 
ano  honour ,anb  power  bnto  the  Jto;b 
our  <5oo : 

2  foi  true  ano  righteous  are  his 
iuogements ,  foi  hce  hath  luogcb  the 
great  Whoze  Which  bio  cojrupt  the 
earth  With  he*  fomitation ,  anb  hath  a* 
uengco  the  bloob  of  his  fcruants  at  her 
Ijano. 

j  ^nb  againc  they  fayb ,  alleluia : 
anb  her  fmotte  rofe  bp  fin  tuer  $  cucc. 

4  anb  the  foure  anb  tWctitie  €V 
bcrs ,  anb  tlje  foure  beads  fell  oowne, 
ano  W02(htppcb  ©ob  that  fate  on  the 
thJonc,faying,aiuen,aileluia. 

5  ano  a  boicc  came  out  of  the  ttuone, 
faying ,  0jaife  our  ©oo  all  yte  hisfet* 
uants.ano  yc  that  feare  hun,botrj  fmail 
ano  great. 

6  anb3JhearbasitWcretheboice 
of  a  great  muintuoe,  anb  as  the  botte  of 
many  watcrs,anb  as  the  boice  of  migh' 
ne  thunbnngsjaymg,  alleluia :  fo;  the 
%  0: 0  (Son  omnipotent  tetgneth. 

7  Uctbsbccglabanbteioyee,anb 
gme  honour  to  him :  fo?  the  manage  of 
the  itambc  is  come,  ano  his  Wife  hath 
maochcrfclfcrcabie. 

8  anb  to  her  was  grantco  .that  (lie 
(homo  bee  arayco  in  fine  lumen ,  cleane 
anb  White :  fo;  the  fine  linncu  is  the 
nghttoufiieffc  of  £>atnts. 

9  anb  hee  fatth  bnto  nice ,  nujtte, 
•Blcffcb  arc  they  Which  are  calico  bn 
to  tlje  marriage  fupper  oftbclLambe. 
ano hefaith  bnto  nice,  Xhcfc  are  the 
trucfayingsofiSob. 

10  anb  3  fell  at  bis  fecte  to  Wtuftnp 
hun:auDhefaiObntomc,  *  S>ce  thou 
boc  it  not :  5  am  thy  fellow  fcruant, 
anb  of  thy  tocthzen ,  that  haue  thereto 
mouic  of  3lefus  ,n902(hip  ©00 :  foi  the 
tcfrimony  ofjefus,  isthcfpintof  pzo^ 
phecie. 

1 1  anb  3  fawe  heaucn  opcncb.anb 
bcholb  aWhiteho2fe,  anb  hce  that  fate 
bponhunWastailcb  faithful  anDtrur, 
anb  mrightcoufneshee  both  lubgc  anb 

mafceWarrc. 

12  Uis 


'Mat. 22. 2. 


■Cha.22.j1. 


Tliefharpefword.  Reuelation.  Satan  loofcd. 


Efi.«i.i. 


•Chjp.17. 
■4- 


n  $ts  eves  we.  e  as  a  flame  of  fire, 
anb  on  htsheabVbcre  manperottmes, 
anb  f)ec  habaname  ttmttcn ,  that  no 
man  bnetb  but  he  Ijtmrelfe. 

13  *  ^nD  tjee  itoas  clott)eD  itoitl)  a  be* 
flute  biptmbloob,  anbhis  name  ts  cat 
leb,Xt)erbojDof<5oD. 

14.  3nb  the  armies  lbhich  lbcre  in 
hcauen  foliorbcD  himbpontbhitcho:- 
fes ,  clotheb  in  fine  lumen,  ibhite  ano 
tleane. 

15  2nt>  out  of  nis  moutl)  goeth  a 
(harpefroojb ,  thatttnthithcefhouio 
fmite  the  nations:auo  he  fljai  rule  chcin 
ttuth  a  rob  of  won :  ano  tje  treabeth  the 
ttunepjeffc  of  thefiertenefle  anbib/ath 
of^lmighty  d5ob. 

i6  2nbhehathonhisbeflurc,anb 
on  his  thigh  a  uamcibutten,*  k  ingOf 

Kings, And   Lord   Of   Lords. 

17  ano^ifaiDan^ngelftanbingtn 
the  5>unne ,  ano  nee  ertcD  tbtth  a  lotbb 
boy  cc,faytng  to  all  the  foulcs  that  flic  in 
the  mioft  of  hcauen ,  Come  anb  gatljer 
youtfclucstogetherbntothcfuppecof 
the  great  Gob: 

1 8  %\)M  yce  may  eatc  the  flefl)  of 
Btngs.anb  the  flefl)  of  Captatnes,  ano 
the  flcfl)  of  mighty  men,  ano  the  flefh  of 
h02fes,anoofthemthatutonthem,ano 
the  flcfl)  of  all  men  both  free  ano  bono, 
bothfmaii  ano  great. 

19  ^no  5  fall)  the  bead,  9  the  Bings 
of  tl)c  earth,  ano  their  armies  gathetcb 
together  to  mane  lbarre  againQ  him 
that  fate  on  the  hotfc ,  ano  agamft  his 
armie. 

xo  %n\)  the  beafl  Ibag  tafecn,  %  lbith 
himthefalfep2ophet,thattt»oughtmi;l 
raclc£bcfo;c  huu ,  uuth  ibhith  hebetet- 1 
ueothem  that  hao  rcceiuebthe  marac 
of  the  bcafl ,  ano  them  that  tbojflnppcb  I 
his unagr.  Xhefe  botlnbcretafl  antic 
uuo  a  lane  of  fire  burning  tbith  b;inv 
ftone. 

zi  ^nb  the  remnant  mere  flam  ttuth 
the  fiuo.'b  of  him  that  fate  bpon  the 
hoirctt'lnchfiuojbpjocccocooutofhis 
mouth :  ano  all  the  foulcs  Ibcre  filleb 
Out!)  their  flcfl). 

CHAP.    XX. 

l  Satan  bound  for  .1  thoufand  yccrcs.  6  The 
firft rcfurrofiion :  they Defied  thathaucpait 
therein.  7  Satan  let  loofe  againc.  8  Gog 
and  Magog.  10  1  he  dcuill  call  into  the  lake 
of  flic  and  btiniflonc.  11  The  lalt  andgc- 
nci all  (cluneal ion. 


..$  ii5b  3  fatt)  an  3ngei  come 
^2M&?  °bU)n  from  hcauen,  hautng 
£5^JB  the  ney  of  the  bottomics  pit, 
is^tt&^t  3  a  great  chaine  in  his  hanb. 
z  anb  hec  laib  hoib  on  the  toagott 
that  olbfcrpent,tt>hich  is  the  ocum  aim 
s>atan  ,  anb  bounb  him  a  thoufano 
ycrcs, 

3  ^nbtaft  him  into  the  bottomlcffc 
pit,anb  fl)ut  huu  bp ,  anb  fct  a  feale  bp 
onljmi,  thatljcflioulb  bcceiucthcnati 
ons  no  moje,  till  the  thoufano  ycercs 

jfhoulb  bee  tuiftlleb :  ano  after  that  Dec 

1  mufl  be  loofeo  a  little  fcafon. 

4.  7hXt>3 fatl1  thrones  ,aub  tftcv  fate 
bpon  them,  anouiogemeuftbasgiuen 

!  bnto  them:  tj  31  falb  the  faults  of  them 
that  ibctc  bchcaoebfo:  the  umneffeef 
3Jcfus ,  anb  fo;  the  tto?b  of  c>oo ,  ano 

iibhtchhab  not  ibo?fl)ippco  the  bcafl, 
neither  his  image,  neither  hao  rccciucD 

Ihismarac  bpon  their  ftwheabs,  ojm 

i  their  hanbs,  anb  they  iiucb  anb  r  ctgncb 

I  Ibith  Chuft  a  thoufano  ycercs. 

5  2Sut  the  reft  ofthcocabltucb not 
againc  bntill  the  thoufano  ycercs  lbcrc 

]fuufl)CO.  Xtusisthcfirtt  refurrection. 

I  6  asieHcOr}  holy  is  he  that  hath  part 
in  y  ficlt  refurrectiomon  fuch  the  feconb 
ocath  hath  no  poibcr ,  but  the?  fljan  be 
^icflsof  ood  ,  ano  of<£lmu\anoft)ail 
rcigncttnth  Ijitn  a  thoufano  yeeres. 

7  ^nb  ibhcn  the  thoufano  rccrcs 
arc  crpircb,  S>atanfl)au  be  loofeo  out 
ofhiSpjflon, 

g  anbfhaligoeouttobccciucthc 
nations  \bhich  arc  in  the  fourc  Quar- 
ters of  the  earth,"  <5og  tj  09agog,to  ga-- 
therthem  together  to  battcll :  thenum^ 
bcr  of  lbhom  is  as  thefano  of  the  fca. 

9  3nb  tl)cv  ibent  bp  on  the  b:cabh 
of  the  earth,  anb  compaflcb  thecampc 
ofthc5>amtsabout,airt)thcbelouebn- 

j  tic :  ano  fire  camebottmefrom  oob  out 
ofhcaucn,anODcuourcothcm. 
io  ^nbthebctul  that  bccciucb  them, 

i  ibas  call  into  the  lane  of  fire  ano  bum* 

!  (tone,  \bhcrc  the  bcafl  ano  the  falfc  p;o- 
phct  ire,  ano  (hall  be  tojmcutco  oar  mm 
night.fojcuccaubcucr. 
1 1  3(nD3Jfatt>  a  great  ibhitc  th.'one, 

:  anb  him  that  fate  on  it.  from  ttihofr  face 

1  the  earth  anb  the  hcauen  flcb  albay  ,anb 
there  ttias founo  no  place fo;  thou. 

ii  2tno3J  faibc the bcao.fmall  anb 
grcat.flanb  befiw  00b:  anb  the  boons 
lbcrc  openco :  9  another  "boonr  uuis  0 
pcncO,\bhichiS  the  bookcof  life :  anb  the 
ocab  Vberc  tubgcb  out  of  thofc  things 

liihuh 


"Ezcch.38. 

i.inJ;y.i. 


'Chap.J.j 


JAnewheauen.         Chap.xxj.         Holylerufalem. 


\\Or,h,ll. 


J.pci.J. 


'7 


•Chi  7.17 


•Chip.  1 
and  11. 
•Eu.  5  5 


Vbhuhlbctc  ibnttcn  in  the  boohs,  atto?- 
bing  to  their  ibojtts. 
13  anb  the  fcagaucbpthcbcaMbhtth 
Were  in  it:  anb  Death  anbllftcll  bclrao 
rcb  top  the  bcab  Which  were  inthem: 
anb  thcp  were  inbgcb  cucrv  man  actor 
Ding  to  their  YbojHS. 

14  ^nbbcathanbhclltbcrcraftinto 
tt»c  lauc  of  ftcc :  tl)is  is  the  feconb  bcath. 

15  3inb  Whofoeucr  was  not  founb 
Wnttenm  the  bootte  of  life, was  eaftuv 
to  t!)c  laUrof  five. 

CHAP.   XXI. 

A  newe  hcauen  and  a  newe  earth.  10  The 
heauenlv  Icmlalem,  widi  a  full  defcription 
thereof.  15  Shenecdethno  funne,thc glory 
ofGod  is  her  light.  Z4  The  kings  of  die  earth 
biino,  their  riches  vnto her. 

ji3D*3JfaW  a  new  hcauen, 

anba  new  cartlj :  fojthc  firft 

hraum,  anb  the  firft  earth 

,_  were  paffeb  awap.anb  rtjevc 

was nonuue  fca. 

2  ^no3J3Jot)nfau)tl)cl)oIv<Citp, 
new  tyicrufalcmcommttig  Down  from 
(3oo  out  of  hcauen,  pjeparcbasabube 
abomcbfoHierhufbanb. 

3  2hib  3  hcarb  a  great  boiec  out  of 
heaucn,faymg,  iBcholb,  thcXaberna; 
tic  of  <5ob  is  With  incn  ,anb  he  Wtl  biitcll 
vo\t\)  them  ,anb  the?  fhail  be  his  people, 
anb  (Sobhimfclfcfhaibc  With  thcm,a.id 

be  then  C5ob.  M     M 

a,  *3inb<5ob  (hail  Wipe  awap  all 

tcates  from  their  eves :  anb  there  Hjali 
bee  no  mo;cbeath,nctthcrfon:oW,no; 
crving,iuithcrr»ail  there  becanrmoze 
painc-.fo?  the  fojmct  things  arc  paffeb 

<  3nb  he  that  fate  upon  the  th?onc, 
fam, '  25ct)olD.-Jf  inane  ail  thingsneW. 
3uo  hec  fatb  bnto  me ,  roritc :  to?  thefc 
Wozbs  arc  true  anb  faithful!. 

6  3tnDhefaa)bntomee,3Jt!Sbone: 
*3jam3Uphaaub  £>incga,  the  begin 
rimg  anb  the  cub.'  3  mill  gitic  bnto  him 
that  is  athitft,  of  the  fountaine  of  the 

water  or  ufcfrcclp. 

7  iDcthatoucTtouuneth.fliaumhC' 

ntc  all  things, anb 31  Will  bee  his  tfob 
anbhcfhallbcmpfotmc. 

s  zSiitthcfcaccfiil.anbbnbclccmng, 
anb  the  abominable ,  aim  murbcrcrs, 
anbWho:cmongcrs,aubro2ccrcrs,aub 
iooiatcrs,anb  all  ipars.ihailhauc •their 
part  m  the  lauc  which  burnetii  With  fire 
anobumttone:  ttJhich  UJ  the  fctonD 
Death. 


9  3nb  there  tame  bnto  me  one  of 
the  fcuen  Angels ,  which  hab  the  fcucn 
bialsfullof  the  fcucn  laft  plagues,  anb 
talbeb  With  mc,faving,€omc  hither  ,31 
Will  thew  thee  the  25nDc,  the  ILambcs 
Wife. 

10  3nDhccarteDmcawapinthcfpi; 
nt  to  a  great  anb  high  monntame ,  anb 
fheweb  mc  that  great  ritie,thc  holy  ^ie> 
rufalcm,befccnbingoutofhcaucnfrom 
Oob, 

1 1  patting  the  glozp  of  (5ob :  anb  her 
light  was  utjc  bnto  a  done  tuofl  precious; 
eucnuBcaiafperftoncclcarcaschnttai, 

11  3nb  hab  a  wall  great  anb  high, 
anb  hab  ttbelue  gates,  anb  at  the  gates 
trbcluc  Angels,?  names  tbuttcnthcrc? 
on,  Which  arc  the  names  of  thctWelue 
tribes  ofthc  cbtlbicn  of  Jfracl. 

13  ©n  the  cafttbjee gates,  on  the 
iSotfhthJcc  gates,  on  the  South  tbjee 
gates , ant.  on  the  oaeft  ttvee  gates. 

14.  3no  the  wall  of  the  titic  hab 
tweluc  founbations,  anb  in  them  the 
names  of  the  tibclue  3poftlcs  of  the 
JUmbe. 

15  3nbhcc  that  taUtcb  With  mce,hab 
a  golben  teebe  to  mcafutc  the  citic ,  anb 
the  gates  thereof,  anb  the  ibali  thereof. 

16  3nD  the  city  lieth  foure  fquarcanb 
the  length  is  as  large  as  the  bzcabth : 
anb  hemcafureb  the  cup  With  tl)t  rceb, 
tweluc  thoufanb  furlongs :  the  length, 
anb  the  b,tcabth,anb  the  height  of  it  are 
cquail. 

17  2nb  he  mcafurco  the  rball  there- 1 
of ,an  hunbjeb ,  anb  fourtte ,  anb  foure 
icubitcs,  accoibing  to  thetneafureof  a 
man,  that  is,of  the  ^ngcl. 

is  5lnb  the  bmlbingofthcmaiiof  it 
rt>as  of  ^afper ,  anb  the  nty  ibaspurc 
golbjibcbntoclearcgiaffc. 

19  Jlub  thcfounbationsof thctball 
ofthc  citv  mere  gattunjebibithall  ma^ 
net  of  pictious  ftones.  Xhe  firft  fouit; 
cation  teas  Jafpcr ,  the  fctonb  £>& 
phir, the  thiro a Chalccbonr, the  fourth 

anCmcralb, 

20  xhcfiftSaroouirahcfiirtSar; 
bins,  thcreutntilChipfoUtc,  the  eight 
23ervl ,  the  ninth  a  ICopas ,  the  tenth  a 
Clnrfopjafus ,  the  clcuenth  a3latinct, 
the  twelfth  an  attnethpft. 

2 1  ^liib  the  tibclue  gates  ibere  tihelue 
oearlcs,  euccpfeuerall  gate  was  of  one 
ncarlc ,  anb  the  ftrcctc  of  thcntylbas 
purr  golbc ,  as  it  Ibcrc  tranfparcnt 

0lzzC»nB  3  fall)  no  Zcmple  therein: 

foz 


The  water  of  life      Reuelation.      is  offeredfreel 


*  E.lii.  60 


•Efai4o.li 


f  02  tDc  %o  jd  (Pod  aimtgDtte ,  anD  the 
fLambcarc  ttjc  ICcmplc  of  it. 

ii  *  anD  the  eitte  fjau  no  neeD  of  tDc 
£>utme,  ncit^ct  oftDcsJPoonc  to  (bine 
in  tt :  fo2  tbc  glo2v  of  ©ob  did  lighten  it, 
anD  tljc  ILainbc  is  tljc  light  tljcrcof. 

24  *  anD  tljc  nations  oftljcm  tUDicl) 
arefaueo ,  fljail  ttiaifec  in  tljc  Ugljt  of  it : 
an&  tDc  Rings  of  tf)e  cacti)  Doe  Dung 
tDeir  glotv  anD  Donour into  it. 

25  *  ^nD  tDc  gates  of  it  (nail  not  bee 
fbutatailbvbav:fo2tDcrc  (Dailbec  no 
nigbttDcrc. 

26  anD  iDc?  (ban*  biing  tbe  glonc 
anD  honour  of  the  nations  into  it. 

27  anD  there  (ball  in  no  Ibife  enter. 
into  it  an?  thing  tDatDefiletD,  neither 
tbrjatfoenenbo«ibctrj  aboinmation ,  02 
makcth  a  lie:  but  tbep  ibDicbare  XO}U- 
tenintheHanibcsbooacoflifc. 

CHAP.    XXII. 

The  riuerofthe  water  of  life.  2  The  tree  of 
life.  5  The  light  oftheCitieofGod  is  him- 
felfe.  9  The  Angel  will  not  be  worf  hipped. 
18  Nothing  may  bee  added  to  the  word  of 
God, nor  taken  therefrom. 

&■%&£?  ®*  ftc  fl>eujeD  tnec  apurc 

■A  \vs&j  nuer  ofibatcc  oflife,clecre 

*  as  €b2vftall,  pjocecDmg 

out  of  tnc  tluouc  of  OOD, 

_anDofttje1Lanibc. 

'Jntbe  nuDDcO  of  tDcftrcct  of  it, 

anDoFettDcr  Gbcof  tbc  nncr,  was  there 

trjc tree  of  ufcibhicl) bare  tlbcluc  man; 

net  of  fruits,  anD  veelDcD  her  fruit  eue= 

ry  monetf)  :anD  the  leaucs  of  the  tree 

tbere  foi  the  healing  of  the  nanons. 

j  anD  there  (ball  be  no  nioiecurfe, 
out  trje  throne  of  ©oD ,  ?of  tDcHambc 
(ball  bee  mit ,  anD  bis  (truants  (ball 
fecuerjun. 

4  anotbev  (bail  fee  bis  face,  anD 
bis  name  foal!  be  m  their  fo:cbcaDS. 

5  'anD tbere fbaibc no nigbt tbere, 
aiiDtbep  neeD  no  tanDle,neitber  Itgbt  of 
the  fitnnc,  fo2  the  IL02DC  C5oD  giuetlj 
them  light,  anD  tljcv  (ball  rcignefo2C: 
ueranDeucr. 

6  anD  bee  faiD  Ditto  nice ,  1EDcfc 
ravings •« faitbfuliauD true.  atiDtbe 
IL02D  (5ob  of  the  holy  psopbets  fetit 
his  angel  to  (belb  bnto  his  fcruants 
the  things  Much  mud  flwtly  be  Done. 

7  23eholDc,  3J  tome  qiuthly :  zsicf 
fcD  is  be  that  tuepctl)  the  ravings  of  the 
pzophccitofthisboohe. 


"Chap.ii, 


y- 


'Chip.  19 
10. 


'Rora.5.4. 

•£(141.4. 

41^44.6. 


s  anD  3  3(ol)n  favu  tbcfe  things 
anD  IjcarD  tbetn.  anD  ruben  3  haD 
DcarDanD  feenc,  31  fell  Doibnc ,  to  lito; 
fbip  before  tbc  feet  of  the  angel ,  urtiirti 
fl)CibeD  me  tljefc  things. 

9  1Tl)cu  faith  he  bnto  mc/^ee  tbou 
Doc  it  not :  fo:  3  am  thv  felloib  fcruant, 
anooftOytwctftJcntljc  tfiopljcts,  anD 
oftbtmlbbicl)  beepe  the  fayingsof  tljis 
booKc:lboi(l)ip0oD. 

10  anD  bee  fait!)  bnto  mee ,  j&eaic 
nottbc  favmgs  of  thcpiophefie  of  this 
boobc:  fo2tl)ctuneisatbanD. 

1 1  $c  that  is  btuuCr,  let  bun  be  bnittft 
Oill :  anD  he  mbic!)  isfilthv.let  Dim  be  fil 
tbv  dill :  anD  Dec  that  is  righteous ,  let 
htm  bee  righteous  fhll :  anDIjcctDatts 
Doly,  let  Dim  be  holy  (till. 

1  z  anD  bcholD,  31  tome  qmcaiy,  anD 
mv  reruarDts  lbith  nice  ,*  to  giuccuerv 
man  actojDmg  as  his  iboj&c  fliaii  be. 

13  3Jam^ipDaanD^)mcga,ni)ebc= 
ginning  anD  the  cud,  tbc  ftrtt  $  tlje  laft. 

14  2SleUtDaretDcvthatDohlstom; 
inanDcmeiits,tDatthcvmavhaucrigbt 
to  the  tree  of  life ,  anD  map  cuter  in  tt)o= 
rolb  tbc  gates  into  tljc  ntte. 

1$  #02  nmljout  ucDogs,  anD  fojet^ 
rcrs,  anD  ibDo2cmongers,  auD  murDr 
rcrs.anDiDolaters,  anDlbhofocucrlo; 
uettjanDmabetDalie. 

16  "J3(cfasDaucfcntmmeangeI,to 
tefhfic  bnto  you  tDcfe  things  m  the 
Churches.  3aiutDerootcanDtbcof£ 
fpjtng  of  £>auiD ,  anD  tbe  tyigljt  anD 
morning  ftarrc. 

17  auD  the  Spirit  anD  the  Snoe 
fav,  Come.  anD  let  Ijimtbat  Dcaretl), 
fay , Come.  *  anD  let  Dim  that  is  arhtrlt, 
tomc.atiD  iDDofocuet  U)ill,let  Dim  tahc 
tlje  mater  of  life  frcclv. 

13  f  02  3J  tefttfic  bnto  ettcry  man  that 
DcarctD  the  VbojDesof  tbepzopbefic  of| 
tbis  boobc,*3Jf  anv man  dial  aDDcbuto ,  ncut  1 
tDcfe  tbtngs,<5oD  (baiiaDDc  bnto  Dim  r,ou ! 
tljc  plagues,  tljat  arc  lbztttcn  in  this 
booUc. 

19  anD  if  anv  man  fbali  tafic  albav 
front  tbc  Uwdcs  of  tbc  boohc  oftbis 
p;opDcfie,  00D  (bal  tauc  albav  Dis  part 
out  of  the  boohc  of  life,  anDoutof  tl)t 
Dolvntte,  anD  from  tDe  things  ibDitD 
arcib2ittcn  m  this  boolte. 

2 0  tyce  lbljitb  tcdiacth  tDcfe  tDmgs, 
faitD>S)urtlv,  31  conic  quitUlv.  amen. 
€uen  fo.Comc  S.02D  gicbis. 

21  XDc  grate  of  our  JL02D  3(efus 
€D2i(t  be  \DitD  vou  all.  amen. 


'Eft  55.1. 


F  I  N  I   S. 


^  i«r 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


Bible,  English 
The  Holy  Bible; 


*1 


